The Institutes of Justinian (Justinian I (Thomas Collett Sandars, trans.), 1874)
==========================================================
Justinian's Institutes (533 CE): Roman law codified — the foundation of civil-law systems worldwide. Translated by Thomas Collett Sandars (1st ed. 1853). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/institutesofju00sand).

University  of  Toronto


I'  ,

(f,

r/

^-^^^/:^«:^^  i^-O^i^l^O


THE     INSTITUTES

OF

JUSTINIAN

J

LONDON  :    PRINTED    BY

SPOTTISWOODE    AND    CO.,    NEW-STREET    SQUAEE

AND    PARLIAMENT    STREET

THE      INSTITUTES

OF

JUSTINIAN

WITH

ENGLISH   INTRODUCTION,    TRANSLATION,   AND   NOTES

BY

THOMAS  COLLETT  SANDAES,  M.A.

BARRISTER- AT- LAW
LATE  FELLOW  OF  ORIEL  COLLEGE,  OXFORD

FIFTH    EDITION

LONDON
LONGMANS,    GEEEN,    AND    CO.

1874

K


,  ^J^Ji^

^O-fl

PEEFACE

TO

THE      FIFTH       EDITION.

This  Edition  of  the  '  Institutes '  has  been  in  a  great  measure
rewritten.  The  admirable  and  exhaustive  work  of  Deman-
geat  ('  Cours  Elementaire  du  Droit  Eomain ')  has  supphed  so
much  new  material,  and  suggested  so  many  alterations,  and
Mr.  Poste  in  his  edition  of  '  Gains '  has  contributed  so  much
that  bears  on  some  of  the  subjects  treated  in  the  '  Institutes,'
that  I  have  found  it  necessary  to  make  many  revisions  of
the  Notes  and  some  additions  to  them.  I  have,  however,
endeavoured,  in  a  work  which  is  only  intended  for  those
who  are  unacquainted  with  Eoman  law,  to  state  nothing
but  what  a  beginner  can  understand,  and  to  avoid  as  much
as  possible  all  difficult  and  controverted  points.

I  must  repeat  what  I  stated  in  the  Preface  to  the  first
edition,  that  in  preparing  this  volume  originally,  I  was
under  obligations  to  the  French  edition  by  Ortolan  so  great
as  to  call  for  the  amplest  acknowledgment.  I  also  derived
great  assistance  from  the  edition  by  Ducaurroy,  and  from
the  '  Manuel  du  Droit  Eomain  '  of  Las;ranc^e,  as  well  as  from
the  '  Commentaries  '  of  Warnkoenig,  and  the  '  Institutes  '  of
Puclita.  In  the  Introduction  is  embodied  much  that  was
suggested  by  the  '  Histoire  de  la  Legislation  Eomaine '  and

VI  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION.

the  '  Generalisation  du  Droit  Eomain '  of  Ortolan,  and  by
the  first  volume  of  the  '  Institutes  '  of  Puchta.  In  the
translation  I  was  greatly  assisted  by  the  French  translations
of  Ortolan  and  Ducaurroy,  as  well  as  by  the  translations  in
English  of  Harris  and  Cooper.

Under  each  paragraph  of  the  text  are  placed  references
to  the  parallel  passages  of  the  '  Institutes  '  of  Gains,  of  the
'  Digest,'  and  the  '  Code.'  These  references  are  nearly  the
same  as  those  given  in  the  *^  Juris  Civilis  Enchiridium.'
The  text  is  almost  the  same  throughout  as  that  given  in  the
'  Corpus  Juris,'  edited  by  the  Kriegels,  Leipsic,  1848.

At  the  end  of  the  volume  I  have  given  a  Summary  of
the  principal  contents  of  the  Text  and  Notes.  As  the
arrangement  of  the  '  Institutes '  is  often  deficient  in  method,
and  as  the  transition  from  the  text  to  the  notes  makes  the
combination  of  the  materials  they  respectively  supply
sometimes  a  little  difficult,  I  have  thought  a  Summary
might  be  useful  to  those  to  whom  the  whole  subject
is  new.

T.  C.  S.

INTEODTJCTION.

].  The  legislation  of  Justinian  belongs  to  the  latest  period
of  the  history  of  Roman  law.  During  the  long  space  object  of  the
of  preceding  centuries  the  law  had  undergone  as  many  ^''^^'^oduction.
changes  as  the  State  itself.  The  Institutes  of  Justinian  embody
principles  and  ideas  of  law  which  had  been  the  slow  growth  of
ages,  and  which,  dating  their  origin  back  to  the  first  begin-
ning of  the  Koman  people,  had  been  only  gradually  unfolded,
modified,  and  matured.  It  is  as  impossible  to  understand  the
Institutes,  without  having  a  slight  knowledge  of  the  position  the
work  occupies  in  the  history  of  Roman  law,  as  it  is  to  understand
the  history  of  the  Eastern  Empire  without  having  studied  that  of
the  Western  Empire  and  of  the  Republic.  Many,  also,  of  the
leading  principles  of  Roman  law  contained  in  the  Institutes
are  unfamiliar  to  the  English  reader,  and  though  they  may  be
learnt  by  a  perusal  of  the  work  itself,  the  reader,  to  whom  the
subject  is  new,  may  be  glad  to  anticipate  the  study  of  details  by
having  placed  before  him  a  general  sketch  of  the  part  of  law  on
which  he  is  about  to  enter.  It  is  proposed,  therefore,  in  this
Introduction,  to  give  first  an  outline  of  the  history  of  Roman  law,
and  then  an  outline  of  Roman  private  law.  Each,  however,  will
only  be  given  with  the  very  moderate  degree  of  fulness  proper  to
a  sketch  intended  to  be  merely  a  preliminary  to  the  study  of  the
Institutes.

HISTORY   OF  ROMAN  LAW.

2.  However  obscure  may  be  the  history  of  early  Rome,  we
cannot  doubt  that  Roman  citizens  were,  from  a  very   ^.  ,       ^

^  ^  J    History  oj

early  period,  composed  of  two  distinct   bodies,  the  early  Rome,
populus  and  the  plebs,  of  which  the  first  alone  origi-      ^^    ^^"  "*'
nally  possessed  all  political  power,  and  the  members  of  which

vm  INTKODUCTION.

were  bound  together  by  peculiar  religious  ties.  Nor  can  we  have
any  reasonable  doubt  about  the  general  features  of  the  constitu-
tion of  the  populus.  Whatever  may  have  been  their  origin,  it
consisted  of  three  tribes.  Each  tribe  was  divided  into  ten  curiosy
and  each  curia  into  ten  decuricE ;  another  name  for  a  decuria  was
a  gens,  and  it  included  a  great  number  of  distinct  families,  united
by  having  common  sacred  rites,  and  bearing  a  common  name.  It
was  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  any  tie  of  blood  between
these  different  families,  in  order  that  they  should  form  part  of  the
same  gens ;  but  a  pure  unspotted  pedigree,  ancient  enough  to  have
no  known  beginning,  was  claimed  by  every  member  of  a  gens,^
and  there  was  a  theoretical  equality  among  all  the  members  of  the
whole  tribe.  The  heads  of  the  different  families  in  these  hundred
gentes  met  together  in  a  great  council,  called  the  council  of  the
curies  (^comifki  cnriata),  A  smaller  body  of  one  hundred,  answer-
ing in  number  to  the  gentes,  and  called  the  Senate,  was  charged
with  the  office  of  initiating  the  more  important  questions  sub-
mitted to  the  great  council ;  and  a  king,  nominated  by  the  senate,
but  chosen  by  the  curies,!  presided  over  the  whole  body,  and  was
charged  with  the  functions  of  executive  government.

3.  The  populus  was  also  bound  together  by  strong  religious
Beligious  ^^^^'  ^^^bat  was  most  peculiar  in  the  religion  of  Rome
system.  ^vas  its  intimate  connection  with  the  civil  polity.
The  heads  of  religion  were  not  a  priestly  caste,  but  were  citizens,
in  all  other  respects  like  their  fellows,  except  that  they  were  in-
vested with  peculiar  sacred  offices.  The  king  was  at  the  head  of
the  religious  body ;  and  beneath  him  were  augurs  and  other
functionaries  of  the  ceremonies  of  religion.  The  whole  body  of
the  populus  had  a  place  in  the  religious  system  of  the  State.  The
mere  fact  of  birth  in  one  of  the  familicB  forming  part  of  a  gens
gave  admittance  to  a  sacred  circle  which  was  closed  to  all  besides.
Those  in  this  circle  were  surrounded  by  religious  ceremonies  from
their  cradle  to  their  grave.  Every  important  act  of  their  life  was
sanctioned  by  solemn  rites.  Every  division  and  subdivision  of
the  State  to  which  they  belonged  had  its  own  peculiar  sacred
ceremonies.     The  individual,  the  family,  the  gens,  were  all  under

■^  Gentiles  sunt,  qui  inter  se  eodem  nomine  sunt ;  non  est  satis :  qui  ah
ingenuis  oriundi  sunt;  ne  id  quidem  satis  est :  quorum  majorum  nemo
servitutem.  servivit :  ahest  etlam  nunc  qui  capite  non  sunt  deminuti. —
Cicero,  Topic.  6.

f  Quirites,  regem  create  ;  ita  Patrihus  visum  est. — Liv.  i.  17.

INTEODUCTION.  IX

the  guardianship  of  their  respective  tutelary  deities.  Every
locality  with  which  they  were  familiar  was  sacred  to  some  patron
god.  The  calendar  was  marked  out  by  the  services  of  religion :
the  pleasure  of  the  gods  arranged  the  times  of  business  and
leisure ;  and  a  constantly-superintending  Providence  watched  over
the  councils  of  the  State,  and  showed,  by  signs  which  the  wise
could  understand,  approval  or  displeasure  at  all  that  was  under-
taken.

4.  By  the  side  of  this  associated  body  there  was  another
element  of  the  State,  occupying  a  position  very  dif-
ferent from  that  which  was  occupied  by  this  privi-
leged community.  The  p^ehs  was  probably  formed  by  the  inhabi-
tants of  conquered  towns  being  brought  to  Rome ;  perhaps  also
by  the  influx  of  voluntary  settlers.  These  new-comers,  or,  if  we
are  to  suppose  that  the  plehs  was  coeval  with  the  populus,  these
strangers,  remained  without  the  political  circle  which  included  the
populus.  They  belonged  to  no  gens*  had  no  place  in  the  comitia,
no  share  in  the  legislative  or  executive  government ;  as  little  had
they  any  share  in  the  jus  sacrum.  They  were  as  much  excluded
from  the  pale  of  the  peculiar  divine  law  as  from  that  of  the  pecu-
liar public  law  of  the  ruling  body.  Even  the  Servian  constitu-
tion, and  the  formation  of  the  thirty  tribes,  laid  the  foundation  of
future  change,  rather  than  altered  in  early  times  the  basis  on
which  existing  institutions  were  founded.  The  centuries  opened
to  the  plehs  a  door  to  political  power  by  making  the  two  orders
meet  on  the  common  ground  of  a  graduated  scale  of  property ;
and  the  constitution  of  the  thirty  tribes  marked  off  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  town  and  country  into  small  local  divisions,  in  the
comitia  of  which  the  plehs  had  of  course  the  preponderance,  if  it
is  to  be  supposed  that  the  tribes  had  any  recognised  comitia  before
the  institution  of  tribunes  at  the  beginning  of  the  Kepublican
period.  But  though  the  comitia  centuriata  took  away  ultimately
almost  all  political  power  from  the  comitia  curiata,  still  the  old
relations  of  the  different  members  of  the  body  politic  remained,
in  theory  at  least,  long  unimpaired.  The  curies  alone  could  give
the  religious  sanction  which  was  indispensable  to  the  validity  of
the  resolutions  of  the  centuries,  and  the  plehs  was  as  much  as

*  The  position  of  the  plebeian  families  included  in  the  gentes  was  so
exceptional,  and  is  so  obscure,  that  we  need  not  qualify  the  general  state-
ment that  the  jjlehs  did  not  belong  to  a  gens,  especially  if  the  expression  in
the  text  is  considered  as  referring  to  the  early  times  of  Rome.

X  INTKODUCTION.

ever  excluded  from  admission  into  the  body  of  tlie  populus,  fenced
round  with  its  impassable  wall  of  religious  privileges,  although
the  plebs  and  the  populus  were  governed  for  the  most  part  by  the
same  rules  of  private  law.

5.  There  could  be  very  little  direct  law-making,  except  to
Legislation  ioi    i^eet  temporary  emergencies,  in  such  a  community  as
early  Borne.      early  Eome.     What  laws  were  made,  were  first  pro-
posed, arranged,  and  determined  on  by  the   Senate^  under  the
guidance  of  its  chief  magistrate,  the  king,  and  then  submitted  to
the  highest  source  of  power,  the  comitia  curlata.     After  the  in-
stitution of  the  centuries,  the  comitia  centuriata  gradually  suc-
ceeded to  the  political  power  of  the  mriata,  and  the  curies  only
met  to  give  a  formal  religious  sanction  to  the  resolutions  of  the
centuries.     The  king  published  regulations  on  matters  that  fell
exclusively  within  his  province  as  pontifex  maximus,  and  a  collec-
tion of  these  leges  regicB,  which  were  probably  nothing  more  than
by-laws  for  the  conduct  of  religious  ceremonies,  was  made,  or  said
to  be  made,  by  Papirius,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Tarquinius
Superbus.^

6.  The  king  was  the  supreme  judge  in  all  causes.     But  if,  in

a  criminal  trial,  the  accused  was  a  member  of  the
populus,  he  could  appeal  from  the  king  to  the  comitia
curiata.  If  the  accused  was  a  plebeian,  he  had  no  tribunal  to  which
he  could  appeal,  until,  shortly  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,
the  Valerian  laws  transferred  appeals  to  the  comitia  centuriata ,
of  which  the  plebs  formed  a  part.  Civil  causes  were  decided  by
the  king  in  his  quality  oi pontifex  maximus,  or  by  the  subordinate
pontijices  acting  under  him,  as  all  the  private  law  of  the  populus
was  so  mixed  up  with  the  sacred  law,  that  it  was  part  of  the  duty
of  a  pontifex  to  know  and  guard  its  provisions,  f

7.  After  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  the  struggle  between  the

plebs  and   the  populus   became  gradually  more   and

Tositmi  of  the  -^  .  \/    _  ,  .    .^       _        -^       i     .      xi,

Flehs  after  the  more  scrious.     iicsidcs  the  right  ot    appeal   to  tne
exindsion  oj      centuries  secured  by  the  lex   Valeria  in  every  case

the  Kings.  ^  «^  *'       .

when  a  citizen  Avas  condemned  to  death,  the  secession
to  the  Aventine  in  260  A.u.C  wrung  from  the  patres  a  cancel-

*  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Papirius  was  a  real  person  (Dionys.
iii.  36).  But  when  Pomponius  speaks  of  his  collection  as  the  jus  civile
papirianuni  (D.  i.  2.  2.  2),  he  probably  uses  the  term  not  with  reference  to
the  real  work  of  Papirius,  but  to  a  work  composed  towards  the  end  of  the
republic  by  Granius  Flaccus,  De  Jure  Papiriano  (D.  1.  10.  144).

t  D.  i.  2.  2.  6.

INTEODUCTIOK  XI

ment  of  existing  debts,  and  the  creation  of  tribunes,  at  first  two  in
number,  then  five,  and  afterwards  ten,  to  defend  the  plehs.    These
champions  of  the  lower  order  of  the  State  gave  great  additional
importance  and  a  new  character,  or  perhaps  a  beginning,  to  the
cornitic  tributa,  which  now  had  to  elect  magistrates,  who  were
protected  themselves  by  a  sacred  character,  and  were  specially
commissioned  to  maintain  the  interest  of  their  fellow-tribesmen.
But  the  j)l^^s  li^^  to  struggle  with  an  evil  which  no  partial  remedies
could  meet.     There  was  no  body  of  laws  to  which  they  could
appeal  in  case  they  were  "wronged.     The  whole  administration  of
the  laws  was  in  the  hands  of  the  patricians,  and  there  was  no  ap-
peal from  the  decision  of  the  magistrate  except  in  cases  where  life
was  at  stake,  or  unless  the  injury,  inflicted  by  -wilful  perversion
of  the  law,  was  great  enough,  as  in  the  memorable  instance  of
Virginia,  to  rouse  the  wronged  to  the  redress  of  physical  force.
Many  of  the  rights  which  theoretically  belonged  to  the  plebeians
as  having  the  same  private  law  with  the  populus,  were  practically
denied  them.     At  last,  a  successful  revolution  enabled  the  plebs
to  insist  on  a  changed  form  of  political  government,  which  might
open  the  door  of  power  and  oflfice  to  the  members  of  their  own
body,  and  supply  a  machinery  for  the  preparation  of  a  fixed  and
permanent  body  of  law.     The  Decemvirate,  superseding  and  in-
corporating into  itself  every  other  magistracy,  and  composed  of  an
equal  number  of  patricians  and  plebeians,  was  formed  303  A.u.c,
for  the  purpose  of  collecting  and  embodying  in  the  shape  of  written
law  all  those  portions  of  the  customary  law  which  it  was  most
essential  for  the  due  administration  of  justice  to  place  on  an  in
disputable  footing,  and  publish  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  body
of  citizens.

8.  The  lavish  praises  bestowed  on  the  laws  of  the  Twelve
Tables  by  the  later  writers  of  Rome,  and  the  story  of  j-^^^  Twelve
the  deputation  sent  to  learn  the  laws  of  Greece,  would  Tables.
give  us  an  idea  of  a  very  difierent  body  of  laws  from  that  which
these  Tables  actually  presented.  We  should  expect  to  find  a
systematic  exposition  of  Roman  public  and  private  law  as  it
existed  in  the  times  previous  to  the  Gallic  invasion ;  and  to  find,
also,  that  the  whole  body  of  law  was  at  least  coloured  by  the
infusion  of  a  foreign  element.  We  should  naturally  think  that
there  was  somethino;  new  and  ori^rinal  in  a  leo:islation  which  Cicero
considers  as  almost  the  perfection  of  human  wisdom."^     The  frag-

*  See  esj)ecially  De  Orat.  i.  43,  44.

Xll  INTRODUCTION.

ments  of  the  Twelve  Tables  which  remam  to  us  show  how  erro-
neous are  these  conceptions  of  their  contents.  There  is  nothing
whatsoever  which  we  can  decidedly  pronounce  to  be  borrowed
from  a  foreign  origin,  except  possibly  some  provisions  respecting
the  law  of  funerals,  taken  from  the  laws  of  Solon.  These  Tables
contained,  for  the  most  part,  short  enunciations  of  those  points  of
law  which  the  conduct  of  the  affairs  of  daily  life  required  to  be
settled  and  publicly  announced.  The  law  had  existed  before,  but
in  a  floating,  vague,  traditionary  shape,  only  some  very  few  laws
having  been  engraved  on  tablets  and  publicly  displaj^ed.  The
Twelve  Tables  left  to  the  decision  of  the  magistrate,  and  the
interpretation  of  those  skilled  in  law,  the  application  and  exposi-
tion of  these  principles ;  they  also  left  many  parts  of  the  custo-
mary law  wholly  untouched  on.  But  what  the  exigencies  of  the
time  required  deciding,  they  decided ;  and  they  laid  a  firm  foun-
dation on  which  the  structure  of  private  law  would  rest  for  the
future.  It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  this  was  esteemed  so
great  a  gain  to  the  large  body  of  the  citizens,  that  these  laws  were
spoken  of  by  the  ancients  as  the  creations  of  a  new  legislation.

The  following  are  the  chief  provisions  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
so  far  as  they  are  known.* — 1.  The  First  Table  related  to  the  pro-
ceedings in  a  civil  suit.  If  the  person  summoned  before  the
magistrate  would  not  come,  he  "s\^as  to  be  forced  to  go,  but  for  an
old  or  sick  man  a  beast  of  burden  was  to  be  provided.  If  the
adversaries  could  agree  on  the  way,  they  were  to  be  allowed  to  do
so.  If  not,  the  statements  of  both  were  to  be  heard  before  midday
in  the  Comitium  or  the  Forum,  and  then,  after  midday,  the  magis-
trate was  to  adjudge  the  thing,  but  every  process  was  to  be  stopped
at  sunset.  2.  The  Second  Table  fixed  the  amount  to  be  depo-
sited in  the  action  by  wager,  and  provided  that  the  affair  might  be
put  off  if  necessary,  as  if,  among  other  things,  the  judge  or  arbiter
appointed  by  the  magistrate  was  ill;  and  pointed  out  how  witnesses
might  be  summoned.  3.  The  Third  Table  vras  apparently  made
in  favour  of  debtors,  for  though  it  left  them  ultimately  at  the
mercy  of  the  creditor,  it  gave  them  new  means  of  averting  their
fate.  They  were  to  have  thirty  days  before  any  steps  could  be
taken  against  them  on  a  debt  confessed  or  decided  to  be  due.
They  might  then  be  brought  before  a  magistrate,  and  unless  pay-

*  This  summary  is  taken  from  the  arrangement  of  the  supposed  con-
tents of  the  Twelve  Tables  adopted  by  Ortolan  ;  but  in  manj'-  points,  and
especially  in  the  assignment  to  a  particular  Table  of  a  fragment,  this  arrange-
ment is  necessarily  conjectural.

INTKODUCTION.  Xlll

ment  was  made  or  a  surety  {yindex)  found,  the  creditor  mlglit
put  them  in  irons,  but  not  of  more  than  fifteen  pounds  weight,
and  must  give  them  a  pound  of  flour  a  day.     This  could  last  for
sixty  days  only,  and  the  debtor  had  meanwhile  to  be  produced
before  the  magistrate  to  show  he  was  alive ;  and  notice  of  the
amount  of  the  debt  must  be  given  on  three  market-days  by  the
creditor,  so  that  an  opportunity  of  ransoming  the  debtor  might  be
given.     Then,  but  not  till  then,  the  debtor  was  at  the  mercy  of
the  creditor,  who  could  sell  him  as  a  slave  or  kill  him,  and  if  there
were  several  creditors,  they  might  hew  him  in  pieces,  and  although
any  of  them  took  a  part  of  his  body  larger  in  proportion  than  his
claim,  he  was  not  to  be  punished.     4.   The  Fourth  Table  referred
to  the  father  of  the  family,  who  was  bidden  to  destroy  deformed
children,  and  whose  absolute  power  over  the  life  and  liberty  oJt
his  children  was  established,  while  it  was  provided  that  if  he
sold  his  son  three  times,  the  son  should  be  freed  from  his  power.
5.   The  Fifth  Table  related  to  inheritances  and  tutorships.     Wo-
men were  to  be  in  perpetual^  tutorship,  except  the  vestal  virgins.
As  a  man  disposed  by  testament,  so  was  the  law  to  be ;  but  if
he  died  intestate,  and  without  a  suus  heres,  his  nearest  agnati,  or,
in    default  of   agnati,  the  gentiles,  were  to   take.      The   agaati
were  to  be  tutors,  and  have  the  custody  of  madmen  who  had  no
curators.     6.   The  Sixth  Table  referred  to  ownership,  and  pro-
vided that   the  words  spoken  in  the    solemn  forms  of  transfer,
a  nexum  or  mancipium,  should   be  held  binding ;    that  he  who
denied  them  should  pay  double  ;  that  ten  years'  possession  for
immoveables,  and  one  for  moveables,  should  be  the  time  necessary
for  usucapion,  and  that  a  year  should  suffice  for  the  usucapion  of
a  wife  by  her  husband,  unless  she  absented  herself  for  three  nights
in  the  time ;  that  no  one  not  a  Roman  citizen  should  acquire
by  usucapion ;  and  that  materials  built  into  a  house  should  not  be
reclaimed  by  their  owner,  at  least  until  the  building  was  taken  or
fell  down.     The  property  in  a  thing  sold  was  not  to  pass  to  the
purchaser  until  the  vendor  was  satisfied.     The  "fictitious  suit  for
the  transfer   of  property  called  in  jure  cessio,  and  mancipation,
were  confirmed.     7.  The  Seventh  Table  contained  provisions  as
to  buildings  and  to  plots  of  land,  as  to  the  width  of  way  to, be  left,
as  to  overhanging  trees,  and  so  forth ;  and  in  case  of  disputes  as
to  boundaries,  the  magistrate  was  to  appoint  arbitrators.     8.  The
Eighth  Table  dealt  with  delicts.     It  prescribed  capital  punish-
ment for  libellous  sono-s  and  outrages.     A  limb  was  to  be  given
for  a  limb,  three  hundred  asses  for  the  tooth  of  a  free  man,  and

XIV  INTRODUCTION.

one  hundred  and  fifty  for  the  tooth  of  a  slave ;  for  an  injury  or
minor  outrage,  twenty-five  asses  ;  a  four-footed  beast  doing  injury
might  be  given  up  to  whomsoever  it  injured,  in  lieu  of  compensation.
The  nocturnal  devastation  of  crops  or  the  incendiarism  of  a  build-
ing was  punished  with  death.  Theft,  if  the  thief  was  caught  red-
handed,  was  to  be  punished  by  the  thief,  if  a  freeman,  being
given  over  to  the  person  robbed,  and,  if  a  slave,  by  his  being
beaten  and  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian  Rock ;  while  various  other
provisions  are  made  as  to  theft,  fixing  minor  penalties,  where  the
circumstances  were  not  so  grave.  The  rate  of  interest  was  fixed  at
8J  per  cent,  per  annum  {centesimcB  usurce),  and  the  usurer  who
exceeded  this  was  to  be  fined  quadruple.  The  false  witness  was  to
be  thrown  from  the  Kock,  and  the  witness,  in  a  solemn  form,  who
refused  his  testimony  was  to  be  infamous ;  and  the  enchanter  and
poisoner  were  to  be  punished.  9.  The  Ninth  Table  related  to  public  j
law,  and  provided  that  there  were  to  be  no privilegia,  or  laws  affect-
ing individuals  only ;  that  the  centuries  alone  could  pronounce
capital  sentence ;  that  the  judge  or  arbiter  taking  a  bribe  should  be
punishable  capitally ;  that  there  should  be  an  appeal  to  the  people
from  every  penal  sentence ;  and  that  death  should  be  the  punish-
ment of  leaguing  with  or  handing  over  a  citizen  to  the  enemy.
10.  The  Tenth  Table  related  to  funerals,  limiting  the  ceremonies
and  display  attending  them.  11.  The  Eleventh  Table  prohibited
the  marriage  of  patricians  and  plebeians;  and  12.  The  Twelfth
Table  had  reference  to  some  miscellaneous  matters  ;  as  that  a  slave
who  had  done  an  injury  might  be  abandoned  to  the  person  injured,
in  lieu  of  compensation.  The  seizure  of  anything  belonging  to
the  debtor  {pignoris  capio)  was  permitted  when  the  debt  had  been
contracted,  or  the  sum  due  was  to  be  expended,  for  sacrificial
purposes.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  Twelve  Tables  recognise  four  of
the  actions  of  law,  the  nature  of  which  will  be  noticed  in  a  later
part  of  the  Introduction,  viz.,  sacramentum,  judiciis  postulatio,
(in  the  shape  of  the  arbitration  to  be  given  to  settle  boundaries),
maniis  injectio,  and  pignoris  capio.  They  further  recognise  the
distinction  between  the  magistrate  and  the  Jz^c/e^,  w^hich  was  the
characteristic  feature  of  Roman  procedure ;  and  probably  these
actions  of  law  and  this  distinction  between  the  judge  and  the
magistrate  date  from  a  time  much  earlier  than  the  Twelve  Tables.
Most,  too,  of  the  characteristic  points  of  Roman  civil  law  are  to
be  found  in  the  TavcIvc  Tables.     The  patria  potestas,  usucapion.

INTKODUCTION.  XV

tutelao-e,  testamentary  and  intestate  succession,  the  nexuin,  man-
cipatio,  all  are  enforced,  and  evidently  formed  part  of  the  ancient
customary  law  of  Rome.

9.  The  Decemvirate  was  nominally  intended  to  be  a  means  of
removinof,  as  far  as  was  then  thouo;ht  possible,  the

The  attain-

political  distinction  between  the  orders.     How  little  mcnt  of  poU-
the  object  was  really  accomplished  is  notorious.     Al-  t^c^^'^n'^'^^^y
though  half  the  decemvirs  were  plebeians,  the  suppres-
sion of  the  meetings  of  the  comitia  tributa,  and  the  loss  of  tribunes,
was  poorly  compensated  by  the  presence  of  magistrates  who  acted
in  conjunction  with  patricians,  and  readily  yielded  deference  to
their  colleagues.     Besides,  the  Two  Tables  added  in  the  year  of
the  second  Decemvirate  contained  provisions  which  later  writers
considered  manifestly  unjust;^  and  we  have  seen  that,  among
other  things,  they  expressly  refused  the  connuhlum  to  the  plehs.
The  Twelve  Tables,  as  fixing  and  proclaiming  the  law,  were  un-
doubtedly a  source  of  great  strength  to  the  plebeians,  and  enabled
them  to  maintain  a  much  more  secure  position  in  their  future
struggles ;  but   the  Decemvirate,  regarded   as   a  crisis   in   their
political  history,  was  certainly  unfavourable  to  them.     Nothing
shows  more  completely  that  this  was  so  than  the  progress  they
made  immediately  after  the  downfall  of  Appius  Claudius  and  his
colleagues.     The  laws  of  Horatius  and  Valerius  not  only  forbad
the  constitution  of  any  magistracy  from  which  there  should  be  no
appeal,  but  provided  that  the  ordinances  of  the  comitia  trihuta
should,  if  sanctioned  by  the  senate  and  the  curies,  be  binding  on
all  Roman  citizens ;  and  in  309,  only  four  years  after  the  aboli-
tion of  the  Decemvirate,  the  Canuleian  law  gave  the  connuhivm
to  the  plebs,  and  the  marriage  of  a  patrician  with  a  plebeian  was  no
longer  forbidden  by  law.     This  change  was  important,  not  only
as  removing  a  distinction  mortifying  to  many  individuals  and  em-
barrassing many  of  the  relations  of  private  life,  but  as  breaking
through  one  of  the  barriers  which  the  jus  sacrum  had  hitherto
interposed  in  the  way  of  the  plebs.'f     The  obstacle  of  a  religious
disqualification  was  the  reason  generally  assigned  by  the  populus
for  the  exclusion  of  plebeians  from  public  offices ;  J  and  it  was  a

^  Cic.  De  Rep.  ii.  37.

t  Ideoque   decewmros  connubium  '  diremlssey   ne    incertd    prole    auspicia
turharentur. — Liv.  iv.  6.

X  Interroganti  tribimo,  curplebeium  considem  Jieri  non  oporteret  ?  respondit,
qudd  nemo  plebeius  auspicia  haheret. — Liv.  iv.  6.

a

XVI  INTEODUCTION.

great  step  towards  political  equality  that  the  objection  urged  to
marriages  between  the  two  orders — that  it  would  disturb  the  sacra
of  the  cjentes — should  be  overcome.  The  advance  of  the  plehs  to
political  equality  was,  however,  very  slow ;  and  it  was  not  until
a  century  and  a  half  had  elapsed  from  the  passing  of  the  Canuleian
law  that  the  two  orders  were  placed  on  an  equal  footing.  We
may  take  the  year  467  ,a.u.c.,  the  date  of  the  lex  Hortensia,  as
the  period  when  we  can  first  pronounce  that  the  distinction  of  the
two  orders  was  really  done  away.  When  that  law  had  been
passed,  the  plebeian  had  a  full  share  in  the  jus  publicum  and  the
jus  sacrum.  The  ordinances  of  the  comitia  tributa  required  no
confirmation  of  the  curies,  no  sanction  of  the  Senate ;  they  were
binding  on  the  whole  Koman  people  directly  they  were  passed.
The  equality  between  the  two  orders  was  so  complete  that  the
plebeian  could  become  consul,  censor,  praetor,  curule  gedile ;  he
could  enter  the  Senate,  he  could  administer  justice ;  he  was
excluded  from  none  of  the  privileges  of  ih^jus  sacrum ;  he  could
become  pontifex  and  augur ;  and  though  he  could  not  of  course
take  part  in  any  of  the  sacra  belonging  to  particular  gentes,  go
through  certain  religious  ceremonies,  or  be  engaged  in  the  service
of  particular  gods,  these  exceptions  did  not  lower  his  political
position.  As  far  as  the  history  of  law  is  concerned,  we  may
henceforv/ard  lose  sight  of  the  distinction  between  plebeian  and
patrician.

10.  From  the  writings  of  the  later  jurists,  and  especially
from  those  of  Gains  and  Cicero,  and  from  the  frag-
ments of  the  TavcIvc  Tables  that  have  come  down
to  us,  we  can  collect  the  essential  features  of  the  private  law  of
Some  in  its  earliest  period,  before  a  general  advance  in  civilisa-
tion had  modified  it.  This  early  law,  which  rested  on  custom  as
its  foundation,  and  the  elements  of  which,  except  so  far  as
appeared  in  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  were  only  known  by
tradition,  was  called  in  subsequent  times  \hQJus  civile,  the  pecu-
liar law  of  the  Koman  State.  The  history  of  Koman  law  is  the
history  of  the  changes  introduced  into  this  law,  of  the  additions
made  to  it,  and  of  the  method  adopted  in  the  process.  The
notion  of  a  body  of  customary  law,  in  part  unwritten,  which  was
not  abrogated,  but  was  evaded  or  amplified  by  persons  acting
under  the  ideas  of  later  times,  is  the  notion  which,  above  all
others,  must  be  embraced  clearly  by  any  one  who  wishes  to  under-
stand Roman  law.     The  jus  civile  must  always  be  taken  as  the

INTRODUCTION.  XVll

standino-  point,  and  in  tracing  the  history  of  the  later  law  we  have
always  to  trace  how,  while  the  jus  civile  still  remained  in  force,
the  law  was  made  to  suit  the  requirements  of  diiFerent  periods  by
evading  or  adding  to  \h.QJus  civile.  It  was  only  in  the  later  days
of  the  Empire  that  ihejus  civile  began  to  be  swept  away.  When
we  come  to  speak  of  the  contents  of  Koman  private  law,  we  shall
have  occasion  to  notice  what  were  the  leading  features  of  i\\QJus
civile.  We  need  not  at  present  do  more  than  say  that,  when  a
student  of  Koman  law  has  made  himself  acquainted  with  the
elementary  doctrines,  he  will  find  that  the  chief  of  these  peculiar
principles,  dating  from  an  unknown  antiquity,  and  affecting  the
whole  body  of  later  jurisprudence,  are  those  which  determine  the
position  of  a  father  of  a  family,  the  succession  to  his  estate,  and
the  contracts  and  actions  relating  to  the  chief  possessions  of  an
agricultural  proprietor.

11.  The  conquest  of  Italy  and  the  gradual  spread  of  Roman
conquest  materially  altered  the  character  of  the  legal   Conquest  of
system.    A  branch  of  law  almost  entirely  new  sprang  I^^^y-
up,  which  determined  the  different  relations  in  which  the  con-
quered cities  and  nations  were  to  stand  with  reference  to  Rome
itself.     As  a  general  rule,  and  as  compared  with  other  nations  of
antiquity,  Rome  governed  those  whom  she  had  vanquished  with
wisdom  and  moderation.     Particular  governors,  indeed,  abused
their  power ;  but  the  policy  of  the  State  was  not  a  severe  one,
and  Rome  connected  herself  with  her  subject  allies  by  conceding
them  privileges  proportionate  to  their  importance,  or  their  ser-
vices.    The  jus  Latinum  and  the  Jm^  Italicum  are  terms  familiar
to  all  readers  of  Roman  history ;  the  first  expressed  that,  with)
various  degrees  of  completeness,  the  rights  of  Roman  citizenship)
were  accorded  to  the  inhabitants  of  different  towns,  some  having^'
the  commercium  only,  some  also  the  co7inubium.     Towards  the
end  of  the  republic,  after  the  Social  War  (a.u.c.  663),  the  dis-  /
tinction  of  the  Latinitas,  as  a  partial  right  of  citizenship  attached
to  the  inhabitants  of  particular  places,  disappeared  among  the*"
people  of  Italy.     The  lex  Junia  (a.u.C.  664)  and  the  lex  Plautia
(a.u.c.  663)  gave  the  full  rights  of  citizenship  to  almost  the  whole  ,
of  Italy,  and  the  Italians  were  distributed  among  the  thirty-five
tribes.    T\iQJus  Italicum  expressed  a  certain  amount  of  municipal
independence  and  exemption  from  taxation,  attached  to  the  dif-
ferent places  on  which  the  right  was  bestowed.     The  citizens  of
some  particular  places  in  the  provinces  possessed  the  jus  Latinum^

a  2

XVlil  INTRODUCTION.

and  the  jus  Italicum  was  attached  to  certain  privileged  cities  ;  but
the  provinces  generally  had  no  participation  in  either  right.  They
were  subject  to  a  proconsul  or  propraetor,  paid  taxes  to  the  trea-
sury of  Rome,  and  had  as  much  of  the  law  of  Rome  imposed  upon
them,  and  were  made  to  conform  as  nearly  to  Roman  political
notions,  as  their  conquerors  considered  expedient."^

12.  But  the  contact  of  Rome  with  foreign  nations  produced  a

much  more  remarkable  effect  on  Roman  law  than  the  introduction

of  a  new  branch  of  law  regulating  the  position  of  subject  nations.

It  wrought,  or  at  least  contributed  largely  to  work,  a

Change  in       ■  i      •         •        i       i         i  •  p     i       -r>  t

Boman  law     revolution  ni  the  legal  notions  oi  the  Roman  people.
zmdcr  the        j^  forced  them  to  compare  other  systems  with  their

FrcBiors.  ,       .      .  .

^  own.     In  the  language  of  the  jurists,  it  brought  the

Qjis^^iientium,  that  is,  the  law  ascertained  to  obtain  generally  in
I  other  nations,  side  by  side  with  the  jm5  civile,  the  old  law  of  Rome.
The  prcBtor  peregrinus,   who   was   appointed  (a.u.C.  507)  to  ad-
judge suits  in  which  persons  who  were  not  citizens  were  parties,
could  not  bind  strangers  within  the  narrow  and  technical  limits
in  which  Romans  were  accustomed  to  move.     Many  of  the  most
important  parts  of  Roman  law  were  such  that  their  provisions
.could  not  be  extended  to  any  but  citizens.     No  one,  for  instance,
except  a  citizen,  could  have  the  peculiar  ownership  termed  domi-
nium ex  jure  Quiritiiim.  But  when  justice  and  reason  pronounced
a  stranger  to  be  an  owner,  it  was  impossible  for  a  prcBtor  not  to
recognise  an  ownership  different  from  that  which  a  citizen  would
claim ;  and  what  magistrates  were  obliged  to  do  in  the  case  of
strangers,  the  requirements  of  advancing  civilisation  soon  induced
them  to  do  in  the  case  of  citizens.     They  recognised  and  gave
effect  to  principles   different  from  those  of  the  municipal  law  of
Rome.     This  municipal  law  remained  in  force  wherever  its  pro-
visions could  give  all  that  was  required  to  do  substantial  justice ;
but  when  they  could  not,  the  praetor  appealed  to  a  wider  law,  and
sought  in  the  principles  of  equity  a  remedy  for  the  deficiencies  of
ihejus  civile.     He  pronounced  decrees  (^edicta),  laying  down  the
law  as  he  conceived  it  ought  to  be,  if  it  was  to  reo-ulate  aris^ht  i
the  case  before  him.     In  process  of  time  it  became  the  custom  for  I
the  praetor  to  collect  into  one  edictum  the  rules  on  which  he  in-
tended to  act  during  his  tenure  of  office,  and  to  publish  them  on
a  tablet  {in  alio)  at  the  commencement  of  his  official  year.     The

*  See  Warnkcenig,  Hist,  du  droit  romain  externe,  p.  70.      Savigny,
Geschicht.  Rom.  Beclits,  vol.  i.  ch.  2.

INTEODUCTION.  XlX

edict,  put  forward  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  of  office,  and
running  on  from  one  praetor  to  another,  was  termed  the  edictum
perpetuiim.  How  much  the  praetor  was  aided  in  the  formation
of  a  broader  and  more  comprehensive  system  of  law  by  a  change
in  the  form  of  actions,  will  appear  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the
system  of  civil  process.  By  degrees  such  a  system  w^as  intro-
luced  and  fully  established,  and  the  jus  honorarium,  the  law  of
:he  23ra3tors*  {qui  honor es  gerebant),  was  spoken  of  as  having  a
listinct  place  by  the  side,  and  as  the  complement,  of  i\\QJus  civile.
The  praetors  gave  the  formula  of  an  action  to  the  judge.  For
nany  centuries  senators  alone  were  indoles  until  the

i.  /  X  1  1  .    1  p     The  judges.

ex  Semproma  (A.u.C.   632)  tooK  away  the  right  oi

)eing  judges   from  the   senators,  and  ga,ve   it  to  the   knights.

Ifter  a  series  of  contests,  the  right  was  shared  by  the  two  orders,

Lud  extended  even  to  persons  of  inferior  rank,  so  that  the   300

►f  the  senatorial  times  had  become  4,000  by  the  time  of  Augustus.

Besides  the  judges  placed  on  the  annual  list  {in  albo  relati)  there

v^ere  the  recziperatores,  who  were  appointed  to  determine  causes

o  which  peregrini  were  parties,  and  who  were  taken  from  every

ank  for  the  special  occasion,  who  sat  three  or  more  together,  and

vho  were  used  in  cases  requiring  despatch.     And  there  were

lIso  the  centumviri,  taken  so  many  from  each  tribe,  and  who

udged  of  cases  of  status,  Quiritary  property,  and  testamentary

.nd  intestate  succession.

13.   The  progress  of  law  was   also  much   facilitated  by  the

growth  of  a  body  of  men  termed  juris  consulti  or  The  juris  ^nu-

uris  pru denies,  men  who  studied  the  forms,  and,  in  denies.

ime,  the  principles  of  law,  and  expounded  them  for  the  benefit

f  their  friends  and  dependents.     They  were  generally  among

he  first  men  of  the  State,  and  the  employment  was  considered  one

f  the  most  dignified  that  could  occupy  the  evening  of  a  life  of

lublic  service  and  magisterial  honours.     In  the  earlier  times  of

he  republic  the  patricians  alone  knew  the  days  on  which  it  was

r  was  not  lawful  to  transact  legal  business,  and  the  forms  in

^hich   actions  were  to  be  brought.     The   story  of  the  publishing

f  a  collection  of  these  forms,  and  of  a  list  of  the  days  on  which

usiness  could  be  transacted,  by  Caius  Flavins,  is  familiar  to  all

eaders  of  Livy.f     But  although  to  a  certain  extent  the  study  of

*  The  term  also  included  the  edicts  of  the  sediles  who  issued  decrees  in
latters  that  came  specially  within  their  province,
t  Liv.  ix.  46.

XX  INTEODUCTION.

the  law  became  open  to  all,  whether  patricians  or  plebeians,  yet  it
does  not  seem  to  have  been  ever  undertaken  except  by  men  of
eminence.     Such  men  used  to  instruct  and  protect  the  persons
who  sought  their  advice,  explain  the  steps  necessary  for  the  suc-
cessful conduct  of  an  action,  and  write  out  the  necessary  forms."^
They  gave  answers  when  asked  as  to  the  law  on  a  particular
point ;  and  though  they  professed  only  to  interpret  the  Twelve
Tables,  not  to  make  laws,  their  notion  of  interpretation  was  so
wide  that  it  included  whatever  could  be  brought  within  the  spirit
of  anything  which  the  Twelve  Tables  enacted.     Such  answers
(responsa)  were  of  course  of  no  legal  authority ;  but  as  the  sage
would  frequently  accompany  his  client f  (as  the  questioner  was
called)  before  the  magistrate,  and  announce  his  opinion,  it  had
frequently  all  the  effect  upon  the  magistrate  which  a  positive
enactment  would  have  had,   and  thus  the  responsa  prudentum
came  to  be  enumerated  among  the  direct  sources  of  law.     The
names  of  some  of  these  sages  have  been  handed  down  to  us.  Cato
the  censor,  and  Severus  Sulpicius,  the  cotemporary  of  Cicero,  are
those   otherwise  best  known  to  us.|     In  the  latter  days  of  the
republic  the  juris  prudeiites  were  men  acquainted  with  some  por-
tion at  least  of  Greek  philosophy,  men  of  learning  and  general
cultivation ;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  powerfully
their  authority,  acting  almost  directly  on  judicial  decisions,  must
have  contributed  to  the  change  which  the  law  underwent  towards
the  end  of  the  republic.

14.  By  far  the  most  important  addition  to  the  system  of
The  law  of  I^oman  law  which  the  jurists  introduced  from  Greek
nature.  philosophy,  was  the   conception  of  the    lex  natures.

We  learn  from  the  writings  of  Cicero  whence  this  conception
came,  and  what  was  understood  by  it.§  It  came  from  Che  Stoics^
and  especially  from  Chrysippus.  By  natura,  for  which  Cicero
sometimes  substitutes  mundus,  was  meant  the  universe  of  things,
and  this  universe  the  Stoics  declared  to  be  guided  by  reason.
But  as  reason  is  thus  a  directive  power,  forbidding  and  enjoining,
it  is  called  law  {lex  est  ratio  summa  insita  in  natura,  quce  juhet  ea

*  The  duty  of  a  jurisprudent  was  respondere,  cavere,  agere,  scrihere. —
Cic.  De  Orat.  i.  48.     -'^—■'-^'

f  Clienti  j^t'omere  jura. — Hon.  Epist.  ii.  104.

J  Gibbon,  viii.  31.

§  The  most  important  passages  in  Cicero,  with  reference  to  the  lex
naturse,  are  De  Leg.  i.  6-12  ;  Be  Nat.  Deor.  i.  14,  ii.  14.  31  ;  De  Fin.  iv.  7.
The  expressions  used  in  the  text  are  from  De  Leg.  i.  6.

INTRODUCTION.  XXl

qucB  facienda  sunt,  prohihetque  contraria).     But  nature  is  with  the
Stoics  both  an  active  and  a  passive  principle,  and  there  is  no  source
of  the  law  of  nature  beyond  nature  itself.     By  lex  natures,  there-
fore, was  meant  primarily  the  determining  force  of  the  universe,  a
force  inherent  in  the  universe  by  its  constitution, (Z^^  est  naturce  vis).
But  man  has  reason,  and  as   reason  cannot  be  twofold,  the  ratio
of  the  universe  must  be   the  same  as  the  ratio  of  man,  and  the
lex  naturcB  will  be  the  law  by  which  the  actions  of  man  are  to  be
guided,  as  well  as  the  law  directing  the  universe.     Virtue,  or
moral  excellence,  may  be  described  as  living  in  accordance  with
reason,  or  with  the  law  of  the  universe.     These  notions  worked
themselves  into  Koman  law,   and  the  practical  shape  they  took  \
was  that  morality,  so  flir  as  it  could  come  within  the  scope  of  I
judges,  was  regarded  as  enjoined  by  law.     The  jurists  did  not   j
draw  any  sharp  line  between  law  and  morality.   As  the  lex  natures  I
was  a  lex,  it  must  have  a  place  in  the  law  of  Rome.     The  prsetor
considered  himself  bound  to  arrano;e    his    decisions  so  that   no
strons:  moral  claims  should  be  disreo-arded.     He  had  to  o;ive  effect
to  the  lex  natiircB,  not  only  because  it  was  morally  right  to  do  so,
but  also  because  the  lex  natures,  was  a  lex.     When  a  rij^id  adher-
ence  to  the   doctrines  of  the  jus  civile  threatened  to  do  a  moral/
wrong,  and  produce  a  result  that  was  not  equitable,  there  the  lex\
naturcB  was  supposed  to  operate,  and  the  praitor,  in  accordance  •
with  its  dictates,  provided  a  remedy  by  means  of  the  pliant  forms
of  the  praetorian   actions.     Gradually  the  cases,  as  well  as  the
modes  in  which  he  would  thus  interfere,  grew  more  and  more  cer-
tain and  recognised,  and  thus  a  body  of  equitable  principles  was
introduced  into  Roman  law.     The  two  great  agents  in  modifying
and  extending  the  old,  rigid,  narrow  system  of  the  jm5  civile  were
thus  the  jus  gentium  and  the  lex  naturcB  ;  that  is,  generalisations
from  the  legal  systems  of  other  nations,  and  morality  looked  on
according  to  the  philosophy  of  the  Stoics  as  sanctioned  by  a  law.
But  as,  on  the  one  hand,  the  generalisations  from  experience  had
in  themselves  no  binding  force,  and  as,  on  the  other,  the  best
index  to  ascertain  what  morality  commanded  was  to  examine  the
contents  of  other   legal    systems,  the  jus  gentium  and  the    lex
natures,  were  each  the  complement  of  the   other,  and  were  often
looked  on  by  the  jurists  as  making  one  whole,  to  which  the  term
jus  gentium  was  generally  applied.*

*    See    Austin",    Province    of    Jurisprudence    determined.       Appendix,
page  xii.

xxii  INTKODUCTION.

•

15.   The  centuries  met  to  decide  questions  of  war  and  peace,

and  to  choose  the  higher  magistrates ;  but  the  laws  which,  after

Sources  of        the  lex   Hortensia,   were    j)assed  to  effect   any   real

legislation.        change  in  the  body  of  Roman  law,  were  almost  all

plehhcita.     The   comitia  tributa  were  recognised   as   almost  the
\  .  .       .

\exclusive  centre  of  legislative  power:  but  in  the  later  times  of

the  republic  a  continually-increasins:  importance  was

JPIebiscita.  J  g         r  ^

attached  to  the  ordinances  of  the  senate.  Gains
says  that  it  had  been  questioned  whether  the  senatus-consulta
had  the  force  of  law.^  Perhaps  they  had  not  exactly  the  force
of  law  at  any  time  under  the  republic,  excepting  when  they
related  to  matters  which  it  was  the  peculiar  province  of  the
senate  to  regulate ;  but  they  were  probably  of  little  less  weight

than   enactments  recognized  as  constitutionally  bind-

The  Senate.       .  „  on  •        •       t         i    •       ,   j_

mg.     Ihe  senate  successiuUy  mamtamed  a  clamif  to

exercise  a  dispensing  power,  and  to  release  individuals  from
obedience  to  particular  laws.  It  was  generally  able  to  reject  a
law,  either  wholly  or  partly,  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  religious
scruples ;  and  if  it  added  a  clause  to  a  law,  the  new  portion  of
the  law  was  as  binding  as  the  old.  J  In  the  shape  of  directions
to  particular  magistrates,  it  issued  injunctions,  of  which  the  force
was  felt  by  all  those  who  were  subject  to  the  magistrate's  power;
and  it  made,  we  have  reason  to  think,  independent  enactments  in
matters  belonging  to  religion,  police,  and  civil  administration,
and  perhaps  even  in  matters  of  private  law.§  The  senate  com-
prised the  richest  and  most  influential  men  in  the  State ;  the
disruption  of  society  attending  the  civil  wars  strengthened  their
influence ;  and  the  Komans  of  the  days  of  Cicero  were  quite
prepared  for  the  place  which  the  senate  held,  as  a  legislative
body,  under  the  early  C^sars.

The  growth  of  law  during  the  time  that  elapsed  between  the
:  promulgation  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  the  commencement  of
the  empire  is  marked  not  only  by  the  abolition  of  the  actions
of  law  and  the  institution  of  praetorian  actions,  but  by  the
^development  of  the  law  of  obligations,  the  old  conveyance  of
nexum  having  expanded  into  verbal  and  literal  contracts,  and  real
contracts  being  recognised  where  no  form  but  the  delivery  of  the

*  Cicero  mentions  them  among  the  sources  of  law.  — Tojjic.  5.
f  AscoN.  Argum.  in  Cornel.  (Orell.  p.  57).
%  AscoN.  Argum.  in  Cornel.  (Orell.  p.  67).
§  PucHTA,  Inst  it.  i.  298.

INTEODUCTION.  xxm

thing  was  required;  and  four  forms  of  purely  consensual  con-
tracts being  admitted  as  part  of  the  civil  law ;  to  all  which  the
prgetor  constantly  added  cases  in  which  he  announced  that  he
would  recognise  and  enforce  an  obligation.  The  pra3tor,  too,  pro-
tected and  regulated  possession  as  apart  from  ownership ;  and
his  attention  w^as  bestowed  on  the  ties  of  blood,  the  father  being
restrained  from  disinheriting  his  children,  and  cognati  taking  the
place  oi  gentiles  in  intestate  succession.  ^^

16.  The  first  emperors  were  only  the  chief  magistrates  of  the
republic.     Auo;ustus    and   his   immediate    successors

united  m  their  own  persons  all  the  highest  omces  ot
the  State.  The  imperhtm,  or  supreme  command,  was  conferred
on  them  by  the  lex  regia  passed  as  a  matter  of  form  at  the  be-
ginning of  their  reign,  and  by  which  the  later  jurists  suj^posed
that  the  people  devolved  on  the  emperor  all  their  own  right  to
govern  and  to  legislate.*  The  assumption  of -despotism  was  veiled
under  an  adherence  to  republican  forms ;  and,  at  any  rate  during
the  first  century  of  our  era,  the  emperor  always  affected  to  con-
sider himself  as  nothing  more  than  the  princeps  reipuhlicce.
Although  we  have  instances,  even  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  of
edicts  intended  to  be  binding  by  the  mere  authority  of  the
emperor,  yet  the  people  at  first,  and  the  senate  afterwards,  was
recognised  as  the  j)rimary  source  of  law.  By  degrees  the
emperor  usurped  the  sole  legislative  authority,  either  dictating  to
the  senate  what  it  was  to  enact,  or,  in  later  times,  enacting  it
himself.  The  will  of  the  prince  came  to  have  the  force  of  law.f
Sometimes  this  will  decided  what  the  law  should  be  by  the  pub-
lication of  edicta  pronounced  by  the  emperor  in  his  magisterial
capacity,  or  mandata,  orders  directed  to  particular  officers ;  some-
times by  decreta,  or  judicial  sentences  given  by  the  emperor,
which  served  as  precedents ;  at  other  times  by  rescripta,  that  is,
answers  given  by  the  emperor  to  magistrates  who  requested  his
assistance  in  the  decision  of  doubtful  points.

17.  The  people  did  not  cease  to  make  laws  for  a  considerable  time
after  the  commencement  of  the  empire.!     These  laws

n  n  1  «PI  )  Laws.

were  ol  course  really  the  creations  ot  the  emperor  s

will.     Augustus,  for  instance,  procured  the  sanction  of  legislation

*  D.  i.  4.  1.

t  Inst.  i.  2.  6  :  Quod  principi  placuit,  legis  hahet  vigorem.
X  Gaius  mentions  a  lex  Claudia. — Gaius,  i.  157.

XXIV  INTEODUCTION.

to  a  series  of  measures  which  made  a  considerable  innovation  in
private  law.  These  measures  were  designed  to  repress  and  dis-
courage the  excesses  and  corruption  of  a  demoralised  society.
The  lex  Julia  et  Papia  PoppcEa,  and  others  of  a  similar  character,
attempted  to  restore  virtue  to  private  life  by  a  system  of  rewards
and  penalties,  attached  to  the  fulfilment  or  neglect  of  family
duties,  and  consisting  chiefly  in  the  taking  away  of  testamentary
benefits  from  the  unmarried  and  childless,  and  giving  them  to  those
married  with  children,  and,  in  default,  to  the  treasury.  They
failed  in  their  object;  but  the  portion  of  law  to  which  they
belonged,  and  especially  that  of  testaments  and  legacies,  was  con-
siderably modified  by  their  provisions.  To  the  time  of  Augustus
also  belongs  the  introduction  oi Jideicommissa  and  codicils.

18.  After  the  middle  of  the  first  century  of  our  era,  all  legis-

^,    „  lative  enactments  of  which  we  know  are  senatus-con~

The  Senate.  mi        i        •

sulta.  The  election  of  maecistrates  was  transferred  to
the  senate  from  the  comitia^  and  the  senate  was  intrusted  with
the  cognisance  of  offences  against  the  emperor  and  the  State,  and
the  decision  of  appeals  from  inferior  tribunals. f  The  later  jurists
said  that  the  senate  was  made  to  represent  the  whole  people,
because  the  number  of  the  citizens  became  too  great  to  permit  of
their  acting  as  a  political  body.  J  However  historically  false  this
may  be,  it  yet  is  so  far  true  that  the  senate  was,  in  the  earlier
times  of  the  empire,  a  body  distinct  from,  and,  in  a  certain  very
limited  degree,  opposed  to,  the  emperor.  We  have  some  few
memorable  instances  in  Tacitus  of  senators  who  dared  to  speak
what  they  thought,§  and  who  showed  that  the  senate  was,  in
more  than  name,  a  remnant  of  the  republic.  Gradually  the  very
notion  of  independent  action  died  away,  and  the  senate  met  merely
to  adopt  the  will  of  its  master.

19.  The  edictum  perpetuum,  the  annual  edict  of  the  praetor,  as

being  the  written  exposition  of  the  jus  honorarium,
edict  ''^^^^^     was   the   subject   of  many   of  the   treatises   of  the

Roman  jurists.  In  the  time  of  Hadrian,  a  jurist  of
great  eminence,  Salvius  Julianus,  was  appointed  by  the  emperor
to  draw  up  an  edict,  partly  from  existing  edicts,  partly  according
to  his  own  opinion  of  what  was  necessary,  which  should  serve  as

■^  Tacit.  Annal.  i.  15.

t  Suet.  Calig.  2  ;  Nero,  17.     Tacit.  Annal.  xiii.  44.

:i:  Inst.  i.  2.  5 .     PoMPONius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  9.

§  Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  8,    Puchta,  Inst.  i.  512.

INTKODUCTION.  XXV

the  guide  and  rule  of  all  succeeding  praetors.  The  edict  which
he  drew  up,  and  to  which  the  sanction  of  Hadrian  gave  the  force
of  law,  was  itself  termed  the  edictum  perpetuum,  the  word  -per-
petuum,  instead  of  meaning,  as  before,  that  the  edict  ran  on  from
year  to  year,  being  used  to  express  that  the  edict  was  permanent
and  unchangeable.  The  different  magistrates,  who  had  to  apply  the
edict,  would  thencsforw^ard  use  their  own  discretion  only  when  the
edict  drawn  up  by  Julianus  did  not  serve  as  an  express  authority.
20.  The  writings  of  the  jurists,  the  authority  attached  to
their  decisions,  and  the  admirable  manner  in  which
they  developed  and  arranged  the  law,  formed  the
most  marked  feature  of  the  legal  history  of  this  period.
Augustus  found  the  position  which  the  great  sages  of  the  law
held  in  public  opinion  too  important  a  one  to  be  overlooked  in  his
scheme  of  government.  He  formally  gave  to  their  decisions  the
weight  which  usage  had  in  many  instances  given  them  already ;
and  it  was  enacted  that  their  answers  should  be  solicited  and
announced  in  a  formal  manner,  and  given  under  the  sanction  of
the  emperor.  Hadrian  decided  that  they  should  have  the  force
of  law,  provided  the  respondents  all  agreed  in  their  answer ;  but,
if  they  differed,  the  judge  Avas  at  liberty  to  adhere  to  whichever
023inion  he  preferred."^  Among  the  eminent  jurists  of  the  days
of  Augustus  was  Trebatius,  whose  opinion,  as  the  Institutes  tell
us,  was  specially  asked  by  Augustus  as  to  the  propriety  of
admitting  codicils.  Two  others,  of  even  higher  authority,
Antistius  Labeo  and  Ateius  Capito,  represented  in
the  same  period  two  opposite  modes  of  regarding  law,  Labeo  and
and  were  the  founders  of  schools  which  maintained  ^^^^  °'
and  handed  down  their  respective  opinions.  Labeo,  in  whom  a
wider  culture  had  instilled  a  love  of  general  principles,  did  not
hesitate  to  make  such  innovations  as  he  conceived  reason  and
philosophy  to  require :  Capito  was  distinguished  by  the  fidelity
with  which  he  adhered  to  the  law  as  he  had  himself  received  itf
A  succession  of  jurists  of  greater  or  less  renown  divided  them-
selves under  the  banners  of  these  rival  authorities.  But  the
schools  of  which  Labeo  and  Capito  were  the  first  authors  did  not
derive  their  names  from  their  founders.     The  one   school  was

*  Gaius,  i.  7.

t  Labeo  ingenii  qualitate  et  Jlducia  doctringe,  qui  et  in  cseteris  sapientigs
partibus  operam  dederat,  plurima  innovare  statuit.  Ateius  Capito,  i)i>  his  qux
ei  tradita  erant,  perseverabat. — Dig.  i.  2.  2.  47.

XXVI  INTEODUCTION.

termed  Proculians,  after  Proculus,  a  distinguished  follower  of
Labeo ;  the  other  Sabinians,  after  Sabinus,  a  follower  of  Capito.
Gaius,  who  informs  us  that  he  was  a  Sabinian^  gives  the  differing
opinions  of  the  two  schools  on  many  subtle  questions  of  law.  By
the  labours  of  this  succession  of  jurists,  the  law  was  moulded  and
prepared  until  it  came  into  the  hands  of  the  five  great  luminaries
of  Roman  jurisprudence — Gains,  Papinian,  Paul,  Ulpian,  and
Modestinus,  whose  writings,  as  we  shall  see,  were  subsequently
made  a  distinct  and  special  source  of  law.

21.  Gains,  or  Caius,  as  the  name  is  sometimes  written,  was

probably  born  in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  and  wrote

Gains.  .  r^n      ^   '  11«

under  the  Antomnes.  Oi  his  personal  history
nothino;  is  known.  He  himself  tells  us  that  he  was  an  adherent
of  the  school  of  Sabinus.  Besides  other  works  which  he  is
known  or  supposed  to  have  written,  he  composed  a  treatise  on
the  edictum  -promnciale  (the  edict  of  the  proconsul  in  the  pro-
vinces) and  a  commentary  on  the  Twelve  Tables.  But  the
work  by  which  he  is  best  known  to  us  is  his  Institutes.  The
discovery  of  the  manuscript  of  this  work  by  Niebuhr  in  1816
has  contributed  greatly  to  the  modern  knowledge  of  Koman
law.  The  manuscript  had  been  written  over  with  the  letters  of
St.  Jerome,  and  its  existence  was  almost  entirely  unknown  until
Niebuhr  brought  it  to  light  while  examining  the  contents  of  the
library  of  the  Chapter  at  Verona.  The  Institutes  of  Gains
formed  the  basis  of  those  of  Justinian,  who  has  followed  the  order
in  which  Gains  treats  his  subject,  and  adopted  his  exposition  of
law,  so  far  as  it  was  applicable  to  the  times  in  which  the
Institutes  of  Justinian  were  composed.  The  work  of  Gains,
therefore,  showing  us  what  was  common  to  the  two  periods,  and
also  where  the  law  had  changed,  enables  us  to  understand  what
the  change  was,  and  what  the  law  had  really  been  at  the  time
when  its  system  was  most  perfect.

22.  ^milianus  Papinianus  was  the  intimate  friend  of  the

Emperor  Septimius  Severus,  and  held  under  him  the
office  of  praetorian  prajfect,  which  had  now  become
equivalent  to  that  of  supreme  judge.  He  probably  accompanied
Severus  into  Britain,  and  was  present  at  the  emperor's  death  at
York  in  a.d.  211.  Severus  commended  his  two  sons,  Geta  and
Caracalla,  to  his  care.  Caracalla  dismissed  Papinian  from  his
office ;  and,  after  his  murder  of  Geta,  is  said  to  have  required
Papinian  to  compose  his  vindication.     Papinian  refused,  and  was

INTEODUCTION.  XXVU

executed  by  the  orders  of  Caracalla.  He  was  considered  the  first
and  greatest  of  juristS;,  and  every  epithet  which  succeeding  writers
could  devise  to  express  wisdom,  learning,  and  eloquence  was
heaped  on  him  in  profusion.  We  know,  from  the  Digest,  of  his
Books  of  Questions,  Books  of  Answers,  and  Books  of  Definitions.
The  fragments  of  his  works  which  we  possess  amply  justify  his
eminent  reputation.

23.  Paul,  UlpiaUj  and  Modestinus  are  all  said  to  have  been
pupils  of  Papinian.     Julius  Paulus  was  a  member  of

the  imperial  council  and  praatorian  praefect  under
Alexander  Severus  (a.d.  222).  Besides  numerous  fragments  in
the  Digest,  we  possess  his  ReceptcB  Sententice,  which  was  long  the
chief  source  of  law  among  the  Visigoths  in  Spain.  The  most
celebrated  of  his  works,  which  were  very  numerous,"^  was  that
Ad  Edictum  in  80  books.

24.  Domitius  Ulpianus  derived  his  origin,  as  he  himself  tells
us,  from    Tyre   in    Phoenicia.f      He   wrote    several

works  during  the  reigns  of  Septimius  Severus  and
Caracalla,  and  perished  (a.d.  228)  by  the  hands  of  the  soldiers,
who  killed  him  in  the  presence  of  the  emperor,  Alexander
Severus.  He  was  praetorian  praifect  at  the  time  of  his  death,
but  the  exact  time  when  he  was  first  appointed  to  the  office  is
unknown.  The  Digest  contains  a  greater  number  of  extracts
from  his  writings  than  from  those  of  any  jurist.  Besides  these
extracts,  we  also  possess  fragments  of  his  composition  in  twenty-
nine  titles,  known  by  the  name  of  the  Fragmenta  Vlpiani.

25.  Herennius  Modestinus  was  the  pupil  of  Ulpian  as  well
as  of  Papinian.     He  was  a  member  of  the  imperial

T^od&stiiTi  Its

council  in  the  time  of  Alexander  Severus,  but  hardly
anything  is  known  of  his  history.     One  of  the  best  known  of  his
writino;s  is  the  Excusationum  Lihri.     We  have  nothino^  remainino-
of  his  composition  except  the  extracts  from  his  works  given  in  the
Digests.

26.  The  influence  of  Christianity  on  Roman  law  was  partly
direct,  partly  indirect.     The  establishment  of  a  hier-  jnfluence  of
archical  rank,  the  power  granted  to  religious  corpora-  Christianity.
ations  to  hold  property,  the  distinction  between  Christians  and
heretics,  affecting  the  civil  position  of  the  latter,  the  creation  of

*  We  know  the  names  of  more  than  70,  embracing  an  extraordinary
variety  of  subjects.

xxviii  INTEODUCTION.

episcopal  courts,  and  many  other  similar  innovations,  gave  rise  to
direct  specific  changes  in  the  law.  But  its  influence  is  even  more
remarkable  in  the  changes  which  were  suggested  by  its  spirit,
rather  than  introduced  as  a  necessary  part  of  its  system.  To  the
community  which  citizenship  had  bound  together"^  succeeded
another  bound  by  the  ties  of  a  common  religion.  The  tendency
of  the  change  Avas  to  remove  the  barriers  which  had  formed  a
part  of  the  older  condition  of  society.  If  Ave  compare  the  Insti-
tutes of  Justinian  with  those  of  Gains,  we  find  changes  in  the
law  of  marriage,  in  that  of  succession,  and  in  many  other  branches
of  law,  in  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  recognise  the  spirit  of
humanity  and  reverence  for  natural  ties,  Avhich  Christianity  had
inspired.  The  disposition  to  get  rid  of  many  of  the  more  peculiar
features  of  the  old  Roman  law,  observable  in  the  later  legislation,
was  partly  indeed  the  fruit  of  secular  causes ;  but  it  was  also  in
a  o^reat  measure  due  to  the  alteration  of  thouo;ht  and  feelino;  to
Avhich  the  new  religion  had  given  birth.  But  it  Avas  not  only  the
substance  of  the  laAv  that  Avas  changed  under  the  emperor.  The
forms  of  procedure  became  different.  Even  under  the  formulary
system  the  magistrate  had  occasionally,  instead  of  sending  the
trial  of  an  action  to  the  judex,  disposed  of  it  himself  {cognitio  ex-
traor  dinar  id).  The  practice  grew  more  frequent  as  the  empire
Avent  on,  and  in  a.d.  296  Diocletian  ordered  the  presidents  of  the
provinces  themselves  to  try  all  cases.  The  formulary  system  and
the  exposition  of  the  laAv  by  the  praitors  became  a  thing  of  the
past,  and  the  law  Avas  altered  by  the  enactments  of  the  emperor,
and  administered  directly  by  the  magistrates.

27.  Before  Ave  pass  to  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  we  must
bestow    a   cursory    notice    on   the    efforts   made   by

Theodosius  II.  .         ^^  ,  .  .,

Ineodosms  11.  to  determme  and  arrange  the  law,
and  to  promote  its  study.  With  a  vicAv  to  keep  alive  and  increase
the  knoAvledge  of  law,  he  founded  (in  a.d.  425)  a  school  of  juris-
prudence at  Constantinople.  He  also  constituted  the  works  of
the  five  great  Avriters,  Gains,  Papinian,  Ulpian,  Paul,  and
Modestinus,  into  a  source  of  laAv  of  the  highest  authority,  enact-
ing by  a  constitution,  published  A.D.  426,  that  the  judge  should

*  The  value  of  citizenship  was  greatly  lessened  by  the  recklessness  with
which  it  was  extended.  Caracalla  (a.d.  212)  gave  the  citizenship  to  all
persons  not  slaves,  who  were  then  subjects  of  the  empire,  leaving  it,  how-
ever, possible,  that  slaves  imperfectly  manumitted  after  this  date  should  hold
the  place  of  Latini,  not  of  cives.

INTRODUCTION.  xxix

always  be  bound  by  the  opinion  expressed  by  the  majority  of
these  writers  ;  if  those  among  them  who  expressed  an  opinion  on
the  point  were  equally  divided,  the  opinion  of  Papinian  was  to
prevail :  if  he  was  silent,  the  judge  could  use  his  own  discretion.
In  A.D.  438,  Theodosius  published  his  Code,  containing  a  collec-
tion of  the  constitutions  of  the  emperors  from  the  time  of  Con-
stantine.  It  was  made  on  the  model  of  two  earlier  collections
compiled  by  the  jurists  Gregorianus  (a.d.  306)  and  Hermogenianus
(A.D.  365).

28-  The   Emperor  Justinian  was  of   Sclavonic  origin.     His
native   name    was    IJprauda,   a  word    said   to   mean

.    -  T     ,  ,  ft  •      1  •      Justinian.

upright,  and  thus   to  nave  lound   an   equivalent  m
the  Latin  Justinianus.     He  was  born  at  Taurisium  in  Bulgaria,
about  the  year  a.d.  482,  and  having  been  adopted  by  his  uncle,
the  Emperor  Justin,  succeeded  him  as  sole  emperor  in  the  year
A.D.  527.     He  died  in  a.d.  6Q5,  after  an  eventful  reign  of  thirty-
eight  years.     Procopius,  the  secretary  of  his  general  Belisarius,
has  left  us  a  secret  memoir  of  the  times,  which,  if  we  may  rely
upon  his  accuracy,  would  make  us  believe  Justinian  to  have  been
a  Aveak,  avaricious,  rapacious  tyrant.     His  court,  wholly  under
the  influence  of  his  wife  Theodora,  a  degraded  woman,  whom  he
had  raised  from  the  theatre  to  share  his  throne,  was  as  corrupt  as
was  customary  in  the  empire  of  the  East.     Justinian  would  never
have  been   distinguished  from  among  the  long    list  of  eastern
emperors  had  it  not  been  for  the  victories  of  his  generals  and  the
legislation  to  which  he  gave  his  name.     The  successes  of  Belisarius
and  Narses  have  shed  the  splendour  of  military  glory  over  his
reign.     But  his  principal  claim  to  be  remembered  by  posterity  i&
his  havinoj  directed  the  execution  of  an  undertakino;  which  crave  to
Boman  law  a  form  that  fitted  it  to  descend  to  the  modern  world.
29.  In  the  year  A.D.  528,  Justinian  issued  instructions  for  the
compilation  of  a  new  code,  which,  founded  on  that  of
Theodosius,  and  on  the  earlier  codes  on  which  that
code  was  based,*  should  embrace  the  imperial  constitutions  down

*  Shortly  before  the  time  of  Justinian,  three  attempts  had  been  made  to-
draw  up  a  body  of  law  for  the  use  of  the  western  barbarians  and  their  Roman
subjects.  These  were — the  edict  of  Theodoric,  king  of  the  Ostrogoths  (a.d.
500)  ;  the  Lex  Romana  Burgundiorum  (a.d.  500)  ;  and  the  Lex  Romancd
Visigothorum  (a.d.  506).  These  names  are  so  well  known  that  it  is  perhaps
hardly  proper  to  pass  them  over  altogether  ;  but,  as  their  assistance  was  not
employed  in  the  construction  of  Justinian's  legislation,  a  detailed  account
of  them  is  unnecessary  here.

XXX  INTRODUCTION.

to  the  date  of  its  promulgation.     The  task  was  entrusted  to  a

body  of  ten  commissioners,  who  completed  their  labours  in  the

following  year,  and  in  the  month  of  April,  a.d.  529,  the  emperor

gave  it  his  sanction,  and  abolished  all  preceding  collections.

30.  In  the  December  of  the  following  year,  Tribonian,  who

_^    ^  had  been  one  of  the  commission  appointed  to  draw  up

The  Digest.  iiii  iii*         i^  ,

the  code,  and  who  had  recommended  himself  to  the

emperor  by  the  energy  and  ability  he  had  shown,  was  instructed,
in  conjunction  with  a  body  of  coadjutors  whom  he  selected  to  the
number  of  sixteen,  to  make  a  selection  from  the  writings  of  the
elder  jurists,  which  should  comprehend  all  that  was  most  valuable
in  them,  and  should  form  a  compendious  exposition  of  the  law.
In  spite  of  the  foundation  of  schools  of  jurisprudence,  of  which
those  of  Rome,  Constantinople,  and  Berytus  were  the  most  famous,
the  knowledge  which  the  lawyers  of  the  time  had  of  the  writings
of  the  old  jurists  was  exceedingly  limited.  Justinian  wished  not
only  to  promulgate  a  body  of  law  which  should  not  be  too  bulky
and  voluminous  for  general  use,  but  also  to  provide  a  work,  the
study  of  which  should  form  a  necessary  part  of  legal  education.
The  commissioners  performed  their  task  in  the  short  space  of
three  years,  and  on  the  30th  of  December,  a.d.  533,  the  emperor
gave  to  the  result  of  their  labours  the  force  of  law.  The  com-
pilation, termed  Digesta,  or  Pandectae,  from  its  comprehensive
character,  was  divided  into  fifty  books.,  and  was  arranged  on  the
model  of  the  perpetual  edict.  Ulpian's  work  on  the  edict  had
been  a  text-book  in  the  schools  of  jurisprudence,  and  probably  it
Vv^as  this  that  determined  the  commissioners  to  adopt  a  model,*
which  has  prevented  their  work  having  anything  like  a  scientific
arrangement.  There  are  thirty-nine  jurists  from  whose  writings
the  Digest  contains  literal  extracts,  those  from  Ulpian  and  Paul
constituting  about  one-half  of  the  Avhole  work.

31.  The  Digest  was  too  vast  a  work,  and  also  required  for  its
comprehension  too  great  a  previous  knowledo-e  of  law,

The  Institutes.  ox  q  y

to  admit  of  its  being  made  the  opening  of  a  course  of
legal  study.  Justinian,  therefore,  determined  to  have  an  elemen-
tary work  composed.  He  had  declared  his  intention  in  the  consti-
tution of  December  a.d.  530,  in  which  he  directed  the  compilation
of  the  Digest ;  and  Tribonian,  in  conjunction  with  Theophilus
and  Dorotheus,  respectively  professors  in  the  schools  of  Constan-

*  WARNKCENia,  Hist,  du  droit  romain^  j).  182.

INTRODUCTION.  xxxi

tinople  and  Beiytus,  were  appointed  to  draw  it  np.  This  ele-
mentary work  is  tlie  Institutes.  It  was  formed  on  the  basis  of  the
Institutes  of  Gains,  alterations  being  made  to  bring  it  into  har-
mony with  the  Digest  and  Code.

32.  There  were  still  some  points  which  had  been  debated  by
the  old  jurists,  and  to  which  the  legislation  of  Justinian  The  Fifty  De-
did  not  as  yet  furnish  any  answer.  To  determine  these,  ^'^^'^^"*-
Justinian  published  a  book  of  Fifty  Decisions ;  and  as  the  Code
of  the  year  a.d.  529  was  a  very  imperfect  work,  it  was  deter-
mined to  revise  that  Code,  and  to  incorporate  the  The  second
Fifty  Decisions   in   the   revised    edition.     Tribonian  ^^^^*

was  appointed  to  superintend  the  undertaking,  and  in  November,
A.D.  534,  the  ncAv  code,  called  the  code  repetitce  prcelectionis  received
the  force  of  law.  This  is  the  code  we  now  have ;  the  former
code,  that  of  a.d.  529,  having  been  carefully  suppressed,  and  no
trace  of  it  remaining.  The  Code,  which  is  divided  into  twelve
books,  is  arranged  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Digest.

33.  But  Justinian  could  not  endure  that  his  having  systema-
tised  the  law  should  exclude  him  from  law-making.

He  announced  in  the  Code  *  that  any  legislative
reforms  he  might  at  any  future  time  see  fit  to  make  should  bo
published  in  the  form  of  Novellm  Constitutiones,  Many  such
NovellcB  were  afterwards  published ;  the  first  in  January,  a.d.  535,
the  last  in  November,  a.d.  564.  Altogether  they  amount  to  165  ;
but  no  collection  of  them  seems  to  have  been  made  in  the  lifetime
of  Justinian.  Few  of  them  bear  a  later  date  than  a.d.  545,  the
year  of  Tribonian 's  death.

34.  The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  after  a  few  g-eneral  observa-
tions  on  the  nature,  the  divisions,  and  the  sources  of    >  ,

^  '  ^  Arrangement

laAv,  proceed  to  treat,  first  of  persons,  then  of  things,  of  the  Insti-
then  of  successions  to  deceased  persons,  then  of  obli-
gations, and  lastly  of  actions.     An  arrangement  as  nearly  similar
as  possible  will  be  observed  in  the  following  outline  of  Roman
private  law.

*  Const,  de  Emend.  Cod.  4.

XXXU  INTKODUCTION.

ROMAN  PRIVATE   LAW.

The  reader  of  Mr.  Austin's  Treatise  on  the  Province  of  Juris-
prudence will  remember  that  he  proposes,  in  the  outline  given
in  the  Appendix,  to  treat  the  subject  of  Law  by  examining,  first,
the  science  of  General  Jurisprudence,  that  is,  of  the  legal  notions
and  principles  which  enter  into  every  system  of  law ;  and  secondly,
the  science  of  Particular  Law,  that  is,  as  he  explains  it,  '  The
science  of  any  such  system  of  Positive  Law  as  now  actually  ob-
tains, or  once  actually  obtained  in  a  specifically  determined
nation;'  and  he  carefully  distinguishes  between  the  sciences  of
general  and  particular  jurisprudence  and  the  science  or  sciences
which  would  tell  us,  not  what  law  is,  but  what  law  ought  to  be.

The  Roman  jurists  made  no  approach  to  a  division  of  the  sub-
ject so  accurate  and  so  exhaustive.  It  is  their  great  merit,  the
real  source  of  their  value  to  modern  Europe,  that  they  apprehended
and  elucidated  the  great  leading  principles  and  notions  of  general
jurisprudence ;  but  they  did  not  clearly  distinguish  between  general
jurisprudence  and  the  municipal  law  of  Rome,  or  between  law  and
morality.  As  we  have  said  before,  they  assumed,  on  the  authority
of  Greek  philosophy,  that  there  was  a  lex  naturae  binding  on  them
because  it  was  a  lex^  and  they  endeavoured  to  work  up  the  dictates
of  this  law  and  of  the  jus  gentium  together  with  the  provisions  of
the  old  jus  civile  into  a  whole.  The  Institutes  of  Gains  open
with  a  declaration  that  every  system  of  law  must  contain  the  two
elements  of  general  and  municipal  law ;  but  in  the  Institutes  of
-r,  r  ;■        n    Justimau  there  are  prefixed  two  definitions  taken  from

Bejimtions  of  ^  ^  /

justice  and  the  writings  of  Ulpian ;  and,  while  the  definitions  them-
jurisjpru  ence.  g^jy^g  illustrate  the  inexactness  with  which  the  jurists
determined  the  province  of  jurisprudence,  the  place  assigned  to
them  in  this  compilation  shows  the  utter  want  of  anything  like
philosophy  in  the  age  when  the  Institutes  were  written.  The
first  definition  defines  the  moral  virtue  of  justice  by  reference  to
a  legal  term  {jus),  which  it  leaves  unexplained  :  the  second  pro-
nounces jurisprudence  to  be  the  '  science  of  things  human  and
divine,'  a  phrase  which,  originally  referring,  perhaps,  to  the  dis-
tinction between  pontifical  and  secular  law,  has  no  general  mean-
ing, except  as  a  summary  of  the  philosophy  Avhich  thought  that
law  was  the  expression  of  a  reason  common  to  the  universe  and
to  man.     We  can  only  treat  the  Roman  notions  of  law  and  juris-

INTRODUCTION.  XXXlil

prudence  historically,  and  ascertain  what  they  were  and  whence
tliey  came :  we  cannot  make  them  fit  into  the  more  accurate
shapes  assigned  to  these  general  terms  by  the  modern  philosophy
of  law.

35.  The  preceding  historical  sketch  will  have  sufficed  to  show
what  were  the  sources  of  Koman  law:  (1)  There  was

SozcTCcs  Or  icvuj

the  old  jus  civile^  which  mainly  depended  on  custom
as  its  basis.  (2)  There  were  the  judicial  decisions  of  the  prcBtors^
and  the  opinion  of  the  juris  prudentes,  supplementing  the  jus
civile  from  the  dictates  of  the  lex  naturce  and  the  jus  gentium  ;
and  (3)  There  were  positive  enactments,  which  may  be  divided
into  leges,  plehiscita,  senatus-consulta,  and  announcements  of  the
vpAX  of  the  emperor.

36.  The  main  leo:al   term  with  which  we  have   to  start   in
approachino;  E-oman  law  is  jus.     The  word  is  used  to

.  .  .         Jus  jura.

signify  both  the  sum  of  rights  and  their  corresponding
duties  sanctioned  by  law,  and  also  any  single  one  of  these  rights.
The  law  prescribes  different  relations  in  which  the  members  of  a
State  are  to  stand  to  things  and  to  each  other.     The  claim,  pro-
tected by  legal  remedies,  which  each  man  has  to  have  any  of  these
relations  observed  in  his  own  case  is  a  right ;  and  as
the  right  must  be  conceived  to  belong  to  or  reside  in,
a  person,  we  speak  of  a  right  being  the  right  of  a  person,  e.g.  my
fight  to  have  that  book,  your  right  to  have  that  house  (^jus  meum,
jus  tuum).     When  we  examine  the  different  rights  established  by
law  in  a  State,  we  find  some  of  a  public  character,  affecting  in-
:lividuals  as  members  of  a  body  politic ;  others  of  a  private  cha-
racter, affecting  individuals  directly.     It  is  only  of  the  private
rights  established  by  Roman  law  that  we  now  propose  to  speak ;
and  as  rights  are  either  rights  which  persons  have  over  things,  or
fights  which  persons  have  against  some  other  person  j)iyision  of
[)r  persons,  we  shall  treat,  first,  of  the  mode  in  which  ^^^^  subject.
the  Roman  law  regarded  persons ;  then  of  the  mode  in  which  it
regarded  things ;  then  of  the  rights  it  gave  to  persons  against
persons ;  and,  lastly,  of  the  method  by  which  the  State  enforced
private  rights  when  disputed  or  disregarded,  that  is,  the  system  of
civil  process.

b2

xxxiv  INTRODUCTION.

I.  PERSONS.

37.  The  word  jjersoiia  had,  in  the  usage  of  Koman  law,  a
...       n      different  meanino;  from  that  which  we  ordinarily  at-

Mcamng  of  ^  •'

the  ivord  ])er-  tach  to  the  word  person.  Whoever  or  whatever  was
^^'^^'*  capable  of  having,  and  being  subject  to,  rights  was  a

persona.  All  men  possessing  a  reasonable  will  would  naturally  be
personce ;  but  not  all  those  who  were,  physically  speaking,  men,
were  personce.  Slaves,  for  instance,  were,  not  in  a  position  to
exercise  their  reason  and  will,  and  the  law,  therefore,  refused  to
treat  them  as  personae.  On  the  other  hand,  many  personce  had  no
physical  existence.  The  law  clothed  certain  abstract  conceptions
with  an  existence,  and  attached  to  them  the  capability  of  having,
and  being  subject  to,  rights.  The  law,  for  instance,  spoke  of  the
State  as  2i  persona.  It  was  treated  as  being  capable  of  having
rights,  and  of  being  subject  to  them.  These  rights  really  belonged
to  the  men  who  composed  the  State,  and  they  flowed  from  the
constitution  and  position  of  associated  individuals.  But,  in  the
theory  and  language  of  law,  the  rights  of  the  whole  community
were  referred  to  the  State,  to  an  abstract  conception  interposed
between  these  rights  and  the  individual  members  of  the  society.
So,  a  corporation,  or  an  ecclesiastical  institution,  was  a  persona,
quite  apart  from  the  individual  personce  who  formed  the  one  and
administered  the  other.  Even  thejiscus,  or  imperial  treasury,  as
being  the  symbol  of  the  abstract  conception  of  the  emperor's
claims,  was  spoken  of  as  a  persona,

38.  The  technical  term  for  the  position  of  an  individual  re-

garded as  a  legal  person  was  status,  and  the  constitu-
tive elements  of  his  status  were  liberty,  citizenship,
and  membership  in  a  family.     First,  he  must  be  free.     A  slave
had  no  rights.     In  the  earlier  days  of  Koman  law,
no  one  would  have  conceived  this  to  be  unnatural.
But  philosophy,    and  the   study    of  morality,  taught  the  later
jurists  that  the  condition  of  a  slave  was  a  violation  of  natural
law.     It  was  not,  however,  necessary  that  the  person  should  have
been  born  free  {ingenuus)\  for  the  process  of  manumission  placed
the  slave  in  some  degree  on  a  level  Avith  the  freedman  {lihertinus,
or,  if  spoken  of  with  reference  to  his  master,  liber tus  *).     It  de-

*  The  Latin  for  a  freedman  was  lihertinus  ;  but  libertus  Titii  is  the  Latin
for  the  freedman  of  Titius.

INTKODUCTION.  XXXV

pended  on  the  mode  and  circumstance  of  his  manumission  whether
he  became  at  once  a  Roman  citizen ;  but  in  whatever  way  he  was
enfranchised  he  still  owed  certain  duties  to  his  patron,  and  in
certain  cases  his  patron  was  his  heir.

39.  The  second  element  of  the  status  was  citizenship.  The
Roman  notion  of  the  State  was  that  of  a  compact
privileged  body  separated  off  from  the  rest  of  the
world  by  the  exclusive  possession  of  certain  public  and  private
rights.  In  the  early  times  of  Rome  the  cives,  or  members  of  the
State,  were  divided  into  two  bodies  of  patres  and  plebeians,  the
former  of  whom  had  a  public  and  sacred  law  peculiar  to  them-
selves, while  they  shared  with  the  latter  the  system  of  private  law.
Beyond  the  State  all  were  hostes  and  harbari.  But  as  civilisation
progressed,  the  number  of  foreigners  who  resorted  to  Rome  for
trade,  or  were  otherwise  brought  into  friendly  relations  with  citi-
zens, was  so  great  that  they  were  looked  upon  as  a  distinct  class,
that  of  peregrini.  To  be  a  citizen  was  thenceforward  not  to  be  a
peregrinus,  the  force  of  the  one  idea  being  brought  out  by  the
prominence  of  its  opxDosite.  A  peregrinus  was  subject  only  to  the
jits  gentium ;  citizens  alone  could  claim  the  privileges  of  the  jus
Quiritium.  But  when  her  conquests  placed  Rome  in  new  and
varying  relations  with  the  nations  of  Italy,  an  intermediate  posi-
tion between  the  citizen  and  the  peregrinus  was  accorded  to  the
more  privileged  of  the  vanquished.  Some  of  the  rights  of  the
citizen  were  given  to  them,  and  some  were  withheld.  These
peculiar  rights  of  the  citizen  were  summed  up  in  the  familiar  term
suffragium  et  honores,  the  right  of  voting  and  the  capacity  of
holding  magisterial  offices,  and  in  the  terms  connuhium  and
commercium,  Connuhium  is  a  term  which  explains  itself.  The
foundation  of  the  Roman  family  was  a  marriage  according  to  the
jus  Quiritium,  and  not  to  have  the  connuhium  was  to  be  incapable
of  entering  into  the  Roman  family  system.  In  the  word  commer-
cium  were  included  the  power  of  holding  property  and  making
contracts  according  to  the  Roman  law,  and  also  the  testamenti
f actio,  or  power  to  make  a  will,  and  to  accept  property  under  one.
By  the  jus  Latinum  and  the  jus  Italicum  various  modifications  of
the  different  rights  implied  in  the  civitas  were  granted.  The  jus
Latinum  gave  private  rights  to  individuals,  the  jus  Italicum  gave
public  rights  to  towns.  In  some  cases  \hQJus  Latinum  gave  the
connuhium  and  commercium ;  in  some  only  the  latter,  in  many
only  a  portion  of  the  latter ;  the  testamenti  f actio,  the  power  of

XXXVi  INTRODUCTION.

making,  or  taking  under,  a  testament  being  withheld.  The  jus
Italicum  gave  certain  favoured  towns  a  free  municipal  constitu-
tion, an  immunity  from  direct  taxation,  and  made  the  soil  subject
to  Quiritarian  ownership  (see  sec.  58).  In  the  course  of  time  other
shades  between  the  civis  and  the  peregrinus  were  introduced,  but
all  distinction  between  them  was  gradually  swept  away,  by  the
increasing  recklessness  with  which  the  rights  of  citizenship  were
bestowed.  At  last  Caracalla  made  all  the  free  subjects  of  the
empire  citizens ;  and  thenceforward  the  class  of  peregrini,  pro-
perly speaking,  ceased  to  exist.  All  the  free  inhabitants  of  the
civilised  world  were  cives,  and  beyond  were  nothing  but  barbari
and  Jiostes.

40.  The  Roman  family,  in  the  peculiar  shape  it  assumed  under
the  jus  Quiritium,  was  modelled  on  a  civil  rather  than
on  a  natural  basis.  The  tie  which  bound  members  of
the  same  family  was  not  that  of  blood ;  it  was  their  commort
position  in  the  midst  of  an  artificial  system.  For  the  formation
of  such  a  family,  a  legal  marriage  was  an  indispensable  prelimi-
nary ;  but  it  was  only  a  preliminary,  and  the  peculiar  character
of  the  family  did  not  in  any  way  flow  from  the  tie.  The  head  of
the  family  was  all  in  all.  He  did  not  so  much  represent  as  absorb
in  himself  the  subordinate  members.  He  alone  was  sui  juris,  i.e.
had  an  independent  will ;  all  the  other  members  were  alieni  juris
their  wills  were  not  independent,  but  were  only  expressed  through
their  chief.  The  paterfamilias,  the  head  of  the  family,  was  said
to  have  all  the  other  members  of  his  family  in  his  power ;  and  this
power  (^patria  potestas)  was  the  foundation  of  all  that  peculiarly
characterised  the  Roman  family.  At  the  head  of  the  family  stood
the  paterfamilias  alone.  Beneath  him  came  his  children,  sons  and
daughters,  and  his  wife,  who,  in  order  to  preserve  the  symmetry
of  the  system,  was  treated  by  law  as  a  daughter.*  If  a  daughter
married,  she  left  this  family,  and  passed  into  the  family  of  her
husband ;  but  if  a  son  married,  all  his  children  were  as  much  in
the  power  of  the  paterfamilias  as  the  son  himself.  Thus  all  the
descendants  through  the  male  line  were  in  the  power  of  the  same
person.  And  it  was  this  that  constituted  the  link  of  family  rela-
tionship between  them,  not  the  natural  tie  of  blood.  When  the
paterfamilias  died,  each  of  the  sons  became  in  his  turn  a  pater-

*  She  was  technically  said  to  be  in  the  manus  of  her  husband  ;  and  per-
haps manns  is  the  old  word  signifying  the  power  of  the  paterfamilias,  and
potestas  is  only  an  expression  of  later  Latin.

INTRODUCTION.  XXXVll

familias ;  he  was  now  sui  juris,  and  all  his  own  descendants
through  the  male  line  were  in  his  power.  Each  of  the  daughters,
as  long  as  she  remained  unmarried,  was  also  sui  juris ;  but
directly  she  formed  a  legal  marriage,  and  thereby  entered  into
her  husband's  family,  she  passed  into  the  power  of  another.
Hence  it  was  said  that  a  woman  was  at  once  the  beginning  and
end  of  her  family,  caput  et  finis  families,  sucb,  for  directly  she
attempted  to  continue  it,  she  passed  into  another  family.

41.  Persons  who  were  under  the  power  of  another  could  not
hold  or  acquire  any  property  of  their  own.     All  belonged  to  the
jpater familias ;   and  whatever   the   son   acquired   was  p^^^-^ww  of
acquired  for  the  father.     In  matters  of  public  law  i^ersons  in
the  filiusfamilias  laboured  under  no  incapacities ;  he  "^
could  vote  or  hold  a  magistracy,  but  in  all  the  relations  of  pri-
vate law  he  was  absolutely  in  his  father's  power.     He  could  not
make  a  will,  for  he  had  no  property  to  dispose  of;  nor  bring  an
action,  for  nothing  was  owing  to  him.     But  in  all  public  relations,
whenever   this   incapability  of  possessing   property  was    not  in
question,  the  filiusfamilias  had  all  the  privileges  of  a  citizen ;  he
had,  for  instance,  the  connuhium,  aud  could  contract  a  legal  mar-
riage ;  and  the  commercium,  and  could,  therefore,  be  a  witness
ill  sale  by  mancipation,  to  which  none  except  citizens  could  be
witnesses.     The  indulgence  of  later  times  permitted  the  filius-
familias to  hold  certain  property  apart  from  the  paterfamilias,  an
indulgence  first  accorded  as  an  encouragement  to  military  service.
But  even  over  a  portion  of  this  property  the  head  of  the  family
possessed  certain  rights ;  and,  so  far  as  it  went,  it  was  a  departure
from  the  strict  theory  of  law.

42.  The  distinction  between  the  legal  and  the  natural  family
is   illustrated  by   its  being   possible    for   a  member

p,,,^.,  ."~.  ,,  .        Emancipation.

01  the  legal  family  to  quit  it  and  become  an  entire
stranger  to  it,  and  for  an  entire  stranger  to  be  admitted  to  it,  and
be  as  completely  a  member  as  if  he  were  a  son  of  the  pater-
familias. The  mode  by  which  the  change  in  either  case  was
accomplished  was  by  a  fictitious  sale.  Every  Roman  citizen  could
sell  himself  to  another  by  the  peculiar  form  of  sale  called  man-
cipatio ;  and  as  the  father  possessed  over  the  son  the  rights  which  a
person  sui  juris  possessed  over  himself,  he  sold  the  filiusfamilias
to  a  nominal  purchaser,  who  was  supposed  to  buy  the  son.  It
was  declared  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  a  son  thrice
sold  by  his  father  should  be  free  from  his  power,  and  the  cere-

XXXVlll  INTKODUCTION.

mony  was  therefore  repeated  three  times,  and  the  son  was  then
emancipatus,  or  sold  out  of  the  family.  When  a  stranger,  being
himself  alieni  juris,  wished  or  was  compelled  to  enter  a  family,  the
process  was  effected  by  adoption.  Here  again,  then,  was  another
sale,  the  paterfamilias  of  the  family  he  quitted  being  the  seller,
and  the  paterfamilias  of  that  he  entered  being  the  purchaser.  If
the  stranger  was  sui  juris,  he  entered  his  new  family  by  arroga-
tion,  which  in  ancient  times  could  only  be  effected  by  a  vote  in
the  comitia  curiata,  it  being  considered  a  matter  of  public  policy
to  keep  a  watch  over  such  a  proceeding,  lest  the  last  of  his  gens
should  arrogate  himself,  and  its  sacra  be  lost.  Much  simpler
modes  for  effecting  arrogation,  as  well  as  for  effecting  emancipa-
tion and  adoption,  were  employed  in  later  times.

43.  A  person  might  be  sui  juris,  and  be  in  possession  of  every
Tutors  and       I'ight,  and  yet  be  unable,  through  some  imperfection.
Curators.         to  exercisc  the  rights  he  possessed.     A  child,  for  in-
stance, Avas  not  only  not  able  to  conduct  his  affairs  with  discretion,
but  he  was  unable  to  understand,  perhaps  to  speak,  the  forms
necessary  to  be  expressly  pronounced  in  almost  every  legal  trans-
action.    A  tutor  was  therefore  appointed,  who,  until  the  child
attained  the  age  of  puberty,  suj3plied  this  defect  of  his  ward,  or,
as  he  was  called,  his  pupil.     And  this  is  the  Roman  notion  of  a
tutor :  he  was  a  person  who  supplied  something  tliat  was  wanting,
who  filled  up  the  measure  of  his  pupil's  persona.     He  of  course
took  care  of  the  person  and  property  of  the  child ;  but  this  was
only  an  accessory  of  his  position ;  his  primary  office  was  to  supply
by  his  auctoritas  '^  what  the  pupil  fell  short  of.     So,  too,  in  the
old  law,   unmarried  women,   of  whatever  age,  remained  in  the
tutelage  of  their  relations.     Further,  a  person  might  be  sui  juris,
and  be  of  an  age  to  exercise  his  rights,  and  yet  it  might  be  neces-
sary to  ensure  that  he  did  not  hurt  himself  and  his  family  by  the
mode  in  which  he  exercised  them.     In  such  cases,  a  curator  was
appointed,  whose  duty  it  was  to  look  after  his  property.     This
curator  had  a  perfectly  different  office  from  a  tutor  ;  in  technical
language,  the  tutor  was  said  to  be  appointed  to  the  person,  the
curator  to  the  property.     The  curator  was  only  appointed  as  a
check  to  prevent  pecuniary  loss.     Curators  were  also  appointed
to  watch  over  the  interests  of    insane  persons,  and   of  persons

*  The  derivation  of  auctoritas  slioiild  never  be  lost  sight  of.  When  one
person  increased,  augebat,  what  another  had,  so  as  to  fill  iij)  a  deficiency,
this  increasing  or  filling  np  was  called  auctoritas.

INTRODUCTION.  xxxix

notoriously  prodigal,  as  well  as  of  those  who  had  attained  the  age
of  puberty,  but  were  under  the  age  of  twenty-five.

44.  While  the  head  of  a  family  lived,  all  those  who  were  in
his   i3ower  were    connected   together   by  the    tie  of

Aanciti.

subjection  to  the  power  of  the  same  person.  The
tie  was  called  agnatio,  and  the  persons  so  mutually  connected
were  agnati  to  each  other.  When  the  paterfamilias  died,  the  tie
of  agnatio  still  subsisted.  Each  of  those  who,  by  his  death,  be-
came sui  juris,  became  the  head  of  a  new  family ;  but  still  they
and  their  descendants  were  agnati  to  each  other  so  long  as  they  did
not  by  emancipation  or  by  adoption,  or,  in  the  case  of  women,  by
marriage,  leave  their  original  flimily.  All  those,  in  short,  who
would  have  been  agnati  to  each  other  if  the  life  of  the  original
paterfamilias  had  been  prolonged  were  agnati  at  any  distance
of  time,  however  great,  after  his  death.  A  number  of  distinct
families  might  thus,  when  looked  on  as  connected  by  agnatio,
be  spoken  of  as  one  family ;  for  they  were  all  portions  of  the
family  of  a  deceased  paterfamilias,

45.  Beyond  the  circle  of  the  agnati,  the  ancient  patrician  had
that  of  the  qens.     They  were  nearer  to  him  than  those

.  Gentiles.

who  were  only  related  to  him  by  blood.  If  a  patri-
cian died  intestate,  in  default  of  agnati,  his  gentiles,  the  men  of  his
gens,  were  his  heirs.  He  was  placed  in  the  midst  of  two  artificial
circles,  shutting  out  the  natural  circle  of  blood  relations ;  while
the  plebeian,  unless  he  happened  to  belong  to  one  of  the  few  ple-
beian gentes,  and  when  the  system  of  gentes  had  faded  away,  the
patrician  also,  acknowledged  the  ties  of  blood  as  next  to  that  of
agnatio.     All  those  who  were  connected  too;ether  by

,         .  11  Cognati.

the  ties  01  blood  were  cognati.     It  was  the  tendency

of  the  later  Koman  legislation  to  give  greater  and  greater  weight

to  the  ties  of  blood,  and  to  substitute  a  natural,  for  an  artificial,

system  of  family  relationship.     Lastly,  the  cognati  of

each  of  the  parties  to  a  marriage  were  said  to  be

affines  to  the  other  party.

46.  We  have  spoken  as  if  the  wife  had  been  always  in  the
manus,  or  power,  of  her  husband.  And  this  was  so,  j>osition  of
probably,  in  the  strict  theory  of  the  Koman  family,  ^^^^^  '^'-'^fi-
and  in  the  practice  of  early  times.  The  tie  of  marriage  was
formed  among  the  patricians  by  the  ceremony  of  confarreatio,  in
which  none  could  partake  except  those  who  had  the  privileges  of
ihQjus  sacrum  ;  and  apparently  the  mere  fact  of  going  through  the

xl  INTRODUCTION.

ceremony  placed  a  wife  in  the  manus  of  her  husband.  The  ple-
beians had  no  corresponding  ceremony ;  and  in  order  that,  when
two  persons  came  together  in  marriage,  the  wife  should  be  in  the
power  of  the  husband,  she  Avas  sold  to  the  husband  by  the  father,
a  process  which  was  termed  coemptio,  or  if  she  remained  with  her
husband  a  year,  then  the  power  over  her  was  acquired  by  usus,
that  is,  by  the  uninterrupted  lapse  of  time.  If,  however,  she
absented  herself  for  three  nights  in  the  year,  this  prevented  her
falling  into  the  husband's  power.  Perhaps,  at  all  times,  at  least
in  plebeian  families,  a  woman  could  so  marry  as  not  to  fall 'into  the
maniis  of  her  husband ;  and  in  later  times  such  marriages  formed
the  rule.  It  made  no  difference  in  other  relations  of  the  family
whether  the  wife  was  in  the  power  of  the  husband  or  not.  Sup-
posing she  and  her  husband  had  the  connuhium,  that  is,  were
capable  of  intermarrying,  all  the  usual  incidents  of  a  marriage,
such  as  the  pafria  potestas,  attached  to  the  connection.  If  a  man
and  a  ivoman  entered  into   a  permanent  connection

Concubinage.  ..  .  xi'i-it

Without  marriage  {concubinatus),  their  children  were
naturales  liheri,  and  were  so  far  favoured  by  the  later  law  as  to  be
capable  of  being  placed  in  the  position  of  children  sprung  from
a  legal  marriage,  by  the  process  of  legitimatio.  After  the  time  of
Constantine  they  might  be  made  legitimate  by  the  subsequent
marriage  of  their  parents.  In  all  unions  of  the  sexes,  other  than
a  legal  marriage,  the  children  followed  the  condition  of  their
mother:  being  free,  for  instance,  if  she  was  free,  and  slaves  if
she  was  a  slave.  The  union  of  slaves  was  called  contuhernium ;
but  however  solemnly  entered  into,  and  however  faithfully  its
natural  tie  acknowledged,  it  was  never  in  the  eye  of  the  law
regarded  as  anything  better  than  promiscuous  intercourse.

47.  It  was  possible  that  any  one  who  possessed  a  complete
Beoninutio  status  should  undergo  a  change  of  status,  and  this
capitis.  change  might  happen  in  any  one  of  the  three  com-

ponent parts  of  the  status.  The  capability  of  exercising  all  those
rights  implied  in  a  perfect  status  was  frequently  spoken  of  as  a
man's  caput,  and  the  change  in  each  of  these  component  parts  was
said  to  be  a  cleminutio  capitis,  a  lessening  or  impairing  of  the
caput.  First,  a  man  might  lose  his  freedom ;  he  might  be  taken
prisoner  by  an  enemy,  or  undergo  a  very  severe  criminal  sentence.
The  loss  of  this  element  of  the  status,  called  capitis  deminutio
maxima,  involved  the  loss  of  the  remaining  two,  the  person  who
ceased  to  be  free  ceasing  also  to  have  the  rights  of  citizenship  or

INTRODUCTION.  xli

family  rights.  Secondly,  he  might  lose  his  rights  of  citizenship,
and  this  loss,  called  the  capitis  deminutio  media,  involved  the  loss
of  family  rights,  but  still  left  him  free.  Thirdly,  by  what  was
called  the  capitis  deminutio  minima,  he  might  lose  his  position  in
his  family,  by  emancipation,  adoption,  or  arrogation.  In  early
times  there  were  rights,  principally  those  forming  part  of  the  jus
sacrum,  which  a  person  who  passed  out  of  his  family  really  lost ;
but  in  later  times,  as  in  every  case  the  person  who  underwent  this
capitis  deminutio  either  entered  another  family,  or  became  the
head  of  his  own  family,  his  status  was  really  not  made  at  all  less
perfect  by  the  change.  Of  course  this  capitis  deminutio  involved
the  loss  of  neither  of  the  two  other  component  parts  of  the
status.

48.  When  a  person  was  possessed  of  a  perfect  status,  he  was
considered  to  enjoy  a  high  dignity  and  reputation  in

the  eyes  oi  others.  Ihis  reputation  [existimatw)  the
Komans  considered  as  one  of  the  chief  possessions  of  a  person.
It  was  even  to  a  certain  extent  regulated  by  law.  If  a  person
ceased  to  be  free,  his  existimatio  was  gone.  Certain  offences  were
treated  by  law  as  impairing  it.  If  the  offence  was  so  grave  as  to
impair  the  existimatio  very  seriously,  its  diminution  was  said  to
amount  to  infamia.  For  example,  a  partner,  or  a  mandatary,
condemned  in  an  action  pro  socio  or  mandato,  was  stamped  with
infamy.  The  consequences  of  infamy  were,  that  the  guilty  per-
son could  not  be  a  Avitness,  could  not  receive  public  honours,  and
could  not  bring  a  public  prosecution.  If  the  offence  was  rather
less  grave,  the  consequence  was  turpitudo ;  and  if  the  person  was
in  some  inferior  position,  as,  for  instance,  an  actor,  he  was  said  to
be  marked  with  a  levis  nota,  a  slight  brand  of  disgrace.

49.  It  only  remains  to  be   observed  that,  although  persons
that  were  the  mere  creations  of  law,  as  corporations,  ^  ,    ,.  ,
ceased  to  exist  when  the  law  in  any  Avay  put  an  end  existence  of
to  their  existence,  as  by  the  dissolution  of  the  corpo-  -2^^^^^^^^-
ration,  yet  the  person  of  individuals,  that  is,  their  legal,  as  opposed
to  their  natural  being,  did  not  become  extinct  by  their  death.     At
the  moment  of  death  it  was  shifted  to  those  who  represented  them.
The  son  was  clothed  with  the  person  of  the  father,  the  heir  with
that  of  the  testator.     What  we  mean  by  saying  that  the  deceased
is  represented,  that  is,  again  made  present  and  brought  before
us,  the  Koman  jurists  expressed  by  saying  that  his  person  had  been
shifted  to  those  who  succeeded  in  his  place.

xlii  INTEODUCTION.

IT.  THINGS.

50  The  word  thing  (res)  has,  in  Roman  law,  a  sense  as  arti-
Use  of  the  ficial  and  as  wide  as  the  word  person.  As  person  com-
word  res.  prehends  every  being  who  has  rights  and  is  subject

to  them,  so  thing  comprehends  all  that  can  be  considered  as  the
object  of  a  right.  The  object  of  a  right  may  be  incorporeal,  or
the  pure  creation  of  law,  and  need  not  be  limited  to  things  cor-
poreal and  visible.  The  law  can  separate  the  right  to  possess  a
field  and  the  right  to  walk  in  it,  and  the  object  of  each  right  is
called  indifferently  a  thing.  When  we  attempt  to  classify  these
objects  of  rights,  we  are  unable  to  select  any  one  principle  of
division  according  to  which  we  may  distribute  them.  The  aspects
in  which  we  may  view  them  are  too  various  to  admit  of  a  simple
arrangement ;  Ave  may,  however,  make  a  division  approximately
accurate  by  considering,  first,  those  heads  of  things  which  we
arrive  at  by  examining  the  nature  of  the  things  themselves  ;  and
secondly,  those  gained  by  inquiring  into  the  interest  which
persons  have  in  them.

51.  First,  then,  things  may  be  corporeal  or  incorporeal ;  or,
as  the  jurists  expressed  it,  tangi  possunt  or  tangi  noii

Division  of  __^        ^  *^  ,

things.  possunt.      VY  e  see  a  house  or  a  Held  ;  we  do  not  see

Corporeal  and  ^  j^ig-ht  to  inhabit  the  One  or  reap  the  fruits  of  the

incorporeal.  *=*  •■•

other.  The  physical  tangible  object  of  sense  is  a
corporeal  thing ;  the  intangible  abstraction  of  the  mind  is  an  in-
corporeal thing.  Incorporeal  things  always  consist  in  a  right;
if  we  see  a  stream  flowing,  or  a  path  winding  through  a  field,  the
mind  sees,  as  something  distinct  from  the  object  of  sense,  the
power  of  using  the  water  or  of  following  the  path.  This  power
is,  in  the  language  of  the  law,  an  incorporeal  thing  ;  and  a  person
may  have  a  right  to  possess  it  just  as  he  may  have  a  right  to  pos-
sess a  house  or  field.  Strictly  speaking,  the  right  to  own  a  field,
and  not  the  field  itself,  is  what  the  law  takes  cognisance  of,  and
this  is  as  much  incorporeal  as  the  right  to  walk  over  it.  But
Koman  law  has  adopted  or  introduced  the  popular  way  of  speak-
ing, according  to  which  we  say,  '  I  have  a  field ; '  '  I  have  a  right
of  way  over  a  field.'

52.  We  may  again  speak  of  corporeal  things  as  moveable  and

rry.  immoveable  (res  mobiles ^  se  moventes,  and  res  soli,  res

Ihings  move-  ...  .

able  and  im-      immohiles),  a  distinction  so  obvious  that  it  needs  no

other  remark  than  that  some  moveable  things  are  so

incorporated  with  immoveables,  or  so  constantly  associated  with

.  INTKODUCTION.  xliii

their  use,  that  the  law  treats  them  as  immoveables  ;  as  for  instance
a  house,  each  brick  of  which  is  a  moveable,  is  itself  an  immove-
able, because  attached  to  the  soil.

53.  Thino^s  are  also  either  divisible  or  indivisible.    We  cannot
di\ide   a  slave  or  a  horse  so  that  the  several  parts  ^,.       ..  .

^  1  kings  dim-

have  the  same  value  which  they  had  when  they  were  sihU  and  in-
parts  of  a  whole  ;  but  if  we  divide  a  field  into  four,
we  have  four  small  fields.

54.  They  are   also  principal  or  accessory ;  that  is,  they  are
the  direct  obiect  of  ris^hts,  or  are  only  so  as  forminoj  m.-

"^      ,  ^ ,  ''  ,  "    1  flings  imn-

portion  of,  or  being  intimately  connected  Avith,  some-  cival  and  ac-
thing  that  is ;  thus  a  tree  is  a  principal    thing,  its  ^^^^^^y-
fruit  an  accessory.

65.  Another   distinction   relating  to   things    familiar  to    the
Koman  jurists  was  that  between  the  genus  and  the   Q(,nus  and
species.     By  the  genus  was  meant  a  whole   class  of  Specks.
objects,  such  as  horses,  or  the  general  name  for  an  object,  such
as  wine,  oil,  wheat.      Species  was  the  particular  member  of  the
class,  or  particular  portion  of  the  object  comprehended  under  the
genus,  as  this  horse,  or  the  wine  in  this  bottle.     If  a  purchaser
bought  a  horse  or  a  certain  quantity  of  oil,  the  thing  bought  was
said  to  be  determined  genere ;  if  he  bought  a  particular  horse  or
the  oil  in  a  certain  vase,  the  thing  bought  was  said  to  be  deter-
mined specie.     All  things  which  are  included  under  a  general
name,  such  as   oil  or  wheat,  are    commonly  divided   by  being
weighed,  numbered,  or  measured,  and  were  therefore  spoken  of
by  the  jurists  as  being  those  things  quce  pondere,  numero,  mensu-
rave  constant.

6Q.  We  may,  lastly,  regard  things  as  particular,  or  as   col-
lected under  some  head,  when  the  whole  collection  is
a  thing  in  law.     Thus  a  sheep  is  a  particular  thing  i^res  and

(res  singularis)  a  flock,   composed  ex  distantibus  uni  ^'^''^^^  univer-
.  .  11        .  r>    ^  '  sitaies.

nomini  subjectis,  is  a  collection  of  things,  or,  as  the
jurists  expressed  it,  is  a  rerum  universitas  (or  simply  universitas).
As  also,  of  course,  are  such  comprehensive  things  as  an  inherit-
ance, a  dowry,  the  peculium  of  a  slave.

57.  In  proceeding  to  the  second  division  of  things  according
to  the  persons  who  have  rights  over  them,  and  to  the  extent  of
those  rights,  we  must  first  notice  the  distinction  in  things  caused
by  certain  things  having  a  sacred  character  {res  divini
juris).       inese  Avere    res  sacrcB^  consecrated  to  the
superior  gods ;  or  res  religioscBy  such  as  tombs  or  burial-grounds,

xliv  INTEODUCTION.

consecrated  to  the  infernal  gods ;  or,  lastly,  res  sanctcs,  things
human,  but  having  a  sort  of  sacredness  attaching  to  them,  such
as  the  walls  and  gates  of  cities.

58.  The  State,  again,  impressed  on  some  things  a  peculiar
character.  All  things  which  were  held  by  peregrini  and  not  by
citizens  were  peregrina.    The  soil  which  was  included  in  the  terri-

Ager  torics  of  the  early  State,  the  ager  Romanus,  was  dis-

tinguished from  all  other  land  by  being  alone  capable
of  being  the  subject  of  a  sale  by  mancipation,  and  being  alone
held  by  the  especial  tenure  oiihQJus  Quiritium.^  In  later  times,
a  greater  portion  of  the  soil  of  Italy  was  placed  on  the  same
footing  with  the  soil  of  the  ager  Romanus,  and  solum  Italicum
came  to  be  the  name  of  all  soil  wherever  situated  to  which  the
privileges  of  the  old  ager  Romanus  were  accorded  as  opposed  to
solum  provinciale,  which  always  remained,  at  least  in  theory,  the
property  of  the  State,  and  of  which  a  perfect  ownership  could
not  be  acquired,  t  Justinian  abolished  this  difference  in  the
tenure  of  the  soil.

59.  In   the    older    law   there    also    prevailed   a   distinction,

abolished  by  Justinian,  between  res  mancipi  and  res
es  onancij^i.  ^^^^  mancipi.  We  know  from  a  fragment  of  Ulpian,J
what  thino'S  were  res  mancipi.  They  were  prcedia  in  Italico  solo,
whether  in  the  country  or  the  city,  servitudes  (a  term  to  be
explained  presently)  over  these  prcEdia  when  in  the  country,
slaves,  and  four-footed  animals,  as  oxen  and  horses,  tamed  for  the
service  of  man.  All  other  things  were  nee  mancipi.  We  also
know  that  property  in  res  mancipi  could  only  be  transferred  by
mancipatio,  that  is,  by  a  form  of  sale,  in  which  the  purchaser
took  hold  with  his  hand  of  the  thing  purchased,  and  claiming  it
to  be  his  tendered  a  piece  of  copper  to  the  seller.  §  The  list  of
res  mancipi  is  evidently  a  list  of  the  possessions  of  an  early  agri-
cultural community,  and  there  can  be  scarcely  any  doubt  that  the
form  of  sale  required  to  transfer  the  property  in  them  was  the
ordinary  form  of  sale  in  such  a  community.  At  some  period,  and
in  some  manner  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge,  these  possessions
of  an  early  agricultural  community  were  contrasted  with  other

*  Dion.  Halicarn.  iv.  13.

t  Ulpian,  xix.  1 ;  Cicero,  Pro  Flacco,  i.  32 ;  Gaius,  i.  20.

X  Ulp.  Beg.  xix.

§  The  form  of  mancipatio  will  be  more  fully  noticed  in  sec.  81  of  the

Introduction.

INTRODUCTION.  xlv

forms  of  wealth,  and  the  mode  of  transfer  customary  in  the  one
case  was  found  not  to  be  customary  in  the  other.  The  law,  sanc-
tioning and  embodying  the  custom,  made  the  form  of  mancipatio
necessary  to  pass  res  mancipi,  and  declared  it  not  to  be  necessary
to  pass  other  things.  Manus,  as  signifying  '  power,'*  is,  pro-
bably, the  root  of  the  phrases  mancipi  and  mancipatio.  Thus
res  mancipi  meant  originally  things  in  the  hand,  or  taken  by  the
hand,  of  the  owner,  and  the  taking  by  the  hand  in  the  form  of
transfer  w^as  symbolic  of  the  purchaser  holding  or  acquiring  the
thing  in  the  way  in  which  the  seller  had  held  or  acquired  it.

60.  If  we  look  at  things  according  to  the  persons  by  whom
they  are  owned,  we  have  a  division  into  res  communes^

jRcS  CO^)Z77ZZ('}Z€S

as  the  sea  and  the  air,  which  cannot  be  appropriated

by  any  particular  individuals ;  res  puhlicce,  things   which   belong

to  the  State,  as  the  State  land  (ager  puhlicus\  navi-

gable    rivers,    roads,    &c.  ;     res    universitatis,    things

which  belong  to  aggregate  bodies,  as  to  corporations ;    and  res

privatcB,    things    which  belong  to   individuals ;     and

wnicn  were   saicl  to  be  in  nostra  patrimomo,  i.  e.  we

could,  in  one  way  or  another,  have  a  property  in  them :  whereas

things  common,  or  public,  or  dedicated  to  the  gods,     r       .

were   extra  patrimonium,  i.  e.  could  not  become  the    patrimonio.

subject  of  private  property.  Lastly,  there  were  res  nuUius,  things

of  which  no  one  has  acquired  the  ownership,  as  wild  animals,  or

unoccupied  islands  in  the  sea.

61.  Having  thus  given  a  sketch  of  the  position  of  persons  in
Roman  law,  as  also  of  the  divisions  of  things,  we  now

proceed  to  speak  of  that  connection  between  persons  ^^^^^*

and  things  which  what  are  termed  rights  express.  The  necessities
of  his  physical  position  oblige  man  to  exert  his  power  over  the
world  of  things ;  his  special  interests  prompt  each
man  to  claim,  as  against  his  fellows,  an  exclusive  ^^^  ^^^'^^^^*
interest  in  particular  things.  Sometimes  such  a  claim  sanctioned
by  law  is  urged  directly  :  the  owner,  as  he  is  said  to  be,  of  the
thing  publishes  this  claim  against  all  other  men,  and  asserts  an
indisputable  title  himself  to  enjoy  all  tlie  advantao-es   which  the-

*  How  manus  signifies  power  is  a  further  question;  it  may  be  that
the  hand  is  merely  a  metaphor,  as  we  say  ^in  the  hands'  for  'in  the
power '  of  a  person  ;  or  it  may  mean  the  hand  of  a  conqueror  or  pkm-
derer,  and  thus  originally  things  7nanu  capta  would  be  the  booty  of
plunderers.

xlvi  INTRODUCTION.

possession  of  the  thing  can  confer.  Sometimes  the  claim  is  more
indirect ;  the  claimant  insists  that  there  are  one  or  more  parti-
cular individuals  who  ought  to  put  him  in  possession  of  something
he  wishes  to  obtain,  or  do  something  for  him,  or  fulfil  some
promise,  or  repair  some  damage  they  have  made  or  caused.  Such
a  claim  is  primarily  urged  against  particular  persons,  and  not
against  the  world  at  large.  On  this  distinction  between  claims
to  things  advanced  against  all  men,  and  those  advanced  primarily
against  particular  men,  is  based  the  division  of  rights  into  real
and  personal  expressed  by  writers  of  the  middle  ages,"^  on  the
analogy  of  terms  found  in  the  writings  of  the  Roman  jurists,  by
the  jyhrases  jura  in  re  tmdjura  ad  rem.  A.  real  right,  a  jus  in  re,
or,  to  use  the  equivalent  phrase  preferred  by  some  later  commen-
tators, ^z^^  191  rem,  is  a  right  to  have  a  thing  to  the  exclusion  of
all  other  men.f  A  personal  right,  jus  ad  rem,  or,  to  use  a  much
more  correct  expression,  jics  in  personam,  is  a  right  in  which
there  is  a  person  who  is  the  subject  of  the  right,  as  well  as  a
thing  as  its  object,  a  right  which  gives  its  possessor  a  power  to
oblige  another  person  to  give  or  procure,  or  do  or  not  do  some-
thing. It  is  true  that  in  a  real  right  the  notion  of  persons  is
involved,  for  no  one  could  claim  a  thing  if  there  were  no  other
persons  against  whom  to  claim  it ;  and  that  in  a  personal  right  is
involved  the  notion  of  a  thing,  for  the  object  of  the  right  is  a
thing  which  the  possessor  wishes  to  have  given,  procured,  done,  or
not  done.  But  the  leading  principle  of  the  distinction  is  simple
and  intelligible  ;  and  though  it  has  not  been  formally  adopted  in
the  system  of  the  Institutes  or  of  the  leading  jurists,  yet  the
classifications  of  the  different  relations  of  persons  and  things
which  they  actually  employed,  are  so  capable  of  being  assimilated
to  that  which  this  distinction  susfS^ests  that  we  need  not  hesitate
to  adopt  it.

o&

*  The  term  jus  in  re  appears  in  the  summary  of  law  bearing  the
name  of  the  Brachylogus,  which  belongs  to  the  twelfth  century ;  both
phrases  occur  in  the  pontifical  constitutions  of  the  thirteenth  century.
(See  Sexti  Decret.  iii.  7,  8,  in  quihus  jus  non  esset  qucesitum  in  re,  licet  ad
re'm. )

t  The  objection  to  using  the  term  jus  in  re  is  that  the  expression  occurs
in  the  classical  jurists  as  meaning  an  interest  in  a  thing  short  of  ownership,
as  the  interest  of  a  mortgagee  in  the  thing  pledged,  and  on  this  ground  the
term  jus  in  rem,  which  is  not  found  in  the  classical  jurists,  but  is  supported
by  the  analogy  of  the  familiar  term  actio  in  rem,  seems  preferable.

INTEODUC'TION.  jl^JJ

III.   RIGHTS  OVER  THINGS.

62.  The  most  complete  real  right  is  of  course  that  possessed
by  the  absolute  owner  of  the  thing,  the  person  who
has  power  to  dispose  of  it  as  he  likes,  and  who  holds    '°'""""«'"-
it  by  a  title  recognised  as  valid  by  law.     This  ownership  was   in
Koman  law  expressed  by  the  word  dominium,  sometimes  by  pro-
prietas.     The  dominus  was  entitled  to  the  use  of  the  thino-  (usus)
to  the  perception  of  all  its  products  {fructus),  or  to  consume  the
thing  entirely  if  it  were  capable  of  consumption  (abusns)      He
could  also  dispose  of,  or  alienate  it  at  will.    In  the  ancient  system

t  ^Ti^  ^^'  f""  '''''"^''  ^''^  ''''''  *°  ^'  °^"^''  ^^■>'-^  Quiritium.
JNor  did  the  old  law  recognise  any  dominium  other  than  that

which  was  enjoyed  ex  jure  Quiritium.  But  the  prietors  found
occasions  when  they  wished  to  give  all  the  advantages  of  owner-
ship, but  were  prevented  by  the  civil  law  from  givino-  the  leo-al
dommium..  Another  kind  of  dominium  came  therefore  to  le
spoken  of:  and  the  term  in  bonis  habere  was  used  to  express  an
ownership  which  was  practically  absolute  because  it  was  protected
by  the  praetor's  authority,  but  which  was  not  technically  the  same
as  ownership  ex  jure  Quiritium.  Commentators  have  called  this
ownership  the  dominium  bonitarium,  a  term  not,  however,  used  by
the  jurists.  The  distinction  between  the  dominium  bonitarium  and
that  ex  jure  Quiritium  entirely  disappeared  under  Justinian.

63.  To  the  notion  of  dominium  was  opposed  that  of  possesno
A  person  might  be  owner  of  a  thing  and  yet  not  pos-
sess it,  or  possess  it  without  being  the  owner.     Pos-      ■''''«*«««''■
session  implied  actual  physical  occupation,  or  'detention,  to  use  the
technical  term,  of  the  thing;  but  it  also  implied  somethinc.  more
in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  used  by  the  Eoman  lawyers      It
implied  not  only  a  fact,  but  an  intention;  not  only  the  fact  of
the  thing  being  under  the  control  of  the  possessor,  but  also  the
intention  on  the  part  of  the  possessor  to  hold  it  so  as  to  reap
exactly  the  same  benefit  from  it  as  the  real  owner  would   and  to
exercise  the  same  rights  over  it,  even  though  he  mio-ht  be  well
aware  that  he  was  not  the  real  owner,  and  had  no  claim  to  be  so
The  possessor  was  entitled  to  have  his  possession  protected  a<.ainst
every  one  but  the  true  owner,   and  length  of  possession  would
Linder  certain  conditions  fixed  by  law,  make  the  possessor  really
become  the  owner  of  the  thing  possessed.

xlviii  INTKODUCTION.

64.  As  the  real  rights  over  a  thing  may  be  very  numerous,  ii
is  perfectly  possible  to  separate  them,  and  to  give  some  to  on(
person  and  some  to  another.  We  can,  for  instance,  separate  the
right  of  walking  in  a  field  from  the  right  of  digging  under  the
surface,  and  give  the  right  of  doing  the  one  to  this  person  and  o1
doing  the  other  to  that.  In  this  way  each  right  that  is  separatee
off  may  be  considered  as  a  fragment  of  the  whole  dominium.
capable  of  being  given  away  from  the  proprietor.  These  frag-
mentary rights,  these  portions  of  the  whole  right  comprised  in  the

absolute   ownership,  were  termed  servitutesy  because

SsTvitutcs

the  thing  was  under  a  kind  of  slavery  for  the  benefit
of  the  person  entitled  to  exercise  over  it  this  separate  right.     In
some  servitudes,  the  right  over  the  thing  subject  to  the  servitude.
res  serviensy  was  attached  to  the   ownership  of  another  thing  (res
dominans) :    the    servitudes    were    then    spoken    of  as  servitutes
rerum  or  prcEdiorum,  and  a  distinction  was  made  in  these  servi-
tudes according  as  the  right  given  by  them  referred  to  the  soil
itself,  as  the  right  to  go  or  to  drive  over  it,  when  the   servitutes
were  said  to  be  rusticorum  prcBdioriim,  or  to  the  soil  as  supporting
some  superstructure,  as  a  house,  when  the  servitudes  were  said  to
be  urhanorum   prcedioi'um.     In  other    servitudes,  the  right  was
given  to  particular  persons  ;  and  the  servitudes  were  then  termed
servitutes  personarum.     The  most  important  of  these  latter  servi-
tudes were  ususfructus  and  usus.      Ususfructus  was  the  right  to
enjoy  a  thing  belonging  to   another  person   so  as  to  reap  all  the
produce  derivable  from  it,   as,  for  instance,   all  the  fruits  of  the
soil ;  usus  was   the  right  to  use  and  enjoy  a  thing  belonging  to
another  person,  only  without  reaping  any,  or  only  a  small  portion,
of  its  produce.     Only  immoveable   property  was  subject  to  the
servitutes  prcediorum ;  both   moveable    and    immoveable  to    the
servitutes  personarum,

^5.  There  were  two  other  real  rights  which  had  something  of
^     ,        .       the  nature  of  servitudes,  but  which  received  a  par-
and  sufpcr-        ticular  name.      These  were  emphyteusis    and  super-
^*^*'  Jicies,     The  former  was   an  alienation  of  all  rights

except  that  of  the  bare  ownership  for  a  long  term,  in  considera-
tion of  the  proprietor  receiving  a  yearly  rent  (pensio) ;  the  latter
was  the  alienation  by  the  owner  of  the  surface  of  the  soil  of  all
rights  necessary  for  building  on  the  surface,  a  yearly  rent  being
generally  reserved.

^Q,  Lastly,  there  was  the  real  right  given  over  a  thing  by

INTRODUCTION.  xlix

ledge  or  mortgage,  piptus,  h?/potheca;   the  former  term  being
sed  to  express  the  case  of  the  thinfy,  over  which  the    ^

.  1         1  •       1  •  /»    1       Jus  ptgnoris.

[crht  was  given,  being  placed  m  the  possession  oi  the

reditor,  the  latter  to  express  the  case  of  it  being  left  in  the

ossession  of  the    debtor.     The   right   was    given   to    secure    a

reditor  the  payment  of  his  debt ;  and  he  ultimately  had  power

3  sell  the  thing,  and  to  satisfy  his  claim  out  of  the  proceeds,  or,

■  he  could  find  no  purchaser,  to  have  himself  made  owner  of  the

liino;.

67.  We  may  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the  mode  in  which  real
ights  are  acquired.  We  find  at  the  outset  an  obvious  diiference
etvveen  acquiring  rights  over  a  particular  thing,  and  acquiring
ights  over  the  entirety  of  a  number  of  things  comprised  in  such

term  as  an  inheritance,  which  includes  the  entirety    .

^  «^     Acquisition

f  the  rights  belonging  to  a  deceased  person,  both  of  rights  over
eal  and  personal.  We  may  thus  divide  the  subject  "^^^^"
f  the  acquisition  of  rights  into  two  parts :  the  first  comprising
he  modes  in  which  real  rights  are  acquired  over  particular
hings ;  the  second  comprising  the  modes  in  which  an  entirety
universitas)  of  rights,  both  real  and  personal,  passed  from  one
lerson  to  another.

68.  We  may  mention,  as  the  first  of  the  modes  of  acquiring
)articular  things,  occupation,  i.e.  the  seizing  on  a  thing  which  is
L  res  nuUius,  i.e.  without  an  owner :  land  in  an  un-

.    ,  ^         .  jj.  •!  1        •        1         Acquisition  of

►ccupied  country  is  a  res  nulLius,  so  are  wild  animals;  riqhtsomrpar-
f  we  seize  on,  or,  as  we  should  say,  occupy  the  land,  ^^^ular  things.

-,  11  -n  -1  •  -1  Occupatio.

md  catch  the  wild  animal,  we  gam  our  right  over

he  soil  and  the  animal  by  having  been  the  first  to  seize  it.

69.  Accession  is  the  general  term  for  the  acquisition  of  rights
iither  over  things  which  are  added  by  the  forces  of

j4.CC€SSZ0

lature  to,  and  become  an  inseparable  part  of,  another

:hing  regarded  as  the  principal  thing,  or  over  things  which  by

^he  operation  of  man  are  united  with  other  things  so  as  to  form

m  indivisible  product.     The  owner  of  the  principal  thing,  by

drtue  of  his  being  owner,  is  the  owner  also  of  the  accessory

thing.

70.  A  contract  or  gift,  by  which  one  person  promised  to  give
a  thing  to  another,  did  not  make  that  other  the  owner

3f  the  thing.     A  further  step  was  necessary.     The
thing  must  be  handed  over  to  the  person  who  was,  under  the
terms  of  the  contract,  to  become  the  owner  of  it.     This  handing

c2

1  INTKODUCTION.

over  was  called  traditio  ;  and  a  perfect  traditio  implied,  first
that  it  was  a  real  absolute  owner,  capable  of  alienating  the  thing
who  transferred  it,  and  secondly,  that  he  placed  the  new  pro
prietor  in  actual  possession  of  the  thing.

71.  The  above  are  termed  natural  modes  of  acquisition;  bu

there  are  some  which  are  said  to  derive  their  force

brljts.

only  from  the  civil  law.  One  is  acquisition  by  gift
Strictly  speaking,  gift  is  not  a  peculiar  mode  of  acquisition,  bui
an  acquisition  by  delivery  with  a  particular  motive  for  th(
transfer.  Probably  it  was  on  account  of  the  solemnities  witl
which  under  Justinian  sifts  had  to  be  made  that  ffifts  are  treatec
in  the  Institutes  as  a  special  mode  of  acquisition.  One  special
kind  of  gift  was  a  donatio  mortis  causa,  a  gift  to  take  effect  in
case  of  the  death  of  the  donor  in  the  lifetime  of  the  recipient.

72.  The  law  also  gave  the  ownership  of  a  thing  by  usucapio,

that  is,  by  quiet  possession,  bona  fide,  and  founded  on
a  good  title,  which  sufficed,  under  the  civil  law,  to
transfer  the  dominium,  or  legal  ownership,  if  maintained  during
one  year  over  moveable  things,  or  during  two  years  over  im-
moveable. The  operation  of  usucapio  Avas  of  great  importance  in
Roman  law ;  for  by  it  the  interest  of  a  person  to  whom  a  res
mancipi  was  transferred  otherwise  than  by  mancipation  and  the
interests  of  all  persons  who  held  things  in  bonis  (see  sec.  62)
were,  after  a  short  lapse  of  time,  converted  into  full

Prescription.      _...  ,.  -p»  .,.  ,«  ,

Quiritarian  ownership.  prescription,  before  the
time  of  Justinian,  was  not  a  means  of  acquiring  rights :  it
merely  gave  a  means  of  repelling  actions  brought  to  regain  rights
which  had  long  been  held  by  another  than  the  absolute  owner.
It  was  applicable  to  immoveables  in  the  provinces,  they  being
not  affected  by  usucapio,  which  regarded  all  moveables,  but  only
such  immoveables  as  were  in  Italy.  Justinian  made  considerable
alterations  in  the  law  with  respect  to  acquisition  of  ownership  by
length  of  possession.  The  same  law  was  made  to  prevail  through-
out the  empire,  and  possession  during  three  years  gave  the
ownership  of  moveables,  and  possession  during  ten  years,  if  the
parties  had  inhabited  the  same  province  during  the  time,  or
possession  during  twenty  years  if  they  had  not,  gave  the  owner-
ship of  immoveables.

73.  The   ownership  was    also  transferred  when  things  were

surrendered  by  the  fictitious  process  of  injure  cessio.
In  jure  cessio.       .         .  «i   •         i  •   i     j_i        i    />      i       ^  ,       -i

that  is,  a  suit  m  which  the  deienaant  gave  up  to  the

I

INTKODUCTION.  li

plaintiff  all  he  claimed,  or  when  things  were  adjudged  {adjudicatio)
in  certain  actions,  such  as  those  for  assigning  boundaries,  and
dividing  a  family  estate,  when  the  judge  had  a  power  to  assign
the  respective  portions  to  the  different  parties.

74.  The  entirety  of  rights  was  acquired  when  one  person
succeeded   to    the    -persona,   or    les^al    existence,    of    .     .  .,•      ^

^  '  o  '  Acquisition  oj

another,   and   thereby  succeeded   to    all   his   rights,  an  entirety  of

whether  over  things  or  against  persons.     The  cases  ^^^

in  which  this  most  naturally  occurred  were  that  of  arrogation

(for   when  a   person  was    arrogated,  he,  of  course,

transferred  all  that  he  had  to  the  person  whose  family

he  entered),  and  that  of  succession  to  the  inheritance  of  testators

and  intestates.

75.  Testaments  were  originally  made  by  being  proclaimed  in
the  comitla  curiata,  or  by  a  fictitious  sale,  in  which
testators  transferred  their  property  to  a  purchaser
{familice  emptor)  who  was  himself  heir,  or  who  was,  after  their
death,  to  distribute  it  according  to  their  wishes.  In  later  times
a  testament  was  made  in  the  presence  of  seven  witnesses,  who
affixed  their  seals  to  it,  and  the  witnesses  and  the  testator  sub-
scribed the  testament.  In  order  to  make  a  testament,  it  was
necessary  to  have  the  testamenti  f actio,  a  term  implying  such  a
participation  in  the  law  of  private  Roman  citizens  as  to  make  a
person  considered  capable  of  making,  taking  under,  or  beino-
witness  to,  a  testament.

76.  The  testator  was   obliged  to  disinherit  by  name   every
one  who,  being  among  those  in  his  own  power,  had  a
natural  claim  on  his  property ;  and  if  he  failed  to  do  ^^^^'

so,  the  whole  testament  was  set  aside.     The  great  peculiarity  of  a
Koman  testament  was  the  institution  of  the  heir,  that  is,  of  the
person    who  was  to   succeed  to  the  persona    of   the  j  ft  f      f
testator.     Unless  there  was  such  a  person,  no  other  ^^^^  ^^&^'^-
disposition  of  the  testament  could  take  effect,  for  there  was  no  con-
tinuation of  the  testator's  legal  existence.     The  heir  was,  therefore
properly  appointed  at  the  beginning  of  the  testament ;  in  case  of
the  heir  accepting,  he  placed  himself  exactly  in  the  position  of  the
testator,  received  all  his  property,  and  was  answerable  for  all  his
iebts  ;  in  receiving  his  property  he  was,  however,  bound  to  o-ive
3ffect  to  the  subsequent  dispositions  of  the  testament.      Various
provisions  were  made  at  different  times  to  protect  the  heir,  and
especially  he  was  secured  by  the  Lex  Falcidia  in  a  clear  fourth,

Hi  INTEODUCTION.

as  the  inheritance ;  and  under  the  later  empire,  he  could  sepa-
rate the  property  of  the  testator  from  his  own.  In  order  that
the  testament  miorht  not  fail  because  the  heir  was  not  wdllino;  to
enter  on  the  inheritance,  it  was  customary  to  name  one  or  more
persons  to  "whom  in  succession  it  might  be  open  to  take  upon
them  the  office  of  heir  {suhstitutio).  And  a  testator  could  always
secure  an  heir  by  naming,  as  the  last  of  the  list,  one  of  his  own
slaves,  whom  the  law  did  not  permit  to  refuse  the  office  (Jieres
necessarius).  When  some  of  the  conditions  necessary  to  create  an
heir,  or  give  a  legacy,  were  wanting  in  a  will,  still  the  expressions
of  the  testator's  wall  were  binding  as  trusts  upon  the  heir  under
Fideicom-  ^^®  ^^^^^^  ^^'  ^^^^'  ^^  intestato.  Such  trusts  {Jidei-
missa.  commisso)  w^ere  first  made  obligatory  by  Augustus,

who  also  first  gave  effect  to  codicils,  that  is,  writings  purporting  to
^  ,    ,         deal  with  property  in  the  manner  of  a  testamentary

Codicils.  .    .  ,  n  .    1  1  •    .

disposition,  but  not  executed  with  the  solemnities
which  were  required  to  make  a  testament  valid.

77.  If  there  was  no  testament  to  determine  the  succession  to

the  particular  property,  the  law  prescribed  the  order
inustaiel'  ^^"     ^^^  which  it  was  to  devolve.     The  first  claimants  were

the  sui  lieredes,  that  is,  all  persons  in  the  power  of
the  deceased,  and  who,  on  his  death,  became  themselves  sui  juris.
Thus,  a  son  in  potestate  was  a  suus  heres  of  the  deceased,  but  not
a  grandson  until  the  son  was  dead.  These  persons  were  termed
sui  heredes  as  having  an  interest  of  their  own  in  the  family  pro-
perty. If  there  were  no  sui  heredes,  the  next  heirs  were  the
agnati,  i.e.  all  members  of  the  same  civil  family;  and  then,  in
default  of  agnatic  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  gave  the  in-
heritance to  the  members  of  the  same  gens,  an  enactment  which
could  of  course  only  take  effect  when  the  deceased  was  a  member
of  a  gens.  What  was  the  course  of  devolution  beyond  the  agnati
under  the  old  civil  law,  when  the  deceased  was  not  a  member  of
a  gens,  w^e  do  not  know ;  but  probably  the  blood-relations  suc-
ceeded. In  default  of  ognati,  under  the  praetorian  legislation,
the  claims  of  the  natural  family  were  attended  to,  and  the
cognati,  or  blood-relations,  succeeded  to  the  inheritance.  In  the
later  times  of  the  Roman  law  the  claims  of  blood-relations  were
more  and  more  favoured,  and  in  many  important  points  w^ere
gradually  preferred  to  those  of  merely  civil  kinsmanship.

The  Institutes  also  notice  three  other  modes  of  minor  impor-
tance by  which  universitates  rerum  were  acquired.     (1)  Bonorum

INTEODUCTION.  liii

addictio,  the  giving  over  of  the  property  of  a  deceased  person  to
a  slave  to  whom  the  deceased  had  given  his  freedom,   other  modes
(2)  Bonorum  venditio,  the  sale  by  order  of  the  whole  ^/«^^^«^^y

^    /  ^  «^  universitates

property  of  an  insolvent  to  a  person  who  would  under-  rerum.
take  to  pay  most  to  the  creditors.     (3)  Ex  seriatus-coiisulto  Clau-
dlano,  which  gave  over  a  woman  with  all  her  property,  who  had
cohabited  with  a  slave,  to  the  slave's  master.

IV.    EIGHTS    AGAINST    PERSONS.

78.  A  personal  right  is,  as  w^e  have  said  before,  a  right  which
one  person  has  against  another ;  a  right  to  constrain

that  other  to  give  something  to,  or  do  something  for,  ^jj^^^^^^"^*^
or  make  something  good  to,  the  possessor  of  the  right.
The  person  to  whom  the  right  belonged,  and  the  person  against
whom  it  existed,  were  said  in  Roman  law  to  be  bound  by  an
oblio-ation,  the  notion  of  an  oblio-ation  beinfT  that  of  a  tie  between
two  parties  of  such  a  nature  as  to  confer  on  the  one  a  power  of
compelling  by  action  the  other  to  give,  do,  or  make  good  some-
thing. The  obligation  did  not  give  any  interest  in  a  thing,  to
get  which  might  be  the  ultimate  object  of  the  proceeding,  but
only  gave  a  means  of  acquiring  it,  or,  under  the  praetorian
system,  its  value.

79.  The  three  words,   dare,  facere,  prmstare,  were   used  to
embrace  all  the  possible  duties  an  obligation  could

create.  Either  the  person  bound  by  the  obligation  r>rLstarr^^'
w^as  obliged  dare,  i.e.  to  give  the  absolute  ownership
of  a  thing ;  or  facere,  that  is,  to  do  or  not  to  do  some  act ;  or
prcsstare,  that  is,  to  make  good  something,  as  to  make  good  a
loss,  or  to  furnish  any  advantage  or  thing,  the  yielding  of  which
could  not  be  included  in  the  limited  sense  of  the  word  ^  dare!'
Every  person  who  possessed  a  personal  right  against  another
was  termed  a  creditor,  and  every  one  who  owed  the  satisfaction
of  a  claim,  or  was  the  subject  of  a  personal  right,  was  a  debitor.
The  word  creditor,  of  course,  points  to  those  transactions  in
w^hich  the  possessor  of  the  right  trusted  the  person  w^ho  was  the
subject  of  it;  but  the  application  of  the  terms  was  perfectly
general,  and  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  English  usage
of  the  words  creditor  and  debtor.

80.  According  to  the  theory  of  Roman  law,  all  obligations

llV  INTEODUCTION.

owed  their  origin  either  to  the  consent  of  the  parties  (^contractus).
Division  of     ^^  ^^  injuries  (^delicto)  done  by  one  person  to  another,
obligations,      which    gave    the    injured   party  a   right   to    recom-
pense.    Contracts   did  not,  however,   include  all  cases  when  an
obligation  arose  from   the  mutual   consent  of  the   parties.     The
general  name  for  such  an  obligation  was  conventio,  pactum  con-
ventum,     A    contract   was    properly    an    obligation    arising    by
mutual  consent,  and  made  in  one  of  the  forms  recognised  by  the
civil  law ;  but  all  oblio:ations   arisino^  from  mutual   consent  are
spoken  of  as  arising  from  contracts,  because  in  the  old  law  no
other  mode  of  expressing  mutual  consent  was  recognised,   and
mere  agreements  were  not  binding.

81.   The  mode  of  transferring   res  mancipi  was,  as  we  have
said  in   sec.   59,  called   mancipatio.     Gains  (i.   119)
thus  describes  the  form  of  transfer :  '  Mancipation  is
effected  in  the  presence  of  not  less  than  five  witnesses,  who  must
be  Roman  citizens  of  the  age  of  puberty,  and  also  in  the  presence
of  another  person  of  the  same   condition,  who   holds  a  pair   of
scales,  and  hence  is  called  libripens.     The  purchaser,  taking  hold
of  the  thing,  says  and  affirms  that  this  thing  is  mine,  ex  jure
Quiritium,  and  it  is  purchased  by  me  with  this  piece  of  copper
and  these  scales.     He  then  strikes  the  scales  with  the  piece  of
money,  and  gives  it  to  the  seller  as  a  symbol  of  the  price.'     But
the  generic  term  for  this  mode  of  sale  was  not  mancipatio,  but
nexum*  for  this  form  was  used  not  only  when  a  sale  was  its  real
object,  but  when  under  the  form  of  a  sale  the  parties  intended  to
effect  a  contract  of  deposit  or  pledge.     The  purchaser  took  the
thing  handed  over  to  him  upon  the  condition  of  restoring  it  under
certain  specified  circumstances,  and  thus  a  form  of  transfer  came
to  be  a  form  of  contract  where  part  of  the   contract   was  still  to
be  executed.

82.  In  the  time  when  the  civil  law  had  assumed  its  full
Contracts  shape,  and  apart  from  the  alterations  it  received  from
made  re.  the  pr^torian   system,  the  nexum  was  used  chiefly  as

the  mode  of  transferring  res  mancipi,  for  contracts  of  deposit  and
pledge  were  ordinarily  made,  as  it  was  termed,  re.  That  is,  by
the  mere  delivery  of  the  thing,  the  person  to  whom  it  was
delivered,  and  who  accepted  it,  was  bound  by  an  obligation  to
hold  it  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  had  been  delivered.     There

*  Nexum  est,  quodcumque  per  ces  et  libram  geritur,  idque  necti  dicitur. —

Festus.

INTRODUCTION.  Iv

were  four  heads  of  contracts  recognised  by  the  civil  law,  and  this
of  contracts  made  re  is  the  first  noticed  in  the  Institutes,  although
historically  the  recognition  of  such  contracts  was  probably  pos-
terior to  that  of  the  more  formal  contracts,  verbis  and  Uteris.
Under  contracts  re  were  classed  four  kinds  of  contract,  namely,
the  contracts  of  mutuum  when  the  receiver  had  to  return  as  much
of  the  same  kind  of  the  thing  he  received,  commodatum  when  he
had  to  return  the  specific  thing  itself,  depositum  when  the  receiver
was  bound  to  keep  safe  a  thing  committed  to  his  charge,  and
pignus  when  the  receiver  took  a  thing  in  pledge.

83.  The  second  head  of  contract  under  the  civil  law  was  that
of  contracts  made  verbis,  of  executory  contracts,  that     Contracts
is,  made  in  a  prescribed  form  of  solemn  words.     One    "''^"^^^  vtrbis.
of  the  parties  put  to  the  other  a  formal  (question  {stipulatio) ,  to
which  the  other  gave  a  formal  answer  {responsio,  promissio).   To  the
validity  of  the  contract  it  was  necessary  that  the  question  should
be  couched  in  the  form  *  spondes  ? '  and  the  answer  in  that  of
'  spondeo.''     Do  you  engage  ?     I  do  engage.     It  was  long  before
equivalent  words,  such  as  promitto  or  dabo,  were  admitted  as  sub-
stitutes.     A  contract  made  by  the  pronunciation  of  these  solemn
words  was  said  to  be  made  verbis,

84.  A  third  head  of  contract  under  the  civil  law  was  that  of
contracts  made  Uteris.  An  engagement  having  been  Contracts
made  to  give  a  definite  amount,  the  parties  agreed  to  ^'^^'^^^  Uteris.
make  a  memorandum  of  the  terms  of  the  contract.  The  creditor
placed  in  his  book  of  domestic  accounts  [tabulce,  or  codex)  the
name  of  the  debtor,  and  the  sum  as  pecunia  expensa  lata,  weighed
out  and  given  to  the  debtor ;  and  the  debtor  entered  in  his  tabulcE
the  same  sum  as  pecania  accepta  relata.  Either  party  could  call
on  the  other  to  produce  his  tabulcB,  which  it  Avas  considered  so
incumbent  on  a  Roman  citizen  to  keep  carefully  and  accurately,
that  any  wilful  error  was  discoverable  without  much  difficulty.
The  debtor,  in  fact,  furnished  the  creditor  with  a  means  of
proving  that  the  debtor  had  on  a  certain  day  received  the  money,
and  even  if  the  debtor  had  not  set  the  sum  down  in  his  tabulca,
the  creditor  could  show  his  own  tabulcE  as  a  proof  of  the  contract.
These  contracts  were  peculiar  to  Roman  citizens.  Peregrini
had  as  a  substitute  syngraphce,  signed  by  both  parties,  or  chiro-
graplia,  signed  only  by  the  debtor ;  and  on  these  documents  an
action  could  be  brought.

85.  There  were,  also,  four  particular  contracts,  for  the  forma-

Ivi  INTRODUCTION.

tion   of   which   the   civil  law  required  no  formalities  whatever,
^    ^     ,  but  which  were  made  merely  consensu,  by  the  con-

Contracts  _  ^  «^  'J

made  con-       sent  of  the  parties.      These  four  contracts  Avere — sale
(^emptio-veaditio),  hiring  (locatio-conductio),   partner-
ship [societas),  and  bailment  [mandatum).     The  four  modes,  then,
in  which  contracts  mionht  be  entered  into  under  the  civil  law  were
— re,  verhis,  Uteris,  and  consensu.

86.  When,  however,  the  old  law  of  contracts  fell  under  the
manipulation  of  the  prastors,  many  changes  were  introduced.     The

Prcstorian  ^^^  forms  of  Contract  recognised  by  the  civil  law,
innovations,  that  is,  the  four  heads  of  contract  made  re,  the  four
heads  of  contract  made  consensu,  and  contracts  made  verbis  and
Uteris  still  remained  the  basis  of  the  whole  law  of  contracts ;  but
the  prastors,  while  nominally  adhering  to  the  civil  law,  introduced
changes  that  had  a  great  practical  effect.  The  nature  of  this
change  can  only  be  understood  by  studying  the  details  of  theRoman
law  of  contracts,  and  it  would  be  out  of  place  in  a  general  intro-
duction to  attempt  to  notice  them.  But  there  are  three  ways  in
which  the  praitors  wrought  a  change,  which  were  so  important
that  they  may  be  briefly  stated  here.  By  an  extension  of  the
theory  of  the  civil  law  contract  re,  the  pra3tors  permitted  an
action  to  be  brought  to  enforce  every  contract  that  was  in  part
executed  ;  secondly,  agreements  (pacta)  that  would  not  furnish
a  cause  of  action  were  permitted  to  be  set  up  by  way  of  defence
to  an  action  with  which  they  were  inconsistent ;  and  thirdly,
there  were  a  few  specified  particular  cases  in  which  the  praetor
permitted  pacts  to  be  enforced  by  action.

87.  Obligations  might,  however,  very  well  arise,  without  any
.  fault  on  the  part  of  any  one,  and  yet  without  having

\yOtl(JCLLt\/  ito

quasi  ex  con-  their  Origin  in  mutual  consent.  The  mere  fact  of
occupymg  a  certain  position  will  sometimes  involve
duties,  the  performance  of  which  may  be  enforced  by  an  action,
and  which  give  rise  to  a  personal  right  which  the  person  interested
in  their  performance  has  against  the  person  bound  to  perform
them.  An  heir,  for  instance,  was,  by  the  mere  fact  of  accepting
the  inheritance,  bound  to  pay  the  legacies  given  by  the  testament.
Such  obligations  were  said  to  be  quasi  ex  contractu,  not  that  they
really  rested  on  any  contract,  but  there  was  an  analogy  between
the  obligation  thus  arising,  and  that  arising  from  the  formation  of
a  contract.*

*  See  Austin,  Province  of  Jurisprudence  determined.  Appendix,  page  xl.

INTKODUCTION.  Ivii

88.  It  was  not  every  wrong  deed  for  which  compensation  could
be  obtained  that  gave  rise  to  an  obligation  ex  delicto  ;   obligations
there  were  certain   particular  wrong   deeds,  such  as  ^^  delicto.
theft  and  robbery  with  violence,  which  the  law  expressly  charac-
terised as  delicta,  and  to  procure   reparation  for  which  the  law
pro\ided  a  special  action.     It  was  only  when  a  person  suffered  by
one   of  these   wrono;  deeds  that   an   oblio-ation   ex  delicto  arose.
When  any  wrong  deed  was  done  not  thus  expressly  designated  by
law  as  a  delictum,  and  when  no  particular  and  appropriate  form
of  action  was  provided,  the  obligation  was  said  to  arise  quasi  ex
delicto ;  among  the   instances  given   in  the   Institutes  is  that  of
dangerous  things  being  placed  so  as  to  fall  into  a  public  Avay.     If
any  one  were  hurt  by  the  fall,  the  author  of  the  injury  would  be
bound  to  make  reparation  by  an  obligation  quasi  ex  Qf^ij^y^fi^^^g
delicto,  there  being  this  point  of  analogy  between  this  ?«««*  e^  de-
obligation,  and  that  in  the  case  of  a  delict,  that  the

person  liable  to  be  sued  had  done  harm  to  the  person  or  property
of  another.  The  division  of  obligations  adopted  in  the  Institutes
is  therefore  into  those  ex  contractu,  those  quasi  ex  contractu,  those
ex  delicto,  and  those  quasi  ex  delicto.

89.  The  ancient  law  considered  an  oblis^ation  as  existins;  until
the  tie  of  law,  the  vinculum  juris,  was  loosed  by  the  Dissolution  of
thing  being  given,  furnished,  or  done,  or  by  a  new  obligations.
tie  being  formed  in  place  of  the  old ;  this  loosening  of  the  tie
was  termed  solutio.  If  payment  was  made,  i.e.  if  the  contract
was  carried  out,  this  at  once  put  an  end  to  the  contract.  But  it
might  happen  that  the  parties  wished  to  put  an  end  to  the  contract
before  it  was  carried  out.  Each  mode  of  forming  a  contract  by
the  civil  law  was  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  mode  of  dis-
solving it.  When  the  contract  had  been  formed  re,  it  was  enousfh
that  the  thing  should  be  restored ;  when  it  had  been  formed  verbis,
a  question  and  ansAver  again  furnished  the  means  of  accomplishino;
the  desired  object.  Habesne  acceptum  ?  Habeo,  sufficed  to  put
an  end  to  the  contract.  The  parties  made  an  entry  of  payment
in  their  codices,  if  the  contract  had  been  Uteris ;  and  mutual  con-
sent dissolved  those  contracts  Avhich  it  had  sufficed  to  form.  The
solutio  verbis  was  most  frequently  employed,  and  it  was  easy  to
employ  it  on  every  occasion :  for  in  whatever  way  the  contract
might  originally  have  been  entered  into,  its  terms  could  be  repeated
in  the  form  of  a  stipulation,  and  then  this  stipulation  could  be
dissolved  by  a  solutio  verbis.     The  stipulation  extinguished  the

Iviii  INTRODUCTION.

original  contract.  For  contracts  were  extinguished  not  only  by
payment,  but  by  what  was  called  novatio ;  that  is,  by
makmo;  a  new  contract,  and  substitutmo;  it  m  the
place  of  the  original  one.  The  law  required  that  the  new  contract
should  be  always  made  verbis  or  Uteris.  When  strict  adherence
to  the  rule  of  law,  requiring  a  particular  mode  of  payment,  would
work  injustice,  the  praetor  would  always  provide  a  remedy  by
means  of  his  equitable  jurisdiction.

V.     SYSTEM   OF  CIVIL  PROCESS.

90.  An  action  is  the  process  by  which  a  right  is  enforced.
Meaninq  of  Unless  a  means  of  enforcing  it  was  provided,  the  right
the  word  ac-      would  be  a  mere  inoperative  abstraction.     Directly  it

was  disputed,  it  would  cease  to  have  any  real  exist-
ence ;  but  in  order  that  it  may  have  a  real  existence,  the
State  uses  its  powers  to  ensure  a  free  exercise  of  it,  as  soon
as  it  is  made  certain  to  the  magistrate,  who  is  entrusted  with
the  authority  of  the  State,  that  the  right  claimed  does  really
belong  to  the  claimant.  The  proceeding  by  which  this  is  made
evident  to  the  magistrate,  and  the  machinery  set  in  motion  by
which  the  State  exerts  its  power  of  compulsion,  is  called  an  action.
The  word  '  action  '  is  not,  however,  always  used  exactly  in  this
sense ;  for  it  is  also  employed  to  mean  sometimes  the  right  to
institute  such  a  proceeding,  and  sometimes  the  form  which  the
proceeding  takes.

91.  There  are  three  great  epochs  in  the  history  of  the  Koman

system  of  civil  process.     First,  that  of  the  system  of
history  of  Bo-  ^^^  ^^9^^  actiones,  certain  hard,  sharply-defined  forms

man  system  of  which  a  rude  civilisation  prescribed  for  all  proceed-
ed i;i?  process.       .  ^  Ti        1  PI  n    ^  7      1
mgs.      secondly,  that  ot  the   system  ot  jormuics,  by

which  the  praetor,  adopting  a  most  flexible  form  of  organising  the
proceedings,  was  enabled  to  give  a  means  of  enforcing  every  right
which  the  more  enlarged  vicAvs  of  an  advancing  civilisation  pro-
nounced to  be  founded  on  equity  ;  and  thirdly,  that  of  the  extra-
or dinar ia  judicia,  by  which,  under  the  later  emperors,  the  supreme
authority  took  the  whole  conduct  of  the  proceeding  into  its  ov/n
hands,  and  arrived  at  what  seemed  to  it  to  be  just  in  as  direct  and
speedy  a  manner  as  it  found  possible.

92.  In  enforcing  rights  two  very  different  functions  have  to
be  exercised  by  those  to  whom  the  powers  of  the  State  are  dele-

INTKODUCTION.  lix

gated.  First,  there  must  be  some  one  invested  with  magis-
terial authority,  o^ivino^  the  sanction  and  solemnity  of  ^,,  ^_.
his  position  to  the  whole  proceeding,  who  shall  re-  trate  and  the
present  the  law  and  say  what  the  law  is,  and  who  shall  -^ '  ^  "
have  power  to  employ  the  force  which  the  State  places  at  the  dis-
posal of  those  it  selects  to  administer  justice.  Secondly,  an  inquiry
has  to  be  made  into  particular  facts,  evidence  has  to  be  received
and  weighed,  and  an  opinion  formed  and  pronounced  as  to  the  real
merits  of  the  case.  The  person  who  exercised  the  one  function
was  spoken  of  by  the  Romans  as  magistratus ;  the  person  who
exercised  the  other  as  judex.  To  the  law,  represented,  pro-
nounced, vindicated,  by  the  magistrate,  they  applied  the  term
jus:  to  the  examination  of  contested  facts  by  the  judge,  the  term
judicium.  It  is  perfectly  possible  that  the  same  person  should
act  as  magistrate  and  judge  ;  but  it  is  also  possible  that  the  two
provinces  should  be  separated  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  different
persons.  Among  the  Romans  the  magistratus  was  a  different
person  from  the  judex,  until  the  introduction  of  the  system  of
extraor dinar ia  judicia.  The  two  functions  were  kept  almost
entirely  apart  under  the  system  o^ formulce,  and,  from  a  compara-
tively early  period  of  Roman  history,  the  notion  of  a  judge  distinct
from  the  magistrate  was  familiar  to  the  national  mind.  After  the
expulsion  of  the  kings,  and  during  the  time  of  the  first  period  of
the  system  of  civil  process,  first  the  consuls,  then  the  prcEtor
urbanus,  and  in  some  cases  the  CBdiles,  acted  as  the  magistrate,  and
the  magistrate  was  said  to  have  two  functions,  (1)  Jurisdiction  the
elements  of  which  were  summed  up  into  three  words :  do,  I  give
an  action  or  possession  of  goods ;  dico,  I  express  the  law,  issue
edicts  or  interdicts ;  addico,  I  give  ownership  as  a  judge ;  and
(2)  Imperium,  the  power  of  using  the  public  forces  to  ensure  obe-
dience to  his  orders.  As  judex,  any  member  of  the  senatorial
body,  so  long  as  senators  alone  were  qualified  to  act  as  judges,
could  act  who  was  chosen  by  the  mutual  consent  of  the  parties  :
if  they  could  not  agree,  the  choice  was  determined  by  lot.  There
was  also  a  standing  body  of  plebeian  judges  dating  from  ancient
antiquity,  the  centumvirs,  elected  annually  by  the  comitia,  three
from  each  local  tribe,  and  constituting  a  collegium  divided  into
sections.  They  had  special  jurisdiction  over  questions  of  status,
of  dominium  ex  jure  Quiritium,  and  of  successions,  and  a  spear
(hasta),  the  special  symbol  of  Quiritian  ownership,  was  set  up  in
front  of  the  place  where  they  met.    In  cases  involving  any  question

Ix  INTRODUCTION.

into  which  the  centumolrs  were  the  proper  persons  to  inquire,  it  was
not  open  to  the  parties  to  ask  for  a  judge,  and  the  whole  proceed-
ings were  carried  on  before  the  centuntvirs.  Lastly,  in  cases
where  the  interests  of  peregrvni  were  involved,  recuperatores,
i.e.  persons  not  on  any  list,  were  invited  to  act,  and,  so  acting,
furnished  the  body  who  were  to  act  the  part  of  the  judex.  It
may  be  added  that  where  the  circumstances  of  the
case  demanded  that  the  judge,  in  pronouncing  his
opinion  on  the  facts,  should  exercise  a  wider  discretion  than
was  ordinarily  open  to  him,  or  decide  from  special  knowledge,  he
was  spoken  of  as  an  arbiter,  and  although  there  were  never  more
than  one  judex,  there  were  sometimes  several  arhitri,  but  the
arbiter  was  chosen  from  the  same  class  as  \h.Q  judex.

93.  All  judicial  proceedings,  whether  before  a  magistrate  or  a
Character  of  j^^o^»  ^cre  Conducted  publicly  at  Rome.  The  pro-
judicialjpro-  cccdings  began  with  the  in  jus  vocatio,  or  summons  to
^Eomc  in  early  comc  before  the  magistrate.  If  the  adversary  would
times.  ^f^^^  come  the  summoner  called,  by  touching  them  on
the  ear,  bystanders  to  witness  that  he  had  made  the  summons  ;
but  ascendants  and  patrons  could  not  be  summoned  except  by  pre-
vious authorisation  of  the  magistrate.  When  before  the  magis-
trate the  parties  had  to  give  security  for  their  further  appearance
(vadimonium),  and  called  witnesses  to  testify  that  the  litigation
had  duly  begun  (litis  contestatio).  In  early  times,  the  magistrate
sat  in  the  forum,  and  openly  dispensed  justice  to  all  comers.
Nothing,  perhaps,  conveys  a  more  correct  picture  of  the  ideas  and
feelings  that  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  public  life  of  a  Roman
citizen,  while  Rome  was  still  the  rival  of  the  Volscians  or  the
^quians,  than  the  mode  in  which  the  actions  of  law  were  con-
ducted. The  magistrate  and  the  judge  of  the  patrician  order,  the
distinction  of  days  fasti  and  nefasti,  the  key  to  which  only  those
who  knew  the  jw5  sacrum  possessed,  the  solemn  and  indispensable
form  of  words  by  which  every  stage  of  the  proceeding  must  be
accompanied,  would  throw  over  the  conduct  of  the  action  much
of  the  same  character  which  the  existence  of  a  privileged  and
partly  sacerdotal  order  impressed  on  the  whole  body  politic.

94.  The  most  ancient  and  most  important  of  the  actions  of
law,  the  actio  sacramenti,*  brings  before  us,  in  the  most  marked
manner,  the  delight  in  appeals  to  the  external  senses,  and  the

*  Gaius,  iv.  13.

INTRODUCTION.  Ixi

use  of  symbolical  acts,  sanctioned  by  long  usage  and  expressive
in  themselves,  which  belongs  to  the  early  times  of
so  many  nations.  It  was  originally  the  only  form  ^ZtLTslflaw,
of  action ;  and  every  species  of  right  could  be  en-  —actio  sacra-
forced  by  it.  When  it  was  employed  to  enforce  a
right  over  things,  the  proceedings  opened  by  the  thing  being
brought  before  the  magistrate  (in  jure) ;  the  claimants  appeared,
each  touched  it  with  a  rod  [vindicta  or  festucd),  and  said,  ^  Hunc
ego  hominem  (the  instance  given  in  Gains  is  that  of  a  claim  to  a
slave)  ex  jure  Quiritium  meum  esse  aio  secundum  suam  causam,
sicut  dixi.  Ecce  tibi  vindictam  imposui.^  His  adversary  repeated
the  same  words.  At  the  same  time  that  the  words  were  spoken
each  party  seized  hold  of  the  thing  claimed ;  this  was  termed  the
manuum  consertio,  representing  a  combat  which  was  supposed  to
take  place  in  the  presence  of  the  magistrate  before  he  would
interpose,  and  the  imposing  the  rod  was  termed  vindicatio.  If
the  thing  was  one  that  could  not  be  brought  into  court,  a  portion
of  it  was  brought  to  represent  the  whole.  A  piece  of  turf,  a
twig,  a  brick,  or  one  sheep,  stood  in  place  of  a  field,  a  house,  or
a  flock."^  When  the  vindicatio  and  manuum  consertio  were  over,
the  magistrate  said  to  the  parties,  mittite  ambo  hominem  ;  both  were
to  place  their  claims  in  his  hands.  Then  came  the  wager,  the
sacramentum,  each  party  challenging  his  adversary  to  deposit  a
certain  sum,  which  the  loser  of  the  cause  was  to  forfeit  to  the
treasury  of  the  people  {cBrarium) ,  to  be  applied  to  the  expenses
of  sacrifices.  The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  fixed  the  amount
of  the  wager  at  500  or  50  asses,  according  as  the  value  of  the
thing  contested  fell  above  or  below  1,000  asses.  The  formal
words  by  which  this  was  done  are  thus  given  by  Gains.  He  who
had  first  gone  through  the  vindicatio  asked  his  adversary  why  he
claimed  it.  Postulo  anne  dicas,  qua  ex  causa  vindicaveris.  The
other  replied  that  it  was  in  conformity  with  right  and  law  that  he
had  made  his  claim.  Jus  peregri  sicut  vindictam  imposui :  the
first  answered,  Quando  tu  injuria  vindicasti,  D.  L.  ceris  Sacra-
mento te  provoco ;  '  I  challenge  you  to  a  deposit  of  500  pounds  of
copper ;  '  and  the  other  accepted  the  challenge  by  saying.  Simili-
ter ego  te.     The  magistrate  then   awarded   the  possession  of  the

*  If  the  thing  was  an  immoveable,  there  appears  to  have  been  an  old
ceremony  of  the  parties  going  to  the  land  or  other  immoveable  thing,  and
one  expelling  the  other  from  it,  and  leading  him  before  a  magistrate  (deduc-
tio).     See  Aulus  Gellius,  Noct.  Att.  xx.  10 ;  Cicero,  Pro  Murxna,  c.  6.

Ixii  INTRODUCTION.

thing  contested  until  a  decision  was  pronounced  to  the  party  that
appeared  to  have  the  best  right  to  it,  requiring  him  to  furnish
security  that  it  would  be  forthcoming  at  the  proper  time.  These
sureties  were  called  pr cedes  litis  et  vindiciarum — Us  signifying  the
thing  contested  itself,  and  vindicice  the  fruits  or  profits  which
might  arise  from  it  before  the  final  sentence  was  given.  After  a
certain  delay,  a  judge  was  appointed  to  examine  the  facts  ;  he  in-
formed the  magistrate  what  his  decision  was,  and  the  magistrate
gave  effect  to  this  decision  by  using  the  force  placed  at  his  dis-
])0sal.  When  the  right  to  be  tried  was  a  personal  one,  there  was
of  course  nothing  that  could  be  claimed  by  vindication  and  the
action  bes^an  at  once  with  the  wao-er.

95.   The  details  of  the  actio  sacramenti  furnish  so   lively  a
picture  of  the   actual  working  of  early  Roman  law.

Actio  per  ju-       ^  ^     ^  ^  r>  j  ^

dicis  postula-     that  it  is  worth  while  to  set  them  fully  before  us  ;  but
i07iem.  ^^^  other  actions   of  law  may  be  passed  over  with  a

much  more  cursory  notice ;  "^  indeed,  our  knowledge  of  them  is
very  deficient,  as  the  portion  of  the  manuscript  of  Gains  which
contained  a  sketch  of  the  proceedings  is  imperfect.     We  know
that  the  action  called  judicis  jiostulatio  was  employed  with  regard
to  obligations,  the   machinery  of  the   actio  sacramenti  being  ob-
viously but  very  ill  adapted  for  enforcing  rights  against  persons.
We  know  little  more  than  that  the  magistrate  was  asked  to  allow
the  appointment  of  a  judge,  or  arbiter,  to   decide  the  matter  iu
question ;  and  that  the  form  of  action  was  probably  adopted,  not
where  some  certain  thin»;  was  asked  for  as  the  fulfilment  of  the
engagement,  but  where  a  greater  uncertainty  in  the  circumstances
of  the  case  allowed  a  greater  latitude  of  opinion,  and  where  an
appearance  of  good  or  bad  faith  would  naturally  colour  the  whole
cause.f     In  the   year  A.u.C  510  (as  it  is  conjectured)  the  lex
Silia  instituted  a  new  form   of  action  where  the  obligation  was
for  the  giving  a  definite   sum   of  money,  and   a  lex
Calpurnia  (a.u.C.   520)  extended  the  scope  of  the
action  to  all  obligations  for  any  certain   definite  thing.  J     This
action  was  called  condictio,  because  the  plaintiff  gave  notice  (^con-
dicere)  to  the  defendant  that  he  must  appear  before  the  magistrate,
at  an  interval  of  thirty  days,  to  receive  a  judge.     Probably  its

*  Gaius,  iv.  12.

t  Prmdarum  a  majoribus  accepimus  morem  rogandi  judicis,  si  ea  rogare-
mus  qu3e  salva  fide  facere  possit. — Cicero,  De  Off,  iii.  10.
X  Gaius,  iv.  19.

INTEODUCTION.  Ixiii

institution  completed  the  withdrawal  of  the  enforcement  of  obli-
gations from  the  scope  of  the  actio  sacramenti.  The  judicis  postu-
latio  may  have  left  to  the  sphere  of  the  actio  sacramenti  the  de-
mand for  things  certi,  and  then  the  condictio  took  that  also  away.
96.  There  were  two  other  actions  of  law,^  that  per  manus
ijijectionem,  and  that  per  pignoris  capionem.  These  .  ..
were,  however,  not  really  actions  so  much  as  methods  onanus  injec-
of  obtainins;  execution.  If  it  was  a  rio^ht  over  a  thino^
that  was  claimed,  then,  if  the  sentence  was  in  favour  of  the
claimant,  the  magistrate  at  once  put  the  claimant  in  possession  of
the  thing,  having  recourse  to  force,  manus  militaris,  if  necessary.
But  when  a  right  against  a  person  had  to  be  enforced,  there  was
nothing  which  could  be  thus  handed  over ;  the  remedy  was  against
the  person,  the  liberty  of  the  defeated  adversary,  and  the  action
p)er  manus  injectionem  was  the  means  by  which  the  successful
litigant  exerted  his  power.  He  laid  hands  on  him,  manus  ijijecit,
and  brought  him  before  a  magistrate,  stating  that  he  had  been
cast  in  the  previous  suit ;  if  this  was  denied,  ii  judex  was  ap-
pointed, and  inquiry  made  whether  judgment  had  really  been
given  against  him  as  alleged.  If  this  was  found  to  be  the  case,
he  was  adjudicatus  to  the  claimant  who,  kept  him  prisoner,  and
then  being  brought,  after  sixty  days,  before  the  magistrate,  was
addictus,  or  assigned  over,  and  became  the  slave  of  his  creditor.
To  the  principle  that  the  person,  and  not  the  property,  of  the
debtor  was  bound,  an  exception  was  made  when  the  debt  was  due
to  a  soldier  for  military  service,  to  the  fund  for  sacrifices,  or  the
public  treasury.f  The  creditor,  in  such  cases,  might  seize  on
anythino-   belonginoj  to  the  debtor,  and  take  it  as  a    ,  ,.

•^  °  °     ^  ^  ^  Actio  per

pledge  for  the   payment  of  a  debt.     This  pignoris  pignoris
capio  was  only  spoken  of  as  an  actio  because   it  was  ^"^^^^'^^^^^*
conducted  with  certain  solemnities,  and  accompanied  by  the  re-
petition of  a  peculiar  form  of  words.

The  following  are  some  of  marked  features  of  actions  of  law,
in  respect  of  which  great  differences  were  gradually  introduced
under  the  later  systems.  (1)  The  procedure  in  the  actions  of
law  was  one  open  only  to  Koman  citizens.  (2)  The  parties  were
almost  always  obliged  to  appear  personally,  but  an  assertor
lihertatis  could  appear  to  claim  the  freedom  of  a  person  w^rongly
treated  as  a  slave.     (3)  So  rigid  was  the  necessity  of  adherence

^  Gaius,  iv.  21.  t  Gaius,  iv.  26.     (See  also  ante,  sec.  8.)

d

Ixiv  INTKODUCTION.

to  the  prescribed  forms,  as  Gains  informs  us  (iv.  11),  that  if,
in  an  action  for  damage  to  a  vineyard,  the  plaintiff  used  the
word  vites  instead  of  the  general  word  arhores,  employed  in  the
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  he  lost  his  action.  (4)  If  the  action
was  once  brought,  it  was  exhausted,  or  if  it  failed,  even  on  the
most  technical  ground,  the  plaintiff  had  no  further  remedy.
(5)  The  sentence  was  ordinarily  to  give  the  thing  demanded,
not  a  pecuniary  equivalent.

97.  The  leg  is  actiones  were  necessarily  replaced  by  other  forms
of  actions  more  convenient  as  Home  advanced  in  civilization.
They  were  in  a  great  measure  suppressed  by  the  lex  j^hutia
cy           .      r  (about  A.u.c.  573),  and  afterwards,  in  the  time  of

iSupjpression  of   ^  ^^  ^

the  actions  of  Augustus,  by  the  leges  JiflicB.     They  were,  however,

lono;  retained  in  cases  where  the  centumviri  were
the  proper  Jw^/ces,  that  is,  in  questions  of  status,  Quiritian  owner-
ship, and  disputed  succession,  the  prcetor  presiding  personally  over
the  deliberations  of  the  centumviri,  and  not  instructing  them  by
a  formula ;  and  a  fictitious  process,  termed  in  jure  cessio,  which
was  nothing  else  than  an  undefended  action  at  law,  in  wdiich  a
disputant  gave  u'p{cessit)  before  the  magistrate  {injure)  the  thing
in  dispute,  was  retained  as  a  ready  means  of  many  legal  changes,
such  as  manumission  or  adoption,  long  after  the  actions  of  law
had  fallen  into  disuse.  Before  the  actions  of  law  were  suppressed,
the  prcBtor  peregrinns  had  for  years  been  administering  justice
through  forms  of  action  devised  by  him  where  peregrini  were
concerned.

98.  The  changes  wrought  by  intercourse  with  foreign  nations,
,       ,      the  new  duties  of  extended  dominion,  and  the  stimulus

Second  ejpoch  ;       ^

the  system  of  given   to   the    national   mind   by  the   long   internal

jormucB.  struggles    which    had    now   subsided,   produced    by

degrees  a  general   change   in   the   mode   in  which  justice   was

^  ,      .  administered.     A  new  system  succeeded  the  old  leqis

Judges  tn  ^  ''  «^

the  second         actiones ;  the  magistrate  was  more  strongly  marked

jpeno  .  ^^  from  the  judex,  and  it  was  the  directions  which  the

former  gave  the  latter  that  constituted  the  important  feature  of

the  new  system  of  procedure.     At  home  the  praetors,  of  whom

there  were  eighteen  in  the  days  of  Pomponius,*  and  one  or  two

other  magistrates  ;  and  in  the  provinces  the  prcesides  or  pra3fects,

vfho  held  cvnventus  or  assizes  in  the  principal  towns  at  stated

intervals,  sat  as  magistrates.     At  Rome  the  long  struggle  between

*  Dig.  i.  2.  34.

INTRODUCTION.  1;

XV

the  senate  and  the  equites  for  the  exclusive  right  to  farnish  the
judges  ended,  as  has  been  ah^eady  said  (sec.  12),  in  the  judges
ceasing  to  be  taken  entirely  either  from  the  senate  or  the  equites ;
and  two,  at  least,  out  of  the  five  decurles  of  judges  appearing  in
the  album  were  taken  from  a  comparatively  humble  class.  The
recuperatores  and  centumviri  still  continued  to  act  in  the  cases
which  properly  fell  within  their  province.

99.  The  directions  which  the  magistrate  sent  .to  the  judge
were  always  conveyed  in  a  formal  shape,  and  the  ^w^ord  formulcB
was  used  to  express  the  diiferent  forms  in  which  dii^^ctions  w^ere
given.     These  formulcB  were  preserved  and  collected.

.  .  FormulcB.

and  it  became  the  great  object  of  the  contending  parties
ih^t  the  right  formula  should  be  used  in  their  case,  the  judge
not  being  allowed  to  depart  from  the  instructions  he  received.  As
there  was  no  legal  form  to  bind  the  magistrate,  he  could  easily
vary  the  formula  so  as  to  render  substantial  justice,  and  had  thus
a  ready  means  of  availing  himself  of  any  equitable  doctrine,
which  a  more  refined  jurisprudence  or  his  own  sense  of  wdiat  was
right  suggested  to  him.  These  formulcB,  so  flexible  in  their
general  character,  yet  couched  in  terms  always  precise  and  simple,
furnish  one  of  the  many  admirable  instances  of  the  pa^er  of  the
Romans  to  express  correctly  the  subtlest  legal  ideas ;  and  it  w^as  by
this  machinery  that  the  prastors  principally  introduced  their  great
legal  changes.  But  it  may  be  observed  that,  although  the  old
actions  of  law  became  obsolete,  traces  of  them  are  to  be  found  in
the  praetorian  system.  Thus,  in  certain  actions  the  parties  entered
into  a  v/ager  sponsio  pcenalis,  evidently  a  relic  of  the  old  actio
sacramenti^  by  which  each  stipulated  with  the  other  for  a  sum  of
money  to  be  paid  as  a  penalty  by  the  loser  in-,  the  action  to  the
successful  party.

100.  To  show  what  these  formulcB  were,  it  wdll  perhaps  be
best  to  give  at  length  one  of  those  we  find  in  Gains,  Exa7n,vle  of
and  then  to.  explain  .its  difierent  parts.     One  which  a  formula.
we  may  collect  from  difierent  sections  of  the  Fourth  Book  runs
thus : —

Judex  esto  :  Quod  Aulus  Agerius  Numerio  Negidio  homiuem
vendidit ;  si  paret  Numeriam  Negidium  Aulo  Agerio  sestertiuni
X.  millia  dare  oportere,  judex  Numerium  Negidium  Aulo  Agerio
sestertium  X.  jnillia  condemnato,  si  nor^/paret';  absolvito.^

*  Gaius,  iv.  40-43.
d2

Ixvi  INTKODUCTION.

Judex  esto  is  merely  the  order  for  the  appointment  of  the  judge,
and  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  a  part  of  ihe  formula.  From  *  quod''
to  ^  vendidW  is  what  is  called  the  demonstration  from  ^  si  paret''
to  ^ dare  ojjortere''  is  the  intention  and  from  ^ judex"*  to  the  end  is
the  condemnatio.  11\\q  formula  ordinarily  consisted  of  these  three
parts — the  demonstration  the  intentio,  and  the  condemnatio.

101.  The  demonstratio  is  the  statement  of  the  fact  or  facts

which  the  plaintiff  alleges  as  the  ground  of  his  case."^

D6')110')lStTCLt'io  .

Aulus  Agerius,  the  plaintiff,  says  that  he  has  sold  a
slave  to  Numerius  Negidius.  The  demonstratio  varied,  of  course,
Avith  each  particular  case.

102.  The  intentio  was  the  really  important  part  of  the  formula.

It  was  a  precise  statement  of  the  demand  which  the
plaintiff  made  against  {tendebat  in)  f  his  adversary.
It  was  necessary  that  it  should  exactly  meet  the  law  which  would
govern  the  facts  alleged  by  the  plaintiff,  if  true.  Whether  Aulus
Agerius  has  sold  this  slave  to  Numerius  Negidius  at  the -price  he
alleges,  and  whether  the  debt  is  still  owing,  this  is  what  the  judex
has  to  determine;  if  the  judge  thinks  he  has  {si  paret),  then  the
judge  is  instructed  to  pronounce  his  judgment  against  him  ;  if  he
thinks  he  has  not  {si  non  paret),  he  is  to  be  absolved.

103.  The  condemnatio  is  the  direction  to  condemn  or  absolve

according  to  the  true  circumstances  of  the  case.J  The
judex  was  only  a  private  citizen,  and,  unless  specially
authorized  by  a  magistrate,  could  have  no  power  to  pronounce  a
judicial  sentence.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  condemnatio  was
under  the  formulary  system  always  pecuniary;  the  judge  was
always  directed  to  condemn  to  a  payment  of  money,  never  to  do
or  crive  a  particular  thing.  In  three  particular  actions,  however,
and  perhaps  in  more,  the  judge  was  directed  to  'adjudicate'  a
thino',  in  the  sense  of  dividing  it  out  among  several  litigants.
These  three  actions  were  those  brought  to  divide  a  flmiily  inherit-
ance, to  divide  the  property  of  partners,  and  to  settle  boundaries.
In  these  actions  there  was  an  additional  part  of  the  formula  run-
nino*  thus :  quantum  adjudicari  oportet,  judex  Titio  adjudicato.
This  was  called  the  adjudicatio ;  so  that  in  these  actions  the  parts
of  the  formulce  were  four — demonstratio,  intentio,  adjudicatio,  and
condemnatio.     Of  course  when  a  thing,  and  not  a  sum  of  money.

•^    Gaius,  iv.  40.  t  Gaius,  iv,  41.

t  Gaius,  iv.  42.

INTRODUCTION.  1

xvii

was  claimed,  it  was  not  possible  for  the  magistrate  always  to  fix  a
precise  sum  iu  which  the  defendant  was  to  be  condemned.  Some-
times, therefore,  the  condemnatio  merely  fixed  the  maximum  as
the  sum,  and  ran  duntaxat  X.  millia  condemnato.  Sometimes  the
direction  was  still  more  indefinite,  and  the  sum  was  left  to  the
discretion  of  the  judge.  Quanti  ea  res  erit,  tantum  j^ecuniam,
&^c.,  condemnato.  Sometimes,  too,  as  when  the  action  was  real,
i.e.  brought  to  claim  a  thing,  the  actio  was  arbitraria,  and  the
words  nisi  restituat  were  inserted  in  the  condemnatio.  The  de-
fendant was  ordered  to  give  up  the  thing,  and  then  was  condemned
to  pay  the  money  if  he  refused  to  restore  the  thing,  in  accordance
with  the  order  {arhitrium)  of  the  judge.

104.  The  intentio  sometimes  stood  quite  alone,  and  was  then
called  a  ipr(2judicialis  formula  \^  when  this  w^as  the  Prcejudldalis
case^  the  object  of  the  action  was  merely  to  establish  formula.
a  point  which  it  was  necessary  to  have  settled  with  a  view  to  a
future  action.  The  decision  of  such  a  preliminary  point  was
called  a  proijudicium.  Of  course  the  intentio  took  any  form  that
best  suited  the  case ;  and  accordingly  it  was  the  intentiones  that
were  so  carefully  preserved  as  precedents,  and  so  keenly  debated
by  the  contending  parties.  Sometimes  the  grounds  of  the  defence
made  part  of  the  intentio.  The  defendant  might  admit  the
plaintiff's  statement,  but  say  that  there  were  special  circumstances
to  take  this  particular  case  out  of  the  general  rule  of  law  under
which  it  would  naturally  fall.  He  might  own,  for  instance,  that  he
had  bought  a  slave  at  the  price  alleged,  but  say  that  he  had  been
induced  to  do  so  by  fraud.     This  plea  was  called  an

.     /.  1  .  XT  -\  r  Exceptio.

exceptio  (i.e.  a  taking  out),  and  was  made  to  lorm  part
of  the  intentio,  some  such  words  as  these  being  added :  si  in  ea  re
nihil  dolo  malo  Auli  A(jerii  factum  sit  neque  Jiat.      The  plaintiff,
again ,  mio;ht  have  somethino;  to  uro:e  as  an  exception
m  reply  to  this  plea :  ms  answer  was  called  repLicatio ;
if  the  defendant  had  a  further  answer,  it  was  called  a  duplication
the  plaintiff's  further  reply  a  triplication  and  so  on.     There  was
also  sometimes  an  accessory  part  of  the  formula  called  the  'prcE-
scriptio,  placed,  as  its  name  denotes,  at  the  beginning  of  the  whole
formula  for  the  purpose  of  limiting  the  enquiry.     As  employed
by  the  defendant,  it  answered  the  purpose  of  the  exceptio,  and
belongs,  probably,  to  a  time  before  the  exceptio  had  its  regular

^  Gaius,  iv.  44.  133.

Ixviii  INTRODUCTION.

place  in  \h.Q  formula.  A  well-known  example  of  its  use  is  that  by
which  the  defendant  sto])ped  an  action  for  the  possession  of  pro-
vincial lands,  by  raising  the  question  whether  he  had  not  been  in
possession  for  a  particular  period,  which  is  the  origin  of  the  familiar
term  *  prescription.'  (See  sec.  72.)  But  the  plaintiff  also  might,  in
the  early  days  of  the  formulary  system,  hav^  occasion  to  resort  to  a
pr(Escriptio.  He  might,  for  instance,  wish  that,  in  enforcing  a
security  on  which  payments  were  due  from  time  to  time,  the  action
brought  to  try  whether  this  security  was  valid  should  only  affect
his  claim  to  payments  already  due,  so  that  if  hefailed  he  might  have
a  further  action  for  future  payments.  In  such  a  case  some  such
words  as  ea  res  agatur  cujus  re  dies  fuit  (let  the  enquiry  only  be
made  as  to  the  sum  for  the  payment  of  which  the  time  has  arrived)
were  prefixed  to  \hQ formula.  Gradually,  however,  the prcEscriptio
fell  into  disuse,  and  the  intentio  and  esoceptio  were  so  constructed  as
to  serve  every  purpose  for  Avhich  it  had  been  employed.

105.  In  the  Roman  system  of  civil  process  the  time  when  a
Litis  contcs-  conte&ted  right  was  to  be  considered  as  really  made
^«'^^^-  the  subject  of  litigation,  was  very  carefully  marked.

It  was  very  necessary  that  this  should  be  very  clearly  ascer-
tained. The  claimant  in  whose  favour  the  ultimate  decision  was
aiven  was  entitled  to  all  that  accrued  to  the  thino-  claimed  from
this  moment;  and  when  once  a  point  had  been  submitted  to
litigation,  it  could  not  be  again  litigated,  both  parties  surrender-
in  o^  all  their  interest  into  the  hands  of  the  court,  which  assigned
to  the  successful  claimant  such  a  fresh  interest  in  the  thing
claimed  as  might  appear  to  be  due  to  him.  This  time  was
marked  by  each  party,  at  the  end  of  the  proceedings  before  the
magistrate,  calling  bystanders  to  witness,  that  they  submitted  the
matter  to  the  decision  of  the  judge."^  This  was  called  the  litis
contestatio,  as  has  been  said  (see  sec.  93).  In  process  of  time  the
ceremony  might  be  omitted,  or  at  any  rate  become  a  mere  form,
but  the  conclusion  of  the  proceedings  before  the  magistrate  {in
jure),  i.e.  in  the  formnlary  system,  the  time  when  the  praetor
delivered  the  formula,  still  formed  the  crisis  at  which  the  claims
of  the  different  parties  were  considered  to  be  finally  submitted
to  the  decision  of  the  law.  Under  the  judicia  extraor dinar ia,
when    the    magistrate   and   the  judex  were   no    longer   different

*  Festus,  stib  voce  Contest ari. — Dig.  xxviii.  1.  20.

INTKODUCTION.  Ixix

persons,  the  litis   contestatio  was    fixed   by   the    commencement
of  the  trial."^

106.  Actio  meant,  under  the  system  of  the  actions  of  law,
a  particular  form  of  procedure ;    under  that  of  the  Memmiq  of
formulae,  it  meant  the  rio-ht  crranted  to  a  plaintiff  by  ^^^^  ^^^^  «^-

r  Hon  tinder

the  magistrate  to  seek  what  was  due  to  him  before  a  the  system  of
judge.  Sometimes,  however,  the  formula  by  which  J^'^^'^'^^-
the  judge  was  to  determine  the  right,  and  sometimes  i\iQ  judicium,
the  proceedings  by  which  the  judge  determined  the  right,  were
spoken  of  as  '\i  formulcR,  judicium^  and  actio  were  synonymous
terms.  Of  the  divisions  under  which  the  formulary  actions  may
be  grouped,  the  following  were  the  most  important.  1.  The
first  division  turns  on  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  Divisions  of
the  thing  claimed,  and,  according  to  this  division,  actions.
actions  were  in  rem  and  in  personam.  If  the  object  of  the  pro-
ceedings was  to  enforce  a  right  to  a  thing,  then  the  formula  ran
si  paret  hominem  AuH  Agerii  esse ;  if  to  enforce  an  obligation,
then  the  formula  ran  si  paret  Numerium  Negidium  Auli  Agerii
dare,  facere,  prcestare,  oportere-,  and  it  was  according  to  this
difference  in  the  intentio  that  actions  were  said  to  be  in  rem  or  in
persojiam,  Vindicatio  came  to  be  used  as  a  generic  term  for
actions  in  rem.,  and  condictio  for  actions  in  personam.  2.  Another
division  of  actions  refers  to  the  modes  in  which  the  prtetor
extended  or  modified  the  law  by  the  shape  he  gave  to  the  for-
mula. In  shaping  actions,  the  praetor  introduced  changes  of  two
kinds  :  First,  he  gave  actions  for  the  enforcement  of  actions
outside  the  old  civil  law,  and  this  he  principally  effected  by
giving  an  actio  in  factum  concepta^  in  which  the  demonstratio  and
intentio  were  blended,  and  the  praetor  directed  that,  if  a  given
state  of  facts  was  found  to  be  true,  the  defendant  was  to  be  con-
demned, the  action  being  thus  contrasted  with  one  in  jus  con-
cepta,  i.e.  given  to  try  an  issue  by  the  rules  of  law.  Secondly,
the  praitor  extended  existing  actions  {actiones  directcB)  by  giving
actions  {actiones  utiles)  to  suit  cases  and  persons  outside  the
limits  of  the  direct  actions ;  and  this  he  did  either  by  means  of
actionss    in  factum,   which    could    be    used  for  these  purposes

"^  It  had,  however,  much  less  importance,  as  fixing  an  epoch,  under  the
judicia  extraordinaria  (see  page  144,  where  this  sense  must  be  given  to  the
statement  that  the  litis  contestatio  had  no  place  in  the  ci^dl  process  of  Jus-
tinian's time).

Ixx  INTRODUCTION.

equally  well  as  to  give  new  remedies,  or  by  giving  a  fictitious
action,  i.e.  an  action  in  which  the  plaintiff  was  allowed  to  feign
that  he  was  within  the  scope  of  the  unextended  action.  When
there  was  a  contract  not  falling  under  the  old  heads,  but  executed
on  one  side,  the  prajtor  enforced  it  by  an  action  in  factum  prce-
scriptis  verbis,  an  action  to  meet  the  case  with  the  circumstances
set  forth  at  the  beginning ;  but  such  an  action,  as  it  was  to  try
an  issue  according  to  known  rules  of  law,  was  in  jvs  concepta.
3.  A  further  division  depended  on  the  varying  amount  of  latitude
given  to  the  judge.  The  actions  depending  on  the  old  civil
law  were  stricti  juris,  and  the  judge  had  merely  to  decide  the
question  submitted  to  him,  without  taking  into  account  considera-
tions of  equity.  Other  actions  were  boncB  Jidei,  i.e.  the  judges  were
allowed  to  take  such  considerations  into  account.  In  real  actions,
and  in  some  few  special  actions,  the  judge  had  always  a  particular
kind  of  latitude  given  him,  as  the  action  was  arhitraria  (see  sec.
103),  i.e.  he  could  order  the  thing  claimed  to  be  given  up,  and,  if
it  was  not,  could  condemn  the  defendant  in  as  much  as  he  thought
equitable.  Among  personal  actions  which  were  arhitraria  was
one  termed  ad  exJiibendum,  which  was  used  in  order  to  make  a
person  in  possession  of  a  thing  produce  it,  so  that  its  existence  in
his  hands  and  the  state  in  which  it  was  might  be  ascertained,  or
pay  damages  for  not  so  producing  it.

107.  In  speaking  of  actions  under  the  system  oi  formulcE,  it
is  impossible  to  pass  over  without  notice  the  interdicts
of  the  prsetor,"^"  though  they  were  only  incidentally
connected  with  actions.     An  interdict  was  an  order  issued  by  the
praetor,  and  was  in  fact  an  edict  addressed  to  some  person  or  per-
sons with  reference  to  a  particular  thing.    Vim  fieri  veto,  exhibeas,
restituas,  '  I  forbid  you  to  have  recourse  to  violence  ;  you  are  to
produce,  you  are  to  restore ; '  such  were  the  forms  in  which  these
commands  were  couched.     Interdicts  were  granted  where  some
danger  was  apprehended,  or  some  injury  was  being  done  to  some-
thing to  which  a  public  character  attached ;  as,  for  instance,  if  a
road  was  stopped  up ;    but  they   were   also  granted  to  protect
private  interests,  and  especially  to  protect  or  regulate  possession.
If  the  person   to  whom  the  interdict  was  addressed   acquiesced
and  obeyed  the  pra3tor's  injunction,  nothing  remained  to  be  done;
but  if  he  refused  to  obey,  the  magistrate  then  referred  to  the

*  Gaius,  iv.  138.

INTRODUCTION.  Ixxi

decision  of  a  judge,  whether  the  terms  of  the  interdict  ought  to
be  complied  with.  For  instance,  an  interdict  ordering  a  thing  to
be  restored  might  have  been  issued ;  but  the  person  to  whom  it
was  directed  might  deny  that  by  law  he  was  bound  to  restore  the
thino'.  On  his  statino;  this  to  the  mas^istrate,  the  mao;istrate
would  give  an  action  to  try  the  question,  shaping  the  terms  of
the  interdict  into  the  intentio  of  the  formula,  si  paret  A.  A.  rem
restituere,  oportere,  8fc.  And  it  is  thus  that  interdicts  are  con-
nected with  actions,  as  their  validity  depended  on  no  action  being
brought  to  contest  them,  or  the  result  of  an  action  belno^  to
support  them.  Gradually  the  action  superseded  the  interdict,
which  was  no  longer  used  as  a  preliminary  step,  and,  by  the
time  of  Justinian,  they  had  become  obsolete.

108.  There  were  under  the  system  of  f annul (B  certain  cases
which  the  magistrate  decided  without  sending  to  a  Extraordina-
judge.  In  these  cases  the  magistrate  Avas  said  extra  ''^^f^J^'-^^^cia.
ordincm  cognoscere^  and  the  proceedings  were  termed  extra
ordlnem  cognitiones,  judicia,  or  actiones.  Among  the  cases  in
which  the  magistrate  proceeded  in  a  summary  way,  were  restitu-
tiones  in  integrum  (that  is,  certain  cases  in  which  he  restored
a  person  suffering  from  something  from  which  he  ought  not  by
law  to  suffer,  to  the  same  position  as  he  had  occupied  before  the
injury  was  sustained),  and  cases  relating  to  fideicommissa.  But
he  was  called  upon  most  frequently  to  proceed  in  this  way  in
order  to  give  execution  to  the  sentence  of  a  judge.

rj^,         1  1  1  p  •  1  .  T       Execution.

Ine  old  modes  ot  execution,  the  manus  injectio  and

pignoris  capio,  remained,  though  under  a  mitigated  form ;  but  a

new  method  of  execution  was  also  permitted  by  the  praetor,  and

was  much  more   generally  adopted.     The  creditors  were  placed

in  full  possession  of  all  that  the  debtor  had  belonging  to  him ;

his  persona  was,  in  fact,  transferred  to  them.     This  was  termed

the  missio  in  honor um  possessionem.     After  a  certain  delay,  the

creditors  sold  their  interest  in  the  debtor's  property  to  the  person

who  Avould  offer  to  pay  the  largest  proportion  of  the  sums  they

claimed.      He    became    the    purchaser,  and  this  emptio  honorum

transferred  to  him  the  persona,  or  legal  existence  of  the  debtor,

who   thereby  suffered   a   capitis   deminutio,  and   became,  in   the

language  of  the  law,  '  infamous.'     It  was  in  the  exercise  of  his

'  extraordinary  '  jurisdiction  that  the  magistrate  gave  this  mode

of  execution.

109.  In   the  third  period  of  the  Eoman  system  of  civil  pro-

ixxil  INTRODUCTION.

cess,  the  period  of  extraordinaria  judicia^  this  summary  jurisdiction
Third  period  was  the  Only  jurisdiction  the  magistrate  exercised.
tJtemorcMl  ^here  was  no  longer  any  distinction  between  J7/S  and
process.  judicium  ;    the    magistrate    and  the  judge  were   the

dinariajudi-  Same  person.  By  a  constitution  published  a.d.  294,
^^^'-  Diocletian  directed  all  magistrates  in  the  provinces

to  decide  causes  themselves.  The  practice  was,  in  courseof  time,
extended  throughout  the  whole  of  the  empire ;  and  in  the  days
of  Justinian,  it  was  possible  to  speak  of  the  or  dinar  ia  judicia  as
quite  past.^

110.  In  the  days  of  the  later  emperors,  the  provinces  were

classed  together  into   praefectures.     Over  each  pro-

Judqes.  .  i       i      i  •         •  •  •

vmce  was  a  presses,  who  had  a  vicarius,  or  vice-presi-
dent under  him,  and  who,  either  himself  or  by  his  vicarius,  tried
all  cases  above  a  certain  amount,  fixed  by  »Tustinian  at  300  solidi ;
cases  below  that  amount  were  tried  by  inferior  judges,  called
judices  ijedanei.  The  great  cities,  such  as  Constantinople  and
Alexandria,  were  under  a  separate  jurisdiction.  The  preetorian
prEefect  was  the  head  judge  of  appeal  ;  but  a  final  appeal  lay  to
the  emperor  himself.

111.  In  the  time  of  Justinian,  an  action  was  begun  by  the
Mode  of  pro-  p^^i^tiff  announcing  to  a  magistrate  that  he  wished  to
ccdure.  bring  an  action,  a  proceeding  which  was  termed  the

denuntiatio  actionis,  and  furnishing  a  short  statement  of  his  case ;
this  statement,  called  the  libellus  conventionis,  the  magistrate  sent
by  a  bailiff  of  the  court  {executor)  to  the  defendant.  The  parties
or  their  procurators  appeared  before  the  magistrate,  and  the
magistrate  decided  the  case.  JExceptio  was  still  used  as  the  term
to  express  the  plea  of  the  defendant,  which  he  generally,  of
course,  reduced  to  writing,  but  apparently  not  only  was  he  not
obliged  to  do  so,  but  it  was  not  even  necessary  in  all  cases  for  the
plaintiff  to  put  his  plaint  into  writing  ;  if  he  did  not,  the  executor
would  merely  tell  the  defendant,  by  word  of  mouth,  that  an
action  had  been  brought  against  him,  perhaps  adding  a  general
statement  of  the  object  for  which  it  was  brought.  The  litis  con-
testatio  took  place  directly  the  magistrate  began  to  hear  the  cause.
The  condemnation  was  no  longer  merely  a  pecuniary  one,  but  the
system  of  execution  was  not  materially  different  from  what  it  had
been  under  the  praetorian  system.

*  Inst.  iv.  15,

INTEODUCTION.  Ixxiii

112.  Although  the  subject  of  crimes  and  criminal  procedure
does  not  fall  properly  within  the  scope  of  the  Insti-

.  .  T-»  •  r  Crimes.

tutes,   which   is  a  treatise  on  Jrrivate  i>aw,  yet    as
the  subject  is  slightly  noticed  at  the  end  of  the  Institutes,   and
is  connected  with  the  general   history  of  Roman  Law,  it  may
be  convenient  to  give  some  slight  account  of  it  here.     Criminal
jurisdiction  was  under  the  kings  an  attribute  of  the  king  him-
self, but  there  was  an  appeal  in   capital   cases  to    the    comitia
curiata.     After   the    establishment  of  the   republic  the    comitia
centuriata  alone  could  judge  capital  cases.     The  comitia   trihuta
exercised  a  criminal  jurisdiction  (but  without  the  power  of  in-
flicting death)  for  political  offences,  such  as  those  committed  by  a
magistrate  during  his  year  of  office.    Before  both  these  comitia  the
accusation  had  to  be  made  by  the  presiding  magistrate.  The  senate
also  exercised  a  special  power  of  judging  offenders  in  times  of
public  danger,  and  sometimes  under  such  circumstances  inflicted
death  as  punishment,  but  it  did  not  properly  belong  to  the  senate
to  deal  with  capital  cases,  and  the  senate  also  exercised  an  ordi-
nary jurisdiction  and  dealt  with  such  crimes  as  it  thought  proper
to  notice.     But  all  these  authorities,  the  king,  the  comitia  and
the  senate,  while  they  sometimes  discharged  themselves  the  func-
tions of  the  judge,  were  in  the  habit  of  delegating  their  powers
to  others  charged  to  make  an  investigation  (^qucEstio)  of  the  crime.
At   first  each  delegatio  was  made  to  try  one  particular  offence,
and  when  the  case  had  been  tried  the  qucBstio  was  at  an  end.
These  qucestiones,  the  term  being  transferred  from  the  inquiry  to
the  persons  making  it,  were   subsequently  appointed  to  try  all
offences  of  a  particular  kind  that  it  might  be  necessary  to  in-
quire   into,    while  the    delegated    persons  held  their    authority.
Lastly,  the  qucestioiies  began  to  be  made  perpetuce  (a.u.c.  605),
and  this  change  was  accompanied  by  the  introduction  of  some-
thing like  a  body  of  criminal  law.      When  a  qucBstio  was   made
perpetua,  the  delicts  it  was  to  try  were  in  some  degree  defined,
and  the  punishment  prescribed ;    whereas  previously,  the  body
exercising  criminal  jurisdiction  or  its  delegates  had  been  bound
by  no  rules  of  law  as  to  the  nature  of  the  delict  or  its  punish-
ment,  except    that    the   comitia    centuriata    could   alone    inflict
death.     Each  qucestio  consisted  of  a  number  of  judges  varying
according  to  the  regulations  laid  down  in  the  law  creating  it ;
sometimes   of    thirty-two,    or    of    fifty,    or   of  a   hundred — the
judges  being  appointed  for  a  year  and  taken  from  the  same  list  as

Ixxlv  INTRODUCTION.

that  from  which  judges  in  civil  suits  were  selected,  so  that  the
history  of  the  contests  between  the  senatorial  and  equestrian
orders  for  the  right  of  being  judges  already  referred  to  (see  sec.  12),
applies  to  criminal  and  civil  judges  equally.  Before  the  qucEstlones
jjerpetucB  any  citizen  might  be  an  accuser.  He  had  to  swear  that
his  charge  was  not  false,  and  he  had  to  prove  the  guilt  of  the
accused — ^so  that  the  system  under  which  a  criminal  trial  is
regarded  as  a  suit  between  parties  was  thus  introduced  into  Roman
law.  Private  persons  had  from  an  early  time  of  Koman  law
recovered  penalties  in  a  civil  action  for  delicts  committed  to  their
injury,  and  now  the  criminal  proceeding  took  the  form  of  an
action  between  the  private  person  accusing  and  the  accused.  The
judges  were  under  the  guidance  of  a  president  (^prcEses),  and  each
judge  pronounced  that  he  condemned,  absolved,  or  that  there  was
not  proof  either  way,  by  dropping  into  an  urn  one  of  three  tablets,
bearing  respectively  the  v^^ords  condemno,  ahsolvo,  non  liquet.  If
the  accused  was  condemned  he  received  the  precise  punishment
provided  by  the  law  creating  the  qucBstio  perpetua.  During  the
last  century  of  the  republic,  and  in  the  early  days  of  the  empire,
a  great  number  of  laws,  each  handing  over  a  special  head  of
offence  to  a  qumstio  perpetua  were  passed,  and  thus  something
like  a  system  of  criminal  law  and  criminal  procedure  was  esta-
blished. Under  the  empire,  as  time  went  on,  exactly  what  hap-
pened in  civil  suits  happened  in  criminal  proceedings.  ■  The
magistrates  had  exercised  a  power  of  dealing  with  some  offences  in
a  summary  manner  (e.r^r<7  ordinem),and  the  sphere  of  their  autho-
rity was  gradually  enlarged  until  it  superseded  the  qucestiones
perpetucB  altogether,  as  the  formulary  system  of  actions  was  super-
seded by  the  extraordinary  jurisdiction  of  the  magistrate  in  civil
suits.

INSTITUTIONUM   JUSTINIAN!

PEOCEMIUM.

IX  NOMINE  lyO^nXI   NOSTKI

jesxj  christi.

Impekator  Cesar  Flavius  Justi-
NiANus,  Alamanicus,  Gothicus,
Francicus,  Germanicus,  Anticus,
Alaxicus,  Vandalicus,  Africanus,
pius,  felix,  inclytus,  victor  ac
triumphator,  semper  augustus,
cupids  legum  juventuti.

Imperatoriam  majestatem  non
solum  armis  decoratam,  sed  etiam
legibus  oportet  esse  armatam,  ut
utriimque  tempiis  et  bellorum  et
pacis  recte  possit  gubernari  ;  et
princeps  Romaniis  victor  existat
non  solum  in  liostilibus  prpeliis,  sed
etiam  per  legitimos  tramites  calum-
niantium  iniquitates  expellens,  et
fiat  tam  juris  religiosissimus,  quam
victis  kostibtis  triiimpliator.

1.  Quorum  utramqne  viam  cum
summis  vigiliis  siimmaque  provi-
dentia,  annuente  Deo,  perfecimus.
Et  bellicos  quidem  sudores  nostros
barbaricse  gentes  sub  jnga  nostra
deductfe  cognoscunt,  et  tam  Africa
quam  alife  numerosge  provincioe  post
tanta  temporum  spatia,  nostris  vic-
toriis  a  coslesti  Numine  prsestitis,
iterum  ditioni  Romanfe  nostroque
additae  imperio  protestantur  ;  omnes
vero  populi  legibus  jam  a  nobis
promulgatis  vel  compositis  regun-
tur.

2.  Et  cum  sacratissimas  constitu-
tiones  antea  confusas  in  luculentam
ereximus  consonantiam,  time  nos-
tram  extendimns  curam  ad  immensa

in  the  name  op  cue  lord
jesus  christ.

The  Emperor  C^sar  Flavius  Jus-

TINIANUS,    vanquisher    OF    THE     AlA-

MANi,  GoTHS,  Francs,  Germans,
Antes,  Alani,  Yandals,   Africans,

PIOUS,  HAPPY,  glorious,  TRIUMPHANT
CONQUEROR,  EVER  AUGUST,  TO  THE
YOUTH  DESIROUS  OF  STUDYING  THE
LAW,    GREETING.

Tlie  imperial  majesty  should  be
not  only  made  glorious  by  arms,  but
also  strengthened  by  laws,  that,  alike
in  time  of  peace  and  in  time  of  war,
the  state  may  be  well  governed,  and
that  the  emperor  may  not  only  be
victorious  in  the  field  of  battle,  but
also  may  by  every  legal  means  repel
the  iniquities  of  men  who  abuse  the
laws,  and  may  at  once  religiously
uphold  justice  and  triumph  over  his
conquered  enemies.

1.  By  our  incessant  labours  and
great  care,  with  the  blessing  of  God,
we  have  attained  this  double  end.
The  barbarian  nations  reduced  under
our  yoke  know  our  efforts  in  war ;  to
which  also  Africa  and  very  many
other  provinces  bear  witness,  which,
after  so  long  an  interval,  have  been
restored  to  the  dominion  of  Rome  and
our  empire,  by  our  victories  gained
through  the  favour  of  heaven.  All
nations  moreover  are  governed  by
laws  which  we  have  either  promul-
gated or  arranged.

2.  When  we  had  arranged  and
brought  into  perfect  harmony  the
hitherto  confused  mass  of  imperial
constitutions,   we   then  extended  our

B

PEOCEMIUM.

veteris  prudentioe  voliimina  ;  et  opus
desperatiim,  quasi  per  medium  pro-
fundum  euntes,  ccelesti  favore  jam
adimplevimus.

3.  Cumque  hoc  Deo  propitio
peractum  est,  Triboniano  viro  mag-
uiiico,  magistro  et  exqupestore  sacri
palatii  nostri,  r.ec  non  Theophilo  et
Dorotheo  viris  illustribus,  anteces-
soribus  nostris  (quorum  omnium
solertiam  et  legum  scientiam  et  circa
nostras  jussiones  fidem  jam  ex  multis
rerum  argumentis  acceijimus)  con-
vocatis,  mandavimus  specialiter  ut
nostra  auctoritate  nostrisque  suasio-
nibus  Institutiones  componerent,  ut
liceat  vobis  prima  legum  cunabula
non  ab  antiquis  fabulis  discere,  sed
ab  imperiali  splendore  appetere  ;  et
tam  aures  quam  animse  vestrse  nihil
inutile  nihilque  perperam  positum,
sed  quod  in  ipsis  rerum  obtinet  ar-
gumentis, accij)iant.  Et  quod  priore
tempore  vix  post  quadriennium
prioribus  contingebat,  ut  tunc  con-
stitutiones  imperatorias  legerent,
hoc  vos  a  primordio  ingrediamini  :
digni  tanto  honore  tantaque  reperti
felicitate,  ut  et  initium  vobis  et
finis  legum  eruditionis  a  voce  prin-
cipali  procedat.

4.  Igitur  post  libros  quinquaginta
Digestorum  seu  Pandectarum,  in
quibus  omne  jus  antiquum  collatum
est,  quos  per  eumdem  virum  excel-
sum  Tribonianum  nee  non  ceteros
viros  illustres  et  facundissimos  con-
fecimus,  in  hos  quatuor  libros  eas-
dem  Institutiones  partiri  jussimus,
ut  sint  totius  legitimse  scientise  prima
elementa.

5.  In  quibus  breviter  expositum
est  et  quod  antea  obtinebat,  et  quod
postea  desuetudine  inumbratum  im-
periali remedio  illuminatum  est.

6.  Quas  ex  omnibus  antiquorum
Institution  ibus,  et  praecipue  ex
commentariis  Gaii  nostri  tim  Insti-
tutionum  quam  rerum  cotidianorum,
aliisque  multis  commentariis  com-
positas  cum  tres  prsedicti  viri  pru-
dentes  nobis  obtulerunt,  et  legimus
et  cognovimus  et  plenissimum  nos-
trarum  constitutionum  robur  eis
accommodavimus.

care  to  the  endless  volumes  of  ancient
law ;  and,  sailing  as  it  were  across
the  mid  ocean,  have  now  completed,
through  the  favour  of  heaven,  a  work
we  once  despaired  of.

3.  When  by  the  blessing  of  God
this  task  was  accomplished,  we  sum-
moned the  most  eminent  Tribonian,
master  and  ex-qusestor  of  our  palace,
together  with  the  illustrious  Theo-
philus  and  Dorotheus,  professors  of
law,  all  of  whom  have  on  many  occa-
sions proved  to  us  their  ability,  legal
knowledge,  and  obedience  to  our
orders  ;  and  we  specially  charged  them
to  compose,  under  our  authority  and
advice.  Institutes,  so  that  you  may  no
more  learn  the  first  elements  of  law
from  old  and  erroneous  sources,  but
apprehend  them  by  the  clear  light  of
imperial  wisdom  ;  and  that  your  minds
and  ears  may  receive  nothing  that  is
useless  or  misplaced,  but  only  what
obtains  in  actual  practice.  So  that,
whereas,  formerly,  the  foremost  among
you  could  scarcely,  after  four  years'
study,  read  the  imperial  constitutions,
you  may  now  commence  your  studies
by  reading  them,  you  who  have  been
thought  worthy  of  an  honour  and  a
haj^piness  so  great  as  that  the  first
and  last  lessons  in  the  knowledge  of
the  law  should  issue  for  you  from  the
mouth  of  the  emperor.

4.  When  therefore,  by  the  assist-
ance of  the  same  eminent  person
Tribonian  and  that  of  other  illustrious
and  learned  men,  we  had  compiled
the  fifty  books,  called  Digests  or
Pandects,  in  which  is  collected  the
whole  ancient  law,  we  directed  that
these  Institutes  should  be  divided  into
four  books,  which  might  serve  as  the
first  elements  of  the  whole  science  of
law.

5.  In  these  books  a  brief  exposi-
tion is  given  of  the  ancient  laws,  and
of  those  also,  which,  overshadowed
by  disuse,  have  been  again  brought
to  light  by  our  imperial  authority.

6.  These  four  books  of  Institutes
thus  compiled,  from  all  the  Institutes
left  us  by  the  ancients,  and  chiefly
from  the  commentaries  of  our  Gaius,
both  from  his  Institutes  and  his
Journal,  and  also  from  many  other
commentaries,  were  presented  to  us
by  the  three  learned  men  we  have
above  named.  We  read  and  examined
them,  and  have  accorded  to  them  all
the  force  of  our  constitutions.

PROCEMIUM.  3

7.  Summa   itaque  ope  et  alacri  7.  Receive,  therefore,  with  eager-

studio  has  leges  nostras  accipite  ;  ness,  and  study  with  cheerful  dili-
et  Tosmetipsos  sic  eruditos  ostendite,  gence,  these  our  laws,  and  show  your-
ut  spes  vos  pulcherrima  foveat,  toto  selves  persons  of  such  learning  that
legitimo  opere  perfecto,  posse  etiam  you  may  conceive  the  flattering  hope
nostram  rempublicam  in  partibus  of  yourselves  being  able,  when  your
ejus  vobis  credendis  gubernari.  course  of  legal  study  is  completed,  to

govern  our  empire  in  the  different  por-
tions that  may  be  entrusted  to  your
care.
D.  CP.  XI.  calend.  decembris,  D.  Given    at    Constantinople   on   the

JusTiNiAXO  PP.  A.  III.  cons.  eleventh  day  of  the  calends   of   De-

cember, in  the  third  consulate  of  the
Emperor  Justinian,  ever  August.

LIBEE   PEIMUS

Tit.  I.     DE   JUSTITIA  ET  JUKE.

JusTiTiA   est    constans    et    per-  Justice  is   the   constant  and  per-

petiia    voluntas    jus    suum    cuique     petual  wish  to  render  every  one  his
tribuendi.  due.

D.  i.  1.  10.

The  term  jus,  in  its  most  extended  sense,  was  taken  by  the
Roman  jurists  to  include  all  the  commands  laid  upon  men  that
they  are  bound  to  fulfil,  both  the  commands  of  morality  and  of
law.  The  distinction  between  commands  which  are  only  enforced
by  the  sanction  of  public  or  private  opinion,  and  those  enforced
by  positive  legal  sanctions,  may  seem  clear  to  us ;  but  the  Roman
jurists,  in  speaking  of  the  elementary  principles  and  divisions  of
jurisprudence,  did  not  keep  law  and  morality  distinct.  Celsus
defines  Jw5,  as  ars  honi  et  cequi.  (D.  i.  I.  1.)  This  extension  of
the  term  would  sink  positive  law  in  morality  ;  that  only  would  be
supposed  to  be  commanded  which  ought  to  be  commanded.  The
confusion  arose  principally  from  the  view  of  the  law  of  nature,
borrowed  from  Greek  philosophy  by  the  jurists.  (See  Introd.
sec.  14.)

Jus,  used  in  its  strictly  legal  sense,  has  two  principal  meanings.
It  either  signifies  law,  that  is,  the  whole  mass  of  rights  and  duties
protected  and  enforced  by  legal  remedies,  or  it  means  any  single
right,  that  is,  any  faculty  or  privilege  accorded  by  law  to  one
man  accompanied  by  a  correlative  duty  imposed  on  another  man.
Jus  itineris,  for  instance,  is  the  right  given  to  one  man  of  going
through  the  land  of  another  who  is  placed  under  a  duty  to
let  him  pass.  Neither  a  right  nor  a  duty,  at  any  rate  in  the
sphere  of  private  law  with  which  alone  the  Institutes  deal,  can
exist  without  the  other.     (See  Introd.  sec.  36.)

1.  Jurisprudentia  est  divinarum  1.  Jurisprudence  is  the  knowledge

atque    humanarum    rerum    notitia,     of  things  divine  and  human  ;  the  sci-
justi  atque  injusti  scientia.  ence  of  the  just  and  the  unjust.

D.  i.  1.  10.  2.

Jurisprudentia  is  the  knowledge  of  what  is  jus,  and  jus,  accord-
ing to  the  theory  of  the  law  of  nature,  laid  down  what  is  com-

6

LIB.  I.      TIT.  I.

manded  by  right  reason,  this  right  reason  being  common  to  nature,
or,  as  the  Romans  more  often  said,  to  the  Gods,  and  to  man.  On
this  ground,  and  also  because  public  law  has  to  deal  with  religious
worship,  the  knowledge  of  divine  things  was  therefore  necessary,
as  well  as  the  knowledge  of  human  things,  to  say  what  were  the
contents  of  jus.  Both  this  and  the  preceding  definition  are  taken
at  random  out  of  the  writings  of  Ulpian,  are  unintelligible  unless
taken  in  connection  with  a  philosophical  theory  from  which  they
are  here  dissevered,  and  are  quite  out  of  place  at  the  beginning
of  an  elementary  treatise  on  law.     (See  Introd.  sec.  34.)

2.  His  igitur  generaliter  cogni-
tis  et  incipientibu.s  nobis  exponere
jura  populi  Romani,  ita  videntur
posse  tradi  commodissime,  si  primo
levi  ac  simplici  via,  post  deinde
diligentissima  atqiie  exactissima
interpretatione  singula  tradantur.
Alioquin,  si  statim  ab  initio  rudem
adliuc  et  infirmum  animum  studiosi
multitudine  aut  varietate  rerum
oneraverimus,  duorum  alterum,  aut
desertorem  studiorum  efficiemus,  aut
cum  magno  labore,  seepe  etiam  cum
diffidentia  quse  plerumque  juvenes
avertit,  serius  ad  id  perducemus,  ad
quod  leviore  via  ductus  sine  magno
labore  et  sine  ulla  diffidentia  matu-
rius  perduci  potuisset.

3.  Juris  preecepta  sunt  li?ec :
honeste  vivere,  alterum  non  Icedere,
suum  cuique  tribuere.

4.  Hujus  studii  duse  sunt  po-
sitiones,  publicum  et  privatum.
Publicum  jus  est,  quod  ad  statum
rei  Romanse  spectat ;  privatum,
quod  ad  singulorum  utilitatem.
Dicendum  est  igitur  de  jure  pri-
vate,  quod  tripertitum  est ;  col-
lectum  est  enim  ex  naturalibus
prpeceptis  aut  gentium  aut  civi-
libus.

2.  Having  explained  these  general
terms,  we  think  we  shall  commence
our  exposition  of  the  law  of  the  Ro-
man people  most  advantageously,  if
we  pursue  at  first  a  plain  and  easy
path,  and  then  proceed  to  explain
particular  details  with  the  utmost
care  and  exactness.  For,  if  at  the
outset  we  overload  the  mind  of  the
student,  while  yet  new  to  the  subject
and  unable  to  bear  much,  with  a  mul-
titude and  variety  of  topics,  one  of
two  things  will  happen  —  we  shall
either  cause  him  wholly  to  abandon
his  studies,  or,  after  great  toil,  and
often  after  great  distrust  of  himself
(the  most  frequent  stumbling-block
in  the  way  of  youth),  we  shall  at  last
conduct  him  to  the  point,  to  which,
if  he  had  been  led  by  an  easier  road,
he  might,  without  great  labour,  and
without  any  distrust  of  his  own  powers,
have  been  sooner  conducted.

3.  The  maxims  of  law  are  these  :
to  live  honestly,  to  hurt  no  one,  to
give  every  one  his  due.

4.  The  study  of  law  is  divided  into
two  branches  ;  that  of  public  and  that
of  private  law.  Public  law  regards
the  government  of  the  Roman  Em-
pire ;  private  law,  the  interest  of  in-
dividuals. We  are  now  to  treat  of  the
latter,  which  is  composed  of  three
elements,  and  consists  of  precepts
belonging  to  natural  law,  to  the  law
of  nations,  and  to  the  civil  law.

B.  i.  1.  1.  2.

Both  the  jus  publicum  and  the  jus  privatum  fall  under  municipal
law,  that  is,  the  law  of  a  particular  state.  Publicum  jus  in  sacris,  in
sacerdotibus^inmagistratibus  consistit,  (D.  i.  1.  2.)  Public  law  regu-
lates religious  worship  and  civil  administration ;  private  law  deter-
mines the  rights  and  duties  of  individuals.  The  threefold  division
of  private  law  given  in  the  text  is  discussed  in  the  next  section.

LIB.  L      TIT.  II.  7

Tjt.  II.  DE  JURE  NATURALI,  GENTIUM  ET  CIVILE

Jus   naturale   est,    quod   natura  The  law  of  nature  is  that  law  which

omnia    animalia    docuit  :    nam   jus  nature   teaches   to    all   animals.      For

istud  non  humani  generis  proprium  this  law  does  not  belong  exclusively

est,  sed  omnium  animalium  qufe  in  to  the  human  race,  but  belongs  to  all

coelo,    qua3   in    terra,   qute    in  mari  animals,    whether   of    the    earth,    the

nascuntur.      Hinc   descendit   maris  air,  or  the  water.     Hence  comes  the

atque     feminse     conjunctio,     quam  union  of  male  and  female,  which  we

nos  matrimonium  appellamus  ;  hinc  term  matrimony ;  hence  the   procrea-

liberorum  procreatio,  hinc  educatio.  tion  and  bringing  up  of  children.     We

Videmus  etenim  cetera  quoque  ani-  see,  indeed,  that  all  the  other  animals

malia  istius  juris  perita  censeri.  besides  man  are  considered  as  having

knowledge  of  this  law.

D.  i.  1.  1.  3.

In  the  Introduction  (sec.  14)  a  sketch  has  been  given  of  what
the  jurists  meant  by  the  lex  naturcB.  It  was  the  expression  of
right  reason  inherent  in  nature  and  man,  and  having  a  binding
force  as  a  law.  It  was  contrasted  with  \\\&jns  civile,  the  old  strict
law  of  Kome  (Introd.  sec.  10),  and  also  Avith  \\\q  jus  gentium,  the
sum,  that  is,  of  the  law  found  to  obtain  in  other  nations  besides
the  Komans,  as  well  as  in  Roman  law.  (Introd.  sec.  12.)  There
thus  arose  the  threefold  division  of  law  adopted  in  the  last  para-
graph of  the  last  title  ;  but  the  jus  gentium  and  the  Jw5  naturale
were  often  placed  in  the  same  head  of  division,  for  the  law  com-
mon to  all  nations  was  but  the  embodiment  and  indication  of  what
right  reason  was  supposed  to  command  to  all  men.  Thus  while
the  threefold  division  of  law  was  adopted  by  some  jurists,  a  two-
fold division  was  adopted  by  others,  and  is  adopted  in  the  next
and  the  last  paragraphs  of  this  title,  Justinian  first  borrowing  from
Ulpian,  who  adopted  the  threefold  division,  and  then  from  Gains,
who  adopted  the  twofold.

Unfortunately,  in  order  to  give  a  notion  of  jus  naturale,  Jus-
tinian has  borrowed  a  passage  from  Ulpian,  in  which  that  jurist
runs  off  into  a  subsidiary  and  divergent  line  of  thought.  It  is
easy  to  see  that  if  we  begin  to  make  inherent  reason  the  foundation
of  law,  we  may  find  it  necessary  to  take  into  account  the  commu-
nity of  actions  which,  in  some  of  the  primary  features  of  physical
life,  reason  or  instinct  suggests  to  man  and  animals.  Vljns  is  that
which  nature  commands,  nature  may  be  said  to  command  the
propagation  of  the  species  in  animals  as  much  as  in  man,  and  thus
there  would  be  a  jus  common  to  animals  and  to  men.  A  jurist,
to  whom  the  theory  of  the  lex  naturcB  was  familiar,  might  easily
pursue  the  subject  to  a  point  in  which  men  and  animals  seemed
to  meet.  But  the  main  theory  had  nothing  to  do  with  animals,
as  it  looked  only  to  the  reason  inherent  in  the  universe  and  in
man,  and  in  considering  what  the  Roman  jurists  meant  by  jus
naturale  this  fragment  of  Ulpian  may  be  dismissed  almost  entirely
from  our  notice.

8

LIB.  I.      TIT.  II.

1.  Jus  auten  civile  vel  gentium
ita  dividitur,  Omnes  populi  qui
legibus  at  moribus  reguntur,  partim
suo  proprio,  partim  communi  om-
nium hominum  jure  utuntur  ;  nam
quod  quisque  popukis  ipse  sibi  jus
constituit,  id  ipsius  civitatis  pro-
prium  est,  vocaturque  jus  civile,
quasi  jus  proprium  ipsius  civitatis.
Quod  vero  naturalis  ratio  inter
omnes  homines  constituit,  id  apud
omnes  perseque  custoflitur,  voca-
turque jus  gentium,  quasi  quo  jure
omnes  gentes  utuntur.  Et  populus
itaque  Romanus  partim  suo  proprio,
l^artim  communi  omnium  hominum
jure  utitur :  qua3  singula  qualia  sint,
suis  locis  proponemus.

2.  Sed  jus  quidem  civile  ex  una-
quaque  civitate  appellatur,  veluti
Atheniensium  :  nam  si  quis  velit
Solonis  vel  Draconis  leges  ajDpellare
jus  civile  Atheniensium,  non  erra-
verit.  Sic  enim  et  jus  quo  populus
Homanus  utitur,  jus  civile  Roma-
norum  appellamus,  vel  jus  Quiri-
tium  quo  Quirites  utuntur  ;  Romani
enim  a  Quirino  Quirites  appellan-
tur.  Sed  quotiens  non  addimus
pomen  cujus  sit  civitatis,  nostrum
jus  significamus  :  sicuti  cum  poe-
tam  dicimus  nee  addimus  nomen,
subauditur  apud  Grascos  egregius
Homerus,  apud  nos  Virgilius.  Jus
autem  gentium  omni  humano  generi
commune  est  :  nam  usu  exigente  et
humanis  necessitatibus,  gentes  hu-
man?e  qu?edam  sibi  constituerunt.
— Bella  etenim  orta  sunt  et  cap-
tivitates  secutse,  et  servitutes  quoe
sunt  naturali  juri  contraripe  ;  jure
enim  naturali  ab  initio  omnes  homi-
nes liberi  nascebantur.  Et  ex  hoc
jure  gentium,  omnes  pene  contractus
introducti  sunt,  ut  emptio,  venditio,
Jocatio,  conductio,  societas,  deposi-
tum,  mutuum.,  et  alii  innumerabiles.

1.  Civil  law  is  thus  distinguished
from  the  law  of  nations.  Every  com-
munity governed  by  laws  and  customs,
uses  partly  its  own  law,  partly  laws
common  to  all  mankind.  The  law
which  a  people  makes  for  its  own
government  belongs  exclusively  to
that  state  and  is  called  the  civil  law,
as  being  the  law  of  the  particular
state.  But  the  law  which  natural
reason  appoints  for  all  mankind  ob-
tains equally  among  all  nations,  and
is  called  the  law  of  nations,  because
all  nations  make  use  of  it.  The
people  of  Rome,  then,  are  governed
p>artly  by  their  own  laws,  and  partly
by  the  laws  which  are  common  to  all
mankind.  We  will  take  notice  of  this
distinction  as  occasion  may  arise.

2.  Civil  law  takes  its  name  from
the  state  which  it  governs,  as,  for  in-
stance, from  Athens  ;  for  it  would  be
very  proper  to  speak  of  the  laws  of
Solon  or  Draco  as  the  civil  law  of
Athens.  And  thus  the  law  which  tliQ
Roman  people  make  use  of  is  called
the  civil  law  of  the  R-omans,  or  that
of  the  Quirites,  as  being  used  by  the
Quirites  ;  for  the  Romans  are  called
Quirites  from  Quirinus.  But  when-
ever we  speak  of  civil  law,  without
adding  the  name  of  any  state,  we  mean
our  own  law  ;  just  as  the  Greeks,  when
'  the  poet '  is  spoken  of  without  any
name  being  expressed,  mean  the  great
Homer,  and  we  Romans  mean  Virgil.
The  law  of  nations  is  common  to  all
mankind,  for  nations  have  established
certain  laws,  as  occasion  and  the  ne-
cessities of  human  life  required.  Wars
arose,  and  in  their  train  followed  cap-
tivity and  then  slavery,  which  is  con-
trary to  the  law  of  nature  ;  for  by  that
law  all  men  are  originally  born  free.
Further,  by  the  law  of  nations  almost
all  contracts  were  at  first  introduced,
as,  for  instance,  buying  and  selling,
letting  and  hiring,  partnership,  de-
posits, loans  returnable  in  kind,  and
ver)^  many  others.

D.  i.  4.  5.

The  term  jus  civile,  as  used  here,  entirely  depends  for  its
meaning  on  the  contrast  betvs^een  it  and  the  J7is  gentium.  When
the  jurists  came  to  examine  different  systems  of  laws,  they  found
much  in  each  that  was  common  to  all.  This  common  part  they
termed  the  jus  gentium ;  and  the  residue,  the  part  peculiar  to
each  state,  they  called  jus  civile.  The  contracts  of  sale,  hiring,
and  the  others  mentioned  in  the  text,  were,  they  found,  carried

LIB.  I.      TIT.  II.  9

on  much  in  the  same  way  in  every  country,  and  they  therefore
assigned  them  to  the  head  of  jus  gentium,  and  contrasted  them
with  forms  of  contract  which  were  peculiar  to  the  old  Roman  law,
and  were  therefore  considered  part  of  the/«.<f  civile.  In  the  usual
sense  of  jus  civile,  in  which  it  means  the  old  law  of  Rome  prior
to  the  jus  honoi^ariuni  (see  Introd.  sec.  10),  these  contracts  were
part  of  i\iQ  jus  civile,  that  is,  they  were  part  of,  and  were  recog-
nised by,  the  old  law,  but  they  were  also  part  of  the  general  law
of  nations,  and  no  forms  peculiar  to  Roman  law  were  necessary
for  their  creation.

3.  Constat  autem  jus  nostrum  3.  Our  law  is  written  and  un-
aut  ex  scripto  aut  ex  non  scripto,  written,  just  as  among  the  Greeks
lit  apud  Griecos  -wj^  j'uhmp  o\  tar  some  of  their  laws  were  written  and
eYypcKpot ,  o\  Se  dypuipoi.  Scriptum  jus  others  not  written.  The  written  part
est  lex,  plebiscita,  senatus-consulta,  consists  of  laws,  plebiscUa,  soiatits-
principum  placita,  hiagistratuum  consulta,  enactments  of  emperors,  edicts
edicta,  responsa  prudentium.  of  magistrates,  and  answers  of  juris-
prudents.

4.  Lex  est  quod  populus  Roma-  4.  A  law  is  that  which  was  enacted
nus,  senatorio  magistratu  interro-  by  the  Roman  people  on  its  being
gante,  veiati  consule,  constituebat.  proposed  by  a  senatorian  magistrate,
Plebiscitum  est  quod  plebs,  plebeio  as  a  consul.  A  plebiscitum  is  that
magistratu  interrogante,  veluti  tri-  which  was  enacted  by  the  plebs  on
buno,  constituebat.  Plebs  autem  its  being  proposed  by  a  plebeian
a  populo  eo  ditfert,  quo  species  a  magistrate,  as  a  tribune.  The  i^^ey^i
genere  ;  nam  apj)ellatione '  populi  differs  from  the  people  as  a  species
universi  cives  signiticantur,  con-  from  its  genus  ;  for  all  the  citizens,
numeratis  etiam  patriciis  et  sena-  including  patricians  and  senators,  are
toribus.  Plebis  autem  appellatione,  comprehended  in  the  j)eople  ;  but  the
sine  patriciis  et  senatoribus,  ceteri  plebs  only  includes  citizens,  not  being
cives  signiticantur.  Sed  et  plebi-  patricians  or  senators.  Plebiscita,  after
scita,  lata  lege  Hortensia,  non  minus  the  Hortensian  law  had  been  passed,
valere  quani  leges  coeperunt.  began  to  have  the  same  force  as  laws.

Gai.  i.  3.

A  lex  ov  populi  scitwn,  to  use  a  word  made  by  the  commenta-
tors on  the  analogy  of  plebiscitum,  was  passed  originally  only  in
the  comitia  curiata ;  after  the  establishment  of  the  comitia  centuriata
in  both  these  comitia  ;  but,  excepting  in  the  case  of  conferring  the
imperium,  almost  always  in  the  centuriata.     (See  Introd.  sec.  15.)

The  lex  Hortensia,  467  A.U.C.,  had  been  preceded  by  the  lex
Valeria,  304  A.u.C,  and  the  lex  Puhlilia,  414  A.u.C,  by  both  of
which  it  was  provided  that  plebiscita  should  bind  the  whole
people.  Either  the  effect  of  their  provisions  had  been  disputed,
or  exceptions  had  been  made  to  them,  or  perhaps  the  extension
of  the  authority  of  the  plebiscitum  which  they  gave  was  not  so
complete  as  their  terms  would  seem  to  imply.  (Nieb.  2.  366.)
The  term  lex  is  very  frequently  applied  to  plebiscita  as  well  as  to
populi  scita.     (See  Introd.  sec.  9.)

5.  Senatus-consultum  est  quod  5.  K senatus-consultiimi^ i\\3iivfh\.c\\
senatus  j  ubet  atque  constituit  :  nam  the  senate  commands  and  appoints  :
cum  auctus  esset  populus  Roma-  for,  when  the  Roman  people  was  so
nus    in    eum    moduni     ut    difficile  increased  that  it  was  diiiicult  to  asseni-

10

LIB.  I.     TIT.  II.

esset  in  unum  eum  convocari  legis
sanciendai  causa,  teqiium  visum  est
senatum  vice  populi  consuli.

ble  it  together  to  pass  laws,  it  seemed
right  that  the  senate  should  be  con-
sulted in  the  place  of  the  people.

Gai.  i.  4  ;  D.  i.  2.  2.  9.

Senatus-considta  had  in  some  instances  the  force  of  a  law  even
in  the  times  of  the  republic,  for  we  have  a  few  preserved  of  a
date  antecedent  to  the  Caesars,  which  undoubtedly  had  the  force  of
law ;  but  they  all  relate  to  matters  of  social  administration,  such
as  forbidding  burial  within  the  city,  or  the  importation  of  wild
beasts.  (See  Introd.  sec.  17.)  But  we  cannot  speak  of  iienatus-
consulta  as  a  substantial  part  of  the  general  legislation  till  the
times  of  the  emperors,  when  they  superseded  every  other  except
the  emperor's  enactments.  The  appeal  of  the  emperor  to  their
authority  dwindled  down  almost  immediately  into  a  mere  form.
(Cod.  i.  14.  12.  1,  ill  inasemti  leges  condere  soli  imperatori  con-
cessum  est.)

6.  Sed  et  quod  principi  placuit,
legis  habet  vigorem  ;  cum  lege  regia
quae  de  ejus  imperio  lata  est,  populus
ei  et  in  eum  omne  imperium  suum
et  potestatem  concessit.  Quodcum-
que  ergo  imperator  per  epistolam
constituit,  vei  cognoscens  decrevit,
vel  edicto  prsecepit,  legem  esse  con-
stat ;  hie  sunt  quae  constitutiones
appellantur.  Plane  ex  his  qusedam
sunt  personales,  quae  nee  ad  exem-
plum  trahuntur,  quoniam  non  hoc
princeps  vult ;  nam  quod  alicui  ob
meritum  indulsit,  vel  si  cui  poenam
irrogavit,  vel  si  cui  sine  exemplo
subvenit,  personam  non  transgredi-
tur.  Alige  autem  cum  generales  sint,
omnes  procul  dubio  tenent. .

6.  That  which  seems  good  to  the
emperor  has  also  the  force  of  law  ;  for
the  people,  by  the  lex  regia,  which  is
passed  to  confer  on  him  his  power,
make  over  to  him  their  whole  power
and  .authority.  Therefore  whatever  the
emperor  ordains  by  rescript,  or  decides
in  adjudging  a  cause,  or  lays  down  by
edict,  is  unquestionably  law ;  and  it  is
these  enactments  of  the  emperor  that
are  called  constitutions.  Of  these,
some  are  personal,  and  are  not  to  be
drawn  into  precedent,  such  not  being
the  intention  of  the  emperor.  Sup-
posing the  emperor  has  granted  a
favour  to  any  man  on  account  of  his
merit,  or  inflicted  some  punishment,
or  granted  some  extraordinary  relief,
the  application  of  these  acts  does  not
extend  beyond  the  particular  indi-
vidual. But  the  other  constitutions,
being  general,  are  undoubtedly  bind-
ing on  all.

Gai.  i.  5  ;  D.  i.  4.  1.

The  imperial  constitutions,  though  known  in  the  time  of  the
previous  emperors,  first  attained,  under  Hadrian,  the  position  of
being  in  reality  the  only  source  of  law.  They  were  of  three
kinds :  first,  epistolcB,  letters  or  answers  to  letters  addressed  by
the  emperor  to  different  individuals  or  public  bodies,  or  mandata,
orders  given  to  particular  oflficers,  and  rescripta,  answers  given  by
the  emperor  to  magistrates  who  requested  his  assistance  in  the
decision  of  doubtful  points  ;  secondly,  judicial  sentences,  decreto^
given  by  the  emperors  (Bk.  ii.  15.  4);  both  these  kinds  having
force  only  by  serving  as  a  precedent  in  similar  cases  ;  and  thirdly,
edicta,  or  laws  binding  generally  on  all  the  subjects  of  the  emperor.
(See  Introd.  sec.  16.)  ~

LIB.  I.      TIT.  II.  11

It  is  here  said,  on  the  authority  of  Ulpian  (D.  i.  4.  1),  that
the  emperor  derives  his  authority  from  the  lex  regia.  This  does
not  refer  to  any  one  law  of  that  name ;  but  to  the  law  of  the
comitia  curiata  by  which  the  imperium  was  conferred.  Gains
says,  1.  5,  nee  unquam  dubitatxim  est  quin  principis  constitutio
leqis  vicem  obtineaf,cum  ipse  imperator  per  legem  imperium  accipiat.
This  law  was  a  relic  of  that  by  which  the  king  had  been  invested
with  the  royal  authority,  intrusted  to  him  by  the  curia  rej^resenting
the  populus ;  and  it  was  considered  that  the  emperor  was  in  like
manner  invested  with  all  the  power  of  the  Koman  people  trans-
ferred to  him  on  his  receiving  the  imperium.  (See  Introd.
sec  .16.)

7.  Preetorum  quoque  edicta  non  7.  The  edicts  of  the  praetors  are
modicam  jiiris  obtinent  auctori-  also  of  great  authority.  These  edicts
tatem.  Hoc  etiam  jus  honorarium  are  called  the  honorary  law,  because
solemus  appellare,  quod  qui  hono-  those  who  bear  honours  in  the  state,
rem  gerunt,  id  est  magistratus,  auc-  that  is,  the  magistrates,  have  given
toritatem  huic  juri  dederunt.  Pro-  them  their  sanction .  The  curule  a;diles
ponebant  et  sediles  curules  edictum  also  used  to  publish  an  edict  relative
de  quibusdam  causis,  quod  edictum  to  certain  subjects,  which  edict  also
juris  honorarii  portio  est.  became  part  of  the  jus  honorarium.

Gai.  i.  6  ;  D.  xxi.  1.  1.

Papinian  says  (D.  i.  1.  7),  that  the  jus  prcBtorum  was  intro-
duced by  the  praetors,  ddjuvandi  vel  supplendi  vel  corrigendi  juris
civilis  gratia.  New  circumstances,  new  habits  of  thinking,  and,
in  the  case  of  the  prcBtor  peregrinus,  a  new  scope  for  authority,
compelled  the  praitor  to  use  an  equitable  power,  and  frequently
equitable  fictions,  to  extend  the  narrow  limits  of  the  old  civil  law.
(See  Introd.  sec.  12.)  The  decisions  by  which  he  did  this  were
called  edicta.  At  the  beginning  of  his  year  of  office,  the  pra3tor
published  a  list  of  the  rules  by  which  he  intended  to  be  bound,
and  this  was  called  the  edictum  perpetuum,  as  it  ran  on  from  year
to  year  under  successive  praetors,  each  making  such  additions  and
changes  as  each  thought  necessary.  Edictum  repentinum  was
one  made  to  meet  a  particular  case.  The  lex  Cornelia  (b.c.  67)
forbad  a  praetor  to  depart  during  his  term  of  office  from  the  edict
he  had  promulgated  at  its  commencement.  In  the  time  of  Hadrian,
a  jurist  named  Salvius  Julianus,  who  filled  the  office  of  praetor,
systematised  and  condensed  the  edicts  of  preceding  praetors  into  a
final  edictum  per petuum,  which,  if  further  annual  edicts  were  issued
at  all,  which  is  doubtful,  served  as  their  basis,  and  is  specially
known  as  the  edictum  perpetuum.     (See  Introd.  sec.  19.)

8.  Responsa  prudentium  sunt  8.  The  answers  of  the  jurispru-
sententifie  et  opiniones  eorum  qui-  dents  are  the  decisions  and  opinions
bus  permissum  erat  jura  condere.  of  persons  who  were  authorised  to  de-
Nam  antiquitus  institutum  erat,  ut  termine  the  law.  For  anciently  it  was
essent  qui  jura  publice  interpreta-  provided  that  there  should  be  persons
rentur,  quibus  a  Csesare  jus  respon-  to  interpret  publicly  the  law,  who
dendi  datum  est,  qui  jurisconsulti  were  permitted  by  the  emperor  to  give
appellabantur :      quorum     omnium  answers  on  questions  of  law.      They

12  LIB.  I.      TIT.  II.

sententire  et  opiniones  earn  aucto-  were  called  jurisconsnlti  ;  and  the  au-
ritateiii  tenebant,  lit  judici  recedere  thority  of  their  decisions  and  opinions,
a  responso  eoriim  non  liceret,  nt  est  when  they  were  all  unanimous,  was
constitutum.  such,  that  the  judge  could  not,  accord-

ing to  the  constitutions,  refuse  to  be
guided  by  their  answers.

Gai.  i.  7.

It  is  to  the  change  in  the  position  of  the  jurists  eiFected  by
Augustus  (Introd.  sec.  20),  that  reference  is  made  in  the  words
quibus  a  CcBsare  jus  respondendi  datum  est,  and  it  is  to  the  consti-
tutions of  Hadrian  (sec.  20)  and  Theodosius  (sec.  27),  that  the
Avords  judici  recedere  a  responso  eorum  non  liceret,  ut  est  consti-
tutum,  refer.

9.   Ex  non  scripto  jus  venit,  quod  9.   The  unwritten  law  is  that  which

usus    comprobavit  :    nam    diuturni  usage  has  established  ;  for  ancient  cus-

mores  consensu  utentium  comprobati  toms,  being  sanctioned  by  the  consent

legem  imitantur.  of  those  who  adopt  them,  are  like  laws.

D.  i.  3.  32.

Quid  interest  suffragio  populus  voluntatem  suam  declaret  an
rebus  ipsis  etfactis/  (I),  i.  3.  32.)  The  Roman  jurists  did  not
trouble  themselves  to  ascertain  very  accurately  whence  laws
derive  their  binding  force.  The  vague  expression  in  the  text  mores
lege)n  imitantur,  and  the  question  asked  in  these  words  of  the
Digest,  leave  undecided  the  question  of  the  relation  of  customs  to
laws.  The  Koman  law  held  that  customs  could  not  only  interpret
law  (^optima  legum  interpres  consuetudo,  D.  i.  3.  37),  but  also
abrooate  it.  In  the  last  section  of  this  Title  it  is  said  that  the
enactment  of  a  state  may  be  changed  tacito  consensu  populi,  and
in  the  Digest  (i.  3.  32.  1)  it  is  expressly  stated  that  teyes  tacito
consensu  omnium  per  desuetudinem  abrogantur.  The  Code,  cer-
tainly, lays  down  (viii.  53)  that  the  authority  of  a  custom  is  not
so  great  that  it  can  '  conquer  reason  or  law  ; '  but  this  is  said  of
particular  not  general  customs.  A  law  fallen  into  desuetude
might  be  abrogated  by  general  custom,  but  a  particular  custom,
of,  perhaps,  only  local  force,  would  not  be  suft'ered  to  prevail
against  the  general  law.

10.  Et  non  ineleganter  in  duas  10.   The  civil  law  is  not  improperly

species  jus  civile    distributum   esse  divided  into  two  kinds,  for  the  divi-

videtur  ;  nam  origo  ejus  ab  institutis  sion  seems  to  have  had  its  origin  in

duarum  civitatum,   Athenarum  sci-  the  customs  of  the  two  states  Athens

licet  et  Lacedsemonis  lluxisse  vide-  and  Lacedsemon.     For  in  these  states

tur.     In  his  enim  civitatibus  ita  agi  it  used  to  be  the  case,  that  the  Lace-

solitum  erat,  ut   Lacedsemonii  qui-  dsemonians   rather   committed  to  me-

dem    magis    ea    quae    pro    legibus  mory    what    they    observed    as    law,

observarent,   memorise    mandarent  ;  while  the  Athenians  rather  observed

Athenienses  vero,  ea  quse  in  legibus  as   law  what   they  had    consigned   to

scripta    comprehendissent,    custodi-  writing,  and  included  in  the  body  of

rent.  their  laws.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say,  that   the  distinction  between
\yritten  and  unwritten  law  must  always  exist  where  laws  are

LIB.  I.      TIT.  III.  13

written  at  all,  and  where  no  attempt  has  been  made  to  express
all  law  in  positive  terms ;  and  that  this  Greek  origin  for  the  two
branches  of  Koman  law  is  quite  imaginary.

11.   Sed   naturalia   quidem   jura  11.   The  laws  of  nature,  which  all

qu£e   apud   omnes   gentes    peraeque  nations  observe  alike,  being  established

servantur,  divina  quadam  providen-  by  a  divine   providence,  remain  ever

tia  constituta,  semper  firma    atque  fixed  and   immutable.     But  the  laws

immutabilia  permanent.      Ea  vero  which  every  state  has  enacted,  undergo

quse  ipsa  sibi   quosque  civitas  con-  frequent  changes,  either  by  the  tacit

stituit,    ssepe    mutari     solent,    vel  consent  of  the  people,  or  by  a  new  law

tacito    consensu    populi,    vel     alia  being  subsefjuently  passed,
postea  lege  lata.

Gai.  i.  1 ;  D.  i.  3.  32.  1.

Justinian,  abandoning  the  threefold  division  of  Ulpian,  which
he  had  adopted  in  the  earlier  paragraphs  of  this  chapter,  now
follows  the  twofold  division  of  Gaius  (i.  1),  into  jus  naturale
and  7^5  civile.

Tit.   hi.     DE   JURE    PERSONARUM.

Omne  autem  jus  quo  utimur  vel  All  our  law  relates  either  to  per-

ad  personas  pertinet,  vel  ad  res,  vel  sons,  or  to  things,  or  to  actions.     Let

ad  actiones.     Et  prius  de   personis  us  first  speak  of  persons  ;  as  it  is  of

videamus  ;  nam  parum  est  jus  nosse,  little  purpose  to  know  the  law,  if  we  do

si   personfB  quarum  causa  constitti-  not  know  the  persons  for  whose  sake

turn  est,  ignorentur.     Summa  itaque  the  law  was  made.     The  chief  division

divisio  de  jure  personarum  hpec  est,  in  the  rights  of  persons  is  this  :  men

quod  omnes  homines  aut  liberi  sunt,  are  all  either  free  or  slaves,
aut  servi.

Gai.  i.  8.

In  Gaius,  and  in  the  Institutes  of  Justinian,  obliofations  are
treated  of  under  the  head  of  things.  The  division  of  law  which
compels  them  to  be  so  treated  is  obviously  inaccurate,  for  actions
themselves  are  just  as  much  things  as  obligations ;  and  if  obliga-
tions were  classed  under  the  head  of  things  because  they  are  a
mode  of  obtaining  things,  there  is  the  objection  to  the  classifica-
tion, that  the  obtaining  a  thing  is  only  an  ultimate  and  accidental
result,  not  a  necessary  part,  of  an  obligation.

Every  being  capable  of  having  and  being  subject  to  rights  was
called  in  Roman  law  a  persona.  (See  Introd.  sec.  37.)  Thus
not  onlv  was  the  individual  citizen,  when  looked  at  as  havino-  this
capacity,  a  persona,  but  also  corporations  and  public  bodies.
Slaves,  on  the  contrary,  were  not  personce.  They  had  no  rights.
(See  Introd.  sec.  38.)  The  word  persona  has  also  another  sense.
It  was  used  not  only  for  the  being  who  had  the  capacity  of
enjoying  rights  and  fulfilling  duties,  but  also  for  the  different
characters  or  parts  in  which  this  capacity  showed  itself;  or,  to
borrow  the  metaphor  suggested  by  the  etymology  of  the  w^ord,
for  the  different  masks  or  faces  which  the  actor  wore  in  playinof
his  part  m  the  drama  of  civic  and  social  life.  Thus,  for  instance,
the  same  man  might  have  the  persona  pntris,  or  tutoris,  or  mariti-,

14  LIB.  I.      TIT.  III.

that  is,  might  be  regarded  in  his  character  of  father,  tutor,  or
husband.

Status  (legal  standing)  is  the  correlative  of  persona.  Status
is  the  legal  capacity  of  a  persona :  persona  is  that  Avhich  has  a
status.  In  Koman  law  there  were  recoo:nised  three  sreat  heads
of  this  legal  capacity  :  lihertas,  the  capacity  to  have  and  be  subject
to  the  rights  of  a  freeman ;  civitas,  the  capacity  to  have  and  be
subject  to  the  rights  of  a  Roman  citizen  ;  smdfamiUa,  the  capacity
to  have  and  be  subject  to  the  rights  of  a  person  sui  juris.  The
extent  and  meaning  of  each  of  these  capacities  is  to  be  determined
by  contrasting  it  with  its  corresponding  negative,  that  is,  with  the
absence  of  the  capacity  spoken  of.  In  order  to  determine  the
capacity  of  freemen,  we  must  speak  of  the  position  of  (freedmen
and)  slaves :  in  order  to  determine  the  capacity  of  a  citizen,  we
must  speak  of  the  position  of  a  Latinus  and  a  jjerer/rinus :  in  order
to  determine  the  capacity  of  a  person  sui  juris,  we  must  speak  of
the  position  of  a  person  not  sui  juris.  The  discussion  of  these
points  occupies  the  remainder  of  the  first  book  of  the  Institutes.

1.  Et  libertas  quidem,  ex  qua  1.  Freedom,  from  which  men  are
etiam  liberi  vocantur,  est  natiiralis  said  to  be  free,  is  the  natural  power
facultas  ejus  quod  cuique  facere  libet,  of  doing  what  we  each  please,  unless
nisi  si  quid  vi  aut  jure  prohibetur.  prevented  by  force  or  by  law.

2.  Servitus  autem  est  constitutio  2.   Slavery  is  an  institution  of  the
juris    gentium,    qua    quis    dominio  law  of  nations,  by  which  one  man  is
alieno  contra  naturam  subjicitur.  made   the   property  of   another,   con-
trary to  natural  right.

D.  i.  5.  4.  1.

The  institution  of  slavery  was  the  one  thing  in  which  the  jus
gentium  seemed  to  be  irreconcilable  with  the  jus  naturale ;  and  it
was  this,  probably,  more  than  anything  else,  that  made  some  of
-the  jurists  adopt  the  threefold  division  of  law.

3.  Servi  autem  ex  eo  appellati  3.  Slaves  are  denominated  servl,
sunt,  quod  imperatores  captivos  ven-  because  generals  order  their  captives
dere,  ac  per  hoc  servare  nee  occidere  to  be  sold,  and  thus  preserve  them,
Solent  :  qui  etiam  mancipia  dicti  and  do  not  put  them  to  death.  Slaves
sunt,  eo  quod  ab  hostibus  manu  are  also  called  mancipia,  because  they
capiuntur.  are    taken    from   the    enemy   by   the

strong  hand.

4.  Servi  autem  aut  nascuntur  aut  4.  Slaves  either  are  born  or  become
fiunt.  Nascuntur  ex  ancillis  nostris :  so.  They  are  born  so  when  their
hunt  aut  jure  gentium,  id  est  ex  mother  is  a  slave  ;  they  become  so
captivitate  ;  aut  jure  civili,  cum  either  by  the  law  of  nations,  that  is,
liber  homo,  major  viginti  annis,  ad  by  captivity,  or  by  the  civil  law,  as
X)retium  participandum  sese  venum-  when  a  free  person,  above  the  age  of
dari  passus  est.  twenty,  suffers  himself  to  be  sold,  that

he  may  share  the  price  given  for  him.

D.  i.  5.  5.  1.

Children  born  out  of  the  ])ale  of  lawful  marriage  always
followed  the  condition  of  the  mother ;  and  as  slaves  were  incapable
of  contracting  a  lawful  marriage,  in  the  peculiar  sense  of  '  lawful '
adopted  by  lioman  law,  the  children  of  a  female  slave  were  neces-

LIB.  I.      TIT.  IV.  15

sarilv  slaves.     They  were  called  vernce  when  born  and  reared  on
the  property  of  the  owner  of  their  mother.    (See  Introd.  sec.  46.)

In  order  to  prevent  a  fraud,  by  which  a  person,  having  allowed
himself  to  be  sold  in  order  to  share  the  price  with  the  vendor,
turned  round  on  the  purchaser  and  claimed  his  liberty  as  being
free-born,  a  law,  perhaps  the  Seiiatus-cojisultum  Claudianum
(D.  xl.  3.  5),  enacted  that  the  perpetrator  of  the  fraud  should  be
bound  by  his  statement,  and  be  held  to  be  a  slave.  In  the  early
law  of  Kome,  it  may  be  observed,  a  citizen  could  really  sell
himself  so  as  to  lose  his  freedom ;  but  he  always  retained  a  right
of  redemption.

There  were  other  modes  by  which  slavery  could  arise  under
the  Koman  law,  as  (1)  when  a  free  woman  had  commerce  with  a
slave,  or  (2),  when  malefactors  were  condemned  to  the  amphi-
theatre or  the  mines,  the  guilty  parties  were  held  in  law  to  be
slaves.  These  latter  modes  of  legal  slavery  were  abolished  by
Justinian.  (Bk.  iii.  12.  1.  Nov.  22.  cap.  8.)  Lastly  (3),  an
emancipated  slave,  if  guilty  of  any  gross  act  of  ill  behaviour
towards  his  patron,  i.e.  his  late  owner,  such  as  a  violent  attack  on
his  reputation  or  person,  might  be  reclaimed  to  slavery.  (D.  xxv.
3.  6.)

In  the  older  law,  addictio,  that  is,  delivery  of  the  person  to  a
creditor  by  way  of  execution  for  a  debt,  the  being  detected  in
furtum  manifestum,  and-  omitting  to  be  inscribed  in  the  tables  of
the  census  in  order  to  defraud  the  revenue,  were  each  a  cause  of
slavery ;  but  these  causes  had  become  obsolete  long  before  the
time  of  Justinian.

5.  In  servorum  conditione  nulla  5.  In  the  condition  of  slaves  there

est  differentia,  in  liberis  miiltse  dif-  is  no  distinction  ;  but  there  are  many
f erentifB  sunt  :  aut  enim  sunt  ingenui  distinctions  among  free  persons  ;  for
aut  libertini.  they  are  either  born  free,  or  have  been

set  free.

D.  i.  5.  5.  5.

In  the  later  empire  there  was  introduced  what  may  be  almost
termed  a  difference  in  the  condition  of  slaves  by  the  institution  of
colonic  that  is,  persons  attached  to  the  soil,  ascripti  glebce,  passing
with  it,  and  bound  to  remain  on  it,  but  entitled  to  retain  for  their
own  use  all  they  could  gain  from  it  beyond  the  value  of  a  yearly
payment,  which  they  had  to  make  to  the  owner  of  the  soil,  and
enjoying  also  all  tlie  family  rights  of  freemen.

Tit.    IV.     DE   INGENUIS.

Ingenuus  est   is   qui,  statim  ut  A  person  is  ingenuus  who  is  free

natus  est,  liber  est,  sive  ex  duobus  from   the   moment    of   his   birth,    by

ingenuis  matrimonio  editus  est,  sive  being  born  in  matrimony,  of  parents

ex  libertinis  duobus,  sive  ex  altero  who  have  been  either  both  born  free,

libertino  et  altero  ingenuo.     Sedetsi  or  both  made  free,   or  one  of  whom

quis  ex  matre  nascitur  libera,  patre  has   been   born   and   the  other  made

servo,    ingenuus    nihilominus    nas-  free ;   and  when  the   mother  is  free,

16

LIB.  I.      TIT.  V.

and  the  father  a  slave,  the  child  never-
theless is  born  free  :  just  as  he  is  if  his
mother  is  free,  and  it  is  uncertain  who
is  his  father  ;  for  he  had  then  no  legal
father.  And  it  is  sufficient  if  the
mother  is  free  at  the  time  of  the  birth,
although  a  slave  when  she  conceived  ;
and  on  the  other  hand,  if  she  be  free
when  she  conceives,  and  is  a  slave
when  she  gives  birth  to  her  child,  yet
the  child  is  held  to  be  born  free  ;  for
the  misfortune  of  the  mother  ought
not  to  prejudice  her  unborn  infant.
The  question  hence  arose,  if  a  female
slave  with  child  is  made  free,  but
again  becomes  a  slave  before  the  child
is  born,  whether  the  child  is  born  free
or  a  slave  ?  Marcellus  thinks  it  is  born
free,  for  it  is  sufficient  for  the  unborn
child,  if  the  mother  has  been  free,  al-
though only  in  the  intermediate  time  ;
and  this  is  true.

Gai.  i.  11.  82.  89,90;  D.  i.  5.  5.

If  a  child  was  born  in  matrimonio,  a  tie  which  could  only,  in
the  eyes  of  the  civil  law,  be  contracted  between  two  free  persons,
the  child  w^as  free  from  the  moment  of  conception.  If  it  was  not
born  in  mafrimonio,  then  it  followed  the  condition  of  the  mother ;
and  it  was  her  condition  at  the  time  of  birth,  not  at  that  of  con-
ception, which  decided  the  statics  of  the  child.  It  was  only  by  a
departure  from  the  strict  theory  of  law  that  the  enjoyment  of
liberty  by  the  mother  before  the  birth  was  allowed  to  make  the
child  free.     (Gat.  i.  89.)

citur  :  quemadmodum  qui  ex  matre
libera  et  incerto  patre  natus  est,
quoniam  vnlgo  conceptus  est.  Suf-
ficit  autem  liberam  fuisse  matrem
eo  tempore  quo  nascitur,  licet  an-
cilla  conceperit.  Et  e  contrario  si
libera  conceperit,  deinde  ancilla
facta  pariat,  placuit  eum  qui  nasci-
tur liberura  nasci  ;  quia  non  debet
calamitas  matris  ei  nocere,  qui  in
ventre  est.  Ex  his  illud  quassitum
est,  si  nncilla  prsegnans  manumissa
sit,  deinde  ancilla  postea  facta  pe-
pererit,  liberum  an  servum  pariat  ?
Et  Marcellus  probat  liberum  nasci  ;
sufficit  enim  ei  qui  in  ventre  est,
liberam  matrem  vel  medio  tempore
habuisse  :  quod  verum  est.

1.  Cum  autem  ingenuus  aliquis
natus  sit,  non  officit  illi  in  servitute
fuisse,  et  postea  manumissum  esse  ;
s?epissime  enim  constitutum  est,  na-
talibus  non  officere  manumissionem.

1.  When  a  man  has  been  born  free
he  does  not  cease  to  be  ingenuus,  be-
cause he  has  been  in  the  position  of
a  slave,  and  has  subsequently  been
enfranchised  ;  for  it  has  been  often
settled  that  enfranchisement  does  not
prejudice  the  rights  of  birth.

In  servitute  ff/isse.  This  does  not  mean  to  have  beeu  a  slave,
but  to  have  been  in  the  position  of  one.  As  if  a  freeborn  child
were  considered  erroneously  to  be  a  slave,  and  were  manumitted,
and  then  his  free  birth  were  discovered,  his  status  would  be  that
of  an  ingenuus,  and  not  of  a  lih^rtinus.

Tit.  y.     DE   LIBERTINIS.

Libertini  sunt,  qui  ex  justa  ser-

(■\dtnte  manumissi  sunt.  Manumis-
sio  autem  est  datio  libertatis  ;  nam
quamdiu  quis  in  servitute  est,  manui
et  potestati  suppositus  est,  et  manu-
missus  liberatur  potestate.  Quas  res
a  jure  gentium   originem   sump  it,

Freedmen  are  those  who  have  been
manumitted  from  just  servitude.  IMa-
numission  is  the  process  of  freeing
from  'the  hand.'  For  while  anyone
is  in  slavery,  he  is  under  '  the  hand '
and  power  of  another,  but  by  manu-
mission he  is  freed  from  this  power.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  V.  17

iitpote  cum  jure  natural!  omnes  This  institution  took  its  rise  from  the
liberi  nascerentur,  nee  esset  nota  law  of  nations  ;  for  by  the  law  of  nature
manumissio,  cum  servitus  esset  in-  all  men  were  born  free  ;  and  manu-
cognita.  Sed  posteaquam  jiu*e  gen-  mission  was  not  heard  of,  as  slavery
tium  servitus  invasit,  secutum  est  was  unknown.  But  when  slavery
benehcium  manumissionis  ;  et  cum  came  in  by  the  law  of  nations,  the
uno  naturali  nomine  homines  appel-  boon  of  manumission  followed.  And
larentur,  jure  gentium  tria  genera  w^hereas  all  were  denominated  by  the
esse  coeperunt,  liberi  et  his  contra-  one  natural  name  of  'men,'  the  law
rium  servi,  et  tertium  genus  liber-  of  nations  introduced  a  division  into
tini,  qui  desierant  esse  servi.  three  kinds  of  men,  namely,  freemen,

and  in  opposition  to  them,  slaves  ;  and
thirdly,  freedmen  who  had  ceased  to
be  slaves.

Gai.  i.  11  ;  D.  i.  1.  4.

In  some  few  cases  a  slave  could  obtain  liberty  without  manu-
mission. Many  of  these  cases  are  enumerated  in  the  Digest
(xl.  8).  A  slave,  for  instance,  Avho  was  abandoned  by  his  master
on  account  of  disease  or  infirmity  {oh  gravem  injirmitatem),  was
pronounced  free  by  an  edict  of  Claudius.

1.  Multis  autem  modis  manumis-  1.  Manumission  is  effected  in  va-

sio   procedit,.   aut    enim    ex    sacris  rious  ways  ;  either  in  the  face  of  the

constitutionibus  in  sacrosanctis  ec-  Church,  according  to  the  imperial  con-

clesiis,  aut  vindicta,  aut  inter  ami-  stitutions,    or  by  vindicta,   or  in   the

cos,  aut  per  epistolam,  aut  per  tes-  presence  of  friends,  or  by  letter,  or

tamentum,  aut  per  aliam  quamlibet  by  testament,  or  by  any  other  expres-

Tiltimam  voluntatem.     Sed  et   aliis  sion  of  a  man's  last  will.     And  a  slave

multis    modis    libertas    servo   com-  may  also  gain   his  freedom   in  many

petere  potest,  qui  tam  ex  veteribus  other  ways,  introduced  by  the  consti-

quam    ex    nostris    constitutionibus  tutions  of  former  emperors,  and  by  our

introducti  sunt.  own.

Gai.  i.  17  ;  D.  xl.  ;  C.  i.  13  ;  vii.  6.  1.  1.

A  manumissio  was  said  to  be  legitima  when  made  in  one  of  the
three   ways  recognised   by  the  old  law.     These  three  modes  of
effecting  a  legitima  mamcmissio  were  census,  vindicta,  and  testa-
vientum.     A  legitima  manumissio  was  made:    1st,  censu,  i.e.  by
the  master  and  the  slave  appearing  before  the  censor  at  the  time
of  the  census  beins^  taken,  and  the  slave's  name  beinsf»  at  the
master's  desn^e,  enrolled  on  the  census  list.     This  mode  became
obsolete  in  the  time  of  the  empire  (Ulp.  Reg.  i.  8  ;   Gai.  i.  140),
the  census  having  been  rarely  taken  under  the  early  emperors,
and  not  at  all  after  Decius,  a.d.  249.    2nd,  vindicta,  i.e.  by  means
of  a  fictitious  suit  called  causa  liberalis  (D.  xL  12),  in  vv^hich  a
person,  termed  the  assertor  libertatis,  that  is,  a  friend  of  the  slave,
or  in  his  place  a  lictor,  asserted  before  the  prajtor  that  the  slave
v/as  free,  by  touching  him  on  the  head  with  a  wand  (which  repre-
sented the  hasta  or  symbol  of  proprietorship),  and  thus  claiming
him  as  against  the  master.     In  token  of  his  consent,  the  master
turned  him  round  and  then  let  him  go,  and  the  magistrate  pro-
nounced him  free.     3rd,  testamento  (D.  xl.  4),  i.e.  by  testament.
Freedom  might  be  given  by  testament,  either  as  a  legacy  to  the
slave  himself,  in  which  case  the  slave  was  called  orcinus,  because

C

18  LIB.  I.      TIT.  V.

his  patron,  i.e.  the  person  to  whom  he  owed  his  liberty,  was  dead
when  he  gained  it;  or  the  heir  might  be  charged  to  grant  or
procure  the  liberty  of  the  slave,  in  which  case  the  heir  would  be
the  patron.  If  a  slave  was  made  by  testament  conditionally  free,
he  was  said  to  be  statu  liber — statu  liber  est,  qui  statutam  et  desti-
natam  in  tempus  vel  conditionem  libertatem  liabet  (D.  xi.  7.  1).
The  solemnities  attached  to  manumission  by  the  vindicta  ceased
to  be  strictly  observed  long  before  the  time  of  Justinian.
Although  the  magistrate  was  at  his  country  seat  (D.  xl.  2.  8),
no  lictors  present,  or  the  master  silent,  the  manumission  was
still  held  good.

By  manumissio  legitima  the  slave  became  a  Roman  citizen,
and  the  state  therefore  was  represented  in  the  proceedings  by
the  censor  and  by  the  prgetor  in  the  two  first-mentioned  modes
of  emancipation,  and  in  the  third  case  by  the  Roman  testament
having  always,  theoretically,  a  public  character  attached  to  it ;
and  it  was  when  the  state  was  so  represented  that  the  manumis-
sion was  legitima.  But  manumission  was  not  always  legitima.
Usage  and  the  praetor's  authority  established  gradually  many
other  less  formal  methods  of  accomplishing  the  same  object,  and
the  imperial  constitutions  added  others.  Of  those  mentioned  in
the  text,  that  in  presence  of  the  Church  was  established  by  Con-t
stantine,  a.d.  316  (C.  i.  13).  The  ceremony  was  generally
performed  at  some  one  of  the  great  feasts,  and  it  was  necessary  it
should  take  place  before  the  bishops.  Freedom  could  also  be
given  by  a  master  writing  to  a  slave  {per  epistolam),  or  declaring
before  his  friends  (inter  amicos),  ih^t  he  gave  the  slave  liberty,  or
by  his  making  a  codicil  to  that  effect  {per  quamlibet  aliam  ultimam
voluntatem),  witnesses,  however,  being  necessary  in  each  of  these
cases  (C.  vii.  6.  1  ;  C.  vii.  6.  2  ;  C.  vi.  36.  8.  3).  Other  methods
are  noticed  in  the  Code  (vii.  6.  3-12),  all  based  upon  an  implied
wish  of  the  master  to  free  the  slave.  Until  the  time  of  Justinian,
however,  the  slave  emancipated  by  any  of  these  private  modes
was  only  thereby  placed  in  the  position  of  a  Latinus^  and  not  in
that  of  a  Roman  citizen.

2.  Servi  autem  a  dominis  semper  2.  Slaves  may  be  maniimitted  by
manumitti  solent,  adeo  ut  vel  in  their  masters  at  any  time  ;  even  when
transitu  manumittantnr,  veliiti  cum  the  magistrate  is  only  passing  along,
prsetor  aut  prseses  aut  proconsul  in  as  when  a  prsetor,  or  praeses,  or  pro-
balneum  vel  in  theatrum  eant.  consul  is  going  to  the  baths,  or  the

theatre.

3.  Libertinorum  autem  status  tri-  3 .  Freedmen  were  formerly  divided
pertitus  antea  f  uerat  :  nam  qui  ma-  into  three  classes.  For  those  who  were
numittebantur,  modo  majorem  et  manumitted  sometimes  obtained  a  com-
justam  libertatem  consequebantur,  plete  liberty,  and  became  Roman  citi-
et  fiebant  cives  Romani  ;  modo  mi-  zens  ;  sometimes  a  less  complete,  and
norem,  et  Latini  ex  lege  Junia  Nor-  became  Latins  under  the  lex  Junia
bana  fiebant ;  modo  inferiorem,  et  Norbana  ;  and  sometimes  a  liberty  stUl
fiebant  ex  lege  ^lia  Sentia  dediti-  inferior,  and  became  dedititii,  by  the
tiorum  numero.  Sed  dedititiorum  lex  ^lia  Sentia.  But  this  lowest
quidem  pessima  conditio  jam  ex  class,  that  of  the  dedititii,  has  long
midtis  temporibus  in  desuetudinem  disappeared,  and  the  title  of  Latins
abiit,  Latinorum  vero   nomen   non  become  rare  ;  and  so  in  our  benevo-

LIB.  I,      TIT.  V.

19

'requentatiir.    Ideoque  nostra  pietas
)mnia  augere  et  in  meliorem  statum
^educere  desiderans,  duabus  consti-
:utionibus  hoc  emendavit  et  in  pris-
:iniim  statum  perduxit  :  quia  et  a
primis  urbis  Romse   cunabulis   una
itque  simplex  libertas  competebat,
id  est,  ea  quam  habebat  manumis-
3or  ;  nisi  quod  scilicet  libertinus  sit
qui  manumittitur,  licet  manumissor
ingenuus  sit.     Et  dedititios  quidem
per  constitutionem  nostram  expuli-
mus,  quam  promulgavimus  inter  nos-
tras decisiones,  per  quas  saggerente
nobis  Triboniano,  viro  excelso,  quse-
store,  antiqui  juris  altercationes  pla-
cavimus.     Latinos  autem  Junianos,
et  omnem  quae  circa  eos  fuerat  ob-
servantiam,    alia   constitutione    per
ejusdem     quaestoris     suggestionem
correximus,    quae    inter    imperiales
radiat  sanctiones  ;  et  oranes  libertos,
nullo    nee    £etatis    manumissi,    nee
dominii  manumissoris,  nee  in  manu-
missionis   modo   discrimine   habito,
sicuti   antea   observabatur,    civitate
feomana   donavimus,    multis   modis
additis  per  quos  possit  libertas  servis
cum  civitate  Romana,  quse  sola  est
in  prsesenti,  prsestari.

lence,  which  leads  us  to  complete  and
improve   everjrthing,    we   have   intro-
duced a  great  reform  by  two  constitu-
tions, which  re-established  the  ancient
usage  ;  for  in  the  infancy  of  the  state
there  was  but  one  liberty,  the  same
for  the  enfranchised  slave  as  for  the
person  who  manumitted  him  ;  except-
ing, indeed,   that   the   person  manu-
mitted   was    a  freedman,    while    the
maniunittor  was  freeborn.     We  have
abolished   the  class  of   dedititii  by  a
constitution  published  among  our  de-
cisions, by  which,  at  the  suggestion  of
the  eminent  Tribonian,  qusestor,    we
have  put  an  end  to  difficulties  arising
from  the  ancient  law.     We  have  also,
at  his  suggestion,  done  away  with  the
Latini    Juniani,   and   everything   re-
lating to  them,   by  another  constitu-
tion,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of
our   imperial   ordinances.      We   have
made  all  freedmen  whatsoever  Roman
citizens,  without  any  distinction  as  to
the  age  of  the  slave,  or  the  interest  of
the  manumittor,  or  the  mode  of  manu-
mission.     We   have    also   introduced
many  new  methods,  by  which  slaves
may  become  Roman  citizens,  the  only
kind  of  liberty  that  now  exists.

Gal  i.  12-17;  C.  vii.  5,  6.

For  a  complete  emancipation  it  was  originally  necessary  that
the  owner  should  have  quiritary,  i.e.  complete,  ownership  (see
Introd,  sec.  62)  of  the  slave,  and  that  the  manumissio  should  be
legitima.  If  the  ownership  were  less  full,  or  the  ceremony  pri-
vate, the  slave  lived  in  a  state  of  freedom,  and  the  praetor  forbad
the  master  to  exert  his  strictly  legal  power  of  reasserting  his  right
to  the  services  of  the  slave ;  but  the  condition  of  the  slave  as
regarded  the  state  was  not  that  of  a  citizen,  and  at  his  death  his
master  took  all  his  property.

By  the  lex  jT^Ua  Sentia,  A.D.  4,  it  was  enacted  that,  to  make
the  emancipation  complete,  that  is,  to  make  the  slave  a  citizen,  a
third  requisite  should  be  added.  He  was  to  be  thirty  years  old ;
or  else,  if  he  were  under  that  age,  the  ceremony  was  to  be  per-
formed by  vindicta,  after  the  reason  for  the  emancipation  had  been
held  good  by  a  consilium,  consisting,  at  Rome,  of  five  senators
and  five  equites ;  in  the  provinces  of  twenty  recuperatores,  i.  e.
judges  specially  appointed,  and  who  were  necessarily  Roman
citizens.  This  council  sat  under  the  presidency  of  the  praetor  at
i  Rome,  and  of  the  proconsul  in  the  provinces.

The  lex  Jiinia  Norbana  was  made  A.D.  19;  and  the  eflfect  of

its  provisions,  coupled  with  that  of  the  lex  j^lia  Sentia,  was  to

1  place  those  whose  emancipation  was  defective  in  any  one  of  these

j  three  requisites  on  the  footing  of  the  Latini  (Gai.  i.  17),  that  is,

c   2

20  LIB.  I.      TIT.  V.

tliey  might  trade  with  Romans  on  the  footing  of  Roman  citizens
but  could  not  vote  at  elections  or  fill  public  offices,  and,  unless
by   special  grant,  had    not  the   comiubium^  and    therefore    theii
children  were  not  in  their  power.     Further,  they  could  not  be-
come  heirs,  legatees,  or  guardians   under  a  testament,  although
they  could  receive  the  benefit  of  Jidei  commissa  (Gai.  i.  24);
and  at  their  death  their  original  owner  took  their  property  ex-
actly as  if  they  had  never  ceased   to  be  slaves.     (See   Bk.  iii.
Tit.  7,  sec.  4,  in  ipso  ultimo  spiritu  simul  animam  et  lihertatem  am.it-
tebant.)     But  there  were  many  ways  in  which  a  libertus,  in  this
position,  could    attain  citizenship :    as   by   an  imperial   rescript ;
by  holding  a  magistracy  in  a  Latin  colony ;    by  proving  before
a  magistrate  his  marriage   with  a  Roman  or  -Latin  wife,  or   a
person  he  believed  to  be  a  Roman  or  Latin,  and  the  birth  of  a
son  who  was  a  year  old  ;  or  by  going  through  the  ceremony  of
emancipation  again  and  fulfilling  the  three  conditions  requisite
(this  was  called   iterutio) ;  or  by  the  modes  noticed  by  Ulpian
{Reg.  3.  1)  in  the  words  militia,  nave,  (Bdijicio,  pistrino,  that  is,
by  military  service,  building  a  ship  and  carrying  wheat  for  six
years,  making  a  building,  or  establishing  a  bakeshop.     (Gai.  i.
22,  23,  24-28.  31  ;  ii.  275  ;  iii.  ^Q,  et  seq,)      The  lex  ^lia  Sentia
further  provided  that  slaves  who  had  been  guilty  of  a  crime  for
which  they  had  been  put  in  chains,  branded,  or  put  to  the  tor-
ture, should,  by  emancipation,  be  only  raised  to  the  level  of  dedi-
titii,  that  is,  of  people  vanquished  in  war.    They  enjoyed  personal
liberty,  but  that  was  all.     They  could  not  trade  except  on  the
footing  of  strangers  ;  could  not  make  a  testament ;  were  forbid-
den to  live  within  a  hundred  miles  of  Rome,  on  pain  of  being
themselves    sold,  together  with   all   their   property;    they  could
never  become  citizens  ;  and  at  their  death  their  master  took  all
their   property  by  right  of  succession  if  the  emancipation  had
been  complete ;  and  if  not,  by  the  right  an  owner  always  had  to
the  slave's  peculium.     (Gai.  i.  12-15.  25-27;  iii.  74-76.)     The
children  of  the  Latini  Junvnd  were  Latini,  and  those  of  the  de-
dititii  were  perecjrini,  and  the   patron  had   no  rights  over  them.
(Demangeat,  i.  194.)

There  were  thus  three  classes  of  freedmen :  —  1.  Those  who
were  citizens;  2.  Those  who  were  in  the  position  of  Latini;  3.
Those  in  the  position  of  dedititii.  (Gai.  i.  112.)  But  these  dis-
tinctions were  abolished  by  Justinian,  nullo  nee  cetatis  manumissi,
nee  dominii  manumittejitis,  nee  in  modo  manumissionis  diserimine
hahlto  (C.  vii.  5  and  6);  and  under  his  legislation  a  slave  became
at  once  completely  free  by  any  act  of  the  owner  signifying
his  intention  to  bestow  liberty.  By  a  Novel  (78.  1)  Justinian
abolished  all  distinction  between  libertini  and  ingenui^  retaining,
however,  t\\QJus  patronatus.  The  libertus  owed  his  patronus  reve-
rence (Dig.  xxxvii.  15),  and  also  in  many  cases  had  to  discharge
certain  services  (Dig.  xxxvii.  14)  for  him:  but  the  chief  feature!
of  the  jus  patronatus  was  the  rigiit  of  the  patron  to  succeed  to]

LI±5.  I.      TIT.  VI.  21

the  inheritance  of  his  lihertus\  for  if  the  libertus  died  childless,
the  patron  succeeded  to  his  whole  inheritance,  supposing  he  left
no  testament ;  and  if  he  left  one,  still  the  patron  took  a  third
part  of  the  property.     (Bk.  iii.  Tit.  7.  3.)

Tit.  YI.     QUI,  QUIBUS  EX  CAUSIS,  MANUMIT-
TERE   NON   POSSUNT.

Non   tamen   cuicumque    volenti  It  is  not,  however,  every   master

manumittere    licet.       I^ain    is    qui  who  wishes  that  may  manumit,  for  a

in  fraudem  creditorum  manumittit,  manumission  in  fraud  of  creditors  is

nihil   agit ;    quia   lex    ^lia    8entia  void,  the  Ux  jElia  iSentia  restraining

impedit  libertatem.  '  the  power  of  enfranchisement.

Gai.  i.  37.

A  person,  as  the  third  section  informs  us,  manumitted  his
slaves  in  fraud  of  creditors,  who  knew  that  he  was  insolvent,  or
that  by  the  manumission  he  would  make  himself  unable  to  pay
his  debts  ;  and  in  such  a  case,  as  the  Boman  law  held  that  liberty
once  given  could  not  be  revoked,  the  lex  j^Ua  Sentia  provided
that  the  act  of  manumission  was  entirely  void  {nihil  agit)  :  the
freedom  was  considered  never  to  have  been  given.  The  slave
would  indeed  be  treated  as  free  until  the  creditors  attacked  the
manumission  as  fraudulent ;  but  directly  they  did  so  successfully,
he  was  exactly  in  the  position  in  which  he  would  have  been  if
never  enfranchised.  If,  however,  though  the  master  was  insol-
vent at  the  time  of  manumission,  his  debts  were  paid  before  the
manumission  was  attacked,  the  creditors  could  no  longer  impugn
the  manumission,  and  the  slave  was  considered  to  have  been  free
from  the  date  of  the  manumission.  Probably  there  was  a  time
limited,  beyond  which  creditors  were  not  allowed  to  attack  the
manumission.  We  learn  from  the  Digest  that  if  the  manumis-
sion were  made  in  fraud  of  ih.Q  Jiscus,  it  must  be  impugned  within
ten  years ;  and  it  is  not  probable  that  the  private  creditor  would
have  had  a  longer  time  allowed  him.     (Dig.  xl.  9.  11.)

1.  Licet  autem  domino  qui  sol-  1.  A  master,  who  is  insolvent,  may,

vendo  non  est,   in  testamento  ser-  however,  by  his  testament,  institute  a

vum   suum   cum   libertate  heredem  slave  to  be  his  heir,  at  the  same  time

instituere,  ut  liber  fiat  heresque  ei  giving  him  his   liberty,    so   that  the

solus    et    necessarius;   si    modo    ei  slave  becoming  free  may  be  his  only

nemo  alius  ex  eo  testamento  heres  and    necessary    heir,     provided    that

extiterit,  aut  quia  nemo  heres  sori-  there  is  no  other  heir  under  the  same

ptus  sit,  aut  quia  is  qui  scriptus  est,  testament,  which  may  happen,   either

qualibet  ex  causa  heres  non  extite-  because  no  other  person  was  instituted

rit,     Idque  eadem  lege  ^lia  Sentia  heir,  or  because  the  person  instituted,

provisum  est,  et  recte  ;  valde  enim  from  some  reason  or  other,  does  not

prospiciendum  erat,  ut  egentes  ho-  become   heir.     This  was  wisely  esta-

mines  quibus  alius  heres  extiturus  blished  by  the  lex  JElia  Sentia  :    for

non  esset,  vel  servum  suum  neces-  it  was  very  necessary  to  provide,  that

sarium  heredem  haberent,  qui  satis-  men  in  insolvent  circumstances,  who

facturus  esset  creditoribus;  aut  hoc  could  get  no  other  heir,  should  have

eo  non  faciente,  creditores  res  here-  a  slave   as    necessary   heir,   in   order

22

LIB.  I.      TIT.  VI.

ditarias   servi   nomine   vendant,  ne
injuria  defunctus  adficiatur.

Gai.

that  he  might  satisfy  their  creditors  ;
or  that  if  he  failed  to  do  so,  the
creditors  might  sell  the  goods  of  the
inheritance  in  the  name  of  the  slave,
so  as  to  prevent  the  deceased  suffering
disgrace.

ii.  154.

The  heirs  under  a  Roman  testament  accepted  all  the  liabilities
of  the  deceased.  When,  therefore,  the  debts  exceeded  the  value
of  the  inheritance,  the  heir  named  in  the  testament  would  pro-
bably refuse  the  inheritance ;  and  if  no  one  would  accept  the
heirship,  the  creditors  stepped  in  and  had  the  estate  sold  for  their
benefit.  As  this  was  thought  a  great  stigma  on  the  memory  of
the  deceased,  a  slave  was  frequently  enfranchised  by  the  testator
and  named  heir ;  and  as  the  slave  could  not  refuse  to  take  the
office  upon  him  (being  thence  called  heres  necessarius),  the  sale
of  the  effects,  if  necessary,  was  made  in  his  name,  and  not  in  that
of  his  master.  Of  course  this  could  only  take  place  when  the
slave  was  the  sole  heir.  If  there  were  any  other  heir,  the  slave
would  not  be  heir  by  necessity ;  and  hence,  in  the  text,  the  ex-
pression solus  et  necessarius  heres  is  used.  A  slave  so  emanci-
pated became  a  Koman  citizen.     (Gai.  i.  21.)

2.  Idemqne  juris  est,  etsi  sine
libertate  servus  heres  institutus  est.
Quod  nostra  constitutio  non  solum
in  domino  qui  solvendo  non  est,  sed
generaliter  constituit  nova  humani-
tatis  ratione,  ut  ex  ipsa  scriptura
institutionis  etiam  libertas  ei  com-
petere  videatur :  cum  non  est  veri-
simile,  eum  quem  heredem  sibi
elegit,  si  praetermiserit  libertatis
dationem,  servum  remanere  volu-
isse,  et  neminem  sibi  heredem  fore.

3.  In  fraudem  autem  creditorum
manumittere  videtur,  qui  vel  jam  eo
tempore  quo  manumittit,  solvendo
non  est,  vel  datis  libertatibus  desi-
turus  est  solvendo  esse,  Pmevalu-
isse  tamen  videtur,  nisi  animum
quoque  fraudandi  manumissor  ha-
buerit,  non  impediri  libertatem,
quamvis  bona  ejus  creditoribus  non
sufficiant.  Ssepe  enim  de  facultati-
bus  siiis  amplius  quam  in  his  est,
sperant  homines.  Itaque  tunc  in-
telligimus  impediri  libertatem,  cum
utroque  modo  fraudantur  creditores,
id' est,  et  consilio  manumittentis  et
ipsa  re,  eo  quod  ejus  bona  non  sunt
suffectura  creditoribus.

2.  The  law  is  the  same  also  when
a  slave  is  instituted  heir,  although
his  freedom  be  not  expressly  given
him ;  for  our  constitution,  in  a  new
spirit  of  humanity,  decides  not  only
with  regard  to  an  insolvent  master,
but  generally,  that  the  mere  insti-
tution of  a  slave  implies  the  grant  of
liberty.  For  it  is  highly  improbable,
that  a  testator,  although  he  has  omit-
ted an  express  gift  of  -freedom,  should
have  wished  that  the  person  he  has
selected  as  heir  should  remain  a  slave,
and  that  he  himself  should  have  no
heir.

3.  A  person  manumits  in  fraud  of
creditors,  who  is  insolvent  at  the
time  that  he  manumits,  or  becomes
so  by  the  manumission  itself.  It  has,
how^ever,  been  settled  that  unless  the
manumittor  intended  to  commit  a
fraud,  the  gift  of  liberty  is  not  in-
validated, although  his  goods  are
insufficient  for  the  payment  of  his
creditors ;  for  men  often  hope  their
circumstances  are  better  than  they
really  are.  The  gift  of  liberty  is  then
invalidated  only  when  creditors  are
defrauded,  both  by  the  intention  of
the  manumittor,  and  in  reality ;  that
is  to  say,  by  the  insufficiency  of  the
effects  to  meet  their  claims.

D.  xl.  9,  10;  xlii.  8.  15.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  VI.  23

Fraudis  interpretatio  semper  in  jure  civili  non  ex  eventu  dun-
taxat,  sed  ex  consilio  quoque  desideratur.  (D.  1.  17.  79.)  Gaius
informs  us  (i.  47)  that  peregrini  were  prevented  from  enfran-
chising slaves  in  fraud  of  creditors,  though  the  other  provisions  of
the  lex  j^lia  Sentia  did  not  affect  them.

4.   Eadem  lege  -^lia  Sentia  do-  4.  By  the  lex  ^lia  Sentia,  again,  a

mino  minori  viginti  annis  non  aliter  master,  under  the  age  of  twenty  years,

manumittere   permittitur,    quani   si  cannot   manumit,  except  by  the  vin-

vindicta,  apud  consilium  justa  causa  dicta,  and  upon  some  legitimate  ground

manumissionis  probata,  fuerint  ma-  approved  of  by  the  council,
numissi.

Gai.  i.  38.

Tliis  consilium  was  held  on  certain  days  at  Rome,  and  in  the
provinces  sat  during  a  session,  on  the  last  day  of  which  cases  such
as  those  referred  to  in  the  text  were  determined.     (Gai.  i.  20.)

5.  Justae  autem  manumissionis  5.  Legitimate  grounds  for  manu-
causse  hte  sunt :  veluti  si  quis  pa-  mission  are  such  as  these :  that  the
trem  aut  matrem,  filium  filiamve,  person  to  be  manumitted  is  father  or
aut  fratrem  sororemve  naturales,  mother  to  the  manumittor,  his  son  or
aut  p?edagogum,  nutricem,  educa-  daughter,  his  brother  or  sister,  his
torem,  aut  alumnum  alumnamve  preceptor,  his  nurse,  his  foster-father,
aut  coUactaneum  manumittat,  aut  his  foster-child,  or  his  foster-brother ;
servum  procuratoris  habendi  gratia,  that  the  person  is  a  slave  whom  he
aut  ancillam  matrimonii  causa :  wishes  to  make  his  procurator,  or
dum  tamen  intra  sex  menses  uxor  female  slave  whom  he  intends  to
ducatur,  nisi  justa  causa  impediat ;  marry,  provided  the  marriage  be  per-
et  qui  manumittitur  procuratoris  formed  mthin  six  months,  miless  pre-
habendi  gratia,  non  minor  decem  vented  by  some  good  reason ;  and
et  septem  annis  manumittatur.  provided  that  the  slave  who  is  to  be

made  a  procurator,  be  not  manumitted
under  the  age  of  seventeen  years.

Gai.  i.  19.  39 ;  D.  xl.  2.  11-13.

The  most  common  case  of  a  person  emancipating  his  father
and  mother,  and  other  near  relations,  would  be  when  a  slave  was
made  heir.  Theophilus  (paraphr.  on  this  paragraph)  gives  as  an
instance  of  a  person  enfranchising  his  brother,  the  case  of  a  man
having  a  child  by  a  slave  and  then  a  son  by  a  legal  marriage.
The  former  would  be  the  slave  of  the  latter.

If  the  marriage  was  in  any  way  impossible,  the  minor  would
not  be  allowed  to  enfranchise  his  female  slave  ;  and  it  was  re-
quisite that  it  should  be  he  himself  who  intended  to  marry  her.

A  procurator  below  the  age  of  seventeen  could  not  represent
his  principal  in  any  action  (D.  iii.  1.  1.  3),  and  it  is  this  probably
that  makes  Justinian  here  require  that  the  slave  should  be  seven-
teen years  of  age  in  order  to  be  emancipated  by  a  minor.

6.  Semel  autem  causa  probata,  6.  The  approval  of  a  ground  of
sive  vera  sit  sive  falsa,  non  retrac-  manumission  once  given,  whether  the
tatur.                                                            reasons  on  which  it  is  based  be  true  or

false,  cannot  be  retracted.

7.  Cum  ergo  certus  modus  ma-  7.  Certain  limits  being  thus  as-
numittendi  minoribus  viginti  annis     signed  by  the  lex  JEUa  Sentia  to  the

24  LIB.  I.      TIT.  VII.

dominis  per  legem  ^Eliam  Sentiam  power   of  persons  under   the   age   of

constitutus   erat,  eveniebat   ut   qui  twenty  to  manumit  slaves,  the  result

quatuordecim    annos    a^tatis    exple-  was  that  any  one,  who  had  completed

verat,  licet  testamentum  facere  et  in  his   fourteenth   year,    might   make    a

eo  sibi  heredem  instituere,  legata-  testament,    institute     an     heir,     and

que  relinquere  posset,  tamen  si  ad-  give  legacies,  and  yet  that  no  person,

hue  minor  esset  viginti  annis,  liber-  under   twenty,    could  give  liberty  to

tatem  servo  dare  non  posset.     Quod  a    slave.      This    seemed    intolerable  :

non  erat  ferendum,  si  is  cui  totorum  that  a  man,  permitted  to  dispose  of

bonorum    in   testamento    dispositio  all    his    effects    by    testament,    could

data  erat,  uni  servo  dare  libertatem  not    enfranchise     one     single     slave.

non  permittebatur.     Quare  non  si-  AVhy  should  we  not,  then,  give  him

militer  ei,  quemadmodum  alias  res,  the  power  of  disposing,  by  testament,

ita    et    servos   suos   in   ultima   va-  of  his  slaves,  as  of  all  his  other  pro-

luntate     disponere     quemadmodum  perty,  exactly  as   he  pleases,   and  of

voluerit,  permittimus,  ut  et  liberta-  giving   them   their   liberty  ?     But    as

tern  eis  possit  prsestare  1     Sed  cum  liberty   is    of   inestimable   value,  and

libertas   ingestimabilis    est,    et   pro-  our  ancient  laws,  therefore,  prohibited

pter   hoc   ante    XX   setatis    annum  any   person,    under  twenty   years    of

antiquitas    libertatem     servo    dare  age,  to  give  it  to  a  slave,  we  adopt  a

prohibebat,  ideo  nos  mediam  quo-  middle  course,  and  only  permit  a  per-

danunodo  viam  eligentes,  non  aliter  son,   under   twenty  years   of   age,   to

minori  viginti    annis  libertatem   in  confer  freedom  on  his  slaves  by  testa-

testamento  dare  servo  suo  concedi-  ment,  if  he  has  completed  his  seven-

mus  nisi  septimum  et  decimum  an-  teenth  and  entered  on  his  eighteenth

num   impleverit,   et   octavum.  deci-  year.     For  since  ancient  custom  per-

mum  annum  tetigerit.     Cum  enim  niitted   persons   at   eighteen  years  of

antiquitas   hujusmodi   setati  et  pro  age  to  plead  for  others,  why  should

aliis   postulare    concessit,    cur    non  not    their    judgment     be     considered

etiam    sui   judicii  stabilitas  ita   eos  sound  enough  to  enable  them  to  give

adjuvare  credatur,  ut  ad  libertates  liberty  to  their  own  slaves  ?
dandas    servis    suis   possint   perve-
nire  ?

Gai.  40.

The  lex  u^lia  Sentia  required  the  manumission  to  be  given  by
the  form  of  vindicta.  This  was  held  to  exclude  the  minor  from
giving  it  by  testament.  Manumission  was  something  more  than
the  disposal  of  a  piece  of  property ;  it  was  the  creation  of  a
citizen,  and  thus  might  consistently  be  denied  to  minors  Avhose
power  of  disposing  of  property  was  unfettered.  Justinian,  nine
years  after  the  Institutes  were  published,  abolished  the  distinc-
tion he  establishes  in  the  text  by  a  Novel  (119,  2),  containing  the
words  sancimus  ut  licentia  pateat  minoribus  in  ipso  tempore,  in
quo  eis  de  reliqua  eorum  substantia  disponere  permittitur,  etiam
servos  suos  in  ultimis  voluntatihus  manumittere.

Tit.  VII.    DE  LEGE  FUSIA  CANINIA  SUBLATA.

Lege  Fusia  Caninia  certus  modus  The  lex  Fusia  Caninia  imposed  a

constitutus  erat  in  servis  testamento  limit  on  manumission   by  testament ;

manumittendis.     Quam,  quasi  liber-  but  we  have  thought  right  to  abolish

tates  impedientem  et  quodammodo  this  law  as  invidiously  placing  obsta-

invidam,    tollendam     esse     censui-  cles  in  the  way  of  liberty.     It  seemed

mus ;  cum  satis  fuerat  inhumanum,  very  unreasonable,  to    allow  persons,

vivos     quidem     licentiam     habere  in  their  lifetime,  to  manumit  all  their

totam     suam     familiam     libertate  slaves,  if   there   is   no  special   reason

LIB.  I.       TIT.  VIII.  25

donare,  nisi  alia  causa  impediat  to  prevent  them,  and  to  deprive  the
libertatem,  morientibus  autem  hu-  dying  of  the  power  of  doing  the  same,
jusmodi  Ucentiam  adimere.

Gai.  i.  42-46;  C.  vii.  3.

The  lex  Fusia  Caninia  was  made  in  the  j^ear  A.D.  8.  four
years  after  the  lex  ^lia  Sentia,  (SuET.  Au(/.  40.)  Its  object
was  to  prevent  the  manumission  of  crowds  of  slaves  enfranchised
in  order  to  gratify  the  vanity  of  testators,  who  wished  their  funeral
train  to  be  swollen  with  these  witnesses  to  their  liberality.  It
provided  that  the  owner  of  two  slaves  might  enfranchise  both ;
of  from  two  to  ten,  half;  of  from  ten  to  thirty,  one-third;  of  from
thirty  to  one  hundred,  one-fourth;  and  of  a  larger  number,  one-
fifth  ;  but  in  no  case  was  the  number  enfranchised  to  exceed  one
hundred.  The  slaves  to  be  manumitted  were  required  to  be  de-
signated by  name.  The  citizenship  was  so  worthless  in  the  days
of  Justinian,  that  it  mattered  little  how  many  slaves  were  made
free  ;  but  in  the  days  of  Augustus,  the  distinction  made  between
the  living  and  the  djdng  master,  which  Justinian  calls  satis  in-
humanum\  was  far  from  unreasonable.  A  master  might  well  be
trusted  not  to  impoverish  himself  by  reckless  manumission  during
his  life,  and  yet  be  denied  the  power  of  gratifying  his  vanity  at
the  expense  of  his  heir.

Tit.  YIIL     DE   IIS   QUI    SUI    VEL   ALIENI
JURIS   SUNT.

Sequitur  de  jure  personarum  alia  We  now  come  to  another  division

divisio  ;   nam  qufedam  persons;  sui  relative  to  the  rights  of  persons ;  for

juris  sunt,  qusedam  alieno  juri  sub-  some  persons   are   independent,  some

jectae.     Rursus    earum   qute    alieno  are   subject   to   the   power  of   others,

juri  subjectie  sunt,  alife  in  potestate  Of   those,    again,   who  are  subject  to

parentum,  alise  in  potestate  domino-  others,    some    are    in    the    power   of

rum  sunt.     Videamus  itaque  de  iis  parents,    others   in   that    of    masters,

quce  alieno  juri  subjecta3  sunt :  nam  Let  us   first   treat    of   those  who  are

si   cognoverimus  quae  istse  personpe  subject  to  others  ;  for,  when  we  have

sunt,    simul    inteliigemus   qua3   sui  ascertained  who  these  are,  we  shall  at

juris   sunt.     Ac    prius   dispiciamus  the   same   time  discover  who  are  in-

de  iis  quse  in  potestate  dominorum  dependent.     And  first  let  us  consider

sunt.  those     who     are     in     the     power    of

masters.

Gai.  i.  48.  51.

Justinian  now  passes  to  the  division  of  persons  as  members  of
a  family.  The  head  of  a  Roman  family  exercised  supreme  autho-
rity over  his  wife,  his  children,  his  children's  children,  and  his
slaves.  (See  Introd.  sec.  40.)  He  was  their  owner  as  well  as
their  master.  He  alone  was  sui  juris,  and  all  the  other  members
of  the  family  were  alieni  juris,  for  they  belonged  to  him.  The
whole  group,  that  is,  the  head  and  those  in  his  power,  were  the
familia.  The  head  was  the  paterfaniilias,  a  term  not  expressive
of  paternity  (D.  1.  16.  195.  2),  but  merely  signifying  a  person

26  LIB.  I.      TIT.  VIII.

who  was  not  under  the  power  of  another,  and  who^  consequently,
might  have  others  under  his  power.  An  unmarried  woman  whose
father  was  dead,  was  said  to  be  a  mater familias,  a  term  which,  in
this  sense,  is  only  the  feminine  form  of  paterfamilias.  She  was
sui  juris,  and  might  have  slaves,  though  of  course  she  could  have
no  poAver  over  persons  free-born.  For  if  she  married,  her  children
were  in  her  husband's  power,  not  in  hers.      (See  Introd.  sec.  40.)

The  word  familia  was  used  in  so  many  different  senses,  that
it  ma,y  be  as  well  to  collect  them  here,  before  entering  on  the
subject  of  family  relations.  Familia  is  used  to  mean, — 1.  All
persons  of  the  blood  of  the  same  ancestor;  2.  The  head  of  the
family  and  all  those  in  his  power  whether  slaves  or  free ;  3.  All
connected  by  agnation  (see  Introd.  sec.  45);  4.  The  slaves  of
one  man;  5.  The  property  of  a  paterfamilias,  of  whatever
sort.  The  word  is  fully  explained  in  a  fragment  of  Ulpian.  (D.
1.  16.  195.)

Gains,  from  whom  much  of  this  section  is  borrowed,  saj^s, —
Rursus  earum  personarum  qucB  alieno  juri  suhjectce  sunt,  alicE  in
potestate,  alice  in  manu,  alics  in  mancipio  stmt  (i.  49).  The  persons
in  manu  were  those  wives  who  passed  through  the  particular  forms
of  marriage  which  placed  a  wife  in  the  position  of  a  daughter  to
her  own  husband  ;  that  is,  the  religious  ceremony  of  crmfarreatio,
the  fictitious  sale  coemptio,  and  usus,  or  cohabitation  unbroken  by
an  absence  of  three  nights  in  the  year.  (See  Introd.  sec.  46.)
Persons  in  mancipio  were  those  sold  by  the  head  of  their  family,
or  by  themselves  with  the  form  of  mancipatio.  (See  Introd.  sec.
42.)  They  were  said  to  be  servorum  loco  (not  servi)  with  reference
to  the  purchaser,  but  as  to  other  persons  they  were  free.  Such
sales  were  merely  fictitious,  except  in  the  early  days  of  Rome.
The  subjection  i?i  rnanu  had  ceased  before 'the  time  of  Justinian,
and  he  did  away  with  the  last  traces  of  that  in  mancipio.  (See
Tit.  12.)

1.  In  potestate  itaqiiedommorum  1.  Slaves  are  in  the  power  of  mas-
sunt  servi.  Qute  quidem  potestas  ters,  a  power  derived  from  the  law  of
juris  gentium  est :  nam  apud  omnes  nations  :  for  among  all  nations  it  may
perseque  gentes  animadvertere  pos-  be  remarked  that  masters  have  the
sumus,  dominis  in  servos  vitse  necis-  power  of  life  and  death  over  their
que  potestatem  fuisse  ;  et  quodcum-  slaves,  and  that  everything  acquired
que  per  servum  adquiritur,  id  domino  by  the  slave  is  acquired  for  the  mas-
adquiritur.  ter.

Gal  i.  52.

The  power  of  the  master  over  his  slaves  was  spoken  of  as  the
dominica  potestas.  The  origin  of  this  power  has  been  already
ascribed  to  Xh^jus  gentium.     (Tit.  3.  2.)

2.  Sed  hoc  tempore  nullis  ho-  2.  But  at  the  present  day  none  of
minibus  qui  sub  imperio  nostro  sunt,  our  subjects  may  use  unrestrained
licet  sine  causa  legibus  cognita  in  violence  towards  their  slaves,  except
servos  suos  supra  modum  ssevire ;  for  a  reason  recognised  by  law.  For,
nam  ex  constitutione  divi  Pii  An-  by  a  constitution  of  the  Emperor
tonini,  qui  sine  causa  servum  suum  Antoninus  Pius,  he  who  without  any

LIB.  I.      TIT.  VIII.

27

Occident,  non  minus  puniri  jubetur,
quani  qui  alienum  servum  occi-
derit.  !Sed  et  major  asperitas  do-
minorum  ejusdem  principis  consti-
tutione  coercetur;  nam  consultus
a  quibusdam  prsesidibus  provin-
ciarum  de  iis  servis  qui  ad  fedem
sacram  vel  ad  statuas  principum
confugiunt,  pra;cepit,  ut  si  intole-
rabilis  videatur  ssevitia  dominorum,
cogantur  servos  suos  bonis  conditio-
nibus  vendere,  ut  pretium  dominis
daretur ;  et  recte.  Expedit  enim
reipublicae,  ne  sua  re  quis  male
utatur.  Cujus  rescripti  ad  ^lium
Marcianum  emissi  verba  sunt  hsec :
'  Dominorum  quidem  potestatem
in  servos  suos  illibatam  esse  opor-
tet,  nee  cuiquam  hominum  jus
suum  detrahi ;  sed  dominorum
interest,  ne  auxilium  contra  ssevi-
tiam  vel  famem  vel  intolerabilem
injuriam  denegetur  iis  qui  juste
deprecantur.  Ideoque  cognosce  de
querelis  eorum  qui  ex  familia  Julii
Sabini  ad  statuam  confugerunt ;  et
si  vel  durius  habitos  quam  sequum
est,  vel  infami  injuria  aflectos  cog-
noveris,  venire  jube,  ita  ut  in  potes-
tatem domini  non  revertantur.
Qui  si  mese  constitutioni  fraudem
fecerit,  sciet  me  admissum  severius
executurum.'

reason  kills  liis  own  slave,  is  to  be
punished  equally  with  one  who  has
killed  the  slave  of  another.  The  ex-
cessive severity  of  masters  is  also  re-
strained by  another  constitution  of  the
same  emperor.  For,  when  consulted
by  certain  governors  of  provinces
on  the  subject  of  slaves,  who  fly  for
refuge  either  to  temples,  or  the  statues
of  the  emperors,  he  decided  that  if  the
severity  of  masters  should  appear
excessive,  they  might  be  compelled
to  make  sale  of  their  slaves  upon
equitable  terms,  so  that  the  masters
might  receive  the  value  ;  and  this  was
a  very  wise  decision,  as  it  concerns  the
public  good,  that  no  one  should  mis-
use his  own  property.  The  following
are  the  terms  of  this  rescript  of  Anto-
ninus, which  was  sent  to  ^lius  Mar-
cianus.  '  The  power  of  masters  over
their  slaves  ought  to  be  preserved  un-
impaired, nor  ought  any  man  to  be  de-
prived of  his  just  right.  But  it  is  for
the  interest  of  all  masters  themselves,
that  relief  prayed  on  good  grounds
against  cruelty,  the  denial  of  suste-
nance, or  any  other  intolerable  injury,
should  not  be  refused. ' '  Examine,
therefore,  into  the  complaints  of  the
slaves  who  have  fled  from  the  house
of  Julius  Sabinus,  and  taken  refuge
at  the  statue  of  the  emperor ;  and,  if
you  find  that  they  have  been  too
harshly  treated,  or  wantonly  dis-
graced, order  them  to  be  sold,  so  that
they  may  not  fall  again  under  the
power  of  their  master;  and,  if  Sabi-
nus attempt  to  evade  my  constitution,
I  would  have  him  know,  that  I  shall
severely  punish  his  disobedience.'

Gal  i.  53;  D.  i.  6.  2.

The  lex  Cornelia  de  Sicariis,  passed  by  Sylla,  B.C.  82,  made
killing  the  slave  of  another  person  punishable  as  homicide,  with
death  or  exile  (D.  ix.  2.  23.  9);  and  the  text  tells  us  that  the
provisions  of  this  law  were  extended  by  the  Emperor  Antoninus
Pius  to  the  case  of  a  master  killing  his  own  slave.  The  lex  Pe-
tronia  (D.  xlviii.  8.  11.  2),  passed  in  the  time  of  one  of  the  early
emperors,  forbade  masters  to  expose  their  slaves  to  contests  with
wild  beasts.  Hadrian  required  the  sanction  of  a  magistrate
in  all  cases  before  death  was  inflicted.  (Spart.  in  Hadr.  cap.
18  ;  D.  i.  6.  2.)  Constantine  only  permitted  moderate  corporal
chastisement  to  be  inflicted,  and  Justinian  in  the  Code  retains  his
enactment.     (C.  ix.  14.)

Justinian  does  not  notice  the  corresponding  changes  which  the
clemency  of  later  times  worked  in  the  control  of  the  master  over

28  LIB.  I.      TIT.  IX.

the  slave's  property ;  according  to  the  usage  of  these  times  this
property,  called  jjeculium,  belonged,  in  fact,  though  not  in  law,  to
the  slave,  and  he  often  purchased  his  liberty  with  it.  (Tacit.
Ajiu,  xiv.  42  ;  D.  xv.  1.  53.)

Tit.  IX.     DE   PATRIA   POTESTATE.

Ill   potestate   nostra   sunt  liberi  Our   children,   begotten   in   lawful

nostri,  quos  ex  justis  nuptiis   pro-     marriage,  are  in  our  power,
creaverimus.

Gai.  i.  55.

The  patria  potestas  differed  originally  little,  if  at  all,  from  the
dominica  potestas.  If  the  sense  of  ownership  v>^as  not  so  complete
in  the  former,  it  was  probably  limited  more  by  natural  feeling
than  by  law.  The  father  could,  sell,  expose,  or  put  to  death  his
children.  Time,  however,  ameliorated,  the  position  of  the  child,
and  all  that  was  left  was  a  power  to  inflict  moderate  chastisement
(C.  viii.  47.  31),  and  to  sell  at  the  time  of  birth  in  cases  of
extreme  necessity.  (C.  iv.  43.  I.)  Constantine  condemned  the
father  who  killed  his  child  to  the  punishment  of  a  parricide.  (C.
ix.  17.  1.)  The  sale  of  a  child  was  in  general  fictitious,  and  only
formed  the  mode  by  Avhich  the  child  was  released  from  the  father's
power.

Like  that  of  the  slave,  the  child's  property  was  only  a  pecu-
litim,  belonging  strictly  to  the  father ;    and  whatever  the  son  in
j)otestate  acquired  was  acquired  for  the  father,  although  the  son
could  not  make  his  father's  position  worse,  and  the  father  was  not
liable  for  the  debts  and  engagements  of  the  son.     But  under  the
early  emperors  a  change  was  made,  and  the  son  had  complete
ownership  in  property  acquired  in  war  {castre?ise  peciilium);  Con-
stantine made  a  further  exception  of  property  acquired  in  employ-
ments   about   the  court  (^quasl-castrense  peculium)  (^see  Bk.   ii.
9,  and  Introd.  sec.  41);    and  Justinian  only  permitted  the  father
to  have  the  usufruct  during  his  Hfe  of  everything  coming  to  the
son  in  any  way  except  from  the  father  himself.     (^Bk.  ii.  9.)
The  meaning  ofjustce  nuptice  will  appear  in  the  next  Title.
Neither  age  nor  marriage,  nor  anything  except  emancipation,
terminated  the  power  of  a  father  over  his  son.    As  we  learn  from
Tit.  12.  4,  the  Jiliusfamilias  might  rise    to   the    highest    public
dignities,  even  that  of  consul,  and  yet  he  would  remain  in  the
power  of  his  father.     If  a  daughter  married  in  manu,  she  passed
from  her  father's  power  into  that  of  her  husband.

1,  Nuptios  autem  sive  matrimo-  1.    Marriage,    or  matrimony,   is   a

nium  est  viri  et  mulieris  conjunctio,     binding  together  of  a  man  and  woman
individuam  vitse  consuetudinem  con-     to  live  in  an  indivisible  union,
tinens.

D.  xxiii.  2.  1.

Nupii(B  is  properly  the  ceremonies  attending  the  formation  of
the  legal  tie,  and  matrimonium  is  the  tie  itself;  but  the  jurists  use

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.

29

the   two  terms  quite  indifferently,  as,  for  instance,  Moclestinus
says,  '  nupticB  sunt  conjunctio  maris  et  femincB.^     (D.  xxiii.  2.  1.)

The  individua  vitce  consuetudo  implied  a  community  of  rank
and  position,  and  of  sacred  and  human  law,  divini  et  humam
juris  communicatio  (D.  xxiii.  2.  1),  but  not  necessarily  of  property.
Marriage  gave  neither  party  any  right  oyer  the  property  of  the
other,  except  w^hen  the  wife  passed  in  manum,  and  then  all  that

she  had  belonged  to  the  husband.

2.  The  power  which  we  have  over
our  children  is  peculiar  to  the  citizens
of  Rome  ;  for  no  other  people  have  a
power  over  their  children,  such  as  we
have  over  ours.

2.  Jus  autem  potestatis  quod  in
liberos  habemus,  proprium  est  ci-
vium  Romanorum  ;  nulli  enim  alii
sunt  homines,  qui  talem  in  liberos
habeant  potestatem,  qualem  nos
habemus.

Gai.  i.  55.

Gains  mentions  the  Galatae  as  being  reported  to  have  had  a
similar  institution.

3.  Qui  igitur  ex  te  et  uxore  tua
nascitur,  in  tua  potestate  est.  Item
qui  ex  filio  tuo  et  uxore  ejus  nas-
citur, id  est,  nepos  tuus  et  neptis,
peque  in  tua  sunt  potestate,  et  pro-
nepos  et  proneptis,  et  deinceps  ce-
teri.  Qui  tamen  ex  filia  tua  nascitur,
in  tua  potestate  non  est,  sed  in
patris  ejus.

3.  The  child  born  to  you  and  your
wife  is  in  your  power.  And  so  is  the
child  born  to  your  son  of  his  wife,
that  is,  your  grandson  or  granddaugh-
ter ;  so  are  your  great  grandchildren,
and  all  your  other  descendants.  But
a  child  born  of  your  daughter  is  not
in  your  power,  but  in  the  power  of  its
own  father.

If  a  woman,  although  she  was  not  in  the  power  of  her  hus-
band, had  children,  they  were  not  in  her  power;  and  hence,  as
she  could  have  no  descendants  in  her  power,  it  was  said,  mulier
familicE  suce  et  caput  et  finis  est,  i.e.  her  family  ended  with  her-
'self     (D.  1.  16.  195.  5.)

Tit.  X.     DE    NUPTIIS.

Justas  autem  nuptias  inter  se  ci-
ves  Romani  contrahunt,  qui  secun-
dum praecepta  legum  coeunt,  mas-
culi  quidem  puberes,  femina3  autem
viripotentes,  sive  patresfamilias  sint
sive  filiifamilias  :  dum  tamen,  si
filiifamilias  sint,  consensum  ha-
beant parentum  quorum  in  potes-
tate sunt.  Nam  hoc  iieri  debere  et
civilis  et  naturalis  ratio  suadet,  in
tantum  ut  jussum  parentis  pr?ece-
dere  debeat.  Unde  qusesitum  est  an
furiosi  filia  nubere  aut  furiosi  filius
uxorem  ducere  possit  ?  Cumque
super  filio  variabatur,  nostra  pro-
cessit  decisio,  qua  permissum  est,
ad  exemplum  filise  furiosi,  filium
quoque  posse  et  sine  patris  inter-
ventu   matrimonium   sibi   copulare,

Roman  citizens  are  bound  together
in  lawful  matrimony,  when  they  are
united  according  to  law,  the  males
having  attained  the  age  of  puberty,
and  the  females  a  marriageable  age,
whether  they  are  fathers  or  sons  of  a
family  ;  but,  if  the  latter,  they  must
first  obtain  the  consent  of  their  parents,
in  whose  power  they  are.  For  both
natural  reason  and  the  law  require  this
consent ;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  it
ought  to  precede  the  marriage.  Hence
the  question  has  arisen,  whether  the
daughter  of  a  madman  could  be  mar-
ried, or  his  son  marry  ?  And  as  opinions
were  divided  as  to  the  son,  we  decided
that  as  the  daughter  of  a  madman
might,  so  may  the  son  of  a  madman
marry  without  the  intervention  of  the

30  LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.

secundum  datum  ex   nostra  consti-     father,  according   to   the   mode   esta-
tutione  modum.  blished  by  our  constitution.

C.  V.  4.  25.

In  the  earliest  times  of  Roman  law  there  were  three  modes  of
forming  the  tie  of  marriage ;  first,  confarreatio,  a  religious  cere-
mony, in  which  none  but  those  to  whom  the  jus  sacrum  was  open
could  take  part ;  secondly,  coemptio,  a  fictitious  sale,  in  which
the  wife  was  sold  to  the  husband;  and  lastly,  usus,  i.e.  cohabita-
tion with  the  intention  of  forming  a  marriage.  All  three  modes
had  the  same  effect  on  the  position  of  the  wife.  She  always
passed  in  manum  viri.  (See  Introd.  sec.  46.)  This  incident  of
marriage  was  attached  to  the  marriage  by  mere  cohabitation  and
lapse  of  time,  on  the  analogy  of  the  ownership  which  was  acquired
in  a  thing  by  uninterrupted  possession.  It  was,  however,  open
to  the  wife  to  *  break  the  use ; '  to  prevent,  that  is,  her  husband
gaining  complete  power  over  her  by  lapse  of  time  :  the  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables  declared  that,  if  the  wife  absented  herself
from  her  husband  for  three  nights  in  the  year,  the  usus  should
be  interrupted,  and  she  should  remain  in  her  own  familia,  and
not  pass  into  that  of  her  husband.  This  was  considered  so  much
more  advantageous  to  the  wife  that,  even  in  the  latter  days  of
the  republic,  almost  all  marriages  were  formed  without  the  wife
passing  into  the  manus  of  her  husband.  In  the  time  of  Justinian
she  never  did  so,  and  the  whole  distinction  of  the  effect  of  different
modes  of  marriage  had  been  long  obsolete.  The  nuptim  were
equally  Jz^.s^^  whether  the  wife  passed  in  manum  or  not.

At  no  time  did  these  different  modes  of  beings  married  form
part  of  the  real  tie  of  marriage ;  they  only  decided,  when  the  tie
of  marriage  was  formed,  what  should  be  the  position  of  the  wife.
Neither  were  the  religious  ceremonies  nor  the  nuptial  rites  any-
thing more  than  accessories  of  that  which  created  the  binding  rela-
tion between  the  parties.  The  tie  itself  was  constituted  by  the
consent  of  the  parties — by  their  intention  to  become  man  and
wife — being  expressed  and  manifested  ;  and  the  mode  in  which
it  was  necessary  the  manifestation  should  take  place  was  that  the
woman  should  pass  into  her  husband's  possession.  A  man  and
woman  were  not  married  because  they  lived  together,  unless  they
had  the  intention  to  be  married.  Nuptias  non  concubitus  sed  con-
sensus facit.  (D.  XXXV.  1.  15.)  Neither  was  the  mere  expression
of  a  consent  sufficient  to  constitute  a  marriage.  There  must  be
an  actual  or  constructive  passing  of  the  woman  into  the  posses-
sion of  the  man.  The  ordinary  sign  of  this  was  that  she  was  re-
ceived into  the  husband's  house,  in  domum  deduci\  but  this  was
only  the  usual  and  most  patent  sign,  and  any  other  clear  indica-
tion was  accepted.  If,  for  example,  the  parties  were  both  per-
sonally present  and  formally  consented,  the  woman  was  taken  to
have  placed  herself,  or  been  ])laced  if  she  were  in  manu,  in  the
possession  of  the  man  (C.  v.  17.  11),  and  the  marriage  tie  was
formed  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  a  marriage  could  not  be  effected

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.  31

by  a  mere  written  consent  between  persons  not  present  together,
as  by  letter  (D.  xxiii.  2.  5),  without  the  woman  passing  into  the
man's  possession  by  some  separate  distinct  act,  such  as  being
received  into  his  house.

In  order  that  the  marriao^e  mio^ht  have  the   effect  of  just(E
nuptice,  it  was  necessary  that  three  conditions  should  be  fulfilled.

1.  There  must  be  the  consent  of  the  parties  duly  manifested ;

2.  The  parties  must  be  piiberes,  i.e.  the  man  must  be  fourteen
and  the  woman  twelve  years  of  age  ;  and  3.  They  must  have  the
connubium,  or  legal  power  of  contracting  marriage,  which  may  be
regarded  under  three  heads: — 1.  Under  the  old  law  both  parties
were  required  to  be  citizens,  or  to  have  had  so  much  of  citizenship
given  them  as  w^ould  enable  them  to  iorm.  justcB  nupticB.  Various
changes  were  made  on  this  head,  which  will  be  noticed  under  sec-
tion 11  of  this  Title.  2.  They  must  not  stand  within  the  prohi-
bited degrees  of  relationship ;  what  these  were  is  discussed  in  the
following  paragraphs  of  this  Title.  3.  If  under  the  power  of  any
one,  they  must  have  obtained  that  person's  consent.  The  hus-
band was  obliged,  even  though  in  his  grandfather's  power,  to
obtain  his  father's  consent ;  otherwise  the  grandfather  could  have
eventually  increased  the  number  of  the  father's  family  without
consulting  him  (D.  i.  7.  7),  which  it  was  against  the  spirit  of  the
law  to  allow,  as  no  one  could  have  a  new  suus  heres  forced  on
him  by  agnation  against  his  will.     (See  Tit.  11.  7.)

The  same  reason  had  caused  the  doubt  adverted  to  in  the
text,  whether,  even  if  the  father  were  incapable  of  giving  his
consent,  the  son  could  introduce  new  members  into  his  father's
family.  This  did  not  apply  to  the  daughter,  who  could  not  intro-
duce new  members  into  her  father's  family.  Justinian,  in  the
Code,  prescribed  the  mode  in  which  marriage  might  be  validly
made  either  by  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  madman.  The  son  or
daughter  of  the  madman  was  to  submit  the  proposed  marriage  to
be  approved,  and  the  gift  to  the  wife,  or  dowry,  to  be  fixed,  by
the  prcEfectus  urbi  at  Constantinople,  by  the  presses  or  bishop  of
the  city  in  the  provinces,  in  the  presence  of  the  curator  of  the
madman  and  his  principal  relations.  Marcus  Aurelius  had  pre-
viously provided  for  the  case  of  children  of  imbecile  persons,
dementcs,  (C.  v.  4.  25.)  Where  the  rights  of  the  paterfamilias
were  not  in  question,  as  when  the  son  was  emancipated,  it  was
not  necessary  to  have  the  father's  consent.     (D.  xxiii.  2.  25.)

If  the  persons,  whose  consent  was  necessary,  did  not  give  it,
the  marriage  was  absolutely  void,  and  therefore  no  subsequent
consent  could  ratify  it.  Thus  Justinian  says  here  that  the  con-
sent^jussus  (a  word  denoting  the  authority  of  the  paterfamilias)
must  precede  the  marriage.  It  was  not,  however,  necessary  that
the  consent  should  be  expressly  given.  If  the  paterfamilias  knew
of  the  marriage  and  did  not  oppose  it,  his  assent  was  presumed
(C.  V.  4.  5);  and  if  he  were  absent  or  a  captive  for  three  years,
his  children  might  form  a  marriage  which  he  could  not  afterwards

32

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.

disapprove  of.  (D.  xxiii.  2.  9.  10.)  If  both  or  either  of  the
parties  were  impuheres  at  the  time  of  the  marriao^e,  the  marriage,
thouoii  then  invalid,  became  valid  by  their  living  together  with
the  intention  of  being  married  after  puberty  was  attained.  (D.
xxiii.  2.  4. )

1.  Ergo  non  omnes  nobis  iixores
ducere  licet ;  nam  quaramclam  nup-
tiis  abstinendum  est.  Inter  eas  enim
personas  qu£e  parentum  liberorum-
ve  locum  inter  se  obtinent,  contrahi
nuptise  non  possiint  :  veluti  inter
patrem  et  filiam,  vel  avum  et  nep-
tem,  vel  matrem  et  filium,  vel  aviam
et  nepotem,  et  usque  ad  infinitum  ;
et  si  tales  personae  inter  se  coierint,
nefarias  atque  incestas  nuptias  con-
traxisse  dicuntur.  Et  lipec  adeo  ita
sunt,  ut  quamvis  per  adoptionem
parentum  liberorumve  loco  sibi  esse
coeperint,  non  possint  inter  se  matri-
monio  jungi,  in  tantum  ut  etiam
dissoluta  adoptione  idem  juris
maneat.  Itaque  eam  quse  tibi  per
adoptionem  filia  vel  neptis  esse
coeperit,  non  poteris  uxorem  ducere,
quamvis  eam  emancipaveris.

1.  We  may  not  marry  every  woman
without  distinction  ;  for  with  some,
marriage  is  forbidden.  Marriage  can-
not be  contracted  between  persons
standing  to  each  other  in  the  relation
of  ascendant  and  descendant,  as  be-
tween a  father  and  daughter,  a  grand-
father and  his  granddaughter,  a  mother
and  her  son,  a  grandmother  and  her
grandson  ;  and  so  on,  ad  infinitum.
And.,  if  such  persons  unite  together,
they  only  contract  a  criminal  and  in-
cestuous marriage  ;  so  much  so,  that
ascendants  and  descendants,  who  are
only  so  by  adoption,  cannot  inter-
marry; and  even  after  the  adoption
is  dissolved,  the  prohibition  remains.
You  cannot,  therefore,  marry  a  woman
who  has  been  either  your  daughter  or
granddaughter  by  adoption,  although
you  may  have  emancipated  her.

Gai.  i.  58,  59.

When  two  persons  were  related  by  being  agnati  to  each  other,
tliey  were  exactly  in  the  same  relative  position,  so  far  as  regarded
the  power  of  marrying,  as  if  they  had  been  related  in  the  same
degree  by  blood.  If  the  tie  of  agnatio  was  dissolved  by  emanci-
pation, the  tie  of  blood,  if  any,  would  of  course  remain,  and  be  a
bar  to  marriage ;  but  if  there  were  no  tie  of  blood,  that  is,  if  one
of  the  parties  had  entered  the  family  by  adoption,  then,  if  the
emancipated  person  had,  while  the  agnatio  subsisted,  occupied
the  position  of  ascendant  or  descendant  to  the  other  person,  mar-
riage was  forbidden,  but  if  of  a  collateral,  it  was  allowed.

2.  Inter  eas  quoque  personas  quae
ex  trans  verso  gradu  cognationis  jun-
guntur,  est  qusedam  similis  observa-
tio,  sed  non  tanta.  Sane  enim  inter
fratrem  sororemque  nuptic^e  prohi-
bitse  sunt,  sive  ab  eodem  patre  ea-
demque  matre  nati  fuerint,  sive  ex
alterutro  eorum ;  sed  si  qua  per  adop-
tionem soror  tibi  esse  coeperit,  quam-
diu  quidem  constat  adoptio,  sane
inter  te  et  eam  nuptiae  consistere
non  possunt  ;  cum  vero  per  emanci-
pationem  adoptio  sit  dissoluta,  po-
teris eam  uxorem  ducere.  Sed  et  si
tu  emancipatus  fueris,  nihil  est  im-
pedimento  nuptiis.    Et  ideo  constat,

2.  There  are  also  restrictions,
though  not  so  extensive,  on  marriage
between  collateral  relations.  A  bro-
ther and  sister  are  forbidden  to  marry,
whether  they  are  the  children  of  the
same  father  and  mother,  or  of  one  of
the  two  only.  And,  if  a  woman  be-
comes your  sister  by  adoption,  so  long
as  the  adoption  subsists,  you  certainly
cannot  marry ;  but,  if  the  adoption  is
destroyed  by  emancipation,  you  may
marry  her  ;  as  you  may  also,  if  you
yourself  lu'e  emancipated.  Hence  it
follows,  that  if  a  man  would  adopt  his
son-in-law,  he  ought  first  to  emancipate
his  daughter  ;  and  if  he  v/ould  adopt

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.  33

si  quis  genenim  adoptare  velit,  de-     his    daughter-in-law,    he    ought   pre-
bere  eum  ante  filiam  emancipare  ;  et     viously  to  emancipate  his  son.
si  quis  velit  nurum  adoptare,  debere
eum  ante  filium  emancipare.

Gai.  i.  60,  61 ;  D.  xxiii.  2.  17.  1.

To  adopt  a  son-in-laAV  would  be  to  make  him  brother  by
agnation  of  his  own  wife.  The  bar  did  not  invalidate  the  pre-
vious marriage,  but  operated  to  restrain  the  adoption,  until  the
daughter  had  been  emancipated.

3.  Fratris  vero  vel  sororis  filiam  3.  A  man  may  not  marry  the
uxorem  ducere  non  licet.  Sed  nee  daughter  of  a  brother,  or  a  sister,  nor
neptem  fratris  vel  sororis  quis  ux-  the  granddaughter,  although  she  is  in
orem  ducere  potest,  quamvis  quarto  the  foiu'th  degree.  For  when  we  may
gradu  sint ;  cujus  enim  filiam  ux-  not  marry  the  daughter  of  any  person,
orem  ducere  non  licet,  neque  ejus  neither  may  we  marry  the  grand-
neptem  permittitur.  Ejus  vero  mu-  daughter.  But  there  does  not  appear
lieris  quam  pater  tuus  adoptavit,  to  be  any  impediment  to  marrying  the
filiam  non  videris  impediri  uxorem  daughter  of  a  woman  whom  your
ducere,  quia  neque  natiu-ali  neque  father  has  adopted  ;  for  she  is  no  rela-
civili  jure  tibi  conjungitur.  tion  to  you,  either  by  natural  or  civil

law.

Gai.  i.  62  ;  D.  xxiii.  2.  12.  4.

In  the  direct  line  every  degree  represents  a  generation.  The
son  is  in  the  first  degree  with  respect  to  his  father ;  the  grandson
in  the  second  with  respect  to  his  grandfather.  In  the  collateral
line  the  generations  are  taken  first  up  to  and  then  down  from  the
common  ancestors.  For  instance,  first-cousins  are  in  the  fourth
degree.  From  either  cousin  to  his  father  is  one  degree,  from  the
father  to  the  grandfather  is  another,  from  the  grandfather  to  the
father  of  the  other  cousin  is  a  third,  and  from  that  father  to  that
cousin  is  a  fourth.

The  marriaoje  of  an  uncle  with  a  niece  had  been  legialised  in
favour  of  Claudius  and  Agrippina  (Suet,  in  Claud.  26);  but
prohibited  by  Constantine.     (Cod.  Theod.  i.)

The  children  never  followed  the  family  of  the  mother,  and
therefore,  though  she  was  adopted,  remained  as  they  were  be-
fore. But  of  course  a  daughter  could  not  have  married  an  adopted
son's  son.

4.  Duorum  autem  fratrum  vel  4.  The  children  of  two  brothers  or
sororum  liberi,  vel  fratris  et  sororis,  two  sisters,  or  of  a  brother  and  sister,
jungi  possunt.                                          may  marry  together.

D.  xxiii.  2.  3.

The  marriage  of  first-cousins,  forbidden  by  preceding  em-
perors, had  again  been  legalised  by  Arcadius  and  Honorius.
(C.  V.  4.  19.)

5.  Item  amitam,  licet  adoptivam,  5.  So,  too,  a  man  may  not  marry
ducere  uxorem  non  licet  ;  item  nee  his  paternal  aunt,  even  though  she  be
materteram,  quia  parentum  loco  so  only  by  adoption  ;  nor  his  maternal
habentur.     Qua  ratione  verum  est,  aunt ;  because   they  are  regarded  in

D

34

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.

magnam  qiioque  amitam  et  mater-  the  light  of  ascendants.  For  the  same
teram  magnam  prohiberi  uxorem  reason,  no  person  may  marry  his  great
ducere.  aunt,  either  paternal  or  maternal.

Gai.  i.  62 ;  D.  xxiii.  2.  17.  2.

It  was  of  course  only  possible  to  be  in  the  same  family  with
an  adopted  aunt  on  the  father's  side.  A  mother's  sister  by  adop-
tion would  be  in  the  family  to  which  the  mother  belonged  by
birth,  whereas  the  nephew  would  be  in  the  family  of  the  father,
and  therefore  adoptivam  is  added  to  amitam  only,  not  to  mater-
teram..

Every  person  in  the  first  degree  from  a  common  ancestor  was
considered,  so  far  as  regarded  marriage,  in  the  position  of  that
ancestor.  Thus  an  aunt,  being  in  the  first  degree  from  the  grand-
father, the  common  ancestor,  was  looked  upon  as  standing  in  the
place  of  that  grandfather  (jparentis  loco  liahetur),  and  could  not
therefore  marry  her  nephew.  A  cousin  would  be  in  the  second
degree  from  the  common  ancestor,  and  therefore  proximity  would
not  be  a  bar  to  the  union.

6.  Adfinitatis  quoque  venera-
tione  qiiarumdam  nuptiis  absti-
nendum  est,  nt  ecce  :  privignam
aut  nurum  iixorem  ducere  non  licet,
quia  utreeque  filise  loco  sunt.  Quod
ita  scilicet  accipi  debet,  si  fuit
nurus  aut  privigna  tua  :  nam  si  adhuc
nurus  tua  est,  id  est,  si  adhuc  nupta
est  filio  tuo,  alia  ratione  uxorem
eam  ducere  non  possis,  quia  eadem
duobus  nupta  esse  non  potest.  Item
si  adhuc  privigna  tua  est,  id  est,  si
mater  ejus  tibi  nupta  est,  ideo  eam
uxorem  ducere  non  poteris,  quia
duas  uxores  eodem  tempore  habere
non  licet.

6.  There  are,  too,  other  marriages
from  which  we  must  abstain,  from
regard  to  the  ties  created  by  marriage ;
for  example,  a  man  may  not  marry  his
wife's  daughter,  or  his  son's  wife,  for
they  are  both  in  the  place  of  daughters
to  him  ;  and  this  must  be  understood
to  mean  those  who  have  been  our  step-
daughters or  daughters-in-law :  for  if
a  woman  is  still  your  daughter-in-law,
that  is,  if  she  is  still  married  to  your
son,  you  cannot  marry  her  for  another
reason,  as  she  cannot  be  the  wife  of
two  persons  at  once.  And  if  your  step-
daughter is  still  your  stepdaughter,
that  is,  if  her  mother  is  still  married
to  you,  you  cannot  marry  her,  because
a  person  cannot  have  two  wives  at  the
same  time.

Gai.  i.  63.

Affinitas  is  the  tie  created  by  marriage  between  each  person
of  the  married  pair  and  the  kindred  of  the  other.

7.  Socrum  quoque  et  novercam
prohibitum  est  uxorem  ducere,  quia
matris  loco  sunt.  Quod  et  ipsuni
dissoluta  demum  adfinitate  procedit ;
alioquin,  si  adhuc  noverca  est,  id
est,  si  adhuc  patri  tuo  nupta  est,
communi  jure  impeditur  tibi  nubere,
quia  eadem  duobus  nupta  esse  non
potest.  Item  si  adhuc  socrus  est,  id
est,  si  adhuc  filia  ejus  tibi  nupta  est,
ideo  impediuntur  nuptife,  quia  duas
uxores  habere  non  possis.

7.  Again,  a  man  is  forbidden  to
marry  his  wife's  mother,  and  his  father's
wife,  because  they  hold  the  place  of
mothers  to  him  ;  a  prohibition  which
can  only  operate  when  the  affinity  is
dissolved  ;  for  if  your  stepmother  is
still  your  stepmother,  that  is,  if  she  is
still  married  to  your  father,  she  would
be  prohibited  from  marrying  you  by
the  common  rule  of  law,  which  forbids
a  woman  to  have  two  husbands  at  the
same  time.  So  if  your  wife's  mother
is  still  your  wife's  mother,  that  is,  if

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.  35

her  daughter  is  still  married  to  you,
you  cannot  marry  her,  because  you
cannot  have  two  wives  at  the  same
time.

Gai.  i.  63.

The  Institutes  do  not  notice  the  marriage  of  a  brother  and
sister-in-law.  It  was  permitted  up  to  the  time  of  Constantine,
who  forbad  it.  (Cod.  Theod.  i.  2.)  The  prohibition  was  renewed
bj  Yalentinian,  Theodosius,  and  Arcadius.     (C.  v.  5.  5.)'

8.  Mariti  tamen  filius  ex  alia  8.  The  son  of  a  husband  by  a  former
uxore,  et  uxoris  filia  ex  alio  marito,  wife,  and  the  daughter  of  a  wife  by  a
vel  contra,  matrimonium  recte  con-  former  husband,  or  the  daughter  of  a
trahunt,  licet  habeant  fratrem  so-  husband  by  a  former  wife,  and  the  son
roremve  ex  matrimonio  postea  con-  of  a  wife  by  a  former  husband,  may
tracto  natos.  lawfully  contract  marriage,  even  though

they  have  a  brother  or  sister  born  of
the  second  marriage.

9.  Si  uxor  tua  post  divortium  ex  9.  The  daughter  of  a  divorced  wife
aho  filiam  procreaverit,  hsec  non  est  by  a  second  husband,  is  not  your  step-
quidem  privigna  tua,  sed  Julianus  daughter ;  and  yet  Julian  says  we
hujusmodi  nuptiis  abstineri  debere  ought  to  abstain  from  such  a  marriage,
ait  :  nam  nee  sponsam  filii  nurum  For  the  betrothed  wife  of  a  son  is  not
esse,  nee  patris  sponsam  novercam  your  daughter-in-law  ;  nor  your  be-
esse,  rectius  tamen  et  jure  facturos  trothed  wife  your  son's  stepmother  ;
eos  qui  hujusmodi  nuptiis  abstinue-  and  yet  it  is  more  decent  and  more  in
rint.                                              .               accordance  with  law  to  abstain  from

such  marriages.

D.  xxiii.  2.  12.  1,  and  foil.

The  sponsalia  constituted  in  no  Avay  a  binding  tie.  They
were,  as  far  as  law  went,  mutual  promises  to  contract  a  tie.  Spon-
salia sunt  sponsio  et  repromissio  nuptiarum  futurarum.  (D.  xxiii.
1.  1.)  All  that  was  necessary  was,  that  the  parties,  and  their
respective  patresfamilias,  should  consent,  and  that  the  betrothed
should  have  attained  the  age  of  seven  years.  Either  party  wish-
ing to  renounce  the  engagement,  which  by  law  was  always  per-
missible, could  do  so  by  announcing  the  wish  in  these  w^ords —
conditione  tua  non  utor.  Hence  it  could  only  be  custom  founded
on  a  respect  for  boni  mores  that  prevented  a  father  marrying  his
son's  betrothed,  or  a  son  his  father's.

10.  lUud  certum  est,  serviles  10.  It  is  certain  that  the  relation-
quoque  cognationes  impedimento  ship  of  slaves  is  an  impediment  to  mar-
nuptiis  esse,,  si  forte  pater  et  filia  aut  riage,  even  if  the  father  and  daughter,
frater  et  soror  manumissi  fuerint.  or  brother  and  sister,  as  the  case  may

be,  have  been  enfranchised.

D.  xxiii.  2.  14.  2.

The  union  of  slaves,  contuhernium,  was  not  recognised  in  law
as  a  marriage,  but  still  the  law  did  not  permit  natural  ties  to  be
violated  in  the  case  of  slaves,  any  more  than  in  the  case  of  the
issue  of  concubinage,  or  that  of  illicit  commerce.  (C.  v.  4.  4.)
Of  course  a  manumission  must  have  taken  place,  or  there  could
be  no  question  of  nuptm ;  but  if  slaves  were  freed,  then,  although

D    2

36  LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.

competent  to  contract  a  marriage,  they  were  bound  by  the  ties  of
blood,  and  could  not  marry  any  one  connected  with  them  by  close
natural  relationship.

1].  Sunt  et   alise   personse   quae  11.  There  are  other  j)ersons  also,

propter    diversas    rationes    nuptias  between  whom  marriage  is  prohibited

contrahere  prohibentiir,  quas  in  libris  for   different  reasons,  which  we  have

Digestorum    sen    Pandectamm    ex  permitted    to  be   enumerated   in   the

veteri  jure   collectarum    enumerari  books   of    the    Digests    or   Pandects,

jDermisimus.  collected  from  the  old  law.

D.  xxiii.  2.  44,  jDr.  and  1.

The  reasons  alluded  to  are  not,  like  the  preceding,  founded
on  nearness  of  relationship  or  other  tie,  but  on  public  or  political
grounds.  The  patres  and  plels  could  not  intermarry  till  the  lex
Canuleia.  Nor  the  freeborn  and  freedmen  till  the  lex  Julia  and
Papia  Poppcea.  (D.  xxiii.  2.  23.)  These  laws  prohibited  the
marriage  of  senators  with  liberti,  but  allowed  that  of  other  free-
born,  forbidding  at  the  same  time  all  freeborn  to  marry  actresses
or  women  of  openly  bad  character.  (D.  xxiii.  2.  41.)  Constan-
tino extended  the  prohibition  to  marrying  women  of  the  lowest
class,  humiles  ahjectcEve  personcE.  (C.  v.  27.  1.)  This  was  re-
pealed by  Justinian.  (Nov.  117.  6.)  The  guardian  could  not
marry  his  ward  before  she  was  twenty-six  years  of  age,  unless
betrothed  or  given  to  him  by  her  father.  (D.  xxiii.  2.  %Q.)  The
governor  of  a  province  could  not,  while  he  held  his  office,  marry
a  native  of  that  province  (D.  xxiii.  2.  38.  57),  lest  he  should  abuse
his  authority.  The  ravisher  could  not  marry  the  woman  he  vio-
lated. (C.  ix.  13.  2.)  Nor  the  adulterer  his  accomplice.  (Nov.
134.)     Nor  a  Jew  a  Christian.     (C.  i.  9.  6.)

While  the  distinction  between  Latini  and  cives  remained  in
force,  a  citizen  could  not  marry  a  Latina  (excepting  ^!v\\QreLatmitas
carried  with  it  the  connuhiwn),  nor  could  he  marry  a  peregrina,
without  the  permission  of  the  emperor.  But  the  unauthorised
union  of  a  citizen  with  a  Latina  or  peregrina  was  recognised  as
matrimoiiium,  though  not  as  justm  nuptice.  The  wife  was  termed
in  such  a  case  injusta  uxor.  None  of  the  rules  of  law  as  to  patria
potestas  and  dos  applied  to  such  a  union,  but  the  breach  of  the
tie  would  be  looked  on  as  adultery.     (D.  xlviii.  5.  13.  pr.  1.)

12.  Si  adversus  ea  quse  diximus,  12.  If  persons  unite  themselves  in

aliqui  coierint,  nee   vir,  nee  uxor,  contravention  of   the  rules  thus   laid

nee  nuptise,  nee  matrimonium,  nee  down,  there  is  no  husband  or  wife,  no

dos  intelligitur.      Itaque   ii   qui  ex  nuptials,  no   marriage,   nor  marriage

60    coitu    nascuntur,    in    potestate  portion,  and  the  children  born  in  such

patris    non    sunt,    sed     tales    sunt  a  connection  are  not  in  the  power  of

(quantum    ad    patriam    potestatem  the  father.     For,  with  regard  to  the

pertinet)  quales  sunt  ii  quos  mater  power  of   a  father,  they   are   in   the

vulgo  concepit  :  nam  nee  hi  patrem  position  of  children  conceived  in  j)ro-

habere  intelliguntur,  cum  his  etiam  stitution,  who  are  looked  upon  as  having

pater   incertus    est.      XJnde    solent  no  father,  because  it  is  uncertain  who

spurii  appellari,  vel   a  Grseca  voce  he  is  ;  and  are  therefore  called  spurii,

quasi  cTropddrjv  concepti ;    vel  quasi  either  from  a  Greek  word   airopddrjv,

LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.  37

siiie  patre  fiUi.  Seqiiitur  ergo,  ut  meaning  '  at  hazard,'  or  as  being  sine
dissoluto  tali  coitii  nee  dotis  ex-  patre,  without  a  father.  On  the  disso-
actioni  locus  sit.  Qui  autem  pro-  lution  of  such  a  connection  there  can
hibitas  nuptias  contrahunt,  et  alias  be  no  claim  made  for  the  demand  of  a
po3nas  patiuntur,  quae  sacris  con-  marriage  portion.  Persons  who  con-
stitutionibus  continentur.  tract   prohibited   marriages  are  liable

also  to  further  penalties  set  forth  in
our  imperial  constitutions.

Gai.  i.  64  ;  D.  i.  5.  23  ;  D.  xxiii.  2.  52.

Under  the  head  of  stuprum  the  Komans  included  every  union
of  the  sexes  forbidden  by  morality.  Different  punishments
awaited  the  guilty  according  to  the  degree  of  crime  implied  in  the
union.  (Cod.  v.  5.  4.)  But  the  law  recognised  and  regulated  in
concubinage  {concuhinatus)  a  permanent  cohabitation,  though
■vvithout  the  sanction  of  marriage,  between  parties  to  whose  mar-
riage there  was  no  legal  obstacle.  In  every  case  where  such  an
obstacle  existed,  unless  the  obstacle  was  one  merely  founded  on
public  policy^  such  as  that  of  being  governor  of  a  province,  who
was  not  permitted  to  marry  a  native  of  that  province,  the  law
inflicted  a  punishment  on  parties  cohabiting  in  defiance  of  law.
The  chief  incident  of  the  Koman  concuhinatus^  which  was  so  far
restricted  that  a  man  could  not  have  two  concubines  at  once,  or  a
wife  and  a  concubine,  was,  that  the  children  could  be  legitimatised,
and  so  placed  on  a  footing  with  the  offspring  of  a  legal  marriage.
Between  the  formation  of  such  a  union,  and  the  contracting:  a
legal  marriage,  there  seems  to  have  been  no  diflPerence  except
what  rested  in  the  intention  of  the  parties.  If  two  persons  lived
together,  it  was  the  intention  with  which  they  did  so  which
decided  whether  the  union  was  concubinasce  or  marriao;e.  Concu-
hinam  ex  sola  animi  destinatione  (Bstimari  oportet.  (D.  xxv.  7.  4.)
If  there  was  no  affectio  maritalis,  no  intention  to  treat  the  woman
as  a  wife,  she  was  not  a  wife.  Of  course,  practically,  the  question
of  consent  was  seldom,  if  ever^  left  doubtful.  Generally  speaking,
an  instrument  fixing  the  amount  settled  respectively  by  the
busband  and  wife,  was  drawn  up,  and  the  consent  was  publicly
^iven  in  the  presence  of  friends.  And  as  concubinage  was  a  dis-
honourable state,  the  presumption  in  favour  of  marriage,  when
the  woman  was  of  honest  parentage,  and  of  good  character,  was
v^ery  strong.  To  the  union  of  concubinage  none  of  the  incidents
3f  marriage  attached.  No  dowry  could  be  asked  for,  no  settle-
ment was  made  by  the  man:  the  children  were  not  in  the  power
of  the  father.  But  the  connection  was  separated  from  that  of  a
temporary  intercourse  by  no  man  being  allowed  to  have  two  con-
cubines, or  a  wife  and  a  concubine  at  the  same  time,  and  by  the
power  which  was  given  to  legitimatise  the  children,  and  place
bhem  in  the  position  of  the  offspring  of  a  legal  marriage.  (See
aext  paragraph.)

In  a  legal  marriage,  without  convejitio  in  manum,  the  marriage
portion  of  the  wife  {dos)  belonged  to  the  husband  during  the
continuance  of  the  marriage.     In  early  times  his  power  over  the

38  LIB.  I.      TIT.  X.

dos  was  unrestricted,  but  afterwards  successive  limitations  of  this
power  were  introduced.  (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  7.  3  ;  Tit.  8.  introd.
paragr.)  The  settlement  on  the  wife  by  the  husband  (^donatio
propter  nuptias)  belonged,  during  the  marriage,  to  the  wife,  but
was  managed  by  the  husband.  (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  7.  3.)  When
the  marriage  was  dissolved,  which  it  might  be  by  death,  loss  of
liberty,  captivity,  or  divorce  (D.  xxiv.  2.  1),  the  dos  was  returned
to  the  wife  or  her  father.  Divorce  was  always  permitted  if
either  party  ceased  to  wish  to  preserve  the  tie  of  marriage,  which
was  only  looked  on  as  a  contract  resting  on  mutual  consent.  But,
unless  both  parties  consented  to  a  divorce,  heavy  penalties  were
attached  to  its  being  insisted  on  by  one  alone  {repudmm\  unless
any  of  the  grounds  for  divorce  established  by  law,  such  as  adultery
or  criminal  conduct  (Cod.  v.  17.  8), could  be  shown  to  exist;  and
the  fact  of  repudiation  had  to  be  established  by  the  presence  of
seven  citizens  as  witnesses,  and  a  libelliis  repudii.  After  the
divorce  either  party  might,  after  a  fixed  interval,  marry  again.

13.  Aliquando   autem  evenit  iit  13.    It    sometimes    happens,    that

liberi  qui,  statim  ut  nati   sunt,  in  children  who  at  their  birth  were  not  in

potestate  parentum  non  fiant,  postea  the  power  of  their  father,  are  brought

autem    redigantur     in    potestatem  under  it  afterwards.     Such  is  the  case

parentum.     Qualis  est  is  qui,  dum  of  a  natural  son,  who  is  given  to  the

naturalis  fuerat,  postea  curiae  datus  curia,  and  then  becomes  subject  to  his

potestati  patris  subjicitur  :  nee  non  father's  power.     Again,  a  child  born  of

is  qui  a  muliere  libera  x^rocreatus,  a   free  woman,  with  whom  marriage

cujus    matrimonium    minime    legi-  was  not  prohibited   by  any  law,  but

bus     interdictum     fuerat,     sed     ad  with  whom  the  father  only  cohabited,

quam   pater    consuetudinem    habu-  will  likewise   become   subject  to   the

erat,  postea  ex  nostra  constitutione  power  of  his  father  if  at  any  time  after-

dotalibus  instrumentis  compositis  in  wards  instruments  of  dowry  are  drawn

potestate   patris   efficitur.     Quod  si  up  according  to  the  provisions  of  our

alii    liberi    ex    eodem    matrimonio  constitution.      And    this   constitution

fuerint    procreati,    similiter   nostra  confers    the    same     benefits    on    any

constitutio  prsebuit.  children  who  may  be  subsequently  born

of  the  same  marriage.

Gai.  i.  65  ;  C.  v.  27.  10.

By  legitimation  the  offspring  of  concubinage  were  placed  in
the  position  of  liberi  legitimi,  and  this  was  effected  in  three  ways :
1.  By  oblation  to  the  curia-,  2.  By  the  subsequent  marriage  of
the  parents ;  and  3.  By  a  rescript  of  the  emperor,  a  mode  intro-
duced by  Justinian  in  the  74th  Novel.  The  curia  was  the  class
from  which,  in  provincial  towns,  the  magistrates  were  eligible.
To  be  a  member  was  a  distinction,  but  an  onerous  one,  from  the
expenses  and  burdens  attached  to  the  position.  In  order  to
prevent  the  order  decaying  through  unwillingness  to  incur  the
expenses  attending  it,  Theodosius  and  Yalentinian  permitted
citizens,  whether  themselves  members  of  the  curia  or  not,  to
present  their  children  born  in  concubinage  to,  and  make  them
members  of,  the  order  (Cod,  v.  27.  3),  by  which  they  became
legitimate,  and  the  heirs  of  their  father.  This  mode  of  legiti-
mation, which  could,  of  course,  only  be  adopted  when  the  parents

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XI.  39

were  rich,  did  not,  however,  make  the  children  complete  members
of  the  father's  family.  They  became  his  legitimate  children,  but
gained  no  new  relationship  or  right  of  succession  to  any  other
member  of  his  family.     (C.  v.  27.  9.)

Constantine  first  established  that  natural  children  should  be
made  legitimate  by  the  subsequent  marriage  of  their  parents.
The  law  required  that  at  the  moment  of  conception  the  parents
should  have  been  capable  of  a  legal  marriage  ;  that  an  instrument
settling  the  dowry  [instrumentum  dotale\  or,  at  least,  attesting
the  marriage  (instrumentum  nuptiale),  should  be  drawn  up,  and
that  the  children  should  ratify  the  legitimation,  for  no  one  was
made  legitimate  against  his  will.     (Nov.  89.  11.)

If  the  mother  Avere  dead  or  had  disappeared,  and  the  marriage
was  thus  impossible,  the  emperor  would  by  a  rescript  allow  the
natural  children  (if  there  was  no  legitimate  one)  to  be  placed  in
the  position  they  would  have  held  if  the  marriage  had  taken
place,  as  he  would  also  if  a  father  by  his  testament  expressed  his
wish  to  that  effect.

Tit.  XI.     DE   ADOPTIONIBUS.

Non  solum  autem  natnrales  li-  Not  only  are  our  natural  cliildren,

beri,  secundum  ea  qupe  diximus,  in  as  we  have  said,  in  our  power,  but

potestate  nostra  sunt,  verum  etiam  those  also  whom  we  adopt,
ii  quos  adoptamus.

■   Gai.  i.  97.

Before  the  time  of  Justinian,  the  effect  of  adoption  (see  Introd.
sec.  42)  was  to  place  the  person  adopted  exactly  in  the  position  he
Avould  have  held  had  he  been  born  a  son  of  the  person  adopting
him.  All  the  property  of  the  adoptive  son  belonged  to  his  adop-
tive father.  The  adoptive  son  Avas  heir  to  his  adoptive  father,  if
intestate,  bore  his  name  (retaining,  however,  the  name  of  his  own
gens  with  the  change  of  -us  into  -anus,  as  Octavius,  Octavianus),
and  shared  the  sacred  rites  of  the  family  he  entered.

Natnrales  liberi  is  here  opposed  to  adoptivi,  not,  as  in  the  last
Title,  to  legitimi,

1.   Adoptio  autem  duobus  modis  1.    Adoption   takes    place   in    two

fit,  aut  principali  rescripto,  aut  im-  ways,   either  by  imperial  rescript,  or

perio  magistratus.    Imperatoris  auc-  by  the   authority  of  the   magistrate.

toritate    adoptare   quis    potest    eos  The  imperial  rescript  gives  power  to

easve    qui   quseve   sui    juris    sunt  :  adopt  i)ersons  of  either  sex  who  are

qure  species   adoptionis   dicitur  ad-  sui  juris  ;  and  this  species  of  adoption

rogatio.     Imperio  magistratus  adop-  is  called  arrogation.     By  the  authority

tare   licet  eos   easve  qui  quseve  in  of   the  magistrate   we   adopt   persons

potestate  parentum  sunt,   sive  pri-  in  the  power  of  an  ascendant,  whether

mum  gradum  liberorum  obtineant,  in  the  first  degree,  as  sons  and  daugh-

qualis  fllius,  fili^,,   sive  inferiorem,  ters,  or  in  an  inferior  degree,  as  grand-

qualis    est   nepos   neptis,    i)ronepos  children  or  great-grandchildren.

proneptis.

Gai.  X.  98,  99.

40  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XL

A  public  character  was  always  attached  in  ancient  Koman  law
to  so  important  an  alteration  in  families  as  adoption.  (See  Introd.
sec.  42.)  The  sanction  of  the  curice  was  probably  necessary  to
its  validity,  when  the  family  of  a  member  of  the  curicB  was
affected.  If  the  person  adopted  was  sui  juris,  his  entry  into  a
new  family  (arrogatio)  was  jealously  watched,  as  the  jjontifices
would  never  allow  it  where  there  was  any  likelihood  of  the  sacred
rites  of  the  family  he  quitted  becoming  extinct  by  his  departure
from  it.  The  form  of  gaining  the  consent  of  the  curice  was  even
continued  when  the  curice  were  only  represented  by  thirty  lictors,
until  the  rescript  of  the  emperor  was  substituted  as  a  means  of
effecting  arrogations.

What  were  the  forms  of  arrogation,  when  neither  the  person
arrogated  nor  the  person  arrogating  belonged  to  the  body  of  the
curicE,  we  have  no  certain  knowledge  ;  but  we  may  guess  arro-
gation was  effected  by  a  fictitious  suit,  in  which  the  person  arro-
gated was  claimed  as  the  child  of  the  arrogator,  and  let  judgment
go  by  default.

If  the  person  adopted  were  under  the  power  of  another,  the
person  under  whose  power  he  was  had  to  release  him  from  that
j^ower,  Avhich  he  did  by  selling  him  (^maiicipatio)  three  several
times,  which  destroyed  his  own  patria  potestas  (see  Introd.  sec.
42),  and  then  giving  him  up  to  the  adopting  parent  by  a  fictitious
process  of  law,  called  '  injure  ceasio,^  in  which  he  was  claimed  and
acknowledged  as  the  child  of  the  person  who  adopted  him,  and
pronounced  to  be  so  by  the  magistrate  before  whom  the  proceeding
was  held  {imperio  magistratus).   The  word  adojjtio  was  common  to
both  jorocesses,  both  to  arrogatio,  said  by  Gains  to  be  derived  from
rogo,  because  the  person  arrogated  was  asked  before  the  curice
whether  he  consented  (Gai.  i.  99),  and  to  adoptio  in  its  more
limited  sense  of  the  adoption  of  a  person  not  sui  juris.     For  the
ceremonies  previously  required  for  the  adoption  of  a  j^erson  alieni
juris,  Justinian  substituted  the  simple  proceeding  of  executing,  in
presence  of  a  magistrate,  a  deed,  declaring  the  fact  of  the  adoption
— the  parties  to  the  adoption,  that  is,  the  person  giving,  the  person
given,  and  the  person  receiving,  being  personally  present  to  give
their  consent.     But  it  was  sufficient  if  the  consent  of  the  party
adopted  were  expressed   by  his  not  declaring   his   dissent — non
contradicente.     (C.  viii.  48.  11.  Tit.  12.  10.)

2.  Sed  hodie,  ex  nostra  consti-  2.  But  now,  by  our  constitution,

tutione,   cum  filiusfamilias   a  patre  when  a  filiusfamilias  is  given  in  adop-

naturali  extranese  person?e  in  adop-  tion  by  his  natural  father  to  a  stranger,

tionem  datur,  jura  potestatis  patris  the  power  of  the  natural  father  is  not

naturalis  minime  dissolvuntur,  nee  dissolved  ;  no  right  passes  to  the  adop-

quicquam    ad     patrem    adoptivum  tive  father,  nor  is  the  adopted  son  in

transit,  nee  in  potestate   ejus   est,  his  power,  although  we  allow  such  son

licet  ab  intestato  jura  successionis  the  right  of  succession  to  his  adoptive

ei  a   nobis   tributa   sint.      Si   vero  father  dying  intestate.     But  if  a  natu-

pater  naturalis   non   extraneo,   sed  ral  father  should  give  his  son  in  adop-

avo   filii   sui   materno,   vel   si   ipse  tion,  not  to  a  stranger,  but  to  the  son's

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XI.  41

pater  naturalis  fuerit  emancipatus,  maternal  grandfather  ;  or,  supposing
etiani  avo  paterno  vel  proavo  simili  the  natural  father  has  been  emanci-
niodo  paterno  vel  materno  filium  i)ated,  if  he  gives  the  son  in  adoption
suum  dederit  in  adoptionem  :  in  hoc  to  the  son's  paternal  grandfather,  or
casu,  quia  concurrent  in  unani  per-  to  the  son's  paternal  or  maternal  great-
sonam  et  naturalia  et  adoptionis  grandfather,  in  this  case,  as  the  rights
jura,  manet  stabile  jus  patris  adop-  of  nature  and  adoption  concur  in  the
tivi,  et  naturali  vinculo  copulatum,  same  person,  the  power  of  the  adop-
et  legitimo  adoptionis  nodo  constric-  tive  father,  knit  by  natural  ties  and
turn,  ut  et  in  familia  et  in  potestate  strengthened  by  the  legal  bond  of
hujusmodi  patris  adoptivi  sit.  adoption,  is  preserved  undiminished,

so  that  the  adopted  son  is  not  only  in
the  family,  but  in  the  power,  of  his
adoptive  father.

C.  viii.  48.  10.

The  change  made  by  Justinian  in  the  law  of  adoption  (C  viii.
48.  10)  completely  altered  its  character.  It  used  sometimes  to
happen  under  the  old  law,  that  a  son  lost  the  succession  to  his
own  father  by  being  adopted,  and  to  his  adoptive  father  by  a
subsequent  emancipation.  Justinian  Avished  to  remedy  this  effec-
tually. He  therefore  provided  that  the  son  given  in  adoption  to
a  stranger,  that  is,  any  one  not  an  ascendant,  should  be  in  the
same  position  to  his  own  father  as  before,  but  gain  by  adoption
the  succession  to  his  adoptive  father,  if  the  adoptive  father  died
intestate.  The  adoptive  father  was  not,  however,  bound,  like  the
natural  father  (Bk.  ii.  Tit.  18),  to  leave  him  a  share  of  his  property,
if  he  made  a  will.  In  this  kind  of  adoption,  which  commentators
have  termed  the  adoptio  minus  plena,  the  adoptive  son  still
remained  in  the  family  of  his  natural  father ;  and  the  only  change
which  adoption  caused,  was,  that  he  acquired  a  right  of  succession
to  his  adoptive  father,  if  intestate.     (Bk.  ili.  Tit.  1.  14.)

When  the  person  to  whom  the  adoptive  son  was  given,  was
one  of  his  own  ascendants,  then  the  old  law  was  permitted  to
regulate  the  effects  of  the  adoption,  and  the  adoption  in  this  case
was  what  the  commentators  term  adoptio  plena.  The  adoptive
son  entered  the  family  of  the  ascendant,  who  became  his  adoptive
father.  A  grandson  was  not  naturally  in  the  same  family  with
his  maternal  grandfather,  and  could  only  enter  the  family  of  his
maternal  grandfather  by  being  adopted.  If  he  had  been  born
after  his  father  had  been  emancipated,  he  would  not  be  in  the
same  family  with  his  paternal  grandfather,  who  might  therefore
kvish  to  adopt  him.  It  was  even  possible  that  he  might  be  adopted
by  his  own  father ;  for  if  born  before  his  father  was  emancipated,
lis  grandfather  might  have  emancipated  his  father  without  eman-
iipating  him,  and  then  might  afterwards  have  given  him  in
idoption  to  his  father.

3.  Cum  autem  impubes  per  prin-  3.  When  any  one,  under  the  age  of

iipale   rescriptum  adrogatur,  causa  puberty,  is  arrogated  by  the  imperial

lognita    adrogatio    permittitur,    et  rescript,  the  arrogation  is  only  allowed

ixquiritur    causa    adrogationis    an  Avhen  inquiry  has  been  made  into  the

lonesta  sit  expediatque  pupillo,  et  circumstances  of  the  case.     It  is  asked,

42

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XI.

cum  quibusdam  conditionibus  ad-
rogatio  fit  :  id  est,  ut  caveat  adro-
gator  personse  publico,  hoc  est
tabiilario,  si  intra  pubertatem  pti-
pilhis  decesserit,  restitutnrum  se
bona  illis  qui,  si  adoptio  facta  non
esset,  ad  siiccessionem  ejus  venturi
essent.  Item  non  alias  emancipare
eum  potest  adrogator,  nisi  causa
cognita  dignus  emancipatione  fuerit,
et  tunc  sua  bona  ei  reddat.  Sed
etsi  decedens  pater  eum  exhereda-
verit,  vel  vivus  sine  justa  causa  eum
emancipaverit,  jubetur  quartam  par-
tem ei  bonorum  suorum  relinquere,
videlicet  prseter  bona  qu?e  ad  patrem
adoptivum  transtulit  et  quorum  com-
modum  ei  postea  adquisivit.

what  is  the  motive  leading  to  the  arro-
gation,  and  whether  the  arrogation  is
honourable    and    expedient    for    the
pupil.     And  the  arrogation  is  always
made   under   certain   conditions  ;  the
arrogator   is  obliged  to  give  security
before  a  public  person,  that  is,  before
a  notary,  that  if  the  pupil  should  die
within   the    age   of   puberty,    he   will
restore  all  the  jDroperty  to  those  who
would  have  succeeded  him  if  no  adop-
tion had  been  made.     Nor,  again,  can
the  arrogator  emancipate   the  person
arrogated,     unless,     on     examination
into  the  case,  it  appears  that  the  latter
is  worthy  of  emancipation  ;  and,  even
then,  the  arrogator  must  restore  the
property  belonging  to   the  person  he
emancipates.    Also,  even  if  the  arroga-
tor, on  his  death-bed,  has  disinherited
his  arrogated  son,  or,  during  his  life,
has    emancipated    him    without    just
cause,  he  is  obliged  to  leave  him  the
fourth  part  of  all  his  goods,  besides
what  the  son  brought  to  him  at  the
time   of    arrogation,    or   acquired   for
him  afterwards.
Gal  i.  102 ;  D.  i.  7.  18  ;  D.  xxxviii.  5.  13.

Neither  women  nor  children  under  the  age  of  puberty  could
be  arrogated.     Arrogation  was  first  permitted  in  the  case  of  the
latter  by  Antoninus  Pius  (Ulp.  Reg.  viii.  5;  D.  i.  7.  21),  but
only  after  strict  inquiry  had  been  made  into  the  circumstances  of
the  case.     Besides  the  general  inquiry  which  took  place  in  evety
case  of  adoption,  as  to  the  ages  of  the  parties,  and  the  possible
injustice  to  other  members  of  the  family,  which  the  introduction
of  a  new  member  might  give  rise  to,  in  this  case  inquiry  was
made  whether  the  character  and  circumstances  of  the  proposed
arrogator  were  such,  as  to  make  it  probable  that  the  arrogation
would  be  beneficial   to  the  person  arrogated.     Further,  certain
regulations  were  made,  designed  to  protect  the  property  of  the
imjnihes,  which  were  briefly  as  follows: — 1.  If  the  arrogated  son
died  before  puberty,  the  arrogator  had  to  restore  the  property  of
the  son  to  that  son's  natural  heirs.     2.  If  the  arrog-ated  son  was
disinherited  or  was  emancipated  without  good  reason  before  pu-
berty, the  arrogated  son  received  back  all  his  own  property,  and
also  received  one-fourth  of  the  property  of  the  arrogator,  called  the
quarta  D.  Pii,  or  quarta  Ant.nina,  as  having  been  first  required
by  that  emperor.     3.  If  the  son  were  emancipated  before  puberty
for  a  good  reason,  the  son  received  his  own  property  from  the
arrogator,  but  nothing  more.     4.  Lastly,  if  the  arrogated  son,  on
attaining  puberty,  wished   to  rescind  the   arrogation,  he  was  at
liberty  to  do  so,  if  he  could   show  it  was   prejudicial   to  him.
Under   Justinian    arrogated    persons    and  persons    adopted    by
ascendants  were  treated  as  cognati  in  the  succession  to  the  natural

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XI.  43

father  (Bk.  iii.  6.  3) ;  and,  in  the  intestate  succession  to  the  arro-
gated son,  the  arrogator  was  postponed  to  the  children  and
brothers  and  sisters  of  the  arrogated  son  (Bk.  iii.  10.  2),  and  the
arrogator  had  only  the  usufruct  of  the  property  of  the  arrogated
son  while  the  arrogated  son  was  living.

There  is  some  little  doubt  when  arrogation  was  first  made  'per
rescriptum  principis.  However,  Ulpian  {Reg,  viii.  5)  expresses
himself  too  plainly  to  admit  of  a  doubt  that  in  his  time  arroga-
tion was  made  per  popidum  (i.e.  by  the  curies  represented  by
lictors),  and  not  by  imperial  licence.  He  further  adds,  that  arro-
gation was  only  made  at  Rome  {JReg.  viii.  4),  and,  of  course,  when
the  system  of  permitting  it  by  imperial  rescript  was  adopted,
place  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  arrogation.

The  tahularii  here  spoken  of  were  public  notaries,  who  kept
public  registers  {tabulce),  on  which  formal  acts  were  recorded.

4.  Minorem  natu  majorem  non  4.  A  younger  person  cannot  adopt
posse  adoptare  placet.  Adoptio  enim  an  older  ;  for  adoption  imitates  na-
naturam  imitatur,  et  pro  monstro  ture  ;  and  it  seems  unnatural,  that  a
est  ut  major  sit  filius  quam  pater,  son  should  be  older  than  his  father.
Debet  itaque  is  qui  sibi  filium  per  Any  one,  therefore,  who  wishes  either
adoptionem  vel  adrogationem  facit,  to  adopt  or  arrogate  a  son  should  be
plena  pubertate,  id  est,  decem  et  the  elder  by  the  term  of  complete
octo  annis  praecedere.  puberty,  that  is,  by  eighteen  years.

D.  i.  7.  15.  3  ;  D.  i.  7.  IG ;  D.  i.  7.  40.  1.

As  long  as  the  required  number  of  years  intervened,  there
was  no  further  positive  rule  as  to  age  ;  but  it  being  in  the  discre-
tion of  the  emperor  to  allow  ado2:)tion  or  not,  there  was  generally
a  disposition  to  refuse  it  unless  the  person  who  wished  to  adopt
was  of  such  an  age  as  to  make  it  improbable  he  should  have
children  of  his  own.    (D.  i.  7.  15.)

The  legal  age  of  puberty  in  males  was  fourteen  ;  but  eighteen
was  the  age  at  which  the  body  was  considered  to  be  fully  deve-
loped in  all  cases,  plena  puhertas.

5.  Licet  autem  et  in  locum  ne-  5.  A  person  may  adopt  another  as
potis  vel  pronepotis,  vel  in  locum  grandson  or  granddaughter,  great-
neptis  "vel  proneptis,  vel  deinceps  grandson  or  great-granddaughter,  or
adoptare,  quamvis  filium  quis  non  any  other  descendant,  although  he  has
habeat.  no  son.

It  would  have  seemed,  without  express  enactment,  that  a
person,  to  have  a  grandson  in  his  power,  must  have  or  have  had
a  son,  as  the  sons  of  his  daughter  Avould  not  be  in  his  power.
But,  as  we  know,  the  maternal  grandfather  might  adopt. ;  With  re-
spect to  the  degrees  of  marriage,  it  sometimes  made  an  important
difference  whether  a  person  was  adopted  as  a  son  or  grandson.
The  natural  (i.  e.  non-adoptive)  granddaughter,  for  instance,  of
the  person  adopting  would  be  cousin  or  niece  of  the  person
adopted,  according  as  he  was  adopted  as  a  grandson  or  son,  and
might  marry  him  in  the  one  case,  and  not  in  the  other.

6.  Et  tarn  filium  alienum  quis  6.  A  man  may  adopt  the  son  of
in  locum  nepotis  adoptare  potest,  another  as  his  grandson,  and  the
quam  nepotem  in  locum  filii.                  grandson  of  another  as  his  son.

44  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XI.

7.  Sed  si  quis  nepotis  loco  adop-  7.  If  a  man  adojDts  a  grandson  to
tet,  vel  quasi  ex  eo  filio  quern  liabet  be  the  son  of  a  son  already  adopted,
jam  adoptatum,  vel  quasi  ex  illo  or  of  a  natural  son  in  his  power,  the
quern  naturalem  in  sua  potestate  consent  of  this  son  ought  first  to  be
habet,  in  eo  casu  et  filius  consen-  obtained,  that  he  may  not  have  a
tire  debet,  ne  ei  invito  suus  heres  s^tns  heres  given  him  against  his  will,
adgnascatur.  Sed  ex  contrario,  si  But,  on  the  contrary,  if  a  grandfather
aviis  ex  filio  nepotem  det  in  ad-  gives  his  grandson  by  a  son  in  adop-
optionem,  non  est  necesse  filium  tion,  the  consent  of  the  son  is  not
consentire.  necessary.

D.  i.  7.  6.  10,  11  ;  D.  xxiii.  1.  16.  1.

A  grandson  could  be  adopted  either  generally,  when  he  was
supposed  to  be  the  issue  of  a  deceased  son,  and  so  was  sui  juris  at
the  death  of  the  grandfather ;  or,  specially  as  the  son  of  a  parti-
cular son,  in  which  case  he  came  under  that  son's  power  when  the
grandfather  died.  The  grandfather  could  at  his  pleasure  dimi-
nish, but  could  not  add  to  the  number  of  his  son's  family :  because
otherwise  the  son  would  have  had  a  suus  heres  (see  Introd.  sec.
77)  forced  on  him  against  his  will,  to  take  a  share  of  his  pro-
perty.

8.  In  plurimis  autem  causis  ad-  8.  He  who  is  either  adopted  or  ar-
similatur  is  qui  adoptatus  vel  adro-  rogated  is  assimilated,  in  many  points,
gatus  est  ei  qui  ex  legitimo  matri-  to  a  son  born  in  lawful  matrimony  ;
monio  natus  est.  Et  ideo  si  quis  per  and  therefore,  if  any  one  adopts  a  per-
imperatorem,  sive  apud  pr?etorem,  son  who  is  not  a  stranger  by  imperial
vel  apud  prsesidem  provincise  non  rescript,  or  before  the  praetor,  or  the
extraneum  adoptaverit,  potest  eum-  prxses  of  a  province,  he  can  afterwards
dem  alii  in  adoptionem  dare.  give  in  adoption  to  another  the  person

whom  he  has  adopjted.

Gai.  i.  105.

The  text  says  that  the  adoptive  son  is  assimilated  to  the  na-
tural in  plurimis  causis,  and  not  altogether;  because,  among
other  differences,  if  the  adoptive  son  left  his  adoptive  family,  he
ceased  to  have  any  relationship  whatever  to  its  members ;  but
the  natural  son  was  always  cognatus  to  his  own  blood  relations,
although,  by  emancipation  or  adoption,  he  might  cease  to  be
agnatus  to  them.

Of  course,  under  Justinian's  legislation,  the  adoptive  father,
if  a  stranger,  had  no  patria  potestas  at  all,  and  therefore  could
not  exercise  such  a  power  as  that  of  giving  his  adoptive  son  in
adoption  to  another  person.

When  once  the  tie  of  adoption  w^as  dissolved,  all  the  relations
created  by  it  were  entirely  at  an  end,  except  that  marriage  was
forbidden  between  the  person  adopting  and  the  person  adopted.
(See  Tit.  10.  1.)  In  omni  fere  jure,  finita  patris  adoptivi  potes-
tate, nullum  ex  pristino  retinetur  vestigium,  (D.  i.  7.  13.)  But
the  tie  could  never  again  be  renewed  between  the  same  persons.
(D.  i.  7.  37.  1.)

9.  Sed  et  illud  utriusque  adop-  9.  It  is  a  rule  common  to  both
tionis  commune  est,  quod  et  ii  qui     kinds   of  adoption,  that  persons,   al-

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XI.  '  45

renerare  non  possunt,  quales  sunt  though  incapable  of  procreating,  as,
j'padones,  adoptare  possunt ;  castrati  for  instance,  impotent  persons,  may,
lutem  non  possunt.  hut  those  who  are  castrated,  cannot,

adopt.

Gai.  i.  103.

The  distinction  was  drawn  because  it  was  considered  as  never
perfectly  certain  that  the  former  {spadones)  would  not  at  some
time  or  other  have  children  of  their  own.

10.  Feminse  quoque  adoptare  10.  Women,  also,  cannot  adopt  ;
Qon  possunt,  quia  nee  naturales  li-  for  they  have  not  even  their  own  chil-
beros  in  sua  potestate  habent.  Sed  dren  in  their  power  ;  but,  by  the  in-
sx  indulgentia  principis  ad  solatium  diligence  of  the  emperor,  as  a  comfort
liberorum  amissorum  adoptare  pos-  for  the  loss  of  their  own  children,  they
sunt.  are  allowed  to  adopt.

Gai.  i.  104 ;  C.  viii.  48.  5.

Women  could  not  adopt,  because  the  meaning  of  adoption
was  that  the  person  adopted  passed  into  the  patria  potestas  of
the  person  adopting.  The  adoption  mentioned  in  the  text  (which
was  permitted  by  a  constitution  of  Diocletian  and  Maximian,  C.
viii.  48.  5),  only  placed  the  adopted  children  in  the  same  relation,
to  the  woman  as  her  own  children  would  have  held.  She  gained,
nothing  like  patria  potestas  over  them.

11.  lUud  proprium  est  adoptionis  11.  Adoption  by  the  rescript  of  the
illjus  quae  per  sacrum  oraculum  fit,  emperor  has  this  peculiarity.  If  a  per-
quod  is  qui  liberos  in  potestate  son,  having  children  under  his  power,
habet,  si  se  adrogandum  dederit,  should  give  himself  in  arrogation,  not
non  solum  ipse  potestati  adroga-  only  does  he  submit  himself  to  the
toris  subjicitur,  sed  etiam  liberi  power  of  the  arrogator,  but  his  chil-
ejus  in  ejusdem  fiunt  potestate,  dren  are  also  in  the  arrogator's  power,
tamquam  nepotes.  Sic  enim  et  being  considered  his  grandchildren,
divus  Augustus  non  ante  Tiberium  It  was  for  this  reason  that  Augustus
adoptavit,  quam  is  Germanicum  did  not  adopt  Tiberius  until  Tiberius
adoptavit,  ut  protinus  adoptione  had  adopted  Germanicus  ;  so  that
facta  incipiat  Germanicus  Augusti  directly  the  adoption  was  made,  Ger-
nepos  esse.  manicus     became     the    grandson    of

Augustus.

Gai.  i.  107.

This  is  said  to  be  an  incident  of  arrogation  only,  because  when
a  person  not  sui  juris  was  adopted,  his  children  were  not  in  his
power,  and  so  he  could  not  transfer  them  to  the  power  of  his
adoptive  father;  into  which  they  only  came  after  the  death  of
the  person  in  whose  power  their  own  natural  father  was.

All  the  property  of  the  person  arrogated  became,  before
Justinian's  time,  the  property  of  the  arrogator.  (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.
10.)  The  adoptive  son,  as  he  was  previously  in  the  power  of  his
natural  father,  had  no  property  to  pass.

12.  Apud  Catonem  bene  scrip-  12.  Cato,  as  we  learn  from  the
turn  refert  antiquitas,  servos,  si  a  ancients,  has  with  good  reason  writ-
domino  adoptati  sint,  ex  hoc  ipso  ten,  that  slaves,  when  adopted  by
posse  liberari.     Unde  et  nos  eruditi  their  masters,  are  thereby  made  free.

46

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XII.

in  nostra  constitutione,  etiam  eum
serviim  quern  dominus  actis  inter-
venientibus  filium  suiim  nomina-
verit,  liberum  esse  constituimus,
licet  hoc  ad  jus  filii  accipiendum
non  sufficiat.

In  accordance  with  which  opinion,  we
have  decided  by  one  of  our  constitu-
tions, that  a  slave  to  whom  his  master
by  a  solemn  deed  gives  the  title  of  son
is  thereby  made  free,  although  he  does
not  acquire  thereby  the  rights  of  a  son.

C.  vii.  6.  10.

It  is  doubtful  whether  slaves  could  be  adopted,  so  as  to  be-
come members  of  the  family  of  the  person  adopting  them.  Aulus
Gellius  (Noct.  Attic,  v.  9)  says  that  the  majority  of  the  ancient
jurists,  including  Sabinus,  held  that  they  could.  Theophilus  says
Cato  was  of  the  contrary  opinion.  They  certainly  became  freed-
men,  and  never  ingenui  by  adoption  ;  even  a  freedman  never  be-
came ingenuus  by  adoption  (D.  i.  7.  26),  and  he  could  only  be
adopted  by  his  j)atron  (D.  i.  7.  15),  and  on  a  good  ground,  such
as  the  patron  having  no  children.     (C.  viii.  48.)

Tit.  XII.    QUIBUS  MODIS  JUS  POTESTATIS

SOLYITUR.

Videamus  nunc  quibus  modis  ii
qui  alieno  juri  sunt  subjecti,  eo  jure
liberantur.  Et  quidem  servi  quem-
admodum  potestate  liberantur,  ex
iis  intelligere  possumus  qiise  de  servis
manumittendis  superius  exposuimus.
Hi  vero  qui  in  potestate  parentis
sunt,  mortuo  eo  sui  juris  fiunt  ;  sed
hoc  distinctionem  recipit.  Nam  mor-
tuo patre,  sane  omnimodo  filii  fili?eve
sui  juris  efficiuntur ;  mortuo  vero
avo,  non  omnimodo  nepotes  neptes-
que  sui  juris  fiunt,  sed  ita  si  post
mortem  avi  in  potestatem  patris  sui
recasuri  non  sunt.  Itaque,  si  mori-
ente  avo  pater  eorum  vivit  et  in
potestate  patris  sui  est,  tunc  post
obitum  avi  in  potestate  patris  sui
fiunt.  Si  vero  is  quo  tempore  avus
moritur,  aut  etiam  mortuus  est  aut
exiit  de  potestate  patris,  tunc  ii,
quia  in  potestatem  ejus  cadere  non
j)ossunt,  sui  juris  fiunt.

Let  us  now  inquire  into  the  dif-
ferent ways   in  which  persons  in  the
power  of    others   are   freed   from    it.
How  slaves  are  freed  from  the  power
of  their  masters  may  be  learnt  from
what  we  have  already  said  with  regard
to   manumission.     Those  who    are   in
the  power  of  a  j)arent  become  indepen-
dent at   his  death  ;  a  rule,   however,
which    admits   of  a   distinction.     For
when    a    father   dies,    his    sons    and
daughters  become  undoubtedly  inde-
pendent ;  but  when  a  grandfather  dies,
his  grandchildren  do   not  necessarilj'-
become   independent,  but  only  if  on
the  grandfather's   death   they  do  not
fall  under  the  power  of  their  father.
Therefore,   if  their   father  is  alive  at
the   death   of  their  grandfather,  and
was  in  his  power,  then,  on  the  grand-
father's death,  they  become  subject  to
the  power  of  their  father.     But,  if  at
the   time    of  the  grandfather's   death
their  father  is  either  dead,  or  has  al-
ready passed  out  of  the  grandfather's
power    by    emancipation,  as  they   do
not   fall   under    the    x^ower    of    their
father,  they  become  independent.

Gal  i.  124.  126,  127.

The  modes  in  which  the  patria  potestas  was  ended  were —
1.  The  death  of  the  parent;  2.  The  parent  or  son  suffering  loss  of
freedom  or  of  citizenship  ;  3.  The  son  attaining  certain  dignities;
4.  Emancipation.     All  these  modes  are  treated  of  in  this  Title.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XII.  47

1.  Cum  aiitem  is  qui  ob  aUquocl  1.    If   a  man,    convicted   of   some

maleficium   in   insulam   deportatur,  crime,   is   deported   to   an   island,    he

civitatem   amittit,   sequitur  ut,  qui  loses  the  rights  of  a  Roman  citizen  ;

eo  modo  ex  numero  civium  Roma-  whence   it   follows,  that  the   children

norum  toUitur,  perinde  ac  eo  mor-  of  a  person  thus  banished  cease  to  be

tuo  desinant  liberi  in  potestate  ejus  under  his  power,  exactly  as  if  he  were

esse.     Pari  ratione,  et  si  is  qui  in  dead.     Equally,  if  a  son  is  deported,

potestate    parentis   sit,    in   insulam  does  he  cease  to  be  under  the  power  of

deportatus  fuerit,  desinit  in  potes-  his  father.     But,  if  by  the  favour  of

tate  parentis  esse.     Sed  si  ex  indul-  the  emperor  any  one  is  restored,  he

gentia  principal!  restituti  fuerint,  per  regains   his  former  position  in  every

omnia  pristinum  statum  recipiunt.  respect.

Gai.  i.  128.

The  i^atria  jiotestas  belonging  exclusively  to  citizens,  and
being  necessarily  exercised  over  citizens,  when  a  parent  or  son
lost  the  rights  of  citizenship,  or,  as  it  was  termed,  underwent  a
media  capitis  chminutio  (see  Tit.  16.  2),  the  patria  potestas  was
necessarily  at  an  end.  (Ulp.  Reg.  x.  3.)  The  punishment  of
deportatio  in  insulam  consisted  in  the  condemned  being  confined
within  certain  local  bounds,  whether  really  those  of  an  island,  or
of  some  prescribed  space  of  the  mainland,  and  being  considered
as  civilly  dead,  deportatus  pro  mortuo  liahctur  (D.  xxxvii.  4.  10.  8),
and  looked  on  as  peregrinus,  not  as  a  civis.  (Ulp.  Reg.  x.  3.)  It
the  condemned  was  recalled,  and  by  the  pardon  of  the  emperor
all  the  effects  of  his  punishment  were  done  away,  he  was  said  to
be  restitutus  in  integrum  :  he  then  resumed  all  his  civil  rights,
and  was  placed  as  exactly  as  possible  in  the  position  which  he
would  have  held,  had  he  never  been  deportatus.  (Cod.  ix.  51.  1.)
Many  texts,  instead  of  reading  in  this  section  restituti  fuerint,
per  omnia  .  .  .  recipiunt,  read  restituti  fuerint  per  omnia,
making  restitutio  per  omnia  equivalent  to  restitutio  in  integrum.
The  reading  adopted  in  the  text  supposes  that  a  restitutio  in  in-
tegrum is  spoken  of  in  the  word  restituti.

2.  Relegati  autem  patres  in  in-  2.  A  father  who  is  merely  banished
sulam  in  potestate  sua  liberos  reti-  by  relegation,  still  retains  his  children
nent.  Et  ex  contrario  liberi  relegati  in  his  power  ;  and  a  child  who  is  re-
in potestate  parentum  remanent.  legated  still  remains  in  the  power  of

his  father.

D.  xlviii.  22.  4.

The  relegatus  was  merely  forbidden  to  leave  a  certain  spot,
and  his  civil  status  was  in  no  way  altered.  (See  Ovid,  Trist.
V.  11.)

3.  Poenae  servus  effectus  filios  3.  When  a  man  becomes  a  ^  slave
in  potestate  habere  desinit.  Servi  of  punishment '  he  ceases  to  have  his
autem  pcense  efficiuntur,  qui  in  sons  in  his  jpower.  Persons  become
metallimi  damnantur,  et  qui  bestiis  ^  slaves  of  punishment '  who  are  con-
subjiciuntur.  demned  to  the  mines,  or  exposed  to

wild  beasts.

D.  xlviii.  19.  17.  19.

A  slave  had  no  legal  power  over  his  children ;  in  whatever
way,  therefore,  a  father  became  a  slave,  he  lost  his  power  over

48

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XII.

Ills  cliildreii.  When  a  person  was  sentenced  to  work  in  the  mines,
or  to  contend  with  wild  beasts  in  the  arena,  punishments  only
inflicted  for  very  great  crimes,  he  became,  by  the  mere  operation
of  his  sentence,  a  slave.  But  as  there  was  no  master  whose  slave
he  could  be  considered,  it  was  said  that  he  became  the  slave  of
the  punislnnent  i^servus  'pmncB).

4.  Filiusfamilias,  si  militaverit
vel  si  senator  vel  consul  fiierit
factus,  manet  in  potestate  patris ;
militia  enim  vel  consiilaris  dignitas
potestate  patris  filium  non  liberat.
Sed  ex  constitutione  nostra,  summa
patriciatus  dignitas,  illico  imperiali-
bns  codicillis  prsestitis,  filium  a
patria  potestate  liberat.  Quis  enini
patiatur,  patrem  quidem  posse  per
emancipationis  niodum  su?e  potes-
tatis  nexibus  filium  relaxare,  im-
peratoriam  autem  celsitudinem  non
valere  eum  quern  sibi  patrem  elegit,
ab  aliena  eximere  potestate  ?

4.  A  son,  though  he  becomes  a
soldier,  a  senator,  or  a  consul,  still
remains  in  the  power  of  his  father,
from  which  neither  military  service
nor  consular  dignity  can  free  him.
But  by  our  constitution  the  supreme
dignity  of  the  patriciate  frees  the  son
from  the  power  of  his  father  imme-
diately on  the  grant  of  the  imperial
patent.  It  is  obviously  absurd  that
a  parent  could  emancipate  his  son
from  the  tie  of  his  power,  and  that
the  majesty  of  the  emperor  should
not  be  able  to  release  from  the  power
of  another,  one  whom  he  had  chosen
to  be  a  father  of  the  state.

D.  i.  7.  3;  C.  xii.  3.  5.

Under  the  old  Koman  law  no  child  was  released  from  a  father's
power,  by  having  any  dignity  or  office,  except  that  of  ^  jiamen
dialis,  or  a  vestal  virgin.  Persons  holding  either  of  these  offices,
without  undergoing  any  capitis  deminutio,  or  ceasing  to  be  mem-
bers of  their  father's  family,  became  sui  juris.  Justinian  con-
ferred the  privilege  on  those  enjoying  the  dignity  of  the  patriciate,
and  at  a  later  period  of  his  legislation  enlarged  the  number  of
dignities  to  which  this  incident  was  attached ;  and  the  child  was
freed  from  the  power  of  his  father  by  being  made  a  bishop,  a
consul,  qujestor  of  the  palace,  proetorian  prefect,  or  master  of
infantry  or  cavalry  ;  and,  in  general,  all  those  whose  dignity
exempted  them  from  the  burdens  of  the  curia  were  freed  from  the
power  of  their  father.  (Nov.  31 ;  C.  x.  31.  QtQ.)  When  under
Justinian^s  legislation  a  child  was  released  by  attaining  a  dignity,
he  still,  as  in  the  older  law,  remained  a  member  of  his  father's
family,  and  enjoyed  all  his  rights  of  succession  and  agnation.
(Nov.  81.  2.)

Constantine  changed  the  meaning  of  patricius,  by  making  it
a  title  of  the  highest  honour  conferred  on  persons  who  enjoyed
the  chief  place  in  the  emperor's  esteem.  The  power  of  making
-patricii  was,  in  general,  used  very  sparingly  by  the  emperors,  and
hence  the  title  became  an  object  of  ambition  even  to  foreign
princes.

5.  Si  ab  hostibus  captus  fuerit
parens,  quamvis  hostium  fiat,  tamen
pendet  jus  liberorum  propter  jus
postliminii ;  quia  hi  qui  ab  hostibus
capti  sunt,  si  reversi  fuerint,  omnia

5.  If  a  parent  is  taken  prisoner,
although  he  becomes  the  slave  of  the
enemy,  yet  his  paternal  power  is  only
suspended,  owing  to  the  jits  postli-
7ninii ;  for  captives,  when  they  return,

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XII.

49

pristina  jura  recipiunt.  Idcirco
reversus  etiam  liberos  habebit  in
potestate ;  quia  postliminium  fingit
eum  qui  captus  est,  semper  in  civi-
tate  fuisse.  Si  vero  ibi  decesserit,
exinde  ex  quo  captus  est  pater,
filius  sui  juris  fuisse  videtur.  Ipse
quoque  filius  neposve  si  a.b  liosti-
bus  captus  fuerit,  similiter  dicimus
propter  jus  postliminii,  jus  quoque
potestatis  parentis  in  suspenso  esse.
Dictum  est  autem  postliminium  a
LIMINE  et  POST.  Unde  eum  qui
ab  hostibus  captus  in  fines  nostros
postea  pervenit,  postliminio  rever-
sum  recte  dicimus ;  nam  limina  sicut
in  domibus  finem  quemdam  faciunt,
sic  et  imperii  finem  limen  esse
veteres  voluerunt.  Hinc  et  limes
dictus  est,  quasi  finis  quidam  et
terminus ;  ab  eo  postliminium  dic-
tum, quia  eodem  limine  reverte-
batur,  quo  amissus  fuerat,  Sed  et
qui  captus  victis  hostibus  recupera-
tur,  postliminio  rediisse  existimatur.

are  restored  to  all  their  former  rights.
Thus,  on  his  return,  the  father  will
have  his  children  in  his  power :  for
the  postlwiinium  supposes  that  the
captive  has  never  been  absent.  If,
however,  a  prisoner  dies  in  captivity,
the  son  is  considered  to  have  been
independent  from  the  time  when  his
father  was  taken  prisoner.  So,  too,
if  a  son,  or  grandson,  is  taken  pri-
soner, the  power  of  the  parent,  by-
means  of  the  jus  postliminii,  is  only
in  suspense.  The  term  postlimi7iium
is  derived  from  post  and  limen.  We
therefore  say  of  a  person  taken  by
the  enemy,  and  then  returning  into
our  territory,  that  he  is  come  back
by  postliminium.  For,  just  as  the
threshold  forms  the  boundary  of  a
house,  so  the  ancients  have  termed
the  boundary  of  the  empire  a  thres-
hold. Wlience  limes,  also,  is  derived,
and  is  used  to  signify  a  boundary  and
limit.  Thence  comes  the  word  postli-
minium, because  the  prisoner  returned
to  the  same  limits  whence  he  had  been
lost.  The  prisoner,  also,  who  is  re-
taken on  the  defeat  of  the  enemy,  is
considered  to  have  come  back  hj  post-
liminium.

Gai.  i.  129;  D.  xlix.  15.  29.  3;  D.  xlix.  15.  26.

By  the  jus  postliminii ,  property  taken  in  war,  and  retaken
from  the  enemy,  was  restored  to  the  original  owners  (see  Bk.  ii.
Tit.  1.  17);  and  captives,  on  their  return  to  their  own  country,
were  re-established  in  all  their  former  rights.  When  the  captive
returned,  all  the  time  of  his  captivity  was,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,
blotted  out,  and  he  was  exactly  in  the  position  he  would  have
held  if  he  had  not  been  taken  captive.  (D.  xlix.  15.  21.  6.)  The
manner  of  his  return  was  quite  immaterial.  Nihil  interest  quomodo
captivus  reversus  est,  (D.  xlix.  15.  26.)  When  the  father
returned,  he  resumed  all  his  rights  over  his  property,  and  his
patria  potestas  over  his  children ;  when  a  child  returned,  he
regained  his  rights  of  succession  and  agnation,  and  at  the  same
time  he  fell  again  under  the  patria  potestas  of  his  father.  (D.
xlix.  15.  14.)  If  the  captive  did  not  return  from  captivity,  the
law  considered  him  to  have  died  at  the  moment  of  his  captivity
commencing,  a  point  important  with  regard  to  testaments  (see
Bk.  ii.  Tit.  12.  5);  and  also  as  making  children  sui  juris,  and
giving  them  all  property  acquired  by  them,  from  the  time  of  the
parent's  captivity.  Gains  says  that  in  his  time  this  point  in
favour  of  the  children  was  not  established  (Gai.  i.  129);  but,  at
any  rate,  it  was  so  when  Ulpian  wrote.     (D.  xlix.  15.  18.)

6.  Prseterea  emancipatione  quo-  6.  Children,  also,  cease  to  be  under

que    desinunt    liberi    in    potestate    the  power  of  their  parents  by  eman-

50  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XII.

parentum    esse.      Sed   emancipatio  cipation.     Formerly  emancipation  was

antea  qiiidem  vel  per  antiquam  legis  effected,   either  by  adopting  the  pro-

observationem  procedebat,  quae  per  cess  of  the  ancient  law,  consisting  of

imaginarias  venditiones   et  interce-  imaginary   sales,    each   followed  by  a

dentes  maimmissiones  celebrabatur,  manumission,  or  by  imperial  rescript ;

vel  ex  imperiali  rescripto.     Nostra  but  we,  in  our  wisdom,    have   intro-

autem  providentia  et  hoc  in  melius  duced  a  reform  on  this  point  by  one  of

per  constitutionem    reformavit,    ut  our  constitutions.     The  old  fictitious

tictione  pristina  explosa,  recta  via  process  is  now  done  away  with,  and

ad  competentes   judices  vel  magis-  parents  may  now  appear  directly  be-

tratus  parentes  intrent,  et  sic  filios  fore  a  proper  judge  or  magistrate,  and

suos  vel  filias,  vel  nepotes,  vel  nep-  free  from  their  power  their  children,

tes   ac   deinceps   sua,   manu   demit-  or  grandchildren,  or  other  descendants,

terent.     Et  tunc  ex  edicto  prastoris  And  then,  according  to  the  praetorian

in  hujus  filii  vel  filiae  vel  nepotis  vel  edict,  the  parent  has  the  same  rights

neptis  bonis,  qui  vel  quae  a  parente  over    the    goods   of    those   whom   he

manumissiTS  vel   manumissa  fuerit,  emancipates,  as  the  patron  has  over  the

eadem  jura  praestantur  parenti,  qua3  goods  of  his  freedman.     And  further,

tribuuntur  patrono  in  bonis  liberti ;  if  the  child  or  children   emancipated

et  praeterea,  si  impubes  sit  filius  vel  are   within   the    age   of  puberty,    the

filia  vel  ceteri,  ipse  parens  ex  manu-  parent,  by  the  emancipation,  becomes

missione  tiitelam  ejus  nanciscitur.  their  tutor.

Gai.  i.  132.  134;  D.  xxxvii.  12.  1;  D.  xxvi.  4.  3.  10;  C.  viii.  49.  5.  6.

We  have  no  trace  of  any  other  form  of  giving  freedom,  in
early  times,  than  that  of  emancipation.  In  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  we  find  it  laid  down,  ^  Si  pater  filium  ter  venumduit  (sells)
liber  esto.^  The  father  might  sell  his  son,  and  he  would  then  be
in  the  mancipium  of  the  purchaser;  but  when  the  purchaser  freed
him,  the  son  would  fall  again  under  his  father's  power.  This
might  happen  over  and  over  again ;  but  the  Twelve  Tables,  whe-
ther making  a  new  enactment,  or  sanctioning  an  old  custom,
declared  that  after  a  third  sale  the  father's  power  was  extinguished
for  ever.  This  may  perhaps  have  been  originally  intended  as  a
kind  of  check  on  the  father  abusing  his  power  of  selling  his  son,
and  have  been  afterwards  used  as  a  means  of  giving  freedom  by  a
fictitious  sale ;  or  it  may  have  been  expressly  enacted  in  the
Twelve  Tables  to  extinguish  all  doubts  whether  the  custom  of
freeing  from  a  father's  power  by  three  sales  was  valid.  In  the
form  the  fictitious  sale  took  in  the  times  of  historical  certainty,
the  father  three  times  sold  his  son  to  a  fictitious  purchaser,  who,
between  the  first  and  the  second  sale,  and  also  between  the  second
and  the  third,  manumitted  the  son,  i.e.  discharged  him  from  his  i
power  as  a  master  which  he  had  acquired  by  the  sale.  After  the
third  sale,  the  son  was  in  the  mancipium  of  the  fictitious  purchaser,
and  if  this  purchaser  had  manumitted  him,  he  would  have  been
the  son's  patron.  But  as  the  father  generally  wished  to  be  the
patron  of  his  son,  the  relation  giving  him,  among  other  things,
the  right  of  succeeding  to  the  son  if  intestate  and  childless,  the  ;
purchaser,  instead  of  manumitting  him,  resold  (remancipavii)  him
to  the  father,  who  then  himself  manumitted  him,  and  became  his
patron.  In  cases  where  the  fictitious  purchaser  manumitted  the
third  time,  he  was  considered  as  a  trustee  for  the  father  of  all  the  .

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XII.

51

rio-hts  of  patronage.  Originally,  an  express  contract  was  made,
contracta  Jiducia,  to  bind  the  purchaser  to  remancipate  or  to
manumit,  reserving  the  rights  of  patronage  to  the  father,  as  the
case  mio*ht  be ;  but  in  later  times  the  purchaser  was  considered
bound  by  an  implied  contract,  and  the  prastorian  edict,  as  we  learn
from  the  text,  secured  to  the  father  in  all  cases  the  rights  of
patronage.

As  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  spoke  only  of  a  son,  it  was
considered  by  a  strict  interpretation  of  the  term  '  son/  that  one
sale  instead  of  three  was  sufficient  in  the  case  of  a  daughter
or  grandchild.     (G.  i.  132.)

Anastasius  introduced  a  new  mode  of  freeing  the  child  from
the  power  of  the  father.  The  emperor  issued,  in  cases  where  he
thought  it  proper,  a  rescript  authorising  the  emancipation ;  and
this  rescript  being  registered  by  a  magistrate,  the  process  was
complete.     (C.  viii.  49.  5.)

Justinian,  in  giving  the  greatest  possible  facility  to  emancipa-
tion, preserved  all  the  effects  which  the  process  had  had  under  the
old  system  of  fictitious  sales.  Both  under  his  system  and  that  of
Anastasius,  a  child  could  be  emancipated  in  his  absence,  which
was  not  possible  in  the  times  when  the  old  forms  of  manumission
were  strictly  observed.

7.  Admonendi  autem  sumtis,  li-
berum  arbitrium  esse  ei  qui  filmm
et  ex  eo  nepotem  vel  neptem  in
potestate  habebit,  filium  quidem
potestate  diinittere,  nepotem  vero
vel  neptem  retinere ;  et  ex  diverse
filium  quidem  in  potestate  retinere,
nepotem  vero  vel  neptem  manu-
mittere,  vel  omnes  sui  juris  eificere.
Eadem  et  de  pronepote  et  pronepte
dicta  esse  intelligantur.

8.  Sed  et  si  pater  filium  quern
in  potestate  habet,  avo  vel  proavo
naturali,  secundum  nostras  consti-
tutiones  super  his  habitas,  in  adop-
tionem  dederit :  id  est,  si  hoc  ipsum
actis  intervenientibus  apud  com-
petentem  judicem  manifestaverit,
prsesente  eo  qui  adoptatur  et  non
contradicente,  nee  non  eo  prsesente
qui  adoptat,  solvitur  jus  potestatis
patris  naturalis ;  transit  autem  in
hujusmodi  parentem  adoptivum,  in
cujus  persona  et  adoptionem  esse
plenissimam  antea  diximus.

7.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  a
parent  having  in  his  power  a  son,
and  by  that  son  a  grandson  or  grand-
daughter, may  emancipate  his  son,
and  retain  in  his  power  his  grandson
or  granddaughter;  or,  conversely,  he
may  emancipate  his  grandson  or
granddaughter,  and  retain  his  son  in
his  power ;  or,  he  may  make  them  all
independent.  And  it  is  the  same  in
the  case  of  a  great-grandson,  or  a
great-granddaughter.

8.  If  a  father  has  a  son  in  his
power,  and  gives  him  in  adoption  to
the  son's  natural  grandfather  or  great-
grandfather, in  conformity  with  our
constitutions  enacted  on  this  subject,
that  is,  if  he  declares  his  intention  in
a  formal  act  before  a  competent  judge,
in  the  presence  and  without  the  dis-
sent of  the  person  adopted,  and  also
in  the  presence  of  the  person  who
adopts,  then  the  right  of  paternal
power  is  extinguished  as  to  the  natural
father,  and  passes  from  him  to  the
adoptive  father ;  with  regard  to  whom,
as  we  have  before  observed,  adoption
preserves  all  its  effects.

C.  viii.  47.  11.

The  adoptive  father  could  not  acquire  any  patria  potestas  by
fictitious  sales;   he  could  only  extinguish  that  of  the   natural

E   2

52

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XIII.

father.  In  order  to  gain  it  himself,  he  had  recourse  to  another
fictitious  process,  called  in  jure  cessio.  He  claimed  the  child  as
his  before  a  magistrate,  and  the  natural  father  not  withstanding
the  claim,  the  child  was  given  into  the  patria  potestas  of  the
adoptive  father.  For  the  change  made  by  Justinian  in  the  law
of  adoption,  see  Tit.  11.  1.

9.  lUud  autem  scire  oportet,  quod
si  nuriis  tua  ex  filio  tuo  conceperit,
et  filium  postea  emancipaveris  vel
in  adoptionem  dederis  prsegnante
iiurii  tua,  nihilominus  quod  ex  ea
nascitur,  in  potestate  tua  nascitur;
quod  si  post  emancipationem  vel
adoptionem  conceptus  fuerit,  patris
sui  emancipati  vel  avi  adoptivi
potestati  subjicitur ;  et  quod  neque
naturales  liberi  neque  adoptivi  uUo
pene  modo  possunt  cogere  parentes
de  potestate  sua  eos  dimittere.

9.  It  must  be  observed,  that,  if
your  daughter-in-law  becomes  preg-
nant, and  if  during  her  pregnancy
you  emancipate  your  son,  or  give  him
in  adoption,  the  child  will  be  born  in
your  power;  but  if  the  child  is  con-
ceived subsequently  to  the  emanci-
pation or  adoption,  he  is  born  in  the
power  of  his  emancipated  father,  or
his  adoptive  grandfather.  Children,
natural  or  adoptive,  have  almost  no
means  of  compelling  their  parents  to
free  them  from  their  power.

Gai.  i.  135.  137;  D.  i.  7.  31.33.

The  rights  of  a  child  were  always  determined  by  reference  to
the  moment  of  conception,  not  of  birth,  when  he  was  born  injusto
mairimonio,  because  he  then  followed  the  condition  of  his  father.
But  when  he  followed  the  condition  of  his  mother,  as  he  did  when
he  was  born  out  ofjustum  matrimonium,  reference  was  had  to  the
time  of  his  birth  (G.  i.  89),  or,  in  the  later  law,  to  the  time  of  his
conception,  of  his  birth,  or  to  any  intermediate  time,  as  might  be
most  favourable  to  him.     (See  Tit.  4.  pr.)

The  exceptional  cases  alluded  to  in  the  words  neque  ullo  pene
modo  only  occurred  where  the  father  attempted  to  make  a  base
use  of  his  power  over  his  children,  or  abandoned  them  ( C.  xi.  40.
6  ;  viii.  52.  2) ;  or  when  a  person,  adopted  under  the  age  of
puberty,  on  attaining  that  age,  compelled  his  adoptive  father  to
emancipate  him.     (D.  i.  7.  33.)

Tit.  XIII.     DE   TUTELIS.

Transeamus  nunc  ad  aliam  divi-
sionem  personarum;  nam  ex  his
personis  quse  in  potestate  non  sunt,
quaedam  vel  in  tutela  sunt  vel  in
curatione,  quaedam  neutro  jure
tenentur.  Videamus  ergo  de  his  qui
in  tutela  vel  curatione  sunt :  ita
enim  intelligemus  ceteras  personas
quae  neutro  jure  tenentur.  Ac  prius
dispiciamus  de  his  quae  in  tutela
sunt.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  another^
division  of  persons.  Of  those  who  are
not  in  the  power  of  a  parent,  some
are  under  a  tutor,  some  under  a
curator,  some  under  neither.  Let  us
treat,  then,  of  those  persons  who  are
under  a  tutor  or  curator ;  for  we  shall
thus  ascertain  who  are  they  who  are
not  subject  to  either.  And  first  of
persons  under  a  tutor.

Gai.  i.  142,  143.

This  is  rather  a  subdivision  of  persons  sui  juris  than  another
division  of  persons  generally.      There  were  some  persons  who

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XIII.

53

■yvere  exempt  from  the  patria  potestas,  and  yet  required  constant
protection  and  assistance.  When  this  arose  from  youth,  or,  in  the
old  law  of  Rome,  from  the  incapacity  supposed  always  to  attach
to  females  (^propter  animi  levitatem,  Gx\i.  i.  144),  the  protector
was  called  a  tutor \  when  it  arose  from  mental  incapacity,  he  was
called  a  curator.  The  two  offices  greatly  resembled  each  other ;
but  there  was  one  leading  distinction  between  them.  The  tutor
was  said  to  be  given  to  the  person ;  he  not  only  administered  the
property  of  the  pupil,  but  he  also  supplied  what  was  wanting  to
complete  the  pupil's  legal  character.  The  curator  was  said  to  be
given  to  the  property :  his  duty  was  exclusively  to  see  that  the
person  under  his  care  did  not  waste  his  goods.  (See  Introd.
sec.  43.)

1.  Est  autem  tiitela  (ut  Servius
definivit)  vis  ac  potestas  in  capite
libero,  ad  tuendum  eum  qui  propter
setatem  se  defendere  nequit,  jure
civili  data  ac  permissa.

1.  Tutelage,  as  Servius  lias  defined
it,  is  an  authority  and  power  over  a
free  person,  given  and  permitted  by
the  civil  law,  in  order  to  protect  one
whose  tender  years  prevent  him  de-
fending himself.

D.  xxvi.  1.  1.

By  a  free  person  is  meant  here  one  sui  juris.  The  power  of
a  tutor  {^vis  ac  potestas  being  merely  a  redundant  expression)
was  either  given  [data)  by  the  civil  law,  when  it  devolved  on
the  next  of  kin,  or  allowed  (^permissa)  by  that  law,  when  it  was
conferred  by  testament.

2,  Tutores  autem  sunt,  qui  earn
vim  ac  potestatem  habent,  exque
ipsa  re  nomen  ceperunt.  Itaque
appellantur  tutores,  quasi  tuitores
atque  defensores,  sicut  seditui  di-
cuntur  qui  sedes  tuentur.

3.  Permissum  est  itaque  parenti-
bus,  liberis  impuberibus  quos  in
potestate  habent,  testamento  tutores
dare,  et  hoc  in  filios  filiasque  pro-
cedit  omnimodo.  Nepotibus  tamen
neptibusque  ita  demum  parentes
possunt  testamento  tutores  dare,  si
post  mortem  eorum  in  patris  sui
potestatem  non  sunt  recasuri.  Ita-
que si  filius  tuus  mortis  tufe  tem-
pore in  potestate  tua  sit,  nepotes
ex  eo  non  poterunt  testamento  tuo
tutorem  habere,  quamvis  in  potes-
tate tua  fuerint :  scilicet,  quia  mor-
tuo  te  in  potestatem  patris  sui  re-
casuri sunt.

2.  Tutors  are  those  who  have  this
authority  and  power,  and  they  take
their  name  from  the  nature  of  their
office ;  for  they  are  called  tutors,  as
being  protectors  (tuitores)  and  de-
fenders ;  just  as  those  who  have  the
care  of  the  sacred  edifices,  are  called
geditui.

3.  Parents  may  give  tutors  by  tes-
tament to  such  of  their  children  as
have  not  attained  the  age  of  puberty,
and  are  under  their  power.  And  this,
without  any  distinction,  in  the  case  of
all  sons  and  daughters.  But  grand-
fathers can  only  give  tutors  to  their
grandchildren  when  these  will  not  fall
under  the  power  of  their  father  on  the
death  of  the  grandfather.  Hence,  if
your  son  is  in  your  power  at  the  time
of  your  death,  your  grandchildren  by
that  son  cannot  have  a  tutor  appointed
them  by  your  testament,  although
they  were  in  your  power ;  because,  at
your  decease,  they  will  fall  under  the
power  of  their  father.

Gai.  i.  144.  146.

The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  said,  '  Uti  legassit  super  pecu-
nia  tutelave  su(b  rei,  ita  jus  esto.^  None  but  the  head  of  the  family

54  LIB.  I.     TIT.  XIII.

could  appoint  a  tutor  by  testament,  and  for  none  but  children,
or  descendants  in  his  power,  who  were  included  in  the  term  sua
res.  Further,  he  could  only  appoint  a  tutor  for  those  who,  on
his  death,  became  sui  juris,  and  were  under  age.

4.    Cum   autem   in  compluribus  4.  Posthumous  children,  as  in  many

aliis  causis  postumi  pro  jam  natis  other  respects,  so  also  in  this  respect,
liabentur,  et  in  hac  causa  placuit  are  considered  as  already  born  before
non  minus  postumis  quam  natis  tes-  the  death  of  their  fathers ;  and  tutors
tamento  tutores  dari  posse  :  si  modo  may  be  given  by  testament  to  posthu-
in  ea  causa  sint  ut,  si  vivis  parenti-  mous  children,  as  well  as  to  children
bus  nascerentur,  sui  et  in  potestate  already  born,  provided  that  the  post-
eorum  fierent.  humous  children,  had  they  been  born

in  the  lifetime  of  their  father,  would
have  been  sui  heredes,  and  in  their
father's  power.

Gai.  i.  147.

It  was  a  maxim  of  Koman  law  that  nothing  could  be  given
by  testament  to  an  uncertain  person,  and  a  posthumous  child  was
looked  on  in  this  light,  so  much  so  that  he  could  not  be  heir,
nor  take  a  legacy,  nor  have  a  tutor  appointed,  by  will ;  after-
Avards  this  was  so  far  modified  that,  as  regarded  the  chief  of  his
family,  he  was  looked  on  as  if  born  in  the  father's  lifetime  (pro
jam  Jiato  hahebatur) ;  that  is,  the  ascendant  might  make  him  heir,
disinherit  him,  give  him  a  legacy,  or  appoint  a  tutor  for  him.

It  was  not  until  the  time  of  Justinian  that  the  posthumous
child  of  a  stranger  was  capable  of  taking  under  a  testament.
(See  note  on  Bk.  ii.  20.  28.)  The  words  compluribus  in  causis
are  extracted  from  Gains ;  Justinian  left  no  point  of  difference
between  the  posthumous  child  and  the  child  born  in  its  father's
lifetime.  (C.  vi.  48.)  The  proper  meaning  of  posthumus  is
'  born  after  the  death  of  a  person.'  Under  special  legislation  it
received  the  artificial  sense  of  *  born  after  the  date  of  a  testament.'
(Bk.  ii.  13,  2.)

By  the  term  sui  heredes  were  meant  those  persons  who,  on
the  death  of  the  head  of  the  family,  having  no  one  above  them  in
the  line  of  ascent,  became  sui  juris,  and  were  the  necessary  heirs
of  the  deceased,  if  intestate.     (See  Introd.  sec.  77.)

5.   Sed  si  emancipato  filio  tutor  5.  But,  if  a  father  gives   a  tutor

a    patre    testamento    datus    fuerit,  by  testament  to  his  emancipated  son,

confirmandus  est  ex  sententia  pras-  the   apx3ointment   must  be   confirmed

sidis  omnimodo,  id  est,  sine  inqui-  by  the  sentence  of  the  preeses  in  all

sitione.  cases,  that  is,  without  inquiry.

D.  xxvi.  3.  1.

The  emancipated  child  not  being  in  the  power  of  his  father,
could  not,  strictly  speaking,  be  subject  to  the  father's  directions
as  to  his  tutor ;  but  a  magistrate  had  power  to  carry  out  an  ap-
pointment of  a  tutor  in  a  testament  if  there  was  only  this  tech-
nical objection  to  be  surmounted.  The  wishes  of  a  father  were
considered  so  sure  an  indication  to  the  magistrate  of  the  fittest

i

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XIV.  55

person  to  be  tutor^  that  they  were  always  carried  out  without
examining  into  the  suitability  of  the  appointment  (si?ie  inguisi-
tione).  unless  some  change  in  the  position  of  the  tutor  since  the
making  of  the  testament  made  him  obviously  unfit  for  the  office.
(D.  xivi.  111.  8.  9.)

A  father  could  appoint  by  testament  a  tutor  for  his  natural
children  if  he  left  them  property  ;  and  the  mother,  the  patron,
and  indeed  any  one  who  left  property  to  infants  sui  juris,  might
appoint  a  tutor  by  testament,  and  the  magistrate  carried  out
the  appointment,  but  in  these  cases  not  until  he  had  examined
all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  (D.  xxvi.  111.  2.  4.)  The
husband  might  also  by  testament  appoint  a  tutor  to  his  wife  in
manu,  or  give  her  the  option  of  fixing  on  a  tutor.  (Gai.  i.  148-
154.)

Tit.  XIV.    QUI  TESTAMENTO  TUTORES   DARI

POSSUNT.

Dari    autem    potest    tutor    non  Not  only  a  father  of  a  family  may

solum     paterfamilias,      sed     etiam    be  appointed  tutor,  but  also  a  son  of
filiusfamilias.  a  family.

The  office  of  tutor  was  looked  on  as  in  some  respects  a
public  one,  as  the  tutor  supplied  what  was  wanting  to  the  per-
sona of  a  citizen  ;  and  a  filiusfamilias  was  always  capable  of
holding  any  public  office.     (D.  i.  6.  9.)

Any  one  could  be  made  a  tutor  with  whom  there  was  the
testamenti  f actio  (D.  xxvi.  2.  21),  or,  in  other  words,  any  one
who  had  the  rights  of  citizenship  sufficiently  to  enable  him  to  go
through  the  peculiar  forms  of  Koman  law.

Women  could  not  be  appointed  tutors  according  to  the  old
law,  but  the  emperors  would  confirm  the  power  of  a  mother
named  by  testament  tutor  of  her  children.     (D.  xxvi.  1.  18.)

1.   Sed  et  servus  proprius  testa-  1.  A  man  may  also  by  testament

mento  cum  libertate  recte  tutor  appoint  as  a  tutor  his  own  slave,  at
dari  potest.  Sed  sciendum  est  eum,  the  same  time  giving  him  his  liberty,
et  sine  libertate  tutorem  datum,  But  it  must  be  observed,  that  if  a
tacite  libertatem  directam  accej^isse  slave  be  appointed  tutor  without  an
videri,  et  per  hoc  recte  tutorem  express  gift  of  liberty,  he  is  still  held
esse.  Plane  si  per  errorem  quasi  to  receive  by  implication  a  direct  free-
liber  tutor  datus  sit,  aliud  dicen-  dom,  and  thus  can  legally  accept  the
dum  est.  Servus  autem  alienus  office  of  tutor.  If,  however,  it  is  by
pure  inutiliter  testamento  datur  mistake,  and  from  the  testator  sup-
tutor  ;  sed  ita  cum  liber  erit,  utiliter  posing  him  to  be  free,  that  he  is  ap-
datur.  Proprius  autem  servus  in-  pointed  tutor,  the  decision  would  be
utiliter  eo  modo  tutor  datur.  different.     The  appointment  of  a  slave

belonging  to  another  person  as  tutor
is  ineffectual,  if  unconditional;  but
is  valid  when  made  with  this  condi-
tion, 'when  he  shall  be  free.'  If,
however,  any  one  appoints  his  own
slave  with  such  a  condition,  the  ap-
pointment is  void.

D.  xxvi.  2.  32.  2.

56  LIB.  I.      TIT,  XIV.

A  slave  was  incapable  of  holding  any  legal  office.  It  was
therefore  necessary  to  enfranchise  him  in  order  that  he  might
become  a  tutor.  If  the  appointment  were  made  without  express
enfranchisement,  it  was  the  opinion  of  Paul  (D.  xxvi.  2.  32)  that
the  appointment  implied  enfranchisement,  and  this  as  if  given  by
the  testator  himself  {direcfa),  and  not  entrusted  to  his  heir  to
give  {Jideicnmmissaria).  Valerian  and  Gallian,  however,  decided
subsequently  by  a  rescript  (C.  vii.  4.  9),  that  it  was  only  a  libertas
Jideicommissaria  which  such  an  appointment  carried  with  it.
Justinian  here  restores  the  authority  of  the  former  opinion.

The  appointment  of  the  slave  of  another  carried  with  it  the
libertas  Jideicommissaria^  that  is,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  heir  to
j^urchase  and  emancipate  the  slave,  who  could  then  discharge  the
office  of  tutor.  (D.  xxvi.  2.  10.  4.)  If  the  heir  was  not  able  to
purchase  the  slave,  then  the  slave  could  not  act  as  tutor  until
he  gained  his  freedom  in  some  other  way.  Even  if  the  testator
had  not  used  the  words  cum  liber  erit,  or  some  corresponding
expression,  he  was  presumed  to  have  intended  to  use  them,
unless  a  contrary  intention  appeared.  (D.  xxvi.  2.  10.  4  ;  Cod.  vii.
4.  9.)  If  a  testator  said  of  his  own  slave  that  he  was  to  be  tutor
when  free,  this  showed  that  the  testator,  who  had  the  power  to  en-
franchise him,  did  not  choose  to  exercise  it ;  and  as  he  thus  volun-
tarily made  his  own  appointment  void,  the  law  would  not  help  him.

2.  Furiosiis  vel  minor  viginti  2.  If  a  madman  or  a  person  under
quinque  aimis  tutor  testamento  the  age  of  twenty-five  years  is  by  tes-
datus  tutor  erit,  cum  compos  mentis  tament  appointed  tutor,  the  one  is  to
aut  major  viginti  quinque  annis  begin  to  act  when  he  becomes  of
factus  fuerit.  sound  mind,  and  the  other  when  he

has  completed  his  twenty-fifth  year.

D.  xxvi.  1.  11 ;  xxvi.  2.  32.  2.

Meanwhile  the  magistrate  would  appoint  another  tutor.  (See
Tit.  20.)

3.  Ad  certum  tempus,  seu  ex  3.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  tutor
certo  tempore,  vel  sub  conditione,  may  be  appointed  either  until  a  cer-
vel  ante  heredis  institutionem  posse  tain  time,  or  from  a  certain  time,  or
dari  tutorem  non  dubitatur.  conditionally,  or  before  the  institution

of  an  heir.

The  old  law  regarded  the  naming  the  persons  designed  to
take  as  heirs  under  the  testament  as  the  base  of  the  testament,
and  passed  over  every  declaration  of  the  testator's  wishes  placed
before  this  as  out  of  due  order  and  entirely  void.  The  Proculians
(Gai.  ii.  231)  thought  this  ought  not  to  be  extended  to  the  ap-
pointment of  a  tutor,  and  Justinian  did  away  with  the  doctrine
altogether.

4.  Certae  autem  rei  vel  causae  4.  A  tutor  cannot  be  appointed  for
tutor  dari  non  potest,  quia  person^e  a  particular  thing  or  business,  as  it  is
non  causae  vel  rei  datur.                          to  a  person,  and  not  for  a  business  or  a

thing,  that  a  tutor  is  appointed.

D.  xxvi.  2.  12.  14.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XV.

r)7

The  tutor  had  to  take  charo^e  of  the  whole  interests  of  the
pupil,  and  complete  his  pei'sona,  and  therefore  to  appoint  him  to
take  charge  of  his  interest  in  any  one  matter  only  was  incon-
sistent with  the  nature  of  his  office,  and  such  an  appointment  was
Toid.  (D.  xxvi.  2.  13.)  If,  however,  the  property  of  the  pupil
was  situated  in  provinces  far  apart  from  each  other,  a  separate
tutor  might  be  appointed  to  take  care  of  his  interests  in  each
province.      (D.  xxvi.  2.  15.)

5.  Si  quis  filiabiis  snis  vel  filiis
tntores  dederit,  etiam  postumae  vel
postumo  dedisse  videtur  ;  quia  filii
vel  filige  appellatione  postmmis  vel
postnma  continetur.  Quod  si  ne-
potes  sint,  an  appellatione  filiorum
et  ipsis  tutores  dati  sunt  ?  Dicen-
dum  est  ut  ipsis  quoque  dati  vide-
antur,  si  modo  liberos  dixit:  ceterum
si  filios,  non  continebuntur ;  aliter
enim  filii,  aliter  nepotes  appellan-
tur.  Plane  si  postumis  dederit,
tarn  filii  postumi  quam  ceteri  liberi
continebuntur.

5.  If  any  one  appoint  a  tutor  to
his  sons  or  daughters,  lie  is  held  also
to  appoint  him  as  tutor  to  his  post-
humous children  ;  because,  under  the
appellation  of  son  or  daughter,  a  post-
humous son  or  daughter  is  included.
But  if  there  are  grandchildren,  are
they  included  in  the  appointment  of  a
tutor  to  sons?  We  answer,  that  under
an  appointment  to  children,  grand-
children are  included,  but  not  under
an  appointment  to  sons  ;  for  son  and
grandson  are  quite  distinct  words.
But,  if  a  testator  appoints  a  tutor  to
his  posthumous  descendants,  the  term
obviously  includes  all  posthumous
children,  whether  sons  or  grandsons.

Tit.  XY.    DE   LEGITIMA  ADGNATOEUM   TUTELA.

Quibus  autem  testamento  tutor
datus  non  sit,  his  ex  lege  duodecim
tabularum  adgnati  sunt  tutores,  qui
vocantur  lesritimi.

They  to  whom  no  tutor  has  been
appointed  by  testament,  have  their
agnati  as  tutors,  by  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  and  such  tutors  are
called  '  legal  tutors.'

D.  xxvi.  4.  1 :  Gai.  i.  155.

Tutores  legitimi  was  a  general  term  applied  to  all  tutors
appointed  by  law,  and  especially  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  or  according  to  some  inference  from  its  provisions,  as
in  the  case  of  patrons.  We  do  not  know  the  exact  terms  of  the
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  on  this  subject.

1.  Sunt  autem  adgnati,  cognati
per  virilis  sexus  cognationem  con-
junct!, quasi  a  patre  cognati :  veluti
frater  eodem  patre  natus,  patris
filius  neposve  ex  eo  ;  item  patruus
et  patrui  filius,  neposve  ex  eo.  At
qui  per  feminini  sexus  personas
cognatione  junguntur,  non  sunt
adgnati,  sed  alias  naturali  jure  co-
gnati. Itaque  amitse  tuse  filius  non
est  tibi  agnatus,  sed  cognatus,  et
invicem  scilicet  tu  illi  eodem  jure
conjungeris  ;     quia  qui  nascuntur.

1.  Agnati  are  those  who  are  related
to  each  other  through  males,  that  is,
are  related  through  the  father,  as,  for
instance,  a  brother  by  the  same  father,
or  the  son  of  a  brother,  or  the  son  of
such  a  son ;  or,  again,  a  father's  brother,
or  a  father's  brother's  son,  or  the  son
of  such  a  son.  But  those  who  are
related  to  us  through  females  are  not
agnati,  but  merely  cognati  by  their
natural  relationship.  Thus  the  son  of
a  father's  sister  is  related  to  you  not
by  agnation,  but    by   cognation,   and

58

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XV.

j)atris     non
qimntur.

matris     familiam     se-

you  are  also  related  to  him  by  cogna-
tion ;  as  children  belong  to  the  family
of  their  father,  and  not  to  that  of  their
mother.

Gai.  i.  ]56.

The  law  gave  the  rights  of  relationship,  such  as  inheritance
and  appointment  as  tutors,  to  the  agnati  only.  All  persons,  related
by  ties  of  blood,  were  cognati  to  each  other.  Within  this  larger
circle  the  members  of  any  one  family  were  agnati  to  each  other.
A  family,  in  this  sense,  consisted  of  all  persons  related  to  each
other,  by  having  a  common  ancestor,  in  whose  power,  if  he  were
alive,  they  would  all  be.  A  brother  and  sister,  for  instance,
were  agnati,  and  a  nephew  and  aunt,  by  the  father's  side.  For
if  the  grandfather  were  alive  all  would  be  in  his  power.  But  the
tie  was  dissolved  by  the  sister  or  aunt  marrying  in  manum  (see
Introd.  sec.  46);  and  as  the  children  of  females  would  be  in  the
power  of  the  husband,  they  could  never  be  agnati  to  their  mother's
agnati,  except  by  adoption ;  and  hence  it  is  here  said  that  agnati
are  related  through  males  only.  By  the  118th  Novel  Justinian
abolished  the  distinction  between  agnati  and  cognati,  and  the
nearest  in  blood  was  thenceforth  the  tutor  legitimus.

2.  Quod  autem  lex  ab  intestato
vocat  ad  tutelam  adgnatos,  non  hanc
habet  significationem,  si  omnino
non  fecerit  testamentiim  is  qui  po-
terat  tutores  dare  ;  sed  si,  quantum
ad  tutelam  pertinet,  intestatus  de-
cesserit  ;  quod  tunc  quoque  accidere
intelligitur,  cum  is  qui  datus  est
tutor,  vivo  testatore  decesserit.

2.  The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
calling  the  agnati  to  be  tutors  in  case
of  intestacy,  does  not  refer  merely  to
the  case  of  a  person  who  might  have
appointed  a  tutor,  dying  without
having  made  any  testament  at  all,  but
also  to  that  of  a  person  dying  intestate
only  so  far  as  regards  the  appointment
of  a  tutor,  and  this  includes  the  case  of
a  tutor  nominated  by  testament  dying
in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator.

D.  xxvi.  4.  6.

It  was  necessary  to  state  expressly  that  the  testament  was
good,  as  far  as  it  went,  and  that  the  law  remedied  its  deficiency  by
making  the  agnati  tutors,  because  it  was  a  maxim  of  Roman  law
that  a  man  could  not  die  partly  testate  and  partly  intestate.

3.  The  right  of  agnation  is  ordi-
narily taken  away  by  every  capitis
deminutio,  or  change  of  status,  for  ag-
nation is  a  civil  right :  but  the  right  of
cognation  is  not  lost  by  every  kind  of
capitis  deminutio,  for  although  civil  law
may  destroy  civil  rights,  it  cannot  de-
stroy natural  rights.

I  158.

3.  Sed  adgnationis  quidem  jus
omnibus  modis  capitis  deminutione
plerumque  perimitur,  nam  adgnatio
juris  est  nomen.  Cognationis  vero
jus  non  omnibus  modis  commutatur ;
quia  civilis  ratio  civilia  quidem  jura
corrumpere  potest,  naturalia  vero
non  utique.

Gai.

The  tie  of  agnation  being  created  by  law,  could  also  be  dis-
solved by  it :  not  so  that  of  cognation,  which  was  a  tie  of  nature.
But  the  law  could  take  away  the  legal  rights  attaching  to  the
natural  tie ;  and  this  it  did  in  the  case  of  the  maxima  capitis  de-
minutio,    (See  next  Title,  6.)

A  constitution  of  Theodosius  and  Arcadius  provided  that  the

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XVI.  59

mother,  if  she  has  not  remarried,  and  undertakes  not  to  remarry,
may  have  the  tutela  of  her  children  given  her.  (C.  v.  35.  2.)  And
Justinian,  by  the  118th  Novel,  extended  this  to  the  grandmother,
as  well  as  the  mother,  if  there  was  no  testamentary  tutor.

Tit.  XYI.     DE   CAPITIS  DEMINUTIONE.

Est  autem  capitis  deminutio  prio-  The  capitis  deminutio  is  a  change

ris  status  commutatio,  eaque  tribus  of  status,  which  may  happen  in  three

modis  accidit  :  nam  aut  maxima  est  ways  :  for  it  may  be  the  greatest  capitis

cajDitis  deminutio,  aut  minor  quam  deminutio,  or  the  less,  also  called  the

quidam  mediam  vocant,  aut  minima,  middle,  or  the  least.

Gai.  i.  159.

The  status  of  a  Roman  citizen  was  composed  of  three  elements :
Tria  sunt  qucB  habernus :  libertatem,  civitatem,  familiam  (D.  iv.  5.
11.)  The  citizen  was  free,  he  had  his  position  as  a  civis,  he  had
his  position  in  a  family.  Caput,  originally,  perhaps,  signifying  the
mention  made  of  the  citizen  in  the  registers  of  the  census,  was  used
as  synonymous  with  persona ;  and  if  a  citizen  ceased,  lost  his
liberty  or  his  civic  rights,  or  changed  his  family  position  by
adoption  or  emancipation,  he  underwent  what  was  termed  a  capitis
deminutio,  this  capitis  deminutio  being  termed  maxima,  media,  or
minima,  according  to  which  of  the  three  elements  of  status  it  was
that  was  primarily  affected.

1.  Maxima  capitis  deminutio  est,  1.  The  greater  capitis  dendnutio  is,
cum  aliquis  simul  et  civitatem  et  when  a  man  loses  both  his  citizen-
libertatem  amittit  :  quod  accidit  in  ship  and  his  liberty ;  as  they  do  who
his  qui  servi  poenae  efficiuntur  atro-  by  a  terrible  sentence  are  made  '  the
citate  sententise,  vel  libertis  ut  in-  slaves  of  punishment ;'  and  freedmen,
gratis  erga  patronos  condemnatis,  condemned  to  slavery  for  ingratitude
vel  qui  se  ad  pretium  participandum  towards  their  patrons  ;  and  all  those
venumdari  passi  sunt.  who  suffer  themselves  to  be   sold   in

order  to  share  the  price  obtained.

Gai.  i.  160  ;  D.  xxviii.  3.  6.  6  ;  xxv.  3.  7.  1.
See  Tit.  12.  3 ;  Tit.  3.  4  note.

2.  Minor  sive  media  capitis  demi-  2.  The  less  or  middle  capitis  c^e^ni-
nutio  est,  cum  civitas  quidem  amitti-  nutio  is,  when  a  man  loses  his  citizen-
tur,  libertas  vero  retinetur  :  quod  ship,  but  retains  his  liberty ;  as  is  the
accidit  ei  cui  aqua  et  igni  inter-  case  when  any  one  is  forbidden  the  use
dictum  fuerit,  vel  ei  qui  in  insulam  of  fire  and  water,  or  is  deported  to  an
deportatus  est. .  island.

Gai.  i.  161.

In  this  kind  of  capitis  deminutio,  as  well  as  in  the  preceding,
the  position  in  the  familia  was  lost,  its  rights  belonging  only  to
citizens.  In  this  lesser  kind,  freedom  is  preserved ;  but  the  person
who  undergoes  the  change  of  status  becomes  a  stranger,  peret/rinus
Jit.  (Ulp.  Beff.  10.  3.)  It  was  a  maxim  of  Roman  law,  that  no
one  could  cease  to  be  a  citizen  against  his  will.  Civitatem  nemo
unquam  ullo  populi  jussu  amittit  invitus.     (CiC.  pro  Dom,  29.)

60  LIB,  I.      TIT.  XVI.

The  condemned  was  therefore  denied  the  necessaries  of  life,
until  he  was  driven  to  withdraw  himself  from  the  city.  Id
autem  vt  esset  faciendum,  non  ademptione  civitatis,  sed  tecti,  et
aqucB  et  ignis  inter d ictione  facieb ant,  (CiC.  pro  Dom.  30.)  The
aqiicR  et  ignis  interdictio  thus  became  a  form  by  which  a  sentence
of  perpetual  banishment  was  inflicted.  The  deportatio  in  insulam
superseded  this  form.  (D.  xlviii.  29.  2.)  The  person  who  was
banished  was  confined  to  certain  limits,  out  of  which  he  could  not
stir  without  rendering  himself  punishable  with  death.  This  must
be  kept  distinct  from  simple  relegatio,  which  was  also  an  exile
within  prescribed  limits,  but  did  not  in  any  way  affect  the  status,
(D.  xlviii.  22.  7.     See  Tit.  12.  1  and  2.)

3.  Minima  capitis  deminutio  est  3.  The  least   capitis  deminutio  is,

cum  et  civitas  et  libertas  retinetur,  when  a  person's  status  is  changed  with-

Sed    status     hominis    commutatur  ;  out  forfeiture  either  of  citizenship  or

quod  accidit   in   his    qui,  cum   sui  liberty ;  as  when  a  person  sid  juris  be-

juris  fuerint,  cceperunt  alieno  juri  comes  subject  to  the  power  of  another,

subjecti  esse,  vel  contra.  or  a  person  alieni  juris  becomes  inde-
pendent.

Gai.  i.  162.

The  status  was  changed  (commutatur)  by  the  change  of  family
position  ;  but  the  person  who  underwent  this  form  of  capitis  demi-
nutio had  still  after  it  all  the  three  elements  of  status.  Whether
the  minima  capitis  deminutio  involved  a  degradation  or  merely  a
change  has  been  much  debated  by  commentators.  Savigny  (see
Posters  Gai^is,  p.  108)  was  of  opinion  that  capitis  deminutio  always
involved  a  degradation.  The  French  commentators  take  the  other
view,  that  there  was  merely  a  change  implied,  and  they  have,
perhaps,  if  not  the  better  arguments,  the  clearer  authorities  on
their  side.  Therefore  Ulpian  says  the  minima  capitis  deminutio
takes  place  salvo  statu.  (D.  xxxviii.  17.  1.)  What  is  said  here
of  change  of  family  by  arrogation  and  emancipation  must  be
extended  to  adoption.  (D.  iv.  5.  3.)  In  old  times,  the  wife  who
passed  iii  manum  viri,  or  the  freeman  who  was  given  in  mancipio,
underwent  this  minima  capitis  deminutio,     (Gai.  i.  162.)

After  the  words  vel  contra,  at  the  end  of  this  paragraph,  some
texts  have  the  following  words :  veluti  si  filiusfamilias  a  patre
emancipatus  fuerit,  est  capite  deminutus.  The  addition  is  probably
owing  to  some  writer  having  perceived  that  it  was  only  in  the
case  of  emancipation  that  it  was  true  that  when  a  person  became
sui  juris  he  was  capite  minutus.  There  was  no  change  of  family
when  a  son  became  sui  juris  on  the  death  of  his  father.

The  person  who  underwent  the  minima  capitis  deminutio  was,
in  the  eyes  of  the  law,  a  new  person.  He  could  not,  therefore,
until  the  praetor  permitted  an  action  against  him,  be  sued  for
debts  previously  contracted.  (D.  iv.  5.  21.)  And  we  shall  see,
in  the  Second  Book,  that  in  the  old  law  a  usufruct  was  extin-
guished by  the  minima  capitis  deminutio  of  the  usufructuary.
(Bk.  ii.  Tit.  4.  3.)     The  capite  minutus  also,  as  we  shall  see  in  the

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XVI.

61

Third  Book  (Tit.  1.  9  and  10.  1),  forfeited  his  place  in  intestate
succession,  except  so  far  as  he  was  helped  by  the  praetor^,  or  by

lesrislation.

o

4.  Servns  autem  manmnissus
capite  non  minuitiir,  quia  nuUiim
caput  liabuit.

D

IV.

5.  Quibus  autem  dignitas  magis
quam  status  permutatur,  capite  non
minuuntur  ;  et  icleo  senatu  motum
capite  non  minui  constat.

4.  A  slave  who  is  manumitted  is
not  said  to  be  capite  minutus,  as  he  has
no  '  caput, ^  or  civil  existence.

5.  3.  1.

6.  Those  whose  dignity  rather  than
their  status  is  changed,  do  not  sufter  a
capitis  demmutio,  as  those,  for  instance,
who  are  removed  from  the  senatorial
dignity.

D.  i.  9.  3.

Even  infamia  did  not  produce  a  capitis  deminutio  (D.  ii.  16.
103.)

6.  Quod  autem  dictum  est  manere
cognationis  jus  et  post  capitis  demi-
nutionem,  hoc  ita  est,  si  minima
capitis  deminutio  interveniat ;  ma-
net  enim  cognatio.  Nam  si  maxi-
ma capitis  deminutio  currat,  jus
quoque  cognationis  perit,  ut  puta
servitute  alicujus  cognati ;  et  ne  qui-
dem  si  manumissus  fuerit^  recipit
cognationem.  Sed  et  si  in  insulam
quis  deportatus  sit,  cognatio  solvitur.

6.  In  saying  that  the  right  of  cog-
nation remains  in  spite  of  a  ca2ntis
deminutio,  we  were  speaking  only  of
the  least  deminutio,  after  which  the
cognation  subsists.  For,  by  the  greater
deminutio,  as,  for  example,  if  one  of  the
cognati  becomes  a  slave,  the  right  of
cognation  is  wholly  destroyed,  so  as
not  to  be  recovered  even  by  manumis-
sion. So,  too,  the  right  of  cognation
is  lost  by  the  less  or  middle  deminutio^
as,  for  example,  by  deportation  to  an
island.

D.  xxxviii.  8.  5.  7.

A  change  of  the  civil  family  by  adoption  or  arrogation  never
dissolved  the  natural  tie  of  cognatio,  or  destroyed  its  attendant
civil  rights ;  but  these  were  destroyed  by  a  sentence  which  in-
volved the  loss  of  the  civitas.  And  if  the  civitas  were  once  lost
and  then  regained,  the  restored,  or  rather  new,  civis  was  in  all
respects  the  founder  of  a  new  family,  excepting  when  he  was
restitutus  in  integrum,  that  is,  restored  by  the  emperor  to  the
same  position  that  he  had  formerly  held.     (See  Tit.  12.  1.)

7.  Cum  autem  ad  adgnatos  tutela
pertineat,  non  simul  ad  omnes  per-
tinet,  sed  ad  eos  tantum  qui  proxi-
miore  gradu  sunt,  vel  si  plures  ejus-
dem  gradus  sunt  ad  omnes  :  veluti  si
plures  f  ratres  sunt  qui  unum  gradum
obtinent,  ideoque  pariter  ad  tutelam
vocantur.

7.  The  right  to  be  tutor,  which  be-
longs to  the  agnati,  does  not  belong  to
all  at  the  same  time,  but  to  the  nearest
in  degree  only;  or,  if  there  are  many
in  the  same  degree,  then  to  all  in  that
degree.  Several  brothers,  for  instance,
in  the  same  degree,  are  aU  equally
called  to  be  tutor.

Gal  i.  164.

The  principle  of  the  law  was,  that  those  persons  should  have
the  burden  of  the  tutelage  who  had  the  hope  of  the  succession.
(Tit.  17.  pr.)  The  nearest  in  degree  of  the  agnati  were  therefore
the  tutors  in  case  of  intestacy.     The  nearest  in  degree  might.

62

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XVII.

however,  happen  to  be  a  woman  or  an  infant,  and  then,  althouo-h
this  person  was  the  next  in  succession  to  the  inheritance,  it
was  necessary  to  go  a  step  further  off  to  find  the  tutor.  (D.  xxvi.
4.  1.  1.)

Tit.  XVII.

DE   LEGITIMA  PATRONORUM
TUTELA.

By  the  same  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  the  tutelage  of  freedmen  and
freedwomen  belongs  to  their  patrons,
and  to  the  children  of  their  patrons  ;
and  this  tutelage  is  called  legal  tute-
lage, not  that  the  law  contains  any-
express  provision  on  the  subject,  but
because  it  has  been  as  firmly  esta-
blished by  interpretation,  as  if  it  had
been  introduced  by  the  express  words
of  the  law.  For,  as  the  law  had  ordered
that  patrons  and  their  children  should
succeed  to  the  inheritance  of  their
freedmen  or  freedwomen  who  should
die  intestate,  the  ancients  were  of
opinion  that  the  intent  of  the  law  was
that  the  tutelage  also  belonged  to  them ;
since  the  law,  which  calls  agnati  to  the
inheritance,  also  appoints  them  to  be
tutors,  because,  in  most  cases,  where
the  advantage  of  the  succession  is,
there  also  ought  to  be  the  burden  of
the  tutelage.  We  say  '  in  most  cases,'
because,  if  a  person  below  the  age  of
puberty  is  manumitted  by  a  female,  she
is  called  to  the  inheritance,  although
another  person  is  tutor.

Gai.  i.  165  ;  D.  xxvi.  4.  1.  1.  3.

The  law  gave  the  patron  the  right  of  succession  to  the  inhe-
ritance of  the  freedman ;  and  as  the  right  of  succession  was  con-
nected with  the  tutelage  in  the  case  of  the  agnati,  it  seemed
natural  to  connect  the  two  in  the  case  of  the  patron.

Ex  eadem  lege  duodecim  tabula-
rum,  libertorum  et  libertarum  tu-
tela  ad  patronos  liberosque  eorum
pertinet.  Quae  et  ipsa  legitima
tutela  vocatur,  non  quia  nominatim
in  ea  lege  de  hac  tutela  caveatur,
sed  quia  perinde  accepta  est  per  in-
terpretationem,  atque  si  verbis  legis
introducta  esset.  Eo  enim  ipso
quod  hereditates  libertorum  liber-
tarumque,  si  intestati  decessissent,
jusserat  lex  ad  patronos  liberosve
eorum  pertinere,  crediderunt  veteres
voluisse  legem  etiam  tutelas  ad  eos
pertinere  :  cum  et  adgnatos  quos  ad
hereditatem  lex  vocat,  eosdem  et
tutores  esse  jussit ;  quia  plerumque
ubi  successionis  est  emolumentum,
ibi  et  tutela?  onus  esse  debet.  Ideo
autem  diximus  plerumque,  quia  si  a
femina  impubes  manumittatur,  ipsa
ad  hereditatem  vocatur,  cum  alius
sit  tutor.

Tit.  XYIII.    DE  LEGITIMA  PARENTUM  TUTELA.

Exemplo  patronorum  recepta  est
et  alia  tutela,  quae  et  ipsa  legitima
vocatur ;  nam  si  quis  filium  aut
filiam,  nepotem  aut  neptem  ex  filio
et  deinceps  impuberes  emancipaverit,
legitimus  eorum  tutor  erit.

In  imitation  of  the  tutelage  of
patrons,  there  is,  too,  another  kind
which  also  is  said  to  be  legal  ;  for  if
a  parent  emancipate,  below  the  age  of
puberty," a  son,  a  daughter,  a  grandson,
or  a  granddaughter,  who  is  the  issue  of
that  son,  or  any  other  descendant,  he
is  their  legal  tutor.

Gai.  i.  175.

It  was  not  the  sales  by  the  father  which  emancipated  the
son,  but  the  subsequent  enfranchisement  after  these  sales  had

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XIX.  63

destroyed  the  father's  power,  and  made  the  son  a  mancipium  of
the  fictitious  purchaser.  Sometimes,  probably  generally,  the
purchaser  resold  (remancipavit)  the  son  thus  in  mancipio  to  the
father,  who  freed  him,  and  thus  became  his  patromis  and  his
tutor  legitimus.  If  the  purchaser  did  not  resell  him,  but  himself
emancipated  him,  he  became  the  patromis^  and  so  the  tutor ;  but
as  the  whole  proceeding  was  but  a  form,  he  became  only  a  tutor
fiduciarius,  (Gai.  i.  166.  172.  175;  Ulp.  Reg.  xi.  5;  D.  xxvi.
4.  3.  I.)

Tit.  XIX.     DE   FIDUCIARIA  TUTELA.

Est  et  alia  tutela  quse  fiduciaria  There  is  another  kind  of  tutelage

appellatnr  ;  nam  si  parens  liliiun  vel  called  fiduciary ;  for,  if  a  parent  eman-

filiam,    nepotem     vel     neptem    vel  cipate,  below  the  age  of  puberty,  a  son

deinceps     impuberes     manumiserit,  or  a  daughter,  a  grandson  or  a  grand-

legitimam    nanciscitur  eorum   tute-  daughter,  or  any  other  descendant,  he

lam  :  quo  defuncto,    si  liberi  virilis  is  their  legal  tutor ;  but  if,  at  his  death,

sexus   ei   extant,    fiduciarii    tutores  he  leave   male   children,  they  become

filiorum  suorum,  vel  fratris  vel  so-  the  fiduciary  tutors  of  their  own  sons,

roris  et  ceterorum  efiiciuntur.     At-  or  brother,  or  sister,  or  other  descend-

qui  patrono  legitimo  tutore  mortuo,  ants   of    the   deceased.      But  when  a

liberi    quoque     ejus    legitimi    sunt  patron,  who  is  a  legal  tutor,  dies,  his

tutores.       Quoniam     filius     quidem  children  also  become  legal  tutors,  the

defuncti,  si  non  esset  a  vivo  patre  reason  being  that  a  son,  who  has  not

emancipatus,  post   obitum  ejus  sui  been  emancipated  in  his  father's  life-

juris  efficeretur,  nee  in  fratrum  po-  time,  becomes  independent  at  the  death

testatem   recideret,  ideoque  nee   in  of  his  father,  and  does  not  fall  under

tutelam  ;   libertus  autem,  si  servus  powerof  his  brothers,  nor,  therefore, un-

mansisset,  utique  eodem  jure  apud  der  their  tutelage  ;  while  the  freedman,

liberos    domini    post    mortem   ejus  had  he  remained  a  slave,  would  also

futurus    esset.      Ita    tamen   hi    ad  have  been,  after  the  death  of  his  master,

tutelam  vocantur,  si  perfectse  setatis  the    slave    of    his    master's    children,

sunt.    Quod  nostra  constitutio  gene-  These  persons,  however,  are  not  called

raliter  in  omnibus   tutelis  et  cura-  to  be  tutors  unless  of  full  age,  a  rule

tionibus  observari  pra3cepit.  which  by  our  constitution  applies  gene-
rally to  all  tutors  and  curators.

D.  xxvi.  4.  3,  4  ;  C.  v.  30.  5.

When  it  is  said  that  the  sons  become  the  fiduciary  tutors  of
their  own  sons,  reference  is  made  to  the  case  of  the  grandsons
having  been  emancipated  by  the  grandfather.

The  person  who  emancipated  the  child  succeeded  to  all  the
rights  of  a  patron  over  the  child ;  if  it  was  the  father,  then,  as
being  a  patron,  he  was  included  in  the  terms  of  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  and  was  a  tutor  legitimus  (Gai.  i.  172  ;  D.  xxvi.
4.  3-10) ;  if  it  was  not,  he  was  a  tutor  fiduciarius  (Gai.  i.  166),
a  tutor  bound  to  the  father  by  a  trust.  In  the  case  of  a  slave,
the  children  of  a  patron  succeeded  to  the  rights  of  patronage ;
but  this  did  not  extend  to  the  case  of  emancipated  children :  the
children  not  emancipated  were  not  the  patrons  of  those  who
were.  They  were  not  tutors,  therefore,  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  and  the  word  fiduciarii  is  borrowed  from  its  more  proper
usage  to  express  their  position,  and  is  in  this  case  merely  opposed

64  LIB.  I.     TIT.  XX.

to  legitimi.  (D.  xxvi.  4.  4.)  The  reason  given  in  the  text  for
their  being  only  tutores  Jlduciarii,  viz.  that  the  emancipated  in-
fant would  have  been  sui  juris  if  he  had  not  been  emancipated,
is  manifestly  an  imperfect  one.  For  it  would  not  be  necessarily
true  when  a  grandfather  emancipated  his  grandson,  who,  if  his
father  were  living,  would  not  on  the  grandfather's  death  become
S211  juris.  If  the  father  of  the  emancipated  child  left  no  other
children  above  the  age  of  puberty,  the  nearest  agnatus,  as,  for
instance,  the  father's  brother,  was  the  tutor,  and  he,  too,  was  called
the  tutor  Jiduciarius.     (Theoph.  Paraph.)

The  perfecta  (Bias  was  the  age  of  twenty-five  years.

Tit.  XX.    DE  ATILIANO  TUTORE  ET  EO  QUI  EX
LEGE   JULIA  ET   TITIA  DABITUR.

Si  cui  nullus  omnino  tutor  f uerat,  If  any  one  had  no  tutor  at  all,  one

ei  dabatur,  in  urbe  quidem  Roma  a  was  given  him,  in  the  city  of   Rome

prsetore  urbano  et  ma j ore  parte  tri-  by  the  prsetor  urhanus,  and  a  majority

bunorum  plebis,  tutor  ex  lege  Atilia ;  of  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs,  under  the

in  provinciis  vero,  a  prsesidibus  pro-  lex  Atilia  ;    in  the   provinces,  by   the

vinciarum  ex  lege  Julia  et  Titia.  presides  under  the  lex  Julia  et  Titia.

Gai.  i.  185.

The  date  of  the  lex  Atilia  is  unknown,  but  it  must  have  been
in  existence  in  the  year  of  the  city  557,  when  Livy  (xxxix.  9)
says  of  a  liherta,  ^  Post  patroni  mortem,  quia  nullius  in  manu  esset,
tutors  a  tribunis  et  prcRtore  petito.^  And  as  the  necessity  for  some
means  of  appointing  a  tutor,  where  one  was  not  appointed  by
testament  or  law,  must  have  been  early  felt,  the  lex  Atilia,  or  one
similar  to  it,  must  probably  have  existed  long  before  the  time
of  which  Livy  speaks.  The  date  of  the  lex  Julia  et  Titia  was
probably  723  a.u.C  As  there  were  ten  tribunes,  the  majority
would  be  at  least  six.

The  term  tutor  dativus  is  used  by  commentators  to  express  a
tutor  given  by  the  magistrate ;  this  term  being  used  by  Gaius
(i.  154)  to  express  tutors  given  by  testament.

1.  Sed  et  si  testamento  tutor  sub  1.   Again,  if  a  testamentary  tutor

conditione  aut  die  certo  datus  f uerat,  had  been  appointed  conditionally,  or
quamdiu  conditio  aut  dies  pendebat,  from  a  certain  time,  until  the  com-
ex  iisdem  legibus  tutor  dari  poterat.  pletion  of  the  condition  or  arrival  of
Item  si  pure  datus  fuerat,  quamdiu  the  time  fixed,  another  tutor  might
ex  testamento  nemo  heres  existebat,  be  appointed  under  the  same  laws,
tamdiu  ex  iisdem  legibus  tutor  pe-  Also,  if  a  tutor  had  been  given  un-
tendus  erat :  qui  desinebat  esse  tutor,  conditionally,  yet,  as  long  as  no  one
si  conditio  existeret,  aut  dies  veniret,  had  accepted  the  inheritance,  as  heir
aut  heres  existeret.  by  the  testament,  another  tutor  might

be  appointed  for  the  interval.  But
his  office  ceased  when  the  condition
was  accomplished,  when  the  time
arrived,  or  the  inheritance  was  entered
upon.

Gai.  i.  186;  D.  xxvi.  2.  11.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XX.

65

If  the  wishes  of  the  testator  were  declared  to  any  extent  re-
specting the  appointment  of  a  tutor,  this  entirely  excluded  the
tutores  legitimi,  and  every  deficiency  in  the  declaration  was  reme-
died by  the  interposition  of  the  magistrate.    (D.  xxvi.  2.  11.)

No  testament  took  effect  until  an  heir  entered  on  the  inhe-
ritance. If  it  was  known  that  a  testament  existed  appointing  a
tutor,  this  excluded  the  aynatl  from  being  tutors  ;  but  the  tutor
under  the  testament  did  not  commence  his  tutela  until  the  testa-
ment took  effect.  Meantime  a  tutor  appointed  by  the  magistrate
took  care  of  the  pupil.

2.  Ab  hostibiis  qnoque  tiitore
capto,  ex  his  legibus  tutor  peteba-
tur:  qui  clesinebat  esse  tutor,  si  is
qui  captus  erat,  in  civitatem  rever-
sus  fuerat ;  nam  reversus  recipiebat
tutelam  jure  postliminii.

2.  If,  again,  a  tutor  was  taken  pri-
soner by  the  enemy,  appHcation  could
be  made,  under  the  same  laws,  for
another  tutor,  whose  office  ceased
when  the  first  tutor  returned  from
captivity ;  for  on  his  return  he  re-
sumed the  tutelage  by  the  jus  post"
liminii.

Gai.  i.  187.
For  an  account  of  the  jus  -postliminii,  see  Title  12.  5.

3.  Sed  ex  his  legibus  tutores
pupillis  desierunt  dari,  posteaquam
primo  consules  pupillis  utriusque
sexus  tutores  ex  inquisitione  dare
coeperunt,  deinde  prsetores  ex  con-
stitutionibus ;  nam  supradictis  legi-
bus, neque  de  cautione  a  tutoribus
exigenda  rem  salvam  pupillis  fore,
neque  de  compellendis  tutoribus  ad
tutelse  administrationem  quicquam
cavebatur.

3.  But  tutors  have  ceased  to  be
appointed  under  these  laws,  since
they  have  been  appointed  to  pupils  of
either  sex,  first  by  the  consuls,  after
inquiry  into  the  case,  and  afterwards
by  the  praetors  under  imperial  con-
stitutions. For  the  above-mentioned
laws  required  no  security  from  the
tutors  for  the  safety  of  the  pupils'
property,  nor  did  they  contain  any
provisions  to  com^Del  them  to  accept
the  office.

The  power  to  appoint  tutors  was  given  by  Claudius  to  the
consuls  (Suet,  in  Claud.  23),  and  transferred  by  Antoninus  Pius
(Jul.  Capit.  in  Vit  M,  Anton,  10)  to  the  praetors.

4.  Sed  hoc  jure  utimur,  ut  Romee
quidem  preefectus  urbi  vel  pr£etor
secundum  suam  jiu-isdictionem,  in
provinciis  autem  prsesides  ex  inqiu-
sitione  tutores  crearent ;  vel  magis-
tratus  jussu  prsesidum,  si  non  sint
magn?e  pupilli  facultates.

4.  Under  our  present  system  tutors
are  appointed  at  Rome  by  the  prsefect
of  the  city,  or  the  prsetor,  according
to  his  jurisdiction,  and,  in  the  pro-
vinces, by  the  prxsides  after  inquiry  ;
or  by  an  inferior  magistrate,  at  the
command  of  the  prseses,  if  the  pro-
perty of  the  pupil  is  only  small.

D.  xxvi.  5.  1.

The  prcBfectus  urhi  was,  from  the  time  of  Augustus,  an  officer
who  had  the  superintendence  of  the  city  and  its  police,  with  juris-
diction extending  one  hundred  miles  from  the  city,  and  power  to
decide  on  both  civil  and  criminal  cases  As  he  was  considered
the  direct  representative  of  the  emperor,  much  that  previously
belonged  to  the  prcetor  urhanus  fell  gradually  into  his  hands.

F

66  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XX.

The  prcefectus  urhi  appointed  tutors  in  cases  where  pupils  of
higher  rank  and  larger  fortune  were  concerned  ;  the  prcetor,  when
the  pupils  were  of  humbler  station  and  smaller  fortune ;  and
this  it  is  which  is  referred  to  in  the  words  secundum  suam  juris-
dictionem..

In  the  provinces  the  prceses  appointed  ;  but  until  Justinian
altered  the  law  (see  next  paragraph),  not  only  could  not  muni-
cipal magistrates  appoint  without  the  authority  of  the  presses,  but
no  one  could  be  authorised  by  the  presses  unless  he  Avere  a  ma-
gistrate.   (D.  xxvi.  5.  8.)

5.  Nos  aiitem  per  constitutionem  5.  But  by  one  of  our  constitutions,

nostram,   et  hujusmodi  difficultates  to  do  away  with  these  distinctions  of

hominum  resecantes,  nee  expectata  different  persons,   and  to   avoid    the

jussione  preesidum,  disposuimus,  si  necessity  of  waiting  for  the  order  of

facultas  pupilli  vel  adulti  usque  ad  the  prmses,  we  have  enacted,  that  if

quingentos  soUdos  valeat,  defensores  the  property  of  the  pupil  or  adult  does

civitatum  una  cum  ejusdem  civitatis  not  exceed  five  hundred  solidi,  tutors

religiosissimo     antistite,     vel     alias  or  curators  shall  be  appointed  by  the

publicas  personas,  id  est,  magistra-  defensores  of  the  city  acting  in   con-

tus  vel  juridicum  Alexandrince  -  ci-  junction  with  the  holy  bishop,  or  by

vitatis,  tutores  vel  curatores  creare,  other  public  persons,  that  is,  by  the

legitima  cautela  secundum  ejusdem  magistrates,  or,  in  the  city  of  Alex-

constitutionis    normam    prasstanda,  andria,   by  the   judge ;    and  legal  se-

videlicet    eorum    periculo   qui   eam  curity  must  be  given  according  to  the

accipiunt.  terms  of  the  same  constitution,  that  is

to  say,  at  the  risk  of  those  who   re-
ceive it.

Cod.  i.  4.  30.

The  constitution  of  Justinian  provided  that,  where  the  fortune
of  the  person  requiring  a  tutor  or  curator  did  not  amount  to  more
than  500  solidi  (the  aureus,  11.  Is.  Id.  of  English  money,  after
the  time  of  Alexander  Severus,  was  called  a  solidus),  a  local
magistrate,  without  the  authorisation  of  the  prceses,  could  appoint,
not  making  a  formal  examination  into  the  position  and  character
of  the  tutor  or  curator  {inquisitio\  but  merely  taking  a  money
security  for  his  faithful  performance  of  his  duties.

The  defensor  was  a  magistrate  appointed  for  two  years  out  of
the  decuriones  of  a  city.  His  principal  business  was  to  act  as  a
check  on  the  presses,  and  he  had  besides  a  limited  civil  and  criminal
jurisdiction.

6.  Impuberes  autem  in  tutela  esse  6.    It   is   agreeable   to  the  law   of

naturali  juri  conveniens  est,  ut  is  nature,  that  persons  under  the  age  of
qui  perfectse  setatis  non  sit,  alterius  puberty  should  be  under  tutelage,  so
tutela  regatur.  that  persons  of  tender  years  may  be

under  the  government  of  another.

Gai.  i.  189.

Gains,  in  his  Institutes,  after  the  words  extracted  from  him  in
the  text,  proceeds  to  contrast  "with  the  tutelage  of  minors,  which
is  an  institution  natural  and  necessary  in  all  communities,  the
tutelage  of  women,  which  he  considers  founded  on  no  reasonable
basis.    The  original  reason  of  this  tutelage  was  probably  the  inca-

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXI.  67

pability  of  women  to  share  in  the  proceedings  of  the  curia,  and
their  being  supposed  unfit  to  go  through  solemn  forms.  In  default
of  a  testamentary  tutor — and  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  husband
could  by  testament  either  appoint  a  tutor  to  his  wife  in  manu,  or
give  her  the  option  of  choosing  one  (Gai.  i.  148  et  seq.) — the
nearest  agnatus  was  the  tutor,  women  being  either  alieni  juris,  or
else  under  a  tutor  all  their  lives ;  the  tutor  being  allowed  in  cer-
tain cases  to  surrender  his  office  (Gai.  i.  168),  and  the  woman
being  allowed  to  demand  a  substituted  tutor  in  place  of  one  absent.
(Gai.  i.  173.)  The  lex  Papia  Poppcea  exempted  from  tutelage
women  who  had  three  children,  and  a  lex  Claudia  (a.d.  45)  sup-
pressed the  tutelage  of  the  agnati  altogether  in  the  case  of  women
of  free  birth,  leaving  only  the  tutelage  of  ascendants  and  patrons.
(Gai.  i.  157.)  This  modified  tutelage  of  women  existed  in  the
time  of  Ulpian  {Reg.  11.  8),  but  had  fallen  into  desuetude  in  the
time  of  Justinian.  While  the  tutelage  of  women  lasted,  the
woman  above  puberty  (see  Gai.  i.  180  et  seq.)  managed  her
own  affairs,  and  the  tutor  was  only  called  in  to  give  his  auctoritas
on  occasions  of  moment,  the  praetor  interposing  to  force  a  tutor  to
give  his  authority  when  necessary,  but  the  praetor  would  not  adopt
this  course  where  the  tutor  was  an  ascendant  or  patron,  unless
some  very  strong  reason  existed.

7.  Cum  igitur  pupillorum  pupilla-  7.  As  tutors  administer  the  affairs

rumque  tutores  negotia  gerunt,  post  of  their   pupils,   they   may   be    com-

pubertatem  tutelse  judicio  rationes  pelled  to  account,  by  the  actio  tutel<Fy

reddunt.  when  their  pupils  arrive  at  puberty.

Gai.  i.  191.

The  modes  by  which  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  duty  by  a
tutor  was  insured  are  given  in  the  24th  Title.

Tit.  XXL  DE  AUCTORITATE  TUTOEUM.

Auctoritas  autem  tutoris  in  qui-  In  some  cases  it  is  necessary  that

busdam  causis  necessaria  pupillis  est,  the  tutor  should  authorise  the  acts  of

in  quibusdam  non  est  necessaria.  Ut  the  pupil,  in  others  not.     When,  for

ecce,  si  quid  dari  sibi  stipulentur,  instance,  the  pupil  stipulates  for  some-

non  est  necessaria  tutoris  auctoritas  ;  thing  to  be  given  him,  the  authorisa-

quod  si  aliis  pupilli  promittant,  ne-  tion  of  the  tutor  is  not  requisite ;  but

<?essaria  est :   namque  placuit  nieli-  if  the  pupil  makes  the  promise,  it  is

orem     quidem    suam    conditionem  requisite ;  for  the  rule  is,  that  pupils

licere  eis   facere,  etiam  sine  tiitore  may  make  their  condition  better,  but

auctore,  deteriorem  vero  non  aliter  may  not  make  it  worse,  without  the

quam  tutoris  auctoritate.     Unde  in  authorisation    of    their    tutor.      And

his    causis    ex   quibus   obligationes  therefore   in   all    cases    of    reciprocal

mutuse  nascuntur,  ut  in   emptioni-  obligation,  as  in  contracts  of  buying,

bus,     venditionibus,      locationibus,  selling,  letting,  hiring,  bailment,   de-

conductionibus,  mandatis,  depositis,  posit,  if  the  tutor  does  not  authorise

si  tutoris  auctoritas  non  inter veniat,  the  pupil  to  enter  into  the  contract,

ipsi    quidem    qui    cum   his   contra-  the   person   who    contracts   with    the

hunt,  obligantur ;  at  invicem  pupilli  pupil  is  bound,  but  the  pupil  is  not

non  obligantur.  bound.

D.  xix.  1.  13.  29.

F  2

68  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXI.

The  duties  of  the  tutor  were  twofold :  to  administer  the  affairs
of  the  pupil,  and  to  interpose  what  Avas  termed  his  authority.  It  is
to  the  second  head  of  his  functions  that  this  Title  refers.

There  were  many  things  in  which  the  Roman  law,  in  its
stricter  times,  did  not  allow  one  person  to  represent  another.
Much  that  to  us  seems  only  to  belong  to  private  life  was  bound
up  with  political  and  public  duties  and  rights.  (See  Introd.  sec.
43.)  The  law  could  not  contemplate  one  beneath  the  age  of
puberty  acting  as  if  he  were  a  member  of  the  curia,  or  any  one
else  coming  forward  to  fill  for  him  his  place  in  the  list  of  citizens.
No  one  could  bring  actions  of  strict  law  in  another  name,  or
go  through,  for  another,  the  fictitious  process  of  in  jure  cessio,  or
through  the  forms  of  manumission  and  adoption,  or  perform  for
another  any  of  those  acts  to  which  a  solemn  ceremony  was
attached,  such  as  mancipation  or  stipulation.  (D.  xl.  2.  24 ;  D.
xlvi.  4.  13.  10.)  It  was  necessary  that  a  minor  should  himself  go
through  the  forms  and  repeat  the  words  requisite  for  the  validity
of  such  transactions ;  but  it  was  also  necessary  that  the  tutor
should  be  present  and  give  his  sanction.  The  auctoritas  of  the
tutor  was  the  complement  (^auctoritas  is  derived  from  augeo)  to
the  symbolical  forms  through  which  the  child  went.  (See  Introd.
sec.  43.)  It  represented  the  intention  or  the  mental  act  on  which
those  forms  ultimately  rested.  If  the  child  could  not  speak  with
understanding,  no  such  forms  could  be  used ;  if  he  could  speak,  but
could  scarcely  understand  the  import  of  what  he  said,  or,  in  techni-
cal language,  if,  being  still  infanti proximus,  he  had  as  yet  little  or
no  intellectus  (Gai.  iii.  109),  the  tutor  could  but  very  rarely,  by
interposing  his  sanction,  give  legal  validity  to  words  uttered
v/ithout  understanding.  It  was  only  when  the  act  would  confer
a  very  great  and  very  clear  benefit  on  the  child,  that  this  was
allowed ;  and  although  the  tutor  was,  to  a  certain  extent,  per-
mitted to  act  for  an  infant,  it  was  not  until  a  very  late  period  of
Roman  law  that  a  constitution  of  Theodosius  and  Valentinian,
A.D.  426  (C.  vi.  30.  18.  2),  permitted  a  tutor  to  enter  on  an  inherit-
in  the  name  of  an  infant.  (D.  xxix.  2.  9.)  But  when  the  child  had
entered  on  his  eighth  year,  and  was  now  puhertati  proximus,  or
approaching  thereto,  he  was  considered  to  have  intellectus,  but  not
judicium  (Theoph.  Paraph,  on  Bk.  iii.  19.  9);  that  is,  he  under-
stood the  meaning  of  the  form,  but  could  not  decide  for  himself
whether  it  was  to  his  advantage  to  go  through  the  act  or  not.  This
want  of  judgment  the  tutor  supplied ;  and  in  every  case  where  the
tutor  gave  his  sanction,  the  act  was  legally  valid.  Supposing,  how-
ever, a  pupil  acted  without  the  auctoritas  of  the  tutor,  what  was  the
consequence  ?  In  the  case  of  contracts,  the  pupil  acting  without
authorisation  took  every  benefit,  but  sustained  no  injury  from  the
contract ;  because,  while  his  tender  years  shielded  him,  the  person
with  whom  he  contracted,  having  by  the  agreement  made  a  formal
expression  of  his  will,  must  abide  the  event.  But  when  it  is  said
that  a  pupil  took  every,  benefit  of  the  contract,  it  must  not  be

LIB.  L      TIT.  XXI.

69

understood  that  he  could  continue  to  enjoy  at  pleasure  the  advan-
tages of  another's  property  without  giving  anything  for  the  enjoy-
ment. The  original  owner  might  reclaim  the  property ;  and  if  a
profit  was  being  derived  from  its  possession,  might  take  that  profit
to  himself.  (D.  xxvi.  8.  5.  1.)  Only  he  could  never  make  the
pupil  restore  or  refund  anything  that  was  once  gone ;  and  while  a
pupil  could  always  disclaim  an  executory  contract  made  to  his
disadvantage,  he  could  always,  through  the  intervention  of  his
tutor,  enforce  one  that  promised  to  benefit  him.  In  other  cases,
however,  the  act  of  the  pupil  without  authorisation  was  alto-
gether invalid,  because  there  was  a  risk  involved ;  and  although  it
might  practically  happen  that  the  act  would  have  been  advanta-
geous to  the  pupil,  the  law  guarded  him  against  the  risk  by
making  his  act  invalid.  What  these  cases  were  is  learned  from
the  next  paragraph.

lo  Neque  tamen  hereditatem
adire,  neque  bonorum  possessionem
petere,  neque  hereditatem  ex  fidei-
commisso  suscipere  aliter  possunt,
nisi  tutoris  auctoritate,  quamvis  illis
lucrosa  sit,  nee  uUum  damnum  ha-
beat.

1.  Pupils,  however,  cannot,  without
the  authorisation  of  the  tutor,  enter
on  an  inheritance,  demand  the  pos-
session of  goods,  or  take  an  inherit-
ance given  by  a  Jideicommissum,  even
though  to  do  so  would  be  to  their
gain,  and  could  involve  them  in  no
risk.

-  D.  xxvi.  8.  9.  11.

The  hereditas  was  the  legal  succession  to  the  property  of  the
deceased,  the  bonorum  possessio  here  spoken  of  was  an  interest  in
the  property  of  a  deceased  person,  accorded  by  the  pra3tor,  and
the  hereditas  ex  fideicommisso  was  a  succession  received  through
the  intervention  of  a  trustee  appointed  by  the  testator.  (See
Introd.  sec.  76.)

2.  Tutor  autem  statim,  in  ipso
negotio,  prsesens  debet  auctor  fieri,
si  hoc  pupillo  prodesse  existima-
verit.  Post  tempus  vero  aut  per
epistolam  interposita  auctoritas  nihil
agit.

2.  A  tutor  who  wishes  to  authorise
any  act,  which  he  esteems  advan-
tageous to  his  pupil,  should  do  so  at
once  while  the  business  is  going  on,
and  in  person,  for  his  authorisation  is
of  no  effect  if  given  afterwards  or  by
letter.

D.  xxvi.  8.  9.  5.

3.  Si  inter  tutorem  pupillumque
judicium  agendum  sit,  quia  ipse
tutor  in  rem  suam  auctor  esse  non
potest,  non  prsetorius  tutor  ut  olim
constituitur,  sed  curator  in  locum
ejus  datur :  quo  interveniente  judi-
cium peragitur,  et  eo  peracto  cura-
tor esse  desinit.

3.  When  a  suit  is  to  be  commenced
between  a  tutor  and  his  pupil,  as  the
tutor  cannot  give  authority  with  regard
to  his  owTi  cause,  a  curator,  and  not,
as  formerly,  a  praetorian  tutor,  is  ap-
pointed, with  whose  intervention  the
suit  is  carried  on,  and  who  ceases  to

be  curator
mined.

when  the   suit  is    deter-

Gai.  i.  184.

Although  the  person  who  assisted  the  pupil  in  an  action  in
which  the  tutor  was  concerned  did  exactly  what  the  tutor  did  for

70  LIB.  I.     TIT.  XXII.

the  pupil  in  any  other  action,  and  thus,  as  having  to  authorise  the
proceedings,  might  be  spoken  of  as  a  tutor  (Ulp.  Reg,  11.  24),
yet,  as  he  was  given  for  a  particular  purpose,  which  tutors  were
not  (see  Tit.  14.  4),  it  was  very  natural  that  he  should,  in  pre-
ference, receive  the  name  of  curator.

Subsequently  the  72nd  Novel  (cap.  2)  provided  that,  if  the
pupil  became  at  any  time  the  debtor  of  the  tutor,  another  tutor
should  be  added  to  protect  the  pupil.

Tit.  XXII.  QUIBUS  MODIS   TUTELA  FINITUK.

Pupilli  piipillseque  cum  puberes  Pupils,  both  male  and  female,  are

esse    coeperint,    tutela     liberantiu".  freed  from  tutelage  when  they  attain

Pubertatem  autem  veteres   quidem  the   age   of    puberty.      The    ancients

non  solum  ex  annis,  sed  etiam  ex  judged  of  puberty  in  males,  not  only

habitu  corporis  in  masculis  pestimari  by  their  years,  but   also   by  the   de-

volebant.     Nostra   autem    majestas  velopment  of  their  bodies.     But  we,

dignum    esse     castitate    nostrorum  from  a  wish  to  conform  to  the  purity

temporum   bene    putavit,    quod  in  of  the  i)resent  times,  have  thought  it

feminis  et  antiquis  impudicum  esse  proper,    that   what   seemed,    even   to

visum  est,  id  est,  inspectionem  habi-  the  ancients,  to  be  indecent  towards

tudinis  corporis,  hoc  etiam  in  mas-  females,  namely,  the  inspection  of  the

culos  extendere.  Et  ideo  sancta  con-  body,  should  be  thought   no   less   so

stitutione   promulgata,    pubertatem  towards  males  :  and,  therefore,  by  our

in  masculis  post  quartum  decimum  sacred  constitution,  we  have  enacted,

annum    completum    illico    initium  that  puberty  in  males  should  be  con-

accipere    disposuimus,    antiquitatis  sidered  to  commence  immediately  on

normam   in  feminis  personis    bene  the    completion    of    their  fourteenth

positam  suo  ordine  reHnquentes,  ut  year;  while,  as  to  females,  we   have

l)ost  duodecimum  annum  completum  preserved  the  wise  rule  adopted  by  the

viripotentes  esse  credantur,  ancients,  by  which  they  are  esteemed

fit  for  marriage  on  the  completion  of
their  twelfth  year.

Gai.  i.  196 ;  C.  V.  60.  3.

We  learn  from  Gains  and  Ulpian  {Reg,  11.  28)  that  the  Pro-
culians  were  in  favour  of  a  particular  age  being  fixed  as  that  of
puberty ;  the  Sabinians  wished  to  let  it  be  decided  by  nature.
Justinian  here  decides  in  favour  of  the  former.  All  agreed,  however,
that  the  age  could  in  no  case  be  taken  as  later  than  eighteen  years.

1.  Item  finitur  tutela,  si  adrogati  1.  Tutelage  is  also  determined,  if
sint  adhuc  impuberes,  vel  deportati ;  the  pupil,  before  attaining  the  age  of
item  si  in  servitutem  pupillus  redi-  puberty,  is  either  arrogated,  or  suffers
gatur,  vel  ab  hostibus  fuerit  captus.  deportation,  or  is  reduced  to  slavery,

or  becomes  a  captive.

D.  xxvi.  1.  14.

The  puhertati  proximus  was  considered  liable  to  criminal
punishment  (C.  ix.  47.  7),  and  he  might  be  made  a  slave  for  in-
gratitude towards  his  patron.  (Theoph.  Paraph.)  If  he  re-
turned from  captivity  the  tutelage  would  recommence.  (See
Tit.  20.  2.)

2.  Sed  et  si  usque  ad  certam  con-  2.  Again,  if  a  person  is  appointed
ditionem  datus  sit  testamento,  seque     by  testament  to  be  tutor  until  a  con-

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXIII.  71

evenit   ut   desinat   esse   tutor  exis-     dition   is   accomplished,  he   ceases  to
tente  conditione.  be   tutor   on  the   accomplishment    of

the  condition.

D.  xxvi.  1.  14.  5.

3.  Simili  modo  finitur  tutela  3.  Tutelage  ends  also  by  the  death
morte  vel  pupillorum  vel  tutorum.        of  the  tutor,  or  of  the  pupil.

D.  xxvii.  3.  4.

4,  Sed  et  capitis  deminutione  4.  When  a  tutor,  by  a  capitis  deml-
tutoris,  per  quam  libertas  vel  civitas  nutlo,  loses  his  liberty  or  his  citizen-
ejus  amittitur,  omnis  tutela  perit.  ship,  his  tutelage  is  in  every  case  at
Minima  autem  capitis  deminutione  an  end.  But,  if  he  undergo  only  the
tutoris,  veluti  si  se  in  adoptionem  least  capitis  deminutio,  as  when  a  tutor
dederit,  legitima  tantum  tutela  gives  himself  in  adoption,  then  only
perit ;  ceterae  non  pereunt.  Sed  legal  tutelage  is  ended,  and  not  the
pupilli  et  pupillse  capitis  deminutio,  other  kinds  ;  but  any  capitis  deminutio
licet  minima  sit,  omneS  tutelas  of  the  pupil,  even  the  least,  always
toUit.  puts  an  end  to  the  tutelage.

D.  iv.  5.  7 ;  D.  xxvi.  4.  2.

The  tutela  legitima  belonged  to  the  nearest  of  the  agnati  in
right  of  his  position  in  the  family ;  but  a  tutor  appointed  by  tes-
tament or  by  any  special  means  had  a  charge  committed  to  him
personally,  and  his  change  of  family  could  not  alter  this.

The  minima  deminutio  capitis  suffered  by  the  pupil  would
make  him  under  the  power  of  the  arrogator ;  and  as  he  would  be
no  longer  sui  juris,  he  could  no  longer  have  a  tutor.

5.  Pr.ieterea,  qui  ad  certum  tem-  5.  A  tutor,  again,  who  is  appointed
pus  testamento  dantur  tutores,  finito  by  testament  to  hold  office  during  a
eo  deponunt  tutelam.                               certain  time,  lays  down  his  office  when

the  time  is  expired.

D.  xxvi.  1.  14.  3.

6.  Desinunt  autem  tutores  esse,  6.  They  also  cease  to  be  tutors
qui  vel  removentur  a  tutela  ob  id  who  are  removed  from  their  office  on
quod  suspecti  visi  sunt,  vel  ex  justa  suspicion,  or  who  excuse  themselves
causa  sese  excusant  et  onus  admi-  on  good  grounds  from  the  burden  of
nistrandfe  tutelse  deponunt,  secun-  the  tutelage,  and  rid  themselves  of  it
dum  ea  quse  inferius  proponemus.  according  to   the   rules  we  will  give

hereafter.

D.  xxvi.  1.  14.  4.

At  the  end  of  the  tutelage  the  pupil  could  bring  an  action  to
make  the  tutor  account  {actio  tutelce  directa)',  the  tutor  could
bring  one  to  procure  indemnification  for  all  losses  he  had  sus-
tained (actio  tutelce  contraria).  In  the  same  Avay  there  was  an
action  against  and  in  behalf  of  a  curator  for  similar  purposes
(^actio  negotiorum  gestorum  directa  vel  contraria^.

Tit.  XXIII.     DE   CURATIONIBUS.

Masculi  puberes  et  feminse  viri-  Males  arrived  at  the  age  of  puberty,

potentes  usque  ad  vicesimum  quin-     and   females   of    a  marriageable   age,

72  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXIII.

turn  annum  completiim  curatores  :v  receive  curators,  until  they  have  com -
accipiunt  ;  quia  licet  puberes  sint,  pleted  their  twenty-fifth  year ;  for,
adhuc  tamen  ejus  setatis  sunt  lit  sua  although  they  have  attained  the  age
negotia  tueri  non  possint.  of   puberty,  they  are   still  of   an  age

which    makes    them   unfit  to   protect

their  own  interests.

Gai.  i.  197.

The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  provided  for  the  appointment
of  curators  in  the  case  of  madmen  and  prodigals,  but  did  not
make  any  provision  for  the  protection  of  young  persons  who  had
attained  the  age  of  puberty.  The  first  enactment  on  the  subject,
of  which  we  have  any  knowledge,  is  the  lex  Plcetoria,  or,  as  it  is
often  written,  Lcetoria,  passed  before  the  time  of  Plautus  {Pseud,
act  i.  sc.  3  :  Lex  me  perdit  quinavicennaria  !  metuunt  credere  omnes),
which,  fixing  the  time  of  the  perfecta  cBtas  at  twenty-five  years,
provided  that  any  one  overreaching  a  person  under  that  age
should  be  liable  to  a  criminal  prosecution  and  to  infamy  (CiC.  de
Nat.  Dcor.  3.  30;  de  Off,  3.  15);  and,  possibly,  permitted  the  ap-
pointment of  curators  in  cases  where  a  good  reason  for  the  appoint-
ment was  given.  The  praetor  subsequently  provided  a  remedy,
which  was  a  great  protection  to  persons  under  twenty-five  years
who  came  before  him,  by  directing,  in  all  cases  where  they  had
been  prejudiced,  a  restitutio  in  integrum ;  that  is,  that  the  appli-
cant should  be  placed  exactly  in  the  position  in  which  he  would
have  been  had  not  the  fraud  been  practised  against  him.  Finally,
Marcus  Antoninus  ordered  that  curators  should  be  given  in  all
cases,  without  inquiry,  on  the  application  of  the  pubes.  This
seems  the  most  probable  and  consistent  account  of  the  matter,
which  has  been  the  subject  of  much  dispute  among  commentators.
The  chief  authority  is  Julius  Capitolinus,  in  Vita  M,  Aurel.  Anton,
€ap.  10, who  says:  De  curatorihus  vero,quum  ante  non  nisi  ex  lege
LcBtoria,  v el  propter  lasciviam  vel  propter  dementiam  darentur,  ita
statuit  \_M,  Antoninus']^,  ut  omnes  adulti  curatorem  acciperent  non
redditis  causis,

1.    Dantur  autem   curatores   ab  1.  Curators  are  appointed  by  the

iisdem  magistratibus,  a  quibus  et  same  magistrates  who  appoint  tutors,
tutores.  Sed  curator  testamento  A  curator  cannot  be  appointed  by  tes-
non  datur,  sed  datus  confirmatur  tament,  but  if  appointed,  he  may  be
decreto  pr^etoris  vel  prsesidis.  confirmed  in  his  oflice  by  a  decree  of

the  praetor  or  prseses.

Gai.  i.  1.  198;  D.  xxvi.  3.  1.  3.

The  magistrates  who  appointed  the  curators  were,  therefore,
at  ^Rome,  the  prc^fectus  iirbi  or  the  prastor ;  in  the  provinces,  the
presses  or  municipal  magistrate.  (See  Tit.  20.  4.)  A  curator
could  not  be  appointed  by  testament,  because  it  was  not  certain
that  the  adolescens  would  require  one.  If  he  did  require  one,  it
was  natural  that  the  person  named  in  the  testament  of  the  father
should  be  selected  by  the  magistrate  as  the  most  proper  person.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXIII.  73

2.  Item  iiiviti  adolescentes  curcX-  2.  No  adolescent  is  obliged  to  re-

tores  non  accipiunt,  prseterquam  in  ceive  a  curator  against  his  will,  unless
litem ;  curator  enim  et  ad  certam  in  case  of  a  law-suit,  for  a  curator  may
causam  dari  potest.  be  appointed  for  a  particular  sj)ecial

purpose.

D.  xxvi.  6.  2.  5.

A  person  who  had  attained  the  age  of  puberty  was  not  obliged
to  have  a  curator ;  but,  practically,  he  was  almost  sure,  if  he  had
much  property,  to  apply  for  one,  as  it  was  part  of  his  tutor's  duty
to  urge  him  to  do  so  (D.  xxvi.  7.  5.  5),  and  he  could  not,  at  the  age
of  fourteen,  be  fit  to  manage  his  own  affairs.  There  were  two
other  cases,  besides  that  mentioned  in  the  text,  in  which  a  curator
was  siven  acfainst  the  will  of  the  adolescent  for  v^^hom  he  was
appointed.  When  a  debtor  Avished  to  pay  a  debt  owed  to  the
adolescent  (D.  iv.  4.  72),  or  the  tutor  to  settle  his  accounts
with  him  (C.  v.  31.  7),  a  curator  was  appointed  to  watch  the  in-
terests of  the  adolescent,  and  thus  to  make  the  payment  and
settlement  indisputably  valid ;  for  if  the  adolescent  were  left  to
himself,  the  praetor  might,  on  suspicion  of  fraud,  order  a  restitutio
in  integrum.  The  curator,  once  appointed,  held  his  office  until
the  adolescent  attained  the  age  of  twenty-five,  and  the  minor
could  not  aliene,  and,  perhaps,  could  not  contract,  without  the
sanction  of  his  curator ;  but  if  an  adolescent  who  had  a  curator
was  thought  capable  of  managing  his  affairs,  he  might,  by  the
special  grant  of  the  emperor,  have  a  dispensation  {venia  cBtatis)
from  waiting  for  the  full  age ;  but  it  was  requisite,  to  obtain  this,
that  a  man  should  be  twenty,  and  a  woman  eighteen  vears  of  age.
(D.  iv.  4.  3 ;  C.  ii.  45.)

3.  Furiosi  quoque  et  prodigi,  licet  3.  Madmen  and  prodigals,  although

majores  viginti  quinque  annis  sint,  past  the  age  of  twenty-five,  are  yet
tamen  in  curatione  sunt  adgnatorum  placed  under  the  curatorship  of  their
ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum  ;  sed  agnati  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.
Solent  Rom?e  praefectus  urbi  vel  But,  ordinarily,  curators  are  appointed
praetor,  et  in  provinciis  praesides  ex  for  them,  at  Rome,  by  the  prsefect  of
inquisitione  eis  curatores  dare.  the  city  or  the  praetor ;   in  the  pro-

vinces, by  the  prsesides,  after  inquiry
into  the  circumstances  has  been  made.

D.  xxvii.  10.  1.

The  words  of  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  with  regard  to
the  furiosus  were :  Si  furiosus  est,  adgnatorum  gentiliumque  in
€0  pecuniaque  ejus  potestas  est,  (CiCERO,  de  Invent,  ii.  50.)  The
prodigus  was  first  interdicted  by  the  magistrate ;  and  this,  Ulpian
says,  was  recognised  by  custom  even  before  the  date  of  the
Twelve  Tables  :  Lege  XIL  Tabularum  prodigo  interdicitur  hono-
rum  suorum  administrotio ;  quod  morihus  ah  initio  interdictum
est.  (D.  xxvii.  10.  1.  pr.)  He  was  then  placed  under  the  cura-
torship of  the  agnate.     Hence  Horace  says  :

Huic  omne  adimat  jus
Praetor,  et  ad  sanos  abeat  tutela  propinquos.

Sat.  ii.  3.  218.

74  LIB.  I.     TIT.  XXIII.

While,  however,  the  prodigus  was  interdicted,  the  furiosus  was
not,  and  what  he  did  was  valid  if  he  was  not  mad  at  the  parti-
cular time  when  he  did  it.     The  form  of  the  interdiction  of  the
prodigus  is  given  by  Paul :  '  Quando  tihi  bona  paterna  avitaque
nequitla  tua   disperdis,  liherosque  ad  egestatem  perducis,  oh  earn
rem   tihi  cere  commercioque  interdico.      (^Sent.  iii.  4  a.  7.)     The
agnates  were,  however,  the  curatores  legitimi  of  the  prodigus,  under
the  law  of   the  TavcIvc  Tables,    only  when  the  goods  he  was
wasting   had  come   to  him  as    the  successor  ah   intestato  of  an
ascendant.    (Ulp.  Reg,  xii.  3.)     But  the  praetor  extended  the  in-
terdiction of  prodigi  to  all  cases  where  there  was  a  prodigal  waste
of  goods,  just  as  he  extended  the  curatorship  of  furiosi  to  other
forms  of  madness  or  incapacity  (see  next  paragraph) ;  and  the
magistrate  appointed  the  curator  in  all  cases  which  came  under
either  head  of  this  extension  of  the  law  by  the  praetor.     The  text
further  tells  us  that,  although  the  legal  curatorship  of  the  agnate
was   still  recognised   in  the  cases  of  furiosi  and  prodigi  wasting
goods  under  an  intestate  succession  to  an  ascendant,  yet  in  prac-
tice the  magistrate  genei-ally  appointed ;  and  even  before  this  prac-
tice grew  up,  the  magistrate,  if  he  thought  an  agnate  having  the
legal  right  to  be  curator  unfit,  would  give  the  practical  adminis-
tration of  the  property  to  some  one  else.     (D.  xxvii.  10.  13.)

4.  Sed  et  mente  captis,  et  sur-  4.  Persons  who  are  of  unsound
dis,  et  miitis,  et  qui  perpetuo  morbo  mind,  or  who  are  deaf,  mute,  or  sub-
laborant,  quia  rebus  suis  superesse  ject  to  any  perpetual  malady,  since
non  possunt,  curatores  dandi  sunt.  they  are  unable  to  manage  their  own

affairs,  must  be  jjlaced  under  curators.

D.  xxvii.  10.  2.

The  word  furiosi,  that  is,  the  mad  as  opposed  to  the  imbe-
cile, in  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  was  taken  strictly,  and
there  was  no  legal  curator  for  any  one  suffering  under  any  other
form  of  mental  malady.

5.  Intcrdum  autem  et  pupilli  5.  Sometimes  even  pupils  receive
curatores  accipiunt :  ut  puta  si  le-  curators  ;  as,  for  instance,  when  the
gitimus  tutor  non  sit  idoneus ;  legal  tutor  is  unfit  for  the  office  ;  for  a
quoniam  habenti  tutorem  tutor  dari  person  who  already  has  a  tutor  cannot
non  potest.  Item  si  testamento  datus  have  another  given  him ;  again,  if  a
tutor,  vel  a  pr^etore  vel  j)r?eside,  tutor  appointed  by  testament,  or  by
idoneus  non  sit  ad  administrationem,  the  prsetor  or  prseses^  is  unfit  to  admi-
nec  tamen  fraudulenter  negotia  ad-  nister  the  affairs  of  his  pupil,  although
ministret,  solet  ei  curator  adjungi.  there  is  nothing  fraudulent  in  the  way
Item  in  locum  tutorum  qui  non  in  he  administers  them,  it  is  usual  to
perpetuum,  sed  ad  tempus  a  tutela  appoint  a  curator  to  act  conjointly
excusantur,  solent  curatores  dari.  with  him.     It  is  also  usual  to  assign

curators  in  the  place  of  tutors  excused
for  a  time  only.

D.  xxvi.  1.  13 ;  D.  xxvi.  2.  27 ;  D.  xxvi.  5.  15  and  16.

6.  Quod  si  tutor  adversa  vale-  G.  If  a  tutor  is  prevented  by  ill-
tudine  vel  alia  necessitate  impe-  ness  or  otherwise  from  administering
ditur  quominus  negotia  pupilli  ad-     the  affairs  of  his  pupil,  and  his  pupil

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXIV.  75

ministrare    possit,    et    pupillus   vel    is  absent,  or  an  infant,  then  the  pr?etor
absit  vel  infans  sit,  qiiem  velit  acto-     or  prxses  of  the  province  will,  at  the
rem,  periciilo  ipsius  tutoris,  praetor     tutor's  risk,  appoint  by  decree   some
vel  qui  provincise  prseerit,   decreto     one  to  be  the  agent  of  the  pupil,
constituet.

D.  xxvi.  7.  24.

This  agent  is  to  be  distinguished  from  a  curator.  He  is
merely  a  person  who  acts  under  the  tutor,  and  for  whom  the
tutor  is  responsible.  If  the  pupil  were  present,  and  past  the  age
of  infancy,  he,  with  the  authorisation  of  the  tutor,  could  appoint
the  agent,  and  there  would  be  no  necessity  for  the  confirmation
of  a  magistrate ;  hence  the  words  et  pupillus  vel  absit  vel  infans
sit.

The  uncertain  duration  of  mental  incapacity  made  the  person
entrusted  with  the  case  of  one  suffering  under  it  be  termed  a
curator,  not  a  tutor ;  otherwise  the  sufferer  might  be  as  incapable
of  going  through  legal  forms  as  an  infant.  An  adolescent  and  a
prodigus  could  go  through  all  the  forms  of  law,  and  therefore
there  was  no  necessity,  in  their  case,  for  the  curator  having  an
auctoritas.  If  they  went  through  the  prescribed  forms,  they
were  legally  bound,  whether  the  curator  consented  or  not ;  but
unless  the  curator  consented,  the  praetor  would  always  interpose
and  relieve  them  from  any  consequences  that  might  be  prejudi-
cial ;  and  so  they  were  not  really  bound,  unless  with  the  curator's
consent.

Tit.  XXIV.  DE  SATISDATIONE  TUTORUM  VEL

CURATORUM.

Ne    tamen    pupillorum    pupilla-  To  prevent  the  property  of  pupils

rumve,  et  eorum  qui  quaeve  in  cura-  and    persons    placect    under    curators

tione    sunt,    negotia   a    curatoribus  being  wasted  or  destroyed  by  tutors

tutoribusve  consumantur  vel  demi-  or  curators,  the  praetor  sees  that  tu-

nuantur,  curat  prsetor  ut  et  tutores  tors  and  curators  give  security  against

et   curatores   eo   nomine    satisdent.  such  conduct.     But  this  is  not  always

Sed  hoc  non  est  perpetuum ;    nam  necessary ;    a    testamentary    tutor    is

tutores    testamento    dati    satisdare  not  compelled  to  give  security,  as  his

non  coguntur,  quia  fides  eorum  et  fidelity   and   diligence   have  been  re-

diligentia  ab  ipso  testatore  probata  cognised  by  the  testator.     And  tutors

est.     Item   ex   inquisitione   tutores  and  curators  appointed  upon  inquiry,

vel  curatores  dati  satisdatione  non  are  not  obliged  to  give  security,  be-

onerantur,  quia  idonei  electi  sunt.  cause  they  have  been  chosen  as  being

l^roper  persons.

Gai.  i.  199,  200.

A  patron  and  a  father,  when  tutors,  were  ordinarily,  though
not  as  a  matter  of  right,  exempt  from  the  necessity  of  giving
caution.  (D.  xxvi.  4.  5.  1.)  This  necessity,  therefore,  only  fell
on  tutores  or  curatores  legitimiy  and  those  appointed  by  inferior
magistrates;  those  appointed  by  higher  magistrates  being  only
appointed  after  inquiry,  which  rendered  the  giving  security
needless.     (See  Tit.  20.  4.)     The  persons  who  became  sureties

76

XIB.  I.      TIT.  XXIV.

(for  the  security  demanded  was  always  that  of  the  guarantee  of
third  persons)  went  through  the  form  oi  Jidejussio.  The  pupil
or  the  person  requiring  a  curator  asked  the  surety  whether  he
guaranteed  the  safety  of  the  property,  Fide  jiihisne  rem  salvam
fore.  And  he  answered.  Fide  jubeo.  If  the  pupil  or  adult  could
not  go  through  the  ceremony,  his  slave,  or,  if  he  had  no  slave,  or
his  means  did  not  suffice  to  buy  one,  a  slave  appointed  by  the
magistrate,  went  through  the  form  for  him.  (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  20  ;
D.  xlvi.  6.  2.)

Besides  the  guarantee  taken  for  the  fidelity  of  the  tutor  and
curator,  and  the  general  liability  of  the  whole  of  the  tutor's  or
curator's  property  to  make  good  any  losses  incurred  through
their  neglect,  a  constitution  of  Constantine  having  subjected  their
property  to  a  tacit  hypothec  in  favour  of  the  pupil  or  minor  (C.
V.  37.  20),  those  entrusted  to  their  care  had  a  further  protection
in  the  necessity  under  which  the  tutor  and  curator  were  to  make
an  inventory  of  all  the  property  of  the  pupil  or  person  requiring
a  curator  (D.  xxvi.  7.  3.  2),  and,  after  the  publication  of  the  78th
Novel,  by  the  tutor  or  curator  being  obliged  to  pledge  himself  by
oath  that  he  would  act  as  a  '  bonus  paterfamilias  '  would  act.
(Nov.  78,  cap.  7.)

1.  If  two  or  more  are  appointed  by
testament,  or  by  a  magistrate,  after
inquiry,  as  tutors  or  ciu*ators,  any  of
them,  by  offering  security  for  the  in-
demnification of  the  pupil  or  adoles-
cent, may  be  preferred  to  his  co-tutor
or  co-citrator,  so  that  he  may  either
alone  administer  the  property,  or  may
oblige  his  co-tutor  or  co-curator  to
give  security,  if  he  wishes  to  obtain
the  preference  and  become  the  sole
administrator.  He  cannot  directly
demand  security  from  his  co-tutor  or
co-curator;  he  must  offer  it  himself,
and  so  give  his  co-tutor  or  co-curator
the  choice  to  receive  or  to  give  secu-
rity. If  no  tutor  or  curator  offers
security,  the  person  appointed  by  the
testator  to  manage  the  property  shall
manage  it;  but  if  no  such  person  be
appointed,  then  the  administration
will  fall  to  the  person  whom  a  majority
of  the  tutor»  shall  choose,  as  is  pro-
vided by  the  praetorian  edict.  If  the
tutors  disagree  in  their  choice,  the
praetor  must  interpose.  And  in  the
same  way,  when  several  are  appointed
after  inquiry  by  a  magistrate,  a  ma-
jority is  to  determine  who  shall  ad-
minister.

D.  xxvi.  2.  17.  19.  1 ;  D.  xxvi.  7.  3.  1.  7,  8,  9.

As  it  was  generally  most  convenient  that  one  tutor  alone
should  act,  although  all  continued  responsible  (D.  xxvi.  7.  3.  2.

1.  Sed  si  ex  testamento  vel  in-
quisitione  duo  pluresve  dati  fuerint,
IDotest  unus  offerre  satis  de  indem-
nitate  pupilli  vel  adolescentis,  et
contutori  vel  concuratori  praeferri
ut  solus  administret,  vel  ut  contutor
satis  offerens  praeponatur  ei,  et  ipse
solus  administret.  Itaque  per  se
non  potest  petere  satis  a  contutore
vel  concuratore  suo ;  sed  offerre
debet,  ut  electionem  det  contutori
vel  concuratori  suo,  utrum  velit
satis  accij^ere  an  satisdare.  Quod
si  nemo  eorum  satis  offerat,  si  qui-
dem  adscriptum  fuerit  a  testatore
quis  gerat,  ille  gerere  debet ;  quod
si  non  fuerit  adscriptum,  quem
major  pars  elegerit,  ipse  gerere
debet,  ut  edicto  praetoris  cavetur.
Sin  autem  ipsi  tutores  dissenserint
circa  eligendum  eum  vel  eos  qui
gerere  debent,  praetor  partes  suas
interponere  debet.  Idem  et  in
pluribus  ex  inquisitione  datis  pro-
bandum  est,  id  est,  ut  major  pars
eligere  possit,  per  quem  admini-
stratio  fieret.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXIV.  77

6),  it  was  necessary  that  the  tutor  who  did  act,  tutor  onerarius
(opposed  to  tutores  honorarii,  those  who  did  not  act),  should  give
security  to  the  co-tutors.  If  he  did  not,  he  could  be  compelled,
by  the  means  described  in  the  text,  either  to  do  so  or  to  allow
some  other  co-tutor  to  take  his  place.  Sometimes  the  tutelage
was  apportioned  by  the  magistrate  among  the  different  tutors,
and  each  had  a  separate  duty  to  perform,  for  which  he  alone  was
responsible.     (D.  xxvi.  7.  3.  9.)

2.  Sciendum  aiitem  est  noii  so-  2.  It  should  be  observed  that  it  is
him  tutores  vel  ciu'atores  pupillis  not  only  tutors  and  curators  who  are
vel  adultis  ceterisque  personis  ex  responsible  for  their  administration  to
administratione  rerum  teneri ;  sed  pupils,  minors,  and  the  other  persons
etiam  in  eos  qui  satisdationem  acci-  we  have  mentioned,  but,  as  a  last
piunt,  subsidiariam  actionem  esse,  safeguard,  a  subsidiary  action  may  be
quae  ultimum  eis  pnesidium  possit  brought  against  the  magistrate  who
adferre.  Subsidiaria  autem  actio  in  has  accepted  the  security  as  sufficient,
eos  datur,  qui  aut  omnino  a  tutori-  The  subsidiary  action  may  be  brought
bus  vel  curatoribus  satisdari  non  against  a  magistrate  who  has  wholly
curaverunt,  aut  non  idonee  passi  omitted  to  take  security,  or  has  taken
sunt  caveri.  Quae  quidem,  tam  ex  insufficient  security ;  and  the  liability
I)rudentium  responsis  quam  ex  con-  to  this  action,  according  to  the  re-
stitutionibus  imperialibus,  etiam  in  spouses  of  the  jurisprudents,  as  well
heredes  eorum  extenditur.  as  the  imperial  constitutions,  extends

also  to  the  heirs  of  the  magistrate.

D.  xxvii.  8.  1.  11,  12.  4.  6.

The  heirs  of  the  magistrate  were  only  liable  where  the  negli^
gence  of  the  magistrate  had  been  very  great.     (D.  xxvii.  8.  6.)

3.  Quibus  constitutionibus  eb  3.  The  same  constitutions  also  ex-
illud  exprimitur,  ut  nisi  caveant  pressly  enact,  that  tutors  and  cura-
tutores  vel  curatores,  pignoribus  tors  who  do  not  give  security,  may  be
captis  coerceantur.  compelled  to  do  so  by  seizure  of  their

goods  as  pledges.

C.  V.  35.  2.

The  magistrate  would  order  a  portion  of  their  property  to
be  seized,  and  retained  until  they  gave  security.  (Theophil,
Parajjhr.)

4.  Neque  autem  prsefectus  urbi,  4.  Neither  the  preefect  of  the  city,
neque  praetor,  neque  prseses  pro-  nor  the  praetor,  nor  the  prases  of  a
vincise,  neque  quis  alius  cui  tutores  province,  nor  any  one  else  to  whom
dandi  jus  est,  hac  actione  tenebi-  the  appointment  of  tutors  belongs,
tiu* ;  sed  hi  tantummodo  qui  satis-  will  be  liable  to  this  action,  but  only
dationem  exigere  solent.  those   whose   ordinary   duty   it   is   to-

exact  the  security.

D.  xxvii.  8.  1.  1.

The  Avords  of  the  text,  which  are  borrowed  from  Ulpian,  are-
not  strictly  correct,  as  the  municipal  magistrates,  whose  business
it  was  to  take  security,  could  in  some  cases  appoint  tutors  (Tit»
20.  5),  and  they  were  always  liable  to  this  action.

78

LIB.  I.   TIT.  XXV.

Tit.  XXV.

DE  EXCUSATIONIBUS  TUTOKUM
VEL  CURATORUM.

Excusaiitur  autem  tiitores  vel
curatores  variis  ex  causis,  plerurn-
que  autem.  propter  liberos,  sive  in
potestate  sint,  sive  emancipati.  Si
enim  tres  liberos  superstites  Romse
quis  liabeat,  vel  in  Italia  quatuor,
vel  in  XDrovinciis  quinque,  a  tutela
vel'  cura  potest  excusari,  exemplo
ceterorum  munerum  ;  nam  et  tute-
1am  vel  curam  placuit  publicum
munus  esse.  Seel  adoptivi  liberi
Hon  prosunt,  in  adoptionem  autem
dati  naturali  patri  prosunt.  Item
nepotes  ex  filio  prosunt,  ut  in  locum
patris  succedant ;  ex  filia  non  pro-
sunt. Filii  autem  superstites  tan-
tum  ad  tutelse  vel  curpe  numeris
excusationem  prosunt ;  defuncti  non
prosunt.  Sed  si  in  bello  amissi
sunt  qua3situm  est  an  j)rosint  ?  Et
constat  eos  solos  prodesse,  qui  in
acie  amittuntur  ;  hi  enim  qui  pro
republica  ceciderunt,  in  perpetuum
per  gloriam  vivere  intelliguntur.

Tutors  and  curators  are  excused  on
different  grounds  ;  most  frequently  on
account  of  the  number  of  their  children,
whether  in  their  power  or  emancipated.
For  any  one  who  at  Rome  has  three
children  living,  in  Italy  four,  or  in  the
provinces  five,  may  be  excused  from
being  tutor  or  curator  as  from  other
ojSices,  for  the  office  of  both  a  tutor
and  a  curator  is  considered  a  public
one.  Adopted  children  will  not  avail
the  adopter,  but  though  given  in  adop-
tion are  reckoned  in  favour  of  their
natural  father.  Grandchildren  by  a
son  may  be  reckoned  in  the  number,
so  as  to  take  the  place  of  their  father,
but  not  grandchildren  by  a  daughter.
It  is  only  those  children  who  are  living
that  can  be  reckoned  to  excuse  any  one
from  being  tutor  or  curator,  and  not
those  who  are  dead.  It  has  been
questioned,  however,  whether  those
who  have  perished  in  war  may  not  be
reckoned  ;  and  it  has  been  decided,
that  those  who  die  in  battle  may,  but
they  only,  for  glory  renders  those
immortal  who  have  fallen  for  their
country.

D.  xxvii.  1.  2.  2,  &c.  ;  D.  xxvii.  1.  18.

It  was  considered  a  matter  of  public  policy  that  tutors  or
-curators  should  act  when  their  assistance  was  necessary,  and  there-
fore those  who  were  appointed  were  obliged  to  accept  the  office,
unless  they  could  establish  any  valid  reason  for  being  excused.
This  Title  gives  a  number  of  grounds  on  which  a  person  appointed
tutor  or  curator  was  excused  from  holding  the  office.  These
grounds  of  excuse  may  be  classed  with  tolerable  accuracy  under
four  heads.  Tutors  and  curators  Avere  excused  as — 1.  Having
rendered  a  service  to  the  public,  or  being  engaged  in  the  discharge
of  some  public  duty  (pr.  and  paragraphs  1,  2,  3.  14,  15);  2.
Being  in  a  position  adverse  to  the  pupil  or  adult  (paragraphs
4.  9.  11,  12.  19);  3.  Being  incompetent  to  sustain  the  burden  of
the  office  (paragraphs  6,  7,  8.  13);  4.  Filling  or  having  filled
similar  offices  (5.  18.)

It  was  the  lex  Papia  PoppcEa  that  first  introduced  exemption
on  the  ground  of  the  number  of  the  children.

Grandchildren  by  the  daughter  were  not  reckoned,  as,  other-
wise, they  would  have  been  reckoned  by  two  different  persons,
their  maternal  grandfather  and  their  paternal  father  or  grand-
father.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXV.

79

1.  Item  diviis  Marcus  in  semes-
tribus  rescripsit,  eiim  qui  res  fisci
administrat,  a  tutela  vel  cura,  quam-
diu  administrat,  excusari  posse.

1.  The  Emperor  Marcus  declared
by  rescript  in  his  ISemestria,  that  a
person  engaged  in  administering  the
property  of  the  fiscus  is  excused  from
being  tutor  or  curator  while  his  ad-
ministration lasts.

D.  xxvii.  1.  41.

Augustus  and  Tiberius  held  a  council  of  senators  every  six
months  for  the  discussion  of  affairs  (Suet.  Aug,  35);  and  we
gather  from  the  text  that  the  practice  was  also  adopted  by  Marcus
Aurelius,  who  published  the  records  of  the  councils  under  the
name  of  Semestria.

2.  Item  qui  reipublic^e  causa  ab-
sunt,  a  tutela  vel  cura  excusantur.
Sed  et  si  fuerint  tu  tores  vel  cura-
tores,  deinde  reipublic?e  causa  abesse
coeperint,  a  tutela  vel  cura  excusan-
tur, quatenus  reipublicse  causa  ab-
sunt,  et  interea  curator  loco  eorum
datur.  Qui  si  reversi  fuerint  reci-
piunt  onus  tutelse  :  nam  nee  anni
habent  vacationem,  ut  Papinianus
libro  quinto  responsorum  rescripsit  ;
nam  hoc  spatium  habent  ad  novas
tutelas  vocati.

2.  Persons  absent  on  the  service  of
the  state  are  excused  from  being  tutors
or  curators  ;  and  if  those  who  have
already  been  appointed  either  as  tutors
or  curators,  should  afterwards  be  ab-
sent on  the  public  service,  they  are
excused  during  their  absence,  and
meanwhile  curators  are  appointed  in
their  place.  On  their  return,  they
must  again  take  upon  them  the  burden
of  tutelage  ;  and,  according  to  Papi-
nian's  opinion,  expressed  in  the  fifth
book  of  his  answers,  are  not  entitled
to  the  privilege  of  a  year's  vacation,
which  is  only  allowed  them  when  they
are  called  to  a  new  tutelage.

D.  xxvii,  1.  10.  pr.  and  2.

The  meaning  of  the  text  is  that,  if  they  had  commenced
holding  the  office  of  tutor  before  their  absence,  they  were  obliged
to  resume  it  immediately  on  their  return.  If,  when  they  returned,
a  new  tutelage  was  imposed  on  them,  they  might  delay  for  a  year
to  enter  on  its  duties.

3.  Et  qui  potestatem  habent  ali-
quam,  se  excusare  possunt,  ut  divus
Marcus  rescripsit ;  sed  cwj^tam  tu-
telam  deserere  non  possunt.

3.  By  a  rescript  of  the  Emperor
Marcus,  all  persons  invested  with
magisterial  power  may  excuse  them-
selves ;  but  they  cannot  abandon  the
office  of  tutor,  which  they  have  already
undertaken.

D.  xxvii.  1.  17.  5.
Qui  potestatem  aliquam  habent  I  i.e.  all  magistrates,  including

local  magistrates.

4.  Item  propter  litem  quam  cum
X)upillo  vel  adulto  tutor  vel  curator
habet,  excusare  nemo  se  potest,  nisi
forte  de  omnibus  bonis  vel  hereditate
controversia  sit.

4.  No  tutor  or  curator  can  excuse
himself  by  alleging  a  law-suit  with  the
pupil  or  adult ;  unless  the  suit  embraces
the  whole  of  the  goods,  or  the  2)roperty,
or  is  for  an  inheritance.

D.  xxvii.  1.  21.

Justinian  afterwards,  in  the  72nd  Novel  (c.  1),  decided  that
no  creditor  or  debtor  of  the  pupil  or  adult  should  be  allowed  to
become  tutor  or  curator.

8Q

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXV.

5.  Item  tria  onera  tuteliB  non
adfectatfe  vel  cutvq  prsestant  vaca-
tionem,  qiiamcliu  aclministrantur :  lit
tamen  plurium  piipillorum  tutela,
vel  cura  eorumdem  bonorum,  veluti
fratrum,  pro  una  computetiir.

5.  Three  tutelages  or  curatorsliips,
if  unsolicited,  serve  as  an  excuse  from
filling  any  other  such  office,  while  the
holder  continues  to  discharge  the
duties.  But  the  tutelage  of  several
pupils,  or  the  curatorship  of  an  undi-
vided property,  as  v/here  the  pupils  or
adults  are  brothers,  is  reckoned  as  one
only.

D.  xxvii.  1.  3.  15.  15.

6.  Sed  et  propter  paupertatem
excusationem  tribui  tam  divi  fratres
quam  per  se  divus  Marcus  rescripsit,
si  quis  imparem  se  oneri  injuncto
jDOssit  docere.

D.

XXVll

6.  Poverty  also  is  a  sufficient  ex-
cuse, when  it  can  be  proved  such  as  to
render  a  man  incapable  of  the  burden
imposed  upon  him,  according  to  the
rescripts  given  both  by  the  imperial
brothers  together,  and  by  the  Emperor
Marcus  singly.

1.7.

Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus  and  Lucius  Verus  were  the  divi
fratres.

7.  Item  propter  adversam  vale-
tudinem,  propter  quam  nee  suis
quidem  negotiis  interesse  i^otest,
excusatio  locum  habet.

8.  Similiter  eum  qui  literas  ne-
sciret,  excusandum  esse  divus  Pius
rescripsit ;  quamvis  et  imperiti  lite-
rarum  possint  ad  administrationem
nearotiorum  sufficere.

7.  Illness  also,  if  it  prevents  a  man
from  superintending  his  own  affairs,
afibrds  a  ground  of  excuse.

8.  So,  too,  a  person  who  cannot
read  must  be  excused,  according  to  the
rescript  of  the  Emperor  Antoninus
Pius  ;  but  persons  who  cannot  read
are  sometimes  considered  capable  of
administering.

D.  xxvii.  1.  6.  19.

The  magistrate  would  have  to  decide  whether  the  property-
was  so  small,  and  the  position  of  the  pupil  or  adult  so  humble.

that  this  ignorance  would  be  no  bar.

9.  Item  si  propter  inimicitias
aliquem  testamento  tutorem  pater
dederit,  hoc  ipsum  prsestat  ei  excu-
sationem :  sicut  per  contrarium  non
excusantur,  qui  se  tutelam  admini-
straturos  patri  pupillorum  promise-
runt.

D.  xxvii.

10.  Non  esse  admittendam  excu-
sationem ejus  qui  hoc  solo  utitur,
quod  ignotus  patri  pupillorum  sit,
divi  fratres  rescripserunt.

9.  If  it  is  through  enmity  that  the
father  appoints  by  testament  any  one
as  tutor,  this  circumstance  itself  will
affi^rd  a  sufficient  excuse  ;  just  as,  on
the  other  hand,  they  who  have  pro-
mised the  father  of  the  pupils  to  fill
the  office  of  tutor,  cannot  be  excused.

1.  6.  17.

10.  That  the  tutor  was  unknown  to
the  father  of  a  pupil  is  not  of  itself  to
be  admitted  as  a  sufficient  excuse,  as
is  decided  by  a  rescript  of  the  imperial
brothers.

D.  xxvii.  1.  15.  14.

11.  Inimicitise  quas  quis  cum
patre  pupillorum  vel  adultorum
exercuit,  si  capitales  fuerunt,  nee
reconciliatio  intervenit,  a  tutela  vel
cura  sclent  excusare.

11.  Enmity  against  the  father  of
the  pupil  or  adult,  if  of  a  deadly  cha-
racter, and  no  reconciliation  has  taken
place,  is  usually  considered  as  an  excuse
from  being  tutor  or  curator.

D.  xxvii.  1.  6.  17.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXV.

81

12.  Item  qui  status  controver-
siam  a  pupillorum  patre  passus  est,
excusatur  a  tutela.

12.  So,  too,  he  whose  status  has
been  called  in  question  by  the  father
of  the  pupil,  is  excused  from  the  office
of  tutor.

That  is,  if  the  deceased  has  attempted  to  show  that  the  person
appointed  tutor  was  a  slave.

13.  Item  major  septuaginta  annis
a  tutela  vel  cura  excusare  se  potest.
Minores  autem  viginti  quinque  annis
olim  quidem  excusabantur.  A  nostra
autem  constitutione  prohibentur  ad
tutelam  vel  curam  adspirare,  adeo
ut  nee  excusationis  opus  fiat.  Qua
constitutione  cavetur  ut  nee  pupillus
ad  legitimam  tutelam  vocetur,  nee
adultus  ;  cum  erat  incivile,  eos  qui
alieno  auxilio  in  rebus  suis  admini-
strandis  egere  noscuntur,  et  aliis  re-
guntur,  aliorum  tutelam  vel  ciu-am
subire.

13.  Persons  above  seventy  years  of
age  may  be  excused  from  being  tutors
or  curators.  Persons  under  the  age  of
twenty-five  were  formerly  excused,  but,
by  our  constitution,  they  are  now  pro-
hibited from  aspiring  to  these  offices,
so  that  excuses  are  become  unneces-
sary. This  constitution  provides  that
neither  pupils  nor  adults  shall  be  called
to  a  legal  tutelage.  For  it  is  absurd
that  persons  who  are  themselves  go-
verned, and  are  known  to  need  assist-
ance in  the  administration  of  their  own
afiairs,  should  become  the  tutors  or
curators  of  others.

D.  xxvii.  1.  2.  10.  7 ;  C.  V.  30.  5.

14.  Idem  et  in  milite  observan-
dum  est,  ut  nee  volens  ad  tutelas
onus  admittatur.

15.  Item  Romse  grammatici,  rhe-
tores  et  medici,  et  qui  in  patria  sua
id  exercent  et  intra  numerum  sunt,  a
tutela  vel  cura  habent  vacationem.

14.  The  same  rule  holds  good  also
as  to  military  persons.  They  cannot,
even  though  they  wish  it,  be  admitted
to  the  office  of  tutor  or  curator.

15.  Grammarians,  rhetoricians,  and
physicians  at  Rome,  and  those  also
who  exercise  such  professions  in  their
own  country,  and  are  within  the  num-
ber authorised,  are  exempted  from
being  tutors  or  curators.

D.  xxvii.  1.  (3.  1.

It  was  Antoninus  Pius  who  fixed  the  number  which  each  city-
was  to  have.  (D.  xxvii.  1.  6.  1.)  The  largest  provincial  city  was
not  allowed  to  have  more  than  ten  physicians,  five  grammarians,
and  five  rhetoricians.

Philosophers  were  also  excepted  (D.  xxvii.  1.  6.  5);  jurispru-
dents who  were  members  of  the  council  of  the  emperor  (xxvii.
1.  30);  and  all  clerici,     (C.  i.  3.  52.)

I        16.  Qui  autem  vult  se  excusare,

j  si  plures  habeat  excusationes  et  de

I  quibusdam  non  probaverit,  aliis  uti

intra  tempora  non  prohibetur.     Qui

autem  excusare  se  volunt,  non  ap-

■  pellant ;  sed  intra  dies  quinquaginta

I  continues  ex  quo  cognoverunt,  ex-

1  cusare  se  debent,  cujuscumque  ge-

i  neris   sunt,   id   est,  qualitercumque

I  dati  fuerint  tutores,  si  intra  centesi-

I  mum  lapidem  sunt  ab  eo  loco  ubi

I  tutores  dati  sunt ;  si  vero  ultra  cen-

tesimum     habitant,    dinumeratione

facta  viginti  millium  diurnorum  et

16.  If  a  person  wishes  to  excuse
himself,  arid  has  several  excuses,  even
supposing  some  are  not  admitted,  there
is  nothmg  to  prevent  him  employing
others,  provided  he  does  so  within  the
prescribed  time.  Those  who  wish  to
excuse  themselves  are  not  to  appeal,
but  whatever  kind  of  tutors  they  may
be,  that  is,  however  they  may  have
been  appointed,  must  offer  their  ex-
cuses within  the  fifty  days  next  after
they  have  known  of  their  appointment,
if  they  are  within  a  hundred  miles  of
the  place  when  they  were  appointed.
G

82  LIB.  I.     TIT.  XXV.

amplius  triginta  dierum.  Quod  ta-  If  they  are  at  a  greater  distance  they
men,  iit  Scsevola  dicebat,  sic  debet  are  allowed  a  day  for  every  twenty
computari  ne  minus  sint  quam  quin-  miles,  and  thirty  days  besides  ;  but
quaginta  dies.  the  time  should,  as  Scsevola  said,  be  so

calculated  as  never  to  be  less  than  fifty

days  in  the  whole.

D.  xxvii.  1.  21.  1.  13.  1.  9.

If  he  lived  anywhere  within  four  hundred  miles,  he  would,
reckoning  a  day  for  each  twenty  miles,  and  thirty  days  besides,
fall  short  of  fifty  days,  and  therefore  the  rule  was  laid  down  as
stated  in  the  concluding  sentence  of  the  text.  If  he  did  not
excuse  himself  within  the  appointed  time,  he  could  not  afterwards
escape  the  charge.

Dies  coniinui  are  opposed  to  dies  utiles,  the  days  on  which
legal  business  could  be  done ;  dies  continui  meaning  the  next  days,
of  whatever  kind.

The  ordinary  rule  was  that  persons  called  to  a  public  office
had,  in  order  not  to  serve,  to  appeal  to  a  higher  magistrate  than
the  one  appointing  them.

17.  Datus  autem  tutor  ad  uni-  Vj.  The  tutor  who  is  appointed  is
versum  patrimonium  datus  esse  considered  as  appointed  for  the  whole
creditur.                                                     l^atrimony.

D.  xxvii.  1.  21.  2.

The  tutor  was  appointed  for  the  whole  patrimony;  but  if
it  was  situated  in  very  different  parts,  he  might  apply  to  have
other  tutors  appointed  to  act  in  the  different  localities.  (D.  xxvii.
1.  21.  2.)

18.  Qui  tutelam  alicujus  gessit,  18.  A  person  who  has  discharged
invitus  curator  ejusdem  fieri  non  the  ofiice  of  tutor  is  not  compelled
compellitur  :  in  tantum  ut,  licet  against  his  will  to  become  the  curator
paterfamilias  qui  testamento  tutorem  of  the  same  person  ;  so  much  so,  that
dedit,  adjecerit  se  eumdem  cura-  although  the  father,  after  appointing  a
torem  dare,  tamen  invitum  eum  tutor  by  testament,  adds  that  he  also
curam  suscipere  non  cogendum  divi  appoints  the  same  person  to  be  curator,.
Severus  et  Antoninus  rescripserunt.  the  person  so  appointed  if  unwilling

cannot  be  compelled  to  take  the  office
of  curator  ;  so  it  has  been  decided  by
the  rescript  of  the  Emperors  Severus
and  Antoninus.

It  is  Antoninus  Caracalla  who  is  here  meant.

19.  lidem  rescripserunt,  maritum  19.  The  same  emperors  have  de-
uxori  suae  curatorem  datum  excusare  cided  by  rescript,  that  a  husband
se  posse,  licet  se  immisceat.                    appointed  as  curator  to  his  wife  may

excuse  himself  from  the  office,  even  after
he  has  intermeddled  with  her  affairs.

D.  xxvii.  1.  1.  5.

The  husband  not  only  might  excuse  himself  from  the  cura-
torship  of  his  wife,  but  in  the  time  of  Justinian  he  could  not  fill

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXVI.

83

the  office  (C.  v.  34.  2) ;  neither  could  the  wife's  curator  marry
her.     (C.  V.  6.)

It  was  the  general  rule   that  a  tutor  or  curator  who  inter-
meddled with  the  aiFairs  of  the  pupil  or  adult  renounced  the  right

of  oiFering  excuses.

20.  Si  qiiis  autem  falsis  allega-
tionibus  excusationem  tiitelse  meruit,
non  est  liberatiis  onere  tiitelse.

20.  If  any  one  lias  succeeded  by  false
allegations  in  getting  himself  excused
from  the  office  of  tutor,  he  is  not  dis-
charged from  the  burden  of  the  office.

D.  xxiii.  2.  60.

Tit.  XXVI.    DE   SUSPECTIS   TUTORIBUS   VEL

CURATORIBUS.

Sciendum  est  suspecti  crimen  ex
lege  duodecim  tabularum  descen-
dere.

The  right  of  accusing  a  suspected
tutor  or  curator  is  derived  from  the
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.

D.  xxvi.  10.  1,  2.

1.  Datum  est  autem  jus  remo-
vendi  tutores  suspectos  Romse  prte-
tori,  et  in  provinciis  praesidibus
earum  et  legato  proconsulis.

I>.  xxvi.

2.  Ostendimus,  qui  possint  de
suspecto  cognoscere  ;  nunc  videamus
qui  suspecti  fieri  possint.  Et  quidem
omnes  tutores  possunt,  sive  testa-
mentarii  sint  sive  non,  sed  alterius
generis  tutores  ;  quare  et  si  legiti-
mus  sit  tutor,  accusari  poterit .  Quid
si  patronus  ?  Adhiic  idem  erit  di-
cendum :  dummodo  meminerimus
famse  patroni  parcendum,  licet  lit
suspectus  remotus  fuerit.

1.  The  power  of  removing  suspected
tutors  belongs  at  Rome  to  the  praetor  ;
in  the  provinces  to  the  praesides,  or  to
the  legate  of  the  proconsul.

10.  1.  3,  4.

2.  We  have  shown  what  magis-
trates may  take  cognisance  of  sus-
pected j)ei'sons  :  let  us  now  inquire,
Avhat  persons  may  become  suspected.
All  tutors  may  iDecome  so,  whether
testamentary,  or  others ;  thus  even
a  legal  tutor  may  be  accused.  But
what  is  the  case  with  a  patron  ?  He,
too,  may  be  accused  ;  but  we  must
remember,  that  his  reputation  must
be  spared,  although  he  be  removed  as
suspected.

The  descendants  could  not  bring  an  action  to  which  infamy
attached  against  an  ascendant.  They  and  the  libertus  could  only
call  for  the  interference  of  the  law  to  protect  their  property,  not
to  punish  the  tutor  with  infamy.  (D.  xxxvii.  15.  5.)  And  in  the
case  of  all  legal  tutors  it  was  customary,  except  in  very  bad  cases,
not  to  remove  them,  but  to  join  a  curator  with  them.  (D.  xxvi.
10.  9.)  By  famcR  parcendum  is  meant  that  the  grounds  of  the
decision  for  their  removal  were  not  to  be  expressed.

2>.  Consequens  est  ut  videamus,
qui  possunt  suspectos  postulare.  Et
sciendum  est  quasi  publicam  esse
hanc  actionem,  hoc  est,  omnibus
patere.  Quinimo  et  mulieres  admit-
timtur  ex  rescripto  divorum  Severi
et  Antonini,  sed  ese  solas  quae  pie-

3.  Let  us  now  inquire,  by  whom
suspected  persons  may  be  accused.
Now  an  accusation  of  this  sort  is  in
a  measure  public,  that  is,  it  is  open  to
all.  Nay,  by  a  rescript  of  the  Em-
perors Severus  and  Antoninus,  even
women  are  admitted  to  be  accusers  :
G  2

84

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXVI.

tatis  necessitudine  ductse  ad  hoc
procedunt,  ut  puta  mater ;  nutrix
quoque  et  avia  possunt,  potest  et
soror.  Sed  et  si  qua  alia  mulier
fnerit,  cujus  prsetor  perpensam  pie-
tatem  intellexerit  non  sexus  vere-
cimdiam  egredientem,  sed  pietate
productam  non  continere  injuriam
pupillorum,  admittet  earn  ad  accu-
sationem.

D.  xxvi.

but  only  those  who  are  induced  to  do
so  through  feelings  of  affection,  as  a
mother,  a  nurse,  or  a  grandmother,
or  a  sister,  who  may  all  become  ac-
cusers. But  the  praetor  will  admit
any  other  woman  to  make  the  accu-
sation, in  whom  he  recognises  a  real
affection,  and  who,  without  overstep-
ping the  modesty  of  her  sex,  is  im-
j)elled  by  this  affection  not  to  endure
the  pupil  suffering  harm.

10.  1.  6,  7.

The  action  is  called  quasi  puhJica,  because  on  tlie  one  hand  it
had  the  private  object  of  securing  the  pupil's  interests,  and  on
the  other  had,  like  public  actions,  criminal  consequences,  and^
might  be  brought  by  a  person  not  interested  in  the  private  result.

Women,  as  a  general  rule,  could  not  institute  public  actions.
(D.  xlviii.  2.  1.)

4.  Impuberes  non  possunt  tutores
suos  suspectos  postulare  ;  puberes
autem  curatores  suos  ex  consilio  ne-
cessariorurn  suspectos  possunt  argu-
ere,  et  ita  divi  Severus  et  Antoninus
rescripserunt.

4.  No  person  below  the  age  of  pur
berty  can  bring  an  accusation  against
his  tutor  as  suspected  :  but  those  who
have  attained  that  age  may,  under  thi
advice  of  their  near  relations,  accusi
their  curators.  Such  is  the  decisioi
given  in  a  rescript  of  the  Emperori
Severus  and  Antoninus.

D.  xxvi.  10.  7.

5.  Suspectus  autem  est,  qui  non
ex  fide  tutelam  gerit,  Ucet  solvendo
sit,  ut  Julianus  quoque  rescripsit.
Sed  et  antequam  incipiat  tutelam
gerere  tutor,  posse  eum  quasi  sus-
pectum  removeri  idem  Julianus
rescripsit,  et  secundum  eum  con-
stitutum  est.

5.  A  tutor  is  suspected  who  doeg
not  faithfully  execute  his  trust,  al-
though perfectly  solvent,  as  Julian
writes,  who  also  thinks  that  even  \
fore  he  enters  on  his  office,  a  tui
may  be  removed,  as  suspected  ;  and
a  constitution  has  been  made  in  acr
cordance  with  this  opinion.

D.  xxvi.  10.  8.

Ulpian  says  that  a  tutor  could  not  be  suspectus  before  he  en-
tered on  his  office,  and  that  if  there  were  any  reason  to  think  him
an  improper  person  beforehand,  the  magistrate  would  forbid  him
to  assume  the  administration.  (D.  xxvi.  10.  3.  5  and  12.)  Jus-
tinian decides  in  opposition  to  this.

6.  Suspectus  autem  remotus,  si  6.  A  suspected  j:>erson,  if  removed

quidem  ob  dolum,  famosus  est ;  si     on  account  of  fraud,  is  infamous,  but
ob  culpam,  non  seque.  not  if  for  neglect  only.

C.  v.  40.  9.
For  the  meaning  of  the  word  infamia  see  Introd.  sec.  48.

7.  Si  quis  autem  suspectus  postu-
latur,  quoad  cognitio  finiatur,  inter-
dicitur  ei  administratio,  ut  Papiniano
visum  est.

7.  If  an  action  is  brought  against
any  one  as  suspected,  his  administra-
tion, according  to  Papinian,  is  sus-
pended while  the  accusation  is  pend-
ing.

D.  xlvi.  3.  14.  1.

LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXVI.  S5

8.  Sed  si  snspecti  cognitio  sus-  8.  If  a  process  is  commenced  against
cepta  fuerit,  posteaque  tutor  vel  a  tutor  or  curator,  as  suspected,  and
curator  decesserit,  extinguitur  sus-  he  dies  while  it  is  going  on,  the  process
jjecti  cognitio.  is  at  an  end.

D.  xxvi.  10.  11.

The  action  to  force  the  tutor  or  curator  to  give  in  his  accounts
would  be  brought  against  the  heirs  of  the  tutor  or  curator.  But
the  suspecti  cognitio  could  not,  as  its  object  was  to  remove  the
tutor  or  curator,  not  to  recover  money  from  him.  The  crimen
suspecti  could  only  be  brought  against  a  person  actually  tutor  or
curator,  and  was  at  an  end  if  the  office  came  to  an  end,  not  only
by  death,  but  in  any  way.    (D.  xxvi.  10.  11.)

9.  Si  quis  tutor  copiam  sui  non  9.   If  a  tutor  fails  to  appear,  that
faciat  ut  alimenta  pupillo  decernan-     a  certain  amount  of  maintenance  may
tur,  cavetur  epistola  divorum  Severi    be  fixed  on  for  his  pupil,  it  is  provided
et  Antonini,  ut  in  possessionem  bono-     by  a  rescript  of  the  Emperors  Severus
rum  ejus  pupillus  mittatur  ;  et  quae     and  Antoninus,  that   the  pupil   shall
mora   deteriora    futura    sunt,    dato     be  put  into  the  possession  of  the  effects
curatore    distrahi    jubentiu*.     Ergo     of  the  tutor,  and  that  after  a  curator
ut  suspectus  removeri  poterit,  qui     has  been  appointed,  those  things,  which
non  prsestat  alimenta.                              are  perishable,  may  be  sold.     There-
fore a  tutor  who  does  not  afford  main-
tenance to  his  pupil  may  be  removed,
as  suspected.

D,  xxvi.  10.  7.  2.

The  prastor  generally  determined  the  amount  to  be  annually
expended  on  the  maintenance  and  education  of  the  pupil  (the
word  alimenta  must  be  taken  very  widely),  when  it  was  not  de-
termined by  the  testament  of  the  father.  The  tutor  had  therefore
to  attend  before  the  magistrate  to  state  Avhat  amount  the  fortune
of  the  pupil  would  bear.

Dato  curatore^  i.e.  a  curator  appointed  for  this  particular
purpose  only.

10.  Sed  si  quis  prsesens  negat  10.  But  if  the  tutor  appears,  and
propter  inopiam  alimenta  non  posse  denies  that  maintenance  can  be  allowed
decerni,  si  hoc  per  mendacium  dicat,  in  consequence  of  the  smallness  of  the
remittendum  eum  esse  ad  prsef ectum  pupil's  estate  ;  if  he  says  this  falsely,
urbi  puniendum  placuit ;  sicut  ille  he  shall  be  handed  over  to  the  prsefect
remittitur,  qui  data  pecunia  ministe-  of  the  city,  to  be  punished,  just  as  a
rium  tutelae  redemit.  person  is  handed  over  who  has  pur-
chased a  tutelage  by  bribery.

D.  xxvi.  10.  3.  15.

The  praetor  had  no  criminal  jurisdiction,  and  therefore  persons
were  sent  for  punishment  to  the  prcefectus  urhi,  (D.  i.  12.  1.)
In  the  provinces  the  prcBses  could  punish,  as  well  as  remove,  the
tutor.

11.  Libertus  quoque,  si  fraudu-  11.  Also  a  freedman,  who  is  proved
lenter  tutelam  filiorum  vel  nepotum    to  have  been  guilty  of  fraud,  when

86  LIB.  I.      TIT.  XXVI.

patroni  gessisse  probetur,  ad  praefec-    acting  as  tutor  to  the  son  or  grandson
turn  urbi  remittitur  puniendus.  of  liis  patron,  is  handed  over  to  the

prsefect  of  the  city  to  be  punished.

D.  xxvi.  10.  2.

12.  Novissime  sciendum  est,  eos  12.  Lastly,  it  must  be  known  that

qui  fraiidulenter  tutelam  vel  curam  they  who  are  guilty  of  fraud  in  their

administrant,  etiamsi  satis  offerant,  administration,  must  be  removed,  al-

removendos  a  tutela ;  quia  satisdatio  though  they  offer  sufficient   security,

tutoris  propositum  malevolum  non  For  giving  security  makes  no  change

mutat,  sed  diutius  grassandi  in  re  in  the  malevolent  purpose  of  the  tutor,

familiari  facultatem  prsestat.  but  only  procures  him  a  longer  oppor-
tunity of  injuring  the  estate.

D.  xxvi.  10.  5.  6.

A  person  is  considered  thus  open  to  suspicion  whose  general
character  and  conduct  warrant  the  suspicion.  But  a  zealous  and
honest  man,  as  we  learn  in  the  next  paragraph,  is  not  to  be  re-
moved on  suspicion,  because  he  is  poor.

13.  Suspectum  enim  eum  puta-  13.  "We  also  deem  every  man  sus-

mus,  qui  moribus  talis  est  ut  sus-  pected,  whose  conduct  is  such  that  we

pectus    sit.       Enimvero    tutor    vel  cannot  but  suspect  him.     A  tutor  or

curator,  quamvis  pauper  est,  fidelis  curator  who  is  faithful  and  diligent,  is

tamen  et  diligens,  removendus  non  not  to  be  removed,  as  a  suspected  per-

est  quasi  suspectus.  son,  merely  because  he  is  poor.

D.  xxvi.  10.  8.

I

LIBEE    SECUNDUS

Tit.  I.   DE  DIVISIONS  KEEUM  ET  QUALITATE.

Having  treated  in  the  first  book  of  the  law  of  persons,  the  Insti-
tutes now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  law  of  things — that  is,  they
pass  from  persons  who  exercise  rights  to  things  over  which  rights
are  exercised.  Rights  may  be  divided  into  those  which  we  have
in  or  over  things  as  against  all  the  world,  and  those  which  we
have  against  particular  persons.  (See  Introd.  sec.  61.)  The  second
book  of  the  Institutes,  and  the  first  portion  of  the  third,  treat  of
the  former  class,  and  of  the  mode  in  which  they  are  acquired.

The  most  proper  mode  of  treating  the  law  of  things  would
be,  perhaps,  first  to  inquire  of  what  divisions  things  themselves
are  susceptible ;  next,  to  divide  rights  over  things  (Jura  in  rem)
according  to  the  extent  of  the  right ;  and  lastly,  to  treat  of  the
mode  in  which  those  rights  are  acquired.  To  a  certain  extent
this  mode  of  dividing  the  subject  is  adopted  in  the  Institutes,  but
not  very  distinctly  or  expressly.  Things  themselves  may  be
divided,  generally,  by  making  the  basis  of  division  either  the  re-
lation in  which  they  stand  to  persons,  or  something  inherent  in
the  nature  of  the  things.  Things  divided  in  the  first  way  may  be
divided  according  as  they  are  the  subject  of  the  rights  of  all  men
or  no  men  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  particular  men  on  the  other,
the  latter  class  receiving  modifications  according  to  the  character
in  which  particular  men  hold  them.  This  division  of  things  is
treated  of  in  the  first  sections  of  this  Title.  The  most  promi-
nent distinction  inherent  in  things  is  that  of  things  corporeal  and
things  incorporeal,  and  this  is  treated  of  in  the  second  Title.
There  are  other  divisions  of  things  (see  Introd.  sees.  52-60)  which
are  alluded  to  in  the  Institutes,  but  not  expressly  noticed.

A  person  may  have  the  whole  sum  of  all  rights  over  a  thing
when  in  Roman  law  he  was  said  to  have  the  dominium.  These
rights  of  the  dominus  were  summed  up  in  the  jus  utendi,  that  is,
making  use  of  the  thing ;  the  jus  fruendi,  that  is,  reaping  the
fruits  and  profits ;  and  the  jus  abutendi,  that  is,  consuming  the

88  LIB.  II.     TIT.  I.

thing,  if  capable  of  consumption.  Or  any  one  of  the  jura  in  rem  may
be  separated  from  the  rest  and  enjoyed  by  different  persons.  (See
Introd.  sec.  64.)  These  fragments  of  the  dominium,  called  ser-
vitudes, are  treated  of  in  the  third  and  three  following  Titles.
Or  a  person  may  have  a  right  over  a  thing  in  the  ownership  of
another,  limited  by  the  extent  to  which  he  has  a  claim  against
the  owner,  as  a  creditor  has  over  the  thing  given  him  in  pledge
as  a  security  for  the  debt.  This  right,  generally  termed  in  Roman
law  ihe  jus  pignoris,  is  not  spoken  of  expressly  in  the  Institutes,
but  a  brief  sketch  of  the  law  on  the  subject  will  be  found  in  the
conclusion  of  the  notes  to  the  fifth  Title.

The  Institutes  then  recur  to  the  modes  by  which  the  owner-
ship in  things  is  acquired,  and  the  subject  is  divided  according  as
ownership  is  acquired  in  a  particular  thing,  or  in  a  universitas  rerum,
that  is,  the  aggregate  of  rights  possessed  by  a  particular  person.
Two  of  the  principal  modes  of  acquiring  particular  things,  occu-
pation, that  is,  being  the  first  person  to  appropriate  an  unappro-
priated thing,  and  tradition,  that  is,  the  OAvner  handing  over  the
thing  to  another  person  with  the  intention  of  transferring  the  owner-
ship, and  the  transferee  receiving  the  thing  with  the  intention  of
becoming  owner  of  it,  have  been  treated  of  in  the  first  Title,  as
also  have  the  subordinate  modes  of  accession,  when  an  owner  ac-
quires by  the  natural  increment  of  the  thing  owned,  or  when,  the
property  of  two  owners  being  somehow  mixed  up,  the  law  gives  the
result  to  one  only,  and  specification,  when  a  new  thing  is  created,  and
belongs  to  the  creator.  All  these  are  said  to  be  modes  of  acquiring
things  jure  naturali.     Two  modes  of  acquiring  particular  things
jure  civili  are  then  noticed.      (1.)  The  sixth  Title  treats  of  usu-
capion, the  process  by  which  the  law  attached  the  legal  ownership
after  a  certain  length  of  possession.    (2.)  The  seventh  Title  treats
of  certain  cases  in  which  gift  might  be  looked  on  as  a  different  mode
of  conferring  ownership  from  tradition.     This  ends  the  discussion
of  the  modes  of  acquiring  the  ownership  in  particular  things.    The
eighth  and  ninth  Titles  speak  of  certain  restrictions  on  alienation,
and  of  one  person  acquiring  ownership  through  other  persons.
In  the  tenth  Title  the  Institutes  proceed  to  discuss  the  modes  of
acquiring  a  universitas  rerum.     The  two  chief  modes  are,  the  gift
of  an  hereditas  by  testament,  and  the  succession  to  an  liereditas  in
case  of  intestacy.     The  subject  of  testaments  occupies  the  re-
mainder of  the  second  book,  and  that  of  succession  to  an  intestate
occupies  the  first  nine  Titles  of  the  third  book.     Some  minor
modes  of  acquiring  a  universitas  rerum,  of  which  arrogation  is  the
most  important,  are  then  noticed ;  and  with  the  twelfth  Title  of
the  third  book  the  treatment  of  jura  in  rem,  and  of  the  modes  of
acquiring  ownership  in  them,  is  brought  to  a  conclusion.     This
treatment  of  the  modes  of  acquisition  is  subject  to  the  inconve-
nience noticed  by  Gains  (ii.  191),  that  legacies  which  are  a  mode
of  acquiring  specific  things,  are  treated  of  as  coming  under  the
acquisition  of  a  universitas  rerum  by  testament.

LIB.  11.     TIT.  I.  89

Previously  to  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  there  had  been  two
other  modes  of  acquisition  J?/?'e  civili,  applicable  both  in  the  case
of  particular  things  and  in  that  of  a  universitas  rerum,  which  are
treated  of  by  Gains  at  considerable  length.  (GrAi.  ii.  18-37.  See
also  Ulpian,  Reg.  19.  2.)  These  were  mancipation,  the  process
by  which  res  mancipi  were  conveyed  from  one  Roman  citizen  to
another  (see  Introd.  sec.  59),  and  in  jure  cessio.  The  cessio  injure
was  a  fictitious  suit,  in  which  the  person  who  was  to  acquire  the
thing  claimed  (vindicahat)  the  thing  as  his  own,  the  person  who
was  to  transfer  it  acknowledged  the  justice  of  the  claim,  and  the
magistrate  pronounced  it  to  be  the  property  {addicehat)  of  the
claimant.  Mancipation  and  cessiones  injure  were  both  abolished
by  Justinian.  Ulpian  {Reg.  19.  2)  also  notices  two  others,  adjudi-
catione,  i.  e.  by  property  held  in  common  being  judicially  marked
out,  so  that  the  separate  portions  were  owned,  and  lege,  by  some
special  statute,  as  when  legacies  devolved  under  the  lex  Papia
Poppcea,     (Bk.  ii.  20.)

The  explanation  of  the  term  possession,  which  occurs  fre-
quently in  this  Title,  may  be  conveniently  deferred  until  we  reach
the  sixth  Title.

Superiore  libro  de  jure  persona-  In   the   preceding   book   we   have

rum    exposiiimus  :   modo   videamus  treated  of   the  law   of   persons.     Let

de  rebus,  qua?  vel  in  nostro  patri-  us  now  speak  of  things,  which  either

monio  vel  extra  patrimoniuin  nos-  are  in  ovir  patrimony,  or  not  in  our

trum  habentur.     Qusedam  enim  na-  patrimony.     For  some  things  by  the

turali  jure  communia  sunt  omnium,  law   of   nature    are   common    to   all ;

qusedam   publica,   quaedam  univer-  some  are  public  ;  some  belong  to  cor-

sitatis,    qusedam    nulHus,    pleraque  porate  bodies,  and  some  belong  to  no

singulorum,    quae    ex   variis    causis  one.     Most   things   are   the   property

cuique    adquiruntur,  sicut   ex  sub-  of  individuals,   who  acquire   them  in

jectis  apparebit.  diJElerent  ways,  as   will   appear   here-

-^  after.

Gal  ii.  1 ;  D.  i.  8.  2.

Under  the  word  res,  thing,  is  included  whatever  is  capable  of
being  the  subject  of  a  right.  The  principal  division  of  Grains  is
into  things  divini  juris  and  liumani  juris.  Here  the  principal
division  is  according  as  things  are  in  nostro  patrimonio,  that  is,
belong  to  individuals  ;  or  extra  nostrum  patrimonium ,  that  is,  belong
to  all  men  {communes),  to  the  state  {publiccB),  to  no  xnQn  {nullius),
or  to  bodies  of  men  {univer sitatis).  The  words  bona  smd  pecunia,
it  may  be  observed,  are  only  used  of  things  i?t  Jiostro  patinmonio,

1.  Et  quidem  naturali  jure  com-  1.    By   the    law   of    nature    these

munia  sunt  omnium  hsec  :  aer,  aqua  things  are  common  to  mankind — the
profluens,  et  mare  et  per  hoc  litora  air,  running  water,  the  sea,  and  con-
maris.  Nemo  igitur  ad  litus  maris  sequently  the  shores  of  the  sea.  No
accedere  prohibetur,  dum  tamen  one,  therefore,  is  forbidden  to  ap-
villis  et  monumentis  et  aedificiis  abs-  proach  the  sea-shore,  provided  that
tineat :  quia  non  sunt  juris  gentium,  he  respects  habitations,  monuments,
sicut  et  mare.  and  buildings,  which  are  not,  like  the

sea,  subject  only  to  the  law  of  nations.
D.  i.  8.  2.  1 ;  D.  i.  8.  4.

90  LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

Of  things  that  are  common  to  all  any  one  may  take  such  a
portion  as  he  pleases.  Thus  a  man  may  inhale  the  air,  or  float
his  ship  on  any  part  of  the  sea.  As  long  as  he  occupies  any  por-
tion, his  occupation  is  respected ;  but  directly  his  occupation
ceases,  the  thing  occupied  again  becomes  common  to  all.  The
sea-shore,  that  is,  the  shore  as  far  as  the  waves  go  at  furthest,
was  considered  to  belong  to  all  men.  For  the  purposes  of  self-
defence  any  nation  had  a  right  to  occupy  the  shore  and  to  repel
strangers.  Individuals,  if  they  built  on  it,  by  means  of  piles  or
otherwise,  were  secured  in  exclusive  enjoyment  of  the  portion
occupied ;  but  if  the  building  was  taken  away,  their  occupancy
was  at  an  end,  and  the  spot  on  which  the  building  stood  again
became  common.     (D.  i.  8.  6.)

2.  Flumina  autem  omnia  et  por-  2.  All  rivers  and  ports  are  public  ;
tns  pnblica  sunt.     Ideoque  jus  pis-  hence  the  right  of  fiishing  in  a  port,  or
candi  omnibus  commune  est  in  portu  in  rivers,  is  common  to  all  men.
fluminibusque.

D.  i.  8.  4.  1 ;  D.  xlvii.  10.  13.  7.

The  word  puhlicus  is  sometimes  used  as  equivalent  to  com-'
munis,  but  is  properly  used,  as  here,  for  what  belongs  to  the
people.  Things  public  belong  to  a  particular  people,  but  may  be
used  and  enjoyed  by  all  men.  Roads,  public  places  and  build-
ings might  be  added  to  those  mentioned  in  the  text.  The  parti-
cular people  or  nation  in  whose  territory  public  things  lie  may
permit  all  the  world  to  make  use  of  them,  but  exercise  a  special
jurisdiction  to  prevent  any  one  injuring  them.  In  this  light  even
the  shore  of  the  sea  was  said,  though  not  very  strictly,  to  be  a
res  puhlica  :  it  is  not  the  property  of  the  particular  people  whose
territory  is  adjacent  to  the  shore,  but  it  belongs  to  them  to  see
that  none  of  the  uses  of  the  shore  are  lost  by  the  act  of  indivi-
duals. Celsus  says,  Litora  in  qucB  populus  Romanus  im-perium  hahet
populi  JRomani  esse  arbitror  (D,  xliii.  8.  3),  where,  if  we  are  to
bring  this  opinion  of  Celsus  into  harmony  with  the  opinions  of
other  jurists,  we  must  understand  ^populi  Romani  esse  '  to  mean
^  are  subject  to  the  guardianship  of  the  Roman  people.'

3.  Est  autem  litus  maris,  quatenus  3.  The  sea-shore  extends  as  far  as
hybernus  fluctus  maximus  excurrit.     the  greatest  winter  flood  runs  up.

D.  1.  16.  96.

Celsus  ascribes  this  definition  to  Cicero,  who  apparently  bor-
rowed it  from  Aquilius.    (CiC   Top,  7.)

4.  Riparum  quoque  usus  publicus  4.  The  public  use  of  the  banks  of
est  juris  gentium,  sicut  ipsius  flu-  a  river  is  i^art  of  the  law  of  nations,
minis.  Itaque  navem  ad  eas  adpli-  just  as  is  that  of  the  river  itself.  All
care,  funes  arboribus  ibi  natis  reli-  persons  therefore  are  as  much  at  liberty
gare,  onus  aliquod  in  his  reponere  to  bring  their  vessels  to  the  bank,  to
cuilibet  liberum  est,  sicut  per  ipsum  fasten  ropes  to  the  trees  growing  there,

'  flumen    navigare  ;     sed     proprietas    and  to  place  any  part  of  their  cargo
earum  illorum  est  quorum  preediis    there,  as  to  navigate  the  river  itself.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.  91

hserent:  qua  de  causa  arbores  quoque     But  the  banks  of  a  river  are  the  pro-
iii  iisdem  natse  eorumdem  sunt.  perty  of  those  whose  land  they  adjoin  ;

and  consequently  the  trees  growing  on
them  are  also  the  property  of  the  same
persons.

D.  i.  8.  5.

The  banks  of  rivers  belonged  to  the  proprietors  of  the  adja-
cent lands ;  but  the  use  of  them,  for  the  purposes  of  navigation
or  otherwise,  was  open  to  all.  The  proprietors,  therefore,  could
alone  reap  the  profits  of  the  soil ;  but  if  they  attempted  to  exer-
cise their  rights  so  as  to  hinder  the  public  use  of  the  bank,  they
would  be  restrained  by  an  interdict  of  the  prsetor.  (See  Introd.
sec.  107.)

5.  Litorum  quoque  usus  publicus  5.  The  public  use  of  the  sea-shore,
juris  gentium  est,  sicut  ipsius  maris ;  too,  is  part  of  the  law  of  nations,  as  is
et  ob  id  quibuslibet  Uberum  est  that  of  the  sea  itself ;  and  therefore
casam  ibi  ponere  in  quam  se  reci-  any  person  is  at  liberty  to  place  on  it
plant,  sicut  retia  siccare  et  ex  mari  a  cottage,  to  which  he  may  retreat,  or
reducere.  Proprietas  autem  eorum  to  dry  his  nets  there,  and  haul  them
potest  intelligi  nullius  esse,  sed  ejus-  from  the  sea  ;  for  the  shores  may  be
dem  juris  esse  cujus  et  mare,  et  quse  said  to  be  the  property  of  no  man,
subjacet  mari  terra  vel  arena.  but  are  subject  to   the    same   law   as

the  sea  itself,  and  the  sand  or  ground
beneath  it.

D.  i.  8.  5.  pr.  and  1.

The  shores  over  which  the  Koman  people  had  power  were  not
the  property  of  the  Roman  people,  although  it  belonged  specially
to  the  Roman  people  to  see  that  the  free  use  of  them  was  not
hindered.     (See  note  to  paragraph  2.)

6.  Universitatis  sunt,  non  singu-  6.  Among  things  belonging  to  a  cor-
lorum,  veluti  quse  in  civitatibus  sunt  porate  body,  not  to  individuals,  are,  for
theatra,  stadia  et  similia,  et  si  quae  instance,  buildings  in  cities,  theatres,
alia  sunt  communia  civitatum.  race-courses,  and  other  similar  places

belonging  in  common  to  a  whole  city.

D.  i.  8.  6.  1.

Universitas  is  a  corporate  body,  such  as  the  guilds  (^collegia)
of  different  trades ;  for  instance,  the  collegium  pistorum.  Res
universitatis  are  things  which  can  be  used  by  the  members  of  the
universitas.

Both  the  state  and  corporate  bodies  had  property  which  they
held  exactly  like  individuals  ;  as,  for  instance,  the  agri  vectigales,
or  slaves  and  lands  belonging  to  a  collegium.  Such  things  were
not  'puhliccB  or  universitatis  in  the  sense  in  which  the  words  are
used  here  ;  for  every  member  of  the  state  or  corporation  could  not
use  and  enjoy  such  things,  although  the  proceeds  went  to  the
general  purposes  of  the  state  or  corporation.  They  were,  like  the
property  of  individuals,  in  nostro  patrimonio,  the  state  or  corpo-
ration being  looked  on  as  any  other  owner.

7.  Nullius  autem  sunt  res  sacrse  7.  Things  sacred,  religious,  and
et  religiosse  et  sanctse  ;  quod  enim    holy,  belong  to  no  one  ;  for  that  which

92

.LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

divini  juris  est,  id  nullius  in  bonis     is  siibject  to  divine  law  is  not  the  pro-

Gai.  ii.  9.

Res  nullius  are  either  things  unappropriated  by  any  one,  in
Avhich  sense  things  common,  or  unoccupied  lands,  or  wild  animals,
are  res  nullius ;  or  they  are  things  to  which  a  religious  character
prevents  any  human  right  of  property  attaching.

8.  Sacrse  res  sunt,  quae  rite  et
per  jDontifices  Deo  consecrata3  sunt,
veluti  sedes  sacra?  et  donaria  qua3  rite
ad  ministerium  Dei  dedicata  sunt.
Quse  etiam  per  nostram  constitutio-
nem  alienari  et  obligari  prohibuimus,
excepta  causa  redemptionis  capti-
yorum.  Si  qiiis  vero  auctoritate  sua
quasi  sacrum  sibi  constituent,  sacrum
non  est  sed  prof anum.  Locus  autem
in  quo  cedes  sacra?  sunt  sedificata?,
etiam  diruto  sedificio  sacer  adhuc
manet,  ut  et  Papinianus  rescripit.

D.  i.  8.  G.

8.  Tilings  are  sacred  which  have
been  duly  consecrated  by  the  pontiffs,
as  sacred  buildings  and  offerings,  pro-
perly dedicated  to  the  service  of  God,
which  we  have  forbidden  by  our  con-
stitution to  be  sold  or  mortgaged,
except  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing
the  freedom  of  captives.  But,  if  any
one  consecrates  a  building  by  his  own
authority,  it  is  not  sacred,  but  profane.
But  ground  on  which  a  sacred  edifice
has  once  been  erected,  even  after  the
building  has  been  destroyed,  continues
to  be  sacred,  as  Papinian  also  writes.

; ;  C.  i.  2.  21.

The  distinction  between  res  sacrce  and  religiosce,  in  the  older
pagan  law,  was  that  the  former  were  things  dedicated  to  the  celes-
tial gods,  the  latter  were  things  abandoned  to  the  infernal — relictce,
diis  manibus.  (Gai.  ii.  4.)  In  order  that  a  thing  should  be  sacra,
it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  dedicated  by  a  pontiff  and  with
the  authority  of  the  people,  afterwards  of  the  senate,  finally  of
the  emperor.  (D.  i.  8.  9.  1.)  Things  consecrated  were  by  law
inalienable.  The  support  of  the  poor  in  a  time  of  famine  (C.  i.  2.
21),  and  afterwards  the  payment  of  the  debts  of  the  church  (Nov.
120.  10),  sufficed,  as  well  as  the  release  of  captives,  as  reasons  for
the  sale  of  consecrated  moveables  ;  but  immoveables  were  always
inalienable.

9.  Religiosum  locum  unusquis-
que  sua  voluntate  facit,  dum  mor-
tuum  infert  in  locum  suum.  In
communem  autem  locum  purum
invito  socio  inferre  non  licet  ;  in
commune  vero  sepulcrum  etiam  in-
vitis  ceteris  licet  inferre.  Item  si
alienus  ususfructus  est,  proprieta-
rium  placet,  nisi  consentiente  usu-
frvictuario,  locum  religiosum  non
facere.  In  alienum  locum  concedente
domino  licet  inferre  ;  et  licet  i)ostea
ratum  habuerit  quam  illatus  est  mor-
tuus,  tamen  religiosus  fit  locus.

D.  i.  8.  6.  4  ;

9.  Any  man  at  his  pleasure  makes
a  place  religious  by  burying  a  dead
body  in  his  own  ground  ;  but  it  is  not
permitted  to  bury  a  dead  body  in  land
hitherto  pure,  which  is  held  in  common,
against  the  wishes  of  a  coproprietor.
But  when  a  sepulchre  is  held  in  com-
mon, any  one  coproprietor  may  bury
in  it,  even  against  the  wishes  of  the
rest.  So,  too,  if  another  person  has  the
usufruct,  the  proprietor  may  not,  with-
out the  consent  of  the  usufructuary,
render  the  place  religious.  But  a  dead
body  may  be  laid  in  a  place  belonging
to  another  person,  with  the  consent  of
the  owner  ;  and  even  if  the  owner  only
ratifies  the  act  after  the  dead  body
has  been  buried,  yet  the  place  is
religious.

D.  xi.  7.  2.  7.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

93

Directly  the  body  or  bones  of  a  dead  person,  whether  slave  or
free,  were  buried,  the  ground  in  which  they  were  buried  became
religiosus,  although  previously  pure,  that  is,  neither  sacer,  reli-
giosus,  nor  sanctus  (D.  xi.  7.  2.  4),  provided  that  the  person
burying  the  body  was  the  owner  of  the  soil  or  had  the  consent  of
the  owner.

Although  the  place  was  a  res  nullius,  yet  there  could  be  a
special  kind  of  property  in  it.  There  were  tombs  and  burial-
places  in  which  none  but  certain  persons,  as,  for  instance,  members
of  the  same  family,  could  be  buried ;  and  this  kind  of  interest  in
a  locus  religiosus  was  transmissible  to  heirs,  or  even  to  purchasers
of  a  property,  if  the  right  of  burying  in  a  particular  place  was
attached,  as  it  might  be,  to  the  ownership  of  that  property.  (D.
xviii.  1.  24.)

10.  Sanctse  quoque  res,  veluti
inuri  et  portfe,  quodammodo  divini
jiiris  sunt,  et  ideo  nullius  in  bonis
sunt.  Ideo  autem  muros  sanctos
dicimus,  quia  poena  capitis  consti-
tuta  sit  in  eos  qui  aliquid  in  muros
deliquerint.  Ideo  et  legum  eas
partes  quibus  poenas  constituimus
adversus  eos  qui  contra  leges  fece-
rint,  sanctiones  vocamus.

Gai.  ii.  8.  9  ;  D.  i.  J

10.  Holy  things  also,  as  the  walls
and  gates  of  a  city,  are  to  a  certain
degree  subject  to  divine  law,  and
therefore  are  not  part  of  the  property
of  any  one.  The  walls  of  a  city  are  said
to  be  holy,  inasmuch  as  any  ofience
against  them  is  punished  capitally  ;  so
too  those  parts  of  laws  by  which
punishments  are  established  against
transgressors,  we  term  sanctions.

;  D.  i.  8.  9.  3  ;  D.  i.  8.  11.

Res  sanct(B  are  those  things  which,  without  being  sacred,  are
protected  against  the  injuries  of  men  (^sanctum  est  quod  ah  injuria
hominum  defensum  atgue  munitum  est  (D.  i.  8.  8.))  by  having  a
severe  penalty  attached  to  the  violation  of  their  security.

11.  Singulorum  autem  hominum
multis  modis  res  fiunt  ;  quarumdam
enim  rerum  dominium  nanciscimur
jure  naturali,  quod,  sicut  diximus,
appellatur  jus  gentium  ;  quarumdam
jure  civili.  Commodius  est  itaque
a  vetustiore  jure  incipere  ;  palam  est
autem  vetustius  esse  jus  naturale,
quod  cum  ipso  genere  humano  rerum
natura  prodidit.  Civilia  enim  jura
tunc  esse  coeperunt,  cum  et  civitates
condi  et  magistratus  creari  et  leges
scribi  coeperunt.

11.  Things  become  the  property  of
individuals  in  various  ways  ;  of  some
we  acquire  the  ownership  by  natural
law,  which,  as  we  have  observed,  is.
also  termed  the  law  of  nations  ;  of
others  by  the  civil  law.  It  will  be
most  convenient  to  begin  with  the
more  ancient  law ;  and  it  is  very  evi-
dent that  the  law  of  nature,  established
by  nature  at  the  first  origin  of  man-
kind, is  the  more  ancient,  for  civil  laws-
could  then  only  begin  to  exist,  whent
states  began  to  be  founded,  magis-
trates to  be  created,  and  laws  to  be
written.

D.  xli.  1.  1.

We  now  proceed  to  inquire  how  property  is  acquired  in  par-
ticular things.  It  is  acquired  either  by  natural  or  civil  modes.
The  natural  mode  first  treated  of  is  occupation,  of  which  there  are
two  essential  elements ;  that  the  thing,  the  property  in  which  is
acquired,  should  be  a  res  nullius,  and  that  the  person  acquiring  it
should  bring  the  thing  into  his  possession,  that  is,  into  his  power>

94

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

and  do  so  with  the  intention  of  holding  it  as  his  property  (joro  suo
hahendi).

12.  Wild  beasts,  birds,  fish,  and  all
animals,  which  live  either  in  the  sea,
the  air,  or  on  the  earth,  so  soon  as
they  are  taken  by  any  one,  immedi-
ately become  by  the  law  of  nations  the
property  of  the  captor ;  for  natural
reason  gives  to  the  first  occupant  that
which  had  no  previous  owner.  And
it  is  immaterial  whether  a  man  takes
wild  beasts  or  birds  upon  his  oami
ground,  or  on  that  of  another.  Of
course  any  one  who  enters  the  ground
of  another  for  the  sake  of  hunting  or
fowling,  may  be  prohibited  by  the  pro-
prietor, if  he  perceives  his  intention
of  entering.  Whatever  of  this  kind
you  take  is  regarded  as  your  property,
so  long  as  it  remains  in  your  power,
but  when  it  has  escaped  and  recovered
its  natural  liberty,  it  ceases  to  be  yours,
and  again  becomes  the  property  of  him
who  captures  it.  It  is  considered  to
have  recovered  its  natural  liberty,  if  it
has  either  escaped  out  of  your  sight,
or  if,  although  not  out  of  sight,  it
yet  could  not  be  pursued  without  great
difficulty.

Gai.  ii.  67  ;  D.  xli.  1. 1. 1 ;  D.  xli.  1.  3  pr.  and  1 ;  D.  xli.  1.  3.  2 ;  D.  xli.  1.  5.

Directly  the  thing  ceases  to  be  in  the  power  of  the  occupant,
the  property  in  it  is  lost,  and  it  is  exactly  as  if  it  had  never  been
seized  or  occupied.  What  is  meant  by  being  in  the  power  of  the
occupant  must  vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the  thing  occu-
pied. Several  examples  are  given  in  this  and  the  following
paragraphs.

12.  Ferae  igitur  bestice  et  volucres
et  pisces,  id  est,  omnia  animalia  qu?e
mari,  coelo  et  terra  nascuntur,  simul
atque  ab  aliquo  capta  fuerint,  jure
gentium  statim  illius  esse  incipiunt ;
quod  enim  ante  nuUius  est,  id  natu-
rali  ratione  occupanti  conceditur.
Nee  interest,  feras  bestias  et  volu-
cres utrum  in  suo  fundo  quisque
capiat,  an  in  alieno.  Plane  qui  in
alienum  fundum  ingreditur  venandi
aut  aucupandi  gratia,  potest  a  do-
mino, si  is  providerit,  prohiberi  ne
ingrediatur.  Quidquid  autem  eorum
ceperis,  eo  usque  tuum  esse  intelli-
gitur,  donee  tua  custodia  coercetur  ;
cum  vero  evaserit  custodiam  tuam,
et  in  naturalem  libertatem  se  rece-
perit,  tuum  esse  desinit,  et  rursus
occupantis  fit.  Naturalem  autem
libertatem  recipere  intelligitur,  cum
vel  oculos  tuos  ejffugerit,  vel  ita  sit
in  conspectu  tuo,  ut  difficilis  sit  ejus
j)ersecutio.

13.  It  has  been  asked,  whether,  if
you  have  wounded  a  wild  beast,  so
that  it  could  be  easily  taken,  it  imme-
diately becomes  your  property.  Some
have  thought  that  it  does  become  yours
directly  you  wound  it,  and  that  it  con-
tinues to  be  yours  while  you  continue
to  pursue  it,  but  that  if  you  cease  to
pursue  it,  it  then  ceases  to  be  yours,
and  again  becomes  the  property  of  the
first  person  who  captures  it.  Others
have  thought  that  it  does  not  become
your  property  until  you  have  captured
it.  We  confirm  this  latter  opinion,
because  many  accidents  may  happen  to
prevent  your  capturing  it.

D.  xli.  1.  5.  1.

^■-  Gains,  in  this  passage  of  the  Digest,  informs  us  that  the
former  opinion  was  that  of  Trebatius.

13.  Illud  qu8esitum  est,  an  si  fera
bestia  ita  vulnerata  sit  ut  capi
possit,  statim  tua  esse  intelligatur.
^uibusdam  placuit  statim  esse  tuam,
et  eousque  tuam  videri  donee  earn
persequaris ;  quod  si  desieris  perse-
qui,  desinere  tuam  esse,  et  rursus
fieri  occupantis.  Alii  non  aliter  puta-
verunt  tuam  esse,  quam  si  eam
ceperis.  Sed  posteriorem  sententiam
nos  confirmamus,  quia  multa  accidere
possunt  ut  eam  non  capias.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

95

14.  Apiiim  quoque  natura  fera
est.  Itaque  qii?e  in  arbore  tiia  con-
sederint,  antequam  a  te  alveo  inclii-
dantiir,  non  magis  tuae  intelligimtur
esse,  quam  volucres  quae  in  arbore
tua  nidum  fecerint ;  ideoque  si  alius
eas  incluserit,  is  earum  dominus
erit.  Favos  quoque  si  quos  efFece-
rint,  quilibet  eximere  potest.  Plane
integra  re,  si  provideris  ingredien-
tem  fundum  tuum,  poteris  eum  jure
prohibere  ne  ingrediatur.  Exanien
quoque  quod  ex  alveo  tuo  evolave-
rit,  eousque  intelligitur  esse  tuum,
donee  in  conspectu  tuo  est,  nee  dif-
ficilis  ejus  est  persecutio  :  alioquin
occupantis  fit.

14.  Bees  also  are  wild  by  nature.
Therefore,  bees  that  swarm  upon  your
tree,  until  you  have  hived  them,  are
no  more  considered  to  be  your  pro-
perty than  the  birds  which  build  their
nests  on  your  tree  ;  so,  if  any  one  else
hive  them,  he  becomes  their  owner.
Any  one,  too,  is  at  liberty  to  take  the
honeycombs  the  bees  may  have  made.
But  of  course,  if,  before  anything  has
been  taken,  you  see  any  one  entering  on
your  land,  you  have  a  right  to  prevent
his  entering.  A  swarm  which  has
flown  from  your  hive  is  still  considered
yours  as  long  as  it  is  in  your  sight  and
may  easily  be  x^ursued  ;  otherwise  it
becomes  the  property  of  the  first  per-
son that  takes  it.

D.  xli.  1.  5.  2-4.

It  is  said  tliat  the  owner  of  the  land,  if  he  wished  to  secure
the  bees  for  himself,  must  prevent  any  one  entering  integra  re ;
because,  if  the  bees  are  once  taken,  they  belong  to  the  person  who
takes  them,  although  the  owner  of  the  land  may  have  an  action
against  the  person  entering  against  his  will.

15.  Pavonumet  columbarumfera
natura  est :  nee  ad  rem  pertinet,
quod  ex  consuetudine  avolare  et
revolare  solent  ;  nam  et  apes  idem
faciunt,  quarum  constat  feram  esse
naturam.  Cervos  quoque  ita  qui-
dam  mansuetos  habent,  ut  in  silvas
ire  et  redire  soleant,  quorum  et  ipso-
rum  feram  esse  naturam  nemo
negat.  In  iis  autem  animalibus
quse  ex  consuetudine  abire  et  redire
solent,  talis  regula  comprobata  est,
ut  eousque  tua  esse  intelligantur,
donee  animum  revertendi  habeant ;
nam  si  revertendi  animum  habere
desierint,  etiam  tua  esse  desinunt,
et  fiunt  occupantium.  Revertendi
autem  animum  videntur  desinere
habere,  cum  revertendi  consuetudi-
nem  deseruerint.

15.  Peacocks,  too,  and  pigeons  are
naturally  wild,  nor  does  it  make  any
difference  that  they  are  in  the  habit  of
flying  out  and  then  returning  again,  for
bees,  which  without  doubt  are  natu-
rally wild,  do  so  too.  Some  persons
have  deer  so  tame,  that  they  will  go
into  the  woods,  and  regularly  return
again  ;  yet  no  one  denies  that  deer  are
naturally  wild.  But,  with  respect  to
animals  which  are  in  the  habit  of  going
and  returning,  the  rule  has  been
adopted,  that  they  are  considered  yours
as  long  as  they  have  the  intention  of
returning,  but  if  they  cease  to  have
this  intention,  they  cease  to  be  yours,
and  become  the  property  of  the  first
person  that  takes  them.  These  animals
are  supposed  to  have  lost  the  intention,
when  they  have  lost  the  habit,  of
returning.

Gal  ii.  68 ;  D.  xli.  1.  55.

16.  Gallinarum  autem  et  anserum
non  est  fera  natura  ;  idque  ex  eo
possumus  intelligere,  quod  aliae  sunt
gallinse  quas  feras  vocamus,  item
alii  anseres  quos  feros  appellamus.
Ideoque  si  anseres  tui  aut  gallince
tuse  aliquo  casu  turbati  turbatseve
evolaverint,  licet  conspectum  tuum
effugerint,  quocumque    tamen   loco

16.  But  fowls  and  geese  are  not
naturally  wild,  which  we  may  learn
from  there  being  particular  kinds  of
fowls  and  geese  which  we  term  Avild.
And,  therefore,  if  your  geese  or  fowls
should  be  frightened,  and  take  flight,
they  are  still  regarded  as  yours  wher-
ever they  may  be,  although  you  may
have  lost  sight  of  them  ;  and  whoever

96  LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

sint,  tui  tiireve  esse  intelliguntur  ;  et     detains  such  animals  with  a  view  to  his
qui  lucrandi  animo  ea  animalia  re-     own  profit,  commits  a  theft,
tinet,  furtum  committere  intelligitur.

D.  xli.  1.  5.  6.

17.  Item  ea  quee  ex  hostibus  capi-  17.  The  things  we  take  from  onr
mus,  jnre  gentium  statim  nostra  enemies  become  immediately  ours  by
fiunt,  adeo  quidem  ut  et  liberi  the  law  of  nations,  so  that  even  free-
homines  in  servitutem  nostrum  de-  men  thus  become  our  slaves  ;  but  if
ducantur.  Qui  tamen,  si  evaserint  they  afterwards  escape  from  us,  and
nostram  'potestatem  et  ad  suos  re-  return  to  their  own  people,  they  regain
versi  fuerint,  pristinum  statum  re-  their  former  condition.

cipiunt.

Gai.  ii.  69  ;  D.  xli.  1.  5.  7 ;  D.  xli.  1.  7.

The  possessions  of  an  enemy  were  always  looked  on  as  res
mdlius ;  the  first  person  who  took  them  became  the  owner.
Practically,  of  course,  things  taken  in  war  did  not  belong  to  the
particular  soldier  who  took  them,  unless  in  very  exceptional  cases,
because  he  took  them  as  one  of  a  large  body,  whose  exertions  all
contributed,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  capture.  The  army,
again,  did  but  represent  the  state ;  and  though  moveables  were
generally  given  up  to  the  soldiers  and  divided  among  them,  land
taken  in  Avar  was  claimed  by  the  state,  whose  servants  the  soldiers
were  and  in  whose  behalf  they  fought.

Just  as  the  freeman,  who  had  been  made  a  prisoner  and  a
slave,  regained  his  status  when  he  returned  to  his  own  country  by
the  jus  postliminii  (see  Bk.  i.  Tit.  12.  5),  so  everything  that
returned  to  its  former  state  of  being  free  from  any  owner,  was
said  to  do  so  by  a  process  analogous  to  the  jus  postliminii,
Marcian,  for  example,  speaks  in  the  Digest  (i.  8.  6)  of  a  person
building  on  a  shore,  and  after  having  said  that  the  soil  is  only  his
while  the  building  remains,  goes  on,  alioquin,  mdijicio  dilapso,
quasi  jure  postliminii  revertitur  locus  in  pristinam  causam.

We  have  no  mention  here,  which  we  might  expect  to  have,  of
the  mode  by  which  things  retaken  in  war  returned  to  their
owners,  nor  what  things  did  so  return.  We  know  that  the  things
that  did  return  were  said  to  do  so  by  postliminium :  Pomponius
says,  dticB  species  postliminii  sunt,  aut  ut  ipsi  revertamur  aut
aliquid  recipiamus,  (D.  xlix.  15.  14.)  Generally  speaking,  if  the
property  of  individuals  was  captured  by  an  enemy  and  retaken,  it
was  prceda,  that  is,  was  part  of  the  spoil  of  war,  and  belonged  to
the  state,  not  to  its  former  owner.  But  there  were  certain  things
to  which  a  jus  postliminii  attached,  and  which,  if  retaken,  reverted
to  their  original  owner,  and  did  not  form  part  of  the  prceda.
These  things,  so  far  as  we  know  them,  were  land,  slaves,  horses,
mules,  and  ships  used  in  war.     (CiC.  Top.  8  ;  D.  xlix.  15.  2.)

18.  Item  lapiUi  et  gemmse  et  18.  Precious  stones,  gems,  and
cetera  quae  in  litore  inveniuntur,  other  things,  found  upon  the  sea-
jure  naturali  statim  inventoris  fiunt.     shore,  become  immediately  by  natural

law  the  property  of  the  finder.

D.  i.  8.  3.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.  97

In  the  next  section  Justinian  leaves  the  subject  of  acquisition
by  occupation,  but  afterwards  speaks  of  matters  that  properly
belong  to  it,  of  islands  rising  in  the  sea  (paragr.  22),  and  things
found  which  have  been  intentionally  abandoned  by  their  owners
(paragr.  47,  48).

19.  Item  ea  quae  ex  animalibns  19.  AU  that  is  born  of  animals  of

dominio    tuo    siibjectis    nata   sunt,     which  you  are  the  owner,  becomes  by
eodem  jure  tibi  aclquiruntur.  the  same  law  your  property.

D.  xli.  1.  6.

From  the  19th  to  the  35th  paragraph  inclusive,  may  be  taken
together  as  bearing  more  or  less  on  the  subject  of  accession.  The
Latin  word  accessio  always  means  an  increase  or  addition  to  some-
thing previously  belonging  to  us,  but  commentators  have  used
the  word  accession  not  only  for  the  increase  itself,  but  also  for
the  mode  in  which  the  increase  becomes  our  property.

First,  there  is  the  instance  given  in  this  section  and  in  the
35th  section  of  the  produce  of  animals,  and  the  fruits  of  lands
belonging  to  us.  They  are  really  part  of  that  which  originally
belonged  to  us.  The  owner  of  the  wheat-seed  is  potentially  the
owner  of  the  blade  and  the  ear ;  the  owner  of  the  animal  is
potentially  the  owner  of  its  young.

Again,  a  thing  may  be  an  accessio ^  an  actual  gain  or  increase
to  our  property,  which  was  in  theory  of  law,  but  not  in  fact,  ours
already.  This  is  the  case  with  an  island  in  a  river,  an  instance
given  in  sec.  22.  The  bed  of  the  river  becomes  publicus  by  the
mere  fact  of  the  river  flowing  over  it ;  if  any  portion  of  the  bed
is  dried  so  as  to  form  an  island,  it  ceases  to  be  public,  and,
becoming  private,  is  presumed  to  be  a  part  of  the  adjacent  land.
It  is  something  not  newly  acquired,  but  restored  to  us  by  nature  ;
we  have  been  temporarily  deprived  of  it,  and  again  resume  our
rights  over  it.

Again,  a  person  who  uses  materials  sometimes  only  gives
them  a  new  form,  sometimes  makes  with  them  a  new  thing,
different  from  the  materials  themselves.  When  he  does  the  latter,
the  thing  he  makes,  the  nova  species,  as  the  jurists  termed  it,
becomes  his  by  the  fact  of  his  making  it.  The  thing  did  not  exist,
and  he  has  made  it  to  exist,  and  it  belongs  to  him  by  a  title  not
dissimilar  to  that  of  occupation :  it  is  a  new  thing,  which  he  is
the  first  to  get  into  his  power.  To  take  an  instance  given  in
paragraph  25,  a  man  who  makes  wine  out  of  another's  grapes  has
made  something  new  of  a  kind  distinct  from  the  grapes  themselves,
and  the  wine  belongs  to  him.  This  specification  may  be,  perhaps,
regarded  as  a  distinct  mode  of  acquisition.

Again,  when  two  thinocs  belonorino;  to  different  owners  are
united  so  as  to  become  integral  portions  of  a  common  whole,  but
one  portion  is  subordinate  and  inferior  to  the  other,  we  have  to
ask  whether  the  owner  of  the  greater  became  the  owner  of  the
less.     The  Roman  jurists  answered  this  by  asking  whether  the

H

98  LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

two  things  could  after  their  union  be  separated  from  each  other.
If  this  was  physically  possible,  each  owner  of  the  respective  por-
tions continued  to  be  owner ;  but  if  not,  the  owner  of  the  more
important  or  principal  thing  became  the  owner  of  the  less  im-
portant or  accessory  thing.

20.  Prseterea  quod  per  alliivio-  20.     Moreover,    the    alluvial    soil

nem  agro  tuo  Humeri  adjecit,  jure  added  by  a  river  to  your  land  becomes

gentium  tibi  adquiritur.    Est  autem  yours  by  the  law  of   nations.     Allu-

alluvio    incrementum    latens  ;    per  vion    is    an    imperceptible    increase ;

alluvionem  autem  id  videtur  adjici,  and  that  is  added  by  alluvion,  which

quod  ita  paulatim  adjicitur  ut  Intel-  is  added  so  gradually  that  no  one  can

ligere  non  possis  quantum  quoquo  perceive   how  much  is  added  at   any

memento  temporis  adjiciatur.  one  moment  of  time.

D.  xli.  1.  7.  1.

The  deposit  of  earth  gradually  formed  by  alluvion  upon  the
bank  of  a  river  is  inseparable  from  the  native  soil  of  the  bank ;
and  the  owner  of  the  latter  acquires  the  former  by  right  of  ac-
cession.

An  exception  was  made  in  the  case  of  agri  limitati,  that  is,
lands  belonging  to  the  state  by  right  of  conquest,  and  granted  or
sold  in  plots.  If  these  plots  were  enlarged  by  alluvion,  the  in-
crease did  not  become  the  proyjerty  of  the  owner  of  the  plot.  (D.
xli.  1.  16.)  The  reason  seems  to  be  that  the  particles  deposited
by  alluvion  were  considered  public  as  forming  portion  of  the  cur-
rent of  the  stream,  the  waters  of  which  were  public,  and  when
these  particles  were  deposited  by  the  side  of  a  plot  granted  or
sold  by  the  state,  they  were  not  allowed  to  enlarge  the  plot  of
which  the  state  had  already  determined  the  proper  size.

21.  Quod  si  vis  fluminis  partem  21.  But  if  the  violence  of  a  river

aliquam  ex  tuo  prredio  detraxerit,  et  should   bear  away  a  portion  of  your

vicini   prsedio    attulerit,    palam   est  land,    and   unite   it   to   that   of  your

earn    tuam    permanere.      Plane,    si  neighbour,    it   undoubtedly  still   con-

longiore   tempore    fundo   vicini   tui  tinues  yours.     If,  however,  it  remains

hseserit,     arboresque     quas     secum  for  a  long  time  united  to  your  neigh-

traxerit    in    eum    fundum    radices  hour's  land,   and  the  trees,   which  it

egerint,  ex  eo  tempore  videntur  vi-  swept  away  with  it,  take  root  in  his

cini  fundo  adquisitse  esse.  ground,  these  trees  from  that  time  be-
come part  of  your  neighbour's  estate.

D.  xli.  1.  7.  2.

When  a  large  mass  of  earth  is  carried  to  the  side  of  a  river
bank,  it  is  quite  possible  to  detach  it,  and  consequently  the  mass
remains  the  property  of  its  former  owner ;  but  if  it  becomes  in-
separable in  the  manner  described  in  the  text,  then  the  property,
in  it  is  chano-ed.

Videntur  acquisitcB  is  substituted  here  for  videtur  acquisita  in
the  Digest,  to  include  the  trees  themselves  as  well  as  the  soil  of
the  fragment.     (See  paragr.  31.)

22.   Insula  quse  in  mari  nata  est,  22,  When  an  island   is  formed  in

quod   raro    accidit,    occupantis    fit ;     the   sea,  which   rarely  happens,   it  is
nullius  enim  esse  creditur.     In  flu-     the   property  of   the   first   occupant ;

LIB.  11.      TIT.  I.

99

mine  nata,  quod  frequenter  accidit,
si  quidem  mediam  partem  fiuminis
tenet,  communis  est  eorum  qui  ab
utraque  parte  fluminis  prope  ripam
prsedia  possident,  pro  modo  latitu-
dinis  cuj usque  fundi,  qu?e  latitudo
prope  ripam  sit.  Quod  si  alteri  parti
proximior  sit,  eorum  est  tantum  qui
ab  ea  parte  prope  ripam  prsedia  pos-
sident. Quod  si  aliqua  parte  divi-
sum  sit  flumen,  deinde  infra  unitum,
agrum  alicujus  in  formam  insulse
redegerit,  ejusdem  permanet  is  ager
cujus  et  fuerat.

for  before  occupation,  it  belongs  to  no
one.  But  when  an  island  is  formed  in
a  river,  which  frequently  happens,  if  it
is  placed  in  the  middle  of  it,  it  belongs
in  common  to  those  who  possess  the
lands  near  the  banks  on  each  side  of
the  river,  in  proportion  to  the  extent
of  each  man's  estate  adjoining  the
banks.  But,  if  the  island  is  nearer
to  one  side  than  the  other,  it  belongs
to  those  persons  only  who  possess  lands
contiguous  to  the  bank  on  that  side.
If  a  river  divides  itself  and  afterwards
unites  again,  thus  giving  to  any  one's
land  the  form  of  an  island,  the  land
still  continues  to  belong  to  the  person
to  whom  it  belonged  before.

D.  xli.  1.  7.  3,  4.

An  island  formed  by  a  stream  cutting  off  a  portion  of  land
could  not  be  supposed  to  belong  to  any  one  but  its  former  owner.
But  if  the  island  was  formed  by  the  bed  of  the  river  becoming  dry
in  any  part,  it  might  be  doubtful  to  whom  it  belonged.  The
bed  of  the  river,  as  long  as  the  river  flowed  over  it,  was  public,
Ille  alveus  quern  sihi  flumen  fecit,  et  si  privatus  antea  fuit,  incipit
tamen  esse  publicus  (D.  xliii.  12.  1.  7)  ;  or  rather  the  use  of  it  was
public,  while  the  soil  itself  was  the  property  of  the  private  indivi-
duals to  whom  the  soil  of  the  banks  belonged,  and  therefore  when
the  bed  was  dried,  w^hen  it  had  ceased  to  be  subject  to  public  use,
the  private  owners  resumed  the  rights  of  ownership  over  it.  Quum
exsiccatus  esset  alveus,  proximorurn  fit,  quia  jam  populus  eo  noii
ulitur,  (D.  Ixi.  1.  30.  1.)  If  the  bed  was  not  wholly  but  par-
tially dried,  the  island  formed  would  belong  to  the  owner  of  the
nearest  bank,  if  it  lay  entirely  on  one  side  of  the  stream ;  or  if  it
lay  partly  on  one  side  and  partly  on  the  other,  it  would  belong  to
the  owners  of  both  banks  in  such  proportion  as  a  line  drawn  along
the  middle  of  the  stream  would  divide  it.

23 .  Quod  si  natural!  alveo  in  uni-
versum  derelicto,  alia  parte  fluere
coeperit,  prior  quidem  alveus  eorum
est  qui  prope  ripam  ejus  prsedia  pos-
sident, pro  modo  scilicet  latitudinis
cujusque  agri,  quse  latitudo  prope
ripam  sit.  Novus  autem  alveus
ejus  juris  esse  incipit,  cujus  et  ip-
sum  flumen,  id  est  publicus.  Quod
si  post  aliquod  tempus  ad  priorem
alveum  reversum  fuerit  flumen,  rur-
sus  novus  alveus  eorum  esse  incipit
qui  prope  ripam  ejus  prsedia  pos-
sident.

23.  If  a  river,  entirely  forsaking
its  natural  channel,  begins  to  flow  in
another  direction,  the  old  bed  of  the
river  belongs  to  those  who  possess  the
lands  adjoining  its  banks,  in  propor-
tion to  the  extent  that  their  respective
estates  adjoin  the  banks.  The  new
bed  follows  the  condition  of  the  river,
that  is,  it  becomes  public.  And,  if
after  some  time  the  river  returns  to
its  former  channel,  the  new  bed  again
becomes  the  property  of  those  who
possess  the  lands  contiguous  to  its
banks.

D.  xli.  1.  7.  5.

It  might  happen  that  the  soil  over  which  the  river  flowed  was
known  to  have  belonged  to  a  different  person,  and  not  to  the

H  2

100

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

owners  of  the  adjacent  banks.  If  the  river  changed  its  channel
and  left  the  soil  dry,  to  whom  was  the  recovered  land  to  belong  ?
Could  its  original  owner  claim  it,  or  was  the  presumption  of  law
so  fixed  in  favour  of  the  owners  of  the  adjacent  banks  that  no-
thing was  admitted  to  rebut  it  ?  Gains  says  that  strict  law  was
against  the  original  owner,  but  adds,  vix  est  ut  id  obtineat  (D.
xli.  1.  7.  5);  equity  would  hardly  allow  such  strictness  to  prevail
in  all  cases.

24.  Alia  sane  cansa  est,  si  ciijus
totus  ager  inundatus  fuerit  :  neque
enim  inundatio  fundi  speciem  com-
mntat,  et  ob  id  si  recesserit  aqua,
palam  est  eum  fundum  ejus  manere
cujus  et  fuit.

24.  The  case  is  quite  different  if
any  one's  land  is  completely  inun-
dated ;  for  the  inundation  does  not
alter  the  nature  of  the  land,  and
therefore,  when  the  waters  have  re-
ceded, the  land  is  indisputably  the
property  of  its  former  owner.

D.  xli.  1.  T.  6.

An  inundation  is  here  contrasted  with  a  change  in  the  course
of  a  river.  A  field  overflowed  with  water  is  still  a  field,  and  as
much  belongs  to  its  owner  as  if  it  were  dry.

25.  Cum  ex  aliena  materia  spe-
cies aliqua  facta  sit  ab  aliquo,  quseri
Rolet  quis  eorum  naturali  ratione
dominus  sit,  utrum  is  qui  fecerit,
an  ille  potius  qui  materia3  dominus
fuerit.  Ut  ecce,  si  quis  ex  alienis
uvis  aut  olivis  aut  spicis  vinum  aut
oleum  aut  frumentum  fecerit,  aut
ex  alieno  auro  vel  argento  vel  sere
vas  aliquod  fecerit,  vel  ex  alieno
vino  et  melle  mulsum  miscuerit,  vel
ex  medicamentis  alienis  emplastrum
aut  collyrium  composuerit,  vel  ex
aliena  lana  vestimentum  fecerit,  vel
ex  alienis  tabulis  navem  vel  arma-
rium vel  subsellium  fabricaverit.
Et  post  multas  Sabinianorum  et
Proculianorum  ambiguitates  placuit
media  sententia  existimantium,  si
ea  species  ad  materiam  reduci  pos-
sit,  eum  videri  dominum  esse,  qui
materise  dominus  fuerit  ;  si  non  pos-
sit  reduci,  eum  potius  intelligi  domi-
num, qui  fecerit  :  ut  ecce,  vas  con-
flatum  potest  ad  rudem  massam  asris
vel  argenti  vel  auri  reduci ;  \'inimi
autem  aut  oleum  aut  frumentum  ad
uvas  et  olivas  et  spicas  reverti  non
potest,  ac  ne  mulsum  quidem  ad
vinum  et  mel  resolvi  potest.  Quod
si  partim  ex  sua  materia  partim  ex
aliena  speciem  aliquam  fecerit  quis,
veluti  ex  suo  vino  et  alieno  melle
mulsum  miscuerit,  aut  ex  suis  et
alienis  medicamentis  emplastrum  aut
collyrium,  aut  ex  sua  lana  et  aliena

25.  When  one  man  has  made  any-
thing with  materials  belonging  to
another,  it  is  often  asked  which,  ac-
cording to  natural  reason,  ought  to  be
considered  the  proprietor,  whether  he
who  gave  the  form,  or  he  rather  who
owned  the  materials.  For  instance,
suppose  a  person  has  made  wine,  oil,
or  wheat,  from  the  graj)es,  olives,  or
.ears  of  corn  belonging  to  another  ;
has  cast  a  vessel  out  of  gold,  silver,  or
brass,  belonging  to  another  ;  has  made
mead  with  another  man's  wine  and
honey ;  has  composed  a  plaster,  or
eye-salve,  with  another  man's  medica-
ments ;  has  made  a  garment  with
another's  wool ;  or  a  ship,  a  chest,  or
a  bench,  with  another  man's  timber.
After  long  controversy  between  the
Sabinians  and  Proculians,  a  middle
opinion  has  been  adopted,  based  on
the  following  distinction.  If  the  thing
made  can  be  reduced  to  its  former  rude
materials,  then  the  owner  of  the  ma-
terials is  also  considered  the  owner  of
the  thing  made  ;  but,  if  the  thing  can-
not be  so  reduced,  then  he  who  made
it  is  the  owner  of  it.  For  example,  a
vessel  when  cast,  can  easily  be  reduced
to  its  rude  materials  of  brass,  silver,
or  gold  ;  but  wine,  oil,  or  wheat,  can-
not be  reconverted  into  grapes,  olives,
or  ears  of  corn  ;  nor  can  mead  be  re-
solved into  wine  and  honey.  But,  if
a  man  has  made  anything,  partly  with
his  own  materials  and  partly  with  tha

LIB.  II.     TIT.  I.  101

vestimentnm  fecerit,  dubitandum  materials  of  another,  as  if  he  has  made
non  est  hoc  casu  eum  esse  dominum  mead  Mdth  his  own  wine  and  another
qui  fecerit,  cum  non  sohim  operam  man's  honey,  or  a  plaster  or  eye-salve,
snam  dedit,  sed  et  partem  ejusdem  partly  with  his  own,  and  partly  with
materise  prsestavit.  another  man's  medicaments,  or  a  gar-

ment with  his  own  and  also  with
another  man's  wool,  then  in  such
cases,  he  who  made  the  thing  is  un-
doubtedly the  proprietor ;  since  he
not  only  gave  his  labour,  but  fur-
nished also  a  part  of  the  materials.

Gal  ii.  79  ;  D.  xli.  1.  7.  7 ;  D.  vi.  1.  5.  1 ;  D.  xH.  1.  27.  1.

When  materials  belonging  to  different  persons  were  mixed  to-
getiier,  or  one  person  bestowed  his  labour  on  the  materials  of
another,  although  one  person  only  might  be  the  owner  of  the
product,  yet  he  did  not  become  so  at  the  expense  of  others.  He
was  obliged  to  pay  those  whose  materials  or  labour  had  been  em-
ployed the  value  of  their  respective  materials  or  labour,  and  was
liable  to  a  condictio  or  personal  action  (see  Introd.  sec.  95)  for
the  enforcement  of  the  payment.  He  himself  could  claim  the
product  itself  by  vindication  or  real  action,  given  only  to  the
owner  of  a  thing.  The  jurists  very  commonly  speak  of  a  person
being  able  to  vindicate  a  thing  as  a  mode  of  saying  that  he  is  the
owner,  the  test  of  ownership  being  whether  the  supposed  owner
could  or  could  not  claim  the  thing  by  vindicatio.  If  he  could
bring  a  vindicatio,  he  could  also  bring  a  preliminary  action  called
the  actio  ad,  exldbendum,  the  object  of  which  was  to  have  the  thing
claimed  produced  to  the  tribunal,  or  to  get  damages  if  it  was  not
produced.

Supposing  a  person  formed  a  thing  with  materials  belonging
to  another,  which  was  the  one  that  could  claim  it  by  a  real  action,
the  maker  of  the  thing  or  the  owner  of  the  materials  ?  The  Pro-
culians  said,  the  thing  is  a  new  thing  and  its  maker  is  the  owner ;
the  Sabinians  said,  the  materials  remain,  althcJugh  their  form  is
changed,  and  their  proprietor  is  the  owner  of  the  thing  made.
The  distinction  sanctioned  by  Justinian  decided  the  question  ac-
cording to  the  fact  of  there  being  or  not  being  a  really  new  thing
made.  If  there  was,  then  the  reasoning  of  the  Proculians  held
good,  and  the  maker  becomes  the  owner  by  a  species  of  occupa-
tion, quia  quod  factum  est,  ante  nullius  fuerat.  If  the  thing  made
was  only  the  old  materials  in  a  new  form,  then  it  belonged  to  the
owner  of  the  materials  in  accordance  with  the  opinions  of  the
Sabinians.  The  opinion  of  each  school,  therefore,  was  admitted
w^here  the  facts  were  in  accordance  with  it.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  section  Justinian  says  that  if  the
materials  were  partly  the  property  of  the  maker,  the  thing  made
certainly  belonged  to  him.  This  must  be  understood  strictly  with
reference  to  the  case  spoken  of  in  the  text,  that,  namely,  of  ma-
terials, none  being  merely  accessory,  i.  e.  subordinate,  to  the  others,
being  inseparably  mixed  together.     If  some  of  the  materials  were

102  LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

only  accessory,  and  the  thing  made  was  not  a  new  thing,  it  would
not  necessarily  belong  to  the  maker,  but  would  only  belong  to
him  if  he  were  the  owner  of  the  principal  materials ;  and  if  the
different  materials  were  separable  from  each  other,  they  would
still  belong  to  their  respective  owners.

26.  Si  tamen  alienam  purpuram  26.  If,  however,  any  one  has  woven

vestimento  suo  quis  intexuit,  licet  purple  belonging  to  another  into  his

pretiosior   est    purpura,   accessionis  own  vestment,   the   purple,   although

vice  cedit  vestimento.     Et  qui  domi-  the   more   valuable,    attaches    to   the

nus  fuit  purpurse,  adversus  eum  qui  vestment  as  an  accession,  and  its  for-

subripuit,    habet   furti   actionem  et  mer  owner  has  an  action  of  theft  and

condictionem,  sive  ipse  sit  qui  vesti-  a  condiction  against  the  person  who

mentum  fecit,  sive  alius  ;  nam  ex-  stole  it  from  him,  whether  it  was  he

tinctae  res,  licet  vindicari  non  pos-  or  some  one  else  who  made  the  vest-

sint,    condici    tamen    a   furibus    et  ment.      For    although    things    which

quibusdam    aliis   possessoribus  pos-  have  perished  cannot  be  reclaimed  by

sunt.  vindication,  yet  this  gives  ground  for

a   condiction   against    the   thief,    and
against  many  other  possessors.

D.  X.  4.  7.  2 ;  Gai.  ii.  79.

This  is  an  instance  of  what  is  termed  by  commentators  ad-
junctio.  Ulpian  says,  in  the  Digest  (x.  4.  7.  2),  that  a  person
whose  purple  was  woven  in  could  bring  an  action  ad  exhihendum
against  the  owner  of  the  vestment.  This,  which  is  as  much  as  to
say  that  the  owner  of  the  purple  is  still  its  owner,  seems  at  variance
with  what  Justinian  says  here  of  the  purple  acceding  to  the  vest-
ment, and  of  the  person,  qiii  dominus  fuit  pur  puree,  having  only  a
personal  action.  Their  respective  decisions  would,  however,  be
right,  according  as  the  purple  was  not  or  was  an  inseparable  part
of  the  vestment.  Supposing  the  purple  was  so  woven  in  that  it
could  be  again  separated,  then  its  owner,  remaining  its  owner,
could  bring  an  action  ad  exhibendum.  If  it  were  made  an  inse-
parable part  of  the  vestment,  if  it  were  an  extincta  res,  i.e.  could
no  more  have  a  separate,  distinct  existence,  then,  being  by  its
nature  accessory  to  the  vestment,  it  would  become  the  property
of  the  owner  of  the  vestment,  and  its  former  owner  would  only
have  a  personal  action  to  recover  its  value.

Quibusdam  possessoribus.     The   word  quibusdam  is   used   to

exclude  bona  fide  possessors  of  the  res  extincta,  who  had  not  done

anything  to  cause  it  to  perish.     Against  an  actual  thief  an  actio

furti  and  a  condictio  might  be  brought,  against  others  only  a  con-

dictio.     (Theophil.  Paraphr.)

27.   Si  duorum  materise   ex  vo-  27.  If  materials   belonging  to  two

luntate    dominorum    confusse    sint,  persons  are  mixed  together  by  their

totum  id  corpus  quod  ex  confusione  mutual   consent,    whatever  is   thence

fit  utriusque  commune  est ;  veluti  si  produced   is  common  to   both,  as   if,

qui  vina  sua  confuderint,  aut  massas  for    instance,    they   have    intermixed

argenti  vel  auri  conflaverint.     Sed  their  wines,  or  melted  together  their

etsi  diverse©  materiee  sint,  et  ob  id  gold  or  silver.     And  although  the  ma-

propria   species   facta   sit,  forte   ex  terials  are  different  which  are  employed

vino  et  melle  mulsum,  aut  ex  auro  in  the  admixture,  and  thus  a  new  sub-

et  argento  electrum.  idem  juris  est :  stance  is  formed,   as  when  mead  is

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

103

nam  et  eo  casu  commiinem  esse  spe-
ciem  noil  dubitatur.  Quod  si  for-
tuitu  et  non  voluntate  dominorum
confuste  fuerint  vel  diversiTe  materise,
vel  quse  ejusdem  generis  sunt,  idem
juris  esse  placuit.

made  with  wine  and  honey,  or  elec-
trum  by  fusing  together  gold  and
silver,  the  rule  is  the  same  ;  for  in
this  case  the  new  substance  is  un-
doubtedly common.  And  if  it  is  by
chance,  and  not  by  the  intention  of
the  proprietors,  that  materials,  whether
similar  or  different,  are  mixed  together,
the  rule  is  still  the  same.

D.  xli.  1.  7-9.

This  union  of  liquids  is  termed  by  commentators  confusio.
Wlien  the  product  became  common  property,  then  any  of  the
joint  proprietors  could  procure  their  own  share  to  be  given  up  to
them  by  bringing  an  action  called  communi  dividundo.

28,  Quod  si  frumentum  Titii  fru-
mento  tuo  mixtum  f  uerit,  si  quidem
ex  voluntate  vestra,  commune  erit  ;
quia  singula  corpora,  id  est,  singula
grana  quj3e  cuj usque  propria  fuerunt,
ex  consensu  vestro  communicata
sunt.  Quod  si  casu  id  mixtum
fuerit,  vel  Titius  id  miscuerit  sine
tua  voluntate,  non  videtur  commune
esse,  quia  singula  corpora  in  sua
substantia  durant ;  nee  magis  istis
casibus  commune  fit  frumentum,
quam  grex  intelligitur  esse  com-
munis, si  pecora  Titii  tuis  pecoribus
mixta  fuerint.  Sed  si  ab  alterutro
vestrum  totum  id  frumentum  re-
tineatur,  in  rem  quidem  actio  pro
modo  frumenti  cujusque  competit  ;
arbitrio  autem  judicis  continetur,
ut  ipse  SBstimet  quale  cujusque  fru-
mentum fuerit.

28.  If  the  wheat  of  Titius  is  mixed
with  yours,  when  this  takes  place  by
your  mutual  consent,  the  mixed  heap
belongs  to  you  in  common  ;  because
each  body,  that  is,  each  grain,  which
before  was  the  property  of  one  or
other  of  you,  has  by  your  mutual
consent  been  made  your  common  pro-
perty ;  but,  if  the  intermixture  were
accidental,  or  made  by  Titius  without
your  consent,  the  mixed  wheat  does
not  then  belong  to  you  both  in  com-
mon ;  because  the  grains  still  remain
distinct,  and  retain  their  proj^er  sub-
stance. The  wheat  in  such  a  case  no
more  becomes  common  to  you  both,
than  a  flock  would  be,  if  the  sheep  of
Titius  were  mixed  with  yours  ;  but,  if
either  one  of  you  keep  the  whole  quan-
tity of  mixed  wheat,  the  other  has  a
real  action  for  the  amount  of  wheat
belonging  to  him,  but  it  is  in  the  pro-
vince of  the  judge  to  estimate  the
quality  of  the  wheat  belonging  to
each.

D.  vi.  1.  4.  5.

This  mixing  together  of  things  not  liquid  is  termed  by  com-
mentators commixtio.  If  the  things  mixed,  still  remaining  the
property  of  their  former  owners,  were  easy  to  separate  again,  as
for  instance,  sheep  united  in  one  flock,  when  one  owner  brought
his  claim  by  vindication  his  property  was  restored  to  him  without
difficulty ;  but  if  there  was  difficulty  in  separating  the  materials
from  each  other,  as  in  dividing  the  grains  of  wheat  in  a  heap,  the
obvious  mode  would  be  to  distribute  the  whole  heap  in  shares
proportionate  to  the  quantity  of  wheat  belonging  to  the  respective
owners.  But  it  might  happen  that  the  wheat  mixed  together  was
not  all  of  the  same  quality,  and  therefore  the  owner  of  the  better
kind  of  wheat  would  lose  by  having  a  share  determined  in  amount
only  by  the  quantity  of  his  wheat;  and  the  judge  therefore  was

104

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

permitted  to  exercise  his  judgment  {arhitrio  continetur  —  see
Introd.  sec.  106)  how  great  an  addition  ought  to  be  made  to  his
share  to  compensate  for  the  superior  quality  of  the  wheat  originally

belouo^ins^  to  him.

29.  Cum  in  suo  solo  aliquis  ex
aliena  materia  osdificaverit,  ipse  in-
telligitur  dominus  sedificii  ;  quia
omne  quod  ineedificatur  solo  cedit.
Nee  tamen  ideo  is  qui  materi^e
dominus  fuerat,  desinit  dominus
ejus  esse  ;  sed  tantisper  neque  vin-
dicare  earn  potest,  neque  ad  ex-
hibendum  de  ea  re  agere,  propter
legem  duodecim  tabularum,  qua
cavetur  ne  quis  tignum  alienum
iedibus  suis  junctum  eximere  co-
gatur,  sed  duplum  pro  eo  prsestet
per  actionem  qufe  vocatur  de  tigno
injuncto.  Appellatione  autem  tigni
omnis  materia  significatur,  ex  qua
jedificia  iiunt.  Quod  ideo  pro  visum
est,  ne  sedificia  rescindi  necesse  sit ;
sed  si  aliqua  ex  causa  dirutum  sit
jiedificium,  poterit  materise  dominus,
si  non  fuerit  duplum  jam  persecutus,
tunc  earn  vindicare  et  ad  exliibendum
de  ea  re  agere.

29.  If  a  man  builds  upon  his  own
ground  with  the  materials  of  another,
he  is  considered  the  proprietor  of  the
building,  because  everything  built  on
the  soil  accedes  to  it.  The  owner  of
the  materials  does  not,  however,  cease
to  be  owner,  only  while  the  building
stands  he  cannot  claim  the  materials,
or  demand  to  have  them  exhibited,
on  account  of  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  providing  that  no  one  is  to  be
compelled  to  take  away  the  tignum  of
another  which  has  been  made  part  of
his  own  building,  but  that  he  may  be
made,  by  the  action  de  tigno  injuncto,
to  pay  double  the  value  ;  and  under
the  term  tignum  all  materials  for  build-
ing are  comprehended.  The  object  of
this  provision  was  to  prevent  the  ne-
cessity of  buildings  being  pulled  down.
But  if  the  building  is  destroyed  from
any  cause,  then  the  owner  of  the  ma-
terials, if  he  has  not  already  obtained
the  double  value,  may  reclaim  the
materials,  and  demand  to  have  them
exhibited.

Gai.  ii.  73 ;  D.  xli.  1.  7.  10.

Materials,  although  forming  part  of  a  building  belonging  to
the  owner  of  the  ground,  were  not  considered  themselves  as
necessarily  belonging  to  the  owner  of  the  building.  They  were
istill  the  property  of  the  person  to  whom  they  had  belonged
before  being  employed  in  the  building.  They  were  separable
from  the  soil,  and,  if  a  special  law  had  not  prevented  it,  could
have  been  claimed  by  their  owner,  and  their  production  enforced
by  an  action  ad  exliibendum.  The  Twelve  Tables  forbad,  however,
the  needless  destruction  of  buildings,  ne  cedificia  rescindi  necesse
sit.  They  suspended  the  right  of  claiming  the  materials,  or
bringing  an  action  ad  exliibendum,  until  the  building  was  destroyed.
When  it  was  destroyed  in  any  way  {aliqua  ex  causa)  the  materials
might  be  reclaimed,  or  an  action  ad  exliibendum  brought.  Mean-
while, by  an  action  termed  de  tigno  injuncto,  their  owner  might,
if  he  preferred,  recover  double  their  value,  forfeiting,  however,
thereby  all  right  of  eventually  reclaiming  them,  unless  the  builder
had  acted  mala  fide,  and  then  the  ov\^ner  of  the  materials  had  both
remedies.     (D.  xlvii.  3.  2.)

Such  was  the  law  when  the  builder  employed  the  materials
of  another  quite  innocently.  If  his  conduct  was  tainted  with
mala  fides ,  as  it  would  be  if  he  knew  that  the  materials  did  not

LIB.  II.     TIT.  I.  105

belong  to  him,  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  still  prevented  the
materials  being  at  once  reclaimed  by  the  compulsory  destruction
of  the  building ;  but  an  action  ad  exldhendum  was  permitted  to
be  brought  as  a  means  of  punishing  the  builder.  (D.  vi.  1.  23.  6.)
The  effect  of  this  action  in  such  a  case  was  that  the  defendant,
not  producing  the  thing  demanded,  was  condemned  in  such  a  sum
as  the  judge  thought  right  as  a  punishment  for  his  having  put  it
out  of  his  power  to  produce  it — quasi  dolo  fecerit  quominus  possi-
deat,     (D.  xlvii.  3.  1.  2.)

30.  Ex  diverse,  si  qiiis  in  alieno  30.  On   the   contrary,  if   any   one

solo  sua  materia  domiim  asdificaverit,  builds  with  his  own  materials  on  the
illius  fit  domus  cujus  et  solum  est.  ground  of  another,  the  building  be-
Sed  hoc  casu  materise  dominus  pro-  comes  the  property  of  him  to  whom
prietatem  ejus  amittit,  quia  volun-  the  ground  belongs.  But  in  this  case
tate  ejus  intelligitur  alienata,  utique  the  owner  of  the  materials  loses  his
si  non  ignorabat  se  in  alieno  solo  property,  because  he  is  j^resumed  to
a^dificare  ;  et  ideo  licet  diruta  sit  have  voluntarily  parted  with  them,
domus,  materiam  tamen  vindicare  that  is,  if  he  knew  he  was  building
non  potest.  Certe  iliud  constat,  si  upon  another's  land  ;  and,  therefore,
in  possessione  constitute  sedificatore,  if  the  building  should  be  destroyed,
soli  dominus  petat  domum  suam  esse,  he  cannot,  even  then,  reclaim  the  ma-
nec  solvat  pretium  materise  et  mer-  terials.  Of  course,  if  the  person  who
cedes  fabrorum,  posse  eum  per  ex-  builds  is  in  possession  of  the  soil,  and
ceptionem  doli  mali  repelli,  utique  si  the  owner  of  the  soil  claims  the  build-
bonse  fidei  possessor  fuerit,  qui  «idi-  ing,  but  refuses  to  pay  the  price  of  tlie
ficavit  ;  nam  scienti  alienum  solum  materials  and  the  wages  of  the  work-
esse  potest  objici  culpa,  quod  asdijS-  men,  the  owner  may  be  repelled  by  an
caverit  temere  in  eo  solo  quod  intel-  exception  of  dolus  malus,  provided  the
ligeret  alienum  esse.  builder  was   in   possession  bona  fide.

For  if  he  knew  that  he  was  not  the
owner  of  the  soil,  it  may  be  said
against  him  that  he  was  wrong  to
build  on  ground  which  he  knew  to
be  the  property  of  another.

D.  xli.  1.  7.  12.

If  a  person  used  his  own  materials  in  building  on  the  land  of
another,  we  have  to  consider  his  position,  according  as  he  was  or
was  not  still  in  possession,  and  according  as,  in  building,  he  had
acted  boriajide  or  mala  fide.  If  he  was  in  possession  of  the  soil,
then,  if  he  was  acting  bona  fide,  he  could  not  be  turned  out
without  the  owner  paying  him  for  the  additional  value  he  had  by
the  building  given  to  the  soil,  this  rather  than  the  price  of  the
materials  and  wages  of  workmen,  as  stated  in  the  text,  being  the
measure  of  compensation.  If  he  was  acting  mala  fide,  that  is,  if
he  knew  the  soil  was  not  his,  he  could  not  claim  the  additional
value,  but  he  might  take  away  the  materials  he  had  used,  if  he
could  separate  them  without  doing  damage.  (D.  vi.  1.  37.)
There  is,  however,  a  passage  of  Paulus  (D.  v.  3.  38)  which  would
seem  to  show  that,  in  the  opinion  of  that  jurist,  the  mala  fide  pos-
sessor could  claim  the  additional  value.  If  he  was  not  in  possession
of  the  soil,  he  might,  whether  having  acted  in  good  or  bad  faith
(D.  xl.  1.  7.  12  ;  C.  iii.  32.  2),  reclaim  the  materials  if  the  building

106  LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

was  destroyed ;  and,  wlietlier  he  had  acted  in  good  faith  or  bad,  he
could  not  bring  any  action  for  compensation  for  the  additional  value.

This  statement  of  the  law  is,  it  will  be  seen,  at  variance,  in  one
point,  with  the  language  of  the  text,  which  says  that  if  the  owner
of  the  materials  knew  he  was  building  on  another  man's  land  he
could  not  reclaim  the  materials,  because  the  fact  that  he  knew
this  was  taken  to  show  that  he  meant  to  alienate  the  materials.
The  passage  in  the  Code  above  referred  to  is  inconsistent  with
this.  If  the  owner  of  the  materials  meant  to  give  them  to  the
owner  of  the  soil,  no  question  could  arise ;  but  the  fact  that  he
used  his  materials,  knowing  the  soil  was  not  his,  Avas  declared  by
the  constitution  referred  to  (being  a  constitution  of  Antoninus
Caracalla),  not  to  imply,  as  the  text  takes  for  granted  that  it
does  imply,  the  intention  to  alienate  the  materials ;  and  if  there
was  no  such  intention,  then  the  materials  could  be  reclaimed  even
by  the  mala  fide  possessor.  The  words  of  the  constitution  are
— Materia  ad  pristinum  dominum  redit,  sive  bona  fide  sive  mala
(Edficium  exstructum  sit,  si  non  donandi  animo  cBdificia  alieno  solo
imposita  sint.  The  date  of  this  constitution  is  a.d.  213,  which
is  posterior  to  the  time  of  Gains,  from  whom  the  text  is  taken.

Dolus  malus  (opposed  to  dolus  bonus,  artifice  which  the  law
considers  honestly  employed)  means  nearly  what  we  mean  by
fraud.  When  a  plaintiff  was  repelled  by  an  exception  of  fraud,
such  words  as  these  were  introduced  in  the  intentio  of  the  action :
si  in  ea  re  nihil  dolo  malo  Auli  Agerii  factum  sit,  neque  fiat,
(See  Introd.  sec.  104.)

31.    Si   Titius   alienam  plantam  31.  If  Titius  places  another  man's

in  solo  suo  posuerit,  ipsius  erit,  et  plant  in  ground  belonging  to  himself,
ex  diverso  si  Titius  suam  plantam  the  plant  will  belong  to  Titius  ;  on
in  Maevii  solo  posuerit,  Maevii  the  contrary,  if  Titius  places  his  own
planta  erit :  si  modo  utroque  casu  plant  in  the  ground  of  Maevius,  the
radices  egerit ;  ante  enim  quam  plant  will  belong  to  Msevius — that  is,
radices  egerit,  ejus  permanet  cujus  if,  in  either  case,  the  plant  has  taken
et  fuerat.  Adeo  autem  ex  eo  tern-  root ;  for,  before  it  has  taken  root,  it
pore  quo  radices  agit  planta,  pro-  remains  the  property  of  its  former
prietas  ejus  commutatur,  ut  si  vicini  owner.  But  from  the  time  it  has
arbor  ita  terram  Titii  presserit  ut  taken  root,  the  property  in  it  is
in  ejus  fundum  radices  egerit,  Titii  changed ;  so  much  so,  that  if  the  tree
effici  arborem  dicamus ;  rationem.  of  a  neighbour  presses  so  closely  on
enim  non  permittere  ut  alterius  the  ground  of  Titius  as  to  take  root
arbor  esse  intelligatur,  quam  cujus  in  it,  we  pronounce  that  the  tree  be-
in  fundum  radices  egisset.  Et  ideo  comes  the  property  of  Titius.  For
prope  conlinium  arbor  posita,  si  reason  does  not  permit,  that  a  tree
etiam  in  vicini  fundum  radices  ege-  should  be  considered  the  property  of
rit,  communis  fit.  any  one    else   than    of   him  in  whose

ground  it  has  taken  root ;  and  there-
fore, if  a  tree,  planted  near  a  boun-
dary, extends  its  roots  into  the  lands
of  a  neighbour,  it  becomes  common.

Gai.  ii.  74 ;  D.  xli.  1.  7.  13.

The  tree,  after  it  had  once  taken  root,  did  not  belong  to  its]
former  owner,  although  it  was  afterwards  severed  from  the  soil.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

107

It  would  seem  natural  that  it  should  belong  to  him,  because  it
was  separable  from  the  soil,  and  did  not  become  a  part  of  it  more
than  the  materials  of  a  building  became  part  of  the  soil ;  but  the
jurist  considered  that  the  nourishment  it  had  drawn  from  the  soil
had  made  it  a  new  tree,  alia  facta  est  (D.  xli.  1.  26.  2),  and  thus
the  owner  of  the  soil  claimed  it  by  occupation.

When  the  text  says  that  the  tree  which  strikes  root  into  the
soil  of  Titius  belongs  to  Titius,  this  is  only  to  be  understood  of  a
tree  of  which  all  the  roots  are  in  the  soil  of  Titius.  If  only  some
of  the  roots  were  in  the  soil  of  Titius,  the  tree  would  belong
partly  to  Titius,  partly  to  its  former  owner.

32.  Qua  ratione  autem  plantse
quae  terra  coalescunt,  solo  cedunt,
eadem  ratione  frumenta  quoque
qua3  sata  sunt,  solo  cedere  intel-
liguntur.  Ceterum  sicut  is  qui  in
alieno  solo  sedificaverit,  si  ab  eo
dominus  petat  aidificium,  defendi
potest  per  exceptionem  doli  mali
secundum  ea  quae  diximus,  ita  ejus-
dem  exceptionis  auxilio  tutus  esse
potest  is  qui  alienum  fundum  sua
impensa  bona  fide  conseruit.

32.  As  plants  rooted  in  the  earth
accede  to  the  soil,  so,  in  the  same
way,  grains  of  wheat  which  have
been  sown  are  considered  to  accede
to  the  soil.  But  as  he  who  has  built
on  the  groiind  of  another  may,  ac-
cording to  what  we  have  said,  defend
himself  by  an  exception  of  dolus
malus,  if  the  proprietor  of  the  ground
claims  the  building,  so  also  he  may
protect  himself  by  the  aid  of  the  same
exception,  who,  at  his  own  expense
and  acting  honajide,  has  sown  another
man's  land.

Gai.  ii.  75,  76;  D.  xli.  1.  9.

33.  Literse  quoque,  licet  aureae
sint,  perinde  chartis  ^membranisqxie
cedunt,  ac  solo  cedere  solent  ea
quse  in?edificantur  aut  inseruntur  :
ideoque  si  in  chartis  membranisve
tuis  carmen  vel  historian!  vel  ora-
tionem  Titius  scripserit,  hujus  cor-
poris non  Titius  sed  tu  dominus  esse
videris.  Sed  si  a  Titio  petas  tuos
libros  tuasve  membranas,  nee  im-
pensas  scripturse  solvere  paratus  sis,
poterit  se  Titius  defendere  per  ex-
ceptionem doli  mali,  utique  si
earum  chartarum  membranarumve
possessionem  bona  fide  nactus  est.

33.  Written  characters,  although  of
gold,  accede  to  the  paper  or  parch-
ment on  which  they  are  written,  just
as  whatever  is  built  on,  or  sown  in,
the  soil,  accedes  to  the  soil.  And
therefore  if  Titius  has  written  a
poem,  a  history,  or  an  oration,  on
your  paper  or  parchment,  you,  and
not  Titius,  are  the  owner  of  the  writ-
ten paper.  But  if  you  claim  your
books  or  parchments  from  Titius,  but
refuse  to  defray  the  cost  of  the  writing,
then  Titius  can  defend  himself  by  an
exception  of  dolus  malus  ;  that  is,  if  it
was  bona  fide  that  he  obtained  posses-
sion of  the  papers  or  parchments.

Gai.  ii.  77;  D.  xli.  1.  9.  1.

In  this  case  the  letters  are  inseparable  from,  and  subordinate
to,  the  substance  on  which  they  are  written,  and  become  at  once
the  property  of  the  owner  of  that  substance.

34.  Si  quis  in  aliena  tabula  pinx-
erit,  quidam  putant  tabulam  pic-
turse  cedere  ;  aliis  videtur  picturam,
qualiscumque  sit,  tabulas  cedere.
Sed  nobis  videtur  melius  esse  tabu-
lam picturse  cedere;  ridiculum  est
enini  picturam  Apellis  vel  Parrhasii

34.  If  a  person  has  painted  on  the
tablet  of  another,  some  think  that
the  tablet  accedes  to  the  picture,
others,  that  the  picture,  of  whatever
quality  it  may  be,  accedes  to  the
tablet.  It  seems  to  us  the  better
opinion,  that  the  tablet  should  accede

108  LIB.  11.     TIT.  I.  M

in  accessionem  vilissimse  tabulae  to  the  picture ;  for  it  is  ridiculous
cedere.  Unde  si  a  domino  tabulae  that  a  painting  of  Apelles  or  Parrha-
imaginem  possidente,  is  qui  pinxit  sius  should  be  but  the  accessory  of
earn  petat,  nee  sol  vat  pretium  ta-  a  thoroughly  worthless  tablet.  But
buiae,  poterit  per  exceptionem  doli  if  the  owner  of  the  tablet  is  in  pos-
mali  submoveri.  At  si  is  qui  pinxit  session  of  the  picture,  the  painter,
possideat,  consequens  est  ut  utilis  should  he  claim  it  from  him,  but  re-
actio  domino  tabulae  adversus  eum  fuse  to  pay  the  value  of  the  tablet,
detur :  quo  casu,  si  non  solvat  im-  may  be  repelled  by  an  exception  of
pensam  picturae,  poterit  per  excep-  dolus  mains.  If  the  painter  is  in
tionem  doli  mail  repelli,  utique  si  possession  of  the  picture,  the  law  per-
bona  lide  possessor  fuerit  ille  qui  mits  the  owner  of  the  tablet  to  bring
picturam  imposuit.  Illud  enim  a  utilis  actio  against  him ;  and  in  this
palam  est,  quod,  sive  is  qui  pinxit  case,  if  the  owner  of  the  tablet  does
subripuit  tabulas,  sive  alius,  com-  not  pay  the  cost  of  the  picture,  he
petit  domino  tabularum  furti  actio.       may  also  be  repelled  by  an  exception

of  dolus  malus ;  that  is,  if  the  painter
obtained  possession  hona  fide.  If  the
tablet  has  been  stolen,  Avhether  b}'  the
painter  or  any  one  else,  the  owner  of
the  tablet  may  bring  an  action  of
theft.

Gai.  ii.  78 ;  D.  xli.  1.  9.  2.

As  written  characters  belonof  to  the  owner  of  the  substance
on  which  they  are  written,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  a  paint-
ing also  would  belong  to  the  owner  of  the  substance  on  which  it
was  painted;  and  Paul  (D.  vi.  1.  23.  3)  decides  that  it  does,  say-
ing that  the  painting  could  not  exist  without  the  substance  on
which  it  was  painted,  and  therefore  acceded  to  it.  Gains,  whose
opinion  is  adopted  in  the  text,  makes  the  great  value  of  the  paint-
ing the  reason  for  an  exception  to  the  rule.  But  the  owner  of
the  tablet  or  substance,  on  which  the  painting  was  painted,  had  in
one  way  something  of  the  rights  of  an  owner ;  for  if  the  painter
was  in  possession  of  the  painting,  the  owner  of  the  tablet  was  not
left  only  to  a  personal  action  for  the  value  of  the  board,  but  could
claim  the  board  itself.  The  action  by  which  he  did  so  was  termedl
utilis,  because  it  was  only  an  equitable  method  of  protecting  him,
the  prjetor  allowing  him  to  assert  fictitiously  that  he  was  the
owner.  The  direct  legal  power  of  claiming  the  tablet  {vindicati6\
recta)  was  in  the  ])ainter  whose  property  the  tablet  had  become  ;
but  the  former  owner  of  the  tablet  was  allowed  still  to  treat  it
as  his,  in  order  to  compel  the  painter  to  pay  its  value.  If,  when
the  actio  utilis  was  brought,  the  painter  paid  the  value  of  the
tablet,  the  right  of  action  was  at  an  end,  and  the  owner  of  the
tablet  could  not  get  possession  of  the  picture  by  offering  to  pay
its  cost.

Consequens  est  ut  utilis  actio,  &c.  It  would  not  follow  from
the  painter  possessing  that  the  owner  of  the  tablet  should  have  a
real  action  of  any  kind.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  an  exception
that  then  he  sliould  have  one.  Therefore  consequens  must  be  taken
as  meaning  '  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  law ; '  or  the
sentence  must  be  taken  as  meaning,  ^  If  the  painter  is  in  posses

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

109

sion/  this  circumstance  places  the  owner  of  the  tablet  in  such  a
iiard  position  that  it  is  thought  right  he  should  have  a  utilis
actio.

35.  Si  quis  a  non  domino  quern
dominum  esse  crediderit,  bona  fide
fundum  einerit,  vel  ex  donatione
aliave  qualibet  justa  causa  aeque
bona  fide  acceperit,  naturali  ratione
placuit  fructiis  quos  percepit,  ejus
esse  pro  cultura  et  cura ;  et  ideo  si
postea  dominus  supervenerit,  et
fundum  vindicet,  de  fructibus  ab  eo
consumptis  agere  non  potest.  Ei
vero  qui  alienum  fundum  sciens
possederit,  non  idem  concessum  est :
itaque  cum  fundo  etiam  fructus,
licet  consumpti  sint,  cogitur  resti-
tuere.

35.  If  any  one  has  bona  fide  pur-
chased land  from  another,  v/houi
he  believed  to  be  the  true  owner,
when  in  fact  he  was  not,  or  has  bona
fide  acquired  it  from  such  a  person
by  gift  or  by  any  other  good  title,
natural  reason  demands  that  the
fruits  which  he  has  gathered  shall  be
his  in  return  for  his  care  and  culture.
And  therefore,  if  the  real  owner  after-
wards appears  and  claims  his  land,  he
can  have  no  action  for  fruits  which
the  possessor  has  consumed.  But  the
same  allowance  is  not  made  to  him
who  has  knowingly  been  in  possession
of  another's  estate  ;  and  therefore,  he
is  compelled  to  restore,  together  with
the  lands,  all  the  fruits,  although  they
may  have  been  consumed.

D.  xli.  1.  48 ;  D.  xxii.  1.  15.

Justinian  now  passes  to  the  interest  of  a  bona  fide  possessor
and  a  usufructuary  in  the  fruits  of  land,  a  subject  to  which  he  is
led  by  having  spoken  of  other  ways  in  which  the  interest  of  the
owner  of  the  soil  w^as  limited.

A  person  would  be  said  to  possess  bona  fide  and  ex  justa  causa
who  had  received  a  thing  from  a  person  he  believed  to  be  the
owner  in  any  method  by  which  ownership  could  legally  pass.

As  long  as  the  fruits  still  adhered  to  the  soil,  that  is,  were
still  ungathered,  they  belonged  to  the  owner  of  the  soil.  If
gathered,  but  not  consumed,  they  belonged  to  the  bona  fide  pos-
sessor as  against  every  one  except  the  owner  of  the  soil.  When
the  owner  of  the  soil  claimed  them,  they  became  his,  for  they  had
only  been  the  property  of  the  bona  fide  possessor  interim  (D.  xli.
1.  48),  that  is,  provisionally;  but  if  they  had  been  consumed,  the
owner  of  the  soil  could  not  recover  their  value  from  the  bona  fide
possessor.  The  mala  fide  possessor,  on  the  contrary,  was  obliged
to  give  the  value  even  of  those  that  were  consumed  {restituere
fructus  consumptos).

There  seems  little  doubt  that  the  interest  of  the  bona  fide  pos-
sessor extended  over  all  the  fruits  of  the  land,  and  not  only  over
those  produced  by  his  cultivation  and  care  (see  D.  xli.  1.  48),
although  Pomponius  (D.  xxii.  1.  15)  seems  to  limit  it  to  the
latter.

36.  Is  ad  quern  ususfructus  fundi  36.    The   usufructuary   of  land   is

pertinet,    non   aliter   fructuum    do-  not  owner  of  the  fruits  until  he  has

minus    efficitur,    quam   si   ipse    eos  himself   gathered   them ;    and,   there-

perceperit ;    et   ideo,    licet   maturis  fore,     if    he    should    die    while    the

fructibus   nondum  tamen   perceptis  fruits,    although    ripe,    are    yet    un-

110

LIB.  II.     TIT.  I.

decesserit,    ad    heredem    ejus    non  gathered,  they  do   not  belong  to  his

pertinent,  sed   domino   proprietatis  heirs,    but   are   the    property    of    the

adquirimtur.      Eadem    fere    et    de  owner   of   the    soil.     And   nearly  the

colono  dicuntur.  same  may  be  said  of  the  colonus.

The  interest  of  the  usufructuary  has  a  special  Title  (Tit.  4)
devoted  to  it,  and  all  remarks  upon  it  may  be  reserved  till  we
arrive  at  that  Title.

Eadem  fere.  The  heirs  of  the  colonus  could  gather  fruits  not
gathered  by  him,  for  his  rights  did  not  perish  with  him  ;  but  the
heirs  of  the  usufructuary  had  no  rights  transmitted  to  them,  and
could  not  therefore  gather  fruits  which  he  had  not  gathered.

37.  In  pecudum  frnctu  etiam
foetns  est,  sicnt  lac,  pili  et  lana.
Itaque  agni,  hsedi  et  vitidi  et  equuli
et  suculi  statim  natural!  jure  do-
minii  fructuarii  sunt.  Partus  vero
ancillse  in  fructu  non  est,  itaque  ad
dominum  proprietatis  pertinet  ;  ab-
surdum  enim  videbatur  hominem
in  fructu  esse,  cum  omnes  fructus
rerum  natura  gratia  hominis  com-
paraverit.

37.  In  the  fruits  of  animals  are
included  their  young,  as  well  as  their
milk,  hair,  and  wool ;  and  therefore
lambs,  kids,  calves,  colts,  and  young
pigs,  immediately  on  their  birth  be-
come, by  the  law  of  nature,  the  pro-
perty of  the  usufructuary;  but  the
offspring  of  a  female  slave  is  not  con-
sidered a  fruit,  but  belongs  to  the
owner  of  the  property.  For  it  seemed
absurd  that  man  should  be  reckoned
a  fruit,  when  it  is  for  man's  benefit
that  all  fruits  are  provided  by  nature.

D.  xxii.  1.  28.  pr.  and  1.

Ulpian  gives,  as  a  reason  for  the  children  of  slaves  not  being
in  fructu,  that  non  temere  ancillcs,  ejus  rei  causa  comparantur  ut
pariant.  (D.  v.  3.  27.)  There  were,  however,  many  animals,
cows  or  mares  for  instance,  used  for  draught,  that  could  not  be
said  to  be  expressly  destined  to  bear  offspring,  and  yet  their  off-
spring was  in  fructu.

38.  Sed  si  gregis  usumfructum
quis  habeat,  in  locum  demortuorum
capitum  ex  foetu  fructuarius  sum-
mittere  debet,  ut  Juliano  visum  est ;
et  in  vinearum  demortuarum  vel
arborum  locum  alias  debet  substi-
tuere  :  recte  enim  colere  debet  et
quasi  bonus  paterfamilias.

38.  The  usufructuary  of  a  flock
ought  to  replace  any  of  the  flock  that
may  happen  to  die,  by  supplying  the
deficiency  out  of  the  young,  as  also
Julian  was  of  opinion.  So,  too,  the
usufructuary  ought  to  supply  the
place  of  dead  vines  or  trees.  For  he
ought  to  cultivate  with  care,  and  to
use  everything  as  a  good  father  of  a
family  would  use  it.

This  paragraph  relates  entirely  to  the  subject  of  Title  4.

39.  Thesauros  quos  quis  in  loco
suo  invenerit,  divus  Hadrianus  na-
turalem  sequitatem  secutus  ei  con-
cessit qui  invenerit ;  idemque  sta-
tuit,  si  quis  in  sacro  aut  religioso
loco  fortuito  casu  invenerit.  At  si
quis  in  alieno  loco,  non  data  ad  hoc
opera,  sed  fortuito  invenerit,  dimi-
dium  inventori,  dimidium  domino
soli   concessit ;    et   convenienter,  si

39.  The  Emperor  Hadrian,  in
accordance  with  natural  equity,  al-
lowed any  treasure  found  by  a  man
in  his  own  land  to  belong  to  the
finder,  as  also  any  treasure  found  by
chance  in  a  sacred  or  reUgious  place.
But  treasure  found  without  any  ex-
press search,  but  by  mere  chance,  in  a
place  belonging  to  another,  he  granted
half  to  the  finder,  and  half  to  the

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

Ill

quis  in  Cfesaris  loco  invenerit,  di-  proprietor  of  the  soil.  Consequently,
miciium  inventoris,  dimidium  Cve-  if  anything  is  found  in  a  place  be-
saris  esse  statnit.  Cui  conveniens  longing  to  the  emperor,  half  belongs
est,  ut  si  quis  in  fiscaH  loco  vel  x^ub-  to  the  finder,  and  half  to  the  emperor,
lico  invenerit,  dimidium  ipsius  esse,  And  hence  it  follows,  that  if  a  man
dimidium  fisci  vel  civitatis.  finds  anything  in  a  place  belonging  to

the  fiscus,  the  public,  or  a  city,  half
ought  to  belong  to  the  finder,  and  half
to  the  fiscus  or  the  city.

D.  xli.  1.  63 ;  D.  xlix.  14.  3.  10.

Thesaurus,  says  Paul  (D.  xli.  1.  31.  1),  est  vetus  qucBdam  de-
positio  pecunice  (that  is,  of  anything  valuable),  cujus  iion  extat  me-
moria,  ut  jam  dominum  non  haheat.  Of  course  if  it  was  known
who  placed  it  there,  it  was  known  to  whom  it  belonged.  But
a  treasure,  though  its  depositor  was  unknown,  was  not  considered
exactly  as  a  res  nuUius.  The  owner  of  the  land  in  which  it  was
found  had  always  some  interest  in  it.  If  he  found  it  himself,  it
all  belonged  to  him ;  if  another  person  found  it,  the  finder  and
the  owner  of  the  land  divided  it  equally.  When  there  was  no
owner  of  the  land,  as  when  the  place  was  sacred  or  religious,  the
finder  took  it  all ;  but  no  one  was  allowed  to  make  the  search  for
treasures  an  excuse  for  digging  up  tombs  and  sacred  places,  or
for  digging  up  other  men's  ground  ;  and  therefore  it  was  only
when  the  discovery  was  quite  accidental,  and  the  finder  had  made
no  search  for  it,  that  the  treasure,  or  the  half  of  it,  as  the  case
might  be,  was  permitted  to  belong  to  him.

40.  Per  traditionem  quoque  jure
naturali  res  nobis  adquiruntur  :  nihil
enim  tarn  conveniens  est  naturali
a3quitati,  quam  voluntatem  domini
volentis  rem  suam  in  alium  trans-
ferre,  ratam  haberi.  Et  ideo  cujus-
cumque  generis  sit  corporalis  res,
tradi  potest  et  a  domino  tradita  alie-
natur.  Itaque  stipendiaria  quoque  et
tributaria  pr?edia  eodem  modo  alie-
nantur :  vocantur  autem  stipendiaria
et  tributaria  preedia,  quae  in  pro-
vinciis  sunt  :  inter  quse  nee  non  et
Italica  prsedia  ex  nostra  constitutione
nulla  est  differentia ;  sed  si  quidem
ex  causa  donationis  aut  dotis  aut
qualibet  alia  ex  causa  tradantur,
'  sine  dubio  transf  eruntur.

40.  Another  mode  of  acquiring
things  according  to  natural  law  is
tradition;  for  nothing  is  more  con-
formable to  natural  equity  than  that
the  wishes  of  a  person,  who  is  de-
sirous to  transfer  his  property  to
another,  should  be  confirmed ;  and
therefore  corporeal  things,  of  what-
ever kind,  may  be  passed  by  tradi-
tion, and  when  so  passed  by  their
owner,  are  made  the  property  of
another.  In  this  way  are  alienated
stipendiary  and  tributary  lands,  that
is,  lands  in  the  provinces,  between
which  and  Italian  lands  there  is  now,
by  our  constitution,  no  difference,  so
that  when  tradition  is  made  of  them
for  purpose  of  a  gift,  a  marriage
portion,  or  any  other  object,  the
property  in  them  is  undoubtedly
transferred.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  3  ;  C.  vii.  25.

When  the  property  in  a  thing  was  to  be  transferred  from  one
person  to  another,  it  was  necessary  that  the  process  should  be
I  complete  in  four  points  : — 1.  The  person  who  transferred  it  must
be  the  owner;  2.  He  must  place  the  person  to  whom  he  trans-

112  LIB.  IT.      TIT.  I.

ferred  it  in  legal  possession  of  the  thing  ;  3.  He  must  transfer  the
thing  with  intention  to  pass  the  property  in  it ;  4.  The  person  to
whom  it  was  transferred  must  receive  it  with  intention  to  become
the  owner.

The  placing  another  in  legal  possession  of  a  thing  was  termed
the  traditio  of  that  thing.  In  the  simplest  case,  that  of  a  por-
table moveable,  the  owner  might  really  hand  over  the  thing  to
the  person  who  was  to  become  its  possessor ;  but  in  no  case  was
it  necessary  that  this  should  be  done ;  what  was  necessary  was
that  the  party  who  was  to  receive  it  should  have  the  thing  in  his
power,  and  that  the  two  parties  should  express,  in  any  way  what-
ever, the  wish  of  the  one  to  transfer,  of  the  other  to  accept,  the
possession.  The  thing  need  not  be  touched ;  land,  for  instance,
need  not  be  entered  on ;  but  the  person  who  was  to  be  placed  in
possession  must  have  the  thing  before  him,  so  as  to  be  able,  by  a
physical  act,  to  exercise  power  oyer  it.  (See  Savigny  on  Pos-
session, Bk.  ii.  sees.  16  and  17.)

Property  could  not  be  transferred  by  mere  agreement.  (  Tra-
ditionibus  et  usucapionihus,  non  nudis  pactis  dominia  transferun-
tur.  C.  ii.  3.  20.)  The  agreement  was  but  the  expression  of  the
intention  of  the  parties ;  and  this  was  ineffectual  unless  it  was
accompanied  by  the  party  being  placed  in  possession  to  whom  the
thing  Avas  to  be  transferred.

PrcBdia  stipendiaria  were  provincial  lands  belonging  to  the
people,  trihutaria  provincial  lands  belonging  to  the  emperor.
(Gai.  ii.  21.)  It  will  be  remembered  that,  until  Justinian  de-
stroyed all  distinction  between  Italian  and  provincial  land  by  a
constitution  (C.  vii.  25),  the  Italicum  solum  was  a  res  mancipi,  and
could  only  be  transferred  by  the  peculiar  form  of  mancipation
(See  Introd.  sec.  59.)

41.  Venditse  vero  res  et  traditoe  41.  But  things  sold  and  delivered

non    aliter     emptori     adqiiiriintur,  are  not  acquired  by  the  buyer  until

quam  si  is  venditori  pretium  solve-  he  has  paid  the  seller  the   price,  or

rit,    vel   alio    modo   ei   satisfecerit,  satisfied  him  in  some  way  or  otlier,  as

veluti     expromissore     aut     pignore  by  procuring  some  one  to  be  security,

dato.     Quod  cavetur  quidem  etiam  or  by  giving  a  pledge.    And,  although

lege    duodecim    tabularum,    tamen  this    is    provided    by   a    law   of    the

recte  dicitur  et  jure  gentium,  id  est,  Twelve  Tables,  yet  it  may  be  rightly

jure  naturali,  id  effici.    Sed  si  is  qui  said  to    spring   from  the    law  of   na-

vendidit,  fidem  emptoris  secutus  est,  tions,  that  is,  the  law  of  nature.     But

dicendum  est  statim  rem   emptoris  if  the  seller  has  accepted   the   credit

fieri.  of  the  buyer,  the  thing  then  becomes

immediately  the  property  of  the  buyer.

D.  xviii.  1.  19.  53.

The  seller  would  generally  not  have  the  intention  to  transfer
the  property  until  he  received  the  price ;  but  he  might  be  con-
tent to  receive  security  for  the  payment  of  the  price,  or  he  might
choose  to  accept  the  credit  of  the  buyer  instead  of  the  price  itself;
and  if,  in  either  of  these  cases,  he  intended  to  pass  the  property,
it  would  pass  at  once,  irrespectively  of  the  price  being  paid.  For
the  meaning  oi  expromissor,  see  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  29.  3.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

113

42.  Nihil  autem  interest,  utrum  42.    It  is  immaterial  whether  the

ipse  dominus  tradat  alicui  rem,   an     owner  deliver   the   thing   himself,   or
Toluntate  ejus  alius.  some  one  else  by  his  desire.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  4.

43.  Qua  ratione,  si  cui  libera  uni-
versorum  negotiorum  administratio
a  domino  permissa  fuerit,  isque  ex
his  negotiis  rem  vendiderit  et  tradi-
derit,  facit  eam  accipientis.

43.  Hence,  if  any  one  is  intrusted
by  an  owner  with  the  uncontrolled
administration  of  all  his  goods,  and
he  sells  and  delivers  anything  which
is  a  part  of  these  goods,  he  passes
the  property  in  it  to  the  person  who
receives  the  thins;.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  4.

By  the  will  of  the  owner,  the  manager  of  the  property  is  able
to  deal  with  it ;  and  if  he  deals  with  it,  the  will  of  the  owner  is
expressed  through  him.

44.  Interdum  etiam  sine  tradi-
tione  nuda  voluntas  domini  sufficit
ad  rem  transferendam,  veluti  si  rem
quam  tibi  aliquis  commodavit  aut
locavit  aut  apud  te  deposuit,  ven-
diderit tibi  aut  donaverit ;  quam  vis
enim  ex  ea  causa  tibi  eam  non  tra-
diderit,  eo  tamen  ipso  quod  patitur
tuam  esse,  statim  tibi  adquiritur
proprietas,  perinde  ac  si  eo  nomine
tradita  fuisset.

44.  Sometimes,  too,  the  mere  wish
of  the  owner,  without  tradition,  is
sufficient  to  transfer  the  property  in
a  thing,  as  when  a  person  has  lent,
or  let  to  you  anything,  or  deposited
anything  with  you,  and  then  after-
■\\ards  sells  or  gives  it  to  you.  For,
although  he  has  not  delivered  it  to
you  for  the  purpose  of  the  sale  or
gift,  yet  by  the  mere  fact  of  his  con-
senting to  it  becoming  yours,  you  in-
sta.ntly  acquire  the  property  in  it,  as
fully  as  if  it  had  actually  been  deli-
vered to  you  for  the  express  purpose
of  passing  the  property.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  5.

When  the  person  to  whom  the  property  in  the  thing  was
transferred  was  already  in  possession  of  the  thing,  then,  if  the
wishes  of  the  parties  to  give  and  receive  the  property  in  it  were
added  to  this,  and  the  person  who  affected  to  give  the  property
was  the  real  owner,  all  the  conditions  of  a  transfer  were  com-
plete. It  made  no  difference  what  was  their  respective  order
in  time.  Generally  the  expression  of  will  would  precede  the
placing  in  possession,  but  not  necessarily.  When  the  person  to
whom  the  property  in  the  tiling  was  transferred  had  only  the  mere
detention  of  the  thing,  that  is,  had  it  in  his  keeping  acd  power  as
a  hirer  or  depositary  would  have,  but  had  not  the  possession  of  it,
that  is,  had  not  also  the  intention  of  dealing  with  it  as  an  owner,
all  that  was  necessary  to  change  this  detention  into  possession
was  a  change  in  the  animus  with  which  it  was  held ;  and  of  course
the  intention  to  hold  it  as  an  owner  was  sufficiently  shown  by
accepting  the  transfer  of  the  property.  The  person,  in  like  man-
ner, who  transferred  the  property,  by  doing  so  sufficiently  showed
his  intention  of  placing  the  other  in  possession.  Thus  the  dif-
ferent elements  of  traditio  were  broken  up  and  separated,  not,  as

I

114

LIB.  II.      TIT.  I.

usual,  united  in  a  single  act ;  and  this  is  what  is  meant  in  the
text  by  saying  the  property  passes  sine  traditione.

45.  Item  si  qiiis  merces  in  horreo
depositas  vendiderit,  simiil  atque
claves  horrei  tradiderit  emptori,
transfert  proprietatein  mercium  ad
emptorem.

45.  So,  too,  any  one,  who  has  sold
goods  deposited  in  a  warehouse,  as
soon  as  he  has  handed  over  the  keys  of
the  warehouse  to  the  buyer,  transfers
to  the  buyer  the  property  in  the  goods.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  6.

The  text  does  not  state  all  that  was  necessary  to  transfer  the
property  in  such  a  case.  It  was  requisite  that  the  key  should  be
given  apud  liorrea^  at  the  warehouse  (D.  xviii.  1.  74).  A  person
who  was  at  the  w^arehouse  and  had  the  key  in  his  hand  was  in  a
position  to  exercise  immediate  power  over  the  contents  of  the
warehouse ;  the  goods  were  in  his  custody,  and  he  was  thus  placed
in  possession  of  them.  The  key  was  not  symbolical,  but  was  the
means  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  deal  with  the  goods  as  an
owner.

46.  Hoc  amplius,  interdum  et  in
incertam  personam  collata  voluntas
domini  transfert  rei  proprietatem  :
ut  ecce,  prsetores  et  consules  qui
missilia  jactant  in  vulgus,  ignorant
quid  eorum  quisque  sit  excepturus,
et  tamen  quia  volunt  quod  quisque
exceperit  ejus  esse,  statim  eum  do-
minmn  efficiunt.

46.  Nay,  more,  sometimes  the  in-
tention of  an  owner,  although  directed
only  towards  an  uncertain  person,
transfers  the  property  in  a  thing.  For
instance,  when  the  praetors  and  consuls
throw  their  largesses  to  the  mob,  they
do  not  know  what  each  person  in  the
mob  will  get ;  but  as  it  is  their  in-
tention that  each  should  have  what  he
gets,  they  make  what  each  gets  imme-
diately belong  to  him.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  7.

47.  Qua  ratione  verius  esse  vide-
tur,  si  rem  pro  derelicto  a  domino
habitam.  occupaverit  quis,  statim
eum  dominum  effici.  Pro  derelicto
autem  habetur  quod  dominus  ea
mente  abjecerit,  utid  rerum  suarum
esse  noUet,  ideoque  statim  dominus
esse  desinit.

47.  Accordingly,  it  is  quite  true  to
say  that  anything  which  is  seized  on,
when  abandoned  by  its  owner,  becomes
immediately  the  property  of  the  person
who  takes  possession  of  it.  And  any-
thing is  considered  as  abandoned,
which  its  owner  has  thrown  away  with
a  wish  no  longer  to  have  it  as  a  part  of
his  property,  as  it  therefore  imme-
diately ceases  to  belong  to  him.

D.  xli.  7.  1.

It  might  seem  as  if  the  property  in  things  abandoned  was
transferred,  like  that  in  things  thrown  to  the  mob,  by  the  wish  of
the  owner  to  transfer  it  to  the  person  who  should  first  take  pos-
session of  it ;  but  it  is  much  more  natural  to  consider,  with  the
text,  that  the  thing  becomes  a  res  nullius  by  being  abandoned,
and  the  property  of  the  first  occupant  by  being  taken  posses-
sion of.

48.  Alia  causa  est  earum  rerum
qute  in  tempestate  maris,  levandte
navis  causa;  ejiciuntur;  hse  enim  do-

48.  It  is  otherwise  with  respect  to
things  thrown  overboard  in  a  storm,
to  lighten  a  vessel ;  for  they  remain

LIB.  II.      TIT.  II.  115

minorum  permanent,  quia  palam  est  the  property  of  their  owners  ;  as  it  is

eas  non  eo  animo  ejici  quod  quis  eas  evident   that    they  were    not   thrown

habere  non  \^lt,  sed  quo  magis  cum  away  through  a  wish   to   get    rid   of

ipsa  navi  maris  periculum  effugiat.  them,  but  that  their  owners  and  the

Qua  de  causa,  si  quis  eas  fluctibus  ship   itself    might  more  easily  escape

expulsas,  vel  etiam  in  ipso  mari  nac-  the  dangers  of  the  sea.      Hence,  any

tus,  lucrandi  animo  abstulerit,  fur-  one  who,  with  a  view  to  profit  himself

tum  committit  ;  nee  longe  discedere  by  these,  takes  them  away  when  washed  '

videntur  ab  his  quae  de  rheda  cur-  on  shore,  or  found  at  sea,  is  guilty  of

rente   non    intelligentibus    dominis  theft.     And  much  the   same  may  be

cadunt.  said  as  to  things  which  drop  from  a

carriage  in  motion,  without  the  know-
ledge of  their  owners.

D.  xli.  1.  9.  8  ;  D.  xlvii.  43.  4.

A  thln^  could  not  be  considered  as  abandoned  and  made  a  i^es
nullius  unless  its  owner  intended  to  cease  to  be  its  owner.

Tit.  II.     DE   EEB13S   INCORPOEALIBUS.

Qusedam  praeterea  res  corporales  Certain  things,  again,  are  corporeal,

sunt,  quaedam  incorporales.  others  incorporeal.

Gal  ii.  12  ;  D.  i.  8.  1.  1.

Justinian,  after  having  spoken  of  the  natural  modes  of
acquiring  property  in  thiiigs,  returns  in  this  Title  to  the  division
of  things,  and  adds  one  more  division,  that  of  things  corporeal  and
incorporeal,  to  the  divisions  given  at  the  beginning  of  the  last
Title.  Our  senses  tell  us  what  things  corporeal  are :  things
incorporeal  are  rights,  that  is,  fixed  relations  in  which  men  stand
to  things  or  to  other  men,  relations  giving  them  power  over  things
or  claims  against  persons.  And  these  rights  are  themselves  the
objects  of  rights,  and  thus  fall  under  the  definition  of  things.  For
instance,  the  right  to  walk  over  another  man's  land  is  said  to  be
an  incorporeal  thing ;  for  we  may  have  a  claim  or  right  to  have
this  right,  exactly  as,  if  the  land  belonged  to  us,  we  should  have
a  rio;ht  to  have  the  land.  These  rio:hts  over  thino;s  were  termed
jura  in  rem,  and  these /z<?'a  in  rem,  some  of  the  more  important  of
which  are  treated  of  in  this  part  of  the  Institutes,  were  almost
exactly  on  the  footing  of  '  res '  in  Roman  law,  and  were  the
subjects  of  real  actions  equally  with  things  corporeal.  (See  Introd.
sec.  50.)  This  language  of  Roman  law  is  rather,  perhaps,  in
accordance  with  popular  language  and  practical  convenience  than
theoretically  accurate.  Strictly  speaking,  the  ownership  of  a
field  is  just  as  much  incorporeal  as  the  ownership  of  a  right  of
way  over  a  field,  and  in  both  cases  the  law  only  treats  of  the  cor-
poreal thing,  the  field,  with  reference  to  the  incorporeal  rights.

We  can  hardly  speak  of  the  possession  of  a  thing  incorporeal,
but  still  the  actual  exercise  of  the  right  so  much  resembles  the
occupation  and  using  of  a  corporeal  thing,  that  the  term  quasi-
possessio  has  been  employed  to  denote  the  position  of  a  person  who

I  2

116  LIB.  11.      TIT.  II.

exercises  the  right  without  opposition,  and  exercises  it  as  if  he
were  its  owner.  As  little  can  we  speak  of  the  traditio  or  delivery
of  a  right,  but  just  as  quasi-possessio  is  used  to  express  a  position
analogous  to  that  of  a  possessor,  so  quasi-traditio  is  a  term  used  to
signify  the  placing  a  person  in  this  position.

1.  Corporales  hse  sunt,  quae  sui  1.  Corporeal  things  are  those  which
natura  tangi  possunt  :  veluti  fundus,  are  by  their  nature  tangible,  as  land,  a
homo,  vestis, 'aurum,  argentum,  et  slave,  a  garment,  gold,  silver,  and  other
denique  alise  res  innumerabiles.  things  innumerable.

Gai.  ii.  13  ;  D.  i.  8.  1.  1.

2.  Incorporales  autem  sunt,  quae  2.  Incorporeal  things  are  those
tangi  non  possunt  :  qualia  sunt  ea  which  are  not  tangible,  such  as  are
quae  in  jure  consistunt,  sicut  heredi-  those  which  consist  of  a  right,  as  an
tas,  ususfructus,  usus,  obligationes  inheritance,  a  usufruct,  use,  or  obli-
quoquo  modo  contractse.  Nee  ad  rem  gations  in  whatever  way  contracted,
pertinet,  quod  in  hereditate  res  cor-  Nor  does  it  make  any  difference  that
porales  continentur  ;  nam  et  fructus  things  corporeal  are  contained  in  an
qui  ex  fundo  percipiuntur  corporales  inheritance  ;  for  fruits,  gathered  by  the
sunt,  et  id  quod  ex  aliqua  obliga-  usufructuary,  are  corporeal ;  and  that
tione  nobis  debetur,  plerumque  cor-  which  is  due  to  us  by  virtue  of  an  obli-
porale  est,  veluti  fundus,  homo,  gation,  is  generally  a  corporeal  thing,
pecunia  :  nam  ipsum  jus  hereditatis,  as  a  field,  a  slave,  or  money ;  while
et  ipsum  jus  utendi  fruendi,  et  ipsum  the  right  of  inheritance,  the  right  of
jus  obligationis  incorporale  est.  usufruct,  and  the  right  of  obligation,

are  incorporeal.

Gai.  ii.  14  ;  D.  i.  8.  1.  1.

3.  Eodem  numero  sunt  jura  prse-  3.  Among  things  incorporeal  are
diorum  urbanorum  et  rusticorum,  the  rights  over  estates,  urban  and
quae  etiam  servitutes  vocantur.              rural,  which  are  also  called  servitudes.

Gai.  ii.  14  ;  D.  i.  8.  1.  1.

In  the  last  section  it  was  said  that  usufruct,  a  j^ersonal  servi-
tude, was  an  incorporeal  thing,  and  the  saine  is  now  said  of  real
or  praidial  servitudes.  This  is  intended  as  an  observation  pre-
liminary to  the  three  next  Titles,  which  treat  of  servitudes.  By
servitudes  are  meant  certain  portions  or  fragments  of  the  right  of
ownership  separated  from  the  rest,  and  enjoyed  by  persons  other
than  the  owner  of  the  thing  itself.  When  the  servitude  was  given
to  a  particular  person,  it  was  said  to  be  a  personal  servitude ;
when  it  was  associated  with  the  ownership  of  another  thing,  so
that  whoever  was  the  owner  of  this  other  thing  was  the  ov/ner  of
the  servitude,  the  servitude  was  said  to  be  a  real  or  prandial  servi-
tude ;  the  latter  term  being  used  because  it  was  indispensable
that  there  should  be  an  immoveable  thing  (see  paragraph  3  of
next  Title),  in  virtue  of  which  the  right  given  by  the  servitude
was  exercised ;  and  the  word  prczdium  being  taken  in  a  general
sense,  was  used  to  denote  this  immoveable.  The  thing  over
which  the  praidial  servitude  was  exercised  was  also  always  an
immoveable.  Things  over  which  servitudes,  whether  personal  or
j}ra3dial,  were  exercised,  were  said  to  serve  the  person  to  whom  or
the  thing  to  which  the  servitude  was  attached ;    and  hence  the

LIB.  11.      TIT.  III.  1J7

terms  servitus,  res  serviens  were  employed,  the  thing  in  right  of
which  the  servitude  was  enjoyed  being,  in  opposition,  termed  res
dominans.     (See  Introd.  sec.  64.)

No  one  could  have  a  servitude  over  his  own  thing,  nuUi  res
sua  servit.  (D.  viii.  2.  26.)  For  as  he  was  the  owner  of  all  the
portions  into  which  the  right  of  ownership  was  separable,  he
could  not  have  a  second  right  of  ownership  over  any  one  portion
separated  from  the  rest.  Again,  as  a  servitude  was  the  subtrac-
tion of  some  one  portion  of  ownership,  it  could  never  have  the
effect  of  making  the  owner  of  the  res  serviens  do  any  positive  act ;
its  force  was  either  to  make  him  undergo  something,  as  that
another  should  exercise  a  certain  power  over  a  thing  of  which  he
was  owner,  or  to  make  him  abstain  from  doing  something  which
as  OAvner  of  the  thing  he  had  power  to  do.  Servitutum  non  ea  est
natura  ut  aliquid  faciat  quis,  sed  ut  aliquid  patiatur  vel  non
faciat.  (D.  viii.  1.  15.  1.)  Lastly,  it  may  be  observed  that  a
praedial  servitude  was  indivisible ;  the  person  Avho  enjoyed  the
servitude  could  not  break  up  this  fragment  of  ownership  into
lesser  fragments,  but  a  usufruct  could  be  divided.

Tit.  III.     DE    SERYITUTIBUS.

Rusticoriim  prasdiorum  jura  sunt  The   servitudes    of  rural  immove-

hsec  :  iter,  actus,  via,  aqu?eductus.  ables  are,  the  rigLt  of  passage,  the
Iter  est  jus  eundi  ambulandi  ho-  right  of  passage  for  beasts  or  vehicles,
minis,  non  etiam  jnmentum  agendi  the  right  of  way,  the  right  of  passage
vel  vehiculum.  Actus  est  jus  agendi  for  water.  The  right  of  passage  is  the
vel  jumentum  vel  vehiculum  :  ita-  right  of  going  or  passing  for  a  man,
que  qui  habet  iter,  actum  non  ha-  not  of  driving  beasts  or  vehicles.  The
bet  ;  qui  actum  habet,  et  iter  habet,  right  of  passage  for  beasts  or  vehicles
eoque  uti  potest  etiam  sine  jumento.  is  the  right  of  driving  beasts  or  vehicles
Via  est  jus  eundi  et  agendi  et  am-  over  the  land  of  another.  So  a  man
bulandi  :  nam  et  iter  et  actum  in  se  who  has  the  right  of  passage  simply
continet  via.  Aquaeductus  est  jus  has  not  the  right  of  passage  for  beasts
aquse  ducendse  per  f  undum  alienum.     or  vehicles  ;  but  if  he  has  the  latter

right  he  has  the  former,  and  he  may
use  the  right  of  passing  without  having
any  beasts  with  him.  The  right  of  way
is  the  right  of  going,  of  driving  beasts
or  vehicles,  and  of  walking  ;  for  the
right  of  way  includes  the  right  of  pas-
sage, and  the  right  of  passage  for  beasts
or  vehicles.  The  right  of  passage  for
water  is  the  right  of  conducting  water
through  the  land  of  another.

D.  viii.  3.  1.

Prandial  servitudes,  that  is,  servitudes  possessed  over  one  im-
moveable in  right  of  having  another  immoveable,  were  divided
into  those  of  rural  and  urban  immoveables  [prcedia  rustica  vel
urhana).  The  distinction  undoubtedly  arose  from  the  one  kind
being  more  common  in  the  country,  the  other  in  the  town.  But
the  distinction,  as  it  was  practically  understood,  soon  lost  the
traces  of  its  origin ;  and  a  servitude  was  said  to  be  that  of  a  rural

118  LIB.  11.      TIT.  III.

immoveable  when  it  was  one  which  affected  the  soil   itself,  and
that  of  an  urban  immoveable  when  it  was  one  which  affected  the
superficies,   that  is,  anything  raised  upon  the   soil.      Servitutes
prcBdiorum  alicE  in  solo,  alicB  in  superjicie  consistunt.   (D.  viii.  1.  3.)
If  the  servitude  was  one  which  afl'ected  the  soil,  and  for  the  enjoy-
ment of  which  the  soil  itself  sufficed,  as,  for  instance,  the  right  to
traverse  another  man's  land,  or  to  draw  water  from  his  spring,  it
made  no  difference  where  the  land  or  the  spring  was  situated.
They  might  be  in  the  heart  of  a  city,  and  yet  the  servitude  was
one  of  a  rural  immoveable.      So,  too,  if  the  servitude  was  one
which  affected   something   built    or  placed  on    the    soil,  as,  for
instance,  the  right  to  place  a  beam  in  another  man's  building ;
although  this  building  was  in  the  country,  the  servitude  was  one
of  an  urban  immoveable.     In  this  paragraph  and  in  paragraph  2,
instances  are  given  of  servitudes  of  rural  immoveables.    The  object
of  the  servitude  iter  Avas  the  power  of  passing  across  land  on  foot
or  horseback,  iter  est  qua  quis  pedes  vel  eques  commeare  potest.
(D.  viii.  3.  12.)     That  of  the  servitude  actus  was  the  power  of
driving  animals  or  vehicles  across  land,  qui  actum  habet,  et  plau-
strum  ducere,  et  jumenta  ogere  potest.    (D.  viii.  3.  7.)     That  of  the
servitude  via  was  the  power  of  using  the  road  in  any  way  what-
ever, as,  for  instance,  of  dragging  stones  or  timber  over  it,  which
he  could  not  do  if  he  had  only  the  actus  (D.  viii.  3.  7);  and  of
having  it,  in  the  absence  of  special  agreement,  of  the  Avidth  pro-
vided by  the  laAv  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  is,  eight  feet  where
it  ran  straio;ht,  and  sixteen  feet  where  it  wound  round  to  chang-e
its  direction,  vice  latitudo  ex  lege   Duodeciw,   Tahularum  in  por-
rectum  octo  pedes  hahet ;  in  anfr actum,  id  est  uhiflexum  est,  sedecim.
(D.  viii.  3.  8.)    Of  course  the  larger  of  these  rights  comprehended
the  smaller ;  if  a  person  had  the  right  of  driving  over  land,  he  had
the  right  of  passing  over  it.     A  special  agreement  might  indeed
be  made  to  the  contrary  :   a  person  might,  for  instance,  grant  the
right  of  driving  beasts,  but  insist  that  the  way  should  never  be
used  except  when  beasts  were  driven.

1.  Prsediorum  urbanorum  servi-  1.  The    servitudes    of    urban    im-

tutes  sunt  quae  sedificiis  inha^rent  :  moveables  are  those  which  apj^ertain  to
ideo  urbanorum  prsediorum  dictje,  buiklmgs,  and  they  are  said  to  be  ser-
quoniam  fediiicia  omnia  urbana  vitudes  of  urban  immoveables,  because
prasdia  appellamus,  etsi  in  villa  we  term  all  edifices  urban  immoveables,
sedificata  sint.  Item  urbanorum  although  really  built  in  the  country,
priediorum  servitutes  sunt  h?e  :  ut  Among  these  servitudes  are  the  follow-
vicinus  onera  vicini  sustineat,  ut  in  ing  :  that  a  person  has  to  support  the
parietem  ejus  liceat  vicino  tigninn  weight  of  the  adjoining  house,  that  a
immittere,  ut  stillicidium  vel  llimien  neighbour  should  have  the  right  of  in-
recipiat  quis  in  sedes  suas  vel  in  aream  serting  a  beam  into  his  wall,  that  he
vel  in  cloacam,  vel  non  recipiat,  et  has  to  receive  or  not  to  receive  the
ne  altius  tollat  quis  sedets  suas,  ne  water  that  drops  from  the  roof,  or  that
luminibus  vicini  othciat.  runs  from  the  gutter  of  another  man's

house  on  to  his  building,  or  into  his
court  or  drain  ;  or  that  he  is  not  to
raise  his  house  higher,  or  not  to  obstruct
his  neighbour's  lights.

D.  viii.  2.  2.

LIE.  II.      TIT.  III.  119

The  words  qu(B  (Bdificiis  inhcBrent  in  the  text,  are  equivalent
to  the  in  super-Jicie  consistunt  of  PauL  (D.  viii.  2.  20.)  The
servitudes  attach  to  some  building  raised  on  the  soil.

Onera  vicini  sustineat. — By  this  servitude  a  wall  or  pillar  of
the  res  serviens  was  obliged  to  support  the  weight  of  the  res
dominans.  The  owner  of  this  wall  or  pillar,  so  long  as  he  remained
owner,  was  bound  to  keep  it  in  good  repair,  so  as  to  continue  to
support  the  weight  safely.  (D.  viii.  5.  6.  2.)  But  the  owner  of
the  wall,  into  which  a  beam  was  let  by  the  servitude  tigni  im-
mittendi,  was  not  compelled  to  repair  the  wall,  in  order  that  the
beam  might  rest  there  safely.     (D.  viii.  5.  8.  2.)

It  is  easy  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  servitudes
stillicidil  vel  fluminis  recipiendi  and  altius  non  toUendi.  By  the
one  the  res  serviens  was  made  to  receive  the  rain-water  of  the
res  dominans,  by  the  other  the  res  serviens  was  prohibited  from
beino;  raised  above  the  res  dominans.  But  in  the  text  we  have
the  servitude  stillicidil  vel  fluniinis  non  recipiendi,  and  in  the
passage  of  the  Digest  (viii.  2.  2),  from  which  much  of  the  text  is
borrowed,  we  read  of  a  servitude  altius  tollendi\  and  it  is  not
very  easy  to  understand  what  these  servitudes  were.  Theophilus,
in  his  paraphrase  of  this  section,  thus  explains  the  former.  Aut
tu  jus  livjusmodi  (\.Q.  stillicidia  tua  in  meas  cedes projiciendi)  hahebas
in  cedes  meas  ;  et  rogavi  te  ne  stillicidia  tua  aut  ranales  in  domum
vel  aream  meam  projiceres.  Thus  it  would  appear  that  the  servi-
tude non  recipiendi  was  an  extinction  of  a  pre-existent  servitude
recipieiidi,  made  in  favour  of  the  owner  of  the  res  serviens.  So,
too,  the  servitude  altius  tollendi  is  explained  to  mean  the  allowing
the  house  of  a  neighbour  to  be  built  above  ours ;  so  that  the
neighbour  who  was  previously  under  a  servitude,  or,  at  any  rate,
of  an  obligation  non  altius  tollendi,  by  the  creation  of  what  may
be  called  a  counter-servitude,  does  away  with  the  impediment  to
his  building  above  our  house.  If  it  were  really  a  servitude,  as  we
should  certainly  suppose  from  the  language  of  Theophilus,  that
was  extinguished  or  nullified  by  this  new  counter-servitude,  it
seems  scarcely  natural  that  this  should  not  be  given  among  the
modes  of  ending  a  servitude,  and  still  more,  that  the  usual  language
of  the  jurists  with  respect  to  the  extinction  of  a  servitude  should
be  departed  from.  The  ordinary  phrase  was,  that  the  thing
affected,  the  res  serviens,  was  freed,  res  liberatur,  and  it  seems  a
very  cumbrous  mode  of  effecting  the  liber  alio  rei  to  create  a  new
servitude,  when  the  object  would  have  been  at  once  accomplished
by  merely  surrendering  the  existing  servitude  to  the  owner  of
the  res  serviens.  The  commentators  are  therefore  driven  to
understand  that  the  right  previously  existing,  that,  namely,  of
having  our  water  flow  into  our  neighbour's  house,  or  of  having
our  neighbour's  house  kept  at  the  level  of  our  own,  was  not  a
servitude,  but  was  given  by  law.  Positive  enactments,  such  as
we  read  of  in  Tac.  Annal,  15.  43  ;  Suet.  Aug.  89 ;  D.  xxxix.
1.  1.  17,  may  have  decided  that  adjoining  houses  should,  in  par-
ticular places,  for  the  mutual  advantage  of  the  owners,  be  cf  the

120  LIB.  II.      TIT.  III.

same  level,  or  pour  off  their  water  on  to  the  adjoining  house,
while  those  persons  who  were  intended  to  be  benefited  might  still
forego  this  advantage,  if  they  pleased  to  allow  of  a  servitude  being
created  to  do  away  with  the  effect  of  the  enactment.  It  must,
however,  be  confessed,  that  no  one  who  reads  the  passages  in
which  enactments  for  the  regulation  of  buildings  are  mentioned,
would  suppose  that  individuals  Avere  ever  allowed  to  infringe
them  by  the  mere  permission  of  their  neighbours.  All  that  we
can  be  quite  sure  of  is,  that  these  servitudes,  which  were  the
contraries  of  other  servitudes,  were  constituted  for  the  benefit
of  the  owner  of  a  thing  that  previously  had  been  under  some
disadvantage.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  words  are  sometimes  used  to  express
servitudes  which  seem  proper  to  the  owner  of  the  res  dominans,
not  to  the  owner  of  the  res  serviens.  Thus,  if  the  above  explana-
tion is  correct,  the  servitus  tollendi  means  the  servitus  patiendl
vicinum  tollere  (see  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.  2),  and  what  is  termed  in  the
text,  as  it  would  seem  more  properly,  the  servitus  stillicidii  reci-
piendi,  is  termed  in  the  Digest  (viii.  2.  2)  the  seinjitus  stillicidii
avertendi.

Ne  luminibus  cfficiat. — There  was  also  a  servitude  termed  the
jus  luminum,  between  which  and  that  ne  luminibus  ojfficiat  the
difference  was  probably  one  of  degree.  The  jus  luminum  pre-
vented a  neighbour  blocking  up  our  lights ;  the  servitude  ne
luminibus  officiat  prevented  his  doing  anything,  whether  by
building,  planting  trees,  or  by  any  other  means,  whereby  the
light  was  in  any  way,  however  slightly,  intercepted  from  our
house.     (D.  viii.' 2.  15.  17.  40.)

2.  In  rusticorum.  prpediorum  ser-  2.  Some  think  that  among  the  ser-
vitutes  qiiidam  computari  recte  pu-  vitudes  of  rural  estates  are  rightly
tantaqii8ehaustum,pecorisadaquam  included  the  right  of  drawing  water,
adpulsum,  jus  pascendi,  calcis  co-  of  watering  cattle,  of  feeding  cattle,
quendse,  arente  fodiendae.  of  burning  lime,  of  digging  sand.

D.  viii.  3.  1.  1.

There  are  many  servitudes,  both  of  rural  and  of  urban  im-
moveables, mentioned  in  the  Digest,  besides  those  given  as
examples  in  the  Institutes.

3.  Ideo  autem  hse  servitutes  prse-  3.  These  servitudes  are  called  the
diorum  appellantur,  quoniam  sine  servitudes  of  immoveables,  because
prsediis  constitui  non  possunt :  nemo  they  cannot  exist  without  immove-
enim  potest  servitutem  adquirere  abies.  For  no  one  can  acquire  or
urbani  vel  rustici  prsedii,  nisi  qui  owe  a  servitude  of  a  rural  or  urban
habet  pr^edium  ;  nee  quisquam  de-  immoveable,  unless  he  has  an  im-
bere,  nisi  qui  habet  praedium.  moveable  belonging  to  him.

D.  viii.  4.  1.  1.

The  nature  of  most  servitudes  of  urban  immoveables  demanded
that  the  immoveable  over  which,  and  the  immoveable  in  right  of
which,  the  servitude  was  exercised,  should  be  contiguous :  but
when   the   servitude  was  one  of  rural  immoveables,  the  yrcBdia

LIB.  II.      TIT.  III.  121

need  not  necessarily  be  near  together.  Still,  however,  a  servitude
was  not  permitted  to  exist  which  was  useless  to  its  owner ;  and  a
person  could  not  have  a  right  of  way,  for  instance,  over  the  land
of  another,  if  he  was  prevented  from  using  the  way  by  land,  over
which  he  had  no  servitude,  lying  between  his  land  and  that  over
which  the  servitude  was  to  be  exercised.     (D.  viii.  1.  14.  2.)

There  was  another  difference  between  the  servitudes  of  rural
and  urban  immoveables.  The  latter  w^ere,  for  the  most  part,  used
continuously,  the  former  only  at  times.  The  beam,  for  instance,
always  rested  in  the  wall ;  there  was  no  moment  in  which  the
owner  of  the  res  serviens  was  not  prohibited  from  blocking  up  his
neighbour's  lights.  But  the  way  was  not  always  being  used,
nor  were  cattle  always  being  watered  (D.  viii.  1.  14);  and  this
difference  was  productive  of  very  important  results.  For  instance,
servitudes  might  be  lost  by  not  being  used ;  but  as  the  servitudes
of  most  urban  immoveables  were  by  their  nature  perpetually  used,
they  were  preserved  without  their  owner  taking  any  trouble  to
preserve  them,  and  possessory  rights  could  be  acquired  in  them,
which,  with  a  few  exceptions,  could  not  be  acquired  in  servitudes
whose  usage  was  not  continuous.     (D.  viii.  2.  20.)

4.   Si  quis  velit  vicino  aliquod  jus  4.   If  any  one  wishes   to  create  a

constituere,  pactionibus  atque  stipu-  right  of  this  sort  in  favour  of  his
lationibus  id  efficere  debet.  Potest  neighbour,  he  must  effect  it  by  agree-
etiam  in  testamento  quis  heredem  ments  and  stipulations.  A  person  can
suum  damnare,  ne  altius  tollat  sedes  also,  by  testament,  oblige  his  heir  not
suas,  ne  luminibus  gedium  vicini  offi-  to  raise  his  house  higher,  not  to  ob-
ciat,  vel  ut  patiatur  eum  tignum  in  struct  a  neighbour's  lights,  to  permit
parietem  immittere  vel  stillicidium  a  neighbour  to  insert  a  beam  into  his
habere,  vel  ut  patiatur  eum  per  fun-  wall,  or  to  receive  the  water  from  an
dum  ire,  agere,  aquamve  ex  eo  adjoining  roof;  or,  again,  he  may
ducere.  oblige  his  heir  to  allow  a  neighbour

to  go  across  his  land,  or  to  drive
beasts  or  vehicles,  or  to  conduct  water
across  it.

Gai.  ii.  31 ;  D.  viii.  4.  16.

Gains  tells  us  (ii.  29),  that  servitutes  prcBdiorum  rusticorum
were  among  res  mancipi  (see  Introd.  sec.  59),  while  servitutes
prcEdiorum  urbanorn,m  were  not,  and  that  the  former  were  con-
stituted by  mancipatio ;  the  latter,  as  well  as  personal  servitudes,
were  constituted  by  the  process  termed  in  jure  cessio.  (See  in-
troductory note  to  this  Book.)  But  these  modes  of  constituting
servitudes  were  only  applicable  to  the  solum  Italicum :  in  the
provincial  lands,  where  there  was  no  legal  ownership  at  all,  no
ownership  of  servitudes  could  be  given.  But  Gains  says,  that  if
any  one  wished  to  create  a  servitude  over  provincial  prcsdia,  he
could  effect  it  pactionibus  et  stipulationibus ,  using  the  words  of  the
text.  The  parties  agreed  to  constitute  the  servitude,  and  this
agreement  (pactio)  was  generally,  perhaps  almost  always,  folloAved
by  a  stipulation  or  solemn  contract  fsee  Introd.  sec.  83),  by  which
the  person  who  permitted  the  servitude  to  be  constituted  over  his

122  LIB.  II.      TIT.  III.

prcEdiitm,  bound  himself  to  allow  of  the  exercise  of  the  right,  by
subjecting  himself  to  a  penalty  in  case  of  refusal.  (See  Theophil.
Paraphrase  of  Text.)  When  the  right  had  been  once  exercised,
and  the  owner  of  the  servitude  had  thus  the  quasi-possessio  of  the
servitude,  the  praitor  secured  him  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  right  by
granting  him  possessory  interdicts  (see  Introd.  sec.  107,  and  note
on  introductory  section  of  Title  6  of  this  Book),  and  also  per-
mitted him,  if  the  servitude  afterwards  passed  out  of  his  quasi-
possessio,  to  bring  an  action  to  claim  it,  called  the  actio  publiciana,
by  which  a  bona  fide  possessor  was  allowed  to  represent  himself
fictitiously  as  a  dominus,  and  to  claim  (yindicare)  a  thing  as  if  he
were  the  owner.  In  all  probability  the  same  mode  of  constituting
servitudes  obtained  also  with  reo^ard  to  the  solum  Italicum :
although  there  were  proper  and  peculiar  modes  of  constituting
servitudes  over  prcedia  Italica,  yet  if  an  agreement  and  stipula-
tion were  followed  by  quasi-possessio,  the  praetor  would  protect
the  quasi-p assessor.  And  hence  it  was  said  that  servitudes  were  ,
constituted  ^z^re  preetorio  and  were  maintained  tuitione  prcEtoris.

Modern  writers  on  Roman  law  are  much  divided  in  opinion
whether  servitudes  were  really  constituted  pactionihus  atque  sti-
pulationihus ,  by  agreements    and   stipulations   alone,  or  whether
we  are  always   to  understand   that  to  perfect  the  title,  what  is
termed  quasi-troditio  was  necessary.   That  is,  whether,  as  traditio
was  necessary  to  transfer  the  property  in  a  corporeal  thing,  so  it
was  necessary,  in  order  to  transfer  the  property  in  an  incorporeal
thing,  that  the  person  to  whom  it  was  transferred  should  be  placed
in  the  legal  quasi-possession  of  his  right.     If  the  servitude  was
a  positive  one,  it  is  very  easy  to   see  how  this  quasi-possession
could    be  established ;  for  directly  the   right  was  exercised  with
the  animus  possidendi,  and   permitted  to  be  so  exercised  by  the
owner  of  the  res  servieris,  the  person  in  favour  of  whom  the  ser-
vitude was  constituted  would    have    the   quasi-possession.     But
when  the  servitude  was  a  negative  one,  when  the  owner  of  the
res  serviens  was  merely  bound  not  to  do  something,  the  only  evi-
dent mode  by  which  possession  could  be  said  to  be  gained  was,
when  the    owner  of   the    res  dominans    successfully  resisted    an
attempt  of  the  owner  of  the  res  sei^viens  to  do  the  thing  which  he
was   bound   by  the  servitude  not  to  do.     But  as  the  exercise  of
the  right   given  by  a  positive  servitude  was  an  act  evident  and
cognisable  by  all  whom  it  concerned,  it  is  with  regard  to  positive
servitudes  that  the  question  is   principally  debated,  whether  the
exercise  of  the  right  was  an  indispensable  part  of  the  right  being
constituted.    On  the  whole,  it  seems  the  better  opinion  that  quasi-
tradition  was  a  necessary  part  of  the  constitution  of  a  servitude.

Mancipation  and  iji  jure  cessio  were  quite  obsolete  in  the
time  of  Justinian.  We  have  two  modes  given  in  the  text  by
which  servitudes  might  be  constituted  under  his  legislation  ;  pac-
tionihus atque  stipulationibus,  i.e.  agreements,  whether  followed
or  not  by  a  stipulation,  and  testamento.     When  given  testamentOf

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IV.  123

a  servitude  might  be  given  directly  to  the  legatee  equally  well  as
by  condemning  the  heir  to  transfer  it  to  him,  both  modes,  in
the  time  of  Justinian,  having  exactly  the  same  effect.  To  these
modes  must  be  added:  1.  That  adjudicationey  \\'\\Qn  a  judge
awarded  the  property  in  a  servitude  under  the  actions  faniilicE
ercisciindcB  and  comniuni  dividundo.  (See  Introd.  sec.  103  ;  D.  x.
2.  22.  3.)  2.  That  of  reserving  the  servitude  in  making  a  tradi-
tio  of  the  rest  of  the  property,  when  it  Avas  in  fact  constituted  by
having  all  the  other  jura  in  rem  separated  from  it,  instead  of,  as
usual,  being  itself  separated  from  the  rest.  3.  Lastly,  the  possessor
who  had  had  a  long  quasi-possession  of  a  servitude  was  pro-
tected in  it.  The  usucapion  of  servitudes,  which  perhaps  existed
previously,  was  forbidden  by  the  lex  Scrihonia.  (a.u.C.  720  ;  D.
xli.  3.  4.  29.)  But  a  long  bona  fide  possession  was  protected  by
praetorian  actions  and  interdicts.  Traditio  plane  et  patientia  servi-
tutum  inducet  officium  prcBtoris.  (D.  viii.  1.  20;  D.  viii.  3.  12.)  This,
perhaps,  principally  applied  to  servitudes  urhanorum.  prcEdioriim,
for  these  only  were  capable  of  a  continuous  exercise  [servittites
qucB  in  superficie  consistunt, possessione  retinentur),  (D.  viii.  2.  20.)
But  there  were  particular  servitudes  rusticorum  prcedinrum,  long
usage  of  which  gave  rights  which  were  protected-  Among  these
were  the  jus  aqucB  ducendce  (D.  viii.  5.  10),  the  jua  itineris,  and
the  jus  actus.  (D.  viii.  6.  25.)  The  possessor  had  to  show  that
his  possession  had  been  neither  vi,  clam,  nor  precario  ;  but  had  not
to  show  any  good  title  for  possession.  (D.  viii.  5.  10.)  What  was
the  length  of  time  requisite-  for  the  possessor  to  have  exercised
the  right  is  not  certain ;  although  it  may  be  conjectured  to  have
been  the  same  as  for  the  longi  temporis  possessio  of  provincial
lands,  i.e.  ten  years  for  those  present  and  twenty  for  the  absent.
If  land  was  acquired  by  usucapion,  the  servitudes  that  went  with
it  were  also  acquired  in  the  same  way  (D.  xli.  3.  10.  1),  and
if  a  servitude  had  been  lost  by  non-usage,  it  could,  or  at  any  rate
some  servitudes  could,  be  regained  by  two  years'  usucapion.
(Paul.  Sent.  i.  27.  2.)

Tit.  IY.  DE  USUFRUCTU.

Ususfructus  est  jus  alienis  rebus  Usufruct  is  the  right  of  using,  and

utendi  fruendi,  salva  rerum  sub-  taking  the  fruits  of  things  belonging
stantia  :  est  enim  jus  in  corpore,  quo  to  others,  so  long  as  the  substance  of
sublato  et  ipsum  tolli  necesse  est.  the  things  used  remains.     It  is  a  right

over  a  corporeal  thing,  and  if  this
thing  perish,  the  usufruct  itself  neces-
sarily perishes  also.

D.  vii.  1.  1,  2.

We  now  pass  to  personal  servitudes,  those,  namely,  which
consist  of  a.  jus  in  rem,  i.e.  one  portion  of  the  dominium  being  de-
tached from  the  rest  for  the  benefit  of  a  person.  Personal  servi-
tudes differed  from  real  in  being  applicable  to  moveables  as  well

124  LIB.  II,      TIT.  IV.

as  to  immoveables  ;  and  the  personal  servitude  ususfructus  was
divisible,  that  is,  some  of  the  fruits  included  in  the  servitude
might  be  parted  with,  although  the  servitude  usus  was,  like  real
servitudes,  indivisible.

The  person  to  whom  the  ususfructus  was  given  had  two  rights
iinited  ;  he  had  the  jus  utendi,  that  is,  the  right  of  making  every
possible  use  of  the  thing  apart  from  consuming  it  or  from  taking
the  fruits  of  it,  as,  for  instance,  the  right  of  living  in  a  house  or
employing  beasts  of  burden  ;  and  he  had  also  the  jus  fruendi,  the
right  of  taking  all  the  fruits  of  the  thing  over  which  the  servi-
tude was  constituted.  The  definition  of  fructus  is  quicquid  in
fundo  nascitur  (D.  vii.  59.  1),  that  is,  the  ordinary  produce,  but
not  accidental  accessions  or  auo-mentations,  such  as  a  treasure  I
found  (D.  xxiv.  3.  7.  12)  or  islands  formed  in  a  river.

He  mio;ht  sell,  or  let,  or  give  his  rio-ht  of  takinii:  the  fruits  to
another,  and  the  profits  he  thence  derived  were  termed  his  fructus
civiles.  (D.  vii.  1.  12.  2.)  It  was  only  such  of  the  fructus  as
were  actually  taken  or  gathered  by  him,  or  those  acting  under
him,  that  belonged  to  him ;  and  no  fruits  which  were  not  gathered
at  the  time  of  his  death  passed  to  his  heir.  He  was  obliged  to
give  security,  on  entering  on  the  exercise  of  his  right,  that  he
would  use  his  right  as  a  good  paterfamilias,  and  give  up,  at  the
time  when  his  right  expired,  the  possession  of  the  thing.  (D.  vii.
9.  1.)  We  have  had  an  instance  of  what  was  meant  by  using
his  right  as  a  good  paterfamilias  in  paragr.  38  of  Tit.  1,  where  it
is  said  that  he  is  bound  to  replace  dead  sheep  and  dead  trees.
He  was  also  bound  not  to  alter  the  nature  of  the  thing  over  which
the  right  extended ;  he  could  not,  for  instance,  build  on  land
unbuilt  on,  or  change  the  use  to  Avhich  land  was  specially  des-
tined. (D.  vii.  1.  7.  1  ;  D.  viii.  13.  4.)  And  it  is  with  reference
to  this  that  the  words  salva  rerum  suhstantia,  in  the  text,  are
sometimes  understood,  so  that  the  sentence  would  mean,  usufruct
is  the  right  of  using  and  taking  the  fruits  of  things  belonging  to
another,  but  so  as  not  to  alter  the  substance.  Ulpian  (Reg.  24.  26)
certainly  uses  the  words  salva  rerum  substantia  in  a  sense  very
similar  ;  but  the  concluding  words  of  the  section  make  it  more
natural  to  understand  salva  rerum  substantia  as  referrino;  here  to
the  duration  of  the  usufruct.  It  lasts  as  lono^  as  the  thino^  over
which  it  is  constituted  remains  unaltered ;  for  if  the  thing  perishes,
the  usufruct  perishes.  The  two  sentences  of  this  section  are  taken
without  alteration  from  the  Digest,  but  are  from  different  authors,
the  first  being  from  Paul,  the  latter  from  Celsus.  (D.  vii.  1.  1,  2.)
Very  probably  Paul  did  not  use  the  words  salva  rerum  substantia
with  reference  to  the  duration  of  the  servitudes ;  but  the  com-
pilers of  the  Institutes  saw  that,  if  they  were  used  in  this  sense,
the  two  sentences  would  cohere  together.

1.   Ususfructus  a  proprietate  se-  1.   The  usufruct  is  detached  from

parationem  recipit,  idque  pluribus  the  property  ;  and  this  separation  takes
jnodis  accidit  :  ut  ecce,  si  quis  usum-     place  in  many  ways  ;  for  example,  if

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IV.

125

fructum  aliciii  leg<averit,  nam  lieres
nudam  habet  proprietatem,  legata-
rius  iisiimfriictiim  ;  et  contra,  si  fiin-
dmn  legaverit  deducto  iisufructu,
legatarins  nudam  ^  habet  proprieta-
tem, heres  vero  usiimfructum.  Item
alii  iisumfructum,  alii  deducto  eo
fundum  legare  potest.  Sine  testa-
mento  vero  si  quis  velit  usumfructum
alii  constituere,  pactionibus  et  stipu-
lationibus  id  efficere  debet.  Ne
tamen  in  universum  inutiles  essent
proprietates  semper  abscedente  usu-
fructu,  placuit  certis  modis  extingui
usumfructum  et  ad  proprietatem
reverti.

the  usufruct  is  given  to  any  one  as  a
legacy  ;  for  the  heir  has  then  the  bare
ownership,  and  the  legatee  has  the
usufruct ;  conversely,  if  the  estate  is
given  as  a  legacy,  subject  to  the  de-
duction of  the  usufruct,  the  legatee
has  the  bare  ownership,  and  the  heir
has  the  usufruct.  Again,  the  usufruct
may  be  given  as  a  legacy  to  one  person,
and  the  estate  minus  this  usufruct
may  be  given  to  another.  If  any  one
wishes  to  constitute  a  usufruct  other-
v/ise  than  by  testament,  he  must  effect
it  by  pacts  and  stipulations.  But,  lest
the  property  should  be  rendered  wholly
profitless  by  the  usufruct  being  for  ever
detached,  it  has  been  thought  right
that  there  should  be  certain  ways  in
which  the  usufruct  should  become  ex-
tinguished, and  revert  to  the  property.

D.  vii.  1.  6  ;  D.  xxxii.  2.  19  ;  D.  vii.  1.  3,  pr.  and  2.

We  may  refer  to  what  we  have  said  in  the  note  to  the  fourth
section  of  the  last  Title  for  the  modes  in  which  usufructs  were
acquired.  In  the  time  of  Justinian  they  were  constituted,  1,  by
testament;  2,  by  agreements  followed  by  quasi-tradition ;  3,  by
being  reserved  in  an  alienation  of  the  nuda  proprietas  ;  4,  by  adju-
dication; and  also,  lastly,  lege,  by  express  enactment,  an  instance
of  Avhich  we  have  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  ninth  Title  of  this
Book,  where  it  is  said  that,  under  Justinian's  legislation,  the  father
acquired  the  usufruct  of  his  son's  peculium  ;  5,  whether  they  could
be  acquired  by  usucapion  is  not  certain — probably  they  could.

It  will  be  observed  that,  in  putting  the  third  case  of  gift  of
usufruct  by  testament,  that,  namely,  in  which  the  usufruct  is
given  to  one  legatee,  the  nuda  j)roprietas  to  another,  the  gift  to
the  latter  is  expressed  by  the  words  fundum  deducto  usufructu.
The  Digest  (xxxiii.  2.  19)  explains  why  the  words  deducto  usu-
fructu should,  in  such  a  case,  be  carefully  added  to  a  gift  of  the
fundus ;  for  if  they  were  not,  the  second  legatee  would  be
treated  as  having  the  nuda  proprietas.  and  also  as  having  a  joint
interest  in  the  usufruct  with  the  first  legatee.

2.  Constituitur  autem  ususfructus
non  tantum  in  fundo  et  ajdibus,  ve-
rum  etiam  in  servis  et  jumentis
ceterisque  rebus,  exceptis  iis  quae
ipso  usu  consumuntur  ;  nam  hse  res
neque  naturali  ratione  neque  civili
recipiunt  usumfructum.  Quo  nu-
mero  sunt  vinum,  oleum,  frumen-
tum,  vestimenta  :  quibus  proxima
est  pecunia  numerata,  namque  ipso
usu  assidua  permutatione  quodam-
modo  extinguitur.  Sed  utilitatis
causa  senatus  censuit  posse  etiam
earum   rerum  usumfructum  consti-

2.  A  usufruct  may  be  constituted
not  only  of  lands  and  buildings,  but
also  of  slaves,  of  beasts  of  burden,  and
everything  else  except  those  which  are
consumed  by  being  used,  for  they  are
susceptible  of  a  usufruct  neither  by
natural  nor  by  civil  law.  Among  these
things  are  wine,  oil,  garments,  and  we
may  almost  say  coined  money  ;  for  it,
too,  is  in  a  manner  consumed  by  use,  as
it  continually  passes  from  hand  to  hand.
But  the  senate,  thinking  such  a  mea-
sure would  be  useful,  has  enacted  that
a  usufruct  even  of  these  things  maj''

126

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IV.

tui,  ut  tamen  eo  nomine  lieredi
utiliter  caveatur.  Itaque  si  pecu-
niae ususfructus  legatus  sit,  ita  datur
legatario  ut  ejus  fiat,  et  legatarius
satisdet  heredi  de  tanta  pecunia
restituenda,  si  morietur  aut  capite
minuetur.  Ceterae  quoque  res  ita
traduntur  legatario  ut  ejus  fiant  ;
sed  sBstimatis  his  satisdatur,  ut  si
morietur  aut  capite  minuetur,  tanta
pecunia  restituatur  quanti  hse  f  uerint
sestimatse.  Ergo  senatus  non  fecit
quidem  earum  rerum  usumfructum
(nee  enim  poterat),  sed  per  cautio-
nem  quasi  usumfructum  constituit.

be  constituted,  if  sufficient  security  be
given  to  the  heir  ;  and  therefore,  if  the
usufruct  of  money  is  given  to  a  legatee,
the  money  is  considered  to  be  given  to
him  in  complete  ownership  ;  but  he
has  to  give  security  to  the  heir  for  the
repayment  of  an  equal  sum  in  the
event  of  his  death  or  his  undergoing  a
capitis  deminutio.  All  other  things,
too,  of  the  same  kind  are  delivered
to  the  legatee  so  as  to  become  his
property  ;  but  their  value  is  estimated
and  security  is  given  for  the  payment
of  the  amount  at  which  they  are
valued,  in  the  event  of  the  legatee
dying  or  undergoing  a  capitis  demi-
nutio. The  senate  has  not  then,  to
speak  strictly,  created  a  usufruct  of
these  things,  for  that  was  impossible,
but,  by  requiring  security,  has  esta-
blished a  right  analogous  to  a  usufruct.

D.  vii.  1.  3.  1 ;  D.  vii.  5.  1.  3  ;  D.  vii.  5.  2,  pr.  and  1  ;  D.  vii.  5.  7.

Properly  only  things  quce  in  usu  non  consumuntur  could  be  the
subject  of  a  servitude  which  consisted  in  using  things  only  for  a
time  ;  but  as  things  qucB  usu  consumuntur,  things  that  perish  in
the  using,  are  things  that  may  for  the  most  part  be  easily  replaced
by  similar  things  of  an  equal  quantity  and  quality,  the  senatus
consultum  alluded  to  in  the  text  (the  date  of  which  is  uncertain,
but  is  probably  not  later  than  Augustus)  permitted  that  things
(]U(B  usu  consumuntur  should  be  made  subject  to  a  kind  of  usu-
fruct by  which  they  might  be  consumed  at  once,  and  then,  on  an
event  occurring  by  which  a  real  usufruct  would  have  expired,
that  is,  the  death  or  capitis  deminutio  of  the  usufructuary,  they
were  to  be  replaced  by  similar  things,  or,  what  effected  the  same
object  in  a  different  way,  their  pecuniary  value  was  estimated  on
the  commencement  of  this  quasi-usufruct,  as  it  is  termed,  and  paid
at  its  expiration.  Ulpian  gives  the  following  as  the  terms  of  the
senatus  consultum :  Ut  omnium  rerum,  qucB  in  cujuscjue  patrimonio
esse  constaret,  ususfructus  legari  possit.      (D.  vii.  5.  1.)

It  will  be  observed  that  the  text  includes  garments,  vesti-
menta,  among  things  of  which  there  was  only  a  quasi-usufruct,
whereas  the  Digest  twice  speaks  of  them  as  things  of  which  there
was  a  real  usufruct.  (D.  vii.  1.  15.  4;  vii.  9.  9.  3.)  They  were,
in  fact,  one  or  the  other  according  as  it  was  the  garments  or  their
value  that  was  to  be  given  to  the  owner  of  the  nuda  proprietas
at  the  end  of  the  usufruct,  and  this  might  depend  on  the  intention
of  the  parties  or  the  nature  of  the  materials.

Satisdatur.  The  usufructuary  not  only  guaranteed  by  a  sti-
pulation the  replacement  of  the  things  or  the  payinent  of  their
value,  but  he  procured  a  surety  {Jidtjussor^  to  guarantee  it  also.

3.     Finitur     autem     ususfructus  3.   The  usufruct  terminates  by  the

moite  fructuarii,   et  duabus  capitis     death    of    the   usufructuary,    by   two

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IV.  127

deminutionibus,  maxima  et  media,  kinds  of  capitis  deminutio,  namely,
et  noil  iitendo  j)er  modum  et  tern-  the  greatest  and  the  middle,  and  also
pus  :  qiiffi  omnia  nostra  statuit  con-  by  not  being  used  according  to  the
stitutio.  Item  finitur  ususfructus,  manner  and  during  the  time  fixed  ;
si  domino  proprietatis  ab  usufruc-  all  which  jwints  have  been  decided
tuario  cedatur  (nam  cedendo  extra-  by  our  constitution.  The  usufruct  is
neo  nihil  agit)  ;  vel  ex  contrario  si  also  terminated  if  the  usufructuary
fructuarius  proprietatem  rei  acqui-  surrenders  it  to  the  owner  of  the  pro-
sierit,  quae  res  consolidatio  appel-  perty  (a  cession  to  a  stranger  would
latur.  Eo  amplius  constat,  si  sedes  not  have  this  effect)  ;  or,  again,  by  the
incendio  consumptce  fuerint,  vel  usufructuary  acquiring  the  property,
etiam  terrae  motu  aut  vitio  suo  cor-  which  is  called  consolidation.  Again,
ruerint,  extingui  usumfructum,  et  ne  if  a  building  is  consumed  by  fire,  or
area3  quidem  usumfructum  deberi.         thrown   down   by    an   earthquake,   or

falls  through  decay,  the  usufruct  of  it
is  necessarily  destroyed,  nor  does  there
remain  any  usufruct  due  even  of  the
soil  on  which  it  stood.

C.  iii.  33.  16,  pr.  and  1,  2  ;  Gat.  ii.  33.

The  text  points  out  five  ways  in  which  the  usufruct  would
terminate.  1.  By  the  death  or  capitis  deminutio  of  the  usufruc-
tuary. If  the  usufruct  belonged  to  a  city  or  corporation  which
could  not  die,  it  lasted  for  a  hundred  years,  as  being  the  extreme
length  of  the  duration  of  human  life.  (D.  vii.  1.  b^.^  Previously
to  Justinian  the  minima  capitis  deminutio  extinguished  a  usufruct
(Paul.  Sent.  iii.  6.  29),  because  the  person  who  underwent  it
was  not  the  same  person  in  the  eyes  of  the  law  after  uridergoing
it  as  he  Avas  before;  he  commenced  a  new  existence.  Justinian
altered  the  law  in  this  respect  (C.  iii.  33.  16),  and  he  also  decided
a  question  which  had  divided  the  jurists,  whether  a  usufruct  ac-
quired by  a  slave  or  2i  Jiliusfamilias  terminated  on  the  death  of  the
slave,  or  death  or  capitis  deminutio  of  the  son,  or  whether  it  re-
mained for  the  benefit  of  the  master  or  father.  He  decided  that  it
should  remain  until  the  master's  or  father's  natural  or  civil  death,
and  further,  that  in  the  case  of  Si^liusfamilias, it  should  also  continue
for  his  benefit  after  his  father's  death  ;  so  that  the  father  had  the
usufruct  for  his  life,  and  then  the  son,  if  he  survived  the  father,
had  it  for  his  life.     (C.  iii.  33.  16.  17.)

2.  Non  utendo  per  modum  et  tempus.  Secondly,  the  usu-
fructuary might  lose  the  usufruct  by  not  using  it  in  the  way  agreed
on  by  the  parties  during  the  time  fixed  by  laAv.  The  usufructuary
might,  for  instance,  have  the  use  of  2i  fundus  for  the  summer,  and
if  he  used  it  only  during  the  winter  he  would  not  use  the  usufruct  of
xhefundusm  the  way  it  was  given  him,  and  this  was  e{iuivalent  to
not  using  it  at  all ;  and  if  he  did  not  exercise  his  right  at  any
period  previous  to  the  time  fixed  by  law  as  that  when  the  usu-
fruct became  extinct  by  non-usage,  his  right  was  gone.  This  time
was,  under  the  old  law,  one  year  when  the  usufruct  affected
moveables,  and  two  years  when  the  usufruct  affected  immoveables.
If  this  period  elapsed  without  the  right  being  exercised,  the
owner  of  the  nuda  proprietas  gained  the  usufruct  by  usucapicm.
Justinian    altered  this  by  fixing    three    years    as    the    time    for

1 28  LIB.  JI.      TIT.  IV.

moveables,  and  ten  or  twenty  years  for  immoveables,  according  as
the  person  affected  was  present  or  absent.  (See  Tit.  6.  1.)  The
usufructuary  was  ])laced  so  far  in  the  position  of  an  owner  of  a
thing,  that  it  recjuired  the  same  length  of  time  to  make  him  lose
the  usufruct  as  it  did  to  make  the  owner  lose  the  property.  Hence
it  is  said  in  the  Code  (iii.  33.  16.  1)  that  he  was  not  to  lose  the
usufruct  unless  talis  exceptio  (i.e.  of  usucapion)  usufructuario
opponatur,  quce  etiairi  si  dominium  vindicabat,  poterat  eurn
prcBsentem  vel  ahsentem  excludere.

Non-usage  and  the  minima  capitis  deminutio  only  aifected
rights  already  commenced  ;  and  in  order  to  avoid  their  effects  the
usufruct  was  often  given  by  legacy  in  singulos  annos,  vel  menses,
vel  dies,  Asa  new  usufruct  thus  began  each  year,  month,  or  day,
there  could  be  no  non-usao;e  for  a  lono-er  time  than  the  duration
of  each  usufruct,  and  the  minima  capitis  deminutio  only  affected
the  usufruct  existing  at  the  time  it  was  undergone.  (D.  vii.  4.  1.  1. )

3.  Si  domino  cedatur.  Thirdly,  the  usufruct  was  lost  if  it
w^as  surrendered  to  the  owner  of  the  nuda  proprietas.  The  words
cedatur  and  cedendo  belong,  in  the  passage  of  Gains  from  which
this  part  of  the  section  is  taken,  to  the  injure  cessio,  the  fictitious
suit  by  which  personal  servitudes  were  given  up  in  the  time  of
Gains.  This  mode  of  giving  up  servitudes  to  the  dominus  being
obsolete,  less  technical  words  would  be  more  appropriate  in  the
text.  The  usufructuary  could  not  transfer  the  usufruct  to  another,
because  the  usufruct  attached  to  him  personally,  and  was  to
terminate  by  his  death  or  capitis  deminutio,  and  not  by  that  of  a
stranofer.  He  could  allow  another  to  exercise  his  riixht  of  takin»;
the  fruits  until  he  himself  died  or  lost  the  servitude,  but  this  did
not  make  that  person  the  owner  of  the  usufruct.

4.  5.  The  two  other  modes  by  which  a  usufruct  might  be  lost,
viz.  consolidatio,  w^hen  the  usufruct  was  extinguished,  quia  res  sua
nemini  servit,  and  the  thing  being  consumed,  that  is,  either  really
perishing,  or  having  its  substantia  altered,  need  no  explanation.

Of  course,  if  a  usufruct  was  made  conditionally,  or  for  a  limited
time,  it  expired  when  the  condition  was  accomplished  or  the  time
ended.

Apart  from  the  modes  of  extinction  by  death  and  minima
capitis  deminutio  peculiar  to  ususfructus  and  usus^  servitudes
generally  w^ere  extinguished  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  particular
servitude  of  usufruct,  viz.  :  1 .  By  the  destruction  of  the  thing —
the  res  dominans  or  the  res  serviens.  2.  By  the  same  person
becoming  owner  of  the  res  dominans  and  the  res  serviens,  or,  in
case  of  personal  servitudes,  of  the  remainder  of  the  proprietas  and
the  servitude.  3.  The  termination  (1)  of  the  rights  under  which
the  servitude  is  created,  as  of  an  heir  holding  till  a  condition  is
fulfilled  creates  a  servitude ;  the  condition  being  fulfilled  and  the
heir  ceasing  to  be  owner,  the  servitude  is  at  an  end  ;  (2)  of  the.
period  during  which  the  duration  of  the  servitude  has  been  limited!
by  the  creator.     4.  Lastly,  by  non-usage,  there  being,  however.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  V.  129

a  remarkable  difference  in  this  respect  between  servitudes  rusti-
corum  prcEdiorum  and  servitudes  urhanorum  prcediorum  ;  for  as  the
possession  of  the  former  was  not  continuous,  that  is,  the  right  was
not  always  being  exercised,  the  mere  non-usage  of  the  right
during  the  time  fixed  by  law  extinguished  it ;  but  as  the  possession
of  the  servitudes  urhanorum  -prcBdiorum  was  continuous,  it  was
necessary  that  the  owner  of  the  res  serviens  should  do  something
to  break  the  possession,  or,  as  it  was  termed  by  the  jurist,  usucapere
libertatem  (D.  viii.  2.  6),  i.e.  to  commence  the  liberation  of  the
res  serviens,  as,  for  instance,  to  turn  a  stiUicidium  away  from  his
premises  ;  and  if  this  was  acquiesced  in  during  the  time  fixed
by  law,  that  is,  two  years  before  Justinian,  and,  after  the  changes
introduced  by  Justinian,  ten  or  twenty  years  according  as  the
parties  were  or  were  not  in  the  same  province,  the  owner  of  the
res  dominans  could  not  afterwards  claim  his  servitude.

4.  Cum  autem  finitus  fiierit  usiis-  4.  When  the  usufruct  is  entirely

fructus,  revertitur  scilicet   ad  pro-  extinguished,  it  is  reunited  to  the  pro-

prietatem,  et  ex  eo  tempore   nudse  perty  ;  and  the  person  who  had  the

proprietatis  dominus  incipit  plenam  bare  ownership,  begins  thenceforth  to

in  re  habere  potestatem.  have  full  power  over  the  thing.

Some  texts  have  finitus  faerit  totus  ususfructus ;  for  as  the
usufruct  was  divisible,  portions  of  it  might  exist,  and  yet  other
portions  have  reverted  to  the  owner  of  the  nvda  proprietas.  It
may  be  remarked  that  if.  two  persons  had  a  joint  interest  in  the
same  usufruct,  and  the  usufruct  was  divided  between  them,  when
one  died,  his  share  went,  not  to  the  owner  of  the  nuda  pro-
prietas, but  to  his  coproprietor.     (D.  vii.  2.  1.)

Tit.  y.     DE  USU  ET  HABITATIONE.

lisdem  istis  modis  quibus  usus-  The  naked   use  is  constituted   by

fructus    constituitur,    etiam    nudus  the  same  means  as  the  usufruct  ;  and

usus  constitui  solet  ;  iisdemque  illis  is  terminated  by  the  same  means  that

modis  finitur,  quibus  et  ususfructus  make  the  usufruct  to  cease.
desinit.

D.  vii.  1.  3.  3.

The  use  was  a  portion  of  the  usufruct.  The  person  to  whom
this  right  was  given  could  use  the  thing,  but  not  take  any  of  its
fruits.  He  had  the  nudus  usus  (D.  vii.  8.  1),  the  bare  use  of  the
thing,  and  enjoyed  all  the  advantages  he  could  obtain  from  the
use ;  but  he  could  avail  himself  of  nothing  which  the  thing  pro-
duced. He  could  not,  like  the  usufructuary,  let,  sell,  or  give  the
exercise  of  his  right,  for  he  was  excluded  from  taking  what  were
termed  y)'wc^M5  civiles,  as  much  as  from  taking  fructus  naturales.
The  jurists,  however,  modified  in  some  degree  the  rigour  of  this
principle ;  and  the  owner  of  the  use  was  allowed,  in  cases  where
the  right  would  otherwise  have  produced  no  benefit  whatever,  or
where  it  seemed  right  to  put  a  favourable  interpretation  on  the

130

LIB.  II.      TIT.  V.

1.  The  right  of  use  is  less  extensive
than  that  of  usufruct  ;  for  he  who
has  the  naked  use  of  lands,  has  no-
thing more  than  the  right  of  taking
herbs,  fruit,  flowers,  hay,  straw,  and
wood,  sufficient  for  his  daily  supply.
He  is  permitted  to  establish  himself
upon  the  land,  so  long  as  he  neither
annoys  the  owner,  nor  hinders  those
who  are  engaged  in  the  cultivation
of  the  soil.  He  cannot  let,  or  seU,
or  give  gratuitously  his  right  to  an-
other, while  a  usufructuary  may.

wording  of  a  testament,  to  take  as  much  of  certain  kinds  of  pro-
duce as  was  sufficient  for  his  daily  wants.

1.  Minus  autem  scilicet  juris  est  in
usu  quam  in  usufructu.  Namque  is
qui  fundi  nudum  habet  usum,  nihil
ulterius  habere  intelligitur  quam  ut
oleribus,  pomis,  floribus,  foeno,  stra-
mentis  et  lignis  ad  usum  quotidia-
num  utatur.  In  eo  quoque  fundo
hactenus  ei  morari  licet,  ut  neque
domino  fundi  molestus  sit,  neque  iis
per  quos  opera  rustica  fiunt  impe-
dimento  :  nee  ulli  alii  jus  quod  habet,
aut  locare  aut  vendere  aut  gratis
concedere  potest  ;  cum  is  qui  usum-
fructum  habet  potest  hsec  omnia
facere.

D.  vii.  8.  10.  4  ;  D.  vii.  8.  12.  1 ;  D.  vii.  8.  11.

The  jurists  differed  as  to  the  fructus  of  which  a  certain  daily
supply  might  be  taken,  and  as  to  whether  it  was  necessary  that
they  should  be  consumed  on  the  spot.  (D.  vii.  8.  10.  1 ;  D.  vii.
8.  12.  1.)  The  station  of  the  usuarius  and  the  abundance  of  the
fruits  would  make  a  difference  in  particular  cases.

The  usuarius  could  prevent  the  owner  as  well  as  any  one  else
from  coming  on  land  subject  to  a  usus,  except  for  the  purpose  of
cultivating  it.

Aut  gratis  concedere.  There  would  be  a  sort  oi  fructus  in
being  able  to  gratify  the  wish  of  giving  and  of  conferring  a  favour,
instead  of  receiving  a  price.

2,  Item  is  qui  sedium  usum.  habet,
hactenus  jus  habere  intelligitur,  ut
ipse  tantum  habitet ;  nee  hoc  jus  ad
alium  transferre  potest,  et  vix  re-
ceptum  esse  videtur  ut  hospitem  ei
recipere  liceat  ;  sed  cum  uxore  sua
liberisque  suis,  item  libertis,  nee
non  aliis  liberis  personis  quibus  non
minus  quam  servis  utitur,  habi-
tandi  jus  habet.  Et  convenienter,
si  ad  mulierem  usus  medium  per-
tineat,  cum  marito  ei  habitare  licet.

2,  He  who  has  the  use  of  a  house,
has  nothing  more  than  the  right  of
inhabiting  it  himself  ;  for  he  cannot
transfer  this  right  to  another  ;  and  it
is  not  without  considerable  doubt
that  it  has  been  thought  allowable
that  he  should  receive  a  guest  in  the
house,  but  he  may  live  in  it  with  his
wife  and  children,  and  freedmen,
and  other  free  persons  who  may  be
attached  to  his  service  no  less  than
his  slaves  are.  A  wife,  in  the  same
way,  if  it  is  she  who  has  the  use  of  the
house,  may  live  in  it  with  her  husband.

D.  vii.  8.  2.  1  ;  D.  vii.  8.  4.  6.  8.

The  usuarius  had  the  use  of  the  whole  thino^,  and  the  owner
could  not  make  use  of  any  part  not  used  by  the  usuarius.  (D.  viil
8.  22.  1.)  So,  too,  the  right  of  usus  was  indivisible,  and  could
not  be  given  in  detached  portions,  as  that  of  usufruct  could  be,  to
different  persons.  (D.  vii.  8.  19.)  But  one  person  could  have
the  use,  and  another  the  usufruct  of  the  same  thing.  (D.  vii.  8.
14.  3.)

i

LIB.  II.      TIT.   V.

131

3.  Item  is  ad  quern  servi  usiis
Dertinet,  ipse  tantummodo  operis
itque  ministerio  ejus  uti  potest  :
id  alium  vero  nullo  modo  jus  suum
;ransferre  ei  concessum  est.  Idem
icilicet  juris  est  et  in  jumentis.

3.  So,  too,  he  who  has  the  use  of
a  slave,  has  only  the  right  of  himself
using  the  labour  and  services  of  the
slave  :  for  he  is  not  permitted  in  any-
way to  transfer  his  right  to  another.
And  it  is  the  same  with  regard  to
beasts  of  burden.

D.  vii.  8.  12.  5,  6.

Ipse  tantummodo   uti  potest',    but  the  wife  or  the  husband
night  use  the  thing  of  which  the  use  was  given  to  the  other.    (D.

m.  8.  9.)

4.  Sed  si  pecorum,  veluti  ovium,
isus  legatus  sit,  neque  lacte  neque
Ignis  neque  lana  utetur  usuarius,
pia  ea  in  fructu  sunt.  Plane  ad
;tercorandum  agrum  suum  peco-
•ibus  uti  potest.

4.  If  the  use  of  a  flock  or  herd,  as,
for  instance,  of  a  flock  of  sheep,  be
given  as  a  legacy,  the  person  who
has  the  use  cannot  take  the  milk,
the  lambs,  or  the  wool,  for  these  are
among  the  fruits.  But  he  may  cer-
tainly make  use  of  the  flock  to  manure
his  land.

D.  vii.  8.  12.  2.

As  a  flock  was  hardly  of  any  use  if  a  person  might  not  take
iny  of  \\\Qfructus,  the  usuarius  was  allowed  to  have  a  little  milk
[modicum  lac)  when  the  usus  had  been  constituted  in  a  way  to
admit  of  a  favourable  interpretation.     (D.  vii.  12.  2.)

5.  Sed  si  cui  habitatio  legata
3ive  aliquo  modo  constituta  sit,
neque  usus  videtur  neque  usus-
fructus,  sed  quasi  proprium  aliquod
jus.  Quam  habitationem  haben-
tibus,  propter  rerum  utilitatem,
secundum  Marcelli  sententiam  nos-
tra decisione  promulgata,  permi-
simus  non  solum  in  ea  degere,  sed
etiam  aliis  locare.

5.  If  the  right  of  habitation  is
given  to  any  one,  either  as  a  legacy
or  in  any  other  way,  this  does  not
seem  a  use  or  a  usufruct,  but  a  right
that  stands  as  it  were  by  itself.
From  a  regard  to  what  is  useful,  and
conformably  to  an  opinion  of  Mar-
cellus,  we  have  published  a  decision,
by  which  we  have  permitted  those
who  have  this  right  of  habitation,
not  only  themselves  to  inhabit  the
place  over  which  the  right  extends,
but  also  to  let  to  others  the  right  of
inhabiting  it.

D.  vii.  8.  10 ;  C.  iii.  33.

The  jurists  had  doubted  whether  hahitatio  was  to  be  considered
a  distinct  servitude  (D.  iv.  5.  10;  D.  vii.  8.  10.  2),  which  Justi-
nian here  pronounces  it  to  be.  So  far  as  it  diifered  from  the  use,
or,  after  Justinian  gave  the  power  of  letting  the  house,  from  the
usufruct,  of  the  house,  it  differed  by  being  an  occupation  allowed
as  a  fact  rather  than  as  a  right,  the  creation  of  the  law,  to  which
the  incidences  of  a  personal  servitude  would  attach.  Modestinus
says  of  it,  potius  in  facto  quam  injure  consistit.  (D.  iv.  5.  10.)
Thus,  it  did  not  cease  by  non-usage  or  by  the  minima  capitis  de-
minutio.     (D.  vii.  8.  10.)

K  2

132  LIB.  II.     TIT.  V.

6.   Hcec  de  servitutibus  et  usu-  6.  Let  it  suffice  to  have  said  thus

fructu  et  usu  et  habitat ione  dixisse  much  concerning  servitudes,  usufruct,

sufficiat ;    de   hereditate   autem,   et  use,  and  habitation.     We  shall  treat

obligationibus,     suis     locis     propo-  of    inheritances    and    obligations    in

nemus.        Exposuimus      summatim  their  proper  places.     We  have  already

quibus  modis  jure  gentium  res  nobis  briefly  explained  how  things  are   ac-

adquiruntur :  modo  videamus  quibus  quired  by  the  law  of  nations  ;  let  us

modis  legitime  et  civili  jure  adqui-  now  examine  how  they  are   acquired

runtur.  by  the  civil  law.

D.  vii.  8.  10.

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  servitudes  it  is  proper  to  observe
that,  besides  the  possessory  interdicts  by  v^hich  the  possession  of
servitudes  was  secured,  there  were  two  real  actions  by  which  a
claim  was  made  with  regard  to  a  servitude.  By  the  one  {actio  in
rem  confessoria),  the  owner  of  the  servitude  claimed  to  have  his
servitude  protected,  and  the  right  to  it  pronounced  to  be  his,
against  any  one  who  attempted  to  disturb  him  in  his  quasi-posses-
sion, or  disputed  his  right.  By  the  other  (actio  in  rem  negatoria),
the  owner  of  a  thing  over  which  another  person  claimed  or  exer-
cised a  servitude  himself  claimed  to  have  this  thing  pronounced
free  from  the  servitude.  It  might  seem  as  if  this  was  rather  a  de-
fence to  an  action  for  the  servitude  than  itself  a  real  action.  But
it  was  considered  a  substantive  and  independent  action,  because
the  owner  of  the  dominium  thereby  vindicated  his  claim  to  a  por-
tion of  it,  namely,  to  the  servitude  which  it  was  attempted  to  de--
tach  from  the  ownership.

Justinian  now  returns  to  the  examination  of  the  modes  in
which  things  are  acquired,  and  the  sixth  Title  would  properly
follow  the  latter  part  of  the  first.  Before,  however,  we  leave  the
subject  of  jura  in  rem,  we  must  notice  three  other  kinds  of  jura  in
rem  besides  servitudes,  of  which  the  Institutes  make  no  mention.
These  are  the  jus  emphyteutic arium ,  the  jus  superjiciarium,  and
\\\QJus  pignoris.

The  exact  time  when  servitudes  first  became  a  part  of  Roman
law  is  not  easy  to  discover.  The  Twelve  Tables  determine  the
width  of  a  way,  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  this  was
intended  to  regulate  the  width  of  a  way  to  which  one  person
had  a  right  over  the  land  of  another.  However,  the  nature
of  servitudes  makes  it  almost  certain  that  they  must  have  very
early  been  recognised  by  law ;  and,  at  any  rate,  we  learn  that
they  were  so  long  before  the  end  of  the  Republic.  The  period  at
which  the  three  jura  in  rem,  of  which  we  have  just  spoken,  were
established  as  a  part  of  law,  can  be  ascertained  more  readily.
The  first,  \h.QJus  emphyteuticarium,  though  based  on  an  institution
of  the  civil  law,  yet  only  assumed  its  peculiar  character  in  the
time  of  the  Lower  Empire;  the  two  others  owed  their  existence  to
the  praetors.

TheJ?^;?  emphyteutic arium,  or,  as  it  is  more  generally  called,
emphyteusis,  was  the  right  of  enjoying  all  the  fruits,  and  disposing
at  pleasure,  of  the  thing  of  another,  subject  to  the  payment  of  a

LIB.  II.     TIT.  V.  133

yearly  rent  (pejisio,  or  canon)  to  the  owner.  Formerly  the  lands
of  the  Roman  people,  of  municipalities,  or  the  college  of  priests,
used  to  be  let  for  different  terms  of  years,  sometimes  for  a  short
term,  such  as  that  of  five  years,  sometimes  for  a  term  amounting
almost  to  a  perpetuity,  under  the  name  of  a(/ri  vectigales.  (Gai.
iii.  145.)  Afterwards,  the  lands  of  private  individuals  were  let  in
a  similar  manner,  and  were  also  comprehended  under  the  term
agri  vectigales.  The  emperors  let  the  patrimonial  lands  in  a  simi-
lar way,  and  these  lands  so  let  were  termed  empliyteuticarii  (C.  xi.
58.  61),  a  name  arising  from  there  being  a  new  ownership,  or
what  almost  amounted  to  an  ownership,  engrafted  (^h,  (J)vtsuco)  on
the  real  dominium.  Either  shortly  before,  or  in  the  time  of  Jus-
tinian, the  two  rights,  that  relating  to  the  agri  vectigales,  and  that
of  emphyteusis,  were  united  under  the  common  name  of  emphy-
teusis, and  subjected  to  particular  regulations.

Both  lands  and  buildings  could  be  subject  to  emphyteusis.
(Nov.  vii.  3.  1.  2.)  The  emphyteuta,  as  the  person  who  enjoyed  the
right  was  termed,  besides  enjoying  all  the  rights  of  a  usufructuary,
could  dispose  of  the  thing,  or  rather  of  his  rights  over  it,  in  any  way
he  pleased  (Nov.  vii.  3.  2),  except  that  the  dominus  had  a  right  of
preemption ;  or,  if  he  did  not  exercise  this  right,  he  had  a  fine  on
the  transfer  of  2  per  cent,  on  the  purchase-money.  (C.  iv.  66.  3.)
The  emphyteuta  could  create  a  servitude  over  the  thing  or  mort-
gage it  (D.  xiii.  7.  16.  2);  he  had  a  real  action  (which,  how-
ever, was  said  to  be  a  utilis  vind.icatio,  because  he  was  not  the
owner,  but  only  in  the  place  of  one)  to  defend  or  assert  his  rights  ;
and  at  his  death  his  right  was  transmitted  to  his  heirs.  (Nov.
vii.  3.)  He  was  obliged  to  pay  his  pensio  under  any  circumstances,
whether  he  actually  benefited  by  his  emphyteusis  ov  not,  and  could
be  expelled  if  the  pensio  was  three  years  in  arrear.  (C.  iv.  Q^.  1.)
He  was  also  bound  to  use  the  thing  over  which  his  right  extended,
so  that  it  was  not  deteriorated  in  value  at  the  time  his  right
expired.     (Nov.  vii.  3.  2.)

The  right  of  superficies  was  almost  identical  with  that  of
emphyteusis,  but  applied  only  to  the  superficies,  that  is,  things
built  on  the  ground,  not  to  the  ground  itself.  It  was  the  right  of
disposing  freely  of  a  building  erected  on  another  man's  soil  without
destroying  it,  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  yearly  rent.  (D.  vi.  1.  74.)
It  must  have  been  the  creation  of  the  jus  prcBtorium  at  a  time
when  there  was  nothing  like  the  emphyteusis  of  buildings,  and
when  it  was  only  lands  that  were  let  as  agri  vectigales.  The  rights
and  duties  of  the  superficiarius,  the  person  who  enjoyed  the  right,
may  be  gathered  from  those  of  the  emphyteuta.

The  jfW5  pignoris  was  the  right  given  to  a  creditor  over  a  thing
belonging  to  another,  in  order  to  secure  the  payment  of  a  debt.
Wlien  the  thing  over  which  the  right  was  given  passed  into  the
possession  of  the  creditor,  the  right  of  the  creditor  was  expressed
by  the  word  pignus  ;  when  the  thing  remained  in  the  hands  of  the
debtor,  the  right  of  the  creditor  was  expressed  by  hypotheca.  Some-

134  LIB.  II.     TIT.  VI.  _

times  only  one  or  more  particular  things  were  under  a  hypotheca,  ]
sometimes  all  the  property  of  the  debtor.  The  right  of  the  creditor
extended  only  to  the  amount  of  his  debt,  but  all  the  thing  pledged
was  subject  to  his  claim.  The  right  might  be  created  by  the
mere  agreement  of  the  parties,  without  any  handing  over  or
tradition  of  the  thing  pledged  to  the  creditor.  (C.  viii.  17.  2.  9.)
Sometimes  the  right  was  created  by  a  magistrate,  who  gave
execution  to  a  creditor  by  this  means  ;  and  in  many  cases  the
law  created  what  was  called  a  hypotheca  tacita  over  the  property,
as,  for  instance,  over  the  property  of  a  tutor  in  favour  of  the  pupil,
and  over  the  property  of  a  husband,  that  the  dowry  of  the  wife
might  be  restored.

The  creditor  had  the  right  (1)  of  selling  (D.  xx.  5)  or  pledging
(C.  viii.  24)  the  thing  pledged  ;  (2)  of  satisfying  his  own  claim
before  that  of  any  one  else  out  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale,  or  of  the
money  obtained  by  pledging  the  thing;  (3)of  having  himself  con-
stituted owner  of  the  thing  if  no  purchaser  could  be  found  for  the
thing.  The  creditor  could  not  be  deprived  even  by  agreement  of
his  power  of  sale.  Justinian  enacted  that,  unless  the  parties  other-
wise agreed,  the  sale  should  take  place  two  years  after  notice  to
pay,  and  in  two  years  more,  if  no  purchaser  could  be  found,  the
creditor  should  be  considered  the  owner.  (Tit.  8.  1  note.)  (4)  Of
bringing  a  real  action  (termed  the  actio  quasi- serviana)  against  any
one  who  unlawfully  detained  the  thing  pledged  to  him.  (Bk.  iv.
Tit.  6.)

If  the  same  thing  was  pledged  to  different  creditors,  the  one  to
whom  it  was  first  pledged  had  generally  a  preference,  potior  tem-
pore, potior  jure.  But  there  were  certain  hypothecs  which  had
special  privileges  attached  to  them,  and  which  had  a  first  claim  on
the  property  of  the  debtor,  such  as  the  hypotheca  ofi\iQfiscus  or  im-
perial treasury  for  the  payment  of  taxes  (C.  iv.  46.  1),  and  that  oi
a  wife  for  her  dowry  (C.  viii.  14.  12);  and  hypotheccB  which  were
created  by  an  instrument  publicly  registered  had  a  preference  ovei
others  by  a  constitution  of  Leo.     (C.  viii.  18.  11.)

Tit.  VI.    DE    USUCAPIONIBUS,    ET    LONGI    TEM-
POMS    POSSESSIONIBUS.

Jure  civili  constitutum  fuerat,  ut  By  the  civil  law  it  was  provided,

qui   bona   fide   ab   eo  qui    dominus  that  if  any  one  by  purchase,  gift,  or

non   erat,   cum   crediderit  eum  do-  any  other   legal  means,  had  hona  Jide

minum    esse,    rem    emerit    vel    ex  received   a  thing  from  a  person  who

donatione  aliave  quavis  justa  causa  was    not    the    owner,   but  whom    he

acceperit,    is    eam    rem,  si    mobilis  thought  to  be  so,   he  should  acquire

erat  anno  ubique,  si  immobiUs  bien-  this  thing  by  use  if  he  held  it  for  one

nio  tantum   in  Italico   solo,    usuca-  year,  if    it  were   a   moveable,    wher-

piat,  ne   rerum   dominia  in  incerto  ever  it  might  be,  or  for  two  years,  if

essent.     Et  cum  hoc  placitum  erat  it  were  an  immoveable,  but  this  only

putantibus     antiquioribus     dominis  if   it  were  in  the  solum  Italicum  ;  the

sufficere    ad    inquirendas   res    suas  object  of  this  pro\dsion  being  to  pre-

pr£efata  tempora,  nobis  melior  sen-  vent  the  ownership  of  things  remain-

tentia    sedit,    ne    domini  maturius  ing    in    uncertainty.     Such    was    the

LIB.  11.     TIT.  VI.  135

suis  rebus  defraudentur,  neque  cer-  decision  of  the  ancients,  who  thought
to  loco  beneficium  hoc  concludatur.  the  times  we  have  mentioned  suffi-
Et  ideo  constitutionem  super  hoc  cient  for  owners  to  search  for  their
promulgavimus,  qua  cautum  est  ut  property,  but  we  have  come  to  a
res  quidem  mobiles  per  triennium,  much  better  decision,  from  a  wish  to
immobiles  vero  per  longi  temporis  prevent  owners  being  despoiled  of
possessionem  (id  est,  inter  prsesentes  their  property  too  quickly,  and  to
decennio,  inter  absentes  viginti  an-  prevent  the  benefit  of  this  mode  of
nis)  usucapiantur  ;  et  his  modis  non  acquisition  being  confined  to  any  par-
solum  in  Italia,  sed  in  omni  terra  ticular  locality.  We  have  accord-
quse  nostro  imperio  gubernatur,  ingly  published  a  constitution  pro-
dominia  rerum  justa  causa  posses-  viding  that  moveables  shall  be  ac-
sionis  prsecedente  acquirantur.  quired   by  a  use  extending  for  three

years,  and  immoveables  by  the  '  pos-
session of  long  time,'  that  is,  ten
years  for  persons  present,  and  twenty
for  persons  absent  ;  and  that  by  these
means,  provided  a  just  cause  of  pos-
session precede,  the  ownership  of
things  may  be  acquired,  not  only  in
Italy,  but  in  every  country  subject  to
our  empire.

Gai.  ii.  42-44  ;  D.  xli.  3.  1 ;  C.  vii.  35.

The  subject  of  possessio  is  only  treated  indirectly  in  the  In-
stitutes, and  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  general  conception  of  the
meaning  of  the  term  before  proceeding  to  examine  the  mode  of
acquiring  property  called  usucapion.

By  possessio  is  meant  primarily  mere  detention,  i.e.  the  physi-
cal apprehension  of  a  thing.     If  the  possessor  adds  the  intention
(animus)  of  holding  the  thing  as  his  own  and  of  exercising  over  it
all  the  rights  of  an  ov^'uer,  then  he  has  legal  possession  of  it  as
opposed  to  the  mere  physical  possession  involved  in  simple  de-
tention.    When  a  person  had  legal  possession  of  a  thing,  he  was
protected  in  his  possession  against  any  one  who  had  not  a  better
title  to  possess,  and  in  order  to  protect  him  the  praetor  granted  him
an  interdict.    If  his  possession  was  not  founded  on  force  or  fraud,
and  had  been  acquired  by  a  legal  mode  of  acquisition,  then  it
ripened,  after  a  length  of  time  laid  down  by  law,  into  full  ownership,
and  the  process  by  which  the  change  was  effected  was  termed
usucapio.      Thus  the  meaning   of   the  term  legal    or    juristical
possession,  the  protection  of  the  rights  of  the  possessor  by  the
interdicts,  and  the  transmutation  under  certain  circumstances  of
possessio  into  ownership  by  the  lapse  of  time,  are  the  three  main
points  on  which  attention  has  to  be  fixed  in  examining  the  subject
of  possessio.

The  two  requisites  of  legal  possession  are  briefly  summed  up
in  the  words  detentio  and  animus.  The  detention  of  a  corporeal
thing  means  such  a  dealing  with  it  as  enables  the  person  detaining
to  deal  with  the  thing  at  his  pleasure.  Thus  a  person  who  enters
on  part  of  a  piece  of  land  has  detention  of  the  whole  because  it  is
at  his  pleasure  to  go  to  any  part  of  it.     A  person  who  has  the  key

136  LIB.  II.      TIT.  VI.

of  a  granary  has  the  means  of  going  into  the  granary.  The  ani-
mus means  the  intention  of  the  possessor  to  hold  the  thing  possessed
as  his  own,  and  not  as  a  person  to  whom  a  thing  has  been  pledged
holds  the  thing,  for  he  holds  it  avowedly  as  belonging  to  another
(^alieno  nomine).

When  a  person  was  in  possession  of  a  thing  physically,  but
without  the  animus  possidendi,  as  a  borrower  would  be  of  the  thing
lent,  he  was  said  not  to  possess  it,  but  to  be  in  possession  of  it,  non
possidet,  est  tantum  in  possessione  (D.  xli.  2.  10);  and  a  person
merely  in  possession  was  not  protected  by  interdicts.  The  Roman
jurists  contrast  natural  with  civil  possession,  and  in  natural  posses-
sion they  include  the  two  cases  of  a  possessor  not  possessing  Oo7ia
fide  and  ex  justa  causa  and  a  person  in  -possessione,  while  by  civil
possession  they  mean  such  a  possession  as  was  capable  of  trans-
mutation by  usucapion,  that  is,  was  bona  fide  and  ex  justa  causa.

The  edict  fixed  certain  cases  in  which  the  praetor  would  him-
self at  once  give  a  decision  and  pronounce  what  was  to  be  done
without  sending  the  case  to  be  examined  by  a  judex,  and  the
order  of  the  praetor  thus  given  was  called  an  interdict  (see  Bk.  iv.
Tit.  16).  What  was  termed  an  interdictum  retinendcB  possessionis
was  granted  to  a  person  whose  possession  had  been  disturbed  or
threatened  with  disturbance,  and  an  interdictum  recuperandcB  pos-
sessionis was  granted  to  a  person  who  had  been  forcibly  ejected
from  his  possession.  Whenever  a  person  possessed  a  thing  as  a
matter  of  fact,  with  the  intention  of  treating  it  as  if  he  were  the
owner,  that  is,  as  if  it  belonged  to  him,  the  possessor  had  a  right
to  the  interdicts  that  protected  his  possession.  But  it  was  only
when  the  possession  was  hona  fide  and  ex  justa  causa  that  the
operation  of  usucapion  would  transmute  his  possession  into  owner-
ship :  that  is,  the  possessor  must  have  commenced  his  possession,
thinking  he  had  a  real  right  to  possess,  and  have  acquired  it  by
a  recognised  legal  method  of  acquiring  property.  A  possessio
which  was  commenced  under  these  circumstances  was  changed
into  dominium  by  lapse  of  time,  and  the  time  required,  as  fixed  by
the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  was  two  years  if  the  thing  possessed
was  an  immoveable,  and  one  year  if  it  were  a  moveable.  The
operation  of  usucapion  was  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  sys-
tem of  Roman  law.  Things  that  being  res  mancipi  ought  to
have  been  conveyed  by  mancipation,  but  had  been  conveyed  with-
out the  necessary  ceremony,  were  not  legally  passed  in  ownership
to  the  person  to  whom  they  were  nominally  conveyed.  But  the
very  short  time  requisite  for  the  operation  of  usucapion  quickly
changed  the  possession  into  dominium,  siud  thus  ended  the  separa-
tion of  the  legal  and  beneficial  interests.  And,  generally,  when
the  prajtor  gave  the  possession  of  property  Avhere  he  could  not  by
strict  law  give  the  ownership,  that  is,  when  he  exercised  his  equi-
table jurisdiction,  the  operation  of  usucapio  soon  converted  the
possessor  honorum  into  the  full  legal  dominus.

In  order  that  the  ownership  of  a  thing  should  be  acquired  by

LIB.  II.     TIT.  VI.  137

usucapion,  it  was  of  course  necessary  that  the  thing  itself  should
be  susceptible  of  being  held  in  dominio.  There  was  no  owner-
ship possible,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  solum  provinciale,  and,
therefore,  no  usucapion.  The  emperor  or  the  people  were  owners
of  the  soil,  and  the  actual  occupier  of  land  in  the  provinces  could
not  be  the  owner ;  he  could  only  be  protected  in  the  possession  of
it ;  and  the  pragtors  protected  his  possession  against  the  claim  of
any  one  asserting  himself  to  be  the  rightful  possessor,  by  permit-
ting the  possessor,  when  he  had  held  the  land  for  ten  years,  if  he
and  the  claimant  had  during  that  time  inhabited  the  same  province
{inter  prcesenies),  or  when  he  had  held  it  for  twenty  years,  if  they
had  not,  to  repel  the  action  by  an  exception,  which,  as  being
placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  intentio,  was  termed  a  prcBscriptio
(see  Introd.  sec.  104),  and  would  probably  be  in  this  form :  Ea  res
agatur,  cujus  non  est  longi  temporis  prcbscriptio ;  and  this  prescrip-
tion or  exception  (for  the  terms  may  be  used  indifferently,  as  it
was  only  in  the  early  times  of  the  construction  of  the  formula  that
such  a  defence  was  really  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  intentio),
if  found  to  be  true  in  fact,  made  the  possessor  quite  secure.

This  prescription,  however,  had  not  exactly  the  same  effect  as
usucapion.  In  the  first  place,  it  did  not  make  the  person  owner
of  the  immoveable,  for  nothing  could  do  that  with  respect  to  the
solum  provinciale.  Secondly,  if  an  action  -was  brought  by  the
real  owner,  the  usucapion  was  not  interrupted  until  judgment  had
been  given  against  the  possessor  (D.  xli.  4.  2.  21);  whereas,  if  an
action  was  brought  against  the  possessor  of  an  immoveable  in  the
solum  provinciale,  the  prcBscriptio  longi  temporis  was  of  no  avail
unless  the  time  required  had  expired  before  the  proceeding  had
reached  that  stage  termed  the  litis  contestatio,  ( See  Introd.  sec.
105.)  Lastly,  the  effect  of  the  prcBscriptio  longi  temporis  was  in
one  way  more  favourable  to  the  possessor  than  that  of  usucapion  ;
for  the  person  Avho  acquired  a  thing  by  usucapion  acquired  it  with
all  its  liabilities  and  charges  ;  whereas  the prcBscriptio  longi  temporis
was  a  good  plea  to  the  action  of  a  person  who  claimed  to  have  a
right  over  the  thing,  as,  for  instance,  a  right  of  servitude  or  mort-
gage, so  that  the  possessor  who  could  use  this  plea  had  the  thing
he  possessed  quite  free  from  any  liability  or  charge  anterior  to  the
commencement  of  his  possession.  (D.  xli.  3.  44.  5  ;  D.  xliv.  3. 12.)

In  the  time  of  Justinian  all  difference  between  the  solum
Italicum  and  the  solum  provinciate  was  done  away.  The  text
furnishes  us  with  a  brief  statement  of  the  change  made  in  the
effect  of  possession.  Under  Justinian  possession  during  three
years  (called,  however,  usucapion  in  this  case — see  paragr.  12  of
this  Title)  gave  the  ownership  of  moveables  ;  possession  during
ten  years  if  the  parties  were  present,  or  tAventy  if  they  were  absent,
gave  the  ownership  of  immoveables.  Thus  the  length  of  possession
no  longer  afforded  merely  a  means  of  repelling  an  action,  but  con-
ferred the  dominium,  although  the  word  prcescriptio  was  used  to
express  the  process.     See  Title  9.  5  of  this  Book.

138

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VI.

1.  Sed  aliquando,  etiamsi  maxime  1.  Sometimes,  however,  although
quis  bona  fide  rem  possederit,  non  the  thing  be  possessed  with  perfect  good
tamen  illi  usucapio  nllo  tempore  faith,  yet  use,  however  long,  will  never
procedit,  veluti  si  quis  liberum  ho-  give  the  property ;  as,  for  instance,
minem  vel  rem  sacram  vel  religiosam  when  the  possession  is  of  a  free  person,
vel  serviun  fugitivum  possideat.             a  thing  sacred  or  religious,  or  a  fugitive

slave.
Gai.  ii.  45.  48.

The  Institutes  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the  exceptions  to  the
rule  of  acquisition  by  use.  These  exceptions  arise  from  two
sources  :  either  the  thing  which  we  have  possessed  is  in  its  nature
incapable  of  being  acquired  by  use,  or  there  is  something  in  the
mode  in  which  it  has  come  into  our  possession  which  prevents
length  of  possession  having  its  ordinary  effect.

As  a  general  rule,  no  incorporeal  thing  could  be  acquired  by
usucapion,  incorporales  res  traditionem  et  usucapionem  non  recipere
manifestum  est  (D.  xli.  1.  43);  but  see  as  to  servitudes  Tit.  3.  4
note,  and  as  to  inheritances  note  to  paragr.  10  of  this  Title.

The  fugitive  slave  could  not  be  acquired  by  use,  because  he
was  considered  to  have  robbed  his  master  of  his  interest  in  him  by
his  flight,  sui  fur  turn  facer  e  intelhgetur.     (D.  xlvii.  2.  60.)

2.  Furtivse  quoqueres,  etquse  vi  2.  Things  stolen,  or  seized  by  vio-
possessae  sunt,  nee  si  prsedicto  longo     lence,    cannot    be    acquired    by   use,

although  they  have  been  possessed  bona
fide  during  the  length  of  time  above
prescribed ;  for  such  acquisition  is  pro-
hibited, as  to  things  stolen,  by  the  law
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  by  the  lex
Atinia ;  as  to  things  seized  by  violence,
by  the  lex  Julia  et  Plautia.
.  D.  xli.  3.  4-6.

The  lex  Atinia  was  a  plehiscitum  named  after  its  proposer
Atinius  Labeo,  557  a.u.c.  The  lex  Plautia,  proposed  by  M.
Plautius,  was  passed  QQ5  a.u.c.  We  know  nothing  of  the  Lex  Julia
here  mentioned,  except  that  its  name  makes  it  probable  that  it  was
passed  in  the  time  of  Augustus ;  it  may  possibly  be  the  lex  Julia
de  vi  publica  seu  privata  referred  to  in  Book  iv.  Tit.  18.  8.

3.  Quod  autem  dictum  est,  furti-  3.  When  it  is  said  that  the  acquisi-
varum  et  vi  possessarum  rerum  usu-     tion  by  use  of  things  stolen  or  seized

by  violence  is  prohibited  by  these  laws,
it  is  not  meant  that  the  thief  himself,
or  he  who  possesses  himself  of  the
thing  by  violence,  is  unable  to  acquire
the  property,  for  another  reason  pre-
vents them,  namely,  that  their  posses-
sion is  mala  fide  ;  but  no  one  else,
although  he  has  in  good  faith  purchased,
or  taken  in  any  way  from  them,  is  able

tempore  bona  fide  possessse  fuerint,
usucapi  possunt :  nam  furtivarum
rerum  lex  duodecim  tabularum  et
lex  Atinia  inhibent  usucapionem  ;  vi
possessarum,  lex  Julia  et  Plautia.

Gai.  ii.  45

capionem  per  leges  prohibitam  esse,
non  eo  pertinet  ut  ne  ipse  fur,  quive
per  vim  possidet,  usucapere  possit
(nam  his  alia  ratione  usucai)io  non
competit,  quia  scilicet  mala  fide  pos-
sident);  sed  ne  uUus  alius,  quamvis
ab  eis  bona  fide  emerit  vel  ex  alia
causa  acceperit,  usucapiendi  jus  ha-
beat.  Unde  in  rebus  mobilibus  non
facile  procedit  ut  bonse  fidei  posses-
sori  usucapio  competat :  nam  qui
alienam  rem  vendit  vel  ex  alia  causa
tradit,  furtum  ejus  committit.

to  acquire  the  property  by  use.  Whence,
as  to  moveables,  it  does  not  often
happen  that  a  hoiia  fide  possessor  gains
the  property  in  them  by  use.  For
whenever  any  one  sells,  or  makes  over
for  any  other  reason,  a  thing  belonging
to  another,  it  is  a  theft.
Gai.  ii.  49,  50.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VI.

139

In  the  case  of  moveables  everything  sold  or  delivered  over  by  a
person  who  knew  himself  not  to  be  the  owner  was  considered
stolen,  and  therefore  could  not  be  acquired  by  use  ;  and  it  could
not  often  happen  that  a  person  who  was  not  the  real  owner  could
sell  or  deliver  a  moveable,  thinkinoj  himself  to  be  the  owner.

4.  Sed  tamen  id  aliquando  aliter
se  habet.  Nam  si  heres  rem  defuncto
commodatam  aut  locatam  vel  apud
eum  depositam,  existimans  heredita-
riam  esse,  bona  fide  accipienti  vendi-
derit  aut  donaverit  aut  dotis  nomine
dederit,  quin  is  qui  acceperit  usuca-
pere  possit,  dubium  non  est ;  quippe
ea  res  in  furti  vitium  non  ceciderit,
cum  utique  heres  qui  bona  fide  tam-
quam  suam  alienaverit  furtum  non
committit.

4.  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  other-
wise ;  for,  if  an  heir,  supposing  a  thing
lent  or  let  to  the  deceased,  or  deposited
with  him,  to  be  a  part  of  the  inheritance,
sells  or  gives  it  as  a  gift  or  dowry  to  a
person  who  receives  it  ho7ia  fide,  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  person  receiving
it  may  acquire  the  property  in  it  by
use  ;  for  the  thing  is  not  tainted  with
the  vice  of  theft,  as  the  heir  who  has
bona  jide  alienated  it  as  his  own,  has
not  been  guilty  of  a  theft.

Gal  ii.  50.

5.  Item  si  is  ad  quern  ancillseusus-
fructus  pertinet,  partum  suum  esse
credens  vendiderit  aut  donaverit,
furtum  non  committit ;  furtum  enim
sine  aflfectu  f urandi  non  committitur.

5.  So  if  the  usufructuary  of  a  female
slave  sells  or  gives  away  her  child,  be-
lieving it  to  be  his  property,  he  does
not  commit  theft ;  for  there  is  no  theft
without  the  intention  to  commit  theft.

Gai.  ii.  50.

In  such  a  case  the  usufructuary  would  make  a  legal  mistake,
but  would  not  act  with  a  criminal  intention.

6.  Aliis  quoque  modis  accidere
potest,  ut  quis  sine  vitio  furti  rem
alienam  ad  aliquem  transferat,  et
efficiat  ut  a  possessore  usucapiatur.

6.  It  may  also  happen  in  various
other  ways,  that  a  man  may  transfer
a  thing  belonging  to  another  without
committing  a  theft,  so  that  the  pos-
sessor acquires  the  property  in  it  by
use.

Gai.  ii.  50.

As,  for  instance,  if  a  person  who  was  not  heir  thought  that  he
was  (D.  xli.  3.  36.  1),  and  sold  a  thing  which  was  part  of  the
inheritance ;  or  if  a  person  took  possession  of  a  thing  which  he
believed  the  owner  had  intended  to  abandon.     (D.  xli.  7.  4.)

7.  Quod  autem  ad  eas  res,  quae
solo  continentur,  expeditius  proce-
dit :  ut  si  quis  loci  vacantis  posses-
sionem, propter  absentiam  aut  negli-
gentiam  domini,  aut  quia  sine  suc-
cessore  decesserit,  sine  vi  nancisca-
tur.  Qui  quamvis  ipse  mala  fide
possidet,  quia  intelligit  se  alienum
fundum  occupasse,  tamen  si  alii  bona
fide  accipienti  tradiderit,  poterit  ei
longa  possessione  res  acquiri,  quia
neque  furtivum  neque  vi  possessum
acceperit.  Abolita  est  enim  quorum-
dam  veterum  sententia  existimantium

7.  As  to  immoveables,  it  may  more
easily  happen  that  a  person  may,  with-
out violence,  take  possession  of  a  place
vacant  by  the  absence  or  negligence  of
the  owner,  or  by  his  having  died  with-
out a  successor  ;  and  although  his  pos-
session is  mala  fide,  since  he  knows  that
he  has  seized  on  land  not  belonging  to
him,  yet  if  he  transfers  it  to  a  person
who  receives  it  bona  fide,  this  person
will  acquire  the  property  in  it  by  long
possession,  as  the  thing  he  receives  has
neither  been  stolen  nor  seized  by  vio-
lence.    The  opinion   of  the   ancients

140  LIB.  II.      TIT.  VI.

etiam  fundi  locive  furtum  fieri ;  et  who  thought  that  there  could  be  a  theft
eorum  qui  res  soli  possederint,  prin-  of  a  piece  of  land  or  a  place,  is  now
cipalibus  constitutionibus  prospicitur  abandoned,  and  there  are  imperial
ne  cui  longa  et  indubitata  possessio  constitutions  which  provide  that  no
auferri  debeat.  possessor  of  an  immoveable  shall   be

deprived  of  the  benefit  of  a  long  and
undoubted  possession.

Gai.  ii.  51  ;  C.  vii.  33.  1,  2.

If  tilings  immoveable  could  have  been  stolen,  as  was  the
opinion  of  Sabinus  (AuL.  Gell.  xi.  18),  the  acquisition  of  im-
moveables by  length  of  possession  would  have  been  as  difficult  as
that  of  moveables;  but  as  the  bona  Jides  of  the  actual  possessor
cured  the  mola  Jides  of  the  first  person  who  began  the  possession,
it  might  very  well  happen  that  the  property  in  immoveables  should
be  gained  in  this  way.  By  Novel  119  (cap.  7),  a.d.  542,  Justinian
altered  this,  and  only  allowed  the  title  by  possession  during  ten  or
twenty  years  where  the  true  owner  was  aware  of  his  right,  and  of
the  transfer  to  the  bona  fide  possessor  ;  otherwise  the  right  of
ownership  was  not  gained  until  after  a  possession  of  thirty  years.

8.  Aliquando  etiam  furtiva  vel  8.  Sometimes  even  a  thing  stolen
vi  possessa  res  usucapi  potest,  veluti  or  seized  by  violence  may  be  acquired
si  in  domini  potestatem  re  versa  fue-  by  use  ;  for  instance,  if  it  has  come
rit ;  tunc  enim,  vitio  rei  purgato,  back  into  the  power  of  its  owner,  for
procedit  ejus  usucapio.  then,  the  vice  being  purged,  the  ac-
quisition by  use  may  take  place.

D.  xli.  3.  4.  6.

In  order  that  a  thing  once  stolen  should,  after  again  falling
under  the  power  of  its  owner,  be  capable  of  being  acquired  by  a
bona  fide  possessor,  it  was  necessary  that  the  owner  of  the  thing
should  recover  it  as  a  thing  belonging  to  himself.  If  he  purchased
it,  not  knowing  that  it  belonged  to  him,  the  vice  or  taint  of  theft
was  not  purged.     (D.  xli.  3.  4.  6.)

9.  Res  fisci  nostri  usucapi  non  9.  Things  belonging  to  our  Jiscus
potest ;  sed  Papinianus  scripsit,  bonis  cannot  be  acquired  by  use.  But  Pa-
vacantibus  fisco  nondum  nuntiatis,  pinian  has  given  his  opinion  that  if,
bona  fide  emptorem  traditam  sibi  before  ho7ia  vacantia  have  been  re-
rem  ex  his  bonis  usucapere  posse  ;  ported  to  the  Jiscus,  a  bona  fide  pur-
et  ita  divus  Pius  et  divi  Severus  et  chaser  receives  any  of  them,  he  can
Antoninus  rescripserunt.  acquire   the   property   hj  use.      And

the  Emperor  Antoninus  Pius,  and  the
Emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus,
have  issued  rescripts  in  accordance
with  this  opinion.

D.  xU.  3.  18.  2.

Bona  vacantia  was  the  term  used  to  express  the  property  of
persons  who  died  without  successors.  These  goods  belonged  to
the  fiscus  previously  to  being  reported  by  the  officers  of  the
treasury  (D.  xlix.  14.  1.  1),  but  up  to  that  time  they  could  be
acquired  by  usucapion.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VI.  141

10.  Novissime  sciendum  est,  rem  10.   Lastly,  it  is  to  be  observed  that

talem  esse  debere  ut  in  se  non  ha-  a  thing  must  be  tainted  with  no  vice,

beat  vitium,  ut  a  bonae  fidei  emp-  that  the  bona  fide  purchaser  or  person

tore  usucapi  possit,  vel  qui  ex  alia  who  possesses  it  from  any  other  just

justa  causa  possidet.  cause  may  acquire  it  by  use.

D.  xl.  1.  3.  24

The  word  vice,  as  used  here  with  reference  to  acquisition  by
use,  includes  every  obstacle  that  prevented  a  thing  being  of  a
kind  to  be  acquired  by  length  of  possession.  The  first  requisite
of  civil  possession,  of  possession,  that  is,  capable  of  ripening  into
ownership  by  usucapion,  was  that  the  thing  possessed  should  not
have  any  vice  in  it,  should  not  be  of  a  kind  which  could  not  be
acquired  by  usucapion.  To  the  instances  of  such  things  given  above
in  paragraphs  1,  2,  and  9,  may  be  added  things  belonging  to  pupils
or  to  persons  below  the  age  of  twenty-five  years  (C.  vii.  35.  3),
and  things  forming  part  of  a  dowry,  unless  the  term  of  usucapion
had  begun  to  run  before  the  marriage.  (D.  xxiii.  5.  16  ;  C.  v.  12.
30.)  Secondly,  it  was  necessary  that  the  thing  should  be  pos-
sessed ex  justa  causa.  By  this  it  was  meant  that  it  must  have
come  into  the  power  of  the  possessor  by  a  means,  such  as  sale  or
gift,  which  was  recognised  by  law  as  a  good  foundation  for  the
transfer  of  ownership.  It  might  have  done  so,  and  yet  no  title  be
acquired  to  the  ownership,  except  by  usucapion :  the  person  who
transferred  it  might  not  have  been  the  real  owner ;  or  the  person
who  received  it  might  not  have  had  a  right  to  do  so.

The  Digest  (xli.  4  et  seq.)  gives  a  long  series  of  Titles  in  which
the  several  j?<5/«  causcn  of  possession  are  examined  separately,  and
the  different  characters  in  which  a  person  possessed  are  treated  of.
Thus,  a  person  might  possess  pro  emptore,  as  having  bought  the
thing;  joro  donato,  as  having  received  it  as  a  gift ;  pro  dote,  as  having
received  it  in  dowry ;  pro  soluto,  as  the  payment  of  a  debt ;  pro
derelicto,  as  having  taken  it  when  abandoned  by  its  owner.  In
any  of  these  cases  the  person  who  sold,  gave,  or  abandoned  the
thing,  might  not  have  been  the  real  owner,  and  then  the  possessor
could  only  acquire  the  property  in  the  thing  by  use ;  or  again,  he
might  possess  pro  legato,  and  then  if  he  was  not  the  person  to
whom  the  legacy  had  really  been  left,  or  if  the  legacy  had  been
revoked,  he  might  acquire  by  use  the  property  in  the  thing.  In
this  case  it  was  not  the  testator  not  being  the  proprietor  that
made  the  possessor  not  the  true  owner,  but  it  was  his  having  no
right  to  have  the  possession  of  the  thing.  Again,  he  might  possess
a  thing  pro  suo,  a  general  term  specially  employed  to  denote  the
possession  oifructus  gathered  bona  fide,  or  that  of  res  nulJius,  such
as  wild  animals.  If  he  took  possession  of  an  animal,  naturally
wild,  which  had  been  tamed,  and  possessed  it  jyro  suo,  he  did  not
at  once  acquire  the  property  in  it,  because  it  was  not  of  a  nature,
since  it  had  ceased  to  be  wild,  to  be  acquired  by  mere  possession,
but  he  became  the  owner  by  use.  (D.  xli.  10  -.  D.  xii.  2.  3.  21.)
Thirdly,  it  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  bona  fides  \  the

142  LIB.  II.     TIT.  VI.

possessor  must  be  quite  ignorant  of  that  which  there  was  faulty  in
the  manner  he  had  gained  possession.     No  ignorance  of  a  leading
principle  of  law,  such  as  that  a  person  below  the  age  of  puberty
could  not  alienate  his  goods  (D.  xxii.  6.  4 ;  D.  xli.  3.  31),  nor  any
wilful  ignorance  of  facts,  would  be  permitted  as  the  commence-
ment of  usucapion.     (D.  xxii.  6.  6.)     But  if  a  person  was  only
ignorant  of  a  fact,  of  which  it  was  excusable  he  should  be  ignorant,
as  that  a  vendor  was  under  the  age  of  puberty,  his  possession  was
bonajide.     This  instance  is  taken  from  the  Digest,  and  the  words
are  precise ;  but  if  the  property  of  a  pupil  was,  as  stated  above,
incapable  of  being  acquired  by  acquisition,  it  would  not  seem
material  to  show    that  there  was  a   bona  fide  error   as   to   the
fact  of  the  pupil's  age.     It  may  be  that  some  and  not  all  of  the
kinds  of  property  belonging  to  a  pupil  were  so  incapable,  or
that   there   were   different    theories    among   the    jurists    as    to
the  foundation  of  usucapion  in  such  an  instance.     In  the  case
of  sale   it   was    necessary   that   this  bona  fides  should  exist   at
the  moment  of  the  contract  being  made,  and  also  at  that  of  its
being  performed  (D.  xli.  3.  48),  and  in  every  case  it  was  neces-
sary it  should  exist  at  the  commencement  of  possession.     But
after   the   possession  was  once  commenced  bona  fide,  a  subse-
quent knowledge  of  the  real  facts  did  not  vitiate  the  possession.
Gains  notices  three  exceptional  cases  where  a  mala  fide  possessor
might  acquire  by  usucapion.     Inheritances  in  the  old  law,  though
incorporeal  things,  could  be  acquired  by  usucapion  ;    and  as  the
Twelve  Tables  had  said  that  things  of  the  soil  should  be  acquired
in  two  years,  and  other  things  {ccsteras  res)  in  one,  and  the  inheri-
tance was  not  a  thing  of  the  soil,  it  was  held  that  the  inheritance
or  any  part  could  be  acquired  in  a  year — the  reason  being,  says
Gains,  that  the  law  wished  to  hurry  heirs  to  enter  on  inheritances
in  order  that  the  sacred  rites  might  be   performed,  and  creditors
satisfied  ;  so  that  if  a  man  held  anything,  even  land,  forming  part
of  an  inheritance,  for  one  year  only,  he  acquired  it  by  usucapion,
although  he  knew  it  was  part  of  the  inheritance,  and  he  was  thus
acting  mala  fide.     (Gat.  ii.  52-58.)     But  this  kind  of  usucapion
was   made  ineffectual   in  the  time    of   Hadrian  (Gai.   ii.    57.)
Secondly,  if  a  thing  was  given  over  by  one  man  to   another  to
hold  for  him  fiducicB  causa,  was,  e.g.,  deposited  with  him   or
pledged  to  him,  the  original  owner,  if  he  got  possession  of  the
thing,  could  reacquire  it  by  usucapion  in  a  year,  even  if  it  was
an  immoveable  (Gai.  ii.  59)  ;  but  if  it  was  pledged,  the  new  posses-
sion could  not  thus  operate  if  it  had  been  obtained  by  the  request
of  the  original  owner.    (Gai.   ii.  60.)     Thirdly,  the  owner  of  a
thing  mortgaged  to  the  state  and  sold  for  non-payment  of  the
mortgage  debt  could  reacquire  it  by  usucapion  against  theprcediator
or  purchaser  from  the   state ;  but  if  it  was  an  immoveable  two
years'  possession  was  in  this  case  necessary.

11.    Error    autem    falsse   causae  11.  But  if  a  mistake  is  made  as  to

usucapionem  non   parit  :    veluti    si     the  cause  of  possession,  and  it  is  wrongly

LIB.  II.     TIT.  VI.  143

quis,  cum  non  emerit,  emisse  se  supposed  to  be  just,  there  is  no  usu-
existimans  possideat  ;  vel  cum  ei  capion.  As,  for  instance,  if  any  one
donatum  non  fuerit,  quasi  ex  dona-  possesses  in  the  belief  that  he  has
tione  possideat.  bought,  when  he  has  not  bought,  or  that

he  has  received  a  gift,  when  no  gift
has  really  been  made  to  him.

D.  xli.  3.  27.
Supposing  a  person  who  thought  that  he  had  acquired  ex  justa
causa  had  not,  supposing,  for  instance,  he  thought  a  person  in-
tended to  give  him  a  thing  who  did  not,  or  if  he  had  received  a
thino-  in  payment  of  a  debt,  while  really  no  debt  was  due  to  him,
the  question  naturally  suggested  itself  whether  the  imperfection
in  the  possession  could  be  cured  by  bona  fides,  that  is,  an  honest
belief  that  the  causa  was  justa,  that  a  gift  had  been  made,  or
that  a  debt  was  due.  The  question  had  been  much  debated  by
the  jurists,  and  Justinian  here  decides  it  by  declaring  that  the
imperfection  could  not  be  so  cured,  and  that  if  the  possessor
had  been  mistaken  in  this  respect,  length  of  possession  would
not  profit  him.  But  this  doctrine  is  not  consistent  with  that  of
the  Dio-est,  which  treats  a  plausible  error  (an  error  into  which  a
man  might  naturally  and  reasonably  have  fallen  with  regard  to  the
causa)  as  permitting  usucapion  to  take  place.  We  learn,  for
example,  from  the  Digest,  that  where  it  was  with  respect  to  an
act  of  some  one  through  whom  the  possessor  believed  his  title  to
have  been  gained,  and  whom  he  reasonably  believed  to  have  been
actino-  for  him  as  his  procurator,  that  the  mistake  was  made,  the
possessor  could  acquire  by  use,  although  this  person  might  not
have  acted  as  the  possessor  supposed.  (D.  xli.  4,  11.)

12.  Diutina  possessio  quae  prod-  12.  Long  possession,  which  has  be-

esse    coeperat    defuncto,    et   heredi  gun  to  reckon  in  favour  of  the  deceased,

et  bonorum  possessori  continuatur,  is    continued   in   favour    of    the  heir

licet   ipse    sciat  prsedium  alienum.  or  honorum.  possessor,  although  he  may

Quod    si    ille   initium    justum  non  know  that  the  immoveable  belongs  to

habuit,  heredi  et  bonorum   posses-  another  person  ;  but  if    the  deceased

sori,   licet   ignoranti,   possessio  non  commenced   his  possession  mala  fide,

prod  est.     Quod    nostra    constitutio  the  possession  does  not  profit  the  heir

similiter  et  in  usucapionibus  obser-  or  honorum possessor,  although  ignorant

vari  constituit,  ut  tempora  continu-  of  this.     And  our  constitution  has  en-

entur.  acted  the  same  with  respect  to  usuca-
pions, in  which  the  benefit  of  posses-
sion is  to  be  in  like  manner  continued,

D.  xli.  4.  2.  19  ;  D.  xliv.  5.  11  ;  C.  vii.  31.

Persons  who  possessed  pro  herede  or  pro  possessore,  that  is,  as
honorum  possessores,  did  not  themselves  begin  a  new  usucapion,
but  continued  the  persona  of  the  deceased,  and  were  placed  in
the  same  position  with  reference  to  anything  which  he  had
possessed,  as  if  he  had  himself  continued  to  possess  it.  If  the
deceased  had  possessed  the  thing  pro  emptore  or  pro  donato,  the
heres  or  honorum  possessor  continued  to  possess  it  in  the  same
way,  and  added  to  the  time  of  his  possession  the  time  during
which  the  deceased  had  possessed  it.

144  LIB.  IT.      TIT.  VI.

Similiter  in  usucapionibus,  i.e.  the  continuation  of  possession
by  the  heir  shall  apply  to  the  usucapion  of  moveables  by  three
years'  possession.

13.  Inter  venditorem  quoque  et  13,  Betweentliebuyer  and  the  seller
emptorem  conjungi  tempora  divi  too,  the  Emperors  Sevenis  and  Anto-
Severiis  et  Antoninus  rescripserunt.     niiis    have   decided   by  rescript    that

their  several  times  of  possession  shall
be  reckoned  together.

D.  xli.  4.  2.  20.

Persons  who  were  merely  successors  of  others  in  holding
particular  things  by  sale,  gift,  legacy,  &c.,  did  not  of  course
continue  the  possession,  for  they  did  not  continue  the  person,
of  their  predecessor.  But  if  both  the  possession  of  their  pre-
decessor, and  their  own,  were  such  as  to  give  rise  to  usucapion,
the  times  of  the  two  possessions  were  added,  together.  If  there
was  something  to  prevent  this  in  the  possession  of  their  prede-
cessors, their  own  possession  was  the  first  commencement  of  the
usucapion.

The  interruption  of  usucapion  was  termed  usitrpatio.  (D.  xli.
3.  2.)  It  might  take  place  in  various  ways.  The  thing  itself
might  be  taken  away  from  the  possessor,  or,  if  it  was  an  im-
moveable, he  might  be  expelled  from  it  (D.  xli.  3.  5);  or  it
might  become  impossible,  from  physical  causes,  such  as  an  inroad
of  the  sea,  to  occupy  it  (D.  xli.  2.  3.  17);  or,  again,  the  pos-
sessor might  fall  into  the  power  of  the  enemy,  and  he  would  not
be  reinstated  in  his  possession  hj  postliminium,  for  possession  was
a  fact,  and  as  he  had.  ceased  to  possess,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he
could  only  begin  a  new  possession  by  again  possessing  the  thing
(D.  xlix.  15.  12.  2);  or  the  interruption  might  be  what  was
termed  civil,  that  is,  be  produced  by  an  action  to  contest  the
right,  and  with  respect  to  this  Justinian  (C.  vii.  33.  10)  made
the  time  of  the  first  raising  of  the  controversy  (mota  controversia)
the  period  of  interruption,  instead  of  the  litis  contestation  which
had  no  place  in  the  civil  process  of  his  time.

There  was  also  a  prescription  or  possession,  termed  longissimi
temporis.  If  there  was  a  possession  for  thirty  years,  or,  in  the
case  of  ecclesiastical  property,  or  the  fvndi  patrimoniales  of  the
emperor  (C.  xi.  61.  14),  for  forty  years,  whatever  vitium  or
obstacle  there  might  be  to  the  acquisition  by  use,  for  instance,
theft,  violence,  absence  o^  justa  causa,  or  mala  fides,  the  pos-
sessor could,  before  the  time  of  Justinian,  repel  actions  brought
to  claim  the  thing,  and,  after  his  legislation,  became  the  legal
owner.  (C.  vii.  39.)

14.  Edicto  divi  Marci  cavetiir,  14.  It  is  provided  by  an  edict  of  the
eum  qui  a  fisco  rem  alienam  emit,  Emperor  Marcus,  that  a  person  who
si  post  venditionem  quinquennium  has  purchased  from  the  fiscus  a  thing
prseterierit,  posse  dominum  rei  per  belonging  to  another  person,  may  repel
exceptionem  repellere.  Constitutio  the  owner  of  the  thing  by  an  excep-
autem  div£e  memorise  Zenonis  bene  tion,  if  five  years  have  elapsed  since

LIB.  II.     TIT.  VII.

145

prospexit  iis  qui  a  fisco  per  vendi-
tionein  aut  donationem  vel  aliiiin
titulum  aliquid  accipunt,  ut  ipsi
quidem  securi  statim  fiant,  et  vic-
tores  existant,  sive  experiantur  sive
conveniantur  ;  adversus  autem  sa-
cratissimuin  aerarmm  usque  ad  qua-
driennium  liceat  intendere  iis,  qui
pro  dominio  vel  hypotheca  earum
reruin  quae  alienatse  sunt,  putave-
rint  sibi  quasdam  competere  ac-
tiones.  Nostra  autem  divina  con-
stitutio  quam  nuper  promulgavi-
mus,  etiam  de  iis  qui  a  nostra  vel
venerabilis  Augustse  domo  aliquid
acceperiiit,  hsec  statuit  quae  in  fis-
calibus  alienationibus  prsefata  Ze-
noniana  constitutione  continentur.

the  sale.  But  a  constitution  of  Zeno
of  sacred  memory  has  completely  pro-
tected those  who  receive  anything
from  the  Jiscus  by  sale,  gift,  or  any
other  title,  by  providing  that  they
themselves  are  to  be  at  once  secure,
and  made  certain  of  success,  whether
they  sue  or  are  themselves  sued,  in  an
action.  While  they  who  think  that
they  have  a  ground  of  action  as  owners
or  mortgagees  of  the  things  alienated,
may  bring  an  action  against  the  sacred
treasury  within  four  years.  An  im-
perial constitution,  which  we  ourselves
have  recently  published,  extends  to
those  who  have  received  as  a  gift  any-
thing from  our  palace,  or  that  of  the
empress,  the  provisions  of  the  constitu-
tion of  Zeno  relative  to  the  alienations
of  the  Jiscus.

C.  ii.  37.  3  ;  C.  vii.  37.  2.  2.

As  Theophilus  points  out,  the  privilege  really  conceded  by
the  constitution  of  Marcus  Aurelius  v\^as,  that  no  possession,  if
the  thing  had  been  received  from  the  Jiscus,  should  be  attacked
after  five  years  had  elapsed,  however  otherwise  open  to  attack.
If  not  otherwise  open  to  attack,  the  time  of  usucapion,  being  so
much  shorter  than  five  years,  would,  previously  to  the  changes
of  Justinian,  have  given  the  property  before  the  time  fixed  by  the
constitution  had  arrived.

Tit.  VII.     DE  DONATIONIBUS.

Est  et  aliud  genus  acquisitionis
donatio.  Donationum  autem  duo
sunt  genera,  mortis  causa,  et  non
mortis  causa.

There  is,  again,  another  mode  of
acquiring  property,  donation,  of  which
there  are  two  kinds,  donation  mortis
causa  and  donation  not  mortis  causa.

D.  1.  50.  16.  67.
The  phrase  dono  dare  was  appropriated  in  Roman  law  to  the
mode  of  transferring  property  by  gift ;  dare  signifying  that  the
whole  property  in  the  thing  was  passed  by  delivery,  and  do7io
expressing  the  motive  from  which  the  delivery  was  made.  (See
Vat.  Frapn.  275.  281.  283.)  Viewed  strictly,  gift  is  not  a
peculiar  mode  of  acquisition,  but  an  acquisition  by  delivery  with
a  particular  motive  for  the  transfer.  Possibly  it  was  on  account
of  the  solemnities  with  which,  under  Justinian,  gifts  had  to  be
made,  that  the  authors  of  the  Institutes  treat  gift  as  a  separate
mode  of  acquisition.

1.  Mortis  causa  donatio  est,  quae
propter  mortis  fit  suspicionem  :
cum  quis  ita  donat  ut,  si  quid  liu-
manitus  ei  contigisset,  haberet  is
qui  accipit ;  sin  autem  supervixisset
is  qui  donavit,  reciperet,  vel  si  eum
idonationis  poenituisset,  aut  prior
decesserit  is  cui  donatum  sit.     Hse

1.  A  donation  mortis  caiisa  is  that
which  is  made  to  meet  the  case  of
death,  as  when  anything  is  given  upon
condition  that,  if  any  fatal  accident
befalls  the  donor,  the  person  to  whom
it  is  given  shall  have  it  as  liis  own  ;
but  if  the  donor  should  survive,  or  if
he  should  repent  of  having  made  the

146

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VII.

mortis  cansa  donationes  acl  exem-
plum  legatorum  redactpe  sunt  per
omnia.  Nam  cum  prudentibus
ambiguum  fuerat,  utrum  donationis
an  legati  instar  earn  obtinere  opor-
teret,  et  utriusque  causae  quaedam
habebat  insignia,  et  alii  ad  aliud
genus  earn  retrahebant,  a  nobis
constitutum  est  ut  per  omnia  fere
legatis  connumeretur,  et  sic  procedat
quemadmodum  nostra  constitutio
eam  formavit.  Et  in  summa  mortis
causa  donatio  est,  cum  magis  se
quis  velit  habere  quam  eum  cui
don  at,  magisque  eum  cui  donat
quam  heredem  suum.  Sic  et  apud
Homerum  Telemaclius  donat  Pi-
Tseo  : —

Tliipai',    ov    yap    t      'iSfitv     ottwq    'iarai

Tcide  epyOj
El     icsv     Ifie     nvr]ciT7]piQ     dyijvope^     kv

fieydpoiai
Ad'^pr)       KTtivavTiQ^     Trarpma       irdvTa

ddaovraiy
Avrhv     exovrd     at     jiovXoii    tTravpsjxeV)

y  Tiva  Twi^de  *
El    Cs    K    fcyoi    TOvroKJi    (povov   Kai    Kifpa

(pvrtvouj,
A?}      TOTc     fioi     xaipovTi     fkpnv      TTpbg

gift,  or  if  the  person  to  whom  it  has
been  given  should  die  before  the  donor,
then  the  donor  shall  receive  back  the
thing  given.  These  donations  mortis
causa  are  now  placed  exactly  on  the
footing  of  legacies.  It  was  much
doubted  by  the  jurists  whether  they
ought  to  be  considered  as  a  gift  or  as  a
legacy,  partaking  as  they  did  in  some
respects  of  the  nature  of  both ;  and
some  were  of  opinion  that  they  be-
longed to  the  one  head,  and  others
that  they  belonged  to  the  other.  We
have  decided  by  a  constitution  that
they  shall  be  in  almost  every  respect
reckoned  amongst  legacies,  and  shall  be
made  in  accordance  with  the  forms  our
constitution  provides.  In  short,  it  is  a
donation  mortis  causa,  when  the  donor
wishes  that  the  thing  given  should
belong  to  himself  rather  than  to  the
person  to  whom  he  gives  it,  and  to
that  person  rather  than  to  his  own  heir.
It  is  thus  that,  in  Homer,  Telemachus
gives  to  Pirceus  : —

'  Pirceus,  for  we  know  not  how  these
things  shall  be,  whether  the  proud
suitors  shall  secretly  slay  me  in  the
palace,  and  shall  divide  the  goods  of
my  father,  I  would  that  thou  thyself
shouldst  have  and  enjoy  these  things
rather  than  that  any  of  those  men
should  ;  but  if  I  shall  plant  slaughter
and  death  amongst  those  men,  then
indeed  bear  these  things  to  my  home,
and  joying  give  them  to  me  in  my  joy.'

D.  xxxix.  6.  35.  4.  37.  1.  1.  ;  C.  viii.  57.  4.

There  are  two  essential  conditions  of  a  donatio  mortis  causa  :
it  must  be  made  with  the  view  of  meeting  the  case  of  death ;  and
it  must  be  made  to  take  effect  only  if  death  occurs,  and  so  as  to
be  revocable  at  any  time  previous,  and  to  fail  if  the  recipient
died  before  the  giver.  The  donor  might,  however,  at  his  pleasure,
alter  the  character  of  the  gift,  making  it  irrevocable,  but  it  w^as
always  dependent  on  the  recipient  outliving  the  donor.  (D.
xxxix.  6.  27.)

It  might  be  made  conditional  upon  death  in  two  ways.  The
donor  might  say,  I  hand  you  over  my  horse,  but  the  gift  is  only
to  be  complete  if  I  die  in  this  enterprise ;  or  he  might  say,  I
give  you  my  horse,  if  I  survive  this  enterj)rise  you  are  to  give  it
me  back.  In  the  latter  method,  the  delivery  of  the  thing  is
made  at  once,  subject  to  a  conditional  redelivery :  in  the  former
the  delivery  is  made  conditional.  (D.  xxxix.  6.2  et  seq.)  The  dona-
tion might  also  be  sometimes  made  conditional  upon  the  death  of  a
third  person,  as  if  a  father  promised  to  give  to  his  daughter-in-law
in  case  of  the   death  of  his  son.  (D.  xxxix.  6.  11.)     All  who

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VII.  147

could  make  a  testament  could  make  a  valid  donatio  mortis  causa ;
and  all  who  could  receive  under  a  testament  could  accept  one.
(D.  xxxix.  6.  9  and  15.)  Every  kind  of  thing  could  be  given
in  this  way.  (D.  xxxix.  6.  18.  2.)  Justinian,  in  the  constitution
referred  to  in  the  text,  required  that  a  donatio  mortis  causa
should  be  made  in  the  presence  of  five  witnesses.  (C.  viii.  57.  4.)

If  the  gift  was  made  in  the  first  of  the  two  ways  above  men-
tioned, although  there  was  delivery,  yet  the  thing  was  only  acquired
on  the  death  of  the  donor,  and  the  donor  not  having  ceased  to
be  dominvs  could  therefore,  if  he  revoked  the  gift,  bring  a  real
action  to  reclaim  the  thing  handed  over.  If  the  gift  was  made
in  the  second  way,  the  whole  property  passed  at  once  by  the
tradition  to  the  recipient ;  and  as,  in  the  older  and  stricter  law,
the  dominium  passed  absolutely  when  it  passed  at  all,  the  pro-
perty in  the  thing  could  not  revert  to  the  donor  merely  by  the
condition  having  been  accomplished.  He  would  only  have  a
personal  action  against  the  recipient  to  compel  him  to  give  the
value  of  the  thing  if  he  did  not  choose  to  give  back  the  thing
itself.  The  later  jurists  seem,  however,  to  consider  that  the
dominium  reverted  ipso  jure,  and  that  the  donor  could  bring  a
real  action  for  the  thing  itself.  (D.  vi.  1.  41  ;  D.  xxxix.  6.  29.)

If  the  donor  was  insolvent  at  the  time  of  his  death,  this  was
considered  as  an  implied  revocation  of  the  gift.  (D.  xxxix.  6.  17.)

Ad  exemplum  legatorum  redacted  sunt  -per  omnia  .  .  .  per
omnia  fere  legatis  connumeretur — the  latter  is  the  more  correct
expression ;  gifts  mortis  causa  were  not  exactly  on  the  footing
of  legacies,  especially  because  (1)  they  had  complete  effect  im-
mediately on  the  death  of  the  donor,  whereas  legacies,  to  take
effect,  required  that  the  heir  should  first  enter  on  the  inheritance
(D.  xxxix.  6.  29.)  (2)  The  rules  as  to  capacity  of  taking  were
the  same  in  both  cases,  but  regard  was  had  to  the  capacity  to
receive  of  the  person  to  whom  the  gift  was  made,  only  at  the  time
of  the  death,  and  not,  as  in  the  case  of  legacies,  also  at  the  time  of
the  disposition.  (D.  xxxiv.  9.  5.  17.)  (3)  A  Jiliusfamilias^
who  could  not  before  Justinian  give  anything  but  his  peculium
castrense  by  testament,  could,  with  his  father's  permission,  make
a  donatio  mortis  causa  of  other  things.  (D.  xxxix.  6.  25.  1.)
(4)  A  peregrinus  could  make  a  mortis  causa  donatio,  though  he
could  not  give  a  legacy.  (D.  xxxix.  6.  25.)  There  was  one
remarkable  mode  in  which  they  were  placed  on  the  footing  of
legacies.  By  a  constitution  of  Severus  the  heir  was  permitted
to  retain  as  large  a  portion  (one-fourth)  of  the  gift  as  he  could
of  a  legacy  by  the  lex  Falcidia,    (See  C.  viii.  57.  2.)

The  lines  quoted  in  the  text  are  from  Odyssey  17.  78.

2.  ^  Alias   autem  donationes  sunt,  2.  The  other  kind  of  donations  are

quae  sine  ulla  mortis  cogitatione  fiunt,  those  which    are    made    without   any

quas  inter  vivos  appellamus,  quae  non  consideration  of  death,  and  are  called

omnino  comparantur  legatis  :  quae  si  donations  inter  vivos.    They  cannot,  in

f uerint  perf ectae,  temere  revocari  non  any  respect,  be  compared  to  legacies,

L  2

148

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VII.

and  if  completed  cannot  be  revoked  at
pleasure .  They  are  said  to  be  complete  d
when  the  donor  has  manifested  his
intention,  whether  by  writing  or  not.
Our  constitution  has  declared  that,
after  the  example  of  sales,  they  shall
involve  the  necessity  of  tradition;  so,
however,  that  even  before  tradition,
they  are  completely  effectual,  and  place
the  donor  under  the  necessity  of  deli-
vering them.  Previous  imperial  con-
stitutions have  enacted  that  they  should
be  registered  by  public  deeds,  if  ex-
ceeding two  hundred  solidi,  but  our
constitution  has  raised  the  limit  to  five
hundred  solidi,  so  tha,t  for  a  gift  of  this
sum  registration  is  not  necessary.  We
have  also  marked  out  certain  donations
which  need  no  registration  at  all,  but
are  completely  valid  of  themselves.  We
have,  too,  made  many  other  new  enact-
ments, in  order  to  extend  and  secure
the  effect  of  donations,  all  which  may
be  collected  from  the  constitutions  we
have  promulgated  on  this  subject.  It
must  however  be  observed,  that  how-
ever absolutely  a  donation  maybe  given,
yet,  if  the  object  of  the  donor's  bounty
prove  ungrateful,  he  is  permitted  by
our  constitution,  in  certain  specified
cases,  to  revoke  the  donation;  for  it  is
not  right  that  they  who  have  given
their  i)roperty  to  others  should  suffer
from  them  injuries  or  losses  of  such  a
kind  as  those  enumerated  in  our  con-
stitution.

D.  xxxix.   6.  27  ;   C.  viii.  54.  35.  5 ;    C.  viii.   54.   34,  pr.  3,  4  ;  C.  viii.  64.
36,  pr.  2  and  3  ;  C.  viii.  56.  10.

A  thing  given  was,  if  a  res  mancipi,  given  by  mancipation,  or
in  jure  cessio,  and,  if  a  res  nee  mancipi,  by  tradition.  But  a  mere
agreement  to  give  gratuitously  (^pactum)  was  not  in  the  least
binding  on  the  person  who  agreed  to  give,  and  to  make  a  promise
to  give  binding,  it  was  necessary  that  the  agreement  should
assume  the  form  of  a  stipulation.  (Seelntrod.  sec.  83.)

The  lex  Cincia,  560  A.U.C.,  introduced  several  new  rules  into
the  law  respecting  gifts,  but  did  not  make  a  mere  agreement  to
give  in  any  degree  valid.  The  first  step  taken  in  this  direction
was  by  Constantine  (Cod.  Theod.  viii.  12.  4  et  seq.),  who  made
the  agreement  binding  if  reduced  to  writing.  And  Justinian
(C.  viii.  54. 35.  5)  made  the  agreement  binding,  whether  reduced
to  writing  or  not ;  but  it  is  to  be  observed  that  he  provided,  not
that  the  property  should  pass  by  the  agreement,  but  that  the
donor  should  be  bound  thereby  to  make  tradition  of  the  thing.
So  that  the  property  in  the  thing  was  acquired  by  tradition,  and
not  by  donation,  as  a  distinct  mode  of  acquisition.

possunt.  Perficiuntur  autem,  cum
donator  suam  voluntatem  scriptis  aut
sine  scriptis  manifestaverit ;  et  ad  ex-
emplum  venditionis  nostra  constitutio
eas  etiam  in  se  habere  necessitatem
traditionis  voluit,  ut  etiam  si  non  tra-
dantur,  habeant  plenissimum  et  per-
fectum  robur,  et  traditionis  necessitas
incumbat  donatori.  Et  cum  retro
principum  dispositiones  insinuari  eas
actis  intervenientibus  volebant,  si
majores  fuerant  ducentorum  solido-
rum,  constitutio  nostra  eam  quanti-
tatem  usque  ad  quingentos  solidos
ampliavit,  quam  stare  etiam  sine  in-
sinuatione  statuit ;  sed  et  quasdam
donationes  invenit,  quse  penitus  in-
sinuationem  fieri  minima  desiderant,
sed  in  se  plenissimam  habent  firmi-
tatem.  Alia  insuper  multa  ad  uberio-
rem  exitum  donationum  invenimus  :
quae  omnia  ex  nostris  constitutioni-
bus  quas  super  his  exposuimus,  col-
ligenda  sunt.  Sciendum  est  tamen
quod,  et  si  plenissimfe  sint  dona-
tiones, si  tamen  ingrati  existant
homines  in  quos  beneficium  collatum
est,  donatoribus  per  nostram  consti-
tutionem  licentiam  prasstavimus  cer-
tis  ex  causis  eas  revocare  ;  ne  qui
suas  res  in  alios  contulerunt,  ab  his
quamdam  patiantur  injuriam  vel
jacturam,  secundum  enumerates  in
constitutione  nostra  modos.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VII.

149

Donations  not  registered  were  only  void  for  the  sum  by  which
they  exceeded  the  amount  fixed  by  law.  (C.  viii.  54.  34.)  Those
valid  without  registration  at  all  were  such  as  donations  made  by,
or  to,  the  emperor  to  redeem  captives,  or  to  rebuild  edifices
destroyed  by  fire.     (C.  viii.  54.  36.)

Gifts  inter  vivos  were  revocable  in  certain  cases  specified  in
the  Code  (viii.  6Q.  10),  as,  for  instance,  when  the  person  benefited
seriously  injured,  or  attempted  to  injure,  the  person  or  property
of  the  donor,  or  failed  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  gift.  Revo-
cation in  such  cases  was  personal  to  the  donor  and  to  the  receiver,
and  could  not  be  exacted  by  the  heirs  of  the  one,  or  against  the
heirs  of  the  other.

3.   Est  et  aliud  genus  inter  vivos
donationum,  qnod  veteribus  quidem
pnidentibus  penitus  erat  incognitum,
postea    autem    a    junioribus    divis
principibus  introdiictum  est :    quod
ante  nuptias  vocabatur,  et  tacitam
in  se  conditionem  habebat  ut  tunc
ratum  esset,  cum  matrimonium  fuerit
insecutum,  ideoque  ante  nuptias  ap-
pellabatur,  quod  ante  matrimonium
efBciebatur,  et  nunquam  post  nuptias
celebratas  talis   donatio  procedebat.
Sed  primus  quidem  divus  Justinus
pater  noster,  cum   augeri   dotes   et
post  nuptias    fuerat   permissum,   si
quid  tale  eveniret,  etiam  ante  nup-
tias   augeri    donationem    constante
matrimonio  sua  constitutione  permi-
sit ;    sed  tamen  nomen  inconveniens
remanebat,  cum  ante  nuptias  quidem
vocabatur,  post  nuptias  autem  tale
accipiebat   incrementum.      Sed  nos
plenissimo    fini    tradere    sanctiones
(iupientes,  et    consequentia  nomina
rebus  esse  studentes,  constituimus  ut
tales  donationes  non  augeantur  tan-
tum,    sed  et   constante   matrimonio
initium  accipiant,  et  non  ante  nuptias
sed  propter  nuptias  vocentur  ;  et  do-
tibus  in  hoc  exsequentur,  ut  quem-
admodum  dotes  constante  matrimo-
nio non   solum  augentur  sed  etiam
fiunt,  ita   et    istae    donationes   qu?e
propter  nuptias  introductee  sunt,  non
solum  antecedant  matrimonium,  sed
eo  etiam  contracto  augeantur  et  con-
stituantur.

3.  There  is  another  kind  of  donation
inter  vivos   entirely  unknown  to   the
ancient  lawyers,  and  subsequently  in-
troduced by  the  more  recent  emperors.
It  was  termed  the  donatio  ante  nuptias,
and  was  made  under  a  tacit  condition
that  it  should  only  take  efi'ect  when  the
marriage  had  followed  on  it.     Hence
it  was  called  ante  nuptias,  because  it
preceded  the  marriage,  and  never  took
place  after  their  celebration  ;    but  as
it  was  permitted  that  dowries  should
be  increased  even  after  marriage,  the
Emperor  Justin,  our  father,  was  the
first  to  permit,  by  his  constitution,  that
in  case  the  dowry  was  increased,  the  do-
nation ante  nuptias  might  be  increased
also,  even  during  the  marriage;  but  the
donation  still  retained  what  was  thus
an    improper   name,  and    was   called
ante  7iuptias,  while  this  increase  was
made  to  it  after  marriage.     Wishing,
therefore,  to   perfect   the  law  on   the
subject,  and  to  make  names  appropriate
to  things,  w^ehave  enacted  that  such  do-
nations may  not  only  be  increased,  but
may  also  be  first  made  during  marriage,
and  that  they  shall  be  termed,  not  ante
nuptias,  but  propter  nuptias,  and  that
they  shall  be  placed  on  the  footing  of
dowries,  so  far  that,  as  dowries  may  be
not   only   increased,    but    first    made
during  marriage,  so  donations  propter
nuptias  may  not  only  precede  marriage,
but  also,  after  the  tie  of  marriage  has
been  formed,  may  be  increased  or  made.

C.  V.  3.  19,  20.

When  the  wife  passed  z?z  manum  vzW,  all  that  she  had  belonged
to  her  husband ;  when  she  did  not,  all  her  property  belonged  ex-
clusively to  herself,  and  all  gifts  between  husband  and  wife  were
strictly  prohibited  by  law.  But,  as  a  provision  for  the  expenses
of  marriage,  the  wife  contributed  the  dos,  which,  given  before

150

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VII.

marriage,  and  sometimes  increased  after,  belonged  to  the  husband,
subject,  however,  after  the  passing  of  a  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis
et  de  fundo  dotali  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  to  the  obligation  of
restoring  all  immoveables  comprised  in  it  at  the  end  of  the
marriage ;  and,  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  subject  also  to  the
obligation  of  restoring  the  value  of  the  moveables  also.  The
power  of  the  husband  over  the  dos  is  treated  of  in  the  intro-
ductory paragraph  of  the  next  Title.  The  donatio  ante  nuptias,
of  which  we  first  hear  in  a  constitution  of  Theodosius  and
Valentinian  (C.  v.  17.  8.  4),  which  speaks  of  it  as  recognised
by  law,  was  a  gift  on  the  part  of  the  husband  as  an  equivalent  to
the  dos.  It  was  the  property  of  the  wife,  but  managed  by  the
husband,  and  could  not  be  alienated  even  with  her  consent.
Justinian  provided  (Nov.  97.  1)  that  the  wife,  if  survivor,  should
receive  an  equal  value  from  the  donatio  propter  nuptias  with  that
which  the  husband,  if  survivor,  would  have  received  from  the  dos,
the  actual  amount  reserved  for  the  survivor  being  matter  of  agree-
ment between  the  parties.  By  a  constitution  previous  to  Justinian
(C.  V.  14.  7),  the  wife  had,  if  survivor,  an  equal  portion  of  the
donatio  with  that  her  husband  had  of  the  dos.  Justinian  sub-
stituted an  equality  of  value  for  an  equality  of  proportion.

4.  Erat  olim  et  alius  modus  civilis
acquisitionis  jD^r  jus  accrescendi,
quod  est  tale  :  si  communem  servum
liabens  aliquis  cum  Titio,  solus
libertatem  ei  imposuit  vel  vindicta
vel  testamento,  eo  casu  pars  ejus
amittebatur  et  socio  accrescebat.
Sed  cum  pessimum  fuerat  exemplo,
et  libertate  serAoim  defraudari  et  ex
ea'  humanioribus  quidem  dominis
damnum  inferri,  severioribus  autem
dominis  lucrumi  accrescere,  hoc  quasi
invidia  plenum  pio  remedio  per
nostram  constitutionem  mederi  ne-
cessarium  duximus ;  et  invenimus
viam  x^er  quam  et  manumissor,  et
socius  ejus,  et  qui  libertatem  accepit,
nostro  beneficio  fruantur  :  libertate
cum  effectu  procedente  (cujus  favore
et  antiques  legislatores  multa  etiam
contra  communes  regulas  statuisse
manifestum  est),  et  eo  qui  earn  im-
posuit su£e  liberalitatis  stabilitate
gaudente,  et  socio  indemni  conser-
vato,  pretiumque  servi  secundum
partem  dominii  quod  nos  defini-
vimus,  accij)iente.

4.  There  was  formerly  another  mode
of  acquiring  property  by  the  civil  law,
namely,  that  of  accrual ;  as,  if  any  one,
having  a  slave  in  common  with  Titius,
had  himself  alone  enfranchised  him,
either  by  the  vindicta  or  by  testament,
his  share  in  that  slave  was  lost,  and
accrued  to  the  joint  owner.  But,  as
it  was  an  example  of  very  bad  ten-
dency, that  both  the  slave  should  be
defrauded  of  his  freedom,  and  that
the  more  humane  master  should  sufier
loss,  while  the  more  severe  master
profited,  we  have  thought  it  advisable
to  apply  by  our  constitution  a  pious
remedy  to  what  seemed  so  odious,  and
have  devised  means  by  which  the
manumittor,  and  the  co-proprietor,
and  the  freed  slave,  may  be  all  bene-
fited. Freedom,  to  favour  which
ancient  legislators  have  often  violated
the  ordinary  rules  of  law,  shall  be
really  gained  by  the  slave  ;  he  who
has  given  this  freedom,  shall  have  the
delight  of  seeing  it  maintained  ;  and
his  co-proprietor  shall  be  indemnified
by  receiving  a  price  for  the  slave,
proportioned  to  his  interest  in  him,
according  to  the  rates  fixed  in  our
constitution.

C.  vii.  7.  1.  5.

A  man  could  not  be  partly  free,  partly  a  slave.     If,  then,  a
slave  was  enfranchised  by  one  co-proprietor,  was  he  a  slave  or

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VIII.  '  151

free  ?  The  old  law,  as  the  text  informs  us,  pronounced  him  the
former.  If  the  enfranchisement,  however,  was  such  that,  ac-
cording to  the  rules  given  in  Bk.  i.  Tit.  5.  3,  the  enfranchised
slave  would  have  become  only  a  Latinus-Junianus,  the  enfran-
chisement had  no  effect  at  all,  and  the  slave  remained  the  slave,
as  before,  of  both.  But  if  the  enfranchisement  had  been  such
that  he  would  have  been  a  Roman  citizen,  the  interest  of  the
master  who  manumitted  him  accrued  to  the  other  proprietors.
(Paul.  Sent,  iv.  12.  1.)

The  scale  of  prices  alluded  to  in  the  concluding  words  of  the
text  is  given  in  the  Code.     (vii.  7.  1.  5.)

Tit.  VIII.     QUIBUS  ALIENARE  LICET^  VEL  NOK

Accidit  aliquando  ut,  qui  dominus  Sometimes  it  happens  that  he  who

sit,  alienare  non  possit  ;  et  contra,  is  owner  of  a  thing  cannot  alienate  it,

qui  dominus  non  sit,  alienand?e  rei  while,  on  the  contrary,  he  who  is  not

potestatem  habeat:  nam  dotale  prse-  owner  has   the   power  of   alienation,

dium  maritus  invita  muliere  per  le-  Thus,   the  husband  is  prohibited   by

gem    Juliam    prohibetur    alienare,  the  lex  Julia  from  alienating  immove-

quamvis   ipsius    sit   dotis   causa  ei  ables,  which  form  part  of  the  dowry,

datum.      Quod   nos   legem   Juliam  against  the  wish  of  the  wife,  although

corrigentes,    in     meliorem     statum  these  immoveables,  having  been  given

deduximus  :   cum  enim  lex  in  soli  him  as  a  part  of  the  dowry,  belong  to

tantummodo  rebus   locum   habebat  him.     We  have  amended  the  Zeas  J nZict

quse  Italica3  fuerant.  et  alienationes  and  introduced  a  great  improvement,

inhibebat    quas  invita  muliere   fie-  This  law  only  applied  to  Italian  im-

bant,  hypothecas  autem  earum  re-  moveables,  and   it  prohibited   aliena-

rum     etiam     volente     ea,     utrique  tions  made  against  the  wishes  of  the

remedium  imposuimus,  ut  et  in  eas  wife,  and  mortgages  made  even  with

res  quae  in  provinciali   solo  positse  her  consent.     Wishing  to  amend  the

sunt,  interdicta  sit  alienatio  vel  ob-  law  on  each  of  these  points,  we  have

ligatio,    et   neutrum    eorum    neque  declared  that  the  prohibition  of  alie-

consentientibus    mulieribus    proce-  nation    or    mortgage  shall  extend  to

dat,  ne  sexus  muliebris  fragilitas  in  immoveables    in   the   provinces,    and

jperniciem    substantia?   earum    con-  that  neither  alienation  nor  mortgage

verteretur.  shall  be  made  even  with  the  consent

of  the  wife,  lest  the  weakness  of  the
female  sex  should  be  abused  to  the
detriment  of  their  fortunes.
Gai.  ii.  62,  63 ;  C.  v.  13.  15.

The  power  of  alienating  belongs  to  the  owner  and  to  him
only ;  and  every  owner  can  alienate  the  thing  belonging  to  him.
There  are,  however,  exceptions  to  the  rule,  and  these  exceptions
form  the  subject  of  this  Title.

The  dos  of  the  wife  belonged  to  the  husband,  and  his  rights
over  it  were  in  the  ancient  law  unrestricted.  Gradually  a
restraint  was  imposed  on  them,  first,  by  the  obligation  to  give
up,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage,  those   thins^s  of  which

111  .  O       ■'  O

the  value  had  not  been  estimated ;  next  by  the  lex  Julia  de
adulteriiSf  a  jdehiscitum  of  the  time  of  Augustus,  by  Avhich,  as
Paul,  in  his  Sentences,  ii.  21,  informs  us,  ^  cavetur  ne  dotale
prcedium  maritus  invita  uxore  alienet ;'  that  is,  it  rendered  the
consent  of  the  wife  necessary  for  the  alienation  of  immoveables.

152  LIB.  II.     TIT.  VIII.

^

and  also  prevented  mortgage  of  immoveables  even  with  the  wife's
consent,  a  distinction  evidently  arising  from  it  being  apprehended
that  a  woman  would  be  more  easily  persuaded  to  consent  to  mort-
gage than  to  sell  her  property.  In  the  same  way  the  senatus
consultum  Velleiamim  prevented  a  woman  placing  herself  under  an
obligation  for  another  person,  but  did  not  prevent  her  making  a
gift.  (D.  xvi.  1.  4.  1.)  Any  one  can  understand  what  they  are
doing  when  they  sell  or  give  a  thing,  but  may  easily  not  be  aware
how  much  is  involved  when  they  comply  with  the  legal  forms  of
mortgage  or  guarantee.

As  a  general  rule,  dotes  were  given  on  the  condition  that,  after
the  dissolution  of  the  marriage,  the  things  given  should  belong
to  the  wife  or  her  heirs ;  but  a  special  agreement  might  decide
that  they  should  belong  to  the  husband  ;  and  then,  if  alienated
by  him  during  the  marriage,  they  could  not  be  reclaimed  on  its
dissolution.     (D.  xxiii.  5.  17.)

Under  Justinian  immoveables  forming  part  of  a  dos^  wherever
situated,  could  no  longer  be  either  sold  or  subjected  to  a  hypo-
theca,  even  with  the  wife's  consent.

1.  Contra  autem  creditor  pignus  1.  On   the    other  hand,  a  creditor

ex  pactione,  quamvis  ejus  ea  res  non  may,  according  to  agreement,  alienate

sit,  alienare  potest.  Sed  hoc  forsitan  a  pledge,   although   the   thing  is  not

ideo  videtur  fieri  quod  voluntate  de-  his  own  property.     But  this  alienation

bitoris   intelligitur   pignus  alienari,  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  taking

qui  ab  initio  contractus  pactus  est  place  by  the  intention  of  the  debtor,

ut  liceret  creditori  pignus  vendere,  who    in    making    the     contract     has

si   pecunia   non   solvatur.     Sed  ne  agreed   that   the    creditor   might  sell

creditores   jus   suum   persequi  im-  the   thing  pledged,  if   the  debt  were

I)edirentur,  neque  debitores  temere  not  paid.     But   that  creditors   might

suarum   rerum   dominium  amittere  not   be    impeded    in    the    pursuit    of

videantur,  nostra  constitutione  con-  their   rights,    nor    debtors   seem   too

sultum  est,  et  certus  modus  imposi-  easily  deprived   of   their   property,  a

tus  est  i^er  quem  pignorum  distrac-  provision    has    been    made     by    our

tio  possit   procedere  :  cujus  tenore  constitution      establishing      a     fixed

utrique  parti  creditorum  et  debito-  method  of  procedure   for   the  sale  of

rum  satis  abundeque  provisum  est.  pledges,     by     which    the     respective

interests  of   the    creditor  and   debtor
have  been  fully  secured.

Gai.  ii.  64 ;  C.  viii.  34.  3,  pr.  et  seq.

The  power  of  a  creditor  to  sell  the  thing  pledged,  forming
an  exception  to  the  rule  that  none  but  the  owner  could  alienate,
was  so  necessary  a  part  of  his  rights  that  it  could  not  be  taken
from  him  even  by  express  agreement ;  and  an  agreement  ne
vendere  liceat  had  no  other  effect  than  to  make  it  necessary  for
the  creditor  to  give  the  debtor  notice  of  his  intention  to  sell.  (D.
xiii.  7.  4-6.)  Justinian,  by  his  constitution,  permitted  the  parties
to  fix  the  time,  and  place,  and  manner  of  sale  at  their  pleasure,
and  it  was  only  if  there  was  no  special  agreement  that  the  regu-
lations of  his  constitution  were  to  take  effect,  the  gist  of  which
was  that  the  thing  might  be  sold  after  two  years  had  elapsed
from  the  time  when  the  creditor  gave  the  debtor  notice  to  pay.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  VIII.

153

and  that  after  two  more  years  the  creditor,  if  no  purchaser  could
be  found,  should  be  considered  the  owner.     (C.  viii.  34.  3.)

Tutors  and  curators  might,  in  certain  cases,  alienate  the  goods
of  their  pupils  and  of  those  committed  to  their  care ;  but,  at
any  rate  in  the  later  times  of  law,  they  had  to  obtain  the  permis-
sion of  a  magistrate  for  the  alienation  of  rural  immoveables.
(See  C.  V.  37.  22.)

2.  Nunc  admon  endi  sumiis  neque
piipillum  neque  pupillam  uUam  rem
sine  tutoris  auctoritate  alienare
posse.  Ideoque  si  mutuam  pecu-
niam  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  alicui
dederit,  non  contrahit  obligationem,
quia  pecuniam  non  facit  accii^ientis  ;
ideoque  nummi  vindicari  possunt,
i|  sicubi  extent.  Sed  si  nummi  quos
mutuos  dedit,  ab  eo  qui  accepit
bona  fide  consumpti  sunt,  condici
possunt ;  si  mala  tide,  ad  exliiben-
dum  de  liis  agi  potest.  At  ex  con-
trario  omnes  res  pupillo  et  pupillae
sine  tutoris  auctoritate  recte  dari
possunt,  Ideoque  si  debitor  pu-
pillo solvat,  necessaria  est  debitor!
tutoris  auctoritas ;  alioquin  non
liberabitur.  Sed  hoc  etiam  evi-
dentissima  ratione  statutum  «st  in
constitutione,  quam  ad  Csesarienses
advocatos  ex  suggestione  Triboniani
viri  eminentissimi,  qusestoris  sacri
palatii  nostri,  promulgavimus  :  qua
dispositum  est,  ita  licere  tutori  vel
curatori  debitorem  pupillarem  sol-
vere, ut  prius  judicialis  sententia
sine  omni  damno  celebrata  hoc  per-
mittat  ;  quo  subsecuto,  si  et  judex
pronuntiaverit  et  debitor  solvent,
sequatur  hujusmodi  solutionem
plenissima  securitas.  Sin  autem
aliter  quam  disposuimus  solutio
facta  fuerit,  pecuniam  autem  sal-
vam  habeat  pupillus  aut  ex  ea  locu-
pletior  sit,  et  adhuc  eamdem  pecu-
niae summam  petat,  per  exceptionem
doli  mali  poterit  submoveri.  Quod
si  aut  male  consumpserit  aut  furto
amiserit,  nihil  proderit  debitori  doli
mali  exceptio,  sed  nihilominus
damnabitur,  quia  temere  sine  tutoris
auctoritate  et  non  secundum  nos-
tram^  dispositionem  solvent.  Sed
ex  diverso  pupilli  vel  pupil l^e  sol-
vere sine  tutoris  auctoritate  non
possunt ;  quia  id  quod  solvunt  non
fit  accipientis,  cum  scilicet  nullius
rei  alienatio  eis  sine  tutoris  auc-
toritate concessa  est.

2.  It  must  here  be  observed,  that
no  pupil  of  either  sex  can  alienate
anything  without  the  authority  of  a
tutor.  If,  therefore,  a  pupil,  without
the  tutor's  authority,  lend  any  one
money,  the  pupil  does  not  contract
an  obligation  ;  for  he  does  not  make
the  money  the  property  of  the  re-
ceiver, and  the  pieces  of  money  may
be  claimed  by  vindication,  if  they  still
exist.  But  supposing  these  pieces
which  the  pupil  has  lent  are  con-
sumed by  the  borrower,  then,  if  they
are  so  bona  fide,  a  personal  action  may
be  brought ;  if  rtiala  fide,  an  action
ad  exliibendum.  On  the  contrary,  the
pupil  of  either  sex  may  acquire  any-
thing whatsoever  without  the  authority
of  the  tutor  ;  and  therefore  when  a
debtor  pays  a  pupil,  the  debtor  must
have  the  authority  of  the  tutor,  or  he
does  not  free  himself  from  the  debt.
And  we  have,  for  very  obvious  reasons,
declared  by  a  constitution,  published
to  the  advocates  of  Csesarea  on  the
suggestion  of  the  very  eminent  Tri-
bonian,  qusestor  of  our  sacred  palace,
that  the  debtor  of  a  pupil  may  make
payment  to  the  tutor  or  curator,  first
receiving  permission  by  the  sentence
of  a  judge,  obtained  free  of  all  ex-
penses ;  and  if  these  forms  are  ob-
served, a  j)ayment  made  according  to
the  sentence  of  the  judge  will  give  the
debtor  the  most  complete  security.
If  payment  is  made  not  according  to
the  mode  we  have  sanctioned,  the
pupil  who  has  the  money  still  safe  in
his  possession,  or  has  been  made
richer  by  it,  may,  if  he  demand  again
the  same  sum,  be  repelled  by  an
exception  of  dolus  'mcdus.  But  if  he
has  spent  the  money  uselessly,  or
lost  it  by  theft,  the  debtor  cannot
profit  by  the  exception  of  dolus  mains,
and  he  will  be  condemned  to  pay
over  again,  because  he  has  paid  in  a
rash  manner,  without  the  authority
of  the  tutor,  and  has  not  conformed
to  our  rules.  On  the  other  hand,
pupils  of  either  sex  cannot  pay  with-

154  LIB.  II.     TIT.  VIII.

out  the  authority  of  the  tutor,  be-
cause that  which  they  pay  does  not
thereby  become  the  property  of  the
person  who  receives  it,  as  they  are
incapable  of  alienating  anything  with-
out the  authority  of  the  tutor.

Gai.  ii.  80.  82-84  ;  C.  v.  37.  25  ;  D.  xlvi.  3.  14.  8.

The  pupil  might  make  his  condition  better,  but  not  worse.
(See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  21.)  He  could  not  transfer  the  property  in
anything  belonging  to  him,  but  he  could  acquire  the  property  in
anything  transferred  to  him.  Three  illustrations  of  this  doctrine
are  given.  1.  The  pupil  could  not  lend  anything  under  the
contract  called  mutuum,  the  essence  of  which  was  that  the  thing
lent  became  the  property  of  the  borrower,  who  bound  himself  to
give  back  a  thing  of  equal  value.  (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  14.)  If  the
pupil  attempted  to  lend  a  thing  in  this  way,  the  thing  lent  could
be  recovered  by  vindication,  if  it  were  possible  that  the  actual
thing  should  be  restored ;  if  not,  its  value  could  be  recovered  by
a  personal  action  (^condictio)  against  the  borrower;  or  if  the
borrower  had  been  guilty  Oti  mala  fides ^  by  an  actio  adexhibendum,
that  is,  the  borrower  was  called  upon  to  produce  the  thing
borrowed;  and  on  his  being  found  unable  to  do  so,  he  was
condemned  to  pay  not  only  the  value  of  the  thing,  but  damages
to  compensate  for  the  injury  inflicted.

2.  If  the  pupil  was  a  debtor  and  paid  without  authorisation
money  to  a  creditor,  he  could  not  transfer  the  property  in  the
pieces  of  money  paid,  and  had  a  real  action  to  get  them  back,  if
the  creditor  still  had  them ;  if  not,  the  pupil  had  the  same  remedies
as  just  stated  in  regard  to  a  mutuum,  except  that  if  he  brought  a
€ondictio  against  a  creditor  who  had  bona  fide  spent  the  money,
and  the  creditor  could  claim  the  same  amount  of  money  for  the
debt  due  to  him,  the  Roman  jurists  considered  that  instead  of
these  cross  actions  the  debt  of  the  pupil  ought  to  be  considered
to  be  extinguished.     (D.  xxvi.  8.  9.  2.)

3.  If  the  debtor  made  a  payment  to  the  pupil  without  the
authorisation  of  the  tutor,  that  which  he  paid  became  the  property
of  the  pupil ;  and  as  the  pupil  could  not  make  his  condition  worse,
he  could  not  extinguish  debts  due  to  him ;  and  thus  the  debt  was
still  owing,  although  the  pupil  retained  what  was  paid  him.  The
debtor  might  still  be  sued  for  what  he  owed,  and  he  could  only
repel  the  action  by  a  plea  of  dolus  malus  to  the  extent  in  which
the  pupil  then  had  the  money  paid  in  hand,  so  that  if  the  pupil
had  spent  it  all  the  debtor  would  have  to  pay  over  again.
(G.  ii.  84.)  If  the  tutor  authorised  the  payment,  the  debt  was
extinguished ;  but  still  the  creditor  was  not  quite  safe ;  the  pupil
had  a  right  to  receive  from  the  tutor  the  money  paid ;  and  if  he
could  not  obtain  it  from  him,  the  prastor  would,  under  certain
circumstances,  grant  a  restitutio  in  integrum  (see  note  on  intro-
ductory paragraph  of  Bk.   i.   Tit.   23),  and  the  creditor  might

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IX.

155

then  be  obliged  to  pay  over  again,  in  order  that  the  pupil  might
be  kept  free  from  all  loss.  It  was  to  guard  against  this  that
Justinian,  in  the  constitution  alluded  to  in  the  text,  provided  a
means  whereby  the  creditor  should  have  plenissima  securitas.

Tit.  IX.     PER    QUAS    PERSONAS    NOBIS
ACQUIRITUE.

Acquiritur  nobis  non  solum  per
nosmetipsos,  sed  etiam  per  eos  quos
in  potestate  liabemus,  item  per  ser-
vos in  quibus  usumfructiim  habemus,
item  per  homines  liberos  et  servos
alienos  quos  bona  fide  possidemus:
de  quibus  singulis  diligentius  dis-
piciamus.

Gai.

We  acquire  not  only  by  ourselves,
but  also  by  those  whom  we  have  in
our  power  ;  also  by  slaves,  of  whom
we  have  the  usufruct ;  and  by  those
freemen  and  slaves  belonging  to
others  whom  we  possess  hona  fide.
Let  us  examine  separately  these  dif-
ferent cases.

ii.  86.

The  rule  of  law  was,  that  no  one  could  acquire  through  another
person ;  but  if  persons  in  the  power  of  another  acquired  anything,
that  which  they  acquired  became,  by  the  mere  force  of  their
position,  the  property  of  the  person  in  whose  power  they  were ;
and  thus  the  rule  may  be,  perhaps,  more  accurately  expressed  by
saying  that  nothing  could  be  acquired  per  extraneam  personam,
i.e.  through  a  person  who  was  not  in  the  familia  of  the  acquirer.

1.  Igitur  liberi  nostri  utriusque
sexus,  quos  in  potestate  habemus,
olim  quidem  quidquid  ad  eos  perve-
nerat  (exceptis  videlicet  castrensi-
bus  peculiis),  lioc  parentibus  suis
acquirebant  sine  ulla  distinctione.
Et  hoc  ita  parentum  fiebat,  ut  esset
eis  licentia,  quod  per  unum  vel  unam
eorum  acquisitum  est,  alii  filio  vel
extraneo  donare  v«l  vendere  vel,
quocumque  modo  voluerant,  adpli-
care.  Quod  nobis  inhumanum  visum
est,  et  generali  constitutione  emissa,
et  iliberis  pepercimus  et  patribus
debitum  reservavimus.  Sancitum
etenim  a  nobis  est,  ut  si  quid  ex  re
patris  ei  obveniat,  hoc  secundum
antiquam  observationem  totum  pa-
renti  acquirat ;  quse  enim  invidia
est,  quod  ex  patris  occasione  pro-
fectum  est,  hoc  ad  eum  reverti  ?
Quod  autem  ex  alia  causa  sibi  filius-
familias  acquisivit,  hujus  usumfruc-
tnm  patri  quidem  acquirat,  domi-
nium autem  apud  eum  remaneat ;  ne
quod  ei  suis  laboribus  vel  prospera
fortuna  accessit,  hoc  ad  alium  per-
veniens  luctuosiim  ei  procedat.

1.  Formerly,  all  that  children  under
power  of  either  sex  acquired,  except-
ing castrensia  peculia,  was  without
distinction  acquired  for  the  benefit  of
their  parents  ;  so  much  so,  that  the
paterfamilias  who  had  thus  acquired
anything  through  one  of  his  children,
could  give  or  sell,  or  transfer  it  in  any
way  he  pleased  to  another  child  or  to
a  stranger.  This  appeared  to  us  very
harsh,  and  by  a  general  constitution
we  have  relieved  the  children,  and  yet
reserved  for  the  parents  all  that  was
due  to  them.  We  have  declared  that
all  which  the  child  obtains  by  means
of  the  fortune  of  the  father,  shall,
according  to  the  old  law,  be  acquired
entirely  for  the  father's  benefit  :  for
what  hardship  is  there  in  that  which
comes  from  the  father  returning  to
him?  But  of  everything  that  the
filiusfamilias  acquires  in  any  other
way,  the  father  shall  have  the  usufruct,
but  the  son  shall  retain  the  ownershix),
so  that  another  may  not  reap  the  profit
of  that  which  the  son  has  gained  by
his  labour  or  good  fortune.

Gai.  ii.  87 ;  C.  vi.  CI.  6.

The  filiusfamilias  could  not,  in  the  strict  law  of  Rome,  have

156  LIB.  II.      TIT.  IX.

any  property  of  his  own.     Sometimes,  however,  the  father  per-
mitted the  son  to  have  what  was   called  a  peculium,  that  is,  a
certain  amonnt  of  property  placed  under  his  exclusive  control.
This  peculium  remained  in  law  the  property  of  the  father,  but  the
son  had  the   disposition  and  management  of  it  by  his  father's
permission,  and  as  long  as  it  remained  in  the  son's  possession  it
was,  as  far  as  regarded  third  persons,  exactly  like  property  really
belonging  to  the  son  only,  that  is,  they  could  sue  and  recover
from  him  to  the  extent  of  his  -peculium,     (See  Tit.  12.  1  of  this
Book.)     In  the  early  times  of  the  Empire  ^  jiliusfamilias  came
to  have,  under  the  name  of  castrense  peculium,  property  quite
independent  of  his  father.     This  castrense  peculium  consisted  of
all  that  was  given  to  a  son  when  setting  out  upon  military  service,
or  acquired  while  that  service  lasted.     This  belonged  to  the  son
as  completely  as  if  he  had  been  sui  juris,  and  he  had  full  power  of
disposing  of  it  either  during  his  lifetime  or  by  testament.     Filii-
familias  in  castrensi  peculio  vice  patrumfamiliarum  funguntur,
(D.  xiv.  6.  2.)     If,  however,  he  did  not  choose  to  exercise  his
power  of  disposing  of  it  by  testament,  his  father  took  it  at  his
death,  not  as  succeeding  to  it  ah  intestate,  but  as  the  claimant  of
^peculium.     (See  Tit.  12,  pr.)     A  further  benefit  was  extended
to   the  Jiliusfamilias   by   the  institution  of  the  quasi-castrense
peculium,  a  privilege  given  to  certain  civil  functionaries,  corre-
sponding  to  that  given  by  the   castrense  peculium  to  soldiers.
Constantine,  by  a  constitution  (C.  xii.  31),  placed  on  the  footing
of  the  castrense  j)eculium  things  which  a  Jiliusfamilias,  who  was
an  officer  of  the  palace,  received  from  the  emperor  or  gained  by
his   own    economy.       The   same    advantage   was    subsequently
extended  to  many  other  functionaries,  as  well  as  to  advocates  and
certain  ecclesiastical  dignitaries.     The  quasi-castrense  peculium
must  have  existed  in  the  time  of  Ulpian  (D.  xxxvi.    1.   1.   6 ;
xxxvii.  13.  3.  5),  unless  the  passages  in  the  Digest  in  which  he
alludes  to  it  are  interpolated,  but  under  what  form  it  then  existed
we  do  not  know.     In  one  respect  it  slightly  differed  from  the
castrense  peculium  ;  for  the  power  of  disposing  of  it  by  testament
did  not  always  accompany  it,  but  was  only  given  to  the   more
privileged    classes  of  those  who  were  allowed  to  have  such  a
peculium.     Justinian,  however,  altered  this,  and  gave  the  power
of  disposing  of  it  by  testament  to  every  one  who  had  a  quasi-
castrense  peculium.  (See  Tit.  11.  6.)   Constantine  also  introduced
another  kind  of  peculium,  termed  the  peculium  adventitium.    This
consisted  of  everything  received  by  ^jiliusfamilias  in  succeeding,
whether  by  testament  or  not,  to  his  mother.     (C.  vi.  60.    1.)
Subsequent  emperors  included  in  it  all  received  by  succession  or
as  a  gift  from  maternal  ascendants  (C.  vi.  60.  2),  or  by  one  of
two  married  persons  from  the  other  (C.  vi.  60.  1);  and  Justinian,
as  we  learn  from  the  text,  included  under  the  peculium  adventitium
all  that  came  to  the  son  from  any   other   source  than  from  the
father  himself.     The   father  had  the    usufruct  of  the  peculium

\

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IX.

157

adventitlum,  and  it  was  only  the  ownership  that  was  held  by  the
son.  The  peculium  which  came  to  the  son  as  part  of  the  father's
property,  and  which  continued  to  belong  to  the  father,  has  been
termed  by  commentators  profectitium,  because  it  comes  {prqficis-
citur)  from  the  father.

Thepecidium  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  therefore,  i^profectitium,
belonged  to  the  father ;  in  all  other  cases  it  belonged  to  the  son ;
but  the  father  had  the  usufruct  of  the peculmm  adventitium,  while
the  son  had  as  full  power  over  the  castrense  or  quasi- castrense
peculium  as  if  he  had  been  sui  juris.

2.  Hoc  quoque  a  nobis  dispositiim
est  et  in  ea  specie  ubi  parens,  eman-
cipando  liberum,  ex  rebus  qiise  acqui-
sitionem  eflfugiunt,  sibi  tertiam  par-
tem retinere  si  voluerat,  licentiam  ex
anterioribus  constitutionibus  liabe-
bat,  quasi  pro  pretio  quodammodo
emancipationis ;  et  inhumanum  quid-
dam  accidebat,  ut  filius  rerum  sua-
rum,  ex  hac  emancipatione,  dominio
pro  parte  tertia  defraudetur,  et  quod
honoris  ei  ex  emancipatione  additum
est,  quod  sui  juris  effectus  est,  hoc
per  rerum  diminutionem  decrescat.
Ideoque  statuimus  ut  parens,  pro
tertia  eorum  bonorum  parte  dominii
quam  retinere  poterat,  dimidiam,
non  dominii  rerum,  sed  ususfructus
retineat ;  ita  etenim  res  intact?B  apud
filium  remanebunt,  et  pater  ampHore
summa  fruetur,  pro  tertia  dimidia
potiturus.

2.  We  have  also  made  some  regula-
tions with  respect  to  the  x)ower  which
under  former  constitutions  a  father
had,  when  emancipating  his  chiklren,
of  deducting  a  third  part  from  the
things  over  which  he  had  no  right  of
acquisition,  as  if  this  were  the  price  of
the  emancipation.  It  seemed  very  hard
that  the  son  should  thus  be  deprived
by  emancipation  of  a  third  part  of  his
property,  and  that  what  he  gained  in
honour  by  being  emancipated  he  should
lose  in  fortune.  We  have  therefore
enacted  that  the  father,  instead  of  re-
taining a  third  as  owner,  shall  retain
half  as  usufructuary.  Thus  the  owner-
ship in  the  whole  will  remain  with  the
son  unimpaired,  while  the  father  will
enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  larger  portion,
the  half,  namely,  instead  of  the  third ,

C.  vi.  61.  6.  3.

The  usufruct  of  the  father  over  things,  the  ownership  of  which,
as  part  of  the  peculium  adventitium^  belonged  to  the  son,  would
be  lost  by  emancipation.  It  was  as  an  equivalent  for  this  that  the
property  in  one-third  of  these  things  was  given  to  the  father  on
emancipation,  J  ustinian  substitutes  the  usufruct  of  one-half  for
the  ownership  of  one-third.

3.  Item  nobis  acquiritur  quod  servi
nostri  ex  traditione  nanciscuntur,
sive  quid  stipulentur,  vel  ex  qualibet
alia  causa  acquirant :  hoc  enim  nobis  et
ignorantibus  et  invitis  obvenit ;  ipse
enim  servus  qui  in  potestate  alterius
est,  nihil  suum  habere  potest.  Sed
si  heres  institutus  sit,  non  alias  nisi
nostro  j  ussu  hereditatem  adire  potest ;
et  si  nobis  jubentibus  adierit,  nobis
hereditas  acquiritur,  perinde  ac  si
nos  ipsi  heredes  instituti  essemus ;
et  con veni  enter  scilicet  nobis  legatum
per  eos  acquiritur.  Non  solum  autem
proprietas  per  eos  quos  in  potestate

3.  So,  too,  all  that  our  slaves  acquire
by  tradition,  or  stipulation,  or  in  any
other  way,  is  acquired  for  us  ;  and  that
even  without  our  knowledge  and  against
our  wishes.  For  the  slave  who  is  in  the
power  of  any  one  cannot  himself  have
anything  as  his  own.  And  if  he  is
instituted  heir,  he  cannot  enter  on  the
inheritance  except  by  our  direction.
And  if  he  enters  by  our  direction,  we
acquire  the  inheritance  exactly  as  if  we
had  ourselves  been  instituted  heirs.
Legacies,  again,  are  equally  acquired
for  us  by  our  slaves.  And  it  is  not  only
the  ownership  which  is  acquired  for  us

158  LIB.  II.      TIT.  IX.

habemiis,  nobis  acquiritur,  sed  etiam  by  those  whom  we  have  in  our  power,

possessio;  cujuscumque  enim  rei  pos-  but  also  the  possession.    Everything  of

sessionem  aclepti  fuerint,  id  nos  pos-  which  they  have    obtained  possession

sidere  videmur:  nnde  etiam  -pev  eos  we  are  considered  to  possess,  and  con-

usucapio  vel  longi  temporis  possessio  sequently  we  have  through  them  the

nobis  accedit.  benefits  of  usucapion  and  possession

longi  temporis.

Gai.  ii.  87.  89.

All  that  the  slave  had  belonged  to  his  master  ;  and  this  rule
was  subject  to  no  exceptions  such  as  those  introduced  for  the
benefit  of  \hQ  JiUusfamiUas.  The  slave's />ecz«/zMm  was  always  at
the  disposition  of  his  master,  and  it  made  no  difference  what  was
the  mode  in  which  he  acquired :  he  acquired  it  for  his  master
even  thou2:h  his  master  had  not  consented  or  even  known  of  the
acquisition.  Tiierefore,  if  the  slave  received  anything  in  pursu-
ance of  a  stipulation  [sive  quid  stipulentur),  he  acquired  it  for  his
master,  although  he  could  not  bind  his  master  by  promising  any-
thing to  a  person  who  stipulated  for  anything  from  him.  The
slave  could  not  make  his  master's  condition  worse ;  and  as  an
inheritance  might  be  more  onerous  than  lucrative,  for  the  debts
of  the  deceased,  which  the  heir  was  bound  to  pay,  might  exceed
the  value  of  his  property,  a  slave  was  not  permitted  to  accept  an
inheritance,  except  by  his  master's  express  command.  A  legacy,
on  the  other  hand,  could  not  be  otherwise  than  advantageous,  and
therefore  a  legacy  given  to  a  slave  immediately  belonged  to  his
master.  There  was  a  minor  difference  between  the  institution  of
a  slave  as  heir,  and  a  gift  to  him  of  a  legacy,  which  deserves
mention.  The  right  to  a  legacy  dated  from  the  death  of  the
deceased ;  the  right  to  an  inheritance  dated  from  the  time  of
entering  on  an  inheritance.  The  slave,  therefore,  acquired  a
legacy  for  the  benefit  of  the  master  to  whom  he  belonged  at
the  time  when  the  deceased  died ;  but  a  slave  instituted  heir,
acquired  for  the  master  to  whom  he  belonged  at  the  time  of
entering  on  the  inheritance.  If,  therefore,  the  slave  changed
masters  or  became  free  between  these  times,  he  acquired  a  legacy
for  his  former  master,  but  took  an  inheritance  for  his  new  master,
or,  if  free,  for  himself.

The  physical  fact  of  possession  might  be  accomplished  through
a  slave,  but  not  the  intention,  which  was  requisite  for  legal  posses-
sion. It  was  necessary  that  the  master  should  have  the  intention
of  treating  the  thing  possessed  by  the  slave  as  if  he  himself  were
the  owner.  Animo  nostro,  says  Paul,  corj)ore  etiam  alieno,
possidemus.  (D.  xli.  2.  3.  12.)  The  master  could  not,  therefore,
acquire  through  the  slave  legal  possession,  as  opposed  to  mere
detention,  without  his  knowledge  and  consent,  as  he  could  acquire
ownership ;  except,  indeed,  when  the  slave  possessed  a  thing  as
part  of  his  peculiuyn,  for  then  the  permission  to  have  a  pecnliitm
was  considered  as  enabling  the  slave  to  exercise  the  intention  of
ownership.     (D.  xli.  2.  1.  5.)

LIB.  II.      TIT.  IX.

159

All  that  is  said  here  of  the  slave  may,  with  the  necessary  excep-
tions as  to  the  peculia  castrense,  quasi- castr ens e,  and  adventitium,
be  said  of  the  filiusfcwiiilias,  who  equally  stipulated  for  his  father's
benefit,  could  not  make  his  father's  position  worse,  took  inheri-
tances only  under  his  father's  direction,  received  legacies  for  his
father's  benefit,  and  possessed  physically,  but  needed  his  father's
animus  possidendi.

4.  De  iis  autem  servis  in  qiiibus
tantum  usumfructuin  liabemus,  ita
placuit,  lit  quidqiiid  ex  r^nostra  vel
ex  operibus  siiis  acquirant,  id  nobis
adjiciatiir ;  quod  vero  extra  eas
causas  persecuti  sunt,  id  ad  domi-
num  proprietatis  pertineat  :  itaque
si  is  servus  lieres  institutus  sit,  le-
gatunive  quid  ei  aut  donatum  fuerit,
non  usufructuario  sed  domino  pro-
prietatis acquiritur.  Idem  placet  et
de  eo  qui  a  nobis  bona  fide  possi-
detur,  sive  is  liber  sit,  sive  alienus
servus  :  quod  enim  placuit  de  usu-
fructuario, idem  placet  et  de  bona
fide  possessore  ;  itaque  quod  extra
istas  duas  causas  acquiritur,  id  vel
ad  ipsum  pertinet,  si  liber  est,  vel
ad  dominum,  si  servus  est.  Sed
bonse  fidei  possessor,  cum  usuce-
perit  servum,  quia  eo  modo  dominus
fit,  ex  omnibus  causis  per  eum  sibi
acquirere  potest ;  fructuarius  vero
usucapere  non  potest,  primum  quia
non  possidet,  sed  habet  jus  utendi
fruendi,  deinde  quia  scit  servum
alienum  esse.  Non  solum  autem
proprietas  per  eos  servos  in  quibus
usumfructum  habemus  vel  quos
bona  fide  possidemus,  aut  per  li-
beram  personam  qua3  bona  fide  nobis
servit,  nobis  acquiritur,  sed  etiam
possessio.  Loquimur  autem  in  utri-
usque  persona  secundum  defini-
tionem  quam  proximo  exposuimus,
id  est,  si  quam  possessionem  ex  re
nostra  vel  ex  suis  operibus  adepti
fuerint.

4.  As  to  slaves  of  whom  we  have
only  the  usufruct,  it  has  been  decided
that  whatever  they  acquire  by  means
of  anything  belonging  to  us, or  by  their
own  labour,  shall  belong  to  us  ;  but
that  all  they  acquire  from  any  other
source  shall  belong  to  the  owner.  So  if
a  slave  is  made  heir,  or  anything  is
given  him  as  a  legacy  or  gift,  it  is  the
owner,  not  the  usufructuary,  who  re-
ceives the  benefit  of  the  acquisition.
It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  any  one
whom  we  possess  honajide,  whether  a
freeman  or  the  slave  of  another  person
(for  the  rule  with  regard  to  the  usu-
fructuary holds  good  with  regard  to  the
6o?ia  Jide  possessor):  everything  the
person  possessed  acquires,  except  from
one  of  the  two  sources  above  mentioned,
belongs  to  himself,  if  he  is  a  freeman,
and  to  his  master,  if  he  is  a  slave.
When  the  bona  fide  possessor  has
gained  the  property  in  the  slave  by
usucapion,  he,  of  course,  becomes  the
owner,  and  all  that  the  slave  acquires  is
acquired  for  him.  But  the  usufructuary
cannot  acquire  by  use  :  first,  because
he  has  not  the  possession,  but  only  the
right  of  usufruct  ;  and  secondly,  be-
cause he  knows  that  the  slave  belongs
to  another.  It  is  not  only  the  ownership
that  is  acquired  for  us  by  the  slaves  of
whom  we  have  the  usufruct,  or  whom
we  possess  bona  fide,  or  by  a  free  per-
son whom  we  employ  as  our  slave  6oHct
fide  ;  we  acquire  also  the  possession.
But  in  saying  this  we  must  be  under-
stood, with  regard  to  both  slaves  and
freemen,  to  adhere  to  the  distinction
laid  down  i^reviously,  and  to  refer
only  to  the  possession  they  have  ob-
tained by  means  of  something  belong-
ing to  us,  or  by  their  own  labour.

Gai.  ii.  91-94.

The  usufructuary  was  entitled  to  the  fruits  of  the  slave,  that  is,
to  his  services,  and  to  the  profits  derived  from  letting  out  his
services  to  others ;  but  what  the  slave  acquired  by  stipulation,
gift,  legacy,  or  similar  means,  was  no  part  of  the  fruits,  and,
therefore,  did  not  belong  to  the  usufructuary.     If  the  means  of

.  60  LIB.  II.      TIT.  IX.

acquisition  were  derived  from  the  usufructuary,  as,  for  instance,
if  the  slave  acquired  by  parting  with  any  of  the  produce,  then
the  case  would  be  different.

What  is  true  of  the  usufructuary  is  true  also  of  a  bona  fide
possessor  either  of  the  slave  of  another,  or  of  a  person,  in  fact,
free,  but  honestly  believed  to  be  a  slave.  And  the  bona  fide
possessor  has  the  advantage  over  the  usufructuary  pointed  out  in
the  text,  that  as  he  has  the  possession,  Avhich  no  usufructuary  can
have,  for  no  usufructuary  intends  to  treat  the  thing  as  if  he  were
the  owner,  this  possession  may,  if  continued  long  enough,  give  the
rights  of  usucapion  over  a  moveable,  or  of  iJossessio  longi  temporis
over  an  immoveable.

5.  Exhisitaqueapparet,  perlibe-  5.  Hence  it  appears  that  we  cannot

ros  homines  quos  neque  nostro  jiiri  acquire  by  means  of  free  persons  not

subjectos  habemus,  neque  bona  fide  in  our  power,  or  possessed  by  us  bona

possidemus  ;  item  per  alienos  servos  jide  ;  nor  by  the  slave  of  another,  of

in  quibus  neque  usumfructum  habe-  whom  we  have  neither  the    usufruct

mus    neque    possessionem    justam,  nor  the  possession.  And  this  is  meant,

nulla  ex  causa  nobis  acquiri  posse,  when  it  is  said,  that  nothing   can  be

Et  hoc  est  quod  dicitur,  per  extra-  acquired  by  means  of  a  stranger ;  ex-

neam  personam  nihil  acquiri  posse  :  cept,    indeed,   that    according  to    the

excepto  eo  quod  per  liberam  perso-  constitution  of  the  Emperor  Severus,

nam,  veluti  per  procuratorem,  placet  possession  may  be  acquired  for  us  by

non  solum  scientibus  sed   et  igno-  a  free  person,  as  by  a  procurator,  not

rantibus  nobis  acquiri  possessionem,  only  with,  but  even  without  our  know-

secundum    divi   Severi   constitutio-  ledge ;  and  by  this  possession  we  ac-

nem,  et  per  hanc  possessionem  etiam  quire    the    property,    if    it    was    the

dominium,  si  dominus  fuit  qui  tra-  owner  who  delivered  the  thing,  or  the

didit,    vel    usucapionem    aut  longi  usucapion  or  prescription  longi  tempo-

temporis   prsescriptionem,  si   domi-  ris,  if  it  was  not.
nus  non  sit.

Gai.  ii.  95  ;  C.  iv.  27.  1 ;  D.  xli.  1.  20.  2  ;  C.  vii.  32.  1.

The  rule  of  the  older  law  was  that  no  person  could  be  repre-
sented per  extraneam  personam,  i.e.  by  a  person  who  was  not
under  his  power,  in  any  of  those  acts  which  were  regulated  by
the  civil  law.  Thus,  no  one  could  acquire  the  ownership  of  a
thing  for  another;  if  he  received  anything,  as,  for  instance,  by
mancipation  or  in  jure  cessio,  although  he  received  it  expressly
for  another,  still  this  other  person  did  not  thereby  acquire  the
property  in  the  thing.  But  a  mere  natural  fact  such  as  that  of
possession  could  take  place  for  the  benefit  of  one  person  through
another  person,  if  the  person  for  whose  benefit  the  thing  was
possessed  had  but  the  intention  of  profiting  by  it,  and  then  this
possession  might  lead  through  usucapion  to  ownership.  If,  how-
ever, a  person  was  charo-ed  with  the  management  of  the  affairs  of
another,  he  could  exercise  an  intention  of  possessing  for  the  benefit
of  the  person  for  whom  he  acted,  which  a  mere  stranger  could  not ;
and  thus  it  was  possible  Jion  solum  scientibus  sed  etiam  ignorantihus,
i.e.  for  persons  who  did  not  know  even  of  the  fact  of  possession,
to  acquire  legal  possession  through  an  agent.  But,  though  the
text  would  be  likely  to  mislead  us>  we  learn  from  the  constitution

LIB.  11.      TIT.  X.  161

of  Severus  and  Antoninus  (C.  vii.  32.  1),  which  does  not  appear  to
have  made  any  great  change  in  the  law,  that  usucapion  did  not
commence  until  the  person,  for  whose  benefit  the  thing  was
possessed,  knew  of  the  possession.  If  the  procurator  received
possession  from  a  person  who  was  the  owner,  then  it  was  not  a
question  of  getting  ownership  by  usucapion,  and  the  ownership
immediately  passed  to  the  person  for  whom  the  procurator  was
acting,  even  though  this  person  did  not  know  of  what  was  done.
Si  procurator  rem  mihi  emerit  ex  mandato  meo  eique  sit  tradita
rneo  nomine,  dominium  mihi,  id  est  proprietas,  adquiretur  etiam
ignoranti.     (D.  xli.  1.  13.)

6.  Hactenus  tantisper  admonuisse  6.  Wliat   we  have   said  respecting

sufficit,  quemadmodum  singulae  res  the  modes  of  the  acquisition  of  parti-

nobis  acqiiirantur ;  nam  legatorum  cular    things,    may     suffice     for     the

jus,  quo  et  ipso  jure  singulse  res  nobis  present.     For    we    shall   speak   more

acquiruntur,  item  fideicommissorum  conveniently   hereafter  of  the  law  of

ubi  singulse  res  nobis  relinquuntur,  legacies,    by  which    also   we    acquire

opportunius  inferiore  loco  referemus.  property  in  particular   things,  and  of

Yideamus  itaque  nunc  quibus  modis  fideicommissa,     by    which     particular

per  universitatem  res  acquiruntur  :  things  are  left  us.     Let  us  now  speak

si   cui   ergo    heredes    facti    sumus,  of  the  modes  of  acquiring  per  U7iiver~

sive   cujus  bonorum    possessionem  sitatem.     If  we  are  made  heir,  or  seek

petierimus,  vel  si   quem  arrogaveri-  possession  of  the  goods  of  any  one,  or

mus,   vel   si  cujus  bona  libertatum  arrogate    any    one,    or  goods  are  ad-

conservandarum  causa  nobis  addicta  judged  to  us  in  order  to  preserve  the

fuerint,  ejus  res  omnes  ad  nos  trans-  liberty  of   slaves,  in  these    cases    all

eunt.      Ac  prius    de   hereditatibus  that  belonged  to   the  person  to  whom

dispiciamus,    quarum    duplex    con-  we  succeed  passes  to  us.     First  let  us

ditio  est,  nam  vel  ex  testament©  vel  treat   of   inheritances,  which   may  be

ab   intestate   ad   nos   pertinent  ;  et  divided  into   two  kinds,  according  as

prius  est,  ut  de  his  dispiciamus  quse  they  come  to  us  by  testament  or  ab

ex  testamento  nobis  obveniunt.   Qua  intestato.     We   will  begin  with  those

in    re    necessarium    est    initium  de  which  come  to  us  by  testament ;  and

ordinandis  testamentis  exponere.  for  this,  it  is  necessary  in  the  first  place

to  explain  the  formalities  requisite  in

making  testaments.

Gai.  ii.  97-100.

We  now  pass  to  the  acquisition  of  a  universitas  rerum,  to  the
cases  in  which  one  man  succeeded  to  the  persona  of  another,  and
acquired  in  a  mass  all  his  goods  and  all  his  rights.  (See  Introd.
sec.  74.)

Tit.  X.    DE  TESTAMENTIS  ORDINANDIS.

Testamentum    ex  eo  appellatur,  The  word  testament  is  derived  from

quod  testatio  mentis  est.  testatio  meyitis ;  it  testifies  the  determi-

nation of  the  mind.

D.  xxviii.  1.  1.

With  respect  to  this  derivation  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say
that  mentum  is  merely  a  termination,  and  not  derived  from  mens.
Ulpian  {Beg.  20.  1)  gives  as  a  definition  of  a  testament,  mentis
nostrcE  justa  contestatio,  in  id  solemniter  facta,  ut  post  mortem
nostram  valeat;   and   Modestinus  (D.  xxviii.  1.  1)   gives   vohin-

M

162  LIB.  11.      TIT.  X.

tatis  nostrcE  jiista  sententia  de  eo  quod  quis  post  mortem  suam  fieri
vuJt\  the  y^ovdijusta  implying  in  each,  that,  in  order  to  be  valid,
the  testament  must  be  made  in  compliance  with  the  forms  of  law.

1.  Sed  lit  nihil  antiqnitatispenitus  1.   That  nothing  belonging  to  an-

ignoretnr,  sciendum  est  olim  quidem  tiqiiity  may  be  altogether  unknown,

duo  genera  testamentorum    in  usu  it  is  necessary  to  observe,  that  formerly

fuisse :  quorum  altero  in  pace  et  in  there  were  two  kinds  of  testaments  in

otio  utebantur,  quod  calatis  comitiis  use:  the  one  was  employed  in  times  of

appellabant ;  altero,  cum  in  prselium  peace,  and  was  named  calatis  comitiis^

exituri  essent,  quod  procinctum  di-  the  other  was  employed  at  the  moment

cebatur.      Accessit    deinde   tertium  of  setting  out  to  battle,  and  was  termed

genus  testamentorum,  quod  diceba-  procinctum,.    A  third  species  was  after-

tur  per  ses  et  libram,  scilicet  quia  wards  added,  called  per  ses  et  libram,

per  emancipationem,  id  est,   imagi-  being  effected  by  mancipation,  that  is,

nariam  quamdam  venditionem,  age-  an  imaginary  sale  in  the  presence  of  five

batur,  quinque  testibus  et  libripende  witnesses,  and  the  lihripe7is,  all  citizens

civibus  Romanis  puberibus  prtesen-  of  Rome,  above  the  age  of  puberty,  to-

tibus,  et  eo  qui  familise  emptor  di-  gether  with  him  who  was  called  the

cebatur.      Sed    ilia    quidem    priora  emptor  familise.     The  two  former  kinds

duo    genera  testamentorum   ex  ve-  of  testaments  fell  into  disuse  even  in

teribus  temporibus  in  desuetudinem  ancient  times ;  and  that  made  per  gss

abierunt ;    quod  vero  per  ees  et  li-  et  libram  also,   although    it    has  con-

bram  fiebat,  licet  diutius  permansit,  tinned  longer  in  practice,  has  now  in

attamen  partim  et  hoc  in  usu  esse  part  ceased  to  be  made  use  of.
desiit.

Gal  ii.  101-104.

When  the  head  of  a  family  died,  the  law  in  ancient  times  de-
termined on  whom  his  persona,  that  is,  the  aggregate  of  his  poli-
tical and  social  rights,  should  devolve.  But  we  cannot  say  that
there  was  any  definite  period  of  Roman  history  when  a  man  could
not  make  a  will.  Originally,  as  we  learn  from  the  text  which  i&
borrowed  from  Gains,  testaments  were  made  in  the  comitia  calata,
or  in  procinctu.  By  calata  comitia  is  meant  the  comitia  curiata
summoned  {calata^  for  the  despatch  of  what  we  may  term  private
business.  This  took  place  twice  a  year.  We  do  not  know  how
far  it  was  open  to  any  one  at  the  meeting  to  oppose  a  testament,
or  whether  the  comitia  merely  registered  the  testaments  declared
in  their  presence.  Subsequently  the  mode  of  making  testaments
per  (Bs  et  libram,  that  is,  by  a  fictitious  sale,  was  introduced,  and
both  this  mode  and  that  of  declaration  before  the  comitia  curiata
were  used  indiiFerently,  nor  is  there  any  evidence  to  show  that
the  one  form  was  considered  more  appropriate  to  the  patres  than
the  other.  Only  members  of  the  patrician  gentes  sat  in  the  comitia
curiata,  but  that  is  no  reason  why  the  plebeians  should  not  have
come  before  these  comitia  to  declare  their  testaments.  The
Twelve  Tables  declared  uti  legassit  super  pecunia  tutelave  suce  rei,
itajus  esto,  that  is,  every  one's  testamentary  dispositions  should
be  carried  into  effect,  and  the  necessity  for  the  provision  may
have  arisen  from  some  kind  of  tampering  on  the  part  of  members
of  the  comitia  with  the  testaments  of  plebeians.

Procinctus  properly  means  an  army  in  marching  and  fighting
order.    Procinctus  est  expeditus  et  armatus  exercitus  (Gai.  ii.  101 ).

LIB.  II.     TIT.  X.  163

The  testament  is  said  to  be  procinctum,  but  properly  it  ought  to
be  hi  procinctu  factum.  Cicero  speaks  (^de  Or.  i.  53)  of  the  testa-
ment in  procinctu  as  then  in  use,  and  describes  it  as  made  sine
libra  et  tabidis,  that  is,  -without  the  forms  usual  in  the  testamentum
per  CES  et  lihram.

In  the  testamentwn  per  cbs  et  libram,  the  liereditas  was  sold  by
mancipatio  to  the  purchaser.      Originally  the  testator  sold  the  in-
heritance to  the  person  who  was  really  to  be  the  heir.     The
purchaser,  as  Gains  expresses  it,  heredis  locum  obtinebat,  and  the
testator  instructed  him  how  he  wished  his  property  to  be  disposed
of  after  his  death.     But  as  the  sale  was  irrevocable,  a  testator
might  be  very  glad  to  escape  from  proclaiming   an   heir  whose
position  he  could  not  afterwards  affect.     The  object  was  attained
by  selling  the  inheritance  to  a  third  person  ;  and  the  families
emptor  came  to  be  thus  a  mere  stranger,  who  was  only  appointed
dicis  gratia,  to  go  through  the  form  of  sale.    (GrAi.  ii.  103.)    The
process  of  selling  to  this  fictitious  stranger  is  given  at  length  in
Gains  (ii.  104).      The  testator  summoned  five  witnesses,  and  a
balanceholder  (libripens),  and  then  gave  by  mancipation  his  in-
heritance to  the  purchaser.    The  purchaser,  on  receiving  it,  instead'
of  using  the  ordinary  form,  pronounced  these  words,   Familiam
pecuniamque  tuam  endo  mandatam  tutela  custodelaque  mea  recipio
eaque  quo  tujure  testamentum  facere  possis  secundum  legem  puh-
licam  hoc  cere  (or,  as  some  added,  ceneaque  libra)  esto  mihi  empta  :
he  then,  after  striking  the  scale  with  it,  gave  the  piece  of  copper
to  the  testator,  as  the  price  of  the  inheritance.     The  testator  then
stated  aloud  the  terms  of  his  will,  if  he  wished  to  make  his  testa-
ment orally,  or  if  he  had  written  down  the  terms  of  his  testament
he  produced  the  tablets  on  which  his  testament  was  written,  and
said,  Hcec  ita,  ut  in  his   tabulis   cerisque  scripta  sunt,  ita  do,  ita
lego,  ita  testor,  itaque  vos,  Quirites,  testimonium  mihi  perhibetote.
This  announcement  of  his  wishes  was  termed  nuncupatio..    Nun-
cupare  est  palam   nominare.     (Gai.  ib.)     The  term  is  properly
applicable  to  the  oral  statement ;  but  the  expression  of  the  testa-
tor's wishes  was  really  considered  as  always  made  orally,  as  the
announcement  that  the  written  documents  contained  a  declaration
of  the  testator's  wishes  Avas  taken  as  a  c6mpendious  mode   of
stating  what  those  wishes  were.     (Gai.  ib.)

The  concluding  words  of  the  paragraph,  partim  et  hoc  iri  usu
esse  desiit,  allude  to  the  change  above  mentioned  from  a  sale  to
the  real  heir  to  a  sale  to  a  stranger.  The  sale  became  a  mere
matter  of  form,  and  the  testament  was  that  which  the  testator
wrote.  When  the  mode  of  making  testaments  by  the  calata
( omitia  fell  into  disuse  we  do  not  know,  but  probably  at  an  early
time  of  the  Republic.  The  imperial  constitutions  (see  next  Title)
gave  all  soldiers  the  power  of  making  a  testament  without  ob-
serving the  usual  forms,  and  the  testaments  of  soldiers  under  the
Empire  were  valid,  not  being  made  in  procinctu,  that  is,  by  virtue
of  the  army  being  regarded  as  an  assembly  of  citizens,  but  by  the

M  2

164  LIB.  II.      TIT.  X.

power  which  was  given  to  each  soldier  of  making  an  informal
testament.  In  what  way  they  gave  greater  liberty  to  the  soldier
than  the  old  power  of  making  the  will  in  procinctu  we  cannot  say  ;
but  probably  the  making  of  the  testament  in  procinctu  was  con-
nected with  the  taking  of  the  auspices,  and  thus  was  more  liable
to  be  declared  informal.

\
2.  Sed  praedicta  quidem  nomina  2.  These  three  kinds  of  testament

testamentorum  ad  jus  civile  refere-  belonged  to  the  civil  law,  but  after- '
bantnr.  Postea  vero  ex  edicto  prre-  wa,rds  another  kind  was  introduced  by
toris  forma  alia  faciendorum  testa-  the  edict  of  the  prsetor.  By  the  jus
mentorum  introducta  est:  jure  enim  lionorarimn  no  sale  was  necessary,  but
honorario  nulla  emancipatio  deside-  the  seals  of  seven  witnesses  were  suffi-
rabatur,  sed  septem  testium  signa  cient.  The  seals  of  witnesses  were  not
sufRciebant,  cum  jure  civili  signa  required  by  the  civil  law.
testium  non  erant  necessaria.  i

There  was  no  necessity,  as  the  text  tells  us,  that  a  written
will  made  in  the  old  form  per  ces  et  lihram  should  be  sealed.
After  the  praetorian  form  of  making  wills  became  usual,  a  senatus-
consultum  provided  (as  we  learn  from  Paulus,  S.  R.  v.  25.  6)  that
a  written  testament  should  be  made  on  tablets  of  wax.  These
tablets  were  held  together  at  one  margin  with  a  wire,  and  in  the
opposite  margin  there  was  a  perforation  made  through  all  the
tablets,  and  through  this  was  passed  a  triple  linen  thread,  and
then  the  tablets  were  covered  with  wax  on  the  outside,  and  the
witnesses  placed  their  seal  (that  is,  made  a  mark  with  their  rings)
on  this  external  wax.  It  was  also  customary  for  them  to  write
their  names,  and  to  state  whose  will  it  was  they  had  witnessed
(D.  xxviii.  1.  30),  but  this  was  not  a  necessary  part  of  the  form
until  made  so  by  a  constitution  of  Theodosius  and  Yalentinian
(C.  vi.  23.  21).  This  constitution  also  permitted  a  will  to  be
made  in  a  roll,  which,  if  the  testator  wished  to  keep  the  terms
secret,  he  might  close  and  seal  up,  leaving  the  foot  of  the  roll
open,  on  which  the  witnesses  were  to  put  their  seals  and  sub-
scriptions. The  testator  was  under  this  constitution  to  subscribe
his  name  or  get  an  eighth  witness  to  subscribe  it  for  him.

The  praetor,  as  the  text  informs  us,  permitted  an  heir  insti-
tuted in  a  testament  to  have  the  inheritance,  even  though  the
form  of  mancipation  was  not  gone  through.  He  could  not,
indeed,  make  this  person  heir,  for  it  was  necessary  that  an  heir
should  derive  his  rights  exclusively  from  the  civil  law  :  but  he
gave  him  the  honorum  possession  that  is,  permitted  him  to  enjoy
exactly  what  he  would  have  enjoyed  if  he  had  been  properly  con-
stituted heir,  and  then  usucapion  soon  made  him  Quiritanian
owner.  (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  6.)  The  praetor,  however,  required
that  the  testament  in  which  he  was  instituted  should  have  been
made  in  the  presence  and  attested  by  the  seals  of  seven  witnesses.
This  was  really  the  number  of  witnesses  which  there  would  have
been,  had  the  form  of  mancipation  been  gone  through,  if  the
libripens  and  families  emptor  were  included.     Thus  the  praetor.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  X.

165

while  dispensing  with  the  mere  form  of  mancipation,  retained  ex-
actly the  same  check  against  fraud,  which  that  form  would  have
afforded.     (See  Ulp.  Reg,  28.  6.)

3.  Sed  cum  paulatim,  tarn  ex  usu
liominum  quam  ex  constitutionum
emendationibus,  coepit  in  unam  con-
sonantiam  jus  civile  et  prsetorium
iiinofi,  constitutum  est  ut  uno  eodem-
que  tempore  (quod  jus  civile  quo-
dammodo  exigebat)  septem  testibus
adhibitis,  et  subscriptione  testium
(quod  ex  constitutionibus  inventum
est)  et  ex  edicto  preetoris  signacula
testamentis  imponerentur :  ut  hoc
jus  tripartituna  esse  videatur,  ut
testes  quidem.  et  eorum  prsesentia
u]io  contextu,  testamenti  celebrandi
gratia,  a  jure  civili  descendant ;  sub-
scriptiones  autem  testatoris  et  tes-
tium ex  sacrarum  constitutionum
observatione  adliibeantur,  signacula
autem  et  testium  numerus  ex  edicto
prtetoris.

3.  But  when  the  progress  of  society
and  the  imperial  constitutions  had
produced  a  fusion  of  the  civil  and  the
praetorian  law,  it  was  established  thafc
the  testament  should  be  made  all  at
one  time,  in  the  presence  of  seven
witnesses  (two  points  required  by  the
civil  law),  with  the  subscription  of  the
witnesses  (a  formality  introduced  by
the  constitutions),  and  with  their  seals
appended,  according  to  the  edict  of  the
prcetor.  Thus  the  law  of  testament
seems  to  have  had  a  triple  origin.  The
witnesses,  and  their  presence  at  one
continuous  time  for  the  purpose  of
giving  the  testament  the  requisite  for-
mality, are  derived  from  the  civil  law  ;
the  subscriptions  of  the  testator  and
witnesses,  from  the  imperial  constitu-
tions ;  and  the  seals  of  the  witnesses
and  their  number,  from  the  edict  of
the  praetor.

C.  vi.  23.  21.

The  different  formalities  requisite  were  to  be  gone  through  one
immediately  following  after  another,  so  as  to  make  the  whole
one  transaction.  Est  autem  uno  contextu  nullum  actum  alienum
testamento  intermiscere  (D.  xxviii.  1.  21.  3).

It  was  by  the  above-mentioned  constitution,  enacted  in  the
reign  of  Yalentinian  the  Third  in  the  East,  and  of  Theodosius
the  Second,  his  colleague,  in  the  West,  a.d.  439,  that  the  new
form  of  testament  described  in  the  text,  and  which  received  the
name  of  testamentum  tripartitum,  was  substituted  for  the  ancient
ones.  But  in  the  West  the  form  per  cbs  et  libram  was  never
quite  superseded,  and  traces  of  it  are  to  be  found  even  in  the
middle  ag^es.

4.  Sed  his  omnibus  a  nostra  con-
stitutione,  propter  testamentorum
sinceritatem,  ut  nulla  fraus  adhibea-
tur,  hoc  additum  est :  ut  per  manum
testatoris  vel  testium  nomen  heredis
exprimatur,  et  omnia  secundum  il-
lius  constitution  is  tenorem  proce-
dant.

4.  To  all  these  formalities  we  have
enacted  by  our  constitution,  as  an  ad-
ditional security  for  the  genuineness  of
testaments,  and  to  prevent  fraud,  that
the  name  of  the  heir  shall  be  written
in  the  handwriting  either  of  the  testa-
tor or  of  the  witnesses ;  and  that  every-
thing shall  be  done  according  to  the
tenor  of  that  constitution.

C.  vi.  25.  29.

This  additional  formality,  imposed  by  Justinian,  was  after-
wards abolished  by  him.     (Nov.  119.  9.)

5.  Possunt  autem  omnes  testes  et  5.  All  the  witnesses  may  seal  the

uno   annulo   signare  testamentum.     testament  with  the  same  seal  j.  for,  ?is

166  LIB.  IL      TIT.  X.

Quid    eniin   si    septem    annuli  una  Pomponius  says,  what  if  the  engraving

sciilptura   fuerint,    secundum  quod  on   all   seven    seals   were   the    same  I

Pomponio  visum  est  ?     Sed  et  alieno  And  a  witness  may  use  a  seal  belonging

quoque  annulo  licet  signare.  to  another  person.

D.  xxviii.  1.  22.  2.

6.  Testes  autem  adhiberi  possunt  6.  Those  persons  can  be  witnesses

ii  cum  quibvis  testamenti  factio  est.  with  whom  there  is  testamenti  /actio.

Sed  neque  mulier,  neque  impubes,  But  women,  persons  under  the  age  of

neque  servus,  neque  furiosus,  neque  puberty,  slaves,  madmen,  dumb  per-

mutus,  neque  surdus,  nee  cui  bonis  sons,  deaf  persons,  prodigals  restrained

interdictum  est,  nee  is  qiiem  leges  from   having  their  property   in   their

jubent    improbum    intestabilemque  power,  and  persons  declared  by  law  to

esse,    possunt    in   numero   testium  be  worthless  and  incompetent  to  wit-

adhiberi.  ness,  cannot  be  witnesses.

D.  xxviii.  1.  20.  4.  7 ;  D.  xxviii.  1.  26.

When  testaments  were  made  per  (bs  et  libram,  as  no  one  could
'take  part  in  the  ceremony  of  mancipation  who  did  not  share  in
the  jus  Quiintium,  no  peregrinus,  no  one  who  had  not  the  com-
mercium,  could  be  a  witness  to  a  testament.  It  w^as  equally
necessary  that  the  seller,  i.e.  the  testator,  and  the  purchaser,  that
is  (in  the  old  form),  the  heir,  should  share  in  the  jus  Quiritium.
And  therefore  no  one  who  had  not  the  commerciiim  could  take
any  part  in  the  testamenti  factio,  the  ceremony  of  making  a  tes-
tament, either  as  testator,  heir,- or  witness  ;  and  this  was  expressed
by  saying  that  they  were  not  persons  with  whom  there  was
testamenti  factio — not  persons,  that  is,  with  whom  any  citizen
could  join  in  such  a  ceremony.  *

After  the  heir  had  ceased  to  take  a  part  in  the  ceremony  of
mancipation,  there  was  no  longer  any  necessity  for  his  having
those  qualifications  which  enabled  him  to  join  in  the  ancient  cere-
mony. Accordingly,  any  one  who  could  take  under  a  testament,
or  acquire  for  another,  although  unable  to  make  a  testament,  was.
then  said  to  have  the  testamenti  factio.  An  infant,  for  instance,  a
madman,  or  even  a  child  born  after  the  testator's  death,  had  the
testamenti  factio  in  the  sense  of  being  able  to  be  heir  (see  Tit.  19.
4),  and  a  person  might  thus  have  the  testamenti  factio  in  one
character  without  having  it  in  another.  He  could  be  heir,  and
yet  be  unable  "to  be  a  testator  or  a  witness.

Women  could  take  no  part  in  such  a  solemn  legal  act  as  man-
cipation, and  therefore  could  not  be  witnesses  ;  nor  could  women
imake  wills  if  in  the  power  of  their  father,  or  in  the  manus  of
their  husband.  If  they  were  not  in  potestate,  nor  in  manu,  they
could  make  a  will,  provided  that  the  will  was  confirmed  by  the
auctoritas  of  their  tutor.  By  a  fictitious  sale,  however,  coemptio
jidacicB  causa,  a  woman  could  free  herself  from  the  power  of
her  tutor,  and  then  she  could  make  a  will  independently  of  him.
Infants  and  slaves  could  acquire  by  mancipation  for  those  in  whose
power  they  were,  but  could  not  be  witnesses.  The  prodigus  cui
bonis  interdictum  est  was  prevented  from  using  his  rights  of  com-
mercium,  and  therefore  could   not   take  part  in  a  mancipation.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  X.

167

(D.  xxviii.  1.  18.)  The  mutus  had  not  the  testamenti  f actio,
because  he  could  not  utter  the  words  of  the  nuncupatio,  and  the
surdus  also  had  not  the  testamenti  f actio,  because  he  could  not
hear  the  words  of  the  emptor  familicB.  (Ulp.  Frag.  20.  13.)  By
the  later  law,  however,  provision  was  made  for  giving  validity  to
the  wills  of  the  deaf  and  dumb.  (See  infra,  Tit.  12.  3.)

A  person  who  was  made  intestabilis  for  a  crime  could  neither
make  a  testament  nor  take  part  in  the  making  of  one.  Among
such  persons  were  those  condemned  for  libel,  ob  carmen  farnosum
(D.  xxviii.  1.  18.  1),  for  spoliation,  repetundarnm,  (D.  xxii.  5.  15),
or  adultery  (D.  xxii.  5.  14);  or  who,  having  acted  as  witnesses  to
a  will,  afterwards  refused  to  acknowledge  their  signature  and  seal.
(Theoph.  Paraphr,)

7.  Sed  cum  aliquis  ex  testibus  tes-
tamenti quidem  faciendi  tempore
liber  existimabatur,  postea  vero  ser-
vus  apparuit,  tarn  divus  Hadrianus
Catonio  Vero  quam  postea  divi
Severus  et  Antoninus  rescripse-
runt,  subvenire  se  ex  sua  libera-
litate  testamento,  ut  sic  habeatur
atque  si  ut  oportet  factum  esset ;
cum  eo  tempore  quo  testamentum
signaretur,  omnium  consensu  hie
testis  liberorum  loco  fuerit,  neque
quisquam  esset  qui  status  ei  quse-
stionem  moveret.

7.  A  witness,  who  was  thought  to
be  free  at  the  time  of  making  the
testament,  was  afterwards  discovered
to  be  a  slave,  and  the  Emperor  Ha-
drian, in  his  rescript  to  Catonius  Verus,
and  afterwards  the  Emperors  Severus
and  Antoninus  by  rescript,  declared,
that  they  would  aid  such  a  defect  in  a
testament,  so  that  it  should  be  consi-
dered as  valid  as  if  made  quite  regu-
larly ;  since,  at  the  time  when  the  tes-
tament was  sealed,  this  witness  was
commonly  considered  a  free  man,  and
there  was  no  one  to  contest  his  status.

'  C.  vi.  23.  1.

Regard  was  had  only  to  what  was  the  condition  of  witnesses  at
the  time  of  signature,  not  at  that  of  the  death  of  the  testator,
(D.  xxviii.  1.  22.  1.)

8.  Pater  nee  non  is  qui  in  potes-
tate  ejus  est,  item  duo  fratres  qui
in  ejusdem  patris  potestate  sunt,
utrique  testes  in  uno  testamento
fieri  possunt ;  quia  nihil  nocet  ex
una  domo  plures  testes  alieno  ne-
gotio  adhiberi.

8.  A  father,  and  a  son  under  his
power,  or  two  brothers  under  the  power
of  the  same  father,  may  be  witnesses
to  the  same  testament ;  for  nothing
prevents  several  persons  of  the  same
family  being  witnesses  in  a  matter
which  only  concerns  a  stranger.

No  one  of  the  same  family  with  the  testator  or  heir  could  be
a  mtness  to  the  testament,  a  family  comprising,  in  this  sense,  the
head  and  those  under  his  power ;  for  they  had  so  intimate  a  con-
nection with  each  other  that  they  might  be  said  to  be  witnesses
for  themselves,  if  they  were  witnesses  for  each  other.

9.  In  testibus  autem  non  debet
esse,  qui  in  potestate  testatoris  est.
Sed  et  si  filiusfamilias  de  castrensi
peculio  post  missionem  faciat  testa-
mentum, nee  pater  ejus  recte  adhi-
betur  testis,  nee  is  qui  in  potestate
ejusdem  patris  est ;  reprobatum  est

9.  But  no  person  under  power  of
the  testator  can  be  a  witness.  And  if
a  filiusfamilias  makes  a  testament
giving  his  castrense  peculium  after  leav-
ing the  army,  neither  his  father,  nor
any  one  in  power  of  his  father,  can  be
a  witness.     For,  in  this  case,  the  law

168

LIB.  II.     TIT.  X.

enim  in  ea  re  domesticmn  testimo-     does  not  allow  of  the  testimony  of  a
nium.  member  of  the  same  family.

Gal  ii.  105,  106.

This  had  been  a  point  on  which  the  jurists  were  disagreed.
Justinian  here  follows  the  opinion  of  Gains  (ii.  106),  rejecting  that
of  Ulpian  and  Marcellus.  (D.  xxviii.  1.  20.  2.)  The  question
could  only  arise  respecting  a  testament  made  post  mlssionem,  as,  if
it  were  made  during  service,  it  Avould  be  entitled  to  the  exemptions
accorded  to  military  testaments.

10.  Sed  neque  heres  scriptus  ne-
que  is  qui  in  potestate  ejus  est,  neque
pater  ejus  qui  eum  habet  in  potes-
tate, neque  fratres  qui  in  ejusdem
patris  potestate  sunt,  testes  adhiberi
possunt,  quia  totum  hoc  negotium
quod  agitur  testamenti  ordinandi
gratia,  creditur  hodie  inter  testato-
lem  et  heredem  agi :  licet  enim  to-
tum jus  tale  conturbatum  fuerat,  et
veteres  quidem  familias  emptorem
et  eos  ((ui  per  potestatem  ei  coad-
unati  fuerant,  testimoniis  repelle-
bant,  heredi  et  iis  qui  per  potesta-
tem ei  conjuncti  fuerant,  concede-
bant  testimonia  in  testamentis  prse-
stare.  Licet  ii  qui  id  permittebant,
hoc  jure  minime  abuti  eos  debere
suadebant.  Tamen  nos  eamdem
observationem  corrigentes,  et  quod
ab  illis  suasum  est  in  legis  necessi-
tatem  transferentes,  ad  imitationem
pristini  familise  emptoris,  merito
nee  heredi  qui  imaginem  vetustis-
simi  familiae  emptoris  obtinet,  nee
aliis  personis  quae  ei,  ut  dictum  est,
conjunctse  sunt,  licentiam  concedi-
mus  sibi  quodammodo  testimonia
preestare:  ideoque  nee  ejusmodi  ve-
teres constitutiones  nostro  codici
inseri  permisimus.

Gai.  ii.  108.

When  the  heir  had  ceased  to  be  the  familioB  emptor,  he  was
no  party  to  the  transaction,  and  therefore,  it  was  considered,  he
could  be  a  witness.  Gains  (ii.  108)  reprobates  the  custom,  and
Justinian  here  pronounces  it  illegal.  Under  his  legislation,  there
being  no  longer  any  familicB.  emptor,  the  whole  transaction,  to  use
the  language  of  the  ancient  mode,  was  between  the  testator  and
the  heir.

10.  No  person  instituted  heir,  nor
any  one  in  subjection  to  him,  nor  his
father,  in  whose  power  he  is,  nor  his
brothers  under  power  of  the  same
father,  can  be  witnesses  ;  for  the  whole
business  of  making  a  testament  is  in
the  present  day  considered  a  transac-
tion between  the  testator  and  the  heir.
But  formerly  there  was  great  corrfu-
sion  ;  for  although  the  ancients  would
never  admit  the  testimony  of  the
iardilisE,  emptor,  nor  of  any  one  con-
nected with  him  by  the  ties  of  patria
potestas,  yet  they  admitted  that  of  the
heir,  and  of  persons  connected  with
him  by  the  ties  of  patria  potestas,  only
exhorting  them  not  to  abuse  their  pri-
vilege. We  have  corrected  this,  making
illegal  what  they  endeavoured  to  pre-
vent by  persuasion.  For,  in  imitation
of  the  old  law  respecting  the  familix
emptor,  we  refuse  to  permit  the  heir,
who  now  represents  the  ancient/amiZi^e
emptor,  or  any  of  those  connected  with
the  heir  by  the  tie  of  patria  potestas,  to
be,  so  to  speak,  witnesses  in  their  own
behalf  ;  and  accordingly  we  have  not
suffered  the  constitutions  of  preceding
emjDerors  on  the  subject  to  be  inserted
in  our  code.

11.  Legatariis  autemet  fideicom-
missariis,  quia  non  juris  successores
sunt,  et  aliis  personis  quae  eis  con-
junctse  sunt,  testimonium  non  dene-
gavimus.  Imo  in  quadam  nostra
constitutione  et  hoc  specialiter  con-

11.  But  we  do  not  refuse  the  testi-
mony of  legatees,  or  persons  taking
fideicommissa,  or  of  persons  connected
with  them,  because  they  do  not  suc-
ceed to  the  rights  of  the  deceased.  On
the  contrary,  by  one  of  our  constitu-

LIB.  II.      TIT.  X.

169

cessimus,  et  miilto  magis  iis  qui  in
eorum  potestate  sunt,  vel  qui  eos
habent  in  potestate,  hujusmodi  li-
centiam  damus.

tions  we  have  specially  granted  them
this  privilege ;  and  we  give  it  still
more  readily  to  persons  in  their  power,
and  to  those  in  whose  power  they  are.

Gai.  ii.  108.

It  would  appear  that  the  objection  of  his  being  interested,
which  would  make  the  heir  an  unlit  Avitness,  might  also  have  been
urged  against  the  legatee ;  but  the  legatee  was  admitted  as  a
witness  on  the  technical  ground  of  his  not  being  the  successor  of
the  testator.  The  inheritance  was  not  transmitted  to  him,  and  he
Avas  thus  looked  on  as  a  stranger.

By  the  Senatiis-consultum  Libonianum,  passed  in  the  reign
of  Tiberius,  a.d.  16,  it  was  provided  that  if  a  man  wrote  a  testa-
ment for  another,  everything  which  he  wrote  in  his  own  favour
should  be  null.  He  could  not,  therefore,  make  himself  a  tutor
(D.  xxvi.  2.  29),  an  heir,  or  a  legatee.  (D.  xxxiv.  8.)

12.  Nihil  ^utem  interest,  testa-
mentum  in  tabulis  an  in  chartis
membranisve,  vel  in  alia  materia
fiat.

D.  xxxvii.  11.  1.

12.  It  is  immaterial,  whether  a
testament  be  written  upon  a  tablet,
upon  paper,  parchment,  or  any  other
substance.

13.  Sed  et  unum  testamentum
pluribus  codicibus  conficere  quis
potest,  secundum  obtinentem  tamen
observationem  omnibus  factis  :  quod
interdum  etiam  necessarium  est,
veluti  si  quis  navigaturus  et  seeum
ferre  et  domi  relinquere  judiciorum
suorum  contestationem  velit,  vel
propter  alias  innumerabiles  causas
quae  humanis  necessitatibus  immi-
nent.

13.  Any  person  may  execute  any
number  of  duplicates  of  the  same
testament,  each,  however,  being  made
with  prescribed  forms.  This  may  be
sometimes  necessary  ;  as,  for  instance,
when  a  man  who  is  going  a  voyage  is
desirous  to  carry  with  him,  and  also
to  leave  at  home,  a  memorial  of  his
last  wishes  ;  or  for  any  other  of  the
numberless  reasons  that  may  arise
from  the  various  necessities  of  man-
kind.

D.  xxviii.  1.  24.

Each  codex  was  an  original
with  all  the  solemnities  which
been  the  only  one.

14.  Sed  hsec  quidem  de  testa-
mentis  quse  in  scriptis  conficiuntur.
Si  quis  autem  sine  scriptis  voluerit
ordinare  jure  civiH  testamentum,
septem  testibus  adhibitis  et  sua  vo-
luntate  coram  eis  nuncupata,  sciat
hoc  perfectissimum  testamentum
jure  civili  firmumque  constitutum.

testament,  valid  only  if  itself  made
would  have  been  requisite  had  it

14.  Thus  much  may  suffice  con-
cerning written  testaments.  But  if
any  one  wishes  to  make  a  testament,
valid  by  the  civil  law,  without  writing,
he  may  do  so,  if,  in  the  presence  of
seven  witnesses,  he  verbally  declares
his  wishes,  and  this  will  be  a  testament
perfectly  valid  according  to  the  civil
law,  and  confirmed  by  imperial  con-
stitutions.

Thus  a  testator  under  the  legislation  of  Justinian  mig-ht  either
make  his  testament  according  to  the  form  described  in  paragraph  3,
or  orally  before  seven  witnesses.

Sua  voluntate  nuncupata.  The  word  nuncupatio  was  originally
used  to  express  the  declaration  of  the  testator's  intentions,  whether

170

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XL

the  testament  was  written  or  not;  but  later  usage  appropriated  the
term  nuncupata  to  testaments  where  there  was  no  written  will,  and
where  the  testator  declared  his  wishes  orally.

Tit.  XI.     DE  MILITARI  TESTAMENTO.

Supradicta  diligens  observatio,  in
ordinandis     testamentis,     militibus
propter   nimiam  imperitiam  consti-
tutionibus  principalibus  remissa  est ;
nam   quamvis   ii   neque    legitimum
numerum   testiiim    adhibuerint   ne-
que aliam  testamentorum   solemni-
tatem   observaverint,    recte    nihilo-
miniis  testantur  :  videlicet,  cum  in
expeditionibus  occupati  sunt,  quod
merito  nostra  constitutio  introduxit.
Quoquo    enim   modo  voluntas  ejus
suprema     inveniatur,    sive     scripta
sive  sine  scriptura,  valet  testamen-
tum  ex  voluntate  ejus.     lUis  autem
temporibus,   per  quse  citra  expedi-
tionum    necessitatem   in   aliis   locis
vel  suis  aedibus  degunt,  minime  ad
vindicandum    tale    privilegium   ad-
juvantur  ;    sed  testari  quidem,  etsi
tiliifamiliarum    sunt,    propter  mili-
tiam  conceduntur,  jure  tamen  com-
muni,    eadem    observatione    et    in
eorum  testamentis  adliibenda,  quam
et  in  testamentis  paganorum  prox-
ime  exposuimus.

The  necessity  for  the  observance  of
these  formalities   in   the  construction
of    testaments,    has    been    dispensed
with  by  the  imperial  constitutions,  in
favour  of  military  persons,  on  account
of    their    excessive    unskilfulness    in
such    matters.      For,    although    they
neither  employ  the   legal   number  of
witnesses,   nor  observe  any  other  re-
quisite solemnity,  yet  their  testament
is  valid,  but  only  if  made  while  they
are  on  actual  service,  a  proviso  intro-
duced by  our  constitution  with  good
reason.      Thus   in   whatever  manner
the  wishes   of   a  military  person   are
expressed,  whether  in  writing  or  not,
the   testament   prevails   by  the   mere
force    of    his   intention.     But   during
the  times  when  they  are  not  on  actual
service,  and  live  at  their  own  homes,
or  elsewhere,  they  are  not  permitted
to    claim    this   privilege.     A    soldier,
although   a  JUiusfamilias,   gains  from
military  service  the  power  of  making
a   testament  ;   but,    in  this   case,  the
same  formalities   are   required   to   be
observed,   as  we    above    explained   to
be    necessary  for  the   testaments    of
civilians.

Gai.  ii.  109 ;  C.  vi.  21.  17.

The  privilege  of  making  valid  testaments,  independent  of
any  formality,  was  one  given  to  soldiers,  among  many  others  of  a
similar  kind,  rather  as  a  special  favour  to  them  than  from  any
consideration  for  their  nimia  imperitia.  It  dates  from  the  time  of
Julius  Csesar,  who  granted  it  as  a  temporary  concession.  It  was
made  a  general  rule  by  Nerva,  and  confirmed  by  Trajan.  If  the
testament  of  a  soldier  were  written,  no  witness  was  necessary  ;
but  if  not,  it  is  doubtful  whether  one  witness  was  sufficient  to
prove  it ;  probably  one  witness  sufficed,  although  the  law,  at  any
rate  after  the  time  of  Constantino,  required,  as  a  general  rule,
that  two  witnesses  at  least  should  be  produced  in  every  case.
(D.  xxii.  5.  12  ;  D.  xlviii.  18.  17.)  A  soldier  in  the  power
of  a  father  might  make  a  testament  disposing  of  his  castrense,  and,
under  Justinian,  his  quasi- castrense  peculium.  If  he  made  it  while
on  service,  he  need  observe  no  formality  in  making  the  testament;
if  he  did  not  make  it  while  on  service,  he  was  bound  to  observe
the  usual  formalities.    (Gai.  ii.  106.)     The  concluding  words  of

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XI.

171

the  section  are  meant  to  express  that  it  was  by  military  service
that  the  filiusfamilias  gained  the  power  of  disposing  at  any
time  of  his  peculium  castrense,  but  that  this  general  right,  unless
the  soldier  was  on  service,  had  to  be  exercised  with  the  observance
of  the  usual  forms.  Whether  before  the  time  of  Justinian  the  soldier
could  make  a  military  testament  when  not  serving  on  a  campaign
is  doubtful.

1.  The  Emperor  Trajan  wrote  as
follows,  in  a  rescript  to  Statilius  Se-
verus,  with  respect  to  military  testa-
ments :  '  The  privilege,  given  to  mili-
tary persons,  that  their  testaments,
in  whatever  manner  made,  shall  be
valid,  must  be  understood  as  meaning
that  it  must  j&rst  be  clear  that  a  tes-
tament has  been  made  (a  testament
may  be  made  without  writing  even
by  persons  not  on  military  service).
If,  then,  it  appear  that  the  soldier,
concerning  whose  goods  the  action
before  you  is  now  brought,  did,  in
the  presence  of  witnesses,  called  ex-
pressly for  the  purpose,  declare  who
he  wished  should  be  his  heir,  and  to
what  slave  he  wished  to  give  freedom,
he  shall  be  considered  to  have  made
in  this  way  a  testament  without  writ-
ing, and  effect  shall  be  given  to  his
wishes.  But  if,  as  is  often  the  case
in  the  course  of  conversation,  he  said
to  some  one,  ' '  I  appoint  you  my
heir,"  or,  "  I  leave  you  all  my  estate,"
such  words  must  not  be  regarded  as
a  testament.  No  one  is  more  inte-
rested than  soldiers  themselves  that
such  a  precedent  should  not  be  ad-
mitted ;  otherwise  it  would  not  be
difficult  to  procure  witnesses  who,
after  the  death  of  a  soldier,  would
affirm  that  they  had  heard  him  be-
queath his  estate  to  whomever  they
pleased  to  name  ;  and  thus  the  real
intentions  of  soldiers  might  be  de-
feated. '

D.  xxix.  1.  24.

Convocatis  ad  hoc  hominihus.  There  was  no  necessary  cere-
mony of  calling  witnesses.  If  there  was  but  proof  of  what  the
soldier's  wishes  were,  and  that  he  had  declared  them  while  on
service,  that  was  enough.

2.  Quinimo  et  mutus  et  surdus  2.    A    soldier   though    dumb    and

miles  testamentum  facere  potest,  deaf  may  make  a  testament.

D,  xxix,  1.  4,

1.  Plane  de  testamentis  nlilitum
divus  Trajanus  Statilio  Severo  ita
rescripsit :  '  Id  privilegium  quod
militantibus  datum  est,  ut  quoquo
modo  facta  ab  iis  testamenta  rata
sint,  sic  intelligi  debet,  ut  utique
prius  constare  debeat  testamentum
factum  esse,  quod  et  sine  scriptura
a  non  militantibus  quoque  fieri  po-
test. Is  ergo  miles  de  cujus  bonis
apud  te  quseritur,  si  convocatis  ad
hoc  hominibus  ut  voluntatem  suam
testaretur,  ita  locutus  est  ut  decla-
raret  quem  vellet  sibi  heredem
esse,  et  cui  libertatem  tribuere,  po-
test videri  sine  scripto  hoc  modo
esse  testatus,  et  voluntas  ejus  rata
habenda  est.  Ceterum,  si  (ut  ple-
rumque  sermonibus  fieri  solet)  dixit
alicui.  Ego  te  heredem  facio,  aut
bona  mea  tibi  relinquo,  non  oportet
hoc  pro  testamento  observari  :  nee
ullorum  magis  interest  quam  ipso-
rum  quibus  id  privilegium  datum
est,  ejusmodi  exemplum  non  ad-
mitti ;  alioquin  non  difficulter  post
mortem  alicujus  militis  testes  exis-
terent,  qui  affirmarent  se  audisse
dicentem  aliquem  relinquere  se
bona  cui  visum  sit,  et  per  hoc  vera
judicia  subverterentur. '

It  might  happen,  as  Theophilus  suggests,  that  a  soldier,  in-

172

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XI.

capacitated  for  actual  service  by  becoming  deaf  or  dumb,  might
yet  not  have  received  his  missio  causaria  (discharge  for  an  acci-
dental reason).  A  testament  made  by  him  in  the  interval  between
his  loss  of  capacity  and  his  discharge  would  be  considered  entitled
to  all  the  privileges  of  a  military  testament.

3.  Sed  hactenus  hoc  illis  a  prin-
cipalibus  constitutionibus  concedi-
tur,  quatenus  militant  et  in  castris
degunt.  Post  missionem  vero  ve-
terani,  vel  extra  castra  alii  si  faciant
adliuc  militantes  testamentiim,
communi  omnium  civium  Romano-
rum  .jure  facere  debent  ;  et  quod  in
castris  fecerint  testamentum,  non
communi  jure,  sed  quomodo  volu-
erint,  post  missionem  intra  annum
tantum  valebit.  Quid  ergo  si  intra
annum  decesserit,  conditio  autem
heredi  adscripta  post  annum  exti-
terit  ?  An  quasi  militis  testamen-
tum valeat  ?  Et  placet  valere  quasi
militis.

3.  This  privilege  is  only  granted
by  the  imperial  constitutions  to  mili-
tary men,  as  long  as  they  are  on  ser-
vice, and  live  in  the  camp.  There-
fore, veterans  after  their  discharge,
or  soldiers  not  in  the  camp,  can  only
make  their  testaments  by  observing
the  forms  required  of  all  Roman  citi-
zens. And  if  a  testament  be  made
in  the  camp,  and  the  solemnities  of
the  law  are  not  observed,  it  will  con-
tinue valid  only  for  one  year  after
discharge  from  the  army.  Suppose,
therefore,  a  soldier  should  die  within
a  year  after  his  discharge,  but  the
condition  imposed  on  the  heir  should
not  be  accomplished  until  after  the
year,  would  his  testament  be  valid,
on  the  analogy  of  the  testament  of
a  soldier  ?  We  answer,  it  would  be  so
valid.

D.  xxix.  1.  38,  pr.  and  1.

A  soldier  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  making  a  military  testa-
ment while  his  name  was  inscribed  on  the  list  of  the  army  {in
numeris),  and  also  for  a  year  after  it  had  been  taken  off,  but  this
only  provided  he  were  not  discharged  ignominicB  causa.  (D.  xxix.
1.  38.)  The  doubt  as  to  the  validity  of  a  military  testament,  con-
taining a  condition  under  the  circumstances  mentioned  in  the  text,
arose  from  the  doctrine  of  Roman  law  that,  when  the  institution
of  the  heir  was  conditional,  the  operation  of  the  testament  dated
from  the  accomplishment  of  the  condition,  not  from  the  death  of
the  testator.  If,  therefore,  the  soldier  died  within  a  year  after  he
had  quitted  the  service,  but  the  condition  was  not  accomplished
until  the  year  w^as  expired,  the  testament  did  not,  strictly  speak-
ing, take  effect  within  the  year  ;  and  therefore  Justinian  removes
a  difficulty  which  a  rigorous  adherence  to  the  letter  of  the  law
suggested.

4.  If  a  man,  before  becoming  a
soldier,  has  made  his  testament
irregukrly,  and  afterwards,  while  on
service,  opens  it,  and  adds  something
or  strikes  something  out,  or  in  any
other  way  makes  his  wish  manifest
that  this  testament  should  be  valid,
it  must  be  pronounced  to  be  so,  as
being,  in  fact,  a  new  testament  made
by  a  soldier.

,  1.  20.  1.

4.  Sed  et  si  quis  ante  militiam
non  jure  fecit  testamentum,  et  miles
factus  et  in  expeditione  degens  re-
signavit  illud  et  qusedam  adjecit
sive  detraxit,  vel  alias  manifesta  est
militis  voluntas  hoc  valere  volentis,
dicendum  est  valere  hoc  testamen-
tum quasi  ex  nova  militis  voluntate.

D.  xxix

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XL  173

If  tlie  soldier  manifested  his  intention  of  adhering  to  the  dis-
positions of  his  old  testament,  this  was  as  much  a  fresh  expression
of  his  wishes  as  if  he  had  made  a  new  testament.  If  he  was
altogether  silent  on  the  subject,  an  informal  testament  made  before
his  becoming  a  soldier  was  not  valid,  as  it  was  necessary  that
there  should  be  a  positive  declaration  of  his  wishes  made  while  he
was  on  service  to  make  his  testament  valid  as  a  military  one.

5.  Denique  et  si  in  adrogationem  5.  If  a  soldier  is  given  in  arro-
datus  fuerit  miles,  vel  tiliiisfamilias  gation,  or,  being  a  JUlusfamilias,  is
emancipatus  est,  testamentum  ejus  emancipated,  his  testament  is  valid
quasi  ex  nova  militis  voluntate  as  though  by  a  new  expression  of  the
valet,  nee  videtur  capitis  deminu-  wishes  of  a  soldier  ;  and  is  not  con-
tione  irritum  fieri.  sidered  as  invalidated  by  the  capitis

deminutio  he  has  undergone.

D.  xxix.  1.  22,  23.

By  the  law  of  Rome  every  testament  became  void,  irritum,
by  the  testator,  after  its  execution,  suffering  any  of  the  three
kinds  of  capitis  deminutio.  With  soldiers  it  was  otherwise  ;  their
testament  was  not  invalidated  by  undergoing  either  of  the  two
greater  kinds  of  deminutio,  if  it  was  merely  for  an  infraction  of
military  law  that  they  were  condemned  to  a  punishment  involving
either  of  these  kinds  of  alteration  of  status.  (D.  xxviii.  3.  6.  6.)
Nor  was  it  ever  invalidated  by  their  undergoing  the  third  and
least  kind.  The  will  of  the  soldier  was  supposed  to  be  exercised
so  as  to  declare  his  wish  that  the  old  testament  should  be  valid
{quasi  ex  nova  militis  voluntate) ;  and  in  this  case  it  does  not
appear  that  any  positive  declaration  of  such  a  wish  was  necessary.
His  testament,  made  previous  to  his  change  of  status,  was  effec-
tual, to  the  fullest  extent  it  could  be  in  the  new  position  he
occupied.  The  testament  made  by  a  paterfamilias  respecting  his
property  became,  after  arrogation,  an  effectual  disposition  of  his
castrense  peculium  ;  and  one  made  by  a  filiusfamilias  respecting
his  castrense  peculium  became,  after  emancipation,  an  effectual
disposition  of  all  his  property.

6.  Sciendum  tamen  est  quod,  ad  6.  We  may  here  observe,  that,  in
exemplum  castrensis  peculii,  tarn  imitation  of  the  castrense  peculium,
anteriores  leges  quam  principales  both  old  laws  and  imperial  constitu-
constitutiones  quibusdam  quasi  cas-  tions  have  permitted  certain  persons
trensia  dederant  peculia,  et  horum  to  have  a  quasi-castrense  peculium,
quibusdam  permissum  erat  efciam  and  some  of  these  persons  have  been
in  potestate  degentibus  testari.  permitted  to  dispose  of  this  peculium
Quod  nostra  constitutio  latius  ex-  by  testament,  although  they  were  in
tendens  permisit  omnibus,  in  his  the  power  of  another.  Our  consti-
tantiunmodo  peculiis,  testari  quidem  tution  has  extended  this  permission  to
sed  jure  communi.  Cujus  consti-  all  those  who  have  this  kind  of  pe-
tutionis  tenore  perspecto,  licentia  culium,  but  their  testaments  must  be
est  nihil  eorum,  quae  ad  prsefatum  made  with  the  ordinary  formalities,
jus  pertinent,  ignorare.  By  reading  this  constitution  a  person

may   learn    all    that    relates    to    the
privilege  we  have  mentioned.

174  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XII.

VTe  must  not  suppose,  from  the  expression  anteriores  leges,
that  the  peculiwm  quasi-castrense  belongs  to  a  time  of  law  when
leges  were  really  made.  It  is  even  doubtful,  as  we  have  said
before,  whether  the  passages  in  which  it  is  mentioned  by  Ulpian,
the  only  writer  before  Constantine  who  is  supposed  to  refer  to  it,
are  genuine.    (See  note  on  Tit.  9.  1.)

Horiim  quihusdam.  The  right  of  disposing  by  testament  of
the  quasi-castrense  peculium  had,  before  Justinian,  been  granted
only  to  certain  privileged  classes,  such  as  consuls  and  presidents
of  provinces,  among  those  who  were  permitted  to  hold  this
kind  of  peculium.  (C.  iii.  28.  37.)  Justinian  granted  it  to  all.
(C.  vi.  22.  12.)

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  soldiers  had  other  testamentary
privileges  besides  those  mentioned  in  the  text.  They  could  insti-
tute as  heirs  persons  who  were  generally  incapacitated,  such  as
those  who  had  been  deportati,  or  who  were  peregrini.  (Gai.  ii.
110.)  They  were  not  obliged  formally  to  disinherit  their  children,
their  testament  was  not  set  aside  as  inofficious  (C.  iii.  28.  9),  they
could  give  more  than  three-fourths  of  their  property  in  legacies
(C.  vi.  21.  12),  they  could  die  partly  testate  and  partly  intestate
( D.  xxix.  1.  6),  and  could  dispose  of  the  inheritance  by  codicils
(D.  xxix.  1.  36).  The  succeeding  Title  will  show  how  much  they
thus  differed  from  ordinary  citizens.

Tit.  XII.    QUIBUS  NOjST  EST  PERMISSUM  FACERE

TESTAMENTUM.

Non  tamen  omnibus  licet  facere  The  power  of  making  a  testament

testamentum.      Statim  enim  ii  qui  is  not  granted  to  every  one.     In  the

alieno  juri  subjecti  sunt,  testamenti  first  place,    persons  in   the   power   of

faciendi  jus  non  habent,  adeo  qui-  others  have  not  this  right ;  so  much  so,

dem  ut  quamvis    parentes  eis  per-  that,  although  parents  give  permission,

niiserint,  nihilo   magis    jure  testari  still  they  cannot  make  a  valid  testament.

13ossint  :     exceptis    iis   quos     antea  We  must  except  those  whom  we  have

enumeravimus,  et    prfecipue  militi-  already   mentioned,    and   particularly

bus  qui  in  potestate  parentum  sunt,  flliifcmiiUarum  who   are   soldiers,  for

quibus  de  eo  quod  in  castris  acqui-  the  imperial  constitutions  have  given

sierunt,  permissum  est  ex  constitu-  them  the  power  of  bequeathing  what-

tionibus      principum     testamentum  ever  they  have  acquired  while  on  actual

facere.     Quod  quidem  jus  ab  initio  service.     This  permission  was  at  first

tantum  militantibus  datum  est,  tarn  granted  by  the  Emperors  Augustus  and

ex  auctoritate    divi   Augusti    quam  Nerva,   and    the   illustrious   Emperor

Nervae,  nee  non  optimi  imperatoris  Trajan,   to  soldiers  on  service    only  ;

Trajani ;    postea  vero  subscriptione  but  afterwards  it  was  extended  by  the

divi  Hadriani  etiam  dimissis  a  mi-  Emperor  Hadrian  to  veterans,  that  is,

litia,   id    est,    veteranis    concessum  to  soldiers  who  had  received  their  dis-

est.     Itaque  si  quod  fecerint  de  cas-  charge  ;  and  therefore,  it  a,Jiliusfaniilias

trensi   peculio   testamentum,  perti-  disposes  by  testament  of  his  castrense

nebit   hoc   ad   eum  quern   heredem  peculium,  this  peculium  will  belong  to

reliquerint.      Si  vero   intestati    de-  the  person  whom  he  makes  his  heir;

cesserint,  nullis  liberis  v'el  fratribus  but,  if  he   dies  intestate,  without  chil-

superstitibus,  ad  parentes  eorum  jure  dren  or  brothers,  this  j9eett?Mtm  will  then

communi  pertinebit.    Ex  hoc  intelli-  belong,  according  to  the  ordinary  law

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XII.  175

gerepossiimiis,qiiodincastrisacqui-  of  the  patria  potestas,  to  the  person
sierit  miles  qui  in  potestate  patris  in  whose  power  he  is.  We  may  hence
est  neque  ipsum  patrem  adimere  infer,  that  whatever  a  soldier,  although
posse,  neque  patris  creditores  id  under  power,  has  acquired  while  on
vendere  vel  aliter  inquietare,  neque  service,  cannot  be  taken  from  him  even
patre  mortuo  cum  fratribus  com-  by  his  father,  nor  can  his  father's  cre-
mune  esse,  sed  scilicet  proprium  ditors  sell  it,  or  otherwise  disturb  the
ejus  esse  id  quod  in  castris  acqui-  son  in  his  possession,  nor  is  he  bound
sierit;  quamquam  jure  civili  om-  to  share  it  with  brothers  upon  the
nium  qui  in  potestate  parentum  death  of  his  father,  but  it  remains
sunt,  peculia  perinde  in  bonis  pa-  his  sole  property,  although,  by  the
rentum  computantur  ac  si  servorum  civil  law,  the  peculia  of  all  those  who
peculia  in  bonis  dominorum  mime-  are  in  the  power  of  parents,  are
rantur ;  exceptis  videlicet  iis  quae  ex  reckoned  among  the  goods  of  their
sacris  constitutionibus  et  prsecipue  parents,  exactly  as  the  peculium  of  a
nostris  propter  diversas  causas  non  slave  is  reckoned  amongthegoods of  his
acquiruntur.  Prseter  hos  igitur  qui  master  ;  those  goods  excepted,  which,
castrense  vel  quasi  castrense  habent,  by  the  constitutions  of  the  emperors,  and
si  quis  alius  filiusfamilias  testamen-  especially  by  our  own,  are  prevented,
tum  fecerit,  inutile  est,  licet  suae  for  different  reasons,  from  being  so
potestatis  factus  decesserit.  acquired.     With  the  exception,  there-

fore, of  those  who  have  a  castrense  or
quasi-castrense  peculium^  if  any  other
Jiliusfamilias  makes  a  testament,  it  is
useless,  although  he  become  sid  juris
before  his  death.

D.  xxviii.  1.  6  ;  D.  xxix.  1.  1  ;  C.  vi.  61.  3,  4  ;  C.  vi.  59.  11  ;  D.  xlix.  17.
12  ;  D.  xxxvii.  6.  1.  15  ;  D.  xxviii.  1.  19.

The  first  thing,  says  Gaius  (ii.  114),  which  we  have  to  inquire^
if  we  wish  to  know  whether  a  testament  is  valid,  is  whether  the
person  who  made  it  had  the  testamenti  /actio,  that  is,  in  this  in-
stance, could  take  the  part  of  testator  in  the  making  of  a  testa-
ment. To  be  able  to  do  this  he  must  have  the  commercium ;  and
further,  he  must  be  sui  juris,  or  otherwise,  as  he  could  have  no
property,  he  could  have  nothing  to  dispose  of  by  testament.
Every  Roman  citizen  who  was  sui  juris  had  the  right  of  making
a  testament,  and  if  he  was  capable  of  exercising  hi&  right,  and
made  a  formal  testament,  this  testament  was  valid.

The  text  only  gives  one  instance  of  persons  who,  as  not  being
citizens  sui  juris,  were  unable  to  make  a  testament,  viz.,  sous  in
the  power  of  their  father ;  but,  of  course,  all  who,  like  slaves,
peregrini,  and  persons  who  had  undergone  the  greater  or  middle
capitis  deminutio,  were  not  in  the  possession  of  the  rights  of
citizenship,  were  equally  debarred  from  making  testaments.

The  Jiliusfamilias  could  have   no  property  independently  of

his  father,  and  he  could  not  dispose  of  the  property  he  might  have

if  he  became  sui  juris  by   outliving  his  father,  because  a  future

interest  would  not  pass  by  mancipation.     This  was  a  part  of  the

public  law  (testamenti /actio  non  privati  sed  puhlici  juris  est,  D.

i  xxviii.  1.3),  and  could  not  be  waived  by  the  mere  consent  of  a

I  private  individual.     It  required  express  enactment  to  alter  the

law,  and  it  was  so  far  altered  as  to  permit  a  filiusfamilias  to  dis-

I  pose  by  testament   of    a   castrense  or  quasi-castrense  peculium.

176  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XII.

(See  paragr.  6  of  preceding  Title.)  If,  however,  the  possessor  of
the  peculium  did  not  dispose  of  it  by  testament,  the  head  of  the
family  took  it,  previously  to  the  time  of  Justinian,  not  as  heir  ah
intestato^  but  as  lawful  claimant  of  a  peculium.  For  the  possessor,
not  having  exercised  the  powder  the  law  gave  him,  was  in  the  same
position  as  if  the  law  had  never  permitted  such  a  disposition.
Justinian  deferred  this  claim  of  the  head  of  the  family,  when  the
possessor  of  the  peculium  had  left  children  or  brothers.  If  he
had  not  left  any,  the  head  of  the  family  then  took  the  peculium  ;
whether  in  right  of  his  headship,  or  as  heir  ah  intestato,  is  a  dis-
puted point.  We  have,  however,  the  authority  of  Theophilus  in
the  paraphrase  of  this  paragraph  for  supposing,  that  when  Jus-
tinian in  the  text  says  he  took  it  jure  communis  it  is  meant  that
he  took  it  by  the  right  of  patria  potestas,  and  there  seems  no
necessity  for  understanding  the  passage  otherwise.

1.  Pr?eterea  testamentum  facere  1.  Persons,  again,  under  the  age
non  possiint  impnberes,  quia  nullum  of  puberty  cannot  make  a  testament,
eorum  animi  judicium  est ;  item  fu-  because  they  have  not  the  requisite
riosi,  quia  mente  carent ;  nee  ad  rem  judgment  of  mind,  nor  can  madmen,
pertinet,  si  impubes  postea  pubes,  for  they  are  deprived  of  their  senses,
aut  furiosus  postea  compos  mentis  Nor  does  it  make  any  difference  that
factus  fuerit  et  decesserit.  Furiosi  the  former  arrive  at  puberty,  or  the
autem,  si  per  id  tempus  fecerint  latter  regain  their  senses  before  they
testamentum  quo  furor  eorum  inter-  die.  But  if  a  madman  make  a  testa-
missus  est,  jure  testati  esse  viden-  ment  during  a  lucid  interval,  his  tes-
tur  :  certe  eo,  quod  ante  furorem  tament  is  valid ;  and,  of  course,  a  tes-
fecerint,  testamento  valente  ;  nam  tament  which  he  has  made  before  being
neque  testamenta  recte  facta,  neque  seized  with  madness  is  valid,  for  sub-
ullum  aliud  negotium  recte  gestum,  sequent  madness  can  invalidate  neither
postea  furor  interveniens  perimit.  a  previous  testament  validly  made,  nor

any  other  previous   act   validly   per-
formed.

D.  xxviii.  1.  20.  4.  f

In  this  and  the  succeeding  paragraphs  of  this  Title,  instances
are  given  of  persons  who  have  the  right,  but  are  not  capable  of
exercising  it.  A  testament  made  by  a  person  incapable  of  exer-
cising the  right  was  not  rendered  valid  by  his  subsequently  be-
coming capable,  nor  one  made  by  a  person  capable  rendered
invalid  by  his  subsequently  becoming  incapable.

2.  Item  prodigus  cui  bonorum  2.  A  prodigal,  also,  who  is  inter-
suorum  administratio  interdicta  est,  dieted  from  the  management  of  his
testamentum  facere  non  potest ;  sed  own  affairs,  cannot  make  a  testament ;
id  quod  ante  fecerit  quam  interdictio  but  a  testament  made  before  such  in-
suorum  bonorum  ei  fiat,  ratum  est.  terdiction  is  valid.

D.  xxviii.  1.  18.

3.    Item   surdus  et   mutus   non  3.  Again,  a  deaf  and  dumb  person

semper  testamentum  facere  possunt.  is  not  always  capable  of  making  a  tes-

Utique  autem  de  eo  surdo  loquimur  tament :  by  deaf,  we  mean  one  who  is

qui  omnino   non   exaudit,   non  qui  so  deaf  as  to  be  unable  to  hear  at  all,

tarde  exaudit ;  nam  et  mutus  is  in-  not  one  who  hears  with  difficulty ;  and

telligitur  qui  loqui  nihil  potest,  non  by  dumb,  we  mean  a  person  who  can-

qui  tarde  loquitur.    Seepe  etiam  lite-  not  speak  at  all,  not  one  who  merely

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XII.  177

rati  et  eruditi  liomines  variis  causis  speaks  with  difficulty.  For  it  often
et  aiidiendi  et  loquendi  facultatem  happens,  that  even  men  of  good  edu-
amittunt.  Unde  nostra  constitutio  cation  lose  by  various  accidents  the
etiam  his  subvenit,  ut  certis  casibus  faculty  of  hearing  and  speaking.  Our
et  modis  secundum  normam  ejus  constitution,  therefore,  comes  to  their
possint  testari,  aliaque  facere  quae  aid,  and  permits  them,  in  certain  cases,
eis  permissa  sunt,  Sed  si  quis  post  and  Avith  certain  forms,  to  make  testa-
testamentum  factum,  ad  versa  vale-  ments,  and  do  many  other  acts  accord-
tudine  aut  quolibet  alio  casu  mutus  ing  to  the  rules  therein  laid  down,
aut  surdus  esse  coeperit,  ratum  nihi-  But  if  anyone,  after  making  his  testa-
lominus  ejus  permanet  testamentum.     ment,  become  deaf  or  dumb  by  reason

of  ill  health  or  any  other  accident,  his
testament  remains  valid  notwithstand-
ing.

C.  vi.  22.  10 ;  D.  xxviii.  1.  6.  1.

The  constitution  alluded  to  (C.  vi.  22.  10)  permits  a  testament
to  be  made  by  any  deaf  or  dumb  person  not  physically  incapable
of  making  one,  i.e.  by  any  one  not  deaf  and  dumb  from  birth.

4,  C?ecus  atitem  non  potest  facere  4.  A  blind  man  cannot  make  a  tes-
testamentum,  nisi  per  observatio-  tament  except  by  observing  the  forms
nem  quam  lex  divi  Justini  patris  which  the  law  of  the  Emperor  Justin,
nostri  introduxit.  our  father,  has  introduced.

C.  vi.  22.  8.

Justin,  besides  the  seven  witnesses  ordinarily  necessary,  re-
quired, in  the  case  of  a  testament  made  by  a  blind  man,  tliat  a
notary  {tahularius)  should  be  present,  or  else  an  eighth  witness,
who  should  either  write  at  the  dictation  of  the  blind  man,  or  read
aloud  to  him  a  testament  previously  prepared.     (C.  vi.  22.  8.)

5,  Ejus  qui  apud  hostes  est  tes-  5.  The  testament  of  a  captiv.e  in
tamentimi  quod  ibi  fecit  non  valet,  the  power  of  an  enemy  is  not  valid,  if
quamvis  redierit.  Sed  quod,  dum  made  during  his  captivity,  even  al-
in  civitate  f uerat,  fecit,  sive  redierit,  though  he  subsequently  return.  But
valet  jure  postliminii,  sive  illic  de-  a  testament  made  while  he  was  still  in
cesserit,  valet  ex  lege  Cornelia.  his  own  state  is  valid,  either  by  the

jus  postliminii,  if  he  returns,  or  by  the
lex  Cornelia,  if  he  dies  in  captivity.

D.  xlix.  25.  18.

A  captive  was  incapacitated  from  performing,  during  his  cap-
tivity, any  act  good  in  law ;  and  thus,  though  his  right  to  make  a
testament  was  not  lost,  but  only  suspended,  he  was  incapable,
while  a  captive,  of  exercising  the  right.  But  if  he  had  exercised
it  before  his  captivity,  the  testament  was  valid,  whether  he  re-
turned to  his  country  or  not.  If  he  did  return,  the  right  not
having  been  lost,  and  having  been  once  duly  exercised,  the  testa-
ment was  \^\\di  jure  postliminii.  If  he  did  not  return,  but  died  in
captivity,  it  was  still  valid,  as  he  was  supposed,  by  a  fiction  of
law,  to  have  died  at  the  moment  when  he  was  made  captive,  and
so  before  his  captivity  had  begun.  This  fiction  was  introduced
by  a  rather  strained  construction  of  the  terms  of  the  lex  Cornelia
defalsis  (686  A.u.c),  which  provided  that  the  same  penalty  should

N

178

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIII.

attach  to  the  forgery  of  a  testament  of  a  person  dying  in  captivity
as  to  that  of  a  testament  made  by  a  person  dying  in  his  own
country.  It  was  argued  that  the  law  could  never  have  intended
to  attach  a  penalty  to  the  forgery  of  a  testament  which  was  in-
valid. If  it  was  valid,  it  could  only  be  so  by  treating  it  as  if
made  by  a  person  who  had  not  died  in  captivity,  and  whose  right
was  not  suspended  at  the  time  of  his  death.  For  it  was  necessary
that  a  person  should  have  the  power  of  making  a  testament,  not
only  at  the  time  when  he  made  it,  but  also  at  the  moment  of  his
death  ;  but  in  this  we  must  distinguish  between  the  right  to  make
a  testament  and  the  capacity  of  exercising  that  right ;  for  the  loss
of  capacity  to  make  a  testament  did  not,  as  we  have  seen,  affect  a
testament  made  by  one  capable  at  the  time  of  making  it.  This
favourable  interpretation  of  the  lex  Cornelia  [benejicium  legis  Cot-
iielice)  (Paul.  Sent.  iii.  4.  8)  was  gradually  extended,  so  as  to
embrace  every  branch  of  law,  such  as  tutorship,  heirship,  &c.,  to
Avhich  it  could  be  made  applicable.  In  omnibus  partihus  juris  is
qui  reversus  non  est  ab  hostibus  quasi  tunc  decessisse  videtur  cum
captus  est.      (D.  xlix.  15.  18.)

Tit.  XIII.     DE  EXHEREDATIONE  LIBEEORUM,

Non  tameii,  ut  omnimocio  valeat
testamentum,  sufficit  hsec  observatio
qiiam  supra  exposuimiis  ;  seel  qui
lilium  in  potestate  liabet,  curare
debet  ut  eum  lieredem  instituat,  vel
exheredem  eum  nominatim  faciat.
Alioquin  si  eum  silentio  pneterierit,
inutiliter  testabitar :  adeo  quidem
ut,  etsi  vivo  patre  filius  mortuus  sit,
nemo  lieres  ex  eo  testamento  ex-
istere  possit,  quia  scilicet  ab  initio
non  constiterit  testamentum.  Sed
non  ita  de  filiabus,  vel  aliis  per
virilem  sexum  descendentibus  li-
beris  utriusque  sexus,  antiquitati
fuerat  observatum ;  sed  si  non  fue-
rant  heredes  scripti  scriptfeve  vel
exheredati  exlieredatseve,  testamen-
tum  quidem  non  infirmabatur,  jus
autem  accrescendi  eis  ad  certain
portionem  prsestabatur.  Sed  nee
nominatim  eas  personas  exheredare
parentibus  necesse  erat,  sed  licebat
inter  ceteros  hoc  facere.  Nominatim
autem  quis  exlieredari  videtur,  sive
ita  exlieredetur,  Titius  filius  mens
exheres  esto,  sive  ita,  filius  mens
exheres  esto,  non  adjecto  proprio
nomine,  scilicet  si  alius  filius  non
extet.

The  observation  of  the  rules  al-
ready laid  down  is  not,  however,  all
that  is  required  to  make  a  testament
valid.  A  person  who  has  a  son  in
his  power  must  take  care  either  to
institute  him  his  heir,  or  to  disinherit
him  by  name,  for  if  he  pass  him  over
in  silence,  his  testament  will  be  of
no  effect ;  so  much  so,  that  even  if
the  son  die  while  the  father  is  alive,
yet  no  one  can  be  heir  under  the
testament,  because  it  was  void  from
the  beginning.  But  the  ancients  did
not  observe  this  rule  with  regard
to  daughters,  or  to  grandchildren,
through  the  male  line,  of  either  sex  ;
for  although  these  were  neither  in-
stituted heirs  nor  disinherited,  yet
the  testament  was  not  invalidated,
only  they  had  a  right  of  joining
themselves  with  the  instituted  heirs
so  as  to  receive  a  portion  of  the
inheritance.  Parents,  also,  were  not
obliged  to  disinherit  them  by  name,
but  might  include  them  in  the  term
ceteri.  A  child  is  disinherited  by
name,  if  the  words  used  are  ^  let
Titius  my  son  be  disinherited,'  or
thus,  'let  my  son  be  disinherited,'
without  the  addition  of  a  proper
name,  in  case  the  testator  has  na
other  son.

Gai.  ii.  115.  123,  124.  127.

LID.  II.      TIT.  XIII.  179

The  power  of  making  a  testament  was  a  derogation  of  the
strict  law  regulating  the  devolution  of  the  property  of  deceased
persons.  Of  those  whose  claims  a  citizen  sni  juris  was  permitted
thus  to  set  aside,  the  first  and  most  important  class  was  that  of
what  were  called  the  sjii  heredes,  that  is,  persons  in  the  power  of
the  testator,  but  becoming  siii  juris  by  the  testator's  death,  whose
'  own  '  the  inheritance  was  said  to  be  in  consequence  of  their  posi-
tion in  the  family.  (See  Introd.  77.)  They  were  necessarily
either  children  of  the  testator,  or  his  descendants  in  the  male  line,
and  their  position  in  the  testator's  family,  together  with  their  claim
to  his  property  if  he  died  intestate,  was  considered  to  entitle  them
to  have  an  express  declaration  of  his  intention  from  a  testator  who
wished  to  use  his  power  of  depriving  them  of  the  inheritance.  We
have  already  seen,  in  the  case  of  the  castrense  peculium  (Tit.  12.
pr.),  that  when  the  law  permitted  an  exception  to  a  general  rule
of  law,  unless  advantage  was  taken  of  the  exception,  the  general
rule  prevailed.  So  here,  unless  the  testator  expressly  took  ad-
vantage of  his  power  of  disinheriting  the  sui  heredes,  the  general
rule  that  they  succeeded  to  him  prevailed.  The  law  would  not
permit  his  intention  to  disinherit  them  to  be  inferred  from  his
silence,  thus  drawing  a  distinction  in  their  favour  as  compared  with
the  other  classes  of  persons  who  might  inherit  ah  intestato.

In  order,  therefore,  as  the  text  informs  us,  to  disinherit  a  son,
it  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  referred  to  by  name,  or  in  a
special  and  unmistakable  manner,  as,  Tititis  Jilius  mens  exliercs
esto,  or,  in  case  of  an  only  son,  filius  meus  exheres  esto.  But
daughters  and  the  descendants  of  sons  (those  of  daughters
w^ould  not,  of  course,  be  members  of  the  family  at  all)  might
be  disinherited  by  the  general  clause  ceteri  exlieredes  sunto.
Whenever  a  person  existed  at  the  time  the  will  was  made,  to  dis-
inherit whom  it  was  necessary  to  refer  to  him  by  name,  but  who
was  passed  over  altogether,  the  whole  testament  was  entirely  bad^
and  the  testator  was  considered  to  die  intestate.  Nor  was  the  tes-
tament made  valid  by  this  person  ceasing  to  exist  before  the
death  of  the  testator,  although  this  was  a  point  not  established  in
the  time  of  Gaius  (ii.  123).  If  a  person  existed  at  the  time  of
making  the  testament,  to  disinherit  whom  it  was  only  necessary
the  general  clause  should  be  employed,  the  testament  which  did
not  contain  this  was  good,  but  the  person,  if  the  heir  named  and
instituted  in  the  testament  was  among  the  sui  lieredes,  took  a  jjars
virilis  of  the  inheritance,  that  is,  was  joined  so  as  to  make  one
more  heir  and  one  more  equal  sharer  in  the  inheritance  {jus  ac-
crescendi)  ;  if  the  heirs  instituted  were  strangers,  the  person  took
one-half  the  inheritance.  Scriptis  heredihus  accrescunt,  suis  qui-
dem  heredihus  in  partem  virilem^  exiraneis  autem  in  partem  dimi-
diam,     (Ulp.  Ee(/.  22.  17.)

1.  Postumi  quoqiie  liberi  vel  lie-  1.   Posthumous  children,  too,  must

redes ^  institui     debent,    vel    exhe-     either  be   instituted   heirs,    or   disin-
redari;   et  in  eo  par  omnium  con-     herited;  and  the  condition  of  all  such

N  2

180  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIII.

ditio  est,   quod  et  filio  postumo  et  children  is  equal  in  this,  that  if  a  post-

quolibet     ex     ceteris     liberis,    sive  humous  son,  or  any  posthumous   de-

feminini  sexus  sive  masculini,  pr?e-  scendant  of  either  sex,  is  passed  over,

terito,  valet  quidem    testamentum,  the  testament  is  still  valid  ;  but,  by

sed  postea  adgnatione  postumi  sive  the  subsequent  agnation  of  a  posthu-

postumos   rumpitur,    et    ea    ratione  mous  child  of  either  sex,  its  force  is

totum  infirmatur.  Ideoque  si  mulier  broken,  and  it  becomes  entirely  void,

ex     qua     postumus     aut     postuma  And  therefore,  if  a  woman  from  whom

sperabatur,    abortum    fecerit,    nihil  a  posthumous  child  is  expected,  should

impedimento  est  scriptis  heredibus  miscarry,   there  is  nothing  to  hinder

ad    hereditatem     adeundam.       Sed  the    instituted    heirs   from     entering

feminini     quidem    sexus    postum?e  upon   the   inheritance.       Posthumous

vel  nominatim  vel  inter  ceteros  ex-  females  may  be  either  disinherited  by

heredari  solebant  :    dum   tamen,  si  name,   or  by  using  the  general  term

inter  ceteros  exheredentur,   aliquid  ccterl.      If,    however,  they  are  disin-

eis  legetur,  ne  videantur  pr^eterit^e  herited   by  using   the   general    term,

esse  per  oblivionem,    Masculos  vero  something  must  be  left  them  as  a  legacy

postumos,  id  est  filium  et  deinceps,  to  show  that  they  were  not  passed  over

placuit  non  aliter  recte  exheredari,  through  forgetfulness.    But  male  post-

nisi   nominatim    exheredentur,  hoc  humous  children,  i.e.  sons,  and  other

scilicet     modo :     Quicumque      mihi  descendants,    cannot    be    disinherited

filius  genitus  fuerit,  exheres  esto.  except  by  name,  that  is,  in  this  form,

'  Whatever  son  is  hereafter  born  to  me,
let  him  be  disinherited. '

In  the   strictness   of  the  old  civil  laAV,  a  child  born  after  the
death  of  the   testator    (^postumus)  was  incajDable  of  being  insti-
tuted.    He  had  not,  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  any  certain
existence  ;  and  the  law  said,   Incerta  iicrsona  heres  institui  non
potest.     (IJlp.  Reg.  22.  4.)     But  still  it  might  be  that  the  child,
when  born,  was  a  suits  heres  of  the  testator;   and  as  his  agnatio
would  be  considered  in  law  to  date  from  the  time  of  conception,
not  birth,  the  testator  would  pass  over  one  of  his  sui  heredes  if  he
omitted  to  include  him  or  exclude  him  in  the  testament ;  although,
if  he  had  included  him,  the  posthumous   child  could  not  have
taken  anything.     In  the   course  of  time  the  law  permitted  the
posthumous  child,  if  a  suus  heres,  to  be  instituted  as  an  heir ;  but
the  civil  law  never  permitted  the  posthumous  child  of  a  stranger,
i.e.  a  child  born  after  the  death  of  the  testator,  to  be  instituted.    The
prastor,  however,  gave  him  honorum  possessio,  and  Justinian  per-
mitted such  persons  to  be  instituted.  (Bk.  iii.  Tit.  9.  pr.)  And  thus
the  institution  of  a  posthumous  suus  heres  having  once  been  per-
mitted, the  next  step  was  to  consider  it  imperative  on  the  testator,  if
he  wished  to  exclude  the  posthumous  child  from  a  share  in  the  in-
heritance, to  do  so  in  the  case  of  a  son,  by  referring  to  him  spe-
cially {nominatim  does  not,  of  course,  here  mean  ^  byname,'  but  by
a  phrase  expressly  referring  to  him,  such   as  postumiLS  exheres
esto),  and  in  the  case  of  a  daughter,  or  any  descendant  other  than
a  son,  by  adopting  the  general  clause   of  disinheritance,   cetej^i  ,i
exheredes  sunto,  and  also  by  giving  the  child  some  legacy,  however
trifling,  in  order  to  show  that  it  was  not  by  accident  that  the  tes-
tator allowed  this  clause  to  embrace  the  case  of  a  posthumous  child.

The  jurist  Gallus  Aquilius,  who  lived  towards  the  end  of  the
Ivepublic,  invented  a  form  of  institution  by  which  the  case  was

LIE.  II.      TIT.  XIII.

181

provided  for  of  a  son  dying  in  the  testator's  lifetime^  and  then  the
testator  dying,  and  then  there  being  born  a  posthumous  son  of
the  son,  who  would,  of  course,  be  a  suus  lieres  of  the  testator.
(D.  xxviii.  2.  29.)

2.  Those  ought  also  to  be  placed
on  the  footing  of  posthumous  children,
who,  succeeding  in  the  place  of  a  suus
heres,  become  by  a  kind  of  agnation
sui  heredes  of  their  parents.  Thus,  for
instance,  if  any  one  has  a  son  in  his
power,  and  by  him  a  grandson  or
granddaughter,  the  son,  being  first  in
degree,  has  alone  the  rights  of  a  suus
heres,  although  the  grandson  or  grand-
daughter by  that  son  is  under  the
same  parental  power.  But,  if  the
son  should  die  in  his  father's  lifetime,  or
should  by  any  other  means  cease  to  be
under  his  father's  power,  the  grandson
or  granddaughter  would  succeed  in  his
place,  and  would  thus,  by  this  kind  of
agnation,  obtain  the  rights  of  a  situs
heres.  In  order,  then,  that  the  force
of  his  testament  may  not  be  broken,
the  testator,  who  is,  as  we  have  said,
obliged,  in  order  to  make  an  efiectual
testament,  to  institute  his  son  as  heir
or  to  disinherit  him  by  name,  is  equally
obliged  to  institute  as  heir,  or  to  dis-
inherit, a  grandson  or  granddaughter
by  that  son,  lest,  if,  during  his  life-
time, his  son  should  die,  and  the
grandson  or  granddaughter  succeed  in
his  place,  the  force  of  the  testament
may  be  broken  by  this  kind  of  agnation.
Provision  has  been  made  for  this  by
the  lex  Junia  Velleia,  in  which  is  given
a  mode  of  disinheriting  in  such  a  case
like  that  of  disinheriting  posthumous
children.

Gai.  ii.  134.

A  testament  was  made  void,  not  only  by  the  birth  of  a  post-
humous suus  heres,  but  by  any  one  coming  into  the  position  of  a
suus  heres  after  the  time  when  the  testament  was  made.  The
testator  might  (under  the  ancient  laAv)  have  subsequently  married
a  wife  m  manu ;  an  emancipated  son  might  come  again  into  his
father's  power  ;  a  captive  son  might  return  home  ;  or  the  testator
might  adopt  a  person  into  his  fiimily.  In  all  these  cases,  as  well
as  in  that  mentioned  in  the  text,  the  testament  would  be  invali-
dated by  a  process  which  bore  a  close  analogy  to  agnation,  that  is,
by  these  persons  becoming,  otherwise  than  by  birth,  the  sui  heredes
of  the  testator,  just  as  it  Avould  be  by  direct  agnation,  if  a  son  were
born  to  the  testator  after  the  date  of  the  testament.  The  lex
Junia  Velleia  (Gai.  ii.  134),  passed  in    the    time    of  Augustus

2.  Postumorum  autem  loco  sunt
et  hi,  qui  in  sui  heredis  locum  suc-
cedendo,  quasi  adgnascendo  fiunt
parentibus  sui  heredes.  Ut  ecce :  si
(piis  filium  et  ex  eo  nepotem  nep-
temve  in  potestate  habeat,  quia  filius
gradu  pr^ecedit,  is  solus  jura  sui
heredis  habet,  quamvis  nepos  quo-
que  et  neptis  ex  eo  in  eadem  po-
testate sint  ;  sed  si  filius  ejus  vivo
eo  moriatur,  aut  qualibet  alia
ratione  exeat  de  potestate  ejus,
incipit  nepos  neptisve  in  ejus  locum
succedere,  et  eo  modo  jura  suorum
heredum  quasi  adgnatione  nancis-
cuntur.  Ne  ergo  eo  modo  rum-
patur  ejus  testamentum,  sicut  ix)sum
filium  vel  heredem  instituerc  vel
nominatim  exheredare  debet  tes-
tator, ne  non  jure  faciat  testamen-
tum, ita  et  nepotem  neptemve  ex
filio  necesse  est  ei  vel  heredem  in-
stituere  vel  exheredare,  ne  forte  eo
vivo  filio  mortuo,  succedendo  in
locum  ejus  nepos  neptisve  quasi
adgnatione  rumpat  testamentum ;
idque  lege  Juna  Velleia  provisum
est,  in  qua  simul  exheredationis
modus  ad  similitudinem  postu-
morum demonstratur.

182  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIII.

(763  A.U.C.),  provided  (1st)  that  a  testator  miglit  institute  or
exclude  any  one  conceived  before  the  date  of  the  testament  who
should,  after  tlie  date  of  the  testament,  be  born  his  suus  lieres  in
his  lifetime,  thus  giving  a  new  signification  to  postumus  (such  a
person  was  termed  a  postumus  Velleianus,  Ulf.  Frag.  22.  19),
and  (2ndly)  that  he  might  exclude  a  grandchild,  or  other  descen-
dant, born  before  the  date  of  the  testament,  who  might,  if  the
son  of  the  testator  died  in  the  testator's  lifetime,  step  into  the
place  of  his  father,  and  become  a  suus  heres  during  the  testator's
lifetime.  Previously  such  a  person  could  not  have  been  excluded
in  his  capacity  of  suus  lieres,  for  at  the  date  of  the  testament  he
was  not  in  that  position,  which  he  only  attained  subsequently.  He
could,  however,  have  been  instituted  before  the  lex  Junia  Velleia,
for  he  was  an  existing  person,  and  therefore  not  a  persona
incerta;  but  perhaps  the  second  head  of  the  lex  Junia  Velleia
was  regarded  as  confirming  his  institution  in  the  special  quality  of
a  suus  lieres.  (D.  xxviii.  2.  29.  11  to  end.)  If  persons,  coming
under  the  second  head  of  the  lex  Junia  Velleia,  who  received  the
name  of  quasi  postumi  V^elleiani,  were  excluded,  the  lex  Junia
required  that,  as  in  the  case  of  posthumous  sui  lieredes,  the  males
should  be  excluded  nominatim,  and  the  females  inter  ceteros,  but
with  a  legacy.  In  the  case  of  the  testator  having  subsequently
a  child  not  conceived  when  the  testament  was  made  and  born  in
the  testator's  lifetime,  and  in  the  other  cases  of  quasi-agnation
mentioned  above,  no  law  helped  the  testator,  and  he  had  to  make
a  new  testament  in  order  to  die  testate.

3,  Emancipatos  liberos  jure  civili  3.   The  civil  law  does  not  make  it

neque  lieredes  institnere  neqne  ex-  necessary  either  to  institute  emanci-

heredare  necesse  est,  quia  non  sunt  pated  children  heirs,  or  to  disinherit

sui  heredes,     Sed  proetor omnes  tarn  them  in  a  testament;  because  they  are

feminini  sexus   quam  masculini,   si  not  sui  heredes.  But  the  praetor  ordains,

heredes    non    instituantur,  exhere-  that  all  children,   male  or  female,  if

dari  jubet,  virilis  sexus  nominatim,  they  be  not  instituted  heirs,   shall  be

feminini  vero  et  inter  ceteros  ;  quocl  disinherited;  the  males  by  name,  the

si  neque  heredes    instituti   fuerint,  females  under  the  general  term  ceteri:

neque   ita    ut    diximus    exheredati,  for,  if  they  have  neither  been  instituted

promittit  eis  pra3tor  contra  tabulas  heirs,  nor  disinherited  in  manner  before

testamenti  bonorum  possessionem.  mentioned,  the  prcetor  gives  them  pos-
session of  goods  contra  tahulas.

Gai.  ii.  135.

An  emancipated  child,  passing  out  of  the  testator's  family,
ceased  to  be  his  suus  lieres.  But  thous;!!  he  thus  lost  all  lesfal
claim  upon  the  testator's  inheritance,,  yet  he  had  gained  no  pro-
vision by  being  emancipated,  and  the  prsetor,  therefore,  came  to
Ills  relief,  and  set  aside  the  testament,  if  he  had  not  been  expressly
excluded.  He  did  not  do  this  nominally,  for  the  testament  was
legally  good,  but  he  did  what  amounted  to  the  same  thing ;  he
divided  the  j^roperty  equally  among  all  as  if  the  testator  had  died
intestate,  giving  the  children  what  was  termed  ^  possession  of  the
goods  ; '  a  j^ossession  said,  in  this  case,  to  be  contra  tabulas,  as  it

lib.il     tit.  XIIL  183

overthrew  the  provisions  contained  in  the  tablets  of  the  testament.
The  emancipated  son,  however,  had  to  bring  into  account  the  pro-
perty he  had  acquired  since  emancipation,  if  the  effect  of  his  getting
the  testament  set  aside  was  injurious  to  the  properly  instituted  suus
Jieres.  The  properly  instituted  suus  heres  mi^t,  for  example,  have
had  only  a  quarter  of  the  inheritance  left  him,  and  then  he  would
gain,  not  lose,  by  the  emancipated  son  getting  the  testament  set  aside
and  sharing  the  inheritance  with  him.  (D.  xxxvii.  4.  13.)  An
emancipated  daughter  might,  under  the  praetorian  system,  be
in  a  better  position  than  an  unemancipated,  if  both  were  passed
over,  and  might  in  effect  be  in  as  good  a  position  as  the  male
suus  heres  who  was  passed  over,  the  distinction  mentioned  in  the
note  to  the  initiatory  section  being  thus  ignored.  For  if  the
emancipated  daughter  was  passed  over,  the  testament  would  be
overthrown  altogether,  and  she  would,  if  an  only  child,  take  all
the  property;  whereas,  if  the  unemancipated  daughter  was  passed
over,  she  could  only  take  half  at  most.  Antoninus  put  them  on
an  equality,  by  giving  the  emancipated  only  the  share  she  would
have  had,  had  she  not  been  emancipated.    (GrAi.  ii.  125,  126.)

The  old  civil  law  permitted  grandsons,  not  in  the  immediate
power  of  the  testator,  to  be  disinherited  by  the  general  ceteri
clause.  The  praetor  required  them  to  be  disinherited  nominatim.
(Gai.  ii.  129.)  Further,  whereas  in  the  initiatory  section  we  have
been  told  that  the  testament  was  wholly  void  if  a  son  passed  over
died  in  the  lifetime  of  his  father,  and  Gains  tells  us  that  this
was  the  opinion  of  the  Sabinians,  yet  there  are  passages  which
seem  to  show  that  the  praetors  sometimes  upheld  a  contrary  rule.
(D.  xxxvii.  11.  2.  pr.  ;  D.  xxviii.  93.  17.)

4.  Adoptivi  liberi,  quamdiu  sunt  4.  Adoptive  children,  while  under

in  potestate    patris    adoptivi,  ejus-  the  power  of  their  adoptive  father,  are

dem  juris  habenturcu jus  sunt  justis  in  the  same  legal  position  as  children

nuptiis  queesiti :  itaque  heredes  in-  sprung  from   a  legal   marriage  ;    and

stituendi  vel  exheredandi  sunt,  se-  therefore  they  must  either  be  instituted

cundum  ea  qu8e  de  naturalibus  ex-  heirs  or  disinherited,  according  to  the

posuimus.     Emancipati  vero  a  patre  rules  we  have    laid  down   respecting

adoptivo,  neque   jure   civili,  neque  natural  children.     But  neither  by  the

quod  ad  edictum   prsetoris   attinet,  civil  nor  the  praetorian  law  are  children

inter   liberos  numerantur :    qua  ra-  emancipated    by   an    adoptive   father

tione  accidit  ut  ex  diverso,  quod  ad  reckoned  among  his  natural  children,

naturalem  parentem  attinet,  quam-  Hence,  conversely,  adoptive  children,

diu  quidem  sint  in  adoptiva  familia,  while  in   their    adoptive   family,   are

extraneorum  numero  habeantur,  ut  considered  strangers  to  their  natural

eos  neque  heredes  instituere  neque  parents,  who  need  not  institute  them

exheredare    necesse  sit ;    cum   vero  heirs  or  disinherit  them;  but  if  they

emancipati  fuerint  ab  adoptivo  pa-  are    emancipated    by   their    adoptive

tre,  tunc  incipiant  in  ea  causa  esse  father,  they  are  in  the  same  position

in  qua  futuri  essent,  si  ab  i^Dso  na-  in    which    they   would    have   been  if

turali  patre  emancipati  fuissent.  emancipated  by  their  natural  father.

Gai.  ii.  136,  137.

If  an  adopted  son  were  emancipated  by  his  adoptive  father,  he
would,  under  the  old  law,  have  no  legal  claim  on  the  inheritance

184

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIII.

of  his  adoptive  or  his  natural  father.  But  the  praetor  came  to  his
aid,  and  gave  him  '  a  possession  of  the  goods  '  of  his  natural
father,  unless  he  was  expressly  excluded  by  his  natural  father's
testament.  On  his  adoptive  father,  he  would,  after  emancipation,
in  no  case  have  any  claim  whatever,  until  Justinian  altered  the
law  in  the  manner  alluded  to  in  the  next  paragraph.

5.  Such  was  the  ancient  law.    Biity
thinking  that  no  distinction  can  rea-
sonably be  made  between  the  two  sexes,
inasmuch  as  they  equally  contribute  to
the  procreation  of  the  species,  and  be-
cause, by  the  ancient  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  all  children  were  equally  called
to  the  succession  ah  intestato,  which
law  the    prsetors  seem    afterwards  to
have  followed,  we  have  by  our  consti-
tution made  the  law  the  same  both  as
to  sons  a,nd  daughters,  and  also  as  to
all  other  descendants  in  the  male  line,
whether  already  born  or  j)Osthumous  ;
so  that  all  children,  whether  they  are
sui  heredes  or  emancipated,  must  either
be  instituted  heirs  or  be  disinherited
by  name  ;  and  their  omission  has  the
same  effect  in  making  void  the  testa-
ments  of    their   parents,    and  taking
away  the  inheritance  from  the  insti-
tuted heirs,  as  would  be  produced  by
the  omission  of  children  who  were  sui
heredes  or  emancipated,  whether  they
have   been   already   born,    or  having
been  already  conceived  are  born  after-
wards.    With  respect  to  adoptive  chil-
dren, we  have  established  a  distinction
between  them,  which  is  set  forth  in
our  constitution  on  adoptions.

C.  i.  28.  4 ;  C.  viii.  47.  10,  pr.  and  1.

Under  the  legislation  of  Justinian  a  testament  would  be  ren-
dered invalid  by  the  omission  of  any  one  male  or  female  whom  it
was  necessary  either  to  institute  or  exclude,  and  every  exclusion
must  be  made  nominatim.  An  adopted  son,  if  adopted  by  a
stranger,  i.e.  not  an  ascendant,  lost  none  of  his  claims  upon  his
natural  father's  property,  but  only  had  a  claim  upon  that  of  his
adoptive  father,  if  his  father  died  intestate ;  for  if  the  adoptive
father  made  a  testament,  it  was  not  necessary  he  should  notice
the  adoptive  son.  But  an  adopted  son,  if  adopted  by  an  ascen-
dant, either  a  maternal  grandfather  or  an  emancipated  father  (see
Bk.  i.  Tit.  11.  2),  stood  in  the  position  of  a  suus  heres  to  the
ascendant,  and  a  testament  made  by  such  ascendant  would  be
invalid  in  which  he  was  passed  over.

5.  Sed  h?ec  quidem  vetustas  in-
troducebat.  Nostra  vero  constitutio
inter  masculos  et  feminas  in  hoc
jure  nihil  interesse  existimans,  quia
utraque  persona  in  hominum  pro-
creatione  similiter  naturae  officio
fungitur,  et  lege  antiqua  duodecim
tabularum  omnes  similiter  ad  suc-
cessionem  ab  intestato  vocabantur,
quod  et  prsetores  postea  secuti  esse
videntur,  ideo  simplex  ac  simile  jus
et  in  filiis  et  in  filiabus  et  in  ceteris
descendentibus  per  virilem  sexum
personis,  non  solum  natis  sed  etiam
I)ostumis,  introduxit  :  ut  omnes,
sive  sui  sive  emancipati  sunt,  vel
heredes  instituantur  vel  nominatim
exheredentur,  et  eumdem  habeant
effectum  circa  testamenta  parentum
suorum  infirmanda  et  hereditatem
auferendam,  quern  filii  sui  vel  eman-
cipati habent,  sive  jam  nati  sint,
sive  adhuc  in  utero  constituti  postea
nati  sint.  Circa  adoptivos  autem
filios  certam  induximus  divisionem,
quse  nostra  constitutione  quam  super
adoptivis  tulimus,  continetur.

6.  Sed  si  in  exiieditione  occupa-
tus  miles  testamentum  faciat,  et
liberos  sues  jam  natos  vel  postumos

6.  If  a  soldier  on  actual  ser-^dce
make  his  testament,  and  neither  disin-
herit his  children  already  born,  nor  his

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.

185

nominatim  non  exheredaveritj  sed
silentio  preeterierit  non  ignorans  an
habeat  liberos,  silentium  ejus  pro
exheredatione  nominatim  facta  va-
lere  constitutionibus  principiim  can-
turn  est.

posthumous  children  by  name,  but  pass,
them  over  in  silence,  although  he  is
not  ignorant  that  he  has  children,  it  is
provided  by  the  constitutions  of  the
emperors,  that  his  silence  shall  be
equivalent  to  disinheriting  them  by
name.

D.  xxix.  36.  2.

7.  Mater  vel  a^^ls  maternus  ne-
cesse  non  habent  liberos  suos  aut
heredes  instituere  aut  exheredare,
sed  possunt  eos  omittere;  nam  si-
lentium matris,  aut  avi  materni  et
ceterorum  per  matrem  ascenden-
tium,  tantum  facit  quantum  exhere-
datio  patris.  Nee  enim  matri  filium
filiamve,  neque  avo  materno  nepo-
tem  neptemve  ex  filia,  si  eum  eamve
heredem  non  instituat,  exheredare
necesse  est,  sive  de  jure  civili  qua3-
ramus,  sive  de  edicto  praetoris  quo
IDrffiteritis  liberis  contra  tabulas  bo-
norum  possessionem  promittit ;  sed
aliud  eis  adminiculum  servatur,  quod
paulo  post  vobis  manifestum  fiet.

7.  Neither  a  mother  nor  a  maternal
grandfather  need  either  institute  their
children  heirs,  or  disinherit  them,  but
may  pass  them  over  in  silence  ;  for  the
silence  of  a  mother  or  a  maternal
grandfather,  or  of  any  other  ascendant
on  the  mother's  side,  has  the  same
eft'ect  as  a  father  actually  disinheriting
them.  For  a  mother  is  not  obliged  to
disinherit  her  children,  if  she  does  not
institute  them  her  heirs ;  neither  is  a.
maternal  grandfather  under  the  neces-
sity of  instituting  or  of  disinheriting
his  grandson  or  granddaughter  by  a
daughter ;  whether  we  look  to  the
civil  law,  or  'the  edict  of  the  praetor,
which  gives  possession  of  goods  contra
tabulas  to  those  children  who  have
been  passed  over  in  silence.  But
children,  in  this  case,  have  another
remedy,  which  we  will  hereafter  ex-
plain.

Gai.

ui.

71.

The  children  could  never  be  the  sui  heredes  of  their  mother,
for  women  never  had  any  one  in  their  power ;  nor  could  they  be
the  sui  heredes  of  a  maternal  ascendant,  except  by  adoption,  and
the  case  of  adoption  is  not  spoken  of  here.

Aliud  adminiculum.  This  refers  to  the  action  for  setting  aside
the  testament  as  inofficious,  that  is,  made  without  proper  regard
for  natural  ties.    (See  Tit.  18.)

Tit.  XIY.     DE  HEREDIBUS  INSTITUENDIS.

Heredes  instituere  permissum  est
tarn  liberos  homines  quam  servos,  et
tam  proprios  quam  alienos.  Pro-
prios  autem,  olim  quidem  secundum
plurium  sententias,  non  aliter  quam
cum  libertate  recte  instituere  licebat.
Hodie  vero  etiam  sine  libertate  ex
nostra  constitutione  heredes  eos  in-
stituere i)ermissum  est.  Quod  non
per  innovationem  induximus,  sed
quoniam  a^quius  erat,  et  Atilicino
placuisse  Paulus  suis  libris,  quos
tam  ad  Massurium  Sabinum  quam
ad  Plautium  scripsit,  refert.     Pro-

A  man  may  institute  as  his  heirs,
either  freemen  or  slaves,  and  either
his  own  slaves  or  those  of  another.
Formerly,  according  to  the  more  re-
ceived opinion,  no  one  could  properly
institute  his  own  slaves,  unless  he  also
freed  them;  but  now,  by  our  constitu-
tion, a  testator  may  institute  his  slave
without  expressly  enfranchising  him.
And  we  have  introduced  this  rule,  not
as  an  innovation,  but  because  it  seemed
equitable;  and  Paulus,  in  his  writings
on  Massurius  Sabinus  and  Plautius,
informs  us  that  this  was  the  opinion

186  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.

prius  autem  servus  etiam  is  intelligi-  of  Atilicinus.    Among  a  testator's  own

tur  in  quo  nuclam  proprietatem  tes-  slaves  is  included  one  in  whom   the

tator  habet,   alio  usumfructum  ha-  testator  had   only  a  bare  ownership,

bente.     Est  tamen  casus  in  quo  nee  another    having    the   usufruct.      But

€umlibertateutiliter  servus  a  domina  there  is  a  case,  in  which  the  institution

heres   instituitur,    ut    constitutione  of  a  slave  by  his  mistress  is  void,  al-

divorimi  Severi  et  Antonini  cavetur,  though  his  liberty  is  expressly  given

cujus  verba hsec sunt:  'Servumadul-  to  him,  according  to  the  provisions  of

terio  maculatum  non  jure  testamento  a  constitution  of  the  Emperors  Severus

manumissum  ante  sententiam  ab  ea  and  Antoninus,  in  these  words  :  '  Rea-

muliere  videri,  quae  rea  fuerat  ejus-  son  demands  that  no  slave,  accused  of

dem  criminis  postulata,  rationis  est ;  adultery  with  his  mistress,  shall  be  al-

quare    sequitur,  ut    in    eumdem   a  lowed,    before    his    sentence    is   pro-

domina  collata  institutio  nullius  mo-  nounced,  to  be  made  free  by  the  mis-

menti   habeatur,'      Alienus    servus  tress  who  is  alleged  to  be  a  partner  in

etiam  is  intelligitur,  in  quo  usum-  the  crime.     Hence,  if  a  mistress  insti-

fructum  testator  habet.  tute  such  a  slave  as  her  heir,  it  is  of

no  avail.'  In  the  term,  '  the  slave  of
another,'  is  included  a  slave  of  whom
the  testator  has  the  usufruct.

Oai.  ii.  185-187  ;  C.  vi.  27.  5  ;  C.  vii.  15.   1 ;   D.   xxviii.   5.  48.   2  ;  C.  vii.

15.  1.

By  institution  is  meant  tlie  declaration  who  is  to  be  heir,  that
is,  who  is  to  carry  on  the  legal  existence,  the  persona,  of  the  tes-
tator. And  as,  unless  his  existence  were  continued,  there  could
be  no  thing  or  person  from  whom  the  testamentary  dispositions
€ould  derive  any  force,  or  be  of  any  efficacy,,  the  institution  was
the  all-important  part  of  the  testament.  It  was  veluti  caput  atqiie
fiindamentum  totius  testamenti.  All  other  dispositions  were  ac-
cessories to  it,  being  only  conditions  or  laws  imposed  upon  the
heir.  In  the  older  law  a  peculiar  form  of  words  was  appropriated
to  the  institution.  '  Titius  heres  esto '  was  the  recognised  form.
Even  in  the  days  of  Gains  and  Ulpian  (GrAi.  ii.  116,  117  :  Ulp.
Reg.  20),  such  expressions  as  ^  Titius  heres  sitj'  '  Titium  heredem
esse  juheo^  terms  of  command,  were  considered  right,  and  expres-
sions such  as  '  Titium  heredem  esse  volo^  ^heredem  instituo^
'  heredem  facio^  were  considered  wrong.  And  it  was  not  till  389
A.D.  that  Constantine  the  Second  permitted  the  institution  to  be
made  in  any  terms  by  which  the  meaning  of  the  testator  could  be
clearly  ascertained.  (C.  vi.  23.  15.)  Again,  in  the  older  law,  as
everytliing  else  in  the  testament  derived  its  force  from  the  insti-
tution, it  was  considered  that  the  institution  ought  to  be  put  at
the  head  or  top  of  the  testament,  and  any  legacy  or  other  disposi-
tion placed  before  it  was  passed  over,  and  had  no  effect.  An  ex-
ception was  made  in  behalf  of  an  appointment  of  a  tutor  (see  Bk.  i.
Tit.  14.  3);  and  the  clause  in  which  the  testator  disinherited
his  sui  heredes  was  naturally  placed  before  that  in  which  he  in-
stituted testamentary  heirs.  Justinian,  as  we  shall  see  in  the
20th  Title,  paragr.  34,  enacted  that,  provided  the  institution  ap-
peared in  some  part  of  the  testament,  it  should  be  immaterial  in
what  part  it  might  be  placed.

Any  one  might  be  instituted,  and  consequently  take  as  heir>

LIB.  11.      TIT.  XIV.  187

who  had  the  rights  of  a  citizen,  or,  as  it  Avas  technically  termed,
who  had  the  tcstamentl  /actio  cum  testators,  i.e.  the  power  of
joining  with  the  testator  in  going  through  the  ceremonies  of  the
jits  Quiritium.  This  power  was  not  enjoyed  by  -peregrini,  dejjor-
tati,  dedititii,  nor  by  the  Latini  Juniani,  unless  they  became
citizens  before  entering  on  the  inheritance.  Women  were  pre-
vented by  the  lex  Voconia  (585  A.u.c.)  (Gai.  ii.  274)  from  being
instituted  in  case  the  fortune  of  the  testator  reached  100,000
asses.  Neither  could  any  uncertain  person  be  instituted  (see  Tit.
20.  27,  as  to  the  abolition  of  this  rule  by  Justinian),  nor  any  cor-
porate body,  or  any  of  the  gods,  except  those  in  whose  favour,  as
the  Tarpeian  Jupiter  (Ulp.  Reg.  22.  6),  a  special  exception  had
been  made  by  a  seiiatits-consultnm.  All  these  distinctions  had
ceased  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  and  none  of  those  we  have  men-
tioned, except  peregrini  and  persons  who  had  lost  their  civil  rights
by  deportatio,  were  excluded.  There  were  still,  however,  some  to
Avhom  the  capacity  for  institution  was  specially  denied,  such  as
the  children  of  persons  convicted  of  treason  (C.  ix.  8.  5.  1),  apo-
states and  heretics  (C.  i.  7.  3) ;  and  children  of,  and  parties  to,  pro-
hibited marriages,  could  not  be  instituted  by  the  parents  or  the
other  party  to  the  marriage.  (C.  v.  6.  Q.)  A  second  husband  or
wife  could  not  be  instituted,  when  there  was  issue  of  the  first
marriage  (C.  v.  9.  6) ;  nor  natural,  where  there  were  legitimate
children.  (C.  v.  27.  2.)  Unmarried  persons,  ccciibes,  and  child-
less persons,  orbi,  could  be  instituted,  but  under  the  lex  Papia
PoppcEa  the  former  could  not  take  any  part  of  what  was  given
them  unless  they  were  too  young  to  be  married  or  were  near  rela-
tions of  the  testator,  and  the  latter  took  only  half  of  what  was
given  them.  (Gai.  ii.  226.)  These  incapacities  were  removed  by
Constantino.  (C.  viii.  58.)

If  a  person  instituted  his  own  slave,  this  was  held  to  give  the
slave  his  liberty  by  necessary  implication.  If  he  instituted  the
slave  of  another,  the  slave  took  the  inheritance  for  his  master's
benefit,  provided  the  master  had  the  testamenti  factio  with  the
testator ;  but  if  he  had  not,  the  institution  of  the  slave  was  void.

In  the  law  before  Justinian,  enfranchisement  by  a  person  who
had  only  a  bare  property  in  a  slave,  was  not  held  to  confer
freedom,  a  proprietatis  domino  manumissus  non  liber  Jit,  sed  servas
sine  domino  est.  (ULr.  Beg.  1.  19.)  Under  Justinian  the  slave
became  free,  and  could  acquire  for  himself,  and  could  take  as
heir ;  but  he  was  obliged  to  serve  as  slave  to  the  usufructuary,
during  such  time  as  the  usufruct  continued.

The  slave  accused  of  adultery  with  his  mistress  might  be  sub-
jected, as  all  slaves  might,  to  the»  torture,  to  extract  evidence  of
his  guilt.  If  he  had  been  enfranchised,  he  would  have  escaped
this,  and  thus  the  mistress  might  have  defeated  justice,  unless  she
had  been  restrained  from  using  her  power  of  enfranchising  him.

1.   Serviis  auteni   a  domino  suo  1.   A  slave  instituted   heir  by  liis

heres  institutiis,  si  quidem  in  eadem     master,  if  he  remains  in  the  same  con-

188

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.

causa   manserit,    fit   ex   testamento
liber  lieresque    necessariiis  ;  si  vero
a  vivo  testatore  maniimissus  fiierit,
suo  arbitrio  aclire    liereditatem   po-
test, quia  non  fit  necessarius,  cum
utrumque    ex     domini     testamento
non  consequitur.     Quod  si  alienatus
fuerit,  jussu  novi  domini  adire  liere-
ditatem   debet,  et    ea   ratione    per
eum   dominus    fit  lieres  ;    nam  ipse
alienatus    neque    liber  neque  lieres
esse    potest,  etiamsi    cum   libertate
lieres     institutus    fuerit  ;    destitisse
enim  a  libertatis  datione  videtur  do-
minus, qui  eum  alienavit.     Alienus
quoque    servus  lieres  institutus,    si
in  eadem  causa  duraverit,  jussu  ejus
domini  adire  liereditatem  debet  :  si
vero  alienatus  fuerit  ab  eo,  aut  vivo
testatore,     aut    post    mortem    ejus
antequam  adeat,  debet   jussu    novi
domini  adire  ;  at  si  manumissus  est
vivo  testatore  vel  mortuo  antequam
adeat,  suo    arbitrio  adire  lieredita-
tem potest.

dition,  becomes,  by  virtue  of  the  tes-
tament, free  and  necessary  heir.    But,
if    his   master   has   enfranchised  him
before  dying,  he  may  at  his  pleasure
accept  or  refuse  the  inheritance,  for  he
does  not  become  a  necessary  heir,  since
he  does  not  obtain  both  his  liberty  and
the  inheritance  by  the  testament  of  his
master.   But,  if  he  has  been  alienated,
he  must   enter  on  the  inheritance  at
the  command  of  his  new  master,  who
thus  through  his  slave  becomes  the  heir
of  the  testator.     For  a  slave  once  alie-
nated cannot  gain  his  liberty,  or  him-
self  take  an  inheritance  by  virtue  of
the  testament  of  the  master  who  alie-
nated him,  although  his  freedom  was
expressly  given  by  the  testament ;  be-
cause a  master  who  has  alienated  his
slave,  has  shown  that  he  has  renounced
the  intention  of  enfranchising  him.   So,
too,  when  the  slave  of  another  is  ap-
pointed heir,  if  he  remains  in  slavery,
he  must  take  the  inheritance  at    his
master's  bidding;  and  if  the   slave  bo
alienated  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testa-
tor, or  after  his  death,  but  before  he
has  actually  taken  the  inheritance,  it
is  at  the  command  of  his  new  master
that  he  must  accept  it.     But,  if  he  be
enfranchised  during  the  lifetime  of  the
testator,  or  after  his  death,  and  before
he   has  accepted   the   inheritance,  he
may  enter  upon  the  inheritance  or  not,
at  his  own  option.

Gai.  ii.  188,  189.

It  was  necessary  that  the  heir,  as  being  the  person  who  carried
on  the  legal  existence  of  the  testator,  should  be  possessed  of  civil
rights.  If,  then,  a  slave  of  the  testator  was  instituted,  as  it  was
in  the  power  of  the  testator  to  make  him  free,  and  he  had  invested
him  with  a  character  requiring  freedom,  this  institution  was  con-
sidered to  involve  his  freedom.  The  slave  of  any  one  else,  if  in-
stituted, Avas  only  a  channel  by  which  his  master,  if  possessed  of
civic  rights,  acquired  the  inheritance.  (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  6.  1.)  If
a  slave  of  the  testator  were  instituted  liis  heir,  and  remained  his
slave  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  the  slave,  immediately
upon  the  testator  dying,  became  his  heres  necessarius,  that  is,
became  his  heir  without  any  option  of  refusing  or  taking  the  in-
heritance. But  if  it  were  given  under  any  condition,  and  the
condition  failed,  the  institution  then  became  invalid.

If  the  slave  instituted  did  not   belonsf  to  the  testator  at  the

o

time  of  the  testator's  death,  his  condition  at  the  time  of  his  taking
on  him  the  inheritance  {aditio  hereditoiis)  determined  for  whom
the  inheritance  w^  as  acquired.      If  at  that  time  he  was  a  slave,  he

Lie.  II.      TIT.  XIV.  189

acquired  it  for  the  person  who  was  then  his  master ;  if  free,  for
himself.

Disposing  of  the  slave  to  another  revoked  the  gift  of  liberty,
because  this  was  considered  as  a  legacy,  a  mere  accessory  to  the
inheritance,  to  revoke  which  anything  was  sufficient,  which  showed
a  chano-e  of  intention  on  the  part  of  the  testator  ;  but  it  did  not
revoke  the  institution,  because  this  was  the  keystone  of  the  testa-
ment, and  could  only  be  revoked  by  a  new  testament,  or  destruc-
tion of  the  old  one.

2.  Servus  aiitem  alienus  post  do-  2.  The  slave  of  another  may  be  in-

mini  mortem  recte  heres  instituitur,  stituted  heir  even  after  the  death  of

quia  et  cum  hereditariis  servis  est  his  master,  a^  there  i^  testaynenti  f actio

testamenti   f actio  :     nondum     enim  with  slaves  belonging  to  an  inheritance;

adita  hereditas  person^e  vicem  sus-  for  an  inheritance  not  yet  entered  on

tinet,  non    heredis  futuri,  sed    de-  represents  the  jDerson  of  the  deceased,

f uncti ;  cum  etiam  ejus,  qui  in  utero  and  not  that  of  the  future  heir.     So,

est,  servus  recte  heres  instituitur.  too,  the  slave  even  of  a  child  in  the

womb  may  be  instituted  heir.

D.  xxviii.  5.  31.  1;  D.  xxviii.  5.  64.

After  the  death  of  a  testator,  and  before  the  inheritance  was
entered  on,  the  inheritance  itself  represented  the  person  of  the
deceased,  as  it  did  that  of  an  unborn  child  until  the  birth.  A
slave,  during  this  interval,  was  said  to  belong  to  the  inheritance,
and  if  a  testament  was  made  by  any  one  instituting  as  heir  a
slave  belono^ino  to  the  inheritance,  the  slave  took  the  inheritance
thus  o-iven  him  for  the  benefit  of  that  inheritance  to  which  he
belonged.  And  that  he  should  do  so,  it  was  not  necessary  that
the  person  by  whose  testament  he  was  instituted  heir  should  have
testamenti  f actio  with  the  future  heir,  but  it  was  only  necessary
that  he  should  have  it  with  the  testator  to  whose  inheritance  the
slave  belonofed.

o

3.  Servus  plurium  cum  quibus  3.  If  a  slave  belonging  to  several
testamenti  f actio  est,  ab  extraneo  masters,  all  capable  of  taking  by  testa-
institutus  heres  unicuique  domino-  ment,  is  instituted  heir  by  a  stranger,
rum  cujus  jussu  adierit,  pro  portione  he  acquires  a  proportion  of  the  inherit-
dominii  acquirit  hereditatem.  ance  for  each  master  by  whose  com-
mand he  took  it,  corresponding  to  the
several  interests  they  each  have  in  him.

D.  xxix.  2.  07,  08.

If  the  slave  were  instituted  heir  by  one  of  his  masters,  then,
if  this  master  expressly  gave  him  his  freedom,  he  became  the
heres  necessarius  of  the  master  instituting  him,  and  free ;  a  due
proportion  of  the  price  at  which  he  was  valued  being  paid  to  each
of  his  other  masters.  But  if  his  liberty  were  not  expressly  given
him,  the  share  which  the  testator  had  in  him  accrued  proportion-
ately to  all  those  of  his  masters  by  v^^hose  orders  he  entered  on  the
inheritance.     (See  Tit.  7.  4  of  this  Book.)

4.  Et  unum  hominem  et  plures  4.  A  testator  may  appoint  one  heir
in  infinitum,  quot  quis  velit,  here-  or  several,  the  number  being  (^uite
des  facere  licet.                         '               unrestricted.

190  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.

5.  Hereditas  plerumque  clividitur  5.  An  inlieritance  is  generally  di-

in  duodecim  uncias,  qave  assis   ap-  vided    into    twelve    ounces,    compre-

pellatione      continentur.        Habent  liended  together  under  the  term  of  an

auteni  et  h^e  partes  propria  nomina  as,  and  each  of  these  parts,  from  the

ab  nncia  usqne  ad    assem,  ut  pnta  ounce  to  the  as,  has  its  peculiar  name,

hsec :     uncia,     sextans,      (piadrans,  viz.    uncia,   sextans,   quadrans,    triens,

triens,    quincunx,    semis,    septunx,  quincunx,  semis,  septunx,  bes,  dodrans,.

bes,  dodrans,    dextans,    deunx,  as.  dextans,  deunx,  as.     But  it  is  not  ne-

Non  autem  ufcique  duodecim  uncias  cessary  that   there  should  be  always

esse  oportet,  nam  tot  unciai  assem  twelve  ounces,  for  an  as  may  consist  of

efficiunt,   quot  testator  voluerit  ;.  et  as  many  ounces  as  the  testator  pleases,

si  unum    tantum  quis    ex    semisse,  If,  for  example,  a  man  name  but  one

verbi     gratia,    heredem     scripserit,  heir,  and  appoint  him  ex  semisse,  i.  e.

totus  as  in  semisse  erit :  neque  enim  the  heir  of  six  parts,   then  these  six

idem  ex  parte  testatus  et  ex  parte  parts  will  make  up  the  whole  as  ;  for

intestatus  decedere  potest,  nisi   sit  no   one   can    die   partly  testate    and

miles  cujus  sola  voluntas  in  testando  partly    intestate,     except    a     soldier,

spectatur.      Et    e    contrario   potest  whose  intention  in  making  his  testa-

quis,    in    quantascumque     voluerit  ment  is  alone  regarded.     Conversely,

plurimas  uncias,  suam  hereditatem  a  testator  may  divide  his  estate  into  as

dividere.  many  ounces  more  than  twelve  as  he

thinks  proper.

D.  xxviii.  5.  50.  2  ;  D.  xxviii.  5.  13.  1,  et  seq. ;  D.  xxix.  1.  G.

In  making  a  testament,  where  the  testator  wished  to  give
different  shares  to  his  heirs,  the  singular  system,  alhided  to  in  the
text,  was  often  adopted.  The  testator  did  not  give  a  fifth,  a
fourth,  &c.,  to  each  heir,  hut  gave  so  many  parts,  e.g.  five  or  four
parts,  to  one  heir,  and  so  many  more  to  another.  The  number  of
parts  given  to  each  was  added  up,  and  the  total  formed  the
number  of  which  these  parts  were  taken  to  be  a  fraction.  For
instance,  if  a  testator  gave  to  A  five  parts,  to  B  six,  and  to  C
two,  the  whole  number  amounting  to  thirteen,  A  took  five-thir-
teenths, B  six-thirteenths,  and  C  two-thirteenths.

So  far  all  was  simple,  but  a  greater  complication  was  intro-
duced by  adopting,  conjointly  Avith  this  calculation  of  parts,  a
mode  of  reckoning  derived  from  the  familiar  measure  of  the  as,
or  pound  weight,  and  its  division  into  twelve  ounces.  The  here-
ditas  was  considered  to  be  represented  by  the  as,  and  the  parts  by
the  ounces.  But  the  testator  had  the  power  of  determining  how
many  ounces  there  should  be  in  this  imaginary  pound.  In  the
instance  above  given,  the  as  contains  thirteen  uncice.  But  sup-
posing the  testator  assigned  a  certain  number  of  parts  to  some  of
his  heirs,  and  not  to  others,  as,  to  A  five  parts,  to  B  six  parts,,
and  then  made  C  a  co-heir,  but  without  assigning  him  any  number
of  parts,  the  law  supposed  the  testator  to  have  divided  his  pound
into  twelve  ounces  a.s  the  standard  number,  and  gave  the  heir  to
whom  no  number  of  parts  was  assigned  such  a  number  as  made
up  the  as.  In  this  instance,  therefore,  C  would  have  one  ounce
or  part.  But  if  the  whole  number  of  parts  expressly  given
exceeded  twelve,  then  the  testator  was  supposed  to  have  been
measuring  out  his  inheritance  by  the  double  as  {dupondius),  and
the  heir  to  whom  no  express  number  was  given  took  the  number

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.  1 9 1

of  parts  wanting  to  make  up  twenty-four.  If  the  parts  expressly-
given  exceeded  twenty-four,  then  the  tripondius,  containing  thirty-
six  ounces,  was  the  measure,  and  so  on.  The  testator  never  died
only  partly  testate ;  for  Avhatever  he  gave  was  taken  to  make  up
the  whole  inheritance.  If  his  testament  only  disposed  of  a  por-
tion of  his  property  in  the  way  mentioned  in  the  text,  viz.  by  his
only  <yiving  six  ounces  (semis)  to  his  heir,  and  his  instituting  only
one  heir,  six  Avas  considered  to  be  the  number  of  ounces  he  Avished
to  have  in  the  as,  and,  therefore,  he  died  testate  as  to  all  his  pro-
perty. If  he  did  not  use  any  expression  referring  to  the  parts  of
an  as,  but  gave  his  heir  specific  things,  having  other  property
besides,  what  he  did  give  w^as  considered  to  represent  what  he  did
not  o"ive  ;  as,  for  instance,  if  a  man  possessed  large  estates,  and
made  A  his  heir,  giving  him  one  farm,  and  named  no  other  heir,
A  took  all  his  property;  for  this  one  farm  was  taken  to  be  a
description  of  the  whole.

The  as  was  thus  divided :  uncia,  one  ounce  ;  sextans,  one-
sixth  of  an  as,  or  two  ounces;  quadrans,  one-fourth,  or  three
ounces ;  triens,  one-third,  or  four  ounces  ;  quincunx,  five  ounces  ;
semis,  one-half,  or  six  ounces ;  septunx,  seven  ounces  ;  hes,  con-
tracted from  his  triens,  eight  ounces;  dodrans,  contracted  from
de  quadrans,  the  as  minus  a  quadrans,  nine  ounces  ;  dextans,  con-
tracted from  de  sextans,  ten  ounces,  and  deunx,  eleven  ounces.

6.   Si  plures  institiiantnr,  ita  de-  6.  If  several  heirs  are  appointed,  it

mum  partium  distributio  necessaria  is  not  necessary  that  the  testator
est,  si  nolit  testator  eos  ex  sequis  should  specify  their  several  shares
partibus  heredes  esse ;  satis  enim  unless  he  intends  that  they  should
constat,  nullis  partibus  nominatis,  not  take  in  equal  portions.  For  if
ex  fequis  partibus  eos  heredes  esse,  no  division  is  made,  the  heirs  clearly
Partibus  autem  in  quorumdam  per-  take  equal  portions.  But  if  the  shares
sonis  expressis,  si  quis  alius  sine  of  some  should  be  specified,  and
parte  nominatus  erit,  si  quidem  ali-  another  be  named  heir  without  having
qua  pars  assi  deerit,  ex  ea  parte  any  portion  assigned  him,  he  will  take
heres  fiet  ;  et  si  plures  sine  parte  the  fraction  that  may  be  wanting  to
scrij)ti  sunt,  omnes  in  eamdem  par-  make  up  the  as.  And  if  several  are
tem  concurrent.  Si  vero  totus  as  instituted  heirs  without  having  any
completus  sit,  in  dimidiam  partem  portion  assigned  them,  they  will  all
vocantur,  et  ille  vel  illi  omnes  in  divide  this  fraction  between  them,
alteram  dimidiam  :  nee  interest  pri-  But,  if  the  whole  as  is  given  among
mus  an  medius  an  novissimus  sine  those  whose  parts  are  specified,  and
j)arte  heres  scriptus  sit ;  ea  enim  there  is  then  no  fraction  left,  then
pars  data  intelligitur,  quce  vacat.  they  whose   shares   are   not  specified

take  one  moiety,  and  he  or  they  whose
shares  are  specified  the  other  moiety.
It  is  immaterial  whether  the  heir
whose  share  is  not  specified  holds
the  first,  middle,  or  last  place  in  the
institution  ;  it  is  always  the  part  not
specifically  given  that  is  considered
to  belong  to  him.

D.  xxviii.  5.  9.  12 ;  D.  xxviii.  5.  17,  pr.  and  3,  4 ;  D.  xxviii.  5.  20.

From  this  paragraph  we  may  add  one  more  detail  of  the  system
pursued   in  calculating  the  parts  of   the   inheritance.      If  the

192

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.

number  of  parts  expressly  given  amounted  exactly  to  twelve,  and
there  was  an  heir  instituted  to  whom  no  parts  were  given,  the  du-
pondlus  was  taken  as  the  standard,  and  this  heir  to  whom  no
parts  were  given  took  twelve  out  of  twenty-four.

7.  Videamus,  si  pars  aliquavacet,  7.  Let  us  inquire  how  we  ought  to

nee  tamen  quisquam  sine  parte  sit     decide  in  case  a  iDart  remains  unbe-

queathed,  and  yet  each  heir  has  his
portion  assigned  him  :  as,  if  three
should  be  instituted,  and  a  fourth
part  given  to  each.  It  is  clear,  in
this  case,  that  the  undisposed  part
would  be  divided  among  them  in  pro-
portion to  the  share  bequeathed  to
each,   and   it  would   be  exactly  as  if

heres  institutus,  quid  juris  sit,  veluti
si  tres  ex  quartis  partibus  heredes
scripti  sunt  ]  Et  constat  vacantem
partem  singulis  tacite  pro  hereditaria
parte  accedere,  et  perinde  haberi  ac
si  ex  tertiis  partibus  heredes  scripti
essent ;  et  ex  diverso  si  plures  in
portionibus  sint,  tacite  singulis  de-
■crescere,  ut  si  verbi  gratia  quatuor
ex  tertiis  partibus  heredes  scripti
sint,  perinde  habeantur  ac  si  unus-
•quisque  ex  quarta  j)arte  scriptus
fuisset.

each  had  had  a  third  part  assigned
him.  And,  on  the  contrary,  if  several
heirs  are  instituted  with  such  portions
as  in  the  whole  to  exceed  the  as,  then
each  heir  must  suffer  a  proportionate
diminution  ;  for  example,  if  four  are
instituted,  and  a  third  be  given  to
each,  this  would  be  the  same  as  if
each  of  the  written  heirs  had  been
instituted  to  a  fourth  only.

D.  xxvii.  5.  13.  2,  et  seq.

8.  Et  si  plures  uncise  quam  duo-
decim  distributee  sint,  is  qui  sine
parte  institutus  est,  quod  dupondio
deest  habebit ;  idemque  erit,  si  du-
pondius  expletus  sit.  Quae  omnes
partes  ad  assem  postea  revocantur,
quamvis  sint  plurium  unciarum.

8.  If  more  than  twelve  ounces  are
bequeathed,  then  he  who  is  instituted
without  any  prescribed  share  shall
have  the  amount  wanting  to  complete
the  second  as  ;  and  so,  if  all  the  parts
of  the  second  as  are  already  be-
queathed, he  shall  have  the  amount
necessary  to  make  up  the  third  as.
But  all  these  parts  are  afterwards
reduced  to  one  single  as,  however
great  may  be  the  number  of  ounces.

D.  xxviii.  5.  18.

The  concludine;  sentence  of  the  section  means,  that  thouo^h,
for  the  sake  of  calculating  the  parts,  we  go  beyond  the  as  to  the
dupondius  or  tripoiidlus,  yet  we  must  always  consider  the  as  as
representing  the  inheritance.  For  example,  to  be  quite  correct,
we  must  make  15-24ths  into  7J-12ths,  so  that  the  portions  of  the
inheritance  may  be  expressed  with  reference  to  the  twelve  uncicB
of  the  as.

9.  Heres  pure  et  sub  conditione
institui  potest,  ex  certo  tempore  aut
ad  certum  tempus  non  potest,  veluti
post  quinquennium  quam  moriar,  vel
ex  calendis  illis  vel  usque  ad  cal  en-
das  illas  heres  esto.  Denique  diem
adjectum  haberi  pro  supefvacuo
placet,  et  perinde  esse  ac  si  j)ure
heres  institutus  esset.

9.  An  heir  may  be  instituted  sim-
ply or  conditionally,  but  not  from
or  to  any  certain  period  ;  as,  after
five  years  from  my  death,  or  from
the  calends  of  such,  a  month,  or  imtil
the  calends  of  such  a  month.  The
term  thus  added  is  considered  a
superfluity,  and  the  institution  is
treated  exactly  as  if  unconditional.

T).  xxviii.  5.

This  paragraph  must  be  understood  as  referring  to  heirs  other

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIV.  193

than  sui  heredes.  If  a  suits  heres  was  instituted  sub  conditione,
unless  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  was  within  his  own  powei%
the  testament  was  null.     (D.  xxviii.  2.  3.  1.)

If  the  institution  was  conditional,  all  those  rights  which  other-
wise would  date  from  the  death  of  the  testator,  dated  from  the
accomplishment  of  the  condition.  When  the  condition  was  ac-
complished, the  heir  entered  on  the  inheritance,  and  then  by  this
aditio  (not  by  the  accomplishment  of  the  condition)  his  rights  were
carried  back  to  the  time  when  the  testator  died.  Heres  quandoque
adeundo  hereditatem  jam  tunc  a  morte  successisse  defuncto  intelli-
gitur.  (D.  xxix.  2.  54.)  Until  the  heir  entered  the  inheritance
was  said  J«cer6?,  to  be  in  abeyance.

It  was  a  principle  of  Homan  law  that  a  person  could  not  die
partly  testate  and  partly  intestate ;  if  his  testament  was  valid  at
all,  his  heredes  ah  intestato  were  entirely  excluded.  It  was  also  a
rule  of  law,  that  a  person  who  once  became  heir,  could  not  cease
to  be  heir.  But  if  a  person  was  instituted  heir  from  a  certain
time,  there  would  be  no  one  but  the  heredes  ah  intestato  to  take  in
the  meantime,  and  they  must  cease  to  be  heirs  when  the  time
arrived ;  if  the  institution  was  to  take  effect  only  up  to  a  certain
time,  the  instituted  heir  would  cease  to  be  heir  at  the  expiration
of  the  time,  and  the  heredes  ah  intestato  would  then  take  the  inhe-
ritance. This  would  be  making  the  testator  die  partly  testate  and
;  partly  intestate,  and  therefore  the  law  did  not  permit  such  an
institution.  Such  an  institution  would  also  have  oifended  against
the  second  rule  we  have  just  mentioned,  viz.  that  a  person  who
had  once  been  heir  could  not  cease  to  be  heir  (D.  xxviii.  5.  88),
whence  the  adage  semel  heres  semper  heres ;  for  in  the  first  case
the  heredes  ah  intestato,  in  the  second  the  instituted  heir,  would
cease,  at  the  end  of  a  certain  time,  to  be  heir.  But  if  the  insti-
tution was  conditional,  the  heredes  ah  intestato  did  not  take  until
the  condition  was  fulfilled,  but  were  excluded  by  the  possibility
which  existed  at  every  moment  of  time  that  the  testamentary  heir
would  be  able  to  enter  on  the  inheritance  by  the  condition  being
accomplished.     (D.  xxix.  2.  39.)

The  text  speaks  of  certum  tempus ;  if  the  time  were  uncertain,
if  the  event  was  one  that  must  happen  at  some  time,  as  that
B  should  die,  but  the  time  of  its  happening  was,  as  in  this  case,
uncertain,  and  the  testator  said,  let  A  be  my  heir  from  the
date  of  B's  death,  this  would  operate  to  make  the  institution  condi-
tional. Dies  incertus  conditionem  in  testamento  facit.  (D.  xxxv.  1.
75.)     It  would  be  uncertain  whether  A  would  outlive  B  ;  but  if.

uring  A's  lifetime,  B  died,  which  he  might  at  any  moment,  the
condition,  viz.  that  A  should  outlive  him,  would  be  accomplished,
and  this  possibility  excluded  the  heredes  ah  intestato.

A  soldier  might  make  his  testament  ex  certo  tempore  or  ad
certum  tempus.     (D.  xxix.  1.  41.  pr.)

10.  Impossibilis  conditio  in  insti-  10.  An  impossible  condition  in  the

tutionibus  et  legatis,  nee  non  lidei-     institution  of   heirs,  gift  of   legacies,

O

1 94  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XV.

commissis  et  libertatibus,  pro   non     creation  of  Jideicommissa,  and  gifts  of
scripta  liabetiir.  freedom,  is  considered  as  not  inserted

at  all.
D.  xxviii.  7.  1  ;  D.  xxviii.  7.  14.

That  the  institution  was  res^arded  as  unconditional  instead  of
void,  when  the  condition  was  one  not  allowed  by  law,  must  be
ascribed  to  the  anxiety  of  Romans  not  to  die  intestate,  and  the
consequent  favour  with  which  the  law  regarded  any  means  of
treating  a  will  as  valid.  An  obligation  containing  an  impossible
condition  would  be  void.     (Bk.  iii.  Tit.  19.  11.)

Possihilis  est  qucBper  rerum  naturam  admitti  'potest :  impossibilis
quce  non  potest.  (Paul.  Sent,  iii.  4.  2.  1.)  But  a  thing  con-
trary to  law,  or  to  honi  mores,  was  considered  as  impossible  as  if  it
was  impossible  7^er  rerum  naturam.     (Paul.  Sent.  iii.  4.  2.)

11.  Si  plures  conditiones  institu-  11.  When  several  conditions  are
tioni  adscriptse  sunt,  siquidem  con-  attached  to  the  institution,  if  they
junctim,  ut  puta  si  illud  et  illud  are  placed  in  the  conjunctive,  as,  if
factum  erit,  omnibus  parendum  est ;  this  and  that  thing  is  done,  all  the
si  separatim,  veluti  si  illuTi  aut  illud  conditions  must  be  complied  with,
factum  erit,  cuilibet  obtemperare  But,  if  the  conditions  are  placed  in
satis  est.  the  disjunctive,  as,  if  this  or  that  is

done,  it  will  be  sufficient  to   comply
with  any  one.

D.  xxviii.  7.  5.

12.  li,  quos  numquam  testator  12.  A  testator  may  institute  per-
vidit,  heredes  institui  possunt,  veluti  sons  his  heirs  whom  he  has  never
si  fratris  tilios  peregri  natos,  igno-  seen,  as,  his  brother's  sons,  born  in
rans  qui  essent,  heredes  instituerit  ;  a  foreign  country,  and  unknown  to
ignorantia  enim  testantis  inutilem  him;  for  the  want  of  this  knowledge
institutionem  non  facit.  will  not  vitiate  the  institution.

C.  vi.  24.  11.

Tit.  XV.     DE    VULGARI   SUBSTITUTIONE.

Potest  autem  quis  in  testamento  A  man  by  testament  may  appoint

suo  plures  gradus  heredum  facere,  ut  several  degrees  of  heirs  ;  as,  for  in-  '
puta  si  ille  heres  non  erit  ille  heres  stance,  if  so  and  so  will  not  be  my
esto,  et  deinceps  in  quantum  velit  heir,  let  so  and  so  be  my  heir.  And
testator  substituere  potest,  et  novis-  so  on  through  as  many  substitutions
simo  loco  in  subsidium  vel  servum  as  he  shall  think  proper.  He  may
necessarium  heredem  instituere.  even,    in   the   last   place,    and   as   an

ultimate    resource,    institute    a   slave
his  necessary  heir.

D.  xxviii.  6.  36.

Substitution  was  really  a  conditional  institution.  If  A  is  not
my  heir,  if,  for  instance,  he  dies  before  me,  I  appoint  B.  The  t
extent  to  which  substitution  was  carried,  was  owing  to  the  im-  j
portance  attached  to  dying  testate ;  and  partly  also,  in  the  time  of
the  emperors,  to  the  wish  to  guard  against  the  operation  of  the
lex  Julia  et  Papia,  which  created  numerous  causes  of  incapacity  to
take  under  a  testament,  and  gave  the  shares  of  those  instituted,
but  incapable  of  taking,  as  caduca,  to  those  named  in  the  testa-

I

LIE.  II.      TIT.  XV.  195

ment  who  were  married  and  had  children,  and,  if  there  were  no
such  persons,  to  the  (Erarium,  or  public  treasury.  As  the  effect
of  the  lex  Julia  et  Papia  cannot  be  discussed  without  taking
leo'acies  into  consideration,  a  detailed  account  of  the  two  laws
known  by  this  name  is  deferred  till  we  reach  the  20th  Title.
By  substitution,  that  which  under  these  laws  was  a  caducum  w^ent
to  the  substituted  heir,  if  qualified  to  take,  and  did  not  follow  the
course  of  devolution  which  these  laws  prescribed.

This  kind  of  substitution  is  termed  vulgaris,  as  opposed  to
suhstitutio  j^upillaris,  the  subject  of  the  next  Title.

1.  Et  plures  in  unius  locum  pos-  1.  A  testator  may  substitute  several

sunt  substitui,  vel  unus  in  plurium,  in  the  place  of  one,  or  one  in  the
vel  singuli  singulis,  vel  invicem  ipsi  place  of  several,  or  one  in  the  place
qui  heredes  instituti  sunt.  of   each   one,    or   he   may   substitute

the  instituted   heirs  themselves  reci-
procally to  one  another.

D.  xxviii.  6.  36.  1.

Three  advantages  which  co-heirs  gained  by  being  substituted
to  each  other  are  to  be  noticed:  (1)  If  any  one  instituted  heir
died  before  the  testator,  or  refused  to  take  his  share  of  the  inhe-
ritance, his  share  was,  in  fact,  undisposed  of.     But  as  the  testator
was  always  supposed  to  have  disposed  of  his  whole  estate  if  he
disposed  of  any  part,  this  share  was  divided  among  all  those  who
entered  on  the  inheritance  in  proportions  corresponding  to  the
share  given  them  by  the  will.    Their  claim  to  this  was  called  \\\QJus
accresceadi.     But  a  testator  sometimes  produced  nearly  the  same
effect  as  the  law  would  have  produced  for  him,  by  substituting  the
heirs  who  entered  on  the  inheritance  in  the  place  of  those  who  did
not,  thus  preventing  any  share  from  becoming  vacant.    The  effect
was  nearly  the  same,  but  not  quite  so.     It  was  open  to  the  sub-
stituted heirs  to  refuse  the  inheritance  of  this  new  part,  which
required  to  be  expressly  entered  on  ;  whereas,  if  they  once  entered
on  the  share  given  them  by  the  testament,  they  could  not  decline
accepting  any  further  portion  which  devolved  on  them  by  th.Q  jus
accrescendi.       (D.  xxix.    2.   35.)      (2)   Surviving   co-heirs   might
possibly  gain  in  this  way  ;  the  representatives  of  an  heir  who  had
died  after  entering  on  the  inheritance  received  his  portion  of  the
share  of  a  co-heir  subsequently  renouncing.     But  if  the  co-heirs
were  substituted  to  each  other,  then  only  those  living  at  the  time
when  the  choice  of  entering  on  the  vacant  share  was  offered  them,
took  by  substitution  (D.  xxviii.  6.  23;   D.  xxviii.  5.  59.  7),  the
benefit  of  substitution,  like  that  of  institution,  being  personal ;
and  the  representatives  of  a  co-heir  who  had  died  after  entering,
but  before  he  had  accepted  the  benefit  of  substitution,  would  lose
what,  under  the  ;w5  accrescendi,  would  come  to  them.    (D.  xxviii.
6.  45.   1.)    (3)  The  laws  known  under  the  joint  name  of  the  lex
Julia  et  Papia  Poppcsa,  had,  while  in  force,  given  a  further  reason
for  this  mode  of  mutually  substituting  the  heirs  to  each  other,  as
under  their  provisions  some  persons  could  take  what  was  given

o   2

196  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XV.

them,  but  could  not  claim  caduca.  By  substitution,  an  heir  in-
capable of  claiming  a  caducum  under  these  laws  might  take  it  as
substituted  heir.  For  the  mode  in  which  these  laws  operated,  see
note  on  Tit.  20.  8.

It  is  easy  to  understand  that,  where  there  were  more  than  two
persons  instituted,  the  devolution  might  not  be  the  same  by  sub-
stitution and  by  the  jus  accrescendi.  Supposing  A,  B,  and  C
were  all  instituted  heirs,  and  B  substituted  to  A,  and  then  D  sub-
stituted to  B  ;  if  A  and  B  died,  by  B  being  substituted  to  A,  the
shares  of  A  and  B  would  both  go  to  D  ;  but  by  the  Jm5  accrescendi
(i.e.  supposing  B  had  not  been  substituted  to  A),  the  share  of  A
would  have  been  vacant,  and  would  have  been  divided  between  D
and  C.

2.  Et  si  ex  disparibus  partibus  2.  If  a  testator,  having  instituted
heredes  scriptos  invicem  snbstitue-     several    heirs    with    unequal    shares,
rit,  et  nuUam  mentionem  in  substi-     substitutes  them  reciprocally  the  one
tutione  partium  habuerit,  eas  vide-     to  the  other,   and  makes  no  mention
tur  in  substitutione  partes   dedisse     of  the  shares  they  are  to  have  in  the
quas  in  institutione  expressit ;  et  ita     substitution,  he  is  considered  to  have
divus  Pius  rescripsit.                  -            given  the  same  shares  in  the  substi-
tution  which  he    gave   in   the   insti-
tution ;  thus  the  Emperor  Antoninus
decided  by  rescript.

C.  vi.  26.  1.

If  he  chose,  however,  to  specify  the  shares  they  were  to  take
in  that  portion  to  which  they  were  substituted,  there  was  no  neces-
sity that  they  should  be  the  same  shares  as  those  they  were  said
to  take  by  institution.

3.  Sed  si  instituto  heredi  et  cohe-  3.  If  a  co-heir  is  substituted  to
redi  suo  substituto  dato  alius  sub-  any  instituted  heir,  and  a  third  per-
stitutus  fuerit,  divi  Severus  et  son  to  that  co-heir,  the  Emperors
Antoninus  sine  distinctione  rescrip-  Severus  and  Antoninus  have  by  re-
serunt  ad  utramque  partem  substi-  script  decided  that  this  third  person
tutum  admitti.  shall  be  admitted  to  the  portions  of

both  without  distinction.

D.  xxviii.  6.  41.

A  testator  institutes  two  heirs,  A  and  B.  He  substitutes  B
to  A,  and  to  B  he  substitutes  C.  Supposing  neither  A  nor  B
take  the  inheritance,  C  will  take  the  part  of  each,  utramque
partem,  and  will  take  it  without  any  distinction  {sine  distinctione)
as  to  what  was  the  order  in  which  the  testament  was  drawn  up,
or  whether  A  or  B  first  dies  or  refuses  or  becomes  incapable  of
taking  the  inheritance.  How  he  would  take  the  part  of  B  is  clear
enough ;  but  if  B  died  or  refused  the  inheritance  before  A,  how
would  C  take  A's  share?  He  did  so  by  the  rule  substitutus  sub-
stituto censetur  substitutus  instituto ;  the  person  substituted  to  the
substitute  is  considered  substituted  to  the  instituted  heir ;  C  is
substituted  to  B,  who  is  substituted  to  A,  and  therefore  C  is,  by
what  was  termed  a  tacita  substitutio,  substituted  to  A,  and  takes
his  part.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVI.

197

4.  Si  serviim  alienum  quis  patrem-
familias  arbitratus  heredem  scripse-
rifc,  et  si  lieres  non  esset,  Msevium  ei
substituerit,  isque  servus  jussu  do-
mini  adierit  hereditatem,  Meevius
in  partem  admittitur.  Ilia  enim
verba  si  heres  non  erit,  in  eo  quidem
quem  alieno  juri  subjectum  esse
testator  scit,  sic  accipiuntur,  '  si
neque  ipse  heres  erit,  neque  alium
heredem  effecerit ; '  in  eo  vero  quem
patremfamilias  esse  arbitratur,  illud
significant,  'si  hereditatem  sibi,
eive  cujus  juri  postea  subjectus
esse  cosperit,  non  acquisierit  : '  id-
que  Tiberius  Csesar  in  persona
Parthenii  servi  sui  constituit.

4.  If  a  testator  institutes  the  sla\re
of  another  his  heir,  supposing  him
to  be  sui  juris,  and,  to  provide  for  the
case  of  this  person  not  becoming  his
heir,  substitutes  Msevius  in  his  place  ;
then,  if  that  slave  should  afterwards
enter  upon  the  inheritance  at  the  com-
mand of  his  master,  the  substituted
person,  Msevius,  would  be  admitted
to  a  part.  For  the  words,  '  if  he  does
not  become  my  heir,'  in  the  case  of  a
person  whom  the  testator  knew  to  be
under  the  dominion  of  another,  are
taken  to  mean,  if  he  neither  becomes
heir  himself,  nor  causes  another  to  be
heir ;  but  in  the  case  of  a  person  whom
the  testator  supposed  to  be  free,  the
words  mean,  '  if  the  heir  acquires
the  inheritance  neither  for  himself  nor
for  him  to  whose  dominion  he  after-
wards becomes  subject.'  This  was  de-
cided by  Tiberius  Csesar  in  the  case  of
his  own  slave  Parthenius.

D.  xxviii.  5.  40,  41.

The  pars  which  each  took  was  one-half.  (Theoph.  Par.)
That  each  should  take  half  in  such  a  case  was  a  mere  arbitrary
regulation,  formed  on  no  principle  of  law,  but  only  meeting,  as
was  supposed,  the  equity  of  the  case.  It  seemed  hard  that  the
master  of  the  slave  should  lose  all  benefit  from  the  institution,
when  the  words  of  the  testament  gave  him  the  whole  inheritance,
and  hard  that  the  instituted  heir  should  take  nothing  when  the
master  of  the  slave  was  profiting  by  a  mistake  of  the  testator.
Accordingly  Tiberius  decided  that  each  should  have  half.

Tit.   XVI.     DE   PUPILLARI   SUBSTITUTIONS.

Liberis  suis  impuberibus  quos  in
potestate  quis  habet,  non  solum  ita
ut  supra  diximus  substituere  potest,
id  est  ut,  si  heredes  ei  non  extite-
rint,  alius  ei  sit  heres,  sed  eo  amplius
Tit  etsi  heredes  ei  extiterint  et  ad-
huc  impuberes  mortui  fuerint,  sit
eis  aliquis  heres,  veluti  si  quis  dicat
hoc  modo  :  Titius  filius  mens  heres
mihi  esto ;  si  filius  mens  heres  mihi
non  erit,  sive  heres  erit  et  prius
moriatur  quam  in  suam  tutelam
venerit,  tunc  Seius  heres  esto.  Quo
casu,  si  quidem  non  extiterit  heres
filius,  tunc  substitutus  patri  fit
heres  ;  si  vero  extiterit  heres  filius
et  ante  pubertatem  decesserit,  ipsi
filio  fit  heres  substitutus ;  nam
moribus  institutum  est  ut,  cum  ejus
setatis    filii    sint,    in   qua   ipsi   sibi

A  testator  can  substitute  an  heir
in  place  of  his  children,  under  the
age  of  puberty,  and  in  his  power,
not  only  in  the  manner  we  have  just
mentioned,  namely,  by  appointing
some  other  person  his  heir  in  case
his  children  do  not  become  his
heirs ;  but  also,  if  they  do  become  his
heirs,  but  die  under  the  age  of  pu-
berty, he  may  subsiitute  another
heir ;  as,  for  example,  '  Let  Titius,  my
son,  be  my  heir,  and,  if  he  should  not
become  my  heir,  or,  becoming  my
heir,  should  die  before  he  comes  to
be  his  own  master,  i.e.  before  he
arrives  at  puberty,  let  Seius  be  my
heir.'  In  this  case,  if  the  son  does
not  become  the  testator's  heir,  the
substituted  heir  is  heu*  to  the  father  ;
but,    if    the   son    becomes   heir,    and

198  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XYI.

testamentum   facere    non    possunt,     then  dies  under  the  age  of  puberty,
parentes  eis  faciant.  the  substituted   heir  is   then  heir  to

the  son.     For  custom  has  established
that    parents    may   make   testaments
for  their  children  who  are  not  of  an
age    to    make  testaments    for  them-
selves.
Gai.  ii.  179,  180.
A  child  under  tlie  age  of  puberty  might  be  sui  jvris,  and  so
have  the  legal  capability  of  making  a  testament ;  his  status  might
be  such  as  to  give  him  the  testamenti  f actio,  but  he  would  not
have  the   power  of  exercising  his   right  to  make   a  testament,
according  to  the  distinction  between  a  right  and  the  power  of
availing   oneself  of  the  right,  so  often  met  with  in  Roman  law.
If  this  child,  then,  died  before  attaining  fourteen  years,  he  would
necessarily  die  intestate,  which  in  Roman  eyes  was  so  great  a
misfortune  for  any  one,  that  the  father  of  the  child  was  permitted
to  make  the  child's  testament,  but  only  as  a  part  and  as  accessory
to  his  own.     The  right  to  make  a  child's  testament  depended  on
the  possession  of  the  patria  potestas,  and  could  only  be  exercised
with  regard  to  those  children  who  were  in  the  father's  pov^er.

In  the  words  si  filius  mens  heres  milii  non  erit,  sive  heres  erit
et  prius  moriatur,  we  have  an  instance  both  of  the  vulgar  and  the
pupillary  substitution.  It  was  long  a  vexed  question  among  the
jurisprudents  (CiC.  de  Orat.  1.  39.  57),  whether,  if  one  only  was
expressed,  the  other  was  implied ;  whether,  for  instance,  if  the
words  si  filius  mens  lures  mihi  non  erit  stood  alone,  and  the  child
became  heir  but  died  under  the  age  of  puberty,  the  substituted
heir  would  take  as  if  he  had  been  substituted  by  pupillary  sub-
stitution. Marcus  Aurelius  terminated  the  doubt  by  deciding
that  each  substitution  implied  the  other  (D.  xxviii.  6.  4),  so  that,
when  the  son  was  instituted  heir,  the  person  substituted  to  him
by  pupillary  substitution  was  considered  as  substituted  to  him  by
vulgar  substitution ;  and  conversely,  the  person  substituted  by
vulgar  substitution  was  considered  as  substituted  by  pupillary
substitution,  unless,  in  either  case,  the  testator  had  expressed  a
wish  to  the  contrary.

1.  Qua  ratione  excitati,  etiam  con-  1.  Guided  by  a  similar  principle,

stitutionem  posuimus  in  nostro  co-  we  have  also  inserted  a  constitution
dice,  qua  prospectum  est,  ut  si  in  our  code,  which  provides  that,  if
mente  captos  habeant  filios  vel  ne-  a  man  has  children,  grandchildren,
potes  vel  pronepotes  cujuscumque  or  great-grandchildren,  out  of  their
sexus  vel  gradus,  liceat  eis,  efcsi  pu-  right  minds,  of  whatever  sex  or  de-
beres  sint,  ad  exemplum  pupillaris  gree,  he  may  substitute  certain  per-
substitutionis  certas  personas  sub-  sons  as  heirs  in  place  of  such  chil-
stituere ;  sin  autem  resipuerint,  dren,  on  the  analogy  of  pupillary
eamdem  substitutionem  infirmari,  substitution,  although  they  have  at-
et  hoc  ad  exemplum  pupillaris  sub-  tained  the  age  of  puberty.  But  if  they
stitutionis,  quae  postquam  pupillus  regain  their  reason,  the  substitution
adoleverit,  iniirmatur.  is  void,   on  the  analogy  of  pupillary

substitution,  which  ceases  to  operate
when  the  minor  attains  to  puberty.
C.  vi.  26.  9  :  D.  xxviii.  6.  14.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVI.

199

This  kind  of  substitution  is  termed  by  the  commentators  quasi-
pupillaris  or  exempJaris,  because  made  ad  exemplvm  pupillaris
substitutioids.  The  power  here  given  differs  from  that  of  making
a  child's  testament  in  two  points:  (1)  it  could  be  made  by  any
ascendant,  whether  paternal  or  maternal,  and  not  only  by  the
paterfamilias',  and  (2)  the  testator  could  not  substitute  any  one
he  pleased.  He  was  obliged  to  appoint  one  among  certas  personas,
viz.  one  of  the  descendants  of  the  insane,  and,  if  there  were  none,
then  one  of  his  brothers.  If  he  had  no  brother,  the  choice  of  the
testator  was  then  unrestrained.     (C.  vi.  26.  9.)

If  for  any  other  cause  than  insanity  a  descendant  were  inca-
pable of  making  a  testament,  the  emperor  would,  if  he  thought  fit,
give  a  licence  to  the  head  of  the  family  to  make  a  testament  for
him.     (D.  xxviii.  6.  43.)

2.  Igitiir  in  pupillari  siibstitutione
secundum  pr?efatum  modum  ordi-
nata  duo  quodammodo  sunt  testa-
menta,  alterum  patris,  alterum  filii,
tanquam  si  ipse  filius  sibi  heredem
instituisset,  aut  certe  unum  est  tes-
tamentum  duarum  causarum,  id  est,
duarum  hereditatum.

2.  In  a  pupillary  substitution,  made
in  the  way  we  have  mentioned,  there
are  in  a  manner  two  testaments,  one
of  the  father,  the  other  of  the  son,
as  if  the  son  had  instituted  an  heir
for  himself  ;  or  at  least  there  is  one
testament,  operating  on  two  objects,
that  is,  two  inheritances.

Gai.  ii.  180.

3.  Sin  autem  quis  ita  f ormidolosus
sit,  ut  timeret  ne  filius  ejus  pupillus
adhuc,  ex  eo  quod  palam  substitutu-m
accepit,  post  obitum  ejus  periculo
insidiarum  subjiceretur,  vulgarem
quidem  substitutionem  palam  facere
et  in  primis  testamenti  partibus  de-
bet ;  illam  autem  substitutionem
per  quam,  etsi  heres  extiterit  pupil-
lus et  intra  pubertatem  decesserit,
substitutus  vocatur,  separatim  in
inferioribus  partibus  scribere,  eam-
que  partem  proprio  lino  propriaque
cera  consignare,  et  in  priore  parte
testamenti  cavere,  ne  inferiores  ta-
bulae vivo  filio  et  adhuc  impubere
aperiantur.  lUud  palam  est,  non
ideo  minus  valere  substitutionem
impuberis  filii,  quod  in  iisdem  ta-
bulis  scripta  sit  quibus  sibi  quisque
heredem  instituisset,  quamvis  pu-
pillo  hoc  periculosum  sit.

3.  If  a  testator  is  so  apprehensive
as  to  fear  lest,  after  his  death,  his
son,  being  yet  a  pupil,  should  be  ex-
posed to  the  risk  of  having  designs
formed  against  him,  from  another
person  being  openly  substituted  to
him,  he  ought  to  make  openly  a  vul-
gar substitution,  and  insert  it  in  the
first  part  of  his  testament ;  and  to
write  the  substitution,  by  which  a
substituted  heir  is  called  to  tlie  in-
heritance, if  his  son  should  become
an  heir  and  then  die  under  the  age  of
puberty,  by  itself,  and  in  the  lower
part,  which  part  ought  to  be  sepa-
rately tied  up  and  sealed  :  and  he
ought  also  to  insert  a  clause  in  the
first  part  of  his  testament,  forbidding
the  lower  part  to  be  opened  while
his  son  is  alive  and  within  the  age  of
puberty.  Of  course  a  substitution  to
a  son  under  the  age  of  puberty  is  not
less  valid  because  written  on  the
same  tablet  in  which  the  testator  has
instituted  him  his  heir,  whatever
danger  it  may  involve  to  the  pupil.

Gal  ii.  181.

4.   Non  solum  autem  heredibus  4.  Parents  may  not  only  substitute

institutis    impuberibus     liberis    ita  to   their   children   under   the    age    of

substituere  parentes  possunt,  ut  etsi  puberty,  so  that  if  such  children  be-

heredes  eis  extiterint  et  ante  puber-  come  their   heirs,  and  die  under  the;

200

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVI.

tatein  mortui  fuerint,  sit  eis  heres
is  qiiem  ipsi  voluerint  ;  sed  etiam
exlieredatis  :  itaque  eo  casu,  si  quid
piipiUo  ex  hereditatibus  legatisve
aut  donationibus  propinqiiorum  at-
que  amicorum  acquisitum  fuerit,
id  omne  ad  substitutum  pertinebit,
Qiia3cumque  diximus  de  substitu-
tione  impuberum  liberorum  vel
heredum  institutoriim  vel  exhere-
datorum,  eadem  etiam  de  postumis
intellisfimus.

age  of  puberty,  any  one  whom  tlie
testator  pleases  shall  be  made  their
heir,  but  they  may  also  substitute
to  their  disinherited  children ;  and
therefore,  in  such  a  case,  whatever
a  disinherited  child,  within  the  age
of  puberty,  may  have  acquired  by
succession,  by  legacies,  or  by  gift
from  relations  and  friends,  will  all
become  the  property  of  the  substi-
tuted heir.  All  we  have  said  con-
cerning the  substitution  of  pupils,
instituted  heirs,  or  disinherited  chil-
dren, is  applicable  also  to  post-
humous children.

Gai.  ii.  182,  183.

It  was  not  because  he  instituted  a  child  in  his  own  testament
that  a  joaterfamilias  could  make  the  testament  of  that  child,  but
because  the  child  was  in  his  power,  and  hence  he  could  make  the
testaments  even  of  children  whom  he  disinherited.  Grandchildren
and  other  descendants  could  also  be  made  subject  to  a  pupillary
substitution  by  their  grandfather,  if  they  were  immediately  in  his
power,  that  is,  if  their  own  father  was  dead  or  emancipated.

It  was  necessary  that  the  child  should  be  under  the  power  of
the  father  at  the  time  of  making  the  testament,  and  also  at  that  of
the  father's  death.  No  testator  could,  therefore,  substitute  to  an
emancipated  child.  (D.  xxviii.  6.  2.)  If,  after  the  child  became
sui  juris,  he  was  arrogated,  this  vitiated  the  substitution ;  but  the
person  who  arrogated  him  was  obliged  to  give  security  that  if  the
child  died  under  the  age  of  puberty,  he  would  give  up  to  the
substituted  heir,  or  to  the  heredes  legitimi  if  no  one  was  substi-
tuted, all  that  would  have  to  come  to  the  pupil  if  the  substitution
had  remained  valid.  It  is,  perhaps,  hardly  necessary  to  observe,
that  in  every  case  of  pupillary  substitution,  the  substituted  heir
took  not  only  what  the  pupil  received  from  the  father,  but  all  that
the  pupil  would  have  had  to  dispose  of  by  testament,  if  he  had
been  capable  of  making  a  testament.

5.  Liberis  autem  suis  testamen-
tum  nemo  facere  potest,  nisi  et  sibi
faciat ;  nam  pupillare  testamentum
pars  et  sequela  est  paterni  testa-
menti,  adeo  ut  si  patris  testamentum
non  valeat,  nee  filii  quidem  valebit.

5.  No  parent  can  make  a  testament
for  his  children  unless  he  also  makes
a  testament  for  himself  :  for  the  pu-
pillary testament  is  a  part  of,  and
accessory  to,  the  testament  of  the
parent,  so  much  so,  that  if  the  testa-
ment of  the  father  is  not  valid,  neither
is  that  of  the  son.

D.  xxviii.  6.  2.  1.

The  two  testaments  were  generally  contained  in  the  same
instrument ;  but  a  testator  might,  if  he  pleased,  make  his  son's
testament  by  a  different  instrument,  or  might  even  make  it  by
verbal  nuncupation,  although  his  own  testament  was  written.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVI.

201

6.  Vel  singulis  antem  liberis,  vel
ei  qui  eorum  novissimus  impubes
morietur,  substitui  potest  :  singulis
quidem  si  neminem  eorum  intestato
decedere  voluit,  novissimo  si  jus
legitimarum  hereditatum  integrum
inter  eos  custodiri  velit.

6.  A  parent  may  make  a  pupillary
substitution  to  each,  of  his  children,
or  to  him  who  shall  die  the  last  under
the  age  of  puberty  ;  to  each,  if  he  be
unwilling  that  any  of  them  should  die
intestate  ;  to  the  last  who  shall  die
within  the  age  of  puberty,  if  he  wishes
that  the  order  of  legitimate  succession
should  be  rigidly  preserved  among
them.

D.  xxviii.  6.  37.

7.  Substituitur  autem  impuberi
aut  nominatim,  veluti  Titius,  aut
generaliter,  ut  quisquis  mihi  heres
erit :  quibus  verbis  vocantur  ex  sub-
stitutione,  impubere  mortuo  filio,
qui  et  ei  scripti  sunt  heredes  et  ex-
titerunt,  et  pro  qua  parte  heredes
facti  sunt.

7.  A  substitution  may  be  made  to
a  child  under  the  age  of  puberty  by
name,  as,  '  let  Titius  be  heir : '  or  ge-
nerally ;  for  instance,  '  whoever  shall
be  my  heir.'  By  these  latter  words
all  are  called  to  the  inheritance  by
substitution,  on  the  death  of  the  son
under  the  age  of  puberty,  who  have
been  instituted,  and  have  become
heirs  to  the  father,  and  each  in  pro-
portion to  the  share  assigned  to  him
as  heir.

D.  xxviii.  6.  8.  1.

Quisquis  mihi  heres  erit,  heres  Jilio  meo  impuberi  esto,  would
be  the  full  expression.

8.  Masculo  igitur  usque  ad  qua-
tuordecim  annos  substitui  potest,
feminse  usque  ad  duodecim  annos  ;
et  si  hoc  tempus  excesserint,  sub-
stitutio  evanescit.

8.  A  substitution  may  then  be  made
to  males  Tip  to  the  age  of  fourteen,
and  to  females  up  to  that  of  twelve
years :  this  age  once  passed,  the  sub-
stitution is  at  an  end.

D.  xxviii.  6.  14.

The  father  could  not  extend  the  time  beyond  fourteen  years,
but  he  could  make  it  less ;  as,  for  example,  si  jilius  mens  intra
decimum  annum  decesserit.

The  suhstitutio  jpupillaris  would  be  at  an  end  not  only  by  the
pupil  attaining  the  age  of  puberty,  but  by  his  undergoing  a
capitis  deminutio  before  the  age  of  puberty,  or  dying  before  his
father,  as,  in  either  of  these  cases,  it  would  be  impossible  he
should  make  a  testament.  Or,  again,  if  no  one  entered  on  the
father's  inheritance,  or  the  father's  testament  was  in  any  way
made  inoperative,  the  testament  of  the  son  was  void,  because  it
w^as  on  the  validity  of  the  testament  of  the  father  that  the  validity
of  the  testament  of  the  son  depended.

9.  Extraneo  vero  vel  filio  puberi
heredi  instituto  ita  substituere  nemo
potest,  ut  si  heres  extiterit  et  intra
aliquod  tempus  decesserit,  alius  ei
sit  heres  ;  sed  hoc  solum  permissum
est,  ut  eum  per  fideicommissum
testator  obliget  alii  hereditatem  ejus
vel  totam  vel  pro  parte  restituere  :

9.  After  having  instituted  a  stranger
or  son  of  full  age,  a  testator  cannot
then  go  on  to  substitute  another
heir  to  him,  if  he  dies  within  a  cer-
tain time.  All  that  is  allowed  is,
to  oblige,  by  a  jideicoTiiiinissum,,  the
person  instituted  to  give  up  all  or  a
part   to   a   third    person.     What   the

202  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVII.

quod  jus  quale  sit,  suo  loco  trade-     law  is  on  this  point  we  will  explain  in
mus.  its  proper  place.

Gai.  ii.  184.

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  2i  Jideicommissum,  the  testator  does
not  attempt  to  deal  with  the  inheritance  of  another :  he  only  regu-
lates the  transmission  of  his  own,  and  nothing,  therefore,  passed
by  the  Jideicommissiun,  except  what  came  to  the  person  instituted
from  the  testator.

Soldiers  could  make  a  testament  for  their  children  without
having  made  their  own,  and  could  substitute,  so  far  as  the  inherit-
ance they  gave  went  to  their  children  over  puberty,  to  emanci-
pated children  and  strangers.  (D.  xxviii.  6.  21  ;  D.  xxviii.  6.
105  and  15;  D.  xxix.  141,  4  and  5.)

Tit.  XVII.      QUIBUS   MODIS   TESTAMENTA
INFIEMANTUR.

Testamentum  jure  factum  usque  A  testament,  legally  made,  remains

adeo  valet  donee  rumpatur  irritumve     valid    until   it   be   either   revoked   or
fiat.  rendered  ineffectual.

If  something  was  originally  wanting  to  the  validity  of  the
testament,  it  was  spoken  of  as  being  injustam,  non  jure  factum ;
as  imperfectiim,  if  some  formality  was  wanting ;  and  as  nullius
momenti,  if  a  child  was  not  properly  disinherited.  But  it  might
be  quite  valid  when  made,  and  subsequently  lose  its  effect ;  in
such  a  case  it  was  either  ruptum,  i.e.  its  force  was  broken,  it  was
revoked,  either  by  agnation  of  a  suus  lieres,  or  by  a  subsequent  tes-
tament ;  or  it  was  irritum^  rendered  useless  by  the  testator  under-
going a  change  of  status,  or  by  no  one  entering,  under  it,  on  the
inheritance.  In  this  last  case  it  was  specially  said  to  be  desti-
tutum ;  but  the  general  expression  irritum  was  applied,  as  well  as
the  more  particular  term  destltutum,  to  a  testament  that  had  been
abandoned.

We  have  no  term  nearer  to  riiptum  than  revoked ;  but  it  does
not  express  it  very  accurately,  as  the  rupture  of  the  testament  might
be  something  quite  independent  of  the  testator's  Avill,  whereas
revocation  properly  implies  a  voluntary  act  of  the  testator.  We
have  hitherto,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  metaphor,  translated  it,
*  the  force  of  the  testament  is  broken  ;'  but  this  paraphrase  is  too
cumbrous  to  be  retained  when  the  expression  occurs  frequently.

1.  Rumpitur  autem  testamentum  1.   A  testament  is  revoked  when,

cum  in  eodem  statu  manente  testa-  the    testator    still    remaining    in    the

tore  ipsius  testamenti  jus  vitiatur.  same  status,  the  eifect  of  the  testament

Si  quis  enim  post  factum  testamen-  is  destroyed  ;  for  if,  after  making  his

turn  adoptaverit  sibi  filium  per  im-  testament,  he  arrogates  a  person  siii

peratorem,  eum  qui  est  sui  juris,  aut  juris   by   licence    from   the    emperor,

per   prsetorem    secundum    nostram  or  if,  in  the  presence  of  the  praetor,

constitutionem,  eum  qui  in  potestate  and  by  virtue  of  our  constitution,  he

LIB.  II.     TIT.  XVII.  203

parentis  fuerit,  testamentum  ejus  adopts  a  child  under  the  power  of  his
runipitur  quasi  adgnatione  sui  he-  natural  parent,  then  the  testament
redis.  would    be    revoked    by    this    quasi-

agnation  of  a  sims  heres.

Gai.  ii.  138,  and  foil.

We  have  already  seen  how  the  rupture  of  the  testament  might
be  avoided  by  instituting  or  disinheriting  posthumous  children
and  quasi-postumi.  But  when  a  new  suus  heres  came  into  the
family  by  the  civil  agnation  produced  by  adoption  or  arrogation,
the  stricter  law  of  the  time  of  Gains  pronounced  that  the  testa-
ment was  inevitably  revoked.  But  in  the  times  of  the  later
jurists,  if  the  new  siius  heres  had  been  instituted  by  anticipation,
the  testament  was  considered  as  not  revoked  (D.  xxviii.  2.  23),
and  it  was  only  when  he  had  been  omitted  or  disinherited,  that
the  rule  making  the  testament  of  no  effect  was  allowed  to  prevail.
And  Justinian  seems  here  to  countenance  the  opinion  by  omitting
the  word  omnimodo,  which  Gains  adds  to  rumpitur.

2.  Posteriore  quoque  testamento,  2.  A  former  testament  is  equally

quod  jure  perfectum  est,  superius  revoked  by  a  subsequent  one  made
rumpitur ;  nee  interest,  extiterit  ali-  as  the  law  requires,  nor  does  it  sig-
quis  heres  ex  eo,  an  non :  hoc  enim  nify  whether  under  the  new  testa-
solum  spectatur,  an  aliquo  casu  ex-  ment  any  one  becomes  heir  or  not ;
istere  potuerit.  Ideoque  si  quis  aut  the  only  question  is,  whether  there
noluerit  heres  esse,  aut  vivo  testatore  could  have  been  an  heir  under  it  :
aut  post  mortem  ejus  ante  quam  he-  therefore,  if  an  instituted  heir  re-
reditatem  adiret  decesserit,  aut  con-  nounces,  or  dies,  either  during  the
ditione  sub  qua  heres  institutus  est  life  of  the  testator,  or  after  the  tes-
defectus  sit,  in  his  casibus  paterfa-  tator's  death,  but  before  the  heir  can
milias  intestatus  moritur  :  nam  et  enter  upon  the  inheritance,  or  if  his
prius  testamentum  non  valet  rup-  interest  terminates  by  the  failure  of
tum  a  posteriore,  et  posterius  ?eque  the  condition  under  which  he  was  in-
nullas  habet  vires,  cum  ex  eo  nemo  stituted — in  any  of  these  cases,  the
heres  extiterit.  testator  dies  intestate  ;    for  the   first

testament  is  invalid,  being  revoked
by  the  second,  and  the  second  is  of
as  little  force,  as  there  is  no  heir
under  it.

Gai.  ii.  144.

If  the  heir  instituted  in  a  second  testament  would  have  taken
as  heres  ah  intestato,  the  second  testament,  although  it  might  be
not  formally  made  {jure  perfectum),  was  still  held  valid,  as  an
expression  of  the  last  will  of  the  deceased,  who  died  intestate
indeed,  but  whose  wishes  were  binding  on  the  heir.  (D.  xxviii.
3.  2;   C.  vi.  23.  21.  3.)

The  two  modes  mentioned  in  the  text  by  which  a  testament
could  be  revoked  are  the  ao-nation  of  a  suus  heres  and  the  makino^
a  subsequent  testament.  But  the  testator  could  also  revoke  it
by  tearing  or  defacing  it,  or  by  signifying  a  wish  to  have  it  re-
voked befoi-e  three  witnesses ;  or  if  the  testament  had  at  the
time  of  the  testator's  death  been  made  ten  years,  it  was  enough  to
make  it  considered  as  revoked  if  the  testator  had  signified,  before

204

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVII.

three  witnesses  or  by  a  deed,  his  wish  that  it  should  not  remain  in
force.  Theodosius  had  enacted  that  a  testament  should  be  always
invalid  after  ten  years  had  expired  from  the  time  of  its  being
made.  Justinian  allowed  testaments  to  remain  valid,  as  a  general
rule,  for  any  length  of  time,  but  retained  the  effect  of  the  lapse
of  time  if  the  testator  had  also  signified,  as  above  mentioned,  his
wish  to  have  his  testament  revoked.     (C.  vi.  23.  27.)

When  it  is  said  that  a  subsequent  testament  to  revoke  a  prior
one  must  be  regularly  made,  it  must  be  understood  that,  in  the
case  of  soldiers,  their  privilege  of  making  a  testament  in  any  way
they  pleased  would  permit  them  to  revoke  a  prior  testament  by
any  testament  that  expressed  their  intentions.

3.  Sed  et  si  quis,  priore  testamento
jure  perfecto,  posterius  seque  jure
fecerit,  etiamsi  ex  certis  rebus  in  eo
heredem  instituerit,  superius  testa-
mentum  sublatum  esse  divi  Severus
et  Antoninus  rescripserunt.  Cujus
constitutionis  verba  inseri  jussimus,
cum  aliud  quoque  prseterea  in  ea
constitutione  expressum  est.  '  Impe-
ratores  Severus  et  Antoninus  Coc-
ceioCampano :  Testamentum  secundo
loco  factum,  licet  in  eo  certarum
rerum  heres  scriptus  sit,  perinde
jure  valere  ac  si  rerum  mentio  facta
non  esset ;  sed  teneri  lieredem  scrip-
turn  ut  contentus  rebus  sibi  datis,
aut  suppleta  quarta  ex  lege  Falci-
dia,  hereditatem  restituat  his  qui  in
priore  testamento  scripti  fuerant,
propter  inserta  verba  secundo  tes-
tamento, quibus  ut  valeret  prius
testamentum  expressum  est,  dubi-
tari  non  oportet. '  Et  ruptum  quidem
testamentum  hoc  modo  efficitur.

3.  If  any  one,  after  having  made
a  valid  testament,  makes  another
equally  valid,  although  the  heir  is  in-
stituted therein  for  certain  particular
things  only,  yet,  as  the  Emperors  Se-
verus and  Antoninus  have  decided  by
a  rescript,  the  first  testament  is  con-
sidered to  be  thereby  destroyed.  We
have  ordered  the  words  of  this  con-
stitution to  be  here  inserted,  as  it
contains  a  further  provision.  '  The
Emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus-  to
Cocceius  Campanus  :  a  second  testa-
ment, although  the  heir  named  in  it
is  instituted  to  particular  things  only,
shall  be  as  valid  as  if  the  things  had
not  been  specified,  but  unquestionably
the  heir  instituted  in  the  second  testa-
ment must  content  himself  either  with
the  things  given  him,  or  with  the
fourth  part,  made  up  to  him  according
to  the  lex  Falcidia,  and  shall  be  bound
to  restore  the  rest  of  the  inheritance
to  the  heirs  instituted  in  the  first  testa-
ment, on  account  of  the  words  inserted
in  the  second,  by  which  it  is  declared,
that  efiect  shall  be  given  to  the  first
testament.'  This,  therefore,  is  a  mode
in  which  a  testament  is  revoked.

D.  xxxvi.  1.  29.

It  was  not  the  lex  Falcidia,  but  the  senatiis-consultum
Pegasianum,  by  which  this  fourth  was  in  such  a  case  given  to
the  heir.     (See  Tit.  23.  5.)

If  the  heir  w^as  instituted  for  a  part  only,  certcB  res,  he
would  by  law  be  instituted  for  the  whole,  as  no  one  could  die
partly  testate ;  but  if  in  the  second  testament  it  was  expressed
that  the  first  should  be  valid,  this  would  be  the  same  as  imposing
a  Jideicommissum  on  the  heir  under  the  second  testament,  the
terms  of  the  fideicommissum  being  contained  in  the  first  testa-
ment.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVII.

205

4.  Alio  qiioque  modo  testamenta
jure  facta  infirmantur,  veluti  cum  is
qui  fecit  testamentum,  capite  demi-
nutus  sit.  Quod  quibus  modis  ac-
cidat,  primo  libro  retulimus.

4.  Testaments  validly  made  are
also  invalidated  in  another  way,  viz.  if
the  testator  suffers  a  capitis  deminutio.
We  have  shown  in  the  First  Book
under  what  circumstances  this  may
happen.

Gai.  ii.  145.

As  it  was  from  his  civil  status  that  a  testator's  power  of
making  a  testament  proceeded,  any  change  in  this  was  held  to
invalidate  any  exercise  of  the  power  made  before  the  change.

5.  Hoc  autem  casu  irrita  fieri
testamenta  dicuntur,  cum  alioquin
et  qu93  rumpantur  irrita  fiant,  et
quae  statim  ab  initio  non  jure  j&unt
irrita  sunt,  et  ea  quae  jure  facta
sunt  et  postea  propter  capitis  demi-
nutionem  irrita  fiunt,  possumus  ni-
hilominus  rupta  dicere ;  sed  quia
sane  commoditis  erat  singulas  causas
singulis  appellationibus  distingui,
ideo  quaedam  non  jure  facta  dicun-
tur, quaedam  jure  facta  rumpi  vel
irrita  fieri.

5.  In  such  a  case  testaments  are
said  to  become  ineffectual,  although
those  which  are  revoked,  or  which,
from  the  beginning,  were  not  legally
valid,  may  equally  well  be  termed  in-
effectual. We  may  also  term  those
testaments  revoked,  which,  being  at
first  legally  made,  are  afterwards  ren-
dered ineffectual  by  a  capitis  demi-
nutio. But,  as  it  is  more  convenient
to  distinguish  by  different  terms  each
cause  that  invalidates  a  testament,
some  are  said  to  be  irregularly  made,
and  others,  regularly  made,  to  be  re-
voked or  rendered  ineffectual.

.     Gai.  ii.  146.

Under  irrita  testamenta^  we  must  include  those  which  the
jurisconsults  termed  destituta,  i.e.  abandoned,  by  no  one  entering
on  the  inheritance.

6.  Non  tamen  per  omnia  inutilia
sunt  ea  testamenta,  quae  ab  initio  jure
facta  propter  capitis  deminutionem
irrita  facta  sunt.  Nam  si  septem
testium  signis  signata  sunt,  potest
scriptus  heres  secundum  tabulas
testamenti  bonorum  possessionem
agnoscere,  si  modo  defunctus  et  civis
Romanus  et  suae  potestatis  mortis
tempore  fuerit  :  nam  si  ideo  irritum
factum  sit  testamentum,  quia  civi-
tatem  vel  etiam  libertatem  testator
amisit,  aut  quia  in  adoptionem  se
dedit,  et  mortis  tempore  in  adoptivi
patris  potestate  sit,  non  potest
scriptus  heres  secundum  tabulas  bo-
norum possessionem  petere.

6.  But  testaments  at  first  validly
made,  and  afterwards  rendered  in-
effectual by  a  capitis  deminutio,  are  not
absolutely  void  ;  for  if  they  have  been
attested  by  the  seals  of  seven  wit-
nesses, the  instituted  heir  can  obtain
possession  of  the  goods  according  to
the  testament,  provided  that  the  tes-
tator was  a  Roman  citizen,  and  was
sni  juris  at  the  time  of  his  death.  For
if  a  testament  becomes  void  because
the  testator  has  lost  the  right  of  a
citizen  or  his  liberty,  or  because  he
has  given  himself  in  adoption,  and  at
the  time  of  his  death  was  under  the
power  of  his  adoptive  father,  then  the
instituted  heir  cannot  demand  posses-
sion of  the  goods  according  to  the
terms  of  the  testament.

Gai.  ii.  147.

The  meaning  of  the  praetor  giving  the  honor um  posses sio
secundum  tahulas  is,  that  he  ordered  that  possession  of  the  pro-
perty should  be  given  as  the  testator  intended,  though,  by  the
rules  of  strict  law,  the  testament  in  which  he  had  expressed  his

206

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVII.

intention  was  invalidated.  The  instance  referred  to  in  the  text
is  that  of  a  testator,  after  making  his  testament,  suffering  a  capitis
deminutioj  but  returning  to  his  old  status  before  dying.  In  such
a  case  the  praetor  gave  the  honorum  possessio ;  but  if  the  testator
had  been  arrogated  and  then  emancipated,  he  must  (since  the
arrogation  was  his  own  act)  have  after  his  emancipation  expressly
declared  his  wish  to  abide  by  his  testament  made  before  arroga-
tion (Gat.  ii.  147),  or  the  pra3tor  would  not  give  the  honor um
possessio  to  the  instituted  heir.

7.  Ex  eo  autem  solo  non  potest
infirmari  testamentum,  quod  postea
testator  id  noluit  valere  :  usque  adeo
ut,  etsi  quis  post  factum  prius  testa-
mentum posterius  facere  coeperit,  et
aut  mortalitate  pr?eventus,  aut  quia
eum  ejus  rei  poeiiituit,  non  perfece-
rit,  divi  Pertinacis  oratione  cautum
sit  ne  alias  tabulae  priores  jure  fac-
tre  irritee  fiant,  nisi  sequentes  jure
ordinal  se  et  jterfectae  fuerint  ;  nam
imperfectum  testamentum  sine  dubio
nullum  est.

D.  xxxiv.  4  ;
See  note  on  paragraph  2.

8.  Eadem  oratione  expressit,  non
admissurum  se  liereditatem  ejus  qui
litis  causa  principem  reliquerit  lie-
redem,  neque  tabulas  non  legitime
factas  in  quibus  ipse  ob  eam  causam
heres  institutus^erat  probaturum,
neque  ex  nuda  voce  heredis  nomen
admissurum,  neque  ex  uUa  scriptura
cui  juris  auctoritas  desit  aliquid
adepturum.  Secundum  li^ec  divi
quoque  Severus  et  Antoninus  sse-
pissime  recripserunt  :  licet  enim  (in-
quiunt)  legibus  soluti  simus,  attamen
le^ibus  vivimus.

7.  A  testament  cannot  be  invali-
dated solely  because  the  testator  is
afterwards  unwilling  that  it  should
take  effect ;  so  that,  if  any  one,  after
making  one  testament,  begins  another,
and  then,  being  prevented  by  death,
or  from  having  changed  his  mind,
does  not  complete  it,  it  is  decided  in
an  address  to  the  senate  by  the  Empe-
ror Pertinax,  that  the  first  testament
shall  not  be  revoked,  unless  the  subse-
quent one  is  regularly  made  and  com-
plete, for  an  imperfect  testament  is
undoubtedly  null.

C.  vi.  23.  21.  3.

8.  The  emperor  declared  in  the
same  address  to  the  senate,  that  he
would  not  accept  the  inheritance  of
any  testator,  who,  on  account  of  a
suit,  made  the  emperor  his  heir  ;  that
he  would  never  make  valid  a  testament
legally  deficient  in  form,  if,  in  order
to  cover  the  deficiency,  he  himself  was
instituted  heir  ;  that  he  would  not  ac-
cept the  title  of  heir,  if  he  was  insti-
tuted by  word  of  mouth  ;  and  that  he
would  never  take  anything  by  virtue
of  any  writing  wanting  the  authority
of  strict  law.  The  EmiDerors  Severus
and  Antoninus  have  also  often  issued
rescripts  to  the  same  purpose  :  '  for
although,'  say  they,  'we  are  above  the
laws,  yet  we  live  in  obedience  to  them.'

D.  xxxii.  23.

Testators  occasionally  made  the  emperor  their  heir,  in  order
that  their  adversary  in  a  lawsuit  might  have  him  to  contend
with.

An  oratio  was  an  address  to  the  senate  by  the  emperor,  in
which  he  explained  to  them  what  they  were  to  enact ;  they
then  put  his  recommendations  into  the  shape  of  a  senatus-
consultum.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVIII.  207

Tit.  XYIII.     DE    INOFFICIOSO    TESTAMENTO.

Quia    plerumque   parentes    sine  Since  parents  often  disinherit  tlieir

cansa  liberos  suos  exheredant  vel  children,  or  omit  them  in  their  testa-
omittunt,  inductum  est  ut  de  inoffi-  ments,  without  any  cause,  children
cioso  testamento  agere  possint  liberi,  who  complain  that  they  have  been
qui  queruntur  aut  inique  se  exhere-  unjustly  disinherited  or  omitted,  have
datos  aut  inique  prasteritos  :  hoc  been  j^ermitted  to  bring  the  action  de
colore  quasi  non  sanse  mentis  fue-  inofficioso  testamento,  on  the  supposi-
rint,  cum  testamentum  ordinarent.  tion  that  their  parents  were  not  of
Sed  hoc  dicitur  non  quasi  vere  fu-  sane  mind  when  they  made  their  testa-
riosus  sit,  sed  recte  quidem  fecerit  ment.  This  does  not  mean  that  the
testamentum,  non  autem  ex  officio  testator  was  really  insane,  but  that
pietatis  ;  nam  si  vere  furiosus  sit,  the  testament,  though  regularly  made,
nullum  testamentum  est.  is  inconsistent  with  the  duty  of  affec-

tion the  parent  owes.  For,  if  a  testa-
tor is  really  insane  at  the  time,  his
testament  is  null.

D.  V.  2.  2,  3.  5.

As  we  may  gather  from  the  text,  a  testament  was  termed
inofficwsum,  which  was  at  variance  with  the  dictates  of  natural
affection,  and  those  duties  of  near  relationship  which  were  ex-
pressed by  the  term  qfficium  pietatis.  A  presumption  seemed
to  arise  that  the  persons  very  closely  connected  with  the  testator,
if  passed  over,  must  have  done  something  to  merit  the  testator's
disapprobation.  They  might  therefore  naturally  desire  to  have
their  character  (^cestiinatio)  protected  against  this  imputation,  and
they  therefore  applied  to  the  prsetor  to  set  the  testament  aside.
A  testament  regularly  and  validly  made,  but  liable  to  the  objec-
tion that  it  was  inafficiosum,  was  liable  to  be  set  aside  on  the
application  of  the  children,  or,  if  there  were  no  children,  on  that
of  the  ascendants,  or,  if  there  were  no  ascendants,  on  that  of  the
brother  or  sister  of  the  deceased,  the  claim  of  these  last,  however,
only  prevailing  where  the  person  instituted  was  turpis.

It  is  not  known  at  what  date  the  action  de  inqfficioso  testamento
was  first  introduced.  It  is  referred  to  by  Cicero  (/?i  Verr.  i.  42.)
It  was  brought  before  the  centumviri,  as  were  all  actions  con-
cerning inheritances,  and  if  they  pronounced  the  testament  '  in-
officiosum,''  all  its  dispositions  were  set  aside,  and  the  inheritance
passed  according  to  the  succession  ab  intestato.  (See  Introd.
sec.  77.)

The  power  of  bringing  ihe  action  was,  however,  not  confined
entirely  to  those  who  were  disinherited.  Children  omitted  by  the
mother,  and  grandchildren  omitted  by  the  maternal  grandfather,
might  bring  it,  as  we  have  already  seen.     (Tit.  13.  7.)

1.  Non  autem  liberis  tantum  per-  1.  It  is  not  children  only  who  are

missum  est  testamentum  parentum  allowed   to  attack  the    testaments  of

inofficiosum  accusare,  verum  etiani  their  parents    as  inofficious.     Parents

parentibus  liberorum.     Soror  autem  are  also  permitted  to  attack  those  of

pt  frater  turpibus  personis  scriptis  their  children.     The  brothers  and   sis-

208

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVIII.

heredibus  ex  sacris  constitutionibus  ters  of  a  testator,  also,  by  the  imperial
praelati  sunt ;  non  ergo  contra  omnes  constitutions,  are  preferred  to  infa-
heredes  agere  possunt.  Ultra  fratres  mous  persons,  if  any  such  have  been
igitur  et  sorores  cognati  nullo  modo  instituted  heirs.  Thus,  then,  they
aut  agere  possunt,  aut  agentes  vin-  cannot  bring  such  an  action  against  any
cere.  heir.     Beyond  brothers  and  sisters  no

cognate  can  bring  or  succeed  in  such

an  action  at  all.

C.  iii.  28.  21.  27.

Before  Justinian,  brothers  and  sisters  could  only  bring  this
action  while  the  tie  of  agnation  was  in  existence.  He  permitted
them  to  bring  it  durante  agnatione  vel  non  (C.  iii.  28.  27),  and
thus  made  it  sufficient  that  they  should  be  merely  consanguinei,
i.  e.  born  of  the  same  father.  Subsequently,  by  the  118th  Novel,
uterine  brothers  or  sisters  were  placed  on  the  same  footing  as
consanguinei.

2.  Tarn  autem  naturales  liberi,
quam  secundum  nostrse  constitutio-
nis  divisionem  adoptati,  ita  demum
de  inofficioso  testamento  agere  pos-
sunt, si  nullo  alio  jure  ad  defuncti
bona  venire  possunt  ;  nam  qui  ad
hereditatem  totam  vel  partem  ejus
alio  jure  veniunt,  de  inofl&cioso
agere  non  possunt.  Postumi  quo-
que  qui  nullo  alio  jure  venire  pos-
sunt, de  inofficioso  agere  possunt.

2.  But  natural  children,  as  well
as  adopted  (the  distinction  between
adopted  children  laid  down  in  our
constitution  being  always  observed),
can  only  attack  the  testament  as  in-
officious, if  they  can  obtain  the  efiects
of  the  deceased  in  no  other  way  ;  for
those  who  can  obtain  the  whole  or  a
part  of  the  inheritance  by  any  other
means,  caimot  pursue  this  remedy.
Posthumous  children,  also,  who  are
unable  to  recover  their  inheritance  by
any  other  method,  are  allowed  to  bring
this  action.

D.  V.  2.  6.  8.  15.

Those  adopted  by  strangers  could  not  impugn  the  testament  of
the  adoptive  father,  if  they  were  disinherited  or  passed  over,  but
those  who  were  adopted  by  their  ascendants  could.  This  is  the
divisio  here  alluded  to.     (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  11.  2.)

The  actio  de  inofficioso  testamento  was  only  a  last  resource  open
to  those  who  had  no  other  :  a  pupil,  therefore,  arrogated,  and
afterwards  disinherited  by  the  arrogator,  could  not  bring  this
action,  because  he  was  entitled  to  the  quarta  Antonina  (see  Bk.  i.
Tit.  11.  2);  nor,  again,  could  an  emancipated  son,  omitted  in  the
testament  of  his  father,  because  the  praetor  gave  him  possession
of  the  goods  contra  tabulas.     (See  Tit.  13.  3.)

\

3.  Sed  hsec  ita  accipienda  sunt,
si  nihil  eis  penitus  a  testatoribus
testamento  relictum  est  :  quod  nos-
tra constitutio  ad  verecundiam  na-
turae introduxit.  Sin  vero  quanta-
cumque  pars  hereditatis  vel  res  eis
fuerit  relicta,  inofficiosi  querela
quiescente,  id  quod  eis  deest  usque
ad  quartam  legitimse  partis  replea-
tur,  licet  non  fuerit  adjectum,  boni

3.  All  this  must  be  understood  to
take  place  only  when  nothing  has
been  left  them  by  the  testament  of  the
deceased  ;  a  provision  introduced  by
our  constitution,  out  of  respect  for  the
rights  of  nature.  For,  if  the  least
part  of  the  inheritance  or  any  one
single  thing  has  been  given  them,  they
cannot  bring  an  action  'de  inofficioso
testamento  :  but  they  must  have  made

LIB.  II.     TIT.  XVIII.  209

viri  arbitratu  debere  earn  compleri.     up  to  them  one-fourth  of  what  would

have  been  their  share,  if  the  deceased
had  died  intestate,  supposing  what  is
given  does  not  amount  to  this  fourth  ;
and  this,  although  the  testator  has
not  added  to  his  gift  any  direction
that  this  fourth  is  to  be  made  up  to
them  according  to  the  estimate  of  a
trustworthy  person.

C.  iii.  28.  30,  pr.  and  1.

A  plehisciturn  was  passed  in  the  year  714  A.U.C.,  called  the  lex
Falcidia  (Tit.  22),  which  provided  that  one  clear  fourth  of  the
inheritance  must  remain  to  the  heir,  and  that  legacies  and  trusts
could  only  affect  three-fourths.  Either  from  the  analogy  of  this
law,  or  by  some  express  enactment,  it  was  decided  that  every  one
who  was  near  enouo-h  in  blood  to  the  testator  to  bring;  the  action
de  inojfficioso,  might  bring  it,  though  mentioned  in  the  testament,
unless  one-fourth  were  thereby  given  him  of  what  he  would  have
received  in  a  succession  ab  intestato.  This  fourth  part  was
spoken  of  under  different  names.  Sometimes  it  was  itself  termed
the  Falcidia  (^Solam  eis  Falcidiam  debit(B  successionis  relinquant^
Cod.  Theod.  xvi.  7.  28).  Sometimes  it  is  spoken  of  as  the  portio
lecjihus  debita,  ov  portio  legitima  (C.  iii.  26.  28),  and  commentators
have  called  it  simply  the  ler/itima.  In  the  text,  it  will  be  seen,
the  term  legitima  pars  is  used  to  express  the  share  the  persons
would  have  taken  ab  intestato.

Before  the  time  of  Justinian  (Cod.  Theod.  ii.  19.  4),  unless  a
testator  either  expressly  gave  this  fourth,  or  gave  a  direction  that
such  an  additional  share  of  the  goods  should  be  added  to  that
actually  given,  as  some  trustworthy  person,  who  should  make  an
estimate  of  the  value  of  all  the  goods  of  the  deceased,  should
consider  would  be  necessary  to  make  what  was  given  equal  to  the
fourth,  the  testament  could  be  attacked  and  set  aside  as  inofficious  ;
but  Justinian  altered  the  law  on  this  point,  and  enacted  that  if
the  testator  gave  anything  at  all,  the  action  de  inofficioso  could
not  be  brought,  but  only  an  action  to  obtain  what  was  wanting
to  make  up  the  fourth,  while  the  testament  itself  remained  valid.
(C.  iii.  28.  30.)  There  were  considerable  differences  between
the  action  to  make  up  what  was  wanting  to  the  fourth  part  (actio
in  supplementum  legitimcB^  and  that  de  inofficioso  ;  the  former  was
a  personal  action,  there  was  no  limit  to  the  time  in  which  it  was
to  be  brought,  it  was  transmissible  to  the  heirs  of  the  person  who
could  bring  it,  and  it  left  the  testament  valid  ;  the  latter  was  a
real  action,  was  obliged  to  be  brought  within  a  certain  time  (see
note  to  paragr.  6),  could  not  be  transmitted  to  the  heirs,  unless
the  person  entitled  to  bring  it  had  manifested  an  intention  to  do
so,  and  if  it  was  successfully  brought,  the  testament  was  set  aside.

4.   Si  tutor  nomine  pupilli  cujus  4.   If  a  tutor  accepts  in  the  name

tutelam  gerebat,  ex  testamento  pa-     of  the  pupil  under  his  charge  a  legacy

P

210

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XVIII.

tris  sui  legatum  acceperit,  cum  nihil
erat  ipsi  tutori  relictum  a  patre  suo,
nihilominus  poterit  nomine  suo  de
inofficioso  patris  testamento   agere.

given  in  the  testament  of  the  tutor's
own  father,  while  nothing  has  been
left  to  the  tutor  himself  by  his  father's
testament,  he  may  nevertheless  in  his
own  name  attack  the  testament  of  his
father  as  inofficious.

D.  V.  2.  10.  1.  il

To  accept  a  legacy  -was  to  acquiesce  in  the  validity  of  the
testament  ;  but  it  was  reasonable  that  a  tutor,  who  had  an  un-
avoidable duty  to  perform  towards  his  pupil,  should  not  be
personally  bound  by  an  act  done  in  his  capacity  as  tutor.

5.  Sed  et  si  e  contrario  pupilli
nomine  cui  nihil  relictum  fuerit,  de
inofficioso  egerit  et  superatus  est,
ipse  tutor  quod  sibi  in  eodem  testa-
mento legatum  relictum  est,  non
amittit.

5.  Conversely,  if  a  tutor,  in  the
name  of  his  pupil,  to  whom  nothing
has  been  left,  attacks  as  inofficious
the  testament  of  his  pupil's  father,
and  attacks  it  unsuccessfully,  he  does
not  lose  anything  that  may  have  been
left  himself  in  the  same  testament.

D.  V.  2.  30.  1.

Any  one  who  attacked  a  testament  as  inofficious,  unsuccess-
fully, forfeited  to  the  fiscus  whatever  was  given  him  by  the
testament.

6.  Igitur  quartam  quis  debet  ha-
bere, ut  de  inofficioso  testamento
agere  non  possit,  sive  jure  heredi-
tario  sive  jure  legati  vel  j&deicom-
missi,  vel  si  mortis  causa  ei  donata
tpiarta  fuerit,  vel  inter  vivos  in  lis
tantummodo  casibus  quorum  men-
tionem  facit  nostra  constitutio,  vel
aliis  modis  qui  constitutionibus  con-
tinentur.  Quod  autem  de  quarta
diximus,  ita  intelligendum  est  ut,
sive  unus  fuerit  sive  plures  quibus
agere  de  inofficioso  testamento  per-
mittitur,  una  quarta  eis  dari  possit,
ut  pro  rata  eis  distribuatur,  id  est,
pro  virili  portione  quarta.

6.  That  a  person  should  be  de-
barred from  bringing  the  action  de
inofficioso  testaifnento,  it  is  necessary
that  he  should  have  a  fourth,  either
by  hereditary  right,  or  by  a  legacy
or  a  Jideicommissuni,  or  by  a  donatio
mortis  causa,  or  a  donatio  inter  vivos'
in  the  cases  mentioned  in  our  constitu-
tion, or  by  any  of  the  other  means  set
forth  in  the  constitutions.  What  w^e
have  said  of  the  fourth  must  be  under-
stood as  meaning  that,  Avhether  there
be  one  person  only  or  several,  who  can
bring  an  action  de  inofficioso  testa-
mento, only  one-fourth  is  to  be  distri-
buted among  all  proportionally,  that
is,  each  is  to  have  the  fourth  of  his
proper  share.

D.  V.  2.  8.  6.  8;  D.  v.  2.  25  ;  C.  iii.  28-30.  2.

If  the  donatio  inter  vivos  had  been  made  on  the  express  con-
dition that  it  should  be  reckoned  as  part  of  the  quarta  legitima
(D.  V.  2.  25  ;  C.  iii.  28.  35),  or  had  been  advanced  for  the  pur-
chase of  a  military  rank  (C.  iii.  28.  30),  then  it  was  taken  into
account  in  estimating  how  much  the  recipient  was  entitled  to  as
his  fourth ;  but,  generally  speaking,  as  it  was  the  receipt  of  the
fourth  of  that  which  a  person  would  have  received  ah  intestato
that  excluded  him  from  bringing  the  action  de  inofficioso,  the
right  to  this  action  could  not  be  taken   away  by  the  receipt  of

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIX.  211

gifts,  which,  having  been  made  inter  vivos,  could  not  have  formed
part  of  the  inheritance  ab  intestato.

The  words,  vel  aliis  modis,  &c.,  refer  to  sums  given  by  parents
to  their  children  as  part  of  dotes,  and  to  donationes  propter  nuptias
(C.  iii.  28.  29  ;  C.  vi.  20.  20,  1),  which  were  taken  into  account
in  reckoning  the  amount  due  as  the  portio  legitima.

The  right  to  the  action  de  inofficioso  might  be  extinguished,
(1)  by  the  person  entitled  to  the  quarta  legitima  dying  without
having  manifested  an  intention  to  dispute  the  testament :  if  he
had  done  so,  the   right  to   the  action  passed  to  his  heirs  (D.  v.

2.  6.  2)  ;  (2)  if  he  had  allowed  a  time,  fixed  first  at  two  and
subsequently  at  five  years  (Cod.  Theod.  ii.  19.  5),  to  elapse
without  bringing  the  action  ;  and  (3)  when  he  had  acquiesced
directly  or  indirectly  in  the  testament ;  as,  for  instance,  by  mak-
ing a  contract  with  the  persons  instituted,  in  their  capacity  as
heirs  (D.  v.  2.  20.  1),  or  by  a  demand  against  those  persons  for
the  payment  of  a  legacy,  or  by  desisting  in  the  action  when  once
brought.     (D.  V.  2.  8.  1.)

Justinian,  in  his  Novels,  introduced  considerable  changes  in
the  law  on  these  points.  First,  if  those  entitled  to  the  portio
legitima  were  more  than  four  in  number,  they  divided  between
them  one-half  of  the  whole  inheritance;  if  they  were  four  or  less
than  four,  they  divided  between  them  a  third  of  the  whole  in-
heritance. (Nov.  18.  1.)  Secondly,  those  who  could  claim  a  por^zo
legitima.  were  required  to  be  made  heirs,  and  the  testament  was
not  to  be  upheld  because  those  entitled  to  the  portio  legitima  had
something  otherwise  given  them,  as  by  legacy  or  trust.  (Nov.  115.

3,  4.)  Thirdly,  if  the  testament  was  declared  inofficious,  it  was
only  the  institution  of  the  heir  or  heirs  that  was  to  be  set  aside  ;
the  trusts,  legacies,  gifts  of  liberty,  and  appointments  of  tutors
were  to  remain  good.  (Nov.  115.  4.  9.)  And,  fourthly,  Jus-
tinian fixed  and  specified  the  reasons,  limiting  them  to  fourteen
in  the  case  of  ascendants  and  to  a  less  number  in  other  cases,
for  any  one  of  which  a  testator  might  disinherit  or  omit  his  de-
scendants or  ascendants  ;  the  one  on  which  the  testator  had  acted
was  to  be  expressly  stated.     (Nov.  115.  3.)

Tit.  XIX.     DE    HEREDUM    QUALITATE    ET
DIFFERENTIA.

Heredes  autem  aiit  necessarii  di-  Heirs  are  said  to  be  necessarii,  sui

cimtiir,    aiit   sui   et   necessarii,    ant     et  7iecessariij  or  extranei.
extranei.

Gal  ii.  152.

1.  Necessarius  heres  est  serviis  1.  A  necessary  heir  is  a  slave  in-

heres institutes  ;  ideo  sic  appellatus  stituted  heir  ;  and  he  is  so  called,
quia,  sive  velit  sive  nolit,  omnimodo  because,  whether  he  wish  or  not,  at
post  mortem  testatoris  protinus  liber     the  death  of  the  testator  he  becomes

p  9.

212

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIX.

et  necessarius  lieres  fit.  Unde  qui
facultates  suas  suspectas  habent,
solent  serviim  siiimi  primo  ant  se-
cundo  ant  etiam  iilteriore  gradu
heredem  institiiere  ;  ut  si  creditori-
bus  satis  non  fiat,  potius  ejus  here-
dis  bona  quam  ipsius  testatoris  a
creditoribus  possideantur,  vel  dis-
trahantnr,  vel  inter  eos  dividantur.
Pro  hoc  tamen  incommodo  illud  ei
commodum  prpestatur,  ut  ea  quae
post  mortem  patroni  sui  sibi  acqui-
sierit,  ipsi  reserventur  ;  et  quamvis
bona  defuncti  non  snfiecerint  credi-
toribus, iterum  ex  ea  causa  res  ejus,
quas  sibi  acquisierit,  non  veneunt.

Gal  ii.  153-155

instantly  free,  and  necessarily  heir  ;
he,  therefore,  who  suspects  that  he
is  not  in  solvent  circumstances,  com-
monly institutes  his  slave  to  be  his
heir  in  the  first,  second,  or  some  more
remote  place  ;  so  that,  if  he  does  not
leave  a  sum  equal  to  his  debts,  it  may
be  the  goods  of  this  heir,  and  not  those
of  the  testator  himself,  that  are  seized
or  sold  by  his  creditors,  or  divided
among  them.  But,  to  compensate  for
this  inconvenience,  a  slave  enjoys  the
advantage  of  having  reserved  to  him
whatever  he  has  acquired  after  the
death  of  his  patron  ;  for  although  the
goods  of  the  deceased  should  be  in-
sufficient for  the  payment  of  his  cre-
ditors, yet  property  so  acquired  by  the
slave  is  not  on  that  account  made  the
subject  of  a  further  sale.

D.  xlii.  6.  1.  17.

The  sale  of  goods  for  the  payment  of  debts  brought  on  the
debtor  an  ignominy  which  was  more  than  a  matter  of  opinion,
and  had  legal  effects  (Gai.  ii.  154),  and  which  a  testator  was,
therefore,  very  anxious  his  memory  should  escape.

The  heres  necessarius  was  legally  bound  by  all  the  debts  of
the  deceased ;  but  the  prastor  made  a  change  in  the  strict  law,
and  permitted  the  goods  of  the  deceased  to  be  distinctly  separated
from  the  possessions  of  the  lieres  necessarius,  if  the  heres  neces-
sarius demanded,  before  in  any  way  interfering  with  the  goods  of
the  deceased,  that  this  separation  should  take  place.  When  it
did  take  place,  the  creditors  could  only  recover  from  him  the
amount  of  what  actually  came  into  his  hands  as  heir,  while  he
could  deduct  from  the  inheritance  all  that  he  had  acquired  after
he  became  sui  juris  (D.  xlii.  6.  1.  18);  and  (as  Ulpian  in  the
passage  quoted  goes  on  to  say)  anything  due  to  him  from  the
testator,  Avhich,  Demangeat  suggests,  refers  to  the  case  of  a  gift
by  a  third  person  of  a  legacy  to  a  slave,  si  liber  f actus  fuer it,  in
a  testament  of  which  the  testator  had  been  instituted  heir.

This  henejicium  separationis,  it  may  be  mentioned,  the  right
to  have  the  goods  of  the  heir  separated  from  those  of  the  testator,
was  sometimes  accorded,  in  cases  having  nothing  to  do  with  a
heres  necessarius^  in  favour  of  the  creditors  of  the  testator.  The
heir  might  be  insolvent,  and  then  it  was  for  their  interest  that
the  testator's  propertv  should  be  kept  distinct.  (D.  xlii.  6.  1.
17.)

2.  Sui  autem  et  necessarii  heredes
sunt,  veluti  filius,  filia,  neposneptisve
ex  filio  et  deinceps  ceteri  liberi,  qui
modo  in  potestate  morientis  fuerint.
Sed  ut  nepos  neptisve  sui  heredes
sint,  non  sufficit  eum  eamve  in  po-
testate  avi  mortis  tempore  fuisse  ;

2.  Heirs  are  sui  et  necessarii,  when
they  are,  for  instance,  a  son,  a  daugh-
ter, a  grandson  or  granddaughter,  by
a  son  or  other  direct  descendants,  pro-
vided they  are  in  the  power  of  the  de-
ceased at  the  time  of  his  death.  That
grandchildren  should  be  sui   heredes,

I

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIX.

213

sed  opus  est  ut  pater  ejus  vivo  patre
suo  desierit  suus  heres  esse,  aut
morte  interceptus  aut  qualibet  alia
ratione  liberatus  potestate  :  tunc
enim  nepos  neptisve  in  locum  patris
sui  succedit.  Sed  sui  quidam  here-
des  ideo  appellantur,  quia  domestici
heredes  sunt,  et  vivo  quoque  patre
quodammodo  domini  existimantur  :
unde  etiam  si  quis  intestatus  mor-
tuus  sit,  prima  causa  est  in  succes-
sione  liberorum.  Necessarii  vero
ideo  dicuntur,  quia  omnimodo  sive
velint  sive  nolint,  tarn  ab  intestato
quam  ex  testamento  heredes  fiunt ;
sed  his  praetor  permittit  volentibus
abstinere  se  ab  hereditate,  ut  potius
parentis  quam  ipsorum  bona  simili-
ter a  creditoribus  possideantur.

it  is  not  enough  that  they  were  in  the
power  of  their  grandfather  at  the
time  of  his  decease,  but  it  is  also
requisite,  that  their  father  should  have
ceased  to  be  a  suus  heres  in  the  lifetime
of  his  father,  having  been  either  cut
off  by  death,  or  otherwise  freed  from
paternal  authority ;  for  then  the  grand-
son or  granddaughter  succeeds  in  place
of  their  father.  Sui  heredes  are  so
called  because  they  are  family  heirs,
and,  even  in  the  lifetime  of  their
father,  are  considered  owners  of  the
inheritance  in  a  certain  degree.  Hence,
in  case  of  a  person  dying  intestate,  his
children  are  first  in  succession.  They
are  called  necessary  heirs,  because,
whether  they  wdsh  or  not,  whether
under  a  testament  or  in  a  succession
ah  intestato,  they  become  heirs.  But
the  prsetor  permits  them  to  abstain
from  the  inheritance  if  they  wish,
that  if  possession  is  taken  of  the  goods
of  the  deceased  by  his  creditors,  the
goods  may  be  not  theirs,  but  those  of
their  parent.

Gai.  ii.  156-158.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  either  who  were  sui
heredes,  or  what  was  the  position  they  occupied  with  reference  to
the  inheritance.  If  the  jjaterfamilias  had  had  no  power  of  making
a  testament,  those  persons  in  his  power,  Avho  became  sui  juris  at
his  death,  would  necessarily  have  had  the  inheritance  at  his  de-
cease ;  they  were  in  a  manner,  as  the  text  says,  owners  during
his  lifetime  of  the  inheritance,  which  must  actually  come  into
their  possession  at  his  death.  And,  although  testaments  were
allowed  to  alter  the  leo:al  succession,  the  rio;hts  of  those  who  had
this  interest  in  the  inheritance  were  so  far  guarded  that  it  was
necessary  expressly  to  disinherit  them  in  order  to  deprive  them
of  their  interest;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  testator  ap-
pointed any  one  of  them  as  his  heir,  he  w^as  considered  thereby  to
exercise  his  patria  potestas,  so  that  the  suus  heres  could  not  exer-
cise any  option  as  to  accepting  or  refusing  the  inheritance,  and
was  a  heres  necessarius,  exactly  as  he  was  if  he  succeeded  ab
intestato  until  the  prtetor  interfered  to  enable  him  to  escape  the
burden.  In  every  case  the  suus  heres  took  the  inheritance  or  his
share  in  it,  and  without  any  act  or  exercise  of  his  own  will ;  if  he
was  insane  or  beneath  the  age  of  puberty,  no  authority  was
needed  to  enable  him  to  accept  it,  and  he  never  had  to  enter
formally  on  an  inheritance  that  belonged  to  him  immediately  the
paterfamilias  died,  unless  he  was  instituted  by  the  paterfamilias
only  conditionally,  and  then  the  inheritance  belonged  to  him
immediately  on  the  condition  being  fulfilled.  If  the  grandson,
instituted  while  his  father  was  disinherited,  was  in  the  power  of

214  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIX.

the  deceased  at  the  time  of  his  death,  he  became  suns  heres  et
necessarius,  but  becoming,  on  the  testator's  death,  in  the  power  of
his  OAvn  father,  immediately  placed  his  father  in  the  position  he
himself  occupied  — patrem  suiim  sine  aditione  heredem  fecit  et
quidem  necessariuyn,     (D.  xxix.  2.  6.  5.)

The  inheritance  was,  according  to  the  notions  of  early  law,  the
property  not  so  much  of  the  individual  as  of  the  family,  and  so
the  term  sid  heredes  means  persons  who  took  an  inheritance  that
was  their  own,  who  were  heirs  not  of  the  paterfamilias,  but  of
themselves,  and  being,  as  Cujacius  expresses  it  by  a  Greek
equivalent,  avTQK\r)pou6;.wi.,  took  what  thus  belonged  to  them
already,  and  only  received  possession  of  that  over  which,  as  the
text  says,  they  had  even  in  the  lifetime  of  the  parent  had  a  kind
of  ownership.

As  the  text  informs  us,  the  prastor  interposed  to  prevent  its
being  in  every  case  obligatory  on  the  suks  heres  to  accept  the
inheritance ;  he  was  only  treated  as  an  heir  if  he  intermeddled
with  the  inheritance  ;  and  until  he  had  in  some  way  shown  his
intention  of  doing  so,  the  pra3tor  refused  to  permit  any  action  to
be  brought  against  him  as  suiis  heres  by  the  creditors  of  the
deceased.  The  benejicium  ahstinendi,  as  this  power  of  abstaining
was  termed,  differed  from  the  heneficium  separationis,  accorded
to  slaves,  by  no  express  demand  being  necessary,  as  it  always
existed  in  the  absence  of  express  intention  to  accept  the  inheri-
tance, and  also  by  its  being  a  protection  to  the  suus  heres  against
all  actions  whatever  brought  against  him  in  his  capacity  of  heir,
while  the  slave  was  liable  to  the  amount  of  the  property  of  the
deceased.

The  suus  heres  who  had  availed  himself  of  this  privilege,  did
not  thereby  cease  to  be  heir.  He  could  afterwards  accept
the  inheritance  if  the  goods  were  not  sold  by  the  creditors.
(D.  xxviii.  8.  8.)

3.  Ceteri  qui  testatoris  juri  sub-  3.  All  those  who  are  not  subject  to
jecti  non  sunt,  extranei  heredes  ap-  the  power  of  the  testator  are  termed
pellantur  :  itaque  liberi  quoque  nos-  'extranei  heredes  :  thus,  children,  not
tri  qui  in  potestate  nostra  non  sunt,  within  our  power,  whom  we  institute
heredes  a  nobis  instituti,  extranei  heirs,  are  extranei  heredes.  So,  too,
heredes  videntur.  Qua  de  causa  et  are  children  instituted  heirs  by  their
qui  heredes  a  matre  instituuntur,  mother,  for  a  woman  has  not  her
eodem  numero  sunt,  quia  feminre  in  children  under  her  power.  A  slave
potestate  liberos  non  habent.  Ser-  also,  whom  his  master  has  instituted
vus  quoque  heres  a  domino  institu-  by  testament  and  afterwards  manu-
tus  et  post  testamentum  factum  ab  mitted,  is  considered  a  heres  extraneus.
eo  manumissus,  eodem  numero  ha-

betur.

Gai.  ii.  161.

4.  Inextraneisheredibusilludob-  4.  As  to  extranei  heredes,  the  rule  is,
servatur,  ut  sit  cum  eis  testamenti  that  the  testator  must  have  testament i
factio,  sive  ipsi  heredes  instituantur,  /actio  with  them,  whether  they  are  in-
sive  hi  qui  in  potestate  eorum  sunt ;  stituted  heirs  themselves,  or  whether
et  id  duobus  temporibus  inspicitur,  those  under  their  power  are  instituted.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIX.

215

testamenti  quidem  facti  ut  constite-
rit  institutio,  mortis  vero  testatoris
ut  eifectiim  habeat.  Hoc  ainpliiis  et
cum  adierit  hereditatem.  esse  debet
cum  eo  testamenti  factio,  sive  pure
sive  sub  conditione  heres  institutus
sit ;  nam  jus  heredis  eo  vel  maxime
tempore  inspiciendum  est,  quo  ac-
quirit  hereditatem.  Medio  autem
tempore  inter  factum  testamentum
et  mortem  testatoris  vel  conditionem
institutionis  existentem,  mutatio
juris  non  nocet  heredi  ;  quia,  ut
diximus,  tria  tempora  inspicimus.
Testamenti  autem  factionem  non
solum  is  habere  videtur  qui  testa-
mentum facere  potest,  sed  etiam
qui  ex  alieno  testamento  vel  ipsi
capere  potest  vel  alii  acquirere,  licet
non  possit  facere  testamentum.  Et
ideo  f  uriosus  et  mutus  et  postumus
et  infans  et  filiusfamilias  et  servus
alienus  testamenti  factionem  habei^e
dicuntur  :  licet  enim  testamentum
facere  non  possint,  attamen  ex  tes-
tamento vel  sibi  vel  alii  acquirere
possunt.

And  this  is  required  at  two  several
times  :  at  the  making  of  the  testament,
that  the  institution  may  be  valid,  and
at  the  testators  death,  that  it  may  take
eflect.  Further,  at  the  time  of  enter-
ing upon  the  inheritance,  tesfamevM
factio  ought  still  to  exist  with  the  heir,
whether  he  is  instituted  simply  or  con-
ditionally ;  for  his  capacity  as  the  heir
is  principally  regarded  at  the  time  of
acquiring  the  inheritance.  But  in  the
interval  between  the  making  of  the
testament  and  the  death  of  the  testator,
or  the  accomplishment  of  the  condition
of  the  institution,  the  heir  will  not  be
prejudiced  by  change  of  status  ;  be-
cause it  is  the  three  points  of  time
which  we  have  noted  that  are  to  be  re-
garded. Not  only  is  a  man  who  can
make  a  testament  said  to  have  festa-
menti  factio,  but  also  any  person  who
under  the  testament  of  another  can
take  for  himself,  or  acquire  for  another,
although  he  cannot  himself  make  a
testament  :  and  therefore  insane  and
dumb  persons,  posthumous  children,
infants,  sons  in  power,  and  slaves  be-
longing to  others,  are  said  to  liave  tes-
tamenti factio.  For  although  they  can-
not make  a  testament,  yet  they  can
acc|uire  by  testament  either  for  them-
selves or  others.

D.  xxviii.  5.  49.  1 ;  D.  xxviii.  1.  16.  1.

The  necessity  for  the  heir  having  testamenti  factio  at  the
time  of  the  making  of  the  testament  proceeded  from  the  ancient
mode  of  mf^king  testaments.  When,  in  the  calata  comitia,  the
testator  orally  announced  who  it  was  on  whom  he  wished  his
legal  existence,  his  persona,  to  devolve  after  his  death,  the  person
designated  could  not  have  accepted  the  devolution  unless  he  had
been  in  the  enjoyment  of  those  rights  of  citizenship  implied  in
the  testamenti  factio  ;  and  when  testaments  were  made  per  cbs  et
libram,  it  was  equally  necessary  that  the  purchaser,  that  is,  the
heir,  should  have  those  rights  of  citizenship  which  would  enable
him  to  go  through  a  sale  by  mancipation.

The  testamenti  factio  meant  two  very  different  things  ;  it
meant  as  applied  to  the  testator  the  power  to  make  a  testament,
as  applied  to  the  heirs  the  capacity  to  take  under  a  testament ;
and,  as  the  text  points  out,  many  persons,  as  for  example  the
insane,  could  take  under  a  testament  who  could  not  make  a  testa-
ment.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  text  says  that  it  was  immaterial
whether  the  heir  preserved  his  testamenti  factio  between  the  two
periods  of  the  making  the  testament  and  the  death  of  the  testa-
tor :  if  he  lost  it  between  the  two  later  epochs,  viz.  the  death  of  the

216

LIB.  IL      TIT.  XIX.

testator  and  the  entrance  on  the  inheritance,  he  could  not  take,
and  it  would  not  avail  him  that  he  had  recovered  it  at  the  time
of  entering  on  the  inheritance.   (D.  xxviii.  2.  29.  5.)

The  classes  mentioned  in  the  concluding  portion  of  this  para-
graph might  have  the  rights  of  citizenship,  and  only  be  acci-
dentally prevented  from  exercising  those  rights.

5.  Extraneis  autem  heredibus  de-
liberandi potestas  est  de  adeunda
liereditate  vel  non  adeunda.  Sed
sive  is  ciii  abstinendi  potestas  est,
immiscuerit  se  bonis  hereditatis,
sive  extraneiis  cui  de  adeunda  here-
ditate  deliberare  licet,  adierit,  pos-
tea  relinquendas  hereditatis  faculta-
tem  non  liabet,  nisi  minor  sit  viginti
quinque  annis  ;  nam  hujus  «tatis
hominibus,  sicut  in  ceteris  omnil^us
causis,  deceptis,  ita  et  si  temere
damnosam  hereditatem  susceperint,
prastor  succurrit.

5.  Extranei  heredes  may  deliberate
whether  they  will  enter  upon  the  in-
heritance. But,  if  one,  who  has  the
liberty  of  abstaining,  intermeddles
with  the  i)roperty  of  the  inheritance,
or  an  extraneus  keres,  who  is  permitted
to  deliberate,  enters  on  the  inherit-
ance, it  Avill  not  afterwards  be  in  his
lK)wer  to  renounce  the  inheritance,
unless  he  shall  be  under  the  age  of
twenty-five  years  ;  for  the  prajtor,  as
in  all  other  cases  he  relieves  minors
who  have  been  deceived,  so  too  he
does  when  they  have  rashly  taken
upon  themselves  a  burdensome  in-
heritance.

Gai.  ii.  162,  163.

There  was  no  fixed  time  within  which  it  was  necessary  that
the  heir  should  decide  whether  to  accept  or  reject  the  inherit-
ance, excepting  when  the  testator  fixed  the  time  himself  by  what
was  termed  cretio.  (See  note  to  paragr.  7.)  Those  who  were
interested  in  his  making  a  decision  could  comj^el  him  by  action  to
do  so,  and  the  prietor  then,  if  he  wished,  allowed  him  time  to
deliberate,  never  less  than  one  hundred  days.  Justinian  decides
that  the  time  given  should  not  exceed  nine  months,  or,  as  a
special  favour  from  the  emperor,  a  year.  If  he  did  not  decide
within  the  appointed  time,  he  was  taken  to  have  rejected  the
inheritance,  if  the  action  to  compel  a  decision  was  brought  by
substituted  heirs  or  a  lieres  ab  intestato ;  to  have  accepted  it,  if
the  action  was  brought  by  legatees  or  creditors.  If  he  died
before  the  expiration  of  the  time,  and  within  a  year  of  the  first
commencement  of  his  rioht  to  enter  on  the  inheritance,  his  heir
could,  during  the  unexpired  remainder  of  the  time,  decide  in  his
place.     (D.  xxviii.  2.  28  ;   C.  vi.  30.  19.)

The  mode  by  which  the   praetor  interfered  for  the  protection
of  minors  was  (i2MQdi  restitutio  in  integrum.   (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  23.  2.)

6.  Sciendum  tamen  est  divum  Ha-
drianum  etiam  majori  viginti  quin-
que annis  veniam  dedisse,  cum  post
aditam  hereditatem  grande  ses  alie-
num,  quod  aditse  hereditatis  tem-
pore latebat,  emersisset.  Sed  hoc
(piidem  divus  Hadrianus  cuidam
speciali   beneficio    praestitit ;   divus

6.  The  Emperor  Hadrian,  however,
once  gave  permission  to  a  person  of
full  age,  to  relinquish  an  inheritance,
when  it  appeared  to  be  encumbered
with  a  great  debt,  which  had  been  un-
known "at  the  time  that  he  had  en-
tered on  the  inheritance.  But  this
was  granted  as  a  special  favour.     The

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XIX.

217

autem  Gordianuspostea  in  militibus
tantummodo  hoc  extendit.  Sed  nos-
tra benevolentia  commune  omnibus
subjectis  imperio  nostro  hoc  bene-
ficium  pra3stitit,  et  constitutionem
tarn  [equissimam  quam  nobilem
scripsit,  cujus  tenorem  si  observa-
verint  homines,  licet  eis  et  adire
hereditatem,  et  in  tantum  teneri
quantum  valere  bona  hereditatis
contingit  :  ut  ex  hac  causa  neque
deliberationis  auxilium  eis  fiat  ne-
cessarium,  nisi  omissa  observatione
nostra;  constitutionis,  et  deliberan-
dum existimaverint,  et  sese  veteri
gravamini  aditionis  suj^ponere  ma-
luerint.

Emperor  Gordian  afterwards  exten-
ded this  as  a  settled  privilege,  but  only
to  soldiers.  But  we  in  our  goodness
have  rendered  this  benefit  common
to  all  our  subjects,  having  dictated
a  constitution  as  just  as  it  is  illus-
trious, by  which,  if  heirs  will  attend
to  its  provisions,  they  may  enter  upon
their  inheritance,  and  not  be  liable
beyond  the  value  of  the  estate  ;  so
that  they  need  not  have  recourse  to
deliberation,  unless,  neglecting  to  con-
form to  our  constitution,  they  prefer
to  deliberate  and  submit  themselves
to  the  liabilities  attending  the  enter-
ing on  the  inheritance  under  the  old
law.

Gai.  ii.  163 ;  C.  vi.  30.  22.

Commentators  have  termed  the  privilege  alluded  to  here  the
heneficium  inventarii.  Within  thirty  days  after  the  heir  became
acquainted  with  his  rights,  an  inventory  of  the  property  might  be
begun,  which  was  to  be  finished  within  ninety  days  from  the
same  time.  This  inventory  was  to  be  made  in  presence  of  a
tabelliOi  or  public  notary,  and  of  any  parties  interested  who  might
wish  to  be  present,  or  else  of  three  witnesses.

If  the  heir  chose  to  avxiil  himself  of  this  privilege,  he  entirely
separated  the  estate  of  the  testator  from  his  own  ;  he  could
deduct  anything  that  might  be  owing  to  him  from  it,  and  had  to
pay  to  it  anything  he  might  owe.  He  first  paid  the  expenses  of
the  funeral  and  of  the  inventory,  and  then  all  the  creditors  in  the
order  in  which  they  sent  in  their  claims.  If  there  was  any  surplus,
he  took  it;  if  any  deficiency,  he  was  not  liable.  (C.  vi.  30.  22.)

7.  Itemextraneusheres  testamen-
to  institutus,  aut  ab  intestato  ad
legitimam  hereditatem  vocatus,  po-
test aut  pro  herede  gerendo  aut
etiam  nuda  voluntate  suscipiendce
hereditatis  heres  fieri.  Pro  herede
autem  gerere  quis  videtur,  si  rebus
hereditariis  tamquam  heres  utatur
vel  vendendo  res  hereditarias  vel
praidiacolendo  locandove  et  quoquo
modo,  si  voluntatem  suam  declaret
vel  re  vel  verbis  de  adeunda  here-
ditate  :  dummodo  sciat  eum  in  cujus
bonis  pro  herede  gerit,  testatum  in-
testatumve  obiisse  et  se  ei  heredem
esse.  Pro  herede  enim  gerere  est  pro
domino  gerere;  veteresenim  heredes
pro  dominis  appellabant.  Sicut  au-
tem nuda  voluntate  extraneus  heres
fit,  ita  et  contraria  destinatione  sta-
tim  ab  hereditate  repellitur.  Eum
qui  surdus  vel  mutus  natus  est,  vel
postea  factus,  nihil  prohibet  pro  he-

7.  A  stranger,  instituted  by  testa-
ment, or  called  by  law  to  a  succession
ah  intestato,  may  become  heir,  either
by  doing  some  act  as  heir,  or  even
by  the  mere  wish  to  accept  the  in-
heritance. And  a  man  acts  as  heir  if
he  treats  any  of  the  goods  of  the  in-
heritance as  his  own,  by  selling  any
part,  or  by  cultivating  the  ground,  or
letting  it,  or  in  any  other  way  declares,
either  by  act  or  word,  his  intention
to  enter  on  the  inheritance,  provided
only  that  he  knows  that  the  person,
with  respect  to  whose  estate  he  acts
as  heir,  is  dead,  testate  or  intestate,
and  that  he  himself  is  the  heir  ;  for
to  act  as  heir  is  to  act  as  proprietor  ;
and  the  ancients  frequently  used  the
term  heir  to  dendte  the  proprietor.
But  as  a  stranger  may  become  heir
by  a  mere  intention,  so,  on  the  con-
trary, by  a  contrary  intention,  he  is
at  once  barred  from  the  inheritance.

218  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

rede  gerere  et  acquirere  sibi  here-  Nothing  prevents  a  person,  who  was
ditatem,  si  tarn  en  intelligit  quod  born  deaf  and  dumb,  or  subsequently
agitur.  became  so,  from  acting  as  heir,    and

acquiring  the  inheritance,  if   only  he
knows  what  he  is  doing.

Gai.  ii.  166,  167.  169 ;  D.  xxix.  2.  5.

Besides  the  two  modes  of  enterino;  on  the  inheritance  here
mentioned,  namely,  forming  an  intention  to  do  so,  and  doing
some  act  as  heir,  there  was  a  mode,  abolished  by  a  constitntion
of  Arcadius,  Honorius,  and  Theodosius  (a.d.  407),  called  cretio.
Cretio  appellata  est^  quia  cernere  est  quasi  decernere  et  consti-
tuere.  (Gai.  ii.  164.)  The  testator  himself,  in  his  will,  fixed
the  time  within  which  the  heir  was  to  decide  whether  he  w^ould
accept  the  inheritance.  Generally  the  time  was  made  to  run
from  the  period  when  the  heir  became  acquainted  wdth  his  rights,
and  this  was  called  the  cretio  vulgaris  ;  sometimes  from  that
when  the  rights  accrued  to  him,  and  this  was  called  the  cretio
continua.  The  heir  could  alter  his  decision  at  any  time  within
the  limited  period.  His  decision  was  expressed,  when  made,  by
forms  more  solemn  than  when  the  aclitio  was  made  by  a  simple  de-
claration of  intention.  (Vide  (jxi.in  loc.  cit.)  The  heir  was  said
adire  hereditatem  Avhenever  he  in  any  way  entered  on  the  inheri-
tance, whether  by  doing  some  act  as  heir  (^pro  h'erede  gerere)  or
by  the  mere  intention  to  be  heir  (nuda  vohtntate).  Of  course  this
intention  would  be  manifested  in  some  way  or  other  ;  but  it  w?.s
the  formation,  not  the  expression,  of  the  intention  that  consti-
tuted the  entrance  on  the  inheritance.  Properly  speaking,  one
person  could  not  enter  on  an  inheritance  for  another  ;  but  there
Avere  necessarily  exceptions,  such  as  that  a  tutor  might  accept  an
inheritance  in  behalf  of  his  infant  pu})il.  No  one  could  enter  on
part  of  the  inheritance,  nor  could  he  enter  conditionally,  or  for  a
certain  time.  Directly  he  did  enter,  he  was  clothed  with  the
persona  of  the  deceased,  whom  he  represented  as  if  he  had  suc-
ceeded immediately  on  his  death.     (D.  xxix.  2.  54.)

Tit.  XX.     DE    LEGATIS.

Post  hsec   videamus   de   legatis.  We  will  now  proceed  to  treat  of

Qufe    pars    juris   extra   propositam  legacies.     This   part  of  the   law  may

quidem  materiam  videtur,  nam  lo-  not  seem  to  fall   within   our   present

quimur  de  iis    juris    figuris  qaibus  subject,    namely,    the    discussion    of

per  universitatem  res   nobis  acqui-  those   methods    by  which    things    are

runtur  ;  sed  cum  omnino  de  testa-  acquired  |>er -Jtiuversito^em;   but,  as  we

mentis  deque  hereddbus   qui    testa-  have    already    spoken    of    testaments

mento   instituuntur,    locuti    sumus,  and  testamentary  heirs,  w^e  ma,y  not

non  sine  causa  sequenti  loco  potest  improperly    pass    to    the    subject    of

heec  juris  materia  tractari.  legacies.

Gai.  ii.  191.

LIB.  11.     TIT.  XX.  219

A  legacy,  being  a  mode  by  which  the  property  in  one  or
more  particular  things  is  acquired,  ought  not,  properly,  to  be
discussed  in  the  part  of  the  Institutes  devoted  to  the  discussion
of  the  modes  of  acquiring  a  universitas  rerum.

In  Roman  law  a  legacy  was  an  injunction  given  to  the  heir
to  pay  or  give  over  a  part  of  the  inheritance  to  a  third  person —
Legatiim,  quod  legis  modo  id  est  imperative^  testamento  relinc/uitur.
(Ulp.  Reg.  24.  1.)  Without  an  heir  there  could  be  no  legacy  ;
and,  therefore,  if  no  instituted  heir  entered  on  the  inheritance,  the
gift  of  the  legacy  was  useless.  The  term  was  never  applied,  as
in  English  law,  to  a  direct  bequest.

1.  Legatiim  itaque  est  donatio  1.  A  legacy  is  a  kind  of  gift  left  by
qiiasdam  a  defuncto  relicta.                     a  deceased  person.

D.  xxxi.  36.

2.  Sed  olim  quidem  erant  legato-  2.  Formerly,  there  were  four  kinds
rum  genera  quatuor,  per  vindica-  of  legacies,  namely,  per  vindicationem,
tionem,  per  damna,tionem,  sinendi  per  damncitionem,  sinendi  modo,  and
modo,  per  preeceptionem  ;  et  certa  per  pjrdzceptionem.  There  was  a  cer-
(jupadam  verba  cuique  generi  legato-  tain  form  of  words  proper  to  each  of
rum  adsignata  erant,  per  qu^e  singula  these,  by  which  they  were  distin-
genera  iegatorum  significaban  tur  .guished  one  from  another.  But  these
Sed  ex  constitutionibus  divoriun  solemn  forms  have  been  wholly  sup-
principum  solemnitas  hujusmodi  pressed  by  imperial  constitutions.  We
verborum  penitus  sublata  est,  Nos-  also,  desirous  of  giving  respect  to  the
tra  autem  constitutio,  quam  cum  wishes  of  deceased  persons,  and  re-
magna  fecimus  lucubratione,  defunc-  garding  their  intentions  more  than
torum  voluntates  validiores  esse  cu-  their  words,  have,  by  a  constitution
pientes,  et  non  verbis  sed  voluntati-  composed  with  great  study,  enacted
bus  eorum  faventes,  disposuit  ut  that  the  nature  of  all  legacies  shall  be
omnibus  legatis  una  sit  natura,  et  the  same  ;  and  that  legatees,  whatever
({uibuscumque  verbis  aliquid  dere-  may  be  the  words  employed  in  the
lictum  sit,  liceat  legatariis  id  i^erse-  testament,  may  sue  for  what  is  left
qui,  non  solum  per  actiones  perso-  them,  not  only  by  a  personal,  but  by
nales,  sed  etiam  per  in  rem  et  per  a  real  or  an  hypothecary  action.  The
hypothecariam.  Cujus  constitutio-  wisdom  of  this  constitution  may  be
nis  perpensum  modum  ex  ipsius  easily  seen  by  a  perusal  of  its  disposi-
tenore  perfectissime  accipere  possi-  tions.

bile  est.

Gai.  ii.  192,  193.  201.  209.  216  ;  C.  vi.  37,  21  ;  C.  vi.  43.  1.

Per  vindica t'wjtem.  The  formula  in  this  species  of  legacy  ran
thus  :  '  Hominem  Sticlium  do,  lego,''  or  '  do'' ;  or  '  capito,  sumito,
sihi  habeto.''  The  legacy  was  said  to  be  ^^er  vindicationem^
because,  immediately  on  the  heir  entering  on  the  inheritance,  the
subject  of  the  legacy  became  the  property  of  the  legatee  ex  jure
Quiritium,  who  could  accordingly  claim  it  by  vindicatio.  The
testator  could  only  give,  in  this  way,  things  of  Avhich  he  had  the
dominium  ex  jure  Quiritium,  both  at  the  time  of  making  the  testa-
ment and  of  his  death  ;  excepting  that  such  dominium  at  the  time
of  death  alone  was  sufficient  when  the  subject  of  the  legacy  was
anything  appreciable  by  weight,  number,  or  measure,  as  wine,
oil,  money,  &c.     (Gai.  ii.  196.)

Per    damnationem.      The    formula   ran    thus :    *  Heres    meus

220  LIB.  II.     TIT.  XX.

I

damnas  esto  dare  ;'  or  '  Dato,  facito,  heredem  meum  dare  juheo.'
The  legatee  did  not,  by  this  legacy,  become  proprietor  of  the
subject  of  the  legacy ;  but  he  had  a  personal  action  against  the
heir  to  compel  him  to  give  {dare),  to  procure  (prcBstare),  or  to  do
(facere),  that  which  the  terms  of  the  legacy  directed.  Anything
could  be  given  by  this  legacy  that  could  become  the  subject  of
an  obligation,  whether  the  property  of  the  testator,  the  heir,  or
any  one  else.  The  rights  it  gave  were,  therefore,  said  to  be  the
optimum  jus  leyati.    (Ulp.  Reg.  24.  11  ;   Gai.  ii.  204-208.)

Sinendi  modo.  The  formula  of  this  kind  of  legacy  was  :
^  Heres  meus  damnas  esto  sinere  Luciuvn  Titium  sumere  illam  rem.
sibique  habere.''  (GrAl.  ii.  209.)  The  heir  is  to  allow  the  legatee
to  take  the  thing  given.  This  form,  then,  was  applicable  to  a.ny-
thing  that  belonged  to  the  testator  or  to  the  heir,  but  not  to
anything  belonging  to  a  third  person.  The  legatee  did  not
become  the  owner  of  the  thing  given  until  he  took  possession.
If  the  heir  refused  to  allow  the  legatee  to  take  possession,  the
legatee  might  compel  him  to  do  so  by  the  personal  action  termed
'  Quicquld  heredem  ex  testamento  dare  facer e  oportet.^  (GrAl.  ii.
213,  214.)

Per  prcEceptionem.  The  formula  ran  :  ^  Lucius  Titius  illam
rem  prcecipito''  (i.e.  take  beforehand).  The  proper  application  of
this  form  was  to  a  gift  made  to  one  already  instituted  heir,  of
somethino*  which  he  was  to  take  before  receivino;  his  share  of  the
inheritance.  The  heir  could  enforce  his  claim  to  this  something
beyond  his  share  by  the  action  termed  judicium  familifje  ercis-
cundcE,  i.e.  for  having  the  inheritance  portioned  out  by  a  judge,
who  assigned  the  thing  given  by  the  legacy  to  the  heir  as
legatee.  It  was  only  by  a  mistake  in  language  that  this  form
Avas  applied  to  a  gift  to  a  person  not  an  heir  ;  but  a  gift  made  in
this  form  to  a  person  not  heir  was  not  void ;  for  the  senatus-
consuUum  Neronianum,  about  A.D.  60,  made  every  such  legacy
valid  as  a  legacy  per  damnationem.  Gains  mentions  that
the  Proculians  attempted  to  get  over  the  difficulty  where  the
word  prcBcipito  was  used  to  give  a  legacy  to  a  person  not  heir,  by
reading  '  prcecipito  '  as  '  capita  ;'  and  this  construction  was  con-
firmed by  a  constitution  of  Adrian.     (Gai.  ii.  218-221.)

Under  the  imperial  legislation  the  value  attached  to  these
formulcB  was  gradually  lessened.  By  the  senatus-considtum  Nero-
idanum  it  was  enacted  that  any  legacy  given  in  a  form  of  words
not  suited  to  the  gift  intended  should  be  as  valid  as  one  given
in  the  form  most  favourable  to  the  legatee.  '  Ut  quod  minus
aptis  verbis  lerjatum  est  per  hide  sit  ac  si  opjtimo  jure  legatum  esset.''
(Ulp.  Beq.  2*4.  11  ;  Gai.  ii.  197.  218.)  The formulce  remamed,  but
a  mistake  in  their  use  could  no  longer  injure  the  legatee :  and
in  every  case  the  legacy,  however  expressed,  had  the  effect  of
a  legacy  given  per  damnationem.  In  A.D.  342  a  constitution  of
Constantine  II.,  Constantius,  and  Constans,  abolished  the  use  of
formulcB  in  all  legal  acts.     (C.  ii.  58.  1.)     The  division  of  legacies

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

221

still  theoretically  remained,  but  the  appropriate  formulcB  were
no  lono-er  in  use.  Finally  Justinian,  as  we  see  in  the  text,
enacted  that  all  legacies  should  be  of  the  same  nature,  and  that
the  legatee  might  enforce  the  legacy  by  personal,  real,  or  hypo-
thecary actions,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  gift.

3.  We  have  not,  however,  judged
it  expedient  to  confine  ourselves  within
the  limits  of  this  constitution  ;  for,
observing  that  the  ancients  confined
legacies  within  strict  rules,  but  ac-
corded a  greater  latitude  to  fideicom-
7nissa  as  arising  more  immediately  from
the  wishes  of  the  deceased,  we  have
thought  it  necessary  to  make  all  lega-
cies equal  to  gifts  in  trust,  so  that
no  difference  really  remains  between
them.  Whatever  is  wanting  to  legacies
they  will  borrow  from  fideicommissa^
and  communicate  to  them  any  superi-
ority they  themselves  may  have.  But,
that  we  may  not  raise  difficulties,  and
perplex  the  minds  of  young  persons  at
their  entrance  upon  the  study  of  the
law,  by  explaining  these  two  subjects
jointly,  we  have  thought  it  worth
while  to  treat  separately,  first  of  lega-
cies and  then  of  trusts,  that,  the  nature
of  each  being  known,  the  student  thus
prepared,  may  more  easily  understand
them  when  mixed  up  the  one  with  the
other.

3.  Sed  non  usque  ad  eam  consti-
tutionem  standum  esse  existimavi-
mus  :  cum  enim  antiquitatem  inve-
nimus  legata  quidem  stricte  conclu-
dentem,  fideicommissis  autem,  qu£e
ex  voluntate  magis  descendebant
defunctorum,  pinguiorem  naturam
indulgentem,  necessarium  esse  duxi-
mus  omnia  legata  fideicommissis
exgequare,  ut  nulla  sit  inter  ea  dif-
ferentia :  sed  quod  deest  legatis,  hoc
repleatur  ex  natura  fideicommisso-
rum,  et  si  quid  amplius  est  in  lega-
tis, per  hoc  crescat  fideicommis-
sorum  natura.  Sed  ne  in  primis
legum  cunabulis  permixte  de  his
exponendo  studiosis  adolescentibus
quamdam  introducamus  difficulta-
tem,  oper^e  pretium  esse  duximus
interim  separatim  prius  de  legatis  et
postea  de  fideicommissis  tractare,  ut
natura  utriusque  juris  cognita  facile
possint  permixtionem  eorum  eruditi
subtiUoribus  auribus  accipere.

C.  vi.  43.  2.

All  that  remained,  after  the  changes  noticed  in  the  text,  to
distinguish  legacies  from  Jideicommissa,  was  the  general  cha-
racter of  the  expressions  used.  If  they  were  imperative,  the
gift  was  a  legacy ;  if  they  assumed  the  form  of  a  request,
and  were  given  precative,  they  were  Jideicommissa.  If  a  gift
was  in  form  imperative,  but  it  was  not  valid  as  a  legacy,  it
was  valid  as  a  trust.  If  such  a  gift  could  be  valid  as  a  legacy,
it  was  of  course  regarded  as  a  legacy,  and  not  as  a  fideicommissnm.

A  difference  still  remained  with  respect  to  the  gifts  of  libei'ty
to  a  slave.  (Vid.  Tit.  24.  2.)  A  direct  legacy  of  liberty  made
the  slave  the  lihertus  of  the  testator ;  a  gift  of  liberty  by  a  fidei-
commissum  made  the   slave  the  lihertus  of  the  Jideicommissarius.

4.  Non  solum  autem  testatoris  vel
heredis  res,  sed  etiam  aliena  legari
potest,  ita  ut  heres  cogatur  redimere
eam  et  pr?estare  ;  vel,  si  non  potest
redimere,  sestimationem  ejus  dare.
Sed  si  talis  res  sit  cujus  non  est  com-
mercium,  nee  aestimatio  ejus  debe-
tur,  sicuti  si  Campum  Martium  vel

I  basilicas  vel  templa,  vel  quee  publico

4.  A  testator  may  not  only  give  as
a  legacy  his  own  property,  or  that  of
his  heir,  but  also  the  property  of
others.  The  heir  is  then  obliged  either
to  purchase  and  deliver  it,  or,  if  it
cannot  be  bought,  to  give  its  value.
But,  if  the  thing  given  is  not  in  its
nature  a  subject  of  conmierce,  or  pur-
chasable, the  heir  is  not  bound  to  pay
the  value  to  the  legatee  ;  as  if  a  man

222

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

should  bequeath  the  Campus  Martius,
the  palaces,  the  temples,  or  any  of  the
things  appropriated  to  public  purposes,
for  such  a  legacy  is  of  no  effect.  But
when  we  say  that  a  testator  may  give
the  goods  of  another  as  a  legacy,  we
must  be  understood  to  mean,  that  this
can  only  be  done  if  the  deceased  knew
that  what  he  bequeathed  belonged  to
another,  and  not  if  he  were  ignorant
of  it  ;  since,  if  he  had  kno^vvn  it,  he
would  not  perhaps  have  left  such  a
legacy.  To  this  effect  is  a  rescript  of
the  Emperor  Antoninus,  which  also  de-
cides that  it  is  incumbent  upon  the
plaintiff,  that  is,  the  legatee,  to  prove
that  the  deceased  knew  that  what  he
left  belonged  to  another,  not  upon  the
heir  to  prove  that  the  deceased  did  not
know  it,  for  the  burden  of  proof  always
lies  upon  the  person  who  brings  the
action.

Gai.  ii.  202  ;  D.  xxx.  39.  7.  10  ;  D.  xxxi.  67.  8  ;  C.  vi.  37.  10  ;  D.  xxii.  3.  21.

nullius  momenti  legatum  est.  Qviod
autem  diximus  alienam  rem  posse
legari,  ita  intelligendum  est,  si  de-
functus  sciebat  alienam  rem  esse,
non  et  si  ignorabat  ;  forsitan  enim
si  scisset  alienam,  non  legasset.  Et
ita  divus  Pius  rescripsit  ;  et  verius
esse,  ipsum  qui  agit,  id  est  legata-
rium,  probare  oportere  scisse  alienam
rem  legare  defunctum,  non  heredem
probare  oportere  ignorasse  alienam,
quia  semper  necessitas  proband!
incumbit  illi  qui  agit.

5.  Sed  et  si  rem  obligatam  credi-
tor! aliquis  legaverit,  necesse  habet
heres  luere.  Et  hoc  quoque  casu
idem  placet  quod  in  re  aliena,  ut  ita
demum  luere  necesse  habeat  heres,
si  sciebat  defunctus  rem  obligatam
esse  ;  et  ita  divi  Severus  et  Antoni-
nus rescripserunt.  Si  tamen  defunc-
tus voluit  legatum  luere  et  hoc  ex-
pressit,  non  debet  heres  earn  luere.

5.  If  a  testator  gives  as  a  legacy
anything  in  pledge  to  a  creditor,  the
heir  is  bound  to  redeem  it.  But  in  this
case,  as  in  that  of  the  property  of
another,  the  heir  is  not  bound  to  re-
deem it,  unless  the  deceased  knew  that
the  thing  was  pledged  ;  and  this  the
Emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  have
decided  by  a  rescript.  But  when  it
has  been  the  wish  of  the  deceased  that
the  legatee  should  redeem  the  thing,
and  he  has  expressly  said  so,  the  heir
is  not  bound  to  redeem  it.

D.  xxx.  5.  7.

ii

6.  Si  res  aliena  legata  fuerit,  et
ejus  vivo  testatore  legatarius  domi-
nus  factus  fuerit,  siquidem  ex  causa
emptionis,  ex  testamento  actione
pretium  consequi  potest  ;  si  vero  ex
causa  lucrativa,  veluti  ex  causa  do-
nation is  vel  ex  alia  simili  causa,
agere  non  potest :  nam  traditum  est,
duas  lucrativas  causas  in  eumden
hominem  et  in  eamdem  rem  concur-
rere  non  posse.  Hac  ratione,  si  ex
duobus  testamentis  eadem  res  eidem
debeatur,  interest  utrum  rem  an
sestimationem  ex  testamento  conse-
cutus  est  :  nam  si  rem,  agere  non
potest,  quia  habet  earn  ex  causa
lucrativa ;  si  oestimationem,  agere
potest.

6.   If  a  thing  belonging  to  another
is  given  as  a  legacy,  and  becomes  the
property  of  the  legatee  in  the  lifetime
of  the  testator,  then,  if  it  becomes  so
by  purchase,  the  legatee  may  recover
the  value,  by  an  action  founded  on  the
testament  ;  but  if  the  legatee  obtained
it  by  any  way  of  clear  gain  to  him,  as
by  gift,  or  any  similar  mode,  he  cannot
bring  such  an  action,  for  it  is  a  received
rule,  that  two  modes  of  acquiring,  each
being  one  of  clear  gain,  can  never  meet
in  the  same  person  with  regard  to  the
same  thing.     If,    therefore,  the  same
thing  be  given  by  two  testaments  to
the  same  person,  it  makes  a  difference,
whether  the  legatee  has  obtained  the
thing  itself,  or  the  value  of  it,  under
the  first,  for,  if  he  has  already  received
the  thing  itself,   he  cannot  bring  an
action,   for   he   has   received   it   by  a

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.  223

mode  of  clear  gain  to  him  ;  but,  if  he
has  received  the  value  only,  he  may
bring  an  action.

D.  XXX.  108  ;  D.  xliv.  7.  17  ;  D.  xxx.  34.  2.

It  may  be  observed,  that  if  a  person  acquired  the  subject  of
a  le2;acy  by  a  causa  lucratlva  during  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,
and  the  legacy  was  made,  not  in  his  own  favour  directly,  but  was
o;iven  to  his  slave,  or  a  descendant  in  his  power,  he  could  recover
the  value  of  the  thing  given  from  the  heir.  In  such  a  case  the
two  causcB  lucrativcR  were  not  considered  so  to  unite  in  one  person
as  to  violate  the  general  rule,  although,  in  fact,  the  result  was  the
same  as  if  the  rule  had  been  directly  violated.     (D.  xxx.  108.)

In  the  beginning  of  this  paragraph  it  is  said  that  if  the  legatee
acquire  the  thing  during  the  lifetime  of  the  testator  by  a  causa
lucratlva,  he  could  not  regain  it  or  its  value  by  legacy.  The
vivo  testatore  is  merely  an  example  ;  it  would  be  the  same  if  the
legatee  acquired  the  thing  by  a  causa  lucratlva  at  any  time  before
receiving  it  by  way  of  legacy.

7.  Ea  quoque  res  quas  in  rennu  7.  A  thing  not  in  existence,  but
natura  non  est,  si  modo  futura  est,  which  one  day  will  be  in  existence,
recte  legatur  :  veluti  fructus  qui  in  may  be  properly  given  as  a  legacy,  as,
illo  fundo  nati  erunt,  aut  quod  ex  for  instance,  the  fruits  which  shall
ilia  ancilla  natum  erit.  gi'ow  on  such  a  farm,  or  the  child  which

shall  be  born  of  such  a  slave.

Gai.  ii.  203.

8.  Si  eadem  res  duobus  legata  sit  8.  If  the  same  thing  is  given  as  a
give  conjunctim  sive  disjunctim,  si  legacy  to  two  persons,  either  conjointly
ambo  perveniant  ad  legatum,  scindi-  or  separately,  and  both  take  the  legacy,
tur  inter  eos  legatum;  si  alter  defi-  it  is  divided  between  them.  But  should
ciat,  quia  aut  spreverit  legatum,  aut  either  of  the  legatees  fail  to  take  it,
vivo  testatore  decesserit,  vel  alio  either  from  refusing  it  or  from  dying  in
quolibet  modo  defecerit,  totum  ad  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,  or  from  any
collegatarium  pertinet.  Conjunctim  other  reason,  the  whole  goes  to  his  co-
autem  legatur,  veluti  si  quis  dicat,  legatee.  A  legacy  is  given  conjointly,
Titio  et  Seio  hominem  Stichum  do  if  a  testator  says,  I  give  as  a  legacy  my
lego  ;  disjunctim  ita,  Titio  hominem  slave  Stichus  to  Titius  and  Seius  :  but
Stichum  do  lego,  Seio  Stichum  do  separately,  if  he  says,  I  give  as  a  legacy
lego.  Sed  et  si  expresserit  eumdem  my  slave  Stichus  to  Titius  ;  I  give  as  a
hominem  Stichum,  aeque  disjunctim  legacy  my  slave  Stichus  to  Seius.  And
legatum  intelligitur.  if  the  testator  says,  that  he  gives  the

same  slave  Stichus,  yet  the  legacy  is
still  taken  to  be  given  separately.

Gat.  ii.  199.

A  legacy  might  be  void  originally,  wdien  it  w^as  said  to  be
taken  pro  non  scripto,  i.  e.  as  if  it  had  never  been  inserted ;  or  it
might  be  valid  originally,  and  yet  before  the  rights  of  the  legatee
were  fixed  (i.e.  to  use  the  technical  term  (see  note  on  paragr.
20),  before  the  dies  cedlt)  the  legatee  might  die  or  refuse  the
legacy,  or  become  incapable  to  take,  when  the  legacy  was  called
irrltum  or  destitutum  \  or  the  rights  of  the  lescatee  mio;ht  be  fixed,
but  before  the  legacy  was  actually  delivered  over  to  him,  it  might

224  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.  -A

be  taken  away  from  him  on  account  of  something  rendering  him
unworthy  to  receive  it ;  the  legacy  was  then  called  erepiitium
{qucB  lit  indignis  eripitur).  If  there  were  no  co-legatees,  the
legacy,  if  ereptitium,  went  to  the  Jiscus  ;  in  the  two  other  cases
the  failure  of  the  legacy  was  for  the  benefit  of  the  heir.  The
legacies  were  burdens  with  which  he  might  have  been,  but  was
not,  charged.

But  if  there  was  a  co-legatee  the  case  was  different.  Co-
leo^atees  might  be  created,  according  to  a  division  made  by  Paulus
(D.  1.  16.  142),  re,  re  et  verbis,  or  verbis ;  re  being  equivalent  to
the  disjunctim  of  the  text,  when  the  same  gift  was  made  separately
to  two  or  more  persons  ;  re  et  verbis,  equivalent  to  the  conjunctim
of  the  text,  when  the  same  thing  was  given  at  once  to  two  or
more;  and  verbis^  in  which  the  joint  legacy  was  only  apparent,  the
gift  being  made  at  once  to  two  or  more,  but  their  respective  shares
being  assigned  them,  as  '  lego  Titio  et  Seio  ex  cBquis  partibus.^

The  rights  of  co-legatees  were  very  different  at  different
periods  of  Roman  law.  Originally  the  interest  of  the  co-legatee
was  determined  by  the  formula  under  which  the  legacy  was  given.
If  it  was  per  vindicationem,  the  right  to  the  property  in  the
whole  thing  given  passed  to  each  legatee.  They  had  to  divide  it
between  them,  but  each  had  a  right,  as  against  the  heir,  to  claim
the  whole.  If  it  was  given  per  damnationem,  no  right  to  the  pro-
perty passed,  but  each  legatee  was  a  creditor  of  the  heir  in
respect  of  the  thing  given,  and  a  difference  was  made  according
as  the  thing  was  given  conjunctim  or  disjunctim.  In  the  former  case,
each  of  the  co-legatees,  if  there  were  two,  was  entitled  to  half
only,  and  if  either  could  not  take,  his  half  remained  in  the
inheritance  for  the  benefit  of  the  heir.  If  the  legacy  was  given
disjunctim,  then  each  had  a  claim  against  the  heir  for  the  whole,  and
if  one  got  the  thing  from  the  heir,  the  other  could  get  its  value.
(Gai.  ii.  205.)  If  the  legacy  was  given  sinendi  modo,  and  the  heir
allowed  either  co-legatee  to  take  the  thing,  he  had  done  his  duty,
and  the  co-legatee  got  nothing.  (Gai.  ii.  215.)  If  the  legacy
was  given  per  prcBceptionem,  the  effect  as  between  co-legatees  was
the  same  as  in  the  case  of  legacies  given  per  vindicationem.  (Gai.
ii.  223.)  Before  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea  there  was  no  such  thing  as
accrual  of  legacies  between  co-legatees  ;  each  legatee  was  entitled
to  the  property  in  the  whole  thing,  or  was  creditor  for  the  whole.

The  lex  Julia  de  maritandis  ordinibus  (B.C.  13)  and  the  lex  Pa-
pia Popp(Ea  (a.d.  9),  which  are  usually  spoken  of  as  one  law,  lex
Julia  et  Papia,  introduced  great  changes  in  testamentary  law :  the
former  to  prevent  unequal  marriages,  as  of  a  senator  with  a  liberta,
and  the  latter  to  promote  marriage  and  the  birth  of  children.
Two  classes  of  persons,  ccelibes  and  orbi,  were  affiected  with  in-
capacities. They  might  be  instituted  or  have  legacies  given  them,
i.e.  the  institution  or  gift  was  not  void,  but  the  benefit  derivable
from  it  was  taken  away  from  them  and  given  to  some  one  else.
By  ccelebs  was  meant  a  man  betAveen  the  ages   of  twenty  and

LIB.  II.     TIT.  XX.  225

sixty,  or  a  woman  between  the  ages  of  twenty  and  fifty,  who  had  not
been  married  or  was  a  widower  or  widow.  Men  had  a  hundred
days  from  the  death  of  the  testator  in  which  they  might  marry,
and  thus  avoid  the  penalties  attaching  to  celibacy,  and  women
were  allowed  two  years  from  the  death  of  a  husband,  and  eighteen
months  from  the  time  of  divorce,  in  which  to  remarry.  By  orhus
was  meant  a  man  between  twenty-five  and  sixty,  and  a  woman
between  twenty  and  fifty,  who  had  not  a  child  living  at  the  time
of  the  accrual  of  the  right  to  take  under  the  testament.  Adop-
tive children  could  not  be  counted,  a  senatus-considtum  having
been  passed  to  exclude  them.  The  lex  Pajna  fixed  the  time  of
accrual  of  rights  under  a  testament,  the  dies  cedit,  as  it  was  tech-
nically termed,  at  the  date  of  the  opening  of  the  testament,  in-
stead of  the  date  of  the  testator's  death,  which  had  previously
been  the  legal  date.

The  ccelehs  lost  all,  and  the  orhus  one-half,  of  what  was  given
him,  and  this  lapsed  portion  {caducum,  quasi  ceciderit  ah  eo,  IJLr.
Reg.  17.  1)  was  given  to  some  one  else.  These  caduca  produced  by
the  person  to  whom  they  were  given  not  being  capable  of  taking
them  were  not  the  only  interests  dealt  with  by  the  lex  Papia,  If
a  gift  was  originally  invalid,  as  if  it  was  given  to  a  person  already
dead  at  the  date  when  the  testament  Avas  made,  the  gift  was
looked  on  as  if  it  had  never  been  made  at  all,  j^ro  non  scripto.
With  such  gifts  the  lex  Papia  had  nothing  to  do.  But  a  gift
might  have  been  valid  originally  and  then  become  invalid,  as  if,
e.g.,  it  had  been  given  to  a  person  who  died  after  the  making  of
the  testament  and  before  the  death  of  the  testator.  The  old  law
prescribed  how  they  should  be  treated,  and  gave  them  by  accrual
to  co-heirs  if  given  to  an  heir,  or  allowed  them  to  fall  in  as  part  of
the  inheritance  if  given  to  a  legatee.  Such  vacant  things,  however,
were  affected  by  the  lex  Papia,  They  were  said  to  be  in  causa
caduci ;  and  the  caduca  and  the  things  in  causa  caduci  devolved
together  to  those  who  had  the  jus  caduca  vindicandi.

In  the  first  place  there  were  certain  excepted  persons,  viz.
ascendants  or  descendants  of  the  testator  in  the  third  degree,  who
were  not  aifected  by  the  lex  Papia  at  all.  They  lost  nothing
if  they  were  ccelihes  or  orhi;  they  took  all  that  the  old  law  would
have  given  them,  although  ccelihes  or  orhi.  They  were  said  to  be
solidi  capaces,  capable  of  taking  all  the  testament  gave  them.

Apart  from  them  it  was  the  jjatres,  i.  e.  persons  having  a  husband
or  wife  and  one  child  living,  mentioned  in  the  testament,  who
took  the  caduca  and  the  thino:s  in  causa  caduci.  heirs  takino'  before
legatees.  If  there  were  no  persons  answering  to  this  description,
the  cer avium,  or  treasury  of  the  people,  as  opposed  to  XhQjiscuSy
or  treasury  of  the  emperor,  took  them.  But  the  object  of  the
law  was  not  to  get  money  for  the  treasury,  but  to  reward  mar-
riage and  the  birth  of  children,  and  this  is  why  testators  were
allowed  to  substitute  heirs  (who,  of  course,  unless  near  relations
or  patresy  could  not  take)  so  as  to  prevent  the  cBrarium  taking.

Q

22()  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

^Yhcre  there  were  co-legatees,  the  caduca  of  co-legatees  Avere
given,  in  the  first  place,  to  co-legatees  who  were  patres ;  but
by  a  distinction,  based  apparently  on  no  very  good  reason,  it
was  only  those  joined  re  et  verbis,  and  those  joined  verbis,  who
were  considered  co-legatees  for  this  purpose  ;  those  joined  re  were
not,  and  only  ranked  with  other  legatees.  If  there  were  no  co-
legatees  who  were  patres,  the  legacies  went  to  the  heirs  who  were
•patres.  If  there  were  none,  then  to  legatees  generally  who  had
children.  If  none  had  children,  then  to  the  (Erarium,  (Gai.  ii.
206,  207.)  Any  legacy  given  by  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea  might  be
refused :  if  accepted,  it  passed  with  all  the  burdens  attaching  to
it.  Caduca  cum  sua  onere  fiunt.  (Ulp.  Rec).  17.  2.)  By  a
constitution  of  Caracalia  (Ulp.  Peg,  17.  2),  all  caduca  were
given  to  \\\Q,fiscus,  the  distinction  between  the  (crarium  and  the
flscus  having  ceased  to  exist,  and  no  legatee  or  heir  any  longer
profited  by  the  failure  of  legacies  under  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea.

Constantine  abolished  the  law  of  incapacity  arising  from  celi-
bacy. (Cod.  viii.  58.)  And  Justinian  did  away  with  all  the  law
of  caduca  springing  out  of  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea.  The  dis-
tinction between  the  kinds  of  legacies  being  no  longer  in  existence,
new  provisions  on  the  subject  were  made.  (C.  vi.  51.  11.)  The
right  to  bring  a  real  action  was  to  attach  to  every  legacy ;  and
oo-legatees  were  placed  in  the  position  they  would  have  occupied
before  the  lex  Papia  Popjicea ;  but  it  was  enacted  that  in  every
case  of  a  gift  to  a  co-legatee  failing,  an  accrual  should  take  place
to  the  other,  or  others  joined  with  him.  If  they  were  joined  re,
the  accrual  was  said  to  be  obligatory  on  those  conjoined  ;  but  the
burdens  of  the  legacy  did  not  pass  with  it.  Really  there  was  no
accrual  at  all ;  the  co- legatees  were  in  the  same  position  as  if  the
gift  had  only  been  made  to  one.  If  the  co-legatees  were  joined
re  et  verbis,  the  accrual  was  voluntary,  but  the  burdens  of  the
legacy  passed  with  it.  The  co-legatees  were  looked  upon  as
having  really  distinct  interests,  and,  therefore,  if  the  gift  to  one
failed,  the  others  had  something  to  receive.  But,  at  the  same
time,  they  took  the  share  they  gained,  with  all  its  burdens  ;  it
might,  for  instance,  be  encumbered  with  n.  Jldeicommissum.  Lega-
tees joined  only  verbis  were  not,  properly  speaking,  co-legatees
at  all,  and  Justinian  does  not  permit  any  accrual  between  them.
There  was  thus  a  clear  distinction  made  between  le^iacies  ffiven
jointly  to  legatees  re  et  verbis  and  tliose  given  verbis.  In  both
distinct  interests  were  in  eftect  given  to  all  the  legatees ;  but  in  the
former  case  these  interests  were  so  united,  that,  through  the
failure  of  the  legacy  of  one  legatee,  his  interest  accrued  to  those
joined  with  him.

If  the  ris^hts  of  a  co-lesiatee  were  once  fixed,  tlien  even  if  he
died  before  he  received  his  legacy,  the  accrual  on  any  failure
still  took  place  for  his  benefit,  or  rather  that  of  his  representa-
tives, and  was  said  to  be  given  to  his  pars  or  share.  (D.  vii.
1.  33.  1.)

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

227

9.  Si  cui  fundus  alienus  legatus
fuerit,  et  einerit  proprietatem  de-
ducto  usufructu,  et  ususfructus  ad
eum  jDervenerit,  et  postea  ex  testa-
mento  agat,  recte  eum  agere  et  fun-
dum  petere  Julianiis  ait,  quia  usus-
fructus in  petitione  servitutis  locum
obtinet  ;  sed  officio  judicis  contine-
tur,  ut  deducto  usufructu  jubeat
xestimationem  prfestari.

9.  If  a  testator  gives  as  a  legacy-
land  belonging  to  another,  and  the
legatee  purchases  the  bare  ownership,
and  the  usufruct  come  to  him,  and
he  afterwards  brings  an  action  under
the  testament,  Julian  says  that  an
action  claiming  the  land  is  well
brought,  because,  in  this  claim,  the
usufruct  is  regarded  as  a  servitude
only.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  judge,  in
this  case,  to  order  the  value  of  the
property,  deducting  the  usufruct,  to  be
paid.

D.  XXX.  82.  2,  3  ;  D.  1.  16.  25.

A^  fundus,  or  landed,  estate,  is  left  by  legacy;  the  legatee
"buys  the  naked  ownership,  but  receives  by  a  causa  lucrativa
(this  is  expressed  by  pervenerit)  the  usufruct.  He  is,  of
course,  entitled  to  receive  the  value  of  what  he  has  bought,
but  not  of  that  which  has  already  come  to  him  by  a  causa
lucrativa.  Supposing  he  wishes  to  recover  by  action  the  value
of  the  naked  ownership  from  the  heir,  he  can  only  demand
•exactly  that  which  was  given  him  by  the  testament.  He,  there-
fore, asks  for  the  fundus ;  but  the  fundus  includes  both  the
naked  ownership  and  the  usufruct.  Will  he  not,  then,  be  asking
too  much,  and  thus  fail  in  his  action  from  what  was  termed  plus
,petitio?  (See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.  33.)  Julian  answers  that  he  will
not,  because  in  every  demand  of  a  fundus,  the  plaintiff  must
necessarily  ask  for  it,  subject  to  all  its  servitudes.  Usufruct  was
a  servitude,  and,  therefore,  in  demanding  the  fundus  from  the
heir,  he  does  not  demand  the  usufruct,  if  the  fundus  is  sub-
ject to  such  a  servitude.

10.  Sed  si  rem  legatarii  quis  ei  10.  If  a  testator  gives  as  a  legacy
legaverit,  inutile  est  legatum,  quia     anything  that  already  belongs  to   the

legatee,  the  legacy  is  useless  ;  for
what  is  already  the  property  of  a  le-
gatee cannot  become  more  so.  And,
although  the  legatee  has  parted  with
the  thing  bequeathed,  he  would  not  be
entitled  to  receive  either  the  thing
itself  or  its  value.

D.  XXX.  41.  2.

Et  licet  alienaverit  earn.  This  is  an  application  of  what  was
called  the  rule  of  Cato,  regula  Catoniana  (perhaps  Cato  Major),
tIz.  Quod,  si  testamenti  facti  tempore  decessisset  testator,  inutile
foret,  id  legatum  quandocumque  decesserit  non  valere  (D.  xxxiv.
7.  1),  i.e.  a  legacy  invalid  when  the  testament  was  made,  could
never  become  valid.

11.  Si  quis  rem  suam  quasi  alie-  11.  If  a  testator  gives  a  thing  be-
nam  legaverit,  valet  legatum ;  nam  longing  to  himself,  as  if  it  were  the
plus  valet  quod  in  veritate  est,  quam  property  of  another,  the  legacy  is
quod  in  opinione.    Sed  et  si  legatarii  valid  ;  for  its  validity  is   decided  by

Q  2

-quod  proprium  est  ipsius  amplius
■ejus  fieri  non  potest ;  et  licet  alie-
naverit eam,  non  debetur  nee  ipsa
nee  restimatio  ejus.

228  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

piitavit,  valere  constat,  qiiia  exitiim    what  is  the   real   state   of  the   case,
voluntas  defiinctis  i^otest  habere.  not  by  what  he  thinks.     And  if  the

testator  imagines  that  what  he  gives  be-
longs already  to  the  legatee,  yet,  if  it
does  not,  the  legacy  is  certainly  valid,
because  the  wish  of  the  deceased  can
thus  take  effect.

D.  xl.  2.  4.  1.

The  words  'plus  valet  quod^  &c.,  are  not  the  statement  of  a
general  rule  of  law,  but  merely  of  what  happens  under  the  par-
ticular circumstances  referred  to.  Under  other  circumstances,
exactly  the  opposite  is  laid  down.  Ulpian  says,  for  instance,
that  a  person  thinking  himself  a  necessarius  lures,  but  really  not
being  so,  could  not  repudiate  the  inheritance,  nam  plus  est  in
opinione  quam  in  veritate.     (D.  xxix.  2.  15.)

12.  Si  rem  suam  legaverit  tes-  12.  If  a  testator  gives  his  own  pro-
tator,  posteaque  earn  alienaverit,  perty  as  a  legacy,  and  afterwards
Celsus  existimat,  si  non  adimendi  alienates  it,  it  is  the  opinion  of  Celsus
animo  vendidit,  nihilominus  deberi  ;  that  the  legatee  is  entitled  to  the
idemque  divi  Severus  et  Antoninus  legacy,  if  the  testator  did  not  sell
rescripserunt.  lidem  rescripserunt  with  an  intention  to  revoke  the  le-
eum  qui,  post  testamentum  factum,  gacy.  The  Emperors  Severus  and
prfedia  quae  legata  erant  pignori  Antoninus  have  published  a  rescript
dedit,  ademisse  legatum  non  videri ;  to  this  effect.  And  they  have  also
et  ideo  legatarium  cum  herede  agere  decided  by  another  rescrijDt,  that  if
posse,  ut  prsedia  a  creditore  luantur.  any  person,  after  making  his  testa-
Si  vero  quis  partem  rei  legatee  alie-  ment,  pledges  immoveables  which  he
naverit,  pars  qujB  non  est  alienata  has  given  as  a  legacy,  he  is  not  to  be
omnimodo  debetur  ;  pars  autem  taken  to  have  thereby  revoked  the
alienata  ita  debetur,  si  non  adi-  legacy  ;  and  that  the  legatee  may,  by
mendi  animo  alienata  sit.  bringing  an  action  against    the  heir,

compel  him  to  redeem  the  property.
If,  again,  a  part  of  the  thing  given
as  a  legacy  is  alienated,  the  legatee  is
of  course  still  entitled  to  the  part  which
remains  unalienated,  but  is  entitled  to
that  which  is  alienated  only  if  it  ap-
pears not  to  have  been  alienated  by  the
testator  with  the  intention  of  taking
away  the  legacy.

Gai.  xi.  198  ;  D.  xxxii.  11,  12  ;  C.  vi.  37.  3  ;  D.  xxx.  8.  .

Gains  informs  us  that  the  opinion  confirmed  by  Severus  and
Antoninus  was  not  that  generally  entertained  when  he  wrote.
When  the  legacy  "was  given  per  mndicationem,  it  seemed  impos-
sible that  if  the  thing  were  alienated  the  legatee  could  take  any-
thing ;  and  even  if  it  were  per  damnationem,  though  there  was
nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  legacy  to  prevent  the  legatee  making
a  valid  claim  {licet  ipso  jure  debeatur  legatum),  it  was  considered
that  he  might  be  repelled  by  an  exception,  because  he  would  be
acting  against  the  wishes  of  the  deceased.     (GrAi.  ii.  198.)

13.  Si  quis  debitor!  suo  liberatio-  13.  If  a  testator  gives  as  a  legacy
nem  legaverit,  legatum  utile  est,  et    to  his  debtor  a   discharge  from  his

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

229

neque  ab  ipso  debitore  neque  ab
lierede  ejus  potest  heres  petere,
nee  ab  alio  qui  heredis  loco  est  ;
sed  et  potest  a  debitore  conveniri,
ut  liberet  eum.  Potest  autem  quis
vel  ad  tenipus  jubere  ne  lieres  petat.

debt,  the  legacy  is  valid,  and  the  heir
cannot  recover  the  debt  from  the
debtor,  his  heir,  or  any  one  in  the  place
of  his  heir.  The  debtor  may  by  action
compel  the  heir  to  free  him  from  his
obligation.  A  man  may  also  forbid  his
'  heir  to  demand  payment  of  a  debt  dur-
ing a  certain  time.

The  debt  was  not  extinguisliecl  by  the  legacy  of  liberatio.
But  if  the  heir  sued  the  debtor,  then  the  debtor  could  repel  him
by  the  plea  of  fraud  {exce-ptione  doll  mali),  and,  if  the  debtor
wished,  he  could,  by  suing  under  the  testament,  compel  the  heir
to  release  the  debt,  by  consent  only,  if  the  obligation  had  been
made  in  that  manner,  by  acceptllatio,  i.e.  by  the  heir  acknowledg-
ing the  receipt  of  the  thing  owed  (see  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  29.  1),  if  it
had  not.

A  legacy  of  a  discharge  from  debt  might  be  made  indirectly
by  giving  as  a  legacy  to  the  debtor  the  chirographum,  or  bond
by  which  he  was  bound.     (D.  xxxiv.  3.  3.  1,  2.)

Vel  ad  tempus.  The  effect  of  such  a  legacy  was,  that  if  the
heir  sued  the  legatee  before  the  time  had  expired,  he  could  be
repelled  by  an  exception  of  dolus  mains.

14.  Ex  contrario  si  debitor  cre-
ditor! suo,  quod  debet,  legaverit,
inutile  est'  legatum,  si  nihil  plus
est  in  legato  quam  in  debito,  quia
nihil  amplius  habet  per  legatum.
Quod  si  in  diem  vel  sub  conditione
debitum  ei  pure  legaverit,  utile  est
legatum  propter  reprfesentationem.
Quod  si  vivo  testatore  dies  venerit
vel  conditio  extiterit,  Papinianus
scripsit  utile  esse  nihilominus  lega-
tum, quia  semel  constitit  :  quod  et
verum  est  ;  non  enim  placuit  sen-
tentia  existimantium  extinctum  esse
legatum,  quia  in  eani  causam  per-
venit  a  qua  incipere  non  potest.

14.  On  the  contrary,  a  legacy  given
by  a  debtor  to  his  creditor  of  the
money  which  he  owes  him,  is  in-
effectual if  it  includes  nothing  more
than  the  debt  did,  for  the  creditor
thus  receives  no  benefit  from  the
legacy.  But  if  a  debtor  gives  abso-
lutely as  a  legacy  to  his  creditor
what  was  due  only  on  the  expiration
of  a  term,  or  on  the  accomplishment  of
a  condition,  the  legacy  is  effectual,
because  it  thus  becomes  due  before
the  debt.  Papinian  decides,  that  if
the  term  expires,  or  the  condition  is
accomplished,  in  the  lifetime  of  the
testator,  the  legacy  is  nevertheless
effectual,  because  it  was  once  good  ;
which  is  true.  For  we  may  reject
the  opinion  that  a  legacy  once  good
can  afterwards  become  extinct,  be-
cause circumstances  have  arisen  which
would  have  prevented  its  being  origin-
ally valid.

D.  XXXV.  2.  1.  10 ;  D.  xxxv.  2.  5  ;  D.  xxxi.  82.

15.  Sed  si  uxori  maritus  dotem
legaverit,  valet  legatiun,  quia  ple-
nius  est  legatum  quam  de  dote  actio.
Sed  si  quam  non  accepit  dotem  le-
gaverit, dii'i  Severus  et  Antoninus
rescripserunt,  si  quidem  simpliciter
legaverit,  inutile  esse  legatum  ;  si
^.'^ero  certa  pecunia  vel  certum  corpus

15.  If  a  man  gives  as  a  legacy  to
his  wife  her  marriage-portion,  the
legacy  is  valid,  for  the  legacy  is  more
beneficial  than  the  action  she  might
maintain  for  the  recovery  of  her  por-
tion. But  if  he  bequeath  to  his  wife
her  marriage-portion,  which  he  has
never  actually  received,  the  Emperors

230

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

aut  instriimentum  dotis  in  prsele-  Severus  and  Antoninus  have  decided
gando  demonstrata  sunt,  valere  le-  by  a  rescript,  that  if  the  portion  is
gatum.  given   without  any   specification,    the-

legacy  is  void  ;  but  if  in  the  terms  of
the  gift  a  particular  sum  or  thing,
or  a  certain  sum  mentioned  in  the
act  of  dowry,  is  specified  as  to  be
received  as  a  legacy  before  it  could  be
received  as  dowry,  the  legacy  is  valid.

D.  xxxiii.  41.  2.  7,  8.

In  the  cle  dote,  ov,  as  it  was  otherwise  called,  the  rei  uxorice
actio,  certain  delays  in  the  restitution  of  the  doAvry  were  per-
mitted ;  and  sums  expended  for  the  improvement  of  the  property
of  the  wife  might  be  set  off  against  the  claim.  The  legacy  had
to  be  paid  without  delay,  and  no  set-off  was  admissible.  It  was
from  the  dowry  being  thus  restored,  w^hen  made  the  subject  of  a
legacy,  sooner  than  when  the  action  was  brought,  that  the  ex-
pression prcelegare  dotem  was  used ;  the  dos  was  given  by  legacy
(legare)  sooner  {prcB)  than  it  could  otherwise  be  obtained.

By  the  words  ^  certa  jpecunia^  &c.,  is  meant  that  if  the
testator  said,  '  I  give  to  my  wife  the  sum  she  brought  me  as
dowry,'  and  she  had  not  brought  anything,  the  legacy  would  be
useless  ;  but  if  he  said,  *  I  give  her  the  100  aurei  she  brought  me,'
then  the  words  referrino;  to  her  havino;  brougiht  them  would  be
only  ^  falsa  demonstration  that  is,  an  unnecessary  particularity  of
expression,  which  would  be  passed  over  as  if  not  written.  (C.  vi.
44.  3.)

Instrumentum.  dotis.  So,  if  the  testator  said,  '  I  give  the
l^roperty  mentioned  in  the  act  of  dowry,'  if  there  were  no  act
of  dowry,  the  gift  would  be  useless  ;  but  if  he  said,  '  I  give  such
or  such  a  particular  thing  mentioned  in  the  act  of  dowry,'  if  there
were  no  act  of  dowry,  the  wife  would  receive  the  thing  specified,
and  the  words,  '  mentioned  in  the  act  of  dowry,'  would  be  treated
as  superfluous.

I

16.  Si  res  legata  sine  facto  he-
redis  perierit,  legatario  decedit ;  et
si  servus  alienus  legatus  sine  facto
heredis  manumissus  fuerit  non  te-
netur  heres.  Si  vero  heredis  servus
legatus  fuerit,  et  ipse  eum  manu-
miserit,  teneri  eum  Julianus  scripsit,
nee  interesse  utrum  scierit  an  ig-
noraverit  a  se  legatum  esse  ;  sed  et
si  alii  donaverit  servum,  et  is  cui
donatus  est  eum  manumiserit,  te-
netur  heres,  quamvis  ignoraverit  a  se
eum  legatum  esse.

16.  If  a  thing  given  as  a  legacy
perishes  without  the  act  of  the  heir,
the  loss  falls  upon  the  legatee.  And,
if  the  slave  of  another,  given  as  a
legacy,  should  be  manumitted  with-
out the  act  of  the  heir,  the  heir  is.
not  answerable.  But  if  a  testator
gives  as  a  legacy  the  slave  of  his  heir,
who  afterwards  manumits  that  slave,
Julian  says  that  the  heir  is  answer-
able, v/hether  he  knew  or  not  that
the  slave  was  given  away  from  him
as  a  legacy.  And  it  would  be  the?
same  if  the  heir  had  made  a  present
of  the  slave  to  any  one  who  had  en-
franchised him  :  the  heir,  though
ignorant  of  the  legacy,  would  be  an-
swerable.

D.  XXX.  35.  1  ;  D.  xxx.  112.  1.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

231

1l\\q  factum  of  the  heir  means  anything  by  which,  however
innocently,  he  may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  thing  perishing,
&c.

17.  Si  qiiis  ancillcis  cum  suis  natis
legaverit,  etiamsi  ancill^e  mortiiEc
fiierint,  partus  legato  cedunt.  Idem
est,  si  ordinarii  servi  cum  vicariis
legati  fuerint;  et  licet  mortui  sint
ordinarii,  tamen  vicarii  legato  ce-
dunt. Sed  si  servus  cum  peculio
fuerit  legatus,  mortuo  servo  vel
manumisso  vel  alienato  et  i)eculii
legatum  extinguitur.  Idem  est,  si
fundus  instructus  vel  cum  instru-
mento  legatus  fuerit ;  nam  fundo
alienato  et  instrumenti  legatum
extinguitur.

17.  If  a  testator  bequeaths  his
female  slaves  and  their  offspring,  al-
though the  mothers  die,  the  issue
goes  to  the  legatee.  And  so,  if  ordi-
nary slaves  are  bequeathed  together
with  vicarial,  although  the  ordinary
slaves  die,  yet  the  vicarial  slaves  will
pass  by  virtue  of  the  gift.  But,  whero
a  slave  is  bequeathed  with  his  j^ecii-
liurti,  and  afterwards  dies,  or  is  manu-
mitted or  alienated,  the  legacy  of  the
peculinm  becomes  extinct.  It  is  the
same  if  the  testator  gives  as  a  legacy,
land  '  provided  with  instruments,'  or
'  with  its  instruments  of  culture.'  If
the  land  is  alienated,  the  legacy  of
the  instruments  of  culture  is  extin-
guished.

D.  xxxiii.  8.  1.  3  ;  D.  xxxiii,  7.  1,  pr.  and  1.

An  ordinarius  servus  was  a  slave  who  had  a  special  office  in
th.  e  establishment,  as  cook,  barber,  baker,  &c.  The  vicarii  were
his  attendants,  and  were  generally  reckoned  as  part  of  his
p  culium.  But  in  the  case  of  this  legacy,  the  law  considered
them  as  having  an  independent  existence  {propter  dignitatem
hominis),  and  not  merely  as  accessories  to  the  ordinarii.  So,
the  children  of  the  female  slaves  are  not  treated  as  mere  acces-
sories to  her.  Had  they  been  so,  they  could  not  have  passed
without  the  principal  to  which  they  were  attached.

Fundus  instructus  is  land,  with  everything  on  it,  whether
for  use  or  ornament ;  fundus  cum  instrumento,  land,  with  the
instruments  of  its  culture  only.     (D.  xxxiii.  7.  12.  27.)

18.  Si  grex  legatus  fuerit  postea-
que  ad  unam  ovem  pervenerit,  quod
superfuerit  vindicari  potest.  Grege
autem  legato,  etiam  eas  oves  qupe
post  testamentum  factum  gregi  ad-
jiciuntur,  legato  cedere  Julianus
ait  :  est  enim  gregis  unum  corpus  ex
distantibus  capitibus,  sicut  medium
unum  corpus  est  ex  cohoerentibus
laj)idibus.

18.  If  a  flock  is  given  as  a  legacy,
and  it  is  afterwards  reduced  to  a
single  sheep,  the  legatee  can  claim
what  remains  :  and  if  a  flock  is  given
as  a  legacy,  any  sheep  that  may  be
added  to  the  flock  after  the  making
of  the  testament,  will,  according  to
Julian,  pass  to  the  legatee.  For  a
flock  is  one  body,  consisting  of  se-
veral different  heads,  as  a  house  is
one  body,  composed  of  several  stones
joined  together.

D.  XXX.  21,  22.

19.  ^dibus  denique  legatis,  co-  19.  So,  when  a  building  is  given  as

lumnas  et  marmora  quse  post  testa-  a  legacy,  any  marble  or  pillars  whicli

mentum  factum  adjecta  sunt,  legato  may  be   added  after  the  testament  is

dicimus  cedere.  made  wiU  pass  by  the  legacy.

D.  xxxi.  39.

232

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

20.  Si  peculimn  legatiim  fuerit,
sine  cliibio  qiiicqiiid  peculio  accedit
vel  decedit  vivo  testatore,  legatarii
lucro  vel  damno  est.  Quod  ei  post
mortem  testatoris  ante  aditam  here-
ditatem  servus  acquisierit,  Julianiis
ait,  siquidem  ipsi  manumisso  pecu-
lium  legatum  fuerit,  omne  quod
ante  aditam  liereditatem  acquisitum
est,  legatario  cedere,  quia  liujus  le-
gati  dies  ab  adita  hereditate  cedit  ;
sed  si  extraneo  peculium  legatum
fuerit,  non  cedere  ea  legato,  nisi  ex
rebus  peculiaribus  auctum  fuerit.
Peculium  autem,  nisi  legatum  fue-
rit, manumisso  non  debetur  ;  quam-
vis,  si  vivus  manumiserit,  sufHcit  si
non  adimatur,  et  ita  divi  Severus  et
Antoninus  rescripserunt.  lidem
rescripserunt,  peculio  legato  non
videri  id  relictum,  ut  petitionem
habeat  pecuniae  quam  in  rationes
dominicas  impendit.  lidem  rescrip-
serunt peculium  videri  legatum  cum
rationibus  redditis  liber  esse  jussus
est,  et  ex  eo  reliqua  inferre.

20.  When  the  pecuUnm  of  a  slave
is  given  in  a  legacy,  it  is  certain  that
if  it  is  increased  or  diminished  in
the  life  of  the  testator,  it  is  so  much
gained  or  lost  to  the  legatee.  And  if
the  slave  acquires  anything  between
the  death  of  the  testator  and  the
time  of  the  heir  entering  on  the
inheritance,  Julian  makes  this  dis-
tinction :  if  it  is  to  the  slave  himself
that  the  peculium,  together  with  his
enfranchisement,  is  given,  then  all
that  is  acquired  before  the  heir  en-
ters on  the  inheritance  goes  to  the
legatee,  for  the  right  to  such  a  legacy
is  not  fixed  until  the  inheritance  be
entered  on.  But  if  it  is  to  a  stranger
that  the  peculium  is  given,  then  any-
thing acquired  within  the  period
above  mentioned  will  not  pass  by  the
legacy,  unless  the  acquisition  v/ere
made  by  means  of  something  form-
ing part  of  the  peculium.  His  pecu-
lium does  not  go  to  a  slave  manumit-
ted by  testament,  unless  expressly
given  ;  although,  if  a  master  in
his  lifetime  manumits  his  slave,  it  is
enough  if  he  does  not  expressly  take  it
away  from  him ;  and  to  this  effect  is
the  rescript  of  the  Emperors  Severus
and  Antoninus,  who  have  also  de-
cided, that  when  his  peculimn  is  given
as  a  legacy  to  a  slave,  this  does  not
entitle  him  to  demand  what  he  may
have  expended  for  the  use  of  his
master.  The  same  emperors  have
further  decided,  that  a  slave  is  en-
titled to  his  peculium  when  the  tes-
tator says  he  shall  be  free  as  soon  as
he  has  brought  in  his  accounts,  and
made  up  any  deficiency  out  of  his
peculium.

D.  xxxii.  65  ;  D.  xxxiii.

8.  8.  ;  D.  xxxiii.
D.  XV.  1.  53.

6.  4  ;  D.  xxxiii.  8.  8.  7

Dies  cedit,  *  the  day  begins,'  and  dies  venit, '  the  day  is  come,'
are  the  two  expressions  in  Koman  law  which  signify  the  vesting
or  fixing  of  an  interest,  and  the  interest  becoming  a  present  one.
Cedere  diem  (says  Ulpian,  D.  L.  16.  213),  signijicat  incipere
deheri  pecuniam ;  venire  diem^  significat  euin  diem  venisse,  quo
pecunia  peti  jiotest.  Cedit  dies  may,  therefore,  be  translated,  ^  the
right  to  the  thing  is  fixed ;  '  venit  dies,  '-  the  thing  may  be  de-
manded.' ITor  instance,  if  A  buys  a  horse  of  B,  without  any
terms  being  attached  to  the  purchase,  the  right  of  B  in  the  pur-
chase-money is  fixed  at  once,  and  also  he  may  at  once  demand  it,
et  cessit  et  venit  dies.  If  A  agrees  that  the  purchase- money  shall
be  paid  by  instalments,  then,  dies  cessit,  B  has  a  fixed  interest  in

LIB.  11.      TIT.  XX.  233

the  money  ;  but  the  dies  can  only  be  said  venisse,  as  each  instal-
ment falls  due,  and  with  regard  only  to  the  portion  becoming  due.
If,  again,  A  only  buys  it  on  condition  that  C  will  lend  him  the
money,  then  until  C  has  done  so,  neque  ccssit  nequc  venit  dies,  B
has  no  fixed  interest  in,  or  right  to,  the  purchase-money  until  the
condition  is  accomplished.  \¥ith  regard  to  legacies,  the  dies
cedit,  the  time  at  which  the  eventual  rights  of  the  legatee  were
fixed,  was  the  day  of  the  testator's  death,  excepting  when  the
vesting  or  fixing  of  these  rights  was  suspended  by  a  condition  in
the  testament  itself.  The  dies  venit,  the  time  when"  the  thing
given  could  be  demanded,  was  not  till  the  heir  entered  on  the
inheritance,  and  there  Avas  thus  some  one  of  Avhom  to  make  the
demand  ;  if  the  legacy  was  given  after  a  term,  or  on  a  condition,
the  demand,  of  course,  could  not  be  made  {dies  noii  venit)  until
the  term  ]iad  expired,  or  the  condition  was  fulfilled.

An  alteration  was  made  by  the  lex  Pajria  Poj^pcea  in  fixing
the  dies  cedit  at  the  day  wlien  the  testament  was  opened,  not  at
that  Avhen  the  testator  died  (see  note  to  paragr.  8);  but  this
had  been  done  away  with,  and  the  old  law  Avas  in  force  under
Justinian.     (C.  vi.  51.  1.  1.)

The  legatee  had  the  thing  given  exactly  as  it  was  at  the
time  of  the  dies  cedit.  He  took  it,  with  all  the  gains  and  losses
that  had  accrued  to  it  since  the  date  of  the  testator's  death,
and  directly  his  rights  were  fixed,  they  were  transmissible  to  his
heirs.

But  if  a  testator  gave  his  liberty  to  one  of  his  slaves  as  a
legacy,  there  was  in  this  case  an  exception  to  the  rule  that  the
dies  cedit  dates  from  the  death  of  the  testator.  If  the  gift  of
liberty  was  given  to  a  slave  as  a  legacy,  he  could  not  begin  to
acquire  for  his  own  benefit  until  an  Iieir  had  entered  on  the  in-
heritance, as  it  was  requisite  there  should  be  some  one  to  free
him.  The  peculium,  therefore,  if  given  to  him,  would  be  such  as
it  w^as  when  the  lieir  entered  on  the  inheritance ;  while,  if  the
peculiuni  was  given  to  a  stranger,  it  would  be  such  as  it  was  at
the  death  of  the  testator,  excepting  when  the  j)eculiuin  was  aug-
mented by  things  derived  from  itself  (ex  rebus  peculiaribns),  as,
for  instance,  if  sheep  or  cattle,  forming  part  of  the  peculium,  had
young.

There  was  another  case,  that  of  personal  servitudes,  in  which
the  dies  cedit  dated  from  the  entrance  on  the  inheritance,  not
from  the  death  of  the  testator.  These  servitudes  were  exclusively
attached  to  the  person  of  the  legatee,  and  as  they  were  not  trans-
missible to  his  heirs,  there  could  be  no  interest  in  them  until  the
actual  enjoyment  of  them  was  commenced.

The  terms  of  the  second  rescript  referred  to  in  the  text  are
given  by  Ulpian.  (D.  xxxiii.  8.  6.  4.)  When  the  master  en-
franchised his  slave  himself,  he  was  present  to  demand  the
pecidium,  and  if  he  did  not,  it  was  considered  evident  that  he
intended  the  slave  to  keep  it.     Not  so  in  a  legacy  of  liberty,  in

234  LIB.  II.     TIT.  XX.

giving  whicli  the  master  might  so  easily  forget  the  pecuUum  that
some  expressions  were  required  to  show  that  he  remembered  it^
and  wished  to  2;ive  it  to  the  slave.

21.  Tarn  autem  corporales  res  le-  21.  Things  corporeal  and  incorpo-
gari  possunt,  quani  incorporales  ;  et  real  may  be  equally  well  given  as  a
ideo  quod  defuncto  debetur,  potest  legacy.  Thus,  the  testator  may  give
alicui  legari,  ut  actiones  suas  heres  a  debt  due  to  him,  and  the  heir  is  then
legatario  priijstet,  nisi  exegerit  vivus  obliged  to  use  his  actions  for  the  be-
testator  pecuniam  ;  nam  hoc  casu  nefit  of  the  legatee,  unless  the  testatoi?
legatum  extinguitur.  Sed  et  tale  in  his  lifetime  exacted  payment,  for
legatum  valet  :  Damnas  esto  heres  in  this  case  the  legacy  would  become
domum  illius  reficere  vel  ilium  rere  extinct.  Such  a  legacy  as  this  is  also
alieno  liberare.  good  :  let  my  heir  be  bound  to  rebuild

the  house  of  such  a  one,  or  to  free  him
from  his  debts.

D.  XXX.  41  ;  D.  xxx.  39.  3,  4.

The  legacy  of  a  debt  due  to  the  testator  was  usually  called
lef/atum  nominis,  (See  D.  xxx.  44.  6.)  Of  course  the  legatee
could  not  sue  for  it,  he  could  only  compel  the  heir  to  sue  for  his
benefit.

22.  Si  generaliter  servus  vel  res  22.  If  a  testator  gives  a  slave  or
alia  legetur,  electio  legatarii  est,  anything  else  as  a  legacy,  without
nisi  aliud  testator  dixerit.                       specifying  a  particular  slave  or  thing,

the  choice  belongs  to  the  legatee,  un-
less the  testator  has  expressed  the
contrary.

The  jurists  took  care  to  lay  down,  with  respect  to  what  was
called  a  legatum  generis,  that  the  class  of  objects  must  not  be  one
too  wide.  Legatum  nisi  certce  rei  sit,  et  ad  certom  personam
deferatur,  nullius  est  momenti,  (Paul,  ^ent,  iii.  6.  13.)  For
instance,  the  gift  of  '  an  animal '  would  have  seemed  rather  in-
tended to  mock  than  to  benefit  the  legatee,  magis  derisorium  quam
utile  videtur.     (D.  xxx.  7.)

Before  Justinian,  it  depended  on  the  formula  with  which  the
legacy  was  given  whether  the  choice  of  the  particular  thing  to
be  given  to  the  legatee  belonged  to  the  heir  or  the  legatee.  In
a  legacy  per  vindicationem  it  belonged  to  the  latter ;  there  was
a  real  action  for  a  thing  which  must  have  formed  part  of  the
testator's  actual  estate.  In  a  legacy  per  damnationem  it  belonged
to  the  heir ;  there  was  only  a  personal  action  against  the  heir  as
debtor,  and  the  debtor  might  discharge  the  obligation  in  the  way
most  beneficial  to  himself.     (Ulp.  Reg,  24.  14.)

The  main  difference  between  a  legatum  generis  and  a  legatum
optionis  was  that  in  the  latter  the  legatee  could  choose  the  best
of  the  kind  in  the  possession  of  the  testator :  in  the  latter  the
legatee  could  not  choose  the  best,  nor  the  heir  the  worst.
(D.  xxx.  1.  37  ;  D.  xxx.  5.  2.)

23.  Optionis  legatum,  id  est,  ubi  23.  The  legacy  of  election,  that  is
testator  ex  servis  suis  vel  aliis  rebus     when  a  testator  directs  his  legatee  to
optare  legatarium  jusserat,  habebat     choose  any  one  from  among  his  slaves.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.  235

in  se  conditionem  ;  et  ideo,  nisi  ipse  or  any  other  class  of  things,  was  for-
legatariiis  vivus  optaverit,  ad  here-  merly  hekl  to  imply  a  condition,  so
dem  legatum  non  transmittebat.  that  if  the  legatee  in  his  lifetime  did
Sed  ex  constitutione  nostra  et  hoc  ad  not  make  the  election,  he  did  not
meliorem  statnm  reformatum  est,  et  transmit  the  legacy  to  his  heir.  But,
data  est  licentia  heredi  legatarii  op-  by  our  constitution,  we  have  altered
tare,  licet  vivus  legatarius  hoc  non  this  for  the  better,  and  the  heir  of  the
fecit.  Et  diligentiore  tractatu  habi-  legatee  is  now  permitted  to  elect,  al-
to, ethoc  in  nostra  constitutione  ad-  though  the  legatee  in  his  lifetime  has
ditum  est,  ut  sive  plures  legatarii  not  done  so.  And,  pursuing  the  sub-
existant  quibus  optio  relicta  est,  et  ject  still  further,  we  have  added,  that
dissentiant  in  corpore  eligendo,  sive  if  there  are  several  legatees  to  whom
unius  legatarii  plures  heredes  et  in-  an  option  is  left,  and  they  differ  in
ter  se  circa  optandum  dissentiant,  their  choice,  or  if  thqjre  are  many  heirs
alio  aliud  corpus  eligere  cupiente,  of  one  legatee,  and  they  cannot  agree
ne  pereat  legatum  (quod  plerique  what  to  choose,  then  to  prevent  the
prudentium  contra  benevolentiam  legacy  becoming  ineffectual,  which  the.
introducebant),  fortunam  esse  hujus  generality  of  ancient  lawyers,  contrary
optionis  judicem,  et  sorte  hoc  esse  to  all  equity,  decided  would  be  the
dirimendum,  utadquem  sors  veniat,  case,  fortune  must  be  the  arbitress  of
ilHus  sententia  in  optione  preecellat.  the  choice,  and  the  dispute  must  be

decided  by  lot,  so  that  his  choice,  to
whom  the  lot  falls,  shall  x^revail.

D.  xl.  9.  3  ;  D.  xxxvi.  2.  12.  8  ;  C.  vi.  43.  3.

When  once  the  dies  ced'it  had  fixed  the  rights  of  the  legatee,
he  could  transmit  to  his  heirs  all  the  rights  he  had  himself.  To
this  the  Koman  lawyers  xionsidered  the  legatum  optionis  an  excep-
tion,  as  intended  to  be  personal  to  the  legatee  himself.  Justinian
decides  that  the  exception  shall  not  exist.  (C.  vi.  43.  3.)  We
must  distinguish  the  legatum  generis,  when  an  object,  though  an
uncertain  one,  was  given,  from  the  legatum  optionis,  where  only
the  right  to  select  an  object  was  given.  The  former  was  never
treated  as  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  of  the  dies  cedit.

A  testator  might  also  leave  as  a  legacy  a  part,  as  e.g.  the
half,  of  the  inheritance  (Tit.  23.  5.  note);  but  still  the  heir
took  tlie  Avhole  inheritance  as  heir,  and  then  had  to  divide  it
Avith  the  legatarius  partiarius,  although  the  legatee  was  really
not  getting  a  particular  thing,  but  a  share  of  a  universal  suc-
cession.    (Gai.  ii.  254.)

24.  Legari  autem  illis   solis  po-  24.  A  legacy  can  be  given  to  those-

test,  cum   quibus  testamenti  factio     only,  with  whom  the  testator  has  ^es^a-
est.  menti  factio.

D.  xli.  8.  7.

We  have  already  said  (Tit.  14.  2)  that  the  necessity  of  having
the  rights  of  citizenship  in  order  to  make,  to  witness,  or  to
profit  by  a  testament,  excluded  all  peregrini.  But  even  among
those  who  were  otherwise  in  a  position  to  take  as  heirs  or  le-
gatees, there  were  some  who  at  different  periods  Avere  specially
precluded :

First,  the  Latini  Juniani  (see  Bk.  i.  Tit.  5.  3)  could  not
be  appointed  tutors  by  testament,  nor  could  they  benefit  at  all
by  a  testament,  unless  they  had  the  full  rights  of  citizenship

2:^6

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  or  acquired  them  within  a
hundred  days  after  his  decease.  (Gat.  i.  23  ;  Ulp.  Reg.  17.  1
and  22.  2.)

Secondly,  by  the  lex  Voconia  (585  A.u.c),  the  general  object
of  which  was  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  large  sums  in
the  liands  of  women,  no  woman  could  be  instituted  by  a  person
rated  in  the  census  as  possessing  a  fortune  of  100,000  asses.
(Gai.  ii.  274.)

Thirdly,  by  the  lex  Julia  de  maritandis  ordinihus,  unmarried
persons  could  take  nothing  under  a  testament,  unless  they  were
married  at  the  death  of  the  testator,  or  within  one  hundred  days
after  his  decease ;  and  by  the  lex  Papia  PoppcBa  persons  married,
but  childless,  could  only  receive  one-half  of  what  was  left  them.
{Ulp.  Reg.  17.  2  and  22.  3.)

Lastly,  the  disabilities  of  the  lex  Julia  and  the  lex  Papia
PoppcBa  were  removed  by  the  Christian  emperors  ;  but  a  new
kind  of  disability  was  created,  by  enacting  that  no  heretic  should
take  anything  whatever,  even  under  a  military  testament.  (C.  i.
^.  4,  5  and  22.)  In  the  time  of  Justinian  it  may  be  said  that
■every  one  had  the  testamenti  f actio,  excepting  harhari,  dejwrtati,
and  heretics.

25.  Incertis  vero  personis  neqiie
legata  neque  fideicommissa  olim  re-
linqiii  concessum  erat ;  nam  nee
miles  qiiidem  incertfe  personam  po-
terat  relinquere,  ut  divus  Hadrianiis
rescripsit.  Incerta  autem  persona
videbatur,  quam  incerta  opinione
animo  siio  testator  subjiciebat  ;  vel-
uti  si  quis  ita  dicat  :  Quicumque
filio  filiam  snam  in  matrimonium  de-
derit,  ei  lieres  mens  ilium  fiindum
dato.  lUud  quoque  quod  iis  relin-
■quebatur,  qui  post  testamentum.
scriptum  primi  consules  designati
«runt,  ?eque  incert?e  persons  legari
videbatur,  et  denique  multte  alias
ejusmodi  species  sunt.  Libertas
•quoque  incertse  personog  non  vide-
batur posse  dari,  quia  placebat  no-
minatim  servos  liberari.  Sub  certa
vero  demonstratione,  id  est,  ex  cer-
tis  personis  incertfe  personse  recte
legabatur  ;  veluti,  Ex  cognatis  meis
qui  nunc  sunt,  si  quis  filiam  meam
uxorem  duxerit,  ei  lieres  mens  illam
rem  dato.  Incertis  autem  personis
legata  vel  fideicommissa  relicta,  et
per  errorem  soluta,  repeti  non  posse
sacris  constitutionibus  cautum  erat.

25.  Formerly,  it  was  not  permitted
that  either  legacies  or  fideiconnmissa
should  be  given  to  uncertain  persons,
and  even  a  soldier  could  not  leave
anything  to  an  uncertain  person,  as
the  Emperor  Hadrian  has  decided  by
a  rescript.  By  an  uncertain  person
was  meant  one  who  is  not  present  to
the  mind  of  the  testator  in  any  defi-
nite manner,  as  if  he  should  say  :
Whoever  shall  give  his  daughter  in
marriage  to  my  son,  to  him  let  my
heir  give  such  a  piece  of  land.  So,  if
he  had  left  anything  to  the  persons
first  appointed  consuls  after  his  testa-
ment was  written,  this  also  would  have
been  a  gift  to  uncertain  persons,  and
there  are  many  other  similar  examples.
Freedom  likewise  could  not  be  con-
ferred upon  an  uncertain  person,  for
it  was  necessary  that  all  slaves  should
be  enfranchised  by  name  ;  but  a  legacy
given  with  a  certain  demonstration,
that  is,  to  an  uncertain  person  among
a  number  of  persons  certain,  was  valid,
as  :  Among  my  existing  cognati,  if  any
one  shall  marry  my  daughter,  let  my
heir  give  him  such  a  thing.  But,  if  a
legacy  or  jideicommissum  to  uncertain
persons  had  been  paid  by  mistake,  it
was  provided  by  the  constitutions,  that
such  persons  could  not  be  called  on  to
refund.

Gai.  ii.  238,  239.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

237

Neque  Jideicommissa .  It  was  by  a  senatus-consuUum,  m  the
time  of  Hadrian,  that  the  law  was  thus  settled  with  respect  to
Jideicommissa.  (GrAi.  ii.  287.)  Previously,  a  gift  by  way  of
Jideicommissum  to  an  uncertain  person  had  been  valid.

The  lex  Furia  Caninia  (Gai.  ii.  239)  required  that  slaves  to
whom  freedom  was  given  by  testament  should  be  expressly  named,
jubet  servos  nominatim  liherari.

26.  Postumo  quoque  alieno  inii-
tiUter  legabatur.  Est  autem  alienus
postiimas,  qui  natus  inter  siios  here-
des  testatori  futures  non  est ;  ideo-
qiie  ex  emancipato  iilio  conceptusiie-
pos  extraneus  erat  postumiis  avo.

Gai.

26.  Formerly,  a  legacy  to  a  post-
humous stranger  was  ineffectual  ;  a.
posthumous  stranger  is  any  one  who,
if  he  had  been  born  before  the  death
of  the  testator,  would  not  have  been
numbered  among  his  sui  heredes,  and
so  a  posthumous  grandson,  the  issue
of  an  emancipated  son,  was  a  posthu-
mous stranger  with  regard  to  his  grand-
father,
ii.  241.

We  have  already  seen  (see  Tit.  13.  1)  how  the  rigour  of  this
principle  came  to  be  modified  with  respect  to  a  posthumous
suus  heres.  It  was  as  an  incerta  persona  that  the  posthu-
mous child  was  originally  excluded  from  taking  either  as  heir  or
legatee.

27.  Sed  nee  hujusmodi  -  species
penitus  est  sine  justa  emendatione
relicta  ;  cum  in  nostro  codice  consti-
tutio  posita  est,  per  quam  et  huic
parti  medemur,  non  solum  in  here-
ditatibus,  sed  etiam  in  legatis  et
fideicommissis  :  quod  evidenter  ex
ipsius  constitutionis  lectione  clares-
cit.  Tutor  autem  nee  per  nostram
constitutionem  incertus  dari  debet,
quia  certo  judicio  debet  quis  pro  tu-
tela  suse  posteritati  cavere.

27.  These  points  have  not,  how-
ever, been  left  without  proper  altera-
tion, for  a  constitution  has  been  placed
in  our  code  by  which  the  law  has  been
altered,  not  only  as  regards  inherit-
ances, but  also  as  regards  legacies  and
jideicommissa.  This  alteration  will  ap-
pear from  the  constitution  itself.  But
not  even  by  our  constitution  is  the  no-
mination of  an  uncertain  tutor  permit-
ted, for  it  is  incumbent  upon  every  pa-
rent to  take  care  that  his  posterity  have
a  tutor  by  a  determinate  appointment.
C.  vi.  48.

There  was,  probably,  a  constitution  treating  of  this  subject
inserted  in  the  first  Code  (see  Introd.  sec.  29),  which  was  not
given  in  the  Code  we  now^  have.

28.  Postumus  autem  alienus  he-
res  institui  et  antea  poterat  et  nunc
potest ;  nisi  in  utero  ejus  sit,  quae
jure  nostro  uxor  esse  non  potest.

28.  A  posthumous  stranger  could
formerly,  and  may  now,  be  appointed
heir,  unless  it  appear  that  he  has  been
conceived  by  a  woman  who  by  our
law  could  not  have  been  married  to
his  father.

Gai.  ii.  242.  287  ;  D.  xxviii.  2.  9.  1.  4.

Posthumous  children,  who,  if  born  in  the  testator's  lifetime,
would  not  have  been  in  his  power  (this  is  the  meaning  of  alienus),
could  not  be  instituted  heirs  under  the  civil  law  ;  but  the  praitor
gave  them,  if  instituted,  the  possessio  bonormn,  Justinian  per-
mitted their  institution.     (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  9.  pr.)

238

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

Nisi  in  utero  ejus  sit,  that  is,  unless  the  posthumous  child  is
the  child  of  the  testator,  and  of  a  woman  whom  the  testator  could
not  have  married.

29.  Si  quis  in  nomine,  cogno-
mine,  prtenomine  legatarii  erraverit,
si  de  persona  constat,  nihilominus
valet  legatum.  Idemque  in  here-
dibiis  servatnr,  et  recte  ;  nomina
enim  significandoriim  liominuui  gra-
tia reperta  snnt,  qui  si  alio  quolibet
niodo  intelliscantnr,  nihil  interest.

2B.  Altliougli  a  testator  may  have
mistaken  the  nomcn,  cognomen,  or  pree-
nonien  of  a  legatee,  yet,  if  it  is  certain
who  is  the  person  meant,  the  legacy  is
valid.  The  same  holds  good  as  to
heirs,  and  with  reason  ;  for  the  nse  of
names  is  but  to  point  out  persons  ;
and,  if  they  can  be  distinguished  by
any  other  method,  it  is  the  same  thing.

D.  xix.  4.

30.  Huic  proxima  est  ilia  juris
Tegula,  falsa  demonstratione  legatum
non  perimi,  veluti  si  quis  ita  legave-
rit,  Stichum  servum  meum  vernam
do  lego  ;  licet  enim  non  verna  sed
emptus  sit,  si  de  servo  tamen  con-
stat, utile  est  legatum.  Et  conve-
nienter  si  ita  demonstraverit,  Sti-
chum servum  quem  a  Seio  emi,  sitque
ab  alio  emptus,  utile  est  legatum,  si
de  servo  constat.

30.  Closely  akin  to  this  is  the  rule
of  law,  that  a  legacy  is  not  rendered
void  by  a  false  description.  For  in-
stance, if  the  testator  were  to  say,  I
give  as  a  legacy  Stichus  born  my
slave  ;  in  this  case,  although  Stichus
was  not  born  in  the  family,  but
bought,  yet,  if  it  is  certain  who  is
meant,  the  legacy  is  valid.  And  so  if
a  testator  marks  out  the  particular
slave  in  this  way  ;  I  bequeath  Stichus
my  slave,  whom  I  bought  of  Seius  ;
yet,  although  he  was  bought  of  an-
other, the  legacy  is  good,  if  no  doubt
exists  as  to  the  slave  intended  to  be
eiven.

D.  XXXV.  1.  17,  pr,  and  1.

31.  Much  less  is  a  legacy  rendered
invalid  by  a  false  reason  being  as-
signed for  giving  it  ;  as,  if  a  testator
says,  I  give  my  slave  Stichus  to  Titius,
because  he  took  care  of  my  affairs  in
my  absence  ;  or,  because  I  was  ac-
quitted upon  a  capital  accusation,  by
his  undertaking  my  defence.  For
although  Titius  has  never  taken  care
of  the  afiairs  of  the  deceased,  and
although  the  testator  was  never  ac-
quitted by  means  of  Titius  defending
him,  the  legacy  will  be  valid.  But
it  is  quite  different  if  the  reason  has
been  assigned  under  the  form  of  a
condition,  as,  I  give  to  Titius  such  a
piece  of  ground,  if  he  has  taken  care
of  my  affairs.

D.  XXXV.  1.  17.  2,  3.

Ulpian  shortly  sums  up  the  law  of  this  and  the  two  last
paragraphs  by  the  rule,  ^  Neque  ex  falsa  demonstratione,  neque  ex
falsa  causa  legatum  iiifirmatur.''     (Ulp.  Reg.  24.  19.)

Of  course  if  the  cause  was  so  oiven  as  to  constitute  a  con-

31.  Longe  magis  legato  falsa
■causa  non  nocet,  veluti  cum  quis  ita
dixerit,  Titio,  quia  me  absente  ne-
gotia  mea  curavit,  Stichum  do  lego;
vel  ita,  Titio,  quia  patrocinio  ejus
capitali  crimine  liberatus  sum,  Sti-
chum do  lego.  Licet  enim  neque  ne-
gotia  testatoris  umquam  gessit  Ti-
tius, neque  patrocinio  ejus  liberatus
«est,  legatum  tamen  valet.  Sed  si
conditionaliter  enuntiata  fuerit  cau-
sa, aliud  juris  est,  veluti  hoc  modo  :
Titio,  si  negotia  mea  curavit,  fundum
•do  lego.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

239

:lit'ion,  the  legacy  was  only  valid,    if  the  condition   had   been
accomplished.

32.  An  servo  lieredis  recte  lega-
mus,  quferitur.  Et  constat  pure
Lnutiliter  legari,  nee  quicquam  pro-
[icere,  si  vivo  tesfcatore  de  potestate
iieredis  exierit ;  quia  quod  inutile
foret  legatum,  si  statim  post  factum
fcestamentum  decessisset  testator,
Qon  hoc  ideo  debet  valere  quia  diu-
bius  testator  vixerit.  Sub  conditione
v^ero  recte  legatur,  ut  requiramus  an
quo  tempore  dies  legati  cedit,  in
potestate  heredis  non  sit.

32.  The  question  has  been  raised,
whether  a  testator  can  give  a  legacy
to  the  slave  of  his  heir ;  and  it  is  evi-
dent that  such  a  legacy  is  quite  in-
effectual, nor  is  it  at  all  helped  by  the
slave  having  been  freed  from  the
power  of  the  heir  in  the  lifetime  of  the
testator  ;  for  a  legacy  which  wonld
have  been  void  if  the  testator  had
expired  immediately  after  he  had  made
the  testament,  ought  not  to  become
valid,  merely  because  he  happened  to
enjoy  a  longer  life.  But  a  testator
may  give  the  legacy  to  the  slave  under
a  condition,  and  then  Vv^e  have  to  en-
quire whether,  at  the  time  when  the
right  to  the  legacy  becomes  fixed,  the
slave  has  ceased  to  be  in  the  power  of
the  heir.

Gai.  ii.  244  ;  D.  xxxiv.  7.  1.

This  paragraph  is  based  on  the  rcgula  Catoniana  (see  note  on
paragraph  10),  though  no  express  allusion  to  it  is  made.  As  to
the  doubts  entertained  on  the  subject,  see  Gai.  ii.  244.

33.  Ex  diverso,  herede  instituto
servo,  quin  domino  recte  etiam  sine
conditione  legetur,  non  dubitatur  ;
nam  etsi  statim  post  factum  testa-
mentum  decesserit  testator,  non  ta-
men  apud  eum  qui  heres  sit  dies
legati  cedere  intelligitur  ;  cum  here-
ditas  a  legato  separata  sit,  et  possit
per  eum  servum  alius  heres  efFici,
si  priusquam  jussu  domini  adeat,  in
alterius  potestatem  translatus  sit,
vel  manumissus  ipse  heres  efhcitur  :
quibus  casibus  utile  est  legatum.
Quod  si  in  eadem  causa  permanserit,
et  jussu  legatarii  adierit,  evanescit
lesratum.

33.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not
doubted,  but  that  if  a  slave  is  ap-
pointed heir,  a  legacy  may  be  given
to  his  master  unconditionally  ;  for,
although  the  testator  should  die  in-
stantly, yet  the  right  to  the  legac}»"
immediately  after  making  the  testa-
ment, does  not  immediately  accrue  to
the  heir ;  for  the  inheritance  is  sepa-
rated from  the  legacy,  and  another
may  become  heir  by  means  of  the  slave,
if  he  should  be  transferred  to  the  power
of  a  new  ]uaster,  before  he  has  entered
upon  the  inheritance,  at  the  command
of  the  master,  who  is  the  legatee  ;  or
the  slave  himself,  if  enfranchised,  may
become  heir  ;  and,  in  these  cases,  the
legacy  would  be  good.  But,  if  the
slave  should  remain  in  the  same  state,
and  enter  upon  the  inheritance  by
order  of  the  legatee,  the  legacy  is  at  an
end.

Gai.  ii.  245.

34.  Ante  heredis  institutionem
lnutiliter  antea  legabatur,  scilicet
quia  testamenta  vim  ex  institutione
heredum  accipiunt,  et  ob  id  veluti
caput  atque  fundamentum  intelli-
gitur totius  testamenti  heredis  in-
stitutio.      Pari  ratione  nee  Hbertas

34.  Formerly,  a  legacy  placed  be-
fore the  institution  of  the  heir  was  in-
effectual, because  a  testament  receives
its  efficacy  from  the  institution  of  the
heir,  and  it  is  thus  that  the  institution
of  the  heir  is  looked  on  as  the  head
and  the  foundation  of  the  testament.

240

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

ante  lieredis  institutionem  dari  po-
terat.  Sed  quia  incivilc  esse  piita-
vimus  ordinem  quideiu  scriptural
seqiii,  quod  et  ipsi  antiquitati  vitu-
perandum  fuerat  visum,  sperni  au-
tem  testatoris  voluntatem,  per  nos-
traiii  constitutionem  et  hoc  vitium
emeudavimus  :  ut  liceat  et  ante
heredis  institutionem  et  inter  medias
heredum  institutiones  legatum  re-
linciuere,  et  multo  magis  libertatem
cujus  usus  favorabilior  est.

So,  too,  freedom  could  not  be  given
before  the  institution  of  the  heir.  But
we  have  thought  it  unreasonable  that
tlie  mere  order  of  writing  should  be
attended  to,  in  contempt  of  the  real
intention  of  a  testator — a  thing  of  which
the  ancients  themselves  seem  to  have
disapproved.  We  have,  therefore,  by
our  constitution,  amended  the  law  in
this  point ;  so  that  a  legacy,  and  much
more  a  grant  of  liberty,  which  is  always
favoured,  may  now  be  given  before  the
institution  of  an  heir,  or  among  the
institutions  of  heirs  where  more  than
one.

Gai.  ii.  229,  230  ;  C.  vi.  23,  24.

The  nomination  of  a  tutor,  as  not  constituting  any  burden  on
the  inheritance,  had  already  been  made  an  exception  to  the  rule,
that  nothing  in  a  testament  could  be  valid  that  preceded  the  in-
stitution of  the  heir.     (Gai.  ii.  231.)

1

35.  Post  mortem  quoque  heredis
aut  legatarii  simili  modo  inutiliter
legabatur,  veluti  si  quis  ita  dicat  :
Cum  heres  mens  mortuus  erit,  do
lego.  Item,  pridie  quam  heres  aut
legatarius  morietur.  Sed  simili
modo  et  hoc  correximus,  firmitatem
hujusmodi  legatis  ad  lideicommis-
sorum  similitudinem  prtestantes,  ne
vel  hoc  casu  deterior  causa  lega-
torum  quam  fideicommissorum  inve-
niatur.

35.  A  legacy  made  to  take  effect
after  the  death  of  an  heir  or  legatee,
was  also  ineffectual  ;  as,  if  a  testator
said,  '  When  my  heir  is  dead,  I  give  as
a  legacy,'  or  thus, '  I  give  as  a  legacy  on
the  day  preceding  the  day  of  the  death
of  my  heir,  or  of  my  legatee.'  But  we
have  corrected  the  ancient  rule  in  this
respect,  by  giving  all  such  legacies  the
same  validity  as  Jideicommissa  ;  lest
trusts  should  be  found  in  this  respect
to  be  more  favoured  than  legacies.

Gai.  ii.  232  ;  C.  iv.  38.  11  ;  C.  iv.  11.

Gains  remarks,  that  the  second  of  these  forms,  Pridie  quam^
though  objected  to  because  the  time  when  the  right  was  fixed
could  not  be  known  until  the  heir  was  dead,  was  not  objected  to
on  any  very  good  ground.  For  all  that  the  principles  of  law
forbad  was,  that  the  interest  should  not  be  fixed  until  after  the
death  of  the  heir,  for  then  it  would  have  been  the  heir's  heir,  and
not  the  heir,  that  was  charged  ;  and  that  it  should  not  be  fixed
until  after  the  death  of  the  legatee,  for  if  he  had  no  vested
interest  in  his  life,  he  could  have  nothing  to  transmit.  But  a
legacy  made  so  as  to  give  a  fixed  right  the  day  before  either  of
their  deaths,  was  not  open  to  the  same  objections.

36.  Poense  quoque  nomine  inuti-
liter legabatur  et  adimebatur,  vel
transferebatur.  Poense  autem  no-
mine legari  videtur  quod  coercendi
heredis  causa  relinquitur,  quo  magis
aliquid  faciat  aut  non  faciat  :  veluti
si  quis  ita  scripscrit,  Heres  mens,  si
filiam  suam  in  matrimonium  Titio
collocaverit,   vel  ex  diverso  si  non

36.  Also,  formerly,  if  a  testator
had  given,  revoked,  or  transferred  a
legacy  by  way  of  penalty,  he  would
have  done  so  ineffectually.  A  legacy
is  considered  as  given  by  way  of  a
penalty,  when  it  is  intended  to  con-
strain an  heir  to  do  or  not  to  do  some-
thing ;  as,  if  a  testator  said,  '  If  my  heir
gives  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Titius,

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XX.

241

collocaverit,  clato  decern  aureos  Seio ;
aiit  si  ita  scripserit,  Heres  mens,  si
serviim  Sticlium  alienaverit,  vel  ex
diverse  si  non  alienaverit,  Titio
decern  aureos  dato.  Et  in  tantum
lieec  regula  observabatiir,  tit  quam
pluribiis  principalibus  constitutioni-
nibiis  signijBcetiir,  nee  principem
quidem  agnoscere  quod  ei  poense  no-
mine legatum  sit.  Nee  ex  militis
quidem  testamento  talia  legata  vale-
bant, quamvis  alise  militum  volun-
tates  in  ordinandis  testamentis  valde
observabantur.  Quinetiam  nee  liber-
tatem  poena?  nomine  dari  posse  place-
bat.  Eo  amplius  nee  lieredem  poense
nomine  adjici  posse  Sabinus  existi-
mabat,  veluti  si  quis  ita  dicat,  Titius
heres  esto,  si  Titius  filiam  suam  Seio
in  matrimonium  collocaverit,  Seius
quoque  heres  esto.  Nihil  enini  in-
tererat,  qua  ratione  Titius  coerce-
retur,  utrum  legati  datione  an  co-
heredis  adjectione.  Sed  hujusmodi
scrupulositas  nobis  non  placuit,  et
generaliter  ea  quve  relinquuntur,
licet  poenfe  nomine  fuerint  relicta
vel  adempta  vel  in  alios  translata,
nihil  distare  a  ceteris  legatia  con-
stituimus  vel  in  dando  vel  in  adi-
mendo  vel  in  transf erendo :  exceptis
videlicet  iis  quae  impossibilia  sunt,
vel  legibus  interdicta,  aut  alias  pro-
brosa.  Hujusmodi  enim  testamen-
torum  dispositiones  valere,  secta
rneorum  temporum  non  patitur.

or,  if  he  do  not  give  her  in  marriage
to  Titius,  let  him  pay  ten  aurei  to
Seius  ; '  or,  thus,  '  If  my  heir  shall
alienate  my  slave  Stichus,  or,  if  my
heir  shall  not  alienate  my  slave  Stichus,
let  him  pay  ten  aurei  to  Titius.'  And
this  rule  was  so  rigorously  observed,
that  it  was  expressly  ordained  by  many
constitutions,  that  even  the  emperor
would  not  receive  a  legacy  which  was
given  by  way  of  a  penalty,  nor  could
such  a  legacy  be  valid,  even  when
given  by  the  testament  of  a  soldier ;
although,  in  every  other  respect,  the
intention  of  a  testator  in  a  military
testament  was  scrupulously  adhered
to.  And  even  freedom  could  not  be
given  by  way  of  a  penalty  ;  still  less,
in  the  opinion  of  Sabinus,  could  another
heir  be  added  ;  as  if,  for  instance,  a
testator  said,  *  Let  Titius  be  my  heir,
but  if  he  gives  his  daughter  in  marriage
to  Seius,  let  Seius  also  be  my  heir. '  It
made  no  difference  how  Titius  was  put
under  constraint,  whether  by  the  gift
of  a  legacy,  or  the  addition  of  a  co-
heir. But  this  scrupulous  severity  has
not  pleased  us,  and  we  have  therefore
ordained  generally  that  things  left,
revoked,  or  transferred  by  way  of
penalty,  shall  be  treated  as  other  lega-
cies, with  the  exception  of  anything
that  may  be  imj^ossible,  prohibited  by
law,  or  contrary  to  good  manners,
for  the  principles  of  our  age  will  not
j)ermit  testamentary  dispositions  of
such  a  character.

Gai.  ii.  235,  236.  243  ;  C.  vi.  41.

It  is  rather  difficult  to  say  how  this  rule  sprang  up  in  Roman
law,  or  how  the  gift  of  a  legacy  poencB  nomine  differed  from  an
ordinary  condition.  Theophilus,  in  his  Paraphrase,  gives  as  one
reason  that  a  legacy  ought  to  spring  from  a  feeling  of  kindness  to
the  legatee,  and  not  be  used  as  a  means  to  punish  another.  For
want  of  a  better  reason,  we  may  be  content  with  this.

The  sections  of  this  Title  may  be  arranged  under  five  heads.
The  first  treats  of  the  definition  and  general  notions  of  a  legacy
(paragr.  1,  2,  3,  8)  ;  the  second  treats  of  the  objects  given  by  a
legacy  (paragr.  4,  5,  6,  7,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  21,  22,  and
23);  the  third  treats  of  the  persons  to  whom  legacies  can  be
given  (paragr.  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  32,  and  33)  ;  the  fourth  of
rules  as  to  the  position,  terms,  and  construction  of  legacies  (paragr.
29,  30,  31,  34,  35,  and  36);  and  the  fifth,  of  the  loss,  diminution,
or  increase  of  things  given  by  legacies  (paragr.  16,  17,  18,  19,  20).

R

242  LIB.  II.  TIT.  XXI.

Tit.  XXI.  DE  ADEMPTIONE  ET  TRANSLATIONE

LEGATOKUM.

Ademptio  legatorum,  sive  eodem  The  revocation  of  a  legacy,  whether

testamento    adimantur    legata    sive  made  in  the  same  testament  or  in  a

codicillis,  firma  est,    sive  contrariis  codicil,  is  valid,  and  may  be  made  in

verbis  fiat  ademptio,  veluti  si  quod  terms  contrary  to  those  of  the  gift,  as

ita  quis  legaverit  do  lego,  ita  adi-  when  a  testator  gives  in  these  terms,

matur  non  do  non  lego  ;   sive  ncn  '  I  give  as  a  legacy,'  and  revokes  it  by

contrariis,  id  est,  aliis  quibuscumque  saying,  '  I  do  not  give  as  a  legacy  ; '  or

verbis.                                              .  in  terms  not  contrary,  that  is,  in  any

other  form  of  expression.

D.  xxxiv.  4.  3.  11.

It  was  considered  necessary,  in  the  times  when  weight  was
attached  to  the  formula  under  which  the  legacy  was  given,  that
the  legacy  should  be  revoked  by  words  exactly  opposite  (^con-
trariis  verbis)  to  those  by  which  it  was  given,  as  in  a  legacy  per
vindicationem  the  revocation  ought  to  have  been  by  the  words
^  non  do,  non  lego.''     (Ulp.  Reg.  24.  29.)

The  text  only  speaks  of  direct  revocation  of  legacies  by  an
express  declaration  of  the  testator's  wishes  in  some  testamentary
document  ;  but  it  was  also  revoked  by  the  mere  wish  of  the
testator  {nnda  voliintate,  D.  xxxiv.  4.  3.  11)  that  it  should  be  re-
voked being  in  any  way  declared.  In  such  a  case  the  legacy
was  not,  strictly  speaking,  taken  away ;  but  the  legatee  who
brought  an  action  for  it  might  be  repelled  by  an  exception  of
dohts  malus.  We  have  seen,  in  the  last  Title  (paragr.  12),  that
a  sale  of  the  thing  given  as  a  legacy  was  held  to  be  or  not  to  be
a  revocation  of  the  legacy,  according  as  the  testator  intended  or
did  not  intend  that  such  should  be  its  effect.

A  legacy  was  also  considered  to  be  revoked  by  implication  if
something  occurred  after  it  was  given  which  made  it  impossible
to  believe  that  the  testator  could  have  continued  to  wish  the
legatee  to  profit  by  his  bounty  ;  as,  for  in?  tance,  if  a  notorious
and  deadly  enmity  sprang  up  between  them.  (D.  xxxiv.  4.  3.  11.)

1.  Transferri  quoque  legatum  ab  1.  A  legacy  may  also  be  transferred

alio  ad  alium  potest,   veluti  si  quis  from  one   person  to   another  ;  as,   'I

ita  dixerit  hominem  Stichum  quem  give   as  a   legacy   to    Seius   my  slave

Titio  legavi  Seio   do   lego,    sive   in  Stichus,  whom  I  have  given  as  a  le-

eodem  testamento  sive  in  codicillis  gacy  to  Titius,'  whether  this  be  done

hoc  fecerit.     Quo  casu  simul  Titio  in  the  same  testament  or  in  codicils  ;

adim^i  videtur  et  Seio  dari.  and  then  at  the  same  time  a  legacy  is

taken  from  Titius  and  given  to  Seius.

D.  xxiv.  4,  5.

The  translation  had  two  effects  :  it  took  away  a  legacy  from
one  person  and  gave  it  to  another ;  but  it  might  have  either
effect  without  the  other.     The  original  legatee  might  be  dead.

LIB.  II.     TIT.  XXII.  243

md  thus  the  legacy  useless,  and  yet  the  gift  to  the  new  legatee
ivould  be  valid  ;  or  the  new  legatee  might  subsequently  die,  and
yet  the  legacy  would  be  lost  to  the  original  legatee.  (D.  xxxiv.
1.  20.)

Tit.  XXII.     DE  LEGE  FALCIDIA.

Superest  ut  de  lege  Falcidia  dis-  It  remains  to  speak  of  the  lex  Fal-

piciamas,  qua  modus  novissime  lega-  cidia,  by  which  legacies  have  received

tis  impositus  est.     Cum  enim  olim  their  latest  limitations.    By  the  law  of

lege    duodecim     tabularum     libera  the  Twelve  Tables,  a  testator  was  per-

erat  legandi  potestas,  ut  liceret  vel  niitted  to  dispose  of  his  Avhole  patri-

totum  patrimonium  legatis  erogare  mony  in  legacies  ;    for  the  law  said,

^quippe  ea  lege   ita   cautum   esset,  '  As  a   man  has  disposed  of  his  pro-

uti  legassit  su?e  rei,  ita   jus  esto),  perty,  so  let  the  law  be  ; '  but  it  was

visum   est   hanc    legandi    licentiam  thought  proper  to  restrain  this  licence

coarctare.     Idque  ipsorum  testato-  even  for  the  benefit  of  testators  them-

rum  gratia  provisum  est,  ob  id  quod  selves,   because  they  frequently   died

plerumque    intestati     moriebantur,  intestate,  the  heirs  they  instituted  re-

recusantibus  scriptis  heredibus  pro  fusing  to  enter   upon   an  inheritance

nullo  aut  minimo  lucro  hereditates  from  wliich  they  could   receive  little

adire.     Et  cum  super  hoc  tam  lex  or  no  profit.     With  this  object  the  lex

Puria  quam  lex  Voconia  latse  sunt,  Furia  and  the  lex  Voconia  were  passed  ;

quarum  neutra  sufficiens  ad  rei  con-  and   lastly,    as   neither   of  these   was

summationem  videbatur,  novissime  found  adequate  to  the  piu'pose,  the  lex

lata  est  lex  Falcidia,  qua  cavetur  ne  Falcidia  was  enacted,  which  forbids  a

plus  legare  liceat  quam  dodrantem  testator  to  give  more  in  legacies  than

totorum  bonorum,   id   est,   ut   sive  three-fourths  of  all  his  property ;  so

nnus    heres    institutus    esset,    sive  that,  whether  there  be  one   or  more

plures,  apud  eum  eosve  pars  quarta  heirs  instituted,  there   must  now  re-

xemaneret.  main  to  him,  or  them,   at  least  one-
fourth  part  of  the  whole.

Gai.  ii.  224.  227.

The  lex  Furia  testamentaria,  which  must  not  be  confounded
with  the  lex  Furia,  or  Fusia  Caninia,  restraining  the  testamentary
manumission  of  slaves  (Bk.  i.  Tit.  7 ),  was  a  plebiscit?im,  probably
of  the  year  571  A.u.c.  Gains  thus  acquaints  us  with  its  pro-
visions:— 'Qua,  exceptis  jjersonis  quibusdam,  cceteris  plus  niille
ussibus  legatorum  nomine  mortisve  causa  capere  permissum  non
est :'  more  than  1000  asses  could  not  be  given  as  a  legacy.  The  law
failed  to  effect  its  object,  as  the  testator  was  not  restrained  in  the
number  of  legacies  he  might  give,  but  only  in  the  amount  of  each
legacy.     (Gai.  ii.  2.  25.)

The  lex  Voconia,  also  called  testamentaria,  was  a  plebiscitum,
of  which  the  year  585  A.u.c.  is  given  as  the  date.  Gains  says  of
it,  *  Qua  cautum  est,  ne  cui  plus  legatorum  nomine  mortisve  causa
capere  liceret,  quam  heredes  caperent :'  no  legatee  was  to  have
more  than  each  heir  had.  This  law  also  failed  in  its  object  ;  as,
by  multiplying  the  number  of  legatees  and  giving  each  a  trifling
amount,  the  sum  received  by  the  heirs,  which  would  be  equally
small,  might  be  too  trifling  to  make  it  worth  their  while  to  enter
on  the  inheritance.     (Gai.  ii.  226.)

The  lex  Falcidia  was  a  plebiscitum  passed  in  the  year  714

R   2

244  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXII.

A.U.C.  Its  principles  were  extended  to  Jideicommissa  by  the
senatus-consultum  Pegasianum  (see  next  Title);  to  Jideicommissa
imposed  on  heredes  ah  intestato  by  a  rescript  of  Antoninus  Pius
(D.  XXXV.  2.  18) ;  to  donations  mortis  causa  by  a  rescript  of
Severus  (C.  vi.  50.  5) ;  and  lastly,  to  donations  between  husband
and  wife.  (C.  vi.  50.  12.)  The  mode  in  which  the  heir  would
avail  himself  of  the  lex  Falcidia  w^ould  be  by  repelling  by  an
exception  the  legatee  who  demanded  the  whole  of  his  legacy,
when  less  than  the  whole  was  due  by  the  lex  Falcidia.

The  part  reserved  to  the  heir  is  spoken  of  by  the  jurists  as
quarta  or  Falcidia.  The  commentators  more  usually  employ
the  full  term  quarta  Falcidia.

1.  Et  cum  quaesitum  esset  duo-  1.  Wlien  two  heirs  are  instituted,

bus  lieredibus  institutis,  veluti  Titio  as  Titius  and  Seius,  a  question  has
et  Seio,  si  Titii  pars  aut  tota  ex-  been  raised  :  supposing  the  share  of
hausta  sit  legatis  quae  nominatim  ab  Titius  in  the  inheritance  is  either  en-
eo  data  sunt  aut  supra  modum  one-  tirely  absorbed,  or  very  heavily  bur-
rata,  a  Seio  vero  aut  nulla  rehcta  dened  with  legacies  specifically  charged
sint  legata  aut  quae  partem  ejus  upon  it,  while  the  share  of  Seius  is
dumtaxat  in  partem  dimidiam  mi-  wholly  free,  or  has  legacies  charged  on
nuant,  an  quia  is  quartam  partem  it  only  up  to  half  its  amount,  in  such
totius  hereditatis  aut  amj^lius  habet,  a  case  does  the  circumstance  of  Seius
Titio  nihil  ex  legatis  quae  ab  eo  re-  having  a  clear  fourth  or  more  of  the
licta  sunt,  retinere  liceret.  Placuit,  inheritance,  prevent  Titius  from  re-
ut  quartam  partem  sua3  partis  sal-  taining  out  of  the  legacies  charged
vam  habeat,  posse  retinere  ;  etenim  upon  his  share,  enough  to  secure  a
in  singulis  lieredibus  ratio  legis  Fal-  fourth  part  of  his  own  moiety  to  him-
cidise  ponenda  est.  self  ?     It  has  been  decided  that  Titius

may  retain  the  fourth  of  his  own  share,
for  the  calculation  of  the  lex  Falcidia
is  applicable  to  each  heir  separately.

D.  XXXV.  2.  77.

The  testator  is  here  supposed  to  give  a  distinct  share  of  his .
inheritance  to  two  different  persons,  and  to  burden  one  share
with  leo-acies  while  leavino;  the  other  free.  The  heir  whose
share  is  burdened  is  entitled  to  have  a  clear  fourth  of  his  share,
although  the  legatees  would  be  getting  less  in  the  whole  than
three-fourths  of  the  inheritance.  The  reason  was  probably  this  : —
Under  the  old  civil  law,  if  one  heir  refused  to  enter,  his  share
accrued  to  the  co-heir  who  did  enter  free  of  all  burdens  {sine
onere).  Unless,  therefore,  the  heir  whose  share  was  burdened  had
been  induced  by  the  right  of  retaining  the  Falcidian  fourth  to
enter,  he  would  have  refused  to  enter,  and  his  share  would  have
accrued  si?ie  onere  to  the  co-heir,  and  the  legatees  would  have  got
nothing.  Under  the  lecjes  caducaricB  the  accrual  took  place
cum  onere  ;  but  even  then,  although,  if  the  free  share  accrued  to
the  owner  of  the  burdened  share,  the  two  were  taken  as  one
for  the  benefit  of  the  legatees,  and  the  heir  who  took  both  could
take  nothing  more  than  a  fourth  of  the  two  conjoined,  if  the
legacies  were  sufficient  to  exhaust  the  remainder,  yet,  if  the
burdened  share  accrued  to  the  owner  of  the  free  share,  he  kept

LIB.  II,      TIT.  XXII.

245

lis  free  share  unimpaired,  and  was  allowed  to  keep  a  clear  fourth
)f  the  burdened  share.     (D.  xxxv.  2.  78.)

2.  Qiiantitas  aiitem  patrimonii  ad
[iiam  ratio  legis  Falciclise  redigitur
iiortis  tempore  spectatur.  Itaque  si,
^erbi  gratia,  is  qui  centum  aureorum
)atrimonium  in  bonis  habebat,  cen-
um  aureos  legaverit,  nihil  legatariis
)rodest,  si  ante  aditam  hereditatem
)er  servos  liereditarios  aut  ex  partu
-ncillarum  liereditariarum  aut  ex
a3tu  pecorum  tantum  accesserit
lereditati,  ut  centum  aureis  legato-
um  nomine  erogatis  lieres  quartam
)artem  hereditatis  habiturus  sit ;  sed
lecesse  est  ut  nihilominus  quarta
)ars  legatis  detrahatur.  Ex  diverso,
i  septuaginta  quinque  legaverit,  et
.nte  aditam  hereditatem  in  tantum
lecreverint  bona  incendiis  forte,  aut
laufragiis  aut  morte  servorum,  ut
ion  amplius  quam  septuaginta  quin-
[ue  aureorum  substantia  vel  etiam
ninus  relinquatur,  solida  legata
lebentur.  Nee  ea  res  damnosa  est
leredi,  cui  liberum  est  non  adire
lereditatem  :  quae  res  efficit  ut  sit
lecesse  legatariis,  ne  destitute  tes-
amento  nihil  consequantur,  cum
lerede  in  portionem  pacisci.

2.  In  order  to  apply  the  lex  Fal
cidla,  regard  is  had  to  the  value  of
the  estate  at  the  time  of  the  testa-
tor's death.  Thus,  for  instance,  if
he,  who  is  worth  a  hundred  aurei  at
his  decease,  bequeaths  the  whole  hun-
dred in  legacies,  the  legatees  receive
no  advantage,  if  the  inheritance,  before
it  is  entered  upon,  should  so  increase
by  the  acquisition  of  slaves,  the  birth
of  children  to  female  slaves,  or  the
produce  of  cattle,  that,  after  a  full
payment  of  the  one  hundred  aurei  in
legacies,  a  clear  fourth  of  the  whole
estate  would  remain  to  the  heir,  for
the  legacies  notwithstanding  would
still  be  liable  to  a  deduction  of  one-
fourth.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  testa-
tor has  given  only  seventy-five  aurei
in  legacies,  then  although,  before  the
entrance  of  the  heir,  the  estate  should
so  decrease  by  fire,  shipwreck,  or  the
loss  of  slaves,  that  its  whole  value
should  not  be  more  than  seventy-five
aurei  or  less,  yet  the  legacies  would
still  be  due  without  deduction.  'Nor
is  this  prejudicial  to  the  heir,  who
is  at  liberty  to  refuse  the  inheritance,
but  it  obliges  the  legatees  to  come  to
terms  with  the  heir,  so  as  to  get  a
part,  lest,  if  the  testament  were  aban-
doned, they  should  lose  the  whole.

The  calculation  under  the  lex  Falcidia  was  made  at  the  time
Df  the  testator's  death,  in  accordance  with  the  rule  by  which  the
dies  cedit  for  most  legacies  was  fixed  at  that  time.  It  was,  more-
over, made  then,  even  if  the  dies  cedit  was  fixed  at  some  other
time.  Between  the  death  of  the  testator  and  the  time  of  the  heir
entering  on  the  inheritance,  the  estate  might  be  so  deteriorated
as  to  make  it  disadvantageous  to  the  heir  to  enter ;  and  in  order  to
persuade  him  to  do  so,  the  legatees  would  have  to  enter  into  a
compromise  with  him.

3.  Cum  autem  ratio  legis  Falcidiae
ponitur,  ante  deducitur  ?es  alienum,
item  funeris  impensa  et  pretia  ser-
vorum manumissorum  :  tunc  deinde
in  reliquo  ita  ratio  habetur,  ut  ex  eo
quarta  pars  apud  heredes  remaneat,
tres  vero  partes  inter  legataries  dis-
tribuantur,  pro  rata  scilicet  portione
ejus  quod  cuique  eorum  legatum
fuerit.     Itaque  si  fingamus  quadrin-

3.  When  the  calculation  of  the  lex
Falcidia  is  made,  the  testator's  debts,
his  funeral  expenses,  and  the  price
of  the  manumission  of  slaves,  are
deducted,  then  what  remains  is  di-
vided, so  that  a  fourth  part  remains
for  the  heir,  and  the  other  three  parts
are  divided  among  the  legatees  in
proportion  to  the  amount  of  their
respective   legacies ;   for  example,  let

246  LIB.  11.      TIT.  XXIII.

gentos  aureos  legates  esse,  et  patri-  us  suppose  that  four  hundred  aiirei
iQonii  quantitatem  ex  qua  legata  have  been  given  in  legacies,  and  the
erogari  oportet  quadringentorum  estate  out  of  which  the  legacies  are
esse,  quarta  pars  legatariis  singulis  to  be  paid  is  worth  no  more,  each
debet  detrahi  ;  quod  si  trecentos  legatee  must  have  a  fourth  part  sub-
quinquaginta  legatos  fingamus,  oc-  tracted  from  his  legacy ;  but,  if  we
tava  debet  detrahi.  Quod  si  quin-  su^Dpose  that  the  testator  gave  in  le-
gentos  legaverit,  initio  quinta  deinde  gacies  three  hundred  and  fifty  anrei,
quarta  detrahi  debet  :  ante  enim  then  an  eighth  ought  to  be  deducted,
detrahendum  est  quod  extra  bono-  And  if  he  gave  five  hundred  aurei  in
rum  quantitatem  est,  deinde  quod  legacies,  first  a  fifth  must  be  deducted,
ex  bonis  apud  heredem  remanere  and  then  a  fourth.  For  that  which
oportet.  exceeds  the  real  value  of  the  goods  of

the  deceased  must  first  be  deducted,
and  then  that  which  is  to  remain  to  the
heir.
D.  XXXV.  2.  1.  19  ;  D.  xxxv.  2.  39  ;  D.  xxxv.  2.  73.  5.

Octava  debet  detrahi,  i.e.  one-eighth  of  the  whole,  or  fifty  aurei,
must  be  deducted  from  the  whole  sum  given  to  the  diiFerent
legatees,  the  sum  to  be  deducted  from  each  share  being  in  pro-
portion to  the  relative  amount  of  that  share.  Each  share  would
be  diminished  by  one-seventh.

The  lex  Falcidia  did  not  apply  to  military  testaments.  (D.
xxxv.  2.  17.)

By  a  Novel  (1.  2.  2)  Justinian  provided  that  the  Falcidian
fourth  should  never  be  retained  by  the  heir  if  the  testator  ex-
pressly forbad  its  retention.  If  the  heir  renounced  the  inheri-
tance, the  legatees  and  other  persons  who  were  designed  by  the
testator  to  take  under  the  testament  might,  on  giving  security  for
carrying  out  all  the  dispositions  of  the  testament,  receive  the
inheritance.  Even  if  the  testator  had  not  forbidden  the  retention
of  the  fourth,  it  could  not  be  retained  unless  the  heir  made  an
inventory  of  the  property  of  the  deceased.  If  he  accepted  the
inheritance  without  making  an  inventory,  he  had  to  pay  the
legatees  in  full,  even  if  he  was  obliged  to  draw  upon  his  private
funds  to  do  so.

Tit.  XXIII.      DE    FIDEICOMMISSAEIIS
HEKEDITATIBUS.

Nunc    transeamus   ad  fideicom-  Let  us  now  pass  to  Jideicommissa ;

missa.     Et  prius  est  ut  de  heredita-     and  first  we  will  treat  of  fideicommis-
tibus  fideicommissariis  videamus.  sary  inheritances.

Gai.  ii.  246,  247.

Fideicommissa,  that  is^  trusts,  might  be  compared  to  the  insti-
tution of  heirs,  if  the  trust  embraced  the  whole  inheritance,  and  to
the  gift  of  legacies^,  if  it  embraced  only  a  part.  In  the  former
case  they  were  termed  hyihe^wYi^t^^fideicommissaricB  liereditates\  in
the  \2itiQY,  Jideicommissa  singidcR  rei.  The  text  proceeds  to  speak
of  i\\Q  JideicommissaricB  hereditates.

The  Yfoxdi  Jideicommissum  has  been  generally  retained  in  the
translation,  instead  of  trusts,  because,  as  Jideicommissa  include

!   -

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

247

only  trusts  carrying  out  tlie  last  wishes  of  a  deceased  person,  the
word  trusts,  which  is  used  much  more  widely  in  its  application,
might  lead  to  confusion.

Ulpian  gives  {Reg,  25,  1)  the  following  definition  of  ajidei-
commissum  :  '  Quod  non  civilibus  verbis,  sed  precative  relinqidtur  ;
nee  ex  rigore  juris  civilis  prqficiscitur,  sed  ex  voluntate  datur  relin-
quentisJ'

1.  Sciendum  itaque  et  omnia
fideicommissa  primis  temporibus  in-
iirma  esse,  quia  nemo  invitus  coge-
batur  jDrsestare  id  de  quo  rogatus
erat.  Quibus  enim  non  poterant
hereditatem  vel  legata  relinquere,
si  relinquebant,  fidei  committebant
eorum  qui  capere  ex  testamento
poterant  ;  et  ideo  fideicommissa
appellata  sunt,  quia  nuUo  vinculo
juris,  sed  tantum  pudore  eorum  qui
rogabantur,  continebantur.  Postea
divus  Augustus  semel  iterumque
gratia  personarum  motus,  vel  quia
per  ipsius  salutem  rogatus  quis  di-
ceretur,  aut  ob  insignem  quorum-
dam  perfidiam  jussit  consulibus
auctoritatem  suam  interponere.
Quod  quia  justum  videbatur,  et
populare  erat,  paulatim  conversum
est  in  assiduam  jurisdictionem  ;  tan-
tusque  eorum  favor  factus  est,,  ut
paulatim  etiam  prsetor  proprius  crea-
retur,  qui  de  fideicommissis  jus  di-
ceret,  quem  fideicommissarium  ap-
I)ellabant.

1.  At  first  fideicommissa  were  of
little  force  ;  for  no  one  could  be  com-
pelled against  his  will  to  perform
what  he  was  only  requested  to  per-
form. When  testators  were  desirous
of  giving  an  inheritance  or  legacy  to
persons,  to  whom  they  could  not  di-
rectly give  either,  they  then  entrusted
them  to  the  good  faith  of  some  per-
son capable  of  taking  by  testament  ;
and  fideicommissa  were  so  called,  be-
cause their  performance  could  not
be  enforced  by  law,  but  depended
solely  upon  the  good  faith  of  the
person  to  whom  they  were  entrusted.
Afterwards,  the  Emperor  Augustus,
having  been  frequently  moved  by
consideration  for  certain  persons,  or
because  the  request  was  said  to  have
been  made  in  the  name  of  the  empe-
ror's safety,  or  on  account  of  some
striking  instance  of  perfidy,  com-
manded the  consuls  to  interpose  their
authority.  Their  intervention  being
favoured  as  just  by  public  opinion,
gradually  assumed  the  character  of  a
regular  jurisdiction,  and  trusts  grew
into  such  favour,  that  soon  a  special
pra3tor  was  appointed  to  give  judgment
in  these  cases,  and  received  the  name
of  fideicommissarius.

Gai.  ii.  274,  275.  278.  285  ;  D.  i.  2.  2.  32.

The  freedom  given  by  the  introduction  of  obligatory  trusts
was  singularly  wide.  A  testator,  in  order  to  give  anything,  was
obliged  to  do  so  by  a  regular  testament,  to  adopt  prescribed  for-
mulae, to  use  the  Latin  tongue.  He  could  not  give  anything  to
a  peregrinus,  to  a  person  proscribed,  to  a  posthumous  stranger,  or
to  an  uncertain  person.  The  system  oi  fideicommissa  enabled
him  to  give  to  almost  any  one  he  liked,  and  that  in  words  the  least
formal,  and  even  without  a  testament  at  all.  The  lieredes  ah  in-
testato,  if  charged  with  a  fideicommissum  by  the  person  to  whose
property  they  succeeded,  were  obliged  to  fulfil  it.  A  man  might
give  his  whole  inheritance  by  2^  fideicommissum  to  a  woman  whom
he  was  prevented  by  the  lex  Voconia  from  instituting  as  heir
(Gai.  ii.  274) ;  and  Latini  Juniani  (see  Bk.  i.  Tit.  5.  2)  could
t^^Q  fideicommissa,  though  not  inheritances  or  legacies.  (Gai.  ii.
275.)     The  licence  given  to  fideicommissa  was,  indeed,  diminished

248  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

by  different  enactments,  and  tliey  were  gradually  placed  more
and  more  on  the  footing  of  legacies.  Thus  by  one  senatns-
consultum,  passed  in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  the  power  of  giving  a
fideicommissum  to  a  ijeregrinus  (Gai.  ii.  285),  by  another,  the
power  of  giving  one  to  a  posthumous  stranger  or  uncertain  person,
was  taken  away.  (Gai.  ii.  287.)  Again,  the  senatus-consultiim
Pegasianum  subjected  fideicommissa  to  the  rules  of  the  lex  Papia
PoppcBa  (Gai.  ii.  286) ;  and  a  testamentary  tutor  could  never  be  ap-
pointed by  2i fideicommissum,  (Gai.  ii.  289.)  Fideicommissa  v/eve,
indeed,  always  something  beside  and  foreign  to  the  nature  of  Roman
law.  Augustus  merely  ordered  that,  in  a  case  of  great  hardship,  the
consuls  should  interfere.  Then  a  magistrate  was  created  whose
business  it  was  to  interfere  in  cases  which  warranted  it;  but
there  was  nothing  like  an  action  at  law  to  enforce  fideicom-
missa. The  fideicommissarius  applied  for  aid  as  having  equity  on
his  side ;  and  if  the  magistrate  chose  to  interfere,  the  regular
course  of  the  law  was  stayed,  and  the  trust  enforced.  (Ulp.
Peg.  25.  12.)  The  proceeding  was  always  extra  ordinem  (Gai.
ii.  258),  and  the  jurisdiction  was  exercised  throughout  the  year,
while  legacies  could  only  be  claimed  on  days  cum  res  aguntur,  of
which,  under  Marcus  Aurelius,  there  were  230  in  the  year.
(Gai.  ii.  279.     Demangeat,  i.  790.)

The  fideicommissum  itself  did  not,  like  a  legacy,  directly  trans-
fer the  property  in  an  inheritance  or  in  any  particular  thing,  and  of
course  did  not  give  any  right  to  a  real  action.  The  restitution  or
giving  up  of  the  inheritance  was,  hoAvever,  effected  by  the  mere
consent  of  the  heir,  even  before  tradition.

2,   In  primis  igitur  sciendum  est,  2.  We  must  first  observe,  that  some

opus  esse  ut  aliquis  recto  jure  tes-  one  must  be  duly  appointed  heir  in
tamento  heres  instituatur,  ejusque  the  testament  ;  and  then  it  must  be
fidei  committatur  ut  earn  heredita-  entrusted  to  his  good  faith  to  restore
tern  alii  restituat ;  alioquin  inutile  the  inheritance  to  some  other  person  ;
est  testamentum,  in  quo  nemo  heres  for  the  testament  is  ineffectual  in
instituitur.  Cum  igitur  aliquis  scrip-  which  no  one  is  instituted  heir.  And,
serit  Lucius  Titius  heres  esto,  po-  therefore,  when  a  testator  has  said,
terit  adjicere,  rogo  te,  Luci  Titi,  ut  Let  Lucius  Titius  be  my  heir,  he  may
cum  primum  poteris  hereditatem  add,  and  I  request  you,  Lucius  Titius,
meam  adire,  eam  Caio  Seio  reddas  that,  so  soon  as  you  can  enter  upon
restituas.  Potest  autem  quisque  et  my  inheritance,  you  will  restore  it  and
de  parte  restituenda  heredem  rogare,  give  it  up  to  Caius  Seius.  A  testator
et  liberum  est  vel  j)ure  vel  sub  con-  may  also  request  his  heir  to  restore  a
ditione  relinquere  fideicommissum,  part  of  the  inheritance  only,  and  may
vel  ex  die  certo.  leave  the  Jideicommissum  absolutely  or

conditionally,  or  on  the  expiration  of

a  term.
Gai.  ii.  248.  250.

Of  course  if  there  was  no  heir  instituted,  there  could  be  no
person  to  charge  by  testament  with  the  trust  (iiemofiduciarius) ;
but  the  testator  might  charge  the  heredes  ah  intestato.

The  person  who  made  \he  fideicommissum  was  termed  fidei-
committens\  the  person  requested  to  perform  it,  fiduciarius  ;  and
the  person  to  be  benefited  by  it,  fideicommissarius.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

249

3.  Restituta  autem  liereditate,  is
qnideni  qui  restituit,  nihilominus
lieres  permanet  ;  is  vero  qui  recipit
hereditatem,  aliquando  heredis,  ali-
quando  legatarii  loco,  habebatur.

Gai.

11

3.  After  an  heir  lias  restored  the
inheritance,  he  still  continues  heir.
But  he,  who  receives  the  inheritance,
was  sometimes  considered  in  the  light
of  an  heir,  and  sometimes  in  that  of  a
legatee.

251..

In  order  to  protect  himself,  the  heir  who  remained  liable  to  all
actions  of  creditors  against  the  inheritance  had  recourse  to  a
jfiction  of  law.  He  sold  the  inheritance  to  i\\Q  Jideicominissarius,
and  they  entered  into  mutual  agreements  called  emptcB  et  venditcB
liereditatis  stipulationes  (Gai.  ii.  252),  by  which  the  Jiduciarius,
though  remaining  in  the  eye  of  the  law  responsible  for  the  charges
upon  the  inheritance,  was  protected  from  ultimate  harm  by  having
a  remedy  against  the  fideicommissarius,  who  in  his  turn  bargained
that  the  Jlduciariys  Avould  hand  everything  over.  Thus  Gains
says  of  the^ fideicommissarius,  '  Olim  nee  heredis  loco  erat,  nee
legatarii  ;  sed  potius  emptoris.^

4.  Et  Neronis  quidem  tempori-
bus,  Trebellio  Maximo  et  Annceo  Se-
neca consulibus,  senatus-consultum
factum  est  :  quo  cautum  est,  ut  si
hereditas  ex  fideicommissi  causa  re-
stituta  sit,  omnes  actiones  qu^  jure
civili  heredi  et  in  heredem  compe-
terent,  ei  et  in  eum  darentur  cui  ex
fideicommisso  restituta  est  hereditas.
Post  quod  senatus-consultum  praetor
utiles  actiones  ei  et  in  eum  qui  recipit
hereditatem,  quasi  heredi  et  in  here-
dem dare  cospit.

4.  During  the  reign  of  Nero,  in  the
consulship  of  Trebellius  Maximus  and
Annseus  Seneca,  a  senatus-consultum
was  passed,  providing  that,  after  an  in-
heritance had  been  restored  under  a
Jideicommissifin,  all  actions,  which  by
the  civil  law  might  be  brought  by  or
against  the  heir,  should  be  permitted
for  and  against  him,  to  whom  the  in-
heritance was  restored.  After  this,
the  praetor  began  to  give  equitable  ac-
tions for  and  against  the  person  who
received  an  inheritance,  as  if  he  were
the  heir.

Gat.  ii.  253.

The  senatus-eonsultum  Trehellianum  (A.D.  62)  did  away  with
the  necessity  of  any  such  fiction  as  that  of  a  sale.  The  Jideicom-
missarius  stepj)ed  at  once  into  the  place  of  the  heres  institutas.
All  the  actions  belonging  to  the  inheritance  were  given  him  in
the  shape  of  aetiones  utiles,  (See  Introd.  sec.  106.)  If  creditors
sued  the  heres  institutus,  he  had  the  exeeptio  restitutes  liereditatis ;  he
might  plead  that  he  had  parted  with  the  inheritance  as  he  had
been  directed.

5.  Sed  quia  heredes  scripti,  cum
aut  totam  hereditatem  aut  pene
totam  plerumque  restituere  roga-
bantur,  adire  hereditatem  ob  nul-
lum vel  minimum  lucrum  recusa-
bant,  atque  ob  id  extinguebantur
fideicommissa,  postea  Vespasiani
Augusti  temporibus,  Pegaso  et
Pusione  consulibus,  senatus  censuit
ut  ei  qui  rogatus  esset  hereditatem
restituere,  perinde   liceret  quartam

5.  But  the  instituted  heirs,  being  in
most  cases  requested  to  restore  the
whole,  or  almost  the  whole  of  an  in-
heritance, often  refused  to  accept  it,  as
they  would  receive  little  or  no  advan-
tage, and  thus  fideicommissa  were  fre-
quently extinguished.  Afterwards,
during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Ves-
pasian, in  the  consulship  of  Pegasus
and  Pusio,  the  senate  decreed,  that  an
heir,  who  was  requested  to  restore  an

250  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

partem  retlnere,  atque  lege  Falcidia  inheritance,  might  retain  a  fourth,  just
ex  legatis  retinere  conceditur.  Ex  as  in  the  case  of  legacies  he  might  by
singulis  quoq  ue  rebus  quse  per  fidei-  the  Falcidian  law.  And  the  same  de-
commissum  relinquuntur,  eadem  duction  is  allowed  in  particular  things,
retentio  permissa  est.  Post  quod  which  are  left  by  a  Jideicommissum.
senatus-consultum  ipse  heres  onera  For  some  time  after  this  senatns-con-
hereditaria  sustinebat ;  ille  autem  sultum  the  heir  alone  bore  the  charges
qui  ex  hdeicommisso  recepit  partem  of  the  inheritance  ;  and  he  who  had
hereditatis,  legatarii  partiarii  loco  received  a  share  or  part  of  an  inheri-
erat,  id  est,  ejus  legatarii  cui  pars  tance,  under  a  Jideicommissum,  was  re-
bonorum  legabatur  :  quae  species  garded  as  a  part  legatee,  that  is,  a
legati  partitio  vocabatur,  quia  cum  legatee  having  a  legacy  of  a  share  of
herede  legatarius  partiebatur  here-  the  property,  a  species  of  legacy  which
ditatem.  Unde  qua3  solebant  sti-  was  called  partition,  because  the  lega-
pulationes  inter  heredeni  et  partia-  tee  took  a  part  of  the  inheritance  to-
rium  legatarium  interponi,  e^edem  gether  with  the  heir.  Thus  the  same
interponebantur  inter  eum  qui  ex  stipulations  which  were  formerly  in  use
fideicommisso  recepit  hereditatem,  between  the  heir  and  partiary  legatee,
et  heredem,  id  est,  ut  et  lucrum  et  were  likewise  made  between  the  person
damnum  hereditarium  pro  rata  parte  who  received  the  inheritance  under  the
inter  eos  commune  esset.  Jideicommissum  and  the  heir,  that  is,

they  stipulated  they  would  share  the
benefits  and  the  charges  of  the  inheri-
tance between  them,  in  proportion  to
their  respective  interests.

The  senatus-consultum  Trehellianum  protected  the  Jiduciarius
from  any  harm ;  but  it  gave  him  no  incitement  to  enter  on  the
inheritance.  Why  should  he  take  an  inheritance  which  he  had
instantly  to  transfer  to  another  ?  The  trust  might  thus  perish  ;
and,  to  remedy  this,  the  senatus-consultum  Pegasianiun  (a.d.  73)
permitted  the  lieres  Institutus  to  retain  a  fourth,  just  as  the  lex
Falcidia  permitted  in  the  case  of  legacies.  Even  the  term
quarta  Falcidia,  was  applied  to  the  fourth  retained  by  the
Jiduciarius  heres.  (D.  xxxvi.  1.  16.  9.)  T.\\q  fideicommis sarins
thus  became  exactly  like  a  legatee.  As  having  a  definite  part  of
the  inheritance,  he  was  considered  in  the  light  of  a  legatee  of  a
part  of  the  inheritance,  and,  as  the  text  says  (sec.  3),  the  Jidei-
commissarius  was,  under  the  senatus-consultum  Trehellianum,
placed  in  the  position  of  an  heir,  and  under  the  senatus-consultum
Pegasianum  in  that  of  a  legatee.

A  testator  sometimes  gave  a  legatee  not  a  particular  thing,
but  a  certain  share  in  his  whole  property.  The  legatee  (then
termed  legatarius  partiarius)  took,  in  this  case,  per  universitatem;
but  he  was  not  thereby  made  an  heir,  not  having  been  formally
instituted ;  and  if  there  w^as  no  heir  who  entered  on  the  inheri-
tance, the  legacy  was  extinguished.  The  claims  of  creditors
against  the  inheritance  were  made  exclusively  against  the  heir,
and  the  heir  alone  could  recover  sums  due  to  the  inheritance.
Thus  it  was  necessary  that,  if  the  heir  paid  a  creditor,  the  legatee
.  should  account  to  him  for  a  part  of  the  payment  proportionate  to
his  share  of  the  inheritance  ;  while  if  the  legatee  wished  that  his
share  should  be  increased  by  the  payment  of  a  debt  due  to  the

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

251

inheritance,  lie  could  only  effect  this  through  the  heir.  Accord-
ingly they  made  stipulations  with  each  other,  termed  stipulatioiies
jmrtis  et  pro  parte.  By  one  of  these  stipulations  the  heir
bound  the  legatee  to  pay  a  proportion  of  sums  expended  in
satisfaction  of  claims  against  the  inheritance  ;  by  the  other  the
legatee  bound  the  heir  to  account  to  him  for  his  share  of  sums
received  in  satisfaction  of  debts  owing  to  the  inheritance.  The
Jideicommissarius  was  on  the  footing  of  such  a  legatee  under  the
seiiatus'consultum  Pegasianum,  and  the  stipulationes  partis  et  pro
parte  were  made  between  the  heir  and  ih.Q  Jideicommissarius.

6.  Ergo  si  qiiidem  non  pins  quam
dodrantem  liereditatis  scriptiis  heres
rogatus  sit  restituere,  tunc  ex  Trebel-
liano  senatus-consiilto  restituebatur
liereditas,  et  in  iitrumqiie  actiones
hereditaripe  pro  rata  parte  dabantur,
in  lieredem  qiiidem  j  are  civili,  in  eum
vero  qui  recipiebat  hereditatem  ex
senatus-consulto  Trebelliano,  tam-
quam  in  lieredem.  At  si  plus  quam
dodrantem  vel  etiam  totam  heredi-
tatem restituere  rogatus  sit,  locus
erat  Pegasiano  senatus-consulto,  et
lieres  qui  semel  adierit  heredita-
tem, si  modo  sua  voluntate  adierit,
sive  retinuerit  quartam  partem  sive
retinere  noluerit,  ipse  universa  onera
hereditaria  sustinebat  :  sed  quarta
quidem  retenta,  quasi  partis  et  pro
parte  stipulationes  interponebantur,
tamquam  inter  partiariumlegatarium
et  heredem  ;  si  vero  totam  heredita-
tem restitueret,  empt£e  et  venditse
hereditatis  stipulationes  interpone-
bantur. Sed  si  recuset  scriptus  heres
adire  hereditatem,  ob  id  quod  dicat
earn  sibi  suspectam  esse  quasi  dam-
nosam,  cavetur  Pegasiano  senatus-
consulto  ut,  desiderante  eo  cui  re-
stituere rogatus  est,  jussu  praitoris
adeat  et  restituat  hereditatem,  per-
indeque  ei  et  in  eum  qui  recipit
hereditatem  actiones  darentur  ac
juris  est  ex  Trebelliano  senatus-
consulto.  Quo  casu  nullis  stipula-
tionibus  est  opus  ;  quia  simul  et  huic
qui  restituit  securitas  datur,  et  ac-
tiones hereditariae  ei  et  in  eum  trans-
feruntur  qui  recepit  hereditatem,
utroque  senatus-consulto  in  hac  spe-
cie concurrente.

6.  Therefore,  if  the  instituted  heir
was  not  requested  to  restore  more  than
three-fourths  of  the  inheritance,  he  re-
stored such  part  in  accordance  with
the  provisions  of  the  senatus-consuUum
Trehelliaiium  ;  and  all  actions  which
concern  an  inheritance,  might  be
brought  against  each  according  to  their
respective  shares — against  the  heir,  by
the  civil  law,  and  against  him  who  re-
ceived the  inheritance,  by  the  senatus-
consuUum  Trehellianum^  as  against  an
heir.  But  if  the  instituted  heir  was
requested  by  the  testator  to  restore  the
whole  inheritance,  or  more  than  three -
fourths,  then  the  senatus-consultwm
Ferjasianmn  became  applicable  ;  and
the  heir  who  had  once  entered  on  the
inheritance,  provided  he  did  so  vo-
luntarily, was  obliged  to  sustain  all
the  charges  of  the  inheritance,  whether
he  had  retained  or  had  declined  to
retain  his  fourth.  But,  when  the  heir
did  retain  a  fourth  part,  the  stij)ula-
tions  termed  pcvrtis  et  pro  parte,  were
entered  into,  as  between  a  legatee  of
part  and  an  heir  ;  and,  when  the  heir
did  not  retain  a  fourth,  then  the  stipu-
lations termed  empts&  et  venditse,  here-
ditatis, were  made  between  them.  But
if  the  instituted  heir  refused  to  enter
on  the  inheritance,  alleging  that  he
feared  he  should  lose  by  doing  so,  it
was  provided,  by  the  senatus-consul-
tum  Fegasianiim,  that,  on  the  demand
of  him  to  whom  he  had  been  requested
to  restore  the  inheritance,  he  should,
under  an  order  of  the  prsetor,  enter  on
the  inheritance,  and  restore  it ;  and
that  all  actions  might  be  brought  by
or  against  him  who  received  the  inhe-
ritance, as  in  a  case  falling  under  the
senatus-consultuTYh  Trehellianum.  And
in  this  case  stipulations  are  not  neces-
sary, for  the  heir,  who  restores  the
inheritance,  is  secured,  and  all  actions
concerning  an  inheritance  are  trans-

252

LIB.  I.I.      TIT.  XXIII.

ferred  to  and  against  liim,  by  whom
it  is  received,  there  being,  in  this  in-
stance, a  concurrent  a^Dplication  of
both  aenatus-consulta.

Gai.  ii.  255-258.

The  senatus-consultum  Trehellianum  was  not  abrogated  by  the
Pegasianum.  They  applied  to  different  cases.  If  the  fourth  was
expressly  reserved  to  the  Iteres  Jiduciarius,  he  took  the  other
three  parts,  and  immediately  restored  or  transferred  them  to  the
Jideicommis sarins,  who  had  the  position  of  heres  fideicommissarius,
and  all  the  actions  belonging  to  the  inheritance,  so  far  as  his
share  extended.  But  if  the  fourth  was  not  reserved,  the  senatus-
consultum  Pegasianum  became  applicable.  Thejiduciarius  heres
retained  the  fourth,  and  ihejideicommissarius  held  the  position  of  a
legatee.  The  heres  institutus  might,  however,  not  choose  to
retain  the  fourth.  He  might  enter  on  the  inheritance,  and  at
once  voluntarily  transfer  the  whole  to  the  fideicommissarius.  The
jurists  were  divided  in  opinion  as  to  the  senatus-consultum  under
which  he  then  entered.  Gains  thinks  it  was  under  the  Pegasi-
anum. (GrAi.  ii.  256.  7.)  If  he  refused  to  enter  on  the  inheri-
tance, the  praetor  compelled  him,  by  a  power  given  in  the  senatus-
consultum  Pegasianum,  and  he  was  placed  exactly  in  the  same
position  as  if  he  had  entered  under  the  senatus-consultum  Tre-
hellianum. He  had  no  fourth  reserved  for  him ;  and  all  action
passed   at  once   to  the  fideicommissarius.

7.  Sed  quia  stipulationes  ex  se-
natus-consulto  Pegasiano  descenden-
tes  et  ipsi  antiquitati  displicuerunt  ;
et  quibusdam  casibus  captiosas  eas
homo  excelsi  ingenii  Papinianus
appellat,  et  nobis  in  legibus  magis
simplicitas  quam  difficultas  i^lacet,
ideo  omnibus  nobis  suggestis  tarn
similitudinibus  quam  differentiis
utriusque  senatus-consulti,  placuit,
exploso  senatus-consulto  Pegasia-
no quod  postea  supervenit,  omnem
auctoritatem  Trebelliano  senatus-
consulto  prcestare,  ut  ex  eo  fidei-
commissarise  hereditates  restituan-
tur,  sive  habeat  heres  ex  voluntate
testatoris  quartam,  sive  plus  sive
minus  sive  nihil  penitus  :  ut  tunc,
quando  vel  nihil  vel  minus  quarta
apud  eum  remanet,  liceat  ei  vel
quartam  vel  quod  deest  ex  nostra
auctoritate  retinere  vel  repetere  so-
lutum,  quasi  ex  Trebelliano  senatus-
consulto  pro  rata  portione  actionibus
tam  in  heredem  quam  in  fideicom-
missarium  competentibus.  Si  vero
totam  hereditatem  sponte  restitue-
rit,  omnes  hereditarise  actiones  fidei-

7.  But,  as  the  stipulations,  which
arose  from  the  senatus-consultum  Pega-
sianum, were  displeasing  even  to  the
ancients,  and  Papinian,  a  man  of  great
genius,  considers  them  in  some  cases  as
cai)tious  ;  and,  as  we  prefer  simplicity
to  complicity  in  matters  of  law,  we
have  been  pleased,  upon  comparing
the  points  of  agTeement  and  disagree-
ment in  these  two  senatus-consulta,  to
abrogate  the  senatus-consultum  Pegasia-
num, which  was  subsequent  to  the
senatus-consultum,  Trehellianum,  and  to
give  an  exclusive  authority  to  the  se-
natus-consultum Trehellianum,  by  which
all  Meicommissary  inheritances  shall
be  restored  for  the  future,  whether
the  testator  has  given  by  his  will  a
fourth  part  of  his  estate  to  the  insti-
tuted heir,  or  more,  or  less,  or  even
nothing,  so  that,  when  nothing  is  given
to  the  heir,  or  less  than  a  fourth  part,
he  may  be  permitted  to  retain  a  fourth,
or  as  much  as  will  make  up  the  defi-
ciency, by  virtue  of  our  authority,  or
to  demand  repayment  of  it  if  he  has
paid  it  over ;  and  actions  may  be
brought  both  against  the  heir  and  the

LIB.  II.      TIT,  XXIII.

253

commissario  et  adversus  eum  com-
petuiit.  Sed  etiam  id  quod  prfeci-
pimm  Pegasiani  senatus- consult!
fuerat,  ut  quando  recusabat  lieres
scriptus  sibi  datam  hereditatem
adire,  necessitas  ei  imponeretur  to-
tam  hereditatem  volenti  fideicom-
missario  restituere,  et  omnes  ad
eum  et  contra  eum  transire  actiones,
et  hoc  transponimus  ad  senatus-
consultum  Trebellianum  :  ut  ex  hoc
solo  et  necessitas  heredi  imponatur,
si  ipso  nolente  adire  fideicommissa-
rius  desiderat  restitui  sibi  heredita-
tem, nullo  nee  damno  nee  commodo
apud  heredem  remanente.

fideicommissarius  according  to  their  re-
spective shares,  as  if  under  the  senatus-
consuUum  Trebellianum.  But,  should
the  heir  voluntarily  restore  the  whole
inheritance,  all  actions  concerning  an
inheritance  may  be  brought  either  by
or  against  the  jideicommissarius.  And,
as  to  the  most  important  provision  of
the  senatus  -  consultum  Pegasiauum,
that,  when  an  instituted  heir  refused
to  accept  an  inheritance,  he  might  be
constrained  to  restore  it  to  the  Jidei-
commissarius if  he  demanded  it,  and  to
transfer  all  actions  to  and  against  him,
we  have  transferred  this  provision  to
the  senatus-consultum  Trebellianum,  by
which  alone  this  obligation  is  now  laid
upon  the  heir,  when  he  himself  re-
fuses to  enter  on  the  inheritance,  and
the  fideicommissarius  is  desirous  that
it  should  be  restored,  the  heir  in  this
case  receiving  neither  gain  nor  loss.

Justinian  unites  tlie  two  senatus-consulta  into  one,  giving  them
the  name  of  the  senatus-consultinn  Trehellianum.  The  heir  is  to
retain  a  fourth,  as  under  the  senatus-consultum  Pegasianum,  but
actions  are  to  be  brought  for  or  against  the  heir  and  \hQ  Jideicom-
missarius in  proportion  to  their  ^\\2iVQ^,ih.Q  Jideicommissarius  being
thus  in  loco  heredis  as  to  his  share,  asunder  i\\Q  senatus-consultuDt
Trehellianum,  If  the  heir  would  not  enter,  then  he  was  compelled
to  do  so,  but  was  protected  against  all  loss,  as  under  the  senatus-
consultum  Pegasianum,

Before  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  the  heres  could  not  re-
demand  the  fourth,  if  he  had  once  paid  it  over.  (Paul.  Sent,
iv.  3.  4.)

8.  But  it  makes  no  dijQTerence
whether  the  heir  is  instituted  to  the
whole  inheritance,  and  is  requested  to
restore  the  whole  or  a  part,  or  whether
being  instituted  to  a  part  only,  he  is
requested  to  restore  that  entire  part,
or  a  portion  of  it,  for  we  enjoin  that
the  same  rules  be  observed  in  the
latter  case,  as  in  case  of  restitution  of
the  whole.

8.  ]N"ihil  autem  interest,  utrum
aliquis  ex  asse  heres  institutus  aut
totam  hereditatem  aut  pro  parte  re-
stituere, an  ex  parte  heres  institutus
aut  totam  eam  partem  aut  partem
partis  restituere  rogatus  sit ;  nam  et
hoc  casu  eadem  observari  prsecipi-
mus,  qu{3e  in  totius  hereditatis  resti-
tutione  diximus.

Gai.  ii.  259.

9.  Si  quis  una  aliqua  re  deducta
sive  pra3cepta  quse  quartam  continet,
veluti  fundo  vel  alia  re,  rogatus  sit
restituere  hereditatem,  simili  modo
ex  Trebelliano  senatus-consulto  re-
stitutio fiat,  perinde  ac  si  quarta
parte  retenta  rogatus  esset  reliquam
hereditatem  restituere.  Sed  illud
interest,  quod  altero  casu,  id  est,
cum  deducta  sive  proecepta  aliqua  re
restituitur  hereditas,  in  solidum  ex
eo  senatus-consulto  actiones  transfe-

9.  If  an  heir  is  requested  by  a
testator  to  give  up  an  inheritance,
after  deducting  or  excepting  some
particular  thing,  equivalent  to  a  fourth
of  the  whole,  as  a  piece  of  land,  or
anything  else,  he  will  give  it  up  under
the  senatus-consultum  Trebellianum,
exactly  as  if  he  had  been  requested  to
restore  the  remainder  of  an  inheri-
tance, after  reserving  a  fourth.  But
there  is  this  difference,  that,  in  the
first  case,  when  an  heir  is  requested

254

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

to  give  up  an  inheritance,  after  de-
ducting or  excepting  a  particular
thing,  then,  according  to  that  senatus-
consultum,  all  actions  are  transferred
to  and  against  the  fideicommissarius,
and  what  remains  to  the  heir  is  free
from  all  incumbrance,  as  if  acquired
by  legacy.  In  the  second  case,  when
an  heir  is  requested  in  general  terms
to  give  up  an  inheritance  after  re-
taining a  fourth  to  himself,  all  actions
are  proportionably  divided  ;  those
which  regard  the  three-fourths  of  the
estate  being  transferred  to  the  fidei-
commissarius, and  those  which  regard
the  one -fourth  to  the  heir.  And,
even  if  an  heir  is  requested  to  give
up  an  inheritance,  after  making  a
deduction  or  exception  of  some  par-
ticular thing,  which  comprises  the
greatest  part  of  the  whole  inheritance,
all  actions  are  still  transferred  to  the
fideicommissarius,  who  ought  always,
therefore,  to  consider  whether  it  will
be  expedient  or  not,  that  the  inherit-
ance should  be  given  up  to  him.  All
this  applies  equally,  whether  an  heir
is  requested  to  give  up  an  inheri-
tance after  a  deduction  or  exception  of
two,  or  more,  particular  things,  or  of
a  certain  simi  of  money,  which  may
comprise  a  fourth  or  even  the  greatest
part  of  the  inheritance.  What  we  have
said  of  an  heir,  who  is  instituted  to
the  whole  of  an  inlieritance,  applies
equally  to  one  who  is  instituted  only
to  a  part.

D.  xxxvi.  1.  1.  16.  21 ;  D.  xxxvi.  1.  30.  3.

If  the  testator  gave  a  particular  object  to  the  heres  institutes
which  was  equal  in  value  to  the  fourth  of  the  inheritance,  the
law  considered  this  as  a  specific  legacy  given  to  the  heres»  The
fideicommissarius  took  the  whole  inheritance  except  this  part,  and
all  the  actions  of  the  whole  inheritance  were  transferred  to  him.
Justinian  retains  this  distinction  between  a  particular  object
being  given,  and  a  general  direction  to  retain  a  fourth.  If  a
particular  object  were  given  not  equal  in  value  to  a  fourth,  the
heir  would  retain  enough  to  complete  his  fourth ;  and  all  actions
relating  to  the  part  so  retained  would  pass  to  him,  and  all  others
to  \\\Q  fideicommissarius,     (Cod.  vi.  50.  11.)

runtur,  et  res  qufe  remanet  apud
heredem  sine  ullo  onere  heredita-
rio  apud  eum  remanet,  quasi  ex
legato  ei  acquisita ;  altero  vero
casu,  id  est,  cum  quarta  parte  re-
tenta  rogatus  est  heres  restituere
hereditatem  et  restituit,  scinduntur
actiones,  et  pro  dodrante  quidem
transferuntur  ad  fideicommissarium ,
pro  quadrante  remanent  apud  here-
dem. Quin  etiam,  licet  una  re  aliqua
deducta  aut  prcecepta  restituere  ali-
quis  hereditatem  rogatus  est,  qua
maxima  pars  hereditatis  contineatiu",
{©que  in  solidum  transferuntur  ac-
tiones, et  secum  deliberare  debet  is
cui  restituitur  hereditas,  an  expe-
diat  sibi  restitui.  Eadem  scilicet
interveniunt,  et  si  duabus  pluri-
busve  deductis  praeceptisve  rebus
restituere  hereditatem  rogatus  sit  ;
sed  et  si  certa  summa  deducta  prse-
ceptave,  qure  quartam  vel  etiam
maximam  partem  hereditatis  con-
tinet,  rogatus  sit  aliquis  heredita-
tem restituere,  idem  juris  est.  Quae
autem  diximus  de  eo  qui  ex  asse
heres  institutus  est,  eadem  transfe-
xemus  et  ad  eum  qui  ex  parte  heres
ficriptus  est.

!

10.  Prseterea  intestatus  quoque
moriturus  potest  rogare  eum,  ad
quern  bona  sua  vel  legitimo  jure
vel  honorario  pertinere  intelligit,  ut
hereditatem  suam  totam  partemve
ejus,  aut  rem  aliquam,  veluti  fun-

10.  Moreover,  a  man  about  to  die
intestate,  may  request  the  person,  to
whom  his  estate  will  pass,  either  by
the  civil  or  pra3torian  law,  to  give  up
to  a  third  person  the  whole  inherit-
ance, or  a  part  of  it,  or  any  particular

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIII.

255

dum,  liominem,  pecuniam,  alicui  thing,  as  a  piece  of  land,  a  slave,  or  a
restituat  ;  cnm  alioqnin  legata  nisi  sum  of  money.  Legacies,  on  the  con-
ex  testamento  non  valeant.  trary,  are  only  valid  when  given  by

testament.

Gai.  ii.  270  ;  D.  xxxi.  36.

Antoninus  Pius  extended  the  provisions  of  the  senatu^-con-
sulta  Trebellianum  and  Pegasianum  to  trusts  imposed  on  heredes
ah  intestato.     (D.  xxxv.  2.  18.)

11.  Eum  quoque  cui  aliquid  re-  11.  A  Jideicoynmissarius  may   also

stitiiitur,  potest  rogare  ut  id  rursiim  himself  be  requested  to  give  up  to
alii,  aut  totum  aut  pro  parte,  vel  another  either  the  whole  or  a  part  of
etiam  aliquid  aliud  restituat.  what  he   receives,    or  even    anything

else.

Gai.  ii.  271.

l^h.Q  Jidcicommissarius ,  who  was  thus  only  a  vehicle  to  pass  on
the  inheritance  to  another  fideicommissarius,  could  not  retain  a
fourth  for  himself.  The  object  of  the  lex  Falcidia  was  merely  to
secure  an  heir,  not  in  all  cases  to  give  a  fourth  to  the  person  who
virtually  had  the  inheritance  ;  but  when  the  heir  entered  on  the
inheritance  by  order  of  the  praetor,  then  the  fideicommissarius
stood  in  the  place  of  the  heir,  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  apply  the
lex  Falcidia,  as  if  representing  the  heir,  against  legatees,  but  not
against  a  second  Jideiconunissarius.     (D.  xxxvi.  1.  63.  4.)

12.  Et  quia  prima  fideicommis-
sorum  cunabula  a  fide  heredum
pendent,  et  tam  nomen  quam  sub-
stantiam  acceperunt,  et  ideo  divus
Augustus  ad  necessitatem  juris  ea
detraxit,  nuper  et  nos  eumdem  prin-
cipem  superare  contendentes,  ex
facto  quod  Tribonianus,  vir  excel-
sus,  qusestor  sacri  palatii  suggessit,
constitutionem  fecimus  per  quam
disposuimus  :  si  testator  fidei  heredis
sui  commisit  ut  vel  hereditatem  vel
speciale  fideicommissum  restituat,  et
neque  ex  scriptura  neque  ex  quin-
que  testium  numero  qui  in  fideicom-
missis  legitimus  esse  noscitur,  possit
res  manifestari,  sed  vel  pauciores
quam  quinque,  vel  nemo  penitus
testis  intervenerit,  tunc  sive  pater
heredis  sive  alius  quicumque  sit  qui
fidem  heredis  elegerit,  et  ab  eo  resti-
tui  aliquid  voluerit,  si  heres  i)erfidia
tentus  adimplere  fidem  recusat  ne-
gando  rem  ita  esse  subsecutam,  si
fideicommissarius  jusjnrandum  ei  de-
tulerit,  cum  prius  ipse  de  calumnia
juraverit,  necesse  eum  habere  vel
jusjurandum  subire  quod  nihil  tale
a  testatore  audivit,  vel  recusantem
ad  fideicommissi  vel  universitatis  vel
specialis    solutionem    coarctari,    ne

12.  Originally  all  fiduciary  gifts
depended  only  upon  the  good  faith  of
the  heir  :  whence  they  took  their  name
as  well  as  their  character.  To  remedy
this,  the  Emperor  Augustus  made  them
obUgatory  in  law,  and  we  have  lately
endeavoured  to  surpass  that  prince  ;
and,  on  the  occasion  of  a  case  brought
to  our  notice  by  the  most  eminent  Tri-
bonian,  the  qusestor  of  our  sacred  pa-
lace, we  have  enacted  by  a  constitu-
tion, that  if  a  testator  has  entrusted  to
the  faith  of  his  heir  the  restoration
of  an  inheritance,  or  any  particular
thing,  and  the  fact  cannot  be  proved
either  by  any  writing  or  by  five  wit-
nesses (the  legal  number  in  such  cases),
there  having  been  fewer,  or  perhaps
no  witnesses  present,  then,  whether  it
is  his  father  who  has  thus  trusted  to
the  good  faith  of  the  heir,  and  begged
him  to  restore  the  inheritance,  or
whether  it  is  any  one  else,  if  the  heir
perfidiously  refuse  to  make  the  resti-
tution, and  deny  the  whole  transac-
tion, the  Jldeicommissarius,  having  pre-
viously himself  sworn  to  his  own  good
faith,  may  put  the  heir  to  his  oath  ;
and  thus  force  him  either  to  deny
having  received  any  such  trust  upon
oath,  or  to  fulfil  it,  whether  it  relate  to

256

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIV.

pereat  ultima  voluntas  testatoris
tidei  heredis  commissa.  Eadem  ob-
servari  censuimus,  et  si  a  legatario
vel  fideiconimissario  aliquid  similiter
relictum  sit.  Quod  si  is  a  quo  relic-
turn  dicitur,  confiteatur  quidem  a  se
aliquid  relictum  esse,  sed  ad  legis
subtilitatem  decurrat,  omnimodo
solvere  cogendus  est.

tlie  whole  inheritance  or  to  some  par-
ticular thing  ;  and  this  is  allowed,  lest
the  last  wishes  of  a  testator,  committed
to  the  faith  of  an  heir,  should  be  de-
feated. The  same  process  may  be
adopted  against  a  legatee,  or  ajideicom-
missarius  charged  with  a  restitution.
And  if  any  one  so  charged  admits  the
trust,  but  endeavours  to  shelter  him-
self in  the  subtleties  of  the  law,  he  may
be  compelled  to  perform  his  duty.

C.  vi.  42.  32.

De  calumnia  juraverit,  that  Is,  he  must  swear  beforehand  that
he  is  acting  honajide,  and  not  inventing  a  ground  of  litigation.

Tit.  XXIY.  DE  SINGULIS  REBUS  PER  FIDEI-
COMMISSUM  RELICTIS.

Potest  autem  quis  etiam  singulas
res  per  fideicommissum  relinquere,
veluti  fundum,  hominem,  vestem,
aurum,  argentum,  pecuniam  nume-
ratam  ;  et  vel  ipsum  heredem  rogare
ut  alicui  restituat,  vel  legatarium,
quamvis  a  legatario  legari  non  possit.

Gai.  ii.  260.  271.

A  person  may  also  leave  particu-
lar things  by  a  Jideicommissum,  as  a
piece  of  land,  a  slave,  a  garment,  gold,
silver,  pieces  of  money ;  and  he  may
request  either  his  heir  to  restore  them,
or  a  legatee,  although  a  legatee  cannot
be  charged  with  a  legacy.

1.  Potest  autem  non  solum  pro-
prias  res  testator  per  fideicommis-
sum relinquere,  sed  heredis  aut
legatarii  aut  fideicommissarii  aut
cujuslibet  alterius.  Itaque  et  le-
gatarius  et  fideicommissarius  non
solum  de  ea  re  rogari  potest,  ut
earn  alicui  restituat  quae  ei  relicta
sit,  sed  etiam  de  alia,  sive  ipsius
sive  aliena  sit  :  hoc  solum  obser-
vandum  est,  ne  plus  quisquam  roge-
tur  alicui  restituere,  quam  ipse  ex
testament©  ceperit ;  nam  quod  am-
plius  est,  inutiliter  relinquitur.  Cum
autem  aliena  res  per  fideicommissum
relinquitur,  necesse  est  ei  qui  roga-
tus  est,  aut  ipsam  redimere  et  prse-
stare  aut  aestimationem  ejus  solvere.

1.  A  testator  may  leave  by  Jidei-
commiiissumj  not  only  his  own  property,
but  also  that  of  his  heir,  of  a  legatee,
of  a  fideicommissariiis,  or  of  any  other
person  ;  so  that  a  legatee  or  Jideicom-
tnissarius  may  not  only  be  requested
to  give  what  has  been  left  to  him,  but
what  is  his  own,  or  even  what  is  the  pro-
perty of  another.  The  only  rule  to  be  ob-
served is,  that  no  one  shall  be  requested
to  restore  more  than  he  has  received
under  the  testament  :  for  as  to  the
excess  the  disposition  is  inefiectual.
And ,  when  the  j^roperty  of  another  is
left  by  a  fideicommissum,  the  person
requested  to  restore  it  is  obliged  either
to  obtain  from  the  proprietor  and  deli-
ver the  thing  itself,  or  to  pay  its  esti-
mated value.

Gai.  ii.  261,  262.

Ulpian  {Reg.  25.  5)  expresses  the  power  of  disposal  hy  Jidei-
commissum, by  saying  that  everything  could  be  disposed  of  in
that  way,  that  could  be  given  by  a  legacy  per  damnationem.

Quod  amplius  est,  inutiliter  relinquitur.  If,  however,  the
thino-  which  the  fideicommissarius  was  to  give  belonged  to  him-
self, he  was  obliged  to  give  it,  whatever   might  be   its   value.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXIV.

257

if  he  accepted  what  was  given  to  him  by  the  fideicommissum,  as
he  was  considered  to  have  had  an  opportunity  of  exercising  his
judgment,  and  not  to  have  valued  his  own  thing  more  highly  than
that  which  he  received.     (D.  xl.  5.  24.  12.)

2.   Libertas    quoque     servo    per
£deicommissum  dari  potest,  ut  heres
eum  rogetiir  manumittere,  vel  lega-
tarius    vel     fideicommissarius  :    nee
interest  iitrum  de  suo  proprio  servo
testator  roget,  an  de  eo  qui   ipsius
heredis  aut   legatarii  vel  etiam  ex-
tranei  sit  :  itaque  et  alieniis  servus
redimi  et  manumitti  debet.     Quod
si  dominus  eum  non  vendat,  si  modo
nihil    ex   judicio    ejus   qui   reliquit
libertatem,  recepit,  non  statim   ex-
tinguitur    fideicommissaria    libertas
sed   differtur  ;    quia   possit  tempore
procedente,  ubicumque  occasio  servi
redimendi  fuerit,  prsestari  libertas.
Qui   autem  ex   fideicommissi  causa
manumittitur,  non  testatoris  fit  li-
bertus,  etiamsi  testatoris  servus  sit,
sed  ejus  qui  manumittit  ;  at  is  qui
directo  testamento   liber  esse  jube-
tur,  ipsius  testatoris  libertus  fit,  qui
etiam  Orcinus  appellatur.     Nee  alius
ullus  directo  ex  testamento  liberta-
tem habere  potest,  quam  qui  utroque
tempore    testatoris    fuerit,   et    quo
faceret  testamentum   et   quo  more-
retur  :   directo  autem  libertas  tunc
dari  videtur,  cum  non  ab  alio   ser-
vum  manumitti  rogat,  sed  velut  ex
suo  testamento  libertatem  ei  compe-
tere  vult.

Gal  ii.  263-

2.  Freedom  may  also  be  conferred
upon  a  slave  by  a  Jideicommissum  :  for
an  heir,  legatee,    or  Jideicom'tnissarius
may  be  requested  to  enfranchise  him  ;
nor  does  it  signify  whether  it  is  of  his
own  slave   that  the   testator  requests
the  manumission,  or  of  the  slave  of  his
heir,  or  of  a  legatee,  or  of  a  stranger  ;
and  therefore,  when  a  slave  is  not  the
testator's   own  property,  he  must  be
bought,  and  enfranchised.     But,  if  the
proprietor  of  the  slave  refuses  to  sell
him,  as  he  may,  if  he  has  taken  no-
thing under  the  testament,  yet  the  free-
dom given  by   the  jideicommissum  is
not  extinguished,    but   deferred   only
until  it  may  be  possible  in  the  course
of  time,    on  any  occasion  offering   of
purchasing  the  slave,  to  efiect  his  en-
franchisement.    The  slave  who  is  en-
franchised in  pursuance  of  a  Jideicom-
missum, does  not  become  the  freedman
of  the  testator,  although  he  was  the
testator's  own  slave,  but  he  becomes
the    freedman    of    that    person    who
enfranchises   him.      But  a  slave  who
receives  his  liberty  directly  from  the
testament,  becomes   the    freedman  of
the  testator,  and  is  said  to  be  Orcinus ;
and  no  one  can  obtain  liberty  directly
by    testament,    unless    he    were    the
slave  of  the  testator,  both  at  the  time
of  the  testator's  making  his  testament,
and  also  at  that  of  his  death.     Liberty
is  given  directly,  when  a  testator  does
not  request  that  freedom  be  given  to
his  slave  by  another,  but  gives  it  him-
self by  virtue  of  his  own  testament.

267 ;  C.  vii.  4.  6.

It  was  the  opinion  of  Gains,  that  if  the  master  of  the  slave
refused  to  sell  the  slave  for  a  reasonable  price,  the  fideicommissum
perished.  (Gai.  ii.  265.)  Justinian,  in  accordance  with  a  rescript
of  the  Emperor  Alexander  (C.  vii.  4.  6),  decides  that  it  is  only
delayed.

If  a  testator  enfranchised  directly  a  slave  that  could  not  be
so  enfranchised,  the  gift  of  liberty  would  be  as  valid  as  Vijidei-
commissum.

Orcinus,  from  Orcus ;  because  he  is  the  freedman  of  a  dead
person.

3.  Verba  autem   fideicommisso-  3.  The   terms   generally   used    in

rum  hsec  maxime  in  usu  habentur  :     making  Jideicommissa  are  the  follow-

S

258

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXV.

peto,  rogo,  volo,  mando,  fidei  tuse  ing  :  I  request,  I  ask,  I  desire,  I
committo.  Quae  perinde  singula  commit,  I  entrust  to  thy  good  faith  ;
firma  sunt,  atque  si  omnia  in  unum  and  each  of  them  is  of  as  much  force
congesta  essent.  separately  as  all  of  them  placed  toge-

ther.

Gai.  ii.  249.

The  expressions  by  which  ^  Jideicommissum  was  created  were*
quite  immaterial,  provided  that  the  wishes  of  the  testator  could
be  ascertained.

Tit.  XXY.     DE  CODICILLIS.

Codicils  were  certainly  not  in  use
before  the  reign  of  Augustus  ;  for
Lucius  Lentulus,  to  whom  the  origin
of  Jideico7nmissa  may  be  traced,  was
the  first  who  introduced  codicils.
When  dying  in  Africa,  he  wrote
several  codicils,  which  were  confirmed
by  his  testament  ;  and  in  these  he
requested  Augustus  by  a  fideicom-
wissuni  to  do  something  for  him.  The
emperor  complied  with  the  request,
and  many  other  persons,  following
his  example,  discharged  Jideicommissa
committed  to  them  ;  and  the  daughter
of  Lentulus  paid  debts,  which  in
strictness  of  law  were  not  due  from
her.  It  is  said,  that  Augustus,  having
called  together  upon  this  occasion  per-
sons learned  in  the  law,  and  among
others  Trebatius,  whose  opinion  was  of
the  greatest  authority,  asked  whether
codicils  could  be  admitted,  and  whether
they  Avere  not  repugnant  to  the  prin-
ciples of  law.  Trebatius  advised  the
emperor  to  admit  them,  as  they  were
most  convenient  and  necessary  to  citi-
zens, on  account  of  the  great  and  long
journeys  v/hich  they  were  frequently
obliged  to  take,  during  which  a  man
who  could  not  make  a  testament,  might
be  able  to  make  codicils.  And  subse-
quently, Labeo  himself  having  made
codicils,  no  one  afterwards  doubted
their  perfect  validity.

Codicilli  were  small  tablets  on  which  memorandums  or  letters
were  written.  A  testator  might  naturally  address  a  short  letter
giving  short  directions  to  his  heir.  When  Jideicommissa  came  to
be  enforced,  these  letters  or  directions  w^ere  enforced  as  creating
Jideicommissa.  As  under  the  Roman  law  a  testator  could  make
no  alteration  in  liis  testament  without  making  an  entirely  new
testament,  the  use  of  codicils  was  obviously  great.  Codicils
might  be  made  without  there  being  any  testament  at  all.     They

Ante  Augusti  tempora  constat
codicillorum  jus  non  fuisse,  sed
primus  Lucius  Lentulus,  ex  cujus
persona  etiam  fideicommissa  coepe-
runt,  codicillos  introduxit.  Nam
cum  decederet  in  Africa,  scripsit
codicillos  testamento  confirmatos,
quibus  ab  Augusto  petiit  per  fidei-
commissum  ut  faceret  aliquid  ;  et
cum  divus  Augustus  voluntatem
ejus  implesset,  deinceps  reliqui  ejus
auctoritatem  secuti  fideicommissa
prsestabant,  et  filia  Lentuli  legata
quae  jure  non  debebat,  solvit.  Di-
citur  autem  Augustus  convocasse
prudentes,  inter  quos  Trebatium
quoque  cujus  tunc  auctoritas  maxi-
ma erat,  et  qucesisse  an  posset  hoc
recipi,  nee  absonans  a  juris  ratione
codicillorum  usus  'esset ;  et  Tre-
batium suasisse  Augusto,  quod
diceret  utilissimum  et  necessarium
hoc  civibus  esse  propter  magnas  et
longas  peregrinationes  quae  apud
veteres  fuissent,  ubi  si  quis  testa-
mentum  facere  non  posset,  tamen
codicillos  posset.  Post  quae  tempora,
cum  et  Labeo  codicillos  fecisset,
jam  nemini  dubium  erat  quin  codi-
cilli jure  Optimo  admitterentur.

LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXV.

259

were  then  directions  addressed  to  the  heredes  ah  intestato.  But
if  there  was  a  testament,  they  were  always  considered  as  attached
to  it :  if  the  testamentary  dispositions  failed,  they  failed  also,  and
all  their  provisions  were  taken  with  reference  to  the  time  when
the  testament  was  made.     (D.  xxix.  7.  2.  2.  and  3.  2.)

A  testator  by  inserting  an  express  clause  to  that  effect,
termed  by  commentators  clausula  codicillaris,  might  provide  that
his  testament,  if  invalid  as  a  testament,  should  take  effect  as  a
codicil,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  as  codicils,  for  the  word
was  generally  used  in  the  plural.

As  to  Labeo  and  Trebatius,  see  Introd.  sec.  20.

1.  Not  only  a  person  who  has
already  made  his  testament,  may  make
codicils,  but  even  a  person  dying  in-
testate may  create  Jidelcommissa  by
codicils.  But  when  codicils  are  made
before  a  testament,  they  cannot  take
effect,  according  to  Papinian,  unless
confirmed  by  a  special  disposition  in
the  testament.  But  the  Emperors
Severus  and  Antoninus  have  decided  by
rescript,  that  a  thing,  left  in  trust  by
codicils,  made  before  a  testament,  may
be  demanded  by  the  Jidc'tcomniissarlus,
if  it  appears  that  the  testator  has  not
abandoned  the  intention  which  he  at
first  expressed  in  the  codicils.

Gai.  ii.  270.

There  was  a  distinction  between  codicils  confirmed  by  testa-
ment, and  those  not  so  confirmed ;  for  if  codicils  were  confirmed
by  testament,  their  provisions  could  operate  to  give  legacies
or  appoint  a  tutor,  and  not  only  to  create  Jideicornmissa.  A
testator  could,  by  anticipation,  confirm  in  his  testament  any
codicils  he  mio-ht  thereafter  make.

1.  Non  tantum  autem  testamento
facto  potest  quis  codicillos  facere,
sed  intestato  quis  decedens  fidei-
committere  codicillis  potest.  Sed
cum  ante  testamentum  factum  codi-
cilli  facti  erant,  Papinianus  ait  non
aliter  vires  habere,  quam  si  speciali
postea  voluntate  confirmentur  ;  sed
divi  Severus  et  Antoninus  rescrip-
serunt,  ex  iis  codicillis  qui  testa-
mentum prsecedunt,  posse  fideicom-
missum  peti,  si  appareat  eum  qui
postea  testamentum  fecit,  a  volun-
tate quam  codicillis  expresserat,  non
recessisse.

(D.  xlix.  7.  8.)

2.  Codicillis  autem  hereditas
neque  dari  neque  adimi  potest,  ne
confundatur  jus  testamentorum  et
codicillorum ;  et  ideo  nee  exhere-
datio  scribi.  Directo  autem  here-
ditas codicillis  neque  dari  neque
adimi  potest  ;  nam  per  fideicom-
missum  hereditas  codicillis  jure  re-
linquitur,  Nee  conditionem  lieredi
institute  codicillis  adjicere  neque
substituere  directo  potest.

2.  An  inheritance  can  neither  be
given  nor  taken  away  by  codicils,  as
the  different  effect  of  testaments  and
codicils  would  be  thereby  confounded,
and  of  course,  therefore,  no  heir  can  be
disinherited  by  codicils.  But  it  is  onlj''
directly  that  an  inheritance  can  neither
be  given  nor  taken  away  by  codicils,
for  it  may  be  legally  disposed  of  in
codicils  by  means  of  a  Jideicommissuw,.
Nor,  again,  can  a  condition  be  imposed
on  the  institution  of  an  heir,  nor  a
direct  substitution  be  made,  by  codi-
cils.

Gai.  ii.  273  ;  D.  xxix.  7.  6.

3.  Codicillos  autem  etiam  plures
quis  facere  potest,  et  nullam  solem-
nitatem  ordinationis  desiderant.

3.  A  person  may  make  several  codi-
cils, and  they  require  no  solemnity  in
their  form.

D.

xxix.  7

s    2

6.  1.

260  LIB.  II.      TIT.  XXV.

Codicils  were  not  originally  subjected  to  any  rules  determin-
ing the  mode  in  which  they  were  made.  But  by  a  constitution
of  Theodoslus,  added  to  by  Justinian,  they  were  to  be  made  uno
contextii,  m  presence  of  five  witnesses,  and  the  witnesses  were  to
subscribe  them.  If  codicils  were  not  so  made,  then  the  fideicom-
mUsarius  could,  after  having  sworn  to  his  own  good  faith,  call  on
the  heir  to  deny  them  on  oath.     (C.  vi.  36.  8.)

LIBBE    TEETIUS.

Tit.  L  DE  HEEEDITATIBUS  QU^  AB  INTESTATO

DEFERUNTUR.

Intestatus  decedit,  qui  aut  om-  A  person  dies  intestate,  who  either

nino  testamentum  non  fecit,  aut  non  has  made  no  testament  at  all,  or  has
jure  fecit  ;  aut  id  quod  fecerat  rup-  made  one  not  legally  valid  ;  or  if  the
turn  irritumve  factum  est,  aut  nemo  testament  he  has  made  is  revoked,  or
ex  eo  heres  extitit.  made  useless ;  or   if  no  one  becomes

heir  under  it.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  ].

If  a  person  died  without  a  testament,  the  law  regulated  the
succession  to  the  inheritance.  So  also  it  did,  if  he  left  a  testa-
ment that  was  fatally  defective  in  form  {iion  jure  factum),  or  if
his  testament  was  revoked,  or,  in  the  language  of  Roman  law,
broken  {rupturn),  or  if  it  was  set  aside  as  inofficious,  or  made
useless  by  a  change  of  status  in  the  testator  {irritum),  or  if  no
heir  would  accept  the  inheritance  under  it.

If  there  was  no  testament  to  determine  the  succession,  the
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  gave  the  inheritance  first  to  the  sui
heredes,  who  were  also  necessarii  heredes^  that  is,  could  not
refuse  to  accept  the  inheritance ;  then  to  the  agnati ;  and  then,
if  the  deceased  was  a  member  of  a  gens,  to  the  gentiles.  In
default  of  agnati,  the  praetor  called  to  the  inheritance  the
co^?z«i2,  or  blood-relations.  (See  Introd.  sec.  45.)  Perhaps  the
succession  of  gentiles  lasted  to  a  time  later  than  that  of  this
praetorian  succession  of  the  cognati  ;  but,  at  any  rate,  it  did  not
outlast  the  Republic,  and,  therefore,  speaking  of  the  times  when
we  are  most  familiar  with  Roman  law,  we  may  say  that  the
succession  was  given  first  to  the  sui  heredes,  then  to  the  agnati,
then  to  the  cognati.  But  some  complication  was  introduced  into
the  rules  of  succession,  by  certain  classes  of  persons  being,  by
different  changes  in  the  law,  raised  from  the  rank  of  agnati  to
that  of  sui  heredes,  and  from  the  rank  of  cognati  to  that  of
agnati.     These  changes  are  not,  however,  very  difficult  to  follow.

262

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

if  we  divide  them  according  as  they  were  effected,  (1)  by  the
praetor,  (2)  by  senatus-tdnsulta,  and  Imperial  enactments  pre-
vious to  Justinian,  (3)  by  Justinian  himself.  The  first  Title
treats  of  the  succession  of  sui  heredes,  and  of  those  ranked  among
the  sui  heredes  ;  the  second  and  two  following  Titles  treat  of  the
succession  of  oc/nati,  and  of  those  ranked  among  agnati.  At  the
end  of  this  Title  will  be  found  a  short  summary  of  the  changes  in
the  law  relative  to  the  succession  of  sui  heredes  :  at  the  end  of
the  fourth  Title  one  will  be  found  of  the  chansies  relative  to  the
succession  of  agnati,

Justinian  altered  the  whole  mode  of  succession  to  intestates
by  the  118th  and  127th  Novels.  This  change,  being  effected
several  years  after  the  publication  of  the  Institutes,  should  not
be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the  consideration  of  the  law  ot
succession  existing  when  the  Institutes  were  published.  But  as
it  is  too  remarkable  and  too  well  known  a  part  of  Justinian's
legislation  to  remain  wholly  unnoticed,  a  short  account  of  it  will
be  given  at  the  end  of  the  ninth  Title,  which  closes  the  part  ot
the  Institutes  treating  of  successions  ab  intestato.

1.  Intestatoriim  autem  heredi-
tates  ex  lege  diiodecim  tabiilarum
primum  ad  suos  heredes  pertinent.

1.  The  inheritances  of  intestates,
by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
belong   in   the   first  place  to  the  sui

heredes.

Gai.  ill.  1.

2.  Sui  autem  heredes  existiman-
tur,  ut  et  supra  diximus,  qui  in  po-
testate  morientis  fuerint,  veluti
filiuis  filiave,  nepos  neptisve  ex  filio,
pronepos  proneptisve  ex  nepote  ex
filio  nato  prognatus  prognatave  ;
nee  interest  utrum  naturales  sint
liberi  an  adoi^tivi.  Quibus  con-
numerari  necesse  est  etiam  eos  qui
ex  legitimis  quidem  matrimoniis
non  sunt  progeniti,  curiis  tamen
civitatum  dati,  secundum  divalium
constitutionum  quje  super  his  po-
sitse  sunt  tenorem,  heredum  suorum
jura  nanciscuntur  ;  necnon  eos  quos
nostr^e  amplexfe  sunt  constitutiones
per  quas  jussimus,  si  quis  mulierem
in  suo  contubernio  copulaverit,  non
ab  initio  aflectione  maritali,  earn
tamen  cum  qua  poterat  habere  con-
jugium,  et  ex  ea  liberos  sustulerit,
postea  vero  affectione  procedente
etiam  nuptialia  instrumenta  cum
ea  fecerit,  et  filios  vel  filias  habu-
erit,  non  solum  eos  liberos  qui  post
dotem  editi  sunt,  justos  et  in  po-
testate  patris  esse,  sed  etiam  ante-
riores  qui  et  iis,  qui  postea  nati
sunt,  occasionem  legitimi  nominis
prsestiterunt.     Quod   obtinere   cen-

2.  And,  as  we  have  observed  be-
fore, those  are  sui  heredes  Avho,  at
the  death  of  the  deceased,  were
under  his  power ;  as  a  son  or  a
daughter,  a  grandson  or  a  grand-
daughter by  a  son,  a  great-grandson
or  great-granddaughter  by  a  grand-
son of  a  son  ;  nor  does  it  make  any
ditFerence  whether  these  children
are  natural  or  adopted.  We  must
also  reckon  among  them  those,  who,
though  not  born  in  lawful  wedlock,
nevertheless,  according  to  the  tenor
of  the  imperial  constitutions,  acquire
the  rights  of  sui  heredes  by  being  pre-
sented to  the  airigs.  of  their  cities  ;  as
also  those  to  whom  our  own  con-
stitutions refer,  which  enact  that,  if
any  person  has  lived  with  a  woman
not  originally  intending  to  marry  her,
but  whom  he  is  not  prohibited  to
marry,  and  shall  have  children  by
her,  and  shall  afterwards,  feeling
towards  her  the  affection  of  a  hus-
band, enter  into  an  act  of  marriage
with  her,  and  have  by  her  sons  or
daughters,  not  only  those  born  after
the  settlement  of  the  dowry  shall  be
legitimate,  and  in  the  power  of  their
father,   but    also   those   born   before,

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

263

who  gave  occasion  to  the  legitimacy
of  the  children  born  after.  And  this
law  shall  obtain,  although  no  children
are  born  subsequent  to  the  making
of  the  act  of  dowry,  or  those  born  are
all  dead.  But  a  grandson  or  grand-
daughter, a  great-grandson  or  great-
granddaughter,  is  not  reckoned
among  the  sui  heredes,  unless  the  per-
son preceding  them  in  degree  has
ceased  to  be  under  the  power  of  the
ascendant,  either  by  death,  or  some
other  means,  as  by  emancipation.
For,  if  a  son,  when  the  grandfather
died,  was  under  the  power  of  his
father,  the  grandson  cannot  be  suus
heres  of  his  grandfather  ;  and  so  with
regard  to  all  other  descendants.  Post-
humous children,  also,  who  would
have  been  under  the  power  of  their
father,  if  they  had  been  born  in  his
lifetime,  are  sui  heredes.

Gai.  iii.  1,  2;  C.  v.  27.  3.  10,  11.

The  sui  heredes  were  the  children,  whether  natural,  adoptive,
or  made  legitimate  (see  Bk.  i.  Tit.  10.  13),  in  the  power  of  the  de-
ceased at  the  time  of  his  death.  We  must  not  confuse  persons
made  sui  heredes  bv  the  later  legrislation,  as  these  leo-itimated
children  were,  with  those  permitted  to  rank  with  sui  heredes.

suimus,  etiam  si  non  progeniti
fuerint  post  dotale  instrumentum
confectum  liberi,  vel  etiam  nati  ab
hac  luce  fuerint  subtracti.  Ita  de-
mum  tamen  nepos  neptisve,  pro-
nepos  proneptisve,  suorum  heredum
numero  sunt,  si  prsecedens  persona
desierit  in  potestate  parentis  esse,
sive  morte  id  acciderit,  sive  alia
ratione,  veluti  emancipatione  :  nam
si  per  id  tempus  quo  quis  more-
retur,  filius  in  potestate  ejus  sit,
nepos  ex  eo  suus  heres  esse  non
potest ;  idque  et  in  ceteris  deinceps
liberorum  personis  dictum  intelli-
gimus.  Postumi  quoque,  qui  si
vivo  parente  nati  essent,  in  potes-
tate ejus  futuri  forent,  sui  heredes
sunt.

3.  Sui  autem  etiam  ignorantes
fiunt  heredes,  et  licet  furiosi  sint,
heredes  possunt  existere,  quia  qui-
bus  ex  causis  ignorantibus  nobis
acquiritur,  ex  his  causis  et  fariosis
acquiri  potest.  Et  statim  morte
parentis  quasi  continuatur  domi-
nium, et  ideo  nee  tutoris  auctori-
tate  opus  est  pupillis,  cum  etiam
ignorantibus  acquiratur  suis  here-
dibus  hereditas  ;  nee  curatoris  con-
sensu acquiritur  furioso,  sed  ipso
jure.

3.  Sui  heredes  may  become  heirs,
without  their  knowledge,  and  even
though  insane  ;  for  in  every  case  in
which  inheritances  may  be  acquired
without  our  knowledge,  they  may
also  be  acquired  by  the  insane.  At
the  death  of  the  father,  ownership  in
an  inheritance  is  at  once  continued  ;
accordingly,  the  authority  of  a  tutor
is  not  necessary,  as  inheritances  may
be  acquired  by  sui  heredes  without
their  knowledge  :  neither  does  an
insane  person  acquire  by  assent  of  his
curator,  but  by  operation  of  law.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  14.

Directly  the  succession  ab  intestato  commenced,  which  it  did
when  the  deceased  died  if  there  was  no  testament,  and  as  soon
as  it  was  ascertained  that  the  testament  was  ineffectual  if  a  tes-
tament had  been  made,  the  suus  heres  became  at  once  heir  with-
out any  act  of  his  own.  We  may,  however,  apply  here  what
we  have  already  said  of  the  power  to  abstain  altogether  from  the
inheritance  given  him  by  the  praetor.     (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  19.  2.)

4.  Interdum  autem,  licet  in  po-  4.   But  sometimes  a  child  becomes

testate  parentis  mortis  tempore  suus     a    suus    heres,   although   he   was    not
heres  non  fuerit,  tamen  suus  heres     under    power    at    the    death   of    IukS

264

LIB.  III.     TIT.  I.

parent!  efficitur,   veluti  si  ab  hosti-  parent ;  as  when  a  person  returns  from

bus  reversus  quis  fuerit  post  '^or-  captivity  after  the  death  of  his  father,

tern   patris  ;    jus    enim    postliminii  He  is  then  made  a  suus  heres  by  the

hoc  facit.  jus  postlimmii.

5.  Per  contrarium  evenit  ut,  licet
quis  in  familia  defuncti  sit  mortis
tempore,  tamen  suus  heres  non  fiat,
veluti  si  post  mortem  suam  pater
judicatus  fuerit  perduellionis  reus,
ac  per  hoc  memoria  ejus  damnata
fuerit  :  suum  enim  heredem  habere
non  potest,  cum  fiscus  ei  succedit ;
sed  potest  dici  ipso  jure  suum  here-
dem esse,  sed  desinere.

5.  On  the  contrary,  it  may  happen
that  a  child  who,  at  the  death  of
his  parent,  was  under  his  power,  is
not  his  suus  heres  :  as  when  a  parent,
after  his  decease,  is  adjudged  to
have  been  guilty  of  treason,  and  his
memory  is  thus  made  infamous.  He
can  then  have  no  suits  heres ^  as  it  is
the  fiscus  that  succeeds  to  his  estate.
In  this  case  it  may  be  said  that  there
has  in  law  been  a  suus  heres,  but  that
he  has  ceased  to  be  so.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  1.  3.

As  a  general  rule,  if  the  accused  died  before  conviction,  the
prosecution  was  at  an  end.  His  succession  went  to  his  heirs  by
testament  or  in  law.  But  to  this  there  was  one  exception.  If
a  person  charged  with  perdiiellio  (treason  against  the  state  or
emperor)  died  before  conviction,  the  prosecution  was  continued,
and  if  he  was  found  guilty,  his  memory  was  said  to  be  con-
demned {memoria  damnata  fuit),  and,  his  sentence  having  a  re-
trospective effect,  his  property  was  confiscated  exactly  as  if  he
had  been  condemned  in  his  lifetime.

0.  Cum  filius  filiave  et  ex  altero
filio  nepos  neptisve  existunt,  pariter
ad  hereditatem  avi  vocantur,  nee
qui  gradu  proximior  est,  ulteriorem
excludit  :  sequum  enim  esse  vide-
tur  nepotes  neptesque  in  patris  sui
locum  succedere.  Pari  ratione,  et
si  nepos  neptisve  sit  ex  filio,  et  ex
nepote  pronepos  proneptisve,  simul
vocantur.  Et  quia  placuit  nepotes
neptesque,  item  pronepotes  et  pro-
neptes  in  parentis  sui  locum  suc-
cedere, conveniens  esse  visum  est
non  in  capita  sed  in  stirpes  heredi-
tatem dividi,  ut  filius  partem  dimi-
diam  hereditatis  habeat,  et  ex  altero
filio  duo  pluresve  nepotes  alteram
dimidiam.  Item,  si  ex  duobus  filiis
nepotes  neptesve  extant,  ex  altero
unus  forte  aut  duo,  ex  altero  tres
aut  quatuor,  ad  unum  aut  duos  di-
midia  pars  pertineat,  ad  tres  vel
quatuor  altera  dimidia.

Gai.

6.   A   son,   or   a   daughter,   and   a
grandson       or      granddaughter       by
another  son,  are  called  equally  to  the
inheritance  ;    nor   does  the  nearer  in
degree    exclude    the    more    remote  ;
for  it  seems  just  that  grandsons  and
granddaughters     should     succeed     in
the   j)lace    of   their   father.     For  the
same   reason,    a   grandson   or   grand-
daughter   by    a    son,    and    a    great-
grandson   or   great-granddaughter  by
a     grandson,     are      called    together.
And     since     grandsons     and     grand-
daughters, great-grandsons  and  great-
granddaughters,    succeed   in   place  of
their   parent,    it   appeared    to    follow
that  inheritances  should  not  be  divided
per  capita,  but  per  stirpes  ;  so  that  a
son  should  possess  one  half,  and  the
grandchildren,  whether  two  or  more,
of  another  son,  the  other  half  of  an
inheritance.      So,    where     there     are
grandchildren  by  two  sons,  one  or  two
perhaps  by  the  one,  and- three  or  four
by  the  other,  the  inheritance  will  be-
long, half  to  the   grandchild   or   the
two   grandchildren   by   the    one    son,
and  half  to  the  three  or  four  grand-
children by  the  other  son.

iii.  7,  8.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

265

The  expressions  ^  dividing  per  stirpes  and  per  capita '  may
be  rendered,  dividing  by  the  *  stock  '  and  ^  by  the  head.'  An
inheritance  is  divided  '  by  the  head  '  when  each  head  or  person
of  those  who  take  has  an  equal  share  in  it ;  it  is  divided  '  by  the
stock '  when  one  share  is  distributed  amonof  all  who  are  descended
from  one  stock,  i.  e.  are  descended  from  the  person  who  would,  if
he  had  been  living,  have  taken  the  whole  share.

7.  Cum  autem  quaeritur  an  qiiis
suns  heres  existere  possit,  eo  tem-
pore quserendum  est  quo  certum  est
aliquem  sine  testamento  decessisse,
quod  accidit  et  destituto  testa-
mento. Hac  ratione,  si  Alius  ex-
heredatus  fuerit  et  extraneus  lieres
institutus,  et  filio  mortuo  postea
certum  fuerit  heredem  institutum
ex  testamento  non  fieri  heredem,
aut  quia  noluit  esse  heres  aut  quia
non  potuit,  nepos  avo  suus  heres
existet ;  quia  quo  tempore  certum
est  intestatum  decessisse  patrem-
familias,  solus  invenitur  nepos  :  et
hoc  certum  est.

7.  When  it  is  asked,  whether  such
a  person  is  a  suns  lieres,  we  must
look  to  the  time  at  which  it  was  cer-
tain that  the  deceased  died  without
a  testament,  including  therein  the
case  of  the  testament  being  aban-
doned. Thus,  if  a  son  is  disinhe-
rited and  a  stranger  is  instituted
heir,  and  after  the  death  of  the  son
it  becomes  certain  that  the  instituted
heir  will  not  be  heir,  either  because
he  is  unwilling  or  unable  to  be  so,
in  this  case  the  grandson  of  the  de-
ceased becomes  the  su%is  heres  of  his
grandfather;  for,  at  the  time  when
it  was  certain  that  the  deceased  died
intestate,  there  exists  only  the  grand-
child, and  of  this  there  can  be  no
doubt.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  1.  8  ;  D.  xxxviii.  6,  7.

8.  Et  licet  post  mortem  avi  natus
sit,  tamen  avo  vivo  conceptus,  mor-
tuo patre  ejus  posteaque  deserto  avi
testamento,  suus  heres  efiicitur.
Plane,  si  et  conceptus  et  natus
fuerit  post  mortem  avi,  mortuo
patre  suo  desertoque  postea  avi
testamento,  suus  heres  non  existit,
quia  nuUo  jure  cognationis  patrem
sui  patris  tetigit  :  sic  nee  ille  est
inter  liberos  avi,  quem  filius  eman-
cipatus  adoptaverat.  Hi  autem,
cum  non  sint  quantum  ad  heredi-
tatem  liberi,  neque  bonorum  pos-
sessionem petere  possunt  quasi
proximi  cognati.  Hsec  de  suis
heredibus.

8.  And  although  a  child  is  born
after  the  death  of  his  grandfather,
yet,  if  he  was  conceived  in  the  life-
time of  his  grandfather,  he  will,  if
his  father  is  dead,  and  his  grand-
father's testament  is  abandoned,
become  the  suus  lieres  of  his  grand-
father. But  a  child  both  conceived
and  born  after  the  death  of  his
grandfather,  could  not  become  the
suus  heres,  although  his  father  should
die  and  the  testament  of  his  grand-
father be  abandoned ;  because  he
was  never  allied  to  his  grandfather
by  any  tie  of  relationship.  Neither
is  a  person  adopted  by  an  eman-
cipated son  to  be  reckoned  among
the  children  of  the  father  of  his
adoptive  father.  And  not  only  are
these  adoptive  children  of  an  eman-
cipated son  incaj)able  of  taking  the
inheritance  as  children  of  the  deceased
grandfather,  but  they  cannot  demand
possession  of  the  goods  as  the  nearest
cognati.  Thus  much  concerning  sui
heredes.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  6,  7.

9.   Emancipati  autem  liberi  jure  9.    Emancipated   children   by   the

civili    nihil    juris    habent  :     neque     civil    law   have   no   right   to   the   in-

266

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

enim  siii  heredes  sunt,  quia  in
potestate  parentis  esse  desierunt,
neque  ullo  alio  jure  per  legem
duodecim  tabularum  vocantur  ;  sed
prffitor  naturali  fequitate  motus  dat
eis  bonorum  possessionem  undo
liberi,  perinde  ac  si  in  potestate
parentis  tempore  mortis  fuissent,
sive  soli  sint,  sive  cum  suis  lieredi-
bus  concurrant.  Itaque  duobus
liberis  extantibus,  emancipato  et
qui  tempore  mortis  in  potestate
fuerit,  sane  quidem  is  qui  in  potes-
tate fuerit,  solus  jure  civili  lieres
est,  id  est,  solus  suns  heres  est ;
sed  cum  emancipatus  beneficio  prpe-
toris  in  partem  admittitur,  evenit
ut  suus  heres  pro  parte  heres  fiat.

heritances  of  their  father ;  being  no
longer  under  the  power  of  their
parent,  they  are  not  his  sui  heredes,
nor  are  they  called  to  inherit  by  any
other  right  under  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables.  But  the  praetor,
obeying  natural  equity,  grants  them
the  possession  of  goods  called  unde
liberi,  as  if  they  had  been  under  the
power  of  their  father  at  the  time  of
his  death,  and  this,  whether  they
stand  alone,  or  whether  there  are
also  others,  who  are  sui  heredes.
Thus,  when  there  are  two  children,
one  emancipated,  and  the  other
under  power  at  his  father's  death,
the  latter,  by  the  civil  law,  is  alone
the  heir,  and  alone  the  suus  heres  :
but,  as  the  emancipated  son,  by  the
indulgence  of  the  praetor,  is  admitted
to  his  share,  the  sims  heres  becomes
heir  only  of  a  part.

Gal  iii.  19.  25,  26 ;  D.  xxxviii.  6.  1.

Not  only  emancipated  children,  but,  if  they  themselves  were
dead,  their  children  conceived  after  the  emancipation,  had  the
possessio  bonorum  given  them  by  the  praetor  (D.  xxxvii.  4.  5.
I)  ;  and  a  grandchild  conceived  before  the  emancipation,  and  who
remained  in  the  power  of  the  grandfather,  was  allowed  to  succeed
to  the  inheritance  of  the  emancipated  son.  The  praetor  could
not  give  these  persons  the  title  of '  heir,'  as  that  only  belonged  to
those  who  received  it  from  the. jus  civile-,  but  he  gave  them  pos-
sessio bonorum,  for  part  of  the  inheritance  [pro  parte).  If  the
emancipated  son  had  children  who  remained  in  the  power  of  the
emancipator,  he  shared  the  inheritance  with  them,  instead  of  ex-
cludino^  them.  (D.  xxxvii.  8.  1.  pr.  1.)  Emancipated  children
were,  however,  obliged  to  bring  into,  and  add  to,  the  inheritance
all  the  property  they  themselves  possessed  at  the  time  of  the
father's  death  (co//«f/r;  bonorum)  \  because,  if  they  had  remained  in
the  family,  all  that  they  had  acquired  would  have  been  acquired
for  the  paterfamilias,  and  thus  have  formed  part  of  the  inherit-
ance ;  and  a  married  daughter  succeeding  as  heres  sua  had  to
bring  into  the  inheritance  her  dowry  (collatio  dotis).  (C.  vi.  20.  4.)
When  a  person,  after  a  capitis  deminutio,  was  restitutus  in  inte-
grum, he  also  had  the  possessio  bonorum  given  him,  and  received
what  he  would  have  had  if  his  disability  had  not  prevented  him
from  succeeding  as  sicus  heres.     (D.  xxxvii.  4.  1.  9.)

10.  At  hi  qui  emancipati  a  pa-
rente  in  adoptionem  se  dederunt,
non  admittuntur  ad  bona  naturalis
patris  quasi  liberi,  si  modo  cum
is  moreretur  in  adoptiva  familia
sint ;  nam  vivo  eo  mancipati  ab
adoptivo  patre,  perinde   admittun-

10.  But  those,  who  after  emanci-
pation have  given  themselves  in
adoption,  are  not  admitted  as  chil-
dren to  the  possession  of  the  effects
of  their  natural  father,  that  is,  if,  at
the  time  of  his  death,  they  are  still
in  their  adoptive  family.     But  if,  in

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.  267

tnr  ad  bona  natiiralis  patris,  ac  si  the  lifetime  of  their  natural  father,
emancipati  ab  ipso  essent,  nee  they  have  been  emancipated  by  their
umqiiam  in  adoptiva  familia  fuis-  adoptive  father,  they  are  then  ad-
sent  ;  et  convenienter,  quod  ad  mitted  to  receive  the  goods  of  their
adoptivum  patrem  pertinet,  extra-  natural  father  exactly  as  if  they  had
neorum  loco  esse  incipiunt.  Post  been  emancipated  by  him,  and  had
mortem  vero  naturalis  patris  eman-  never  entered  into  the  adoptive
cipati  ab  adoptivo,  et  quantum  ad  family.  Accordingly,  with  regard  to
hunc  peque  extraneorum  loco  hunt,  their  adoptive  father,  they  become
et  quantum  ad  naturalis  parentis  from  that  moment  strangers  to  him.
bona  pertinet,  nihilo  magis  libero-  But  if  they  are  emancipated  by  ther
rum  gradum  nanciscuntur :  quod  adoptive  father  after  the  death  of
ideo  sic  placuit,  quia  iniquum  erat  their  natural  father,  they  are  equally
esse  in  potestate  patris  adoptivi,  ad  considered  as  strangers  to  their  adop-
quos  bona  naturalis  patris  pertine-  tive  father  ;  and  yet  do  not  gain  the
rent,  utrum  ad  liberos  ejiis  an  ad  position  of  children  with  regard  to
agnatos.  the  inheritance  of  their  natural  father.

This  has  been  so  laid  down,  because  it
was  unreasonable  that  it  should  be  in
the  power  of  an  adoptor  to  determine
to  whom  the  inheritance  of  a  natural
father  should  belong,  whether  to  his
children,  or  to  the  agnati.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  4 ;  T>.  xxxvii.  4.  6.  4.

Until  the  time  of  Justinian,  an  adopted  son,  during  his  con-
tinuance in  his  adoptive  family,  had  no  right  of  succession  to  his
natural  father,  but  was  a  smis  heres  of  his  adoptive  father.  If
he  left  the  adoptive  family  before  the  death  of  his  natural  father,
he  was  called  by  the  praetor  to  the  succession  of  his  natural  father
as  a  suits  heres,  but  had,  of  course,  no  claim  on  the  adoptive
father.  If  he  left  the  adoptive  family  after  the  death  of  his
natural  father,  he  had  no  claim  to  the  succession  of  either  natural
or  adoptive  father,  except  as  a  cognatus  of  his  natural  father.
Justinian,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  First  Book  (Tit.  11.  2),  altered
this,  and  the  adopted  son,  unless  adopted  by  an  ascendant,  never
lost  his  right  to  the  succession  of  his  natural  father,  although  he
gained  a  right  to  the  succession  ah  intestato  of  his  adoptive
father.  (See  paragr.  14.)  Justinian,  it  will  be  observed,  does
not  in  the  text  speak  of  the  case  of  children  given  in  adoption  by
their  natural  father,  the  changes  he  had  made  having  altered  their
position.  He  speaks  of  children  emancipated,  and  then  giving
themselves  by  arrogation  to  an  adoptive  father,  and  the  position
was  not  changed  by  his  system.  What  is  said  in  the  text  may,
however,  be  applied  to  children  given  in  adoption  before  the  legis-
lation of  Justinian.  What  the  text  describes  as  unreasonable  is
that,  after  the  natural  father  is  dead,  the  adoptive  father  should
have  power  to  alter  the  succession  of  the  natural  father.

11.     Minus    ergo    juris    habent  11.   The  rights  of  adopted  children

adoptivi   quam  naturales  :    namque  are  therefore  less  than  those  of  natural

naturales  emancipati  beneficio  prse-  children,  who,   even   after   emancipa-

toris    gradum    liberorum    retinent,  tion,   retain  the  rank  of  children  by

licet  jure    civili   perdunt ;    adoptivi  the  indulgence  of  the  prastor,  although

vero  emancipati  et  jure  civili  per-  they   lose   it   by   the  civil  law.     But

268

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

dunt  gradum  liberorum,  et  a  prse-
tore  non  adjuvantur,  et  recte  :
naturalia  enim  jura  civilis  ratio
perimere  non  potest,  nee  quia  de-
sinunt  sui  lieredes  esse,  desinere
possunt  filii  filieeve  aut  nepotes
iieptesve  esse.  Adoptivi  vero  eman-
cipati  extraneoruni  loco  incipiunt
esse,  quia  jus  nomenque  filii  filifeve
quod  per  adoptionem  consecuti  sunt,
alia  civili  ratione,  id  est  emancipa-
tione,  perdunt.

12.  Eadem  haec  observantur  et
in  ea  bonorum  possessione,  quam
contra  tabulas  testamenti  parentis
liberis  pneteritis,  id  est,  neque  lie-
redibus  institutis  neque  ut  oportet
exheredatis,  praetor  pollicetur  ;  nam
eos  quidern  qui  in  potestate  parentis
mortis  tempore  fuerunt,  et  eman-
cipatos  vocat  praetor  ad  eam  bo-
norum possessionem  ;  eos  vero  qui
in  adoptiva  familia  fuerint  per  hoc
tempus  quo  naturalis  parens  more-
retur,  repellit.  Item  adoptivos  libe-
ros  emancipatos  ab  adoptivo  patre,
sicut  ab  intestato,  ita  longe  minus
contra  tabulas  testamenti  ad  bona
ejus  non  admittit ;  quia  desinunt
numero  liberorum  esse.

adopted  children,  when  emancipated,
lose  the  rank  of  children  by  the  civil
law,  and  are  not  aided  by  the  praetor.
And  the  distinction  between  the  two
cases  is  very  proper,  for  the  civil  law
cannot  destroy  natural  rights ;  and
children  cannot  cease  to  be  sons  and
daughters,  grandsons  or  granddaugh-
ters, because  they  may  cease  to  be  sui
lieredes.  But  adopted  children,  when
emancipated,  become  instantly  stran-
gers ;  for  the  rights  and  title  of  son
or  daughter,  which  they  have  only
obtained  by  adoption,  may  be  de-
stroyed by  another  ceremony  of  the
civil  law,  that,  namely,  of  emanci^ja-
tion.

Gai.  i.  158.

12.  The  same  rules  are  observed
in  the  possession  of  goods  which  the
prjetor  gives  contra  tabulas  to  children
Avho  have  been  passed  over,  that  is,
who  have  neither  been  instituted
heirs,  nor  properly  disinherited.  For
the  praetor  calls  to  this  possession  of
goods  those  children  under  the  power
of  their  father  at  the  time  of  his  death,
and  those  also  who  are  emancipated  ;
but  he  excludes  those  who  were  in  an
adoptive  family  at  the  decease  of  their
natural  father.  So,  too,  adopted  chil-
dren emancipated  by  their  adoptive
father,  as  they  are  not  admitted  to
succeed  their  adoptive  father  ah  in-
testato, much  less  are  they  admitted  to
possess  the  goods  of  their  adoptive
father  contrary  to  his  testament,  for
they  cease  to  be  included  in  the  num-
ber of  his  children.

D.  xxxviii.  6.  1.  6 ;  D.  xxxvii.  4.  6.  4.

When  a  testament  was  made,  but  a  person  who  was  a  sinis  heres,
or  who  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  suus  heres,  was  not  expressly
disinherited  in  the  testament,  the  proetor  gave  him  the  possessw
bonorum  contra  tabulas,  i.e.  contrary  to  the  testament.  Such  a
person  is  not  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  suus  heres  so  much  as  main-
tained in  his  position  of  suus  heres.

13.  Admonendi  tamen  sumus,  eos
qui  in  adoptiva  familia  sunt,  quive
post  mortem  naturalis  parentis  ab
adoptivo  patre  emancipati  fuerint,
intestato  parente  naturali  mortuo,
licet  ea  parte  edicti  qua  liberi  ad
bonorum  possessionem  vocantur,
non  admittantur,  alia  tamen  parte
vocari,  id  est,  qua  cognati  defuncti
vocantur.     Ex  qua  parte  ita  admit-

13.  It  is,  however,  to  be  observed
that  cliildren  still  remaining  in  an
adoptive  family,  or  who  have  been
emancipated  by  their  adoptive  father,
after  the  decease  of  their  natural
father,  who  dies  intestate,  although
not  admitted  by  the  part  of  the  edict
calling  children  to  the  possession  of
goods,  are  admitted  by  another  part,
by  which  the  cognati  of  the  deceased

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

269

tuntur,  si  neque  sui  heredes  liberi
neque  emancipati  obstent,  neque
agnatiis  qiiidem  ullus  interveniat  ;
ante  enim  praetor  liberos  vocat  tarn
snos  heredes  quam  emancipatos,
deinde  legitimos  heredes,  deinde
proximos  cognatos.

Gal  iii.  31 ;

14.  Sed  ea  omnia  antiqiiitati
quidem  placuerunt,  aliquam  autem
emendationem  a  nostra  constitutione
acceperimt,  quam  super  his  personis
posuimus  quae  a  patribus  suis  natu-
ralibus  in  adoptionem  aliis  dantur  :
invenimus  etenim  nonnullos  casus,
in  quibus  filii  et  naturalium  paren-
tum  succession  em  propter  adoptio-
nem amittebant,  et  adoptione  facile
per  emancipationem  soluta  ad  neu-
trius  patris  successionem  vocaban-
tur.  Hoc  solito  more  corrigentes
constitutionem  scripsimus  per  quam
definivimus,  quando  parens  natu-
ralis  filium  suum  adoptandum  alii
dederit,  Integra  omnia  jura  ita  ser-
vari  atque  si  in  patris  naturalis  po-
testate  permansisset,  nee  penitus
adoptio  fuisset  subsecuta,  nisi  in
hoc  tantummodo  casu  ut  possit  ab
intestato  ad  patris  adoptivi  venire
successionem.  Testament©  autem
ab  eo  facto,  neque  jure  civili  neque
prfetorio  aliquid  ex  hereditate  ejus
persequi  potest,  neque  contra  ta-
bulas  bonorum  possessione  agnita,
neque  inofficiosi  querela  instituta :
cum  nee  necessitas  patri  adoptivo
imponitur  vel  heredem  eum  insti-
tuere  vel  exheredatum  facere,  ut-
pote  nullo  vinculo  naturali  copula-
turn,  neque  si  ex  Sabiniano  senatus-
consulto  ex  tribus  maribus  fuerit
adoptatus ;  nam  et  in  hujusmodi
casu  neque  quarta  ei  servatur,  nee
ulla  actio  ad  ejus  persecutionem  ei
competit.  Nostra  autem  constitu-
tione  exceptus  est  is  quern  parens
naturalis  adoptandum  susceperit ;
utroque  enim  jure  tarn  naturali
quam  legitime  in  hanc  personam
concurrente,  pristina  jura  tali  adop-
tioni  servavimus,  quemadmodum  si
paterfamilias  se  dederit  arrogan-
dum  ;  quae  specialiter  et  sigillatim
ex  praef  atse  constitutionis  tenore  pos-
sunt  colligi.

are  called.  They  are,  however,  only
thus  admitted  in  default  of  sui  heredes,
emancipated  children,  and  agnati.  For
the  praetor  first  calls  the  children,  both
the  std  heredes  and  those  emancipated,
then  the  legitimi  heredes,  and  then  the
cognati.

D.  xxxvii.  15.  1.

14.  Such  were  the  rules  that  for-
merly obtained ;  but  they  have  re*
ceived  some  emendation  from  our  con-
stitution relating  to  persons  given  in
adoption  by  their  natural  parents.
For  cases  have  occurred  in  which
sons  have  lost  by  adoption  their
succession  to  their  natural  parents,
and,  the  tie  of  adoption  being  easily
dissolved  by  emancipation,  have  lost
the  right  of  succeeding  to  either  pa-
rent. Correcting,  therefore,  as  usual,
what  is  wrong,  we  have  promulgated
a  constitution  enacting  that,  when  a
natural  father  has  given  his  son  in
adoption,  the  rights  of  the  son  shall
be  preserved  exactly  as  if  he  had  still
remained  in  the  power  of  his  natural
father,  and  no  adoption  had  taken
place  ;  except  only  in  this,  that  the
person  adopted  may  succeed  to  his
adoptive  father,  if  he  dies  intestate.
But,  if  the  adoptive  father  makes  a  tes-
tament, the  adoptive  son  can  neither
by  the  civil  law  nor  under  the  prae-
torian edict  obtain  any  part  of  the
inheritance,  whether  he  demands  pos-
session of  the  eflt'ects  contra  tabulas,
or  alleges  that  the  testament  is  in-
officious ;  for  an  adoptive  father  is
under  no  obligation  to  institute  or
disinherit  his  adopted  son,  there  being
no  natural  tie  between  them,  not  even
if  the  adopted  son  has  been  chosen
among  three  brothers,  according  to
the  senatus-considtum  Sabinianum,  for
even  in  this  case  the  son  does  not  ob-
tain the  fourth  part  of  his  adoptive
father's  effects,  nor  has  he  any  action
whereby  to  claim  it.  But  persons
adopted  by  an  ascendant  are  excepted
in  our  constitution  ;  for,  as  natural
and  civil  rights  both  concur  in  their
favour,  we  have  thought  proper  to
preserve  to  this  adoption  its  effect
under  the  old  law,  as  also  to  the
arrogation  of  a  paterfamilias.  But
this,  in  all  its  details,  may  be  collected
from  the  tenor  of  the  above-mentioned
constitution.

C.  viii.  47.  10,  pr.  1,  2,  3.

270

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

Theophilus,  in  his  Paraphrase,  tells  us  that  when  a  person
adopted  one  of  three  male  children,  he  was  obliged,  by  the
senatiis-cojisultum  Sahinianum,  to  leave  him  a  fourth  part  of  his
property,  but  gives  no  reason  for  the  rule,  and  we  have  no  means
of  ascertaining  what  the  true  reason  was.  Justinian  did  away
with  the  provision  of  the  senatus-consultum^  because  it  Vv^as  not,
under  his  legislation,  necessary  to  protect  specially  the  person
thus  chosen,  inasmuch  as  no  adopted  child  lost  his  share  of  his
inheritance  of  his  natural  father.

Children  adopted  by  a  stranger  were,  under  Justinian's  legis-
lation, not,  properly  speaking,  placed  in  the  rank  of  sui  heredes,
but  were  sui  heredes,  for  the  adoption  had  no  effect  on  their
position  in  their  natural  family.  The  effect  of  adoption  was  de-
stroyed, not  its  results  specially  provided  against.

15.  Item  vetiistas  ex  masculis  pro-
genitos  plus  diligens,  solos  nepotes
qui  ex  virili  sexii  descendunt,  ad  suo-
rum  vocabat  successionem,  et  juri
agnatorum  eos  anteponebat ;  nepotes
autem  qui  ex  filiabus  nati  sunt,  et
proneptes  ex  neptibus,  cognatorum
loco  numerans  post  agnatorum  line-
am  eos  vocabat,  tarn  in  avi  vel  pro-
avi  materni  quam  in  aviae  vel  proavi^
sive  paternre  sive  matern?e  succes-
sionem. Divi  autem  principes  non
pass!  sunt  talem  contra  naturam
injuriam  sine  competente  emenda-
tione  relinquere  :  sed  cum  nepotis
et  pronepotis  nomen  commune  est
utrisque  qui  tarn  ex  masculis  quam
ex  feminis  descendunt,  ideo  eumdem
gradum  et  ordinem  successionis  eis
donaverunt.  Sed  ut  amplius  aliquid
sit  eis  qui  non  solum  natune,  sed
etiam  veteris  juris  sulfragio  muni-
untur,  portionem  nepotum  et  neptum
vel  deinceps  de  quibus  supra  dixi-
mus,  paulo  minuendam  esse  existi-
maverunt :  ut  minus  tertiam  partem
acciperent,  quam  mater  eorum  vel
avia  fuerat  acceptura,  vel  pater
eorum  "vel  avus  paternus  sive  ma-
ternus,  quando  femina  mortua  sit
cuJQS  de  hereditate  agitur  ;  iisque,
licet  soli  sint,  adeuntibus  agnatos
minime  vocabant.  Et  quemadmo-
dum  lex  duodecim  tabular um  tilio
mortuo  nepotes  vel  neptes,  prone-
potes  vel  proneptes  in  locum  patris
sui  ad  successionem  avi  vocat,  ita  et
prill  cipalis  dispositio  in  locum  matris
auve  vel  a  vise  eos  cum  jam  designata
partis  tertise  deminutione  vocat.

15.  The  ancient  law,  favouring  de-
scendants from  males,  called  only
grandchildren  so  descended  to  the
succession  as  sui  heredes,  in  preference
to  the  agnati,  while  grandchildren  born
of  daughters,  and  great-grandchildren
born  of  granddaughters,  were  reckoned
among  cognatl,  and  succeeded  only
after  the  agnati  to  their  maternal
grandfather  and  great-grandfather,  or
to  their  grandmother,  or  great-grand-
mother, maternal  or  paternal.  But
the  emperors  would  not  suffer  such  a
violence  against  nature  to  continue
without  an   adequate  alteration  ;  and

as  the  name  of  grandchild

as

inasmuch

and  great-grandchild  is  common,
well  to  descendants  by  females  as  by
males,  they  gave  all  the  same  right
and  order  of  succession.  But,  that
persons  whose  privileges  rest  not  only
on  nature,  but  also  on  the  ancient  law,
might  enjoy  some  peculiar  advantage,
they  thought  it  right  that  the  portions
of  grandchildren,  great-grandchildren,
an  d  other  lineal  descendants  of  a  female,
should  be  somewhat  diminished,  so  that
they  should  not  receive  so  much  by  a
third  part  as  their  mother  or  grand-
mother would  have  received,  or,  when
the  succession  is  to  the  inheritance  of
a  woman,  as  their  father  or  grand-
father-, paternal  or  maternal,  would
have  received  ;  and,  although  there
were  no  other  descendants,  if  they
entered  on  the  inheritance,  the  em-
perors did  not  call  the  agnati  to  the
succession.  And  as,  upon  the  decease
of  a  son,  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables
calls  the  grandchildren  and  great-
grandchildren, male  and  female,  to
represent   their  father  in  the  succes-

LIB.  III.      TIT.  I.

271

sion  to  their  grandfather,  so  the  im-
perial legislation  calk  them  to  take  in
succession  the  place  of  their  mother
or  gi'andmother,  subject  only  to  the
above-mentioned  deduction  of  a  third
part.

C.  vi.  65.  9.

This  section  contains  the  substance  of  a  constitution  of  the
Emperors  Theodosius,  Yalentinian,  and  Arcadius.  (Cod.  Theod.
V.  5.)  Justinian  here  says,  that  when  there  were  descendants
by  a  female  who  entered  on  the  inheritance,  the  agnati  were
not  called  to  the  succession.  We  knoAV,  however,  from  the  Code
itself,  that  the  agnati  had  a  fourth  part  of  the  inheritance,  as  a
sort  of  Falcidia.     (See  next  paragr.)

16.  Sed  nos,  cum  adhuc  dubitatio
manebat  inter  agnatos  et  memoratos
nepotes,  quartam  partem  substantive
def  uncti  agnatis  sibi  vindicantibus  ex
cujusdam  constitutionis  auctoritate,
memoratam  quidem  constitutionem
a  nostro  codice  segregavimus,  neque
inseri    eam  ex   Theod osiano   codice
in   eo  concessimus.     Nostra   autem
constitutione   promulgata,  toti   juri
ejus    derogatum  est,    et   sanximus,
talibus   nepotibus   ex   filia  vel  pro-
nepotibus  ex  nepte  et  deinceps  su-
perstitibus,  agnatos  nullam  partem
mortui  successionis  sibi  vindicare  :
ne  hi  qui  ex  transversa  linea  veniunt,
potiores  iis  habeantur  qui  recto  jiu^e
descendunt.     Quam   constitutionem
nostram  obtinere  secundum  sui  vigo-
rem  et  tempora  et  nunc  sancimus  :
ita  tamen  ut,  quemadmodum  inter
filios  et  nepotes  ex  filio  antiquitas
statuit  non  in  capita  sed  in  stirpes
dividi  hereditatem,  similiter  nos  in-
ter filios  et  nepotes  ex  filia  distri-
butionem   fieri   jubemus,    vel   inter
omnes  nepotes  et  neptes  et  alias  de-
inceps personas,  ut  utraque  proge-
nies matris  suae  vel  patris  avia;  vel
avi  portionem  sine  ulla  deminutione
conseqviatur ;  ut  si  forte  unus  vel  duo
ex  una  parte,  ex  altera  tres  aut  qua-
tuor  extent,  unus  aut  duo  dimidiam,
alteri  tres  aut  quatuor  alteram  dimi-
diam hereditatis  habeant.

16.  But,   as   there   still   remained
matter  of  dispute  between  the  agnati
and   the   above-mentioned   grandchil-
dren,  the  agnati  claiming  the  fourth
part  of  the  estate  of  the  deceased  by
virtue  of  a  constitution,  we  have  re-
jected this  constitution,  and  have  not
permitted  it  to  be  inserted  into  our
code  from  that  of  Theodosius.     And
in  the  constitution  we  have  ourselves
promulgated,  we  have  completely  de-
parted  from   the   provisions  of  those
former    constitutions,    and    have    en-
acted  that  agnati   shall  take  no  part
in   the    succession    of    the    deceased,
when  there  are  grandchildren  born  of
a    daughter,     or     great-grandchildren
born  of  a  granddaughter,  or  any  other
descendants  from  a  female  in  the  direct
line  ;  as  those  in  a  collateral  line  ought
not  to  be  preferred  to  direct  descend-
ants.    This  constitution  is  to  prevail
from  the  date  of  its  promulgation  in
its  full  force,  as  we  here  again  enact.
And  as  the  old  law  ordered,  that  be-
tween the  sons  of  the  deceased  and
his  grandsons  by  a  son,  every  inheri-
tance should  be  divided  j^er  stirpes,  and
not  per  capita,  so  we  also  ordain,  that
a  similar  distribution  shall   be   made
between    sons    and    grandsons    by    a
daughter,  and  between  grandsons  and
granddaughters,  great-grandsons    and
great-granddaughters,    and    all    other
descendants  in  a  direct  line  ;  so  that
the  children  of  either  branch  may  re-
ceive  the   share    of    their   mother   or
father,  their   grandmother   or  grand-
father, without  any  diminution  ;  and,
if  of  the  one  branch  there  should  be
one  or  two  children,  and  of  the  other
branch  three  or  four,  then  the  one  or

272  LIB.  III.     TIT.  II.

two  shall  have  one  half,  and  the  three
or  four  the  other  half  of  the  inheri-
tance.

C.  vi.  55.  12.

Those  who,  not  being  iiui  heredes,  were  admitted  to  rank  as
such,  were  not  necessarii.  They  could  accept  the  inheritance  or
not,  which  they  only  acquired  when  they  entered  on  it,  iis  adeun-
tibus.     (Paragr.  15.)

The  changes  in  the  succession  of  the  sui  heredes  were  these : —

1.  Those  at  the  time  of  his  death  in  the  power  of  the  de  cujus
(i.  e.  the  person  of  whose  inheritance  we  are  speaking),  succeeded
as  sui  heredes  under  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.

2.  The  praetor,  by  giving  them  the  possessio  bonorum,  placed
in  the  rank  of  sui  heredes  the  following  classes  of  persons  :  (1)
emancipated  children,  and  (2),  if  the  emancipated  father  was
dead,  grandchildren  conceived  after  his  emancipation,  or  (.3),  if
the  de  cujus  were  the  emancipated  son,  his  unemancipated  children
conceived  before  the  emancipation,  and  (4)  sui  heredes  deprived
of  the  power  of  inheriting  by  a  capitis  deminutio,  but  afterwards

*  restituti  in  integrum.

3.  A  constitution  of  Theodosius  permitted  the  children  and
descendants  of  deceased  daughters  to  succeed  to  the  portion  their
mother  would  have  received  as  suus  heres,  giving  up  one-third  of
it  to  other  sui  heredes^  if  there  were  any,  and,  if  not,  one-fourth
to  the  agnati.

4.  Under  Justinian,  adoption  by  a  stranger  ceased  to  have
any  effect  upon  the  position  of  the  person  adopted  in  his  natural
family ;  and  the  persons  referred  to  in  the  constitution  of  Theo-
dosius just  mentioned  succeeded  to  the  whole  share  of  the  deceased
daughter  without  any  deduction.

Tit.  II.     DE   LEGITIMA  AGNATORUM   SUC-

CESSTONE.

Si  nemo  suus  heres,  vel  eorum  "When  there  is  no  suus  heres,  nor

quos  inter  suos  heredes  prsetor  vel  any  of   those   persons   called   by   the

constitutiones  vocant,  extat  qui  sue-  praetor  or  the  constitutions  to  inherit

cessionem  quoquo   modo  amplecta-  with  sui  heredes,  to  take   the  succes-

tur,  tunc  ex  lege  duodecim  tabula-  sion    in    any    way,    the    inheritance,

rum  ad  agnatum  proximum  pertinet  according  to   the   law  of   the   TAvelve

hereditas.  Tables,  belongs  to  the  nearest  agnatus.

Gai.  iii.  9.

All  persons  were  agnati  who,  descended  from  a  common  an-
cestor, would,  if  that  ancestor  had  been  living,  have  been  in  his
power.  The  sui  heredes  w^ere  thus  agnati ;  but  as  they  had  the
title  of  sui  heredes  peculiar  to  themselves,  only  those  agnati  re-
ceived the  name  of  agnati  who  were  connected  with  the  de  cujus
by  a  collateral  line.

LIE.  HI.      TIT.  II.

273

1.  Sunt  autem  agnati,  tit  primo
quoque  libro  tradidimus,  cogiiati
per  virilis  sexus  personas  cognatioiii
jiincti,  quasi  a  patre  cognati  :  itaque
eodem  patre  nati  fratres  agnati  sibi
sunt,  qui  et  consanguinei  vocantur,
iiec  requiritur  an  etiam  eamdem
matrem  liabuerint.  Item  patruus
fratris  filio  et  invicem  is  illi  agnatus
est.  Eodem  numero  sunt  fratres
patrueles,  id  est,  qui  ex  duobus  fra-
tribus  procreati  sunt,  qui  etiam  con-
sobrini  vocantur  :  qua  ratione  etiam
ad  plures  gradus  agnationis  perve-
nire  poterimus.  li  quoque  qui  post
mortem  patris  nascuntur,  jura  con-
sanguinitatis  nanciscuntur.  Non  ta-
men  omnibus  simul  agnatis  dat  lex
liereditatem  ;  sed  iis  qui  tunc  proxi-
miore  gradu  sunt,  cum  certum  esse
coeperit  aliquem  intestatum  xleces-
sisse.

1.  Agnati,  as  we  have  explained  in
the  First  Book,  are  those  cofpuUi  who
are  related  through  males,  that  is,  are
cognati  by  the  father  ;  and  tlierefore
brothers,  who  are  the  sons  of  the  same
father,  are  agnati  to  each  other  (they
are  also  called  consanguinei).  and  it
does  not  make  any  difference  whether
they  have  the  same  mother.  An  uncle
is  also  agnatus  to  his  brother's  son,
and  vice  versa,  the  brother's  son  to  his
paternal  uncle.  So  also  fratres  patrue-
les, that  is,  the  children  of  brothers
(also  called  consohrini),  are  likewise
agnati.  We  may  thus  reckon  many
degrees  of  agnation ;  children,  too,
who  are  born  after  the  decease  of  their
father,  obtain  the  rights  of  consangui-
nity. The  law  does  not,  however,  give
the  inheritance  to  all  the  agnati,  but  to
those  only  who  are  in  the  nearest  de-
gree, at  the  time  that  it  becomes  certain
that  the  deceased  has  died  intestate.

Gai.  i.  156  ;  iii.  10,  11.

2.  Per  adoptionem  quoque  agna-
tionis jus  consistit,  veluti  inter  filios
naturales  et  eos  quos  pater  eorum
adoptavit ;  nee  dubium  est  quin  pro-
prie  consanguinei  appellentur.  Item,
si  quis  ex  ceteris  agnatis,  veluti  fra-
ter  8Ait  patruus,  a,ut  denique  is  qui
longiore  gradu  est,  adoptaverit  ali-
quem, agnatos  inter  suos  esse  non
dubitatur.

3.  Cetemni  inter  masculos  qui-
dem  agnationis  jure  hereditas,  etiam
longissimo  gradu,  ultro  citroque  ca-
pitur :  quod  ad  feminas  vero  ita
placebat,  ut  ipste  consanguinitati.s
jure  tantum  capiant  liereditatem,  si
sorores  sint,  ulterius  non  capiant  ;
masculi  autem  ad  earum  hereditates,
etiamsi  longissimo  gradu  sint,  ad-
mittantur.  Qua  de  causa,  fratris  tui
aut  patrui  tui  filias  vel  amitae  tu8e
hereditas  ad  te  pertinet,  tua  vero
ad  illas  non  pertinebat  :  quod  ideo
ita  constitutum  erat,  quia  commo-
dius  videbatur  ita  jura  constitui,  ut
l)lerumque  hereditates  ad  masculos
confluerent.  Sed  quia  sane  iniquum
erat  in  universum  eas  quasi  extra-
neas  repelli,  praetor  eas  ad  bonorum
possessionem  admittit  ea  parte  qua
IDroximitatis  nomine  bonorum  pos-
sessionem pollicetur  :  ex  qua  parte
ita   scilicet    admittuntur,    si  neque

2.  The  right  of  agna-tion  arises  also
through  adoption  ;  thus  the  natural
and  adopted  sons  of  the  same  father
are  agnati.  And  such  persons  are
without  doubt  properly  included  in
the  term  consanguinei.  Also,  if  one
of  your  agnati,  as,  for  example,  a.
brother,  a  paternal  uncle,  or  any  other
agnatus,  however  remote,  adopt  any
one,  then  the  person  so  adopted  is  un-
doubtedly to  be  reckoned  among  your
ag)iati.

3.  Agnation  gives  males,  however
distant  in  degree,  reciprocal  rights  to
the  succession  to  inheritances.  But  it
has  been  thought  right  that  females
should  only  inherit  by  title  of  consan-
guinity if  they  were  sisters,  and  not,
if  in  a  more  remote  degree  ;  while
their  male  agnati,  in  however  remote
a  degree,  were  admitted  to  succeed  to
them.  Thus  the  inheritance  of  your
brother's  daughter,  or  of  the  daughter
of  your  paternal  uncle  or  aunt,  will
belong  to  you  ;  but  not  your  inherit-
ance to  them.  This  distinction  was
made,  because  it  seemed  expedient
that  the  law  should  be  so  ordered,
that  inheritances  should  for  the  most
part  fall  into  the  possession  of  males.
But  as  it  was  contrary  to  equity  that
females  should  be  thus  almost  wholly
excluded  as  strangers,  the  prretor  ad-
mits them  to  the  possession  of  goods
promised  by  his  edict,  on  account  of

T

274

LIB.  III.      TIT.  II.

agnatiis  ullus,  neqne  proximior  cog-
natiTs  interveniat.  Et  hsec  quidem
lex  diiodecim  tabularum  niillo  modo
introduxit  ;  sed  simplicitatein  legi-
bus  amicam  amplexa,  simili  modo
omnes  agnatos  sive  masculos  sive
feminas  cujusciimqiie  gradiis,  ad
similitudinem  siiorum,  invicem  ad
successioneni  vocabat.  Media  au-
tem  jurisprudentia,  qups  erat  lege
duodecim  tabularum  junior,  impe-
riali  autem  dispositione  anterior,
subtilitate  quadam  excogitata  prse-
iatam  differentiam  inducebat,  et  pe-
nitus  eas  a  successione  agnatorum
rej)ellebat  :  omni  alia  successione
incognita,  donee  praetores  paulatim
asperitatem  juris  civilis  corrigentes,
sive  quod  deerat  implentes,  humano
proposito  alium  ordinem  suis  edictis
addiderunt,  et  cognationis  linea
proximitatis  nomine  introducta  per
bonorum  possessionem  eas  adjuva-
bant,  et  pollicebantur  his  bonorum
possessionem  qu?e  unde  cognati  ap-
pellatur.  Nos  vero  legem  duodecim
tabularum  sequentes,  et  ejus  ves-
tigia in  liac  parte  conservantes,
laudamus  quidem  prsetores  su?e
liumanitatis,  non  tamen  eos  in  ple-
num causDe  mederi  invenimus :  quare
etenim  uno  eodemque  gradu  naturali
concurrente,  et  agnationis  titulis  tarn
in  masculis  quam  in  feminis  ffiqua
lance  constitutis,  masculis  quidem
dabatur  ad  successionem  venire  om-
nium agnatorum,  ex  agnatis  autem
mulieribus  nulli  penitus,  nisi  soli
sorori,  ad  agnatorum  successionem
patebat  aditus  ?  Ideo  in  plenum
omnia  reducentes  et  ad  jus  duodecim
tabularum  eamdem  dispositionem
exsequantes,  nostra  constitutione
sanximus,  omnes  legitimas  personas,
id  est,  per  virilem  sexum  descen-
dentes,  sive  masculini  generis  sive
feminini  sint,  simili  modo  ad  jura
successionis  legitim^e  ab  intestato
vocari  secundum  sui  gradus  priero-
gativam,  nee  ideo  excludendas  quia
consanguinitatis  jura,  sicutgermanse,
non  habent.

Gai.  iii.  14.  23.

proximity  ;  but  tliey  are  only  admitted
if  there  is  no  agnatus,  nor  any  nearer
cognatus.  The  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  did  not  introduce  any  of  these
distinctions  ;  but  with  the  simplicity
proper  to  all  legislation,  called  the
agnat'h  of  either  sex,  or  any  degree,  to
a  reciprocal  succession,  in  the  same
manner  as  sui  hercdes.  It  was  an  in-
termediate jurisprudence  posterior  to
the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  but
prior  to  the  imperial  constitutions,
that  in  a  spirit  of  subtle  ingenuity
introduced  tliis  distinction,  and  en-
tirely excluded  females  from  the  suc-
cession of  ag}iatl,  no  other  method  of
succession  being  then  known,  until  tlie
praetors,  correcting  by  degrees  the  as-
perity of  the  civil  law,  or  supplying
what  was  deficient,  were  led  by  their
feeling  of  equity  to  add  in  their  edicts
a  new  order  of  succession.  The  line
of  cognati  was  admitted  according  to
the  degrees  of  proximity,  and  relief
was  thus  afibrded  to  females  by  the
pmstor  giving  them  the  possession  of
goods  called  uncle  cognati.  But  we,
turning  to  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  and  following  in  its  steps,  in
our  legislation  on  this  point,  praise
the  kind  feeling  of  the  praetors,  but
cannot  think  they  have  provided  a
complete  remedy  for  the  evil.  Why,
indeed,  when  males  and  females  are
placed  in  the  same  degree  of  natural
relationship,  and  have  equally  the  title
of  agnation,  should  males  be  j)ermitted
to  succeed  to  all  their  agnatl,  while
females,  with  the  single  exception  of
sisters,  are  entirely  excluded  ?  We
therefore,  making  a  comj)lete  change,
and  returning  to  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  have  declared  by  our  constitu-
tion, that  all  legitimse.  persoux,  that  is,
descendants  from  males,  whether  them-
selves male  or  female,  shall  be  equally
called  to  the  rights  of  succession  ab
intestato,  according  to  the  proximity  of
their  degree,  and  that  females  shall  not
be  excluded  on  the  ground  that  none
but  sisters  have  the  right  of  consan-
guinity.

29 ;  C.  vi.  58.  14.

The  inedia  jurisprudentia  here  spoken  of  consisted  of  the
opinions  of  the  jurispru denies,  who  extended  the  principle  of  the
lex  Voconia^  which  limited  the  succession  of  females  under  a  tes-
tament (see  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  14.  pr.)  to  their  succession  ab  intestato.
Fcemince  ad  hereditates  legitimas  ultra  consanguineas  successiones
non  admittuntur.   Idquejure  civili  Voconia  ratione  videtur  effectum.

LIB,  III.      TIT.  II.

275

(Paul.  Se?it  4.  8.  22.)  Thus  a  distinction  was  made  among  the
agnatl  themselves  and  the  consangiiinei,  that  is,  agnati  in  the
second  degree ;  or,  in  other  words,  brothers  and  sisters,  natural
or  adoptive,  of  the  de  ciijus,  were  made  into  a  class  apart  and
distinguished  from  the  agnati  properly  so  called.  Consanguineus,
when  used  to  mark  off  a  particular  class  of  the  agnati,  merely
means  children  of  the  same  father,  without  any  reference  to  the
mother.

4.  Hoc  etiam  addendum  nostrte
constitiitioniexistimavimus,  Tit  trans-
feratur  unus  tantummodo  gradus  a
jure  cognationis  in  legitimam  succes-
sionem  :  ut  non  solum  fratris  tilius
et  filia,  secundum  quod  jam  defini-
vimus,  ad  successionem  patrui  sui
vocentur,  sed  etiam  germanse  con-
sanguinese  vel  sororis  uterinse  filius
et  filia  soli,  et  non  deinceps  personae,
ima  cum  his  ad  jura  avimculi  sui  per-
veniant ;  et  mortuo  eo  qui  patruus
quidem  est  sui  fratris  filiis,  avuncu-
lus autem  sororis  suse  soboli,  simili
modo  ab  utroque  latere  succedant,
tamquam  si  omnes  ex  masculis  de-
scendentes  legitimo  jure  veniant,  sci-
licet ubi  frater  et  soror  superstites
non  sunt.  His  etenim  personis  pr^ie-
cedentibus  et  successionem  admit-
tentibus,  ceteri  gradus  remanent  pe-
nitus  semoti,  videlicet  hereditate  non
ad  stirpes  sed  in  capita  dividenda.

4.  We  have  also  thought  fit  to  add
to  our  constitution,  that  one  whole
degree,  but  only  one,  shall  be  trans-
ferred from  the  line  of  cognati  to  the
legal  succession.  Not  only  the  son
and  daughter  of  a  brother,  as  we  have
just  explained,  shall  be  called  to  the
succession  of  their  paternal  uncle,  but
the  son  or  daughter  of  a  sister,  though
she  is  only  by  the  same  father  or  only
by  the  same  mother,  but  no  one  in  a
more  distant  degree  than  a  son  and
daughter  of  such  a  sister,  may  also  be
admitted  to  the  succession  of  their  ma-
ternal uncle.  Thus,  when  a  person
dies  who  is  a  paternal  uncle  to  the
children  of  his  brother,  and  maternal
uncle  to  the  children  of  his  sister,  then
the  children  of  either  branch  succeed
exactly  as  if  they  were  aU  descendants
from  males,  and  had  a  right  by  law  to
the  succession.  But  this  is  only  if  the
deceased  leaves  no  brother  or  sister,
for  if  he  leaves  any,  and  they  accept
the  inheritance,  the  more  remote  de-
grees are  entirely  excluded  from  the
inheritance,  as  it  is  to  be  divided  in
this  instance  per  capita  and  not  per
stirpes.

C.  vi.  58.  14.  1.

The  children  of  a  sister,  although  only  consanguinea,  that  is,
having  the  same  father,  or  uterina,  having  the  same  mother,  were
thus  admitted  to  the  succession  as  agnati.  We  might  gather  from
this  that  uterine  brothers  and  sisters  themselves  were  admitted,
although  it  is  not  expressed  in  the  text.  The  Code  contains  a
constitution  of  Justinian  (C.  vi.  56,  7)  expressly  admitting  them.
The  changes  in  the  law  with  respect  to  the  admission  of  brothers
and  sisters  and  their  children  as  agnati  were  as  follows  : — In  A.D.
498  Anastasius  gave  the  rights  of  agnation  to  emancipated
brothers  and  sisters,  except  that  they  only  received  three-fourths
of  what  they  would  have  had  if  they  had  remained  in  the  family.
(See  Tit.  5.  1.)  The  children  of  emancipated  brothers  and  sis-
ters still  remained  cogjiati  only.  Justinian  gave  the  rights  of
agnation,  in  a.d.  528,  to  uterine  brothers  and  sisters  (C.  vi.  56,  7);

T   2

276

LIB.  III.      TIT.  II.

and  in  A.D.  532,  to  the  children  of  uterine  sisters  (C.  vi.  58.  14.  1);
and  thouMi  the  children  of  uterine  brothers  are  not  mentioned
in  the  constitution,  they  must  undoubtedly  have  beeu  placed  in
the  same  position.  Finally,  in  a  constitution  dated  October,  a.d.
534  (C.  vi.  58.  15),  and  therefore  subsequent  to  the  promulga-
tion of  the  Institutes,  Justinian  admitted  as  acjnati  emancipated
brothers  and  sisters  without  any  deduction  of  a  fourth,  uterine
brothers  and  sisters,  and  nephews  and  nieces  being  the  children
either  of  emancipated  or  uterine  brothers  and  sisters.  After  that
constitution  there  v/ere  not,  therefore,  any  but  agnati  in  the
second  degree,  nor  any  in  the  third  degree  except  the  uncles  and
aunts  of  the  de  ciijus.

Agnatorum  hereditates  dioiduntur  in  capita.  (Ulp.  Reg.  26.  4.)
There  was  no  division  per  stirpes,  which  was  originally  only  a
consequence  of  the  pairia  potcstas,  in  the  succession  of  agnati.
If  one  of  those  in  any  degree  of  relationship  was  dead,  his  re-
presentatives did  not  take  his  share.  He  was  entirely  passed
over,  and  the  others  in  that  degree  of  relationship  were  alone
called  to  the  succession.

Agnati  were  spoken  of  as  legitimi  heredes,  because  the  inhe-
ritance was  given  to  them  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
whereas  the  cognati  only  received  it  from  the  praitor.

5.  Si  pliires  sint  grcadus  agna-
torum, aperte  lex  duodecim  tabu-
laiiim  proximuni  vocat.  Itaque  si
(verbi  gratia)  sit  defimcti  frater  et
alteriiis  fratris  filius  ant  patruus,
frater  potior  liabetur.  Et  quamvis
singulari  niimero  usa  lex  proximum
vocet,  tamen  diibiuni  non  est  quin,
et  si  plures  sint  ejusdem  gradiis,
omnes  admittantur  :  nam  et  proprie
proximiis  ex  pluribus  gradibus  in-
telligitur,  et  tamen  non  diibium  est
quin,  licet  unus  sit  gradus  agnato-
rum, pertineat  ad  eos  hereditas.

5.  When  there  are  many  degxees  of
agnati,  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables
expressly  caUs  the  nearest  ;  if,  for  ex-
ample, there  is  a  brother  of  the  de-
ceased, and  a  son  of  another  brother,
or  a  paternal  uncle,  the  brotlier  is
preferred.  And,  although  the  lav,^  of
the  Twelve  Tables  calls  the  nearest
agnatus  (in  the  singular  number),  yet
Avithout  doubt,  if  there  be  several  in
the  same  degree,  they  ought  all  to  be
admitted.  And,  although  properly  by
the  nearest  degree  must  be  understood
the  nearest  of  several,  yet,  if  all  the
agnati  are  i'l  the  same  degree,  the
inheritance  undoubtedly  belongs  to
them  all.

Gai.  iii.  15.

6,  Proximus  autem,  si  quid  em
nullo  testamento  facto  quisquam  de-
cesserit,  per  hoc  tempus  requiritur,
quo  mortuus  est  is  cujus  de  heredi-
tate  quferitur.  Quod  si  facto  testa-
mento quisquam  decesserit,  per  hoc
tempus  requiritur,  quo  certum  e5ise
coeperit  nullum  ex  testamento  here-
dem  extiturum. ;  tunc  enim  proprie
quisque  intestato  decessisse  iutelligi-
tur.  Quod  quidem  aliquando  longo
tempore  deciaratur  ;  in  quo  spa,tio
temporis  ssspe  accidit,  ut  proximiore

6.  When  a  man  dies  without  a  testa-
ment, the  nearest  agnatus  is  the  agnatus
who  is  nearest  at  the  time  of  the  death
of  the  deceased.  But,  if  he  dies  after
having  made  a  testament,  then  he  is
tlie  nearest  who  is  so  when  it  becoines
certain  that  there  will  be  no  testamen-
tary heir  ;  for  it  is  only  then,  that  a
man  who  has  made  a  testament  can  be
said  to  have  died  intestate,  and  this
sometimes  is  uncertain  for  a  long  time.
Meanwhile,  the  nearest  agnatus  may
die,  and  some  one  become  the  nearest

LIB.  III.      TIT.  H.

277

mortuo  proximns  esse  incipiat,  qui     v/lio  was  not  so  at  the  death  of  the

moriente  testatore   non  erat  proxi-     testator.

mils.

Gai.  iii.  13.

7.  Placebat  autem  in  eo  genere
percipiendanim  hereditatiim  siicces-
sioneiii  non  esse,  id  est,  iTt  quamvis
proximus  qui,  secundum  ea  qu?e
diximus,  vocatur  ad  hereditatem,  aut
spreverit  hereditatem,  aut  antequam
adeat  decesserit,  nihilo  magis  legi-
timo  jure  sequentes  admittantur.
Quod  iterum  pnietores  imperfecto
jure  corrigentes,  non  in  totum  sine
adminiculo  relinquebant ;  sed  ex
cognatorum  ordine  eos  vocabant,
utpote  agnationis  jure  eis  reduso.
Sed  nos  nihil  deesse  perfectissimo
juri  cupientes,  nostra  constitutione
quam  de  jure  patronatus  humani-
tate  suggerente  protulimus,  sanxi-
mus  successionem  in  agnatorum
liereditatibus  non  esse  eis  denegan-
dam  ;  cum  satis  absurdum  erat,
quod  cognatis  a  praetore  apertum
est,  hoc  agnatis  esse  rechisum,  maxi-
me  cum  in  onere  quidem  tutelarum
et  proximo  gradu  deficiente  sequens
succedit,  et  quod  in  onere  obtinebat,
non  erat  in  lucro  permissum.

7.  But  it  was  settled  that  in  this
order  of  succession  there  should  be
no  devolution,  so  that  if  the  nearest
agnatv.s,  called  in  the  manner  we  have
mentioned  to  the  inheritance,  either
refused  it,  or  died  before  he  entered
on  it,  his  own  legal  heir  was  not
thereby  admitted  to  succeed  him.
Here,  too,  the  praetors,  though  not
introducing  a  complete  reform,  did
not  leave  the  agnati  wholly  without
relief,  but  ordered  that  they  should
be  called  to  the  inheritance  as  cognati,
since  they  were  debarred  from  the
rights  of  agnation.  But  we,  desirous
that  our  law  should  be  as  complete  as
possible,  have  decided  by  our  consti-
tution, which  in  our  goodness  we  pub-
lished concerning  the  right  of  patron-
age, that  a  devolution  in  the  succession
shall  not  be  denied  to  agnati.  It  was
indeed  absurd  to  refuse  them  a  right
which  the  prretor  gave  to  cognaiiy
especially  as  the  burden  of  tutelage
devolved  on  tlie  second  degree  of
agnati,  if  there  was  a  failure  of  the
first ;  and  thus  the  principle  of  de-
volution was  admitted  to  impose  l)ur-
dens,  and  was  not  admitted  to  confer
advantages.

Gai.  ii.  12.  22.  25.  28.

In  liereditate  legitima  sitcccssioni  locus  non  est.  (Paul.  Sent,
4.  23.)  The  suits  liercs  or  sai  licrcdes  in  the  nearest  degree  be-
came heirs  by  force  of  law.  They  could  not  help  becoming  so.
But  as  to  those  who  were  only  allowed  to  rank  among  the  sui
heredes  Avithout  being,  strictly  speaking,  sui  heredes,  if  those  in  the
nearest  degree  refused  to  accept  the  inheritance,  or  died  before
entering  on  it,  the  succession  did  not  devolve  upon  any  other
sui  heredes,  but  went  at  once  to  the  agnati.  (D.  xxxviii.  16.  1.  8.)
If,  in  this  case  or  any  other,  the  nearest  agnatus  refused  or  died
before  entering  on  the  inheritance,  the  succession  passed  to  the
cognati  without  first  devolving  on  any  of  the  more  remote  agnati.
«Justinian  alters  this  ;  and  under  his  system  there  was  a  devolu-
tion of  the  succession  to  the  agnati,  and  therefore  probably  to
those  ranked  among  the  sui  heredes.

8.    Ad    legitimam    successionem  8.  An  ascendant  also  is  called  to

nihilominus   vocatur    etiam    parens  the  legal  succession  who  has  emanci-

qui     contracta     fiducia     iilium    vel  pated  a  son,  a  daughter,  a  grandson,

hliam,  nepotem  vel  neptem  ac  dein-  a  granddaughter,  or  other  descendant

ceps    emancipat.     Quod    ex  nostra  under  a  fiduciary  agreement.     And  by

278  LIB.  III.      TIT.  II.

constitutione  omnimodo  indicitiir,  our  constitution,  every  emancipation
ut  emancipationes  liberorum  sern-  is  now  considered  to  have  been  made
per  videantur  contracta  fiducia  fieri;  under  such  an  agreement,  while
cum  apud  antiquos  non  aliter  hoc  among  the  ancients  the  ascendant
obtinebat,  nisi  specialiter  contracta  was  never  called  to  the  succession
fiducia  parens  manumisisset.  unless   he   had    expressly  made    this

agreement  at  the  time  of  the  eman-
cipation.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  10;  C.  viii.  48.  6.

Under  the  old  law  the  ascendant  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
succession  ah  intestato  of  his  descendant ;  for  if  the  descendant
was  in  the  power  of  the  ascendant,  the  latter  took  all  the  pro-
perty of  which  the  former  could  dispose,  but  did  not,  as  belong-
ing to  him  by  right  of  his  patria  potestas.  If  the  descendant
was  emancipated,  he  was  no  longer  in  the  family  of  the  ascend-
ant. The  emancipated  son,  in  short,  had  no  agnati ;  and  in  de-
fault of  sui  heredes  the  inheritance  went  to  his  patron,  that  is,
to  the  person  who  had  emancipated  him.  This  was  the  fictitious
purchaser  (see  Introd.  sec.  42),  unless  the  ascendant  who  eman-
cipated him  made  an  agreement  {contracta  fiducia)  with  the  pur-
chaser, by  which  the  purchaser  made  himself  a  trustee  of  the
right  of  patronage  for  the  ascendant.  If  this  was  done,  the
ascendant  succeeded  in  default  of  sui  heredes.

By  the  later  imperial  constitutions  three  changes  were  made
in  the  position  of  the  ascendant.  First,  by  a  constitution  of
Theodosius  and  Valentinian  (C.  vi.  61.  3),  and  subsequently  of
Leo  and  Anthemius  (C.  vi.  61.  4),  and  lastly  of  Justinian  (C.  vi.
59.  11),  in  the  case  of  goods  coming  to  a  son  from  his  mother,
the  order  of  succession  was  thus  fixed  :  1st,  his  children  and
other  descendants  were  admitted  ;  2ndly,  his  brothers  and  sisters,
whether  of  the  whole  or  the  half  blood ;  Srdly,  his  nearest  ascend-
ant, i.  e.  his  father,  was  preferred  to  his  grandfather.

Secondly,  Justinian,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  12th  Title  of  the
Second  Book,  arranged  the  order  of  succession  to  the  peculium
of  a  son,  placing  first  the  children,  then  the  brothers  and  sisters,
and  lastly  the  father.  But  in  this  case  the  father  was  not  pre-
ferred to  the  grandfather ;  for  the  ascendant  did  not  really  take
in  this  instance  ah  intestato,  but  ^jure  communi\ '  i.e.  the  claims
of  the  patria  poterMis  had  been  deferred  to  let  in  the  children  and
brothers ;  but  if  there  were  no  children  or  brothers,  the  ascend-
ant, who  is  at  the  time  the  paterfamilias,  took  the  peculium.

Lastly,  the  succession  of  emancipated  sons  was  altered  by  the
constitution  of  Justinian,  which  made  a  fiduciary  contract  implied
in  every  emancipation.  The  ancestor  thus  retained  all  his  rights
of  succession  as  patron  to  the  emancipated  son,  and  would  pro-
perly have  succeeded  immediately  after  the  sui  heredes  \  but
Justinian  admitted  the  brothers  and  sisters  before  him,  and  the
ascendant  who  emancipated  the  son  had  thus  the  third  place  in
the  order  of  succession.     (C.  vi.  ^'o,  2.)

LIB.  III.      TIT.  III.

279

Tit.  hi.    DE  SENATUS-CONSULTO  TEETULLIANO.

Such  was  the  rigour  of  the  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  so  decided  the
preference  given  to  the  issue  of  males,
and  the  exclusion  of  those  related
by  the  female  line,  that  the  right  of
reciprocal  succession  was  not  per-
mitted between  a  mother  and  her
children.  The  prsetors,  however,  ad-
mitted such  persons,  but  only  in  their
rank  as  coguati,  to  the  possession  of
goods  called  imde  cognati.

Lex  duodecim  tabularum  ita
stricto  jure  utebatur,  et  pneponebat
masculorum  progeniem,  et  eos  qui
per  feminini  sexus  necessitudinem
sibi  junguntur  adeo  expellebat,  ut
ne  quidem  inter  matrem  et  filium
iiliamve  ultro  citroque  hereditatis
capiendie  jus  daret :  nisi  quod  prfe-
tores  ex  proximitate  cognatorum  eas
personas  ad  successionem,  bonorum
possessione  unde  cognati  accommo-
data,  Yocabant.

Gal  iii.  24,  25.  30.

Until  the  senatus-consrdtum  Tertidlianuni  was  made,  a
mother  and  her  children  had  no  right  of  succession  to  each  other,
except  that  which  the  praetor  gave  them  as  cognati.  The  chil-
dren were  not  in  the  power  of  the  mother,  and  were.,  therefore,
not  her  siii  heredes  ;  they  were  not  in  her  family,  and  were,  there-
fore, not  her  agnati.  If,  indeed,  the  mother  at  her  marriage
passed  in  manum  viri,  she  became,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  the
daughter  of  her  husband,  and  as  she  was  thus  of  the  same  family
with  her  children,  she  and  they  were  agnati  to  each  other.  But
even  in  the  later  days  of  the  Kepublic,  a  marriage  cum  conven-
tione  in  manum  had  probably  become  comparatively  unusual.

1.  Sed  h£e  juris  angustias  postea
emendata?  sunt,  et  primus  quidem
divus  Claudius  matri,  ad  solatium
liberorum  amissorum,  legitimam
eorum  detulit  hereditatem.

2.  Postea  autem  senatus-consulto
Tertulliano,  quod  divi  Hadriani
temporibus  factum  est,  plenissime
de  tristi  successione  matri  non  etiam
aviss  deferenda  cautum  est  :  ut  ma-
ter ingenua  trium  liberorum  jus
habens,  libertina  quatuor,  ad  bona
filiorum  filiarumve  admittatur  in-
testato  mortuorum,  licet  in  potes-
tate  parentis  est  ;  ut  scilicet,  cum
alieno  juri  subjecta  est,  jussu  ejus
adeat  hereditatem  cujus  juri  sub-
jecta est.

1.  But  this  strictness  of  the  law
was  afterwards  mitigated.  The  Em-
peror Claudius  was  the  first  who  gave
the  legal  inheritance  of  deceased  chil-
dren to  a  mother,  to  console  her  grief
for  their  loss.

2.  Afterwards,  the  senatus-consul-
tum  Tertullianum,  in  the  reign  of  the
Emperor  Hadrian,  established  the
general  rule  that  mothers,  but  not
grandmothers,  should  have  the  me-
lancholy privilege  of  succeeding  to
their  children ;  so  that  a  mother,  born
of  free  parents,  having  three  children,
or  a  freedwoman  having  four,  should
be  admitted,  although  in  the  power  of
a  parent,  to  the  goods  of  her  intestate
children.  Except  that  a  mother  in  the
power  of  another  can  only  enter  upon
the  inheritance  of  her  children  at  the
command  of  him  to  whom  she  is  sub-
ject.

This  senatKs-consultiun  was  passed  158  A.D.,  in  the  time  of
Antoninus  Pius,  who  is  here  called  by  his  name  of  adoption.  It
was  only  an  extension  of  the  lex  Pujria  Pojipcea,  which  had  con-

280

LIB.  III.     TIT.  III.

ferred  on  free  persons  having  three  children,  and  freed  persons
having  four,  many  exceptional  advantages.  Husbands  and  wives,
for  examj^le,  could,  under  these  circumstances,  leave  to  each  other
a  larger  share  of  their  property  than  was  otherwise  permitted.
(IjLr.  Fr.  15, 16.)  This  jus  trium  Uberoriwi,  as  it  was  termed,
was  frequently  conferred  by  special  favour  of  the  emperors  on
persons  who  had  not  the  requisite  number  of  children.

3.  Prsef eriintur  autem  matri  liberi
defuncti  qui  sui  sunt,  quive  suorum
loco  sunt,  sive  primi  graclus  sivo
ulterioris.  Seel  et  filipe  suoe  mortura
iilius  vel  filia  opponitur  ex  consti-
tutionibus  matri  defunctre,  id  est,
aviae  sues.  Pater  quoque  utriusque,
non  etiam  avns  vel  proavus,  matri
anteponitur,  scilicet  cum  inter  eos
solos  de  liereditate  agitur.  Frater
auteni  consanguineus  tam  filii  quam
filiaD  excludebat  matrem :  soror  au-
tem  consanguinea  pariter  cum  ma-
tre  admittebatur ;  sed  si  fuerat
frater  et  soror  consanguinei,  et  ma-
ter liberis  lionorata,  frater  quidem
matrem  excludebat,  communis  au-
tem  erat  liereditas  ex  aequis  partibus
fratri.5  ct  sororisj.

3.  The  children  of  the  deceased  son
being  sui  hcredes,  or  ranked  as  such,
either  in  the  first  or  another  degree,
are  preferred  to  the  mother.     And  if
it  is  a  daughter  sui  juris  Avho  is  dead,
her  son,  or  daughter,  is  preferred  by
the  constitutions  to  her  mother,  i.e.
to  their  gTandmother.     The  father  of
the     deceased     is     preferred    to    the
motlier;    not   so   the    grandfather   or
great-grandfather,  at  least  when  they
and  the  mother  are  the  only  claimants
of   the  inheritance.     The  brother   by
the  same  father,  either  of  a  son  or  a
daughter,  excluded  the  mother;    but
the  sister  by  the  same  father  was  ad-
mitted equally  with  the  mother.     If
the  deceased  left  a  brother  and  a  sister
by   the   same   father  as   himself,    the
brother  excluded  the  mother,  although
rendered   capable   by  the  number  of
her  children,  and  the  inheritance  was
equally  divided  between  the  brother
and  sister.

D.  xxxviii.  17.  2.  15.  18,  19 ;  C.  vi.  56.  5.

The  mother  was  allowed  to  rank  among  the  agnati  by  the
senatus-considtum  TertulUanum,  but  she  had  a  relative  position
rather  than  a  definitive  position,  as  being  in  a  certain  degree  of
agnation.  What  her  exact  ])osition  was  at  different  periods  of
the  law  will  be  stated  at  the  end  of  the  Fourth  Title.

4.  Sed  nos  constitutione  quam  in
Codice  nostro  nomine  decorato  po-
suimus,    matri   subveniendum    esse
existimavimus,  respicientes   ad   na-
turam  et  puerperium  et  periciilum
et  ssepe  mortem  ex  hoc  casu  matri-
bus   illatam ;   ideoque  impium  esse
credidimus  casum  fortuitum  in  ejus
admitti  detrimentum.     Si  enim  in-
genua  ter  vel  libertina  quater  non
peperit,      immerito      defraudabatur
successione  suorum  liberorum ;  quid
enim  peccavit,   si  non    plures   sed
paucos  peperit?      Et   dedimus   jus
legitimum    plenum    matribus,    sive
ingenuis  sive  libertinis,  etsi  non  ter
enixse  fuerint  vel  quater,  sed  eum
tantum  vel   eam  qui  qu?eve  morte

4.  But  by  a  constitution,  inserted
in  the  Code  which   ].)ears   our  name,
we  have  thought  fit  to  come  to   the
aid  of  the  motlier,   from  considering-
natural  reason,  as  well   as   the  pains
of  child-birtli,  the  danger,  and  death
itself,  which  they  often  suffer.     We,
therefore,    have    esteemed    it    highly
unjust  that  the   law  should   turn   to
their  detriment  what  is  in  its  nature
purely   fortuitous  ;    for,  if   a  married
woman  free-born  does  not  give  birtli
to  three  children,  or  a  freedwoman  to
four,  they  do  not  therefore  deserve  to
be  deprived  of  the  succession  to  their
children.     For  how  can  it  be  imputed
to  them  as  a  crime  to  have  had  few
children?     We,  therefore,  have  given

LIB.  III.      TIT.  III.

281

intercepti  sunt,  ut  et  sic  vocentur  in
liberorum  suorum  leofitimam  succes-

sionem.

a  full  right  to  every  mother,  whether
free-born  or  freed,  to  be  called  to  the
legal  succession  of  her  children,
although  she  may  not  have  given
birth  to  three  or  four  children,  or  may
not  have  had  any  other  than  the  child
whose  inheritance  is  in  question.

C.  viii.  59.  2.

5.  Sed  cum  antea  constitutiones
jura  legitima)  successionis  perscru-
tantes,  partim  matrem  adjuvabant,
partim  earn  praegravabant  et  non  in
solidum  eam  vocabant ;  sed  in  qui-
busdam  casibus  tertiam  ei  partem
abstrahentes  certis  legitimis  dabant
personis,  in  aliis  autem  contrarium
faciebant,  nobis  visum  est  recta  et
simplici  A^ia  matrem  omnibus  per-
sonis  legitimis  anteponi,  et  sine  ulla
deminutione  filiorum  suorum  suc-
cessionem  accipere,  excepta  fratris
et  sororis  persona,  sive  consanguinei
sint,  sive  sola  cognationis  jura  ha-
bentes  ;  ut  quemadmodum  eam  toti
alii  ordini  legitimo  pr^eposuimus,
ita  omnes  fratres  et  sorores,  sive
logitimi  sunt  sive  non,  ad  capiendas
iiereditates  simul  vocemus ;  ita
tamen  ut,  si  quidem  soIdo  sorores
acjnatfB  vel  cognata)  et  mater  de-
f uncti  vel  defuncts©  supersint,  di-
midiam  quidem  mater,  alteram  vero
dimidiam  partem  omnes  sorores  ha-
beant.  Si  vero  matre  superstite  et
fratre  vel  fratribus  solis,  vel  etiam
cum  sororibus  sive  legitima  sive  sola
cognationis  jura  habentibus,  intes-
tatus  quis  vel  intestata  moriatur,  in
cai)ita  distribuatur  ejus  hereditas.

5.  The  constitutions  of  former
emperors,  relative  to  the  right  of
succession,  were  partly  favourable  to
mothers,  and  partly  unfavourable.
They  did  not  always  give  the  mothers
the  entire  inheritance  of  their  chil-
dren, but  in  some  cases  deprived  them
of  a  third,  which  was  given  to  certain
agiiati ;  and  in  other  cases,  doing  just
the  contrary,  gave  a  third.  But  it
seems  right  to  us  that  mothers  should
receive  the  succession  of  their  children
without  any  diminution,  and  that  they
should  be  decidedly  and  exclusively
preferred  before  all  legal  heirs,  except
the  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  de-
ceased, wliether  by  the  same  father  or
having  only  the  rights  of  cognation.
And  as  we  have  preferred  the  mother
to  all  other  legal  heirs,  we  call  all
brothers  and  sisters,  legal  or  not,
to  the  inheritance  together  with  the
mother,  the  foUovvdng  rule  being  ob-
served. If  there  are  living  only  sisters
agnate  or  cognatx,  and  the  mother  of
the  deceased,  the  mother  shall  have
one  half  of  the  goods,  and  the  sisters
the  other  half.  But  if  there  are  living
the  mother,  and  also  a  brother  or  bro-
thers only,  or  brothers  and  sisters,
Avhether  legal,  or  only  having  the
rights  of  coynati,  then  the  inheritance
of  the  intestate  son  or  daughter  shall
be  divided  in  capita.

C.  vii.  56.  T.

In  the  code  of  Theodosius  (v.  1.  1),  we  find  two  constitutions,
one  of  Constantine,  the  other  of  Valentinian  and  Yalens,  which
made  the  first  change  in  the  jus  liberorum  introduced  by  the  lepc
Papia  PoppcBa.  By  these  constitutions  it  was  enacted  that  if
there  were  persons  in  a  certain  degree  of  agnation  with  the
deceased,  namely,  a  paternal  uncle,  or  a  paternal  uncle's  son  or
grnndson,  or  an  emancipated  brother,  then  the  mother,  instead  of
excluding  them,  as,  if  she  had  \\\QJus  liberorum,  she  would  have
done,  divided  tlie  inheritance  wdth  them,  taking  two- thirds  if  she
had  t\\QJus  trium  liberorum,  and  one-third  if  she  had  not.  This
enactment  was,  therefore,  a  gain  to  those  who  had  not  the  jus
liberorum,  and  a  loss  to  those  Avho  had.     Justinian  did  away  alto-

282

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IV.

gether  with  the  jus  liherorum  and  the   distinctions  founded  upon
it.

6.  Sed  qiiemadmodiun  nos  matri-
Ibiis  prospeximus,  ita  ea,s  oportet  su«i
soboli  consiilere  :  scitiiris  eis  quod,
si  tutores  liberis  non  petierint,  vel
in  locum  remoti  vel  excusati  intra
annum  petere  neglexerint,  ab  eorum
impuberum  morientium  successione
repellentur.

0.  And  as  we  have  thus  taken  care
of  the  interests  of  the  mothers,  they
ought  in  return  to  consult  the  welfare
of  their  children.  Let  them  know,
then,  that  if  they  neglect,  during  the
space  of  a  whole  year,  to  demand  a
tutor  for  their  children,  or  to  ask  for
the  appointment  of  a  new  tutor  in  the
place  of  one  who  has  been  removed
or  excused,  they  v/ill  be  deservedly
repelled  from  the  succession  of  the
children,  if  they  die  before  the  age  of
puberty.

D.  xxxviii.  17.  2.  43.

7.  Licet  autem  vulgo  qusesitus  sit
filius  filiave,  potest  tamen  ad  bona
ejus  mater  ex  TertuUiano  senatus-
consulto  admitti.

7.  Although  a  son  or  a  daughter  is
born  of  an  uncertain  father,  yet  the
mother  may  be  admitted  to  succeed  to
their  goods  by  the  senatus-consulUim
Tertullianum.

The  natural  tie  is  all  that  is  regarded  in  this  case :  this  is
equally  strong  between  the  mother  and  child,  whoever  may  be
the  father.

Tit.  IV.     DE   SENATUS-CONSULTO  ORPHITIANO.

Per  contrarium  autem,  ut  liberi
ad  bona  matrum  intestatarum  ad-
mittantur  senatus-consulto  Orphi-
tiano,  Orphitio  et  Rufo  consul  ibus,
effectum  est,  quod  latum  est  divi
Ma,rci  temporibus ;  et  data  est  tam
filio  quam  filite  legitima  hereditas,
etiamsi  alieno  juri  subjecti  sunt,  et
pr?eferuntur  consanguineis  et  agna-
tis  defunct?e  matris.

Reciprocally  children  are  admitted
to  the  goods  of  their  intestate  mothers
by  the  senatus-considtum  Orphitiannm,
made  in  the  consulship  of  Orphitius
and  Rufus,  in  the  reign  of  the  Em-
peror Marcus  Antoninus.  By  this
senatus-consnltum  the  legal  inherit-
ance is  given  both  to  the  sons  and
daughters,  although  in  the  power  of
another,  and  they  are  preferred  to  the
consangulnel,  and  to  the  agnati  of  their
deceased  mother.

D.  xxxviii.  17.  9 ;  C.  vi.  57.  1.

The  senatus-consultum  Orpldtianum  was  made  a.d.  178,  in
the  time  of  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Commodus.  Previously,  chil-
dren could  not  succeed  to  their  mother,  except  as  cognati.  But
by  this  senatus-consultum  they  were  preferred  to  the  consanguinel,
that  is,  the  agnati  of  the  second  degree,  or,  in  other  words,  brothers
and  sisters,  natural  or  adoptive,  as  well  as  to  all  other  agnati.
They  were  not,  however,  preferred  to  the  mother  of  the  deceased,
who  derived  her  right  of  succession  from  the  senatus-consultum
Tertullianum,  but  they  shared  the  inheritance  with  her.  Her
claim  to  share  it  with  them  was,  however,  subsequently  taken
away  by  a  constitution  (C.  vi.  57.  4)  of  Gratian,  Valentinian,
and  Theodosius.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IV.

283

1.  Sed  cum  ex  hoc  senatus-con-
sulto  nepotes  ad  avise  successionem
legitimo  jure  non  vocabantur,  pos-
tea  hoc  constitutionibus  principali-
bus  emendatum  est,  ut  ad  similitu-
dinem  iiliorum  filiarumque  et  ne-
potes et  neptes  vocentur.

1.  But  since  grandsons  and  gi-and-
daughters  were  not  called  by  this
senatus-consultmn  to  the  legal  succes-
sion of  their  grandmother,  the  omis-
sion was  afterwards  supplied  by  the
imperial  constitutions,  and  grandsons
and  granddaughters  were  called  to
inherit,  just  as  sons  and  daughters
had  been.

C.  vi.  55.  9.

The  constitution  enacting  this

given

in   the  Code  is  one  of

Valentinian,  Theodosius,  and  Arcadius.

2.  Sciendum  autem  est,  hu jus-
modi  successiones  quse  a  Tertulliano
et  Orphitiano  deferuntur,  capitis
deminutione  non  perimi,  propter
illam  regulam  qua  nov^e  hereditates
legitim?e  capitis  deminutione  non
pereunt,  sed  ill^e  solos  qure  ex  lege
duodecim  tabularum  deferuntur.

2.  It  must  be  observed  that  these
successions,  derived  from  the  senatus-
consulta  Tertullimmm  and  Orphitla-
lium,  are  not  lost  by  a  capitis  demi-
nutio.  The  rule  is,  that  legitimate
inheritances  given  by  the  late  law  are
not  destroyed  by  capitis  deminutio,
which  afiects  those  only  that  are  given
by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.

It  is  only  the  minima  capitis  deminutio  which  is  here  spoken
of.  Any  one  who  sustained  the  maxima  or  minor  deminutio,  as  he
ceased  to  be  a  citizen,  ceased  to  have  any  rights  of  succession.

3.  Novissime  sciendum  est,  etiam  3.   Lastly,   it   must    be    observed,

illos  liberos  qui  vulgo  quj^esiti  sunt,  that  even  children  born  of  an  un-
ad  matris  hereditatem  ex  hoc  sena-  certain  father  are  admitted  by  the
tus-coiisulto  admitti.  "  senatns-consnltum.  Or^^hltianum  to  the

inheritance  of  their  mother.

D.  xxxviii.  17.  1,2.

Justinian  afterwards  altered  this,  so  as  to  exclude  such  chil-
dren from  the  inheritance  of  their  mother,  if  she  was  of  hisfh
rank  {iUustris;\  or  if   she  had  other   children    born    in  lawful

marriao^e.

(C.  vi.  57.  5.)

4.  Si  ex  pluribus  legitimis  heredi-
bus  quidam  omiserint  hereditatem,
vel  morte  vel  aha  causa  impediti
fuerint  quominus  adeant,  reliquis
qui  adierint,  accrescit  illorum  portio;
et  licet  ante  decesserint  qui  adierint,
ad  heredes  tamen  eorum  pertinet.

4.  When  there  are  many  legal
heirs,  and  some  renounce  the  in-
heritance, or  are  prevented  by  death,
or  any  other  cause,  from  accepting
it,  then  the  portions  of  such  persons
accrue  to  those  who  accept  the  in-
heritance :  and  if  any  of  those  who
accept  happen  to  die  beforehand,  the
portions  accruing  to  them  will  go  to
their  heirs.

D.  xxxviii.  16.  9.

This  paragraph  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  *S*.  ('.  Orphitiamim.
It  refers  to  the  right  of  accrual  enjoyed  by  all  heredes  lefjitimi.
If  any  of  those  called  to  share  an  inheritance  did  not  take  liis
share,  it  was  divided  among  all  those  who  entered  on  the  inherit-
ance ;  and,  if  any  of  those  who  had  entered  died  before  receiving
the  share  that  accrued  to  him,  this  accruing  share   passed  to  his

284  LIB.  III.      TIT.  IV.

heirs,  his  interest  in  it  having  become  fixed,  and  made  transmis-
sible to  his  heirs  by  his  entering  on  the  inheritance.

The  following  Avere  the  principal  changes  in  the  law  of  the
succession  of  the  agnati.  By  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
agnati,  i.e.  collaterals  in  the  same  civil  family,  succeeded  in
default  of  sui  heredes.  Subsequently,  different  classes  of  persons
were  allowed  to  rank  as  agnativ^ho  were  not  so.  1.  Emancipated
brothers  and  sisters  were  allowed  to  rank  as  agnati  by  Anastasius,
and  their  children  were  allowed  to  do  so  by  Justinian.  2.  Under
Justinian,  a  peculiar  order  of  succession  was  fixed  on  for  persons
emancipated  ;  first  came  their  children  ;  secondly,  their  brothers
and  sisters  ;  thirdly,  the  ascendant  emancipator.  3.  Justinian
placed  uterine  brothers  and  sisters,  and  their  children,  on  the
same  footing  as  consanguinei  and  their  children.  4.  The  mother
was  allowed  to  succeed  to  her  children  by  the  senatus-consultum
Tertullianum,  and  children  to  their  mother  by  the  senatus-
consultant  Oiyliitianum.  As  tliis  is  a  subject  of  some  complexity,
it  is  treated  separately  at  the  end  of  this  note.  5.  Grandchildren
succeeded  to  their  grandmother  by  a  constitution  of  Yalentinian,
Theodosius,  and  Arcadius.     (Tit.  4.  1.)

There  were  also  two  other  points,  besides  the  admission  of
these  persons  excluded  by  the  strict  definition  of  agnati,  in  which
the  law  underwent  alterations.  First,  the  Twelve  Tables  made
no  distinction  of  sex  in  the  agnati ;  the  prudentes  limited  the
succession  of  females  to  the  second  de2:ree.  Justinian  restored
the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  on  this  point,  and  permitted  no
distinction  of  sex.  (Tit.  2.  3.)  Secondly,  under  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  there  was  no  devolution  among  the  agnati',  if  the
nearest  refused,  the  more  remote  could  not  come  in  their  place  ;
«Justinian  permitted  such  a  devolution  to  take  place.     (Tit.  2.  7.)

To  have  a  place  in  the  succession  under  the  S.  C.  TertuUia-
num,  the  mother  must  have  the  jus  liberorum,  the  privileges
accorded  to  free  persons  having  three  or  freed  persons  having  four
children,  and  she  had  not  a  definite  place,  but  one  varying  ac-
cording as  there  were  or  were  not  other  persons  to  preclude  or
share  her  claim.  The  chief  provisions  of  the  law  on  this  head  may
be  stated  as  follows  : —

We  will  first  consider  the  position  of  the  mother,  having  the
jus  Uherorurn,  when  the  father  is  dead.  1.  If  her  son  died  leaving
children,  his  children,  if  in  his  family,  w^ould  succeed  as  sui
heredes.  But  these  children  might  be  in  an  adoptive  family,  and
so  have  no  claim,  previously  to  Justinian's  legislation,  to  the  in-
lieritance  of  their  natural  father.  If  there  were  agnati  of  the
d.eccased,  then  the  conflict  was  between  the  mother  and  these
agnatic  and  tlie  mother  excluded  them.  If  there  were  no  agnati,
then  the  conflict  was  between  the  mother  and  the  children  as
cognati,  and  the  children  excluded  the  mother.  (D.  xxxviii.
17.  2.  9.)  If  her  daughter  died  leaving  children,  they  shared
with    the    dau2;hter's    mother    under   the     *S'.    C.     Tertullianum

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IV.  285

(Tit.  4.  pr.),  and  excluded  her  under  a  constitution  of  Gratian.
2.  If  her  son  or  daughter  died  childless  and  without  brothers  or
sisters  living,  the  mother  took.  If  there  was  a  brother  of  the
deceased,  he  excluded  the  mother  and  shared  with  the  sisters,  if
any.  If  there  were  no  brothers,  but  there  were  sisters,  the  mother
shared  with  them.  (Tit.  3.  3.)  Until  we  get  to  the  legislation  of
Justinian,  it  is  only  of  brothers  and  sisters  by  the  same  father,  con-
san(/uinei{cB),  thutyve  are  speaking.  3.  Under  the  later  emperors,
previously  to  Justinian,  the  position  of  tlie  mother  with  regard
to  acpiati  of  the  third  or  a  remoter  degree  was  changed  under  a
constitution  of  Constantine.  If  the  mother  had  not  the  jus
Uberorum.^  she  was  no  longer  excluded  by  such  agnatic  but  took
one- third  of  the  inheritance.  If  she  had  the  jus  liber oruiriy  she
no  longer  excluded  them  altogether,  but  only  took  two-thirds.
Under  a  constitution  of  Theodosius  she  was  placed  in  the  same
position  with  regard  to  a  brother  of  the  deceased  who  had  passed
out  of  the  family.     (Tit.  3.  5.)

Secondly,  we  will  take  the  case  of  the  father  as  w^ell  as  the
mother  having  the  jus  llherorum  being  alive.  1.  The  father
took  if  in  the  same  family  wdth  the  deceased  chikl ;  but  the  father
might  have  been  emancipated  or  given  in  adoption,  and  the
deceased  child  not.  Here,  if  there  were  ngnati  of  the  deceased,  the
mother  was  excluded  if  there  was  a  brother  of  \^q  deceased  amono;
the  agnati ;  she  shared  with  sisters,  and  excluded  remoter  agnati.
If  there  were  no  agnati,  then  the  conflict  was  between  the  father
as  one  of  the  cognati  and  the  mother,  and  then  the  father  excluded
the  mother.  (D.  xxxviii.  17.  2.  17.)  2.  If  there  was  a  grand-
father and  the  father  was  dead,  the  mother  excluded  the  grand-
father ;  but  if  the  father  was  living  and  the  deceased  had  been
emancipated,  then,  if  the  mother  was  preferred  to  the  grand-
father, the  father  would  be  preferred  to  the  mother  (Tit.  3.  3),
and  the  grandfather  to  the  father.  So  it  was  simpler  to  say  that
the  grandfather  w^as  preferred  to  the  mother.  (D.  xxxviii.  17.
5.  2.)  It  is  said  in  the  text  of  Tit.  3.  3.  that  the  mother  is  pre-
ferred to  the  grandfather,  but  not  to  the  father  when  the  conflict
is  directly  between  them.  If  the  father  was  living  in  the  case
just  mentioned,  the  conflict  was  not  between  the  mother  and  the
grandfather,  but  between  the  mother  and  the  father,  and  it  -was
through  the  l\ither  that  the  grandfather  v/as  preferred,  just  as  the
mother  was  preferred  to  the  father  when  the  conflict  was  not
between  them  directly,  but  between  the  mother  and  the  agnati
as  noticed  in  the  foregoing  case  (No.  1).

Justinian  made  the  following  changes  affecting  the  position  of
the  mother.  1.  He  entirel}^  did  away  with  t\\QJus  liber orum,  and
put  all  mothers  on  an  equality.  (Tit.  3.  5.)  2.  He  put  eman-
cipated and  uterine  brothers  and  sisters  and  their  children  on  a
level  with  consanguinei[cE),  and  they  therefore  had  to  be  taken
into  account  when  the  mother's  position  had  to  be  determined
with  regard  to  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  deceased.

286  LIB.  III.      TIT.  V.

Some  other  minor  points  as  to  the  succession  of  mothers  and
children  are  worth  noticing.  (1)  The  rule  as  to  there  being  no
devolution  among  ar/nati  did  not  apply  to  the  mother.  If  the
agnatl  who  preceded  her  refused,  she  took ;  if  she  refused,  the
ogiiati  Avhom  she  preceded  took.  (D.  xxxviii.  17.  29.  14.  20.)
(2)  The  minima  capitis  deminutio  did  not  interfere  with  succes-
sions under  the  S.  C.  Tertullianum  or  Or jjhitianum  (Tlit.  4.  2);
and  (3)  children  born  of  an  uncertain  father  inherited  from  their
mother  under  the  S,  C.  Orphitianum  (Tit.  4.  3),  and  their  mother
from  them  under  the  S.  C.  Tertullianum  {Tit,  3.  7).  (4)  Mothers
were  excluded  from  succeeding  to  their  children  dying  under  the
age  of  puberty,  if  they  had  not  provided  them  with  tutors.
(Tit.  3.  6.)

Tit.  V.     DE   SUCCESSIOXE  COGNATOKUM.

Post  siios  lieredes,  eosque  quos  After    tlie    sui  heredes    and   those

inter  suos  heredes  pmetor  et  consti-  whom   the   praetor  and   the   constitu-

tutiones  vocant,  et  post   legitunos,  tions   call   to   inherit   among  the   sui

quorum  numero  sunt  agnati,  et  hi  heredes,  and  after  the  legal  heirs,  that

quos     in     locum     agnatorum     tam  is,    the   agnati  and   those   whom  the

supradicta    senatus-consulta     quam  above-mentioned  senatus-consulta  and

nostra  erexit  constitutio,  proximos  our   constitution   have  placed   among

cognatos  prsetor  vocat.  the  agnati,  the  praetor  calls  the  nearest

cognati.

D.  xxxviii.  15.  1 ;  D.  xxxviii.  7.  2.  4.

The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  recognised  only  the  succession
of,  (1)  szii  heredes;  (2)  agnati;  (3)  gentiles.  If  there  were  no
gentiles,  the  inheritance  lapsed  to  the  state.  In  plebeian  families,
or  rather  in  such  plebeian  families  as  were  not  parts  of  a  23lebeian
gens,  if  there  were  no  agnati,  the  inheritance  would  lapse  at
once.

The  subject  of  gentilitas  is  too  obscure,  and  repays  investiga-
tion too  little,  to  permit  us  to  enter  into  it  here.  Probably  the
original  notion  of  gentiles  was  that  of  members  of  some  pure
uncorrupted  patrician  stock,  though  not  necessarily  of  the  same
descent,  but  bearing  the  same  name,  and  having  the  same  sacra.
(See  Introd.  sec.  2.)  Probably,  also,  freedmen  and  clients  of
gentiles  were,  in  some  degree,  considered  as  themselves  gentiles ;
probably  if  their  property  was  not  claimed  by  their  patron,  it
went  to  the  members  of  his  geiis,  but  they  had  not  any  claim  on
the  property  of  any  other  gentilis.  We  know  also  that  there
were  plebeian  gentes,  formed  probably  by  the  marriage  of  a  pa-
trician with  a  plebeian  before  the  plehs  received  the  conniibium.
Members  of  plebeian  gentes  would,  we  may  suppose,  have  the
rights  of  gentilitas  towards  other  members  of  the  same  plebeian
gens,  bat  whether  they  had  them  towards  the  members  of  the
patrician  gens,  from  which  they  were  an  offset,  is  wholly  uncer-
tain.    Of  the  mode  in  which  the  gentiles  took  the  inheritance,  we

LIE.  III.      TIT.  V.

287

know  nothing,  nor  at  liow  late  a  period  of  history  the  gentes  were
still  really  in  existence.  Gains  {\\i.  17)  treats  the  subject  as  one
of  mere  antiquarian  interest.  Probably  at  the  time  of  the  praetors'
legislation  there  were  few  families  that  could  boast  a  descent
so  pure  and  accurately  known  as  to  satisfy  the  requisites  of
gentilitas.  At  any  rate,  the  pri\3tors  felt  themselves  at  liberty
to  favour,  in  every  way,  the  tie  of  blood,  and  they  accordingly
called  the  cognati  to  the  succession.

1.  It  is  the  natural  relationship
that  is  here  looked  to  ;  thus  agnati
who  have  undergone  a  capitis  demi-
nutio  and  their  descendants  are  not
included  among  the  legal  heirs  by  the
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  but  they
are  called  by  the  praetor  in  the  third
order.  We  must  except  an  emanci-
pated brother  or  sister,  but  not  their
children.  For  the  law  of  Anastasius,
calling  an  emancipated  brother  or
sister,  together  with  brothers  whose
rights  still  exist  unaltered,  to  the
legal  succession  of  their  brother  or
sister,  not,  indeed,  giving  them  an
equal  share,  but  making  a  deduction
set  forth  in  the  constitution,  prefers,
them  to  all  agnati  of  an  inferior  de-
gree, even  though  tliese  agnati  have
undergone  no  capitis  deminutio,  and>
of  course,  prefers  them  to  all  cognati.

Gai.  iii.  21.  27  ;  C.  v.  30.  4.

We  have  already  spoken  of  this  lex  Anastasiana  in  the  note
to  Tit.  2.  4,  and  noticed  the  constitution  of  534,  by  which  Jus-
tinian admitted  as  agnati  the  children  of  emancipated  brothers
and  sisters,  and  did  away  with  the  deduction  mentioned  in  the
text,  namely,  that  of  one-fourth.

2.   Hos  etiam  qui   per   feminini  2.   Collateral  relations  united  only

sexus   personas   ex   transverso  cog-  by  the  female  line  are  also  called  by

natione     junguntur,     tertio     gradu  the  praetor  in  the  third  order  of  suc-

XDroximitatis  nomine  pra3tor  ad  sue-  cession,  according  to  their  proximity,
cessionem  vocat.

Gai.  iii.  30.

1.  Qua  parte  naturalis  cognatio
specta^tur ;  nam  agnati  capite  demi-
nuti,  quique  ex  his  progeniti  sunt,
ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum  inter
legitimos  non  habentur,  sed  a  pras-
tore  tertio  ordine  vocantur.  Exceptis
solis  tantummodo  fratre  et  sorore
emancipatis,  non  etiam  liberis  eo-
rum,  quos  lex  Anastasiana  cum  fra-
tribus  integri  juris  constitutis  vocat
quidem  ad  legitimam  fratris  heredi-
tatem  sive  sororis,  non  eequis  tamen
partibus,  sed  cum  aliqua  deminu-
tione  quam  facile  est  ex  ipsius  con-
stitutionis  verbis  coUigere.  Aliis
vero  agnatis  inferioris  gradus,  licet
capitis  deminutionem  passi  non  sunt,
tamen  eos  anteponit,  et  procul  dubio
coofnatis.

3.  Liberi  quoque  qui  in  adoptiva
familia  sunt,  ad  naturalium  paren-
tmn  hereditatem  hoc  eodem  gradu
vocantur.

Gai.

3.  Children,  who  are  in  an  adoptive
family,  are  likewise  called  in  the  third
order  of  succession  to  the  inheritance
of  their  natural  parents.

iii.  31.

Justinian's  change  in  the  law  of  adoption  lelt  the  adoptive
child,  unless  adopted  by  an  ascendant,  in  his  natural  family,  and,
therefore,  he  could  come  in  as  a  suus  heres,  or  agnatus,  and  not
merely  as  a  cognatus.      But  the  text  would  still  be   applicable

288

LIB.  III.      TIT.  VI.

to  persons  adopted  by  an  ascendant  and  to  persons  &vi  juris,  who

arroGfated  themselves.

4.  Vulgo  qufiesitos  nullum  habere
agnatum  maiiifestuni  est,  cum  agna-
tic a  patre,  cognatio  a  ma,tre  sit :  lii
autem  nullum  patrem  habere  intel-
liguntur.  Eadem  ratione  nee  inter
se  quiclem  possunt  vicleri  consan-
guinei  esse,  quia  consanguinitatis
jus  species  est  agnp.tionis ;  tantum
igitur  cognati  sunt  sibi,  sicut  et
matris  cognatis.  Itaque  omnibus
istis  ea  parte  competit  bonorum
possessio,  qua  proximitatis  nomine
cognati  vocantur.

4.  It  is  manifest  that  children  born
of  an  uncertain  father  have  no  wjuciti,
inasmuch  as  agnation  proceeds  from
the  father,  cognation  from  the  mother,
and  such  children  are  looked  upon  as
having  no  father.  And,  for  the  same
reason,  consanguinity  cannot  be  said
to  subsist  between  these  children,  be-
cause consanguinity  is  a  species  of
agnation.  They  can,  therefore,  only
be  allied  to  each  other  as  cognati  by
being  related  by  their  mother  ;  and  it
is  for  this  reason  that  all  such  children
are  admitted  to  the  possession  of  goods,
which  calls  the  cognati  according  to
their  degree  of  proximity.

D.  xxxviii.  8.  2.  4.

5.  Hoc  loco  et  illud  necessario  ad-
monendi  sumus,  agnationis  quidem
jure  admitti  aliquem  ad  hereditatem,
etsi  decimo  gradu  sit,  sive  de  lege
cluodecim  tabularum  quseramus,  sive
de  edicto  quo  prsetor  legitimis  here-
4ibus  daturum  bonorum  possessio-
nem pollicetur.  Proximitatis  vero
nomine  iis  solis  prrstor  promittit
bonorum  possessionem,  qui  usque
.ad  sextum  gradum  cognationis  sunt,
et  ex  septimo  a  sobrino  sobrinaque
;iiato  nata3ve.

5.  Here  we  may  observe,  that  by
right  of  agnation  any  one  may  be
admitted  to  inherit,  although  in  the
tenth  degree,  both  by  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  and  by  the  edict  in
which  the  prajtor  promises  that  he
will  give  the  possession  of  goods  to
the  legal  heirs.  But  the  prsetor  pro-
mises the  possession  of  goods  to  cog-
natl  according  to  their  proximity  only
as  far  as  the  sixth  degree  of  cognation,
and  in  the  seventh  degree  to  those
cognati  who  are  the  children  of  a
second  cousin.

D.  xxxviii.  IG.  2.  2.  4;  D.  xxxviii.  8.  1.  3 ;  D.  xxxviii.  8.  9.

The  acfiiati  were  not  limited  by  the  tenth  degree.  (See  Tit.
■€.  12.)  This  degree  is  only  given  as  an  instance  of  how  f;jr
the  succession  might  go.  But  the  sixth  degree  vv-as  the  limit,  with
the  exception  given  in  the  text,  of  the  succession  of  cognati.

Tit.  VI.    DE   GRADIBUS  COGNATIONIS.

Hoc  loco  necessarium  est  expo-
nere  quemadmodum  gradus  cogna-
tionis numerentur  :  quare  in  primis
admonendi  sumus  cognationem
•aliam  supra  numerari,  aliam  infra,
aliam  ex  transverso,  quae  etiam  a
latere  dicitur.  Superior  cognatio
est  parentum,  inferior  liberorum,
•ex  transverso  fratrum  sororumve,
eorumque  qui  qussve  ex  his  proge-
nerantur,  et  convenienter  patrui,
umitse,  avunculi,  materterse.  Et
superior  quidem  et  inferior  cognatio

It  is  necessary  to  explain  here  how
the  degrees  of  cognation  are  com-
puted ;  and  first  we  must  observe,
that  one  cognation  is  reckoned  by
ascending,  a  second  by  descending,
and  a  third  by  going  transversely,  or,
as  it  is  also  called,  collaterally.  The
cognation  reckoned  by  ascending  is
that  of  ascendants ;  that  reckoned  by
descending  is  that  of  descendants  ;
that  reckoned  transversely  is  that  of
brothers  and  sisters,  and  their  issue,
and  consequently  that  of  uncles  and

LIB.  III.      TIT.  VI.

289

a  primo  gradii  incipit ;  at  ea  quae  ex     aunts,  whether  paternal  or  maternal.

transverse  numeratur,  a  secundo.  In  the  ascending  and  descending  cog-
nation the  nearest  cognatus  is  in  the
first  degree;  in  the  transverse,  the
nearest  is  in  the  second.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  1,  pr.  and  1.

1.  Primo  gradu  est  supra  pater  1.  In  the  first  degree  are,  ascend-
mater,  infra  filius  filia.                            ing,   a  father  or  a  mother ;    descend-
ing, a  son  or  a  daughter.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  1.  3.

2.  Secundo,  supra  avus  avia,  infra  2.  In  the  second  degree  are,  as-
nepos  neptis,  ex  transverso  frater  cending,  a  grandfather  or  a  grand-
soror.                                                            mother ;    descending,    a   grandson   or

granddaughter ;  in  the  collateral  line,
a  brother  or  a  sister.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  1.  4.

3.  Tertio,  supra  proavus  proavia,
infra  pronepos  proneptis,  ex  trans-
verso fratris  sororisque  filius  filia,  et
convenienter  patruus  amita,  avun-
culus matertera.  Patruus  est  frater
patris,  qui  Greece  7ra-fj(tiog  vocatur;
avunculus  est  frater  matris,  qui  apud
Greecos  proprie  p.i)ti.h?)uc  et  promis-
cue  ffiof  dicitur.  Amita  est  patris
soror,  matertera  vero  matris  soror :
utraque  ^tia,  vel  apud  quosdam
rj;t-<(,-  appellatur.

3.  In  the  third  degree  are,  ascend-
ing, a  great-grandfather  or  a  great-
grandmother  ;  descending,  a  great-
grandson  or  great  -  granddaughter  ;
in  the  collateral  line,  the  son  or
daughter  of  a  brother  or  sister  ;  and
so  accordingly  are  an  uncle  or  an
aunt,  whether  paternal  or  maternal.
Patruus  is  a  father's  brother,  called
in  Greek  -n-arfx^ng ;  avunculus  is  a
mother's  brother,  in  Greek  ^//ro^jJof  ;
f/iiof  is  applied  indifierently  to  either;
amita  is  a  father's  sister,  matertera  a
mother's  sister,  and  each  is  called  in
Greek  fct^a,  indifierently,  and.  some-
times TtjI-tL.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  1.  5 ;  D.  xxxviii.  10.  10.  14.

Schraecler  substitutes  in  the  text  Trdrpois  and  /jbrjTpcjs,  which
are  the  forms  used  in  classical  Greek.

4.  Quarto  gradu,  supra  abavus
abavia,  mfra  abnepos  abneptis,  ex
transverso  fratris  sororisque  nepos
neptis,  et  convenienter  patruus  mag-
nus  amita  magna,  id  est,  avi  frater
et  soror ;  item  avunculus  magnus  et
matertera  magna,  id  est,  avise  fra-
ter et  soror ;  consobrinus  consobrina,
id  est,  qui  quseve  ex  fratribus  aut
sororibus  progenerantur.  Sed  qui-
dam  recte  consobrinos  eos  proprie
dici  putant,  qui  ex  duabus  sororibus
progenerantur,  quasi  consororinos  ;
eos  vero  qui  ex  duobus  fratribus
progenerantur,  proprie  fratres  pa-
trueles  vocari  :  si  autem  ex  duobus
fratribus  fili^e  nascuntur,  sorores
patrueles  appellari;  at  eos  qui  ex
fratre   et   sorore  propagantur,  ami-

4.  In  the  fourth  degree  are,  as-
cending, a  great-great-grandfather,
or  a  great-great-grandmother ;  de-
scending, a  great-great-grandson,  or
a  great-great-granddaughter;  in  the
collateral  line,  the  grandson  or  the
granddaughter  of  a  brother  or  a
sister ;  as  also  a  great-uncle  or  great-
aunt,  paternal,  that  is,  the  brother  or
sister  of  a  grandfather;  or  maternal,
that  is,  the  brother  or  sister  of  a
grandmother;  and  first  cousins,  that
is,  the  cMldren  of  brothers  or  sisters  ;
but  to  speak  strictly,  according  to
some,  it  is  the  children  of  sisters
that  are  properly  called  consohrlni,  as
if  consororini ;  the  children  of  bro-
thers are  properly  fratres  patrueles,  if
males ;  sorores  patrueles,  if  females ;
U

290

LIB.  III.      TIT.  VI.

tinos  proprie  dici.  Amitas  tuae  filii  the  children  of  a  "brother  and  of  a
consobrinum  te  appellant,  tu  illos  sister  are  properly  amitini  ;  the  chil-
amitinos.  dren    of    your    amita   (aunt    by    tli€

father's    side)    call    you    consobrinus.

and  you  call  them  amitmi.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  L  6.

We  see  from  the  concluding  words  of  this  paragraph,  thai
consobrinus  was  used  in  another  sense  than  its  strict  one  of  '  on€
of  the  children  of  two  sisters.'

5.  In  the  fifth  degree  are,  ascending,
a  great-grandfather's  grandfather,  oi
a  great-grandfather's  grandmother
descending,  a  gTeat-grandson  or  a
great-granddaughter  of  a  grandson  oi
granddaughter  ;  in  the  collateral  line,
a  great-grandson  or  great-grand-
daughter of  a  brother  or  sister,  as
also  a  great-grandfather's  brother  oi
sister,  or  a  great-grandmother's  bro-
ther or  sister ;  also,  the  son  or  daughtei
of  a  first  cousin,  that  is,  of  a  f rater  oi
soror  patruelis,  of  a  consobrinus  oi
consobriyia,  or  of  an  amitinus  or  amir
Una  ;  also  cousins  who  precede  by  a
degree  second  cousins,  that  is,  the
son  or  daughter  of  a  great-uncle  oi
great-aunt,  paternal  or  maternal.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  1.  7.

Propior  sobrino  is,  to  use  the  exact  equivalent,  a  first  cousin
once  removed.  He  is  one  degree  nearer  (^propior)  than  a  sobrinus
or  second  cousin.

5.  Quinto,  supra  atavus  atavia,
infra  adneptos  adneptis,  ex  trans-
verso  fratris  sororisque  pronepos
proneptis,  et  convenienter  propa-
truus  proamita,  id  est,  proavi  frater
et  soror ;  proavunculus  promater-
tera,  id  est,  proaviae  frater  et  soror.
Item  fratris  patruelis  sororis  patru-
elis, consobrini  consobrinae,  amitini
amitinae  filius  filia,  propior  sobrino
propior  sobrina.  Hi  sunt  patrui
magni  amitae  magnae,  avunculi
magni  materterae  magnas  filius  filia.

6.  Sexto  gradu,  supra  tritavus
tritavia,  infra  trinepos  trineptis,  ex
transverso  fratris  sororisque  abne-
pos  abneptis,  et  convenienter  ab-
patruus  abamita,  id  est,  abavi  frater
et  soror,  abavunculus  abmatertera,
id  est,  abaviae  frater  et  soror.  Item
sobrini  sobrinaeque,  id  est,  qui
quaeve  ex  fratribus  vel  sororibus
patruelibus  vel  consobrinis  vel  ami-
tinis  progenerantur.

6.  In  the  sixth  degree  are,  ascend-
ing, a  great  -  grandfather's  great  -
grandfather,  or  a  great-grandfather's
great-grandmother ;  descending,  the
great-grandson  or  great-granddaugh-
ter of  a  great-grandson  or  a  great-
granddaughter  ;  in  the  collateral  line,
a  great-great-grandson  or  a  great-
great-granddaughter  of  a  brother  or
sister  ;  as  also,  a  great-great-grand-
father's brother  or  sister,  and  a  great-
great-grandmother's  brother  or  sister  ;
also,  second  cousins,  that  is,  the  sons
and  daughters  of  first  cousins  in
general,  whether  the  first  cousins  are
sprung  from  two  brothers  or  two
sisters,  or  a  brother  and  a  sister.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  3.

The  nomenclature  proper  to  the  different  degrees  stops  here,
because  the  sixth  degree  was  the  limit  of  cognation.

7.  Hactenus  ostendisse  sufiiciet,  7.   It  is  sufiicient  to  have   showTi

quemadmodum   gradus    cognationis     thus  far  how  degrees  of  cognation  are

LIE.  III.      TIT.  VI.

291

numerentur  ;  namque  ex  his  palam
est  intelligere  qiiemadniodum  ulte-
riores  quoqiie  gradus  niimerare  de-
beamus,  quippe  semper  generata
quaeque  persona  gradum  adjiciat  :
ut  longe  facilius  sit  respondere
quoto  quisque  gradu  sit,  quam  pro-
pria cognationis  appellatione  qiiem-
quam  denotare.

reckoned ;  and,  from  the  examples
given,  the  more  remote  degrees  may
be  computed ;  for  each  generation
always  adds  one  degree ;  so  that  it  is
much  easier  to  determine  in  what
degree  any  person  is  related  to  an-
other than  to  denote  such  person  by
his  proper  term  of  cognation.

D.  xxxviii.  10.  10.  9.

8.  Agnationis  quoque  gradus  eo-  8.    The    degrees   of    agnation   are

dem  modo  numerantur.  reckoned  in  the  same  manner.

9.  Sed  cum  magis  Veritas  oculata
fide  quam  per  aures  animis  hominum
infigitur,  ideo  necessarium  duximus
post  narrationem  graduum  etiam
eos  pra3senti  libro  inscribi,  quatenus
possint  et  auribus  et  oculoriim  in-
spectione  adolescentes  perfectissi-
mam  graduum  doctrinam  adipisci.

9.  But  as  truth  is  fixed  in  the  mind
much  better  by  the  eye  than  by  the
ear,  we  have  thought  it  necessary  to
subjoin,  to  the  account  given  of  the
degrees,  a  table  of  them,  that  the
young  student,  both  by  hearing  and
by  seeing,  may  gain  a  perfect  know-
ledge of  them.

Justinian  intended  that  a  scheme  of  relationship  shoukl  be
here  inserted  ;  but  as  the  degrees  of  relationship  are  sufficiently
obvious,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  place  a  scheme  before  the  eyes
of  the  modern  reader.

10.  lUud  certum  est,  ad  serviles
cognationes  illam  partem  edicti,  qua
proximitatis  nomine  bonorum  pos-
sessio  promittitur,  non  pertinere  ;
nam  nee  uUa  antiqua  lege  talis  cog-
natio  computabatur.  Sed  nostra
constitutione  quam  pro  jure  patro-
natus  fecimus  (quod  jus  usque  ad
nostra  tempora  satis  obscurum  atque
nube  plenum  et  undique  confusum
fuerat)  et  hoc  humanitate  sugge-
rente  concessimus,  ut  si  quis  in  ser-
vili  consortio  constitutus  liberum
vel  liberos  habuerit  sive  ex  libera
sive  ex  servilis  conditionis  muliere,
vel  contra  serva  mulier  ex  libero  vel
servo  habuerit  liberos  cujuscumque
sexus,  et  ad  libertatem  his  perveni-
entibus,  et  ii  qui  ex  servili  ventre
nati  sunt  libertatem  meruerint,  vel
dum  mulieres  liberie  erant,  ipsi  in
servitute  eos  habuerint,  et  postea
ad  libertatem  pervenerint  :  ut  hi
omnes  ad  successionem  patris  vel
matris  veniant,  patronatus  jure  in
hac  parte  sopito.  Hos  enim  liberos,
non  sohim  in  suorum  parentum
successionem,  sed  etiam  alteram  in
alterius  mutuam  successionem  vo-
cavimus  :  ex  ilia  lege  specialiter  eos
vocantes,  sive  soli  inveniantur  qui
in   servitute  nati   et   postea  manu-

10.  It  is  certain  that  the  part  of  the
edict  in  which  the  possession  of  goods
is  promised  according  to  the  degree  of
proximity,  does  not  apply  to  servile
cognation,  which  was  not  recognised
by  any  ancient  law.  But,  by  our  con-
stitution concerning  the  right  of  pa-
tronage, a  right  hitherto  so  obscure,
so  cloudy  and  confused,  we  have
enacted,  from  a  feeling  of  humanity,
that  if  a  slave  shall  have  a  child  or
children,  either  by  a  free  woman  or  a
slave,  and  reciprocally  if  a  female
slave  shall  have  a  child  or  children  of
either  sex  by  a  freeman  or  a  slave,
then  if  the  father  and  mother  are
enfranchised,  and  the  children,  whose
mother  was  a  slave,  become  also  free,
or  if  the  children  of  a  free  mother
have  a  slave  as  father,  and  this  slave
afterwards  attain  his  freedom,  these
children  shall  all  succeed  to  their
father  or  mother,  the  right  of  patron-
age in  this  case  lying  dormant.  And
we  have  called  these  children  to  suc-
ceed not  only  to  their  parents,  but
also  mutually  to  each  other,  and  thnt
whether  they  have  all  been  born  in
servitude  and  afterwards  enfrancliised,
or  whether  they  succeed  with  others
who  were  conceived  after  the  en-
franchisement of  their  parents ;    and

V  2

292

LIB.  III.     TIT.  VI.

missi  sunt,  sive  una  cum  aliis  qui  also  whether  they  have  all  the  same

post   libertatem   parentum  concept!  father  and  mother,  or  have  a  different

sunt,  sive   ex   eodem  patre  vel   ex  father  or  mother,  exactly  as  would  be

eadem  matre,  sive  ex  aliis,  ad  simi-  the   case   with   the   issue    of    parents

litudinem  eorum  qui  ex  justis  nup-  legally  married,
tiis  procreati  sunt.

D.  xxxviii.  8.  1,  2.

Not  even  in  tlie  case  of  emancipated  slaves  did  the  law  recog-
nise the  claims  of  the  kin  of  the  slave  to  succeed  to  him ;  all
went  to  the  patron  if  there  were  no  sui  heredes.

11.  Repetitis  itaque  omnibus  quae
jam  tradidimus,  apparet  non  semper
eos  qui  parem  gradum  eognationis
obtinent,  pariter  vocari  ;  eoque  am-
plius  ne  eum  quidem  qui  proximior
sit  cognatus,  semper  potiorem  esse.
Cum  enim  prima  causa  sit  suorum
heredum  et  eorum  quos  inter  suos
heredes  jam  enumeravimus,  apparet
pronepotem  vel  abnepotem  defuncti
potiorem  esse  quam  fratrem  aut
patrem  matremque  defuncti  ;  cum
alioquin  pater  quidem  et  mater  (ut
supra  quoque  tradidimus)  primum
gradum  eognationis  obtineant,  fra-
ter  vero  secundum,  pronepos  autem
tertio  gradu  sit  cognatus,  et  abnepos
quarto,  Nee  interest  in  potestate
morientis  fuerit,  an  non,  quod  vel
emancipatus  vel  ex  emancipato,  aut
feminino  sexu  propagatus  est.

11.   To  recapitulate  what  we  have
Baid  on   this  subject,  it   appears  that
those   who   are   in    the    same   degree
of    cognation   are   not    always    called
equally  to    the    succession  ;    and   fur-
ther, that  even  the  nearest  in  degree
of  cognation  is  not  always  preferred.
For,  as  the  first  place  is  given  to  sui
heredes,  and  to  those  who    are   num-
bered with    them,  it   is  evident    that
the     great-grandson     or     great-great-
grandson  is   preferred  to  the  brother
or   even  the   father  or  mother  of  the
deceased,     although     a     father     and
mother  (as  we  have  before  observed)
are  in  the  first  degree  of    cognation,
a   brother    in    the    second,    a    great-
grandson   in  the  third,  and   a   great-
great-grandson  in  the  fourth  ;  neither
does  it  make  any  difference  whether
the  descendants  were  under  the  power
of    the   deceased   at   the  time   of   his
death,  or  out  of  his  power,  either  by»
being  themselves   emancipated,  or  byy
being  the  children  of  those  who  were
nor  whether  they  were  descended

D.

so

by  the  female  line.

xxxviii.  10.  1,  2.

12.  Amotis  quoque  suis  heredibus,
et    quos    inter   suos   heredes  vocari
diximus,   agnatus  qui  integrum  jus
agnationis  habet,  etiamsi  longissimo
gradu  sit,  plerumque  potior  habetur
quam  proximior  cognatus  ;  nam  pa-
trui  nepos  vel  pronepos  avunculo  vel
materterse  prsef ertur.    Totiens  igitur
dicimus,   aut   potiorem  haberi   eum
qui    proximiorem    gradum     eogna-
tionis obtinet,  aut  pariter  vocari  eos
qui    cognati   sunt,    quotiens    neque
suorum  heredum  jure  quique  inter
suos  heredes  sunt,  neque  agnationis
jure  aliquis  prajferri  debeat,  secun-
dum ea  qua?  tradidimus.     Exceptis
fratre  et  sorore  emancij)atis,  qui  ad
successionem   fratrum   vel   sororum
vocantur  ;  qui  et'si  capite  deminuti

i

12.  But,   when  there   are   no   sui
heredes,    nor    any   of    those   who    are
called    with   them,    then   an    agnatus
who    has    retained    his    full     rights,
although   he   be  in  the   most  distant
degree,    is    generally   preferred    to   a
cognatus    in    a    nearer    degree  ;    thus
the  grandson  or  great-grandson  of  a
paternal  uncle  is  preferred  to   a  ma-
ternal  uncle   or   aunt.      Thus,    when
we  say  that  the  nearest  in  degree  of
cognation  is  called  to  the  succession,
or  if  there  be  many  in  the  same  de-
gree, that  they  are  all  called  equally,
we  only  say  so  because  there  are  no
sui  heredes,  nor  any  of  those  who  are
called  with   them,    nor   any  one  who  ,
ought   to    be    preferred   by   right    of
agnatio,    according   to   the    principles

i

LIB.  III.     TIT.  VII.  293

sunt,  tamen  prseferuntiir  ceteris  ul-     we   have  laid   down.     And  we   must
terioris  gradus  agnatis.  notice    the    exception    made    in    the

case  of  an  emancipated  brother  and
sister  who  are  called  to  the  succession
of  their  brothers  and  sisters  ;  for,  al-
though they  have  suffered  a  capitis demi-
nutio,  they  are  nevertheless  preferred
to  all  agnati  of  a  more  remote  degree.

Gal  iii.  27.  29  :  C.  v.  30.  40.

Tit.  VII.     DE  SUCCESSIONE  LIBERTOKUM.

Nunc  de  libertorum  bonis  videa-  We  will  now  speak  of  succession  to

mus.      Olim   itaque   licebat   liberto  freedmen.      A    freedman    might    for-

patronum  suum  impune  testamento  merly,    with    impunity,    omit    in    his

prseterire  ;  nam  ita  demum  lex  duo-  testament  any  mention  of  his  patron,

decim    tabularum    ad    hereditatem  for  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  called

liberti  vocabat   patron um,  si  intes-  the   patron   to    the    inheritance   only

tatus   mortuus  esset  libertus   nullo  when     the    freedman    died    intestate

suo  herede  relicto  :  itaque  intestato  without  leaving  any  suus  heres.   There-

quoque  mortuo  liberto,  si  is  suum  fore,  though  he  had  died  intestate,  yet

heredem  reliquisset,  patrono  nihil  in  if  he  had  left  a  suus  heres,  the  patron

bonis  ejus  juris  erat.     Et  si  quidem  had  no  claim  upon  his  estate.     And

ex  naturalibus  liberis  aliquem  suum  when  the  suus  heres  was  a  natural  child

heredem  reliquisset,  nulla  videbatur  of  the  deceased,   the  patron   had   no

querela  ;    si    vero    adoptivus    filius  cause  of  complaint  ;  but  when  the  suus

fuisset,  aperte    iniquum    erat    niliil  heres  was  only  an  adopted  son,  it  was

juris  patrono  superesse.  .  manifestly    unjust    that     the    patron

should  have  no  claim.

Gal  iii.  39,  40.

The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  regulated  the  succession  to
enfranchised  slaves  as  follows ;  an  enfranchised  slave  had  no
agnati,  for  he  belonged  to  no  civil  family ;  but  he  might  marry
and  found  a  family  of  his  own,  and  then  his  children  would  be
his  sui  heredes,  or  he  might  gain  sui  heredes  by  adoption.  If  he
died  intestate,  his  sui  heredes  succeeded  to  him ;  and  in  default  of
sui  heredes,  the  patron,  or,  if  the  patron  were  dead,  the  children
of  the  patron,  took  the  place  of  agnati,  and  received  the  inherit-
ance. The  enfranchised  slave  had,  however,  full  power  to  make
a  testament,  and  might  pass  over  both  his  own  sui  heredes  and  his
patron.  A  female  slavCj  however,  if  emancipated,  could  not  ex-
clude the  patron  from  her  inheritance ;  for  she  could  have  no  sui
heredes,  being  a  woman  ;  and  as  she  was  always,  on  account  of
her  sex,  considered  under  the  tutela  of  her  patron,  she  was  inca-
pable of  making  a  testament,  unless  with  the  consent  of  her  patron.
(Ulp.  Reg.  29.  2  ;   Gai.  iii.  43.)

1,  Qua  de  causa,  postea  prsetoris  1.   This  unfairness  in  the  law  was

edicto  hcec  juris  iniquitas  emendata  therefore  afterwards  amended  by  the

est.   Sive  enim  faciebat  testamentum  edict  of  the  prsetor.     Every  freedman

libertus,  jubebatur  ita  testari  ut  pa-  who  made  a  testament  was  commanded

trono    partem    dimidiam    bonorum  to  make  such  a  disposition  of  his  pro-

294

LIB.  III.      TIT.  VII.

siiorum  relinqueret,  et  si  aut  nihil
aut  minus  parte  dimidia  reliquerat,
dabatur  patrono  contra  tabulas  tes-
tamenti  partis  dimidise  bonorum
possessio  ;  sive  intestatus  morieba-
tiir  siio  herede  relicto  filio  adoj^tivo,
dabatur  aeque  patrono  contra  hunc
suum  heredem  partis  dimidise  bo-
norum possessio.  Prodesse  autem
liberto  solebant  ad  excludendum
patronum  naturales  liberi,  non  solum
quos  in  potestate  mortis  tempore
habebat,  sed  etiam  emancipati  et  in
adoptionem  dati,  si  modo  ex  aliqua
parte  scripti  heredes  erant,  aut  prse-
teriti  contra  tabulas  bonorum  pos-
sessionem ex  edicto  petierant  ;  nam
exheredati  nullo  modo  repellebant
patronum.

perty  as  to  leave  one  half  to  his  patron;
and,  if  the  testator  left  him  nothing,
or  less  than  a  half,  then  the  possession
of  half  was  given  to  the  patron  contra
tabulas.  And  if  a  freedman  died  intes-
tate, leaving  an  adopted  son  as  his
suus  heres,  still  the  possession  of  a  half
was  given  to  the  patron.  But  the
patron  was  excluded  by  the  natural
children  of  a  freedman,  not  only  by
those  in  his  power  at  the  time  of  his
death,  but  by  those  children  also  who
had  been  emancipated,  or  given  in
adoption,  provided  that  they  were  in-
stituted heirs  for  any  part,  or,  in  case
they  were  omitted,  had  demanded  the
possession  contra  tabulas,  under  the
praetorian  edict.  For  disinherited  chil-
dren did  not  ever  exclude  the  patron.

Gai.  iii.  41.

The  praetor  considered  it  hard  that  a  testament,  or  s?ii  heredes
gained  by  adoption,  or  by  the  marriage  of  a  wife  in  manu,  should
exclude  the  patron.  This  was  to  exclude  him  by  purely  volun-
tary acts  of  the  slave.  If  the  slave  had  children  really  born  to
him,  that  constituted  a  good  reason  why  the  patron  should  be
excluded,  and  in  this  case  the  prastor  did  not  interfere.  It  is  to
be  observed  that  the  praetor  left  the  law  as  it  was  if  it  was  a
patrona,  or  a  female  child  of  the  patronus^  who  was  excluded
(Gai.  iii.  49  ;  Ulp.  Reg.  29.  4) ;  but  by  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea
women  with  a  certain  number  of  children  were  placed  on  a  level
with  men  in  this  respect.

2.  Postea  lege  Papia  adaucta  sunt
jura  patronorum  qui  locupletiores
libertos  habebant  ;  cautum  est  enim
ut  ex  bonis  ejus  qui  sestertium  cen-
tum millium  patrimonium  relique-
rat, et  pauciores  quam  tres  liberos
habebat,  sive  is  testamento  facto
sive  intestato  mortuus  erat,  virilis
pars  patrono  deberetur.  Itaque,
cum  unum  quidem  filium  filiamve
heredem  reliquerat  libertus,  perinde
pars  dimidia  debebatur  patrono,  ac
si  is  sine  uUo  filio  filiave  iestatus
decessisset  :  cum  vero  duos  duasve
heredes  reliquerat,  tertia  pars  de-
bebatur patrono.  Si  tres  reliquerat,
repellebatur  patronus.

2.  But  afterwards  the  rights  of
patrons,  who  had  wealthy  freedmen,
were  enlarged  by  the  lex  Papia,  which
provides  that  he  shall  have  one  equal
share  in  the  distribution  of  the  effects
of  his  freedman,  whether  dying  testate
or  intestate,  if  the  freedman  has  left  a
j)atrimony  of  a  hundred  thousand  ses-
terces, and  fewer  than  three  children.
Thus,  if  a  freedman  possessed  of  such
a  fortune  has  left  only  one  son  or
daughter  as  heir,  a  half  is  due  to  the
patron,  exactly  as  if  the  deceased  had
died  testate,  without  having  any  son
or  daughter.  But,  when  there  are  two
heirs,  male  or  female,  a  third  part  only
is  due  to  the  patron  ;  and,  when  there
are  three,  the  patron  is  wholly  excluded.

Gai.  iii.  42.

3.  Sed  nostra  constitutio  quam
pro  omnium  notione  Grasca  lingua
compendioso  tractatu  habito  compo-

3.  But  our  constitution,  published
in  a  compendious  form,  and  in  the
Greek  language,  for  the  benefit  of  all

LIB.  III.      TIT,  VII.

295

suimus,  ita  hujiismodi  ca^^sas  defini-
vit,  ut  si  qiiidem  libertus  vel  liberta
minorescentenariis  sint,  id  est,  minus
centum  aureis  liabeant  substantiam
(sic  enim  legis  Papise  summam  inter-
pretati  sumus,  ut  pro  mille  sestertiis
unus    aureus    computetur),    nullum
locum    liabeat    patronus    in    eorum
successionem,  si  tamen  testamentum
fecerint  ;  sin  autem  intestati  deces-
serint  nuUo  liberorum   relicto,  tunc
patronatus  jus   (quod  erat   ex   lege
duodecim    tabularum)  integrum    re-
servavit.     Cum  vero  majores  cente-
nariis  sint,  si  heredes  vel  bonorum
possessores     liberos     liabeant,    sive
unum  sive  plures  cujuscumque  sexus
vel    gradus,    ad    eos     successionem
parentum  deduximus,  patronis   om-
nibus una  cum  sua  progenie  semotis  ;
sin    autem    sine   liberis  decesserint,
si  quidem  intestati,  ad  omnem  here-
ditatem  patronos  patronasque  voca-
vimus.    Si  vero  testamentum  quidem
fecerint,  patronos  autem  vel  patronas
preeterierint,  cum  nullos  liberos  ha-
berent,  vel  habentes  eos  exhereda-
verint,  vel  mater  sive  avus  maternus
eos  prseterierit,  ita  ut  non   possint
argui  inofRciosa  eorum  testamenta,
tunc    ex    nostra    constitutione    per
bonorum    possessionem    contra    ta-
bulas,  non  dimidiam  (ut  antea)  sed
tertiam  partem  bonorum  liberti  con-
sequantur,   vel  quod   deest    eis    ex
constitutione    nostra    repleatur,    si
quando  minus  tertia  parte  bonorum
suorum  libertus  vel  liberta  eis  reli-
querit  ;  ita  sine  onere,  ut  nee  liberis
liberti  libertseve  ex  ea  parte  legata
vel  fideicommissa  prsestentur,  sed  ad
coheredes     hoc    onus    redundaret  :
multis  aliis  casibus  a  nobis  in  pr?e-
fata  constitutione  congregatis  quos
necessaries  esse  ad  hujusmodi  juris
dispositionem  perspeximus,  ut  tam
patroni     patroneeque    quam     liberi
eorum,   nee  non  qui   ex  transverso
latere   veniunt   usque    ad   quintum
gradum,  ad  successionem  libertorum
vocentur,   sicut  ex  ea  constitutione
intelligendum    est,    ut    si   ejusdem
patroni   vel    patronse,    vel   duorum
duarum   pluriumve  liberi   sint,  qui
proximior  est  ad  liberti  seu  libertse
vocetur   successionem,  et   in  capita
non   in  stirpes    dividatur  successio,
eodem  modo  et  in  iis  qui  ex  trans-
verso latere  veniunt  servando.  Pene
enim  consonantia  jura  ingenuitatis

nations,  established  the  following  rules.
If  a  freedman  or  freedwoman  are  less
than  centenarii,  i.e.  when  their  fortune
does  not  reach  a  hundred  aurei    (the
amount  at  which  we  estimated  the  sum
mentioned  in  the  lex  Papia,  counting
one  aureus  for  a  thousand  sesterces),
the  patron  shall  not  be  entitled  to  any
share  in  the  succession,  provided  the
deceased  has  made  a  testament.     But
where  a  freed  man  or  woman  dies  in-
testate, and  without  children,  the  right
of    patronage   is   maintained  undimi-
nished, and    is    as    it   formerly   was,
according  to   the   law  of   the   Twelve
Tables.     But  if  a  freed  person  leave
more  than  a  hundred  aurei,  and  has
one  child  or  several,  whatever  be  their
sex   or   degree,    as    his  heirs    or   the
possessors  of  his  goods,   such  child  or
children  shall  succeed  their  parent  to
the  exclusion  of  every  patron  and  his
issue  ;  but  if  he  die  without  children
and  intestate,  we  have  called  the  pa-
trons   or    patronesses    to    his    whole
inheritance.     If  he   has    made   a  tes-
tament, omitting  his  patron,  and  has
left  no  children,   or  has  disinherited
them,    or    if    a   mother   or    maternal
grandfather  has  omitted  them,  so  how-
ever  that   such  testaments  cannot  be
attacked  as  inofficious,  then,  according
to  our  constitution,  the   patron  shall
succeed  by  a  possession  contra  tahulas,
not  to  a  half  as  formerly,  but  to  the
third  part  of  the  estate  of  the  deceased
freedman,  or  shall  have  any  deficiency
made  up  to  him  in  case  the  freed  man
or  woman  has  left  him  a  less  share  than
a  third  of  his  or  her  estate.     But  this
third  part  shall  not  be  subject  to  any
charge,  so  much  so  that  it  shall  not
furnish  anything  towards  any  legacies
or  fideicommissa,  even  though  given  for
the   benefit   of    the    children    of    the
deceased  ;  but  the  whole  burden  shall
fall  exclusively  on  the  co-heirs  of  the
patron.     In  the  same  constitution  we
have  collected   many  other   decisions
which  we  thought  necessary  to  settle
the    law   on   the   subject.     Thus,   pa-
trons and  patronesses,  their  children
and  collateral  relations,  so  far  as  the
fifth  degree,  are  called  to  the  succes-
sion  of    their    freedmen    and    freed-
women,   as  may  be  seen  in  the  con-
stitution   itself.       And,    if    there   be
several  children,  whether  of  one,  two,
or  more  patrons    or   patronesses,  the
nearest  in  degree  is  called  to  the  sue-

296

LIB.  III.      TIT.  VII.

et    libertinitatis
fecimus.

in    successionibus

cession  of  the  freedman  or  freedwoman ;
and  the  estate  is  divided  per  capita  and
not  per  stirpes.  It  is  the  same  with  colla-
terals ;  for  we  have  made  the  laws  of  suc-
cession almost  the  same  as  regards  per-
sons free  born  and  enfranchised  slaves.

Doing  away  with  all  distinction  of  sex,  and  making  the  claim
of  the  patrona  the  same  as  that  of  the  patronus,  and  the  position
of  the  liberta  the  same  as  that  of  the  libertus,  Justinian  thus  regu-
lates the  succession  ah  intestato :  first  come  the  children  of  the
freedman,  whether  in  his  power  or  not,  or  even  if  born  before  he
was  enfranchised ;  then,  if  he  has  no  children,  come  the  patron
and  his  descendants ;  in  default  of  these,  the  collaterals  of  the
patron  to  the  fifth  degree.  If  the  freedman  has  children,  he  can
make  any  testament  he  pleases ;  if  he  has  not,  he  can  only  make
what  testament  he  pleases  provided  his  fortune  is  less  than  one
hundred  aurei;  if  it  is  more,  he  must  leave  the  patron  one  unen-
cumbered third,  or  the  law  will  give  this  third  contra  tabulas.

4.   Sed  hsec  de  iis  libertinis  hodie
dicenda  sunt,  qui  in  civitatem  Ro-
manam  pervenerunt,  cum  nee  sunt
alii  liberti,   simul  dedititiis   et  La-
tinis  sublatis  ;  cum  Latinorum  legi-
timse     successiones     nullse    penitus
erant,  qui,  licet  ut  liberi  vitam  suam
peragebant,    attamen    ipso     ultimo
spiritu  simul  animam  atque  liberta-
tem  amittebant,  et  quasi  servorum
ita   bona   eorum  jure   quodammodo
peculii  ex  lege  Junia  manumissores
detinebant.      Postea   vero    senatus-
consulto    Largiano    cautum    fuerat,
ut   liberi    manumissoris   non   nomi-
natim     exheredati    facti     extraneis
heredibus   eorum   in  bonis   Latino-
rum  prseponerentur.     Quibus  super-
venit    etiam    divi   Trajani  edictum,
quod    eumdem   hominem.  si   invito
vel  ignorante  patrono  ad  civitatem
venire    ex  beneficio   principis   festi-
navit,  faciebat  vivum  quidem  civem
Romanum,    Latinum   vero    morien-
tem.   Sed  nostra  constitutione,  prop-
ter   hujusmodi    conditionum.    vices
et     alias     difficultates,     cum     ipsis
Latiiiis     etiam     legem    Juniam    et
senatus-consultum      Largianum     et
edictum  divi  Trajani  in  perpetuum
deleri  censuimus,  ut  omnes   liberti
civitate  Romana  fruantur,   et  mira-
bili  modo  quibusdam  adjectionibus
ipsas  vias  qu?e  in    Latinitatem  du-
cebant,  ad  civitatem  Romanam  ca-
piendam  transposuimus.

Gai.  iii.  56-58.  63-

4.  What  we   have   said  relates  in
these  days  to  freedmen  who  are  citi-
zens of  Rome  ;  for  there  are  now  no
others,   there  being  no  more  dedltitii
or  Latinl.     And  the  Latini  never  en-
joyed  any   legal  right  of  succession  ;
for  although  they  lived   as  free,  j^et,
with  their  last  breath,  they  lost  at  once
their  life  and  liberty  :  and  their  goods,
like  those  of  slaves,  were  claimed  by
their  manumittor,  as  a  kind  of  pecu-
lium,    by    virtue    of    the    lex    Junia
Norbana.     It  was  afterwards  provided
by  the  senatus-consultum  Largianum,
that  the  children  of  a  manumittor,  not
disinherited  by   name,  should,  in  the
succession  to  the  goods  of  a  Latin,  be
preferred   to   any   strangers    whom  a
manumittor  might  institute  his  heirs.
The  edict  of  the  Emperor  Trajan  fol-
lowed,   by   which,    if    a   slave,    either
against  the  will  or  without  the  know-
ledge of  his  patron,  had  obtained  Roman
citizenship  by  favour  of  the  emperor,
he  was  regarded  as  free  during  his  life,
but  at  his  death  was  looked  on  as  a
Latin.    But  we,  being  dissatisfied  with
the  difficulties  attending  these  changes
of  condition,  have  thought  proper,  by
our   constitution,  for  ever  to  abolish
the   Latini,    and   with   them   the    lex
Junia,  the  senatus-consultum   Largia-
num, and  the  edict  of  Trajan  ;  so  that
all  freedmen  whatever  become  citizens
of  Rome.     And  we  have  happily  con-
trived, by  some  additional  dispositions,
that  the  manner  of  conferring  the  free-
dom of  Latins  has  now  become  the  man-
ner of  conferring  Roman  citizenship.

65.  71-73  ;  C.  vii.  6.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  VIII.

297

Latini  Juniani.     See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  5.  3.

Senatus-consulto  Largiano.  This  senatus-consultum  was  passed
in  the  time  of  Claudius,  and  in  the  consulate  of  Lupus  and
Largus.  (Gai.  iii.  63-67.)  As  we  might  infer  from  the  text,
the  rights  of  the  children  of  the  patron  to  the  succession  of  a
Latinus  Junianus  remained  if  they  were  disinherited  in  any
other  way  than  by  name.

By  the  edict  of  Trajan  the  rights  of  the  patron  were,  in  the
case  mentioned  in  the  text,  restored  at  the  death  of  a  Latinus
exactly  as  if  the  Latinus  had  never  become  a  citizen  by  imperial
rescript.  (Gai.  iii.  72.)  As  to  the  modes  in  which  a  Latinus
could  acquire  the  rights  of  full  citizenship,  see  note  on  Bk.  i.
Tit.  5.  3.

Tit.  YIII.    DE  ASSIGNATIONE  LIBERTORUM.

In  summa,  quod  ad  bona  liberto-
rum,  admonendi  sumus  censiiisse
senatum,  ut  quamvis  ad  omnes  pa-
tron! liberos  qui  ejusdem  gradus
sunt,  fequaliter  bona  libertorum
pertineant,  tamen  bcere  parent!  un!
ex  l!ber!s  assignare  libertum  :  ut
post  mortem  ejus  solus  is  patronus
habeatur  cui  assignatus  est,  et  ceteri
liber!  qui  ipsi  quoqiie  ad  eadem
bona,  nulla  assignatione  interveni-
ente,  pariter  admitterentur,  nihil
juris  in  iis  bonis  habeant  ;  sed  ita
demum  pristinum  jus  recipiunt,  si
is  cui  assignatus  est  decesserit  nul-
lis  liberis  relictis.

Finally,  with  regard  to  the  goods
of  freedmen,  we  must  remember  that
the  senate  has  enacted,  that  although
the  goods  of  freedmen  belong  equally
to  all  the  children  of  the  patron  who
are  in  the  same  degree,  yet  a  parent
may  assign  a  freedman  to  any  one  of
his  children,  so  that,  after  the  death
of  the  parent,  the  child,  to  vfhom  the
freedman  was  assigned,  is  alone  con-
sidered as  his  patron,  and  the  other
children,  who  would  have  been  equally
admitted  had  there  been  no  assig-
nation, are  wholly  excluded.  But  if
the  child  to  whom  the  assignation  has
been  made,  dies  without  issue,  they
regain  their  former  right.

D.  xxxviii.  4.  1.

The    senate    enacted   this    by    the    consultum    mentioned    in
paragr.  3.

1.  Nee  tantum  libertum,  sed
etiam  libertam,  et  non  tantum  filio
nepotive,  sed  etiam  filise  neptive
assignare  permittitur.

D.  xxxviii.  4.

1.  Not  only  a  freedman,  but  a
freedwoman  may  be  assigned,  and  not
only  to  a  son  or  grandson,  but  to  a
daughter  or  granddaughter.

1,  and  3.  1,  2.

But  it  was  necessary  that  the  child  or  grandchild  should  be  in
the  power  of  the  patron.

2.  Datur  autem  haec  assignandi
facultas  ei  qui  duos  pluresve  liberos
in  potestate  habebit,  ut  iis  quos  in
potestate  habet,  assignare  ei  liber-
tum libertamve  liceat.  Unde  qu£e-
rebatur,    si    eum    cui    assignaverit

2.  The  power  of  assigning  freed
persons  is  given  to  him  who  has  two
or  more  children  in  his  power,  and  it
is  to  children  in  his  power  that  a  fa-
ther may  assign  a  freedman  or  freed-
woman.     Hence   the   question   arose,

298

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IX.

postea  emancipaverit,  niim  evanes-  supposing  a  father  assigned  a  freed-
cat  assignatio  ]  Sed  placuit  eva-  man  to  his  son,  and  afterwards  eman-
nescere,  quod  et  Juliano  et  ahis  cipated  that  son,  whether  the  assign-
plerisque  visum  est.  ment  would  be  destroyed.    It  has  been

determined  that  it  is  destroyed  ;  such
was  the  opinion  of  Julian  and  of  most
others.

D.  xxxviii.  4.  1,  and  13.  I.

The  senatus-consultum  did  not  allow  the  patron  to  give  the
freedman  new  heirs,  but  only  to  give  a  preference  to  particular
heirs.  If  the  children  passed  out  of  the  power  of  the  patron,  they
would  cease  to  be  heirs  of  the  freedman.

3.  Nee  interest  testament©  quis
assignet  an  sine  testamento,  sed
etiam  quibuscumque  verbis  patronis
hoc  permittitur  facere  ex  ipso  sena-
tus-consulto,  quod  Claudianis  tem-
poribiis  factum  est  Suillo  Rufo  et
(^sterio  Scapula  consulibus.

D.  xxxviii.  4

3.  It  makes  no  difference,  whether
the  assignment  of  a  freedman  be
made  by  testament,  or  without  a  tes-
tament. And  patrons  may  make  it
in  any  terms  whatever,  by  virtue  of
the  senatus-cons'idtian  passed  in  the
time  of  Claudian,  in  the  consulship
of  Suillus  Rufus  and  Osterius  Sca-
pula,

,  1,  pr.  and  3.

The  date  of  this  senatus-consultum  is  given  as  a.d.  45.

Just  as  any  expression  of  the  wishes  of  the  patron  sufficed  to
make  an  assignation,  so  any  expression  of  a  contrary  wish  sufficed
to  revoke  it.     (D.  xxxviii.  4.  1.  4.)

Tit.  IX.     DE  BONOEUM  POSSESSIONIBUS.

Jus  bonorum  possessionis  intro-
ductum  est  a  pr?etore,  emendandi
veteris  juris  gratia.  Nee  solum  in
intestatorum  hereditatibus  vetus  jus
eo  modo  prsetor  emendavit,  sicut
supra  dictum  est,  sed  in  eorum  quo-
que  qui  testamento  facto  decesse-
rint  ;  nam  si  alienus  postumus  heres
fuerit  institutus,  quamvis  heredita-
tem  jure  civili  adire  non  poterat,
cum  institutio  non  valebat,  hono-
rario  tamen  jure  bonorum  possessor
efficiebatur,  videlicet  cum  a  pr?etore
adjuvabatur :  sed  et  is  a  nostra
constitutione  hodie  recte  heres  in-
stituitur,  quasi  et  jure  civili  non
incognitus.

The  system  of  bonorum  possessiones
was  introduced  by  the  preetors  as  an
amendment  of  the  ancient  law,  not
only  with  regard  to  the  inheritances  of
intestates,  as  we  have  said  above,  but
of  those  also  who  die  after  making  a
testament.  For  if  a  posthumous  stran-
ger were  instituted  heir,  although  he
could  not  enter  upon  the  inheritance
by  the  civil  law,  inasmuch  as  his  in-
stitution would  not  be  valid,  yet  by
the  praetorian  law  he  might  be  made
the  possessor  of  the  goods,  because  he
received  the  assistance  of  the  prtetor.
Such  a  person  may  now,  by  our  con-
stitution, be  legally  instituted  heir  as
being  no  longer  unrecognised  by  the
civil  law.

Gai.  ii.  242  ;  D.  i.  1.  71 ;  D.  xxxviii.  6.  1.

•
The  7*7^.9  civile  knew  of  no  other  mode  of  succession  than  that  of
those  who  were  strictly  heredes.  The  praetor  introduced  a  new  mode,

LIB.  III.     TIT.  IX.  299

that  by  giving  possession  of  the  goods.  This  was,  in  its  origin,
merely  the  placing  the  person  best  entitled  in  at  least  temporary
possession  of  the  liereditas  in  case  this  possession  was  dis])uted  :
and  then  the  praetor  being  thus  called  on  to  admit  to  the  posses-
sion, in  process  of  time  regulated  this  admission  by  the  feeling  of
natural  justice  which  it  was  part  of  his  province  to  entertain,  and
admitted,  in  many  cases,  those  whose  blood  gave  a  claim,  in  pre-
ference to  those  whom  the  course  of  the  civil  law  marked  out.
He  did  not,  indeed,  admit  any  one  whom  the  law  expressly  re-
jected ;  for  the  praetor  could  not  openly  violate  the  law  ;  but
when  the  law  was  silent,  the  praetor  took  advantage  of  this  silence
to  admit  persons  whom  the  law  passed  over.  (D.  xxxvii.  1.  12.  1.)
He  never  gave  the  dominium  Quiritarium  in  any  of  the  goods  of
the  inheritance,  but  only  the  dominium  honitarium  (see  Introd.
sec.  62),  i.  e.,  he  made  all  that  constituted  the  inheritance  a  part
of  the  goods  (*  in  bonis^)  of  the  person  to  whom  he  gave  the  pos-
session, and  then  usucapion  gave  this  person  the  legal  ownership.

1.  Aliquando  tamen  neqiie  emen-  1.  But  the  praetor  sometimes  be-
dandi  neque  impugnandi  veteris  stows  the  possession  of  goods  with  a
juris,  sed  magis  confirmandi  gratia  wish  not  to  amend  or  impugn  the  old
poUicetur  bonorum  possessionem  ;  law,  but  to  confirm  it  ;  for  he  gives
nam  illis  quoque,  qui  recte  facto  possession  secundum  tabulas  to  those
testamento  heredes  instituti  sunt,  who  are  appointed  heirs  by  regular
dat  secundum  tabulas  bonorum  pos-  testament.  He  also  calls  sui  heredes
sessionem.  Item  ab  intestato  suos  and  agnati  to  the  possession  of  the
heredes  et  agnatos  ad  bonorum  pos-  goods  of  intestates,  and  yet  the  in-
sessionem  vocat ;  sed  et  remota  heritance  would  be  their  own  by  the
quoque  bonorum  possessionem  ad  eos  civil  law,  although  the  praetor  did  not
pertinet  hereditas  jure  civili.  interpose  his  authority.

Gai.  iii,  34  ;  D.  xxxvii.  1.  6.  1.

The  person  to  whom  the  praetor  gave  the  bonorum  possessio
could  make  use  of  the  interdict  (see  Introd.  sec.  107)  begin-
ning with  the  words  ^  Quorum  bonorum  ; '  and  as  this  was  the
readiest  way  of  procuring  the  praetor's  aid  in  being  placed  in  pos-
session, the  heir  might  be  glad  to  adopt  it,  though  the  possessio
bonorum  did  not  give  him,  as  it  did  others,  a  title  to  succeed,
which  he  would  not  otherwise  have  had.

In  cases  provided  for  by  the  edict  the  praetor  gave  possession
in  the  exercise  of  his  executive  authority  [possessio  edictalis).  If
there  were  special  circumstances  in  the  case,  the  prsetor  would,
after  hearing  opponents,  give  a  special  possession  {possessio  decre-
talis)  which  was  not  always  protected  by  the  interdict  Quorum
bonorum,  but  might  be  protected  only  by  an  interdict  forbidding
forcible  eviction.    (D.  xxxviii.  6.  14  ;   xxxvii.  1.  3.  8  ;  xliii.  4.)

2.  Quos  autem  praetor  solus  vocat  2.  But  those  whom  the  prastor  alone
ad  hereditatem,  heredes  quidem  ipso  calls  to  an  inheritance,  do  not  in  law
jure  non  fiunt,  nam  praetor  heredem  become  heirs,  inasmuch  as  the  praetor
facere  non  potest  :  per  legem  enim  cannot  make  an  heir,  for  heirs  are  made
tantum  vel  similem  juris  constitu-  only  by  law,  or  by  what  has  the  efi'ect
tionem     heredes    fiunt,    veluti    per  of  a  law,  as  a  senatus-consultum  or  an

300

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IX.

senatus-consulta  et  constitutiones
principales  ;  sed  cum  eis  preetor  dat
bonorum  possessionem,  loco  here-
dum  constituuntur  et  vocantur  bo-
norum possessores.  Adhuc  autem  et
alios  complures  gradus  prsetor  fecit
in  bonorum  possessionibus  dandis,
dum  id  agebat  ne  quis  sine  suc-
cessore  moreretur  ;  nam  angustissi-
mis  iinibus  constitutum  per  legem
duodecim  tabularum  jus  percipien-
darum  hereditatum  prsetor  ex  bono
et  aequo  dilatavit.

imperial  constitution.  But  when  the
prEetor  gives  any  persons  the  possession
of  goods,  they  stand  in  the  place  of
heirs,  and  are  called  the  possessors  of
the  goods.  The  prtetors  have  also
devised  many  other  orders  of  persons
to  whom  the  possession  of  goods  may
be  granted,  from  a  wish  to  insure  that
no  man  should  die  without  a  successor.
In  short,  the  right  of  succeeding  to
inheritances,  which  was  confined  within
very  narrow  limits  by  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  has  been  extended  by
the  prsetors  in  conformity  to  the  prin-
ciples of  justice  and  equity.

Gai.  iii.  18.  25.  32.

3.  The  testamentary  possessions  of
goods  are  these.  First,  that  which  is
given  to  children  passed  over  in  the
testament ;  this  is  called  contra  tabulas.
Secondly,  that  which  the  prsetor  pro-
mises to  all  those  legally  instituted
heirs,  and  is  therefore  called  possessio
secundum  tabulas.  After  having  spoken
of  these,  he  passes  on  to  intestacies  ;
and  first  he  gives  the  possession  of
goods,  called  unde  liheri,  to  the  sui
heredes,  or  to  those  who  by  the  prae-
torian edict  are  numbered  among  the
sui  heredes ;  secondly,  to  the  legal  heirs  ;
thirdly,  to  the  ten  persons  who  were
preferred  to  a  patron,  if  a  stranger  ;
and  these  ten  persons  were,  a  father  ;
a  mother ;  a  grandfather  or  grand-
mother, paternal  or  maternal ;  a  son  ;
a  daughter ;  a  grandson  or  grand-
daughter, as  well  by  a  daughter  as
by  a  son  ;  a  brother  or  sister,  either
consanguine  or  uterine.  Then,  fourthly,
he  gave  the  possession  of  goods  to  the
nearest  cognati  ;  fifthly,  '  turn  quern  ex
familia,''  to  the  nearest  member  of  the
family  of  the  patron  ;  sixthly,  to  the
patron  or  patroness,  and  to  their  chil-
dren and  parents  ;  seventhly,  to  a
husband  and  wife  ;  eighthly,  to  the
cognati  of  the  manumittor.

Gai.  iii.  26,  27.  30 ;  D.  xxxviii.  6.  1.

The  various  kinds  of  possessions  of  goods  may  be  divided  accord-
ing as  they  were  testamentary  (^ex  testamento)  or  ah  intestato.
Under  the  first  head  come  the  two  kinds  called  contra  tabulas  and
secundum  tabulas.

1.  The  possessio  contra  tabulas  was  given,  as  it  is  said  in  the
text,  to  children  passed  over  in  the  testament.  It  was  not  given
against  the  testament  of  women,  as  they  had  no  sui  heredes.
(D.  xxxvii.  4.  4.  2.)

3.  Sunt  autem  bonorum  posses-
siones  ex  testamento  quidem  hse  :
prima,  qu^e  pmeteritis  liberis  datur,
vocaturque  contra  tabulas  ;  secunda,
quam  omnibus  jure  scriptis  heredi-
bus  praitor  pollicetur,  ideoque  voca-
tur  secundum  tabulas.  Et  cum  de
testamentis  prius  locutus  est,  ad  in-
testatos  transitum  fecit  :  et  primo
loco  suis  heredibus,  et  iis  qui  ex
edicto  prsetoris  inter  suos  connume-
rantur,  dat  bonorum  possessionem
qua)  vocatur  unde  liberi  ;  secundo
legitimis  heredibus  ;  tertio  decem
personis  quas  extraneo  manumissori
prseferebat.  Sunt  autem  decem  per-
sonse  life  :  pater  mater,  avus  avia
tam  paterni  quam  materni  ;  item
filius  filia,  nepos  neptis  tam  ex  filio
quam  ex  filia ;  frater  soror,  sive  con-
sanguinei  sunt  sive  uterini.  Quarto
cognatis  proximis,  quinto  tum  quem
ex  familia,  sexto  patrono  et  patronse
liberisque  eorum  et  parentibus,  sep-
timo  viro  et  uxori,  octavo  cognatis
manumissoris.

LIB.  III.     TIT.  IX.  301

2.  The  possessio  secundum  tahuJas  was  given  not  only  when  the
testament  was  in  due  form  and  valid,  but  also  when  it  would  have
had  no  effect  according  to  the  civil  law.  The  pra3tor  gave  the
possession  though  the  testament  was  defective  in  form,  as,  for
instance,  if  it  contained  no  familicB  mancipatio  or  nuncupation.
(Ulp.  Reg.  28.  6.  See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  10.)  The  praitor,  again,  only
required  that  the  testator  should  have  been  capable  of  making  a
testament  at  the  time  he  made  it  and  at  his  death,  without  regard
to  the  intermediate  time.  (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  10  ;  D.  xxxvii.  11.  1.  8.)
He  permitted  the  institution  of  the  posthumous  child  of  a  stranger
(see  Bk.  ii.  13),  and  would,  in  cases  where  a  gift  was  conditional,
place  the  heir  or  legatee  in  possession  of  the  goods  while  the  con-
dition was  pending,  and  remove  him  if  the  condition  was  not  ful-
filled.    (D.  xxxvii.  11.  5.)

The  possessio  secundum  tabulns  was  not  given  until  after  that
contra  tabulas,  that  is,  not  until  it  was  ascertained  that  there
were  no  children  passed  over,  or  that  they  had  made  no  claim
within  the  time  fixed  by  law.     (D.  xxxvii.  11.  2.)

If  there  was  no  testament,  the  praetor  gave  the  possession  under
one  of  the  following  heads:  Unde  liheri — Unde  legitimi — Unde
decem  personcB — Unde  cognati — Turn  quem  ex  familia — Unde
liberi  patroni  patronceque  et  parentes  eorum —  Unde  vir  et  uxor —
Unde,  cognati  manumissoris.

These  are  given  in  the  text  in  the  order  in  which  they  occurred
in  the  edict;  and  those  beginning  wdth  unde  are  in  that  form,  by
a  contraction  for  ea  pars  edicti  wide  liberi  vocantur;  unde  legitimi
vocantur,  &c.

Four  only  have  reference  to  the  succession  of  persons  of  free
birth  :  Unde  liberi,  unde  legitimi^  unde  cognati,  unde  vir  et  uxor.
The  other  four  are  only  applicable  to  freed  men.

1.  The  possessio  unde  liberi  w^as  given  to  the  sui  heredes  and
those  called  with  them,  in  case  there  was  no  testament,  or  one
wholly  inoperative.  If  there  was  a  testament  not  allowed  to
operate,  the  possessio  would  be  that  contra  tabulas.

2.  That  unde  legitimi  was  given  to  all  those  who  would  be  the
heirs  of  the  deceased  by  law,  that  is,  to  those  summoned  to  the
succession  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  those  placed  in
the  same  rank  by  subsequent  legislation.  Tum^  quem  ei  heredem
esse  oporteret,  si  intestatus  mortuus  esset.  (D.  xxxviii.  7.  1.)  It
included  the  sui  heredes,  if  they  did  not  apply  within  the  shorter
time  prescribed  to  them  as  sui  heredes,  the  agnati,  those  placed  by
the  constitutions  in  the  rank  of  agnati,  the  mother  under  the
senatus-consultum  Tertullianum,  the  children  under  the  senatus-
consultum  Orphitianum,  and  the  patron  and  his  children  as  the
heredes  legitimi  of  their  libertus,

3.  That  unde  decem  persoricB  was  given  to  the  ten  persons  men-
tioned in  the  text  in  preference  to  a  stranger  who  might  have
emancipated  a  free  person,  after  having  acquired  him  in  mancipio
for  the  purpose  of  the  fictitious  sale  necessary  to  emancipation.

302  LIB.  III.      TIT.  IX.

This  emancipation  made  the  emancipator  the  patron,  and  gave
him  rights  of  succession,  which  the  praetor  postponed  by  the
edict.

4.  The  possessio  unde  cognati  created  a  new  class  of  persons
interested  in  the  succession  by  ties  of  blood  which  gave  no  claim
except  under  the  edict.  The  sui  heredes  and  legitimi^  if  they  had
omitted  to  come  in  within  the  time  prescribed  to  them,  might
come  in  as  coynati.

5.  The  possessio  turn  quern  ex  familia  was  given  to  the  nearest
member  of  the  family  of  the  patron,  in  default  of  the  sui  heredes
taking  under  the  unde  legitimi.  The  words  are  an  abridgment  of
part  of  the  edict,  *  turn  quern  ex  familia  patroni  proximum  oportebit,
vocaho,''  For  the  first  two  words  is  read  sometimes  tanquam^
sometimes  turn  qua ;  but  turn  quern  is  much  the  most  intelligible
reading:.

6.  The  possessio  unde  liheri  patroni  patronceque  et  parentes
eorum  was  given  to  the  descendants  of  the  patron,  whether  they
had  been  in  the  power  of  the  patron  or  not,  and  to  the  ascendants,
whether  the  patron  had  been  in  their  power  or  not — thus  going  a
step  beyond  the  last-mentioned  possession,  which  was  onlj^  given
to  a  person  in  the  family  of  the  patron.  This  is  as  probable  an
account  as  any  of  the  use  of  this  and  the  last  possessio ;  bat  so
little  is  known  respecting  them,  that  we  cannot  be  certain  how
they  were  applied.

7.  The  possessio  unde  vir  et  uxor  gave  husband  and  wife
reciprocal  rights  of  succession.  The  only  mode  in  which  one
married  person  succeeded  by  iho,  jus  civile  to  the  goods  of  another
was  when  the  wife  passed  into  the  power  of  her  husband  by  in
manum  conventio.  The  husband  and  wife  succeeded  in  default  of
cognati.

8.  The  possessio  unde  cognati  manumissoris  was  given  to  all
the  blood  relations  of  the  patron.  In  the  possession  given  exclu-
sively with  reference  to  the  goods  of  freedmen,  it  was  the  same
as  with  those  given  alike  of  the  goods  of  free  persons  and  of  freed-
men ;  any  one  who  might  have  applied  for  an  earlier  possession
might,  if  he  failed  to  do  so  within  the  prescribed  time,  apply  for  a
later  possession,  in  the  terms  of  which  he  was  included.  Thus
the  quern  proximum  might  apply  as  for  the  possessio  unde  liberi
patroni,  &c.,  and  both  he  and  one  of  the  liberi  patroni  might  have
applied  for  that  unde  cognati  manumissoris.

If  there  was  no  one  to  whom  possession  of  goods  could  be
given,  the  right  to  the  goods  devolved  to  the  people,  and,  in  the
times  of  the  later  emperors,  to  i\\Qjiscus.  [Si  nemo  sit,  ad  quern
bonorum  possessio  pertinere  possit,  aut  sit  quidem,  sed  jus  suum
omiserit,  populo  bona  deferuntur  ex  lege  Julia  caducaria.)  (Ulp.
Reg.  28.  7.)

4.   Sed  eas  quidem  praetoria  in-  4.   Such  are  the  possessions  of  goods  ^

troduxit  jurisdictio.     A  nobis  tamen     introduced  by  the  praetor's  authority,
nihil  incuriosum  prseterraissum  est ;     We  ourselves,   who  have  passed  over

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IX.

303

sed  nostris  constitutionibus  omnia
corrigentes,  contra  tabulas  qiiidem
et  secundum  tabulas  bonorum  pos-
sessiones  admisimus,  utpote  neces-
sarias  constitutas,  nee  non  ab  intes-
tato  unde  liberi  et  unde  legitimi
bonorum  possessiones.  Quae  autem
in  praitoris  edicto  quinto  loco  posita
fuerat,  id  est  unde  decern  personse,
earn  pio  proposito  et  compendioso
sermone  super vacuam  ostendimus.
Cum  enim  pra3fata  bonorum  pos-
sessio  decern  personas  prseponebat
extraneo  manumissori,  nostra  con-
stitutio  quam  de  emancipatione
liberorum  fecimus,  omnibus  paren-
tibus  eisdemque  manumissoribus
contracta  fiducia  manumissionem
facere  dedit,  ut  ipsa  manumissio
eorum  hoc  in  se  habeat  privilegium,
et  supervacua  fiat  supradicta  bono-
rum possessio.  Sublata  igitur  prse-
fata  quinta  bonorum  possessione,  in
gradum  ejus  sextam  antea  bonorum
possessionem  induximus,  et  quintam
fecimus  quam  praetor  proximis  cog-
natis  pollicetur.

nothing  negligently,  but  have  wished
to  amend  everything,  have  admitted  by
our  constitutions  as  indispensably  ne-
cessary, the  possession  of  goods  contra
tabulas  and  secundiini  tabulas,  and  also
the  possessions  ab  i)itestato,  called  unde
liberi  and  U7ide  legitimi  ;  but  with  a
kind  intention,  and  in  a  few  words,  we
have  shown  that  the  possession  called
unde  decern  per  so  nee,  which  held  the
fifth  place  in  the  praetor's  edict,  was
superfluous  ;  for  ten  kinds  of  persons
were  therein  preferred  to  a  patron  if  a
stranger  ;  but  by  our  constitution  on
the  subject  of  the  emancipation  of
children,  parents  themselves  are  the
manumittors  of  their  children,  as  if
under  a  fiduciary  contract,  which  has
now  become  an  understood  part  of  the
manumission,  so  that  this  privilege
belongs  necessarily  to  the  manumission
they  go  through,  and  the  possession
unde  decern  personce  is  now  useless.
We  have  suppressed  it  therefore,  and,
putting  the  sixth  in  its  place,  have
now  made  that  the  fifth,  by  which  the
praetor  gives  the  succession  to  the
nearest  cog)iati.

5.  Cumque  antea  fuerat  septimo
loco  bonorum  possessio  turn  quern  ex
familia,  et  octavo  unde  liberi  patroni
patronaeque  et  parentes  eorum,
utramque  per  constitutionem  nos-
tram  quam  de  jure  patronatus  feci-
mus, penitus  vacuavimus.  Cum
enim  ad  similitudinem  successionis
ingenuorum,  libertinorum  successi-
ones  posuimus,  quas  usque  ad  quin-
tum  tantummodo  gradum  coarcta-
vimus,  ut  sit  aliqua  inter  ingenuos
et  libertinos  differentia,  sufficit  eis
tarn  contra  tabulas  bonorum  pos-
sessio quam  unde  legitimi  et  unde
cognati,  ex  quibus  possunt  sua  jura
vindicare,  omni  scrupulositate  et
inextricabili  errore  istarum  duarum
bonorum  possessionum  resoluto.

6.  Aliam  vero  bonorum  posses-
sionem quae  unde  vir  et  uxor  appel-
latur,  et  nono  loco  inter  veteres  bo-
norum possessiones  posita  fuerat,  et
in  suo  vigore  servavimus,  et  altiore
loco,  id  est  sexto,  eam  posuimus  ;
decima  veteri  bonorum  possessione,
quae  erat  unde  cognati  manumis-
soris,  propter  causas  enarratas  me-
rito  sublata,  ut  sex  tantvimmodo
bonorum  possessiones  ordinariae
permaneant  suo  vigore  pollentcs.

5.  As  to  the  possession  tiim  quern
ex  familia,  formerly  in  the  seventh
place,  and  the  possession  unde  liberi
patroni  patronoique  et  parentes  eorum,
in  the  eighth,  we  have  now  annulled
them  both  by  our  constitution  con-
cerning the  right  of  patronage.  And
having  made  the  successions  of  liher-
tini  like  those  of  ingenui,  except  that
we  have  limited  the  former  to  the
fifth  degree,  so  that  there  may  still
remain  some  difl'erence  between  them,
we  think  that  the  possessions  contra
tabidas,  unde  legitimi,  and  unde  cognati
may  suffice  for  the  ingenui  to  vindicate
their  rights  ;  all  the  subtle  and  intricate
niceties  of  those  two  kinds  of  j^osses-
sions,  tum  quem  ex  familia  and  unde
patroni,  being  done  away  with.

6.  The  other  possession  of  goods,
called  vir  et  uxor,  which  held  the  ninth
place  among  the  ancient  possessions,
we  have  preserved  in  full  force,  and
have  given  it  a  higher  place,  namely,
the  sixth.  The  tenth  of  the  ancient
possessions,  called  unde  cognati  mann-
missoris,  has  been  deservedly  abolished
for  reasons  already  given  ;  and  there
now,  therefore,  remain  in  force  only
six  ordinary  possessions  of  goods.

304

LIB,  III.      TIT.  IX.

7.  Septima  eas  secuta,  qiiam  op-
tima ratione  prastores  introduxe-
runt  :  novissime  enim  promittitur
edicto  iis  etiam  bonorum  possessio,
quibus  ut  detur,  lege  vel  senatiis-
consulto  vel  constitutione  compre-
hensiim  est.  Quam  neqiie  bonorum
possessionibus  qu8e  ab  intestato
veniunt,  neque  iis  quae  ex  testa-
mento  sunt,  prsetor  stabili  jure  con-
numeravit  ;  sed  quasi  ultimum  et
extraordinarium  auxilium,  prout  res
exigit,  accommodavit  scilicet  iis  qui
ex  legibuSjSenatus-consultis  constitu-
tion ibusve  principum  ex  novo  jure,
vel  ex  testamento  vel  ab  intestato,
veniunt.

1

on  t

V.  To  these  a  seventh  possession
has  been  added,  which  the  praetors
have  most  properly  introduced.  For
by  the  last  disposition  of  the  edict,
possession  of  goods  is  promised  to  all
those  to  whom  it  is  given  by  any
law,  senatus-consultum,  or  constitu-
tion. The  praetor  has  not  positively
numbere'd  this  possession  of  goods
either  with  the  possessions  of  the  goods
of  intestates,  or  of  persons  who  have
made  a  testament ;  but  has  given  it,
according  to  the  exigence  of  the  case,
as  the  last  and  extraordinary  resource
of  those  who  are  called  to  the  succes-
sions of  intestates,  or  under  a  testa-
ment by  any  particular  law,  senatus-
consultum,  or,  in  later  times,  by  an
imperial  constitution.

D.  xxxviii.  14.  1,  pr.  and  2.

The  difference  between  the  possessio  quib^is  ut  detur,  lege  vel
senatus-consulto  vel  constitutione  comprehensum  est,  or,  as  it  was
sometimes  called,  the  possessio  turn  quihus  ex  legibus  ("Theoph.
Paraphr.\  and  i\\Q  possessio  wide  legitimi,  was,  that  the  first  was
given  when  the  law%  &c.,  expressly  declared  that  the  possession  of
goods  was  to  be  given;  the  latter  w^hen  the  law,  &c.,  gave  the
liereditas,  and  the  prastor  gave  the  possessio.  It  was,  for  instance,
by  means  of  the  possession  uti  ex  legihus,  that  the  patron  took
concurrently  with  the  children  of  the  lihertus,  by  virtue  of  the  lex
Papia  Poppcea.

8.  Cum  igitur  plures  species  suc-
cessionum  praetor  introduxisset,  eas-
que  per  ordinem  disposuisset,  et  in
unaquaque  specie  successionis  saepe
plures  extent  dispari  gradu  personae  ;
ne  actiones  creditorum  difFerrentur,
sed  haberent  quos  convenirent,  et  ne
facile  in  possessionem  bonorum  de-
functi  mitterentur,  et  eo  modo  sibi
consulerent,  ideo  petendae  bonorum
possessioni  certumtempus  praefinivit.
Liberis  itaque  et  parentibus  tarn  na-
turalibus  quam  acloptivis  in  petenda
bonorum  possessione  anni  spatium,
ceteris  centum  dierum  dedit.

D.  xxxviii.  9

8.  The  praetor,  having  thus  intro-
duced and  arranged  in  order  many
kinds  of  successions,  and  as  persons  in
different  degrees  of  relationship  are
often  found  in  the  same  place  Avith
regard  to  the  succession,  thought  fit  to
limit  a  certain  time  for  demanding  the
possession  of  goods,  that  the  actions  of
creditors  might  not  be  delayed,  but
there  might  be  a  proper  person  against
whom  to  bring  them,  and  that  the
creditors  might  not  possess  themselves
of  the  effects  of  the  deceased  too  easily,
and  consult  solely  their  own  advantage  ;
the  praetor  therefore  fixed  a  certain
time  within  which  the  possession  of  the
goods  was  to  be  demanded,  if  at  all.
To  parents  and  children;  whether  natu-
ral or  adopted,  he  allowed  one  year,
within  which  they  must  either  accept
or  refuse  the  possession.  To  all  other
persons,  agnati  or  cognati,  he  allows
only  a  hundred  days.

1,  pr.  and  12.

The  species  successionum  correspond  to  the  dii^Qveni possessiones.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  IX.

305

.  9.  Et  si  intra  hoc  tempiis  aliquis
bonoriim  possessionem  non  petierit,
ejusdem  gradiis  personis  accrescit  ;
vel  si  nemo  sit  deinceps,  ceteris  bo-
norimi  possessionem  perinde  ex  siic-
cessorio  edicto  poUicetur,  ac  si  is  qui
praecedebat  ex  eo  numero  non  esset.
Si  qiiis  itaqne  delatam  sibi  bono-
rum  possessionem  repudiaverit,  non
quousque  tempus  bonorum  posses-
sioni  prsefinitum  excesserit,  expec-
tatiir  ;  sed  statim  ceteri  ex  eodem
edicto  admittimtur.  In  petenda
antem  bonorum  possessione  dies
utiles  singuli  considerantur.

9.  And  if  any  person  entitled  do
not  claim  possession  within  the  time
limited,  his  right  of  possession  accrues
first  to  those  in  the  same  degree  with
himself  ;  and  if  there  be  none,  the
praetor,  by  the  successory  edict,  gives
the  possession  to  the  next  degree,
exactly  as  if  he  who  preceded  had  no
claim  at  all.  If  a  man  refuses  the  pos-
session of  goods  when  it  is  open  to
him,  there  is  no  necessity  to  wait  until
the  time  limited  is  expired,  but  the
next  in  succession  are  instantly  ad-
mitted under  the  same  edict.  In
reckoning  the  time  allowed  for  appli-
cations for  the  possession  of  goods,  we
only  count  those  days  which  are  utiles.

D.  xxxvii.  1.  3.  9  ;  D.  xxxvii.  1.  4.  5  ;  D.  xxxviii.  9.  1.  6.  8.  10  ;

D.  xxxviii.  15.  2.

10.  Sed  bene  anteriores  principes
et  huic  causae  providerunt,  ne  quis
pro  petenda  bonorum  possessione
curet ;  sed  quocumque  modo,  si
admittentis  eam  indicium  intra  sta-
tuta  tamen  tempora  ostenderit,
plenum  habeat  earum  beneficium.

10.  Former  emperors  have  wisely
provided  that  no  person  need  trouble
himself  to  make  an  express  demand  of
the  possession  of  goods  ;  for  if  he  has
in  any  manner  signified  within  the
appointed  time  his  wish  to  accept  the
succession, he  shall  enjoy  the  full  benefit
of  it.

C.  vi.  9.  8,  9.

Only  those  dies  were  considered  utiles  which  were  subsequent
to  the  person  entitled  to  the  possession  being  aware  of  his  right,
and  which  were  not  days  on  which  magistrates  did  not  transact
business  (dies  nefasti).  Demand  of  possession  was  to  be  made
before  a  magistrate,  that  is,  before  the  prgetor  in  the  city,  and  the
frcBses  in  the  province ;  for  the  possession  did  not  devolve,  like
the  hereditas,  by  course  of  law,  but  had  to  be  expressly  asked  for
within  a  prescribed  time.  A  particular  formality  in  the  terms  of
the  demand  was  held  necessary,  the  applicant  having  to  say,  ^  da
mihi  hanc  honorum  possessionem''  (Theoph.  Paraphr.),  until  a
constitution  of  the  Emperor  Constantius  (C.  vi.  9.  9)  permitted
the  application  to  be  made  in  any  terms,  and  before  any  magis-
trate, and  another  constitution  excused  those  whom  ifrnorance  of
what  was  the  proper  course,  or  whom  absence  prevented  from
making  an  application.  (Cod.  vi.  9.  8.)  In  the  time  of  Justinian
there  was  no  application  before  a  magistrate ;  any  act  that  mani-
fested the  wish  to  have  the  possession  was  enough.

Sometimes  the  possession  of  goods  was  said  to  be  given  sine  re,
as  opposed  to  cum  re.  (Gai.  iii.  35  ;  Ulp.  Reg,  28.  13.)  The
possession  might  be  claimed,  in  many  cases,  by  persons  who  were
entitled  to  enter  on  the  inheritance  as  heirs  under  the  civil  law.
If  these  persons  entered  on  the  inheritance  without  demanding
possession  of  the  goods,  the  right  to  this  possession  devolved,  at
the  expiration  of  the  time  in  which  they  might  have  claimed  it,

X

306  LIB.  III.     TIT.  X.

to  the  next  class  entitled  to  it.  But  if  the  person  standing  next
in  the  order  of  praetorian  succession  demanded  the  possession  in
such  a  case,  he  received  it,  but  only  sine  re,  i.e.  he  was  placed
in  the  legal  position  of  possessor  of  the  goods,  but  did  not  really
have  any  share  in  those  goods  which  formed  the  inheritance  of
the  heir  under  the  civil  law.

As  we  have  now  finished  the  subject  of  successions  ah  intes-
tato,  as  treated  of  in  the  Institutes,  and  seen  the  system  prevail-
ing when  the  Institutes  were  published,  this  is  the  most  natural
place  to  notice  briefly  the  complete  change  introduced  by  the
118th  and  127th  Novels,  which  were  issued  respectively  in
the  years  543  and  547.  By  this  sweeping  change,  the  diffe-
rence between  the  possessio  honorum  and  the  hereditas,  and  that
between  agnati  and  cognati,  were  entirely  suppressed,  and  three
orders  of  succession  were  created :  the  first,  that  of  descen-
dants ;  the  second,  that  of  ascendants ;  the  third,  that  of  col-
laterals. (1.)  The  descendants  succeeded,  whether  emancipated
or  not,  and  whether  adoptive  or  natural,  to  the  exclusion  of  all
other  relations,  and  without  distinction  of  sex  or  degree.  When
they  were  in  the  first  degree,  they  shared  the  inheritance  j)^'"'
capita  ;  when  in  the  second,  they  shared  it  per  stirpes.  (2.)  If
there  were  no  descendants,  the  succession  belonged  to  the  as-
cendants, except  that,  when  there  were  brothers  or  sisters  of  the
whole  blood,  the  ascendants  shared  the  inheritance  with  them,
each  person  who  had  a  claim  to  succeed  taking  an  equal  share.
When  there  were  no  such  brothers  or  sisters,  the  nearest  ascendant
took,  excluding  the  more  remote ;  if  two  or  more  ascendants  of
the  same  degree  were  not  in  the  same  line,  that  is,  were  partly
in  the  paternal,  partly  in  the  maternal  line,  then  the  ascendants
of  one  line  took  one  half,  and  the  ascendants  of  the  other  took
the  other  half,  although  there  might  be  more  of  the  same  degree
in  one  line  than  in  the  other.  (3.)  If  there  were  no  ascendants,
then  came,  first,  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  whole  blood,  then
brothers  and  sisters  of  the  half  blood,  no  distinction  being  made
between  consanguinei,  -ce,  and  uterini,  -cb.  The  children  of  a  de-
ceased brother  or  sister  were  allowed  to  represent  their  deceased
parent,  and  to  receive  the  share  that  parent  would  have  received;
but  the  o^randchildren  of  a  brother  or  sister  were  not  allowed  to
represent  their  grandfather  or  grandmother.  If  there  were  no
brothers  and  sisters,  or  children  of  brothers  and  sisters,  the  nearest
relation,  in  whatever  degree,  succeeded  ;  if  there  were  several  in
the  same  degree,  they  shared  the  inheritance  per  capita.

Tit.  X.    DE  ACQUISITIONS  PER  ARROGATIONEM.

Est  et  alteriiis  generis  per  iiniver-  There  is  also  another  kind  of  uni-

sitatem   successio,  quae   neque  lege     versal  succession,  introduced  neither  by
duodecim    tabularum,    neque    prae-     the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  nor  by

LIB.  III.      TIT.  X.

307

toris  edicto,  sed  eo  jure  quod  con-
sensu receptum  est,  introducta  est.

the  edict  of  the  praetor,  but  by  the  law
which  rests  on  general  consent.

Gai.  iii.  82.

We  now  pass  to  other  modes  of  acquiring  per  universitatem.

And  the  first  is  that  of  arrogation.

1.  Ecce  enim,  cum  paterfamilias
sese  in  arrogationem  dat,  omnes  res
ejus  corporales  et  incorporales,  quse-
que  ei  debitse  sunt,  arrogatori  antea
quidem  pleno  jure  acquirebantur,
exceptis  iis  quae  per  capitis  deminu-
tionem  pereunt,  quales  sunt  opera-
rum  obligationes  et  jus  agnationis.
Usus  etenim  et  ususfructus  licet  his
antea  connumerabantur,  attamen
capitis  deminutione  minima  eos  tolli
nostra  prohibuit  constitution

1.  For  if  the  father  of  a  family
gives  himself  in  arrogation,  his  pro-
perty corporeal  or  incorporeal,  and
the  debts  due  to  him,  were  formerly
acquired  in  full  ownership  by  the  arro-
gator,  with  the  exception  only  of  those
things  which  were  extinguished  by  tlie
capitis  demimitio,  as  the  obligation  of
services  and  the  rights  of  agnation.
Formerly,  use  and  usufruct  were  num-
bered among  these,  but  one  of  our
constitutions  prevents  their  extinction
by  the  minima  deminutio.

Gai.  iii  82..  82  ;  C.  iii.  33.  16,  pr.  and  1,  2.

Gains  remarks  that  the  property  of  the  wife  who  passed  in
manum  viri  was  acquired  by  her  husband  exactly  as  fully  as  that
of  the  paterfamilias  was  by  the  person  who  arrogated  him.
Everything  belonging  to  them  passed  to  the  husband  or  arro-
gator,  except  only  those  things  which  were  ij^so  facta  destroyed
by  the  change  of  status^  ajs,  for  example,  services  which,  as  the
price  of  his  freedom,  the  freedman  bound  himself  by  oath  to
render  to  the  patron,  operarum  obliyationes,  were  due  to  him  per-
sonally, and  were  no  longer  due  if  the  patron  passed  into  the
power  of  another.  The  ties  of  agnation  were  also  lost  by  the
change  of  status,  as  the  person  arrogated  passed  out  of  his  civil
family»

2.  Nunc  autem  nos  eamdem  ac-
quisitionem  quge  per  arrogationem
fiebat,  coarctavimus  ad  similitudi-
nem  naturalium  parentum  ;  nihil  et
enim  aliud,  nisi  tantummodo  usus-
fructus, tam  naturalibus  patribus
quam  adoptivis  per  filiosfamilias
acquiritur  in  iis  rebus  quse  extrirx-
secus  filiis  obveniunt,  dominio  eis
integro  servato.  Mortuo  autem  filio
arrogato  in  adoptiva  familia,  etiam
dominium  ejus  ad  arrogatorem  per-
transit,  nisi  supersint  alia3  personse
quae  ex  constitutione  nostra  patrem,
in  iis  qupe  acquiri  non  possunt,  an-
tecedunt.

2.  At  the  present  day  acquisitions
by  arrogation  are  restrained  within  the
same  limits  as  acquisitions  by  natural
parents.  Neither  natural  nor  adoptive
parents  now  acquire  anything  but  the
usufruct  of  those  things  which  come
to  their  children  from  any  extraneous
source,  the  children  still  retaining  the
dominium.  But,  if  an  arrogated  son
dies  in  his  adoptive  family,  then  the
property  also  will  pass  to  the  arrogator,
provided  there  exist  none  of  those
persons  who,  by  our  constitution,  are
preferred  to  tlie  father  in  the  succes-
sion of  those  things  which  are  not
acquired  by  him.

The  order  of  succession  fixed  by  later  emperors  and  Justi-
nian to  the  goods  of  the  Jiliusfamilias  coming  to  him  from  his
mother,  from  legacies,  gifts,  or  sources  other  than  the  father  (/^ecz^-
lium  adventitium,  which  could  not  be  acquired  by  the  father,  but

X  2

308

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XI.

only  the  usufruct  of  which  passed  to  him),  was — 1.  His  children;
2.  His  brothers  or  sisters ;  3.  His  ancestors,  the  father  taking  be-

(C.  vi.  61.  3.  4.  6;   C.  vi.  59.  11.)

fore  the  grandfather.

3.  Sed  ex  diverse,  pro  so  quod  is
debuit  qui  se  in  adoptionem  dedit,
ipso  quidem  jure  arrogator  non  te-
netur,  sed  nomine  filii  convenietur  ;
et  si  noluerit  eum  defendere,  perniit-
titur  creditoribus  per  competentes
nostros  magistratus  bona  quae  ejus
cum  usufructu  futura  fuissent,  si  se
alieno  juri  non  subjecisset,  possidere
et  legitimo  modo  ea  disponere..

3.  On  the  other  hand,  an  arrogator
is  not  directly  bound  to  satisfy  the
debts  of  his  adopted  son,  but  he  may
be  sued  in  his  son's  name  ;  and  if  he
refuse  to  answer  for  his  son,  then  the
creditors  may,  by  order  of  the  proper
magistrates,  seize  upon  and  sell  in  the
manner  prescribed  by  law  those  goods,
of  which  the  usufruct,  as  well  as  the
property,  would  have  been  in  the
debtor,  if  he  had  not  made  himself
subject  to  the  power  of  another.

Gal  iii.  84.

The  arrogator  succeeded  to  all  the  rights  of  action  for  debt
which  the  person  arrogated  had,  but  not  to  the  debts.  For  the  ar-
rogator was  in  the  position  of  a  father,  who  was  not  bound  by  the
obligations  of  a  son.  But  the  property  of  the  arrogated  son  was  held
answerable  for  the  debts,  and  the  pra3tor,  creating  a  sort  of  resti-
tutio in  integrum  in  favour  of  the  creditor,  gave  an  action  against
the  arrogated  as  if  the  capitis  minutio  had  not  taken  place ;  and
then,  if  the  arrogator  did  not  guarantee  the  creditors,  the  pr^tor
put  the  creditors  in  possession  of  the  goods  brought  by  the  arro-
gated to  the  arrogator,  with  leave  to  sell  them.  (D.  iv,  5.  2.  1  ;
Gai.  iii.  84.)

Tit.  XI.    DE  EO  GUI  LIBERTATIS  CAUSA  BGNA

ADDICUNTUK

Accessit  novus  casus  successionis
ex  constitutione  divi  Marci  :  nam  si
ii,  qui  libertatem  acceperunt  a  domi-
no in  testamento  ex  quo  non  aditur
hereditas,  velint  bona  sibi  addici
libertatum  conservandarum  causa,
audiuntur.

A  new  species  of  sticcession  has
been  added  by  the  constitution  of  the
Emj)eror  Marcus  Aurelius.  For,  if
those  slaves,  to  whom  freedom  has  been
given  by  the  testament  of  their  master,
under  which  testament  no  one  will
accept  the  inheritance,  wish  that  the
property  should  be  adjudged  to  them,
in  order  that  efltect  may  be  given  to  the
disposition  for  their  enfranchisement,
their  request  is  granted.

D.  xl.  4.  50,  pr.  and  1.

If  no  lieres  ex  testamento  accepted  the  inheritance,  it  devolved
to  the  heredes  ah  iiitestato,  and  if  no  heres  ah  intestato  accepted  it,
it  devolved  to  the  fiscus  ;  if  the  Jiscus  would  not  accept  it,  the
creditors  could  have  the  goods  of  the  deceased  sold  for  their
benefit.  But  if  the  deceased  had  by  testament  or  codicil  given
freedom  to  any  slaves,  then,  after  the  inheritance  had  been  suc-
cessively rejected  by  the  heredes  ex  testamento,  the  lieredes  ah
intestato,  and  the  Jiscus,  application  might  be  made  to  have  the

I

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XI.

309

goods  given  up  to  the  applicant  instead  of  being  sold  by  the  cre-
ditors, the  applicant  undertaking  to  enfranchise  the  slaves,  and
to  satisfy  the  creditors,  and  then  the  applicant  became  the  bono-
rum  possessor,  though  not  the  owner,  of  all  the  property  of  the
deceased.  If  the  inheritance  was  accepted  by  any  heir,  or  if  there
were  no  slaves  to  whom  the  deceased  had  left  their  liberty,  then
this  addictio  could  not  take  place.

Gains  makes  no  mention  of  this  mode  of  acquisition  per  uni-
versitatem ;  a  circumstance  used  to  fix  his  date,  as  showing  that
he  wrote  before  the  time  when  Marcus  Aurelius  issued  the  re-
script contained  in  the  next  paragraph.

1.  Et  ita  divi  Marci  rescripto  ad
Popilium  Riifum  continetur.  Verba
rescript!  ita  se  habent :  '  Si  Virginio
Valenti,  qui  testamento  suo  liberta-
tem  quibusdam  adscripsit,  nemine
successore  ab  intestate  existentC;^  in
ea  causa  bona  ejus  esse  coeperunt  ut
veniri  debeant,  is  cujus  de  ea  re  notio
est,  aditus  rationem  desiderii  tui  ha-
bebit  :  ut  libertatum,  tarn  earum
quee  directo  quam  earum  quae  per
speciem  fideicommissi  relictse  sunt,
tuendarum  gratia  addicantur  tibi,  si
idonee  creditoribus  caveris  de-solido
quod  cuique  debetur  solvendo.  Et
ii  quidem  quibus  directa  libertas
data  est,  perinde  liberi  erunt  ac-  si
liereditas  adita  esset ;  ii  autem  quos
heres  manumittere  rogatus  est,  a  te
libertatem  consequentur  :  ita  ut,  si
non  alia  conditione  velis  bona  tibi
addici,  quam  ut  etiam  qui  directo
libertatem  acceperunt,  tui  liberti
fiant ;  nam  huic  etiam  voluntati
tu8e,  si  ii  quorum  de  statu  agitur
consentiant,  auctoritatem.  nostram
accommodamus..  Et  ne  hujus  re-
scriptionis  nostras  emolumentum
alia  ratione  irritum  fiat,  si  fiscus
bona  agnoscere  voluerit,  et  ii  qui  re-
bus nostris  attendunt,  scient  com-
modo  pecuniario  prseferendam  liber-
tatis  causam,  et  ita  bona  cogenda  ut
libertas  iis  salva  sit,  qui  eam  adipisci
potuerunt  si  hereditas  ex  testamento
adita  esset.'

of   Virginius

given

certain  slaves,  must

1.  Such  is  the  effect  of  a  rescript
addressed  by  the  Emperor  Marcus  to
Popilius  Rufus,  in  the  following
terms :  *  If  the  estate
Valens,  who  by  testament  has
their  freedom  to

necessarily  be  sold,  there  being  no  sue
cessor  ah  intestato,  then  the  magistrate
who  has  the  cognisance  of   the  affair
shall  upon  application  attend  to  your
request,  that,.for  the  sake  of  preserving
the  liberty  of   those  to  whom  it  was
given,  either  directly  or  by  a  jideicom-
missiim,  the  estate  of  the  deceased  may
be  adjudged  to  you,  on  condition  that
you  give  good  security  to  the  creditors
that  their  claims  shall  be  satisfied  in
full.     And  all  those,,  to  whom  freedom
was  given  directly,  shall  then  become
free,  exactly  as  if  the  inheritance  had
been  entered  upon  ;.  but  those  whom
the  heir  was  ordered  to  manumit  shall
obtain  their  freedom  from  you  only.
However,  if  you  do  not  wish  that  the
goods  of  the  deceased  should  be  ad-
judged to  you  on  any  other  condition
than  that  those  slaves  also  who  received
their  liberty  directly  by  testament  shall
become   your   freedmen,  and  if  those
who  are  to  receive  their  freedom  agree
to  this,  we  are  willing  that  your  wishes
in  this  respect  shall  be  complied  with.
And,  lest  you  should  lose  the  benefit
of    this  our  rescript  in  another  way,
namely  by  the  property  being  seized
on  behalf  of  the  imperial  treasury,  be
it  known  to  the  officers  of  our  revenue,
that  the  gift  of  liberty  is  to  be  attended
to  more  than  our  pecuniary  advantage  ;
and  seizure  shall  be  made  of  the  pro-
perty in  such  a  way  as  to  preserve  the
freedom  of  those  who  would  have  been
in  a   situation   to    obtain  it,  had  the
inheritance  been  entered  on  under  the
testament. '

D.  xl.  5.  2,  and  4.  8.  11,  12.  17.

310

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XI.

By  a  constitution  of  Gordian,  it  was  declared  that  the  rescript
of  Marcus  Aurelius  extended  to  cases  in  which  a  stranger,  and
not  one  of  the  slaves  of  the  deceased,  applied  for  the  addiction.
(C.  vii.  2.  6.)

When  the  inheritance  Avas  not  rejected,  but  accepted  by  the
Jieredes  ah  intestato  or  by  the  fiscus^  the  Jisciis,  so  far  as  regards
the  enfranchisement  of  the  slaves,  was  placed  by  the  latter  part
of  this  rescript  in  a  difterent  position  from  that  which  was  occu-
pied by  the  heredes  ah  intestato ;  whichever  accepted  it,  the  addictio
could  not  take  place,  but  i\\Qjiscus  was  ordered  to  fulfd  the  wishes
of  the  deceased,  while  the  heredes  ah  intestato  were  at  liberty  to

disregard  them.

2.  Hoc  rescripto  subventum  est
et  libertatibus  et  defunctis,  ne  bona
eorum  a  creditoribus  possideantur
et  veneant.  Certe  si  fiierint  hac  de
causa  bona  addicta,  cessat  bonorum
venditio  :  extitit  enim  defuncti  de-
fensor, et  quidem  idonens,  qui  de
solido  creditoribus  cavet.

2.  This  rescript  is  meant  to  favour
both  the  gift  of  liberty  and  also  the
deceased  testator,  whose  effects  it  pre-
vents being  seized  and  sold  by  credi-
tors :  for,  of  course,  when  goods  are
thus  adjudged,  in  order  that  liberty
may  be  preserved,  there  cannot  be  a
sale  by  creditors,  for  there  is  some  one
to  answer  for  the  deceased,  who  is
solvent,  and  gives  security  to  the  cre-
ditors for  the  full  satisfaction  of  their
claims.

D.  xlii.  4.  2,  and  5.  3.

3.  In  primis  hoc  rescriptum  toties
locum  habet,  quoties  testamento
libertates  datse  sunt.  Quid  ergo  si
quis  intestatus  decedens  codicillis
libertates  dederit,  neque  adita  sit  ab
intestato  hereditas  ?  favor  constitu-
tionis  debebit  locum  habere.  Certe
si  testatus  decedat,  et  codicillis  dede-
rit libertatem,  competere  eam  nemini
dubium  est.

3.  This  res<!ript  is  applicable  when-
ever freedom  is  conferred  by  testament.
But  what  if  a  master  dies  intestate,
having  bequeathed  freedom  to  his
slaves  by  codicils,  and  the  inheritance
ab  intestato  be  not  entered  upon  ?  The
benefit  of  the  constitution  shall  extend
to  this  case  ;  of  course,  if  the  deceased
dies  testate,  freedom  given  by  codicils
is  effectual.

D.  xl.  5.  2.

4.  Tunc  enim  constitutioni  locum
esse  verba  ostendunt,  cum  nemo
successor  ab  intestato  existat  ;  ergo
quamdiu  incertum  erit  utrum  existat
an  non,  cessabit  constitutio.  Si  cer-
tum  esse  coeperit  neminem  extare,
tunc  erit  constitutioni  locus.

4.  The  words  of  the  constitution
show,  that  it  is  then  in  force,  when  there
is  no  successor  ah  intestato.  There-
fore, as  long  as  it  remains  doubtful,
whether  there  be  or  be  not  a  successor,
the  constitution  is  not  applicable  ;  but
when  it  is  certain  that  no  one  will
enter  upon  the  succession,  it  then  takes
effect.

D.  xl.  5.  4.

5.  Si  is  qui  in  integrum  restitui
potest,  abstinuerit  se  ab  hereditate,
quamvis  potest  in  integrum  restitui,
potest  admitti  constitutio  et  bono-
rum addictio  fieri.  Quid  ergo  si,
post  addictionem  libertatum  con-
servandarum  causa   factam,  in  inte-

5.  If  a  person  who  has  a  right  to  be
placed  again  in  exactly  the  position  he
once  held,  should  abstain  from  taking
the  inheritance,  here  too  the  constitu-
tion is  applicable,  and  an  adjudication
of  the  goods  may  be  made.  Suppos-
ing then,    after    an   adjudication    has

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XI.

311

griim  sit  restitutus  ?  Utique  non  been  made  for  the  sake  of  preserving
erit  dicendum  revocari  libertates,  liberty,  the  heir  is  restored  to  his
quae  semel  competierunt.  former  position  ;   still  the  freedom  is

not  to  be  revoked,  since  it  has  been

once  gained.

D.  xl.  5.  4.  1,  2.

The  case  contemplated  is  that  of  a  minor  under  25  years,
who  was  heres  oh  intestato.  If  he  had  accepted  the  inheritance
at  once,  he  would  have  taken  it  without  any  of  the  burdens,  such
as  gifts  of  liberty,  with  which  it  was  charged  by  the  testament,
which  had  become  of  no  effect.  But  if  he  refused  to  accept  it,
and  the  slaves  were  enfranchised  by  addiction  being  granted,  then
when  the  minor  attained  the  age  of  25,  and  was  entitled  to  the
restitutio  in  integrum,  was  the  freedom  gained  by  the  slaves  to  be
revoked  ?  Justinian  says,  undoubtedly  not.  The  inheritance
would  be  restored  to  the  minor,  but  liberty  once  given  could  not
be  taken  away  again.

6.  Haec  constitutio  libertatum  tu-
endarum  causa  introdiicta  est  ;  ergo
si  libertates  nullse  sunt  dat?e,  cessat
constitutio.  Quid  ergo  si  vivus  de-
derit  libertates,  vel  mortis  causa,  et
ne  de  hoc  quaeratur  utrum  in  frau-
dem  creditorum  an  non  factum  sit,
idcirco  velint  sibi  addici  bona,  an
audiendi  sunt  ?  Et  magis  est  ut  au-
diri  debeant,  etsi  deticiant  verba
constitutionis.

See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  6.

7.  Sed  cum  raultas  divisiones
ejusmodi  constitutioni  deesse  per-
speximus,  lata  est  a  nobis  plenissima
constitutio,  in  qua  multi«  species
coUatee  sunt,  quibus  jus  hujusmodi
successionis  plenissimum  est  effec-
tum  :  quas  ex  ipsa  lectione  constitu-
tionis potest  quis  cognoscere.

6.  This  constitution  was  intended
to  make  gifts  of  liberty  effectual ;  and,
therefore,  when  freedom  is  not  given,
the  constitution  is  not  applicable.
Suppose,  then,  a  master  has  given  free-
dom to  his  slaves  either  inter  vivos  or
mortis  causa,  and  to  prevent  any  ques-
tion arising  whether  the  creditors  have
been  defrauded,  the  slaves  intended  to
be  enfranchised  should  petition,  that
the  goods  of  the  deceased  may  be  ad-
judged to  them  ;  is  this  to  be  allowed  ?
And  we  think  that  we  ought,  on  the
whole,  to  say  that  it  is,  although  the
constitution  is  silent  on  the  point.

7.  Perceiving  that  the  constitution
was  deficient  inmanyresf)ects,  we  have
published  a  very  complete  constitution,
containing  many  provisions,  which
complete  the  legislation  on  this  kind
of  succession,  and  which  may  be  easily
learnt  by  reading  the  constitution  itself.

C.  vii.  2.  15,  pr.  1,  and  foil.

The  chief  changes  made  by  this  constitution  were — 1.  That
even  if  the  goods  had  been  sold  by  the  creditors,  the  addictio  might
still  be  made  within  a  year  from  the  sale,  which  was  rescinded
on  the  applicant  guaranteeing  the  creditors ;  2.  That  the  addictio
might  be  made  if  the  applicant  offered  a  composition  satisfactory
to  the  creditors,  instead  of  payment  in  full ;  3.  That  some  only
of  the  slaves  need  be  enfranchised  if  the  property  did  not  admit
of  all  being  enfranchised  ;  and  4.  That  while,  if  several  persons,

312  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XII.

having  an  equal  right  to  apply,  asked  for  an  addictio,  they  be-
came joint  possessors  of  the  goods ;  if  they  applied  one  after  the
other,  the  first  applicant  was  preferred.

Tit.  XII.  DE  SUCCESSIONIBUS  SUBLATIS,  QU^
FIEBANT  PER  BONORUM  VENDITIONEM,  ET
EX    SENATUS-CONSULTO  CLAUDIANO.

Erant  ante  prgedictam  successio-  There  were  formerly  other  kinds  of

nem  olim  et  aliee  per  universitatem  universal   succession   prior  to  that  of

successiones  :  qnalis  fuerat  bonorum  which  we  have  just  spoken  ;  such  was

emptio,  quae  de  bonis  debitoris  ven-  the  sale  of  goods  which  was  employed

dendis,  per  multas  ambages  fuerat  to  sell  with  numberless  formalities  the

introducta,  et   tunc  locum  habebat  goods  of  debtors.     It  continued  as  long

quando  judicia  ordinaria  in  usu  fue-  as  the  judicia  ordinaria  were  in  use  ;

runt.     Sed  cum  extraordinariis  judi-  but  afterwards,  when  the  judicia  extra-

ciis  posteritas  usa  est,  ideo  cum  ipsis  ordinaria  were   adopted,  the    sale   of

ordinariis    judiciis    etiam    bonorum  goods   passed   away  with  the  judicia

venditiones  expiraverunt.      Et  tan-  ordinaria.     Creditors  can  now  do   no

tvimmodo  creditoribus   datur  officio  more  than  possess  themselves  of   the

judicis  bona  possidere,  et  prout  utile  goods  of  their  debtors  by  order  of  a

eis  visum  fuerit  ea  disponere  :  quod  judge,  and   dispose  of   them   as  they

ex  latioribus  Digestorum  libris  per-  think  proper.  The  subject  will  be  found

fectius  apparebit.  treated  of  more  at  length  in  the  larger

work  of  the  Digest.

Gai.  iii.  77-81 ;  D.  xlii.  5  ;  C.  vii.  72.  9.

This  bonorum  emptio  per  universitatem,  one  of  the  praetorian
modes  of  execution  (see  Introd.  sec.  108),  was  a  transfer  of  the
entire  property  of  the  debtor  to  the  person  who,  in  consideration
of  receiving  it,  would  undertake  to  pay  the  largest  proportion  of
the  claims  of  the  creditors.  The  creditors  might  apply  for  per-
mission to  have  the  goods  sold  in  this  way,  not  only  when  the
debtor  was  dead,  but  (1)  when  he  fraudulently  hid  himself,  so
that  he  could  not  be  summoned  before  the  magistrate;  or  (2)
when  he  was  absent,  and  no  one  appeared  to  defend  his  cause  ;
or  (3)  if,  after  having  been  condemned,  he  did  not  satisfy  the
claims  of  the  creditors  within  the  time  allowed  by  law ;  or  (4)  if
he  had  made  a  cessio  bonorum,  i.  e.  had  himself  abandoned  all  his
property  to  his  creditors,  as  he  was  allowed  to  do  by  the  lex
Julia.  (Gai.  iii.  78.)  The  venditio  bonorum  was  held  to  carry  Avith
it  the  infamy  of  the  debtor.  The  creditors  were  first  placed  by
the  praetor  in  possession  of  the  j^roperty,  rei  servanda^  causa,  and
this  possession  was  continued  during  thirty  days  if  the  debtor
was  alive,  and  during  fifteen  if  he  was  dead.  They  then,  with
the  praetor's  sanction,  announced  the  intended  sale  by  advertise-
ment {proscriptio),  and  chose  one  of  their  own  body  to  conduct  the
business  for  them,  called  the  magister.  Lastly,  the  conditions  of  sale
were  fixed  under  the  supervision  of  the  praetor  ^publication  After
a  further  delay,  the  goods  were  put  up  to  public  auction,  and,  the
offer  of  the  highest  bidder  having  been  accepted,  the  praetor  made

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIII.  313

the  addictlo,  by  which  the  goods  of  the  debtor,  though  not  the
Quiritarian  ownership  in  them,  were  transferred  to  the  honorum
emptor,  who  stepped  into  the  place  of  the  debtor,  and  might  sue
and  be  sued  exactly  as  the  debtor  might  have  been.  (Theopii.
Par,',  Gai.  iii.  77.  80.)

Judicia  ordinaria,  extraor dinar ia.  (See  Introd.  sec.  109.)
The  process  under  the  judicia  extraordinaria,  which  is  referred  to
in  the  text,  was  termed  distractio  bonorum.  The  creditors — or
some  of  them,  time  being  allowed  for  others  to  come  in  (C.  vii.
72.  10.  pr.) — were  placed  in  possession  of  the  goods  generally  of
the  debtor,  and  then  the  goods  were  sold,  not  in  block  to  one
purchaser,  but  separately  to  separate  purchasers,  as  occasion
offered.     (See  D.  xxvii.  10.  pr.  5.)

1.   Erat   et   ex   senatns-consulto  1.  There  was  also,  by  virtue  of  the

Claudiano  miserabilis  per  universi-  senatus-cons^dtio^n  Claudianum,  another

tatem  acquisitio,  cum  libera  mulier  most  wretched  method  of  acquisition

servili  amore  bacchata  ipsam  liber-  per  universitatem  ;  when  a  free-woman

tatem  per  senatus-consultum  amit-  indulged  her  passion  for  a  slave,  and

tebat,  et  cum  libertate  substantiam.  lost  her  freedom  under  this   senatus-

Quod  indignum  nostris  temporibus  consultum,,  and  with  her  freedom  her  es-

esse  existimantes,   et  a  nostra  civi-  tate.     This  was,  in  our  opinion,  un-

tate   deleri,    et   non    inseri    nostris  worthy  of  our  age,  and  we  have  there-

Digestis  concessimus.  fore  abolished  it  in  our  empire,  and  for-
bidden it  to  be  inserted  in  the  Digest.

Gai.  l  84.  91.  160 ;  C.  vii.  24.

There  could  be  no  marriage-  between  a  slave  and  a  free  per-
son. If,  therefore,  a  woman  born  free  lived  with  a  slave  in  con-
tubernio,  this  was  thought  so  disgraceful  to  her,  that  if  the  master
of  the  slave  complained  by  three  denunciations  of  her  conduct,
a  magisterial  decree  subjected  her  to  the  punishment  mentioned
in  the  text,  and  she  and  her  property  passed  to  the  owner  of  the
slave.  The  strong  expression,  '  servili  amore  bacchata,^  must  not
be  taken  as  indicating  anything  more  than  cohabitation  wdth  a
slave.  If  the  woman  was  a  freedwoman  who  thus  lived  with  a
slave,  she  became  again  the  slave  of  her  patron,  if  he  had  not
known  of,  and  assented  to,  her  conduct,  and  the  slave  of  the
master  of  the  slave  with  whom  she  lived,  if  the  patroii  had  been
aw^are  of  how^  she  was  living.  (Paul.  Serit.  2.  21  ;  Gai.  i.  84-91.
160;  see  also  Tacit.  Annal.  xii.  53.)  The  date  of  the  senatus-
consultum  Claudianum  is  a.d.  52.

Tit.  XIII.     DE   OBLIGATIONIBUS.

Nunc  transeamus  ad  obligationes.  Let  us  now  pass  to  obligations.    An

Obligatio    est   juris   vinculum,    quo  obligation  is  a  tie  of  law,  which  binds

necessitate  astringimur  alicujus  sol-  us,  according  to  the  rules  of  our  civil

vendse  rei  secundum  nostr^e  civitatis  law,  to  render  something,
jura.

D.  xliv.  7.  3.

314  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIII.

1.  Omnium  autem  obligationum  1.  The  principal  division  of  obli-
summa  divisio  in  duo  genera  dedu-  gations  is  into  two  kinds,  civil  and  prae-
citur ;  namque  aut  civiles  sunt  aut  torian.  Civil  obligations  are  those
prgetori?e.  Civiles  sunt,  quee  aut  le-  constituted  by  the  laws,  or,  at  least,
gibus  constitutfe  aut  certe  jure  civili  recognised  by  the  civil  law.  Prseto-
comprobatiB  sunt.  Prsetoripe  sunt,  rian  obligations  are  those  which  the
quas  praetor  ex  sua  jurisdictione  praetor  has  established  by  his  own  au-
constituit,  quse  etiam  honorarise  thority  ;  they  are  also  called  honorary,
vocantur.

D.  xliv.  7.  52.

2.  Sequens  divisio  in  quatuor  spe-  2.  A  further  division  separates  them
cies  deducitur  :  aut  enim  ex  contractu  into  four  kinds,  for  they  arise  ex  con-
sunt,  aut  quasi  ex  contractu,  aut  ex  tractu  or  quasi  ex  contractu,  ex  Tnalejicio
maleficio,  aut  quasi  ex  maleficio.  or  ciuasi  ex  maleficio.  Let  us  first  treat
Prius  est  ut  de  iis  quae  ex  contractu  of  those  which  arise  from  a  contract ;
sunt,  dispiciamus  :  harum  aeque  qua-  which  again  are  divided  into  four
tuor  sunt  species  ;  aut  enim  re  con-  kinds,  according  as  they  are  formed
trahuntur  aut  verbis  aut  Uteris  aut  by  the  thing,  by  word  of  mouth,  by
consensu  :  de  quibus  singulis  dispi-  writing,  or  by  consent.  Let  us  examine
ciamus.  each  kind  separately.

We  now  pass  to  obligations.  Having  finished  the  subject  of
rights  over  things,  and  of  the  modes  by  which  they  are  acquired,
Ys'Q  now  pass  to  rights  against  particular  persons,jMra  in  personam,
expressed  very  inaccurately  in  later  Latin  by  the  tQvm  jura  ad
rem.  (See  Introd.  sec.  61.)  These  rights  are  those  which  we
have  against  some  one  or  more  particular  persons,  as  opposed  to
the  general  rights,  such  as  that  of  having  the  secure  enjoyment
of  our  property,  which  we  have  against  all  mankind.  (See'
Introd.  sec.  61.)

Obligations  are  placed  in  the  Institutes  between  the  subject
of  things  and  the  subject  of  actions ;  and  as  in  Bk.  i.  3,  pr.  it  is
said  that  the  whole  of  private  law  relates  to  persons,  things,  and
actions,  it  has  been  questioned  whether  obligations  are  meant  to
be  included  under  things  or  actions.  Theophilus  understood
them  to  be  included  under  actions,  as  we  see  by  his  paraphrase
on  this  Title,  and  on  the  6th  Title  of  the  Fourth  Book;  but  it  is
evident  that  Gains,  from  whom  Justinian  borrows  the  arrange-
ment, meant  obligations  to  come  under  the  discussion  of  res :
otherwise,  as  Savigny  remarks  (^System  des  heut,  rom.  Rechts,
Bk.  ii.  ch.  1),  we  must  consider  the  part  specially  relating  to
actions  as  a  subsidiary  part  of  the  portion  commencing  with
obligations,  which  is  contradicted  by  the  mode  in  which  Gains
treats  of  the  subject  of  actions.  The  subject  of  obligations  does
not  properly  fall  under  res  or  actiones,  and  it  was  from  feeling
this  that  Gains  placed  it  between  the  two,  although  his  division
of  law  obliofed  him  to  rank  it  under  one  or  the  other.  He  could
not,  consistently  with  this  division,  place  obligations  in  his  system
accordino;  to  their  nature,  and  he  nreferred  to  consider  them  with
reference  to  their  ultimate  result  (res)  rather  than  with  reference
to  the  mode  by  which  the  law  secured  this  result  i^actio).  The
incorrectness  of  such  a  mode  of  treating  obligations,  and  the  in-

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XIII.  315

accuracy  of  the  expression  Jus  ad  rem,  are  evident  when  we  consider
that  the  actio  did  not  really  give  the  ?t5  which  was  the  subject
of  the  obligation,  but  only  a  pecuniary  equivalent.

The  remainder  of  this  Book  and  the  first  five  Titles  of  the
Fourth  Book  must  be  taken  together  as  treating  of  obligations,
the  remainder  of  this  Book  being  mainly  devoted  to  one  head
of  obligations,  those  arising  from  contract.  As  a  preliminary  to
the  general  study  of  the  part  of  the  Institutes  treating  of  obliga-
tions, and  specially  to  the  study  of  contracts,  it  will  be  convenient
here  to  take  a  preliminary  survey  of  some  points  to  which  con-
stant reference  is  made  in  the  discussion  of  subsequent  details.

These  points  are  :  1.  The  meaning  of  the  term  ohllgatio.
2.  The  sources  of  obligations.  3.  The  oblio-ations  which  arise
from  contract,  and  their  recos^nised  heads.  4.  Innominate  con-
tracts,  pacts,  natural  obligations.  5.  Culpa.  6.  Interest.  7.  The
actions  by  which  obligations,  and  especially  contracts,  were
enforced.

1.  The  Meaning  of  the  Term  Obligatio. —  Obligatio,  as  the
text  in  the  initial  paragraph  tells  us,  is  a  *  tie  of  law  by  which
we  are  bound  to  render  something;  accordino;  to  the  rules  of  our
law,'  the  latter  words  being  explained  in  par.  1  as  meaning  the
rules  of  either  the  strict  civil  law  or  the  praetorian  law.  It  was
because  it  could  be  enforced  by  an  action  that  the  tie  was  binding
on  the  person  bound,  debitor  (^debitor  iiitelligitur  is  a  quo  invito
exigi  pecunia  potest,  D.  1.  16.  108),  in  favour  of  the  creditor,
these  words  debitor  and  creditor  beino;  used  in  a  o^eneral  sense,
in  Komau  law,  for  the  person  bound  by  and  the  person  profiting
by  the  tic.  That  which  the  debtor  is  thus  bound  to  render  is  in
the  text  expressed  by  the  general  word  solvere  ;  and  this  general
term  includes  three  kinds  of  such  rendering — dare,  facere,
prcEstare — dare  meaning  to  give  the  property  in  a  thing,  as,  for
example,  the  buyer  had  to  give  the  property  in  the  money  he
paid ;  facere,  to  do  something,  as,  for  example,  the  mandatary  or
agent  had  to  do  what  he  had  undertaken  to  do ;  and  prcestare,  to
furnish  or  make  good,  as  the  seller  had  to  i\xvms\i,  prcestare,  though
not  to  give  the  property  in  the  thing  sold,  and  the  person  guilty  of
negligence  had  prcestare  cidpam,  to  make  good  his  fault.  In  every
case,  however,  it  was  a  sum  of  money  that  was  the  real  thing  that
the  debtor  was  forced  to  give,  as  the  remedy  for  every  breach  of
contract  was  put  into  the  shape  of  a  pecuniary  equivalent,  unless
the  debtor  could  and  did  execute  his  contract  under  compulsion.

Obligatio  is  thus  properly  the  tie  between  the  creditor  and
debtor;  but  it  is  also  used  to  express  the  right  thus  gained
(D.  xii.  2.  9.  3),  the  duty  thus  owed  (D.  1.  16.  21),  and  also  one
mode  by  which  such  a  tie  is  created,  being  used  as  equivalent  to
contractus.     (D.  v.  1.  20.)

2.  The  Sources  of  Obligations. — The  two  main  sources  of
obligations  are  contracts  and  delicts:  the  debtor  is  bound  by  having
undertaken  to  be  bound,  or  he  has  done   an  injury  and  has  to

316  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIII.  ^^

make  good  his  wrong.  Contracts  are  the  principal  subject  of  the
remainder  of  this  Book,  and  delicts  of  the  first  Titles  of  the
Fourth  Book.  But  there  were  obliofations  which  arose  in  a
manner  very  similar  to  that  from  which  contracts  sprang,  a  state
of  facts  having  arisen  by  which  the  debtor  was  placed  in  very
much  the  position  in  which  he  would  have  been  had  he  contracted
— ohligatio7ies  quasi  ex  contractu,  treated  of  in  the  27th  Title  of
this  Book ;  and  there  were  obligations  which  arose  from  wrongs
being  done,  which  did  not  fall  within  the  special  list  of  delicts
known  to  Roman  law — obligationes  quasi  ex  delicto,  treated  of  in
Title  5  of  the  Fourth  Book.  The  sources  of  oblio^ations  in  the
Institutes  are  thus  four;  while  Gains  says  (iii.  88),  omnis
obligatio  vel  ex  contractu  nascitur,  vel  ex  delicto,  and  adds  in  a
passage  given  in  the  Digest  (xliv.  1),  aut  propria  quo  dam  jure
ex  variis  causarum  Jiguris,  i.e.  by  obligations  quasi  ex  contractu
and  quasi  ex  delicto.

3.    Contracts,—  A    contract  is  a    species    of    agreement,  the
accord  of  two  wills,  conventio,  pactum  ;  and  in  an  agreement  there
is  first  of  all  the  pollicitatio,  the  oifer  made  by  one   party,  and
then  the  acceptance  by  the  other.      When  this  accord  of  wills  is
such   that  the   law  adds   a  third  element,  the   vinculum  juris,  or
obligation,  we  have  a  contract.    (D.  1.  12.  3.)    But  in  order  that
this  third  element  should  be  added,  it  was,  according  to  the  strict
theory  of  Roman  law,  necessary  that  the  accord  of  wills  should
have  been  expressed  in  a   particular  manner.     In  the  old  times
of  Roman  law,  the  nexum,  the  form  of  conveyance  by  the  scales
and  the  copper,  was  the  only  form  of  contract  recognised,  and  the
use  of  this  form   continued  to  be  necessary  to  pass  res  mancijn.
(See  Introd.  sec.  59.)     Afterwards  other  and  more  varied  forms
were  substituted.     There  were  thus  introduced  successively  forms
by  which  contracts  could  be  made :   1.   Verbis,  by  the  stipulation.
2.  Literis,  by  entry  in   a  ledger.     3.    Then,  without  any  special
form  being  gone  through,  contracts  were  recognised  when  made
re,  by  the  simple  delivery  of  a  thing  in  one  of  four  ways,  mutuum,
commodatum,  depositum,  pignus.      And,  lastly,  4.   In  four  cases
contracts  were  recognised  as  arising  immediately  out  of  the  con-
sent of  the  parties,  sale,  letting  on  hire,  partnership,  mandatum.
There  were  thus  ten  recognised  heads  of  contract.   The  Institutes,
following  Gains,  treat  first  of  contracts  re,  although  this  is  out  of
the  historical  order,  then  the  formal  contracts  verbis  and   literis,
and  lastly  the  formless  contracts  consensu.     It  may  be  observed
that  contracts  re  may  in  one  way  be  classed  with  contracts  verbis
and  literis,  and  opposed  to  the  consensual  contracts  ;   for  in  them
there  is  something,  i.  e.  the  delivery  of  the  thing,  as  in  contracts
verbis  and  literis  there  is  something,  i.  e.  the  use  of  a  form,  be^^ond
the  mere  consent.

By  an  obligation  the  debtor  is  bound  to  the  creditor ;  but  an
obligation  might  either  be  such  as  to  bind  one  party,  the  debtor,
and  not  the  other,  the  creditor  (unilateral  contracts),  or  it  might

A

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIII.  3 1  7

be  such  that  each  party  was  in  turn  debtor  and  creditor  (bilateral
contracts).  Contracts  made  verbis  and  Uteris  were  unilateral.
Contracts  made  consensu  were  bilateral.  Contracts  made  re
were  indirectly  bilateral.  It  was  only  if  the  person  receiving
the  thino-  subsequently  neglected  some  duty  that  he  was  in  his
turn  bound,  as,  for  example,  if  he  did  not  take  proper  care  of  the
thing  he  received.

4.   Innominate  Contracts. — When  an  agreement  did  not  take
the  shape  of  any  of  the  ten  forms  of  contract  recognised  in  the
civil  law  (it  will  be  remembered  that  the  heads  re  and  consensu
have  each  four  subdivisions),  it  was,  strictly  speaking,  not  a  con-
tract at  all,  but  if  one   party  to  it   had   executed  it,  the  prsetor
would  force  the  other  party  to  execute  it  also.      These  contracts,
as  havino-  no  special  name,  have  been  termed  contractus  innomi-
nati,  and  as  the  contract  sprang  into  existence  by  a  thing  having
been  done  or  given,   by  the  fact,  that  is,  of  the  contract  being
already  executed  by  one  party  to  it,  these  contractus  innominuti
may  be  looked  on  as  belonging  more  immediately  to  the  head  of
contracts  made  re.     Paulus  (D.  xix.  6.  5)  thus  sums  up  the  heads
of  the  cases  in  which  such  contracts  might  arise  :   '  Aut  do  tibi  ut
des,  aut  do  ut  facias,  aut  facio  ut  des,  aut  facio  ut  facias.'    I  give
something  to  you  in  such  a  way  that  by  the  fact  of  my  gift  (re)
you  are  bound  to  give  something  to  me,  or  I  give  so  that  you  are
bound  to  do  something  for  me,  or  I  do  something  for  you  so  that
vou  are  bound  to  give  me  something,  or  I  do  something  for  you
so  that  you  are  bound  to  do  something  for  me.     Contracts  of  this
sort  would  be  enforced  by  an  actio  in  factum  prcBscriptis  verbis^
by  one,  that  is,  in  which  the  formula  would  be  arranged  to  meet
the  circumstances  of  this  particular  case  {in  factum),  a  short  state-
ment of  these   circumstances   being  placed  in   the  demonstratio
(prcescriptis  verbis).

Pacts. — An  sigreement,  pactum,  not  coming  under  the  ten  heads
of  contract,  nor  binding  as  an  innominate  contract  by  having  been
executed  on  one  side,  was,  as  a  general  rule,  a  ?iudum  pactum  ;
that  is,  it  could  not  be  enforced  by  an  action.  But  such  an
agreement  might  be  used  as  the  basis  of  an  exception.  Nuda  pactio
obligationem  non  parit,  sed  parit  exceptionem.  (D.  ii.  14.  7.  4.)
There  were,  however,  some  pacts  to  which  an  action  was  attached,
either  by  express  enactment,  pacta  legitima,  such  as,  after  the
time  of  Justinian,  the  agreement  to  give  (Bk.  ii.  Tit.  7),  or  by
the  prsstors  {pacta  prcBtoria),  such  as  the  pactum  constitutce  pe~
cunice,  an  agreement  by  which  a  person  agreed  to  pay  what  he
already  owed.  (Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.  9.)  Pacta  might  also  be  added
{adjecta)  as  subsidiary  to  a  main  obligation.

Natural  Obligations. — There  were  certain  ties  to  which  no
action  was  attached,  but  which  still  were  not  without  a  recognised
legal  force,  because  of  the  moral  claim  to  recognition  they  involved.
They  were  called  natural  obligations.  As  for  example,  if  an  agree-
ment was  made  heUweeia.  a  paterfamilias  and  any  one  in  his  power,

318  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIII.

this  was  not  an  obligation  that  could  be  legally  enforced,  but  the
parties  were  bound  by  a  tie  which  the  jurists  ascribed  to  the
sphere  of  the  lex  naturce  or  jus  gentium.  Is  natura  debet  quern
jure  gentium  dare  oportet  cujus  fidem  secuti  sumus.  (D.  1.  17.
84.  1.)  The  principal  effects  of  natural  obligations  were,  that  if
money  was  paid  in  pursuance  of  them  it  could  not  be  sued  for
back.  (D.  xii.  6.  19,  pr.),  and  they  could  be  made  the  subject  of
a  set-oft'  in  an  action  brought  to  enforce  a  legal  obligation.  Etiam
quod  natura  dehetur  venit  in  compensationem.  (D.  xvi.  2.  fi.)
Pacts  probably  were  considered  to  produce  always  a  natural
obligation ;  but  a  natural  obligation  might  arise  in  cases  where
there  was  no  pact,  no  agreement,  for  example,  of  persons  able  to
contract,  as,  if  a  thing  was  due  from  a  slave,  the  slave  could  not
bind  himself,  but  the  thing  was  due  by  a  natural  obligation,  and
a  suretyship  could  be  created  to  give  effect  to  it.     (Tit.  20.  1.)

5.  Culpa,  dolus,  diligentia. — One  of  the  varying  features  in
obligations  which  it  is  of  considerable  importance  to  notice  is  the
amount  of  responsibility  thrown  on  one  or  both  of  the  parties  to  it.

If  one  person  who  was  bound  to  another  by  a  contract,  de-
signedly subjected  him  to  harm  or  loss  {damnum)  with  respect  to
anything  included  in  the  contract,  the  wrongdoer,  in  inflicting
this  wilful  injury,  was  said  to  be  guilty  of  dolus ;  if  he  was  the
means  of  an  injury  not  designed  being  inflicted,  then  unless  the
damnum  was  the  result  of  unavoidable  accident,  he  was  said  to  be
guilty  of  culpa.  The  technical  term  for  to  be  responsible  for
malicious  injury  or  a  fault  was  dolum,  culpam  prcestare.  Every
contract  bound  all  parties  dolum  prcestare,  and  a  special  agi'ee-
ment  that  the  parties  should  not  be  so  bound  was  void.  (D.
ii.  14.  27.  3.)  CV.Z/;a  would  naturally  admit  of  degrees.  The  fault
might  be  one  which  any  man  in  his  senses  would  have  scrupled  to
commit,  and  it  was  then  termed  lata  culpa  {lata  culpa  est  nimia
negligentia,  id  est,  non  intelligere  quod  omnes  intelligunt ;  D.  L.
16.  213.  2);  and  lata  culpa  was  treated  as  approaching  nearly  to
dolus,  as  such  extreme  negligence  must  generally  be  due  to  design.
Or  it  might  consist  in  falling  short  of  tlie  highest  standard  of  care-
fulness to  avoid  injury  that  could  be  found ;  such,  for  instance,  as
the  carefulness  employed  in  the  management  of  affairs  by  a  person
who  would  deserve  to  be  called  bonus  paterfamilias,  and  the
culpa  was  then  termed  levis  or  levissima.  Or,  again,  it  might
consist  in  falling  short  of  the  care  which  the  person  guilty  of  the
culpa  was  accustomed  to  bestow  on  his  own  affairs.  In  this  last
case  we  no  longer  measure  by  an  absolute  standard,  but  a  relative
one  ;  what  is  culpa  in  one  man  is  not  in  another,  and  modern
writers  have  therefore  spoken  of  it  as  being  culpa  levis  in  concreto,
i.e.  as  seen  in  and  measured  by  the  particular  individual,  opposed  to
the  culpa  levis  in  abstracto,i.e.  estimated  by  the  absolute  standard
of  the  dili<^ence  which  a  person  of  the  utmost  care  would  exhibit.

If  we  measure  the  degrees  of  responsibility  which  under
various  circumstances  those  bound  by  an  obligation  will  incur,  we
may  speak  either  of  the  fault  for  which  they  will  be  held  respon-

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIII.  319

sible,  or  of  the  degree  of  negligence  which  this  fault  implies,  or  of
the  degree  of  diligence  that  is  exacted  from  them.     These  are  only
different  modes  of  talking  of  the  same  thing.   If  the  circumstances
are  such   that  the  person  bound   by  the  obligation  undergoes  a
slio'ht  degree  of  responsibility,  we  may  say  that  he  will  be  respon-
sible for  a  grave  fault  {lata   culpa),  not  for  a  slight  one  (culpa
levis),  that  the  negligence  for  which  he  will  be  responsible  must
be  orross,  crassa,  or  that  the  diligence  he  has  to  show  is  of  the
second,  not  of  the  first,  of  the  two  orders  to  be  mentioned  imme-
diately.    It  is  in  the  language  of  diligence  that  the  Roman  jurists
generally  calculate  the  amount  of  responsibility.     They  make  two
orders  of  diligence,  the  higher,  that  of  the   bonus  paterfamilias,
exacta  diligentia,  and  the  lower,  that  shown  by  the  person  spoken
of  in  the  conduct  of  his  own  affairs,  quanta  in  suis  rebus  diligentia ;
and  these  two  orders  of  diligence  are  brought  into  harmony  with
the  three  divisions  oi  culpa  (lata,  Ze?;z>,  and  levis  in  concreto^in  this
way.     (1)  A  person  responsible  for  culpa  levis  in  abstracto  has
to   show  the  diligence  of  a  bonus  paterfamilias.     (2)  A  person
who  is  only  responsible  for  lata  culpa  is  not  to   be  held  liable
until  it   is  shown    that   he    has    not  used   as  much   care   as  he
does  habitually   about  his   own  things.      A  person  who  is  re-
sponsible for  culpa  levis  in  concreto  has  to  show  that  he  has  used
as  much  care  as  he  does  about  his  own  things,  i.e.  in  this  case  the
burden  of  proof  is  on  him.     In  each  case  the  standard  is  the  care
which  the  person  sought  to  be  made  liable  takes  about  his  own
things.     All  responsibility  for  culpa  is  thus  set  under  two  heads
of  diligence,  and  in  the   same  way  there  are  two  corresponding
heads  of  negligence  ;  and  negligence   has  a  distinguishing  mark
added  to  it  in  the  term  crassa,  as  opposed  to  slight  (minima),  when
it  is  meant  that  the  person  spoken  of  has  not  used  in  the  case  in
question  the  care  he  habitually  employs  in  matters  that  affect  him.
The  higher  degree  of  diligence,  that  of  a  bonus  paterfa.milias,
was  required,  or,   in   other   words,   the    negligence    from   which
liability  would  arise  need  not  be  crassa,  or,  in  other  words,  the
culpa  causing  liability  might  be  levis  and  levis  in  abstracto,  in  the
following  set  of  cases :   1.  Where  the  person  responsible  got  the
benefit  of  a  contract,  as,  for  example,  when  he  borrowed  a  thing
for  his  own   use  (commodatum) ;  or  (2)  when  both  parties  were
interested  in  the  obligation  being  carried  out,  but  there  was  no
joint  interest    in    the  thing,   as,    for    example,    mortgagor    and
mortgagee  (D.  xiii.   7.  pr.),  vendor   and   vendee  (D.  xviii.  6.  3),
letter  and  hirer  (D.  xix.  2.   25.  7).     3.  In  case   of  agents  (neyo-
tiorum  f/estores).

Only  the  lower  degree  of  diligence,  that  quanta  in  suis  rebus,
was  required,  or,  in  other  words,  the  negligence  from  which
liability  would  arise  must  be  crassa,  or,  in  other  words,  the  culpa
causing  liability  might  be  levis, hut  levis  in  concreto, \u  the  following
cases:  1.  When  the  other  person  to  the  contract  got  the  benefit
from  it,  as,  in  a  contract  of  deposit,  the  depositary  is  only  liable  for
crassa  negligentia,  and  it  must  be  proved  that  he  has  not  used  the

320  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XIII.

quanta  in  suis  rebus  diligentla.  2.  When  both  parties  to  the
contract  have  a  common  interest  in  the  thing  as  to  which  the
(juestion  of  diligence  or  negligence  arises,  as  partners,  the  husband
in  the  management  of  the  dotal  estate,  where  he  is  a  sort  of  part-
ner (D.  xxiii.  3.  17),  co-heirs  and  co-legatees  (D.  x.  2.  25.  16).
3.  Involuntary  parties  to  a  quasi  contract,  like  tutors  and  cura-
tors (D.  xxvii.  3.  1,  pr. ).

6.  Interest,  mora. — When  a  person  bound  by  a  contract  delayed
to  execute  it,  and  this  delay  (?/z^r«)  was  of  such  a  kind  that  culpa
could  be  imputed  to  him,  he  was  subjected  to  something  more
than  the  necessity  of  fulfilling  the  contract,  and  especially  he
was  in  most  cases  liable  to  pay  interest  {usur(E).  (D.  xxii.  1.  7.)
But  interest  was  not  ordinarily  payable  on  debts  except  by
express  agreement,  and  there  was  a  legal  maximum  of  12  per
cent,  or  1  per  month,  centesimce  usurce,  reduced  by  Justinian  to
6  per  cent,  in  most  cases.     (C.  iv.  32.  26.)

7.  Actions. — The  subject  of  actions  is  treated  of  fully  in  the
Sixth  and  following  Titles  of  the  Fourth  Book,  and  it  is  only
necessary  here  to  notice  generally  that  part  of  the  subject  which
has  to  do  with  the  enforcement  of  obligations,  and  especially  of
contracts.  As  an  obligation  was  constituted  a  legal  tie  by  having
an  action  attached  to  it,  it  is  necessary  to  know  by  what  kind  of
action  different  obligations  were  enforced,  and  in  almost  every
case  the  Institutes  couple  the  mention  of  the  kind  of  action
attached  with  the  mention  of  each  kind  of  obligation.  The
main  distinction  to  be  now  referred  to  is  that  between  condictions
and  boncE  Jidei  actions,  corresponding  with  the  distinction  noticed
in  Tit.  13.  1  between  civil  and  praetorian  obligations.

The  older  actions  of  law  (see  Introd.  sec.  94)  afforded  a  very
cumbrous  machinery  for  the  enforcement  of  rights  against  parti-
cular persons ;  and  the  lex  Silia  (510  A.u.C.)  introduced  a  new
kind  of  action,  termed  condictio,  for  the  enforcement  of  obliga-
tions binding  a  person  to  give  the  absolute  ownership  (dare)  of  a
certain  sum  of  money  (pecunia  certa) ;  and  the  lex  Calpurnia
(520  A.u.C.)  extended  its  application  to  a  similar  demand  of  any
certain  thing,  as  a  definite  quantity  of  oil  or  wheat.  (Gai.  iv.  19.)
In  process  of  time  the  condictio  was  made  to  embrace  uncertain
as  well  as  certain  things,  and  Avas  applied  to  obligations  binding  a
person  facere,  and  hence  Gains  says,  appellantur  in  personam
actiones,  quibus  dari  Jierive  intendinius,  condictiones  (iv.  5).  The
condictio  certi,  i.e.  the  condictio  in  its  older  and  stricter  form,  came
thus  to  be  opposed  to  the  condictio  incerti.  We  may  therefore  say
that  contracts  dare  or  facere  were  enforced  by  a  condictio,  and
that  this  condictio  was  certi  or  incerti  according  as  a  definite  or
indefinite  thing  was  demanded.  Whenever  the  contract  was
to  do  a  thing,  it  was  always  uncertain,  because  the  law  could
not  compel  the  person  bound  by  the  contract  to  do  the  thing,
but  only  to  give  a  pecuniary  equivalent ;  and  what  sum  of
money  was  a  reasonable  compensation  for  the  loss  sustained  by
the  thing  not  being  done  was  left  to  be  settled  by  the  ludge.    The

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIV.  321

formula  of  the  condictio  certi  r^in  si  paret  eum  \jlecem  aureos\  dare
oportere.  (See  paragr.  1  of  next  Title.)  That  of  the  condictio
incerti  YHia.  quicquid  paret  eum  dare  facer e  oportere.  The  condictio
incerti,  besides  its  general  name,  received  also  a  special  name
derived  from  the  kind  of  contract  it  was  brought  to  enforce,  or
from  the  subject-matter  of  the  contract  itself.  For  instance,  the
action  brought  to  enforce  a  stipulation  for  an  uncertain  sum  was
termed  an  actio  ex  stipulatu.  When  the  condictio  was  certi,  it
was  generally  spoken  of  simply  as  condictio.  Sometimes,  however,
though  more  rarely,  it  too  received  a  special  name,  as  the  condictio
eerti  brouoht  to  enforce  a  mutiium,  sometimes  termed  the  actio
jnutui.

There  was  another  class  of  actions  in  which  a  wide  discretion
was  given  to  the  judge,  who  was  to  take  all  the  circumstances  of
the  case  into  his  consideration,  and  pronounce  the  sentence  which
equity  demanded,  thus  acting  as  an  arbiter  rather  than  as  2i  judex.
Such  actions  were  termed  bonce  Jidei  actiones,  and  the  obligations,
to  enforce  which  they  were  given,  were  termed  bonce  Jidei  obliga-
tiones.  The  right  to  have  this  equitable  consideration  of  the
whole  case  was  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  obligation,  i.e.  the
action  brought  to  enforce  any  of  the  boncB  Jidei  obligationes  was
always  bonce  Jidei.  All  actions  instituted  by  the  joratorian  law
were  of  this  description.  There  was  thus  an  opposition  made
between  condictiones  which  were  stricti  juris,  derived  from  the
civil  law,  and  in  Avhich  the  judge  was  confined  within  the  limits
of  the  formula,  and  these  bonce  Jidei  actiones.  Among  the  bonce
Jidei  actiones  we  shall  find  several  mentioned  in  the  following
Titles  of  this  Book,  as,  for  instance,  the  action  ex  empto,  ex  vendito,
ex  locato,  ex  conductOymandati,  depositi,  pro  socio,  &c.  (See  Bk.  iv.
Tit.  6.  38.)  The  bonce  Jidei  action  given  by  the  pra3tor  to  enforce
innominate  contracts  was  almost  always  one  specially  adapted  to
meet  the  facts  of  the  particular  case,  and  it  received  the  name  of
the  actio  in  factum,  prcescriptis  verbis.  The  formula  was  drawn
up  to  meet  the  facts  of  the  particular  case  {in  factum\  and  this
w^as  done  by  placing  in  the  demonstratio  a  short  statement  of  these
facts  {prcescriptis  verbis).     (Sec  Introd.  sec.  106.)

Tit.  XIY.     QUIBUS   MODIS   EE  CONTEAHITUR

OBLIGrATIO.

Re  contrahitur   obligatio,  velnti  An  obligation  may  be  contracted  by

iniitni  datione.     Mutui  autein  datio  the  thing,  as,  for  example,  by  giving

in  iis  rebus  consistit  qua3  pondere,  a  mutuwn.     This   always   consists  of

numero  mensiirave  constant,  velnti  things  which  may  be  weighed,  num-

vino,  oleo,  frnmento,  pecunia  nmne-  bered,  or  measured,  as  wine,  oil,  corn,

rata,  aire,  argento,  auro  :  quas  res  coin,  brass,  silver,  or  gold.     In  giving

aut  numerando,  aut  metiendo,   aut  these  things  by  number,  measure,  or

appendendo  in  hoc  damns  ut  acci-  weight,  we  do  so  that  they  may  be-

pientium  fiant,  et  quandoque  nobis  come  the  property  of  those  who  re-

non   eredem  res,   sed   alia3  ejusdem  ceive  them.     The  identical  things  lent

naturseetqualitatisreddantur :  unde  are  not  returned,  but  only  others  of

y

322  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIV.

etiam  mntuum  appellatiim  est,  quia  the  same  nature  and  quality ;  and
ita  a  me  tibi  datur,  ut  ex  meo  tuum  lience  the  term  mutuum,  because,
fiat.  Et  ex  eo  contractu  nascitur  what  I  give  from  being  mine  becomes
actio  qu?e  vocatur  condictio.  yours.     From  this  contract  arises  the

action  termed  condictio.

Gai.  iii.  90 ;  D.  xii.  1.  9,  pr.  and  3.

Obligations  were  said  to  be  contracted  re  when  the  actual
receipt  of  a  thing  under  certain  conditions  imposed  the  necessity
of  fulfilling  those  conditions.  Four  kinds  of  contracts  came
under  this  head,  all  of  which  are  noticed  in  this  Title,  viz.  those
named  mutuum,  commodatum,  depositum,  and  pignus.  By  the
contract  of  mutuum  the  property  in  the  thing  delivered  passed  to
the  receiver  ;  by  that  of  pignus  the  recipient  acquired  possession ;
in  contracts  of  commodatum  and  dejiositum  the  recipient  was  only
ill  possessione.     (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  6.)

The  contract  of  mutuum  was  a  contract  of  loan,  where  not
the  thing  lent,  but  an  equivalent,  was  to  be  returned.  The  obli-
gation to  return  this  equivalent  arose  on  and  by  the  delivery  of
the  thing  lent.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  the  deriva-
tion from  ex  meo  tuum  is  quite  erroneous.  Things  which  were
of  such  a  nature  that  they  could  be  replaced  by  equal  quan-
tities and  qualities  are  termed,  in  barbarous  Latin,  fungihiles,
because  mutua  vice  funguntur  (D.  xii.  1.  6),  they  replace  and
represent  each  other :  thus  a  bushel  of  wheat  is  said  to  be  a  res
fungihilis,  a  particular  picture  is  not.  The  distinction  is  much
better  expressed  by  saying  that  the  classes  of  things  which  can
represent  each  other  are  considered  in  genere,  those  which  cannot
are  considered  in  specie.  (See  Introd.  sec.  55.)  If  the  person
who  lends  the  bushel  of  wheat  receives  in  return  a  bushel  of
equally  good  wheat,  consisting  of  grains  totally  different  from
those  he  lent,  it  is  the  same  to  him  as  if  the  identical  grains  were
restored ;  the  v/heat  may  be  considered  in  genere  ;  not  so  with  the
picture,  which  can  only  be  considered  in  specie.  But  it  is  to  be
observed  that  it  is  the  intention  of  the  parties,  not  the  nature  of
the  thing,  that  makes  the  thing  considered  in  genere  rather  than
in  specie.  A  person  might  lend  a  picture,  and  only  require  that
a  picture  of  some  sort,  whether  the  same  picture  or  another,  j
should  be  given  in  return  to  him,  in  which  case  the  picture  would
be  considered  in  genere ;  or  a  person  might  require  the  identical
grains  of  v/heat  to  be  returned,  and  then  the  wheat  would  be
considered  in  specie.  A  thing  lent  in  a  mutuum  was  always  con-
sidered in  genere,  so  that  whenever  it  was  the  intention  of  the
parties  that  the  loan  should  be  a  mutuum,  it  was  also  their  inten-
tion that  the  thing  lent  should  be  considered  in  genere.

The  action  for  recovering  the  equivalent  would  be  a  condictio
certi,  as  the  equivalent  was  necessarily  something  fixed  and  de-
termined on.  In  this  case  the  condictio  received  the  name  of
condictio  ex  mutuo,  or  sometimes  actio  mutiii,  hut  as  it  was  always
ccrti,  it  very  seldom  was   termed    anything   but  condictio y  and

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIV

323

perhaps  the  term  actio  mutui  (C.  vii.  35.  5)  would  not  have  been
used  in  the  thne  of  strict  les^al  lano;uaG;e.

CD  O  O

1.  Is  quoqiie  qui  non  debitum
accepit  ab  eo  qui  per  errorem  solvit,
re  obligatur,  daturque  agenti  contra
euiD  propter  repetitionem  condicti-
tia  actio  ;  nam  perinde  ab  eo  condici
potest,  si  paret  eum  dare  oportere,
ac  si  niutuum  accepisset :  unde  pu-
pillus,  si  ei  sine  tutoris  auctoritate
non  debitum  per  errorem  datum  est,
non  tenebitnr  indebiti  condictione,
magis  quam  mutui  datione.  Sed  lioec
species  obligationis  non  videtur  ex
contractu  consistere,  cum  is  qui  sol-
vendi  animo  dat,  magis  distraliere
Toluit  negotium  quam  contraliere.

1.  A  person,  also,  who  receives  a
payment  which  is  not  due  to  him,  and
which  is  made  by  mistake,  is  bound-
re,  i.e.  by  the  thing  ;  and  the  plaintiff
may  have  against  him  an  actio  condic-
titla  to  recover  what  he  has  paid.  For
the  comUctio  '  Si  paret  eum  dare  opor-
tere,^ may  be  brought  against  him,  ex-
actly as  if  he  had  received  a  tnutiium.
Thus  a  pupil,  to  whom  a  payment  has
been  made  by  mistake  without  the  au-
thorisation of  his  tutor,  is  not  subject
to  a  condictio  indebiti,  any  more  than
he  would  be  by  the  gift  of  a  imituiim.
This  species  of  obligation,  however,
does  not  seem  to  arise  from  a  contract,
since  he,  who  gives  in  order  to  acquit
himself  of  something  due  from  him,
intends  rather  to  dissolve  than  to  make
a  contract.

Gai.  iii.  91.

In  this  case  it  is  the  law  that  imposes  certain  conditions,  and
not  the  intention  of  the  parties,  and,  therefore,  the  obligation  arises
quasi  ex  contractu,  under  which  head  it  is,  indeed,  subsequently
placed.  (Tit.  27.  6.)  A  pupil  could  not  be  bound  without  the
consent  of  his  tutor.  If,  therefore,  without  the  consent  of  his
tutor,  a  loan  was  made  him,  he  was  not  bound  to  repay  it,  or
if  money  not  due  to  him  Avere  paid  him,  he  was  not  bound  to
refund  it.     (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  21,  pr.)

2.  Item  is  cui  res  aliqua  utenda
datur,  id  est  commodatur,  re  obliga-
tur et  tenetur  commodati  actione.
Sed  is  ab  eo  qui  mutuum  accepit,
longe  distat ;  namque  non  ita  res
datur  ut  ejus  fiat,  et  ob  id  de  ea  re
ipsa  restituenda  tenetur,  Et  is  qui-
dem  qui  mutuum  accepit,  si  quolibet
fortuito  casu  amiserit  quod  accepit,
veluti  incendio,  ruina,  naufragio  aut
latronum  hostiumve  incursu,  niliilo
minus  obligatus  permanet  :  at  is  qui
utendum  accepit,  sane  quidem  ex-
actam  diligentiam  custodiendaa  rei
prpestare  jubetur,  nee  sufficit  ei  tan-
tam  diligentiam  adhibuisse,  quan-
tam  in  suis  rebus  adhibere  solitus
est,  si  modo  alius  diligentior  poterit
earn  rem  custodire ;  sed  propter
majorem  vim  majorcsve  casus  non
tenetur,  si  modo  non  hujus  ipsius
culpa  is  casus  inter venerit.  Alioqui
si  id  quod  tibi  couunodatum  est,
peregre  tecum  ferre  malueris,  et  vel

2.  A  person,  too,  to  whom  a  thing-
is  given  as  a  commiodatmn,  i.e.  is  given
that  he  ma}'"  make  use  of  it,  is  bound
re,  and  is  subject  to  the  actio  commo-
dati. But  there  is  a  wide  difference
between  hun  and  a  person  who  has
received  a  rautiiuin  ;  for  the  thing  is
not  given  him  that  it  may  become  his
property,  and  he  therefore  is  bound
to  restore  the  identical  thing  he  re-
ceived. And,  again,  he  who  has  re-
ceived a  mut'tmm,  if  by  p.nj  accident,
as  fire,  the  fall  of  a  building,  ship-
wreck, the  attack  of  thieves  or  ene-
mies, he  loses  what  he  received,  still
remains  bound.  But  he  who  has
received  a  thing  lent  for  his  use,  is
indeed  bound  to  employ  his  utmost
diligence  in  keeping  and  j^reserving
it  ;  nor  will  it  suffice  that  he  should
take  the  same  care  of  it,  which  he
was  accustomed  to  take  of  his  own
property,  if  it  appear  that  a  mure
careful  person  might  have  preserved

Y  2

324

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIV,

incursu  Iiostium  prsedoniimve  vel
naufragio  amiseris,  diibmm  non  est
quin  de  restituenda  ea  re  tenearis.
Commodata  autem  res  tunc  proprie
intelligitiir,  si  nulla  mercede  ac-
cepta  vel  constituta  res  tibi  utenda
data  est  :  alioqui  mercede  interve-
niente  locatus  tibi  usus  rei  videtur  ;
gratuitum  enim  debet  esse  commo-
datum.

it  in  safety  ;  but  lie  lias  not  to  answer-
for  loss  occasioned  by  superior  force,
or  extraordinary  accident,  provided
the  accident  is  not  due  to  any  fault  of
his.  If,  however,  you  take  with  you
on  a  journey  the  thing  lent  you  to
make  use  of,  and  you  lose  it  by  the
attack  of  enemies  or  robbers,  or  by
shipwreck,  you  are  undoubtedly  bound
to  restore  it.  A  thing  is  properly  said
to  be  commodatum,  when  you  are  per-
mitted to  enjoy  the  use  of  it,  without
any  recompense  being  given  or  agreed
on  ;  for,  if  there  is  any  recompense,
the  contract  is  that  of  locatio,  as  a  thing,
to  be  a  com'inodatmn,  must  be  lent  gra-
tuitously.

D.  xHv.  7.  1.  3,  4;  D.  xiii.  5,  6.  12.

As  the  advantage  is,  in  almost  every  case,  entirely  on  the
side  of  the  receiver  of  the  commodatum,  he  was  bound  to  take
every  care  of  it,  or,  as  Gains  says,  as  great  care  as  the  most
diligent  patejifamilias  takes  of  his  own  property.   (D.  xiii.  6.  18.)

To  use  the  technical  phrase,  it  was  ^  essential '  to  the  commo-
datum that  it  should  be  gratuitous.  Things  incident  to  a  con-
tract may  be  essential  to  it,  i.e.  necessarily  belonging;  natural,
i.e.  belonging  in  the  absence  of  express  agreement  to  the  con-
trary; or  accidental,  i.e.  belonging  only  by  express  agreement.

The  commodatum  gave  rise  to  the  actio  commodati,  which  v/as
either  directa  or  contraria  ;  by  the  actio  commodati  directa,  the
commodans  made  the  receiver  of  the  commodatum  restore  the
thino;  lent,  after  the  receiver  had  had  it  in  his  possession  for  the
time  agreed  on  (for  he  could  not  reclaim  it  before),  or  made  him
pay  for  any  loss  accruing  through  his  fault.  By  the  actio  commo-
dati contraria,  the  receiver  of  the  commodatum  obtained  from  the
commodans  compensation  for  any  extraordinary  expenses  which
the  preservation  of  the  thing  had  entailed,  or  for  any  losses  occa-
sioned by  the  fault  of  the  commodans.  The  actio  was,  in  the
former  case,  termed  directa,  because  it  proceeded  from  what  v/as
a  •  necessary  part  of  the  execution  of  the  contract,  viz.  the  thing
lent  being  put  in  the  possession  of  the  receiver,  while  the  actio
contraria  only  arose  from  a  thing  which  might  happen  or  not,  viz.
there  being  some  extraordinary  expense,  or  some  fault  on  the
part  of  the  commodans.  (See  D.  xiii.  6.  17.)  All  the  actions
arising  out  of  contracts  re,  except  the  condictio  ex  mutuo,  vv-ere
honcBJidei.

3.  Prasterea  et  is  apud  quem  res
aliqua  deponitur,  re  obligatur  et  ac-
tione  depositi ;  qui  et  ipse  de  ea  re
quam  accepit  restituenda  tenetur.
Sed  is  ex  eo  solo  tenetur,  si  quid  dolo
conimiserit  ;  culp?e  autem  nomine,
id  est,  desidire  ac  negligentiee,  non

3.  A  person  with  whom  a  thing  is
deposited,  is  bound  re^  and  is  subject
to  the  actio  dcjwsiti,  and  must  give
back  the  identical  thing  which  he  re-
ceived. But  he  is  only  a,nswerable  if
he  is  guilty  of  fraud,  and  not  for  a
mere  fault,  such  as  carelessness  or  negli-

J

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIV.  325

tenetiir :  itaqiie  securiis  est,  qui  gence  ;  and  lie  cannot,  therefore,  be
pariim  diligeiiter  custoditam  rem  called  to  account  if  the  thing  de-
furto  amiserit,  quia  qui  negligenti  posited,  being  carelessly  kept,  is  stolen,
amico  rem  custodiendam  tradidit.  For  he  who  commits  his  property  to
su£e  facilitati  id  imputare  debet.  the  care  of  a  negligent  friend,  should

impute  the  loss  to  his  own   want  of

caution.

D.  xliv.  7.  1.  5.

Here  the  benefit  is  entirely  on  the  side  of  the  person  Avho
commits  the  thing  to  the  care  of  one  who  receives  it  gratuitously.
The  latter,  therefore,  unless  he  specially  agrees  to  be  ansAverable
for  the  thing  entrusted  to  him,  or  himself  offers  to  take  care  of
it  (D.  xiii.  65.  2),  is  not  liable  for  its  loss  or  deterioration,  if  he
is  not  guilty  of  dishonesty,  or  of  such  gross  neglect  as  amounts
to  dishonesty.  He  has,  however,  no  right  to  make  use  of  the
thing  (D.  iv.  1.  6),  and  would  be  guilty  of  theft  if  he  did  (Bk.
iv.  1.  6) ;  and  as  it  is  deposited  for  the  benefit  of  the  person  depo-
siting it,  that  person  can  reclaim  it  when  he  pleases,  and  need
not,  like  the  commodans^  wait  for  the  expiration  of  the  time
a2;reed  on.

The  depositum  gave  rise  to  the  actio  depositi,  which  was  directa
or  contraria,  upon  the  same  principle  as  the  actio  cormnodati.
The  depositary  was  entitled  to  be  recompensed  for  every  expense
incurred,  and  to  compensation  for  every  loss  incurred  by  the  fault
of  the  deponens,  however  light  that  fault  might  be.  If  the  depo-
sitary had  voluntarily  offered  to  receive  the  deposit,  he  too  would
be  answerable  for  loss  occasioned  by  a  cidpa  levis,  i.  e.  a  slight
fault,  as  opposed  to  culpa  gravis,  gross  negligence.  If  a  deposit
was  rendered  necessary  by  circumstances  of  unforeseen  and  sud-
den misfortune,  as  a  shipwreck  or  fire,  and  if  the  depositary  who
had  received  the  thing  denied  he  had  received  it,  double  the  value
of  the  thing  could  be  recovered.     (See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.  23.)

4.  Creditor  quoque  qui  pignus  ac-  4.  A  creditor  also,  who  has  received

cepit,  re  obligatur ;  qui  et  ipse  de  ea  a  pledge,  is  bound  re,  for  he  is  obliged
re  quam  accepit  restituenda  tenetur  to  restore  the  thing  he  has  received,
actione  pigneratitia.  Sed  quia  pignus  by  the  actio  pigneratltia.  But,  inas-
utriusque  gratia  datur,  et  debitoris  much  as  a  pledge  is  given  for  the
quo  magis  pecunia  ei  crederetur,  et  benefit  of  both  parties,  of  the  debtor
creditoris  quo  magis  ei  in  tuto  sit  that  he  may  borrow  more  easily,  and
creditum,  placuit  suflicere  quod  ad  of  the  creditor  that  repayment  may
eam.  rem  custodiendam  exactam  dili-  be  better  secured,  it  has  been  decided
gentiam  adhiberet  :  quam  si  prsesti-  that  it  will  suffice  if  the  creditor  em-
terit,  et  aliquo  fortuito  casu  eam  rem  ploys  his  utmost  diligence  in  keeping
amiserit,  securum  esse  nee  impediri  the  thing  pledged  ;  if,  notwithstanding
creditum  petere,  this  care,  it  is  lost  by  some  accident,

the  creditor  is  not  accountable  for  it,
and  he  is  not  prohibited  from  suing
for  his  debt.

D.  xliv.  7.  1.  6;  D.  xiii.  7.  13.  1.

The  oldest  form  of  the  contract  of  pledge  was  that  of  mancipa-
tio,  or  absolute  sale  of  the  thing  subject  to  a  contract  oi  fiducia  or
agreement  for  redemption.     There  were  so  many  things  to  which

326  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XV.

mancipatio  was  considered  inapplicable,  that  the  more  simple
contract  of  pignus  quite  superseded  this  mancipatio  contracta
Jiducia.  A  further  simplification  of  the  contract  of  pledge  was
the  hypotlieca,  in  v/hich  the  thing  pledged  remained  with  the
pledger.  The  mancipatio,  it  may  be  observed,  transferred  both
the  property  and  possession  of  the  thing  pledged ;  the  pignus
gave  the  possession  to  the  creditor^  but  left  the  property  in  the
thing  with  the  debtor ;  the  liypotheca,  left  both  the  property  and
the  possession  with  the  debtor.  (See  note  at  end  of  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  5.)
The  right  of  the  creditor  over  the  thing  pledged  or  hypothecated
was  protected  by  the  actio  quasi- Serviana  (see  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.  7),
by  which  the  creditor  recovered  the  thing  pledged  if  lost  out  of
his  possession,  and  got  possession  of  the  thing  hypothecated.

The  text  seems  to  draw  a  distinction  between  the  position  of
the  creditor  and  that  of  the  recipient  of  a  commodatum,  in  re-
gard to  the  degree  of  responsibility  for  negligence.  But  practi-
cally they  Avere  on  the  same  footing.  The  creditor,  like  the  receiver
of  a  commodatum,  could  not  make  use  of  the  thing  placed  in  his
possession ;  and,  although  he  could  without  agreement  take  them
as  against  the  principal  of  his  claim  (C.  iv.  24.  1),  it  was  only  by
special  agreement  that  the  creditor  could  take  the  fruits  of  the.
thing  pledged  by  way  of  interest.

Creditor  and  debtor  are  terms  used  more  widely  in  Roman
law^  than  in  our  own.  Every  one  who  possessed  a  personal  right
against  another  was  termed  a  creditor,  and  every  one  who  owed
the  satisfaction  of  a  claim,  or  was  the  subject  of  a  personal  right,
was  a  debitor.

From  the  contract  of  pignus  sprang  the  actio  pigneratitia,
which  was  directa  when  used  by  the  debtor  to  constrain  the  cre-
ditor to  give  back  the  thing  pledged  if  the  debt  had  been  paid,
or  to  pay  over  the  surplus  if  the  thing  pledged  had  been  sold^
and  produced  more  than  was  due  for  the  debt,  or  to  obtain  com-
pensation from  him  for  any  injury  to  the  thing  pledged,  arising
through  his  fault.  The  actio  pigneratitia  was  contraria  Avhen  used
by  the  creditor  to  make  the  debtor  reimburse  him  for  all  expenses
incurred  in  keeping  the  thing  safe,  or  compensate  him  for  all  in-
juries sustained  by  the  thing  pledged  through  the  fault  of  the
debtor  (D.  xiii.  7.  31);  or,  again,  to  compensate  him  if  the  thing
pledged  proved  to  be  in  reality  not  the  property  of  the  debtor,
and  was  claimed  by  the  real  owner.  Until  it  was  claimed,  the
fact  that  it  belonged  to  another  did  not  prevent  a  thing  being
made  the  subject  of  a  contract  of  p^ignus,  and  the  creditor  was  as
much  bound  to  restore  it  to  the  debtor,  if  the  sum  due  was  paid,
as  if  it  had  really  been  the  debtor's  property.

Tit.  XV.  DE  VEEBORUM  OBLIGATIONE.

Verbis  obligatio  contraliitur  ex  An  obligation  by  word  of  moutli  is

interrogatione  et  responsione,   cum     contracted  by  means  of  a  question  and

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XV.  327

quid  clari  fierive  nobis  stipulamiir  ;  an  answer,  when  we  stipulate  that  any-
ex  qua  dura  proticiscuntur  actiones,  thing  shall  be  given  to,  or  done  for  us.
tarn  condictio  si  certa  sit  stipulatio,  It  gives  rise  to  two  actions — the  coii-
quam  ex  stipulatu  si  incerta.  Qufe  diciio,  when  the  stipulation  is  certain,
hoc  nomine  inde  utitur,  quia  stipu-  and  the  actio  ex  stipulatu,  when  it  is
lum  apud  veteres  hrmuni  appella-  uncertain.  The  term  stipulation  is
batur,  forte  a  stipite  descendens.  derived   from   stipuhon,   a   word   em-

ployed by  the  ancients  to  mea,n  '  firm,'
and  coming  perhaps  from  stipes,  the
trunk  of  a  tree.

D.  xliv.  r.  1.  7 ;  D.  xii.  1.  24.

The  stipulatio  was,  properly  speaking,  not  a  contract,  but  a
means  of  making  a  contract,  a  solemn  form  giving  legal  validity
to  an  agreement.  This  form  consisted  of  a  question  and  answer,
and  it  was  the  question  only  which  was,  properly  speaking,  the
stipulatio,  it  being  only  by  an  extension  of  the  term  that  the  word
was  applied  to  the  whole  mode  of  contracting,  and  that  the
answerer  as  well  as  the  questioner  was  said,  as  in  paragr.  1,  to  be
one  of  the  stipulantcs.  Like  all  the  old  forms  of  obligation,  tliis
formula  only  bound  one  party,  viz.  the  maker  of  the  promise.
The  promissor  had  himself  to  become  the  stipulator,  and  to  receive
in  his  turn  a  promise,  if  he  wished  to  secure  reciprocal  riglits.
Oblij^ations  mav  be  divided  accordins:  as  they  are  unilateral  and
bind  one  party  only,  or  bilateral  and  bind  both  parties.  A  stipu-
lation gave  rise  to  a  unilateral  obligation.

Festus  derives  stipulatio_  from  stips,  coined  money ;  and  Iso-
dorus  from  stipula,  a  straw.  '  Veteres  enim,  quando  sibi  aliquid
promittehant,  stipulam  texentes  frangebant,  quam  iterum  jungentes,
sponsiones  suas  agnoscebant.^  (Orig.  iv.  24.  Quoted  by  Ortolan.)
Stipes  and  stipulam  are  a  more  probable  source  of  the  derivation
of  the  word.

When  the  stipulation  was  for  something  certain,  as  for  a
fixed  sum  of  money,  or  for  wine  of  a  specified  kind,  it  was  enforced
by  the  condictio  certi\  when  for  something  uncertain,  as  for
wine  of  a  good  quality,  for  something  to  be  done  or  left  undone,
by  the  condictio  incerti.  The  term  actio  ex  stipulatu  is  sometimes
used  to  denote  the  condictio,  whether  certi  or  incerti ;  but  it  is
more  usually  employed  to  denote  the  condictio  incerti,  as  when  the
condictio  was  certi,  that  is,  was  employed  in  its  proper  form,
it  generally  received  no  other  name  than  condictio.  The  action
arising  on  a  stipulation  of  any  kind  was  always  stricti  juris.

The  stipulation  was  not  the  only  contract  made  by  going
through  a  solemn  form  of  words.  By  the  dictio  dotis  the  wife  and
her  ascendants  bound  themselves  to  «ive  the  dos  to  the  husband  :
and  by  a  promise  accompanied  by  an  oath  {jiLrata  promisso
liberti)  the  freedman  bound  himself  to  render  his  services  to  his
patron.

1.  In  hac  re  olim  talia  verba  tra-  1.    Formerly  the   words    used    in

dita  fuerunt :  Spondes  ?  Spondeo.  making  this  kind  of  contract  were  as
Promittis  ?  Promitto.     Fidepromit-     follows — Spondes  ?  do  you  engage  your-

328

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XV.

tis  ?  FideiDromitto.  Fidejubes  ?
Fidejubeo.  Dabis  ?  Dabo.  Fades?
Faciam.  Utriim  autem  Latina  an
Grreca  vel  qua  alia  lingua  stipulatio
concipiatur,  nihil  interest,  scilicet  si
uterque  stipulantium  intellectum
ejus  lingupe  habeat.  Nee  necesse
est  eadem  lingua  utrumque  uti,  sed
sufficit  congruenter  ad  interrogata
respondere  :  quin  etiam  duo  Grseci
Latina  lingua  obligationem  contra-
liere  possunt.  Sed  hvec  solemnia
verba  olim  quidem  in  usu  fuerunt.
Postea  autem  Leoniana  constitutio
lata  est,  qu£e  solemnitate  verborum
sublata  sensum  et  consonantem  in-
tellectum ab  utraque  parte  solum
desiderat,  licet  quibuscumque  ver-
bis expressus  est.

self  ?  Spondeo,  I  do  engage  myself.
Promittis  ?  do  you  promise  ?  Promitto,
I  do  promise.  Fidepromittis  ?  do  you
promise  on  your  good  faith  ?  Flde-
promitto,  I  do  promise  on  my  good
faith.  Fidejuhes  ?  do  you  make  your-
self fidejussor  ?  Fldejuheo,  I  do  make
myself  fidejussor.  Dabis?  -will  you
give  ?  Dabo,  I  will  give.  Fades  ?
will  you  do  ?  Faciam,  1  will  do.  And
it  is  immaterial  whether  the  stipula-
tion is  in  Latin  or  in  Greek,  or  in  any
other  language,  so  that  the  parties
understand  it ;  nor  is  it  necessary  that;
the  same  language  should  be  used  by
each  person,  but  it  is  sufficient  if  the
answer  agree  with  the  question.  So
tvfo  Greeks  may  contract  in  Latin.
Anciently  indeed  it  was  necessary  to
use  the  solemn  words  just  mentioned,
but  the  constitution  of  the  Emperor
Leo  was  afterwards  enacted,  Vv^hich
makes  unnecessary  this  solemnity  of
the  expressions,  and  only  requires  the
apprehension  and  consent  of  each
p»arty,  in  whatever  words  it  may  be
expressed.

Gai.  iii.  92,  93;  D.  xlv.  1.  1.  6  ;  C.  viii.  37.  10.

Spondes  ?  spondeo  was  the  form  exclusively  proper  when  both
parties  were  Homan  citizens  ;  adeo  propria  civium,  Romanorum  est
ut  ne  quidem  in  GrcBcum  serinonem  per  interpretationem  proprie
transferri  possit,  quamvis  dicatur  a  GrcBca  voce  Jigurata  esse,
(Gai.  iii.  93.)

This  constitution  of  Leo  was  published  a.d.  469.  (C.  viii.
37.  10.)

2.  Omnis  stipulatio  aut  pure  aut
in  diem  aut  sub  condition e  fit  :  pure,
veluti  quinque  aureos  dare  spondes  ?
idque  confestim  peti  potest ;  in  diem,
cum  adjecto  die  quo  pecunia  solva-
tur,  stipulatio  fit,  veluti  decern  au-
reos prim  is  calendis  Martiis  dare
spondes  1  Id  autem  quod  in  diem
stipulamur,  statim  quidem  debetur  ;
sed  peti  priusquam  dies  venerit,  non
potest.  At  ne  eo  quidem  ipso  die  in
quern  stipulatio  facta  est,  peti  potest,
quia  totus  is  dies  arbitrio  solventis
tribui  debet ;  neque  enim  certum  est
eo  die  in  quern  promissum  est,  datum
non  esse,  priusquam  is  prseterierit.

2.  Every  stipulation  is  made  simply,
or  with  the  introduction  of  a  particular
time,  or  conditionally.  Simply,  as,
'  Do  you  engage  to  give  five  aurei  V  in
this  case  the  money  may  be  instantly
demanded.  With  the  introduction  of
a  particular  time,  as  when  a  day  is
mentioned  on  which  the  money  is  to
be  paid,  as,  'Do  you  engage  to  give
me  ten  aurei  on  the  first  of  the  calends
of  March  ? '  That  which  we  stipulate
to  give  at  a  j^articular  time  becomes
immediately  due,  but  cannot  be  de-
manded before  the  day  arrives,  nor  can
it  even  be  demanded  on  that  day,  for
the  Avhole  of  the  day  is  allowed  to  the
debtor  for  payment,  as  it  is  never  cer-
tain that  payment  has  not  been  made
on  the  day  appointed  until  that  day  is
at  an  end.

D.  xlv.  1.  46 ;  D.  1.  16.  213  ;  D.  xlv.  1.  18.  1.

LIE.  III.      TIT.  XV.  329

In  the  technical  language  of  the  jurists,  Ubl  pure  quis  stipu^
latus  ftierit,  et  cessit  et  venit  dies  ;  uhi  in  diem,  cessit  dies,  sed  non-
dum  venit.  (See  note  on  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  20.  20.)  If  the  stipulation
was  made  pure,  the  interest  in  the  thing  stipulated  for  passed  at
once  to  the  stipulator  {cessit  dies),  and  he  could  at  once  demand
to  have  it  {venit  dies),  giving,  of  course,  sufficient  time  for  the
debtor  to  fulfil  his  obligation.  If  the  stipulation  was  made  in
diem,  the  interest  in  the  thing  stipulated  for  passed  at  once  to
the  stipulator,  but  he  could  not  demand  it  until  the  dies  was
past.

There  is  a  distinction  in  the  respective  effects  of  a  stipulation
in  diem  and  of  a  conditional  stipulation  that  deserves  notice.
When  a  stipulation  was  made  in  diem,  the  promise  was  binding  at
once,  and  the  debt  was  already  due,  and  therefore  if  any  part  of
the  debt  were  paid  before  the  day  named,  it  could  not  be  recovered  ;
whereas,  when  a  stipulation  w\as  made  with  a  condition,  if  any-
thing was  paid  before  the  condition  was  accomplished,  it  could
be  recovered  back,  because,  until  the  condition  was  fulfilled,  the
stipulator  had  no  interest  in  the  thing  stipulated  for  {nondum  cessit
dies).     (See  paragr.  4.)

3.  At  si  ita  stipuleris,  decern  an-  3.  But,  if  you  stipulate  thus,  ^  Do
reos  annuos  quoad  vivam  dare  you  engage  to  give  me  ten  aurei  an-
spondes  ?  et  pure  facta  obligatio  nually,  as  long  as  I  live  ?' the  obligation
intelligitur  et  perpetuatur,  quia  ad  is  understood  to  be  made  simply,  and
tempus  deberi  non  potest ;  sed  heres  is  perpetual  ;  for  a  debt  cannot  be  due
petendo  pacti  exceptione  submove-  for  a  time  only  ;  but  the  heir,  if  he
bitur.  demands  2:)ayment,  will  be  repelled  by

the  except io  pacti.

D.  xlv.  1.  56.  4.

Laj^se  of  time  was  not,  in  the  Roman  law,  a  mode  by  which  a
debt  could  be  extinguished.  Consequently,  if  it  was  owed,  it  was
owed  for  ever  ;  but  this  technicality  was  prevented  from  working
any  injustice  by  the  plea  referred  to  in  the  text,  namely,  that
there  was  an  agreement  to  the  contrary,  or  by  that  of  fraud.
Plane  post  tempus  stipulator  v el  pacti  conventi^  veldoli  mali  excep-
tione submoveri  poterit.  (D.  xliv,  7.  44.)  If,  however,  a  similar
gift  had  been  given  as  a  legacy,  the  right  to  receive  would  be
extinguished  ipso  jure  by  the  death  of  the  legatee.

4.  Sub  conditione  stipulatio  fit,  4.  A  stipulation  is  made  condition-
cum  in  aliquem  casum  dillertur  obli-  ally,  when  the  obligation  is  made  sub-
gatio,  ut  si  aliquid  factum  fuerit  aut  ject  to  the  happening  of  some  uncertain
non  fuerit,  stipulatio  committatur  :  event,  so  that  it  takes  effect  if  such  a
veluti,  si  Titius  consul  fuerit  factus,  thing  happens,  or  does  not  happen,  as,
quinque  aureos  dare  spondes  ?  Si  for  instance,  '  Do  you  engage  to  give
quis  ita  stipuletur,  si  in  Capitolium  five  aurel,  if  Titius  is  made  consul?'
nonascendero  dare  spondes  l  perinde  Such  a  stipulation  as  '  Do  you  engage
erit  ac  si  stipulatus  esset  cum  morie-  to  give  five  aurei  if  I  do  not  go  up  to
tur  sibi  dari.  Ex  conditionali  stipu-  the  Capitol  V  is  in  eflect  the  same  as
latione  tantum  spes  est  debitum  iri,  if  the  stipulation  had  been,  that  five
eamque    ipsam    spem    in    heredem  cmrei  should  be  given  to  the  stipulator

330

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XV

transmittimns,  si  priiis  quam  conditio
existat,  mors  nobis  contio-it.

I

at  the  time  of  liis  death.  From  a  con-
ditional stipulation,  there  arises  only  a
hope  that  the  thing  will  become  due  ;
and  this  hope  we  transmit  to  our  heirs,
if  we  die  before  the  condition  is
accomplished.

T>.  xlv.  1.  115.  1  ;  D.  1.  16.  54.

The  heir  or  legatee,  it  mn.j  be  remembered  (see  Bk.  ii.  Tit.
14.  9),  who  died  before  the  condition  was  accomplished^  did  not
transmit  any  interest  in  the  inheritance  or  legacy  to  his  heirs,
wdiereas  the  stipulator  did,  as  we  learn  from  the  text,  transmit  to
his  heirs  the  hope  tliat  the  thing  stipulated  for  w^ould  be  one  day
due  to  him  (^spes  dchitum  iri).  The  reason  of  this  difference  is,
that  the  testamentary  dispositions  were  considered  to  be  made  to
the  heir  or  legatee  personally.

If  the  promissor  attemjoted  to  defeat  the  condition  by  prevent-
ing its  being  fulfilled,  he  was  treated  as  if  he  had  promised  jmre^
and  the  thing  could  be  demanded  from  him  at  once.

It  is  here  said  that  a  promise  to  pay,  if  a  person  did  not
do  a  thing,  was  a  promise  to  pay  when  he  died.  There  was,
however,  this  difference  :  the  promissor  was  certain  to  die,  and
therefore  the  stipulation,  with  the  words  cum  moriar,  was  really
made  in  diem  ;  whereas  it  was  not  certain  whether  the  promissor
would  or  would  not  go  up  to  the  Capitol,  and,  therefore,  the
stipulation  Avith  tlie  words  si  in  Cajntoliam  non  ascendero  was
made  suh  conditione.

5.  Loca  etiam  inseri  stipulationi
Solent,  veluti  Cartha,gine  dare  spon-
des  ?  Qua?  stipulatio,  licet  pure  iieri
videatur,  tamen  re  ipsa  habet  tem-
pus  injectum,  quo  promissor  utatur
ad  pecuniam  Carthagine  dandam  ;
et  ideo  si  quis  Pvomce  ita  stipuletur,
hodie  Carthagine  dare  spondes  I
inutilis  erit  stipulatio,  cum  impos-
sibilis  sit  repromissio.

D.  xlv.  1.  73

6.  Conditiones  qure  ad  prfeteri-
tum  vel  prsesens  tempus  referuntur,
aut  statim  infirmant  obligationem,
aut  omnino  non  dilierunt,  veluti  si
Titius  consul  fuit,  vel  si  Moevius
vivit,  dare  spondes  1  nam  si  ea  ita
non  sunt,  nihil  valet  stipulatio  ;  sin
autem  ita  se  habent,  statim  valet.
Quae  enim  per  rerum  naturam  sunt
certa,  non  morantur  obligationem,
licet  apud  nos  incerta  sint.

5.  It  is  customary  to  insert  a  par-
ticular place  in  a  stipulation,  as,  for
instance,  'Do  you  engage  to  give  me  at
Carthage  ? '  and  this  stipulation,  al-
though it  appear  to  be  made  simply,
yet  necessarily  implies  a  delay  sufficient
to  enable  the  person  who  promises  to
pay  the  money  at  Carthage.  And
therefore,  if  any  one  at  Home  stipulates
tiius,  '  Do  you  engage  to  give  to  me
this  day  at  Carthage  V  the  stipulation
is  useless,  because  the  thing  promised
is  imj^ossible.

D.  xiii.  4.  2.  6.

6.  Conditions,  which  relate  to  timo
present  or  past,  either  instantly  make
the  obligation  ;"oid,  or  do  not  suspend
it  in  any  way  ;  as,  for  instance,  '  If
Titius  has  been  consul,  or  if  Msevius
is  alive,  do  j  ou  engage  to  give  me  ] '  If
the  thing  mentioned  is  not  really  the
case,  the  stipulation  is  void ;  if  it  is
the  case,  the  stipulation  is  immediately
valid.  Things  certain,  if  regarded  in
themselves,  although  uncertain  as  far
as  our  knoAvledge  is  concerned,  do  not
delay  the  formation  of  the  obligation.

D.  xlv.  1.  100  ;  D.  xii.  1.  37-39.

i

LIE.  III.      TIT.  XVI.

toi

7.  Non  solum  res  in  stipiilatiim
deduci  possunt,  sed  etiam  facta,  iit  si
stipiilemur  aliquid  fieri  vel  non  fieri,
Et  in  liujusmodi  stipulationibus
optimum  erit  poenam  subjicere,  ne
quantitas  stipuiationis  in  incerto  sit,
ac  necesse  sit  actori  probare  quid
ejus  intersit ;  itaque  si  quis  ut  fiat
aliquid  stipuletur,  ita  adjici  poena
debet  :  si  ita  factum  non  erit,  tunc
j)cenn3  nomine  decem  aureos  dare
spondes  I  Sed  si  qaa3dam  fieri,  qupe-
dam  non  fieri,  una  eademque  concej)-
tione  stipuletur,  clausula  liujusmodi
erit  adjicienda :  siadyersus  ea  factum
erit,  sive  quid  ita  factum  non  erit,
tunc  poonse  nomine  decem  aureos
dare  spondes  I

7.  i^ot  only  things,  but  acts,  may
be  the  subject  of  a  stipulation  :  as  when
we  stipulate,  that  something  shall,  or
shall  not,  be  done.  And,  in  these
stipulations,  it  will  be  best  to  subjoin
a  xDenalty,  lest  the  amount  included  in
the  stipulation  should  be  uncerbain,
and  the  plaintifl'  should  therefore  be
obliged  to  prove  how  great  his  interest
is.  Therefore,  if  any  one  stipulates,
that  something  shall  be  done,  a  penalty
ought  to  be  added  as  thus:  'If  the
thing  is  not  done,  do  you  engage  ta
give  ten  aui^ei  by  way  of  penalty?^'
13ut,  if  by  one  single  question  a  stipu-
lation is  made,  that  some  things  shall
be  done,  and  that  other  things  shall
not  be  done,  there  ought  to  be  added
some  such  clause  as  this  :  '  If  anything
is  done  contrary  to  what  is  agreed  on,
or  anything  agreed  on  is  not  done,  then
do  you  engage  to  give  ten  aurei  by  way
of  penalty  1 '

D.  xlv.  1.  137.  7  ;  D.  xlvi.  5.  11.

Tit.  XYI.    DE  DIJOBUS  EEIS  STIPULANDI  ET

PEOMITTENDI.

Two  or  more  persons  may  be  par-
ties together  in  the  stipulation  or  in
the  promise.  In  the  stipidation,  if,,
after  all  have  asked  the  question,  the
promissor  answers,  '  Spondeo,^  '  I  en-
gage ;'  for  instance,  when,  two  stipu-
lators having  each  sejDarately  asked
the  question,  the  promissor  answers,,
'  I  engage  to  give  to  each  of  you.'  For
if  he  first  answers  Titius,  and  then,  on,
another  i^erson  putting  the  same  ques-
tion, he  again  answers  him,  there  will
be  two  distinct  obligations,  and  not  two
co-stipulators.  Two  or  more  become
co-promissors,  thus  :  '  Msevius,  do  you
engage  to  give  five  aureir  '  Seius,  do
you  engage  to  give  five  aurei?'  each
then  separately  answers,  '  I  do  engage.''

D.  xlv.  3.  28.  2  ;  D.  xlv.  2.  4.

The  word  reus,  strictly  speaking,  signifies  the  person  who  is
liable,  or  subject,  to  a  demand,  but  is  used  more  generally  ta
signify  a  party  to  an  obligation,  whether  active  or  passive :  so
here  we  have  rei  stipulandi,  as  well  as  ret  promitfendi.

It  was  immaterial  whether  the  interrogation  was  put  and]
answered  in  the  plural,  spondetis  9  spondemus  ;  or  in  the  singular^
spondes?  spondeo.     (D.  xlv.  2.  4.)

Et  stipulandi  et  promittendi  duo
pluresve  rei  fieri  possunt :  stipulandi
ita,  si  post  omnium  interrogationem
promissor  respondeat,  spondeo,  ut
l)uta,  cum  duobus  separatim  stipu-
iantibus  ita  promissor  respondeat,
utrique  vestrum  dare  spondeo  ;  nam
si  prius  Titio  spoponderit,  deinde
alio  interrogante  spondeat,  alia  atque
alia  erit  obligatio,  nee  creduntur  duo
rei  stipulandi  esse.  Duo  pluresve
rei  promittendi  ita  fiunt :  Msevi,
quinque  aureos  dare  spondes  1  Sei,
eosdem  quinque  aureos  dare  spondes  I
si  respondent  singuli  separatim,
spondeo.

332  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XVI.

It  was  not  only  in  contracts  made  verbis  that  there  could  be
joint  creditors  and  joint  debtors.  In  a  commodatum  or  depositum,
for  instance,  the  parties  might  agree  that  several  persons  should  be
subject  to  a  common  obligation,  and  each  be  bound  for  the  whole.
(D.  xlv.  2.  9.)

1.  Ex  liujusmodi  obligationibus,  1.  By  virtue  of  sucli  obligations,
et  stipulantibus  solidiim  singulis  the  whole  thing  stipulated  for  is  due
debetur,  et  promittentes  singuli  in  to  each  stipulator,  and  from  each  pro-
solidum  tenentur  ;  in  utraque  tamen  missor.  tBut,  in  each  obligation,  there
obligatione  una  res  vertitur,  et  vel  is  only  one  thing  due,  and  if  either  of
alter  debitum  accipiendo,  vel  alter  the  joint  parties  receives  the  thing  due,
solvenclo,  omnium  perimit  obliga-  or  gives  the  thing  due,  the  obligation
i/ionem  et  omnes  liberat.  is   at   end   for   all,  and  ail   are  freed

from  it.

D.  xlv.  2.  2.  3.  1.

If  we  look  to  the  thing  which  was  the  subject  of  the  contract,
we  may  say,  however  many  were  the  joint  parties,  there  was  but
one  obligation,  while,  if  we  look  to  the  persons  by  or  to  whom
the  promise  was  given,  there  were  as  many  obligations  as  there
were  persons  making  or  receiving  the  promise  ;  if,  therefore,  the
thing  Avas  given,  that  is,  payment  or  performance  made,  the  ob-
ligation was  at  an  end,  but  the  obligation  binding  on  any  one
might  be  made  to  cease,  as  by  the  deminuti  ocapitis  of  one  of  the
co-promissors,  without  those  binding  on  the  others  ceasing  also.
If,  indeed,  the  aid  of  the  law  had  been  called  in  to  enforce  the
obligation,  the  position  of  the  parties  was  diiferent.  If  one  co-
stipulator  sued  the  promissor,  all  the  other  parties  to  the  stipulation
were  thereby  prevented  from  suing  him  ;  and  if  one  co-promissor
were  sued,  none  of  the  others  could  be  sued,  the  litis  contestatio
operating  as  an  extinction  of  the  debt ;  but  under  Justinian,  Avhen
it  appeared  that  there  was  a  deficiency  in  what  had  been  obtained
from  the  promissor  that  had  been  sued,  the  others  might  then  be
sued  to  make  up  this  deficiency.  (C.  viii.  41.  28.)  The  co-
promissor  who  had  paid  all  could  recover,  as  a  j^artner,  their  shares
from  the  others,  if  there  was  a  partnership  between  them,  and  if
not,  he  could  recover  by  paying  to  the  creditor  the  whole  sum,
but  separating  the  payment,  paying  his  share  absolutely,  and
paying  the  rest  as  the  price  of  having  the  creditor's  actions  trans-
ferred to  him  to  use  against  the  other  co-promissors  {heneficium
cedendorum  actionum)\  and  probably,  even  if  he  had  not  actually
made  this  separation,  the  praitor  would  allow  him  to  bring  an
action  against  the  other  co-promissors  in  which  he  was  feigned  to
have  done  it.     (D.  xxvii.  3.  1.  13.)

2.  Ex  diiobus  reis  promittendi  2.  Of  two  co-promissors,  one  may
alius  pure,  alius  in  diem  vel  sub  engage  simply,  the  other  with  the
conditione  obligari  potest ;  nee  im-  introduction  of  a  particular  time,  or
pedimento  erit  dies  aut  conditio,  conditionally ;  and  neither  the  time
quominus  ab  eo  qui  pure  obligatus  nor  the  condition  will  prevent  payment
est,  petatur.  being  exacted  from  the  one  who  binds

himself  simply.
D.  xlv.  2.  7.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XVII.

333«

Tit.  XVII.     DE  STIPULATIOXE  SERVOEUM.

Servus  ex  persona  domini  jus
stipulandi  liabet  ;  sed  hereditas  in
l)lerisque  personse  defuncti  vicem
sustinet ;  ideoque  quod  servus  here-
ditarius  ante  aditam  hereditatem
stipulatur,  acquirit  liereditati,  ac
per  hoc  etiam  heredi  postea  facto
acquiritur.

A  slave  derives  from  the  persona
of  his  master  the  power  of  making  a
stipulation.  And  as  the  inheritance  in
most  respects  represents  the  persona  of
the  deceased,  if  a  stipulation  is  made
by  a  slave  belonging  to  the  inheritance
before  the  inheritance  is  entered  on,
he  acquires  for  the  inheritance,  and
therefore  for  him  who  subsequently
becomes  heir.

D.  xli.  1.  34.  61.

A  slave  had  no  persona,  that  is^  no  capacity  of  acquiring  civil
or  political  rights.  But  his  master,  Avho  had  such  a  capacity,
could  make  his  own  persona  speak  and  act  through  the  slave,
who  was  thus  only  a  channel  by  which  the  wishes  of  the  master
were  expressed.  (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  3,  pr.)  But  although  a  slave
could  thus  engage  others  for  the  benefit  of  his  master,  by  a  sti-
pulation, he  could  not  bind  his  master,  and  could  not,  therefore,
be  the  promissor  in  a  stipulation ;  hence,  the  text  only  speaks  of
the  stipulations,  and  not  of  the  promises,  of  slaves.

In  pier isque  persona  defuncti  vicem  sustinet  \  the  inheritance
represented  the  person  of  the  deceased  in  most  things,  but  there
Avere  some  things  which  the  slave  could  not  acquire  for  the  inhe-
ritance, which  he  could  acquire  for  a  living  master ;  a  usufruct,
for  instance,  being  always  attached  to  a  person,  could  not  be
stipulated  for  by  a  slave  before  the  inheritance  was  entered  on.
(D.  xlv.  3.  29.)

1.  Sive  autem  domino,  sive.sibi,
sive  conservo  suo,  sive  impersonaliter
servus  stipuletur,  domino  acquirit.
Idem  juris  est  ct  in  liberis  qui  in
potestate  patris  sunt,  ex  quibus  causis
acquirere  possunt.

1.  "VMiether  a  slave  stipulates  for
his  master,  or  for  himself,  or  for  his
fellow-slave,  or  without  naming  any
person  for  whom  he  stipulates,  he
always  acquires  for  his  master.  It  is
the  same  with  children  in  the  power  of
their  father,  in  all  cases  in  which  they
acquire  for  him.

D.  xlv.  3.  15  ;  D.  xlv.  1.  45,  pr.  and  4.

What  is  said  here  of  the  children  in  potestate  must  be  taken
with  all  the  limitations  made  necessary  by  the  power  they  had
to  acquire  a  jjeculiumioY  themselves.     (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  9.)

2.  Sed  cum  factum  in  stipulatione
continebitur,  omnimodo  persona  sti-
pulantis  continetur,  veluti  si  servus
stipuletur  ut  sibi  ire  agere  liceat ;
ipse  enim  tantum  prohiberi  non
debet,  non  etiam  dominas  ejus.

2.  If  it  is  a  licence  to  do  something
that  is  stipulated  for,  the  benefit  of  the
stipulation  is  personal  to  the  stipu-
lator ;  for  instance,  if  a  slave  stipulates
that  he  shall  have  a  right  of  passage
for  himself  or  beasts  and  vehicles,  it  is
he  himself,  not  his  master,  who  is  not
to  be  hindered  from  passing.

D.  xlv,  1.  130.

134

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XVIII.

Even  in  this  case  the  slave  really  acqfiires  for  the  master.  It
is  the  master,  and  not  the  slave,  who  could  enforce  the  stipulation
by  action.  Of  course  this  personal  licence  to  cross  land  is  some-
thing quite  different  from  a  servitude.  For  a  servitude  euncli  or
agendi,  stipulated  for  by  the  slave,  could  only  be  attached  to  the
jjrcedium  of  the  master.     (D.  xlvi.   3.  17.)

3.  Servus  communis  stipulanclo
iTnicuiqTie  dominoriim.  pro  portione
dominii  acquirit ;  nisi  jussii  iinius
eoriim  aut  nominatim  ciii  eorum
stipulatus  est  ;  tunc  enim  ei  soli
acquiritiir.  Quod  servus  communis
stipulatur,  si  alteri  ex  dominis  ac-
quiri  non  potest,  solidum  alteri
acquiritur  ;  veluti  si  res  quam  dari
■stipulatus  est,  unius  domini  sit.

3.  If  a  slave  held  in  common  by
several  masters  stipulates,  he  acquires
a  share  for  each  master  according  to
the  proportion  whicli  each  has  in  him,
unless  he  stipulates  at  the  command,
or  in  the  name  of  any  one  master,  for
then  the  thing  stipulated  for  is  acquired
solely  for  that  master.  And  whatever
a  sLave  held  in  common  stipulates  for,
is  all  acquired  for  one  of  his  masters,
if  it  is  not  capable  of  being  acquired
for  the  other;  as  for  instance,  if  it
belongs  to  one  of  his  masters.

Gai.  iii.  167  ;  D.  xlv.  3.  7.  1.

Tit.  XVIII.     DE  mVISIONE  STIPULATIONUM.

Stipulationum  alice  sunt  judici-
'ales,  alise  praetorise,  alise  conventio-
nale s,  alife  communes  tarn  pr^torice
quam  judiciales.

Stipulations  are  either  judicial,  or
prretorian,  or  conventional,  or  common,
that  is,  both  praetorian  and  judicial.

1.  Judiciales  sunt  dumtaxat  quce
a  mero  judicis  officio  proficiscun-
tur  :  veluti  de  dolo  cautio,  vel  de
persequendo  servo  qui  in  fuga  est,
restituendove  pretio.

D.  xlv.  o.

The  division  of  stipulations  here  given  is  based  on  the  dif-
ference of  the  grounds  on  which  they  are  entered  into,  the  ground
being  sometimes  the  will  of  the  parties,  sometimes  the  direction
of  a  person  in  authority.

1.  Judicial  stipulations  are  those
which  proceed  exclusively  from  the
office  of  the  judge,  such  as  the  giving
security  against  fraud,  or  the  engage-
ment to  pursue  a  fugitive  slave,  or  to
pay  his  price.

D.  xlv.  1.  5  ;  D.  XXX.  69.  5.

Before  the  magistrate  the  parties  were  in  jure^  before  the
judex  they  v\^ere  in  judicio.  (See  Introd.  sec.  98.)  Tha  judex
sometimes  ordered  that  the  parties  before  him  should  enter  into
stipulations.

Two  instances  are  here  given  of  stipulations  directed  by  the
judex.  The  first  is  the  dc  dolo  cautio.  This  was  a  stipulation
directed  for  the  benefit  of  a  plaintiff,  that  the  sentence  given  in
his  favour  might  be  executed,  without  any  attempt  at  fraud  {dolus
malus)  on  the  part  of  the  defendant.  For  instance,  if  the  de-
fendant was  ordered  to  make  over  the  property  in  a  slave,  the

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XVIII=  335

judex  would  direct  that  he  should  stipulate  that  he  had  done
nothing  to  lessen  the  value  of  the  slave.  Othervvdse  the  slave
might  be  made  over  to  the  plaintiff,  and  the  plaintiffs  claim  be
thus  nominally  satisfied,  while  it  might  really  be  evaded  by  the
defendant  wilfully  doing  the  slave  some  material  harm.  (D.  vi.
1.  20.  and  45.)

The  other  instance  given  is  tliat  of  the  stipulation  dc  perse-
quendo  servo  qui  in  furja  est,  restitaendove  pretio.  A  slave  must
be  supposed  to  be  demanded,  and  to  run  away  before  the  decision
is  given.  As  the  defendant,  being  the  actual  possessor,  could  alone
reclaim  the  slave  against  third  parties,  the  judex  would  compel
iiim  to  engage  by  stipulation  to  follow  and  reclaim  him,  or  to  pay
his  price.  If  the  slave  escaped  without  any  fault  vv-hatsocver  of
the  defendant,  the  judge  merely  directed  that  the  defendant
should  engage  to  give  up  the  slave  if  he  came  into  his  power,
and  to  permit  the  plaintiff  to  bring  an  action  in  the  defendant's
name  for  the  recoverv  of  the  slave  from  any  one  who  might  detain
him.     (D.  iv.  2.  14.  H.)

2.  Prajtorifie   sunt,  qu?e   a  inero  2.  Prretorian  stipiilation.s  are  those

praitoris  officio  proficiscuntur,  veiuti  "which  proceed  exchisively  from  the
dainni  infecti  vel  legatorum.  Prje-  office  of  the  pnetor  ;  as  the  givinsr
torias  auteni  stipulationes  sic  exau-  security  against  damniim  infectnm,  or
diri  oportet,  ut  in  his  contineantnr  for  the  payment  of  legacies.  Under
etiam  ^-SdiHtiss  ;  nam  et  hte  a  jiu'is-  praetorian  sti])ulations  must  be  coia-
dictione  veniunt.  prehended  ^^dihtian,  for  these,  too,

proceed  from  a  magistrate  pronouncing

the  law.

D.  xl.  1.  5.

Damnum  infectum  est  damnum  nan  factum  quod  faturum
veremur.  (D.  xxxix.  2.  2.)  Supposing  the  damnum  futurum
which  a  man  apprehended  were  an  injury  to  his  premises  from  the
fall  of  the  ill-repaired  house  of  his  neighbour,  by  the  strict  civil
lavv',  if  he  was  to  wait  till  the  mischief  were  done,  his  neighbour
might  abandon  his  property  in  the  fallen  house,  nnd  the  injured
man  could  then  obtain  no  reparation  from  him.  To  remedy  this,
the  prsetor  would,  if  he  saw  fit,  order  the  neighbour  to  give
security  {cautio  damni  infecti)  to  indemnify  the  person  applying
against  any  damage  that  might  be  done.  If  this  order  was  not
obeyed,  the  praitor  authorised  the  complainant  to  enter  upon  and
occupy  the  premises  {in  possessionem  'mittehat) ;  and,  finally,  if
security  was  still  refused,  the  praetor  gave  the  com})lainant  full
possession  of  the  premises,  but  he  was  liable  to  be  dispossessed,
if  within  a  certain  time  the  original  proprietor  made  compensa-
tion and  complied  with  everything  enjoined  him.  (See  D.  xxxix.
2.  4.  1.)

Legatorum  :  this  was  a  stipulation  binding  tlie  heir  to  pay
legacies,  Avhen  due,  which  were  not  yet  payable  ;  otherwise  the
lieir  might  previously  have  spent  and  consumed  all  the  inheritance.

A  jurisdictione  veniunt,  that  is,  come  from  a  magistrate  qui

336  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

jus  dicit.  Jurisdiction  in  its  general  sense,  includes  the  whole
officium  of  the  jus  dicentis,  which  is  said  to  be  latissimum^  for
honorum    possessionem     dare  potest,   et    in   possessionem     mittere,

pupillis  non  hahentihus  tutor es  constituere,  judices  litiqantihus  dare,
(D.  ii.  1.  1.)

3.  Conventionales  sunt,  qupe  ex  3.  Conventional  stipulations  are
conventione  utriusque  partis  conci-  those  which  are  made  by  the  agree-
piuntur,  hoc  est,  neque  jussu  judi-  ment  of  parties  ;  that  is,  neither  by
cis,  neque  jussu  pra3toris,  sed  ex  the  order  of  a  judge  nor  by  that  of
conventione  contrahentium.  Qua-  the  preetor,  but  by  the  consent  of  the
rum  totidem  genera  sunt  qnot,  pene  persons  contracting.  And  of  these
dixerim,  rerum  contrahendarum.  stipulations  there  are  as  many  kinds,

so  to  speak,  as  there  are  of  things  to
be  contracted  for.

D.  xlv.  1.  5.

4.  Communes  stipulationes  sunt,  4.  Common  stipulations  are  those,
veluti  rem  salvam  fore  pupilli ;  nam  for  example,  providing  for  the  secu-
et  prjetor  jubet  rem  salvam  fore  rity  of  the  property  of  a  pupil,  for
pupillo  caveri,  et  interdum  judex  sometimes  the  prsetor,  and  sometimes,
si  aliter  expediri  ha3c  res  non  potest ;  too,  when  the  matter  cannot  be  ma-
vel  de  rato  stipulatio.  naged  in  any  other  way,   the  judge,

orders  it  should  be  entered  into  ;  or,
again,  the  stipulation  thab  a  thing
shall  be  ratified.

D.  xlv.  1.  5.

Communes  stipulationes  were  those  sometimes  directed  by  the
prajtor,  sometimes  by  the  judex.  They  ought  properly  to  have
preceded  the  conventionales.

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  security  a  tutor  or
curator  was  obliged  to  give.  (Bk.  i.  Tit.  24,  pr.)  It  was  pro-
perly given  before  the  tutor  entered  on  his  office,  and  it  belonged
to  the  pra3tor  to  see  that  it  Avas  given.  But  if,  before  it  was
given,  the  tutor  sued  a  debtor  of  the  pupil,  and  the  debtor  ob-
jected that  security  had  not  been  given,  the  judge,  in  order  that
tlie  proceedings  might  not  be  put  an  end  to,  would  direct  security
to  be  then  given  before  him.

The  stipulation  de  rato,  or  rem  ratam  liaheri,  was  one  entered
into  by  a  procurator  bringing  an  action  in  the  name  of  his  prin-
cipal that  what  he  did  would  be  ratified  by  his  principal.  It
properly  belonged  to  the  praator  to  direct  that  this  stipulation
should  be  entered  into  before  the  litis  contestatio  (see  Introd.
sec.  105)  ;  but  if  he  omitted  to  direct  this,  and  there  was  ground
for  distrusting  the  authority  of  the  procurator,  the  judge  would
direct  that  the  procurator  should  bind  himself  by  this  stipulation.
"(See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  11.  1.)

Tit.  XIX.     DE   INUTILIBUS   STIPULATIOXIBUS.

Omnis  res  quce  dominio  nostro  Everything,  of  which  we  have  the

subjicitur,  in  stipulationem  deduci  property,  whether  it  be  moveable  or
potest,  sive  ilia  mobilisj  sive  soli  sit.     immoveable,   may  be  the  object  of  a

stipulation.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

337

A  stipulation  is  inutilis,  i.e.  invalid,  when  it  produces  no  tie
binding  on  the  parties  to  it.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  proper
to  have  examined  here  the  causes  which  make  contracts  of  any
kind  invalid,  and  not  to  limit  the  inquiry  to  stipulations.  But
the  stipulation  was  so  much  the  most  important  kind  of  contract
that  it  is  taken  to  represent  all  other  kinds.  Some  few  of  the
causes  of  invalidity  noticed  in  this  Title  are  peculiar  to  stipulations,
but  most  are  common  to  all  contracts.

Lagrange  thus  classifies  the  reasons  given  in  this  Title  for  the
invalidity  of  stipulations:  they  might  be  invalid  (1)  on  account
of  their  object  (pr.  paragr.  1,  2,  22,  24);  (2)  on  account  of  the
persons  by  whom  (paragr.  7,  8,  9,  10,  and  12),  for  whom
(paragr.  3,  4,  19,  20,  21),  or  between  whom  (paragr.  6)  they  were
made;  (3)  on  account  of  the  manner  in  w^hich  they  were  made
(paragr.  5,  17,  18,  23)  ;  (4)  on  account  of  the  time  (paragr.  13,
14,  15,  16,  26),  or  the  condition  (paragr.  11,  25)  subject  to  which
they  were  made.

1.  At  si  quis  rem  quse  in  rerum
natura  non  est  aut  esse  non  potest,
dari  stipulatus  fuerit,  veluti  Stichum
qui  mortuus  sit,  quein  vivere  crede-
bat,  aut  Hippocentaurum  qui  esse
non  possit,  inutilis  erit  stipulatio.

Gai.  iii.  97.

1.  But,  if  any  one  stipulates  for  a
thing  which  does  not,  or  cannot  exist,
as  for  Stichus,  who  is  dead,  but  whom
he  thought  to  be  living,  or  for  a  Hip-
pocentaur,  which  cannot  exist,  the
stipulation  is  void.

In  such  a  case  no  claim  could  be  made  for  the  supposed  value
of  the  thing,  nor  even  for  a  sum  promised  under  a  penal  clause  in
case  of  non-performance.     (D.  xlv.  1.  69  and  103.)

2,  Idem  juris  est,  si  rem  sacram
aut  religiosam  quam  humani  juris
esse  credebat,  vel  publicam  quae
usibus  populi  perpetuo  exposita  sit,
ut  forum  vel  theatrum,  vel  liberum
hominem  quern  servum  esse  cre-
debat, vel  cujus  commercium  non
habuerit,  vel  rem  suam  dari  quis
stipuletur  :  nee  in  pendenti  erit  sti-
pulatio ob  id  quod  publica  res  in
privatum  deduci,  et  ex  libero  servus
fieri  potest,  et  commercium  adipisci
stipulator  potest,  et  res  stipulatoris
esse  desinere  potest  ;  sed  protinus
inutilis  est.  Item  contra,  licet  initio
utiliter  res  in  stipulatum  deducta
sit,  si  postea  in  earum  qua  causa
de  quibus  supra  dictum  est,  sine
facto  promissoris  devenerit,  extin-
guitur  stipulatio.  At  nee  statim  ab
initio  talis  stipulatio  valebit,  Lucium
Titium,  cum  servus  erit,  dare  spon-
des  ?  et  similia  ;  quia  quae  natura  sui
dominio  nostro  exempta  sunt,  in  ob-
ligationem  deduci  nullo  modo  pos-
sunt.

2.  It  is  the  same  if  any  one  stipu-
lates for  a  thing  sacred  or  religious,
which  he  thought  to  be  profane,  or
for  a  public  thing  appropriated  to  the
perpetual  use  of  the  people,  as  a  forum
or  theatre,  or  for  a  free  man,  whom,  he
thought  to  be  a  slave,  or  for  a  thing  of
which  he  has  not  the  comTnercmm,  or
for  a  thing  belonging  to  himself.  Nor
will  the  stipulation  remain  in  suspense,
because  the  public  thing  may  become
private,  the  freemanmay  become  a  slave,
the  stipulator  may  acquire  the  commer-
cium of  the  thing,  or  the  thing  which
now  belongs  to  him  may  cease  to  be
his  ;  but  the  stipulation  is  at  once  void.
So,  conversely,  although  a  thing  may
have  been  validly  stipulated  for  origi-
nally, yet,  if  it  afterwards  fall  under
the  class  of  any  of  the  things  before
mentioned,  without  the  fault  of  the
promissor,  the  stipulation  is  extin-
guished. Such  a  stipulation,  too,  as
the  following,  is  void  ah  initio,  '  Do
you  promise  to  give  me  Lucius  Titius,
when  he  shall  become  a  slave  ? '  for

338

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

that  which  by  its  nature  belongs  to  no  i
one,  cannot  in  any  way  be  made  the
object  of  an  obligation.

Gai.  iii.  97 ;  D.  xlvi.  82,  83.  5.

Cujus  commercium  non  kabuerit.  For  instance,  if,  in  the
days  of  Gains,  a  perec/rinus  had  stipulated  for  2,  fundus  Italicus  ;
or  if,  in  the  times  of  the  Lower  Empire,  a  heathen  had  stipulated
for  a  Christian  slave  (C.  i.  10).  Of  course,  if  the  promissor  had
not  the  commercium  of  the  particular  thing,  while  the  stipulator
liad  it,  the  promissor  was  ansAverable  to  the  stipulator  for  a  breach
of  contract  if  he  did  not  fulfil  his  promise.     (D.  xlv.  1.  34.)

Vel  rem  suam.  It  cannot  belong  to  him  more  than  it  does  ;
but  he  might  stipulate  for  its  value,  or  for  the  thing  itself  if  it
ceased  to  belong  to  him.     (D.  xlv.  1.  31.)

Extinguitur  stipulatlo.  And  if  it  were  once  extinguished,  no
alteration  of  circumstances  would  renew  it.  In  perpetuum  sublata
ohligatio  restitui  non  potest.     (D.  xlvi.  3.  98.  8.)

In  a  stipulation  it  made  no  difference  that  the  stipulator  was
really  ignorant  that  there  was  some  character  attaching  to  the
object  of  the  stipulation  which  made  the  stipulation  invalid,  as
that  it  was  sacred  or  jmblic.  The  fact  that  it  was  sacred  or
public  invalidated  the  stipulation,  and  the  stipulator  had  no  further
remedy  against  the  promissor.  We  shall  find  (Tit.  24.  5)  that  if
a  person  purchased  in  ignorance  a  thing  of  this  nature,  he  would
have  a  remedy  against  the  seller  to  indemnify  him  for  the  loss  he
;sustained  by  the  purchase.

3.  Si  quis  alium  datiirum  factu-
rumve  quod  spoponderit,  non  obli-
gabitnr,  veluti  si  spondeat  Titium
quinque  aiireos  daturum.  Quod  si
eftecturum  se  ut  Titius  daret,  spo-
ponderit, obligatur.

D.  xlv.  1.  83.

4.  Si  quis  alii  quam  cujus  juri
subjectus  sit,  stipuletur,  nihil  agit.
Plane  solutio  etiam  in  extranei  per-
sonam conferri  potest,  veluti  si  quis
ita  stipuletur,  mihi  aut  Seio  dare
spondes  ]  ut  obligatio  quidem  stipu-
latori  acquiratur,  solvi  tamen  Seio
etiam  invito  eo  recte  x)Ossit ;  ut  libe-
ratio  ipso  jure  contingat,  sed  ille
adversus  Seium  habeat  mandati  ac-
tionem. Quod  si  quis  sibi  et  alii
cujus  juri  subjectus  non  sit,  dari
decern  aureos  stipulatus  est,  valebit
quidem  stipuhatio  ;  sed  utrum  totum
debeatur  quod  in  stipulationem  de-
ductum  est,  an  vero  i^ars  dimidia,
dubitatum  est  ;  sed  placet  non  plus
quam  dimidiam  partem  ei  acquiri.
Ei  qui  juri  tuo  subjectus  est,  si  sti-

4.  If  any  one  stipulates  for  the
benefit  of  a  third  person,  other  than
a  person  in  whose  power  he  is,  the
stipulation  is  void.  But  it  may  be
arranged  that  payment  shall  be  made
to  a  third  person,  as  if  a  person  stipu-
lates thus,  '  Do  you  engage  to  pay
to  me  or  to  Seius  ? '  The  stipulator
alone,  in  this  case,  acquires  the  obli-
gation ;  but  payment  may  be  made  to
Seius  even  against  his  will  ;  the  payer
will  then  be  at  once  freed  from  his
obligation,  while  the  stipulator  will
have  against  Seius  an  actio  mandati.
If  any  one  stipulates  that  ten  aurei
shall  be  paid  to  him  and  to  a  third
person,  other  than  a  person  in  whose
power  he  is,  the  stipulation  is  valid  ;
but  it  has  been  doubted  whether,  in

3.  If  a  man  promises  that  another
shall  give  or  do  something,  he  is  not
bound,  as  if  he  promises,  that  Titius
shall  give  five  aurei.  But,  if  he  pro-
mises that  he  will  manage  that  Titius
shall  give  five  aurei,  he  is  bound.

LIB.  in.      TIT.  XIX.  339

iilatus  sis,  tibi  acquiris  ;  quia  vox  this  case,  the  whole  sum  is  due  to  the
Lia  tainquam  filii  sit,  sicuti  lilii  vox  stipulator,  or  only  half  ;  and  it  has
imquam  tua  intelligitur  in  iis  rebus  been  decided  that  only  half  is  due.
ua3  tibi  acquiri  possunt.  But,  if  you  stipulate  for  another,  who

is  in  your  power,  you  acquire  for  your-
self ;  for  your  words  are  as  the  words
of  your  son,  and  your  son's  words  are
as  yours,  with  respect  to  all  things
which  can  be  acquired  for  you.

Gai.  iii.  103  ;  D.  xlv.  1.  141.  3  ;  D.  xlv.  1.  39.  130  ;  D.  xxxix.  2.  42.

No  one  who  was  not  a  party  to  a  contract  could  gain  or  lose
)y  it.    Res  inter  alios  acta,  aliis  neque  nocere,  neque  prodesse  potest
a  maxim  not  to  be  found  exactly  in  its  present  shape,  but  based
)n  C.  vii.  60.  1).     And  as  this  was  true  of  all  kinds  of  contracts,
50  was  it  specially  of  stipulations,  in  which  a  particular  formula
lad  to  be  spoken,  and  which  could  not  properly  be  entered  into
by  any  one  that  was  absent.  The  third  person  not  being  a  party  to
the  contract,  could  have  no  action  to  enforce  it,  and  the  stipulator
30uld  not  enforce  it  because  he  had  no  interest  in  it.     If,  indeed,  he
bad  any  interest  in  it,  that  is,  any  legal  interest,  which  of  course
might  happen,  a  stipulation  for  another  was  binding.      Si  stipuler
alii  cum  mea  interesset,  ait  Marcellus,  stipulationem  valere.  (D.  xlv.
1.  38.  20,  and  see  paragr.  20  of  this  Title.)     And  when  one  per-
son wished  to  stipulate  for  another,  the  object  might  generally  be
effected  by  adding    a  penalty  for  the  non-performance    of   the
promise.     A  stipulation  binding  the  promissor  to  give  something
to  Titius,  or,  if  it  were  not  given,  to  pay  a  penalty  to  the  stipu-
lator, was  binding.     It  was,  indeed,  nothing  but  a  conditional
contract.     In  the  event  of  something  not  happening,  which  might
have  happened,  a  certain  benefit  was  to  accrue  to  the  stipulator.
(D.  xlv.  1.  38.  17.)     It  is  because  the  thing  might  have  happened
that  such   a  penal  clause  differs  in  its  effect  from  one  made  to
enforce  the  performance  of  a  thing  physically  impossible.     (See
note  on  paragr.  1.)

Mihi  aut  Seio.  The  third  person,  to  whom  payment  might
be  thus  made  at  the  option  of  the  payee,  was  said  to  be  solutionis
causa  adjectus.      (D.  xlvi.  3.  95.  5.)

Sibi  et  alii.  We  learn  from  Gains,  that  the  Sabinians  were
of  opinion  that  the  whole  sum  specified  was  in  this  case  due  to
the  stipulator.  Justinian  adopts  the  contrary  opinion.  (Gai.
iii.  103.)

Every  one  could  stipulate  and  promise  for  his  heir.  Every
paterfamilias  could  stipulate  for  those  under  his  power  and  his
slaves ;  every  person  under  power  and  every  slave  could  stipulate
for  the  paterfamilias  or  master,  and  could  promise  so  as  to  bind
the  paterfamilias  or  master,  if  authorised,  directly  or  indirectly,
to  do  so.     (See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  7.)

In  the  later  law  many  kinds  of  stipulations  could  be  made
through  another  person,  though  this  was  contrary  to  the  primary
notion  of  a  stipulation.  For  instance,  the  stipulation  *  rem  pupillo

z  2

340

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

salvam  fore''  (see  Tit.  18.  4)  could  be  made,  for  a  pupil  who  was
infans,  or  absent,  by  a  public  slave,  by  a  person  appointed  by  the
praetor,  or  by  a  magistrate  if  the  parties  came  before  him.
(D.  xxvii.  8.  1.  15.)

5.  Prseterea  inutilis  est  stipulatio,
si  quis  ad  ea  quae  interrogatus  erit,  non
respondeat  :  veluti,  si  decern  aureos
a  te  dari  stipuletur,  tu  quinque  pro-
mittas,  vel  contra ;  aut  si  ille  pure
stipuletur,  tu  sub  conditione  promit-
tas,  vel  contra,  si  modo  scilicet  id
exprimas,  id  est,  si  cui  sub  condi-
tione vel  in  diem  stipulanti  tu  re-
spondeas,  prsesenti  die  spondeo  :
nam  si  hoc  solum  respondeas,  pro-
mitto,  breviter  videris  in  eamdem
diem  vel  conditionem  spopondisse  ;
neque  enim  necesse  est  in  respon-
dendo  eadem  omnia  repeti,  quae
stipulator  expresserit.

5.  A  stipulation,  again,  is  void,  if
the  answer  do  not  agree  with  the
demand ;  as  when  a  person  stipulates
that  ten  aurei  shall  be  given  him,  and
you  answer  five,  or  vice  versa.  A  sti-
pulation is  also  void,  if  a  person  sti-
pulates simply,  and  you  promise
conditionally,  or  vice  versa  ;  provided
only  that  the  disagreement  is  ex-
pressly stated,  as  if,  when  a  man  stipu-
lates conditionally,  or  for  a  particular
time,  you  answer,  *  I  promise  for  to-
day.' But,  if  you  answer  only,  '  I
promise,'  you  seem  in  a  brief  way  to
agree  to  the  time  or  condition  he
proposes.  For  it  is  not  necessary,
that  in  the  answer  every  word  should
be  repeated  which  the  stipulator  ex-
pressed.

D.  xlv.  1.  1.  3,  4  ;  D.  xlv.  1.  134.  1.

Si  decern  aureos,     Ulpian,  in  the  Digest,  decides  the  question
the  other  way.     (D.  xlv.  1.  1.  4.)

6.  Item  inutilis  est  stipulatio,  si
vel  ab  eo  stipuleris  qui  tuo  juri  sub-
jectus  est,  vel  si  is  a  te  stipuletur.
Sed  servus  quidem  non  solum  do-
mino suo  obligari  non  potest,  sed  ne
alii  quidem  ulli  ;  filii  vero  familias
aliis  obligari  possunt.

6.  A  stipulation  is  also  void  if  made
with  one  who  is  in  your  power,  or  if
such  a  person  stipulate  with  you.  A
slave  is  incapable  not  only  of  entering
into  an  obligation  with  his  master,  but
of  binding  himself  to  any  other  person.
But  a  filiusfamilias  can  enter  into  an
obligation  with  others.

Gai.  iii.  104.  39 ;  D.  xliv.  7.  14.

The  slave  could  not  contract  civilly  with  his  master ;  but  the
later  law  recognised  that  there  might  be  a  naturalis  ohHgatio
created  between  them,  so  that  if  a  master  owed  anything  to  a
slave  in  the  accounts  kept  between  them,  and  paid  it  to  the  slave
after  he  had  been  manumitted,  the  master  could  not  recover  it,  as
he  was  paying  what,  by  a  natural  obligation,  he  was  bound  to  pay.
(D.  xii.  6.  64.)

The  JiUus familias  could  bind  himself  civilly.  Filiusfamilias
ex  omnibus  cuusis  tanquam  "paterfamilias  obUgatur,  (D.  xliv.
7.  39.)  He  could  be  sued  and  his  person  taken  in  execution,  and
his  peculia  could  be  made  available  for  his  creditors ;  and  Jus-
tinian permitted  him  to  make  a  cessio  bonorum.  (C.  vi.  71.  7.)
To  protect  filiifamiliarum,  the  senatus-consultum  Macedonianum
was  passed,  by  which  money  lent  to  filiifamiliarum  could  not  be
recovered  from  them.     (See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  7.  7.)

i

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XIX.

341

7.  Mutum  neque  stipulari  neque
promittere  posse  palam  est,  quod  et
in  surdo  receptum  est ;  quia  et  is  qui
stipulatur  verba promittentis,  et  is  qui
promittit  verba  stipulantis  audire  de-
bet :  unde  apparet  non  de  eo  nos
loqui  qui  tardius  exaudit,  sed  de  eo
qui  omnino  non  audit.

7.  It  is  evident  that  a  dumb  man
can  neither  stipulate  nor  promise.
And  this  is  considered  to  apply  also
to  deaf  persons,  for  he  who  stipulates
ought  to  hear  the  words  of  the  pro-
missor,  and  he  who  promises,  the
words  of  the  stipulator.  Hence,  it  is
clear  that  we  are  not  speaking  of  a
person  who  hears  with  difficulty,  but
of  one  who  cannot  hear  at  all.

Gai.  iii.  105  ;  D.  xliv.  7.  1.  15.

8.   Furiosus  nullum  negotium  ge-  8.  A  madman  can  go  through  no

rere  potest,  quia  non  intelligit  quid     legal  act,  because  he  does  not  under-
agit.  stand  what  he  is  doing.

Gai.  iii.  106.

During  lucid  intervals  a  madman  could  make  valid  stipula-
tions or  promises.

9.  Pupillus  omne  negotium  recte
gerit,  ut  tamen  sicubi  tutoris  aucto-
ritas  necessaria  sit,  adhibeatur  tutor,
veluti  si  ipse  obligetur  :  nam  alium
sibi  obligare  etiam  sine  tutoris
auctoritate  potest.

9.  A  pupil  may  go  through  any
legal  act,  provided  that  the  tutor  takes
a  part  in  the  proceeding  in  cases  where
his  authorisation  is  necessary,  as,  for
instance,  when  the  pupil  binds  himself  ;
for  a  pupil  can  bind  others  to  him
without  the  authorisation  of  his  tutor.

Gai.  ii.  107.

10.  Sed  quod  diximus  de  pupillis,
utique  de  iis  verum  est  qui  jam  ali-
quem  intellectum  habent  :  nam  in-
fans  et  qui  infanti  proximus  est,  non
multum  a  furioso  distant,  quia  hujus
setatis  pupilli  nullum  habent  intel-
lectum ;  sed  in  proximis  infanti,
propter  utilitatem  eorum,  benignior
juris  interpretatio  facta  est,  ut  idem
juris  habeant  quod  pubertati  proximi.
Sed  qui  in  potestate  parentis  est
impubes,  ne  auctore  quidem  patre
obligatur.

10.  This  must  be  understood  only
of  pupils  who  already  have  some  under-
standing ;  for  an  infant,  or  one  still
near  to  infancy,  difiters  but  little  from  a
madman,  for  pupils  of  such  an  age  have
no  understanding  at  all.  But,  in  order
to  consult  their  interest,  the  law  is
construed  more  favourably  to  those
who  are  near  to  infancy,  and  they  are
allowed  the  same  rights  as  those  near
the  age  of  puberty.  A  son  in  the  power
of  his  father,  and  under  the  age  of
puberty,  cannot  bind  himself  even  if
his  father  authorises  him.

Gai.  iii.  109 ;  D.  xlv.  1.  141.  2.

An  infant  was  properly  one  qui  fari  non  potest,  a  child  not
yet  old  enough  to  speak  with  understanding  of  what  he  said,  i.  e.
was  below  the  age  of  seven  years.  AYhen  a  child  could  talk,  and
began  to  have  some  degree  of  understanding,  he  was  termed  in-
fanti proximus.  He  could  now  pronounce,  and  in  some  measure
understand,  the  words  of  a  stipulation,  and  the  law  permitted  him
to  do  so  with  the  sanction  of  his  tutor  in  certain  cases,  such  as  the
acquisition  of  an  inheritance,  where  his  personal  intervention
w^as  necessary.  But  the  law  did  not  allow  him  to  stipulate  except
when  the  stipulation  was  clearly  for  his  benefit.   (D.  xxix.  2.  9.)

Just  as  the  child  who  was  older  than  an  infant  was  said  to
be  infanticB  proximus,  so  one  a  little  younger  than  a  puhes  was

342  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

said  to  be  puhertati  proximus.  Theophilus,  in  his  paraphrase  of
this  paragraph,  says,  proximus  infanti  qualis  fuerit  qvi  septimum
ant  octavum  annum  agit.  The  original  notion  seems  to  have  been
that  the  child  infantice  proximus  could  not  do  things  which  the
puhertati  proximus  could  do.  There  was  a  clear  difference  be-
tween a  child  between  seven  and  ei^ht  and  a  child  between  thir-
teen  and  fourteen.  But  the  capacity  existing  in  the  inter-
vening years  would  vary  with  the  individual.  Gradually  the  law
recognised  more  and  more  the  acts  of  the  child  over  seven  years,
as  this  was  considered,  as  the  text  says,  the  henignior  interpre-
tation the  more  favourable  interpretation  to  the  child,  as  removing
doubts  as  to  his  competence,  and  avoiding  the  necessity  of  having
recourse  to  a  slave  to  stipulate  for  the  child.  (D.  xlvi.  6.  6.)  But,
with  regard  to  delicts,  the  benignior  interpretotio  would  be  to
mark  the  distinction  between  different  ao;es  of  children  above
seven;  and  so  we  are  told  (Bk.  iv.  Tit..  1.  18)  that  the  impuhes  is
only  bound  ex  furto  in  so  far  as  proximus  puhertati  intelligit  se
delinquere.

The  paterfamilias  could  not,  like  a  tutor,  supply  his  autho-
rity to  make  up  what  was  deficient  in  the  power  of  the  impuhes.
The  concluding  words  of  this   paragraph  are  taken  from  Gains,   |
who  makes  his  statement  more  complete  by  adding  puhes  vero  qui  ™
in  potestate  est,  proinde  ac  si  paterfamilias  obligari  solet,    (D.  xlv.
1.  141.  5.)

11.  Si  impossibilis  conditio  obli-  11.  If  an  impossible  condition  is
gationibiis  adjiciatnr,  nihil  valet  added  to  an  obligation,  the  stipulation
stipulatio.  Impossibilis  antem  con-  is  void.  A  condition  is  considered
ditio  habetnr,  cui  natnra  impedi-  impossible  of  which  natnre  forbids  the
mento  est  quominns  existat,  veluti  accomplishment  ;  as,  if  a  person  says,
si  quis  ita  dixerit,  si  digito  coehim  '  Bo  you  promise  if  I  touch  the  heavens
attigero  dare  spondes  1  At  si  ita  with  my  finger  ? '  But  if  a  stipulation
stipuletur,  si  digito  coelum  non  at-  is  made  thus,  '  Do  you  promise  if  I  do
tigero  dare  spondes  ?  pure  facta  not  touch  the  sky  with  my  finger  ? '
obligatio  intelligitur,  ideoque  statim  the  obligation  is  considered  as  uncon-
petere  potest.  ditional,  and  performance  may  be  in-
stantly demanded.

Gai.  iii.  98 ;  D.  xlv.  1.  7.

An  impossible  condition  in  a  testamentary  gift  was  treated  as
if  it  had  never  been  inserted.  In  a  stipulation  or  any  other  con-
tract it  made  the  contract  void,  a  difference  owing  to  the  favour
with  which  testamentary  gifts  were  regarded.  (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.
15.  10.)

In  the  stipulation,  '  If  I  do  not  touch  the  heavens,'  &c.,  there  >
is  really  no  condition  ;  there  is  nothing  left  undecided  in  the  mind
of  the  speaker  or  hearer.

12.  Itemverborum  obligatio  inter  12.  A  verbal  obligation,  made  be-
absentes  concepta  inutilis  est.  Sed  tween  absent  persons,  is  also  void.  But
cum  hoc  materiam  litium  conten-  as  this  doctrine  afibrded  matter  of
tiosis  hominibus  pr^stabat,  forte  strife  to  contentious  men,  who  alleged,
post   tempus  tales   allegationes  op-  after  some  time  had  elapsed,  that  either

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

343

ponentibus,  et  non  praesentes  esse
vel  se  vel  adversaries  sues  conten-
dentibns,  ideo  nostra  constitutio
propter  celeritatem  dirimendarum
litium  introducta  est,  quam  ad
Ca3sarienses  advocates  scripsimns  :
per  qiiam  disposiiimus  tales  scrip-
tiiras  quae  presto  esse  partes  in-
dicant, omnimodo  esse  credendas,
nisi  ipse  qui  talibus  utitur  improbis
allegationibus,  manifestissimis  pro-
bationibus  vel  per  scripturam  vel
per  testes  idoneos  af)probaverit,  in
ipso  toto  die  quo  conficiebatur  in-
strumentum  sese  vel  adversarium
suum  in  aliis  locis  esse.

they  or  their  adversaries  were  not  pre-
sent, we  issued  a  constitution,  addressed
to  the  advocates  of  Caesarea,  in  order
to  provide  for  the  speedy  determination
of  such  suits.  By  this  we  have  en-
acted, that  written  acts  which  declare
that  the  contracting  parties  were  pre-
sent, shall  be  considered  as  indisputable
evidence  of  the  fact,  unless  the  party
who  has  recourse  to  such  shameless
allegations  makes  it  evident,  by  the
most  manifest  proofs,  either  by  writing
or  by  credible  witnesses,  that  either  he
or  his  adversary  was  in  some  other
place  during  the  whole  day  in  which
the  instrument  was  made.

Gai.  iii.  138  :  C.  viii.  38.  14.

Xo  writing  was  necessary  to  make  a  verbal  contract  valid  ;
but  one  was  generally  drawn  up  as  a  record  of  the  transactions,
and  called  instrumentum  or  cautio,  as  being  a  security  for  the
stipulator.

13.  Post  mortem  suam  dari  sibi
nemo  stipulari  poterat,  non  magis
quam  post  mortem  ejus  a  quo  sti-
pulabatur  ;  ac  nee  is  qui  in  alicujus
potestate  est,  post  mortem  ejus  sti-
pulari poterat,  quia  patris  vel  do-
mini  voce  loqui  videtur.  Sed  et  si
quis  ita  stipuletur,  pridie  quam
moriar  vel  pridie  quam  morieris
dabis  ?  inutilis  erat  stipulatio.  Sed
cum  (ut  ita  dictum  est)  ex  consensu
contrahentium  stipulationes  valent,
placuit  nobis  etiam  in  hunc  juris  ar-
ticulum  necessariam  inducere  emen-
dationem  :  ut  sive  post  mortem,  sive
pridie  quam  morietur  stipulator  sive
promissor,  stipulatio  concepta  est,
valeat  stipulatio.

13.  A  man  could  not  formerly  sti-
pulate that  a  thing  should  be  given
him  after  his  own  death,  any  more
than  after  the  death  of  the  promissor.
Neither  could  any  person  in  the  power
of  another  stipulate  that  anything
should  be  given  him  after  the  death  of
the  person  in  whose  power  he  was,
because  it  was  his  father  or  master  who
appeared  to  be  speaking  in  him.  And
if  any  one  stipulated  thus,  '  Do  you
promise  to  give  the  day  before  I  die  ?
or  the  day  before  you  die  ? '  the  stipu-
lation was  invalid.  But  since  all  sti-
pulations, as  we  have  already  said,
derive  their  force  from  the  consent  of
the  contracting  parties,  we  have  thought
it  proper  to  introduce  a  necessary  alte-
ration in  this  respect,  so  that  now,
whether  it  is  stipulated  that  a  thing
shall  be  given  after,  or  immediately
before,  the  death  either  of  the  stipu-
lator or  the  promissor,  the  stipulation
is  good.

Gai.  iii.  100  ;  C.  viii.  38.  11  ;  C.  iv.  11.

A  stipulation  '^pridie  quam  moriar^  was  held  to  be  invalid,
because  the  date  when  the  thing  promised  became  due  could  not
be  fixed  until  the  death  happened,  and  then  the  action  would
only  be  acquired  for  or  against  the* heirs,  exactly  as  in  the  case  of
a  stipulation  '  dahis  post  mortem '  (Gai.  iii.  100),  and  the  heirs
were  looked  on  as  those  parties  for  whom  a  stipulation  could  not
be  made.  Gains  says,  inelegans  visum  est  ex  heredh  persona  inci-
pere  obligatlonem ;  it  was  out  of  the  due  order  of  things  that  a

344  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

man  should  enter  into  an  obligation  in  which  no  action  could  be
brought  until  after  his  death.  Justinian  does  away  with  all  these
subtleties.

14.  Itemsi  quisitastipulatuserat,  14.  Also,  if  any  one  stipulated
si  navis  eras  ex  Asia  venerit,  liodie  thus,  '  If  a  certain  ship  arrives  to-
dare  spondes  ?  inutilis  erit  stipu-  morrow  from  Asia,  do  you  engage  to
latio,  quia  pr^epostere  concepta  est,  give  to-day  T  the  stipulation  would
Sed  cum  Leo  inclytse  recordationis  be  void,  as  being  preposterous.  But,
in  dotibus  eamdem  stipulationem  since  the  Emperor  Leo,  of  glorious  me-
quse  prsepostera  nuncupatur,  non  mory,  decided  that  such  a  stipulation,
esse  rejiciendam  existimavit,  nobis  which  is  termed  prsepostera,  ought  not
placuit  et  huic  perfectum  robur  to  be  rejected  with  respect  to  marriage-
accommodare,  ut  non  solum  in  portions,  we  have  thought  it  right  to
dotibus  sed  etiam  in  omnibus  valeat  give  it  complete  validity,  so  that  novr,
hujusmodi  conceptio  stipulationis.  every  stipulation  made  in  this  way  is

valid,  not  only  with  respect  to  mar-
riage-portions, but  whatever  may  be
its  object.

C.  vi.  23.  25.

Such  a  stipulation  was  said  to  be  prcepostere  concepta  (i.  e.
the  things  which  should  come  j^^st  are  placed  pr«),  because  the
payment  is  to  be  made  at  once,  and  thus  is  placed  before  {proi)
instead  of  after  (post)  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition.  Under
Justinian's  enactment  the  contract  was  binding  at  once,  but  pay-
ment could  not  be  enforced  until  the  condition  was  fulfilled.  (C.
vi.  23.  25.)

15.  Ita  autern  concepta  stipulatio,  15.  A  stipulation  made  thus,  as  if,
veluti  si  Titius  dicat,  cum  moriar  for  instance,  Titius  says,  '  Do  you  pro-
dare  spondes  ?  vel  cum  morieris  ?  et  mise  to  give  when  I  die,'  or  '  when  you
apud  veteres  utilis  erat  et  nunc  die  V  was  considered  valid  by  the
valet.  ancients,  and  is  so  now.

D.  xlv.  1.  45.  3.      '

This  stipulation  was  said  to  be  valid  because  the  thing  was  to
be  given  '  jioji  post  moi^tem,  sed  ultimo  vitce  tempore.^  (GrAi.  ii.
232.)  The  moment  Avhen  the  performance  of  the  engagement
became  due' was  fixed  before  the  time  when  the  rights  of  the
heir  were  distinct  from  those  of  the  deceased.  In  the  stipulation
darl  pridie  quam  morUir,  the  moment  when  the  performance  be-
came due  could  only  be  ascertained  after  the  death  of  the  deceased.
Until  he  had  died  it  was  not  known  when  the  day  before  the  day
of  his  death  would  be.  But  he  must  die,  and  the  moment  of  his
death  might  be  taken  as  an  epoch  in  itself.

16.  Item  post  mortem  alterius  16.  We  may  also  validly  stipulate
recte  stipxilamur.                                      that  a  thing  shall  be  given  after  the

death  of  a  third  person.

D.  xlv.  1.  45.  1.

The  death  of  a  third  person  was  an  uncertain  term,  which
might  be  as  legitimately  affixed  to  a  stipulation  or  any  other  un-

I

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

345

certain  time.     The  reason  which  prevented  the  stipulation  post
mortem  meam  or  tuam  did  not  apply.

17.  Si  scriptum  in  instriiinento
fuerit  promisisse  aliquem,  perinde
habetur  atque  si  interrogatione
prsecedente  responsum  sit.

17.  If  it  is  written  in  an  instru-
ment that  a  person  has  promised,  the
promise  is  considered  to  have  been
given  in  answer  to  a  precedent  interro-
gation.

See  Paul.  Sent.  v.  7.  2.  Ulpian  says  (D.  ii.  14.  7.  12)  that
if,  at  the  end  of  the  instrument  of  an  agreement,  the  words  usually
added  were  found,  viz.  rogavit  Titius,  spopondit  Mcevius,  the
agreement  was  taken  to  be  a  stipulation  unless  it  were  expressly
shown  that  it  was  in  reality  only  a  pactum.

18.  Quoties  plures  res  una  stipu-
latione  comprehenduntur,  si  quidem
promissor  simpliciter  respondeat
dare  spondeo,  propter  omnes  tene-
^tur.  Si  vero  unam  ex  his  vel
quasdam  daturum  se  respondent,
obligatio  in  iis  pro  quibus  spopon-
derit,  contrahitur  :  ex  pluribus  enim
stipulationibus  una  vel  queedam
\identur  esse  perfects©  ;  singulas
enim  res  stipulari,  et  ad  singulas
respondere  debemus.

18.  When  many  things  are  compre-
hended in  one  stipulation,  a  man  binds
himself  to  all,  if  he  answers  simply  '  I
promise  to  give.'  But,  if  he  promises
to  give  one,  or  some  of  the  things  stipu-
lated for,  he  is  bound  only  with  respect
to  the  things  comprised  in  his  answer.
For,  of  the  difierent  stipulations  con-
tained in  the  question,  only  some  are
considered  to  have  been  answered,  as
for  each  object  a  question  and  an  answer
is  required.

D.  xlv.  1.  83.  4  ;  D.  xlv.  1.  4,  5.

19.  Alteri  stipulari  (ut  supra
dictum  est)  nemo  potest  :  invent^e
sunt  enim  hujusmodi  obligationes
ad  hoc  ut  unusquisque  sibi  acquirat
quod  sua  interest  ;  ceterum,  ut  alii
detur,  nihil  interest  stipulatoris.
Plane  si  quis  velit  hoc  facere,  poe-
nam  stipulari  conveniet,  ut  nisi  ita
factum  sit  ut  comprehensum  est,
committatur  poense  stipulatio  etiam
ei  cujus  nihil  interest  ;  prenam  enim
quum  stipulatur  quis,  non  illud  in-
spicitur  quid  intersit  ejus,  sed  quce
sit  quantitas  in  conditione  stipula-
tionis.  Ergo  si  quis  stipuletur
Titio  dari,  nihil  agit  ;  sed  si  addi-
derit  poenam,  nisi  dederis  tot  aureos
dare  spondes  ?  tunc  committitur
stipulatio.

19.  No  one,  as  we  have  already
said,  can  stipulate  for  another,  for  this
kind  of  obligations  has  been  invented,
that  every  person  may  acquire  what  it
is  for  his  own  advantage  to  acquire  ;
and  it  cannot  be  for  his  interest  that  a
thing  should  be  given  to  another.  But
if  any  one  wishes  to  stipulate  for  an-
other, he  should  stipulate  for  a  penalty
payable  to  him,  although  he  would
otherwise  receive  no  advantage  from
the  obligation,  so  that  if  the  promissor
does  not  perform  his  promise,  the  sti-
pulation for  the  penalty  may  be  valid
even  for  a  person  who  had  no  interest
in  the  performance  of  the  promise  ;
for  when  a  penalty  is  stipulated  for,  it
is  not  the  interest  of  the  stipulator
that  is  regarded,  but  the  amount  of
the  penalty.  If,  therefore,  any  one
stipulates  that  a  certain  thing  shall  be
given  to  Titius,  this  is  void  ;  but  if  he
adds  a  penalty,  '  Do  you  promise  to
give  me  so  many  aurei  if  you  do  not
give  the  thing  to  Titius  1 '  this  stipula-
tion binds  the  promissor.

D.  xlv.  1.  38.  17.

20.  Sed  et  si  quis  stipuletur  alii,  20.  But,   if  any  one  stipulates  for

cum  ejus   interesset,  placuit  stipu-     another,  having  himself  an  interest  in

346

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XIX.

lationem  valere.  Nam  si  is  qui
pupilli  tutelam  administrare  coepe-
rat,  cessit  administratione  contiitori
suo,  et  stipnlatus  est  rem  pupilli
salvam  fore  ;  quoniam  interest  sti-
pulatoris  fieri  quod  stipulatus  est,
cum  obligatus  futurus  esset  pupillo
si  male  gesserit,  tenet  obligatio.
Ergo  et  si  quis  procuratori  suo  dari
stipulatus  sit,  stipulatio  vires  habe-
bit  ;  et  si  creditori  dari  stipulatus
sit,  quod  sua  interest,  ne  forte  vel
poena  committatur  vel,  prfedia  dis-
trahantur  qua3  pignori  data  erant,
valet  stipulatio.

the  performance  of  the  promise,  the
stipulation  is  valid.  Thus  if  he  who
has  begun  to  act  as  tutor  afterwards
gives  up  the  administration  to  his  co-
tutor,  and  stipulates  for  the  security
of  the  estate  of  his  pupil,  since  it  is
for  the  interest  of  the  stipulator  that
the  promise  should  be  performed,  as  he
is  answerable  to  the  pupil  for  malad-
ministration, the  obligation  is  binding.
So  if  a  person  stipulates  that  a  thing
shall  be  given  to  his  procurator,  the
stipulation  is  eflfectual.  So,  too,  is  a
stipidation  that  a  thing  shall  be  given
to  a  creditor  of  the  stipulator,  the  stipu-
lator having  an  interest  in  the  perform-
ance of  the  promise  ;  as,  for  instance,
that  he  may  avoid  becoming  liable  to  a
penal  clause,  or  that  his  immoveables,
given  in  pledge,  should  not  be  sold.

D.  xlv.  1.  38.  20.  23.

See  note  on  paragr.  4.     The  tutor  was  liable  for  all  his  co-
tutor  did.     (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  24.)

21.  Versa  vice,  qui  alium  factu-
rum  promisit,  videtur  in  ea  esse
causa  ut  non  teneatur,  nisi  poenam
ipse  promiserit.

21.  Conversely,  he  who  undertakes
for  the  performance  of  another,  is
not  bound  unless  he  promises  under  a
penalty.

D.  xlv.  1.  38.  2.

22.  Item  nemo  rem  suam  futu-
ram,  in  eum  casum  quo  sua  sit,
utiliter  stipulatur.

22.  No  man  can  validly  stipulate
that  a  thing  which  may  hereafter  be-
long to  him  shall  be  given  him  when  it
becomes  his.

D.  xlv.  1.  87.

When  the  time  was  come,  the  stipulation  would  have  nothing
on  which  to  take  effect.

23.  Si  de  alia  re  stipulator  sen-
serit,  de  alia  promissor,  perinde
nulla  contrahitur  obligatio,  ac  si  ad
interrogatum  responsum  non  esset :
veluti,  si  hominem  Stichum  a  te
quis  stipulatus  fuerit,  tu  de  Pam-
philo  senseris  quem  Stichum  vocari
credideris.

D.  xlv.

23.  If  the  stipulator  intend  one
thing,  and  a  promissor  another,  an
obligation  is  no  more  contracted  than
if  no  answer  had  been  made  to  the
interrogation  ;  for  instance,  if  any  one
has  stipulated  that  you  should  give
Stichus,  and  you  understood  him  to
refer  to  Pamphilus,  thinking  that
Pamphilus  was  called  Stichus.

1.  137.  1.-

Stipulatio  ex  utriusque  consensu  valet.  (D.  xlv.  1.  83.  1.)
And  if  the  seeming  consent  implied  in  pronouncing  the  words  of
the  stipulation  was  vitiated  by  a  mistake  under  which  one  party
spoke  of  one  thing  and  the  other  of  another,  the  stipulation  was
void ;  but  if  the  mistake  was  only  with  reference  to  something  in,
or  relating  to,  the  thing  they  were  speaking  of,  i.e.  if  they  were

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XX.

34:

really  speakiDg  of  the  same  thing,  but  one  party  was  under
some  misapprehension  respecting  it,  the  stipulation  was  valid.
So  it  was  valid  if  fraud  or  violence  had  been  used  to  procure  it ;
but  though  in  such  cases  it  was  valid,  the  rights  it  gave  were
worthless  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  prsetor,  who  always  allowed
exceptiones  doli,  metus^  &c.,  by  which  the  action  brought  on  the
stipulation  was  repelled.

24.  Quod  turpi  ex  causa  promis-  24.    A   promise   made   to   effect   a

sum  est,  veluti  si  quis  homicidium  base  purpose,  as  to  commit  homicide

vel    sacrilegium    se    facturum   pro-  or  sacrilege,  is  not  binding,
mittat,  non  valet.

D.  xlv.  1.  26,  27.

A  thing  was  said  to  be  promissum  ex  turpi  causa,  when  it  was
promised,  being  itself  illegal  or  immoral,  or  was  the  reward,  or
depended  on  the  happening,  of  anything  illegal  or  immoral.

25.  Cum  quis  sub  aliqua  condi-
tione  stipulatus  fuerit,  licet  ante
conditionem  decesserit,  postea  exis-
tente  conditione  lieres  ejus  agere
potest.  Idem  est  et  ex  promissoris
parte.

25.  If  a  stipulation  is  conditional,
although  the  stipulator  dies  before
the  accomplishment  of  the  condition,
yet  if,  afterwards,  the  condition  is  ac-
complished, his  heir  can  demand  the
execution  of  the  promise ;  and  so,
too,  the  heir  of  the  promissor  may  be
sued.

D.  xlv.  1.  57.

26.  Qui  hoc  anno  aut  hoc  mense
dari  stipulatus  est,  nisi  omnibus
partibus  anni  vel  mensis  prseteritis
non  recta  petet.

26.  A  person  who  stipulates  that  a
thing  shall  be  given  to  him  in  such
a  year  or  month,  cannot  legally  de-
mand the  thing  promised  until  the
whole  year  or  month  has  elapsed.

D.  xlv.  1.  42.

27.  Si  fundum  dari  stipuleris  vel
hominem,  non  poteris  continuo
agere,  nisi  tantum  spatium  prteter-
ierit  quo  traditio  fieri  possit.

27.  If  you  stipulate  for  a  piece  of
ground,  or  a  slave,  you  cannot  in-
stantly demand  the  thing,  but  must
wait  until  enough  time  has  passed  for
delivery  to  have  been  made.

D.xlv.  1.  73.

Tit.  XX.     DE    FIDEJUSSOEIBUS.

Pro  eo  qui  promittit,  solent  alii  It  is  customary  that  other  persons,

obligari,  qui  fidejussores  appellan-  termed  Jldejussores,  should  bind  them-
tur ;  quos  homines  accipere  solent  selves  for  the  promissor,  creditors
dum  curant  ut  diligentius  sibi  cau-  generally  requiring  that  they  should
tum  sit.  do  so  in  order  that  the  security  may

be  greater.

Gal  iii.  115.  117.

We  have    already   noticed  in  Title  16  the  cases  of  persons
who  joined  in  making  the   same    stipulation   or  who  joined   in

348  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XX.

making  the  same  promise.  We  now  come  to  the  cases  of  persons
who  come  in  as  accessories  to  the  creditor  or  debtor.  Many  of
the  rules  of  law  applying  to  the  corei  stlpulandi  or  promittendi
applied  to  these  accessories  ;  especially  those  rules  applied  so  that
if  payment  was  made  to  the  accessory  of  the  creditor  the  debtor
was  free  as  against  the  creditor ;  and  if  the  principal  debtor  or
any  of  his  accessories  was  sued,  no  further  action  could,  until
Justinian  permitted  it,  be  brought  by  the  creditor  against  those
who  were  not  sued,  the  litis  contestatio  operating  as  an  extinction
of  the  debt.

Besides  the  principal  parties  to  a  stipulation,  the  stipulator  and
the  promissor,  there  might  be  accessory  parties,  called  respectively
adstipulatores  and  adpromissores.  The  adstipulator  either  received
the  same  promise  as  his  principal  did,  and  could,  therefore,  have
the  same  actions,  and  equally  receive  or  exact  payment ;  or  he
only  stipulated  for  a  part  of  that  for  which  the  principal  stipu-
lated, and  then  his  rights  were  co-extensive  with  the  amount  of
his  own  stipulation.  In  the  early  law,  the  chief  use  of  an  adsti-
pulator was,  probably,  to  supply  the  place  of  a  procurator  at  a
time  when  the  law  refused  to  allow  stipulations  to  be  made  by
procuration.  A  might  make  a  stipulation,  and  know  that  at  the
time  when  payment  would  be  due  he  would  be  abroad.  He,
therefore,  joined  B  in  the  stipulation,  who  could  receive  payment
or  bring  an  action  in  his  place.

Before  the  time  of  Justinian  no  one  could  stipulate  validly  for
a  thing  after  his  own  death  (see  Tit.  19.  13);  and,  therefore,
those  who  wished  to  make  such  a  stipulation  joined  an  a^.^^i/?z«/«fo?'
with  them,  and  this  adstipulator  could  bring  an  action,  or  receive
payment,  after  the  death  of  the  stipulator.  As,  in  the  days  of
Gains,  all  contracts  could  be  made  by  procuration,  it  appears
from  bis  account  of  the  adstipulator ^  which  is  the  only  one  we
have,  that  the  only  use  of  the  adstipulator  was  to  make  this
^t\^u\^i\on  post  mortem  suam  valid.      (Gai.  iii.  117.)

The  adstipulator  could  not  transmit  his  right  of  action  even
to  his  heirs.  His  rights  were  purely  personal,  because  he  was
selected  by  the  stipulator,  to  whom  he  stood  in  the  relation  of  a
mandatary,  from  motives  of  personal  confidence.     (Gai.  iii.  114.)

The  adpromissores  were  accessory  to  the  promise,  in  order  to
give  the  stipulator  greater  security.  They  were  guarantees  for
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  (Gai.  iii.  116),  and  these  guarantees
were  termed  sponsores  when  Koman  citizens,  as  they  pledged
themselves  by  the  word  spondeo,  a  word  which  citizens  alone  could
utter,  SLudJidepromissores  when  peregriiii  (GrAi.  iii.  120),  because,
in  binding  themselves,  they  used  the  expression  ^of^  mea  promitto.

The  sponsores  and  fidepromissores  held  a  position,  in  many
respects,  the  exact  converse  of  the  adstipulator.  They  made  the
same  promise  as  their  principal,  or  one  not  so  extensive,  for  they
might  only  choose  to  become  guarantees  to  a  certain  extent ;  they
could  not  bind  themselves  for  more  than  their  principal  was  bound

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XX.  '  349

for.  They  were  often  employed  to  remove  any  objections  that
might  be  made  to  the  capacity  of  their  promissor,  as,  for  instance,
that  he  was  impuhes  and  contracting  without  the  consent  of  his
tutor.  Their  heirs  were  not  bound  (Gai.  iii.  120),  and  they
might  recover  from  their  principal  by  an  actio  mandati  what  they
had  advanced  for  him.     (Gai.  iii.  127.)

By  the  lex  Furia  (circ.  95  B.C.)  their  obligation  was  only
binding  for  two  years  from  the  time  when  it  could  have  been
enforced  against  them,  and  the  amount  of  the  liability  of  all  was
divided  equally  among  all  living  at  the  time  when  the  guarantee
could  be  enforced.

These  restrictions,  the  limitation  of  the  intervention  of  spon-
sores  Sind  Jidepromissores  to  verbal  contracts,  and  their  obligation
dying  with  them,  made  it  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  more
unfettered  mode  of  becoming  surety  for  a  party  to  a  contract.
This  was  supplied  by  the  introduction  of  the  Jidejussores,  who
could  bind  themselves  in  every  kind  of  obligation,  and  who  trans-
mitted their  obligation  to  their  heirs.  In  the  time  of  Justinian,
sponsores  and  Jidepromissores  had  been  long  obsolete,  and  as,
under  his  legislation,  stipulations  post  mortem  suam  were  allowed,
there  was  no  longer  any  occasion  for  the  intervention  of  adstipv-
latores,  and,  consequently,  none  of  the  additional  parties  to  a  verbal
contract,  exceipt  Jidejussores,  are  mentioned  in  the  Institutes.

Gains  mentions  other  laws  besides  the  lex  Furia,  bearing  on
the  subject  of  the  additional  parties  to  a  contract;  and  as  the  effect
of  some   of  their  provisions  is  traceable  in  what  we  read  with
respect  to  Jidejussores  in  this  Title,  it  may  be  as  well  to  notice
them  here.      (1.)  The   lex  Apuleia  (102   B.C.)  established  a  kind
of  partnership  (^quandam  societatem)  between  the  different  spon-
sores or  Jidepromis sores  ;  any  one  of  them  who  had  paid  the  whole
debt  could  recover  from  the  others  what  he  had  paid  in  excess  of
his  own  share  by  an  action  pro  socio.     (Gai.  iii.  122.)     (2.)  A
law,  the  name  of  which  is  illegible  in  the  manuscript  of  Gains,
required  that  the  creditor  should  give  notice  beforehand,  for  what
amount  he  was  going  to  exact  security,  and  how  many  sponsores
ov  Jidepromissores  there  were  to  be.     (3.)  The  provisions  of  the
lex  Furia  (95  B.C.)  have  been  noticed  above.     (4.)  A  lex  Cornelia
(81  B.C.),  referring  not  only  to  sponsores  2indi  Jidepromissores,  but
to  all  sureties,  and  therefore  to  Jidejussores  (which,  perhaps,  shows
the  date  of  the  first  introduction  o^ Jidejussores) ,  provided  that  no
one  should  bind  himself  for  the  same  debtor,  to  the  same  creditor,
in  the  same  year  [idem  pro  eodem,  apud  eundem,  eodem  anno),  for
more  than  20,000  sesterces.     (Gai.  iii.  124,  125.)     (5.)  Lastly,  a
lex  Puhlilia  gave  sponsores  an  advantage  over  any  other  sureties,
for  they  were  allowed,  unless  reimbursed  in  six  months,  to  recover
from  their  principal  what  they  had  paid  by  a  special  action  {actio
depensi),  and,  if  he  denied  his  liability,  they  recovered  double,
or  they  might,  without  judgment,  proceed  to  personal  execution,
manus  injectio,  against  him.     (Gai.  iii.  127.)

350  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XX.

Inter cedere  was  the  proper  term  for  becoming  bound  for  the
debt  of  another ;  satisdare  for  the  giving  surety  for  the  obhgation
of  the  principal ;  satisaccipere  for  the  receiving  it.

Suretyship  might  be  created,  not  only  in  the  modes  above
mentioned,  but  by  the  surety  offering  himself  as  mandator  pecunics
credendcB,  i.  e.  bidding  the  creditor  to  lend  to  the  debtor,  or  by  a
pactum  constitutes  pecunice,  an  undertaking  to  pay  an  ascertained
debt,  and  in  this  case  the  debt  of  another  person.     (Bk.  iv.  6.  9.)

The  senatus-considtum  Velleianum  (D.  xvi.  1.  2.  1),  46  A.D.,
forbad  women  ever  to  bind  themselves  for  another  person.

1.  In  omnibus  autem  obligationi-  1.  Fldejussores  may  be  added  in
bus  assiimi  possunt,  id  est,  sive  re,  every  kind  of  obligation,  i.e.  whether
sive  verbis,  sive  Uteris,  sive  con-  the  obligation  is  contracted  by  the
sensu  contractse  fuerint ;  at  ne  illud  delivery  of  the  thing,  by  words,  by
quidem  interest  utrum  civilis  an  writing,  or  by  the  consent  of  the
naturalis  sit  obligatio  cui  adjiciatur  parties.  Nor  is  it  material  whether
fidejussor,  adeo  quidem  ut  pro  servo  the  obligation  to  which  the  fidejussor
quoque  obligetur,  sive  extraneus  sit  is  made  an  additional  party,  is  civil
qui  fidejussorem  a  servo  accipiat,  or  natural ;  so  much  so,  that  a  man
sive  ipse  dominus  in  id  quod  sibi  may  bind  himself  as  a  fidejussor  for
naturaliter  debetur.  a  slave,  either  to  a  stranger  or  to  the

master  of  the  slave,  when  the  thing
due  to  him  is  due  by  a  natural  obli-
gation.

Gal  iii.  119  ;  D.  xlvi.  1.  8.  5.

In  omni  ohligatione,  including  obligations  arising  out  of  delicts.
This  was  the  principal  advantage  gained  by  the  introduction  of
fldejussores.

2.  Fidejussor  non  tantum  ipse  2.  A  fidejussor  not  only  binds  him-
obligatur,  sed  etiam  heredem  obli-     self,  but  also  his  heir.

gatum  relinquit.

D.  xlvi.  1.  4.  1.

This  was  the  second  chief  point  of  difference  hetween  fldejus-
sores and  sponsores,  or  fidepromissores.  There  was  no  limit  to
the  time  during  which  fldejussores  remained  bound,  such  as  the
lex  Furia  had  laid  down  for  the  benefit  of  sponsores  audflde-
promissores,

3.  Fidejussor  et  prsecedere  obli-  S.  A  fidejussor  may  he  added  eithev
gationem  et  sequi  potest.                        before  or  after  an  obligation  is  entered

into.

D.  xlvi.  1.  6,  pr.  and  2.

Probably  the  formality  of  verbal  contracts  exacted  that  the
words  of  the  principal  should  precede  those  of  the  accessory.

4.  Si  plures  sint  fldejussores,  4.  Where  there  are  several  fide-
quotquot  erunt  numero,  singuli  in  jnssores,  whatever  is  their  number,
solidum  tenentur  :  itaque  liberum  each  is  bound  for  the  whole  debt,  and
est   creditori,  a  quo  velit  solidum  the  creditor  may  demand  the  whole

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XX.  351

petere.  Sed  ex  epistola  divi  Hadri-  from  any  of  them  he  pleases.  But,
aiii  compellitur  creditor  a  singulis,  by  a  rescript  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian,
qui  modo  solvendo  sunt  litis  con-  the  creditor  is  forced  to  divide  his
testatee  tempore,  partes  petere  :  demand  between  all  those  Jidejitssores
ideoque,  si  quis  ex  jBdejussoribus  who  are  solvent  at  the  time  of  the
eo  tempore  solvendo  non  sit,  hoc  litis  contestatio,  so  that,  if  any  of  the
ceteros  onerat.  Sed  si  ab  uno  fide-  Jidejussores  is  not  solvent  at  that  time,
jussore  creditor  totum  consecutus  the  rest  have  so  much  additional  bur-
fuerit,  hujus  solius  detrimentum  den.  But,  if  the  creditor  obtains  his
erit,  si  is  pro  quo  fidejussit  solvendo  whole  demand  from  one  of  the  Jide-
non  sit ;  et  sibi  imputare  debet,  cum  jussores,  the  whole  loss  falls  upon  him
potuerit  adjuvari  ex  epistola  divi  alone,  if  the  principal  debtor  cannot
Hadriani,  et  desiderare  ut  pro  parte  pay  ;  for  he  has  no  one  but  himself  to
in  se  detur  actio.  blame,  as  he  might  have  availed  him-

self of  the  rescript  of  the  Emperor
Hadrian,  and  might  have  required
that  no  action  should  be  given  against
him  for  more  than  his  share  of  the
debt.

Gai.  iii.  121 ;  D.  xlvi.  1.  26.

The  provision  of  the  lex  Furia  not  applying  to  Jidejussores^
they  were  bound  for  all  they  had  promissed  ;  and  as  each  promised
for  himself  alone,  the  one  first  sued  had  no  remedy  against  the
other  Jidejussores,  until  the  rescript  of  Hadrian  provided  one,  and
gave  him  what  was  called  the  heneficiuiin  dlvisionis ;  but  under
the  lex  Furia,  the  liability  was  divided  among  the  different  sureties
ipso  jure,  whereas  the  surety  first  sued  was  obliged  expressly  to
claim  the  benefit  given  by  the  rescript  of  Hadrian  {benejlcium
dlvisionis).

There  were  two  other  privileges  or  heneficla  of  which  the
fidejussor  might  avail  himself:  one  was,  that  cedendarum  actlonum,
by  which,  if  the  creditor,  without  suing  the  debtor,  proceeded
against  the  fidejussor,  the  surety,  if  prepared  to  pay  the  whole
debt,  could,  before  paying  the  creditor,  compel  him  to  make  over
to  him  the  actions  which  belonged  to  the  stipulator,  and  thus  the
fidejussor  could  sue  those  bound  with  him,  or  the  principal  debtor

(D.   xlvi.  1.  17),   and   this  was  often  more  advantageous  to  the
fidejussor  than  having  recourse  to  the  rescript  of  Hadrian,  because,

if  the  creditor  had  taken  pledges,  they  were  transferred  to  the  fide-
jussor, if  the  actions  were  ceded  to  him.     If  the  creditor  refused

to  cede  the  actions  and  still  sued  the  surety,  he  could  be  repelled

by  an  exceptlo  doll  mall.     (D.  xlvi.  1.  59.)

There  was  also   a   heneficiuru  ordinis,  or,  as   it  was  otherwise

termed,    excusslonls   or    discussionls,    introduced    by    Justinian

(Nov.  4.  1)  ;  by  this   a   creditor  was   bound   to  sue  the  principal

debtor  first,  and  could  only  sue  the   sureties  for  that  which  he

could  not  recover  from  the  principal.

5.  Fidejussores  ita  obligai     non  5.   Fidejussores  cannot  bind  them-

possunt,    ut     plus     debeant     quam  selves    for   more   than   the   debtor   is

debet  is  pro  quo  obligantur :   nam  bound  for ;    because   their   obligation

eorum    obligatio   accessio   est   prin-  is   accessory  to   the   principal  obliga-

cipalis  obligationis,  nee  plus  in  ac-  tion;   and  the  accessory  cannot  con-

352

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XX.

cessione  potest  esse  quam  in  prin-
cipal! re ;  at  ex  diverso,  ut  minus
debeant,  obligari  possunt,  Itaque
si  reus  decern  aureos  promiserit,
fidejussor  in  quinque  recte  obliga-
tur ;  contra  vero  obligari  non  potest.
Item  si  ille  pure  promiserit,  fide-
jussor sub  conditione  promittere
potest,  contra  vero  non  potest :  non
solum  enim  in  quantitate,  sed  etiam
in  tempore  minus  et  plus  intelligi-
tur;  plus  est  enim  statim  aliquid
dare,  minus  est  post  tempus  dare.

tain  more  than  the  principal.  They
may,  however,  bind  themselves  for
less.  Therefore,  if  the  principal
debtor  promises  ten  aurei,  the  fide-
jussor may  be  bound  for  five,  but  the
fidejussor  cannot  be  bound  for  ten
when  the  principal  debtor  is  bound
only  for  five.  Again,  when  the  prin-
cipal promises  unconditionally,  the
fidejussor  may  promise  conditionally,
but  not  vice  versa.  For  the  terms
more  and  less  are  used  not  only  with
respect  to  quantity,  but  also  with  re-
spect to  time  ;  it  is  more  to  give  a
thing  instantly,  it  is  less  to  give  it
after  a  time.

Gai.  iii.  113.  126.

6.  Si  quid  autem  fidejussor  pro
reo  solvent,  ejus  recuperandi  causa
habet  cum  eo  mandati  judicium.

6.  If  a  fidejussor  has  made  payment
for  the  debtor,  he  may  have  an  actio
mandati  against  him  to  recover  what
he  has  paid.

Gai.  iii.  127.

If  he  had  intervened  without  the  knowledge  of  the  prin-
cipal, he  would  have  an  actio  negotiorum  gestorum,  not  mandati
(Tit.  27.  1)  ;  and  he  would  have  no  action  at  all  if  he  had
intervened  in  defiance  of  the  wishes  of  the  principal.  (D.  xvii.
1.  40.)

7.  Greece  fidejussor  ita  accipitur,

sive   fSovXofiai ;   sed   et  si  6tp]i  dix-
erit,  pro  eo  erit  ac  si  dixerit  Xfyw.

7.  A  fidejussor  may  bind  himself
in  Greek,  by  using  the  expression
rrj  tfi?)  tt'kttu  KsXtvo  (I  order  upon
my  faith),  Xh'o  (I  say),  f'!-\uj  or
fiuvXofiai  (I  wish) ;  if  he  uses  the
word  (pT]fxi,  it  will  be  equivalent  to
Xeyw,

D.  xlvi.  1.  8.

The  appropriate  Latin  formula  was, '  Idem  fide  mea  esse  juheo,^
but  this  formula  was,  probably,  never  insisted  on,  as  the  formulae
^  spondeo  '  and  '  idem  fide  mea  promitto  '  were.

8.  In  stipulationibus  fidejusso-
rum  sciendum  est  generaliter  hoc
accipi,  ut  quodcumque  scriptum  sit
quasi  actum,  videatur  etiam  actum  ;
ideoque  constat,  si  quis  scripserit
se  fidejussisse,  videri  omnia  solem-
niter  acta.

8.  It  is  a  general  rule  in  all  stipu-
lations of  fidejussores,  that  whatever
is  stated  in  writing  to  have  been  done,
is  considered  really  to  have  been  done.
If,  therefore,  any  one  states  in  writing
that  he  has  bound  himself  as  a  fide-
jussor,   it    is    presumed   that   all   the

necessary  forms  were  observed.
D.  xlvi.  1.  30.

Cautio  was  the  general  term  for  the  documentary  evidence  of
a  contract.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXI.

353

Tit.  XXI.     DE   LITERARUM   OBLIGATIONE.

Olim  scriptura  fiebat  obligatio
quae  nominibus  fieri  dicebatur,  quse
nomina  hodie  non  sunt  in  usu.
Plane  si  quis  debere  se  scripserit
quod  ei  numeratum  non  est,  de
pecunia  minime  numerata  post  mul-
tum  temporis  exception  em  opponere
non  potest ;  hoc  enim  ssepissime
constitutum  est.  Sic  fit  ut  et  hodie,
dum  queri  non  potest,  scriptura
obligetur,  et  ex  ea  nascitur  con-
dictio,  cessante  scilicet  verborum
obligatione.  Multum  autem  tem-
pus  in  hac  exceptione  antea  quidem
ex  principalibus  constitutionibus
usque  ad  quinquennium  procede-
bat.  Sed  ne  creditores  diutius  pos-
sint  suis  pecuniis  forsitan  defrau-
dari,  per  constitutionem  nostram
tempus  coarctatum  est,  ut  ultra
biennii  metas  hujnsmodi  exceptio
minime  extendatur.

Formerly  there  was  made  by  writ-
ing a  kind  of  obligation,  which  was
said  to  be  made  nominibus.  These
nomina  are  now  no  longer  in  use.  But
if  any  one  states  in  writing  that  he
owes  a  sum  which  has  never  really
been  told  out  to  him,  he  cannot,  after
a  long  time  has  elajDsed,  use  the  ex-
ception, non  numeratsR  pecuniae,  i.e.
that  the  money  has  not  been  told  out.
This  has  been  often  decided  by  im-
perial constitutions ;  and  thus  it  may
be  said,  even  at  the  present  day,  as  he
cannot  relieve  himself  from  payment,
he  is  bound  by  the  writing,  and  that
the  writing  gives  rise  to  a  condiction,
in  the  absence,  that  is,  of  any  verbal
obligation.  The  length  of  time  fixed
as  barring  this  exception,  was,  nnder
imperial  constitutions  antecedent  to
our  time,  not  less  than  five  years.
But,  that  creditors  might  not  be  ex-
posed too  long  to  the  risk  of  being
defrauded  of  their  money,  we  have
shortened  the  time  by  our  constitu-
tion, and  this  exception  cannot  now
be  used  beyond  the  space  of  two  years.

Gai.  in.  128-130.  133,  134;  C.  iv.  30.  14.

A  contract  was  said  to  be  formed  Uteris  when  it  originated  in
a  certain  entry  or  statement  of  it  being  made  in  the  books  of  the
creditor  with  the  consent  of  the  debtor.  Regularity  in  keeping
accounts,  and  in  entering  all  matters  of  business  in  a  private
ledger,  was  considered  one  of  the  first  duties  of  a  Roman  citizen.
Cicero  speaks  of  a  failure  in  this  duty  as  an  almost  insupposable
act  of  negligence  and  dishonesty.  (See  pro  Roscio,  3.  1  and  3.)
Events,  as  they  occurred,  were  jotted  down  in  rough  memoran-
dums called  adversaria,  and  these  were  transferred  at  least  once
a  month  to  the  ledger  {codex  or  tabulce).  It  was  only  this  ledger
which  had  any  legal  importance.  If  any  one  put  down  in  his
ledger  that  he  had  advanced  such  a  sum  of  money  to  another
{expensum  ferre\  this  entry  {expensilatio)  was  an  admissible  proof
of  the  fact.  If  the  debtor  also  had  made  a  corresponding  entry
in  his  ledger  {acceptum  referre),  the  tallying  of  the  two  together
made  what  was  called  an  obligatio  Uteris.  These  two  entries  had,
in  fact,  exactly  the  same  effect  as  if  the  two  parties  had  entered
into  a  stipulation.  But  this  was  not  all ;  the  creditor  was  not  to
be  placed  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  his  debtor,  whose  wilful  or
accidental  negligence  preventing  a  proper  entry,  might  make  the

obligation  fail.

The  real  source  of  the  obligation  was  taken  to

A  A

354  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXI.

be  the  consent  of  the  debtor  to  the  entry  made  by  the  creditor.
If  the  debtor  made  a  corresponding  entry  in  his  ledger,  this  was
a  conclusive  proof  that  he  had  consented  to  the  creditor's  entry ;
but  if  he  did  not,  then  the  creditor  might  still  prove,  in  any  way
that  he  could,  that  he  had  really  made  his  entry  mth  the  debtor's
consent.  Of  course,  if  he  had  really  paid  the  money  over,  this,
if  proved,  would  show  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  debtor  had  con-
sented.

The  foundation  of  this  contract  Uteris  being  the  payment  of
a  sum  certain  by  the  creditor,  the  obligation  was  always  for  a
sum  or  certain  thing,  and  was  therefore  enforced  by  condictio  certl,
more  usually  termed  simply  condictio.

As  the  creditor  put  down  the  name  of  his  debtor,  the  word
^  nomen '  came  to  signify  a  debt :  and  Gains  speaks  of  '  nomina
transcriptia.''  He  says  transcriptio  took  place  {\)  are  in  personam,
as  w^hen  something  being  already  owed,  as,  for  instance,  under  a
contract  of  sale,  or  of  letting  to  hire,  the  debtor  assented  to  the
creditor  making  an  entry  of  the  debt  (Gai.  iii.  129):  this  o])e-
rated  as  a  novatio  (see  Introd.  sec.  89)  of  the  old  debt,  and  the
creditor  could  now  employ  a  condictio  to  enforce  his  claim;  (2)
the  transcriptio  took  place  a.  persona  in  personam,  viz.  when  one
man  took  on  himself  the  debt  of  another.  ^Gai.  iii.  130.)  In
both  cases  the  effect  was  that  the  debtor  recognised  that  a  ficti-
tious loan  had  been  made  to  him.  He  assented  to  its  beino;  re-
corded  in  the  codex  that  he  had  received  in  account  what  he
owed  on  the  sale,  or  what  the  third  person,  whose  debt  he  was
taking  over,  had  received.

These  contracts  were  peculiar  to  Roman  citizens.  Peregrini
had,  as  a  substitute,  syngraphcE,  sismed  by  both  parties,  or  chirogra-
pka,  signed  only  by  the  debtor.  These  syngraphcB  and  chirographa
were  not  mere  proofs  of  a  contract,  but  were  instruments  on
which  an  action  could  be  brought,  and  the  making  of  which
operated  as  a  novation  of  an  existing  debt.

The  w^ord  most  usually  employed  for  a  mere  memorandum
intended  to  furnish  a  proof,  and  not  to  give  a  right  of  action,  was
cautio.  In  the  time  of  Justinian  there  had  ceased  to  be  any
real  difference  between  chirographa  and  cautiones.  Any  w^riting
stating  that  a  sum  was  due  sufficed  as  the  ground  of  an  action.

In  every  period  of  the  law,  if  there  was  a  formal  verbal  con-
tract, the  written  contract  was  thought  subsidiary,  and  was
merged  in  the  stipulation,  as  the  text  says,  nascitur  condictio,
cessante  scilicet  verborurn  ohligatione.

If  the  debtor  had  given  what  before  Justinian  w^as  a  mere
memorandum,  a  ^  cautio,^  and  then  denied  his  liability,  he  had  to
prove  that,  in  spite  of  the  cantio,  he  was  not  bound.  The  burden
of  proof  was  against  him  ;  but  if  a  contract  formed  Uteris  had
been  made,  the  civil  law  treated  it  exactly  as  it  did  a  stipulation.
The  contract  was  conclusive  evidence  of  the  liability.  Fairly  or
unfairly,  the  debtor  must  abide  by  this  contract.     The  praetor.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXII.

355

however,  when  the  debtor  had  not  really  received  the  money,
permitted  him  to  repel  the  action  of  the  creditor  by  an  exception
called  the  '  exceptio  non  numerates  pecumce,''  by  which  the  debtor
insisted  that  the  money  which  formed  the  consideration  of  the
obligation  had  never  been  told  or  counted  out  to  him ;  and  here
the  burden  of  proof  was  considered  to  fall  on  the  creditor.  It
was  for  him  to  prove  that  he  had  paid  the  money,  not  for  the
debtor  to  prove  tliat  he  had  not.  The  obligation  Avas  so  often
entered  into  before  the  money  was  really  paid,  that  the  law,  to
prevent  fraud,  insisted  on  the  creditors  proving  the  payment  if
it  were  denied  ;  but  after  a  certain  number  of  years,  originally
five,  and  reduced  by  Justinian  to  two,  the  debtor  was  bound  by  the
writing  conclusively.  During  these  five  or  two  years,  however,
the  debtor  who  had  not  really  received  the  money  need  not
wait  to  be  sued  ;  he  might  protest  in  a  public  act  against  any
writing  by  which  he  admitted  a  debt,  or  bring  an  action  against
the  creditor  to  compel  him  to  give  it  up  (C.  iv.  30.  7;;  and  a
constitution  in  the  Code  (iv.  30.  14.  4)  permitted  him  to  make
his  exception  perpetual  by  a  formal  announcement  to  the  cre-
ditor of  his  intention  to  do  so,  and  by  his  going  through  certain
forms.

Tit.  XXII.     DE   CONSENSU  OBLIGATIONE.

Obligations  are  formed  by  the  mere
consent  of  the  parties  in  the  contracts
of  sale,  of  letting  to  hire,  of  partner-
ship, and  of  mandate.  An  obligation
is,  in  these  cases,  said  to  be  made  by
the  mere  consent  of  the  parties,  be-
cause there  is  no  necessity  for  any
writing,  nor  even  for  the  presence  of
the  parties :  nor  is  it  requisite  that
anything  should  be  given  to  make  the
contract  binding,  but  the  mere  consent
of  those  between  whom  the  transaction
is  carried  on  suffices.  Thus  these  con-
tracts may  be  entered  into  by  tliose
who  are  at  a  distance  from  each  other
by  means  of  letters,  for  instance,  or  of
messengers.  In  these  contracts  each
party  is  bound  to  the  other  to  renrl^r
him  all  that  equity  demands,  while  in
verbal  obligations  one  party  stipulates
and  the  other  promises.

Gai.  iii.  135.  137.

AYe  now  pass  to  contracts  which  belong  to  the  jus  cjentivrn,
which  have  nothing  of  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the  old  civil
law  of  Rome,  and  which  are  perfected  by  the  simple  consent  (if
the  parties.  As  is  remarked  in  the  concludlrg  words  of  the  text,
these  contracts  by  simple  consent,  unlike   the  contracts  of  wljic!i

A   A   2

Consensu  fiunt  obligationes  in
emptionibus  venditionibus,  locatio-
nibus  conductionibus,  societatibus,
mandatis.  Ideo  autem  istis  modis
consensu  dicitur  obligatio  contrahi,
quia  neque  scriptura  neque  pr?esen-
tia  omnimodo  opus  est,  ac  nee  dari
quidquam  necesse  est  ut  substan-
tiam  capiat  obligatio  ;  sed  sufficit
eos  qui  negotia  gerunt  consentire  :
unde  inter  absentes  quoque  talia
negotia  contrahuntur,  veluti  per
epistolara  vel  per  nuntium.  Item
in  his  contractibus  alter  alteri  obli-
gatiir  in  id  quod  alterum  alteri  ex
bono  et  pequo  prsestare  oportet,  cum
alioquin  in  verborum  obligationibus
alius  stipuletur,  alius  promittat.

356

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXIII.

we  have  hitherto  spoken,  are  bilateral ;  there  is  something  which
binds  both  parties  ;  whereas  the  older  and  peculiarly  Roman  con-
tracts were  only  unilateral.  In  a  stipulation,  for  instance,  it  was
only  the  promissor  that  was  bound.  Commodatum,  deposltum,  and
pignus  were  only  bilateral  in  the  sense  that  they  gave  rise  to  actiones
contraricE  under  certain  circumstances,  so  that  then  both  parties
were  bound  by  them.  These  contracts '  consensu  '  were  not  enforced
by  actions  stricti  juris,  such  as  were  proper  to  the  peculiarly
Koman  contracts  of  mutuum,  stipulation,  and  contracts  made  Uteris,
but  by  actions  '  bonce  fidei,^  i.e.  praetorian  actions,  in  w^hich  equi-
table principles  were  permitted  to  govern  the  decision.  (See
Introd.  sec.  106.)

Tit.  XXIII.    DE  EMPTIONE  ET   VENDITIONE.

Emptio  et  venditio  contrahitur
simul  atque  de  pretio  convenerit,
quamvis  nondum  pretium  numera-
tum  sit,  ac  ne  arra  qiiidem  data
fuerit  :  nam  quod  arrse  nomine
datur,  argument  um  est  emptionis
et  venditionis  contractse.  Sed  h^ec
quidem  de  emptionibus  et  vendi-
tionibus  quae  sine  scriptura  consis-
tunt,  obtinere  oportet ;  nam  nihil
a  nobis  in  hujusmodi  venditionibus
innovatum  est.  In  iis  autem  quae
scriptura  conficiuntur,  non  aliter
perfectam  esse  venditionem  et  emp-
tionem  constituimus,  nisi  et  instru-
menta  emptionis  fuerint  conscripta,
vel  manu  propria  contralientium,
vel  ab  alio  quidem  scripta  a  con-
tralientibus  autem  subscripta,  et  si
per  tabelliones  fiant,  nisi  et  com-
pletiones  acceperint,  et  fuerint  par-
tibus  absoluta  :  donee  enim  aliquid
deest  ex  Ms,  et  poenitentise  locus
est,  et  potest  emptor  vel  venditor
sine  poena  recedere  ab  emptione.
Ita  tamen  impune  eis  recedere  con-
cedimus,  nisi  jam  arrarum  nomine
aliquid  fuerit  datum  :  hoc  etenim
subsecuto,  sive  in  scriptis  sive  sine
scriptis  venditio  celebrata  est,  is
qui  recusat  adimplere  contractum,
si  quidem  est  emptor,  perdit  quod
dedit ;  si  vero  venditor,  duplum
restituere  compellitur,  licet  super
arris  nihil  expressum  est.

Gal  iii.  139 ;  C.  iv.  21.  17.

The  contract  of  sale  belonging  to  the  y?/5  gentium  was  attended
with  none  of  those  material  symbols  which  characterised  the  forma-
tion of  contracts  under  the  civil  law.     Directly  one  person  agreed

The  contract  of  sale  is  formed  as
soon  as  the  price  is  agreed  upon,
although  it  has  not  yet  been  paid,
nor  even  an  earnest  given  ;  for  what
is  given  as  an  earnest  only  serves  as
proof  that  the  contract  has  been  made.
This  must  be  understood  of  sales  made
without  writing  ;  for  with  regard  to
these  we  have  made  no  alteration  in
the  law.  But,  where  there  is  a  writ-
ten contract,  we  have  enacted  that  a
sale  is  not  to  be  considered  completed
unless  an  instrument  of  sale  has  been
drawn  up,  being  either  written  by  the
contracting  parties,  or  at  least  signed
by  them,  if  written  by  others ;  or
if  drawn  up  by  a  tabellio,  it  must
be  formally  complete  and  finished
throughout ;  for  as  long  as  anything
is  wanting,  there  is  room  to  retract,
and  either  the  buyer  or  seller  may
retract  without  suffering  loss  :  that
is,  if  no  earnest  has  been  given.  If
earnest  has  been  given,  then,  whether
the  contract  was  written  or  unwritten,
the  purchaser,  if  he  refuses  to  fulfil  it,
loses  what  he  has  given  as  earnest,
and  the  seller,  if  he  refuses,  has  to  re-
store doable  ;  although  no  agreement
on  the  subject  of  the  earnest  was
expressly  made.

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXIII.  357

to  sell  a  particular  thing,  and  another  to  buy  it,  for  a  fixed  sum
of  money,  the  contract  was  complete  ;  no  thing  need  be  delivered,
no  money  paid,  in  order  that  an  obligation  should  arise.  On  the
mutual  consent  being  given,  the  seller  was  bound  to  deliver,  the
buyer  to  pay  the  price.  The  change  which  Justinian  here  intro-
duced is  that,  when,  in  giving  this  mutual  consent,  they  agree
that  the  terms  of  the  contract  shall  be  reduced  to  writing,  they
shall  be  considered  not  to  have  consented  to  the  contract  until  all
the  formalities  have  been  gone  through.

The  arr(B  were  either  signs  of  a  bargain  having  been  struck,
as,  for  instance,  when  the  buyer  deposited  his  ring  with  the  seller
(D.  xix.  1.  11.  6),  or  consisted  of  an  advance  of  a  portion  of  the
purchase-money.  They  were  also  intended  as  a  proof  that  the
purchase  had  been  made.  Justinian  gave  these  deposits  a  new
character  by  making  them  the  measures  of  a  forfeit  in  case  either
party  wdshed  to  recede  from  his  bargain,  it  being  open  to  either
party  to  retract  if  he  chose  to  incur  this  forfeit.  This  power  of
retracting  by  forfeiture  of  the  deposit,  or  double  its  value,  was  a
great  change  in  the  law  ;  and  when  Justinian  says  ^V^  hiijusnwdi
venditionihus  nihil  innovatum  est,  he  must  be  understood  only  to
be  referring  to  unwritten  contracts  of  sale,  in  which  there  w^as  no
deposit  made  as  earnest.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  text  that  this
power  of  retraction  was  given  whether  the  contract  was  made
with  writing  or  without.

Besides  a  buyer  and  a  seller,  there  must,  in  a  contract  of  sale,
be  a  fixed  price  and  a  particular  thing  sold.  The  jurists  are
very  minute  in  their  distinctions  of  the  nature  of  the  thing  sold.
There  is  a  distinction  with  regard  to  things  future  and  uncertain
forming  the  object  of  a  sale,  which  is  worth  mentioning.  Either
a  proportionate  price  may  be  agreed  to  be  paid  on  a  greater  or
lesser  number  of  things  that  may  be  actually  realised,  as  ^  so
much  a  head  for  all  the  fish  I  catch  to-day,'  which  is  termed  rei
speratce  emptio ;  or  a  definite  sum  may  be  agreed  on  as  the  price
of  the  possibility  of  any  number  of  things,  more  or  less,  being
realised,  as  '  so  much  for  the  chance  of  all  the  fish  I  catch  to-day;'
and  this  was  termed  spei  emptio.     (D.  xviii.  1.  8.  1.)

1.  Pretium  autem  constitui  opor-  1.    It    is    necessary   that    a    price

tet,  nam  nulla  emptio  sine  pretio  esse  should  be  agreed  upon,  for  there  can

potest ;   sed   et   certum  esse  debet,  be  no  sale  without  a  price.     And  the

Alioquin  si  inter  aliquos  ita  conve-  price  must  be  fixed  and  certain.     If

nerit,  ut  quanti  Titius  rem  sestima-  the  parties  agree  that  the  thing  shall

verit,  tanti  sit  empta,  inter  veteres  be  sold  at  the  sum   at  which  Titius

satis   abundeque    hoc    dubitabatur,  shall  value  it,  it  was  a  question  much

sive  constat  venditio  sive  non.     Sed  debated  among  the  ancients,  whether

nostra  decisio  ita  hoc  constituit,  ut  in  such  a  case  there  is  a  sale  or  not.

quoties   sic   composita   sit    venditio  We  have  decided,  that  when  a  sale  is

quanti    ille    festima verit,    sub    hac  made  for  a  price  to  be  fixed  by  a  third

conditione    staret    contractus,  ut  si  person,  the  contract  shall  be  binding

quidem  ipse  qui  nominatus  est  pre-  under  this  condition — that  if  this  third

tium    definierit,    omnimodo    secun-  person  does  fix  a  price,  the  price  to  be

dum  ejus  sestimationem  et  pretium  paid  shall  be  determined  by  that  which

358

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIII.

persolvatur  et  res  tradatur,  ut  vendi-
tio  ad  effectiim  perducatur  emptore
quidem  ex  empto  actione,  venditore
ex  vendito  agente.  Sin  autem  ille
qui  iiominatus  est  vel  noluerit  vel
non  potuerit  pretium  deiinire,  tunc
pro  nihilo  esse  venditionem,  quasi
nullo  pretio  statute.  Quod  jus,  cum
in  venditionibus  nobis  placuit,  non
est  absurdum  et  in  locationibus  et
conductionibus  trahere.

he  fixes,  and  that  according  to  his  de-
cision the  thing  shall  be  delivered  and
the  sale  perfected.  But  if  he  will  not
or  cannot  fix  a  price,  the  sale  is  then
void,  as  being  made  without  any  price
being  fixed  on.  This  decision,  which
we  have  adopted  with  respect  to  sales,
may  reasonably  be  made  to  apply  to
contracts  of  lettins:  to  hire.

Gai.  iii.  140 ;  C.  iv.  38.  15.

2.  Item  pretium  in  numerata
pecunia  consistere  debet  ;  nam  in
ceteris  rebus  an  pretium  esse  possit,
veluti  an  homo  aut  fundus  aut  toga
alterius  rei  pretium  esse  possit,  valde
qu?erebatur.  Sabinus  et  Cassius
etiam  in  alia  re  putant  posse  pre-
tium consistere  :  unde  illud  est  quod
vulgo  dicebatur,  permutatione  re-
rum  emptionem  et  venditionem  con-
trahi,  eamque  speciem  emptionis  et
/enditionis  vetustissimam  esse  ;  ar-
gumentoque  utebantur  Grseco  poeta
Homero,  qui  aliqua  parte  exercitum
Achivorum  vinum  sibi  comparasse
ait,  permutatis  quibusdam  rebus,  his
verbis  : —

"Evc^iv       ci/j'      oii/iC,opTO      /ca  jOj/KO/i  6  WIT  fc,-

'Axaioi,
"AWoi  jikv  ;(«X/cfpi,    aWot    d'   a'iOojvi  ai-

"AWol    de    pipolc,   aWoi   S'  avrolci  j3v-

"AXXoi  ^'  avcpmrdlinai.

Diversse  schol?e  auctores  contra
sentiebant,  aliudque  esse  existima-
bant  permutationem  rerum,  aliud
emptionem  et  venditionem  :  alio-
quin  non  posse  rem  expediri  permu-
tatis rebus,  quae  videatur  res  venisse
et  qu?e  pretii  nomine  data  esse;  nam
utramque  videri  et  venisse  et  pretii
nomine  datam  esse,  rationem  non
pati.  Sed  Proculi  sententia  dicentis,
permutationem  propriam  esse  spe-
ciem contractus  a  vendition  e  separa-
tam,  merito  pr{3evaluit,  cum  et  ipsa
aliis  Homericis  versibus  adjuvatur,
et  validioribus  rationibus  argumen-
tatur.  Quod  et  anteriores  divi
principes  admiserunt,  et  in  nostris
Digestis  latius  significatur.

2.  The  price  should  consist  in  a
sum  of  money.  It  has  been  much
doubted  whether  it  can  consist  in
anything  else,  as  in  a  slave,  a  piece
of  land,  or  a  toga.  Sabinus  and  Cas-
sius thought  that  it  could.  And  it  is
thus  that  it  is  commonly  said  that
exchange  is  a  sale,  and  that  this  form
of  sale  is  the  most  ancient.  The  tes-
timony of  Homer  Avas  quoted,  who
says  that  part  of  the  army  of  the
Greeks  procured  wine  by  an  exchange
of  certain  things.  The  passage  is
this  : —

'  The  long-haired  Achseans  pro-
cured wine,  some  by  giving  copper,
others  by  giving  shining  steel,  others
by  giving  hides,  others  by  giving
oxen,  others  by  giving  slaves. '

The  authors  of  the  opposite  school
w^ere  of  a  contrary  opinion  :  they
thought  that  exchange  was  one  thing
and  sale  another,  otherwise,  in  an
exchange,  it  would  be  impossible  to
say  which  was  the  thing  sold,  and
which  the  thing  given  as  the  price  ;
for  it  was  contrary  to  reason  to  con-
sider each  thing  as  at  once  sold,  and
given  as  the  price.  The  opinion  of
Proculus,  who  maintained  that  ex-
change is  a  particular  kind  of  contract
distinct  from  sale,  has  deservedly
prevailed,  as  it  is  supported  by  other
lines  from  Homer^  and  by  still  more
weighty  reasons  adopted  by  preceding
emperors  :  it  has  been  fully  treated  of
in  our  Digests.

Gai.  iii.  141;  D.  xviii.  1.  1.  11;  C.  iv.  64.  7.

A  sale  and  an  exchange  differ  so  little  that  it  might  seem

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIII.  359

natural  to  treat  the  promise  to  exchange  as  raising  an  obligation
equally  with  the  promise  to  deliver  a  thing  sold  ;  it  was  indeed  the
opinion  of  the  Sabinians  that  it  did  so ;  but  this  opinion  did  not
prevail,  and  the  law  recognised  no  obligation  as  existing  under
an  agreement  to  exchange  unless  one  party  had  delivered  to  the
other  the  thing  he  had  promised.  Ex  placito  permutationis  nulla
re  secuta,  constat  nemint  actionem  competere.  (C.  iv.  64.  3.)  Thus
the  distinction  between  sale  and  exchange  was  that  in  the  former
the  contract  was  made  consensu,  in  the  other  re :  when  one  party
had  delivered  the  thing,  the  other  was  obliged  to  give  the  other
thing.  Perynutatio  ex  re  tradita  initiuni  ohligationi  prcebet,
(D.  xix.  4.  1.  2.)

In  a  contract  of  sale  the  seller  was  not  bound  to  make  the
buyer  absolute  master  (^dominiis)  of  the  thing  sold,  as  he  would
have  been  in  a  stipulation.  (D.  xviii.  1.  25.  1.)  What  he  was
bound  to  do  was  this:  1st.  He  was  bound  to  deliver  the  thing
\i^e\f  {pr(2stare,  tradere)  (D.  xix.  1.  11.  2),  to  give  free  and  un-
disturbed })ossession  of  it  (possessionem  vacuam  pr(Estare)  (D.  xix.
1.2.  1),  and  to  give  lawful  possession  of  it  {prcBstare  licere  habere^,
(D.  xix.  1.  30.  1.)  2ndly.  He  was  bound,  if  the  buyer  was  disturbed
in  his  possession  by  the  real  owner  (which  was  termed  evictlo\  to
recompense  him  for  what  he  lost.  (D.  xix.  1.  11.  2.)  And  3rdly.
To  secure  the  buyer  against  secret  faults;  if  such  faults  were  disco-
vered, either  compensation  might  be  claimed  by  an  actio  cEstimatoria,
to  a  greater  or  less  amount,  according  as  the  seller  had  or  not  know-
ledge of  the  defect  (D.  xix.  1.  13),  or,  at  the  option  of  the  buyer,
the  contract  might  be  rescinded,  and  the  thing  returned  (which
was  termed  redhibitio — redhibere  est  facere  ut  riirsus  habeat  vendi-
tor quod  liabuerlt).  (D.  xxi.  1.  21.)  In  order  to  fortify  his
position,  the  buyer  could  stipulate  with  the  seller,  and  make  the
seller  promise  that  he  would  give,  not  the  free  possession  only,  but
the  dominium  of  the  thing,  and  that  he  would  pay  the  buyer
double  the  price  if  the  buyer  was  evicted.  The  buyer  would  then
have  an  action  ex  stipulatu  to  enforce  the  undertaking.  Even  if
there  was  no  such  stipulation  actually  made,  yet,  after  it  had
become  usual  to  make  such  stipulations,  custom  was  held  to  have
so  far  imported  the  promise  into  the  contract  of  sale  that  the
buyer,  in  bringing  the  action  appropriate  to  his  contract,  actio  ex
empto,  could  obtain  double  the  price  in  case  of  eviction,  as  this
action  was  bonct  Jidei,  i.e.  the  parties  could  be  placed  in  a  fair
position  towards  each  other,  and  it  Avas  considered  that  to  have
given  the  promise  to  pay  double  the  price  in  case  of  eviction  was
a  duty  of  the  seller.     (D.  xxi.  2.  2.)

The  buyer  was  bound  to  make  the  seller  the  real  owner  of  the
money  paid  as  the  price  (^emptor  nummos  venditor  is  facere  cogitur,
D.  xix.  1.  11.  2),  and  was  also  bound  to  pay  interest  on  the  pur-
chase-money from  the  day  when  he  had  received  the  thing  sold.
(D.  xix.  1.  13.  20.)

The  lines  cited  in  the  text  are  from  II.  7.  472 ;  probably  the

360

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIII.

alii  versus  alluded  to  are  those  describino;  the  exchano;e  between

-  •  DO

Glaucus  and  Diomede  (//.  6.  235.)

3.  Cum  autem  emptio  et  venditio
contracta   sit,    quod    effici    diximus
simul  atque    de   pretio    convenerit,
cum  sine  scriptura  res  agitur,  peri-
culum  rei  venditse  statim  ad  emp-
torem    pertinet,    tametsi    ad  hue    ea
res  emptori  tradita  non  sit.     Itaque
si  homo  mortuus  sit  vel  aliqua  f>arte
corporis  Isesus  fuerit,  aut  sedes  tot?e
vel  aliqua  ex   parte   incendio    con-
sumptse  fnerint,  aut  fundus  vi  ilu-
minis  totus  vel  aliqua  ex  parte  abla-
tus  sit,  sive  etiam  inundatione  aquae
aut  arboribus  turbine  dejectis  longe
minor    aut   deterior    esse    cosperit,
emptoris  damnum  est,    cui  necesse
est,    licet    rem    non   fuerit   nactus,
pretium    solvere.       Quicquid    enim
sine  dolo  et  culpa  venditoris  accidit,
in  eo  venditor  securus  est.     Sed  etsi
post  emptionem  fundo  aliquid  per
alluvionem    accessit,    ad     emptoris
commodum  pertinet  ;  nam  et  com-
modum  ejus  esse  debet  cujus  peri-
culum   est.     Quod  si  fugerit  homo
qui  veniit,  aut  surreptus  fuerit,  ita
ut   neque   dolus   neque    culpa  ven-
ditoris   interveniat,    animadverten-
dum  erit  an  custodiam  ejus  usque
ad  traditionem  venditor  susceperit  :
sane  enim  si  suscepit,  ad  ipsius  peri-
culum  is  casus  pertinet  ;  si  non  sus-
cepit, securus  est.  Idem  et  in  ceteris
animalibus  ceterisque  rebus  intelli-
gimus  :  utique  tamen  vindicationem
rei  et  condictionem  exhibere  debebit
•  emptori,  quia  sane  qui  nondum  rem
emptori  tradidit,  adhuc  ipse  domi-
nus  est.     Idem  est  etiam  de  furti  et
de  damni  injuri^e  actione.

3.  As  soon  as  the  sale  is  contracted,
that  is,  in  the  case  of  a   sale   made
without    writing,     when    the     parties
have   agreed    on    the   price,    all    risk
attaching  to  the  thing  sold  falls  upon
the  purchaser,  although  the  thing  has
not  yet  been  delivered  to  him.    There-
fore, if  the  slave  dies  or  receives  an
injury  in  any  part  of  his  body,  or  a
whole   or   a   portion  of   the  house  is
burnt,  or  a  whole  or  a  portion  of  the
land  is  carried  by  the  force  of  a  flood,
or  is  diminished  or  deteriorated  by  an
inundation,  or  by  a  tempest  making
havoc  with  the    trees,    the  loss   falls
on   the   purchaser,    and   although    he
does  not  receive  the  thing,  he  is  ob-
liged to  pay  the  price,  for  the  seller
does   not   suffer    for   anything   which,
happens  without  any  design  or  fault
of  his.     On  the  other  hand,  if  after
the    sale    the    land    is    increased   by
alluvion,  it  is  the  purchaser  who  re-
ceives the  advantage,  for  he  who  bears
the  risk  of  harm  ought  to  receive  the
benefit   of   all   that   is   advantageous.
If   a   slave  who   has   been   sold   runs
away  or  is  stolen,  without  any  fraud
or  fault  on  the  part  of  the  seller,  we
must  inquire  whether  the  seller  under-
took to  keep  him  safely  until  he  was
delivered  over  ;  if  he  undertook  this,
what  happens  is  at  his  risk  ;  if  he  did
not  undertake  it,  he  is  not  responsible.
The  same  would  hold  in  the  case  of
any  other  animal  or  any  other  thing,
but  the  seller  is  in  any  case  bound  to
make  over  to  the  purchaser  his  right
to  a  real  or  personal  action,  for  the
person  who    has    not    delivered    the
thing  is  still  its  owner ;  and  it  is  the
same   with    regard   to   the    action   of
theft,  and  the  action  damni  injuriae.

D.  xviii.  6-8 ;  D.  xviii.  1.  35.  4.

The  contract  of  sale  was  complete  when  the  price  had  been
fixed,  but  the  thing  sold  did  not  pass  to  the  buyer  thereby.  The
seller  retained  the  proprietorship  (^dominiurn)  until  he  delivered  it
to  the  buyer,  and  the  buyer  received  it,  or  until  the  property  in  it
was  passed  by  the  buyer  having  paid  the  price,  or  given  security
for  it,  or  in  someway  satisfied  the  seller  (^cere  solufo,  vel  Jidejussore
dato,  vel  alias  satisfacto,  D.  xiv.  4.  5.  18).  Until  this  happened,
the  seller  retained  the  thing  in  his  custody,  and  if  it  had,  mean-
while, any  accretion,  or  suffered  any  diminution,  he  was  still  the
dominus  of  the  thing  which  was  increased  or  decreased.  But  his
obligation  bound  him  to  deliver  the  thing  exactly  in  the  state  in

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXIII.  361

which  it  might  happen  to  be  at  the  time  of  delivery ;  and  so  it  made
no  real  difference  to  him  whether  there  was  an  accretion  or  diminu-
tion. If  the  thing  was  lost  by  accident,  the  loss  fell  on  the  buyer
and  not  on  the  seller,  the  dominus  ;  so  res  domino  perit  could  not  be
said  of  him.  But,  whatever  happened  to  the  thing  sold,  the  price
fixed  on  remained  due.  For  the  obligation  of  the  buyer  being  a
distinct  and  independent  obligation,  the  price  could  not  alter,  but
remained  fixed.  The  seller  was,  however,  answerable  for  the  care
with  which  he  preserved  the  thing  while  in  his  custody,  periculum
rei  ad  emptorem  pertinet  dummodo  custodiam  venditor  aut  traditio-
nem  prcestet.  (D.  xlvii.  2.  14,  pr.);  and  he  was  not  only  bound
to  guard  against  gross  and  ordinary  negligence  [dolmn  et  culpam
prcBstare,  D.  xiii.  6.  5.  2),  but  to  preserve  it  more  carefully  even
than  his  own  property,  diligentiayn  prcestet  exactiorem,  quam  in  suis
rebus  adiiiberet.  (D.  xviii.  6.  3.)  He  was  bound  to  exercise  the
care  of  a  bonus  paterfamilias.  In  the  text  the  case  of  a  slave  is
taken,  and  a  bonus  paterfamilias  might  exercise  the  diligence  pro-
per to  him,  and  yet  a  slave  might  run  away.  The  loss  would  fall
on  the  buyer,  unless  the  seller  had  specially  undertaken  that  he
would  keep  him  safely.

The  actio  furti  and  the  actio  damni  injuries  are  noticed  in  Tit.
1  and  4  of  the  Fourth  Book.  If  the  thing  was  stolen  or  injured
by  a  third  person,  withont  the  fault  of  the  seller,  the  buyer  suf-
fered the  loss,  but  the  seller  was  obliged  to  cede  to  the  buyer  the
actions  which  as  dominus  he  had  against  the  thief  or  the  doer  of
the  injury.

4.    Emptio   tarn   sub   conditione  4.  A  sale  may  be  made  conditionally

quam    pure    contrahi    potest :    sub  or  unconditionally ;  conditionally,   as,

conditione,  veluti   si    Stichus   intra  for    example,    '  If    Stichus   suits   you

certum  diem  tibi  placuerit,  erit  tibi  within  a  certain  time,  he  shall  be  pur-

emptus  aureis  tot.  chased  by  you  at  such  a  price.'

Gal  iii.  146.

The  exact  opposite  might  be  contracted  for  :  if  within  a  certain
time  you  find  Stichus  does  not  suit  you,  let  it  be  considered  you
have  not  bought  him.  The  jurists  then  said  that  the  sale  was  apura
emptio,  qucB  sub  conditiojie  resolvitur.  (D.  xli.  4.  2.  5.)  Stichus
is  sold,  but  wdthin  a  certain  time  the  contract  may  be  rescinded.

The  generic  name  for  the  accessory  agreements  which  modified
the  principal  contract  was  pacta.  Some  of  these  pacta  relating  to
the  contract  of  sale  are  treated  of  at  considerable  length  in  the
Digest  (D.  xviii.  2  and  3)  ;  diff'erent  names  being  appropriated
to  those  most  frequently  in  use ;  as,  for  instance,  the  i?i  diem
addictio,  when  the  thing  was  sold,  but  if  the  seller  had  a  better
offer  within  a  certain  time,  the  contract  mioht  be  rescinded  (D.
xvni.  2) ;  and  the  lex  commissoria,  which  was  a  general  ao-ree-
ment  lor  the  rescission  of  the  contract  if  either  party  violated
its  terms,  and  was  especially  used  to  enable  the  seller  to  de-
mand back  the  thing  sold,  if  the  price  was  not  paid  by  a  certain
day.

362  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIV.

We  may  observe  that  the  Code  (iv.  44.  2  and  8)  permits  a
seller,  at  all  times,  to  rescind  a  contract  if  he  has  not  received  half
its  real  value.

5.  Loca  sacra  vel  religiosa,  item  5.  A  sale   is  void  wlien   a   person

publica,  veluti  forum,  basilicam,  frus-  knowingly  purchases  a  sacred  or  re-
tra  quis  sciens  emit.  Quse  tamen  si  ligious  place,  or  a  public  place,  such
pro  profanis  vel  privatis  deceptus  a  as  a  forum  or  basilica.  If,  however,
venditore  omerit,  habebit  actionem  deceived  by  the  vendor,  he  has  sup-
ex  empto  quod  non  habere  ei  liceat,  posed  that  what  he  was  buying  was
ut  consequatur  quod  sua  interest  profane  or  private,  as  he  cannot  have
deceptum  non  esse.  Idem  juris  what  he  purchased,  he  may  bring  an
est,  si  hominem  liberum  pro  servo  action  ex  empto  to  recover  whatever
emerit.  it    wonld    have    been    worth   to   him

not  to  have  been  deceived.  It  is  the
same  if  he  has  purchased  a  free  man,
supposing  him  to  be  a  slave.

D.  xviii.  1.  4.  6;  D.  xviii.  1.  62.  1.

This  paragraph  is  probably  inserted  in  order  to  contrast  the
effects  of  a  contract  of  sale  with  those  of  a  stipulation.  In  the
strict  civil  law,  ignorance  that  a  thing  was  not  a  subject  of  com-
merce, would  not  help  the  person  who  had  stipulated  for  it.  But
in  a  contract  of  sale,  if  the  seller  had,  and  the  buyer  had  not,
known  the  real  character  of  the  thing  he  was  buying,  the  buyer
could  recover  against  the  seller  anything  he  lost  by  entering  into
the  bargain  ;  for  instance,  he  would  not  only  receive  back  the
purchase-money,  but  also  would  be  entitled  to  interest  upon  it
from  the  date  of  its  payment.

The  contract  of  sale  gave  rise  to  two  actions  honcB  Jidei,  the
actio  ex  vendito  or  venditi,  belonging  to  the  seller,  and  the  actio
ex  eynpto  or  empti,  mentioned  in  the  text,  belonging  to  the  buyer.

Tit.  XXIY.     DE    LOCATIONE   ET   CONDUCTIONE.

Locatio  et  conductio  proxima  est  The  contract  of  letting  to  hire  ap-

emptioni    et   venditioni,    iisdemque  proaches  very  nearly  to  that  of  sale,

juris  regulis  consistit  :  nam  ut  emp-  and  is  governed  by  the  same  rules  of

tio  et  venditio  ita  contrahitur  si  de  law.    As  the  contract  of  sale  is  formed

pretio  convenerit,   sic  etiam  locatio  as  soon  as  a  price  is  fixed,  so  a  con-

et  conductio  ita  contrahi  intelligitur  tract  of  letting  to  hire  is  formed  as

si  merces  constituta  sit  ;  et  competit  soon  as  the  amount  to  be  paid  for  the

locatori  quidem  locati  actio,  conduc-  hiring  has  been  agreed  on ;    and  the

tori  vero  conducti.  letter   has   an   action   locati,  and  the

hirer  an  action  conducti.

D.  xix.  2.  2,  and  15,  pr.

The  contract  of  letting  on  hire  (locatio-conductio),  like  that  of
sale,  was  complete  by  the  mere  consent  of  the  parties,  and,  like  it,
produced  only  personal  obligations,  and  not  any  real  rights.  The
hirer  was,  however,  not  even  entitled  to  the  possessio  ;  the  latter
still  remained  the  possessor  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  his  duty  not
hemg  prcBstare  rem  licere  habere,  hut  prcEstare  refrui,  uti  licere.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIV.  363

There  were  three  principal  heads  of  this  contract :  1,  locatio-
conductio  rerum,  when  one  person  let  a  thing  and  another  hired
it ;  2,  locatio-conductio  operarum,  when  one  person  let  his  services
and  another  hired  them  ;  3,  locatio-conductio  operis  faciendi,  Avhen
one  person  contracted  that  a  particular  piece  of  work  should  be
done,  and  another  contracted  to  do  it.  If  in  such  a  contract  we
look  at  the  labour,  &c.,  expended  on  the  work,  we  should  naturally
call  the  person  who  did  the  work  the  locator,  as  it  was  he  who  let
out  his  services  for  its  performance  ;  but  the  Roman  jurists  gene-
rally looked  at  the  work  itself  that  was  to  be  done,  and  spoke  of
the  person  who  contracted  for  its  performance,  i.e.  gave  it  out,  as
its  locator,  and  the  person  who  engaged  to  perform  or  execute  it,
i.e.  took  it  in,  as  the  conductor.  The  price  of,  or  consideration
for,  the  letting,  was  properly  called  merces,  sometimes  prethtm  (D.
xix.  2.  28.  2),  and,  in  the  case  of  the  letting  of  houses  or  Xnndi,  pensio
or  reditus.  In  particular  contracts,  the  conductor  had  special  names,
as  the  hirer  of  a  house  was  called  inquilinus,  of  a  farm  colonus.

The  duty  of  the  letter  was  to  guarantee  the  hirer  against
eviction,  and  to  reimburse  him  for  any  useful  or  necessary  ex-
penses he  had  incurred  ;  the  duty  of  the  hirer  was  to  take  care  as
a  bonus  paterfamilias  of  the  thing  hired  (see  paragr.  5),  to  give  up
the  thing  hired  at  the  end  of  the  term  for  which  it  was  let,  and
to  pay  the  price  agreed  on.

The  -text  gives  us  the  names  of  the  personal  actions  which
belonged  to  the  letter  and  the  hirer  respectively,  the  former  hav-
ing the  actio  locati,  the  latter  the  actio  conducti.  But  actions
of  a  very  different  kind  were  sometimes  connected  with  this  con-
tract. In  the  case  of  land  let  to  hire,  certain  instruments  of
farming  and  other  property  of  the  hirer  were  held  as  a  security  for
the  payment  of  the  rent,  and  a  real  action,  termed  the  actio  Ser-
viana,  because  first  introduced  by  the  prastor  Servius,  was  given
to  the  letter  to  enforce  his  riffht  to  these  thinos  in  case  of  non-
payment  of  the  rent ;  this  action  was  gradually  extended  in  its
effects,  and  the  extended  action,  under  the  name  of  actio  quasi-
Serviana,  was  used  to  enforce  the  rights  of  a  creditor  over  any-
thing given  in  pledge.  (See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.  7.)  The  praetor,  too,
gave  an  interdict,  termed  the  interdictum  Salvianum,  by  which  the
letter  got  possession  of  things  pledged  for  the  rent  of  land.  (See
Bk.  iv.  Tit.  15.  3.)

1.  Etquse  supra  diximus,  si  alieno  1.  What  we  have  said  above  of  a

arbitrio  pretium  promissum  fuerit,  sale  in  which  the  price  is  to  be  fixed

eadem  et  de  locatione  et  conductione  by  the  decision  of  a  third  person,  may

dicta  esse  intelligamus,  si  alieno  ar-  be  applied  to  the  contract  of  letting  to

bitrio  merces  permissa  fuerit.     Qua  hire,  if  the  amount  to  be  paid  for  the

de  causa,  si  fuUoni  polienda  curan-  hire  is  left  to  the  decision  of  a  third

dave,  aut  sarcinatori  sarcienda  ves-  person.     Accordingly,  if  any  one  gives

timenta  quis   dederit,  nulla   statim  clothes  to  a  fuller  to  be  cleaned,  or  to

mercede  constituta,  sed  postea  tan-  a  tailor  to  be  mended,  without  fixing

turn  daturus  quantum  inter  eos  con-  the  sum  to  be  paid  for  their  work,  a

venerit,  non  proprie  locatio  et  con-  contract  of  letting  to  hire  cannot  pro-

364

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIV.

ductio  contrahi  intelligitur,  sed  eo  perly  be  said  to  be  made ;  but  the
nomine  actio  prsescriptis  verbis  circumstances  furnish  ground  for  an
datur.  action  prsescriptis  verbis.

Gai.  iii.  143 ;  D.  xix.  2.  25,  pr.

Qua  de  causa,  i.e.  '  the  price  ought  to  be  determined,  and
therefore,'  &c. ;  the  passage  is  taken  rather  unconnectedly  out
of  Gains.

Actio  prcBscriptis  verbis.  (See  note  on  Tit.  13.  pr.)  Or  an
actio  mandati  might  be  brought.     (Tit.  26.  13.)

2.  Prseterea,  sicut  vulgo  qusere-
batur,  an  permutatis  rebus  emptio
et  venditio  contrahitur,  ita  quseri
solebat  de  locatione  et  conduct]  one,
si  forte  rem  aliquam  tibi  utendam
sive  fruendam  quis  dederit,  et  in-
vicem  a  te  aliam  rem  utendam  sive
fruendam  acceperit.  Et  placuit  non
esse  locationem  et  conductionem,
sed  proprium  genus  esse  contractus  :
veluti  si,  cum  unum  bovem  quis
haberet  et  vicinus  ejus  unum,  pla-
cuerit  inter  eos  ut  per  denos  dies
invicem  boves  commodarent  ut  opus
facerent,  et  apud  alterum  bos  periit,
neque  locati  vel  conducti  neque
commodati  competit  actio,  quia  non
fuit  gratuitum  commodatum  ;  verum
praescriptis  verbis  agendum  est.

2.  Moreover,  just  as  the  question
was  often  asked  whether  a  contract  of
sale  was  formed  by  exchange,  a  similar
question  arose  with  respect  to  the  con-
tract of  letting  to  hire,  in  case  any  one
gave  you  a  thing  to  use  or  take  the
fruits  of,  and  in  return  received  from
you  something  else  of  which  he  was  to
have  the  fruits  or  use.  It  has  been
decided  that  this  is  not  a  contract  of
letting  to  hire,  but  a  distinct  kind  of
contract.  For  example,  if  two  neigh-
bours have  each  an  ox,  and  agree  each
to  lend  the  other  his  ox  for  ten  days
to  make  use  of,  and  one  of  the  oxen
dies  while  in  the  care  of  the  person  to
whom  it  does  not  belong,  .there  will
not  be  an  action  locati,  or  conducti,  or
commodati,  since  the  loan  was  not
gratuitous,  but  an  action  prsescriptis
verbis.

Gai.  iii.  144 ;  D.  xix.  5.  17.  3.

3.  Adeo  autem  familiaritatem
aliquam  inter  se  habere  videntur
emptio  et  venditio,  item  locatio  et
conductio,  ut  in  quibusdam  causis
quasri  soleat,  utrum  emptio  et  ven-
ditio contrahatur,  an  locatio  et  con-
ductio :  ut  ecce  de  prsediis  quge  per-
petuo  quibusdam  fruenda  traduntur,
id  est,  ut  quamdiu  pensio  sive  redi-
tus  pro  his  domino  prsestetur,  neque
ipsi  conductori  neque  heredi  ejus,
cuive  conductor  heresve  ejus  id
prsedium  vendiderit  aut  donaverit
aut  dotis  nomine  dederit,  aliove
quoquo  modo  alienaverit,  auferre
liceat,  Sed  talis  contractus  quia
inter  veteres  dubitabatur,  et  a  qui-
busdam locatio,  a  quibusdam  ven-
ditio existimabatur,  lex  Zenoniana
lata  est,  quae  emphyteuseos  contrac-
tus propriam  statuit  naturam,  neque
ad  locationem  neque  ad  vendition  em
inclinantem,  sed  suis  pactionibus  ful-
ciendam.  Et  si  quidem  aliquid  pac-
tum  fuerit,  hoc  ita   obtinere  ac  si

3.  Contracts  of  sale  and  of  letting
to  hire  are  so  nearly  connected,  that
in  some  cases  it  is  questioned  whether
the  contract  is  one  or  the  other.  For
instance,  when  lands  are  delivered
over  to  be  enjoyed  for  ever,  that  is,
that  as  long  as  the  rent  is  paid  for  the
land  to  the  owner,  he  cannot  take
away  the  land  from  the  hirer  or  his
heir,  or  any  one  to  whom  the  hirer  or
his  heir  has  sold,  or  given,  or  made  a
dowry  of  the  land.  As  the  ancients
were  in  doubt  as  to  this  contract,  some
regarding  it  as  a  letting  to  hire,  and
some  as  a  sale,  the  constitution  of
Zeno  was  made,  which  declared  that
the  contract  of  emphyteusis  was  of  a
special  nature,  and  was  not  to  be  con-
founded either  with  letting  to  hire  or
with  sale,  but  rested  upon  its  own
peculiar  agreements  ;  and  that  if  any
special  agreement  was  made,  it  was  to
be  observed  as  if  to  have  such  an
agreement  was  part  of  the  nature  of
the  contract ;  but  if  no  agreement  was

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIV.

365

natura  talis  esset  contractus  :  sin
autem  nihil  de  periculo  rei  fuerit
pactum,  tunc  si  quidem  totius  rei
interitus  accesserit,  ad  dominum
super  hoc  redundare  periculum  ;  sin
particularis,  ad  emphyteuticarium
hujusmodi  damnum  venire.  Quo
jure  utimur.

made  as  to  the  risks  the  thing  might
undergo,  the  risk  of  a  total  loss  should
fall  upon  the  owner,  and  the  detriment
of  a  partial  loss  upon  the  occupier;
and  this  we  still  wish  to  be  considered
the  law.

Gai.  iii.  145 ;  C.  iv.  QQ.  1.

We  have  already  given  an  account  of  emphyteusis  in  the  note
to  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  5.  6.

The  law  would  naturally  contemplate  the  contract  under
which  the  emphyteuta  entered  as  a  locatio-conductio ;  but  the
dominus  seemed  to  have  parted  with  so  much  of  his  interest,  that
it  appeared  doubtful  whether  it  ought  not  rather  to  be  considered
as  a  sale.  Zeno  enacted  that  it  should  be  regarded  as  a  separate
form  of  contract.

4.  Item  quaeritur,  si  cum  aurifice
Titius  convenerit  ut  is  ex  auro  suo
certi  ponderis  certaeque  formse  anu-
los  ei  faceret,  et  acciperet  verbi  gratia
aureos  decern,  utrum  emptio  et  ven-
ditio  contrahi  videatur,  an  locatio  et
conductio  ?  Cassius  ait,  materiae
quidem  emptionem  et  venditionem
contrahi,  operse  autem  locationem
et  conductionem ;  sed  placuit  tan-
tum  emptionem  et  venditionem  con-
trahi. Quod  si  suum  aurum  Titius
dederit  mercede  pro  opera  consti-
tuta,  dubium  non  est  quin  locatio  et
conductio  sit.

4.  It  is  also  questioned  whether,
when  Titius  has  agreed  with  a  gold-
smith to  make  him  rings  of  a  certain
weight  and  pattern,  out  of  gold  be-
longing to  the  goldsmith  himself,  the
goldsmith  to  receive,  for  example,  ten
aurei,  whether  the  contract  is  one  of
sale  or  letting  to  hire.  Cassius  says
that  there  is  a  sale  of  the  material,  and
a  letting  to  hire  of  the  goldsmith's
work;  but  it  has  been  decided  that
there  is  only  a  contract  of  sale.  If
Titius  gives  the  gold,  and  a  sum  is
agreed  on  to  be  paid  for  the  work,
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  contract  is
then  one  of  letting  to  hire.

Gai.  iii.  147.

5.  Conductor  omnia  secundum
legem  conductionis  facere  debet ;  et
si  quid  in  lege  praetermissum  fuerit,
id  ex  bono  et  aequo  debet  prsestare.
Qui  pro  usu  aut  vestimentorum  aut
argenti  aut  jumenti  mercedem  aut
dedit  aut  promisit,  ab  eo  custodia
talis  desideratur,  qualem  diligentis-
simus  paterfamilias  suis  rebus  adhi-
bet :  quam  si  praestiterit,  et  aliquo
casu  rem  amiserit,  de  restituenda  ea
non  tenebitur.

5.  The  hirer  ought  to  do  everything
according  to  the  terms  of  his  hiring,
and  if  anything  has  been  omitted  in
these  terms,  he  ought  to  supply  it
according  to  the  rules  of  equity.  Be
who  has  given  or  promised  a  sum  for
the  hire  of  clothes  or  silver,  or  a  beast
of  burden,  is  required  to  bestow  as
great  care  on  the  safe  custody  of  the
thing  he  hires  as  the  most  careful
father  of  a  family  bestows  on  the
custody  of  his  own  property.  If  he
bestows  such  care,  but  loses  the  thing
through  some  accident,  he  is  not
bound  to  restore  it.

D.  xix.  1.  25.  3.  7.

The  distinction  here  between  the  cases  of  a  sale  and  of  a
letting  on  hire  is  to  be  noticed.  Here  the  risk  of  fortuitous  loss
is  with  the  owner,  i.e.  the  locator,  in  accordance  with  the  general

366  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXV.

rule  ;  but  in  sale  the  risk  of  fortuitous  loss  is  not  with  the  owner,
the  seller,  but  with  the  buyer.

6.  Mortuo  condiictore  intra  tern-  6.  If  the  hirer  dies  during  the  time

pora  conductionis,  heres  ejus  eodem     of  his  hiring,  his  heir  succeeds  to  all
jure  in  conductione  succedit.  the  rights  given  him  by  the  contract.

C.  iv.  65.  10.

And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  locator ;  but  in  a  locatio-con-
ductio  of  personal  services  or  of  a  thing  to  be  done  by  a  special
person,  the  death  of  the  person  who  let  out  his  services  terminated
the  contract.

The  contract,  in  the  case  of  a  locatio-conductio  rei,  was  also
terminated  by  the  sale  of  the  thing  hired.  The  buyer  was  not
considered  bound  by  the  contract.  Emptor i  fundi  non  necesse  est
stare  colormm  cui  prior  dominiis  locavit ;  nisi  ea  lege  emit  (C.  iv.
^5.  9);  but  the  conductor  Qouldi  demand  compensation  from  the
locator.  The  contract  ceasing  if  the  thing  was  sold  serves  clearly
to  distino;uish  the  interest  of  the  conductor  from  a  usufruct.  The
conductor  had  no  real  interest  in  the  thing,  but  only  a  personal
rio'ht  ao:ainst  the  locator^  while  the  usufructuary  had  a  servitude,
i.e.  a  real  rig^ht,  in  the  thins^.  The  whole  of  the  thinor  over  which
the  usufruct  extended  could  not  be  sold,  because  part  of  it,  namely
the  usufruct,  had  already  been  parted  with.

The  contract  was  also  terminated  if  the  rent  was  two  years  in
arrear  (D.  xix.  2.  54.  1);  if  the  conductor  grossly  misused  the
thing  hired  (C  iv.  65.  3)  ;  if  the  locator  had  indispensable  need
o^  ii,  si  propj'iis  usibus  dominus  earn  necessariam  esse  prohaverit
(C.  ib.);  or  if  the  conductor  was  prevented  from  getting  benefit
from  it,  as  by  armed  force.     (D.  xix.  2.  13.  7.)

Tit.  XXV.     DE  SOCIETATE.

Societatem  coire  solemus  aut  to-  A  partnership  is  formed  either  of

torum  bonorum,  quam  Graeci  specia-  the   whole   goods    of   the    contracting

liter  K-nj J") TTioo^^f)' appellant,  aut  unius  parties,  to  which  the  Greeks  give  the

olicujus  negotiationis,  veluti  manci-  special  name  of  Koivo-7rpati>,  or  for  some

piorum    emendorum   vendendorum-  particular  business,  as  the  sale  or  pur-

que,  aut  olei,  vini,  frumenti  emendi  chase  of  slaves,  wine,  oil,  or  wheat,
vendendique.

Gai.  iii.  148.

The  text,  borrowed  from  Gains  (iii.  148),  gives  the  general
division  of  partnerships  into  two  classes  according  as  they  are
universal  or  particular.  In  the  Digest  we  have  a  further
division  by  distinguishing  five  kinds  of  partnership.     (D.   xvii.

2.  5.)

1.  Societas  universorum  honorum/m  which  everything  belong-
ino*  or  accruing  in  any  way  to  each  partner  is  held  in  common.
(D.  xvii.  2.  1.  1.)     Here  the  property  belc^nging  to  each  partner

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXV.

367

at  the  time  when  the  partnership  was  formed  became  the  property
of  all,  without  delivery.      (D.  xvii.  2.  1.  1.)

2.  Societas  miiversorum  quce  ex  qucestu  veniunt,  i.e.  of  all
things  which  are  gained  or  acquired  by  each  partner  through
business  transactions ;  but  not  of  things  belonging  or  accruing  in
other  ways,  such  as  inheritances  or  legacies.

3.  Societas  negotiationis  alicujus,  formed  to  carry  on  a  parti-
cular business.

4.  Societas  vectigalis^  formed  to  carry  on  the  farming  of
public  revenues — a  mere  branch  of  the  last,  but  subject  to  special
rules.      (D.  xvii.  2.  5.)

5.  Societas  rei  unius,  when  one  or  more  particular  things  are
held  in  common.

1.  Et  quidem  si  nihil  de  partibus
lucri  et  dainni  nominatim  convenerit,
sequales  scilicet  partes  et  in  lucro  et
in  damno  spectantiir.  Quod  si  ex-
pressae  fnerint  partes,  hye  servari
debent ;  nee  enim  unquam  dubium
fuit  quin  valeat  conventio,  si  duo
inter  se  pacti  sunt  ut  ad  unuro  qui-
dem duse  partes  et  lucri  et  damni
pertineant,  ad  alium  tertia.

1.  Unless  the  proportions  of  gam
and  loss  have  been  sjjecially  agreed  on,
the  shares  of  gain  and  loss  are  equal.
If  they  have  been  agreed  on,  eflect
ought  to  be  given  to  the  agreement,
for,  indeed,  the  validity  of  the  agree-
ment has  never  been  questioned,  if
two  partners  have  agreed  that  two-
thirds  of  the  gain  and  loss  should  be-
long to  the  one,  and  one-third  to  the
other.

.   Gai.  iii.  150.

j^quales  partes,  i.e.  one  equal  share  of  the  whole,  not  propor-
tional to  what  each  contributes.

2.  De  ilia  sane  conventione  quse-
situm  est,  si  Titius  et  Seius  inter  se
pacti  sunt  ut  ad  Titium  lucri  duse
partes  pertineant,  damni  tertia,  ad
Seium  duse  partes  damni,  lucri  ter-
tia, an  rata  debeat  haberi  conven-
tio?  Quintus  Mutius  contra  naturam
societatis  talem  pactionem  esse  exis-
timavit,  et  ob  id  non  esse  ratam
liabendam.  Servius  Sulpitius,  cujus
sententia  prsevaluit,  contra  sensit,
quia  ssepe  quorumdam  ita  pretiosa
est  opera  in  societate,  ut  eos  justum
sit  conditione  meliore  in  societatem
admitti  :  nam  et  ita  coiri  posse
societatem  non  dubitatur,  ut  alter
pecuniam  conferat,  alter  non  con-
ferat,  et  tamen  lucrum  inter  eos
commune  sit,  quia  ssepe  opera  ali-
cujus pro  pecunia  valet.  Et  adeo
contra  Quinti  Mutii  sententiam  ob-
tinuit,  ut  illud  quoque  constiterit
posse  conveniri,  ut  quis  lucri  par-
tem ferat,  damno  non  teneatur ;
quod  et  ipsum  Servius  convenienter
sibi  existimavit.  Quod  tamen  ita
intelligi  oportet,  ut  si  in  aliqua  re
lucrum,  in  aliqua  damnum  allatum

2.  But  doubts  have  been  raised  as
to  the  following  agreement.  Supposing
Titius  and  Seius  have  agreed  that  two-
thirds  of  the  profit  and  one-third  of
the  loss  shall  belong  to  Titius,  and  two-
thirds  of  the  loss  and  one-third  of  the
profit  shall  belong  to  Seius,  ought  such
an  agreement  to  be  valid  ?  Quintus
Mutius  considered  it  as  contrary  to  the
nature  of  partnership,  and  as  there-
fore not  to  be  held  valid.  Servius
Sulpitius,  on  the  contrary,  whose
opinion  has  prevailed,  thought  it  valid,
as  frequently  the  services  of  particular
partners  are  so  valuable  that  it  is  just
to  give  them  advantages  in  the  terms
of  the  partnership.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  a  partnership  may  be
formed  on  the  terms  of  one  partner
contributing  money,  and  of  the  other
not  contributing,  while  yet  the  profit
is  common  to  both,  as  often  a  man's
labour  is  equivalent  to  money.  Tlie
opinion,  therefore,  contrary  to  that  of
Quintus  Mutius,  has  prevailed,  and  it
is  admitted  that  by  special  agreement
a  partner  may  share  the  profit,  and
yet  not  be  responsible  for  the  loss,  as

368  LIB.  HI.      TIT.  XXV.

sit,  compensatione  facta  solum  quod     Servius  consistently  held.     This  must
superest  intelligatur  lucri  esse.  be   understood    as    meaning   that,    if

there  is  profit  on  one  transaction  and
loss  on  another,  the  accounts  must  be
balanced,  and  only  the  net  profit  be
reckoned  as  profit.

Gal  iii.  149 ;  D.  xvii.  2.  30.

A  partnership  in  which  one  partner  was  totally  excluded  from
gain  was  void.  The  jurists  called  it  a  leonina  societas,  as  the
other  partner  w^ould  have  the  lion's  share.     (D.  xvii.  2.  29.  1.)

With  respect  to  the  power  of  one  partner  to  bind  another,  a
point  not  touched  on  by  Justinian,  we  may  observe  that  as  between
the  partners  themselves,  any  one  who  acted  in  behalf  of  the  rest
was  their  mandatary,  and,  beyond  acts  of  pure  administration  of
their  affairs,  could  only  be  empowered  to  act  by  their  express  desire
(mandatum).  If  he  were  so  empowered,  he  had  an  action  against
them  for  all  expenses  and  losses  he  incurred,  and  was  bound  to
account  to  them  for  the  profits.  With  regard  to  third  persons,  as
the  Roman  law,  strictly  speaking,  took  no  notice  of  any  one  who
was  not  a  party  to  the  particular  contract,  they  could  not  sue,  or
be  sued  by,  the  remaining  partners,  who  were  not  parties.  The
prsetor,  however,  allowed  the  remaining  partners  to  sue  if  they
had  no  other  means  of  protecting  their  interests  (D.  xiv.  3.  1,  2);
and  the  stranger  to  sue,  if  the  partners  had  benefited  by  the
contract.      (D.  xvii.  2.  82.)

3.  lUud  expeditum  est,  si  in  una  3.  Of  course  if  the  share  on  one
causa  pars  fuerit  expressa,  veluti  side  only  is  expressly  agreed  on,  as  on
in  solo  lucro  vel  in  solo  damno,  in  the  side  of  profit  only,  or  on  that  of
altera  vero  omissa,  in  eo  quoque  loss  only,  the  same  share  is  to  be  con-
quod  prsetermissum  est,  eamdem  sidered  as  held  on  the  side  of  which
partem  servari.  no  mention  is  made.

Gai.  iii.  150.

4.  Manet  autem  societas  eousque  4.  A  partnership  continues  as  long
donee  in  eodem  consensu  persevera-  as  the  partners  continue  to  agree  that
verint ;  at  cum  aliquis  renantiaverit  it  shall  do  so  ;  but  if  any  one  partner
societati,  solvitur  societas.  Sed  renounces  the  partnership,  then  the
plane  si  quis  callide  in  hoc  renun-  partnersliip  is  dissolved.  If,  however,
tiaverit  societati,  ut  obveniens  he  makes  this  renunciation  with  a
aliquod  lucrum  solus  habeat  :  veluti  secret  motive,  such  as  that  he  may
si  totorum  bonorum  socius,  cum  ab  alone  enjoy  a  gain  which  he  knows
aliquo  heres  esset  relictus,  in  hoc  awaits  him  ;  as,  for  instance,  if  an  in-
renun tiaverit  societati  ut  heredita-  heritance  has  been  left  to  a  member  of  a
tem  solus  lucrifaceret,  cogetur  hoc  partnership  embracing  all  the  property
lucrum  communicare  ;  si  quid  vero  of  each  of  the  partners,  and  he  re-
lucrifaciat  quod  non  captaverit,  ad  nounces  the  partnership  to  enjoy  alone
ipsum  solum  pertinet.  Ei  vero  cui  the  advantage  of  an  inheritance  left
renuntiatum  est,  quicquid  omnino  him  ;  he  is  compelled  to  share  this
post  renuntiatam  societatem  acqui-  source  of  gain  with  his  partners.  But
ritur,  soli  conceditur.  if  he  gains  anything  without  such  pre-
vious design,  he  alone  profits  by  it  :
while  the  partner  who  has  received  his
renunciation  acquires  alone  all  that
falls  to  him  subsequently.

Gai.  iii.  151.

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXV.  369

The  contract  of  partnership  may  have  different  modifications.
It  may  be  made  during  or  from  a  certain  time,  or  conditionally.
(D.  xvii.  2.  1.)  But  there  can  be  no  partnership  to  last  for  ever,
as  no  one  can  be  forced  to  remain  a  partner  against  his  will.
(D.  xvii.  2.  70.)  Any  partner  may  renounce,  i.e.  withdraw,
when  he  pleases.

The  remaining  paragraphs  of  this  Title  treat  of  the  modes  in
which  the  partnership  may  be  dissolved.  Ulpian,  enumerating
the  causes  of  the  dissolution  of  partnerships,  says, '  Societas  solvihir
ex  personis^ex  rehus,  ex  voluntate,  ex  actione,^  (D.  xvii.  2.  63.  10.)
Ex  personis,  when  one  of  the  parties  is  dead  or  incapacitated,  as  by
confiscation  (^publicatio)  of  goods,  when  the  treasury  succeeds  to
his  persona  (paragr.  7) ;  ex  re^w5,  when  the  purpose  of  the  partner-
ship is  effected,  or  its  subject-matter  has  ceased  to  exist,  as  in  the
case  of  cession  of  goods  (paragr.  8)  ;  ex  voluntate,  when  one  partner
wishes  to  withdraw ;  and  ex  actione,  when  one  partner  compels  a
dissolution  of  partnership  by  action.  We  may  add  ex  tempore,  if
the  partnership  was  only  temporary.

5.  Solvitur  adhuc  societas  etiam  5.  A  partnership  is  also  dissolved

morte  socii,  quia  qui  societatem  by  the  death  of  a  partner,  as  he  who
contrahifc,  certam  personam  sibi  enters  into  a  partnership  chooses  a  par-
eligit,  Sed  et  si  consensu  pluriuui  ticular  person  to  whom  he  binds  him-
societas  contracta  sit,  morte  unius  self.  And  even  if  there  are  more  than
socii  solvitur,  etsi  plures  supersint,  two  partners,  the  death  of  any  one
Tiisi  in  coeunda  societate  aliter  con-  dissolvesthe  partnership  although  more
venerit.  than  one  survive,  unless  on  the  forma-

tion  of   the  partnership   it  has  been
otherwise  agreed.

Gai.  iii.  152;  D.  xvii.  2.  65.  9.

Although,  in  forming  the  partnership,  the  parties  might  agree
that,  if  any  one  ceased  to  be  a  partner,  the  rest  should  still  con-
tinue partners,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  should  immediately
and  without  fresh  agreement  form  a  new  partnership,  yet  no  one
could  validly  make  it  part  of  the  contract  that  his  heirs  should,  on
his  death,  be  admitted  partners  (D.  xvii.  2.  59),  the  contract
being  personal.  There  was  an  exception  made  to  this  rule  in  the
case  of  societates  vectigales,     (D.  xvii.  2.  59.)

6.  Item  si  alicujus  rei  contracta  6.   If    the    partnership    has    been
societas    sit,    et    finis    negotio   im-     formed  for  a  single  transaction,  when
positus  est,  finitur  societas,                     the  transaction  is  completed,  the  part-
nership is  ended.

D.  xvii.  2.  65.  10.

7.  Publicatione  quoque  distrahi  7.  It  is  evident,  also,  that  a  part-
societatem  manifestum  est,  scilicet  nership  is  dissolved  by  the  confiscation
si  universa  bona  socii  publicentur  ;  of  all  the  property  of  a  partner  ;  for
nam  cum  in  ejus  locus  alius  sue-  this  partner,  as  he  is  replaced  by  a
cedat,  pro  mortuo  habetur.  successor,  is  considered  dead.

D.  xvii.  2.  65.  12.

370  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXV.

8.  Item  si  quis  ex  sociis  mole  8.  So,  too,  if  one  of  the  partners,
debiti  prsegravatus  bonis  siiis  ces-  borne  down  by  the  weight  of  his  debts,
serit,  et  ideo  propter  publica  aut  makes  a  cession  of  his  goods,  and  his
privata  debita  substantia  ejus  ve-  property  is  therefore  sold  to  satisfy  his
neat,  solvitur  societas  ;  sed  hoc  casu,  debts,  public  or  private,  the  partner-
si  adhuc  consentiant  in  societatem,  ship  is  dissolved.  But  in  this  case,  if
nova  videtur  incipere  societas.  the  parties  agree  still  to  continue  part-
ners, a  new  partnership  would  seem  to
be  begun.

Gai.  iii.  153,  154.

The  persona  of  an  individual  might,  we  know,  be  destroyed
even  in  his  lifetime  and  passed  on  to  a  successor,  as,  for  instance,
by  the  maxima  and  media  capitis  deminutio,  and  by  the  puhlicatio
or  confiscation  of  all  the  goods  of  the  deminutus,  which  was  one
of  their  consequences,  so  that  i\\Qjiscus  was  his  successor  (D.  xlviii.
20.  1),  or  by  the  sale  of  his  property  in  the  mass,  either  for  the
profit  of  the  treasury  in  the  case  of  criminals  (sectio  bonorum,  the
old  form  of  puhlicatio),  or  of  private  individuals  in  certain  cases
of  insolvency  {emptio  bonorum),  or  when  he  had  made  a  cessio
bonorum  under  the  lex  Julia.  (See  Tit.  12  of  this  Book.)  In
the  time  of  Justinian  sales  in  one  mass  of  a  whole  patrimony
were  obsolete,  and  therefore  confiscation  (j)ublicatio) ,  when  the
fiscus  was  the  successor,  and  cessio  bouorum  are  alone  mentioned
here ;  the  latter,  however,  as  taking  away  the  fortune  of  the
partner,  and  not  as  destroying  his  persona.

Of  course  the  partnership  might  be  immediately  renewed  with
the  partner  whose  goods  had  been  confiscated  or  ceded  to  creditors,
if  the  other  partners  were  willing  to  enter  into  what  was  really  a
new  partnership,  as  it  might  if  the  partner  had  lost  his  civitas
by  the  media  deminutio ;  for  partnership,  being  a  contract  of  the
jus  gentium,  could  be  formed  with  a  stranger.  The  minima
capitis  deminutio  did  not  cause  a  dissolution  of  the  partnership,
and  a  person  arrogated  or  emancipated  still  remained  a  partner.
(D.  xvii.  2.  Q6.  11.)  (Poste's  Gains,  348.)  (Gai.  iii.  154.)  The
arrogator,  however,  did  not  become  a  partner,  as  a  new  partner
could  not  be  introduced  without  the  consent  of  the  others,
Societas,  quemadmodum  ad  heredes  socii  non  transit,  ita  nee  ad
arrogatorem,  ne  alioquin  invitus  quis  socius  ejfficiatur  cui  non  vult,
(D.  xvii.  2.  Qd.  11.)

9.  Socius  socio  utrum  eo  nomine  9.  It  has  been  questioned  whether
tantum  teneatur  pro  socio  actione,  si  one  partner  can  be  made  answerable  to
quid  dolo  commiserit,  sicut  is  qui  another  by  the  action  pro  socio,  if  he
deponi  apud  se  passus  est,  an  etiam  has  been  guilty  of  malicious  wrong,  as
culpse,  id  est  desidias  atque  negli-  a  depositary  is,  or  whether  also  for  a
gentise  nomine,  qusesitum  est :  prse-  fault,  that  is,  for  carelessness  and  neg-
valuit  tamen  etiam  culpse  nomine  ligence.  The  opinion  has  prevailed
teneri  eum.  Culpa  autem  non  ad  that  he  is  also  answerable  for  a  fault,
exactissimam  diligentiam  dirigenda  but  the  fault  is  not  to  be  measured  by
est  :  sufficit  enim  talem  diligentiam  a  standard  of  the  most  perfect  careful-
in  communibus  rebus  adhibere  so-  ness  possible.  It  is  sufficient  that  he
cium,  qualem   suis   rebus   adhibere  should  be  as  careful  of  things  belonging

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVI.  37 1

solet ;  nam  qui  pariim  diligentem  so-     to  the  partnership  as  he  is  of  his  own
cium  sibi  assiimit,  de  se  queri  debet,     property.    For  he  who  accepts  as  part-
ner a  person  of   careless  habits,  has
only  himself  to  blame*

D.  xvii.  2.  72.

Societas  Jus  quodammodo  fraternitatis  in  se  hahet,  (D.  xvii.  2.
63.)  Hence,  while  each  partner  had,  if  sued,  an  allowance  (termed
the  heneficium  competenticE)  made  for  him,  and  was  only  held
responsible  to  the  extent  of  his  means,  yet,  on  the  other  hand^
if  he  was  condemned  in  an  action  pro  socio,  he  was  marked  with
infamy.     (D.  xvii.  2.  63,  pr.  1-3;  D.  iii.  2.  1.)

The  action  pro  socio  was  the  remedy  in  almost  every  case  that
could  arise  between  partners.  It  was  employed,  for  instance,  to
enforce  accounts,  to  get  compensation  for  losses,  and  to  dissolve
the  partnership.  If  any  partner  was  guilty  of  a  delict  against
his  partners,  such  as  theft,  he  would  be  made  amenable  by  such
actions  as  the  actio  fvrti,  vi  bonorum  raptorum,  or  legis  Aqiiilioe,
of  which  we  read  in  the  Fourth  Book.  There  was  also  another
action  incident  to  partnerships,  called  the  actio  communi  dividundo^
which  was  brought  to  procure  a  partition,  by  the  judex,  of  the
common  property.     (See  Introd.  sec.  103.)

Tit.  XXYI.     DE   MANDATO.

Mandatum  contrahitiir  qiiinque  The  contract  of  mandate  is  formed

modis :  sive  sua  tantum.  gratia  aliquis  in  five  modes  ;  according  as  a  mandator
tibi  mandet,  sive  sua  et  tua,  sive  gives  you  a  mandate  for  his  benefit
aliena  tantum,  sive  sua  et  aliena,  only,  or  for  his  benefit  and  for  yours  ;
sive  tua  et  aliena  ;  at  si  tua  tantum  or  for  the  benefit  of  a  third  person
gratia  mandatum  sit,  supervacuum  only,  or  for  his  benefit  and  that  of  a
est,  et  ob  id  nulla  obligatio  nee  third  person,  or  for  your  benefit  and
mandati  inter  vos  actio  nascitur.  that  of  a  third  person.      A  mandate

made  for  your  benefit  only  is  useless,
and  does  not  produce  between  you  any
obligation  or  action  mmidati.

J),  xvii.  1.  2.

In  the  theory  of  Roman  law  one  person  could  not  represent
another.  The  person  who  actually  made  the  contract,  who  uttered
the  binding  words,  or  went  through  the  binding  formalities,  was
the  only  legal  contractor ;  he  alone  could  sue  and  be  sued.  The
law  would  not  take  notice  that  it  was  really  in  behalf  of  another
that  he  made  the  contract.

But  a  friend  on  whom  reliance  could  be  placed  might  be  per-
suaded to  make  the  contract  in  his  own  name.  Honour  and
friendship  would  then  effect  what  the  law  would  not  compel.  This
friend  would  give  up  all  that  he  gained  by  the  contract  to  the  per-
son at  whose  request  he  entered  into  it.  The  promise  to  perform
this  act  of  friendship  was  given,  in  the  old    times  of  Roman

B    B    2

372  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXVI.

manners,  with  an  appropriate  formality.     The  person  really  in-
terested took  the  friend  by  the  right  hand,  and  told  him  that  he
placed  in  his  hand  the  trust  he  was  anxious  to  have  discharged.
The  trust,  or  commission  itself,  was  hence  called  mandatum  (manu
datum),     Plautus  thus  describes  the  ceremony  {Captiv.  ii.  3) :
Tynd. — HcBC  per  dexter  am  tuam,  te  dexter  a  retinens  manu^
Obsecro,  infidelior  milii  ne  fuas,  quam  ego  sum  tibi,
Tu  hoc  age,  tu  mihi  herns  nunc  es,  tu  patronus,  tu  pater,
Tibi  commendo  spes  opesque  meas.

Ph. — Mandavisti  satis.

The  execution  of  a  mandatum  was  thus  a  discharge  of  an  office
of  friendship.  Originem  ex  officio  atque  amicitia  trahit.  (D.  xvii^
1.  1.  4.)  And  it' never  lost  the  traces  of  its  origin.  It  was  always
necessarily  gratuitous ;  the  mandatarius,  i.  e.  the  person  charged
with  the  mandatum,  was  obliged  to  bestow  on  it  the  care  of  the
most  diligent  paterfamilias  (C.  iv.  35.  13),  and  if  he  failed  to
discharge  the  trust,  and  was  condemned  in  an  actio  mandati,  he
was  stamped  with  infamy.      (D.  iii.  2.  1.)  (Introd.  sec.  48.)

When  the  introduction  of  the  praetorian  system  furnished  a
method  by  which  every  equitable  claim  could  be  enforced,  friends
who  entered  into  such  an  agreement  were  obliged  to  discharge
their  reciprocal  duties.  The  prajtor,  by  the  actio  mandati  directa
given  to  the  mandator,  compelled  the  mandatarius  to  account  for
all  he  received,  and  to  pay  over  the  profits,  and,  by  the  actio  man-
dati contraria  given  to  the  mandatarius,  compelled  the  mandator
(i.e.  the  person  who  requested  the  favour)  to  reimburse,  with
interest,  the  mandatarius  for  all  expenses  incurred,  to  indemnify
him  for  all  losses,  and  to  free  him  from  all  obligations  contracted
in  the  execution  of  the  mandate.

The  pra3torian  law  went  a  great  step  further,  by  allowing  the
mandator  to  bring  equitable  actions  against,  and  to  be  sued  by,
the  third  party,  with  whom  the  mandatarius  contracted.  First
as  to  actions  brought  by  the  mandator.  Whatever  direct  ac-
tions the  mandatarius  would  properly  have  brought  or  was  liable
to,  the  mandator  was  allowed  to  bring  in  the  shape  of  actiones
utiles ;  and  if  the  mandator  sued  or  intended  to  sue,  the  manda-
tarius could  not  sue.  As,  for  instance,  where  the  mandatarius
would  have  brought  a  condictio,  or  an  actio  empti  or  venditi,  the
mandator  was  allowed  to  bring  a  condictio  utilis,  or  an  actio  utilis
empti  or  venditi,  (D.  xix.  1.13.  25.)  In  the  case  of  a  special
mandate,  these  actions  were  allowed,  as  of  course ;  in  the  case  of
a  general  mandate,  only  when  the  mandator  had  no  other  way  of
protecting  his  interests,  a  mandate  being  termed  special  when  one
man  charged  another  with  the  execution  of  one  or  more  particular
things,  and  general  when  he  asked  him  to  represent  him  in  all  his
affairs.     (D.  xiv.  3.  2.)

Secondly  as  to  actions  brought  against  the  mandator.  There
were  some  acts,  of  a  solemn  character,  in  which  one  citizen  could,
at  no  time  of  Koman  law,  act  for  another,  such  as  bringing  any

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXVI.  373

of  the  legis  actioncs^  mancipation,  making  testaments,  or  the  cretio
or  aditio  of  an  inheritance.  Nor  did  the  civil  law  ever  permit
any  one,  except  a  son  or  a  slave  (Tit.  28),  to  contract  for  another
so  as  to  make  the  person  for  whom  he  contracted  directly  re-
sponsible or  directly  able  to  sue  on  the  obligation.  But  the
praetorian  system  gradually  recognised  the  intervention  of  an
agent.  A  cognitor,  i.  e.  a  person  authorised  formally  to  conduct
a  suit,  was  allowed  to  act  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiff  or  defendant,
and  fully  represented  his  principal.  (See  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  10.)  The
manager  of  a  shop  {instltor)  and  the  captain  of  a  ship  (exercitor)
were  permitted  to  bind  their  employers  (Bk.  iv.  Tit.  7),  and  by
an  extension  of  the  actions  appropriate  to  these  cases,  i.  e.  by
allowing  a  utilem  actionem  quasi  institoriam  (D.  xvii.  1.  10.  5),
the  prastor  made  all  employers  liable  for  acts  of  their  agents
authorised  by  or  profitable  to  them,  and  allowed  actions  to  be
brought  directly  against  the  employer  without  regard  to  the
procurator  or  agent ;  and  this  was  the  mode  in  which  the  mandator
was  made  responsible.  Thus,  ultimately,  obligations  were  ac-
quired by  or  against  the  mandator  through  the  agent,  and  not  for
him  by  the  agent.

1.  Mandantis  tantum  gratia  in-  1.  A  mandate  is  made  for  the  bene-
tervenit  mandatum,  veluti  si  quis  fit  of  the  mandator  only;  if,  for  in-
tibi  mandet  ut  negotia  ejus  gereres,  stance,  any  one  gives  yon  a  mandate  to
vel  ut  fundum  ei  emeres,  vel  ut  pro  transact  his  business,  to  buy  an  estate
eo  sponderes.  for  him,  or  to  become  surety  for  him.

D.  xvii.  1.  2.  1.

This  is  the  usual  case  of  a  mandatum.  Justinian  employs
here,  it  may  be  remarked,  the  word  sponderes,  although  sponsores
no  longer  existed.     (See  Tit.  20.)

2.  Tua  et  mandantis,  veluti  si  2.  A  mandate  is  made  for  your
mandet  tibi,  ut  pecuniam  sub  usuris  benefit  and  that  of  the  mandator  ;  if,
crederes  ei  qui  in  rem  ipsius  mutua-  for  instance,  he  gives  a  mandate  to  you
retur ;  aut  si,  volente  te  agere  cum  to  lend  money  at  interest  to  a  person
eo  ex  fidejussoria  causa,  tibi  man-  who  borrows  it  for  the  purposes  of  the
det  ut  cum  reo  agas  periculo  man-  mandator  ;  or  if,  when  you  are  about
dantis,  vel  ut  ipsius  periculo  stipu-  to  sue  him  as  ?i  fidejussor,  he  gives  you
leris  ab  eo  quem  tibi  deleget  in  id  a  mandate  to  sue  the  principal  at  his
quod  tibi  debuerat.  risk,    or  to   stipulate   at   his   risk    as

against  something  owed  by  him  to  you,
for  payment  from  a  person  whom  he
appoints  as  his  substitute.

D.  xvii.  1.  2.  4  ;  D.  xvii.  1.  45.  7,  8.

Volente  te  agere  cum  eo  ex  fidejussoria  causa.  Under  the  law
anterior  to  Justinian,  the  creditor  could  sue  either  the  debtor  or
the  fidejussor,  but  not  both.  If  he  proposed  to  sue  the  latter,  the
fidejussor  might  give  him  a  mandatum  to  sue  the  debtor,  and  then,
if  the  creditor  did  so,  the  fidejussor  would  be  freed  from  any  obli-
gation as ^r/^M 550 r,  but  would  be  hound  sls  mandator ;  and  thus
the  mandate  would  be  for  the  benefit  of  the  fidejussor,  because  he

374

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVI.

would  be  sued  after  the  principal,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  cre-
ditor, because  he  could  sue  the  principal  first  and  then  the  surety
in  his  quality  of  mandator,  whereas  he  could  not  ordinarily  sue
both  the  principal  and  the  surety,  but  was  obliged  to  make  his
choice  between  them,  as  the  litis  contestatio  in  the  action  he
first  brought  extinguished  the  obligation  they  had  jointly  made.
This  could  not  be  of  any  use  after  Justinian  had  decided  that  the
principal  debtor  should  be  sued  first,  and  then,  if  there  was  any
deficiency,  the,  fidejussor,     (See  Tit.  20.  4.)

Ah  eo  quern  tihi  deleget.  The  debtor  points  out  to  the  creditor
a  third  person  who  owes  the  debtor  a  sum  equal  to  his  debt  to  the
creditor ;  and  asks  the  creditor  to  stipulate  with  this  third  person
for  payment  of  the  amount  due  from  the  debtor.  If  the  third
person  does  not  pay,  the  debtor  is  held  responsible  as  mandator.
The  creditor  thus  benefits,  as  he  has  two  persons  to  sue,  and  the
debtor  benefits,  because  he  employs  his  creditor  to  collect  a  debt
due  to  him.

3.  Aliena  autem  causa  intervenit
mandatum,  veluti  si  tibi  mandet  ut
Titii  negotia  gereres,  vel  ut  Titio
fundum  emeres,  vel  ut  pro  Titio
sponderes.

3.  A  mandate  is  made  for  the  bene-
fit of  a  third  person,  if,  for  example,
the  mandator  bids  you  manage  the
affairs  of  Titius,  or  buy  an  estate  for
Titius,  or  become  surety  for  Titius.

D.  xvii.  1.  2.  2.

4.  Sua  et  aliena,  veluti  si  de
communibus  suis  et  Titii  negotiis
gerendis  tibi  mandet,  vel  ut  sibi  et
Titio  fundum  emeres,  vel  ut  pro  eo
et  Titio  sponderes.

4.  A  mandate  is  made  for  the  bene-
fit of  the  mandator  and  of  a  third
person,  if,  for  example,  the  mandator
gives  you  a  mandate  to  manage  afiairs
common  to  himself  and  Titius,  or  to
buy  an  estate  for  himself  and  Titius,
or  to  become  surety  for  himself  and
Titius.

D.  xvii.  1.  2,  3.

5.  Tua  et  aliena,  veluti  si  tibi
mandet  \\i  Titio  sub  usuris  crederes ;
quod  si  ut  sine  usuris  crederes,  aliena
tantum  gratia  intercedit  mandatum.

5,  A  mandate  is  made  for  your
benefit  and  for  that  of  a  third  person,
if,  for  instance,  the  mandator  bids  you
to  lend  money  at  interest  to  Titius.
Were  the  money  lent  without  interest,
the  mandate  would  be  only  for  the
benefit  of  a  third  person.

D.  xvii.  1.  2.  5.

6.  Tua  gratia  intervenit  manda-
tum, veluti  si  tibi  mandet  ut  pecu-
nias  tuas  in  emptiones  potius  prae-
diorum  coUoces,  quam  foeneres  ;  vel
ex  di verso,  ut  foeneres  potius  quam
in  emptiones  prsediorum  colloces.
Cujus  generis  mandatum  magis
consilium  est  quam  mandatum,  et
ob  id  non  est  obligatorium  ;  quia
nemo  ex  consilio  obligatur,  etiamsi
non  expediat  ei  cui  dabitur,  cum  li-
berum  cuique  sit  apud  se  explorare

6.  A  mandate  is  made  for  your
benefit  only,  if,  for  example,  the  man-
dator bids  you  invest  your  money  in
the  purchase  of  land  rather  than  put
it  out  to  interest,  or  vice  versa.  Such
a  mandate  is  rather  a  piece  of  advice
than  a  mandate,  and  consequently  is
not  obligatory,  as  no  one  is  bound  by
giving  advice,  although  it  be  not  judi-
cious, as  each  may  judge  for  himself
what  the  worth  of  the  advice  is.  If,
therefore,  you  have  a  sum  of  money

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXVI.  375

an   expediat   consilium.      Itaque  si  lying  idle  in  your  house,  and  any  one

otiosam  pecuniam  domi  te  habentem  advises  you  to  make  a  jDurcliase  with

hortatus  fuerit   aliquis   ut  rem  ali-  it,  or  put  it  out  to  interest,  although  it

quam    emeres,    vel    earn    crederes,  may  not   be   advantageous  to  you  to

quamvis     non     expediat     tibi    earn  have  made  this  purchase,  or  to  have

emisse  vel  credidisse,  non  tamen  tibi  lent  your  money,  yet  your  adviser  is

mandati  tenetur.      Et  adeo  hsec  ita  not  bound  by  an  action  inandati.     So

sunt,  ut  quassitum   sit  an   mandati  much  so,  that  it  has  been  questioned

teneatur,  qui  mandavit  tibi  ut  pecu-  whether   a   person   is   bound   by    this

niam  Titio  foenerares  ?  sed  obtinuit  action  who  has  given  you  a  mandate  to

Sabini  sententia,   obligatorium  esse  lend  your  money  at  interest  to  Titius.

in   hoc   casu   mandatum,  quia   non  But  the  opinion  of  Sabinus   has  pre-

aliter  Titio  credidisses,  quam  si  tibi  vailed,  that  such  a  mandate  is  obliga-

mandatum  esset.  tory,  as  you  would  not  have  lent  your

money  to  Titius  unless  the   mandate

had  been  given.

Gai.  iii.  156 ;  D.  xvii.  1.  2.  6.

It  was  a  very  narrow  line  which  divided  the  expression  of  a
mere  opinion  advising  another  person  to  do  a  thing,  and  such  a  re-
quest to  him  to  do  it  as  involved  the  responsibilities  of  a  mandatum.
Everything  depended  on  the  intention  of  the  parties.  The  ques-
tion was,  did  the  person  who  expressed  the  opinion,  or  made  the
request,  mean  to  say  that,  if  the  opinion  would  not  be  adopted,  or
the  request  granted,  unless  he  made  himself  responsible  for  the
consequences,  he  was  willing  to  become  responsible  ?  If  he  did
mean  this,  he  was  treated  as  a  mandator.

A  mandator  stood  in  this  and  similar  cases  almost  exactly  in
the  place  of  2,  fidejussor.  Neque  enim  multum  referre  puto  prcesens
quis  interrogatus  fidejuheat,  an  ahsens  mandet.  (D.  xvii.  1.  32.)
Accordingly,  in  the  Digest  and  the  Code,  the  two  are  treated  of
under  the  same  head,  de  fidejussoribus  et  mandatoribus.  For  the
mandate  might  be  an  inter cessio,  i.e.  a  mode  in  which  a  third  party
steps  in  between  two  others  as  a  surety  for  one  of  them,  and  was
subject  to  the  general  rules  common  to  accessary  contracts,  such
as  the  prohibition  of  the  senatus-consultum  Velleianum,  with
respect  to  women,  the  benefits  of  discussion  under  Justinian,  i.e.
that  the  principal  should  be  sued  first,  of  division  under  Hadrian's
rescript,  i.e.  that  the  liabilities  of  co-sureties  should  be  divided,
and,  to  some  extent,  of  cession  of  actions.     (See  Tit.  20.  4.)

But  the  mandatum  being  a  distinct,  and  not  an  accessary
contract,  it  was,  in  some  points,  distinguished  from  a  fidejussio.
1.  The  mandator  was  sometimes  considered  more  responsible  than
the  fidejussor.  If  a  minor  borrowed  money  under  a  guarantee,
and  was  restitutus  in  integrum,  Ulpian  says  it  was  doubtful  whe-
ther the  loss  should  fall  on  the  creditor  or  the  fidejussor ;  but  he
is  clear  it  ought  to  fall  on  the  mandator  if  the  guarantee  was
given  by  mandate,  nothj  fidejussio.  (D.  iv.  4.  13.  pr.)  2.  The
debtor  and  the  fidejussor  being  liable  for  the  same  debt,  the  litis
contestatio  in  a  suit  against  the  debtor  released  the  fidejussor ;  but
this  was  not  so  in  the  case  of  the  mandator,  who  was  bound  by  a
separate  contract.     Justinian  altered  the  law,  and  made  the  action

376

LIE.  III.      TIT.  XXVi.

Sigamst  the jftdejussor  survive,  thus,  as  he  says,  placing  him  in  the
position  of  the  mandator.  (C.  viii.  41.  28.)  3.  If  once  there
was  a  litis  contestatio  in  a  suit  against  the  fidejussor,  it  was  no
longer  open  to  the  fidejussor  to  demand  that  the  actions  against
the  debtor  and  the  other  Jidejussores  should  be  ceded  to
him,  for  the  litis  contestatio  had  extinguished  them ;  but  neither
the  litis  contestatio  nor  judgment  against  the  debtor  affected  the
claim  of  the  mandator  for  the  cession  of  actions.  (D.  xlvi.  3.  95.
10.)  4.  The  fidejussor  could  only  claim  that  the  actions  which
the  creditor  actually  had  should  be  ceded  to  him  ;  but  the  man-
dator  was  altogether  released  if  the  creditor  had  abandoned  the
right  of  bringing  any  action  he  could  have  brought,  because,  the
contracts  being  distinct  and  the  creditor  bound  by  a  bilateral
contract  to  the  mandator,  if  he  had  not  fulfilled  his  duty,  the
mandator  was  free  from  his  obligation.     (D.  xlvi.  3.  95.  11.)

7.  lUud  quoque  mandatiim  non
est  obligatorium,  quod  contra  bonos
mores  est,  veluti  si  Titius  de  fnrto
aut  de  damno  faciendo,  aiit  de  in-
juria facienda  tibi  mandet  ;  licet
enim  poenam  istius  facti  nomine
prsestiteris,  non  tamen  uUarn  habes
adversus  Titium  actionem.

7.  A  mandate,  again,  is  not  obliga-
tory which  is  contrary  to  honi  mores  ;
as,  for  instance,  if  Titius  gives  you  a
mandate  to  commit  a  theft,  or  do  a
harm  or  injury  ;  although  you  pay  the
penalty  of  vrhat  you  may  do,  you  have
not  in  such  a  case  an  action  against
Titius.

Gai.  iii.  157  ;  D.  xvii.  1.  22.  6.

8.  Is  qui  exequitur  mandatum,
non  debet  excedere  finem  mandati  :
ut  ecce,  si  quis  usque  ad  centum
aureos  mandaverit  tibi  ut  fundum
emeres,  vel  ut  pro  Titio  sponderes,
neque  pluris  emere  debes,  neque  in
ampliorem  pecuniam  fidejubere  ;
alioquin  non  habebis  cum  eo  man-
dati actionem,  adeo  quidem  ut  Sa-
bino  et  Cassio  placuerit,  etiamsi
usque  ad  centum  aureos  cum  eo
agere  velis,  inuti  liter  te  acturum.
Diversfe  scholse  auctores  recte  usque
ad  centum  aureos  te  acturum  exis-
timant,  quae  sententia  sane  benig-
nior  est.  Quod  si  minoris  emeris,
habebis  scilicet  cum  eo  actionem  ;
quoniam  qui  mandat  ut  sibi  centum
aureorum  fundus  emeretur,  is  uti-
que  mandasse  intelligitur  ut  mino-
ris, si  possit,  emeretur.

8.  A  mandatary  must  not  exceed
the  limits  of  the  mandate  ;  for  instance,
if  a  mandator  bids  you  buy  land  or
become  surety  for  Titius  up  to  the
amount  of  a  hundred  aurei,  you  must
not  exceed  this  sum  in  making  the
purchase  or  becoming  surety,  otherwise
you  will  not  have  an  action  mcutdati  ;
so  much  so,  that  Sabinus  and  Cassius
thought  that  even  if  you  limited  your
action  to  a  hundred  aurei,  you  would
bring  it  in  vain.  The  authors  of  the
opposite  school  think  that  you  may
rightly  bring  an  action  limited  to  a
hundred  aurei,  and  this  opinion  is
doubtless  the  more  favourable.  If  you
lay  out  less  on  the  purchase,  you  can
certainly  bring  an  action  against  the
mandator  ;  for  a  person  who  gives  a
mandate  that  an  estate  shall  be  bought
for  him  at  the  price  of  a  hundred  aurei,
is  understood  to  mean  that  it  should
be  bought  for  less  if  possible.

Gai.  iii.  161 ;  D.  xvii.  1.  3.  2 ;  D.  xvii.  1,  4,  5.

Qui  excessit,  aliud  quid  facer  e  videtur.  (D.  xvii.  1.  5.)  Sa-
binus, in  giving  the  opinion  mentioned  in  the  text,  insisted  very
rigorously  on  the  effect  of  the  thing  done  being  aliud  quid.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVI.

377

9.  Recte  quoque  mandatum  con-
tractiim,  si  dum  adhuc  Integra  res
sit,  revocatum  fuerit,  evanescit.

Gai.  iii.  159.

9.  The  mandate,  although  validly
formed,  is  extinguished,  if  before  it  has
been  executed  it  is  revoked.

10.  A  mandate  is  also  extinguished,
if,  before  it  is  executed,  the  mandator
or  mandatary  dies.  But  motives  of
convenience  have  given  rise  to  the
decision,  that  if,  after  the  death  of  the
mandator,  you,  in  ignorance  of  his  de-
cease, execute  the  mandate,  you  may
bring  an  action  mandatl  :  otherwise
you  would  be  prejudiced  by  what  was
allowable  and  natural  ignorance.  Simi-
larly it  has  been  decided  that,  if  debtors
make  a  payment  to  the  steward  of
Titius,  after  he  has  been  enfranchised,
in  ignorance  of  his  enfranchisement,
they  are  freed  from  their  obligation,
although,  in  strict  law,  they  could  not
be  freed,  as  they  have  made  the  pay-
ment to  a  person  other  than  him  to
whom  they  ought  to  have  made  it.

Gai.  iii.  160.

Manumisso.  It  vrould  be  the  same  if  the  slave  had  not  been
enfranchised,  but  had  been  sold,  or  had  his  office  of  dispensator
taken  from  him,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  debtors.  (D.  xlvi.
3.  51.)

10.  Item  si  adhuc  integro  man-
dato  mors  alterius  interveniat,  id
est,  vel  ejus  qui  mandaverit,  vel
illius  qui  mandatum  susceperit,
solvitur  mandatum ;  sed  utilitatis
causa  receptum  est,  si  eo  mortuo
qui  tibi  mandaverat,  tu  ignorans
eum  decessisse  executus  fueris  man-
datum,  posse  te  agere  mandati  ac-
tione  ;  alioquin  justa  et  probabilis
ignorantia  tibi  damnum  aflferet.  Et
huic  simile  est  quod  placuit,  si  debi-
tores  manumisso  dispensatore  Titii
per  ignorantiam  liberto  solverint,
liberari  eos ;  cum  alioquin  stricta
juris  ratione  non  possent  liberari,
quia  alii  solvissent  quam  cui  solvere
debuerint.

11.  Mandatum  non  suscipere  cui-
libet  liberum  est,  susceptum  autem
consummandum  est,  aut  quampri-
mum  renuntiandum,  ut  per  semet-
ipsum  aut  per  alium  eamdem  rem
mandator  exequatur  ;  nam  nisi  ita
renuntiatur  ut  Integra  causa  man-
datori  reservetur  eamdem  rem  ex-
plicandi,  nihilominus  mandati  actio
locum  habet,  nisi  justa  causa  inter-
cessit  aut  non  renuntiandi  aut  in-
tempestive  renuntiandi.

11.  Every  one  is  free  to  refuse  ac-
cepting a  mandate,  but  if  it  is  once
accepted,  it  must  be  executed,  or  else
renounced  soon  enough  to  permit  the
mandator  carrying  out  his  purpose
himself  or  through  another.  For,  un-
less the  renunciation  is  made  so  that
the  mandator  is  still  in  a  position  to  do
this,  an  Miction  mandati  maybe  brought
in  spite  of  the  renunciation  of  the
mandatary,  unless  some  good  reason
has  prevented  him  making  the  renun-
ciation, or  making  it  within  a  proper
time.

D.  xvii.  1.  22.  11.

Nisi  justa  causa.  For  example,  a  sudden  and  serious  illness,
a  deadly  enmity  springing  up  between  the  mandator  and  the
mondatarius,  or  the  insolvency  of  the  former.  (D.  xvii.  1.  23.)
In  the  execution  of  the  mandate  the  mandatarius  was  bound  to
use  the  diligence  of  a  bonus  paterfamilias.     (Tit.  27.  1.)

12.  Mandatum  et  in  diem  difierri,  12.  A  mandate   may  be   made  to

et  sub  conditione  fieri  potest.  take  effect  from  a  particular  time,  or

may  be  made  conditionally.

D.  xvii.  1.  1.  3.

378  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVII.

13.    In     siimma,    sciendum    est  13.  Lastly,    it    may  be   observed,

mandatum,    nisi    gratuitum   sit,    in  that  unless  a  mandate  is  gratuitous,

aliam  formam  negotii  cadere,  nam  it  will  take  the   form   of    some  other

mercede  constituta  incipit  locatio  et  contract,  for,  if  a  price  is  fixed  on,  it  is

conductio  esse.     Et,  ut   generaliter  a  contract  letting  to  hire.    And  gene-

dixerimus,  quibus  casibus  sine  mer-  rally  we  may  say,  that  in  every  case  in

cede    susce^Dto   officio   mandati    aut  which,  whenever  the  duty  being  under-

depositi    contrahitur    negotium,    iis  taken  without  pay,  there  is  a  contract

casibus  interveniente  mercede  loca-  of  mandate  or  deposit,  in  every  such

tio    et    conductio    contrahi    intelli-  case,  if  pay  is  received,  the  contract  is

gitur  ;    et   ideo   si   fuUoni   polienda  one  of  letting  to  hire.     If,  therefore,  a

curandave  vestimenta    dederis,  aut  person  gives  his  clothes  to  a  fuller  to

sarcinatori  sarcienda,  nulla  mercede  be  cleaned,  or  to  a  tailor  to  be  mended,

constituta  neque  promissa,  mandati  without  any  pay  being   agreed  on  or

competit  actio.  promised,   an  action  mandati  may  be

brought.

Gai.  ii.  162 ;  D.  xvii.  1.  1.  4.

Althougli  the  execution  of  the  mandatum  was  necessarily
gratuitous,  yet,  without  making  the  contract  a  locatio  conductio,  a
mandator  might  offer  a  reward  to  the  mandatarius,  not  exactly  in
payment  of,  but  in  gratitude  for,  his  services.  Such  a  recompense
was  called  salarium  or  sometimes  honorarium,  a  term  that  Avas
especially  applied  to  the  recompense  offered  to  those  who  exercised
the  liberal  professions,  such  as  philosophers,  rhetoricians,  physi-
cians, advocates,  &c.  These  honoraria  could  not  be  made  the
subject  of  an  action  ;  but  the  magistrate,  pr^tor,  or  presses  of  the
province  pronounced  extra  ordinem  (see  Introd.  sec.  108)  whether
they  were  due  and  what  was  the  proper  amount.  (D.  L.  13.  1.)

Tit.  XXYII.     DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUASI  EX

CONTRACTU.

Post  genera  contractuum  enume-  Having  enumerated  the  difierent
rata,  dispiciamus  etiam  de  iis  obli-  kinds  of  contracts,  let  us  treat  of  those
gationibus  quse  non  proprie  quidem  obligations  which  do  not  spring,  pro-
ex  contractu  nasci  intelliguntur  ;  perly  speaking,  from  a  contract,  but
sed  tamen,  quia  non  ex  maleficio  yet,  as  they  do  not  take  their  origin
substantiam  capiunt,  quasi  ex  con-  from  a  delict,  seem  to  arise,  as  it  were,
tractu  nasci  videntur.  from  a  contract.

If  the  oblio;ations  were  to  be  considered  as  always  arisino;
either  ex  contractu  or  ex  delicto,  one  man  could  only  be  bound  to
another  in  one  of  two  ways  ;  either  by  a  mutual  exercise  of  will
he  had  entered  into  an  agreement  with  him,  or  he  had  done  him
some  injury  which  he  ought  to  repair.  But  there  were  many
instances  in  which  justice  required  that  he  should  be  considered
bound,  where  na  contract  had  been  made,  and  where  nothing  to
which  the  law  gave  the  technical  term  of  delictum  had  been  com-
mitted. Such  cases,  however,  if  separately  examined,  would
approach  more  nearly  either  to  an  obligatio  ex  contractu  or  to  one
ex  delicto.     If  it  more  nearly  resembled  the  former,  the  binding  tie

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVII.

379

was  called  an  ohligatio  quasi  ex  contractu  ;  if  the  latter,  it  was  called
an  ohligatio  quasi  ex  delicto,     (See  Introd.  sec.  87.)

The  leading  distinction  between  oblio-ations  ex  contractu  and
those  quasi  ex  contractu  is,  that  in  the  former  one  person  chooses  to
bind  himself  to  another,  in  the  latter  he  is  placed  in  such  circum-
stances that  he  is  thereby  bound  to  another.  To  take,  for  instance,
the  examples  given  in  the  Title :  if  I  take  upon  me  the  manage-
ment of  my  neighbour's  affairs,  become  tutor,  have  things  in
common  with  others  who  are  yet  not  my  partners,  accept  an
inheritance,  or  receive  money  not  due  to  me,  the  mere  fact  of  my
so  conducting  myself  imposes  on  me  certain  duties  which  the  law
will  force  me  to  fulfil.  Of  course,  if  I  make  an  express  agreement
in  any  of  these  cases,  I  am  then  bound  by  the  agreement,  and
not  by  the  circumstances  of  my  position.  It  is  only  in  the  absence
of  any  agreement  that  I  am  bound  by  an  ohligatio  quasi  ex  con-
tractu.  An  ohligatio  quasi  ex  contractu  does  not  rest  on  any
contract  at  all ;  it  rests  on  a  fact  or  event,  but  there  is  an  analogy
between  a  contract  and  the  kind  of  fact  or  events  which  give  rise
to  an  ohligatio  quasi  ex  contractu ^-iox  they  both  create  rights  in
personam.  (See  Austin,  Province  of  Jurisprudence  Determined,
Appendix  xl.)  The  instances  of  obligations  quasi  ex  contractu
which  follow  are  only  meant  as  examples,  not  as  an  exhaustive
list.

1.  Igitur  cum  quis  absentis  ne-
gotia  gesserit,  ultro  citroque  inter
eos  nascuntur  actiones  quae  appel-
lantur  negotiorum  gestorum  ;  sed
domino  quidem  rei  gestae  adversus
eum  qui  gessit,  directa  competit
actio,  negotiorum  autem  gestori
contraria.  Quas  ex  nullo  contractu
proprie  nasci  manifestum  est  ;
quippe  ita  nascuntur  istse  actiones,
si  sine  mandato  quisque  alienis  ne-
gotiis  gerendis  se  obtulerit,  ex  qua
causa  ii  quorum  negotia  gesta  fue-
rint,  etiam  ignorantes  obligantur.
Idque  utilitatis  causa  receptum  est,
ne  absentium  qui  subita  festinatione
coacti,  nulli  demandata  negotiorum
suorum  administratione,  peregre
profecti  essent,  desererentur  ne-
gotia :  quae  sane  nemo  curaturus
esset,  si  de  eo  quod  quis  impendisset,
nullam  habiturus  esset  actionem.
Sicut  autem  is  qui  utiliter  gesserit
negotia,  habet  obligatum  dominum
negotiorum,  ita  et  contra  iste  quo-
que  tenetur  ut  administrationis  ra-
tionem  reddat  :  quo  casu  ad  exactis-
simam  quisque  diligentiam  compel-
litur  reddere  rationem,  nee  sufficit
talem  diligentiam  adhibuisse  qua-
lem  suis  rebus   adhibere  soleret,  si

1.  Thus,  if  a  person  has  managed
the  affairs  of  another  in  his  absence,
they  have  reciprocally  actions  negotio-
rum gestoruTYi,  the  action  belonging  to
the  owner  against  him  who  has  managed
his  affairs  being  an  actio  directa,  and  the
action  given  to  this  person  against  the
owner  being  an  actio  contraria.  It  is
evident  that  these  actions  cannot  pro-
perly be  said  to  arise  from  a  contract,
for  they  arise  only  when  one  person
has,  without  receiving  a  mandate,  taken
upon  himself  the  management  of  the
affairs  of  another,  and  consequently
those  whose  affairs  are  thus  managed,
are  bound  by  an  obligation,  even  with-
out their  knowing  it.  It  is  from  mo-
tives of  convenience  that  this  has  been
admitted,  to  prevent  the  entire  neglect
of  the  affairs  of  absent  persons,  who
may  be  forced  to  depart  in  haste,  with-
out having  entrusted  the  management
to  any  one  ;  and  certainly  no  one  would
pay  any  attention  to  them,  unless  he
could  recover  by  action  any  expenses
he  might  be  put  to.  On  the  other
hand,  just  as  he  who  has  advantage-
ously managed  the  affairs  of  another,
makes  this  person  liable  to  him  by  an
obligation,  so  he  himself  is  bound  to
render  an  account  of  his  management.

380

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVIl.

mo  do   alius    diligentior    commodius
administratiirus  esset  negotia.

D.  iii.  5.  2

And  the  standard  which  he  is  bound
to  observe  in  rendering  an  account,  is
that  of  the  most  exact  diligence,  nor  is
it  sufficient  that  he  should  use  such
diligence  as  he  employs  in  the  manage-
ment of  his  own  affairs,  that  is,  if  it  is
possible  a  person  of  greater  diligence
could  manage  the  affairs  of  the  absent
person  better.

D.  xliv.  7.  5  ;  C.  ii.  18.  20.

Fdiam  ignor antes.  If  the  owners  had  known  of  the  part  taken
in  the  management  of  then*  affairs,  there  would  have  been  a
mandatum  taciturn.

2.  Tutores  quoque  qui  tutelae  ju-
dicio  tenentur,  non  proprie  ex  con-
tractu obligati  intelliguntur  (nullum
enim  negotium  inter  tutorem  et  pu-
pillum  contrahitur)  ;  sed  quia  sane
non  ex  maleficio  tenentur,  quasi  ex
contractu  teneri  videntur.  Et  hoc
autem  casu  mutute  sunt  actiones  :
non  tantum  enim  pupillus  cum
tutore  habet  tuteloe  actionem,  sed
ex  contrario  tutor  cum  pupillo  habet
contrariam  tutelse,  si  vel  impendent
aliquid  in  rem  pupilli,  vel  pro  eo
fuerit  obligatus,  aut  rem  suam  cre-
ditoribus  ejus  obligaverit.

D.  xliv.

2.  Tutors,  again,  who  are  liable  to
the  action  tutelae,  are  not,  properly-
speaking,  bound  by  a  contract,  for  there
is  no  contract  made  between  the  tutor
and  the  pupil,  but  as  they  are  certainly
not  bound  by  a  delict,  they  seem  to  be
bound  quasi  ex  contractu.  In  this  case,
too,  there  are  reciprocal  actions,  for
not  only  has  the  pupil  an  action  tutelde,
against  the  tutor,  but,  in  his  turn,  the
tutor  has  an  actio  contraria  tutelae
against  the  pupil,  if  he  has  incurred
any  expenses  in  managing  the  pupil's
property,  or  has  entered  into  an  obli-
gation for  him,  or  given  his  own  pro-
perty as  security  to  the  pupil's  creditors.

7.  5.  1.

We  should  add  here  the  corresponding  case  of  the  curator.

His  negotiorum  gestio  did  not  give  rise  to  a  special  action,  but
to  the  action  negotiorum  gestorum  contraria,  which  he  could  avail
himself  of  to  reimburse  himself  for  all  reasonable  expenses.  (D.
iii.  5.  3.  5.)

Quasi  ex  contractu  teneri  videntur.  The  exact  translation
w^ould  be  ^  seem  to  be  bound  by  a  tie  analogous  to  that  by  which
persons  are  bound  under  contracts  ; '  but  as  this  is  too  long  a
phrase  to  repeat  every  time  the  words  quasi  ex  contractu  occur,
the  Latin  has  been  retained  in  the  translation.

3.  Item  si  inter  aliquos  com-
munis sit  res  sine  societate,  veluti
quod  pariter  eis  legata  donatave
esset,  et  alter  eorum  alteri  ideo
teneatur  communi  dividundo  ju-
dicio,  quod  solus  fructus  ex  ea  re
perceperit,  aut  quod  socius  ejus
solus  in  eam  rem  necessarias  im-
pensas  fecerit,  non  intelligitur  pro-
prie ex  contractu  obligatus,  quippe
nihil  inter  se  contraxerunt ;  sed  quia
non  ex  maleficio  tenetur,  quasi  ex
contractu  teneri  videtur.

D.  xvii.

3.  So,  again,  if  a  thing  is  common
to  two  or  more  persons,  without  there
being  any  partnership  between  them,
as,  for  instance,  if  they  have  received
a  joint  legacy  or  gift,  and  one  of  them
is  liable  to  the  other  by  an  action  com-
muni dividundo,  because  he  alone  has
enjoyed  the  fruits  of  the  thing,  or  be-
cause the  other  party  has  incurred
expenses  necessary  for  the  thing,  he
cannot  be  said  to  be  bound  by  a  con-
tract, for  no  contract  has  been  made  ;
but  as  he  is  not  bound  by  a  delict,  he
is  said  to  be  bound  quasi  ex  contractu.

2.  31.  34.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVII.  381

Necessarias  Impensas.  Useful  expenses,  and  not  merely  neces-
sary ones,  could  be  recovered.     (D.  x.  3.  6.  3.)

4.  Idem  juris  est  de  eo  qui  colie-  4.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  a
redi  suo  familige  erciscuudee  judicio  person  who  is  bound  to  his  co-heir  by
ex  his  causis  obligatus  est.                      an  action  familim  erciscundx.

D.  xvii.  2.  34.

The  aciio  familicB  erciscundoi  was  that  by  which  any  one
lieres  applied  to  the  judge  to  make  a  fair  division  of  the  inhe-
ritance.

5.  Heres  quoque  legatorum  no-  5.  The  heir,  too,  is  not  bound  to  the
mine  non  proprie  ex  contractu  obli-  legatee  by  a  contract,  for  the  legatee
gatus  intelligitur  (neque  enim  cum  cannot  be  said  to  have  made  a  contract
herede,  neque  cum  defuncto  ullum  with  the  heir  or  with  the  deceased  ;
negotium  legatarius  gessisse  proprie  and  yet,  as  the  heir  is  not  bound  by  a
dici  potest) ;  et  tamen  quia  ex  male-  delict,  he  is  considered  to  be  bound
ficio  non  est  obligatus  heres,  quasi  qyiasi  ex  contractu.

ex  contractu  debere  intelligitur.

D.  xliv.  7.  5.  2.

The  circumstance  of  accepting  the  inheritance  imposed  on  the
heir  the  obligation  of  carrying  out  the  testator's  wishes,  and  this
he  was  compelled  to  do  by  the  actio  ex  testamento.  If  a  particular
thing  were  given  as  a  legacy,  so  that  the  legatee  could  bring  a
vindicatio,  he  might  exercise  his  choice  between  the  personal  and
the  real  action.

6.  Item  is  cui  quis  per  errorem  6.  A  person  to  whom  money  not
non  debitum  solvit,  quasi  ex  con-  due  has  been  paid  by  mistake,  is  bound
tractu  debere  videtur.  Ideo  enim  quasi  ex  contractu.  For  so  far  is  he
non  intelligitur  proprie  ex  contractu  from  being  bound  by  a  contract,  that,
obligatus,  ut  si  certiorem  rationem  to  reason  strictly,  we  may  say,  as  we
sequamur,  magis  (ut  supra  diximus)  have  said  before,  that  he  is  bound
ex  distractu  quam  ex  contractu  pos-  rather  by  the  dissolution  than  by  the
sit  dici  obligatus  esse  :  nam  qui  formation  of  a  contract ;  for  a  payment
solvendi  animo  pecuniam  dat,  in  hoc  is  generally  made  to  dissolve,  not  to
dare  videtur  ut  distrahat  potius  ne-  form,  a  contract ;  and  yet  he  who  re-
gotium,  quam  contrahat  ;  sed  tamen  ceives  it  in  the  case  we  have  mentioned
perinde  is  qui  accepit  obligatur,  ac  is  bound  exactly  as  if  it  had  been  given
si  mutuum  illi  daretur,  et  ideo  con-  him  as  a  mutuum,  and  is  therefore
dictione  tenetur.  liable  to  a  condictio.

D.  xliv.  7.  8.  3.

If  the  person  who  paid  what  was  not  due  was  one  who,  like  a
pupil  or  madman,  had  not  legally  the  power  of  passing  the  property
in  what  he  gave,  no  property  in  the  thing  paid  passed  by  the
transfer,  and  the  tutor  or  curator  recovered  it  by  a  viiidicatio,  unless
the  thing  ceased  to  exist,  and  then  recourse  was  had  to  a  con-
dictio indehiti,  i.e.  a  condictio  where,  as  in  an  actio  vfiutui^  the  claim
was  for  things  to  be  given  back  of  a  like  nature  ;  but  if  he  had  this
power,  the  property  was  transferred  by  the  delivery,  and  he  could
not  recover  the  thing  itself, but  could  only  bring  a  co?z^2cf zo,  in  which
he  claimed  that  the  defendant  should  give  him  what  he  ought  to
give  to  put  the  plaintiff  in  a  proper  position  {dare  oportere).

382  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXVII.

If  a  person  knowingly  made  a  payment  not  due,  he  could  not
recover  what  he  paid,  as  the  payment  was  treated  as  a  gift ;  nor
could  he,  if  he  paid  what  was  due  by  a  natural,  though  not  by  a
legal,  obligation,  or  paid  sooner  than  he  need  have  done  what  he
must  pay  at  a  certain  date ;  but  he  could  recover  if  he  paid,
under  a  conditional  undertaking,  before  the  event  had  happened.
(D.  xii.  6.  64.)  The  error  which  would  permit  him  to  reco-
ver might  be  one  arising  from  ignorance  not  only  of  fact  but  of
law.    Juris  ignorantia  swum  petentibus  non  nocet.     (D.  xxii.  6.  7.)

The  word  '  pay,'  *  solvo,^  must  be  taken  in  a  much  more  ex-
tended sense  than  the  payment  of  money.  It  must  be  consi-
dered as  including  anything  given  to  or  done  for  another.

It  is  here  said  that  the  person  who  receives  what  is  not  due  is
bound  not  merely  quasi  ex  contractu,  but  as  if  he  had  been  bound
by  a  particular  contract,  viz.  mutuum.  So  the  persons  interfering
in  the  affairs  of  another,  the  tutor  and  the  curator,  are  bound  as
if  by  a  mandate,  and  the  persons  mentioned  in  paragr.  3  and  4  as
if  they  were  bound  by  the  particular  contract  of  societas.

7.  Ex  quibusdam   tamen  causis  7.  In  some  cases,  however,  money

repeti  non  potest  quod  per  errorem  paid  by  mistake  cannot  be  recovered  ;

non  debitum  solutum  sit ;  namque  the  ancients  have  decided  that  this  is

definierunt  veteres,  ex  quibus  causis  so  in  cases  in  which  the   amount  re-

inficiando   lis  crescit,  ex  iis   causis  covered  is  doubled  if  the   liability  is

non    debitum   solutum    repeti    non  denied ;   as,   for   instance,    in   actions

posse,  veluti  ex  lege  Aquilia,  item  brought  under  the  lex  Aqiiilia,  or  with

ex  legato.     Quod  veteres  quidem  in  respect   to   a   legacy.      The   rule   was

iis  legatis  locum  habere  voluerunt,  only  applied  by  the  ancients,  in  the

quae   certa    constituta    per    damna-  case  of  legacies,  where  specific  things

tionem   cuicumque    legata   fuerant.  were  given  per  darmiationem.     But  our

Nostra  autem  constitutio,  cum  unam  constitution,  which  has  placed  all  lega-

naturam    omnibus    legatis  et   fidei-  cies   and  Jldeicommissa  on    the   same

commissis  indulsit,  hujusmodi  aug-  footing,  has  extended  to  all  the  effect

mentum  in  omnibus  legatis  et  fidei-  of  denial  in  doubling  the  amount  re-

commissis  extendi  voluit ;  sed  non  quired.     It  has  not,  however,  given  it

omnibus  legatariis  prsebuit,  sed  tan-  in  behalf  of  all  legatees,  but  only  in

tummodo  in  iis  legatis  et  fideicom-  the  case  of  legacies  and  Jldeicommissa

missis  quse  sacrosanctis  ecclesiis  et  left  to  churches  and  other  holy  places  ;

ceteris  venerabilibus  locis,  quse  re-  such  legacies,  although  paid  when  not

ligionis   vel  pietatis   intuitu    hono-  due,  cannot  be  recovered,
rificantur,  derelicta  sunt.     Quse,  si
indebita  solvantur,  non  repetuntur.

Gai.  ii.  283 ;  iv.  9.  171 ;  C.  iv.  5.  4 ;  C.  i.  2.  23.

This  penalty,  first  exacted  from  those  who  denied  that  a  judg-
ment pronounced  against  them  had  been  pronounced,  was  ex-
tended to  cases  of  refusing  to  pay  legacies  given  per  damnationem,
to  cases  under  the  lex  Aquilia  (Tit.  4.  3),  and  to  many  other  cases.
(Tit.  4.  6.  23.)

In  all  cases  where  by  denying  his  liability  the  person  liable
might  have  an  increased  amount  ultimately  recovered  against
him,  it  was  considered  that  paying  the  thing  for  which  he  was,
or  for  which  he  thought  himself,  liable,  was  but  a  mode  of  escap-

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXVIII.

383

ing  from  paying  a  penalty,  and  that  it  was  paid  in  order  to  attain
security.  If,  therefore,  it  was  discovered  that  the  thing  need  not
have  been  paid,  yet,  as  the  person  who  paid  it  had  paid  it  to
purchase  security,  he  could  not  recover  it  back.

Nostra  constitutio.  This  constitution  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
Code,  but  we  have  provisions  in  the  Code  bearing  on  the  sub-
ject.    (See  C.  vi.  43.  2.  1-3.)

Ceteris  venerahilibus  locis.  Such,  for  instance,  as  monasteries^
asylums  for  strangers,  orphans,  the  aged,  &c.    (C.  i.  2.  23.)

Tit.  XXYIII.    PER  QUAS  PERSONAS  NOBIS
OBLIGATIO  ACQUIRITUR.

Expositis  generibus  obligationum
qii£e  ex  contractu  vel  quasi  ex  con-
tractu nascuntur,  admonendi  sumus
acquiri  nobis,  non  solum  per  nosmet-
ipsos,  sed  etiam  per  eas  personas
qu83  in  nostra  potestate  sunt,  veluti
per  servos  et  fiiios  nostros  ;  ut  tamen
quod  per  servos  quidem  nobis  acqui-
ritur,  totum  nostrum  fiat ;  quod
autem  per  liberos  quos  in  potestate
habemus,  ex  obligatione  fuerit  ac-
quisitum,  hoc  dividatur  secundum
imaginem  rerum  proprietatis  et  usus-
fructus  quam  nostra  discrevit  consti-
tutio :  ut  quod  ab  actione  commodum
perveniat,  hujus  usumfructum  qui-
dem habeat  pater,  proprietas  autem
filio  servetur,  scilicet  patre  actionem
movente  secundum  noveUse  nostrse
constitutionis  divisionem.

After  having  gone  through  the
different  kinds  of  obligations  which
arise  from  a  contract,  or  arise  quasi  ex
contractu,  we  may  observe  that  we
may  acquire  an  obligation,  not  only
by  ourselves,  but  also  by  those  who
are  in  our  power,  as  our  slaves  or
children.  But  there  is  this  distinc-
tion in  acquiring  by  slaves  or  by  chil-
dren, that  what  is  acquired  for  us
by  our  slaves  is  entirely  ours,  while
the  benefit  of  the  obligation  acquired
by  our  children  is  divided  in  the  same
way  as  our  constitution  has  laid  down
with  respect  to  the  ownership  and
usufruct  of  things.  Thus,  of  all  that
is  gained  by  an  action,  the  father  will
have  the  usufruct,  and  the  ownership
will  be  reserved  for  the  son,  that  is  to
say,  when  the  action  is  brought  by  the
father  in  conformity  with  what  is  laid
down  by  our  new  constitution.

Gai.  iii.  163  ;  C.  vi.  61.  8.  3.

By  acquiring  an  obligation  is  meant  that  we  become  creditors,
and  have  a  right  to  the  action  necessary  to  enforce  the  obligation.

As  to  the  division  of  the  usufruct  and  ownership,  see  Bk.ii.
Tit.  9.  1.     It  is  the  object  of  the  obligation,  it  may  be  observed,
not  the  obligation  itself,  that  is  thus  divided  between  the  father
and  the  son.     Only  the  father  could  bring  the  action  to  enforce
the  obligation.

(C.  vi.  61.  1.  3.)

1.  Item  per  liberos  homines  et
alienos  servos  quos  bona  fide  possi-
demus,  acquiritur  nobis  ;  sed  tantum
ex  duabus  causis,  id  est,  si  quid  ex
operis  suis  vel  ex  re  nostra  acquirant.

1.  An  obligation  is  also  acquired
for  us  by  freemen,  and  by  slaves  be-
longing to  others,  whom  we  possess
bona  Jide,  but  only  in  two  cases,
namely,  when  it  arises  from  their
labours,  or  from  something  belonging
to  us.

Gai.  iii.  164.

See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  9.  4.

384

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIX.

Per  liberos  homines,  i.e.  by  persons  really  free,  but  whom  we
bona  fide  believe  to  be  slaves.

2.  It  is  equally  acquired  for  us  in
the  same  two  cases  by  a  slave  of  whom
we  have  the  usufruct  or  use.

2.  Per  eum  quoque  servum  m
quo  usumfructum  vel  usum  habe-
mus,  similiter  ex  cluabus  istis  causis
nobis  acquiritur.

Gai.  iii.  165  ;  D.  vii.  8.  14.

See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  9.  4.

In  the  case  of  a  slave  of  whom  we  have  only  the  use,  we  can
only  acquire  when  the  two  cases  unite,  i.e.  when  his  labour  is
expended  on  something  that  is  our  property,  for  we  cannot  derive
any  benefit  from  his  labour  expended  elsewhere.

3.  Communem  servum  pro  domi-
nica  parte  dominis  acquirere  certum
est,  excepto  eo  quod  uni  noniinatim
stipulanclo  aut  per  traditionem  ac-
cipiendo,  illi  soli  acquirit :  veluti  cum
ita  stipulatur,  Titio  domino  meo  dare
spondes  ?  Sed  si  unius  domini  jussu
servus  fuerit  stipulatus,  licet  antea
dubitabatur,  tamen  post  nostram  de-
cisionem  res  expedita  est,  ut  illi
tantum  acquirat  qui  hoc  ei  facere
jussit,  ut  supra  dictum  est.

3.  A  slave  held  in  common  un-
doubtedly acquires  for  his  different
masters  in  proportion  in  their  inter-
ests in  him,  excepting  that,  in  stipu-
lating or  receiving  by  tradition  for  one
only,  whom  he  mentions  by  name,  he
acquires  only  for  this  one  ;  for  instance,
if  he  stipulates  thus,  '  Do  you  engage
to  give  to  Titius  my  master  ? '  But  if
the  slave  has  stipulated  by  order  of
one  master  only,  in  spite  of  former
doubts,  there  is  no  question  since  our
constitution,  but  that  he  acquires,  as
we  have  already  said,  for  him  alone
who  has  given  him  the  order.

Gai.  iii.  367;  C.  iv.  27.  3.

The  text  only  notices  the  acquisition  of  obligations  through
others  as  recognised  by  the  civil  law,  i.e.  through  slaves  and  sons
in  pote state,  and  does  not  notice  the  pr^torian  changes  by  which
the  principal  acquired  obligations  through  his  agent.  (See  Tit.
26.  pr.)

Tit.  XXIX.  QUIBUS  MODIS  OBLIGATIO  TOLLITUE.

Tollitur  autem  omnis  obligatio
solutione  ejus  quod  debetur,  vel  si
quis  consentiente  creditore  aliud  pro
alio  solverit.  Nee  tamen  interest
quis  solvat,  utrum  ipse  qui  debet,
an  alius  pro  eo  ;  liberatur  enim  et
alio  solvente,  sive  sciente  debitore
sive  ignorante  vel  invito  solutio  fiat.
Item  si  reus  solverit,  etiam  ii  qui
pro  eo  intervenerunt,  liberantur.
Idem  ex  contrario  contingit,  si  fide-
jussor solverit  ;  non  enim  solus  ipse
liberatur,  sed  etiam  reus.

Every  obligation  is  dissolved  by
the  payment  of  the  thing  due,  or  of
something  else  given  in  its  place  with
the  consent  of  the  creditor.  And  it
makes  no  difference  whether  it  is  the
debtor  himself  who  pays,  or  some  one
else  for  him  ;  for  the  debtor  is  freed
from  the  obligation,  if  payment  is  made
by  a  third  person,  and  that  either  with
or  without  the  knowledge  of  the  debtor,
or  even  against  his  will.  If  the  debtor
pays,  all  those  who  have  become  surety
for  him  are  thereby  freed,  just  as  if  a
surety  pays,  not  only  he  himself  is
freed,  but  the  principal  is  freed  also.

Gai.  iii.  168  ;  D.  xlvi.  3.  53  ;  D.  xlvi.  3.  38.  2  ;  D.  xlvi.  3.  43  ;  D.  xlvi.  1.  66.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIX.  385

We  now  pass  to  considering  how  an  obligation  once  formed
may  be  dissolved.  Solvere,  to  unloose,  dissolve  the  tie,  is  the
appropriate  term  for  the  process,  in  whatever  way  it  may  be  ac-
complished —  Solutionis  verbum  pertinet  ad  omnem  liberationem
quoquo  modo  factam  (D.  xlvii.  3.  54) — although  most  generally
applied  to  the  payment  of  money,  as  the  mode  by  which  contracts
are  usually  terminated.  It  is  by  a  slight  extension  of  the  strict
use  of  the  word  that  a  person  was  said  not  solvere  obligationem,
but  solvere  pecuniam.

The  civil  law,  which  imposed  forms  on  the  formation  of  a  con-
tract, imposed  corresponding  forms  on  its  dissolution.  And  when
these  Avere  fulfilled,  the  debtor  was  said  to  be  freed  from  his  obli-
gation '  ipso  jure.'  In  later  times,  in  cases  where  these  forms
had  not  been  gone  through,  but  yet  equity  demanded  that  the
debtor  should  be  considered  free,  the  pr^tor  allowed  him  to  repel,
by  an  exception,  the  creditor  who  sued  him ;  and  it  has  thence
been  said,  *  obligatio  aut  ipso  jure,  aut  per  exceptionem  tollitur.''

When  it  is  said  in  the  text  that  if  the  fidejussor  pays  the
principal  is  freed,  the  case  must  be  understood  to  be  referred  to  of
^fidejussor  paying,  without  using  his  right  of  having  the  actions
ceded  to  him.  Pavment  might  be  made  to  the  creditor  or  his
authorised  agent,  to  the  tutor  or  curator,  or  to  the  pupil  if
authorised.

Of  course,  in  every  stage  of  the  law,  payment  put  an  end  to
the  contract.  The  claims  of  the  contracting  parties  were  satisfied,
and  nothing  more  remained  to  be  done.  But,  supposing  payment
was  not  made,  but  one  of  the  parties  was  willing  to  release  the
other,  or  one  party  could  claim,  for  some  reason,  to  be  released,
certain  solemn  forms  had  been  entered  into,  which  could  not  be
made  of  no  effect  by  the  mere  consent  of  the  parties.  Such  forms
were  too  solemn  in  the  eyes  of  the  law  to  lose  their  power  unless
other  forms  equally  solemn  were  gone  through.  Accordingly,  in
such  cases,  where  no  real  payment  was  made,  there  was  what
Gains  calls  an  imaginaria  solutio,  varying  in  the  method  in  which
it  was  made  according  to  the  forms  nexum,  verbis,  or  Uteris,  with
which  the  contract  had  been  formed.

If,  for  instance,  the  contract  had  been  formed  per  ces  etlibram,
not  less  than  five  witnesses  and  a  libripens  were  called  together.
The  debtor  struck  the  scale  with  a  piece  of  money  and  gave  it
to  the  creditor  in  the  name  of  the  whole  sum  owing.  (Gai.  iii.
174.)  This  form  was  also  adopted  in  cases  where  payment  of
a  legacy  given  per  damnationem  was  remitted,  probably  because
the  testament  was  itself  supposed  to  be  made  per  ces  et  libram ;
and  also  in  cases  where  payment  of  money  due  by  a  judicial
sentence  was  remitted,  probably  because  the  most  formal  mode  of
imaginary  payment  was  adopted  Avhen  the  money  was  due  in  a
way  which  the  law  considered  as  specially  solemn.  (Gai.  iii.
175.)     This    form   of  imaginary   payment  was    also    applicable

c  c

386  LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIX.

wherever  anything  certain  of  those  things  which  '  ponder e,  numero.
mensurave  constant'^  was  due.

If  the  contract  had  been  made  '  verbis,^  the  debtor  asked  the
creditor  if  he  held  what  was  due,  as  received,  '  Quod  ego  tihi  jyro-
misi,  habesne  acceptum  ?  '  The  creditor  answered  that  he  did,
*  Habeo.''  The  creditor  was  said  ^  acceptum  ferre^  and  the  pro-
cess was  called  '  acceptilatio.''     (See  next  paragr.)

If  the  contract  had  been  made  '  Uteris,''  the  debtor  probably
entered  on  his  tabulce  the  expenditure  (^expensilatio)  of  the  sum
due,  with  the  consent  of  the  creditor,  but  we  cannot  learn  any-
thing from  Gains  on  the  subject.

If  the  contract  had  been  made  re,  the  mere  return  of  the
thing  was  a  sufficient  sign  that  the  contract  was  at  an  end.
There  was  a  visible  act,  and  the  whole  object  of  the  forms  by
which  contracts  were  made  and  dissolved  was  to  substitute  visible
acts  for  mere  expressions  of  consent.  Where  the  contract,  as
belonging  to  iho,  jus  gentium,  coxAdi  be  made  merely  by  consent,
it  could  also  be  dissolved  by  consent.     (See  paragr.  4.)

1.  Item  per  acceptilationem  toUi-  1.  An  obligation  is  also  put  an  end

tiir  obligatio.    Est  aiitem  acceptilatio  to  by  acceptilation.     This  is  an  ima-

imaginaria  solutio  :  quod  enim  ex  ver-  ginary  payment,  for  if  Titius   wishes

borum  obligatione  Titio  debetur,  id  to  remit  payment  of  that  which  is  due

si  velit  Titius  remittere,  poterit  sic  to  him  by  a  verbal  contract,  he  can  do

fieri  ut  patiatur  hsec  verba  debitorem  so  by  permitting  the  debtor  to  put  to

dicere,  Quod  ego  tibi  promisi  habesne  him  the  following  question,  '  Do  you

acceptum  ?  et  Titius  respondeat,  Ha-  acknowledge    to   have    received    that

beo.    Sed  et  Greece  potest  acceptum  which  I  promised  you  ? '  Titius  then

fieri,   dummodo  sic  fiat,  ut  Latinis  answering,   'I  do.'     The  acknowledg-

verbis  solet :  tx^iQ  Xai3(ov  dijvama  Torra;  ment  may  also  be  made  in  correspond-

iX^o  \a66iv.    Quo  genere,  ut  diximus,  ing  Greek  -words,  f  \etc  Xa/iw»^   Sijvapia

tantum    eve  solvuntur    obligationes  rona  ;  6\'ai  XaSdiv.     In  this  way  verbal

quae  ex  verbis  consistunt,  non  etiam  contracts  are  dissolved,  but  not  con-

ceterpe  :  consentaneum  enim  visum  tracts  made  in  other  ways  :  it  seemed

est,  verbis  factam  obligationem  aliis  natural  that  an  obligation  formed  by

posse  verbis  dissolvi.     Sed  et  id  quod  words  should  be  dissolved  by  words  ;

alia  ex  causa  debetur,  potest  in  sti-  but  anything  due  by  any  other  kind

pulationem  deduci  et  per  acceptila-  of  contract  may  be  made  the  subject

tion em  dissolvi.     Sicut  autem  quod  of  a  stipulation,  and  the  debtor  be  freed

debetur,  pro  parte  recte  solvitur,  ita  by  acceptilation.     And  as   part   of  a

in   partem   debiti    acceptilatio   fieri  debt  may  be  paid,  so  acceptilation  may

potest.  be  made  of  a  part  only.

Gai.  iii.  169,  170.  172  ;  D.  xlvi.  4.  8.  4  ;  D.  xlvi.  4.  9.

Properly  the  acceptilatio  only  operated  as  a  release  when  the
contract  had  been  made  verbis,  but  it  was  held,  in  all  cases,  to
contain  by  implication  a  pact  or  agreement  not  to  sue,  and,  there-
fore, an  exceptio  could  be  grounded  on  it  to  repel  the  creditor
Avho  had  entered  into  it.  Si  acceptilatio  inutilis  fuit,  tacita  pac-
tione  id  acturus  videtur,  ne  peter etur.  (D.  ii.  14.  27.  9.)  The
jurists,  however,  found  a  means  of  making  the  acceptilatio  extend
to  every  kind  of  contract.  It  was  looked  on  as  a  stipulation
which  operated  as  a  novation  of  the  old  contract,  that  is,  which

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIX.

387

did  away  with  the  former  contract,  and  substituted  a  new  one  in
its  place.

2.  Est  prodita  stipulatio  quae
vvilgo  Aqiiiliana  appellatiir,  per
quam  stipulationem  contiiigit  ut
omnium  rerum  obligatio  in  stipii-
latiim  deducatur,  et  ea  per  accep-
tilationem  tollatur  ;  stipulatio  enim
Aquiliana  novat  omnes  obligationes,
et  a  Gallo  Aquilio  ita  composita  est :
'  Quicquid  te  mihi  ex  quacumque
causa  dare  facere  oportet  oportebit,
prsesens  in  diemve,  quarumque  re-
rum  mihi  tecum  actio,  quasque  ad-
versus  te  petitio  vel  adversus  te
persecutio  est  eritve,  quodve  tu
meum  habes,  tenes  possidesve,  do-
love  malo  fecisti  quominus  possi-
deas  :  quanti  quseque  earnm  rerum
res  erit/  tantam  pecuniam  dari
stipulatus  est  Aulu-s  Agerius  ;  spo-
pondit  Numerius  Negidius.  Item
ex  diverso  Numerius  Negidius  in-
terrogavit  Aulum  Agerium  :  '  Quic-
quid tibi  liodierno  die  per  Aquilia-
nam  stipulationem  spopondi,  id
omne  habesne  acceptum  ? '  respondit
Aulus  Agerius  :  '  Habeo,  acceptum-
que  tuli.'

2.  A  stipulation  has  been  invented,
commonly    called    the    Aquilian,    by
which  every  obligation,  whatever  may
be  the- thing  it  concerns,  is  put  into  the
form  of  a  stipulation,  and  afterwards
dissolved  by  acceptilation.    This  Aqui-
lian stij)ulation  effects  a  novation  of
all  obligations,  and  was  framed  in  the
following  terms  by  Gallus  Aquilius  : —
'  Whatever  for  any  cause  you  are  or
shall  be  bound  to  give  or  do  for  me,
either  now  or  at  a  future  day,  every-
thing for  which  I  have  or  shall  have
against  you,  actions,  personal  or  real,
or  right  to  have  recourse  to  the  extra-
ordiiiaria  judicla  of   the   magistrate  ;
everything  of  mine  which   you  have,
hold,  or  possess,  or  which  you  only  do
not  possess  through  some  wilful  fault
of  your   own,  whatever   shall   be  the
value    of   all   these   things,'    so  much
Aulus   Agerius   stipulated   should    be
given   him  in  money,   and  Numerius
Negidius  engaged   to  give  it ;  on  the
other  hand,  Numerius  Negidius  put  to
Aulus  Agerius  the  question,  'All  that
I  have   promised   you   to-day  by  the
Aquilian  stipulation,  do  you  acknow-
ledge    it    as    received  ? '    and    Aulus
Agerius  answered  that  he  did  acknow-
ledge it.

D.  ii.  15.  4 ;  D.  xlvi.  4.  18.  1.

This  Aquilius  Gallus  was  the  friend  of  Cicero,  whose  col-
league he  was  in  the  pr^&torship  (b.c.  65).  He  was  the  pupil
of  Mucins,  and  the  teacher  of  Sulpicius,  and  is  mentioned  in
the  Digest  (i.  2.  2.  42)  as  of  great  authority  with  the  people.
He  is  said  to  have  devised  a  means  by  which  postumi  sui  might
be  instituted  (D.  xxviii.  2.  29) ;  and  Cicero  informs  us  that  he
was  also  the  author  of  certain  formulae  in  the  actions  of  theft.
{De  Off.  iii.  14)  (see  page  180).

We  may  remark  with  what  care  and  forethought  Aquilius
Gallus  has  made  his  formula  applicable  to  all  possible  cases.
'  Causa  '  is  the  generical  expression.  '  Oportet,  oportebit '  embrace
the  present  and  the  future.  '  Prcesens  in  diemve  '  (most  texts  add,
'  aut  sub  conditione  ')  refer  to  what  are  termed  the  '  modalities  '  to
which  contracts  are  liable.  '  Actio  '  is  the  '  actio  in  personam  ; '
'  petitio  '  is  the  '  actio  in  rem  ;  '  '  persecutio  '  is  the  extraordinary
proceeding  before  a  magistrate  ;  '  habes  '  refers  to  '  vindicatio  ; '
'  tenes  '  to  physical  detention ;  ^  possides  '  to  ])OSsession.  The
expression,  '  dolove  malo  fecisti  quominus  possideas,''  was  added
to  express  the  obligation  which  bound  a  person  who  had  frau-
dulently destroyed  a  thing  in  his  possession  to  prevent  the  owner

c  c  2

388

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIX.

reclaiming  it.  The  stipulatio  Aquiliana  was  equally  applicable
if  the  object  was  to  effect  a  novation  intended  to  operate  as
the  foundation  of  a  new  contract  to  be  really  fulfilled  by  the
parties.     (D.  ii.  15.  2  and  9.  2.)

3,  Prseterea  novatione  tollitur
obligatio,  veluti  si  id  quod  tu  Seio
debeas,  a  Titio  dari  stipulatus  sit  ;
nam  interventii  novse  personse  nova
nascitiir  obligatio  et  prima  tollitur
translata  in  posteriorem  ;  adeo  ut
interdum,  licet  posterior  stipulatio
inutilis  sit,  tamen  prima  novationis
jure  tollatur,  veluti  si  id  quod  tu
Titio  debebas,  a  pupillo  sine  tutoris
auctoritate  stipulatus  fuerit.  Quo
casu  res  amittitur,  nam  et  prior
debitor  liberatur,  et  posterior  ob-
ligatio nulla  est.  Non  idem  juris
est,  si  a  servo  quis  fuerit  stipulatus  ;
nam  tunc  prior  perinde  obligatus
manet,  ac  si  postea  nullus  stipulatus
fuisset.  Sed  si  eadem  persona  sit
a  qua  postea  stipuleris,  ita  demum
novatio  fit,  si  quid  in  posteriore
stipulatione  novi  sit,  forte  si  con-
ditio aut  dies  aut  fidejussor  adji-
ciatur  aut  detraliatur.  Quod  autem
diximus,  si  conditio  adjiciatur  nova-
tionem  fieri,  sic  intelligi  oportet  ut
ita  dicam  factam  novationem  si
conditio  extiterit  :  alioquin  si  defe-
cerit,  durat  prior  obligatio.  Sed
cum  hoc  quidem  inter  veteres  con-
stabat,  tunc  fieri  novationem  cum
novandi  animo  in  secundam  obli-
gationem  itum  fuerat  ;  per  lioc
autem  dubium  erat,  quando  no-
vandi animo  videretur  hoc  fieri,  et
quasdam  de  hoc  prcesumptiones  alii
in  aliis  casibus  introducebant.  Ideo
nostra  processit  constitutio  quie
apertissime  definivit,  tunc  solum
novationem  fieri  quotiens  hoc  ipsum
inter  contrahentes  expressum  fuerit,
quod  propter  novationem  prioris  ob-
iigationis  convenerunt  ;  alioquin  ma-
nere  et  pristinam  obligationem,  et
secundam  ei  accedere,  ut  maneat  ex
utraque  causa  obligatio  secundum
nostrse  constitutionis  definitionem,
qiiam  licet  ex  ipsius  lectione  aper-
tius  cognoscere.

3.  An  obligation  is  also  dissolved
by  novation,  as  for  instance,  if  Seius
stipulates  from  Titius  for  that  which
is  due  to  Seius  from  you.  For  by  the
intervention  of  a  new  debtor  a  new
obligation  arises,  and  the  former  obli-
gation is  extinguished  by  being  trans-
ferred into  the  latter  ;  so  much  so,  that
it  may  happen,  that  although  the
latter  stipulation  is  void,  yet  the
former,  by  the  efiect  of  the  novation,
ceases  to  exist ;  as  for  instance  if
Titius  stipulates  from  a  pupil  not
authorised  by  his  tutor,  for  a  debt
due  to  Titius  from  you,  in  this  case
Titius  loses  his  whole  claim,  for  the
first  debtor  is  freed,  and  the  second
obligation  is  void.  But  the  case  is
diiferent  if  it  is  a  slave  from  whom
he  stipulates,  for  then  the  original
debtor  rem.ains  bound  as  if  the  sub-
sequent stipulation  had  never  been
made.  But  if  it  is  the  original  debtor
himself  from  whom  you  make  the
second  stipulation,  there  will  be  no
novation,  unless  the  subsequent  sti-
pulation contains  something  new,  as,
for  instance,  the  addition  or  suppres-
sion of  a  condition,  a  term,  or  a
surety.  In  saying  that  if  a  condition
is  added  there  is  a  novation,  we  must
be  understood  to  mean  that  the  nova-
tion will  take  place  if  the  condition
is  accomplished,  but  that  if  it  is  not
accomplished,  the  former  obligation
remains  binding.  The  ancients  were
of  opinion  that  the  novation  only
took  place  when  the  second  obliga-
tion was  entered  into  for  the  purpose
of  making  the  novation,  and  doubts
consequently  arose  as  to  the  existence
of  this  intention,  and  difierent  pre-
sumptions were  laid  down  by  those
who  treated  the  subject  according  to
the  difierent  cases  they  had  to  settle.
In  consequence,  our  constitution  was
published,  in  which  it  was  clearly  de-
cided that  novation  shall  only  take
place  when  the  contractir.g  parties
have  expressly  declared  that  their
object  in  making  the  new  contract  is
to  extinguish  the  old  one  ;  otherwise
the  former  obligation  will  remain
binding,  while  the  second  is  added  to
it,  so  that  each  contract  wiU  give  rise

LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXIX.  389

to  an  obligation  still  in  force,  accord-
ing to  the  provisions  of  our  constitu-
tion, which  may  be  more  fully  learned
by  reading  the  constitution  itself.

Gai.  iii.  176,  177.  179  ;  D.  xlvi.  2.  6.  8.  1,  and  foil.;  C.  viii.  41.  8.

Novation  is  the  dissolution  of  one  obligation  by  the  formation
of  another.  Ulpian  says,  ^  Novatio  est  prioris  debiti  in  aliam
ohligutionem  vel  civilem  vel  naturalem,  transfusio  atque  trans-
latio :  hoc  est,  cum  ex  prcEcedente  causa  ita  nova  constituatur,  ut
prior  perimatur.  Novatio  enim  a  novo  nomen  accepit,  et  a  nova
ohligatione.^     (D.  xlvi.  2.  1.)

Every  kind  of  contract  could  be  superseded  by  novation,  but
the  new  contract  must  be  either  Uteris  (see  Tit.  21)  or  by  stipu-
lation, and  the  predominance  of  the  use  of  stipulations  as  the
instruments  of  novation  was  so  great  that  the  jurists  generally
refer  to  it  alone.  Qualiscumque  obligatio  sit  qu(B prcEcesserit,  novari
verbis  potest.     (D.  xlvi.  2.  1.)

It  was  necessary  that  the  obligation  superseded  should  be
existing  at  the  time  ;  but  whether  it  was  civil,  prastorian,  or  na-
tural, was  immaterial.  (D.  xlvi.  2»  1,  2.)  And  it  was  also
necessary  that  the  stipulation  which  superseded  it  should  be
binding,  either  civilly  or  naturally.  In  the  text  we  have  two
instances  of  contracts  which  are  not  binding,  owing  to  the  inca-
pacity of  the  parties,  one  made  with  a  pupil,  and  one  with  a  slave,
and  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  them.  The  stipulation  made
with  the  pupil  is  a  stipulation,  though  only  one  binding  naturally  :
the  pupil  is  a  Roman  citizen,  and  can  pronounce  the  word  spondeo ;
but  a  stipulation  made  with  a  slave,  except  when  the  slave  speaks
merely  as  the  mouthpiece  of  his  master,  is  no  stipulation  at  all.
The  slave  cannot  use  the  words  of  the  formulary.  There  is  no
contract  verbis  to  supersede  the  existing  obligation.

By  a  novation  a  new  debtor  might  be  substituted,  even  without
the  consent  of  the  original  debtor.  If  it  was  done  with  the  con-
sent of  the  original  debtor,  the  new  debtor  was  termed  delegatus,
and  the  process  delegatio.  If  it  was  done  without  his  consent,
the  new  debtor  was  termed  the  expromissor,  and  the  process  ex-
promissio ;  but  these  terms,  expromissor  and  expromissio,  were  also
used  in  a  wider  sense,  as  implying  the  new  debtor  and  the  mode
of  contracting  generally,  without  implying  that  the  consent  of  the
old  debtor  had  not  been  given  to  the  substitution.  (D.  xiii.  7.  10.)

Of  course,  if  both  parties  to  the  original  contract  were  willing,
a  new  creditor  could  be  substituted  as  well  as  a  new  debtor,  by  a
novation  ;  and  if  a  new  debtor  was  delegated  who  already  owed  a
debt  to  the  old  debtor,  there  would  necessarily  be  a  change  of
creditor  as  well  as  debtor.  A  owes  to  B,  and  B  to  C,  an  equal
sum.  If  B  tells  A  to  pay  C,  C  has  a  new  debtor,  and  A  a  new
creditor.

In  the  passage  of  Gains  (iii.  177)  on  which  the  text  is  based,
it  is  said  that  if  a  sponsor  was  added,  there  was  a  new  contract.

390  LIB.  III.     TIT.  XXIX.

Sponsores  being  obsol-ete,  Justinian  substitutes  fidejussor ;  but
although  a  contract  mig^ht  be  extinguished  by  a  surety  being  added,
this  would  not  be  so  if  the  parties  did  not  mean  it  to  have  this
effect.

If  the  original  contract  was  made  in  any  other  way  than  a
stipulation,  it  could  be  superseded  by  a  stipulation  containing  the
same  terms.     But  if  it  was  made  by  a  stipulation,  then,  unless
some  alteration  were  made  in  it,  the  new  stipulation  would  be,  in
fact,  the  old  one,  and  there  could  be  no  novatio,  unless  some  new
term  was  added.     But  suppose  a  new  stipulation  was  made  with
a  condition  introduced  into  it,  was  the  old  stipulation  extinguished
at  once  by  novation?     The  text  lays  down  the  general  principle
that  it  was  not  extinguished,  as  it  is  said  in  the  Digest  (xlvi.  2.  14)
non  statimjit  novatio,  sed  tunc  demum  cum  conditio  extiterit\   the
old  contract  endured  until  the  condition  was  accomplished,  and  if
the  condition  failed  the  old  contract  remained  bindinor.    But  some
of  the  jurists   said  that  to   extinguish  the  first  contract  might
be  the  intention  of  the  parties  in  making  the  second  contract,  or
it  might  not.      The  question  of  novation  was  therefore  a  question
of  the  intention  of  the  parties  in  each  particular  case.     Justinian
lays  down  in  the  text  that,  unless  the  parties  expressly  declare  it
to  be  their  wish   that  the  first  contract  shall  be  extinguished  by
the  second,  the  first  contract  shall  be  considered  as  subsisting.

In  personal  actions  something  like  novation  took  place  at  two
points  of  the  suit  (Gai.  iii.  180) — at  the  litis  contestatio  (see  In-
trod.  paragr.  105),  and  w^hen  judgment  had  been  given.  After  the
litis  contestatio,  the  plaintiff  could  sue  in  a  fresh  action  on  wdiat
was,  at  this  period  of  the  suit,  ascertaiified  to  be  his  legal  position,
but  not  on  the  contract  itself.  After  judgment  was  given,  he
could  sue  on  the  judgment.  But  in  both  cases  all  the  beneficial
accessories  of  the  original  contract  were  continued  on  to  the  new
— such,  for  instance,  as  pledges  given  in  security  remained,  and
interest  continued  to  run  on,  lite  contestata  usurcp.  currunt  (D.
xxii.  1.  35),  and  so  this  juridical  novation  did  not,  like  novation
proper,  quite  supersede  the  original  contract.     (D.  xlvi.  2.  29.)

4.   Hoc  amplius,  ese  obligationes  4.     Those    obligations    which    arc

quae    consensu    contrahuntur,    con-  formed  by  consent  alone,  are  dissolvec

traria  voluntate  dissolvuntur  ;  nam  by  the  expression  of  a  contrary  wish,

si  Titius  et  Seius  inter   se  consen-  If  Titiiis  and  Seins  have  agreed  thai

serint,  ut  fundum  Tusculanum  emp-  Seius    shall    purchase    an    estate    ai

tum  Seius  haberet  centum  aureorum,  Tusculum    for  a  hundred  aurei,  anc

deinde   re  nondum   secuta,   id  est,  then,    before   the   contract    has    beei

neque   pretio   soluto    neque    fundo  executed,  that  is,  before  the  price  ha:

tradito,  placuerit   inter  eos  ut  dis-  been   paid,   or   delivery  made    of  tin

cederetur  ab  ea  emptione  et  vendi-  estate,    they   agree    to    abandon    th<

tione,  invicem  liberantur.     Idem  est  agreement  for  the  sale,  they  are  mutu

in  conductione  et  locatione,  et  inom-  ally  freed  from  their  obligation.     It  i:

nibus  contractibus  qui  ex  consensu  the  same  in  the  contract  of  letting  t<

descendunt.  hire,  and  in  all  other  contracts  formec

by  consent  alone.

D.  xlvi.  3.  80 ;  D.  xviii.  5.  5.  1.

LIB.  III.      TIT.  XXIX.  391

This  paragraph  must  be  understood  with  the  limitation  that
the  contract  could  only  be  rescinded  integris  omnibus,  i.e.  if  each
party  could  possibly  be  placed  in  the  position  he  held  before.  The
text  rather  loosely  expresses  this  by  '  re  nondum  secuta.^  If  all
things  were  not  integra,  but  the  parties  agreed  to  make  them  so,
this  would  be  a  new  contract  extinguishing  the  old  contract  by
novation,  not  an  extinction  of  the  contract  by  mere  consent.

There  were  other  modes  by  which  a  contract  was  dissolved,  as,
if  the  subject  of  the  contract  being  a  thing  certain  perished  with-
out the  fault  of  any  party  ;  or  if  the  qualities  of  debtor  and  creditor
were  united  in  the  same  person,  as,  for  instance,  if  the  debtor  be-
came heir  of  the  creditor,  which  is  termed  confasio ;  or  if  one  debt
was  set  oiF  against  another  {comjiensatio),  which,  however,  if  the
actions  proper  to  the  contract  were  actions  stricti juris,  would  only
give  rise  to  an  exception,  and  not  to  an  extinction  of  the  contract :
in  actions  bonce  fide  I, ^h.QrQ  equitable  grounds  of  defence  need  not  be
stated  in  the  formula,  the  compensatio  would  be  necessarily  taken
notice  of,  and  in  such  cases  the  contract  may  be  said  to  have  been
virtually  (see  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  6.39)  put  an  end  to  by  the  compensatio.
There  were  also  many  other  things  which,  although  they  left  the
contract  still  subsisting,  prevented  an  action  being  brought  on  it.
These  will  be  treated  of  in  the  next  Book  under  the  head  of
Exceptions.

LIBEE    QUAETUS.

Tit.  I.     DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QU^  EX  DELICTO

NASCUNTUE.

Cum  expositum  sit  siiperiore  libro  As  we  have  treated  in  the  preced-

de  obligationibus  ex  contractu  et  ing  Book  of  obligations  arising  ex  con-
quasi  ex  contractu,  sequitur  ut  de  tractu  and  quasi  ex  contractu,  we  have
obligationibus  ex  maleficio  dispicia-  now  to  treat  of  obligations  arising  ex
mus.  Sed  illse  quidem,  ut  suo  loco  maleficio.  Of  the  obligations  treated
tradidimus,  in  quatuor  genera  divi-  of  in  the  last  Book,  there  were,  as  we
duntur  :  h?e  vero  unius  generis  sunt ;  have  said,  four  kinds  ;  of  those  we
nam  omnes  ex  re  nascuntur,  id  est,  are  now  to  treat  of,  there  is  but  one
ex  ipso  maleficio,  veluti  ex  furto  aut  kind,  for  they  all  arise  from  the  thing,
rapina  aut  damno  aut  injuria.  that  is,  from  the  delict,  as,  for  example,

from  theft,  from  robbery,  or  damage,

or  injury.

Gal  iii.  182 ;  D.  xliv.  7.  4.

This  part  of  the  Institutes  only  treats  of  delicta,  i.  e.  violations
of  the  rights  of  property  and  of  ingredients  of  status,  such  as
liberty,  security,  and  reputation,  so  far  as  they  produce  obligations
and  are  the  grounds  of  private  actions.  It  is  not  the  evil  intent
which  makes  an  act  a  delict.  Many  acts  done  with  evil  intent
are  excluded,  many  done  without  are  included  in  the  number.
Those  acts  only  were  delicts  which  had  been  characterised  and
provided  against  as  such  by  the  ancient  civil  legislation,  and  to
which  a  particular  action  was  attached.  (See  Introd.  paragr.  88.)
In  this  and  the  three  following  Titles  we  have  the  four  principal
kinds  of  delicts  treated  of,  viz.  furtum,  vi  bona  rapta,  damni
injuria,  and  injuria.

All  the  obligations  attached  to  delicts  are  said  in  the  text
nasci  ex  re,  i.e.  from  the  evil  act  or  thing  done,  ex  ipso  maleficio,
to  contrast  them  with  the  various  modes  in  which  obligations  ex
contractu  are  formed.

Ut  de  ohligationihus  ex  maleficio  dispiciamus.  Many  texts
read,  ut  de  obligationibus  ex  maleficio  et  quasi  ex  maleficio  di-
spiciamus.

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  I.  393

1.  Furtmn  est  contrectatio  rei  1.  Theft  is  the  fraudulent  dealing
fraudulosa,  vel  ipsius  rei,  vel  etiam  with  a  thing  itself,  with  its  use,  or
usus  ejus  possessionisve  :  quod  lege  its  possession  ;  an  act  which  is  pro-
naturali  prohibitum  est  admittere.  hibited  by  natural  law.

D.  xlvii.  2.  1.  3.

The  definition  of  theft  includes  the  term  contrectatio  rei,  to
show  that  evil  intent  is  not  sufficient ;  there  must  be  an  actual
touching  or  seizing  of  the  thing :  fraudulosa,  to  show  that  the
thing  must  be  seized  with  evil  intent,  and  rei,  usus,  possessionis,
to  show  the  different  interests  in  a  thing  that  might  be  the  subject  of
theft.  It  mis^ht  seem  that  it  would  have  made  the  definition  more
complete  to  have  said  contrectatio  rei  alienee.  Perhaps  the  word
aliencB  was  left  out  because  it  was  quite  possible  that  the  dominus
or  real  owner  of  a  thing  should  commit  a  theft  in  taking  it  from
the  possessor,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  a  debtor  stealing  a
thing  given  in  pledge ;  and  yet  the  res  was  scarcely  aliena  to  the
dominus.

Many  texts,  after  the  words  contrectatio  fraudulosa,  add  lucri
faciendi  cfratia,  i.  e.  with  a  design  to  profit  by  the  act,  whether
the  profit  be  that  of  gaining  a  benefit  for  one's  self,  or  that  of
inflicting  an  injury  on  another.  These  words  are  found  in  the
passage  of  the  Digest  (xlvii.  2.  1.3)  from  which  this  definition  of
theft  is  taken,  but  the  authority  of  the  manuscripts  seems  against
admitting  them  here.

Only  things  moveable  could  be  the  subject  of  theft.  (D.  xlvii.
2.  25.)

2.  Furtum  autem  vel  a  furvo,  id  2.  The  word  furtum  comes  either
est  nigro,  dictum  est,  quod  clam  et  from  furvum,  which  means  '  black/
obscure  fit,  et  plerumque  nocte  ;  vel  because  it  is  committed  secretly,  and
a  fraude,  vel  a  ferendo,  id  est  aufe-  often  in  the  night ;  or  from  fraus  ;
rendo.  vel  a  Gneco  sermone,  qui  or  from  /erre,  that  is,  '  taking  away,'
^iopcK^  appellant  fures.  Imo  et  Grseci  or  from  the  Greek  word  (piop,  meaning
ctTTo  Tod  (^jtpeiv  'j.wpar  dixerunt.  a  thief,  which  again  comes  from  (pipur,

to  carry  away.

D.  xlvii.  2.  1.

3.  Furtorum  autem  genera  duo  3.  Of  theft  there  are  two  kinds,
sunt,  manifestum  et  nee  manifes-  theft  manifest  and  theft  not  manifest ;
tum  ;  nam  conceptum  et  oblatum  for  the  thefts  termed  conceptum  and
species  potius  actionis  sunt  furto  ohlatum  are  rather  kinds  of  actions
cohserentes,  quam  genera  furtorum,  attaching  to  theft  than  kinds  of  theft,
sicut  inferius  apparebit.  Manifestus  as  will  appear  below.  A  manifest  thief
fur  est,  quem  Grseci  t-nr'  avTu(pMf)qj  is  one  whom  the  Greeks  term  stt'
appellant,  nee  solum  is  qui  in  furto  avrocpiopfi),  being  not  only  one  taken
deprehenditur,  sed  etiam  is  qui  eo  in  the  fact,  but  also  one  taken  in  the
loco  deprehenditur  quo  fit  :  veluti  place  where  the  theft  is  committed  ;
qui  in  domo  furtum  fecit,  et  nondum  as,  for  example,  before  he  has  passed
egTessus  januam  deprehensusfuerit;  through  the  door  of  the  house  where
et  qui  in  oliveto  oli varum  aut  in  he  has  committed  a  theft,  or  in  a  plan-
vineto  uvarum  furtum  fecit,  quam-  tation  of  olives,  or  a  vineyard  where
diu  in  oliveto  aut  vineto  fur  clepre-  he  has  been  stealing.  We  must  also
hensus  sit.  Imo  ulterius  furtum  extend  manifest  theft  to  the  case  of  a
manifestum  extendendum  est,  quam-  thief  seen  or  seized  by  the  OAvner  or

394

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  I.

diu  earn  rem  fur  tenens  visus  vel
depreliensns  fuerit,  sive  in  publico
sive  in  private,  vel  a  domino  vel  ab
alio,  antequam  eo  pervenerit  quo
perferre  ac  deponere  rem  destinas-
set  ;  sed  si  pertulit  quo  destinavit,
tametsi  deprehendatur  cum  re  fur-
tiva,  non  est  manifestus  fur.  Nee
manifestum  furtum  quid  sit,  ex  iis
quse  diximus  intelligitur  ;  nam  quod
manifestum  non  est,  id  scilicet  nee
manifestum  est.

any  one  else  in  a  public  or  private
place,  while  still  holding  the  thing  he
has  stolen,  before  he  has  reached  the
place  where  he  meant  to  take  and
deposit  it.  But  if  he  once  reaches
his  destination,  although  he  is  after-
wards taken  with  the  thing  stolen  on
him,  he  is  not  a  manifest  thief.  What
we  mean  by  a  not  manifest  thief  may
be  gathered  from  what  we  have  said,
for  a  theft  which  is  not  a  manifest
theft  is  a  not  manifest  theft.

Gai.  iii.  183-185  ;  D.  xlvii.  2,  3 ;  D.  xlvii.  2.  5,  pr.  and  1.

The  distinction  between ^z^r^^^/Tz  manifestum  and  nee  manifes-
tum is  found  in  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  affixed  to  a
furtum  manifestum  the  penalty  of  death  if  committed  by  a  slave,
and  the  penalty  of  being  given  over  as  a  slave  to  the  person
injured  if  the  thefts  were  committed  by  a  freeman ;  and  attached
to  2i  furtum  nee  manifestum  the  penalty  of  double  the  value  of  the
thing  stolen,  whether  committed  by  a  freeman  or  a  slave.  The
praetor  retained  the  penalty  fixed  in  the  latter  case,  but  in  the
former  altered  the  penalty  to  the  payment  of  four  times  the  value
of  the  thing  stolen,  whether  the  theft  was  committed  by  a  slave
or  a  freeman.     (Gai.  iii.  189.)

Gains  tells  us  that  the  jurists  were  divided  on  the  point  of
what  It  was  that  constituted  2i  furtum  manifestum  ;  some  thinking
the  thief  must  be  taken  in  the  act,  some  that  he  need  only  be
taken  on  the  spot,  some  that  he  need  only  be  taken  with  the  thing
stolen  on  him  before  he  had  transported  it  to  its  destination  (this
is  the  opinion  received  in  the  text),  and  some  that  time  and  place
were  immaterial  so  that  he  was  taken  with  the  thing  stolen  on
him.     (Gai.  iii.  184.)

4.  Conceptum  furtum  dicitur,  cum
apud  aliquem  testibus  prsesentibus
furtiva  res  qusesita  et  inventa  sit  ;
nam  in  eum  propria  actio  constituta
est,  quamvis  fur  non  sit,  quse  appel-
latur  concepti.  Oblatum  furtum  di-
citur, cum  res  furtiva  ab  aliquo  tibi
oblata  sit,  eaque  apud  te  concepta
sit,  utique  si  ea  mente  tibi  data
fuerit,  ut  apud  te  potius  quam  apud
eum  qui  dedit,  conciperetur  ;  nam
tibi  apud  quem  concepta  sit,  propria
ad  versus  eum  qui  obtulit,  quamvis
fur  non  sit,  constituta  est  actio  quae
appellatur  oblati.  Est  etiam  pro-
hibiti  furti  actio  ad  versus  eum,  qui
furtum  quserere  testibus  prsesenti-
bus  volentem  prohibuerit.  Prseterea
poena  constituitur  edicto  prsetoris
per  actionem  furti  non  exhibiti  ad-
versus  eum  qui  furtivam  rem  apud
se  qusesitam  et  inventam  non  exhi-

4.  There  is  what  is  termed  con-
ceptum  furtum,  when  a  thing  stolen
has  been  sought  and  found  in  the
presence  of  witnesses  in  any  one's
house ;  for  although  this  person  may
not  be  the  actual  thief,  he  is  liable
to  a  special  action  termed  concepti.
There  is  what  is  termed  furtum  ob-
latum, if  a  thing  stolen  has  been
placed  in  your  hands  and  then  seized
in  your  house  ;  that  is,  if  the  person
who  placed  it  in  your  hands  did  so,
that  it  might  be  found  rather  in  your
house  than  in  his.  For  you,  in  whose
house  it  had  been  seized,  would  have
against  him  who  placed  it  in  your
hands,  although  he  were  not  the  actual
thief,  a  special  action  termed  oblatL
There  is  also  the  action  prohibiti  furti
against  a  person  who  prevents  another
who  wishes  to  seek  in  the  presence  of
witnesses  for  a  thing  stolen  ;  there  is,

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  I.  395

buit.  Sed  hse  actiones,  id  est,  con-  too,  by  means  of  the  action  furti  non
cej)ti  et  oblati  et  furti  prohibiti,  nee  exhibiti,  a  penalty  provided  by  the
non  furti  non  exhibiti,  in  desue-  edict  of  the  prsetor  against  a  person
tudinem  abierunt  :  cum  enim  requi-  who  has  not  produced  a  thing  stolen
sitio  rei  furtive©  hodie  secundum  which  has  been  searched  for  and  found
veterem  observationem  non  fit,  me-  in  his  possession.  But  these  actions,
rito  ex  consequentia  etiam  praifatse  concepti,  oblati,  furii  prohibiti,  and
actiones  abusucommunirecesserunt,  furti  non  exhibiti,  have  fallen  into
cum  manifestissimum  est,  qaod  om-  disuse  ;  for  search  for  things  stolen  is
nes  qui  scientes  rem  f  urtivam  sus-  not  now  made  according  to  the  ancient
ceperint  et  celaverint,  furti  nee  practice,  and  therefore  these  actions
manifesti  obnoxii  sunt.  have  naturally  ceased  to  be  in  use,  as

all  who  knowingly  have  received  and
concealed  a  thing  stolen  are  liable  to
the  action  furti  nee  manifesti.

Gai.  iii.  186-188.

To  the  Jurhim  concepfum  and  the  furtum  ohlotum  a  penalty  of
triple  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen  was  affixed  by  the  Twelve
Tables.  To  the  furtum  prohihitum ,  not  noticed  in  the  Twelve
Tables,  a  penalty  of  quadruple  the  value  was  affixed  by  the
prastor.  (Gai.  iii.  192.)  The  Twelve  Tables  noticed  a  kind  of
furtum  coiiceptum  of  which  no  mention  is  made  here  ;  it  was  called
furtum  lance  licioque  conceptum.  The  searcher  entered  the  house
of  the  supposed  receiver,  having  nothing  on  his  person  but  a  cinc-
ture ijicium)  round  his  waist,  and  a  plate  (Janx)  which  he  held
wdth  both  his  hands,  so  that  there  could  be  no  suspicion  that  he
had  brought  in  with  him  the  thing  supposed  to  be  stolen.  If  he
then  found  the  thing  in  the  house,  the  receiver  was  punished  as  if
he  had  committed  2^.  furtum  manifestum.  (Gai.  iii.  192.)  This
mode  of  search  and  the  action  founded  on  it  were  suppressed  by
the  lex  Mhutia.  (AuL.  Gell.  Noct.  Att,  xvi.  10.)  The  actions
furti  concepti,  oblati,  and  jjroliibiti,  Avere  still  in  use  in  the  time  of
Gai  us.

Ulpian  (D.  L.,  16.  13)  explains  the  meaning  of  the  word
pce,na.  Pcena  is  the  punishment  of  an  offence,  noxce  vindicta.  It
is  contrasted  with  multa.  Poena  is  a  punishment  imposed  by  some
general  law,  affecting  possibly  the  caput  and  existimatio  of  the
person  punished.  Multa  is  a  fine,  a  money  fine  in  later  law,  a
fine  of  cattle  and  sheep  in  earlier  times  {jpecuaria^.

The  value  of  the  thing  was  the  rei  verum  pretium,  its  worth
under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  So  if  a  slave  was  stolen,
who  was  in  a  position  to  enter  on  an  inheritance  at  his  master's
bidding  (and  then  died  before  entering),  the  pretium  hereditatis,
the  value  of  the  inheritance  thus  lost  was  calculated  in  the  value
of  the  slave  stolen.     (D.  xlvii.  2.  50,  pr.)

5.    Poena    manifesti   furti    qua-  5.   The  penalty  for  manifest  theft

drupli  est,  tarn  ex  servi  quam  ex  is  quadruple  the  value  of  the  thing
liberi  persona ;  nee  manifesti,  dupli.     stolen,  whether  the  thief  be  a  slave  or

a  freeman ;  that  for  theft  not  manifest

is  double.

Gai.  iii.  189,  190.

396

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  I.

6.  Furtiim  autem  fit  non  solum
cum  quis  intercipiendi  causa  rem
alienam  amovet,  sed  generaliter  cum
quis  alienam  rem  invito  domino
contrectat.  Itaque,  sive  creditor
pignore,  sive  is  apud  quern  res  de-
posita  est,  ea  re  utatur,  sive  is  qui
rem  utendam  accepit,  in  alium  usum
earn  transferat  quam  cujus  gratia  ei
data  est,  furtum  committit  :  veluti,
si  quis  argentum  utendum  acceperit
quasi  amicos  ad  coenam  invitatunis,
et  id  peregre  secum  tulerit,  aut  si
quis  equum  gestandi  causa  commo-
datum  sibi  longius  aliquo  duxerit.
Quod  veteres  scripserunt  de  eo  qui
in  aciem  equum  perduxisset.

6.  It  is  theft,  not  only  when  any-
one takes  away  a  thing  belonging  to
another,  in  order  to  appropriate  it,
but  generally  when  any  one  deals
with  the  property  of  another  contrary
to  the  wishes  of  its  owner.  Thus,
if  the  creditor  uses  the  thing  pledged
or  the  depositary  the  thing  deposited,
or  the  usuary  employs  the  thing  for
another  purpose  than  that  for  which
it  is  given,  it  is  a  theft  ;  for  example,
if  any  one  borrows  plate  on  the  pre-
tence of  intending  to  invite  friends  to
supper,  and  then  carries  it  away  with
him  to  a  distance,  or  if  any  one  bor-
rows a  horse,  as  for  a  ride,  and  takes
it  much  farther  than  suits  such  a  pur-
pose, or,  as  we  find  supposed  in  the
writings  of  the  ancients,  takes  it  into
battle.

Gai.  iii.  195,  196  ;  D.  xlvii.  2.  54.

7.  Placuit  tamen  eos  qui  rebus
commodatis  aliter  uterentur  quam
utendas  acceperint,  ita  furtum  com-
mittere  si  se  intelligant  id  invito
domino  facere,  eumque  si  intellexis-
set  non  j)ermissurum,  at  si  permis-
surum  credant,  extra  crimen  videri  :
optima  sane  distinctione,  quia  fur-
tum sine  affectu  furandi  non  com-
mittatur.

7.  A  person,  however,  w^ho  borrows
a  thing,  and  apx)lies  it  to  a  pui'pose
other  than  that  for  which  it  was  lent,
only  commits  theft,  if  he  knows  that
he  is  acting  against  the  wishes  of  the
owner,  and  that  the  owner,  if  he  were
informed,  would  not  permit  it ;  for  if
he  really  thinks  the  owner  would  per-
mit it,  he  does  not  commit  a  crime  ;
and  this  is  a  very  proper  distinction,
for  there  is  no  theft  without  the  inten-
tion to  commit  theft.

Gai.  iii.  197  ;  D.  xli.  3.  37.

8.  Sed  et  si  credat  aliquis  invito
domino  se  rem  commodatam  sibi
contrectare,  domino  autem  volente
id  fiat,  dicitur  furtum  non  fieri.
Unde  illud  qu?esitum  est,  cum  Titius
servum  Mtevii  sollicitaverit  ut  quas-
dam  res  domino  subriperet  et  ad  eum
perferret,  et  servus  id  ad  Msevium
pertulerit  ;  Msevius  dum  vult  Titium
in  ipso  delicto  deprehendere,  per-
miserit  servo  quasdam  res  ad  eum
perferre,  utrum  furti  an  servi  cor-
rupti  judicio  teneatur  Titius,  an
neutro.  Et  cum  nobis  super  hac
dubitatione  suggestum  est,  et  anti-
quorum  prudentium  super  hoc  alter-
cationes  perspeximus,  quibusdam
neque  furti  neque  servi  corrapti
actionem  prsestantibus,  quibusdam
furti  tantummodo.  Nos  hujusmodi
calliditati  obviam  euntes  per  nostram
decisionem  sanximus,  non  solum  furti
actionem,  sed  et  servi  corrupti  con-
tra eum  dari.     Licet  enim  is  servus

8.  And  even  if  the  borrower  thinks
he  is  applying  the  thing  borrowed  con-
trary to  the  wishes  of  the  owner,  yet  if
the  owner  as  a  matter  of  fact  approves
of  the  application,  there  is,  it  is  said,
no  theft.  Whence  the  following  ques-
tion arises  :  Titius  has  urged  the  slave
of  Mfevius  to  steal  from  his  master
certain  things,  and  to  bring  them  to
him ;  the  slave  informs  his  master,
who,  wishing  to  seize  Titius  in  the  act,
permits  his  slave  to  take  certain  things
to  Titius  ;  is  Titius  liable  to  an  action
furti,  or  to  one  servi  corrupti,  or  to
neither  ?  This  doubtful  question  was
submitted  to  us,  and  we  examined  the
conflicting  opinions  of  the  ancient  ju-
rists on  the  subject,  some  of  whom
thought  Titius  was  liable  to  both  these
actions,  v/hile  others  thought  he  was
only  liable  to  the  action  of  theft ;  and
to  prevent  subtleties,  we  have  decided
that  in  this  case  both  these  actions
may  be  brought.     For,  although  the

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  I.

397

deterior  a  sollicitatore  minime  f actus
est,  et  ideo  non  concurrant  regnlse
qu?e  servi  cornipti  actionem  intro-
ducerent,  tarnen  consilium  corrup-
toris  ad  perniciem  probitatis  servi
introductum  est  :  ut  sit  poenalis  actio
imposita,  tamquam  si  re  ipsa  fuisset
servus  corruptus,  ne  ex  liujusmodi
impunitate  et  in  alium  servum  qui
facile  possit  corrumpi,  tale  facinus  a
quibusdam  perpetretur.

slave  has  not  been  corrupted,  and  the
case  does  not  seem  therefore  within
the  rules  of  the  action  servi  corrupti,
yet  the  intention  to  corrupt  the  slave
is  indisputable,  and  he  is  therefore  to
be  punished  exactly  as  if  the  slave  had
been  really  corrupted,  lest  his  impunity
should  incite  others  to  act  in  the  same
criminal  way  towards  a  slave  more  easy
to  corrupt.

Gai.  iii.  198  ;  C.  vi.  2.  20.

Was  the  slave  corrupted  ?  No  ;  he  had  given  a  signal  proof
of  his  fidelity.  Was  the  thing  stolen  ?  No  ;  the  owner  had  con-
sented to  its  being  taken.  Thus  had  reasoned  those  who  refused
either  action.  Justinian  avoids  these  subtleties,  and  decides  that
crime  shall  at  any  rate  be  punished,  and  reparation  be  made  for
a  WTongful  act.

9.  Interdum  etiam  liberorum
hominum  furtum  fit,  veluti  si  quis
liberorum  nostrotum  qui  in  potes-
tate  nostra  sit,  subreptus  fuerit.

9.  Sometimes  there  may  be  a  theft
of  free  persons,  as,  if  one  of  our  chil-
dren in  our  power  is  carried  away.

Gai.  iii.  199.

Gains  adds,  as  an  example,  the  case  of  a  wife  in  many  being
stolen.  It  was  not  the  value  of  the  person  stolen  which  in  such
cases  formed  the  measure  of  the  penalty,  for  the  value  of  a  free
person  was  inappreciable  ;  but  it  was  the  loss  occasioned  by  the
theft  to  the  person  in  whose  power  the  subject  of  the  theft  was.

10.  Aliquando  etiam  sufe  rei
furtum  quisque  committit,  veluti  si
debitor  rem  quam  creditori  pignoris
causa  dedit,  subtraxerit.

10.  A  man  may  even  commit  a
theft  of  his  own  property,  as,  if  a
debtor  takes  from  a  creditor  a  thing
he  has  pledged  to  him.

Gai.  iii.  200.

11.  Interdum  furti  tenetur  qui
ipse  furtum  non  fecit,  qualis  est
cujus  ope  consiUo  furtum  factum  est.
In  quo  numero  est,  qui  tibi  nummos
excussit  ut  alius  eos  raperet,  ant
tibi  obstitit  ut  alius  rem  tuam  exci-
peret,  aut  oves  tuas  vel  boves  fugavit
ut  alius  eas  caperet ;  et  hoc  veteres
scripserunt  de  eo  qui  panno  rubro
fugavit  armentum.  Sed  si  quid  eo-
rum  per  lasciviam,  et  non  data  opera
ut  furtum  admitteretur,  factum  est,
in  factum  actio  dari  delDet.  At  ubi
ope  Msevii  Titius  furtum  fecerit,
ambo  furti  tenentur.  Ope  consilio
ejus  quoque  furtum  admitti  videtur,
qui  scalas  forte  fenestris  supposuit,
aut  ipsas  fenestras  vel  ostium  efiregit
ut  alius  furtum  faceret ;  quive  fer-

11.  A  person  may  be  liable  to  an
action  of  theft,  although  he  has  not
liimseK  committed  a  theft,  as,  for  in-
stance, a  person  who  has  lent  his  aid
and  planned  the  crime.  Among  such
is  one  who  makes  your  money  fall
from  your  hand  that  another  may  seize
upon  it  ;  or  has  placed  himself  in  your
way  that  another  may  carry  off  some-
thing belonging  to  you  ;  or  has  driven
your  sheep  or  oxen  that  another  may
make  away  with  them,  or,  to  take  an
instance  given  by  the  old  lawyers,
frightens  a  herd  with  a  piece  of  scarlet
cloth.  But  if  such  acts  are  only  the
fruit  of  reckless  folly,  with  no  design
of  assisting  in  the  commission  of  a
theft,  the  proper  action  is  one  in  fac-
tum.    But  if  Meevius  assists  Titius  to

398

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  I.

ramenta  ad  effringendum,  aut  scalas
ut  fenestris  supponerentur,  commo-
daverit,  sciens  cujus  gratia  commo-
daverit.  Certe  qui  niillam  opem  ad
furtum  faciendum  adhibuit,  sed  tan-
tum  consilium  dedit  atque  liortatus
est  ad  furtum  faciendum,  non  tenetur
furti.

commit  a  robbery,  both  are  liable  to  an
action  of  theft.  A  person,  again,  as-
sists in  a  theft  who  places  ladders
under  a  window,  or  breaks  a  window
or  a  door,  that  another  may  commit  a
theft  ;  or  who  lends  tools  to  break
a  door,  or  ladders  to  place  under  a
window,  knowing  the  purpose  to  which
they  are  to  be  applied.  But  a  person
who  does  not  actually  assist,  but  only
advises  and  urges  the  commission  of
a  theft,  is  not  liable  to  an  action  of
theft.

Gai.  iii.  202 ;  D.  xlvii.  2.  54.  4  ;  D.  xlvii.  2.  36.

12.  Hi  qui  in  parentum  vel  do-
minorum  potestate  sunt,  si  rem  eis
subripiant,  furtum  quidem  illis  fa-
ciunt,  et  res  in  furtivam  causam
cadit,  nee  ob  id  ab  ullo  usucapi
potest  antequam  in  domini  potes-
tatem  revertatur  :  sed  furti  actio  non
nascitur,  quia  nee  ex  alia  ulla  causa
X^otest  inter  eos  actio  nasci.  Si  vero
ope  consilio  alterius  furtum  factum
fuerit,  quia  utique  furtum  commit-
titur,  convenienter  ille  furti  tenetur,
quia  verura  est  ope  consilio  ejus  fur-
tum factum  esse.

12.  Those  who  are  in  the  power  of
a  parent  or  master,  if  they  steal  any-
thing belonging  to  the  person  in  whose
power  they  are,  commit  a  theft.  The
thing  stolen,  in  such  a  case,  is  con-
sidered to  be  furtiva,  and  therefore
no  right  in  it  can  be  acquired  by  usu-
capion before  it  has  returned  into  the
hands  of  the  owner  ;  but  no  action  of
theft  can  be  brought,  because  the  re-
lation of  the  parties  is  such,  that  no
action  whatever  can  arise  between
them.  But  if  the  theft  has  been  com-
mitted by  the  assistance  and  advice  of
another,  as  a  theft  is  actually  com-
mitted, this  person  will  be  subject
to  the  action  of  theft,  as  a  theft  is
undoubtedly  committed  through  his
means.

D.  xlvii.  2.  17  ;   D.  xlvii.  2.  36.  1.

13.  Furti  autem  actio  ei  competit
cujus  interest  rem  salvam  esse,  licet
dominus  non  sit.  Itaque  nee  domino
aliter  competit,  quam  si  ejus  intersit
rem  non  perire.

13.  An  action  of  theft  may  be
brought  by  any  one  who  is  interested
in  the  safety  of  the  thing,  although  he
is  not  the  owner  ;  and  the  proprietor,
consequently,  cannot  bring  this  action
unless  he  is  interested  in  the  thing  not
perishing.

Gai.  iii.  203.

The  right  to  bring  the  actio  furti  may  belong  to  several  per-
sons at  the  same  time.  For  instance,  both  the  owner  and  the
usufructuary  had  sufficient  interest  in  the  thing  to  support  an
action.  But  mere  interest  in  a  thino;  was  not  sufficient  unless
the  thing  had  been  delivered  to,  and  was  or  had  been  in  the  pos-
session of,  the  plaintiff.  A  person,  for  instance,  to  whom  a  thing
was  due  by  stipulation  could  not  bring  an  actio  furti  if  the
thing  was  stolen  ;  he  could  only  compel  the  actual  owner  to  allow
him  to  bring  an  actio  furti  in  the  owner's  name;  nor  could  a  cre-
ditor bring  an  actio  furti  for  a  thing  stolen  from  his  debtor.  (D.
xlvii.  2.  14.  1.  49.)

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  I.

399

14.  Unde  constat  creditorem  de
pignore  subrepto  furti  actione  agere
posse,  etiamsi  idoneum  debitorem
habeat,  quia  expedit  ei  pignori  po-
tius  incumbere  quam  in  personam
agere  :  adeo  quidem  ut,  quamvis
ipse  debitor  earn  rem  subripuerit,
nihilominus  creditori  competit  actio
furti.

14.  Hence,  a  creditor  may  bring
this  action  if  a  thing  pledged  to  him
is  stolen,  although  his  debtor  is  sol-
vent, because  it  may  be  more  advan-
tageous to  him  to  rely  upon  his  pledge
than  to  bring  an  action  against  his
debtor  personally  ;  so  much  so,  that
although  it  is  the  debtor  himself  that
has  stolen  the  thing  pledged,  yet  the
creditor  can  bring  an  action  of  theft.

Gai.  iii.  204.

15.  Item  si  fullo  polienda  curan-
dave,  aut  sarcinator  sarcienda  ves-
timenta  mercede  certa  acceperit,
eaque  furto  amiserit,  ipse  furti
habet  actionem,  non  dominus ;  quia
domini  nihil  interest  earn  rem  non
perisse,  cum  judicio  locati  a  fuUone
aut  sarcinatore  rem  suam  persequi
potest.  Sed  et  bonse  fidei  emptori
subrepta  re  quam  emerit,  quamvis
dominus  non  sit,  omnimodo  competit
furti  actio,  quemadmodum  et  cre-
ditori. Fulloni  vero  et  sarcinatori
non  aliter  furti  competere  placuit,
quam  si  solvendo  sint,  hoc  est,  si
domino  rei  sestimationem  solvere
possint  ;  nam  si  solvendo  non  sunt,
tunc  quia  ab  eis  suum  dominus  con-
sequi  non  possit,  ipsi  domino  furti
competit  actio,  quia  hoc  casu  ipsius
interest  rem  salvam  esse.  Idem  est,
et  si  in  partem  solvendo  sint  fullo
aut  sarcinator.

15.  So,  too,  if  a  fuller  receives
clothes  to  clean,  or  a  tailor  receives
them  to  mend,  for  a  certain  fixed  sum,
and  has  them  stolen  from  him,  it  is  he
and  not  the  owner  who  is  able  to  bring
an  action  of  theft,  for  the  owner  is  not
considered  as  interested  in  their  safety,
having  an  action  locati,  by  which  he
may  recover  the  thing  stolen,  against
the  fuller  or  tailor.  But,  if  a  thing
is  stolen  from  a  bona  fide  purchaser,
he  is  entitled,  like  a  creditor,  to  an
action  of  theft,  although  he  is  not  the
proprietor.  But  an  action  of  theft  is
not  maintainable  by  the  fuller  or  tailor,
unless  he  is  solvent,  that  is,  unless  he
is  able  to  pay  the  owner  the  value  of
the  thing  lost ;  for  if  the  fuller  or
tailor  is  insolvent,  then  the  owner,  as
he  cannot  recover  anything  from  them,
is  allowed  to  bring  an  action  of  theft,
as  he  has  in  this  case  an  interest  in
the  safety  of  the  thing.  And  it  is  the
same  although  the  fuUer  or  tailor  is
partially  solvent.

Gai.  iii.  205 ;  D.  xlvii.  2.  20.  1.

The  owner  has  no  interest  in  recovering  the  penalty  if  he  can
get  compensation  from  the  person  whose  services  he  has  hired  to
the  full  amount  of  any  loss  he  sustains  by  the  theft ;  but  he
would  still  be  able  to  bring  an  action,  i.e.  a  vindicatio,  an  actio
ad  exliihendum,  or  a  condictio,  to  get  the  thing  itself,  or  its  value,
from  the  thief.

16.  Quae  de  full  one  et  sarcinatore
diximus,  eadem  et  ad  eum  cui  com-
modata  res  est,  transferenda  veteres
existimabant ;  nam,  ut  ille  fullo  mer-
cedem  accipiendo  custodiam  pr?estat,
ita  is  quoque  qui  commodum  utendi
percipit,  similiter  necesse  habet  cus-
todiam praestare.  Sed  nostra  pro-
videntia  etiam  hoc  in  nostris  deci-
sionibus  emendavit,  ut  in  domini
voluntate  sit,  sive  commodati  ac-
tionem adversus  eum  qui  rem  com-
modatam  accepit,  movere  desiderat,

10.  What  we  have  said  of  the  fuller
and  tailor  was  applied  by  the  ancients
to  the  borrower.  For  as  the  fuller  by
accepting  a  sum  for  his  labour  makes
himself  answerable  for  the  safe  keep-
ing of  the  thing,  so  does  a  borrower
by  accepting  the  use  of  the  thing  he
borrows.  But  our  wisdom  has  intro-
duced in  our  decisions  an  improve-
ment on  this  point,  and  the  owner  may
now  bring  an  action  commodati  against
the  borrower,  or  of  theft  against  the
thief ;    but  when  once   his   choice    is

400

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  I.

sive  furti  aclversus  eum  qui  rem  sub-
ripnit,  et  alterutra  earum  electa  clo-
miiium  non  posse  ex  poenitentia  ad
alteram  venire  actionem.  Sed  si
qnidem  furem  elegerit,  ilium  qui
rem  utendam  accepit,  penitus  libe-
rari  ;  sin  autem  commodator  veniat
adversus  eum  qui  rem  utendam  ac-
cepit, ipsi  quidem  nuUo  modo  com-
petere  posse  adversus  furem  furti
actionem,  eum  autem  qui  pro  re
commodata  convenitur,  posse  ad-
versus furem  furti  habere  actionem:
ita  tarn  en,  si  dominus  sciens  rem  esse
subreptam,  adversus  eum  cui  res
commodata  fuit,  pervenit.  Sin  au-
tem nescius,  et  dubitans  rem  non
esse  apud  eum,  commodati  actionem
instituit,  postea  autem  re  comperta
voluit  remittere  quidem  commodati
actionem,  ad  furti  autem  pervenire,
tunc  licentia  ei  concedatur  et  ad-
versus furem  venire,  nullo  obstaculo
ei  opponendo,  quoniam  incertus  con-
stitutus  movit  adversus  eum  qui  rem
utendam  accepit,  commodati  actio-
nem, nisi  domino  ab  eo  satisfactum
est.  Tunc  etenim  omnimodo  furem
a  domino  quidem  furti  actione  libe-
rari,  suppositum  autem  esse  ei  qui
pro  re  sibi  commodata  domino  satis-
fecit  ;  cum  manifestissimum  est,
etiamsi  ab  initio  dominus  actionem
commodati  instituit  ignarus  rem  esse
subreptam,  postea  autem  hoc  ei  cog-
nito  adversus  furem  transivit,  omni-
modo liberari  eum  qui  rem  commo-
datam  accepit,  quemcumque  caus£e
exitum  dominus  adversus  furem
habuerit  :  eadem  definitione  obti-
nente,  sive  in  partem  sive  in  solidum
solvendo  sit  is  qui  rem  commodatam
accepit.

Gai.  iii.  206  ;

17.  Sed  is  apud  quem  res  deposita
est,  custodiam  non  praestat ;  sed  tan-
tum  in  eo  obnoxius  est,  si  quid  ipse
dolo  malo  fecerit.  Qua  de  causa,  si
res  ei  subrepta  fuerit,  quia  resti-
tuendse  ejus  rei  nomine  depositi  non
tenetur,  nee  ob  id  ejus  interest  rem
salvam  esse,  furti  agere  non  potest  ;
sed  furti  actio  domino  competit.

made,  he  cannot  change  his  mind  and
have  recourse  to  the  other  action.  If
he  elects  to  sue  the  thief,  the  borrower
is  quite  freed  ;  if  he  elects  to  sue  the
borrower,  he  cannot  bring  an  action  of
theft  against  the  thief,  but  the  bor-
rower may,  that  is,  provided  that  the
owner  elects  to  sue  the  borrower,
knowing  that  the  thing  has  been  stolen .
If  he  is  ignorant  or  uncertain  of  this,
and  therefore  sues  the  borrower,  and
then  subsequently  learns  the  true  state
of  the  case,  and  wishes  to  have  re-
course to  an  action  of  theft,  he  will  be
permitted  to  sue  the  thief  without  any
difficulty  being  thrown  in  his  way,  for
it  was  in  ignorance  of  the  real  fact
that  he  sued  the  borrower  ;  unless,
indeed,  his  claim  has  been  satisfied  by
the  borrower,  for  then  the  thief  is
quite  free  from  any  action  of  theft  on
the  part  of  the  owner,  but  the  borrower
takes  the  place  of  the  owner  in  the
power  of  bringing  this  action.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  very  evident  that  if
the  owner  originally  brings  an  action
commodati,  in  ignorance  that  the  thing
has  been  stolen,  and  subsequently
learning  this,  prefers  to  proceed  against
the  thief,  the  borrower  is  thereby  en-
tirely freed,  whatever  may  be  the  issue
of  the  suit  against  the  thief  ;  as,  in
the  previous  case,  the  thief  would  be
freed  as  against  the  lender,  whether
the  borrower  was  wholly  or  only  par-
tially able  to  satisfy  the  claim  against
him.

C.  vi.  2.  22.  1,  2.

17.  A  depositary  is  not  answerable
for  the  safe  keeping  of  the  thing  de-
posited, but  is  only  answerable  for
wilful  wrong  ;  therefore,  if  the  thing
is  stolen  from  him,  as  he  is  not  bound
by  the  contract  of  deposit  to  restore
it,  and  has  no  interest  in  its  safety,
he  cannot  bring  an  action  of  theft,  but
it  is  the  owner  alone  who  can  bring
this  action.

Gai.  iii.  207.

We  must,  in  all  cases  of  theft,  bear  in  mind  that  an  actio  furti
might  also  be  brought  against  any  one  who  had  '  ope  consilio '
participated  in  the  theft,  and  the  whole  amount  of  the  penalty

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  I.  401

could  be  recovered  separately  against  each  thief  and  each  person
taking  an  indirect  part  in  the  theft.     (D.  xlvii.  2.  21.  9.)

Custodiam  Jion  prcBstat  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  he  is  not
answerable  for  culpa  levis.

18.  In  summa  sciendum  est  quae-  1 8.  It  should  be  observed,  that  the
situm  esse  an  impubes,  rem  alienam  question  has  been  asked  whether,  if  a
amovendo,  furtum  faciat  ?  Et  placet,  person  under  the  age  of  puberty  takes
quia  furtum  ex  afiectu  consistit,  ita  away  the  property  of  another,  he  com-
demum  obligari  eo  crimine  impube-  mits  a  theft.  The  answer  is,  that  as  it
rem  si  proximus  pubertati  sit,  et  ob  is  the  intention  that  makes  the  theft,
id  intelligat  se  delinquere.  such  a   person  is   only   bound  by  the

obligation  springing  from  the  delict  if
he  is  near  the  age  of  puberty,  and
consequently  understands  that  he  com-
mits a  crime.

Gal  iii.  208|.

19.  Furti  actio,  sive  dupli  sive  19.  The  action  of  theft,  whether
quadrupli,  tantum  ad  poenae  perse-  brought  to  recover  double  or  quad-
cutionem  pertinet ;  nam  ipsius  rei  ruple,  has  no  other  object  than  the  re-
persecutionem  extrinsecus  habet  do-  covery  of  the  penalty.  For  the  owner
minus,  quam  aut  vindicando  aut  con-  has  also  a  means  of  recovering  the
dicendo  potest  auferre.  Sed  vindi-  thing  itself,  either  by  a  vindieatio  or  a
catio  quidem  adversus  possessorem  condidio.  The  former  may  be  brought
est,  sive  fur  ipse  possidet,  sive  alius  against  the  possessor,  whether  the
quilibet  ;  condictio  autem  adversus  thief  or  any  one  else  ;  the  latter  may
furem  ipsum  heredemve  ejus,  licet  be  brought  against  the  thief  or  the  heir
non  possideat,  competit.  of  the  thief,  although  not  in  possession

of  the  thing  stolen.

Gai.  iv.  8  ;  D.  xlvii.  2.  54.  3.

The  thief  and  those  who  assisted  him  had  to  pay  a  penalty  as
a  punishment  for  their  wrong-doing ;  but  something  more  re-
mained for  the  thief  himself  to  do ;  he  had  to  restore  the  thing
stolen  or  its  value.  The  owner  could  bring  a  vindieatio  or  an
actio  ad  exiiibendiim,  which  were  both  actiones  arbitrarice ;  that
is,  the  thief  was  directed  to  restore  the  thing  or  exhibit  it,  and  if
he  did  not  do  so,  then  the  judge  condemned  him  to  pay  what
under  the  circumstances  it  was  reasonable  he  should  pay.  These
actiones  might  be  brought  against  any  possessor,  against  the  thief,
or  any  one  who  had  received  possession  from  the  thief.  As  a
general  rule  the  person  who  could  bring  a  vindieatio  could  not
bring  a  condictio  for  the  same  thing ;  for  in  the  vindieatio  he  as-
serted that  the  property  in  the  thing  was  his,  whereas  in  the  con-
dictio he  asserted  that  the  defendant  dare  oportere,  ought  to  make
over  the  property  in  the  thing  to  him,  and  these  were  inconsistent
assertions.  In  the  case  of  theft,  however,  the  plaintiff  had  an
option  given  him  in  odiofurum  (Tit.  6.  14),  and  it  might  sometimes
be  advantageous  to  have  this  option.  For  example,  the  thing  might
have  perished,  and  it  was  a  rule  that  res  extinct(B  vindieari  non
possunt.  ExtinctcB  res,  licet  vindieari  non  possiut,  condici  tamen
furibus  possunt  (Gat.  ii.  79).

This  condictio  might  be  brought  against  the  heirs  of  the  thief»

D  D

402

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  II.

whereas  the  actio  furti,  which  inflicted  a  punishment  for  a  pei
sonal  wrongful  act,  could  only  be  brought  against  the  thief  him
self  Every  action  against  a  thief  or  those  who  assisted  hir
might  be  brought  by  the  heirs  of  any  one  entitled  to  brino-  it
<See  Tit.  12.)

Tit.  II.     DE   BONIS   VI   RAPTIS.

Qui  res  alienas  rapit,  tenetur  qui-
dem   etiam   furti :  quis  enim  magis
alienam    rem    invito    domino    con-
trectat,  quam  qui  vi  rapit  1  Ideoque
recte    dictum   est,    eum    improbum
f  urem  esse  ;  sed  tamen  propriam  ac-
tionem  ejus  delicti  nomine  prsetor
introduxit,  quae  appellatur  vi  bono-
rum  raptorum,  et  est  intra  annum
quadrupli,  post  annum  simpli.    Quae
actio  utilis  est,   etiam  si  quis  unam
rem  licet  minimam  rapuerit.     Qua-
druplum  autem  non  totum  posna  est,
et  extra  poenam  rei  persecutio,  sicut
in  actione  furti  manifesti  diximus  ;
sed  in  quadruple  inest  et  rei  perse-
cutio, ut  poena  tripli  sit,  sive  com-
prehendatur  raptor  in  ipso  delicto,
sive  non :  ridiculum  est  enim  levioris
conditionis   esse  eum  qui  vi  rapit,
quam  qui  clam  amovet.

A  person  who  takes  a  thing  belong
ing  to  another  by  force  is  liable  to  a:
action  of  theft,  for  who  can  be  sai(
to  take  the  property  of  another  mor
against  his  will  than  he  who  takes  i
by  force  1  And  he  is  therefore  rightl;
said  to  be  an  improhus  fur.  Th^
praetor,  however,  has  introduced  ;
peculiar  action  in  this  case,  calle(
vi  honormn  raptorum  ;  by  which,  i
brought  within  a  year  after  the  rob
bery,  quadruple  the  value  of  the  thinj
taken  maybe  recovered;  butif  brough
after  the  expiration  of  a  year,  then  th(
single  value  only  can  be  recovered
This  action  may  be  brought  ever
against  a  person  who  has  only  taker
by  force  a  single  thing,  and  one  of  the
most  trifling  value.  But  this  qua-
drujDle  of  the  value  is  not  altogether  a
penalty,  as  in  the  action  of  furtum
inanifestum  ;  for  the  thing  itself  is  in-
cluded, so  that,  strictly,  the  penalty
is  only  of  three  times  the  value.  And
it  is  the  same,  whether  the  robber  was
or  was  not  taken  in  the  actual  com-
mission of  the  crime.  For  it  would
be  ridiculous  that  a  person  who  uses
force  should  be  in  a  better  condition
than  he  who  secretly  commits  a  theft.

Gai.  iv.  a

The  edict  of  the  praetor,  introducing  this  action,  ran  as  fol-
lows :  Si  cui  dolo  malo^  hominibus  coactis,  damni  quid  factum
esse  dicetur,  sive  cujus  bona  rapta  esse  dicentur :  in  eum,  qui  id
fecisse  dicitur  judicium  dabo.     (D.  xlvii.  8.  2.)

It  was  necessary  that  the  act  of  violence  should  be  committed
with  evil  intent  {^dolo  malo).  If,  for  instance,  a  publicanus  car-
ried off  a  flock  of  sheep,  thinking  that  some  offence  had  been
committed  against  the  lex  vectigalis,  although  he  was  mistaken,
this  action  could  not  be  brought  against  him.  (D.  xlvii.  8.  2.  20.)
Even  if  the  thief  was  alone,  or  one  thing,  however  small,  were
carried  off,  yet  the  action  might  be  brought  although  the  words
hominibus  coactis  and  bona  rapta  occur  in  the  edict.  It,  like  the
action  of  theft,  could  only  be  brought  if  the  thing  or  things  taken
were  moveables.     (C.  ix.  33.  I.)

The  text  explains  how  the  amount  recovered  under  it  differed

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  II.

403

from  that  recovered  under  an  actio  farti.  Under  the  actio  vi  bonorum
raptorum  the  thing  itself  was  recovered,  or  its  value  if  the  thief  no
longer  had  it  in  his  possession,  and  also  three  times  the  estimated
value  of  the  thing  itself;  while  the  actio  furti  was  only  penal.
(See  paragr.  19  of  last  Title.)

The  plaintiff  might,  if  he  pleased,  bring  the  actio  furti  in-
stead ;  and  he  might  bring  this  action  after  the  expiration  of  a
year  prevented  his  bringing  that  '  vi  honorum  raptorum.^

This  action  united  in  its  effects  the  vindicatio  or  condictio,  and
also  the  recovery  of  a  penalty.  As  it  was  partly  penal,  it  could
not  be  brought  against  the  heirs  of  the  thief.  (D.  xlvii.  8.  2.  27.)
The  offence  of  taking  goods  by  force  could  also  be  made  the  sub-
ject of  a  criminal  charge.     (Tit.  18.  8.)

1.  As,  however,  this  action  can
only  be  brought  against  a  person  who
robs  with  the  intent  of  committing  a
wilful  wrong,  if  any  one  takes  by  force
a  thing,  thinking  himself,  by  a  mistake,
to  be  the  owner,  and,  in  ignorance  of
the  law,  believing  it  permitted  to  an
owner  to  take  away,  even  by  force,  a
thing  belonging  to  himself  from  per-
sons in  whose  possession  it  is,  he
ought  to  be  held  discharged  of  this
action,  nor  in  such  a  case  would  he  be
liable  to  an  action  of  theft.  But  lest
robbers,  under  the  cover  of  such  an
excuse,  should  find  means  of  gratifying
their  avarice  with  impunity,  the  im-
perial constitutions  have  made  a  wise
alteration,  by  providing  that  no  one
may  carry  off  by  force  a  thing  that  is
moveable,  or  moves  itself,  although  he
thinks  himself  the  owner.  If  any  one
acts  contrary  to  these  constitutions,  he
is,  if  the  thing  is  his,  to  cease  to  be
owner  of  it ;  if  it  is  not,  he  is  not  only
to  restore  the  thing  taken,  but  also  to
pay  its  value.  The  constitutions  have
declared  these  rules  applicable,  not
only  in  the  case  of  moveables  of  a
nature  to  be  carried  off  by  force,  but
also  to  the  forcible  entries  made  upon
immoveables,  in  order  that  every  kind
of  violent  robbery  may  be  prevented.

D.  xlvii.  8.  2.  18;  C.  viii.  4.  7.

The  constitution  referred  to  was  enacted  in  a.d.  389  by
the  Emperors  Valentinian,  Theodosius,  and  Arcadius.  It  pro-
vided a  much  more  effectual  remedy  for  forcible  disturbance  than
had  been  given  by  the  interdict  wide  vi.  It  applied,  which  the
interdict  did  not,  to  moveables  as  well  as  immoveables,  and  it
not  only  made  the  wrongdoer  give  up  the  thing,  but  it  made  him,  if
he  was  the  owner,  lose  the  property  in  the  thing,  and,  if  he  was  not
the  owner,  pay  its  value.     (See  Tit.  15.  6.)

D  D  2

1.  Quia  tamen  ita  competit  hsec
actio,  si  dolo  malo  quisque  rapuerit,
qui  aliquo  errore  in  ductus  suam  rem
esse  existimans  et  imprudens  juris
eo  animo  rapuit,  quasi  domino  liceat
etiam  per  vim  rem  suam  auferre  a
possessoribus,  absolvi  debet  :  cui
scilicet  conveniens  est,  nee  furti
teneri  eum  qui  eodem  hoc  animo
rapuit.  Sed  ne,  dum  talia  excogi-
tentur,  inveniatur  via  per  quam  rap-
tores  impune  suam  exerceant  avari-
tiam,  melius  divalibus  constitutioni-
bus  pro  hac  parte  prospectum  est,  ut
nemini  liceat  vi  rapere  rem  mobile^n
vel  se  moventem,  licet  suam  eamdem
rem  existimet  :  sed  si  quis  contra
statuta  fecerit,  rei  quidem  suae  do-
minio  cadere  ;  sin  autem  aliena  sit,
post  restitutionem  ejus  etiam  sesti-
mationem  ejusdem  rei  prsestare.
Quod  non  solum  in  mobilibus  rebus
quae  rapi  possunt,  constitutiones  ob-
tinere  censuerunt,  sed  etiam  in  in-
vasionibus  quae  circa  res  soli  fiunt,
ut  ex  hac  causa  omnirapina  homines
abstineant.

404

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  III.

2.  In  this  action  it  is  not  necessary
that  the  thing  should  have  been  par
of  the  goods  of  the  plaintiff;  for  whethe]
it  has  been  part  of  his  goods  or  not
yet  if  it  has  been  taken  from  among  hii
goods,  the  action  may  be  brought
Consequently,  if  anything  has  beer
let,  lent,  or  given  in  pledge  to  Titius,
or  deposited  with  him,  so  that  he  has
an  interest  in  its  not  being  taken  awaj
by  force,  as,  for  instance,  he  has  en-
gaged to  be  answerable  for  any  fauh
committed  respecting  it  ;  or  if  he  pos
sesses  it  honajide,  or  has  the  usufrud
of  it,  or  has  any  other  legal  interest  ir
its  not  being  taken  away  by  force,  this
action  may  be  brought,  not  to  give  hin
the  ownership  in  the  thing,  but  merel}
to  restore  him  what  he  has  lost  by  the
thing  being  taken  away  from  out  oj
his  goods,  that  is,  from  out  of  his  pro-
perty. And  generally,  we  may  say,
that  the  same  causes  which  would  give
rise  to  an  action  of  theft,  if  the  thefi
is  committed  secretly,  will  give  rise
to  this  action,  if  it  is  committed  witli
force.

D.  xlvii.  8.  2.  22-24.

In  order  to  make  the  punishment  of  an  open  and  flagrant
violation  of  law  more  severe  than  that  of  a  secret  theft,  the  very
slightest  interest  in  the  thing  taken  was  suflScient  to  enable  a
plaintiff  to  bring  the  action  vi  honorum  raptorum.  For  instance.
a  mere  depositary  could  bring  it,  although  his  interest  was  not
great  enough  to  permit  of  his  bringing  an  actio  furti.

2.  Sane  in  hac  actione  non  utique
expectatur  rem  in  bonis  actoris  esse ;
nam  sive  in  bonis  sit  sive  non  sit,  si
tamen  ex  bonis  sit,  locum  haec  actio
habebit  :  quare  sive  locata,  sive  com-
modata,  sive  pignorata,  sive  etiam
deposita  sit  apud  Titium,  sic  ut  in-
tersit  ejus  eam  rem  non  auferri,
veluti  si  in  re  deposita  culpam  quo-
que  promisit,  sive  bona  fide  possi-
deat,  sive  usumfructum  in  ea  quis
habeat,  vel  quod  aliud  jus  ut  in-
tersit  ejus  non  rapi,  dicendum  est
competere  ei  hanc  actionem,  ut  non
dominium  accipiat,  sed  illud  solum
quod  ex  bonis  ejus  qui  rapinam  pas-
sus  est,  id  est,  quod  ex  substantia
ejus  ablatum  esse  proponatur.  Et
generaliter  dicendum  est,  ex  quibus
causis  furti  actio  competit  in  re  clam
facta,  exiisdem  causis  omnes  habere
hanc  actionem.

Tit.  III.     DE   LEGE  AQUILIA.

Damni  injurise  actio  constituitur
per  legem  Aquiliam :  cujus  primo
capite  cautum  est  ut  si  quis  alienum
hominem,  alienamve  quadrupedem
qu8e  pecudum  numero  sit,  injuria
Occident,  quanti  ea  res  in  eo  anno
plurimi  fuerit,  tantnm  domino  dare
damnetur.

The  action  damni  injuriae,  is  esta-
blished by  the  lex  AquUia,  of  which
the  first  head  provides,  that  if  any  one
shall  have  wrongfully  killed  a  slave,  oi
a  four-footed  beast,  being  one  of  those
reckoned  among  cattle,  belonging  to
another,  he  shall  be  condemned  to  pay
the  owner  the  greatest  value  which  the
thing  has  possessed  at  any  time  within
a  year  previously.

Gai.  iii.  210.

The  lex  Aquilia  was,  as  Ulpian  informs  us  (D.  ix.  2.  1),  a
plehiscitvm  made  on  the  proposition  of  the  tribune  Aquilius.  It
made  an  alteration  in  all  the  previous  laws,  including  those  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  which  had  treated  of  damage  wrongfully  done
[de  damno  injuria).     Theophilus  says  it  was  passed  at  the  time  of

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  III.

405

the  secession  of  the  plebs,  meaning,  probably,  that  to  the  Janicii-
him,  in  the  year  468  A.u.c.     (Paraphrase  on  paragr.  15.)

A  fragment  of  Gaius  in  the  Digest  (D.  ix.  2.  2)  contains  the
terms  of  this  first  head  of  the  lex  Aquilia :  '  Qui  servum  servamve
alienum  alienamve  quadrupedem  vel pecudem  injuria  occiderit,guanti
id  in  eo  anno  plurimi  fuerit,  tantum  ces  dare  domino  damnatus  esto,^

1.  Quod  autem  non  prsecise  de
quadrupede,  sed  de  ea  tantum  quae
pecudum  numero  est,  cavetur,  eo
pertinet  ut  neque  de  feris  bestiis
neque  de  canibus  cautum  esse  in-
telligamus,  sed  de  iis  tantum  qua3
proprie  pasci  dicuntur,  quales  sunt
equi,  muli,  asini,  oves,  boves,  capree.
De  suibus  quoque  idem  placuit  ;
nam  et  sues  pecudum  appellatione
continentur,  quia  et  hi  gregatim
pascuntur.  Sic  denique  et  Homerus
in  Odyssea  ait,  sicut  -^lius  Marcia-
nus  in  suis  Institutionibus  refeit : —

Aijeic      Tovyi.      autaai      nap)inivui>  '      ai

Tiap     KopaKCQ    Trerpy,     iiri     t,j     Kprjvy
ApiOovny.

1.  As  the  law  does  not  speak  gene-
rally of  four-footed  beasts,  but  only  of
those  which  are  reckoned  among  cattle,
we  may  consider  its  provisions  as  not
applying  to  dogs  or  wild  animals,  but
only  to  animals  which  may  be  properly
said  to  feed  in  herds,  as  horses,  mules,
asses,  sheep,  o:5ten,  goats,  and  also
swine,  for  they  are  included  in  the
term  cattle,  for  they  feed  in  herds.
Thus  Homer  says,  as  ^lius  Marcianus
quotes  in  his  Institutes : —

'  You  will  find  him  seated  by  his
swine,  and  they  are  feeding  by  the
rock  of  Corax,  near  the  spring  Are-
thusa.'

D.  xi.  2.  2.  2 ;  D.  xxxii.  65.  4.
The  passage  is  from  Od.  13,  407.

2.  Injuria  autem  occidere  intelli-
gitur,  qui  nullo  jure  occidit.  Itaque
latronem  qui  occidit,  non  tenetur,
utique  si  aliter  periculum  eflPugere
non  potest.

2.  To  kill  wrongfully  is  to  kill
without  any  right  ;  consequently,  a
person  who  kills  a  thief  is  not  liable
to  this  action,  that  is,  if  he  could  not
otherwise  avoid  the  danger  with  which
he  was  threatened.

It  was
damage
Aquilia  applied.

D.  ix.  2.  5,  pr.  and  1.

not  necessary  to  consider  the  intent  with  which  the
was   done.     Was  it    done   ^  nullo  jure  ? '  if  so,  the   lex

3.  Ac  ne  is  quidem  hac  lege  te-
netur, qui  casu  occidit,  si  modo
culpa  ejus  nulla  inveniatur  ;  nam
alioquin  non  minus  quam  ex  dolo
ex  culpa  quisque  hac  lege  tenetur.

3.  Nor  is  a  person  made  liable  by
this  law,  who  has  killed  by  accident,
provided  there  is  no  fault  on  his  part,
for  this  law  punishes  fault  as  well  as
wilful  wrong-doing.

Gai.  iii.  202.  211.

4.  Itaque  si  quis  dum  jaculis
ludit  vel  exercitatur,  transeuntem
servum  tuum  trajecerit,  distinguitur :
nam  si  id  a  milite  in  campo  eove
ubi  solitum  est  excrcitari,  admissum
est,  nulla  culpa  ejus  intelUgitur  ;
si  alius  tale  quid  admisit,  culpas  reus
est.     Idem  juris  est  de  milite,  si  in

4.  Consequently,  if  any  one  playing
or  practising  with  a  javelin,  pierces
with  it  your  slave  as  he  goes  by,  there
is  a  distinction  made  ;  if  the  accident
befalls  a  soldier  while  in  the  camp,  or
other  place  appropriated  to  military
exercises,  there  is  no  fault  in  the  soldier,
but   there   would  be  in  any  one  else

406

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  III.

alio    loco    quam     qui    exercitandis
militibus  destinatus  est,  id  admisit.

besides  a  soldier,  and  the  soldier  him-
self would  be  in  fault  if  he  inflicted
such  an  injury  in  any  other  place  than
one  appropriated  to  military  exercises.

D.  ix.  2.  9.  4.

5.  Item  si  putator,  ex  arbore  de-
jecto  ramo,  servum  tuum  transeun-
tem  Occident  :  si  prope  viam  pub-
licam  aut  vicinalem  id  factum  est,
neque  proclamavit  ut  casus  evitari
possit,  culpse  reus  est ;  si  procla-
mavit, nee  ille  curavit  cavere,  extra
cuipam  est  putator.  ^que  extra
culpam  esse  intelligitur,  si  seorsum
a  via  forte  vel  in  medio  fundo
csedebat,  licet  non  proclamavit ;  qnia
in  eo  loco  nulli  extraneo  jus  fuerat
versandi.

5.  If,  again,  any  one,  in  pruning  a
tree,  by  letting  a  bough  fall,  kills  your
slave  who  is  passing,  and  this  takes
place  near  a  public  way,  or  a  way  be-
longing to  a  neighbour,  and  he  has  not
cried  out  to  make  persons  take  care,
he  is  in  fault ;  but  if  he  called  out,  and
the  passer-by  would  not  take  care,  he
is  not  to  blame.  He  is  also  equally
free  from  blame  if  he  was  cutting  far
from  any  public  way,  or  in  the  middle
of  a  field,  even  though  he  has  not
called  out,  for  by  such  a  place  no
stranger  has  a  right  to  pass.

D.  ix.  2.  31.

6.  Prpeterea  si  medicus  qui  ser-
vum tuum  secuit,  dereliquerit  cura-
tionem,  atque  ob  id  mortuus  fuerit
servus,  culpse  reus  est.

6.  So,  again,  a  physician  who  has
performed  an  operation  on  your  slave,
and  then  neglected  to  attend  to  his
cure,  so  that  the  slave  dies,  is  guilty  of
a  fault.

D.  ix.  2.  8.

7.  Imperitia  quoque  culpae  ad-
numeratur  :  veluti  si  medicus  ideo
servum  tuum  occiderit,  quod  eum
male  secuerit,  aut  perperam  ei  me-
dicamentum  dederit.

7.  Unskilfulness  is  also  a  fault,  as,
if  a  physician  kills  your  slave  by  un-
skilfully performing  an  operation  on
him,  or  by  giving  him  wrong  medicines.

D.  ix.  2.  7,  8  ;  D.  ix.  2.  8  ;  D.  1.  17.  132.

8.  Impetu  quoque  mularum,  quas
mulio  propter  imperitiam  retinere
non  potuerit,  si  servus  tuus  op-
pressus  fuerit,  culpps  reus  est  mulio  ;
sed  et  si  propter  infirmitatem  eas
retinere  non  potuerit,  cum  alius
firmior  retinere  potuisset,  seque
culpse  tenetur.  Eadem  placuerunt
de  eo  quoque  qui,  cum  equo  vehe-
retur,  impetum  ejus  aut  propter
infirmitatem  aut  propter  imperitiam
suam  retinere  non  potuerit.

D.  ix.  2.

9.  His  autem  verbis  legis,  quanti
id  eo  anno  plurimi  fuerit,  ilia  sen-
tentia  exprimitur,  ut  si  quis  homi-
nem  tuum  qui  hodie  claudus  aut
mancus  aut  luscus  erit,  occiderit,
qui  in  eo  anno  integer  et  pretiosus
fuerit,  non  tanti  teneatur  quanti
hodie  erit,  sed  quanti  in  eo  anno
plurimi  fuerit.     Qua  ratione  credi-

8.  So,  too,  if  a  muleteer,  through
his  want  of  skill,  cannot  manage  his
mules,  and  runs  over  your  slave,  he  is
guilty  of  a  fault.  As,  also,  he  would
be  if  he  could  not  hold  them  in  on
account  of  his  weakness,  provided  thai
a  stronger  man  could  have  held  then
in.  The  same  decisions  apply  to  ai
unskilful  or  infirm  horseman,  unabh
to  manage  his  horse.

9.  The  words  above  quoted,  '  th(
greatest  value  the  thing  has  possessec
at  any  time  within  a  year  previously,
mean  that  if  your  slave  is  killed,  bein^
at  the  time  of  his  death  lame,  maimed
or  one-eyed,  but  having  been  within  {
year  quite  sound  and  of  considerabL
value,  the  person  who  kills  him  ii
bound  to  pay,  not  his  actual  value,  bu

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  III.

407

turn  est  poenalem  esse  hujiis  legis
actionem,  quia  non  solum  tanti
quisque  obligatur  quantum  damni
dederit,  sed  aliquando  longe  pluris  :
ideoque  constat  in  heredem  earn
actionem  non  transire,  quee  trans-
itura  fuisset,  si  ultra  damnum  num-
quam  lis  sestimaretur.

the  greatest  value  he  ever  possessed
within  the  year.  Hence,  this  action
may  be  said  to  be  penal,  as  a  person  is
bound  under  it  not  only  for  the  damage
he  has  done,  but  for  much  more  ;  and,
therefore,  the  action  does  not  pass
against  his  heir,  as  it  would  have  done-
if  the  condemnation  had  not  exceeded
the  amount  of  the  actual  damage.

Gai.  iii.  214  ;  D.  ix.  2.  23.  3.  8.

10.  Illud  non  ex  verbis  legis,  sed
ex  interpretatione  placuit,  non  so-
lum perempti  corporis  sestimatio-
nem  habendam  esse,  secundum  ea
quae  diximus,  sed  eo  amplius  quid-
quid  prasterea  perempto  eo  corpore
damni  nobis  allatum  fuerit  :  veluti
si  servum  tuum  heredem  ab  aliquo
institutum  antea  quis  occiderit,
quam  jussu  tuo  adiret,  nam  heredi-
tatis  quoque  amisste  rationem  esse
habendam  constat.  Item  si  ex  pari
mularum  unam,  vel  ex  quadriga
equorum  unum  occiderit,  vel  ex
comoedis  unus  servus  occisus  fuerit,
non  solum  occisi  lit  sestimatio  ;  sed
eo  amplius  id  quoque  computatur,
quanti  depretiati  sunt  qui  super-
sunt.

10.  It  has  been  decided,  not  by
virtue  of  the  actual  wording  of  the
law,  but  by  interpretation,  that  not
only  is  the  value  of  the  thing  perish-
ing to  be  estimated  as  we  have  saidy,
but  also  the  loss  wliich  in  any  way  we
incur  by  its  perishing  ;  as,  for  instance,
if  your  slave  having  been  instituted
heir  by  some  one  is  killed  before  he
enters  at  your  command  on  the  inherit-
ance, the  loss  of  the  inheritance  should
be  taken  account  of.  So,  tooj  if  one
of  a  pair  of  mules,  or  of  a  set  of  four
horses,  or  one  slave  of  a  band  of  come-
dians, is  killed,  account  is  to  be  taken
not  only  of  the  value  of  the  thing
killed,  but  also  of  the  diminished  value
of  what  remains.

Gai.  iii.  212  ;  D.  ix.  2.  22.  1.

11.  Liberum  autem  est  ei  cujus
servus  occisus  fuerit,  et  judicio  pri-
vato  legis  Aquiline  damnum  perse-
qui,  et  capitalis  criminis  eum  reum
facere.

11.  The  master  of  a  slave  who  is
killed  may  bring  a  private  action  for
the  damages  given  by  the  lex  Aqnilia,
and  also  bring  a  capital  action  against
the  murderer.

Gai.  iii.  213.

A  crimen  capitale  was  one  which  affected  the  caput  oi  the
condemned.  The  lex  Cornelia  (D.  ix.  2.  23.  9  ;  see  also  Title  18.
5,  of  this  Book)  gave  the  master  the  power  to  bring  a  criminal
accusation  against  the  murderer.  The  Code  (iii.  35.  3}  contain»
a  rescript  of  the  Emperor  Gordian,  stating  it  as  undoubted  law
that  a  criminal  accusation  did  not  prevent  a  master  also  bringing
a  private  action  under  the  lex  Aquilia,

12.   Caput  secundum  legis  Aqui-
lise  in  usu  non  est.

12.    The   second   head   of
Aquilia  is  not  now  in  use.

the  lex

Gai.  iii.  215  ;  D.  ix.  2.  27.  4.

We  learn  from  Gaius  (Gai.  iii.  215)  that  the  second  head  of
the   lex  Aquilia   gave  an  action  for  the   full  value  of  the  injury
sustained  to  a  stipulator,  whose  claim  was  extinguished  by  an  ad-
stipulator  releasing   the  debtor  by  acceptilation.      (See   Bk.  iii.
Tit.    29.)      The   stipulator    might  also   bring   an   actio  mandaii

408

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  III.

against  tlie  adstipulator,  if  he  preferred  doing  so  ;  but,  as  we  see
from  Title  16  of  this  Book  (paragr.  1),  proceeding  under  the  lex
■Aquilia  gave  the  plaintiiF  the  advantage  of  having  the  amount  he
recovered  doubled  if  the  defendant  denied  his  liability.

13.  Capite  tertio  de  omni  cetero
damno  cavetur.  Itaque  si  quis
servum,  vel  earn  quadrupedem  quae
pecuduin  numero  est,  vulneraverit,
sive  earn  quadrupedem  qua3  pecu-
dum  numero  non  est,  veluti  canem
aut  feram  bestiam  vulneraverit  ant
Occident,  hoc  capite  actio  consti-
tuitur.  In  ceteris  quoque  omnibus
animalibns,  item  in  omnibus  rebus
quae  anima  carent,  damnum  injuria
datum  hac  parte  vindicatur  :  si  quid
enim  ustum  aut  ruptum  aut  frac-
tum  fuerit,  actio  ex  hoc  capite  con-
stituitur,  quamquam  poterat  sola
rupti  appellatio  in  omnes  istas
causas  sufficere ;  ruptum  enim  in-
telligitur,  quod  quoquo  modo  cor-
ruptum  est.  Unde  non  solum
fracta  aut  usta,  sed  etiam  scissa  et
coUisa  et  ejffusa,  et  quoquo  modo
perempta  atque  deteriora  facta,  hoc
verbo  continentur  :  denique  respon-
sum  est,  si  quis  in  alien  um  vinum
aut  oleum  id  immiserit  quo  naturalis
bonitas  vini  aut  olei  corrumperetur,
ex  hac  parte  legis  eum  teneri.

13.  The  third  head  provides  for
every  kind  of  damage  ;  and,  therefore,
if  a  slave,  or  a  four-footed  beast  of  those
reckoned  among  cattle,  is  wounded,
or  a  four-footed  beast  of  those  not
reckoned  among  cattle,  as  a  dog  or
wild  beast,  is  wounded  or  kiUed,  an
action  may  be  brought  under  the  third
head.  Compensation  may  also  be  ob-
tained under  it  for  all  wrongful  injury
to  animals  or  inanimate  things,  and,
in  fact,  for  anything  burnt,  broken,  or
fractured,  although  the  word  broken
(ruptum)  would  have  sufficed  for  all
these  cases  ;  for  a  thing  is  ruphtm
which  is  in  any  way  spoilt  (corruptiim),
so  that  not  only  things  fractured  or
burnt,  but  also  things  cut,  bruised,
spilt,  or  in  any  way  destroyed  or  dete-
riorated, may  be  said  to  be  rv.pta.  It
has  also  been  decided,  that  any  one
who  mixes  anything  with  the  oil  or
wine  of  another,  so  as  to  spoil  the
goodness  of  the  wine  or  oil,  is  liable
under  this  head  of  the  lex  Aquilia.

Gai.  iii.  217;  D.  ix.  2.  27.  15.

The  terms  of  this  third  head  of  the  Aquilian  law  are  given  by
Ulpian  (D.  ix.  2.  27.  5):  '  Cceteraj^um  rerum,  prceter  hominern  et
pecudem  occisos,  si  qids  alter i  damnum,  facit^  quod  usserit,  fregerit^
ruperit  mjuria,  quanti  ea  res  erit  in  diehus  triginta  proximis,  tan-
tuin  ces  domino  dare  damnas  esto.^

14.

ex

Illud  palam  est,  sicut
.primo  capite  ita  demum  quisque
tenetur  si  dolo  aut  culpa  ejus  homo
aut  quadrupes  occisus  occisave  fu-
erit, ita  ex  hoc  capite  de  dolo  aut
culpa  de  cetero  damno  quemque
teneri.  Hoc  tamen  capite,  non
quanti  in  eo  anno,  sed  quanti  in
diebus  triginta  proximis  res  fuerit,
obligatur  is  qui  damnum  dederit.

14.  It  is  evident  that,  as  a  person
is  liable  under  the  first  head,  if  by
wilful  injury  or  by  his  fault  he  kills  a
slave  or  a  four-footed  beast,  so  by  this
head,  a  person  is  liable  for  every  other
damage,  if  there  is  wrongful  injury  or
fault  in  what  he  does.  But  in  this
case,  the  offender  is  bound  to  pay  the
greatest  value  the  thing  has  possessed,
not  within  the  year  next  preceding,  but
the  thirty  days  next  preceding.

Gai.  iii.  218  ;  D.  ix  2.  30.  3.

15.  Ac  ne  plurimi  quidem  verbum
adjicitur  ;  sed  Sabino  recte  placuit,
perinde  habendam  aestimationem  ac
si  etiam  hac  parte  plurimi  verbum
adjectum  fuisset:  nam  plebem  Ho-

is. Even  the  word  plurimi,  i.  e.  of
the  gi'eatest  value,  is  not  expressed  in
this  case.  But  Sabinus  was  rightly  of
opinion,  that  the  estimation  ought  to
be  made   as  if  this   word  was  in  the

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  III.

409

iiianam  quae  Aquilio  tribune  rogante     law,  since  it  must  have  been  that  the
lianc  legem  tnlit,  contentam  fuisse     plebeians,  who  were  the  authors  of  this

quod  prima  parte  eo  verbo  usa  est.

law  on  the  motion  of  the  tribune
Aquilius,  thought  it  sufficient  to  have
used  the  word  in  the  first  head  of  the
law.

Gai.  iii.  218  ;  D.  ix.  2.  1.  1.

16.  Ceterum  placuit  ita  demum
directam  ex  hac  lege  actionem  esse,
si  quis  pr?ecipue  corpore  suo  dam-
num dederit.  Ideoque  in  eum  qui
alio  modo  damnum  dederit,  utiles
actiones  dari  solent,  veluti  si  quis
hominem  alienum  aut  pecus  ita  in-
cluserit  ut  fame  necaretur,  aut  ju-
mentum  tam  vehementer  egerit  ut
rumperetur,  aut  pecus  in  tantum
exagitaverit  ut  praecipitaretur,  aut
si  quis  alieno  servo  persuaserit  ut
in  arborem  ascenderet  vel  in  pu-
teum  descenderet,  et  is  ascendendo
vel  descendendo  aut  mortuus  aut
aliqua  corporis  parte  Isesus  fuerit,
utilis  actio  in  eum  datur.  Sed  si
quis  alienum  servum  aut  de  ponte
aut  de  ripa  in  fiumen  dejecerit,  et
is  suffocatus  fuerit,  eo  quod  projecit
corpore  suo  damnum  dedisse  non
difficulter  intelligi  poterit,  ideoque
ipsa  lege  Aquilia  tenetur.  Sed  si
non  corpore  damnum  datum,  neque
corpus  lc3esum  fuerit,  sed  alio  modo
damnum  alicui  coiitigerit,  cum  non
sufficit  neque  directa  neque  utilis
Aquilia,  placuit,  eum  qui  obnoxius
fuerit,  in  factum  actione  teneri  :
veluti  si  quis  misericordia  ductus
alienum  servum  compeditum  sol-
vent, ut  fugeret.

16.  But  the  direct  action  under  this
law  can  only  be  brought  if  any  one
has,  with  his  own  body,  done  damage,
and  consequently  utiles  actiones  are
given  against  the  jjerson  who  does
damage  in  any  other  way,  as,  for  in-
stance, a  utilis  actio  is  given  against
one  who  shuts  up  a  slave  or  a  beast,  so
as  to  produce  death  by  hunger  :  who
drives  a  horse  so  fast  as  to  knock  him
to  pieces,  or  drives  cattle  over  a  preci-
pice, or  persuades  another  man's  slave
to  climb  a  tree,  or  go  down  into  a  well,
and  the  slave  in  climbing  or  descending
is  killed  or  maimed.  But  if  any  one
has  flung  the  slave  of  another  from  a
bridge  or  a  bank  into  a  river,  and  the
slave  is  drowned,  then,  as  he  has  actually
flung  him  down,  there  can  be  no  diffi-
culty in  deciding  that  he  has  caused
the  damage  with  his  own  body,  and
consequently  he  is  directly  liable  under
the  lex  Aquilia.  But  if  no  damage
has  been  done  by  the  body,  nor  to  the
body,  but  damage  has  been  done  in
some  other  way,  the  actio  directa  and
the  actio  utilis  are  both  inapplicable,
and  an  actio  in  factum  is  given  against
the  wrong-doer  ;  for  instance,  if  any
one  through  compassion  has  loosed
the  fetters  of  a  slave,  to  enable  him  to
escape.

Gai.  iii.  219  ;  D.  ix.  2.  33.  1 ;  D.  iv.  3.  7.  7.

If  the  injury  was  done,  to  use  the  language  of  the  jurists,
covpore  corpori,  that  is,  with  direct  bodily  force,  to  the  body  of  a
slave  or  beast,  the  actio  (legis)  Aquilice  had  place.  If  it  was
done  corpori,  but  indirectly  and  not  corpore,  the  actio  vtilis
AquilicB  had  place.  If  it  was  done  neither  to  the  body,  nor  yet
with  direct  bodily  force,  the  actio  must  be  brought  ia  factum,
that  is,  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case.

The  directa  actio  Aquilice  could  only  be  brought  by  the  owner  ;
the  utilis  might  be  brought  by  the  possessor,  usufructuary,  and
others  having  an  interest  less  than  that  of  ownership.

As  the  action  under  the  lex  Aquilia  was  penal,  the  whole  sum
recoverable  against  one  could  be  recovered  separately  against
each  or  more  than  one  offender.

If  the  defendant  denied  his  liability,  the  penalty  under  the

410  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  IV.

lex  Aquilla  was  doubled,  adversus  inficiantem  in  duplum  actio  est.
(D.  ix.  2.  2.  1.)

It  might  very  often  happen  that  the  person  injured  could  also
bring  an  action  arising  from  a  contract  against  the  doer  of  the
injury,  as,  for  instance,  an  actio  pro  socio,  mandati,  depositi,  if  the
person  who  did  the  injury  was  a  partner,  a  mandatary,  or  de-
positary of  the  person  to  whom  the  injury  was  done.  In  such  a
case  he  could  either  bring  the  action  on  the  contract,  or  proceed
under  the  lex  Aquilia.  He  could  not  do  both  ;  but  if  he  brought
the  action  on  the  contract,  and  then  found  that  if  he  had  proceeded
under  the  lex  Aquilia  he  would  have  recovered  a  larger  sum,  he  •
was  allowed  to  bring  an  action  under  the  lex  Aquilia  to  recover
the  surplus.     (D.  ix.  2.  7,  8  ;  D.  xliv.  7.  34.  2.)

The  subject  of  damnum  is  hardly  noticed  in  the  Institutes,
except  in  connection  with  the  lex  Aquilia.     (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  i8.
2.)      By  damnum  is   meant   the   diminution  of  a  man's  property,
and  it  is  treated  of  in  the   Digest  according  as  it  \&  factum,  that
is  already  done,  or  infectum,  that  is  apprehended,  as  if  an  adjoin-
ing house  seemed  likely  to  fall.  (D.  xxxix.  2.)  Damnum  factum,
more  usually  termed  simply  damnum,  might  arise  from   a  mere
accident,  or  from  the  free  will  of  another.     If  it  arose  in  the
latter  way,  it  might  have  arisen  in  the  exercise  of  a  right  enjoyed
by  the  person  causing  it,  and  then  no  reparation  had  to  be  made
for  causing  it,  non  videtur  vim  facere   qui  jure  sua  utitur  (D.  L.
17.  155)  ;  or  it  might  have  been  done  wrongfully,  damnum  injuria
datum ^  and  then  the  person  injured  was   entitled  to  compensation
according  to  the  rates  provided  by  the  lex  Aquilia,  if  the  damage
came  within  the  scope  of  the  law  ;  if  it  did   not,  then  an  actio  in
factum  was  given  (D.  ix.  2.  33.  1),  and   compensation  was  made
at  rates  differincr  accordino;  to  the  de2:ree  of  wrono-.     If  there  had
been  dolus  or  culpa  lata,  the  compensation  was  regulated  by  the
value  peculiar  to  the  person  injured :  if  the  degree  of  culpa  had
been  less,  the  common  value  was  the  measure  of  the  compensation.
In  cases  of  damnum  infectum,  the  owner  of  the  property  threatened
could  call  on   the  owner   of  the  property  from  which  danger  was
apprehended   to  give   security  against  any  loss  which  might  thus
arise.     (D.  xxx.  12.  2.  5.  1.)

Tit.  IV.     DE   INJURIIS.

Generaliter  injuria  dicitiir  omne  hijuria,  in  its  general  sense,  signi-

quocl  non  jure  fit  :  specialiter,  alias  fies  every  action  contrary  to  law  ;  in  a

contumelia,  quae  a  contemnendo  dicta  special  sense,  it  means,  sometimes,  the

est,    quam    Grseci  i''/3on'  appellant ;  same    as   contumelia  (outj-age),  which

alias    culpa,    quam     Gr?eci    unKt)j:a  is  derived  from  contemnere,  the  Greek

dicunt,  sicut  in  lege  Aquilia  damnum  vftptc  ;   sometimes  the   same    as   culpa

injurise  accipitur  ;  alias  iniquitas  et  (fault),  in  Greek  a^tKtjjjo,  as  in  the  lex

injustitia,quamGr8eciaO(K-/Vn' vocant.  Aquilia,  which  speaks  of  damage  done

Cum   enim   prsetor  vel   judex   non  injuria  ;  sometimes  it  has  the  sense  of

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  IV.  411

jure  contra  quern  pronuntiat,  inju-     iniquity,  injustice,  or  in  Greek  aciKt'a;

riam  accepisse  dicitur.  for  a  person  against  whom  the  praetor

or  judge  pronounces  an  unjust  sen-
tence, is  said  to  have  received  an
injuria.

D.  xlvii.  10.  I.

Injuria,  then,  is  used  in  three  senses — 1,  a  wrongful  act,  an
act  clone  nullojure;  2,  the  fault  committed  by  a  judge  who  gives
judgment  not  according  to  jus  ;  3,  an  outrage  or  affront.

1.  Injuria  autem  committitur,  1.  An  injury  is  committed  not  only
non  solum  cum  quis  pugno,  puta,  by  striking  with  the  fists,  or  striking
aut  fustibus  Cciesus  vel  etiam  ver-  with  clubs  or  the  lash,  but  also  by
beratus  erit,  sed  et  si  cui  convicium  shouting  till  a  crowd  gathers  round
factum  fuerit  ;  sive  cu jus  bona  quasi  any  one  ;  by  taking  possession  of  any
debitoris,  qui  nihil  deberet,  possessa  one's  goods,  pretending  that  he  is
fuerint  ab  eo  qui  intelligebat  nihil  debtor  to  the  inflictor  of  the  injury,
eum  sibi  debere  ;  vel  si  quis  ad  in-  who  knows  he  has  no  claim  on  him  ;  by
famiam  alicujus  libellum  aut  car-  writing,  composing,  publishing  a  libel
men  scripserit,  composuerit,  ediderit,  or  defamatory  verses  against  any  one,
dolove  malo  fecerit  quo  quid  eorum  or  by  maliciously  contriving  that  an  other
fieret  ;  sive  quis  matremfamilias  does  any  of  these  things  ;  by  following
aut  prsetextatum  prgetextatamve  ad-  after  an  honest  woman,  or  a  young  boy
sectatus  fuerit,  sive  cujus  pudicitia  or  girl  ;  by  attempting  the  chastity  of
attentata  esse  dicetur,  et  denique  any  one  ;  and,  in  short,  by  numberless
aliis  pluribus  modis  admitti  injuriam  other  acts.

manifestum  est.

Gal  iii.  220.

Convicium,  Ulpian  gives  (D.  xlvii.  10.  15.  4)  the  following
derivation  of  the  word : — '  Convicium  autem  dicitur  vel  a  concita-
tione  vel  a  conventu,  hoc  est,  a  collatione  vocum,  quum  enim  in
unum  complures  voces  conferuntur,  convicium  appellatur,  quasi
convocium,^  any  proceeding  which  publicly  insults  or  annoys
another,  as  gathering  a  crowd  round  a  man's  house,  or  shouting
out  scandal  respecting  another  to  a  mob.

Matremfamilias,  i.e.  every  married  woman  of  honest  character.

PrcBtextatum,  -am,  i.e.  still  wearing  the  prcEtexta,  which  was
put  off  at  the  age  of  puberty.

Adsectatus  fuerit.  Ulpian  says  (D.  xlvii.  10.  15.  22),' Ad-
sectatur  qui  ta.citus  frequenter  sequitur,  assidua  enim  frequentia
quasi  prcebet  nonnuUam  infamiam.^

Pudicitia  attentata.  Paul  says  (D.  xlvii.  10.  10),  '  Attentari
pudicitia  dicitur  cum  id  agitur,  ut  ex  pudico  impudicus  Jiat.^

2.  Patitur  autem  quis  injuriam  2.  A  man  may  receive  an  injury,
non  solum  per  semetipsum,  sed  not  only  in  his  own  person,  but  in  that
etiam  per  liberos  suos  quos  in  po-  of  his  children  in  his  power,  and  even
testate  habet  ;  item  per  uxorem  in  that  of  his  wife,  according  to  the
suam,  id  enim  magis  prsevaluit.  opinion  that  has  prevailed.  If,  there-
Itaque  si  filire  alicujus  quae  Titio  fore,  you  injure  a  daughter  in  the
nupta  est,  injuriam  feceris,  non  so-  power  of  her  father,  and  married  to
lum  filise  nomine  tecum  injuriarum  Titius,  the  action  for  the  injury  maybe
agi  potest,  sed  etiam  patris  quoque  brought,  not  only  in  the  name  of  the
et  mariti  nomine.     Contra  autem  si  daughter  herself,  but  also  in  that  of

412  LIB.  IV.     TIT.  IV.

viro  injuria  facta  sit,  uxor  injuria-  the  father  or  the  husband.  But,  if  a
rum  agere  non  potest  :  defendi  enim  husband  has  sustained  an  injury,  the
uxores  a  viris,  non  viros  ab  uxoribus  wife  cannot  bring  the  actio  injuriariiTrif
sequum  est.  Sed  et  socer  nurus  for  the  husband  is  the  protector  of  the
nomine  cujus  vir  in  potestate  est,  wife,  not  the  wife  of  the  husband.  The
injuriarum  agere  potest.  father  in-law  may  also  bring  this  action

in  the  name  of  his  daughter-in-law,  if
her  husband  is  in  his  power.

Gai.  iii.  221 ;  D.  xlvii.  10.  2  ;  D.  xlvii.  10.  1.  3.

Each  person  injured  could  bring  an  action.  Take,  for  instance,
the  case  of  a  married  woman.  She,  her  husband,  her  own  father,
and  her  husband's,  have  each  an  action,  supposing  both  she  and
her  husband  are  in  potestate.  But  a  person  in  potestate,  though
he  had  an  action,  could  not  bring  it  himself,  except  in  certain
cases,  as  in  the  absence  of  the  paterfamilias.  The  paterfamilias
would  bring  the  action,  and  could  sue  either  in  his  son's  name  or
his  own.  The  amount  recovered  in  the  respective  actions  differed
according  to  the  dignity  of  the  person  bringing  it.  It  might
happen,  for  instance,  that  the  son  was  of  higher  rank  than  the
father.  Cum  utrique  tam  filio  quam  patri  adquisita  actio  sit,
non  eadem  utique  facienda  (Bstimatio  est:  cum  possit  propter filii
dignitatem  major  ipsi  quam  patri  injuria  facta  esse.  (D.  xlvii.
10.  30,  31.)  Although  the  wife  was  in  power  of  the  father,  yet
her  husband  could  always  bring  an  action  for  injury  done  to  her,
grounded  on  his  natural  duty  to  protect  her.

3.    Servis    autem    ipsis    quidem  3.    An    injury    cannot,    properly

nulla  injuria   fieri   intelligitur,   sed  speaking,  be  done  to  a  slave,  but  it  is

domino  per   eos  fieri  videtur,   non  the    master   who,    through   the  slave,

tamen   iisdem   modis  quibus  etiam  is  considered  to  be  injured  ;  not,  how-

per  liberos  et  uxores,  sed  ita  cum  ever,  in  the  same  way  as  through  a

quid  atrocius  commissum  fuerit,  et  child  or  wife,  but  only  when  the  act

quod  aperte  ad  contumeliam  domini  is  of  a  character  grave  enough  to  make

respicit  :     veluti    si    quis     alienum  it  a  manifest  insult  to  the  master,  as

servum    verberaverit,    et    in    hunc  if   a  person  has  flogged   severely  the

casum  actio  proponitur.     At  si  quis  slave  of  another,   in  which  case   this

servo  convicium  fecerit,   vel  pugno  action  is  given   against   him.     But  a

eum  percusserit,  nulla  in  eum  actio  master  cannot  bring  an  action  against

domino  competit.  a  person  who   has   collected  a  crowd

round  his  slave,  or  struck  him  with
his  fist.

Gai.  iii.  222.

Under  the  civil  law  the  master  could  not  bring  an  action  for
injury  done  to  his  slave,  unless  the  injury  was  done  with  intent
to  hurt  or  annoy  the  master.  But  the  praetor  gave  an  action
pleno  jure,  i.  e.  which  could  be  brought  as  a  matter  of  right,  if  the
slave  was  beaten  or  tortured  without  the  master's  orders,  and  an
action  cognita  causa,  i.  e.  allowed  if  the  circumstances  of  the  case
seemed,  on  inquiry,  to  furnish  good  ground  for  it,  if  the  injury
had  been  slighter.  Regard  was  had,  in  making  this  inquiry,  and
in  estimating  the  amount  of  damage,  to  the  class  of  slaves  to  which
the  slave  belonged.     (See  paragr.  7.)    The  slave  himself  could  in

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  IV.

413

no  case  bring  an  action   for  injury  sustained   by  him.      (D.  xlvii.
10.  15.  34.)

4.  Si  communi  servo  injuria  facta
sit,  sequum  est,  non  pro  ea  parte
qua  dominus  quisque  est,  sestima-
tionem  injuria}  fieri,  sed  ex  domi-
norum  persona,  quia  ipsis  fit  injuria.

4.  If  an  injury  has  been  done  to  a
slave  held  in  common,  equity  demands
that  it  shall  be  estimated  not  accord-
ing to  their  respective  shares  in  him,
but  according  to  their  respective  posi-
tion, for  it  is  the  masters  who  are
injured.

If  the  co-proprietors  brought  the  action  for  injury  done,  or
intended  to  be  done,  to  them  through  their  slave,  then,  as  it  is
said  in  the  text,  it  made  no  difference  what  was  the  amount  of
their  interest  in  the  slave.  Each  had  equally  had  an  insult
offered  him.  But  the  co-proprietors  might  bring  a  praetorian
action  for  harm  done  to  the  slave,  when  no  insult  or  hurt  was
intended  to  them,  but  the  only  question  was,  how  much  was  the
slave  damaged,  and  made  unfit  for  work,  and  then  the  amount
recovered  was  divided  between  them,  proportionately  to  their
respective  interests  in  the  slave.     (See  note  on  last  paragr.)

5.  Quod  si  ususfructus  in  servo
Titii  est,  proprietas  M8e\di,  magis
Msevio  injuria  fieri  intelligitur.

5.  If  Titius  has  the  usufruct,  and
Msevius  the  property  in  a  slave,  the
injury  is  considered  to  be  done  rather
to  Msevius  than  to  Titius.

D.  xlvii.  10.  15.  47.

It  might,  however,  happen  that  it  could  be  shown  that  the
intention  was  to  injure  and  insult  the  usufructuary  more  than  the
proprietor.     (D.  xlvii.  10.  15.  48.)

6.  Sed  si  libero  qui  tibi  bona  fide
servit,  injuria  facta  sit,  nulla  tibi
actio  dabitur ;  sed  suo  nomine  is
experiri  poterit,  nisi  in  contumeliam
tuam  pulsatus  sit :  tunc  enim  corn-
petit  et  tibi  injuriarum  actio.  Idem
ergo  est  et  in  servo  alieno  bona  fide
tibi  serviente,  ut  toties  admittatur
injuriarum  actio,  quoties  in  tuam
contumeliam  injuria  ei  facta  sit.

6.  If  the  injury  has  been  done  to
a  freeman,  who  serves  you  bona  fide,
you  have  no  action,  but  he  can  bring
an  action  in  his  own  name,  unless  he
has  been  injured  merely  to  insult  you,
for,  in  that  case,  you  may  bring  the
actio  injuriarum.  So,  .too,  with  regard
to  a  slave  of  another  who  serves  you
bona  fide,  you  may  bring  this  action
whenever  the  slave  is  injured  for  the
purpose  of  insulting  you.

D.  xlvii.  10.  15.  48.

7.  Poena  autem  injuriarum  ex
lege  duodecim  tabularum,  propter
membrum  quidem  ruptum  talio  erat ;
propter  os  vero  fractum  nummarise
poenae  erant  constitutpe,  quasi  in
magna  veterum  paupertate  :  sed
postea  prajtores  permittebant  ipsis
qui  injuriam  passi  sunt,  earn  sesti-
mare,  ut  judex  vel  tanti  reum  con-
demnet,  quanti  injuriam  passus  ?esti-
maverit,  vel  minoris,  prout  ei  visum
fuerit.     Sed  poena  quidem  injuria-

7.  The  penalty  for  injuries  under
the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  was  a
limb  for  a  limb,  but  if  only  a  bone
was  fractured,  pecuniary  compensa-
tion was  exacted  proportionate  to  the
great  poverty  of  the  times.  After-
wards, the  prretor  permitted  the  in-
jured parties  themselves  to  estimate
the  injury,  so  that  the  judge  should
condemn  the  defendants  to  pay  the
sum  estimated,  or  less,  as  he  may
think  proper.     The  penalty  appointed

414

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  IV.

rum  quse  ex  lege  duodecim  tabula-
rum  introducta  est,  in  desuetudinem
abiit  ;  quam  autem  prsetores  intro-
duxerunt,  quse  etiam  honoraria  ap-
pellatur,  in  judiciis  frequentatur,
nam  secundum  gradum  dignitatis
vitaeque  honestatera  crescit  aut  mi-
nuitur  eestimatio  injurise  :  quigradus
condemnationis  et  in  servili  persona
non  immerito  servatur,  ut  aliud  in
servo  actore,  aliud  in  medii  actus
homine,  aliud  in  vilissimo  vel  com-
pedito  constituatur.

by  the  Twelve  Tables  has  fallen  into
desuetude,  but  that  introduced  by
the  prastors,  and  termed  honorary,
is  adopted  in  the  administration  of
justice.  For,  according  to  the  rank
and  character  of  the  person  injured,
the  estimate  is  greater  or  less  ;  and  a
similar  gradation  is  observed,  not  im-
properly, even  with  regard  to  a  slave,
one  amount  being  paid  in  the  case  of
a  slave  who  is  a  steward,  a  second  in
that  of  a  slave  holding  an  office  of  an
intermediate  class,  and  a  third  in  that
of  one  of  the  lowest  rank,  or  one  con-
demned to  wear  fetters.

Gai.  iii.  223,  224 ;  D.  xlvii.  10.  15.  44.

The  greater  part  of  the  edict  of  the  prastor  on  this  subject  is
given  by  Ulpian  in  different  parts  of  the  extracts  from  his  writ-
ings.     (See  Digest,  xlvii.  10.  15.)

8.  Sed  et  lex  Cornelia  de  injuriis
loquitur,  et  injuriarum  actionem  in-
troduxit,  quae  competit  ob  eam  rem
quod  se  pulsatum  quis  verberatumve,
domumve  suam  vi  introitam  esse  di-
cat,  Domum  autem  accipimus,  sive
in  propria  domo  quis  habitat,  sive  in
conducta  vel  gratis  sive  hospitio  re-
ceptus  sit.

8.  The  lex  Cornelia  also  speaks  of
injuries,  and  introduced  an  actio  in-
juriarum, which  may  be  brought  when
any  one  alleges  that  he  has  been  struck
or  beaten,  or  that  his  house  has  been
broken  into.  And  the  term  '  his  house '
includes  one  which  belongs  to  him  and
in  which  he  lives,  or  one  he  hires,  or
one  in  which  he  is  received  gratuitously
or  as  a  guest.

D.  xlvii.  10.  5,  pr.  and  2.

The  lex  Cornelia  de  Sicariis  (see  Tit.  18.  5),  though  chiefly
directed  against  murderers,  also  contained  provisions  against  other
deeds  of  Adolence.  Lex  itaque  Cornelia  ex  tribus  causis  dedit
actionem :  quod  quis  pulsatus  verberatusve  domusve  ejus  vi  introita
sit.     (D.  xlvii.  10.  5.)

9,  Atrox  injuria  sestimatur  vel  ex
facto,  veluti  si  quis  ab  aliquo  vulne-
ratus  fuerit  vel  f ustibus  csesus  ;  vel
ex  loco,  veluti  si  cui  in  theatro  vel
in  foro  vel  in  conspectu  prsetoris
injuria  facta  sit ;  vel  ex  persona,
veluti  si  magistratus  injuriam  passus
fuerit,  vel  si  senatori  ab  humili  in-
juria facta  sit,  aut  parenti  patronove
tiat  a  liberis  vel  libertis  :  aliter  enim
senatoris  et  parentis  patronique,
aliter  extranei  et  humilis  personse
injuria  sestimatur.  Nonnunquam  et
locus  vulneris  atrocem  injuriam  facit,
veluti  si  in  oculo  quis  percusserit.
Parvi  autem  refert,  utrum  patri-
familias  an  filiofamilias  talis  injuria
facta  sit :  nam  et  haec  atrox  sestima-
bitur.

9.  An  injury  is  said  to  be  of  a  grave
character,  either  from  the  nature  of
the  act,  as  if  any  one  is  wounded  or
beaten  with  clubs  by  another,  or  from
the  nature  of  the  place,  as  when  an
injury  is  done  in  a  theatre,  a  forum,
or  in  the  presence  of  the  praetor ;
sometimes  from  the  quality  of  the
person,  as  when  it  is  a  magistrate  that
has  received  the  injury,  or  a  senator
has  sustained  it  at  the  hands  of  a  per-
son of  low  condition,  or  a  parent  or
patron  at  the  hands  of  a  child  or  freed-
man.  For  the  injury  done  to  a  senator,
a  parent,  or  a  patron  is  estimated  dif-
ferently from  an  injury  done  to  a  per-
son of  low  condition  or  to  a  stranger.
Sometimes  it  is  the  part  of  the  body
injured  that  gives  the  character  to  the

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  IV.

415

injury,  as  if  any  one  has  been  struck
in  the  eye.  Nor  does  it  make  any
difierence  whether  such  an  injury  has
been  done  to  a  paterfamilias  or  3i,filhts-
familias,  it  being  in  either  case  con-
sidered of  a  gi'ave  character.

Gal  iii.  225  ;  D.  xlvii.  10.  7,  8  ;  D.  xlvii.  8,  9.  1,  2.

If  the  injury  was  atrox,  a  freedman  might  bring  an  action
against  his  patron,  and  the  emancipated  son  against  his  father,
but  not  otherwise.  (D.  xlvii.  10.  7.  3.)  And  the  prastor  him-
self, in  cases  of  atrox  injuria,  when  he  gave  the  formula  to  the
judge,  fixed  the  maximum  of  the  condemnation,  and  the  judge
would  not  condemn  the  defendant  in  a  less  sum.    (GrAi.  iii.  224.)

10.  In  summa  sciendum  est,  de
omni  injuria  eum  qui  passus  est,
posse  vel  criminaliter  agere  vel  civi  ■
liter.  Et  si  quidem  civiliter  agatur,
sestimatione  facta  secundum  quod
dictum  est,  poena  imponitur ;  sin
autem  criminaliter,  officio  judicis
extraordinaria  pcena  reo  irrogatur.
Hoc  videlicet  observando  quod  Ze-
noniana  constitutio  introduxit,  ut
viri  illustres  quique  super  eos  sunt,
et  per  procuratorem  possint  actio-
nem injuriarum  criminaliter  vel
persequi  vel  suscij)ere,  secundum
ejus  tenorem  qui  ex  ipsa  manifestius
apparet.

10.  Lastly,  it  must  be  observed,
that  in  every  case  of  injury  he  who
has  received  it  may  bring  either  a
criminal  or  a  civil  action.  In  the  lat-
ter, it  is  a  sum  estimated  as  we  have
said  that  constitutes  the  penalty  ;  in
the  former,  the  judge,  in  the  exercise
of  his  duty,  inflicts  on  the  ofiender  an
extraordinary  punishment.  We  must,
however,  remark,  that  a  constitution
of  Zeno  permits  men  of  the  rank  of
illustris,  or  of  any  higher  rank,  to
bring  or  defend  the  actio  injuriarimi
if  brought  criminally  by  a  ^jrocurator,
as  may  be  seen  more  clearly  by  reading
the  constitution  itself.

D.  xlvii.  10.  6;  C.  ix.  35.  11.

It  was  only  as  a  very  peculiar  exception  that  criminal  actions
could,  like  private  actions,  be  brought  or  defended  through  a
procurator.

11.  Non  solum  autem  is  injuria-
rum tenetur,  qui  fecit  injuriam,  id
est,  qui  percussit ;  verum  ille  quoque
continebitur,  qui  dolo  fecit  vel  cura-
vit  ut  cui  mala  pugno  percuteretiu*.

11.  Not  only  is  he  liable  to  the
actio  injuriarum  who  has  inflicted  the
injury,  as,  for  instance,  the  person
who  has  struck  the  blow  ;  but  he  also
who  has  maliciously  caused  or  con-
trived that  any  one  should  be  struck
in  the  face  with  the  fist.

D,  xlvii.  10,  11.  1.

12.  Hsec  actio  dissimulatione
aboletur  ;  et  ideo  si  quis  injuriam
dereliquerit,  hoc  est,  statim  passus
ad  animum  suum  non  revocaverit,
postea  ex  po^nitentia  remissam  in-
juriam non  poterit  recolere.

,   therefore,  a  person
no  account  of  the  in-

12.  This  action  is  extinguished  by
a  person  dissembling  to  have  received
the  injury  ;  and
who  has  taken
jury,  that  is,  who  immediately  on  re-
ceiving it  has  shown  no  resentment  at
it,  cannot  afterwards  cliange  his  mind
and  resuscitate  the  injury  he  has  al-
lowed to  rest.

D.  xlvii.  10,  11.  1.

416  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  V.

If  the  person  injured,  though  expressing  indignation  at  the
time,  did  not  take  any  steps  towards  enforcing  reparation  within
a  year,  the  action  was  extinct.  (D.  xlvii.  10,  17.  6  ;  C.  ix.  35.  5.]
The  action  was  personal  to  the  person  injured,  and  could  not  be
transmitted  to  his  heirs,  unless  before  his  death  the  action  had
already  proceeded  as  far  as  the  litis  contestatio.

Tit.  Y.     DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QU^  QUASI  EX
DELICTO  NASCUNTUR.

Si  judex  litem  suani  fecerit,  non  If  a  judge  makes  a  cause  his  own

proprie  ex  maleficio  obligatus  vide-  he  does  not,  properly  speaking,  seen
tur  :  sed  quia  neque  ex  contractu  to  be  bound  ex  maleficio  ;  but  as  h<
obligatus  est,  et  utique  peccasse  ali-  is  neither  bound  ex  maleficio  nor  ei
quid  intelligitur,  licet  per  impru-  contractu,  and  as  he  has,  nevertheless
dentiam,  ideo  videtur  quasi  ex  male-  done  a  wrong,  although  perhaps  onh
ficio  teneri  ;  et  in  quantum  de  ea  re  from  ignorance,  he  seems  to  be  bounc
i«quum  religioni  judicantis  videbi-  as  it  were  ex  maleficio,  and  will  b(
tur,  poenam  sustinebit.  condemned    to    the     amount     whicl

seems  equitable  to  the   conscience  o

the  judge.

D.  1.  13.  6.

The  Koman  law  characterised  rather  arbitrarily  certain  wrong
ful  acts  as  delicts,  and  then,  as  there  were  many  other  wrongfu
acts  which  bound  the  wrong-doer  to  make  reparation,  and  as  i
could  not  be  said  that  the  wrong-doer  was  bound  ex  delicto^he  wai
said  to  be  bound  quasi  ex  delicto,  i.e.  there  was  an  evident  analog]
between  the  mode  in  which  the  obligation  arose  from  other  kinds  o
wronjx-doinfj  and  that  in  which  it  arose  from  the  kinds  of  wrons;.
doing  technically  called  delicts.  The  principle  was  exactly  th(
same,  but  the  particular  act  did  not  happen  to  be  among  thos<
technically  termed  delicts.  The  first  instance  given  is  that  of  {
judge  qui  litem  sua m  fecerit,  that  is,  who,  through  favour,  corrup
tion,  or  fear  (D.  v.  1.  15.  1),  or  even  ignorance  of  law  {licet  pci
imprudentiam),  gives  a  manifestly  wrong  sentence,  and  who  thui
makes  the  lis  or  suit  to  be  sua,  that  is,  affect  himself  by  render
ing  him  responsible  for  the  sentence.  Gains  gives  an  example,  ii
the  case  of  a  iuds^e  condemnino^  a  defendant  in  a  sum  differen
from  that  fixed  in  the  formula.     (Gai.  iv.  52.)

The  defendant  might,  if  he  pleased,  instead  of  bringing  ai
action  against  the  judge,  appeal  from  his  decision ;  and  in  som(
cases,  as  when  the  judge  had  violated  public  law,  or  been  cor
rupted,  he  might  treat  the  decision  as  null,  and  commence  th(
action  afresh  (D.  xlix.  1.  5.  19);  but  his  adversary  might  be  in
solvent,  or  his  indignation,  or  many  other  reasons,  might  make  hin
prefer  suing  the  judge.

Ducaurroy  points  out  that  the  distinction  made  between  th(
seemingly  parallel  cases  of  an  ignorant  physician  and  an  ignorani
judge,  the  fault  of  the  former  being  punished  under  the  lex  Aquilia

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  V.

417

the  latter  being  bound  quasi  ex  delicto ,  arises  from  the  injury  of
the  physician  being  done  to  the  body.  The  severity  of  the  pe-
nalty against  a  judge  who  was  merely  ignorant  of  the  law,  is
owing  probably  to  the  great  checks  against  ignorance  which  the
judge  possessed  if  he  pleased  to  avail  himself  of  them  in  the
advice  of  the  '  prudentes,'  whose  business  it  was  to  assist  him,
and  in  the  possibility  of  having  recourse  to  the  magistrate  who

had  given  the  action  to  him.

1.  Item  is  ex  cujus  coenaculo,  vel
proprio  ipsiiis  vel  in  quo  gratis  habi-
tabat,  dejectum  eflfusumve  aliquid
est,  ita  ut  alicui  noceretur,  quasi  ex
maleficio  obligatus  intelligitur.  Ideo
autem  non  proprie  ex  maleficio  ob-
ligatus intelligitur  quia  plerumque
ob  alterius  culpam  tenetur,  aut  servi
aut  liberi.  Oui  similis  est  is  qui,  ea
parte  qua  vulgo  iter  fieri  solet,  id
positum  aut  suspensum  habet  quod
potest,  si  ceciderit,  alicui  nocere  :
quo  casu  poena  decern  aureorum
constituta  est.  De  eo  vero  quod  de-
jectum effusumve  est,  dupli  quanti
damnum  datum  sit,  constituta  est
actio  :  ob  hominem  vero  liberum
occisum,  quinquaginta  aureorum
poena  constituitur  ;  si  vero  vivat
nocitumque  ei  esse  dicatur,  quantum
ob  eam  rem  sequum  judici  videtur,
actio  datur.  Judex  enim  computare
debet  mercedes  medicis  praestitas,
ceteraque  impendia  quse  in  cura-
tione  facta  sunt,  prteterea  operarum
quibus  caruit  aut  cariturus  est,  ob  id
quod  inutilis  factus  est.

1.  So,  too,  he  who  occupies,  whether
as  proprietor  or  gratuitously,  an  apart-
ment, from  which  anything  has  been
thrown  or  poured  down,  which  has
done  damage  to  another,  is  said  to  be
bound  qimsi  ex  maleficio,  for  he  is  not
exactly  bound  ex  maleficio,  as  it  is  gene-
rally by  the  fault  of  another,  a  slave,
for  instance,  or  a  freedman,  that  he  is
bound.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to
a  person  who,  where  there  is  a  public
way,  keeps  something  placed  or  sus-
pended, which  may,  if  it  fall,  hurt  any
one ;  in  this  case,  a  penalty  has  been
fixed  of  ten  aureL  With  respect  to
things  thrown  or  poured  down,  an
action  is  given  for  double  the  amount
of  the  damage  done  ;  and  if  a  freeman
has  been  killed,  there  is  a  penalty  of
fifty  aurei.  If  he  is  not  killed,  but
only  hurt,  the  action  is  given  for  the
amount  which  the  judge  considers
equitable  under  the  circumstances ;  the
judge  ought  to  take  into  account  the
fees  paid  to  the  physician,  and  all
the  other  expenses  of  the  man's  ill-
ness, as  well  as  the  employment  which
he  has  lost,  or  will  lose,  by  being  in-
capacitated.

D.  xliv.  7.  5.  5 ;  D.  ix.  3.  5,  6  ;  D.  ix.  3.  1 ;  D.  ix.  3.  7.

The  edict  of  the  praetor,  in  the  cases  referred  to  in  the  text,
is  given,  D.  ix.  3.  1  ;  and  D.  ix.  3.  5.  6.

The  action  given  in  each  case  was  popularis,  that  is,  any  one
might  bring  it,  but  in  the  case  of  a  freeman  being  killed,  his
heirs  or  relations,  if  they  brought  an  action,  were  preferred  to

strangers.

2.  Si  filiusfamilias  seorsum  a  pa-
tre  habitaverit,  et  quid  ex  coenaculo
ejus  dejectum  effusumve  sit,  sive
quid  positum  suspensumve  habu-
erit,  cujus  casus  periculosus  est,  Ju-
liano  placuit  in  patrem  nuUam  esse
actionem,  sed  cum  ipso  filio  agen-
dum.   Quod  et  in  filiofamilias  judice

2.  If  a  filiusfamilias  lives  apart
from  his  father,  and  from  a  room  in
his  house  anything  is  throw^l  or
poured  down,  or  is  placed  or  sus-
pended, the  fall  of  which  would  be
dangerous,  Julian  thinks  that  no
action  could  be  brought  against  the
father,  but  only  against  the  aon.     Tlie

E  E

418  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

observandum  est,    qui  litem  suam    same  holds  good  with  respect   to  a
fecerit.  Jiiiusfamilias,  who,  being  a  judge,  has

made  a  cause  his  own.

D.  xUv.  7.  5.  5  ;  D.  v.  1.  15.

The  Jiliusfamilias  could  be  sued  himself  for  delicts,  but  the
father  was  not  obliged  to  repair  the  injury  done  even  to  the  extent
of  the  son's  peculiuniy  which  was  only  made  to  meet  the  contracts
or  quasi  contracts  of  the  son  ;  but  if  a  slave  had  done  the  injury,
the  master  was  always  bound  to  repair  the  damage,  or  to  abandon
the  slave.     (See  Tit.  8.  7.)

3.  Item  exercitor  navis  aut  cau-  3.  The  master  of  a  ship,  of  an  inn,

ponee  aut  stabuli  de  damno  aut  furto  or  a  stable,  is  liable  quasi  ex  maleficio,

quod  in  navi  aut  caupona  aut  stabu-  for  any  damage  or  loss  through  theft

lo  factum  erit,  quasi  ex  maleficio  te-  occurring  in  the  ship,  inn,   or  stable,

neri  videtur,  si  modo  ipsius  nullum  that  is,  if  it  is  not  he  who  has  com-

est  maleficium,  sed  alicujus  eorum  mitted   the  wrongful  deed,   but  some

quorum  opera  navem  aut  cauponam  one   employed   in  the    service  of  the

aut  stabulum  exerceret ;  cum  enim  ship,  inn,  or   stable.     For  as  the  ac-

neque  ex  contractu  sit  adversus  eum  tion  given  against  him  does  not  arise

constituta  hsec  actio,  et  aliquatenus  ex  maleficio  or  ex  contractu,  and  yet  he

culpae  reus  est,  quod  opera  malorum  is  in  fault  in  employing  dishonest  per-

hominum  uteretur,   ideo   quasi   ex  sons  as  his   servants,  he  seems  to  be

maleficio  teneri  videtur.     In  his  au-  bound  quasi  ex  maleficio.      In    these

tem  casibus   in   factum   actio  com-  cases  it  is  an  action  in  factum  that  is

petit,    quae    heredi    quidem    datur,  given,  and   it  may  be  brought  by  the

adversus  heredem  autem   non  com-  heir,  but  not  against  the  heir,
petit.

D.  xliv.  7.  5,  6;  D.ix.  3.  5.  13.

The  action  was  for  double  the  value  of  the  thing  damaged
or  lost.  (D.  xlvii.  5.  2.)  The  person  injured  might  also,  at  his
option,  have  an  actio  furti,  or  AquilicB,  as  the  case  might  be,
against  the  actual  wrong-doer.  (D.  xlvii.  5.)  This  action  was
different  from  that  given  by  the  prsetor  against  innkeepers  and
others  for  the  restoration  of  things  confided  to  them.     (D.  iv.  9.)

Tit.  VI.     DE   ACTIONIBUS.

Superest  ut  de  actionibus  loqua-  It  now  remains  that  we  speak  of

mur.     Actio  autem  nihil  aliud  est,  actions.     An   action  is    nothing    else

quam  jus  persequendi  judicio  quod  than  the  right  of  suing  before  a  judge

sibi  debetur.  for  that  which  is  due  to  us.

D.  xliv.  7.  61.

We  now  come  to  the  last  division  of  the  Institutes,  that
which  treats  of  actions  and  the  subsidiary  subjects  of  exceptions
and  interdicts.  A  sketch  has  been  given  in  the  Introduction
(sec.  90-111)  of  the  old  legal  actions,  of  the  formulary  system,
and  of  the  system  of  extraor dinar ia  judicia,  by  which,  long
before  the  time  of  Justinian,  the  formulary  system  had  been
replaced.  In  treating  of  actions  the  Institutes  make  such  con-
stant reference  to  the  formulary  system,  and  generally  to  the
praetorian  law  on  the  subject,  that  it  is  necessary,  for  the  compre-

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VI.  419

hension  of  this  part  of  the  Institutes,  to  set  out  with  a  know-
ledge of  the  law  of  actions  while  the  formulary  system  prevailed.
For  a  statement  of  the  mode  in  which  this  system  replaced  the
older  actions,  and  of  the  scheme  of  the  formula,  the  reader  is
referred  to  sections  98  to  106  of  the  Introduction.  But  it
will  be  convenient  to  add  here  an  outline  of  the  principal  divi-
sions of  actions  under  the  pra&torian  system,  and  to  connect  these
divisions  with  the  corresponding  paragraphs  of  this  Sixth  Title.

1.  Actions  in  rem,  in  personam,  A  main  division  of  actions
is  that  into  real  actions  and  personal  actions,  a  division  based  on
the  difference  in  the  thing  which  the  plaintiff  claims  to  be  due.
In  a  real  action,  the  plaintiff  claims  that,  as  against  all  the  world,
a  thing  corporeal  or  incorporeal  is  his.  The  intentio  of  such  an
action  ran — Si  paret  hominem  ex  jure  Quiritium  Auli  Agerii  esse.
But  under  the  formulary  system  every  condemnation  was  in  a
sum  of  money.  It  was  the  value  of  the  thing,  not  the  thing,
that  was  awarded ;  and  so  the  condemnatio  in  a  real  action  ran —
Quanti  ea  res  erit  tantam  pecuniam  Numerium  Negidium  Aulo
Agerio  condemna  ;   si  non  paret,  absolve.

A  personal  action  was  one  in  which  the  plaintiff  claimed  that
the  defendant  should  give,  do,  or  make  good  something  to  or  for
him — Cum  intendimus  dare,  facere,  prcestare  oportere.  For  pnje-
stare,  as  in  the  action  of  theft  (Gai.  iv.  37),  the  words  damnum
decidere,  to  make  good  the  loss,  were  sometimes  substituted.  Con-
dictio,  used  sometimes  in  the  general  sense  of  a  personal  action,
had  a  special  sense.  Originally  the  condictio  was  the  action  by
which  the  plaintiff  demanded  that  the  defendant  should  give,  i.e.
make  over  the  full  property  in,  something,  and  the  thing  to  be  given
was  something  certum,.  It  was  therefore  specially  attached  to
unilateral  contracts,  to  contracts  made  re  (which,  it  will  be  re-
membered, are  only  indirectly  bilateral)  or  verbis  or  Uteris,  or
to  such  obligations  quasi  ex  contractu  as  that  to  restore  money
unduly  paid.  But  the  condictio  was  extended  to  things  uncertain,
to  the  p^ivinor  or  doing;  something^  which  was  not  fixed ;  and  the
condictio  in  its  primary  application  received  the  name  of  con-
dictio certi,  and  in  its  extended  application  that  of  condictio
incerti ;  and  the  condictio  certi,  or  simply  condictio,  was  limited  by
usage  to  actions  brought  on  contracts  re,  verbis,  or  Uteris,  while
condictiones  certi,  brought  on  other  grounds,  received  special
names,  as  the  condictio  indebiti,  brought  to  enforce  the  repayment
of  money  unduly  paid.  The  condictio  incerti  always  received  a
special  name,  according  to  the  obligation  it  was  brought  to  enforce,
as  ex  stipulatu.  Lastly,  as  the  old  condictio  certi  was,  when  first
introduced  by  the  lex  Silia  (510  A.u.c),  given  to  enforce  the
giving  of  a  fixed  sum  of  money,  and  only  extended  by  the  lex
Calpurnia  (529  A.u.c. j  to  enforce  the  giving  of  other  things,  the
condictio,  when  brought  for  anything  else  except  a  fixed  sum  of
money,  and  whether  certi  ov  incerti,  was  spoken  of  as  iriticaria,  from
^nY/cwm,  wheat,  one  of  the  objects  comprised  in  the  extension  made

E   E   2

420  LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VI.

by  the  lex  Calpurnia.  The  intentio  in  the  condictio  certi  ran — Si
paret  oportere  dare  (^decern  aureos) ;  and  in  the  condictio  incerti —
Quicquid  paret  dare,  facere  oportere.  Every  action  facer e  being
necessarily  uncertain,  the  condemnatio  was  necessarily  uncertain,
even  in  condictiones  certi,  if  the  action  was  for  anything  but  a  fixed
sum  of  money.  If,  for  example,  the  action  was  to  give  a  fixed
amount  of  wheat,  as  every  condemnatio  was  in  a  pecuniary  shape,
the  defendant  was  condemned  in  the  value,  whatever  it  might  be,
of  that  amount  of  wheat —  Quanti  ea  res  erit.

2.  Actions  in  jus,  in  factum,  directed,  utiles,  JictiticB,  in  fac~
turn  prcescriptis  verbis.  These  terms  applied  to  actions  indicate
the  modes  in  which  the  praetor  extended  or  modified  the  law  by  the
shape  he  gave  to  the  formula.  In  shaping  actions  the  praetor
introduced  changes  of  two  kinds.  First,  he  gave  actions  for  the
enforcement  of  rights  altogether  outside  the  old  civil  law,  but
sanctioned  by  the  edict ;  or,  secondly,  he  extended  existing  actions
(generally  civil,  but  sometimes  praetorian)  to  cases  and  persons
outside  the  limits  in  which  these  actions  could  be  brought.

The  principal  mode  in  which  he  effected  the  first  object  was
to  frame  an  action  not  in  jus,  but  in  factum.  Probably  the
actio  in  factum  concepta  represents  the  formula  in  its  earliest  stage.
The  demonstratio  and  intentio  were  confounded  or  united  in  it.
The  praetor  merely  said,  ^  If  such  a  fact  appears  to  be  true,  con-
demn the  defendant.'  Such  a  formula  would  enable  the  praetor  to
give  legal  remedies  to  persons  who,  under  the  civil  law,  could  not
sue,  as  peregrini  or  Jiliifamiliarum,  or  to  give  a  legal  remedy
where  none  previously  existed.  But  when  the  formula  was
applied  to  actions  properly  within  the  sphere  of  the  civil  law,
then  the  formula  had  reference  to  this  law  ;  and  in  the  intentio,
separated  from  the  demonstratio,  it  was  said,  ^  If  the  plaintiff  has
such  and  such  a  legal  right,  or  the  defendant  is  legally  bound
{oportet)  to  give  or  do,  then  condemn.'  Reference  being  made  to
the  law  in  this  way,  the  formula  was  said  to  be  in  jus  concepta.

When  there  was  an  existing  action  and  the  praetor  wished  to
extend  it  to  persons  or  cases  not  within  its  sphere,  the  existing
action  was  termed  directa,  and  the  extended  action  utilis.  In
framing  actiones  utiles,  the  praetor  had  two  resources.  He  either
gave  an  actio  in  factum,  i.e.  stated  that  if  a  fact  was  ascertained
the  defendant  was  to  be  condemned,  so  that  actiones  in  factum
were  used  both  to  give  a  new  remedy  and  to  enlarge  an  existing
action,  or  he  devised  a  fictitious  action  in  jus.  He  said,  ^  If  some-
thing were  true  which  is  not  true,  then  what  would  the  plaintiff's
legal  rights  be  ?  '  For  example,  if  a  plaintiff  claimed  as  if  he  had
acquired  by  usucapion  before  the  time  of  usucapion  had  run,
the  praetor  said,  si  anno  possedisset,  what  would  be  the  plaintiff's
rights  ?  and  the  judge  treated  the  plaintiff  as  if  the  year  had  run.

Lastly,  where  there  was  an  innominate  contract  executed  on
one  side,  the  praetor  gave  an  action  in  jus  termed  actio  in  factum
prcescriptis  verbis,  which  was  exactly  like   an  action   in  jus  on  a

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  421

nominate  contract,  only  that,  as  the  contract  did  not  fall  under
one  of  the  recognised  heads,  the  facts  had  to  be  stated  in  order
to  show  how  the  legal  obligation  had  arisen.

3.  Actiones  strlcti  juris,  bonce  Jidei,  arbitraricB.  This  division
depends  on  the  varying  amount  of  latitude  given  to  the  judge.
The  action  might  be  one  in  jus  concepta,  and  within  the  limits  of
the  civil  law;  and  then  the  judge  had  simply  to  decide  the
question  submitted  to  him  without  taking  into  account  any  con-
siderations of  equity.  But  in  some  actions  of  this  kind  the
prgetor  added  the  w^ords  ex  fide  bona,  quod  cequius,  melius,  or  some
equivalent  expression  ;  and  then  the  judge  imported  equitable
considerations,  i.  e.  he  took  notice  of  dolus  without  an  exceptio  doli
mali  being  inserted  ;  he  looked  to  customs  and  usages  ;  he  took
cognisance  of  sets-ofF  (^compensationes),  without  these  sets-ofF
being  distinctly  brought  before  him  by  the  formula ;  he  allowed
interest  from  the  time  of  default.  The  actions  in  which  the  judge
had  this  latitude  allowed  him  were  termed  bonce  fidei  actiones,  as
opposed  to  those  stricti  juris,  where  he  had  no  such  latitude  ;  and,
speaking  generally,  unilateral  obligations  gave  rise  to  actions
stricti  juris,  and  bilateral  obligations  gave  rise  to  actions  bonce
fidei.  This  division  referred,  however,  to  personal  actions.  In
real  actions  the  judge  had  a  latitude  by  the  actions  being  what
was  termed  arbitrarice,  i.e.  an  order  to  restore  the  thing  was
made,  and  if  the  thing  was  not  restored  (nisi  restituat),  then  the
defendant  was  condemned  in  a  pecuniary  equivalent  fixed  after
taking  all  circumstances  into  account.  Some  special  personal
actions,  such  as  the  actio  ad  exhibendum,  were  also  made
arbitrarice.

Actions  in  factum  were  not  exactly  stricti  juris  or  bonce  fidei,
terms  only  applied  to  actions  in  jus  conceptce,  but  practically  they
approached  bonce  fidei  actions,  as  the  praetor  directed  a  condemna-
tion if  the  facts  were  found  as  he  thought  proper  to  state  them,
and  some  of  them  were  made  arbitrarice,  and  all  condictiones
incerti  were  so  far  like  actions  bonce  fidei  thsit  the  judge  had  to  fix
the  pecuniary  value,  as  he  might  think  proper,  of  an  uncertain
thing.

4.  Judicia  legitima,  imperio  continentia. — There  is  one  more
division  of  actions  to  be  noticed  in  connection  with  the  formulary
system.  It  is  one  which  flowed  out  of  the  original  diversity  of
the  application  of  the  preetor's  authority,  according  as  he  had  cives
or  peregrini  before  him.  When  the  formula  was  framed  in  Rome,
or  within  a  mile  of  Rome,  when  all  parties  were  citizens,  and
when  there  was  only  one  judge,  the  judicium  was  said  to  be  legi-
timum  ;  when  any  one  of  these  three  conditions  was  wanting,  the
judicium  was  said  to  be  imperio  continens,  flowing  out  of  the
powers  of  the  magistrate  who  gave  the  action.  The  chief  distinc-
tions were  that  in  the  judicia  legitima,  when  the  formula  was
once  framed,  the  action  lasted  until  the  judge  gave  sentence,
until  a  lex  Julia  in  the  time  of  Ausrustus  fixed  eisfhteen  months  as

422  LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VI.

the  time  in  which  sentence  must  be  given,  while  the  imperio  con-
tinentia  depended  on  the  magistrate  who  had  given  the  formula
continuing  in  office,  and  when  his  office  came  to  an  end,  or  if  he
died  previously^  the  action  was  at  an  end,  and  the  parties  had  to
begin  over  again.  This  division  will  be  referred  to  under  the  head
of  Exceptions.  (Tit.  13.  5.)  The  other  three — viz.  that  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  thing  demanded,  that  according  to  the
shape  of  the  formula,  and  that  according  to  the  latitude  given  to
the  judge — are  the  principal  divisions  of  actions.  But,  obviously,
the  same  action  may  come  under  more  than  one  division.  Thus
the  actio  Serviana  (par.  7)  was  a  real  action  in  factum  ;  the  action
de  constituta  pecunia  (par.  9)  was  a  personal  'eiQ,t\ov\.  in  factum  \
the  actio  empti  (par.  28)  was  a  personal  bones  Jidei  action  in  jus
concepta.

The  Institutes  in  this  Title  notice   six   divisions  of  actions  :
(1)  that  according  to  the  nature  of  the  thing  demanded  {in  rem
and  in  personam)  (par.  1—11),  and  (2)  that  according  to  the  lati-
tude given  to  the  judge  (par.  28-31).     As  the  formulary  system
had  passed  away,  they  do  not  ostensibly  notice  the  division  accord-
ing to  the  shape  of  the  formula,  but  they  refer  to  one  of  its  main
features  by  noticing  the  distinction  of  actions  (3)  according  as  the
action  was  a  prastorian  application  of  the  civil  law,  or  was  a  new
creation  of  the  prajtor  (par.  3.  8).   The  other  divisions  noticed  are
subordinate,  and  refer  (4)  to  the  effect  of  the  condemnation  accord-
ing as  the  action  was  penal  or  not  (par.  16.  19) ;  (5)  according  as
the  condemnatio  was  for  the  simple  value,  or  for  the  double,  treble,
or  quadruple  value  (par.  21-27) ;   and  (6)  according  as  the  whole
sum  in  which  the  defendant  miorht  have  been   condemned  was
recoverable  or  not  (par.  36-38).

1.  Omnium  actionum  quibus  inter  1.  All  actions  whatever,   by  which

aliquos  apiid  judices  arbitrosve  de  any  matter  whatever  is  submitted  to
quacumque  re  quaeritur,  summa  di-  the  decision  of  judges  or  of  arbitrators
visio  in  duo  genera  deducitur  :  aut  may  be  divided  into  two  classes  ;  for
enim  in  rem  sunt,  aut  in  personam,  actions  are  either  real  or  personal.
Namque  agit  unusquisque  aut  cum  Either  the  plaintiff  sues  the  defendant,
eo  qui  ei  obligatus  est  vel  ex  con-  because  he  is  made  answerable  to  him
tractu  vel  ex  maleficio,  quo  casu  pro-  by  contract,  or  by  a  delict,  in  which
ditse  sunt  actiones  in  personam,  per  case  the  plaintifi'  brings  a  personal
quas  intendit  adversarium  ei  dare  action,  alleging  that  his  adversary  is
facere  oportere,  et  aliis  quibusdam  bound  to  give  to,  or  to  do  something
modis  ;  aut  cum  eo  agit  qui  nuUo  for  him,  or  making  some  other  similar
jure  ei  obligatus  -est,  movet  tamen  allegation.  Or  else  the  plaintiff  brings
alicui  de  aliqua  re  controversiam,  an  action  against  a  person  not  made
quo  casu  proditse  actiones  in  rem  answerable  to  him  by  any  obligation,
sunt :  veluti  si  rem  corporalem  pos-  but  with  whom  he  disputes  the  right
sideat  quis,  quam  Titius  suam  esse  to  some  corporeal  thing,  and  for  such
aflirmet  et  possessor  dominum  se  cases  real  actions  are  given  ;  as  for
esse  dicat  ;  nam  si  Titius  suam  esse  example,  if  a  man  is  in  possession  of
intendat,  in  rem  actio  est.  land,  which  Titius  maintains  to  be  his

property,  while  the  possessor  says  that
he  himself  is  the  proprietor,  the  action
is  real.
Gai.  iv.  1.  3  ;  D.  xliv.  7.  25.

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

423

2.  JEque  si  agat  jus  sibi  esse  f undo
forte  vel  sedibus  utendi  fruendi,  vel
per  fundum  vicini  eundi  agendi,  vel
ex  fundo  vicini  aquam  ducendi,  in
rem  actio  est.  Ejusdem  generis  est
actio  de  jure  prsediorum  urbano-
rum  :  veluti,  si  agat  jus  sibi  esse
altius  aedes  suas  tollendi,  prospi-
ciendive,  vel  projiciendi  aliquid,  vel
immittendi  in  vicini  sedes.  Contra
quoque  de  usufructu  et  de  servitu-
tibus  praediorum  rusticorum,  item
prsediorum  urbanorum,  invicem
quoque  proditse  sunt  actiones,  ut  si
quis  intendat  jus  non  esse  adver-
sario  utendi  fruendi,  eundi  agendi,
aquamve  ducendi,  item  altius  tol-
lendi, prospiciendi,  projiciendi,  im-
mittendi. Istse  quoque  actiones  in
rem  sunt,  sed  negativae.  Quod
genus  actionis  in  controversiis  rerum
corporalium  proditum  non  eat,  nam
in  his  is  agit  qui  non  possidet  ;  ei
vero  qui  possidet  non  est  actio  pro-
dita  per  quam  neget  rem  actoris
esse.  Sane  uno  casu,  qui  possidet
nihilominus  actoris  partes  obtinet,
sicut  in  latioribus  Digestorum  libris
opportunius  apparebit.

2.  So,  too,  if  any  one  alleges  that
he  has  a  right  to  the  usufruct  of  land,
or  of  a  house,  or  that  he  has  a  right  of
going  or  driving  his  cattle,  or  of  con-
ducting water,  over  the  land  of  his
neighbour,  the  action  is  real ;  as  also
are  actions  relating  to  prsedial  servi-
tudes, as  when  a  man  alleges  a  right  to
raise  his  house,  a  right  to  an  uninter-
rupted view,  a  right  to  make  part  of
his  house  project,  or  of  inserting  the
beams  of  his  building  into  his  neigh-
bour's walls.  There  are  also  actions
relating  to  usufructs,  and  the  servi-
tudes of  country  and  city  estates,
which  are  the  reverse  of  these  ;  as
when  the  complainant  alleges  that  his
adversary  is  not  entitled  to  the  usu-
fruct, or  has  not  the  right  to  go,  to
drive,  to  conduct  water,  to  raise  his
house,  to  have  an  uninterruj)ted  view,
to  throw  out  projections,  or  to  insert
his  beams.  1  hese  actions  are  equally
real,  but  are  negative,  and  cannot
therefore  be  used  in  disputes  respect-
ing things  corporeal,  for  in  these  dis-
putes it  is  the  person  out  of  possession
who  brings  the  action  :  for  a  possessor
cannot  bring  an  action  to  deny  that
the  thing  is  the  property  of  the  plain-
tiff. There  is,  however,  one  case,  in
which  a  possessor  may  act  the  part  of
plaintiff ;  which  will  be  more  fully  seen
if  reference  is  made  to  the  books  of
the  Digest.

Gai.  iv.  3  ;  D.  viii.  5.  2  ;  D.  xxxix.  1.  15.

Usufructs,  uses,  rural  and  urban  servitudes,  might  be  the  ob-
jects of  real  actions.  These  actions  were  either  confessoricE  or
jiegativce ;  in  the  former  the  plaintiff  claimed  to  exercise  a  servi-
tude over  the  immoveables  of  another,  in  the  latter  he  maintained
that  a  servitude  which  another  attempted  to  exercise  over  an
immoveable  belonging  to  the  plaintiff  was  not  due.

The  actio  confessoria  might  be  brought  either  when  a  per-
son claiming  a  servitude  found  this  right  contested,  or  when
any  obstacle,  as  if  a  tree  overhung  a  way  over  which  a  servitude
vice  or  actus  was  claimed,  prevented  the  free  enjoyment  of  the
servitude.     (D.  viii.  5.  4,  5).

The  actio  confessoria  might  be  brought  by  the  person  claiming
the  servitude,  whether  he  was  or  was  not  in  possession  of  the
servitude.  For  example,  a  man  claims  a  servitude  non  altius
tollendi  —that  his  neighbour  should  not  build  his  house  higher
than  that  of  the  claimant.  Before  the  neighbour  has  built  his
house  higher  the  claimant  of  the  servitude  is  in  possession  of  the
servitude.  He  has  his  servitude  and  enjoys  the  advantages  of  it.
After  the  neighbour  has  built  his  house  higher,  the  claimant  of  the

424  LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VI.

servitude  has  his  servitude,  but  is  no  longer  in  possession  of  it.  In
either  case  the  claimant  of  the  servitude  might  bring  his  actio
confessoria  (D.  viii.  5,  6.  1),  although,  if  he  was  still  in  possession,
he  was  further  secured  by  being  allowed  to  apply,  if  he  pleased,  for
a  prohibitory  interdict  (see  Tit.  lo)  after  interdicts  were  granted
to  protect  servitudes.

The  actio  negativa  was  virtually  an  affirmative  action  brought
by  the  owner  of  the  immoveable,  claiming  that  the  thing  was  his,
freed  from  the  servitude.  Originally  the  possession  of  a  servitude
was  not  protected  by  interdicts,  and  the  use  of  the  actio  negativa
was  to  protect  the  enjoyment  of  the  thing  free  from  the  servitude,
or,  in  other  words,  to  protect  the  enjoyment  of  that  fragment  of  the
dominium  which  constituted  the  servitude,  as  well  as  of  all  other
fragments,  while  the  possession  of  the  thing  itself  was  protected
by  the  interdicts  uti  possidetis,  (Tit.  16.)  Subsequently  the
possession  of  servitudes  was  protected  by  interdicts,  but  still  the
actio  negativa  remained  as  a  concurrent  remedy  with  the  possessory
interdict  to  protect  the  enjoyment  of  that  fragment  of  the  domi-
nium which  constituted  the  servitude,  just  as  the  actio  confessoria
remained  as  a  concurrent  remedy  with  the  prohibitory  interdict
to  prevent  a  servitude  being  infringed.

Sane  uno  casu.  It  is  a  subject  of  much  dispute  what  is  the
one  case  in  which  the  possessor  could  be  plaintiff.  Perhaps  the
words  are  but  a  summary  of  what  has  gone  before.  '  There  is,
indeed,  but  one  case  of  a  person  in  possession  being  plaintiff,  that,
namely,  of  the  possessor  of  an  incorporeal  thing.'  Perhaps  they
refer  to  a  person  repelling  by  an  exceptio  justi  dominii  the  actio
Puhliciana  noticed  in  par.  4,  as  such  a  person  had  to  prove  he  Avas
owner.

3.  Sed  istse  quidem  actiones  qua-  3.  The  actions  just  mentioned,  and

rum  mentionem  habuimus,  et  si  those  of  a  similar  nature,  are  derived
quae  sunt  similes,  ex  legitimis  et  from  particular  laws  and  from  the  jus
civilibus  causis  descendunt.  Alise  civile  ;  but  there  are  others,  both  real
autem  sunt  quas  praetor  ex  sua  and  personal,  which  the  prsetor,  by
jurisdictione  comparatas  habet  tam  virtue  of  his  jurisdiction,  has  intro-
in  rem  quam  in  personam,  quas  et  duced,  and  of  which  it  is  necessary  to
ipsas  necessarium  est  exemplis  os-  give  some  examples  :  thus  the  praetor
tendere  :  ecce  plerumque  ita  per-  often  permits  a  real  action  to  be
mittitur  in  rem  agere,  ut  vel  actor  brought,  by  which  the  plaintiff  is
diceret  se  quasi  usucepisse  quod  non  allowed  to  allege,  that  he  has  acquired
usuceperit,  vel  ex  diverso  possessor  something  by  prescription,  which  he
diceret  adversarium  suum  non  usu-  has  not  acquired  ;  or  by  which,  on  the
cepisse  quod  usuceperit.  contrary,  the  possessor  alleges  that  his

adversary  has  not  acquired  something
by  prescription,  which,  in  reality,  he
has  acquired.

D.  xliv.  7.  25.  2.

The  second  division  of  actions,  given  in  this  Title,  is  that  of
civil  and  praetorian.  The  two  methods  principally  adopted  by  the
praetor  to  give  an  action  in  cases  not  provided  for  by  the  civil  law,
were,  as  already  stated  (p,  420),  either  to  construct  a  formula  on

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  425

a  fictitious  hypothesis,  or  make  the  action  one  in  factum  concepta.
The  three  following  paragraphs  give  examples  of  fictitious  actions
in  rem.

Justinian  notices  five  prsetorian  actions  in  rem,  viz.  the  actio
Puhliciana,  the  actio  quasi  Puhliciana,  the  actio  Pauliana,  the
actio  Serviana,  and  the  actio  quasi  Serviana,  and  gives  as  instances
of  the  numerous  praetorian  actions  in  personam,  the  actions  de  pe-
cunia  constituta,  de  peculio,  &c.      (See  par.  8  and  foil.)

4.  Namque  si  cui  ex  justa  causa  4.  For  instance,  if  anything  is  deli-
res  aliqua  tradita  fuerit,  vehiti  ex  vered  for  a  just  cause,  as  a  purchase,
causa  emptionis  aut  donationis  aut  gift,  dowry,  or  legacy,  to  a  person  who
dotis  aut  legatorum,  necdum  ejus  has  not  yet  become  proprietor  of  the
rei  dominus  effectus  est  ;  si  ejus  rei  thing  delivered,  if  he  chances  to  lose
possessionem  casu  amiserit,  nuUam  the  possession,  he  has  no  direct  action
habet  directam  in  rem  actionem  ad  for  its  recovery  ;  inasmuch  as  the  civil
eam  persequendam,  quippe  ita  pro-  law  only  permits  such  actions  to  be
ditse  sunt  jure  civili  actiones  ut  quis  brought  by  the  proprietor.  But,  as  it
dominium  suum  vindicet  :  sed  quia  was  very  hard  that  there  should  be  no
sane  durum  erat  eo  casu  deficere  ac-  action  given  in  such  a  case,  the  prsetor
tionem,  inventa  est  a  prtetore  actio  has  introduced  one,  in  which  the  per-
in  qua  dicit  is  qui  possessionem  ami-  son  who  has  lost  the  possession,  alleges
sit,  eam  rem  se  usucepisse,  et  ita  he  has  acquired  the  thing  in  question
vindicat  suam  esse.  Quae  actio  Pub-  by  prescription,  although  he  has  not
liciana  appellatur,  quoniam  primum  really  so  acquired  it,  and  he  thus
a  Publicio  prsetore  in  edicto  propo-  claims  it  as  his  own.  This  action  is
sita  est.                                         '  called  the  actio  Publicimia,  because  it

was    first   placed  in  the  edict  by  the

praetor  Publicius.

Gai.  iv.  36.

When  any  one  except  the  real  owner  of  a  thing  (dominus)
delivered  over  a  thins^  on  a  o;round  and  in  a  mode  which  would
have  sufficed  to  pass  the  property,  if  he  had  had  it  to  pass,  or
if  an  owner  of  a  thing  transferred  a  thing  by  a  mode  insufficient
to  pass  the  dominium,  as  if  a  res  mancipi  was  delivered  without
mancipation,  the  person,  in  either  of  these  cases,  to  whom  the
thing  was  delivered,  being  a  bona  fide  possessor,  could  perfect  his
title  to  it  by  usucapion ;  but  if  he  lost  the  thing  out  of  his  posses-
sion after  it  was  delivered  to  him,  but  before  the  time  necessary
to  complete  the  usucapion  had  expired,  the  civil  law  gave  him  no
remedy,  for  he  was  not  the  dominus,  and  none  but  a  dominus
could  claim  a  thing  by  '  vindicatio.^  The  actio  Publiciana,  an
actio  fictitia  in  jus  concepta,  was  therefore  given  for  his  relief  by
the  prastor  Publicius,  perhaps  the  Publicius  mentioned  as  prsetor  by
Cicero.  (Pro  Cluent.  45.)  In  this  action  the  plaintiff  was  allowed
to  state  what  was  in  fact  not  true,  that  the  usucapion  was  com-
plete, and  thus  to  claim  as  if  his  ownership  was  absolute.  If  the
thing  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  persoi  who  himself  claimed
to  be  really  the  dominus,  and  to  have  a  bona,  fide  ground  of  re-
pelling the  actio  Publiciana,  it  could  be  repelled  by  an  exception
termed  the  exceptio  justi  dominii.    (D.  vi,  2.  16.^

If  it  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  person  who  did  not  claim

426  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

to  be  the  owner,  but  who  had  so  acquired  it  as  to  be  in  a  situa-
tion to  perfect  his  title  by  usucapion,  i.e.  who  was  also  a  bona  fide
possessor,  and  the  plaintiff  brought  an  actio  Puhliciana  for  it  be-
fore the  time  of  the  usucapion  had  expired,  the  title  of  the  actual
holder  of  the  thing  was  considered  the  better ;  for  in  pari  causa
melior  est  conditio  possidentis.  The  formula  of  the  action  ran
thus  :  *  Judex  esto.  Si  quern  liominem  Aldus  Agerius  emit,  quique
ei  traditus  esset,  anno  possedisset,  turn  si  eum  liominem,  de  quo  agi-
tur,  ejus  ex  jure  Quiritium  esse  oporteret.^     (Gai.  iv.  36.)

The  actio  Puhliciana  might  also  be  useful  to  a  person  who
was  really  the  owner ;  for  while  the  distinction  between  res  man-
dpi  and  7iec  mancipi  was  retained,  the  owner  of  a  thing  requiring
to  be  passed  by  mancipation  might  have  himself  received  it  by
mancipation,  but  be  unable  to  show  that  the  person  who  trans-
ferred it  to  him  was  really  the  dominus,  and  had  in  his  turn  re-
ceived it  by  mancipation.  If  he  lost  the  thing  before  he  had
perfected  the  title  by  usucapion,  he  could  not  bring  a  vindicatio,
but  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  actio  Puhliciana ;  and  be-
fore the  legislation  of  Justinian  this  action  was  especially  useful
to  persons  who  had  received  a  transfer  of  things  which,  like  the
provincial  lands,  could  not  be  made  the  subject  of  a  perfect  domi-
nium, and  the  title  to  which  could  not  be  perfected  by  usucapion
(see  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  6) ;  for  they  were  allowed  to  bring  this  fictitious
action  if  they  were  deprived  of  the  possession,  at  any  rate  after
the  time  entitling  them  to  use  the  pr^sscriptio  longi  temporis  had
elapsed.     (C.  vii.  39.  8.)

5.  Rursus  exdiv^erso  si  quiSjCum  5.  On  the    contrary,  if    any  one,

reipublicse  causa  abesset  vel  in  lios-  while  abroad  in  the  service  of  his
tium  potestate  esset,  rem  ejus  qui  in  country,  or  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of
civitate  esset  usuceperit,  permittitur  the  enemy,  has  acquired  by  usucapion
domino,  si  possessor  reipublicse  causa  a  thing  which  belongs  to  another  per-
abesse  desierit,  tunc  intra  annum  son  resident  at  home,  then  the  proprie-
rescissa  usucapione  earn  rem  petere,  tor  is  permitted  within  a  year  after  the
id  est,  ita  petere  ut  dicat  possesso-  return  of  the  possessor,  to  bring  an
rem  usu  non  cepisse,  et  ob  id  suam  action  by  rescinding  the  usucapion  ;
rem  esse.  Quod  genus  actionis  qui-  that  is,  he  may  allege  that  the  posses-
busdam  et  aliis  simili  aequitate  mo-  sor  has  not  acquired  by  prescription,
tus  prsetor  accommodat,  sicut  ex  and  that  the  thing  therefore  is  his.
latiore  Digestorum  seu  Pandectarum  Similar  feelings  of  equity  have  led  the
volumine  intelligere  licet.  prsetor  to  grant  this  species  of  action

in  certain  other  cases,  as  may  be  learnt
from  the  larger  treatise  of  the  Digest
or  Pandects.

D.  iv.  6.  21  ;  D.  iv.  1.  1,  2  ;  D.  iv.  6.  1.  1.

This  paragraph  gives  the  converse  case.  Before,  the  usuca-
pion was  not  complete,  and  the  action  supplied  what  was  wanting
to  it.  Here  the  usucapion  is  complete,  and  the  action  takes  away
its  effect.

Such  an  action  might  be  wanted  in  either  of  two  cases.  Either
the  proprietor  of  the  thing  might  be  absent,  or  deprived,  on  some
legitimate  ground,  of  the  power  of  attending  to  his  affairs ;  and

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  427

during  this  time  the  usucapion  might  have  been  completed  against
him  ;  or  the  possessor,  the  person  in  whose  favour  the  time  of  usu-
capion was  running,  might  have  been  absent,  and  the  proprietor,
not  being  able  to  sue  him,  might  have  been  unable  to  stop  the
usucapion.  In  either  of  these  cases  this  kind  of  actio  Piihliciana,
called  rescissoria,  because  the  usucapion  was  rescinded,  came  to
the  aid  of  the  proprietor.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  Justinian
notices  only  the  latter  of  the  two  cases,  and  yet  he  had  provided
a  much  more  simple  remedy  in  behalf  of  proprietors,  who  were
allowed  to  interrupt  the  usucapion  of  an  absent  possessor  by  a
protestation  made  before  a  magistrate.     (C.  vii.  40.  2.)

The  actio  Puhliciana  rescissoria,  an  actio  Jictitia  in  jus  concepta,
had  to  be  brought  within  a  year,  commencing  from  the  time  when
it  first  became  possible  to  bring  the  action.  Intra  annum,  quo
primum  de  ea  re  experiundi  potestas  ei'it.  (D.  iv.  6.  1.  1.)  The
year  was  a  utilis  annus,  and  its  length,  therefore,  varied  in  dif-
ferent cases,  for  which  Justinian  substituted  the  uniform  term  of
four  years.

Quihusdam  et  aliis.  Such  as  the  restitutio  in  integrum,  by
which  the  praetor  protected  a  person  under  the  age  of  twenty-five
years.     (See  Bk.  i.  Tit.  23,  pr.)

6.  Item,  si  quis  in  fraudem  credi-  6.  Again,  if  a  debtor  delivers  to  a

torum  rem  siiam  alicui  tradiderit,  third  person  anything  that  is  his  pro-
bonis  ejus  a  creditoribus  ex  senten-  perty,  in  order  to  defraud  his  credi-
tia  prsesidis  possessis,  permittitur  tors,  who  have  seized  on  his  goods  by
ipsis  creditoribus  rescissa  traditione  order  of  the  prseses,  the  creditors  are
earn  rem  petere,  id  est,  dicere  earn  permitted  to  rescind  the  delivery,  and
rem  traditam  non  esse,  et  ob  id  in  bring  an  action  for  the  thing  delivered  ;
bonis  debitoris  mansisse.  that  is,  they  may  allege  that  the  thing

was  not  delivered,  and  that  it  there-
fore continues  to  be  a  part  of  the
debtor's  goods.

D.  xlii.  8.  1,  pr.  1,  2.

Theophilus  tells  us  that  this  action,  an  actio  Jictitia  in  jus  con-
cepta,  was  called  the  actio  Pauliana.  The  lex  ^lia  Sentia  (see
Bk.  i.  Tit.  7)  had  made  enfranchisements  in  fraud  of  creditors
void;  but  the  law  did  not  extend  to  alienations  ;  and  the  praetor,
therefore,  when  the  creditors  had  taken  possession  of  the  effects
of  the  debtor,  permitted  them  to  reclaim  anything  which  had  been
alienated  after  insolvency  and  with  intent  to  defraud.

This  actio  Pauliana,  in  rem  (says  Ortolan)  is  not  spoken  of  else-
where in  the  works  of  Roman  law  which  have  come  down  to  us.
It  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  actio  Pauliana  in  personam.
treated  of  in  the  Digest  (xxii.  1.  38,  pr.  and  4),  which  was  given,
not  only  in  case  of  alienation,  but  of  every  act  whereby  the
debtor  had  diminished  his  assets,  and  the  intentio  of  which  was
directed  against  the  particular  person  who  had  profited  by  such
an  act,  and  not  as  that  of  the  actio  in  rem,  which  forms  the  subject
of  this  paragraph,  against  any  one  who  happened  to  be  the  person
detaining  the  thing  claimed.

428

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

7.  Item  Serviana,  et  quasi  Servia-
na,  quae  etiain  hypothecaria  vocatur,
ex  ipsiiis  prsetoris  jurisdictione  sub-
stantiam  capiunt,  Serviana  autem
experitur  quis  de  rebus  coloni,  quae
pignoris  jure  pro  mercedibus  fundi
ei  tenentur  ;  quasi  Serviana  autem,
qua  creditores  pignora  hypotliecasve
persequuntur.  Inter  pignus  autem
et  hypothecam,  quantum  ad  ac-
tionem hypotliecariam  attinet,  nihil
interest  ;  nam  de  qua  re  inter  credi-
torem  et  debitorem  convenerit  ut
sit  pro  debito  obligata,  utraque  hac
appellatione  continetur,  sed  in  aliis
differentia  est  :  nam  pignoris  appel-
latione earn  proprie  rem  contineri
dicimus,  quae  simul  etiam  traditur
creditori,  maxime  si  mobilis  sit ;  at
eam  quae  sine  traditione  nuda  con-
ventione  tenetur,  proprie  hypothecse
appellatione  contineri  dicimus.

7.  The  actio  Serviana,  and  the  actio
quasi- Serviana  also  called  hypothecaria,
equally  take  their  rise  from  the  prse-
tor's  jurisdiction.  The  actio  Serviana
is  brought  to  get  possession  of  the
effects  of  a  farmer  which  are  held  as  a
pledge  to  secure  the  rent  of  the  land.
The  actio  quasi-Serviana  is  that  by
which  creditors  sue  for  things  pledged
or  mortgaged  to  them ;  and,  as  regards
this  action,  there  is  no  difference  be-
tween a  pledge  and  a  hijpotheca  ;  for
the  two  terms  are  indifferently  applied
to  anything  which  the  debtor  and  cre-
ditor agree  shall  be  bound  as  security
for  the  debt  ;  but  in  other  points  there
is  a  distinction  between  them.  The
term  pledge  is  properly  applied  to  a
thing  which  has  actually  been  delivered
to  a  creditor,  especially  if  the  thing  be
a  moveable  ;  the  term  hypotheca  means
anything  bound  by  simple  agreement
without  delivery.

D.  XX.  2.  4  ;  D.  xx.  1.  17.  5.  1  ;   T>.  xiii.  7.  9.  2.

We  have  already  given  a  slight  sketch  of  the  jus  pignoris,  and
the  relative  position  of  the  creditor  and  debtor,  at  the  end  of  the
fifth  Title  of  the  Second  Book.  The  interest  of  the  creditor  was
not  thought  sufficient  to  support  a  vindicatio  if  he  lost  the  thing
pledged  out  of  his  possession,  or  wished  to  get  the  thing  subjected
to  a  hypotheca  into  his  possession ;  but  a  praetorian  action  enabled
him  to  effect  this.  The  actio  Serviana  mentioned  in  this  para-
graph was  given  to  enforce  the  claim  of  the  landlord  to  the  farm-
ing instruments,  which,  without  any  special  agreement,  were  con-
sidered, in  law,  to  be  held  as  a  pledge  for  the  rent  of  the  farm,
and  the  actio  quasi- Serviana  was  an  extension  of  this,  giving  a
means  to  every  creditor  of  enforcing  his  right  to  anything  pledged
or  mortgaged.     Both  actions  were  in  factum.

Maxime  si  mobilis  sit.  An  immoveable  might  of  course  be
given  in  pledge ;  but  it  would  generally  happen  that  things  given
in  pledge  were  moveables.

A  thing  subjected  to  successive  hypotheccs  belonged,  as  we  have
said  in  treating  of  the  real  right  given  by  the  jus  pignoris  (Bk.  ii.
Tit.  5),  to  the  person  in  whose  favour  the  first  hypotheca  was  consti-
tuted. If,  therefore,  a  creditor,  whose  hyjwtheca  was  subsequent,
brought  the  actio  quasi-Serviana  against  a  creditor  whose  hypotheca
was  prior,  he  would  be  repelled  by  an  exception.    (C  viii.  18.  6.)

8.  In  personam  quoque  actiones  8.  There  are  also  personal  actions
ex  sua  jurisdictione  propositas  habet  which  the  praetor  has  introduced  in  the
praetor,  veluti  de  pecunia  constituta,  exercise  of  his  jurisdiction,  as,  for  in-
cui  similis  videbatur  receptitia.  Sed  stance,  the  action  de  pecunia  constituta,
ex  nostra  constitutione,  cum  et  si  which  that  called  receptitia  much  re-
quid  pleniiis  habebat,  hoc  in  actionem  sembled.  But  t\ie  actio  receptitia  h^s
pecuniae  constitutae  transfusum  est,  been   rendered  superfluous  by  all  its

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VI.  429

ea  quasi  siipervacua  jussa  est  cum  advantages  being  transferred  to  the
sua  auctoritate  a  nostris  legibus  actio  pecimix  constitute,  and  has,
recedere.  Item  praetor  proposuitde  therefore,  by  one  of  our  constitutions,
peculio  servorum  filiorumque  fami-  lost  its  authority,  and  disappeared
lias,  et  ex  qua  quseritur  an  actor  from  our  legislation.  The  praetor  has
juraverit,  et  alias  complures.  likewise  introduced  an  action  concern-

ing the  peculium  of  slaves,  and  oifilii-
familiarum,  an  action  in  which  the
question  is  tried,  whether  the  plaintiff
has  made  oath,  and  many  others.

C.  iv.  18.  2,  pr.  and  1.

9.  De  constituta  autem  pecunia  9.  The  actio  de  constituta  pecunia

cum  omnibus  agitur  quicumque  pro  may  be   brought   against  any  person

se  vel  pro  alio  soluturos  se  consti-  who  has  engaged  to  pay  money,  either

tuerint,    nulla   scilicet    stipulatione  for  himself  or  another,  without  having

interposita  ;  nam  alioquin,  si  stipu-  made  a  stipulation  ;  for,  if  he  has  pro-

lanti    promiserint,    jure    civili    te-  mised  a  stipulator,  he  is  bound  by  the

nentur.  civil  law.

D.  xiii.  5.  14.  3.

The  actio  de  constituta  pecunia  was  an  action  by  which  the
praetor  enforced  a  mere  pact  or  agreement  (not  a  stipulation,  for
then  the  action  would  have  been  ex  stipulatu)  by  which  a  person
promised  again  what  he  already  owed,  or  promised  what  another
owed,  fixing  the  time  for  payment.  This  agreement  {constltu-
turn)  did  not  operate  as  a  novation,  and  was  enforced  as  subsidiary
to  the  main  contract.  The  actio  de  constituta  pecunia  could  only
be  brought  within  a  year,  and  only  applied  to  things  which  could
form  the  subject  of  a  mutuum,  i.e.  things  quce  numero^  pondere,
mensurave  constant.  The  pecunia  was  said  to  be  constituta  be-
cause it  was  agreed  to  be  paid  on  a  particular  day.  The  actio
receptitia  was  an  action  given  against  bankers  {argentarii)  who
promised  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  a  creditor  of  one  of  their
customers.  This  creditor  was  said  recipere  diem,  to  have  a  day
fixed  by  the  banker  for  payment  of  his  claim,  and  hence  the  action
was  called  receptitia.  The  mere  promise  of  the  banker  was  con-
sidered enough  to  ground  an  action  on,  an  exception  to  the
ordinary  rules  of  the  civil  law  which  must  have  grown  out  of  the
peculiar  character  of  a  banker's  business.  What  the  civil  law
confined  to  bankers  only  the  praetor  extended  to  every  one  alike  ;
and  whenever  any  one,  who  owed  a  debt  to  another  or  had  funds
of  another  in  his  hand,  promised  to  pay  the  money  owed  by  or
deposited  with  him  on  a  particular  day,  the  praetor  gave  the
action  de  constituta  pecunia  to  enforce  the  fulfilment  of  the
promise.

Justinian  abolished  the  actio  receptitia,  and  invested  the
actio  de  constituta  pecunia  with  privileges  which  had  before  be-
longed exclusively  to  the  actio  receptitia ;  for  he  made  it  perpe-
tual, and  he  allowed  it  to  be  brought  whatever  was  the  nature  of
the  thing  promised.     (C.  iv.  18.  2.)

The  pact  to  pay  might  be  advantageous  to  the  creditor,  if  it  was
the  debt  of  another  that  was  agreed  to  be  paid,  or  if  the  antecedent

430

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

obligation  was  only  a  natural  one,  or  if  the  time  in  which  the
original  debt  could  be  sued  on  was  on  the  point  of  expiring.

10.  Actiones  autem  de  pecnlio
ideo  adversiis  patrem  dominiimve
comparavit  praetor,  quia  licet  ex
contractu  filiorum  servorumve  ipso
jure  non  teneantur,  sequum  tamen
est  peculio  tenus,  quod  veluti  patri-
monium  est  filiorum  filiarumque,
item  servorum,  condemnari  eos.

10.  The  praetor  has  introduced
actions  de  peculio  against  fathers  and
masters,  because,  although  they  are
not,  according  to  the  civil  law,  bound
by  the  contracts  of  their  children  and
slaves,  yet  they  ought  in  equity  to  be
bound  to  the  extent  of  the  peculium,
which  is  a  kind  of  patrimony  of  sons
and  daughters,  and  of  slaves.

D.  XV.  1.  47.  6.

Actions  de  peculio,  are  treated  of  in  par.  4  of  next  Title.

11.  Item  si  quis,  postulante  ad-
versario,  juraverit  deberi  sibi  pecu-
niam  quam  peteret,  neque  ei  solva-
tur,  justissime  accommodat  ei  talem
actionem,  per  quam  non  illud  quae-
ritur  an  ei  pecunia  debeatur,  sed  an
juraverit.

11.  Also,  if  any  one,  when  called
upon  by  his  adversary,  makes  oath,
that  the  debt  which  he  sues  for  is  due
and  unpaid,  the  praetor  most  justly
grants  him  an  action,  in  which  the
inquiry  is  not  whether  the  debt  is  due,
but  whether  the  oath  has  been  made.

D.  xii.  2.  3.  5.  2.

Either  party  mi^ht  challenge  the  other  to  swear  to  the  truth
of  his  statement.  This  was  done  out  of  court,  and  if  the  party
challenged  took  the  oath,  his  statement  could  no  longer  be  im-
pugned by  the  person  who  had  challenged  him.  For  instance,  if
the  creditor,  being  challenged,  swore  that  the  debt  was  due,  the
debtor  was  obliged  to  pay.  The  only  question,  therefore,  which
could  be  subsequently  referred  to  a  court  of  justice  v*^as  whether
the  oath  had  or  had  not  been  taken,  inquiry  into  which  circum-
stance was  made  under  an  actio  in  factum  given  by  the  praetor.

12.  Poenales  quoque  actiones  bene
multas  ex  sua  jurisdictione  intro-
duxit  ;  veluti  adversus  eum  qui
quid  ex  albo  ejus  corrupisset,  et  in
eum  qui  patronum  vel  parentem  in
jus  vocasset,  cum  id  non  impetras-
set ;  item  adversus  eum  qui  vi  ex-
emerit  eum  qui  in  jus  vocaretur,
cujusve  dolo  alius  exemerit,  et  alias
innumerabiles.

12.  The  praetor  has  also  introduced
many  penal  actions  by  virtue  of  his
jurisdiction.  As,  for  instance,  against
a  person  who  has  damaged  any  part
of  the  praetor's  album  ;  against  those
who  summon  before  the  praetor  their
patron  or  father  without  previous  per-
mission from  the  proper  magistrate  ;
against  those  who  carry  away  by  force
any  one  summoned  to  appear  before
the  praetor,  or  fraudulently  induce  a
third  person  to  carry  him  off ;  and  very
many  other  actions.

Gai.  iv.  46.

The  album  was  the  tablet  suspended  in  the  forum,  containing
the  ordinances  of  the  prsetor.  Any  attempt  to  injure  or  deface  it
was  punished  by  an  action  de  albo  corrupto.     (D.  ii.  1.  7.  pr.)

The  descendant  or  freedman  who  summoned  before  a  magis-
trate (in  jus)  his  ascendant  or  patron  without  the  permission  of

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  431

the  praetor,  was  liable  to  an  action  termed  de  parente  aut  patrono
in  jus  vocato.     (Gai.  iv.  46.)

The  actio  de  in  jus  vocato  vi  exempto  was  given  against  a  per-
son who  rescued  with  violence  any  one  who,  after  disobeying  a
notice  to  appear  in  jure,  was  being  forcibly  conveyed  before  the
magistrate.  The  penalty  was  a  sum  equivalent  to  that  which  the
plaintiff  would  have  received  from  the  action  he  had  commenced
against  the  person  rescued,  while  this  person  rescued  remained
still  liable  to  the  action  he  had  been  summoned  to  answer.  The
actions  under  all  the  heads  mentioned  in  this  paragraph  were  in
factum,     (D.  ii.  7.  5.  1.)

13.  Prsejudiciales  actiones  in  rem  13.  Prejudicial  actions  seem  to  be

esse  videntur  ;  quales  sunt  per  quas  real  actions  ;  such  are  those  by  which

quseritur  an  aliquis  liber,  an  liber-  it  is  inquired  whether  a  man  is  bom

tus   sit,    vel   de   partu   agnoscendo.  free,  or  has  been  made  free  ;  whether

Ex  quibus  fere  una  ilia  legitimam  he  is  a  slave,  or  whether  he  is  the  off-

causam  habet,  per  quam  quaeritur  spring  of  his  reputed  father.     But  of

an  aHquis  liber  sit :  ceterse  ex  ipsius  these,  that  alone  by  which  it  is  inquired

praetoris    jurisdictione   substantiam  whether  a  man  is  free,  belongs  to  the

capiunt.  civil  law.     The  others  spring  from  the

praetor's  jurisdiction.

Gai.  iv.  44 ;  C.  viii.  47.  9.

The  object  of  a  prcejudicialis  actio  was  to  ascertain  a  fact,  the
establishing  of  which  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  further  judi-
cial proceedings.  (See  Introd.  par.  104.)  Such  actions  differ
from  actions  i?i  rem,  because  in  an  actio  prcBJudicialis  no  one  is
condemned,  only  the  fact  is  ascertained  ;  but  they  are  said  in  the
text  to  resemble  actions  in  rem,  because  they  were  not  brought  on
any  obligation,  and  because  in  the  intentio,  which  indeed  composed
the  whole  formula  in  this  case,  no  mention  was  made  of  any  par-
ticular person.

Questions  of  status,  such  as  those  of  paternity,  filiation,  pa-
tronage, and  the  like,  were  most  commonly  the  subjects  of  actiones
prcBJudiciales,  but  were  by  no  means  the  only  ones.  We  hear  of
others,  such  as  quanta  dos  sit  (Gai.  iv.  44)  ;  an  res  de  qua  agitur
major  sit  centwn  sestertiis  ;  an  bona  jure  venierint,  (D.  xlii.  5.
30.)

The  liheralis  causa,  the  suit  in  which  the  status  of  a  supposed
slave  was  ascertained,  was  originally  nothing  else  but  a  vindicatio.
The  person  called  the  assertor  libertatis  claimed  him,  and  the  mas-
ter of  the  slave  defended  his  possession.  If  the  decision  wasin  favour
of  the  assertor,  it  was  still  open  to  another  person  to  attempt  to
prove  that  the  subject  of  the  suit  was  really  a  slave  ;  if  the  deci-
sion was  in  favour  of  the  master,  another  assertor  could  bring  a
fresh  suit ;  but  there  could  only  be  three  assertores  in  all.  If  the
supposed  slave  was  thrice  adjudged  a  slave,  his  status  could  be  no
further  questioned.  Justinian  entirely  altered  the  action,  by
allowing  the  slave  himself  to  claim  his  liberty,  and  making  the
first  decision  final.     (C.  vii.  16.)

432

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

14.  Sic  itaque  discretis  actioni-
bus,  certum  est  non  posse  actorem
suam  rem  ita  ab  aliquo  petere,  si
paret  eum  dare  oportere  ;  nee  enim
quod  actoris  est,  id  ei  dari  oportet,
quia  scilicet  dari  cuiquam  id  intel-
ligitur,  quod  ita  datur  ut  ejus  fiat,
nee  res  quae  jam  actoris  est  magis
ejus  fieri  potest.  Plane  odio  furum,
quo  magis  pluribus  actionibus  tene-
antur,  efiectum  est  ut,  extra  poenam
dupli  aut  quadrupli,  rei  recipiendse
nomine  fures  etiam  hac  actione  te-
neantur  si  paret  eos  dare  oportere,
quamvis  sit  adversus  eos  etiam  hc^ec
in  rem  actio  per  quam  rem  suam
quis  esse  petit.

14.  Actions  being  thus  divided,  it
is  certain  that  a  plaintiff  cannot  sue
for  his  own  property  by  such  a  for-
mula as  this,  '  If  it  appears  that  the
defendant  ought  to  give.'  For  it  is
not  a  duty  to  give  the  plaintiff  that
which  is  his  own.  To  give  a  thing  is
to  transfer  the  property  in  it,  and  that
which  is  already  the  property  of  the
plaintiff  cannot  belong  to  him  more
than  it  does  already.  However,  to
show  detestation  for  thieves,  and  to
make  them  liable  to  a  greater  number
of  actions,  it  has  been  determined,
that  besides  the  penalty  of  double  or
quadruple  the  amount  taken,  they
may,  for  the  recovery  of  the  thing
taken,  be  subjected  to  the  action,  '  If
it  appear  that  they  ought  to  give  ; '
although  the  party  injured  may  also
bring  the  real  action  against  them,  by
which  the  plaintiff  demands  the  thing
as  proprietor.

Gai.  iv.  4.

We  have  already  seen  (Tit.  1.  19)  that  the  plaintiff  might
benefit  by  being  allowed  to  bring  a  personal  instead  of  a  real
action  as  the  things  taken  might  have  perished.  But  why  should
the  condictio  be  so  shaped  as  described  in  the  text  ?  The  reason
w^as  this,  the  plaintiff,  by  being  allowed  to  frame  his  action  with  the
word  dare,  which  was  technically  wrong,  as  this  implied  to  transfer
the  full  ownership,  whereas  the  plaintiff  remained  the  owner  of  the
thing  stolen,  had  the  advantage,  under  the  formulary  system,  of
recovering  the  sponsio  poenalis  (Gai.  iv.  171),  or  wager  of  one-
third  of  the  value  of  the  thing,  which  was  added  to  a  condictio
certi.     (See  Introd.  par.  99.)

15.  Appellamus  autem  in  rem
quidem  actiones,  vindicationes  ;  in
personam  vero  actiones  quibus  dare
facere  oportere  intenditur,  condic-
tiones.  Condicere  enim  est  denun-
tiare,  prisca  lingua  :  nunc  vero  abu-
sive dicimus,  condictionem  actionem
in  personam  esse  qua  actor  intendit
dari  sibi  oportere  ;  nulla  enim  hoc
tempore  eo  nomine  denuntiatio  fit.

15.  Real  actions  are  called  vindi-
cations ;  and  personal  actions,  in  which
it  is  maintained  that  something  ought
to  be  done  or  given,  are  called  condic-
tions  ;  for  condicere,  in  old  language,
meant  the  same  as  denuntiare  ;  and  it
is  improperly  that  condiction  is  now
used  as  the  name  of  the  personal  ac-
tion, by  which  the  plaintiff  contends
that  something  ought  to  be  given  to
him,  for  there  is  no  dermntiatio  now
actually  in  use.

Gai.  iv.  5.  18.

Gaius  says,  '  actor  adversario  denuntiahat,  ut  ad  judicem  capi-
endum  die  xxx,  adesset^  (iv.  18).  Thus  the  proper  meaning  of
condictio  is  the  appointing  of  a  day.

16.   Sequens  ilia  divisio  est,  quod  16.  Actions  may  be  next  divided

qusedam   actiones   rei   persequendse     into  actions  given  to  recover  the  thing.

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

433

gratia    comparat?e    sunt,     qusedam     actions  given  to  recover  a  penalty,  and

pcense  perseqnendi^,  qusedam  mixtee     mixed  actions.

sunt.

Gai.  iv.  G.

We  now  come  to  the  third  division  of  actions,  that,  namely,
according  to  the  object  for  which  they  were  brought ;  they  were
divided  under  this  head  into  three  classes — those  in  which  it  was
sought  to  get  a  thing,  rei  jpersecutorioi^  those  in  which  it  was
sought  to  enforce  a  penalty,  and  those  {mixtoi)  in  which  both  these
objects  were  united.

17.  Rei  persequendj©  causa  com-
paratse  sunt  omnes  in  rem  actiones.
Earum  vero  actionum  qu£e  in  per-
sonam sunt,  eve  quidem  quse  ex
contractu  nascuntur  fere  onmes  rei
persequendae  causa  comparatse  vi-
dentur  :  veluti,  quibus  mutuam  pe-
cuniam  vel  in  stipulatum  deductam
petit  actor,  item  com.modati,  depo-
siti,  mandati,  pro  socio,  ex  empto
vendito,  locato  conducto.  Plane  si
dei)ositi  agatur  eo  nomine  quod  tu-
multus,  incendii,  ruinse,  naufragii
causa  depositum  sit,  in  duplum  ac-
tionem preetor  reddit,  si  modo  cum
ipso  apud  quem  depositum  sit,  aut
cum  herede  ejus  ex  dolo  ipsius  age-
tur  :  quo  casu  mixta  est  actio.

17.  For  the  recovery  of  the  thing
are  given  all  real  actions  ;  and  of  per-
sonal actions  almost  all  those  which
arise  from  contract,  as  the  action  for  a
sum  lent  or  stipulated  for,  a  commoda-
tnm,  a  deposit,  a  mandate,  a  partner-
ship, a  sale,  or  a  letting  to  hire.  But
when  the  action  on  a  deposit  is  brought
for  a  thing  deposited  by  reason  of  a
riot,  a  lire,  the  fall  of  a  building,  or  a
shipwreck,  the  preetor  always  gives  the
action  for  the  double  of  the  value  of  the
thing  deposited,  provided  the  suit  is
brought  against  the  depositary  him-
self, or  against  his  heir,  if  personally
guilty  of  dolus  mains,  in  which  case  the
action  is  mixed.

Gai.  iv.  7  ;  D.  xvi.  3.  1.  1-4  ;  D.  xvi.  3.  18.

The  action  against  a  fraudulent  depositary  was  not  in  duplum,
unless  the  depositor  had  been  forced  by  fire,  shipwreck,  the
fall  of  a  building,  or  other  sudden  calamity,  to  make  the  de-
posit. If,  without  being  so  forced,  he  had  selected  the  deposi-
tary, then  the  action  was  only  for  the  single  value.  It  was  his
own  fault  not  to  have  chosen  an  honester  man.  (See  Bk.  iii.
Tit.  13.  3.)

18.  Ex  maleficiis  vero  proditse
actiones  alire  tantum  poense  perse-
quendas  causa  comparafcco  sunt,  alij]e
tarn  pcense  quam  rei  persequendse,
et  ob  id  mixtie  sunt.  Poenam  tan-
tum persequitur  quis  actione  furti  :
sive  enim  manifesti  agatur  quadru-
pli,  sive  nee  manifesti  dupli,  de  sola
po^na  agitur,  nam  ipsam  rem  propria
actione  persequitur  quis,  id  est,  suam
esse  petens,  sive  fur  ipse  earn  rem
possideat  sive  alius  quilibet.  Eo
amplius,  adversus  furom  etiam  con-
dictio  est  rei.

18.  Actions  arising  from  a  delict
are  either  for  the  penalty  only,  or  both
for  the  thing  and  the  penalty,  which
makes  them  mixed.  But,  in  an  action
of  theft,  nothing  more  is  sued  for  than
the  i)enalty ;  whether,  as  in  manifest
theft,  the  quadruple,  or,  in  theft  not
manifest,  the  double,  is  sued  for,  the
owner  recovers  the  thing  itself  by  a
separate  action,  by  claiming  it  as  jjro-
prietor,  whether  it  is  in  the  posses-
sion of  a  thief  or  of  any  one  else.  He
may  also  bring  against  the  tliief  a  con-
diction  for  the  thing.

Gai.  iv.  8.  3 ;  D.  xiii.  1.  7.  1.

434

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

Persons  who  suffered  from  crimes  had  a  private  action  against
the  wrong-doer  for  compensation,  quite  apart  from,  and  indepen-
dent of,  the  prosecution  of  the  offender  for  his  outrage  on  the
laws  of  society.  There  was,  indeed,  something  more  than  an
exact  compensation  enforced  by  the  private  actions ;  for,  by  way
of  penalty,  the  defendant  had  often  to  pay  two,  three,  or  four
times  the  amount  of  loss  actually  sustained,  and  also  to  give  back
the  thing  or  its  value ;  but  still  this  penalty  was  given  as  a  pu-
nishment for  the  injury  to  the  individual,  and  not  as  a  punishment
for  the  infraction  of  public  law.

19.  Yi  autem  bonorum  raptoriim
actio  mixta  est,  quia  in  qiiadruplum
rei  persecutio  continetur  ;  poena  au-
tem tripli  est.  Sed  et  legis  Aqui-
lise  actio  do  damno  injurise  mixta
est,  non  solum  si  adversus  infician-
tem  in  duplum  agatur,  sed  inter-
dum  et  si  in  simplum  quisque  agit  :
veluti  si  quis  hominem  claudum  aut
luscum  occiderit,  qui  in  eo  anno  in-
teger et  magni  pretii  fuerit ;  tanti
enim  damnatur,  quanti  is  homo  in  eo
anno  plurimi  fuerit,  secundum  jam
traditam  divisionem.  Item  mixta
est  actio  contra  eos  qui  relicta  sacro-
sanctis  ecclesiis  vel  aliis  venerabili-
bus  locis  legati  vel  fideicommissi  no-
mine dare  distulerint,  usque  adeo  ut
etiam  in  judicium  vocarentur  :  tunc
enim  et  ipsam  rem  vel  pecuniam  qu?e
relicta  est,  dare  compelluntur,  et
aliud  tantum  pro  poena,  et  ideo  in
duplum  ejus  fit  condemnatio.

19.  An  action  for  goods  taken  by
force  is  a  mixed  action  ;  because  the
thing  taken  is  included  under  the
quadruple  value  to  be  recovered  by
the  action  ;  and  thus  the  penalty  is
but  triple.  The  action  introduced  by
the  lex  Aquilia,  for  wrongful  damage,
is  also  a  mixed  action  ;  not  only  when
brought  for  double  value  against  a
man  denying  the  fact,  but  sometimes
when  the  action  is  only  for  the  single
value  ;  for  instance,  according  to  the
distinction  previously  laid  down,  when
a  man  has  killed  a  slave,  who  at  the
time  of  his  death  was  lame,  or  wanted
an  eye,  but  within  the  year,  previous
to  his  decease,  was  free  from  any  de-
fect, and  of  great  value.  The  action
is  also  mixed  which  is  brought  against
those  who  have  delayed  the  payment
of  a  legacy,  or  fideicommissum,  left  to
our  holy  churches,  or  any  other  sacred
place,  until  at  last  they  have  been  sum-
moned before  a  magistrate ;  for  then
they  are  compelled  to  give  the  thing,
or  to  pay  the  money  left  by  the  de-
ceased, and  in  addition  an  equivalent
thing  or  an  equal  sum  besides,  by  way
of  penalty  ;  and  thus  they  are  con-
demned in  a  double  amount.

C.  ix.  33.  1 ;  D.  ix.  2.  23.  3-6  ;  C.  i.  3.  46,  pr.  and  7.

Interdum  si  in  simj)lum.  An  action  could  be  brought  in  sim-
plum under  the  lex  Aquilia,  if  the  object  of  the  action  was  not  to
determine  whether  the  defendant  had  done  the  injury,  but  to  fix  I
the  sum  which  would  be  the  proper  compensation  for  it.  It  could
not  be  brought  in  simplum  to  determine  the  fact  of  the  defendant
having  done  the  injury :  for  if  he  denied  it,  the  action  was  in  du-
plum ;  if  he  confessed  it,  there  was  no  need  of  an  action  to  prove
what  he  confessed.

Sacrosanctis  ecclesiis.  The  punishment  had  formerly  been
enforced  in  the  case  of  all  legacies  in  which  a  certain  sum  had  been
given  j9er  damnationem,     (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  27.  7.)

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  435

Dare  distulerint.  Formerly  the  punishment  had  only  been
inflicted  in  case  of  an  absolute  refusal  of  the  legacy.  (C.  i.  3.  46.  7.)

The  use  in  this  paragraph  of  the  word  mixtcB  in  the  sense  of
'  brought  at  once  to  recover  a  thing  and  to  enforce  a  penalty,'
seems  to  have  suggested  the  reference  in  the  next  paragraph  to
actions  which  were  mixtce  in  a  very  different  sense,  viz.  '^  both  real
and  personal.'

20.-  Qiicedam  actiones  mixtam  20.  Some  actions  are  also  mixed,  as
causam.  obtinere  videntiir,  tam  in  being  both  real  and  personal  ;  as,  for
rem  quam  in  personam  :  qualis  est  instance,  the  action  familise,  erciscundse,
familif©  ercisciindaB  actio,  qufe  com-  brought  between  co-heirs  for  the  par-
petit  coheredibus  de  dividenda  he-  tition  of  the  inheritance  ;  the  action
reditate  ;  item  communi  dividundo,  de  communi  dividundo,  between  part-
qnse  inter  eos  redditur  inter  quos  ners  for  the  division  of  things  held  in
aliquid  commune  est,  ut  id  divi-  common  ;  also,  the  action  jinium  re-
datur ;  item  jfinium  regundorum,  gimdorum,  between  owners  of  con-
quse  inter  eos  agitur  qui  confines  tiguous  estates.  And,  in  these  three
agros  habent.  In  quibus  tribus  ju-  actions,  the  judge,  following  the  rules
diciis  permittitur  judici,  rem  alicui  of  equity,  may  give  any  particular
ex  litigatoribus  ex  bono  et  aequo  thing  to  any  of  the  parties  to  the  suit,
adjudicare,  et  si  unius  pars  prsegra-  and  then  condemn  him,  if  he  seems  to
vare  videbitur,  eum  invicem  certa  have  an  undue  advantage,  to  pay  the
pecunia  alteri  condemnare.  other  a  certain  sum  of  money,

D.  x.  1.  2.  1  ;  D.  X.  1.  3  ;  D.  x.  2.  55.

These  actions,  though  entirely  personal,  as  being  founded  on
obligations  and  brought  against  particular  persons,  are  here  said
to  seem  in  one  aspect  like  real  actions,  because  they  involved
not  only  a  condemnatio,  but  an  adjudication  Particular  things  were
adjudged  and  given  over  to  the  parties.  Even  here,  however,  the
analogy  to  real  actions  was  not  very  complete,  as  real  actions
were  always  brought  for  some  definite  thing,  ascertainable  before
the  action  was  brought ;  but  in  the  actions  mentioned  in  the  text,
the  thing  to  be  adjudged  was  only  ascertained  by  the  action.

As  to  the  formula  in  these  actions,  see  Introd.  sec.  103.  In
these  actions  no  distinction  can  properly  be  made  of  plaintiff  and
defendant.  Ulpian  says,  ^  Mixtce  sunt  actiones,  in  quihus  uterque
actor  est.''  (D.  xliv.  7.  37.  1.)  The  judge  discharged  the  func-
tion assigned  him  equally  for  the  benefit  of  all  persons  interested
in  the  subject-matter  of  the  action.

21.   Omnes  autem  actiones  vel  in  21.  All  actions  are  for  the  single,

simplum  conceptas  sunt,  vel  in  du-     double,    triple,    or    quadruple  value  ;
plum,    vel  in  triplum,  vel  in  qua-     beyond  that  no  action  extends,
druplum  ;  ulterius  autem  nulla  actio
extenditur.

D.  ii.  8.  3.

We  have  now  the  fourth  division  of  actions,  that,  namely,
according  to  the  amount  of  the  condemnation.

In  actions  which  were  2?2  dwplum,  in  triplum,  ov  in  quadruplam
€oncept(B,  the  intentio  only  contained  an   estimate  of  the  single

F   F   2

436

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

value,  the  amount  of  actual  loss,  and  then  in  the  condemnatio  this
was  doubled,  tripled,  or  quadrupled,  as  the  case  might  be;  the
word  conceptcB,  therefore,  which  properly  refers  to  the  intentio,  is
not  very  strictly  used.

22.  In  simplum  agitur  :  veluti  ex
stipiilatione,  ex  miitui  datione,  ex
empto  vendito,  locate  conducto,
mandato,  et  denique  ex  aliis  com-
pluribus  causis.

22.  The  single  tiling  itseK,  or  its
simple  value,  is  sued  for  ;  as,  for  ex-
ample, in  case  of  a  stipulation,  a  loan,
a  mandate,  a  sale,  a  letting  to  hire,
and  in  numberless  other  cases.

If  a  person  stipulated  that  in  a  certain  case  his  debtor  should
give  him  double  or  triple  of  the  value  of  the  sum  owed,  the  action
brought  to  enforce  the  stipulation  would  still  be  in  simplum  con-
ce-i^ta.  It  Avould  be  the  agreement,  and  not  the  action,  which
would  double  or  triple  the  sum  to  be  paid.

23.  The  double  value  is  sued  for  ;
as,  for  example,  in  an  action  of  theft
not  manifest,  of  wrongful  injury  by
the  lex  Aquilia,  and,  in  certain  cases,
in  an  action  of  deposit.  Also  in  an
action  on  account  of  the  corruption  of
a  slave  brought  against  him  by  whose
advice  or  instigation  the  slave  has  fled
from  his  master,  has  gro^vn  disobedient
towards  him,  become  dissolute  in  his
habits,  or  been  made  in  any  manner
worse  ;  and,  in  this  action,  an  estimate
is  also  to  be  made  of  whatever  things
the  slave  has  stolen  from  his  master
before  his  flight.  An  action  also  for
the  detention  of  a  legacy,  left  to  a
sacred  place,  is  brought  for  double
value,  as  we  have  before  remarked.

Gai.  iii.  190 ;  Gai.  iv.  9.  171  ;  D.  xvi.  3.  1.  1 ;  D.  xi.  3.  1  ;  C.  i.  3.  46.  7.

Depositi   ex    quibusdam    casibus,    i.e.  when    made  under  the
pressure  of  a  sudden  calamity.     See  note  on  par.  17.

23.  In  diiplum  agimus ;  veluti
furti  nee  manifesti,  damni  injurige
ex  lege  Aquilia,  depositi  ex  quibus-
dam  casibus  ;  item  servi  corrupt!,
qu?e  competit  in  eum  cujus  hortatn
consiliove  servus  alienus  fugerit,  aut
contumax  adversus  dominum  factus
est,  aut  luxuriose  vivere  cosperit,  aut
denique  c[uolibet  modo  deterior  fac-
tus sit.  In  qua  actione  etiam  earum
rerum  quas  fugiendo  servus  abstulit,
gestimatio  deducitur.  Item  ex  legato
quod  venerabilibus  locis  relictum
est,  secundum  ea  qui?e  supra  diximus.

1

24.  Tripli  vero,  cum  quidam  ma-
jorem  vera3  eestimationis  quantita-
tem  in  libello  conventionis  inseruit,
ut  ex  hac  causa  viatores,  id  est  ex-
ecutores  litium,  ampliorem  summam
sportularum  nomine  exegerint  :  tunc
enim  id  quod  propter  eorum  causam
damnum  passus  fuerit  reus,  in  tri-
plum  ab  actore  consequetur,  ut  in
hoc  triple  et  simplum  in  quo  dam-
num passus  est,  connumeretur.  Quod
nostra  constitutio  induxit,  qu?e  in
nostro  Codice  fulget,  ex  qua  dubio
procul  est  ex  lege  condictitiam
emanare.

24.  The  triple  value  is  sued  for
when  any  person  inserts  a  greater  sum
than  is  due  to  him,  in  his  statement  of
demand,  so  that  the  viatores,  that  is,
the  officers  of  suits,  exact  a  larger  sum
as  their  fee.  In  this  case  the  defend-
ant may  obtain  from  the  plaintifl"  the
triple  value  of  the  loss  he  has  sustained
by  giving  the  fee,  but  the  amount
properly  expended  in  the  fee  is  in-
cluded in  the  triple  value.  Thus,  a
constitution  inserted  in  our  code  has
established,  on  which  constitution,
without  doubt,  a  statutory  condiction^
may  be  grounded.

C.  iii.  10.  2.  2.

i

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

437

In  the  old  law  there  had  been  other  actions  in  triplum,  as  those
furti  concepti  Sindfurti  ohlati,  (Gai.  iii.  191 ;  see  Tit.  1.4,  of
this  Book.)  The  action,  of  which  Justinian  speaks  in  this  para-
graph, had  been  substituted  by  him  for  the  penalty  of  entirely
losing  all  right  of  action,  to  which  a  plaintiff  who  sued  for  more
than  was  due  to  him  had  been  liable.

The  libellus  conveniionis  in  the  system  of  civil  process  obtain-
ing in  the  Lower  Empire,  was  the  notification  of  an  action  and
its  grounds  delivered  by  a  bailiff  of  the  court  {executor)  to  a  de-
fendant, who,  on  the  receipt  of  it,  had  to  give  security  for  his
appearance  before  the  judex.  It  thus,  in  the  extraordinaria
hf'dicia,  replaced  the  old  vocatio  in  jus,  Condictio  ex  lege  is  lite-
rally '  a  condiction  under  a  statute.'

25.  Quadrupli,  veluti  furti  mani-
festi :  item  de  eo  quod  metus  causa
:actum  sit,  deque  ea  pecunia  quse  in
ioc  data  sit,  ut  is  cui  datur  caliim-
lise  causa  negotium  alicui  faceret,
zel  non  faceret.  Item  ex  lege  con-
iictitia  a  nostra  constitutione  oritur,
n  quadruplum  condemnationem  im-
Donens  iis  executoribus  litium,  qui
;ontra  constitutionis  normam  a  reis
juidquam  exegerint.

25.  Tlie  quadruple  value  is  sued
for;  as,  for  example,  in  an  action  for
manifest  theft,  in  an  action  ciuod  metus
causa,  and  an  action  relating  to  money
given  to  any  one  to  set  on  foot,  or  to
desist  from,  a  vexatious  suit.  The  sta-
tutory condiction  is  also  for  the  qua-
druple value,  which  is  established  in
our  constitution  against  those  officers
of  suits,  who  demand  anything  from
the  defendant,  contrary  to  the  regula-
tions of  the  constitution.

Gai.  iii.  189  ;  D.  iv.  2.  14.  1  ;  D.  iii.  G.  1  ;  C.  iii.  2.  4.

De  ea  pecunia  qucB  datur,  Titius  is  bribed  by  some  one  to  insti-
tute a  vexatious  suit,  or  he  threatens  to  bring  a  vexatious  suit,
md  the  person  he  threatens  pays  him  not  to  bring  it.  In  either
iase  an  action  in  quadruplum  lies  against  him.

26.  Sed  furti  quidem  nee  mani-
'esti  actio,  et  servi  corrupti,  a  ceteris
ie  quibus  simul  locuti  sumus  eo  dif-
erunt,  quod  hse  actiones  omnimodo
lupli  sunt  ;  at  illse,  id  est,  damni  in-
urite  ex  lege  Aquilia  et  interdum
lepositi  inficiatione  duplicantur,  in
jonfitentem  antem  in  simplum  dan-
;ur.  Sed  ilia  qu^e  de  iis  competit
iiTse  relicta  venerabilibus  locis  sunt,
ion  solum  inficiatione  duplicatur,
jed  etiam  si  distulerit  relicti  solu-
ionem  usquequo  jussu  magistra-
:uum  nostrorum  conveniatur  ;  in
;onfitentem  vero,  et  anteqnam  jussu
nagistratuum  conveniatur  solven-
:em,  simplum  redditur.

2(5.  But  an  action  of  theft  not  ma-
nifest, and  an  action  on  account  of  a
slave  corrupted,  differ  from  the  others,
which  we  have  placed  under  the  same
head,  in  that  they  are  always  brought
for  double  the  value ;  but  the  others,
that  is,  the  action  given  by  the  lex
Aquilia  for  a  wrongful  injury,  and  the
action  of  deposit  under  pressure,  are
brought  for  the  double  value  in  case  of
denial ;  but  if  the  defendant  confesses,
the  single  value  only  can  be  recovered.
In  actions  brought  for  things  given  to
sacred  places,  double  is  recovered,  not
only  on  the  denial  of  the  defendant,
but  also  on  payment  being  delayed
until  a  magistrate  orders  an  action  to
be  brought ;  but  it  is  the  single  value
only  that  can  be  recovered,  if  the  debt
be  acknowledged  and  paid  before  such
an  order  is  siven.

Oai.  iv.  9.  173.  173 ;  C.  i.  3.  46.  7.

438

LIB.  IV.      TJT.  VI.

27.  Item  actio  de  eo  quod  metns
causa  factum  sit,  a  ceteris  de  quibus
simul  locuti  sumus  eo  differt,  quod
ejus  natura  tacite  continetur,  ut  qui
judicis  jussu  ipsam  rem  actori  resti-
tuat,  absolvatur.  Quod  in  ceteris
casibus  non  ita  est  sed  omnimodo
quisque  in  quadruplum  condemna-
tur  ;  quod  est  et  in  furti  manifesti
actione.

27.  The  action  quod  metus  causa
differs  also  from  the  other  actions  in-
cluded under  the  same  head,  because
it  is  tacitly  implied  in  the  nature  of
this  action,  that  a  defendant,  who,  in
obedience  to  the  command  of  the
judge,  restores  the  things  taken,  ought
to  be  acquitted ;  in  all  the  other  actions,
on  the  contrary,  the  defendant  must
always  be  condemned  to  pay  the  four-
fold value,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  ac-
tion of  manifest  theft.

D.  iv.  2.  14.  1.  4.

The  actio  quod  metus  causa  was  given  to  a  person  who  had,
while  under  constraint  from  the  fear  of  actual  or  threatened
violence,  alienated  anything,  created  real  rights,  or  entered  into
an  obligation.  The  action  was,  as  the  text  informs  us,  arhitraria.
(See  Introd.  sec.  106.)

28.  Actionum  autem  qusedam
boucse  fidei  sunt,  quredam  stricti  juris,
Bonse  fidei  sunt  hse  :  ex  empto  ven-
dito,  locato  conducto,  negotiorum
gestorum,  mandati,  depositi,  pro
socio,  tutelse,  commodati,  pignerati-
tia,  famili^e  erciscundse,  communi
dividundo,  pr?escriptis  verbis  quse  de
eestimato  proponitur,  et  ea  qu?e  ex
permutatione  com  petit,  et  heredi-
tatis  petitio.  Quamvis  enim  usque
ad  hue  incertum  erat,  sive  inter
bon?e  fidei  judicia  connumeranda  sit
hereditatis  petitio,  sive  non,  nostra
tamen  constitutio  aperte  eam  esse
bonse  fidei  disposuit.

28.  Again,  some  actions  are  honse
fidei,  some  are  stricti  juris.  Of  those
hon[)e,  fidei  there  are  the  following  : —
the  actions  empti  and  venditi,  locati
and  co7iducti,  negotiorum  gestorum ;
those  brought  on  a  mandate,  deposit,,
partnership,  tutelage,  loan,  or  pledge  ;
the  action  familise  erciscundx  ;  that
communi  dividundo  ;  the  action  prse-
scriptis  verbis,  arising  from  a  commis-
sion to  sell  at  a  fixed  price,  or  an  ex-
change ;  and  the  demand  of  an  in-
heritance. For,  although  it  was,  till
recently,  doubtful  whether  this  last  ac-
tion should  be  included  among  those
house  fidei,  our  constitution  has  clearly
decided  that  it  is  to  be  included  among

them.
Gai.  iv.  62;  C.  iii.  31.  12.  3.

We  here  enter  on  the  fifth  division  of  actions,  that,  namely,
according  to  the  powers  given  to  the  judge,  and  according  to
which  they  are  divided  into  actiones  hones  Jiclei,  actiones  stricti  juris  y
and  actiones  arhitrarice.

In  actions  bonce  Jideiy  the  words  ex  bonajide,  or  some  equivalent
expression,  were  permitted  to  be  added  to  the  formula,  so  thati
the  intentio,  which  was  always  incerta,  ran,  quicquid  dare,  or
Jacere,  or  prcBstare  oportet  ex  bona  fide.  The  actions  in  which
this  was  permitted  were  all  praetorian.  Justinian  here  gives  a
list  of  them;  and  probably,  though  not  quite  certainly,  the  list
is  meant  to  be  a  complete  one.  The  principal  effects  of  this
addition  to  the  formula  were: — (1)  That  all  circumstances
tending  to  show  dolus  malus  were  taken  into  consideration,  with-
out   an  exception  doli  mali  being  inserted.      (D.  xxx.   84.  5.)

J

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  \L  439

(2)  Every  assistance  Avhich  the  consideration  of  customs  and  com-
mon use  could  give  to  the  determination  of  the  particular  question
was  permitted  to  affect  the  decision  of  the  judge.  (D.  xxi.  1.  31.
20.)  (3)  The  judge  would  notice  any  counter  claims  which  the
defendant  might  have  arising  out  of  the  same  set  of  circumstances
which  gave  rise  to  the  action  of  the  plaintiff  (Gai.  iv.  63),  and
would  provide  for  future  contingencies,  as  e.g.,  in  an  action  pro
socio,  he  met  the  case  of  one  partner  having  taken  on  himself  lia-
bilities not  as  yet  enforceable.  (D.  xvii.  2.  38.  pr.)  (4)  And,
lastly,  interest  was  due  on  the  thing  withheld  from  the  time  it  ought
to  have  been  given.     (D.  xxii.  1.  32.  2.)

In  the  actions  stricti  juris,  the  judge  was  obliged  to  adhere
strictly  to  the  principles  of  the  civil  law.  Dolus  malus,  or  counter
claims,  could  not  be  taken  into  consideration  unless  exceptions
were  inserted  bringing  them  before  the  notice  of  the  judge.  And
interest  could  not  generally  be  claimed  from  before  the  time  of
the  litis  contestatio,  except  by  special  stipulation.  (D.  xii.  1.  31.)
It  was  the  actions  derived  from  the /?/.§  civile,  i.e.  real  actions  and
condictions,  that  were  stricti  juris.  That  a  real  action  should,  as  in
the  case  of  the  petitio  hereditatis,  be  honoi  Jidei,  was  quite  an  ex-
ception. But  the  petitio  hereditatis  had  characteristics  which
allied  it  with  personal  actions,  habet  prcestationes  quasdam  per-
sonales,  (D,  v.  3.  25.  18.)  It  could  only  be  brought  against
those  who  possessed  an  inheritance  {1)  j)ro  Jierede,  i.e.  as  heir  or
honorum  possessor,  ov  (2)  p)ro  possessore.  Pro  possessore  possidet
prcedo  qui  interrogatus  cur possideat,  responsurus  sit  quia  possideo,
i.e.  a  possessor  who  does  not  pretend  to  justify  his  possession  by
any  legal  title.  (D.  v.  3.  11  and  12.)  And  not  only  was  the  petitio
hereditatis  thus  personal  in  the  sense  of  being  limited  to  two
classes  of  persons,  but  it  had  some  of  the  consequences  of  a  per-
sonal action.  By  it  the  plaintiff  could  recover  from  the  possessor
moneys  he  had  derived  from  the  inheritance,  and  it  could  be
brought  against  debtors  of  the  deceased  to  make  them  pay  what
they  owed  to  the  inheritance  in  case  these  debtors  claimed  to  retain
their  debts  as  being  the  right  heirs.  (D.  v.  3.  13.  15 ;  D.  v.  3.
42.)  The  jurists  had  been  divided  on  the  point  whether  in  a  pe-
titio hereditatis  cognisance  could  be  taken  of  dolus  makes  without  an
exceptio.  Justinian  decided  that  it  could,  the  action  being  treated
as  one  hones  Jldei.

Actiones  arhitrarice  are  treated  of  in  paragr.  31.

An  iiciiOYi  prcescrijjtis  verbis,  otherwise  in  factum  prcescriptis
verbis,  or  civilis  in  factum,  was,  as  we  have  elsewhere  said,  an  ac-
tion in  which  at  the  head  of  the  formula  were  placed  words
stating  the  facts  giving  rise  to  a  contract  which  did  not  come
under  any  of  the  heads  of  contracts  bearing  a  particular  name.  Of
these  actions,  which  were  always  boncB  fidei  and  in  jus  conceptce,
the  two  mentioned  in  the  text  are  only  examples.  In  the
coniv£)iQt  per mutatio,  each  party  made  a  contract  re^  i.e.  by  depo-
siting the  thing  bartered  with  the  other ;  but  the  thing  given  was

440  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

n

not  given  as  a  mutuum,  a  cornmodatum,  a  dejjositum,  or  2i  jjignus,
and  therefore  the  circumstances  had  to  be  stated  specially.  The
action  de  (Estimato  was  given  when  a  thing  was  entrusted  to
another  to  sell  for  a  certain  sum  ;  the  agent  being  permitted  to
retain  all  he  received  above  that  given,  and  to  give  back  the  thing
if  he  could  not  obtain  the  price  fixed.  This  was  not  precisely  a
locatio,  a  societas,  or  a  mandatum,  and  therefore  the  action  was
given  in  the  form  of  one  jjrcescriptis  verbis.  (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.
13.  2.)

29.   Fuerat   antea  et  rei  uxorias  29,  Formerly,  the  action  rei  uxorias

actio  una  ex  bonse  fidei  judiciis.  Sed  was  included  among  the  actions  honx
cum  pleniorem  esse  ex  stipulatu  ac-  Jidei ;  but  finding  the  action  ex  stipulatu
tionem  invenientes,  omne  jus  quod  to  be  more  advantageous,  we  have,
res  uxoria  ante  habebat,  cnm  multis  while  establishing  many  distinctions,
divisionibus  in  actionem  ex  stipulatu  transferred  to  the  action  ex  stipulatu,
quse  de  dotibus  exigendis  proponitur,  when  given  for  the  recovery  of  mar-
transtulimus  :  merito  rei  uxorije  ac-  riage  portions,  all  the  effects  before
tione  sublata,  ex  stipulatu  qute  x^ro  attaching  to  the  action  rei  uxorix  ;  the
ea  introducta  est,  naturam  bonces  actio  rei  uxorise  being  then  reasonably
fidei  judicii  tantum  in  exactione  done  away  with,  the  action  ex  si  ipitZa^it,
dotis  meruit,  ut  bonre  fidei  sit  ;  sed  by  which  it  is  replaced,  naturally  as-
et  tacitam  ei  dedimus  hypothecam.  sumed  the  character  of  an  action  bo7i£&
Prseferri  autem  aliis  creditoribus  in  ^c^ei,but  assumed  it  only  when  brought
hypothecis  tunc  censuimus,  cum  ipsa  for  the  recovery  of  a  marriage  portion,
mulier  de  dote  sua  experiatur,  cujus  We  have  also  given  the  wife  an  implied
solius  providentia  hoc  induximus.         mortgage,  but  when  we  prefer  her  to

mortgagees,  we  do  so  only  whenever
she  herself  sues  for  her  marriage  par-
tion.  For  it  is  to  her  personally  that
we  grant  the  privilege.

D.  iv.  5.  8;  C.  v.  13  ;    C.  viii.  18.  12.  1.

In  order  to  enforce  the  restitution  of  a  marriage  portion,  the
actio  rei  uxorice  was  given  ;  but  sometimes  the  wife  or  other  per-
son entitled,  not  content  with  the  remedy,  stipulated  with  the
husband  for  the  restitution,  and  thus  secured  the  power  of  bring-
ing an  action  ex  stipulatu.

In  the  actio  rei  uxoricE,  which  was  an  action  honcB  fidei^  the
husband  could,  for  different  reasons,  make  certain  deductions  in
his  restitution  of  the  dos.  He  had  three  years  in  which  to  make
restitution  of  all  things,  «/m^  numero,  pondere,  mensurave  constant ;
he  could  oppose  to  the  action  the  heneficium  competenticB,  that  is,
he  was  only  condemned  to  pay  quantum  facere  potest ;  and  he
could  deduct  the  useful  as  well  as  the  necessary  expenses  he  had
incurred  in  managing  the  dotal  property.  (See  paragr.  37.)  The
wife  could  not  transmit  the  action  to  her  heirs,  and  if  her  husband
was  deceased,  and  she  had  benefited  by  his  testament,  she  could
not  both  accept  the  gift  under  the  testament,  and  also  ask  for  the
restitution  of  her  portion,  but  was  obliged  to  abandon  either  the
one  advantage  or  the  other.     (Ulp.  Reg.  6.)

!None  of  these  drawbacks  attended  the  action  ex  stipulatu.
There  could  be  no  deductions,  no  delay  in  payment,  no  regard  to

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

441

the  husband's  power  to  pay.  The  action  passed  to  the  heirs  of
the  wife,  and  she  could  take,  in  addition,  anything  given  her  by
her  husband's  testament.

Justinian  united  the  two  actions  into  one.  However  the  dos
might  have  been  given,  and  whether  there  had  really  been  any
stipulation  to  restore  it,  a  tacita  stipulatio  was,  in  every  case,  to
be  supposed.  The  actio  rei  uxoricB  was  to  be  abolished,  and  all
actions  for  the  restitution  of  a  marriage  portion  to  be  brought  ex
stijmlatu.  But  then,  this  action  was  treated  as  one  honce  Jidei,
and  produced  most  of  the  advantages  which  the  husband  had
«enjoyed  under  the  actio  rei  uxoricR.  He  had  a  year  in  which  to
restore  all  moveables  ;  he  could  claim  the  heneficium  competenticB,
and  might  deduct  the  necessary  expenses  he  had  been  put  to.  (See
paragr.  37.)  Lastly,  in  order  to  make  the  position  of  the  wife
more  secure,  Justinian  gave  her  an  implied  mortgage  on  the
effects  of  her  husband,  taking  priority  over  all  other  incum-
brances—  a  privilege,  however,  personal  to  herself.     (C.  iv.  13.)

30.  In  all  actions  honx  jidei  full
power  is  given  to  the  judge  to  deter-
mine, according  to  the  rules  of  equity,
how  much  ought  to  be  restored  to  the
plaintiff ;  whence  it  follows  that  when
the  plaintiff  also  is  found  to  be  in-
debted to  the  defendant,  the  debtor
ought  to  be  allowed  to  set  oft"  the  sum
due  to  him,  and  to  be  condemned  only
to  pay  the  diflference.  Even  in  actions
stricti  juris,  a  rescript  of  the  Emperor
Marcus  permitted  a  set-off  to  be
claimed,  by  opposing  the  exception  of
fraud  ;  but  our  constitution,  when  the
debt  due  to  the  defendant  is  evident,
has  given  a  greater  latitude  to  claims
of  set-oft' ;  for  now  actions,  real  or  per-
sonal, or  of  whatever  kind,  are  ipso
jure  reduced  by  the  claim,  with  the  ex-
ception only  of  the  action  of  deposit,
against  which  we  have  not  judged  it
proper  to  permit  any  claim  of  set-oft"
to  be  made,  lest  under  this  pretence
any  one  should  be  fraudulently  pre-
vented from  recovering  the  thing  de-
posited.

Gai.  iv.  61 ;  C.  iv.  31.  14,  pr.  and  1 ;  C.  iv.  34. 11.

The  subject  of  compensatio  will  be  treated  of  more  fully  under
paragr.  39.

30.  In  bon[3e  fidei  autem  judiciis
libera  potestas  permitti  videtur  ju-
dici  ex  bono  et  oequo  a^stimandi,
quantum  actori  restitui  debeat :  in
quo  et  illud  continetur,  ut  si  quid
invicem  prrestare  actorem  opDrteat,
eo  compensato  in  reliquum  is  cum
quo  actum  est,  debeat  condemnari.
8ed  et  in  strictis  judiciis  ex  rescript©
divi  Marci,  opposita  doli  mali  excep-
tione  compensatio  inducebatur.  Sed
nostra  constitutio  eas  compensa-
tiones  qupe  jure  aperto  nituntur,
latius  introduxit,  ut  actiones  ipso
jure  minuant,  sive  in  rem  sive  in
personam,  sive  alias  quascumque  :
excepta  sola  depositi  actione,  cui
aliquid  compensationis  nomine  ojd-
poni  satis  impium  esse  credidimus,
ne  sub  praitextu  compensationis  de-
positarum  rerum  quis  exactione  de-
fraudetur.

31.  Prseterea  quasdam  actiones
arbitrarias,  id  est,  ex  arbitrio  judicis
pendentes,  appellamus  :  in  quibus,
nisi  arbitrio  judicis  is  cum  quo  agitur
actori  satisfaciat,  veluti  rem  restituat,
vel  exhibeat,  vel  solvat,  vel  ex  noxali

31.  Some  actions,  again,  arc  called
arbitrary,  as  dexDending  upon  the  ar-
hitrkmi  of  the  judge.  In  these,  if  the
defendant  does  not,  on  the  order  of  the
judge,  give  the  satisfaction  awarded
by  the  judge,  and  either  restore,  ex-

442  LIB.  lY.      TIT.  YI.

causa  servum  cledat,  condemnari  de-  hibit,  or  pay  the  thing,  or  give  up  a.

beat.     Sed  istse  actiones  tarn  in  rem  slave  that  has  committed  an  injury,  he

quam  in  personam  inveniuntur  :  in  ought  to  be  condemned.     Of  these  ar-

rem,  veluti  Publiciana,  Serviana  de  bitrary  actions  some  are  real  and  some

rebus   coloni,   quasi    Serviana   qufe  personal  :  real,  as  the   actions  Publi-

etiam  hypothecaria  vocatur  ;  in  per-  ciana,    Serviana,    and  quasi   Serviana,

sonam,  veluti  quibus    de  eo  agitur  also  called  hypothecaria  ;  personal,  as

quod  aut  metus  causa  aut  dolo  malo  those   by  which  a  suit  is  commenced

factum  est,  item  cum  id  quod  certo  on  account  of  something  done  through

loco  promissum  est  petitur  ;  ad  ex-  fear  or  fraud,  and  that  for  which  some-

hibendum   quoque  actio  ex  arbitrio  thing  was  promised   to  be   paid   at  a

judicis   j)endet.     In    his    enim    ac-  particular  place ;  the  action  ad   exhi-

tionibus  et  ceteris  similibus  permit-  bendum  also  depends  on  the  arhitriwnv

titur  judici  ex  bono  et  aequo,  secun-  of  the   judge  :  in   these  actions,    and

dum  cujusque  rei  de  qua  actum  est  others    of    a    like  nature,  the   judge

naturam,  sestimare    quemadmodum  may  determine,  according  to  the  prin-

actori  satisfieri  oporteat.  ciples  of  equity  and  the  circumstances

of  the  particular  case,  the  satisfaction
which  the  plaintiff  ought  to  receive.

D.  vi.  1.  68  ;  D.  iv.  2.  14.  4  ;  D.  xiii.  4.  4.  1  ;  D.  x.  4.  3.  9  ;  D.  xx.  1.  16.  3 ;

D.  iv.  3.  18.

In  the  actiones  arhitraincE  the  judge  was  instructed  only  to
condemn  the  defendant  in  a  sum  of  money,  if  he  did  not  satisfy
the  demand  of  the  plaintiff,  supposing  that  demand  was  well-
founded.  When,  therefore,  the  judge  had  ascertained  the  validity
of  the  plaintiff's  claim,  he  issued  an  order  {arbitrium?)  to  the  de-
fendant, and  at  the  same  time  condemned  him  to  pay,  in  case  of
his  refusal,  a  sum  proportionate  to  the  value  of  AvhatAvas  claimed,
quanti  ea  res  erit.  This  was  fixed,  if  the  defendant,  when  ordered
to  restore  a  thing,  falsely  stated  that  he  had  not  the  thing  in  his
possession,  by  the  plaintiff  himself,  who  stated  on  his  oath  (D.
xii.  3.  5)  the  amount  he  considered  fairly  due  to  him  as  compen-
sation ;  otherwise  the  judex  fixed  the  amount  according  to  the
circumstances  of  the  case.  Probably,  though  this  is  a  point  on
which  there  is  a  divergence  of  opinion,  the  manus  militaris  was
employed,  by  the  direction  of  the  judge,  to  put  the  plaintiff  in  pos-
session, when  the  defendant  falsely  stated  that  it  was  not  in  his
possession,  or  when  the  defendant,  after  being  condemned,  would
neither  pay  the  amount  fixed  nor  restore  the  thing.  (D.  vi.  1.
68.)

Actions  in  rem  were  enforced  by  being  made  arbitrarics,  and
all  actions  in  rem  were  so  enforced.  (See  Tit.  17.  2.)  In  real
actions  the  satisfaction  ordered  by  the  judge  was  to  restore  the
thing.  In  the  actio  Serviana  and  quasi- Serviana,  the  arbitrium
was  alternative,  and  the  defendant  was  ordered  either  to  give  up
the  thing  pledged,  or  to  pay  the  debt.  (D.  xx.  1.  16.  3.)  It  is
to  this  case  that  the  words  '  vel  solvat '  in  the  text  refer.  When  the
thino^  claimed  was  restored,  the  condemnatio  mio^ht  still  be  made
available  for  the  fr actus.  (D.  vi.  1.  68.)  Among  personal
actions,  those  quod  metus  causa,  de  dolo  malo,  and  ad  exhibendum
were  arbitrarice,  because  they  were  brought  virtually  to  have
something  restored  or  exhibited.     The  action  de  eo  quod  certo  loco

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  443.

promissicm  est  was  made  arhitraria^  for  the  peculiar  reason  men-
tioned below.

With  respect  to  the  actio  quod  metus  causa,  see  paragr.  25  and
27.  The  actio  de  dolo  malo  was  given  to  avoid  the  consequences
of  a  dolus  malus,  but  only  when  there  was  no  other  means  of  avoid-
ing them  (D.  iv.  3.  1,  2);  it  was  in  simylum\  it  subjected  the
defendant,  if  condemned,  to  infamy,  and  had  to  be  brought  with-
in a  year.     (D.  iv.  3.  29.)

As  will  be  found  from  Tit.  12.  2,  in  every  action  the  defend-
ant was  to  be  absolved  if,  before  sentence  was  given,  he  satisfied
the  demands  of  the  plaintiff.

Cum  id  quod  certo  loco  promissum  est  petitur.  When  a  con-
tract was  made  in  which  it  was  agreed  that  payment  should  be
made  at  a  particular  place,  the  creditor  could  not  demand  pay-
ment anywhere  else.  If  he  did,  he  asked  for  more  than  was  his
due,  and  was  subject  to  the  consequences  of  a  pluris-petitio.  (See
paragr.  33.)  Supposing,  indeed,  the  action  brought  on  the  obli-
gation was  one  honcB  Jidei,  or  had  an  intentio  incerta,  as  being  for
an  undetermined  object,  then,  as  the  judge  would  take  into  account
all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  allow  the  defendant  the
benefit  of  whatever  difference  being  sued  in  a  wrong  place  could
be  supposed  to  make  to  him,  the  consequence  of  this  pluris-
petitio  would  be  immaterial.  But  if  the  action  was  stricti  juris
and  for  a  thing  certain,  the  plaintiff  could  not  have  brought  it  else-
where than  in  the  place  named  without  incurring  the  consequences
of  a  pLus-petitio,  had  not  the  praetor  come  to  his  relief  and  given
him  the  actio  arhitraria  mentioned  in  the  text.  By  this  action  the
creditor  was  allowed  to  sue  in  the  wrong  place,  but  the  praetor
compensated  the  debtor  by  giving  him  an  advantage.  The  action
was  made  arhitraria,  and  the  debtor  was  ordered  to  pay  what  the
creditor  claimed,  or  to  give  security  that  it  would  be  paid  in  the
place  where  due.  If  he  did  not  do  this,  then  in  the  condemnatio
the  judex  fixed  an  amount  in  which  the  advantage  it  might  have
been  to  the  debtor  to  have  paid  in  the  particular  place  was  taken
into  consideration.  (See  paragr.  33.)  The  pra3tor,  however,  per-
haps only  allowed  the  creditor  to  take  advantage  of  this  action  if
the  defendant  absented  himself  from  the  place  where  the  payment
ought  to  have  been  made  (D.  xiii.  4.  1),  and  then  the  creditor
could  bring  this  action  either  at  Kome  or  in  any  place  where  the
defendant  had  a  domicile,  or  in  any  place  where  the  defendant  con-
sented to  appear.  (D.  v.  1. 19.  4.)

32.  Curare  autem  debet  judex  ut  32.  A  judge  ought,  as  much  as  pos-

omnimodo,  quantum  possibile  ei  sit,  sible,  to  take  care  that  liis  sentence
certse  pecunia3  vel  rei  sententiam  awards  a  thing  or  sum  certain,  even
ferat,  etiam  si  de  incerta  quantitate  though  the  demand  on  which  he  pro-
apud  eum  actum  est.  nounces  may  have  been  for  an  uncer-

tain quantity.

Gai.  iv.  48.  52  ;  C.  vii.  4.  17.

444.

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

CertcB  jpeciimxE  vel  rei.  Before  the  formulary  system  tlie  judg-
ment might  be  either  to  give  a  thing  or  to  pay  a  sum  of  money.
Under  the  formulary  system  the  condemnatio  was  always  to  pay  a
sum  of  money.  Under  the  system  of  judicia  extraor dinar ia  a
return  was  made  to  the  old  law,  and  the  condemnatio  mis^ht  be  not
only  for  a  certain  sum  of  money,  but  also  for  any  other  definite
thing,  that  thus  the  object  of  the  demand  might  be  directly  ob-
tained.

The  condemnatio  was  always  certain,  even  if  the  action  was
brought  for  a  sum  or  thing  uncertain ;  the  nature  of  the  action
might,  indeed,  be  such  as  to  give  the  defendant  the  choice  of  two
alternatives,  and  the  condemnatio  would,  of  course,  correspond;
but  even  then  the  condemnation  cannot  properly  be  said  to  have
been  uncertain,  as  it  compelled  the  defendant  to  choose  between
two  definite  thins^s.

33.  Si  quis  agens  in  intentione
sua  plus  coinplexus  fuerit  quam  ad
eum  pertineret,  causa  cadebat,  id
•est,  rem  amittebat ;  nee  facile  in
integrum  a  pr^etore  restituebatur,
nisi  minor  erat  viginti  quinque
annis  :  huic  enim,  sicut  in  aliis
causis  causa  cognita  succurrebatur,
si  lapsus  juventute  fuerat,  ita  et  in
hac  causa  succurri  solitum  erat.
Sane,  si  tarn  magna  causa  justi
erroris  interveniebat,  ut  etiam  con-
stantissimus  quisque  labi  posset,
etiam  majori  viginti  quinque  annis
succurrebatur  :  veluti,  si  quis  totum
iegatum  petierit,  post  deinde  pro-
lati  fuerint  codicilli  quibus  aut  pars
legati  adempta  sit,  aut  quibusdam
aliis  legata  data  sint,  quce  efficie-
bant  ut  plus  petiisse  videretur  pe-
titor  quam  dodrantem,  atque  ideo
lege  Falcidia  legata  minuebantur.
Plus  autem  quatuor  modis  petitur,
re,  tempore,  loco,  causa  ;  re,  veluti
si  quis  pro  decern  aureis  qui  ei  de-
bebantur,  viginti  petierit ;  aut  si  is
cujus  ex  parte  res  est,  totam  eam
vel  majore  ex  parte  suam  esse  in-
tenderit ;  tempore,  veluti  si  quis  ante
diem  vel  ante  conditionem  petierit  :
qua  ratione  enim  qui  tardius  solvit
quam  solvere  deberet,  minus  solvere
intelligitur,  eadem  ratione  qui  prse-
iiiature  petit,  plus  petere  videtur.
Loco  plus  petitur,  veluti  cum  quis  id
•quod  certo  loco  sibi  stipulatus  est,
alio  loco  petit  sine  commemoratione
illius  loci  in  quo  sibi  dari  stipulatus
fuerit :  verbi  gratia,  si  is  qui  ita  sti-
pulatus fuerit,  Ephesi  dare  spondes  ?
Roma3  pure  intendat  sibi  dare  opor-

33.  Formerly,  if  a  plaintiff  claimed
in  his  intentio  more  than  his  due,  he
failed  in  his  action,  that  is,  he  lost
the  thing  owing  to  him,  nor  was  it
easy  for  him  to  get  reinstated  by  the
prsstor  unless  he  was  under  the  age
of  twenty-five  years,  for  in  this,  as
well  as  in  other  cases,  it  was  usual  to
aid  the  plaintiff  if  it  appeared  that  he
had  made  an  error  owing  to  his  youth.
If,  however,  the  reasons  which  betrayed
him  into  the  mistake  were  such  as  might
have  misled  the  most  careful  man,  re-
lief was  given  even  to  persons  of  full
age.  For  example,  if  a  legatee  had
demanded  his  whole  legacy,  and  codi-
cils were  afterwards  produced  by  which
a  part  of  it  was  taken  away,  or  new
legacies  given  to  other  persons,  so  that,
the  legacies  being  reduced  by  the  lex
Falcidia,  the  plaintiff  appeared  to  have
demanded  more  than  three-fourths.
A  man  may  demand  more  than  what
is  due  to  him  in  four  ways — in  respect
to  the  thing,  to  the  time,  to  the  place,
and  to  the  cause.  In  respect  to  the
thing,  as  when  the  plaintiff,  instead  of
ten  aurei,  which  are  due  to  him,  de-
mands twenty  ;  or  if,  although  owner
of  but  part  of  some  particular  thing,
he  claims  the  w^hole,  or  a  greater  share
than  he  is  entitled  to.  In  respect  to
time,  as  when  the  plaintiff  makes  his
demand  before  the  day  of  payment,  or
before  the  time  of  the  performance  of
a  condition ;  for  just  as  he  who  does
not  pay  so  soon  as  he  ought  is  held  to
pay  less  than  he  ought,  so  whoever
makes  his  demand  prematurely,  de-
mands more  than  his  due.  In  respect
to  place,  as  when  any  person  demands

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

445

tere.     Icleo  autem  plus   petere   in-
telligitur,  quia  utilitatem  quam  lia-
buit   promissor  si  Ephesi   solveret,
adimit  ei  pura  intentione.     Propter
quam  causam  alio  loco  petenti  arbi-
traria  actio  proponitur,  in  qua  sci-
licet   ratio    habetur    utilitatis    quae
promissori    competitura    fuisset,    si
illo  loco  solveret  :  quce  utilitas  ple-
rumque  in  mercibus  maxima  inve-
nitur,  veluti  vino,  oleo,   frumento,
quc^   per  sing-ulas   regiones   diversa
liabent  pretia ;  sed  et  pecunias  nu-
meratre  non  in  omnibus  regionibus
sub  iisdem  usuris   foenerantur.     Si
quis  tamen  Ephesi  petat,  id  est,  eo
loco  petat  quo  ut  sibi  detur  stii)u-
latus   est,  pura  actione   recte  agit ;
idque  etiam  praetor  monstrat,  scili-
cet quia  utilitas  solvendi  salva  est
promissori.     Huic    autem   qui   loco
]3lus    petere    intelligitur,    proximus
est  is  qui  causa  -plus  petit :  ut  ecce,
si  quis  ita  a  te  stipuletur,  hominem
Sticlium    aut    decem    aureos    dare
spondes  ?  deinde   alterutrum  petat,
veluti  hominem  tantum  aut  decern
aureos   tantum.      Ideo   autem  plus
IDetere  intelligitur,  quia  in  ea  genere
stipulationis  promissoris  est  electio,
utrum   pecuniam  an  hominem   sol-
vere   malit ;    qui    igitur    pecuniam
tantum  vel  hominem   tantum    sibi
dari  oportere   intendit,  eripit  elec-
tionem  adversario,  et  eo  modo  suam
quidem  conditionem  meliorem  facit,
adversarii  vero  sui  deteriorem  :  qua
de  causa  talis  in  ea  re  prodita  est
actio,    ut    quis    intendat    hominem
Stichum  aut  aureos  decem  sibi  dari
oportere,   id   est,    ut   eodem    modo
peteret   quo    stipulatus   est.      Pree-
terea,  si  quis  generaliter  hominem
stipulatus  sit,  et  specialiter  Stichum
petat,  aut  generaliter  vinum  stipu-
latus   specialiter   Campanum  petat,
aut  generaliter  purpuram  stipulatus
sit,  deinde  specialiter  Tyriam  petat,
plus   petere   intelligitur  ;  quia  elec-
tionem  adversario  tollit,  cui  stipu-
lationis jure  liberum  fuit  aliud  sol-
vere  quam   quod  peteretur.     Quin
etiam,    licet    vilissimum    sit    quod
quis  petat,  nihilominus  'plus  petere
intelligitur ;    quia    stepe    accidit    ut
promissori  facilius  sit  illud  solvere,
quod  majoris   pretii  est.     Sed  hrec
quidem  antea  in  usu  fuerant.    Postea
autem  lex  Zenoniana  et  nostra  rem
coercuit ;  et  si  quidem  tempore  plus
fuerit  petitum,  quid  statui  oportet,

that   something  stipulated  to  be   de-
livered at  a  particular  place,  should  be
delivered  at  some  other  place,  without
noticing  the  place  fixed  by  the  stipu-
lation ;   for   example,   if,   after   stipu-
lating in  these  words,  '  Do  you  promise
to  give  at  EphesusT  any  one  should
afterwards  bring  an  action  at  P^-ome,
merely    stating    that    the    defendant
ought  to  give.     In  this  case  the  plain-
tifi"  would  demand  more  than  his  due,
as  he  vv^ould,  by  his  intentio  thus  con-
ceived simply,  deprive  the   promissor
of  the  advantage   he   might   have   in
paying  at  Ephesus.     And  it  is  thus,
that  an  arbitrary  action  is  given  to  a
plaintifi'  demanding  payment  in  a  place
difierent  from  that  agreed  on,  in  which
action  allowance  is  made  for  the  ad-
vantage which  the  debtor  might  have
reaped   from  j)aying  his  debt   in  the
place   agreed  on.     This   advantage  is
generally  found  to  be  most  consider-
able in  the  different  kinds  of  merchan-
dise, as  in  wine,   oil,   corn,  of  which
the   price   differs   in  different   places.
Money  itself,  again,  is  not  lent  every-
where at  the  same  interest.     But  if  a
man  bring  his  action  at  Ephesus,  that
is,  at  the  place  fixed  by  the  stipula-
tion, he  may  validly  bring  an  action
conceived  simply ;  and  this  the  proetor,
too,  points  out,  because  all  the  advan-
tage the  debtor  will  have  in  paying  at
the  particular  place  is  secvired  to  him.
To  him  who  demands  more  than  his
due  in  regard  to  place,  he  approaches
very  nearly  who  demands  more  than
his  due  in  regard  to  the  cause  ;  as,  for
instance,  if  any  one  stipulate  thus  with
you,  '  Do  you  promise  to  give  either
your  slave  Stichus  or  ten  cmrei  ] '  and
then  demand  either  the  slave  only,  or
the  money  only.     He   would  in  this
case  be  held  to  have  demanded  more
than  his  due,  because  in  such  a  stipu-
lation the  promissor  has  the  right  to
choose  whether  he  will  give  the  slave
or  the   money.      He,    therefore,   who
claims  either  the  money  only,  or  the
slave  only,  takes  away  his  adversary's
power  of  choice,  and  thus  makes  his
own  condition  better,  and  that  of  his
adversary  worse.      An   action,  there-
fore, has  been  given  by  which  in  such
a    case    the   plaintiff   maintains    that
either  the  slave  Stichus  ought  to  be
given  him,  or  the  money,  and   thus
makes  a  demand  in  conformity  witli
the  stipulation.      So,  too,  if  a  man  sti-
pulates generally  that  wine,  or  purple,

446

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

Zenonis  divae  memoriae  loquitur  con-
stitutio.  Sin  aiitem  quantitate  vel
alio  modo  plus  fuerit  petitum,  omne
si  quod  forte  damnum  ex  liac  causa
acciderit  ei,  contra  quem  plus  peti-
tnm  fuerit,  commissa  tripli  con-
demnatione,  sicut  supra  diximus,
puniatur.

or  a  slave  be  given  Iiim,  and  afterwards
sues  for  the  wine  of  Campania,  the
purple  of  Tyre,  or  the  slave  Stichus
in  particular,  he  is  held  to  demand
more  than  his  due,  for  he  thus  takes
the  power  of  election  from  his  adver-
sary, to  whom  it  was  open  by  the
terms  of  the  stipulation  to  pay  some-
thing different  from  what  is  demanded.
Nay,  even  if  the  thing  actually  sued
for  is  of  little  or  no  value,  yet  the
plaintiff  is  held  to  claim  more  than
his  due,  because  it  is  often  easier  for
the  debtor  to  i^ay  a  thing  of  greater
value.  Such  was  the  law  formerly  in
use.  But  the  severity  of  the  law  on
this  point  has  been  greatly  restrained
by  the  constitution  of  the  Emperor
Zeno,  and  by  our  own.  If  more  than
is  due  is  demanded  in  respect  of  time,
the  constitution  of  Zeno  must  be  ap-
plied ;  if  in  respect  of  quantity,  or  in
any  other  way,  then,  as  we  have  said
above,  the  plaintiff  is  to  be  condemned
in  a  sum  triple  the  amount  of  any  loss
sustained  by  the  defendant.

Gai.  iv.  53  ;  D.  iv.  4.  1.  1 ;  D.  iv.  4.  7.  4  ;  D.  iv.  6.  1.  1  ;  D.  xiii.  4  and

foil.  ;  C.  iii.  10.  1,  2.

Under  the  system  oi  formulm,  a  j^lus-pctitlo  or  pluins-petltio
liad  the  effect  of  making  the  plaintiff  fail  entirely  in  an  actio
stricti  juris,  when  the  error  was  in  the  intentio,  and  the  intentio
was  for  a '  thing  certain.  Supposing  this  were  the  case,  as  the
formula  would  run  si  paret  decern  nummos,  &c.,  condemna,  si  non
absolve,  then,  if  the  defendant  owed  only  nine  nummi^  he  did  not
owe  ten,  and  so  the  judex  could  not  condemn  him.  The  plaintiff
failed,  and  having  once  come  injudicio,  the  litis  contestatio  ope-
rated as  a  novation  of  the  cause  of  action  (see  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  29),
and  his  original  claim  being  thus  cut  away,  he  was  left  entirely
without  remedy,  and  could  take  no  further  proceedings  to  enforce
his  demand.

Of  course,  if  the  demand  was  for  a  thing  uncertain,  there
could  be  no  plus-petitio.  If  there  were  an  error  in  the  demon-
stration the  plaintiff  was  not  at  all  prejudiced.  If  there  were  a  mis-
take in  the  condemnatio,  making  it  more  unfavourable  to  the  de-
fendant than  it  ought  to  have  been,  it  was  the  defendant  who
would  be  prejudiced ;  but  the  praetor  would  grant  a  new  formula,
and  so  rectify  the  mistake.  (See  Gai.  iv.  53-60,  reading  in  57,
&ed  (reus  cum)  iniquam  formulam  acceperit.)

Under  the  system  of  the  judicia  extraordinaria  Sb  plus-petitio
would  mean  any  claim  in  excess  contained  in  the  lihellus  conven-
tiouis.  The  text  informs  us  of  the  mode  in  which  such  a  mistake
or  misstatement  was  punished  when  the  plus-petitio  was  not  one
tempore.     If  the  plus-petitio  was  tempore,  i.e.  if  the  plaintiff  suedj

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VI.

447

before  the  proper  time,  he  was  condemned  by  the  constitution  of
Zeno  (C.  iii.  10.  1)  to  Avait  double  the  time  he  ought  originally  to
have  waited,  and  to  reimburse  the  defendant  all  expenses  he  might
have  been  put  to  by  the  action  improperly  brought

Sicut  supra  diximus  refers  to  the  case  of  the  damnum  being
the  exaction  of  a  larger  fee  by  the  executor,  as  mentioned  in
paragr.  24.

34.  Si  minus  in  intentione  com-
l^lexus  fuerit  actor  quam  ad  eum
pertineret,  veliiti  si,  cum  ei  clecem
deberentur,  quinque  sibi  dari  opor-
tere  intenderit ;  aut  si,  cum  totus
fundus  ejus  esset,  partem  dimidiam
suani  esse  petierit,  sine  periculo  agit.
In  reliquum  enim  nihilominus  judex
adversarium  in  eodem  judicio  con-
demnat,  ex  constitutione  divse  me-
morise Zenonis.

34.  If  a  plaintiff  includes  less  in  his
intetdio  than  he  has  a  claim  to,  de-
manding, for  instance,  only  five  aurei
when  ten  are  due,  or  the  half  of  an
estate,  when  the  whole  belongs  to  him,
he  runs  no  risk,  for  the  judge  may,  by
the  constitution  of  Zeno,  of  glorious
memory,  condemn  in  the  same  action
the  adverse  party  to  pay  the  remainder
of  what  is  due  to  the  plaintiii".

Gai.  iv.  56 ;  C.  iii.  10.  1.  3.

Under  the  praetorian  system,  a  plaintiff  who  claimed  a  less
amount  than  was  really  due  to  him,  could  bring  another  action
for  the  surplus  if  he  waited  until  another  praetor  came  into  office.
'(Gai.  iv.  56.)  Zeno  allowed  the  judex  to  add  the  surplus  in  con-
demning the  defendant.

35.  Si  quis  aliud  pro  alio  inten-
derit, nihil  eum  periclitari  placet  ;
sed  in  eodem  judicio,  cognita  veri-
tate,  errorem  suum  corrigere  ei  per-
mittimus  :  veluti,  si  is  qui  hominem
Stichum  petere  deberet,  Erotem  pe-
tierit ;  aut  si  quis  ex  testamento  sibi
dari  oportere  intenderit,  quod  ex
stipulatu  debetur.

35.  When  a  plaintifi"  demands  one
thing  instead  of  another,  he  incurs  no
risk.  For  if  he  discovers  the  truth,
he  is  allowed  to  correct  his  mistake  in
the  same  action  :  as  if  he  should  de-
mand the  slave  Eros  instead  of  Stichus,
or  should  claim  as  due  by  virtue  of  a
testament,  what  is  really  due  upon  a
stipulation.

Gai.  iii.  55.

In  the  time  of  Gains,  a  plaintiff  who  demanded  one  thing  in-
stead of  another,  lost  the  action,  but  could  recover  the  thing  really
due  in  a  subsequent  action.  Justinian  permitted  the  mistake  to
be  retrieved  in  the  same  action,  as  the  text  informs  us.

36.  Sunt  prseterea  qusedam  ac-
tiones  quibus  non  solidum  quod
nobis  debetur,  persequimur,  sed
modo  solidum  consequimur,  modo
minus,  ut  ecce,  si  in  peculium  filii
■servive  agamus  :  nam  si  non  minus
in  peculio  sit  quam  persequimur,  in
.solidum  dominus  jjaterve  condem-
Jiatur  :  si  vero  minus  inveniatur,
•eatenus  condemnat  judex,  quatenus

36.  There  are,  again,  certain  actions
by  which  we  do  not  always  sue  for  the
whole  of  what  is  due  to  us,  but  some-
times for  the  whole,  sometimes  for  less.
For  example,  when  a  suit  is  brought
so  as  to  form  a  claim  against  the  pcca-
lium  of  a  son  or  a  slave,  then  if  the
peculium  is  suflicient  to  answer  the
demand,  the  father  or  master  is  con-
demned to  pay  the  whole  debt ;  but  if

448

LIE.  lY.      TIT.  VI.

in  peculio  sit.  Quemadmodum  au-
tem  peculium  intelligi  debeat,  suo
ordine  proponemus.

1

the  peculimn  is  not  sufficient,  he  i»
condemned  to  pay  only  to  the  ex-
tent of  the  peculkmi.  We  will  here-
after explain,  in  its  proper  place,  how
the  peculium  is  to  be  estimated.

C.  iv.  26.  12.

We  here  enter  on  another  division  of  actions,  according  to
which  actions,  by  which  the  whole  of  what  was  due  was  obtained,
are  distino-uished  from  those  bv  which  sometimes  the  whole,  some-
times  less  than  the  whole,  of  what  was  due  was  obtained.

37.  Item,  si  de  dote  judicio  mn-
lier  agat,  j^lacet  eatenus  maritum
condemnari  debere  quatenus  facere
possit,  id  est,  quatenus  facultates
ejus  patiuntur :  itaque,  si  dotis  quan-
titati  concurrant  facultates  ejus,  in
solidum  damnatur ;  si  minus,  in  tan-
tum  quantum  facere  potest.  Propter
retentionem  quoque  dotis  repetitio
minuitur  ;  nam  ob  impensas  in  res
dotales  factas  marito  retentio  con-
cessa  est,  quia  ipso  jure  necessariis
sumptibus  dos  minuitur,  sicut  ex
latioribus  Digestorum  libris  cognos-
cere  licet.

37.  Thus,  too,  if  a  wife  brings  an
action  for  the  restitution  of  her  mar-
riage portion,  the  husband  must  be
condemned  to  pay  only  as  far  as  he
is  able,  i.e.  as  far  as  his  means  permit.
Therefore,  if  his  means  admit  of  his.
paying  the  whole  amount  of  the  por-
tion, he  mvist  do  so  ;  if  not,  he  must
pay  as  much  as  it  is  in  his  power  to
pay.  The  claim  of  a  wife  for  the
restitution  of  her  marriage  j)ortion
may  also  be  lessened  by  the  husband
having  a  right  to  retain  something,
for  the  husband  is  permitted  to  retain
a  sum  equivalent  to  the  expenses  he
has  incurred  about  the  things  given,
since  the  marriage  portion  is  by  law
diminished  by  the  amount  of  all  ne-
cessary expenses,  as  may  be  seen  in
fuller  detail  in  the  Digest.

D.  xxiv.  3.  12.  34;  D.  xxv.  1.  5.

The  privilege  of  having  the  condemnatio  reduced,  duntaxat
in  id  quatenus  facere  potest,  i.e.  of  being  condemned  only  in
an  amount  which  he  could  pay  without  being  reduced  to  a  state
of  destitution  (D.  L.  17.  173),  a  privilege  called  by  the  commen-
tators the  heneficium  competentlcB,  was  accorded  to  the  defendant
in  several  other  cases  besides  those  mentioned  in  the  text  and  in
the  next  paragraph  and  in  paragr.  40.  We  may  instance  the
cases  of  one  brother  sued  by  another,  and  every  case  arising
between  man  and  wife,  except  claims  grounded  on  delicts.  (D.  i
lil.  1.  20.)  This  privilege  was  always  personal,  and  did  not  avail
either  heirs  or  sureties.

If  the  debtor  subsequently  had  funds,  he  had  to  pay  what
under  the  heneficium  competentim  he  left  unpaid.  (C.  v.  18.  8.)'  i
In  calculating  how  much  the  debtor  could  pay,  account  was
only  taken  of  what  he  possessed,  without  deduction  for  what  he
owed,  except  in  the  one  case  of  the  donor,  who  might  deduct  his
debts.     (D.  xlii.  1.  19,  pr.  1.)

Propter  retentionem  dotis.

\

The  husband  mio'ht  deduct  the

J

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.  449

amount  of  all  necessary  expenses  incurred  in  the  management
of  the  property  constituting  the  marriage  portion.  If  the  ex-
penses had  been  only  profitably  and  not  necessarily  incurred,
that  is,  were  utiles,  and  not  necessarice,  Justinian  only  allowed  the
husband  to  bring  an  actio  mandaii,  or  an  actio  negotiorum  gesto-
rum,  to  reimburse  himself;  whereas,  previously,  he  had  been  able
to  deduct  such  expenses  as  well  as  those  that  were  necessaries,
(D.  L.  16.  79.  1 ;  C.  V.  13.  1.)

38.  Sed  et  si  quis  cum  parente  suo  38.  If  any  person  sues  his  parent  or
patronove  agafc,  item  si  socius  cum  patron,  or  one  partner  sues  another  in
socio  judicio  societatis  agat,  non  plus  an  action  of  partnership,  he  cannot
actor  consequitur  quam  adversarius  obtain  a  greater  sum  than  his  adver-
ejus  facere  potest.  Idem  est,  si  sary  is  able  to  pay.  It  is  the  same
quis  ex  donatione  sua  conveniatur.  when  a  donor  is  sued  for  his  gift.

D.  xlii.  1.  16.  19,  pr.  and  1.

39.  Compensationes  quoque  op-  39.  When  a  set-ofF  is  opposed  by
positse  plerumque  efficiunt,  ut  minus  the  defendant  to  the  demand  of  the
quisque  consequatur  quam  ei  debe-  plaintiff,  it  generally  happens  that  the
batur  ;  namque  ex  bono  et  aequo  plaintiiF  recovers  less  than  what  he  de-
habita  ratione  ejus,  quod  invicem  mands,  for  the  judge,  proceeding  on
actorem  ex  eadem  causa  prsestare  equitalDle  principles,  may  deduct  from
oportet,  in  reliquum  eum  cum  quo  the  demand  of  the  plaintiff  whatever
actiim  est  condemnare,  sicut  jam  he  owes  under  the  same  head  to  the
dictum  est.  defendant,  and  may  condemn  the  de-
fendant to  pay  the  remainder  only,  as
has  been  already  observed.

Gai.  iv.  61.

If  the  defendant  was  not  only  a  debtor  but  a  creditor  of  the
plaintiff,  if  he  had  something  owing  to  him  from  the  plaintiff  as
well  as  owed  something  to  him,  it  was  evidently  the  most  conve-
nient way  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  balance  one  debt  against
the  other  (compensafio,  pensare  cum),  and  only  account  for  the
surplus,  supposing  a  surplus  was  still  due  from  him.

Under  the  praetorian  system,  in  all  actions  honcujidei,  the  judge,
who  could  take  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  into  his  consi-
deration, set  off  as  a  matter  of  course  any  debt  due  to  the  defend-
ant from  the  plaintiff  in  consequence  of  the  same  set  of  circum-
stances {ex  eadem  causa)  by  which  the  debt  on  which  the  action
was  brought  became  due.  (Gai.  iv.  61.)  In  one  case,  however,
viz.  that  of  a  banker  {argentarius) ,  a  much  stricter  system  pre-
vailed. The  argentarius  could  only  sue  a  customer  for  the  sum
due  to  him  after  allowing  for  what  he  owed  to  the  customer.  If
he  sued  for  more,  it  was  a  plus-petitio.  (GrAi.  iv.  64.)  The  bono-
rum  emptor,  or  purchaser  of  an  insolvent's  estate,  had  also  to
make  a  deduction  of  what  was  due  to  the  defendant  from  the  in-
solvent when  he  sued  a  debtor  of  the  insolvent.  (Gai.  iv.  Q5.)
Between  this  deductio  and  the  compensatio  required  from  the
argentarius  there  were  some  differences :  compensatio  was  only  of
things  of  the  same  kind,  only  of  debts  due,  and  had  to  be  in-

450  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VI.

serted  in  the  intentio ;  whereas  the  deductio  was  of  things  of  dif-
ferent kinds,  of  debts  not  due  as  well  as  due,  and  being  inserted
in  the  condemnatio  did  not  expose  the  plaintiff  to  the  risk  of  plus-
petitio.  (Gai.  iv.  66-68.)  In  the  actions  stricti  juris,  which  arose
from  unilateral,  not  bilateral  contracts,  there  could  be  no  recipro-
cal rights,  as  in  a  bilateral  contract,  giving  the  defendant  a  claim
€x  eadem  causa.  But  the  rule  grew  up  and  was  confirmed  by  a
rescript  of  Marcus  Aurelius  (see  paragr.  31),  dolo  facit  qui  petit
quod  redditurus  est.  (D.  xliv.  4.  8.)  If  the  plaintiff  claimed  a
sum  which  directly  he  had  obtained  he  would  have  to  repay  back
to  the  defendant,  he  was  guilty  of  a  dolus ;  he  had  acted  as  it
he  had  a  right  to  the  money,  whereas  he  had  not.  Accordingly
the  defendant  could  avail  himself  of  the  exception  of  dolus.  What
the  effect  of  this  exception  was  is  not  certain.  Some  think  that
if  the  plaintiff  was  found  to  owe  the  defendant  anything  of  a
similar  kind,  although  ex  dispari  causa,  which  he  had  not  allowed
for  in  stating  the  amount  of  his  claim,  he  entirely  failed  in  his
action.  He  did  not  recover  any  surplus  which  might  be  really
due  to  him.  The  exception  stopped  the  action  altogether.  The
formula  ran :  Si  in  ea  re  nihil  dolo  malo  Auli  Agerii  factum  sit
neque  fiat  .  .  .  condemna,  si  non  paret,  absolve.  Dolus  nialus  did
appear,  and  all  the  judex  could  do  was  to  absolve  the  defendant.
(Paul.  Sent.  ii.  5.  3.)  Others  suppose  that  the  defendant  had
to  pay  any  balance  found  to  be  due  by  him.  (See  Demangeat,
2.  629.)

But  we  must  not  suppose  that  compensatio  was  originally
looked  on  as  a  means  of  extinguishing  an  obligation.  In  theory
of  law,  each  debt  subsisted  separately.  Certainly  in  the  case  of
the  argentarius  it  is  hard  to  draw  any  line  between  an  extinc-
tion of  obligation  and  the  way  in  which  debts  due  to  customers
were  necessarily  deducted ;  but  it  was  necessary  that  the  debts
due  to  and  from  the  argentarius,  although  ex  dispari  causa,  should
be  in  eadem  re,  that  is,  should  both  consist,  for  instance,  of  money
or  wine.  This  was  an  exceptional  case,  and,  generally  speaking,  the
two  debts  clearly  subsisted  together,  although,  w^hen,  by  submitting
the  facts  to  the  knowledge  of  the  judex  in  the  case  of  actions  hona  |
fidei,  and  by  the  exceptio  doli  in  the  action  of  law,  the  set-off  was
claimed,  its  effects  were  retroactive,  and  may  be  said  to  have  com-
menced from  the  moment  when  the  two  debts  first  began  to  exist
together.     (C.  iv.  31.4.)

Under  Justinian  the  debts  were  held  to  operate  as  mutually  i
extinguishing  each  other  ipso  jure.  When  the  parties  came  ;
before  the  judex,  he  ascertained  their  respective  claims  on  each
other,  and  if  there  was,  on  the  whole,  a  balance  in  favour  of  the
plaintiff,  awarded  the  amount  to  him.  All  the  old  distinctions
were  done  away,  and  it  no  longer  made  any  difference  whether
the  two  debts  arose  from  the  same  transaction,  or  whether  things
of  the  same  kind  were  payable  (the  words  ex  eadem  causa  in  the
text  are,  therefore,  under  Justinian's  legislation,    inaccurate).

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VII.

451

But  Justinian  made  it  requisite  that  the  defendant's  claim  should
be  clearly  well  founded,  and  that  the  amount  should  be  at  once
ascertainable,  and  not  need  further  inquiry  to  determine  it
(causa  liquida){see  C.  iv.  31.  14.  1),  and  he  would  not  allow  any
set-off  to  an  actio  depositi.     (Seeparagr.  30.)

40.  Eum  quoque  qui  creditoribus
suis  bonis  cessit,  si  postea  aliquid
{icquisierit  quod  idoneum  emolu-
mentum  habeat,  ex  integro  in  id
quod  facere  potest,  creditores  cum
eo  experiuntur  :  inhumanum  enim
erat  spoliatum  fortunis  suis  in  soli-
dum  damnari.

40.  So,  when  a  debtor  who  has
made  a  cession  of  his  goods  to  his
creditors  acquires  a  fortune  which
makes  it  worth  their  while,  the  cre-
ditors may  compel  him  by  action  to
pay  as  much  as  he  is  able,  but  not
more,  for  it  would  be  inhuman  to  con-
demn a  man  to  pay  the  whole  debt
who  has  already  been  deprived  of  all
his  property.

D.  xlii.  3,  4.  6.

Tit.  VII.     QUOD  CUM  EO  CONTRACTUM  EST,  QUI
IN  ALIENA  POTESTATE  EST.

Quia  tamen  superius  mentionem
habuimus  de  actione,  qua  in  pecu-
lium  filiorumfamilias  servorumve
agitur,  opus  est  ut  de  hac  actione  et
de  ceteris  quae  eorumdem  nomine  in
parentes  dominosve  dari  solent,  di-
ligentius  admoneamus.  Et  quia,
sive  cum  servis  negotium  gestum  sit,
sive  cum  iis  qiii  in  potestate  parentis
sunt,  his  fere  eadem  jura  servantur,
ne  verbosa  fiat  disputatio,  dirigamus
sermonem  in  personam  servi  domi-
nique,  idem  intellecturi  de  liberis
quoque  et  parentibus  quorum  in
potestate  sunt ;  nam  si  quid  in  his
proprie  observatur,  separatim  osten-
demus.

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  ac-
tion which  may  be  brought  relative  to
the  peculiwm  of  JiUifamiliarum  or  of
slaves.  And  we  must  now  speak  of  it
more  fully,  and  also  of  all  other  ac-
tions which  may  be  brought  against
parents  and  masters  as  representing
children  and  slaves.  But,  as  the  law
is  almost  the  same,  whether  the  deal-
ing is  with  a  slave,  or  with  one  under
the  power  of  a  parent,  to  avoid  pro-
lixity, we  will  treat  only  of  slaves  and
their  masters,  leaving  what  we  say  of
them  to  be  understood  as  applicable
also  to  children  and  the  parents,  under
whose  power  they  are.  For  anything
which  is  peculiar  to  children  and  pa-
rents we  will  point  out  separately.

Gai.  iv.  69.

By  the  strict  rule  of  the  civil  law,  the  parent  or  master  could
not  be  bound  or  prejudiced  by  any  act  of  a  child  or  slave.  But
a  sense  of  equity  gradually  broke  in  upon  this  rule,  and,  in  cer-
tain cases,  the  contracts  and  delicts  of  persons  alienl  juris,  came
to  affect  those  in  whose  power  these  persons  were.

This  Title  treats  of  the  contracts  of  persons  alieni  juris,  which
were  considered  to  concern  the  master  or  parent  (1)  whenever
they  were  made  by  his  order ;  and  (2)  whenever  he  had  profited
by  them.

1.   Si   igitur   jussu  domini  cum  1.  Thus,    then,    if  any   one   deals

servo  negotium  gestum  erit,  in  soli-     with  a  slave  acting  under  the  command
dum  praetor  adversus  dominum  ac-     of  his  master,  the  proator  will  give  an

G  G  2

452

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VII.

tionem  pollicetur  ;  scilicet  quia  qui
ita  contraliit,  fidem  domini  sequi
videtur.

action  against  the  master  for  the  whole
of  what  is  due  under  the  contract ;  for,
in  this  case,  the  person  who  contracts
does  so  as  relying  on  the  faith  of  the
master.

Gai.  iv.  70.

The  jussus  domini  extended  to  cases  where  the  master  subse-
quently ratified  the  contract,  the  ratification  being  equivalent  to
a  mandate.     (D.  xv.  4.  1.  6.)

If  the  slave  had  been  merely  the  instrument  of  his  master,  if,
for  instance,  the  master  arranged  that  money  borrowed  for  himself"
should  be  told  out  to  his  slave,  the  praetor  would  give  a  condictio,
not  an  action  guod  jussu,     (D.  xv.  4,  5,  pr.)

2.  Eadem  ratione  praetor  duas
alias  in  solidum  actiones  pollicetur,
quarum  altera  exercitoria,  altera  in-
stitoria  appellatur.  Exercitoria  tunc
habet  locum,  cumquis  servum  suum
magistrum  navi  prseposuerit,  et  quid
cum  eo  ejus  rei  gratia  cuiprsepositus
erit  contractum  fuerit  :  ideo  autem
e<xercitoria  vocatur,  quia  exercitor
appellatur  is  ad  quern  quotidianus
navis  qusestus  pertinet.  Institoria
tunc  locum  habet,  cum  quis  tabernse
forte  aut  cuilibet  negotiationi  servum
prseposuerit,  et  quid  cum  eo  ejus  rei
causa  cui  prsepositus  erit  contractum
fuerit  :  ideo  autem  institoria  appel-
latur, quia  qui  negotiationibus  prse-
ponuntur,  institores  vocantur.  Istas
tamen  duas  actiones  praetor  reddit,
et  si  liberum  quis  hominem  aut  alie-
num  ser\^im  navi  aut  tabernse  aut
cuilibet  negotiationi  prseposuerit,
scilicet  quia  eadem  sequitatis  ratio
etiam  eo  casu  interveniebat.

2.  For  the  same  reason  the  prsetor
also  gives  two  other  actions  for  the
whole  sum  due,  the  one  called  the  actio
exercitoria,  the  other  the  acfio  institoria.
The  action  exercitoria  may  be  brought
when  a  master  has  made  his  slave  com-
mander of  a  vessel,  and  a  contract  has
been  entered  into  with  the  slave  re-
lating to  the  business  he  has  been  ap-
pointed to  manage.  This  action  is
named  exercitoria,  because  he,  to  whom
the  daily  profits  of  a  ship  belong,  i»-
said  to  be  an  exercitor.  The  action
institoria  may  be  brought  when  a
master  has  intrusted  his  slave  with  the-
management  of  a  shop  or  any  par-
ticular business,  and  a  contract  has
been  made  with  the  slave  relating  ta
the  business  he  has  been  appointed  to
manage.  This  action  is  called  institoria^
because  persons  to  whom  the  manage-
ment of  a  business  is  intrusted  are
called  institores.  The  prsetor  likewise
permits  these  two  actions  to  be  brought
if  any  one  commits  to  a  free  person,,
or  to  the  slave  of  another,  the  manage-
ment of  a  ship,  a  warehouse,  or  any
particular  affair,  as  the  principle  of
equity  is  the  same.

Gai.  iv.  71.

Liberum  hominem.  We  have  seen  at  how  late  a  period  of
Koman  law  it  was  that  one  freeman  could  act  for  another.  (See
Bk.  iii.  Tit.  26.)  It  was,  in  fact,  by  extending  these  actions
institoria  and  exercitoria,  so  as  to  embrace  the  case  of  a  manda-
tary, that  the  prastor  made  the  principal  directly  responsible,  and
thus  enabled  him  to  be  really  represented  by  the  agent.

3.  Introduxit  et  aliam  actionem
praetor,  quae  tributoria  vocatur  :
namque  si  servus  in  peculiari  merce

3.  The  praetor  has  also  introduced
another  action  called  tributoria;  for,
if  a  slave  with   the  knowledge  of  his

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VII.

453

sciente  domino  negotietur,  et  quid
cum  eo  ejus  rei  causa  contractum
erit,  ita  praetor  jus  dicit,  ut  quid-
quid  in  his  mercibus  erit,  quodque
inde  receptum  erit,  id  inter  dominum
si  quid  ei  debetur,  et  ceteros  credi-
tores  pro  rata  portione  distribuatur.
Et  quia  ipsi  domino  distributionem
permittit,  si  quis  ex  creditoribus
queratur  quasi  minus  ei  tributum
sit  quam  oportuerit,  banc  ei  actionem
accommodat,  quae  tributoria  appel-
latur.

master  trades  with  his  peculium,  and
contracts  are  made  with  him  in  the
course  of  business,  the  praetor  ordains
that  all  the  merchandise  or  money
arising  from  his  traffic  shall  be  dis-
tributed between  the  master,  if  any-
thing is  due  to  him,  and  the  rest  of  the
creditors  of  the  slave  in  proportion  to
their  claims.  And  as  the  master  him-
self is  permitted  to  make  the  distri-
bution, if  any  creditor  complains  that
he  has  received  too  small  a  share,  the
praetor  will  permit  him  to  bring  the
actio  tributoria.

Gai.  iv.  72 ;  D.  xiv.  4.  1 ;  D.  xiv.  4,  5.  11 ;   D.  xiv.  4.  T.  1,  2.

The  actio  tributoria  was  only  given  against  the  master  when
there  was  fraud  (^dolus)  in  the  distribution ;  but  there  would  be
dolus  directly  the  master  had  notice  that  a  creditor  had  received
nothing,  or  less  than  his  share.     (D.  xiv.  4.  7.  2,  3.)

4.  Praeterea  introducta  est  actio
de   peculio  deque    eo  quod  in  rem
domini  versum  erit :  ut  quam  vis  sine
voluntate  domino  negotium  gestum
erit,   tamen  sive   quid  in  rem  ejus
vesrum   fuerit,    id  totum    praestare
debeat,  sive  quid  non  sit  in  rem  ejus
versum,  id  eatenus  praestare  debeat,
quatenus  peculium  patitur.     In  rem
autem    domini  versum  intelligitur,
quidquid  necessario  in  rem  ejus  im-
penderit  servus  :  veluti,  si  mutuatus
pecuniam  creditoribus  ejus  solvent,
aut    aedificia    ruentia   fulserit,    aut
familiae  frumentum  emerit,vel  etiam
fundum  aut   quamlibet    aliam  rem
necessariam  mercatus  erit.     Itaque,
si  ex  decem  ut  puta  aureis  quos  ser-
vus tuus  a  Titio  mutuos  accepit,  cre-
ditori  tuo   quinque  aureos  solverit,
reliquos  vero  quinque  quolibet  modo
consumpserit,   pro  quinque  quidem
in  solidum  damnari  debes  ;  pro  ce-
teris vero  quinque,  eatenus  quatenus
in  peculio  sit.     Ex  quo  scilicet  ap-
paret,    si  toti  decem   aurei  in  rem
tuam  versi  fuerint,  totos  decem  au-
reos  Titium    consequi  posse  ;   licet
enim  una  est  actio  qua   de  peculio
deque  eo  quod  in  rem  domini  ver-
sum sit  agitur,  tamen    duas    habet
condemnationes.   Itaque  judex  apud
quern  de  ea  actione  agitur,  ante  di-
spicere  solet  an  in  rem  domini  ver-
sum sit ;  nee  aliter  ad  peculii  aesti-
mationem  transit,  quam  si  aut  nihil
in  rem  domini  versum  esse  intelli-
gatur,  aut  non  totum.     Cum  autem

4.  The  praetor  has  also  introduced
an  action  relating  at  once  to  a  pecu-
lium^   and    to   things   by   w^hich   the
master  has  profited  ;  for  although  the
slave  contracts  without  the  consent  of
his   master,  yet  the  master   ought,  if
he  has  profited  by  anything,  to  pay  all
up  to  the  amount  of  his  profit ;  if  he
has  not  received  any  profit,  he  ought
to  pay  the  amount  of  the  slave's  pecu-
lium.    Everything    is    understood   as
profiting  the  master  w^hich  is  laid  out
in  his  necessary  expenses  by  the  slave  ;
as,  for  instance,  if  the  slave  borrows
money  wdth  which  he  pays  the  debts
of  his  master,  repairs  his  buildings  in
danger  of  falling,  purchases  wheat  for
the    establishment,    or    land    for    his
master,  or  any  other  necessary  thing.
Thus  if  your  slave  borrows  ten  aurei  of
Titius,  pays  five  to  one  of  your  cre-
ditors, and  spends  five,  you  would  be
condemned  to   pay  the  whole  of  the
first  five,  and  so  much  of  the  other  five
as  the   slave's  peculium  would  cover ;
whence  it  will  appear,  that  if  all  the
ten  aurei  had  been  spent  to  your  profit,
Titius  might  have  recovered  the  whole
from  you  ;  for  although  it  is  the  same
action  in  which  the  plaintiff  seeks  to
obtain  the  pecidiuTn,  and  the  amount
by  which  the  master  has  profited,  yet
this   action    contains  two   condemna-
tions.    The  judge  before   whom   the
action  is  brought,  first  inquires  whether
the  master  has   received    any  profit ;
and  then,  when  he  has  ascertained  that
no  part  or  not  the  whole  of  the  sum

454

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VII.

quseritur  quantum  in  peculio  sit,
ante  deducitur  quidquid  servus  do-
mino, eive  qui  in  potestate  ejus  sit
debet,  et  quod  superest  id  solum
peculium  intelligitur.  Aliquando
tamen  id  quod  ei  debet  servus  qui
in  potestate  domini  sit,  non  dedu-
citur ex  peculio,  veluti  si  is  in  hujus
ipsius  peculio  sit ;  quod  eo  pertinet,
ut  si  quid  vicario  suo  servus  debeat,
id  ex  peculio  ejus  non  deducatur.

due  from  the  slave  has  been  expended"
to  the  profit  of  the  master,  he  proceeds
to  estimate  the  value  of  the  peculium,
in  estimating  which,  a  deduction  is.
first  made  of  what  the  slave  owes  his
master,  or  any  one  under  the  power  of
his  master,  and  the  remainder  only  is
considered  as  the  peculium.  But  it
sometimes  happens,  that  what  a  slave
owes  to  a  person  in  the  power  of  his
master  is  not  deducted,  as  when  he
owes  something  to  a  slave  who  forms^
part  of  his  own  peculium.  For  if  a.
slave  is  indebted  to  his  vicarius,  the
sum  due  cannot  be  deducted  from  the
peculium.

Gai.  iv.  73,  74 ;  D.  xiv.  5.  1 ;  D.  xv.  3.  3.  1 ;  D.  xv.  1. 17.

This  action  is  generally  called  de  peculio  et  in  rem  verso,  be-
cause, in  most  cases,  the  judge  had  to  take  notice  of  both  the
profit  derived  by  the  master  and  of  the  amount  of  the  slave's
peculium.  But  in  some  cases,  as,  for  instance,  where  the  slave  had
no  peculium,  the  action  could  be  brought  de  in  rem  verso  only,  and
so  it  would  naturally  be,  if  it  could  be  shown  that  the  master
had  reaped  all  the  benefit  of  the  contract.  (See  end  of  next
paragraph.)

Si  quid  vicario.  The  vicarii  formed  part  of  the  peculium  of
the  ordinary  slave  ;  anything,  therefore,  deducted  from  the  pecu-
lium^ as  owed  to  the  vicarii,  would,  if  paid,  again  enter  into  the
peculium  as  the  property  of  the  ordinary  slave.  It  was,  therefore,^
useless  to  pay  it.

5.  Ceterum  dubium  non  est  quin
is  quoque  qui  jussu  domini  contrax-
erit,  cuique  institoria  vel  exerci-
toria  actio  competit,  de  peculio
deque  eo  quod  in  rem  domini  ver-
sum  est,  agere  possit ;  sed  erit  stul-
tissimus,  si  omissa  actione  qua
facillime  solidum  ex  contractu  con-
sequi  possit,  se  ad  difficultatem  per-
ducat  probandi  in  rem  domini  ver-
sum  esse,  vel  habere  servum  pecu-
lium, et  tantum  habere  ut  solidum
sibi  solvi  possit.  Is  quoque  cui  tri-
butoria  actio  competit,  seque  de  pe-
culio et  in  rem  verso  agere  potest ;
sed  sane  huic  modo  tributoria  ex-
pedit  agere,  modo  de  peculio  et  in
rem  verso.  Tributoria  ideo  expedit
agere,  quia  in  ea  domini  conditio
prsecipua  non  est,  id  est,  quod  do-
mino debetur  non  deducitur,  sed
ejusdem  juris  est  dominus  cujus  et
ceteri  creditores  ;  at  in  actione  de
peculio  ante  deducitur  quod  domino
debetur,  et  in  id  quod  reliquum  est

5.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  a
person  who  has  contracted  with  a
slave  acting  by  his  master's  command,
and  who  may  bring  either  the  action
institoria  or  exercitoria,  may  also  bring
the  action  de  peculio,  or  that  de  in  rem
verso.  But  it  would  be  the  height  of"
folly  in  any  one  to  give  up  an  action
by  which  he  might  easily  recover  his
whole  demand,  and  have  recourse  to-
another  by  which  he  would  be  reduced
to  the  difficulty  of  proving  that  the
money  he  lent  to  the  slave  was  em-
ployed to  the  profit  of  the  master,  or
that  the  slave  is  possessed  of  a  pecu-
lium, and  that  sufficient  to  answer  the
whole  debt.  Any  one,  again,  in  whose
power  it  is  to  bring  the  actio  tributoria,
may  equally  bring  the  action  de  peculio
or  that  de  in  rem  verso ;  and  it  is  ex-
pedient, in  some  cases,  to  employ  the
former,  and  in  some  cases  one  of  the
two  latter.  On  the  one  hand,  the  actio
tributoria  is  preferable,  because  in  this*.
no  privilege  is  accorded  to  the  master^

LIB.  IV.      TIT    VII.

455

creditori  dominiis  condemnatur.
Rursus  de  peculio  ideo  expedit  agere,.
quod  in  hac  actione  totius  peculii
ratio  habetur  ;  at  in  tributoria,  ejus
tantum  quo  negotiatur,  et  potest
quisque  tertia  forte  parte  peculii  aut
quarta  vel  etiam  minima  negotiari,
majorem  autem  partem  in  prsediis  et
mancipiis  aut  foenebri  pecunia
habere.  Prout  ergo  expedit,  ita
quisque  vel  banc  actionem  vel  illam
eligere  debet :  certe,  qui  potest  pro-
bare  in  rem  domini  versum  esse,  de
in  rem  verso  agere  debet.

i.e.  there  is  no  previoiTS  deduction
made  in  his  favour  of  what  is  due  to
him,  but  he  stands  in  the  same  posi-
tion as  the  rest  of  the  creditors ;
whereas  in  the  action  de  peculio,  there
is  first  deducted  the  debt  due  to  the
master,  who  is  only  condemned  to
distribute  the  remainder  among  the
creditors.  On  the  other  hand,  in  some
cases,  it  may  be  more  convenient  to
bring  the  action  de  peculio,  because  it
affects  the  whole  ^eci'iiiim,v/hereas  the
action  trihutoria  affects  only  so  much
of  it  as  has  been  employed  in  trade  ;
and  it  is  possible  that  a  slave  may
have  traded  only  with  a  third,  a  fourth,
or  some  very  small  part  of  it,  and  that
the  rest  may  consist  in  lands,  slaves,
or  money  lent  at  interest.  Every  one
ought,  therefore,  to  select  this  or  that
action  as  may  promise  to  be  most  ad-
vantageous to  him.  If,  however,  a
creditor  can  prove  that  anything  has
been  employed  to  the  profit  of  the
master,  he  ought  to  bring  the  action
de  in  rem  verso.

Gai.  iv.  74  ;  D.  xiv.  4.  11.

Any  one  who  could  bring  an  actio  quod  jussu,  exercitorial  or
institoria,  could  also,  at  option,  bring  an  actio  cle  peculio  et  de  in
rem  verso,  but  not  at  all  necessarily  vice  versa.

6.  Quae  diximus  de  servo  et
domino,  eadem  intelligimus  et  de
filio  et  filia  aut  nepote  et  nepte,  et
patre  avove  in  cujus  potestate  sunt.

6.  What  we  have  said  in  relation
to  a  slave  and  his  master,  is  equally
applicable  to  children  and  grandchil-
dren, and  to  their  ascendants,  in  whose
power  they  are.

D.  xiv.  4.  1.  4.

It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  (1)  the  master  was  never
bound,  if  the  slave  engaged  himself  by  mandate,  or  fidejussion,  for
a  third  person,  but  the  father  was  bound  to  the  extent  of  a
mrC?» peculium  by  the  son's  inter cessio  (D.  xv.  1.  3.  9),  and  (2)  the
son  was  bound  civilly,  the  slave  only  naturally.  If  the  son  was
sued  and  condemned  to  pay,  an  action  judicati  could  be  brought
against  the  father  to  the  extent  of  the  son's  peculium.

7.  lUudproprieservaturineorum
persona,  quod  senatus-consultum
Macedonianum  prohibuit  mutuas
pecunias  dari  eis  qui  in  parentis
erunt  potestate,  et  ei  qui  crediderit
denegatur  actio  tarn  adversus  ipsum
filium  filiamve,  nepotem  neptemve,
sive  adhuc  in  potestate  sunt,  sive
morte  parentis  vel  emancipatione
suae  potestatis  esse  coeperint,  quam
adversus  patrem  avumve,  sive  eos

7.  A  peculiar  provision  has,  how-
ever, been  made  in  their  favour  by  the
senatus-ccnsidtum  Macedonianum,  which
prohibits  money  to  be  lent  to  children
under  power  of  their  parents  ;  and  re-
fuses any  action  to  the  creditor,  either
against  the  descendants,  whether  still
under  power,  or  become  sui  juris  by
the  death  of  the  parent  or  by  emanci-
pation, or  against  the  parent,  whether
he  still  retains  them  under  his  power,

456

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VII.

habeat  adhuc  in  potestate,  sive  eman-  or  has  emancipated  them.     This  pro-

cipaverit.      Quse  ideo  senatus   pro-  vision    was  adopted    by    the   senate,

spexit,  quia  s£epe  onerati  sere  alieno  because    they    thought   that    persons

creditarum     pecuniarum     quas     in  under  power,  when  loaded  with  debts

luxuriam  consumebant,  "vitse  paren-  contracted  by  borrowing  sums  to  be

tum  insidiabantur.  wasted  in  debauchery,  often  attempted

the  lives  of  their  parents.

D.  xiv.  6.  1 ;  D.  xiv.  6.  3.  3  ;  D.  xiv.  6.  7.  10.

The  senatus-consultum  Macedonianum  was  made,  according  to
Tacitus,  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  {Ann.  xi.  31);  according  to
Suetonius,  in  that  of  Vespasian  {Vesp.  11).  Perhaps  it  was
only  renewed  in  the  latter  reign.  Theophilus  informs  us  that  it
was  made  to  meet  the  case  of  a  young  prodigal  named  Macedo,
who  attempted  the  life  of  his  father.  The  terms  of  the  senatus-
consultum  (D.  xiv.  6.  1)  would  rather  lead  us  to  suppose  Macedo
was  the  name  of  a  usurer.  The  text  says  denegatur  actio  ;  but  if
there  was  any  doubt  as  to  the  facts,  the  action  was  brought,  and
the  senatus-consultum  Macedonianum  made  the  ground  of  an
exception.     (D.  xiv.  6.  11.)

8.  lUud  in  sum  ma  admonendi
sumus,  id  quod  jussu  patris  domi-
nive  contractum  fuerit,  quodque  in
rem  ejus  versum  erit,  directo  quo-
que  posse  a  patre  domino ve  condici,
tamquam  si  principaliter  cum  ipso
negotium  gestum  esset.  Ei  quoque
qui  vel  exercitoria  vel  institoria
actione  tenetur  directo  posse  condici
placet,  quia  hujus  quoque  jussu  con-
tractum intelligitur.

8.  Lastly,  we  may  observe,  that
whenever  any  contract  has  been  made
by  command  of  a  parent  or  master,  or
anything  employed  to  their  profit,  a
condictio  may  be  brought  directly
against  the  father  or  master  exactly
as  if  the  contract  had  been  originally
made  with  them.  So  when  any  one  is
liable  to  the  action  institoria  or  exhihi-
toria,  a  condictio  may  also  be  brought
directly  against  him,  as  in  this  case
also  it  is  by  his  order  that  the  contract
has  been  made.

D.  xvii.  2.  84 ;  D.  xiv.  3.  17.  5 ;  D.  xii.  1.  29.

Posse  condici.  If  a  condiction  could  be  brought,  of  what  use
were  the  peculiar  praetorian  actions  of  which,  as  the  text  informs
us,  the  plaintiff  could  avail  himself?  Probably  the  institution  of
these  actions  was  long  antecedent  to  the  time  when  the  condiction
was  admitted  as  an  appropriate  form  of  action  in  cases  where  a
paterfamilias  was  to  be  made  responsible  for  the  acts  of  his  son  or
slave.  It  was  only  by  a  great  extension  of  the  scope  of  the  con-
diction that  it  was  given,  first,  when  one  man  profited  in  any  way
by  the  property  of  another  (D.  xii.  1.  23.  32);  and,  secondly,
against  a  person  by  whose  order  another  person  had  contracted,
or  whose  manager  {institor)  the  person  contracting  was.  (D.  xii.
1.  9.  2.)  After  it  had  received  this  extension,  the  co/zc^ec^zo  would
be  a  concurrent  remedy  with  the  prsetorian  actions.  But  there
would  still  be  cases,  namely,  bilateral  contracts,  giving  rise  to
praetorian  actions,  such  as  those  empti  or  venditi,  pro  socio,  locati
or  conducti,  or  contracts  giving  rise  to  actions  in  factum,  in  which
the  condiction  would  not  be  given  against  the  paterfamilias,  and
in  which  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  praetorian  actions  proper  to

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  VIII.  457

ihe  kind  of  contract.  These  praetorian  actions  would,  in  the  par-
ticular case  of  the  paterfamilias,  receive  a  slight  modification  of
form,  and  a  new  name,  and  be  termed  quod  jussu,  de  in  rem  verso,
de  peculio,  &c.,  though  remaining  substantially  empti,  locati,  pro
socio,  &c.,  according  to  the  character  of  the  transaction.

Tit.  VIII.     DE  NOXALIBUS  ACTIONIBUS.

Ex  maleficiis  servorum,  veluti  si  The  wrongful  acts  of  a  slave,  wlie-

furtum  fecerint,  aut  bona  rapuerint,  ther  he  commits  a  theft  or  robbery,  or

ant  damnum  dederint,  aut  injuriam  does  any  damage   or  injury,  give  rise

•commiserint,   noxales  actiones  pro-  to  noxal  actions,  in  which  the  master

ditse  sunt,  quibus  domino  damnato  of  the  slave,  if  condemned,  may  either

permittitur   aut  litis  gestimationem  pay  the  estimated   amount  of  damage

suflferre,  aut  hominem  noxae  dedere.  done,  or  deliver  uj)  his  slave  in  satis-
faction of  the  injury.

Gai.  iv.  75.

We  now  pass  to  actions  given  to  enforce  obligations  arising
from  the  delicts  of  persons  alieni  juris.  These  actions,  which
were  given  against  the  master  of  the  slave,  and,  in  ancient  times,
against  the  parent  of  the  Jiliusfamilias,  were  termed  noxales,  be-
cause the  master  or  parent  could  rid  himself  of  all  liability,  by
abandoning  the  slave  or  child  committing  the  delict  to  the  person
injured.  There  was,  however,  no  distinct  actio  noxalis.  The
action  brought  on  the  delict  was  one  furti,  vi  bonorum  raptorum,
&c.,  as  the  case  might  be,  the  difference  being  that  the  condem-
natio  was  alternative,  either  to  pay  so  much  or  to  abandon  the
slave,  instead  of  simply  to  pay  so  much.

If  at  any  time,  either  before  or  after  the  litis  contestatio,  the
master  abandoned  the  slave,  all  right  of  action  for  damages
against  him  became  immediately  extinct.  The  actio  noxalis  had
thus  a  kind  of  resemblance  to  the  actiones  arhitraricB,  in  which  the
judex  first  ordered  the  defendant  to  make  satisfaction,  and  then,  if
he  did  not  comply,  proceeded  to  condemn  him.

1.  Noxa  autem  est  corpus  quod  1.  Noxa  is  the  doer  of  the  wrrongful
nocuit,  id  est,  servus  ;  noxia,  ipsum  act,  i.e.  the  slave.  Noxia  is  the  act
maleficium,  veluti  furtum,  damnum,  itself,  that  is,  the  theft,  the  damage,
rapina,  injuria.  the  robbery  with  violence,  or  injury.

D.  ix.  1.  1.  1.

2.  Summa  autem  ratione  permis-  2.  It  is  with  great  reason  that  the
sum  est  noxse  deditione  defungi ;  master  is  permitted  to  deliver  up  the
namque  erat  iniquum  nequitiam  offending  slave  :  for  it  would  be  very
eorum  ultra  ipsorum  corpora  dominis  unjust,  when  a  slave  does  a  wrongful
damnosam  esse.  act,  to  make  the  master  liable  to  lose

anything  more  than  the  slave  himself.

Gai.  iv.  75.

3.  Dominus  noxali  judicio  servi  3.  A  master  sued  in  a  noxal  action
sui  nomine  conventus,  servum  actori  on  account  of  his  slave,  clears  himself
noxse  dedendo  liberatur  :  nee  minus    if  he  gives  up  his  slave  to  the  plaintiff,

458

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  VIII.

perpetuum  ejus  dominmm  a  domino
transfertur  ;  sin  autem  damnum  ei
cui  deditus  est  servus  resarcierit
qusesita  pecunia,  auxilio  prsetoris
invito  domino  manumittetur.

and  then  the  property  in  the  slave  is
thus  transferred  for  ever ;  but,  if  the
slave  can  procure  money,  and  satisfy
the  master  to  whom  he  has  been  given
up  for  all  damage  he  has  sustained,  he
may  be  manumitted  by  the  interven-
tion of  the  praetor,  though  against  the
wish  of  his  new  master.

D.  ix.  4.  20.

4.  Sunt  autem  constitutee  noxa-
les  actiones,  aut  legibus,  aut  edicto
prsetoris  :  legibus,  veluti  furti  lege
duodecim  tabularum,  damni  injurise
lege  Aquilia  ;  edicto  prsetoris,  veluti
injuriarum  et  vi  bonorum  raptorum.

Gai.

4.  Noxal  actions  are  established
either  by  the  laws,  or  by  the  edict  of
the  praetor.  By  the  laws,  as  for  theft,
by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  ;  for
wrongful  damage,  by  the  lex  Aquilia  ;
by  the  prsetor's  edict,  as  for  injuries
and  robbery  with  violence.

iv.  76.

These  are  but  examples  ;  any  delict  whatsoever  committed  by
a  slave  would  furnish  ground  for  an  actio  noxalis.

5.  Omnis  autem  noxalis  actio
caput  sequitur  :  nam  si  servus  tuus
noxiam  commiserit,  quamdiu  in  tua
potestate  sit,  tecum  est  actio  ;  si  in
alterius  potestatem  pervenerit,  cum
illo  incipit  actio  esse  ;  at  si  manu-
missus  fuerit,  directo  ipse  tenetur,
et  extinguitur  noxse  deditio.  Ex
diverse  quoque  directa  actio  noxalis
esse  incipit :  nam  si  liber  homo
noxiam  commiserit,  et  is  servus  tuus
esse  coeperit(quod  quibusdam  casibus
effici  prime  libro  tradidimus),  incipit
tecum  esse  noxalis  actio  quae  antea
directa  fuisset.

5.  Every  noxal  action  follows  the
delinquent.  The  delicts  committed
by  your  slave  are  a  ground  of  action
against  you,  while  the  slave  belongs  to
you  ;  if  the  slave  becomes  subject  to
another,  the  action  must  be  brought
against  the  new  master  ;  but  if  the
slave  is  manumitted,  the  action  is
brought  directly  against  him,  and  there
cannot  then  be  any  giving  up  of  the
slave  in  satisfaction.  Conversely,  an
action,  which  was  at  first  direct,  may
afterwards  become  noxal ;  for  if  a  free-
man commits  a  wrongful  act,  and  then,
becomes  your  slave,  which  may  happen
in  some  cases,  of  which  we  have  spoken
in  our  First  Book,  then  the  direct  ac-
tion against  the  slave  is  changed  inta
a  noxal  action  against  you.

Gai.  iv.  77.

If  the  slave  was  not  in  the  possession  of  his   owner  [dominus),
of  course  the  owner  would  not  be  liable  for  his  delicts.

6.  Si  servus  domino  noxiam  com-
miserit, actio  nulla  nascitur:  namque
inter  dominum  et  eum  qui  in  potes-
tate ejus  est,  nulla  obligatio  nasci
potest ;  ideoque  et  si  in  alienam
potestatem  servus  pervenerit  aut
manumissus  fuerit,  neque  cum  ipso,
neque  cum  eo  cujus  nunc  in  potes-
tate sit,  agi  potest.  Unde,  si  alienus
servus  noxiam  tibi  commiserit,  et  is
postea  in  potestate  tua  esse  coeperit,
intercidit  actio,  quia  in  eum  casum
deducta  sit,  in  quo  consistere  non

6.  If  a  slave  commits  a  wrongful
act  against  his  master,  no  action  can
be  brought ;  for  no  obligation  can  arise
between  a  master  and  his  slave  ;  and
if  the  slave  passes  under  the  power  of
another  master,  or  is  manumitted,  no
action  can  be  brought  either  against
him  or  his  new  master  ;  whence  it
follows,  that,  if  the  slave  of  another
should  commit  a  wrongful  act  against
you,  and  become  your  slave,  the  action
is  extinguished  ;  as  it  has  become  im-
possible, in  the  actual  position  of  the

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  IX.

459

potuit  ;  ideoque  licet  exierit  de  tua
potestate,  agere  nonpotes  :  quemad-
modum  si  dominus  in  servum  suiim
aliquid  commiserit,  nee  si  manumis-
sus  aut  alien  atus  fuerit  serviis,  nllam

actionem   contra
potest.

parties.  And  although  he  subsequently
passes  out  of  your  power,  yet  you
cannot  bring  an  action.  Neither,  if  a
master  injures  his  slave  in  any  way,
can  the  slave,  after  having  been  alien-
dominum  habere  ated  or  manumitted,  bring  any  action
against  his  master.

Gai.  iv.  78.

The  Proculians  had  thought  that  a  master  could,  after  a  slave
had  passed  out  of  his  power,  bring  an  action  against  the  slave,  for
anything  done  by  him  whilst  his  slave.     (Gai.  iv.  78.)

7.  Sed  veteres  quidem  h83c  et  in
filiisfamilias  masculis  et  feminis  ad-
misere.  Nova  autem  hominum  con-
versatio  hujusmodi  asperitatem  recte
respuendam  esse  existimavit,  et  ab
usu  communi  hoc  penitus  recessit.
Quis  enim  patiatur  filium  suum  et
maxime  filiam  in  noxam  alii  dare,  ut
pene  per  corpus  pater  magis  quam
filius  periclitetur,  cum  in  filiabus
etiam  pudicitise  favor  hoc  bene  ex-
cludit?  Et  ideo  placuit  in  servos
tantummodo  noxales  actiones  esse
proponendas,  cum  apud  veteres
legum  commentatores  invenimus
seepius  dictum,  ipsos  filiosfamilias
pro  suis  delictis  posse  conveniri.

7.  The  ancients,  indeed,  applied
the  same  rules  to  children  of  both
sexes  in  the  power  of  ascendants  ;  but
the  feeling  of  later  times  has  rightly
rejected  such  extreme  rigour,  and  it
has  therefore  passed  wholly  into  disuse.
For  who  could  bear  to  deliver  up  as  a
forfeiture  a  son,  and  still  more  a
daughter?  for,  in  the  person  of  his
son,  the  father  would  suffer  more  than
the  son  himself,  and  mere  regard  to
decency  forbids  such  treatment  of  a
daughter.  Noxal  actions  have,  there-
fore, been  allowed  to  apply  to  slaves
only ;  and  we  find  it  often  laid  down
in  the  older  jurists,  that  an  action  may
be  brought  directly  against  sons  in
power  for  their  wrongful  acts.

Gai.  iv.  75.  77-79;  D.  ix.  4.  33-35.

The  sons  of  a  family  could  be  sued  for  delicts,  and  then  the
plaintiff  could  by  sxn  action  judicati  recover  from  the  father  up  to-
the  amount  of  the  peculium.

Tit.  IX.     SI  QUADRUPES  PAUPERIEM  FECISSE

DICATUR.

Animalium  nomine  quae  ratione
carent,  si  qua  lascivia  aut  fervore  aut
feritate  pauperiem  facerint,  noxa-
lis  actio  lege  duodecim  tabularum
prodita  est.  Quae  animalia,  si  noxee
dedantur,  proficiunt  reo  ad  libera-
tionem,  quia  ita  lex  duodecim  tabu-
larum scripta  est,  ut  puta,  si  equus
calcitrosus  calce  percusserit,  aut  bos
cornu  petere  solitus  petierit.  Hsec
autem  actio  in  iis  quae  contra  naturam
moventur  locum  habet  :  ceterum,  si
genitalis  sit  feritas,  cessat.  Denique
si  ursus  fugit  a  domino  et  sic  nocuit,
non  potest  quondam  dominus  conve-
niri, quia  desiit  dominus  esse  ubi  f  era
evasit.     Pauperies  autem  est  dam-

A  noxal  action  is  given  by  the  law
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  when  irrational
animals,  through  wantonness,  rage,  or
ferocity,  have  done  any  damage  ;  but
if  the  animals  are  delivered  up  in
satisfaction  for  the  damage  done,  the
owner  is  secured  against  any  action  ;
such  is  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  ;
as,  for  example,  if  a  kicking  horse
should  kick,  or  an  ox,  apt  to  gore,
should  inflict  an  injury  with  his  horns.
But  this  action  can  only  be  brought  in
the  case  of  animals  acting  contrary  ta
their  nature,  for,  when  the  ferocity  of
a  beast  is  innate,  no  action  can  be
brought,  so  that,  if  a  bear  breaks  loose
from  his  master,  and  mischief  is  done,

460

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  IX.

niim  sine  injuria  facientis  datum  :  the  master  cannot  be  sued  ;  for  he
nee  enim  potest  animal  injuriam  ceased  to  be  the  master  as  soon  as  the
fecisse  dici,  quod  sensu  caret.  Hsec  wild  beast  escaped.  The  word  pau-
quod  ad  noxalem  pertinet  actionem,     peries  denotes  a  damage  done  without

any  wrong  intent ;  for  an  animal  void
of  reason  cannot  be  said  to  have  had  a
wrong  intent.  Thus  much  as  to  noxal
actions.

D.  ix.  1.  1,  pr.  3,  4.  T.  10.

Although  in  the  Twelve  Tables  the  word  quadrupes  was  used,
all  animals  were  held  to  be  included  under  it.

The  distinction  noticed  in  the  text  is  that  between  an  animal
with  an  inborn  fierceness  {genitalis  feritas)  and  one  with  a  con-
firmed vicious  habit  {calcitrosics,  petere  solitus).  The  owner  of
the  latter  only  was  liable  to  the  actio  noxalis  given  by  the  Twelve
Tables.

If  an  animal  fierce  by  nature  did  any  damage  while  in  the
keeping  of  any  one,  his  keeper  would  be  liable  to  an  actio  utilis,
though  not  to  the  direct  actio  noxalis  given  by  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables.     (See  next  paragraph.)

1.  Ceterum  sciendum  est  sedili-
tio  edicto  prohiberi  nos  canem,  ver-
rem,  aprum,  ursum,  leonem  ibi
habere  qua  vulgo  iter  fit  ;  et  si  ad-
versus  ea  factum  erit,  et  nocitum
libero  homini  esse  dicetur,  quod
bonum  et  asquum  judici  videtur,
tanti  dominus  condemnetur ;  cete-
rarum  rerum,  quanti  damnum  da-
tum sit  dupli.  Prseter  has  autem
sedilitias  actiones,  et  de  pauperie
locum  habebit ;  numquam  enim  ac-
tiones, prsesertim  poenales,  de  ea-
dem  re  concurrentes  aUa  aliam  con-
sumit.

1.  It  must  be  observed,  that  the
edict  of  the  sedile  forbids  any  man
to  keep  a  dog,  a  boar,  a  bear,  or  a  lion,
where  there  is  a  public  road  ;  and,  if
this  prohibition  is  disobeyed,  and  any
freeman  receives  hurt,  the  master  of
the  beast  may  be  condemned  at  the
discretion  of  the  judge  ;  and,  in  case
of  damage  to  anything  else,  the  con-
demnation must  be  in  double  the
amount  of  damage  done.  Besides  the
aedilitian  action,  the  action  de  pauperie
may  also  be  brought  against  the  same
jperson ;  for  when  different  actions,
especially  penal  actions,  may  be  each
brought  on  account  of  the  same  thing,
the  employment  of  one  does  not  pre-
vent the  employment  of  another.

D.  ix.  4.  2.  1  ;  D.  xxi.  1.  40.  1 ;  D.  xxi.  1.  41,  42  ;  D.  xUv.  7.  60.

The  same  delict  might  be  resolvable  into  two  distinct  offences.
A  slave  is  corrupted,  and  then  made  to  commit  a  theft.  A  sepa-
rate action  lay  for  each  oifence.  Or  the  same  delict,  though  con-
sisting of  one  offence,  might  come  under  two  heads  of  delict.  A
slave  is  injured  by  being  beaten,  and  an  action  would  lie  injuria-
rum,  or  under  the  lex  Aquilia.  The  master  might  bring  both
actions  in  succession,  but  he  would  only  recover  in  the  second
any  special  advantages  which  that  action  might  give  him  beyond
what  the  first  had  given.     (D.  xliv.  7.  34,  pr.)

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  X.  461

Tit.  X.    DE  IIS  PER  QUOS  AGEEE  POSSUMUS.

Nunc   aclmonendi    snmus    agere  We  must  now  remark,  that  a  per-

posse  quemlibet  hominem  aut  suo  son  may  conduct  an  action  either  in
nomine,  aut  alieno  :  alieno  veluti  his  own  name,  or  in  that  of  another,
procuratorio,  tutorio,  curatorio ;  cum  as,  for  instance,  if  he  is  a  procurator,
olim  in  usu  fuisset  alterius  nomine  a  tutor,  or  a  curator ;  but  anciently,
agere  non  posse,  nisi  pro  populo,  pro  custom  forbad  one  person  conducting
libertate,  pro  tutela.  Prceterea  lege  an  action  in  the  name  of  another,  un-
Hostilia  permissum  est  furti  agere  less  for  the  people,  for  freedom,  or  for
eorum  nomine  qui  apud  hostes  es-  a  pupil.  The  lex  Sostilia  afterwards
sent,  aut  reipublicse  causa  abessent,  permitted  an  actio  furti  to  be  brought
quive  in  eorum  cujus  tutela  essent.  in  the  names  of  those  who  were  pri-
Et  quia  hoc  non  minimam  incommo-  soners  in  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  of
ditatem  habebat,  quod  alieno  nomine  persons  absent  in  the  service  of  the
neque  agere  neque  excipere  actionem  state,  or  of  those  under  the  tutorship
licebat,  coeperunt  homines  per  pro-  of  such  persons.  But,  as  it  was  found
curatores  litigare  ;  nam  et  morbus  to  be  exceedingly  inconvenient,  that
et  8etas  et  necessaria  peregrinatio,  one  man  should  be  prohibited  from
itemque  alise  multae  causae  saepe  im-  bringing  or  defending  an  action  in  the
pedimento  sunt  quominus  rem  suam  name  of  another,  it  by  degrees  became
exequi  possint.  a  practice  to  sue  by  procurators.     For

ill-health,  old  age,  unavoidable  jour-
neys, and  many  other  causes,  con-
tinually prevent  men  from  being  able
to  attend  personally  to  their  own
affairs.

Gai.  iv.  82 ;  D.  J.  17.  123 ;  D.  iii.  3.  1.  2.

The  old  principle  of  Roman  law  was,  that  no  one  could  re-
present another,  and  with  the  exceptions  noticed  in  the  text  this
principle  was  rigorously  observed  during  the  period  of  the  actions
of  law.

By  agere  pro  p(ypulo  was  meant  bringing  an  actio  popularis
(earn  popularem  actionem  dicimus  qucB  suumjus  populo  tuetiir,  D.
xlvii.  23.  1)  ;  by  agere  pro  libertate,  was  meant  becoming  assertor
lihertatis  for  a  slave ;  and  by  agere  pro  tutela,  bringing  an  action
on  behalf  of  a  pupil.

Under  the  system  oiformulce,  the  first  step  towards  breaking
through  the  old  rule  was  the  permitting  a  cognitor  to  be  appointed.
A  cognitor  was  a  person  who  was  appointed  by  one  of  the  parties
to  a  suit  to  conduct  it  for  him.  The  cognitor  himself  was  not
necessarily  present  when  he  was  appointed,  but  it  was  necessary
that  the  appointment  should  be  made  before  the  magistrate,  in
presence  of  the  adversary,  and  by  a  certain  form  of  words.  For
instance,  a  plaintiff  speaking  generally  of  his  action  would  say,
'  Quod  ego  tecum  agere  volo,  in  cam  rem  Lucium  Titium  cognito-
rem,  do.''  Other  forms,  adapted  to  other  cases,  are  given  in  Gains
(iv.  83).  In  the  case  of  a  cognitor,  the  actio  judicati  was  for  or
against  the  party  to  the  suit.

The  next  step  was  to  permit  a  procurator  appointed  by  a  man-
date to  conduct  a  suit,  but  at  first  he  did  so  in  his  own  name,  for

462  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XI.

it  was  not  till  a  later  period  of  Roman  law  that  a  procurator  could
expressly  represent  his  principal.  He  had  accordingly,  if  plain-
tiff, to  give  security  ratam  rem  dominum  liabiturum^  and,  if  de-
fendant, to  give  security  jMc?2c«^Mm  solvit  as  explained  in  the  next
Title.  If  a  person  offered  to  conduct  a  suit  for  another  as  'pvo-
curator  voluntarius,  and  could  not  produce  an  authorisation,  he
was  allowed  to  act,  not  as  mandatory,  but  as  negotiorum  cjestor,  if
he  acted  in  good  faith,  and  gave  security  for  ratification.  (Gai.  iv.
84.)  The  actio  judicati  lay  for  or  against  the  procurator,  and  not
the  party.  Subsequently,  when  the  mandate  was  clear,  or  if  the
mandator  was  present  and  gave  it,  the  procurator  was  consi-
dered as  only  representing  the  party,  and  the  actio  judicati  was
given  to  or  against  the  party,  not  the  procurator  (  Vat.  Frag.
331),  and  this  was  extended  to  the  case  of  the  negotiorum  gestor,
who,  although  at  first  acting  without  a  mandate,  afterwards  showed
that  the  party  approved  what  he  did.  Thus  the  procurator  had
taken  the  [place  of  the  cognitor,  and  it  is  only  of  the  former  that
Justinian  speaks.

1.  Procurator  neque  certis  verbis,  1.  A  procurator  is  appointed  with-
neque  prresente  adversario,  immo  out  any  particular  form  of  words,  nor
plerumque  ignorante  eo  constitui-  is  the  presence  of  the  adverse  party
tur  ;  cuicumque  enim  permiseris  required  ;  indeed,  it  is  generally  done
rem  tuam  agere  aut  defendere,  is  without  his  knowledge.  For  any  one
procurator  intelligitur.  is  considered   to  be   your  procurator

who  is  employed  to  bring  or  to  defend
an  action  for  you.

Gai.  iv.  84 ;  D.  iii.  3.  1.  1.  3.

2.  Tutores  et  curatores  quemad-  2.  How  tutors  and  curators  are
modum  constituuntur,  primo  libro  appointed  has  been  already  explained
«xpositum  est.                                           in  the  First  Book.

Gat.  iv.  85.

If  the  tutor,  in  appearing  for  the  pupil,  had  merely  discharged
a  duty  forced  upon  him,  the  actio  judicati  (i.e.  the  action  brought
to  enforce  the  sentence)  was  given  to  or  against  the  pupil.  If  the
tutor  chose  to  appear  for  the  pupil  when  he  need  have  done
nothing  more  than  authorise  the  pupil  to  appear  himself  (^si  se  liti
obtulit),  the  actio  judicati  was  given  to  or  against  the  tutor.  The
case  was  the  same  as  regards  the  curators  of  persons  under  the
age  of  twenty-five.     (D.  xxvi.  7.  2,  pr. ;  D.  xxvi.  9.  5,  pr.)

Tit.  XL     DE   SATISDATIONIBUS.

Satisdationum  modus  alius  anti-  One    system    of    taking    securities

quitati   placuit,    alium   no  vitas   per  prevailed  in  ancient  times  ;  custom  has

usum  amplexa  est.     Olim  enim,   si  introduced  another  in  modern  times,

in  rem  agebatur,  satisdare  possessor  Formerly,  in  a  real  action,  the  possessor

compellebatur,    ut   si  victus    esset,  was  compelled  to  give  security,  so  that

nee  rem  ipsam  restitueret  nee  litis  if  he  lost  his  cause,  and  did  not  either

sostimationem    ejus,   potestas  esset  restore  the  tiling  itself,  or  pay  the  es-

LIE.  IV.      TIT.  XI.  463

petitori  aiit  cum  eo  agendi,  aut  cum  timated  value  of  it,  the  plaintiff  might

fidejussoribus  ejus  :  qu^e  satisdatio  either  sue  him  or  his  fidejussors  ;  this

appellatur  judicatum   solvi.     Unde  species  of  security  is  termed  judicahim

autem  sic  appellatur,   facile  est  in-  solvi,  nor  is  it  difficult  to  understand

telligere  ;    namque    stipulatur    quis  why  it  is  so  called.     For  the  plaintiff

ut  solvatur  sibi  quod  fiierit  judica-  used  to  stipulate   that  what  was   ad-

tum.     Multo  magis  is  qui  in  rem  judged   to  him   should   be  paid,  and

actione  conveniebatur,  satisdare  co-  with  still  greater  reason  was  a  person

gebatur,  si  alieno  nomine  judicium  sued  in  a  real  action  obliged  to  give

accipiebat.     Ipse  autem  qui  in  rem  security  if   he  was  defendant   in   the

agebat,  si  suo  nomine  petebat,  sa-  name   of   another.     A   plaintiff   in   a

tisdare    non   cogebatur,   procurator  real  action  suing  in  his  own  name,  was

vero,    si  in    rem   agebat,    satisdare  not  obliged   to  give   security ;   but  a

jubebatur     ratam     rem     dominum  procurator  had  to  give   security  that

habiturum  :    periculum    enim    erat  his  acts  would  be  ratified  by  the  person

ne    iterum   dominus    de   eadem    re  for  whom  he  acted  ;  for  there  was  a

experiretur.     Tutores  et  curatores,  danger  lest  the  person  should  bring  a

eodem  modo   quo   et  procuratores,  fresh  action  for  the  same  thing.     By

satisdare  debere  verba  edicti  facie-  the   words   of   the   edict,    tutors   and

bant  ;  sed  aliquando   his  agentibus  curators  were  bound  to  give  security,

satisdatio    remittebatur.      Hsec    ita  as  well  as  procurators,  but  it  was  some-

erant,  si  in  rem  agebatur.  times  dispensed  with  when  they  were

the  plaintiffs.     Such  was  the  practice
with  regard  to  real  actions.

Gai.  iv.  89.  91.  96.  98-100  ;  D.  xlvi.  7.  6.

Judicatum  solvi  stipulatio  tres  clausulas  in  unum  collatas  h.ahet ;
de  re  judicata,  de  re  defendenda,  de  dolo  malo,  (D.  xlvi.  7.  6.)
There  v^ere  three  objects  secured  hj  the  cautio  judicatitm  solvi.
It  wasl  promised  (1)  that  the  litis  cBstimatio,  the  amount  of  what
was  adjudged  by  the  sentence,  should  be  paid  if  the  defendant
should  be  condemned  and  should  not  give  back  the  thing ;  (2)
that  the  defendant  should  appear  to  receive  the  sentence  of  the
judge;  (3)  that  the  defendant  should  use  no  dolus  mains,  should
not,  for  instance,  give  back  the  thing,  but  give  it  in  a  state  dete-
riorated by  his  fault.  The  object  of  the  defendant,  as  well  as
the  sureties,  binding  himself  for  the  litis  cRstimatio  {^aut  cum  eo
agendi,  says  the  text,  aut  C7im  Jidejussorihus),  was  to  give  the
plaintiff  his  choice  between  an  action  ex  stijmlatu,  which  was  often
preferred,  or  one  ex  judicato,  i.e.  upon,  or  to  enforce,  the  sen-
tence. The  object  of  making  the  defendant  directly  liable,  by
a  stipulation,  if  he  did  not  appear  to  defend  the  action,  was  to
avoid  having  recourse  to  the  less  direct  mode  in  which  the  disobe-
dience of  the  defendant  to  obey  the  magistrate's  summons  was
made  to  benefit  the  plaintiff.

Satisdare  possessor  compellehatur.  If  the  possessor  would  not
give  the  cautio  judicatum  solvi,  the  possession,  by  means  of  an
interdict  (see  Tit.  15.  3),  was  transferred  to  the  plaintiff,  if  he
was  willing  to  give  the  security  which  his  adversary  refused  to
give.

Litis  (Bstimatio.     Lis  here  signifies  the  subject  of  the  suit.

Multo  magis  si  alieno  nomine.  This  applied  to  the  procurator
in  the  days  when  he  did  not  really  represent  the  principal.  The
cognitor  never  gave  security.     The  person  really  interested  in

464

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XI.

the  action  was  called  dominus  litis ;  when  the  procurator  did  not
represent  him,  but  came  forward  as  if  he  was  the  dominus  litis,  it
was  necessary  to  guard  against  the  real  dominus  litis  bringing
another  action.

Tutors  had  probably  to  give  security  in  all  cases  where  they
were  the  party  defendant.

1.  In  personal  actions,  on  the  part
of  the  plaintiff,  the  same  rules  as  to
giving  security  were  observed  as  in
real  actions.  As  to  the  defendant,  if
he  appeared  in  the  name  of  another,
he  was  obHged  to  give  security,  for
no  one  was  considered  a  competent
defendant  in  behalf  of  another  unless
he  gave  security  ;  but  any  one  who
defended  a  personal  action  in  his  own
name  was  not  compelled  to  give  the
security  judicatum  solid.

Gai.  iv.  100-102.

If  the  defendant  was  a  cognitor,  the  dominus  litis  gave  secu-
rity for  him.     (  Vat.  Fragm.  317.)

Gains  notices  (iv.  102)  that  in  some  few  exceptional  instances,
as  if  the  action  was  onejudicati,  or  if  there  was  anything  to  make
the  credit  of  the  defendant  suspected,  the  defendant  was  obliged
in  personal  actions  to  give  securit j,  judicatum  solvi.

1.  Si  vero  in  personam,  ab  actoris
quidem  parte  eadem  obtinebant,  quae
diximus  in  actione  qua  in  rem  agitur.
Ab  ejus  vero  parte  cum  quo  agitur,
si  quidem  alieno  nomine  aliquis  inter-
veniret,  omnimodo  satisdaret,  quia
nemo  defensor  in  aliena  re  sine  satis-
datione  idoneus  esse  creditur.  Quod
si  proprio  nomine  aliquis  judicium
accipiebat  in  personam,  judicatum
solvi  satisdare  non  cogebatur.

2.  Sed  hsec  hodie  aliter  obser-
vantur  :  sive  enim  quis  in  rem  ac-
tione convenitur  sive  in  personam
sno  nomine,  nullam  satisdationem
pro  litis  sestimatione  dare  compel-
litur,  sed  pro  sua  tantum  persona,
quod  in  judicio  permaneat  usque  ad
terminum  litis  ;  vel  committitur  suae
promissioni  cum  jurejurando,  quam
juratoriam  cautionem  vocant ;  vel
nudam  promissionem  vel  satisda-
tionem pro  qualitate  personse  suae
dare  compellitur.

2.  At  present  a  different  practice
prevails.  A  defendant  who  is  sued
in  his  own  name,  either  in  a  real  or
personal  action,  is  not  forced  to  give
security  for  the  payment  of  the  esti-
mated value  of  the  thing  sued  for,
but  only  for  his  own  person,  that  is,
that  he  will  remain  and  abide  the
judgment  until  the  end  of  the  suit.
For  this  security  recourse  may  be  had
to  the  promise  on  oath  of  the  party,
when  the  security  is  called  a  cautio
juratoria,  or  to  his  simple  promise
without  oath,  or  to  a  satisdatio,  ac-
cording to  the  quality  of  the  person.

C.  xii.  1.  17.

In  judicio  permaneat.  An  earlier  Avriter  would  probably  have
pointed  out  that  the  cautio  was  given,  when  the  parties  were
before  the  prgetor,  that  the  defendant  would  go  before  the  judex.
But  in  Justinian's  time  the  distinction  of  in  jure  and  in  judicio
was  done  away.

We  gather  from  the  text,  that  whereas  under  the  old  law  the
defendant  would  have  had  to  give  security  both  for  the  payment
of  the  amount  at  which  the  subject-matter  of  the  action  was
valued,  and  that  he  would  appear  to  defend  himself  {pro  re  de-
fendenda,  or,  as  here,  in  judicio  permaneat^  under  Justinian's

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XI.

465

legislation  lie  did  not  enoraore

at  all  for  the  former,  and  for  the
latter  he  did  not  necessarily  give  the  security  of  a  fidejussor,  but,
if  a  vir  illustris,  only  pledged  himself  by  oath,  or  even  by  a  simple
promise.     (C.  xii.  1.  17.)

3.  Sin  autem  per  procuratorem
lis  vel  infertur  vel  suscipitur,  in  ac-
toris  quidem  persona,  si  non  man-
datum  actis  insinuatum  est,  vel
prEesens  dominns  litis  in  judicio
procnratoris  sui  personam  confir-
maverit,  ratam  rem  dominum  habi-
turum  satisdationem  procurator  dare
compellitur :  eodem  observando,  et
si  tutor  vel  curator  vel  alise  tales
personae  quse  alienarum  rerum  gu-
bernationem  receperunt,  litem  qui-
busdam  per  alium  inferunt.

4.  Si  vero  aliquis  convenitur,  si
quidem  prsssens  procuratorem  dare
paratus  est,  potest  vel  ipse  in  judi-
cium venire,  et  sui  procnratoris  per-
sonam per  judicatum  solvi  satisda-
tionis  solemnes  stipulationes  jSrmare,
vel  extra  judicium  satisdationem  ex-
ponere,  per  quam  ipse  sui  procnra-
toris fidejussor  existat  pro  omnibus
judicatum  solvi  satisdationis  clau-
sulis  :  ubi  et  de  hypotheca  suarum
rerum  convenire  compellitur,  sive
in  judicio  promiserit,  sive  extra
judicium  caverit,  ut  tam  ipse  quam
heredes  ejus  obHgentur ;  alia  in-
super  cautela  vel  satisdatione  prop-
ter personam  ipsius  exponenda,  quod
tempore  sententiae  recitandse  in  ju-
dicio invenietur,  vel  si  non  venerit
omnia  dabit  fidejussor  quse  condem-
natione  continentur,  nisi  fuerit  pro-
vocatum.

3.  But,  where  a  suit  is  commenced
or  defended  by  a  procurator,  if  the
procurator  of  the  plaintiff  does  not
either  register  a  mandate  of  appoint-
ment, or  if  the  person  who  really
brings  the  action  does  not  himself
appear  before  the  judge  to  confirm  the
appointment  of  the  procurator,  then
the  procurator  himself  is  obliged  to
give  security,  that  the  person  for
whom  he  acts  will  ratify  his  jproceed-
ings.  The  same  rule  applies  also  if  a
tutor,  curator,  or  any  other  person,
who  has  undertaken  to  manage  the
afiairs  of  another,  brings  an  action
through  a  third  party.

4.  As  to  the  defendant,  if  he  ap-
pears and  wishes  to  appoint  a  pro-
curator, he  may  either  himself  come
before  the  judge,  and  there  confirm
the  appearance  of  the  procurator,  by
giving  with  a  solemn  stipulation  the
caution  called  judicatum  solvi,  or  he
may  give  such  a  security  elsewhere,
and  become  himself  the  fidejussor  of
his  own  procurator,  as  to  each  clause
of  the  caution  judicatiom  solvi ;  and
he  is  compelled  to  subject  all  his  pro-
perty to  a  hypotheca,  whether  he  pro-
mises before  the  judge  or  not,  and
this  obligation  binds  not  only  himself
but  his  heirs.  He  must  also  give  a
further  caution  that  he  will  himself
appear  at  the  time  when  judgment  is
given,  or  if  he  fails  to  do  so,  his  Jide-
jussor  will  be  obliged  to  pay  all  that  is
fixed  to  be  paid  by  the  sentence,  un-
less the  decision  is  appealed  against.

For  the  clausulce  of  the  cautio  judicatum  solvi,  see  note  on  the
introductory  paragraph  of  this  Title.

Alia  insuper  cautela.  This  was  to  insure  that  the  actio  judi-
cati  should  be  given  against  the  real  dominus  litis.

5.  Si  vero  reus  prsesto  ex  qua-
cumque  causa  non  fuerit,  et  alius
velit  defensionem  ejus  subire,  nulla
differentia  inter  actiones  in  rem  vel
in  personam  introducenda,  potest
hoc  facere,  ita  tamen  ut  satisda-
tionem judicatum  solvi  pro  litis
SBstimatione  prsestet ;  nemo  enim
secundum  veterem  regulam  (ut  jam

H

5.  But  if,  from  any  cause,  a  defend-
ant does  not  appear,  and  another  per-
son is  willing  to  defend  the  action  for
him,  he  may  do  so  (nor  does  it  make
any  difference  whether  the  action  is
real  or  personal),  but  he  must  give
iiQcwviij  judicatum  solvi  to  the  amount
of  what  is  at  stake  ;  for,  according  to
the  old  rule  of  law  we  have  just  men-
II

466

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XII.

dictum,  est)  alienee  rei  sine  satisda-
tione  defensor  idoneus  intelligitur.

6.  Quse  omnia  apertiiis  et  per-
fectissime  a  quotidiano  judiciorum
Tisu  in  ipsis  rerum  documentis  ap-
parent.

7.  Quam  formam  non  solum  in
hac  regia  urbe,  sed  etiam  in  omni-
bus nostris  provinciis,  et  si  propter
imperitiam  forte  aliter  celebraban-
tur,  obtinere  censemus  ;  cum  ne-
cesse  est  omnes  provincias  caput
omnium  nostrarum  civitatum,  id
est,  hanc  regiam  urbem  ejusque
observantiam  sequi.

tioned,  no  one  can  be  defendant  for
another  without  giving  security.

6.  All  this  will  be  learnt  more
easily  and  fully  by  attending  the  sit-
tings of  judges,  and  by  the  teaching
of  actual  practice.

7.  We  order  that  these  rules  shall
be  observed  not  only  in  this  our  royal
city,  but  also  in  all  our  provinces,
although  other  usages  may  be  now
adopted  there  through  ignorance  ;  for
it  is  necessary  that  all  the  provinces
should  conform  to  the  practice  of  our
royal  city,  the  capital  of  our  whole
empire.

Tit.  XII.  DE  PEKPETUIS  ET  TEMPORALIBUS
ACTIONIBUS,  ET  QU^  AD  HEREDES  ET  IN
HEREDES  TRANSEUNT.

We  ought  here  to  observe  that  the
actions  derived  from  the  law,  from  a
senatus-consultum,  or  from  imperial
constitutions,  could  formerly  be  exer-
cised at  any  length  of  time,  however
great ;  until  imperial  constitutions
assigned  fixed  limits  both  to  real  and
to  personal  actions.  Of  the  actions
derived  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the
prsetor,  the  greater  part  only  last
during  one  year,  for  this  was  the  limit
of  the  praetor's  authority.  Sometimes,
however,  these  actions  are  perpetual,
that  is,  last  until  the  time  fixed  by  the
constitutions  ;  such  are  those  given  to
the  honorum,  possessor  and  to  others
standing  in  the  place  of  the  heir.  The
action  furti  manifesti,  also,  though  pro-
ceeding from  the  jurisdiction  of  the
praetor,  is  yet  perpetual,  for  it  seemed
absurd  to  limit  its  duration  to  a  year.

Hoc  loco  admonendi  sumus,  eas
quidem  actiones  quse  ex  lege  sena-
tusve  consulto  sive  ex  sacris  con-
stitutionibus  proficiscuntur,  perpe-
tuo  solere  antiquitus  competere,
donee  sacrse  constitutiones  tarn  in
rem  quam  in  personam  actionibus
certos  fines  dederunt ;  eas  vero  quae
ex  propria  prsetoris  jurisdictione
pendent,  plerumque  intra  annum
vivere  :  nam  et  ipsius  prsetoris  in-
tra annum  erat  imperium.  Ali-
quando  tamen  et  in  perpetuum  ex-
tenduntur,  id  est,  usque  ad  finem
ex  constitutionibus  introductum  :
quales  sunt  ese  quas  bonorum  pos-
sessori,  ceterisque  qui  heredis  loco
sunt,  accommodat.  Furti  quoque
manifesti  actio,  quamvis  ex  ipsius
prsetoris  jurisdictione  proficiscatur,
tamen  perpetuo  datur  ;  absurdum
enim  esse  existimavit  anno  earn
terminari.

Gai.  iv.  110,  111.

In  the  introductory  note  to  Title  6,  si.  reference  has  been  made
to  the  distinction  hetween  judicia  legitima  smd  judicia  imperio  con-
tinentia,  a  distinction  which  determined  the  time  within  which,
after  the  formula  was  framed,  sentence  must  be  given  to  be  effec-
tual. The  point  referred  to  in  the  text  is  a  different  one.  This
point  is,  how  long  the  right  of  action  lasted  from  its  inception,  i.e.
from  the  time  when  the  plaintiff  could  have  brought  an  action.

The  general  rule  was  that  actions  arising  from  the  law,  a
senatus-consultum y  or  constitutions,  including  an  action

arising

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XII.  467

out  of  the  old  civil  law,  were  perpetual;  that  is,  there  was  no  limit
to  the  time  in  which  they  could  be  brought  until  such  a  limit
was  fixed  by  constitutions  of  the  later  emperors.  On  the  other
hand,  praetorian  actions  were  annual,  i.e.  must  be  brought  within
an  annus  utiiis,  or  year  made  up  of  days  in  which  there  was  no  ob-
stacle to  the  plaintiff  appearing  in  court,  so  that  more  than  twelve
months  might  be  included.  This  time  of  a  year  was  probably
suggested  by  the  duration  of  the  praetor's  office,  but  it  had  nothing
to  do  with  any  one  praetor  being  in  office.  It  was  merely  a
limited  time  during  which  the  praetor,  in  creating  an  action,  fixed
that  it  must  be  brought.

To  the  rule  that  praetorian  actions  were  annual,  there  were,
Jiowever,  exceptions  of  a  very  wide  kind.  The  text  mentions  the
actions  given  to  a  bonorum  possessor,  and  to  every  one  placed  in
loco  herediSf  and  also  the  praetorian  action  for  fitrtum  munifes'
tium,  which  was  perpetual  because  it  was  a  commutation  of
capital  punishment.  (Gai.  iv.  111.)  Further,  all  praetorian
actions  rei  persecutorice,  for  the  sake  of  the  thing,  including  all
actions  on  contracts,  were  perpetual,  unless  the  action  was  one  not
extending,  but  directly  contradicting,  the  civil  law,  when  it  was
annual.  An  example  will  show  what  was  meant  by  this  distinc-
tion. The  actio  Pahliciana  (Tit.  6.  4),  given  to  extend  the
operation  of  usucapion,  lyas  perpetual,  but  the  actio  quasi-Puhli-
•ciana,  given  to  rescind  usucapion  (Tit.  6.  5),  was  annual.  (D.
;:xliv.  7.  35,  pr.)  We  may,  therefore,  almost  reverse  the  descrip-
tion of  praetorian  actions,  and  say  that  they  were  perpetual
except  when  they  were  (1)  penal  (the  actio  furti  manifesti  being,
however,  perpetual),  or  (2)  rei persecutorics,  but  in  direct  opposi-
tion  to  the  civil  law.

In  A.D.  424,  Theodosius  II.  enacted  that,  as  a  general  rule,
■-■actions,  real  or  personal,  should  not  be  brought  after  a  lapse  of
thirty  years.  (C.  vii.  39.  3.)  Subsequently  the  time  was,  in  the
case  of  some  actions,  as  in  that  of  an  actio  hypothecaria,  when  the
thing  hypothecated  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  debtor,  ex-
tended to  forty  years.  (C.  vii.  39.  71.)  The  term  perpetua,
^however,  still  continued  to  be  applied  to  these  actions,  though,
properly  speaking,  in  the  time  of  Justinian  it  meant  nothing  more
than  an  action  which  could  be  brought  within  thirty  or  forty
years,  as  opposed  to  those  which  could  only  be  brought  within  a
shorter  period.

1.    Non  omnes   autem    actiones  1.  It  is  not  all  the  actions  allowed

quse  in  aliquem  aut  ipso  jure  com-  against  any  one  by  the  law,  or  given

petunt  aut  a  prtetore  dantiir,  et  in  by  the  pmetor,   that  will   equally  be

heredem  jeque  competunt  aut  dari  allowed  or  given  against  his  heir.    For

Solent :    est    eniin   certissima    juris  it  is  a  fixed  rule  of  law,  that  actions

regula,   ex    nialeficiis    poinales    ac-  arising  from  delicts  are   not   allowed

tiones  in  heredem  rei  non  compe-  against  the  heir  of  the  delinquent,  as,

tere,  veluti  furti,  vi  bonorum  rap-  for  instance,  the  actions  furti,  vi  bono-

torum,  injuriarum,  dainni  injurise  ;  rum  raptorum,  injuriarum,  damni  in-

sed  heredibus   hujusmodi   actiones  jurix.     These    actions   are,   however,

H  u   2

468  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XII.

competunt,  nee  denegantur,  excepta  given  to  heirs,  with  the  exception  of

injuriarum   actione,  et  si  qua   alia  the  action  injuriarum,  and  others  that

similis   inveniatur.      Aliquando   ta-  may  resemble  it.    Sometimes  an  action^

men  etiam  ex  contractu  actio  contra  arising  from  a  contract,  is  not  allowed-

heredem  non  competit,  cum  testator  against  an  heir  ;  for  instance,  the  ac-

dolose  versatus  sit,  et  ad  heredem  tion  given  against  any  one  for  wilful'

ejus  nihil   ex   eo    dolo    pervenerit.  wrong  committed  by  him,  is  not  al-

Pcenales  autem  actiones  quas  supra  lowed  against  the  heir  under  his  testa-

diximus,    si   ab   ipsis    principalibus  ment.      But    penal    actions,    such    aa

personis  fuerint  contestat?e,  et  here-  those  of  which  we  have   just  spoken,

dibus    dantur,    et    contra    heredes  from  the  moment  of  the  litis  contest

transeunt.  tatio,  pass  both  to  and  against  the

heirs  to  the  parties.

Gai.  iv.  112,  113 ;  D.  iv.  3.  17.  1 ;  D.  xliv.  7.  26.  58.

Although  penal  actions  could  not  be  brought  against  the  heir
of  the  wrong- doer  in  order  to  enforce  the  liability  to  a  penalty,  as
the  liability  was  personal  to  the  wrong-doer,  yet  they  could  be
brought  against  the  heirs  for  the  purpose  of  getting  back  from,
them  anything  by  which  they  had  received  an  advantage  from  the
delict.     (D.  xliv.  7.  35,  pr.)

Aliquando  ex  contractu  actio  contra  heredem  non  corn-petit.
This  Is  taken  from  Gains,  who  means  it  to  apply  to  the  heirs  of
adstipulatores,  sponsor es,  saidjidepromissores,  for  their  heirs  were
not  bound ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  to  what  it  could  apply  in  the
time  of  Justinian.  It  would  also  be  supposed,  from  the  text,  that
an  action  making  a  testator  responsible  for  dolus  malus  did  not
ordinarily  pass  against  his  heirs,  if  his  heirs  were  not  benefited'
by  the  wrong  he  had  committed  ;  but  there  was  only  one  case  in
which  the  action  did  not  joass  against  his  heirs  whether  they  had
benefited  by  the  dolus  malus  or  not,  namely,  the  action  in  duplum
against  a  person  who  had  been  guilty  of  dolus  malus  with  regard
to  a  deposit  placed  in  his  custody  under  the  pressure  of  an  acci-
dental misfortune  (see  Tit.  6.  23) ;  and  even  in  this  case  an  actio
in  simplum  passed  against  the  heirs.     (D.  xvl.  3.  18.)

2.  Superest  ut  admoneamus,  quod,  2.  It  remains  that  we  should  re-

si  ante  rem  judicatam  is  cum  quo  mark,  that  if,  before  the  sentence,  the
actum  est  satisfaciat  actori,  officio  defendant  satisfies  the  plaintifi",  the
judicis  convenit  eum  absolvere,  licet  judge  ought  to  absolve  the  defendant,
judicii  accipiendi  tempore  in  ea  causa  although,  from  the  time  of  the  action
fuisset,  ut  damnari  debeat :  et  hoc  being  commenced  before  the  magis-
est  quod  ante  vulgo  dicebatur,  omnia  trate,  it  was  evident  the  defendant
judicia  absolutoria  esse.  would   be  condemned.     It   is  in  this

sense  that  in  former  times  it  was  com-
monly said  that  in  all  actions  the  de-
fendant might  be  absolved.

Gai.  iv.  114.

If,  after  the  formula  was  delivered,  but  before  judgment  was
given,  the  defendant  satisfied  the  plaintiff,  a  question  had  arisen,
as  we  learn  from  Gains  (iv.  114),  whether  In  all  cases  the  judge
was  to  absolve  the  defendant,  or  whether  In  actions  stricti  juris  the
judge  was   technically  bound  to  go  on  and  pronounce  judgment.

J

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  XIII.  46  9

The  Proculians  thought  that  the  condemnation  was  still  to  be
made  in  actions  stricti  jitris,  though  not  in  honm  fidei  actions  or
actions  in  rem.  The  Sabinians  held  that  the  defendant  should  be
absolved  in  all  actions,  and  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  Sabinians  that
Justinian  confirms.

Tit.  XIII.     DE  EXCEPTIONIBUS.

Sequitur  ut  de  exceptionibus  dis-  It  now  follows  that  we  should  speak

piciamus.     Comparatse   autem  sunt  of  exceptions.     They  have  been  intro-

exceptiones   defendendorum   eorum  duced  as  a  means  of  defence  for  those

gratia    cum    quibus    agitur  :    seepe  against  whom  the  action  is  brought,

enim  accidit,  ut  licet  ipsa  persecu-  For  it  often  happens  that  the  action  of

tio   qua   actor   experitur  justa   sit,  the   plaintiff,   although   in   itself  well

tamen  iniqua  sit  ad  versus  eum  cum  founded,  is  yet  unjust  as  regards  the

quo  agitur.  person  against  whom  it  is  brought.

Gai.  iv.  H5,  116.

Exceptions  belonged  properly  to  the  system  of  formulae  only.
Under  that  system  the  praator  or  other  magistrate  who  pronounced
on  the  right,  qui  jus  dicebat,  decided  whether,  on  the  statement  of
facts,  the  plaintiff  had  a  right  to  an  action.  If  he  had,  the  parties
were  sent  to  the  judge.  But  though  the  plaintiff  might  have  a
right  to  an  action,  the  defendant  might  have  some  ground  to  urge
why,  in  the  particular  instance,  the  action  should  be  defeated ;  and
if  the  action  in  factum  was.  not  honcB  fidei,  i.e.  if  it  was  stricti
Juris,  arhitraria,  or  penal,  it  was  necessary  that  this  ground  should
be  distinctly  stated  by  the  defendant  to  the  praetor.  Thus  the
statement  was  incorporated  in  the  formula  sent  to  the  judge,  and
was  called  the  exceptio ;  it  excepted,  or  took  away  from  the  power
of  the  action.  (See  Introd.  sec.  104.)  The  judge  was  bound  by
the  instructions  he  received  in  the  intentio.  He  could  take  notice
of  no  reason  urged  by  the  defendant  why  the  action  should  fail,  if
the  only  question  submitted  to  him  by  the  praetor  was  whether
the  plaintiff  had  a  good  ground  of  action.  It  was  necessary  that
the  praetor  should  also  expressly  instruct  him  to  inquire  whether
he  action,  however  well  grounded,  ought  not  to  be  defeated.

For  instance,  supposing  an  action  was  brought  on  a  stipula-
tion, the  formula  would  run  Si  paret  Numerium  Negidium  Aulo
Agerio  sestertium  X  millia  dare  oportere.  The  only  question
which  the  judex  could  have  to  decide  would  be,  was  the  stipula-
tion made  or  not  ?  If  it  was,  the  right  of  the  plaintiff  to  have  a
sentence  in  his  favour  was  indisputable.  But  supposing  the  prae-
tor went  on  to  add  an  exception,  which  was  always  negative,  and
say.  Si  in  ea  re  nihil  dolo  malo  Auli  Agerii  factum  sit  nequejiat,
then  a  further  inquiry  would  have  to  be  made  ;  was  there  any
fraud  on  the  part  of  the  creditor  which  made  it  unjust  that  he
should  recover  in  the  action  ?

The  defendant,  in  making  an  exception,  was  not  supposed  to
admit  the  truth  of  the  plaintiff's  statement.     (D.  xliv.  1.  9.)  The

470  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XIII.

plaintiff  had  first  to  prove  his  intentio,  and  unless  he  did  so  the
action  failed.  Supposing  he  proved  it  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
judex,  it  was  then  for  the  defendant  to  prove  his  exception.  He
afiirmed  the  facts  on  which  the  exception  rested^  and  he  must
prove  them  ;  he  was  in  his  turn  the  attacking  party.  Reus  in  ex-
ceptione  actor  est.     (D.  xliv.  1.  1.)

In  actions  ^o?i(e^c?ez\  as  we  have  already  said  (see  Tit.  6.  31  )j
exceptions  were  never  used  ;  for  here  the  judge  was  bound  by  the
character  of  the  action  to  examine  into  all  the  circumstances,  and
only  to  condemn  the  defendant  if  justice  demanded  he  should  do
so.  The  action  itself  was  said  to  imply  any  exception  that  could
be  set  up.     (D.  xxxv.  1.  84.  5.)

In  the  time  of  Justinian  there  were,  properly  speaking,  no
such  things  as  exceptions.  The  word  came  to  mean  any  defence
other  than  a  denial  of  the  subsistence  of  the  right  of  action,  which
was  urged  before  the  magistrate  by  the  defendant.

1,   Yerbi  gratia,  si  metu  coactus,  1.  For  instance,  if  forced  by  fear,

ant  dolo  inductus,  ant  errore  lapsus,  inveigled  by  fraud,  or  fallen  into  a
stipulanti  Titio  promisisti  quod  non  mistake,  you  promise  Titius  in  a  stipu-
debueras,  palam  est  jure  civili  te  ob-  lation  that  which  you  did  not  owe  him,
ligatuni  esse,  et  actio  qua  intenditur  it  is  evident  that,  according  to  the  civil
dare  te  oportere,  efficax  est ;  sed  law,  you  are  bound,  and  the  action,  in
iniquum  est  te  condemnari.  Ideo-  which  it  is  maintained  that  you  ought
que  datur  tibi  exceptio  metus  causa,  to  give,  is  validly  brought.  Yet  it  is.
aut  doli  mali,  aut  in  factum  com-  unjust  that  you  should  be  condemned  ;
posita  ad  impugnandam  actionem.        and,  therefore,  to  repel  the  action,  you

have  given  you  the  exception  metus
causa,  or  doli  mali,  or  one  made  to
raise  the  question  of  a  particular  fact.

D.  xliv.  4.  4.  16.  33  ;  D.  xliv.  7.  36.

Errore  lapsus,  i.e.  not  a  mistake  as  to  the  thing  forming  the
subject  of  the  stipulation,  for  such  a  mistake  would  make  the
stipulation  void ;  but  a  mistake  in  the  apprehension  of  some  fact
which,  if  the  defendant  had  known  rightly,  he  would  not  have
entered  into  the  stipulation.     (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  19.  23.)

The  exceptio  metus  causa  ran  thus :  Si  in  ea  re  nihil  metus
causa  factum  est.  The  exceptio  doli  mali  thus  :  ISi  in  ea  re  nihil
dolo  malo  Auli  Agerii  factum  sit  neque  fiat.  (D.  xliv.  4.  4.  2  and'
4.)  We  may  remark  that  the  former  is  general  (fear  inspired  by
any  one  whomsoever),  the  latter  personal  (the  fraud  of  Aulus
Agerius),  and  that  the  exceptio  doli  mali  relates  not  only  to  the
character  of  the  action  at  the  particular  time  when  the  obligation
was  formed,  but  also  to  its  subsequent  character,  neque  factum  sit
neque  fiat.  A  claim  might  be  perfectly  fair  in  the  first  instance,
and  afterwards  become  only  partially  so,  or  even  wholly  unfair.
For  instance,  the  real  owner  of  an  estate  might  claim  it,  and  then
find  that  the  possessor,  having  improved  it  during  the  time  he  held
it,  is  entitled  to  compensation.  If  the  owner  refuses  the  compensa-
tion, his  claim,  in  itself  fair,  becomes,  in  the  way  he  urges  it>
unfair.

LIB.  IV.    TIT.  ::iii.  471

In  factum  composita,  i.e.  shaped  so  as  to  raise  the  question
whether  a  statement  of  a  particular  fact  was  or  was  not  true.
Some  particular  fact  is  submitted  by  the  prsetor  to  the  judex,  in-
stead of  such  a  general  inquiry  as  whether  the  plaintiff  has  been
guilty  of  fraud.  For  instance,  to  use  the  example  given  in  the
Digest  (xlv.  1.  22),  the  inquiry  directed  to  be  made  might  be
whether  the  plaintiff  has  not  made  the  defendant  believe  that  the
subject  of  stipulation,  which  is  made  of  brass,  was  made  of  gold.

The  exceptio  in  factum  composita  was  thus,  like  the  actio  in
factum  composita,  opposed  to  one  in  jus  concepta.  For  instance,
the  exceptio  doli  mali,  which  was  in  jus  concepta,  not  only  raised  a
question  of  fact,  but  made  it  requisite  that  the  judex  should  affix
a  certain  character  to  the  acts  of  the  parties.  It  may  be  observed
that  this  general  exception  doli  mali  would  always  answer  every
purpose  which  could  be  gained  by  using  an  exception  in  factum
composita  ;  for  any  particular  fact  which,  if  stated  as  an  exception
and  proved,  would  furnish  a  bar  to  the  action,  would  be  taken
notice  of  under  the  exception  ^o/zttz a /z.  But  the  magistrate  would
not  always  allow  an  exception  doli  mali  to  be  inserted  when  he
would  give  permission  to  employ  one  in  factum  composita ;  for  in-
famy was  attached  to  a  plaintiff  against  whom  an  exception  doli
mali  was  proved ;  and  when  the  plaintiff  stood  to  the  defendant
in  any  such  near  relation  as  that  of  patron  or  ascendant,  the  ma-
gistrate would  not  allow  an  exception  to  be  used  which  would  have
any  further  consequence  than  to  protect  the  defendant.  (D.  xliv.
4.  4.  16.)  The  instances  of  exceptions  in  the  following  para-
graphs are  all  instances  of  exceptions  in  factum,

2.  Idem  juris  est,   si  qiiis  quasi  2.  It  is  the  same,  if  any  one  should

credendi  causa  pecuniam  stipulatus  stipulate  from  you  for  the  repayment
fuerit,  neque  numeraverit ;  nam  of  money  he  is  to  lend  you,  and  then
eam  pecuniam  a  te  petere  posse  eum  does  not  pay  to  you  the  sum  borrowed  ;
certum  est,  dare  enim  te  oportet,  in  such  a  case,  he  could  certainly  de-
cum  ex  stipulatione  tenearis  ;  sed  mand  from  you  the  amount  you  have
quia  iniquum  est  eo  nomine  te  con-  engaged  to  repay  him,  and  you  are
demnari,  placet  per  exceptionem  bound  to  give  it,  for  you  are  tied  by
pecuniae  non  numeratse  te  defendi  the  stipulation.  But  as  it  would  be
debere,cujustemporanos (secundum  unjust  that  you  should  be  condemned
quod  jam superioribuslibrisscriptum  in  such  an  action,  it  has  been  thought
est)  constitutione  nostra  coarctavi-  right  you  should  have  the  defence  of
mus.  the  exception  pecunise  non  numerate.

The  time  within  which  this  exception
can  be  used,  has,  as  we  have  said  in
a  former  Book,  been  shortened  by  our
constitution.

Gat.  iv.  116 ;  C.  iv.  30.  14.

Quasi  credendi  causa,  i.e.  had  made  the  defendant  promise  to
pay  a  sum,  as  if  he,  the  plaintiff,  were  going  to  lend  the  sum  to
the  defendant.

It  will  be  remembered  that,  in  this  exception,  the  burden  of
proof  was  on  the  plaintiff,  instead  of,  as  in  other  exceptions,  on

472

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  XIII.

the  defendant,  and  then  it  must  be  pleaded  within  five  years,  a
term  reduced  by  Justinian  to  two  years.     (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  21.)

3.  Prseterea  debitor,  si  pactus
fuerit  cum  creditore  ne  a  se  pete-
retur,  nihilominiis  obligatiis  manet,
quia  pacto  convento  obligationes  non
omnimodo  dissolvuntur.  Qua  de
causa  efficax  est  adversus  eum  actio
qua  actor  intendit,  si  paret  eum  dare
oportere ;  sed  quia  iniquum  est  con-
tra pactionem  eum  damnari,  defen-
ditur  per  exceptionem  pacti  conventi.

3.  Again,  the  debtor  who  has
agreed  with  his  creditor  that  payment
shall  not  be  demanded  from  him,  still
remains  bound.  For  an  agreement  is
not  a  mode  by  which  obligations  are
always  dissolved.  The  action,  there-
fore, in  which  the  inte^itio  runs,  *  If  it
appears  that  he  ought  to  give,'  may  be
validly  brought  against  him  ;  but  as
it  would  be  unjust  that  he  should  be
condemned  in  contravention  of  the
agreement,  he  may  use  in  his  defence
the  exception  pacti  conventi.

Gal  iv.  116.

Obligations  formed  re  or  verbis  could  not  be  dissolved  by  a
simple  pact.  As  the  contract  was  a  subsisting  one,  an  exception
was  necessary.  The  exception  pacti  conventi  ran  thus  :  Si  inter
Auluni  Agerium  et  Numerium  Negidium  non  convenit,  ne  ea  pecu-
nia  peter etur.     (Gai.  iv.  119.)

4.  So,  too,  if  the  debtor,  when
the  creditor  challenges  him  to  swear,
affirms  on  oath  that  he  ought  not  to
give,  he  still  remains  bound.  But  as
it  would  be  unjust  to  examine  whether
he  has  perjured  himself,  he  is  allowed
to  defend  himself  with  the  exception
jurisjurandi.  In  actions  in  rem,  these
exceptions  are  equally  necessary  ;  for
instance,  if  the  possessor,  on  being
challenged  by  the  claimant,  swears
that  the  property  is  his,  and  yet  the
plaintiff  still  persists  in  his  real  action.
For  the  claim  of  the  plaintiff  might  be
well  founded,  and  yet  it  would  be  un-
just to  condemn  the  possessor.

D.  xii.  2.  9,  pr.  and  1 ;  D.  xii.  2,  3.  1 ;  D.  xii.  2.  11.  1.

The  exceptio  jurisjurandi  was  only  necessary  when  the  fact
whether  the  defendant  had  accepted  the  oath  when  offered  him
was  disputed.  If  it  was  acknowledged,  the  prastor  would  not
give  an  action  at  all.  (D.  xii.  2,  3.)  The  oath  terminated  the
right  of  the  plaintiff  to  an  action ;  jusjurandum  speciem  trans-
actionis  continet,  major eraque  habet  auctoritatem  quam  res  judicata.
(D.  xii.  2.  2.)

4.  ^que  si  debitor  creditore  de-
ferente  juraverit  nihil  se  dare  opor-
tere, adhuc  obligatus  permanet ;  sed
quia  iniquum  est  de  perjurio  quseri,
defenditur  per  exceptionem  jurisju-
randi. In  iis  quoque  actionibus
quibus  in  rem  agitur,  seque  neces-
sarise  sunt  exceptiones,  veluti  si  pe-
titore  deferente  possessor  juraverit
eam  rem  suam  esse,  et  nihilominus
petitor  eamdem  rem  vindicet  ;  licet
enim  verum.  sit  quod  intendit,  id
est,  rem  ejus  esse,  iniquum  tamen
est  possessorem  condemnari.

5.  Item  si  judicio  tecum  actum
fuerit,  sive  in  rem  sive  in  personam,
nihilominus  obligatio  durat,  et  ideo
ipso  jure  de  eadem  re  postea  ad-
versus te  agi  potest ;  sed  debes  per
exceptionem  rei  judicatse  adjuvari.

5.  Again,  if  an  action  real  or  per-
sonal has  been  brought  against  you,
the  obligation  still  subsists,  and,  in
strict  law,  an  action  might  still  be
brought  against  you  for  the  same  ob-
ject, but  you  are  protected  by  the
exception  rei  judicatse.

Gai.  iv.  106,  107.

LIE.  IV.      TIT.  XIII.  473

Under  the  system  of  the  actions  of  law,  if  a  cause  had  once
been  decided,  no  further  action  could  again  be  brought  on  the
same  grounds  (Gai.  iv.  108) ;  but  this  was  not  the  case  under
the  praetorian  system.  To  understand  the  effect  of  a  previous
action  having  been  brought  under  the  praetorian  system,  we  must
notice  the  distinction  drawn  by  Gains  in  the  part  of  his  Fourth
Book  which  treats  of  exceptions  between  Jw6/zcz«  legitima  andj?^-
dicia  imperio  continentia.  A.  judicium  legitimum,  i.e.  founded  on
the  old  jus  civile,  was  an  action  given  in  the  city  of  Rome,  or
within  the  first  milestone  round  the  city,  between  Koman  citizens,
and  tried  by  a  single  judge.  A.  judicium  imperio  continens,  i.e.
founded  on  the  authority  of  the  praetor,  was  an  action  given  out  of
Kome,  or  tried  by  recuperatores,  or  one  or  both  parties  to  which  was
a  peregrinus,ov  v^qyq  peregrini.  Judicia  imperio  continentia  never
extinguished  the  right  of  action,  and  therefore  the  plaintiff  who
brought  an  action  for  the  second  time  had  to  be  met  with  an  ex-
ception. With  respect  to  judicia  legitima,  a  further  distinction  is
to  be  made.  If  they  were  in  rem  or  in  factum,  the  nature  of
these  actions  prevented  the  litis  contestatio  in  their  case  operating
as  a  novation  ;  and  therefore,  if  a  fresh  action  was  brought,  the
defendant  had  to  repel  it  by  the  exception  rei  judicatce.  Accord-
ingly we  may  say,  in  brief,  that  under  the  prsetorian  system  none
hut  judicia  legitima  in  personam  extinguished  the  right  of  action,
and  therefore  in  all  other  cases  an  exception  was  necessary.

In  the  time  of  Justinian  these  distinctions  had  disappeared,
and  therefore  he  says  generally  that  the  res  judicata  produces  an
exception.  It  was  to  have  the  same  force  as  it  had  formerly  had
in  the  case  oi  judicia  imperio  continentia,  and  not  that  it  had  re-
ceived in  judicia  legitima.  Whether  the  action  was  real  or  per-
sonal, as  the  text  informs  us,  the  principal  obligation  still  sub-
sisted, and,  no  novation  having  taken  place,  a  second  action  could
only  be  repelled  by  an  exception.  But,  practically  speaking,
under  the  system  oi  judicia  extraordinaria,  as  the  judge  did  not
receive  instructions  from  a  magistrate,  and  was  not  bound  within
the  limits  of  a  formula,  the  distinction  between  the  res  judicata
operating  as  a  bar  or  as  an  exception  was  a  very  immaterial  one.
In  order  that  a  res  judicata  should  be  available  either  as  a
bar  or  an  exception,  it  was  necessary  that  there  should  have  been,
in  the  former  action,  the  same  thing  as  the  subject-matter  of  the
litigation,  the  same  quantity,  the  same  right,  the  same  ground  of
action,  the  same  parties.  Cum  qucRritur  hcBc  exceptio  noceat  necne,
inspiciendum  est  an  idem  corpus  sit :  quantitas  eadem,  idem  jus  :  an
eadem  causa  petendi,  eadem  conditio  personarum — qu(B  nisi  omnia
concurrant,  alia  res  est,     (D.  xliv.  2.  12.  Bk.  14.)

Gains  also  mentions  the  exceptio  rei  in  judicium  deducted,  i.e.
either  that  the  case  was  already  before  the  tribunals,  as  where,  one
of  two  {duo  reipromittendi)  having  been  sued,  the  other  if  sued  could
say  that  the  case  was  already  in  the  way  of  adjudication,  or  that
the  case  had  reached  the  litis  contestatio,  and  had  not  been  ended

474  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XIII.

within  the  appointed  time,  i.e.  within  eighteen  months  if  it  was
2i  judicium  legitimum,  or  not  within  the  duration  of  the  power  of  the
magistrate  if  it  was  imperio  continens.  See  introductory  note  to
Tit.  6.     (Gai.  iv.  107.)

6.  Hsec  exempli  causa  retulisse  6.  The  above  examples  of  excep-
sufficiet.  Alioquin,  quam  ex  multis  tions  may  suffice.  It  may  be  seen  in
variisque  causis  exceptiones  neces-  the  larger  work  of  the  Digest  or  Pan-
saricie  sint,  ex  latioribus  Digestorum  dects  how  numerous  and  how  different
seu  Pandectarum  libris  intelligi  po-  are  the  causes  which  make  exceptions
test.  necessary.

7.  Quarum  qua3dam  e  legibus  vel  7.  Some  of  these  exceptions  are
ex  iis  quse  legis  vicem  obtinent,  vel  derived  from  the  laws,  and  from  other
ex  ipsius  praetoris  jurisdictione  sub-  enactments  having  the  force  of  law,  or
stantiam  capiunt.  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  prsetor.

Gai.  iv.  118.

E  legibus  ;  such  as  the  exception  nisi  bonis  cesserit,  relative  to
the  cession  of  the  debtor's  goods,  under  the  lex  Julia.

Ex  iis  qucB  legis  vicem  obtinent,  i.e.  senatus-consulta  and  con-
stitutions. The  exception  under  the  rescript  of  Hadrian,  permit-
ting the  employment  of  an  exception  doli  mali  when  a  plaintiff
neglected  to  notice  a  counter-claim  (see  Tit.  6.  39),  may  serve  as
an  example.

8.  Appellantur  autem  exceptio-  8.  Exceptions  are  either  perpetual
nes,  aliee  perpetuce  et  peremptorise,  and  peremptory,  or  temporary  and
aliae  temporales  et  dilatorise.                  dilatory.

D.  xliv.  1.  3.

The  duration  according  to  which  exceptions  are  said  to  be
perpetucE  or  temporales,  is  the  length  of  time  in  which  they  can
be  used  by  the  defendant  if  he  has  occasion,  not  the  length  of
time  during  which  their  effect  continues  if  they  are  employed.

All  exceptiones  perpetucB  were  necessarily  peremptoricB ;  if
found  to  be  justified  by  the  facts,  they  set  the  matter  in  litigation
at  rest  for  ever.  All  exceptiones  temporales  were  necessarily  dila^
toricB ;  they  did  but  defer  the  decision  of  the  matter  in  question
till  the  expiration  of  a  certain  time.

9.  Perpetua3etx>eremptorisesunt,  9.  Those  are  perpetual  and  per-
quae  semper  agentibus  obstant,  et  emptory  which  always  present  an  ob-
semper  rem  de  qua  agitur  perimunt :  stacle  to  the  demand,  for  we  cut  away
qualis  est  exceptio  doli  mali,  et  the  ground  on  which  it  is  brought ;
quod  metus  causa  factum  est,  et  as,  for  instance,  the  exception  doli
pacti  conventi,  cum  ita  convenerit  mali^  that  metus  causa,  and  that  pacti
ne  omnino  pecunia  peteretur.  conventi,  when  it  has  been  agreed  that

no  demand  for  the  money  shall  ever  be
made.

D.  xHv.  1.  3.

An  act  might  be  used  for  ever  as  an  exception ;  and  yet  if  an
action  were  brought  grounded  on  it,  that  action  might  possibly

LIE.  IV.      TIT.  XIII.

475.

have  to  be  brought  within  a  certain  time.  For  instance,  if  fraud
or  violence  had  been  used  in  the  making  of  a  contract,  the  ex-
ception would  be  good  whenever  an  action  was  brought  on  the
contract ;  but  the  person  injured  could  only  bring  an  actio  doli  or
metus  causa  within  a  limited  time.  Hence  it  came  to  be  said  that
such  things  were  temporalia  ad  agendum,  perpetua  ad  excipiendum.
(SeeD.  iliv.  4,  5,  6.)

10.  Temi)orales  atqtie  dilatorise
sunt,  quae  ad  tempus  nocent,  et  tem-
poris  dilationem  tribiiunt  :  qualis  est
j)acti  conventi,  cum  ita  convenerit
ne  intra  certum  tempus  ageretur,
veluti  intra  quinquennium  ;  nam
finito  eo  tempore  non  impeditur
actor  rem  exequi.  Ergo  ii  quibus
intra  certum  tempus  agere  volenti-
bus  objicitur  exceptio  aut  pacti
conventi  aut  alia  similis,  differre
debent  actionem  et  post  tempus
agere  ;  ideo  enim  et  dilatorise  istse
exceptiones  appellantur.  Alioquin,
si  intra  tempus  egerint,  objectaque
sit  exceptio,  neque  eo  judicio  quid-
quam  consequerentur  propter  excep-
tionem,  neque  post  tempus  olim
agere  poterant,  cum  temere  -rem  in
judicium  deducebant  et  consume-
bant,  qua  ratione  rem  amittebant.
Hodie  autem  non  ita  stricte  hsec  pro-
cedere  volumus  ;  sed  eum  qui  ante
tempus  pactionis  vel  obligationis
litem  inferre  ausus  est,  Zenonianae
constitutioni  subjacere  censemus,
quam  sacratissimus  legislator  de  iis
qui  tempore  plus  petierint,  protulit  :
ut  si  inducias  quas  ipse  actor  sponte
indulserit  vel  natura  actionis  con-
tinet,  contempserit,  in  duplum  ha-
beant  ii  qui  talem  injuriam  passi
sunt ;  et  post  eas  finitas  non  aliter
litem  suscipiant,  nisi  omnes  expensas
litis  antea  acceperint,  ut  actores  tali
poena  perterriti  tempora  litium  do-
ceantur  observare.

10.  Those  are  temporary  and  dila-
tory which  present  an  obstacle  for  a
certain  time  and  procure  delay.  Such
is  the  exception  pacti  conventi  when  it
has  been  agreed  that  no  action  shall  be
brought  for  a  certain  time,  as,  for  in-
stance, for  five  years  ;  when  once  this
period  has  elapsed,  the  plaintiff  is  not
prevented  from  liringing  his  action.
Those,  therefore,  who  seek  to  bring  the
action  before  the  expiration  of  the
time,  and  are  repelled  by  the  exception
pacti  conventiy  or  any  similar  one,  ought
to  put  it  off  and  to  bring  it  after  the
time  has  elapsed  ;  hence  these  excep-
tions are  termed  dilatory.  If  plaintiffs,
have  brought  the  action  before  the  ex-
piration of  the  time,  and  been  repelled
by  the  exception,  they  will  not  gain
anything  by  the  action  they  bring,  be-
cause of  the  exception  ;  and,  formerly,
they  would  not  have  been  able  again
to  bring  an  action  on  the  expiration  of
the  time,  because  they  had  rashly
brought  their  claim  before  a  judge,,
and  so  used  up  their  right  to  bring  an
action,  and  lost  all  they  could  claim.
But  at  the  present  day  we  do  not  wish
to  proceed  so  rigorously  ;  any  one  who-
shall  venture  to  bring  an  action  before
the  time  fixed  by  the  agreement  or
obligation  shall  be  subject  to  the  dis-
positions of  the  constitution  of  Zeno,
published  by  that  emperor  with  respect
to  those  who,  in  regard  to  time,  ask
more  than  is  due  to  them.  Conse-
quently, if  the  plaintiff  shall  disregard
the  delay  which  he  himself  has  volun-
tarily accorded,  or  which  results  from
the  nature  of  the  action,  the  delay
shall  be  doubled  for  the  benefit  of  those
who  have  sustained  such  a  wrong  ;  and
even  after  the  expiration  of  the  time,
these  persons  shall  not  be  obliged  to
defend  the  action  unless  they  have
been  first  reimbursed  for  all  the  ex-
penses of  the  former  action,  that  a
penalty  so  heavy  may  teach  plaintiffs
to  have  due  regard  to  the  delays  that
are  to  elapse  before  actions  are  brought.

Gai.  iv.  122,  323;  C.  iii.  10.

47  G  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XIV.

Alia  similis.  Gaius  gives,  as  an  instance,  the  exceptio  litis  divi-
duce,  given  to  repel  a  plaintiff  who  broke  up  into  two  actions  his
remedy  for  a  single  thing,  and  sued  within  the  same  prsetorship
for  the  part  he  did  not  include  in  his  first  action.  Gaius  defines
dilatory  exceptions  as  those  quce  non  semper  locum  liabent,  sed
£vitari  possunt,     (iv.  122.)

ZenoniancE  constitutioni.     See  Tit.  6.  33.

11.  Prseterea   etiam  ex  persona  11.  There  are  also  dilatory  excep-

dilatorise    sunt  exceptiones,    quales  tions  by  reason   of  the   person  :  snch

sunt  procura>tori£e,  veluti  si  per  mi-  are  those    objecting  to  a  procurator  ;

litem  aut  mulierem  agere  quis  velit :  as,  for  instance,  if  a  plaintiff  wishes  to

nam    militibus,  nee   pro    patre   vel  have  his  cause  conducted  by  a  soldier

matre  vel  uxore,  nee    ex   sacro  re-  or  woman,  for  soldiers  cannot  be  pro-

scripto,  procuratorio  nomine  expc-  curators    even    for    their    father,    or

riri  conceditur  ;   suis   vero   negotiis  mother,  or  wife,  not  even  by  virtue  of

superesse     sine    offensa    disciplinse  an  imperial  rescript ;   but   they  may

possunt.     Eas  vero  exceptiones  qua)  conduct  their  own  affairs  without  any

olim    procuratoribus    propter   infa-  breach  of  discipline.     As  to  the  excep-

miam  vel  dantis  vel  ipsius    procu-  tions  formerly  opposed  to  procurators

ratoris  opponebantur,  cum  in  judi-  on  account  of  the  infamy,  either  of  the

ciis  frequentari  nuUo  modo  perspe-  person  appointing  the  procurator,  or

ximus,   conquiescere   sancimus  ;    ne  of  the   procurator    himself,  since    we

dum  de  his  altercatur,  ipsius  negotii  found  that  they  were  no  longer  used

disceptatio  proteletur.  in  practice,  we  have  enacted  that  they

shall  be  abolished,  that  no  discussion
as  to  their  effect  may  prolong  the
course  of  the  action  itself.

D.  xUv.  1.  3 ;   C.  ii.  13.  7.  9.

The  exception  to  the  procurator  as  an  improper  person  only
produced  a  delay ;  directly  the  plaintiff  appointed  a  proper  per-
son as  procurator,  the  action  proceeded.

The  infamia  was  that  produced  by  being  condemned  in  cer-
tain actions,  as  in  the  actio  tutelce,  depositi^  pro  socio,  &c.

After  noticing  exceptions,  Gaius  notices  prescriptions,  which
orio:inallv  had  been  limitations  of  the  action  inserted  on  behalf  of
the  plaintiff  or  defendant.  We  have  had  an  instance  of  the  one
inserted  for  the  protection  of  the  defendant  in  the  pr(Rscrij)tio  longi
temporis  (Bk.  ii.  Tit.  6.  pr.  note) ;  but  by  the  time  of  Gains  all
prescriptions  on  behalf  of  the  defendant  were  ranked  among  ex-
ceptions. Prescriptions  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiff  still  remained
where  it  was  to  the  interest  of  the  plaintiff  that  not  all  his  right,
but  only  so  much  of  it  as  had  given  rise  to  an  existing  liability,
should  be  sued  on,  so  that  he  might  not  be  barred  from  suing
when  other  liabilities  came  into  existence.     (Gai.  iv.  130.  9.)

Tit.  XIY.     DE   REPLICATIONIBUS.

Interdum  evenit  ut  exceptio,  qure  Sometimes  an  exception  which  at

prima  facie  justa   videatur,   inique  first  sight  seems  just,  is  really  unjust,

noceat.      Quod    cum    accidit,     alia  In  this  case,  to  place  the  plaintiff  in

allegatione  opus  est  adjuvandi  ac-  a  right  position,  it  is  necessary  there

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XIV.

477

should  be  another  allegation,  termed
a  replication,  because  it  unfolds  and
resolves  the  right  given  by  the  excep-
tion. For  example,  supposing  a  cre-
ditor has  agreed  with  a  debtor  not  to
demand  payment,  and  then  makes  an
agreement  to  the  contrary  ;  that  is,
that  he  may  demand  payment  ;  if,
when  the  creditor  brings  his  action,
the  debtor  uses  the  exception,  alleging
that  he  ought  only  to  be  condemned  if
his  creditor  is  not  under  an  agreement
not  to  demand  payment,  this  exception
presents  an  obstacle  to  the  creditor.
For  it  remains  true  that  this  agree-
ment was  made,  although  a  contrary
agreement  was  afterwards  made.  But
as  it  would  be  unjust  to  deprive  the
creditor  of  his  remedy,  he  will  be  per-
mitted to  use  a  replication  founded  on
the  latter  agreement.

Gai.  iv.  126.

All  that  has  been  said  on  the  use  and  nature  of  exceptions  is
applicable  to  replications,  which  are  but  exceptions  of  an  excep-
tion.    (D.  xliv.^1.  22.)

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  there  could  not  be  an  exceptio  doli
mail  to  an  exceptio  doli  niali.  If  the  plaintiff  had  been  guilty  of
fraud,  it  could  not  strengthen  his  right  of  action  that  the  defend-
ant had  also  been  guilty.     (D.  xliv.  4.  4.  13.)

toris  gratia,  quae  replicatio  vocatur,
quia  per  earn  replicatur  atque  re-
sol  vitur  jus  exceptionis :  veluti,
cum  pactus  est  aliquis  cum  debitore
suo  ne  ab  eo  pecuniam  petat,  deinde
postea  in  contrarium  pacti  sunt,  id
est,  ut  creditori  petere  liceat.  Si
agat  creditor,  et  excipiat  debitor,  ut
ita  demum  condemnetur,  si  non  con-
venerit  ne  eam  pecuniam  creditor
petat,  nocet  ei  exceptio.  Convenit
enim  ita :  namque  nihilominus  hoc
verum  manet,  licet  postea  in  contra-
rium pacti  sint ;  sed  quia  iniquum
est  creditorem  excludi,  replicatio  ei
dabitur  ex  posteriore  pacto  convento.

1.  R-ursus  interdum  evenitut  re-
plicatio, qufle  prima  facie  justa  est,
inique  noceat.  Quod  cum  accidit,
alia  allegatione  opus  est,  adjuvandi
rei  gratia,  quae  duplicatio  vocatur.

1.  The  replication,  in  its  turn,
may,  at  first  sight,  seem  just,  and  yet
be  really  unjust.  In  this  case,  to  aid
the  defendant,  it  is  necessary  there
should  be  a  further  allegation,  termed
a  duiMcatio.

Gai.  iv.  127.

2.  Et  si  rursus  ea prima  facie  justa
videatur,  sed  propter  aliquam  cau-
sam  actori  inique  noceat,  rursus  alia
allegatione  opus  est,  qua  actor  ad-
juvetur,  quae  dicitur  triplicatio.

2.  And  if,  again,  the  duplicatio  may
seem  just,  but  is  really  unjust,  there
is  wanted  to  aid  the  plaintiflf  a  still
further  allegation,  termed  a  triplicatio.

Gai.  iv.  128.

3.  Quarum  omnium  exceptio-
num  usum,  interdum  ulterius  quam
diximus,  varietas  negotiorum  intro-
ducit  :  quas  omnes  apertius  ex  Di-
gestorum  latiore  volumine  facile  est
coenioscere.

3.  The  great  diversity  of  affairs  has
made  it  requisite  to  carry  still  further
the  use  of  these  exceptions.  A  clearer
knowledge  of  them  all  may  be  obtained
by  reading  the  fuller  work  of  the  Digest.

Gai.  iv.  129.

4.  Exceptiones  autem  quibus  de-
bitor defenditur,  plerumque  accom-
modari  solent  etiam  fidejussoribus
ejus  et  recta  ;  quia  quod  ab  iis  pe-

4.  The  exceptions  given  for  the
protection  of  the  debtor  are  also  for
the  most  part  given  in  behalf  of  his
Jldejnssores,  and  rightly  so  ;   for  wliat

■478

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XV.

titur,  id  ab  ipso  debitore  peti  vide-
tur,  quia  mandati  judicio  redditurus
est  eis  quod  ii  ^Dro  eo  solverint.
Qua  ratione,  et  si  de  non  petenda
pecunia  pactus  quis  cum  reo  fuerit,
placuit  perinde  succurrendum  esse
]per  exceptionem  pacti  conventi  illis
quoque  qui  pro  eo  obligati  essent,
ac  si  cum  ipsis  pactus  esset  ne  ab  eis
ea  pecunia  peteretur.  Sane  queedam
exceptiones  non  solent  hisaccommo-
dari ;  ecce  enim  debitor,  si  bonis
suis  cesserit,  et  cum  eo  creditor  ex-
periatur,  def enditur  per  exceptionem
nisi  bonis  cesserit ;  sed  lii^ec  exceptio
lidejussoribus  non  datur,  ideo  scilicet
quia  qui  alios  pro  debitore  obligat,
hoc  maxime  prospicit,  ut  cum  facul-
tatibus  lapsus  fuerit  debitor,  possit
ab  iis  quos  pro  eo  obligavit,  suum
consequi.

is  demanded  from  them  is  really  de-
manded from  the  debtor,  because  by
the  actio  mandati  he  will  be  forced  to
repay  them  what  they  have  paid  for
him.  Hence,  if  a  creditor  agrees  with
his  debtor  not  to  demand  payment,  the
exception  pacti  conventi  may  be  em-
ployed by  those  who  are  bound  for
him,  exactly  as  if  the  agreement  not
to  demand  payment  had  been  made
with  them  personally.  There  are,
however,  some  exceptions  not  allowed
them  ;  for  instance,  if  the  debtor  has
made  a  cession  of  his  property,  and
the  creditor  sues  him,  he  may  protect
himself  by  the  exception  nisi  bonis  ces-
serit ;  but  this  exception  is  not  allowed
to  fidejussores.  For,  in  taking  security
for  the  payment  of  a  debt,  Avhat  the
creditor  principally  looks  to  is  reco-
vering what  is  owed  him  from  the
sureties,  in  case  of  the  insolvency  of
the  principal.

D.  xliv.  1.  19  ;  D.  ii.  14.  32.

Exceptions  were  divided  into  r-ei  cohcBrentes,  which  affected  the
right  to  claim,  and  personce  cohcercntes,  which  only  protected  the
debtor  himself.  As  an  instance  of  an  exceptio  cohcBvcns  rei  may
be  given  an  exceptio  doli  mali,  or  a  general  pact  not  to  sue.  As
an  instance  of  an  exceptio  colicer^ens  personcR  may  be  given  that
mentioned  in  the  text,  where  the  debtor  was  protected  by  having
given  up  all  his  property,  or  a  particular  pact  not  to  sue  the  debtor
personally.  Generally  the  fidejussors  of  the  defendant  could  use
the  exceptions  which  he  could  have  used  ;  but  this  was  not  always,
as  the  text  points  out,  true  of  those  personce  cohcerentes,  as  in  the
case  of  the  exception  nisi  bonis  cesserit.

Tit.  XV.    DE  INTEKDICTIS.

We  have  now  to  ;^reat  of  interdicts
and  the  actions  which  supply  their
place.  Interdicts  were  certain  for-
mulas by  which  the  prsetor  ordered  or
forbad  something  to  be  done  ;  they
were  chiefly  employed  in  disputes  as  to
possession  or  quasi  possession.

Sequitur  ut  dispiciamus  de  inter-
dictis,  seu  actionibus  quse  pro  his
exercentur.  Erant  autem  interdicta
formae  atque  conceptiones  verborum
quibus  prsetor  aut  jubebat  aliquid
lieri,  aut  fieri  prohibebat  :  quod  tunc
maxime  faciebat,  cum  de  possessione
aut  quasi  possessione  inter  aliquos
contendebatur.

Gai.  iv.  138,  139.

An  interdict  was  a  decree  or  edict  of  the  praetor  made  in  a
special  case.  The  praetor  published  a  general  edict  stating  the
leadino-  principles  on  which  he  would  act.  But  in  certain  cases
he  would  make  an  edict  applicable  only  to  particular  persons  and
particular  things.  Instead,  for  instance,  of  referring  the  party
applying  to  him  for  relief  to  the  general  rule  of  law  that  one  man

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XV,  479

should  not  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the  watercourses  of  an-
other, he  made  an  edict  that  A  should  not  interfere  with  the
watercourses  of  B.  According  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case
such  a  command  might  be  either  positive  or  negative ;  and  though,
as  is  remarked  in  paragr.  1,  the  word  inter  dictum  was  considered
to  apply  more  properly  to  a  negative  command  only,  it  was,  as  a
matter  of  usage,  applied  to  all  such  special  edicts  indifferently :
and  Justinian  seems  to  suppose  that  interdicere  does  not  mean,  as
Gains  assumes,  to  forbid,  but  inter  duos  dicere,  to  decide  between
two  parties.     (See  paragr.  1.)

If  the  person  to  whom  the  special  edict  was  addressed  obeyed
its  directions,  no  further  proceedings  were  necessary ;  if  he  as-
serted that  he  had  not  done  wrong,  the  pr^tor  allowed  an  action
to  be  brought  grounded  on  the  interdict.  A  sketch  of  the  mode
in  which  the  proceedings  grounded  on  an  interdict  were  conducted
ivill  be  found  in  the  notes  to  paragr.  8.

There  was  always  something  of  a  public  character  in  the  rea-
sons which  induced  the  praetor  to  grant  an  interdict.     He  adopted
it  as  a  speedy  and  sure  remedy  in  cases  when  danger  was  threat-
ened to  objects  which  public  policy  is  especially  interested  to  pre-
serve uninjured,  such  as  public  roads  and  waters,  burial-grounds,
or  sacred  places ;  and  though  interdicts  were  granted  where  the
quarrel  was  entirely  between  private  parties,  it  was  originally,
perhaps,  only  when  the  subject  of  dispute  was  such  as  to  render
a  breach  of  the  public  peace  the  probable  result,  unless  the  matter
was  set  at  rest  by  the  summary  interposition  of  legal  authority.
If,  for  instance,  it  was  a  possession  or  quasi-possession  that  was
•disputed,  it  might  be  feared  that  the  claimant  would  adopt  force
to  eject  the  actual  occupier,  that  force  would  be  met  by  force,
and  the  public  peace  be  broken  ;  and  the  limitation  of  the  time —
one  year — within  which,  as  we  shall  see,  interdicts  had  in  many
cases  to  be  applied  for,  seems  to  connect  the  acts  giving  rise  to  them
with  delicts.  (Poste,  Gai,  501.)    This  public  character  attaching
to  interdicts  may  suggest  that  they  were  originally  given  to  pro-
tect public,  not  private  interests.     Niebuhr  (Hist.  Bom.  vol.  ii.
149)  and  Savigny  (Possess.  Bk.  iv.  44)  think  that  in  the  private
occupancy  of  the  ager  puhlicus  may  be  seen  an  interest  so  little
protected  otherwise,  and  calling  so  precisely  for  some  such  aid  as
the  interdict,  that  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  early  use  of
interdicts  was  directed  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  this  particular
case.    Anyhow,  as  the  civil  law  did  not  deal  with  possession  apart
from  ownership,  a  remedy  became  necessary  when  the   proctors
recognised  possession,  and,  after  the  prastorian  system  was  fully
established,  a  character  of  settled  law  was   imposed   upon   the
mode  of  giving  interdicts  by  the  pra3tor  announcing  in  his  edict
that  he  would  grant  a  particular  interdict  under  particular  cir-
cumstances.    Interdicts  were  given,  as  the  text  informs  us,  to
protect  not  only  the  possession  of  corporeal  things,  but  the  quasi-
possession  of  servitudes.     (See  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  3,  4.)

480

XI B.  IV.      TIT.  XV.

Even  before  the  introduction  of  the  system  of  extraor dinar ia
judicia,  interdicts  had  become,  probably,  less  frequently  used,
there  being  a  tendency  to  go  direct  to  the  action  grounded  on
them,  and  to  do  away  with  the  interdict  as  a  preliminary  step.
In  the  time  of  Justinian  persons  who  under  the  praetorian  system
would  have  applied  for  an  interdict,  brought  an  action.  In  con-
ducting this  action,  the  magistrate  would  be  greatly  guided  by
the  old  law  relating  to  interdicts  ;  but  otherwise,  the  subject  of
interdicts  was  one  with  which  the  law  of  the  Lower  Empire  had
very  little  to  do.

1.  The  principal  division  of  inter-
dicts is,  that  they  are  prohibitory,  re^
stitntory,  or  exhibitory.  Prohibitory
interdicts  are  those  by  which  the
preetor  forbids  something  to  be  done,
as,  for  example,  to  use  force  against  a
person  in  lawful  possession,  or  against
one  who  carries  a  dead  body  to  a  spot
where  he  has  a  right  to  carry  it,  or  to
build  on  a  sacred  place,  or  to  do  any-
thing in  a  public  river,  or  on  its  bank,
which  may  impede  the  navigation-
Restitutory  interdicts  are  those  by
which  the  prsetor  orders  something  to
be  restored,  as,  for  instance,  when  he
orders  to  be  restored  to  the  possessor
the  possession  of  the  goods  of  an  in-
heritance possessed  by  another  as  heir
or  as  possessor,  or  when  he  orders  the;
possession  of  land  to  be  restored  to  the
person  who  has  been  violently  expelled
from  it.  Exhibitory  interdicts  are
those  by  which  the  j)ra3tor  orders  to
exliibit  ;  for  instance,  to  exhibit  the
person  whose  freedom  is  being  ques-
tioned, or  the  freedman  whose  services
are  claimed  by  the  patron,  or  to  ex-
hibit to  the  father  the  children  in  his
power.  Some,  however,  think  that
the  term  interdict  ought,  strictly
speaking,  to  be  applied  to  those  which
are  j^roliibitory,  because  interdicere
means  '  to  denounce,  to  prohibit,'  while
those  that  are  restitutory  or  exhibi-
tory ought  to  be  called  decreta.  But
usage  has  applied  the  word  interdict
to  aU  alike,  as  they  are  all  given  be-
tween two  parties.

Gai.  iv.  139,  140.  142.  144  ;  D.  xliii.  1,  2.  1.

The  formula  of  many  of  the  interdicts  most  ordinarily  in  use  is
preserved  to  us  in  the  Digest.  It  would  take  up  too  much  space  to
give  many  of  these  at  length.  One  or  two  examples  of  each  kind
must  suffice.

The  formula  of  the  prohibitory  interdict  generally  ended  with

1.  Summa  autem  divisio  inter-
dictorum  hasc  est,  quod  aut  prohi-
bitoria  sunt,  aut  restitutoria,  aut  ex-
hibitoria.  Prohibitoria  sunt,  quibus
vetat  aliquid  fieri,  veluti  vim  sine
vitio  possidenti,  vel  mortuum  in-
ferenti  quo  ei  jus  erat  inferendi,  vel
in  loco  sacro  sedificari,  vel  in  flumine
publico  ripave  ejus  aliquid  fieri  quo
pejus  navigetur.  Restitutoria  sunt,
quibus  restitui  aliquid  jubet,  veluti
bonorum  possessori  possessionem
eorum  quae  quis  pro  herede  aut  pro
possessore  possidet  ex  ea  hereditate,
aut  cum  jubet  ei  qui  vi  possessione
fundi  dejectus  sit,  restitui  posses-
sionem. Exhibitoria  sunt  per  qu£e
jubet  exhiberi,  veluti  eum  cujus  de
libertate  agitur,  aut  libertum  cui
patronus  operas  indicere  velit,  aut
parent!  liberos  qui  in  potestate  ejus
sunt.  Sunt  tamen  qui  putant  pro-
prie  interdicta  ea  vocari  qua3  prohi-
bitoria sunt,  quia  interdicere  est  de-
nuntiare  et  prohibere  ;  restitutoria
autem  et  exhibitoria  proprie  decreta
vocari ;  sed  tamen  obtinuit  omnia
interdicta  appellari,  quia  inter  duos
dicuntur.

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  XV.  481

the  words  veto  or  vim  fieri  veto.  That  forbidding  nuisances  in
public  ways  ran  thus : —

In  via  publica  itinereve  publico  facere,  immittere  quid,  quo  ea
via  idve  iter  deterius  fiat,  veto.     (D.  xliii.  8.  2.  20.)

That  forbidding  interruption  in  the  use  of  a  burial-ground  ran
thus : —

Quo  quave  illi  (the  person  protected),  inferre  invito  te  (the
person  against  whom  the  interdict  wasgranted),j*z^5  est^  quominus
illi  eo  eave  mortuum  inferre  et  ibi  sepelire  liceat,  vim  fieri  veto,
(D.  xi.  8.  1.)  Other  prohibitory  interdicts  may  be  found  relating
to  sacred  places  (D.  xi.  8.  1),  tombs  (D.  xi.  8.  1),  public  places
(D.  xliii.  8.  2.  20),  navigation  (D.  xliii.  12.  1).

Restitutory  interdicts  ran,  for  example,  thus  : —

Quod  in  fiumine  publico  ripave  ejus  factum,  sive  quid  in  flu-
men  ripamve  ejus  immissum  liabes  si  ob  id  oliter  aqua  fiuit,  atque
uti  prior e  (Estate  fluxit,  restituas,     (D.  xliii.  13.  11.)

Restituere  is  used  in  a  very  wide  sense,  as  it  includes  not  only,
as  in  this  example,  putting  back  things  into  the  state  they  were
before,  and  giving  back  possession,  but  giving  possession  to  a  per-
son who  had  not  had  possession.

Of  exhibitory  interdicts,  which  were  used  as  the  preliminary
of  a  vindication,  we  may  take  as  a  specimen  that  de  libero  homine
exhibendo,  granted  to  make  any  one  who  had  a  freeman  in  his  cus-
tody produce  him,  and  thus  render  it  impossible  that  he  should
be  illegally  retained  in  his  custody.     It  ran  thus  : —

Quern  liberum  dolo  malo  retineas,  exhibeas.  (D.  xliii.  29.  1.)

2.  Sequens  divisio  interdictorum  2.  The  second  division  of  interdicts
hsec  est,  quod  qiiaedam  adipiscendse  is,  that  they  are  given  to  some  to  ac-
possessionis  causa  comparata  sunt,  quire,  some  to  retain,  and  others  to
qusedam  retinendse,  qusedam  recu-  recover  possession.

perandie.

Gai.  iv.  143.

As  interdicts  were  mainly  applied  to  questions  of  the  possessory
rights  of  private  persons,  those  interdicts  which  distinctly  referred  to
such  possession  are  here  classed  together.  But  they  fall  under  the
heads  of  the  first  division.  Interdicts  retinendcB  possessionis  were
prohibitory ;  interdicts  adipiscendcB  or  recuperandce  possessionis
were  restitutory.

3.  Adipiscendse  possessionis  causa  3.  To  acquire  possession  an  inter-
interdictum  accommodatur  bonorum  diet  is  given  to  the  honorunn  possessor,
possessori,  quod  appellatur  quorum  termed  Quorum  honorum,  of  which  the
bonorum.  Ejusque  vis  et  potestas  effect  is  to  compel  the  person  possess-
hsec  est,  ut  quod  ex  iis  bonis  quisque  ing,  as  heir  or  possessor,  any  of  the
quorum  possessio  alicui  data  est,  pro  goods  of  which  the  possession  is  given,
herede  aut  pro  possessore  possideat,  to  make  restitution  to  the  bonorum
id  ei  cui  bonorum  possessio  data  est  possessor.  A  person  is  said  to  possess
restituere  debeat.  Pro  herede  autem  as  heir,  who  thinks  himself  to  be  heir,
possidere  videtur,  qui  putat  se  here-  and  as  possessor,  who,  without  any
dem  esse  ;  pro  possessore  is  possidet,  right,  and  knowing  that  it  does  not
qui  nullo  jure  rem  hereditariam  vel  belong  to  him,  possesses  a  part  or  the

I  I

482  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XV.

etiam  totam  hereditatem,  sciens  ad  whole  of  an  inheritance.     It  is  said  of

so  non  pertinere,   possidet.      Ideo  this  interdict,  that  it  is  given  to  acquire

autem  adipiscendee  possessionis  vo-  possession,  because  it  is  only  available

catur  interdictum,  quia  ei  tantum  for  a  person  who  wishes  to  gain,  for

utile  est  qui  nunc  primum  conatur  the  first  time,  possession  of  a  thing,

adipisci  rei  possessionem :  itaque  si  If,  then,  a  person  who  has  gained  pos-

quis  adeptus  possessionem  amiserit  session  loses  it,  he  cannot  avail  him-

eam,  hoc  interdictum  ei  inutile  est.  self  of  this  interdict.     There  is,  too,

Interdictum    quoque    quod    appel-  another  interdict  given  to  acquire  pos-

latur   Salvianum,   adipiscendae  pos-  session,    viz.    the   interdictum   Salvia-

sessionis    causa     comparatum    est,  num.,  to  which  an  owner  of  land  has

eoque  utitur  dominus  fundi  de  re-  recourse  to  enforce  his  right  over  the

bus  coloni,  quas  is  pro  mercedibus  things  belonging  to  the  farmer,  which

fundi  pignori  futuras  pepigisset.  the  farmer  has  pledged  as  a  security

for  his  r^Qt.

Gai.  iv.  144.  147.

The  interdict  Quorum  honorum  ran  thus  : —

Quorum  honorum  ex  edicto  meo  illipossessio  data  est,  quod  de  his
bonis  pro  herede  aut  pro  possessore  possides,  possideresve  si  nihil
usucaptum  esset,  quod  quidem  dolo  fecisti  ut  desineres  possidere,  id
illi  restituas,  (D.  xliii.  2.)  Although  the  interdict  was  only  given
when  the  honorum  possessor  had  never  before  had  possession,  yet  it
was  restitutory,  a  term  used  very  widely,  as  has  been  observed  in
the  note  to  paragr.  1,  and  the  wordi  restituas  appears  in  its  terms.
Restituas,  therefore,  must  be  used  as  meaning  *  to  give  up,'  not  ^  to
give  back.'

The  use  of  this  interdict  was  to  secure  the  possession  to  those
whom  the  praetor  treated  as  having  a  right  to  the  inheritance,  but
who  had  not  a  right  recognised  by  the  civil  law.  Not  being
heirs,  properly  so  called,  they  could  not  bring  a  real  action  for  the
inheritance.  (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  9.)  It  will  be  observed  from  the
formula  that  the  interdict  might  be  used  against  the  person  pos-
sessing pro  herede  or  pro  possessore,  although  the  time  of  usu-
capion had  run  in  his  favour,  and  against  such  a  person  if,  having
possessed,  he  had,  through  dolus  malus  on  his  part,  ceased  to
possess.  The  person  possessing  pro  possessore,  i.e.  without  any  alle-
gation of  title,  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  prcedo.    (See  page  439.)

We  must  not  confound  the  interdictum  Salvianum  with  the
actio Serviana  (see  Tit.  fi.  7),  but  it  was  probably  only  a  step  to
that  action,  and  may  have  fallen  into  disuse  when  the  actio  Serviana
was  established  as  a  means  of  redress  for  the  creditor.  The  inter-
dictum Salvianum  was  not  given  to  every  mortgage  creditor,  but
only  to  the  owner  of  a  rural  estate,  as  a  means  of  getting  posses-
sion of  the  goods  of  the  occupier  of  the  estate  which  had  been
pledged  for  the  rent.  Probably  the  interdict  was  granted  even  if
the  goods  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  third  party.  (D.  xliii.
33.  1,  but  see  C.  viii.  9.  1.)  Gains  mentions  two  other  interdicts
coming  under  this  head,  one  given  to  honorum  emptores,  and  one  to
sectores,  or  purchasers  of  public  goods,     (iv.  155,  156.)

4.  Retmendae  possessionis  causa  4.  To  retain  possession  there  are

comparata  sunt  interdicta  uti  possi-     given  the  interdicts  uti  possidetis  and

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XV.

483

utruhi,  when,  in  a  dispute  as  to  the
ownership  of  a  thing,  a  dispute  first
rises  which  of  the  parties  ought  to  be
possessor  and  which  plaintiff.  For,
unless  it  is  first  determined  to  which
the  possession  belongs,  it  is  impossible
to  shaj)e  the  real  action,  as  law  and
reason  both  require  that  one  party
should  possess,  and  the  other  bring
his  claim  against  him.  And  as  it  is
much  more  advantageous  to  possess
than  to  claim  the  thing,  there  is  gene-
rally a  keen  dispute  as  to  the  right  to
possess.  The  advantage  of  possession
consists  in  this,  that  even  if  the  thing
does  not  really  belong  to  the  possessor,
yet,  if  the  plaintiff  does  not  prove
himself  to  be  the  owner,  the  possessor
still  remains  in  possession,  and,  there-
fore, when  the  rights  of  the  parties
are  doubtful,  it  is  customary  to  decide
against  the  claimant.  The  interdict
uti  possidetis  applies  to  the  possession
of  land  and  buildings,  the  interdict
utruhi  to  that  of  moveables.  There
were  formerly  great  differences  in
their  effects ;  for,  in  the  interdict
uti  possidetis,  he  prevailed  who  was
in  possession  at  the  time  of  the  in
terdict,  provided  that  he  had  not
acquired  possession  from  his  adver-
sary by  force,  or  clandestinely,  or  as  a
concession  ;  but  it  made  no  difference
if  he  had  acquired  it  from  any  one
else,  by  forcibly  expelling  him,  secretly
depriving  him  of  possession,  or  obtain-
ing from  him  possession  as  a  conces-
sion. In  the  interdict  utruhi,  on  the
contrary,  he  prevailed,  who  during
the  greater  part  of  the  preceding  year
had  had  the  possession  without  having
obtained  it  as  against  his  adversary  by
force,  clandestinely,  or  as  a  concession.
At  the  present  day  it  is  different,  for
the  two  interdicts  have  the  same  effect
as  regards  possession,  so  that  whether
the  thing  claimed  is  an  immoveable  or
a  moveable,  he  prevails,  who,  at  the
time  of  the  litis  contestatio,  is  in  pos-
session, without  having  obtained  it  as
against  his  adversary  by  force,  clan-
destinely, or  as  a  concession.

Oai.  iv.  148-150 ;  D.  vi.  1.  24;  D.  xliii.  17.  1 ;  D.  xliii.  31 ;  C.  iv.  19.  2.

The  interdict  uti  possidetis  ran  thus  : —

Uti  eas  aides,  quihus  de  agitur,  nee  vi,  nee  clam,  nee  precario
alter  ah  altera  possidetis,  quominus  ita  possideatls  vim  fieri  veto.
(D.  xliii.  17.  1.)

It  was  granted  to  defend  the  possession  of  all  immoveables^

I  I  2

-detis  et  utrubi,  cum  ab  utraque  parte
de  proprietate  alien  jus  rei  contro-
versia  sit,  et  ante  quseritur  uter  ex
litigatoribus  possidere,  et  uter  petere
debeat  :  namque,  nisi  ante  explora-
rtum  fuerit  utrius  eorum  possessio
sit,  non  potest  petitoria  actio  insti-
tui,  quia  et  civilis  et  naturalis  ratio
facit  ut  alius  possideat,  alius  a  pos-
sidente  petat.  Et  quia  longe  com-
modius  est  possidere  potius  quam
petere,  ideo  plerumque  et  fere  sem-
j)er  ingens  existit  contentio  de  ipsa
possessione.  Commodum  autem  pos-
sidendi  in  eo  est,  quod  etiamsi  ejus
res  non  sit  qui  possidet,  si  modo
actor  non  potuerit  suam  esse  pro-
bare,  remanet  suo  loco  possessio  :
propter  quam  causam,  cum  obscura
-sunt  utriusque  jura,  contra  petito-
rem  judicari  solet.  Sed  interdicto
quidem  uti  possidetis  de  fundi
vel  medium  possessione  contenditur,
utrubi  vero  interdicto  de  rerum
mobilium  possessione.  Quorum  vis
ac  potestas  plurimam  inter  se  diffe-
rentiam  apud  veteres  habebat :  nam
uti  possidetis  interdicto  is  vincebat,
qui  interdicti  tempore  possidebat,  si
■modo  nee  vi  nee  clam  nee  precario
nactus  fuerat  ab  adversario  posses-
sionem, etiamsi  alium  vi  expulerat,
aut  clam  arripuerat  alienam  posses-
sionem, aut  precario  rogaverat  ali-
quem  ut  sibi  possidere  liceret ;  utrubi
vero  interdicto  is  vincebat,  qui  ma-
jore  parte  ejus  anni  nee  vi  nee  clam
nee  precario  ab  adversario  posside-
bat. Hodie  tamen  aliter  observatur ;
nam  utriusque  interdicti  potestas
(quantum  ad  possessionem  pertinet)
exsequata  est :  ut  ille  vincat  et  in  re
soli  et  in  re  mobili,  qui  possessionem
nee  vi  nee  clam  nee  precario  ab  ad-
versario litis  contestatse  tempore
detinet.

484  LIB.  IV.     TIT.  XV.

except  cloaccB,  which,  were  expressly  excepted  by  the  praetor's  edict.
The  word  cedes  in  the  text  of  the  interdictis  only  an  example.

By  -possessing  precario  is  meant  possessing  by  having  extorted
possession  by  prayer  and  entreaties.  When  the  person  from
whom  the  possession  had  been  extorted  wished  to  do  so,  he  could
always  resume  it ;  and  hence  the  word  precarius  came  to  mean
uncertain.  Perhaps  the  origin  of  precaria  possessio  was  the  in-
terest that  clients  had  in  a  portion  of  the  ager  publicus,  which
their  patron  might  permit  them  to  use,  and  which  they  were  bound
to  restore  immediately  if  their  patron  demanded  it  back.

The  words  alter  ah  altera  are  inserted,  because  it  would  be  no
ground  for  disturbing  the  possession  that  it  had  been  obtained  vi,
clam,  or  precario,  unless  it  had  been  so  obtained  from  the  other
litigant  party.

It  was  necessary  that  application  should  be  made  for  this  in-
terdict within  a  year  after  the  security  of  the  possession  had  been
threatened.  (D.  xliii.  17.  1.)  It  did  not  signify  how  it  had
been  threatened.  The  text  only  refers  to  the  case  of  an  action
being  brought  to  dispute  it,  but  the  interdict  would  be  granted  in
whatever  way  the  possession  had  been  attacked.

The  interdict  utruhi  ran  thus : —

TJtruhl  hie  homo  quo  de  oqitur  majore  parte  hujusce  anni  fuity
quominus  is  eum  ducat,  vim  Jiero  veto.     (D.  xliii.  31.)

The  example  is  taken  from  the  case  of  the  disputed  possession
of  a  slave,  but  the  interdict  applied  to  the  case  of  all  moveables»
This  interdict  was  considered  one  retinendce  possessionis,  although,
as  it  was  granted  to  the  person  who  had  possessed  during  the
greater  part  of  the  preceding  year,  it  might  happen  that  it  was
granted  to  a  person  who  had  not  the  possession  at  the  exact  time
it  was  granted,  but  who  had  possessed  the  thing  during  more
months  in  the  year  than  the  person  Y\^ho  happened  to  be  in  pos-
session at  the  end  of  the  year.

5.  Possidere  autem  videtur  quis-  5.  A  person  is  considered  to  pos-

que,  non   solum  si  ipse  possideat,  sess  not  only  when  he  himself  pos-

sed  et  si  ejus  nomine  aliquis  in  pos-  sesses,    but    also    if    any    one   is    in

sessione  sit,  licet  is  ejus  juri  sub-  possession  in  his  name,  although  not

jectus  non  sit,  qualis  est  colon  us  et  a  person  in  his  power,  as  the  tenant

inquilinus.     Per  eos   quoque   apud  of  a  farm  or  building.     He  may  also

quos   deposuerit   quis,    aut    quibus  possess    through    a    depositary    or   a

commodaverit,    ipse    possidere    vi-  borrower,  and  this  it  is  that  is  meant

detur  ;    et    hoc    est   quod    dicitur,  by  saying,  that  a  person  may  retain

retinere  i)ossessionem  posse  aliquem  possession  by  any  other  who  possesses

per  quemlibet  qui  ejus  nomine  sit  in  his  name.     Moreover,  it  is  held  that

in   possessione.      Quinetiam   animo  possession  may  be  retained  by  mere

quoque  retineri  possessionem  placet,  intention  only,  that  is,  that  although  a

id  est,  ut  quamvis   neque  ipse  sit  person  is  not  in  possession  himself,  nor

in  possessione,  neque  ejus  nomine  is  any  one  else  in  his  name,  yet,  if  it  is

alius,  tamen  si  non  derelinquendse  not  with  any  intention  of  abandoning

possessionis  animo,  sed   postea  re-  the  thing,  but  of  returning  again  to  it,

versurus   inde   discesserit,    retinere  that  he  has  placed  himself  at  a  dis-

possessionem     videatur.       Adipisci  tance  from  it,  he  is  considered  still  to

vero  possessionem  per  quos  aliquis  retain  the  possession.     Through  whom

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XV.

485

potest,  secundo  libro  exposuimus ;  possession  may  be  acquired,  we  have

nee  uUa  dubitatio  est  quin  animo  already  explained  in  the  Second  Book,

solo    adipisci    possessionem     nemo  But  it  most  certainly  can  never  be  ac-

potest.  quired  by  mere  intention  only.

Gai.  iv.  153.

In  tlie  introductory  note  to  Bk.  ii.  Tit.  6,  the  distinction  has
been  pointed  out  between  civilis  possessio,  that  is,  possession  bona
jide  and  ex  just  a  causa.,  which  could  be  transmuted  by  usucapion
into  ownership,  and  naturalis  possessio,  which  again  is  divided  into
possessio  where,  although  there  is  not  possession  such  as  will  ripen
by  usucapion,  there  is  still  possession  as  a  matter  of  fact,  coupled
with  the  intention  of  treating  the  thing  as  if  the  possessor  were
the  owner,  and  in  possessione  esse,  where  the  person  has  the  deten-
tio,  but  not  the  animus  possidendi.  Civilis  possessio  and  naturalis
j)ossessio  with  the  intention  of  ownership  were  protected  by  these
possessory  interdicts,  whereas  the  being  merely  in  possession  was
not.  This  paragraph  points  out  (1)  that  one  person  may  be  in
possession  while  another  is  the  possessor,  and  that  the  first  is  not,
while  the  second  is,  entitled  to  the  interdicts  ;  and  (2)  that  a  pos-
sessor may  sometimes  possess  only  with  the  animus  without  being
actually  on  the  spot  possessing.  An  instance  given  in  Gains  is
that  of  a  man  who  possesses  a  mountain  pasture,  and  leaves  it  when
the  season  for  its  use  is  over,  with  the  intention  of  returning.
(Gai.  iv.  153),  although  the  mere  intention  to  possess  as  owner,
without  the  physical  fact  of  detention  having  ever  taken  place,
was  of  no  avail.

6.  Recuperandsepossessionis  causa
solet  interdici,  si  quis  ex  possessione
fundi  vel  sediiim  vi  dejectus  fuerit ;
nam  ei  proponitur  interdictum  unde
vi,  per  quod  is  qui  dejecit,  cogitur
«i  restituere  possessionem,  licet  is  ab
eo  qui  dejecit  vi  vel  clam  vel  precario
possidebat.  Sed  ex  constitutionibus
sacris,  ut  supra  diximus,  si  quis  rem
per  vim  occupaverit,  si  quidem  in
bonis  ejus  est,  dominio  ejus  priva-
tur ;  si  aliena,  post  ejus  restitutionem
etiam  sestimationem  rei  dare  vim
passo  compellitur.  Qui  autem  ali-
quem  de  possessione  per  vim  deje-
cerit,  tenetur  lege  Julia  de  vi  pri-
vata,  aut  de  vi  publica  :  sed  de  vi
privata,  si  sine  armis  vim  fecerit ;
sin  autem  cum  armis  eum  de  pos-
sessione expulerit,  de  vi  publica.
Armorum  autem  appellatione  non
solum  scuta  et  gladios  et  galeas  sig-
nificari  intelligimus,  sed  et  fustes  et
lapides.

6.  To  recover  possession  an  inter-
dict is  given  in  case  any  one  has  been
expelled  by  violence  from  the  posses-
sion of  land  or  a  building.  He  has
then  given  him  the  interdict  unde  vi,
by  which  he  who  has  expelled  him  is
forced  to  restore  to  him  the  posses-
sion, although  the  person  to  whom  the
interdict  is  given  has  himself  taken  by
force,  clandestinely,  or  as  a  concession,
the  possession  from  the  person  who
has  expelled  him.  But,  as  we  have
said  above,  the  imperial  constitutions
provide  that  if  any  one  seizes  on  a
thing  by  violence,  he  shall  lose  the
ownership  of  it,  if  it  is  a  part  of  his
own  goods,  and  if  it  belongs  to  another,
he  shall  not  only  restore  it,  but,  in
addition,  pay  to  the  i)erson  who  has
sustained  the  injury,  the  amount  at
which  the  thing  is  estimated.  More-
over, a  jjerson  who  has  expelled  by
violence  another  from  his  possession,
is  liable  under  the  lex  Julia  for  pri-
vate or  for  pubHc  violence  ;  for  private
violence,  if  his  violence  was  exercised
without  the  use  of  arms ;  for  public

486  LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XV.

violence,  if  the  expulsion  from  pos-
session was  made  by  armed  force.
Under  the  term  arms  are  included,
not  only  shields,  swords,  and  helmets^
but  sticks  and  stones.

Gai.  iv.  154,  155 ;  D.  xlviii.  7  ;  D.  1.  16.  41 ;  C.  viii.  4.  7.

The  interdict  wide  vi  ran  thus : —

Unde  tu  ilium,  vi  dejecisti,  aiit  familia  tua  dejecit,  de  eo,  quce-
que  ille  tunc  ihi  hahuit,  tantummodo  intra  annum,  post  annum  de  eo
quod  ad  eum  qui  vi  dejecit  pervenerit,  judicium  daho.  (D.  xliii,
16.  1.)

Formerly  a  distinction  was  made  in  granting  this  interdict,
according  to  the  degree  of  violence  used.  If  it  had  been  ordinary-
violence  {vis  quotidiand),  the  interdict  was  only  granted  if  the.
possession  had  not  been  obtained  vi,  clam,  or  precario,  with  respect
to  the  adversary  (Gai.  iv.  144),  and  could  only  be  obtained
within  a  year ;  but  if  vis  armata  had  been  employed,  the  interdict
was  granted  in  all  cases.  (Cic.  Epist.  xv.  16.)  This  difference  had
ceased  long  before  the  time  of  Justinian,  and  apparently  before
the  time  when  the  interdict  assumed  the  shape  in  which  we  now
find  it  in  the  Digest,  by  which,  as  will  be  seen,  possession  was  given
within  a  year,  of  the  thing  as  it  then  was ;  after  a  year,  only  of  the^
thing  as  it  came  into  the  hands  of  the  dispossessor.

The  interdict  unde  vi  only  applied  to  immoveables  (D.  xliii..
16.  6)  ;  but  the  constitution  of  Valentinian,  Theodosius,  and  Ar-
cadian, A.D.  389,  referred  to  in  the  text  (and  in  Tit.  2.  1),  pro-
tected moveables  as  well  as  immoveables.     (C.  viii.  4.  7.)

The  lex  Julia  de  vi  is  treated  of  in  Tit.  18.  8.

Possession  could  be  recovered  by  uti  and  utrubi  possidetis  as
well  as  by  unde  vi,  and  it  was  by  utruhi  possidetis  that,  previously
to  the  constitution  above  mentioned,  possession  of  moveables  was
recovered.  But  the  interdict  unde  vi  was  in  some  respects  more-
advantageous  than  uti  possidetis,  (1)  It  gave  a  remedy  where
not  the  dispossessor,  but  a  third  person,  was  in  possession  (D.  xliii..
16.  1.  40)  ;  (2)  it  gave,  if  brought  within  a  year,  t]iQfructus  from
the  time  of  the  ejectment,  not  as  uti  possidetis  merely  from  the
commencement  of  proceedings  (D.  xliii.  16.  1.  40)  ;  and  (3)  it  was
not,  if  the  vis  had  been  armata,  or  after  the  distinction  between  the
characters  of  the  violence  employed  had  been  done  away,  barred
by  the  vices  of  the  possession  of  the  applicant  for  the  interdict  ;>
(4)  it  applied  not  only  to  immoveables,  but  to  any  moveables^
thereon.     (D.  xliii.  16.  1.  6.)

There  were  other  interdicts  under  the  head  of  recuperandcB
possessionis— that  de  precario  and  that  de  clandestina  possessionem
(D.  xliii.  26.  2,  pr. ;  D.  x.  3.  7.  5) ;  but  little  is  known  of  them.

7.    Tertia  divisio   interdictorum  7.  The  third  division  of  interdicts,

hsec  est,  quod  aut  simplicia  sunt,     is,   that    they  are    either    simple   or
aut  duplicia.     Simplicia  sunt,  veluti    double.     Those  are  simple  in  whiclt.

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  X7.

487

in  quibus  alter  actor,  alter  reus  est,
qualia  sunt  omnia  restitutoria  aut
exhibitoria  :  namque  actor  est,  qui
desiderat  aut  exhiberi  aut  restitui,
reus  est  is  a  quo  desideratur  ut  resti-
tuat  aut  exhibeat.  Prohibitoriorum
autem  interdictorum  alia  simplicia
sunt,  veluti  cum  prohibet  praetor  in
loco  sacro  vel  in  flumine  publico
ripave  ejus  aliquid  fieri  ;  nam  actor
est  qui  desiderat  ne  quid  fiat,  reus
est  qui  aliquid  facere  conatur.  Du-
plicia  sunt,  veluti  uti  possidetis  in-
terdictum  et  utrubi ;  ideo  autem
duplicia  vocantur,  quia  par  utrius-
que  litigatoris  in  his  conditio  est,
nee  quisquam  prsecipue  reus  vel
actor  intelligitur,  sed  unusquisque
tarn  rei  quam  actoris  partes  sustinet.

one  person  is  plaintiff  and  the  other
defendant,  as  is  the  case  in  all  that
are  restitutory  or  exhibitory.  For  he
is  the  plaintiff  who  wishes  that  a  thing
shall  be  exhibited  or  restored,  and  he
is  defendant  against  whom  the  claim
is  made.  But  of  prohibitory  inter-
dicts some  are  simple,  some  double  :
simple,  as,  for  instance,  when  the  prae-
tor forbids  anything  to  be  done  in  a
sacred  place,  or  in  a  public  river,  or
on  its  banks ;  for  he  is  plaintiff  who
wishes  that  the  thing  should  not  be
done,  and  he  is  defendant  who  wishes
to  do  it :  double,  as  in  the  case  of  the
interdicts  uti  possidetis  and  utruhi ;
and  these  interdicts  are  called  double,
because  in  them  the  position  of  each
party  is  equal,  for  neither  can  be  said
to  be  properly  plaintiff  or  defendant,
but  each  is  at  once  plaintiff  and  de-
fendant.

Gai.  iv.  156-160.

Diiplicia  sunt^  veluti  uti  J)  OS  sidetis  inter  dictum  et  utruhi.  These
interdicts  here  and  in  Gains  (Gai.  iv.  160)  are,  seemingly,  only
adduced  as  examples,  but  we  know  of  no  others  having  the  same
character.

8.  De  ordine  et  vetere  exitu  in-
terdictorum supervacuum  est  hodie
dicere  ;  nam  quoties  extra  ordinem
jus  dicitur  (qualia  sunt  hodie  omnia
judicia),  non  est  necesse  reddi  in-
terdictum ;  sed  perinde  judicatur
sine  interdictis,  ac  si  utilis  actio  ex
causa  interdicti  reddita  fuisset.

8.  Of  the  process  and  effect  of  in-
terdicts in  former  times  it  would  be
now  superfluous  to  speak.  For  when-
ever the  jurisdiction  is  extraordinary,
as  is  the  case  now  in  all  actions,  there
is  no  necessity  for  an  interdict ;  for
judgment  is  given  without  interdicts,
exactly  as  if  a  utilis  actio  had  been
given  in  pursuance  of  an  interdict.

C.  viii.  1.  3.

From  the  Institutes  of  Gains  we  gather  a  general  notion  of
the  manner  in  which  the  proceedings  on  an  interdict  were  con-
ducted. But  the  text  of  Gains  is,  in  this  part,  very  imperfect
and  difficult  to  understand,  and  as  the  whole  process  was  obsolete
in  the  time  of  Justinian,  a  very  short  sketch  of  the  proceedings
must  suffice  here.

The  parties  were  made  to  appear  in  jure  exactly  in  the  same
way  when  an  interdict  was  to  be  applied  for  as  when  an  action
was  to  be  brought.  The  prsetor  heard  the  statement  of  the  party
who  made  the  application,  and  if  the  adversary  confessed  the
truth  of  the  statement,  or  the  facts  were  manifest,  the  praetor  an-
nounced his  decree  at  once,  and  had  it  executed,  if  necessary,  by
the  strong  arm  of  the  law  {manu  militari).  If  the  merits  of  the
case  were  doubtful,  and  the  defendant  asserted  that  he  had  not
done  wrong,  the  prajtor  gave  an  action  based  upon  the  interdict,  to
ascertain  whether  the  facts  were  as  the  plaintiff,  in  applying  for

488  LIB.  IV.     TIT.  XVI.

the  interdict,  alleged  ;  that  is,  the  intentio  of  the  formula  was  the
language  of  the  interdict  put  as  a  hypothetical  case.  The  interdict
would  run, — Hoc  vel  illud  te  facere  veto :  the  intentio,  Si  hoc  vel
illud  A.  A.  fecerit  (^condemna,  &c.).  The  parties  bound  themselves
by  a  sponsio  and  restipulatio  in  a  penal  sum,  which  the  defendant
was  to  pay  if  he  was  in  the  wrong,  and  to  receive  if  he  was  not.
But  this  practice,  which  was  always  adopted  when  the  interdict  was
prohibitory,  was  probably  gradually  abandoned  when  the  interdict
was  restitutory  or  exhibitory  ;  and  in  these  cases,  in  order  to  com-
pel the  actual  performance  of  the  act  ordered  by  the  prsetor,  an
action  was  given  with  a  formula  arhitraria,  so  that  the  judex
might  issue  a  preparatory  order  to  the  defendant,  and,  if  it  was
not  complied  with,  might  make  him  pay  the  amount  of  all  damage
sustained  (^quanti  ea  res  erit),     (Gai.  iv.  161,  and  foil.)

Tit.  XVI.    DE  PCENA  TEMERE  LITIGANTIUM.

Nunc  admonendi  sumus  magnam  We   may  here   observe,   that   the

curam  egisse  eos  qui  jura  sustine-  authors  and  preservers  of  our  law
bant,  ne  facile  homines  ad  litigan-  have  always  sought  most  anxiously
dum  procederent,  quod  et  nobis  to  hinder  men  from  engaging  too
studio  est ;  idque  eo  maxime  fieri  recklessly  in  law-suits,  and  it  is  what
potest,  quod  temeritas  tam  agentium  we  ourselves  desire  also.  And  the  best
quam  eorum  cum  quibus  ageretur,  method  of  succeeding  in  it  is,  to  repress
modo  pecuniaria  pcena,  modo  juris-  the  rashness  alike  of  plaintiffs  and  of
jurandi  religione,  modo  infamise  defendants,  sometimes  by  a  pecuniary
metu  coercetur.  penalty,  sometimes  by  the  sacred  tie  of

an  oath,  sometimes  by  the  fear  of  in-
famy.

Gai.  iv.  174,  and  foil.

In  the  days  of  Gains,  the  means  of  punishing  persons  who
recklessly  brought  or  defended  a  suit  were  more  numerous.  The
plaintiff  was  restrained  from  recklessly  bringing  an  action  not
only  by  being  condemned  in  damages  and  costs,  but  (1)  by  an
action  of  calumny — that  is,  the  defendant  could  bring  against  a
plaintiff  who  had  sued  him  dishonestly  an  action  by  which  the
defendant  could  recover  one-tenth  of  what  the  plaintiff  had
claimed,  if  by  action,  and  one-fourth  of  what  he  had  claimed,  if  by
interdict  (Gai.  iv.  1175);  (2)  by  what  was  termed  the  "contrary
action "  the  unsuccessful  plaintiff,  although  he  had  honestly
brought  his  action,  was  made  to  pay  a  tenth  or  a  fifth  of  what  he
claimed,  but  then  it  was  only  failing  in  a  few  special  actions,  such
as  that  injuriarum,  that  exposed  him  to  this  risk ;  (3)  by  oath,
i.e.  by  the  defendant  calling  on  him  to  swear  to  his  bona  fides,  but
if  the  defendant  did  this,  he  could  not  afterwards  bring  an  action
of  calumny,  or  the  contrary  action ;  and  (4)  by  restipulatio,  i.e.  by
being  called  on  to  wager  a  sum  to  be  lost  if  he  failed,  which  was
allowed  in  certain  actions  ;  this  mode  of  proceeding  excluded  the
three  others  previously  mentioned.

In  the  law  as  described  by  Gaius,  the  defendant  was  restrained
from  recklessly  defending  an  action  (1)   by  the  sponsio,  or  wager

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVI.

489

that  he  would  lose,  allowed  in  certain  actions  (the  sponsio  and
restipulatio  made  up  the  wager) ;  (2)  in  certain  actions,  as,  for
instance,  for  deposit  in  case  of  necessity,  the  penalty  was  double
in  case  of  denial  (Tit.  6.  17),  and  all  actions  with  a  penalty  are
looked  on  by  Gaius  as  restraining  the  defendant  (i v.  171);  (3)
if  the  case  was  one  where  no  restraint  operated  under  these  first
two  heads,  the  defendant  was  obliged  to  take  an  oath  of  hona  fides  ;
(4)  certain  actions  carried  infamy  with  them  against  the  persons
condemned.

1.  And  first,  under  our  constitu-
tion, an  oath  is  administered  to  all
defendants.  And  the  defendant  is
not  admitted  to  state  his  defence  until
he  has  sworn  that  it  is  from  a  persua-
sion of  the  goodness  of  his  own.  cause
that  he  resists  the  demand  of  the
plaintiff.  In  many  cases  the  action  is
raised  so  as  to  be  for  the  double  or
treble  value  against  those  who  deny;
for  instance,  in  the  case  of  wrongful
damage,  or  of  legacies  left  to  holy
places.  There  are  other  cases,  in
which,  from  the  beginning,  the  action
is  more  than  for  the  single  value,  as,
for  instance,  the  action /itr^i  manifesti
for  the  quadruple,  and  furti  nee  mani-
festi for  the  double.  In  these  cases
and  in  some  others,  whether  the  de-
fendant denies  or  confesses,  the  action
is  for  more  than  the  single  value.  The
litigiousness  of  the  plaintiff  is  also  re-
strained, for  he  is  obliged  by  our  con-
stitution to  take  the  oath  de  calwmnia.
The  advocates  also  of  each  party  take
an  oath  prescribed  by  another  of  our
constitutions.  All  these  formalities
have  been  introduced  to  replace  the
old  action  calumnise,  which  is  fallen
into  disuse,  for  it  subjected  the  plain-
tiff to  a  fine  of  the  tenth  of  the  value
of  the  thing  in  dispute  ;  but  we  have
never  known  this  penalty  enforced.
In  its  stead,  there  has,  in  the  first
place,  been  introduced  the  oath  we
have  just  mentioned  ;  and,  in  the  next
place,  a  person  who  brings  a  ground-
less action  is  made  to  reimburse  his
adversary  for  all  losses  and  expenses
he  has  been  put  to.

Gai.  iv.  173 ;  C.  ii.  59.  2  ;  C.  iii.  1.  13.  6  ;  C.  iii.  1.  14.  1.

For  the  terms  of  these  oaths  see  C.  ii.  59.  2 ;  C.  iii.  1.  14.  1.

Vel  tripli.     We  know  of  no  actions  in  which  there  was  a  penalty

of  treble  against  a  defendant  who  denied  the  claim.     Perhaps  the

word  tripli  has  slipped  in  from  the  text  of  Gaius,  in  which  it  refers

to  actions /wr^z  oblati,  &c.     (Gai.  iv.  171.  173.)

1.  Ecce  enim  jusjurandum  om-
nibus qui  conveniuntur,  ex  consti-
tutione  nostra  defertur  ;  nam  reus
non  aliter  suis  allegationibus  utitur,
nisi  prius  juraverit  quod  putans
sese  bona  instantia  uti  ad  contra-
dicendum  pervenit.  At  adversus
inficiantes  ex  quibusdam  causis  du-
j^li  vel  tripli  actio  constituitur,  vel-
uti  si  damni  injurias  aut  legatorum
locis  venerabilibus  relictorum  no-
mine agatur.  Statim  autem  ab  in-
itio pluris  quam  simpli  est  actio,
veluti  furti  manifesti  quadrupli,  nee
manifesti  dupli ;  nam  ex  his  causis
et  aliis  quibusdam.  sive  quis  neget
sive  fateatur,  pluris  quam  simpli
est  actio.  Item  actoris  quoque  ca-
iumnia  coercetur,  nam  etiam  actor
pro  calumnia  jurare  cogitur  ex  nostra
constitutione  ;  utriusque  etiam  partis
advocati  jusjurandum  subeunt,  quod
alia  nostra  constitutione  comprehen-
sum  est.  Haic  autem  omnia  pro  ve-
teris  calumniee  actione  introducta
sunt,  quse  in  desuetudinem  abiit,
quia  in  partem  decimam  litis  actores
mulctabat,  quod  numquam  factum
esse  invenimus  :  sed  pro  his  intro-
ductum  est  et  prsefatum  jusjuran-
dum, et  ut  improbus  litigator  et
damnum  et  impensas  litis  inferre
adversario  suo  cogatur.

490

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVI.

2.  Ex  quibusdam  judiciis  dam-
nati  ignominiosi  fiunt :  veluti  furti,
vi  bonorum  raptorum,  injuriarum,
de  dolo  ;  item  tiitelse,  mandati,  de-
posit! directis  non  contrariis  actioni-
bus  ;  item  pro  socio,  quse  ab  utraque
parte  directa  est,  et  ob  id  quilibet
ex  sociis  eo  judicio  damnatus  igno-
minia  notatur.  Sed  furti  quidem
aut  vi  bonorum  raptorum,  aut  in-
juriarum, aut  de  dolo,  non  solum
damnati  notantur  ignominia,  sed
etiam  pacti,  et  recte :  plurimum
enim  interest,  utrum  ex  delicto  ali-
quis  an  ex  contractu  debitor  sit.

2.  In  certain  actions  the  person
condemned  becomes  infamous,  as  in
the  actions  furti,  vi  bonorum  raptorumy
injuriarum,  de  dolo  ;  as  also  in  the  ac-
tions tutelae,  mandati,  depositi,  if  direct,,
but  not  if  contrary  ;  and  also  in  the
action  pro  socio,  which  is  direct,  by
whichever  of  the  contracting  parties^
it  may  be  brought,  and  in  which  in-
famy is  attached  to  whichever  of  these;
parties  may  be  condemned.  But  in
the  actions  furti,  vi  honorum  raptorum,
injuriarum,  and  de  dolo,  it  is  not  only
to  have  been  condemned  that  makes
a  person  infamous,  but  also  to  have
agreed  for  the  commission  of  the
offence  ;  and  rightly,  for  there  is  a
great  difference  in  being  debtor  by  a»
delict,  or  by  a  contract.

Gai.  iv.  182 ;  D.  iii.  2.  7.

Directis  non  contrariis.  Contraries  actiones  were  such  as
those  brought  against  the  pupil,  the  mandator,  or  depositor,  by  the
tutor,  mandatary,  or  depositary.  There  could  be  no  reason  why
infamy  should  attach  to  a  pupil  who  did  not  know  the  amount
of  the  claims  of  the  tutor,  or  to  a  depositor  who  did  not  know
the  amount  of  the  expenses  to  which  the  depositary  had  been  put.

The  consequences  of  infamy  were  to  prevent  the  guilty  person
from  being  a  witness,  receiving  any  public  honours,  or  bringing  a
public  prosecution.  We  have  also  seen  (Tit.  13.  11)  that,  pre-
vious to  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  a  person  declared  infamous
could  not  appear  as  procurator  in  the  cause  of  another.

3.  Omnium  autem  actionum  insti-
tuendarum  principium  ab  ea  parte
edicti  projBciscitur,  qua  praetor  edi-
cit  de  in  jus  vocando  ;  utique  enim
in  primis  adversarius  in  jus  vocan-
dus  est,  ad  eum  qui  jus  dicturus  sit.
Qua  parte  praetor  parentibus  et  pa-
tronis,  item  parentibus  liberisque
patronorum  et  patronarum  hunc
prsestat  honorem,  ut  non  aliter
liceat  liberis  libertisque  eos  in  jus
vocare,  quam  si  id  ab  ipso  praetore
postulaverint  et  impetraverint ;  et  si
quis  aliter  vocaverit,  in  eum  poenam
solidorum  quinquaginta  constituit.

3.  In  bringing  any  action,  the  first
thing  is,  to  comply  with  that  part  of
the  edict  in  which  the  praetor  treats
of  the  vocatio  in  jus.  For  the  de-
fendant must  always  be  summoned  in
jus,  i.e.  before  the  magistrate  who  has
the  jurisdiction.  In  this  part  of  the
edict  the  praetor  wishes  that  such  re-
spect should  be  shown  towards  ascen-
dants, patrons,  and  even  towards  the
ascendants  and  children  of  patrons,
that  children  and  freedmen  cannot
summon  them  in  jus,  unless  they  have
first  obtained  permission  from  the
praetor  ;  and  he  subjects  persons  who
summon  them  without  having  obtained
the  praetor's  permission,  to  a  penalty  of
fifty  solidi.

Gai.  iv.  46  ;  D.  ii.  4.  1  ;  D.  ii.  4.  4.  1  ;  D.  ii.  4.  24.

The  earliest  method  of  vocatio  in  jus  was  to  seize  on  the  de-
fendant, and  drag  him  before  a  magistrate.  Afterwards  the  seiz-
ing became  symbolical,  and  the  plaintiff  called  some  one  to  witness
that  the  defendant  had  been  seized,  but  would  not  come.

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVII.

491

Tit.  XYII.     DE  OFFICIO  JUDICIS.

Superest  ut  de  officio  judicis  dis-
piciamus.  Et  qiiidem  imprimis  il-
lud  observare  debet  judex,  ne  aliter
judicet  quam  legibus  aut  constitu-
tionibiis  aut  moribus  proditum  est.

It  remains  to  treat  of  the  office  of
the  judge.  His  first  care  ought  to  be,,
never  to  judge  otherwise  than  accord-
ing to  the  laws,  the  constitutions,  or
customary  usage.

D.  V.  1.  40.  1 ;  D.  xlviii.  10.  1.  3.

Judex  qui  contra  sacras  principum  constitutiones,  contra  jus
publicum  quod  apud  se  recitatum  est,  pronunciat,  in  insulamdepor-
tatur.     (Paul.  Sent.  v.  25.  4.)

If  the  judge  gave  a  sentence  manifestly  wrong,  or  if  the  sum
was  fixed  in  the  condemnation  by  the  praetor,  and  the  judge  con-
demned  the  defendant  in  a  different  sum  (see  Tit.  4.  9.  1.),  the
sentence  was  treated  as  void  without  any  appeal  being  necessary*
If  the  judge  was  mistaken,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  mode  in  which
he  regarded  some  fact,  an  appeal  was  allowed,  which  had  to  be
brought  within  two  days  (prolonged  to  ten  days  by  Justinian  in
Nov.  23)  after  the  sentence,  or  three  days  if  a  procurator,  and
not  the  party  himself,  had  conducted  the  suit.  The  appeal  lay
from  the  judge  back  to  the  praetor,  from  the  praetor  to  the  senate,
or,  in  later  times,  to  the  council  of  the  emperor  with  the  praetorian
praefect  as  its  head  judge,  and  finally  to  the  emperor  himself

1.  Ideoque  si  noxali  judicio  ad-
dictus  est,  observare  debet,  ut  si
condemnandus  videatur  dominus,
ita  debeat  condemnare :  Publium
Msevium  Lucio  Titio  decem  aureos
condemno,  aut  noxam  dedere.

1.  Consequently,  in  a  noxal  action,
if  he  thinks  the  master  ought  to  be
condemned,  he  ought  thus  to  shape  the
condemnation  :  '  I  condemn  Publius
Msevius  at  the  suit  of  Lucius  Titius
to  pay  ten  aurelj  or  to  abandon  the
cause  of  the  injury.'

D.  xlii.  1.  6.  1.

2.  Et  si  in  rem  actum  sit,  sive
contra  petitorem  judicaverit,  ab-
solvere  debet  possessorem  ;  sive
contra  possessorem,  jubere  eum
debet  ut  rem  ipsam  restituat  cum
fructibus.  Sed  si  possessor  neget
in  prfesenti  se  restituere  posse,  et
sine  frustratione  videbitur  tempus
restituendi  causa  petere,  indulgen-
dum  est  ei,  ut  tamen  de  litis  sesti-
matione  caveat  cum  fidejussore,  si
intra  tempus  quod  ei  datum  est
non  restituisset.  Et  si  hereditas
petita  sit,  eadem  circa  fructus  in-
terveniunt,  quae  diximus  interve-
nire  in  singularum  rerum  petitione  :
illorum  autem  fructuum  quos  culpa
sua  possessor  non  perceperit,  in
utraque  actione  eadem  ratio  pene
habetur,  si   prsedo   fuerit ;   si  vero

2.  In  a  real  action,  if  he  determines
against  the  claimant,  he  ought  to  ab-
solve the  possessor ;  if  against  the
possessor,  he  ought  to  order  the  pos-
sessor to  give  up  the  thing  itself  to-
gether with  the  fruits.  But  if  the
possessor  states  that  it  is  out  of  his
power  to  give  up  the  thing  at  once,,
and  his  request  for  delay  seems  ho-
nestly made,  some  indulgence  should
be  accorded  him  ;  but  he  must  first
furnish  a  fidejussor  to  give  security
to  the  amount  of  the  value  of  the
thing  in  dispute,  in  case  he  should
not  restore  it  within  the  time  allowed
him.  If  the  action  is  for  an  inheri-
tance, the  rules  with  regard  to  the
fruits  are  the  same  as  those  we  have
laid  down  in  the  case  of  particular
things.     Of  the  fruits  not  gathered  by

492

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVII.

bona  fide  possessor  fuerit,  non  habe-
tur  ratio  consumptoruin,  neque  non
perceptorum.  Post  inchoatam  au-
tem  petitionem,  etiam  illorum  fruc-
tiium  ratio  liabetur  qui  culpa  pos-
sessoris  percepti  non  sunt,  vel  per-
oepti  consumpti  sunt.

the  fault  of  the  possessor,  account  is
taken  almost  in  the  same  way  in  both
actions,  when  the  possession  is  inala
Jide.  The  bona  fide  possessor  has  not
to  account  for  fruits,  whether  con-
sumed or  not  gathered.  But  from
the  time  when  the  claim  is  made,  the
possessor  has  to  account  for  all  fruits
not  gathered  through  his  fault,  or
gathered  and  consumed.

D.  vi.  1.  17.  1;  D.  vi.  1.  35.  1;  D.  vi.  1.  62.  1 ;  C.  iii.  32.  22.

What  the  words  eadem  pene  ratio  refer  to  is  not  easy  to  say.
Perhaps  they  may  have  reference  to  the  lesser  degree  of  severity
with  which  an  account  of  fruits  not  gathered  was  exacted  in  the
case  of  an  inheritance,  the  possessor  not  being  accountable  for  all,
but  only  for  those  which  it  could  be  fairly  said  he  ought  to  have
gathered.     (D.  v.  3.  25.  4.)

Justinian  here  says  that  the  position  of  a  bona  Jide  possessor
was  the  same  in  the  case  of  an  inheritance  and  of  a  particular  ob-
ject ;  for  that  in  neither  case  was  he  answerable  for  fruits  gathered
and  consumed.  But  this  was  not  the  case  after  a  senatus-con-
sultum  made  in  the  time  of  Hadrian  (D.  v.  3.  20.  6),  which  made
the  bona  Jide  possessor  of  an  inheritance  answerable  for  all  that
he  had  profited  by  (D.  v.  3.  28) ;  and  he  was  therefore  answerable
for  the  fruits  he  had  consumed.  Perhaps  the  text  may  be  based
on  some  passage  in  the  writings  of  a  jurist  who  wrote  before  the
senatus-consultum  was  made.

i

3.  Si  ad  exhibendum  actum  fue-
rit, non  sufficit  si  exhibeat  rem  is
cum  quo  actum  est ;  sed  opus  est  ut
etiam  rei  causam  debeat  exhibere,
id  est,  ut  eam  causam  habeat  actor
quam  habiturus  esset,  si  cum  primum
ad  exhibendum  egisset,  exhibita  res
fuisset :  ideoque  si  inter  moras  usu-
oapta  sit  res  a  possessore,  nihilominus
condemnabitur.  Prseterea  fructus
medii  temporis,  id  est,  ejus  quod
post  acceptum  ad  exhibendum  judi-
cium ante  rem  judicatam  intercessit,
rationem  habere  debet  judex.  Quod
si  neget  is  cum  quo  ad  exhibendum
actum  est,  in  praesenti  exhibere
posse,  et  tempus  exhibendi  causa
petat,  idque  sine  frustratione  postu-
lare  videatur,  dari  ei  debet,  ut  tamen
caveat  se  restituturum.  Quod  si
neque  statim  jussu  judicis  rem  ex-
hibeat, neque  postea  exhibiturum  se
caveat,  condemnandus  sit  in  id  quod
actoris  intererat  ab  initio  rem  ex-
hibitam  esse.

3.  In  the  action  ad  exhibendum  it
is  not  sufficient  that  the  defendant
exhibits  the  thing,  but  he  must  also
exhibit  everything  derived  from  the
thing,  that  is,  he  must  place  the
claimant  in  the  same  position  as  he
would  have  been  in,  if  the  thing  had
been  exhibited  immediately  on  the
demand  being  made.  If,  therefore,
during  the  delay,  the  possessor  com-
pletes the  usucapion  of  the  thing,  he
will  still  be  condemned.  The  judge
ought  also  to  make  him  account  for
the  fruits  of  the  intermediate  time,
that  is,  of  the  time  elapsed  between
the  granting  the  action  ad  exhibendum
and  the  sentence.  If  the  defendant
states  that  it  is  out  of  his  power  to
make  the  exhibition  immediately,  and
his  request  for  delay  seems  honestly
made,  he  should  have  time  given  him,
but  he  must  first  give  security  that  he
will  give  the  thing  up.  But  if  he
neither  exhibits  the  thing  at  once,
upon  the  order  of  the  judge,  nor  gives
security  for  exhibiting  it  afterwards,
he  must  be  condemned  in  an  amount

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVII.

493

D.  X.  4.  9.  5,  6

4.  Si  familise  erciscundse  judicio
actum  sit,  singulas  res  singulis
heredibus  adjudicare  debet  ;  et  si
in  alterius  persona  praegravare  yi-
deatur  adjudicatio,  debet  hunc  in-
vicem  coheredi  certa  pecunia,  sicut
jam  dictum  est,  condemnare.^  Eo
quoque  nomine  coheredi  quisqiie
suo  condemnandus  est,  quod  solus
fructus  hereditarii  fundi  percepit,
aut  rem  hereditariam  corruperit  aut
consumpserit.  Quae  quidem  simi-
liter inter  plures  quoque  quam  duos
coheredes  subsequuntur.

equivalent  to  the  interest  of  the  claim-
ant in  having  it  exhibited  immedi-
ately.

D.  X.  4.  12.  4,  5.

4.  In  the  action  familise  erciscun-
dse,  he  ought  to  adjudge  each  object
to  each  heir  separately,  and,  if  any
one  heir  has  more  than  his  share  ad-
judged him,  the  judge  ought,  as  we
have  said  above,  to  condemn  him  to
pay  his  coheir  a  fixed  sum  as  an
equivalent.  So,  too,  an  heir  ought  to
be  condemned  to  make  compensation
to  his  coheirs,  who  has  alone  enjoyed
the  fruits  of  the  land  of  the  inheritance,
or  has  damaged,  or  consumed  anything
forming  part  of  the  inheritance.  And
these  rules  apply,  whether  the  coheirs,
are  two  or  more.

D.  X.  2.  51,  52.  2.

As  to  the  office  of  the  judge  in  the  three  actions  noticed  in
this  and  the  two  succeeding  paragraphs,  see  Introd.  sec.  103.

5.  Eadem  interveniunt,  et  si
communi  dividundo  de  pluribus
rebus  actum  fuerit.  Quod  si  de
una  re,  veluti  fundo,  si  quidem  iste
fundus  commode  regionibus  divisio-
nem  recipiat,  partes  ejus  singulis
adjudicare  debet,  et  si  unius  pars
praegravare  videbitur,  is  invicem
certa  pecunia  alteri  condemnan-
dus est.  Quod  si  commode  dividi
non  possit,  veluti  homo  forte  aut
mulus  erit  de  quo  actum  sit,  tunc
totus  uni  adjudicandus  est,  et  is
invicem  alteri  certa  pecunia  con-
demnandus.

5.  It  is  the  same  in  the  action
communi  dividundo  for  the  division
of  a  number  of  things.  If  there  is
only  one  object  to  be  divided,  for
instance,  a  piece  of  land,  the  judge
ought,  if  the  land  easily  admits  of
division,  to  adjudge  their  respective
shares  to  the  several  co-proprietors.
And  if  one  of  them  receives  too  large
a  share,  the  judge  ought  to  order  him
to  pay  a  sum  of  money  as  compensa-
tion to  the  other.  If  the  thing  is  one
that  cannot  be  advantageously  divided,
as,  for  instance,  a  slave  or  mule,  then
the  whole  must  be  adjudged  to  one,
and  he  must  be  condemned  to  pay
a  fixed  sum  as  compensation  to  the
other.

D.  x.  2.  55 ;  C.  iii.  37.  3.

6.  Si  finium  regundorum  actum
fuerit,  dispicere  debet  judex  an
necessaria  sit  adjudicatio  :  quae  sane
uno  casu  necessaria  est,  si  eviden-
tioribus  finibus  distingui  agros  com-
modius  sit,  quam  olim  fuissent  dis-
tinct! ;  nam  tunc  necesse  est  ex
alterius  agro  partem  aliquam  alte-
rius agri  domino  adjudicari,  quo
casu  conveniens  est  ut  is  alteri
certa  pecunia  debeat  condemnari.
Eo  quoque  nomine  damnandus  est
quisque  hoc  judicio,  quod  forte
circa   fines  aliquid    malitiose   com-

6.  In  the  action  finium  regundorum
the  judge  ought  to  examine  if  the
adjudication  is  necessary,  and  it  is  so
only  in  one  case,  viz.  if  it  would
be  advantageous  that  the  boundaries
should  be  more  clearly  marked  than
before.  In  that  case  it  becomes
necessary  to  adjudge  to  one  party  a
portion  of  the  field  of  the  other,  and
consequently  the  person  to  whom  it
is  adjudged  ought  to  be  condemned  to
pay  a  fixed  sum  as  compensation  to
the  other.  In  this  action  he  ought
also  to  be  condemned  who  has  fraudu-

494

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVIII.

misit,  verbi  gratia,  quia  lapides
£nales  fiiratus  est,  vel  arbores
finales  cecidit.  Contumacise  quoque
nomine  qiiisque  eo  judicio  condem-
natur,  veluti  si  quis  Jubente  jndice
metiri  agrod  passus  non  fuerit.

lently  interfered  with  the  boundaries,
as,  for  instance,  by  carrying  off  the
boundary  stones,  or  cutting  down  the
trees  that  mark  the  limit,  A  person
may  be  also  condemned  by  this  same
action  for  contumacy,  who,  in  defiance
of  the  order  of  the  judge,  opposes  the
measurement  of  the  fields.

D.  X.  1,  2.  1  ;  D.  X.  1.  3,  4.  3,  4.

7.  Quod  autem  istis  judiciis  ali-
<5ui  adjudicatum  sit,  id  statim  ejus
fit  cui  adjudicatum  est.

See  Introd.  sec.  103.

7.  In  these  actions,  anything  ad-
judged becomes  at  once  the  property
of  the  person  to  whom  it  is  adjudged.

Tit.  XVIII.     DE   PUBLICIS   JUDICIIS.

Publica  judicia  neque  per  ac-
tiones  ordinantur,  neque  omnino
quidquam  simile  habent  cum  cete-
ris judiciis  de  quibus  locuti  sumus,
magnaque  diversitas  est  eorum  et  in
instituendis  et  in  exercendis.

Public  prosecutions  are  not  intro-
duced by  actions,  and  bear  no  resem-
blance to  the  other  legal  remedies  of
which  we  have  been  speaking.  There
is  a  great  difference  between  them,
both  in  the  mode  in  which  they  are
begun  and  in  that  in  which  they  are
carried  on.

•  The  subject  of  public  prosecutions  is  foreign  to  a  treatise
which,  like  the  Institutes,  professes  to  treat  only  of  private  law.
It  is  not  noticed  at  all  in  the  Institutes  of  Gains,  and  is  treated  in
a  very  cursory  manner  in  this  Title.  For  the  comprehension  of
this  Title,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  observe  that,  in  the  later  times
•of  the  Republic  and  in  the  first  years  of  the  Empire,  a  series  of
laws  was  made,  fixing  the  penalty  to  be  attached  to  particular
crimes,  and  prescribing  the  procedure  to  be  employed  in  the  trial.
Many  of  these  laws  are  briefly  referred  to  in  this  Title ;  and  it
was  the  trials  conducted  under  their  provisions  that  alone  received
the  name  o^puhlica  judicia.  Under  the  Empire,  most  of  the  crimes
not  coming  under  these  special  laws,  and  especially  those  pro-
vided against  by  a  seiiatus-consultum  or  constitution,  were  judged
by  the  prcetor  or  prcsfectus  urbi  in  a  more  summary  method.  The
judicium  was  then  said  to  be,  not  publicum,  but  extra  ordinem ;
and  gradually  the  method  of  procedure  prescribed  by  the  law  for
the  different  puhlica  judicia  fell  into  desuetude,  and  nothing  was
retained  of  the  special  laws  but  the  penalty  they  fixed  (D.  xlviii.  1.
8),  the  procedure  being  the  same  as  in  the  judicia  extraordinaria,
(See  Introduction,  sec.  112.)

1.  Publica    autem     dicta    sunt,  1.  They  are  called  public,  because

quod     cuivis     ex    populo    executio     generally   any   citizen    may    institute
eorum  plerumque  datur.  them,

D.  xxiii.  2.  43.  10.

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVIII.

495

There  were  certain  persons  excluded  from  the  right  of  bring-
ing a  criminal  accusation  ;  for  instance,  women,  unless  the  injury-
complained  of  was  done  to  themselves  or  their  near  relations,
persons  below  the  age  of  puberty,  persons  made  infamous  by  a
judicial  sentence,  and  persons  so  poor  as  not  to  possess  fifty  aureu
(D.  xlviii.  2.  2.  8  and  10.)  But,  generally  speaking,  it  was  the
right  of  any  one  to  make  a  criminal  charge,  although  he  might  be
totally  unconnected  by  any  ties  with  the  person  who  suffered  from
the  crime.

2.  Publicorum  judiciorum  quse-
dam  capitalia  sunt,  quaedam  non
capitalia.  Capitalia  dicimus,  quae
ultimo  supplicio  afficiunt,  vel  aquae
et  ignis  interdictione,  vel  deporta-
tione,  vel  metallo  ;  cetera,  si  quam
infamiam  irrogant  cum  damno  pe-
cuniario,  haec  publica  quidem  sunt,
non  tamen  capitalia.

2.  Some  public  prosecutions  are
capital,  some  are  not.  We  term  capi-
tal those  which  involve  the  extreme
punishment  of  the  law,  or  the  inter-
diction from  fire  and  water,  or  depor-
tation, or  the  mines.  Those  which
carry  with  them  infamy  and  a  pecu-
niary penalty  are  public,  but  not
capital.

D.  xlviii.  1,  2.

3.  Publica  autem  sunt  haec  :  lex
Julia  majestatis,  quae  in  eos  qui
contra  imperatorem  vel  rempubli-
cam  aliquid  moliti  sunt,  suum  vigo-
rem  extendit.  Hujus  j)cena  animae
amissionem  sustinet,  et  memoria  rei
etiam  post  mortem  damnatur.

3.  The  following  laws  have  refer-
ence to  public  prosecutions.  The  lex
Julia  majestatis,  which  subjects  to  its
severe  provisions  all  who  attempt  any-
thing against  the  emperor  or  State.
The  penalty  it  inflicts  is  the  loss  of
life,  and  the  memory  of  the  guilty  is
condemned  even  after  his  death.

D.  xlviii.  4.  11.

The  lex  Julia  majestatis  was  passed  in  the  time  of  Julius
Caasar.     (D.  xliii.  4.)

Aliquod  moliti  sunt.  The  design,  without  any  overt  act,  was
enough  to  sustain  the  charge.

Etiam  post  mortem,     (See  Bk.  iii.  Tit.  1.  5.)

4.  Item  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis
coercendis,  quae  non  solum  temera-
tores  alienarum  nuptiarum  gladio
punit,  sed  et  eos  qui  cum  masculis
nefandam  libidinem  exercere  au-
dent ;  sed  eadem  lege  Julia  etiam
stupri  flagitium  punitur,  cum  quis
sine  vi  vel  virginem  vel  viduam
honeste  viventem  stupraverit.  Poe-
nam  autem  eadem  lex  irrogat  pec-
catoribus,  si  honesti  sunt,  publica-
tionem  partis  dimidiae  bonorum  ;  si
humiles,  corporis  coercitionem  cum
relegatione.

4.  Also  the  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis,
which  punishes  with  death  not  only
those  who  defile  the  marriage  bed,  but
those  also  who  give  themselves  up  to
works  of  lewdness  with  their  own  sex.
The  same  law  also  punishes  the  seduc-
tion without  violence  of  a  virgin,  or  of
a  widow  of  honest  character.  The
penalty  upon  offenders  of  honourable
condition  is  the  confiscation  of  half
their  fortune,  upon  those  of  low  con-
dition, corporal  punishment  and  rele-
gation.

D.  xlviii.  34,  pr.  and  1.

496

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVIII.

The  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis  belongs  to  the  time  of  Augustus,
about  B.C.  17.

Gladio  pnnit.  The  lex  Julia  only  punished  the  guilty  with
confiscation  of  a  portion  of  their  property  and  relegation.  (Paul.
Sent.  ii.  26.  14.)  Constantine  affixed  the  graver  penalty.  (C.  ix^
9.  31.)

5.  Item  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis,
qu8e  homicidas  ultore  ferro  perse-
quitiir,  vel  eos  qui  hominis  occi-
dendi  causa  cum  telo  ambulant.
Telum  autem,  ut  Gains  noster  in
interpretatione  legum  duodecim
tabularum  scriptum  reliquit,  vulgo
quidem  id  appellatur,  quod  ab  arcu
mittitur  ;  sed  et  omne  significatur
quod  manu  cujusdam  mittitur.  Se-
quitur  ergo  ut  lapis  et  lignum  et
ferrum  hoc  nomine  contineatur,
dictumque  ab  eo  quod  in  longin-
quum  mittitur,  a  Grjeca  voce  c'nro
Tov  rrjXoi'.  Et  hanc  signification  em
invenire  possumus  et  in  Graeco  no-
mine :  nam  quod  nos  telum  appel-
lamus,  illi  fitXog  appellant  dvo  mu
iSdXXtaoai.  Admonet  nos  Xeno-
plion,  nam  ita  scribit :  Kal  rd  jS'sXri

ofiou    i(/£|0£ro,  Xoyxai,   Tottiijiara,   rr^.fi'-

S6i>ai.  TvXtlaroi  dk  Kal  XiOot.  Sicarii
autem  api)ellantur  a  sica,  quod  sig-
nificat  ferreum  cultrum.  Eadem
lege  et  venefici  capite  damnantur,
qui  artibus  odiosis  tam  venenis
quam  susurris  magicis  homines  oc-
ciderint,  vel  mala  medicamenta  pub-
lice  vendiderint.

5.  Also  the  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariisy
which  strikes  with  the  sword  of  ven-
geance those  who  for  the  purpose  of
killing  a  man  go  armed  with  a  telum.
By  telum,  according  to  the  interpreta-
tion given  by  our  Gains  in  his  com-
mentaries on  the  Twelve  Tables,  is
ordinarily  meant  anything  that  is  shot
from  a  bow,  but  it  equally  signifies
anything  sent  from  the  hand.  Thus,
a  stone,  a  piece  of  wood,  or  of  iron,  is
included  in  the  meaning  of  the  term,
for  it  merely  implies  something  im-
pelled to  a  distance,  being  derived
from  the  Greek  word  ti]Xov.  And  the
corresponding  word  in  Greek  has  the
same  signification,  for  what  we  call
telum.,  they  call  pf.Xoc,  from  jSdXXeaQai,
as  we  may  learn  from  Xenophon,  who
says,  '  they  carried  /StX?/,  viz.  spears,
arrows,  slings,  and  a  great  quantity
of  stones.'  Assassins  are  called  sicarii
from  sica,  a  short  sword.  By  the  same
law,  poisoners  are  condemned  who  by
hateful  arts  use  poisons  or  magic
charms  to  kill  men,  or  publicly  sell
hurtful  drugs.

D.  xlviii.  8.  1 ;  D.  1.  16.  233.  2.

Lex    Cornelia  de  sicariis,  passed  during   the  dictatorship  of
Sylla,  B.C.  80.

6.  Alia  deinde  lex  asperrimum
crimen  nova  poena  persequitur,  quse
Pompeia  de  parricidiis  vocatur.  Qua
cavetur,  ut  si  quis  parentis  aut  filii,
aut  omnino  aff'ectionis  ejus  quae
nuncupatione  parricidii  continetur,
fata  properaverit,  sive  clam  sive
palam  id  ausus  fuerit,  nee  non  is
cujus  dolo  malo  id  factum  est,  vel
conscius  criminis  existit,  licet  ex-
traneus  sit,  poena  parridicii  puni-
atur.  Et  neque  gladio  neque  igni-
bus  neque  uUa  aha  solemn!  poena
subjiciatur,  sed  insutus  culeo  cum
cane  et  gallo  gallinaceo  et  vipera
et  simia,  et  inter  eas  ferales  angus-
tias  comprehensus,  secundum  quod

6.  Another  law,  the  lex  Pompeia  de
parricidiis,  inflicts  on  the  most  horrible
of  crimes  a  singular  punishment.  It
provides,  that  anyone  who  has  hastened
the  death  of  a  parent  or  child,  or  of
any  other  relation  whose  murder  is
legally  termed  parricide,  whether  he
acts  openly  or  secretly,  and  whoever
instigates,  or  is  an  accomplice  in  the
commission  of  the  crime,  although  a
stranger,  shall  undergo  the  penalty  of
parricide.  He  will  be  punished,  not
by  the  sword,  nor  by  fire,  nor  by  any
ordinary  mode  of  punishment,  but  he
is  to  be  sewed  up  in  a  sack  with  a  dog,
a  cock,  a  viper,  and  an  ape,  and  en-
closed in  this  horrible  prison  he  is  to

I

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVIII.

497

regionis  qualitas  tulerit,  vel  in  vi-
cinum  mare  vel  in  amnem  projicia-
tur  :  nt  omnium  elementorum  usu
vivus  carere  incipiat,  et  ei  coelum
siiperstiti  et  terra  mortno  auferatur.
Si  qnis  autem  alias  cognatione  vel
affinitate  conjunctas  personas  neca-
verit,  poenam  legis  Cornelise  de  si-
cariis  siistinebit.

be,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
place,  thrown  into  the  sea,  or  into  a
river,  that  even  in  his  lifetime  he  may-
begin  to  be  deprived  of  the  use  of  the
elements,  and  that  the  air  may  be  de-
nied to  him  while  he  lives,  and  the
earth  when  he  dies.  He  who  kills
persons  allied  to  him  by  cognation
or  alliance,  shall  undergo  the  penalty
of  the  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis.

J),  xlviii.  9.  1.  9  ;  C.  ix.  17.

Lex  Pompeia  de  parricidiis,  passed  in  the  consulship  of  Pom-
peius,  B.C.  52.  The  punishment  mentioned  in  the  text  is  bor-
rowed from  the  legislation  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  lex  Pompeia,
under  the  term  parricidium,  embraced  the  murder  of  any  ascend-
ant, of  a  husband  or  wife,  of  consobrmi,  of  a  step-father,  step-mother,
father-in-law,  mother-in-law,  &c.,  of  a  patron,  and  of  a  child  if
killed  by  the  mother  or  grandfather,  but  not  if  killed  by  the  father.
(D.  xlviii.  9.  1.)  If  there  was  no  river  at  hand,  the  offender  was
torn  to  pieces  by  wild  beasts.     (D.  xlviii.  9.  9.)

7.  Item  lex  Cornelia  de  falsis,
qure  etiam  testamentaria  vocatur,
pcienam  irrogat  ei  qui  testamentum
vel  aliud  instrument  am  falsum  scrip-
serit,  significaverit,  recitaverit,-sub-
jecerit ;  quive  signum  adulterinum
fecerit,  sculpserit,  expresserit  sciens
dolo  malo.  Ej  usque  legis  poena  in
servos  ultimum  supplicium  est  (quod
etiam  in  lege  de  sicariis  et  veneficis
servatur),  in  liberos  vero  deportatio.

7.  Also  the  lex  Cornelia  de  falsis,
otherwise  called  testamentaria,  pun-
ishes any  one  who  shall  have  written,
sealed,  read,  or  substituted  a  false  tes-
tament, or  any  other  instrument,  or
shall  have  made,  cut,  or  impressed  a
false  seal,  knowingly  and  wilfully.
The  penalty  is,  upon  a  slave,  the  ex-
treme punishment  of  the  law,  as  is
pronounced  by  the  lex  Cornelia  upon
assassins  and  poisoners  ;  that  upon
freemen  is  deportation.

D.  xlviii.  10.  1.  13.  16.  1.

Lex  Cornelia  de  falsis,  or  Cornelia  testamentaria,  was  passed
under  the  dictatorship  of  Sylla,  B.C.  80.

8.  Item  lex  Julia  de  vi  publica
seu  privata  adversus  eos  exoritur,
qui  vim  vel  armatam  vel  sine  armis
commiserint  :  sed  si  quidem  armata
vis  arguatur,  deportatio  ei  ex  lege
Julia  de  vi  publica  irrogatur ;  si
vero  sine  armis,  in  tertiam  partem
bonorum  publicatio  imponitur.  Sin
autem  per  vim  raptus  virginis  vel
viduffi  vel  sanctimonialis  vel  alte-
rius  fuerit  perpetratus,  tunc  et  pec-
catores  et  ii  qui  opem  flagitio  dede-
runt,  capite  puniuntur,  secundum
nostra;  constitutionis  deiinitionem
ex  qua  hoc  apertius  est  scire.

8.  Also  the  lex  Julia  de  vi  publica
seu  privata  punishes  those  who  are
guilty  of  violence,  whether  with  armed
force  or  without.  For  violeiice  with
armed  force,  the  penalty  inflicted  by
the  lex  Julia  de  vi  piddica  is  deporta-
tion. For  violence  without  arms,  it
is  the  confiscation  of  a  third  of  the
offender's  property.  But  in  case  of
the  rape  of  a  virgin,  a  widow,  a  per-
son devoted  to  religion,  or  any  one
else,  both  the  ravishers  and  all  who
have  aided  in  the  commission  of  the
crime  are  punished  capitally,  accord-
ing to  the  provisions  of  our  constitu-
tion, in  which  may  be  found  fuller
information  on  this  head.

D.  xlviii.  6.  10.  2  ;  C.  ix.  13.  1,  pr.  and  foil.
Iv  K

498

LIB.  IV.      TIT.  XVIII.

Lex  Julia  de  vi,  passed  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar  or  Au-
gustus, but  its  exact  date  is  not  known.

9.  Item  lex  Julia  peciilatns  eos
punit,  qui  pecuniam  vel  rem  publi-
cara  vel  sacram  vel  religiosam  f  urati
fuerint.  Sed  si  quidem  ipsi  jiidices
tempore  administrationis  publicas
pecunias  subtraxerint,  capitali  ani-
madversione  piiniantur  ;  et  non  so-
lum hi,  sed  etiam  qui  ministerium
eis  ad  hoc  exhibuerint,  vel  qui  sub-
tractas  ab  his  scientes  susceperint.
Alii  vero  qui  in  hanc  legem  incide-
rint,  poense  deportationis  subju-
gantur.

D.  xlviii.  13.

9.  Also  the  lex  Julia  peculatus  pun-
ishes those  who  have  stolen  public
money,  or  anything  sacred  or  religious.
Magistrates,  who,  during  the  time  of
their  administration,  have  stolen  the
public  money,  are  punishable  capitally,
as  also  are  all  who  aid  them  in  their
robbery,  or  who  receive  their  plunder
from  them.  Other  persons  who  offend
against  this  law  are  subject  to  the
penalty  of  deportation.

1.  3  ;  C.  ix.  28.

I

Lex  Julia  peculatus.  The  exact  date  of  this  law  is  also  un-
known. It  probably  belongs  to  the  same  epoch  as  the  lex  Julia
de  vi.

10.  Est  et  inter  publica  judicia
lex  Fabia  de  plagiariis,  quae  inter-
dum  capitis  poenam  ex  sacris  consti-
tutionibus  irrogat,  interdum  levi-
orem.

10.  There  is  also  the  lex  Fahia  de
plagiariis,  which  inflicts,  in  certain
cases,  capital  puishment  according  to
the  constitutions,  sometimes  a  lighter
punishment.

C.  ix.  20.  7.

Cicero  refers  to  this  law  {pro  Rahirio,  3),  but  nothing  more  is
known  of  it.  A  plagiarius  was  one  who  knowingly  kept  in  irons,
or  confined,  sold,  gave,  or  bought  a  citizen  (whether  freeborn  or
a  freedman)  or  the  slave  of  another.

11.  Sunt  prseterea  publica  judi-
cia, lex  Julia  ambitus,  lex  Julia
rex^etundarum,  ex  lege  Julia  de
annona,  et  lex  Julia  de  residuis :
quse  de  certis  capitulis  loquuntur,
et  animse  quidem  amissionem  non
irrogant,  aliis  autem  poenis  eos  sub-
jiciunt  qui  prsecejDta  earum  negle-
xerint.

11.  The  following  laws  also  pertain
to  public  prosecutions  :  the  lex  Julia
de  amhitu,  the  lex  Jidia  repetundarum,
the  lex  Julia  de  annona,  and  the  lex
Julia  de  residuis.  These  laws  apply
to  certain  special  cases,  and  do  not
carry  with  them  the  punishment  of
death,  but  lesser  punishments,  against
offenders.

D.  xlviii.  11 ;  D.  xlviii.  13.  2.  4,  5  ;  D.  xlviii.  12.  2,  pr.  and  foil. ;

D.  xlviii.  14.

Lex  Julio,  de  amhitu,  made  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  to  repress
illegal  methods  of  seeking  offices.    (D.  xlvii.   14.)

Lex  Julia  repetundarum,  made  in  the  time  of  Julius  Cassar,
to  punish  magistrates  or  judges  for  receiving  bribes.

Lex  Julia  de  annoyia,  made  to  repress  combinations  for  height-
eniDg  the  price  of  provisions.

Lex  Julia  de  residuis,  made  to  punish  those  who  gave  an  incom-
plete account  of,  or  misappropriated,  public  moneys  committed  to
the^r  charge.     (D.  xhiii.  13.  2.)

LIB.  IV.     TIT.  XVIII.  499

It  is  uncertain  whether  these  last  two  laws  belong  to  the  time
of  Julius  Cagsar  or  of  Augustus.

12.  Sed  de  publicis  judiciis  hsec  12.   This  notice  of  public  prosecii-

exposuimus,  ut   vobis   possibile   sit  tions  has  only  been  meant  to  give  you

summo  digito  et  quasi  per  indicem  the  merest  sketch  that  might  serve  you

ea    tetigisse  :     alioquin    diligentior  as  a  guide   to   studying  them.      You

eorum   scientia  vobis  ex   latioribus  may,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  gain  a

Digestorum  sen  Pandectarum  libris,  more  complete  knowledge  of  them  from

Deo  propitio,  adventura  est.  the  fuller  account  given  in  the  Digest

or  Pandects.

KK    2

SUMMAEY.

BOOK  L

SOURCES    OF    LAW.

Private  Laav  :  its  Sources. — The  Institutes  treat  of  private  law,  jas
privatum^  the  law  that  has  to  do  with  individuals,  as  distinguished  from
jus  j^uhlicimi,  that  which  regards  the  Roman  Empire  and  regulates  reli-
gious worship  and  civil  administration.  (Tit.  1.  4,  note.)  The  sources  of
private  law  are  natural  law,  the  law  of  nations,  and  the  civil  law.  (A.)  The
two  first  are,  in  the  system  of  Gains,  identical.  That  law  which  right  reason
commands,  jus  natuixde,  is  also  that  law  which  is  found  to  be  common
to  the  legal  systems  of  different  nations.  Justinian  sometimes  adopts
this  method  of  speaking,  and  sometimes  borrows  passages  in  which  the  jus
nahirale  has  a  larger  sense,  is  thus  distinguished  from  the  jus  gentium^
and  is  extended  to  the  rules  which  instinct  makes  animals  obey.  (Tit.  2.
pr.  note.)  (B.)  The  civil  law  is  the  special  law  of  the  Romans,  and  is
derived  from  the  following  sources : —

Sources  of  the  Jus  Civile. — 1.  Laws  {leges)  passed  by  the  comitia
curiata  or  centuriata.  2.  Flebiscita,  which  by  the  lex  Hortensia  bound  the
whole  people.  (Tit.  2.  4.)  3.  ASe?ia^ziS-consw/^rt,  which,  especially  after  the
beginning  of  the  Empire,  had  the  force  of  laws.  (5.)*  4.  The  imperial  con-
stitutions, which,  by  virtue  of  the  lex  regia  or  law  passed  by  the  comitia
curiata  conferring  the  imperiuin^  had  the  force  of  law,  and  which  were  of
three  kinds  :  (a)  epistolce,  mandata,  rescripta^  announcements  of  the  im-
perial will  to  different  authorities ;  (b)  clecreta^  judicial  decisions  of  the
Emperor ;  (c)  edicta,  enactments.  (6.)  5.  The  edicts  of  the  praetors  (jus
honorarium),  who  announced  at  the  beginning  of  their  year  of  office  the
rules  they  would  follow  in  what  was  termed  the  edictum  perpetuum,  which
ran  on  from  year  to  year  under  successive  praetors,  with  such  additions  and
changes  as  each  might  think  necessary,  and  which  assumed  a  final  shape  in
the  time  of  Hadrian.  The  curule  aBdiles  also  issued  edicts,  which  were  part
oi  t\\e  jus  honorarium.  (7.)  6.  The  responsa  prudentum,  v^ho  ^\ ere  fir^t
called  on  officially  by  Augustus  to  give  their  opinions,  and  whose  decisions,
v/hen  those  who  gave  them  agreed,  were  invested  by  Hadrian  with  the  force
of  law.  Special  authority  was  given  by  Theodosius  to  the  writings  of
the  five  great  jurists,  and,  in  case  of  their  disagreement,  to  the  writings  of
Papinian.  (8.)    7.  Custom,  too,  is  one  of  the  sources  of  private  law,  for  cus-

*  When  a  number  is  placed  between  brackets,  as  here  (5),  it  shows  to  which
paragraph  of  the  Title  last  mentioned  reference  is  made.

502  SUMMAEY.

toms  are  like  laws,  legem  {mitantu7\  Laws  might  be  abrogated  by  desuetude
(11),  but  particular  customs  could  not  prevail  against  general  law.    (9.)

LAW    RELATING    TO    PERSONS.

Private  law  relates  to  persons,  to  things  (including  obligations),  and
actions.  The  law  relating  to  persons  is  first  treated  under  the  three  heads
of  status,  that  is,  the  legal  capacity  of  persons,  viz.  libertas,  civitaSj  and
familia ;  and  as  libertas  comes  first,  the  first  division  of  persons  noticed
is  that  into  persons  who  are  not  free,  i.e.  slaves,  and  those  who  are  fi'eed,
libertini,  or  free  by  birth,  ingeimi.

Slaves. — Slavery,  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature,  but  recognised  by
the  law  of  nations,  is  based  on  the  fact  that  those  who  were  originally
treated  as  slaves  had  been  preserved  from  death  when  defeated  and  cap-
tured in  war.  But  all  slaves  are  not  captured  in  war  :  how  then  do  these
others  become  slaves?  1.  By  birth,  for  the  children  of  a  female  slave
always  follow  her  condition ;  and,  2,  slavery  is  inflicted  as  a  punishment
on  persons  born  free,  as  upon  a  free  person  who,  to  share  the  price,  colludes
with  a  fictitious  vendor  who  sells  him  as  a  slave,  and  on  others  guilty  of
great  crimes,  servi  j^oence.  (Tit.  3.)  Opposed  to  slaves  are  those  who  are
born  free,  born  in  matrimony,  or,  if  not,  of  a  woman  who  at  any  time
after  conception  was  free.  (Tit.  4.)  Lastly,  there  is  an  intermediate  class,
those  born  slaves,  but  made  free  {libertini),  and  their  position  depended  on
the  mode  and  circumstances  of  the  manumission.

Manumission. — If  manumission  was  made  in  any  one  of  the  three
modes  known  to  the  old  law,  censu,  vindicta,  or  testamento,  the  slave
became  by  manumission  a  Roman  citizen  until  the  time  of  Augustus,
when,  by  the  laws  -^lia  Sentia  and  Junia  Norbana,  another  con-
dition was  imposed,  and  it  was  necessary  that  unless  the  manumission
was  made  vindicta,  the  emancipated  slave  should  be  thirty  years  old
and  the  manumittor  twenty  (Tit.  6.  4)  ;  unless  some  good  cause  (5)
for  dispensing  with  this  rule  was  shown  to  the  council.  The  require-
ment of  age  in  the  testator,  in  the  case  of  manumission  by  testament,  was
first  reduced  by  Justinian  from  twenty  years  to  seventeen,  and  subse-
quently done  away  with.  (Tit.  6,  7,  note.)  It  was  also  necessary  that  the
master  should  have  complete  ownership  of  the  slave.  (Tit.  5.  3,  note.)
But  if  the  manumission  failed  in  any  of  these  respects,  or,  if  it  was  made
in  a  private  manner,  as  by  letter,  or  in  presence  of  friends,  the  emanci-
pated slave  was  in  the  position  of  a  Latinus,  not  in  that  of  a  Roman
citizen,  it  being,  however,  open  to  him  to  rise  to  the  position  of  a  citizen
by  certain  modes,  and  chiefly  by  rendering  public  services.  (Tit.  5.  3,
note.)  If,  previously  to  emancipation,  slaves  had  been  guilty  of  some  great
crime,  then  they  were  only  raised  by  emancipation  to  the  rank  of  dedititii
or  surrendered  enemies.  Justinian  abolished  these  distinctions  and  made
every  emancipated  slave  a  Roman  citizen.  (Tit.  5.  3.)  Further,  the  lex  JElia
Sentia  nullified  manumissions  made  in  prejudice  of  creditors,  except  that  a
slave,  for  the  purpose  of  administering  the  inheritance,  might  be  made  the
sole  and  necessary  heir  of  the  testator  (Tit.  6.  pr.  1)  ;    and  the  lex  Fusia

BOOK   I.  503

Caninia^  abolished  by  Justinian,  limited  the  number  of  slaves  a  testator
might  manumit  (Tit.  7).  The  power  of  a  master  over  his  slave,  formerly
unlimited,  was  gradually  subjected  to  many  restrictions.  The  Emperor
Antoninus  Pius  extended  the  provisions  of  Sylla's  law,  the  lex  Cornelia  de
sicariis,  which  punished  with  death  or  exile  the  homicide  of  the  slave  of
another,  to  the  case  of  a  master  killing  his  own  slave  ;  and  also  protected
slaves  cruelly  treated  and  fleeing  to  the  statue  of  the  emperor.  (Tit.
8.  2.)  Gradually,  not  only  the  life,  but  the  person,  and  even  the  property,
in  fact  though  not  in  law,  of  the  slave  were  protected.  (Tit.  8.  2,  note.)

CiviTAS  is  indirectly  treated  in  the  preceding  notice  of  Latini,  and  in
the  twelfth  and  sixteenth  Titles,  in  which  the  loss  of  citizenship  is  noticed.
But  the  subject  mainly  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  public  law,  and  the  rest
of  the  first  book  is  occupied  with  considering  the  third  head  of  status,
Familia. — Here  the  main  division  is  into  persons  not  sui  juris  and  persons
sui  juris.  The  position  of  persons  not  sui  juris  is  a  consequence  of  the
patria  potestas.  The  subject  of  the  patria  potestas,  the  power  of  the
father  over  his  descendants,  originally  not  much  less  than  that  of  a  master
over  his  slaves,  is  discussed  in  the  ninth  and  three  following  Titles.
Justinian  inquires,  1,  How  it  arises?  2,  How  it  is  ended  ?

Patria  Potestas:  how  it  arises. — It  arises  in  three  ways,  by,  1,
Marriage ;   2,  Legitimation ;   3,  Adoption.

I.  Marriage. — In  order  that  marriage  may  give  rise  to  the  pat7'ia
potestas  it  must  be  according  to  law  (justce  miptice),  and  for  this  there
were  three  requisites:  1,  Puberty  (fourteen  years  for  husband,  twelve
for  wife)  ;  2,  Consent  of  the  parties,  the  intention  to  be  married  mani-
fested by  the  woman  passing  into  the  possession  of  the  man ;  and,  3,  Con-
nubium ;  the  parties  must  be  legally  capable  of  being  married  to  each  other.

There  were  three  ways  in  which  the  parties  might  fail  to  have  this
legal  capacity.  1.  They,  or  one  of  them,  might  be  persons  or  a  person
whom  the  State  held  to  be  incapable  of  forming  the  nexus  termed  justce
nnptice ;  as,  for  instance,  a  citizen  and  a  foreigner  could  not  form  the  tie
of  justce  nuptice,  &c.  (Tit.  10,  pr.  and  11.)  2.  They  might  be  within  the
prohibited  degrees  of  relationship  (Tit.  10.  1-10)  ;  and  it  is  to  be  re-
marked that  relationship  by  adoption,  as  well  as  by  blood,  constitutes  a
bar.  (Tit.  10.  2.)  3.  They  might,  or  one  of  them  might,  be  m  potestate,
and  then,  unless  the  consent  of  the  person  in  whose  potestas  they  were
was  obtained,  the  marriage  was  invalid.  (Tit.  10.  pr.)  Divorce  was
always  permitted  by  mutual  consent,  but  repudiation  by  one  party  only
under  penalties,  except  in  case  of  misconduct,  and  with  certain  solemn  forms.

II.  Legitimation,  by  which  the  oifspring  o£  concubinage  were  placed
in  the  position  of  libe7'i  legitimi,  and  this  could  be  eifected  in  three  ways.
1.  Oblation  to  the  curia,  i.e.  enrolling  the  child  in  the  number  of  those
on  whom  the  chief  burdens  of  provincial  towns  fell.  2.  The  subse-
quent marriage  of  the  parents;  an  act  attesting  the  marriage  and  the
ratification  by  the  children  being  necessary.  3.  The  rescript  of  the
emperor,  granted  in  case  one  of  the  parents  was  dead.  (Tit.  10.  13.)

III.  Adoption. — A  general  term,  under  which  is  included  adoptio
properly   so    called,  when  a  person  in  potestate  was  given  in  adoption,

504  SUMMARY.

and  arrogatio  when  the  person  adopted  was  sui  juris.  (Tit.  11.)  Adop-
tion in  the  old  law  was  effected  by  three  sales  to  destroy  the  patria
potestas  of  the  person  giving  in  adoption,  and  a  fictitious  process,  in  jure
cessw,  by  which  the  person  adopted  was  given  over  to  the  adopter ;  for
which  process  Justinian  substituted  the  execution  of  a  deed  before  a  magis-
trate. Arrogatio  had  a  more  public  character,  and  was  made  originally
before  the  curia,  then  before  lictors  representing  the  curia,  and  subse-
quently by  imperial  rescript.  ( 1 .)  Originally  a  person  adopted  or  arrogated
was  in  the  potestas  of  the  person  adopting  or  arrogating,  exactly  as  if  he  had
been  so  by  birth,  and  was  not  in  any  way  protected  against  him ;  but
Justinian  entirely  altered  the  law  as  to  adoptio,  and  under  his  legislation
(unless  the  adopter  was  an  ascendant  paternal  or  maternal  of  the  adopted,
in  which  case  the  rules  of  the  old  law  operated),  the  person  adopted  did
not  pass  at  all  into  the  family  of  the  adopter,  but  remained  in  his  natural
family ;  and  the  only  effect  of  adoption  was  to  give  the  adopted  a  right  of
succession  to  the  adopter  if  intestate.  Provisions  were  also  made  to  pro-
tect the  arrogated  if  he  was  not  of  the  age  of  puberty.  Such  an  arrogation
was  not  permitted  unless  after  inquiry  it  had  been  found  to  be  beneficial
to  the  arrogated,  and  if  he  was  emancipated  under  the  age  of  puberty,
although  for  a  good  reason,  he  got  all  his  own  property  back,  while,  if  he
was  disinherited  or  emancipated  without  good  reason  before  that  age,  he
not  only  got  his  own  property  back,  but  got  a  fourth  of  the  arrogator's
property  {quaria  Antonina) ;  and  lastly,  when  he  attained  puberty,  he  could
have  the  arrogation  rescinded  if  prejudicial  to  him.  (3,  note.)  Women,  who
had  lost  their  own  children,  were  permitted  by  the  emperors  to  adopt.  (10.)
The  chief  rule  as  to  the  capacity  of  adopting  is  that  adoption  is  said  to
imitate  nature,  and  therefore  the  adopter  must  be  eighteen  years  at  least
older  than  the  adopted,  so  as  to  permit  physically  of  his  having  been  the
natural  father.  (4.)

Patria  Potestas  :  how  ended. — The  patria  potestas  might  be  dissolved
in  four  ways.     1.  Death  of  the  parent-,   the  grandson,  however,  Avhose
father  was  living,  passing  into  the  power  of  the  father,  on  the  grand-
father's death.  (Tit.    12.   pr.)     2.  Deminutio  capitis;    the    father  or  son
losing  that  civic  position  which  was  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  patria
potestas ;    and  this  might  happen  by  (a)    deportatio  in  insulam    (12) ;
(b)  condemnatio  to  be  a  servus  jjwnce  (3) ;   and  (c)  captivitas.     But  if  the
capite  minutus  was  restored  by  the  emperor  to  his  former  rights  (1),  or  if
the  prisoner  became  free,  then  (by  what  in  the  second  of  these  cases  was
termed  postliminium)   the  father  was  placed  in  exactly  the  same  position
as  if  the  deportatio  or  captivitas  had  not  taken  place.  (5.)     3.  Attain-
ment of  dignities,  by  the  son  attaining  the  patriciate  (4)  or,  subsequently
to  the  date  of  the  Institutes,  other  dignities.   (4,  note.)     4.  Emancipa-
tion, which,  under  the   old   law,   was  effected  by  three   fictitious    sales
made  by  the  father,   and  then  the   purchaser  reselling  the    son  to  the
father,   who  then  manumitted  him  ;    the  object  of  this   being  that  the
father,  being  the  manumittor,  might  have  the  rights  of  patronage,   the
chief  of  which  was  the  same  right  of  succession  to  the  son  as  the  manu-
mittor of  a  slave  had,  in  case  of  his  enfranchisement.  (Tit.  12.  6,  note,  and

I

i

BOOK   I.  505

Tit.  5.  3,  note.)  Under  the  legislation  o£  Justinian,  emancipation  was
eiFected  by  a  declaration  before  a  judge  or  magistrate  (Tit.  12.  6).

Other  Forms  of  Potestas. — In  order  to  make  the  subject  of  Potestas
complete,  we  ought  to  notice  not  only  1,  the  power  of  the  master  of  the
slave,  and  2,  the  power  of  the  father  over  his  descendants,  but  3,  the
power  of  the  husband  over  the  wife  who  passed  in  mamini,  as  she  did
when  married,  by  (a)  confarreatio  ;  (b)  coemptio,  or  fictitious  sale  ;  and  (c)
usus,  the  parties  living  together  for  a  year  without  the  wife  breaking
the  use  by  three  nights'  absence  (Tit.  10.  pr.  note) ;  and,  4,  the  power,
in  the  old  law,  of  the  purchaser  over  a  person  m  mancipio,  that  is,  sold
to  him  by  the  father  of  the  person  sold,  the  person  in  mancipio  being,  as
regards  the  purchaser,  almost  in  the  position  of  a  slave,  although,  as  regards
others,  he  was  still  ingemms.     (Tit.  8.  pr.  note.)

Persons  sui  Juris  :  their  Incapacities.  Tutors  and  Curators. —
From  the  beginning  of  the  8th  Title  we  have  been  considering  persons  in
jwiestate.  We  now  turn  to  persons  sui  j^tris  ;  but  it  is  only  of  certain
incapacities  of  persons  sui  juris,  that  the  Institutes  treat :  incapacities
arising  from,  1,  age;  2,  physical  or  mental  infirmity;  or  (so  far  as  refe-
rence is  made  to  an  earlier  period  of  law),  3,  sex.  Tutors  were  appointed
to  protect  the  interests  and  authorise  the  acts  of  pupils  under  the  age  of
puberty;  and  curators  might  be  appointed  to  watch  over,  1,  prodigals  ;  2,
persons  afflicted  with  mental  or  great  physical  infirmity ;  3,  persons  above
the  age  of  puberty,  but  under  the  age  of  twenty-five  years.  The  rest  of
this  book  is  taken  up  with  the  subject  of  tutors  and  curators.

Tutors  :  how  appointed.— Tutors  are  first  divided,  according  to  the
mode  of  their  appointment,  into,  1,  Testamentary,  2,  Legitimate,  3,  Fidu-
ciary, and  4,  Given  by  the  magistrate.

I.  Testamentary  Tutors :  ivJio  may  appoint. — The  paterfamilias
may  appoint  testamentary  tutors  to  all  descendants  under  his  power
who  become  svi  juris  on  his  death.  (Tit.  13.  3.)  This  excludes  grand-
children having  a  father  living,  who,  by  the  death  of  the  paterfamilias,
come  under  the  power  of  their  own  father  (3),  and  includes  posthumous
children  of  t\\Q paterfamilias,  who  become  sui  juris  at  his  death.  (4.)  The
wishes  of  the  father  were  also  carried  out  by  the  magistrate  (usually  as  a
matter  of  course),  if  he  appointed  a  testator  by  his  testament  to  an  eman-
cipated child ;  and  the  magistrate  generally  ratified,  after  he  had  inquired
into  the  circumstances,  the  appointment  of  a  testamentary  tutor  by  a
father  in  case  of  his  natural  children,  or  such  an  appointment  by  others
who  had  a  strong  interest  in,  or  had  left  property  to,  any  child  under  the
age  of  puberty.    (5,  note.)

Testamentary  Tutors:  ivJio  maybe  appointed. — A  f  liusf ami  lias  could
be  appointed  to  the  office,  as  it  was  of  a  public  character.  (Tit.  14.  pr.)
Women  could  not,  although  the  emperor  would  sometimes  interfere  to
confirm  their  appointment.  (Tit.  14.  pr.  note.)  Slaves  could  not ;  and,
if  a  slave  of  the  testator  was  appointed  tutor,  the  appointment  was  held  to
carry  the  freedom  of  the  slave  with  it,  and  if  the  testator  ap^^ointed  the
slave  of  another,  this  imposed  on  the  testamentary  heir  the  duty  of  pur-
chasing, if  possible,  the  freedom  of  the  slave.     If  a  madman,  or  a  person

506  SUMMAE^.

under  the  age  of  twenty-five  years,  was  appointed  a  testamentary  tutor,  lie
could  only  act  if  lie  became  sane,  or  after  he  was  twenty-live,  and,  mean-
time, the  magistrate  appointed  another  tutor.  (2.)  A  tutor  could  be  ap-
pointed to  hold  his  office  after  or  up  to  a  certain  time  (3),  but  he  could
not  be  appointed  to  discharge  one  portion  only  of  the  functions  of  a  tutor,
as  he  was  given  to  the  person,  not  to  the  property.  (4.)

II.  Legitimate  Tutors  (i.e.  called  to  their  office  by  the  statute  law)
come  under  three  heads  :  In  case  no  testamentary  tutor  had  been  ap-
pointed, the  agnati  had  a  claim,  under  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  to
be  tutors,  and  hence  were  called  legitimi  tutores  (Tit.  15.  pr.),  and  this
includes  the  case  of  the  testamentary  tutor  dying  in  the  lifetime  of  the
testator.  (2.)  Under  the  later  emperors  the  mother,  and  even  the  grand-
mother, might  be  appointed  tutors,  where  none  was  appointed  by  testament,
(3,  note.)  The  right  to  be  tutor  did  not  belong  to  all  the  agnati,  but
only  to  those  nearest  in  degree,  all  those  in  the  same  degree  sharing  the
office.  (Tit.  16.  7.)

Capitis  Deminutio. — The  tie  of  agnation  being  severed  by  capitis
deminutio,  the  Institutes  digress  to  explain,  in  the  16th  Title,  what  capitis
deminutio  means.  It  means  a  change  in  the  caput,  or  legal  existence,  of  a
person,  so  that  his  status  undergoes  change  in  one  or  more,  or  all,  of  its
elements,  viz.  liberty,  citizenship,  and  family.  (Tit.  16.  pr.)  The  demi-
nutio is  termed  maxima  when  all  three  elements  are  lost,  when  the  capite
minutus  ceases  to  be  free  and  to  be  a  citizen,  and  loses  his  family  position,  as
would  happen  in  the  case  of  servi  pcenw,  freedmen  condemned  to  be  again
slaves  for  ingratitude,  and  freemen  joining  in  a  fraudulent  sale  of  them-
selves. The  capitis  deminutio  was  called  media  when  liberty  was  not
touched,  but  citizenship  was  lost,  and  with  it  family  position,  as  would
happen  in  the  case  of  any  one  interdicted  fire  and  water,  or  deported  to  an
island.  (2.)  The  capitis  deminutio  was  said  to  be  minima  when  liberty
and  citizenship  were  not  touched,  but  the  family  position  was  altered,  as
in  the  case  of  adoption,  arrogation,  emancipation,  or,  in  the  old  law,  a  ^vife
passing  in  manum.  (3.)  The  rights  of  agnation  are  affected  by  all  the
three  kinds,  but  those  of  cognation  only  by  the  maxima  and  media,  (Tit.
16.  6.)  The  minima  capitis  deminutio,  or  change  of  family,  so  far  changed
the  legal  existence  of  the  person  undergoing  it  that,  under  the  old
law,  he  not  only  lost  his  place  in  the  intestate  succession  of  the  family  he
quitted,  but  he  could  not  be  sued  for  his  antecedent  debts,  and  any  usu-
fructs he  held  came  to  an  end  (3,  note).  Mere  loss  of  dignity,  and  even
infamy,  produced  no  change  of  status.  (5.)

2.  To  return  to  the  subject  of  legitimate  tutors.  Patrons  are  the
legitimate  tutors  of  their  freedmen  and  freedwomen.  In  case  the
manumittors  are  dead,  their  children  are  the  legitimate  tutors  of  the
freedmen  and  freedwomen.  (Tit.  17.)

3.  Parents  are  the  legitimate  tutors  of  their  children  or  other  de-
scendants whom  they  have  emancipated  below  the  age  of  puberty.  (Tit.  18.)

III.  Fiduciary  Tutors. — In  case  the  master  emancipated  his  slave,
and  died  before  the  freedman  attained  the  age  of  puberty,  the  tutelage  of
this  slave  passed  by  law,  or  rather,  by  an  extension  of  the  law  of  the

EOOK  I.  507

Twelve  Tables  (Tit.  17),  to  the  children  of  the  emancipator.  But  if
a  parent  emancipated  his  descendant,  and  died  before  the  person
emancipated  attained  the  age  of  puberty,  the  tutelage  also  passed  to  the
children  of  the  emancipator,  but  it  was  not  supposed  to  do  so  by  any  ex-
press law,  and  the  tutors  in  this  case  were  called,  not  legithni,  hut  Jldu-
ciarii,  a  term  properly  applied  to  the  nominal  tutor,  who,  in  case  of
emancipation,  did  not  resell  to  the  father,  but  himself  emancipated  the
son,  and  had  thus,  as  emancipator,  the  tutelage,  which  he  held  in  trust
(whence  he  was  called  Jiduciarius)  for  the  father.  (Tit.  19.)

IV.  Tutors  appointed  by  the  7nagistrate. — Tutors  were  appointed  by
the  magistrate  under  the  lex  Atiliana  and  the  lex  Junta  Titia.  Under
the  first  of  these  laws  a  tutor  was  appointed  at  Rome  by  the  prastor  and
a  majority  of  the  tribunes ;  and  under  the  second,  in  the  provinces,  by
the  presses  (Tit.  20.  pr.),  if  there  was  no  tutor  on  whom  the  office
devolved  under  the  heads  of  appointment  already  noticed  ;  or  if  from  any
cause  there  was  a  vacancy  in  the  office.  (1,  2.)  Subsequently,  under
the  empire,  the  tutor  was  in  such  cases  appointed  at  Rome  by  the  pi^ce-
fectus  urbij  if  the  position  of  the  pupil  was  a  high  one,  and  by  the  prwtor
urbanus  if  it  was  not.  The  proeses  appointed  in  the  provinces  and,  in
cases  of  small  importance,  the  local  magistrates ;  but  these  magistrates
needed  the  preliminary  authority  of  the  prceses.  In  all  cases,  inquiry  was
made  into  the  circumstances  before  the  appointment  was  made.  (Tit.
20.  4.)  Justinian,  in  cases  where  the  fortune  of  the  pupil  or  adult  (for
here  we  have  a  provision  extending  to  curators)  did  not  exceed  500
solidi,  allowed  the  local  magistrate  to  appoint  without  any  authorisation,
merely  taking  security  from  the  person  appointed,  without  inquiring  into
the  circumstances  of  the  case.  (5.)

Tutelage  of  Women. — Under  the  old  law  women  were  in  tutelage  all
their  lives,  even  after  they  had  become  sui  juris ^  the  tutor  being  appointed
by  the  testament  of  the  husband,  if  she  was  in  manu^  and  the  husband  could
not  only  appoint  a  tutor,  but  give  the  wife  the  option  of  choosing  one.  If  no
testamentary  tutor  was  appointed,  the  nearest  agnatus  was  the  tutor ;  and
the  tutor  might  be  changed,  either  by  his  act,  or  on  the  woman's  application.
After  she  had  attained  the  age  of  puberty,  the  woman  under  tutelage
managed  her  own  affairs,  but  the  tutor  had  to  intervene  in  order  to
sanction  solemn  acts.  All  this  tutelage  of  women  above  the  age  of  pu-
berty had  become  obsolete  before  the  time  of  Justinian.  (6,  note.)

Authority  of  the  Tutor. — The  tutor  had,  in  the  first  place,  to  manage
the  affairs  of  the  pupil ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  to  add  his  auctoritas,
i.  e.  the  supplement  of  what  was  wanted  to  make  the  pupil  legally
competent  to  act.  If  the  pupil  was  under  seven  years  old,  the  tutor  could
only  in  very  rare  cases,  where  the  benefit  was  clearly  great  for  the  pupil,
go  through  any  acts  on  behalf  of  the  infant  beyond  such  as  were  necessary
for  the  ordinary  management  of  his  affairs.  It  was  only,  for  example,  at  a
late  period  of  the  empire,  that  the  tutor  was  allowed  to  enter  on  an  inheri-
tance on  behalf  of  the  infans.  Between  the  ages  of  seven  and  fourteen,
the  pupil  could  contract  without  the  authorisation  of  the  tutor,  so  far  as
the  contract  was  beneficial  to  him ;  but  every  unauthorised  contract  was

508  SUMMARY.

inoperative  to  his  prejudice.  (Tit.  21.  pr.  note.)  Tlie  pupil  could  not
take  any  very  serious  step  involving  possible  risk,  such  as  entering  on  an
inheritance,  demanding  possession  of  goods,  or  taking  an  inheritance  under
a  Jideicomm{ss2i7n,  without  the  authorisation  of  the  tutor.  (1.)  The  tutor
was  obliged  to  give  this  authorisation  personally,  not  by  writing,  and  could
not  give  it  by  ratification.  (2.)  If  there  was  a  suit  between  the  tutor  and
pupil,  a  curator  was  appointed  to  intervene  in  this  suit  on  behalf  of  the
pupil.  (3.)

Termination  of  Tutor's  Office. — The  office  of  a  tutor  came  to  an  end, —

(«.)  By  the  pupil  reaching  the  age  of  puberty,  which  had  previously
been  regarded  as  a  time  varying  according  to  the  facts  of  each  case,
eighteen  years  being  the  maximum,  but  which  Justinian  fixed  at  fourteen
for  males,  and  twelve  for  females.  (Tit.  22.  pr.)

(b.)  By  the  pupil  being  arrogated,  deported,  reduced  to  slavery,  or
made  a  captive,  or  dying.   (Tit.  1,  2.)

(c.)  By  the  condition  being  fulfilled  on  which  the  testamentary  tutor
was  to  cease  to  be  tutor,  or  the  time  having  expired  during  which  the
testamentary  tutor  was  to  act.  (Tit.  21.  3.  5.)

(d.)  By  the  tutor  dying  (3);  or —

{e.)  Undergoing,  however  appointed,  the  maxima  or  media  capitis
deminutio  ;  and

(/)  In  the  case  of  a  tutor  legitimus,  his  undergoing  the  minima  capitis
deminutio.  (4.)    And

(^.)  By  the  tutor  being  removed  as  suspected,  or  being  relieved  from
his  office  on  good  grounds  of  excuse.  (6.)

Curators  :  whom  they  were  to  protect. — Curators  were  appointed  to
protect  the  property  and  interests  of  four  classes  of  persons  : —

1.  Madmen  {furiosi). — This  was  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
and  was  extended  by  the  praetors  so  as  to  include  all  forms  of  mental
alienation  (Tit.  22,  note),  and  the  deaf,  mute,  and  perpetually  infirm.  (4.)

2.  Prodigals  (i.  e.  persons  wasting  recklessly  their  property). — This
was  also  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  but  that  law  only  applied  to
the  case  of  a  prodigal  wasting  goods  received  under  an  intestate  succession,
while  the  pr^tor  extended  it  to  all  cases  of  prodigality.  The  fact  of  the
madness  or  prodigality  was  first  ascertained,  by  the  prastor,  and  then  the
prodigus  was  absolutely  interdicted  from  managing  his  own  afl?airs,  but
the  furiosus  was  not  so  interdicted,  and  was  only  placed  under  the  care
of  the  curator.  When  the  case  came  within  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  the  curatorship  of  the  fariosus  and  prodigus  belonged  to  the
nearest  agnate.  The  magistrate  appointed  in  cases  of  the  praetorian  ex-
tensions of  the  terms,  and  in  the  time  of  Justinian  in  all  cases.  (Tit.  23.  3.)

3.  Adolescentes. — Persons  of  either  sex,  above  the  age  of  puberty,
and  under  the  age  of  twenty-five  years.

The  lex  Plcetoria  subjected  to  prosecution  and  infamy  persons  over-
reaching adolescents  under  twenty-five  years,  and  possibly  allowed  cura-
tors to  be  appointed  to  prot^ect  them.  Subsequently  praetors  protected  such
persons  by  ordering,  in  case  they  had  been  prejudiced,  a  restitutio  in  inte-
grum, that  is,  that  they  should  be  put  in  the  same  position  which  they

BOOK  I.  509

would  have  occupied  if  not  prejudiced.  Lastly,  Marcus  Antoninus  ordered
that  curators  should  be  appointed  in  all  cases  on  the  application  of  the
minor.  (Tit.  23.  pr.  note.)  The  adolescent  was  not  obliged  to  have  a
curator  for  general  purposes  unless  he  wished,  but  a  curator  could  be
forced  on  him  in  case  of  a  lawsuit,  or  his  debtor  wishing  to  pay  him,  or
his  late  tutor  wishing  to  settle  accounts  with  him ;  and  if  he  had  a  curator
he  could  not  aliene  any  part  of  his  property  without  the  sanction  of  the
curator.  (Tit,  23.  2,  note.)  The  curator  to  an  adolescent  could  only  be  ap-
pointed by  the  magistrate,  the  same  magistrates  appointing  who  appointed
tutors  ;  but  a  magistrate  would  generally  have  regard  to  the  wishes,
as  to  curatorship,  expressed  in  the  testament  of  a  person  who  could  have
appointed  a  tutor.  (1.)

4.  Pupils. — Pupils  sometimes  received  curators,  as,  for  example,  if
the  tutor  legitimus  was  unfit,  a  curator  was  appointed  to  protect  the  pupil
and  act,  to  a  great  extent,  instead  of  the  tutor  :  or,  if  the  testamentary
tutor,  or  the  tutor  appointed  by  the  magistrate,  was  unfit,  a  curator  was
appointed  to  act  conjointly  with  him,  and  curators  were  assigned  in  place
of  tutors  excused  for  a  time  only.   (Tit.  23.  5.)

If  a  tutor  was  prevented  by  illness  or  other  cause  from  administering
the  affairs  of  his  pupil,  a  person  might  be  appointed  to  act  for  him,  but
this  person  was  not  a  curator,  but  a  delegate  of  the  tutor.  (Tit.  23.  6.)

Modes  of  Protection  against  Tutors  and  Curators. — Persons  having
tutors  and  curators  were  protected  against  the  misconduct  of  tutors  and
curators  in  the  following  ways  : —

] .  Security  was  required  and  enforced  by  the  exaction  of  pledges  from
tutores  and  curator es  legitimi,  and  from  those  appointed  by  inferior  magis-
trates. (Tit.  24.  pr.)  2.  If  such  security  was  not  taken,  or  was
taken  to  an  insuflScient  degree,  the  magistrate  was  himself  liable  in  an
action,  Avhich  extended  to  his  heirs.  (Tit.  24.  2.)  3.  Every  tutor  or
curator  was  bound  to  make  an  inventory  of  the  property  of  the  pupil  or
person  under  care.  (Tit.  24.  pr.  note.)  4.  Every  tutor  or  curator  was,
after  the  publication  of  the  78th  novel,  obliged  to  pledge  himself  by  oath
that  he  would  act  as  a  bonus  paterfamilias.  (Tit.  24.  pr.  note.)  5.  The
property  of  tutors  and  curators  was  subjected  to  a  tacit  hypothec  to  make
good  losses  sustained  through  their  neglect.  (Tit.  24.  pr.  note.)  6.  An
action  might  be  brought  against  tutors  or  curators  when  their  office  was
ended,  to  make  them  account.  (Tit.  22.  6,  note.)  7.  Tutors  and  curators
might  be  removed  by  the  actio  suspecti.  (Tit.  26.)

Removal  on  Suspicion. — All  tutors,  including  the  patron  (though  in
his  case  the  grounds  of  a  decision  against  him  were  not  to  be  disclosed  in
order  to  save  his  reputation — Tit.  26.  2),  and  all  curators,  might  be  re-
moved, after  and  even  before  entering  on  office,  on  a  charge  of  suspicion,
suspecti  crimen — a  charge  permitted  by  the  Twelve  Tables  (Tit.  26.  pr.) —
being  successfully  brought  before  the  praetor  at  Rome,  the  j^rcEses,  or  pro-
consular legate,  in  the  provinces,  by  any  one,  even  a  woman  (3),  except
that  the  pupil  could  not  bring  this  charge  against  his  tutor,  while  the
minor  could  bring  it  against  his  curator.  (4.)  Infamy  attached,  if  fraud,  but
not  if  neglect,  was  proved.  (6.)     The  tutor  or  curator  might  be  removed

510  SUMMAEY.

although  solvent  (5),  and  although  he  offered  to  give  security,  (12.)
While  the  action  was  pending,  the  accused  was  suspended  from  his  admi-
nistration (7),  but  if  he  died  the  action  was  at  an  end.  (8.)  It  was  the
duty  of  the  tutor  to  provide  his  pupil  with  maintenance.  If  he  failed  to  do
so,  this  was  a  ground  for  his  being  removed  on  a  charge  of  suspicion.  (9.)
If  he  falsely  asserted  that  the  pupil's  means  did  not  suffice  to  allow  main-
tenance, he  was  to  be  handed  over  to  the  prcefectus  urbi,  or  presses,  to  be
punished,  as  also  was  a  tutor  who  had  obtained  his  office  by  bribery,  and
a  freedman  proved  to  be  guilty  of  fraud  while  acting  as  tutor  to  the  son  or
grandson  of  the  patron.  (10.)

Where  there  were  more  than  one  tutor  or  curator,  one  might  offer
to  his  co-tutor  or  co-curator  to  give  security,  and  alone  act  as  adminis-
trator, the  other  co-tutor  or  co-curator  having,  however,  the  preference  if  he,
when  thus  challenged,  was  willing  to  give  security.  If  no  tutor  or  curator
came  forward  in  this  way,  the  person,  if  any,  appointed  by  the  testament
to  administer  was  allowed  to  act ;  and,  if  there  was  no  such  person,  the
majority  of  the  tutors  or  curators  was  to  decide  who  should  act,  and,  if  an
agreement  could  not  be  come  to  in  this  way,  the  magistrate  would  decide.
(Tit.  24.  1.)

Tutors  and  Curators  when  excused. — Tutors  and  curators  might  be
excused  from  holding  their  offices  on  grounds  which  may  be  classed  under
four  heads : —

1.  Having  rendered  a  service  to  the  public,  or  being  engaged  in  the  dis-
charge of  some  public  duty,- — (a)  Having  a  certain  number  of  children
living  (three  at  Rome,  four  in  Italy,  five  in  the  provinces),  children  slain
in  battle,  and  grandchildren,  in  lieu  of  their  parent,  being  reckoned  in
(Tit.  25.  pr.) ;  (b)  being  engaged  in  the  administration  of  the  fisciis
(1)  ;  (c)  being  absent  on  the  service  of  the  State  (2)  ;  (d)  being  magis-
trates, military  persons  (14),  or  members  of  learned  professions.  (15.)

2.  Being  in  a  position  adverse  to  the  pupil  or  adult. — (a)  Being  a
creditor  or  debtor  (4,  note)  ;  (b)  being  appointed  by  a  father  through
enmity  (9)  ;  (c)  having  been  in  deadly  enmity  with  the  father  (11);  (d)
having  had  their  status  questioned  by  the  father  (12);  (e)  being  the
husband  of  the  woman  under  care.  (19.)

3.  Being  incompetent  to  sustain  the  burden  of  the  office. — (a)  Through
being  in  extreme  poverty;  (b)  being  in  bad  health  (7) ;  (c)  not  being
able  to  read  (8) ;   (e)  being  over  seventy  years  of  age.  (3.)

4.  Filling,  or  having  filled,  similar  offices. — (a)  Holding  already  three
offices  of  the  kind  in  question  (3) ;  (b)  having  already  been  the  tutor  of
the  person  to  whom  a  curator  was  to  be  appointed.   (18.)

511

BOOK  11.

LAW    RELATING    TO    THINGS.

Distinctions  of  Things. — We  now  come  to  the  law  relating  to  things;
but  the  Institutes  only  deal  with  private  law.  The  first  step  is,  therefore,
to  notice  the  distinction  of  things  according  as  they  are  exti^a  nostrum
■patrimonium  or  in  nostro  patrimonio,  that  is,  according  as  they  are  or  are
not  capable  of  being  the  property  of  private  persons.  It  is  only  of  things
in  nostro  patrimonio  that  the  Institutes  treat.  Of  things  within  the
compass  of  private  law  the  principal  division  is  that  into  things  corporeal
and  incorporeal ;  of  things  like  a  field,  quce  tangi  possimt,  and  things  like
a  right  of  way  over  a  field,  an  inheritance,  or  an  obligation,  qu(B  tangi  non
possunt.  (Tit.  2.)

Modes  of  Acquisition. — How  do  we  acquire  things  in  7iostro  patri-
monio^ whether  corporeal  or  incorporeal  ?  The  answer  to  this  question
takes  up  the  Second  Book  of  the  Institutes,  and  the  Third  Book  down  to
the  end  of  the  Twelfth  Tide.  First  the  inquiry  is  made  how  we  acquire
particular  things,  res  singular,  and  then  how  we  acquire  groups  of  things,
universitates  rerum,  like  an  inheritance.

"We  acquire  particular  things  by,  1,  Occupatio;  2,  Accessio  ;  3,  Tra-
ditio  ;  4,  Usucapio  ;  5,  Donatio  ;  the  first  three  being  modes  of  acquiring
jure  naturali ;  the  last  two,  ju7^e  civili.  We  acquire  groups  of  things,
by,  1,  Testamentary  succession ;  2,  Intestate  succession;  3,  Arrogation;
4,  Bonorum  addictio ;  5,  Bonorum  venditio ;  6,  Forfeiture  under  the
senatus-consultum  Claudianum.

The  First  Title  of  the  Second  Book  treats  of  the  distinction  of  things
according  as  they  are  extra  nostrum  patrimonium  or  in  nostro  patrimonio,  and
then  of  the  acquisition  of  particular  things  by  occupatio,  accessio,  and  traditio.

Res  extra  nostrum  Patrimonium  are,  1,  Communes,  common  to
ail  men,  such  as'  the  air,  the  sea,  and  the  sea-shore  as  far  as  the  highest
winter  flood  runs  up  (Tit.  1,  1.  3)  ;  every  one  being  allowed  to  use  the
sea-shore,  as  for  drying  nets  (5) ;  avoiding,  however,  injury  to  existing
buildings  thereon  (1);  and  each  State  having  the  sea-shore  adjacent  to
its  territory  under  its  supervision.  (2,  note.)  2.  Publicw,  belonging  to  the
State,  as  rivers  and  ports,  and  the  right  of  fishing  therein,  and  the  use  for
purposes  of  navigation  of  the  banks  thereof,  although  these  banks  might
belong  to  private  proprietors.  (2.  4.)  3.  Universitatis,  belonging  to  a  cor-
porate body,  as  e.  g.,  a  racecourse  belonging  to  a  city.  4.  Nullius,  in  the
sense  of  being  so  devoted  to  the  gods  that  they  cannot  belong  to  men,  and
such  res  nullius  may  be  (a)  sacrce,  consecrated,  as  temples,  by  the  pontiffs,
with  the  sanction  of  the  State,  (b)  Religiosce,  invested  with  a  religious
character  by  interment,  private  proprietors  being  at  liberty  to  impress  this

512  SUMMARY.

character  on  their  ground  by  simply  burying  a  dead  body  there;  and  (c)
sanctce,  holy,  or  protected  against  violation,  like  the  gates  or  walls  of  a
city.  (10.)

Modes  of  acquiring  Particular  Things  jure  naturali. — Particular
things  in  nostra  patrimonio  are  acquired  by —

I.  OccuPATio,  i.e.  the  taking  or  holding,  as  the  holder's  own,  of  res
nuUhis,  in  the  sense  of  things  which  previously  belonged  to  no  one,  such
as  (a)  Avild  animals  wherever  found,  which  you  have  actually  captured,
not  merely  wounded  (Tit.  1.  13),  and  not  let  go  again.  (Tit.  1.  12.)  Bees
you  have  hived.  (Tit.  1.  14.)  (But  swarms  issuing  from  your  hive  and
staying  in  your  sight  and  power  (Tit.  1.  14)  ;  wild  animals,  such  as
pigeons  and  deer,  that  have  acquired  the  habit  of  returning  to  your  keeping,
and  fowls,  not  wild,  but  that  stray  from  your  keeping  (Tit.  1.  16),  are  con-
sidered as  your  property  and  not  i^es  nullhis,  and  to  take  them  is  theft.)  (Tit.
1.  16.)  (b)  Things  taken  from  the  enemy;  if  the  things  taken  from  the
enemy  by  a  Roman  army  have  been  previously  taken  by  him  from  a  citizen,
they  will,  as  a  general  rule,  form  part  of  the  prceda  or  booty  of  the  Roman
army ;  but  special  things,  such  as  land  and  slaves,  are,  by  a  kind  of
postliminy  applied  to  them,  allowed  to  revert  to  the  owner.  (17,  note.)
(c)  Anything  found  on  the  sea- shore.  (18.)  (d)  Islands  formed  in  the
sea.  (22.)  (e)  Things  found  which  have  been  intentionally  abandoned
by  their  owner  (47),  as  distinguished  from  things  which  the  owner  has
not  wished  to  cease  to  own,  as  things  thrown  overboard  in  a  storm  or
dropped  out  of  a  carriage.  (48.)

II.  AcCESSio.  There  is  no  notice  in  the  Institutes  ofaccessio  as  a  dis-
tinct mode  of  acquisition.  The  subject  is  treated  as  growing  out  of
occupatio.

Acquisition  by  accession  may  be  regarded  as  arising  in  two  classes  of
cases.  1.  In  case<=!  of  natural  increment.  2.  In  cases  where,  the  things
of  two  owners  being  mixed,  the  law  decides  which  owner  shall  have  the
thing  resulting  from  the  mixture.

] .  Accession  hi/  natural  increment. — 1.  An  owner  gains  something  new
by  natural  increment  in  the  following  instances  : — (a)  The  young  of  his
animals.  (19.)  (b)  New  soil  added  imperceptibly  to  his  soil  by  alluvium.
(20.)  (c)  A  portion  of  his  neighbour's  soil  borne  by  a  river  to  his  soil
and  remainino-  there  till  the  roots  of  trees  thereon  become  attached  to  his
soil.  (21.)  (d)  An  island  being  formed  in  a  river;  he  has  the  ownership  in
this  island  up  to  the  line  of  the  mid  channel.  (22.)  (e)  The  bed  of  a  river
left  dry,  up  to  the  same  line.    (23.)

Accessions  by  natural  increment  might  occur  when  a  possessor  or  a
usufructuary,  and  not  the  owner,  held  the  land.  To  whom  did  the  fruits
belong  ?  It  is  only  of  gathered  fruits  we  can  speak,  for  if  the  owner
dispossessed  the  possessor,  the  owner  immediately  took  all  the  fruits
ungathered,  and  if  the  usufructuary  died  the  same  thing  happened.  With
regard  to  the  possessor,  the  bona  fide  possessor  was  not  responsible  for  the
fruits  he  had  consumed,  while  the  mala  fide  possessor  was  responsible.
(1.  30,  note.)  The  usufructuary  had  a  right  to  take  all  the  fruits,  includ-
ing the  young  of  animals ;  but  the  children  of  female  slaves  belonged  to
tlie  owner,  not  to  the  usufructuary.   (36,  37.)

BOOK  II.  513

2.  Accession  in  favour  of  one  of  two  owners. — The  following  in-
stances are  given  in  the  Institutes,  of  cases  where,  the  things  o£  two
owners  being  mixed,  the  law  decides  which  owner  shall  have  the  thing
resulting  from  the  mixture.

1.  A  makes  a  thing  with  the  materials  of  B.  Here,  if  the  thing
can  be  reduced  to  its  rude  materials,  like  a  vessel  of  silver,  the  thing  made
belongs  to  B  ;  if  not,  it  belongs  to  A,  as  the  maker  of  a  nova  species.  (25.)

A  makes  a  thing  partly  with  his  own  materials  and  partly  with  the
materials  of  B.     The  thing  made  belongs  to  A.  (25.)

2.  A  weaves  in  his  garment  the  purple  of  B.  If  the  purple  is
still  separable  the  purple  belongs  to  B,  if  not  to  A,  the  garment  being
considered  the  principal,  the  purple  the  accessary  thing.   (26.)

3.  Two  owners  consent  to  mix  their  materials,  the  product  belongs
to  them  in  common.  (27.)

4.  The  materials  of  two  owners  are  mixed  by  accident.

If  the  mixed  particles  are  physically  inseparable,  as  when  two  metals
are  fused  together,  the  product  belongs  to  them  in  common.     (27.)

If  the  mixed  particles  are  physically  separable,  as  Avhen  two  qualities
of  wheat  are  mixed,  each  remains  the  owner  of  his  share  of  the  mixed
wheat.  (28.)

5.  The  owner  of  the  soil  builds  with  the  materials  of  another.

The  owner  of  the  materials  remains  the  owner,  but  he  cannot  have
the  house  pulled  down.  He  may  wait,  if  he  pleases,  till  the  building  is
destroyed,  and  then  reclaim  his  materials,  or  he  may  bring  an  action  de
tigno  injuncto  and  get  double  the  value  of  the  materials,  and  then  his
claim  for  the  materials  is  at  an  end  if  the  o^vner  of  the  soil  did  not  know
that  the  materials  were  not  his  ;  but  if  he  did  this,  the  owner  of  the
materials  may  first  bring  the  action  de  tigno  injuncto^  and  then  also,  if
the  building  is  pulled  down,  reclaim  the  materials.  (29.)

6.  The  owner  of  materials  builds  on  the  soil  of  another.

(ct)  Let  us  suppose  the  owner  of  the  materials  is  still  in  possession  of
the  soil.  The  owner  of  the  soil  seeks  to  recover  it.  He  is  obliged  to
compensate  the  owner  of  the  materials  for  the  additional  value  given  by
the  building  to  the  soil,  if  the  builder  did  not  know  that  he  was  building
on  another's  soil.  If  he  did  know  this,  the  owner  is  obliged  to  let  him
take  away  such  of  the  materials  as  can  be  removed  without  damage.

(6)  Let  us  suppose  the  owner  of  the  materials  is  not  still  in  possession
of  the  soil.  Then,  whether  he  knew  or  did  not  know  that  he  was  building
on  another's  soil,  he  may,  if  the  building  is  destroyed,  reclaim  the  mate-
rials (30),  but  can  get  no  compensation  for  the  additional  value  he  has
given  to  the  soil.

7.  A  tree  belonging  to  A  is  planted  in  the  soil  of  B.

Until  it  takes  root  in  the  new  soil,  the  tree  continues  the  property  of
A;  but  a  rooted  tree  is  always  the  property  of  the  owner  of  the  soil.  (31.)

8.  The  wheat  of  A  is  sown  in  the  land  of  B.
Sown  wheat  is  on  the  footing  of  rooted  trees.     The  wheat  belongs  to

B  ;   but  the  sower,  if  in  bona  fide  possession,  is  protected  against  B  turning
him  out  without  compensation  for  the  value  of  the  wheat  sown.  (32.)

L  L

514  SUMMARY.

9.  A  writes  a  poem  or  history  on  the  parchment  or  paper  of  B.

B,  the  owner  of  the  parchment,  still  remains  owner,  after  the  parchment
has  been  written  on.  But  if  B  is  in  bona  fide  possession  of  the  parch-
ment, A  cannot  get  it  from  him  without  offering  to  pay  him  the  cost  of
writing.  (33.)

10.  A  paints  a  picture  on  the  tablet  of  B.

Here,  in  consequence  of  the  possible  value  of  pictures,  the  decision  is
the  other  way.  The  painted  canvas  belongs  to  A.  If  B,  the  owner  of
the  tablet,  is  in  possession  of  it  after  it  has  been  painted  on,  A  cannot  get
it  from  him  without  offering  to  pay  the  cost  of  the  tablet.  If,  however,
A  is  in  possession  of  the  tablet,  B  may  claim  the  tablet  by  an  action  in
which  he  is  supposed  still  to  be  the  owner,  offering  to  pay  the  cost  of
the  painting ;  but  the  painter  could  stop  the  action  by  paying  the  cost  of
the  tablet.  (34.)

11.  A  finds  treasure  in  the  land  of  B.     Half  goes  to  A,  half  to  B.  (39.)
III.  Traditio  :    or    delivery.      Its    constituent    elements   are    three.

1.  The  owner  of  a  thing  means  by  the  transfer  to  pass  the  property
he  transfers.  2.  He,  or  any  one  entitled  to  act  for  him  (42,  43),  transfers
by  actually  passing  the  thing,  or  by  giving  the  transferee  command  over
it,  as  when  he  gives  the  keys  of  a  granary.  (45.)  3.  The  transferee,
meaning  thereby  to  become  owner,  receives  it.  Traditio  was  necessary
to  pass  property  of  all  kinds;  and  in  Justinian's  time,  land,  wherever
situated,  passed  by  tradition.  (40,  note.)

The  handing  over  and  the  meaning  to  pass  the  property  are  both
necessary.  The  seller  may  hand  over  a  thing,  but  he  generally  does  not
mean  to  pass  the  property  till  he  is  actually  paid  ;  and  then  not  till  the
seller  is  paid,  does  the  thing  handed  over  become  the  property  of  the
buyer.  (41.)  The  lender,  again,  hands  over  a  thing,  not  meaning  to  cease
to  be  owner  o£  it.  If  he  changes  his  mind  and  wishes  to  give  it,  his
purpose  of  giving  unites  with  the  previous  act  of  handing  over,  and  the
legal  traditio  is  accomplished.  (41.)  Things  on  board  ship  may  be  thrown
overboard  to  lighten  the  ship,  but  their  owners  do  not  mean  to  cease  to  be
owners,  and  therefore  the  property  in  them  does  not  pass  to  those  who  may
pick  them  up.  (48.)  It  is  not,  however,  necessary  that  the  transferee
should  be  a  person  definitely  ascertained,  for  if  money  is  thrown  to  a  mob,
the  incertcB  personce  who  pick  it  up  become  the  owners  by  traditio.  (40.)

Servitudes. — The  Institutes,  at  the  end  of  this  explanation  of  the
modes  of  acquiring  particular  things  jv7'e  naturali,  pause,  before  speaking
of  the  modes  of  acquiring  such  things  jure  civili,  to  treat  of  servitudes,
which  are  introduced  by  noticing  at  the  beginning  of  the  Second  Title  the
division  of  things  into  corporeal  and  inco?^poreal,  and  saying  that  among
incorj)oreal  things  are  servitudes,  or  portions  of  the  right  of  ownership
enjoyed  by  persons  other  than  the  thing  itself.  Servitudes  are  («)  prwdial
when  enjoyed  over  one  thing  in  virtue  of  the  ownership  of  another
thing ;  (prsedial  servitudes  being  of  two  kinds  :  rural  and  urban),  and  (b)
personal  when  attached  to  the  person  of  the  owner  of  the  servitude.

Prcedial  Servitudes. — Rural  prcedial  servitudes  were  so  called  be-
cause they  were  of  kinds  most  frequently  met  with  in  the  country  ;  while
urban   prandial   servitudes   were   so    called  because   they  were  of  kinds

BOOK  11.  515

most  frequently  met  with  in  the  city.  The  four  kinds  of  rural
preedial  servitudes  noticed  in  the  Institutes,  with  an  intimation  that
there  are  others  (Tit.  3.  2),  are,  1,  iter,  the  right  of  passing;  2,  actus,  the
right  of  driving  cattle;  3,  via,  the  right  of  driving  a  vehicle  over
another  man's  land ;  the  more  extensive  always  involving  the  less  extensive
right ;  and,  4j  aquwductus,  the  right  of  conducting  water  through  another
man's  land.  (Tit.  3.  pr.)  Of  urban  servitudes  the  instances  given  in
the  Institutes  are  the  right,  1,  to  make  a  neighbour's  house  sustain  the
weight  o£  that  of  the  owner  of  the  servitude  ;  2,  to  insert  a  beam  in
another  man's  house ;  3,  to  make  another  man  receive  the  overflow  of
water  from  the  roof  or  gutters  (or  to  allow  him  not  to  be  subject  any
more  to  the  .servitude  of  receiving  such  an  overflow,  if  this,  which  does
not  seem  a  servitude,  is  the  meaning  of  stillicidiuni  non  recipiendi) ;  4,  to
prevent  another  man  raising  his  house  higher  than  that  of  the  owner  of
the  servitude ;  5,  to  prevent  another  man  blocking  up  the  lights  of  the
owner  of  the  servitude.  (Tit»  3.  1.)

Personal  Servitudes  are  the  following:  1,  Ususfructus ;  2,  Usus ;
3,  Hahitatio.

Ususfructus  is  the  right  of  using  and  taking  the  fruits  of  anything,
the  fruits  including  \h.e.fructus  civiles,  or  the  profits  derived  from  selling
or  letting  the  right  of  taking  the  fruits.  The  usufructuary  or  owner
of  this  servitude  had  to  act  as  a  good  paterfamilias,  taking,  and  giving
security  that  he  would  take,  good  care  of  the  thing,  and  making  losses
good.  If  the  substance  of  the  thing  ceased  to  exist,  his  servitude  was  at
an  end,  and  it  was  personal  to  himself  and  did  not  pass  to  his  heirs,  and
only  the  fruits  actually  gathered  by  him  belonged  to  him.  (Tit.  4.  pr.)
In  the  old  law  only  things  not  consumed  in  the  use  could  be  the  subjects
of  usufruct ;  but  things  consumed  in  the  use,  such  as  garments  or  v/ine,
might,  under  a  senatus-considtum  oi  the  time  of  Augustus,  be  made  subject
to  a  usufruct,  the  usufructuary  having,  in  some  cases,  as  e.g.,  if  he  was
a  legatee,  to  give  security  that  at  the  termination  of  the  usufruct  he  would
pay  their  value  as  estimated  at  the  commencement  of  the  usufruct.  (2.)

Usus,  or  the  naked  use,  is  the  right  of  using  the  thing,  not  of  taking
the  fruits  of  it,  except  for  his  daily  wants.  (Tit.  5.  1.)  In  the  case  of  a
house,  it  is  the  use  for  the  purpose  of  living  in  it  with  his  family  only,  and
at  the  most  receiving  a  guest  in  it.  (Tit.  5.  2.)  Hahitatio  is  the  use  of
a  house  for  the  purpose  of  living  therein,  with  something  more  added  on,
the  right  of  letting  it.  (Tit.  5.  5.)

Creation  of  Seuvitudes* — Servitudes  were  created  in  the  following
ways  : — 1.  Mancipatio. — This  only  applied  to  praedial  rural  servitudes.

2.  In  jure  cessio. — (Both  these  Avere   obsolete  in  the  time  of  Justinian.)

3.  Pacts  and  stipulations,  followed  by  ^?/as?-tradition,  i.Ci  affording  the
means  of  actual  exercise  of  the  rights.  4.  Testament.  5.  Adjudicaiio.
6.  Deductio. — A  thing  is  transferred^  minus  the  servitude,  which  is  re-
served by  the  transferrer.  7.  Usucapion. — The  acquisition  of  servitudes
by  usucapion  was  forbidden  by  the  lex  Scrihonia-,  but  long  posses-
sion of  them,  or  at  least  of  some  of  them,  was  protected  by  the  prajtor
after  a  time,  the  length  of  which  is  uncertain,  but  which  was  probably

LL     2

516  SUMMAEY.

ten  years  for  those  present,  and  twenty  years  for  those  not  present,
in  the  same  province.  If  land  was  acquired  by  usucapion,  so  were  the
servitudes  that  existed  with  it,  and  a  servitude  lost  by  disuse  might  be
regained  by  usucapion.  Usucapion  applied  principally  to  pr^edial  urban
servitudes.  It  also  applied  to  at  least  some  prsedial  rural  servitudes,
and  probably  to  usufructs.  (Tit.  3.  4,  note;  Tit.  4.  1,  note.)  8.  Lege,
or  express  enactment.  This  only  applied,  perhaps,  to  usufructs,  an
instance  being  the  acquisition  by  the  father  of  the  usufruct  of  the  son's
peculium  under  Justinian's  legislation.   (Tit.  4.  1,  note.)

Extinction  of  Servitudes. — Servitudes  were  extinguished  in  the  fol-
lowing ways  (Tit.  4.  3,  note): — 1.  In  jure  cessio,  the  owner  of  the
servitude  denying  that  he  owns  it  (obsolete  in  time  of  Justinian).  2.  Con-
fusio  or  co7isolidatio ;  the  right  to  the  res  serviens  and  the  res  dominans,  or
to  the  dominium  and  the  usufruct,  vesting  in  the  same  person.  3.  The
termination  (a)  of  the  rights  under  which  the  servitude  is  created,  as  if
an  heir  holding  till  a  condition  is  fulfilled  creates  a  servitude,  the  con-
dition being  fulfilled,  and  the  heir  ceasing  to  be  the  owner,  the  servitude
is  at  an  end;  or  (b)  the  termination  of  the  duration  of  the  servitude,  i.e.
the  period  for  which  it  has  been  fixed  by  the  creator.  4.  Non-usage ;
not  using  it  for  a  period  which,  previously  to  Justinian,  was  two  years,  and,
after  Justinian's  legislation,  was  fixed  at  ten  or  twenty,  according  as  the
parties  were  present  or  absent.  If  the  servitude  was  a  prsedial  urban
one,  it  was  necessary  that,  to  free  the  res  serviens  by  usucapio,  the  person
affected  by  the  servitude  should  do  some  distinct  act  inconsistent  with  sub-
mission to  the  servitude  (usucapio  lihertatis).  (Tit.  4.  3,  note.)  In
usufructs,  if  the  usufructuary  did  not  use  the  thing  according  to  the  terms
of  the  usufruct,  it  came  to  an  end.  (Tit.  4.  3,  note.)  Hahitatio  did  not
cease  by  non-usage.  (Tit.  5.  5,  note.)  5.  Perishing  of  the  thing  in
virtue  of  which,  or  over  which,  the  servitude  was  exercised.  6.  In  the
case  of  usufruct  and  use,  the  death  or  capitis  deminutio  (including,  before
Justinian,  the  minima  capitis  deminutio)  of  the  owner  of  the  servitude.

Emphyteusis,  Superficies,  Jus  Pignoris. — Before  returning  to  the
modes  of  acquisition  of  particular  things,  we  have  to  notice  three  other
incorporeal  rights,  which  naturally  connect  themselves  with  personal  ser-
vitudes. \.  Emphyteusis.  2.  Superficies.  ^.  Jus  pignoris.  (A  summary
of  the  law  relating  to  them  is  given  at  page  132.)*

IV.  Usucapion. — The  Institutes,  as  v/e  have  said,  notice  five  modes  of
acquiring  res  singula,  three  being  modes  of  acquiringji/re  naturali,  and  two
being  modes  of  acquiring  jure  civili.  We  now  come  to  the  first  of  these
two  latter,  viz.,  usucapion,  or  the  process  by  which  possession  ripens  into
ownership  by  lapse  of  time.

It  is  only  civil  possession  that  is  capable  of  so  ripening.  Civil  is  op-
posed to  natural  possession.  If  a  man  has  physical  control  over  a  thing,
detains  it,  as  the  jurists  say,  he  is  in  possession  of  it ;  but,  to  possess  it,  he
must  mean  to  hold  it  as  his  own.  If  he  not  only  is  in  possession  of  it,  and
means  to  hold  it  as  his  own,  but  if  also  his  possession  is  bona  fide  and

*  Where  a  summary  of  any  distinct  portion   of  law  is  given  in  the  body  of  the
work,  it  is  not  repeated  in  this  general  Summary.

BOOK  II.  51?

ex  justa  causa,  then  such  possession  is  civil  possession,  the  possession
that  in  Eoman  law  (civilis)  gave  rise  to  usucapio,  I£  he  is  merely  in
possession,  or  if  he  has  also  the  animus  possidendi,  but  his  possession  is
not  bona  fide  and  ex  justa  causa,  then  his  possession  in  either  case  is  only-
natural,  and  does  not  give  rise  to  usucapio.  The  civil  possessor  and  the
natural  possessor,  who  had  the  animus  possidendi,  were  protected  in  their
possession  by  praetorian  interdicts,  but  the  person  merely  in  possession  was
not.  (Tit.  6.  pr.  note.)

With  regard  to  usucapio,  we  have  to  ask  three  questions.  1.  What
things  can  be  acquired  by  usucajyio  ?  2.  What  is  meant  by  the  terms
honafide  and  ex  justa  causa,  as  applied  to  possession  ?  3.  What  time  was
requisite  to  run  before  usucapio  ripened  the  possession  into  ownership  ?

1.  What  things  can  he  accjuired  by  usucapio  ? — At  the  outset  we  have
to  notice  a  point  of  great  importance.  Lands  in  the  solum  p)rovinciale
never  could  become  the  property  of  an  individual.  The  possessor  could
not,  therefore,  become  the  owner  of  such  land  by  usucapio.  But  after  a
certain  length  of  possession  the  prastor  protected  his  possession  by  allowing
a  plea,  praisct-iptio,  of  long  possession  to  be  effectual  in  an  action  brought
against  him  for  the  recovery  of  the  possession  of  the  land  he  held.  But
as  the  time  was  much  longer  that  was  required  to  run  for  the  protection
in  this  way  than  the  time  required  for  usucapio,  the  term  proiscriptio,  or
possessio  longi  temporis,  was  used  to  describe,  Avith  regard  to  the  solum
jyrovinciale,  the  equivalent  of  usucapio  with  regard  to  moveables  and
solum  Ifalicum.  There  were  some  differences  in  their  operation  ;  the  chief
of  which  were,  1,  thsit  possessio  longi  temporis  did  not  give  ownership;
2,  that  usucapio  was  only  interrupted  by  a  judgment;  longi  temporis
possessio  by  a  litis  contestatio,  and  3,  under  usucapio  the  thing  was
acquired  subject  to  its  liabilities,  i.e.  servitudes  or  mortgages ;  and  under
longi  temporis  jjossessio,  it  was  held  free  from  them.  Yet  as  they  were
nearly  of  the  same  effect,  and  as  the  requisites  of  possession  in  each  case
were  the  same,  they  are  generally  spoken  of  together.  (Tit.  6.  pr.  note.)
Under  Justinian's  legislation  (Tit.  6.  pr.)  the  possessio  longi  temporis  gave
the  dominium.  Moveables,  it  may  be  added,  could,  in  all  parts  of  the
Roman  Empire,  be  acquired  by  usucapio,  and  the  posssssio  longi  temporis
did  not  apply  to  them.  (Tit.  6.  pr.  note.)  We  may,  therefore,  break
the  first  question  into  two  heads.  1.  What  moveables  could  be  acquired
by  usucapio.  2.  What  immoveables  could  be  acquired  by  usucapio  or
possessio  longi  temporis.

Generally  speaking,  all  things  in  nostro  patrimonio  could  be  so  ac-
quired, but  things  such  as  res  sacra',  or  a  free  man,  could  not.  Nor,  as  a
general  rule,  could  things  incorporeal.  (1,  note.)  Things  stolen  could
not  be  acquired,  and  a  fugitive  slave  was  reckoned  among  such  things.
(1.)  The  thief,  of  course,  could  not  acquire  by  usucapio  what  he  had
stolen ;  but  neither  could  an  innocent  holder,  and,  as  theft  included  every
handing  over  by  a  person  of  a  thing  he  knew  not  to  be  his,  it  was  rare
that  moveables  could  be  acquired  by  usucapio  (3)  ;  but  it  might  happen,
as  if  an  heir  bona  fide  deals  with  a  thing  merely  deposited  with  the  tes-
tator as  if  it  had  belonged  to  the  testator   (4)  or  a  usufructuary  so  deals

518  SUMMAEY.

witli  the  child  of  a  female  slave,  believing  bona  fide  that  it  is  his  pro-
perty. There  is  no  taint  of  theft,  and  the  thing  when  alienated  by  the
heir,  or  usufructuary,  may  be  acquired  by  nsucapio.  Theft  only  applied
to  moveables.  As  to  immoveables,  they  could  not  be  acquired  by  usucapio
or  longi  temporis  possessio,  if  they  were  7'es  vi  possesses^  forcibly  seized  on
(2)  ;  but  if  the  possession  was  originally  sine  vi,  but  still  mala  fide,  e.  g.
if  a  person  took  possession  of  land  left  unguarded,  knowing  it  not  to  be
his,  and  then  alienated  it  to  a  bona  fide  possessor,  this  possessor  could
gain  the  ownership  by  usucapio,  and  therefore  usvcapio  applied  much
more  frequently  to  immoveables  than  to  moveables.  (7.)  The  goods  of  the
fiscus,  before  being  reported  on  as  such  (vacantia),  could,  but  afterwards
could  not,  be  acquired  by  usucapio.  (9.)  Nor  could  things  belonging  to
pupils  or  minors,  or  things  forming  part  of  a  dowry.  (10.)

2.  What  ivere  the  requisites  of  civil  possession  ?  What  ivere  the  con-
ditions possessioji  must  fulfil  in  order  for  usucapio  to  opei^ate  ?

(1.)  The  thing  possessed  must  not  have  any  vitium  in  it,  i.e.  must
not  be  of  any  of  those  kinds  of  things  which  we  have  just  described  as  in-
capable of  being  acquired  by  usucapio.  (10.)

(2.)  The  thing  must  be  possessed  ex  justa  causa,  that  is,  must  have
come  into  the  power  of  the  possessor  by  some  recognised  legal  mode  of
acquisition,  such  as  sale  or  gift  (10,  note) ;  and,  if  there  had  been  a  mis-
take about  this,  and  the  causa,  or  title,  was  not  just,  the  error,  under
Justinian's  legislation,  prevented  usucapio.  (11.)

(3.)  The  possession  must  be  bona  fide  ;  the  possessor  must  not  know
that  he  was  possessing  Avhat  did  not  belong  to  him,  and,  although  reason-
able ignorance  of  facts  could  be  permitted,  ignorance  of  leading  principles
of  law  could  not.  In  the  case  of  a  sale  it  was  necessary  that  the  bona  fides
should  exist  at  the  making,  and  also  at  the  performance  of  the  bargain.
The  general  rule  was  that  the  possession  must  be  bona,  fide  at  its  com-
mencement. Subsequent  discovery  of  the  real  facts  did  not  stop  the
process  of  usucapio.  (10,  note.)  This  was  equally  true,  if  not  the
same,  but  two  persons  possessed,  one  taking  from  the  other,  the  thing
during  the  time  requisite  for  usucapio.  If,  at  its  commencement,  the
possession  of  the  testator  was  bona  fide,  that  of  the  heir  was  available  for
usucapio,  although  the  heir  knew  that  the  testator  had  been  mistaken.
(12.)  The  times  during  which  two  persons  held  the  thing,  the  one
from  the  other,  as  in  the  case  of  a  seller  and  a  buyer,  counted  together  for
the  purposes  oi  usucapio.  (13.)

UsuKPATio. — The  interruption  of  usucapio,  the  breaking  the  use,
was  termed  usurpatio,  as  if  the  possessor  lost  possession  or  fell  into  the
power  of  the  enemy,  or  an  action  was  brought  to  contest  the  right,  the  use
being,  under  Justinian,  broken  from  the  time  of  the  first  moving  of  the
controversy  {inota  controversial,  instead  of  from  the  litis  contestatio,  which
had  no  longer  the  important  place  it  had  under  the  formulary  system.  (13.)

In  three  exceptional  cases  the  7nala  fide  possessor  might  acquire  by
usucapio :  —  1,  Under  the  old  law  (altered  by  Hadrian),  if  the  thing
possessed  was  an  inheritance,  or  part  of  one,  the  mala  fide  possessor  could
in  a  year   acquire  the  thing,  whether  moveable  or  immoveable ;  2,  so

EOOK  II.  519

could  the  original  owner  of  a  thing  given  over  in  trust  as  against  the  fidu-
ciary ;  and  3,  the  original  owner  of  a  thing  sold  by  the  State  for  non-
payment of  a  mortgage  debt  could  acquire  it,  as  against  the  prcediator^  or
purchaser,  from  the  State,  but  in  this  case  two  years'  possession  was
necessary  for  immoveables.  (10,  note.)

3.  What  time  was  required  for  the  possession  to  run  on  in  order  that
usucapio  might  take  effect  ?

By  the  Twelve  Tables  it  was  provided,  that  usucapio  should  be  com-
pleted in  two  years  in  the  case  of  moveables,  and  in  one  year  in  the
case  of  immoveables.    (Tit.  6.  pr.)

The  longi  temporis  jjossessio,  introduced  by  the  praetors  chiefly  for
the  protection  of  possessors  of  provincial  lands,  required  ten  years  if  the
parties  were  domiciled  in  the  same  province,  inter  prcBsentes ;  and  twenty
years  if  they  were  not,  inter  absentee.  (Tit.  6.  pr.  note.)

Justinian  changed  the  system  generally.  He  lengthened  the  time  for
the  acquisition  of  moveables  from  one  year  to  three,  and  gave  the  name
of  usucapio  to  the  acquisition  of  moveables  by  possession  during  three
years.  He  made  the  lo7igi  temporis  possessio  apply  to  lands  everywhere
(abolishing  the  distinction  between  solum  Italicuni  and  solum  pr^ovinciale),
and  he  made  the  longi  temporis  possessio  give  the  ownership  and  not
merely  bar  actions.    (Tit.  6.  pr.  note.)

Possessio  longissimi  temporis. — There  was  also  possessio  longissimi
temporis,  by  which  possession  lasting  in  the  case  of  ecclesiastical  property
and  the  patrimonial  estate  of  the  emperor  for  fifty  years,  and  in  other
cases  for  thirty  years,  enabled  the  possessor  before  Justinian  to  repel  all
actions,  and  under  Justinian  to  become  owner  of  the  thing  possessed,
whatever  the  defect  in  the  possession  might  be.    (13,  note.)

Possession  for  five  years  of  things  purchased  from  the  fiscus  gave,
imder  an  edict  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  complete  ownership  to  the  purchasers,
whatever  might  be  the  defects  of  the  possession,  as  if,  for  example,  there
were  rights  of  an  owner  or  mortgagee  which  the  fiscus  ought  to  have
respected.  Those  damnified  by  the  action  of  the  fiscus  were  during
five  years  at  liberty,  under  a  constitution  of  Zeno,  to  seek  compensation
from  thQ  fiscus,  while  the  purchasers  had  under  this  constitution  an  incon-
testable title  at  once.    (14.)

Gift. — The  second  mode  of  acquisition  jure  civili  noticed  in  the
Institutes  is  gift,  but,  unless  on  account  of  the  ceremonies  accompanying
gifts  under  Justinian's  legislation,  it  is  not  properly  a  mode  of  acquisition
separate  from  tradition.  It  is  a  delivery  of  a  thing  from  a  particular
motive.  (Tit.  7.  pr.)  The  subject  of  gifts  is  treated  of  under  three
heads :    gifts  mortis  causa,  gifts  inter  vivos,  and  gifts  propter  nuptias.

i.  Donationes  mortis  causa. — Gifts  on  account  of  death  {donationes  mortis
causa)  were  gifts  made  in  contemplation  of  death,  revocable  before  the
death  of  the  donor,  and  failing  if  the  donee  died  first.  They  might  be
made  in  either  of  two  ways.  The  donor  might  hand  over  the  thing  to  the
donee,  but  the  gift  was  not  to  be  completed  until  the  donor  was  dead  ;  or .
the  donor  might  hand  over  the  thing,  giving  it  there  and  then,  but
bargaining  that  it  was  to  be  restored  to  him  if  he  did  not  die  on  the  occa-

520  SUMMARY.

sion  contemplated.  In  either  case,  although  he  had  certainly  in  the
second  case  lost  the  dominium^  the  donee  was  allowed  to  get  back  the  thing
by  a  real  action.    (Tit.  7.  pr.  note.)

Justinian  required  that  a  donatio  mortis  causa  should  be  made  in  the
presence  of  five  witnesses.  (1,  note.)

Donationes  mortis  causa  very  closely  resembled  legacies.  They  were
subjected  to  the  deduction  of  the  Falcidian  fourth,  and  were  not  valid  if
the  giver  was  insolvent :  but  they  differed  from  legacies  in  the  following
particulars.  1.  They  took  effect  on  the  death  of  the  donor  without  it
being  necessary  the  heir  should  enter.  2.  The  same  person  who  could
take  or  could  not  take  the  one,  could  or  could  not  take  the  other,  but
capacity  was  regarded,  in  the  case  of  donationes  mortis  causa,  at  the  time  of
the  death  only,  not,  as  in  the  case  of  legacies,  also  at  the  time  of  the  dis-
position. 3.  A  fdiusfamilias  could,  with  his  father's  permission,  make
donationes  mortis  causa  ;  but  could  not  give  legacies  of  other  things  than
his  peculium  castrense.  4.  A  peregrinus  could  make  donationes  mortis
causa,  but  could  not  give  legacies.    (1,  note.)

ii.  Gifts  inter  vivos  require  tradition,  but  if  the  intentions  of  the  donor
have  been  manifested  he  is  bound  to  deliver.  A  mere  agreement  to  give
was  not  originally  binding,  but  Constantine  enacted  that  such  an  agree-
ment should  be  binding  if  in  writing,  and  Justinian  made  the  agreement
binding  in  every  case.  Some  donations  looked  on  with  peculiar  favour,
such  as  gifts  to  or  from  the  emperor,  were  valid,  without  anything  more
than  the  intention  to  give  being  manifested  ;  but  other  gifts,  if  exceeding
200  solidi  previously  to  Justinian,  and  500  solidi  under  his  legislation,
needed  to  be  registered  by  public  deeds.  Gifts  requiring  to  be  registered
were,  however,  valid  up  to  the  limit  below  which  registration  was  not
necessary.  Gifts,  as  a  rule,  were  not  revocable  :  but  Justinian  made  them
revocable  in  case  of  the  ingratitude  of  the  donee.   (2.)

iii.  Gifts  propter  nuptias. — Gifts  between  husband  and  wife  were
prohibited  by  law.  But  as  an  equivalent  to  the  dos  or  dowry  contributed
by  the  wife,  the  husband  frequently  made  a  gift  before  marriage,  donatio
ante  nuptias,  which  was  the  inalienable  property  of  the  wife  managed  by
the  husband ;  and  this  donation  might,  like  the  dowry,  be  increased  after
marriage.  Justinian  enacted  that  such  gifts,  like  dowries,  might  be  not
only  increased,  but  made  after  marriage,  and  should  receive  the  more
appropriate  name  of  donationes  propter,  instead  of  ante,  nuptias.  The
wife,  if  survivoi',  received  a  portion  of  the  donatio,  equal  in  quantity  before
Justinian,  and  in  value  under  Justinian,  to  that  wliich  the  husband,  if
survivor,  would  have  received  out  of  the  dos.    (3,  note.)

Justinian,  in  closing  the  subject  of  the  mode  of  acquiring  particular
things  by  the  civil  law,  notices  that  there  had  been  at  one  time  a  mode  of
acquiring  per  jus  accrescendi,  which  took  effect  when  one  joint  owner  of  a
slave  enfranchised  him  in  such  a  way  that  if  the  enfranchisement  had  been
effectual,  the  slave  would  have  become  a  citizen;  the  share  of  the  enfran-
chising owner  passed  by  accrual  to  the  other  owner,  and  this  other  owner
became  the  sole  owner  of  the  slave.  Justinian  did  away  with  this  by
enacting  that  in    such  a  case   the  slave  should  be  free,  and  the  other

BOOK  11.  521

part-owner  should  receive  a  pecuniary  compensation  from  the  enfran-
chising part-owner.  (4.)

Before  passing  to  consider  the  modes  of  acquiring  groups  of  things  the
Institutes  deal  with  two  subsidiary  subjects,  viz.  1,  Separation  of
ownership  from  the  power  of  alienation,  and  2,  Acquisition  through
others.

i.  Separation  from  Ownership  of  the  Power  of  Alienation.

1.  A  pej'son  who  is  owner  cannot  always  aliene.  Two  instances  are
given,  (a)  A  husband  cannot  aliene  immoveables  forming  part  of  the
dowry  (dos)  of  his  wife,  although  the  owner^ship  is  in  him.  The  Ux  Julia
prevented  a  husband  selling  such  immoveables  when  in  Italico  solo,  without
his  wife's  consent,  or  mortgaging  them  with  her  consent.  Justinian
enacted  that  immoveables,  forming  part  of  the  dos,  wherever  situated,
could  not  be  sold  or  mortgaged  by  the  husband,  even  with  the  consent  of
the  wife.    (Tit.  8.  pr.  note.)

(b)  A  pupil  cannot,  without  the  authorisation  of  the  tutor,  aliene.

The  pupil  could  not  transfer  the  property  in  anything  belonging  to
him,  but  he  could  acquire  the  property  in  anything  transferred  to  him.
Three  illustrations  of  this  doctrine  are  given.

(a.)  A  pupil  unauthorised  could  not  enter  into  the  contract  of  mu-
tuwn,  i.e.  could  not  lend  a  thing  so  that  the  thing  lent  became  the
property  of  the  person  to  whom  it  was  lent,  he  in  his  turn  having  to  give
as  much  back.  W  the  pupil  made  such  a  contract,  he  could  by  a  real
action  get  the  thing  back,  if  not  consumed:  if  consumed  bo7ia  fide,  he
could  recover  the  value  of  it  by  a  condlctio ;  if  consumed  mala  fide,  he
could  get  not  only  the  value,  but  damages  by  an  actio  ad  exliibendum.

(b.)  If  the  pupil  unauthorised  paid  a  debt,  he  could  not  make  the  money
paid  belong  to  the  creditor.  It  was  still  his,  and  if  not  spent  might  be
got  back  by  a  real  action  from  the  creditor ;  if  spent  bona  fide,  the
debt  due  by  the  pupil  was  considered  as  liquidated  ;  if  spent  mala  fide,  the
pupil  would  have  an  actio  ad  exhibendum.

(c.)  If  a  debtor  made  a  payment  to  a  pupil  without  the  tutor  autho-
rising the  payment,  the  money  paid  became  the  joroperty  of  the  pupil,  and
the  debt  still  remained  unextinguished.  If  the  pupil  sued  for  the  sum  owing,
the  debtor  could  only  repel  the  action  to  the  extent  to  which  the  pupil
then  had  the  money  in  hand,  and  if  the  pupil  had  spent  it  all,  the  debtor
had  to  pay  over  again.  Even  if  the  tutor  authorised  the  payment,  the
debtor  was  not  quite  safe,  for  the  tutor  might  not  hand  over  to  the  pupil
the  money  paid ;  and  then  the  praetor  might  give  a  restitutio  in  integrum,
placing  the  pupil  in  the  position  in  which  he  would  have  been  if  the  debt
had  not  been  paid,  and  so  the  creditor  might  have  to  pay  over  again.  To
obviate  this  risk,  Justinian  enacted  that  if  the  debtor  paid  under  the
authority  of  a  judicial  order,  which  was  to  be  given  gratis,  he  was  to  be
absolutely  secure,  and  under  no  circumstances  could  he  have  to  pay  again.
(Tit.  8.  2,  note.)

2.  A  person  not  owner  can  sometimes  aliene.  The  instance  given  is  that
of  a  creditor  who  has  a  power  (of  which  he  cannot  be  deprived  even  by
agreement)  of  selling  the  thing  pledged  or  mortgaged  {jngnus,  hypolheca).

522  •        .  SUMMARY.

Justinian  enacted,  tliat  unless  the  parties  otherwise  agreed,  the  sale  should
take  place  two  years  after  notice  to  pay ;  and  in  two  years  more,  if  no
purchaser  could  be  found,  the  creditor  should  be  considered  the  owner.
(Tit.  8.  1.)

ii.  Acquisition  through  others. — We  may  acquire  through,  1,  filii-
familiarum.  2,  Through  slaves  belonging  to  us,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,
through  slaves  of  whom  we  have  the  usufruct.    3,  Through  procurators.

1.  Acquisition  through  Jiliifamiliarum. — The  old  rule  of  law  was  that
everything  acquired  by  a  filiusfamilias  was  acquired  for  and  belonged
to  the  paterfamilias.  The  son  might  have  a  peculium  or  property  under
his  control,  which,  so  far  as  third  persons  went,  who  could  sue  and
recover  to  the  extent  of  the  peculium^  was  like  the  son's  property ;  but
the  father  remained  the  legal  owner  of  it,  and  it  was  only  under  the  son's
control  because  the  father  permitted  this.  The  first  change  was  the  intro-
duction of  the  PECULIUM  CASTRENSE,  dating  from  the  beginning  of  the  empire,
consisting  of  everything  given  to  a  son  on  setting  out  for  military  service,
or  acquired  while  that  service  lasted.  This  peculium  was  the  son's ;  he
could  dispose  of  it  as  he  pleased  in  his  lifetime  or  by  testament,  but  if
he  did  not  dispose  of  it  by  testament,  then  his  father  took  it  not  as  the  heir
of  the  son,  but  as  the  claimant  of  a  peculium.  Justinian,  however,  allowed
the  children  or  brother  of  the  Jiliusfa?nilias  to  take  the  peculium  before
the  father.  The  next  change  was  the  introduction  by  Constantine,  or
perhaps  previously,  of  the  peculium  quasi-castrense,  i.e.  property  acquired
by  the  son  in  personal  attendance  on  the  emperor,  and  this  peculium  too
could,  under  Justinian,  be,  like  the  castrense,  given  by  testament.  (Tit.  9.
1,  note.)

Lastly,  Constantine  introduced  the  peculium  adventitium,  which,  having
been  previously  confined  to  property  coming  from  a  mother  or  maternal
ancestor,  or  husband  or  wife,  was  made  by  Justinian  to  include  all  pro-
perty coming  to  the  filiusfamilias^  except  the  peculium  profectitiuvi,  i.e.
the  property  coming  to  him  from  the  father  himself  Of  this  peculium
adventitium  the  son  had  the  ownership,  the  father  the  usufruct.  (Tit.  9.  1,
note.)  From  the  peculium  falling  under  the  three  above  heads  as  not
belonging  to  the  father,  a  third  used  to  be  deducted  by  the  father  when
he  emancipated  the  son.  Justinian  gave  the  father  the  usufruct  of  half,  in-
stead of  the  ownership  of  a  third  of  such  peculium^  in  case  of  emancipation.

2.  Acquisition  through  slaves. — (a)  The  slave  stipulates  for  the  master's
benefit,  but  cannot  make  his  master's  position  worse.  The  slave  enters  on
an  inheritance  only  if  the  master  directs  him,  for  the  inheritance  may  be
such  as  to  cause  loss.  The  slave  takes  a  legacy  for  the  benefit  of  the
master,  whose  slave  he  was  at  the  date  of  the  decease  of  the  testator.  The
slave  possesses  for  the  master,  who  must  have  knowledge  of  the  possession
and  supply  the  animus,  the  slave  only  being  capable  of  physical  detention
— except  when  the  slave  possessed  a  thing  as  part  of  his  peculium  ;  for  the
master,  in  allowing  him  to  create  this  peculium  (which  always  belonged  to
the  master),  has  exercised  the  animus  necessary  for  possession..  And  what
is  here  said  of  the  slave  may,  with  the  necessary  exceptions  as  to  the
2)eculia  castrense,  quasi-castrense,  and  adventiti^im,  be  said  of  the  filius-

BOOK  II.  523

famih'as,  who  equally  stipulated  for  his  father's  benefit,  could  not  make
his  father's  position  worse,  took  inheritances  only  under  his  father's
direction,  received  legacies  for  his  father's  benefit,  and  possessed  physi-
cally for  his  father,  but  needed  his  father's  animus  2Jossidendi.  (Tit.
9.  3,  note.)

{h)  Through  slaves  of  whom  any  one  has  the  usufruct,  he  acquires
whatever  they  acquire  (including  possession  as  well  as  ownership)  by
means  of  anything  belonging  to  the  usufructuary  or  by  their  own  labour.
Everything  else  which  they  acquire,  as  for  example  an  inheritance  or  a
legacy,  is  acquired  for  their  owner.  The  same  may  be  said  of  a  slave
possessed  honafide^  but  who  is  really  not  the  slave  of  the  possessor,  either
as  being  free  or  belonging  to  another.  If  the  slave  possessed  bona  fide
becomes  in  time  the  property  of  the  possessor  by  usucapio  (which  cannot
happen  in  case  of  a  slave  of  whom  there  is  a  usufruct),  he  acquires  thence-
forth everything  for  the  owner  by  usucapio.  (4.)

3.  Acquisition  through  Procurators. — On  the  other  hand,  a  man  could
not  acquire  by  means  of  free  persons  not  in  his  power  or  possessed  by
him  bona  fide,  nor  by  slaves  belonging  to  another,  of  whom  he  had
neither  the  usufruct  nor  the  bona  fide  possession.  He  could  acquire
nothing  '■per  extranemn  personam,^  except  that  a  procurator  could  acquire
possession  for  his  principal,  even  when  his  principal  did  not  know  of  the
acquisition,  and  then  if  the  thing  possessed  was  handed  over  by  the  owner,
the  ownership  was  acquired  by  the  principal  in  any  case,  but  if  it  was
not  handed  over,  then  the  usucapio  began  to  run  on  behalf  of  the  prin-
cipal only  for  the  time  when  he  knew  of  and  adopted  the  possession.
(Tit.  9.  5.)

Testaments.

We  now  come  to  the  first  mode  of  acquiring  universitates  reruniy
viz.  by  testament,  and  this  subject  occupies  the  rest  of  the  Second
Book.

We  have  to  consider  (1)  the  legal  position  of  the  maker  of  the  testa-
ment :  {a)  how  he  must  make  it,  which  will  vary  according  as  he  is  or  is
not  a  soldier  ;  {h)  who  are  legally  incapable  of  making  wills ;  (c)  the  duties
and  powers  of  the  testator  as  to  the  disinherison,  institution,  and  sub-
stitution of  heirs ;  (d)  the  causes  that  make  a  testament  invalid  ;  and
(2)  the  legal  j)Osition  of  those  who  take  under  a  testament,  that  is,  of  {a)
heirs,  (J)  legatees,  and  (c)  those  who  receive  or  benefit  by  a  trust.

1.  Legal  Position  of  the  Maker  of  the  Testament.

1.  Form  of  the  Testament. — In  the  earliest  period  of  Roman  law,
a  testament  might  be  made  {a)  in  the  calata  comitia,  called  twice  a  year
for  this  purpose,  where  the  gentes  watched  over  the  transfer  of  the
hereditas,  or  (b)  in  procinctu,  in  time  of  war,  when  an  army  was  setting
out  to  fight.  Then  a  new  form  of  will  Avas  introduced  in  the  shape  of  a
fictitious  sale,  by  which  originally  the  heir  figuring  as  the  familio'  emptor
bought  the  inheritance  from  the  testator  in  the  presence  of  the  holder  of
the   scales  and  five  witnesses.    Afterwards  the  familiw  emptor   became

524  SUMMARY.

merely  an  outsider,  going  through  the  ceremony  for  the  benefit  of  the
heir,  whose  name  was  concealed  during  the  life-time  of  the  testator.
(Tit.  10.  1.)

Then  came  the  praetorian  testament.  The  form  of  sale  was  no  longer
required.  The  libripens  and  the  familice  emptor  became  two  additional
witnesses,  making  seven  in  all,  but  the  seven  witnesses  had  to  go  through
a  new  formality.     They  had  to  seal  the  testament  with  their  seals.  (2.)

Lastly  came  the  imperial  form  of  will  introduced  in  the  fifth
century  by  Theodosius  the  Second.  Here  a  new  precaution  was  in-
troduced :  the  seven  witnesses  had  not  only  to  seal,  but  to  subscribe  the
testament,  and  so  had  the  testator,  or  if  he  could  not  write,  an  eighth
witness  had  to  subscribe  for  him.  This  testament  was  said  to  be  tripar-
titum.  that  is,  taking  its  origin  from  three  sources.  The  necessity  for  the
testament  being  made  at  one  single  time,  and  the  necessity  of  the  presence
of  seven  witnesses,  came  from  the  old  civil  law  ;  the  sealing  of  the  testa-
ment by  the  witnesses  came  from  praetorian  law ;  the  subscription  of  the
witnesses  and  the  testator  came  from  imperial  law.  (3.)  Justinian  added,
and  subsequently  abolished,  another  requirement,  that  the  name  of  the
heir  should  be  in  the  handwriting  of  the  testator  or  of  one  of  the  wit-
nesses. (4.)

It  made  no  difference  what  seal  the  witnesses  used,  and  before  the
time  of  Theodosius  and  Valentinian  they  used,  and  after  that  time  they
were  obliged,  to  write  by  the  side  of  the  mark  of  their  seal  their  names
and  the  name  of  the  testator.  (4,  and  2,  note.)

Any  one,  as  a  general  rule,  could  be  a  witness  with  whom  the  testator
had  testamenti  factio,  i.e.  to  whom  he  could  leave  his  inheritance.  But
there  were  exceptions  :  such  as  women,  children  below  the  age  of  pubert)'',
slaves,  the  mad,  the  deaf,  the  dumb,  and  persons  considered  as  intesta-
biles  on  account  of  having  committed  certain  offences,  such  as  writing
libels  or  denying  their  signature  to  a  former  testament  which  they  had
witnessed.  (6.)  A  testament  would,  however,  be  valid,  although  wit-
nessed by  a  slave,  if,  at  the  time  of  witnessing  it,  he  was  reputed  to  be
free.  (7.)  Members  of  the  same  family  might  be  witnesses  of  the  same
testament  (8) ;  but  the  filiusfamilias  could  not  be  a  witness  of  the
father's  testament,  nor  could  the  father  be  a  witness  of  the  son's  testament
affecting  h\^  peculium  castrense.  (9.)  Neither  the  heir  nor  any  one  in  the
same  family  with  him  could  be  a  witness — but  legatees  and  Jide{co7n7nissaru,
and  those  connected  with  them,  might.    (10,  11.)

The  testament  might  be  written  on  any  material,  wax,  parchment,
&c.  (12)  ;  and  any  number  of  duplicates  of  a  testament  might  be  made.
(13.)  A  testament  need  not  be  made  in  writing  at  all.  It  might  be
merely  nuncupative,  that  is,  the  testator  might  orally  declare  his  wishes  in
the  presence  of  seven  witnesses.

Military  Testaments. — Special  privileges,  however,  as  to  making
testaments  were  accorded  to  soldiers  by  Julius  Cjesar,  and  confirmed  by
other  emperors.  A  soldier,  while  serving  in  a  campaign,  was  not  re-
quired to  observe  the  formalities  incumbent  on  civilians ;  and  this  applied
to  a  s,o\diev  jiliusfamilias  making  a  testament  as  to  his  peculium  castrense.

EOOK  II.  525

But  if  he  was  not  in  a  campaign,  the  filiusfamilias  had  to  observe  the
usual  formalities.  Under  Justinian  it  was  undoubtedly  necessary  that
the  soldier's  testament  should  be  made  during  a  campaign,  but  whether
this  had  previously  been  the  law  is  doubtful.   (Tit.  11.  pr.)'

The  following  were  the  chief  privileges  of  soldiers  with  regard  to
military  testaments  :  {a)  All  that  was  necessary  for  the  validity  of  a
soldier's  testament,  was  that  he  should  have  meant  in  some  way
to  express  his  testamentary  intentions ;  if  orally,  in  the  presence  of  a
witness,  (h)  Any  words  would  suffice  to  institute  his  heir.  (Tit.  11.  1.)
(c)  The  soldier  might  die  partly  testate  and  partly  intestate,  (d)  He
need  not  disinherit  his  children,  {e)  His  testament  would  not  be  rendered
invalid  by  those  causes  which  would  render  invalid  the  testament  of  a
civilian  (pagamts)^  and  his  testament,  however  informally  made,  would
suffice  for  revocation  of  a  previous  testament.  (Tit.  17.  2^  note.)  (/)  He
could  institute  as  heirs  persons  generally  incapacitated,  such  as  deportati
and  peregrini.  (Tit.  11.  6.)  {g)  He  could  give  more  than  three-fourths  of
his  property  in  legacies.  (Tit.  22.  3.)  (Ji)  He  could  dispose  of  the  inheri-
tance by  codicils.  (Tit.  11.  6,  note.)  (i)  He  might  make  a  testament
although  deaf  or  dumb.  (2.)  {j)  A  testament  made  irregularly  before  he
acquired  the  power  of  making  a  military  testament  became  valid,  as  the
expression  of  his  wishes  after  he  had  acquired  that  power.  (4.)  {k)  Nor
did  a  minima  capitis  deminntio  affect  the  validity  of  a  military  testament,
nor  the  two  greater  kinds,  if  inflicted  for  merely  military  offences.  (5.)
(/)  The  rule  treating  institutions  ex  certo  tempore  or  ad  certum  tempus
as  a  superfluity,  did  not  extend  to  military  testaments.  (Tit.  14.  9.)
[m)  Soldiers  could  make  a  testament  for  their  children  without  having
made  their  own,  and  could  substitute  to  emancipated  children  and  to
strangers.  (Tit.  16.  9,  note.)

The  testament  of  a  soldier  made  without  the  forms  required  from
civilians,  remained  in  force  for  a  year  after  his  discharge  {post  juissionem)  ;
and  if  he  inserted  a  condition  that  could  not  be  fulfilled  within  a  year,
yet  his  testament  was  valid,  supposing  he  died  while  he  could  make  a
military  testament.  After  a  year  from  his  discharge  had  elapsed,  he  was
obliged,  to  die  testate,  to  make  a  testament  with  the  ordinary  forms.
(Tit.  11.  3.)

2.  Persons  incapable  of  Testation. — All  persons,  however,  could  not
make  testaments.  This  power  was  confined  to  Eoman  citizens  sui  juins.
The  filiusfamilias  could,  however,  dispose  by  testament  of  his  pecvlium
castrense^  and  this  privilege  was  first  in  some,  and  then  in  all,  cases
extended  to  the  j9ecwZm??z  quasi  castrense  (Tit.  12.  pr. ;  Tit.  11.  6)  ;  the
father  taking  these  p^eeidiay  however,  by  the  patria  potestas,  if  the  son  died
intestate.  (Tit.  12.  pr.)  Children  under  age,  mad  persons,  except  in
lucid  intervals  (Tit.  12.  1);  interdicted  prodigals  (2);  dea-f  and  dumb
and  blind  people,  except  under  special  precautions  provided  by  the  em-
perors (3,  4),  could  not  make  testaments.

Captivity. — A  testament  made  by  a  man  during  captivity  was  in-
valid, but  a  testament  made  before  he  became  captive  was  valid,  by  the
jus  postliminii,  if  he  returned  ;   or  if  he  died,  by  a  deduction  from  the

526  SU^IMARY.

terms  of  the  lex  Cornelia^  punishing  the  forgery  of  the  testament  of  a
person  dying  in  captivity.  It  was  argued  that  a  testament  made  by  a
person  who  subsequently  died  in  captivity  must  be  vaHd,  or  the  law
would  not  punish  a  forgery  of  such  a  testament.  (5,  note.)

3.  We  now  come  to  the  rules  as  to  the  (a)  disinherison,  (5)  institution,
and  (c)  substitution  of  heirs.

{a)  Disinherison. — The  sui  heredes  of  the  testator,  i.e.  those  persons
who  were  made  sui  juris  by  his  death,  had  such  an  interest  in  the  inheri-
tance that  if  he  wished  to  exclude  them  he  must  do  so  expressly.  He
had  to  exclude  his  sons  by  name,  and  if  he  did  not,  the  testament  was
wholly  invalid.  Other  sui  heredes,  such  as  daughters,  he  might  exclude
by  the  general  term  ccBteri  exheredes  sunto ;  but  if  he  did  not  do  this,
then  the  testament  was  not  invalid,  but  these  excluded  sui  heredes  took
by  a  kind  of  accrual  their  proper  share,  if  the  instituted  heirs  were  sui
heredes,  and  half  the  inheritance  if  the  instituted  heirs  were  strangers.
(Tit.  1 3.  pr.  note.)

The  birth  of  a  new  suns  heres,  after  the  testament  had  been  made,
introduced  a  new  participator  in  the  inheritance,  and  unless  this  person
was  expressly  disinherited  by  anticipation,  the  testament  was  made  invalid.
The  term  posthumous  was  in  strictness  applied  to  any  person  born  after
the  death  of  the  testator.  In  the  theory  of  law,  postumi  were  incertce  per-
sonce,  and  could  not  be  instituted  or  disinherited ;  but  the  civil  law  per-
mitted the  institution  of  postumi  sui  heredes,  born  after  the  death  of  the
testator  (6,  note);  and  the  lex  Junia  Velleia  permitted  the  institution  of
postumi  sui  heredes,  conceived  before  and  born  after  the  date  of  the
testament,  but  born  before  the  testator's  death  {postumi  Velleiani).  (2,
note.)  And  postumi  who  could  be  instituted  must  be  disinherited.  The
jurist  Gallus  Aquilius  invented  a  form  of  institution  by  which  the  case
was  met  of  a  son  dying  in  the  testator's  lifetime,  and  then  the  testator
dying,  and  then  there  being  a  posthumous  son  of  the  son,  who  would  be  a
suus  heres  of  the  testator.  (1,  note.)

There  was  also  another  way  in  which  new  sui  heredes  might  come  into
existence  after  the  date  of  the  testament.  A  son  might  die  in  the  life-
time of  the  testator,  and  then  the  children  of  that  son  would  pass  into  the
rank  of  sui  heredes.  The  lex  Junia  Velleia,  by  a  further  provision,  per-
mitted the  disinherison  of  all  such  children  who  were  said  to  hepostumorum
loco  {postumi  quasi  Velleiani).  (2,  note.)

The  disinherison  of  postumi  had  to  be  made  nominatim :  Quicumque
mihi  filius  genitus  fuerit  exheres  esto.  (1.)  PostumcB  might  be  disinherited
by  the  general  cceteri  clause.  It  was,  however,  necessary  that  the  postumo".,
if  disinherited  by  the  general  clause,  should  have  something  left  them,
to  show  they  were  not  passed  over  through  forgetfulness.  (1.)  Other
persons,  who  came  into  the  family  after  the  date  of  the  testament,  such
as  children  subsequently  adopted,  and  children  both  conceived  and  born
after  the  date  of  the  testament,  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,  necessarily
invalidated  the  testament.  (2,  note.)

So  far  we  have  been  considering  the  provisions  of  the  civil  law.  The
praetor   also    came   to  the  aid  of  those  who   were  not,  in  his   opinion,

BOOK  II.  527

properly  disinherited,  by  giving  them  lonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas.
(3,  note.)

If  a  daughter  or  a  grandchild  was  omitted,  the  prsetor  permitted  the
testament  to  be  set  altogether  aside,  but  the  Emperor  Antoninus  made  a
distinction,  and  allowed  the  daughter  to  have  only  what  she  would  take
by  the  jus  accrescendi,  that  is,  her  share,  which,  if  the  instituted  heir  was  a
stranger,  would  be  one-half,  whereas  the  grandson,  if  omitted,  could  get
the  testament  set  aside,  and  would  take  all  the  inheritance,  as  against  an
instituted  stranger.  (3,  note.)

Under  the  praetorian  law  grandsons  as  well  as  sons  must  be  disinherited
nominatim.  (3,  note.)  Perhaps  also  the  praetor  did  not  permit  the  tes-
tament to  be  set  aside  because  a  son  had  not  been  properly  disinherited
who  died  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,  although  the  law  is  laid  down  by
Justinian  positively  to  this  effect,  that  the  testament  was  ipso  facto  in-
valid in  such  a  case.  (Tit.  13.  pr.  and  3,  note  )

The  praetor  required  all  sons  and  grandsons  to  be  disinherited,  whether
they  were  or  were  not  in  the  power  of  the  testator,  provided  they  were
not  in  another  family.  This  included  those  emancipated  (3),  and  those
given  in  adoption,  and  subsequently  emancipated  by  the  adoptive  father.
(4.)  The  emancipated  son,  however,  had  to  bring  into  account  the  pro-
perty he  had  acquired  since  emancipation,  if  the  effect  of  his  getting  the
testament  set  aside  was  injurious  to  a  properly  instituted  suus  heres.
(3,  note.)

Justinian  made  some  further  changes.  1.  He  required  the  child
and  the  grandchild,  male  or  female,  whom  it  was  necessary  to  disinherit
at  all,  to  be  disinherited  nominatim.  (5.)  2.  In  case  this  was  not  done,
the  testament  was  absolutely  invalid.  There  was  no  longer  any  jus  accres-
cendi for  daughters  and  grandchildren.  (5.)  3.  The  testator  was  obliged
to  disinherit  his  child  given  in  adoption  to  any  one  but  an  ascendant.
(5,  note.)

Soldiers  in  expeditione  were  not  obliged  to  disinherit  expressly  any  one.
(6.)  Mothers  and  maternal  ancestors,  also,  were  not  obliged  to  disinherit
expressly  those  who  would  have  taken  their  inheritance  ab  intestato.
Their  silence  was  sufficient ;  but  then  these  persons,  if  unjustly  passed
over,  might  present  a  querela  inofficiosi  testamenti^  just  as  those  might
who,  although  disinherited  in  due  form,  complained  that  their  disinherison
was  unjust.  (7,  note.)

{h)  Institution. — The  institution  of  the  heir  was  the  basis  of  the  whole
testament.  In  the  old  law  some  such  formal  phrase  as  Titius  heres  esto  was
considered  necessary,  but,  under  the  empire,  any  form  of  institution
would  suffice.  (Tit-  14.  pr.)

Wlio  could  he  instituted, — Those  only  could  be  instituted  heirs  who
had  the  testamenti /actio  with  the  testator,  who  had,  in  the  old  language  of
the  law,  the  commercium  with  him.  Many  persons,  however,  who  had  not
the  testamenti  /actio  in  the  sense  of  being  able  to  make  a  testament,  had
the  testamenti  /actio  in  the  sense  of  being  capable  of  being  instituted  as
heirs,  as,  for  instance,  persons  below  the  age  of  puberty.  Among  those
who  could  not  be  instituted  were  peregrinij  deportati,  and  uncertain  per*

528  SUMMARY.

sons  ;  an  example  of  an  uncertain  person  being  '  whoever  shall  marry
my  daughter,'  but  a  person  whom  the  testator  had  not  seen  was  not  an
uncertain  person.  (12.)  The  institution  of  uncertain  persons  was  per-
mitted by  Justinian.  Further,  it  was  not  permitted  to  institute  munici-
palities ;  the  gods,  with  certain  exceptions,  and  so  forth  ;  and,  under  the
law  of  Justinian,  certain  others,  as  apostates,  heretics,  or  persons  whose
institution  seemed  contrary  to  the  rules  of  law  or  of  justice  as  to  marriage ;
and,  though  ccelibes  and  orhi  could  be  instituted  as  heirs,  the  former  took
(unless  of  an  age  too  young  for  marriage,  or  in  case  of  near  relationship
to  the  testator)  nothing,  and  the  latter  only  half  of  what  was  given  them
by  the  testament,  so  long  as  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea^  abolished  by  Con-
stantine,  was  in  force.  (Tit.  14.  pr.  note.)

Institution  of  Slaves. — The  master  might  institute  his  slave,  and,  under
Justinian,  without  expressly  enfranchising  him,  and  Justinian  permitted
the  institution  of  a  slave  in  whom  the  testator  had  only  a  bare  ownership,
the  slave  having,  however,  still  to  serve  the  usufructuary ;  but  a  mistress
could  not  institute,  and  so  enfranchise,  a  slave  accused  of  adultery  with  her.
(Tit.  14.  pr.)  The  slave  of  the  testator,  if  instituted,  was  obliged  to  take
the  inheritance,  if  not  emancipated  before  the  testator's  death.

If  the  testator  instituted  the  slave  of  another,  the  master  of  the  slave
decided  whether  the  slave  should  accept  the  inheritance,  and  the  slave  took
it  for  his  master,  or  masters,  if  there  were  several,  rateably  (3) ;  and  if
the  master  of  the  slave  was  dead,  the  slave  could  take  the  inheritance  of
the  testator  for  the  benefit  of  his  dead  master's  inheritance.  (2.)  In  order
to  decide,  in  cases  of  the  slave  being  alienated,  for  what  master  the  inheri-
tance was  taken,  it  was  necessary  to  look  to  the  time  when  the  inheritance
was  actually  accepted,  as  the  slave  took  the  inheritance  for  the  master  to
whom  he  then  belonged.  (1.)

A  testator  might  appoint  one  heir,  or  as  many  as  he  pleased.  (Tit.
14.  4.)

Calculation  of  the  parts  of  an  inheritance. — The  calculation  of  the
parts  into  which  the  testator  divided  the  inheritance  was  made  in  the  terms
of  the  «s,  its  multiples  and  its  fractions.  The  real  as  contained  twelve
ounces,  but  the  testamentary  as^  or  unit  of  the  inheritance,  was  held  to
contain  as  many  ounces  as  the  testator  pleased.  A  person  could  not  die
partly  testate  and  partly  intestate,  and  so,  if  a  testator  instituted  only
one  heir  and  gave  him  six  ounces,  it  was  held  that  the  as  in  this  case  only
contained  six  ounces,  and  he  took  the  whole.  (5.)  If  he  instituted
several  heirs,  and  the  number  of  parts,  or  ounces,  he  gave  to  each,  came,
in  the  whole,  to  11  or  13,  this  was  taken  to  be  the  number  included  in
the  as.  But  if  he  gave  two  parts  to  one,  and  two  to  another,  and  insti-
tuted a  third  heir,  without  expressing  how  many  parts  were  given  him,
then  recoiu'se  was  had  to  the  normal  as,  and  this  third  heir  had  the  number
of  parts  (eight)  necessary  to  make  up  the  twelve  ounces  of  the  as  ;  or  if
the  parts  given  reached,  or  exceeded,  twelve,  then  the  testator  was  sup-
posed to  have  had  the  double  as,  or  dupondins,  in  mind,  and  the  instituted
heir,  to  whom  no  express  number  of  parts  was  given,  took  the  number  of
parts  necessary  to  make  up  the  dupondius,  i.  e.,  if  twelve  were  given,  he

1

BOOK  II.  529

took  twelve,  or  one  half  of  the  inheritance,  and,  i£  more  than  twelve,  as
thirteen  or  twenty-five,  were  given,  then  he  took  enough  parts  to  make  up
the  diipondius,  or,  if  necessary,  the  tripondins.  The  fractions  o£  the  du-
pondius  or  tripondius  could,  of  course,  be  brought  back  to  fractions  of  the
«5.  (Tit.  14.  6.  7.  8.)

Conditional  Institution. — Sui  lieredes  could  not  be  instituted  condition-
ally unless  the  condition  was  one  in  their  own  power  to  fulfil,  and  was
one  lawful  to  carry  out  (9),  but  other  heirs  might  be  instituted  condi-
tionally. An  impossible  condition — and  conditions  of  a  kind  contrary  to
law  or  honi  mores  were  reckoned  among  impossible  conditions — Avas
treated  simply  as  if  it  had  not  been  inserted  at  all,  and  the  institu-
tion was  valid.  (10.)  So,  too,  if  an  heir  was  instituted  from,  or  to,  a
certain  time,  this  was  treated  as  something  altogether  superfluous,  for  to
say  that  a  man,  after  a  date,  or  up  to  a  date,  should  be  heir,  offended,  the
former  against  the  rule  that  a  testator  could  not  die  partly  testate,  and
the  latter  against  this  rule,  and  also  against  the  rule  seviel  heres  seinper
heres.  But  if  the  time  was  uncertain,  in  the  sense  that  the  heir  was  to
be  heir  when  a  thing  did  happen  that  must  happen  some  time,  as  when  A
died,  this  uncertain  time  was  looked  on  merely  as  a  condition,  and  the
inheritance  was  in  abeyance  until  it  was  seen  whether  the  instituted  heir
survived  A.  If  he  did,  he  entered  on  the  inheritance,  and,  in  all  cases
when  an  heir  entered  on  a  condition  being  fulfilled,  his  rights  were  made,
by  his  entering,  to  date  back  to  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  testator.

(c)  Substitution,  which  was  either  ordinary,  or  to  a  pupil.  Suhstitutio
vulgaris^  as  opposed  to  p^upiUdriSj  was  the  institution  of  another  heir  in
case  the  heir  first  named  did  not  take ;  and  the  law  allowed  any  number
of  such  substitutions,  to  which  resort  was  had,  partly  from  the  prevailing
wish  not  to  die  intestate,  and  partly  because,  while  the  lex  Julia  et  Papia
Poppcea  Avas  in  operation,  the  testator  by  substituting  an  heir  could  give
to  a  person  he  wished  to  benefit  the  share  of  an  instituted  heir  disqua-
lified from  taking  under  this  law.  (Tit.  15.  pr.  1.)

One  important  use  of  the  power  of  substitution  was  that  which  regarded
co-heirs.  Three  instances  are  given  which  show  the  benefits  of  substitu-
tion to  co-heirs.  1.  Their  position,  if  substituted  to  each  other,  was  better
than  their  position  under  the  law  of  accrual,  jus  accrescendi.  For  though
the  share  of  an  instituted  heir  who  did  not  take  it  passed  to  co-heirs  by
the  right  of  accrual,  the  effect  was  not  the  same  as  in  case  of  substitu-
tion, for  those  substituted  had  a  liberty  of  choice  as  to  taking  this  vacant
«hare,  whereas  they  must  take  what  accrued  to  them.

2.  The  surviving  substituted  co-heirs  might  possibly  get  more  in  the
case  of  one  of  their  number  dying,  for  one  co-heir  might  die  after  entering
on  his  own  share  of  the  inheritance,  but  before  the  share  of  a  co-heir  sub-
sequently renouncing  was  offered  him.  If  there  was  no  substitution,
the  heirs  of  this  co-heir  would  take  by  accrual  the  vacant  share  ;  but  the
benefit  of  substitution  was  personal.  If  the  co-heir  did  not  live  to  take  the
vacant  share,  it  did  not  go  to  his  heirs,  but  went  to  the  surviving  co-heirs,
who  thus  had  the  advantage  of  excluding  his  heirs.

3.  Under  the  lex  Julia  et  Papia  some  persons  might  take  what  was

M  M

530  SUMMARY.

given  them  as  co-heirs,  who  could  not  take  caduca.  Substitution  might  be
beneficial  to  them,  and  they  took  as  substituted  heirs  Avhat  they  were
disqualified  from  claiming  as  caduca.  (1,  note.)

Unless  the  testator  otherwise  provided,  substituted  co-heirs,  if  instituted
with  unequal  shares,  took  the  same  unequal  shares  of  what  they  got  by
substitution.  (Tit.  15.  pr.)  If  one  of  two  co-heirs  is  substituted  to  the
other,  and  a  third  person  is  substituted  to  the  substituted  co-heir,  the
third  person  is  taken  to  be  substituted  also  to  the  other  co-heir,  and,  if
both  co-heirs  die,  takes  the  shares  of  both,  although  the  co-heir  to  whom
he  was  expressly  substituted,  died  first  (3.)  If  a  testator  substituted  an
heir  to  an  instituted  heir,  who,  really  a  slave,  was  thought  by  the  testator
to  be  free,  the  master  of  the  instituted  slave  and  the  substituted  heir  were
permitted,  by  a  kind  of  rough  equity,  each  to  take  half.  (4.)

Suhstihitio  jn/j>27Zam. — Custom  had  also  sanctioned  what  was  termed
2')up{llar{s  suhstihitio.  A  testator  might,  but  only  as  a  part  of  his  own
testament  (Tit.  16.  5),  substitute  to  each  or  to  any  of  his  children  in
his  poAver  at  the  time  of  making  the  testament  and  at  his  death  (including
posthumous  children),  (4)  if  they  became  heirs,  but  died  under  the  legal
age  of  puberty,  or  any  previoiis  date  fixed  by  the  testator  (8) ;  and
a  person  substituted  (whether  specially  named,  or  generally,  as  whoever
might  be  the  heir  of  the  testator)  (7)  to  such  a  child,  was  considered  ta
be  substituted  both  by  vidgaris  substitution  so  that  he  took  if  the  child
never  lived  to  take  the  inheritance,  and  by  j^^pdlaris  suhstitutio,  so  that
he  took  if  the  child  lived  to  take  the  inheritance  but  died  under  puberty.
(Tit.  16.  pr.)  A  substitution  {quasi-jnqnllaris),  framed  on  the  model  of
the  pupillaris,  permitted  any  ascendant  to  substitute  to  persons  of  puberty
dejorived  of  reason  any  one  of  the  descendants,  or,  if  there  were  none,  one
of  the  brothers  of  the  insane.  (1.)  By|m^9z7/am  suhstitutio  the  one  testa-
ment of  the  father  operated  on  two  inheritances,  and  the  substituted  heir
took  all  the  inheritance  of  the  son,  and  not  only  that  which  came  from  the
father.  (2.)  The  father  might,  if  he  thought  proper,  substitute,  but  not
let  the  name  of  the  substituted  heir  be  known,  unless  the  son  died  within
the  age  of  puberty,  so  as  to  guard  against  the  substituted  heir  having  an
interest  in  the  death  of  the  child.  (3.)  Fathers  might  substitute  to  disin-
herited children,  but  not  to  emancipated,  as  they  were  no  longer  in  the
testator's  power,  and  the  patria  2'>otestas  was  the  basis  of  the  custom.  (4,
note.)  If  the  impuhes  was  arrogated  the  substitution  was  at  end,  but  the
arrogator  was  obliged  to  undertake,  in  case  the  child  died  impuhes,  to  give
up  to  the  substituted  heir  all  he  would  have  taken  if  the  substitution  had
remained  in  force.  (4.)

As  the  basis  of  the  custom  was  the  jmtria  j^otestas,  a  father  could  not
substitute  to  a  stranger  or  to  a  son  above  the  age  of  puberty.  All  he
could  do  was  to  impose  a  fideicommissum  on  the  person  instituted,  binding
him,  if  he  died  within  a  certain  time,  to  give  back  that  which  came
to  him  from  the  testator  to  the  person  whom  the  testator  wished  in  that
case  to  benefit.  (9.)

4.  Causes  that  made  a  Testament  invalid. — A  testament  legally
made  remained  valid  until  revoked  (^rvptum),  or  rendered  ineffectual
{irritwn).  (Tit.  17.  pr.)

BOOK  II.  531

Testamentum  7mptum. — A  testament  was  revoked  (i-uptum),  1,  by
the  subsequent  arrogation  or  (if  the  testator  was  an  ascendant)  adoption
o£  a  siius  lieres^  unless  the  new  suus  heres  had  been  mstituted  by  anticipa-
tion. (1.)  2.  By  the  testator  subsequently  making  another  testament  validly
made  (2),  or  made  in  any  way  under  which  there  could  have  been  an  heir.
I£  the  heir  under  the  second  testament  could  take  ah  intestato,  the  second
testament,  although  not  made  with  sufficient  formalities,  revoked  the  first,
and  was  treated  as  an  expression  of  the  testator's  wishes  binding  on  the
hei'es  ah  intestato.  3.  The  testament  was  also  revoked  by  the  testator
tearing  or  defacing  it,  or,  if  it  had  been  made  ten  years  when  the  testator
died,  by  the  testator  having  before  witnesses,  or  by  a  deed,  signified  his
wish  that  it  should  not  remain  in  force.  (2,  note.)  If  the  heir  in  the
second  testament  was  instituted  for  certain  things  only,  and  it  was  declared
that  the  first  testament  should  be  valid,  the  first  testament  was  revoked,
but  the  heir  in  the  second  had  to  content  himself  with  the  things  so  given
him,  or  with  a  fourth  of  the  inheritance,  as  would  be  most  favourable,  and
had  to  restore  the  rest  of  the  inheritance  to  the  heirs  instituted  in  the  first
testament.  (3,  note.)

Testamentum  irritum. — A  testament  was  rendered  ineffectual  {irritum^
by  the  testator  subsequently  undergoing  a  capitis  deminutio.  But  if  the
testator  had  reverted  to  his  former  position,  and  had  been  a  citizen  and
siii  juris  at  the  time  of  his  _  death,  then  the  prajtor  would  give  the  heir
instituted  in  his  testament  honorum  p)ossessio  secundum  tahvlas^  a  distinct
expression  of  the  testator's  wish  to  that  effect  being,  however,  required  in
case  a  testator  who  Avas  arrogated  after  making  the  testament  had  been
subsequently  emancipated.  (G,  note,)  The  emperors,  after  Pertinax,  would
not  accept  an  inheritance  when  they  were  instituted  on  account  of  a  suit,
or  to  cure  the  informality  of  an  informal  testament,  or  if  instituted  by  word
of  mouth.  (8.)

4.  b.  Querela  inofficiosi  testamenti. — Under  the  general  head  of  the
invalidity  of  testaments  we  have  to  notice  the  special  cases  when  a  tes-
tament would  be  attacked  as  inofficiosum.  There  were  certain  persons
who  might  bring  an  action  called  the  querela  inofficiosi  testamenti  before
the  centumviri,  to  have  the  testament  set  aside,  although  it  was  formally
perfect.  The  ground  of  the  action  was  that  the  testator  had  not  done  his
duty  by  them  in  his  testament,  and  that  he  had  cast  a  slur  on  their  good
fame  by  unjustly  excluding  them  from  sharing  the  inheritance,  and,  if
this  was  made  out,  the  testament  was  set  aside  under  the  fiction  that  the
testator  could  not  have  been  of  sound  mind  when  he  made  his  testament.
(Tit.  18.  pr.)

On  the  ground  of  being  unjustly  disinherited  or  omitted,  children,  in-
cluding posthumous  children  and  children  adopted  by  an  ascendant  (2),
might  attack  the  testaments  of  fathers  or  grandfathers  in  whose  power  they
were.   (Tit.  8.  pr.)

On  the  ground  or  being  unjustly  omitted,  children  might  attack  the
testament  of  their  mother,  and  grandchildren  those  of  their  maternal
grandfather.  (Tit.  18.  pr.  1.)

Parents  might,  if  omitted,  attack  ^he  testaments  of  their  children ;

M  M  2

532  SUMMARY.

and  i£  infamous  persons  were  preferred  to  them,  brothers  and  sisters  of  the
testator  might  attack  the  testament,  and  this  liberty,  which  originally  was
given  only  if  the  tie  of  agnation  continued,  was  extended  by  Justinian  to
brothers  and  sisters,  if  the  tie  of  agnation  had  ceased,  and  even  to  brothers
and  sisters  of  the  half  blood  on  either  side.  (1,  note.)  No  more  distant
relation  could  bring  the  action,  nor  could  any  one  bring  it,  unless  as  a  last
resource,  and  if  he  could  not  get  anything  any  other  way.  An  arrogated
pupil,  for  example,  disinherited  by  the  arrogator,  had  the  quarta  Antonina,
and  so  could  not  bring  the  querela  de  inofficioso,

Portio  legitima. — No  one,  if  anything  whatever  was  left  to  him  by  the
testament,  could  attack  it  as  inofficiosum.  But  he  had  a  right  to  bring  the
actio  in  suiyplementum  legitimcBy  to  have  that  which  was  left  to  him.  made
up,  if  below,  to  the  fourth  part  of  that  which  he  would  have  taken  ah
intestato.  Before  Justinian,  if  the  gift  to  him  had  not  reached  the  amount
of  this  fourth,  he  could  attack  the  testament,  unless  the  testator  had
directed  that  the  deficiency  should  be  made  up  to  him.  Justinian  directed
the  fourth  to  be  made  up  without  the  direction  on  the  part  of  the  testator.  (3.)

If  a  person  received  the  fourth  part  in  any  way  under  the  testament,
as  heir,  legatee,  ov  fideicommissariuSj  or  by  a  donatio  rnortis  causa,  or  had
received  it  by  a  donatio  inter  vivos,  expressly  as  this  fourth,  or  for  the
purchase  of  military  rank,  or  had  received  it  from  a  parent,  as  part  of  a
dos  or  donatio  ante  nuptias,  this  person  could  not  attack  as  inofficiosmn  the
testament  of  the  person  from  whom  the  part  was  thus  received.  (6,  note.)

If  there  were  several  persons  entitled  to  bring  the  action,  each  was  to
have  the  fourth  of  what  he  would  have  taken  ah  intestato.  (6.)

Extinction  of  the  action. — The  right  to  bring  the  actio  de  inofficioso  was
extinguished,  1.  By  the  person  entitled  to  the  quarta  legitima  having  died
without  having  manifested  an  intention  to  dispute  the  testament ;  if  he
had  done  so,  the  action  passed  to  his  heirs.  2.  If  he  had  allowed  five
years  to  elapse  without  bringing  the  action.  3.  By  acquiescing  directly
or  indirectly  in  the  testament  (6,  note):  but  a  tutor  who  had  acquiesced
in  the  testament  on  behalf  of  his  pupil  might  still  attack  the  testament  on
his  own  account  (4),  just  as  if  he  had  attacked  the  testament  on  behalf
of  the  pupil  unsuccessfully,  he  did  not  lose  to  ihejiscus  what  was  given  to
himself,  this  being  the  usual  penalty  of  unsuccessful  attack.  (5.)
,  System  of  the  Novels. — Justinian  in  the  Novels  introduced  a  new
system  (Tit.  17.  6,  note.)

1.  TliQ  portio  legitima  was  fixed  in  a  new  way.  If  the  number  of
those  who  could  claim  it  was  four  or  a  less  number,  then  they  were  all  to-
gether entitled  to  one-third  of  the  testator's  whole  inheritance,  which  third
they  shared  between  them.

2.  Those  entitled  to  receive  a  portio  legitima  must  be  instituted  as
heirs,  and  it  was  not  enough  to  prevent  the  testament  being  attacked  as
inqfficiosum,  that  they  got  their  portions  in  some  other  way  than  as  heirs.

3.  If  the  testament  was  set  aside  as  to  the  heirs,  it  still  remained  in
force  for  all  else,  for  trusts,  legacies,  and  so  forth.

4.  The  causes  of  just  disinherison  were  enumerated,  and  on  a  specified
one  of  these  the  testator  must  express  himself  to  be  acting.

EOOK  II.  533

11.  Legal  Position  of  those  taking  under  a  Testament.

This  is  the  second  head  of  testamentary  law,  the  legal  j)osition  of  the
testator  having  been  the  first.  Those  taking  under  a  testament  were,
1,  Heirs;  2,  Legatees;   3,  Fideicoinmissaim,

I.  Heirs. — Heirs  are  of  three  kinds  :  (1)  JSfecessarii  ]  (2)  Sui  et  neces-
sarii;  and  (3)  Extranet.  (Tit.  19.  pr.)

Heredes  Necessarii. — The  heroes  necessarius  was  a  slave  instituted  by
his  master.  He  became  at  once  free  on  the  death  of  the  testator,  and  he
had  no  option  as  to  taking  the  inheritance.  He  was  obliged  to  take  it
{necessarius),  and  the  object  of  the  institution  was  that  the  testator  might
be  sure  of  having  a  testamentary  heir,  so  that  if  the  testator  was  insol-
vent, his  goods  might  be  sold,  not  as  his,  but  as  those  of  the  heir,  and
thus  the  testator's  memory  be  saved  the  disgrace  of  such  a  sale.  (Tit*
19.  1.)

The  lieres  necessarius  might  claim  the  henejicium  separationis,  that  is,
to  have  his  property  acquired  after  the  death  of  the  testator,  or  anything
due  to  him  from  tlie  testator,  kept  distinct  from  the  property  of  the  tes-
tator, and  free  from  claims  against  the  testator's  inheritance.  (1,  note.)

Sui  Heredes. — Sui  et  necessarii  heredes  are  the  descendants  of  the
testator,  in  his  power  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  not  having  any  one
preceding  them  in  whose  power  they  became  by  the  death  of  the  testator,
as  would  be  the  case  with  the  testator's  grandson  who  had  a  living
father.  (2.)

Sui  heredes  were  so  called  because  they  were,  even  in  the  lifetime  of
the  j^;«^er/am?7/«5,  looked  on  as  in  a  manner  partners  in  the  inheritance.
They  were,  so  to  speak,  heirs  to  their  own  inheritance ;  and  the  inheri-
tance came  to  them  without  their  entering  on  it,  or  wishing  to  have  it,
or  proving  that  it  came  to  them.  They  were,  in  the  old  civil  law,
obliged  to  take  the  inheritance,  but  the  proctor  gave  them  the  heneficium
abstinendi, — that  is,  allowed  them  to  abstain  if  they  pleased — and  unless
they  mixed  themselves  up  with  the  inheritance,  the  prcetor  inferred  from
their  holding  aloof  that  they  wished  to  abstain,  and  then,  if  the  goods
were  sold,  they  were  sold  in  the  name  of  the  testator,  and  no  actions
could  be  brought  against  the  suns  heres  as  heir,  although,  if  he  pleased,  he
might  afterwards  alter  his  mind  and  accept  the  inheritance.  (2,  note.)

Extranei  Heredes. — Heirs  not  subject  to  the  power  of  the  testator,
are  termed  stranger  heirs,  extranei  heredes.  Children  not  within  hia
power  if  instituted,  children  instituted  by  the  mother,  slaves  instituted
and  subsequently  manumitted,  are  extranei.  (3.)  These  heirs  were  re-
quired to  have  the  testamenti  /actio  (in  the  sense,  not  of  being  able  ta
make  a  testament,  but  of  being  able  to  take  under  a  testament)  at  three
epochs,  (a)  the  making  of  the  testament;  (b)  the  death  of  the
testator;  (c)  the  entering  of  the  heir  on  the  inheritance.  (4.)  If  his
capacity  was  lost  and  regained  between  the  first  two  of  these  epochs,  the
heir  could  enter  on  the  inheritance,  but  not  so  if  the  loss  and  regaining

534  SUMMARY.

took  place  between  tlie  second  and  third  epochs.  (4,  note.)  The  ex-
traneus  Jieres  was  at  liberty  to  accept  or  renounce  the  inheritance.

Entering  on  the  Inheritance.  Cretio. — How  did  the  heir  accept  it  ?  First,
there  was  a  method  of  instituting,  obsolete  by  the  time  of  Justinian,  in
which  there  was  a  cretio  or  direction  to  the  heir,  to  make  up  his  mind  in
a  given  delay,  either  from  the  time  he  knew  of  his  rights,  cretio  vulgaris^
or  from  the  time  his  rights  accrued  to  him,  cretio  contimia.  The  heir,
within  the  delay  fixed,  could  alter  his  mind.  If  he  accepted,  he  announced
his  acceptance  in  a  solemn  form.  (7,  note.)

Ordinarily  the  heir  entered  on  the  inheritance  either  by  doing  some
act  as  heir  {pro  lierede  gerere)  or  by  the  mere  expression  of  his  willingness
to  be  heir.  (7.)  The  heir,  in  acting  as  heir,  must  know  that  he  is  heir,
and  that  the  testator  is  dead.  (7.)

There  was  no  fixed  time  in  which  the  heir  must  make  his  decision ;
but  the  praetor  would,  on  application,  fix  the  time,  allowing  not  less  than
one  hundred  days,  and  Justinian  extended  this  to  nine  months,  or,  by
imperial  favour,  a  year.  If  the  heir  did  not  decide  within  the  time,  he
was,  in  an  action  on  the  part  of  the  heredes  ah  intesfato,  taken  to  have
rejected,  and,  in  an  action  on  the  part  of  creditors,  to  have  accepted,  the
inheritance.  (5,  note.)

A  person  could  not  enter  for  another,  nor  on  part  of  an  inheritance,
nor  conditionally;  if  he  entered  he  succeeded  to  the  i^ersona  of  the
deceased.  (7,  note.)

If  the  extraneus  heres  wished  to  renounce,  he  might  do  so  by  the  mere
expression  of  his  unwillingness  to  accept.  (7.)

If  he  accepted,  he  could,  if  under  twenty-five  years,  be  relieved  from
his  position,  if  a  disadvantageous  one,  by  the  prsetor  giving  a  restitutio  in
integrum.  (5.)  If  he  was  over  twenty- five,  he  could  not  be  relieved,  and
must  abide  by  all  the  consequences  of  accepting  the  inheritance,  including
the  liability  to  pay  the  debts  of  the  testator ;  but  on  a  very  special
occasion,  Hadrian  relaxed  this  rule,  and  Gordian  ordered  that  it  should
never  be  enforced  against  soldiers.  (6.)  Justinian  introduced  a  new
system  by  which  the  heirs  might  enter  on  the  inheritance  of  even  an
insolvent  testator  without  risk.  The  heir  might  claim  to  have  an  in-
ventory made  {henejlcimn  inventarii)  of  the  inheritance,  this  inventory  to
be  begun  within  thirty,  and  finished  within  ninety,  days  of  the  time  when
he  became  acquainted  with  his  rights,  and  made  in  the  presence  of  a
notary,  or  three  witnesses.  Out  of  the  property  specified  in  the  inventory
he  had  to  pay  the  creditors,  paying  himself  anything  that  might  be  due
to  him.  If  the  property  was  more  than  sufficient  he  took  the  surplus.
If  insufficient,  his  own  estate  was  in  no  way  liable.  (6.)

II.  Legatees. — Although  legacies  constitute  a  title  to  particular  things,
not  to  groups  of  things,  it  is  convenient  to  treat  of  legacies  while  treating
of  testaments.  (Tit.  20.  pr.)  A  legacy  is  a  gift  left  by  a  deceased  person
(1),  and  the  subject  of  legacies  may  be  treated  under  six  heads.

1.  General  Notions  as  to  Legacies  and  their  Forms.  (^A)  Forms. — In
the  old  law  there  were  four  modes  of  giving  legacies  :  {a)  per  vindicationem^
when  the  testator  gave  {Siichum  do,  lego)  the  Quiritary  ownership  of  the

1

BOOK  II.  535

thing  given  ;  {h)  jjer  damnationem,  when  the  testator  bound  the  heir,  heres
meus  clamnas  esto,  to  give  a  thing  to  the  legatee,  who  could  compel  him
by  a  personal  action  to  give  it ;  (c)  sinendi  modo^  when  the  testator  ordered
the  heir  to  allow  the  legatee  to  take  the  thing  given,  the  legatee  having  a
personal  action  to  make  the  heir  give  the  opportunity  of  taking  it ;  and
{d)  2')er  prceceptionem,  a  form  strictly  applicable  to  the  heir,  who  was  thus
allowed  to  take  something  as  a  legacy  before  receiving  his  share  of  the
inheritance.  The  senatus-consultum  Neronianum  provided  that  every
form  of  legacy  should  be  treated  as  equal  to  that  per  damnationem,  which
was  the  most  favourable  to  the  legatee,  as  anything  could  be  given  by  it.
Justinian  enacted  that  all  legacies  should  be  of  the  same  nature,  and  might
be  enforced  by  every  kind  of  appropriate  action.  (2,  note.)

Justinian  assimilated ^<:Ze2Comm/ssa  to  legacies,  except  that  a  slave  was
the  lihertus  of  the  testator  or  of  the  Jideicommissarius,  according  as  he  re-
ceived his  liberty  by  a  legacy  or  n  fideicommissum.  (3.)

(B)  Co-legatees. — The  same  thing  might  be  left  to  more  than  one
legatee.  It  might  be  left  conjunctini,  or,  in  other  language,  re  et  verbis,
as,  I  give  my  slave  to  A  and  B ;  or  disjunctim,  or,  in  other  language,  re,
as,  I  give  my  slave  to  A,  I  give  the  same  slave  to  B ;  or  verbis,  when
the  co-legacy  was  only  nominal,  as,  I  give  my  slave  to  A  and  B  in  equal
shares.  Under  the  old  law  the  effect  of  co-legacies  differed  according
to  the  formula  employed.  Each  under  per  vindicationem  or  per  p)rcecep-
tionem  could  demand  the  whole  thing,  and  then  had  to  divide  it,  but  under
pter  damnationem  the  heir  had  to  give  the  thing  to  one,  and  also  its  value
to  another ;  under  sinendi  modo,  having  given  the  thing  to  one  he  was
free  as  to  the  other.  There  was  originally  no  accrual  of  legacies.  But
the  lex  Papia  Poppcea  introduced  a  new  system,  disqualifying  ccelibes
from  taking  at  all,  and  orbi  from  taking  more  than  half,  and  giving  the  lega-
cies thus  lapsed  (caduca),  and  also  all  other  legacies  lapsed  under  the  general
law  (ill  cansa  caduci),  to  those  mentioned  in  the  testament  in  the  following
order,  if  they  were  jmtres: — (a)  co-legatees,  (b)  heirs,  (c)  other  legatees,  and
in  default  to  the  public  treasury  (cerarium).  Ascendants  or  descendants  to
the  third  degree  were  exempted  from  the  effect  of  the  lex  Papia.  Caracalla
gave  all  caduca  to  the  Jiscus;  Constantine  abolished  the  law  of  incapacity
arising  from  celibacy ;  and  Justinian  did  away  Avith  the  lex  Papia
altogether.  Any  legacies  passing  carried  with  them  burdens,  and  it  was
optional  to  accept  them.  Justinian  gave  rights  of  taking  by  accrual  to
every  co-legatee,  excluding  those  joined  verbis,  who  were  really  not  co-
legatees,  with  this  difference,  that  if  the  co-legacies  were  given  re,  the
accrual  was  obligatory,  but  the  burdens  of  the  legacy  did  not  pass.  If
re  et  verbis,  the  accrual  was  voluntary,  but  the  burdens  did  pass.  (8.)

(  C)  Time  of  Vesting. — The  rights  of  a  legatee  were  vested  {dies  cedit)
at  the  date  of  the  testator's  death,  or,  under  the  lex  Papia,  at  the  day  of
the  opening  of  the  testament.  The  time  when  the  thing  was  to  be
demanded  {dies  venit)  was  the  time  of  the  heir's  entering  on  the  inheri-
tance. The  legatee  took  the  thing,  and  his  heirs,  if  he  subsequently  died,
represented  him  in  taking  the  thing  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  dies  cedit,
excepting  in  the  case  of  a  gift  of  liberty  to  a  slave  or  a  gift  of  a  personal

536  SUMMARY.

servitude,  when  the  dies  cedit  dated  from  the  entering  on  the  inheritance.
(20,  note.)

2.  What  coidd  be  given  ly  way  of  Legacy, — The  testator  might  give
not  only  his  property,  or  that  of  his  heir,  but  a  thing  belonging  to  another,
provided  it  was  not  a  thing  extra  commerciu?n,  and  provided  that  the
legatee,  on  whom  the  burden  of  proof  lay,  could  show  that  the  testator
knew  that  this  thing  belonged  to  another.  The  heir,  if  he  could  not  pur-
chase the  thing,  had  to  give  the  legatee  its  value.  So  the  heir  was  obliged
to  redeem,  unless  the  testator  expressly  said  the  legatee  was  to  redeem,  a
thing  which  the  testator  gave  as  a  legacy  knowing  it  to  be  pledged.  (5.)
If  the  legatee  had,  before  claiming  under  the  testament,  already  got  the
thing  given  him  as  a  legacy,  he  could  claim  the  value  if  he  had  bought  it,
but  not  if  he  had  taken  it  by  a  causa  lucraiiva,  e.g.  gift,  unless  he  had
taken  it  through  a  slave  or  descendant  in  his  power.  If  he  had  received
only  the  value  of  the  thing,  not  the  thing,  under  one  testament  by  a
causa  lucjntiva,  he  still  could  claim  the  thing  under  the  testament  of  a
different  person.  (6.)  Future  things  might  be  given  by  way  of  legacy.
(7.)  A  legatee  might  claim  land  given  him  by  legacy,  although  he  had
already  had  the  usufruct,  for  this  was  treated  as  taking  the  thing  with
a  servit^^de  on  it.  (9.)  A  thing  belonging  to  the  legatee  when  the
testament  was  made  could  not  be  given  to  him  as  a  legacy,  even  if
he  had  afterwards  parted  with  it ;  such  a  case  fell  under  what  was
termed  the  regida  Catoniana,  the  rule  that  a  legacy  invalid  when  the
testament  was  made  remained  always  invalid.  (10.)  If  the  testator  gave
what  he  thought  belonged  to  himself,  although  it  belonged  to  another,  the
gift  was  valid,  and  so  it  was  if  he  gave  what  he  thought  belonged,  but  did
not  really  belong,  to  the  legatee.  (11.)  The  legatee  was  entitled  to  a  thing
alienated  by  the  testator,  and  to  have  redeemed  a  thing  pledged  by  the
testator,  after  the  testament  was  made.  (12.)

A  legacy  to  a  debtor  of  what  was  due  to  the  testator  was  valid,  and
the  heir  coiild  not  recover  from  the  legatee,  and  might  be  made  to  release
him,  and  the  debtor  might  also,  by  a  legacy,  have  the  time  of  payment
deferred.  (13.)  But  a  legacy  to  a  creditor  of  what  the  testator  owed  him
was  invalid,  as  it  gave  the  creditor  nothing  unless  the  testator  gave  abso-
lutely, or  at  once,  what  was  previously  due  conditionally,  or  after  a  time.
(14.)  A  husband  might  give  to  his  wife  her  dos  as  a  legacy,  for  the  legacy
gave  her  a  more  speedy  way  of  recovering  the  dos  ;  if  he  gave  her  her  dos,
and  he  had  not  received  it,  the  legacy  was  void  ;  but  if  he  gave  her,  by
legacy,  a  definite  sum  or  thing,  describing  it  Avrongly  as  having  been
brought  by  her  as  part  of  the  dos,  or  as  mentioned  in  the  instrumentum
dotis,  this  description  Avas  taken  as  surplusage,  and  she  could  take  the
legacy.  (15.)

Things  incorporeal  as  well  as  corporeal  might  be  given  by  way  of
legacy.  Thus  the  testator  might  give  a  debt  due  to  him,  unless  he  had
exacted  payment  in  his  lifetime,  and  the  heir  would  have  to  sue  for  the
benefit  of  the  legatee ;  or  he  might  order  the  heir  to  rebuild  a  house  for
the  legatee,  or  release  him  from  debt.  (21.)  If  he  gave  a  slave  or  any-
thing else  generally,  the  legatee  had  the  choice  among  the  things  of  this

BOOK  II.  537

description  belonging  to  the  testator.  (23.)  Under  Justinian,  this  right  of
choice,  which  had  previously  been  personal  to  the  legatee,  went  to  his  heirs,
i£  the  legatee  died  after  his  rights  had  accrued ;  and  if  there  were  more
than  one  legatee  to  whom  the  right  of  choice  belonged,  they  must  decide  by
lot  which  Avas  to  make  the  choice  if  they  could  not  otherwise  agree.  (23.)
Unless  a  distinct  legacy  of  choice  was  given,  the  legatee  could  not  choose
the  best  of  the  kind.  (22,  note.)  A  legatee  might  have  a  share  of  the
inheritance  given  him  (Jegatarius  partiarius\  and  not  a  sj^ecific  thing,
but  still  he  remained  in  the  position  of  a  legatee  as  towards  the  heir.  (23,
note.)

3.  To  ivliom  might  legacies  he  given  ? — To  those  with  whom  the  tes-
tator had  testamenti  /actio  ;  dejyoj^tati,  jjeregrini,  Latini  Jiiniani^  unless
they  became  citizens  within  a  fixed  delay,  women  under  the  lex  Voconia,
the  unmarried  or  childless  (to  the  extent  above  mentioned,  p.  535)  under
the  lex  Papia,  and  heretics  under  the  Christian  emperors,  were  excluded.
(24.)  A  legacy  under  the  old  law  could  not  be  given  to  an  uncertain
person,  as  e.  g.  to  the  man  who  might  marry  the  testator's  daughter,  unless
it  was  to  an  uncertain  member  of  a  certain  class,  as  that  one  of  the  tes-
tator's cognati  who  might  marry  the  testator's  daughter  ;  nor,  as  being  art
uncertain  person,  to  a  posthumous  stranger,  Justinian  made  all  the  lega-
cies to  uncertain  persons  valid,  and  permitted  a  posthumous  stranger  to  be
instituted  heir  (25) ;  and  even  previously  to  Justinian  a  legacy  paid  to
an  uncertain  person  was  not  to  be  refunded.  (25,  26,  27.)  A  legacy  to
the  slave  of  an  heir,  unless  given  conditionally,  was  invalid ;  but  not  so  a
legacy  to  the  master  of  a  slave  instituted  heir,  for  he  might  not  be  the
master  at  the  time  when  the  slave  entered  on  the  inheritance.  (32,
33.)

4.  Rules  as  to  the  position,  terms,  and  construction  of  legacies. — A
mistake  in  the  name  of  the  person  benefited  does  not  invalidate  a  legacy,
or  the  institution  of  an  heir,  provided  it  is  certain  who  is  meant ;  nor  is  a
legacy  rendered  invalid  by  either  a  falsa  demonstration  as  if  the  testator
gives  '  Stichus  my  born  slave  '  (Stichus  passes  though  not  the  born  slave  of
the  testator),  or  by  a  falsa  causa  or  reason  assigned  wrongly,  as  *  I  give
to  Titius,  because  he  took  care  of  my  affairs.'  The  legacy  is  valid  whether
or  not,  in  fact,  Titius  did  take  such  care  ;  but  if  the  legacy  was  conditional,
as  '  I  give  to  Titius,  if  he  has  taken  care,'  then,  of  course,  the  condition
must  have  been  fulfilled  for  the  legacy  to  be  valid.  (29,  30,  31.)

Justinian  made  it  immaterial  where  in  the  testament  a  legacy  was
placed.  Previously,  if  it  was  placed  before  the  institution  of  the  heir,  it
was  invalid  (20.  34),  and  he  made  legacies  valid  which  were  to  take  effect
after  the  death  of  the  heir  or  legatee;  whereas  such  gifts,  except  as
fideicommissa,  had  previously  been  invalid,  as  even  had  legacies  given  to
take  effect  the  day  before  the  death  of  the  heir  or  legatee.  (35.)  Jus-
tinian also  made  valid  gifts  by  way  of  legacy,  or  institution  of  heirs  (and
revocation  and  transfers  of  such  legacies)  made  posnoi  nomine,  that  is,  when
something  given  to  one  of  the  persons  benefited  was  to  be  given  to  another
if  the  person  originally  benefited  did  or  did  not  do  something,  such  deal-
ings with  heirships  or  legacies  having  been  previously  considered  invalid,

538  smEVIARy.

€ven  tliough  the  penalty  was  given  to  the  emperor  or  a  soldier,  as  intended
to  punish  one  man  rather  than  to  benefit  another.  (36.)

5.  LosSj  diminution^  or  increase  of  tilings  given  hy  way  of  legacies. —
The  loss  of  a  thing  given  as  a  legacy  falls  on  the  legatee,  unless  the  loss
has  been  caused,  however  innocently,  by  the  heir,  on  whom  the  loss  then
falls.  (16.)  If  a  female  slave  is  given  with  her  offspring,  the  legatee  takes
the  offspring  though  the  mother  may  be  dead,  and  so  he  takes  the  vicarial
slaves  under  a  legacy  of  ordinary  and  vicarial  slaves,  though  the  ordinary
slaves  may  have  all  died.  But  under  a  legacy  of  a  slave,  with  his  pecu-
lium,  or  of  land  with  its  instruments  of  use  or  ornament,  the  legatee,  if
he  cannot  take  the  slave  or  the  land,  cannot  take  the  peculium  or  the
instruments.  (17.)  Under  a  legacy  of  a  flock  of  sheep  the  flock  will  pass,
though  reduced  to  one  sheep  or  increased  by  young.  Under  a  legacy  of
a  house,  marble  or  pillars  subsequently  added  by  the  testator  will  pass.
(18,  19.)  But  as  to  the  gift  of  a  2^€Ci(lium,  there  is  this  distinction
to  be  made  : — If  the  gift  was  to  a  stranger,  the  amount  of  the  j^cculi inn
that  passed  was  the  amount  at  the  death  of  the  testator,  with  any  increase
arising  out  of  the  things  contained  in  the  j^^ouliuiii ;  but  if  the  gift  was  to
the  slave  himself,  the  slave  had  no  right  until  the  heir  entered  and  was  able
to  free  him,  and  so  for  him  the  amount  of  the  peculium  was  the  amount
when  the  heir  entered.  A  gift  by  legacy  to  a  slave  of  his  peculium  must
be  express,  although  if  a  man  in  his  lifetime  freed  a  slave  the  slave  kept
his  p)eculium,,  unless  the  emancipator  demanded  it.  (20.)

6.  Ademption  and  transfer  of  legacies, — Legacies  may  be  revoked  by
using  directly  contrary  words,  '  Avhereas  I  gave  I  do  not  give,'  or  by  any
other  words,  or  even  by  the  naked  wish  of  the  testator  becoming  in  any
way  declared,  the  legatee  being  then  repelled  by  an  exception  of  dolus
malus  if  he  sued  for  the  legacy,  or  by  some  cause  having  arisen,  e.g.  an
enmity  having  sprung  up  between  him  and  the  testator,  which  made  it
clear  the  testator  could  not,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  have  wished  to  benefit
him.  (Tit.  21.  pr.)  A  legacy  may  also  be  transferred,  as  by  saying  what
I  gave  to  A  I  give  to  B,  and  then  B  would  take  even  if  A  had  died,  and  A
would  not  take  if  B  had  died.  (1.)

Lex  Falcidia. — The  wide  testamentary  power  given  by  the  Twelve
Tables  (idi  legassit  suce  rei  ita  jus  esto)  and  practically  used,  so  that  the
inheritance  being  exhausted  by  legacies,  there  was  no  inducement  to  the
heir  to  enter,  was  restrained  (a)  by  the  lex  Furia,  forbidding  more  than
1,000  asses  to  be  given  as  a  legacy,  but  ineffectual,  because  any  number
of  legacies  to  that  amount  might  be  given ;  (b)  by  the  lex  Voconia,  pro-
viding that  no  legatee  was  to  have  more  than  each  heir  had,  but  also  in-
effectual, as  the  number  of  legatees  Avas  not  limited ;  and,  lastly  (c),  by
the  lex  Falcidia,  by  which  a  testator  was  restrained  from  giving  away  in
legacies  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  inheritance.  A  fourth,  the  quarta
Falcidia,  must  always  remain  to  the  heirs.  (Tit.  22.  pr.  note.)

If  the  testator  gave  distinct  shares  in  his  inheritance  to  different  heirs,
each  heir  had  a  right  to  one-fourth  of  his  share,  even  though  the  total
thus  deducted  on  the  different  shares  exceeded  one-fourth  of  the  whole
inheritance.  (1.)

.  BOOK  II.  539

In  the  application  of  the  lex  Falcidia  regard  was  had  to  the  value  of
the  estate  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death.  A  subsequent  increase  did
not  augment,  nor  did  a  subsequent  decrease  diminish,  the  amount  the
legatees  received.  But  if  the  estate  subsequently  fell  in  value,  so  that
the  heir  would  get  nothing  bj  entering,  the  legatees  would  have  to  come  to
terms  with  him,  to  induce  him  to  enter.  (2.)

In  order  to  apply  the  lex  Falcidia^  the  testator's  debts,  his  funeral  ex-
penses, and  the  price  of  the  manumission  of  slaves  were  first  deducted,
and  then  the  heir  took  a  fourth  of  what  remained,  each  lega^tee  having  a
proportionate  amount  deducted  from  his  legacy  if  the  testator  had  given
more  than  three-fourths  in  legacies.  If  he  had  given  more  than  the  value
of  the  whole  inheritance,  no  account  was  taken  of  the  excess,  and  the  heir
received  a  fourth  of  the  actual  value.  (3.)

The  lex  Falcidia  did  not  apply  to  military  testaments.  (3,  note.)  The
Novels  introduced  a  new  system.  The  heir  could  not  claim  a  fourth  unless
he  first  had  an  inventory  made,  and  he  could  not  retain  it  at  all  if  the  tes-
tator forbad  its  retention,  the  legatees  and  other  persons  interested  being
then  permitted  to  take  under  the  testament,  although  the  heir  refused  to
enter.  (3,  note.)

III.  FiDEicoMMissARii. — Fideicoiiimissa,  or  requests  to  the  heir  to  do
something  in  favour  of  some  one  else,  and  any  words  of  request  sutHced
(Tit.  24.  3),  were  expressions  of  the  last  wishes  of  the  person  who  made
them,  and  were  dispositions  of  the  inheritance,  or  of  parts  of  it,  the  posi-
tion of  the  person  profiting  by  them  being  in  the  former  case  analogous  to
that  of  an  heir,  in  the  latter  to  that  of  a  legatee.

Either  testamentary  heirs  or  heirs  ah  intestato  Ym^\t'h2ive  Jideicommissa
imposed  on,  them,  and  Jideicommissa  could  be  made  by  testament  or  by
codicils,  or  orally.  (Tit.  23.  pr.  note.)

The  person  making  \\\q  Jideicommissum  was  termed  \hQ  fideicommittens,
the  person  requested  to  perform  it  JlduciariuSj  and  the  person  to  be  benefited
by  it  Jideicommissarius.  (2,  note.)

The  object  oi  Jideicommissa,  when  originally  introduced,  was  to  benefit
persons  legally  incapable  of  taking  as  heirs  or  legatees.  Augustus  first
gave  them  legal  validitj'-,  by  desiring  the  consuls  to  interfere  to  see  them
carried  out.  By  degrees  a  permanent  jurisdiction  was  established  to  main-
tain them,  under  a  special  magistrate,  the  i^a^tor  Jideicommissarius .  The
proceeding  was  always  extra  ordinem.  No  action  lay  to  enforce  Jidei-
commissa. but  the  magistrate  interposed  if  he  thought  it  equitable  to  enforce
them.   (Tit.  23.  pr.  1,  note.)

When  first  introduced,  Jideicommissa  gave  the  maker  of  them  a  very
wide  range.  He  could  by  them  give  to  jjeregrini,  to  a  posthumous  stranger,
to  an  uncertain  person,  to  Latini  Juniani,  and  the  whole  inheritance  to  a
woman  prevented  by  the  lex  Voconia  from  being  instituted  as  heir ;  and
the  leges  caducarioi  did  not  apply.  But  subsequently  this  latitude  was  re-
stricted :  fideicommissa  in  favour  of  iieregrini,  posthumous  strangers,  and
uncertain  persons  were  declared  invalid,  and  the  rules  of  the  lex  Papia
Foppwa  were  made  to  apply  to  them.  A  tutor  could  not  at  any  time  be
given  by  a  fideicommissum.  (Tit.  23.  pr.  note.)

540  SUMMARY.

If  a  Jideicommissinn  was  made  by  testament,  tlie  testament  must  duly
institute  an  heir,  or  there  Avould  be  no  one  to  carr j  out  the  Jideicojumissum.
Originally  the  heir  sold  the  inheritance  to  the  JideicommissariuSy  the  former
binding  the  latter,  by  stipulation,  to  indemnify  him  against  all  claims
in  regard  to  the  inheritance,  and  the  latter  binding  the  former  to  hand
everything  over  (emptce  et  venditcB  hereditatis  stijndationes).  (Tit.  23.  3,
note.)

The  Senatus-consultum  Trebellianum  protected  the  heir,  by  en-
acting that,  directly  the  heir  gave  up  the  inheritance,  all  the  actions  for
and  against  the  inheritance  should  at  once  pass  to  the  Jideicommissarius  in
the  shape  of  actiones  utiles^  and  the  heir  be  allowed  to  protect  himself
against  all  actions  by  an  exception  restitutce  hereditatis.  (4.)

Senatus-consultum  Pegasianum. — But,  though  the  heir  was  thus  pro-
tected, there  was  no  inducement  to  him  to  enter  on  the  inheritance.
Accordingly  the  senatus-consultum  Pegasianum  was  passed,  which  per-
mitted the  heir  to  retain  a  fourth  of  the  inheritance  agsiiiist  Jideico7nmissarii
as  against  legatees.  The  Jideiconimissaimis,  who  had  been  placed  by  the
senatus-considtum  Trebellianum  in  the  position  of  an  heir,  was  now
placed  in  the  position  of  a  legatee,  or,  to  speak  more  strictly,  of  a  legatarius
2'>ariiarius^  that  is,  of  a  legatee  who  had  a  legacy,  not  of  a  thing,  but  of  a
share  in  the  inheritance.  When  legacies  of  a  share  were  given,  actions
belonging  to  the  inheritance  were  brought  by,  and  against,  the  heir,  but  the
heir  stipulated  that  the  legatee  should  contribute  to  all  outgoings  in  pro-
portion to  his  share,  and  bound  himself  to  pay  what  was  due  to  the
legatee  for  his  share.  Similar  stij)ulations  were,  subsequently  to  the
senatus-consultum  Pegasianum^  made  between  the  heir  and  the  fidei-
commissarius  {stipulationes  partis  et  pro  jyctrte).  (5.)

The  senatus-consultum  Trehellianum  was,  however,  still  in  force,  for
it  operated  (a)  if  the  Jideicommissa  did  not  exceed  three-fourths  of  the  in-
heritance, and  (b)  if  the  heir  refused  to  enter  in  spite  of  being  sure  of  his
fourth  under  the  senatus-consultum  Pegasianum,  the  prcetor  made  him
enter,  and  then  all  the  actions  were  transferred  to,  or  against,  ihefidei-
commissarius,  and  he  was  in  the  position  in  which  he  would  have  been  if
the  heir  had  entered  under  the  senatus-consultum  Trehellianum.  (6.)

Justinian  united  the  two  senatus-consulta,  retaining  the  name  of  the
senatus-consultum  Trehellianum.  The  heir  was  to  retain  his  fourth,  as  under
the  senatus-consult^im  Pegasianum  \  but  actions  were  to  be  brought  by,  or
against  the  heir,  or  the  fideicommissarius^  according  to  their  shares,  as  under
the  senatus-consultum  TrehelUanum,  so  that  the  jideicommissarius  was,  as
to  his  share,  in  loco  heredis.  If  the  heir  would  not  enter,  he  was  compelled
to  do  so,  being  protected  against  all  loss,  as  imder  the  senatus-consultum
Pegasianum.  The  heir  could,  under  Justinian,  but  could  not  previously,
redemand  the  fourth  if  he  had  paid  it  over.  (7.)

If  the  heir  had  a  specific  thing  given  him  to  retain,  equal  in  value  to,
or  greater  in  value  than,  a  fourth  of  the  inheritance,  he  retained  it  as  if
he  had  had  a  specific  legacy  of  the  thing,  and  all  actions  as  to  the  whole
inheritance  passed  to,  or  against,  the  Jideicommissarius.  If  the  specific
thing  to  be  retained  by  the  heir  was  less  in  value  than  a  fourth,  then  the

BOOK  II.  541

heir  retained  also  enongli  to  make  up  the  fourth,  and  the  actions  for  and
against  passed  to  the  heir,  as  to  the  share  retained  to  make  up  the  differ-
ence. (9.)

A  Jideicommissarms  might  himself  be  turned  into  a  Jiduciarius^  and
be  requested  to  give  up  to  another  all,  or  a  part,  of  what  he  received ;
and  he  was  not  allowed,  like  the  heir,  to  retain  a  fourth.  (11.)

Fideicommissa  might  also  be  imposed  by  a  person  about  to  die  on  his
lieredes  ah  intestato  (Tit.  23,  10),  either  by  a  written  or  oral  declaration.
If,  under  Justinian,  such  an  oral  declaration  was  made  of  his  wishes  to  the
heir,  before  five  witnesses,  the  proof  was  sufficient.  But  if  it  was  alleged
to  have  been  made  before  less  than  five  witnesses,  or  before  none  at  all,
t\iQ  fideicommissariuSj  having  previously  sworn  to  his  own  good  faith,  might
call  on  the  heir  to  deny,  on  his  oath,  that  the  fideicommissum  had  been
made,  as  alleged.  (12.)

Fideicommissa  of  i^avticvlar  things. — An  heir  or  a  legatee  might  be
charged  by  2i  fideicommissum  to  give  up  a  particular  thing  specified  by  the
testator  (Tit.  24.  pr.),  and  even  a  particular  thing  belonging  to  another
^^erson,  the  fidnciarius  being  thus  obliged,  if  he  could,  to  buy  it  for  the
fideicommissarius^  or,  if  he  could  not  buy  it,  to  give  its  value  to  the  fidei-
commis sarins.  (Tit.  24.)  Freedom,  too,  might  be  given  to  the  slave  of
another  person  by  a  fideicommissum,  and,  if  the  fiduciarius  could  not  at
once  purchase  the  freedom  of  the  slave,  he  must  wait  to  see  if  any  oppor-
tunity of  doing  so  might  arise.  The  slave  so  enfranchised  was  the  freed-
man  of  the  fideicommissarius,  whereas  slaves  who  received  their  freedom
directly  by  testament  (and  only  those  who  were  slaves  of  the  testator,  both
at  the  time  of  his  making  the  testament  a,nd  at  the  time  of  his  death,  could
so  receive  their  freedom)  were  the  freedmen  of  the  dead  man,  and  hence
were  called  orcini.  (2.)

Codicils. — Codicilli,  or  small  tablets  containing  memoranda  addressed
to  the  heir,  were  held  to  create  binding  fideicommissa  in  the  time  of
Augustus,  on  the  authority  of  Trebatius  and  Labeo.  (Tit.  25.  pr.)  If
there  Avas  no  testament,  they  were  binding  on  the  lieres  ah  intestato.  (2.)
If  there  was  a  testament,  then  being  considered  as  attached  to  the  testa-
ment, they  failed  if  it  failed,  but  a  testator  could,  by  inserting  in  his
testament  an  express  clause  to  that  effect  {clausula  codicillaris),  provide
that  his  testament  should,  if  invalid  as  a  testament,  be  valid  as  a  codicil.
(Tit.  25.  pr.  note.)  If  the  codicils  were  made  before  the  testament,  and
not  confirmed  by  it,  they  were  binding,  unless  a  contrary  intention  ap-
peared in  the  testament.  If  made  after  the  testament,  and  not  confirmed
by  anticipation  in  it,  they  were  binding  as  creating  fideico7n?nissa,  but  by
codicils  made  before  or  after  the  testament,  and  confirmed  by  it,  not  only
fideicommissa  could  be  created,  but  legacies  given  or  a  tutor  appointed.  (1,
note.)

No  form  was  necessary  for  codicils.  Thcodosius  enacted  that  they
were  to  be  made  in  the  presence  of  five  witnesses,  who  were  to  subscribe
them.  If  they  were  not  so  made,  the  fideicommissarius  might,  having
sworn  to  his  own  good  faith,  call  on  the  heir  to  deny  them  on  oath.  (3,
note.)

542  SUMMAEY.

BOOK  IIL

INTESTATE    SUCCESSION.

We  now  come  to  the  second  mode  of  acquiring  umuersitates  rei-um,  that
is,  intestate  succession.  In  this  there  were  three  ranks  : — 1,  sui  heredes;
2,  agnati ;   3,  in  substitution  for  the  gentiles  of  the  old  law,  cognati.

I.  Sui  Heredes. — When  a  person  died  intestate,  which  might  happen  in
five  ways, — (a)  his  having  made  no  testament,  (b)  his  testament  not
being  legally  valid,  (c)  its  being  revoked,  or  (d)  made  useless  by  change  of
status, or  {e)  no  heir  entering  under  it, — the  inheritance  passed, by  the  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  sui  heredes  (Tit.  1.  pr.  1),  i.  e.
the  children  natural,  adoptive,  or  made  legitimate,  in  the  power  of  the  de-
ceased at  the  time  of  his  death  (2),  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  at  the
time  when  it  is  established  that  he  died  intestate  (7)  ;  a  grandson,  how-
ever, the  son  of  a  deceased  son,  both  conceived  and  born  after  the  grand-
father's death,  but  before  the  fact  of  intestacy  becoming  established,  not
ranking  as  a  suus  heres,  as  not  having  been  connected  with  the  deceased
while  alive  by  any  tie  of  relationship,  (8.)  A  child,  however,  might  be-
come a  suus  heres^  though  not  in  the  power  of  the  deceased  at  the  time  of
his  death,  if  he  was  a  captive,  and,  returning  subsequently  to  his  father's
death,  was  made  a  suus  lieres  by  postliminy.  (4.)  And,  on  the  other
hand,  a  child,  though  in  the  power  of  the  deceased  at  the  time  of  death,
might  not  be  a  suils  Jieres;  for  the  deceased  might  be  adjudged,  even
after  his  death,  to  have  been  guilty  of  perduellio  (treason),  and  then,  as
\h.Qfiscus  took  his  estate,  there  could  be  no  suus  Jieres.  (5.)  Sui  heredes
were,  under  the  old  law,  obliged  to  take  the  inheritance  (necessarii),  and,
as  they  could  take  it  Avithout  their  knowledge  or  assent,  the  sanction  of  a
tutor  of  a  pupil,  or  of  the  curator  of  an  insane  person,  was  not  required.
All  children,  of  both  sexes,  took  equally ;  more  remote  descendants  j)<?r
stirpes.  (6.)

The  prastor,  by  giving  the  possessio  honorum  wide  liheri,  placed  in  the
rank  of  sui  heredes  (a)  emancipated  children  (9) ;  (b)  if  the  emancipated
father  was  dead,  grandchildren  conceived  af  terhis  emancipation  ;  (c)  if  the
de  cujus  Avas  an  emancipated  son,  his  unemancipated  children  conceived
before  the  emancipation  (9,  note)  ;  emancipated  children  bringing  into  the
inheritance  their  property,  and  married  daughters  their  dowry  (9,  notej  ;
Cd)  sui  heredes  restituti  in  integrum  after  a  capitis  deminutio.  (9,  note.)
The  prajtor  also  preserved  in  their  rank  of  sid  heredes  those  Avho  Avere
improperly  disinherited.  (12.)

Children  given  in  adoption,   or  emancipated,  and  then  giAdng  them-

BOOK  III.  543

selves  in  arrogation,  were,  i£  emancipated  by  the  adoptive  father  in  the
lifetime  of  the  natural  father,  allowed  by  the  praetor  to  rank  among  his
sui  heredes,  but  had  no  claim  on  the  inheritance  of  the  adoptive  father.
If  emancipated  by  the  adoptive  father  after  the  death  of  the  natural  father,
they  had  no  claim  on  the  inheritance  of  the  adoptive  father,  and  only  that
of  cognati  on  that  of  the  natural  father.  (10,  11.  13.)  Under  Justinian
the  adopted  son  always,  unless  adopted  by  an  ascendant,  remained  in  the
family  of  the  natural  father,  and  succeeded  as  a  suus  heres  to  his  adoptive
lather,  if  intestate,  but  had  no  claim  to  be  benefited  by  his  adoptive
father's  testament.  (14.)

A  constitution  of  Theodosius  permitted  the  children  and  descendants
of  deceased  daughters  to  succeed  to  the  portion  their  mothers  would  have
received  as  suns  heres,  giving  up  one-third  of  it  to  other  sui  heredes,  if
there  were  any,  and,  if  not,  one-fourth  to  the  agnatl.  (15.)

Under  Justinian  these  persons  succeeded  to  the  Avhole  share  of  the  de-
ceased daughter,  without  any  deduction.  (16.)

II.  Agnati. — When  there  was  no  suus  heres  or  any  one  called  to  rank
with  sui  heredes,  or  none  who  entered  on  the  inheritance,  then  the  inheri-
tance passed  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  to  the  nearest  agnati,  i.e.
those  related  to  the  de  cvjus  through  males  by  birth  or  adoption  (Tit.  2.  pr.
1,2);  by  nearest  being  meant  nearest  at  the  time  wdien  the  fact  of  intestacy
was  established.  (6.)  If  the  nearest  agnatus  did  not  enter,  or  if  there  were
more  than  one  in  the  same  degree,  then  if  none  of  the  nearest  agnati  (5)
entered,  the  inheritance  passed,  not  to  more  remote  agnati,  but  at  once  to
the  cognati  or  blood  relations,  among  whom  the  more  remote  agnati  were
included  by  the  prsetors.  (7.)  For  there  was  no  devolution  among  agnati,
just  as  there  was  none  among  those  called  to  rank  with  sui  heredes,
Justinian  altered  this,  and  permitted  devolution  among  agnati.  (7.)

There  are  four  special  points  to  be  noticed  in  the  history  of  the
changes  made  in  the  law  of  agnatic  succession.

1.  The  Position  of  Females. — The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  placed
males  and  females  descended  through  males  on  an  equality.  The  media
jurisprudentia,  i.e.  the  opinions  of  the  jurisprudents,  excluded  altogether
females  descended  through  males  except  sisters  so  descended (co?zsa/z^w/«ece).
The  prsetors  allowed  those  excluded  to  come  in  as  cognata^.  Justinian
restored  them  to  the  place  they  held  as  agnatco  under  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables.  (3.)

2.  The  Position  of  Emancipated  and  Uterine  Brothers  and  Sisters  and
their  Children. — Under  the  old  law  such  persons  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  agnatic  succession.  They  were  introduced  into  it  under  the  later
empire.  Anastasius  gave  the  rights  of  agnation  to  emancipated  brothers
and  sisters,  one-fourth  of  what  they  would  have  received  if  they  had
remained  in  the  family  being  deducted.  Their  children  remained  cognati.
Justinian  gave  the  rights  of  agnation  to  uterine  brothers  and  sisters
and  their  children ;  and  subsequently  admitted  as  agnati  emancipated
brothers  and  sisters,  without  deduction  of  a  fourth,  and  their  children.
(4,  note.)

3.  The  Position  of  the  Ascendants. — The  ascendant  had  under   the

544  SUMMARY.

old  law  no  place  in  tlie  agnatic  succession,  as  he  Avould  take  by  virtue
of  his  ^>ai(na  potestas,  unless  the  deceased  descendant  had  been  emanci-
pated. If  emancipation  had  taken  place  with  an  understanding  that  the
nominal  emancipator  should  take  everything  he  got  as  patron  in  trust  for
the  emancipating  ascendant  (and,  under  Justinian,  every  emancipation
was  taken  to  be  made  on  these  terms),  then  this  ascendant  took  as  patron
in  default  of  sui  heredes,  but  Justinian  placed  the  brothers  and  sisters  of
the  de  cujus  before  him.  (8,  note.)

Under  the  later '  empire  the  goods  coming  from  his  mother  to  the
de  cujus  passed  (a)  to  his  children  and  other  descendants,  {h)  then  to  his
brothers  and  sisters,  and  (c)  to  his  father  in  preference  to  his  grand-
father. This  too,  under  Justinian,  was  the  order  of  succession  to  the
peculium  of  a  deceased  son,  except  that  here  the  rights  given  by  the  patria
jwtestas  were  so  far  preserved  that  the  father  took  after,  not  before,  the
grandfather.  (8,  note.)

4.  The  reciproccd  Succession  of  Mothers  and  Children,  —  The
mother  was  allowed  to  succeed  to  her  children  by  the  senatus-considtum
Trehellianum,  and  children  to  their  mother  by  the  senatus-consultum
Orphitianum.  A  summary  of  the  details  of  the  law,  under  this  head,  is
given  at  page  284.

III.  CoGNATi. — After  the  sui  heredes  and  the  agnati  came,  in  the  old
law,  the  gentiles,  or  members  of  the  same  gens.  But  the  succession  of
the  gentiles  became  obsolete,  and  the  praetor  substituted  the  cognati,  that
is,  persons  bound  together  by  blood  relationship.  (Tit.  5.)  The  cognati
included  those  who  had  undergone  a  capitis  deminutio  (1),  i.e.  emanci-
pated children,  and  children  in  an  adoptive  family  (3),  collaterals  by  the
female  line  (2),  and  children  born  of  the  same  mother,  but  of  an  uncertain
father.  (4.)  Later  legislation,  as  has  been  shown  in  the  first  four  Titles
of  the  Book,  took  many  persons  out  of  the  rank  (ordo)  of  cognati  and
made  them  rank  with  sui  heredes  or  agnati.  (1.)  There  was  no  limit  to
the  remoteness  in  which  agnation  was  recognised,  but  the  praitor  only
gave  the  p)ossessio  bonorum  imde  cognati  to  blood  relations  within  the
sixth  degree,  or,  in  the  one  case  of  children  of  a  second  cousin,  to  those
in  the  seventh  degree.  (5.)  The  degrees  of  relationship  of  ascendants
and  descendants  are  calculated  by  the  stages  of  ascent  or  descent.  There
is  a  stage  to  the  father  or  the  child,  a  second  to  the  grandfather  or  the
grandson.  The  degrees  of  collateral  relationship  are  calculated  by  going
up  to  and  down  from  a  common  ancestor,  and  adding  up  the  total  number
of  stages.  (Tit,  6.)  Justinian,  altering  the  old  law,  so  far  recognised  ties
of  cognation  among  slaves,  that  in  the  case  of  the  parents  and  the  children
being  enfranchised,  they  had  reciprocal  rights  of  succession,  and  the
children  were  in  the  position  of  children  born  in  a  regular  marriage.  (10.)
It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  among  persons  of  the  same  natural
degree  {gradus)  of  relationship,  those  are  preferred  who  belong  to
a  higher  rank  {ordo),  i.e.  who  are  or  rank  with  sui  heredes  or  agnati.

(11,12.)

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  intestate  succession,  we  have  to  notice
two  subsidiary  points  connected  with  it.  (1.)  The  succession  (modified  by

BOOK  III.  545

the  assignation)  of  freedmen,  and  (2)  the  machinery  by  which  the  praetor
modified  intestate  succession,  bonorum  possessio.

I.  Succession  of  Freedmen. — Under  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables
the  sui  heredes  of  the  freedman,  including  adopted  children  and  a  wife
passing  in  manum,  excluded  the  patron,  who,  and  whose  children,  suc-
ceeded only  if  there  were  no  sui  heredes,  and  the  freedman  might  make
what  testament  he  pleased  and  exclude  the  patron.  A  freedwoman,  how-
ever, being  in  the  patron's  tutela,  could  only  make  a  testament  with  her
patron's  consent,  and  as  she  could  have  no  sui  heredes  he  necessarily
succeeded  to  her  if  she  died  intestate.  (Tit.  7.  pr.)  Under  the  praetorian
system,  the  prsetor  thinking  it  hard  that  the  patron  should  be  excluded  by
adoptive  sui  heredes,  or  a  wife  married  in  manu,  gave  the  patron  posses-
sion of  half  the  goods,  whether  the  freedman  died  testate  or  intestate  ;  the
patron  being  still  excluded  altogether  by  natural  children,  although  they
had  passed  out  of  the  freedman's  family,  unless  they  w^ere  properly  disin-
herited. This  change,  however,  did  not  apply  in  favour  of  a  patrona  or
the  daughter  of  a  patronus  ;  but  by  the  lex  Papia  Poppcea,  women  having
the  jus  liherorum  were  placed  on  a  level  with  men  in  this  respect.  (1.)  The
lex  Papia  Poppcea  also  introduced  a  change  in  favour  of  patrons.  If  a  freed-
man left  a  fortune  of  100,000  sesterces,  and  fewer  than  three  children,  the
patron  took  a  virile  part  (i.e.  half  if  there  was  one  child,  and  a  third  if
there  were  two)  of  the  inheritance,  whether  the  freedman  died  testate  or
intestate.  (2.)  Justinian  did  away  with  all  distinction  between  \hQ>  patrona.
and  the  patronus,  and  between  the  liberta  and  the  libei^tus,  and  regulated
the  succession  of  freed  persons  as  follows  : — First  came  the  children  of
the  freedman  (to  speak  only  of  a  man),  whether  in  his  power  or  not,  or
even  if  born  before  he  was  enfranchised.  Then,  if  he  had  no  children,
came  the  patron  and  his  descendants ;  in  default  of  these,  the  collaterals  of
the  patron  to  the  fifth  degree.  If  the  freedman  had  children,  he  could
mnke  any  testament  he  pleased ;  if  he  had  not,  he  could  only  make  what
testament  he  pleased  if  his  fortune  was  less  than  100  aurei ;  if  it
was  more,  he  must  leave  one-third  to  the  patron.  (3.)  By  a  change,  sub-
sequent to  the  date  of  the  Institutes,  Justinian,  in  case  the  freedman  left
no  children,  preferred  the  father  and  mother,  the  brothers  and  sisters  of
the  deceased  to  the  patron.  While,  before  Justinian,  there  were  still
Latini  Juniani,  their  goods  were  treated  as  a  peculium,  which  passed  in  all
cases  on  their  death  to  the  manumittor — who  could  deal  with  it  by
testament  as  he  pleased,  but  by  the  se?iatus-consultum  Largianum  the
children  of  the  patron,  unless  duly  disinherited,  were  preferred  to  extranei
heredes ;  and  by  an  edict  of  Trajan  the  rights  of  a  patron  were  restored
at  the  death  of  a  Latinus  Junianus,  who  was,  against  the  will  or  Avithout  the
knowledge  of  the  patron,  made  a  Eoman  citizen  by  imperial  rescript.  (4.)

I.  {A)  Assignation  of  Freedmen. — A  patron  having  two  or  more
children  in  his  power  (Tit.  8.  2)  mighty  instead  of  allowing  the  goods  of  a
freedman  to  go  equally  to  all  the  patron's  children  in  the  same  degree,  as  they
otherwise  would  do  (Tit.  8.  pr.),  assign,  by  or  without  a  testament,  and  in
any  terms  (3),  to  any  person  in  his  power  (2),  a  freed  man  or  woman,
so  that  after  the  death  of  the  parent  the  person  to  whom  the  freed  person

546  SUMMAEY.

is  assigned  is  alone  considered  tlie  patron,  and  excludes  all  other  children.
(Tit.  8.  pr.)  But  if  the  assignee  died  or  was  emancipated  (Tit.  7.  pr.  2),
the  force  of  the  assignment  was  at  an  end.

II.  BoNORUM  PossESSiONES. — The  praetor  placed  the  person  best  en-
titled in  possession  of  the  hereditas,  in  case  the  possession  was  disputed
(Tit.  9.  1);  and  then  in  process  of  time  regulated  this  admission  as  he
thought  best  to  amend,  to  correct,  or  to  supplement  the  civil  law  (1) ;
and  usucapion  ripened  into  ownership  the  possession  he  gave.  The  pos-
sessor was  ordinarily  protected  by  the  interdict  quorum  honorum ;  and  to
obtain  this  protection,  the  heir  who  had  under  the  civil  law  an  indispu-
table title  often  demanded  the  honorum  possessio  ;  the  prsetor  generally
actins:  under  his  executive  authority  and  giving  possession  according  to
his  edict  (possessio  edictalis),  and  sometimes  giving  a  special  possession
(possessio  decretalis)  after  hearing  the  parties,  and  then  sometimes  only
giving  an  interdict  forbidding  violent  eviction.  (1.)

The  various  kinds  of  possession  of  goods  are  divided  according  as
there  was  or  was  not  a  testament;  out  of  ten  kinds  known  before
Justinian,  two  referred  to  testate,  and  eight  to  intestate  succession.

To  testate  succession  belonged  (1)  possessio  contra  tabulas,  given  to
children  passed  over;  (2)  possessio  secundum  tabulas,  given  (but  only
after  it  had  been  ascertained  that  the  possessio  contra  tabulas  was  not
due)  when  the  heir,  under  a  duly  made  and  valid  will,  washed  for  pro-
tection of  the  interdict  quorum  bonorum,  when  the  prsetor  wished  to  uphold
a  testament  defectively  made,  or  in  other  cases,  as  that  of  the  institution
of  a  posthumous  stranger,  or  of  an  heir  under  an  unfulfilled  condition.

To  intestate  succession  belonged  eight,  four  relating  to  the  succession
of  freemen,  four  to  that  of  freedmen.  A  summary  is  given  of  these
eio-ht  kinds  of  possession  at  page  301.  If  there  was  no  one  to  whom
possession  could  be  given,  the  a^rarium,  or,  later,  the  Jiscus,  took  the
goods.  (3.)

Out  of  the  ten  kinds  of  possession  just  mentioned,  Justini^-n  suppressed
four  of  those  relating  to  intestate  succession,  viz.,  the  unde  decern  personce^
suppressed  because  under  his  system  parents  were  themselves  the  manu-
mittors  of  their  children  ;  the  turn  quern  ex  familia,  the  unde  liberi  patroni
patronceque  et  parentes  eorum,  and  the  unde  cognati  manumissoris,  rendered
obsolete  by  his  system,  and  regulating  the  rights  of  patronage.  He,  how-
ever, retained  a  kind  of  possession,  known  to  the  previous  law,  though  not
reckoned  in  the  ten  ordinary  kinds ;  that,  namely,  uti  ex  legibus,  when
possession  was  given  in  pursuance  of  a  direct  enactment,  as,  e.g.,  when  the
patron  shared  with  the    children  of   the    libertus   under  the  lex  Papia

Popp'^a.  (7.)

Possession  of  goods  had  to  be  demanded  by  parents  and  children
within  a  year,  and  by  all  others  within  a  hundred  days  of  the  time  of  their
knowino-  of  their  rights  (8.  10),  dies  utiles  alone  being  counted.  (9.)  If
not  demanded,  then  the  rights  of  possession  of  the  person  not  demanding
at  the  time  fixed,  or  refusing  it,  passed  to  those  in  the  same  degree,
and  if  there  were  none,  then  to  those  in  the  next  degree.  (9.)  Demand  was
made  before  a  magistratcj  and  special  terms  of  demand,   da  mihi  hanc

BOOK  III.  547

possessionem^  were  necessary,  until  Constantius  permitted  any  terms  to  be
iised,  and  Justinian  did  away  with  the  necessity  of  an  application  to  a
magistrate.  If  a  person  having,  as  civil  heir,  right  to  demand  possession,
did  not  demand  it,  and  the  next  in  the  order  of  praetorian  succession
did,  after  the  delay  had  expired,  demand  possession,  it  was  given  him,  but
only  sine  re  as  opposed  to  cum  re  :  he  got  the  technical  j)ossessio,  but  not
an  interest  in  the  goods  conclusive  against  the  heir.  (10.)

System  of  the  Novels. — In  the  years  .543  and  547,  by  the  118th  and
127th  Novels,  Justinian  introduced  a  totally  new  scheme  of  intestate
succession,  a  summary  of  which  is  given  at  page  306.

Other  Modes  of  acquiring  a  Universitas  Eerum.

"We  now  pass  to  the  four  remaining  modes  by  which  a  universitas
rerum  was  acquired,  in  addition  to  testamentary  and  intestate  succes-
sion.

i.  Arrogation. — The  first  is  arrogation,  which  is  specially  mentioned  as
forming  part  of  the  customary  law.  (Tit.  10.  pr.)  By  arrogation  all  the
property  and  all  the  debts  due  to  the  arrogated  passed  to  the  arrogator,,
except  only  those  things  which  were  extinguished  by  the  eajyitis  deminutio
which  arrogation  involved,  such  as  the  rights  of  agnation,  and  the  services
which  a  freedman  bound  himself  by  oath,  as  the  price  of  his  freedom,  to
pay  to  the  patron,  and  which,  being  personal  to  the  patron,  were  extin-
guished if  the  patron  Avas  arrogated.  (1.)  The  arrogator  was  not  l)ound
to  pay  the  debts  of  the  arrogated,  just  as  a  paterfamilias  was  not  bound
to  pay  the  debts  of  the  son ;  but  the  property  of  the  arrogated  was  made
answerable,  the  praetor,  by  a  sort  of  restitutio  in  integrum,  allowing  the
creditors  to  proceed  as  if  the  arrogation  had  not  taken  place  against  the
arrogated,  and  unless  the  arrogator  satisfied  them  the  praetor  trave  tliem
possession  of  the  goods  and  allowed  them  to  be  sold.  (3.)  Under  Justinian's
legislation,  if  any  property  was  acquired  by  the  arrogated  from  any
source  except  the  arrogator,  the  usufruct  only  went  to  the  arrogator,  and
if  the  arrogated  died,  the  property  in  it  passed  to  the  children,  and  if
none,  to  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  deceased,  and  only  in  default  of
them,  to  the  arrogator.  (2).  What  is  said  of  arrogation  as  a  mode  of
acquiring  a  universitas  rerum  is  true  of  the  conventio  in  manum  of  a
wife  under  the  old  law.  (1.)

ii.  BoNORUM  Addictio. — The  mode  next  noticed  of  acquiring  a  uni-
versitas rerum  is  the  honorum  addictio,  introduced  by  a  constitution  of
Marcus  Aurelius.  (Tit.  11.  pr.)  If  a  testator  (even  by  codicils)  gave
liberty  to  any  slaves,  then,  after  the  inheritance  had  been  successively  (4)
rejected  by  the  heredes  ex  testa?nento,  the  heredes  ah  intestato,  and  the  Jiscus,
any  of  these  slaves,  or,  under  a  constitution  of  Gordian,  any  one  else  (1),
might  apply  to  have  the  goods  given  over  to  him  {honorum  addictio),  on  his
undertaking  to  satisfy  the  creditors  in  full,  the  application  being  enter-
tained both  in  favour  of  liberty,  and  to  spare  the  deceased  the  disgrace  of
a  sale  of  his  goods.  (2.)  The  slaves  enfranchised  by  the  testament
were,  when  manumitted,  the   slaves  of  the  deceased  (orcini),  unless  there

N   N   2

548.  SUMMARY.

was  only  a  fiduciary  direction  to  manumit  them,  or  the  slaves  had
agreed  to  be  the  freedmen  of  the  person  to  whom  the  addictio  was  made.
The  constitution  further  directed  that  even  when,  in  such  a  case,  the
Jiscus  accepted,  the  directions  as  to  liberty  should  be  carried  out.  (1.)  If
a  person  while  under  twenty-five  years  did  not  accept  as  lieres  ah  intes-
tato  an  inheritance,  and  liberty  was  acquired  by  the  addictio  bonorum,  then,
although  when  he  was  twenty-five  he  might  be  restituhis  in  integrum  and
uccept,  yet  the  liberty  once  given  could  not  be  taken  away.  (5.)  Justinian
extended  the  addictio  to  cases  where  freedom  was  given  not  by  testament
hut  inter  vivos  OY  mortis  causa  (6),  and  also  provided  that  the  addictio  rm^\t
be  made  afi:er  a  sale  by  the  creditors  had  taken  place,  if  the  appli-
cation was  made  within  a  year  fi'om  the  sale,  which  was  then  rescinded ;
and  that  a  composition  accepted  by  the  creditors,  or  only  enfranchise-
ment of  some  of  the  slaves  directed  to  be  enfranchised,  should  be  accepted,
if  necessary,  as  satisfactory  ;  and  that  if  those  entitled  to  apply  for  an
addictio  did  not  all  apply  at  the  same  time,  the  first  applicant  should  have
the  possession.  (6,  7.)

iii.  Bonoi^m  Venditio. — The  mode  next  noticed  of  acquiring  a  uni-
versitas  rerum  is  the  honomim  venditio^  one  of  the  praetorian  modes  of
execution  by  which  a  transfer  of  the  entire  property  of  a  debtor  was  made
to  the  person  who,  in  consideration  of  receiving  it,  would  pay  the  largest
jjroportion  of  the  creditors'  claims.  A  summary  of  the  mode  in  which,
and  the  circumstances  under  which,  this  process  was  carried  out,  is  given
at  page  312.  In  the  time  of  Justinian  this  process  had  become  obsolete,
and  the  goods  of  the  debtor  being  handed  over  to  the  creditors,  were  sold
by  them  separately  as  occasion  might  offer  {honorum  distractio).  (Tit.
12.  pr.)

iv.  Forfeiture  under  the  Senatus-Considtum  Claudianum. — A  univer-
sitas  rerum  was  acquired  under  the  senatiis-consultmn  Claudianum^  when  a
free  woman  Avas  denounced  three  times  by  the  master  of  a  slave  as  having
formed  a  disgraceful  connection  with  the  slave.  A  magisterial  decree
reduced  her  to  the  condition  of  an  ancilla,  and  she  and  her  property
passed  to  the  owner  of  the  slave.  If  it  was  a  freedwoman  who  formed
such  a  connection,  she  became  again  the  slave  of  her  patron,  unless  he
had  assented  to  her  conduct,  in  which  case  she  became  the  slave  of  the
owner  of  the  slave  with  whom  she  had  disgraced  herself.  Justinian
abolished  all  this  as  unworthy  of  his  empire.  (Tit.  12.  1.)

Obligations.

We  now  pass  to  obligations.  A  summary  is  given  in  the  text,  at  p,  314,
of  the  meaning  of  the  term  obligation,  and  of  the  main  features  of  Ecman
law  with  regard  to  the  sources  of  obligations,  contracts,  culpa,  interest,
and  the  actions  attached  to  obligations.

Of  the  ten  recognised  heads  of  contracts,  the  first  noticed  are  those
made  re.

Contracts  Re. — There  were  four  kinds  of  contracts  made  re,  i.e.  by
the  delivery  of  the  thiug,  mutuuni,  commodatum,  dejpositum,  pignus.     In

I

BOOK  IIL  549

mutuum  the  receiver  became  tlie  owner,  in  2^ijnus  he  became  the  possessor,
in  commodatum  and  depositum  he  became  in  possessione  of  the  thing
delivered.  (Tit.  14.  pr.)

Mutuum. — Here  the  deliverer  of  the  thing  makes  over  the  thing  as  the
property  of  the  recipient,  who  by  receiving  it  binds  himself  to  return  an
exact  equivalent  in  genere^  and  who,  if  he  fails  to  do  this,  can  be  sued
by  a  condictio  certi  (1),  although  the  thing  handed  over  to  him  may  have
perished  through  mere  accident.  (2.)

Commodatum. — Here  the  deliverer  gratuitously  puts  the  recipient  in
possession  of  a  thing  which  the  recipient  wishes  to  make  use  of.  As  it  is
the  recipient  who  benefits  by  the  contract,  he  has  to  take  the  care  of  it
which  a  bonus  paterfamilias  exercises,  and  not  merely  the  care  he  takes  of  his
own  property,  but  he  is  not  answerable  if  the  thing  is  lost  through  causes
wholly  beyond  his  control.  He  can,  when  the  term  for  which  the  thing
was  lent  has  expired,  be  made  to  restore  this  identical  thing  or  its  value
by  the  actio  commodati  directa^  having  in  turn  an  actio  commodati  con-
traria  (both  actions  being  honcE  Jidei)  for  any  extraordinary  expenses  or
for  losses  through  the  fault  of  the  deliverer.  (2.)

Dejjositum. — Here  the  deliverer  for  his  own  benefit  puts  the  recipient
(who  receives  gratuitously)  in  possession  of  a  thing  which  the  deliverer
wishes  to  have  kept  for  him.  The  recipient,  as  he  is  conferring  a  benefit,
is  answerable  not  for  carelessness,  but  only  for  negligence  so  great  as  to
amount  to  fraud.  When,  however,  the  deposit  was  made  in  circumstances
of  sudden  calamity,  as  fire,  shipwreck,  the  recipient  had  to  pay  double  the
value  of  the  thing  if  lost  through  his  negligence.  The  identical  thing
can  be  reclaimed  at  any  time  by  the  deliverer,  and  must  not  be  made  use
of  by  the  recipient.  The  deliverer  had  the  actio  depositi  directa  for  the
restitution  of  the  thing,  and  the  recipient  the  actio  depositi  contraria  (both
actions  being  bonce  Jidei)  for  all  expenses  incurred  and  losses  sustained
through  the  fault  of  the  deliverer.  (3.)

Pignus. — Here  the  deliverer,  the  debtor,  puts  the  recipient,  the  creditor,
in  possession  of  the  thing ;  but  the  creditor  cannot  make  use  of  it,  and  al-
though he  may  apply  the  fruits  in  reduction  of  principal,  he  cannot  take  them
except  by  special  agreement  for  interest.  The  creditor  was  bound  to  use
the  diligence  of  a  bonus  paterfamilias,  but  he  was  not  liable  for  loss  by
accident.  The  creditor  was  compelled  by  the  actio  pigneratitia  directa
to  restore  the  thing  when  his  claim  was  settled,  and  could  bring  the
actio  pigneratitia  contraria  (both  actions  being  bonoi  jidei)  to  recoup
Inmself  for  expenses  and  for  losses  caused  by  the  debtor.

Contracts  made  Verbis. — There  were  two  forms  of  contract  made
verbis,  besides  stipulations  known  to  the  old  law,  but  obsolete  in  the  time
of  Justinian,  the  dictio  dotis  and  the  jurata  promissio  liherti  (Tit.  15.
pr.  note)  ;   but  it  is  only  of  stipulations  that  any  notice  need  be  taken.

Stipulations. — Stipulations  were  a  form  of  unilateral  contract,  in  which
the  stipulator  or  questioner  asked  the  promissor  whether  he  would  enter  into
the  engagement  proposed,  and  on  the  promiser  replying  that  he  would,  the
contract  was  complete.  Originally  the  peculiar  words,  spondesne,  spondeo,
could  only  be  used  by  Koman  citizens,  but  in  later  times  no  special  form

550  SUMMARY,

of  words  was  necessary  as  long  as  there  was  a  question  and  an  answer.

A  stipulation  may  be  made  simply  {pure),  or  may  be  modified,  either
with  reference  to  a  term  {in  diem),  or  by  being  subjected  to  a  condition.

When  a  stipulation  is  made  in  diem,  as  to  give  on  a  future  day  named,
the  interest  in  the  stipulation  is  at  once  fixed  {cessit  dies) ;  and  if  the
promissoj'  pays  before  the  day  named,  he  cannot  get  his  money  back :
but  the  time  for  enforcing  the  obligation  does  not  come  {non  venit  dies)
until  the  whole  of  the  future  day  fixed  has  expired.  (2.)  If  a  person
promises  to  give  in  a  distant  place,  a  delay  sufficient  to  make  the  execution
of  the  promise  possible  is  implied.  (5.)  Lapse  of  time  was  not  a  means
recognised  by  law  for  the  extinction  of  an  obligation  or  promise  to  pay
so  much  to  a  man  every  year  while  he  lived :  it  was  therefore  theoretically
never  extinguished,  but  the  heir  of  the  stipulator  would  be  prevented  by
an  exception  from  enforcing  the  promise  after  the  stipulator's  death.  (3.)

When  a  stipulation  is  made  conditionally,  the  interest  of  the  stipulator
is  not  fixed  till  the  condition  is  fulfilled.  He  has  only  a  hope  that  the
thing  will  be  owed  to  him,  but  this  hope  {spes  dehitum  iri)  passes  to  his
heirs,  and  they  can  enforce  the  contract  when  he  could  have  enforced
it.  A  promise  to  give  if  a  man  does  not  do  something  in  his  power  is
equivalent  to  a  promise  to  give  when  he  dies,  and,  as  he  must  die  some
day,  is  made  in  diem.  (4.)  If  the  condition  relates  to  past  or  present  time,
the  knowledge  of  the  parties  as  to  the  event  is  immaterial.  Either  the  con-
dition has  not  been  fulfilled  and  the  stipulation  is  of  no  effect,  or  it  has  been
fulfilled  and  the  stipulation  can  be  enforced  at  once.  (6.)  Where  the
promise  is  to  do  something  or  not  to  do  something,  the  proper  course  is
to  fix  in  the  stipulation  the  penalty  to  be  paid  if  the  thing  is  not  done  or
is  done,  as  this  avoids  uncertainty  as  to  what  amount  ought  to  be  paid  for
the  breach  of  promise.  (7.)

Co-stipulators.  Co-promissors. — A  verbal  contract  might  be  made  so
that  more  than  one  person  should  be  joined  in  the  stipulation,  the  pro-
missor  undertaking  to  give  to  each,  or  in  the  promise,  each  promissor
answering  affirmatively  the  question.  These  contracts  might  also  be  made
so  as  to  create  joint  creditors  or  joint  debtors  (Tit.  16.  pr.),  and  one
promissor  might  answer  so  as  to  bind  himself  simply ;  the  others  in  a
modified  manner.  (2.)  The  thing  was  due  to  each  co-stipulator  and  from
each  co-promissor.  If  the  thing  was  given  by  or  to  any  of  the  joint
parties,  the  obligation  was  at  an  end.  If  one  co-promissor  ceased,  as  by
deminutio  capitis,  to  be  bound,  the  other  co-parties  remained  bound.  If,
however,  an  action  was  brought  on  the  contract,  then  the  obligation  was
at  an  end,  but,  under  Justinian,  if  the  co-promissor  sued  could  not  pay
entirely,  the  others  might  be  sued  for  the  deficiency.  (1,  note.)  The  co-
promissor  who  had  paid  all  could  recover  their  shares  from  the  other  joint
debtors,  either  as  a  partner,  if  there  was  a  partnership,  or  if  not,  by  so
paying,  or  by  the  law  allowing  him  to  feign  that  he  had  so  paid,  that  the
actions  of  the  creditors  were  made  available  for  his  benefit.  (1,  note.)

Stipidations  of  slaves. — A  slave  can  stipulate  (though  he  cannot  pro-
mise) for  his  owner  (Tit.  17.  pr.),  whether  he  names  his  owner  or  not  (1);

BOOK  III.  551

and  i£  a  slave  stipulates  after  his  owner's  death  and  before  the  entry  of  the
heir,  he  acquires  for  the  inheritance  (Tit.  17.  pr.)  He  may  stipulate,
however,  for  a  personal  right  for  himself,  as  for  leave  to  cross  a  field,  but
he  exercises  this  for  his  master's  benefit.  (2.)  When  a  slave  is  held  in
common,  he  acquires  for  his  joint  owners  in  proportion  to  their  interests
in  him,  unless  he  is  acting  by  the  orders  or  in  the  name  of  one  only  of
them,  or  unless  the  thing  cannot  be  acquired,  as,  e.g.,  if  it  is  already  owned
by  one  of  his  owners.  (3.)

Division  of  Stipulations, — Stipulations  may  be  divided  according
as  they  are  voluntary  or  not.  (Tit.  18.  pr.)  Those  that  are  not  voluntary
are,  1,  judicial,  required  by  the  judge;  2,  praetorian,  required  by  the
prsetor  or  sediie ;  3,  common,  required  properly  by  the  prsetor,  but
often,  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  delay,  by  the  judge.  Instances  of  those
required  by  the  judge  are  the  security  required  de  dolo,  that  a  thing  shall
not  be  restored,  if  injured  by  the  defendant's  fault,  without  compensation,
and  de  persequendo  servo,  that  a  defendant  will  pursue  or  pay  the  price
of  a  slave  the  subject  of  litigation,  who  has,  through  the  defendant's
fault,  escaped  out  of  the  defendant's  possession.  (1.)  Instances  of  those
required  by  the  pr^tor  are  damni  infecti,  security  against  apprehended
injury,  and  lerjatorum,  security  by  the  heir  that  he  will  pay  the  legacies.
(2.)  Instances  of  those  required  sometimes  by  the  praetor,  sometimes  by
the  judex,  are  rem  salvam  fore  pupillo,  security  for  the  property  of  a
pupil,  and  de  rato,  that  a  principal  will  ratify  what  the  procurator  does
for  him.  (4.)

Stipulationes  inutiles. — Stipulations  are  invalid  for  various  reasons,
which  may  be  classed  under  the  following  heads : —

i.  On  account  of  their  object,  as  when  the  stipulation  is  for  (a)  a  thing
that  does  not  or  cannot  exist  (Tit.  19.  pr.)  ;  or  (b)  for  a  thing  of  which
the  stipulator  has  not  the  commercium,  as  for  a  res  saci'a  or  a  freeman ;
and  in  such  cases  the  stipulation  is  invalid  at  once,  though  the  thing
may  afterwards  become  such  as  he  is  capable  of  holding,  and  the  stipula-
tion becomes  void  if  the  thing,  without  the  fault  of  the  promissor,  becomes
such  as  the  stipulator  cannot  hold  (2) ;  (c)  for  a  thing  belonging  to
the  stipulator  or  in  case  it  may  belong  to  him  (2.  22)  ;  or  (d)  ex  turpi
causa,  as  to  commit  murder.

ii.  On  account  of  the  persons  by,  for,  or  between  whom  they  are  made. —
1.  Stipulations  are  invalid  when  made  by  (a)  dumb  or  wholly  deaf
persons  (7);  (b)  madmen  (8);  (c)  an  infant  pupil;  or  (d)  a  filius-
familias  below  the  age  of  puberty.  (9.  10.)

2.  Stipulations  are  invalid  when  made  for  (a)  a  third  person  other
than  a  person  in  whose  power  the  stipulator  is.  (4.)  But  such  a  stipu-
lation may  be  made  valid  by  adding  that,  if  payment  to  the  third  person
is  not  made,  a  penalty  shall  be  payable  to  the  stipulator  (19);  and
whenever  the  stipulator  has  an  interest  in  the  payment  to  a  third  person
being  made,  as  if  it  is  a  co-tutor  who  on  retiring  stipulates,  to  save  him-
self, that  the  property  of  the  pupil  shall  be  safely  administered  by  the
remaining  tutors,  or  if  the  third  person  is  a  procurator  or  creditor  of  the
stipulator,  the  stipulation  is  valid.  (20.)     If  a  stipulator  engaged  for  pay-

552  SUMMAEY.

ment  to  himself  or  another,  payment  to  the  other  extinguished  the  obliga-
tion. If  he  stipulated  for  payment  to  himself  and  another,  he  can  recover  half
the  sum  stipulated  for.  (4.)  (b)  The  stipulation  was  also  invalid  if  the
promise  was  so  made  to  bind  a  third  person  as  that  this  third  person
should  give  or  do  something  (3.  21) ;  but  the  stipulation  might  be  made  valid
either  by  the  promissor  promising  that  he  would  manage  that  the  third
person  gave  or  did  the  thing,  or  that  he  himself  would  pay  a  penalty  in  case
the  third  person  did  not  give  or  do  the  thing.  (3.  19.)

3.  Masters  cannot  stipulate  with  their  slaves,  nor  fathers  with  their
children  in  their  power.  (6.)

iii.  On  account  of  the  manner  in  which  they  ivere  made.  The  parties
must  consent  to  the  same  thing  (5.  23);  and  if  several  things  are  included
in  the  question,  the  promissor  is,  unless  he  gives  a  general  assent,  only
bound  as  to  those  things  to  which  he  bound  himself  by  his  answer.  (18.)
The  question  is  inferred  from  the  record  of  the  answer  in  a  written  docu-
ment embodying  a  stipulation.  (27.)

iv.  On  account  of  the  time  or  the  condition  subject  to  which  they  are
made,  (a)  Ti7ne. — A  stipulation  was  invalid  that  a  thing  should  be  given
after  the  death  of  the  stipulator  or  the  possessor,  because  the  right  to  have  the
engagement  performed  would  then  accrue  not  to  the  party  to  the  contract,
but  to  his  heirs,  who  were  in  the  position  of  third  persons.  (13.)  An  engage-
ment to  give  the  day  before  death  was  equally  invalid,  as  until  the  death
occurred  it  could  not  be  known  when  the  day  was.  (13.)  But  an  en-
gagement to  give  at  the  time  of  death  was  valid,  as  the  performance  was
considered  to  become  due  before  the  heir  occiipied  his  position  as  heir
(15),  and  a  stipulation  to  give  after  the  death  of  a  third  person  was  valid
as  being  merely  an  uncertain  term.  (16.)  A  preposterous  stipulation,
that  is,  if  something  happens  to-morrow,  will  you  give  me  to-day,  was
invalid.  Under  Justinian,  however,  all  the  causes  of  invalidity  under
this  head  and  as  to  the  time  of  death  were  removed.  (13,  14.)

(b)  Condition. — An  impossible  condition  makes  a  stipulation  void,  but  a
stipulation  is  valid  and  the  thing  is  due  at  once,  if  it  is  given  in  case  an
impossible  condiiion  is  not  performed.  (11.)  The  heirs  of  the  stipulator
and  the  promissor  could  sue  and  be  sued  if  the  condition  of  a  properly
made  conditional  stipulation  was  fulfilled  after  the  death  of  the  party  to
whom  they  were  heirs.   (25.)

FiDEJUSSORES. — The  general  term  for  becoming  surety  was  intercession
and  the  principal  modes  of  intercessio  were  (1)  adpromissio^  (2)  fdejussio,
(3)  giving  a  mandate  credendce  pecunice,  and  a  subsequent  pactum  consti-
tute pecunice,  an  engagement  to  pay  the  ascertained  debt  of  the  principal.
The  Institutes  only  treat  of  fidejussores.  The  corei  stijmlandi  et  p)ro-
7Jiittendi,  mentioned  in  Title  16,  were  parties  to  the  same  verbal  contract.
But  it  was  also  possible  for  persons  to  enter  into  a  contract  as  accessories
to  the  principal  contract.  If  one  of  these  accessories,  or  the  principal,  was
sued,  no  further  action  could,  until  Justinian's  time,  be  brought  by  the
creditors  against  those  not  sued,  the  debt  being  extinguished  by  the  litis
contestation  and  payment  to  the  accessory  of  the  creditor  v/as  a  good  pay-
ment as  against  his  principal.  (Tit.  20.  pr.)

BOOK  III.  553

In  stipulations  there  could  be  added  an  adstipulator,  and  the  prin-
cipal use  of  adding  one  was,  before  procurators  were  recognised,  to  put  a
person  in  the  position  of  a  procurator,  and  after  procurators  were  recog-
nised, to  make  valid  a  stipulation  for  something  after  the  death  of  the
stipulator.     The  rights  of  the  adstipulator  did  not  pass  to  his  heirs.

The  adpromissores  {sponsor es^  if  Roman  citizens,  fidepromissores,  if
peregrini)  might  bind  themselves  for  as  much  as,  or  for  less  than,  their  prin-
cipal bound  himself,  not  for  more.  Their  heirs  were  not  bound,  and  they
had  against  their  principal  an  actio  mandati.  Several  laws  were  made  for
their  protection.  By  the  lex  Apuleia  any  one  of  them  who  had  paid  the
whole  debt  could  recover  all  beyond  his  share  from  the  others  by  an  actio
pro  socio.  By  a  law  of  uncertain  name  the  creditor  had  to  give  notice
beforehand  for  what  amount  he  was  going  to  exact  security,  and  how
many  accessories  there  were  to  be.  By  the  lex  Furia  the  obligation  was
only  binding  for  two  years,  and  the  amount  of  the  liability  of  all  was
divided  equally  among  all  living  when  the  guarantee  was  enforced.  The
lex  Puhlilia  gave  a  special  privilege  to  sponsores  (not  to  fidepromissores)^
allowing  them,  unless  reimbursed  in  six  months,  (a)  to  bring  against  their
principal  a  special  action,  actio  depensi,  and  to  recover  double  if  he  denied
his  liability,  or  (b)  to  take  his  person  in  execution.  The  lex  Cornelia  pro-
vided that  no  one  should  bind  himself  for  the  same  debt  or  to  the  same
creditor,  in  the  same  year,  for  more  than  20,000  sesterces.

The  lex  Cornelia  applied,  however,  not  only  to  adjjromissores,  but  to
fidejussores,  which  marks  the  first  introduction  of  a  form  of  suretyship
which,  at  last,  superseded  entirely  the  use  of  adpromissores.  l^h.e  fide-
jussor bound  himself  by  saying  in  Latin  or  in  Greek  (7)  that  he  also
ordered  the  thing  on  his  faith,  but  no  strictness  of  the  formula  was  here
necessary.  Like  the  adp)romissor,  the  fidejussor  could  not  bind  himself  for
more  than  his  principal  (5),  and  had  an  actio  mandati,  or,  if  he  had
intervened  without  the  principal's  authority,  an  actio  negofiorum  jus-
torum,  against  the  principal  for  what  he  paid  ibr  him.  (6.)

The  advantages  of  having  fidejussores  over  adpromissores  were  (a),
they  could  be  used  to  guarantee  any  kind  of  obligation,  including  obli-
gations arising  out  of  delicts  and  natural  obligations,  whereas  adpromis-
sores could  only  guarantee  verbal  contracts,  (b)  The  fidejussor  bound
his  heirs,  the  adpromissor  did  not.  (2.)  (c)  There  was  no  limit  to  the  time
during  which  fidejussores  were  bound,  whereas  adpromissores  were  only
bound  for  two  years  from  the  time  when  the  obligation  could  have  been
enforced  against  them.  (2,  note.)  (d)  The  fidejussio  might  be  made
beforehand  to  guarantee  a  principal  contract  not  yet  made — adpi^omissio
could  not.  (3.)

The  fidejussores  were  each  liable  for  the  whole  debt,  and  one  who  paid
had  no  means  of  making  the  others  contribute,  except  by  taking  advan-
tage of  the  beneficium  cedendarum  actionum,  that  is,  the  surety  who  was
willing  to  pay  in  full  could  repel  the  creditor  by  an  exceptio  doli  maliy
unless  the  creditor  would  cede  his  actions  to  the  surety  who  paid  him  ;
and,  by  means  of  these  actions,  the  surety  could  force  the  princij)al,  or  his
co-sureties,  to  pay  him  what  he  was  entitled  to  receive.     Hadrian,  how-

554  SUMMARY.

ever,  enacted  that,  if  any  fidejussor  was  sued,  he  should  have  what  was
termed  the  heneficium  divisioms,  i.  e.  he  might  force  the  creditor  to  divide
his  demand  among  all  the  fidejussores  who  were  solvent  at  the  time  of  the
litis  contestatio ;  but  the  fidejussor  must  make  this  demand  formally,  since
the  heneficium  did  not  take  place  ipso  jure,  as  the  provisions  of  the  lex  Furia
did  in  favour  of  adpromissor es.  And  it  might  still  be  more  to  the  interest
of  the  surety  to  take  advantage  of  the  heneficium  cedendarum  actionum,
as  he  thus  took  over  any  property  pledged  to  the  creditor,  and  might
satisfy  his  claim  in  this  way.  (4.)

Justinian  introduced  what  was  termed  the  heneficium  oi'dinis,  by  which  a
surety  might  require  that  the  principal  should  be  sued  first,  and  the  sureties
only  called  on  to  pay  what  could  not  be  recovered  from  him.  (4,  note.)

By  the  senatus-consultum  Velleianum  women  were  forbidden  to  bind
themselves  for  another  person.  (Tit.  20.  pr.  note.)  A  fidejussor  who
signs  a  writing  (cautio),  by  which  he  binds  himself  as  fidejussor ,  is  taken
to  have  gone  through  all  the  necessary  forms.  (8.)

Contracts  made  Literis. — A  contract  was  made  Uteris  when  an  entry,
expensilatio,  under  the  name  of  the  debtor,  was  made  in  the  ledger  {codex)
of  the  creditor  with  the  assent  of  the  debtor,  to  the  effect  that  the  creditor
had  paid,  and  the  debtor  received,  a  certain  sum  of  money.  The  best
evidence  of  the  assent  of  the  debtor  was  his  making  a  corresponding  entry
in  his  ledger,  but  this  was  not  necessary.  As  the  contract  was  for  a  sum
certain  advanced,  it  was  enforced  by  a  condictio ;  and  as  the  remedy  by
condictio  was  a  short  and  simple  one,  other  debts,  as  e.  g.  what  was  owing
under  a  sale,  were  changed  by  novation  into  debts  due  under  a  literal  con-
tract (transcriptio  a  re  in  personam),  by  the  debtor  owning  to  having
received  as  a  loan  the  sum  due  from  him  on  the  sale  ;  and,  in  the  same
way,  the  debtor  might  take,  under  a  literal  contract,  the  debt  of  a  third
person  {transcriptio  a  persona  in  personam),  by  assenting  to  an  entry  that
he,  the  debtor,  had  received  a  loan  to  the  amount  of  the  sum  owed  by  the
third  person.

Contracts  literis  were  peculiar  to  Eoman  citizens.  Peregrini  had  as  a
substitute  syngraphce,  signed  by  both  parties,  and  chirographa,  signed  by
the  debtor  only.  These  were  not  merely  documentary  evidence,  but  were
writings  on  which  an  action  could  be  brought,  as  opposed  to  cautiones,
which  were  mere  records  of  the  transaction  until  Justinian's  time,  when
the  distinction  was  done  away,  and  an  action  could  be  brought  on  any
document  stating  that  a  sum  was  due,  unless  there  was  also  a  formal
verbal  contract ;  for  if  there  was  a  stipulation,  this  was  always  looked  on  as
the  contract,  and  the  writing  was  only  evidentiary.  Although  a  debtor  had
admitted  in  writing  a  debt  as  due  from  him,  he"might,  during  five  years  (re-
duced by  Justinian  to  two),  plead  the  exceptio  non  numeratce  pecunice,  and
make  the  creditor  prove  that  he  had  really  paid  the  money ;  or  if  the
debtor  could  show  that  he  had  not  had  the  money,  he  could  ask  to  have  the
writing,  on  which  he  was  sought  to  be  charged,  given  up  to  him.  After
the  five,  or  two,  years  had  elapsed,  the  debtor  was  conclusively  bound  by
any  written  admission  of  debt,  but,  under  Justinian,  the  debtor,  by  going

BOOK  III.  555

through  certain  forms,  at  any  time  during  the  two  years,  might  get  his
exception  made  perpetual.

Consensual  Contracts. — We  now  come  to  the  four  kinds  of  contracts
made  simply  by  consent.  No  writing  nor  earnest  is  necessary  ;  they  may
be  made  inter  absentes,  and  all  give  rise  to  bonw  fidei  actions.  They  are
all  bilateral,  i.  e.  both  parties  are  bound  by  them,  whereas  contracts  under
the  three  former  heads  were  unilateral,  except  so  far  as  co?nmodatum,  depo-
situm^  and  pignus  might  give  rise  to  actiones  contrariw.  These  four  kinds
of  contract  are  sale,  letting  and  hiring,  partnership,  and  mandate.  (Tit.
22.  pr.)

i.  Sale. — The  contract  of  sale  is  formed  as  soon  as  the  price,  i.  e.  a
definite  sum  of  money,  not  anything  else  than  money,  is  fixed  on.  Earnest
(aiThce),  previously  to  Justinian,  only  served  as  a  proof  that  the  contract
had  been  made.  (Tit.  23.  pr.)

Justinian  made  two  changes.  1.  If  the  parties  chose  to  reduce  their
contract  to  writing,  which  they  need  not  do,  he  enacted  that  they  should  not
be  bound  until  it  had  been  reduced  to  writing,  and  one  of  three  conditions
had  been  fulfilled :  viz.  that  the  writing  was  (a)  written  by  the  parties,  or  (b)
signed  by  them,  or  (c)  formally  written  by  a  notary.  2.  The  earnest  (arrlice),
instead  of  a  proof  of  the  contract,  became  a  measure  of  damages  for  not
fulfilling  the  contract,  whether  written  or  unwritten,  the  purchaser  for-
feiting the  earnest  if  he  retracted,  and  the  seller  if  he  retracted  forfeiting
double.

The  thing  sold  must  be  defined  in  some  way,  but  it  might  be  defined
in  many  ways,  as,  e.  g.  by  selling  at  so  much  a  head  the  fish  to  be  cauglit
on  a  day,  rei  speratcB  emptio,  or  the  chance  of  the  whole  take  of  fish  on  a
day,  spei  emptio.  (Tit.  23.  pr.)

The  price  must  be  fixed  and  certain.  If  a  thing  is  sold  at  the  price
at  which  Titius  shall  value  the  thing,  Justinian  decides  that  if  Titius  does
fix  a  value  this  is  a  contract  of  sale  :  but,  if  he  does  not,  there  is  no  con-
tract of  sale.  (1.)

The  price  must  be  in  money,  or  else  the  contract  is  one  of  exchange
(permi(tatio),  not  sale,  the  difference  being  that,  if  a  contract  of  sale
was  made,  the  consent  was  the  basis  of  the  contract,  but  in  exchange  the
contract  was  made  re,  by  the  delivery  of  one  thing  in  exchange  for  which
the  other  thing  was  to  be  given.

The  duties  of  the  seller  were,  1,  to  deliver  the  thing  and  to  give  lawful
and  undisturbed  possession  of  it  (not  to  give  the  dominion  of  it).  2.  To
recompense  the  buyer,  if  evicted.  3.  To  secure  the  buyer  against  secret
faults.  If  secret  faults  were  discovered,  the  buyer  might,  at  his  option,  (a)
by  an  actio  (sstimatoria,  recover  damages,  greater  or  less,  according  as  the
seller  knew  (or  did  not  know)  of  the  faults,  or  (b),  by  what  was  redhibition  get
the  contract  rescinded,  and  return  the  thing  to  the  seller.  But  this  was  not
all.  In  order  to  fortify  himself,  the  buyer  frequently  exacted  by  stipulation  a
promise  from  the  seller  that  he  would  give  him  the  dominium^  and  that,  if
the  buyer  was  evicted,  he  would  pay  him  double  the  purchase  money.
After  the  use  of  this  fortifying  stipulation  had  become  familiar,  it  was

556  SUMMARY.

held  that  custom  so  far  imported  such  a  stipulation  into  the  contract,
that  the  buyer,  who  had  not  demanded  such  a  promise,  and  who,  there-
fore, could  not  sue  ex  stipulatu  if  evicted,  yet,  if  evicted,  could,  in  the  honce
fidei  actio  of  emjjtio,  recover  double  the  purchase  money,  on  the  ground
that  the  seller  ought  to  put  the  hirer  in  as  good  a  position  as  if  the  stipu-
lation had  been  made.

The  buyer  was  bound,  1,  to  make  the  seller  the  receiver  of  the  money
fixed  as  the  price,  and,  2,  to  pay  interest  from  the  day  of  receiving  the
thing  until  he  paid  the  price..  (2.)

The  contract  of  sale  was  complete  when  the  price  was  fixed,  but  the
thing  sold  remained  in  the  ownership  of  the  seller  until  he  delivered  it.
If,  after  the  sale  was  made,  the  thing  bought  improved  in  value,  the  buyer
profited,  and  if  it  lost  in  value  without  the  fault  of  the  seller  the  buyer  had
to  take  it  as  it  was.  The  risk,  after  the  price  was  paid,  was  that  of  the  buyer,
and  if  the  thing  was  wholly  lost,  by  some  cause  beyond  the  control  of  the
seller,  the  loss  fell  on  the  buyer,  not  on  the  seller,  although  the  seller  was
the  dominus,  while  generally  it  is  true  that  res  domino  peril.  But  then  the
seller  had  to  take  the  care  of  a  good  paterfamilias  of  the  thing  while  it
was  in  his  custody,  and,  if  he  did  not,  the  buyer  could  sue  him  for  da-
mages, and,  if  the  seller  chose,  he  might  take  even  a  fiirther  responsibility
and  specially  engage  to  be  answerable  even  beyond  the  measure  of  respon-
sibility of  a  bonus  paterfamilias,  as,  e.g.,  that  a  slave  purchased  should  not
in  any  case  escape  out  of  his  custody.  If  the  thing,  while  retained  by  the
seller,  was  injured,  or  stolen  by  a  third  person,  the  seller  had  to  cede  to
the  buyer  the  action  which,  as  dominus,  he  had  against  the  wrong-doer
or  thief.  (3.)

The  contract  of  sale  might  be  made  to  be  fulfilled  on  a  condition  hap-
pening, or  to  be  at  end  on  a  condition  happening,  or  with  a  subsidiary  agree-
ment added  to  it,  such  as  (a)  that  it  might  be  rescinded  if  the  seller  had  a
better  offer  before  a  given  day  {in  diem  addictio),  or  (b)  a  lex  commissoria,  a
general  agreement  for  the  rescission  of  the  contract,  if  not  executed,  this
agreement  being  specially  used  to  enable  the  seller  to  get  back  the  thing
if  he  had  delivered  it,  and  was  not  paid  by  a  certain  day.  A  seller  could,
under  Justinian,  have  a  sale  rescinded,  or  the  difference  made  up  to  him,
if  he  had  sold  for  less  than  half  the  value.  (4.)

If  the  seller  knowingly  sold  something  that  cannot  be  sold,  as  a  res
puhlica,  or  a  freeman,  the  buyer  could  recover  from  the  seller  all  he  had
lost  by  entering  into  the  bargain :  he  could,  e.  g.,  get  interest  on  his  pur-
chase money.

The  honce  fidei  actio  of  the  buyer  was  termed  ex  empto  or  empti,  that
of  the  seller  ex  vendito  or  venditi.  (5.)

ii.  Letting  on  Hire. — The  contract  of  letting  and  hiring  (locatio-
conductio)  is  the  second  of  the  consensual  contracts,  and  was  formed  as
soon  as  the  price  of  the  letting  {merces)  was  fixed.  The  three  heads  of
this  contract  were,  1,  locatio-conductio  rerum,  when  one  person  let  and
another  hired  a  thing ;  2,  locatio-conductio  operarum,  where  one  person
let  his  services  and  another  hired  them ;  3,  locatio-conductio  open's
faciendi,  where  one  person,  the  locator,  delivered  over  a  thing,  to  have

BOOK  III.  557

something  done  to  it  for  a  price,  by  another  person,  the  conductor.  (Tit.  24.
pr.)  The  price  must  be  fixed,  but  might  be  left  to  be  fixed  by  another
person,  but  if  no  price  was  fixed  the  contract  was  not  technically  one
of  locatio-conductiOy  but  was  an  innominate  contract.  The  price  must
be  in  money,  and  so  if  one  man  lets  his  ox  in  exchange  for  the  hirer  in
turn  letting  his  ox  to  the  first  letter,  this  is  not  locatio-conductio,  but
an  innominate  contract.  (2.)  Emphyteusis,  which  resembles  sale  in  re-
gard to  the  largeness  of  the  interest  passed  by  it,  and  locatio-conductio  in-
asmuch as  the  property  still  remains  in  the  creator  of  the  emphyteusis,
was  declared  to  be  a  separate  form  of  contract  by  Zeno.  In  the  absence
of  special  agreement  to  the  contrary,  the  risk  in  emphyteusis  of  a  total
loss  fell  on  the  owner,  the  risk  of  a  partial  loss  fell  on  the  occupier.  (3.)
If  a  man  gives  his  gold  to  a  goldsmith  to  have  rings  made  of  it  for  a  fixed
price,  this  is  locatio-conductio  ;  but  if  the  rings  are  to  be  made  of  the  gold
of  the  goldsmith,  it  is  a  sale.  (4.)  The  hirer  has  to  bestow  on  the  thing
hired  the  care  of  a  honus  paterfamilias,  but  fortuitous  loss  falls  on  the
owner,  that  is,  the  letter ;  a  distinction  being  thus  established  between  the
contract  of  locatio-conductio  and  that  of  sale,  where  the  risk  of  fortuitous
loss  is  not  with  the  dominus,  the  seller,  but  with  the  buyer  (5),  who  still
remained  possessor  in  the  eyes  of  the  law.  The  duties  of  the  letter
were,  1,  to  give  the  hirer  the  free  use  of  the  thing  ;  2,  to  guarantee  him
against  eviction ;  3,  to  reimburse  him  for  necessary  or  useful  expenses.
The  duties  of- the  hirer  were,  1,  to  give  the  care  of  a  honus  paterfamilias
to  the  custody  of  the  thing ;  2,  to  give  the  thing  up  when  the  term  of
hiring  was  at  end ;  and,  3,  to  pay  the  agreed  price  of  hiring.  (Tit.  24.
pr.)

The  contract  was  terminated,  1,  by  the  death  of  a  person  who  had
contracted  to  let  out  his  personal  services  or  who  specially  was  to  do  a
thing ;  but  it  was  not  terminated  in  other  cases  by  the  death  of  the  locator
or  conductor,  the  contract  passing  to  the  heirs  of  each ;  2,  by  the  sale
of  the  thing,  the  conductor  having  a  right  to  damages  against  the  locator
for  being  turned  out,  but  having  no  title  to  hold  against  a  purchaser  ;  3,
by  rent  being  two  years  in  arrear  ;  or  by  gross  misuse  on  the  part  of  the
conductor  ;  4,  by  the  locator  having  indispensable  need  of  it ;  and,  5,
by  the  conductor  being  prevented  from  getting  benefit  from  it,  as  by
armed  force.  (6,  note.)

The  hirer  \i?idith.Q  actio  conducti;  the  letter  had,  1,  the  actio  locati,  and,
2,  a  real  action,  actio  Serviana,  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  seize  on  the
farming  instruments  of  the  hirer  of  land  if  rent  was  not  paid ;  and,  3,
could  apply  for  the  interdictum  Salvianum,  by  which  he  got  possession  of
things  pledged  for  the  rent  of  land.  (Tit.  24.  pr.)

iii.  Partnership. — The  third  kind  of  consensual  contracts,  partnership,
may  be  considered  under  the  following  heads : —

1.  The  objects  of  the  partnership. — Partnership  might  be  (a)  univer-
sorum  bonorum  (/coivoTrpa^/a),  of  everything  belonging  or  accruing  to  each
partner  in  any  way,  and  goods  belonging  to  the  partners  at  the  time  of
the  contract  passed  to  all  without  delivery  ;  (h)  universoru7n  qua:  ex  quastu
veniunt,  of  things  acquired  in  the  course  of  business,  but  not  of  inheritances,

558  SUMMARY.

legacies,   &c. ;   (c)  negotiationis  alicujus ;  (d)  vectigalis,  for  farming  the
public  revenues  ;   (e)  rei  unius.     (Tit.  25.  pr.)

2.  The  shares  of  the  pai''tne7^s. — In  the  absence  of  special  agreement
each  partner  has  an  equal  share  in  the  profit  and  loss.  (1.)  But  they
may  agree  that  one-third  of  the  profits  and  one-third  of  the  loss  shall  be-
long to  one  partner — or  one  may  have  the  profit  after  a  balance  has  been
struck  and  not  be  responsible  for  loss — or  one  may  contribute  money  and
another  only  services ;  but  a  leonine  partnership,  by  which  one  partner
took  all  the  profit,  was  not  permitted.  (2.)  If  a  share  of  gain  is  assigned
to  one  partner,  he  has,  in  the  absence  of  special  agreement,  to  take  an
equal  share  of  loss.  (3.)

3.  The  dissolution  of  the  partnership. — A  partnership  was  dissolved
(rt)  ex  personis^  when  one  person  is  dead  or  incapacitated.  As  to  death,  it
may  be  remarked  that  the  death  of  one  of  many  partners  dissolved  the
whole  partnership,  but  that  a  societas  vectigalis  passed  to  the  heirs.  (5,  note.)
Incapacity  might  under  Justinian  be  caused  by  puhlicatio  or  confiscation,
when  the fiscus  was  looked  on  as  the  successor;  and  this  was  one  of  the
consequences  of  the  maxima  or  media  capitis  deminutio.  (b)  Ex  rebus,  when
the  purpose  of  the  partnership  has  been  accomplished  or  the  condition  to
which  it  was  made  subject,  for  partnership  might  be  made  conditionally,  has
been  fulfilled  (4),  or  when  the  subject  matter  of  the  partnership  has  ceased
to  exist,  as  in  the  case  of  a  cessio  hoiiorum,  when  the  goods  of  the  insolvent
were  all  lost  to  him.  (7.)  But  the  outgoing  partner  might  form  a  new
partnership  with  his  old  partners,  and  as  partnership,  being  a  contract
jus  gentium,  could  be  formed  with  a  peregrinus,  a  new  partnership  might
be  formed  even  with  a  person  who,  having  undergone  the  media  capitis
deminutio,  had  lost  his  civitas.  The  minima  capitis  deminutio  did  not  dis-
solve a  partnership,  and  a  person  arrogated  or  emancipated  was  still  a
partner.  (^8.)  (c)  Ex  voluntate,  when  one  partner  wished  to  retire;  but  if,
"vvhen  the  partnership  is  universorum  honorum,  he  renounces  from  a
desire  to  profit  exclusively  by  some  gain,  as  an  inheritance,  accruing  to
himself,  he  is  compelled  to  share  this  gain  with  his  partners.  (4.)  {d)  Ex
actione,  when  one  partner  compelled  a  dissolution  by  action,  (e)  Tempoir,
by  the  time   during  which  the  partnership  was  to  last  having  expired.  (4.)

4.  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  partners. — Each  partner  was  the
mandatary  of  the  others,  but,  for  anything  beyond  mere  ordinary  admini-
stration, required  an  express  mandatum.  Properly,  only  the  particular
partner  who  was  party  to  a  contract  could  sue  or  be  sued  by  third  parties,
but  the  pr^tor,  if  necessary,  allowed  actions  to  be  brought  by  or  against
the  other  partners.  Each  partner  had  a  bonoi  fidei  action  p)ro  socio  against
the  others  to  recover  his  just  expenses  and  make  them  answerable  for  his
losses  or  their  negligence.  (2,  note.)  Each  partner  was  bound  to  take  as
much  care  of  goods  belonging  to  the  partnership  as  he  did  of  his  own,  and
to  this  extent  he  was  answerable,  not  only  for  dolus,  but  culpa.  (9.)

There  was  such  2^,  fraternitas  between  partners,  that  while  on  the  one
hand  a  partner  could  not  in  an  actio  pro  socio  be  condemned  beyond  his
means  {beneficium  competenticB),  yet  condemnation  in  this  action  carried
infamy  with  it.     If  a  partner  committed  a  delict  against  his  partners,

BOOK  III.  559

they  had  the  appropriate  actio  ex  delicto  against  him,  and  a  partition  of
the  partnership  property  could  be  enforced  by  an  actio  communi  dividundo.
(9,  note.)

iv.  Mandate. — The  fourth  of  the  consensual  contracts  is  mandate,
by  which  one  person  charges  another  to  do  something :  originally,  one
friend  (the  mandator^  charges  another  friend,  in  whom  he  has  confidence
(the  mandatarius),  to  do  something  for  him,  and  as  a  pledge  places  his
hand  in  his  friend's  {manns  datio).  The  relations  thus  created  were  after-
w^ards  enforced  by  the  bonce  fidei  actions  mandati  directa,  by  which  the
mandator  compelled  the  mandatarius  to  account  to  him,  and  mandati
contraria^  by  which  the  mandatarius  compelled  the  mandator  to  reimburse
him  for  expenses  and  losses.  (Tit.  26.  pr.)  Still  the  original  character  of
the  contract  was  traceable  in  mandate  always  remaining  a  gratuitous
contract  (13),  and  the  mandatarius  who  was  adjudged  in  an  action  to
have  failed  to  discharge  his  duty  w^as  stamped  with  infamy.  (Tit.  26.  pr.)

Gradually  the  scope  of  mandate  was  much  enlarged  by  the  prgetor
allowing  third  parties  with  whom  the  mandatarius  had  contracted  to  sue
or  be  sued  by  the  mandator^  in  the  form  of  actiones  utiles.  There  were
still  some  acts,  such  as  making  a  testament,  or  entering  on  an  inheritance,
which  every  man  must  do  for  himself  ;  but,  in  general  terms,  it  may  be
said,  that  a  law  of  agency  was  thus  created,  as  these  actions  could  be
brought  without  the  concurrence  of  the  agent  or  procurator,  and  thus  the
principal  and  third  parties  were  placed  in  direct  relations.  (Tit.  26.  pr.)

Fo7ins  of  Mandate. — Mandate  may  assume  five  forms,  according  to
the  persons  interested  in  the  contract.  It  may  be  made  (a)  for  the  benefit
of  the  mandator  only,  as  when  he  charges  the  mandatarius  to  buy  an
estate  for  him.  (1.)  (^)  For  the  benefit  of  the  mandator  and  the  manda-
tarius, as,  1,  when  the  mandator  guarantees  a  loan  which  the  mandatarius
makes  with  interest  to  a  third  party,  but  for  the  benefit  of  the  man-
dator ;  or,  2,  when  the  mandator,  being  already  a  fidejussor,  gives  the
mandatarius,  who  is  about  to  sue  him  as  such,  a  mandate  to  sue  the
principal.  (Here  both  gain,  or  rather,  before  Justinian  introduced  the
heneficium  ordinis,  they  gained,  the  mandator  by  having  the  principal  sued
first,  and  the  mandatarius  by  having  two  persons  to  sue,  one  after  the
other;)  or,  3,  when  the  debtor  gives  the  creditor  a  mandate  to  stipulate
for  something  owed  the  mandator  by  a  third  party.  (Here  again  both
benefit ;  the  mandator  gets  his  debt  collected  for  him,  and  the  mandatarius
has  two  persons  to  sue.)  (2.)  (c)  For  the  benefit  of  a  third  person,  as  a
mandate  to  manage  the  affairs  of  Titius.  (c7)  For  the  benefit  of  the  man-
dator, and  a  third  person,  as  when  the  mandatarius  is  charged  to  buy  an
estate  for  Titius  and  the  mandator  jointly,  (e)  For  the  benefit  of  the
mandatarius  and  a  third  person,  as  when  the  mandator  charges  the  man-
datarius  to  lend  money  at  interest  to  Titius,  an  opportunity  of  lending
money  at  interest  being  here,  as  above  in  (b  1),  treated  as  a  benefit  to  the
lender.  (5.)  A  mandate  for  the  benefit  of  the  mandatarius  only,  as  to
invest  his  money  in  the  purchase  of  an  estate,  is  merely  a  piece  of
advice,  and  cannot  be  reckoned  a  mandate  at  all,  unless  the  mandator
meant  to  say  that  if  his  advice  was  followed,  he,  and  not  the  mandatarius,

560  SUMMARY.

was  to  take  the  risk.     (6.)  A  mandate  may  be  made  conditionally,  or  to
have  eifect  from  a  particular  time.  (12.)

Mandate  used  as  a  mode  of  Suretyship. — A  mandate  was  almost  the
same  as,  Jidejussio  as  a  means  of  creating  suretyship,  and  was  subject  to
the  same  general  rules  as  to  the  inability  of  women,  under  the  senatKS-
considtum  Velleianum^  to  enter  into  it  for  this  purpose,  and  as  to  the  bene-
fits of  discussion  {ordinis),  i.e.  that  the  principal  should  be  sued  first,  under
Justinian,  and  of  division,  that  is,  that  the  liabilities  of  co-sureties  should
be  divided  among  them,  under  Hadrian's  rescript,  and,  to  some  extent,  of
the  cession  of  actions.  But  the  mandator  axidi  fidejussor  differed  in  some
respects.  1.  The  mandator  was  considered  sometimes  more  responsible.
It  was,  for  instance,  doubted  by  the  jurists  whether  if  an  adolescent
who  had  borrowed  under  a  guarantee  was  restitutus  in  integrum^  the
creditor  or  the  fidejussor  was  to  suffer  the  loss,  but  it  was  considered
clear  that  the  mandator  rather  than  the  creditor  was  to  suffer.  2.  Before
the  time  of  Justinian,  who  placed  them  on  an  equality,  the  fidejussor  was
released  by  the  principal  being  sued — not  so  the  mandator^  as  his  contract
was  a  separate  one.  3.  The  fidejussor  could  not  demand  that  the  actions
against  the  debtor  and  the  co-sureties  should  be  ceded  to  him  after  a  litis
contestatio  in  a  suit  by  the  creditor  against  the  fidejussor  \  but  the  man-
dator was  not  affected  by  a  litis  contestatio  or  judgment  in  an  action  against
the  debtor.  4.  The  mandator  was  released  if  the  creditor  had  wilfully
abandoned  any  of  the  remedies  the  mandator  could  call  on  him  to  cede,
while  the  fidejussor  could  only  call  on  the  creditor  to  cede  such  as  he  had
to  cede.   (6,  note.)

Duties  and  poivers  ofi  the  Mandatarius. — No  one  need  accept  a
mandate,  but  if  accepted,  it  must  be  executed,  unless  renounced  soon
enough  for  the  mandator  to  carry  out  his  purpose  himself  or  through
another.  Otherwise  the  mandatarius  will  be  liable  to  an  actio  mandati,
unless  some  such  reason  as  a  sudden  illness  or  enmity  has  prevented  him
from  renouncing  or  renouncing  soon  enough.  (11.)  If  the  inandator  revokes
before  execution,  the  mandate  is  at  an  end.  (9.)  A  mandate  is  also  extin-
guished, if,  before  it  is  executed,  either  the  majidator  or  mandatarius  dies,
but  the  mandatarius  has  an  actio  mandati,  if  he  executes  the  mandate
when  the  mandator  is  really,  but  not  to  his  knowledge,  dead ;  just  as  a
payment  to  a  steward,  enfranchised  or  ceasing  to  have  power  to  act  as
steward,  is  good  against  his  master  if  the  person  paying  the  money  does  not
know  that  the  steAvard  is  not  still  a  slave  or  has  ceased  to  have  power  to  act
as  stcAvard.  (10.)  A  mandate  contra  honos  mores^  as  to  commit  theft,  is  not
obligatory ;  the  mandatarius  may  have  to  pay  a  penalty  in  such  a  case,
but  he  has  no  remedy  against  the  person  who  charges  him  to  commit  the
theft.  (7.)  The  mandatarius  must  not  exceed  the  limits  of  his  mandate.
If  a  mandator  charges  the  mandatarius  to  spend  100  aurei^  the  manda-
tarius may  spend  less  but  not  more ;  and  he  can  make  the  mandator
responsible  up  to  100  aurei,  though  not  for  the  excess.  (8.)  In  the  execu-
tion of  the  mandate,  the  7nandatarius  Avas  bound  to  exercise  the  diligence
of  a  bonus  paterfamilias.   (11,  note.)

Gratuitous  character  of  the  Contract. — A  mandate  is  always  gratuitous ;

BOOK   III.  561

and  a  contract  which,  if  gratuitous,  would  be  a  mandate,  will,  if  not
gratuitous,  almost  always  take  the  form  of  locatio-conductio,  and  so  vice
versa,  if  a  person  gives  out  his  materials  to  be  done  something  with,  but
does  not  fix  the  price,  an  actio  mandati  may  be  brought.  But  although  the
mandate  was  gratuitous,  yet  an  honorary  payment  (Jionorariwii)  might  be
arranged  for  and  given,  as  to  doctors,  &c.,  and  although  the  payment  could
not  be  enforced  by  an  action,  yet  the  magistrate  in  the  exercise  of  his
extraordinary  jurisdiction  would  regulate  it  and   see  it  was  paid.  (13.)

Obligations  quasi  ex  Contractu. — We  now  come  to  cases  where  an
obligation  exists,  not  arising  from  a  contract,  but  from  Euch  a  state  of
things  that  one  man  is  bound  to  another  as  if  there  was  a  contract.
These  obligations,  moreover,  resemble  not  only  obligations  generally,  but
those  arising  from  some  particular  form  of  contract.  The  three  first  of
the  examples  that  follow,  for  example,  closely  approach  obligations  arising
from  a  mandate.  The  two  next  closely  approach  obligations  arising  from
a  societas.  The  last  closely  approaches  the  obligation  arising  from
mutuum.  (Tit.  27.  pr.  6.)

The  following  are  the  examples  (which  are  merely  examples)  given  in
the  Institutes.

1.  If  one  man  manages  the  affairs  of  another  who  is  absent,  without
being  charged  to  do  so,  there  is  no  contract  between  them,  but  in  order
that  the  affairs  of  absent  people  might  not  be  neglected,  the  law  treated
the  parties  as  if  a  mandate  had  been  given,  the  person  whose  affairs  had
been  managed  having  an  actio  yiegotiorum  gestotmm  against  the  gestor  to
make  him  account,  and  the  gestor  having  an  actio  contraria  against  him,
but  (in  distinction  to  the  case  of  a  mandate)  only  for  what  he  has  usefully
expended,  not  for  all  his  expenses.  The  gestor  has  to  show  the  diligence
o^  a  bonus  paterfamilias.  (1.)

2.  Tutors  and,  3,  curators  are  bound  to  the  pupil  or  adolescent,  who
have  a  direct  action  to  make  them  account,  and  are  subject  to  a  contrary
action  for  losses  and  all  expenses.  (2.)

4.  If  two  persons,  not  being  partners,  have  a  thing  in  common,  and
one  has  received  the  fruits  or  borne  necessary  or  useful  expenses,  he  can
be  sued  or  sue  as  if  the  other  had  been  a  partner  (3)  ;  and,  5,  the  same
may  be  said  of  two  co-heirs,  who  have  a  right  to  apply  to  have  the  inheri-
tance divided.  (4.)

6.  The  heir,  though  not  bound  by  a  contract  to  the  legatee,  is  under
an  obligation  to  hiva,  quasi  ex  contractu,  to  curvy  out  the  dispositions  of  the
testator,  and  the  legatee  had  an  actio  ex  testamento  to  make  him  do  this ;
having  also,  if  a  particular  thing  was  so  given  as  a  legacy  as  to  give  the
legatee  the  right  to  bring  a  vindicatio,  the  choice  between  the  real  and  the
personal  action.  (5.)

7.  A  person  to  whom  money  not  due  is  paid  by  mistake,  is  not
bound  by  a  contract,  for  payment  is  generally  rather  the  fullilment  than
the  origin  of  a  contract,  but  he  is  bound  to  repay  it  by  an  obligation  quasi
ex  contractu.  (6.)

In  order  that  the  person  paying  might  be  able  to  recover,  three  con-
ditions must  be  fulfilled  :   (a)  the  payment  must  be  really  not  due ;    a,

0  0

562  SUMMARY.

person  could  not  recover  if  what  he  paid  was  due,  although  by  a  merely
natural  obligation,  or  if  he  paid  sooner  than  necessary  what  he  must  some
day  pay  ;  but  he  might  recover  what  he  paid  under  a  conditional  under-
taking before  the  event  happened ;  (b)  he  must  have  paid  under  a
mistake  arising  from  ignorance  of  fact  or  law ;  for  if  he  paid  knowingly,
he  was  treated  as  having  made  a  gift  (6) ;  (c)  he  must  not  have  paid
when  liable  to  pay  double  the  amount  claimed,  as  he  would  be  if  he
denied  that  a  judgment  pronounced  against  him  had  been  pronounced,
or  in  actions  under  the  lex  Aquilia,  or,  before  Justinian,  in  cases  of  legacies
giyen  j:)e?'  damiiationem.  Justinian  put  all  legacies  and  fideicommissa  on
the  same  footing  in  this  respect,  but  only  in  favour  of  certain  legatees,
such  as  churches,  asylums,  monasteries,  and  so  forth.  If  when  a  person
in  such  cases  chose  to  pay  the  simple  sum  claimed,  he  could  not  re-
cover it,  as  he  was  taken  to  have  paid  it  to  obtain  security  from  the
penalty.  (7.)

If  the  thing  not  due  was  paid  by  some  one  not  having  the  power  to
pass  property  in  that  which  he  gave  as  payment  (and  when  payment  is
spoken  of  it  is  not  money  only  that  is  meant),  then  the  thing  paid,  if  still
in  existence,  could  be  reclaimed  by  a  vindicatio.  If  not  in  existence,  or  if
the  property  had  been  transfeired  by  some  one  having  power  to  transfer  it,
then  the  person  paying  had  a  condictio — which  would  be  indehiti  in  the
first  case,  as  he  claimed  things  like  what  he  had  given — or  dare  oportere
in  the  second  case.  (6,  note.)

Acquisition  of  Obligations  thuough  others. — Fathers  and  masters
acquire  obligations,  i.e.  are  creditors,  and  can  bring  actions,  through  sons
in  potestate  (subject  to  the  changes  made  by  Justinian  as  to  the  i^eculium,
the  father,  however,  having  alone  the  right  to  bring  the  action  when  he
had  the  usufruct)  and  slaves.  (Tit.  28.  pr.)  In  the  cases  of  slaves,  or  of  per-
sons supposed  to  be  slaves,  of  whom  there  is  bona  fide  possession  or  a  usufruct,
the  master  acquires  the  obligations  as  to  all  that  arises  from  their  laboiu's  or
from  something  belonging  to  the  master.  In  the  case  of  slaves  of  whom  the
master  has  the  use,  the  master  acquires  the  obligations  as  to  all  that  arises
from  their  labours  expended  on  the  master's  property.  (1,  2.)  The  slave
held  in  common  acquires,  in  the  absence  of  something  to  show  the  contrary,
for  his  masters  in  proportion  to  their  interest  in  him.  (3.)  The  Institutes
do  not  notice  the  acquisition  of  obligations  through  procurators.

Dissolution  of  Obligations. — The  last  Title  of  this  Book  treats  of  the
dissolution  of  obligations,  and  the  case  of  obligations  being  dissolved  ijjso
jure  must  be  distinguished  from  that  of  the  right  to  sue  on  an  obligation
being  met  by  an  exception,  a  subject  reserved  for  the  4th  Book.  There
are  three  modes  of  the  dissolution  of  contracts  noticed  in  the  Institutes  :
1.  Payment;  2.  Novation;  3.  Use  of  a  form  of  dissolution  corresponding
to  the  form  of  the  obligation.  (Tit.  29.)

i.  PaTjment. — Sohitio,  a  term  applicable  generally  to  every  mode  of
loosening  the  tie  of  the  obligation,  is  specially  applied  to  payment  in  its
widest  sense,  i.e.  executing  the  contract.  There  are  as  to  this  three
questions  to  be  answered  :  1.  Who  may  pay  ?  Either  the  debtor  himself
may  pay.  or  any  third  person  with  or  without  the  debtor's  knowledge,  or

EOOK  III.  563

even  against  his  will,  may  pay  for  Iiim.  If  the  debtor  pays,  the  fidejussor
is  released,  and  if  \h.Q  fidejussor  pays  and  does  not  require  the  actions  to
be  ceded  to  him,  the  principal  is  released.  2.  To  whom  might  the  pay-
ment be  made  ?  To  the  creditor  himself,  his  authorised  agent,  to  the  tutor,
curator,  or  authorised  pupil.  3.  What  might  be  given  in  payment  ?  Not
only  the  thing  itself,  but,  with  the  consent  of  the  creditor,  something  else
in  lieu  of  it.  (Tit.  29.  pr.)

ii.  Novation. — Novation  is  the  dissolution  of  one  obligation  by  the
formation  of  another.  Any  contract,  civil  or  natural,  could  be  extin-
guished by  a  new  contract,  operating  either  civilly  or  naturally,  being
formed ;  the  new.  contract  being  one  either  Uteris^  or  (so  generally  as  to  be
spoken  of  as  the  one  recognised  mode)  verbis.  The  new  contract  must
be  different  from  the  old,  and  might  be  different  in  three  ways:  1.  The
terms  might  be  altered ;  2.  A  new  debtor  might  be  introduced,  and  even
if  the  new  debtor  is  unable,  as  e.g.  an  unauthorised  pupil,  to  contract,
still,  though  the  new  contract,  except  as  a  natural  obligation,  is  void,  yet
the  first  is  extinguished ;  but  it  wouM  be  otherwise,  if  the  new  contract
had  been  made  with  an  unauthorised  slave,  for  then  there  would  be  no
new  contract  at  all.  The  new  debtor  might  be  substituted  even  without
the  consent  of  the  old  debtor ;  this  new  debtor  was  termed  expromissor^  in
the  strict  sense  of  that  word.  If  the  old  debtor  substituted  another
person  as  the  new  debtor  in  his  own  place,  this  was  termed  delegatio.  A
new  creditor  might  also  be  introduced,  3.  If  the  parties  remained  the  same,
then  if  the  preceding  contract  was  not  a  stipulation,  the  forming  the  same
contract  by  stipulation  operated  as  a  novation  of  the  first  contract ;  but  if
the  preceding  contract  is  a  stipulation,  something  new  must  be  intro-
duced ;  conditions  of  time  or  fidejussores,  for  exarapffe,  must  be  added
or  taken  away.  If  the  second  contract  is  m^ade  conditionally,  the  first  is
not  extinguished  until  the  second  becomes  operative  by  the  condition
having  been  fulfilled.  (3,  note.)

Justinian  enacted  that  no  contract  should  be  extinguished  by  a  new
one  being  forhied,  unless  the  parties  clearly  expressed  their  intention  that
this  should  be  the  effect  of  the  new  contract.  (3.)

Both  the  litis  contestatio  and  a  judgment  produced  a  novatio,  but  the
effect  was  not  exactly  the  same  as  in  novatio  proper,  as  the  beneficial
accessories  of  the  old  contract,  such  as  pledges  and  interest,  were  con-
tinued. (3,  note.)

iii.  Form  of  Dissolution  corresponding  to  the  Forms  of  the  Ohligation.
If  payment  was  not  made,  nor  novation  made  by  a  new  stipulation,  the
proper  mode  of  dissolving  a  contract  was  by  a  form  {imaginaria  solufio
in  the  first  three  of  the  following  cases)  corresponding  to  the  form  in
which  the  obligation  had  been  contracted.  A  nexum  was  dissolved  by  the
debtor  striking  the  scale  with  a  piece  of  money  and  giving  it  to  the
creditor  as  representing  the  debt ;  and  this  form  was  used  to  remit  pay-
ment of  a  legacy  per  damnationem,  or  of  money  due  on  a  judgment,  or  of
anything  certain,  pondere,  numero  mensurave.  (Tit.  29.  pr.)  A  contract
verbis  was  dissolved  by  acceptilatio,  i.e.  by  the  creditor  saying  Habeo
to  the  debtor's  question  Habesne  acceptu7n.  (1.)  A  contract  Uteris  was  dis-

o   o  2

564  SUMMARY.

solved  by  the  debtor  making  the  expensilatio  of  an  imaginary  payment  in
his  books.  A  contract  re  was  dissolved  by  the  thing  being  returned,  and
one  made  consensu  was  dissolved  by  consent,  if  each  party  could  be  put  in
his  former  position.  (4.)

If  a  contract  had  been  made  in  some  other  way  than  verbis,  and  the
parties  subsequently  went  through  an  acceptilatio,  this  operated  as  giving
an  exception  preventing  the  creditor  from  suing.  But  in  order  that  the
preceding  obhgation  might  be  extinguished,  and  not  merely  an  exception
allowed,  there  was  invented  what  was  terriied  the  Aquilian  stipulation.
The  terms  of  the  former  contract  were  thrown  into  the  form  of  a  stipu-
lation, which  extinguished  the  old  contract  by  novation,  and  then  this
new  stipulation  was  dissolved  by  acceptilatio.  (2.)  Acceptilatio  may  be
apphed  to  a  part  of  a  debt  as  well  as  to  the  whole.  (1.)

There  were  also  the  folloAving  modes  in  which  an  obligation  might  be
dissolved  besides  the  three  above  mentioned :  1.  The  obligation  becoming
impossible  to  execute,  as  if  the  thing  perished.  2.  Confusio,  i.e.  t\iQpersonce
of  the  creditor  and  the  debtor  becoming  merged,  as  if  the  debtor  became
heir  to  the  creditor.  3.  Compensation  or  set-off,  in  the  sense  that  it  was
taken  notice  of  in  honcejidei  actions  without  an  exception.

565

BOOK  IV.

DELICTS.

We   now  proceed  to  notice  obligations  arising    ex  delicto^  or  quasi  ex
delicto.

Delicts. — Obligations  arising  from  delicts,  i.  e.  violations  of  the  rights
of  propertjT-,  or  of  such  ingredients  of  status  as  liberty,  security,  or  repu-
tation, arise  from  the  thing  done  {ex  re),,  without  necessary  reference  to  an
evil  intent,  and  the  kinds  of  delicts  recognised  by  the  law  are  four  :  —
Furtum^  rapina,  damni  injuria ,  injuria^.  (Bk.  iv.  Tit.  1.  pr.)

FuRTUM. — Theft  is  the  fraudulent  dealing  with  a  moveable  thing,  with
its  use  or  its  possession.  (1.)     By  fraudulent  is  meant  ^with  the  intention
of  committing  a  theft,'  and  among  impuheres  it  was  only  a  person  puhertati
proximus  who  was  held  old  enough  to  have  such  an  intention.  (18.)     If
a  borrower  converts  the  thing  borrowed  to  a  purpose  other  than  that  for
■which  it  was  lent,  he  does  not  commit  a  theft,  if  he  honestly  thinks  the
owner  would  permit  it  (7),  or  if  the  oAvner  would,   as  a  matter  of  fact,
nave  permitted  it.  (8.)     But  a  person  tempting  a  slave  to  bring  him  the
property  of  his  master,  and  then  receiving  the  things  by  direction  of  the
master  to  whom  the  slave  has  revealed  the  facts,  is  guilty  both  of  theft
and  of  corrupting  a  slave.  (8.)     There  is  theft  of  the  use  of  a  thing,  as
when  a  creditor  or  a  depositary  uses  for  his  own  purposes  the  thing  com-
mitted to  him  as  a  pledge  or  in  deposit,  or  a  borrower  uses  a  thing  for  a
purpose  other  than  that  for  which  it  is  lent,  e.  g.  borrows  a  horse  for  a
ride,  and  takes  it  into  battle.  (6.)     There  is  theft  of  the  possession,  as  if
a  debtor  takes  from  the  creditor  the  thing  he  has  pledged  to  him.     Free
persons,  as,  e.  g.  children  inpotestate,  are  among  the  things  that  may  come
within  the  law  of  theft.    (10.)     A  person  who  assists  in  a  theft,  as  by
placing  a  ladder  by  which  the  thief  mounts,  is  liable  to  an  action,  of  theft,
but  not  so  if  he  only  counsels  the  theft.  (11.)    If  persons  in  the  power  of
another  steal  from  that  person,  they  cannot  be  sued  for  theft  by  that
person,  but  the  thing  is  furtiva,  and  cannot  be  acquired  by  usucapion,  and
a  person  assisting  them  is  liable  to  an  action  of  theft.   (12.)

In  case  of  theft  the  owner  of  the  thing  could  sue  for  the  thing,  if  in
the  possession  of  the  thief,  by  the  ordinary  means,  vindication  or  an  action
ad  exhibendum,  and,  if  the  thing  was  no  longer  in  the  possession  of  the
thief,  he  could  recover  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen  and  interest  by  a  con-
dictio  furtiva,  or  he  might,  if  he  pleased,  bring  this  action  although  the
thing  was  in  the  thief's  possession.  But,  besides  these  actions,  he  had  an
actio  furti,  an  action  to  recover  a  penalty  for  the  wrong  done  him;  but
this,  though  it  could  be  brought  by  the  heirs  of  the  owner,  could  not  be

566  SUMMARY.

brought  against  those  of  the  thief.   (19,  note.)     It  could,  as  we  have  just
seen,  be  brought  against  the  accomplices  o£  the  thief.    (11.)

Two  questions  arise  as  to  this  action.  1.  What  was  the  amount  of
the  penalty  ?     2.  Who  could  bring  the  action  ?

1.  The  amount  of  the  penalty  varied  according  as  the  theft  was  manifest
or  not  manifest.  A  manifest  theft  is  one  in  which  the  thief  is  detected  in
the  act,  or  in  the  place  of  the  theft,  or  with  the  thing  on  him  before  he
reaches  his  destination.  The  penalty  for  a  manifest  theft,  which  had  been
under  tlife  Twelve  Tables  for  a  slave  death,  and  for  a  freeman  being  given
over  as  a  slave  to  the  person  injured,  was  fixed  by  the  praetors  at  four
times  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen.  The  penalty  for  non-manifisst  theft
was  twice  the  value.  Any  accidental  circumstance  that,  at  the  time  of  the
theft,  gave  a  special  value  to  the  thing,  was  reckoned  in  the  value,  the
quadruple  or  double  of  which  was  to  be  given.  (5.)  In  the  older  law
there  had  been  other  variations  of  theft,  or  concealing  stolen  property,  to
which  actions  had  been  attached,  wirh  varying  penalties,  under  the  heads
of  furtum  conceptum,  oblat^im,  prohibitum,  and  non  exliibitum.  (4.)

2.  The  person  or  persons  Avho  were  interested  in  the  thing  not  being
lost  could  bring  the  actio  furti.  In  the  case  of  a  thing  subjected  to  a
usufruct,  both  the  domimis  and  the  usufructuary  had  such  an  interest,  and
both  could  bring  the  action.  (13,  note.)  The  creditor,  from  whom  a  thing
given  in  pledge  is  stolen,  even  if  the  debtor  is  the  thief,  may  bring  it,  be-
cause to  have  the  thing  pledged  in  possession  is  a  gain,  although  the  debtor
may  be  able  to  pay.  (14.)  The  bona  Jide  purchaser,  too,  has  the  action
although  he  is  not  the  dominus.  (15.)  The  conductor  operis,  the  tailor,  or*
fuller,  who  has  clothes  to  mend  or  <ilean,  can  bring  the  action,  if  he  is  sol-
vent, and  the  owner  cannot ;  for,  as  he  has  his  remedy  against  the  tailor,
the  owner  has  not  an  interest :  but  if  the  tailor  was  insolvent  the  owner
could  bring  the  action.  (15.)  The  same  rule  applied  before  Justinian  to
the  borrower  under  a  commodatum,  but,  under  Justinian,  the  lender  had
his  choice.  If  he  chose  to  bring  the  action  against  the  thief,  the  borrower
was  ireed  from  responsibility.  If,  knowing  of  the  theft,  he  chose  to  sue
the  borrower,  then  the  borrower  had  the  action  against  the  thief  so  far  as
lie  paid,  but  the  lender  had  not,  whether  the  borrower  was  solvent  or  not.
If  the  lender,  ignorant  of  the  theft,  brought  an  action  against  the  borrower,
he  might,  on  knowing  the  facts,  desist  from  that  action,  and  sue  the  thief,
and  then  the  borrower  was  free,  whatever  the  result  of  the  action  against
the  thief  might  be.  (16.)  A  depositary,  not  being  answerable  for  culpa
levis,  had  no  interest  sufficient  to  support  the  action,  and  the  owner  only
could  bring  it.  (17.)  A  mere  interest  in  a  thing  not  delivered  being  safe,
such  as  that  of  a  person  to  whom  a  thing  was  due  under  a  stipulation,  or
that  of  a  creditor  in  anything  belonging  to  his  debtor,  was  not  sufficient
to  support  the  action.  (13,  note.)  A  separate  action  against  each  offender
could  be  brought  for  the  full  penalty.  (17.)

Bona  vi  rapta. — The  praetor  instituted  an  action  to  meet  the  case  of
goods  being  taken  by  violence,  the  plaintiff  being  allowed  to  recover,  if  he
brought  his  action  within  a  year,  the  thing  or  its  value,  and  also  three
times  its  value  as  a  penalty  ;  or,  if  he  brought  his  action  after  a  year,  the

BOOK  IV.  567

thing,  or  its  value,  only.  It  was  necessary  that  the  act  should  be  com-
mitted dolo  malo,  and  not  througli  an  honest  mistake,  but  the  value  of  the
thing  was  immaterial,  and  one  person  acting  alone  could  commit  the  act ;
nor  did  it  make  any  difference  whether  the  robber  was  or  was  not  taken
while  committing  the  robbery,  but  the  action  could  not  be  brought
against  the  heirs  of  the  wrongdoer.  (Tit.  2.  pr.  1.)  It  was  not
necessary  that  the  thing  taken  should  have  been  among  the  goods  of  the
plaintiff.  If  it  was  tal^en  from  among  his  goods,  that  was  enough  ;  and  so
even  the  depositary  might  bring  this  action,  as  could  all  those  who  could
bring  an  actio  furti.  (3.)  The  actio  vi  honorum  raptorum  only  applied  in
case  moveables  were  taken,  but  a  constitution  of  Valentinian,  Theodosius,
and  Arcadius  provided  that  if  n)oveables  were  taken,  or  immoveables  seized
on  by  force,  the  wrongdoer,  if  he  was  the  owner,  lost  the  property  in  the
thing ;  if  he  Avas  not  the  owner,  he  had  to  give  up  the  thing  and  to  pay
its  value  by  'way  of  penalty.  (.1.)

Lex  Aquilia. — The  lex  Aquilia  consisted  of  three  heads,  the  second
of  which  had  reference  to  acceptilatio,  and  it  is  only  the  first  and  third
which  bear  on  the  subject  of  delicts.  (Tit.  4.  pr.)

1.  The  first  head  gave  an  action  damni  injuria^  to  the  owner  of  a  slave
or  any  quadruped  reckoned  among  cattle,  i.  e.  horses,  asses,  swine,  &c.,
but  not  dogs  or  wild  animals  (1),  killed  without  right,  but  without  refe-
rence to  the  intent  of  the  wrongdoer.  Was  the  person  killing  the  slave
in  fault  ?  was  the  question  asked.  A  soldier  throwing  a  javelin  in  the
camp,  and  accidentally  killing  a  slave,  would  not  be  liable,  but  if  he  was
not  in  the  camp  he  would  be.  (4.)  A  person  cutting  down  a  tree  near  a
public  path  Avould  be  liable  if  he  did  not  give  warning,  but  not  if  he  gave
warning,  supposing  the  tree  fell  on  and  killed  a  slave.  If  the  tree  was  in
the  middle  of  a  field,  he  would  not  be  in  fault,  and  therefore  not  liable,
even  though  he  gave  no  warning.  (5.)  Neglect  or  unskilful  treatment
on  the  part  of  a  physician,  leading  to  the  death  of  a  slave,  would  make
the  phj^sician  liable  (6,  7),  and  a  muleteer,  killing  a  slave  by  his  mules
running  away,  would  be  liable  if  a  stronger  man  could  have  held  them
in.  (8.)

The  penalty  was  the  greatest  value  of  the  plave  or  animal  killed  at
any  time  within  a  year,  not  the  actual  value  at  the  time  of  death,  and,  as
the  action  was  thus  penal,  it  did  not  lie  against  the  heirs  of  the  wrong-
doer. Interpretation  of  the  law  decided  that  in  the  greatest  value  was
to  be  included  all  consequential  loss,  as  if  the  slave,  had  he  lived,  could
have  entered  on  an  inheritance  for  the  owner ;  or  if  a  set  or  pair  of  slaves
or  animals  Avas  spoilt  by  one  perishing  (10),  and  if  the  defendant  denied
his  liability,  the  penalty  was  doubled.  The  OAvner,  besides  the  action  under
the  lex  Aquilia,  might  also  briag  a  criminal  charge  against  the  person
who  killed  a  slave.  (11.)

2.  The  second  head  provided  for  every  kind  of  damage  (damjium)
done  wrongfully  to  a  slave,  or  any  four-footed  beast,  including  dogs  and
wild  animals,  or  to  goods,  as  by  mixing  anything  that  spoils  wine  or
oil.  (13.)  But  the  penalty  under  this  head  was  the  greatest  value  of  the
thing,  not  A\dtliin  a  year,  but  Avithin  thirty  days.

568  SUMMARY.

For  a  direct  action  to  lie  under  either  head  of  the  lex  Aquilia  the
injury  must  be  done  bodily  by  the  wrongdoer  to  the  body  of  the  slave
or  thing  injured.  If  it  was  not  done  bodily  by  the  wrongdoer,  if  he  only
did  something  by  which  the  body  of  the  slave  or  thing  was  injured,  as  if  he
shut  up  a  slave  or  animal,  and  let  death  come  from  starvation,  then  the
pragtor  gave  an  actio  utilis  under  the  lex  Aquilia.  If  the  injury  was
done  to  the  owner,  not  by  the  body  of  the  wrongdoer,  nor  to  the  body  of
the  slave  or  animal,  as,  e.  g.,  if  a  person  loosed  the  fetters  of  a  slave  to
allow  him  to  escape,  the  lex  Aquilia  did  not  apply  at  all,  and  the  owner
must  have  recourse  to  an  actio  in  factum,  by  which  he  would  obtain  com-
pensation according  to  the  value  of  the  thing  to  him,  if  there  had  been
dolus  or  culpa,  or  the  ordinary  value  if  not.  (16,  note.)

The  utilis  actio,  under  the  lex  Aquilia,  was  also  given  to  persons  having
an  interest  less  than  ownership  in  the  slave  or  animal,  as  to  a  possessor  or
a  usufructuary.

The  whole  penalty  could  be  recovered  from  each  offender,  if  there  was
more  than  one.  If  the  person  injured  could  also  bring,  and  brought,  an
action,  under  a  contract,  for  the  injury,  he  could  afterwards  bring  an
action  under  the  lex  Aquilia  to  recover  the  excess  which  that  law  would
give  him  as  a  penalty  beyond  what  he  could  recover  on  his  contract.

Besides  damnum  factum  the  preetor  took  cognisance  of  damnum  infectum,
threatened  damage,  and  forced   the  owner   of  the   property   fronj  which
damage  was  apprehended  to  give  security  against  possible  loss.   (16,  note.)
Injuria. — This  term,  which  may  be  applied   to   any  wrongful  act,  or
to  any  judgment  given  against  law,  has  the  special  meaning  of  an  outrage
or  affront,  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  it  is  here  used.   (Tit.  4.  pr.)     It  is
the  insult  that  is  the  gist  of  the  offence.     Examples  of  an  injury  in  this
sense  are  striking  any  one,  gathering  a  crowd  round  him,  falsely  pretending
that  he  is  the  insultor's  debtor,  libelling  him,  soliciting  chastity,  &c.  (1.)
The  paterfamilias,  as  himself  insulted,  might  bring  an  action  if  any  of
those  in  his  power  was  insulted  ;   and  often  several  persons  might  have  the
right  of  action  at  the  same  time  ;  as,  if  a  married  woman  was  insulted,  while
she  and  her  husband  were  both  in  potestate,  she,  her  own  father,  her  hus-
band, and    her   husband's   father   all  had   a  right   of  action,  and,  as  the
penalty  was  in  proportion  to  the  gravity  of  the  insult,  and  this  partly  de-
pended on  the  rank  of  the  person  insulted,  the  son,  if  of  higher  rank  than
his  father,  might  obtain  more  by  bringing  the  action,  or  having  it  brought
in  his  name.   (3.)     It  was  only   if  the  insult  was  atrox,  very  grave,  as
e.  g.  a  severe  flogging,  that  an  injury  to  a  slave  was  considered  an  injury
to  the  master.  (3.)     If  the  slave,  in  such  a  case,  belonged  to  several  mas-
ters, the  insult  was  taken  to  be  done  in  proportion,  not  to  their  interests
in  the  slave,  but  to  their  rank   (4),  and,  except  the  contrary  appeared,
the  insult  was  taken  to  be  to  the  owner,  not  to  the  usufructuary,  of  a  slave.
(5.)     If  it  is  a  freeman   in   the  employ  of   another,   who  is  injured,   he
alone  can  bring  the  action,  unless  the  injury  to  him  was  caused  simply  for
the  purpose  of  insulting  the  employer.  (6.)     The  old  penalty  was  a  limb
for  a  limb,  but  the  praetor  substituted  the  penalty  of  allowing  the  parties
injured  to  fix  the  damages,  subject  to  reduction  by  the  judge.   Eegard  was

EOOK  IV.  569

had  to  the  rank  of  the  person  insulted,  and  to  the  class  to  which,  in  case
it  was  to  a  slave  that  the  injury  was  done,  the  slave  belonged.  (7.)

Atrox  injuria. — Besides  injuria  simple,  we  have  to  consider  atrox  inju-
7'ia,  or  aggravated  insult ;  the  aggravation  arising  from  the  nature  of  the
insult,  the  place  where  it  was  done,  the  rank  or  office  of  the  insulted,  or
the  part  of  the  body  affected,  e.g.  the  eye.  (9.)  The  consequences  of  the
injuria  being  atrox  were  two.  1.  Persons,  who  could  not  otherwise,  might
bring  the  action,  as  (a)  the  owners  of  slaves;  (b)  freedmen  against  a
patron  ;  (c)  an  emancipated  son  against  his  father.  2.  The  damage  was
fixed  by  the  praetor,  and  the  judge  could  not  reduce  it.  (9.)

A  criminal  charge  might  also  be  brought  for  injuries,  and  persons  of
very  high  rank  might  bring  such  a  charge  by  a  procurator.  (10.)  Not  only
the  actual  wrongdoer,  but  any  contriver  of  the  injury,  was  liable  to  the
actio  injuria7mni.  (11.)  But  if  the  person  injured  showed  no  indignation
at  the  time,  or,  though  showing  indignation,  then  took  no  steps  to  obtain
reparation  within  a  year,  the  action,  unless  the  stage  of  the  litis  contesfatio
had  been  reached,  did  not  pass  to  the  heirs  of  the  person  injured.  (12.)

Obligations  quasi  ex  delicto. — The  remaining  head  of  obligations
is  that  of  obligations  arising  from  acts  which,  though  not  technically
coming  under  the  recognised  heads  of  delicts,  gave  rise  under  the  pr^tors
to  similar  actions,  i.e.  to  penal  actions  i7i  factum  not  passing  against  the
heirs.

The  instances  given  are,  (a)  when  a  judge  has  made  a  cause  his  own,
i.e.  has  given  a  wrong  sentence  through  favour  or  corruption  or  merely
ignorance  of  law,  (e.g.  has  condemned  a  defendant  in  a  sum  different
from  that  fixed  in  the  formula,)  he  is  liable  to  an  amount  to  be  fixed  by  the
judge.  (Tit.  5.  pr.)  (b)  When  anything  has  been  thrown  or  poured
down  from  an  apartment,  the  occupier  of  the  apartment  is  liable  to  an
action  that  any  one  might  bring  for  double  the  damage.  If  a  freeman
is  killed  thereby,  there  is  a  penalty  of  50  aurei.  If  a  freeman  is  only
hurt  thereby,  compensation  is  given ;  his  medical  expenses  and  loss  of
employment  being  considered.  A  person  keeping  anything  suspended
where  there  was  a  public  way,  likely  to  fall  or  do  damage,  was  liable
to  a  penalty  of  10  aurei.  It  made  no  difference  whether  the  occupier
was  occupying  by  one  title  or  another.  (1.)  But  if  the  occupier  was
a  Jiliusfamilias,  the  father  was  not  liable ;  nor  was  he  if  the  judex
who  made  a  cause  his  own  was  a  fiUusfamilias.  (2.)  (c)  The  master  of
a  ship,  of  an  inn,  or  a  stall,  was  held  to  an  action  for  double  the  damages
or  loss  caused  by  theft  occurring  through  his  servants  in  his  shop  or
premises.  (3.)

ACTIONS.

We  now  come  to  the  last  division  of  the  Institutes  which  treats  of
Actions,  and,  subordinately,  of  Exceptions  and  Interdicts.

The  mode  in  Avhich  the  subject  of  actions  (Tit.  6-12)  is  treated  is
this :  The  Sixth  Title  discusses  the  different  kinds  of  actions.  The
Seventh  and  Eighth  discuss  actions  to  enforce  obligations  arising  from
contracts  with,  or  delicts   committed  by,   persons  alieni  juris,  and  the

570  SUMMARY.

Nintli  treats  of  injuries  done  by  animals.  Then  in  the  Tenth  the  subject
of  bringing  or  defending  actions  through  other  persons,  and  in  the
Eleventh  that  of  the  securities  to  be  given  by  the  parties,  is  discussed ;
and  lastly,  in  the  Twelfth,  the  subject  of  the  duration  of  the  right  to  bring
an  action,  and  the  question  whether  actions  passed  or  did  not  pass  to  or
against  heirs,  are  treated  of.

A   summary  is  given,  in  the  note  to  the  introductory  paragraph  of
Tit.  6,  of  the  main  divisions  of  actions  under  the  formulary  system.

The  first  division  of  actions  noticed  in  the  Sixth  Title  is  that  of  actions
in  rem  and  actions  in  peisonam.  But  it  is  mixed  up  with  the  second
division  according  as  actions  came  from  the  old  civil  law  or  were  created
by  the  prtetor.  The  general  word  for  a  real  action  was  vindication  but
this  word  was  used  in  a  special  sense,  as  a  civil,  i.e.  non-prcetorian,  action
for  a  coi-poreal  thing.  The  general  word  for  a  personal  action  was  con-
rJictio,  but  the  word  was  used  in  a  special  sense,  as  a  personal  action,  stricti
juris,  excluding  bonce  jidei  actions,  actions  ex  delicto,  and  actions  in  factum
(see  note  to  introductory  paragraph).  (15.)  Generally  speaking,  if  a  man
claimed  a  thing  as  his  own,  he  could  not  bring  a  personal  action  for  the
thing,  but  odio  furum  a  plaintiff  could,  although  he  had  a  real  action,  bring
a  condictio  if  a  thing  was  stolen.  (14.)

The  civil  real  actions  noticed  are  five.  1.  Vindicatio,  in  the  special
sense  of  a  claim  for  a  corporeal  thing.  2.  Confessoria  ;  3.  Negativa,  actions
to  obtain  or  protect  the  enjoyment  of  servitudes.  4.  Causa  liheralis,  an
actio  pra'judicialis,  to  determine  whether  a  person  was  or  was  not  a  free-
man. 5.  Petitio  hereditatis.  There  are  also  five  kinds  of  prcetorian  real
actions  noticed :  actio  Puhliciana,  quasi Publiciana,  Pauliana,  Serviana,  and
quasi  Serviana,  and  two  praetorian  kinds  of  actiones  prwjudiciales  are  also
noticed.  The  subject  of  personal  actions  is  treated  of  in  this  part  of  the
Title  only  by  giving  three  examples  of  personal  actions  created  by  the
prsetor,  de  p>ecunia  constituta,  de  peculio,  de  jurejurando.  Further,  there
are  certain  actions  which  are  said  to  be  mixtce,  i.e.  partly  real  and  partly
personal.

i.  Civil  Real  Actions, — 1.  Vindicatio,  under  which  head  may  be
noticed  the  characteristic  of  real  actions,  that  the  intentio  ran.  Si  p)aret
Titii  rem.  esse,  if  it  appears  that  Titius  has  a  right  against  all  the  world,
without  the  name  of  any  alleged  violator  of  that  right  being  men-
tioned. (1.)  2.  Actio  confessoi'ia,  brought  to  enforce  a  servitude  con-
tested or  impeded,  and  brought  indifferently  whether  the  claimant  was  or
was  not  in  possession  of  the  servitude.  (2.)  3.  Actio  negativa,  brought  by  the
owner  of  a  thing  to  regain  an  alleged  right  of  exercising  a  servitude  over
that  thing,  although  the  owner  was  in  possession,  whereas,  as  a  rule,  real
actions  could  not  be  brought  by  a  possessor.  The  possessor  of  a  servitude
had  a  concurrent  remedy  in  a  prohibitory  interdict,  so  far  as  concerned  the
actio  confessoria,  and  in  a  possessory  interdict  so  far  as  concerned  the  actio
negativa.  (2.)  4.  Actio  jrra^judicialis,  a  preliminary  action  to  ascertain  a
fact,  was  an  actio  in  rem,  but  only  one  such  action,  that  to  determine
whether  a  man  was  or  was  not  free,  was  civilis.  This  action,  kno^^^l  as
caiisa  liheralis,  was  originally  carried  on  by  a  person  who,  as  assertor  liber-

BOOK   IV.  571

tatis,  claimed  a  slave  as  against  a  master,  and  liberty  might  be  thrice
asserted  in  this  way,  if  on  the  tvro  first  occasions  a  decision  was  given  for
the  master.  Justinian  allowed  the  slave  himself  to  claim  his  liberty,  and
made  the  first  decision  final.  (13.)  5.  Petitio  hereditatis,  or  a  claim  for
an  inheritance.  This  (contrary  to  what  was  the  case  with  other  actions
ill  rem)  was  a  hona^  Jidei  action ;  Justinian  decided  that  dolus  mahis
could  be  taken  into  consideration  in  it  without  any  exception  being  pleaded.
It  had  some  affinity  to  a  personal  action,  as  (a)  it  could  only  be  brought
against  two  classes  of  persons,  those  possessing  an  inheritance  pro  herede,
and  those  possessing  pi^o  possessore^  (i.e.  avowedly  without  title,)  and  (b)
the  plaintiff  could  recover  by  it  moneys  derived  by  the  possessor  from
the  inheritance,  and  could  enforce  by  it  debts  due  to  the  inheritance  from
debtors  claiming  to  be  heirs.  (28.)

ii.  Pr.etorian  Real  Actions. — Five  instances  are  given,  the  three
first  being  fictitious  actions,  in  jus  conceptce,  the  two  last  being  in  factum.

1.  Actio  Publiciana,  given  to  protect  a  person  Avho,  while  the  time  of  usu-
capion is  running,  loses  the  thing  out  of  his  possession,  and  to  recover  it
is  allowed  to  feign  that  his  title  by  usucapion  is  complete.  (4.)  2.  Actio
quasi  Publiciana,  or  Publiciana  rescissoria,  given  to  protect  a  person  against
whom  the  time  of  usucapion  has  run,  while  he  was  unable  through
absence  or  other  legitimate  cause  to  attend  to  his  affairs,  or  if  the  pos-
sessor in  whose  favour  the  term  was  running  was  absent,  and  so  the  usu-
capion could  not  while  running  have  been  stopped  by  legal  means.  The
preetor  allowed  the  owner  in  such  a  case  to  rescind  the  usucapion  and  to
claim  the  thing  by  feigning  that  the  usucapion  had  not  been  perfected.  (5.)
3.  Actio  Pauliana,  given  to  rescind  alienation  of  goods  in  defraud  of
creditors.  (6.)  4.  Actio  Serviana,  by  which  possession  was  obtained  of
the  effects  of  a  farmer,  looked  on  as  mortgaged  in  law,  to  recover  the
payment  of  rent.  5.  Actio  quasi  Serviana,  by  which  creditors  generally,
and  not  landlords  only,  obtained  things  mortgaged  or  pledged  to  them.  (7.)
Two  instances  are  also  given  of  prejudicial  actions  created  by  the  praetor
(13):  that  to  decide  whether  a  person  is  ingenuus  or  libertus,  and  that  to
decide  whether  a  person  is  the  son  of  his  reputed  father.  (13.)

Personal  Actions. — Three  instances  are  given  of  personal  actions
created  by  the  praetor :  1.  De  constituta  pecunia,  given  to  enforce  a  pact
for  the  payment  of  a  sum  already  due.  Such  a  pact  was  advantageous  to
the  creditor,  if  the  thing  due  was  owed  by  another  person,  or  if  the  ante-
cedent obligation  was  a  natural  one,  or  if  the  time  during  which  an  action
on  this  antecedent  obligation  might  be  brought  was  on  the  point  of  expiring ;
and  this  action  was  by  Justinian  made  perpetual  and  allowed  to  be  brought
whatever  was  the  nature  of  the  thing  promised,  those  qualities  having  pre-
viously belonged  only  to  the  actio  receptitia,  an  action  specially  given  to
enforce  an  undertaking  by  an  argentarius  to  pay  what  he  owed.  (8,  9.)

2.  De  jyecidio,  given  to  make  patresfamiliarum  liable  to  the  extent  of  the
peculiimi  of  their  sons  in  potestate  and  slaves,  for  the  engagements  of  those
sons  and  slaves.  (10.)  And,  3.  De  jurejurando,  given  to  ascertain  whether
a  party  to  a  suit  had,  when  challenged  to  do  so,  sworn  that  the  facts  on
which  he  rested  his  claim  or  defence  were  true.  (11.)

572  SUMMARY.  i

Mixed  Actions. — The  actions  familioB  erciscundfE,  communi  divi-
dundo,  and  finium  regundorum  are  said  to  be  mixed,  i.e.  both  real  and
personal,  because  although  they  were  otherwise  personal  actions  in  form,
yet  by  the  addition  of  an  adjudicatio  things  were  adjudged  to  belong  to  the
different  parties.   (20.)

Before  proceeding  to  notice  the  division  of  actions  according  to  the
latitude  given  to  the  judge,  the  Institutes  notice  two  subsidiary  divisions.

i.  Penal  Actions  (many  of  which  actions,  as  de  albo  corrupto,  de
parente  aut  patrono  in  jus  vocato,  and  de  in  jus  vocato  vi  exempto,  were
created  by  the  praetor)  (12)  as  distinguished  from  actions  brought  to  get
the  thing  only  (re^  persecutorice)  and  those  in  which  both  these  objects
were  united  (inixtce), — As  a  rule,  all  actions  in  rem  or  ex  contractu  were
only  rei  2^ersecutoricB,  except  that  when  an  actio  depositi  was  brought  against
a  person  or  his  heir,  if  personally  guilty  of  dolus  malus,  to  whom  things
had  been  entrusted  under  the  pressure  of  sudden  calamity,  such  as  fire  or
shipwreck,  when  the  value  of  the  things,  and  also  as  much  again,  was
recoverable,  and  so  the  action  was  mixta.  (17.)  Actions  arising  from  a
delict  always  carried  with  them  a  penalty,  and  were  simply  penal  in  the
case  of  theft,  for  then  the  value  of  the  thing  was  recoverable  by  a  sepa-
rate action,  or  were  mixta^,  as  in  actions  vi  honorum  raptorum^  and  under  the
lex  Aquilia,  and  for  legacies  given  but  not  duly  paid  to  holy  places,  the
value  of  the  thing,  and  something  more  by  way  of  penalty,  being  re-
coverable by  such  actions.  (18,  19.)

ii.  Actions  differing  according  to  the  amount  of  the  Condemna-
tion.— This  goes  very  nearly  over  the  same  ground  as  the  previous
division,  i.  Actions  i^ei  persecutorice,  to  get  the  thing  due,  were  in
simplum.  (22.)  ii.  Actions  (a)  for  non-manifest  theft,  (b)  for  damnum
injurice  under  the  Aquilian  law,  (c)  for  deposit  when  the  deposit  was
denied,  if  it  had  been  made  underpressure  of  calamity,  (d)  for  corrupt-
ing a  slave  and  (e)  for  not  paying  a  legacy  given  to  a  holy  place,  were
ill  duplum.  (23.)  iii.  An  action  given  against  a  person  who  asked
more  than  due,  so  that  the  officials  of  the  court  got  a  larger  fee,  was
in  triplum  of  the  loss  sustained  by  the  payment  of  this  fee,  the  amount
properly  expended  being,  however,  included  in  the  condeimiatio  in  triphnn.
(24.)  iv.  Actions  (a)  for  manifest  thefts  ;  (b)  actions  cpiod  inetus
causa  ;  (c)  actions  for  money  paid  to  hire  a  man  to  bring  a  vexatious
suit,  or  to  induce  a  man  to  desist  from  a  vexatious  suit  which  he  threatens
to  bring ;  and  (d)  actions  brought  against  officers  of  the  court  guilty  of
inijust  exaction,  were  in  quadrvplum.  (25.)  Two  observations,  however,
have  to  be  made.  Of  those  actions  which  are  said  above  to  be  given  in
duplum^  that  under  the  lex  Aquilia  and  that  for  deposit  under  pressure
were  only  in  duplum  if  the  defendant  denied  his  liability  ;  and  in  the  case
of  legacies  given  to  holy  places,  if  the  defendant  denies  or  will  not  pay
until  the  magistrate  makes  an  order  that  the  action  shall  be  brought.  (26.)
Secondly,  the  actio  quod  metns  causa,  given  to  a  person  who  had  been
threatened  or  coerced  into  doing  anything,  was  only  m  quadruplum  if  the
defendant  would  not  obey  the  preliminary  order  of  the  judge  (arhitriuni)
and  restore  the  thing.  (27.)

BOOK  IV.  573

We  now  come  to  the  division  of  actions  according  to  the  latitude  of
the  judge.  According  to  this  division,  actions  are  bonce  Jidei,  stHcti  juris,
or  arhitraricc.

1,  Actions  bon^  fidei. — In  certain  praetorian  actions,  principally
those  arising  out  of  bilateral  contracts,  the  words  ex  bona  fide  or  some
equivalent  words  were  added  to  qidcquid  oportet  in  the  intentio,  which  was.
always  uncertain,  and  then  the  judge  had  to  take  all  equitable  considera-
tions into  view  in  determining  the  liability  of  the  defendant.  The  judge
in  bonce  fidei  actions  took  notice  of  dolus  malus  without  an  exceptio  doli
mail ;  noticed  customs  and  usages ;  took  into  account  counter  claims
arising  out  of  the  same  set  of  •  circumstances  (30);  provided  for  future
liabilities  arising;  and  gave  interest  for  the  time  the  thing  had  been  due.
(28,  note.)  A  list  of  actions  bonco  fidei  is  given  (28):  1,  Empti  and  venditi ;
2,  locati  and  conducti,  S,negotio7mmgestorum- 4,mandati;  b,depositi\  Q^pro
socio  ;  7,  tutelce  ;  8,  commodati ;  9,  pigneratitla  ;  10,  familice  erciscundce ;  11,
communi  dividundo-^  12,  de  c^stimato:  I'd,  ex  permutatione  ;  14:,  hereditatis
petitio  ;   1^,  ex  stipidatu  in  exactione  dotis.   (29.)

This  last-mentioned  action  replaced  a  bonoe  fidei  action  called  rei
uxoricB,  under  which  the  husband  had  certain  advantages  when  sued  by
his  wife  for  the  restitution  of  her  dos.  If  the  wife  had  stipulated  for  the
restoration  of  the  dowry  to  her,  she  could  bring  an  action  on  the  stipulation
which,  being  stricti  juris,  did  not  afford  the  husband  those  advantages,  the
principal  of  which  were,  (a)  that  he  had  three  years  to  make  restitution  of
things  qucje  niimero,  pondere  mensurave  constant',  (b)  he  had  the  beneficium
compctentice;  (c)  he  could  deduct  the  useful  as  well  as  the  necessary  expenses
he  had  been  put  to  in  the  management  of  the  other  property  (37)  ;  (d)  the
wife  could  not  transmit  the  action  to  her  heir ;  (e)  she  could  not  ask  for
her  dos,  and  also  for  any  benefit  by  her  husband's  testament.  Justinian
amalgamated  the  two  actions,  calling  the  new  action  ex  stipulatu,  although
in  fact  no  stipulation  might  have  been  made.  But  he  made  it  bonce  Jidei,
and  the  husband  under  it  had  a  year  for  the  restoration  of  all  moveables,
and  he  had  the  beneficium  conipetentice,  and  could  deduct  necessary  though
not  useful  expenses  ;  but  he  could  recover  the  impensce  utiles  by  a  separate
action.  Justinian,  on  the  other  hand,  gave  the  wife  a  tacit  jus  Injpotliecoe
on  all  the  husband's  effects  for  her  dos,  but  this  was  only  available  when
she  herself  sued  for  her  dowry.   (29.)

2.  AcTiONES  STRICTI  JURIS,  i.e.  real  actions  and  condictiones. — In  these
actions,  dolus  inalus  or  counter  claim  could  only  be  taken  notice  of,  if
pleaded  by  an  exception,  and  interest,  except  by  express  agreement,  only
ran  from  the  litis  contestatio.  (28,  note.)

3.  AcTiONES  ARBiTRARiiE. — In  thesc  actions  the  judge  made  a  pre-
liminary order  on  the  defendant  to  do  something,  as  to  restore  or  exhibit
a  thing,  or  to  pay  a  sum.  If  this  order  was  not  obeyed,  then  the  defendant
was  to  pay  a  sum  fixed  in  the  condemnatio  so  as  to  meet  all  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  case.  If  the  defendant  falsely  denied  having  the  thing
in  his  possession,  or  did  not  either  obey  the  order  or  pay  the  sum  fixed
in  the  condemnatio,  the  manus  militaris  was  employed  by  the  direction  of
the  judge  to  compel  obedience.     All  real  actions  were  arbitraricej  and  the

574  SUMMARY.

following  personal  actions,  (a)  quod  metus  causa  ;   (h)  de  dolo  malo  ;   (c)
ad  exhibendum '^   (d)  de  eo  quod  certo  loco  promissam  est.  (31.)

The  action  de  dolo  tnalo,  given  when  there  was  no  other  means  of  avoid-
ing the  consequences  of  dolus  malus,  was  in  simplum,  carried  infamy
with  the  condemnation  and  had  to  be  brought  within  a  year.  The  actio  de
eo  quod  certo  loco  was  an  action  brought  by  a  creditor  against  a  debtor
who,  having  promised  and  failed  to  pay  in  a  particular  place,  was  not  to
be  found,  and  so  could  not  be  sued  there,  and  the  judge  allowed  the  cre-
ditor in  this  case  to  sue  elsewhere  without  risk  of  plus-petitio.  But
the  debtor  had  this  advantage  :  he  was  given  the  option  of  paying  or
giving  security  for  paying  what  was  due  in  the  right  place  under  an  ctrhi-
triuiii,  and  then  if  he  did  not  obey  the  arhitrium^  he  was  condemned  in
an  amount  in  which  the  benefit  it  would  have  been  to  him  to  pay  in  the
place  named  was  taken  into  consideration.   (31.)

It  was  the  business  of  the  judge  to  make  the  condemnatio  in  the  for-
mulary system  for  a  sum  certain,  and  under  the  judicia  extraordinaria  for
a  thing  certain  or  a  sum  certain  (32),  and  this  leads  us  to  consider  three
special  matters  which  affected  the  result  of  the  action.  1.  Plus-petitio.
2.  Beneficium  competentice.     3.   Compensatio.

1.  Plus-petitio. — Under  the  formulary  system,  if  the  plaintiff  asked
in  the  intentio  of  an  actio  stricti  juris  for  a  thing  certain,  and  asked  for
more  than  he  was  entitled  to,  he  could  not  succeed  in  the  action  at  all,
and  the  claimant  being  barred  by  the  novation  operated  by  the  litis  con-
testation he  had  no  fuither  remedy,  unless  the  preetor  chose  to  give  him  a
restitutio  in  integrum,  which  was  granted  as  a  matter  of  course  to  plaintiffs
under  25  years,  but  to  persons  over  that  age  only  if  the  mistake  had  been
such  as  a  most  careful  man  might  have  made  :  as  if  a  legatee  had  asked  for
his  whole  legacy,  and  then  codicils  had  been  discovered  by  which  he  lost  part
or  had  to  share  with  others.  A  plaintiff  might  ask  too  much  in  four  ways  :
1,  re,  in  regard  to  the  thing  asked  for,  as  if  when  ten  auj^ei  were  due  he  asked
for  twenty,  or  if  when  part  was  due  he  asked  for  the  whole  ;  2,  tempore,
in  regard  to  time,  as  if  he  asked  before  the  day  of  payment  or  before  the
fulfilment  of  a  condition  ;  3,  loco,  in  regard  to  place,  as  if  a  creditor  sues  at
Rome  for  what  is  due  at  Ephesus,  thus  depriving  the  debtor  of  any  advan-
tages he  might  have  from  goods  being  cheaper  or  interest  lower  at  Ephesus.
But  if  the  debtor  absented  himself  from  the  place  named,  the  creditor  had
the  actio  arhitraria  de  eo  quod  cei^to  loco  mentioned  above ;  4,  genere,  in  re-
gard to  the  circumstances  of  the  contract,  as  if  when  the  debtor  promised
to  give  either  one  thing  or  another,  the  creditor  sued  depriving  him  of  the
choice.  It  made  no  difference,  even  if  the  thing  he  asked  for  was  of
less  value  than  the  other  thing.  (33.)

If  too  much  was  stated  in  the  demonstratio,  the  plaintiff  was  not  pre-
judiced, and  if  too  much  was  asked  for  in  the  condemnatio,  the  defendant
could  get  the  formula  rectified.

Under  the  later  emperors,  the  effects  of  a  plus-petitio,  i.e.  any  excess
in  the  lihellus  conventionis,  were  changed,  the  plaintiff  being  no  longer
shut  out  from  his  legal  remedy,  but  being  punished  for  his  mistake.
If  the  plus-petitio  was  tempore,  the  plaintiff  was,  under  a  constitution  of

BOOK  IV.  575

Zeno,  obliged  to  wait  double  the  time  he  ought  to  have  waited  and  to
reimburse  the  defendant  all  expenses  for  his  loss  through  the  action  having
been  improperly  brought.  If  the  plus- i)etitio  was  in  any  other  way,
Justinian  made  the  plaintiff  pay  three  times  the  amount  of  loss  sustained  by
the  defendant  through  the  action  having  been  improperly  brought.   (33.)

If  the  plaintiiF  claimed  in  the  intentio  less  than  was  due,  he  could
under  the  formulary  system  bring  another  action  for  the  surplus  Avhen
another  praetor  came  into  office.  Zeno  allowed  the  judex  to  add  the  sur-
plus in  condemning  the  defendant.  (34.)  If  the  plaintiff  asked  for  one
thing  when  another  was  due,  he  could,  under  the  formulary  system,  bring
another  actio  for  the  right  thing,  and,  under  Justinian,  he  could  have  the
mistake  corrected.  (35.)

In  certain  actions,  which  may  be  made  a  sixth  division  of  actions,
the  defendant  was  condemned  in  less  than  was  due  to  him.  1 .  In  the  actio
de  peculio  a  paterfamilias  could  only  be  condemned  in  the  amount  of
the  peculium  of  his  son  or  slave.  (36.)  2.  In  certain  actions  the  defen-
dant had  the  beneficium  coMPETENTiyE,  i.e.  he  was  only  condemned  in
so  far  as  he  could  pay  without  being  reduced  to  destitution.  The
instances  given  are,  (a)  the  husband  in  a  suit  brought  by  his  wife  to
get  back  her  dos  (37) ;  {b)  a  parent  sued  by  a  child ;  (c)  a  patron  sued
by  a  lihertus ;  {d)  one  partner  sued  by  another ;  (e)  a  donor  sued
for  his  gift  (38)  ;  (/)  a  debtor  who  has  made  a  cessio  honorum  sued  by
his  creditors  after  lie  has  subsequently  acquired  property.  (40.)  We
may  add  a  brother  sued  by  a  brother,  and  all  cases,  except  delicts,  when
one  of  two  married  persons  is  sued  by  the  other.  In  all  these  cases,  if
the  debtor  could  subsequently  pay  in  full,  without  being  reduced  to
destitution,  he  had  to  do  so ;  and  in  the  estimation  of  what  he  could  pay,
his  assets  only,  without  deduction  for  debts,  were  looked  to,  except  in
the  one  case  of  the  donor,  who  might  deduct  his  debts.

CoMPENSATio. — In  bonce  Jidei  actions,  the  judge,  without  any  exception
being  pleaded,  set  off  any  debt  due  from  the  defendant  to  the  plaintiff
from  the  same  set  of  circumstances  (ex  eadem  re).  In  actions  stricti  juris ^
the  plaintiff  could  be  repelled  by  an  exceptio  doli  mali,  if  he  asked  for
what  was  due  without  having  taken  into  consideration  what  he  owed.  It
is  uncertain  whether  the  exception  stopped  the  action  altogether,  or
whether  the  plaintiff  only  recovered  any  surplus  due  to  him.  An
argentarius  who  sued  a  customer  without  giving  credit  for  what  was  due
of  the  same  kind,  as  money  or  wine,  {in  eadem  re,)  was  guilty  of  n  jylus-
jietltio  under  the  formulary  system  and  failed  altogether  in  his  action.  A
bonorwn  emptor  had  also,  in  suing  a  debtor  of  the  insolvent,  to  deduct
what  was  due  from  the  insolvent  to  that  debtor ;  but  as  the  deductio  was
inserted  in  the  condemnation  not,  as  compensation  in  the  case  of  the
argentarius,  in  the  intentio,  the  risk  of  plus-petitio  was  not  run.  Deductio
varied  also  from  compensatio,  as  it  included  debts  of  things  of  different
kinds  and  debts  not  yet  due.  Except,  perhaps,  in  this  case  of  the
argentarius,  the  two  debts  did  not  extinguish  each  other,  until  Justinian
made  them  so  operate,  ipso  jure,  and  under  Justinian  it  no  longer  made
any  difference  whether  the  two  debts  were  due  from  the  same  set  of  cir-

576  SUMMARY.

cumstances,  or  wlietlier  things  of  the  same  kind  were  payable,  but  the
defendant's  claim  was  to  be  a  causa  liqmda,  i.e.  clearly  ascertainable.
(39.)  Justinian  allowed  no  set-ofFto  an  action  of  deposit.  (30.)

The  subject  next  treated  is  that  of  the  responsibility  of  domini  and
patresfamiliamm  for  the  contracts  or  delicts  of  those  in  their  power.
What  is  said  is,  however,  chiefly  devoted  to  the  contracts  and  delicts  of
slaves  ;  what  is  to  be  said  as  to  slaves  being,  with  some  slight  exceptions,
applicable  to  sons  in  j)otestate.  (Tit.  7.  pr.)

1.  Contracts  of  persons  alieni  juris. — If  the  slave  was  merely  the
instrument  of  the  master,  merely  received,  e.g.,  pieces  of  money  made  in
payment,  this  was  not  a  contract  of  a  person  alieni  juris  at  all.  (1,  note.)
The  cases  in  Avhich  the  slave  did  contract  may  be  grouped  under  four  heads.

1.  llie  slave  contracts  under  the  directions  of  the  master. — Here  the
praetor  gives  an  action  quod  jussu  against  the  master  for  the  whole  of  the
debt.  (1.)

2.  The  slave  contracts  as  an  exercitor  or  institor. — The  master  sets  the
slave  up  as  the  master  of  a  vessel,  or  the  keeper  of  a  shop,  or  the  con-
ductor of  any  business.  The  master  thus  authorises  the  slave  to  do  all
things  necessary  for  his  master.  Here  the  prajtor  gives  an  actio  exerci-
toria  or  institoria  against  the  master  for  the  whole  of  the  debt.  (2.)

3.  The  slave  trades  with  his  peculium  to  the  knowledge  of  the  master.
If  debts  are  to  be  satisfied  and  the  master  is  a  creditor  of  the  slave,  the
peculium  and  its  proceeds  are  to  be  divided  proportionately  between
him  and  the  other  creditors.  The  master  makes  the  division,  and  if  he
does  not  make  it  fairly,  any  creditor  prejudiced  has  an  actio  tributoria
against  him.  (3.)

4.  The  slave  contracts  without  the  direction  or  authorisation  of  the
master. — Here  an  action  is  given  against  the  master,  not  for  the  whole
debt,  but,  1,  so  far  as  he  has  profited  by  what  the  slave  has  expended,
and,  2,  to  the  extent  of  the  slave's  peculium.  The  action  is  de  peculio  et
in  rem  verso^  and  the  condemnation  is  double  ;  the  judge  first  taking  into
account  the  profitable  outlay,  and  then  the  jMculium :  but  from  the
peculium  is  first  deducted  what  the  slave  owes  the  master  or  any  one  in
his  power  ;  unless,  indeed,  he  owes  it  to  a  vicarius,  who  is  part  of  the
2yeculium,  for  deduction  would  then  be  useless.  (4.)

The  actio  exercitoria  or  institoria  must  always  be  better  for  the  creditor
than  that  de  peculio  et  in  rem  verso  ;  for  in  the  former  action  the  master  is
bound  for  the  whole  debt.  But  the  actio  tributoria  may  be  sometimes
more  favourable  than  that  de  peculio^  sometimes  less  so  to  the  creditor,  and
he  must  judge  which  he  will  bring.  In  the  actio  tributoria  the  creditor
gains  by  there  being  no  deduction  made  from  the  peculium  of  that  which
is  due  to  the  master.  On  the  other  hand,  the  actio  de  peculio  affects  the
whole  peculium,  while  the  actio  tributoria  only  affects  that  part  of  it  en-
gaged in  trade.  (5.)

What  is  said  of  the  slave  may  be  nearly,  but  not  quite,  said  of  the  son
in  power.  There  are  three  points  of  difference  to  be  noticed.  1.  A
father  was  bound  to  the  extent  of  the  son's  peculium  by  the  son's  becom-
ing ?..  fidejussor.  2.  The  filiusfamilias  could  be  sued  civilly,  and  if  he  was

BOOK  IV.  577

condemned  to  pay,  an  actio  judicati  could  be  brought  against  tlie  father  to
the  extent  of  the  son's  pecuUum.  There  was  no  corresponding  liability  in
either  of  these  cases  as  to  the  slave.  (6.)  3.  By  the  senatus-consultum
Macedonianum^  prohibiting  money  to  be  lent  to  children  or  grandchildren
of  either  sex  in  potestate,  an  action  was  refused  for  money  so  lent  against
the  child,  either  while  in  potestate  or  become  sui  juris ^  and  against  the
paterfamilias.  If  there  was  any  doubt  as  to  the  facts,  the  action  was
permitted,  and  the  senatus-consultum  allowed  on  the  ground  of  an  excep-
tion. (7.)

The  actions  above  mentioned,  quod  jussu,  exercitoria,  and  de  p)eculio^
were  not  properly  separate  actions.  They  were  rather  modifications  of
the  pr^torian  actions  under  which,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  contract,
the  master  was  sued.  In  process  of  time  the  praators  permitted  not  only
preetorian  actions,  but  condictions  to  be  brought  against  the  master  or
father,  where,  had  he  contracted  himself,  a  condiction  would  have  been  the
appropriate  remedy.  (8.)

ii.  Delicts  of  persons  alieni  juris. — A  master  could  be  sued  under
the  praetorian  or  civil  law,  according  to  the  origin  of  the  actio  (Tit.
8.  pr.),  for  the  delicts  (noxia)  of  the  slave,  but  he  had  the  choice  of  paying
the  penalty,  or  giving  up  the  wrongdoer  (yioxa),  (1),  to  the  persons  injured
(Tit.  8.  pr.  2),  before  or  after  the  litis  contestation  (the  action  being  arhi-
traria^  i.e.  togive  the  slaveup  or  pay)  (Tit.  8.  pr.) ;  and  the  slave,  if  given  up,
became  the  property  of  the  person  injured,  unless  he  could  procure  money
to  pay  the  penalty,  and  then  he  became  free,  even  if  his  new  master  would
have  preferred  to  keep  him.  (3.)  The  action  always  followed  the  person
of  the  delinquent  and  was  brought  against  his  master  for  the  time  being,
or,  if  he  was  manumitted,  against  the  slave  ;  and  so  if  a  freeman  became  a
slave  after  having  committed  a  delict,  the  action  was  against  his  master.
(5.)  The  master  had  no  action  against  his  slave  for  a  delict,  nor  the  slave
any  action  against  his  master  for  injury,  nor  did  any  right  of  action  arise
subsequently,  though  the  slave  was  transferred  to  another  master  or  became
free ;  and  if  a  slave  who  had  committed  a  delict  became  the  property  of
the  person  injured,  the  right  of  action  was  extinguished.  (6.)  In  old
times  children  in  potestate  might  be  abandoned  like  slaves  if  they  com-
mitted delicts.  In  later  times  this  was  considered  barbarous.  The  son
could  be  sued  for  the  delict,  and  then  an  action  judicati  brought  against
the  father  to  the  extent  of  the  son's  peculium.

Pauperies. — By  the  Twelve  Tables  when  an  animal  (cpiadrupes,  ex-
tended by  interpretation  to  all  animals)  of  vicious  habits  did  harm
(  pauperies)j  the  owner  might,  instead  of  paying  for  the  damage,  deliver  up
the  animal  (Tit.  9.  pr.).  If  an  animal  of  fierce  nature,  such  as  a  bear,
was  kept  where  there  was  a  public  way,  got  loose  and  did  injury,  then,
if  it  was  a  freeman  that  was  injured,  the  amount  of  the  condemnation
was  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  judge ;  if  a  slave  or  anything  else  was
injured,  the  condemnation  was  for  double  the  damage  done.  (1.)

A  delict  might  consist  really  of  two  offences,  and  then  a  separate  action
lay  for  each ;  or  it  might  come  under  two  heads  of  delict,  and  then,
although  an  action  lay  under  each  head,  the  plaintiff  could  only  recover

P  P

578  SUMMAKY.

in  the  second  anything  which  under  that  action  happened  to  be  recover-
able beyond  what  he  had  recovered  in  the  first.   (1,  note.)

The  discussion  of  the  heads  of  actions  is  now  interrupted  to  notice  two
points  of  procedure.

Representation  in  Suits. — Under  the  old  law  one  man  could  not  sue
in  the  name  of  another.  To  this  rule  there  were  exceptions  in  the  cases
of,  1,  an  actio  pupillaris ;  2,  an  assertio  lihertatis  ]  3,  actions  brought  by
tutors  for  their  pupils.  4.  The  lex  Hostilia  permitted  an  actio  furti
to  be  brought  in  the  names  of  (a)  persons  in  captivity  ;  {b)  persons
absent  on  the  service  of  the  State ;  (c)  those  in  the  tutela  of  such  per-
sons. (Tit.  10.  pr.).  Subsequently  this  rule  was  relaxed  and  a  person
was  allowed  to  appear  in  a  suit;  as  (1)  a  cognitor ;  (2)  a  procurator.
The  cognitor  had  to  be  appointed  formally  and  in  the  presence  of  the
adversary.  When  sentence  was  given,  the  actio  judicati  lay  against,
not  the  cognitor,  but  the  party  to  the  suit.  The  procurator,  Avhose
introduction  was  of  a  later  date,  was  appointed  by  simple  mandate
and  without  communication  with  the  adversary,  and  originally  acted
in  his  own  name,  giving  security  that  the  party  in  the  suit  for
whom  he  was  acting  Avould  ratify  what  he  did,  and  if  he  was  acting
for  the  defendant,  that  the  sentence  should  be  carried  out.  A  person
desirous  of  representing  another  might  be  admitted  to  act  as  negotiorum
gestor,  although  he  could  not  show  his  mandate,  if  he  gave  security.  The
actio  judicati  was  given  for  or  against  the  procurator.  At  a  later  period,
if  the  mandate  was  clearly  proved,  the  procurator  was  considered  to
represent  his  principal ;  and  this  was  extended  to  the  case  of  a  negotiorum
gestor,  who,  acting  at  first  without  authority,  afterwards  showed  that
his  principal  ratified  his  action.  The  actio  judicati  was  then  given  for
or  against  the  principal,  and  the  procurator  was  in  the  position  of  the
cognitor  (Tit.  10.  pr.  note),  only  that  the  mode  of  his  appointment  was
not  necessarily  formal,  or  made  in  the  presence  of  the  adversary.  (1.)  The
tutor  or  curator  represented  the  pupil  or  adolescent  to,  or  against,  whom
the  actio  judicati  was  given,  unless  the  tutor  or  curator  had  intervened
unnecessarily  when  it  was  given  to  or  against  him.  (2.)

Giving  security. — There  were  certain  securities  exacted  from  the
parties  to  suits  or  their  representatives.  Considerable  changes  in  this  re-
spect were  made  by  Justinian.  We  have  to  consider,  1,  whether  the
action  was  real  or  personal ;  2,  whether  the  party  appeared  personally  or
by  a  representative;   3,  the  law  before  and  after  Justinian.  (Tit.  11.  pr.)

ii.  (^A)  The  action  is  in  rem,

(a)  The  plaintiff  had  to  give  no  security.  The  procurator  of  the
plaintiff,  while  still  looked  on  as  a  simple  mandatary,  had  to  give  security,
rem  ratam  dominum  (the  party  was  termed  dominus  litis)  habiturum,  i.e.
that  the  plaintiff  would  not  bring  another  action  in  his  OAvn  name.
The  cognitor  and  the  procurator,  when  the  procurator  came  to  be  looked
on  as  a  mere  representative,  had  to  give  no  security.  The  tutor  or
curator  had  to  give  security,  rem  ratam  dominum  hahiturum,  but  this
security  was,  as  regards  these  persons,  often  dispensed  with,  when  they
were  plaintiffs.

BOOK  IV.  579

(b)  The  defendant  had  to  give  the  cautio judicatum  solvi,  that  he  would
either  restore  the  thing,  or  pay  its  value  (litis  cesfimatio.)  If  he  did  not
give  this  security,  the  plaintiff,  if  willing  to  give  it,  was  put  by  an  inter-
dict in  possession  of  the  thing.  The  judicatum  solvi  contained  three
clauses:  1,  de  re  judicata,  that  the  thing  should  be  given  up  or  its  value
paid ;  2,  de  re  defendenda,  that  the  defendant  would  appear  and  re-
ceive the  sentence  of  the  judge ;  3,  de  dolo  malo,  that  there  should  be  no
dolus  7nalus,  e.g.  the  thing  should  not  be  restored  in  a  deteriorated
condition.  The  defendant  as  well  as  his  surety  gave  the  cautio  judica-
tum solvi  in  order  that  the  plaintiff  might  have  the  easy  remedy  of  suing
on  a  stipulation.  Naturally,  as  the  defendant  had  to  give  this  cautio,  his
representative  had.

(B)  The  action  is  in  personam:

(a)  As  to  the  plaintiff  the  rules  are  the  same  as  when  the  action  is  in
rem.

(b)  The  defendant,  appearing  personally,  had  not,  unless  in  some  ex-
ceptional cases,  to  give  the  caution  judicatum  solvi.  If  he  appeared  by  a
cognitor,  the  defendant  had  to  give  the  judicatum  solvi  on  behalf  of  the  cog-
nitor.  If  he  appeared  by  a  procurator,  the  procurator,  while  still  a  man-
datary, had  himself  to  give  the  judicatum  solvi.

iii.  Under  Justinian. — There  was,  under  Justinian,  no  difference
whether  the  action  was  real  or  personal.  The  plaintiff  appearing  personally
had  to  give  no  security.  The  defendant  appearing  personally  had  not,  in
either  a  real  or  a  personal  action,  to  give  Xhe  judicatum  solvi  ;  but,  in  both,
he  had  to  engage  pro  re  d.efendenda,  that  is,  he  was  bound  by  the  second
clause  of  the  judicatum  solvi,  viz.,  that  he  would  appear  and  receive  the
sentence  of  the  j  udge,  but  not  by  the  first  or  third.  If,  however,  he  was
a  vir  illustris,  it  was  enough  that  he  engaged  to  do  this  by  oath,  cautio  ju-
ratoria,  or  even  by  a  simple  promise.  (2.)

If  the  plaintiff  appeared  by  a  procurator,  whose  mandate  was  registered
officially,  or  given  by  the  plaintiff  personally  before  the  judge,  the  procu-
rator had  to  give  no  security.  If  the  plaintiff  appeared  by  a  procurator
not  so  appointed,  the  procurator  had  to  give  security  rem  ratam  dominum
habiturum  :  and  this  rule  applied  to  tutors  and  curators.  (3.)

If  the  defendant  appeared  by  a  procurator,  whom  he  appointed  per-
sonally before  the  judge,  the  procurator  had  not  to  give  security,  but  the
defendant  had  to  bind  himself,  on  behalf  of  the  procurator,  toall  the  three
clauses  of  the  judicatum  solvi.  If  he  appeared  by  a  procurator,  not  ap-
pointed before  the  judge,  both  the  procurator  and  the  defendant,  asjide-
jussor  of  the  procurator,  had  to  give  the  judicatum  solvi,.  with  all  its  three
clauses  made  binding  on  each.  The  defendant  further,  whether  the  pro-
curator was  appointed  before  the  judge  or  not,  had,  as  a  guarantee  for  the
judicatum  solvi,  to  subject  all  his  property  to  a  hypothec.  This  obligation
passed  to  his  heirs,  and  he  had  also  to  give  security  that  he  himself  would
appear  personally  to  receive  the  sentence  of  the  judge.  (4.)

If  the  defendant  did  not  appear,  but  some  one  volunteered  to  defend
the  action  for  him,  this  was  allowed,  if  this  voluntary  defensor  gave  secu-
rity judicatum  solvi.  (5.)

p  p  2

580  SUMMARY.

The  subject  of  actions  is  resumed,  and  concluded,  by  noticing  two
more  distinctions.

1.  AcTiONES  PERPETUiE,  TEMPORALES. — Actions  differed  in  the  time
during  which  they  could  be  brought.  Actions  arising  from  the  law,  or  a
senatus-consulUnn^  or  constitutions,  were  j)erpetuce,  i.  e.  could  be  brought
without  limit  of  time,  until  Theodosius  II.  imposed  a  general  limit  of
thirty  years  on  all  actions  real  or  personal,  a  limit  subsequently,  in  some
few  exceptional  instances,  as  in  that  of  actions  on  hypothec,  extended  to
forty  years.  Praetorian  actions  were  annual,  i.  e.  must  be  brought  before
the  close  of  an  annus  iitilis  from  the  time  when  they  could  first  have  been
brought.  To  this,  however,  there  were  so  many  exceptions  that  we  may
say  that  prsetorian  actions  also  were  perpetuoe^  except  when  they  were
penal  (the  actio  furti  manifesti  being,  however,  perpetual),  or  when  they
were  for  the  value  of  the  thing,  but  were  in  opposition  to,  not  in  extension
of,  the  civil  law,  like  the  Publiciana  rescissoria.  (Tit.  12.  pr.)

Actions  passing  to  or  against  the  Heir. — It  is  only  penal  actions
that  are  to  be  noticed,  as  all  other  actions  passed  to  and  against  the  heir.
Penal  actions  do  not  pass  against  the  heirs  of  the  wrongdoer,  except  to
make  them  account  for  any  benefit  they  may  have  derived  from  the  dehct.
But  penal  actions  do  pass  to  the  heir  of  the  person  injured,  except  in  such
cases  as  that  of  injuriarum  (personal  insult).  After  the  litis  contestation
however,  all  penal  actions  pass  both  to  and  against  the  heir.  (1.)

Finally,  it  may  be  remarked  that  all  actions  are  ahsolutorice,  that  is,  if
after  the  proceedings  have  commenced,  the  formula  has  been  given,  or  an
equivalent  stage  reached,  the  defendant  satisfies  the  plaintiff,  the  judge
must  absolve  the  defendant,  and  need  not  go  on  in  any  case  to  give  sen-
tence. (2.)

Exceptions. — If  the  plaintiff's  action  is  well  founded,  but  there  is  any
reason  why  it  is  unjust  that  it  should  be  effective  against  the  defen-
dant, he  can  avoid  its  effect  by  the  introduction  of  an  exception,
allowed  by  some  particular  law,  or  by  the  praetor  (Tit.  13.  7),  into  the
formula,  while  the  formulary  system  lasted.  In  actions  bonce  fidei  it  was
not  necessary  that  the  exception  should  be  pleaded,  as  Xh.^  judex  took  cog-
nisance of  all  matters  that  would  form  the  groundwork  of  an  exception.
In  other  actions,  actiones  stricti  juris^  in  factum^  arhitrarice,  including
actions  in  rem  (Tit.  13.  4),  and  penal,  the  exception  had  to  be  pleaded,  and
the  defendant  had  to  prove  it,  just  as  the  plaintiff  had  to  prove  his  case.
Under  Justinian  an  exception  meant  any  defence  other  than  a  denial  of
the  subsistence  of  the  alleged  right  of  action.  (Tit.  13.  pr.)

The  following  instances  of  exceptions  are  given,  and  are  all  supposed
to  be  pleaded  to  an  action  ex  stvpulatu.  1.  Error.  A  mistake  not  as  to
the  subject  of  the  stipulation,  but  as  to  some  fact  which  was  not  known
to  the  defendant,  and  which,  if  known,  would  have  prevented  his  promis-
ino- ;  2,  metus  causa,  a  general  exception,  fear  caused  by  any  one ;  3,
doli  mali,  the  bad  faith  of  the  plaintiff  himself,  either  when  the  obligation
was  formed  or  subsequently  ;  4,  in  factum  (1),  that  is,  the  prastor  merely
stated  a  circumstance  which,  if  established,  was  to  bar  the  action  of  such

BOOK  IV.  581

exceptions.     The  following  examples  are  given  : — (a)  Pecunice  non  nume-
ratce,  when  a   person   agreeing  to  lend   money,  and  stipulating  for  its
repayment,  does  not  really  pay  it.     Here  the  plaintiff  had  to  prove  that
he  had  really  paid  the  money,  but  the  exception  could  only  be  pleaded
within  five  years,   before  Justinian,  and  two  years  under  Justinian  (2) ;
(h)  pacti  conventi,  when  the  plaintiff  has  agreed  not  to  demand  payment,
but  the  contract,  as  being  verbis  or  re,  could  still  be  sued  on  (3)  ;  (o,)  juris -
jurandi,  when,  the  plaintiff  having  challenged  the  defendant,  and  the  de-
fendant having  denied  his  liability,  the  plaintiff  went  on  with  the  action.  (4.)
The  exceptio  dolt  mail  covered  all  cases  of  exceptions  in  factum,  and  might
be  pleaded  in  lieu  of  them,  except  that  as  its  being  found  true  carried  in-
famy Avith  it,  the  magistrate  would  not  allow  it  to  be  employed  when  the
plaintiff    was    a    patron    or    ascendant  (1,   note);   5,   rei  judicatce,   that
judgment  had  already  been  given  in  the  matter,  it  being  necessary  that
there  should  have  been  in  the  former  action  the  same  subject  matter  of
litigation,  the  same  quantity,  the  same  right,  the  same  ground  of  action,
the  same  parties.     If  the  former  action  was  a  judiciimi  legitimum  in  j^erso-
nam,  the  right  of  action  was  extinguished,  and  no  exception  was  necessary.
If  it  was  B.  judicium  legitimum  in  rem,  or  in  factum,  or  was  2i  judicium  im-
perio  continens,  the  right  of  action  not  being  extinguished  by  novation,  the
exceptio  rei  judicatce  was  necessary  to  stop  the  second  action.     Under  Jus-
tinian the  exception  was  in  _  every  case  necessary.     Gains  also  mentions
the  exceptio  rei  in  judiciuin  deducts,  i.  e.  that  the  case  was  virtually  before
the  tribunals,  or  that,   after  the  litis  contestatio,  the  time  within  which
sentence  was  obliged  to  be  given   had  j^assed  without  its  being  given,
which  was  a  stop  to  all  further  proceedings.  (5.)

Exceptiones  perpetuoe,  temporarice,  p)er emptor im,  dilatorice.
Exceptions  were  either  jierpetuce,   i.  e.   could  be  used  by  the  defen-
dant without  restriction  of  time,  or  temporales,  i.  e.  were  subject  to  such
a  restriction  ;  and  they  -were  jieretnptoiia^,  i.  e.  put  an  end  to  the  litigation,
or  dilatorice,  i.  e.  only  stopped  it  for  a  time.  (8.)     Perpetual  exceptions
were  always  peremptory  ;   as  instances  are  given  the  exceptions  doli  mali,
metus  causa,  and  pacti  conventi,  if  the  agreement  has  been  that  no  demand
shall  be  at  any  time  made.     Temporary  exceptions  were  always  dilatory.
As  an  instance  is  given  that  of  j;ocif«   conventi,  when  the  agreement  has
been  that  no  demand  shall  be  made   during  a  given  time,  e.  g.  five  years.
If  he  sued  before  the  five  years  had  elapsed,  the  plaintiff  might  be  repelled
by  an  excejytio.     Previously,  if   the   plaintiff  was   thus  repelled,   he  was
guilty  of  plus-petitio  in  regard  of  time,  and  could  take  no  further  proceed-
ngs.     Under  a  constitution  of  Zeno,  the  plaintiff  suing  prematurely  had
o  wait  twice  as  long  as  he  ought  to  have  waited,  and  he  must  reimburse
he  defendant  for  all  losses  sustained  through  the  demand  being  premature.
10.)     As  another  instance.  Gains   gives  that  of  a  j^laintiff  suing   under
;he  same  praetorship  for  another  part  of  a  thing  (10),  for  one  part  of
vhich  he  had  already  sued.     Some  dilatory  exceptions  have  regard,  not  to
he  thing  sued  for,  but  to  the  person,   as  when  objection  was  taken  to  a
)rocurator,  that  he  or  she  was  a  soldier  or  a  woman,  as  neither  could  act  as

582  •  SUMMARY.

procurator,  or  that  he  was  an  improper  person,  as  having  been  stamped
with  infamy ;  but  Justinian  did  away  with  exceptions  on  this  last
ground.  (11.)

Prescriptions. — Gains  notices  prescriptions  after  noticing  exceptions,
i.  e.  hmitations  of  the  action  entered  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiff,  as,  for  ex-
ample, to  confine  the  action  to  so  much  of  the  plaintiff's  right  as  had  pro-
duced an  existing  liability,  or  for  the  defendant,  as  the  prcescriptio  longi
temporis  ;  but  prescriptions  for  the  defendant  had  already,  in  the  time  of
Gains,  been  classed  among  exceptions.  (11,  note.)

Replications. — There  might  be  an  exception  to  an  exception,  i.  e.
there  might  be  grounds  on  which  the  exception,  although  founded  on  fact,
could  not  be  allowed  to  operate,  as  if  an  agreement  had  been  made  not
to  sue,  and  then  this  agreement  had  been  rescinded.  In  this  case  a  repli-
cation that  the  agreement  had  been  rescinded  would  be  inserted,  to  do
away  with  the  effect  of  the  exceptio  pacti  conventi  (Tit.  14.  pr.),  and  so
there  might  be  a  duplicatio  (1)  to  a  repUcatio,  and  there  might  be  even,
if  necessary,  a  triplicatio.   (2.)

Exceptions  may  be  divided  into  rei  cohcerentes,  affecting  the  rights  to
claim,  and  personce  cohcerentes,  protecting  the  debtor  personally,  as  the  ex-
ceptio pacti  conventi.  As  a  general  rule,  the  Jidejussores  of  the  defendant
could  use  all  the  exceptions  the  defendant  could  use ;  but  this  was  not
universally  true  of  exceptiones  cohcerentes  personce.  For  a  debtor  who  had
made  a  cessio  bonorum  was  protected  from  the  actions  of  his  creditors  by
the  exception  nisi  cesserit  bonis ;  but  his  Jidejussores  could  not  use  this
exception,  as  the  very  object  of  their  suretyship  was  to  guard  against  the
debtor  not  being  able  to  pay.  (4.)

Interdicts. — We  now  come  to  what  was  often  a  preliminary  step
under  the  prsetorian  system  to  the  commencement  of  one  kind  of  actions,
those  that  regarded  possession  and  ^wa^/- possession,  i.  e.  the  possession  of
servitudes.  The  prgetor  issued  an  interdict  or  decree  regulating  possession,
and  then,  if  the  facts  on  which  the  applicant  relied  were  contested  by  the
other  party,  the  praetor  threw  the  decree  into  the  shape  of  an  action  to  be
decided  according  to  the  real  facts.  Probably  the  praetor  interfered  by
interdict  to  protect  and  determine  possession  before  he  gave  actions  to  try
the  right  to  possession,  and  not  improbably  the  interests  arising  out  of  the
possession  of  the  ager  publicus  may  have  first  suggested  the  praetorian  in-
tervention by  interdicts.  Gradually  the  action  was  regarded  as  the  point
of  real  importance,  although,  as  the  granting  of  the  action  depended  on
the  rules  as  to  interdicts,  the  study  of  these  rules  preserved  its  importance.
By  the  time  of  Justinian  interdicts  had  become  whoUy  obsolete,  and  all
questions  as  to  possession  were  determined  by  actions  without  recourse
being  had  to  the  preliminary  step  of  interdicts.

The  interdict  was  issued  by  the  magisterial  authority  of  the  praetor,
and  interdicts  always  bore  traces  of  their  origin  in  two  ways.  1.  First
issued  as  special  edicts  to  meet  special  cases,  they  were  afterwards  issued
under  standing  regulations  incorporated  in  the  praetorian  edict,  but  they
were  always,  perhaps,  theoretically,  grounded  on  infractions  of  public
order,  and  the  time  in  which  most  possessory  interdicts  had  to  be  applied

BOOK  IV.  583

for  (one  year)  connects  them  with  the  law  of  delicts.  2.  They  were  all,
directly  or  indirectly,  connected  with  possession,  with  keeping  things  as
they  ought  to  be.

They  were  of  three  main  kinds: — (a)  Prohibitory,  (b)  Restitutory,
and  (c)  Exhibitory.  By  the  first  the  praetor  ordered  something  not
to  be  done  which  infringed  the  use  of  something  public,  as  a  road,  or
of  something  which,  for  the  sake  of  public  order,  he  protected,  as  the  right
of  possession  of  individuals.  By  the  second  the  praetor  ordered  things  to
be  put  into  the  state  they  were  in  before  something  wrong  had  been  done,
as,  e.  g.,  buildings  to  be  demolished,  which  impeded  the  use  of  a  public
river  or  its  banks;  or  possession  to  be  given  or  restored  to  the  right
person.  By  the  third  the  praetor  ordered  the  thing  or  person,  if  it  was
a  person  that  formed  the  subject  of  contest,  to  be  produced  by  the  person
who  had  got  hold  of  it,  so  that  the  claimant  might  not  be  prejudiced  by
the  thing  being  concealed.

Gains  understood  inUrcUcere  as  'to  prohibit,'  and  says  that  prohibitory
interdicts  alone  ought  strictly  to  be  called  interdicts,  and  interdicts  of  the
other  kinds  ought  to  be  called  decreta.  Justinian  says,  all  may  be  called
interdicts,  as  he  considers  irderdicere  to  mean  to  pronounce  between  two
parties.   (Tit.  15.  pr.  note.)

If  the  interdict  was  prohibitory,  the  parties  in  the  time  of  Gains  bound
themselves  by  a  wager,  in  a  sum  to  be  paid  by  the  losing  party  in  the
action.  If  the  interdict  was  restitutory  or  exhibitory,  the  action  was
arbitraria,  and  the  judex  issued  his  preliminary  order  against  the  party
concerned,  and,  in  the  event  of  its  not  being  obeyed,  gave  a  condemnatio
quanti  ea  res  erat.  (8,  note.)

Those  interdicts,  which  distinctly  referred  to  the  possessory  rights  of
private  persons,  were  given  to  acquire,  to  retain,  or  to  recover  possession,
those  to  retain  possession  being  prohibitory,  and  those  to  acquire  or  to
restore  being  restitutory.  (2.)

1.  Adijnscendce  jwssessioms  causa. — The  chief  interdict  under  this
head  was  that  known  as  quorum  bonorum,  given  to  secure  the  possession  to
those  whom  the  pr^tor,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  civil  law,  treated  as
having  a  right  to  an  inheritance.  It  was  given  against  two  classes  of
persons :  (a)  persons  possessing  pi^o  herede,  i.e.  thinking  themselves
to  be  the  real  heirs ;  (b)  persons  possessing  pro  possessore  {prwdo7ies),
i.  e.  persons  merely  possessing  without  any  claim  of  title.  It  was  given
against  both  classes,  even  if  the  term  of  usucapion  had  run  in  their
favour,  and  also  against  them  if  they  had  through  their  own  dolus  malus
ceased  to  possess.  (3.)

This  interdict  was  never  given  except  to  a  person  getting  possession
for  the  first  time,  so  that  restituas,  the  word  in  the  formula,  must  be  used
(as  well  as  the  term  restitutory  applied  to  interdicts)  in  a  very  wide
sense.  (3.)

Under  this  head  was  also  given  the  interdictum  Salvianum,  by  which
an  owner  of  a  rural  estate  got  possession  of  the  goods  of  the  occupier  (and
probably  even  if  they  had  passed  into  third  hands)  in  case  of  non-payment
of  rent.     This  interdict  was  a  step  historically  to  the  actio  Serviana.  (3.)

584  SUMMARY.

2.  Retinendce  possessionis  causa. — The  two  main  interdicts  under  this
head  were  those  titi  possidetis  and  utruhi  possidetis^  the  former  applying
to  immoveables  and  the  latter  to  moveables.  The  object  of  these  interdicts
was  to  determine  which  of  two  disputants  as  to  ownership  was  entitled  to
the  possession,  and  to  have  this  point  determined  in  his  favour  was  of  great
advantage  to  a  disputant,  as  he  remained  in  possession  if  his  adversary
failed  to  show  lie  was  the  real  owner.  The  interdict  iiti  possidetis  had  to
be  applied  for  within  a  year  after  the  possession  had  been  in  any  way
threatened.  Previously  to  Justinian  the  interdict  utruhi  possidetis  was
given  to  that  disputant  who  himself,  or  by  any  one  through  whom  he
claimed,  had  been  in  possession  during  the  greater  part  of  the  preceding
year.  Under  Justinian  possession  was  confirmed  to  the  person  in  pos-
session at  the  time  of  the  litis  contestation  provided  (which  had  always
been  a  condition  as  to  both  interdicts)  that  he  had  not  obtained  his  pos-
session as  against  his  adversary,  c/am,  vi^  or precario,  the  last  term  meaning
by  permission  of  the  adversary.  (4.)

Only  persons  having  civilis  possessio  or  naturalis  possessio  "with  the
animus  of  ownership,  could  obtain  these  interdicts.  Persons  simply  in
possessionem  detaining  the  thing  without  the  animus  possidendi,  could  not
obtain  them,  but  the  person  on  behalf  of  whom  such  persons  were  in
possessions,  possessed  through  them :  thus  the  owner  possessed  through  the
tenant,  or  the  deposit  or  through  the  depositary,  or  the  lender  through  the
borrower.  Without  the  animus  there  can  be  no  interdictory  possession,
but  if  a  person  has  the  animus  he  need  not  always  have  the  corporeal  de-
tention, as,  for  example,  if  a  man  uses  in  the  seasou  an  Alpine  pasture
and  leaves  it  when  the  season  is  over  with  the  intention  of  returning  to
it,  he  still  possesses  it.  (5.)

3.  Recuperandce  possessionis  causa. — The  main  interdict  under  this
head  was  that  unde  vi.  Here  there  having  been  an  illegal  use  of  violence,
the  wrongdoer  had  to  restore  possession,  although  the  person  to  whom  he
restored  it  had  himself  got  it  from  him  clam,  vi,  or  precario.  In  the  days
of  the  Republic  there  had  been  a  distinction  according  to  the  kind  of
violence  used.  If  the  violence  had  been  ordinary  (^quotidiana)  the  posses-
sion would  only  be  restored  if  it  had  not  been  obtained  by  the  applicant
clam,  vi,  or  precario,  and  the  application  must  be  made  within  a  year.  If
the  violence  had  been  armata,  the  possession  was  restored,  although
obtained  vi,  clam,  or  precario,  and  there  was  no  limit  as  to  the  time  for
asking  for  the  interdict.  This  distinction,  however,  had  become  obsolete
before  the  timeAvhen  the  formula  of  the  interdict  was  shaped  as  it  is  found
in  the  Digest.

The  interdict  unde  vi  only  applied  to  imrnoveables.  But  by  a  consti-
tution of  A.D.  389  it  was  provided  that  any  one  who  seized  on  anything
with  violence  should  lose  the  ownership  if  it  was  his,  or  give  it  up,  and
also  pay  its  value,  if  it  was  not.  This  constitution  applied  to  moveables  as
well  as  immoveables.  (6.)

Previously  to  this  constitution,  possession  of  moveables  had  been  re-
covered by  the  interdict  utruhi,  and  both  this  and  the  interdict  uti  may
be  looked  on  as  means  of  recovering  as  well  as  of  retaining  possession.

BOOK  IV.  585

But  the  employment  o£  the  interdict  wide  vi  had,  as  compared  with  that
uti  possidetis^  the  following  advantages:  (a)  it  could  be  used  Avhen  a
third  person  was  in  possession ;  (b)  it  gave  the  fructus  from  the  time
of  ejectment,  not  that  of  the  commencement  of  proceedings ;  (c)  it
was  given  although  the  possession  had  been  obtained  as  against  the
adversary  vi,  clam,  or  precaiio ;  {d)  it  included  moveables  on  the  estate.
(6,  note.)

Simple,  double  Interdicts. — The  interdicts  uti  possidetis  and  utruhi  may
be  said  to  be  double,  i.e.  each  party  is  at  once  plaintiff  and  defendant,
as  opposed  to  other  interdicts,  where  one  party  claims  and  the  other
defends.  (7.)

Two  points  with  regard  to  the  proceedings  in  actions  remain  to  be
noticed  :   1,  the  checks  on  reckless  litigation  ;  2,  the  duty  of  the  judge.

1.  Checks  on  reckless  Litigation. — A  summary  is  given  at  page  488,
of  the  checks  on  reckless  bringing  or  defending  actions  in  the  time  of
Gains.  Under  Justinian,  both  parties  were  obliged  to  swear,  the  plaintiff
de  calumnia  that  he  was  not  bringing  an  action  vexatiously  or  without
cause,  the  defendant,  that  it  was  from  a  belief  in  the  justness  of  his
cause  that  he  resisted  the  demand  of  the  plaintiff;  and  the  advocates  of
both  parties  had  also  to  take  an  oath.  The  plaintiff  was  liable  to  pay
damages  and  costs.  (Tit.  16.  1.)

The  defendant  was  restrained  {a)  by  the  action  sometimes  being  in
duplum  (the  Institutes  add  in  triplum,  but  no  instances  are  known)  when
there  was  a  denial  on  the  part  of  the  defendant,  as  in  cases  of  damni
injurice  and  legacies  left  to  holy  places ;  (h)  by  the  action  being  for  more
than  the  single  value,  as  in  the  case  of  theft  (1) ;  (c)  by  infamy,  which
attends  condemnation  in  an  action  tutelce,  mandati  or  depositi  if  direct,  and
/)ro  socio  (which  is  direct  for  both  parties),  and  which  attends  not  only
condemnatio,  but  an  agreement  to  commit  the  offence,  in  actions  furti,  vi
honorum  raptorum,  injuriarwni  and  de  dolo.  (2.)

The  first  step  in  an  action  was  the  vocatio  in  jus,  the  summons  to  the
defendant  to  appear  before  the  magistrate.  Children  and  freedmen,
however,  cannot  summon  ascendants,  patrons  and  their  children,  and  ascen-
dants of  patrons,  without  having  first  received  the  permission  of  the
praetor.  If  they  act  without  this  permission,  they  are  liable  to  a  fine  of
fifty  aurei.  (3.)

2.  The  Office  of  the  Judge.  —  The  Institutes  first  lay  down  the
general  duty  of  the  judge,  which  is  to  judge  according  to  the  law,  the
constitutions  or  customary  usage.  (Tit.  17.  pr.)  If  the  judge  gave  a
sentence  wrong  on  the  face  of  it,  or  fixed  the  condemnation  below  what
the  prsetor  had  fixed  it,  the  sentence  was  void,  and  no  appeal  was  neces-
sary. If  the  judge  was  merely  wrong  as  on  mere  questions  of  fact,  an
appeal  had  to  be  brought  within  two  days  (or,  if  the  defendant  had
appeared  by  a  procurator,  three  days),  enlarged  by  Justinian  to  ten  days.
An  appeal  lay  to  the  prsetor,  and  from  him  to  the  senate,  or,  in  later
times,  to  the  emperor's  council,  and  lastly  to  the  emperor.

Secondly,  the  Institutes  point  out  what  judgment  ought  to  be  given  in
certain  actions :

586  SUMMAEY.

(a)  In  a  noxal  action  the  judge  ought  to  state  the  condemnation  by
ordering  a  sum  to  be  paid,  or  the  noxa  abandoned.  (2.)

{h)  In  a  real  action,  if  he  determines  against  the  claimant,  he  ought
to  absolve  the  possessor ;  if  against  the  possessor,  he  ought  to  order  the
thing  and  its  fruits  to  be  given  up,  and,  after  the  time  of  Hadrian,  all  the
fruits  consumed  had  to  be  accounted  for,  whether  the  possession  was  bona
fide  or  mala  Jide^  if  the  thing  possessed  was  an  inheritance.  Before  Hadrian
as  to  inheritance,  and  before  and  after  his  time  as  to  single  objects,
the  rule  was  that  a  bona  fide  possessor  had  to  account  for  fruits  after  the
bringing  of  the  action,  the  mala  fide  possessor  for  all.  If  the  possessor
showed  that  he  could  not  give  up  the  possession  at  once,  he  obtained  a
delay  on  giving  security  to  give  up  within  a  time  allowed  him.

(c)  In  an  action  ad  exhibendum  the  defendant  must  exhibit  the  thing
and  everything  derived  from  it,  as  e.g.  the  fruits,  since  the  bringing  the
action  ;  nor  will  usucapion  accomplished  subsequently  avail  him.  If  he
himself  states  that  he  cannot  exhibit  at  once,  he  can  obtain  a  delay  on
giving  security,  but  if  he  neither  exhibits  nor  gives  security,  he  is  to  be
condemned  in  an  amount  representing  the  interest  of  the  plaintiff  in
having  the  thing  exhibited  at  once.

(d,e,f)  In  the  actions  familice  erciscundce,  commiini  dividundo^  and
finium  regimdot'um,  the  judge  ought,  if  he  gives  one  more  than  another,  and
one  thus  receives  more  than  another,  to  make  this  favoured  person  pay
a  pecuniary  equivalent.  (4,  5,  6.)  In  the  action  finium  regundorum,  a  person
ought  to  ]^e  condemned  who  has  destroyed  boundary  marks,  or  opposed,  in
defiance  of  the  judge's  order,  the  measurement  of  the  land.  (6.)

In  all  these  three  actions  anything  adjudged  becomes  at  once  the  pro-
peity  of  the  person  to  whom  it  is  adjudged.   (7.)

Crimes. — The  subject  of  public  prosecutions  being  altogether  outside
the  general  subject  of  the  Institutes,  which  treat  of  private  law  (Tit.  18.
pr.),  may  be  omitted  here.  A  sketch  of  Koman  criminal  law  is  given  in
the  last  section  of  the  Introduction.

INDEX.

ABS

ABSTINENDI  beneficium,  214
Acceptilatio,  386
Aquiliana,  387
Accessio,  li,  98
Accrescendi  jus,  150,  195
Actio,  Ix,  320,  419

meaning  of  term,  Ixx,  418

divisions  of  actions,  Ixxi,  422

ad  exhibendum,  Ixxii,  154,  401, 442,  492

aestimatoria,  359

arbitraria,  Ixviii,  Ixxi,  421,  442

bonge  fidei,  Lxxi,  321,  420

calumnise,  488

commodati.  324

communi  dividundo,  103,  123^  493

confessoria,  423

contraria,  490

damni  injurise,  404

de  aestimato,  450

de  constituta  pecunia,  428

de  dolo  malo,  443

deinofficioso,  208,  211

de  peeulio  et  in  rem  verso,  455

de  tigno  injimcto,  104

depensi,  349

depositi,  325

directa,  lxxi,  420

empti,  362

exercitoria,  452

familise  ereiscundse,  123,  493

fictitia,  420

finium  regundorum,  493

furti,  398,  437

hypothecaria,  467

in  duplum,  433,  436

in  factum  concepta,  lxxi,  420

in  factum  prsescriptis  verbis,  lxxi,  420

in  jus  concepta,  lxxi,  420

in  personam,  419

in  rem,  419

in  supplementum  legitimse,  209

injuriarum,  412

institoria,  452

judicati,  455,  459,  462

legati,  381

legis,  Ixii,  Ixv

mandati,  372

mixta,  433,  435

negativa,  421

negotiorum  gestorum,  379

AFP

noxalis,  457

Pauliana,  427

perpetua,  466

persecutoria  rei,  433

pigneratitia,  326

poenalis,  433

popularis,  417

prsejudicialis,  431

Publiciana,  425

quasi  institoria,  373,  443

quasi  Publiciana,  426

quasi  Serviana,  154,  428,  442

quod  dolo  malo,  443

quod  jussu,  452

quod  metus  causa,  437

receptitia,  429

rei  uxorise,  440

servi  corrupti,  451

Serviana,  363,  428,  442

strict!  juris,  lxxi,  320,  421

temporalis,  466

tributoria,  453

tutelae,  71

utilis,  lxxi,  420

venditi,  362

vi  bonorum  raptorum,  404
Actus,  117
Addict  io,  15

bonorum,  308
Aditio  hereditatis,  188,  218
Adjudicatio,  lii,  123
Adjunctio,  102
Adoption,  xl,  30-46,  183

plena,  minus  plena,  41
Adpromissor,  348
Adstipulator,  348
Adversaria,  353
-Sjlrarium,  325
Aflfinitas,  34
Ager  publicus,  479

vectigalis,  91,  367
Agnati,  xli,  liv;  succession  of,  272-286
Agri  limitati,  98
Album,  XX,  xxi,  430
Alluvio,  98
Animus  doraini,  93,  136,  485

possidendi,  136,  485

revertendi,  95
Annus  utilis,  248
Appeal,  xii,  491

588

INDEX.

AQU

Aquae  ductus,  117

Aquilius  Gallus,  387

Arbiter,  Ixi,  421

Argentarius,  425,  429,  449

Arrha,  357

Arrogatio,   xl,    liii,    42 ;    acquisition  by,

306
As,  190

Ascripti  glebse,  15
Assertor  libertatis,  Ixv,  17,  431
Aureus,  66

BENEFICIUM  abstinendi,  214
cedendarum  actionum,  332,  351

competentise,  441,  448

divisionis,  351

deliberandi,  216

inventarii,  217

legis  Cornelige,  178,  349

ordinis,  351

S.  C.  Velleiani,  350

separationis,  212
Bona  vi  rapta,  402
Bonitarium  dominium,  xlix
Bouorum  addictio,  308  ;  cessio,  312

distr actio,  313

emptio,  312

possessio,  69,  164,  205,  298-306;  sine
re,  305

sectio,  307

venditio,  312
Buildings,  104

OADUCA,  196,  225
Calata,  comitia,  162
Calumnia,  256,  488
Capitis  deminutio,  xliii,  47-59,  205
Capito,  xxvii
Captivi,  177
Caput,  59

Catoniana  regida,  227,  239
Cautio,  343,  354

judicatum  solvi,  463
Census,  17

Centumviri,  xxi,  Ixi,  Ixyi,  207
Cessio  bouorum,  312

injure,  lii,  Ixvi.  89,  122
Chirographum,  lyii,  354
Civitas,  xxxvii,  14
Code,  Thedosian,  xxx

Justinian's,  xxxi,  xxxiii
Codicils,  liv,  258
Coelebs,  225
Coemptio,  xlii,  30
Cognati,  xli,  liv  ;  succession  of,  286

degrees  of,  288
Cognitio  extraordinaria,  xxx
Cognitor,  461
Co-heir,  195
Co-legatee,  223,  226
CoUatio  bonorum,  266
Colonus,  15,  110

DET

Comitia  calata,  162

centuriata,  xi,  xii,  Ixxiv

curiata,  x,  xii

tributa,  xiii,  xvii,  Ixxii
Commercium,  xxxvii,  166
Commissoria  lex,  361
Commixtio,  103
Commodatum,  h-i,  323
Compensatio,  391  449
Concubinage,  xlii

Condemnatio,  Ixvii,  Ixviii,  444,  491
Condictio,  Ixiy,  Ixxi,  320

furtiva,  401
Conditions,  193,  361
Conductor,  362
Coofarreatio,  xli,  30
Confusio,  103
Connubium,  xvii,  31
Consanguinei,  275,  285
Consensus,  316
Consilium,  23
Constitutum,  23,  422
Contract,  Iv,  Ivii,  3,  6

consensual,  Ivii,  356

formal,  Iviii,  317

formless,  Iviii,  317

literal,  Ivii,  353

real,  Ivi,  321

verbal,  Ivii,  826
Contractus  innominati,  Iviii,  317
Contubernium,  35
Conventio  in  manum,  30
ConA'entus,  Ixvi
Co-rei  promittendi,  331

stipulandi,  331
Creditor,  Iv,  315
Cretio,  216,  218
Crime,  Ixxiv,  494
Culpa,  318

Curator,  xl,  71  ;  suspected,  83
Curatorum  satisdatio,  75

excusationes,  78
Curia,  x.
Customary  law,  12

DAMNUM,  410
infectum,  410
Damnum  injuria  da,tum,  404
Dare,  Iv,  315
Debitor,  Iv,  315
Decemvirs,  xiii,  xvii
Decretum,  10
Dedititii,  18,  20
Deductio,  449
Deliberandi  potestas,  216
Delict,  Iv,  Iviii,  392
Demonstratio,  Ixvii,  Ixviii,  420,  446
Denuntiatio,  Ixxiv
Deportatio,  47
Depositum,  Ivi,  323

miserabile,  323,  433,  436
Derelicts,  114
Detentio,  135,  485

I^JDEX.

589

DIE

Dies  cedit,  225,  232

continui,  82

fasti  et  nefasti,  305

utiles,  82,  305

venit,  232
Digest,  xxxii
Diiigentia,  318
Disinheriting,  liii,  178-185
Divorce,  38
Dolus,  318,  433,  471
Dominica  potestas,  14
Dominium,  xlix,  87

bonitiirium,  xlix

Quiritarium,  xlix
Donationes,  lii,  145

inter  vivos,  147

mortis  causa,  lii,  146

ante  nuptias,  158

propter  nuptias,  158
Dos,  149,  151,  230
Duplieatio,  477

E DICTUM,  xxi
perpetuum,  xxi,  xxvi,  11

repentinum,  11
Emancipatio,  xxxix,  50
Emancipated  children,  50,  182,  200,  266
Emphyteusis,  1,  133,  364
Emperor,  xxv,  10
Emptio  et  venditio,  Ivii,  112,  356
Epistola,  10
Exchange,  359
Exceptio,  Ixix,  469

dilatoria,  474

doli  mali,  471

jurisjurandi,  472

metus  causa,  470

non  numeratge  pecuniae,  355,  471

pacti  conventi,  475

peremptoria,  47

personse  cohfierens,  478

procuratoria,  476

rei  cohserens,  478

rei  in  judicium  deJuctse,  473

rei  judicatee,  472

restitutge  hereditatis,  249
Execution,  Ixiv,  Ixv,  Ixxiii
Executor,  Ixxiv,  Ixxvi,  437
Exercitor,  373
Exheredatio,  liii,  178-185
Existimatio,  xliii,  207
Expensilatio.  353
Extranei,  217
Extraordinaria  judicia,  Ixx,  Ixxii,  Ixxiii,

437,  444,  480

FACERE,  Iv,  315
Familia,  xxxviii,  14,  26
Famili»  emptor,  163,  168
Ferae,  95
Fictions,  420
Fideicommissa,  liv,  246-258,  259

INT

Fidejussor,  347

Fidepromissor,  348

Fiduciarius,  248

Fiduciary  Tutor,  63

Filiusfamilias,  155,   175,  417,    451,  456,

459
Fiscus,  140,  144,  224,  265,  310
Formula,  Ixvii
Formulary  system,  Ixvii
Fructus,  124,  129,  492
Fundus,  227
Furiosi,  73
Furti  vitium,  138
Furtiva  condictio,  401
Furtum,  130,  393

manifestum,  393

nee  manifestum,  393

GAIUS,  xxviii
Gentes,  x,  286
Gentilis,  liv,  286

HABITATIO,  131
Hereditatis  petitio,  439
Heres,  liii,  211
extraneus,  217
intestati,  261
necessarius,  liv,  22,  212
suns,  liv,  179,  212,  262,  ranking  with,
272
Honorarium,  378

Hypotheca,  li,  76, 133,  152,  326,  428,  441,
465

TMPERIUM,  Ixi

X     In  jure  cessio,  I,  Ixvi,  89,  122

In  jusvocatio,  xiv,  431,  480

Indebiti  solutio,  381

Infii,mia,  xliii,  476,  490

Infans,  68,  341

Infanti  proximus,  341

Ingenui,  15

Injuria,  410

Institor,  373

Institutes,  xxxiii

Institution  of  heirs,  111,  185

Insula,  98

Intentio,  Ixvii,  Ixviii

Intercessio,  350

Interdictio  aquse  et  ignis,  60

Interdictum,  Ixxiii,  478

adipiscendse  possessionis,  481

de  clandestina  possessione,  486

de  precario,  486

exhibitorium,  480

possessorium,  481

prohibitorium,  480

quorum  bonorum,  482

recuperandae  possessionis,  485

restitutorium,  480

retinendae  possessionis,  482

590

INDEX.

INT

Salvianum,  482

simplex  et  duplex,  486

unde  vi,  485

uti  possidetis,  481

utrubi,  483
Interest,  xvi,  320
Intestate  succession,  liv,  261  ;  under  the

Xovels,  306
Islands,  98
Italy,  conquest  of,
Italicum  solum,  111,  134
Iter,  117

1UDEX,xxi,  Ix

O      duties  of,  491-494

liability  of,  416
Judicis  postulatio,  Ixiv
Judicatum  solvi,  463
Judicia  extraordinaria,  Ixx,  Ixxii,  Ixxiii,

437,  444,  480
Judicium  imperio  continens,  421,  473

legitimum,  421,  473

publicum,  494
Judge,  xii,  xxi,  Ix,  Ixxiii,  Ixxv
Jurisdictio,  Ixi

Jurisprudentes,  xxi,  xxviii,  11
Jus,  XXXV,  xlvii,  Iv

civile,  xxiii,  7,  12

gentium,  xxiii,  7,  13

honorarium,  xxi,  11

in  personam,  xlviii

in  rem,  xlviii,  87

Italicum,  xix

Latinum,  xix

naturale,  xxii,  7,  13,  14

Qiiiritium,  xx

sacrum,  xvii
Jusjurandum,  256,  430,  472
Justa  causa,  141

manumissionis,  23
Justinian,  xxxi

LABEO,  xxvii,  258
Latini,  xix,  14,  26,  296
Latini  Juniani,  18,  151,  235,  247,  296
Latinitas,  xix
Legacies,  218

ademption  and  transfer  of,  262

contrasted  with  fideicommissa,  248
Legatarius  partiarius,  235
Legatum,  218

ereptitium,  224

generis,  235

incertse  personse,  236

optionis,  235

per  damnationem,  219

per  prseceptionem,  220

per  vindicationem,  219

poense  nomine,  240

sinendi  modo,  220
Legis  actioues,  Ixii,  Ixv
Legitimation,  38

MAN

Lex,  9

^butia,  Ixvi

^lia  Sentia,  18,  21

Anastasiana,  287

Apuleia,  349

Aquilia,  404

Atilia,  64

Atinia,  138

Calpurnia,  Ixiv,  36,  320,  420

Canuleia,  xvii

Cincia,  148

Claudia,  67

Cornelia,  178,  349,  497

de  sicariis,  27,  414,  496
Fabia,  498

Falcidia,  liii,  11,  209,  243-246
Furia,  243,  349
Furia  Caninia,  24,  237
Hortensia,  xviii,  9
Julia,  Ixvi

de  adidteriis,  150,  151,  495
de  ambitu,  498
de  annona,  498
de  maritandis,  224,  236
de  peculatu,  498
de  residuis,  498
de  vi  publica,  486,  497
majestatis,  495
repetundarum,  498
Julia  et  Titia,  64
Junia,  xix
Junia  Norbana,  18
Junia  Velleia,  181
Papia  Poppgpa,  xxvi,  36,    67,    78,    187,

195,  224,  233,  236
Petronia,  27
Plsetoria,  72
Plautia,  xix,  138
Pompeia,  497
Publilia,  9,  349
Eegia,  10
Scribonia,  123
Silia,  Ixiv,  320
Valeria,  xii,  9
Voconia,  187,  236,  243,  247
Libellus  conventionis,  437
Liberalis  causa,  431
Liberorum  jus,  284,  294
Libertas,  xxxvi,  14
Libertus,  succession  to,  290

assignation  of,  293
Libertimis,  16-21
Libripens,  Ivi,  163
Lis  et  vindiciae,  Ixiii,  463
Lis  sua,  416

Litis  contestatio,  Ixii,  Ixx,  Ixxiv,  390,  416
Litis  dominus,  464
Locatio  et  conductio,  Ivii,  362
Longi  temporis  possessio,  123,  137,  160
Longissimi  temporis  possessio,  144

MAGISTRATE,  Ix
Mancipatio,  xlvii,  Ivi

INDEX.

591

MAN

PEO

Mancipi  res,  xlvi

Mancipium,  26

Mandator  compared  with  fidejussor,  375

Mandatiim,  Ivii,  10,  371

Manumission,  17-25

Manns,  xlii,  xlvii,  30

Manus  injectio,  Ixiv,  Ixv

Mannnm  consertio,  Ixiii

Marriage,  28,  29

Matrimonium,  16,  36

Merces,  363

Missio  in  possessionem,  Ixxiii

Modestinns,  xxix

Mora,  320

Multa,  395

Mutuiim,  Ivi,  322

NATUEAL  LAW,  xxii,  7
Necessarins  heres,  liv,  22,  212
Negligence,  318
Negotiorum  gestio,  380
Nexum,  Ivi,  316
Nomen  transcriptitinm,  354
Novatio,  lix,  389
Novels,  xxxiii
Noxa,  457
Noxalis  causa,  457
Nudum  pactum,  317
Nuncupatio,  169
Nuptise,  28  ;  justse,  29,  36

OBLATION  to  the  Curia,  38
Obligatio,  Iv,  lix

ex  contractu,  Iv,  321

ex  delicto,  Iviii,  392

naturalis,  317

quasi  ex  contractu,  Ivii,  378

quasi  ex  delicto,  lix,  416
Obligation,  definition  of,  Iv,  313,  316

dissolution  of,  lix

sources  of,  315
Occupatio,  li,  93
Operse,  363

Operarum  obligationes,  357
Orbi,  224
Orcinus,  257

PACTUM,  Ivi,  317,  361
adjectum,  317,361

legitimum,  317

nudum,  317

prsetorium,  317
Papinian,  xxviii
Partnership,  366
Paterfamilias,  26
Patria  potestas,  xxxix,  28

dissolution  of,  46
Patricians,  48
Patrimonium  nostrum,  things  in  or  not

in,  xlvii,  8
Patrona,  296

Patronus,  62,  294
Paulus,  xxix"^
Pauperies,  459
Peculium,  155,  451

adventitiura,  157

castrense,  155,  167,  173

profectitium,  157

quasi  castrense,  156,  173
Peregrini,  12,  147,  248,  338,  348,  354
Permutatio,  359
Persona,  xxxvi,  xliii,  13
Petitio  hereditatis,  439
Pictures,  107
Pignoris  capio,  Ixiv,  Ixv
Pignus,  li,  ivii,  132,  152,  325
Plebiscita,  xxiv,  9
Plebs,  ix,  xi,  xvii
Pluris  petitio,  444
Poena,  394
Pollicitatio,  316
Populus,  ix,  X.
Portio  legitima,  211
Possessio,  xlix,  135

civilis,  136

decretalis,  209,  485

edictalis,  299

longi  temporis,  123,  137,  160

longissimi  temporis,  144

naturalis,  136,  485

pro  herede,  143,  439

pro  possessore,  143,  439

possessione,  esse  in,  136,  485
Possessor,  105,  109

bona  fide,  141,  160,492

male  fide,  105,  492
Postliminium,  48,  65,  96,  144,  264
Postumus,  179,  237,247

Veil  ei  anus,  182

quasi  Velleianus,  182
Potestas  domiuica,  14

patria,  xxxix,  28
Prsedia  rustica,  112

stipendiaria,  111

tributaria,  118

urbana,  117
Prsediator,  142
Prsedo,  439
Prsefectus  urbi,  65
Prsejudicium,  Ixix,  431
Prses,  Ixiii
Prsescriptio,  lii,  Ixix

longi  temporis,  137,  426

longissimi  temporis,  144
Presides,  Ixvi,  Ixxiii
Prsestare,  Iv,  315
Prgetor,  Iviii,  11

peregrinus,  xx,  Ixvi,  11
Precario,  484
Pretium,  357
Privilegium,  xvi
Pro  herede  gerere,  218
Procinctus,  162
Proculians,  xxviii
Procurator,  160,  461

592

INDEX.

PRO

Prodigi,  73

Provinciale  solum,  137,  139

Pubertati  proximus,  68,  342,  401

Pubes,  68,  341

Publicatio.  370

Pupil,  contracts  of,  154

QU^STIO,  Ixxv
Quarta  Antonina,  42,  208

Falcidia,  244

legitima,  211

Pegasiana,  204
Quasi-contract,  Iviii,  378

delict,    Ivix,  416

posses?io,  115,  122

traditio,  116,  122
Querela  inofficiosi  testamenti,  208
Quiritarian  ownership,  xlix

RAPINA,  403
Eecuperatores,  xxi,  Ixi,  Ixvi
Redhibitio,  359
Eegula  Catoniana,  227,  239
Relegatio,  47
Remancipatio,  50
Eeplicatio,  Ixix,  477
Kepudium,  38

Rerum  universitas,  xlv,  xlvi,  li,  liii,  88
Res,  87

communes,  xlvii,  89,  115

corporales,  xliv,  115

dominans,  118

fungibiles,  322

incorporales,  xliv,  115

mancipi,  xlvi

nee  mancipi,  xlvi

privatse,  xlvii,  89,  93

publicse,  xlvii,  89

religiosse,  xlvi,  92

sacrse,  xlv,  92

sanctse,  xlvi,  93

serviens,  xlv,  118
Rescripta,  10

Responsa  prudentum,  xxi,  xxviii,  11
Restipulatio,  488

Restitutio  in  integrum,  Ixxiii,  47,  73,  216
Rivers,  80,  98,  99

q ABINIANS,  xxviii
kJ    Sacramentum,  Ixii
Sale,  356

Salvius  Julianus,  xxviii
Satisdntio,  462

judicatum  solvi,  463

tutorum,  75
Seashore,  GO
Senate,  x,  xxiv,  Ixxiv
Senatus-consultum,  xxiv,  9

Claudianum,  15,  312

Hadrianum,  237

Largianum,  296

TRA

Libonianum,  169

Macedonianum,  456

Neronianum,  220

Orphitianum,  282

Pegasianum,  248,  251

Tertullianum,  279

Trebellianum,  249,  250

Velleianum,  350
Servitudes,  1,  117-134

personal,  1,  129

prsedial,  1,  117

rural,  i,  118

urban,  1,  118
Servius,  xi.
Servus  poense,  48
Slavery,  14
Slaves,  acquisition  through,  157,  384,  451

institution  of,  188

stipulations  of,  333

abandonment  of,  for  delicts,  457
Societas,  Ivii,  366

universorum  bonorum,  366
Solidus,  66
Solutio,  lix,  385

imaginaria,  385

indebiti,  381
Specificatio,  97
Sponsalia,  35
Sponsio,  Ixvii,  432,  488
Sponsor,  348
Spurii,  366
Status,  XXX vi,  14
Stipulatio,  Ivii,  327

empfse  et  venditse  hereditatis,  249

inutiles,  336

partis  et  pro  parte,  251
Subscriptio,  165
Substitntio  pupillaris,  197
quasi-pupillaris,  199

vulgaris,  194
Succession,  testamentary,  liii,  161

intestate,  261
Sui  juris,  xxxix,  52,  53,  213
Superficies,  1,  133
Suspecti  crimen,  83
Syngraphse,  Ivii,  354

TESTAMENTI  factio,  liii,  55,  66,  175,
215,  236
Testamentum,  liii,  161

calatis  coraitiis,  162

in  prociiictii,  162

inofiflciosum,  185,  207

irritum,  173,  202,  205

militare.  170-174

non  jure  factum,  202

nuncupatum,  170

per  8es  et  libram,  163

ruptum,  202

tripartitum,  165
Theft,  139
Thesaurus,  111
Traditio,  li,  113

INDEX.

593

TEA

Transcriptio,  354
Trebatius,  xxvii,  258
Tribes,  Eoman,  xxxvi
Tribonian,  xxxii
Triplicatio,  477
Tutela,  xl,  52,  70

of  freedmen,  62

of  women,  66
Tutor  Atilianus,  54

dativijs,  64

fiduciarius,  63

legitimus,  57

testamentariuR,  55
Tutor,  removal  of,  83
Tutoris  auctoritas,  68

excusationes,  78

satisdatio,  75
Twelve  Tables,  xiii-xvii

TTLPIAN,  xxix.

U    Universitas,  91
rerum,  xlv,  li,  Hi
Usucapio,  Hi,  134,  398,  426,  482

WIT

Usufruct,  1,  109,  123-129
Usura,  xvi,  320
Usurpatio,  144
Usus,  1,  30,  129
Uterini,  275,  285
Utilis  actio,  Ixx,  420

YENDITIO  bonorum,  302
Vernse,  15
Vi  bona  rapta,  403
Via,  118
Vindex,  Ixiii
Vindicatio,  Ixiii,  Ixxi
Vindicise,  Ixiii
Vindicta,  17,  24
Vis,  486

Vitia  possessionis,  138
Vitium  furti,  138

TiyiFE,  position  of,  xli,  30,   149,  152,
Witnesses  to  a  testament,  166

LO>'r)ON  :     PRINTED    BT

sroTTiswoouE  Axn  CO.,  new-rtheet  square

ASD    FAHLIAMENT    STREET

QQ

LATIN  CLASSICAL  SCHOOL-BOOKS

IN

ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  PUBLIC  SCHOOL   LATIN   PRIMER.

The  CHILD'S  LATIN   ACCIDENCE,  extracted  from   the  Rev.  Canon

Kt:nnedy's  Child's  Latin  Primer,  containing  all  that  is  necessary  to  lead  Boys  up  to  the  Public
School  Latin  Primer.     Price  Is.

The   Rev.    Canon    KENNEDY'S  CHILD'S  LATIN  PRIMER,  or  First

Latin  Lessons.    A  New  Edition,  adapted  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Grammar.     Price  2s.

The  PUBLIC  SCHOOL   LATIN  PRIMER.     Edited  with  the  sanction

of  the  Head  Masters  of  the  Nine  Public  Schools  included  in  the  Royal  Commission.  Price  2s.  6d.

SUB  SI DI A  PRIM  ARIA,  Part  I.  a  First  Companion  Exercise  Book

to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    By  the  Editor  of  the  Primier.    Price  2s.  6d.

SUBSIDIA  FRIMARIA,  Part  IL  a  Second  Companion  Exercise  Book

to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    By  the  Editou  of  the  Primer.    Price  3s.  Gd.

KEY  to  the  EXERCISES  in  SUBSIDIA  PRIM  ARIA,  Parts  L  and  II.

price  5s.  supplied  to  Instructors  only,  on  application  to  the  Publishers.

PUBLIC  SCHOOL  LATIN  GRAMMAR,  to  follow  in  use  the  Public

School  Latin  Primer.    Price  7s.  M.

The  Rev.  Dr.   WHITE'S  FIRST  LATIN  PARSING  BOOK,    adapted

to  the  Syntax  of  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  2s.

The  Rev.  Dr.  WHITE'S  FIRST  LATIN  EXERCISE  BOOK,  adapted

to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.     Price  2s.  6d.— Key,  price  2s.  &d.

VALPY'S    LATIN     DELECTUS.      Newly    edited    by   the   Rev.    Dr.

White,  with  Grammatical  Notes  adapted  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.     2s.  6rf.

The  Rev.  Dr.  WHITE'S  PROGRESSIVE  LATIN    READER  ;   with  a

Vocabulary,  and  Notes  adapted  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  3s.  (Jd.

The   Rev.   Dr.  WHITE'S   JUNIOR    SCHOLAR'S   LATIN-ENGLISH

DICTIONARY  (in  which  the  formation  of  words,  which  forms  ore  prominent  feature  of  the
Public  School  Latin  Primer,  is  exhibited  to  the  eye  at  a  glance).    Price  Is.  ijd.

The   Rev.    Dr.    WHITE'S   NEW   ENGLISH-LATIN    DICTIONARY

for  the  use  of  Schools.    Price  5s.  Qd.

TheRev.Dr.  WHITE'S  JUNIOR  STUDENT'S  COMPLETE  LATIN-

ENGLISH  and  ENGLISH -LATIN  DICTIONARY.     Price  12s.

Mr.    HENRY    MUSGRAVE     WILKINS'S    EASY    LATIN    PROSE

EXERCISES  on  the  Syntax  of  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  2s.  M.—Kky,  2s.  Gd.

Mr.  HENRY    MUSGRAVE     WILKINS'S    PROGRESSIVE    LATIN

DELECTUS,  adapted  with  References  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  2s.

Mr.  HENRY  MUSGRAVE  WILKINS'S  LATIN  PROSE  EXERCISES,

adapted  to  the  Syntax  of  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  4s.  6d. — Key,  5s.

The  Rev.  Dr.  COLLIS'S  PRAXIS  LATIN  A  PRIM  ARIA,  a  Handbook

of  Questions  and  Exercises  for  daily  use  with  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  2s.  Gd.

The  Rev.  Dr.  COLLIS'S  PRAXIS  LATIN  A.     Part  L     Price  25.  U.
The   Rev.   Dr.    COLLIS'S    PONTES    CLASSICI    LATINI,   with

References  throughout  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  3s.  Gd.

BRADLEY'S   EUTROPIUS,  newly  edited  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  White,

with  a  Vocabulary  and  Notes  adapted  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  2s.  Gd.

BRADLEY'S   CORNELIUS  NEPOS,  newly  edited  by  the  Rev.  Dr.

White,  with  English  Notes  adapted  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  3s.  Gd.

BRADLEY'S    OVID'S    METAMORPHOSES,   edited  by  the  Rev.   Dr.

White,  with  English  Notes  adapted  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  4s.  Gd.

BRADLEY'S    PHJLDRUS,    edited    by  the    Rev,  Dr.    White,    with

English  Grammatical  Notes  adapt<3d  to  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer.    Price  2s.  Gd.

London,  LONGMANS  &   CO.

WHITE'S   SCHOOL   AND    COLLEGE  LATIN   DICTIONARIES.

Now  ready,  in  square  12mo.  pp.  394,  price  5s.  6d.  bound,

A  NEW  EMLISH-LATIN  DIOTIOMRY

FOR    THE    USE    OP    SCHOOLS.

Founded  on  White  and  Kiddle's  large  Latin-English  Dictionary.

By  the  Rev.  JOHN  T.  WHITE,  D.D.  Oxon.

Rector  of  St.  Martin  Ludgate,  London.

THE  aim  of  the  Author  in  undertaking  the  present  work  has  been  to  secure  the
production  of  a  New  English-Latin  Dictionary  for  Schools  presenting  a  sufficiently
extensive  Vocabulary,  clearness  in  general  details,  and  adequate  authority  for  the  use
of  the  Latin  equivalents  for  English  words.  The  plan  adopted  is  succinctly  as
follows : —

Such  English  words  have  been  admitted  as  are  likely  to  occur  in  passages  not  too
difficult  for  translation  by  any  but  the  higher  forms.  Whenever  they  are  here  em-
ployed in  two  or  more  meanings,  their  respective  powers  have  been  defined.  The
present  names  of  cities,  mountains,  rivers,  &c,,  remarkable  in  Ancient  Geography,
have  been  mostly  given  ;  and  places  of  note  in  modern  times,  especially  those  in  Great
Britain,  have  not  been  left  unnoticed.

In  the  Latin  portion  of  the  work,  White  and  Riddle's  large  Latin-English
DiCTiONAEY  has  been  taken  as  the  authority  for  all  matters  coming  within  its  range
of  treatment ;  while  for  the  employment  of  late  Latin  terms,  when  such  are  introduced,
reference  has  been  made  to  recognised  sources  of  information.  Every  Latin  word  here
cited  is  followed  by  the  name  of  some  one  or  more  of  the  best  writers  who  employ  it ;
so  that  it  may  at  once  be  seen  whether  it  belongs  to  prose  or  to  poetry  alone,  or
whether  it  is  common  to  both  of  them ;  and  also  to  what  age  of  the  language  it  is  to
be  assigned.  And  further  still,  in  order  that  this  work  may  be  available  for  all  the
legitimate  purposes  of  a  Gbadus,  the  prosodial  quantities  of  words  have  been  marked.

A    JUNIOR      LATIN  -  ENGLISH     DICTIONARY,

abridged  for  the  use  of  Schools  from  the  Dictionaries  of  White  and  Riddle  by
the  Rev.  John  T,  White,  D.D.  Joint- Author.... Square  12mo.  pp.  664,  price  75.  6d.

*^*  In  this  Dictionary,  the  formation  of  Words,  which  forms  one  prominent  feature
of  the  Public  School  Latin  Primer,  is  exhibited  to  the  eye  at  a  glance.

WHITE'S  JUNIOR  SCHOLAR'S  COMPLETE  LATIN-

ENGLISH  and  ENGLISH-LATIN  DICTIONARY  (the  above  Two  Dictionaries
bound  in  One  Volume)  Square  12mo.  price  125.

The   COLLEGE    LATIN -ENGLISH    DICTIONARY

(Intermediate  Size),  abridged  for  the  use  of  University  Students  from  the  large
work  of  White  and  Riddle,  by  John  T.  White,  D.D.  Medium  8vo.  pp.  1,048,
price  18s.

A  LATIN-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY(tlie  Parent AVork),

by  the  Rev.  John  T.  White,  D.D.  Oxon.  and  the  Rev.  Joseph  E.  Riddle,  M.  A.
Oxon 2  vols.  4to.  pp.  2,128,  price  425.

London,  LONGMANS  &  CO.

39  Paternoster  Row,  E.C,
London,  April  1874.

GENERAL  LIST  OF  WORKS

PUBLISHED    BY

Messrs.  Longmans,  Green,  Reader,  and  Dyer.

PAGE

RTS,  Manufactures,  &c.  ...  29

.STRONOMY  &  Meteorology    .     .  18

lOGRAPHICAL   WORKS 7

hemistry,    Medicine,    Surgery,

&  the  Allied  Sciences     ...  25

dictionaries    &  other    Books    of

Reference 15

iNE  Arts  &  Illustrated  Edi-
tions    27

[iSTORY,     Politics,     Historical

Memoirs,  &c i

n[dex 45

PAGE

Mental  &  Political  Philosophy  9

Miscellaneous  &  Critical  Works  12
Natural     History    &    Physical

Science 20

Poetry  &  the  Drama 40

Religious  &  Moral  Works  .  .  32
Rural   Sports,    Horse  &  Cattle

Management,  «See 41

Travels,  Voyages,  <S:c 36

Works  of  Fiction 39

Works    of   Utility    &    General

Information 43

oo'i^C

HISTORY,      POLITICS,      HISTORICAL
MEMOIRS,    &c.

The  Life  of  Napoleon  III.
de7dvedfro7n  State  Reco7^ds,
Unpublished  Family  Cor-
respondence,  and  Personal
Testimony,
By  Blanchard  Jerrold.

Four  Vols.  Zvo.  ivith  Portraits  from  the
Originals  in  possession  of  the  Imperial
Family^  and  Facsitniles  of  Letters  of
Napoleon  I.  Napoleon  III,  Queen
Hortense,  <^c.

*jj*  Vol.  I.  will  be  published  in  Aprils
^ol.  II.  hi  the  Autumn,  and  Vols.  III.
nd  IV.  completing  the  ivork,  in  the  Spring
f  1875.

The  History  of  England
from  the  Fall  of  Wolsey  to
the  Defeat  of  the  Spanish
Amnada.
By  J,  A,  Froude,  M.A,

Cabinet  Edition,  iivals.  er.^zv.  £2,.  12s.
Library  Edition,  12  vols.  Svo.  £8.  iSs.

The  English  in  Ireland
in  the  Eighteenth  Centnry.
By  J.  A.  Fronde,  M.A.

3  7'ols.  Sz'o.  £2.  8 J-.

NEW    V\^ORKS    PUBLISHED   BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Estimates  of  the  English
Kings  fi^om    William  the
Conqueror  to  George  III,
By  y.L.  Sanfo7^d.

Cro7VJi  Zvo.  1 2 J.  (id.

The  History  of  Englmid

from  the  Accession  of

James  II.

By  Lord  Macanlay.

Student's  Edition,  2  %'ols.  cr.  %7>o.  \2s.
People's  Edition,  4  vols.  cr.  %vo.  i6j-.
Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  post  %vo.  a^Zs.
Library  Edition,  5  vols.  %vo.  £0^.

Critical  and  Historical

Essays   contribnted  to  the
Edinburgh  Revieiv.
By  the  Right  Hon.  Lord
Macaiday.

Student's  Edition,  cro7vii  %vo.  6j-.
People's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  %vo.  %s.
Cabinet  Edition,  4  vols.  24s.
Library  Edition,  3  vols.  8vo.  36^.

Lord  Macatilays  Works,
Complete  and  tcniform  Li-
brary Editio7i.
Edited  by  his  Sister,  Lady
Trevelya7i.

8  vols.  Zvo.  xinth  Portrait,  £^.  ^s.

Memoirs  of  Baron  Stock-
mar.

By  his  Son,  Baron  E.  Von

Stockmar.       Translated

from  the  German  by  G.

A.  M.     Edited  by  Max

Midler,  M.A.

2  vols,  croivn  %vo.  21s.

Essays   on  the  Englist
Government  and  Constittc-
tion   from    the   Reign    of
Henry  VI I.  to  the  Present
Time.
By  John  Earl  Russell.

Fcp.  %vo.  y.  6d.

071    Parllan^e7^tary   Go-

veiiiment  in  Engla7id :  its
Origin,  Developmeiit,  and
Practical  Operation.
By  Alp  hens  Todd.

2  vols.  Zvo.  £1.  ijs.

The  Constitutional  His-
tory of  England  since  the
Accession  of  George  HI.
1 760-1 870.

By   Sir    Thoinas   Erskine
May,  K.C.B.

Fourth  Editio)i.  3  vols,  crown  ^vo.  \%s.

Democracy  in  Europe ;
a  History.

By    Sir   Thomas   Erskine
May,  K.C.B,

2  vols.  S7J0.  [/;/  preparation.

I^ectures  on  the  History

of  England  from  the  Ear-
liest Ti7nes  to  the  Death  of
King  Edward  11.
By  W.  Longman,  F,A.S.

Maps  and  Ilhistrations.     %vo.  i^s.

The  History  of  the  Life
and  Tifnes  of  Edzvard  HI.
By  W.  Longman,  F.A.S.

With  9  Maps,  8  Plates,  and  16  Woodcuts.
2  vols.  ^vo.  28j-.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

The  History  of  England
from  the  Earliest  Times  to
the  Year  1865.
By  C.  D,  Yongc.

Ncxo  Edition.      Crown  Zvo.  'js.  6d.

Three  Centuries  of  Mo-
dern History  1 494- 1 8 1 5 .
By  C.  Duke  Yojige,  B.A.

Cro'vu  %vo.  'js.  6d.

History  of  Civilization  in
England  and  France,  Spain
and  Scotland,
By  Heniy  Thomas  B tickle.

Cabinet  Edition.    3  vols.  cr.  %vo.  24s.

History  of  Mary  Stuart
Queen  of  Scots.    Translated
from  the  Original  MS.  of
Professor  Petit.
By    Charles    de    Flaiidrc,
F.S.A.  Scot.    Pt^ofessor
of  the  Frejick  Langiiage
and  Literattcre  in  Edin-
burgh.

With  2  Portraits.     2  vols.  ^to.  6y.

The  Studenfs  Manual  of

the  History  of  Ireland.
By  M.  F.  Cttsack.

Crown  Zvo.  ds.

4  Studenfs  Manual  of
the  History  of  Fidia  from
the  Earliest  Period  to  the
Present.

By  Col.  Meadows   Taylor,
M.R.A.S.

Second  TJioiisand.     Cr.  %vo.  MaJ^s,  ys.  6d.

The  French  Revolution

and    First    Empire;     an

Historical  Sketch.

By  W.  O'Connor  Morris,

sometime  Scholar  of  Oriel

College,  Oxford.

Post  %vo.      With  2  Maps.

\N early  ready.

The   History    of  India
from  the  Earliest  Period
to  the  close  of  Lord  Dal-
housies  A  dministration.
By  fohn  Clark  Marshman .

3  vols,  cro'vn  Zvo.  22s.  6d.

Indian  Polity ;  a  Viezv  of
the  System  of  Administra^
lion  in  India.
By   L  lent.  -  Colonel   George
Chesney.

Second  Editioji,  revised,  with  Map.   Svo.  21s.

Waterloo    Lectures ;     a
Stttdy  of  the  Campaign  of

1815.

By     Colonel     Charles    C
Chesney,  R.E.

l^Jiird  Edition.    Zvo.  with  Map,  los.  6d.

Essays  in  Modern  Mili-
tary Biography.
By    Colonel     Charles     C.
Chesney,  R.E.

8vo.  I2S.  6d.

The  Lniperial  and  Colo-
nial  Constitutions   of  the
Britannic  Empire,  inchid-
ing  Indian  Institutions.
By  Sir  E.  Creasy,  M.A.

With  6  Maps.     %vo.  \<^s.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

The  Oxford Refonners —

yoliii  Co  let,  Erasmus,  a7id
Thomas    Moi^e ;    being    a

History  of  their  Fellow -
Work.

By  Frederic  Seebohm.

Second  Edition.     %vo.  \^s.

The  History  of  Persia

and  its  present  Political
Sitttation  ;  zuith  Abstracts
of  all  Treaties  and  Con-
ventio7is  between  Persia  and
England,  a7id  of  the  Con-
vention with  Baron  Reader.
By  Cleinents  R.  Markham,
CB.  F.R.S.

Svo.  until  Map,  2.1s.

The    Mythology   of  the

Aryan  Nations.

By  Geo.  W.  Cox,  M.A.  late
Scholar  of  Trinity  Col-
lege, Oxford.

2  vols.  Zvo.  28 J-.

A  History  of  Greece.
By  the  Rev.  Geo.  W.  Cox,
M.A.    late    Scholar    of
Triiiity  College,  Oxford.

Vols.  I.  and  IT.    8z'o.  Maps,  ^6s.

The  History  of  Gj'eece.
By    C.    Thirhuall,    D.D.
Lord  Bp.  of  St.  David's.

8  vols.  fcp.  %vo,  28j-.

The   Tale  of  the  Great

Persian     War,    from    the
Plistories  of  Herodottts.
By  Rev.  G.  W.  Cox,  M.A.

Fcp.  %vo.  y.  6d.

The  History  of  the  Pelo-

p07i7iesian    War,   by    Thu-

cydides.

Translated  by  Richd.  Craw-
ley, Fellow  of  Worcester
College,  and  fomnerly
Scholar  of  University
College,  Oxford.

8z'<?.  \In  the  press.

Greek  History  from  The-

inistocles  to  Alexander,  in
a  Series  of  Lives  from
Plntarch.

Revised  and  arranged  by
A.  H.  Clongh.

Fcp.  %vo.  Woodcuts,  6j.

History  of  the  Romans

tmder  the  Empire.

By  the   Very  Rev.  Charles

Merivale,  D.C.L.  Dean

of  Ely.

8  vols,  post  %V0.  A^S.

The  Fall  of  the  Roman

Republic  ;  a  Short  History
of  the  Last  Century  of  the
Common  zuealth.
By  Dean  Merivale,  D.C.L.

\2mo.  Js.  6d.

The  Sixth  Orietttal  Mo-  \

na7xhy ;  or  the  Geography,
History,  and  Antiquities
of  Pa idh ia .  Collected  and
ninst rated  from  Ancient
and  Modern  soitrces.
By  Geo.  Rawlinson,  ALA.

With  Maps  and  Illustrations,     ^vo.  i  ^s.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

The  Sevejith  Great  Ori-
ental Mo7iarchy ;  or,  a
History  of  the  Sassanians  :
with  Notices  Geographical
a7id  Antiqtcarian.
By  Geo.  Rawlinson,  M.A,

Zvo.  with  Maps  and  Illustrations.

[In  the  press.

E^icyclopcBdia  of  Chro-
nology, Historical  and
Biographical ;  conipinsing
the  Dates  of  all  the  Great
Events  of  History,  inclnd-
ing  Treaties,  Alliances,
Wars,  Battles,  &c.  Inci-
dents in  the  Lives  of  Emi-
nent Men,  Scientific  and
Geog  raph ical  Discoveries,
Mechanical  Inve7itions,  and
Social,  Domestic,  and  Eco-
nomical Improvements.

By  B.  B.  Woodward,  B.A.
and  W.  L.  R.  Gates.

%V0.   42J-.

'^he  History  of  Rome.
By  Wilhelm  Ihne.     Eng-
lish Edition,  translated
and  revised  by  the  Au-
thor.

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Zvo.  ^os.

listory     of    Etirofean

Morals  from  Attgnst^ts  to

Charlemagne.

By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  M.A.

2  vols.  Zvo,  2  8 J.

History  of  the  Rise  and

Infltcence  of  the  Spi^dt  of
Rationalism  in  Europe.
By  W,  E.  H.  Lecky,  M.A.

Cabinet  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  %vo.  i6j'.

Introduction       to       the

Science  of  Religion  :  Four
Lectures  delivered  at  the
Royal  Institution ;  with
tivo  Essays  07i  False  Ana-
logies arid  the  Philosophy
of  Mythology.
By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.

Croivn  Sz'o.  los.  6d.

Socrates  aiid  the  Socratic
Schools.

Translated  fro7n  the  Ge7^-
man  of  Dr.  E.  Zeller,
zuith    the   Aut hoik's   ap-
proval, by  the  Rev.  O.  jf .
Reichel,  B.C.L.  M.A.

Croxv7i  Zvo.  8j.  6d.

The  Stoics,  Epicureans,
and  Sceptics.

Ti^anslated  from  the  Ger-
man of  Dr.  E.  Zeller,
with  the  Autho7^'s  ap-
pi^oval,  by  Oswald  y.
Reichel,  B.C.L.  M.A

Cro7vn  Zvo.  145-.

History  of  the  Early
Church  from  the  First
Preaching  of  the  Gospel  to
the  Council  of  Niccua,  a.d.
325.
By  Miss  E.  M.  Sewell.

Fcp.  Zvo.  4^-.  6(/.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

The  History  of  Philoso-
phy, from  r hales  to  Comte.
By  George  Henry  Lewes.

Fourth  Edition,  2  vols.  Zvo.  32^.

History  of  the  Catholic
Chtcrch  from  the  Death  of
fohii  to  the  Middle  of  the
Second  Cejitury ;  inc hiding
an  Account  of  the  Original
Organisatio7i  of  the  Chris-
tian Ministry,  and  the
Grozvth  of  Episcopacy.
By  the  Rev.  T.  W.  Moss-
man,  B.A.

Zvo.  i6j-.

Sketch  of  the  History  of

the  Church  of  England  to

the  Revohition  ^1688.

By  the  Right  Rev.  T.  V.

Short,  D.D.  Bishop  of

St.  Asaph.

Eighth  Edition.    Crown  Sz'o.  Js.  6d.

History  of  the  Christian

Church  fro7ii   the  Ascen-
sion of  Christ  to  the  Co7i-
version  of  Constantine.
By  E,  Burton,  D.D.

Fcp.  Sz'o.  3.r.  6d.

The  Historical  Geogra-
phy of  Eu7^ope.
By  Edward  A.  Freemaii,
D.C.L.    late  Fellozv   of
Trinity  College,  Oxford.

%vo.  Maps.

[If  I  the  press.

Essays  on  the  History  of
the  Christian  Religion.
By  John  Earl  Russell.

Fcp.  %vo.  y.  6d.

Epochs  of  History :    a
Series  of  Books  treating  of
the   History   of   England
and  Europe  at  Successive  i
Epochs    subsequent   to   the*
Chinstian  Era.
Edited    by     Edward    E.
Morris,  M.A.   of  Li7i-
cobi      College,     Oxford,
Head-Master      of      the
Bedfordshire      Middle-
Class  Public  School.

In  fcp.  %vo.  volumes  of  about  22)0  pp.  each.

The    Era   of  the    Pro-
testant Revolution.
By  F.  Seebohm,  Atithor  of
'  The  Oxford  Reformers
— Co  let,  Erasmus,  More!

[In  April.

The  Crusades.
By  the  Rev.   G.  W.   Cox,
AI.A.    late    Scholar  of
Trinity  College,  Oxford.

{In  May.

The  Thirty  Years  War,
1618-1648.

By  Samuel  Razuson  Gar-
diner,   late   Student    of

Christ  Church.       [/n  June.  J

The  Houses  of  Lancaster

and  York ;  with  the  Con-
quest and  Loss  of  France.
By  fames  Gairdner,  of  the

Public    Record     Office ;

Editor  of  '  The  Paston

Letters'  &c.

[I/t  the  press.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

BIOGRAPHICAL    ^VORKS.

A  utobiography.

By  John  SUtai^  Mill.

Life  a7td  Letters  of  Gil-

dert  Elliot,  Fii^si  Earl  of
Minto,  fi'oin  1751  to  1806,
luhen  his  Public   Life  in
Europe  was  closed  by  his
Appointnieiit  to  the   Vice-
Royalty  of  Lidia.
Edited     by     his      Grand-
Niece,    the    Countess    of
Minto.

3  vols,  post  %vo.  3 1  J.  6<:/.

Memoir  of  Thomas  First

Lord   Deiinian,   formerly

Lord     Chief   Jttstice     of

England.

By  Sir  Joseph  Arnonld,
B.A.  K.B.  late  Judge
of  the  High  Court  of
Bombay.

With  two  Portraits.   2  vols.  ^vo.  Z2s.

The  Life  of  Lloyd  First
Lord  Kenyan.
By  Hon.    G.    T.   Kenyan,
M.A.

With  Portraits.     Svo.  I^s.

Recollectiojts     of     Past

Life.

By  Sir  Henry  Holland,
Bart.  M.D.  F.R.S.  late

Physician  -  in  -  Ordinary
to  the  Queen.

Third  Edition.     PostZvo.  los.  6d.

Memoir  of  the  Life  of

Admii^al  Sir  Edward
William  Codrington  ;  with
Selectio7is  from  his  Coi^re-
spondence.

Edited  by   his  D aught er^
Lady  Bourchier.

With  Portraits,  Jllaps,  a  fid  Plans.     2  vols.
Zvo.  36X.

Shakespeare  s  Home  and

Rural  Life.

By  Ja7nes  Walter,  Major
A^th  Lancashire  Artil-
le7y  Vokinteers.  Coni-
p7nsing  a  Biographical
Narrative,  illustrated
by  about  lOO  Landscapes
and  Views  produced  by
the  Heliotype  Process
from  Photographs  taken
in  the  localities  expressly
for  this  work.

Imp.  \to.  5  2  J.  dd.

Bibliotheca  Cormtbiensis;

a  Catalogue  of  the  Writings,
both  MS.    and  printed,  of
Co7^nishnien      from      the
Earliest     Times,    and    of
Works     relating    to     the
Cotmty       of       Cornwall.
With    Biographical    Me-
moranda and  copious  Lite-
rary References.
By  G.  C.  Boase  and  W.
P.  Courtney.

Ill  two  volumes ;    Vol.    I   A.  -O.      /////.
2)V0.  2  IS.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

L^f^  of  Alexander  von

Hwnboldt.

Co7npiled,  ut  commemora-
tion of  the  Ce7itenaiy  of
his  Bii'th,  by  y ,  Loweu-
derg,  R.  A  vd-L  alternant,
and  A.  Dove.  Edited
by  Karl  B^^uhns,  and
ti^anslated  by  yane  and
Caroline  Las  sell.

With  3  Portraits.     2  vols.  8z'<?.  36j",

Biographical  and  Criti-
cal Essays,  reprinted  from
Reviews,    with    Additions
and  Co7n^ectio7is.
By  A.  Hay  ward,  Q.C.

Second  Scries,   2    vols.    Zvo.
Scries,  i  vol.  %vo.  I4J-.

28^'.  ;    Third

The  Life   of  Lsambard

Ki7igdo77i     B7^2i7iel,     Civil
E7igi7ieer.

By      lsambard      Brimel,
B.C.L.

With    Portrait,      Plates,     and    Woodcuts.
Zvo.  2\s.

Lord  George   Bentinck ;
a  Political  Biog7'aphy.
By    the    Right    Hon.    B.
Dis7-aeli,  M.P.

Eighth  Edition.      Cro7V7i  %z'0.  6s.

Memoir  of  George  Ed-
ward Ly7ich  Colt 071,  D.D.
Bishop  of  Calcutta;  zuith
Selections  fro7n  his  foicr-
nals  a7id  Correspo7ide7ice.
Edited  by  Mrs.  Cotto7i.

Second   Edition,    zuith    Portrait.       Croivn
Svo.  Js.  6d.

The  Life  and  Letters  of
the  Rev.  Syd7iey  S77iith.
Edited  by   his   D aught ery

Lady      Holla7id,      a7id

Mrs.  A2tsti7i.

Crown  Svo.  6s.

1

The  Life  and  Times  of

Sixties  the  Fifth.
ByBa7^07iHiib7ier.    Tra7is-

lated  by  Hubert  E.  H,

J  e7nii7igha77i.

2  vols.  Zvo.  24J.

Essays  in  Ecclesiastical
Biography.  '

By  the  Right  Ho7i.  Sir  J .
Stephe7i,  LL.D.

Cabinet  Edition.      Crown  %vo.  ']s.  6d.

Leaders  of  Public    Opi-

7iio7i  171  Irela7icl ;  Swift,
Flood,  Gratta7i,  G  Co7i7ielL
By  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  M.A.

Cro7vn  Zvo.  ^s.  6d.

Life    of   the    Duke     of

Welli7igto7i.

By  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig,
M.A.

Popiilar  EditioJi,    Crow7i   Zvo.    xvitJi   Por-
trait, 5.f.

Felix  Me7tdelssohn' s
Letters   fro77i    Italy    a7id
Szuitzerla7id,    a7id  Letters
fro77i  1833  to  1847.
Ti^a7islated  by  Lady  Wal-
lace.

With  Portrait.  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  ^s.  each.

NEW    WORKS    puELisHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

Dictionary    of    General

Biography  ;  containing
Concise  Mejuoij^s  and  No-
tices of  the  most  Emiiient
Persons  of  all  Cottntries,
from  the  Earliest  Ages  to
the  Present  Time.
Edited  by  W.  L.  R.  Gates.

SZ'O.   2  IS.

The  Rise  of  Great  F ami-

Essays

and

lies ;     other

Stories.

By    Sir   Bernard  Bnrke,

C.B.     LL.D.        Ulster

King-of-A  rms.

Crozvii  Svo.  I2S.  6cf.

Lives  of  the  Queens  of
England.
By  Agnes  StricklaVid.

I Abrary Edition^  witJi  Poi'iraiis,  AittograpJis,
and  V^igncttcs.  8  vols,  ^cst  Src.  'js.  6d.
each.

Memoirs  of  Sir  Henry
Havelock,  K.C.B.
Byjohn  Clark  Marshman.

People's  Edition^    with   Portrait.
%vo.  3^,  6.'/.

Crown

Vicissitudes  of  Families.
By  Sir  y .  Bernard  Burke,
C.B.       Ulster  King-of-
Arms.

Neiv  Edition,   remodelled    and    enlarged.
2  vols,  crown  Zvo.  2is.

MENTAL   and    POLITICAL    PHILOSOPHY.

The  System  of  Positive
Polity,  or  Treatise  ttpon  So-
ciology, of  Atigttste  Comte,
Author  of  the  System   of
Positive  Philosophy.
Translated  from  the  Paris
Edition   of   1851-1854,
a7id furnished  with  Ana-
lytical Tables  of  Contents.

\In  preparatioji.

In  Four  Voliunes,  ^vo.  to  be  published  sepa-
rately, and  each  forming  in  some  degree
an  independent  Treatise : —

Vol.  I.  The  General  Vie-tv  of  Positive
Polity  and  its  Philosophical  Basis.  Trans-
lated by  ^.  H.  Bridges,  yi.'^.  formerly  Fellow
of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.

Vol.  II.  The  Social  Statics,  or  the  Ab-
stract laws  of  Unman  Order.  Translated
by  Frederic  Harrison,  M.A,  of  Lincoln's
Inn.

Vol.  III.     The  Social  Dynamics,  or  the

General  Laivs  of  Human  Progress  [the  Phi-
losophy of  History).  T-an slated  by  JL.  S.
Beesly,  M.  A.  Professor  of  History  in  C/ni-
versity  College,  London.

Vol.    IV.     The  Ideal  of  the  Future  of
Mankind.  Translated  by  Richard  Congreve,
M.D.  formerly  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  IVad-
ham  College,  Oxford.

Essays  Critical  &  Nar-
rative, partly  original  and
partly  reprinted  from  the
Edinbui^gh,  Quarterly,  and
other  Reviews.
By  W.  Forsyth,  Q.C.  M.P.

Zz'o.  1 6 J".

Essays,  Political,  Social,
a7id  Religious.
By  Richd.  Congreve,  M.A.
M.R.CP.L.

I  vol.  %z\\

[In  the  press
B

10

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Essays  on  Freethinking
and  Plai7i speaking.
By  Leslie  Stephen.

Crozvn  ^I'o.  \os.  6d.

Essays     selected    froui

Contrib7ttions  to  the  Edin-
btirgJi  Reviezv.
By  Henry  Rogers.

Neiv  Editio7i,  in  tvhich  the  Literary  and
Theological  Essays  luill  be  classed  in  two
divisions,  each  of  which  may  be  pur-
chased separately.  [/n  preparation.

Selections  from  the  Cor-
respondence  of  R.  E.  H.
Greyson.
By  Henry  Rogers.

Nezv  Edition^  revised,    [/n  the  press.

On    Representative    Go-
vernvient.
By  John  Stuart  Mill.

Eourth  Edition,  croivn  %vo.  2s.

On  Liberty.

By  John  Stuart  Mill.

Post  %vo.  "js.  6d.  croivn  Zvo.  \s.  ^d.

Frinciples    of    Folitical

Economy.

By  John  Stnart  Mill.

2  vols.  %vo.  '}ps.  or  I  vol.  cro7vn  %vo.  ^s.

Essays  on  sonieUjisettled
Questions  of  Political  Eco-
nomy.
By  John  Stnart  Mill.

Second  Edition,     ^vo.  6s.  6d.

Utilitarianisn^.

By  John  Sticart  Mill.

Fottrth  Edition.     Svo.  ^s.

A     System     of    Logic,

Ratiocinative   and  Induc-
tive. By  John  Stttart  Mill.

Eighth  Edition.     2  vols.  Svo.  2^s.

Exaniinatiofi  of  Sir
William  Hamilto7i  s  Phi-
losophy, and  of  the  pi^inci-
pal  Philosophical  Qnestions
discitssed  in  his  Writino;s.
By  John  Sttiart  Mill.

Fourth  Edition.      Svo.  l6s.

TheSiibjection  of  Women.
By  John  Stnart  Mill.

Nno  Edition.     Post  Svo.  ^s.

Dissertations   and  Dis-

C7Lssions.

By  John  Sttiart  Mill.

Second  Edition.     3  vols.  Sz'o.  ^6s.

Analysis  of  the  Fheno-

niena  of  the  Hitman  Mind.

By    James    Mill.       New

Edition,      with     Notes,

ninstr alive  and  Critical.

2  vols.  Svo.  2Ss.

A    Systematic   View   of
the   Science  of  Jnrisprit-
dence.

By  Sheldon  Amos,  M.A.
Professor  of  Jtirispm-
dence    to    the    Inns    of
Court,  London.

Svo.  \Ss.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGIVIANS    8c    CO.

11

^  Primer  of  the  English
Constitictiou   and  Govern-
ment.
By  Sheldon  Amos,  M,A.

Nnv  Edition^  revised.     Post  '^vo.

[In  October.

^rineiples  of  Economical

Philosophy.

By  H.  D.  Macleod,  M.A,
Ba  7^rister-a  t-La  lu,

'ecojtd Edition,  in  2  vols.    Vol.  I.  %vo.  \^s.

The  Institutes  of  yus-
tinian ;  zuith  English  In-
trodnctiojiy  Titans  latio7i,
and  Notes.

By  T.   C,   Sandars,  M,A.
Barrister-at-Law.

N^ew  Edition,     "ivo.  15^.

Lord  Bacons  Works,
Collected  and  Edited  by  R.
L.  Ellis,  ALA.  J.  Sped-
ding,  M.A.  and  D.  D.
Heath.

inv  and  Cheaper  Edition.      7   "^'ol^.   St'c.

Letters     and    Life     of
F^'ancis   Bacon,   including
all  his  Occasional  PVoiVcs.
Collected  and  edited,   with

a    Commentary,    by   J .

Spcddiiig.

^ols.  I.  to  VI.  %vo.  £z-  I2X-       Vol.    Vn.
completing  the  luork,  is  nearly  ready.

The  Nicomachean  Ethics
of  A  ristotle.    Newly  trans-
lated into  English.
By  R,  Williams,  B.A.

SVO.    12S.

Phe  Politics  of  A  ristotle  ;

Greek  Text,  zuith  English

Notes.

By  Richard  Congreve,  M.  A .

Nezv  Edition,  revised.     Svo.

[In  the  press,

Phe  Ethics  of  Aristotle;
with  Essays  and  Notes.
By  Sir  A.   Grant,  Bart.
M.A.  LL.D.

Third  Editioji,  revised  and  partly  re-%vritten.

[In  the  press.

Bacons     Essays,     with
Annotations.
By  R.  Whately,  D.D.

Neiu  Edition.      Svo.  los.  6d.

Elements  of  Logic.
By  R.  Whately,  D.D.

N'eio  Edition,    'ivo.  los.  6d.  cr.  ^vo.  ^s.  6d.

Elements  of  Rhetoric.
By  R.  Whately,  D.D.

New  Edition.    Zvo.  los.  6d.  cr.  Zvo.  ^.  6d.

A  71  Outline  of  the  Neces-

saiy  Lazus  of  Thonght :  a

Treatise     on     Pure     and

Applied  Logic.

By  the  Most  Rev.  W.
Thomson,  D.D.  Arch-
bishop of  York.

Ninth  Thousand.    Croivn  Zvo.  ^s.  6d.

An  Introduction  to  Men-
tal Philosophy,  on  the  In-
ductive Method.
By  7.  D.  Morell,  LL.D.

8c V.    I2J-.

12

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

Elements  of  Psychology,
C07itaiiimg  the  Analysis  of
the  hitellectjtal  Powers.
By  7.  D.  Morcll,  LLP,

Post  %vo.  'js.  6d.

The  Secret    of  Hegel:
being  the  Hegelian  System
in  Oingin,  Principle,  Form,
and  Matter.
By  7.  H.  Stirling,  LL.D.

2  vols.    %V0.   2  8 J".

Sir  William  Hamilton  ;
bei7ig    the    Philosophy    of
Perception :  an  Analysis.
By  7.  H.  Stirlhig,  LL.D.

Zvo.  5  J".

The  Philosophy  of  Ne-
cessity;  or,  Nattn^al  Law
as  applicable  to  Mental,
Moral,  and  Social  Science.
By  Charles  Bi^ay.

Second  Edition.     %vo.  qj".

Time  and  Space  ;  a  Meta-
physical Essay.
By  S.  H.  Hodgson.

%vo.  i6j'.

The  Theory  of  Practice  ;

an  Ethical  Inqtiiry.
By  S.  H.  Hodgson.

2  vols.  %V0.  24J".

Ueberzueg  s    System     of
Logic,     and    History     oj
Logical  Doctrines.
Translated,  with  Notes  and

Appendices,    by    T.    M.

Lindsay, M. A.  F.R.S.E.

Zvo.  1 6 J.

The   Senses  and   the

Litellect.

By  A.  Bain,  LL.D.  Prof,
of  Logic,  Univ.  Aberdeen.

%V0.    1 5 J.

Mental    and    Moral
Science ;  a  Compe7idi2tin  oj
Psychology  and  Ethics.
By  A.  Bain,  LL.D.

Third  Edition.  Crown  Zvo.  \os.  6d.  Or
separately:  Part  I.  Mental  Science,  6s.  bd.
Fart  II.  Moral  Science,  /a^s.  6d.

A  Treatise  on  Human
Nature.  By  David  Hume.
Edited,  with  Notes,  &c.  by

T.  H.  Green,  Pel.  of  Bat.

Coll.  and  T.  H.  Gi^ose,

Pel.  &  Tutor  of  Queens

Coll.  Oxford.

2  vols.  Sz'o.  [In  Apiil.

Essays  Moral,  Political,
and  Literary .  By  D.Hume.
By  the  same  Editors.

2  vols.  8vo.  [I7i  the  press.

MISCELLANEOUS    &   CRITICAL   ^VORKS.

Miscellaneotis  and  Post-

htimous  Works  of  the  late

He^iry  Thomas  Btcckle.

Edited, with  a  Biogi^aphical

Notice,  by  Heleii  Taylor.

3  vols.  %vo.  £2.  \2s.  6d.

Short  Studies  on  Great
Sttbjects.

By  J.  A.  Proude,  M.A.
formerly  Pel  low  of
Exeter  College,  Oxford.

2  vols.  cro7vn  Zvo.  \2s.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

13

Lord  Macatdays  Mis-
cellaneo2is  Writings.

Library  Edition,  2 z^'^/j.  %vo.  Portrait,  i\s.
People's  Edition,  i  vol.  cr.  %vo.  \s.  6d.

Lord  Macaitlay's  Mis-
cellaneo7is  Writings  and
Speeches.

Crown  ?>z'o.  6s.

Speeches  of  the  Right
Hon.  Lord  Afacatclay,  cor-
rected by  Himself.

People's  Edition.      Crown  ?)V0.  "^s.  6d.

L  ordMacaulciy  sSpeeches
on  Parliaine7itary  Refoim
in  1 83 1  and  1832.

idmo.   \s.

The  Rev.  Sydney  Smith's
Essays  contributed  to  the
Edinburgh  Review.

Authorised  Edition,  complete  in  One  Volume,
Crozvn  Zvo.  2s,  6d.  setued,  or  y.  6d.  cloth.

The  Rev.  Sydney  Smith's
Miscellaneous  Works.

Crorun  Svo.  6s.

The  Wit  and  Wisdom  of
the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith ;  a
Selection  of  the  most  memo-
rable Passages  in  his  Writ-
ings and  Conversation.

Crown  %vo.  3^".  6d.

Manual  of  English  Lite-
rattu^e,      Historical     and
Critical,  with  a  Chapter  on
English  Metres.
By  Thomas  Arnold,  M.A.

Neiv  Edition.      Crcnvn  8r'c.  7.C  6d.

Realities  of  Irish  Life.
By  W.  Steiiart  Trench.

Cr.  Sz'o.  2s.  6d.  sewed,  or  y.  6d.  cloth.

Lectures  on  the  Science
of  Language.
By  F.  Max  Milller,  M.A.
&c.  Fo7^eign  Member  of
the  Fre7ich  Institute.

Seventh  Edition.     2  vols,  crown  Zvo.  i6s.

Chips  from   a    German

Workshop ;  being  Essays
on  the  Science  of  Religiony
ajid  on  Alythology,  Tradi-
tions, and  C^istoms.
By  F.  Max  Milller,  M.A.
&c.

3  vols,  Svo.  £2.

Families  of  Speech.

Four  Lecttires  delivered  at
the  Royal  Institution.
By  F.  W.  Farrar,  M.A.
F.R.S.

N'etv  Edition.      Croiun  Zvo.  '3J".  6d.

Chapters  on   Language.
By  F.    W.  Farrar,  M.A.
F.R.S.  Master  of  Marl -
borotigh  College.

New  Edition.      Crown  %vo.  <^s.

Sotitheys    Doctor,    com-
plete in  One  Vohcme.
Edited    by    Rev.    J.     W.
Warter,  B.D.

Square  croivn  Zvo.  \2s.  6d.

Three  Centuries  of  Eng-
lish Literaticre.
By  Charles  D.  Yonge,  B.A.

Cro7vn  %vo.   Js.  6d.

]i

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

A  Btidget  of  Paradoxes.
By  Aitgitstus  De  Morgan,
F.R.A.S,

Reprinted,  ivith  AjUhor''s  Additions^  from
the  Athenaeum.     %vo.  15^.

Recreations  of  a  Country
Parson.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Two  Series,  3^-.  6d.  each.

Seaside  Musings  on  Sim-
days  and  Weekdays.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Crown  Sz'o.  y.  6d.

Changed  Aspects  of  Uji-

changed    Tricths ;    Memo-
rials of  St.  Andrezus  Sun-
days.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Croxvn  %vo.  3J-.  6^/.

Counsel    and     Coinfort
from  a  City  Pidpit.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

CroTvn  Zvo.  y.  6d.

Les^sons  of  Middle  Age,
with  some  Acco2C7it  of  Va-
rious Cities  and  Men.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Crown  Zvo.  ^s.  6d.

Leisure  Hours  in  Town;
Essays  Consolatory, Aisthe-
tical,    Moral,    Social,   and
Domestic.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Crotvn  Sz'o.  3^".  6d.

The  Autumn  Holidays
of  a  Cozcnt7y  Parson.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Crow)i  Svo.  3j-,  6d.

Sunday    Afternoons    at
the  Parish    Chicrch   of  a
Scottish  University  City.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Croivn  Svo.  ^s.  6d.

IVte  Coniinonplace  Phi-
losopher   in     Town    and
Cozmtry.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Croivn  Sz'o.  ;^s.  6d.

Present-Day  Thoughts.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Crown  8z'o.  3^.  6d.

Critical    Essays     of    a
Cotmtry  Parson.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Crown  Sz'o.  3^.  6d.

The  Graver  Thoughts  of
a  Country  Parson.
By  A.  K.  H.  B.

Tzuo  Series,  3^.  6<:/.  each.

From   Jamiary  to   De-
cember  ;  a  Book  for  Children.

Second  Edition.     Sz'o.  3^".  6d.

Principles  of  Education,

drawn  from  Natitre  and
Revelation,  and  applied  to
Female  Education  in  the
Upper  Classes.
By  the  Aitthor  of  'Amy
Herbert!

2  vols.  fcp.  Svo.  I2s.  6d.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8l    CO.

15

The  OKeeffe  Case,  A
f2dl  Report  of  the  Case  of
the  Rev,  Rober^t  O Keeffe  v.
Cardinal  Cidlen,  mclMciing
the  Evidence  given  at  the
Trial  before  Lord  Chief
fustice  Whiteside^  and  the
yndgmejits  delivered  by  the
CourtofQueeii  s Bench  {Ire-
land) 7Lpon  the  Poi^its  of
Law  raised  by  the  Plead-
ings. With  an  Introdnction
by  H.  C  KirkpatiHck,
Ba}^rister-at-Laiv,

8w.    I2J-.

The  Election  of  Repre-

se7itatives,     Parliamentary

and  Municipal;  a  Treatise.

By  Thos.  Hare,  Barrister-

at-Lazv,

Fourth  Edition.     Post  %vo.  "js.

Miscellaneous    Writings
of  John  Co7iingto7t,  M.A.
late    Corp7LS   Professor   of
Latin  in  the  University  of
Oxford.

Edited  by  f ,  A,  Symonds.
M,A,  With  a  Memoir
by  H,  J,  S.  Smith,  M.A.

2  vols.    Zz'O.   2Zs.

DICTIONARIES    and    OTHER

REFERENCE.

BOOKS    of

A    Dictionary     of    the

English  Langicage.

By  R.  G,  Latham,  M.A.
M.D.  F.R.S.  Fou7zded
on  the  Dictionary  of  Dr.
S,  Johnson,  as  edited  by
the  Rev.  H.  J.  Todd,
with  nuniero2ts  Emenda-
tions and  Additions.

4  vols.  ^to.  £"].

Thesaitrns  of  English
Words  and  Phrases,  classi-
fied and  arranged  so  as  to
facilitate  the  expression  of
Ldeas,  and  assist  in  L  iterary
Coniposition,
By  P,  M.  Roget,  M,D,

Crmvn  Svo.  los.  6d,

English  Synonymes.
By  E,  J.  Whately.    Edited
by  Archbishop  Whately.

Fifth  FAlition.     Fcp.  %vo.  ^s.

A  Practical  Dictionary

of  the  Fre7ich  a7id  English

Languages.

By  Professor  Ldon  Contan-
sea2i,  many  years  French
Examiner  for  Military
and  Civil  Appointments,
&c.

Post  8zv.  \os.  (yd.

ContanseatL  s  Pocket  Die-
tio7iaiy,  French  and  Eng-
lish, abridged  from  the
Practical  Dictionary,  by
the  Author.

Square  \%)iic.  3j'.  (yd.

16

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    Sl    CO.

NezD  Practical  Diction^
a7y  of  the  German  Lan-
guage;     German  -  English
and  English-German,
By  Rev.  JV.  L.  Black  ley,

M.A.    and  Dj^.    C.  M.

Friedldnder.

Post  %vo.  7J-.  dd.

A  Dictionary  of  Roman
and  Greek  Antiquities.
With  about  2,000  Engrav-
ings on  Wood,  from  Ancient
Originals,  itlustrative  of
the  Indies  trial  Arts  and
Social  Life  of  the  Greeks
and  Romans.
By  Anthony  Rich,  B.A.

Third  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  'js.  6d.

The  Mastery    of  Lan-
guages;    or,   the    Art   of
Speaking  Foreign  Tongues
Idiomatically.
By  Thomas  Prendergast.

Second  Edition.     Zvo.  6^.

A  Practical  English  Dic-
tionary.
By  John  T.  White,  D.D.

Oxon.  and  T.  C.  Donkin,

M.A.

I  vol.  post  Zvo.  uniform  with   Contanseati's
Practical  French  Dictionary.

\In  the  press.

A    Latin-English   Dic-
tionary.

By  John  T,  White,  D.D.
Oxon.  and  J.  E.  Riddle,
M.A.  Oxon,

Ihird  Edition,  revised.     2  vols.  /^to.  ^2s.

White  s  College  Lati^i-
E  nglish  D  ic  t  io  nary ,
ab7ddged  from  the  Par  em
Work  for  the  tise  of  Uni-
versity Students.

Medinm  8zv?.  \Zs.

A  Latin -English  Dic-
tionary for  Middle-Clasi^
Schools,  abridged  from  the
ytmior  Student's  Latin-
English  Dictionary.
By  John   T.  White,  D.D,

0X071.

iS  7no.  \_In  the  press

White  syimior  St  lidenf  s
Complete  Latin  -  English
a7td  E7iglish- Latin  Die-
tio7iary.

Square  \2nio.  I2s.

c.       .7    r  English-Latin,  Ks.  6d.
^./am/./j  I  Latin-English,  7..  6d

A  Greek-English  Lexi

C071.

Co7npiled  by  H.  G.  Liddell,
D.D.  Dean  of  Ch7nst-
chiurh,  a7id  R.  Scott,
D.D.  Dea7i  of  Rochester,

Sixth  Edition.      Crown  \to.  36^.

A  Lexicon,  Greek  and
E7iglish,  ab7ndged  for
Schools  f 7^0771  Liddell  a7ia
Scotfs  Greek  -  EnMish
Lexicon.

Fourteenth  Edition.     Square  i2mo.  Js.  6d.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    Sl    CO.

17

471  English-Greek  Lexi-
con, containhig  all  the  Greek
Words  tised  by  Writers  of
good  a2ithority.
By  C.  D.  Vouge,  B.A.

Nnv  Edition.     \to.  2\s.

Mr.  Yonges  New  Lexicon,
English  and  Greek,  abiadgcd
fi^om  his  larger  Lexicon.

Sqjiare  i2vio.  8j-.  6d.

4  Sanskrit-English  Dic-
tionary.
Compiled  by  T.  Benfey.

I/'  Cullochs  Dictionary,
Practical,  Theoretical,  and
Historical,  of  Commerce
and  Commercial  Naviga-
tion. New  Edition,  revised
and  corrected  to  the  Preseiit
Time ;  with  a  Biographical
Notice  of  the  Anthor.
Edited  by  H.  G.  Reid.

Zvo.  63X,

The  Post  Office  Gazetteer

of  the  United  Kingdom  :  a
Complete  Dictionary  of  all
Cities,  Tozuns,  Villages,  and
of  the  Principal  Gentle-
men s  Seats,  in  Gi^eat  Bri-
tain and  Ireland,  i^ef erred
to  the  nearest  Post  Toiun,
Railway  &  Telegraph  Sta-
tion ;  with  Natural FeatiLres
and  Objects  of  Note.
By  y,  A.  Sharp.

In  I  z'ol.  2>i'o.  of  ah  oil  t  1,^00  fa ges.
\_In  the  press.

A  General  Dictionary
of  Geography,  Descriptive,
Physical,  Statistical,  and
Historical ;  forming  a  com-
plete Gazetteer  of  the  World.
By  A.  Keith  Johnston,
F.R.S.E.

Neiv  Edition,  tJioroiighly  revised.

\In  tJie  press.

The  Public  Schools  A  lias
of  Modern  Geogi^aphy.  Pi
3 1  Maps,  exhibiting  clearly
the  more  important  Physi-
cal Eeatnres  of  the  Cotin-
tries  delineated,  and  noting
all  the  Chief  Places  of  His-
torical, Commercial,  and
Social  htterest.
Edited,  with  IntrodzLction,
by  Rev.  G.  Bntler,  M.A.

Imperial qiiarto^  3.r.  dd.  sewed;  ^s.  cloth.

The  Public  Schools  Ma-
meal  of  Modern  Geography.
Forming  a  C on p anion  to
'  The  Ptcblic  Schools  Atlas
of  Modern  Geogi^aphyl
By  Rev.  G.  Butler,  M.A.
Principal  of  Liverpool

Colleo-e.

\_In  the  press.

The  Public  Schools  Atlas
of  Ancient  Geography.
Edited,  with  an  Introduc-
tion on  the  Stitdy  of  An-
cient Geography,  by  Rev.
G.  Butler,  M.A.  Prin.
cipal  of  Liverpool  Coll.

Imperial  Quarto.

\I}i  the  press.

c

18

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

ASTRONOMY    and    METEOROLOGY.

The  Universe  and  the
Coining  Traiisiis :  P^^e-
senting  Researches  into  and
New  Views  respecting
the  Constitntion  of  the
Heavens ;  together  zuith  a7i
hivestigation  of  the  Condi-
tions of  the  C07ning  Transits
of  VemLS.  \B.ecently  con-
firniedby  a  7i.naninious  Vote
of  the  chief  Astronomers  of
Great  Britain.\
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.

With  12,  Charts  and  22  Diagj-auis.   Zvo.  ids.

Essays  on  Astronomy,
A  Series  of  Papers  on
Pla7iets  a7id  Meteors,  the
Sun  and  S7i7i-siLr}^on7idi7ig
Space,  Stars  and  Sta7^
Clondlets.
By  R.  A,  Proctor,  B.A.

Ifith  lo  Plates  and  2^  JVoodaits.    Zz'o.  I2s.

The  Moon  ;  her  Motions,
Aspect,  Sce7ie7y,  a7id  Phy-
sical Co7iditio7i.
By  R.  A.  Pi^octor,  B.A.

With  Plates,  Charts,  Woodcuts,  and  I.uiiar
Photographs.      Croncn  ^vo.  l^s.

The  Sun  ;  Rttler,  Light,
Fire,  a7id  Life  of  the  Pla-
7ieta7y  Syste77i.
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.

Second  Edition.    Plates  and  Woodcicts.    Cr.
Sz'o.  i/^s.

Saturn  and  its  System,
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.

Zvo.  zuith  14  Plates,  14^-.

The  Orbs  Around  Us;  a
Series  of  Fa7niliar  Essays
071  the  Moo7t  a7id  Pla7iets,
Meteors  a7td  Comets,  the
Sim  a7id  Coloured  Pai7^s  of
Sims.
By  R.  A.  Pi-octor,  B.A.

Crozvn  Svo.  Js.  6d.

Other  Worlds  than  Ours;
The  Plui^ality  of  Worlds
Studied  under   the   Light \
of  Rece7it    Scie7itific    Re-
searches.
By  R.  A.  Pi^octor,  B.A.

Third  Edition,  with  14  Illustrations.      Cr.
%vo.  lOs.Sd.

Br inh  ley's     A  strononiy.
Revised  a7id partly  re-w7dt-
te7i,  with  Additio7ial  Chap-
ters, a7id  an  Appe7idix  of
Questio7is  for  Exa77ii7iatio7i.
By  John  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.
Tel.  a7id  Tutor  of  Ti^i7i.
Coll.  and  F.    Brim7iow,
Ph.D.  Asti^oftomer  Royal
of  L^ela7id,  and  Prof,  of
Astro7io7ny  in  the  U7ii-
versity  of  Dublin.

Crozvii  '^vo.  ()s.

NEW-  WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

19

littlmes  of  Astronomy,
By  Sir  J.  F,  W,  Hersckel,
Bart.  M,A.

■itest  Editio?i,  zuith  Plates  and  Diagrajiis.
Square  crown  Zvo.  \2s.

i  New  Star  Atlas,  for

the  Library,  the  School,  and
the  Observatory,  in  1 2  Cir-
cular Maps  {zvith  2  Index
Plates).  Intended  as  a  Com-
panion to  '  Webb's  Celestial
Objects  for  Common  Tele-
scopes! With  a  Letterpi^ess
IntrodiLction  on  the  Study
of  the  Stars,  ilhtstrated  by
9  Diagrams.
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A.

Crcnvn  Svo.  ^s.

'^elestial  Objects  for  Com-
mon Telescopes.
By    T.    W.    Webb,    M.A.
F.R.A.S.

eiv  Edition,  ivith  ]\Iap  of  the  Moon  and
IVoodcnts.      Cro^un  Svo.  Js.  6d.

\  argerStarA  t  las, for  the

Library,  in  Twelve  Cir-
ctdar  Maps,  i  '^in.  diameter,
copJainino-  all  the  Stars
visible  to  the  naked  eye  and
about  1,500  Objects  of
Interest,  viz.  Red  Stars,
Double  Stars,  &c.  Photo-
lithogi^aphed  by  A.  Bro-
thers, F.R.A.S.  With  2
Index  Plates  ajid  a  Letter-
p  ress  In  troductio7t.
By  Richard  A.  Proctor,
BA.  F.R.A.S.

Second  Edition.     Small  folio,  2^s.

Magnetism  and  Devia-
tion of  the  Compass.  For
the  tcse  of  Students  in  Navi-
gation and  Science  Schools.
By  y.  Merrifield,  LL.D.

\%mo,  \s.  6d.

Doves  Law  of  Storms,

C07iside7^ed  in  connexion  with
the  oj'dinaiy  Move77ients  of
the  Atiuosphere.
Translated  by  R.  H.  Scott,
M.A.

'^z'o.  los.  6d.

Air  and  Rain  ;  the  Be-

gi7inings    of    a    Chemical

Cli7iiatology.

By  R.  A.  S7nith,  Ph.D.
F.R.S.  F.C.S.  Govt.  I7i-
spector  of  Alkali  Works.

Zvo,  2^S.

Natttical  Surveying,  an
l7itroductio7i  to  the  Practi-
cal adid  Theoretical  Stiidy

of.    ^

By  yolui  K710X  Laughto7i,
M.A.  F.R.A.S.

Small  Zvo.  ds.

Schelleris  SpectrnmA  na-

lysis,  i7i  its  Applicatio7i  to

Te7^restrial  S7ibsta7ices  a7id

the  Physical  Co7istitutio7i  of

the  Heave7ily  Bodies.

Tra7islated  by   ya7ie   a7id

C.  Lassell ;  edMed,  with

Notes,  by   W.  H2iggi7is,

LL.D.  F.R.S.

With  13  Plates  and 22-^  Woodcuts.    Zvo.  2%s.

20

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

NATURAL     HISTORY    and     PHYSICAL

SCIENCE.

The  Correlation  of  Phy-
sical Forces.
By  the  Hon.   Sir    W.  R.

Grove,    M.A.     F.R.S.

&c.

Sixth  Edition,  luith  other  Contributions  to
Science.     Zvo.  [In  the  press.

Professor  Hehnholtz

Popular  Lecttu^es  on  Scien-
tific Sndjects.
Translated  by  E.  Atkinson,
Ph.D.  PCS.

With  many  Illnstrative  Wood  Engravings.
Svo.  12S.  6d.

Natural  Philosophy  for

General  Readers  and  Young
Persons  ;  a  Course  of  Phy-
sics divested  of  Mathemati-
cal For^nulcE  and  expressed
in  the  language  of  daily  life.
Iraiislated  from    Ganol s

Co7trs  de  Physique,  by  E.

Atkinson,  Ph.D.  P.C.S.

Cr.  Zvo.  with  404  Woodcuts,  'js.  6d.

Ganofs    Elementary
Treatise  07i   Physics,   Ex-
perimental   and    Applied,
for  the  use  of  Colleges  and
Schools.

Tra7islated  and  edited  by  E.
Atkijison,  Ph.D.  P.C.S.

JVew  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged ;  ivith  a
Coloured  Plate  and  726  JVoodcuts.
Post  Zvo.  i^s.

Principles    of    Aniinal

Mechanics.

By  the  Rjj.  S.  Haughton,
F.R.S.

Second  Edition.     Zvo.  2\s.

Text-Books  of  Science,
Mechanical  and  Physical^
adapted  for  the  use  of  Ai^ti-
sans  and  of  Students  in\
Pitblic  and  other  Schools.
{The  first  Ten  edited  by
T  M.  Goodeve,  M.A.  Lec-
ttcrer  on  Applied  Science  at
the  Royal  School  of  Mines;
the  remainder  edited  by
C  W.  Merrifield,  F.R.S.
an  Exami^ier  in  the  De-
partment of  Public  EdiLca-
tio7i)

Small  %vo.      Woodcuts.

Edited  by  T.  M.  Goodeve,  M.A.

Anderson's  Strength  of  Materials,  3^-.  (id,
Bloxam's  Metals,  3^.  6a'.
Goodeve's  Mechanics,  3j".  6^.

—  Mechanis7)i,  3^.  6d.

Griffin's  Algebra  ^  Trigonometry,  3.?.  6d.

Azotes  on  the  same,  ivith  Solutions,  3J.  6d.
Jenkin's  Electricity  &^  Magnetism,  ^s.  6d.
Maxwell's  Theory  of  Heat,  t^s.  6d.
Merrifield's  Technical  Arithmetic,   3^.  ()d.

Key,  y.  ed.
Miller  s  Inorganic  Chemistry,  "^s.  6d.
Shelley's  Workshop  Appliances,  3^.  dd.
Watson's  Plane  &=  Sol'd  Geometry,  ^s.  6d.

Edited  by  C.  W.  Merrifield,  F.R.S.

Armstrong's  Orgayiic  Che??iistry,  y.  6d.
Thorpe's  Quantitative  Afialysis,  ^s.  6d.
Thorpe  and  Muir's    Qualitative  Analysis,
2,s.  6d.

Text-Books  in  preparation  : —

To  be  edited  by  T.  M.  Goodeve,  M.A.—

Goodeve's  Steam  Engine.
Shelley's  Applications  of  Heat.
Stokes's  ^5'f//;/f/  and  Light.

To  be  edited  byC.W.  Merrifield,  F.R.S.—

Butler's  Physical  Geography.

Merrifield's      Geometry     and     Mechanical

Dra7i.iing.
Preece  aiid  Sivewright's  Telegraphy.
Unwin's  Machine  Desii^n.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

21

IjitrodMction  to  Experi-
mental Physics,  Theoretical
and  Practical ;  including
Directions  for  Construct-
ing Physical  Apparat^Ls
and  for  Makijig  Experi-
ments.

By  A.  F.  Weinhold,  Pi^of
in  the  Royal  Technical
School  at  Chemnitz.
Translated  and  edited
by  B.  Loewy,  F.R.A.S.
With  a  P^'eface  by  G.  C.
Foster^  F.R.S.

With  numcrotis  Woodcuts.     %vo.  \%s.
[In  the  press.

Fragments  of  Seience.
By  fohn  Tyndall,  LL.D.
D.C.L.  F.R.S.

Third  Edition.     %vo,  \\s.

Heat  a  Mode  of  Motion.
By  John  Tyndall,  LL.D.
D.C.L.  F.R.S.

Fourth  Edition.
\os.  6d.

Cr.  ^vo.  with  Woodcnts,

Soimd;  a  Course  of  Eight

Lectures   delivered    at   the

Royal  Institution  of  Great

Britain.

By  John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.

Fo7'trait  and  Woodcuts.      Cr.  Svo.  gs.

Researches  07i  Diamag-

netisni  and Magne-Crystal-

lic  Action;    incl2tdi7ig   the

Qtcestion    of   Diamagnetic

Polarity.

By  John  Tyndall,  F.R.S.

mth  6  Plates  and  many  Woodcuts,  %vo.  i^s.

Lect tires  on    Light,   de-

livered  in  the  United  States
of  A7nerica  in   1872   and

1873.

By  J.  Tyndall,  F.R.S.

Cro2vn  %vo.  *]s.  6d.

Notes  of  a  Course  of
Seven  Lectures  on  Electri-
cal Pheno?nena  and  Theo-
ries, delivered  at  the  Royal
Institution,  a.d.  1870.
By  J.  Tyndall,  F.R.S.

Crozvn  Sz'o.  is.  seived,  or  \s.  6d.  cloth.

Notes  of  a  Course  of  Nine
Lectures  on  Light,  delivered
at  the  Royal Listitutio7i  a.d.
1869.
By  J.  Tyndall,  F.R.S.

Crozvn  Svo.  is.  setved,  or  \s,  6d.  cloth.

Elementary  Treatise  on
the  Wave-Theory  of  Light.
By  H.  Lloyd,  D.D.  D.C.L.
Provost  of  Trinity  Col-
lege, Dublin.

Third  Edition.     Zvo.  \os.  6d,

Professor  Owens  L^ec-
tures  on  the  Comparative
Anatomy  and  Physiology
of  the  Invertebrate  Ani-
mals.

2nd  Edition,  ivith  235  Woodcuts.    %vo.  2ls.

The  Comparative  Ana-
tomy and  Physiology  of  the
Vertebrate  Animals.
By  Richard  Ozven,  F.R.S.
D.C.L.

With  1,472  Woodcuts,  yjols.  ^vo.  /^^.  i^s.dd

22

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    ^    CO.

Light  Science  for  Lei-
S7ire  Ho2irs ;  a  Series  of
Familiar  Essays  on  Scien-
tific S7Lbjccts,  Nahi7^al  Phe-
nomena, &c.
By  R.  A,  Proctor,  B.A.

First  and  Second  Series.     2  vols,  croivn  Zvo.
'js.  6d.  each.

Kirby  and  Spences  /;/-
trod^tction  to  Entomology,
or  Elements  of  the  Natni^al
Histoiy  of  Lisects.

Croiun  Svo.  ^s.

Strange  Dwellings  ;  a  De-
scription of  the  Habitatio7is
of  A  7ii77ials,  abridged  fr 0771
'  Homes  zuitho7it  Ha7ids!
By  y.  G,  Wood,  ALA.
KL.S,

With  Frontispiece  and  6o  Woodcuts.  Croivn
%vo.  'JS.  6d.

Homes  withottt  Hands  ;
a  Desc7^iptio7i  of  the  Habi-
tatio7is  of  A7ii77tals,  classed
axcordi7ig  to  their  P7H7iciple
of  Co7istr7Lctio7i.
By  the  Rev,  J,  G,  Wood,
M.A,  KL.S.

With  abotit  140  Vignettes  on  Wood.  8: v.  2ls.

Otit  of  Doors  ;  a  Series
of  Essays  07i  Natter al  His-
to7y.

By  the  Rev,  J,  G.  Wood,
M.A.RLS.  Atithor  of
'  Ho77ies  withoid  Ha7ids '
&c.

With  6  Illustrations  from  Original  Designs
ejigraved  on  Wood  by  G.  Pearson.  Cr.
%vo.  \_In  the  press.

\

The  Polar  World:  a
Pop2tlar  Descriptio72-  of
Ma7i  a7id  N^atiire  i7i  the
Arctic  a7id  A7itarctic  Re-
gio7is  of  the  Globe.
By  Dr.  G.  Hartivig.

With  Chromoxylographs^  Maps,  and  Wood-
cuts.    Svo.  los.  6d.

The  Harmonies  of  Na-
t7i7^e  a7td  U7iity  of  Creatio7t.
By  Dr.  G.  Ha7^twig.

Svo.  with  nnnierons  Illnstrations,  iSs.

The  Sea  and  its  Living
Wo7iders.  j

By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig.  \

Fourth  Edition,  enlarged.  Svo.  ivith  many
Illustrations,  \0s.  6d.

The  Tropical  World ;  a

Popular  Scie7itific  Acco7mt
of  the  Nattcral  Histo7y  of
the  Eqitatorial  Regio7is.
By  Dr.  G.  Ha7^twig.

With  about  200  Illustrations.    Svo.  \os.  6d.

The  Subterranean  World.
By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig.

With  Maps  and  Woodcut  Illustrations.  Svo.
2IS.

Geology    Siniplified  for

Begi7i7iers.

By  A.  C.  Ra77isay,  LL.D.
F.R.  S.  Di7^ector-  Ge7ie7'al
of  the  Geological  S7i7'veys
of  the  U7iited  Ki7igdo77i.

{Forming  part  of  the  School  Series  in  course
of  piddication^  edited  by  the  Rev.  G.  R.
Gleig,  M.A.)     \Smo.     \In  the  press.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

23

Insects  at  Home;  aPopit-

laj""  Account  of  British
Insects,  their  Stjmctitre,
Habits,  and  Transforma-
tions.

By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,
M.A.  F.L.S.

With  upivards  of  700  Woodait  Illustrations.

%"J0.    2\S.

Insects  Abroad ;  being  a
Pop  nla  rA  ccou  n  t  of  Foreign
Insects,  theirStructtcre,  Ha-
bits, and  Transformations .
By  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.
F.L.S.

In  I  vol.  printed  and  illustrated  nniformly
tvith  ^Insects  at  Home.''     [In  the  press.

A  Familiar  History  of
Bii^ds.

By  E.  Stanley,  D.D.  late
Id.  Bishop  of  No7^wich.

Fcp.  with  Woodcuts,  3^.  dd.

Rocks  Classified  and  De-
scribed.
By  B.  Von  Cotta.

English  Edition,  by  P.  H.  Lawrence  {jvith
English,  German,  and  French  Sytio-
nymes),  revised  by  the  Author.  Post
iiz'O.  14s.

The  Origin  of  Civilisa-
tion, and  the  Pri7nitive
Condition  of  Man;  Men-
tal and  Social  Condition  of
Savages.

By  Sir  J .  Lnbbock,  Bart.
M.P.  F.R.S.

Second  Edition,  7vith  2^  Woodcuts,    'ivo.  \(is.

The   Earth  and  Man ;

or,  Physical  Geography  in

its  relation  to  the  History

of  Mankind.

Tra^islated  and  slightly
abridged  from  theFi^ench
of  A.  Guyot,withCo7^rec-
tions,  Notes,  and  Index.

Fcp.  %vo.  2s.

A  Manual  of  Anthro-
pology, or  Science  of  Man,
based  on  Afodern  Research.
By  Charles  Bray.

Crown  %vo.  5-$".

A  Phrenologist  amongst
the  Todas,  or  the  Study  of
a  Primitive  Tribe  in  Sonth
India;  Histoiy,  Character,
Customs,  Religion,  Infanti-
cide, Polyandry,  Language.

By  W.  E.  Marshall,  Lieut. -
Col.  Bengal  Staff  Corps.

With  26  Illustrations.     %vo.  2ls.

The  Ancient  Stone  Ini-
p lenient s.  Weapons,  and  Or-
naments of  Great  Britain,
By   John   Evans,  F.R.S,
F.S.A.

With  2  Plates  and  476  Woodcuts.    Zvo.  2^s.

The  Elements  of  Botany
for  Families  and  Schools.
Tenth  Edition,  revised  by
Thomas  Moore,  F.L.S.

Fcp.  tuith  154  Woodcuts^  2s.  6d.

24

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

Bid/e  Anhuals ;  a  De-
scription of  every  Living
Creature  mentioned  in  the
Scriptures,  front  the  Ape
to  the  Coral.

By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,
M.A.  F.L.S.

With  about  lOo  Vignettes  on  Wood.   Szv.  2IJ-.

The     Rose     Amateur  s
Gnide.
By  TJiomas  Rivers.

Tenth  Edition.     Fcp.  Zvo.  d^s.

A  Dictionary  of  Science,

Literatitre,  and  Art.

Fonrth  Edition,  re-edited,
by  the  late  W.  T.  Brande
(the  A  uthor)  a7id  George
W,  Cox,  M.A.

3  vols,  mcdiuni  %vo.  (>'},s.

London  s    Encyclopcedia

of  Plaiits  ;  coniprisiiig  the
Specific  Character,  Descrip-
tion, C^ilttire,  History,  &c.
of  all  the  Plants  foimd  in
Great  Britai?i.

With  upivards  of  1 2, ooo  Woodcuts.   %vo.  \2s.

The  Treasury  of  Botany,
or  Popular  Dictionary  of
the  Vegetable  L^ingdoin ;
with  which  is  incoiporated
a  Glossary  of  Botanical
Terms.
Edited     by     f.     Lindley,

D.R.S.    a? id    T.  Moore,

F.L.S.

With   274   Woodcuts  and  20  Steel  Plates.
Two  Paris,  fcf.  2>vo.  I2r.

LLandbook     of     LLardy

Trees,  Shrnbs,  Herbaceous,
Plants ;    containing    Des-
cinptions,  Native  Countries,^
&c.   of  a  selection  of  tht
Best  Species  in  Ctdtivation ,
together  with  Ctdtnral  De-
tails, Comparative  Lfardi-
ness,  stdtability  for  particu-
lar positions,   &c.     Based
on    the  French    Work   of
Messrs.       Decaisne       and
N^audin,  and  including  the
720      Original      Woodcut
Illustrations.

By  W.  B.  Hems  ley,  former-
ly Assistant  at  the  Her-
barium of  the  Royal
Gardens,  I^ew.

Medium  Svo.  21s.

A    General   System    of
Descriptive  and  A  nalytical
Botany:  I.  Organography,
Anatomy,   and  Physiology
of  Plants  ;  II.  Iconography,  ^
or  the  Description  and  His-  .
lory  of  Natural  Families.  \

Translated  from  theFrench
of  E.  Le  Maout,  M.D.
and  J .  Decaisne,  by  Mrs.
Hooker.  Edited  and
arranged  according  to  the
Botanical  System  adopted
in  the  Universities  and
Schools  of  Great  Britain,
by  y.  D.  Hooker,  M.D.
&c.  Director  oftheRoyal
Botanic  Gardens,  Kew.

With  ^.,<pQ Woodcuts.  IniperialZvo.  ^2s.6d.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

25

CHEMISTRY,     MEDICINE,    SURGERY,    and
the    ALLIED     SCIENCES.

4    Dictionary   of   Che-
mistry   and    the     Allied
Branches  of  other  Sciences.
By  Henry    Watts,  F.C.S.
assisted       by       eminent
Scientific  and  Practical
Chemists,

6  vols,  incdiiuji  Zvo,  £%.  14X,  6c/.

Second  Supplement  com-
pleting the  Record  of  Dis-
covery to  the  e7id  of  1872.

\In  the  press.

Contribtitions    to    Mole-

cttlar   Physics   in    the  do-
main of  Radiant  Heat.
By  John  Tyndall,  D.R.S.

With  2  Plates  and  31   Woodcuts.     Svo.  i6s.

A  Manual  of  Chemical
Physiology,  inchiding  its
Points  of  Contact  with
Pathology.

By  y.  L.  W.  Thtcdichum,
M.D.

Szjo.  with  Woodcuts,  'js.  6d.

Millers     Elemeitts     of

Chemistry,  Theoretical  and
Practical.

Re-edited,  with  Additions,
by  H.  Macleod,  F.C.S.

3  vols.  Svo.  £2,.

Part     I.  Chemical  Physics,  i5j-.
Part    II.  Inorganic  Chemistry,  21s.
Part  III.  Organic  Chemistry,  24^-.

A    Course   of  Practical

Chemistry,  for  the  2ise  of
Medical  Students.
By  W.  Odling,  F.R.S.

New  Edition,  with  70  new  Woodctits.
CroT.vn  Sz'o.  Js.  6d.

Select  Methods  in  Chemi-
cal Arialy  sis,  chiefly  Inor-
ganic.
By  Wm.  Crookes,  F.R.S.

With  22  Woodcuts.      Croxvn  ^vo.  \2s.  6d.

Lectures  on  the  Prin-
ciples and  Practice  of
Physic.

By  Sir  Thomas  Watson,
Bart.  M.D.  Physician-
in -  Ordhiary  to  the  Q iieen .

Fifth  Edition,  thoroughly  revised.     2  vols.
Zvo.  36j",

Lectures     on      Surgical

Pathology.

By  Sir  fames  Paget,  Bart.
F.R.S.  Third  Edition,
revised  and  re-edited  by
the  A  nthor  and  Professor
W.  Tttrner,  M.B.

2>vo.  with  131  Woodcuts,  21s.

On  the  Surgical  Treat-
ment of  Children  s  Diseases.
By  T.  Holmes,  M.A.  &c.
late  Sicrgeon  to  the  Hos-
pital for  Sick  Children.

Second  Edition,   7vith    9   Plates   and    112
Woodcuts.      Svo.  2 IS.

D

2G

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Anatomy,      Descriptive

and  Sti7'gicaL

By  Heniy  Gray,  F.R.S.
With  about  410  Wood-
ctcts  frofii  Dissections.
Sixth  Edition,  by  T,
Holmes,  M.A.  With  a
New  Introdttction  by  the
Editor.

Royal  %vo.  2.%s.

Quains     Elements      of

Anatomy.

Seven  th  Edition  [1867].
Edited  by  W.  Sharpey,
M.D.  F.R.S.  Allen
Thomson,  M.D.  F.R.S.
and  y .  Cleland,  M.D.

With  ujnvards  of  800  Engravings  on  Wood,
2  vols.  %vo.  31^'.  (id.

A  System  of  Sttrgery,
Theoretical  and  Practical,
in  Treatises  by  Vario7ts
Anthors.

Edited  by  T.  Holmes,
M.A.  &c.  S^u^geon  a7id
Lecturer  on  Stirgery  at
St.  George  s  Hospital.

Second  Edition,  with  -jmnicrons  Illustrations.
5  vols.  %vo.  £S-  5^-

The  Science  and  Art  of

Surgery ;  being  a  Treatise
on  S^irgical  Injtiries,  Dis-
eases, and  Operatio7is.
By  John  Eric  Erichseji,
Senior  Surgeon  to  Ujii-
versity  College  Hospital.

Sixth  Edition,    revised  and  enlarged,  with
712  Woodcnts.     2  vols.  Svo.  ^2s.

A  Treatise  07i  the  ConM
tinned    Fevers    of    Great
Britaiii.
By  Chas.  Murchison,  M.D,

LL.D.  F.R.S.  F.R.C.P,

&c.

Second  Edition,  with  tiunierous  Illustrations,
Svo.  24s.

Clinical  Lectures  on

Diseases     of    the     Liver,

faundice,  and  Abdominal

Dropsy.

By  C.Mitrchison,  M.D.  &c.

New  Edition  in  preparation.

Todd     and     Bowman  s

Physiological  A  natomy,  and
Physiology  of  Man.

With  numerous  Illustrations.     Vol.  II.  Svo.
2SS.

Vol.  I.  New  Edition  by  Dr.  Lionel  S.
Beale,  F.R.S.  in  course  of  publication,
loith  nuinej'ous  Illustrations.  Parts  I.  and
II.  *]s.  6d.  each.

Outlines   of  Physiology,

Human  and  Comparative.

By  J.  Marshall,  F.R.C.S,
S^trgeon  to  the  Univer-
sity College  Hospital.

2  vols.  cr.  Svo.  7vith  122  Woodcuts,  32^.

On  the  Sttrgical  Diseases

of  the  Teeth  and  Contigtc-

ous  St7^uctures.    With  their

Treatment.

By  S.  J.  A.  Salter,  M.B.
F.R.S.  Dental  Surgeo7i
to  Guys  Hospital.

Svo.  zvith  ntmierous  Illustrations.

[In  October.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8l    CO.

27

echtres  on  Diseases  of
Infancy  and  Childhood.
By  Chas.  West,  M.D,  &c.

Sixth  Edition.     Svo.  iSs.

f  Treatise  on  Medical
Electricity y  Theoretical  and
Practical ;  and  its  tcses  in
the  Treatment  of  Paraly-
sis, Neuralgia,  and  other
Diseases.

By  Jttliits  Althatcs,  M.D.
M.R.C.P.  &c.

lird  Edition,  for  the  most  part  re-written.
With  Plate  and  Woodcnts.  PostZvo.  i8j.

,echtres  on  Fever  de-
livered in  tJie  Theatre  of
the  Meath  Hospital  and
Cotmty  of  Dnblin  Infirm-
ary.

By  W.  Stokes,  M.D.  D.  C.L.
Oxon.  F.R.S.  Physician
to  the  Qnee7i  in  Ireland.
Edited  by  J.  W.  Moore,
M.D.  F.K.Q.C.P.

Svo.  i^s.

Dr.  Pereirds  Elements
of  Materia  Medica  and
Therapeutics,  abridged  a?id
adapted  for  the  use  of
Medical  and  Pharinaceu-
tical  Practitioiters  and
Students.
Edited  by   Prof  Bentley,

F.L.S.  &c.  and  by  Dr.

Redwood,  F.C.S.  &c.

With  125  Woodatt  Illustrations,  Svo.  2^s.

Copland's  Dictionary
of  P7^actical  Medicine,
abridged  from  the  la^^ger
zvork,  and  throughout
bro2Cght  down  to  the  present
state  of  Medical  Science.

The  Essentials  of  Mate-
ria Medica  a7id  Therapeu-
tics.

By  A.  B.  Garrod,  M.D.
F.R.S.  &c.  Physician  to
Kings  College  Hospital,

Third  Editioji.       Croxvn  Zvo.  I2s.  6d,

The    FINE    ARTS    and    ILLUSTRATED

EDITIONS.

rotesque  Animals,  in-
vented, described,  and  por-
trayed by  E.  W.  Cooke,
R.A.  F.R.S.  F.G.S.  F.Z.S.
in  24  Plates,  zvith  Elucida-
tory Comments.

Royal  /\to.  21s.

Albert  Ditrer,  his  Life
and  Woilcs ;  i7ic  hiding  Au-
tobiographical Papers  and
Complete  Catalogues.
By  William  B.  Scott.

With  6  Etc/lings  by  the  Author  and  other
Illustrations.     %vo.  ids.

28

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

I7t  Fairyland ;  Pichtres
from  the  Elf -World.  By
Richard  Doyle.  With  a
Poem  by  W.  Allingham.

With  1 6  coloured  Plates^  containing  "^^  De-
signs.    Folio,  31^.  dd.

A  Dictionary  of  Artists

of    the    English    School:
Painters,  Sc?  tip  tors,  Archi-
tects, Engravers,  and  O^ma-
me7itists ;    zuith  Notices  of
their  Lives  and  Works.
By  Samuel  Redgrave»

2)Vo.  i6s.

The  New  Testa7Ptent,  il-
lustrated with  Wood  En-
gravings after  the  Early
Masters,  chiefly  of  the
Italian  School.

Crow7i  ^0.  63J.

The  Life  of  Man  Sym-
bolised by  the  Months  of
the   Year.
Text  selected  by  R.  Pigot.

25  Illiistratio7ts  on  Wood  from  Designs  by
John  Leighton,  F.S.A.       Quarto^  42s.

Lyra      Gernianica,     the
Ch  ristia  n   Yea  r.
Translated     by    Miss    C.
Winkworth.

With  abont  325  Woodcut  Illustrations  by  y.
Leighton,  F.S.A.  and  other  Aiiists.
2  vols.  4/^,  p7'ice  42s.

Cats  and  Parties  Moral

Emblems ;  with  Aphorisms,
Adages,  and  Proverbs  of  all
Nations :  comprising  1 2 1
Llhistrations  on  Wood  by
y .  Leighton,  F.S.A.  with
an  appropriate  Text  by  R.
Pigot.

Imperial  Zvo.  3ii-.  dd.

Sacred  and   Legendary
Art.
By  Mrs.  fameson.

6  vols,  square  crown  ^vo.  price £^.  \^s.  6d.
as  follows : —

Legends    of   the   Saijtts
and  Martyrs.

N'ew  Edition,  with    19  Etchings  and  187
Woodcuts.     2  vols.  31^-.  dd.

Legends  of  the  Monastic
07^ders.

New  Edition,  zvith    II    Etchings  and  88
Woodcuts.      I  vol.  2.1  s.

Legends  of  the  Madonna,

New  Edition,  with  27  Etchings   and   165
Woodcuts.      I  vol.  2\s.

The  History  ofOttrLord,

with  that  of  his  Types  and
Precursors.

Completed  by  Lady  East-
lake.

Revised  Edition,  with  13  Etchings  and  281
Woodcuts.      2  vols.  ^2S.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

29

The    USEFUL    ARTS,    MANUFACTURES,    &c,

Industrial  Chemistry  ;  a

Manual  for    Manufactit-

rers   and  for  Colleges   or

Technical  Schools.  Being  a

Translation  of  Professors

Stohmann     and    Englers

German  Edition  of  Pay  ens

'  Prdcis  de  Chin  lie  Indtts-

trielle'  by  Dr.  f.  D.  Bar^y.

Edited,   and  supplemented

with    Chapters    on    the

Chemistry  of  the  Metals,

by  B.  H,  Paul  Ph.D,

Sz'o.  with  Plates  and  Woodcuts.

[In  the  press.

A  Manual  of  Architec-

tiire :  being  a  Concise  His-
toiy  and  Explanation  of  the
Principal  Styles  of  Etcro-
pea7t  Architecticre,  Ancient,
Mediceval,  and  Renaissance;
with  their  Chief  Variations
and  a  Glossary  of  Technical
Terms.
By  Thomas  Mitchell.

With  150  Woodcuts.      Crotvn  Zvo.  \0s.  6d.

History    of  the   Gothic

Revival ;  an  Atte77zpt  to
shew  hozu  far  the  taste  for
MedicEval  Aixhitecture  was
retained  in  England  dicring
the  last  two  centuries,  and
has  been  7^e-developed  in  the
pi^esent.

By  C.  L.  East  lake,  Archi-
tect.

With  48  Illustrations.     Imp.  %vo.  31^.  dd.

Gwilfs  Encyclopc^dia  of
A^xhitecture,    with    above
1,600   Woodcuts.
Fifth  Edition,  with  Altera-
tions and  Additions,  by
Wyatt  Papworth.

Svo.  ^2s.  6d.

The  Three  Cathedrals
dedicated  to  St.  Paul  in
Lo7ido7i ;  their  History
from  the  Fotc7idation  of
the  First  Buildi7ig  i7i  the
Sixth  Ce7itury  to  the  Pro-
posals for  the  Ador7i7nent
of  the  P7^esent  Cathedral.
By  W.  Lo7ig77ia7i,  F.S.A,

With  numerous  Illustrations.   Square  crown
%vo.  2ls.

Hints    on     Household

Taste   i7i   FurnitiLre,    Up-
holste7y,  a7id  other  Details.
By    Charles   L.  East  lake.
Architect.

yew  Edition,  tvith  abo2it  90  Illustrations.
Square  eroruji  ^vo.  i^s.

Geometric  Turning;  com-
p7nsi7iga  Description  of  the
JVew  Geo7net7'ic  Clutch  co7t-
structed  by  Mr.  Pla7it  of
Bi7^77ii7igha77t,  with  Direc-
tio7is  for  its  use,  a7id  a
Se7Hes  of  Patte7ms  cut  by
it,  with  Expla7iatio7is.
By  H.  S.  Savory.

With   571    WoodciU  Illustrations.     Square
crotvn  Zvo.  21  s.

30

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8i.     CO.

Lathes     and     Turning,
Simple,    Mechanical,    and
Ornafnental.
By  W.  Henry  Northcott,

With  about  240  Ilhistrations  on  Steel  and
Wood.     Sva.  iSs.

Handbook  of  Practical

Telegraphy.

By  R,  S.  C7tlley,  Menib.
Inst,  C,E.  Engi7ieer-i7i-
Chief  of  Teleg7'aphs  to
the  Post-Office.

Sixth  Edition,  Plates  ^  Woodcuts.   Svo.  1 6s.

Principles  of  Mechanism,

designed  for  the  2cse  of  Stu-
dents in  the  Universities,
and  for  Engineering  Stn-
dents  generally.
By  R.  Willis,  M.A.  P.R.S.
Professor  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Cambridge.

Second  Edition,  with  374  Woodcuts.  Svo.  iSs.

Elementary  Introduction

to  Practical  Mechanics,  il-

lust7^ated  by  numerous  Ex-

a77tples.

By  the  Rev.  J.  F.  Tzuisde7t,
M.A.  Prof,  of  Mathe-
matics 171  the  Staff  Coll.

Fifth  Edition.     Crozvn  Svo.  los.  6d.

First  Lessons  in   Theo-
retical Mecha7iics.
By  the  Rev.  J.  F.  Tivisde7i,
M.A.  Prof,  of  Mathe-
7natics  i7i  the  Staff  Coll.

Crown  Svo.  %vith  Diagrams.     \_In  the  press.

Perspective  ;  or,  the  Art
of  Drawi7ig  what  one  Sees.
Explained  aiid  adapted  to
the  Use  of  those  Sketchi7ig
fro77i  Nature.
By  LietU.  W.  H.  Colli7is,
R.E.  F.R.A.S.

With  37  Woodcuts.     Crown  Svo.  ^s.

Encyclopcedia  of  Civil
E7iginee7^i7ig,  Historical,
Theoretical,  and  Practical.
By  E.  Cresyy  C.E.

With  above  3,000  Woodcuts.     Svo.  ^2s.

Catechism  of  the  Steam

E7igi7ie,  i7i  its  various  Ap-
plicatio7ts  to  Mi^ies,  Mills,
Stea77t   Navigation,    Rail-
ways, a7id  Agricidture.
By  John  Bourne,  C.E.

New  Edition,  with  89  Woodcuts.  Fcp.  Svo.  6j.

Handbook  of  the  Steam

E7igine.

By  y .  Bo7L7nie,  C.E.  for77i-
inga  Key  to  theA2ctho7^'s
Catechis77t  of  the  Stea77t
E^igine.

With  67  Woodcuts.     Fcp.  Svo.  (^s.

A  Treatise  on  the  Steam
Engi7ie,  in  its  various  ap-
plicatio7is  to  Alines.,  Mills,
Stea77t  Navigatio7t,  Rail-
ways and  Agricidture.
By  J .  Bour7ie,  C.E.

With   Portrait,  37  Plates^  and  546  Wood-
cuts.    /\.to.  42^".

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

31

Recent  Improvements  m
the  Steam  Engine,  includ-
ing ma7iy  New  Examples.
By  y ,  Botcrne,  C.E.

With  124  Woodcuts.      Fcp.  Zvo.  6j-.

The  Engineer  s  Hand-
book ;  explaining  the  P^nn-
ciples  which  should  guide
the  Young  Engineer  in  the
Coiistruction  of  Machinery,
with  the  necessary  Rttles,
Proportions^  and  Tables.
By  C.  S.  Lowndes.

Post  %vo.  5  J-.

Ures  Dictionary  of  Arts,

Manufactures,  and  Mines.
Sixth  Edition,  i^e-written
and  greatly  enlarged  by
R.  Hunt,  F.R.S.  assisted
by  numerous  Contributors.

With  2,000  Woodcuts.     3  vols.  Jiiediiim  8z'f.
£^.  I4J-.  dd.

Guns  and  Steel ;  Miscel-
laneous Papers  on  Mechani-
cal Stibjects.
By   Sir  Jos.    Whitzvorth,

Bt.  C.E.  F.R.S.  LL.D.

D.C.L.

With  numerous  Illustrations.     Royal  %vo.
'js.  6d.

Practical     Treatise     on

Metallurgy,

Adapted fr 0711  the  last  Ger-
man Edition  ofProfessor
KerVs  Metallurgy  by  W.
Crookes,  F.R.S.  &c.  and
E.  Rohrig,  Ph.D.

3  vols.  Sz'f.  with  625  Woodcuts.  £^.  i()s.

Treatise   on    Mills   and
Millwork.

By  Sir  W.  Fairbairn,  Bt.
F.R.S.

With  18  Plates  and  322  Woodctcts.     2  vols.
Svo.  3  2 J.

Useful  Information  for

Engineers.

By  Sir  W.  Fairbairn,  Bt.
F.R.S.

With  many  Plates  and  Woodcuts.     3  vols,
cro'ivn  Svo.  ^is.  6d.

The  Application  of  Cast

and     Wrought     Iron     to
Building  Purposes.
By  Sir  W.  Fairbairn,  Bt.
F.R.S.

JVith  6  Plates  and  118  JVoodcuts.  Zvo.  i6s.

The  Strains  in  Trusses
Computed  by  means  of  Dia-
grams ;  with  20  Examples
d7^awn  to  Scale.
By  F.  A.  Rankejt,  M.A.
C.E.

With  35  Diagrams.  Square  cr.  %vo.  6s.  6d.

A  Handbook  of  Dyeing
and  Calico  Printing.
By  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.  &c.

Illustrated  with  numerous  Specimens  of
Dyed  Textile  Fabrics.  Zvo.    [///  Alay.

Occasional  Papers,

By  Michael  Scott ,  Memb.
Inst.   C.E.  Memb.  Inst.

N.A.

{In  Two  Volumes. )     Vol.  I.  Civil  Engineer-
ing,  7uith  nuiny  Plates  of  Diagrams.
\N'earlv  ready.

32

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Mitcheirs    Mamtal    of

Pi^adical  Assaying.

Fourth  Edition,  revised,
zvith  the  Recent  Disco-
veries inco7^porated,  by
W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.

Svo.  Woodcuts,  3 1  J.  6d.

Bayldons  Art  of  Valu-
i7ig  Remits  and  Tillages,  and
Claims  of  Tenants  ttpoii
Qtntting  Farms,  both  at
Michaelmas  and  Lady-
Day.

Eighth  Edition,  revised  by
y.  C,  Morton,

Zvo.  los.  6d.

Loiido7is  Encyclopcedia
of  Gardening  :  comprising  \
the  Theory  and  Practice  of
Hortictdture,  Florictdtttre,
Arborictittttre,  and  Laiid-
scape  Gardening,

With  1,000  Woodcuts,     Svo.  21  s.

Lotidoiis    Encyclopcedia  j

of  Agric^dttire :  comprising
the  Laying-otit,  Improve-
ment, a7id  Management  of
Landed  Property,  and  the
Cultivation  and  Economy
of  the  Productions  of  Agri-
culture.

With  1,100  Woodcuts.     Svo.  21s.

RELIGIOUS    and    MORAL     WORKS.

yin  Exposition  of  the  39
Articles,  Histo7'ical  a7id
Doct7d7iaL

By  E.  H.  B7'ow7ie,  D.D.
Bishop  of  Wi7ichester.

Ninth  Edition.     %vo.  i6j.

An  Introduction  to  the
Theology  of  the  Chtcrch  of
E7igla7id,  i7i  a7i  Expositio?i
of  the  Thirty-7ii7ie  Articles.
By  Rev.  T.  P.  Boidtbee,
LL.D.

Fcp.  Sz'o.  6s.

Historical   Lectures   on
the  Life  of  Our  Lord  Jesus
Christ ;  beitig  the  Hidsean
Lecttcres  for  1859.
By  C.  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.

Fifth  Edition.     Svo.  I2s.

Texts  and  Thoughts  for
Ch7^istia7i  Mi7tisters.
By  y .  Hardi7ig,  D.D.  late
Bishop  of  Bo7nbay.

Croiv?i  Svo.

[In  the  press.

Sermons  for  the   Times
preached    in     St.    Paul's
Cathedral  a7id  elsewhere.
By  Rev.  T.  Griffith,  M.A.
Pi^eb.  of  St.  PauVs.

Crown  Svo.  6^.

Fundamentals ;  or ^  Bases
of  Belief  C07icerni7tg  Ma7i
and  God:  a  Ha7idbook
of  Me7ttal,  Moral,  a7id
Religious  Philosophy.
By  Rev.  T  Griffith,  M.A.

Svo.  los,  6d.  .

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

33

ynonyms  of  the  Old  Tes-

tamenty  their  Bearing  on
ChiHstian  Faith  and
Practice.

By  Rev.  R.  B.  Girdlestone,
M.A.

Svo.  i^s.

'easons  of  Faith ;  or,
the  Order  of  the  Christian
Alignment  Developed  and
Explained.

By  Rev.  G.  S.  Drew,  M.A.

Sccojid  Edition.     Fcp.  Svo.  6s.

lie  Eclipse  of  Faith ;
or  a  Visit  to  a  Religious
Sceptic.

By  Henry  Rogers.

Latest  Edition.     Fcp.  %vo.  <^s.

defence  of  the  Eclipse  of
Faith.

By  Henry  Rogers.

Latest  Edition.     Fcp.  Svo.  3^".  6c/.

^he  Outlines  of  the
Christian  Ministry  De-
lineated, and  brought  to  the
Test  of  Reason,  Holy
Scriptttre,  History,  and
Experie7ice.

By  C  Wordszvo7Hh,  D .C.L.
Bishop  of  St.  Andrews.

Crown  Svo.  'js.  6d.

The  Life  and  Epistles  of
St.  Paid.
By  Rev.  W.  J.  Conybcare,

M.A.  and  Very  Rev.  J.

S.  Hozvson,  D.D.  Dean

of  Chester.

Three  Editions  : —

Library  Edition,  ivith  all  the  Original
Illustrations,  Maps,  Landscapes  on  Sted,
Woodcuts.  <^c.      2  vols.  \to.  /^Ss.

Intermediate  Edition,  luith  a  Selection
of  Maps,  Plates,  and  Woodcuts.  2  vols.
square  croi.vn  Svo.  lis.

Student's  Edition,  revised  and  condensed,
luith  46  Illustrations  and  Alaps.  i  vol.
crotun  Svo.  ^s.

A    Critical  and  Gram-
matical Commentary  on  St.
Raid's  Epistles.
By  C.  7.  Ellicott,  D.D.  Bp.
of  Gtoncester  and  Bristol.

Svo.  Galatians,  8j-.  6d.  Ephesians,  8j-.  6d.
Pastoral  Epistles,  loj-.  6d.  Philippi-
ans,  Colossians,  »&  Philemon,  loy.  6c/..
Thessalonians,  7^.  6d.

The  Voyage  and  Ship-
wreck of  St.  Paul ;  zvith
Dissertations  on  the  Ships:
and  Navigation  of  the
Ancients.
By  James  Snnth,  B.R.S.

Crown  Svo.  Charts,  \os.  6d.

Evidence  of  the  Trntli
of  the  Christian  Religion
derived  from   the  Literal
Fnlfilment  of  Prophecy.
By  Alexander  Keith,  D.D.

apth  Edition,  7vith  7tunu'rous  Plates.
Square  Svo.  \7s.  bd.  or  i'l  post  Svo.
"ivith  5  Plates,  6s.

34

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Historical  and  Critical
Coinmentary    on    the    Old
Testament ;    zvith   a   N'ew
Tim7tslatt07t.
By  M,  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.

Vol.  I.  Genesis,  ^vo.  i  8j-.  or  adapted  for  the
General  Reader^  I2s.  Vol.11.  Exodus,
1 5  J-,  or  adapted  for  tJu  General  Reader,
I2s.  Vol.  III.  Leviticus,  Fart  I.  i<,s.
or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader,  %s.
Vol.  IV.  Leviticus,  Part  II.  \<,s.  or
adapted  for  the  General  Reader,  %s.

The  History  and  Litera-
ttire  'of  the  Israelites,  ac-
cording to  the  Old  Testa-
ment a?id  the  Apocrypha.
By  C.  De  Rot /is  child  ajid
A.  De  Rothschild.

Second  Edition.     1  vols.  croivnZvo.  12s.  6</.
Abridged  Edition,  in  i  vol.  fp.  %vo.  "^s,  6d.

The  A  n  tiqnities  of  Israel
By  He  in  rich  Ezvald,  Prof,
of    the     University     of
G'dttingen.       Translatedu
front  the  German.

Zvo.  \_In  the  press.

ITistory  of  Israel.

By  H.  Ewald,  Prof,  of  the
University  of  Gottingxn.
Translated  from  the  Ger-
ina7i  by  J .  E.  Carpenter,
M.A.  zuith  Preface  by
R.  Martinean,  M.A.

5  vols.  Svo.  62s.

Coninientary  on  Epistle
to  the  Romans.
By  Rev.   W.  A.   O' Conor,
B.A.

C7'07V7l  Zz'O.   3 J.   6d.

A    Conwiejitary   on  thi
Gospel  of  St.  John.

By  Rev.  W.  A.   G Conor
B.A.

Croivn  8zv'.  lOJ".  dd.

The  Epistle  to  the  He-
brews;  with  Analytical
Introd^iction  and  Notes.

By  Rev.    W.  A.  G Conor,
B.A.

Crozun  Zvo.  t\s.  6d,

St.  Mark's  Gospel.  Greek
Text,  with  English  Vocabu-
lary.

Edited  by  Rev.   John..   T.
White,  D.D.  Oxon.

2)2)no.  is.  6d.

St.  Johns  Gospel.  Greek
Text,  zvith  English  Vocabu-
lary.

Edited  by  the  Rev.  John
T  White,  D.D.  Oxon.

XIDIO.

.•)

\Nearly  ready.

Thoughts  for  the  Age.
By  Elizabeth  M.  SezuelL

N'rcv  Edition.     Fcp.  %vo.  ^s.

Passing     Thoughts     on
Religion.
By  Elizabeth  M.  Sezuell.

Fep.  Zvo.  y.  bd.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

35

Self-examinatioji    before
Cofifirmatioii .
By  Elisabeth  IvI.  Sewell.

2,21/10.  is.  6d.

'^reparation  for  the  Holy

Comniiinion  ;  the  Devotions
chiefly  from  the  zvorks  of
fercmy  Taylor.
By  Elizabeth  M.  Sezuell.

Readings  for  a  Month
Preparatojy  to  Coifirvia.-
tiou,  from  Widters  of  the
Early  av^d  English  Chtu^ch,
By  Elizabeth  M.  Sewell,

Readings  for  Every  Day

in  Lent,  compiled  f^-om  the
IV  r  i  t  ings     of    Bis  h  op
Jeremy  Taylor,
By  Elizabeth  M.  Sewell,

Fcp.  Zvo.  5J-.

Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor  s
E^itire  Works ;  zvith  Life
by  Bishop  Heber,
Revised  and  corrected   by
The  Rev,  C.  P,  Eden,

10  vols.  ^5.  5-r.

Hymns    of  Praise    and
Prayer,

Collected  a.nd  edited  by  the
Rev,  y ,  Martineaic,
LL,D.

Crcnvn  ^zv.  i\s.  6d.

Thoughts  for  the  Holy

Week,  for  Yo2ing  Persons.
By  Elizabeth  M,  Sezuell,

N'no  Edition.     Fcp.  Zvo.  2s.

Spiritual  Songs  for  the
Simdays      and     Holidays
thro7cgho2it  the  Year.
By  J,  S,  B.  Monsell  LL.D,

Fotirth  Edition,  Sixth  TJiousand.  Fcp.
4.C.  (id.

T^yra  Gernianica,  trans-
latcd  from  the  Gennan  by
Miss  C,  Wi?ikworth,  First
Seines,  the  Christian  Year,
Hymns  for  the  Stuidays
and  Chief  Festivals  of  the
ClmrcJi ;  Second  Series,  the
Chiastian  Life,

Fcp.  %vo.  3^,  (id.  each  Scries.

Endeavours     after     the
Christian  Life;  Discourses,
By  the  Rev,  f ,  Martinean,
LL,D,

Fifth  Edition.      Crown  Svo.  Js.  6d.

An  Lntroduction  to  the

Stndy  of  the  Nezu  Testa-
ment, Critical,  Exegetical,
and  Theological,
By  Rev,  S,  Davidson,  D,D.
LL,D,

2  I'ols.  Zvo.  ^os.

Supernatnral  Religion ;
a7i  Liquiry  into  the  Reality
of  Divine  Revelation.

2  I'ols.  ^I'O.  24X.

36

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Christ  the  Consoler  ;
a  Book  of  Comfort  for  the
Sick.

With  a  Preface  by  Rt.  Rev,
the  Ld.  Bp,  of  Carlisle,

Small  %vo.  6>r.

Prayers  for  the  Family

and  for  Private  Use,  selected
from  the  Collection  of  the
late  Baron  Btmsen,  and
Translated  by  Miss  C
Winkworth.

Fcp.  Zvo.  y,  6d.

Lectures  on  the  Penta-
tench  &  the  Moabite  Stone;
with  Appendices,  contain-
ing— /.  The  Eloistic  Nar-
rative ;  II.  The  Oinginal
Story  of  the  Exodus ;  III,
The  Pre-Christian  Cross,

By  J,    W,   Colenso,  D,D,
Bishop  of  Natal.

8zv.  \2s.

Authority     and     Con-

science;  a  Free  Debate  on
the  Tendency  of  Dogmatic
Theology,     and     on     the
Characteristics  of  Faith.
Edited  by  Conway  Morel,

Post  %vo.  1$.  (id.

The  Pen  tateuch  and  Book
of  fos/ma  Critically  Ex-
amined.

By  y .    W,   Colenso,
Bishop  of  Natal,

Crcnun  %vo.  6^.

D,D,

TheSpeaker  s  Bible  Coni-
me}itary,  by  Bishops  and
other  Clergy  of  the  An-
glicaii  Chzci^ch,  critically
examined  by-  the  Rt,  Rev,
y,  W,  Colenso,  D.D,
Bishop  of  Natal,

Svo.  Part  I.  Genesis,  y.  Sd.  Part  II.
Exodus,  \s.  6d,  Part  III.  Leviticus,
2s.  6d.  Part  IV.  Numbo's,  y.  6d.
Part  V.  Deuteronomy,  ^s.  Part  VI.
Joshua  {completing  the  Work),  nearly
ready.

TRAVELS,     VOYAG-ES,     &c.

The  Atlantic  to  the  Pa-
cific ;    What    to    see,   and
How  to  see  it.
By  John  Erastns  Lester,
M,A,

With  Map  and  Woodcuts,      Cro^.an  Svo,  6s,

Stave    Catching    hi    the
Indian   Ocean ;    a   Record
of  Naval  Experiences,
By  Captain  Colomb,  R,N.

Svo.   with   Illustrations  from   Photographs
&^c,  2  IS.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

37

Meeting    the    Sim  ;     a

yoitiniey  all  rotcnd  the
World  tJu^ough  Egypt,
Chma,  yapaii,  and  Cali-
fornia;  inc biding  an  Ac-
count of  the  Afarriage
Ceremonies  of  the  Emperor
of  China.

By  William  Simpson,
F.R.  G.S.  Member  of  the
Society  of  Biblical  Ar-
chcsology.

With  48  Heliotypes  and  Wood  Eugraviiigs.
Medium  Szv.  24^.

The    Cruise  of  H.M.S.

Cnrafoa  among  the  Sonth
Sea  Islands  in  1865.
By      f  21  tins      Brenchley,
M.A.  KR.G.S.

With  Charts  and  z'ciy   ninnerons  Illustra-
tions, imperial  ^vo.  ^2s.

How  to  See  Norway.
By  Captain  J ,  R.  Camp-
bell,

With  Map  and  5  Woodcuts,  fcp.  8zv.  $s.

Rambles,

By  Patricitts  Walker.  Re-
printed from  Eraser  s
Magazine ;  with  a  Vig-
nette of  the  Qiieens
Bower,  in  the  JVezu
Eorest.

Crown  Szv.  \os.  6d.

Hours  of  Exercise  in  the
Alps.

By  John  Tyiidall,  LL.D.
D.CL.  E.R.S.

Third  Edition,
Whymper.

with    7    Woodcuts   by    E.
Cro^^vn  %vo.  \2s.  6d.

Untroddeji     Peaks    and

Uiifreqttented    Valleys ;    a
Midsitmmer  Ramble  among
the  Dolomites.
By  Amelia  B.  Edwards.

With  numerous  Illustrations  engraved  on
Wood  from  Sketches  by  the  Author.
Medium  Svo.  21s.

The  Dolomite  Moun-
tains. Excitrsions  throitgh
Tyj^ol,  Ca7^inthia,  Carniola,
and  Erinli.

By  J.   Gilbert  and  G.   C.
Ch  urch ill,  E.  R.  G.  S.

With  numerous  Illustrations.  Square
crozun  2ic>o.  21  s.

The  Alpine  Club  Map
of  the  Chain  of  Mont
Blanc,  from  an  actual  Sur-
vey in  1 863- 1 864.
By  A.  Adams-Reilly,
ER.G.S.  M.A.C.

1)1  Chromolithography,  on  extra  stout  drazv-
ing  paper  28  ///.  x  17  i?i.  los.  or
moinited  on  canvas  in  a  folding  case,
I2s.  6d.

The  Alpine  Chib  Map
of  the  Valpelline^  the  Val
Toitrnanche,  and  the  South- _
em  Valleys  of  the  Chain  of
Monte  Rosa,  from  actual
Survey.

By   A.    Adams-Reilly ,
ER.G.S.  M.A.C.

Price  6s.  on  extra  Stout  Drawing  Paper,  or
Js.  6d.  mou>ited  in  a  Folding  Case.

The  Rural  Life  of  Eng-
land.
By  W.  Howitt.

Woodcuts  by  Bewick  and  William?.       J^ie
dium  ^vo.  I2s.  6d.

38

NEW       WORKS       PUBLISHED     BY

LONGMANS

8c    CO.

My  Wife  and  I  in  Queens-
land;  Eight  Years  Expe-
rience in  the  Colojty,  with
some  Acconnt  of  Polynesian
Laboitr.
By  Charles  H.  Eden.

Crcnvn  %vo.  (^s.

Map  of  Switzerland  and
the  Adjacent  Cotmtries.
On  a  scale  of  four  miles  to
an  Inchy  extending  from
Schafha2Lse7i  07i  the  North
to  Alilan  on  the  Sonth,  and
from  the  Ortler  Groitp  07i
the  East  to  Geneva  on  the
West.

Constructed  tender  the  im-
mediate S7iperintende7ice
of  the  Alpi7ie  Club,  and.
edited  by  R.  C.  Nichols,
F.S.A.  F.R.G.S.

In  Four  Sheets  as  follows  :—

Sheet  I.  Basely  Lttzern,  IiiterlacJicii,  Bern,

Fribourg,  and  N'eucJidtcI.
Sheet  II.    Constauz,    Znricli,    Chiir,   and

Landeck.
Sheet  III.  Geneva,   Brieg,  Aosta,    Jura,

and  Mont  Blanc.
Sheet  IV.  Splugen,  Oiilei-  S/>.  Adanicllo,

Sondrio,  Coino,  and  Ulilan.

-;f^^  ZZ'^  zvhole  will  be  published  in  the
Spring ;  Sheets  I.  II.  and  III.  complete,
and  Sheet  IV.  vnih  oittline  and  letto-ing
only  ;  but  tvhen  the  engraving  of  the  hills  on
Sheet  IV.  is  completed,  the  proofs  of  that
sheet  will  be  excJianged  for  the  lettered  copies.

Cadore  or  Titian' s  Coun-
try.
By  yosiah  Gilbert,  Joiiit-

A7cthor  of  the  '  Dolo77zite

Mou7ttai7is!

With  Map  and  40  Jllitstrations.    Imp.  Stv.
3ii'.  6d.

Qjtide  to  the  Pyrenees,  for
the  use  of  Mountai7ieers.
By  Charles  Packe.

Second  Edition,  zuith  Maps  &=c.  and  Ap-
pendix.     Crozvn  Svo.  Js.  6d.

Visits  to  Remarkable
Places :  Old  Halls,  Battle-
Fields,  adid  Sce7ies  illus-
trative of  stri/ciftg  Passages
in  E7iglish  Histo7y  aud
Poet7y.
By  W.  Howitt.

With  IFood  Engravings.  2  vols,  square
crown  Zvo.  25^.

The  Alpine  Guide.
By  John  Ball,  M.R.I. A.
late    Preside7it    of    the
Alpi7ie  Club.

Post  Zvo.  tuilh  ]\Iaps  and  other  Illustrations.

The  Guide  to  th^e  Eastern
Alps.

Price  \os.  6d.

The  Gtiide  to  the  IVest-
ei^7i  Alps,  i7tcludi7ig  Mo7it
Blanc,  Mo7ite  Rosa,  Ze7^-
7uatt,  &c.

Price  6s.  6d.

G^tide    to    the    Central

Alps,    i7icludi7ig    all    the
Oberla7id  Dist7Hct.

Price  "js.  6d.

Introduction   on  Alpine

Travelli7ig  in  ge7ieral,  a7icl
071  the  Geology  of  the  Alps.

Price  I  s.  Either  of  the  Three  Volumes  or  Parts
of  the  '■Alpine  Guide'  may  be  had  ivith
this  Introduction  prefixed,  is.  cxti'a.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

39

WORKS    of    FICTION.

Elena  :  an  Italian  Tale.
By  L.  N.  Coniyn,  AiUhor
of  Athcrstoiie  Prioiy!

2  vols,  post  %vo.  14^".

So  much  of  the  Diary  of

Lady  Willojcghby  as  relates
to  her  Domestic  History
and  to  the  Event/id  Period
of  the  Reign  of  Charles  the
First,  the  Protectorate,  and
the  Restoration.

Cnnu?i  Z'i'o.  'js.  6t/.

The  Bnrgoniasters  Fa-
mily;  or,    Weal  and  Woe
in  a  Little  World.
By      Christine       Mil  Her.
Translated    from     the
Dutch  by  Sir  J .  Shazu
Lefevre,  K.CB.  F.R.S.

Crown  2>vo.  ds.

The  Folk-Lore  of  Rome,

collected  by  Word  of  Moit  th

froin  the  People.

By  R.  H.  BiLsk,  Author  of
^  Pair  anas' '  Sagas  from
the  Far  East,'  &c.

Crown  %vo.  \2s.  6d.

Cyllene  ;  or,  The  Fall  of

Paganism.

By  Hemy  S7ieyd,  ALA.

2  vols,  post  %Z'0.    \i\S.

Popular  Romances  of  the
Middle  Ages.
By   the  Rev.    George    W.
Cox,  M.A.  and  E.  //.
fones.

CrozvH  Zz'o.  los.  6d.

Tales    jf  the    Teutonic

Lands;  a  Sequel  to  ' Popu-
lar Romances  of  the  Mid-
dle Ages!

By  Rev.  G.  W.  Cox,  M.A.
and  E.  H.  Jones.

CnnvH  ?>vo.  los.  6d.

Beckers  Galliis;  or Ro-
via7i  Scenes  of  the  Time  of
Attgtistns.

Post  Zvo.  'JS.  6cL

Becker  s  Charicles :  Ll-
lustr alive  of  Piavate  Life
of  the  Ancient  Greeks.

Post  %vo.  "js.  6d.

Tales  of  Ancient  Greece.
By  the  Rev.    G.   W.   Cox,
ALA.    late    Scholar    of
Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Cro7un  ^vo.  6s.  dd.

The  Modern  Novelisfs
Library.

Atherstone  Priory,  2s.  boards  ;  2s.  6d.  cloth.
Melville's    Digby    Grand,    2s.    boards;

2s.  6d.  cloth.
Gladiators^  2s.  boards  ;  2s.  6d.

cloth.
• Good  for  A'othing,  2s.  boards ,

2s.  6d.  cloth.
Ilobiiby    House,     2s.     boards ;

2s.  6d.  cloth.
Interpreter,  2s,  boards  ;  2s.  6d.

cloth.
A'ate    Coventry,     2s.     boards ;

2s.  6d.  cloth.
Qiieen^s    Alaries,    2s.    boards ;

2s.  6d.  cloth.
General  Bounce,    2s.    boards ;

2s.  6d.  cloth.
Trollope's  JFarden,    is.   6d.   boards;  2s.

cloth.
Barchester  7^orvers,  2s.  boards ;

2s.  6d.  cloth.
Brav.i.ey  Moore's  Six  Sisters  0/  the  I  al-
leys, 2s.  boards;  2s.  6d.  cloth.

40

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

Novels  and  Tales.

By  the  Right  Hon.  Benja-
min Disraeli,  M.P.

Cabinet  Editions,  complete  in  Ten  Volumes,

cro7un  Sz'o.  6s.  each,  as  foUozvs  :—
Lothai)',  ds.  i    Venetia,  6s.

Coningsby,  6s.  Alroy,  Ixion,  i^c.  6s.

Sybil,  6s.  Young  Duke,  ^'c.  6s.

Tancred,  6s.  Vivian  Gj-ey,  6s.

Contarini  I'leming,  er-Y.  6s.

Henrietta  Temple,  6s.

Cabinet  Edition,  in  crown
Svo.  of  Stories  and  Tales
by  Miss  Sewell : —

Amy  Herbert,  2s.  6d.
Gertrude,  2s.  6d.
Earl's      Daiighter,

2s.  6d.
Experience   of  Life,

2s.  6d.
Cleve  Hall,  2s.  6d.

Ursula,  3 J".  6d.

Ivors,  2s.  6d.
Katharine     Asliton,

2s.  6d.
Margaret     Per  civ  al,

3J-.  6d.
Laneton    Parsonage,

y.  6d.

POETRY    and    THE    DRAMA.

Ballads   and  Lyrics   of

Old  France;  with  other
Poems.

By  A.  Lang,  Tel.  Merton
College,  Oxford.

Square fcp.  Zvo.  5^.

Moore  s     La  I  la   Rookh,

TennieTs  Bdition,  zvith  68
Wood  Engravings  from
Original  Drawings.

Fcp.  a^to.  2\s.

Moore  s  Irish  Melodies,
Maclise  s  Edition,  zuith  1 6 1
Steel  Plates  f^om  Original
Di^awings.

Super-royal  ^vo.  t,is.  6d.

The  Lycidas  and  Epi-
taphinm  Damonis  of  Mil-
ton.
Edited,    with    Notes    and

Introduction,    by    C    S.

ferra^n,   M.A.    Trinity

College,  Oxford.

\I)i  the  press.

Miniature  Edition  of
Mooj^es  Irish  Melodies,
with  Maclise s  i6i  Illus-
trations reduced  in  Litho-
graphy.

Imp.  \6mo.  \os.  6d.

Lays  of  Ancient  Rome  ;
with  ' Ivry'  and  the  'Ar-
mada!

By  the  Right  Hon.  lord     j
Macaulay.  '

i6mo.  3J".  6d.

Lord  Macaulay  s  Lays

of  A7icient  Rome.  With
90  Illustrations  on  Wood,
Original a7id  from  the  An-
.  tique,  from  Drawings  by
G.  Scharf.

Fcp.  4.10.  2  IS.

Miniature  Edition  of
Lo7^d  Macaulay  s  Lays
of  Ancient  Rome,  with
Scharf  s  90  Illustrations
reduced  in  Lithography.

Imp.  \67no.  lOs.  6d.

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

41

Southey  s  PoettcallVorks

with  the  Atithors  last  Cor-
rections and  copyright  Ad-
ditions.

Library  Edition.  Alediuvi  Svo.  with  Por-
trait and  Vignette,  14^.

G  0  Ids  in  ith'  s     Poetical

Works,  Ilhcstrated  with
Wood  Eng7^avings  from
Designs  by  Members  of  the
Etching  Club.

Imp.  idino.  ']s.  6d.

Bowdlers  Family  Shak-

speare,  cheaper  Ge7iuine
Edition.

Complete  in  i  vol.  medium  Svo.  large  type,
with  36  Woodcut  Illustrations,  i^.  or
in  6  vols.  fcp.  Svo.  price  l\s.

Horatii  Opera,  Libi'ary

Edition,  with  copiotis  Eng-
lish Notes,  Margijtal  Refe-
rences and  various  Read-
ings.

Edited  by  the  Rev.  J .  E.
Yonge,  M.A.

Svo.  21  s.

Poems  by  ye  an  Inge  low.

2  vols.  Fcp.  Svo.  los.

First  Series,  containing  '■Divided'  '  The
Star'' s  Monument,''  &=c.  i6th  Thousand.
Fcp.  Svo.  5^,

Second  Series,  ^  A  Story  of  Doom,'  '  Gla-
dys afid  her  Island, '  ^c.  ^th  Thousajid.
Fcp.  Svo.  5J-.

Poems  by  Jean  Ingelow.
First  Series,  with  nearly
100  Illnstrations  engraved
on  Wood.

Fcp.  \to.  21  s.

The  Odes  and  Epodes  of
Horace;  a  Metrical  Trans-
lation into  E7tglish,  with
Introdtiction  and  Commeit-
taries.
By  Loj^d  Lytton.

Post  Svo.  los.  6d.

The  ^^neid  of  Virgil
Translated  into  English
Verse.

By  the  late  f .  Coningto7ty
M.A.

Crown  Svo.  gs.

RURAL    SPORTS,    HORSE    and    CATTLE

MANAGEMENT,    cScc.

Eticyclopcedia  of  Rural
Sports;  a  Complete  A  cconnty
Historical,  Practical,  and
Descriptive,  of  Hunting,
Shooting,  Fishing,  Racing,
&c.
By  D.  P.  Blaine.

With  above  600  Woodcuts  (20  from  Designs
^j  John  Leech).     Svo.  2\s.

A  Book  on  Angling:
being  a  Complete  Treatise
on  the  Art  of  Angling  in
every  h^anch,  including  fill
I  I  lustra  ted  L  ists  of  Sa  Imon
Flies.
By  Francis  Francis.

With  Portrait  and  15  other  Plates,  plain
and  coloured.     Post  Svo.  1 5^-.

42

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

JVilcockss  Sea  -Fisher-
man :  compiHsing  the  Chief
Methods  of  Hook  and  Line
FisJiing  in  the  BiHtish  and
other  Seas,  a  glance  at  Nets,
and  remarks  on  Boats  and
Boating.

With  80  Woodcuts.     Post  Sw.  \2s.  6d.

Fhe  Setter  ;  with  Notices
of  the  most  Eminent  Breeds
now  exta7it,  Insti^itctions  how
to  Breed,  Rear,  and  Break  ;
Dog  Shozvs,  Field  T7Hals,
and  General  Management,
&c.
By  Edzvard  Lave  rack.

Crown  ^to.  ']s.  6d.

The  Ox,  his  Diseases  and
their  Treatment ;  with  an
Essay  on  Part^trition  in  the
Cow.

By  J.  R.  Dobson,  Memb.
R.C.V.S.

Croiun  8z'(?.  with  Illustrations,  "js.  6d.

A    Treatise    on   Horse-
Shoeing  and  Lameness.
By  y .  Gamgee,  Vet.  Surg.

%vo.  7vith  55  Woodcuts,  \^s.

Yotiatt    on    the   Horse.
Revised  and  enlarged  by  W.
Watson,  AI. R.C.V.S.

%vo.  Woodcuts,  lis.  6d.

Youatt  071  the  Dog.

By  the  same  Author,

8z'^,  Woodcuts,  6j-.

!

Horses  aitd  Stables.
By  Colonel  F.  Fitzwygram,
X  V.  the  King  s  Hussars.

With2Af  Plates  of  Illustrations,  Sz'o.  iOs.6d.

The  Dog  in  Health  and  I
Disease.  \

By  Stonehenge.

With  73  Wood  Engravings.    Square  crown
Zvo.  7s.  6d.

The  Greyhotind.
By  the  same  Author.

Revised  Edition,  ivith  24  Portraits  of  Grey-
Jiounds.     Square  crozun  Svo.  los.  6d.

Stables  and  Stable  Fit-
tings.
By  W.  Miles,  Esq.

Imp.  %vo.  zoit/i  13  Plates,  15^.

The  Horse  s  Toot,  a7id
how  to  keep  it  Sound.
By  W.  Miles,  Esq.

N^i nth  Edition.  Imp.  Zvo.  Woodcuts,  12s.  6d.

A    Plain     Treatise    on
Horse-shoeing.
By  the  same  Author.

Sixth  Edition.    Post  Sz'o.  Woodcuts,  2s.  6d.

Remarks    on     Horses
Teeth,    addressed  to  Ptir-
chasers.
By  the  same  AtUhor.

Post  %vo.  IS.  6d.

NEW    Vv^ORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8c    CO.

43

T/ie  Fly-Fisher  s  Eiito-
mology.

By  Alfred  Ronalds,
With  coloured  Representa-
tions of  the  Naticral  and
Artificial  Insect.

With  20  coloured  Plates.     Zvo.  14^.

The  Dead  Shot,  or  Sports-
mans  Complete  Gtiide ;  a
Treatise  on  the  Use  of  the
Gttn,  Dog-breaking,  Pigeon-
shooting,  &c.
By  Marksma7i.

Fcp.  Sz'o.  ivith  Plate's,  5^.

WORKS

of    UTILITY    and    GENERAL
INFORMATION.

Matmders  Treasury  of
Knowledge  and  Lib^^ary  of
Reference ;  comprisi7ig  an
English  Dictionary  and
Grammar,  Universal  Ga-
zetteer, Classical  Diction-
ary, Chronology,  Law  Dic-
tionary, Synopsis '  of  the
Peerage,  Usefd Tables,&c.

Fcp.  Svo.  6s.

Maunder  s  Biographical

Treasury.

Latest  Edition,  i^econ-
strtccted  and  partly  re-
written, with  abotct  i  ,000
additional  Memoirs,  by
W.  L.  R.   Gates,

Fcp.  Svo.  6s.

Maunder  s  Scientific  and
Literary  Treasury ;  a
Poptilar  Encyclopcedia  of
Science,  Literatttre,  and
Art.

New  Edition,  in  part  re-
written,zuith  above  1,000
nezv  articles,  by  f .  Y.
fohnson.

Fcp.  6s.

Maunder  s       Historical

T^easiiry ;  comprising  a
General  Introdtcctory  Out-
line of  Universal  History,
and  a  Series  of  Separate
Histories.

Fcp.  Zvo.  6s.

Maunder  s  Treasury  of
Geography,  Physical,  His-
torical, Descriptive,  and
Political.

Edited    by     W.    Htcglies,
F.R.G.S.

With  7  Maps  and  i6  Plates.     Fcp.  Zvo.  6s,

Maunder  s  Treasury  of
N attiral History ;  orPoptc-
lar  Dictionary  of  Zoology.

Revised  and  corrected  Edition.     Fcp.   Zvo.
with  900  Woodcttts,  6s.

The  Treasitry  of  Bible

Knowledge ;  being  a  Dic-
tionary of  the  Books,  Per-
sons, Places,  Events,  and
other  Matters  of  zvhich
mention  is  made  in  Holy
Scripture.
By  Rev.  J.  Ayre,  M.A.

With  Maps,  1 5  Plates,  and  numeroids  Wood-
cuts.    Fcp.  Zvo.  6s.

44

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Collieries   and   Colliers  :
a  Handbook   of  the  Law
and  Leading  Cases  relat-
ing ther^eto.
By  y .  C.  Fowler.

Third  Edition.     Fcp.  Svo.  ys.  6d.

The    Theory  and  Prac-
tice of  Banking.
By  H.  D.  Macleod,  M.A.

Second  Edition.     2  vols.  Svo.  ^os.

Modern  Cookery  for  Pri-
vate Families^  reduced  to  a
Sy stein  of  Easy  Practice  in
a  Series  of  caref  illy-tested
Receipts.
By  Eliza  Acton.

With  8  Plates  &^  1 50  Woodcuts.  Fcp.  %vo.  6^.

Three  Hundred  Original
Chess  Pi^oblems  and  Studies.
By  yas.  Pierce,  M.A.  and
W.  T.  Pierce.

With  many  Diagrams.  Sq.fcp.  Zvo.  *]s.  ()d.

Chess  Openings.

By  F.  W.  Longman,  Bal-
liol  College,  Oxford.

Second  Edition,  revised.    Fcp.  '6vo.  2s.  6d.

The  Theory  of  the  Mo-
dern  Scientific    Game    of
Whist.
By  Wm.  Pole,  F.R.S.

Fifth  Edition.      Fcp.  %vo.  2s.  6d.

A  Practical  Treatise  07i

Brewing ;    with  Formulcs
for  Ptiblic   Brewers,   and
Instrtcctions  for    Private
Families.
By  W.  Black.

Fifth  Edition.     Zvo.  \os.  6d.

Hints  to  Mothers  on
the  Management  of  their
Health  dtcring  the  Period
of  Pregnancy  and  in  the
Lying-in  Room.
By  Thomas  Btdl,  M.D.

Fcp.  Svo.  ^s.

Blachstone  Economised  ;
being  a  Coinpendium  of  the
Laws  of  England  to  the
Present  Time.
By  D.  M.  Aird,  Barrister.

Second  Edition.     Post  Svo.  Js.  6d.

The  Maternal  Manage-
ment of  Children  in  Health
and  Disease.
By  Thomas  Btdl,  M.D.

Fcp.  Svo.  <^s.

Pewtners  Comprehe^tsive
Specifier ;  a  Gtcide  to  the
Practical  Specification  of
every  kind  of  Bidlding-
Artificers  Work.
Edited  by  W.  Yoimg.

Croivn  Svo.  ds.

The  Cabinet  Lawyer ;  a
Popular  Digest  of  the  Laws
of  England,  Civil,  Crimi-
nal, and  Constittitional.

Twenty -fourth   Edition,    corrected  and  ex-
tended.    Fcp.  Svo.  gs.

A  Profitable  Book  upon

Domestic  Lazu.  Essays  for
English  Women  arid  Law
Students.

By  Perkins,  f^mior,  M.A.
Barrister-at-Law.

Post  Svo.  \os.  6d.

INDEX.

Acton's  Modern  Cookery 44

4  ird's  Blackstone  Economised 44

Mpine  Club  Map  of  Switzerland  38

Upine  Guide  (The) 38

Althaus  Medical  Electricity 27

4  ;«fj-' J' Jurisprudence  10

Primer  of  the  Constitution 11

Anderson's  Strength  of  Materials  20

4 r;«j'/'r(3;?^'i' Organic  Chemistry    20

4 r«(?/£/' J  Manual  of  English  Literature    ...  13

^rw*??^/;^^  Life  of  Lord  Denman  7

\,therstone  Priory 39

\.uthority  and  Conscience  » 36

Autumn  Holidays  of  a  Country  Parson  ...  14

Ayre's  Treasury  of  Bible  Knowledge   43

3acon.  s 'Essz.ys,  hy  Whafely 11

Life  and  Letters,  by  Spedding    ...  11

Works  II

3(1171  s  Mental  and  Moral  Science 12

on  the  Senses  and  Intellect    12

?(2//'^  Guide  to  the  Central  Alps  38

Guide  to  the  Western  Alps 38

Guide  to  the  Eastern  Alps  38

3ayldon' s  Rents  and  Tillages 32

3eckcrs  Charicles  and  Gallus 39

lenfey's  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary   17

3 lack's  Treatise  on  Brewing  44

3lackley  s  German- English  Dictionary 16

3laine  s  Rural  Sports  41

3loxanis  Metals    20

3oase  and  Courtney  s  Bibliotheca  Cornu-

biensis 7

3oultbee  on  39  Articles 32

3o2irjie's  Catechism  of  the  Steam  Engine  .  30

Handbook  of  Steam  Engine 30

Treatise  on  the  Steam  Engine  ...  30

Improvements  in  the  same 31

3o%vdlcrs  Family  Shakspcare 41

3 ram  ley-Moore's  Six  Sisters  of  the  Valley  .  39
3rande's  Dictionary  of  Science,  Literature,

and  Art   24

3ray's  Manual  of  Anthropology 23

Philosophy  of  Necessity  12

3renchley's  Cruise  of  the  '  Cura9oa' 37

Irinkley's  Astronomy 18

Irowne's  Exposition  of  the  39  Articles 32

3runeTs\JS.Q  oi  Brunei  8

luckle's  History  of  CiviHsation 3

Posthumous  Remains  12

3ull's  Hints  to  Mothers 44

Maternal  Management  of  Children  .  44

3unsen's  Prayers  36

kirgomaster's  Family  (The)  39

3urkes  Rise  of  Great  Families 9

Burke  s  Vicissitudes  of  Families 9

Burton's  Christian  Church 6

Busk's  Folk-lore  of  Rome  39

Butler  s  Physical  Geography 20

Cabinet  Lawyer 44

Campbell' s  Norway  37

Cafes' s  Biographical  Dictionary 9

and  PFffj^war^^'j  Encyclopaedia  ...  5

C^r/j- and  i^^r/zV J- Moral  Emblems    28

Changed  Aspects  of  Unchanged  Truths  ...  14

Chesncy  s  Indian  Polity 3

Modern  Mihtary  Biography 3

Waterloo  Campaign  3

Christ  the  Consoler 36

C lough's  Lives  from  Plutarch 4

Codringto7i' s  (Admiral)  Memoirs  7

Ctf/t7iJ-(?  on  Moabite  Stone  &c 36

's  Pentateuch  and  Book  of  Joshua,  36

Speaker's  Bible  Commentary    ...  36

Collins' s  Perspective 30

Colojnb's  Slave  Catching  in  the  Indian  Ocean  36
Commonplace  Philosopher  in   Town  and

Country,  by  A.  K.  H.  B 14

Comte's  Positive  Polity    9

Corny n's  Elena  39

Congreve's  Essays 9

Politics  of  Aristotle  11

Conington  s  Translation  of  Virgil's  ^neid  41

Miscellaneous  Writings 15

C(7^?/(?;/j'^c??<t'j' Two  French  Dictionaries    ...  15
Conybeare  and  Howson' s  Life  and  Epistles

of  St.  Paul 33

Cooke  s  Grotesque  Animals 27

Copland's  Dictionary  of  Practical  Medicine  27

Cotton  s  Memoir  and  Correspondence 8

Counsel  and  Comfort  from  a  City  Pulpit...  14

Cox's  (G.  W.)  Aryan  Mythology 4

Crusades 6

History  of  Greece  4

Tale  of  the  Great  Persian

War 4

Tales  of  Ancient  Greece  ...  39

and  Jones' s  Romances 39

Teutonic  Tales  39

Craioleys  Thucydides 4

Crt'(?jry  on  British  Constitution  3

Cresy's  Encyclopaedia  of  Civil  Engineering  30

Critical  Essays  of  a  Country  Parson 14

Crookcss  Chemical  Analysis    25

Dyeing  and  Calico-printing 31

Culleys  Handbook  of  Telegraphy 30

O/j'fTr-i''^  Student's  History  of  Ireland  3

Davidson's  Introduction  to  New  Testament    35

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

Dea-d  Shot  {The),  hy  Marksman  43

L>e  Caisne  and  Le  Mao/it's  Botany    24

De  Morga/i's  Paradoxes  14

Disraeli's  Lord  George  Bentinck  8

Novels  and  Tales  40

Dobson  on  the  Ox 42

Doves  Law  of  Storms  19

Doyle's  Fairyland  28

Z^/'^zf'i- Reasons  of  Faith 33

Eastlahe  s  Gothic  Revival   29

Hints  on  Household  Taste 29

i?c/^?/'j' Queensland    38

Edwards's  Rambles  among  the  Dolomites  37

Elements  of  Botany 23

EllicoW s  Commentary  on  Ephesians  33

Galatians    33

Pastoral  Epist.  33

Philippians,  &c.  33

Thessalonians  .  33

Lectures  on  Life  of  Christ   32

Epochs  of  History    6

Erichsen  s  Surgery    26

^t^rt'??/^  Ancient  Stone  Implements  23

Ewald's  Antiquities  of  Israel  34

History  of  Israel    34

Fairlaini  s    Application    of     Cast     and

Wrought  Iron  to  Building...  31

Information  for  Engineers 31

Treatise  on  Mills  and  Milhvork  31

Farrar's  Chapters  on  Language   13

Families  of  Speech  13

Fitztvygra7)i  on  Horses  and  Stables 42

Forsyth' s  ILssviys    9

Fowler's  Collieries  and  Colliers 44

Francis's  Fishing  Book    41

Freema}i' s  l\\stox\c3.\  Geography  of  Europe  6

From  January  to  December  14

/^n?//(5'^' J- English  in  Ireland    i

History  of  England  i

Short  Studies 12

Gairdners  Houses  of  Lancaster  and  York  6

Gamgee  on  Horse-Shoeing 42

G allot' s  Elementary  Physics    20

Natural  Philosophy  20

Gardiner  s  Thirty  Years'  War   6

Garrod's  Materia  Medica    27

Gilbert's  Cadore    38

and  Churchill' sDolormiQS  37

Girdlestone  s  Bible  Synonyms 33

Golds7nith's  Poems,  illustrated  41

Goodeve  s  Mechanics 20

Mechanism  20

Steam  Engine  20

Grant's  Ethics  of  Aristotle 11

Graver  Thoughts  of  a  Country  Parson 14

Gray  s  Anatomy    26

Griffin  s  Algebra  and  Trigonometry 20

Griffith s  Fundamentals   32

Sermons  for  the  Times  32

Grove  on  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces  ...  20

Giiyot's  Earth  and  Man 23

Gwilt's  Encyclopaedia  of  Architectvire 29

Harding's  Texts  and  Thoughts 32

Hare  on  Election  of  Representatives    15

Hartwig s  Harmonies  of  Nature    22

Polar  World    22

Sea  and  its  Living  Wonders    ...  22

Subterranean  World 22.;

Tropical  World 23

Ha  ughtofis  Ani  m  al  M  echanics  20

Hayward' s  Biographical  and  Critical  Essays  8-

Helniholtz  s  Scientific  Lectures  2q

Helmsley's  Trees,  Shrubs,  and  Herbaceous

Plants 2^

//£?rjf/?6'/'i- Outlines  of  Astronomy  19

Hodgson's  Time  and  Space 13

Theory  of  Practice 12

Holland's  Recollections  7

Holmes's  Surgical  Treatment  of  Children  .  25

System  of  Surgery   2.i

Howitt's  Rural  Life  of  England    37

Visits  to  Remarkable  Places 38

Hiibner's  Pope  Sixtus  the  Fifth 8

Humboldt' s  Life 8

Hume'sY.ss-^y%  12

Treatise  on  Human  Nature 12

//z/z^'i' History  of  Rome  5

Ingelow's  Poems    41

Jameson's  Legends  of  Saints  and  Martyrs .  28

Legends  of  the  Madonna 28

Legends  of  the  Monastic  Orders  28

Legends  of  the  Saviour 28

Jenkih s  Electricity  and  Magnetism 20

Jerraih s  Ly cidas  of  Milton 40

jferrold's  Life  of  Napoleon i

Johnston's  Geographical  Dictionary 17

Kalisclis  Commentary  on  the  Bible 34

A'lj/^-^'j  Evidence  of  Prophecy    33

Kenyon' s  (Lord)  Life 7

Kerl's  Metallurgy,  by  Crookes  2iXvd,  Rohrig,  31

Kirby  and  Spence's  Entomology   22

Lang's  Ballads  and  Lyrics 40

Latham's  English  Dictionary 15

Laiightoh s  Nautical  Surveying 19

Laverack's  Setters 42

Latvrence  on  Rocks 23

Lecky's  History  of  European  Morals 5

■ ■ Rationalism  5

Leaders  of  Public  Opinion 8

Leisure  Hours  in  Town,  by  A.  K.  H.  B. ...  14

Lessons  of  Middle  Age,  by  A.  K.  H.  B....  14

Lester's  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific   36

Lewes  s  Biographical  History  of  Philosophy  6

Liddell  2iX\d  Scott's  Greek-English  Lexicons  16

Life  of  Man  Symbolised 28

Lindley  an,d  Moore s  Treasury  of  Botany...  24

Z,/ty'^'j' Wave-Theory  of  Light 21

LoTigman's  Chess  Openings 44

Edward  the  Third    2

— Lectures  on  History  of  England  2

Old  and  New  St.  Paul's 29

Loudon's  Encyclopaedia  of  Agriculture   ...  32

Gardening 32

Plants 24

Lowndes's  Engineer's  Handbook  31

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.

47

Lubbock's  Origin  of  Civilisation 23

Lyra  Germanica 28,  35

Lytloji  s  Odes  of  Horace 41

Macau  lay's  (Lord)  Essays  2

■ History  of  England    ...  2

Lays  of  Ancient  Rome.  40

Miscellaneous  Writings  13

Speeches  13

Works  2

McCulloch's  Dictionary  of  Commerce  17

Maclcod's  Principles  of  Economical  Philo-
sophy    II

Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking  44

Markha7n' s  History  of  Persia 4

Marshall's  Physiology 26

Todas 23

Marshman  s  History  of  India 3

Life  of  Havelock    9

Martineau  s  Q\ix\%\}.dcc\.  Life 35

Hymns 35

Maunder  s  Biographical  Treasury 43

Geographical  Treasury    43

Historical  Treasury 43

Scientific  and  Literary  Treasury  43

Treasury  of  Knowledge  43

Treasury  of  Natural  History  ...  43

Maxivcll's  Theory  of  Heat 20

May  s  History  of  Democracy 2

History  of  England  2

Melville  s  Digby  Grand  39

General  Bovmce  -. 39

-Gladiators    39

Good  for  Nothing  39

Holmby  House 39

Interpreter    39

Kate  Coventry    39

Queen's  Maries    39

Mendelssohn' s  Letters  8

Merivale's  Fall  of  the  Roman  Republic  ...  4

Romans  under  the  Empire 4

Merrifield' s  Kx\\}:\T<\Q.\Xc  and  Mensuration...  20

Geometry     and      Mechanical

Drawing 20

Magnetism 19

Miles  on  Horse's  Foot  and  Horse  Shoeing  42

on  Horse's  Teeth  and  Stables 42

Mill  (J.)  on  the  Mind 10

(J.  S.)  on  Liberty 10

Subjection  of  Women 10

on  Representative  Government  10

Utilitarianism 10

' s  Autobiography   7

Dissertations  and  Discussions 10

Hamilton's  Philosophy     10

System  of  Logic     10

Political  Economy     10

Unsettled  Questions 10

Miller's  Elements  of  Chemistry    25

Inorganic  Chemistry 20

Mi?ito's  (Lord)  Life  and  Letters 7

Mitchell s  Manual  of  Architecture 29

'■ Manual  of  Assaying 32

Modern  Novelist's  Library 39

Mon sell's  '  Spiritual  Songs  '     35

Moore's  lv\shMe\o<:\\cs,  illustrated 40

Lalla  Rookh,  illustrated   40

Moreli  s  Elements  of  Psychology 12

Mental  Philosophy  11

Morris's  French  Revolution    3

Mossman  s  Catholic  Church 6

Mailer  s  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop.  13

Science  of  Language 13

Science  of  Religion  5

Murchison  on  Liver  Complaints    ::6

on  Continued  Fevers    26

New   Testament    Illustrated  with   Wood

Engravings  from  the  Old  Masters 28

Norihcott  on  Lathes  and  Turning 30

O'  Conor's  Commentary  on  Hebrews 34

Romans  34

St.  John  34

Od ling's  Course  of  Practical  Chemistry  ...  25

O' Keeffe  Case  (The)  15

Owe/i's  Comparative  Anatomy  and  Physio-
logy of  Vertebrate  Animals  21

Lectures  on  the  Invertebrata 21

Packe's  Guide  to  the  Pyrenees    38

Paget' s  Lectures  on  Surgical  Pathology  ...  25

Payen's  Industrial  Chemistry 29

Pereira's  Elements  of  Materia  Medica 27

Per  kin's  Profitable  Book  on  Domestic  Law  44

Petit' s  History  of  Mary  Stuart  3

Petviner's  Comprehensive  Specifier  44

Pierce's  Chess  Problems  44

Pole's  Game  of  Whist 44

Preece  and  Siveiuright' s  Telegraphy 20

P/r;/rt^(:/'^<Tj/'j' Mastery  of  Languages    16

Present-Day  Thoughts,  by  A.  K.  H.  B.  ...  14

Proctor's  Astronomical  Essays   18

Moon 18

Orbs  around  Us  18

Other  Worlds  than  Ours    18

Saturn    18

Scientific  Essays  (New  Series)  ...  22

Sun     i3

Two  Star  Atlases 19

■ —  Universe    18

Public  Schools  Atlas 17

Modern  Geography  17

Quain's  Anatomy 26

Pajnsay's  Geology  for  Beginners  22

Panken  on  Strains  in  Trusses 31

Pawlinson's  Parthia 4

Sassanians  5

Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson 14

Pedgrave's 'Dictionary  of  Artists    28

Peilly's  Map  of  Mont  Blanc  37

Monte  Rosa 37

i?/(r/z'.y  Dictionary  of  Antiquities    16

/t'/z/^r' J  Rose  Amateur's  Guide  24

Rogers's  Eclipse  of  Faith 33

Defence  of  Eclipse  of  Faith    33

Greyson's  Letters 10

Poget's  Thesaurus  of  English  Words  and

Phrases    15

Ronald's  Fly-B'ishcr's  Entomology    43

Rothschild's  Israelites  34

A' //jj-d"// on  the  Christian  Religion 6

English  Constitution 2

952014

NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    8i    CO.

48

Salter  on  the  Teeth  26

^i^^/i/^r/i  Justinian's  Institutes ii

Sanford' s  Yx\^v\^\  Kings 2

Savoiy  s  Geometric  Turning 29

Schellen's  Spectrum  Analysis 19

Scoti' s  Albcri  Durer 27

Papers  on  Civil  Engineering 31

Seaside  Musing,  by  A.  K.  H.  B 14

SeeboJiJii  s  Oxford  Reformers  of  1498 4

Protestant  Revolution   6

^^w^//' J  History  of  the  Early  Church  5

Passing  Thoughts  on  Religion 34

Prepa.ration  for  Communion   35

Principles  of  Education    14

Readings  for  Confirmation  35

Readings  for  Lent 35

Examination  for  Confirmation    ...  35

Stories  and  Tales  40

Thoughts  for  the  Age  34

Thoughts  for  the  Holy  Week 35

Sharp's  Post-office  Gazetteer 17

Shelley's  Workshop  Appliances 20

Application  of  Heat 20

Short's  Church  History   6

Simpson  s  Meeting  the  Sun 37

Smith's  Paul's  Voyage  and  Shipwreck 33

[Sydney)  Essays 13

Life  and  Letters 8

Miscellaneous  Works    ...  13

Wit  and  Wisdom  13

(Dr.  R.  A.)  Air  and  Rain  19

Sfieyd's  Cyllene 39

Southey's  Doctor  13

Poetical  Works 41

Stanley's  History  of  British  Birds 23

Stephen's  Ecclesiastical  Biography 8

Freethinking  and  Plainspeaking  10

-S/Zr/Z/z^'j  Secret  of  Hegel    12

Sir  W i Hi a7n  Hamilton  12

Stockmars  Memoirs 2

Stokes's  Lectures  on  Fever  27

Sound  and  Light  20

Stonehenge  on  the  Dog 42

on  the  Greyhound    42

5/r/f>^/a?/a?' J  Queens  of  England    9

Sunday  Afternoons  at  the  Parish  Church  of

a  University  City,  by  A.  K.  H.  B 14

Supernatural  Religion 35

J'^ry/i^r'i' History  of  India   3

[Jeremy)  Works,  edited  hy  Eden.  35

Text-Books  of  Science 20

Tyz/V/ry^?//' J- History  of  Greece  4

Thoinson  s  Laws  of  Thought  11

Thorpe's  Quantitative  Analysis  20

and  Muir's  Qualitative  Analysis  ...  20

7'>^?i;^zV^///«'j- Chemical  Physiology  25

Todd  (A.)  on  Parliamentary  Government...  2

and    Bozvjnati's    Anatomy    and

Physiology  of  Man  26

Trench's  Realities  of  Irish  Life 13

Trollope's  Barchester  Towers 39

Warden     39

Tw/j-^^/^' J  Examples  in  Mechanics    30

First  Lessons  in  Mechanics 30

TyndalV s  American  Lectures  on  Light   ...  21

Diamagnetism 21

Fragments  of  Science 21

Hours  of  Exercise  in  the  Alps...  37

Lectures  on  Electricity 21

Lectures  on  Light 21

Lectures  on  Sound 21

Heat  a  Mode  of  Motion  21

-  —  Molecular  Physics 25

C/(?(5^rw^yj  System  of  Logic 12

t/;/wz;^'j- Machine  Design   20

Ure  s  Dictionary  of  Arts,   Manufactures,

and  Mines 31

Walker  s  [Patricius)  Rambles  37

Walters' s  Home  and  Rural  Life  of  Shak-

speare 7

Watso7i's  Geometry 20

Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic  25

IFa^'/j  J- Dictionary  of  Chemistry  25

Webb's  Objects  for  Common  Telescopes  ...  19

Weinhold's  Experimental  Physics 21

Wellington' s  Life,  by  Gleig   8

West  on  Children's  Diseases 27

Whately's  EngUsh  Synonymes 15

Logic    II

Rhetoric  11

White  and  Donkin's  English  Dictionary...  16

and  Riddle's  Latin  Dictionaries    ...  16

'j  St.  Mark's  Gospel 34

St.  John's  Gospel  34

IF/z/Vwcr/Zz  on  Guns  and  Steel  31

Wilcocks's  Sea-Fisherman  42

Williams's  Axisioile's  Ethics 11

Willis's  Principles  of  Mechanism 30

Willoughby's  (Lady)  Diary 39

Wood's  Bible  Animals 24

Homes  without  Hands 22

Insects  at  Home 23

Insects  Abroad   23

Out  of  Doors 22

Strange  Dwellings 22

Wordsworth's  Christian  Ministry 33

Yo?rge's  History  of  England    3

Enghsia-Greek  Lexicons    17

Horace 41

EngUsh  Literature 13

Modern  History 3

Yoziatt  on  WiQ  Tiog  42

on  the  Horse    42

Z<?//^/-' J  Socrates f

Stoics,  Epicureans,  and  Sceptics...  =

Spottisivoode  «Sr»  Co.,  Printers,  New-street  Square,  Lotidon.

\^

K    .C788  158  I.M.S,

Institutes  of  Justinian
