Sacontala; or, The Fatal Ring (Jones) (Kalidasa, 1789)
==========================================================
The first Sanskrit drama ever translated into a European language: Sir William Jones's 1789 translation of Kalidasa's Shakuntala (this text the 1790 London edition) — the turning-point work that introduced Sanskrit literature to the West and electrified Goethe, Herder, and the Romantics. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_sacontal-or-the-fatal_kalidasa_1790).

TH 
E 
FATAL R 
IN 
G 


MJ 


6 4 e 2 / op! 
SACON TIAL A: . 
9 


OR, 


THE FATAL RING: 


AN 


INDIAN DRAMA. 


BY 
7 | / co EIS 
22 ͤ 
TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSCRIT AND PRACRIT. 


L-0-N-D-0-: 


Printed for EDWARDS, PALL Marr ; 


By J. COOPER, No. 31, Bow STREET, CovenT GARDENS, 
WITH HIS NEW-INVENTED INK. 
M. Dec. xc. 


— , 


PR E F A C E. 


1 N one of the letters which bear the title of zpirvins, 
though most of them swarm with ridiculous errours, and 
all must be consulted with extreme diffidence, I met, some 
years ago, with the following passage : © In the north of 
India there are many books, called Natac, which, as 
„ the Brahmens assert, contain a large portion of ancient 
„ history without any mixture of fable ; ” and having an 
eager desire to know the real state of this empire before 
the conquest of it by the Savages of the North, I was 
very solicitous, on my arrival in Bengal, to procure access 
to those books, either by the help of translations, if they 
had been translated, or by learning the language in which 
they were originally composed, and which I had yet a 
stronger inducement to learn from its connection with the 
administration of justice to the Hindus; but when I was 
able to converse with the Brahmens, they assured me that 
the Natacs were not histories, and abounded with fables ; 
that they were extremely popular works, and consisted of 
conversations in prose and verse, held before ancient Rajas 
in their publick assemblies, on an infinite variety of sub- 
jects, and 1n various dialects of India: this definition gave 
me no very distinct idea; but I concluded that they were 
dialogues on moral or literary topicks; whilst other Euro- 
peans, whom I consulted, had understood from the natives 
that they were discourses on dancing, musick, or poetry. 


At length a very sensible Brahmen, named Radhacanr, 


vi | PREFACE. 


who had long been attentive to English manners, removed 
all my doubts, and gave me no less delight than surprise, 
by telling me that our nation had compositions of the same 
sort, which were publickly represented at Calcutta in the 
cold season, and bore the name, as he had been informed, 
of plays. Resolving at my leisure to read the best of 
them, I asked which of their Natacs was most universally 
esteemed ; and he answered without hesitation, Sacontala, 
supporting his opinion, as usual among the Pandits, by a 
couplet to this effect: The ring of Sacontala, in which 
the fourth act, and four stanzas of that act, are emi- 
nently brilliant, displays all the rich exuberance of Ca- 
Iidasa's genius.“ I soon procured a correct copy of it; 
and, assisted by my teacher Ramalochan, began with 
translating 1t verbally into Latin, which bears so great a 
resemblance to Sanscrit, that it is more convenient than 
any modern language for a scrupulous interlineary version : 
I then turned it word for word into English, and after- 
wards, without adding or suppressing any material sentence, 
disengaged it from the stiffness of a foreign idiom, and 
prepared the faithful translation of the Indian drama, which 
[ now present to the Publick as a most pleasing and au- 
thentick picture of old Hindu manners, and one of the 
greatest curiosities that the literature of Asia has ”= 
brought to light. 

Dramatick poetry must have been immemorially ancient 
in the Indian empire : the invention of it is commonly 
| ascribed to Bheret, a sage believed to have been inspired, 
who invented also a system of musick which bears his 


* 


8 


La 


0 


5 


. 


La 


PREFACE. 2 Vil 


name; but this opinion of its origin 1s rendered very 
doubtful by the universal belief, that the first Sanscrit verse 
ever heard by mortals was pronounced in a burst of resent- 
ment by the great Valmic, who flourished in the silver age 
of the world, and was author of an Epick Poem on the 
war of his contemporary, Rama, king of Ayodhya ; so 
that no drama in verse could have been represented before 
his time; and the Indians have a wild story, that the first 
regular play, on the same subject with the Ramayan, was 
compoled by Hanumat or Pavan, who commanded an 
army of Satyrs or Mountaineers in Rama's expedition 
against Lanca : they add, that he engraved it on a smooth 
rock, which, being dissatisfied with his composition, he 
hurled into the sea; and that, many years after, a learned 
prince ordered expert divers to take impressions of the poem 
on wax, by which means the drama was in great measure 
restored ; and my Pandit assures me that he is in posses- 
sion of it. By whomsoever or in whatever age this species 
of entertainment was invented, it is very certain, that it 
was carried to great perfection in its kind, when Vicrama- 
_ ditya, who reigned in the first century before Christ, gave 
encouragement to poets, philologers, and mathematicians, 
at a time when the Britons were as unlettered and un- 
polished as the army of Hanumat : nine men of genius, 
commonly called the nine gems, attended his court, and 
were splendidly supported by his bounty ; and Calidas 1s 

 unanunously allowed to have been the brightest of them. — 
A modern epigram was lately repeated to me, which does 
so much honour to the author of Sacontala, that I cannot 


_ — — — —⅜— — 


— — — — — — — — 


viii PREFACE. 


forbear exhibiting a literal version of it: Poetry was 
the sportful daughter of Valmic, and, having been edu- 
% cated by Vyasa, she chose Calidas for her bridegroom 


after the manner of Viderbha: she was the mother of 


Amara, Sundar, Sanc'ha, Dhanic ; but now, old and 
V decrepit, her beauty faded, and her unadorned feet slip- 
“ping as she walks, in whose cottage does she disdain to 
«© take shelter ? ” 

All the other works of our illustrious poet, the Shake- 
{peare of India, that have yet come to my knowledge, are 
a second play, in five acts, entitled Urvasi ; an heroick 
poem, or rather a series of poems in one book, on the 


Children of the Sun; another, with perfect unity of ac- 


tion, on the Birth of Cumara, god of war; two or three 


love tales in verse; and an excellent little work on Sanscrit 
Metre, precisely in the manner of Terentianus ; but he 1s 
believed by some to have revised the works of Valmic and 


Vyäsa, and to have corrected the perfect editions of them 


which are now current: this at least is admitted by all, 
that he stands next in reputation to those venerable bards ; 
and we must regret, that he has left only two Dramatick 
Poems, especially as the stories in his Raghuvansa would 


have supplied him with a number of excellent subjects. — 


Some of his contemporaries, and other Hindu poets even 


to our own times, have composed so many tragedies, 
comedies, farces, and musical pieces, that the Indian the- 
atre would fill as many volumes as that of any nation in 


ancient or modern Europe : all the Pandits assert that their 


plays are innumerable; and, on my first inquiries concern- 


PREFACE © ix 


ing them, I had notice of more than thirty, which they 
consider as the flower of their Natacs, among which the 
Malignant Child, the Rape of Usha, the Taming of Dur- 
vasas, the Seizure of the Lock, Malati and Madhava, 
with five or six dramas on the adventures of their incar- 
nate gods, are the most admired after those of Calidas. 
They are all in verse, where the dialogue 1s elevated ; and 
in prose, where 1t 1s familiar : the men of rank and learn- 
ing are represented speaking pure Sanscrit, and the women 
Pracrit, which 1s little more than the language of the 
Brahmens melted down by a delicate articulation to the 
softness of Italian; while the low persons of the drama 
speak the vulgar dialects of the several provinces which 
they are supposed to inhabit. 

The play of Sacontala must have been very popular 
when it was first represented ; for the Indian empire was 
then in full vigour, and the national vanity must have 
been highly flattered by the magnificent introduction of 
those kings and heroes in whom the Hindus gloried ; the 
scenery must have been splendid and beautiful; and there 
18 good reason to believe, that the court at Avanti Was 
equal in brilliancy during the reign of Vicramiditya, to 
that of any monarch in any age or country. — Dush- 
manta, the hero of the piece, appears in the chronological 
tables of the Br ähmens among the Children of the Moon, 
and in the twenty-first generation after the flood; so that, 
if we can at all rely on the chronology of the Hindus, he 
was nearly contemporary with Obed, or jesse; and Puru, 
his most celebrated ancestor, was the fifth in descent from 


x PREFACE. 


Budha, or Mercury, who married, they say, a daughter 
of the pious king, whom Vishnu preserved in an ark from 
the universal deluge : his eldest son Bheret was the illus- 
trious progenitor of Curu, from whom Pandu was lineally 
descended, and in whose family the Indian Apollo became 


incarnate ; whence the poem, next in fame to the Rama- 


yan, 18 called Mahabharat. 


As to the machinery of the drama, it 1s taken from the 
system of Mythology, which prevails to this day, and 
which it would require a large volume to explain; but we 
cannot help remarking that the deities introduced in the 
Fatal Ring are clearly allegorical personages. Marichi, 
the first production of Brahma, or the Creative Power, 
signifies light, that subtil fluid which was created before 


its reservoir, the Sun, as water was created before the sea; 


Casyapa, the offspring of Marichi, seems to be a personi- 


fication of infinite space, comprehending innumerable 
worlds; and his children by Aditi, or his active power, 
(unless Aditi mean the primeval day, and Diti, his other 
wife, the night) are Indra, or the visible firmament, and the 
twelve Adityas, or Suns, presiding over as many months. 

On the characters and conduct of the play I shall offer 
no criticism ; because I am convinced that the tastes of 
men differ as much as their sentiments and passions, and 


that, in feeling the beauties of art, as in smelling flowers, 


tasting fruits, viewing prospects, and hearing melody, 


every individual must be guided by his own sensations and 


the incommunicable associations of his own ideas. This 


only 1 may add, that if Sacontala should | ever be acted i in 


PREFACE. ; 1 10 


India, where alone it could be acted with perfect know- 
ledge of Indian dresses, manners, and scenery, the piece 
might easily be reduced to five acts of a moderate length, 
by throwing the third act into the second, and the sixth 
into the fifth; for it must be confessed that the whole of 
Dushmanta's conversation with his buffoon, and great part 
of his courtship 1 in the hermitage, might be omitted with- 
out any injury to the drama. 

It is my anxious wish that others may take the pains to 
learn Sanscrit, and may be persuaded to translate the works 
of Cälidäs: I shall hardly again employ my leisure in a 
task so foreign to my professional (which are, in truth, my 
favourite) studies, and have no intention of translating any 

other book from any language, except the Law Tract of 
Menu, and the new Digest of Indian and Arabian laws ; 
but, to show that the Brahmens at least do not think polite 
literature incompatible with jurisprudence, I cannot avoid 
mentioning, that the venerable compiler of the Hindu Di- 
| gest, who is now in his etghty-sixth year, has the whole 
play of Sacontala by heart, as he proved when I last con- 
versed with him, to my entire conviction : lest, however, 
I should hereafter seem to have changed a resolution which 
I mean to keep inviolate, I think it proper to say, that 
have already translated four or five other books, and among 
them the Hit6padesa, which I undertook, merely as an 
exercise in learning Sanscrit, three years before I knew 
that Mr. Wilkins, without whose aid I should never have 


learned it, had any thought of giving the same work to 
the Publick. 


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. 


DusymanTa, Emperor of India. 


SACONTALA, the Heroine of the Piece. 
ANusUYA, 


n 5 Damsels attendant on her. 
PRIYAMvAPDA, | | 


* Mäphavva, the Emperor's Buffoon. 
| SGavurauf, an old female Hermit, 
SARNGARAVA, ) 

| 5 two Brahmens. 

| SARADWATA, 

| Canna, Foster-father of Sacontala. 
| CuMBHiLaca, a Fisherman. 
M1sRacEes!, a Nymph. 

MartaL1i, Charioteer of Indra. 


A LITTLE Boy. 
CasYAPA, 


Deities, Parents of Indra. 
ADITI, a 


Officers of State and Police, Brahmens, Damsels, Hermits, Pupils, 
Chamberlains, Warders of the Palace, Messengers, and Attendants. 


THE PROLOGUE. 


A BRAHMEN pronounces the Benediction. 


W arts was the first work of the Creator ; and Fire receives the 
oblations ordained by law; the Sacrifice is performed with solemnity; 
the Two Lights of heaven distinguish time; the subtil Ether, which 
is the vehicle of sound, pervades the universe ; the Earth is the natural 
parent of all increase ; and by Air all things breathing are animated : 


may ISA, the God of Nature, apparent in these eight forms, bless 
and sustain you! 


The MANAGER enters. 


Max. What occasion is there for a long speech * [ Looking Fowards the 


dressing room] When your decorations, Madam, are completed, be 
pleased to come forward. 


An AcTREss enters. 


Acta. I attend, Sir.—What are your commands ? 

Max. This, Madam, is the numerous and polite assembly of the 
famed Hero, our king Vicramäditya, the patron of every delightful 
art; and before this audience we must do justice to a new production 
of Calidas, a dramatick piece, entitled Sacontala, or, The Fatal Ring: 
it is requested, therefore, that all will be attentive. 

AcrR. Who, Sir, could be inattentive to an entertainment so well 
intended ? Ree 

Max. [Smiling.] I will speak, Madam, without reserve. — As far as 
an enlightened audience receive pleasure from our theatrical talents, and 
_ Express it, so far, and no farther, I set a value on them; but my own 
mind is diffident of its powers, how strongly soever exerted. 

AcTR. You judge rightly in measuring your own merit by the degree 


S 


— — — — 
- — — — 


1 THE PROLOGUE. 


of pleasure which this afsembly may receive ; but its value, I trust, 
will presently appear. Have you any farther commands ? 

Max. What better can you do, since you are now on the stage, 
than exhilarate the souls, and gratify the sense, of our auditory with a 
song? 

ACTR. Shall I sing the description of a season ? and which of the 
seasons do you chuse to hear described ? 

Man. No finer season could be selected than the summer, which is 
actually begun, and abounds with delights. How sweet is the close of 
a summer day, which invites our youth to bathe in pure streams, and 
induces gentle slumber under the shades refreshed by sylvan breezes, 
which have passed over the blooming Patalis and stolen their fragrance! 

AcTR. [Singing.| © Mark how the soft blossoms of the Nagacefar 
« are lightly kissed by the bees! Mark how the damsels delicately 
place behind their ears the flowers of Sirisha!“ 

Man. A charming strain ! The whole company sparkles, as it were, 
with admiration; and the musical mode to which the words are 
adapted, has filled their souls with rapture. By what other perfor- 
mance can we ensure a continuance of their favour ? 

AcTr. Oh! by none better than by the Fatal Ring, which 18 have 
just announced. 

Man. How could I forget it! In that moment I was lulled to dis- 
traction by the melody of thy voice, which allured my heart, as the 
king Dushmanta 1 is now allured by the swift antelope. 


[They both go out. 


SAC ONTALA 


OR, 


. 
5 


THE FATAL RING. 


ACE I. 
SCENE, a FortsrT. 


DusHMANTA, in à car, pursuing an antelope, with a bow and quiver, 
attended by his CHARIOTEER. 


CHaR. ¶ Looking at the antelope, and then at the King. 


Wurx I cast my eye on that black antelope, and on thee, O king, 
with thy braced bow, I see before me, as it were, the God Mahesa 
chasing a hart, with his bow, named pinaca, braced in his left hand. 
Dusam. The fleet animal has given us a long chase. Oh! there he 
runs, with his neck bent gracefully, looking back, from time to time, at 
the car which follows him. Now, through fear of a descending shaft, 
he contracts his forehand, and extends his flexible haunches ; and now, 
through fatigue, he pauses to nibble the grass in his path with his mouth 
half opened. See how he springs and bounds with long steps, lightly 
ikimming the ground, and rising high in the air! And now fo rapid in 
his flight, that he is scarce discernible | 
Chak. The ground was uneven, and the kicks. were ducks: i in 
their course. He has taken advantage of our delay. It is level now, 
and we may easily overtake him. 
Dus nx. Loosen the reins. 5 
CHar. As the king commands. [He drives the car firft at full 
speed, and then gently.) He could not escape. The horses were not 
even touched by the clouds of dust which they raised ; they -t tossed 


— — 
— — — = 


4 SACONTALA; OR, 


their manes, erected their ears, and rather glided than gallopped over 
the smooth plain. 

Dusnm. They soon out ran the swift antelope. Objects which, from 
their distance, appeared minute, presently became larger : what was 
really divided, seemed united, as we passed ; and what was in truth 
bent, seemed straight. So swift was the motion of, the wheels, that 
nothing, for many moments, was either distant or near. 

| He fixes an arrow in his bowstring. 

[ Behind the scenes.| He must not be slain. This antelope, O king, 
has an asylum in our forest : he must not be slain. 

Cnar. [Listening and looking.| Just as the animal presents a fair 
mark for your arrow, two hermits are advancing to interrupt your aim. 

Dusum. Then stop the car. 

CHAR. The king 1s obeyed. He draws in the reins. 


Enter a HERuIT and his PUPIL. 


ERM. [Raising his hands.| Slay not, O mighty sovereign, {lay not 
a poor fawn, who has found a place of refuge. No, surely, no; he 
must not be hurt. An arrow in the delicate body of a deer would be 
like fire in a bale of cotton. Compared with thy keen shafts, how weak 
must be the tender hide of a young antelope ! Replace quickly, oh! 
replace the arrow which thou hast aimed. The weapons of you kings 
and warriors are destined for the relief of the oppressed, not for the 
destruction of the guiltless. 

Duos. |Saluting them.] It is replaced. 

[ He places the arrow in his quiver. 

 Herw. [With joy.] Worthy is that act of thee, most illustrious of 
monarchs ; worthy, indeed, of a prince descended from Puru. Mayst 
thou have a son adorned with virtues, a sovereign of the world! 

Pur. [ Elevating both his hands.| Oh! by all means, may thy son 
be adorned with every virtue, a sovereign of the world ! 

Dusum. [Bowing to them.] My head bears with reverence the order 
of a Brahmen. N . 


THE FATAL RING. 5 5 


HERM. Great king, we came hither to collect wood for a solemn 
sacrifice ; and this forest, on the banks of the Malini, affords an asylum 
to the wild animals protected by Sacontala, whom our holy preceptor 
Canna has received as a sacred deposit. If you have no other avocation, 
enter yon grove, and let the rights of hospitality be duly performed. 
Having seen with your own eyes the virtuous behaviour of those whose 
only wealth is their piety, but whose worldly cares are now at an end, 


you will then exclaim, How many good subjects are defended by 
« this arm, which the bowstring has made callous ! ”” 


Duos. Is the master of your family at home? 

HeRrm. Our preceptor is gone to S6matirt'ha, in hopes of deprecating 
some calamity, with which destiny threatens the irreproachable Sacontala ; | 
and he has charged her, in his absence, to receive all guests with due 
honour. 

Dus fu. Holy man, I will attend her; and ihe, having obser ed my 
devotion, will report it favourably to the venerable sage. 

Both. Be it so; and we depart on our own business. 

[The Hermit and his Pupil g go Out. 

Dusum. Drive on the car. By visiting the abode of holiness, w 
shall purify our souls. 

Cram. As the king (may his life be long !) commands. 

[He drives on. 

Dus hu. | Looking on all | rdes.] That we are near the dwelling-place 
of pious hermits, would clearly have appeared, even if it had not been 
told. 

CAR. By what marks? 

Dusk. Do you not observe them? See under yon trees the 
| hallowed grains which have been scattered on the ground, while the 
tender female parrots were feeding their unfledged young in their 

pendent nest. Mark in other places the shining pieces of polithed stone 
which have bruised the oily fruit of the sacred Ingudi. Look at the 
young fawns, which, having acquired confidence in man, and accus- 
tomed themselves to the sound of his voice, frisk at pleasure, without 
varying their course. Even the surface of the river is reddened with 
lines of consecrated bark, which float down its stream. Look again; 


6 |  SACONTALA; OR, 


the roots of yon trees are bathed in the waters of holy pools, which 
quiver as the breeze plays upon them ; and the glowing lustre of yon 
fresh leaves is obscured, for a time, by smoke that rises from oblations of 
clarified butter. See too, where the young roes graze, without appre- 
hension from our approach, on the lawn before yonder garden, where 
the tops of the sacrificial gals, cut for some religious me are sprinkled 
around. 
CHaR. I now observe all those marks of some holy habitation. 
Dushu. [Turning aside.] This awful sanctuary, my friend, must not 
be violated. Here, therefore, stop the car; that I may descend. 
CHar. I hold in the reins. The king may descend at his pleasure. 
Dusk. | Having descended, and looking at his own dress.| Groves 
devoted to religion must be entered in humbler habiliments. Take 
these regal ornaments ; [zhe Charioteer receives them.] and, whilst 1 


am observing those who inhabit this retreat, let the horses be watered 
and dressed. 


CAR. Be it as you direct. He on goes out. 

 Dusnm. [Walking round and r Now then I enter the sanc- 
tuary. [ He enters the grove.| Oh! this place must be holy, my right 
arm throbs —| Pau ng and considering. | What new acquisition does this 
omen promise in a sequestered grove ? But the gates of predestined 
events are in all places open. 


[B ehind the scenes.] Come Hither, beloved companions ; Oh! come 
hither. | 

Dusnm. [ Lifening.| Hah! I hear fenwle voices to the right of yon 
arbour. I am resolved to know who are conversing. | He walks round 
and looks.| There are some damsels, I see, belonging to the hermit's 


family who carry water-pots of different sizes proportioned to their 
strength, and are going to water the delicate plants. Oh! how charm- 
ingly they look! If the beauty of maids who dwell in woodland retreats 
cannot easily be found in the recesses of a palace, the garden flowers 
must make room for the blossoms of the forest, which excel them in 


colour and fragrance. Le fands gazing at them. 


THE FATAL RING. 


Enter SaconTALa, ANusUYA, and PrRIYAMVADA. 


Anv. O my Sacontala, it is in thy society that the trees of our 
father Canna seem to me delightful : it well becomes thee, who art soft 


as the fresh-blown Mallica, to fill with water the canals which have 
been dug round these tender shrubs. 

Sac. It is not only in obedience to our father that I thus employ 
myself, though that were a sufficient motive, but I really feel the 
affection of a sister for these young plane. [Matering them. 

PRI. My beloved friend, the shrubs which you have watered flower 
in the summer, which 1s now begun : Tet us give water to those which 
have passed their flowering time; for our virtue will be the greater 
when it is wholly disinterested. 

Sac. Excellent advice! [/Yatering other plants. 
Dusum. [Afide in transport.) How! is that Canna's daughter, 
 Sacontala? [with surprise.) The venerable sage must have an unfeeling 
heart, since he has allotted a mean employment to so lovely a girl, and 
has dressed her in a coarse mantle of woven bark. He, who could wish 
that so beautiful a creature, who at first fight ravishes my soul, should 
endure the hardships of his austere devotion, would attempt, I suppose, 
to cleave the hard wood Sami with a leaf of the blue lotos. Let me 
retire behind this tree, that I may gaze on her charms without dimi- 
nishing her confidence. [He retires. 

Sac. My friend Priyamvada has tied this mantle of bark fo closely 
over my bosom that it gives me pain: Anusuya, I request you to untie | 
it. LAnusuye a unties the mantle. 

Prr. [Laughing] Well, my sweet friend, enjoy, while you mav, 
that youthful prime which gives your bosom so beautiful a swell. 

Dusam. [Afde.] Admirably spoken, Priyamvada ! No; her charms 
cannot be hidden, even though a robe of intertwisted fibres be thrown 
over her shoulders, and conceal a part of her bosom, like a veil of 
yellow leaves enfolding a radiant lower. The water lily, though | dark 
moss may settle on its head, is nevertheless beautiful ; and the moon 
with dewy beams is rendered yet brighter by its black spots. The 


8 SAC ONTALA; OR, 


bark itself acquires elegance from the features of a girl with antelope's 
eyes, and rather augments than diminishes my ardour. Many are the 
rough stalks which support the water lily; but many and exquisite are 
the blossoms which hang on them. 

Sac. | Looking before her.) Yon Amra tree, my friends, points with 
the finger of its leaves, which the gale gently agitates, and seems 
inclined to whisper some secret. I will go near it. 

[ They all approach the tree. 
PRI. O my Sacontala, let us remain some time in this shade. 

Sac. Why here particularly ? 

PRI. Because the Amra tree seems wedded to you, who are graceful 
as the blooming creeper which twines round it. | 

Sac. Properly are you named Priyamvada, or Speaking kindly. 

Dusnm. [Aside.] She speaks truly. Yes; her lip glows like the 
tender leaflet; her arms resemble two flexible stalks; and youthful 
beauty shines, like a blossom, in all her lineaments. 

Axvu. See, my Sacontala, how yon fresh Mallica, which you have 
surnamed Vanadosini, or Delight of the Grove, has chosen the sweet 
Amra for her bridegroom. 

Sac. [ Approaching, and looking at it with pleasure.) How charming 
is the season, when the nuptials even of plants are thus publickly 
3 [ She stands admiring it. 


1. [ Hzniling.] Do you know, my Anusuya, way Sacontala gazes 
ON ma > Sie with such rapture ? 


. Anu. No, indeed: I was trying to guels. Pray, tell me. 

PRI. As the Grove's Delight 1 is united to a suitable tree, thus I 
too hope for a bridegroom to my mind.” '—That 18 her private 
thought at this moment. 

Sac. Such are the flights of your own imagination. 

[Inverting the water-pot. 

Anu. Here is a plant, Sacontala, which you have forgotten, though it 
has grown up, like yourself, under the fostering care of our father Canna. 

Sac. Then I shall forget myself. — Oh wonderful! | approaching the 
plant.] O Priyamvada ! Lang at it with Joy. bg I have Sogn tidings 


for you. 


THE FATAL RING. 9 


PRI. What tidings, my beloved, for me? 

Sac. This Madhavi-creeper, though it be not the usual time for 
flowering, is covered with gay blossoms from its root to its top. 

Both. | Approaching it hastily.] Is it really so, sweet friend ? 

Sac. Is it so? look yourselves. 


Per. [With eagerness.] From this omen, Sacontala, I announce you 
an excellent husband, who will very soon take you by the hand. 


[ Both girls look at Sacontala. 

Sac. [ Displeased.] A strange fancy of yours! | 

PRI. Indeed, my beloved, I speak not jestingly. I heard something 
from our father Canna. Your nurture of these plants has prospered : 

and thenc., it is, that I foretel your approaching nuptials. 
Au. It is thence, my ee that she has watered them with 
so much alacrity. 

Sac. The Madhavi plant 1s my sister: can I do otherwise than 
cherish her? [ Pouring water on it. 
| Dusnx. [Aside.] I fear she is of he same religious order with her 

foster-father. Or has a mistaken apprehension risen in my mind? My 
warm heart 1s so attached to her, that she cannot but be a fit match for 
a man of the military class. The doubts which awhile perplex the 
good, are soon removed by the prevalence of their strong inclinations. 
I am enamoured of her; and the cannot, therefore, be the daughter of 
a Brahmen, whom I could not marry. 

SAC. Moving her head.] Alas! a bee has left the blossom of this 
Mallicà, and is fluttering round my face. [ She expresses uneasmess. 

Dusnm. | Afide, with astection.] How often have I seen our court 


damsels affectedly turn their heads aside from some roving infect, merely 


to display their graces! but this rural charmer knits her brows, and 
gracefully moves her eyes through fear only, without art or affectation. 
Oh! happy bee, who touchest the corner of that eye beautifully trem- 
bling ; who, approaching the tip of that ear, murmurest as softly as if 
thou wert whispering a secret of love; and who fippest nectar, while she 
waves her graceful hand, from that lip, which contains all the treasures 
of delight! Whilst I am solicitous to know in what family she was born, 


thou art enjoying bliss, which to me would be supreme felicity. 


———— — = — — R <——— 
—_— > 4 * — Ee — - — — — — ä — — __ ak 
* — — -— ” - — = 
— . a * — —— — * — - - — - _—— = — — — * —— * — — 
— —— — — ® as pr — — — — = — - — 
—— — — — 2 - — — — — — — — - 2 — - — — _ — 
8 > — — 
* * - - _ 
- 


10 SACONTALA; OR, 


Sac. Disengage me, I entreat, from this importunate insect, which 
quite baffles my efforts. 

PRI. What power have we to deliver you? The king Dushmanta 1 18 
the fole defender of our consecrated groves. 

Dusnm. [Afide.| This is a good occasion for me to discover myself — 
[advancing à little] I must not, I will not, fear. Yet—| checking 
himself and retiring| my royal character will thus abruptly be known to 
them. No; I will appear as a simple stranger, and claim the duties 
of hospitality. 

Sac. This impudent bee will not rest. I will remove to another 
place. [Stepping afide and looking round.| Away! away! He follows 
me wherever I go. Deliver me, oh! deliver me from this distress. 

Dusnm. [Advancing hastily.] Ah! While the race of Puru govern 
the world, and restrain even the most profligate, by good laws well 
administered, has any man the audacity to molest the lovely daughters 


of pious hermits? [ They look at him with emotion. 
ANu. Sir, no man is here audacious ; but this damsel, our beloved 
friend, was teased by a fluttering bee. [ Both girls look at Sacontala. 


Dvusnm. [ Approaching her.] Damsel, may thy devotion prosper ! 
Sacontalà Joos on the ground, bashful and fulent. 

Axvu. Our guest must be received with due honours. 

PRI. Stranger, you are welcome. Go, my Sacontala ; bring from 
the cottage a basket of fruit and flowers. This river will, in the mean 
time, supply water for his feet. [ Looking at the water-pots. 
Dusnx. Holy maid, the gentlenela of thy speech does me sufficient 

honour. 

ANv. Sit down awhile on this bank of earth, spread with the leaves 
of Septaperna : the shade is refreshing, and our lord must want repose 
after his journey. 

Dvusam. You too must all be fatigued by your e attentions: 2 
rest yourselves, therefore, with me. 

PRI. [Afide to Sacontalä.] Come, let us all be seated: our guest 0 
contented with our reception of him. [ They all seat themselves. 

Sac. [Afide.] At the sight of this youth T feel an emotion scarce 
| consistent with a grove devoted to Pets 


THE FATAL RING, _ — 


Dus gu. [Gazing at them alternately.) How well your friendship 
agrees, holy damsels, with the charming equality of your ages and of 
ay beauties | 

1. [Afide to Anusuya.] Who can this be, my Anusiys? The 
union of delicacy with ade in his form, and of sweetness with 
dignity in his discourse, indicate a character fit for ample dominion. 

Anu. [Afide to Priyamvada.] I too have been admiring him. I 
must ask him a few questions. [ Aloud.) Your sweet speech, Sir, gives 
me confidence. What imperial family is embellished by our noble 
guest ? What is his native country? Surely it must be afflited by his 
absence from it. What, I pray, could induce you to humiliate that 
exalted form of yours by visiting a forest peopled only by fimple 
anchorites ? 

Sac. [| Afide.) Perplex not thyself, oh my heart! let the faithful 
Anusuya dire& with her counsel the thoughts which rise in thee. 

Dusam. [Aside.] How shall I reveal, or how shall I disguise, my- 
self? [ Musing.] Be it so.— [Aloud to Anusuya.] Excellent lady, I am 
a student of the Veda, dwelling in the city of our king, descended from 
Puru; and, being occupied in the discharge of religious and moral 
duties, am come hither to behold the sanctuary of virtue. 

ANu. Holy men, employed like you, are our lords and masters. 

 [Sacontala /ooks modest, yet with affeftion ; while her 
companions gaze alternately at her and at the king. 


Anu. [Afide to Sacontala. Oh! if our venerable father were 
present — 


Sac. What if he were ? 
Anu. He would entertain our guest with a variety of refreshments. 
Sac. [ Pretending displeasure.) Go to; you had some other idea in 
your head : I will not listen to you. [ She fits apart. 
Dusk. [Afide to Anusuya and Pripgamvada.] In my turn, hols 
damsels, allow me to ask one question concerning your lovely friend. 
Both. The request, Sir, does us honour. 
Dusnx. The sage Canna, I know, is ever intent upon the great 
Being; ; and must have declined all earthly connections. How then 
can this damsel be, as it is said, his daughter? 


— —— — — — — 
* 


- I. m_ oo « 
— — __ — — — — — = g—_ — _—_ 
n * 8 . — — 


— — 
5 5 - - 


„ — . — ꝗI2Q—2— K 
— 8 — . 


12 _  SACONTALA; OR, 

Anu. Let our lord hear. There is, in the family of Cusa, a pious 
prince of extensive power, eminent in devotion and in arms. 

Dusnu. You speak, no doubt, of Causica, the sage and monarch. 

Anu. Know, Sir, that he is in truth her father; while Canna bears 
that revered name, because he brought her up, since she was left an 
infant. 

Dusnam. Left? the word excites my curiosity ; and raises in me a 
desire of knowing her whole story. 

Anu. You shall hear it, Sir, in few words. When that sage king 
had begun to gather the fruits of his austere devotion, the go ds of 
Swerga became apprehensive of his increasing power, and sent the 
nymph Menaca to frustrate by her allurements the full effe& of his piety. 
 Dusnm. Is a mortal's piety so tremendous to the inferior deities ? 
What was the event? | 

Anu. In the bloom of the vernal season, Caufica, beholding the 
beauty of the celestial nymph, and wafted by the gale of desire 

[She flops and looks modest. 

Dusam. I now fee the whole. Sacontala then is the daughter of a 
king, by a nymph of the lower heaven. 

Anu. Even so. 

Dusnm. [Aside.] The defire of my heart is gratified. | Alowd.Þ| 
How, indeed, could her transcendent beauty be the portion of mortal 
birth ? Yon light, that sparkles with tremulous beams, proceeds not 
from a terrestrial cavern. | 

[Sacontala /izs modestly, with her eyes on the ground. 

Dushu. [Again aside.] Happy man that I am! Now has my fancy 
an ample range. Yet, having heard the pleasantry of her companions 
on the subje& of her nuptials, I am divided with anxious doubt, 
1 2 she be not wholly destined for a religious life. 

. [Smiling, and looling first at Sacontalä, then at the king. 
lord seems defirous of asking other questions. 
| [ Sacontala rebukes Priyamvada with her hand. 

Dusnm. You know my very heart. I am, indeed, eager to learn 

the whole of this charmer's life ; and must put one question more. 


RI. Why should you muse on it so long? [ Aside.] One would 


THE FATAL RING. 0 13 


— 


think this religious man was forbidden by his vows to court a pretty 
woman. 

Dusk. This I ask. Is the strict rule of a hermit so far to be 
observed by Canna, that he cannot dispose of his daughter in marriage, 
but must check the natural impulse of juvenile love? Can she (oh pre- 
posterous fate !) be destined to reside for life among her favourite ante- 
lopes, the black lustre of whose eyes is far surpassed by hers ? 

PRI. Hitherto, Sir, our friend has lived happy in this consecrated 
forest, the abode of her spiritual father ; but it is now his intention to 
unite her with a bridegroom equal to herself. 

Dusam. [Afide, with ecstasy.] Exult, oh my heart, exult. All doubt 
is removed ; and what before thou wouldit have dreaded as a flame, 
may now be approached as a gem inestimable. 

Sac. [Seeming angry.| Anusuya, I will stay here no longer. 

Anu. Why so, I pray? 

Sac. I will go to the holy matron Gautami, and let her know how 
impertinently our Priyamvada has been prattling. [She rises. 

ANv. It will not be decent, my love, for an inhabitant of this 
hallowed wood to retire before a guest has received complete honour. 

| _ [Sacontala, giving no answer, offers to go. 

Dusam. [ Aside.] Is she then departing ? | He vises, as if going to 
top her, but checks himself.| The actions of a passionate lover are as 
_ precipitate as his mind is agitated. Thus I, whole passion impelled me 
to follow the hermit's daughter, am restrained by a sense of duty. 

PRI. [Going up to Sacontala. | My angry friend, you mult not retire; 

Sac. [Stepping back and frowning.| What should detain me? 

PRI. You owe me the labour, according to our agreement, of 
watering two more shrubs. Pay me firft, to acquit your conscience, 
and then depart, if you please. Holding ber. 

Dusnm. The damsel is fatigued, I imagine, by pouring so much 
water on the cherished plants. Her arms, graced with palms like fresh 
blossoms, hang carelessly down; her bosom heaves with strong breath- 
ing; and now her dishevelled locks, from which the string has dropped, 
are held by one of her lovely hands. Suffer me, therefore, thus to 
discharge the debt. [Giving his ring to Priyamvada. Both dasmsels, 


14 SAcoNTALA; OR, 


reading the name Dushmanta, 7nscribed on the ring, look with surprise 
at each other.] It is a toy unworthy of your fixed attention; but I 
value it as a gift from the king. 

PRI. Then you ought not, Sir, to part with it. Her debt is from 
this moment discharged on your word only. [ She returns the ring. 

Anu. You are now released, Sacontala, by this benevolent lord — 
or favoured, perhaps, by a monarch himself. To what place will you 
now retire ? 

Sac. [ Afide.] Mult I not wonder at all this if I preserve my senses ? 

Pr1. Are not you going, Sacontala ? 

Sac. Am I your subject? I shall go when it pleases me. 

Dusnm. [ Aide, looking at Sacontala. | Either she is affected towards 
me, as I am towards her, or I am distracted with joy. She mingles 
not her discourse with mine; yet, when I speak, she listens attentively. 
She commands not her actions in my presence ; and her eyes are 
engaged on me alone. 

Behind the scenes. Oh pious hermits, preserve the animals of this 
hallowed forest ! The king Dushmanta is hunting in it. The dust raised 
by the hoofs of his horses, which pound the pebbles ruddy as early 
dawn, falls like a swarm of blighting inse&s on the consecrated boughs 
which sustain your mantles of woven bark, moist with the water of the 
stream in which you have bathed. 


Dusnu. [Afide.| Alas! my officers, who are searching for me, have 
indiscreetly disturbed this holy retreat. 

Again behind the scenes. Beware, ye hermits, of yon elephant, who 
comes overturning all that oppose him ; now he fixes his trunk with 
violence on a lofty branch that obstruts his way; and now he is 
entangled in the twining stalks of the Vratati. How are our facred 
rites interrupted! How are the protected herds dispersed! The wild 
elephant, alarmed at the new appearance of a car, lays our forest waste. 


Dusmm. [Aside.] How unwillingly am 1 offending the devout 
foresters! Ves; I must go to them instantly. 


PRI. Noble stranger, we are confounded with dread of the enraged 


elephant. With your permission, therefore, we retire to the hermit's 
cottage. 5 


THE FATAL RING. 1 15 


Anv. O Sacontala, the venerable matron will be much distressed on 
your account. Come quickly, that we may be all safe together. 


Sac. [Walking slowly.) I am stopped, alas! by a sudden pain in 
my fide. 


Duskx. Be not alarmed, amiable damsels. It shall be my care that 
no disturbance happen in your sacred groves. 

PRI. Excellent stranger, we were wholly unacquainted with your 
station ; and you will forgive us, we hope, for the offence of intermit- 
ting awhile the honours due to you : but we humbly request that you 
will give us once more the pleasure of seeing you, though you have 
not now been received with perfect hospitality. 

Dus nu. You depreciate your own merits. The sight of you, sweet 
damsels, has sufficiently honoured me. 

Sac. My foot, O Anusuya, is hurt by this pointed blade of Cusa 
grass; and now my loose vest of bark is caught by a branch of the 
Curuvaca. Help me to disentangle myself, and support me. 

[She goes out, looking from time to time at Dushmanta, and 
supported by the damsels. 

Dvusum. [S7ghing.| They are all departed ; and I too, alas 108 

depart. For how short a moment have I been blessed with a fight of 
the incomparable Sacontala! I will send my attendants to the city, and 
take my station at no great distance from this forest. I cannot, in truth, 
divert my mind from the sweet occupation of gazing on her. How, 
indeed, should I otherwise occupy it? My body moves onward ; but my 
restless heart runs back to her; like a light flag borne on a staff against 
the wind, and fluttering in an opposite direction. He goes out. 


6 SACONTALA; OR, 


ATT 1; 


SCEME, a PLAIN, with royal pavilions on the skirt of the forest. 


Mapnavya. [Sighing and lamenting. | 


STRANGE recreation this Ah me! I am wearied to death. My 
royal friend has an unaccountable taste.—What can I think of a king 
so passionately fond of chasing unprofitable quadrupeds ?—* Here runs 
an antelope there goes a boar !'”—Such is our only conversation. 
Even at noon, in excessive heat, when not a tree in the forest has a 
shadow under it, we must be skipping and prancing about, hke the 
beasts whom we follow. Are we thirsty ? We have nothing to drink 
but the waters of mountain torrents, which taste of burned stones and 
mawkish leaves. —Are we hungry? We must greedily devour lean 
venison, and that commonly roasted to a stick. Have I a moment's 


repose at night ?—My {lumber is disturbed by the din of horses and 


_ elephants, or by the sons of slave-girls hallooing out,“ More venison, 


more venison | ''—Then comes a cry that pierces my ear, Away to 
& the forest, away! — Nor are these my only grievances : fresh pain is 
now added to the smart of my first wounds ; for, while we were sepa- 
rated from our king, who was chafing a foolish deer, he entered, I find, 


yon lonely place, and there, to my infinite grief, saw a certain girl, 


called Sacontala, the daughter of a hermit: from that moment not a 


word of returning to the city! hese distressing thoughts have kept my 


eyes open the whole night. — Alas! when shall we return? II cannot set 
eyes on my beloved friend Dushmanta since he set his heart on taking 
another wife. [Stepping afide and looking.] Oh! there. he is.— How 
changed !—He carries a bow, indeed, but wears for his diadem a garland 
of wood- flowers. — He is advancing : I must begin my operations. ¶ He 


stands leaning on a stasf.] Let me thus take a moment's rest.— [ Aloud. 


THE FATAL RING. © 127 


DusHMaNnTa enters, as described. 


Dusam. | Afide, fighing.) My darling is not so eafily attainable ; 
yet my heart assumes confidence from the manner in which she seemed 
affected: surely, though our love has not hitherto prospered, yet the 
inclinations of us both are fixed on our union. [ Smiling. | Thus do 
lovers agreeably beguile themselves, when all the powers of their souls 
are intent on the objects of their defire But am I beguiled ? No; 
when she cast her eyes even on her companions, they sparkled with 
tenderness ; when she moved her graceful arms, they dropped, as if 
languid with love ; when her friend remonstrated against her departure, 
she spoke angrily—All this was, no doubt, on my account.—Oh ! how 
quick-sighted is love in discerning his own advantages! 

Mapn. | Bending downward, as before.] Great prince! my hands 
are unable to move; and it is with my lips only that I can mutter a 
blessing on you. May the king be victorious ! 

DusHm. | Looking at him and smiling. ] Ah! what has crippled thee, 
friend Madhavya ? 

Mapn. You strike my eye with your own hand, and then ask what 
makes 1t weep. 

Dus#m. Speak intelligibly. I know not what you mean. 

 Mipn. Look at yon Vetas tree bent double in the river. Is it 
crooked, I pray, by its own a&, or by the force of the stream ? | 
Duskx. It is bent, I suppose, by the current. 

 Miapn. So am I by Your Majesty. 

Dusam. How so, Madhavya ? 

Mipn. Does it become you, I pray, to leave the great affairs of 
your empire, and so charming a mansion as your palace, for the sake 
of living here like a forester ? Can you hold a council in a wood? 1, 
who am a reverend Brahmen, have no longer the use of my hands and 
feet: they are put out of joint by my running all day long after dogs 
and wild beasts. Favour me, I entreat, with your permission to repose 


but a single day. 
3 


— « — — — « — —— - — — — — —— — — — "> 
* — —— — — —— — — - — — — 
— — — — —— "—  ——— - a _ a — _—_— - == ” a . — 
8 * — — — 2 — — - — => 
2 * 3 2 3 = af . 


2 ——— 


— ĩ7 —wuo-uůC 


— —— — ed — 


** 


—— 


—ů— —„—-—¼ — — 


18 SACONTALA; OR, 


Dvusnm. [| Afide.) Such are this poor fellow's complaints; whilst I, 
when I think of Canna's daughter, have as little relish for hunting as 
he. How can I brace this bow, and fix a shaft in the string, to shoot 
at those beautiful deer who dwell in the same groves with my beloved, 
and whose eyes derive lustre from hers ? 

Mapn. | Looking stedfastly at the king. | What scheme is your royal 
mind contriving ? I have been crying, I find, in a wilderness. 

Dusnu. I think of nothing but the gratification of my old friend's 
wishes. 

Mäpn. | Zoyfully.] Then may the king live long 

[ Rising, but counterfeiting 28 

Dusnu. Stay; and listen to me attentively. 

Map. Let the king command. 

Dusnm. When you have taken repose, I shall want your assistance 
in another business, that will give you no fatigue. 

Mäpn. Oh! what can that be, unless it be eating rice-pudding : : 

Dusnm. You shall know in due time. 

Man. I shall be delighted to hear it. 

Dusam. Hola! who is there? 


The CHAMBERLAIN enters. 


Cram. Let my sovereign command me. 
Dusnm. Raivataca, bid the General attend. 
Cram. I obey. —| He goes out, and returns with the General. ] 
Come quickly, Sir, the king stands expecting you. Fr 
GEN. | Afide, looking at Dushmanta.] How comes it that 88 5 
which moralists reckon a vice, should be a virtue in the eyes of a king? 
Thence it is, no doubt, that our emperor, occupied in perpetual toil, 
and inured to constant heat, is become so lean, that the sunbeams 
hardly affect him; while he is so tall, that he looks to us little men, 


like an elephant grazing on a mountain: he seems all foul. — [ Aloud, 


approaching the king.] May our monarch ever be victorious | — This 


THE FATAL RING. 


19 
forest, O king, is infested by beasts of prey: we see the traces of their 
huge feet in every path.— What orders is it your pleasure to give? 

Dusam. Bhadrasena, this moralizing Madhavya has put a stop to 
our recreation by forbidding the pleasures of the chase. 


Gen. | Afide to Madhavya.] Be firm to your word, my friend; 


whilst I sound the king's real inclinations. —| Aloud.) O! Sir, the fool 


talks idly. Consider the delights of hunting. The body, it is true, 


becomes emaciated, but it is light and fit for exercise. Mark how the 


wild beasts of various kinds are variously affected by fear and by rage! 
What pleasure equals that of a proud archer, when his arrow hits the 
mark as it flies? — Can hunting be justly called a vice? No recreation, 
surely, can be compared with it. 

Mavn. [Angrily.] Away, thou false flatterer! The king, indeed, 
follows his natural bent, and is excusable ; but thou, son of a flave 
girl, hast no excuse. — Away to the wood ! — How I with thou hadst 
been seized by a tyger or an old bear, who was prowling for a shakal, 
like thyself ! 

Duos nu. We are now, Bhadrasena, encamped near a sacred hermi- 
tage; and I cannot at present applaud your panegyrick on hunting. 
This day, therefore, let the wild buffalos roll undisturbed in the shallow 
water, or toss up the sand with their horns ; let the herd of antelopes, 


assembled under the thick shade, ruminate without fear; let the large 


boars root up the herbage on the brink of yon pool ; and let this my 
bow take repose with a slackened string. 

GEN. As our lord commands. 

Dusk. Recall the archers who have advanced before me, and forbid 
the officers to go very far from this hallowed grove. Let them beware 


of irritating the pious : holy men are eminent for patient virtues, yet 
conceal within their bosoms a scorching flame ; as carbuncles are natu- 
rally cool to the touch; but, if the rays of the sun have been imbibed 


by them, they burn the hand. 
_ Mipn. Away now, and triumph on the delights of hunting 


xX. The king's orders are obeyed. | [ He goes out. 
Dusnhu. [| To his attendants. | Put off your hunting apparel; and 


thou, Raivataca, continue in waiting at a little distance. 


20 SACONTALA; OR, 


Cram. I shall obey. 1 7 80 = [ Goes out. 

Mapn. So! you have cleared the tage : not even a fly 1s left on it. 
Sit down, I pray, on this pavement of smooth pebbles, and the shade 
of this tree shall be your canopy : I will fit by you ; for I am impatient 
to know what will give me no fatigue. 

Dusam. Go first, and seat thyself. 

Mapn. Come, my royal friend. [ They both fit under a tree. 

Dusam. Friend Madhavya, your eyes have not been gratified with 
an obje& which best deserves to be seen. 

Mapn. Yes, truly; for a king is before them. 

Dusnu. All men are apt, indeed, to think favourably of themselves ; 
but I meant Sacontala, the brightest ornament of these woods. 

Mavpn. [Aside.] I must not foment his passion. —| Aloud.) What 
can you gain by seeing her? She is a Brähmen's daughter, and conse- 
quently no match for you! 

Dosun. What! Do people gaze at the new moon, with uplifted 
heads and fixed eyes, from a hope of possessing it? But you must 
| know, that the heart of Dushmanta 1 1s not fixed on an obje& which he 
| mult for ever despair of attaining. 
1 Mapn. Tell me how. 
1 Dosh. She is the daughter of a pious prince and warrior, by a 
6 celestial nymph; and, her mother having left her on earth, she has 
WH been fostered by Canna, even as a fresh blossom of Malati, which droops 
iN on its pendent stalk, is raised and expanded by the sun's light. 
j Mapn. | Laughing.) Your desire to possess this rustick girl, when 
you have women bright as gems in your palace already, is like the 
fancy of a man, who has lost his relish for dates, and longs for the 
sour tamarind. 
Dousnx. Did you know her, you 1 not talk so wildly. 

Miva. Oh! certainly, whatever a king admires must be superla- 

tively charming. 

Dusnm. [Smiling.] What need is ; thets of jon description ? When 
| I meditate on the power of Brahma, and on her lineaments, the 
creation of so transcendent a jewel outshines, in my apprehension, all 
his other works: she was formed and moulded in the eternal mind, 


- — — 
—— — 
- — — 


ww — 
— — . 


— — 2 — — 
— — — 


THE FATAL RING. 5 21 


which had raised with its utmost exertion the ideas of perfect shapes, 
and thence made an assemblage of all abstract beauties. 

Mavpn. She must render, then, all other handsome women con— 
temptible. 

Dusk. In my mind she really does. I know not yet what blessed 
inhabitant of this world will be the possessor of that faultless beauty, 
which now resembles a blossom whose fragrance has not been diffused ; 
a fresh leaf, which no hand has torn from its stalk ; a pure diamond, 
which no polisher has handled ; new honey, whose sweetness is yet 
untasted ; or rather the celestial fruit of collected virtues, to the per- 
fection of which nothing can be added. 

Map. Make haste, then, or the fruit of all virtues will drop into 

the hand of some devout rustick, whose hair shines with oil of Ingudi. 
DusHm. She is not her own mistress ; and her foster-father is at a 
distance. 

Mapn. How 1s she disposed towards you? 

Dusam. My friend, the damsels in a hermit's family are naturally 
reserved: yet she did look at me, wishing to be unperceived ; then she 
smiled, and started a new subje& of conversation. Love is by nature 
averse to a sudden communication, and hitherto neither fully displays, 
nor wholly conceals, himself in her demeanour towards me. 

Mapa. | Laughing. | Has she thus taken possession of your heart on 
so transient a view? 

Dusym. When she walked about with her female friends, I saw her 
yet more distinctly, and my passion was greatly augmented. She said 
sweetly, but untruly, “ My foot is hurt by the points of the Cusa 


„ orass:” then she stopped ; but soon, advancing a few paces, turned 


back her face, pretending a with to disentangle her vest of woven bark 
from the branches in which it had not really been caught. 

Mp. You began with chafing an antelope, and have now started 
new game : thence it is, I presume, that yoo are grown so fond of a 
_ consecrated forest. 
Dusk. Now the business for you, which I mentioned, 1s this: you, 


who are a Brahmen, must find some expedient for my second entrance 


into that asylum of virtue. 


. — 
— A 


22 SACONTALA; OR, 


Mäpn. And the advice which I give is this: remember that you 
are a king. 

Dusnm. What then? 

Mapn. “ Hola! bid the hermits bring my sixth part of their grain.“ 
Say this, and enter the grove without scruple. 

Dus uu. No, Madhavya: they pay a different tribute, who, having 
abandoned all the gems and gold of this world, possess riches far 
superior. The wealth of princes, collected from the four orders of 
their subje&s, is perishable ; but pious. men give us a fixth part of the 
fruits of their piety ; fruits which will never perish. 

Behind the scenes. Happy men that we are! we have now attained 
the object of our defire. 

Dusum. Hah! I hear the voices of some religious anchorites. 


The CHAMBERLAIN Centers. 


Cram. May the king be victorious ! — Two young men, sons of a 
hermit, are waiting at my station and soliciting an audience. 

Dushu. Introduce them without delay. 

Cram. As the king commands. | He goes our, and re-enters with 
two Brahmens. | Come on; come this way. 
FIRST BRAUN. [ Looking at the king. | Oh!] what confidence is in- 
spired by his brilliant appearance! —Or proceeds it rather from his 
disposition to virtue and holiness ? —Whence comes it, that my fear 
vanishes ?—— He now has taken his abode 1 in a wood which supplies us 
with every enjoyment ; and, with all his exertions for our safety, his 
devotion increases from day to day.—The praise of a monarch who has 
conquered his passions ascends even to heaven: inspired bards are con- 
tinually finging, © Behold a virtuous prince!“ but with us the royal 
name stands first : © Behold, among kings, a sage!” 

SECOND BRAnM. Is this, my friend, the truly virtuous Dushmanta ? 

FixsT BRAHM. Even he. ra 

SecoxnD BRAHM. It is not then wonderful, that he alone, whose arm 


is lofty and strong as the main bar of his city gate, possesses the whole 


THE FATAL RING. 0 23 


earth, which forms a dark boundary to the ocean; or that the gods of 
Swerga, who fiercely contend in battle with evil powers, proclaim 
victory gained by his braced bow, not by the thunderbolt of INDRA. 

Both. | Approaching him. O king, be victorious! 

Dusam. | Rifng.] I humbly falute you both. 

Both. Blessings on thee | 


Dusam. [| Respeffully.) May I know the cause of this visit ? 


FixsT BRAUH. Our sovereign is hailed by the pious inhabitants of 


these woods ; and they implore—— 

Dusum. What is their command? | 

FIRST Branm. In the absence of our spiritual guide, Canna, some 
evil demons are disturbing our holy retreat. Deign, therefore, accom- 
panied by thy charioteer, to be master of our asylum, if it be only for 
a few short days. 

Dvusnm. | Eagerly.] I am highly favoured by your invitation. 

Maps. [ Afide.] Excellent promoters of your defign! They draw 
you by the neck, but not against your will. 

Dusam. Raivataca, bid my charioteer bring my car, with my bow 
and quiver. 

Cram. I obey. | He goes out. 

FIRST BRAHu. Such condescension well becomes thee, who art an 
universal guardian. 

SECOND BRAHM. Thus do the descendents of Puru perform their 
engagement to deliver their subje&s from fear of danger. 

Dusam. Go firft, holy men: I will follow instantly. 

Both. Be ever victorious |! [ They go out. 

Dusam. Shall you not be delighted, fiend Madhavya, to des my 
Sacontala ? 

Mapn. At first I should have had no e but I have a con- 
siderable one fince the story of the demons. 

Dusam. Oh! fear nothing: you will be near me. 

Mavpn. And N I hope, will have leisure to protect me from them. 


N 
| 
, 
- 
| 
: 
U 
i 
| 
: 
/ 
} 
} 53 
1 
f 
: 


24 SACONTALA; OR, 


The CHAMBERLAIN Ye-enters. 


Cyan. May our lord be victorious |—The imperial car 1s ready ; and 


all are expecting your triumphant approach. Carabba too, a messenger 
from the queen-mother, 1s just arrived from the city. 


Dusnm. Is he really come from the venerable queen? 
CHAu. There can be no doubt of it. 
Dosnu. Let him appear before me. 


[ The Chamberlain goes out, and returns with the Messenger. 

ChAu. There stands the king —O Carabba, approach him with 
reverence. 

Mess. [Prostrating himself.) May the king be ever victorious! — 
The royal mother sends this message — 

Dusk. Declare her command. 

Mess. Four days hence the usual fast for the advancement of her 
son will be kept with solemnity; and the presence of the king (may his 
life be prolonged !) will then be required. 

Dusk. On one hand is a commission from holy Brahmens ; on the 
other, a command from my revered parent: both duties are facred, 
and neither must be neglected. 

Mapn. | Laughing. Stay suspended between them both, like king 
Trisancu between heaven and earth; when the pious men said, © Rise!” 
and the gods of Swerga said, Fall!” 

Dusuu. In truth I am oreatly perplexed. My mind 1s principally 
distracted by the distance of the two places where the two duties are to 
be performed; as the stream of a river is divided by rocks in the mid- 
dle of its bed. Musing.] Friend Madhavya, my mother brought you 
up as her own fon, to be my playfellow, and to divert me in my child- 
hood. You may very properly act my part in the queen's devotions. 
Return then to the city, and give an account of my distress through the 
commission of these reverend foresters. 


Mipn. That I will; ;—but you could not really e that I was 
afraid of demons ! 


THE FATAL RING. 45 


Dusk. How come you, who are an egregious Brähmen, to be so 


bold on a sudden *? 


Mapn. Oh! I am now a young king. 

Dusnm. Yes, certainly; and I will dispatch my whole train to attend 
your highness, whilst I put an end to the disturbance in this hermitage. 

Mavpn. [Strutting.] See, I am a prince regnant. 

Dusam. | Afide. | This buffoon of a Brahmen has a slippery genius. 
He will perhaps disclose my present pursuit to the women in the palace. 
I must try to deceive him. | Taking Madhavya by the band.] I shall 
enter the forest, be assured, only through respe& for its pious inhabi- 
tants ; not from any inclination for the daughter of a hermit. How 
far am I raised above a girl educated among antelopes ; a girl, whose 
heart must ever be a stranger to love! — The tale was invented for my 
diversion. 

Mavpn. Yes, to be sure ; only for your diversion ! 

Dusk. Then farewel, my friend; execute my commission faith- 


fully, whilst I proceed - to defend the anchorites. | All go out. 


- 
un. 


— — _ — — 
Vee” ——— — — — - = - 
OO GE — — 


— — — — —— , T — 8 > 
— — - — — — 2 — nam — — 2 
— Nas — 3 ——— ů —— — 2 — * 
r rr — = 
. 


26 SACONTALA; OR, 


ACT III. 


SCEMNE, the Hermirtace in a Grove. 


The Hermit's Pup. bearing consecrated grafs. 


Puri. | Meditating with wonder. 


H OW great is the power of Dushmanta! — The monarch and his 
charioteer had no sooner entered the grove than we continued our holy 
rites without interruption. —What words can describe him ? —By his 
barely aiming a shaft, by the mexe sound of his bow string, by the 
{imple murmur of his vibrating bow, he disperses at once our calamities. 
— Now then I deliver to the priests this bundle of fresh Cusa grass to be 
scattered round the place of sacrifice. —| Looking behind the scenes. | 
Ah! Priyamvada, for whom are you carrying that ointment of Usira 
root, and those leaves of water lilies —| Liftening attentively. | What 
say you ?—That Sacontala 1s extremely disordered by the sun's heat, 
and that you have procured for her a cooling medicine! —Let her, my 
Priyamvadaà, be diligently attended; for she is the darling of our vene- 
rable father Canna. —I will administer, by the hand of Gautami, some 
healing water consecrated in the ceremony called Vaitana. | He goes out. 


DusyumanTa enters, expressing the distraction of a lover. 


Dusnm. I well know the power of her devotion : that she will suffer 
none to dispose of her but Canna, I too well know. Yet my heart can 
no more return to its former placid state, than water can reascend the 
steep down which it has fallen. —O God of Love, how can thy darts 
be so keen, since they are pointed with flowers ?—Yes, I discover the 
reason of their keenness. They are tipped with the flames which the 
wrath of Hara kindled, and which blaze at this moment, like the 


THE FATAL RING. . 27 


Barava fire under the waves: how else couldst thou, who wast con- 
sumed even to ashes, be till the inflamer of our souls? By thee and by 
the moon, though each of you seems worthy of confidence, we lovers 
are cruelly deceived. They who love as I do, ascribe flowery shafts to 
thee, and cool beams to the moon, with equal impropriety ; for the 
moon sheds fire on them with her dewy rays, and thou pointest with 
sharp diamonds those arrows which seem to be barbed with blossoms. 
Yet this god, who bears a fish on his banners, and who wounds me to 
the soul, will give me real delight, if he destroy me with the aid of 
my beloved, whose eyes are large and beautiful as those of a roe.—0 
powerful divinity, even when I thus adore thy attributes, hast thou no 
compassion ? Thy fire, O Love, is fanned into a blaze by a hundred of 
my vain thoughts. — Does it become thee to draw thy bow even to thy 
ear, that the shaft, aimed at my bosom, may inflict a deeper wound: 
Where now can I recreate my afflicted soul by the permission of those 
pious men whose uneasiness I have removed by dismissing my train ?— 
L Sighing.] I can have no relief but from a sight of my beloved. 
[ Looking up.] This intensely hot noon must, no doubt, be passed by 
Sacontala with her damsels on the banks of this river overshadowed 
with 'Tamalas. — It must be fo :— I will advance thither. —| Walbing 
round and looking. | My sweet friend has, I guess, been lately walking 
under that row of young trees; for I see the stalks of some flowers, 
which probably she gathered, still unshrivelled ; and some fresh leaves, 
newly plucked, still dropping milk. [ Feeling a breeze.| Ah! this 
bank has a delightful air! — Here may the gale embrace me, wafting 
odours from the water lilies, and cool my breast, inflamed by the 
bo diless god, with the liquid particles which it catches from the waves 

of the Malini. [ Looking down.] Happy lover! Sacontala must be 
somewhere in this grove of flowering creepers ; for I discern on the 
yellow sand at the door of yon arbour some recent footsteps, raifed a 
little before, and deprefsed behind by the weight of her elegant limbs. 
— I shall have a better view from behind this thick foliage. | He 
conceals himself, looking vigilantly.] Now are my eyes fully gratified.— 
The darling of my heart, with her two faithful attendants, reposes on 


28 SACONTALA; OR, 


a smooth rock strown with fresh flowers. — These branches will hide 
me, whilst I hear their charming conversation. 


| He fands concealed, and gazes. 


SACONTALA and her two Damsels discovered. 


Both. | Fanning her.| Say, beloved Sacontala, does the breeze, 
raised by our fans of broad lotos leaves, refresh you? 

Sac. | Mowrnfully.) Why, alas, do my dear friends take this trouble? 

Both look sorrowfully at each other. 

Dusum. [Afide.] Ah! she seems much indisposed. What can have 
been the fatal cause of so violent a fever? — Is it what my heart sug- 
gests? Or ——-| Mufng.} I am perplexed with doubts. — The medicine 
extracted from the balmy Usira has been applied, I see, to her bosom : 
her only bracelet is made of thin filaments from the stalks of a water 
lily, and even that is loosely bound on her arm. Yet, even thus dis- 
ordered, the is exquisitely beautiful. —Such are the hearts of the young! 
Love and the sun equally inflame us; but the scorching heat of summer 
leads not equally to happiness with the ardour of youthful defires. 

PRI. | Afde to Anusuya.] Did you not observe how the heart of 
Sacontala was affected by the first sight of our pious monarch ? My 
| suspicion is, that her malady has no other cause. 

Anu. | Afide to Priyamvada.] The same suspicion had risen in my 
mind. I will ask her at once. —| Aloud.) My sweet Sacontala, let me 
put one question to you. What has really occasioned your indispo- 
sition ? | 

Dus. [| Afide.] She must now declare it. Ah! though her brace- 
lets of lotos are bright as moon beams, yet wad are marked, J see; 
with black spots from internal ardour. 


Sac. Half raising berself.] Oh! say what you sufpe& to have 


occasioned It. 

+," AR; Sacontalä, we must necessarily be ignorant of what is passing 
in your breast; but J suspect your case to be that which we have often 
heard related in tales of love. Tell us openly what causes your illness. 


THE FATAL RING. . 29 


A physician, without knowing the cause of a diforder, cannot even 
begin to apply a remedy. 

Dosh. [Aside.] I flatter myself with the same suspicion. 

Sac. | Afi de. My pain 1s intolerable ; ; yet I cannot hastily disclose 


the occasion of it, 

PRI. My sweet friend, Anusuya, speaks rationally. Consider the 
violence of your indisposition. Every day you will be more and more 
emaciated, though your exquisite beauty has not yet forsaken you. 

Dvusnm. | Aide. | Most true. Her forehead is parched ; her neck 
droops ; her waist is more {lender than before; her shoulders languidly 
fall; her complection is wan; she resembles a Madhavi-creeper, whose 
leaves are dried by a sultry gale : yet, even thus transformed, she is 
lovely, and charms my soul. 

Sac. | Sighing. | What more can I fay ? Ah! why should I be the 
occasion of your sorrow ? 

PRI. For that very reason, my beloved, we are solicitous to know 
your secret ; since, when each of us has a share of your uneasiness, 
you will bear more easily your own portion of it. 

Dus fu. [Aside.] Thus urged by two friends, who share her pains 
as well as her pleasures, she cannot fail to disclose the hidden cause of 
her malady ; whilst I, on whom she looked at our first interview with 
marked affection, am filled with anxious defire to hear her answer. 

Sac. From the very instant when the accomplished prince, who has 
Just given repose to our hallowed forest, met my eye 

[ She breaks off, and looks modest. 
| Both. Speak on, beloved Sacontala. 

Sac. From that instant my affection was unalterably fixed on him 
and thence I am reduced to my present langour. 

Axvu. Fortunately your affection 18 pred. '9 on a man worthy of 
yourself. 

Prr. Oh! could a fine river have lesered the fra and flowed: into 
a lake? 


have told. Love was the cause of my distemper, and love has healed 


Dusam. Jelly. That which I was eager to know, her own lips 


30 | SACONTALA; OR, 


it; as a summer's day, grown black with clouds, relieves all animals 
from the heat which itself had caused. 
Sac. If it be no disagreeable task, contrive, I entreat you, some 
means by which I may find favour in the king's eyes. 

DvusnmM. A,. de.] That request banishes all my cares, and gives me 
rapture even in my present uneasy situation. 

PRI. | Afide to Anusuya.] A remedy for her, my friend, will scarce 
be attainable. Exert all the — of your mind; for her illness 
admits of no delay. 


Axvu. | Afide to Priyamvadä. By what expedient can her cure be 
both accelerated and kept secret? 


PRI. [As before.] Oh! to keep it secret will be Aae ; but to attain 
it soon, almost insuperably difficult. 

Axu. | As before.] How so? 

PRI. The young king seemed, I admit, by his tender glances, to 
be enamoured of her at first fight; and he has been observed, within 
these few days, to be pale and thin, as if his passion had kept him 
long awoke. 

Dusnu. | Afide. | So it has — This golden bracelet, sullied by the 
flame which preys on me, and which no dew mitigates, but the tears 
gushing nightly from these eyes, has fallen again and again on my 
wrist, and has been replaced on my emaciated arm. 

PRI. | Aloud.] I have a thought, Anusuya—let us write a love- 
letter, which I will conceal in a flower, and, under the pretext of 
making a respectful offering, deliver it myself into the king's hand, 

Axvu. An excellent contrivance | It pleases me highly but what 
says our beloved Sacontala ? 


Sac. I must consider, my friend: the poslible consequences of such 
a step. 

PRI. Think also of a verse or two, which may suit your passion, and 
be consistent with the character of a lovely girl born in an exalted family. 

Sac. I will think of them in due time; but my heart flutters with 
the apprehension of being rejected. 

' Dvsnm. [Afide.] Here stands the man supremely blessed in thy 
presence, from whom, O timid girl, thou art apprehensive of a refusal! 


THE FATAL RING. 31 


Here stands the man, from whom, O beautiful maid, thou fearest 
rejection, though he loves thee distractedly. He who shall possess thee 
will seek no brighter gem ; and thou art the gem which I am eager to 
possess. 

AN u. You depreciate, Sacontala, your own incomparable merits. What 
man in his senses would intercept with an umbrella the moonlight of 
autumn, which alone can allay the fever caused by the heat of the noon ? 

Sac. | Smiling. I am engaged in thought. She meditates. 

Dusnm. Thus then I fix my eyes on the lovely poetess, without 
closing them a moment, while she measures the feet of her verse : her 
forehead is gracefully moved in cadence, and her whole aspect indicates 
pure affection. 

Sac. I have thought of a couplet; but we have no writing implements. 

PRI. Let us hear the words; and then I will mark them with my 
nail on this lotos leaf, soft and green as the breast of a young parroquet : 
it may easily be cut into the form of a letter. Repeat the verses. 

Sac.“ Thy heart, indeed, I know not: but mine, oh! cruel, love 
« warms by day and by night; and all my faculties are centred on thee.” 

Dusam. | Hastily advancing, and pronouncing a verse in the same 
measure.) „Thee, O slender maid, love only warms ; but me he 
„ burns; as the day-star only stifles the fragrance of the night-flower, 
but quenches the very orb of the moon.” 

Anu. | Looking at him foyfully.] Welcome, great king: the fruit of 
wy friend's imagination has ripened without delay. 

| Sacontala expresses an inclination to rise. 

"Dome Give yourself no pain. Those delicate limbs, which repose 
on a couch of flowers, those arms, whose bracelets of lotos are dis- 
arranged by a slight pressure, and that sweet frame, which the hot noon 
seems to have disordered, must not be fatigued by ceremony, 

Sac. [ Afide.) O my heart, canst thou not rest at 1 after all 
: thy sufferings 8 

Anu. Let our sovereign take for his seat a part of the ak on which 
she reposes. | Sacontala makes a little room. 

Dvusmm. [ Seating himself.) Priyamvada, is not the fever of your 
charming friend in some degree abated ? 


- — — ——— IRE Ge ed 


= 


— — — — — —- — — H— 


32 SACONTALA; OR, 


Pr1. | Smiling. - She has just taken a salutary medicine, and will 
soon be restored to health. But, O mighty prince, as I am favoured 
by you and by her, my friendship for Sacontala prompts me to converse 
with you for a few moments. | 


Dusmm. Excellent damsel, speak age ; and suppress e 
PRI. Our lord shall hear. 


9 HY I am attentive. 

PRI. By dispelling the alarms of our pious hermits, you have dis- 
ch: arged the duty of a great monarch. 

Dusnm. Oh! talk a little on other subjects. 

PRI. Then I must inform you that our beloved companion is 
enamoured of you, and has been reduced to her present languor by the 
resistless divinity, love. You only can preserve her inestimable life. 

Dusnu. Sweet Priyamvada, our passion is rociprocal.; but it is I who 
am honoured. 

Sac. | Smiling, with a mixture of asfection and resentment. Why 
should you detain the virtuous monarch, who must be afflited W so 
long an absence from the secret apartme ts of his palace 1 

Dusunu. This heart of mine, oh thou who art of all things the 
dearest to it, will have no obje& but thee, whose eyes enchant me with 


their black splendour, if thou wilt but speak in a milder stram. I, who 


was nearly slain by love's arrow, am destroyed by thy speech. 

Axvu. | Laughing. Princes are said to have many favourite consorts. 
You must assure us, therefore, that our beloved friend shall not be 
exposed to affliction through our conduct. 

Dusnu. What need 1s there of many words ? Let there be ever so 
many women in my palace, I will have only two objects of perfect 
regard; the sea-girt earth, which I govern, and your sweet friend, 
whom I love. 

Both. Our anxiety is dissipated. 

| Sacontala frives in vain to conceal her | oy. 
1. [ Afide to Anufuya.] See how our friend recovers her spirits 
by 5 and little, as the peahen, oppressed by the summer heat, is 


refreshed by a soft gale and a gentle shower. 


Sac. | To the damfels. | Forgive, I pray, my offence | in having used 


THE FATAL RING. 5 | 33 


unmeaning words: they were uttered only for your amusement in 
return for your tender care of me. 

PRI. They were the occasion, indeed, of our serious advice. But 
it is the king who must forgive: who else is offended ? 

Sac. The great monarch will, I trust, excuse what has been said 
either before him or in his absence.—| Aside to the damsels ] Intercede 
with him, I entreat you. 

Dvusnm. | Smiling. I would cheerfully forgive any offence, lovely 
Sacontala, if you, who have dominion over my heart, would allow me 
full room to fit by you, and recover from my fatigue, on this flowery 
couch pressed by your delicate limbs. 

PRI. Allow him room; it will appease him, and make him happy. 

1105 [ Pretending anger, aside to Priyamvada. | Be quiet, thou mis- 
chief-making girl! Dost thou sport with me in my present weak state ? 


Anu. | Looking behind the scenes.] O! my Priyamvada, there is our 


favourite young antelope running wildly and turning his eyes on all 
sides: he is, no doubt, seeking his mother, who has rambled in the 
wide forest. I must go and assist his search. 
PRI. He is very nimble; and you alone will never be able to confine 
him in one place. I must accompany you. | | Both going out. 
Sac. Alas! I cannot consent to your going far: I shall be left alone. 
Both. | Smiling.) Alone! with the sovereign of the world by your 


fide ! | [ They 80 Oil. 


Sac. How could my companions both leave me ? 
Dos. Sweet maid, give yourself no concern. Am not I, who 


humbly solicit your favour, present in the room of them Ajade. | 
I must declare my pashon.—-| Aloud.) Why should not I, like them, 


wave this fan of lotos leaves, to raise cool en and dissipate your 
uneasiness? Why should not I, like them, lay fofily | in my lap those 
feet, red as water lilies, and press them, O my charmer, to relieve 
your pain? 

Sac. I should offend against myself, by receiving homage from a 
person entitled to my respect. 
| She rises, od walks flowly through 3 


Dvsn. The noon, my love, 1s not yet passed ; and your sweet 
4 


34 SACONTALA; OR, 


limbs are weak. Having left that couch where fresh flowers covered 
your bosom, you can ill sustain this intense heat with so languid a frame. 
He gently draws her back. 

Sac. Leave me, oh leave me. I am not, indeed, my own mistress, 
or——the two damsels were only appointed to attend me. What can I 
do at present ? 

 Dusnm. | Aide. Fear of displeasing her makes me bashful. 

Sac. | Overhearing him.] The king cannot give offence. It is my 
unhappy fate only that I accuse. 

Dusxm. Why should you accuse so favourable a destiny ? 

Sac. How rather can I help blaming it, since it has permitted my 
heart to be affected by amiable qualities, without having left me at — 
own disposal? 

Dusnu. [HAside. On would imagine that the charming sex, instead 
of being, like us, tormented with love, kept love himself within their 
hearts, to torment him with delay. [ Sacontala going out. 

Dusam. | Ajde.| How! must I then fail of attaining felicity ? 

Following her and catching the skirt of her mantle. 

Sac. Turning back.) Son of Puru, preserve thy reason ; oh! pre- 
serve it.— The hermits are busy on all sides of the grove. 

Dusam. My charmer, your fear of them is vain. Canna himself, 
who is deeply versed in the science of law, will be no obstacle to our 
union, Many daughters of the holiest men have been married by the 
ceremony called Gandharva, as it is praised by Indra's band, and even 
their fathers have approved them. Looking round. | What say you? 
Are you still inflexible ? Alas! I must then depart. 

[Going from her a few paces, then looking back. 

Sac. | Moving also a few fleps, and then turning back her face.] 
Though I have refused compliance, and have only allowed you to con- 
verse with me for a moment, yet, O son of Puru—let not Sacontala 

be wholly forgotten. 

Dusnm. Enchanting gul, thould 5 you be nad to the ends of the 
world, you will be fixed in this heart, as the shade of a lofty tree 


remains with 1t even when the day 1s departed. 


Sac. | Going out, aside.] Since I have heard his protestations, my 


THE FATAL RING, 35 


feet move, indeed, but without advancing. I will conceal myself be- 
hind those flowering Curuvacas, and thence I shall see the result of his 
passion. {She hides herself behind the shrubs. 

Dusnm. | Afide.| Can you leave me, beloved Sacontala ; me who 
am all affection? Could you not have tarried a single moment? Soft is 
your beautiful frame, and indicates a benevolent foul ; yet your heart 
is obdurate : as the tender Sirisha hangs on a hard stalk. 

Sac. [ Afide.] I really have now lost the power of departing. 

Dvusnm. | Afide. | What can I do in this retreat fince my darling has 
left it ?—| Mufng and looking round.) Ah! my departure is happily 
delayed. —Here lies her bracelet of flowers, exquisitely perfumed by 
the root of Usira which had been spread on her bosom : it has fallen 
from her delicate wrist, and is become a new chain for my heart. 

| Taking up the bracelet with reverence. 

Sac. [Ade, babe at her hand. ] Ah me! such was my languor, 
that the filaments of lotos stalks which bound my arm dropped on the 
ground unperceived by me. 

Dosh. | A/ide, placing it in his bosom. \| Oh! how delightful to the 
touch |—From this ornament of your lovely arm, O my darling, though 
it be inanimate and senseless, your unhappy lover has regained confi- 
dence—a bliss which you refused to confer. 

SAC. 146 de.] I can stay here no longer. By this pretext I may 
return. | Going flowly towards him. 

Dusam. | ith rapture.) Ah! the empress of my soul again blesses 
these eyes. After all my misery I was destined to be favoured by in- 
dulgent heaven. — The bird Chatac, whose throat was parched with 
thirst, supplicated for a drop of water, and suddenly a cool stream 
poured into his bill from the bounty of a fresh cloud. 

Sac. Mighty king, when I had gone half way to the cottage, I 
perceived that my bracelet of thin stalks had fallen from my wrist; and 
I return because my heart is almost convinced that you must have seen 
and taken it. Restore it, I humbly entreat, lest you expose both your- 
self and me to the censure of the hermits. 

Dusnm. Yes, on one condition I will return it. 

Sac. On what condition? Speak = 


36 SACONTALA; OR, 


Dvusnm. That I may replace it on the wrist to which it belongs. 

Sac. | Afide. I have no alternative. [| Approaching him. 

Dusmm. But in order to replace it, we must both be seated on that 
smooth rock. They both fit down—Dushmanta taking her band. 
O exquisite softness !——This hand has regained its native strength and 
beauty, like a young shoot of Camalata:—or it resembles rather the 
god of love himself, when, having been consumed by the fire of Hara's 
wrath, he was restored to life by a shower of nectar sprinkled by the 
1mmortals. 


Sac. [ Pressing bis hand.] Let the son of my lord make haste to tie 
on the bracelet. 

Dusam. | Aside, with rapture.) Now I am truly blefsed.—That 
phrase, the son of my lord, is applied only to a husband. —-| Aloud. 
My charmer, the clasp of this bracelet is not eafily loosened : it must 

be made to fit you better. 

Sac. [ Smiling.) As you please. 

Dusk. | Quitting her hand.) Look, my darling: this is " ths new 
moon which left the firmament in honour of superior beauty, and, 
having descended on your enchanting wr:st, has Joined both its horns 
round it in the shape of a bracelet. 

Sac. I really see nothing like a moon: the breeze, I pee has 
shaken some dust from the lotos flower behind my ears, and that has 
obscured my fight. 

Dusk. | Smiling. | If you permit me, I will blow the fragrant dust 

from your eye. 

Sac. It would be a kindness ; but I cannot trust you. 

 Dusnm. Oh! fear not, fear not. A new servant never transgresses 
the command of his nustress. 5 | 

Sac. But a servant over assiduous deserves no confidence. 

Dusnm. | Afide.\| I will not let {hp this charming occasion. —- 
[ Attempting to raise her head—Sacontala faintly repels him, but fits 
sill} —— O damsel with an antelope's eyes, be not apprehensive of 
my indiscretion. ——| Sacontala /ooks up for a moment, and then basp- 

fully drops her head — Dushmanta, afide, gently raising her bond 1— 
That lip, the softness of which is imagined, not proved, seems to 


THE FATAL RING. MIN 


pronounce, with a delightful tremour, its permission for me to allay my 
thirst. 

Sac. The son of my lord seems inclined to break his promise. 

Dusk. Beloved, I was deceived by the proximity of the lotos to 
that eye which equals it in brightness. | He blows gently on her eye. 
Sac. Well; now I see a prince who keeps his word as it becomes 
his imperial character. Yet I am really ashamed that no desert of mine 
entitles me to the kind service of my lord's son. 

Dusnm. What reward can I defire, except that which I consider as 
the greatest, 'the fragrance of your delicious lip ? 
Sac. Will that content you? 

Dus nx. The bee is contented with the mere odour of the water lily. 

Sac. If he were not, he would get no remedy. 

Dus nu. Ves, this and this Kiissing her eagerly. 

Behind the scenes. Hark! the Chacravaca is calling her mate on the 
bank of the Malini : the night is beginning to spread her shades. 

Sac. | Listening, alarmed.) O son of my lord, the matron Gautam! 


approaches to enquire after my health. Hide yourself, I entreat, be- 
hind yon trees. 


Dusk. I yield to necessity. | He retires. 


GauTAMI enters with a vase in her hand. 


Gavr. | Looking anxiously at Sacontala.] My child, here is holy _ 
water for thee.— What! hast thou no companion here but the invisible. 


gods; thou who art so much indisposed! 
Sac. Both Priyamvada and Anufuya are just gone down to the river. 


GaurT. | Sprinkling ber. Is thy fever, my child, a little abated ? 


Feeling her hand. 


Sac. Venerable matron, there 1 1s a change for the better. 
Gar. Then thou art in no danger. Mayst thou live many years! 
Ti nd 18 departing: let us both go to the cottage. 


[Ade, rising flouly.] O my heart, no sooner hadst thou 
os to taste Happiness, than the occasion slipped away! 


| She advances a few Hiebe, and returns to the arbour. 


— — — — — — — — — —— — — — — 5 
—— — „ : © - — * a 


38 SACONTALA; OR, 


Sac. O bower of twining plants, by whom my sorrows have been 
dispelled, on thee I call; ardently hoping to be once more happy under 
thy shade. [ She goes out with Gautami. 

Dusnm. | Returning to the bower, and fighing.| How, alas, have 
my desires been obstructed !—Could I do less than kiss the lips of my 
charmer, though her modest cheeks were half averted ; lips, whose 
sweetness had enchanted me, even when they pronounced a denial ?— 
Whither now can I go?—I will remain awhile in this arbour of creepers 
which my darling's presence has illuminated. Looking round. Yes; 
this 1s her seat on the rock, spread with blossoms, which have been 
pressed by her delicate limbs.—Here hes her exquisite love-letter on the 


g leaf of a water lily; here lay her bracelet of tender filaments which 


had fallen fron er sweet wrist.— Though the bower of twining Voetasas 
be now desolate, since my charmer has left it, yet, while my eyes are 
fixed on all these delightful memorials of her, I am unable to depart. — 
| Mufing.) Ah! how imperfectly has this affair been conducted by a lover, 
like me, who, with his darling by his fide, has let the occasion slip.— 
Should Sacontala visit once more this calm retreat, the opportunity 
{hall not pass again unimproved : the pleasures of youth are by nature 
transitory. Thus my foolish heart forms resolutions ; while it is dis- 
tracted by the sudden interruption of its happiness. Why did it ever 
allow me to quit without effe& the presence of my beloved ? 

Behind the scenes. O king, while we are beginning our evening facri- 
tice, the figures of blood-thirsty demons, embrowned by clouds col- 
lected at the departure of day, glide over the sacred hearth, and (prone 
consternation around. 

Dusnm. Fear not, holy men.—Your king will prote& you. 


| He goes out. 


THE FATAL RING. © 39 


AGE IV. 


SCEME, a Lawn before the Cottage. 


The two damsels are discovered gathering flowers. 


ANUuSUYA. 


O MY Priyamvada, though our sweet friend has been happily mar- 
ried, according to the rites of Gandharvas, to a bridegroom equal in 
rank and accomplishments, yet my affectionate heart is not wholly free 
from care; and one doubt gives me particular uneasiness. 

PRI. What doubt, my Anusuya ? 

 Axv. This morning the pious prince was dismissed with gratitude 
by our hermits, who had then completed their mystick rites : he is 
now gone to his capital, Hastinapura, where, surrounded by a hundred 
women 1n the recefles of his palace, it may be doubted whether he will 
remember his charming bride. 

PRI. In that respe& you may be quite easy. Men, so well informed 
and well educated as he, can never be utterly destitute of | honour.— 
We have another thing to confider. When our father Canna shall 
return from his pilgrimage, and shall hear what has passed, I cannot tell 
how he may receive the intelligence. 

Axvu. If you ask my opinion, he will, I think, approve of the marriage. 

PRI. Why do you think so ? 

ANG. Because he could desire nothing better, 9 that a t 
so accomplished and fo exalted should take Sacontala by the hand. It 
was, you know, the declared obje& of his heart, that she might be 
suitably married ; and, fince heaven has done for him what he most 
wished to do, how can he possibly be diffatished ? 

PRI. You reason well; but Looking at her basket.) My friend, 
we have plucked a sufficient store of flowers to scatter over the place 
of sacrifice. 


40 SACONTALA; OR, 
Anu. Let us gather more to decorate the temples of the goddesses 


who have procured for Sacontala so much good fortune. 


[ They both gather more flowers. 
Behind the scenes. It is I— Hola! 


Anu. | Listening.] I hear the voice, as it seems, of a guest arrived 
in the hermitage. 


PRl. Let us hasten thither. Sacontalä is now repoling ; but though 
we may, when she wakes, enjoy her presence, yet her mind will all 


day be absent with her departed lord. 


Anu. Be it so; but we have occasion, you know, for all these 


flowers. [ They advance. 
Again behind the scenes. How | Dost thou show no attention to a 
guest ? Then hear my 1mprecations. —© He on whom thou art medi- 


tating, on whom alone thy heart is now fixed, while thou neglectest 
a pure gem of devotion who demands hospitality, shall forget thee, 
*« when thou seest him next, as a man restored to sobriety forgets the 
words which he uttered in a state of intoxication.” 
[ Both damsels look at each other with affliftion. 

Pri. Wo is me! Dreadful calamity! Our beloved friend has, through 
mere TY OR of mind, provoked, by her neglect, some holy man who 
expected reverence. 


Anu. | Looking. | It must be so; for the cholerick Durväsas is going 
hastily back. 


PRI. Who else has power to consume, like raging five, whatever 
offends him ? Go, my Anufuya ; fall at his feet, and persuade him, if 


possible, to return: in the mean time I will prepare water and refresh- 
ments for him. 


Anu. I go with eagerness. | [Be goes out. 
PRI. ¶ Advancing hastily, her foot flips. Ah! through my eager 
haste I have let the basket fall; and my religious duties must not be 


postponed. U be gathers fresh flowers. 


ANUSUYA re-enters. 


Anu. His wrath, my beloved, passes all bounds. —Who living could | 


THE FATAL RING. © "Yo 


now appease him by the humblest prostrations or entreaties? yet at 
last he a little relented. 


PRI. That little is a great deal for him. — But inform me how you 


soothed him in any degree. 

Anu. When he positively refused to come back, I threw myself at 
his feet, and thus Aale him: “Holy sage, forgive, I entreat, the 
« offence of an amiablC girl, who has the highest veneration for you, 
„ but was ignorant, through distraction of mind, how exalted a per- 
“sonage was calling to her.“ 

PRI. What then? What said he? 

Kits, He answered thus: “ My word must not be recalled ; but 


« the spell which it has raised shall be wholly removed when her lord 


« shall see his ring.” Saying this, he disappeared. 

PRI. We may now have confidence; for before the monarch 455 
bertel. he fixed with his own hand on the finger of Sacontala the ring, 
on which we saw the name Dushmanta engraved, and which we will 
instantly recognize. On him therefore alone will depend the remedy 
for our misfortune. 

Ax. Come, let us now proceed to the shrines of the goddesses, 
and implore their succour. | Both advance. 

RI. | Looking.| See, my Anusuya, where our beloved friend tits, 
motionless as a picture, supporting her languid head with her left hand. 


With a mind so intent on one object, the can pay no attention to her- 


self, much less to a stranger. 

Anu. Let the horrid imprecation, Priyamvada, remain a secret be- 
tween us two: we mult spare the feelings of our beloved, who is 
naturally susceptible of quick emotions. 

Pri. Who would pour boiling water on the blossom of a tender 


Mallica ? | Both go out. 
4 Puelir of CaNNA enters. 


Pur. Jam ordered by the venerable Canna, who is returned from 


the place of his pilgrimage, to observe the time of the night, and am, 
8 therefore, come forth to see how much remains of i it. —| Walking round, 


. 


42 SACONTALA; OR, 


and observing the heavens.| On one fide the moon, who kindles the 
flowers of the Oshadhi, has nearly sunk in his western bed; and, on 
the other, the sun, seated behind his charioteer Arun, is beginning his 
course : the lustre of them both is conspicuous, when they rise and 
when they set; and by their example should men be equally firm in 
prosperous and in adverse fortune. — The moon has now disappeared, 
and the night-flower pleases no more : it leaves only a remembrance of 

its odour, and languishes like a tender bride whose pain is intolerable in 
the absence of her beloved. — The ruddy morn impurples the dew 
drops on the branches of yonder Vadari; the peacock, shaking off sleep, 
hastens from the cottages of hermits interwoven with holy grass ; and 
yonder antelope, springing hastily from the place of sacrifice, which 1s 
marked with his hoofs, raises himself on high, and stretches his graceful 
limbs. — How is the moon fallen from the sky with diminished beams! 
the moon who had set his foot on the head of Sumern, king of moun- 
tains, and had climbed, scattering the rear of darkness, even to the 
central palace of Vishnu Thus do the great men of this world ascend 


with extreme labour to the summit of ambition, but easily and quickly 


descend from 1t. 
ANUuSUYA enters meditating. 


ANv. [Af de.] Such has been the affection of Sacontala, though she 
was bred in austere devotion, averse from sensual enjoyments !——How 
unkind was the king to leave her! 


Pur. [ Aside.] The proper time is come for performing the hema: 


must apprise our preceptor of it. Ae goes out. 


Anu. The shades of night are dispersed ; ; and I am hardly awake ; 


but were I ever so perfectly in my senses, what could I now do? My 


hands move not readily to the usual occupations of the morning. Let 


the blame be cast on love, on love only, by whom our friend has been 
reduced to her present condition, through a monarch who has broken 


his word. Or does the imprecation of Durvasas already prevail? How 
else could a virtuous king, who made so solemn an engagement, have 
suffered so long a time to elapse without sending even a message — 


THE FATAL RING. 43 


Shall we convey the fatal ring to him? — Or what expedient can be 
suggested for the relief of this incomparable girl, who mourns without 
ceasing ? —Yet what fault has she committed? —With all my zeal for 
her happiness, I cannot summon courage enough to inform our father 


Canna that she is pregnant.— What then, oh! what step can I take to 
relieve her anxiety ? | 


PrRIYAMVADA enters. 


Pr. Come, Anusiya, come quickly. They are making suitable 
preparations for conducting Sacontala to her husband's palace. 

Anu. [With surprise.] What say you, my friend? 

PRI. Hear me. I went just now to vacontala, meaning only to ask 
if she had slept well — 

Anu. What then? oh! what then? 


PRI. She was fitting with her head bent on her knee, when our fa- 
ther On entering her apartment, embraced and congratulated her. 
—*<© My sweet child,” faid he, © there has been a happy omen: the 
young Brahmen who officiated in our morning sacrifice, though his 
« sight was impeded by clouds of smoke, dropped the clarified butter 
into the very center of the adorable lame. Now, since the pious 
act of my pupil has prospered, my foster child must not be suffered 
any longer to languish in sorrow ; and this day I am determined to 
 & send thee from the cottage of the old hermit who bred thee up, to 

& the palace of the monarch who has taken thee by the hand.” 

Anu. My friend, who told Canna what passed in his absence ? 

' Par. When he entered the place where the holy fire was blazing, 
he Tad a voice from heaven pronouncing divine measures.— 

ANU. [ Amazed.” Ah! you astonish me. 

PRI. Hear the celestial verse :—* Know that thy adopted daughter, 
* 0 ION Brahmen, has received from Dushmanta a ray of glory des- 
* tined to rule the world; as the wood Sami becomes pregnant with 
«* mysterious fire.” . 

Anu. [Embracing Priyamvad&., I am delighted, my beloved; I 
am transported with joy. But since they mean to deprive us of our 


cc 


44 SACONTALA; OR, 
friend so soon as to-day, I feel that my delight is at least equalled by 


my sorrow. 

PRI. Oh! we must submit patiently to the anguish of parting. Our 
beloved friend will now be happy ; and that should console us. 

Anu. Let us now make haste to dress her in bridal array. I have 
already, for that purpose, filled the shell of a cocoa nut, which you see 
fixed on an Amra tree, with the fragrant dust of Nagacesaras : take it 
down, and keep it in a fresh lotos leaf, whilst I collect some Gorachana 
from the forehead of a sacred cow, some earth from consecrated ground, 
and some fresh Cusa 3 of which I will make a paste to ensure good 
fortune. 

PRI. By all means. 
[ She takes down the 1 ——Anusuya goes out. 

/Bebind the scenes. O Gautani, bid the two Misras, Sarngarava and 
Saradwata, make ready to accompany my child Sacontala. 

RI. | Listening.] Lose no time, Anusuya, lose no time. Our father 
Canna is giving orders for the intended journey to Hastinapura. 


ANusUYA re-enters with the ingredients of her charm. 


Anu. I am here: let us go, my Priyamvada. | They both advance. 

RI. [ Looking.) There stands our Sacontala, after her bath at sun- 

rise, while many holy women, who are congratulating her, carry 
baskets of hallowed grain. — Let us hasten to greet her. 


Enter SaconTali, Gaurauf, and female Hermits. 


Sac. I prostrate myself before the goddess. 

GauTt. My child, thou canst not pronounce too often the word 
goddess : thus wilt thou procure great felicity for thy lord. 

HER. Mayst thou, O Tarn. bride, be delivered of a hero! 


LTe Hermits go out. 


THE FATAL RING. 45 


Both damsels. | Approaching Sacontala.] Beloved friend, was your 
bath pleasant ? 
Sac. O] my friends, you are welcome : let us fit awhile together. 
[ They seat themselves. 


Anu. Now you mult be patient, whilst I bind on a charm to secure 


your happiness. 

Sac. That is kind. — Much has been decided this day: and the 
pleasure of being thus attended by my sweet friends will not soon 
return. ¶Wiping off her tears. 

PRI. Beloved, it is unbecoming to weep at a time when you are 
going to be so happy.—| Both damsels burst into tears as they dress her. 
Your elegant person deserves richer apparel : it is now decorated with 
such rude flowers as we could procure in this forest. 


 Canxa's Pueir enters with rich clothes. 


Pur. Here is a complete dress. Let the queen wear it auspicioussy; 
and may her life be long [ The women look with astonishment. 

GauT. My son, Harita, whence came this apparel ? 

Pue. From the devotion of our father Canna. 

Gaur. What dost thou mean?. 

Pur. Be attentive. The venerable sage gave this db; „Bring 
„ fresh flowers for Sacontala from the most beautiful trees ;** and sud- 
denly the woodnymphs appeared, raifing their hands, which rivalled 
new leaves in beauty and softness. Some of them wove a lower mantle 
bright as the moon, the presage of her felicity ; another pressed the 
Juice of Lacsha to stain her feet exquisitely red; the rest were busied 
in forming the gayest ornaments; and they eagerly showered their gifts 
ON us. 

i. [Looking at Sacontalä.] Thus it Is, that even the 13 whole. 

= i8 within the hollow trunk, does homage to the honey of the lotos 
flower. 


Gavr. The nymphs must have been commilioned by the goddess 


3 oo —=xů —— — 
——————5ðGi —— — 


- LOT —— — 


— 


—— > — —— down ——__—— i _ 
— — „ 


— 2 — — 
— — SS 


— — 


— 
— * 
— 


— 


— e — — 
* „ = YI 
_ — — 
— 


— —— 2 — — — 


_ ER ͤ—L—ͤ 
— — — — 


— — 


— 
r 
3 — 


— A — 
— = 
X 


— —— — — — — — 
ELIT — I — 


46 SACONTALA; OR, 


of the king's fortune, to predift the accession of brighter ornaments 
in his palace. [ Sacontala looks modest. 
Pur. I must hasten to Canna, who is gone to bathe in the Malin}, 
and let him know the signal kindness of the woodnymphs. 
[ He goes out. 
Anv. My sweet friend, I little expected so splendid a dress :——how 
shall I adjust it properly ?—[Con/idering]—Oh! my {kill in painting 
will supply me with some hints; and I will dispose the drapery 


according to art. 


Sac. I well know your affection for him. 


Canna enters meditating. 


Can. [Afde.) This day must Sacontala depart : that is resolved ; 


yet my soul is smitten with anguish. — My speech is interrupted by a 


torrent of tears, which my reason suppresses and turns inward : my very 
sight is dimmed.—Strange that the affliction of a forester, retired from 
the haunts of men, should be so exceshive! — Oh, with what pangs 
must they, who are fathers of families, be afflicted on the departure 
of a daughter ! He walks round musing. 

PRI. Now, my Sacontala, you are becomingly decorated: put on 
this lower vest, the gift of sylvan goddesses. 

[Sacontala vises and puts on the mantle. 

Gaur. My child, thy spiritual father, whose eyes overflow with 
tears of joy, stands defiring to embrace thee. Hasten therefore to 
do him reverence. [Sacontala modestly bows to Him. 

Can. Mayst thou be f N by thy husband, as Sarmishtha was 
cherished by Yayati! Mayst thou bring forth a foreign of the world, 
as she brought forth Puru! 

GavuT. This, my child, is not a mere benediction; it is a boon 
actually conferred. 

Can. My best beloved, come and walk with me round the sacri- 


ficial fire. ¶ They all advance.] May these fires preserve thee | Fires 


which {pring to their appointed stations on the holy hearth, and 


THE FATAL RING. 47 


consume the consecrated wood, while the fresh blades of mysterious 
Cusa lie scattered around them] — Sacramental fires, which destroy 
fin with the rising fumes of clarified butter! — [Sacontala walks with 
solemnity round the hearth.) Now set out, my darling, on thy auspi- 


cious journey. ——| Looking round.) Where are the attendants, the 
two Misras? 


Enter SARNGARAVA and SARADWATA. 


Both. Holy sage, we are here. 

Can. My son Sarngarava, show thy sister her way. 

SARN. Come, damsel.— [They all advance. 

Can. Hear, O ye trees of this hallowed forest ; ye trees, in which 
the sylvan goddesses have their abode ; hear, and proclaim, that 
Sacontala is going to the palace of her wedded lord; she who drank 
not, though thirsty, before you were watered ; she who cropped not, 
through affection for you, one of your fresh leaves, though she would 
have been pleased with such an ornament for her locks ; she whose 
chief delight was in the season when your branches are spangled 
with flowers! 


CHORUS of invisible WoopNxurus. 


May her way be attended with prosperity | May propitious breezes 
sprinkle, for her delight, the odoriferous dust of rich blossoms ! May 


pools of clear water, green with the leaves of the lotos, refresh her 


as she walks! and may shady branches be her defence from the 


scorching sunbeams ! [All listen with admiration. 


Sanx. Was that the voice of the Cöcila wishing a happy) journey to 


Sacontala ? — Or did the nymphs, who are allied to the pious inhabi- 
tants of these woods, repeat the warbling of the musical bird, and 
make its greeting their own ? 


GaurT, Daughter, the sylvan goddesses, who love their kindred 


48 SACONTALA; OR, 


hermits, have wished you prosperity, and are entitled to humble 
thanks. [Sacontala walks round, bowing to the nymphs. 

Sac. | Afde, to Priyamvada.] Delighted as I am, O Priyamvada, 
with the thought of seeing again the son of my lord, yet, on leaving 


this grove, my early asylum, I am scarce able to walk. 


PRI. You lament not alone. — Mark the affliction of the forest 
itself when the time of your departure approaches — The female 
antelope browses no more on the collected Cusa grass; and the peahen 
ceases to dance on the lawn: the very plants of the grove, whole pale 
leaves fall on the ground, lose their strength and their beauty. 

Sac. Venerable father, suffer me to address this Madhavi creeper, 
whose red blossoms inflame the grove. 

Can. My child, I know thy affection for it. 

ac. [Embracing the plant.] O most radiant of twining plants, 
receive my embraces, and return them with thy flexible arms: from 
this day, though removed to a fatal distance, I shall for ever be thine. 
O beloved father, consider this creeper as myselt. 

Cax. My darling, thy amiable qualities have gained thee a hus- 
band equal to thyself: such an event has been long, for thy sake, the 
chief object of my heart; and now, since my solicitude for thy mar- 


riage is at an end, I will marry thy favourite plant to the bridegroom 


Amra, who sheds fragrance near her. —— Proceed, my child, on thy 
Journey. 


Sac. | Approaching the two dampels., Sweet friends, let this Mäd- 


havi creeper be a precious deposit in your hands. 
ANu. and PRI. Alas! in whose care shall we be left? 
[They both weep. 
Can. Tears are vain, Anusuya: our Sacontala ought rather to be 
supported by your firmness, than weakened by your weeping. 
L advance. 


Sac. Father! when yon female antelope, who now moves {lowly 


from the weight of the young ones with which she is pregnant, shall 
be delivered of them, send me, I beg, a kind message with tidings of 


her safety.— Do not forget. 
Ca. My beloved, I will not forget it. 


THE FATAL RING. N 49 
Sac. | Advancing, then stopping.] Ah! what is it that clings to the 


skirts of my robe, and detains me ? [ She turns round, and looks. 

Cav. It is thy adopted child, the little fawn, whose mouth, when 
the sharp points of Cusa grass had wounded it, has been so often smeared 
by thy hand with the healing oil of Ingudi; who has been so often fed 
by thee with a handful of Syamaka grains, and now will not leave the 
_ footsteps of his protectress. 

Sac. Why dost thou weep, tender fawn, for me, who must leave 
our common dwelling place? — As thou wast reared by me when thou 
hadit lost thy mother, who died soon after thy birth, so will my foster- 
father attend thee, when we are separated, with anxious care.—Return, 
poor thing, return—we mult part. | She bursts into tears. 

Can. Thy tears, my child, ill suit the occasion: we shall all meet 
again: be firm: see the direct road before thee, and follow it. When 
the big tear lurks beneath thy beautiful eyelashes, let thy resolution 
check its first efforts to disengage itself.— In thy passage over this earth, 
where the paths are now high, now low, and the true path seldom dis- 


tinguished, the traces of thy feet must needs be unequal ; but virtue 


will press thee right onward. 

SARN. It is a sacred rule, holy sage, that a benevolent man should 
accompany a traveller till he meet with abundance of water ; and that 
rule you have carefully observed : we are now near the brink of a large 
pool. Give us, therefore, your commands, and return. 

Cax. Let us rest awhile under the shade of this Vata tree.— They 
all go to the shade. What message can I send with propriety to the 
noble Dushmanta ? | He meditates. 

Axu. | Afide to Sacontala. | My beloved friend, every heart in our 
asylum is fixed on you alone, and all are afflicted by your departure. _ 
Look; the bird Chacravica, called by his mate, who is almost hidden 
by water lilies, gives her no answer ; but having dropped from his bill 
the fibres of lotos stalks which he had A gazes on you with in- 
expressible tenderness. 

Can. My son Sarngarava, pes 72 thou malt present Sacon- 
tala to the king, to address him thus, in my name: Considering us 
© hermits as virtuous, indeed, but rich only in devotion, and 1 
| 7 


50 SaAcONTALA: OR, 


c 


« 


ing also thy own exalted birth, retain thy love for this girl, which 
arose in thy bosom without any interference of her kindred ; and 
look on her among thy wives with the same kindness which they 
experience : more than that cannot be demanded ; fince particular 
affection must depend on the will of heaven.” 


SARN. Your message, venerable man, is deeply rooted in my re- 
membrance. 

Cax. | Looking e at Sacontala.] Now, my darling, thou too 
must be gently admonished.— We, who are humble foresters, are 4 et 
acquainted with the world which we have forsaken. 

SARN. Nothing can be unknown to the wise. 

Can. Hear, my daughter. When thou art settled in the mansion 
of thy husband, show due reverence to him, and to those whom he 
reveres: though he have other wives, be rather an affectionate hand- 
maid to them than a rival.— Should he difplease thee, let not thy 
resentment lead thee to disobedience. —In thy conduct to thy domes- 
ticks be rigidly just and impartial ; and seek not eagerly thy own grati- 
fications. — By such behaviour young women become respectable; but 
perverse wives are the bane of a family. — What thinks Gautami of 
this lesson? 

Gar. It is incomparable : — my child, be sure to remember it. 


Can. Come, my beloved girl, give a parting embrace to me and to 
thy tender companions. 


Sac. Must Anusuya and Priyamvada return to the hermitage ? 
Can. They too, my child, must be suitably married ; and it would 
not be proper for them yet to visit the city; but Gautami will accom- 
pany thee. 

Sac. [ Embracing him.) Removed from the bosom of my father, 
like a young sandal tree, rent from the hills of Malaya, how shall I 
exist in a strange soil? | : 

Can. Be not so anxious. When thou shalt be mistress of a family, 
and consort of a king, thou mayst, indeed, be occasionally perplexed 
by the intricate affairs which arise from exuberance of wealth, but wilt 
then think lightly of this transient affliction, especially when thou 
shalt have a son (and a son thou wilt have) bright as the rising day-star. 


C 


** 


c 


* 


00 


* 


0 


THE FATAL RING, © 51 


——Know also with certainty, that the body must necessarily, at the 
appointed moment, be separated from the soul : who, then, can be im- 
moderately afflicted, when the weaker bounds of extrinsick relations 
are loosened, or even broken? 


Sac. | Falling at his feet.] My father, I thus humbly declare my 


veneration for you. 


Can. Excellent girl, may my effort for thy happiness prove suc- 
cessful. 


Sac. | Approaching her two companions.) Come, then, my beloved 
friends, embrace me together. [They embrace her. 


Anu. My friend, if the virtuous monarch should not at once recol- 
le& you, only show him the ring on which his own name is engraved. 

SAC. [ Starting.) My heart flutters at the bare apprehension which 
you have raised. _ 


PRI. Fear not, sweet Sacontala : love always raises ideas of misery, 
which are seldom or never realised. 


SARN. Holy sage, the sun has risen to a considerable height : let the 
queen hasten her departure. 

Sac. [ Again embracing Canna. | When, my father, oh! when again 
shall I behold this asylum of virtue? 

Can. Daughter, when thou shalt long have been wedded, like this 
fruitful earth, to the pious monarch, and shalt have borne him a son, 
whose car shall be matchless in battle, thy lord shall transfer to him the 
burden of empire, and thou, with thy Dushmanta, shalt again seck 


tranquillity, before thy final departure, in this loved and consecrated 


groe. 


Gar. My child, the proper time for our journey passes away 


rapidly: suffer thy father to return. — Go, venerable man, go back to 
thy mansion, from which she is doomed to be fo long absent. 
Can. Sweet child, this delay interrupts my religious duties. 
Sac. You, my father, will perform them long without forrow ; but 
I, alas! am destined to bear affliction. 


Can. O] my daughter, compel me not to neglect my PE devo- 
tions. —— [ Sighing.] No, my forrow will not be diminished. — Can it 
cease, my beloved, when the plants which rise luxuriantly from the 


52 SACONTALA; OR, 


hallowed grains which thy hand has strown before my cottage, are 
continually in my sightꝰ Go, may thy journey prosper. 
[ Sacontala goes out with Gautami and the two Mi isras. 

Both damsels. | Looking after Sacontala with anguish.] Alas! alas! 
our beloved is hidden by the thick trees. 

Can. My children, fince your friend 1s at length departed, check 
your immoderate grief, and follow me. [ They all turn back, 

Both. Holy father, the grove will be a perfe& vacuity without Sa- 
contala. 

Can. Your affection will certainly give it that appearance. [He 
walks round, meditating. I Ah me !—Yes ; at last my weak mind has 
attained its due firmness after the departure of my Sacontala.—In truth 
a daughter must sooner or later be the property of another ; and, hay- 
ing now sent her to her lord, I find my soul clear and undisturbed, 
like that of a man who has restored to its owner an inestimable deposit 


which he long had kept with solicitude. [ They go out, 


THE FATAL RING. 0 53 


UV. 


SCENE, the PaLAck. 


An old CHAMBERLAIN, fghing. 


CHAMBERLAIN. 


which I first held for the discharge of my customary duties in the 
secret apartments of my prince, is now my support, whilst I walk 
feebly through the multitude of years which I have passed. —I must 
now mention to the king, as he goes through the palace, an event 
which concerns himself: it must not be delayed. Advancing slowly. 
What is it *—Oh! I recolle&: the devout pupils of Canna defire an 
audience. How strange a thing is human life The intelle&s of an 
old man seem at one time luminous, and then on a sudden are in- 
volved in darkness, like the flame of a lamp at the point of extinction. 
He walks round and looks.) There is Dushmanta: he has been 
attending to his people, as to his own family ; and now with a tran- 
quil heart seeks a solitary chamber ; as an elephant the chief of his 


herd, having grazed the whole morning, and being heated by the 


meridian sun, repairs to a cool station during the oppressive heats — 


Since the king is just risen from his tribunal, and must be fatigued, I 
am almost afraid to inform him at present that Canna's pupils are ar- 
rived: yet how should they who support nations enjoy rest ?—The sun 
yokes his bright steeds for the labour of many hours ; the gale breathes 
by night and by day; the prince of serpents continually sustains the 
weight of this earth; and equally incessant is the toil of that man, 
whose revenue arises from a sixth part of his people's income. 


He walks about. 


ArLas! what a decrepid old age have I attained ?—This wand, 


——— — ͤwuaV—ᷣ — 


* . 
3 ů — — — — _— 


— — — — 
— — — — — — 


* — 0 4 —  . a 
— — e — — — —— — 
ODS — — . / a a 


2 — — 
— — — 


54 SACONTALA; OR, 


Enter DusnmanTa, Mapnavya, and Attendants. 


Dvusnm. | Looking oppressed with busmess.) Every petitioner having 
attained justice, is departed happy ; but kings who perform their duties 
conscientiously are afflicted without end.—The anxiety of acquiring 
dominion gives extreme pain; and when it is firmly established, the 
cares of supporting the nation incessantly harass the sovereign ; as a 
large umbrella, of which a man carries the staff in his own hand, fatigues 


while it shades him. 
Behind the scenes. May the king be victorious ! 


Two BaRDs repeat flanzas. 


Fixs r BAR D. Thou seekest not thy own pleasure: no; it is for the 
people that thou art harassed from day to day. Such, when thou wast 
created, was the disposition implanted in thy foul! Thus a branchy 
tree bears on his head the scorching sun-beams, while his broad shade 
allays the fever of those who seek shelter under him. 

SECOND BARD. When thou wieldest the rod of Justice, thou bringest 
to order all those who have deviated from the path of virtue : thou 
biddest contention cease : thou wast formed for the preservation of thy 
people: thy kindred possess, indeed, considerable wealth; but fo 
boundless is thy affection, that all thy subjects are considered by thee 
as thy kinsmen. 


Dushu. | Liffening.] That sweet poetry refreshes me after the toil 
of giving judgements and publick orders. 

Maon. Yes; as a tired bull is refreshed when the you say, 
There goes the lord of cattle.” 


Dusk. | Smiling.) Oh! art thou here, my friend : let us take our 
seats together. 


[The king and Madhavya 2 it dom. Maj 6 behind the scenes. 
 Mapn. Listen, my royal friend. I hear a well- tuned Vina sounding, 


THE FATAL RING. - 55 


as if it were in concert with the lutes of the gods, from yonder apart- 


ment.— The queen Hansamati is preparing, I imagine, to greet you 
with a new song. 


Dusk. Be silent, that I may listen. 


Cram. | Afide.| The king's mind seems intent on some other busi- 
ness. I must wait his leisure. [ Retiring on one side. 


SONG. | Behind the scenes. 


Sweet bee, who, desirous of extracting fresh honey, wast wont 
to kiss the soft border of the new-blown Amra flower, how canst 


thou now be satisfied with the water lily, and forget the first object 


« of thy love? 


Dusam. The ditty breathes a tender passion. 

Mapn. Does the king know its meaning? It is too deep for me. 

Duskx. [ Smiling. ] I was once in love with Hansamati, and am 
now reproved for continuing so long absent from her.—Friend Mäd- 
havya, inform the queen in my name that I feel the reproof. 

Mapn. As the king commands; but—| Rifng slowly. |] My friend, 
you are going to seize a sharp lance with another man's hand. I can- 
not relish your commission to an enraged woman.—A hermit cannot 
be happy till he has taken leave of all passions whatever. 

Dusk. Go, my kind friend: the urbanity of thy discourse will 
appease her. 

 Mapn. What an errand! [He goes our. 

Dusnm. | Afide.) Ah! what makes me so melancholy on hearing a 
mere song on absence, when I am not in fact leparated from any real 
object of my affection? Perhaps the sadness of men, otherwise happy, 


on seeing beautiful forms and listening to sweet melody, arises from 


some faint remembrance of past joys and the traces of connections in 
a former state of existence. [ He fits pensive and forrowful. 
Cuau. [ Advancing humbly.) May our sovereign be victorious !— 


Two religious men, with some women, are come from their bode in 


„„ 


56 SAC ONTALA; OR, 


a forest near the Snowy Mountains, and bring a message from Canna. 
— The king will command. 

Dusnm. | Surprised.) What! are pious hermits arrived in the com- 
pany of women ? 

Cram. It is even so. 

Dusun. Order the priest Somarata, in my name, to shew them 
due reverence in the form appointed by the Veda; and bid him attend 
me. I shall wait for my holy guests in a 1 fit for their reception. 

CHa. I obey. | He goes out. 

Dus. Wardour, point the way to the hearth of the consecrated 
sire. 

Warp. This, O king, this is the way. —s[He walks before.] Here 
is the entrance of the hallowed enclosure ; and there stands the vene- 
rable cow to be milked for the sacrifice, looking bright from the 
recent sprinkling of mystick water.—Let the king ascend. 

[Dushmanta 7s raised to the place of sacrifice on the shoulders 
of his Wardours. 

Dushu. What message can the pious Canna have sent me ?—Has 
the devotion of his pupils been impeded by evil spirits—or by what 
other calamity ?—Or has any harm, alas! befallen the poor herds, 
who graze in the hallowed forest ?!—Or have the sins of the king 
_ tainted the flowers and rruits of the creepers planted by female hermits? 
My mind is entangled in a labyrinth of confused apprehensions. 

Warp. What our sovereign imagines, cannot possibly have hap- 
pened ; since the hermitage has been rendered secure from evil by 
the mere sound of his bowstring. The pious men, whom the king's 


benevolence has made happy, are come, I presume, to do him 
homage. 


Enter SARNGARAVA, SARADWATA, and GAUTAM1, leading SACONTALA 
Ey the hand ; and before them the old CHaMBERLAIN and the PRIEs r. 


Cyan. This way, respectable strangers ; come this way. 
SArRn, My friend Saradwata, there fits the king of men, who has 


THE FATAL RING. © 57 


felicity at command, yet shows equal respec to all: here no subject, 
even of the lowest class, is received with contempt. Nevertheless, 
my soul having ever been free from attachment to worldly things, 1 
consider this hearth, although a crowd now surround it, as the station 
merely of consecrated fire. | 

SAiraD. I was not less confounded than yourself on entering the 
populous city ; but now I look on it, as a man just bathed in pure 
water, on a man smeared with oil and dust, as the pure on the im- 
pure, as the waking on the {leeping, as the free man on the captive, 
as the independent on the slave. | 

PRIEST. Thence it is, that men, like you two, are so elevated 
above other mortals. 

Sac. | Perceiving a * men.] Venerable mother, I feel my right 
eye throb! What means this involuntary motici, * 

 Gavur, Heaven avert the omen, my sweet child ! May every 
delight attend thee! | They all advance. 

PRIEST. | Showing the king to them.] There, holy men, is the pro- 
tector of the people; who has taken his seat, and expects you. 

Sinn. This is what we wished ; yet we have no private interest in 
the business. It is ever thus: trees are bent by the abundance of 
their fruit; clouds are brought low, when they teem with salubrious 
rain ; and the real benefactors of mankind are not elated by riches. 

Warp. O king, the holy guests appear before you with placid 
looks, indicating their affection. 

Dusnu. [Gazing at Sacontalä.] Ah! what damsel is hat whose 
mantle conceals the far greater part of her beautiful form? — She 
looks, among the hermits, like a fresh green bud among faded and 
yellow leaves. 

Warp. This at least, O king, is apparent; chat she has a form, 
which deserves to be seen more distinctly. 

Dvusum. Let her still be covered: she seems pregnant ; - and the 
wife of another must not be seen even by me. 

Sac. | Afide, with her hand to her bosom. | O my heart, why dost 


thou palpitate Remember the ee of thy lord's affection, 
and be tranquil. 
8 


58 SACONTALA; OR, 
PRIEST. May the king prosper | The respectable guests have been 


honoured, as the law ordains; and they have now a message to 
deliver from their spiritual guide : let the king deign to hear it. 

Dusnm. [With reverence. J am attentive. 

Both Misras. | Extending their hands.] Victory attend thy banners! 

Dusnm. I respectfully greet you both. 

Both. Blessings on our sovereign ! 

Dvusnm. Has your devotion been uninterrupted ? 

Sirn. How should our rites be disturbed, when thou art the pre- 
server of all creatures? How, when the bright sun blazes, should 
darkness cover the world ? 

Dvusnm. | Afde.| The name of royalty produces, I suppose, all 
worldly advantages !—| Aloud.) Does the holy Canna then prosper ! 

San. O king, they who gather the fruits of devotion may com- 
mand prosperity. He first inquires affectionately whether thy arms 
are successful, and then addrefles thee in these words. 

Dusum. What are his orders? 

SARN. © "The contract of marriage, reciprocally made between thee 
„and this girl, my daughter, I confirm with tender regard; since 
thou art celebrated as the most honourable of men, and my Sacon- 
* tala is Virtue herself in a human form. No blasphemous com- 
„ plaint will henceforth be made against Brahma, for suffering 
* discordant matches: he has now united a bride and bridegroom 
with qualities equally transcendent. Since, therefore, she 1s preg- 
nant by thee, receive her in thy palace, that she may perform, in 
conjunction with thee, the duties prescribed by religion.“ 

Gar. Great king, thou hast a mild aspect; and I wish to address 
thee in few words. 

Dusnw. | Smiling.) Speak, venerable matron. 

Gar. She waited not the return of her spiritual father; nor were 
thy kindred consulted by thee. You two only were present, when 
your nuptials were solemnized : now, therefore, converse freely to- 
_ gether in the absence of all others. 

Sac. | Afde.| What will my lord fay ? 
 Dvusum. | Afde, perplexed.) How strange an adventure 


£c 


46 


— . ² EI RE. Ang 


THE FATAL RING. oy 59 


Sac. [ Afide.| Ah me! how disdainfully he seems to receive the 
message 

SARN. [Afide.| What means that phrase which I overheard, © How 
« strange an adventure? '—| 4/oud.] Monarch, thou knowest the hearts 
of men. Let a wife behave ever so discreetly, the world will think ill 
of her, if she live only with her paternal kinsmen; and a lawful wife 
now requests, as her kindred also humbly entreat, that whether she be 
loved or not, she may pass her days in the mansion of her husband. 

Dusnm. What sayst thou !—Am I the lady's husband ? 


Sac. | Aide, with anguisb.] O my heart, thy fears have proved just. 


SARN. Does it become a magnificent prince to depart from the rules 
of religion and honour, merely because he repents of his engagements ? 


Dusum. With what hope of success could this groundless fable have 
been invented? 


Sinn. [Angrily.] The minds of those whom power intoxicates are 


perpetually changing. 

Dusmm. I am reproved with too great severity. 

Gar. | To Sacontala.] Be not ashamed, my sweet child: let me 
take off thy mantle, that the king may recolle& thee. | She unveils her. 

Dusnm. | Aside, looking at Sacontala.] While I am doubttul whether 
this unblemished beauty which is displayed before me has not been 
possessed by another, I resemble a bee fluttering at the close of night 
over a blossom filled with dew; and in this state of mind, I neither 
can enjoy nor forsake her. 

Warp. | Afde to Dushmanta.] The king best knows his rights and 
his duties: but who would hesitate when a woman, bright as a gem, 
brings lustre to the apartments of his palace ? | 

SARN. What, O king, does thy strange silence import? 

Dusk. Holy man, 1 ye been 8 again and again, but 


have no recollection of my marriage with this lady. How then can I. 


lay aside all consideration of my military tribe, and admit into my 
palace a young woman who 1s pregnant by another husband ? 


Sac. [| Af, de.) Ah! wo is me.—Can there be a doubt even of our 


nuptials ?—The tree of my hope, which had risen so luxuriantly, is at 
once broken down. 


60 SACONTALA; OR, 


SAirn. Beware, lest the godlike sage, who would have bestowed on 
thee, as a free gift, his inestimable treasure, which thou hadst taken, 
like a base robber, should now cease to think of thee, who art law- 
fully married to his daughter, and should confine all his thoughts tc to 
her whom thy perfidy disgraces. 

SRD. Rest awhile, my Sarngarava ; and thou, Sacontala, take thy 
turn to speak ; since thy lord has declared his forgetfulness. 

Sac. | Afde.| If his affection has ceased, of what use will it be to 
recall his remembrance of me ?—Yet, if my soul must endure torment, 
be it so: I will speak to him. [Aloud to Dushmanta.] O my hus- 
band !—| Paufng. | Or (if the just application of that sacred word be 
still doubted by thee) O son of Puru, is it becoming, that, having 
been once enamoured of me in the consecrated forest, and having 
shown the excess of thy passion, thou shouldit this day deny me with 
bitter expressions ? 

Dusnm. | Covering his ears.] Be the crime removed from my foul ! 
Thou hast been instructed for some base purpose to vilify me, and 
make me fall from the dignity which I have hitherto supported ; as a 
river which has burst its banks and altered its placid current, over- 
throws the trees that had risen aloft on them. 

Sac. If thou sayst this merely from want of recollection, I will 


restore thy memory by producing thy own ring, with thy name en- 
graved on it! 


DusHu. A capital invention | | 
Sac. | Looking at her finger.] Ah me! I have no ring. 
[| She fixes her eyes with anguish on Gautami. 
GauT. The fatal ring must have dropped, my child, from thy hand, 
when thou tookest up water to pour on thy head in the pool of Sachi- 
tirt'ha, near the station of Sacravatara. 
Dosh. [Szniling.] So skilful are women in finding ready excules ! 


Sac. The power of Brahma must Prevail : I will yet mention one 
circumstance. 


Dusnm. I must submit to hear the tale. 


Sac. One day, in a grove of Vetasas, thou tookest water in thy 
hand from its natural vase of lotos leaves. — 


THE FATAL RING, 61 


Dusk. What followed ? 

Sac. At that instant a little fawn, which I had reared as my own 
child, approached thee ; and thou saidst with benevolence: © Drink 
thou first, gentle fawn.” He would not drink from the hand of a 
stranger, but received water eagerly from mine; when thou saidst, with 
increasing affection: Thus every creature loves its companions ; you 
are both foresters alike, and both alike amiable.” 

Dusam. By such interested and honied falschoods are the souls of 
voluptuaries ensnared! 

Gar. Forbear, illustrious prince, to speak harshly. She was bred 
in a sacred grove where she learned no guile. 

Dusam. Pious matron, the dexterity of females, even when they 
are untaught, appears in those of a species different from our own.— 
What would it be if they were duly instructed !—The female Cocilas, 
before they fly towards the firmament, leave their eggs to be hatched, 
and their young fed, by birds who have no relation to them. 

Sac. [With anger.] Oh! void of honour, thou measurest all the 
world by thy own bad heart. What prince ever resembled, or ever 
will resemble, thee, who wearest the garb of religion and virtue, but 
in truth art a base deceiver; like a deep well whole mouth 1s covered 
with smiling plants ! 

Dushu. | Afide.] The rusticity of her education makes her speak 
thus angrily and inconsistently with female decorum.—She looks indig- 
nant ; her eye glows ; and her speech, formed of harsh terms, falters as 
she utters them. Her lip, ruddy as the Bimba fruit, quivers as if it 

were nipped with frost ; and her eyebrows, naturally smooth and equal, 
are at once irregularly contracted. —Thus having failed in circumventing 


me by the apparent lustre of simplicity, she has recourse to wrath, and 


snaps in two the bow of Cama, which, if she had not belonged to ano- 
ther, might have wounded me. —— Aloud. ] The heart of Dushmanta, 
young woman, is known to all; and thine is betrayed by thy present 
demeanour. 

Sac. [ Tronically.] You kings are in all cases to be credited impli- 
citly : you perfectly know the respect which is due to virtue and to 
mankind ; while females, however modest, howes er virtuous, know 


62 SACONTALA; OR, 


nothing, and speak nothing truly. — In a happy hour I came hither to 
seek the object of my affection: in a happy moment I received the 
hand of a prince descended from Puru; a prince who had won my 
confidence by the honey of his words, whilst his heart concealed the 
weapon that was to pierce mine. [ She hides her face, and weeps. 

SARN. This insufferable mutability of the king's temper kindles my 
wrath.—Henceforth let all be circumspect before they form secret con- 
nections: a friendship hastily contracted, when both hearts are not 
perfectly known, must ere long become enmity. 


Dusum. Wouldst thou force me then to commit an enormous crime, 
relying solely on her smooth speeches ? 

SARN. | Scornfully.) Thou hast heard an answer. — The words of 
an incomparable girl, who never learned what iniquity was, are here to 
receive no credit; while they, whole learning consists in accusing others, 
and inquiring into crimes, are the only persons who speak truth! 

Dushu. O man of unimpeached veracity, I certainly am what thou 
describest ; but what would be gained by accusing thy female associate? 

SARN. Eternal misery. | 

Dusk. No; misery will never be the portion of Puru's descendents. 

SARN. What avails our altercation ?—O king, we have obeyed the 
commands of our preceptor, and now return. Sacontala 1s by law thy 


wife, whether thou desert or acknowledge her ; and the dominion of a 
husband is absolute.—Go before us, Gautami. 


| The two Misras and Gautami returning. 
Sac. I have been deceived by this perfidious man; but will you, 
my friends, will you also forsake me? Following them. 
Gaur. | Looking back.| My fon, Sacontala follows us with affec- 
tionate supplications. What can she do here with a faithless husband ; 
she who is all tenderness? _ 
 Sarn. [Angrily to Sacontalk.] O * who seest the faults of thy 
lord, dost thou desire independence? [Sacontala fops, and irembles. 
SARA. Let the queen hear. If thou beest what the king proclaims 
thee, what right hast thou to complain? But if thou knowest the purity 
of thy own soul, it will become thee to wait as a handmaid in the 


THE FATAL RING. 63 


mansion of thy lord. Stay, then, where thou art: we must return 
to Canna. 

Dusk. Deceive her not, holy men, with vain expectations. The 
moon opens the night flower; and the sun makes the water lily blos- 
som; each is confined to its own object: and thus a virtuous man 
abstains from any connection with the wife of another, 

SaRN. Yet thou, O king, who fearest to offend religion and virtue, 
art not afraid to desert thy wedded wife ; pretending that the variety 
of thy publick affairs has made thee forget thy private contract. 

Dusnm. [To his Priest.] I really have no remembrance of any such 


engagement ; and I ask thee, my spiritual counsellor, whether of the 


two offences be the greater, to forsake my own wife, or to have an 
intercourse with the wife of another ? 


PRIEs T. | After some ee We may adopt an expedient 
between both. 


Dusnm. Let my venerable guide command. 

PrIesT. The young woman may dwell till her delivery in my house 

Dusnm. For what purpose ? 

PriEsT. Wile astrologers have assured the king, that he will be the 
father of an illustrious prince, whose dominion will be bounded by the 
western and castern seas: now, if the holy man's daughter shall bring 
forth a son whose hands and feet bear the marks of extensive sove- 
reignty, I will do homage to her as my queen, and conduct her to the 
royal apartments; if not, she shall return in due time to her father. 

Dvusnwm. Be it as you judge proper. 

Pr1esT. | To Sacontala.] This way, my daughter; follow me. 

Sac. O earth! mild goddess, give me a place within thy bosom | 

| She goes out weeping with the Priest ; while the two Misras go out 

by a different way with Gautami. Dushmanta fands medita- 

ting on the beauty of Sacontala ; but rhe imprecation id clowns 
his memory. 

Bebind the scenes. Oh! miraculous event ! 


Dus un. [ Liftening.] What can have happened "© 


64 SACONTALA; OR, 


The Priest re-enters. 


Paige Hear, O king, the stupendous event. When Canna's pupils 


had departed, Sacontala, bewailing her adverse fortune, extended her 
arms and wept ; when 


Dusxm. What then? 

PRIEST. A body of light, in a female shape, descended near Apsa- 
rastirt ha, where the nymphs of heaven are worshiped ; and having 
caught her hastily in her bosom, disappeared. 

[ All express astonishment. 

Dusk. I suspected from the beginning some work of sorcery. 
The business is over; and it is needless to reason more on it. Let thy 
mind, Somarata, be at rest. 

PRIEST. May the king be victorious. | He goes out. 

Dusnu. Chamberlain, I have been greatly harassed ; and Oe? War- 
der, go before me to a place of repose. 

Wap. This way; let the king come this way. 

Dusnu. | Advancing, aside.] I cannot with all my efforts recollect 
my nuptials with the daughter of the hermit ; yet so agitated is my 
heart, that it almost induces me to believe her story. All go out. 


THE FATAL RING. 


A I 


SC EMME, a STREET. 


Enter a Superintendent of Police with two Officers, leading a man with 
his hands bound. 


FIRST OFFICER. | Striking the prisoner. 


Fake that, Cumbhilaca, if Cumbhilaca be thy name ; and tell us 
now where thou gottest this ring, bright with a large gem, on which 
the king's name 1s engraved. 

CumBn. | Trembling.] Spare me, I entreat your honours to spare me: 
I am not guilty of so great a crime as you suspect. 

FIRST Orr. O distinguished Brahmen, didst thou then receive it 
from the king as a reward of some important service * 

CumBn. Only hear me: I am a poor fisherman dwelling at Sacrava- 
tara 

SEcoxnD Orr. Did we ask, thou thief, about mY tribe or thy dwel- 
ling place ? 

Sup. O Suchaca, let the fellow tell his own story.— Now conceal 
nothing, firrah. 

FIRST Orr. Dost thou hear? Do as our master commands. 

Cumsn, I am a man who support my family by catching fish in nets, 
or with hooks, and by various other contrivances. 

Sup. [ Laughing.) A virtuous way of gaining a livehhood ! 

CumBn. Blame me not, master. The occupation of our forefathers, 
how low soever, must not be forsaken; and a man who kills animals 
for sale may have a tender heart though his a& be cruel. 

Sur. Go on, go on. 
CumBn. One day having caught a large Röhita fish, I cut it open, 


and faw this bright ring in its stomach; but when J offered to sell it, 1 
: Wn : 5 


66 SACONTALA; OR, 


was apprehended by your honours. So far only am I guilty of taking 
the ring. Will you now continue beating and bruifing me to death ? 

Sur. | Selling the ring. ] It is certain, Jaluca, that this gem has 
been in the body of a fish. The case requires confideration ; and I 
will mention it to some of the king's household, 

Bor Orr. Come on, cutpurse. [ They advance. 

Sur. Stand here, Suchaca, at the great gate of the city, and wait 
for me, while I speak to some of the officers in the palace. 

Born Orr. Go, Räjayucta. May the king favour thee ! 

[| The Superintendent goes out 

SECOND Orr. Our master will stay, I fear, a long while. 

FizsT Orr. Yes; access to kings can only be had at their leisure. 

SECOND Orr. The tips of my fingers itch, my friend Jaluca, to 
Kill this cutpurse. 

CumBn. You would put to death an innocent man. 

FIRST Orr. [ Looking.) Here comes our -master. — The king has 
decided quickly. Now, Cumbhilaca, you will either see your com- 
panions again, or be the food of shakals and vultures. 


The Superintendent re-enters. 


Sue. Let the fisherman immediately — 
Cunsn. | In an agony.] Oh! I am a dead man. 
Sup. — be discharged. —Hola! set him at liberty. The king favs 
he knows his innocence ; and his story 1s true. 
SECOND Orr.. As our master commands. — The fellow is brought 
back from the mansion of Yama, to which he was hastening. 
[ Unbinding the fisherman. 
CumBn. | Bowing.)] My lord, I owe my life to your kindness. | 
Sup. Rise, friend; and hear with delight that the king gives thee 
a sum of money equal to the full value of the ring: it is a fortune to 
a man in thy station. LO him the money. 
Cup, Vith err. ] I am transported with joy. 


THE FATAL RING. 67 


FizsT Orr. This vagabond seems to be taken down from the stake, 
and set on the back of a state elephant. 


SECOND Orr. The king, I suppose, has a great affection for his gem. 


Sue. Not for its intrinsick value; but I guessed the cause of his 


ecstasy when he saw it. 

BorH Orr. What could occasion it ? 

Sue. I suspect that it called to his memory some person who has a 
place in his heart; for though his mind be naturally firm, yet, from 
the moment when he beheld the ring, he was for some minutes exces- 
sively agitated. 

SzconD Orr. Our master has given the king extreme pleasure. 

FIRST Orr. Yes; and by the means of this fish-catcher. 

[ Looking fiercely at him. 

Cuzn. Be not angry — Half the money shall be divided between 
you to purchase wine. 

FixsT Orr. Oh! now thou art our beloved friend. —Good wine is 
the first object of our affection. —Let us go together to the vintner's. 


[ They all go out. 


SCENE, the GarRDEN of the PALACE. 
The Nymph Misracksi appears in the air. 


Misk. My tirst task was duly performed when I went to bathe in 
the Nymphs' pool; and I now must fee with my own eyes how the 
virtuous king is afflicted. ——Sacontala is dear to this heart, because she 
is the daughter of my beloved Menaca, from whom I received both 
_ commissions. {She looks round.\| Ah! on a day full of delights the 


monarch's family seem oppressed with some new sorrow. — By exerting 


my supernatural power I could know what has passed ; but respect must. 


be shown to the desire of MEnaca. I will retire, therefore, among 
those plants, and observe what i is done without being visible. 


1990 ones and takes her ftation. 


68 SACONTALA; OR, 


Enter two Damsels, attendants on the God of Love. 


Firsr Dams. | Looking at an Amra flower.| The blossoms of yon 
Amra, waving on the green stalk, are fresh and light as the breath of 
this vernal month. I must present the goddess Reti with a basket of 
them. 


Stop Daus. Why, my Parabhritica, dost thou mean to present 
it alone ? | 

Firsr Dams. O my friend Madhucarica, when a female Cocila, 
which my name implies, sees a blooming Amra, she becomes entranced, 
and loses her recollection. 


Stcoxd Daus. [ith transport.] What! is the season of sweets 
actually returned ? 


FixsT Daus. Yes; the season in which we must sing of nothing 
but wine and love. 

Second Daus. Support me, then, while I climb up this tree, and 
strip it of its fragrant gems, which we will carry as an offering to Cama. 

Fixsr Daus. If I ashst, I must have a moiety of the reward which 
the god will bestow. 

SECOND Dams. To be sure, and without any previous bargain. We 
are only one soul, you know, though Brahma has given it two bodies. 
——| She climbs up, and gathers the flowers. |] Ah! the buds are hardly 
opened. Here is one a little expanded, which diffuses a charming 
odour—-| Taking a handful of buds. | This flower is sacred to the god 
who bears a fish on his banner. O sweet blossom, which I now conse- 
crate, thou well deservest to point the sixth arrow of Camadeva, who 
now takes his bow to pierce myriads of youthful hearts. 


[ She throws down a blossom. 
The old CHAMBERLAIN enters. 


Can. [ Angrily.) Desist from breaking off those half. -opened buds: 
there will be no jubilee this year; our king has forbidden! it. 


THE FATAL RING. 69 


Born Daus. Oh! pardon us. We really knew not the prohibition. 

Chau. You knew it not! Even the trees which the spring was 
decking, and the birds who perch on them, sympathize with our 
monarch. Thence it is, that yon buds, which have long appeared, 
shed not yet their prolifick dust; and the flower of the Curuvaca, 
though perfectly formed, remains veiled in a closed chalice; while the 
voice of the C6cila, though the cold dews fall no more, is fixed within 
his throat; and even Smara, the god of defire, replaces the shaft half- 
drawn from his quiver. 


Mrsk. | Afide. | The king, no doubt, is constant and tender hearted. 


FIRST Dams. A few days ago Mitravasu, the governor of our pro- 


vince, dispatched us to kiss the feet of the king, and we come to 
decorate his groves and gardens with various emblems: thence it is, 
that we heard nothing of his interdict. 

CAM. Beware then of reiterating your offence. 

_ BxconD Daus. To obey our lord will certainly be our delight; but, 
if we are permitted to hear the story, tell us, we pray, what has induced 
our sovereign to forbid the usual festivity. 

Mrss. | Afide.] Kings are generally fond of gay entertainments ; 
and there must be some weighty reason for the . 

CuAu. [| fide.) The affair is publick : why should I not fatisfy 
them ? —| Aloud.) Has not the calamitous desertion of Sacontala 
reached your ears ? 

FigsT Dams. We heard her tale from the governor, as far as the 
sight of the fatal ring. 

Cram. Then I have little to add. — When the king's memory was 
restored by the fight of his gem, he instantly exclaimed : “ Yes, the 
* incomparable Sacontala is my lawful wife ; and when I rejected her, 
I had lost my reason. + Be showed strong marks of extreme 
affliction and penitence ;. and from that moment Lie has abhorred the 
pleasures of life. No longer does he exert his respectable talents from 


day to day for the good of his people: he prolongs his nights without 
closing hls eyes, perpetually rolling on the edge of his . and 


when 5 rises, he pronounces not one Feten aptly; mistaking the 
names of the women in his apartments, and through distraction, calling 


2 * . — 0 — . — — : 
— ——— —j — r — ﬀq — 


85 SACONTALA; OR, 


each of them Sacontala : then he fits abashed, with his head long bent 
on his knees. 

Mtss. [AH side.] This is pleasing to me, very pleasing. 

CHau. By reason of the deep sorrow which now prevails in his 
heart, the vernal jubilee has been interdicted. 

Born Daus. The prohibition is highly proper. 

Behind the scenes. Make way! The king is passing. 

Cuau. | Listening.] Here comes the monarch: depart therefore, 
damsels, to your own province. — The two Damsels go out. 


Dushuax rA enters in penitential weeds, preceded by a Warder, and 
attended by MADHA VVA. 


Cnam. | Looking at the king.] Ah! how majestick are noble forms 
in every habiliment Our prince, even in the garb of affliction, is a 
venerable obje&t.—Though he has abandoned pleafure, ornaments, and 
business ; though he is become so thin, that his golden bracelet falls 
loosened even down to his wrist ; though his lips are parched with the 
heat of his sighs, and his eyes are fixed open by long sorrow and want 
of sleep, yet am I dazzled by the blaze of virtue which beams in his 
countenance like a diamond exquisitely polished. 

Mrsn. | Aide, gazing on Dushmanta.] With good reason is my 
beloved Sacontala, though disgraced and rejected, heavily oppressed 
with grief through the absence of this youth. 

Dusnu. | Advancing flowly, in deep meditation.| When my darling 
with an antelope's eyes would have reminded me of our love, I was 
assuredly slumbering; but excess of misery has awakened me. 

Mrss. | Afide. | The charming girl will at last be happy. 

Mipn. | A/de.] This monarch of ours is caught again in the gale 
of affection ; and I hardly know a remedy for his illness. 

Cram. | Approaching Dushmanta.] May the king be victorious |— 
Let him survey yon fine woodland, these cool walks, and this bloom- 
ing garden; where he may repose with pleasure on banks of delight. 

Dusnx. | Not attending to bim.] Warder, inform the chief minister 


THE FATAL RING. 7 * 


in my name, that having resolved on a long absence from the city, I 
do not mean to sit for some time in the tribunal; but let him write 
and dispatch to me all the cases that may arise among my subjects. 
Warp. As the king commands. He goes out. 
Dusnm. | To the Chamberlain.) And thou, Parvatayana, negle& not 
thy stated business. 


Cram. By no means. He goes out. 
Mipn. You have not left a fly in the garden. — Amuse yourself 


now in this retreat, which seems pleased with the departure of the 
dewy season. | 
Dusam. O Madhavya, when persons accused of great offences prove 
wholly innocent, see how their accusers are punished !—A phrensy 
obstructed my remembrance of any former love for the daughter of 
the sage; and now the heart-born god, who delights in giving pain, 
has fixed in his bowstring a new shaft pointed with the blossom of an 
Amra.— The fatal ring having restored my memory, see me deplore 
with tears of repentance the loss of my best beloved, whom I rejected 
without cause; see me overwhelmed with sorrow, even while the 
return of spring fills the hearts of all others with pleasure. 
Mapa. Be ftill, my friend, whilst I break Love's arrows with my 
staff. He flrikes off some flowers from an Amra tree, 
Dusan. [Meditating.] Ves, I acknowledge the supreme power of 
Brahma. [ To Madhavya.| Where now, my friend, shall I fit and 
recreate my fight with the flender shrubs which bear a faint resem- 
blance to the shape of Sacontala ? 
Mapk. You will soon see the damsel skilled in painting, whom you 
informed that you would spend the forenoon in yon bower of Madhavi 
creepers; and she wall bring the queen's picture which you commanded 
her to draw. 
Dusam. My soul will be 3 even by her 188 ——Show the 
way to the bower. 
Mäph. This way, my friend. —| They both advance, Misracts Fol- 
lowing them. — The arbour of twining Madhavis, embellished with 
fragments of stone like bright gems, appears by its pleasantness, though 


72 SACONTALA; OR, 


without a voice, to bid thee welcome. Let us enter it, and be 
seated. [ They both fit down in the bower. 
MisR. | A/ide. | From behind these branchy shrubs I shall behold 


the picture of my Sacontala.—TI will afterwards hasten to report the 


sincere affection of her husband. [ She conceals herself. 
Dusnu. [ Sighing.] O my approved friend, the whole adventure of 
the hermitage is now fresh in my memory. I informed you how 


deeply I was affected by the first fight of the damsel ; but when she 
was rejected by me you were not present. —Her name was often 
repeated by me (how, indeed should it not?) in our conversation. —— 
What! hast thou forgotten, as I had, the whole story ? 

Misk. | Afide.| The sovereigns of the world must not, I find, be 
left an instant without the objects of their love. 

Mixpn. Oh, no: I have not forgotten it; but at the end of our 
discourse you assured me that your love tale was invented solely for 
your diversion ; and this, in the fimplicity of my heart, I believed. 
Some great event seems in all this affair to be predestined in heaven. 

Mrss. | Afde.| Nothing is more true. 

Dusnm. | Having meditated.] O! my friend, suggest some relief 
for my torment. 

Mavpn. What new pain torments you? Virtuous men should never 
be thus afflicted : the most violent wind shakes not mountains. 

Dusnum. When I reflect on the situation of your friend Sacontala, 
who must now be greatly affected by my desertion of her, I am with- 
out comfort. — She made an attempt to follow the Brahmens and the 
matron : Stay, said the sage's pupil, who was revered as the sage him- 
self; Stay, said he, with a loud voice. Then once more she fixed 
on me, who had betrayed her, that celestial face, then bedewed with 


gushing tears; and the bare idea of her pan burns me like an en- 
venomed javelin. 


Msn. LY de.] How he afflicts himself! 1 really e with 


him. 


Mapn. Surely {ome inhabitant of the heavens must have wafted 
her to his manson. 


Dvusum. No; what male divinity would have taken the pains to 


THE FATAL RING. — "u4 


5 


carry off a wife so firmly attached to her lord? Menaca, the nymph 
of Swerga, gave her birth; and some of her attendant nymphs have, 1 
imagine, concealed her at the desire of her mother. 

M1ss. | Afide.| To reje& Sacontala was, no doubt, the effect of a 
delirium, not the act of a waking man. 

Mapa. If it be thus, you will soon meet her again. 

Dusk. Alas! why do you think fo ? 

Map. Because no father and mother can long endure to sec their 
daughter deprived of her husband. 

Dusnu. Was it sleep that impaired my memory? Was it delusion ? 
Was it an errour of my judgement ? Or was it the destined reward of 
my bad actions? Whatever it was, I am sensible that, until Sacontala 
return to these arms, I shall be plunged in the abyss of affliction. 

| Mapn. Do not despair : the fatal ring is itself an example that the 
lost may be found. —Events which were foredoomed by Heaven must 
not be lamented. 

Dusam. | Looking at his ring." The fate of this ring, now fallen 
from a station which it will not cafily regain, I may at least deplore.— 
O gem, thou art removed from the soft finger, beautiful with ruddy 
tips, on which a place had been assigned thee ; and, minute as thou 
art, thy bad a appear from the {1milarity of thy punishment 
to mine. 

Misk. | Afrde.] Had it found a way to any other hand its lot would 
have been truly deplorable.— 0 Menaca, how wound? thou be de- 
lighted with the conversation which gratifies my ears! 

Mapn. Let me know, I pray, by what means the nag obtained 
place on the finger of Sacontala. 

Dusam. You shall know, my friend. When I was coming from 
the holy forest to my capital, my beloved, w ith tears in her eyes, thus 
addressed me: TOW long will the fon of my lord N me in his 
« remembrance ? 

Mapn. Well ; what then? 

Dusnm. Then, fixing this ring on her lovely finger, I thus answered: 
Repeat each day one of the three syllables engraved on this gem ; 


and before thou hast spelled che word Dushmanta, one of my noblest 


"20: 


74 SAC ONTALA; OR, 


« ofhicers shall attend thee, and conduct my darling to her palace.“ — 
Yet I forgot, I deserted her in my phrensy. 

Mrss. | Afde.| A charming interval of three days was fixed between 
their separation and their meeting, which the will of Brahma rendered 
unhappy. 

MAapn. But how came the ring to enter, like a hook, into the 
mouth of a carp ? 

Dusku. When my beloved was lifting water to her head in the pool 
of Sachitirt'ha, the ring must have dropped unseen. 

Map. It is very probable. 

Misk. | Afide.] Oh! it was thence that the king, who fears nothing 
but injustice, doubted the reality of his marriage; but how, I wonder, 
could his memory be connected with a ring? 

Dusnm. I am really angry with this gem. 

Mapn. | Laughing.) So am I with this staff. 

Dusam. Why so, Madhavya ? 

_ Maps. Because it presumes to be so straight when I am so crooked. 
—[Impertinent stick ! 

Dusnm. [Mot attending to "RD How, O ring, couldst thou leave 
that hand adorned with soft long fingers, and fall into a pool decked 
only with water lilies ?—The answer is obvious: thou art irrational. — 
But how could I, who was born with a reasonable soul, desert my only 
beloved ? 

Mis. | A/fiae. 15 He anticipates my remark. 

Mapn. | Afde.] So; I must wait here during his meditations, and 
perish with hunger. 

Dusnu. O my darling, whom I treated with disrespect, and forfook 

without reason, when will this traitor, whose heart is deeply stung 
with repentant sorrow, be once more blessed with a fight of thee ? 


A DamsEL enters with a picture. 


Daus. Great king, the picture is finished. | Holding it before him. 
Dusam. | Gazing on it.] Yes; that is her face; those are her beau- 


THE FATAL RING. 75 


tiful eyes; those her lips embellished with smiles, and surpassing the 
red lustre of the Carcandhu fruit : her mouth seems, though painted, 
to speak, and her countenance darts beams of affection blended with 
a variety of melting tints. 

Miavn. Truly, my friend, it is a picture sweet as love itself: my 
eye glides up and down to feast on every particle of it; and it gives 
me as much delight as if I were actually conversing with the living 
Sacontala. 


Mrsr. | Afide.] An exquisite piece of painting! My beloved 
friend seems to stand before my eyes. 

Dusgu. Yet the picture is infinitely below the original; and my 
warm fancy, by supplying its e represents, in 1 some degree, 
the loveliness of my darling. 


M1sr. | Ajfide.)] His ideas are suitable to his exceslive love and 
levere penitence. 

Dus gu. | Sighing.| Alas! I rejected her when she lately approached 
me, and now I do homage to her picture; like a traveller who negli- 
gently passes by a clear and full rivulet, and soon ardently thirsts for a 
false appearance of water on the sandy desert. 

Mapn. There are so many female figures on this canvas, that J 
cannot well distinguish the lady Sacontala. 

Mrss. [ Aside.] The old man is ignorant of her transcendent beauty; 
her eyes, which fascinated the soul of his Prince, never sparkled, I sup- 
pose, on Madhavya. 

Dusk. Which of the e do you conceive intended for the 
queen? 

Mapn. [ Examining the picture. It! is she, I imagine, who looks a 
little fatigued ; with the string of her vest rather loose ; the {lender | 
stalks of her arms falling languidly ; a few bright drops on her face, 
and some flowers dropping from her untied locks. That mult be the 
queen ; and the rest, I suppose, are her damsels. 

Dusnu. You judge well; but my affection requires something more 
in the piece. Besides, through some defect in the colouring, a tear 
seems trickling down her cheek, which ill suits the state in which I. 


desired to see her painted. [% the Damjel. | The picture, O Cha- 


76 SACONTALA; OR, 


turica, is unfinished. — Go back to the painting room and bring the 
implements of thy art. 

Dams. Kind Madhavya, hold the picture while I obey the king. 

Dusum. No; I will hold it. 

| He takes the picture; and the Damsel goes out. 

Mipn. What else is to be painted ? 

Mrsk. | A/ide.] He defires, I presume, to add all those circum- 
stances which became the situation of his beloved in the hermitage. 

Dusnu. In this landscape, my friend, I wish to see represented the 
river Malini, with some amorous Flamingos on its green margin; far- 
ther back must appear some hills near the mountain Himalaya, sur- 
rounded with herds of Chamaras; and in the foreground, a dark 
spreading tree, with some mantles of woven bark suspended on its 
branches to be dried by the sunbeams; while a pair of black antelopes 
couch in its shade, and the female gently rubs her beautiful forchead 
on the horn of the male. | 

Mapn. Add what you please ; but, in my judgement, the vacant 
places should be filled with old hermits, bent, like me, towards the 
ground. 

Dusnu. [Mot attending to him.| Oh! I had forgotten that my be- 
loved herself must have some new ornaments, 

Mapn. What, I pray? 

M1ss. [| Afide.} Such, no doubt, as Ja a damsel bred; in a forest. 

Dusam. The artist had omitted a Sirisha flower with its peduncle 
fixed behind her soft ear, and its filaments waving over part of her 
check; and between her breasts must be placed a knot of delicate 
fibres, from the stalks of water lilies, like the rays of an autumnal moon. 
Mäpn. Why does the queen cover part of her face, as if she was 
afraid of something, with the tips of her fingers, that glow like the 
flowers of the Cuvalaya ? — Oh! I now perceive an impudent bee, that 
thief of odours who seems cager to sip honey from the lotos of her 
mouth. 1 
Dusnu. A bee! drive off the importunate insect. 
| Mapn. The king has supreme power over all offenders. 
Dusnu. 0 male bee, who approachest the loyely inhabitants of a 


THE FATAL RING. | 77 


flowery grove, why dost thou expose thyself to the pain of being 
rejected? —— See where thy female fits on a blossom, and, though 


thirsty, waits for thy return: without thee she will not taste its nectar. 
Miss. | Afide.| A wild, but apt, address ! 


Mavpn. The perfidy of male bees is proverbial. 

Dusk. [Angrily.] Shouldst thou touch, O bee, the lip of my 
darling, ruddy as a fresh leaf on which no wind has yet breathed, a 
lip from which I drank sweetness in the banquet of love, thou shalt, 
by my order, be imprisoned in the center of a lotos.——Dost thou still 
disobey me:? 

Mapn. How can he fail to obey, since you denounce fo severe a 
punishment ? —- | Hide, laughing.) He is stark mad with love and 
affliction ; whilst I, by keeping him company, shall be as mad as he 
without either. 

Dusk. After my positive injunction, art thou {till unmoved ? 

Misk. | A/de. | How does excels of passion alter even the wise ! 

Mäpn. Why, my friend, it is only a painted bee. 

M1ss. | A/ide.| Oh! I perceive his mistake : it shows the perfection 
of the art. But why does he continue muling ? 

Dusnu. What ill-natured remark was that?—Whilst I am enjoying 
the rapture of beholding her to whom my soul is attached, thou, cruel 
remembrancer, tellest me that it is only a picture. eeping. 

M1ss. | Ajide. | Such are the woes of a separated lover! He is on 
all sides entangled in sorrow. 

Dusam. Why do I thus indulge unremitted grief? That intercourse 
with my darling which dreams would give, 1s prevented by my con- 

tinued inability to repose; and my tears will not suffer me to view her 
distinctly even in this picture. | 


Misk. [Afide.] His misery acquits him entirely of having deserted 
her in his perfect senses. 


The DamsEL re-enters. 


Daus. As I was advancing, O king, with my box of pencils and 
colours — 


78 SACONTALA; OR, 


Dun. [Hastily.] What happened? 

Daus. It was forcibly seized by the queen Vasumati, whom her maid 
Pingalica had apprised of my errand ; and she said: “ I will myself 
66 A rer the casket to the son of my lord.” 

Mapn. How came you to be released ? 

Dams. While the queen's maid was disengaging the {skirt of her 
mantle, which had been caught by the branch of a thorny shrub, I 
stole away. 

Dusnu. Friend Madhavya, my great attention to Vasumati has made 
her arrogant; and she will soon be here: be it your care to conceal the 


picture. 
Mapn. [A/ide. I wish you would conceal it yourself. —| He takes 


the picture, and rises.| —| Aloud.) If, indeed, you will disentangle 
me from the net of your secret apartments, to which I am confined, 
and suffer me to dwell on the wall Meghach handa which encircles 
them, I will hide the picture in a place where none shall see it but 
Pigeons. He goes out. 

Mrss. | Afrde.| How honourably he keeps his former engagements, 
though his heart be now fixed on another object! 


4A WaRDER enters with à leaf. 


Warp. May the king prosper ! 

Dusnm. Warder, hast thou lately seen the queen Vasumati? 

Warp. I met her, O king; but when she perceived the leaf in my 
hand, she retired. 

Dusk. The queen distinguishes r time: she would not impede my 
publick business. 

Warp. The chief minister sends this message: © I have carefully 
« stated a case which has arisen in the city, and accurately committed 
« it to writing: let the king deign to consider it.” 

Dushu. Give me the leaf. Receiving it, and reading. |—< Be 
"mt presented at the foot of the king, that a merchant named Dhana- 
„ vnddhi, who had extensive commerce at sea, was lost in a late ship- 


THE FATAL RING. 79 


„ wreck : he had no child born; and has left a fortune of many mil- 
lions, which belong, if the king commands, to the royal treasury.” 
——| With sorrow.] Oh! how great a misfortune it is to die childless ! 
Yet with his affluence he must have had many wives :—let an inquiry 
be made whether any one of them is pregnant. 

Warp. I have heard that his wife, the daughter of an excellent 
man, named Sacetaca, has already performed the ceremonies usual on 
pregnancy. 

DusHm. The child, though unborn, has a title to his father's pro- 
perty.— o: bid the minister make my judgement publick. 

Wax. I obey. | Going. 

Dusnm. Stay awhile— 

Warp. | Returning.) I am here. 

Dusnm. Whether he had or had not left offspring, the estate should 
not have been forfeited. —— Let it be proclaimed, that whatever kins- 
man any one of my subje&s may lose, Duthmanta (excepting always 
the case of forfeiture for crimes) will supply, in tender affection, the 
place of that kinsman. | | 

Warp. The proclamation shall be made. — | He goes out. 


[Dus#ManTA continues meditating. | 
Re-enter W ARDER. 


O king! the royal decree, which proves that your virtues are awake 
after a long slumber, was heard with bursts of applause. 
Dust. [Sighing deeply.) When an illustrious man dies, alas, with- 
out an heir, his estate goes to a stranger ; and such will be the fate of 
all the wealth accumulated by the sons of Puru. 

Warp. Heaven avert the calamity! - | Goes out. 

Dusk. Wo 18 me! I am stripped of all the felicity which I once 
enjoyed. 

Misk. [Aside.] How his heart dwells on the idea of his beloved! 

| Dvsrm. My lawful wife, whom I basely deserted, remains fixed 1 in 


80 SACONTALA; OR, 


my soul: she would have been the glory of my family, and might have 
produced a son brilliant as the richest fruit of the teeming earth. 

Misk. [| 4jide.] She is not forsaken by all; and soon, I trust, will 
be thine. 

Daus. [Hide] What a change has the minister made in the king 
by sending hiv. that mischievous leaf! Behold, he is deluged with tears. 

Dusnu. Ah me! the departed souls of my ancestors, who claim a 
share in the funeral cake, which I have no son to offer, are apprehen- 
sive of losing their due honour, when Dushmanta shall be no more on 
earth: — who then, alas, will perform in our family those obsequies 
which the Veda prescribes ?—— My forefathers must drink, instead of a 
pure libation, this flood of tears, the only offering which a man who 
ces childless can make them. [ Weeping. 

Misk. | A/ide. | Such a veil obscures the king's eyes, that he thinks 
it total darkness, though a lamp be now shining brightly. 

Daus. Afflict not yourself immoderately : our lord is young; and 
when sons illustrious as himself shall be born of other queens, his an- 
cestors will be redeemed from their offences committed here below. 

Dusnm. [With agony.) The race of Puru, which has hitherto been 
fruitful and unblemished, ends in me; as the river Sereswati disappears 
in a region unworthy of her divine stream. | He faints. 

Dams. Let the king resume confidence. — | She supports him. 

MrsR. | Afde. | Shall I restore him? No; he will speedily be roused. 
I heard the nymph Devajanani consoling Sacontala in these words: 
As the gods delight in their portion of sacrifices, thus wilt thou 
* soon be delighted by the love of thy husband.” I go, therefore, to 
raise her spirits, and please my friend Menaca with an account of his 
virtues and his affection. [De rises aloft and disappears. 

Behind the scenes. A Brahmen must not be slain : save the life of a 
Brahmen. 

Dosh. | Reviving and listening. Hah } was not that the plaintive 
voice of Madhavya ? 

Daus. He has, probably, been caught with the picture in his hand 
by Pingalica and the other maids. 


SE, 
is 
We 
4 9 
* 
3 
4 
99 
* 
5 
. 
7 
258 
1 
gb 
Tug 
oF 
2 
— 
5 Wo. 
3 
3 
1 » 
8 
wa 
yg - 
„ 
. 
Fad 
* 


THE FATAL RING. $1 


Dvsum. Go, Chaturica, and reprove the queen in my name for not 
restraining her servants. 


Dams. As the king commands. [She goes out. 
Again behind the scenes. J am a Brahmen, and must not be put to death. 

Dusk. It is manifestly some Brahmen in great danger. — Hola! 
who is there? 


The old CHAMBERLAIN enters. 


CAM. What is the King's pleasure ? 
Dusnm. Inquire why the faint-hearted Madhavya crie: out fo 
piteously. 
Cram. I will know in an instant. | 
He goes out, and returns trembling. 
Dvusnm. Is there any alarm, Parvatayana ? 
Cram. Alarm enough! 
Dvusmm. What causes thy tremour ?—Thus do men tremble through 


age: fear shakes the old man's body, as the breeze agitates the leaves 
of the Pippala. 


CHAu. Oh! deliver thy friend. 
Dus fu. Deliver him ! from what * 
Cyan. From distress and danger. 
 Dvsnm. Speak more plainly. 
Can. The wall which looks to all quarters of the heavens, and is 
named, from the clouds which cover it, Meghach' handa—— 
Dusam. What of that? 


Cram. From the summit of that wall, the pinnacle of which is 


hardly attainable even by the blue-necked pigeons, an evil being, in- 


visible to human eyes, has violently carried away the friend of your 


childhood: 
Dusnm. | Starting up hastily.) What! are even my secret apartments 


infested by supernatural agents ?—Royalty is ever subje& to molestation. 
—A king knows not even the mischiefs which his own negligence 


daily and hourly occasions :—how then should he know what path his 


11. 


82 SAC ONTALA; OR, 


people are treading; and how should he correct their manners when 
his own are uncorrected? 

Behind the scenes. Oh, help! Oh, release me. 

Dus. | Liftening and advancing.” Fear not, my friend, fear no- 
thing —. 

Behind the scenes. Not fear, when a monster has caught me by the 
nape of my neck, and means to snap my backbone as he would snap 
a sugar-cane ! 


Dusnm. | Darting his eyes round. Hola! my bo 


A W aRDER enters with the king's bow and quiver. 


Warp. Here are our great hero's arms. 
[ Dushmanta ales his bow and an arrow. 
Behind the scenes. Here I stand ; and, thirsting for thy fresh blood, 
will slay thee struggling as a tyger slays a calf.— Where now is thy 
protector, Dushmanta, who grasps his bow to defend the opprefled ? 
Dvusnm. [Wrathfully.] The demon names me with defiance. —Stay, 
thou basest of monsters. —Here am I, and thou shalt not long exist. — 
| Raising his bow. | — Show the way, e to the stairs of the 


terrace. 


Cram. This way, great king, —— [ All go out hastily. 


The Scene changes to a broad Terrace. 
Enter DUsHMANTA. 


 Dvusnm. | Looking round.) Ah! the place is deserted. 

Behind the scenes. Save me, oh! save me. —T see thee, my friend, 
but thou canst not discern me, who, like a moule i in the claws of a 
cat, have no hope of life. 

Dusfu. But this arrow shall distinguish thee from thy foe, in spight 

of the magick which renders thee invisible ——Madhavya, stand firm; 


— — — — 322 —— — — — . = _- — ——— = —— > —————— 


THE FATAL RING. 33 


and thou, blood-thirsty fiend, think not of destroying him whom I 
love and will protect. —See, I thus fix a shaft which shall pierce thee, 
who deservest death, and shall save a Brahmen who deserves long life; 
as the celestial bird fips the milk, and leaves the water which has been 
mingled with it. He draws the bowstring. 


Enter MAxrTALI and MA DHAVYA. 


Mar. The god Indra has destined evil 1 to fall by thy sliafts: 
against them let thy bow be drawn, and cast on thy friends eyes bright 
with affection. 


Dusaum. [ Afonished, giving back his arms. J Oh! Matali, welcome; 
I greet the driver of Indra's car. 


Map. What! this cutthroat was putting 1 me to death, and thou 
greetest him with a kind welcome ! 

Mar. | Smiling. ] O king, live long and 3 Hear on = HA 
errand I am dispatched by the ruler of the firmament. 

Dusuu. I am humbly attentive. 

Mir. There is a race of Dinavas, the childre- ot Calanemi, whom 
it is found hard to subdue —— 

Dusk. This I have heard already from Nared. 

Mar. The god with an hundred sacrifices, unable to DA” that gi- 
gantick race, commissions thee, his approved friend, to affail them in 
the front of battle; as the sun with seven steeds despairs of overcom- 
ing the dark legions of night, and gives way to the moon, who easily 
scatters them. Mount, therefore, with me, the car of Indra, and, 
grasping chy bow, advance to assured victory. 

Dusnu. Such a mark of distinction from the prince of good genii 
honours me highly; ; but say why Po treated so roughly my poor 
friend Madhavya. | 

Mir. Perceiving that, for some 8 or 3 you were griev- 
ously afflicted, I was desirous to rouse your spirits by provoking you to 
wrath.—The fire blazes when wood 1s thrown on 1t; the serpent, when 


1 SAcONTALA; OR, 


provoked, darts his head against the assailant; and a man capable of 
acquiring glory, exerts himself when his courage is excited. 

Dusnm. [To Madhavya.] My friend, the command of Divespetir 
must instantly be obeyed: go, therefore, and carry the intelligence to 
my chief minister; saying to him in my name: Let thy wisdom 
secure my people from danger while this braced bow has a different 
« employment.” 

Mapn. I obey; but wish it could have been employed without 
assistance from my terror. He goes out. 
Mar. Ascend, great king. 

[ Dushmanta ascends, and Matali drives off the car. 


THE FATAL RING. 


ACT VIL 


DusHMANTA with MATALI in the car of Ix DRA, supposed to be above 
| the clouds. 


DusHmaANnTa. 


I AM sensible, O Matali, that, for having executed the commission 
which Indra gave me, I deserved not such a profusion of honours. 

Mar. Neither of you is satisfied. You who have conferred fo great 
a benefit on the god of thunder, consider it as a trifling act of devotion : 
whilst he reckons not all his kindness equal to the benefit conferred. 
Dust. There is no comparison between the service and the reward. 
— He surpassed my warmest expectation, when, before he dismissed 
me, he made me fit on half of his throne, thus exalting me before all 
the inhabitants of the Empyreum ; and smiling to see his son Jayanta, 
who stood near him, ambitious of the same honour, perfumed my bo- 
som with effence of heavenly sandal wood, throwing over my neck a 
garland of flowers blown in paradise. 

Mar. O king, you deserve all imaginable rewards from the sove— 
reign of good genii; whose empyreal seats have twice been disentangled 
from the thorns of Danu's race ; formerly by the claws of the man- 
lion, and lately by thy unerring shafts. 

Dos. My victory proceeded wholly from the auspices of the god; 
as on earth, when servants prosper in great enterprises, they owe their 
success to the magnificence of their lords. — Could Arun dispel the 
shades of night if the deity with a thousand beams had not placed him 
before the car of day? 

Mär. That case, indeed, is parallel. — | Driving slowly.) See, O 
king, the full exaltation of thy glory, which now rides on the back of 
| heaven! The delighted genii have been collecting, among the trees of 
life, those crimson and azure dyes, with which the celestial damsels 


86 SACONTALA; OR, 


tinge their beautiful feet; and they now are writing thy actions in 
verses worthy of divine melody. 

Dushu. | Modeftly.) In my transport, O Matali, after the rout of 
the giants, this wonderful place had escaped my notice. In what path 
of the winds are we now Jjourneying ? 

Mär. This is the way which leads along the triple river, heaven's 
brightest ornament, and causes yon luminaries to roll in a circle with 
diffused beams : it is the course of a gentle breeze which supports the 


floating forms of the gods ; and this path was the second step of Vishnu, 


when he confounded the proud Vali. 

Dus. My internal soul, which acts by exteriour organs, is filled 
by the fight with a charming complacency.—| Looking at the Wheels. 
We are now pasling, I guess, through the region of clouds. 

Mär. Whence do you form that conjecture ? 

Dusnm. The car itself instructs me that we are moving over clouds 
pregnant with showers ; for the circumference of its wheels disperses 
pellucid water; the horses of Indra sparkle with lightning; and I now 
see the warbling Chatacas descend from their nests on the summits of 
mountains. = 

Mär. It is even so; and in another moment you will be in the 
country which you govern. _ 

Dvsnn. ¶ Looking down.] Through the rapid, yet imperceptible, 
descent of the heavenly steeds, I now perceive the allotted station of 
men. — Astonishing prospe&! It is yet fo distant from us, that the 
low lands appear confounded with the high mountain tops; the trees 
erect their branchy shoulders, but seem leafless; the rivers look like 
bright lines, but their waters vanish ; and, at this instant, the globe of 
earth seems thrown upwards by some stupendous power. - 

Mar. | Looking with reverence on the earth.) How delightful is the 
abode of mankind O king, you saw distinctly. 

Dust. Say, Mätali, what mountain is that which, like an evening 
cloud, pours exhilarating streams, and forms a golden zone between 
the western and eastern feas? _ 


Mar. That, O king, is the mountain of Gandharvas, named He- 


macuta : the universe contains not a more excellent place for the suc- 


5 5 ” , 1 * 
F 1 > * - - 1 2 1 
EPC ²˙mÄ gn neon df. joan — A q . 
OP, CSE Eo 3 YT 9 * 1 et r IE RE OE i e 
— 


THE FATAL RING. - 97 


cessful devotion of the pious. There Casyapa, father of the immortals, 
ruler of men, son of Marichi, who sprang from the self-existent, resides 
with his consort Aditi, blessed in holy retirement. 

Dushu. | Devoutly.] This occasion of attaining good fortune must 
not be neglected: may I approach the divine pair, and do them com- 
plete homage ? 

Mär. By all means. — It is an excellent idea! — We are now de- 
scended on earth. 

Dusnu. [With wonder. | These chariot wheels yield no sound ; no 
dust rises from them ; and the descent of the car gave me no shock. 

Mär. Such is the difference, O king, between chy car and that of 
Indra! 

Dus hu. Where 1s the holy retreat of Miricha 3 

Mar. | Pointing. A little beyond that grove, where you see a pious 
Yogi, motionless as a pollard, holding his thick bushy hair, and fixing 


his eyes on the solar orb. — Mark; his body is half covered with a white 


ant's edifice made of raised clay; the skin of a snake supplies the place 
of his sacerdotal thread, and part of it girds his loins; a number of 
knotty plants encircle and wound his neck; and surrounding birds' 
nests almost conceal his shoulders. 
Dusam. I bow to a man of his austere devotion. 
Mr. [ Checking the reins.) Thus far, and enough. — We now enter 


the sanctuary of him who rules the world, and the groves which are 


watered by streams from celestial sources. 

Dusk. This asylum is more delightful than paradise itself: I could 
fancy myself bathing in a pool of nectar. 

Mar. | Stopping the car.] Let the king descend. 

Dusam. | Foyfully descending. ] How. canst thou leave the car? 


Mär. On such an occasion it will remain fixed: we may both leave 


b way, victorious hero, this way.——Behold the retreat of the 
truly pious. 


Dusku. I see with equal amazement both the pious and their awful 
retreat. It becomes, indeed, pure spirits to feed on balmy air in a 


| forest blooming with trees of life; to bathe in rills dyed yellow with 
. the golden dust of the lotos, and to fortify their 1 virtue in the myste- 


FF SAC ONTALA; OR, 


rious bath; to meditate in caves, the pebbles of which are unblemished 
gems ; and to restrain their passions, even though nymphs of exquisite 
beauty frolick around them: in this grove alone is attained the summit 
of true piety, to which other hermits in vain aspire. 

Mar. In exalted minds the desire of perfect excellence continually 
increases. Turning afide.|—Tell me, Vriddhasacalya, in what busi- 
ness is the divine son of Marichi now engaged? What sayst thou ?— 
Is he conversing with the daughter of Dacsha, who practises all the 
virtues of a dutiful wife, and is consulting him on moral questions ?— 
Then we must await his leisure. — Zo Dushmanta.]— Rest, O king, 


under the shade of this Asoca tree, whilst I announce thy arrival to the 
father of Indra. 


Dushu. As you judge right. Matali goes out. Dushmanta feels 
his right arm throb.| Why, O my arm, dost thou flatter me with a 
vain omen ?——My former happiness is lost, and misery only remains. 

Behind the scenes. Be not fo restless: in every situation thou showest 
thy bad temper. 

Dusnm. [ Listening.) Hah ! this 1s no place, surely, for a malignant 
disposition.— Who can be thus rebuked ?—| Looking with surprise. 
I see a child, but with no childish countenance or strength, whom two 
female anchorites are endeavouring to keep in order; while he forcibly 
pulls towards him, in rough play, a lion's whelp with a torn mane, 


who seems just dragged from the half-sucked nipple of the lioness ! 


A little Boy and two female ATTENDANTS are di iseovered, as described 
I the ling. 


Boy. Open thy mouth, lion's whelp, that I may count thy teeth. 

FIRST ATTEN. Intractable child! Why dost thou torment the wild 
animals of this forest, whom we cherish as if they were our own off- 
spring ?——Thou seemest even to sport in anger. —Aptly have the 
hermits named thee Servademana, since thou tamest all creatures. 
Dusym. Ah! what means it that my heart inclines to this boy as 


THE FATAL RING. 8g 
if he were my own son ?—| Meditating.] Alas! I have no son; and 
the reflection makes me once more soft-hearted. | 

SECOND ATTEN. The lioness will tear thee to pieces if thou release 
not her whelp. 

Boy. [ Smiling.) Oh! I am greatly afraid of her to be sure ! 

He bites his lip, as in defiance of her. 

Dusnm. | Afide, amazed.) The child exhibits the rudiments of 
heroick valour, and looks like fire which blazes from the addition of 
dry fuel. 

Fixs T ATTEN. My beloved child, set at liberty this young prince 
of wild beasts; and I will give thee a prettier plaything. 

Boy. Give it first. Where is it? Stretebing out his hand. 

Dusnu. | Afide, gazing on the child's palm. | What! the very palm 
of his hand bears the marks of empire ; and whilst he thus eagerly 
extends it, shows its lines of exquisite network, and glows like a lotos 
expanded at early dawn, when the ruddy splendour of 1 its petals hides 
all other tints in obscurity. 

SkcoND ATTEN. Mere words, my Suvrita, will not 1 him.— 
Go, I pray, to my cottage, where thou wilt find a plaything made for 
the hermit's child, Sancara: it is a peacock of earthen ware e 
with rich colours. 

FIRST ATTEN. I vill bring it speedily. [He goes out. 

Boy. In the mean time I will play with the young lion. 

SECOND ATTEN. | Looking at him with a nile.) Let him go, I en- 
treat thee. 

Dusnu. [Afide.] I feel the tenderest affection for this unmanageable 
child. Sighing.] How sweet mult be the delight of virtuous fathers, 
when they soil their bosoms with dust by lifting up their playful chil- 
dren, who charm them with inarticulate prattle, and show the white 
blossoms of their teeth, while they laugh innocently at every rifling 
occurrence | 

SECOND ATTEN. [Raifo ng in finger." What! dost thou thow no 
attention to me ? —[ Looking round.] Are any of the hermits near ? 


——| Seeing Dushmanta. | Oh! let me request you, gentle stranger, to 


12 


90 SAcONxrTALA; OR, 
release the lion's whelp, who cannot disengage himself from the grasp 
of this robust child. 

Dusnu. I will endeavour. — | Appr oaching the Boy, and failing 7 
O thou, who art the son of a pious anchorite, how canst thou dishonour 
thy father, whom thy virtues would make happy, by violating the 
rules of this consecrated forest ? It becomes a black serpent only, to 
infest the boughs of a fragrant sandal tree. | The Boy releases the lion. 

SECOND Arena I thank you, courteous guest ;—but he is not the 
{on of an anchorite. 

Dvusnm. His actions, indeed, which are conformable to lis robust- 
ness, indicate a different birth; but my opinion arose from the sanctity 
of the place which he inhabits. — | Taking the Boy by the hand.] — 
[ Afide.] Oh! since it gives me such delight merely to touch the hand 
of this child, who 1s the hopeful scion of a family unconnected with 
mine, what rapture must be felt by the fortunate man from whom he 
sprang ? 

SECOND ATTEN. | Gazing on them alternately.] Oh a 

 Dvusnm. What has raised your wonder ? 

SECOND ATTEN. The astonishing resemblance between the child and 
you, gentle stranger, to whom he bears no relation. —It surprised me 
also to see, that although he has childish humours, and had no former 
acquaintance with you, yet your words have restored him to his natural 
good temper. 

'Dusnm. | Raising the Boy to his bosom. | Holy matron, if he be not 
the son of a hermit, what then is the name of his family ? 

 SEconD ATTEN. He is descended from Puru. 
| Dvsmw. [Ajide.] Hah! thence, no doubt, springs his disposition, 
and my affection for him. —[Serting him down.|—|\ Aloud.) It is, I know, 
an established usage among the princes of Puru's race, to dwell at first 
in rich palaces with stuccoed walls, where they protect and cherish the 
world, bit in the decline of life to seek humbler mansions near the 
roots of venerable trees, where hermits with subdued passions practise 
austere devotion. —I wonder, however, that this boy, who moves like 
a god, could have been born of a mere mortal. 


SECOND ATTEN. Affable stranger, your wonder will cease when you 


THE FATAL RING. 91 


know that his mother is related to a celestial nymph, and brought him 
forth in the sacred forest of Casyapa. 

Duszu. | Afide.] I am transported. —This is a fresh ground of hope. 
—— [ Aloud.) What virtuous monarch took his excellent mother by 
the hand ? 

StconD ATTEN. Oh! I must not give celebrity to the name of a 
king who deserted his lawful wife. 

Dusnx. | Afrde.) Ah! she means me. Let me now ask the name 
of the sweet child's mother. ¶ Meditating.] But it is against good 


manners to inquire concerning the wife of another man. 


The FIRST ATTENDANT re-enters with a toy. 


FIRST ATTEN. Look Servademana, look at the beauty of this bird, 
Saconta lavanyam. 

Boy. | Looking eagerly round. ] Sacontalä! Oh, where is my beloved 
mother? Both Attendants laugh. 

FIRST ATTEN. He tenderly loves his mother, and was deceived by 
an equivocal phrase. 

SECOND ATTEN. My child, she meant only the beautiful shape and 
colours of this peacock. 

Dusnx. [Af de. Is my Sacontala then his mother ? Or has that 
dear name been given to some other woman ?—— This conversation 
resembles the fallacious appearance of water in a desert, which ends in 
bitter disappointment to the stag parched with thirst. 
Bov. I shall like the peacock if it can run and fly ; not else. 

[I He tales it. 
FirsT ATTEN. | Looking round in confusion. | Alas, the child's amu- 
let is not on his wrilt. 
Dusnu. Be not alarmed. It was dropped while he was playing with 


5 the lion: I see it, and will put it into your hand. 


Both. Oh1 beware of touching it. 
Finsr Arrkx. Ah! he has actually taken it up. 
5 [They both gaze with Surprise 07 each ather. 


92 SACONTALA; OR, 


Dusnu. Here it is; but why would you have restrained me from 
touching this bright gem? 

S8 Sxcond ArTEN. Great monarch, this divine amulet has a wonderful 

power, and was given to the child by the son of Marichi, as soon as 

the sacred rites had been performed after his birth: whenever it fell on 


the ground, no human being but the father or mother of this boy could 
have touched it unhurt. 


DusxMm. What if a stranger had taken it? 

FIRST ATTEN. It would have become a serpent and wounded him. 

Dusnu. Have you seen that consequence on any similar occasion ? 

Both. Frequently. 

Dusnm. | Mith transport.) J may then exult on the completion of 
my ardent desire. He embraces the child. 

SECOND ATTEN. Come, Suvrita, let us carry the delightful intelli- 
gence to Sacontala, whom the harsh duties of a separated wife have fo 
long oppressed. [ The Attendants go out. 

Boy. Farewel; I must go to my mother. 

Dusuu. My darling son, thou wilt make her N by going to her 
with me. 

Boy. Dushmanta is my father; and you are not Dushmanta. 

Dus nu. Even thy denial of me gives me delight. 


Sacontala enters in mourning apparel, with her long hair twisted in a 


Angle braid, and flowing down ber back. 


Sac. ¶Hside.] Having heard that my child's amulet has proved its 
divine power, I must either be strangely diffident of my good fortune, 
or that event which Misraces! predicted has actually happened. 
[ Advancing. 
Dushu. [Yith a mixture FE joy and sorrow.) Ah do I see the in- 
comparable Sacontala clad in sordid weeds ? — Her face is emaciated 
by the performance of austere duties; one twisted lock floats over her 
shoulder ; and with a mind perfectly pure, she supports the long ab- 
scence of her husband, whose unkindness exceeded all bounds _ 


THE FATAL RING. | 93 


Sac. | Seeing him, yet doubting.] Is that the son of my lord grown 
pale with penitence and affliction ?—If not, who is it, that sullies with 
his touch the hand of my child, whose amulet should have preserved 
him from such indignity ? 

Boy. | Going hastily to Sacontala.] Mother, here is a stranger who 
calls me son. 

Dusam. Oh! my best beloved, I have treated thee cruelly ; but my 
cruelty is succeeded by the warmest affe&ion ; and I implore your re- 
membrance and forgiveness. 

Sac. [ Ajide.] Be confident, O my heart! — [ Aloud.) I shall be 
most happy when the king's anger has passed away. — Ale. This 
must be the son of my lord. 

Dvusam. By the kindness of Heaven, O loveliest, of ths sex, thou 
standest again before me, whose memory was obscured by the gloom 
of fascination ; as the star Rohini at the end of an eclipse rejoins her 
beloved moon. 

Sac. May 5 8 be— [ She bursts into tears. 

Dushu. My darling, though the word victorious be suppressed by 
thy weeping, yet I must have victory, since I see thee again, though 
with pale lips, and a body unadorned. 

Boy. What man is this, mother? 

Sac. Sweet child, ask the GNRy, who presides over the fortunes 
of us both. | She weeps. 

Dusnm. O my only beloved, banish from thy mind my cruel deser- 
tion of thee.—A violent phrensy overpowered my foul. —Such, when 
the darkness of illusion prevails, are the actions of the best-intentioed - 
as a blind man, when a friend binds his head with a wreath of !101we:s, 
mistakes it for a twining snake, and foolishly rejects it. 

[He falls at her feet. 

Sac. Rise, my husband, oh! rise — My happiness has been long 
interrupted ; ; but joy now succeeds to affliction, since the son of my 
lord still loves me.—| He rises.] How was the remembrance of this 
unfortunate woman restored to the mind of my lord's son? _ 

 DusHm. When the dart of misery shall be wholly extracted from 
my bosom, I will tell you all ; but fince the anguish of my foul has in 


94 SACONTALA; OR, 


part ceased, let me first wipe off that tear which trickles from thy de- 
licate eye-lash ; and thus efface the memory of all the tears which my 
delirium has made thee shed. [He firetches out his hand. 


Sac. [Wiping off her tears, and seeing the ring on his finger. Ah! 
is that the fatal ring ? 


Dusam. Ves; by the surprising recovery of it my memory was re- 
stored. 


Sac. Its influence, indeed, has been great; since it has brought 


back the lost confidence of my husband. 


Dusnm. Take it then, as a beautiful plant receives a flower from 
the returning season of joy. 


Sac. I cannot again trust it.— Let it be worn by the son of my lord. 


MarTALI enters. 


Mart. By the will of Heaven the king has happily met his beloved 


wife, and seen the countenance of his little son. 


Dushu. It was by the company of my friend that my defire at- 


tained maturity.——But say, was not this fortunate event previously 
known to Indra ? 


Mr. [| Smiling. What is unknown to the gods? But come: the 
divine Maricha desires to see thee. 

Dus hu. Beloved, take our fon by the hand; and let me present 
you both to the father of immortals. 

Sac. I really am ashamed, even in thy presence, to approach the 
deities. 

Dusnu. It is highly proper on so happy an occasion — Come, 1 
entreat thee. "Lo all advance. 


| The Scene is withdrawn, and Casvara is d iscovered on a throne con- 
versing with ADITI. 


Cas. Pointing to OY king. | That, O daughter of Dacsha, is the 


THE FATAL RING. 95 


hero who led the squadrons of thy son to the front of battle, a sove- 
reign of the earth, Dushmanta ; by the means of whose bow the thun- 
der-bolt of Indra (all its work being accomplished) is now a mere orna- 
ment of his heavenly palace. 

Apr1. He bears in his form all the marks of exalted majesty. 

Mar. [Zo Dushmanta.] The parents of the twelve Adityas, O king, 
are gazing on thee, as on their own offspring, with eyes of affection. 
Approach them, illustrious prince. 

Dosh. Are those, O Matali, the divine pair, sprung from Marichi 
and Dacsha ?—Are those the grand-children of Brahma, to whom the 
self-existent gave birth in the beginning; whom inspired mortals pro- 
nounce the fountain of glory apparent in the form of twelve suns ; 
they who produced my benefactor, the lord of a hundred sacrifices, 
and ruler of three worlds ? 

Mar. Even they —— | Proftrating himself with Dushmanta.]—Great 
beings, the king Dushmanta, who has executed the commands of your 
son Vasava, falls humbly before your throne. 

Cas. Continue long to rule the world. 

Abl. Long be a warrior with a car unshattered in combat. 

[ Sacontala and her son prostrate themselves. 

Cas. Daughter, may thy husband be like Indra! May thy son re- 
semble Jayanta And mayst thou (whom no benediQtion could better 
suit) be equal in prosperity to the daughter of Puloman ! 

Apr. Preserve, my child, a constant unity with thy lord: and may 
this boy, for a great length of years, be the ornament and joy of you 
both !——Now be seated near us. [| They all fit down. 
Cas. { Looking at them by turns.] Sacontala is the model of excel- 
lent wives; her son is dutiful ; and thou, O king, hast three rare ad- 
vantages, true piety, abundant wealth, and active virtue. 
Dusk. O divine being, having obtained the former object of my 
most ardent wishes, I now have reached the summit of earthly happi- 
ness through thy favour, and thy benizon will ensure its permanence. 
—— First appears the flower, then the fruit; first clouds are collected, 
then the shower falls: such is the regular course of causes and effects; 
and thus, when thy indulgence preceded, felicity generally followed. 


96 SACONTALA; OR, 


Mar. Great indeed, O king, has been the kindness of the prime- 
val Brähmens. 

Dusk. Bright son of Marichi, this thy handmaid was married to 
me by the ceremony of Gandharvas, and, after a time, was conducted 
to my palace by some of her family; but my memory having failed 
through delirium, I rejected her, and thus committed a grievous of- 
fence against the venerable Canna, who is of thy divine lineage: after- 
wards, on seeing this fatal ring, I remembered my love and my nup- 
tials ; but the whole transaction yet fills me with wonder. — My soul 
was confounded with strange ignorance that obscured my senses ; as if 
a man were to see an elephant marching before him, yet to doubt 
what animal it could be, till he discovered wy the traces of his large 
feet that it was an elephant. 


Cas. Cease, my son, to charge thyself with an offence committed 


ignorantly, and, therefore, innocently. ——Now hear me 


Dusnu. I am devoutly attentive. 

Cas. When the nymph Menaca led Sacontala from the place where 
thy desertion of her had afflicted her soul, she brought her to the 
palace of Aditi; and I knew, by the power of meditation on the Su- 
preme Being, that thy forgetfulness of thy pious and lawful consort 
had proceeded from the imprecation of Durvasas, and that the charm 
would terminate on the fight of thy ring. 

Dusk. [| Afide.| My name then is cleared from infamy. 

Sac. Happy am I that the son of my lord, who now recognises me, 
denied me through ignorance, and not with real aversion.——The ter- 
rible imprecation was heard, I suppole, when my mind was intent on 


a different object, by my two beloved friends, who, with extreme af- 


fection, concealed it from me to spare my feelings, but advised me at 


parting to show the ring if my husband should have forgotten me. 


Cas. | Turning to Sacontala.] Thou art apprised, my daughter, of 


the whole truth, and must no longer resent the behaviour of thy lord. 


— He re »1cted thee when his memory was impaired by the force of a 


charm; and when the gloom was dispelled, his conjugal affection 


revived; as a mirror whose surface has been sullied, reflects no image; 
but exhibits perfe& resemblances when its polish has been restored. 


THE FATAL RING. 97 


Dusk. Such, indeed, was my situation. | 

Cas. My son Dushmanta, hast thou embraced thy child by Sacon- 
tala, on whose birth I myself performed the ceremonies prescribed in 
the Veda ? 

Dusnu. Holy Marichi, he is the glory of my house. 

Cas. Know too, that his heroick virtue will raise him to a dominion 
extended from sea to sea: before he has passed the ocean of mortal life, 
he shall rule, unequalled in combat, this earth with seven peninsulas; 
and, as he now is called Servademana, because he tames even in child- 
hood the fiercest animals, so, in his riper years, he shall acquire the 
name of Bhereta, because he shall sustain and nourish the world. 

Dusk. A boy educated by the son of Marichi, must attain the 
summit of greatness. 

Api. Now let Sacontali, who is restored to happiness, convey intel- 
ligence to Canna of all these events: her mother Menaca is in my 
family, and knows all that has passed. 

Sac. The goddess proposes what I most ardently with. 

Cas. By the force of true piety the whole scene will be present to 
the mind of Canna. 

Dusnu. The devout sage must be still excessively indignant at my 
frantick behaviour. 

Cas. | Meditating.] Then let him hear from me the delightful news, 

that his foster-child has been tenderly received by her husband, and 
that both are happy with the little warriour who sprang from them. — 
Hola! who is in waiting? 


Poi enters. 


pur Great being, Jam here. | 
Cas. Hasten, Gölava, through the light air, and in my name inform 
the venerable Canna, that Sacontala has a charming son by Dushmanta, 
whose affection for her was restored with his remembrance, on the ter- 
mination of the spell raised by the angry Durvasas. 

Pur. As the divinity commands. [ He goes out. 


98 SACONTALA, &c. 


Cas. My son, reascend the car of Indra with thy consort and child, 
and return happy to thy imperial seat. 

Dusnm. Be it as Marichi ordains. | 

Cas. Henceforth may the god of the atmosphere with copious rain 
give abundance to thy affectionate subjects; and mayst thou with fre- 
quent sacrifices maintain the 'Thunderer's friendship! By numberless 
interchanges of good offices between you both, may benefits recipro- 
cally be conferred on the inhabitants of the two worlds ! 


Dusnm. Powerful being, I will be studious, as far as J am able, to 
attain that felicity. 


Cas. What other favours can I bestow on thee ? 
Dusnm. Can any favours exceed those already bestowed ? — Let 


every king apply himself to the attainment of happiness for his people; 
let Sereswati, the goddess of liberal arts, be adored by all readers of 


the Veda; and may Siva, with an azure neck and red locks, eternally 


potent and self-existing, avert from me the pain of another birth in 
this perishable world, the seat of crimes and of punishment ! 


[ All go out. 


Ms e 
3 3 


* 
Wu; 
P 

” 


Th. Munter has 70 A that the fecond, third, and fourth fheets of 
72 frublication are exceed:mgliy injured. by the Hotpreffer. 


_ + bs * : „ my 
V a J CY ” * WY - 

: ug” is 8 5 . . * 

1 1 


: 
| : 
” * 
N — 
* 
j 
4 i i 
| : 
10 
1 : 
1 
U * 5 
: : : | | 
| R 
- 
1 
11 
; | 
1 n ! 
| ' 
bo C 
rn TS 
- 


2 * * G E.” * 1 , 
n NETS do om... * s * . *
