Kalila and Dimna; or, The Fables of Bidpai (Wyndham Knatchbull (trans.), 1819)
==========================================================
The Arabic book of animal fables — the Panchatantra's great westward journey through Persia — in Rev. Wyndham Knatchbull's 1819 English translation from the Arabic (Oxford), the first English rendering of the Arabic Kalila wa Dimna. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/kalilaanddimnao00almgoog).

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


I


KALILA AND DIMNA,


OB


THE FABLES OF BIDPAI.


^^KALILA AND DIMNA//


OR


THE FABLES OF BIDPAL


TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC.


BY THE

REV. WYNDHAM JPTATCHBULLi A.M.

rXLLOW OF ALL 80UL8 COLLEOE, OXFORD, AND RBCTOIl OF WXSTBERE

IN THK COUMTT OF KENT.


OXFORD,

PRINTED BY W. BAXTER j

FOR J. PARKER; AND MESSRS. LONGMAN, HURST, REES, O^ME,

AND BROWN, LONDON.

1819.


a7^vv.<r


t^


t
t


I

i


TO


BROOK TAYLOR, ESQ.

HIS majesty's envoy extbaordinart and minister

PLENIPOTENTIARY AT THE COURT OF WURTEMBERG.

jTHIS small volume was begmi and finished
whilst I was residing abroad, in a situation near
your person, which your partiality and friend-
ship procured for me: I have therefore taken
the liberty of prefixing your name to a Work,
which will ever be associated in my recollec-
tion with a gratefiil sense of the kindness I
experienced from you during the years which
we passed together on the Continent.

WYNDHAM KNATCHBULL.

All Souls^ December, 1818.


i


J


PREFACE.


M. SILVESTRE DE SACY published
in Paris in 1816, after a laborious collation
of different manuscripts, the Arabic text of
the very remarkable work, known by the
name of Kalila and Dimna, or the Fables of
Bidpai ; whose appearance in print is cal-
culated to render important services not
only to the study of the Arabic tongue,
but to any researches which may be cout
nected with the literary history of the
Eastern nations.

In offering to the public an English
translation of this invaluable production,
which may be placed by the side of the
most renowned treasures of oriental lite-

b2


VIU


rature, of which our libraries are in po
session^ I have thought it possible to op<
a source of considerable amusement, if n<
of great intellectual enjoyment, to persoi
who are strangers to the languages of tl
East; the present publication therefore bein
professedly undertaken with a view to il
gratification of the English reader, I sha
content myself here with a few cursor
remarks.

It has been somewhere observed by
very elegant writer, Mr. Dugald Stewaii
(if I mistake not in his Elements of th
Philosophy of the Human Mind,) that tb
effect of a literal translation of a work <
genius is like that of the figures which wi
see when we look at the wrong side of i
beautiful piece of tapestry. It will na
then, I trust, be attributed to laziness oi
caprice, or be regarded as a defect in tb<
performance, if with the intention of doing


IX


all the justice in my power to the-iimu-
m^aUe beauties of my model, I have
allowed myself in the translation a certain
range and freedom of expression, wherever
too close an imitation would have been in
some passages offensive to a modem ear,
in others displeasing and unsatisfactory,
and have given to the whole composition
a tone very little corresponding with the
idiom and resources of the English lan-
guage. And though in many instances it
would have been impossible to express the
sententious brevity of the Arabic with strict
fiddity, without betraying a great want of
skill in the use of my materials, and sacri-
ficing to a pretension to verbal accuracy
and precision every consideration of taste ;
still it has been my endeavour to make the
features of resemblance betwieen the ori-
ginal and the translation sufficiently strik-
ing, not to be accused of having forgotten
the duties of a translator.


It would be foreign to my plan to en
upon any discussion of the various quests
to which this ancient work has at differ
times given rise in the learned world:
beg leave to refer the reader, who desi
to know all that can be said on this he
to the dissertation prefixed to the Ara
text by M. de Sacy : and I shall concli
this short preface by subjoining the Ta
of Contents, which in the original is to
found at the end of the third chapter*


Chap. I. Preface of AH the son of Alschah Far&i.

Chap. II. The mission of Barzouyeh to India in sea
of the Book called Kalila and Dimna.

Chap. III. The subject-matter of the Book of Ki
and Dimna, from the pen of Almokaffa.

Chap. IV. The History of Barzouyeh the Physical
composed by Buzurdjmihr the son of Bakht^gai

Chap. V. The Lion and the Bull, or the emblem
two friends whom a liar contrives to disunite.


"A


XI


Chap. VI. Investigation of the conduct together jifnth
the defence of Dimna.

Chap. VII. The Ring-dove, or the emblem of sincere
firiends.


Chap. X. The Monk and the Weasel, or the danger
of haste in an afiair with which we are but imper-
fectly acquainted.

Chap. XL The Rat and the Cat, or the emblem of a
person who has a great many enemies.

Chap XII. The King and the Bird, or the emblem of
revengeful persons who are unworthy of trust.

Chap. XIII. The Lion and the Jackal, or the emblem
of a man who wishes to be reconciled with one
whom he has ill treated.

Chap. XIV. The History of Iladh, Beladh, Irakht, and
the wise Kibarioun.

Chap. XV, The Lioness and the Horseman, or the
emblem of a man who abstains from injuring an-
other on account of the evil consequences to him-
self.


1


t


Chap. VIIL The Owls and the Crows, or the danger 1 J '
of being deceived by an enemy. *"

Chap. IX. The. Monkey and the Tortoise, or the -; ;.,
emblem of a person who having obtained what
he wanted loses it again.


xu


Chap. XVL The Monk and his Guest, or the embi
of a man who forsakes one condition of life in or
to embrace another.

Chap. XVII. The Traveller and the Goldsmith,
the emblem of a man who bestows his favours
an unworthy object.

Chap. XVIII. The King's Son and his Companions,
the emblem of fate and of the inevitable com
quences of the divine decrees.

All Souls> December, 1818.


J


THE PREFACE OlP ALI, THE l30N 01^ ALSCHAH

FARESt.

Alexander, havki^ orercotEie the kings
of the West^ turned kis arm^ towards the East,
irhere, altet a ^rie^ of military operations, he
either conquered at the head of his troops the
sovetieigns of Persia and of tiie neighbouring
countries who had resii^ted him, or received the
^ubmisi^ion of thoM who were unwilling to risk
the issue of a battle.

Afterwards directing his course towards
China, he in his march summoned Four, at
that time king of India, and rra^wned for his
wisdom and great power, to declare himself his
vassal ; but Four on the contrary made imme-
diate preparations for resistance, with the fixed
determination to prevent if possible the loss
of his crown. He assembled the flower of his
nobiMty, and a number of elephants and horses
that had been trained to war, and made the
necessary dispositions for placing on foot a
formidable force of cavalry and mf^mtry. When

B


the news of the preparations which Four had
made reached Alexander, who till then had Ex-
perienced little or no opposition from the kings
of the countries through which he had passed,
he was afraid that some sudden check or defeat
might tarnish the glory of his arms, if he advanced
with too much precipitation and haste ; he there-
fore determined to call to his aid the experience
which he had acquired, and to employ stratagem
to secure his success. For this purpose he b^an
by ordering an intrenchment to be formed round
his camp, that m^ht secure him from any attack
whilst he was concerting measures for his future
operations, and gave directions to the astrologers
to assemble and choose the most favourable day
for carrying his ulterior plans into execution:
in the mean time he ordered the artificers in his
train, many of whom he had taken from the
different cities on his march, to make hollow
figures of brass, representing horses and men,
caparisoned and equipped in a manner to give
them the appearance of regular cavalry, and
to be filled with naphtha and sulphur, and placed
in front of his line, intending that the combuisti-
ble materials should at the very commencement
of the battle be set on fire. The artificers used


all possible diligence in finishing their work;
which being accomplished, Alexander sent a
second summons to Four, which was answered
by the same tone of defiance, and continued
preparations for resistance ; and accordingly the
dispositions were made in the respective armies
to commence the attack. Four had placed his
el^hants in the fi'ont rank, which, advancing to
meet the figures of brass which were simultane-
ously pushed on, no sooner touched them with
their trunks, than, being rendered fiirious by the
heat, they threw down those who were upon their
backs, and then suddenly turning round, took
to flight, and trod under their feet and crushed
all they met In this manner the army of
Four was thrown into the greatest disorder; and
Alexander, whilst he was pursuing the fiigitives
at the head of his men, cried out, O king of
India, have compassion upon your army, and
do not expose it to inevitable destruction; for
it is cowardly in a sovereign to sacrifice his
troops unnecessarily, when it is in his power by
risking his own person to save them from anni*
hilation ; therefore come forth, and let us decide
by single combat to whom the victory belongs.
Four did not hesitate a moment to accept the

b2


cballanget and the two champions advani
towards each other ; and the fight began, s
Was continued during the greatest part of
day, without any yisible advantage on eit
side, each putting in practice all the skill t
he piossessedy to get the better of his antagon
At Imigth Alexander, being wearied by-
exertions which he had made, almost despai
of success, when on a sudden his army, wfa
had received his orders to that effect, raise
loud cry, whidi Four supposing to be an atti
upon his camp, which had been taken by tk
prise, turned round to convince himself of
cause of the noise which had alarmed him ; i
.Alexander, taking advantage of the mom
when be was off his guard, struck him a bit
whidi made him fall from his horse, and xi
a second laid him dead at his feet.

The Indian army, exasperated by what 1
happened to their king, renewed the coml
with a determination to perish nobly in
struggle ; but findiiig at length all resistance
be ineffi^tual, they accepted the terms wh
the conqueror offered them : upon which Al
ander took possession of the country, and h
boig established a government conformable


his views erf a^randisement^ and the conditioiis
which he had accorded to the vaaqiiished, he
placed it in the hands of one of his officers on
whom he could depend, and whom he invested
with sovereign authority in the room of Four^
and he set out on the execution of the other
plans of conquest which he haA fiHined. But
he had scarcely withdrawn his troops, when the
people of the country, growing impatient under
the weight of the yoke which he had imposed
upon them, determined to shake off all obe^
dience to the viceroy whom he had appointed,
regarding it both as dishonourable^ and an in-
sufferable hardship, to be obliged to submit to
the authority of a stranger, who shewed by his
humiliating and contemptuous treatment of them
how little he was interested in their welfare and
prosperity: they therefore deposed him, and
chose for their sovereign a descendant of their
ancient kings, whose name was Dabscbelim.
Now Dabschelim, as soon as he felt that his
power was firmly established, and that fwtune
seemed to have chosen him for her favourite,
threw off the mask with which be had for some
time concealed his real character, and aban-
doned himself to every kind of excess and enor-

b3


mity. He made hostile and unprovoked i
cursions into the territories of the neighbourii
princes, whilst his own subjects experienced tl
caprices and injustice of the most arbitrary ai
insolent behaviour; and notwithstanding tl
hardships to which every class of the peop
was exposed from his course of life, and tl
manifest injury which was done to the re
interests of the nation, any increase of goo
fortune or any successful enterprise only offere
an additional incitement to acts of oppressii
and tyrannical power.

It happened that during this period there ws
amongst the Brahmins a philosopher name
Bidpai, a man of so distinguished a reputatio
for vrisdom, that his opinion was asked in a
matters of great dilfficulty . Bidpai, after he ha
been a long time a silent vritness of the despoti
government of the king, formed a resolution t
endeavour to draw him off from the course h
was pursuing, to sentiments of moderation am
justice. For this purpose he assembled his dis
ciples, and spoke to them in the following terms
I have been long reflecting on the continuec
bad conduct of Dabschelim, which is a source o
so much oppression and hardship to his subjects


and wkh to consult you on the expediency of
taking some measures, which may put a stop to
the evil. If at any time we, who bear the name
of philosophers, appear to shut our eyes to the
faults of sovereigns, it is with a view of watching
for a favourable opportunity of leading them
back into the path of honour and virtue : and if
we fail, or are remiss in this essential point of our
duty, we expose ourselves to unpleasant conse*
quences from our easy compliance, and to the
risk of being taxed by foolish men with exhibit-
ing in our conduct a greater degree of folly than
themselves. I do not therefore think it advis-
able for i|s to leave the country, and abandon the
king to the uncontrolled sway of his evil and
vicious propensities, for this would cast suspi-
cions upon our wisdom ; at the same time I am
aware, that it will be impossible for us to reckon
upon any assistance which we may be able to
procure from others, and to oppose him by open
force, or to rely upon any thing but our remon-
strances for success; for the first symptoms
which he perceives in us of any resistance to his
will and authority would, notwithstanding the
reputation which we enjoy in the country, be as
certainly destructive to us, as the enmity of fero-

b4


8

cious beasts or yenomous reptiles to those w
are near them ; tmd it is tha duty of a philo(
pher to have a regard to his own preservatic
in taking precautions againat the occurrence
events which may be attended with d<mger
his personal safety : and I have heard it repeat
of a certain philosopher, that in the instructio
which he gave to bis pupils, be compared ti
situation of a man, who is compelled to as$
ciate with persons of bad character, to that oi
sailor, who, though in no danger of drowning,
still never free from the perils of the ocean ; ai
the phUosopher who increases the difficulties
the situation into which be may have be<
thrown, by courting the dangers which it w;
in his power to avoid, is inferior in sagacity
the irrational animals, whose instinct wan
them of any impending ill, and directs them u]
eningly to the pi^eservation of thefr lives. I wi
therefore desirous of consulting you on the pi^
sent occasion, thinking that I oould not do heito
in so weighty an affair than seek the advice an
aid of persons, with whom I am united by tk
of affinity as well aa by the intimacy which bs
sprung up from the relations in which we Stan
to each other : for the saisible man, foreseein


the inconvenience of relying solely on his own
resources, often accpmpUshes by the judicious
and artfiil combination of the multiplied mate-
rials which he employs, what he never could
have brought to pa«s by more violent means*
Hie truth of this maxim is exemplified in the
conduct of the lark, ^who had made her jiest in
the road, which an elephant was in the habit of
passing when he went to drink. The elephant,
going one day as usual to quench his thirst, trod
upon the nest of the lark, and broke the eggs,
and destroyed the unhatched young ones which
they contained ; upon which the lark, who had
no doubt by whom the injury had been done,
mounted up into the air, and, hovering over the
head of the elephant, cried out in a lamentable
tone, O king, is it out of contempt, and the little
respect which you entertain for your ndghbour,
that you have broken my eggs^ and destroyed
my unhatched brood ? which the elephant
acknowledging to be the case, she flew away,
and went to the assembly of the birds, and com-
plained to them of the injustice of which the
dephant had been guilty; but they excused
their refusal to interfere in her fevour, by alleg-
ing their inability to contend with the elephant.


10

Upon this the lark addressed herself more ps

cularly to the magpies and crows, and enga

them to peck out the eyes of the elephant, wl

she was preparing another snare for him ; ;

the magpies and the crows continued striking

elephant's eyes with their beaks, till they had

tirely destroyed them, and he was left without

means of finding his way to the pastures, wl

he was in the habit of feeding, and was for

to content himself with the scanty nourishn

which he could pick up fi*om the place when

was. When the lark was informed of this,

went to a pond, where there were a great mj

firogs, and made similar complaints of the c

duct of the elephant; and they asked her, hoi

was possible for them to assist her against

powerfiil an enemy ? She said to them, 1 1

of you, to have the goodness to accompany

to a large pit, which is near* the spot whei^

elephant is, and to go down mto it, and cros

and the elephant, when he hears the noi

wUl fancy that there is water there, and, advai

ing towards the sound, will fall into the pit, a

perish. The frogs complied with the request

the lark, and every thing happened to the e

phant as she had foretold : then, fluttering oi


11

\aa head as he lay in agonies below her, she said,
O tyrant, thou art deceived in the opinion which
thou hadst formed of thy power and strength ;
and the inferiority of my size compared with
thine has disappeared before the cunning con-
trivance, which has defeated thy sagacity.

Then Bidpai desired each of his disciples to
declare what he thought best to be done. It
would be presumption in us, they replied, to
place our intelligence and judgment on a level
with yours ; at the s Aie time we may be allowed
.. .Lk, withou. any dUpara^Lt .f your
superiority in wisdom, that he who ventures into
the river where the crocodile is, is himsel%he
cause of the inevitable destruction which awaits
him, and that the serpent cannot be said to
have occasioned the death of the man, who has
extracted the poison from its tooth, and voluil-
tarily swallowed it in order to try its effects ;
nor would it be more dangerous to approach a
lion in his den, than it will be to make any bold
representations to the king, who has never had
the benefit of any lessons of experience dearly
bought, to moderate the mischievous violence
and impetuosity of his disposition. Your ap-
prehensions are by no means unfounded, an-


12

swered Bidpai, add your suggestionss are n
sohable ; they fully justify the recourse whicl
have had to you in the present circumstano
and Bire a strong confirmation of the obrious s
vantages of calling the intellectual resources
different individuals, whatever be their rank
life, in aid of our private opinion. My detert
nation however is not weakened by the ar^
ments you have advanced, supported as they s
by the fears which you have expressed for i
safety ; I therefore beg of you to meet me ag€
as soon as my audience with the king is ov<
that I may communicate to you the result of i
coiprersation with him.

Then Bidpai took leave of his disciples ; aj
on the day which he had chosen for the pi
pose, he put on his dress, which was such as t
'Brahmins always wore, and went to court, a]
solicited an audience of the king, under pi
tence of having some important communicati
to make : and this being reported to the kio
•orders were given to admit Bidpai ; who, beii
introduced, bowed respectfully to the king; h
remained silent. Dabschelim was surprised, ai
said, This man is certainly come for one
two things; either fot the purpose of askil


13

some favour) or else to implore ray protection in
slome matter in which he is concerned. Now a
wise man has a more exodlent treasure in the
gift of wisdom, than a king in the possession of
sovereign authority; for a wise man can supply
the want of royal favour by the resources of bis
own mind, whereas riches afford no compensa-
tion to a sovereign for the loss of services wfaicb
wise counsellors are able to render to a state :
and I have remarked, that knowledge and mo-^
desty are always found together, that neither
can exist without the other ; they may be com-
pared to two sincere friends, so inseparable in
sentiment and affection, that the interruption of
their union leaves life without a charm, to make
it supportable ; and whoever is wanting in the
respect which should be shewn to persons dis-
til^uished for wisdom, and is remiss in paying
the homage which is due to their superior merits,
by withholding from them his protection, and
d^rading them below the level of their just pre-
tensions, is not only guilty of the injustice of rob-
bing them of that to which they have a claim,
bat has to answer for the folly of neglecting his
own interest. Then addressing himself to Bid-
pai, he said, In endeavouring to account to


14

myself for the reason of your continued silenc
which has prevented my becoming acquainti
with the purpose that has brought you hithc
and which is no doubt of an extraordinary n;
ture, I thought it might possibly be attributed i
the fearful embarrassment which my presem
has occasioned ; I therefore determined to d
mand an explanation of your motives for comis
to me, feeling that I am the most proper perso
to relieve you from any difficulty into which yo
may have fallen, or to take you by the hand an
promote your views, if they are directed to an
object, of temporal advantage ; at the same tia
1 resolved to punish any culpable interfereno
however improbable your known character ma
render such an act, in what is exclusively matte
for the knowledge and decision of kings ; at tfa
same time not intending to forbid your interest
ing yourself in behalf of my people, because th
recommendation of a sensible man cannot b
otherwise than judicious. I therefore grant yoi
entire freedom of speech.

Bidpai, having received these assurances fron
the king, felt his courage revive, and spoke a
follows ; May heaven pour down its blessing
upon the king, and preserve his kingdom to th


15

end of time; he has been gracious and bountiful
to me, in allowing me to appear before him in
the character of a faithful and honest counsellor;
and whether the impression, which my words
may make upon his mind, be lasting or not, I
shall still enjoy the satisfaction of having dis-
chaiged the duty which my situation imposes
upon me. Tell me, said the king, all that you have
to say, for I promise to listen to you with pa-
tience, and reward you as you deserve. A man,
continuedBidpai,is distinguished from the beasts
by four qualities, wisdonpi, temperance, under-
standing, and justice. Knowledge, Urbanity, and
considerateness, form essential parts of wisdom.
Clemency, patience, and firmness, belong to un-
derstanding. Modesty, nobleness, inclination,
and aversion, are under the control of temper*
ance. Sincerity, goodness, piety, and the amiable
aflfections, are inseparable from justice; and when
a person is in full possession of these bright
qualities, neither the excess of good fortune is
capable of betraying him into any wayward and
pervarse measures, which will throw him into
trouble and disappointment, nor does he wan-
tonly indulge in complaints against Providence
for every slight interruption which is offered to


16

his enjoyments. The decrees of fate do not
compose the serenity of his looks, nor a sud
reverse disturb his peace of mind ; his wise
is a treasure which cannot be diminished by
penditure^ it is an imperishable store under
pressure of poverty and want, it is a robe, wl
does not lose by use the appearance of hi
new, and whose intrinsic worth remains al^
unimpaired, and it becomes a pleasure of t
mited duration. If I have hitherto" refraii
notwithstanding the post which I fill, of fin
declaring my sentiments to the king, it has t
owing to the respect and reverence which
due to sovereigns, especially to one raised so 1
in rank and power above all who have gone
fote him, and in conformity with the precepi
which the sages of old have handed down U
the advantages of mlence ; but the momen
now arrived, in which I may take the libert;
ptusuing a different course.

Four wise men, being once met togethei
the command of a certain king, were desi
each of them ta propose some instructive mai
The first said, the most excellent propertj
knowledge is silence: the second, that
most profitable thing for a man is to know


17

own worth : the third gave ks his opinion, that
a person shonld not allow his words to admit
of a wider interpretation than he intended them
to bear: and the fourth declared, that nothing
afforded so much tranquillity to the mind as
submission to' destiny. On another occasion
the four kings of China, India^ Persia, and
Greece, being together, agreed each of them
to deliver a saying, whicfr might be recorded to
their honour in after ages. The king of China
said, I have more power over what I have not
spoken^ than I have to recall what has once
passed my lips. The king of India, I have been
often struck with the risk of speaking ; for if a
man is heard in his own praise, it is an unprofit^
able boasting, and what he says to his own dis-
credit is injurious in its consequences. The
king of Persia, I am the slave of what I have
spoken, but the master of what I conceal. The
king of Greece, I have never regretted the silence
which I had imposed upon myself, though I
have oftien repented of die words I have uttered,
for silence is attended with advantage to a
sovereign, whereas loquacity is ofl^n followed
by incurable evils. Now the tongue of man is
one of the most active instruments of his ruin ;

c


18


it is however fit that I should obey the con
mands of the king, and make use of the permi
sion he has granted me ; therefore, conformab!
to the objects which I have in view, I will beg
by declaring, that it is my sincere wish an
prayer, that every prospect of private advanta^
may disappear before the interests of the kin
which, connected with his hopes in a future lil
I have principally at heart, my views with regai
to myself being confined to the discharge of i
indispensable duty.

You, O king, are in the full enjoyment
the dignities of your ancestors, those great un
who laid the foundation of the monarchy, ai
increased its splendour by national establis
ments and the victories of their arms, and wli
in spite of the seductive charms of sovereij
authority and the intoxicating nature of pow<
have perpetuated their name, which is still fire
in the memory of their posterity, by good worl
and an equitable and mild government. Yc
O king, were bom to be the heir of their hij
renown, as well as of the countries and weal
which their valour won and their pruden
secured ; but you have stopped short in the pa
in .which you were advancing towards the sui


19

mit of glory, and have sullied the good name
which was your inheritance, by acts of oppres-
sion and injustice towards your subjects, and
by a course of life which has brought distress
and misery upon the nation; whereas it was
your duty to follow the example which has been
set you, by avoiding the disgraceful conduct of
which you have been guilty, and giving your
people a system of laws, which might go down
to after ages in company with the praises of a
sovereign, who sought the recompense of his
virtues in the memorial which they would leave
behind them. A king is deceived in the ex-
pectations which he forms from the exercise of
arbitrary power ; for a mild and gentle govern-
ment is alone consistent with the dictates of
prudence and good sense. Lay to heart there-
fore, O king, the advice which I offer you in
my exhortations to amendment, not with any
views of private interest, or in hopes of reward,
but with the purest intentions, and that regard
to your honour, which will, I trust, disarm your
ill will and displeasure.

Bidpai had no sooner finished speaking, than
Dabschelim, unable to withhold the expression
of his anger, said to him, I could not have

c2


20

r

supposed that any one of my subjects woi
have ventured to address me m the terms vrU
you have used, and have united so much audac
vnth such inconsiderable powers. I cam
sufficiently wonder at the haughty and presun
tuous tone which you have assumed, and thi
it necessary to make you an example for \
admonition of others who may hereafter asp
to the honour which you have abused to yi
own disgrace. Upon which he commanded tl
Sidpai should be put to death ; and whilst
persons who were charged with the execut
of the order were leading him away, the fc
reflected on the severity of the punishment wh
he had pronounced against him, and mitigatet
by changing it into a sentence of close impris<
ment.

As soon as the news of what had happei
to Bidpai reached his disciples, they dispers
and concealed themselves in remote parts, h
Bidpai had been some days in prison, and
king had neither made any enquiries ab
him, nor had any one dared to mention
name ; till Dabschelim, one night being una
to sleep, was reflecting on the motion of the h
venly bodies, and the system of the univei


21


and as he was at a loss to resolve some problem
relating to the revolution of the stars, he recol-
lected Bidpai, and reproached himself with the
injustice of which he had been guilty towards
him, by obeying the impulse of a sudden fit of
passion. The voice of wisdom, said he to him-
self, has pronounced four things to be disgrace-
ful to kings ; anger, which is the most hateM
of all passions ; avarice, that is not excused by
the multitude of its possessions; falsehood,
which is a bar to all intimacy and fellowship ;
and obscene conversation, which is a folly in
words that does not become them. There came _]
to me a man, who was no dealer in fiivolous
discourse, but one capable of giving me good
advice ; and instead of listening to the lessons of
instruction which he would have imparted, and
rewarding him as his merits deserved, I resisted
his efforts to serve me, and repaid him with in-
gratitude. He then ordered Bidpai to be brought
to him, and said. Did you not condemn my
mannerof living, and wish to promote my amend-
ment ? — Bidpai : I considered, O just and be-
nevolent king, in the exhortations which I ad-
dressed to you, what might conduce to your
own safety, and the preservation of your king-

c3


22

dom, as well as to the advantage of your si
jects. The kmg : Then repeat to me the wh<
of your former discourse. Upon this Bidpai I
gan to speak, and the king listened to him w
the greatest attention ; and as often as he i^
struck with any thing he heard, he made a ma
on the ground with something, which he held
his hand : at last he desired him to sit dov
and told him, that he approved oiF every thi
he had said, and that it had made a great i:
pression upon his mind. He then command
his chains to be taken off, and one of his o^
robes to be put upon him, and declared to h
his intention of investing him with unlimit
power over his whole kingdom. Bidpai begg
to be released from so weighty a charge, whi
his unassisted strength was unable to bear ; a
Dabschelim complied with his request, and d
missed him. But he was scarcely gone from I
presence, before he reflected on the impolicy
what he had done, and sent for him again, a
said, I have weighed the consequences of i
cepting your refusal of the post to which I h
appointed you, and find it would be attend
with so much inconvenience, that 1 can
longer consent to yopr opposition to my wish-


23


Now it was a custom on the appointment of a
Vizir, to place a crown on his head, and conduct
him on horseback through the city; and this ce-
remony was observed on the present occasion.
And Bidpai, as soon as he had taken possession
of his office, made his administration of the laws
to be distinguished by the strictest impartiality ;
he observed the same conduct towards the pea-
sant and his lord, and dealt out equal justice to
the people of every class; and when the account
of his elevation reached his disciples, they came
to him from the different places of security to
which they had retired, returning thanks to hea-
ven for having crowned with success the endea-
vours of their master, to produce a change of
sentiments and conduct in the king, and they
appointed a festival to be perpetually observed
in commemoration of so signal an event. Now
Bidpai employed the time that was not devoted
to the transaction of business with Dabschelim,
in composing treatises on government, which,
whilst they did justice to his talents, afforded
him a relaxation from his more serious occupa-
tions; and the king, by following the rules of con-
duct which had been laid down for him, not
only became an object of adoration to his peo-

c4


24


pie, but received the submission of the neigl
bouiing princes, who were proud of acknoiii
ledging their dependence. * After this Bidpa
made handsome presents to his disciples an*
promised them his protection ; and addressin
them, said, You thought, no doubt, when yo
saw me persist in my resolution of going to th
king, that my wisdom had forsaken me, am
want of reflection was hurrying me on to certaii
ruin ; you are now however convinced, that m;
plan was neither rashly nor ignorantly fonned
It is an old saying, that a king, who is intoxi
cated with power, is in his conduct little bette
than a child, and can only be weaned from th<
error into which he has fallen by the admoni
tion of wise counsellors, whose duty it is to giv<
weight to their exhortations by the firm and dig
nified language in which they are delivered
and to repair the moral infirmities of the sove
reign, by inculcating a respect for the laws o
equity and justice ; imitating in their conduct
the practice of the physician, whose business il
is to preserve the body in its sound state, or in
case of disease to restore it to health by judi-
cious treatment of his patient. I was unwilling
that it should be reported of me, either after my


25

death or that of the king, that I was a con-
temporary of the tyrant Dabschelim, and did
not correct the excesses in which he indulged ;
with the addition, that fear for my personal
safety was no excuse for my silence, because if
in danger for my life, it had been always in my
power to fly out of the country. The natural
repugnance to quit one's native land, would
not allow me for a moment to entertain such a
thought ; l4herefore determined to brave every
chance, rather than risk the forfeiture of my
r^utation with posterity; and you are ac^
quainted with the successful result of my under-
taking, which is an illustration of an old saying,
that no one arrives at eminence except either by
personal danger, by detriment to his fortune, or
the hazard of his religion ; for difficulties are a
condition of all fortunate enterprise. I have
now to inform you, that the king has commanded
me to compose a work, containing the precepts
of true wisdom ; I therefore desire each of you
to write on whatever subject he pleases, that I
may form an estimate of the acquirements and
knowledge which you individually possess.
His disciples wished to excuse themselves from
a task, which would have the appearance of


26

placing their talents and learning in competiti
with'those of their master, the lustre of whose i
nown reflected upon i;hem the credit which th
enjoyed. They however declared their rea
ness to obey his directions. In the mean ti
the influence of fiidpai was very visible in <
conduct of the king, who perceiving the go
efiects of the course he was pursuing, as soon
he found, that by the administration of Bid[
his power and authority were firml]fc establish
in the submission of his enemies, employed hi
self in reading the ancient histories of his {
cestors ; and it occurred to him to order an 5
count to be written of his own reign, in whi
bis name mi^t be handed down to poster
with the facts which were recorded : but aws
that the services of Bidpai would be indispei
able to the accomplishment of his purpose,
sent for him, and said, 1 have found, in loc
ing over the treasures of our libraries, that thi
is no one of my ancestors, whose reign did i
form the subject of a work, purporting to Ik
history of his public and private conduct;
some instances the kings themselves, in othi
the philosophers by their orders, were the a
thors of the writings in question : but as I d


27

trust my own capacity for so great an undertak-
ingy and am at the-same time unwilling that my
name alone should be omitted in the annals of
the kingdom, I desire that you would take upon
yourself to perform this literary task, and employ
the resources of your understanding to compose
a work, which professing to embrace only the
instruction of the people, may contain useful
lessons for the conduct of kings i^ho would se-
cure the obedience and fidelity of their subjects.
O king, answered Bidpai, may nothing obscure
the brightness of the star which brings you hap-
piness and power. Your high destiny was
marked out by Providence in the character
which it imprinted on your mind, and your clear
and unbiassed understanding has produced that
elevation of soul, which carries the thoughts up-
wards to the summit of human greatness. May
heaven therefore crown with success the efforts
which I am ready to employ for the accom-
plishment of your will. Your punctuality in
obeying my commands stands in need of no
further proof, answered the king ; it is therefore
my desire, that in the book which you are
about to write, the precepts of morality and the
lessons of wisdom should be enlivened by light


28

and amusing fables. Dabschelim then granted
Bidpai at his own request the space of a yea]
^ for the composition of his work, and set apar
the necessary funds ; after which Bidpai having
assembled his disciples, commimicated to then
the orders he had received from the king, anc
expatiated on the prospect which was opened
of honour to themselves, and advantage to th(
country : but he found at length that it would
be useless to rely on their assistance, where the
utmost exertion of intellect was required, and
where the employment of various and unequal
talents would only impede the progress of hig
labours ; in the same manner as the navigation ol
a ship would be uncertain, if instead of being
entrusted to the direction of the pilot and sailors,
it should be left to the guidance of the pas-
sengers, who happened to be on board: he
therefore determined to seek no other aid than
what his own intellectual resources might afford
him, taking one of his disciples to act as his
secretary; and having procured the requisite
quantity of materials for writing, and the pro-
visions which would be necessary for their sub-
sistence during the time that had been allotted
to him, he retired with his disciple into a small


V I


29

apartment, into which no one else was allowed
to enter; and the method that was then adopted
was for the disciple to commit to writing what
his master dictated, and in this manner the
work was finished, consisting of fourteen chap-
ters, each containing a question with its answer,
which fiidpai afterwards collected into one
book, and called it the book of Kalila and
Dimna, in which tame and wild beasts and birds
were introduced as the actors and speakers, by
which means amusement and an agreeable oc-
cupation were procured for the generality of
readers, whilst the better informed found matter
for more serious reflection : nothing was omitted
which could be of any service to a man in his
domestic relations, or was connected with hi3
happiness in this world or the next, or which
could excite him to the duty of obedience to-
wards his sovereign. The first chapter described
the situation of two friends, who were betrayed
by the arts of a treacherous companion ; and it
was here intended, that Bidpai should speak in
his own person, as the king had desired ; but
recollecting that wisdom out of the mouth of a
philosopher loses its value, when associated
witli fiivolous discourse, he was at a loss how


30


to obviate this inconvenience, and at the same
time fulfil the instractions he had received
'^hen it suddenly occurred to him to place hif
words in the mouths of two animals, whose con-
versation, though clothed in amusing language
might still be made a channel for conveying thi
sound precepts which he wished to inculcate
as the only safeguard of intimacy and friend-
ship; intending by this contrivance to satisfy
both the taste of the uninformed, as well a«
to engage the attention and researches of thi
'. wise.

At the expiration of the year the king enquirec
of the philosopher, if he had ftdfiUed his en-
gagement; and was informed that he had, anc
that he wished to read what he had written ii
the presence of the princip9.1 people of the
kingdom. Therefore the day being come, whicl
the kii^ had fixed for this purpose, he ordered]
a throne similar to his own to be erected foi
Bidpai, and seats to be placed for the rest of the
court, and ordered Bidpai to be sent for ; whc
having put on the dress which he wore on all
occasions, when he was to appear before the
king, gave his disciple the book to carry, and
accompanied him to the palace ; and the king,


31

as soon as he saw him, rose up from his seat,
and thanked him in a speech which was in-
tended to* express the joy and satisfiau^tion which
he felt : he then commanded him to sit down,
and to b^in to read ; and at the end of every
chs^ter asked for an explanation of what he
had heard, and was lost in admiration at the
enlarged and enlightened views of Bidpa'i ; upon
which he left him the choice of his own reward.
I have no occasion for riches, answered Bidpai,
neither for costly robes ; but one thing I will beg
of the king, that this book may be transcribed
like those which your ancestors possessed, and
guarded with the most scrupulous care, lest it
should be stolen and carried out of the country,
and" fall into the hands of the Persians. The
king gave orders to this effect, and made hand-
some presents to the disciples of Bidpai. Now \
Chosroes Nouschir6wan^ during the enquiries
which he made after the writings of the ancients,
having received information of the book of
Kalila and Dimna, became very impatient for
its acquisition : for this purpose he sent Bar-
zouy^h the physician on a mission to India,
who having got possession of a copy of it by
his skill and address, brought it away with him,


32

and deposited it amongst the treasures of th
kings of Persia.


THE MISSION OF BARZOUYEH TO INDIA FOR TH
PURPOSE OF PROCURIN& A COPY OF THE BOO
CALLED KALILA AND DIMNA.

OOD has created man in his wisdom idn
mercy, has raised him to excellence and honou
and has put into his power the means of ha]
piness in this world, and of avoiding punisi
mentin the next: but the best gift of God 1
man is understanding, the source of every thii
which is good and profitable, the key to h
happiness on earth, and his anchor through tl
stormy sea of life to conduct him into the have
of a blissful eternity. Understanding is tl
child of instruction and experience ; its seeds 1
hidden in the soul of man, and must be calle
into life by the nurturing hand of discipline an
fortified by trial, as the sparks are struck oi
firom the hard flint, before the fire, which li<
concealed in the stone, can be produced.

It happened that king Nouschir6wan (c
whom the supreme Disposer of all things ha


33

bestowed a very large portion of understanding,
and that knowledge in afiairs which conducts
immediately to the object which is in view, and,
had imparted to him together with the talent oi
discovering the springs on which events turn,
the power of following them up to their re-
motest results, and thereby raised him to an
eminence of learning and philosophical acquire-
ments, which no king before him had ever
attained,) in the course of his enquiries into the
various branches of science, got information of a
book preserved in India, which contained every
species of instruction, together vnth rules of
conduct for the profitable employment of the
present, and for a confident and happy antici-
pation, of the future. He therefore commanded
his Vizir Buzurdjmihr to look out for some
clever and able person amongst his subjects,
who, posses^ng a thorough knowledge of the
Persian and Indian tongues, was distinguished
as much for his eagerness as his ability to acquire
instruction. Buzurdjmihr lost no time in obey-
ing the orders of the king, and shortly after
found out a physician named Barzouy6h, a man
possessii]^ all the necessary qualifications, who
being introduced into the presence of Nous-

D


34

chir^wan, was addressed by the king in the fol
lowing manner : I have chosen you Barzouyti
bn account of the reputation which you enjoy £o
your wisdom and learning, and thirst afU
knowledge wherever it is to be met with, for
mission to India, for the purpose of gettin
possession of a book, which, according to th
accounts which I have received, is said to I
preserved in the library of the king of thi
country. You will make the best use of yoi
talents and judgment in the prosecution of tb
undertaking, which will extend also to the a
quisition of any other writings hitherto unknot
amongst us, constantly bearing in mind tl
great advantage which your success will pr
cure both to us and yourself; and in order th
nothii^g may be wanting to enable you to ftil
the important charge with which you are e
trusted, I have given orders to my treasury
supply you with whatever money you m
require for the purposes of this mission. T
king then commanded the astrologers to fix
auspicious day for the departure of Barzouy^
who took with him twenty thousand pursesi
money, each containing ten thousand dinars.
Barzouy6h being at length arrived in Ind


35

conducted himself in the most prudent and cir-
cumspect manner possible, assuming the appear-
ance of a foreigner who was travelling for im-
provement. For this purpose he frequented
the levees of the king and the meetings of the
people, and lost no opportunity of making ac-
quaintance with the principal persons of the
court as well as the wise men of the country ; at
last he began to be received familiarly into their
houses, a distinction for which he was indebted
to his engaging manners and good breeding;
but never losing sight of his assumed character,
he pretended on many occasions to receive
information on subjects with which he was
previously acquainted, and was able so well
to conceal the object of his journey, that he
established himself on an intimate footing with
many of the philosophers sa well as persons of
every class and profession. Amongst those
with whom he habitually associated was one
who peculiarly attracted his attention, not only
on account of his distinguished character and his
disinterested professions of friendship, but prin-
cipally on account of the claims which he
seemed to possess to the most unreserved con-
fidence. He therefore attached himself to this

d2


36


person more than to any other, consulted him
on every occasion, and followed his advice in
all his difficulties, concealing from him howevei
for the present his real object, till he should
have time and opportunity to put his fidelity tc
the test, and to find out to what extent he migh
trust him. Now after some time; being con
vinced that his fiiend was a man of honour anc
integrity, and one on whom he could thoroughly
rely, he took occasion one day as they wen
sitting together to confess to him, that he hac
a further purpose in view in the long joume;
which he had made, than what he had till no^
given out to be the reason of his travels, an<
which had probably not altogether escape^
observation, since the man of understanding i
able from the outward appearance to penetrat
into the secrets of the heart. The India
assured him that he had always been upon hi
guard, not to betray the slightest symptoms <
suspicion and distrust, not that he was ignorai
of the object of his mission, which notwithstanc
ing the veil of mystery which was thrown ov<
it, was easily to be guessed, but from a desii
of cultivating his friendship. You are con
amongst us, continued he, at the express orde


37

of your soTereign, to get into your possession
some of our valuable treasures, and to take
them with you into your own country; and
though your conduct carries with it the marks
of deep contrivance, not without a mixture of
deceit and cunning, still however your patience
and assiduity in the pursuit of what you are
searching after, and your admirable prudence
in taking precautions against the discovery of
your secret, so that a syllable has on no one
occasion escaped your lips that might in any
way be interpreted to your disadvantage, had so
far prepossessed me in your favour, and given
me so high an opinion of your wisdom and
understanding, that I became every day more
anxious to be better acquainted with you, and
was lost in admiration of your zeal and per-
severance in a foreign country, and amongst a
people with whose manners and customs you
are unacquainted. A man of sound under-
standing is distinguished by eight different
qualities; by courteous and affable behaviour,
by a knowledge of himself, united with a strict
and impartial observation of his own heart ; by
submission to lawful authority, and an endeavour
to conciliate the good will of those who are in

d3


38

power; by great circumspection in his confr
dential communications; by becoming langus^
and irreproachable conduct at the courts o
kings ; by secrecy, where his own interest is a
stake, and fidelity in his engagements with others
by moderation in his discourse, so that no unplea
sant consequence may arise from any hasty c
intemperate word; and, lastly, by a pruder
reserve and modest diffidence in delivering hi
opinion : and where these qualities are united i
one person, as they are in you, Barzouy6h, the
bring down blessings upon the head of him wh
possesses them. I therefore pray that Go
would assist you in your present undertakiuj
that he would conduct you through my meai
to a fortunate issue of your labours, howevi
injurious your success may prove to the interes
of my country, in robbing it of the high pr
rogative which it has hitherto enjoyed in ti
paths of science and learning. Barzouy6h co
fessed to the Indian, that he had already pi
pared a speech fraught vnth the subtleties
reasoning and argument, for the purpose of la
ing open his views in an inoffensive but clc
manner, but that his discovery of his secret a
the offer of his services had made him all


39

his intention; that he should therefore on the
present occasion do no more than thank him
for the generosity of his conduct, and for the
proof which he had given, that the breast of a
philosopher and of an intelligent and honour-
able man is as inviolable a depository for even
a v«rord told in confidence, as the strength of a
citadel is a security for a great treasure. The
Indian observed to Barzouy^h, that nothing in
the world is more excellent than friendship;
that where it is pure, a man should as it were
become one with his fi*iend, should be without
reserve in his intercourse, even to the com-
munication of his most secret thoughts, which
are placed under the safeguard of honour and
integrity ; he could not however deny, that it
might possibly be better never to divulge a secret,
since it is difficult to withhold from the know-
ledge of a third person, what is already knovirn
to two, and consequently to prevent its general
publicity ; and in the end the author of the
secret is as unable to deny it, when the means
are at hand of tracing it to its source, as* any
one is to dispute the reality of a cloud which is
seen to float in a clear sky. He then informed
Barzouy^h, virith the strongest assurances of the

d4


40

pleasure which he had received from his in-
timacy and acquaintance, that in contributing
to his success in the object which he had in
view, which it would be impossible to keep
secret, he should run the risk of inevitable ruin
from the severity and harshness of the king, who
frequently inflicting a very heavy punishment
for a slight offence, would visit with the whole
weight of his anger and displeasure so great a
crime against the state. Barzouy^h observed
to the Indian, that the wise have in all ages
praised the man, who faithful to his engage-
ments assists his friend to the utmost of his
power ; that he relied for support on his good
services and disinterested friendship ; and that
the apprehensions which he entertained of
danger to himself and family, if the king should
become acquainted with what had passed
between them, ought to be removed, when he
recollected that their intercourse would be of
no long duration, and that his return to his native
country would prevent all publicity of their
proceedings, which would be only known to
themselves. This argument had waght with
the Indian, and he immediately procured for
Barzouy^h the book of which he was principally


41

in search, as well as others of great value, who
spared no pains either of body or mind, labour-
ing night and day for the purpose of translating
them from the Hindoo into the Persian language,
as he was afraid, that the king of India might
possibly ask for the books before his task was
finished, and if he should find that they were
imissing from his library, that his plan would be
discovered and frustrated. At length having
finished his work, he wrote to Nouschirewan to
inform him of it, and the king commanded him
to hasten his departure as quickly as possible
out of the country of India, lest any accident
might arrive to disturb the joy which was felt
at the success of his enterprise, fiarzouy^h
lost no time in obeying the orders of the king,
who upon the arrival of his minister observing
the great alteration which had taken place in
him from excess of fatigue, promised him that
he should reap the fruit of his toils in the honour
and distinction to which he would raise him,
and desired him in the mean time to repose
himself during the space of seven days. On
the seventh day the king commanded the Emirs
and the learned men of his kingdom to appear
before him ; and when they were all assembled


42

in his presence, he ordered Barzouyeh to rea
aloud the contents of the book ; and the persoi
who were present were so struck at the profoui
lessons of knowledge which it contained, th;
they could not withhold the expressions of the
joy, but thanked God for his bounty and mere
testifying their gratitude to Barzouyeh for tl
great service which he had rendered to h
sovereign and country. And the king coi
manded that precious stones of every so:
forming the ricL of his kingdom, together ,ri
the money in his treasury and the most val
able dresses, should be placed before Barzouy^
and he desired him to take of them what
chose ; and addressing him he said, I commai
you, O Barzouyeh, to sit upon a throne li
mine, and to put on a crown, and I exalt you
dignity above all the nobles of the kingdo
Then Barzouy6h humbled himself before 1
king, and called down blessings upon the he
of his royal benefactor, in this world and 1
next; and said, I have no occasion for (
reward which God offers me by the hands
my sovereign ; but since it is the will of t
king, I will choose something in obedience
his orders. So he went to the royal wardro


43

and took a very rich robe of Ghorasan, such as
the kings were in the habit of wearing. Then
Barzouy^h prayed a second time for the glory
and happiness of the king, declaring that gra-
titude was due at the hands of one who had
been so highly honoured, and that the difficulties
which he had had to encounter, and the perils
of his journey, were more than amply repaid by
the testimonies which he had received of appro-
bation and approval of his conduct : that how-
ever there was one request which he would
venture to ask of the king ; and upon Nous-
chir6wan's assuring him that his request should
be granted, were he even to ask for a share in
his kingdom, Barzouy6h begged the king not
to value his services in the readiness which he
had shewn to obey his orders ; that his life was
at the disposal of his sovereign, nor had he any
claim to recompense for his unlimited devotion
to his glory and renown ; that the distinction to
which he had been raised was the effect of the
king's generosity and condescension, and far
exceeded his deserts : and upon Nouschir6wan's
desiring to be acquainted with his wishes, Bar-
zouy6h continued in the following manner; I
beg of the king to order his Vizir Buzurdjmihr,


44


the son of Bakht6gaji, to employ his talents and
the force of his judgment, together with the re-
sources of his learning and imagination, in writ-
ing a short account of my life and actions, to be
placed before the chapter containing the hisr
tory of the lion and the bull; and this me-
morial will not fail to raise me and my family
to the highest pinnacle of glory, and to per-
petuate our name in distant ages as long as the
book exists which has procured for me the
favour of the king. Nouschir6wan and his no-
bles having heard these words, admired thai
elevation of character which sought its reward
in the memory of a grateful posterity ; and the
king, approving the choice of Barzouy^h, told
him that he should have what he desired, which
was the least thing he could have asked for,
whatever importance he appeared to attach tc
it, ^ Then Nouschir6wan went up to his Vizir,
and having praised the fidelity of Barzouy^h,
and his unconquerable perseverance in the mis-
sion with which he had been entrusted, and
having extolled the services which he had ren-
dered to the country by the accession of know-
ledge and wisdom which he had brought into it,
and his disinterestedness in refusing the reward


45

which had been offered him^ desired him to pre-
pare himself for the task of writii^ the history
of the Ufe of Barzouy^h, containing an account
of his journey to, and his return from, India, not
forgetting to place his conduct in the most fa-
vourable point of view: that Barzouy^h had
claims upon the gratitude of the whole country,
and that he, Buzurdjmihr, estimating the value
of his labours by his own knowledge and love
of science, and producing a work, which would
imite the suffrages of all classes of persons,
would perpetuate his own fame together with
that of Barzouy^h. Moreover the king desired
his Vizir, as soon as he had finished what he
was to write, to bring it to him, that he might
have it read aloud to his people, as a proof of
Barzouy^h's attachment to his sovereign s per-
son, and a monument of his own glory. Bu-
zurdjmihr thanked the king for the confidence,
which he had shewn him, and having retired to
his apaitment, he b^an to write the history of
Barzouy6h from the period when he first fre-
quented the schools; he described his journey
to India for the purpose of extending his know-
ledge in chemistry and medicine, where he first
became acquainted with the language of the


i


46

country^ up to the time when Nouschir6wan
9ent him thither in search of the book ; and todk
care to omit nothing that could illustrate aU the
good qualities which Barzouy^h possessed. And
having informed the king that he had finished
his history, Nouschir6wan assembled the nobles
of his kingdom and the principal persons of his
court, and commanded Buzurdjmihr to read
what he had written in the presence of Bar*
zouy6h. And Buzurdjmihr having finished read-
ing, the king praised him for the talents which
he had displayed in the composition of his work,
and offered him presents of different kinds, all
of which he refused, excepting a robe such as wag
worn by the kii^. Then Barzouy6h thanked
Buzurdjmihr, and kissed his head and hand, and
approaching the king, expressed his gratitude
for the distinction and honour which his sove
reign had conferred upon himself and family.


47


THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE BOOK OF KALILA
AND DIMNA, FROM THE PEN OF ALMOKAFFA.

7H£ book of Kalila and Dimna is one of
those which the wise men of India composed,
consisting of proverbs and fables, by which they
conveyed their lessons of morality to the learned
and vulgar ; and amongst the various contriv-
ances which the disciples of every sect and per-
suasion have imagined for giving to the world
the benefit of that instruction, which they thought
could only be received at their hands, was that
to which the present work owes its origin ; than
which none could be found more efficacious, or
better suited to the purpose which was in view ;
for the doctrines being placed in the mouths of
birds and beasts, by this means a pleasing de-
lusion was practised on the reader of every age
and condition, and conviction brought home to
his heart in the very moment that his fancy
alone appeared to be engaged ; so that in the
end the learned man found his stores of wisdom
increased; the ignorant man, who looked for
nothing but amusement, felt himself involun-
tarily instructed ; and the young, who were at first


48


only captivated by the lively images, which pre-
senting themselves under pleasing forms, easily
engraved themselves on the heart, found them-
selves, as their age advanced, possessed of a
fund of information, of which they had not sus"
pected the existence: and as a man, whose
parents during his childhood have been labour-
ing for his welfare in accumulating money and
estates, finds upon reaching manhood that he is
in possession of a large fortune, without having
been himself at the pains of acquiring it ; in the
same manner the young scholar, who has trea-
sured up in his memory the rules of conduci
contamed in this book, is relieved from seeking
after any further instruction in his riper years
* It is necessary however, in order to reap the ad
vantages which its study is able to impart, t(
understand fully the spirit in which it is com
posed, to disengage from its figurative language
the truths which it is intended to convey, anc
to seize the exact purport of its fables : for read
ing vidthout reflection is not accompanied b]
any solid profit; and he who is employed ii
heaping science upon science, vidthout any sys
tem of digesting into a body of useful instructioi
his various acquirements, may be compared t<


49

the man, 6( whom it is told, that he went into
a desert and discovered a spot of ground, where
he suspected there waB a rich mine ; he imme-
diately began to dig, and found in a short time
gold and silver ; but fancying, if he only sup-
plied himself, as occasion required, from the
treasures which he had discovered, that the en-
joyment of his good fortune would be very in-
complete, he determined to get the whole at
once into his possession: for this purpose he
hired a number of persons, whom he conducted
to the spot, and having given in charge to each
of them a certain portion of the gold and silver,
lie ordered them to carry it to his house, re-
maining himself at the mine ; but the labourers,
taking advantage of his want of foresight and
imprudence, carried, in concert with each other,
the load to their own homes ; and after the whole
produce of the mine had been in this manner re-
moved, the man himself went away, exulting in
the satisfoction which he should experience at the
sight of his riches, and only found out, upon reach-
ing his house, the trick which had been practised
upon him, owing to his own inconsiderate-
nesB and want of precaution. And the reading
of this book, without attending to its scope

£


so

and aim/ which often lying de^, do not ob-
trude themselves on the mind's eye at firg
, view/ is as unproductive as the nut which hai
not been broken ; or as the pains of the youAf
scholar, who desired to acquire the talent of con
versing correctly in society, and for that purpoit
went to a friend, who was remarkable for tb
propriety with which he spoke, and acquaintet
him with his wish to learn the proper idiom o
* the language ; his friend directed him to a cei
tain book, and he returned home, and pOKi
over the volume, but vdthout paying any regan
to the connection of its different parts, by whicl
alone the various aec^tations of the same wor
could be ascertained. It happened shortly aftei
that he was in company with a number of clevc
and well informed persons, and in the course c
conversation he made use of a word in a wron
sense; which one of the compamy having n
marked, he replied, that it could not be the casi
as he had read it in a book which he had s
home ; and the tone in which he made this d<
claration was a proof of the validity of tli
chaise of ignorance, which had been brougl
against him. And the man, who having dii
covered the wisdom and morality conceals


51

under proverbial and %ws(ive language^ which
this book contains, besitateft to regulate \m cosr
duct by the knowledge which he has acquired,
is like the person, who perc^ving a thief who
had broken into his house walking about in his
room, whilst he was in bed, pretended to be
asleep, that he might better observe, the motions
of the robber, and watch the moment for arrest-
ing him ; he therefore lay as quiet as he could,,
till at length becoming drowsy, his eyes closed
more effectually than he intended, and his un-
welcome visitor had time and opportunity to
carry off whatever he chose ; at length suddenly
awakening, he looked about to see what wa^
going oh, and found out his mistake, when it
was too late, in having neglected to take earlier
measures for the security of his property, when
he had it in his power.

Knowledge, it has been said, is not perfect
without action ; for knowledge is the tree, and
action the fruit. The man who is possessed of
knowledge, is enabled by a corresponding line
of conduct to reap the advantages of his acquire-
ments ; and he, who does not make a proper
use of what he knows, is like the man, who in
travelling chose a road in which he was aware .

E 2


52

that he should be exposed to danger. And U
he, who does not call to his aid the instructioil
which he has received, would reckon honestlj
with himself, he would find, that his errors in
the path of life are no more to be attributed tc
his ignorance, than the misfortunes of the mas
who chose a dangerous road against his con-
viction of its insecurity, to his want of informa-
tion. Whoever follows blindly his passions and
propensities, without profiting either by his own
experience or that of others, is like the sick man.
who was thoroughly acquainted with the food
which was wholesome for him, and light of di
gestion, but whose intemperate appetite made
him eat, what only increased his disease : anc
he has the least excuse for the evil which he
does, who sins against his judgment and hii
knowledge of what is praiseworthy and good
in the same manner as a man, who has both hi
eyes, would be more deserving of blame foi
havii^ fallen into a pit, than his companion whc
was blind. The principal aim of a man in hii
pursuit of knowledge is to acquire what may l>
useful and profitable to himself, and not t<
imagine, that like the spring which is not bene
fited by its own water, or the silkworm whici


53

has no profit from its own toils, he is only to
labour for the use of others ; when he has laid
up a sufficient stock of learning to serve him on
all occasions in his journey through life, it is
then time for him to think of communicating
the results of his experience and enquiries to his
fellow creatures ; because the man of the world
is not supposed to live entirely for himself; if
he has learning, he is bound to instruct the igno-
rant; if he has wealth, it is his duty t6 assist the
needy; and in his intercourse with mankind,
taking compassion on the frailties of human
nature, he must be kind and indulgent to
the faults which he shares in common with
others, and not imitate the conduct of the blind
man, who blamed his friend for having the same
imperfection. And although every one in his
pursuits and enquiries should ever have some
object steadily in view, to which his undivided
and unremitting attention is directed ; it is
essential, that he should not waste his labour
and his hours in the search after an imagin-
ary good, placed beyond the reach of human
exertions, nor prefer his worldly interest before
his future state ; and if he does not cling vnth
his affections to artificial wants, he can bear

£ 3


54


their loss without a sigh. There are two things
which have been pronounced to be good foi
every one, and which are as much adapted U
human mature, as every species of wood is pro
per fuel for a fire; namely, religion and property
and there are two^ which have been declarei
to be prejudicial, and as incompatible with th
constitution of man, as water with fire; a dividei
kingdom, and a pretension to a share in a wife'
affections : still however the complexion of ai
action, bearing upon it the marks of unsuitable
ness and wrong, is changed, when the hand c
Providence can be traced in its accomplishment
and we should learn to repress our anger, whe:
the conduct of a person, though opening th
prospect of a very different result, has sti
through the agency of fate been the occasion t
us of an unforeseen advantage ; as was the cas
vrith a poor man, whose poverty and distres
drove him to implore the charity of his neigl
hours, but without success. Whilst he was si
ting one night in his house, he saw a thief enti
his door, and felt quite unconcerned at the visi
because he had little or nothing to lose ; as tt
thief was looking about for something to stea
he accidentally touched a jar of wheat, an


55

finding nothing else to repay his trouble, but
being unwilling to go away empty handed, he
took ojOT his shirt, and spread it out in order to
pour the wheat into it : the man seeing this, and
not choosing to be deprived of his last means
of sustenance, which threatened him with starva*
tion, the only ill which remained to complete
bis, misery, as he was already destitute of elites
for his body, seized his club which lay by his
side, and crying out at the same time, so alarmed
the thief; that he fled in haste out of the house,
and left his shirt behind him, with which the
poor man appeared , on the following morning.
It is not however fit, that a man should be in-
duced by an example of this kind to neglect the
necessary means for the improvement of his
temporal condition, or that he should rely on a
fortuitous and happy combination of circum-
stances to deliver him out of all his difficulties
and trouble ; for an extraordinary interposition
of fate very seldom occurs ; and mankind in
general are doomed to owe their advancement
and success in life to their own exertions, and
to the means which it is in the power of every
one to make use of, which however should be
applied to the acquisition of some solid and perr

£ 4


56

manent good ; for whoever fixes his thoughts om
an mappropriate object, where his solicitude and
anxious attention can only end in disappoint-
ment and trouble, is like the dove, who having
hatched and lost her young ones, did not take
warning, but made her nest in the same place,
and was in this manner robbed of her second
brood. Natmre in assigning to every thing its
proper bounds, has also limited the exertions of
man; and whoever gives himself up to visionary
ischemes to which his faculties are inadequate,
will find in the end, that his calculations were
erroneous, and his labour unsatisfactory. The
man whose attention is equally engrossed by the
things of this world and of the next, is subject
to the disagreeable as well as pleasing varieties
of a chequered life ; but he whose mind is wholly
bent on the enjoyments of this world, is unin-
terruptedly exposed to perplexities and disap-
pointment.

There are three things, which are appropriate
and becoming objects of man's care and con-
c^m ; his individual interest, his relations to the
world, and his posthumous renown: and there
are three things, which in their result are disad-
vantageous to him, procrastination, the loss of


57

opportunity, and unbounded credulity ; for it
often happens that a person gives credit to a
story, which is repugnant to his reason, and the
truth of which he doubts, for no other cause
than because it has been told him ; but the man
of understanding will be ever upon his guard
against the suggestions of his passions, and will
pause at every step which he takes in a path of
whose issue he is uncertain, lest advancing too
hastily in a track, vnth which he is but partially
acquainted, he find in the end, like the man
who in a journey chose a wrong road, that he
has been gradually removing from the point at
which he was endeavouring to arrive ; or even
pay more dearly for his inconsiderate haste, like
one who having a moat in his eye continued to
rub it, till he became blind.

The man of sense believes in fate and destiny^
but not to the exclusion of prudence and fore-
sight in human affairs : he unites his exertions for
his own advantage, with his endeavours to pro-
mote that of others, and never seeks to benefit
himself at the expence of his neighbour ; which
would make him deserve the fate of the mer-
chant, who formed a partnership in trade with
another in the same line of business, and the two


58

hired a sliop in common, in which they places
their goods. Now one of them happenii^ t
haVe his house near the shop, determined upoi
stealing, his partners share of their joint stock
but fearing, that, if he went at night and in th
dark, he might possibly, by mistake, carry off
part of his oWn property instead of his partner's
he took a cloak with him one day when he wen
into the shop, and placed it on a bundle, whici
he singled out as his prey, and returned home
shortly after his partner came to look after hi
property, and finding the cloak of the othe
lying upon his own goods, and thinking that i
had been forgotten, he put it, where he though
it was likely to be discovered, on a bundle be
longing to his companion, shut up the shop, am
went away. At night his partner came with
man, whom he had engaged to assist him b;
the promise of a reward, and feeKng about fo
the cloak in the dark, he took away the good
upon which he found it, and after much labou
carried them to his house ; but being too muc
fatigued to examine them that night, he wee
to bed, and in the morning discovered to hi
vexation and surprise, that what he though
he had stolen, was a part of the propert


59

which had always belonged to hhn. Upon
which he went immediately to the shop, wh«re
his partner, having already arrived before him,
was lamenting over the loss of his friend's
goods, and fearing that he should be accused of
a breach of trust, was devising means to pay the
price of what had been stolen, in order to prove
his honesty and int^rity. The real culprit
seeing his partner in this distress, and enquiring
the occasion of it, was informed by his com-
panion, that he missed a part of the stock, which
did not belong to his own share, and that as
he was alarmed at the thoughts of being sus-
pected of the theft, he was desirous of proving
his innocence by paying the value of what had
been lost ; upon which the other desired him to
be under no apprehensions, adding that deceit
was one of the worst crimes which a man can
commit, and that treachery and cunning never
lead to good; that he who practises them, is
always the victim of his own contrivances, and
the author of wrong severely atones for the
propensity which he has encouraged : and upon
this he confessed his dishonest intentions, and
detailed the manner in which he had designed
to put them into execution. His partner told


him that the disappointment which he had met
with, was like that which happened to the thief,
who knowing that a merchant had at home two
jars, one filled with wheat, and the other with
gold, watched his opportunity one day that the
merchant was gone out, and contrived to enter
privately into his house, and conceal himself
there ; and after having searched for some time
for the two jars, he at length found them, and
taking by mistake that which contained the
wheat instead of that in which the money was
placed, he did not discover his error till the
next morning, when instead of the satisfaction,
with which he had flattered himself at the success
of his ingenuity, he had to regret the time and
trouble which' he had unprofitably employed.
The false partner acknowledged the justice of
the comparison, shewed contrition for his crime
which he ascribed to the influence of his corrupt
affections, and received pardon and forgiveness
from the friend, whom he had designed to
deceive, being only reminded of his fault by the
distrust which his character and conduct un-
avoidably drew after them.

Now in conclusion it cannot be too often
repeated, that the person who gives up his time


61


to the study of this book, must hot be satisfed
with the superficial beauties of the images by
which it may attract, but must search out the
depth arid hidden tendency of its fables, extract-
ing from every proverbial expression the truth
which it conceals, and giving to every word its
moral import; in short, he must imitate in his
conduct the prudence and foresight of the young-
est of three brothers, whose history is related
in the following manner. Their father having
left them a large fortune to be divided amongst
them, the two eldest immediately entered upon
a course of such extravagant expenditure, that
in a short time they had nothing left; their
younger brother, seeing the state . and condition
to which their prodigality had reduced them^
could not help reflecting with himself on the
value of riches and their proper object; he
considered money as offering to its possessor
the means of prolonging his existence, and of
surrounding it with the enjoyments of life; of
procuring for him distinction in the eyes of the
world, and of raising him above the necessity of
depending upon others for the satisfying of his
wants. He acloiowledged with gratitude the
kind dispensation of fate in enabling the rich


62

man to provide at his ease for the educatioi
and establishment of his children, or to extent
his bounty to his relations, if he has no ofTsprii^
of his own ; but he pronounced wealth impro
perly consumed to be no better than poverty
when we consider the purposes of nature in thi
unequal distribution of her gifts ; while he an
ticipated for the prudent and useful managemen
of it corresponding blessings, in the certainty o
its duration, and the sweet incense of meritec
praise, unalloyed by the inconveniencies and th<
repining, which make a lavish waste more sen
sibly felt. After reasoning in this manner, h<
determined to make use of the property whicl
had feUen to his share for the advantage botl
of himself and brethren ; who notwithstandin)
they had been themselves the authors of thei
own misfortune, had still he thought some clain
on what had belonged to their common father
for if the prayer of the stranger, said he, in th<
hour of need is entitled to be favourably heard
how can the pitifiil voice of a brother in distres
remain unheeded? Now a similar degree c
sober reflection and prudent determination, i
indispensable to the reader of this book, if h
would avoid the fate of the sportsman, wh«


63


fisbii^ one day in a liyar, saw a tdidl at die
bottom of the water, and threw in his net to
draw it ont, faut £pdled in his attempt, and cao^t
a fish instead of it; which, notwithstanding
it was sufficiently large to sarve him for food
during the whole day, he did not think worth
keeping, but jumped into the riirer to obtain the
shdl ; and having brought it out, he found that
it was empty, and r^retted that he had lost a
certain good by his covetousness and eagerness
to obtain a greater. On the following day he
returned to the same river, and threw in his net,
and he took a small fish ; at the same time he
observed another shell, but paid no attention to
it, fearing that he should be disappointed as on
the preceding day ; but a fisherman passing by,
and being attracted by its beauty, got it out of the

water, and found in it a pearl of great value ;

— V
and as great a treasure awaits the researches of \

the person who carries his enquiries deeper than

the superficial examination of this book : whereas

on the other hand, whoever regards it only in

the light of an amusing history, will be as little

rewarded for his pains, and will meet with as

great a dissq^pointment, as the farmer, who

sowed good seed in fertile ground, and when


64

the crop appeared, in his haste to destroy the
weeds, rooted up the com at the same time.

It is essential in the last place to bear in mind,
that the author of this work had four objects in
view, when he composed it. The first was to
render it attractive to the young reader, by
the ministry of birds and beasts : the second
was to engage the attention of princes, by the
conduct of the animals, in the different circum-
stances in which they are placed : the third was
to promote the amusement and excite the
curiosity of every class, and thereby contribute
to the lasting preservation of a book, which,
fourthly, philosophers would not exclude from
the sphere of their speculations.


65


THE HISTORY OF BARZOUYEH THE PHYSICIAN,
COMPOSED BY BUZURDJMIHR THE SON OF
BAKHTEGAN.

BARZOUYEH the chief of the Persian phy-
sicians, who was employed to take a copy of
this book and to translate it out of the Indian
tongue, as has been previously mentioned, thus
relates his own history: My father was a
military man, and my mother was of one of the
best femilies of the Brahmins. My birth took
place under fortunate circumstances, and I was
the favourite child of my parents, who bestowed
more pains on my education than on that of my
brothers.

Now when I had reached my seventh year,
my parents placed me under the care of a tutor ;
and as isoon as I had made some progress^ in
the elementary branches of learning, I turned
my thoughts to more scientific pursuits, and
conceived a strong passion for the study of
physic; which increasing every day with the
opportunities which I had of reducing my Imow-
ledge to practice by visiting the sick, I felt
it right to pause for a moment in order to

F


66

examine soberly some doubts which had arisen
in my mind respecting the appropriate objects
of human exertion^. I had to choose, as it
appeared to me, between four things, which in
general occupy the attention and engage the
affections of men ; the acquiring of riches, the
procuring a good name, the means of temporal
ei\joyment, and the provision for a iuture state ;
and discovering from the writings of the phy-
sicians, that the last was the aim which they
constantly had in view, I detennined to per->
severe in the profession which 1 had chosen,
lest I should be like the merchant who sold a
precious ruby for a pearl that was of no value :
I found besides in the books of the ancients,
that though the physician in his practice looks
chiefly to the reward of a happy futurity, he is
not however disappointed of his portion oi
worldly good; as the fanner, who sowed hU
land only for a crop of corn, found, when thi
harvest was over, that the ground was coverec
with grass. I therefore continued my practice
of physic, and did not refuse or n^lect to visi
any patient, whose cure I expected to effec
either entirely or in part ; and if personal attend
ance was sometimes out of my power, I pre


67

scribed the mediciiie^' whiefa: werei'prQper ii&t
his disease, withcmt^accepfii]^ any rouiiaer^^
for my advice, and without enyying^those^ tvho
with less knowledge than myself, made their
profession the means of amassing weajith, and
of striving at distinction and honour; and if at
any time I felt a secret longing in my. soul after
similar success, I reproached myself with not
being able to distinguish between my intereirt;
and my hurt, and with propensities, which we
attended with little or no profit, and are always
the source of uneasiness and anxiety ; and I
was ashamed at not always bearing in mind the
state which is to follow after this life, ths
thought of which is sufficient to make ua shun
the company of the wicked in the desire of
perishable things ; for to what in feet are our
possessions reduced I to a moment's enjoymcoat,'
of which we are as speedily robbed, and which
none but the foolish will think deserving of their
toils. With these reflections I endeavouied tq
fortify my resolution of preferring only whgat
was substantially good, knowing that our body
from its very constitution is subject to corrup-
tion, and that life, which is transitory, may be
compared to a statue, whose detached members

f2


68

are kept together by a single nail, which being
removed, the several joints give way, and the
parts fall asunder ; and of what solid or lasting
advantage is the society of friends or lovers,
whose pleasures are often purchased at a great
expence, and put an end to by a trifling inter-
ruption ; as a wooden dish, which has been used
for the table, when it is broken, is good foi
nothing but to become ftiel for the fire. I con-
sidered moi'eover, that the proffered services o:
a friend, often taking their source in some
scheme of private advantage, are unprofitable ii
their result to him, on whom his professions
have been lavished, as the aromatic smell o
incense which a man has been at the pains o
lighting in his land, is lost upon himself, an<
its fragrance wafted to those who are aroum
him ; and the result of this self-examination wa
a fixed purpose to raise my thoughts beyon<
the limits of this fading world, to the contem
plation of my future existence, lest rating to
highly the little which we enjoy here belom
and makii^ an unjust estimate of the greate
good which will be revealed hereafter, I shoul(
be deceived in my calculations, like the mei
chant, who having a great quantity of sands


69

wood in his house, determined to sell it by
weight, that his stock might last the longer,
sgid in this manner disposed of it for less than
its value : I therefore felt more and more con-
vinced, that if I fixed my affections on things
of unapproved worth, or listened to the sug-
gestions of my ill-regulated passions, my cre-
dulity would be repaid by disappointment and
trouble ; and I wa^ confirmed in this persuasion
by the story of the thief, who having formed
with some of his companions a plan for robbii^
the house of a rich man, made so much noise
that he awakened the owner; who informed
his wife of what he had heard, and desired
her to be still, as he thought there were thieves
breaking into his house; he then told her
to pretend to awaken him by making a noise,
which the thieves might hear, and to ask
him to give her some account of his great
fortune and riches ; and when I desire you, said
the master of the house to his wife, to hold your
tongue, you must not forget to be more earnest
and louder in your demand. The wife did as her
husband had desired her, and the thieves listened
attentively to all that was passing. The hus-
band then told his wife, that if fortune had been

f3


70

bountiful to them, she ought to be satisfied with
liie possession bf what fate had given them ;
for if I iiiform you, continued he, of the means
by which I have acquired my riches, it is pos-
&^]e that I shall be overheard, and we may
both of us< sufifer for my imprudence and indis*
cretioni- The -wife assured him that there was
no one near, to hear what he related; upon
wbich he acceded to her request. J have col-
lected together, said he, all that I possess by my
dexterity in robbings and I never excited in any
one su^icion of my practices. One moon-light
flight I went out with my companions, and
climbing up to the top of the house of a rich
person like ourselves, I went to the aperture
which was made for the admission of light,
>^ v^ and used an incantation, which consisted in
' y^^^"^ pronouncing seven times, Shulamy Shulam; then
^ I'-embraced: the light, and no one perceived

that I had let myself down into the room. I
th«a took away all the money and furniture
which I could find, and repeating the same in-
cantation seven times, I embraced the light, and
it drew me up ; theh L went to my companions,
smd we retired unmolested. When the thieves
he&xA this, they congratulated themselves on the


'.*•


71

discovery which they had made, and promfced
themselves a lai^e booty; they therefore ' re-
mained quiet, till they thought that the man and
his wife were asleep; then the leader of them
went to the window^ and said, Shtdamy SAulam,
seven times, and embraced the light, that he
might let himself down into the room, but
fallii^ backwards upon his head on the floor,
llie husband immediately sprung out of his bed,
and rushed upon him with his club, and asking
him who he was, and what he wanted, was
answered by the thief, that he had been betrayed
by his too easy credulity, and was then reaping
the fruits of his error.

In the next place I proceeded to examine
the religions which prevailed, with a view of
choosing that which should appear to be the
best; but the conversations which I had with
various persons on the subject were so un-
satis£Bu;tory, and so little calculated to help me
to a prudent decision in the important question
with which I was occupied, that I felt that I
could not do better than firmly embrace the
persuasion of my forefathers : but this conviction
did not long retain the upper hand; for notwith-
standing the speciousness with which I laboured

F 4


72

to fence it round, it was assailed by the iire-
sistible desire of sifting to the bottom the pre^
tensions of the different systems of belief: I.
could not however forget, that the term of my
existence was fast approaching, and the end of
all worldly things near at hand, and that the
thread of life is often cut asunder in the very
moment that health and happiness promise
to secure and enliven the continuance of our
being.

Whilst I was in this train of thought, and in
this state of indecision and restless impatience,
I compared myself to the man, of whom it is
said, that he was in love with a married woman,
and that she, in order to facilitate their private
meetings, and to afford her lover the means of.
escaping in case of surprise, had a subterraneous
passage dug from her house to the road, and
the door placed near a well of water, which in
case of diflGiculty might serve as a direction to it.
Now it happened one day that her husband ar-
rived unexpectedly, and as soon as his wife-
heard him at the dOor, she desired her lover to
lose no time, but to retire as quickly as possible
by the passage which was near the well ; upon .
which he left her ; but almost immediately re-


73

turned, and said that he could find no well of
water to direct him to the passage ; (for she had
forgotten to mention that the well had been
filled up.) The wife asked him in an angry tone,
what he had to do with the well ; that she had
only spoken of it in order to assist him if ne*
cessary in finding out the passage, but that being
once there, he had nothing to do but to go
strai^t on. The man reproached her with hav^
ing mentioned the well, and thereby perplexed
him to no purpose in his endeavour to find it
out : and this altercation lasted, till the husband
made his appearance, who laying hands upon
the lover, delivered him over to the supreme au-
thority of the place. I began then clearly to see
the inconvenience and danger of an unsettled
state of mind, without any determinate rale of
conduct or opinion, and resolved, by listening
to that warning voice which never £ails to m^ke
itself distinctly heard within us, to trace out a
line of life for myself which no system of religion
could condemn. I conceived an abhorrence of
war and violence of every sort ; I stopped up the
avenues in my heart to lying, deceit, calumny,
and all uncharitable and unsocial feelii^ ; and
I endeavoured to fortify my belief in a fiiture


74

state of rewards ahd punishments, thereby roi
bing the unreal, though in many instances sp
cious chairms of wickedness, of one engine, I
which Ihey subjugate the understanding ai
enchain the sotil, and (Strengthening my pc
severance in that;icourse of moral disciplm
which, acting the part of a faithful monitor,
the <safest companion we can take for a
journey through life, and which, with the blec
ing and. aid* of Providence, is continually si
vancing us to that state of high perfection, whi
is placed out of the reach of the chances of tl
world, where every thing is so unstable and i
secure, and is not exposed like ' the stores
wealth to be annihilated by expenditure, r
offers any temptation to the hand of the robb
or to a violent exertion of arbitrary power, whi
at one stroke deprives us of our all : nor
the elements conspire against it, which of
subject our property to inundations, and :
ravages of fire. The man, who is more anxi<
about the little which he enjoys to-day, i
perhaps may lo^ to-morrow, than about w
is substantially and^ lastingly beneficial, is 1
the merchant who had a very precious pe
and hired a man to bore it, engaging to pay 1


75

a hnndred dinars for the day's work. When he
had conducted the workman to his house, he
led him into a room, where there happened to
be a pair of cymbals lying in the comer, and he
asked him if he could play upon them ; and the
workman having answered in the affirmative, the
merchant desired him to ^ve him a specimen of
his talent, upon which he began to beat the cym-
bals, the merchant keeping time with his hands
and head, and continued playing till the evening,
and then asked for the reward, which had been
agreed upon. The merchant told him that he
had not finished his work, to which the other re-
plied, that he had done as he had been ordered,
and insisted upon receiving the hundred dinars;
which the merchant in the end was obliged to
pay, and his pearl remained untouched.

The more therefore I considered the world,
and what it has in its power to oiSer to its vota-
ries, the more reason I saw for bidding adieu
to its favours, and removing at a distance from
its temptations ; and 1 became convinced, that
religion with all the tenderness of a parent to-
wards its child, would smooth the path which
leads out of this to another life, and open the
door to lasting satisfaction; for the religious man


7e

meditates with composure on all that he does
he is grateful, humble, contented, free froi
anxiety and trouble, not attached to world
and sensual delights, pure and chaste in b
thoughts, not given to envy, and so cautious
weighs every action he performs, that repentant
never follows upon his steps, and neither drea
ing nor flattering men, he is always at pea
with them.

With these reflections my attachment to a re
gious life grew gradually stronger, though mix(
at times vidth secret forebodings of weakn€
and inability to persevere in the course whicl
could not help approving, but which at the sar
time would draw me off" from another of whi
I had already begun to taste the sweets, ai
which my success in my profession render
every day more attractive. And I had a seci
dread of offering a parallel to the example
the dog, who having come to a river with a bo
in his mouth, saw its shadow in the water, a:
fancying that it was another, sprung in to sei
it, and thus not only lost what he had, but g
nothing in return : in this manner I was alt
nately assailed by considerations which stiff
lated me to persevere in my resolution, and


77

doubts and scruples which made me waver in
my purpose ; and I instituted a comparison of
the austerities of religion and the sacrifices
which it demands, with the trials which the
man of the world is bound to undergo, and
could not help confessing, that the most ex-
quisite delights of worldly enjoyment are as
little calculated to satisfy the mind and to shield
it against the attacks of sorrow and dissatis-
faction, as a draught of salt water is able to
quench the thirst which it only serves to in-
crease :. that the gratifications which promise to
be a source of contentment, are as illusory as
the bone which a dog found, and being made
greedy by the smell of meat which it had not
lost, continued to gnaw it, till his mouth bled ;
or perhaps as fatal to their possessor as the bit
of flesh to the kite, who was in consequence
attacked by the other birds and killed : and I
compared the pleasures of life to a bag of honey
containing poison at the bottom, whose taste,
whilst it is agreeable to the palate, is insensibly
producing death ; or to a dream, with which a
man is delighted in his sleep, but which leaves
no trace on his mind, by which he can recall it
to his recollection in his waking hours. The


78

charms therefore and advantages of a religiot
life painted themselves in stronger coloons 1
my mind, and 1 became dissatisfied with tt
continual vacillation in my opinions, embracis
at one moment a line of conduct, which ' i f
speedily rejected the next ; like the judge, wh
having heard one party, gave a decision in h
favour, but as soon as he had listened to th
other, reversed his judgment. Amidst this coi
flict of passions 1 asked myself, if the hardship
of religion deserved a moment's consideratioi
when put into the balance against the calm an
uninterrupted repose of eternity ; and whetb
transitory bliss would not be too dearly pu
chased by lasting misery and punishmeilt thi
would not cease ; and whether a bitter draugl
in the present life mixed up with the assurance
of the sweets of happiness hereafter was m
better than the overflowing cup of worldly jo;
which would beco'flie the measure of future to
ment. I felt persuaded that, were it propose
' to a: man to live an hundred years, and ever
day to have a small portion of his body cut ol
on coiidition that at the expiration of the tern
he should be released from all trouble and pah
and enter into a state of comfort and securit'


79

he would re^rd this limited space of snfifenng
as insignificant: and it is thus with the patk^nce
and endurance ^hich religion requires' for the
few sacrifices which it imposes ; and after all,
what is the. .life of man, but a state of being,
which through all the diiSerent stages of exist-
ence, from the embryo in the womb, to the old
man descending into his grave, is exposed to
trials and vicissitudes M The helpless infant,
the fractious child, the impatient youth, the
busy man. the more advanced period of life,
and, finally, the infirmities of age pointing to the
hour, which is to close the scene, which friends
have enlivened and made dear, all present
aspects of such painful variety and mortifica-
tion, that the prudent man should occupy him-
self with more serious thoughts, than what the
business of this transitory state can supply.
And I became more strengthened in the con-
viction of this truth from the state of manners
of the country in which 1 lived, where, notwith-
standing the character of the king, who was

* I have in tbfs place considerably abridged the original^
whidi offers a tedious display of anatomical observations
neither instructive nor amusing.


80

distiiigiiished for justice, nobleness of sentimei
int^rity, knowledge of men and things, ^
quaibtance with the sciences, love of good ai
hatred of injtistice, the age appeared to be goi
backwards, and all respect for virtue and re
gion was lost in a perversity of will and choic
Honest men grew indifferent, and the bad foui
their account in vidckedness; understands
was set at nought, and vanity had taken :
place; the oppressor walked boldly in op
day, and lust and covetousness had laid asi<
all restraint and shame, because contentme
was looked upon as a weakness. Reputati<
was no longer an object of anxiety, becau
worthlessness had come into honour and pow<
and men of character were obliged to reti
before the pretensions of aspiring and success!
criminality ; and it was painful to behold amid
this triumph of evil over every thing that w
good, how men possessed of reason could
far foi^t the dignity of their nature, and H
proud eminence on which they stood, as to lo
sight in sensual gratifications of the high destii
of their soul. I therefore compared the humj
race to a man, who, flying from a furious el
phant, goes dovra into a well ; he suspends hii


81

§ ...

self from two branches; ^nrhich afe<at the* brksi
of it, whilst his feet' restrjiponr'isoiiiethiiig i^t»
jectmg out of itsr sides/ .wMefr {)royea> to^ 'be the
heads of four seipents^ a^peanjig* outiofiitheir
holes Y2X the bottoms he discovers a- dragon* with
its mouth open ready : to swallow him if *I6
should fall; and raising his eye towards thfet^o
branches, he sees two rats, on^ white > and the
other black, which are incessantly gnawing then*
stems ; at the same moment his attention ii^'ar*
rested by the sight of a bee*hiye, and b^in^
lung eageriy to taste the honey, he is ;go taken
up with its sweetness, that he forgets that. -his
feet are resting upon the serpents, that the rats
are gnawing the branches to which he is hang-
ing, and that the dragon is ready to devour him,
and thus his inconsiderateness and folly only
cease with his existence. I considered the well
to represent the world with the train of ills
which belong to it : the four serpents are the
four humours in the human body, which being
disturbed in their mutual action become so
many deadly poisons : the two rats are mght
and day, which are* continually shorteningM the
spad^ of man's life t the dragon is the term of
bein^, which sooner or later awaits us all r and

o


82

tiiie honey those animal indulgences, which by
their delusive influence turn us away from the
path of duty. I therefore finally determined to
remain in my present state, watching over my
actions, with the steady purpose of carrying
them to the highest degree of perfection ai
which I should be capable, in the hope that I
should one day find a guide for my conduct, a
controlling power for the affections of my soul,
and a faithfiil administrator of my worldly af-
fairs. I translated many books, and returned
from India after having committed this tc
writing.


THE LION AND THE BULL.

BlDPAI, who was the chief of the Brahmins
was . one day summoned into the presence c
king Dabschelim, and being commanded to n
late the story of the two fiiends, whose mutui
esteem and unreserved famiUarity a false an
designing companion succeeded in changing inf
sentiments of hatred and revenge^ he began i
the foUovnng manner: When two friends a<


83


cept the officious services of a person notorious
for falsehood and deceit, their speedy disunion
is the inevitable consequence of their misplaced
confidence, as illustrated in the following story.
There was in the country of Distawand an
old man, who had three sons, who being grown
up, dissipated the fortune of their father, and
had recourse to all possible means of improving
their temporal condition, notwithstanding the
admonitions and exhortations of their agecj
parent, who was continually pointing out to
them the fatal consequences of their conduct.
On one occasion he thus addressed them : My
sons, the man of the world is in search of three
things ; an independent fortune, consideration
in life, and the provision for a future state : but
to the attainment of these, four conditions are
indispensable ; incorruptible integrity in the ob-
taining of riches, security for the acquired good,
its productive employment, and its appropriation
to the lawful enjoyments of life and the benefit
of himself and others ; without which his pro-
spect in a future state will be clouded by appre-
hension and dread, and his expectations even
in this life attended with ^disappointment; for
either his failure in the acquisition of wealth will

g2


84

«

be followed by the loss of worldly happiness, or
bk acquired possessions being built on a sandy
foundation will every moment be in danger oi
falling, and will cov^ him in tiieir ruins, or else
his accumulated but inactive stores vnll gra-
dually but sensibly diminish, even under the
deceitful safeguard of a niggardly expenditure,
as the **kohl is imperc^tibly coiisumed by the
successive application of its minutest particles to
the eye-brow ; and if he is inconsiderate in the
purposes to which he applies and in the choice
of the places where he deposits his riches, he will
scarcely be more benefited by them than he who
has nothing, and expose himself to the risk oi
being violently deprived of them ; as the lake,
which has no sufficient outlet to the accumula-
tion of the streams which serve to fill it, over*
flows its banks, and the water is lost.

The sons of the old man listened with the
greatest attention to the discourse of their father

^ The kohl was a coll3rriiim used for colouring the eye
brows; and though only just so much of the composition wai
employed at one time as could be taken up with the poin
of an instrument made for the purpose^ still the ointment
kept gradually diminishing, and must in the end be entirel}
consumed ; the application to inactive riches is obvious^


85

aad were unable to dispute the justice of his
r^roof. Now it happened sometime after that
the eldest set out on a journey to the country of
Mioun, and as he was travelling in his carriage
drawn by two bulls, the one named Schan-
zabehy and the other Bandaneh, he came to a
part of the road which was rendered impassable
by the mud ; Schanzabeh stuck fast in the mire,
and was unable to proceed, notwithstanding
the efforts which were made to extricate him ;
till at length the traveller being wearied with
his exertions, and impatient at the delay which
they occasioned, determined to continue bis
journey, leaving one of the company behind
with Schanzabeh, with orders to remain with
him, hoping that when the road became dry, he
would be able to follow him with the bull. The
man having passed the night on the spot to no
purpose, grew tired of waiting, so he quitted the
beast, and having rejoined his master, told him
that the btdl was dead ; adding, Behold, when
a man's hour is come, and the day of his death
is at hand, his labour is in vain, for his precau-
tions cannot arrest the arm which is lifted up
to strike him, his toil is folly and his exertions
a mockery: he is like a man, who havmg gone

o3


86


into a desert, which abounded with wild beasts,
had not proceeded far before he saw a wolf ad-
vancing towards him; he looked to the right and
left for a way to escape, and discovering a small
village on the opposite side of a river, he ran in
haste to the bank, but found to his disappoint
ment that there was no bridge. The M'olf being
at his heels and in the act of springing upor
him, he had no time left for reflection, but threv^
himself at once, though unable to swim, into the
water, where he must inevitably have perished
had not some inhabitants of the village, wh(
had observed what had passed, come out to hii
assistance, and rescued him as he was on th<
point of sinking. The man being somewhat re
covered from his fright, and no longer in drea(
of the wolf, walked towards a single house
which he perceived on the side of the river, anc
entering into it was struck at the sight of a com
pany of robbers, who from their appearanc
gSLve him no reason to congratulate himself o]
the asylum he had sought; and his apprehen
sions were not a little increased, on discoverin;
that the banditti were employed m sharing
rich booty, which, he had no doubt, was th
plunder of some merchant, whom they ha<


87

waylaid and murdered : he therefore lost no
time in making his escape as quickly as pos-
sible, and went to the village, and was leaning
with his back against a wall, to take a moment's
breath, when it fell down upon him, and crushed
him to death. The merchant acknowledged
the force of his servant's reasoning, but observed
at the same time that the story was not new to
him.

Whilst this was passing, the bull contrived to
release himself from the mud, and having be-
come his own master, he sought out the richest
pastures, grew fat, and returned to his habits of
gallantry with the females of his species, which
he met vidth in his rambles. In the neighbour- .
hood, where he was, was a large forest, the
haunt of a noble lion, who was the sovereign of
those parts, and had in his service wolves,
jackals, foxes, hyenas, panthers, and other ani-
mals. But notvdthstanding this numerous suite,
his majesty the lion had so high an opinion of
his own sagacity and wisdom, that he thought
it beneath his dignity, and insulting to the here-
ditary knowledge of a great king, ever to ask
advice of any of his attendants ; but happening
one day to hear the bellowing of the bull, with

g4


88

which, net withstanding the extent of his le^tm*
iBg,;he was hithecto unacquainted, baying never
had any animal of the kind inhia service, hisastor
nilsrfament so far got the better of his natural ha-
fatts^' that he remained riveted, to the spot where
he stood, and commanded that his food should
be brought to him thither every day.

Now amongst the. number of his attendants
were two jackals, Kalila and Dimna, both of
them very cunning and clever. What can be
the reason, said Dimna one day to his brother
Kalila, that the lion does not quit the place
where he is? Your .question, replied Kalila, is
not a little surprising. Our business is to wait
upon the king, to rec^ve his orders, obey his
commands, and avoid whatever may be dis-
agreeable to him; and our rank and conse-
quence are not suflSciently great to entitle us to
the honour of conversing with our sovereign, or
to give us the privilege of prying mto his affaks.
I recommend to you for the future more pru-
dence and circumspection in your conduct, lest
your curiosity and indiscretion should expose
you to the fate of the xarpenter's monkey^ who
having seen his master sitting upon a log of
wood, in order to split it with two wedges.


89

took it into his head, one day that he was
left quite alone, to imitate his example; for
this pmpose he seated himself oti a similar
piece of wood, with his tail towards the wedge
which remained in the fissm-e, and his face
towards that with which he was to continue
his work ; in this posture his tail hanging down
in the part o[ the block which was split, the
wood, upon his suddenly removing the wedge
which was behind him, closed upon it, and the
violence of the pain made him fall from his seat
and faint away : at this moment the carpenter
arrived, and without considering what his
monkey had already suffered, he beat him so
unmercifully, that it was difficult to say whether
his own indiscretion or the rage of his master
was the most fatal to him. I comprehend your
meaning, replied Dimna, but am not convinced
by your reasoning. Those who are allowed
to approach their sovereign, should have a
nobler motive in view than their own private
interest ; their aim should be to secure his pro-
tection for his friends, and to put him upon his
guard against his enemies. Persons who have
no energy of character will be contented with
an inferior station, and grasp with eagerness at


90

the boon of an humble pittance, like the dog,
who is satisfied with a dry bone ; whereas on
the other hand, men of distinguished merit
and a vigorous understanding will indignantly
refuse to move for ever in a sphere which is to€
confined for the exercise of their talents, and
disproportioned to their high deserts. The
lion will condescend to feed upon a hare, til
the camel come in his way, and offer him thi
prospect of a more worthy prey ; but the do^
'will fawn and wag his tail for the scanty morse
that is thrown to him ; unlike the elephant, wh<
requires to be caressed before he will eat of tb

I food which is placed before him. He who ha
a proper sense of his own superiority, thougl
his life be short, may yet be said to have livei
long ; whilst he, whose abject soul can repres
the emotions of true greatness, which ar
struggling in his breast, though he may protrac
his existence beyond the years which are usuall
allotted to his species, has in reality lived but
moment, when compared with the man, whos
shorter span of being has been filled up by illui?

(^^ous deeds. The wretch who can sit contente
with the lot of mediocrity, is no better than th
beasts which perish, and leave no memori?


91

behind them. Once more I beseech you, bro-
ther, answered Kalila, to attend to the dictates
of your good sense, for it is but reasonable that
a man should be satisfied with the rank in life
to which his claims entitle him ; and surely the
distinction which we enjoy is not so dispropor-
tioned to our merit, that our actual situation
should make us consider it beneath our deserts.
Dimna. Degrees of honour are commensurate
with the stock of personal character, which is
the ladder, by which a man ascends from the
lowest to the highest steps of advancement, and
the want of which precipitates the unworthy
favourite of fortune into the place which is his
due ; and though the rise to distinction be an
arduous task, and the fall from the eminence
of glory easy, arid which may be compared, the
former to the difficulty with which a stone of
great weight is Ufted up to be placed upon the
back ; and the latter to the facility with which
it is thrown. from thence upon the ground ; still
however this should not deter us from extending
our views beyond the sphere in which we are
moving, when circumstances seem to have put
into our power the means of success. Kalila.
What is it then that you intend to do? JDimna.


92

My intention ^is . to solicit an lAudience x>£ the

lioii, and if I find him undecided homr to act out

the present/occasion^ I^will make his embarras-

ment the means of my advancement. Kalila.

But what makes you think that the lion is in

any difficulty? Dimna. My own observation;

for to the observing eye the outward manner

is the surest key to the secrets of the hearts

Kalila. But how can you expect to meet vdth

any favourable notice from the Hon, without

possessing the qualifications of a minister?

Dimna. A strong man, though not used to

carry great burthens, does not sink under the

heaviest weight, but no practice can give a

weak man the power of lifting a weight which

is beyond his strength. Kalila. A king does

not always think it necessary to select the

worthiest objects for the business of the state ;

it is often sufficient to be near his person, in

order to become the minion of his favour, as

the vine attaches itself to the nearest tree ; and

this is a privilege which you have never enjoyed.

Dimna. I understand the purport of what you

say, but you forget that those who are the

unworthy favourites of the king, and are at this

moment enjoying his unmerited protection, have


^ t


93

no greater claims to his countenance and support
from the circumstance of their being employed
accidentally about his person, than he nrfao has
alivays. lived at a distance from court, and ap-
proaches his sovereign for the first time in his
life. •' My endeavour Mill be to prove, by my
diligence and activity, that I am qualified for
the post of which they are in possession, and
to exhibit in my whole conduct and deport-
ment that fireedom from haughtiness, that
patience under unmerited and unprovoked
calumny, that unruffled temper and good-breed-
ing, which are indispensable to public men in
the pursuit of the objects of their laudable
ambition. KaUla. Well, granted that you are
allowed to approach the lion, upon what do
you ground your hopes of a fevourable recep-
tion ? Dimna. When I have succeeded so far
as to be admitted familiarly to the presence and
conversation of the king, my next step will
be to become thoroughly acquainted with his
temper and disposition ; and having discovered
these, I shall take care, always watching his
whims and caprices, to contradict him as seldom
as possible; and if I see him bent upon any
thing, from which I can anticipate benefit or


94


advantage to the country, I will place it in the
most favourable point of view, in order to flatter
him with an opinion of his judgment and know-'
ledge of affairs ; if on the other hand passion
or. ignorance should make him command any
measure either injurious or dishonourable, I will
do my utmost, by placing the evil which may
result from it in the strongest light, to make
him desist from his purpose; by these means
I hope to gain his confidence and esteem by
my extraordinary services ; for the talent of the
statesman in being able to give to actions the
complexion which he pleases, is not unlike that
of the painter, who by his knowledge of per-
spective practises a pleasing delusion on the
eyes of the beholder. Kalila. Be this as it
may, I shall always think that this familiarity
with the sovereign will be attended with danger
to you ; for it is an old saying, that there are
three things, against which every one who is in
his senses will be upon his guard, owing to the
difficulty of preventing their evil consequences ;
the confidence of a sovereign, the entrusting a
secret to a woman, and drinking poison in ordei
to try its effects ; and a king has not been
unaptly compared to a steep mountain, abound-


95


ing with fruits and precious stones, and medi-^
cinal herbs, but at the same time the haunt of
wild beasts, the difficulty of whose ascent, if it
should be fortunately overcome, is succeeded
if not by certain and speedy destruction, at
least by continual insecurity. Dimna. There
is certainly much truth in what you say, but
your conclusions would lead to the condemn-
ation of all spirited and laudable exertion, if
the possibility of failure in any great undertaking
were always to be considered as a sufficient
reason for not entering upon the trial; you
would exclude from the path of human am-
bition all interference in state affairs, all com-
mercial enterprize, and the pursuit of military
renown ; forgetting that the man of strong un-
derstanding and sound judgment has been
always held up as a pattern for imitation in two
situations, when either through the boldness of
his views, and the steadiness of his conduct, he
has raised himself to a post of high honour at
the court of his sovereign, or given an additional
worth and lustre to his talents by their exercise
in the cause of religion and virtue, as the ele-
phant excites our wonder by the free exertion
of his strength in his wild state, or commands


96

our admiration by his docility, when he has
learned to carry a king upon his back.

Kalila here wished his brother success, and
Dimna went immediately to the lion, who npan
hearing his name, recollected to have known
his father, and enquired what his business was.
Dimna replied, that he had been loiig seeking
an opportunity of offering his humble services
to the king in whatever way he would con-
descend to make use of him; that however
limited his pretensions might be, the example
of persons who scrape together every stick
whi^h they can find against a time of need,
gave him reason to hope, that his slender capa-
cities might find employment. At these words
the lion was not less astonivshed than pleased,
and immediately conceived a good opinion of
Dimna ; and going up to one of his attendants,
he observed to him, that men of understanding
and worth are often condemned to pass their
time in obscurity, till some sudden encourage-
ment produces a spark of emulation, which if
properly fed, bursts forth into a flame of patriotic
and useful conduct.

Now when Dimna had learned what impres-
sion he had made upon the king, he exclaimed.


97

The subjects in a state have no other motive for
presenting themselves to the notice of their sove-
reign than the hope of making him acquainted
with the abilities which they possess, and which
are most usefiilly exerted either in the cabi-
net or in the field. This previous knowledge
in a sovereign of the qualifications of those
whom he employs in the service of the state is
the more necessary, as a multitude of counsel-
lors, whose capacity for business has not been
already tried, greatly impede, by the confiisioit
and irregularity which they occasion, the benefit
which might be derived from a few faithfiil
and approved servants ; a king who is thus
surrounded by a number of unprofitable and
weak ministers, resembles the man who at the
end of his toil, in carrying a large stone of no
value, expires with fatigue, or one who having
occasion for the trunk of a palm tree, gathers a
number of reeds. And the king is too just to
despise real worth, though in a person of little
reputation, who often by the greatness of his
deeds belies his humble origin, as the tendon
which is taken fi*om a dead animal, when
adapted into a bow, becomes a weapon, which

H


98


the hand of a monarch does not disdain to
wield.

The object of Dimna in speaking thus was
to shew to the persons who surrounded the king
and the people at large, that it was not as they
supposed to the reputation which his father had
enjoyed, but to his own personal character,
that he was indebted for the countenance and
support, with which the king honoured him ; and
this induced him to add, that it would be unjusi
in a sovereign to estimate the merit or demerit
of the son by that of the father, without anj
regard to individual worth, and that it would
be no less imprudent in him to suppose, that
the bare circumstance of being about his person,
could impart wisdom to his attendants, than it
would be dangerous to his health in the case oi
sickness, to trust entirely to the strength of hig
constitution, and refuse tlie assistance of his
physician. Here Dimna left off speaking ; and
the lion being pleased with what he heard, gave
him a favourable answer, remarking at the same
time to his court, that it was unbecoming in a
king not to respect legitimate pretensions, and
to imitate the conduct of the world at large,


m

whose inhabitants mi^ht be divided into two
classes, and compared the one on account of
its malignant disposition to the serpent, which
being trod upon and forbearing at first to sting,
darts its venom into the foot which bruises it
a second time ; and the other on account of its
meekness and inoffensive manner to the co)d
sandal wood, which in spite of its smooth
surface and unsuspicious form, suddenly takes .
fire firom excessive rubbing.

From henceforth Dimna began to be admitted
to great familiarity with the lion ; and as he had
often the honour of being alone vnth him, he
took occasion one day to ask the cause of his
remaining so long in the same place; at this
moment Schanzabeh began to bellow very
loudly, which alarmed the lion, and produced
in him a sensation which he refused to explain
to Dimna, though the latter did not fail to
observe it ; and therefore asked the lion, if the
noise which he had heard had frightened him ;
and being answeUred in the affirmative, he ex-
pressed his surprise, that sotrilSing an occurrence,
which really did not deserve attention, should
have obliged the king to forsake his usual habits.
The lion, not being yet at his ease, asked for

h2


100

some further explanation, Dimna proceeded

thus : A fox came once into a wood where a

driim was hanging in a tree, and as often as the

wind blew amongst the branches, the drum

sounded, which astonished the fox on account

of the unusual noise which he heard ; but having

advanced towards it, he was struck at its size,

and anticipated a delicious repast: at length

having got it into his possession, he turned il

about till he broke it, and discovered it to be

hollow, and that notwithstanding its bulk, anci

the distinctness of the sound which it sen

forth, it was weak and contemptible : he thei

begged permission of the king to go and explon

the nature of the noise which had surprised him

declaring it as his opinion that it would tun

out to be no real subject for alarm: and th

king consented. Upon this Dimna immediate!

set out in search of Schanzabeh ; and he ha

scarcely left the presence of the lion, before th

latter began to reflect on what had passed, an

to repent of having entrusted him with tli

mission. For this Dimna, said he to himsel

was in a very low situation, and if he has carrie

away with him the notion, that his pretensioi

have been passed over, and others preferrc


101


before him, whose claims were not so great as
his own, or that any injustice has been'practised
towards him, and he has been made to suffer
unmerited oppression and persecution; if his
ruUng passions be cupidity and criminal am-
bition, for the gratification of which he has been
guilty of crimes of which he dreads the punish-
ment; or if his hopes of aggrandizement are built
on the dishonour of the king, and his schemes
of advancement incompatible with the nation's
prosperity, which would render him an accept-
able and ready tool in foreign hands ; if all or
any of these suppositions be true, I have been
wrong in placing confidence in one, who to the
feelings of wounded pride and the sentiments
of hatred and meditated revenge, unites not
only the talents which are necessary to carry
his purposes into execution, but at the same
time the art of concealing his treachery under
the mask of patriotism and disinterestedness;
and what security have I that his hostile dis-
position towards me will not find support and
encouragement with some enemy more powerfiil
than I am, who is probably the author of the
noise which has alarmed me, and into whose
service he will enter ! At this moment he ad-

H 3


102

vanced a few steps, and saw Dimna retuniii^
to him, and became miore composed ; then he
went back to his place, and as soon as Dimna
reached him, he enquired of him what he had
neea, and received for answer, that it was
nothing but a bull which had made the noise.
The lion. And did he appear to be possessed
of great strengtii? Dimna. By no means. I
^vanced towards him, and addressed him as
my equal, but he paid no attention to me. The
Ucn. You must not be deceived by appearances,
for the strong gale which passes harmless over
the tender shrub, breaks by its violence the
tall paim. Dimna. Be not alarmed, O king!
I will reduce him to submission, if your majesty
^yteases. The lion assented to the proposal, and
Dimna returned to the bull, and told him, that
he had received the commands of the lion to
conduct him into bis presence, and assured him
oi pardon for his past offence in having omitted
to present himself before the king, not forget-
ting to mention the strict injunctions he had
received, to report without delay any refusal on
his part to appear. Schanzabeh having asked
for some further account of the lion, Dimna
informed him, that he was the king of the


103


beasts, and tiiat his residence, where he was
surrounded by his numerous attendants, was at
no great distance. This account alarmed Schan-
zabeh not a little ; but having obtained repeated
assurances of safe conduct and protection against
all danger from the beasts, he accompanied
Dimna to the lion, who received him very gra-
ciously, asked him how long he had been in the
country, and what business brought him thither;
upon which Schanzabeh related his whole his-
tory, which pleased the lion so much, that he
desired him to remain with him, and promised to
raise him to dignities and honour. After this the
lion became so intimate with Schanzabeh, that he
made him the depositary of his secrets, and con-
sulted him on every occasion, and his admiration
of him continually increased. Nowwhen Dimna
perceived that the bull was more honoured by the
lion than he and his companions, that he had
become his bosom friend, his associate in retire-
ment, and the partner of all his pleasures, his
envy and anger so far got the better of his pru-
dence, that he ventured to complain aloud, and
reproached himself with weakness in neglecting
his own interest for the sake of serving the lion,
and in having been himself the cause of the ad-

h4


104


Yanceraent of his rival ; and when his lamenta-
tions reached the ear of Kalila, the consolation
which he received from his brother was con-
fined to the remark, that this was precisely the
case with the monk, whose history, at the re-
quest of Dimna, Kalila related in the following
manner. There was a monk, who on some oc-
casion received from a sovereign as a present a
magnificent robe, of which a thief, whose ward-
robe was not very well furnished, having seen
and admired it, determined in his own mind to
get possession ; for this purpose he came to the
monk, and professing the greatest admiration of
his learning, begged to receive the benefit of his
instruction; to which the monk assented, and
received him into his house, till at length the
thief so far got the better of his unsuspecting
benefactor, that he went off with his prize. The
suspicions of the monk as soon as he missed
his robe fell upon his pupil, and he lost no time
in commencing a search after his stolen goods ;
and as he was travelling along, he passed by
two goats, who were fighting, whilst a fox was
licking up the blood which flowed from their
wounds; who in his turn was so fiiriously at-
tacked by two other goats, that in a very short


105


time they killed him. After this the monk con-
tinued his journey, and arrived at a town, where,
not finding any inn to lodge him, he took up
his quarters in the house of a woman, who had
a young girl in her service, whose attractions
and* beauty she made no scruple of sacrificing
to her own private gain. The young woman
having formed a sincere and strong attachment,
her mistress had determined by the murder of
the lover on the very night on which the monk
arrived, to prevent the loss of her villanous
traffic : for this purpose, when the lover came to
visit his future bride, the woman placed before
him an intoxicating liquor, which having drunk
of, he soon fell into a sound sleep : she then took
a reed, and was in the act of blowing the poison
with which she had previously filled it into his
ear, when suddenly and unintentionally catch-
ing her breath, the poison returned into her own
throat, and caused instant death. Now all this
having passed in the presence of the monk, he
lost no time in quitting his lodging, and in look-
ing out for another, and at last established him-
self with a shoenifaker, who being informed by
his wife of the arrival of his guest, desired her
to pay him every attention in her power, and to


106

make his excuses for his unavoidable absence,
as he was engaged to a party at a friend's house.
It happened that the wife of the shoemaker had
a secret intrigue, and had made the wife of a^
surgeon her confidant; she therefore imme-
diately sent to her obliging female friend, re-
questing her to lose no time in desiring her
lovCT to come, and to assure him, that he need
be under no apprehension of a surprise, as her
husband, if he returned at all in the evening,
would have no notion from excess of drinking
of what was passing in his house. The lover
obeyed the summons, and was waiting below
for admission when the shoemaker arrived, who
notwithstanding the state of intoxication in
which he was, had still sufficiently the use
of his eyes to discover a person at his door,
and enough reason left to guess the object of
his being there : he therefore hastened as well
as he could to his wife, and vnthout entering
into any explanation, began to beat her unmer-
cifully, and having tied her to a pillar m the
house, tottered into bed. Shortly after the wife
of the surgeon came to her, told her that her
lover had been a long time waiting for her, and
asked her the meaning of her present situation ;


107

up(Hi wfaidi the wife of the shoemaker implored
her compassion, entreated her to suffer herself
to be l)Ound to the pillar in her stead, that she
might go to her lover, and promised to return
as quickly as possible. The surgeon's wife good
humouredly consented, and set her fiiend at
Uberty. Now, as ill luck would have it, the
shoemaker awoke before his wife returned, and
having called her twice by her name without
receiving any answer, (for the surgeon's vnfe did
not choose to betray herself,) he went to her in
a great rage, and with a knife cut off her nose,
desiring her to make a present of it to her lover.
At length the real culprit arrived, and when she
saw how her husband had treated the wife of
the sui^eon, she was distressed beyond mea-
sure ; but no other relief was at hand than im*
mediately to release her, and let her go home
with the loss of her nose ; and this also passed
under the eyes of the monk. Then the wife of
the shoemaker began to load her husband vnth
the most bitter imprecations, reproached him with
his barbarity towards her, and desired him to
look and see how gracious Providence had been
to her in restoring her nose. On hearing this the
husband immediately lighted a candle, and see-


108

ing to his astonishment his wife with her nose,
he begged pardon for his conduct, and shewed
signs of the deepest contrition for what he had
done. In the mean time the wife of the sur-
^on, who had now reached her own home,
was occupied in thinking how she should ac-
count to her husband and family for the loss of
her nose, and how she might remove any unfa-
vourable impression respecting her conduct, to
which this strange appearance would give rise.
For the present, she went to bed ; and in the
morning when her husband awoke, he desired
her to fetch him his instruments, as he had beeil
sent for by a patient ; upon which she got up,
and brought him his razor, and upon his asking
for all of them, she left the room, but returned
again with the razor; which put her husband into
such a violent passion, that he threw it at her,
and she immediately fell upon the ground, cry-
ing out, O! my nose! O! my nose! till her
screams brought all the people of the house
about her ; who, seeing the state in which she
was, seized the surgeon, and led him away to
the judge, who having interrogated him as to the
cause of his having treated his wife in so bar-
barous a manner, and hearing no suflScient rea-


109

son alleged in justification, ordered a similar
operation to be performed on him ; which was in
the act of taking place, when the monk sud-
denly appearing said that he would explain the
whole business. The thief, said he, was not the
occasion of the robbery of which I have to com-
plain, but my loss must be attributed to my
own indiscretion in admitting into my society a
stranger of whose character and habits I had
no previous knowledge ; neither can the death
of the fox be laid to the charge of the two goats,
but to his own interference in a quarrel, with
which he had nothing to do ; in the same man-
ner the death of the woman who made a traffic
of female virtue and innocence, which imme-
diately followed upon her swallowing the poi-
son, must be traced to her own deliberate pur-
pose of murder; and, lastly, it is not the sui^eon
who was the occasion of the loss of his wife s
nose, but her own foolishness in promoting an
unlawful connection.

Dimna observed, that he had heard this story
before and was ready to allow, that his own mis-
fortune might peihaps with justice be laid to his
own account : he wished however to determine
what under the present circumstances was the best


110

thing to be done; and Kalila having expressed a
wish to know what he proposed doing, he spoke
in the following terms : I have not presumption
enough to imagine that I shall be in greater favour
with the lion, than Schanzabeh ; I would there-
fore willingly return to my former condition ; for
a prudent man has occasion to use the utmost
pains and diligence in three different ways. In
the first place he should ever pay a due regard
to the accidental as well as more weighty circum-
stances which in former times may have been
the means of his happiness, or have brought
about his ill luck, with a view to pave the way
by the experience he has acquired for the re-
turn of his good fortune, and to ward off any
sudden reverse : his second object of solicitude
is how to secure the advantages of which he is
actually in possession, by the exclusion of every
thing which may hazard their existence : and in
the third place he should so regulate his con-
duct according to the probable chances of the
world, that no favourable opportunity of improv-
ing his temporal condition may be neglected, or
the means of preventing the possibility of any
unexpected danger elude his foresight: there-
fore at present there remains for me no other


Ill

resource, disappointed as I have been in my
hopes and expectations, than to destroy by fofce
or stratagem this eater of grass ; which will not
only recover for me the favour of the lion, but be
of service, I think, to the king in obviating the
mischief which may be expected to result from
the too great intimacy with which he has
honoured the bull. Kalila having here observed
that he saw no danger that was likely to accrue
from the manner in which the lion treated Schan*
zabeh ; Dimna instantly replied, that there were
several impediments to the good administration
of pubhc affairs which might be mentioned;
for instance, favouritism, which founded gene-
rally on caprice or some worse motive, gives the
reins of government into feeble if not polluted
hands, to the proscription of those faithfril coun-
sellors of a nation, who have courage to refrise
becoming the tools of the passions of the prince :
another evil of the body politic is that animosity
of parties, which is continually keeping up a
petty warfare in the state : a third source of mis-
chief is a proliiigacy of manners, when respect
for decency in the prince and the higher circles
has fled before the fascinating and authorized
display of female attractions, and the severity


112


of business is lulled to sleep in the lap of luxu-
rious amusement and excess : the prevalence ol
these disorders gives rise to and nurtures those
tmfeeling and inhuman passions, by whicl
calumny is engendered, and the tongue sendg
forth its venom to taint the bliss and satisfactioi
of conspicuous worth ; or the arm is lifted up t(
acts of violence and oppression; or dangen
arise from the practice of severity where gen-
tleness was called for ; or of indulgence when
severity would have been a virtue ; or^ lastly, th<
hand of time becomes visible in the age and in
firmities of the sovereign, or in his exposure to th<
plagues of famine or war; and the conduct of tb
lion, continued he, in the preference which h
has shewn to the bull, will prove in all proba
bility a source of some of the dangers whicl
I have enumerated. Granted, replied Kalila
but how will you contrive to get the better of th
bull, considering the reputation which he enjoys
You seem to draw your conclusions, answerer
Dimna, from the apparent weakness of m;
person, compared with that of the bull, withou
reflecting that bodily force is not always th
criterion of success; on the contrary, contrivanc
and skill have been often known to succeed


113

where the greatest exertion of strength would
have failed, as was exemplified by the manner in
which a crow destroyed a serpent, as related in
the following story.

A crow had made her nest in a tree upon a
mountain, at no great distance from which was
the hole of a serpent ; and the serpent, as soon
as the crow had hatched her young, came and
took them away, and ate them. This very much
distressed the crow, who went and made her
complaint to a jackal, who was her friend, and
asked his opinion of what she proposed to do,
which was, when the serpent was asleep, to put
out his eyes, and get rid of her enemy. The
jackal did not at all approve of this plan, but
advised the crow to think of some other method,
which would be attended with less danger;
because if she proceeded as she had mentioned,
she might possibly experience the fate of the
swan, who perished in his attempt to kill a crab.
This swan had established himself in a place,
where there was a good deal of water, where he
lived and grew old ; till at length being unable
through age any longer to catch his prey, he
was tormented by the dread of dying from
hunger : at that moment a crab passed by, who,

I


gedng the distress of the swan, enquired the
reason of it ; and was informed by . the swan,
diat having one day overheard two fishermen
talking of the quantity of fish in that place, and
laying plans for catching them, he was uneasy
about his fijture livelihood. Upon this the
crab went to the fish, who happened for some
reason or other to be assembled together, and
communicated to them what he had heard ;
they therefore immediately sent a deputation to
the swan, to ask his advice in their present
dilemma, the greatness of the apparent danger
outweighing all prudential considerations of
the risk they were running, in placing so much
confidence in an enemy. The swan informed
them, that the only means of escaping from the
fate which awaited them would be to retire to
a pool in the neighbourhood, where there was
plenty of food, and at the same time he offered
his services to carry them thither ; which being
accepted, he took two upon his back every day,
and went with them to a hill, and there ate them.
But one morning, when he came as usual to carry
off his two fish, the crab met him, and, express-
ing his apprehensions for his own safety in his
present abode, entreated him to transport him


115

also to the pool) whither he had carried .the &^;
upon which the swan made him get* upon his
back, and transported him to the same spot>
But the crab looking about, and seeing a number
of bones lying upon the ground, began to havie
suspicions of his supposed friend ; and reasoning
with himself, that his situation could not be
made worse by his attempting to defend himself,
he fastened with his claws on the neck of the
swan, and strangled him, and then went to the
fish which remained, and acquainted them with
what he had done : and this story, continued
the jackal, is a proof that the cunning person is
often taken in his own snares : however, I will
point out to you a method, if you think you are
equal to the execution, by which you may
infallibly destroy the serpent, without any dan-
ger to yourself. This raised the curiosity of
the crow, to know what her friend would re-
commend to her, who proceeded thus : My
advice consists in this, that you should look as
you are flying about for some part of a woman's
dress, which having taken up in your mouth,
you must continue just so high above the heads
of the passengers, that they may be able to dis-
cover what it is you are carrying away; and

i2


116

when you are over the spot where the serpent
is, you must drop it so as to attract the notice
of the persons who are near ; who running up
to recover the stolen property, will deliver you
from your enemy. The crow did as she had
been directed, and continued hovering in the
air, till she discovered a woman of rank, who
was taking her bath on the top of a house, and
had laid her clothes and trinkets aside ; so she
darted suddenly down, and carried off a neck-
lace ; and as she flew away with it, the persons
who had witnessed what had passed, followed
without ever losing sight of her, till in the end
they saw her drop the necklace; and imme-
diately coming up found the serpent, and killed
it.

Kalila here remarked to his brother Dimna,
that if the bull's only quality was personal
strength, he might be mastered by skill and
address ; but if to bodily force were united un-
derstanding and judgment, the task would be
more diflScult : Not so difficult as you seem to
imagine, said Dimna, for 1 can always find
resources in my own conduct and prudent
management ; and that you may not think mine
a hopeless case, 1 beg of you to listen to the


117

story of the hare and the lion. A lion was king
of a great forest, plentifully supplied with water,
and filled with beasts of every description ; who
living in a state of constant uneasiness, at last
sent to the lion, to propose fiimishing him every
morning with a piece of game for his breakfast,
on condition that he would let them roam about
unmolested. The lion was pleased with this
offer, and entered into the agreement, and during
some time the beasts regularly performed their
engagement ; till at length it fell to the lot of a
hare to be sent to the lion, who begged of her
companions to indulge her in one request, and
she would deliver them from all dread of the
lion in future: the beasts complied, and de-
sired in consequence the animal which was to
accompany her to allow her to loiter on the
road ; which she having done beyond the hour
of the lion's meal, at last presented herself before
him, and found him in a violent rage at the
delay which had taken place ; when to appease
his anger she told him that she had been sent
by the beasts with a hare for his breakfast, but
that a lion, which met them on the road, had
carried off her companion, declaring that he
was the lord of the wood ; and that upon her

i3


118

representing' to him that it was food which the
beasts had sent to their king, he broke out into
tfie most unbecoming abuse of his majesty.
Upon this the lion desired the bare to conduct
him to the haunt of his rival, and she led him
to the brink of a deep well fall of water, and
told him it was there ; upon which the lion look-
ii^ down, and seeing his own shadow and the
shadow of the hare, had no suspicions of being
deceived, and immediately sprung, as he ima-
gined, upon his enemy, and was drowned ; and
the hare returned to the beasts, and acquainted
them with her success. Kalila told Dimna,
that if he could effect the disgrace and ruin of
the bull without compromising the honour and
safety of the lion, the injuries which they had
both experienced from him would fully justify
the measure; but if on the other hand his
purpose of revenge would be followed by the
destruction of the lion, he should oppose its
execution, as being an act of ingratitude and
treachery in them.

After this, Dimna passed many days without
approaching the lion ; at last he came privately
to him, and was asked what had kept him so
long avray ; if he had any good reason for so


119

doii^, or if any thing unexpected or unforeseen
had taken place. Dimna replied that this was
really the case ; though he felt great reluctance
to mention it, as its relation could not fail to be
as disagreeable to the lion, as it would be pain-
fid to himself. You will do me the justice, O
king, to believe, continued he, that I am the
unwilling reporter of unwelcome news, and
such as even my approved fidelity, and the
evidences which I have given of my zeal in
your service, will scarcely render credible;
though I trust your majesty wU be satisfied
with these vouchers for the truth of what I
assert. And when I consider the obligations
which my relation, as subject, imposes upon me,
I should think it a dereliction of my duty, and
little better than an act of treason, if, even at
die risk of not being believed, and without an
express command, I delayed any longer to
make my report.

This commencement increased the anxiety
of the lion to hear more, upon which Dimna
continued as follows. A person with whom I
am intimately acquainted, and upon whose ve-
racity I can rely, has informed me, that Schan-
zabeh has often private meetings with some of

i4


120


the principal persons of your court, to whom he
has declared to have observed in you infallible
marks of declining strength, and of approaching
incapacity for governing; from which I conclude,
that, if he has not really the project of deposing
you by treachery or violence, he is at least pre-
paring the way for mounting the throne at your
death; indeed his whole conduct furnishes strong
evidence that he has this in view. Now it is
an old saj-ing, that a sovereign, who is sur-
rounded by dangerous subjects, if he does not
by a bold stroke put an end at once to the con-
spiracies which are forming against him, will
at last fall a victim to his own timidity and
want of resolution; and what on the present
occasion makes the bull the more to be feared,
are the consummate skill and knowledge of
business which he possesses : and however im-
probable the circumstance to which I have
alluded may at this moment appear, it is never-
theless the business of a wise man to take his
precautions in time, before any daring enter-
prise becomes ripe for execution. On this head
men may be divided into three classes : in the
first place of two provident men, there is one,
who on the occurrence of an event, which


121

although not quite unforeseen, was still little
expected, does not immediately take fright, and
through distraction become unable to act, but
without hesitation devises means of escaping
from his difficulties : then he, who is gifted with
a greater degree of foresight, though rarely to
be met with, not only follows the approach of
evil step by step, but even represents the danger
which threatens him to be greater than it really
is, and takes his measures accordingly with so
much prudence and address, that he may be
said to have stifled the mischief in its birth : on
the other hand the weak and irresolute man
fluctuates between the illusions of hope, and the
visions of fear; between the phantoms of his
wishes, and the promises of his imagination,
till his protracted indecision occasions his ruin :
but the truth of this will be best illustrated by_
the history of the three fish, which were remark-
able, the one for its shrewdness, the second for
possessing this quality in a greater degree, and
the third for its folly. These fish were in a
pond on the top of a hill, very difficult of access,
and a stream had its source near the same spot.
Now it happened that some fishermen having
come to fish in the stream, discovered the pond.


■\


122

and agreed to try their luck r in it. The fish
overheard their conversation, and the first of the
Ubree immediately taking alarm, thought of
nothing else but of escaping, and therefore at
once parsed into the stream at the place where
die water flowed from it into the pond : the
l^econd remained where it was, but seeing that
the fiishermen began to prepare their nets, and
having therefore no longer any doubt of what
tiiey were going to do, wished also to escape
as the first had done, but found to its great
surprise that the fishermen had stopped up the
hole ; it then began to accuse itself of want of
foresight and neglect; but recollecting that it is
the prerogative of good sense to impart courage,
and to banish all unreasonable fear, it pretended
to be dead, and remained floating on the water,
turning alternately upon its back and its belly,
till at length the fishermen took it out of the
water, and threw it upon the ground betweer
the stream and the pond, upon which it gave a
sudden spring, jumped into the river, and swan
away: but the foolish fish continued swim-
ing about unconcerned in the pond, till it was
taken in the net.

The lion told Dimna, that he understood hi;


123

meaning, but did not think the bull would be
able to deceive him, or indeed that he was
capable of intending him any hurt : that for his
own part, he had no injustice to reproach him-
self with ; on the contrary, had always made
the bull a partaker of his good fortune. The
man of low origin, replied Dimna, will remain
true to his engagements, and shew himself to be
an useful servant and faithful counsellor, as long
as it suits his views. When the rank and con-
sideration which he enjoys leave him no longer
any superior, he advances higher in his pre-
tensions, and will not even brook an equal : this
is especially the case with those, who having no
fund of real merit to support their claims, have
recourse for their advancement to the basest
arts ; and whilst they betray in their conduct the
violence which is done to their natural disposition
by the semblance of integrity, which they are
obliged to assume, and the reluctance with
which they discharge the duties, which motives
of interest alone prompt them to fulfil, they
await the first ray of success which dawns upon
the schemes of their ambition < and culpable ag-
grandisement, to throw off the mask, and dis-
play their character in all its innate turpitude ;


124

as the tail of a dog which is tied up in order to
make it straight, becomes crooked again as
soon as the cord by which it was bound is re-
moved ; and the sovereign who rejects the ad-
vice of his counsellors, because the truths which
they wish to inculcate do not please his ear,
forfeits all claim to good sense and judgment,
and can only be compared to the dying patient,
who throws away the medicine which his physi-
cian has prescribed, and will swallow nothing
but what he himself chooses. Moreover it is the
duty of a sovereign in the government of his
kingdom to direct his attention to what may
increase the nation's prosperity and his own
honour, and keep off from his people and him-
self injury and disgrace: the most faithful coun- v
sellor is he who gives his advice with freedom ;
the most desirable event that whose result is
beneficial ; the most respectable woman is she
whose conduct leaves nothing to be desired by
her husband ; the sweetest praise is the appro-
bation of good men; the brightest gems in a
king's crown are humanity and mildness ; and
the noblest quality of man's heart is the fear of
God : and it has been observed, that the man
who has fire for his pillow, and is obliged to- lie


125

•

upon serpents, is in a more enviable situation
than another, who knowing that his friend is
exasperated against him, and aiming at his ruin,
yet remains at his ease and unconcerned : on
the other hand, the weakest king is he who oc-
cupies himself with trifles, without paying any
regard to future events, and who like the furious
elephant, giving himself up blindly to the guid-
ance of his passions, never fails, if affairs through
his own mismanagement or idle indifference go
wrong, either to charge his people wdth treason,
or his ministers with incapacity.

The lion observed to Dimna that his language
was strong, that however it was the privilege of
,a public servant of unimpeached fidelity to de-
mand attention to his opinion; but, says he,
it will not be in the power of Schanzabeh to do
me any mischief, though he should really have
these hostile intentions ; for, in the first place, his
food is grass and mine flesh, and therefore I
have it every moment in my power to make a
meal of him ; and then I cannot suppose him
capable of such base ingratitude, as to repay
the confidence with which T have honoured
him, and the consideration which he enjoys at
my hands, by the ruin of his benefactor ; and I


126

dbould justly ei^se myself to the imputation
of ignorance in my choice, and of insincerity
and perfidy in the protection which L promised
him, were I to treat him otherwise than as : I
have hitherto done. £iet not the king deceive
himself, answered Dimna, in supposing that the
difference of food can make Schanzabeh cease
to be an object of suspicion ; what he cannot
accomplish by himself, he will contrive meaj9J9
to effect by the assistance of others ; and true it
is, that a person whose character is miknown>
is a dangerous guest for even an hour; and I
hope the king may not meet with a similar fhte
to what the bug experienced from the flea, as is
thus related : A bug had taken up his quarters
in the bed of a rich man^ who sleeping very
soundly was neither sensible of its travels over
his body, nor even felt it when it was sucking
his blood ; the bug having continued this during
sometime, invited a flea one night to come, and
partake of his comfortable birth and good fare,
which the latter accepted, and as soon as the
man retired to bed, it bit him, and being
awakened by the pain he got up, and ordered
his bed to be searched ; but on examination no-
thing could be found but the bug, which being


127

caught was put to deatk in the usual wsy, and
the flea escaped unhurt: and it is thus with i a
wicked man, who, if he is himself too^wes^ to
become the instrument of injury, at least* cour
trives to bring it about by his skill and manage-
ment; and this will probably be the Une of
conduct which Schanzabeh will adopt ; where-
fore it would be right, if not to take immediate
and open precautions against him, at least to
be on your guard against that which he will ex-
cite others to do.

These last words of Dimna appeared to make
some impression upon the lion, who asked him
in consequence what he would recommend to
be done. A tooth, he replied, which is decayed
will never cease to ache, as long as it remains
in the mouth ; nor is there any other remedy for
the disagreeable sensation arising from having
eaten unwholesome food, than that which will
remove it from the stomach, which is the seat of
the disorder. The application of these maxims
to the case of a dangerous enemy points at once
to the necessity of taking away his life. The
lion told Dimna, that the effect of his discourse
was by no means favourable to Schanzabeh,
and seeing that it was no longer safe to have


128

him near his person, he would send for him,
and tell him what should be the place of his
retirement: but this determination was embar-
rassing to Dimna, who was well aware, that
when the lion saw Schanzabeh, and heard his
defence, he would discover the falsehood of
the accusations against him, and that his own
conduct would appear in its true light; he
therefore endeavoured to dissuade the lion from
sending for Schanzabeh, which he represented
as a very imprudent step to take, for that Schan-
zabeh, suspecting from this what was in agita-
tion, would assume a haughty tone, and behave
disrespectfully towards the king, or would per-
haps make his escape vnth feelings of vengeance
in his heart, and the power of making it appear,
that he had been treated with harshness and
severity ; for it is not prudent in a sovereign,
said he, to let it be seen that the punishment oi
any one has been determined upon, before his
guilt has been established by trial ; and though
for an open crime against the state a public
punishment is allotted, it is perfectly consonam
to justice that a concealed and dark plot shouk
be counteracted by secret means. Upon thij
the king observed, that the punishment of a per


129


son on bare suspicion without any positive proof
of guilt is a manifest injustice, and a stretch of
arbitrary power. If these are the sentiments of
the king, answered Dimna, I hope at least that
he will not suffer Schanzabeh to approach him
without being prepared against the arts which
he will employ to prove his innocence, and
which may possibly not be confined to words,
but extended to some act of violence highly in-
sulting to the dignity of your majesty ; and I am
persuaded that the king will discover from his
manner and deportment, notwithstanding his
attempts to conceal it, that some great scheme
is at the bottom of his thoughts: the surest
signs will be, if he betrays in his behaviour the
marks of great inward agitation, by changing
countenance at the sight of your majesty, and by
tossing his head, like a bull who is going to butt
with his horns. The lion assured Dimna that
he would be fully upon his guard, and should
require no other proofs of the evil intentions of
Schanzabeh, than the symptoms which had
been noticed.

Dimna having so far succeeded in his endea-
vours to prepossess the lion against the bull,
determined to go immediately to Scha^nzabeh, in

K


130

order, if possible, to exasperate him against the
lion, and leave an ominous impression on his
mind with respect to the reception which he
was likely to meet with ; for he was afraid, if
what had already passed should reach the
bull's ears, that it would defeat his whole pur-
pose of mining him : he therefore begged per-
mission of the king to go to Scbanzabeh, pro-
mising to make a report of all that he should
see and hear, that might be worth knowing for
the sake of the intended interview ; and having
obtained the consent of the lion, he went to the
bull with all the appearance of a person in the
greatest sorrow and affliction; and being asked,
what had been the occasion of his long absence,
which was calculated to raise some doubts of
the sincerity of his friendship, he answered in a
mysterious manner, that there was no security
for a person, who was entirely dependent on
the will of another, and whose existence was in
the hands of one in whom no trust or confidence
could be placed, and where not a moment
passed, that he was not threatened with the loss
of property and life. You ask me, Schanzabeh,
what has brought me into this state of despair ;
nothing certainly, but what was determined by


131


fate, to whose decision we must all submit. It
is written in the book of destiny, that the great
man should be insolent, the fortunate become
indifferent and careless, the intemperate subject
to loss and dissappointment, and the lover of
women deceived ; that he who asks a pittance
of the covetous should meet wdth a reftisal, that
the companion of the wicked should experience
no peace of mind, nor the favourite of a king
place reliance on the security which he appears
to enjoy ; for kings have not been unaptly com-
pared, on account of the unsteadiness of their
attachment to those whom they have honoured
with their protection and friendship, and for the
facility with which they cast off their old asso-
ciates, to a coquet who dismisses one lover with
the same ease and indifference, with which she
favours the assiduities of another. Schanzabeh
here remarked to Dimna, that from the tenour
of his observations he appeared to be alarmed
at something which had passed between him
and the lion. True, said Dimna, but it is not a
matter which is personal to me. In whom then,
asked Schanzabeh, do you take so lively an
interest ? You shall know all, said Dimna. In
the first place, you have not forgotten what

k2


132

passed between us on the Ifirst day of our meet-
ing, and the proofs of regard which I then
shewed you: the same sentiments oblige me
now to make you acquainted with the fruits of
my observation of the conduct of the lion, and
to point out to you the dangers to which you
are exposed from your relations to him. I have
been informed by a person of great respect-
ability, and who is incapable of asserting what
is not true, that the lion on one occasion re-
marked to some of his attendants, that the fat-
ness of the bull surprised him, and that, as he
had no longer any occasion for his services,' he
was determined to kill him, and invite his court
-to partake of his flesh. I no sooner heard this,
than, knowing the irascibility of the lion's temper
and his bad faith, I made up my mind to come
to you and discharge a debt of friendship, by
putting you upon your guard against the snare
which is laying for you.

Schanzabeh no sooner heard these words,
which the vrinning frankness of Dimna made
him believe without a moment's hesitation, than
he expressed his anxiety to know, on what ac-
count the lion could possibly be angry with him.
as he was not conscious of ever having com-


133


mttted any crime against him or any one in his
service, and therefore could only attribute to
the artful and false representations of some se-
cret enemy the displeasure which he had ex-
cited ; for the society of the wicked, said he,
always begets a bad opinion of the good ; and
the lion, by listening on this occasion to the
calumnies which have been circulated against
an innocent person, and fixing his suspicions in
the quarter where they are unmerited, has com-
mitted a mistake like that of the goose, who
seeing the reflection of a star in the water,
thought it was a fish, and endeavoured to catch
it, and having repeated the attempt several
times, discovered its error ; but observing on the
morrow what was really a fish, and concluding
it to be only what it had seen on the preceding
day, made no exertion to get possession of it :
and in the same manner the lion, having on
some former occasion been deceived by some
worthless courtier, has lent a ready ear to all
the slanderous reports concerning me, and 1
who am innocent am made to sufler, because
the world has not at all times been as free fit>m
fault as myself; but if no report injurious to my
reputation has reached the lion, and he is. act-^

k3


134

ing entirely from his own caprice, his conduct
is the more miaccountable, because it is painful
to think that the best services of a friend should
meet with no adequate return, and doubly so to
find them repaid with ingratitude and persecu-
tion. When the anger which a person conceives
against his friend is well founded, satisfaction is
at no great distance, and reconciliation speedily
follows : but when the occasion of dislike has
taken its rise in some imaginary affront, all
hopes of reconciliation are at an end ; and how
can there be any good fellowship in the world,
if firiends, with a view of not giving offence to
those with whom they are on habits of intimacy,
are obliged to be constantly on their guard
against what may have the most remote ten-
dency to excite displeasure. But to this rigid
observance of rules in the business of the heart,
the man of feeling and sense will offer every
mitigation in his power ; he will consider, whe-
ther the friend with whom he has reason to be
dissatisfied has erred through inadvertence or
design, and whether the pardon of his fault
would be followed by consequences which it
would be improper to overlook ; in a word, his
aim is to find out a motive not for condemnation,


135


but for reconciliation and forgiveness. Now I
am not aware of having furnished the lion with
any reasons for being dissatisfied with me, un-
less it is that I have sometimes held a contrary
opinion from him, which, however injudicious
on my part, was still the result of what I con-
sidered to be the faithful discharge of my duties
, towards him : if unfortunately he has referred
my conduct to other motives, if he has ascribed
it to a want of due respect, and a bold opposi-
tion- of his will and pleasure, I do not plead
guilty to the accusation, for in the advice which
I have given, his interest and the claims of
justice have ever been my guides; and so far
from communicating to any of his ministers or
his court what on these occasions has passed
between us, I have avoided every chance of
publicity, by choosing the moment when I have
had the honour of being alone with him, to urge
my reasons in respectful but at the same time
dignified language, knowing, that whoever looks
for complaisance from his friends in the advice
which they give, or from wise men in their
judgment about a difficult matter, or expects
that the physician should accommodate the
medicine to his palate, and not to the nature of

k4


«*


136

his disease, pays dearly, and is alone answer-
able, for the consequences of his unreason-
able demands ; but if the sudden change in the
king's sentiments may not be traced to this
cause, it may possibly have its source in a state
of mind produced by his approaching end, so
uncertain is the friendship of sovereigns, and so
speedily is their favour often withdrawn in a
moment, when they are lavishing marks of
esteem : or possibly, however incredible it may
appear, my real merit, which the king has wit-
nessed, may be the cause of my disgrace, unless
in short I must attribute it to the inevitable
effect of destiny. It is fate, which robs the lion
of his strength, and lays him in the dust; it
places the timid man on the back of the fierce
elephant, and gives victory over the venomous
serpent; it bestows foresight on the improvident,
adds energy to the sluggard, and enlarges the
bounty of the miser ; it imparts boldness to the
coward, and damps the ardour of the rash, ac-
cording to an uninterrupted and necessary chain
of causes and effects.

Here Dimna assured Schanzabeh, that the
lion had not been excited against him by the
machinations of wicked people, nor was it the


137

result of irritability arising from a morbid state
of body, or any accidental cause ; but of the
suggestions of his own bad disposition, which
took delight in treachery and deceit, but which
in the end would find the sweetness of crime
converted into the bitterness of death. It is I,
replied Schanzabeh, who am destined to see the
charms of the life which I have hitherto led,
end in my destruction ; like the bee, who having
settled upon the water lily, was detained so
long by the agreeableness of its smell and taste, '
that the night came on, and the flower closed
upon and killed her ; and so it is in the world,
whoever is not contented with the measure of
good things which falls to his lot, and such as
his wants require, but raises his eye to objects
far above him, without looking to the conse-
quences of his immoderate desires, resembles
the fly, which was not satisfied with the food
which the trees and herbs afforded, but wished
to taste the water, which flowed from the
elephant's ear, and was killed for its teme-
rity. Whoever bestows his firiendship on an
unworthy object, is sowing his seed in a salt
soil; and whoever gives his advice unasked
from motives of self-satisfaction and compla-


138

cency, maybe said to throw away his words
upon the dead, or to talk to the dumb.

Dimna having begged Schanzabeh not to
waste his time in useless exclamations, but to
take measures for his safety ; How is it possible,
he replied, if the lion is determined to destroy
me? You forget what you have told me of
the badness of his heart; or supposing that
he is really not such as you have represented
him to be, yet if thos6 who are about him, are
resolved at all risks to effect my ruin, they have
it certainly in their power; for the innocent man,'
however strong he may be, can never prevail
over perfidy and villany, when they are leagued
against them. The camel, who was killed by
the united efforts of the wolf, the crow, and the
jackal, proves the truth of this remark, as ex-
emplified in the following story. A lion lived
in a wood near a high road, and had for his
companions a wolf, a crow, and a jackal ; and
it happened, as a man was passing along the
road with a number of camels, that one of them
stayed behind, and went into the wood to the
lion; and being asked whence he came, and
what his business was, he answered, from such
and such a place, and that he awaited the com-


139

mands of the king. Then the lion promised
him, that he should remain in perfect security,
and have every thing that he could require for
his support ; and things continued on this foot-
ing during some time. It happened after this
that the lion went out one morning in search of
prey, and met vnth an elephant, from whom he
had great difficulty to escape ; and even this not
without having been severely wounded, so much
so, that he was scarcely able, through weakness
from the loss of blood, to crawl to his den, where
he lay many days unable to move, and in danger
of starving from want of food, which it was
out of his power to procure for himself; and
the wolf, the crow, and the jackal fared equally
ill, for they were in the habit of feeding upon
what the Uon left. The lion, observing that
they grew thin, expressed his concern at their
being deprived of their victuals ; but they as-
sured him that it was on his and not on their
own account that they felt uneasy ; upon which
he thanked them for this proof of attachment,
and desired them to go out and look for some
game for him and themselves. Upon this the
wolf, the crow, and the jackal, went forth, and
consulted together what was to be done, and


140


their thoughts fell upon contriving some expe-
dient how to kill the camel, who would be a
good meal for themselves and the lion. The
jackal observed that the plan would be attended
with much difficulty, because the lion had pro-
mised the camel his protection. The crow said,
if this is the only obstacle, it may be soon
removed, and I vnll undertake to procure the
lion's consent : so he went to him immediately,
and being asked what success they had had,
replied, that the state of weakness in which he
and his two companions were, from having
fasted so long, had made it quite impossible for
them to catch any game in the woods, but that
they only waited for his permission to put into
execution a scheme which they had formed for
killing the camel, who was passing his time un-
profitably amongst them in idleness and inacti-
vity, vnthout making any return whatever for the
kindness which he had experienced. At this
proposition the lion grew angry, and reproached
the crow vntli his bad faith and shallow pre-
texts, and asked how he could have the auda-
city to come to him with such a proposal, which
was at variance vnth the promise of security
given to the camel; and he added, that the


141


most enlai^ed charity never found a greater re-
compense than the inward satisfaction which a
generous soul feels in having quieted the alarm
and apprehension of a fellow creature in distress,
and that the camel had never in the slightest
d^ree excited his displeasure, or given him
reason to repent of the reception which he had
afforded him. The crow told the lion he was
prepared for what he had said, as he knew the
goodness of his heart, but that policy com-
manded and justice did not forbid, that the in-
terest of the multitude should be preferred
before that of an individual, and a single life
offered up for the sake of many ; that it was by
no means uncommon for a whole family to be
sacrificed in order to save a tribe, which on
a greater occasion might itself become the price
of the city's security ; add to this, said he, the
example of many a country, which has been
unable to ransom its sovereign on any other
terms than the captivity of thousands of its
inhabitants, and the king will surely see the
necessity, in the circumstances in which he is
placed, of listening to what I have proposed,
to which at the same time he will not appear
to have been a party, but the execution will be


142

so artfully and prudently contrived that he will
reap the profit without having been guilty of
any crime in procuring it.

The lion having made no answer to this last
remark, the crow was convinced that his aver-
sion to the scheme was insensibly abating ; upon
which he hastened to his companions, and in-
forming them of what had taken place, con-
certed with them, that they should meet toge-
ther with the camel at the lion's den; and
shewing signs of the deepest sorrow and afflic-
tion at the state in which they found him. should
offer themselves in turn as food for their master,
agreeing at the same time that the proposal of
the first should be met by objections on the
part of the other two, and so successively.
The plan being thus previously arranged, they
went to the lion, and the crow began by observ-
ing to him, that his weak and forlorn condition
had not escaped, the notice of himself and com-
panions, and that they felt it to be their duty,
to offer their lives for the reestablishment of the
health and strength of one, to whom they were
$o much indebted, and on whom they were
entirely dependent ; and concluded by entreat-
ing the king to accept of him as a meal. Upon


143

this the wolf and the jackal remarked to the
crow, that it was presumption in him to suppose
that he could satisfy the king with so small a
morsel. The jackal then went through the
same ceremony of pretended devotion to the
service of the lion, and met with similar oppo-
sition from the wolf and crow, who observed
to him, that his flesh stunk. To the apparently
disinterested offer of the wolf, the crow and the
jackal replied, that according to the saying of
the physicians the eating of wolves' flesh occa-
sioned instant death. The camel, who had
listened attentively to all that was said, and
did not doubt that an excuse would be found
for rejecting a similar offer on his part, thought
this a favourable opportunity of proving to the
lion his sense of gratitude for the favours he
had received, and for securing their continuance,
and observed, that the reasons which ha,d been
advanced against eating the crow, the jackal,
or the wolf, did not apply to him ; that his flesh
was wholesome and easy of digestion, and there
would be enough both for the king and his
attendants. The crow, the jackal, and the wolf,
contrary to the expectations of the camel,
agreed with him in what he had said, and com-


144

plimenting him on the nobleness and generosity
of his conduct, instantly rushed upon him, and
killed him. You see therefore, continued Schan-
zabeh, that if the companions of the lion are
really bent on my destruction, neither my own
exertions, nor even the good will of the king,
will be of any service to me. The best of
sovereigns is he, who is just in his actions, and
this I believe to be a characteristic of the lion ;
but how easily may his favourable sentiments
towards me be changed by the reports and in-
sinuations which are industriously circulated to
my prejudice, for the effect of calumny repeat-
edly uttered on the mind of a person of appa-
rently the most unperverted rectitude and un-
conquerable candour, is no less certain, thar
that of the drop of water which successivel)
falling upon a stone gradually though imper-
ceptibly penetrates its hard surface. What then
says Dimna, do you think of doing ? Nothing
remains for me, answered Schanzabeh, if I an
obliged to try my strength with the lion, bu
to do my utmost to come off victorious from th(
struggle. The prayer of the devout is a worths
homage, the gift of the charitable a meritorioui
offering, and the piety of the religious mai


145

an acceptable sacrifice ; but the reward which
attends the successful efForts of one who is con-
tending for his life in a good cause, is infinitely
greater. Dimna said, that it was the height
of folly to expose one's self in person to certain
danger, when other means of escaping were at
hand ; that a prudent man will never have
recourse to measures of open violence, till he
has exhausted the resources of intrigue and
secret management ; and that this in the present
instance would be the best course to pursue;
for how could the lion, strong and powerful as
he is, be successfully, if openly, opposed ; and,
on the other hand, instances were not wanting
to prove the fortunate issue of stratagem and
contrivance.

On a certain occasion the hen bird of a spe-
cies of sea fowl, called Titawi, said to the cock,
I wish we could find a secure place to hatch
our young, for I am afiraid that the genius of the
sea will discover them, and take them away.
The cock desired her to remain where she was,
as there was plenty of food ; upon which she
reproached him with his inconsiderateness, but
received the same answer, with some observations
on the unreasonableness of her alarm. The


'\


146


ben still persisted in urging her apprehensions,
and cautioned the cock not to treat so lightly
what she said, reminding him of what happened
to the tortoise for not attending to the advice of
the two geese, who, being in the same pond
with him, and living on terms of intimacy and
friendship, were unwilling to go away, when
the too great decrease of the water made their
departure necessary, without taking leave of
him. The tortoise observed to them, that the
diminution of the water was more a reason for
his departure, as he was almost as helpless on
dry land as a ship, than for theirs, and begged
that they would take him with them ; to which
they agreed, and for that purpose desired him
to suspend himself from the middle of a long
piece of wood, one end of which each of them
would take hold of, and in this manner fly away
with him, strictly forbidding him to utter a
sound. They had not flown far, when some
persons below, seeing what was passing over
their heads, and crying out from astonishment,
the tortoise, alarmed at the discovery, and for-
getting the injunctions which he had received,
expressed aloud his wish, that their eyes might
be plucked out; and losing his hold upon open-


147

I

ing his mouth, fell to the ground and was killed.
This account made no impression upon the
cock bird, but the predictions of the hen proved
too true ; for shortly after, the genius of the sea
came and took away her brood. An altercation
then ensued between the cock and the hen;
the latter asserting, as is common enough, that
she knew she was right, and her mate declaring
vengeance against his enemy; so he immediately
repaired to the assembly of the birds, and ap-
pealing to them as his relations and friends,
implored their assistance; upon which it was
determined that the matter should be laid before
the whole feathered race ; by whom it was at
length agreed upon to address themselves to
their sovereign '', who would certainly listen to
the complaint, and call forth the whole force of
his kingdom to avenge the wrong done to one
of his subjects ; and they were not disappointed
in their expectations. Now as soon as the genius
of the sea became acquainted with the pre-

^ In the Arabic a fabulous bird called Anka is mentioned,
which often occurs in Eastern romances : it is supposed to
have had the gift of speech, and to have reigned as queen on
the mountain of Kaf. Vide Richardson's English and Persian
l>ictionary.

l2


148

parations for hostility which were going to com-
mence against him, he was afraid of engaging
in a contest of which he foresaw that the issue
would be unfavourable, and therefore restored
the young ones of the Titawi. I recommend to
you therefore on the present occasion, continued
Dimna, to use as much prudence, and not risk
your life on the event of a battle with the lion.
Schanzabeh replied, that so far from wishing to
contend with the lion, he had never given occa-
sion for any subject of dispute, either in his pub-
lic conduct or by any secret intrigue, nor ever
been wanting in respect up to the present
moment.

This meekness and humility on the part of
Schanzabeh did not please Dimna, who knew
that if the lion did not discover in the behaviour
and deportment of the bull the symptoms of
dissatisfaction and rebellion which he had
predicted, he should be suspected himself. He
therefore begged Schanzabeh to go to the lion,
and convince himself in person of the truth of
what he had told him ; adding, that he would
find him sitting in an erect posture, with flaming
eyes, pricking up his ears, and with his mouth
open ready to rush upon him : and Schanzabeh


149


allowed, that if he found him as thus described,
all doubt would be removed from his mind.
Dimna having thus succeeded in prepossessing
in the first instance the l^n against the bull, and
in having left on the mind of the bull unfavour-
able impressions as to the intentions of the lion,
lost no time in returning to Kalila, who was
desirous of hearing some account of what he
had done ; and was informed by Dimna, that the
accomplishment of their mutual wishes was
very near at hand. They then went together to
be present at the battle between the lion and
the bull, being curious to see the issue of the
business : about the same time Schanzabeh
arrived, and found the lion as Dimna had told
him would be the case;, upon which he ex-
claimed, that the friend of a sovereign is like a
man, who carries about a serpent in his bosom,
against whose sting he is never secure : at these
words the lion looking stedfastly at the bull, no
longer doubted of his intentions, and immediately
sprung upon him. The contest which was very
furious lasted some time, and was at intervals
doubtful, till at length Kalila, remarking that
the lion had the advantage, observed to Dimna,
that the power of a sovereign vrith bis com*

l3


150

panions was like that of the sea with its waves,
and that the exhortations which he had given
him might be summed up in the advice of the
man to the bird, not to meddle in matters that
do not promise success, and may be attended
with danger. A number of monkeys who lived
on a mountain were wishing on a cold, windy,
and rainy night for a fire to warm themselves ;
at last they saw a glow-worm, and thinking that
it was a spark of fire, they got together a quan-*
tity of wood and threw it upon it, and blew upon
it, in order to produce a flame : not far off there
was a bird upon a tree, which, observing what
they were doing, cried out to them, and endea-
voured to convince them of their error: This
scene attracted the attention of a man, who was
passing by ; who told the bird, that it was
wasting both its time and patience ; that no one
thought of proving a sword upon a stubborn
impenetrable stone, or of making a bow out of
a piece of wood that would not bend. The bird
however, without attending to him, flew to the
monkeys, to prove to them that the glow-worm
was not fire ; and was taken up by one of them,
dashed upon the ground, and killed. And this
case applies exactly to you, brother, continued


151


Kalila, and my advice has found no better
success in the endeavours which I have used
to detach you from the course of treachery and
wickedness in which you are engaged, two
qualities equally bad, though the former is gene-
rally more fatal in its consequences, as instanced
in the following story ; where it is related, that
a fraudulent and an inconsiderate man were
partners in trade, and having set out on a
journey together, it happened whilst they were
travelling, that the inconsiderate man had oc-
casion to stop, and accidentally discovered a
purse containing a thousand dinars lying on the
ground, which he took up, and put into his
pocket, but not without having been observed
by his companion. At length as they were
returning home, and had nearly reached the
town where tliey lived, they sat down to divide
the money ; the inconsiderate man desiring his
partner to take half, and he would keep the
» remainder for himself: but this proposal was
not at all agreeable to the fraudulent partner,
who had already formed the plan in his own
mind of getting the whole sum for himself: he
therefore remarked, that it would appear as if
they mutually distrusted each other, were they

l4


152

to divide the treasure which had so unex-
pectedly fallen into their possession ; that friends
should have every thing in common, without
admitting any distinction of property ; that it
would therefore be better for each to take what
he wanted for his present expences, and to bury
the. rest at the foot of a tree, which was near
them, and return for more as often as they had
occasion for it ; by this means the secret of their
good fortune would remain undivulged, and
they would not attract extraordinary notice by
the appearance of having become suddenly very
rich. This then was agreed upon, and each
took as much of the money as he chose ; the
remainder was buried at the foot of the tree, and
they returned home. Shortly after, the frau-
dulent man came in the absence of his partner,
and carried away the bag with its contents,
taking care to make the ground smooth and
level again, that there might be no suspicion of
its having been turned up. In a few days the ^
inconsiderate man having occasion for a fresh
supply, communicated his wishes to his partner,
and desired him to accompany him to the tree,
that they might both at the same time and in
concert take what they wanted. Upon their


163

arrival^ having dug a sufficient depth, and find-
ing nothing, the fraudulent man, with all . the
signs of despair and disappointment, reproached
his friend with roguery, and with his endeavour
to conceal it under the mask of uprightness and
candour, and accused him of having stolen the
money privately. The other persisted in assert-
ing his innocence, till at length, after a long and
violent altercation, they agreed to refer the
matter to the judge ; before whom the same
scene being renewed, each accusing his partner
of the theft, which the other as strenuously de-
nied, the judge asked the fraudulent man if he
could adduce any proof of the truth of his asser-
tions ; he immediately appealed to the tree,
which he declared would bear witness to the
veracity of all that he had said ; and this he did
with the greater confidence, as he had pre-
viously directed his father to go and conceal
himself in the hollow of the trunk, that he might
return an answer in the name of the tree. This
proposal surprised the judge ; so he went with
his attendants and the parties, and being arrived
at the tree, put the necessary question to it, to
which the old man replied, that it was the in-
considerate man who had been guilty of the


154

fraud. The astonishment of the judge became
greater after hearing these words, and consider-
ing that the business deserved a closer investi-
gation, he cohimanded M^ood to be brought and
fires to be lighted round the tree, which begin-
ning to bum, the old prisoner was alarmed for
his safety, and cried out for help ; and being re-
leased, just as he was on the point of perishing
in the flames, confessed the imposture ; upon
which the judge sentenced both father and son,
the latter to a severe, and the former to a lighter
punishment, exposed them on horseback in the
streets, fined the fraudulent man the amount of
the sum, which he hg^d surreptitiously obtained,
and gave it to his injured partner. You see
therefore, brother Dimna, that the effects of
treachery and deceit generally fall on the heads
of those who have practised them, and it is on
this account that your conduct, stamped with
the mark of daring wickedness, joined to the
most subtle and artfiil contrivance, and which
proves to me that you have as it were two
faces and two tongues, makes me apprehensive
for your safety. Integrity of heart is incom-
patible with the restlessness of uncontrolled pas-
sion, as the water of the river only remains


155


sweet, till it has reiached the sea« Instead
of resembling the honest man, who has no cor-
rupt inclination, you are more like the adder,
which carries the poison under its tongue; or
the serpent, which having been brought up,
fed, handled, and caressed, at length stings
its benefactor. It is an old saying, Make
a friend of the intelligent and nobleminded
man ; (but those, brother, are not your charac-
teristics.) If your companion be a man of under-
standing and generosity, his society is the more
desirable, and though he be intelligent without
possessing a noble mind, still his friendship is
of value. Where the two qualities are united,
the possession of them leaves nothing more to
be desired. Good sense unaccompanied by any
laudable disposition has claims to consideration
and regard, as affording scope for discrimina-
tion in reaping the advantages of talents, which
are not under the control of amiable affections ;
on the other hand honour and integrity, though
not associated with learning, have an undis-
puted title to respect and esteem, when you can
apply your own information in aid of your
friend s uninstructed virtues ; but where want
of talent is united with want of character,


156


the person who is thus destitute of aUt
complishments, will never repay the time and
pains/which are employed in cultivating his
acquaintance. The acknowledged truth of
these ^ remarks convinces me, Dimna, that I
must not expect from you either sincere attach-
ment or the fruits of good behaviour, after
the return which you have made to the favour
and distinctions which your sovereign has
heaped upon you. You remind me of the
story of the merchant, who said that if there was
a country, in which the mice were able to eat an
hundred pounds of iron, the hawks might very
well be supposed capable of destroying the
elephants. The story is thus related.

A merchant who possessed an hundred
pounds of iron, being obliged to be absent for a
few days, entrusted bis stock to th^ care of a
friend, and having at his return demanded to
have it restored to him, was answered, that the
mice had eaten it ; to which he made no other
reply than that he had heard of the sharpness
of their teeth in biting iron, removing by this
declaration all suspicion of incredulity: but
as he was going away, he chanced to meet
the son of his friend, and seizing him, led him


\L


157

away to his own house. On the morrow the
father came to him in great haste, to ask if he
knew any thing of his son : the merchant told
him, that as he was returning home the preceding
day, he saw a hawk carry off a young lad, who
probably might be his son. Is it credible, ex-
claimed the father, or was it ever heard, of, that
a hawk carried away a little child ? Indeed,
answered the merchant, in a country, where the
mice can eat an hundred pounds of iron, it is
not incredible that hawks should be able to
carry off the elephants. Upon this the father con-
fessed his theft, paid the merchant the price of his
iron, and demanded in return his son : you see
therefore how little dependence can be placed
upon a man, who does not scruple to deceive his
companion ; and how perishable a thing friend-
ship is, when founded on professions, which the
heart does not approve ; where the gift of love is
not received vrith gratitude, where advice is
thrown away upon a deaf ear, and confidential
intercourse is every moment in danger of being
betrayed. The society of the good is productive
of corresponding advantages, whilst the fellow-
ship of the vncked is attended by very opposite,
results, in the same manner as the zephyr which


158


fans the aromatic shrub, becomes impr^nated
with its delicious smell, whilst the wind which
lias passed over a corrupt substance, carries
pollution on its wings.

Kalila here left off speaking, and in the mean
time the lion, having executed his purpose of
destroying the bull, began to reflect on what he
had done ; and his anger giving way to softer
feelings, he spoke aloud his sorrow at the death
of Schanzabeh, whom he acknowledged to have
been possessed of understanding and judgment,
and of an amiable disposition, and whom he
allowed to have been probably innocent of the
crimes laid to his charge, and to have fallen a
victim to the calumnies and false accusations of
his enemies. He was in this state of uneasiness
and dissatisfaction with himself, which was
visibly depicted on his countenance, when
Dimna, after congratulating him on his success,
enquired the cause of his present sadness ; and
being informed, that it was on account of the
loss of Schanzabeh, who had so many good
qualities to recommend him, he took the liberty
of r^resenting to the king, that it was unbecom-
ing in a man of his sense and wisdom to be
afflicted at the death, of one whom he feared ;


159


that sometimes indeed a prudent man, notwith-
standing his dislike of a person, might think it
advisable to make use of his services, if he found
that he was possessed of ability and talent, in
the same manner as be would submit to a dis-
agreeable remedy in hopes of being cured of an
obstinate disease ; but even then the favour
which he shews him is generally of short dura-
tion, and the manner of his fall usually declares
the apprehensions entertained of the mischief he
might do ; as a person who has been bitten in
the finger by a serpent, proves the magnitude of
the danger, which he fears may arise from the
poison to his whole body, by cutting off the
hand. This satisfied the lion for some time, till
at length having discovered the treachery and
villany of Dimna, he proceeded to punish him
in an exemplary manner.


160


INVESTIGATION OF THE CONDUCT OF DIMNA.

DABSCHELIM the king said to BidpaY the
philosopher, Well, you have detailed to me the
means by which this slanderer and detractor was
able to destroy the intimacy which subsisted
between the two friends ; I now wish to be in-
formed of what became of Dimna after the death
of Schanzabeh, when the lion, seeing the case
of the bull in its true light, proceeded to sub-
mit the arts of treachery and villany, to which
he had fallen a victim, to a strict investigation.
The philosopher replied, that it was related in
the history of Dimna that the lion, after he had
killed Schanzabeh, expressed great sorrow and
concern at his death, and often spoke with feel-
ing and warmth of the pleasure which he had
found in his society, as well as of the benefit
which he had derived from his services ; that he
had been the most favoured and distinguished
of all his attendants, possessing unlimited free-
dom of access to his person, and consulted on
occasions, when no other was allowed the same
privilege.


161

Now next to the bull no one enjoyed the
confidence of the lion in so great a degree as
the leopard ; and as he was returning home one
night, having spent the evening with his master,
he had to pass by the house of Kalila and
Dimna ; and as he reached the door, he heard
Kalila expostulating with his brother on the
atrocity of his conduct, and blaming him for his
treachery and deceit, and especially for the use
which he had made of them to the prejudice of
the respect which is due to persons of consi-
deration and power. The leopard having thus
found a clue to the perfidy of Dimna in the dis-
satisfaction expressed by his brother, listened
with great attention to their conversation, and
overheard Kalila speak in the following terms :
You have embarked, brother, in an enterprise
pregnant vnth dangers, and of which the issue
will lead to your destruction, as soon as your
conduct, together vnth the arts by which you
have disgraced it, becomes known to the lion.
No one will have the power or inclination to
espouse your cause, because contempt for the
meanness of which you have been guilty, joined
to a dread of the further mischief which you
may be able to effect, will point to an exem-

M


162

plary punishment as the only safe means of pre-
caution which can be taken against your con-
trivances in future. From this moment I dis-
claim all connection and familiarity with you, for
the wisdom of ages has pronounced, that he,
^ho has no title to esteem, is also unworthy of
confidence ; besides I am bound to consult my
own interest and safety, for I shall not fail to
be implicated in your crime, and to be thought
to approve of what you have done, if the lion
observes that I am on the same intimate footing
with you as formerly. The leopard after this
returned, and went to the mother of the lion,
and having obtained fi*om her a promise, 'that
she would not divulge any thing of what he
should communicate to her, he acquainted her
vrith the conversation which he had overheard
between Kalila and Dimna: then as soon as
she was up in the morning, she went to the
lion, and seeing that he was still very low and
out of spirits, enquired the reason, and her son
informed her, that the death of Schanzabeh was
ever present to his mind, and that his sorrow at
his untimely end was rendered more poignant
by the reflection, that he had at the same time
lost a friend and a counsellor. His mother told


163

him, that self-accusation was the severeist and
most painful of all feelings, and that he had ex-
posed himself to the pangs of remorse and con-
scious guilt which he felt, by his intemperate
haste in putting Schanzabeh to death without
sufficient proof of his crime ; and added, that
she was only restrained by the recollection of
the turpitude which attached to a breach of
trust in divulging what had been placed under
the seal of secresy, from explaining herself more
fully to him. The lion replied, that the sayings
of wise men, under which she sheltered her re-
serve, were to be interpreted with great latitude,
and were capable of different modifications ac-
cording to circumstances, and desired her there-
fore not to withhold from him any information,
which it was important for him to know. Upon
this his mother related to him the whole of what
she had heard from the leopard, whom however
she did not mention by name, observing, that
though she was by no means convinced of the
lawfulness of publishing what had been confi*
dentially entrusted to her, still she had not
hesitated to prefer his interest, which would be
essentially promoted by the disclosure she had '
made, to that of others, to whom it might pro-

m2


164

bably be fatal, whose pertinacity in their at-
tempts to deceive the king deserved to be
brought to light and punished, lest foolish and
ignorant men, judging of the innocence of the
means by the success which attends them,
should find an excuse for the impudence and
want of decency with which they attack the
good and virtuous.

As soon as his mother had done speaking,
the lion commanded the presence of all his at-
tendants, and being unable to suppress the pain-
fiil emotions which agitated him, Dimna no
sooner remarked the symptoms of sorrow and
sadness on his countenance and in his manner,
than turning to one of his companions, he asked
what had happened to distress the king. The
mother of the lion answered him in an angry
tone, that his presence was the cause of the un-
easiness which he pretended to deplore, and
gave him plainly to understand, that he would
not be suffered to live many hours longer.
Dimna replied, that the threat which had been
pronounced against him, if carried into execu-
tion, would leave nothing more to be dreaded
by him ; yet he could not believe that the king
and his court would expose themselves to the


165

risk of taking part with evil-disposed persons.
That the contagious example and dangerous
alliance of the wicked was one reason, why re-
ligious men withdrew themselves from the com-
merce of mankind, and sought their safety and
peace of mind in retirement and the practice of
devotional duties ; looking up for' the recom-
pense of their good actions to Him, who repays
according to the deserts of every one, and not
to the world, where purity of conduct is not
only often unrewarded, but even entails misery
on the virtuous and honest, however contrary
this is to the upright and equitable conduct due
from the subjects of a king ; and it has been
said, whoever confounds the nature of things,
is liable to be drawn into error by specious
appearances, like the woman in the fable, who
mistook her servant for her lover.

It is told of a merchant in a certain city, that he
was married to a woman of great beauty and ac-
complishments. There was also in the same city
a painter, who was very intimate with the vrife of
the merchant ; so she desired him to think of
some means, by which she might be apprised of
his coming to visit her, without exciting any
suspicion of the familiarity which subsisted be-

M 3


166

tween, them. The painter told her, that this wa«
•by no means difficult, for that he was possessed
of a dress of different colours, and very curiously
worked with figures, which on such occasions
he would put on, and that she would be able
to know Jiim at a distance ; this therefore took
place a few days after, and every thing went off
to their mutual satisfaction : but it happened.that
the servant of the wife, who had been a witness of
what was passing, was struck vrith astonish-
ment at what he saw, and determined to take
advantage of the discovery which he had made;
and as he was acquainted vidth the painter s
maid, he begged her to lend him the dress, that
he might shew it to a friend, and promised to
return, it, before her master should call for it.
The maid made no difficulty in giving it to him,
upon which he put it on, and went to the spot
to which he had observed the painter go ; and
bis mistress, not doubting that it was her lover,
immediately joined him, and during the whole
time that she was with him, betrayed no symp-
toms of suspicion or distrust. When the meet-
ing was over, the servant carried back the dress^
to the maid, who, as her master was absent, had
siifficiemj^ liine to put it in its {proper place again.


167

In the eyening the painter came home, and put-
ting on his dress as usual, presented himself ta
his female friend ; who, rushing out to meet him,
asked him, why he had so soon repeated his
visit. The painter, being surprised at the ques-
tion, lost no time in returning to his house, and
calling for his maid, threatened to put her to
death, if she did not satisfactorily account to him
for what had happened ; upon which the maid
made a full confession of all that had passed, and
the painter took his dress and burnt it. Dimna
added, that he had related this story, to shew
the king the danger of too great haste in the
decision of a difficult matter, and not through
any fear of death, which, though by no means
an agreeable event, was stripped of many of its
terrors, by the knowledge that it would inevi-
tably sooner or later take place ; that, besides
this, had he a hundred lives, he would readily
sacrifice them to please the king. One of those
who were present, observing to Dimna that he
could not discover in what he said any attach-
ment to the king, but only an attempt to excuse
himself; he indignantly replied. How can any
one be blamed, who, feeling warmly for his own
honour and safety, endeavours to screen himself

m4


168

from the consequences of an attack upon his
reputation and life ? and on what occasion can
a man exert himself with greater right than in
his own defence? I discover in the reproach
which you have made me, the pred6minant
passions of envy and hatred, which are the off-
spring of your bad heart, and render you un-
worthy to serve the king, or even appear at his
court. This rebuke from Dimna made his ad-
versary retire; but called forth from the mother
of the lion an expression of surprise at his
effrontery, and want of decency in the language
which he had held. Dimna told her, that her
prepossessions against him, and the partiality
which she shewed to his accusers, obliged him
to speak as he had done ; that his miserable
condition deprived him of the means of taking
precautions against the contrivances of his ene-
mies, who having the ear of the king, could in-
vent and procure belief for what stories they
pleased, in order to effect his ruin and disgrace ;
that the lot of persons at the court of a sove-
reign was by no means enviable, living as they
necessarily must in continual uncertainty, as to
the duration of royal favour, and exposed to the
risk of losing, by an untimely word or an incau-


169

tious expression, their distinctions as well as
their means of existence. Do you not see, ex-
claimed the mother of the lion to those who sur-
rounded her, how this execrable sinner, notwith*
standing the magnitude of his crime, endeavours
to pass himself off for an injured and innocent
person? Dimna replied, that he took no blame to
himself for the course which he was pursuing ;
that the unforeseen circumstances, in which he
found himself, fully justified him ; and that were
he to act in a difierent manner, he should resem-
ble the man, who spread ashes where he ought
to have scattered sand ; or like one who put on
the dress of a woman instead of his own ; or
like the person who pretended to be the master
of the house, in which he was only a guest; or
like him who gave an answer to a question
which had not been asked him ; and that the
person deserved indeed to be pitied, who owing
to his inexperience in business, and his igno-
rance of mankind, was unable to keep ofi* the
evil which was impending over him. Do you
think, O traitor, said the mother of the lion, by
this plausible language to deceive the king,
and escape imprisonment ? The traitor, replied
Dimna, is he who does not miss the opportunity


il70

of destroyiiig without a cause his eoeniy, who
is in continual alarm at bis secret contrivances.
Do you think, villanous liar, answered i the
mother, that your falsehood will remain un-
punished, and that you will be able to throw a
cloak over your crime by your ingenuity and

[ sophistry? The liar, answered Dimna, is he
who asserts what is not true, and publishes
what has been neither said nor done ; but my
language is both clear and indisputable. The
mother of the lion then complimented those
amongst the attendants, who from a sense of
duty had stood forward as the accusers of

i Dimna, and arose and went away.

Then the lion delivered Dimna over to the
judge, who directed him to be put into confine-
ment, and a rope being placed about his neck,
he was led away to prison. And in the middle
of the night, Kalila, being informed that Dimna
had been arrested, came to him privately, and
when he saw what his brother was suffering
from the weight of his chains, and from the
narrow space in which he had to move, he
could not refrain from weeping at his fate ; W
at the same time told him, that his intemperate
language and indiscretion, together with an


:i7i

inattention to the advice which had be^n given
him, and a neglect of the means which were in
his power to recover the false step he had made,
had brought him into his present difficulties.
And if I did not feel, continued he, that I have
done every thing in my power to correct the
propensities and ey^l habits, which I foresaw
would be fatal to you, by persuasion and ex-
hortation, as well as by placing before your eyes
examples of persons who have fallen untimely
victims of thieir own folly and deceitful prac-
tices, I should reproach myself with being in a
great measure the cause of the misfortune which
has happened to you, and should even charge
myself with a participation in your crime ; but
the fond conceit of your own abilities so far got
the better of your judgment and good sense,
that all friendly hints were thrown away upon
you. Dimna acknowledged the justice of his
brother's remarks, but consoled himself with
the reflection, that it is better, according to the
saying of vnse men, to pay the penalty of a
crime in this world, than to be tormented ever-
lastingly for it in the next : however, this reason-
ing was not so conclusive to the mind of Kalila,
who dreaded the punishment which it would


172

be in the power of the lion to inflict. upon
Dimna.

Now there happened to be confined in the
same prison a hyena, who overhearing the con-
versation which took place, and the expostula-
tions of Kalila vrith Dimna on his ill conduct,
together with the confessions of the latter, who
freely acknowledged to his brother the enormity
of his crime, carefully treasured up in his mind
the information which he had acquired, that he
might be able to give evidence if called upon.
After this Kalila returned home, and the mother
of the lion as soon as she was up in the morning
went to her son, and implored him not to change
the orders which he had given the day before,
and which had spread general satisfaction
amongst his attendants, for that dispatch and
decision were necessary to counteract the pur-
poses of a dangerous enemy, however unjust it
would be to have recourse to a crime in order
to punish him.

As soon as the lion had heard the words of
his mother, he commanded that the leopard,
who was one of the judges, should be sent for ;
and upon his appearing, he directed him and
Giwash el Adel to take their seats on the bench


I

/


173

of justice,, and summon the whole troop, to
come forward and give evidence in the cause of
Dimna ; and ordered at the same time that the
defence of Dimna should be recorded, and a
report made to him of the proceedings from
day to day. The leopard and Giwash el Adel,
who was the uncle of the lion, replied, that it
was only necessary to know the orders of the
king, in order to obey them, and they imme-
diately retired to execute the commands which
they had received. And the trial having com-
menced, the judge at the expirati6n of three
hours ordered Dimna to be conducted into
court, and placed in the front of the assembly ;
and after silence had been proclaimed, the
president spoke in the following terms: It is
known to this assembly, (iiat the king of the
beasts since the loss of Schanzabeh has been in
the greatest affliction and sorrow at the unlawful
manner by which, as it appears, through the
falsehood and treachery of Dimna his death
was brought about ; it is for the purpose of en-
quiring into this matter that we are met together
this day : I therefore call upon every one pre-
sent to declare what he knows, tending either
to the condemnation or exculpation of Dimna,


174

that the sentence of the court may be dotbed
in all the legal forms, and be hRj substantiatedi
by evidence : if the death of Schanzabeh admits
of justification, it is important that this fact
should be brought to light, that the ends of
justice may not be frustrated by partiality, or a
time-serving compliance with the wishes of the
king. When the president had finished speaks
ing, the judge directed the attention of the court
to what had been said, and cautioned the wit-
nesses not to dismiss from their minds the
recollection of the-^ bull's services, or to think
that his merits were small^ and therefore the
injtistice done to him unworthy of consideration,
because there was no greater crime than the
putting to death an innocent person ; and who-
ever suppressed any part of the evidence, which
mi^t serve to unravel the plot,- to which he had
fallen a victim, would be virtually guilty of the
murder, and share its consequences: in the
next place, he called upon every one to declare
if the accused had at any time acknowledged
his oflfence ; that he might not be deprived of
the benefit of a voluntary confession, from the
clemency of the king: and, lastly, he charged
them hot to be biassed by any considerations


ITS

of friendship or views of interfestr^^o give ^
false colour to their evidence ; remindh^ tbemv
that at the future distribution of rewards and
punishments, the neglect to vindicate the repu-
tation of a dead man, M'ould be visited by th^
torment of eternal flames. After this speech
of the judge, there was a general silence in the
court, upon which Dimna called upon the wit*
nesses to relate what they knew, declaring that
he was ready to answer whatever they could
urge against him; but threatening any false
vritness vnth what had happened to the phy-
sician, who asserted his knowledge of a thing of
which he was ignorant; and at (he desire of
the court he related the story : That there was
in a certain city a physician of established
reputation in his profession, but who was very
old, and nearly blind ; and the king of the place
had a daughter married to his nephew, who
experiencing the pains which usually denote a
state of pregnancy, the physician was sent for
to be consulted on the occasion, and imme-
diately declared the nature of her maktdy,
regretiiDg at the same time that he was unaUe,
on account of his imperfect sight, to prepare
himself the proper medicines, and unwilling to


176

trust any one else with his prescription. This at
length reached the ears of another practitioner
of no education, but who pretended to have
a thorough knowledge of his profession, and
offered to undertake the cure of the princess ;
upon which the king desired him to procure the
necessary drugs : but when he went to the shop,
and the different medicines were shewn to him,
he was so entirely ignorant of the various kinds,
that amongst other ingredients which he chqse
for the physic which he intended to prepare,
he took a deadly poison ; and having mixed the
whole together, he gave the draught to his
patient, who died upon the spot. But the king,
to punish him for his presumption and folly,
made him drink of the same mixture, and his
own death immediately ensued.

Here Dimna remarked upon the instruction
contained in the fable which he had related,
and dwelt upon the liability to error, to which
every one is exposed, who does not unite pru-
dence and moderation with his attempts to bring
to issue a doubtful matter : in this manner he
wished to impress on the minds of the court
the necessity of circumspection and discrimina-
tion in the proceedings which had been insti-


177

tuted against him, not only in justice to the
accused, but from considerations which were
personal to themselves ; because, according to a
current saying, a person was answerable for
what he said, and the full liberty of speech,
which had been accorded to them, might pos*
sibly induce them to overstep the bounds of
right and discretion. Upon this the chief of
those who were employed in the kitchen of the
lion, who enjoyed great consideration on account
of the post which he filled, stood up, and ad-
dressed the court in the following words : I
beseech this noble and learned court to listen
with attention to what I have to advance. The
bounty of Providence in its dispensations to-
wards you has gifted you with the power of
ascertaining by outward signs and marks what
is passing in the heart, and of distinguishing
the good man from him who is of a contrary
disposition: it is therefore your bounden duty
to make use of this prerogative on the present
occasion, and from an examination of the fea-
tures of Dimna, and of the appearances which
tell against him, to arrive at a knowledge of his
true character. Here the judge observed to the
principal cook, that as he eiigoyed the talent of

N


178

discriminationy to which he had alluded, in .so
great a d^ree, it became him to acquaint the
court with the conclusions which he had formed
from observing the countenance of Dimna;
upon which, without hesitation, he declared, that
the wise men had pronounced as their opinion;
that the person, whose left eye was smaller than
the right, and continually winking, and whose
nose at the same time inclined to his right side,
contained in himself the very essence of im-
purity, deceit, and wickedness. Here Dimna
was unable to suppress his indignation at the
cojiduct and language of the cook, and told
him, that he only deserved to be answered, as
the man answered one of his wives, who re-
proached the other with being naked, though
she was herself without any covering : It once
hiq[>pened, he said, that the enemy having got
possession of a city which was besieged, plun-
dered the inhabitants, and carried off a great
many prisoners ; and there fell to the share of
one of the soldiers a farmer and his two wives,
whom the soldier treated with great inhu-
manity, depriving them both of food and rai-
ment. One dav the farmer went out, attended
by his two wives, to collect wood for the soldier,


17»

and oneof thefeniiales^hayifa^picked^xip an\Qld
rag^ made the most decent use she could ofvjt
to suf^ly her ' want of • clothes ; and then
duected the attention of' the < husband to^ the
barefacedness^ of the other, * who was walking
about unconcerned at. the state in whick flh^
was. The husband told her, that in finding
fault with her companion, she was at the same
time condemning herself, for that the charge
of indecency would apply equally to both. And
your behaviour, continued Dimna, addressing
himself to the cook, is truly surprising; for
when I consider the deformity of your person,
and the filthiness which renders it more disgust^
ing, I wonder at your presumption in daring
even to set a foot in the kitchen of the king, not
to mention your impudence in venturing to
appear in his presence. You have put yourself
forward to speak against an innocent person of
pure and honest intentions ; and your baseness
in thus calumniating me in the presence of the
court, releases me from the obligation, which
from motives of friendship I had voluntarily
contracted towards you, and imposes upon me
the duty of laying open your character,, which
however is known to most who are present,

N 2


180


and of drawing aside the veil, which an indul-
gent hand has so long held before your vicious
habits, that the king may see the danger of
employing you in future ; for you are not only
unworthy of so distinguished a post in his
kitchen, but you are unfit for the most menial
occupation, or to exercise the lowest profession.
The cook here gi'ew impatient, and a few angry
words escaped him; and Dimna proceeded:
I have asserted nothing but what is true, and
to finish your portrait, I add, that you have been
lame fi'om your birth, and a very skeleton, clubr
footed, and labouring under the most loathe
isome diseases in diflerent parts of your body,
which make you an object of aversicMi and
disgust. At these words the cook changed
colour, and the depression in his spirits which
they occasioned deprived him of the means of
making even the shadow of a reply. And
Dimna, observing the state of despondency into
^hich he had sunk, and that the tears were
starting from his eyeSi told him in a tone of
malignant joy and exultation, that he would
soon have greater reason to weep, when the king,
becoming acquainted with his worthlessness
and depravity, would not only dismiss him from


181

the kitchen, but banish him altogether from hid
court and presence.

Now a jackal, in whom the lion had great
confidence, and who had received orders from
the king to report from time to time what was
going on, immediately left the court, to inform
his sovereign of what had just taken place;
which he detailed in a very clear and distinct
manner; and the lion immediately ordered, that
the cook should be dismissed from his office,
and sent into banishment ; and directed that
Dimna should be conducted back again to
prison: and the proceedings having already
occupied the greater part of the day, the whole
of the evidence, together with the defence of the
prisoner, was committed to writing, and sealed
with the seal of the leopard, and the court
separated.

Amongst the jackals there wa^ one named
Rusbah, a very intimate friend of Kalila, and
in great favour with the lion. Now the state
of alarm and apprehension for his own safety
and Ufe having occasioned the sudden death of
Kalila, Rusbah lost no time in going to Dimna,
to acquaint him with the distressing news ; who
was so much afflicted at the loss of his brother,

n3


182

th^t he broke out .into ai'flood of tears; but
suddenly reflecting on his own forlorn isituation,
he exclaimed. What henceforth can 1 hope or
Cfl[pect in the world, if Providence is not gra-
cious to me! I see^: Rusbah, that you are not
«amoved at my present condition ; I beg of you
therefpre to be so good as to go to a place
which I will name to you, and bring me the
small property which my brother and 1 have
been able to collect by our pains and diligence*
Rusbah having executed the commission, Dimna
made him a present of half of what he possessed,
and addressing him said. You have freer access
to the lion than any of his attendants ; I there-
fore beseech you to lose no opportunity of
learning what is reported to him concerning
me; and to be particularly attentive to the
language of his mother, as far as it concerns
me, in order to discover, if possible, to what
extent her son is inclined to follow her advice ;
and to observe if he betrays in his answers any
favourable disposition towards me. The jackal
made no scruple of accepting the present which
Dimna offered him, and carried it home. On the
next morning the lion rose earlier than usual, and
dkfter his attendants had waited two hours in


183

expectation of being sent for, they be^ed per*
mission to be admitted to an audience, and pre-
sented to him the minutes of evidence which had
been taken on the trial ; upon which the lion sent
for his mother, and read the whole proceedings
to her ; which she had no sooner heard, than
she expressed her dissatisfaction at the course
which her son had pursued, who, blind to his
own interest and regardless of her advice, ex-
posed himself to the risk of being deceived by
the specious arguments and ingenious reason-
ing of Dimna, and immediately left the room«
The jackal, whose good services Dimna had
seciu^d, having heard this, went to inform him
of what had passed ; and whilst he was talking
to him, there arrived a messenger, who was
ordered to conduct him again to the court of
justice ; and as soon as he appeared before the
judge, the president of the assembly addressed
him in the following manner : We are now ar-
rived at that stage of the proceedings, in which
we are bound to call upon you to give a true
account of yourself, and of what is laid to your
charge, remembering that this world is only
the passage to another, and that our conduct
here is the rule by which it will be detenmned

n4


184

heiieafter, if we are worthy to enter into that
eteipal dwelling, whither the prophets and
ministers of knowledge and good are gone be-
fore. The information which we had already
received was sufficient to stamp on yoiu* beha-
viour a complexion, which betrayed the motives
by which you were instigated ; it was neverthe-
less the will and pleasure of the king that we
should fsubmit it to a judicial examination, how-
ever small the doubt which remained on our
own minds. I see, O judge, answered Dimna,
that you are not bound by the rules of equity in
your proceedings ; and it is unjust in a king to
persecute the unfortunate, who have been guilty
of no crime, by preferring an accusation against
them, without allowing them to make their de-
fence ; and I cannot be expected to submit to un-
merited punishment without resistance ; besides,
the precipitation with which you have hurried
on the proceedings against me (for my trial has
scarcely lasted three days) proves, that the at-
tainment of the ends of justice is the least of the
motives by which you have been influenced.
The duty of a judge, replied the other, as has
been in old times laid down, is to make him-
self acquainted with the conduct both of the


186

good and bad, that, by dealing with every one
according to his deserts, he may strengthen and
improve the disposition of the former, and create,
virhere they are wanting, good intentions in the
latter ; therefore the best counsel which we can
give you, Dimna, is to reflect on your present
situation, and in acknowledging your crime, ix>
shew signs of repentance and contrition. Up-
right judges, continued Dimna, never decide
from suspicion alone, for suspicion ought never
to supply the place of justice ; and though in
your opinion I may be guilty of the crime laid
to my charge, still I cannot consent to sacrifice
the inward persuasion which I have of my own
innocence, founded on a knowledge of the mo-
tives by which I have been guided, to your pre-
sumption of my guilt, which from its very nature
must be inconclusive, and liable to error. If the
accusation of others has already had the effect
of injuring me in your opinion, what advantage
can I promise myself In becoming my own ac-
cuser ; I should then belie the consciousness of
my innocence, and challenge the punishment
which I feel I do not deserve; and I should incur
d charge of inconsistency in deposing falsely to
my own criminality, in the very moment that I


186


am CD my trial for a supposed offence of the
dame nature against aii^other. Cease therefore,
O judge, to address me in this manner. Ypur
language, if meant a^ advice, is ill-timed, and
ill-directed ; if intended as a snare to entrap
the innocent, it is base, and unbecoming the
situation which you fill, and, what is worse than
this, your words will be treasured up by foolish
and ignorant men as lessons of instruction ; for
the decisions and opinions of those who are en-
trusted with the administration of justice, are
capable, according to the different construction
which is put upon them, and the latitude with
which they are interpreted, of becoming a sup-
port to the cause of virtue, or of affording a
cloak to vice. I warn you, therefore, against
tibe train of evil consequences, which the course
you are . pursuing may draw after it. I do not
allude,. to any worldly misfortune which may
result to you from it, for the high opinion which
the king and his attendants entertain of your
wisdom and judgment, places you above the
reach of temporal calamity, but will not protect
you from the pangs of remorse, for having vio-
lated in my person the rules of equity and jus-
tice: and have you never heard it reported.


187

that he who pretends to have a knowledge of
that with which he is not acquainted, and
speaks authoritatively and unblushingly in a
dubious aiiair, is likely to meet with no better
fate than the falconer, who accused his master's
wife of adultery? The judge having desired to
hear the story, Dimna continued as follows :

There was in a certain city a nobleman married
to a woman of great beauty, and remarkable for
the propriety of her conduct ; and he had iQ his
service a falconer thoroughly skilled in the
bringing up and training of hawks, and who was
in such estimation with his master,, that he often
enjoyed the honour of sitting at table with him
in the company of the ladies; and the conse*
quence was, that he fell in love vrith his wife^
who so iar from listening to his declarations, or
giving him the least encouragement, changed
colour and became red with shame, as often as
he renewed his indecent proposals. The pas*
sion of the falconer being only increased by
the refusal which he met with, he had recourse
to various expedients for the attainment of his
purpose, but which were all equally unsuccess*
fill. So he went out hawking one day as usual,
and caught two young parrots, which he carried


186

borne and brought up, and when they were
grown to their full size, he placed them in two
separate cages, and taught one of them to say,
I saw the porter lying with my mistress in my
master's bed ; and the other he instructed to cry
out, I will not tell tales. At the end of six
months, the parrots being quite perfect in their
lesson, the falconer carried them to his master,
who was all admiration and wonder at hearing
them talk, though he did not understand a
syllable of what they said, for the falconer had
taught them in the language of Balk ; however
his astonishment was not diminished by this
circumstance, and he desired his wife to take
care of them. A short time after some friends
from Balk came on a visit to the nobleman, who
entertained them very hospitably ; and after
they had dined, and talked over the news of the
day, their host ordered the falconer to bring the
two parrots, and as soon as they were in the
room, they cried out as they had been taught ;
and the men of Balk, understanding what they
said, looked with surprise one at the other, and
then turned away their heads, in order to con-
ceal the astonishment which their looks might
betray. This conduct of his guests did not


189


escape the notice of the nobleman, who there-
fore asked his friends what the parrots had
said, but they refused for a long time to tell
him ; till at length, beii^ tired by a repetition of
the same question, they explained it to him, and
added, that they could not remain in a house of
such ill feme. Upon this the nobleman be^ed
them to speak to the parrots in the language of
Balk, which they did, and found that they were
not able to say any thing but what they had
learned from the falconer ; and in this way the
innocence of the nobleman's wife was com-
pletely proved, and the villany of the falconer
brought to light. The nobleman therefore sent
-for him, and he came into the room with a white
hawk upon his hand ; and the wife, as soon as
she saw him, asked him triumphantly, if he had
himself seen what the parrots had published ;
and upon his answering in the affirmative, the
hawk sprung at his face, and plucked out his
eyes with its claws; and the wife exclaimed, that
it was a punishment from heaven, for his having
asserted what he did not know. Dimna added,
that he had related this fable, to shew that false-
hood is severely punished as well in this world
as in the next.


190

As soon as the judge had heard the sq^ch
of Dimna, he arose and wCTit to report it in
person to the lion, who, after some motndnts re-
flection; sent for his mother, and acquainted her
with it ; and his mother told him, that the lan-
guage of Dimna filled her with alarm, and gave
her reason to apprehend a greater crime, ex-
tending possibly to an attempt on her sons life,
than that which he had committed in procuring
by his treachery and cunning the death of the
innocent bull. These words of his mother made
an impression upon the mind of the lion, and
he desired her to tell him who* it was, who had
given the information which she had com-
municated about Dimna, that he might have a
good reason for putting him to death. His
mother refused to divulge, what had been en-
trusted to her mider a promise of secrecy, lest
the death of Dimna procured by such a breach
of trust should be imputed to her as a crime ;
but thinking at length of a way to relieve her-
self firom her embarrassment, without violating
her word, she sent for the leopard, and remind-
ing him of what he owed to the honour of the
lion, and of what was due both to the living and
the dead, she conjured him to withhold no


191

long^ the evidence of which he was in posses*
sion, to prove the guilt of Dimna, lest his dien
regrard to the reputation of a murdered person
should cry out for vengeance against him at the
day of judgment ; and she did not cease u^iig
the same arguments, till the leopard was at
length persuaded to go to the lion, and relate
the whole of what Dimna had confessed in his
hearing. After the leopard had declared all
that he knew, the hyena, who had been con-
fined in the same prison with Dimna, and had
been privy to his confessions, sent to the lion,
to say that he was also ready to give evidence ;
upon which he was led forth firom his confine-
ment, and related what he had heard. Then
the lion asked them, what had prevented them
from coming forward sooner to give their evi-
dence, as they knew his anxiety about the trial
of Dimna. They answered each of them, that
they were unwilling to appear individually, as
the declaration of one alone was insufficient to
convict the prisoner; but one witness having
deposed to his guilt, a second could have no
longer any objection to give his evidence. The
lion therefore, having received their depositions,
ordered Dimna to be put to death by torture in


192


prison: and thus every one who seeks his own
advantage by the injury of another, will fiaid
the means which he employs for the attainment
of his purpose, converted into the instruments
of his own destruction.


THE RING-DOVE.

After Bidpai had finished the history of
Dimna, Dabschelim desired him to relate the
story of the friends, who in their conduct
towards each other displayed the aflection and
disinterestedness of brethren, together with the
origin of their acquaintance. The philosopher
said, that nothing was held in greater estimation
by men of understanding than brotherly love ;
which heightens and gives a relish to the en-
joyment of our good fortune in the time of pros-
perity, and becomes a resource under the pres-
sure of calamities; the truth of which was
exemplified in the fable of the ring-dove, the
rat, the roe, and the crow, as thus related.

Tliere was in the land of Sakawand Ghin,
mMr the city Daher, a place abounding with


193


game/ and consequently very much frequented
by sportsmen. And there was hi this spot a
tree, with spreading brancheid and very luxuriant
foliage, in which a crow had built her nest : and
as she was one day returning home, and on the
point of settling upon her nest, she observed a
fowler of very suspicious appearance, with a
net upon his back and a club in his hand,
advancing towards the tree, and was apprehen*
sive of danger to herself or some other bird;
she therefore determined to remain quiet where
she was, and see what the fowler would do;
and she saw him spread his net upon the ground;
and scatter some seeds over it, and then go and
hide himself a little way off. In a short time,
a ring-dove, the queen of the tribe, with a
number of her companions, came and settled
upon the ground to eat the seeds, and they
were caught in the net. The fowler seeing this,
ran in haste towards the net, in which tfie doves
were fluttering about, endeavouring to escape.
The ring-dove had in the mean time desired
them not to fatigue themselves by their useless
efforts, or to think each of its own safety alone,
but to act in concert, and unite their strength in
flying away with the net, and they Would then

o


194

all be saved. Upon this they mutually exertied
themselves to lift up the net, and having suc-
ceeded, they mounted with it into the air ; and
the foMrler continued to foUoMr them, thinking
that they would fly a little way, and then settle
again. The crow also deterijiined to fly aft^
thein, to see what would become of them.
Then the ring-dove looking round, saw that the
fowler was pursuing them; and she told her
companions, that they would never be concealed
from him as long as they continued flying over
the open fields, but if they directed their course
over the woody and more cultivated parts of
the land, that they would soon be out of his
sight, and he would then go away; and she
added, that she was very intimately acquainted
with a rat, that lived at no great distance, and
if they could only reach his dwelling, that he
would soon release them fi'om the net. The
doves followed the advice of their queen^ and
the fowler therefore despairing of catching them
went away ; but the crow continued to fly after
them: and as soon as the ring-dove arrived
over the spot vrhere the rat lived, she desired
her companions to settle upon the ground.
Nov the rat had a hupdred different h^les,


which he inhabited. The ritig-doye therefore
called aloud Zirak, which was his naihe, to which
the rat answering, enquired Who was there; aiid
the ring-dove repUed, that it was his friend, the
ring-dove; upon which the rat came runnilig
out of one of his holes, and seeing what had
happened to the ring-dove, was very much asto-
nished, and asked for an explanation of it.
The ring-dove said, that it was the decree of
fate which determined irrevocably both good
and evil ; that even the sun and moon were
subject to its irresistible laws in their appointed
eclipses. The rat then set about gnawing that
part of the net where the ring-dove was entan-
gled ; but she desired him to go to the other
doves, and begin by releasing them, and after-
wards come to her; and when she had re^
peated this several times, and the rat had paid
no attention to her, he at length remarked to
her, that to judge from her manner of talking,
she did not appear to have any thought about
herself, or even to be aware of the state in which*
she was. She told him, she was afraid, if he
b^an by setting her at liberty, that he would
be tired, or periiaps too lazy to undertake after-
wards the liberation^ of the rest ; whereati, if on

o2


196

the contrary he left her till the last, that for her
own part she had no apprehensions of being
fbigotten. This disinterestedness called forth
from the rat the strongest assurances of friendw
ship, and of a readiness to serve her ; and he
immediately set to work with «o much zeal and
earnestness, that in a shori time he had released
both the queen and her companions.

Now after the crow had seen what the rat
had done, she desired very much to become
acquainted with him, and went and called him
by his name ; and he put his head out of one of
his holes, and asked what she wanted; and
being told what her purpose was, he replied,
Aat there could not possibly be any intimacy
between them ; that sensible persons always
limited their wishes to what they could reason-
ably expect to obtain, without wasting their
time in vain and unprofitable pursuits, and that
he could not consent to seek the familiar ac-
quaintance of one, of whom he was likely to
become the food. The crow replied, that it
was not with the intention of eating him that
Ab was come ; that she had a more important
object in view, which was to secure his friend-
ship; and diat the truth and sincerity with


i«7

which she courted it, did not deserve to be
repaid by distrust; that her principal motive
for seeking his acquaintance were the good and
amiable qualities which she had observed in
him, and which it was as impossible for him
to conceal, as it was for a bag of musk not to
send forth a sweet smell. The rat observed,
that the strongest enmity was that which had
its foundation in nature, and which on different
occasions presented itself under various aspects;
that, for instance, in the case of the lion and the
elephant, its effect was contingent, as accord*
ing to circumstances either might become the
victim of the other ; whereas, on the other hand,
the antipathy which existed between him and
the crow, or the cat, was as uniform in its ope-
ration, and as certain in its consequences, as
that water, though heated by boiling to the tem-^
perature of a fire, will nevertheless extinguish
the flame ; and that the society of an enemy,
which a sensible person would never desire,
was as dangerous as a serpent carried about in
the bosom. I perfectly understand what you
say, answered the crow ; it is fit however that
you should give firee scope to the nobleness of
your disposition, and not be hurried away by

oS


198


the false notion, that it is impossible for us to
l>ecome frijends ; for nothing is easier to good
and well-intentioned persons, than to form ^an
attachment as indissoluble, or, in case of a slight
interruption, as easy to be repaired, as a vessel
of gold, whereas the friendship of the wicked
is as liable to be broken and as difficult to be
restored as an earthen cup. The noble-minded
person is forcibly attracted by a disposition
similar to his own ; whereas the mean and un-
generous, if they sometimes affect a social tem-
per, never fail to betray the selfishness in which
their professions have originated : I have only
to add, that I will not, even at the risk of starv-
ing, quit your dwelling till you have acceded to
my request. The rat answered the crow, that
he accepted an offer, which had all the charac-
teristics which were calculated to inspire con-
fidence; and though in the end he might be
deceived, that he should not reproach himself
with inconsiderateness, or a too ready acquies-
cence in the proposal which had been made
him. After this he came out of his hole and
sat at the door ; and the crow asked him the
reason for his not venturing out fiirther, and
if he had still some doubts in his mind of her


190

sincerity. The rat observed, that th^re aire
two things which are objects of pursuit in
the world, the tribute of the mind, and the
offerings of the hand ; that the commerce of
the heart, and the best affections^ is distin-
guished by the purity of disinterested attach-
ment; whereas the interchange of good OlBSces
between two persons, has very often no foun-
dation in feeling or sentiment, but originates
altogether in a mutual desire of profit imd
advantage, each, notwithstanding a. shew of
generosity, being exclusively influenced by
motives of self-interest, in the same manner as
the fowler scatters the com upon the ground^
with the intention not of feeding the birds, but
of catching them in his net. He added, that
the attributes of the mind opened a sweeter
source of gratification than was to be found
out of the sphere of their opetation, and that
his confidence in the crow's integrity, made it
his duty to observe a similar line of conduct ;
that if he had hitherto betrayed some distrust
in his behaviour, it was because the sentiments
which she had professed, were not those of
all her species.

. Upon this the crow assured the nrt, that she

o4


200

would prove, that she knew the value of friend*'
ship, by disclaiming all connection with his
ienemies of every description. Then the rat ad*
vanced towards the crow, and they embraced
each other, as if they were the best friends in
the world. And after some days, the crow
remarked to the rat, that his dwelling was too
near the high road, and she was afraid that some
boy in going along would throw a ^tone at
him and kill him; and she proposed to him
to accompany her to a retired spot, which she
knew of, where there was a tortoise, who was
her Mend, and plenty of fish, and that they
could pass, their time there very comfortably,
and never be at a loss for food. The rat as-
sented, and promised the crow that, upon their
arrival at the place which she had mentioned,
be would entertain her by relating a number
of fobles and stories which he knew. Then
the crow took hold of the rat's tail, and flew
away with him : and when they reached the
pond, the tortoise, who did not immediately
reci^nise his fiiend, was firightened at what he
8aw» but at last came out of the water, and
asked the crow whence she came; and she
told him her story from beginning to end;


how ^e had b^un by foUowmg the doves,
and what had passed between her and the
rat. The tortoise compUmented the rat
upon his understanding and sincerity, and
begged to know what had brought him to that
country? The crow joined in the request of
the tortoise, at the same time calling upon the
rat to fulfil his promise ; and he began in the
following manner.

My first habitation was in the house of a re-
ligious man, who had neither family nor ser-
vants, and who received every day a basket of
food, of which he ate as much as he wanted,
and put away the rest; and I was in the habit of
watching till he went out, and as soon as he wa)i
gone, I jumped into the basket, and what I
could not eat myself, I gave to the other rats in
the house, so that nothing was left; and the reli-
gious man mad^ many fruitless attempts to hang
up the basket out of my reach. Now one night
there arrived a guest to sup with him, and the
religious man asked his visitor whence he wa^
come, and what were his fiiture plans. The
other told him, that he had passed through a
great many different countries, and began to
relate the history of his travels, and of all the


208

remarkable things which he had seen, when on
a sudden the religious man clapped his haUds^
in order to frighten me away from the basket ;
and the guest was angry at this, which he con^
strued into a want of due attention to what he
was relating; but the religious man excused
himself by saying, that he had only made the
Aoise to frighten away a rat, which ate up all
the victuals in his house, wherever he put them^
The guest enquired if it was one rat which did
all the mischief; and the other answered, that
there were many in the house, but one in par-
ticular, of which he had to complain. The guest
replied, You have brought to my recollection what
was said of a certain woman, that it was for some
good reason she had exchanged peeled for un-
peeled sesame : I once came to a friend, and
supped ^ith him, and he offered me a bed in his
house; and upon retiring to my room, I saw
that it was only separated by a small partition
pf reeds from that in which the husband and
wife slept; so I overheard the husband say, that
he intended the next day to invite company to
dinner, and he desired his wife to prepare some-
thing for the table : she told him, that he could
not have any persons to dine with him, as no-


903


had been put by the day before, afid there
were no provisions in the larder. The hmbaad
told her not to regret what had been consumed
at table, for that the danger of hoarding was
exemplified in the story of the wolf, where it
was related of a sportsman, that he went out
one day with his bow and arrows, and very
soon shot a roe, with which he was returning
home, when a wild boar appeared, at which he
discharged an arrow, and wounded him; and
the boar being rendered fiirious by the pain,
rushed upon the sportsman, and they both fell
down dead upon the spot. At this moment a
wolf came by, who seeing the man, the roe, and
the boar^ thought he had found a supply of food
for some time, but chose to begin by eating the
bow, intendii^ to reserve the rest for another
occasion ; and he had no sooner bitten the string
asunder, than the bow flew back, and struck
him on the head, and killed him. The wife seemed
folly to comprehend the lesson which this story
was intended to convey, and told her husband
that she had some rice and sesame in the house,
enough for six or seven persons, and that she
would have them dressed for the company which
he meant to invite to dinner; and as soon as she


204

was up in the morning, she took the s^ame
and peeled it, and exposed it in the sun to dry,
and desired one of the servants to watch it,
and to keep off the birds and dogs from it ; bat
the servant neglected to do as he had been
wdered, and a dog came by, and spoiled it ;
and after this the wife did not choose to have
it served at table, but carried it to the market,
smd exchanged it for the same quantity of un-
peeled sesame ; and I happened to be standing
near at the same time, and heard a person i*e-
mark, that she had certainly not done this vidth-
out some good reason : you must therefore imi-
tate the prudence and good management of this
woman, and contrive some other means of get-
ting the better of the rat ; and if you will have the
goodness to give me a spade, I will dig into his
hole, and see what he is about. Upon this, con-
tinued the rat, the religious man borrowed a
spade from one of his neighbours, and brought
it to his guest ; and it happened, that I Mras at
that moment in a hole which did not belong to
pae, and overheard the whole of their conversa-
tion, but in my hole was a purse, containing an
hundred pieces of gold, but how it came there^
I am unable to say. Then the guest dug till he


306

discovered the purse, which he took up, and
carried to the religious man, and told him that
it was that which had enabled the rat to per-
form all his tricks, because wealth was the
source of strength and power ; but that when
the purse^ was removed, he would be unable to
repeat what he had so successfully executed
before.

Hie next day the rats came to me, complain-
ing of great hunger, and telling me that I was
tlieir only suf^rt; so I went with them to the
place, whence I was accustomed to qnring into
llie basket, and attempted it in vain; upon which
my compamms, seeii^ the state to which I waa
rednoed, left me, and became my declared eo0^
mies, kMBg no opportunity of ii^imuig me. I
then began to reflect on the lastabiitty of ftiead*
ship, and on the meroeDaiyviewsof those who aM
often its waimest advocates^and I OMdethe patO'
fal diacovcry that the ptomiand a(Cyom|iiyimisBt
of cm hopes and expectations otbm Imamim
statioBary 9 and then passes into disainiointifisnt,
where the help of riches is wantiiai^, as Urn wntm
fioBlhenMNmtaintomflitwhM kindsttv pas*
aage to the river, nests in Hm ftM^jf^ isstf it «l
leaigth ascked upbflkt^ mrtU. I UMm4 ^Am


2m

that the mem<»rial of a man is dependent otk
the poi^ession of relations and cMldren, and
that wealth establishes a reputation for under-
standing and wisdom, whilst the absence of it
in clouding our views in this life throws a
^oom over the mind, which darkens the pro-
spects of the next. The distressed man is like
a tree in a salt soil, which is eaten on eveary:
side, and deprived of nourishment ; and what is
a greater evil than this, poverty generally nou-
rishes in the breast the passions of hatred and
calumny, arising from the distrust with which
die poor man is regarded^ and from the suspi-
cion which even his vntuea excite ; for his cou-
rage is called rashness ; his disposition to be
liberal, did he but possess the means, is ^gma-
tized as profusion; his gentleness is degraded
into weakness; and his peaceable temper
branded with the name of stupidity : and who^
would not rather embrace death, than be ex-
posed to this train of ills, from which the only
relief consists in asking a pittance at the hands
of the covetous, to which the noble-minded
man will submit with greater reluctance, than
to the sentence which dooms him to extract
the poison from the mouth of a viper, and


907

swallow itl' Now I was watching^ the gnest as
he took away the purse of gold, which he
dmded with the religious man, who pat his shar^
into a bag, and placed it near his head when he
went to bed ; and seeing this, I was desirous of
getting possession of it in order to recover my
power, and restore my lost credit with my
firiends ; for this purpose I was stealing quietly
into the room of the religious man as he was
asleep, when the guest, who was folly awake,
observing me, gave me a violent blow on the
head with a stick, which made me hurry again
to my hole ; and when the pain had subsided,
I ventured out again, as 1 was very hungry, in
search of something to eat ; but I could not
escape the notice of my enemy, who struck me
a second time so violentiy, that he brought
blood, and I had just strength enough to crawl
to my hole, and then iainted away ; and this
was sufficient to fill me with such a disgust for
money, that I could not hear it mentioned with-
out fear and trembling; and I was pmBuaded,
that the greatest part of the misery which is in
the world arises from inordinate desires, which
ai^e an endless source of calamity and trouUe;
I therefore determined to quit the house of the


208

religious xnan^ pl^ferring the hardships of wan*
dering abqut in the open fields in search of
food, to the uncertain subsistence with which
I was now threatened; and it was in my new
habitation where I '\^&^ idsited by my fiiend the
dove, that:! became casually acquainted with
the crow, who haviztg informed me of the inti-
macy whioh existed between her and you, and
of her desire to go to you, proposed to me to
accompany her^ to which I readily assented ;
for I di^like solitude, and think no pleasure
can be compared with that, which is enjoyed in
the society of persons who mutually love and
esteem each other; and I learned by experience,
tliat honesty and int^rity will supply the place
of worldly possessions, provided we have only
enough of the good things of this life to ke^
off the evils of hunger and thirst: and these are
my real sentiments, which I trust will procure
for me your friendship and regard.

As soon as the rat had done speaking, the
tortoise addressed him thus : I acknowledge
the truth and propriety of what you have said;
«Dd with respect to certam notions which ap-
pear to have taken possession of your mind, it
id Jit that you should prove the sincerity of


209

your declarations by a corresponding behaviour.
The physician who is aciquainted with the
remedy for a disease and does not apply it, is
neither esteemed for his knowledge, nor does
he benefit his patient ; and it would equally ill
become you to make so little use of your un-
derstanding, as to repine at your want of for-
tune. Riches are as unnecessary to call forth
the lustre of real worth, as the exertions of the
lion's strength to prove that he is endowed with
force; on the other hand where character is
wanting, the abundance of wealth is as in-
capable of procuring esteem for its possessor,
as the ornaments round the neck and feet of a
dog are of proving his value. Let not therefore
the necessity to which you have been reduced
of wandering about, be a source of uneasiness
to you, for travelling is as serviceable to a per-
son of understanding, as strength is indispens-
able to the natural habits of the lion ; but be
zealous in seeking by contentment, consolation
for the losses which you have suffered, and
your life will pass on as undisturbed as the wa-
ter in its course downwards. The prudent and
the patient seldom miss their aim, but distinc-
tion and renown are as incompatible vnth irre^

p


210

solution and sluggishness, as a young woman
is unfit for the society of an old and decrepid
man. The shadow of a cloud in a summer's
day, the fiiendship of the wicked, the love (tf
women, and a false report, are not more perish-
able in their nature than worldly possessions,
which a sensible person therefore will never
regret, making his real wealth to consist in his
understanding and the consciousness of having
done his duty, which, whilst they are the surest
treasures in this life, throw no im^diment in
the Way of preparation for the next, which the
uncertainty of our existence should rend^ an
objecit of Unceasing care and concern.

The reception, which the rat had received,
was very agreeable to the cr6w, who expressed
her satisfaction to the tortoise : You have filled
me, she said, with indescribable joy, which, I
hope, may return into your own bosom, for the
purest bliss is what is derived fi*om the fellow-
ship and brotherhood of Mends, who are actu-
ated by one common feeling of kindness and
good-will, and by the desire of mutually assist-
ing and supporting each other ; it is in such a
chaste and honourable union of heart and hand,
that the noble-minded man finds relief under the


211

V

pressure of any unexpected calanuty, whifet. Im
would spurn the sympathy of a soul lesij dtgnir
fied than his own; as the elephant who has
stuck in the mud, must be indebted ^ fOr his de-
liverance to the force.and strength of one of his
own species. -• ; ^ , ,.

As the crow wasf speaking, thare came run-
ning towards th^m a roe, and the tortoise was
frightened and went into the water, the rat
crept into a hole, and the crow flew aitray and
first settled upon a tree, and^ then mounted
into the air, and kept hovering over the roe
to see whether 'he waff in search of any thing;
but disco verii^ nothing which cotdd excite her
suspicion, she called the rat and the tortoise,
and they both appeared ;: and the tortoiae, ofa^
serving that the roe was looking at the waiter,
desired him to drink if he was tfadrsty, and not
be alarmed ; upon which the .roe advanced, and
the tortoise having saluted him^ enquired whence
he came, and received for answer, that having
been continually dri v^ about from place to place
by the huntsmen^ he had been alarmed in llie
morning at the sight of an old man, whom he
took for an enemy. The tortoise desured him
to be under no apprehensions, that they had

p2


212

never seen any sportsmen in those parts, and
begged him to remain with them, as he would
find food and water in abundance ; and the roe
accepted the proposal.

Now this select society was in the habit of
meeting together at different times in a small
summer house, to amuse themselves with the
relation of stories and fables ; and it happened
that' the crow, the rat, and the tortoise, as-
sembled one day, and the roe was missing; and
they waited for him some time without his
making his appearance ; and as it began to
grow late, they suspected that some accident
had happened to him ; upon which the rat and
the tortoise begged the' crow to fly about and
see what was passing in the neighbourhood,
and she very soon discovered the roe caught in
a net, and returned in great haste to inform her
companions, and adding her entreaties to those
of the tortoise, they engaged the rat, who alone
had it in his power, to go and release the roe ;
and the rat going up to him asked, why, with
all his cunning, he had suffered himself to be
taken? the roe replied, that cunning was of
no avail against the power of destiny: and
whilst they were talking, the tortoise arrived.


213

and the roe asked him, what he meant by
coming to them ; for tf the huntsman made
his appearance, his weight and slowness of mo-
tion would prevent his escaping, whilst he on
the contrary could save himself by the swiftness
of his feet, the rat could retreat into a hole, and
the crow fly away. The tortoise answered, that
there was no pleasure in life, when separated
from those whom we love ; that the eye grew
dim, when it could no longer look upon the
friend whose presence had cheered it ; and the
heart felt a pang, when its dearest ties were
broken. This conversation had scarcely ended,
when the huntsman appeared, and the roe, hav*
ing at the very instant regained his liberty, ran
away and escaped, the crow flew about in the
air to see how matters would end, and the rat
went into a hole ; and the huntsman looking
about to the right and the left, and discovering
nothing but the tortoise, took possession of it,
and bound its legs with a string. And not long
aft^r, the crow, the rat, and the roe met together
again, and lamented bitterly the fate of their
companion. The rat was the first who broke
silence, and said. The amount of our affliction
will be very grievous suffering ; so. true it is, that

p3


214

if one false step occurs to interrupt the uniform-
ity of our walk through life, the smoothness of
the path ofiers no security s^ainst the recurrence
of the daiiger. Now what has happened to the
tortoise, fillip me with the greatest apprehensions
for its safety.. The befet of fnends are those
whose friendship is disinterested^ and only ceases
with death, and which. even surpasses the affec-
tion of' a parent "for his child; but its sweets
have now been embittered by the distress which
has come upon me, proving that the joys of life
are as quickly followed by disappointment, as
the rising is isucceeded by the setting sun ; and
the pang which is felt at separating from those
to whom we were united by the closest ties,
may be compared to the pain which is caused
by the rent of a wound, which had begun to
heal. The crow and the roe told the rat, that they
shared his sentiments on the present occasion,
but that words alone would be of no use to the
tortoise ; that affliction was sent for the trial of
man, that mutual services are the test of faithful
attachment, that the union of a family is best
seen in poverty, and the love of brethren proved
in adversity. The rat said, I have thought of
a contrivance, by which to relesuse omr friend ;


215


the roe must endeavour to attract the notice of
the hunter and pretend to be wounded, and the
crow fly down as if she would feed upon him ;
at that moment I will run by, and the hunter
observing me will probably put down the tor-
toise, in order to throw at me whatever he has
in his hand ; at the same time continuing his
chace after the roe, who from time to time must
duffer himself to be very nearly caught, he will
gradually remove further away, iand, I hope,
leave me sufficient time to gnaw the string by
which the tortoise is bound, and we shall escape
together. The crow and the roe did as the rat
had directed them, and the hunter pursued
them ; and the roe, following implicitly the in-
structions which he had received, drew off the
hunter, and the rat was able to release the tor-
toise, and they both saved themselves. By this
time the hunter, having given up pursuing the
roe, returned fatigued and disappointed, and
when he reflected on what had passed, he
cursed the earth for being the seat of witchcraft
and the habitation of evil spirits ; and the crow,
the rat, the tortoise, and the roe, returned to
their summer-house, and were as well and haj^y
as ever they had been in their lives. And in

p 4


216

this manner the rat, notwithstanding his . ap-
parent weakness and diminutive size, was able
on more occasions than one to effect the de-
liverance of his friends from impending destruc-
tion, owing to the mutual confidence, and sin-
cere attachment, which subsisted between them ;
and it is a proof, that he who is gifted with un*
derstandmg and intelligence, and the power
of discerning good and evil, is the surest and
most profitable companion.


THE OWLS AND THE CROWS.

The former story being ended, king Dab-
schelim desired Bidpai to point out, by relating
a fable, the danger of putting confidence in an
enemy, notwithstanding the marks of submis-
sion and meekness in his conduct which ap-
parently leave no room for distrust. The philo-
sopher then began as follows.

There was on a certain mountain a tree of
the kind called Dauah, in which was a nest,
which was the habitation of a thousand crows,
living under the authority of one who was their


217

chief; and not far off was a cave occupied by a
thousand owls, who were also the subjects of a
monarchical government. Now there had ex*
isted for some time between the two kings a
secret enmity and dislike; and one night the
king of the owls, accompanied by a great many
of his people, made an attack upon the crows
in their nest, and killed several of them, and
took a number of prisoners ; and in the morn-
ing the crows went to their king, to com-
plain of what had happened, some with their
wings broken, and others having lost most
of their feathers ; but the greatest misfortune,
said one of them, addressing the king, is the
discovery, which by means of their audacity
the owls have made of our abode, so they
can return and renew their attack when-
ever they please, unless your majesty takes
measures to prevent it. And there were
amongst the crows five, who were remarkable
for their judgment, and had a share . in the
administration of affairs, and were always con-
sulted by the king in matters of importance.
So the king said to the first of the five. What is
your opinion on this occasion? and he answered,
The wise men have anticipated my advice^ by


218

declaring that it is most pradent to fly from
an angry enemy: the second coincided with
this opinion. Then the king said to them,
I cannot approve of the advice which you have
given, that we should quit our homes, and
abandon them to the enemy, on account of the
first disaster which we have experienced from
him ; on the contrary, we ought to take mea-
sures of precaution against his future hostilities,
that we may not be fallen upon by surprise;
and if he renews his attack, we will boldly
advance to meet him, without however un-
necessarily provoking or pusillanimously avoid-
ing the combat ; and as our country is opposite
to that of the enemy, it will be desirable to
repair our fortifications, that we may adopt
according to circumstances an offensive or
defensive system of warfare. Then the king
desired the third to declare his opinion, who
said, I do not consider the plan of my two
companions at all adviseable, but I think it
would be more prudent to send out spies into
the country, who will be able to inform us of
the proceedings of the enemy ; whether he is
making preparations to rekindle the flame of
war, of appears desirous of peace ; and if we


219


ieam that he is disposed to grant us faroixmble
terms, on condition of our paying him an aimual
tribute, I strongly recommend that we shoidd
accede to his propositions; for it is; an old
maxim, that a sovereign who is unable to con-
tend by force of arms with an enemy more
powerful than himself, ought to make his riches
a shield for his country and subjects. The
king then asked the fourth crow, what .he
thought of a peace to be obtained in .such a
manner; and the crow answered, I >see many
objections to it, and think it preferable to aban-
don our homes, and suffer every species of hard-
ship, rather than tarnish our repu^tion by sub-
mitting to an enemy, who in every other respect
but that of power is so much our infmor ;
besides, it is not certain that the owls will be
satisfied with the tribute which we offer them ;
w at best they will make a treaty with us, of
which the articles will be so obscure, that they
will never be at a loss for a pretext to break
it, whenever it suits either their convenience
or their interest. It is an old rule, that you
should make advances to your enemy to a cer-
tain extent, with a view to the accomplishm^it
of any secret purpose; but by no means expose


220

«

your intentions, and incur the risk of failure, by
a gratuitous and rash display of confidence and
frankness ; for the pretensions of an enemy will
rise or fall, in proportion to the reluctance or
readiness which he observes to satisfy them;
as a piece of wood placed in the sun, gives a
great or a small shadow according to the in-
clined direction which it receives ; and as I
foresee that the owls will not be satisfied with
reasonable terms, it would perhaps be better to
decide at once upon open war. The king then
called upon the fifth, to declare what course he
thought best to be pursued under the present
circumstances; whether peace on the terms
which had been suggested, would afford security
for the future ; and if this did not appear likely
to be the case, whether it would be better to
quit their habitations, or oppose force to force.
The crow replied. Success is not to be expected
from resistance, when the person to whom it is
x>fifefed is superior in power: and a sensible
man will never so far undervalue the strength
of his enemy, as knowingly to risk his safety in
an unequal contest; add to which, I still en-
tertain the same fears as formerly of what the
owls may do, though they do not declare war


221

against us. The prudent man will upon every
occasion be upon his guard against an eHemy^
whose means of injuring him do not depend on
the greater or less distance by which he is re-
moved ; and who can supply the want of large
resources by stratagem and cunning ; therefore
besides the personal danger with which we
should at least be threatened, an open rupture
would certainly entail upon us a great expence,
and in the end possibly engage us in the laby-
rinth of negociations of which the issue is un-
certain. When a king is distinguished for the
secrecy with which he guards confidential com-
munications, and for the prudence with which
he chooses his ministers, and is moreover ho-
noured in the eyes of men, it is fit that he
should reap the firuits of his virtues. Now
there are secrets which are only communicated
to a few people ; others which become a subject
of greater notoriety ; but sqpie there are, which
can only be safely entrusted to the discretion of
two persons ; and of this latter description Is
the affair of state, about which your majesty
has done me the honour to consult me; and my
opinion therefore, though regarding a matter of
public interest, must be considered as of a


222

prhrate nature. Upon this the king rose up
and retired with the crow, and the first question
which he asked him was, if he knew how the
quarrel began between them and the owls ? It
originated, answered the crow, in a speech which
a certain crow made to an assembly of cranes,
who had met together in order to choose the
king' of the owls for their sovereign. Whilst
they were deliberating, a crow flew over their
heads, so they determined, if he settled amongst
them, that they would consult him on the pro-
priety of the choice which they werie about to
make. They had scarcely agreed upon this,
before the crow appeared in the midst of them,
and being asked his opinion, spoke as follows :
If the peacocks, the geese, the ostriches, and
the doves, were destroyed from the face of the
earth, and the race of birds was almost entirely
extinct, still what motive could possibly induce
you to make an owl your king, who is not only
the ugliest bird to look at, but remarkable at
the same time for his bad character and pro-
found ignorance, united to a violent temper,
and a want of all generous feeling ; besides this,
his partial blindness, for he is at least unable to
support the broad light of day, and natural


223


stupidity reader Um totally unfit for so
t]nguislied.a>po^; unless you have secretly in
view to declare/ him nominally your sovereign,
reserving to yourselves the whole . direction and
administration of affairs, as the hare did, when
she said that the moon vras her sovereign. The
cranes being desirous of hearii^ the story, the
crow continued : There was a certain country,
where the elephants, after a length of time, b^an
to suffer very much from hunger and thirst, for
the springs had failed, the ground was parched
up, and all vegetation was destroyed; and
when they were no longer able to support the
great drought which prevailed, they made a
complaint to their king, who sent out persons
in every direction in search of water; one of
whom soon returned with the information, that
he had discovered a fountain, called the foun-
tain of the moon, where there was a very abun-
dant source of water. The king of the ele-
phants therefore, attended by his companions,
repaired without delay to the fountain, which
happened to be situated in the country belong
ing to the hares, a great many of which they
trod under foot and killed. So the hares begged
an audience of their sovereign, and iii^onped


224

him of the conduct of the elephants; and the
king said. Let every one who has any advice to
give, at once declare it. Then one of the haies,
named Firouz, who was known to the king for
the soundness of her judgment, and the extent
of her information, proposed to the king to send
her to the elephants, accompanied by some
trusty person, who might report all the proceed-
ings pf her mission. The king said to her,
You are worthy of being trusted, and I approve
of your proposal, therefore equip yourself for
your journey, and go to the elephants; but
recollect that it is by discretion and good sense,
united to moderation, and grafted upon real
worth, that an ambassador justifies the choice
of his master, and that affability and conciliat-
ing manners alone can win the heart ; whereas
an unbending spirit and uncourteous behaviour
will only exasperate the feelings. Then the
hare set out on her journey one moon-light
night, and came to the place where the ele-
phants were ; but was afraid of going very near
them, lest one of them should tread upon her
without perhaps intending it ; but she went up
on a hill, and called aloud to the king of the
elephants, and said, The moon has sent me to


225

you ; and if my language in obedience to my
instructions should appear objectionable, I must
trast for my justification to the character in
which I appear. The king of the elephants^
desiring to be further acquainted with the object
of her mission, she continued : He who, owing
to a successfiil effort against a weak enemy, is
led to believe that his strength is irresistible,
often pays dearly for his presumption, in a con-
test with a more powerful opponent ; and you,
O king, relyfhg on your superiority over the
other beasts, overlook the consequences of your
temerity in drinking at and polluting the foun-
tain of the moon, who has directed me to cau-
tion you against a repetition of this insult, threat-
ening, in case of your disobedience, not only
to withdraw the light which she so graciously
dispenses, but to effect your destruction ; and
if you have any doubts about my mission, I
will accompany you to the fountain, and con-
vince you of the truth of it. The king of the
elephants was surprised at the speech of the
hare, and went with her to the fountain, and
looking down saw the shadow of the moon in it :
then Firouz said to him, Take up a little water
with your trunk and wash your face, and hum-

Q


226

ble yourself before the moon. Then the ele-
phant put his trunk into the fountain and dis^
turbed the water, and seeing that the moon ap-»
peared to be in motion, he exclaimed, What is
the reason that the moon trembles? she is
surely angry at my having touched the water
with my lips. Firouz by her answer confirmed
him in the persuasion ; upon which he bowed a
second time to the moon as a sign of his re«
pentance for what he had done, and promised
that neither he nor his companions would evet
again be guilty of the same fault.

Then the crow, after enlarging for some time
on the deceitfiil and treacherous disposition of
the owls, said. The worst qualities in a sovereign
are falsehood and perfidy, and whoever placesr
confidence in one of this character, vnll expe-
rience the fate of the hare and the nightingale,
when they referred their quarrel to the oat.
It happened that I had a nightingale for my
ne^hbour at the root of the tree in which I had
made my nest, and we passed a great deal of
our time together ; at length one day I missed
my friend, without being at all apprised of his
intended departure ; and durii^ his absence ia
hare came and took possesion of the place


227

which he had left ; as I did not think it ne-
cessary to interfere, she remained there some
time ; till the nightingale returning and finding
the hare there, desired her to remove. The
hare disputed the claims of the nightingale, and
challenged him to make good his pretensions ;
upon which the nightingale replied, that theiB
was some one not far off who would settle thdr
dispute, and mentioned a cat who lived on the
bank of a neighbouring river, and who was at
peace with all the world, and so abstemious,
that he was contented with the grass of the
field and the water of the river. The cat being
thus appointed the arbiter between the hare and
the nightingale, I was anxious to see the issue of
the quarrel, and therefore followed the parties
to the place of meeting, to be present at the
decision of this abstemious judge. As soon as
the cat saw the hare and the nightingale coming
towards him, he stood up, and prayed with
great humility and devotion ; upon which they
approached him with all the marks of reverence
and respect, and entreated him to settle the
point of difference which bad arisen between
them. Then he desired them to state their
case; and they had scarcely begun, when he

q2


228


said to them, Old age, which every day presses
more heavily upon me, has rendered me nearly
deaf; I therefore beg of you to come nearer,
that I may hear distinctly what you have to
say : upon this they went up close to him, and
related every thing which it was necessary for
him to know, in order to give his opinion.
The cat being thus informed of the origin as
well as of .all the particulars of their quarrel,
addressed them in the following terms : I call
upon you both, in the name of the most sacred
obligations, to demand nothing but what is
just and right, for rectitude of intention is
always accompanied by a self-approval, which
awaits and can support with unbending for-
titude the injustice of fortune ; whilst unauthor-
ized desires, though crowned for the moment
vpith success, are in the end pernicious. The '
greatest treasure which the man of the world
can possess, is a productive store of right con-
duct, which is more profitable than mines of
'wealth, and more permanent than even the
constancy of Mends ; and a person of under-
standing will fix his views on this imperishable
good, whilst he is taught to despise every less
substantial gift. The value of riches in the


229

opinion of a sensible man, is no greater than
that of the earth on which he treads ; the so-
ciety of a woman, when displaying the cap-
tivating allurements of her charms, as danger-
ous as the approach of a venomous serpent;
but man, as an object of our benevolence, is
esteemed a second self. The cat continuing
to speak in this strain, the hare and the night-
ingale insensibly lost all fear, and by degrees
approached nearer and nearer to him, till at
last, watching his opportunity, he suddenly
sprang upon them, and killed them. Th^ crow
in continuation said, that in addition to all the
bad qualities enumerated, there were many
others which made the choice of the owl for a
king unadviseable. So the cranes were con-
vinced by the speech of the crow, and imme-
diately desisted from their purpose.

Now it happened that an owl was accident-
ally present, and had heard the whole of what
ha^passed ; and as soon as the determination
of the cranes was declared, he addressed the
crow, and said. Your language has filled me
with uneasiness and apprehension, and I am at
a loss to account for your conduct on this oc-
casion, not being aware of having offered you

q3


230

any provocation. The tree which has felt the
stroke of the axe will sprout again, and the cut
which a sword has given will close up and heal,
but the wound which the tongue inflicts is in*
curable ; the point of the spear may be drawn
out from the flesh which it has pierced, but the
weapon of speech remains fixed in the heart
which it has reached. A flame tnay be smo-
thered by pouring water upon it, and the bane
of poison subdued by its antidote ; sorrow can
be lightened by patience, and an unfortunate at-
tachment cured by absence ; but the fire, which
maleyolence has kindled in the bosom^ defies
all attempts to extinguish it; from henceforth
there will be eternal enmity and hatred between
us and you. The owl after this went away in
a great passion to inform his sovereign of what
had passed. Then the crow repented of what
he had done, and reasoning vnth himself, said.
It was the height of folly and madness in me to
make use of language, which will entail upon
me and my companions a long train of evil con-
sequfences. I wish I had not been so unre-
served in my remarks upon the owls ; for though
there is perhaps scarcely any bird which does
not entertain the same opinion of them as my-


231

self, and probably has more to alledge against
them than I have ; yet a secret dread of the
consequences which I have overlooked, and a
knowledge of the punishment which awaits un-
seemly and injudicious sallies of the tongue,
have imposed silence upon others ; whereas on
the other hand my judgment has been so far
led astray by a disregard to all the restraints of
prudence, that every word which I have uttered
was more irritating and sharper than a pointed
spear; and this behaviour is at variance with
all sound maxims of conduct ; for the sensible
man, however confident of his own strength and
of his high claims, should be as cautious of
creating himself enemies by an unreasonable
and presumptuous display of his superiority, as
a person would hesitate to swallow poison,
though he is in possession of its antidote. He
who is guided in his actions by just views, has
no occasion to talk beforehand of the glories
which await him, as if they could only owe their
existence to the prophetic language in which
they have been announced to the credulity of
the worid ; for his excellence and merit stand-
ing the test of time, and rising superior to the
trials to which they are exposed, will shine forth

q4


232


at last, and procure for him the reputation
which he deserves; but claims to distinction
which have no other support than the parade of
words, with which they are fenced round, will
sooner or later discover the weakne^ of the
foundation on which they rest ; aiid I have cer-
tainly been guilty of very culpable indiscretion
in speaking on a subject of so much delicacy
and importance, without having previously con-
sulted 'any one of my friends, or reflected on
what I was about to do ; for whoever neglects
the experience of former times, and acts wdth-
out due consideration according to the dictates
of his own unassisted judgment, is exposed to
difficulties and inconveniences, which he might
have avoided by a moderate share of reflection
and prudence.

The crow having expostulated with himself
in this manner went away, and this was the
origin of the quarrel between us and the owls :
now with regard to the policy of open war, I
have already declared my disapproval of such a
measure, and am of opinion, that it would be pos-
sible to contrive some expedient, without having
recourse to hostilities, to obtain what we wish,,
and therefore beg leave to relate the story of the


233


monk who was robbed of his kid. A monk had
bought a fat kid for a sacrifice, and led it away,
but was observed by some persons near him,
who agreed amongst themselves that they would
endeavour to rob him of it ; upon this one of
them came up to him, and asked him, what he
intended to do with the dog which he was lead-
ing away ; a second and then a third repeated
the same question, till at length he no longer
trusted his own eyes, but fancied he had been
cheated by the person who had sold him the
kid, upon which he let it go, and the others
went off with it. Thinking therefore on . the
present occasion that we may accomplish all
what we desire by some device which will
escape the penetration of the owls, I entreat the
king to order my tail and all my feathers to be
plucked out, and to have me thrown at the foot
of the tree, and then to retire with all his at-
tendants. This being done, the crow began to
mourn, and to send forth the most pitiful groans,
till some of the owls having heard him were
attracted by the noise, and coming and seeing
the state in which he was, lost no time in in-
forming their king of it. The king determined
to have the crow questioned, and commanded


234

an owl to ask him who he was, and whei^ the
other crows were ; upon which the crow told
hifi name, and appealed to the state in which he
was as a reason for giving credit to what he
might say. It was then told to the king of the
owls, that this was the vizir and principal
counsellor of the king of the crows, and it was
immediately agreed upon to find out, if possible,
by interrogating him, what the crime could be
for which he had been so severely punished ;
and to the questions which were put to him for
this purpose^ the crow answered in the follow-
ing manner.

The king was one day taking the advice of
his counsellors on the important question of
peace or war between you and us, and as I
happened to be present, I took the liberty of
observing to his majesty, that we were totally
unable to contend with the owls, who were
both more powerful and more intelligent than
us ; and I gave it as my opinion, that we should
make peace, even though we might be reduced
to the necessity of purchasing it ; that if the
terms were accepted by the owls, we should be
at liberty to fly about unmolested wherever we
chose ; whereas, on the other hand, if we ob-


235


stinately preferred war, that the issue could not
under any supposition but be unfavourable to
us. At the same time I dwelt on the compa-
rative advantages of peace and war, enforcing
my arguments by illustrations, and examples
taken from the histories of former times, tend-
ing to shew the irreconcileabl^ hatred of an
enemy, who has the means of ^tvenging any af-
front that is offered to his power and supe-
riority ; and I instanced the tender plant which,
yielding to the gale which passes over it^
escapes being broken, as a proof of the good
policy of timely submission ; but nothing that I
could advance had any weight, but on the con-
trary produced an opposite effect, and rather
inflamed than mitigated the ardour for war;
and more than this I was suspected of trea-
chery, and of being secretly attached to the
interest of the owls ; and the advice which I
had conscientiously given was rewarded in the
manner you see, and from that period I have
heard nothing either of the king or his people.

The king of the owls was no sooner ac-
quainted with the speech of the crow, than he
called upon one of his vizirs for his opinion, as
to the manner in which he ought to be treated ;


236

who replied, My advice is, that the utmost dis-
patch should be used in putting him to death ;
for as long as he lives, we can never be sure
that he will not contrive some plot against us ;
and as he is without doubt one of the principal
crows, his loss to the community will be very
, sensibly felt. It has been truly said, that it is
no proof of wisdom to miss a favourable oppor-
tunity of striking a decisive blow, when the
prospect of almost certain success challenges
the attempt ; and that where the means which
were in our power of accomplishing a vast un-
dertaking have been neglected, we deserve to be
reminded hereafter of our folly and irresolution,
by seeing our hopes for ever annihilated; and
whoever spares an enemy whose inability to
defend himself renders his destruction inevit-
able, will at last see his error, when the increas-
ing though unsuspected power of resistance
renders his purpose no longer practicable. The
king then desired to know the sentiments of
another vizir, who said, My opinion is, that
you should not kill the crow, for a needy

•

and unprotected enemy is an object of pity,
and should disarm the hand which is raised
against his life ; and if his defenceless state


237

does not give him a right to be treated with kind-
ness, it should at least procure him pardon, and
no worse treatment than the thief experienced
from the merchant, of whom it is told, that he
was very rich, and married ^to a handsome wife;
and one night a thief got into his house with
the intention of robbing it, and found the mer-
chant asleep, but his wife was awake ; and she
being frightened at what she saw, kept close to
the side of her husband, a mark of affection and
love which he had been a long while unsuc-
cessfully waiting for ; the novelty of his situa-
tion at length awoke the merchant, and whilst
he was asking his wife the reason of this sudden
passion, he discovered the thief, and not doubt-
ing that he had been the occasion of the good
fortune which had happened to him, he told him
to keep what he had stolen, as a recompense for
the services he had rendered. The king then
ordered a third vizir to declare what he thought
should be done with the crow, and he gave it
as his opinion, that he should be well treated,
on account of the information which it might
be in his power to give; for a sensible man,
said he, will always take advantage of the dis-
sension which exists between his enemies, and


238

torn their mutual animosity to his owu profit,
as was the case with the monk, who owed his
safety to the quarrel between the robber and
the evil genius. Theking desired to hear the
story related, and the vizir continued.

A monk had bought from a man a milch
cow, which he was leading away to his home,
when a robber met him, who wished to steal from
him his beast; and not far ofTwas an evil genius,
who was thinking by what means he could get
the monk into his power, and who came up to
the robber, and asked him who he was, and
was answered, I am a robber, who intend to
steal this cow when the monk is asleep ; and
now have the goodness to give an account of
yourself, said he, addressing himself to his in-
quisitive companion, who replied, I am an evil
genius, and I purpose carrying off the monk
himself when he is asleep. By this time the
monk had arrived at his house, and having tied
up his cow, he supped and went to bed. Then
the robber and the evil genius disputed, who
should first put his plan into execution; and the
evil genius said to the robber. If you begin by
stealing the cow, the monk will probably be
awakened by the noise, and assemble the


239

people in the house, and my purpose will be
entirely frustrated ; I therefore beg of you to
look quietly on, whilst I am employed in securing
the monk, and you will then be unmolested in
your attempt to steal the cow. This proposal
did not please the robber, who thought that the
monk would awake at the first effort^ which
the evil genius might make to secure him^ and
that he should therefore be deprived of the booty
which he anticipated; so he proposed to the
evil genius to give him the precedence in the
accomplishment of their projected plans ; and
they continued quarrelling in this manner, til)
at length each of them proclaiming in an au-
dible voice what the other intended to do, the
monk and his neighbours were awakened by
the noise, and the two rogues fled away iti
haste.

Then the vizir who had first spoken, and
who had advised the killing of the crow, said,
I think that the object of the crow has been to
deceive us, and his words, ovnng to their not
having been duly weighed and examined, seem
likely to produce inattention to a measure which
our real interest imperiously calls for ; I there-
fore take the liberty of cautioning the king


240

against embracing a determination, which may
be productive of mischief to him, and expose
him to the risk of being as fatally deceived, as
the carpenter was, who chose rather to give
credit to what he heard, than to believe what
his own eyes had witnessed ; for it is told of
him, that he had a wife, of whom he was very
fond, but who was secretly attached to another
man ; and the husband being informed of this,
was desirous of hailing some stronger proof, th^n
public rumour of his wife's infidelity ; he there-
fore told her that he had received orders to go
to a city at some distance on business of the
king, and desired her to get ready what was
necessary for his journey. The wife was de-
lighted at the prospect of her husband's de-
parture, which would remove every impediment
to her enjoying the society of her lover. Then
the husband pretended as if he would leave the
house, and told his wife to shut the door after
him ; but instead of going out, he stole privately
into a comer behind the door, where he re-
mained hid till his wife retired ; he then removed
quietly into his bed room, and concealed himself
under the bed. Now the wife had lost no time
in sending to her lover, to beg him to come to


241


her, and he obeyed the suiiimohs, and west
and passed the night with her.. The m^chant
at length grew very drowsy, and fell asleep*;
and havii^ stretched out his legs from undet
the bed, his wife immediately recognised them;
and calling to her aid aU her presence of mind
against the danger of discoyery, with whkli
she was threatened, she said to her lover. Ask
me with a loud voice whom I love most, my
husband or you : and as soon as he had put
the question to her, as she desired, she answered
angrily. What authorizes you to ask me this
question ? do you not know, that the heart and
affections of a woman take no part in the most
intimate and unequivocal intercourse which she
allows her friend, whereas a husband awakeni?
all the tender feeUngs which either ^ a son or a
brother are capable of exciting, and is as dear
to his wife as her own existence! As soon
as the husband heard these words, the bad
opinion which he had entertained of his wife gave
way to other thoughts ; and though he was dis**
tressed at the suspicious appeamnces to which*
her frailty had given rise, every feelii^ of ran-
cour or ill will quickly subsided, in the per-
suasion which he felt of the sincerity of her

R


242

attachment; he did not however think it pru-
dent to leave his hiding-place till the morning,
when he was sure that his rival was gone ; then
he came out from under the bed, and found his
wife asleep, and he sat down by her, being un-
willing to disturb her ; and when she awoke, he
said to her, O joy of my heart, sleep on, for
you have passed a restless night ; and I have
only been restrained, by a regard for your
jionour and reputation, from calling your visitor
to an open account.

Now the king was not convinced by the
arguments of his vizir, but ordered that the
crow should be taken care of, and treated with
kindness and attention; and some time after,
the crow» being in the presence of the king, with
several of the owls, amongst whom was the
viiir who had recommended his death, said to
his mcgesty. You are now fully informed, O
king, of what I have experienced from the
crows, and will find it pardonable, that I seek
to be revenged for the insult which has been
ofiered to me ; but having considered the matter,
I am persuaded that I never. shall be able to
accomplish what I wish, as long as I remain in
my present state ; but there is a tradition handed


243

down to us by the sages of old, that whoever
commits his body to the flames, performs the
most acceptable sacrifice to heaven; and that
whatever he prays for whilst he is burning in
the fire, is instantly accorded to him ; if there-
fore it meets with the approbation of the king,
I will undergo the trial, and pray to be chained
into an owl, by which means I shall become
a more certain and hurtful enemy to the crows,
and have it in my power to execute my pur-
pose of vengeance. Upon this the vizir, who
had advised putting the crow to death, inter-
rupted him, and said. When I consider the
speciousness of your language, which is intended
to throw a cloak over the corrupt motives of
your conduct, I can only compare you to wine,
that has a good taste and smell, though it is
mixed with poison. Do you think that your
substance and composition will be changed by
the burning of your body, or would you per-
suade us that this experiment will produce an
sdteratioh in your person and being? Nature
will maintain her right as inviolably, as in the
case of the female mouse, who having the choice
of a husband between the sun, the wind, the

r2


i


244


cloud, and the mountain,, became at la^ the
partner of the male of her owij species.

It is told of a religious man, who never failed
to obtain what he prayed for, that he was one
day sitting on the shore of the sea, and a kite
flew by him with a young mouse in its claws,
which falling down near him, he took it, and
wrapped it u|> in a leaf, and carried it home ;
but fearing that it would be difficult for him to
Jbring it up in his family, he prayed to heaven
that it might be changed into a young girl ; and
his prayer was heard, and his petition imme-
diately granted : he then carried her to his wife^
and told her that it was his adopted daughter,
and desired that she might be treated as if she
were his own chUd. And when the girl had
reached the age of woman, the religious man
said to her. My daughter, it is now time for
you to think of marrying, and I leave you the
free choice of your husband. She replied, that
as he had left her at liberty to consult her
own inclinations, she should prefer a husband
who waB possessed of uncommon strengths
Perhaps,' said the religious man, you would
have no objection to the sun : Upon which he


245

went and addressed tbe sim, saying, I have a
young woman, who is in search of a husband^
and his principal qualification must be his
strength; have you any objection to marry her?
The sun answered, I will dired; you to some
one who is stronger than I am, and that is the
cloud, which is able to prevent the heat of my
rays from reaching the earth, and eclipises the
brightness of my Kght. Upon this the religioun
man .made a proposal of marriage to the cloudy
who refused his consent after the exaQq>le of tbe
sun, but recommended the wind as the most
suitable husband, who blows, said he, violently
against me, and drives me about in the heavens
fit)m the east to the west. The religious
man then addressed himself to the wind, who
referred him to the mountain, whose power
and resistance, he added, defied all his attempts
to move it : so he went to the mountain, and
the mountain, having heard what he had to say,
said, that the mouse was his superior in strength,
as was proved by his being obliged to afford
him an habitation. At length then the religious
man offered his daughter to the mouse ; and di^'
mouse asked how it would be possiUe for him
to marry her, as the hole where he lived was

r3


246

too small to contain her ; and besides this, a
mouse was accustomed to marry one of his
own species: then the religious man prayed
that his adopted daughter might be transformed
into her first state, and she returned to what
she had been : and this is a faithful picture of
what we may expect from you. But nothing
that his vizir could say had any effect upon
the mind of the king, who continued to treat
the crow with great kindness, and to lavish
upon him proofs of his consideration and
r^ard ; so he spent his time very pleasantly ;
till at length when his feathers had grown again,
and he had made all the observations which
suited his purpose, he flew away, and returned
to his companions, and being admitted to an
audience of the king, he begged permission to
communicate the information which he had
acquired; which being granted, he spoke as
follows.

The owls are living upon a mountain abound-
ing with wood, and not far off* there is a flock
of sheep, and a man watching them ; we shall
thierefore have no difficulty in procuring a light,
and having set fire to some dry wood, we will
put it into the holes in which the owls are,


247

adding fresh fuel as often as is necessary, and
fanning the flame with our wings, by which
means our enemies will be suffocated by the
smoke ; or if any one endeavours to escape by
flying out, he will be burnt to death. The
crows obeyed punctually the instructions they
had received, and having in this manner de-
stroyed the owls, they returned quietly and
unmolested to their own homes.

Then the king asked the crow, how he had
been able to endure the company of the owls,
as the society of the wicked must be so in-
supportable to the good. It is very true, replied
the crow ; but a man of sense, when any weighty
matter seems pregnant with mischief to himself
and those with whom he is connected, will
submit without reluctance to the severest trials
of his patience, when he has the prospect of a
happy issue to his endurance and resignation ;
he neither repines at the pains which he is
obliged to undergo, nor at the mortifying hu-
miUation of a temporary compliance with the
will of an inferior, looking to the attainment of
the object which he has in view as a sufficient
recompence for all his toils and sufferings.
The king then desired the crow to give him

r4 .


248

som^ aooMOit of the intellectual attainment of
die 9wl6. I did not find, he replied, any one
who possessed the least understanding, eiucept
Ae vizir who ^[ideavoured to procure my death.
TYiey proved their utter want of judgment and
good sense, by the little attention which they
paid to my case, and foigetting the credit in
w)»ck I had stood widi die crows, they were
so far from having eusfncions. of any plot which
I might be contriving against them, that they
KOt mily rejected the advice of their counsellor,
whose i^^prehensions were so well founded^
biHt shewed me the most unreserved confidence
in making me the depositary of their secrets,
contrary to the maxim of the wise men, who
condemn in a sovereign a gratuitous disclosure
of his intentions in the presence of flatterers
and sycophants. Nothing, said the king, has
in my opinion occasioned the ruin of the owls,
but die unreasonable and weak conduct of their
king, in listening to the advice of evil coun^-
adlors. The observation of your majesty^
replied the crow, is perfecdy just, and the truth
which it contains may rank for ^importance
with those sayings, which experience and time
)lAVe stamped with the character of incontro-


249

yertible maxims. Insolence, for instance, and
haughtiness of behaviour are almost inseparable
attendants on great good fortune ; a pas^oaate
love of women is a source of more than iH*obaUe
evil ; in the indulgences of the table lie the
seeds of disease, as the ruin of a Btate is almost
Inevitable under the administration of corrupt
ministers. The same authority has also jhio-
nounced the proud and imperious man to be
an unsuccessful candidate* for fame; the false
and deceitful companion to be unworthy of
finding a friend, and the man of bad conduct
incapable of arriving at distinction; nor is it
less true, that avarice, wiiich in no instance id
firee from blame, is often the parent of crimes,
and that a sovereign, who either through idle-
ness and indifference neglects the affairs of
state, or through weakness, places the reins of
government in unserviceable hands, compro-
mises the safety of his kingdom, and the hi^i-
ness of his subjects.

The king here observed to the crow, that he
must have possessed a great deal of self-com-
mand, not to have betrayed any impatience un-
der the humiliating character in which he v^
peared amongst the owls : to which the crow


250

replied, that the temper of mind, which disposes
us to support difficulties on account of the profit
which follows them, without reluctance and
peevishness, is highly praiseworthy; and in-
stanced the example of the serpent, who found
a reward for the readiness with which he car-
ried the king of the frogs upon his back, in the
plentiful provision of food which it procured
him. The king desiring to know how this
happened, the crow related the story as fol-
lows :

There was a serpent of a very advanced age,
whose sight began to grow dim, and his strength
to fail to that degree, that it became almost
impossible for him to hunt after his food, and
he was therefore at times at a loss even for a
morsel to eat ; one day however he crawled out
in the hopes of finding something to support
life, and went to a pond, where there were a
great )najay;fi*ogs, and where in former times he
had often been used to regale himself very
plexitiMly, and he lay at the edge of the water
exhibiting sigQS of great sorrow and aflSiction.
Then a frog asked him the reason of his dis-
tress, and he answered, that it was no small
cause that had occasioned it ; that he had hi-


251 V

therto lived upon the firogs which he was able to
catch, whereas at present, owing to some fatality
of which he was the victim, if he met with any,
he was unable to draw them oiit of the water.
Upon this the frog went to his sovereign, and
acquainted him vnth what the serpent had said.
Then the king of the frogs came to the serpent,
and asked him what was the matter; and the
serpent replied, I was one evening employed
in hunting a frog, which took refuge in the
house of a religious man, and I followed it thi-
ther, and as 1 was pursuing it in the dark, I
bit the finger of the religious man's son, which
I mistook for the frog, and he died of the wound :
then I fled away as quickly as I could, and the
father followed me, loading me with impreca-
tions for what I ha(} done to his innocent child,
and praying, that as a punishment for my crime
I might be reduced to the servile condition of
being rode upon by the king of the frogs, and
of living from his charity and bounty. I am
therefore come to you according to the curse
which hangs over me, to await your will and
pleasure. Then the king of the frogs was impa-
tient to ride the serpent, which he thought would
be a great honour and distinction, and having


3S2

mamited upon him, he was highly pleased and
satisfied. Upon this the serpent reminded the
king of the state to which be had been doomed,
and implored his charitable aid to save him
from starving ; and the king of' the frogs ac-
knowledged the justiee of his claims, and that
he fairly earned his livelihood by the nse which
was made of him ; and he commanded two
frogs to be delivered to him ^very day, which
were sufficient for his support ; and his servi-
tude and patient submission to his enekny were
therefore in the result rather profitable than in-
jurious to him : in the s^me manner the security
for our persons, and freedom from a)l appre-
hensions for the ftiture, which have lieen put
beyond all doubt by the destruction of our foes,
were the object, and have become the recom-
pense, of the inconveniences to which I sub-
mitted. I found too that meekness and a com-
plying temper would be more effectual in bring-
ing about the purpose which I had in view,
than a 'hanghty and assumiing deporhnent,
drawing a parallel in my own mind between
the power and respective influence of the va^
rious qualities which we betray in our conduct,
and the natural but opposite jrfienomena of fire


253

and water, the fonnefr of whicb^Hotwithstending
the intensity of its heat, wiil only consume the
hu^k and branches of a tree, whilst the latter
by its chilling moisture will even destroy the
roots. And it has been said^ that neither fire,
nor a disease, nor an enemy, nor a debt, should
be despised on account of their apps^ent insig-
nificance, a maxim which- the kii^ has always
observed, and in which he has found his ac*'
count ; and it has been laid down as certain,
that where two men are in pursuit of the same
object, the strongest of the two is always suc-
cessfiil; but if they happen to be equal in
strength, tlie victory will declare itself for the
more persevering ; and if both are endowed with
an equal measure of indefatigable patience, that
the issue will^ be favourable to him who has
made the greater preparation for the exertions
which he will be called upon to employ : and
whoever makes war against a king who uses
foresight in the measures which he orders, and
who is neither rendered arrogant by good for-
tune, nor beat down by the pressure of ill luck,
but like you, O king, determines prudently what
is to be done, as well as the time and place for
its execution, neither injuring his cause by un*


254

seasonable violence and precipitation on the
one hand, nor by procrastination and a timid
forbearance on the other, but looking to the
business in which he is engaged under eyery
point of view in which it is possible to survey
it, such a man must inevitably bring ruin upon
his ovm head.

The king here disclaimed all merit for him-:
self, and told, the crow, that his judgment and
sensible conduct, aided by the blessing which
seemed to be attached by fate to every thing
which he did, deserved all the praise; for that
one prudent and intelligent person was of more
use in counteracting the plans of an enemy,,
and converting them into engines of his destruc-
tion, than a multitude, who had nothing to trust
to except their courage and number ; and what
surprises me the most, added he, is your con-
duct in being able to listen for such a length of
time to the vulgar discourse of the owls, with-
out letting fall a single expression, which might
betray your secret views. I never for a moment
lost sight of your instructions, answered the
crow, and succeeded to the utmost of my
wishes, by following uninterruptedly a mild
and conciliatory course of action. Indeed, said


255


the king, T am convinced of your worth in this
respect : it is true, I have had other vizirs, who
could talk plausibly, but without giving any
effect to what they uttered ; but in you I have
found a strong and powerful support, so that I
can now enjoy my meals in peace, and take my
rest in whatever place I choose, vnthout any
apprehensions for my safety ; my present situa-
tion reminds me of the state of a sick man, who
can neither enjoy the pleasures of his table, nor
taste the repose of his couch, till he is recovered
from his illness ; or I may compare myself to
the ambitious man, who is tormented by the
desire of arriving at fortune and power, and is
not at ease, till the bounty of his sovereign has
crowned his schemes with success ; or to the
man who, living in constant dread of his enemy,
is a martyr to his fears, till the cause of them is
removed ; for the mind is lightened by the disap-
pearance of the apprehensions which agitated
it, as the hand is relieved by the removal of a
heavy weight which it was carrying. I will
pray, said the crow, to God, who alone has

■

been the destroyer of your enemy, that he will
pour down upon you the blessings of his good-
ness, and make the excess of his bounty to you


&56


the measure of the happiness and prosperity of
your subjects i for when a people. 9u:e not' happy
under the sway of their sovereign, he mii^inbe
compared to the excrescence, whicb grows o»der
the fliroat of theshergoaty, wjbdeh the kid siiicks;
fimcyii^ it to be t^e teat of^ the u^lder, and is
disappointed of its mitk . Tell me^ thou faithful
minister, said the king^ what was the praedee
of the owls and their king in their wars, and'in
the management ofthesir affairs; Their conducts
answered the crow, 'was marked* by. indolence,
haughtiness, arrogance, weakness, and .iiilid!^;
this was the character both of the king aoid his^
vizirs, with the excq^tion of him who advised
my death; he indeed was vnse aiid intelligejat^
gifted with foresight and knowledge, ^rtd rarely
to be equalled in firmness, understandings .and
sound judgment. T/ie kip,g; And what did you
observe in his behaviour, which led you to form
this opinion of him ? The craw. Two circum-
stances, which struck me very forcibly : one was,
his recommendation that I should be put to
death; and the other, the freedom with which
he delivered his opinion, notwithstanding the
contempt it met with ; at the same time his
speech was remarkable for moderation and


257

temper ; and in combating the arguments of his
colleagues he avoided every sort of personality,
endeavouring to give weight to whst he ad-
vanced by examples and stories vi^hich bore
upon the point under discussion, by which he
incurred no risk of exciting the displeasure of
the king : and I distinctly heard him say to his
tovereign, that a king ought not to neglect, his
affairs ; that but few people were equal to the
task of a great undertaking, and that in no case
could it be successfully conducted without pru-
dent management; that the possession of a king-
dom was a great acquisition, but entailed upon
the sovereign the necessity of unceasing atten-
tion to the means of consolidating and securing
it; that in the uncertainty of its duration it
might be compared to the transitory shadow of
the leaf of the Nilouphar, and in the quickness
with which it is lost to the passage of the virind ;
in the instability of its most flourishing state to
the casual and temporary connection .which a
noble-minded man may have formed with a per^
son of an opposite character ; and in its n^id
decline to the bubbles of water, which are mo-
mentarily occasioned by the falling rain.


s


258


THE MONKEY AND THE TORTOISE.

IVhEN the former story was finished, king
Dabschelim commended Bidpai to . relate ^e
history of the man, the success of whose pur-
suit in the fulfilment of his wishes is imme-
diately followed by the loss of what he had ob-
tained. The philosopher replied, that the ac-
quisition of a desired good is often attended
with less difficulty than the means of preserving
it, and whoever cannot secure the possession of
what he has got into his power, may be com-
pared to the tortoise in the following fable.

It is told of a certain king of the monkeys,
whose name was Mahir, that being very old

and infirm through age, he was attacked by a

• ' . ..

young competitor for his crown, and was over-
come and obliged to take flight ; so he retired
to the river -side, and discovered a fig-tree, and
climbed up into it, and determined to make it
his home ; and as he was one day eating of the
fi*uit, a fig fell down, and the noise which it
occasioned by falling into the water delighted
him so much, that he never ate without repeat-
ing the experiment ; and a tortoise, who was


359

bdow, as ofteaaa arfig £^l d^wjOijdevQitr^ Jtj;
and receiving during some d^ys a r^g^la;? supr
ply, considered it aa>an attentioi^ tpiivi^p^s
him on the part of the monkey ;:th^^ore.hQ
desired to become acquainted with himr;:a&d in
a short time they grew so intimatd, that ,they
often conversed femiUarly together. Now it
happened, that the tortoise stayed a loi^tinote
away from his wife, who grew impatient at
his absence, and complained of it to one of
her neighbours, saying, I fear something has
happened unexpectedly to my husbai^d. Her
friend replied, that if her husband was on the
river side, he would probably have: made ac-
quaintance with the monkey, and have been
hospitably entertained by him.

Then after some days the tortoise returned to
his home, and found Us wife ^ in. a bad i state of
health, and apparently suffering very much, and
he could not conceal the uneasiness which the
s^ht of her occasioned ; and expressing aloud his
distress, he was ipterrupted by her friend, who
said to him. Your wife is very dangerously; ill^
and the physicians have prescribed iox her* the
heart of a monkey. The tortoise replied, This
is no easy matter, for living as we do in the

s2


260


water, how can we possibly procure the heart
of a monkey ? however I will consult my friend
about it. And he went to the shore of the river,
and the 'monkey asked in terms of great affec-
tion what had detained him so long; and. he
answered, Thp reluctance which I felt to repeat
my visits, was owing to my being at a loss how
to make you any suitable return for the kind-
ness you have shewn me ; but I beg of you to
add to the obligations under which you have
laid me, by coming and passing some days
with me ; and as I live upon an island, which
moreover abounds in fruit, I will take you upon
my back, and swim over the water with you.
The monkey accepted the invitation, and came
down from the tree, and got upon the back of
the tortoise, who, as he was swimming along
with him, began to reflect on the crime which
he harboured in his breast, and from shame and
remorse hung down his head. What is the oc-
casion, said the monkey, of the sudden fit of
sadness which is come upon you ? It occurs to
me, answered the tortoise, that my wife is very
ill, and that I shall not therefore have it in my
power to do the honours of my house in the
manner I could wish. The intimations, replied


261


the monkey, which your, friendly behaviour has
conveyed to me of your kind intentions, vnll
supply the place of all unnecessary parade and
ostentation. Then the tortoise felt more at
his ease, and continued his course : but on a
sudden he stopped a second time ; upon which
the monkey, who was at a loss to account for
this hesitation of the tortoise, began to suspect
that something more was intended by it than
he was able to discover ; but as suddenly re-
pressing every thought that was injurious to the
sincerity of his friend, he said to himself, I can-
not believe that his heart has changed, that his
sentiments towards me have undergone an
alteration, and that he intends to do me any
mischief, however freq^uent such appearances
may be in the world ; and it is the voice of ex-
perience which directs the sensible man to look
narrowly into the soul of those, with whom he
is connected by ties of affinity or friendship, by
attending closely to every thing that passes
vrithout them ; for a wink of the eye, an expres-
sion which falls from the tongue, and even the
motions of the body, are all evidences of what
is going on in the hoart ; and wise men have
laid it down as a rule, that when any one

S3


262

doiibts the sincerity of his friend^ he should, .by
imremittihgly observing every part of his con-
dnct, guard agakist t^e possibility of being de-
tseived by hiih ; Sot if his suspicions are founded,
he is repaid for the violence which they may
have offered to his feelings^ by the safety which
they liave procured him ; and if they have been
entertained without good grounds, he may at
leal^ congratulate himself on the measure of fore-
sight which he possesses, which in no instance
can be otherwise than serviceable to him. After
haTing indulged himself in these reflections, he
said to the .tortoise, Why do you stop a second
time, and appear as if you were anxiously de*
bating some question with yourself? I am tor-
mented, answered the tortoise, by the idea, that
you will find my house in disorder owing to the
illness of my wife. Do not, said the monkey,
be uneasy on this account, for your anxiety will
be of no use to you, but rather look out for
some medicine, and food, which may be of ser-
vice to your wife ; for a person possessed of
riches cannot employ them in a better manner,
than either in works of charity during a time of
want, or in the service of women. Your ob-
servation, answered the tortoise^ is just, but the


263

physician has declared that nothing will cure
her except the heart of a monkey. Then the
monkey reasoned with himself thus ; Fool that
I am! immoderate desires, which are not suited
to my ag^, threaten me with destruction, and I
now discover too late how true it is that the
contented man passes his life in peace and
secunty, whilst the covetous and ambitious
live in trouble and difficulty; and I have
occasion at this moment for all the resources
of my understanding, to devise a means
of escaping from the snare into which I have
fallen. Then he said to the tortoise. Why did
you not inform me of this sooner, and I would
have brought my heart virith me ; for it is the
practice of the monkeys, when any one goes out
on a visit to a friend, to leave his heart at home,
or in the custody of his family, that he may be
able to look at the wife of hkn who has ra-
ceived him under his roof, and be at the mwb
time vdthout his heart. Where is your heart
now ? said the tortoise. I have left it in the tree,
answered the monkey, and if you will returb
vnth me thither, I vnll bring it away. The pro-
posal was accepted, and the tortoise swam back
with the monkey, who, as soon as he was near

s4


264

enough, sprung upon the shore, and imme-
diately climbed up into the tree ; and when
4iie tortoise had waited for him some time,
he grew impatient, and called out to him, to
take his heart and come down, and not detain
him any longer. What, said the monkey, do
you think I am like the ass, of whom the
jackal declared that he had neither heart nor
ears ? How was this ? the tortoise asked.

It is told, said the monkey, that a lion in a
forest was waited upon by a jackal, who lived
upon the food which he left, and it happened
that the lion was attacked by a violent disease,
which brought on such a state of weakness, that
he was unable to hunt for his prey ; upon which
the jackal asked him the reason of the change
which he observed in his manner and appear-
ance, and was told that it was owing to the ill-
ness with which he was af&icted, and for which
there was no remedy, except the heart arid the
ears of an ass. The jackal replied, that there
would be no difficulty in procuring them,
for that he was acquainted with an ass, who
was in the service of a fuller, and was em-
ployed in carrying his cloths ; and he imm^
diately set out, and went to the ass, and as soon


\


265


as he saw him he addressed him, and told him
how distressed he was to find him so thin and
emaciated; which the ass accounted for by
saying, that his master gave him scarcely any
thing to eat. Jcickal. Why do yon remain any
longer with him, and submit to this treatment ?
Ass. What can I do, or whither can I go?
wherever I am, it is my fate to be ill used and
starved. Jacked. If you will follow me, 1 will
conduct you to a place uninhabited by men,
who you say are your foes, and abounding in
food, and where you will find a female ass,
whose equal in beauty and fatness was never
seen, and who is desirous of a male companion.
Let us not lose a moment in going to her, said
the ass, and I beg of you to shew me the way.
Then the jackal led him to where the lion was,
but entered alone into the forest, to inform the
lion of the spot where the ass was waiting ; and
the lion went out, and immediately made an
attempt to rush upon him, but was unable
through weakness; upon which the ass being
firightened ran away. Then the jackal observed
to the lion, that he did not suppose he was so
weak as to be unable to master the ass. Bring
him to me a second time, said the lion, and I


266

pi*omise you he &hall not escape again. So the
jackal went to the ass, and said/ What was the
reason of your sudden fright? a she ass, owing
to the violence of her passion, gave you, to be
sure, rather rude demonstrations of her alSection;
hut you have only to remain quiet and undis-
mayed, and she will become gentle and sub-
missive. As soon as the ass heard her name
mentioned, his desire became uncontroulable,
and he brayed through impatience, and sujffered
himself to be conducted again to the lion ; and
the jackal preceded him as before, and told
the lion where he was, and cautioned him to
be well upon his guard, for that if he escaped
a second time, he would never return. The
.eagerness of the lion not to be disappointed a
second time of his prey was very great, and he
went to the spot where the ass was, and 'no
sooner saw him, than, without leaving him time
to prepare for his defence, he rushed upon him,
and killed him : then recollecting that the
physicians had forbidden his flesh to be eaten
before it had been washed and purified, he
desired the jackal to take care that every thing
which was necessary was done, and that he
would shortly come back and eat the heart and
ears, and leave him the rest.


267

Now as soon as the lion was gone, the jackid
ate the heart and ears of the ass, hoping by this
stratagem to deter the lion from eating any
part of the remainder of the animal, and that
he should thereby have the whole for himself.
Then the lion returned, and asked for the heart
and ears of the ass ; and the jackal said to him,
Do you think if he had had a heart and ears,
that he would ever have sulSered himself to be
brought back, after he had once escaped from
destruction? Now do not imagine, said the
monkey in continuation to the tortoise, that I
am going to be guilty of the same folly as the
ass in this fable. You have been endeavouring
to deceive me by trick and contrivance ; and I
have therefore been obliged to practise, and
vnth complete success, the same means in my
defence, thereby shewing that knowledge and
talents can make good the error of a too easy
and thoughtless compliance. You are right,
said the tortoise, and an honest man will
confess his crime ; and if he has committed a
fault, he does not refuse instruction, that he
may profit by the lesson which has been taught
him, if on any future occasion he should be
entangled in difficulties; like the man, who


268


when he has made a false step and fallen, sup-
ports himself on the ground, against which he
has stumbled, to raise himself again upon his
leeia


THE MONK AND THE WEASEL.

On the following day king Dabschelim com-
manded Bidpai to relate to him the fable of
the man, who betrays too much haste and pre-
cipitation in his conduct, without bestowing
aiiy thoughts on the consequences which may
ensue ; and the philosopher began in the^ follow-
ing manner.

The man who never pauses for a moment,
in order to check the danger of an inconsiderate
decision, and reap the benefit of a prudent and
cautious hesitation in a matter in which he is
engaged, will find occasion to repent of his*
folly when it is too late, and offer a parallel to
the religious man, who in destroying the weasel,
unknowingly killed his benefactor. How hap-
pened this? the monarch asked. It is told,


269

continued the philosopher, of a religious man»
that he lived in the country of Georgiana, and
had a wife to whom he was very much attached,
and to whom he had been married a great
many years, without any prospect of having a
family. At length, when all hopes were nearly
at an end, his wife became unexpectedly preg-
nant, and the husband in a transport of joy
thanked Providence for its bounty to him, and
prayed to heaven that the child might be a boy ;
and he said to his wife. Rejoice with me, for I
trust we shall have a son, who will prove the
comfort and joy of our lives, and for whose
education and instruction no pains or expence
shall be spared. The wife found fault with her
husband for indulging in anticipations of the
future, of which he could not possibly know
any thing; and reminding him of what hap-
pened to the religious man, who poured the
honey and oil upon his own head, related to.
him, at his desire, the fable as follows.

A religious man was in the habit of receiving
every day frottf the house of a merchant a
certain quantity of oil and honey, of which
having eaten as. much as he wanted, he put the
rest into a jar, which he hung on a nail in a


270

comer of the room, hoping that the jar would
in time be filled. Now as he was leankifg
back one day on his couch with a stick in hk
hand, and the jar suspended over his head, he
thought of the high price of oil and hon^y, smd
said to himself, I will sell what is in thig jar^
and buy with the money which I obtain for it
ten goats, which producing eadi of them a
young one every^five months, in addition to the
produce of the kids as soOn as they begin to
bear, it will not be long before there is a large
flock. He continued to make his calculations^
and found that he should at this rate in the
course of two years have more than four hundred
goats. At the expiration of this term I vnll
buy, said he, a hundred black cattle, in the
proportion of a bull or a cow for every four
goats ; I will then purchase land, and hire work-
men to plough it with the beasts, and put it into
tillage, so that before five years are passed, I
shall no doubt have realized a great fortune by
the sale of the milk which the cows vnll give,
and of the produce of my Tand. My next
business will be to build a magnificent house,
and engage a number of servants both male
and fi^Bale; and when my establishment is


271

Qompleted, I will many the handsomest woman
I can find, who in due time becommg a mother
will present me with an heir to my possessions,
who, as he advances . in sge, shall receive the
best masters that can be procured ; and if the
progress which he makes in learning is equal
to my reasonable expectations, I shall be amply
repaid for the pains and expence which I have
bestowed upon him ; but if, on the other hand,
he disappoints my hopes, the rod which I have
here shall be the instrument vrith which I will
make him feel the displeasure of a justly of-
fended parent. At these words he suddenly
raised the hand which held the stick towards
the jar, and broke it, and the contents ran dovinu
upon his head and lace. And you see, added
the wife in conclusion, from this story, how
unfit it is to talk of any matter out of season,
and of whose fortunate or unfortunate issue you
are alike ignorant : and the religious man ac-
knowledged the justice of the reproof.

At length his wife was brought to bed of a
fine boy, to the great joy of his father, and after
some days, when the time arrived for the wife to
go through the ceremonies, which were com-
manded by her religion to take place after


272

child-birth, she said to her husband, Remain
with the child whilst I go to the bath, and when
I have bathed, I will return. Then she left her
husband and the boy, and went to the ba,th^
and she had scarcely quitted the • house, before
a messenger arrived from the king, desiring the
presence of the religious man at court ; and he
could find nobody to leave with his son, except
a tame weasel, which he had caught very young,
s^nd brought up, and was as. fond of as if it had
been his own child. So. the father left the
weasel with his son, and shut the door of the
house, and followed the messenger ; and shortly
after a snake came out from a hole in the room
and approached the child, and as soon as the
weasel saw the snake, it sprang upon it and
killed it, and tore it in pieces, and some traces
of blood remained in its mouth. On the return
of the religious man, the weasel came up to
him, as soon as he had opened the door, as if
it wished to acquaint him with what it had
done ; but the father observing the spots of blood
upon the weasel, without listening for a moment
to the voice of reason, concluded at once that
it had strangled his child ; and without pausing
for an instant to ascertain the fact, he struck


273

it with the stick which he had in his hand on
the head, and killed it. Then he went towards
the child, and found him alive and unhurt, and
the snake was lying by him torn into pieces :
and after this discovery, he reproached himself
bitterly for the haste with which* he had acted,
and striking himself on the forehead, exclaimed.
Would to heaven I had never been the father
of this child, and I should have escaped the
crime which I have committed ! At this moment
his wife i^tumed. a..d seeing the state in which
he was, asked him what had happened, and he
acquainted her with the whole truth, speaking
in high terms of the conduct of the weasel, and
chai^ng himself with injustice for the ill return
which he had made it for its services. These,
replied his wife, are the fruits of haste.


THE RAT AND THE CAT.

•

Now tell me, said king Dabschelim to Bidpai,
the story of the man, who is surrounded on
every side by enemies intent upon his destruc-
tion, and on the point of carrying their plans

T


274.

into execution, when it occurs to him to courjt
the acquaintance of one of them, of whose in-
timacy and friendship he makes so good an use»
that he is enabled to escape the danger which
threatens him, and shews his gratitude for the
service rendered him by his fidelity ^ towards his
deliverer. Then the philosopher spoke as fol-
lows.

Friendship and enmity are; in their nature
far fi*om being immutable, fpr friendship can
sometimes degenerate into the opposite feeliog,
and enmity yield to the dominion of better and
more amiable alffections ; but such changes are
not always the result of intention and of an unbi-
assed and free will, but are often produced by the
unusual circumstances in which we are placed,
and may be said to owe their birth in many in-
stances to the caprice of accidents. It is right
therefore for the man of understanding to be
prepared against the occurrence of any unex-
pected event, that he may be able to rely on
llie resources of his judgment for the conduct
which he may be casually called upon to pursue,
whether it respect the attitude of defiance and
resistance, which it may become him to assume
in face of an enemy, or the familiarity with which


275

he may be called upon to treat a friend; for
occasions may arise, where the sensible ^man
will think it adviseable to mitigate the fciry.^
resentment, and even court the assistance of
one to whom he has been hostilely opposed,
from motives of interest or self-defence ; and
that the prudence of such behaviour is rewarded
with the desired success, may be shewn from
the history of the rat and the cat, who beii^
alike beset with difficulties, were both indebted
for their safety to an oblivion of their natural
dislike of each other, and to a reconciliation
which was dictated by views of mutual ad-
vantage. And how happened this? said the
king.

At the foot of a great tree, continued Bidpai',
was the hole of a cat, whose name was Roumi,
and close by, the hole of a rat, called Feridoun.
Now sportsmen were in the habit of coming
into these parts to take the pleasures of thev
chase, and a fowler having one day spread his
net over the hole where Roumi was, he in an
unlucky moment came out, and was caught.:
Shortly after, the rat crept out of ,the ground to
look for something to eat, and was in constant
dread of meeting the cat, till all at once seeing

t2


^6

t

that he was a prisoner in the net, he rejoiced at
the captivity of his enemy ; but suddenly turn-
ing round, he observed a vireasel following him,
and endeavouring to overtake him, and at the
same time he discovered above his head in a
tree an owl, who was waiting for an opportunity
of flying down, and carrying him olBT. Feridoun
now began to be at a loss what to do : if he
retreated, he must inevitably fall into the power
of the weasel ; if he turned to the right or left,
he was sure that the owl would find a moment
when he was olBT his guard to ^art down upon
its accustomed prey ; and if he went forward, he
was advancing to his death from the claws of
the cat. He therefore reasoned with himself,
and said, I am now in a situation of great
difficulty, and am on every side surrounded by
dangers ; it therefore only remains for me to
call to my aid the understanding of which I am
possessed, and not to be dismayed at the
alarming prospect which is before me, nor yield
to the suggestions of a timid and wavering
policy. The man, whose mind is richly stored,
may safely abandon himself to the guidance of
his judgment, and place his reliance on the con-
duct of his understanding, whose resources,


277

where it has been properly cultivated, are as
undefinable as the depth of the unfathomable
ocean, and will carry their possessor triumphant-'
ly through the hardest trials, whilst his good
sense will check the insolent and intoxicating
presumption of unreasonable hopes, which call-
ing ojff his attention from the real object, to
which his thoughts should be directed, must
necessarily lead him astray in the track which
he is pursuing. Now under the present cir-
cumstances, my only chance of safety depends
upon my coming to terms with the cat, who
being in no less a state of embarrassment than
myself, will probably lend a ready ear to my
ailments ; and, seriously laying to heart the
proposal which I have to make to him, with all
the eloquence of unmixed sincerity and candour,
will agree to render me all the assistance in his
power, as the price of his own delivery by my
means. Then the rat approached the cat, and
said to him. How do you find* yourself? As
you would desire, he answered, in trouble and
distress. And I, continued the rat, am your
partner in misfortune, and I see no prospect of
safety for myself (and this is my honest and
firm persuasion) but what offers you an equal

t3


2TS

chance of scaping ? You see there the weasel,
who is cumiixigly laymg Wait for me ; and the
owl^ who i$ watching me from the tree ; and
^ese are both 'of them your enemies as welt as
mine ; if you will therefore jengage not to do me
any harm, I. will gnaw the net, and release you
from; your captivity ;smd thus we shall be in-
strumental each of us in saving the other, in
the same manner as. the safety of a ship is in-
separable from that of the crew ; for the vessel,
conducted by skilful hands, rides safely over
the . boisterous deep, and carries the sailors,
W;ho. man it, into port, in spite of the violence of
wind and waves.

The cat no sooner heard the proposal of the
rat, than he gave him credit for his sincerity,
and promised to repay his good offices by ever-
lasting gratitude ; upon which the rat apprised
him, that he must. leave so much of the net un-
touched, as a proper regard to his own security
required ; and then he entered upon his task ;
and the owl and the weasel, when they saw
what was going on, despaired of their prey, and
departed. Now the rat was far from hurrying
himself in gnavnng the net, upon which Roumi
grew impatient and said. What must I think


279

of your delay in releasing me ? You have ob-
tained by my means what you wanted ; if you
now forget your promise, and betray an indif*
ference to my interest, your conduct will be
both ungenerous and base, for a noble-minded
person is never slow in discharging an obliga-
tion to a friend. My good-will has already
been of the greatest service to you, and demands
a suitable return, together with an obUvion of
the enmity, which till now has subsisted be-
tween us, but which is at present effaced by
more peaceable feelings ; add to which, there
is a reward which follows a strict observance
of engagements, whilst the consequences of
treachery and insincerity are often fatal. The
generous man, when called ' upon to discharge
a debt of gratitude, will stifle every emotion of
envy or ill-will, and foiget, in the service which
he is about to requite, any offence of which he
may formerly have had to complain. It has
been truly said, that no fault draws after it its
appropriate punishment sooner than malignity
of heart ; and no one exposes himself more cer-
tainly to the imputation of this dishonourable
passion^ than he who, refusing the tribute of sub-
mission which is offered to him, is too unge-

T 4


280

nerous to pardon. The rat replied. Friends
may be divided into two classes; the one con-
sists of those who act from free will, and the
other class of such as only act from compul-
sion ; but the views of both are alike directed
to what may be of service to them, and to the
means of keeping off what may prove injurious.
Where friendship springs from the choice of the
heart, it is a source of the closest familiarity ^
whereas, on the other hand, when it is neces-
sitated by circumstances, the intimacy, to which
it gives rise, is weaker, and the temper conse-
quently less open and unsuspicious; for the
prudent man will ever be upon his guard against
the caprices of one who has sought his ac-
quaintance from accidental or interested mo-
tives, and will never extend his good offices be-
yond the bounds of a safe and prudent com-
pliance. Now in what I have already done for
you, I cannot be charged with any breach of
promise ; and I am compelled to take the pre-
cautions of which you complain, lest I should
find at last, that I have fallen into as great a
danger, as that from which I escaped by. the
agreement into which we entered. Every ac-
tion must have its proper season, otherwise the


281

result cannot but be unfavourable ; and out of
r^ard to my own safety I have left so much of
the net as v^rill keep you a prisoner, till the
fowler makes his appearance. I will then gnaw
the remainder, when I know that you will ne-
cessarily be too much occupied with tjie means
of escaping yourself, to have time to bestow a
thought upon me. Then the rat continued to
gnaw the net, and on a sudden the fowler ar-
rived, upon which the cat desired the rat to
make all the haste in his power, and the net
was very soon in pieces ; upon which the cat
climbed up into a tree, and the rat ran into one
of his holes, and the fowler went away disap-
pointed of his game.

Then after a little while the rat came out of
his hole, but was afraid of going too near the
cat ; upon which the latter called out to him,
O my good and tried friend, what keeps you at
such a distance ? come near, that I may reward
you for thie service which you have done me, and
do not break off the intimacy which has begun
to unite us as closely as the ties of relationship ;
for whoever chooses a friend, and then puts an
end to the connection by a violent interruption
of the commerce which has subsisted, is as un-


282

profitable to the person, on whom he had fixed
his choice, as he is incapable of receiving aiiy
benefit himself firom the acquaintance which he
had formed. Now I assure you, that you may
command my services, if it is in my power to
be of use to you, for you have laid an obligation
on me and my family, a proper sense of which
on my part, together with the declaration, which
I do not hesitate to make, that I do not feel as
yet to have made you any return, should banish
from your mind all apprehension and fear. In
this manner the cat endeavoured to convince
the rat of his sincerity and good intentions*
To this th^ rat replied. Secret enmity often lies
concealed under the mask of the most friendly
professions ; and as it is more violent in its
effects than an avowed dislike, whoever is not
upon his guard against its silent operation, will
fall a victim to his neglect and inconsiderate-
ne9s ; like the man, who chose to ride upon the
trunk of an elephant, and having fallen asleep,
tumbled down under his feet, and was crushed
to death. A friend is so named, on account of
the service which he may be able to render ;
and an enemy has acquired his denomination,
from the mischief which we are in dread of ex-


283


periencing from him ; but a prudent man, when
his interest requires it, will endeavour to con-
ciliate his enemy, in the same manner that he
will abandon his friend, when he is no longer
safe from his caprices, and power to injure him.
Hare you not often remarked, how young
beasts follow their mothers in expectation of
their milk, and how suddenly they quit them
when the supply is stopped ? It ofl;en happens
too, that the same reasons which have given
rise to a familiar acquaintance, may likewise
occasion its dissolution, without being followed
by any evil consequences, because no hereditary
dislike has contributed to bring about the
change : on the other hand, where a friendly
connection has been raised on the temporary con-
troul of the natural aversion subsisting between
the parties who have laid aside their animosity,
the intimacy not only ceases with the occasion
which gave it birth, but gives way to the return
of feelings which had been suppressed, with-
out being subdued ; and this is a result, which is
no less certain, than that boiling water becomes
cold again after it has been removed from the
fire. Now of all my enemies, there is no one ca-
pable of doing me more mischief than you. Ne-


284


cessity, it is true, has obliged us to come ta
terms with each other ; but the purpose of our
reconciliation being now accomplished, I can-
not help dreading as an inevitable consequence
the revival of your evil disposition towards
me. What chance of success have the weak
when they cope vnth the powerful ? and what are
the fruits of submission to an enemy, who is
conscious of his own superiority ? Moreover, it
is. impossible for me to place any reliance on
your professions, knowing, as I do, that all you
w^nt, is to be able to devour me. Be assured,
however, that a person of little power, when he
is prudent enough to take the necessary precau-
tions against the assaults of a mighty enemy, is
exposed to less danger than one of greater
strength, who, despising the resources of an in-
considerable adversary, treats him with confi-
dence and regard. The man of sense will not
hesitate for a moment to make peace with his
foe, when circumstances call for it ; he will even
stoop to acts of affability towards him, when.he
cannot with safety avoid it ; but on the first op-
portunity he vnll put an end to the connection,
which he has formed against his inclination,
lest any evil which happens to him may be


V


285


traced to his too easy compliance and con-

r

descension; at the same time he will never
violate an engagement which he has contracted,
the fulfilment of which he regards as a debt,
which he ought to pay, though he will check
every tendency towards an undue reliance on
his enemy's professions, frqm a conviction of
the danger which would result from too close
an acquaintance, and of the greater security of
distant civilities. As long therefore as I re-
main suflBiciently removed from your presence,
no thought will arise in my mind to disturb my
wishes for your prosperity and happiness; and
the only recompense which I desire for the
services which you acknowledge to have re-
ceived from me, is a corresponding anxiety on
your part for my welfare ; for no other commerce
than this, of good-will and benevolent affections,
can ever exist between us.


286


THE KINO AND THE BIRD.

#

I

BlBPAI, having finished the preceding story,
was commanded by king Dabschelim to relate
the fable of two vindictive characters, of whom
one suspects and distrusts the other.

There was a king of India, said the philo-
sopher; whose name was Beridoun, and he had
a bird called Fanzah, which had a young one,
and the mother and her young one had learned
to talk so prettily, that the king took great plea-
sure in them, and ordered them to be placed
in his wife's apartment, and desired her to take
care of them. Now it happened that the queen
was brought to bed of a prince, and the young
bird very soon became accustomed to him, and
they used to play together. And Fanzah went
every day to a mountain, and brought back an
unknown fruit, half of which she gave to the
king's son, and the other half to her own young
one, and they both grew very fast in conse-
quence; and the king observing this, shewed
Fanzah repeated marks of kindness and at-
tention. But as Fanzah was one day absent
gathering fruit as usual, the young bird, which


287

was in the room with the prince, dirtied the
floor ; upon which the child flew into a violent
passion, and, takings his play-fellow in his hand,
threw him upon the ground, and killed him.
Fanzah, on her return, finding her young one
dead, was very sad, and cried out in a lamentable
tone. Cursed be princes, in whom there is nei-
ther faith nor integrity ! and woe to him who is
hazardous enough to court their presence, when
they have neither a sense of honour nor a senti-
ment of compassion, and when the distinctions
which they lavish are only intended as the
price of mercenary services ! Their breasts are
closed against every sofl;er feeling, and they are
strangers to the charms of brotherly affection, and
to the influence of virtuous habits : they know
not how to pardon a fault, nor are they equi-
table enough to respect the rules of justice ; in
a word, hypocrisy and improbity are their
ruling passions, for they account for nothing
the guilt of the crimes which they themselves
commit, and magnify the most trifling offence
in others, if it opposes in any degree the grati-
fication of their inordinate desires. This is a
true picture of that ungratefiil fellow, whose
heart is inaccessible to every emotion of pity.


288

and who has been guilty of treachery towards
his friend and intimate companion. At these
words she darted at the face of the boy, and
scratched out his eye, and then flew away and
settled upon the roof of the house.
• As soon as the king was informed of what
had. happened, his impatience to catch Fanzah
was very great, and he. determined to try every
expedient for the purpose. So he approached
her, and called out. Come down, Fanzah, for
you have nothing to fear. O king! answered
Fanzah, the deceitful man is taken in his own
snares ; and if he escape himself the chastise-
ment which he deserves, his crime is visited
upon his children's children. Now your son
has acted treacherously towards mine, and T
have lost no time in punishing him as he
merited. I acknowledge, said the king, that
we have dealt deceitfully with your son, but
your revenge being complete, there is no reason
why we should retain any ill-will towards each
other; so return to us, T beseech you. Never,
as long as I live, answered Fanzah ; for it is the
height of folly to put one's self in the power of a
person who is seeking to avenge himself. The
favourablie colour which the malevolent man


289

endeavouris to give to his conduct, together
with his assumed meekness and courteous be-
haviour, only serve to increase the fear v^^hich he
naturally inspires, and to make us think worse of
him ; for he who conceals a passion for revenge
ui a corrupt heart, possesses no quality on
which we may so safely rely for our preser-
vation, as upon our own prudent reserve in
keeping at a distance from him, not to mention
that active precautions are under all circmn-
stances the best security. In all family con-
nections, as well as in the different relations
of life, the sensible man acknowledges the
various dependencies which support and keep
together the social system, and sets their
distinctive value on parents, brethren, wife,
sons, and daughters ; but he learns to con-
sider himself at times as an individual
existing for himself ; and this is my case at
present, who am no better than a stranger or
an exile, and have prepared for myself, in my
journey through the world, a load of sorrow
and affliction, the weight of which no one vrill
assist me in supporting : but it is now time to
take my leave. Your reflections, said the king,
would be just, if you had not taken satisfaction

u


290

for what we have done to you, or if your con*-
duct had been unprovoked by our perfidious
behaviour; but as the fault was in the first
instance on our side, no imputation can lie
against you ; you have therefore no reason for
distrusting what I say ; so come back, and I
engage that no harm shall reach you. Hatred,
says Fanzah, when it has once got possession
of the breast, is more easily augmented t^han
removed, owing to its peevish and irritable
nature; and the tongue does not always der
clare what is passing in the heart, whose secret
workings are inscrutable to the outward senses,
fi^nd can often only be determined by a sort of
instinctive judgment. Now my heart will
neither bear witness to the truth of your asser-
tions, nor will yours give evidence in favour of
what I say. The king. Do you not know,
that hatred and malevolence are found amongst
the generality of persons, and that a sensible
man is more anxious to subdue those passions,
than to nurture and encourage them ? Fanzah.
This is as you observe ; it is not however fit,
that one who is possessed of judgment should
flatter himself with the notion, that a person,
whose desire of revenge has been once excited.


291


will forget the occasion of his resentment, or
be turned from his purpose ; and he who has
not forfeited every claim to good sense, Avill
not banish from his mind all apprehension of
trick and cunning, as long as he remembers the
maxim, that violence and haughtiness often fail,
where gentleness and management are effectual
in getting the better of an enemy ; as the wild
elephant is hunted down and taken by means
of one that is tame. The king. A person en-
dowed with a noble mind will not forsake his
companion, or leave his brethren, or blot out
the recollection of former friendship, at the first
symptom of alarm for his own safety ; in this
we may take a lesson from die beasts, for you
may have seen persons play with dogs, which
they have afterwards killed and eaten; and
yet the faithful companion of the same species,
notwithstanding he has been a witness of what
has happened to his fellows, will not leave his
master. Fanzah. Where hatred exists, it must
always be dreaded; more especially (because
it then sets no bounds to its indulgence) when
it has taken possession of the breast of a king ;
for kings make a matter of conscience of re-
venge, and look upon the pursuit and attain-
ment of their object as honourable and glorious ;

u2


292

and it is a mark of folly to be deceited by the
apparent inactivity of this mischievous principle :
•for a malevolent disposition, when it does not
betray itself by any outward and visible effects,
may be compared to smothered ashes, which,
for want &£ wood, do not break out into a
flame ; but continually looking for a provoca-
tion, as the fire covets fuel, k no sooner finds
an object on which to pour out the bitterness
of its gall, than it rages with the fury of a
bumiiig flame, inaccessible to the persuasion
of kind words or the language of meekness
and submission, and only bent upon destruc-
tion. If on any occasion he, who has ex-
cited in another the desire of revenge, is in-
duced to seek a reconciliation with the person
M^hom he has offended, it must be with a view
to some advantage, or as a measure of pre-
caution, and must also offer some chance of
success ; but I am in too humble circumstances
to have any power of changing your sentiments
towards me, or even to be benefited by such
an alteration, were it possible to be effected ;
upon the whole then I cannot but augur ill
fi'om the renewal of our intimacy, and think it
most adviseable that we should separate for
ever; so farewell. The king. You must be


293

aware, that no one has it exclusively in his own
power either to benefit or injure another ; but
every thing which happens, either of importance
or of little moment, takes place according to
the decree and determination of fate, to whose
inevitable laws both creation and production^
and the subsistence of all things, as well as
death and destruction, are all subjected, without
any intervention on the part of men ; you have
not therefore been the willing instrument of any
crime in what you have doue to my son, nor
can he be charged with the imputation of any
premeditated offence in his conduct towards
yours; but all was determined and brought
about by the agency of fate, for whose effects
we are not in any way responsible. Fate, re-
plied Fanzah, has been truly described by you ;
but still the provident man will be upon his guard
against the object of his fear, and take precau-
tions against the success of his treacherous
plans, uniting a belief in destiny with the use
of his foresight and strength ; and I know, that
the language which you hold is belied by your
real sentiments, because it is no trifling matter
which has occasioned our altercation; for I
have done no less than scratch out the eye of

u3


294

your son, for which you consider nothing short
of my death a sufficient atonement ; to accom-
plish which, you are practising against me every
stratagem in your power, not recollecting the
horror with which the mind is filled at the
prospect of death. Poverty, the |oss of friends,
disease, and old age, are all of them heavy
visitations, but the greatest of all af&ictions is
death ; and as no one is a better judge of what
is passing in the mind of a sorrowful and dis-
tressed person than one who is in similar
circumstances, I can surely form a good opinion,
from what 1 feel myself, of what is at this mo-
ment occupying your thoughts, and foresee in con-
sequence, that your society would be dangerous
to me ; let therefore no trace of any recollection
of what is past, as far as concerns the con-
duct of each of us towards the son of the other,
remain, except what the change in our mutual
relations must render unavoidable. No good,
says the king, is to be expected from a person
who cannot dismiss from his mind, if required,
an object that has engrossed his attention, and
deny it for the future any place in his thoughts.
The man, says Fanzah, the sole of whose foot
ha^ been hurt, cannot walk without making his


295

wound rim ; and he who is labouring under the
ophthalmia, if his eye meets the wind, must
necessarily increase the quantity of the sand
which brought on his complaint : in the same
manner the person, who hte excited in another's
breast the desire of revenge, pays dearly for his
temerity in offering himself to the notice of the
adversary whom he has affironted. Our busi-
ness in this world is to avoid all risk of the loss
of life, and to be prepared for the predestinated
course of events, fiilly persuaded of the littie
reUance that can be placed on bodily strengdi,
and ever upon our guard against the winning
manners of a treacherous companion ; for an
unreasonable confidence in our own pow^«
wiU bring us on the road where we meet with
dangers at every step we take, and thus become
the instruments of our own destruction. Who*
ever is unable to procure the food which is re*
quired for the support of life, or undertakes
more than he is able to accomplish, necessarily
perishes : and he who does not measure the
quantity of meat which he puts into his mouth
at once, by its capacity to contain it, is choked
in his attempt to swallow it, and dies : and
whoever, mistaking the true purport of what his

u4


296

enemy says, suffers himself to be imposed upon
by specious language, can no longer pass for
a pradent man, and is the chief promoter of
his own ruin. It is impossible for any one to
discern clearly his own share in the decrees
of fate, but his duty is to be provident and care-
ful in the line of conduct which he adopts, and
to exert himself to the utmost of the capacities
which he is conscious of possessing, shewing
the force of his mind in his contempt of fear,
and in the resources for which he is never at a
loss. I trust therefore, wherever I go, that 1
shall never be in want of that, of which I may
have need ; for there are five things, which any
one may call his friends, which are his surest
support on every occasion, his protecting com-
panions in his journey through life, and the
source from which he may draw the supply of
of his natural wants : the first of these is the
knowledge how to guard against evil ; the se-
cond are virtuous habits ; the third, freedom from
doubt; the fourth, generosity of character; and
the fifth, good conduct: and when a man is in
dread of any mischief that may happen to him,
he will bid adieu to riches, family, children, and
home, in hopes that he may be compensated


297

hereafter for the sacrifices he has made; but
he clings fondly to life, for with the close of his
existence all his worldly prospects disappear.
The most useless fortune is that, of which there
is no expenditure ; the worst of wives is she who
opposes the wishes of her husband ; the most
unworthy sons are the rebellious, and the dis-
obedient to their parents; the most faithless
companions are those who forsake a brother in
distress ; the most pernicious kings are those
whom the innocent fear, and who are unmind-
ful of the interest of their subjects ; and the most
unserviceable country is that, which neither
affords provisions nor security. Now, O king,
I should never think myself safe in your pre-
sence, nor enjoy any repose in the neighbour-
hood of your palace: and with these words
Fanzah took leave of his majesty, and flew
away.


298


THE LION ANto THE JACKAL.

King Dabschellm commanded Bidpai to re-
late th^ ^tory of the king, who admits again into
favour the man whom he has severely but unde-
servedly punished ; and the philosopher spoke
as follows :

A king who refiises to be reconciled to a
man, whom he has severely punished, whether
justly or unjustly, endangers the public good ;
on the contrary, he ought to examine into the
condition of the person who has thus incurred
his displeasure, and is suffering from the effects
of it, with a view to discover in what manner
he may be employed for the advantage of the
state ; and if he finds that he is of the number
of those, on whose judgment and fidelity re*
liance may be placed, he should endeavour to
pave the road for his return to favour ; for the
power and strength of a kingdom cannot be
solidly and firmly established, unless persons of
this description are at hand to occupy the post
of ministers, and fill the various departments of
government ; and the choice of public servants


299

must be guided by the attachment which they
have shewn to the existing order of things, and
by their approved fidelity as counsellors of
state ; and these two qualities can only exist,
where the judgment is sound, and the will pre-
disposed to what is laudable and right. The
duties of a sovereign are various and important,
and he requires many advisers and servants for
the due administration of affairs ; but the num-
ber of those who possess the qualifications
which I have mentioned is small, and the story
of the lion and the jackal will serve to illustrate
the truth of what I advance. What is the
slory ? said the king.

It is related, continued the philosopher, of a
certain jackal, that he was of very rigid and
abstemious habits; and though he passed his
time in the society of females of his own spe-
cies, and with wolves and foxes, he was far
firom imitating his companions in the jealousies
and contentions which sprung up amongst
them, and neither shed blood nor ate meat;
upon this the other beasts quarrelled with him,
and told him, that they were not pleased with
his manner of living, nor approved the opinion
which he entertained of the merit of his austere


300

practices ; adding, that his pretensions to extraor-
dinary piety would be of no use to him, nor give
him any superiority over them, for being of the
same nature with themselves, he was subject to
the same laws, and therefore his aversion to the
shedding of blood and eating flesh was ridicu-
lous and absurd. The jackal replied, As long
as I do not consider it a crime to keep company
with you, it is unjust that you should think un-
favourably of me on this account ; it is neither
the place which he inhabits, nor the society
which he frequents, which determine the cha-
racter of a person, but what passes in his heart,
and shews itself in his conduct; for if good
and bad actions have no other distinctive pro-
perty than that arising from the diversity of the
scene on which they occur, he who kills a reli-
gious man in a mosque would not commit a
crime, whilst he who spares his life on a field of
battle would be highly culpable. I appear out-
wardly, it is true, to form a part of your society,
but my heart refuses all fellowship with yoUj
and this will account for the difference in our
respective behaviour. So the jackal persisted
in the manner of life which he had chosen, and
became celebrated for his piety and devotion ;


301

and his fame reached the ears of a lioQ, who
was the king of those parts, who desired there-
fore to be acquainted with him, on account of
the report which he had heard of his extra-
ordinary reputation. So he sent to him, and
desired him to come to him ; and on his arrival
he received him very graciously, and conversed
with him familiarly, and dismissed him: then
after some days he sent for him again, and ad-
dressing him said. You know, probably, that I
have a great many servants and persons whom
I employ to execute my orders, but notwith-
standing this, I am still in want of further as-
sistance; and as the character which I have
heard of you has made me desire to have you
in my service, I propose entrusting you with a
considerable branch of the public administra-
tion, and raising you to the honour of being
one of my chief counsellors. Kings, answered
the jackal, do well in choosing able assistants
in any urgent affair, but it is not adviseable for
them to force any one to enter into their service,
for no one is diligent in a work which he has
been obliged to undertake. Now I have
neither inclination to accept any employment
under a king, nor experience enough in affairs


802

to justify me in so doing; bnt amongs^t the
beasts of your kingdom are many to be found
of great. celebrity 5 who have both the good will
and the means to serve you advantageously,
and the emulation which will be excited amongst
them by the prospect of royal favour and dis-
tinction vnll turn to the profit of the state*
The lion. No more of this, for I am determined
to employ you. The jackal. Two classes of
men are principally calculated to become the
ministers of a king, to neither of which do I
belong ; the one consists of such as have recourse
to every expedient, to obtain the end which
they have in view, and are in no alarm for the
consequences of their unjust and villanous
schemes ; the other is composed of men, who
are too inactive and sluggish to excite envy;
but he who thinks to serve his sovereign with
fidelity and integrity, but without the aid of
artfiil management, is disappointed in his ex-
pectations, because both the enemies and the
fiiends of the king will unite against him to
effect his ruin ; the latter, envying him the dis-
tinction which he enjoys, will take every oc-
casion to insult him, and make him feel their
dislike; and the former will be exasperated


303

against liim on account of his faithful and pro^
fitable administration of affairs ; and how can
he hope io escape destruction, when two such
powerful adversaries are striving together to
bring about his fall! The lion. I shall take
care that you do not experience the treatment
which you apprehend, and I promise to reward
you honourably for the diligence which you
display in my service. ThejackuJ. If the king
really wishes me well, I beg of him to place m$
in this desert, where I shall live in peace, and
free from anxiety, and shall be satisfied with
the food which water and grass will afford me ;
for the companion of a sovereign experiences
more uneasiness and fear in one hour, than any
other is exposed to in the whole course of his
life ; and a scanty meal in quiet and safety, is
better than a sumptuous repast that is eaten in
the midst of apprehension and dread • The lion.
I am listening to what you say ; but do not be
alarmed at these phantoms of danger, for I
cannot dispense with your services, as^ I have
already declared to you. The jojckal. Well
then, if it must be so, let the king give me his
word, that if any of his people are unjust
towards me, whether it be one, who, being above


304


me in rank, endeavours to make nse of hiis
credit against me ; or one, who, enjoying less
consideration than I do, quarrels with me on
account of this di^iaritv of distinction; he will
not decide upon the report which is made of
my conduct from any r^resentations of my
enemies in person, or by a memorial which is
transmitted to him, without all necessary delay
and caution in the proceedings, and a scru-
pulous examination of all the circumstances
which bear upon the case. With this assurance^
I will engage to assist him to the utmost of my
power, and will discharge the duties of the
situation, in which he is pleased to place me,
with punctuality and diligence, studiously avoid-
ing every act which may bring upon me his
displeasure. The lion agreed to comply with
the conditions, and immediately gave his trea-
sures in charge to the jackal, and honoured
him with greater intimacy than the rest of his
companions. And as soon as the attendants
of the lion saw this, they were angry and dis-
pleased, and began to lay their plans for coun-
teracting the consequences with which this
preference threatened them.

Now the lion had ordered some food to be


305

prepared for him, which he found very good,
and to have an unusual taste; he therefore
ordered the jackal to put it away into some
safe place, that he might eat of it again. Then
the other attendants took it away privately, and
carried it into the apartment of the jackal, and
hid it there without his knowledge, anxiously
waiting for an opportunity, which they expected
would offer itself, of convicting him of a false-
hood. In the morning the lion called for his
breakfast, and the dish in question was wanting^
the jackal being all the time ignorant of the trap
that had been laid for him. And the authors
of the trick happened to be in the presence
chamber; and whilst the lion was asking for the
meat, and was very earnest in his enquiries
about what had become of it, they looked sig-
nificantly at each other, and one of them, in a
tone which promised to carry conviction to his
hearers of the truth of what he uttered, said.
We cannot help informing the king of whatever
we know to be either injurious or profitable to
him, however disagreeable it may prove to one
who is interested that the discovery should not
be made; it therefore becomes my duty to
declare, that a report has reached us, that the

X


306

jackal has carried the meat to his own apart-
ment. Another said, I confess that I did not
see him do this ; but it will be right to examine
into the business, for it is no easy thing to know
exactly the characters of persons. A third said.
Forsooth, this mystery was very near escaping
detection, but I am now of opinion, that if
you search the jackal's chambers, you will
find the meat there, and we certainly ought to
submit what has been related of his turpitude
and deceit to this easy proof. A fourth said,
that if the fact should be established, it would
be an instance of treachery combined with the
foulest iugratitude and impudence. A fifth said,
I am unwilling to suppose that such bonoiirable
persons would advance what is untrue ; but the
surest mode of proceeding would be for the lion
to send some one to search the apartments of
the jackal. A sixth advised the king to lose no
time in commanding the search, before the spies
of the jackal could get notice of what was
going on : and they continued holding this
language, till at last it made so strong an im-
pression on the. mind of the lion, that he sent
for the jackal, and asked him where the meat
was, which he had ordered him to take care of;


307

the jackal replied^ that he had given U, io
charge to the master of the kitchen, to ^et it
before the king whenever he should call for it :
then the lion order^ the head of the kitchen,
vtrho was also one of those who had . conspired
against the jackal, to come, forward ; which he
did, and declared that nothing had been de-*
livered to him : upon this the lion sent a con-
fidential person to search the apartments of the
jackal, who found the meat there, and brought
it to the king. Then a wolf, who had ' till now
remained a silent spectator, vdthout taking any
part in the enquiry which was on foot, and who'
was too cautious and just to deliver his opinion
in a matter, till he had a clue to guide his judg-
ment, approached the lion, and said. If the king
is convinced of the treachery of the jackal, it
will be impossible for him to pardon him, with-
out being guilty of injustice, if he punishes any
culprit hereafter. Then the king commanded
the jackal to be taken away, and guarded : upon
which one of his attendants exclaimed, I wpn-
der that the king with his good judgment, and
his knowledge of business, can entertain a
shadow of doubt respecting the deceit which
has been practised ; and I am more astonished,

x2


308

in foreseeing from all appearances that he will
pardon the criminal, in spite of the strong and
convincing evidence of his guilt. After this the
lion sent to the jackal, to know what defence
he could make ; and the messenger who was
dispatched returned with an answer which he
himself had fabricated, which threw the lion
into so violent a passion, that he ordered the
jackal to be killed.

Now the mother of the lion, who knew that
her son had been too hasty in the business, sent
and stopped the execution of his orders, and
came to him, and said. For what crime have
you commanded the jackal to be put to death?
and being informed of the reason. My son, she
continued, your decision has been too precipi-
tate, and the sensible man always proceeds
with cautious hesitation, that he may not have
to repent of an injudicious and hasty step, and
reap the fruits of a rash and sudden determina-
tion ; and it is especially the interest of kings
to adopt in their conduct this prudent reserve,
which resembles, on account of the close con-
nection which it ought to have with every action
which they perform, the relation which sub-
sists between man and wife, between a child


309

and his parents, between a pupil and his master,
a tribe and its chief, a devout man and his re-
ligion, between a people and their sovereign,
between a king and power, and between power
and understanding. But the chief qualities in
a king are vigilance and attention, which, acting
upon a knowledge of the characters of those
about him, direct each to the proper sphere
in which he ought to move, and guard against
the intrigues by which they are labouring for
the ruin of each other. Now you have tried
the jackal, and have had al)undant proofs of
his fideUty, judgment, and good character, and
have shewn your satisfection by the praises which
you have bestowed upon his conduct ; it is not
therefore fit, that you should alter on a sudden
the opinion which you had of him, thereby ac-
cusing yourself of having misplaced your con-
fidence ; for from the moment of his coming to
your court, up to this day, he has proved him-
self to be a faithful and honest counsellor; and
it would therefore be unwise in the king to deal
so hardly with him for the sake of a bit of meat,
granting that he has stolen it; which how-
ever I am so far from believing to be the case,
that I have no doubt, if the king looks narrowly

x3


310


into the whole business, that those who have
been so loud in condemning the jackal, are his
secret enemies, and took away the meat, and
placed it in his room : so a kite, when it is flying
away with a piece of flesh, invites the attacks
of the other birds ; and a dog with a bone is
worried by his fellows. The jackal has been
of great use to you, submitting to every sort of
inconvenience, by which you might possibly be
benefited, and sacrificing his own comfort to
your advantage and security by a course of the
most undisguised and open behaviour. Whilst
the mother of the lion was speaking, one of his
confidential firiends came to him, and acquainted
him with the innocence of the jackal; upon

which his mother, when she saw that he was

I,

convinced of the truth of the report, told him, that
he ought to shew no mercy to the person who
had accused the jackal falsely, lest his impunity
should carry him to the commission of some
greater crime ; that a sensible man can never
be upon terms with a traducer of innocence,
who attempts to blacken the lustre of virtuous
self-denial, because he is in no dread of punish-
ment in a future life, of which he denies the
existence. So bitter are the fruits of impetuous


311

anger, said she, and of an excess of haste, which
bemg unreasonably excited, are often followed by
a serious loss, which bears no proportion to the
cause from which they sprung ; that the best
thing which you can now do is to admit the
jackal into your favour again, and to treat him
with kindness, in order, that no recollection of
the injustice which he has experienced may
rob you of the benefit of his faithful advice for
the future ; for there are certain persons, whose
friendship should under no circumstances be
wantonly lost, such as are known to possess in-
tegrity, and honour, and good faith, and a
sense of gratitude, and of the binding engage-
ment of promises, and who are distinguished
by their love of mankind, and their freedom
from envy, and their abhorrence of injustice,
and the patience with which they bear the
weaknesses of their brethren and companions,
however difficult it may be to arrive at this
degree of perfection : those, on the other hand,
whose society is dangerous, and ought to be
avoided, are persons branded with the mark of
improbity and bad faith, and a sordid mind,
who are remarkable for their non-observance of
obUgations, and their disregard of aU compas-

x4


312

sionate and pious feelings, and their disbelief
of the rewards and punishment of another
world. Upon this the lion sent for the jackal,
and offered an excuse for his conduct towards
him, and promised him satisfaction, and, begging
his pardon, told him that he was restored to his.
former rank. To which the jackal replied.
The worst pretender to friendship is he who
seeks his own advantage at the. expence of one
whom he calls his friend, and whose interest
he considers as subordinate to his own, fol-
lowing the bent of his passions in violation of
the rules of probity and justice ; and this is by no
means an uncommon occurrence amongst per-
sons who have the credit of being on the best
terms. Now since what I have experienced from
the king is a matter of public notoriety, let him
not accuse me of using towards him disrespectful
language, when I declare frankly, that I place
no reliance on his word, and consider it unad-
viseable to become again his familiar com-
panion: at the same time I must add, that it
is as impolitic in a king to court the intimacy of
one whom he has severely punished, as it is. to
discard him entirely ; for a person possessed of
power, when he falls into disgrace, is still ea-


313


titled to distant rfespect. The lion, without ap-
pearing to have paid any attention to the words
of the jackal, said to him, I have tried your dis-
position and character, and have satisfactory
proofs of your fidelity, integrity, and sincerity,
and am thoroughly convinced of the treachery
of those who have been plotting your ruin ; and
I rank you amongst the number of those who
are the most distinguished for probity and
honour. Now one good quality will efface in
the memory of the noble-minded man the re-
collection of many that were of an opposite
nature; let us therefore renew the footing of
mutual confidence, which will prove a source
of joy and satisfaction to both. Then the
jackal resumed the post which he had formerly
occupied, and was in greater honour than ever
with the king, who became every day more
firmly attached to him.


314


THE HISTORY OF ILADH, BELADH, IRAKHT, AND

THE WISE KIBARIOUN.

King Dabschellm commanded Bidpai to in-
form him by what means a king may most
highly exalt himself, render his authority secm-e
and lasting, and consolidate his kingdom;
whether by clemency, by fortitude, by valour,
or goodness. The best security for his kingdom,
answered the philosopher, and the safeguard of
his power, is the clemency of the monarch,
which is the brightest gem in his crown, and
the very essence of all his duties, as is proved
by the following history.

There was a king named Beladh, very de-
vout and religious, who had a vizir, whose
name was Iladh ; and the king saw one night in
his sleep eight visions, which so alarmed him,
that he suddenly awoke, and called together
the Brahmins, who were the chief ministers of
religion, that they might interpret them. And
when the Brahmins appeared, the king related
to them what he had seen ; and they all de-
clared that the visions were very extraordinary.


«


315

but promised, if he would grant them a delay
of seven days, to return with the interpretation
of them. The king having acceded to their
request, they retired to a house, which belonged
to one of them, to hold their consultation ; and
being met together, they reasoned amongst
themselves, and said, We have acquired indeed
a great piece of information, by which we may
avenge on our enemies the death of our bre-
thren, who perished yesterday, to the number
of twelve thousand : we are now become the
depositaries of an important secret of the king,
who has required of us the interpretation of the
visions he has seen ; it is therefore the moment
for us to assume a bold and threatening tone,
which may frighten him into a compHance
with all our demands ; and we will insist upon
his delivering up into our power his favourites,
and those who enjoy the greatest credit at
his court, that we may put them to death,
declaring that we have consulted our books,
and found, that there is no other way of
keeping off the evil, which he is apprehensive
will happen to him ; and if the king desires us
to name the persons whose death we pronounce
to be necessary, we will say to him, We de-


316


mand Queen Irakht, the mother of Ghowir, the
most honoured and distinguished of your wives,
and Ghowir, the most beloved and favoured of
your sons, and the son of your noble brother,
and Iladh, your friend and companion, and Kal
Katib, your confidential adviser, and your in-
comparable sword, and the white elephant,
which no horse can equal in celerity and speed,
and the horse which you ride in battle, and the
two other great elephants which are with the
male elephant, and the quick and strong camel,
and the wise, excellent, and intelligent Kjba-
rioun, that we may be avenged of him for
all the mischief which he has done to us ;
and we will say moreover to him, It will be
necessary for you, O king, when you have
put to death the persons we have named
to you, to fill a cauldron with their blood, and
sit upon it, and when you get up from the
cauldron, we the Brahmins, assembled from
the four quarters of the kingdom, will walk
round you, and pronounce our incantations over
you, and we will spit upon you, and wipe off
from you the blood, and will wash you in water
and sweet oil, and then you may return to your
palace, trusting in the protection of heaven


317

against the danger which threatens you : for if,
O king^ you will submit without reluctance to
be deprived of the friends we have mentioned,
and make them the price of your own redemp-
tion, you will be safe from all personal danger,
your kingdom will continue, and your power re-
main undiminished, and you will be at liberty
to choose for your successor whomsoever you
please ; but if you refuse to comply with these
conditions, we dread either the dismemberment
of your kingdom, or your own destruction : and
if the king follows our instructions, we shall
have it in our power to put him to death in any
manner we choose.

Then after the Brahmins had agreed upon
their plan, they returned to the king at the ex-
piration of the seven days, and said to him, O
king, we have searched in our books for the
interpretation of the visions which you have
seen, and have examined the affair, which so
nearly concerns our glorious and just soverei^,
but we are not able to declare our opinion, un-
less we are left alone with you : then the king
sent away all who were present, and as soon as
he was left alone with the Brahmins, they ac-
quainted him with what they had previously


318

agreed upon. Then the king said, Death is a
greater blessing than life, if I atn oblige^ to kill
those who are as dear to me as myself. I khow
that I must one day certainly die, and that life
is short, and that I cannot remain a king ^ for
ever ; but in my opinion there is no difference
beween the loss of friends and the loss of ex-
istence. The Brahmins said to him in reply,
If you will not be offended at the liberty we
take, we must declare to you, that you entertain
an erroneous notion, when you estimate the
soul of another more highly than your own ;
look therefore to yourself and your kingdom^
and do not neglect the means which are offered
to you of fixing your future expectations on
solid ground, with the prospect before you of
a happy reign in the midst of those whom you
have honoured and ennobled, unless through
the perverted choice of a small in preference to
a greater good, you sacrifice yourself to save
those you love. Know moreover, O king, that
a man clings to life out of affection which he
bears to his own person ; and as your exist-
ence, next to the protection of heaven, depends
on the security of your throne, the possession
of which is not exempt fi-om many a painful vi-


319

cissitade, it is not fit that you should consider
your kingdom as a vile and contemptible thing,
and wantonly expose it to devastation and ruin.
Follow therefore, O king, the safe course which
we recommend, and, putting aside all other con-
siderations, lay seriously to heart the advice
which we have given.

The arrogant and haughty tone of the Brah-
mins only added to the grief and distress of the
king, and he arose from his seat, and retired
into his chamber, and fell on his face and wept,
and turned himself about as a fish when it is
taken out of the water ; and began to say to
himself, I do not know which of the two evils
is the greater, my own death, or that of my
firiends ; and I shall no longer have any plea-
sure in life if I lose my kingdom, or see my
wishes frustrated on every occasion ; and where
will be the charms of existence, if I am de-
prived of Irakht! or how shall I possess the
means of governing the state or conducting my
affairs without my vizir lladh, and my white
elephant, and my famous horse! or how can
I deserve the name of a king, if I consent to
the death of those whom the Brahmins have
pointed out, without whose presence and as-


320


sistance I shall be left as it were alone in the
world !

Now by this time the news had spread
abroad in the country of the affliction and sor-
row of the king ; and as soon as Iladh was in-
formed of it, he very wisely determined not to
go to the king and enquire the cause, until he
should be sent for ; but he went to Irakht, and
said to her. The king from the day I entered
his service to this moment has never taken any
step without my advice and opinion ; but he is
now engaged in some affair, the knowledge of
which he studiously conceals from me, and all
that I have been able to learn is, that he has
passed some nights with the Brahmins, where
no other person was present ; and I am afraid^
that he has communicated to them some im-
portant secrets, and that they will have advised
some measure, which may prove injurious to his
interests : go therefore, I beseech you, and in-
form yourself of what he is about, and lose no
time in acquainting me with the result of your
enquiries, for I am unable to do this myself,
and you will probably discover that the Brah-
mins have been implicating him in some dis-
graceful business ; for you have seen enough of


321


the character of the king to know, that when
he is angry, he never stops to ask the advice of
any one, or weigh the matter in which he is
engaged. Irakht replied, that she had lately
had some disagreement with the king, and un-
der those circumstances could not make up her
mind to go to him. Do not bear malice, re-
plied lladh, or let your rancour prevail over
your better feelings, for no one but yourself has
free access to him ; and I have often heard him
say, that his sorrow was never so great, but that
it was instantly removed by the presence of
Irakht: hasten therefore to him and forgive
him, and tell him what you have heard ; you
will relieve his mind from the weight of grief
with which it is oppressed, and procure for his
people an end to their anxiety.

Then Irakht went, and entered into the apart-
ment of the king, and seated herself by him,
and said to him, What is the matter, my ho-
noured sovereign, and what is it that you have
heard from the Brahmins ? the sorrovirfril state
in which I see you is not to be mistaken, and
it is fit that I should be informed of the cause
of your grief, that if I cannot procure you an
alleviation for your sufferings, I may at least

Y


have tiie satisfaction of sharing your pains'. Do
not a^d to my distress, replied the king, by en-^
quiring into the occasion of it, for it is a subr
ject of which you had better remain ignorant*
Does the relation in which I stand to you, said
Irakht, entitle me to no better treatment than
thi^ ? The man who is praised for his under-
standing, is he who, when a misfortune hap-v
pens to him, does not abandon himself .to his
owi^ resources, but has the courage to listen to
tjiose who are able to give him good adyice;
and he expects to be relieved from his embar-
rassment by prudent contrivance and judicious
counsel, as a great criminal rests his hopes of
pardon on the voice of mercy which pleads in
his favour : do not therefore yield yourself up to
weeping and sadness, which only display their
effects in an emaciated body, and in the satis-
faction which they cause to the insulting enemy.
Cease, replied the king, to be importunate with
your questions on so disagreeable a subject,
which is connected with my death and yours,
as well as vrith that of many persons in my
kingdom, who are the objects of my warmest
aflfection, for the Brahmins have declared this
sacrifice c# you and them to be indispensably *


323


necessary; and inseparably attached as my
happiness is to your existence, can I hear un^
concerned, that the tie must be broken M^hicfa
so closely unites us ? Irakht having heard this,
grew very impatient, but her good sense pre-
vented her from betraying herself to the king ;
to whom she said, Be calm, O king, and com-
posed ; it is fit that I should give my life to save
yours, for you have other women at your court
who will console you by the delight and satis-
faction which you will experience in their so-
ciety for the loss of me ; but one thing I beg of
you, which my love and attachment to you au-
thorize me to demand, and bid me earnestly
recommend. And what is it? says the king.
It is, said Irakht, that for the present you
would place no confidence in the Brahmins, nor
have any communication with them, till you
have had time to consult the persons, on whose
opinions you can rely ; for death is a weighty
matter, and you will never be able to restore to
life the persons whom you have caused to be
killed. You should not throw away a pearl,
says the fable, though possibly of no value, till
you have shewn it to a competent judge. Now
you, O king, do not know your enemies, for I

y2


324


am persuaded that the Brahmins are exas-
perated against you on account of the twelve
thousand of them, whom you caused to be put
to death yesterday ; for do not deceive yourself
with the notion, that these with whom you have
at present to do are well disposed towards you,
because they were not of the number of those
who perished, and that you run no danger in
acquainting them with the visions which you
have seen ; I am persuaded, that the language
they have held has been dictated by the hatred
which they bear you, and they flatter them-
selves, that they shall be able to effect the se-
cret purposes which they have in view, which
depends upon the facility, with which they may
be able to accomplish your destruction, together
with that of your friends and ministers ; if there-
fore you attend to their instructions, and put to
death the persons whom they have named to
you, I foretell your own ruin, and that the
kingdom vnll return under their authority as it
was before. Go therefore, I beseech you, to the
wise Kibarioun, he is clever and intelligent,
and acquaint him with what you have seen in
your visions, and demand of him their meaning
and interpretation.


325

*

Then the king got the better of his low spi-
rits, and ordered his horse to be saddled, and
mounted it, and rode to the wise Kibarioun ;
and when he came to him, he dismounted from
his horse, and saluted him, and stood with his
head bent towards the ground : and the wise
man said to him, What is the matter, O king,
for I am distressed at seeing you so changed
in your looks ? The king. I have seen in my
sleep eight visions, which I have related to the
Brahmins, and I am afraid, from the manner in
which they have interpreted them, that. some
great event is at hand, which threatens the
prosperity of my kingdom. Kibarioun. Do
you prefer giving an account yourself of your
visions, or that I should relate to you the whole
of what you have seen? The king. In your
mouth the relation will be more surprising.
Kibarioun. Cease, O king, to be alarmed and
distressed. The two red fish, which you saw
standing upon their tails, signify that a mes-
senger will come to you from the king of Hy-
moun, and present to you two boxes set round
with pearls and sapphires, worth four thousand
weight of gold. The two geese which you saw
flying from behind you, and settling upon your

y3


326

hand, signify, that the king of Balk will send
you two horses, whose equals . are not to be
found on earth. The serpent, which you saw
creeping near your left foot, signifies, that a
man from Senjin will present you with an in-
comparable sword of the purest steel. The
blood with which your body appeared to be
stained signifies, that the king of Kasroun will
send you a magnificent purple robe, which pos-
sesses the property of shining in the dark. The
vision in which you appeared to be washing
yourself with water signifies, that a person will
arrive from the king of !(lehzin, with a present
for you of cotton dresses, such as kings are in
the habit of wearing. The vision in which you
were standing on a high mountain signifies, that
the king of Kidour will send you a white ele-
phant, whose speed no horse can equal. The vi-
sion which shewed you something like fire upon
your head signifies, that the king of Arzen will
send you a crown of gold set round with pearls
and sapphires. And the vision, in which you saw
a bird, which seemed to strike your head with
its beak, I cannot interpret now, though it does
not threaten you with any misfortune, nor con-
tain any cause of alarm ; but it portends a little


327

displeasure against one whom yon love. Now
these are the interpretations of your visions,
O king; and the messengers who wilt be the
bearers of the presents will arrive at the ex-
piration of seven days, and offer them to you.

Then the king took leave of Kibarioun, and
returned to his palace. And at the expiration
of seven days it was announced that the mes-
sengers were arrived ; so the king took his seat
upon his throne, and summoned the nobles to
his audience, and the gifts were presented to
him as Kibarioun had foretold. And the joy
of the king, and his wonder at the knowledge
of Kibarioun, were very great ; and he said. It
was my ill fortune which prevailed, when I re-
lated my visions to the Brahmins, and placed
myself in their power ; and if heaven had not
shewn me mercy, I should not only have
perished myself, but should also have been
persuaded to have delivered up many others
to destruction. I see therefore how necessary
it is to listen to the counsel of friends who
possess understanding. Irakht advised what
was best, and I adopted her recommendation,
which has been crowned with complete success ;
therefore the presents shall be placed at her

y4


328

disposal, that she may choose whatever she
pleases of them. So take the crown and the
robes, Iladh, and follow me with them to the
apartments of the women. Then the king sent
for Irakht and Hourkanat, the two most fa-
voured of his wives, and ordered Iladh to give
into the hands of Irakht the crown and robes,
that she might take her choice ; and she chose
the crovra, and Hourkanat chose one of the
richest and most beautiful robes.

Now it was the practice of the king to pass
alternately one evening with Irakht and one
with Hourkanat ; and it was customary for the
wife, with whom . he was to pass the evening,
to prepare for him a dish of sweet rice, of which
he usually ate. And on the evening that the
king was with Irakht, she presented the dish of
rice which she had prepared for him, and she
wore the crown upon her head ; and Hourkanat
hearing this was jealous of Irakht, so she put
on her robe, and went to the king, and her
dress was as resplendent as the brightness of
the sun ; and the king was astonished at what
he saw, and turning to Irakht, said to her, You
acted foolishly in choosing the crown, and
leaving the robe, which has nothing to equal it


3^


amongst all my treasures. Irakht was offended

at the manner in which the king had blamed

her choice, and at the indirect praise which he

had bestowed upon Hourkanat; and her

jealousy and rage were so violent, that she

struck the king on the head with the dish

which was in her hand, and the rice ran down

upon his face ; upon which the king suddenly

rose . from his seat, and called for lladh, and

said to him. Do you see what this silly woman

has done in contempt of my sovereign authority ?

lead her away instantly, and have her put to

death without mercy. Then lladh quitted the

presence of the king, and said to himself,

I will not put her to deiath, that I may leave

time for his anger to pass away, for she is the

most sensible and well-behaved of all the

women, and I know no one who is like her ;

and she is not only indispensably necessary

to the king, but amongst a number of good

actions which she has performed, she has lately

been the means of his escaping from death, so

that she has become the person on whom the

hopes of the country rest ; and if I immediately

carry into execution the orders of the king, I

run the risk of being called hereafter to an


330


account for having deprived Irakht by my
hurry and precipitation of all chance of pardon :
I will therefore wait some time, that I mdy
have other proofs of what was the real intention
of the king ; and if I see that he is sorry for
what he has done, I will present her alive to
him, and shall not only enjoy the credit and
satisfaction of having saved her, but I shall
spare the king many a pang of remorse, and
be in favour and authority with the people : on
the other hand, if I discover no symptoms of
repentance for what he has done, and have
good reason to believe that he is satisfied with
his decision, in that case her death will be in-
evitable. Then he led her away, and gave her in
charge to a trusty servant, with orders to guard
her very closely, that he might have leisure to ob-
serve what turn the business would take. After
this he stained his sword with blood, and went
to the king with the countenance of a person
who was in sorrow and affliction, and said, O
king, I have executed the orders which you
gave me concerning Irakht. Then it was not
long before the resentment which the king had
felt against Irakht began to cool ; and when he
recollected all her good qualities^ and the beauty


331

of lier person, his grief exceeded all boimds,
and he sought in vain to console himself for
her loss ; but he was ashamed to ask Iladh if
it was really true that he had executed his
orders, though he indulged a hope, from what
he knew of his understanding, that it would
prove not to be the case. It was not difficult
for Iladh to guess what was passing in the
mind of the king ; he said to him therefore, O
king, moderate your grief, for sorrow and dis-
tress wear out and consume the body; and
learn to endure patiently what you have no
longer any power to alter; and if the king
pleases, I will relate to him a story, which may
serve to tranquillize his spirits. O tell it me,
I beseech you, said the king.

There were once two doves, continued Iladh,
a cock, and a hen, who filled their nest vrith a
quantity of wheat and barley. Then the cock
bird said to the hen. As long as we can find
any thing in the fields to eat, we will leave
what we have here untouched ; so when winter
comes, and the fields no longer afford us any
food, we can eat the com in our nest. The
hen bird was pleased with this proposal, and
agreed to it Now it happened, that the grain


332

was wet at the time that it was placed in the
nest. After this the cock went away, and was
absent a long time, and summer came, and the
com dried up, and shrunk very considerably;
and when he returned, and found that the com
had apparently diminished in quantity, he said
to the hen, Did we not agree that we would
not eat any of the corn for the present ; why
therefore have you done so ? upon which she
affirmed with an oath that she had not touched
it; but he did not believe it, and beat her to
death. Then when the winter had set in, and
the rains had fallen, the grain became moistened,
and swelled again, and the nest appeared as full
as before : and the cock bird remarking this re-
pented of what he had done, and lay down by
the side of his dead partner, crying'* out. Of
what use is the com to me now, for you are
not able to share my food ? I now see that I
have acted unjustly towards you : then he refused
all nourishment, and expired at her side. The
sensible man therefore will never be quick in
punishing, lest he should have to repent of his
conduct, like the male dove.

I have also heard tell of a man, that as he
was going up a mountain with a bundle of.


333

lentils upon his head, he put down his load,
and stopped to rest ; and a monkey came
down from a tree, and stole as many of the
lentils as one of his paws would hold, and
climbed up into the tree again ; but one of the
grains having fallen, he returned to look for it,
and did not find it, and all the rest lay scattered
upon the ground. And you, O king, have six-
teen thousand wives, and in the midst of the .
pleasure and amusement which they afford you,
you are sighing for one who is no longer at
your command. When the king heard this,
he was afraid that Irakht was really dead. O
Iladh, you have not hesitated for a moment to
obey my commands, though it was but a word
that I spoke to you. The word of God alone
is unchangeable, answered Iladh, whose decrees
are immutable and fixed. The king. I have
injured myself, and am plunged into grief by the
death of Irakht. Uadh. Affliction is the lot of two
descriptions of persons ; of those who commit
evil every day, and of those who never do good.
Their joy and happiness in this world are trifling,
and their repentance, when they have the pro-
spect of rietribution in view, is long and laborious.
The king. Were Irakht only alive, my sorrow


334


would then have an end. Ifadh. Sorrow kas
no power over the man who is every day ex-
ercised in good works, nor over him who never
does evil. The king. I shall never again see
Irakht! Iladk. Two descriptions of persons
may be said - not to see ; the blind man, and he
who is without understanding ; for as the blind
man does not behold the firmament of heaven
and the stars, nor what is near nor far off, in
the same manner he who is deprived of under^
standing can neither distinguish what is praise-
worthy from what is dishonourable, nor the good
man from the bad. The king. If I couM but
see Irakht again, my joy would be complete.
IJadh. Those who have most reason to rejoice,
are persons^possessed of discernment and know-
ledge, the former of whom survey the things of
the world with all the changes and chances to
which they are exposed, and the latter discover
the qualities of virtue and wickedness, and
regulating their conduct with a view to the
next life, continue in the path in which they
can walk without danger. The king. I must
leave you, Iladh, and take precautions, and'
put myself upon my guard. Iladh, Two-
classes of men are proper objects of aversion ;


335

those who deny the distinctioii between viir*
tue and vice, dispute the certainty of rewards
and punishments, and contest the force of
obligations they have contracted; smd those
who never turn away their eyes fh)m what
it is forbidden to look on, nor their ears fironn'
listening to what is evil, who neither check
their passion for adulterous connections, nor
controul the heart in its inordinate and vicious
propensities. The king. I stretch out my arms
towards Irakht, and my hand returns empty
into my own bosom. Uadh. Three things may
be pronounced to be empty ; a river without
water, a country without a king, and a woman
without a husband. The king. O Iladh, you
are never at a loss for an answer. Uadh. There
are three persons who may be said t^ receive
this talent as it were by inspiration ; the king
who gives abundantly from his treasures, the
woman who falls into the hands of a man of
fortune whom she loves, and the knowing man
who makes his arrangements with a view to
what is good. He then told the king, when he
saw that his distress was taking a serious turn,
that Irakht was alive ; and the joy of the king
was excessive when he heard it, and he said.


336

Iladb, the knowledge which I have acquired
of your fidelity in council, and of. the sincerity
-which accompanies every word that you utter,
will not allow me to be angry: my confidence
in your wisdom gave me reason to hope that
you would not put Irakht to death ; for though
she was guilty of great imprudence, and added
to her crime by the language which she held,

1 cannot attribute it to any ill-will which she
bore me, nor to any desire on her part to injure
me, but to her jealousy, the effects of which I
ought to have pardoned and forgotten ; but you,

Iladh, wished to try me, and therefore left
me so long in doubt and suspense; however
the favour which you have conferred upon me
is not the less on that account, and calls for my
best thanks ; so go immediately and bring
Irakht to me.

Then Iladh went away fi'om the king, and
came to Irakht, and begged her to dress herself;
which she did, and he accompanied her to the
king, and when she came into his presence, she
bowed her head, and placing herself before him
said. Heaven be praised for its mercies, and
the king for the favour which he has shewn me !

1 have been guilty of a great fault, which ren-


337

dered me unworthy to live, but has furnished the
king with an occasion for the noble exercise of
his mildness, generosity, and clemency towards
me; and praised be Iladh, who, acquainted
with the merciful, kind, and compassionate dis-
position of the king, has saved me from de-
struction by his judicious delay. Then the king
said to Iladh, Your authority with me and with
Irakht and with my people is unbounded, for
you have saved the life of her who was doomed
to perish, and have restored her to me again.
You have not belied the confidence which I
have always had in your advice, and in the
prudence of your administration ; and as a proof
of the honourable distinction of which I think
you deserving, I invest you with unlimited
authority in my kingdom, to do what you think
best, and to act in every instance according to
your own discretion and judgment. Iladh re-
plied, May heaven prolong the reign, and increase
the happiness of the king ! The praise which you
bestow upon me is more than I deserve, for I
have only dischai^ed the duties which as your
servant I was bound to perform, and I was
anxious that the king should not use too much
precipitation in a matter of which he might

z


afterwards repent, and remember only with
regret; especially where the interest of this'
£aithfiil woman was at stake, who was so
deserving of pity, and has no equal upon earth.
True^ O Uadh ! answered the king; and from
henceforth I will neither engage in any trifling
or important measure, much less one like that,
from the difficulties of which I have so narrowly^
escaped, without previously calling to my aid
the advice, and discernment, and reflection of
my friends. Then the king gave Iladh very
handisome presents, and the Brahmins^ whoi^
he was authorized to punish as he pleased^
atoned by their death for the conspiracy which
they had formed against him. And the king
and the nobles of the kingdom rejoiced, and
offered up their thanksgivings to heaven, and
commended Kibarioun for the extent of his
knowledge and the superiority of his wisdom,
which had been the means of saving the king
and his faithful wife and his vizirs.


389


THE LIONESS AND THE HORSEMAN.

DABSCHELIM commaiided Bidpai to relate
the fable of the man, who is restrained fiiDm
injuring another by the recollection of what he
has suffered himself, and who, profiting by a
dearly bought lesson of experience, corrects his
propensity towards hatred and violence.

The persons, says the philosopher, who take
delight in actions which are the source of pain
and injury to others, may be ranked as men,
whom ignorance and folly have so far led
astray, that they are either incapable of dis-
cerning the relations and mutual dependence of
events in this world and the next, or have no
dear notion of the heavy responsibility which
their senseless conduct will infallibly draw after
it ; and if in some instances they escape by a
premature death a part of the temporal punish-
ment which they have merited, they only pasa
from the chastisement which has been sus*
pended in this life, to the inexpressible and
undefinable torments which await them beyond
the grave; however the silly man is oiteh

z2


340

admonished, by the injury which he himself
has sustained, to be cautious in inflicting
upon another a wound of which he knows
the effects to be painful, and this self-com-
mand turns to ^ his profit and advantage : and
if the king pleases, I will tell him the fable
of the lioness, the horseman, and the jackal, in
which this maxim is inculcated. ^ Dabschelim
expressed a wish to hear it, and the philosopher
continued thus.

There was a lioness in a wood, who had two
whelps, and she went out one day to search for
game, and left them in their den ; and a horseman
passing by discovered them, and shot at them,
and killed them, and tore off* their skins, and
placed them upon his back, and went home.
And when the lioness returned, and saw what
had happened to her whelps, she rolled on the
earth, and in an agony of despair poured forth
the most bitter lamentations ; and her roaring
attracted the notice of a jackal, who was in the
neighbourhood, who came and asked her what
she was about, and what had happened to her.
A horseman, she answered, has killed my two
whelps, and torn off* their skins, and carried
them away. The jackal replied. Do not be


li


vour
;'ue8t
here
par-
was
t he
Kijns
)se;

ious

was
so

om
bis
he
Is.

e;

id

10

I

r


342


inattention to the consequences of your own
Tiolent conduct, of which you are now reaping
the sad fruits. Then the lioness, after she had
beard the words of the jackal, was convinced
of the justice of all that he had said, and
that her life had. been one continued practice
of cruelty and. oppression ; she therefore deter*
mined to leave off eatii^ flesh, and to live upon
fruits, and to enter upon a course of great aus-
terity. Now a woodrpigeon, who inhabited the
same wood, and lived upon fruit, having ob-
served this, said to the lioness, I thought the
trees had been without fruit this year, owing to
the little rain which has fallen ; but when I saw,
that you, who are by nature an eater of flesh,
had forsaken your accustomed food, which
heaven has destined for you, in order to live on
what has been provided for others, and rob them
of their support and sustenance, I then knew
that the trees had been as productive in this
as in former years ; for all this then, woe to the
trees, and to the friiit, and to whoever has the
temerity to seek his own destruction in the
forbidden food v*rith which they supply him!
The lioness, being alarmed at what the wood-
pigeon said, did not persist in eating the fruits


343

ef the treesy but made up her mind to Utc upon
gfrass, and seek relief in devotion for the priva-
tions to which she was exposed ; and my ob-
ject in relating this fable, added Bidpa i in con-
clusion, was to shew, that the ignorant man is
often restrained by his own painful experience
from injuring anoHi^r, as the lioness was in-
duced, by what had happened to her whelps,
to leave off eating flesh, and abandoned as
speedily the food which the trees afforded her
in consequence of the speech of the wood-
pigeon. Man has therefore occasion for dis-
cernment and reflection, that he may avoid
doing to others what under similar circum-
stances would be disagreeable to himself; for
this is justice which heaven commands, and
men approve.


THE MONK AND HIS GUEST.

Relate to me, said king Dabscfaelim to
Bidpai, the fable of the man who quits a con-
dition of life which suits him, and to which he

z4


344


is accustomed, for the sake of embracing an-
other, and is astonished and perplexed at the
ill success which awaits his choice.

There was in the land of Kark, said the
philosopher, a monk, who was very devout and
zealous in the discharge of his religious duties.
One day a visitor arrived, and the monk ordered
some dates to be set before him, that he might
taste a fruit with which he was not acquainted.
As they were eating together, the guest ob-
served, that they were very sweet and good,
and that there were none in his ovni country,
which in other respects abounded with fruit of all
kinds. But, continued he, I have never longed
for dates, with which I can very readily dis-
pense, considering how difficult of digestion
they are, and that they are unwholesome for
the stomach. The monk replied. You are
very fortunate in being contented vnth what
you have ; for there are inconveniences at-
tending all wishes that cannot be satisfied.
And this observation the monk made in He-
brew, and his guest found the language so
beautiful, that he desired to learn it, and
turned his thoughts seriously to it. Upon
which the monk said to him. You deserve


345

to experience what happened to the crow as
a punishment for your wishing to quit your
own language to learn Hebrew ; and his guest
expressing a wish' to hear the story, There
was a crow, he* continued, which saw a par-
tridge moving and strutting about, and was
so pleased with his manner of walking, that he
desired to imitate him, and took great pains
without heing able to accomplish his purpose ;
till at last, despairing of success, he was anxious
to return to the manner of walking which was
natural to him ; instead of which, he was so
puzzled by the little that he had copied from
the partridge, and by his attempts to recover his
former steps, that in the motion of his feet he
became the most graceless of all the birds.
And this story applies directly to your case;
for you would quit your own tongue, and
endeavour to learn Hebrew, which is by no
means calculated for you, and in which you
. will never make any proficiency ; and when
you return to your friends, you vnll be re-
markable for your bad pronunciation, and for
the inaccuracy with which you speak your own
language; and he is justly accounted a fool,
who throws away his time and labour on an


346

occupation, in which having recdved no in*
Btraction from his parents, he ought therefore
to conclude that it is not suited to bis telents.


THE TRAVELLER AHD THE GOLDSMITH.

JBtELATE to me, said king DabschQlim -to
Bidpai, the fable of the man who^ bestows his
favours on unworthy objects, and yet hopes to
jneet with a good return.

It is right, says the philosopher^ that kings as
well as others should select, as objects of their
bounty and kindness, persons in whom they
may hope to meet with gratitude, sincerity, and
moderate pretensions ; and not exhaust their
generosity on relations and friends, who have
often no better claims than what the peculiarity
of their situation gives them. It is then that
the distinctions which a king confers become
a title of honour to the receiver, when the noble
as well as more humble pretender to royal fa-
vour is indebted for the notice of his sovereign
to the opinion which is entertained of his sensi-


347

bility to kindness, and to the proof which he
has given, that he is incapable of falsehood and
ingratitude ; and the conduct of a kii^ in sub-
mitting the pretensions of those who look up
to him for promotion and reward to this severe
trial, resembles the practice of the prudent
physician, who in his treatment of a patient is
not satisfied with the bare symptoms which his
looks betray, but fieels his pulse, and prescribes
the medicine which lie is to take according to
the knowledge which he has in this manner ac-
quired of his complaint. And the sensible man^
if he finds amongst persons of low extraction
any possessed of integrity, and a feeling alive
to gratitude ; or if he discovers even amongst
irrational animals any whom instinct has en-
dued with a sensibility to good treatment, and
a power to discriminate their benefactor; he
will endeavour by affability and kindness to
win them to his interest, against the day when
he may have occasion for their services : and
thus we sometimes see, that a man, whose good
sense is indisputable, is obliged, from distrust
of his fellow-creatures, to use precautions
against those with whom he associates, whilst
he is not afiraid to wrap up the weasel in his


348

cloak, and takes a bird and places it on his
hand ; for it is unwise to despise either man or
beast, small or great, without having examined
their utility, which is the proper rule for the
conduct to be observed towards them: and
this is a maxim which has often been in the
mouths of wise men of old, and is contained in
the following fable.

A number of persons dug a pit, and there
fell into it a goldsmith, a serpent, a monkey,
and a tiger ; and a traveller, who was passing
by, stood over the pit, and saw the man and
his companions, and said to himself, I cannot
perform any deed that will plead more strongly
in my favour in the life to come, than by saving
this man from the enemies by whom he is sur-
rounded ; so he took a rope, and let it dovni
into the pit; and the monkey, owing to his dexte-
rity and nimbleness, was the first to cling to it,
and climb up; he then let it down a second
time, and the serpent twisted himself round it,
and came out ; then a third time, and the tiger
took hold of it, and he drew him up. Then the
three beasts thanked him for his having assisted
them to escape, but begged him not to release
the goldsmith, adding, that men in general, and


' 349

especially the person in question, were incapable
of gratitude. And the monkey said to him, I
live on a mountain near a city called Nawa-
darkht : the tiger said, I live in a vrood close
by this city: and the serpent, 1 dwell in the
walls of the city, and if you pass in our neigh-
bourhood at any time, and have occasion for
our services, call to us, and we will come and
reward you for the kindness which you have
shewn us. But the traveller paid no attention
to what they had told him of the ingratitude of
the man, but let down the rope again, and
brought out the goldsmith, who thanked him
for what he had done, and said. If ever you
come to Nawadarkht, enquire for my house ; I
am a goldsmith, and shall be happy to be of
any use to you 1 can for the service you have
rendered me. Then the goldsmith returned
to the city, and the traveller continued his
journey.

Some time after the traveller had occasion to
go to Nawadarkht, and as he wbs walking
along, the monkey met him, and saluted him,
and kissed his feet, and made apologies for the
inability of monkeys to do much for a friend,
but begged him to sit down, and wait till be


356

returned ; then the monkey went aWiiy^ and
yery soon came back, bringing some choice
fraitj wliich he placed before the traveller^ who
having eaten as much as he chose, continued his
journey : and as he approajched tbegate of the
city, the tiger advanced towards him, and
placing himself in an- humble posture before
him, said, Wait a moment, and I will very
soon come back to you ; then the tiger went
away, and entered the city by one of the walls,
and killed the king's daughter, and tore off her
trinkets, and brought them to the traveller, with-
out informing him by what means he had pro-
cuited them. Then the traveller said to him-
self. These beasts have rewarded me very hand-
somely, and I am now curious to see what the
goldsmith will do ; if he is poor, and has no
means of shewing his gratitude, he may at least
sell these trinkets for their fall value, with
which of course he is acquainted, and divide
with me the sum of money which he obtains for
them. So he went to the goldsmith, who, as
soon as he saw him, saluted him, and made him
enter his house : and observing the trinkets, he
immediately recognised them to be those which
he had made for the daughter of the king. He


then told the traveller that he had no provi*
siontt in the house good enough for him, but if
he would wait a little while, he would fetch hin^~
sometiiing to eat : then he went out, and said to
himself, This is an opportunity not to be lost ; I
will go to the kiilg, and infotm him of the dis^
covery I have made, and he will no doubt ac^
knowledge and reward my zeal. Then he went
to the antichamber of the king, and announced
himself by a message to the following purport :
The person who has killed your majesty's
daughter and stolen her trinkets, is at this mo-
ment in my house. Then the king desired the
traveller, to be brought before him, and as soott
as he saw the jewels in his possession, he im-
mediately ordered him to be put to the torture,
and after that to be led through the city, and in
the end put to death. Whilst the punishment
was being executed, the traveller began to weep,
and cry out with a loud voice, If I had attended
to the hints which the monkey, the serpent, and
the tiger gave tne of the ingratitude of this
man, I sliould have escaped this misfortune;
and as he repeated the same words several
times, the serpent heard what he said, and came
out fitmi her hole, and knew her benefactor


352

again, and was so distressed at the situation in
which she found him, that she immediately
thought of some contrivance to release him,
and went and stung the son of the king ; and
the king called together the wise men of his
kingdom, who endeavoured to charm the bite
by their incantations and magical arts,* but all
to no purpose.

Now the serpent had a sister, who was one
of the Genii ; so she went to her, and informed
her of the kindness she had experienced from
the traveller, and of the misfortune into which
he was fallen ; and the sister felt pity for him,
and went to the king's son, and rendering her-
self invisible told him, that he would not get
well, unless the man who had been punished so
undeservedly pronounced an incantation over
him. Then the serpent went to the traveller in
prison, and reproached him for not having at-
tended to her advice concerning the goldsmith ;
and she gave him leaves, which she told him
served as an antidote to her poison, and desired
him, when he was called to charm the bite which
the king's son had received, to make the young
prince drink a decoction of the leaves, which
would cure him ; and if the king enquired into


353

his circumstances, he must give a true account
of himself, and by the favour of heaven he
would by these means escape. Then the king's
son told his father, that he had heard the voice
of some one speaking, virho said to him, that he
would not get well, unless the man, who had
been unjustly imprisoned, charmed the sting of
the serpent ; upon which the king ordered the
traveller to be sent for, and desired him to
charm his son. The traveller replied. Incanta-
tions will be of no use to him, but if he drinks
a decoction of these leaves, he will vnth the as-
sistance of heaven be cured. Then he made
him drink, and the child got well, to the great
joy and satisfaction of his father ; and the king
desired the traveller to give some account of
himself, and the latter related his history.
Then the king thanked him, and made him a
handsome present, and commanded that the
goldsmith should be put to death in his stead ;
and the sentence was carried into execution,
as a just punishment for the false evidence
which he had given, and the bad return he had
made to a good action. So in the ingratitude
of the goldsmith towards the traveller, con-
tinued Bidpai, and the gratitude on the other

A a


354

hand of the beasts towards their benefactor, by
the means of one of whom he escaped from the
danger which threatened him, is contained a
salutary lesson for those who will Usten to in-
struction, and matter of reflejt^tion for the con-
siderate man, who will learn from this example
to select, from motives of prudence as well as
interest, those only as objects of his generosity
and favour, who d!te possessed of integrity and
honourable sentiments, in whatever rank or con-
dition of life he may find them.


THE king's son AND HIS COMPANIONS.


King Dabschelim said to Bidpai, I have
listened attentively to what you have just re-
lated ; and now if a man, as has been said, can-
not arrive at any soUd good without the exer-
cise of his understanding and jud^ent, and
using caution in all he does, what is the reason
that the inconsiderate man often attains to emi-
nence and prospers in the world, whilst those


355

who possess the former qualities in a great de-
gree often meet with vexation and losses ? The
philosopher replied :

Intelligence, good sense, and caution are as
necessary to man in his conduct through life^
as the eye to vision, or the ear to the sense of
hearing; though fate and destiny sometimes
prevail over all the calculations of human pru-
dence. The history of the king's son and his
companions affords an example of this. And
v^hat was this ? said the king.

Four persons, continued the philosopher^
met once in a road ; the first was the son of
a king, the second the son of a merchant, the
third, who was very handsome, was the son of
a nobleman, and the fourth the son of a hus-
bandman. They were all in great trouble and
distress in a place at a distance firom all relief,
and had nothing, except the clothes which were
upon them ; and as they were travelling along,
and thinking what they should do, the prevail-
ing notion in the mind of each of them evinced
itself in the following declarations. The son
of the king said, AU thii^ in the world are de-
termined by destiny ; and as the decrees of fate

m

are always infellibly accomplished, patience

Aa2


356

and a due submission to the will of Providence
is the safest conduct for man : the son of the
merchant said, Understanding is the most ex-
cellent of all things : the son of the nobleman,
that beauty was superior to any thing that had
been mentioned : and the son of the husband-
man gave the preference to industry over all
the rest. By this time they had reached a city
called Matroun, and sat down to consult on the
course to be pursued : at length the other three
said to the husbandman, Go and procure by
means of your industry something for us to eat
to-day : so he went into the city and enquired
for work, the wages of which would be suffi-
cient to procure food for four persons ; and he
was told, that nothing fetched so high a price
in the city as wood for fuel, which was not to be
had nearer than the distance of a parasang ; so
he went out, and cut a bundle of sticks, and
brought it to the city, and sold it for a piece of
silver, and bought food ; and wrote on the gate
of the city. The price of one day's hard labour
is a piece of silver ; and he returned to his com-
panions with the provisions, and they all made
a hearty meal.
The next day it was agreed to be his turn.


357

who said, there was nothing more valuable than
beauty, to try his good fortune. So the son of
the nobleman set out to go to the city, and on the
way he said to himself, I am unable to work,
therefore what will be the use of my entering
into the city ? but as he was ashamed to return
to his companions without food, he thought of
separating from them altogether, and for this pur-
pose took another direction ; and as he was lying
down with his back against a tree, he became
drowsy, and fell asleep, and • the wife of one of
the principal men of the city passing by at the
time, observed him, and was so struck with his
beauty, that she desired her maid to go and con-
duct him to her ; and the girl went, and begged
him to follow her to her mistress, with whom he
passed the day in a very agreeable manner, and
in the evening she presented him with five hun-
dred pieces of silver. Then he went and wrote
upon the gate of the city, The value of beauty for
one day is estimated at five hundred pieces of
silver ; and he returned with the money to his
companions.

On the third morning the son of the merchant
was desired to go, and make use of his under-
standing and knowledge in business, to procure

A a3


358

food for the day's consumption. Then he went
forth, and he saw a ship laden wiih goods,
lying at anchor close to the shore, and a great
many merchants going on board, as if they in-
tended to buy the cargo ; and they sat down in a
comer of the vessel and consulted together, and
said one to the other. We will go home to-day
without making any purchase, and when the
owners of the ship find that no one offers to buy
their merchandise, which however it is necessary
for us to have, for the sake of our trade, they
will lower their deiiiands, and we shall obtain
it at a cheaper rate. Then the son of the mer-
chant hearing this changed t^e direction he
was taking, and came to the owners of the ship,
and bought the whole cargo on credit for a
hundred pieces of gold, and pretended that he
wished to transport the goods to another city ;
and the merchants hearing this were afraid that
they should lose the opportunity of acquiring the
cargo ; therefore they gave him a premium of a
hundred thousand pieces of silver for the bar-
gain he had concluded, and he referred the
owners of the vessel to them for the purchase
money, and he carried the sum which had been
paid him to his companions, after he had written


359

on the gate of the city, One day's exercise of
the understanding has been paid by a hundred
thousand pieces of silver.

On the fourth day the king's son was desired
to go and try what fate and destiny would do
for him. So he took his leave, and came to
the gate of the city, and sat down on a seat
which he found there; and it happened that
the king of the country was just dead, without
leaving any%8uccessor to the crown ; and as the
fimeral passed by, he appeared quite uncon-
cerned, whilst all who followed the corpse
were mourning the loss of their sovereign ; upon
which they reproached him with his indif-
ference; and the keeper of the gate said to
him in a threatening tone, Who art thou,
wretch, that darest to sit at the gate of the
city, without sharing our grief at the death of
the king? and he drove him away from the
gate. But as soon as the funeral had passed, he
came back to his former place ; and when the
procession returned from the burial, the door-
keeper remarked him again, and said. Did I
not forbid thy sitting here? then he had him
arrested, and thrown into prison. The next
day the people of the city assembled, in order

A a 4


360

to deliberate on the, choice of a king ; and each
waited with impatience for the proposition of
his neighbour ; however, they came to no deter-
mination. Then the keeper of the gate ad-
dressed the aissembly, I saw yesterday, said
he, a young man sitting at the gate, who in the
midst of the general sorrow and mourning ap-
peared totally unconcerned ; I spoke to him,
and as he gave me no answer, I sent him away
from the gate ; on my return from the funeral
I found him sitting again in • the same place ; I
therefore had him put into prison, thinking he
might be a spy. Then the nobles of the city
sent to the prison, and had the young man
brought before them ; and they enquired into his
history, and what had made him come to their
city. I am the son, said he, of the king of
Fawiran : at the death of my father, my brother
deprived me of the crown; and in order to
save my hfe, I fled from the country, which
reduced me to the extremity in which you see
me. And when the young man had finished
his story, one who was present, and who had
been accidentally in the country of his father,
recollected to have seen him, and spoke in
high terms of him; upon which the nobles


361

r

chose him for their king, and appeared highly
satisfied with his election.

Now it was a custom with the people, when
a king was chosen, to conduct him round the
city upon a white elephant, and* the ceremony
took place as usual on this occasion ; and as
the newly-elected sovereign rode by the gate,
he observed the writing which was upon it ;
then he commanded to be written, that in-
dustry, and beauty, and understanding, and
whatever good or evil happens to man in the
world, takes place by the decree and determi-
nation of Providence, as exemplified, he said,
in the honour and favour which heaven this
day had bestowed upon him. He then went
to his audience chamber, and took his seat
upon his throne, and sent to his former com-
panions to come to him. The man of under-
standing he made one of his ministers; he
established the industrious son of the husband-
man amongst the cultivators of the soil ; and
having ordered a large sum of money to be
given to the handsome man, he sent him away,
that he might not corrupt the morals of the
ladies of his court. After this he assembled
the men of the country, who were most dis-


362

tingoished for their wisdom and understanding,
and said to them, My companions are certainly
convinced, that they are indebted for aU the
good which has fallen to their lot to the bounty
of heaven ; and I wish you all to acknowledge
the decree of fate in the favour which I have
received at the h^.nds of Providence, and not
to mistake for an effect either of beauty, or
understanding, or industry, what was wholly
independent of human means. I could not
even expect, when my brother drove me away
from my kingdom, to be able to procure the
necessaries of life, much less that I shpiild
reach the high rank to which I have now been
raised. I could not indulge this hope, knowing
that this country possesses persons who excel
me in all the qualities, both of mind and body ;
but the will of heaven, vrhich had determined
my ris^ to honour, reduced me to the fate of
privation in which I haye lived, for the ac-
complishment of its purpose.

In the assembly, before whom the king
spoke, was an elderly man, who stood up, and
addressed him thus : Understanding and wis-
dom have graced the words which you have
uttered, and justified the good opinion which


363

we have formed of you : we have^ a fall con-
viction of your sincerity in all that you have
spoken, and think you deserving of the power
and honour to which heaven hafi raised you,
on account of the knowledge and judgment
which you have received from above. The
happiest man in this world and the next is he
on whom Providence has bestowed under-
standing and wisdom ; and we must regard it
as a favour of heaven, that it has procured for
us, by the death of our king, a sovereign who
will be the glory and pride of the country.

Then another aged man, who had been a
traveller, stood up, and returned thanks to
heaven, and pronounced an eulogium on the
king, and said. In my younger days, before I
began to travel, I was in the service of a
nobleman, and when I had scraped together
a little property, I left my master, who at my
departure gave me two pieces of gold, one of
which I destined for charitable purposes, and
the other piece I intended to keep for myself;
and going one day to the market, I saw a
fowler who bad two doves, and I bargained
with him for them, but he refased to sell them
for less than two pieces of gold, though I did


364


all I could to make him part with them ^r
one ; but he persisted in his refusal : then I
said to myself, 1 will buy one of them, and leave
the other ; but recollecting, that probably they
were male and female, I had compassion upon
them, and would not separate them ; so trusting
in heaven, I bought them both for the two
pieces of gold, but I was afraid, if I let them
loose in the inhabited part of the country, that
they would be exposed to a similar danger to
that from which I had just released them. So ^
I carried them to a spot abounding with food, at
a distance from the habitations of men, and let
them go ; and they flew away, and settled upon
a fruit-tree : and when they were on the top of
it, they thanked me ; and I heard one of them
say to the other. This man has been our deliverer
and benefactor, and we ought to reward him
for what he has done ; now at the root of this
tree is a vessel filled with gold ; ought we not
therefore to direct him to it, that he may take
it? I said to them. How can you pretend to
direct me to an invisible treasure, and you were
not able to see the net in which you were
caught? They answered me. Fate, which can
rob the eye of vision, prevented our seeing the


N


365

net, but has not rendered this treasure invisible.
Then I dug, and took out the vessel, and found it
filled virith gold ; and I wished them good luck,
and said in parting, Heaven be praised for the
accomplishment of its purpose in the knowledge
it imparted to you ; now fly about in the air,
and inform me of what is concealed under the
earth. They replied, O man of understanding,
do you not know that fate prevails over every
thing, and that its decrees are inevitable ? This
is the report which I have felt it to be my duty
to make to the king, arid if my sovereign orders
me, I will bring the money, and pay it into his
treasury. It belongs to you, answered the king,
and there is a large property for you. The con-
versation of the philosopher and the king being
here end ed , the king was silent. Then the philo-
sopher addressing him said. May you live, O
king, a thousand years, and your authority be
extended over the seven climates; may you
meet with every earthly blessing, to the satis-
faction of yourself and the happiness of your
subjects! May Providence and destiny unite
together for your preservation ; and the imme-
diate protection of heaven, which watches over
your words and actions, make the rich treasures


366

of your clemency and knowleci^, and the
sagacity of your understanding and memory,
conspire to perpetuate the reign of virtue and
goodness, which hare established their seat in
your soul !


THE END.


AAXTlft, PAINTCRy OXrOBD.


The borrower must return this item on or before
the last date stamped below. If another user
places a recall for this item, the borrower will
be notified of the need for an earlier return,

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt
the borrower from overdue fines.


Harvard College Widener Library

-e, MA 02U8 ^yjeft5-2413


Please handle with care.

Thank you for helping to preserve
library collections at Harvard.
