The Dictatorship of the Proletariat (Karl Kautsky (H. J. Stenning, trans.), 1918)
==========================================================
Kautsky's critique of Bolshevik dictatorship — the text that split Marxism over democracy. Translated by H. J. Stenning, 1919. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dictatorshipofpr00kautiala).

^TilJaNVSOl^        %aMINf 

.^WFUNIVERS/A         vvlOSANC 
Q      — 

O         uL 

AWEUNIVER% 

^lOSANCElfj^ 
o 

-^illBRARYOc^      j;^lLIBRA 

.^MEUNIVER% 

'^/yajAiNn-aftv' 

^lOSANCfl^^ 

<f5l§DNVS01^       %a3AINnmV 

^OFCAII 

.^,0FCAIIF0% 

^OAavaaii# 

^(?Aavaj 

-^tllBRARYQ^ 

-j^lllBRARYOr 

^OFCAllFOff^      ^OFCAIIFO/?^ 

^6>Aavaaii-# 

A\\EUNIVER5'//i 

^JIIVD-JO'^^      %OJnVJ-JO-^  ^f^lJDNVSOl^ 

^^WEUNIV£R5/4 

■%M3AINI 

vvlOSANC 
o 

<rjl33NVS01^        '^/Sa3AINI 

,^WEUNIVER%        vvlOSANCEl£j> 

^t-LIBRARYQr         ^MIBRA 

I  LIlT  1  I L  If 

%ojnvDJo^ 

^J'iiJONVsoi^    '^AaaAiNfl^wv^ 

.^OFCAIIFO% 

CI 

..    .    ^ 

>- 

% 

^^Aavaan#       <(3i]dnvsoi^     '%a3AiN(i-3V^ 

.^WE•UNIVER%. 

o 

%iaoNvsoi^ 

^lOSANCElf/^ 

-< 

%a3MNn-3WV^ 

-5^tlIBRARYQr 

-^tUBRARY(?A 

^JITVJJO^      ^OJUVDJO"^ 

AWEUNIVERSy/. 

^lOSMElfj^ 

^^;OfCAllF0% 

^OFCALIFOff^ 

<riuoNYsoi^     "^yaaAiNn-JiW^       ^^Auvaani^ 

'^(?Aavaan#' 

^iUBRARYQ^^       ^^UlBRARYQr^ 

.^WE•l]NIVERS/A 
^^ ^5 

^aojnv3-jo'^    \mm\^      "^j^uonvsoi^     "^aJAiNflmv^ 

^lOSANCElfx^ 
o  ^ 

^^0FCAIIF0%       ,^.OF•CAllFO% 

.^WEUNIVERy/A 

^•lOSANCElf/^ 

^(?Aavaan-^'^     "^(^Aavaan-^       ^^^umsoi^     "^-^mhrn^ 

.^ElJNIVER%        vvlOSANCElfj^ 

-j^lLIBRARYOc.       ^tUBRARYQc. 

Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive 

in  2007  witli  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 

littp://www.arcliive.org/details/dictatorsliipofprOOkautiala 

UNIFORM  WITH  THIS  VOLUME 

DEMOCRACY 

AND 

THE    PRESS 

BY 

F.  H.  HAYWARD,  D.Lit..  B.Sc 

and 
B.  N    LANGDON-DAVIES.  MA. 

1/6   &  2/6  net. 

Othtr  Books  in  the  I. LP.   Library 
will  follovo  in  due  course. 

The  national  LABOUR  PRESS,  Ltd. 

30,  Blackfriars  Street.  Manchester: 

and  at  8  &  9,  Johnson  8  Court,  Fleet  Stref  t. 

London,  E.C.4. 

THE  DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

I  LP.    LIBRARY 

'THE 

DICTATORSHIP 

OF  THE 

PROLETARIAT ' 

BY      / 
KARL   KAUTSKY 

TRANSLATED    BY    H.    J.     STENNING 

THE    NATIONAL   LABOUR    PRESS.  LTD.. 

30,  Blackfriars  Street,  Manchester, 
and    at    London     and     Leicester* 

3K 

EDITORS    PREFACE   TO   THE    ENGLISH 
EDITION 

Karl  Kautsky,  the  author  of  "The  Dictatorship  of  the 
Proletariat,"  of  which  an  English  translation  is  now  sub- 
mitted to  the  public,  is  the  most  eminent  Socialist  writer 
of  the  Continent. 

Kautsky  is  65  years  of  age,  was  bom  in  Austria,  and  has 
lived  most  of  his  life  in  Germany.  He  resided  in  London, 
in  close  association  with  Friedrich  Engels,  from  1885  to 
1890,  and  studied  daily  at  the  British  Museum. 

For  more  than  thirty  years  Kautsky  has  served  Inter- 
national Socialism  with  high  literary  ability,  great  learn- 
ing, and  unusual  aptitude  for  sociological  research. 

Students  of  economics  owe  him  a  heavy  debt  for  the 
laborious  and  difficult  work  of  editing  the  literary  remains 
of  Karl  Marx.  In  1882,  Kautsky,  in  partnership  with 
another,  founded  the  iVewe  Zeit,  from  the  editorship  of 
which  he  was  deposed  by  the  German  Majority  Socialists 
in  May,  1918.  His  various  books  have  been  translated 
into  many  European  languages,  and  have  been  an 
important  factor  in  the  education  of  the  European  working 
classes.  By  way  of  recreation  from  his  political  and 
economic  duties,  Kautsky  employed  his  scanty  leisure  in 
the  study  of  Christian  origins,  and  some  ten  years  ago 
published  "  The  Origin  of  Christianity,"  one  of  the  most 
fascinating  books  on  that  subject  ever  written. 

405575 

vi.  PREFACE 

The  present  examination  of  Bolshevism  was  written  by 
Kautsky  in  the  latter  part  of  1918,  and  published  in 
Vienna.  Soon  after  the  outbreak  of  the  German  political 
revolution  of  a  year  ago,  about  one-half  of  the  matter 
contained  in  '  *  The  Dictatorship  of  the  Proletariat ' '  was 
issued  by  a  Berlin  publisher  under  the  title,  "  Democracy 
or  Dictatorship." 

The  Russian  Bolsheviks  have  had  the  most  difficult  task 
ever  placed  in  human  hands,  and  though  it  is  yet  too 
early  to  pass  a  final  judgment  upon  their  success  or 
failure,  the  evidence  at  present  available  points  to  the 
conclusion  that  they  have  accomplished  wonderful 
achievements.  Lenin  himself  is  the  first  to  admit  that 
they  have  made  mistakes.  It  could  not  be  otherwise. 
In  his  letter  to  the  Hungarian  Communists  he  warns  them 
not  to  attempt  to  copy  too   closely  the  methods  which 

Dhave  been  adopted  in  Russia.  Socialism  will  learn  as 
much  from  the  failures  as  from  the  successes  of  these 
first  efforts  to  establish  Socialism  in  a  great  community. 
The  forms  of  government  and  administration  most  suit- 
able for  a  period  of  transition,  and  in  economic  and 
political  conditions  so  different  from  those  which  exist  in 
the  Western  countries,  cannot  be  accepted  without  ques- 
tion as  the  most  appropriate  and  effective  for  other 
countries  and  for  other  circumstances.  The  readiness 
with  which  some  British  Socialists  have  embraced  the 
idea  of  the  Soviet  form  of  government  as  being  the  new- 
democracy  and  capable  of  universal  adoption  shows  a  lack 
of  appreciation  of  the  difference  between  what  may  be 
expedient  as  a  temporary  measure  and  what  is  best  for 
stable  conditions. 

PREFACE  vii 

No  apology  is  made  for  the  publication  of  an  English 
version  of  ' '  The  Dictatorship  of  the  Proletariat. "  It  is 
felt  that  the  problems  raised  by  the  momentous  happen- 
ings in  Russia  will  not  be  solved  unless  all  shades  of 
Socialists  are  heard  and  impartiality  and  tolerance  are 
observed  in  the  discussions. 

The  translation  for  this  edition  has  been  made  by  Mr. 
H.  J.  Stenning,  to  whom  the  Editor  desires  to  express  his 
indebtedness. 

TABLE   OF   CONTENTS 

CHAPTER.  PAGE 

i.  The  Problem   I 

II.  Democracy  and  the  Conquest  of   Political 

Power  4 

III.  Democracy  and  the  Kipening  of  the  Prole- 

tariat       12 

IV.  The  Effects  of  Democracy 25 

V.  Dictatorship   42 

VI.  Constituent  Assembly  and  Soviet  59 

VII.  The  Soviet  Kepublic  70 

VIII.  The  Object  Lesson  88 

IX.  The  Legacy  of  the  Dictatorship  : 

(a)  Agriculture  101 

(b)  Industry  120 

X.  The  New  Theory  136 

The  Dictatorship  of  the  Proletariat 

CHAPTER  I. 

The  Problem. 

The  present  Eussian  Revolution  has,  for  the  first 
time  in  the  history  of  the  world,  made  a  Socialist 
Party  the  rulers  of  a  great  Empire.  A  far  more 
powerful  event  than  the  seizing  of  control  of  the 
town  of  Paris  by  the  proletariat  in  1871,  Yet,  in  ^ 
one  important  aspect,  the  Paris  Commune  was 
superior  to  the  Soviet  Republic.  The  former  was 
the  work  of  the  entire  proletariat.  All  shades  of 
the  Socialist  movement  took  part  in  it,  none  drew 
back  from  it,  none  was  excluded. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Socialist  Party  which 
governs  Russia  to-day  gained  power  in  fighting 
against  other  Socialist  Parties,  and  exercises  its 
authority  while  excluding  other  Socialist  Parties 
from  the  executive. 

The  antagonism  of  the  two  Socialist  movements 
is  not  based  on  small  personal  jealousies  :  it  is  the 
clashing  of  two  fundamentally  distinct  method*,     ^ 
that  of  democracy  and  that  of  dictatorship.     Both 

DIOTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAEIAT 

HiovemeritS' h^vfe  the  same  end  in  view  :  to  free  the 
proletariat,  and  with  it  humanity,  through 
Sociahsm.  But  the  view  taken  by  the  one  is  held 
by  the  other  to  be  erroneous  and  Hkely  to  lead  to 
destruction. 

It  is  impossible  to  regard  so  gigantic  an  event 
as  the  proletarian  struggle  in  Russia  without  taking 
fSides.  Each  of  us  feels  impelled  to  violent  parti- 
sanship. And  the  more  so  because  the  problem 
which  to-day  occupies  our  Russian  comrades  will 
to-morrow  assume  practical  significance  for 
Western  Europe,  and  does  already  decisive ely 
influence  the  character  of  our  propaganda  and 
tactics. 

It  is,  however,  our  party  duty  not  to  decide  for 
one  or  the  other  side  in  the  Russian  internal 
quarrel  before  we  have  thoroughly  tested  the  argu- 
ments of  both.  In  this  many  comrades  would 
hinder  us.  They  declare  it  to  be  our  duty  blindly 
to  pronounce  in  favour  of  the  section  now  at  the 
helm.  Any  other  attitude  would  endanger  the 
devolution,  and  Socialism  itself.  This  is  nothing 
less  than  to  ask  us  to  accept  as  already  proved  that 
which  is  still  to  be  examined,  viz.,  that  one  of  the 
sections  has  struck  out  in  the  right  path,  and  we 
must  encourage  it  by  following. 

We  place  ourselves,  of  course,  by  asking  for  the 
fullest    discussion,    already    on    the    ground    of 

THE  PROBLEM  3 

democracy.  Dictatorship  does  not  ask  for  the 
refutation  of  contrary  views,  but  the  forcible 
suppression  of  their  utterance.  Thus,  the  two 
methods  of  democracy  and  dictatorship  are  already 
irreconcilably  opposed  before  the  discussion  has 
started.     The  one  demands,  the  other  forbids  it. 

In  the  meantime,  dictatorship  does  not  yet 
reign  in  our  Party;  discussion  amongst  us  is  still 
free.  And  we  consider  it  not  only  as  our  right, 
but  as  our  duty  to  express  our  opinions  freely, 
because  an  appropriate  and  fruitful  decision  is  only 
possible  after  hearing  all  the  arguments.  One 
man's  speech  is  notoriously  no  man's  speech.  Both 
sides  must  be  listened  to. 

We  will,  therefore,  examine  the  significance 
which  democracy  has  for  the  proletariat — what  we 
understand  by  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat — 
and  what  conditions  dictatorship,  as  a  form  of 
government,  creates  in  the  struggle  for  freedom  of 
the  proletariat. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Democracy  and  the  Conquest  of  Political 
Power. 

The  distinction  is  sometimes  drawn  between 
democracy  and  Socialism,  that  is,  the  socialisation 
of  the  means  of  production  and  of  production,  by 
saying  that  the  latter  is  our  goal,  the  object  of  our 
movement,  while  democracy  is  merely  the  means  to 
this  end,  which  occasionally  might  become  unsuit- 
able, or  even  a  hindrance. 

To  be  exact,  however,  Socialism  as  such  is  not 
our  goal,  which  is  the  abolition  of  every  kind  of 
exploitation  and  oppression,  be  it  directed  against 
a  class,  a  party,  a  sex,  or  a  race. 

We  seek  to  achieve  this  object  by  supporting  the 
proletarian  class  struggle,  because  the  proletariat, 
being  the  undermost  class,  cannot  free  itself  with- 
out abolishing  all  causes  of  exploitation  and 
oppression,  and  because  the  industrial  proletariat, 
of  all  the  oppressed  and  exploited  classes,  is  the  one 
which  constantly  grows  in  strength,  fighting 
capacity  and  inclination  to  carry  on  the  struggle, 
its  ultimate  victory  being  inevitable.  Therefore, 
lo-aay  every  genuine  opponent  of  exploitation  and 

THE  CONQUEST  OF  POLITICAL  POWEK         5 

oppression  must  take  part  in  the  class  struggle, 
from  whatever  class  he  may  come. 

If  in  this  struggle  we  place  the  Socialist  way  of 
production  as  the  goal,  it  is  because  in  the 
technical  and  economic  conditions  which  prevail 
to-day  SociaHstic  production  appears  to  be  the  sole 
means  of  attaining  our  object.  Should  it  be 
proved  to  us  that  we  are  wrong  in  so  doing,  and 
that  somehow  the  emancipation  of  the  proletariat 
and  of  mankind  could  be  achieved  solely  on  the 
basis  of  private  property,  or  could  be  most  easily 
realised  in  the  manner  indicated  by  Proudhon, 
then  we  would  throw  Socialism  overboard,  with- 
out in  the  least  giving  up  our  object,  and  even  in 
the  interests  of  this  object.  Socialism  and 
democracy  are  therefore  not  distinguished  by  the 
one  being  the  means  and  the  other  the  end.  Both 
are  means  to  the  same  end.  The  distinction' 
between  them  must  be  sought  elsewhere.  Socialism 
as  a  means  to  the  emancipation  of  the  proletariat, 
without  democracy,  is  unthinkable. 

Social  production,  it  is  true,  is  also  possible  in 
a  system  other  than  a  democratic  one.  In 
primitive  conditions  communistic  methods  became 
the  basis  of  despotism,  as  Engels  noted  in  1875, 
when  dealing  with  the  village  communism  which 
has  existed  in  India  and  Russia  down  to  our  own 
day. 

6    DICTA TOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

Dutch  colonial  policy  in  Java  for  a  long  time 
based  the  organisation  of  agricultural  production 
under  the  so-called  "  culture  "  system  upon  land 
communism  for  the  profit  of  the  government  who 
exploited  the  people. 

The  most  striking  example  of  a  non-democratic 
organisation  of  social  work  was  furnished  in  the 
eighteenth  century  by  the  Jesuit  State  of  Paraguay. 
There  the  Jesuits,  as  the  ruhng  class,  organised 
with  dictatorial  power  the  labour  of  the  native 
Indian  population,  in  a  truly  admirable  fashion, 
without  employing  force,  and  even  gaining  the 
attachment  of  their  subjects. 

For  modern  men,  however,  such  a  patriarchal 

regime  would  be  intolerable.      It  is  only  possible 

under  circumstances  where  the  rulers  are  vastly 

superior  to  the  ruled  in  knowledge,  and  where  the 

latter  are  absolutely  unable  to  raise  themselves  to 

an  equal  standard.       A  section  or  class  which  is 

engaged  in  a  struggle  for  freedom  cannot  regard 

such  a  system  of  tutelage  as  its  goal,   but  must 

-_^  decisively  reject  it. 

t     For  us,  therefore,  Socialism  without  democracy 

U  is    unthinkable.      We    understand     by     Modern 

yM  Socialism  not  merely  social  organisation  of  pro- 

Muction,  but  democratic  organisation  of  society  as 

well.    Accordingly,  Socialism  is  for  us  inseparably 

connected  with  democracy.    No  Socialism  without 

THE  CONQUEST  OF  POLITICAL  POWEK         7 

democracy.  But  this  proposition  is  not  equally 
true  if  reversed.  Democracy  is  quite  possible 
without  Sociahsm.  A  pure  democracy  is  even 
conceivable  apart  from  Socialism,  for  example,  m 
small  peasant  communities,  where  complete 
equality  of  economic  conditions  for  everybody 
exists  on  the  basis  of  participating  in  privately 
owned  means  of  production. 

In  any  case,  it  may  be  said  that  democracy  is 
possible  without  Socialism,  and  precedes  it.  It^is^ 
this  pre-Socialist  democracy  which  is  apparently  in 
the  minds  of  those  who  consider  that  democracy 
and  Socialism  are  related  to  each  other  as  the 
means  to  an  end,  although  they  mostly  hasten  to 
add  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  is  really  no  means  to 
an  end.  This  interpretation  must  be  most 
emphatically  repudiated,  because,  should  it  win 
general  acceptance,  it  would  lead  our  movement 
into  most  dangerous  tracks. 

Why  would  democracy  be  an  unsuitable  means 
for  the  achievement  of  Socialism? 

It  is  a  question  of  the  conquest  of  political 
power. 

It  is  said  that  if  in  a  hitherto  middle-class 
democratic  State  the  possibility  exists  of  the  Social 
Democrats  becoming  the  majority  at  an  election, 
the  ruling  classes  would  make  use  of  all  the  forces 
at  their  command  in  order  to  prevent  democracy 

8        DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

asserting  itself.  Therefore,  it  is  not  by  democracy, 
but  only  by  a  political  revolution  that  the  prole- 
tariat can  conquer  the  political  power. 

Doubtless,  in  cases  where  the  proletariat  of  a 
democratic  State  attains  to  power,  one  must  reckon 
with  attempts  of  the  ruling  classes  to  nullify  by 
violence  the  realisation  of  democracy  by  the 
rising  class.  This,  however,  does  not  prove  the 
worthlessness  of  democracy  for  the  proletariat. 
Should  a  ruling  class,  under  the  suppositions  here 
discussed,  resort  to  force,  it  would  do  so  precisely 
because  it  feared  the  consequences  of  democracy. 
And  its  violence  would  be  nothing  but  the 
subversion  of  democracy.  Therefore,  not  the  use- 
lessness  of  democracy  for  the  proletariat  is 
demonstrated  by  anticipated  attempts  of  the  ruling 
classes  to  destroy  democracy,  but  rather  the 
necessity  for  the  proletariat  to  defend  democracy 
with  tooth  and  nail.  Of  course,  if  the  proletariat  is 
told  that  democracy  is  a  useless  ornament,  the 
needful  strength  for  its  defence  will  not  be 
created.  The  mass  of  the  people  are  everywhere 
too  attached  to  their  political  rights  willingly  to 
abandon  them.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  rather  to  be 
expected  that  they  would  defend  their  rights  with 
such  vigour  that  if  the  other  side  endeavoured  to 
destroy  the  people's  privileges,  a  political  over- 
throw would  be  the  result.     The  higher  the  prole- 

THE  CONQUEST  OF  POLITICAL  POWER         9 

tariat  values  democracy,  and  the  closer  is  its 
attachment  to  its  rights,  the  more  may  one 
anticipate  this  course  of  events. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  must  not  be  thought  that 
the  forebodings  above  mentioned  will  every where__^ 
be  realised.    We  need  not  be  so  fainthearted.    The  ,  1 
more  democratic  the  State  is,  the  more  dependent^ 
are  the  forces  exerted  by  the  Executive,  even  the 
military  ones,   on  public  opinion.       These  forces 
may  become,   even  in  a  democracy,  a  means  of 
holding  down   the  proletarian   movement,    if  the 
proletariat    is   still    weak   in   numbers,    as   in   an 
agrarian    State,    or    if    it    is    politically    weak, 
because  unorganised,   and  lacking  self -conscious- 
ness.     But  if  the  proletariat  in  a  democratic  State 
grows  until  it  is  numerous  and  strong  enough  to    \ 
conquer  political    power  by  making   use   of   the 
liberties  which  exist,  then  it  would  be  a  task  of 
great  difficulty  for  the  capitalist  dictatorship  to 
manipulate  the  force  necessary  for  the  suppression 
of  democracy. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Marx  thought  it  possible, 
and  even  probable,  that  in  England  and  America 
the  proletariat  might  peacefully  conquer  political 
power.  On  the  conclusion  of  the  Congress  of  the 
Inlernational  at  the  Hague  in  1872.  Marx  spoke  at 
a  meeting,  and  among  other  things  said  : 

**The  worker  must  one  day  capture  political 

^0      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

power  in  order  to  found  the  new  organisation  of 
labour.  He  must  reverse  the  old  policy,  which 
the  old  institutions  maintain,  if  he  will  not,  like  the 
Christians  of  old  who  despised  and  neglected  such 
things,  renounce  the  things  of  this  world, 

' '  But  we  do  not  assert  that  the  way  to  reach  this 
^oal  is  the  same  everywhere. 

' '  We  know  that  the  institutions,  the  manners  and 
the  customs  of  the  various  countries  must  be  con- 
sidered, and  we  do  not  deny  that  there  are  countries 
like  England  and  America,  and,  if  I  understood 
your  arrangements  better,  I  might  even  add 
Holland,  where  the  worker  may  attain  his  object 
by  peaceful  means.  But  not  in  all  countries  is  this 
the  case." 

■^  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  Marx's  expecta- 
tions will  be  realised. 

There  are  certainly  in  the  above  named  countries 
sections  of  the  ruling  classes  whose  inclinations  to 
use  force  against  the  proletariat  grow.  But,  beside 
these  there  are  other  sections  in  whom  the  rising 
power  of  the  proletariat  gains  respect  and  evokes  a 
desire  to  keep  it  in  good  humour  by  concessions. 
Although  the  world  war,  for  the  period  of  its  dura- 
tion, has  strictly  confined  the  struggle  of  the  masses 
for  freedom  everywhere,  it  has  brought  to  the 
English  proletariat  a  considerable  extension  of 
political  power.      It  cannot  to-day  be  foreseen  how 

THE  CONQUEST  OF  POLITICAL  POWEK      11 

democracy  in  the  various  States  will  influence  the 
forms  which  the  conquest  of  political  power  by  the 
proletariat  will  take,  and  how  far  it  will  avert  the 
use  of  violent  methods  from  both  sides  and  promote 
the  use  of  peaceful  means.  In  any  case,  the  institu- 
tion of  democracy  would  not  lose  its  importance. 
In  a  democratic  republic,  where  the  people's  rights 
have  been  firmly  established  for  decades,  perhaps 
centuries,  rights  which  the  people  conquered  by 
revolution,  and  maintained  or  extended,  thus  com- 
pelling the  respect  of  the  ruling  classes  for  the 
masses,  in  such  a  community  the  forms  of  transition 
would  certainly  be  different  from  those  in  a  State 
where  a  military  despotism  has  been  accustomed  to 
rule  by  force,  and  hold  the  masses  of  the  people  in 
check. 

For  us  the  significance  of  democracy  in  the  pre- 
Socialist  period  is  not  exhausted  with  the  influence  1 
it  may  have  on  the  forms  of  transition  to  a  prole- 
tarian regime.  It  is  most  important  for  us  during 
this  period,  in  so  far  as  it  bears  on  the  ripening  of 
the  proletariat. 

CHAPTER  III. 

Democracy    and    the   Ripening  of   the 
Proletariat. 

Socialism  postulates  special  historical  conditions, 
which  render  it  possible  and  necessary.  This  is 
pretty  generally  recognised.  Yet  there  is  by  no 
means  unanimity  amongst  us  as  regards  the  condi- 
tions which  must  be  fulfilled  in  order  to  make 
modern  Socialism  possible,  should  a  country  be 
ripe  for  it.  This  divergence  on  such  an  important 
question  is  not  a  calamity,  and  so  far  as  it  causes  us 
to  be  occupied  with  the  problem  at  the  present 
time  is  a  matter  for  rejoicing.  We  are  obliged  to 
consider  this  matter  because,  for  most  of  us, 
Socialism  has  ceased  to  be  something  that  must  be 
expected  in  hundreds  of  years,  as  we  were  assured 
by  many  at  the  time  of  the  outbreak  of  war. 
Socialism  has  become  a  practical  question  on  the 
order  of  the  day. 

What,  then,  are  the  pre-requisites  for  the 
establishment  of  Socialism? 

Every  conscious  human  action  presupposes  a 
will.  The  Will  to  Socialism  is  the  first  condition  for 
its  accomphshment. 

12 

THE  RIPENING  OF  THE   PROLETARIAT       13 

This  Will  is  created  by  the  great  industry.  Where 
small  production  is  uppermost  in  a  society,  the 
masses  of  the  people  are  possessors  of  the  means  of 
production.  He  who  happens  to  be  without  property 
conceives  his  ideal  to  be  the  acquirement  of  a  small 
possession.  This  desire  may,  in  some  circum- 
stances, assume  a  revolutionary  form,  but  such  a 
social  revolution  would  not  have  a  Socialist 
character — it  would  only  redistribute  the  existing 
wealth  in  such  a  manner  that  everyone  would 
receive  a  share.  Small  production  always  creates 
the  Will  to  uphold  or  to  obtain  private  property  in 
the  means  of  production  which  are  in  vogue,  not 
the  will  to  social  property,  to  Socialism.  This 
Will  first  appears  amongst  the  masses  when  large 
scale  industry  is  akeady  much  developed,  and  its 
superiority  over  small  production  is  unquestioned ; 
when  it  would  be  a  retrograde  step,  if  it  were  pos- 
sible, to  break  up  large  scale  industry  when  the 
workers  engaged  in  the  large  industry  cannot 
obtain  a  share  in  the  means  of  production  unless 
they  take  on  a  social  form ;  when  small  production, 
so  far  as  it  exists,  steadily  deteriorates,  so  that  the 
small  producers  can  no  longer  support  themselves 
thereby.     In  this  way  the  Will  to  Socialism  grows. 

At  the  same  time,  the  material  possibilities  of  its 
achievement  increase  with  the  growth  of  the  large 
industry.  The  larger  the  number  of  producers,  and 

14       DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

the  more  independent  of  each  other  they  are,  the 
more  difficult  it  is  to  organise  them  socially.  This 
difficulty  disappears  in  the  measure  in  which  the 
number  of  producers  decreases,  and  the  relations 
between  them  become  more  close  and  uniform. 
Finally,  alongside  of  the  will  to  Socialism,  and  its 
material  conditions — the  raw  material  of  Socialism 
— the  strength  to  realise  it  must  also  exist.  Those 
who  want  Socialism  must  become  stronger  than 
those  who  do  not  want  it. 

This  factor,  too,  is  created  by  the  development 

j  of  the  large  industry,  w^hich  causes  an  increase  in 

l^the  number  of  proletarians — those  who  have  an 
interest  in  Socialism — and  a  decrease  in  the  number 

i  of  capitalists,  that  is  a  decrease  as  compared  with 
the  number  of  proletarians.  In  comparison  with 
the  non-proletarian  classes,  the  small  peasants  and 
lower  middle  classes,  the  number  of  capitalists  may 
increase  for  some  time.  But  the  proletariat 
increases  more  rapidly  than  any  other  class  in  the 
State. 

/  These  factors  are  the  direct  outcome  of  the 
economic  development.  They  do  not  arise  of 
themselves,  without  human  co-operation,  but  they 
arise  without  proletarian  co-operation,  solely 
through  the  operations  of  the  capitalists,  who  have 
an  interest  in  the  growth  of  their  large  industry. 
This  development  is  in  the  first  place  industrial,  and 

THE  EIPENING  OF  THE  PKOLETAEIAT       15 

confined  to  the  towns.  The  agrarian  development 
is  only  a  weak  echo  of  it.  Socialism  will  come  from 
the  towns  and  from  industry,  but  not  from  agri- 
culture .  For  its  realisation  yet  another — a  fourth — 
factor  is  needful  besides  those  already  mentioned. 
The  proletariat  must  not  only  have  an  interest  in  the 
establishment  of  Socialism,  it  must  not  merely  have 
the  material  conditions  for  Socialism  ready  to 
hand,  and  possess  the  strength  to  make  use  of  them ; 
^  it  must  also  have  the  capacity  to  retain  its  hold  of  v 
them,  and  properly  to  employ  them.  Only  then 
can  Socialism  be  realised  as  a  permanent  method  of 
production. 

To  the  ripening  of  the  conditions,  the  necessary 
level  of  the  industrial  development,  must  be  added 
the  maturity  of  the  proletariat,  in  order  to  make 
Socialism  possible.  This  factor  will  not,  however, 
be  created  by  the  efforts  of  the  capitalist  to  obtain 
rent,  interest  and  profit,  without  the  co-operation 
of  the  proletariat.  It  must,  on  the  contrary,  be 
obtained  by  the  exertions  of  the  proletariat  in 
opposition  to  the  capitalist. 

Under  the  system  of  small  production  those 
without  property  fall  into  two  sections.  For  one 
of  them,  viz.,  apprentices  and  peasants'  sons,  their 
lack  of  property  is  only  a  temporary  condition. 
The  members  of  this  class  expect  one  day 
to    become    possessors    and    have     an    interest 

16       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

in  private  property.  The  other  section  of 
the  class  without  property  are  the  vagabonds, 
who  are  unnecessary  and  even  harmful  parasites  on 
society,  without  education,  without  self-conscious- 
ness, without  cohesion.  When  a  chance  offers 
itself,  they  are  quite  ready  to  expropriate  the 
possessors,  but  they  neither  want  nor  are  able  to 
construct  a  new  social  order. 

The  capitalist  method  of  production  makes  use 
of  this  propertyless  class  of  vagabonds,  whose 
numbers  assume  large  proportions  in  the  beginning 
of  the  capitalist  system.  Out  of  superfluous,  even 
dangerous  parasites,  they  are  transformed  into  the 
indispensable  economic  foundations  of  production, 
and  therefore  of  society.  Capitalism  increases 
their  numbers  and  multiplies  their  strength,  but  it 
exploits  their  ignorance,  rawness  and  incapacity. 
It  even  seeks  to  depress  the  working  classes  to  their 
level.  By  overwork,  monotony  and  dulness  of 
toil,  labour  of  women  and  children,  capitalism  even 
presses  the  working  classes  below  the  level  of  the 
former  vagabond  class.  The  impoverishment  of 
the  proletariat  increases  in  an  alarming  degree. 

From  it,  however,  the  first  striving  towards 
Socialism  appears  as  an  effort  to  make  an  end  of  the 
growing  poverty  of  the  masses.  It  seemed,  how- 
ever, that  this  poverty  must  render  the  proletariat 
for  ever  incapable  of  emancipating  itself.     Middle- 

THE  EIPENING  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT       17 

class  sympathy  must  save  it,  and  bring  Socialism 
about. 

It  is  soon  apparent  that  nothing  can  be  expected 
from  this  sympathy.  Sufficient  strength  to 
accomphsh  Socialism  can  only  be  expected  from 
those  whose  interests  lie  that  way,  that  is  the  J 
proletarians.  But  were  not  they  perishing  without 
hope? 

Not  all,  in  fact.      There  were  particular  sections    1 
which  had  shown  strength  and  courage  to  fight 
against  poverty.    This  small  fraction  would  do  what 
the  Utopians  were  not  capable  of  doing. 

By  a  sudden  stroke  it  would  capture  the  powers 
of  the  State,  and  bring  Socialism  to  the  people. 
This  was  the  conception  of  Blanqui  and  Weitling. 
The  proletariat,  which  was  too  ignorant  and 
demoralised  to  organise  and  rule  itself,  should  be 
organised  and  ruled  by  a  government  comprised  of 
its  educated  elite,  something  like  the  Jesuits  in 
Paraguay  who  had  organised  and  governed  the 
Indians. 

Weitling  foresaw  the  dictatorship  of  a  single 
person,  who  would  carry  through  Socialism  at  the 
head  of  a  victorious  revolutionary  army.  He 
called  him  a  Messiah. 

"  I  see  a  new  Messiah  coming  with  the  sword,  to 
carry  into  effect  the  teachings  of  the  first.  By  his 
courage  he  will  be  placed  at  the  head  of  the  revolu- 

18       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

tionary  army,  and  with  its  help  he  will  crumble  the 
decayed  structure  of  the  old  social  order,  arid  drown 
the  sources  of  tears  in  the  ocean  of  forgetfulness, 
and  transform  the  earth  into  a  paradise." — 
(Guarantees  of  Harmony  and  Freedom.) 

A  generous  and  enthusiastic  anticipation.  It  is 
based,  however,  solely  upon  the  expectation  that 
the  revolutionary  army  will  find  the  right  man.  But 
suppose  one  is  not  disposed  to  accept  this  belief  in 
a  coming  Messiah,  and  holds  the  conviction  that 
unless  the  proletariat  can  free  itself  Sociahsm  must 
remain  an  Utopia? 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  proletariat  has  not 
attained  to  the  capacity  for  self-government  in  any 
of  the  organisations  with  which  it  is  concerned,  is 
not  the  hopelessness  of  Socialism,  in  fgfce  of  the 
impoverishment  of  the  workers  by  capitalism, 
thereby  demonstrated? 

So  it  would  appear.  Yet  practice  and  theory 
soon  showed  a  way  out.  In  England  the  industrial 
proletariat  first  became  a  mass  movement,  there  it 
found  some  instalment  of  democratic  rights,  some 
possibilities  of  organisation  and  of  propaganda,  and 
was  stirred  into  motion  by  being  summoned  to  the 
aid  of  the  middle  class  in  the  struggle  with  the 
nobles  for  the  franchise. 

Among  the  Ti-ade  Unions  and  the  Chartists  the 
beginnings  of  the  Labour  movement  first  arose,  with 

THE  EIPENING  OF  THE  PEOLETAEIAT      19 

the  resistance  offered  by  the  proletariat  to  its 
impoveiishment  and  disfranchisement.  It  •com- 
menced its  strikes,  and  its  great  fight  for  the 
suffrage  and  the  normal  working  day. 

Marx  and  Engels  early  recognised  the  signifi- 
cance of  this  movement.  It  was  not  the  *'  theory 
of  impoverishment ' '  which  characterised  Marx  and 
Engels.  They  held  this  in  common  with  other 
Socialists,  but  were  superior  to  them  by  not  only 
recognising  the  capitalist  tendency  towards 
impoverishment,  but  also  the  proletarian  counter 
tendency,  and  in  this,  in  the  class  struggle,  they 
recognised  the  gi'eat  factor  which  would  uplift  the 
proletariat,  and  give  it  the  capacity  which  it  needs 
if  it  is  not  merely  to  grasp  political  power  by  the 
luck  of  an  accident,  but  is  to  be  in  a  position  to 
make  itself  master  of  that  power,  and  to  use  it. 

The  proletarian  class  struggle,  as  a  struggle  of 
the  masses,  presupposes  democracy.  If  not 
absolute  and  pure  democracy,  yet  so  much  of 
democracy  as  is  necessary  to  organise  masses,  and 
give  them  uniform  enlightenment.  This  cannot  be 
adequately  done  by  secret  methods.  A  few  fly 
sheets  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  an  extensive  daily 
Press.  Masses  cannot  be  organised  secretly,  and, 
above  all,  a  secret  organisation  cannot  be  a 
democratic  one.  It  always  leads  to  the  dictatorship 
of  a  single  man,  or  of  a  small  knot  of  leaders.    T!if» 

■i- 

20      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARUT 

ordinary  members  can  only  become  instruments  for 
carrying  out  orders.  Such  a  method  may  be 
rendered  necessary  for  an  oppressed  class  m  the 
absence  of  democracy,  but  it  would  not  promote  the 
/  self-government  and  independence  of  the  masses. 
Rather  would  it  further  the  Messiah-consciousness 
of  leaders,  and  their  dictatorial  habits. 

The  same  Weitling,  who  gave  such  prominence  to 
the  function  of  a  Messiah,  spoke  most  contemp- 
tuously of  democracy. 

"  Communists  are  still  pretty  undecided  about 
the  choice  of  their  form  of  government.  A  large 
part  of  those  in  France  incline  to  a  dictatorship, 
because  they  well  know  that  the  sovereignty  of  the 
people,  as  understood  by  republicans  and  politi- 
cians, is  not  suited  for  the  period  of  transition  from 
the  old  to  a  completely  new  organisation.  Owen, 
the  chief  of  the  English  Communists,  would  have 
the  performance  of  specified  duties  allotted  to  men 
according  to  age,  and  the  chief  leaders  of  a  govern- 
ment would  be  the  oldest  members  of  it.  All 
Socialists  with  the  exception  of  the  followers  of 
Fourier,  to  whom  all  forms  of  government  are  the 
same,  are  agreed  that  the  form  of  government  which 
is  called  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  a  very 
unsuitable,  and  even  dangerous,  sheet  anchor  for 
the  young  principle  of  Communism  about  to  be 
reaHsed.'* 

THE  BIPENING  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT       21 

Weitling  goes  further.  He  will  have  nothing  of 
democracy,  even  in  a  Socialist  community. 

* '  If  the  idea  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  to   | 
be  appHed,  all  must  rule.      This  can  never  be  the     \ 
case,  and  it  is,  therefore,  not  the  sovereignty  of     I 
the  people,  but  the  chance  sovereignty  of  some  of 
the  people." 

Weitling  wanted  the  greatest  geniuses  to  govern. 
They  would  be  selected  in  a  competition  by 
scientific  assemblies. 

I  have  quoted  Weitling  in  detail  in  order  to  show 
that  the  contempt  for  democracy,   which  is  now 
recommended  to  us  as  the  highest  wisdom,  is  quite    | 
an  old  conception,  and  corresponds  to  a  primitive    \ 
stage  in  the  working-class  movement.    At  the  same 
time   that   Weitling    poured    scorn    on   Universal   • 
Suffrage  and  freedom  of  the  Press,  the  workers  of 
England  were  fighting  for  these  rights,  and  Marx      i> 
and  Engels  ranged  themselves  by  their  side.  ' 

Since  then  the  working  classes  of  the  whole  of 
Europe,  in  numerous — often  bloody — struggles, 
have  conquered  one  instalment  of  democracy  after 
the  other,  and  by  their  endeavours  to  win,  maintain 
and  extend  democracy,  and  by  constantly  making 
use  of  each  instalment  for  organisation,  for  pro- 
paganda, and  for  wresting  social  reforms,  have 
they  grown  in  maturity  from  year  to  year,  and  from 

22       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

the  lowest  have  become  the  highest  placed  section 
of  the  masses  of  the  people. 

Has  the  proletariat  already  attained  the  maturity 
which  Socialism  postulates?  And  are  the  other 
conditions  now  in  existence  ?  These  questions  are 
to-day  much  disputed,  the  answers  given  being  by 
some  as  decisively  in  the  affirmative  as  by  others  in 
the  negative.  Both  answers  seem  to  me  rather 
over  hasty.  Ripeness  for  Socialism  is  not  a  condi- 
tion which  lends  itself  to  statistical  calculation 
before  the  proof  can  be  put  to  the  test.  In  any 
case,  it  is  wrong,  as  so  often  happens  in  discussing 
this  question,  to  put  the  material  pre-requisites  of 
Socialism  too  much  in  the  foreground.  No  doubt, 
without  a  certain  development  of  the  large  industry 
no  Socialism  is  possible,  but  when  it  is  asserted  that 
Socialism  would  only  become  practicable  when 
capitalism  is  no  more  in  a*  position  to  expand,  all 
proof  of  this  is  lacking.  It  is  correct  to  say  that 
Socialism  would  be  the  more  easily  realisable  the 
more  developed  the  large  industry  is,  and  therefore 
the  more  compact  the  productive  forces  are  v/hich 
must  be  socially  organised. 

Yet  this  is  only  relevant  to  the  problem,  when  it 
is  considered  from  the  standpoint  of  a  particular 
State.  The  simplification  of  the  problem  in  this 
form  is,  however,  counteracted  by  the  fact  that  the 
growth  of  the  large  industry  is  accompanied  by  an 

THE  KIPENING  OF  THE  PROLETAEIAT       23 

expansion  of  its  markets,  the  progress  of  the 
division  of  labour  and  of  international  communica- 
tions, and  therewith  the  constant  widening  and 
C increasing  complication  of  the  problem  of  the 
social  organisation  of  production.  There  is,  indeed, 
no  reason  for  believing  that  the  organisation  of  the 
largest  part  of  production  for  social  ends,  by  the 
State,  Municipalities,  and  Co-operative  Societies,  is 
not  already  possible  in  modern  industrial  States, 
with  their  banking  facilities  and  their  machinery  for 
the  conduct  of  businesses. 

The  decisive  factor  is  no  longer  the  material,  but 
the  personal  one.     Is  the  proletariat  strong  and     i 
intelligent  enough  to  take  in  hand  the  regulation  of 
society,  that  is,  does  it  possess  the  power  and  the 
capacity  to  transfer  democracy  from  politics  to 
economics?      This  cannot  be  foretold  with  cer- 
tainty.   The  factor  in  question  is  one  which  is  in 
different  stages  of  development  in  different  coun-^/^ 
tries,  and  it  fluctuates  considerably  at  various  times    ) 
in    the    same    country.     Adequate    strength    and 
'•apacity    are    relative    conceptions.      The    same 
measure  of  strength  may  be   insufficient   to-day, 
when   the  opponents  are   strong,   but   to-morrow 
quite  adequate,  when  they  have  suffered  a  moral,     / 
economic  or  military  collapse. 

The  <?ame  measure  of  capacity  might  be  quite 
inadequate  to-day  should  power  be  attained  m  a 

24      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PROLETAKIAT 

highly  compHcated  situation,  and  yet  to-morrow  it 
could  be  equal  to  all  demands  made  on  it,  if  mean- 
while   conditions    have    simplified    and    become 
^_  stabler. 

,'     X^  In  every  case  only  practice  can   show  if  the 

'       proletariat    is    already    sufficiently    mature    for 

Socialism.     We   can  only   say  the  following  for 

V;  certain.    The  proletariat  grows  always  in  numbers, 

jlstrength  and  intelligence,  it  is  ever  approaching  the 

'j climax  of  its  development. 

It  is  not  definite  enough  to  say  that  the  latter 

phase  will  be  reached  when  the  proletariat  forms  the 

majority  of  the  people,  and  when  the   majority 

announce   their  adhesion  to    Socialism.      On  the 

other  hand,  it  may  be  confidently  said  that  a  people 

is  not  yet  ripe  for  Socialism  so  long  as  the  majority 

of  the  masses  are  hostile  to  Socialism,  and  will  have 

nothing  of  it. 

.      So  here  again  democracy  not  only  matures  the 

y  Iproletariat    the   soonest,   but  gives   the   quickest 

indications  of  this  process. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  Effects  of  Democracy. 

The  modern  State  is  a  rigidly  centralised  organism^ 
an  organisation  comprising  the  greatest  power 
within  modern  society,  and  influencing  in  the  most 
effective  way  the  fate  of  each  individual,  as  is 
especially  obvious  in  time  of  war. 

The  State  is  to-day  what  the  family  and  com-  • 
munity  used  to  be  for  the  individual.  If  com- 
munities were  in  their  way  democratically 
organised,  the  power  of  the  State,  on  the  contrary, 
including  the  bureaucracy  and  the  army,  looms  over 
the  people,  even  gaining  such  strength  that  at  times 
it  acquires  an  ascendancy  over  the  classes  which 
are  socially  and  economically  dominant,  thus  con-  } 
stituting  itself  an  absolute  government.  Yet  this  ' 
latter  condition  is  nowhere  lasting.  The  absolute 
rule  of  bureaucracy  leads  to  its  ossification  and  its 
[absorption  into  endless  time-wasting  formulas,  and 
jthat  just  at  the  time  when  industrial  capitalism  is 
(developing,  when  the  revolutionary  methods  of 
production  which  arise  from  it  subject  all  economic 
and   social    conditions   to   constant    change,    and 

i  25 

26       DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETAEIAT 

impart  a  quicker  movement  to  industrial  life,  thus 
requiring  the  speediest  political  adjustments. 

The  absolute  rule  of  bureaucracy,  therefore, 
leads  to  arbitrariness  and  stultification,  but  a  system 
of  production  like  capitalism,  in  which  each  pro- 
ducer is  dependent  upon  numerous  others  needs 
for  its  prosperity  the  security  and  legality  of  social 
relations.  The  absolute  State  gets  into  conflict  with 
the  productive  forces,  and  becomes  a  fetter  on 
them.  It  is,  then,  urgently  necessary  for  the 
executive  to  be  subjected  to  public  criticism,  for 
free  organisations  of  citizens  to  counterbalance  the 
power  of  the  State,  for  self-government  in  munici- 
palities and  provinces  to  be  established,  for  the 
power  of  law-making  to  be  taken  from  the 
bureaucracy,  and  put  under  the  control  of  a  central 
assembly,  freely  chosen  by  the  people,  that  is  a 
Parliament.  The  control  of  the  Government  is  the 
most  important  duty  of  Parliament,  and  in  this  it 
can  be  replaced  by  no  other  institution.  It  is  con- 
ceivable, though  hardly  practicable,  for  the  law- 
making power  to  be  taken  from  the  bureaucracy, 
and  entrusted  to  various  committees  of  experts, 
which  would  draft  the  laws  and  submit  them  to  the 
people  for  their  decision.  The  activities  of  the 
executive  can  only  be  supervised  by  another  cen- 
tral body,  and  not  by  an  unorganised  and  formless 
mass  of  people. 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCKACY  27 

The  attempts  to  overcome  the  absolute  power  of 
the  State,  as  here  described,  are  made  by  all  classes 
in  a  modern  State,  with  the  exception  of  those 
which  may  share  in  its  power,  that  is  all  except 
bureaucrats,  court  nobles,  the  State  Church,  as  well 
as  the  gi'eat  bankers  who  do  a  lucrative  business 
with  the  Stale. 

Before  the  united  pressure  of  the  other  classes, 
which  may  include  the  landed  gentry,  the  lower 
clergy,  the  industrial  capitalists,  the  absolute 
regime  must  give  way.  In  a  greater  or  lesser 
degree  it  must  concede  freedom  of  the  Press,  of 
public  meeting,  of  organisation,  and  a  Parliament. 
All  the  States  of  Europe  have  successfully  passed 
through  this  development. 

Every  class  will,  however,  endeavour  to  shape 
the  new  form  of  the  State  in  a  manner  correspond- 
ing to  its  particular  interests.  This  attempt  is 
especially  manifested  in  the  struggle  over  ■  the 
character  of  the  Parliament,  that  is  in  the  fight  for 
the  franchise.  The  watchword  of  the  lower  classes, 
of  the  people,  is  Universal  Suffrage.  Not  only  the 
wage-earner,  but  the  small  peasant  and  the  lower 
middle  classes  have  an  interest  in  the  franchise. 

Everywhere  and  under  all  circumstances  these 

lasses  form  the  great  majority  of  the  population. 

Whether  the  proletariat  is  the  predominant  class 

amongst    these    depends    on    the    extent    of    the 

28      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

economic  development,  although  this  factor  does 
not  determine  whether  the  proletariat  comprises  the 
majority  of  the  population.  The  exploiters  are 
always  a  small  minority  of  the  population. 

In  the  long  run  no  modern  State  can  withstand 
the  pressure  of  these  classes,  and  anything  short  of 
general  suffrage  in  our  society  to-day  would  be  an 
absurdity.  In  capitalist  society,  with  its  con- 
stantly changing  conditions,  the  classes  cannot  be 
stereotyped  in  fixed  grooves.  All  social  conditions 
are  in  a  state  of  flux.     A  franchise  based  on  status 

.  is  consequently  excluded.  A  class  which  is  not 
organised  as  such  is  a  formless  fluctuating  mass, 
whose  exact  boundaries  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
mark.  A  class  is  an  economic  entity,  not  a  legal 
one.    Class-membership  is  always  changing.   Many 

A  handworkers  who,  under  the  regime  of  small 
industry,  think  they  are  possessors,  feel  like  prole- 
tarians under  large  industry,  and  are  really  prole- 
tarians even  when  for  purposes  of  statistics  they  are 
included  with  the  possessing  classes  and  inde- 
pendent producers.  There  is  also  no  franchise 
based  on  the  census  which  would  secure  to  the 
possessing  classes  a  lasting  monopoly  of  Parliament. 
It  would  be  upset  by  every  depreciation  in  money 
values.  Finally,  a  franchise  based  on  education 
would  be  even  more  futile,  in  view  of  the  progress 
of  culture   amongst  the  masses.       Thus  various 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCRACY  29 

factors  combine  to  render  general  suffrage  the  only 
solution  in  the  society  of  to-day,  and  bring  the 
question  more  and  more  to  the  front.  Above  all, 
it  is  the  only  rational  solution  from  the  standpomt 
of  the  proletariat  as  the  lowest  class  of  the  popula- 
tion. The  most  effective  weapon  of  the  proletariat 
is  its  numerical  strength.  It  cannot  emancipate 
itself  until  it  has  become  the  largest  class  of  the 
population,  and  until  capitalist  society  is  so  far 
developed  that  the  small  peasants  and  the  lower 
middle  classes  no  longer  overweight  the  prole- 
tariat. 

The  proletariat  has  also  an  interest  in  the  fact 
that  the  suffrage  should  not  only  be  universal  and 
equal,  but  also  non-discriminatory,  so  that  men  and 
women,  or  wage  earners  and  capitalists,  do  not  vote 
in  separate  sections.  Such  a  method  would  not 
only  involve  the  danger  that  particular  sections,  who 
belong  to  the  proletariat  in  reality,  but  are  not  wage 
earners  in  form,  would  be  separated  from  it,  but 
it  would  also  have  the  still  worse  result  of  narrowing 
the  outlook  of  the  proletariat.  For  its  great 
historical  mission  consists  in  the  fact  that  the 
collective  interests  of  society  fall  into  line  with  its 
permanent  class  interests,  which  are  not  always  the 
same  thing  as  special  sectional  interests.  It  is  a 
symptom  of  the  maturity  of  the  proletariat  when  its 
class  consciousness  is  raised  to  the  highest  point  by 

30      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

its  grasp  of  large  social  relations  and  ends.  This 
understanding  is  only  made  completely  clear  by 
scientific  Socialism,  not  only  by  theoretical  teach- 
ing, but  by  the  habit  of  regarding  things  as  a  whole 
instead  of  looking  at  special  interests  which  are 
furthered  and  extended  by  engaging  in  political" 
action.  Confining  the  outlook  to  trade  interests 
narrows  the  mind,  and  this  is  one  of  the  draw- 
backs to  mere  Trade  Unionism.  Herein  lies  the 
superiority  of  the  organisation  of  the  Social 
Democratic  Party,  and  also  the  superiority  of  a 
nondiscriminatory,  as  compared  with  a  franchise 
which  divides  the  electors  into  categories. 

In  the  struggle  for  the  political  rights  referred  to 
modern  democracy  arises,  and  the  proletariat 
matures.  At  the  same  time  a  new  factor  appears, 
viz.,  the  protection  of  minorities,  the  opposition  in 
the  State.  Democracy  signifies  rule  of  majority,  but 
not  less  the  protection  of  minorities. 

The  absolute  rule  of  bureaucracy  strives  to  obtain 
for  itself  permanency.  The  forcible  suppression  of 
all  opposition  is  its  guiding  principle.  Almost 
everywhere  it  must  do  this  to  prevent  its  power 
being  forcibly  broken.  It  is  otherwise  with 
democracy,  which  means  the  rule  of  majorities. 
But  majorities  change.  In  a  democracy  no  regime 
can  be  adapted  to  long  duration. 

Even  the  relative  strength  of  classes  is  not  a  fixed 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCEACY  31 

quantity,  at  least  in  the  capitalist  era.  But  the 
strength  of  parties  changes  even  quicker  than  the 
strength  of  classes,  and  it  is  parties  which  aspire  to 
power  in  a  democracy. 

It  musti  not  here  be  forgotten,  what  so  often 
'happens,  that  the  abstract  simpUfication  of  theory, 
although  necessary  to  a  clear  understanding  of 
realities  is  only  true  in  the  last  resort,  and  between 
it  and  actualities  there  are  many  intervening 
factors.  A  class  can  rule,  but  not  govern,  for  a . 
class  is  a  formless  mass,  while  only  an  organisation^-, 
can  govern.  It  is  the  political  parties  which  govern  / 
in  a  democracy.  A  party  is,  however,  not 
synonymous  with  a  class,  although  it  may,  in  the 
first  place,  represent  a  class  interest.  One  and  the 
same  class  interest  can  be  represented  in  very 
different  ways,  by  various  tactical  methods. 
According  to  their  variety,  the  representatives  of ; 
the  same  class  interests  are  divided  into  different  ^ 
parties.  Above  all,  the  deciding  factor  is  the 
position  in  relation  to  other  classes  and  parties. 
Only  seldom  does  a  class  dispose  of  so  much  power 
that  it  can  govern  the  State  by  itself.  If  a  class 
attains  power,  and  finds  that  it  cannot  keep  it  by  its 
own  strength,  it  seeks  for  allies.  If  such  allies  are 
forthcoming,  various  opinions  and  standpoints 
prevail  amongst  the  representatives  of  the  dominant 
claPs  interests.  • ^ 

32       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETARIAT 

In  this  way,  during  the  eighteenth  century  Whigs 
and  Tories  represented  the  same  landed  interest, 
but  one  party  endeavoured  to  further  it  by 
aUiance  with  the  middle  classes  of  the  towns  at  the 
expense  of  the  Throne  and  its  resources,  while  the 
other  party  conceived  the  Monarchy  to  be  its 
strongest  support.  Similarly  to-day  in  England  and 
also  elsewhere,  Liberals  and  Conservatives  repre- 
sent the  same  capitalist  interests.  But  the  one 
thinks  they  will  be  best  served  by  an  alliance  with 
the  landed  class,  and  forcible  suppression  of  the 
working  classes,  while  the  other  fears  dire  conse- 
quences from  this  policy,  and  strives  to  conciliate 
the  working  classes  by  small  concessions  at  the 
expense  of  the  landed  class. 

As  with  the  socially  and  economically  ruling 
classes  and  their  parties,  so  it  is  with  the  aspiring 
class  and  its  parties. 

■  V  Parties  and  classes  are  therefore  not  necessarily 
coterminous.  A^  class  can  split  up  into  various 
j  parties,  and  a  party  may  consist  of  members  of 
various  classes.  A  class  may  still  remain  the 
rulers,  while  changes  occur  in  the  governing  party, 
if  the  majority  of  the  ruling  class  considers  the 
methods  of  the  existing  governing  party  unsuitable, 
and  that  of  its  opponents  to  be  more  appropriate. 

Government  by  parties  in  a  democracy  changes 
more  rapidly  than  the  rule  of  classes.    Under  these 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCKACY  33 

circumstances,  no  party  is  certain  of  retaining 
power,  and  must  always  count  on  the  possibility  of 
being  in  the  minority,  but  by  virtue  of  the  nature  of 
the  State  no  party  need  remain  in  a  minority  for 
ever. 

These  conditions  account  for  the  growing  practice 
of  protecting  minorities  in  a  democracy.  The 
deeper  the  roots  which  a  democracy  has  struck,  and 
the  longer  it  has  lasted  and  influenced  political 
customs,  the  more  effective  is  the  minority,  and  the 
more  successfully  it  can  oppose  the  pretensions  of 
any  party  which  seeks  to  remain  in  power  at  all 
costs. 

What  significance  the  protection  of  minorities  has 
for  the  early  stages  of  the  SociaHst  Party,  which 
everywhere  started  as  a  small  minority,  and  how 
much  it  has  helped  the  proletariat  to  mature,  is 
clear.  In  the  ranks  of  the  Socialist  Party  the  pro- 
tection of  minorities  is  very  important.  Every  new  "^ 
doctrine,  be  it  of  a  theoretical  or  a  tactical  nature, 
is  represented  in  the  first  place  by  minorities.  If 
these  are  forcibly  suppressed,  instead  of  being  dis- 
cussed, the  majority  is  spared  much  trouble  an  A 
inconvenience.  Much  unnecessary  labour  migh.t 
be  saved — a  doctrine  does  not  mean  pro- 
gress because  it  is  new  and  championed  by  a 
minority.    Most  of  what  arises  as  new  thought  has 

34       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

already  been  discussed  long  before,  and  recognised 
as  untenable,  either  by  practice  or  by  refutation. 

Ignorance  is  always  bringing  out  old  wares  as  if 
they  were  something  new.  Other  new  ideas  may 
be  original,  but  put  in  a  perverted  shape.  Although 
only  a  few  of  the  new  ideas  and  doctrines  may  spell 
real  progress,  yet  progress  is  only  possible  through 
new  ideas,  which  at  the  outset  are  put  forward  by 
minorities.  The  suppression  of  the  new  ideas  of 
minorities  in  the  Party  would  only  cause  harm  to 
Ae  proletarian  class  struggle,  and  an  obstacle  to 
the  development  of  the  proletariat.  The  world  is 
always  bringing  us  against  new  problems,  which 
are  not  to  be  solved  by  the  existing  methods. 

Tedious  as  it  may  be  to  sift  the  wheat  from  the 
chaff,  this  is  an  unavoidable  task  if  our  movement 
is  not  to  stagnate,  and  is  to  rise  to  the  height  of  the 
tasks  before  it.  And  what  is  needful  for  a  party  is 
also  needful  for  the  State.  Protection  of  minorities 
is  an  indispensable  condition  for  democratic 
development,  and  no  less  important  than  the  rule  of 
the  majority. 

Another  characteristic  of  democracy  is  here 
brought  in  view,  which  is  the  form  it  gives  to  the 
class  struggle. 

In  1893  and  in  1900 1  have  already  discussed  this 
matter,  and  give  below  some  quotations  from  my 
writings : 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCEACY  35 

"  Freedom  of  combination  and  of  the  Press  and 
universal  suffrage  (under  circumstances,  even  con- 
scription) are  not  only  weapons  which  are  secured 
to  the  proletariat  in  the  modern  State  by  the  revo- 
lutionary struggle  of  the  middle  class,  but  these 
institutions  throw  on  the  relative  strength  of  parties 
and  classes,  and  on  the  mental  energy  which 
vitahses  them  a  Hght  which  is  absent  in  the  time  of 
Absolutism.  At  that  time  the  ruling,  as  well  as 
the  revolutionary,  classes  were  fighting  in  the  dark. 
As  every  expression  of  opposition  was  rendered 
impossible,  neither  the  Government  nor  the  Kevo- 
lutionists  were  aware  of  their  strength.  Each  of 
the  two  sides  was  thus  exposed  to  the  danger  of 
over-estimating  its  strength,  so  long  as  it  refrained 
from  measuring  itself  in  a  struggle  with  the 
opponent,  and  of  under-estimating  its  strength  the 
moment  it  suffered  a  single  defeat,  and  then  chrew 
its  arms  away. 

"This  is  really  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why,  in 
the  revolutionary  period  of  the  middle  class,  so 
many  institutions  collapsed  at  one  blow,  and  so 
many  governments  were  overthrown  at  a  smgle 
stroke,  and  it  also  explains  all  the  vicissitudes  of 
revolution  and  counter-revolution. 

"  It  is  quite  different  to-day,  at  least  in  countries 
which  possess  some  measure  of  democratic  govern- 
ment.      These  democratic  institutions  have  been 

36      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

called  the  safety  valve  of  society.  It  is  quite  fulse 
to  say  that  the  proletariat  in  a  democracy  ceases  to 
be  revolutionary,  that  it  is  contented  with  giving 
public  expression  to  its  indignation  and  its  suffer- 
ings, and  renounces  the  idea  of  social  and  political 
revolution.  Democracy  cannot  remove  the  class 
antagonisms  of  capitalist  society,  nor  prevent  the 
overthrow  of  that  society,  which  is  their  inevitable 
outcome.  But  if  it  cannot  prevent  the  Eevolution, 
it  can  avoid  many  reckless  and  premature  attempts 
at  revolution,  and  render  many  revolutionary 
movements  unnecessary.  It  gives  a  clear  indica- 
tion of  the  relative  strength  of  classes  and  parties ; 
it  does  not  do  away  with  their  antagonism,  nor 
does  it  avoid  the  ultimate  outcome  of  their  struggle, 
but  it  serves  to  prevent  the  rising  classes  from 
attempting  tasks  to  which  they  are  not  equal,  and  it 
also  restrains  the  ruling  classes  from  refusing  con- 
cessions when  they  no  longer  have  the  strength  to 
maintain  such  refusal.  The  direction  of  evolution 
is  not  thereby  altered,  but  the  pace  is  made  more 
even  and  steady.  The  coming  to  the  front  of  the 
proletariat  in  a  State  with  some  measure  of 
democratic  government  will  not  be  marked  by  such 
a  striking  victory  as  attended  the  middle  classes  in 
their  revolutionary  period,  nor  will  it  be  exposed 
to  a  violent  overthrow. 
•  *  *  Since  the  rise  of  the  modern  Social  Democi  atic 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCEACY  37 

working-class  movement  in  the  sixties,  the 
European  proletariat  has  only  suffered  one  great 
defeat,  in  the  Paris  Commune  of  1871.  At  the 
time  France  was  still  suffering  from  the  conse- 
quences of  the  Empire,  which  had  withheld  real 
democratic  institutions  from  the  people,  the 
French  proletariat  had  only  attained  to  the  slij^htest 
degree  of  class-consciousness,  and  the  revolt  was 
provoked. 

The  proletarian-democratic  method  of  conduct- 
ing the  struggle  may  seem  to  be  a  slower  affair 
than  the  revolutionary  period  of  the  middle  class ; 
it  is  certainly  less  dramatic  and  striking,  but  it  also 
exacts  a  smaller  measure  of  sacrifice.  This  may 
be  quite  indifferent  to  the  finely  endowed  literary 
people  who  find  in  Socialism  an  interesting 
pastime,  but  not  to  those  who  really  carry  on  the 
fight. 

"This  so-called  peaceful  method  of  the  class/ 
struggle,  which  is  confined  to  non-mihtant  methods,. 
Parliamentarism,     strikes,     demonstrations,     the\ 
Press,  and  similar  means  of  pressure,  will  retain  ; 
its  importance  in  every  country  according  to  the/ 
effectiveness  of  the  democratic  institutions  which/ 
prevail  there,  the  degree  of  political  and  economi<| 
enlightenment,  and  the  self-mastery  of  the  people .'| 

"On  these  grounds,  I  anticipate  that  the  social   ^ 
revolution   of  the   proletariat   will    assume   quite 

405"'--'^ 

38      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

other  forms  than  that  of  the  middle  class,  and  tliat 
it  will  be  possible  to  carry  it  out  by  peaceful 
I  economic,  legal  and  moral  means,  instead  of  by 
physical  force,  in  all  places  where  democracy  has 
been  established." 

The  above  is  my  opinion  to-jjay. 

Of  course,  every  institution  has  its  bad  side,  and 
disadvantages  can  be  discovered Jii^emocracy. 

Where  the  proletariat  is  without  rights,  it  can 
develop  no  mass  organisation,  and  normally 
cannot  promote  mass  action;  there  it  is  only 
possible  for  a  handful  of  reckless  fighters  to  offer 
lasting  opposition  to  the  governing  regime.  But 
this_  elite  is  daily  confronted  with  the  necessity  of 
bringing  the  entire  system  to  an  end.  Undis- 
tracted  by  the  small  demands  of  daily  politics,  the 
mind  is  concentrated  on  the  largest  problems,  and 
learns  constantly  to  keep  in  view  the  entire 
political  and  social  relations. 

Only  a  small  section  of  the  proletariat  takes 
part  in  the  fight,  but  it  cherishes  keen  theoretical 
interest,  and  is  inspired  by  the  great  aims. 

Quite  differently  does  democracy  affect  the 
proletariat,  when  it  has  only  a  few  hours  a  day  at 
its  disposal  under  present-day  conditions.  Demo- 
cracy develops  mass  organisations  involving 
immense  administrative  work;  it  calls  on  the 
citizen  to  discuss  and  solve  numerous  questions  of 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCRACY  39 

the  day,  often  of  the  most  trivial  kind.  The  whole 
of  the  free  time  of  the  proletariat  is  more  and  more 
taken  up  with  petty  details,  and  its  attention 
occupied  by  passing  events.  The  mind  is  con-, 
tracted  within  a  narrow  circle.  Ignorance  and 
even  contempt  of  theory,  opportunism  in  place  of 
broad  principles,  tend  to  get  the  upper  hand. 
Marx  and  Engels  praised  the  theoretical  mind  of 
the  German  working  class,  in  contrast  with  the 
vvorkers  of  Western  Europe  and  America.  They 
would  to-day  find  the  same  theoretical  interest 
amongst  the  Russian  workers,  in  comparison  with 
the  Germans. 

Nevertheless,  everywhere  the  class-conscious 
proletariat  and  their  representatives  fight  for  the 
realisation  of  democracy,  and  many  of  them  have 
shed  their  life's  blood  for  it. 

They  know  that  without  democracy  nothing  can 
be  done.  The  stimulating  results  of  the  struggle 
with  a  despotism  are  confined  to  a  handful,  and  do 
not  touch  the  masses.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
degenerating  influence  of  democracy  on  the  prole- 
tariat need  not  be  exaggerated.  Often  is  it  the 
consequence  of  the  lack  of  leisure  from  which  the 
proletariat  suffers,  not  of  democracy  itself. 

It  were  indeed  extraordinary  if  the  possession  of 
freedom  necessarily  made  men  more  narrow  and 
trivial  than  its  absence.      The  more  democracy 

40       DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETARIAT 

tends  to  shorten  the  working  day,  the  greater  the 
sum  of  leisure  at  the  disposal  of  the  proletariat, 
the  more  it  is  enabled  to  combine  devotion  to  large 
problems  with  attention  to  necessary  detail.  And 
the  impulse  thereto  is  not  lacking.  For  whatever 
democracy  may  be  able  to  accomplish  it  cannot 
resolve  the  antagonisms  inherent  in  a  capitalist 
system  of  production,  so  long  as  it  refrains  from 
altering  this  system.  On  the  contrary,  the 
antagonisms  in  capitalist  society  become  more 
acute  and  tend  to  provoke  bigger  conflicts,  in  this 
way  forcing  great  problems  on  the  attention  of  the 
proletariat,  and  taking  its  mind  off  routine  and 
detail  work. 

Under  democracy  this  moral  elevation  is  no 
longer  confined  to  a  handful,  but  is  shared  in  by 
the  whole  of  the  people,  who  are  at  the  same  time 
gradually  accustomed  to  self-government  by  the 
daily  performance  of  routine  work. 

Again,  under  democracy,  the  proletariat  does 
not  always  think  and  talk  of  revolution,  as  under 
despotism.  It  may  for  years,  and  even  decades,  be 
immersed  in  detail  work,  but  everywhere  situations 
must  arise  which  will  kindle  in  it  revolutionary 
thought  and  aspirations. 

When  the  people  are  roused  to  action  under  a 
democracy,  there  is  less  danger  than  under 
despotism  that  they  have  been  prematurely  pro- 

TirE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOCRACY  41 

voked,  or  will  waste  their  energy  in  futile  efforts. 
When  victory  is  achieved,  it  will  not  be  lost,  but 
successfully  maintained.  And  that  is  better  in  the 
end  than  the  mere  nervous  excitement  of  a  fresh 
revolutionary  drama. 

CHAPTER  V. 

r^^ — , 
V  Dictatorship. 

Democracx  is  the  essential  basis  for  building  up  a 
Socialist  system  of  production.  Only  under  the 
influence  of  democracy  does  the  proletariat  attain 
that  maturity  which  it  needs  to  be  able  to  bring 
about  Socialism,  and  democracy  supplies  the  surest 
means  for  testing  its  maturity.  Between  these  two 
stages,  the  preparation  for  Socialism  and  its 
realisation,  which  both  require  democracy,  there  is 
the  transition  state  when  the  proletariat  has  con- 
quered political  power,  but  has  not  yet  brought 
about  Socialism  in  an  economic  sense.  In  this 
intervening  period  it  is  said  that  democracy  is  not 
only  unnecessary,  but  harmful. 

This  idea  is  not  new.  We  have  already  seen  it 
to  be  WeitHng's.  But  it  is  supposed  to  be  sup- 
ported by  Karl  Marx.  In  his  letter  criticising  the 
Gotha  party  programme,  written  in  May,  1876,  it 
is  stated  :  '  *  Between  capitalist  and  communist 
society  lies  the  period  of  the  revolutionary  trans- 
formation of  the  one  into  the  other.  This  requires 
a  political  transition  stage,  which  can  be  nothing 

42 

DICTATORSHIP  43 

else   than    the   revolutionary   dictatorship   of  the  1 
^proletariat." 

Marx  had  unfortunately  omitted  to  specify  more 
exactly  what  he  conceived  this  dictatorship  to  be. 
Taken  literally,  the  word  signifies  the  suspension 
of  democracy.  But  taken  literally  it  also  means 
the  sovereignty  of  a  single  person,  who  is  bound  by 
no  laws.  A  sovereignty  which  is  distinguished 
from  a  despotism  by  being  regarded  as  a  passing 
phase,  required  by  the  circumstances  of  the 
moment,  and  not  a  permanent  institution  of  the 
State. 

The   expression    ' '  Dictatorship    of   the    Prole- 
tariat," that  is  the  dictatorship   not  of  a  single 
-person,  but  of  a  class,  excludes  the  inference  that    i 
Marx  thought  of  dictatorship  in  the  Hteral  sense.      | 

He  speaks  in  the  passage  above  quoted  not  of  a 
form  of  government,  but  of  a  condition  which  must 
everywhere  arise  when  the  proletariat  has  con- 
quered pohtical  power.  That  he  was  not  thinking 
of  a  form  of  government  is  shown  by  his  opinion 
that  in  England  and  America  the  transition  might 
be  carried  out  peacefully.  Of  course.  Democracy 
does  not  guarantee  a  peaceful  transition.  But 
this  is  certainly  not  possible  without  Democracy. 

However,  to  find  out  what  Marx  thought  about 
the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  we  need  not 
have  recourse  to  speculation.       If  in  1875  Marx 

44       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

did  not  explain  in  detail  what  he  understood  by  the 
dictatorship  of  the  pix>letariat,  it  might  well 
have  been  because  he  had  expressed  himself  on  this 
matter  a  few  years  before,  in  his  study  of  the  Civil 
War  in  France.  In  that  work,  he  wrote  :  "..The 
Coinmune  was  essentially  a  government_Q£-^4he 
working  class,  the  result  of  the  struggle  of  the 
producing  class  against  the  appropriating  class,  the 
political  form  under  which  the  freedom  of  labour 
could  be  attained  being  at  length  revealed.'*  J 

^  ■   Thus    the    Paris    Commune    was,     as    Engels 
expressly  declared  in  his  introduction  to  the  third 
edition  of  Marx's  book,  "  The  Dictatorship  of  the 
i.^/;- Proletariat." 

It  was,  however,  at  the  same  time  not  tJbie 
suspension  of  democracy,  but  was  founded  on  its 
most  thoroughgoing  use,  on  the  basis  of  universal 
suffrage.  The  power  of  the  Governipent  was  sub- 
jected to  universal  suffrage. 

"  The  Commune  was  composed  of  town  coun- 
cillors, chosen  by  general  suffrage  in  the  various 
departments  of  Paris. 

' '  Universal  suffrage  was  to  serve  the  people, 
constituted  in  Communes,  as  individual  suffrage 
serves  every  other  employer  in  the  search  for  the 
workmen  and  managers  in  his  business." 

Marx  constantly  speaks  here  of  the  general 
suffrage  of  the  whole  people,  and  not  of  the  votes 

DICTATOBSHIP  45 

y^faspecially  privileged  claljs  The  dictatorship 
of  Jiie_prDletariat  was  for  him  a  condition  which 
necessarily  arose  in  a  real  democracy,  because  of 
the  overwhelming  numbers  of  the  proletariat. 

Marx  must  not,  therefore,  be  cited  by  those  who 
support  dictatorship  in  preference  to  democracy. 
Of  course,  this  does  not  prove  it  to  be  wrong. 
Only,  it  must  be  demonstrated  on  other  grounds.  _. 

In  the  examination  of  this  question,  dictatorship 
as  a  condition  must  not  be  confused  with  dictator- 
ship as  a  form  of  government,  which  alone  is 
a  subject  of  dispute  in  our  ranks.  Dictatorship  as 
a  form  of  government  means  disarming  the  opposi- 
tion, by  taking  from  them  the  franchise,  and 
Hberty  of  the  Press  and  combination.  The  question 
is  whether  the  victorious  proletariat  needs  to 
employ  these  measures,  and  whether  Socialism  is 
only  or  most  easily  realisable  with  their  aid. 

It  must  next  be  noted  that  when  we  speak  of 
dietatcH-ship  as  a  form  of  government,  we  cannot 
mean  the  dictatorship  of  a  class.  For,  as  already 
remarked,  a  class  can  only  rule,  not  govern.  If  by 
iliiitatorshij)  we  do  not  merely  signify  a  state  of 
sovereignty,  but  a  form  of  government,  then 
dictatorship  comes  to  mean  that  of  a  single  pcjrson, 
or  of  an  organisation,  not  of  the  proletariat,  but  of 
a  proletarian  party.  The  problem  is  then  com- 
plicated so  soon  as  the  proletariat  itself  ia  divided 

46       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

into  various  parties.  The  dictatorship  of  one  of 
'  Ihese  parties  is  then  no  longer  in  any  sense  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  but  a  dictatorship 
of  one  part  of  the  proletariat  over  the  other.  The 
situation  becomes  still  more  complicated  if  the 
1  Socialist  Parties  are  divided  according  to  their 
1  relations  to  non-proletarian  elements,  and  if  per- 
chance one  party  attains  to  power  by  an  alliance  of 
town  proletarians  and  peasants,  then  the  dictator- 
ship becomes  not  merely  a  dictatorship  of  pro- 
letarians over  proletarians,  but  of  proletarians  and 
peasants  over  proletarians.  The  dictatorship  of 
the  proletariat  thus  assumes  a  very  peculiar  form. 

What  are  the  grounds  for  thinking  that  the 
sovereignty  of  the  proletariat  must  necessarily 
take  a  form  which  is  incompatible  with  democracy? 

Now  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  as  a  rule 
the  proletariat  will  only  attain  to  power  when  it 
represents  the  majority  of  the  population,  or,  at 
least,  has  the  latter  behind  it.  Next  to  its  economic 
indispensability,  the  weapon  of  the  proletariat  in 
its  political  struggles  is  its  huge  numbers.  It  may 
only  expect  to  carry  the  day  against  the  resources 
of  the  ruling  classes  where  it  has  the  masses  behind 
it.  This  w'as  the  opinion  of  Marx  and  Engels,  and 
therefore  they  wrote  in  the  Communist  Manifesto  : 
*  *  All  previous  movements  were  movements  of 
minorities,  and  in  the  interests  of  minorities.   The 

DICTATORSHIP  47 

proletarian  movement  is  the  independent  move- 
ment of  the  immense  majority,  in  the  interest  of 
that  majority." 

This  was  true  also  of  the  Paris  Commune.  The 
first  act  of  the  new  revolutionary  regime  was  an 
appeal  to  the  electors.  The  ballot,  taken  under 
conditions  of  the  greatest  freedom,  gave  strong 
majorities  for  the  Commune  in  all  districts  of 
Paris.  Sixty-five  revolutionaries  were  chosen, 
against  21  of  the  Opposition,  of  whom  15  were 
distinct  reactionaries,  and  six  Radical  Republicans 
of  the  Gambetta  school.  Among  the  65  revolu- 
tionaries all  the  existing  phases  of  French 
Sociahsm  were  represented.  However  much  they 
fought  against  each  other,  no  one  exercised  a 
dictatorship  over  the  others. 

A  government  so  strongly  supported  by  the 
masses  has  not  the  least  occasion  to  interfere  with 
democracy.  It  cannot  dispense  with  the  Uc^e  of 
force  when  this  is  employed  to  suppress  demo- 
cracy. Force  can  only  be  met  by  force.  But  a 
government  which  knows  that  the  masses  are 
behind  it  would  only  use  force  to  protect  demo- 
cracy, and  not  to  subvert  it.  It  would  be  com- 
mitting suicide  to  cast  aside  such  a  strong  support 
as  universal  suffrage,  which  is  a  powerful  source 
of  moral  authority. 

The  subversion  of  democracy  by  dictatorship 

48       DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT 

can  therefore  only  be  a  matter  for  consideration  in 
exceptional  cases,  when  an  extraordinary  com- 
bination of  favourable  circumstances  enables  a 
proletarian  party  to  take  to  itself  political  power, 
while  the  majority  of  the  people  are  either  not  on 
its  side,  or  are  even  against  it. 

Amongst  a  people  who  have  been  trained  in 
pohtics  for  decades,  and  have  run  into  party 
moulds,  such  a  chance  victory  is  hardly  possible. 
It  is  only  likely  in  very  backward  conditions.  If 
in  such  a  case  universal  suffrage  goes  against  the 
Socialist  Government,  is  the  latter  now  to  do  what 
we  have  hitherto  demanded  of  every  government, 
viz.,  to  bow  to  the  will  of  the  people,  and  to 
resume  its  struggle  for  the  power  of  the  State  with 
confidence,  on  the  basis  of  democracy,  or  is  it  to 
subvert  democracy  in  order  to  hold  on  to  power? 

How   can   a   dictatorshio  remain    at   the   holm 

J. 

against  the  will  of  the  majority  of  the  people? 

Two  ways  suggest  themselves,  that  of  Jesuitism 
or  that  of  Bonapartism. 

We  have  already  referred  to  the  Jesuit  State  in 
Paraguay.  The  means  by  which  the  Jesuits  there 
maintained  their  authority  was  their  enormous 
mental  superiority  to  the  natives  organised  by 
them,  who  without  them  were  helpless. 

Can  a  Socialist  Party  acquire  such  a  superiority 
in  a  European  State?      This  is  quite  out  of  the 

DICTATORSHIP  49 

question.  No  doubt  the  proletariat,  in  the  course 
of  the  class  struggle,  raises  its  mental  stature  until 
it  is  higher  than  that  of  other  workers,  such 
as  peasants,  but  not  without  the  latter  acquiring  a 
political  interest  and  understanding  at  the  same 
time.  The  chasm  between  these  various  classes  is 
by  no  means  an  unbridgable  one. 

Alongside  of  the  classes  of  hand  workers  grows 
a  section  of  mtellectuals,  which  tends  to  become 
more  numerous  andlncreasingly  necessary  for  the 
productive  system.  Their  vocation  calls  for  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge  and  the  exercise  and 
development  of  intelligence. 

This  section  occupies  a  middle  place  between 
the  proletariat  and  the  capitalist  class.  It  is  not 
directly  interested  in  capitalism,  but  is  neverthe- 
less mistrustful  of  the  proletariat,  so  long  as  it 
does  not  consider  the  latter  to  be  capable  of  taking 
its  fate  into  its  own  hands.  Even  such  members 
of  the  cultured  classes  as  most  warmly  espouse 
the  cause  of  the  freedom  of  the  proletariat  stand 
aloof  from  the  Labour  movement  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  class  struggle.  They  only  change 
their  attitude  when  the  proletariat  shows  increasmg 
capacity  in  its  struggles.  The  confidence  in  the 
proletariat,  which  is  thus  inspired  in  intellectuals 
who  enter  the  Socialist  movement,  is  not  to  be 
confused  with  the  trust  which,   since  August  4, 

B 

J 

60      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PBOLETAEIAT 

1914,  the  Liberal  and  Centre  Parties,  and  even  the 
Government  of  Germany,  have  placed  in  the 
Governmental  Socialists. 

The  first  kind  of  confidence  is  bred  by  the  con- 
viction that  the  proletariat  has  acquired  the 
strength  and  capacity  to  free  itself.  The  second 
sort  of  confidence  comes  with  the  conviction  that 
the  Socialists  in  question  no  longer  take  the  prole- 
tariat's fight  for  freedom  seriously. 

Without  the  help,  or  in  opposition  to  the 
intellectuals.  Socialist  production  cannot  be 
instituted.  In  circumstances  where  the  majority 
of  the  population  mistrust  the  proletarian  party, 
or  stand  aloof  from  it,  this  attitude  would  be 
shared  by  the  bulk  of  the  intellectuals.  In  that 
case,  a  victorious  proletarian  party  would  not  only 
be  without  great  intellectual  superiority  to  the  rest 
of  the  people,  but  would  even  be  inferior  to  its 
opponents  in  this  regard,  although  its  outlook  iu 
general  social  matters  might  be  a  much  higher 
one. 

The  method)  of  Paraguay  is  therefore  not 
practicable  in  Europe.  There  remains  to  be  con- 
sidered the  method  adopted  by  Napoleon  the  First 
on  Brumaire  18,  1799,  and  his  nephew,  the 
third  Napoleon,  on  December  2,  1852.  This  con-  L 
sists  in  governing  by  the  aid  of  the  superiority  of  f  ' 
a    centralised    organisation    to    the    unorganised 

DICTATORSHIP  51 

masses  of  the  people,  and  the  superiority  ol 
military  power,  arising  from  the  fact  that  the 
armed  forces  of  the  Government  is  opposed  to  a 
people  who  are  defenceless  or  tired  of  the  armed 
struggle. 

Can  a  Socialist  system  of  production  be  built  up] 
on  this  foundation  ?      This  means  the  organisation 
of  production  by  society,  and  requires  econom:c 
self-government  throughout  the  whole  mass  of  the 
people.     State   organisation   of  production  by   a  1 
bureaucracy,   or  by  the  dictatorship  of  a  single 
section  of  the  people,  does  not  mean  Socialism. 
Socialism  presupposes  that  broad  masses  of  the 
people  have  been  accustomed  to  organi.^-cition,  that  / 
numerous    economic    and    political    organisations.! 
exist,  and  can  develop  in  perfect  freedom.      The 
Socialist  organisation  of  Labour  is  not  an  affair  of  ' 
barracks. 

A  dictatorship  of  a  minority  which  grants  to  the 
people  the  fullest  freedom  of  organisation  under- 
mines its  own  power  by  so  doing.  Should  it  seek, 
on  the  other  hand,  to  maintain  its  authority  by 
restricting  this  freedom,  it  impedes  development 
towards  Socialism,  instead  of  furthering  it. 

A  minority  dictatorship  always  finds  its   most\ 
powerful  support  in  an  obedient,  army,   but  the 
more  it  substitutes  this  for  majority  support,  the 
more  it  drives  the  opposition  to  seek  a  remedy  by 

52      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETAEIAT 

an  appeal  to  the  bayonet,  instead  of  an  appeal  to 
that  vote  which  is  denied  them.  Civil  war  becomes 
,the  method  of  adjusting  political  and  social 
JBiritagonisms. 

Where  complete  political  and  social  apathy  or 
dejection  does  not  prevail,  the  minority  dictator- 
ship is  always  threatened  by  armed  attack,  or 
constant  guerilla  warfare,  which  easily  develops 
into  a  protracted  armed  rising  of  great  masses,  to 
cope  with  which  all  the  military  power  of  the 
dictatorship  is  needed. 

The  dictatorship  is  then  involved  in  civil  war, 
and  lives  in  constant  danger  of  being  overthrown. 

To  the  building  up  of  a  Socialist  society  there  is 
no  greater  obstacle  than  internal  war.  In  the 
present  state  of  extensive  geographical  division  of 
labour,  the  big  industries  are  everywhere  closely 
dependent  on  the  security  of  communications  no 
less  than  on  the  security  of  contract.  External 
war  would  shake  the  Socialist  society  to  its 
,  foundations,  even  if  the  enemy  did  not  penetrate 
^  into  the  country.  Russian  Socialists  of  all  sections 
in  the  present  Revolution  are  right  in  urging  the 
necessity  of  peace  for  the  rebuilding  of  society. 

Yet  civil  war  is  far  more  harmful  to  a  Socialist 
society  than  external  war,  as  civil  war  is  fought 
out  in  the  land  itself,  and  wastes  and  paralyses  as 
much  as  a  foreign  invasion. 

DICTATORSHIP  5$- 

In  the  struggles  of  States  it  is  usually  only  a 
question  of  an  accession  or  loss  of  power  on  the" 
part  of  one  or  the  other  government,  and  not  a 
matter  of  their  very  existence.  After  the  war  the 
various  belhgerent  governments  and  peoples  seek 
to  live  in  peace,  if  not  in  amity. 

The  parties  in  a  civil  war  are  quite  differently 
related  to  each  other.  They  do  not  carry  on  the 
war  to  wrest  some  concessions  from  the  opponents. 
and  then  to  live  with  them  in  peace.  And  a  civil 
war  is  also  different  from  democracy,  under  which 
minorities  are  so  protected  that  any  party  which 
finds  itself  in  this  position,  and  is  obliged  to 
renounce  hopes  of  being  the  Government,  need  not 
relinquish  political  activity.  Every  party  which  is 
reduced  to  a  minority  always  retains  the  right  to 
strive  to  become  the  majority,  and  thereby  take 
over  the  Government. 

In  a  civil  war  each  party  fights  for  its  existence, 
and  the  vanquished  is  menaced  with  complete 
destruction.  The  consciousness  of  this  fact 
accounts  for  civil  wars  being  so  terrible.  A 
minority  which  only  retains  control  by  military 
power  is  inclined  to  crush  its  opponents  by  the 
bloodiest  means,  and  to  decimate  them  in  reck- 
less slaughter,  when  it  is  threatened  by  a  revolt, 
and  succeeds  in  repressing  it.       June,    1848,  in 

54       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

Paris,   and  the  bloody  May  week  of  1871  have 
shown  this  with  terrible  distinctness. 

Chronic  civil  war,  or  its  alternative  under  a 
dictatorship,  the  apathy  and  lethargy  of  the 
masses,  would  render  the  organisation  of  a 
Socialist  system  of  production  as  good  as  impos- 
sible. And  yet  the  dictatorship  of  Ihe  minority, 
which  either  produces  civil  war  or  apathy,  is  to  be 
the  sovereign  means  for  effecting  the  transition 
from  Capitalism  to  SociaHsm ! 

Many  people  confuse  icivil  wfer  with  the  social 
revolutioi),  considering  this  to  be  its  form,  and  are 
therefore  prepared  to  excuse  the  acts  of  force 
inevitable  in  a  civil  war.     This  has  always  been  the 

\  case  in  revolutions,  they  say,  and  ever  will  be. 

I     We  ^ocial  Democrats  are  decidedly  not  of  the 

I  opinion  that  that  which  has  been  must  always  be. 

'  Such  ideas  of  the  revolution  are  formed  on  the 
examples  of  previous  middle-class  revolutions. 
The  proletarian  revolution  will  be  accomplished 
under  quite  different  conditions  from  these. 

The  middle-class  revolutions  broke  out  in  States 
in  which  a  despotism,  supported  by  an  army 
separated  from  the  people,  suppressed  all  free 
movements,  in  which  freedom  of  the  Press,  of 
public  meeting,  of  organisation,  and  general 
suffrage  did  not  exist,  and  in  which  there  was  no 
real   representation    of   the    people.       There  the 

DICTATORSHIP  65 

struggle  against  the  Government  necessarily  took 
the  form  of  a  civil  war.  The  proletariat  of  to-day 
will,  as  regards  Western  Europe  at  least,  attain  to 
power  in  States  in  which  a  certain  measure  of 
democracy,  if  not  "  pure  "  democracy,  has  been 
deeply  rooted  for  decades,  and  also  in  which  the 
military  are  not  so  cut  off  from  the  people  as 
formerly.  It  remains  to  be  seen  how  the  conquest 
of  political  power  by  the  proletariat  is  achieved 
under  these  conditions,  where  it  represents  the 
majority  of  the  people.  In  no  case  need  we\ 
anticipate  that  in  Western  Europe  the  course  of  the  ' 
great  French  Ee volution  will  be  repeated.  If 
present-day  Russia  exhibits  so  much  likeness  to  the 
France  of  1793,  that  only  shows  how  near  it  stands 
to  the  stage  of  middle-class  revolution. 

The  social  revolution,  the  political  revolution, 
and  civil  war  must  be  distinguished  from  each 
other. 

The  social  xfivolutjon  is  a  profound  transforma- 
tion of  the  entire  social  structure  brought  about 
by  the  establishment  of  a  new  method  of  produc- 
tion. It  is  a  protracted  process,  which  may  be 
spread  over  decades,  and  no  definite  boundaries 
can  be  drawn  for  its  conclusion.  It  will  be  the 
more  successful,  according  to  the  peaceful  nature 
of  the  forms  under  which  it  is  consummated.  Civil 
•nd  foreign  wars  are  its  deadly  foes.    As  a  rule  a 

66       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

social  revolution  is  brought  about  by  a  political 
revolution,  through  a  sudden  alteration  in  the 
relative  strength  of  classes  in  the  State,  whereby  a 
class  hitherto  excluded  from  the  political  power 
possesses  itself  of  the  machinery  of  government. 
The  political  revolution  is  a  sudden  act,  which  is 
rapidly  concluded.  Its  forms  depend  on  the  con- 
stitution of  the  State  in  which  it  is  accomplished. 
The  mqre  democracy  rules,  not  merely  formally, 
but  actually  anchored  in  the  strength  of  the  work- 
ing classes,  the  greater  is  the  likelihood  that  the 
political  revolution  will  be  a  peaceful  one.  Con- 
trariwise, the  more  the  system  which  has  hitherto 
prevailed  has  been  without  the  support  of  a 
majority  of  the  people,  and  has  represented  a 
minority  which  kept  control  by  military  force,  the 
greater  is  the  likelihood  that  the  political  revolution 
will  take  the  form  of  a  civil  war. 

Yet,  even  in  the  last  case,  the  supporters  of  the 
social  revolution  have  a  pressing  interest  in  seeing 
that  the  civil  war  is  only  a  transitory  episode 
which  quickly  terminates,  that  it  is  made  to  serve 
the  sole  end  of  introducing  and  setting  up  demo- 
cracy, to  whose  pace  the  social  revolution  should 
be  adapted.  In  other  words,  the  social  revolution 
must  not,  for  the  time  being,  be  carried  out  farther 
than  the  majority  of  the  people  are  inclined  to  go, 
because  beyond  this  the  Social  Revolution,  desir- 

DICTATORSHIP  67 

able  as  it  may  seem  to  far-seeing  individuals,  would 
not  find  the  necessary  conditions  for  establishing 
itself  permanently. 

But  did  not  the  Eeign  of  Terror  of  the  proletariat 
and  lower  middle-class  of  Paris,  that  is  the  dicta- 
torship of  a  Minority,  in  the  great  French  Eevolu- 
tion,  bring  with  it  enormous  consequences  of  the 
highest  historical  significance? 

Of  course.  But  of  what  kind  were  they?  That 
dictatorship  was  a  child  of  the  war  which  the  allied 
Monarchs  of  Europe  had  waged  against  Eevolu- 
tionary  France.  To  have  victoriously  beaten  off 
this  attack  was  the  historical  achievement  of  the 
Reign  of  Terror.  Thereby  is  again  proved 
distinctly  the  old  truth,  that  dictatorship  is  better 
able  to  wage  war  than  democracy.  It  proves  in 
no  way  that  dictatorship  is  the  method  of  the 
proletariat  to  carry  through  social  transformations 
to  its  own  liking,  and  to  keep  control  of  political 
power. 

In  energy  the  Reign  of  Terror  of  1793  cannot 
be  surpassed.  Yet  the  proletariat  of  Paris  did  not 
succeed,  by  this  means,  in  retaining  power.  The 
dictatorship  was  a  method  by  means  of  which  the 
various  fractions  belonging  to  proletarian  and  small 
middle-class  poHtics  fought  amongst  themselves, 
and,  finally,  it  was  the  means  of  making  an  end  of 
all  proletarian  and  lower  middle-class  politics. 

58       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

The  dictatorship  of  the  lower  classes  opens  thte 
way  for  the  dictatorship  of  the  sword. 

Should  it  be  said,  after  the  example  of  the 
middle-class  revolutions,  that  the  Revolution  Is 
synonymous  with  civil  war  and  dictatorship,  then 
the  consequences  must  also  be  recognised,  and  it 
must  be  added  the  Revolution  would  necessarily 
end  in  the  rule  of  a  Cromwell  or  a  Napoleon. 

This  is,  however,  by  no  means  the  necessary 
upshot  of  a  proletarian  revolution  where  the  prole- 
tariat forms  the  majority  of  the  nation,  which  is 
democratically  organised,  and  only  in  such  cases 
do  the  conditions  for  Socialist  production  exist. 

By  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  we  are 
unable  to  understand  anything  else  than  its  rule  on 
the  basis  of  democracy. 

* 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Constituent  Assembly  and  Soviet. 

The  contrast  between  democracy  and  dictatorship 
has  just  acquired  an  important  significance  in  the 
Russian  Revolution.  The  Sociahsts  of  Russia  were 
from  the  first  divided.  They  comprised  Social 
Revolutionaries  and  Marxists.  The  Social  Revolu- 
tionaries were,  in  the  first  place,  the  representa-' 
tives  of  the  peasantry,  which  in  Russia,  in  contrast 
to  all  the  rest  of  Europe,  were  still  a  revolutionary 
factor,  and  therefore  could  march  with  the 
Socialist  proletariat.  Against  the  Social  Revolu- 
tionaries were  the  Marxists,  the  representatives  of 
the  industrial  proletariat.  These  divided  into 
two  sections,  the  Mensheviks,  who  held  that  only 
a  middle-class  revolution  was  possible  in  the 
existing  economic  conditions  in  Russia,  unless  the 
revolution  coincided  with  a  European  Socialist 
revolution,  and  the  Bolsheviks,  who  always  believed 
in  the  omnipotence  of  will  and  force,  and  now, 
without  considering  the  backwardness  of  Russia, 
are  trying_to_sliapfi__the  Revolution  on  Socialist  \l 
lines. 
In  the  course  of  the  Revolution  the  contrast 

59 

y 

60       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETAEIAT 

became  more  acute.  The  Mensheviks  considered 
it  to  be  their  task  to  take  part  in  a  Provisional 
Coalition  Government  until  the  duly  constituted 
National  Assembly  had  formed  a  definite  govern- 
T  ment.  The  Bolsheviks  endeavoured,  even  before 
the  meeting  of  the  National  Assembly,  to  overthrow 
this  Provisional  Government,  and  replace  it  by 
government  of  their  party.  An  additional  ground 
"*of  opposition  came  with  the  question  of  peace. 
[The  Mensheviks  wanted  immediate  peace  as  much 
as  the  Bolsheviks,  both  wanted  it  on  the  basis  of 
Zimmerwald — no  annexations  or  indemnities. 
Both  sections  had  been  represented  at  Zimmerwald, 
and  the  Mensheviks  had  been  in  the  majority  there. 
But  the  Mensheviks  wanted  a  general  peace,  and  all 
belligerents  to  adopt  the  watchword — no  annexa- 
tions or  indemnities.  So  long  as  this  was  not 
achieved,  the  Russian  army  should  keep  their  arms 
in  readiness.  The  Bolsheviks,  on  the  other  hand, 
demanded  immediate  peace  at  any  price,  and  were 
ready,  if  necessary,  to  conclude  a  separate  peace, 
and  they  sought  to  enforce  their  views  by  increas- 
ing the  already  great  disorganisation  of  the  army. 

They  were  supported  by  the  war  weariness  of 
great  masses  in  the  army  and  among  the  people,  as 
well  as  by  the  apparent  inactivity  of  the  Provisional 
Government,  which,  however,  accomplished  far 
more  political  and  social  reform  than  any  other 

CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  AND  SOVIET      61 

middle-class  government  in  the  same  period, 
although  it  did  not  do  as  much  as  would  be 
expected  of  a  revolutionary  government.  The 
elections  for  the  Constituent  Assembly  could  not  be 
so  rapidly  completed  as  was  desired.  It  was  first 
necessary  to  renew  the  old  official  machinery,  and 
to  create  democratic  town  and  country  representa- 
tion. Enormous  difficulties  were  met  with  in  the 
compilation  of  voters'  lists  in  the  giant  Empire, 
whose  census  took  place  in  1897.  So  the  elections 
to  the  Constituent  Assembly  were  constantly  post- 
poned. 

Above  all,  peace  was  no  nearer.  Wherever  the 
guilt  for  this  may  rest,  the  statesmen  of  the 
Entente  did  not  understand  how  necessary  it  was 
for  themselves  at  that  time  to  pronounce  in  favour 
of  no  annexations  or  indemnities.  They  pursued 
a  policy  which  made  the  Entente  appear  to  the 
Russian  people  the  obstacle  to  peace,  and  with 
them  their  Allies  the  Provisional  Government. 
This  was  the  reason  why  some  of  the  Mensheviks, 
the  Internationalists,  demanded  separation  from 
the  Entente,  and  went  in  opposition  to  the  Provi- 
sional Government.  Yet  they  did  not  go  so  far  as 
the  Bolsheviks.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
Bolsheviks  gained  ground  (ji-the  expense  of  the 
Mensheviks  and  the  Provisional  GovemmentI]  ^ 
which     they     succeeded     in     overthrowing     in 

^2       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

*\  I  November,  1917.  \Their  propaganda  zeal  proved 
j/J  to  be  so  great  that  they  were  able  to  draw  a  part  \ 
'  of  the  Social  Revolutionaries  to  their  side^  The 
left  Social  Revolutionaries  henceforth  marched 
with  the  Bolsheviks,  into  whose  Government  they 
entered,  while  the  right  and  also  the  centre 
remained  on  the  side  of  the  Mensheviks. 

The   Bolsheviks  drew   their   strength  from   the    J 
great  expectations  which  they  raised.       If  they 
were  to  retain  this  strength,  they  had  to  fulfil  these 
expectations.    Was  that  possible? 

The  Bolshevist  Revolution  was  based  on  the  sup- 
position that  it  would  be  the  starting  point  of  a 
general  European  Revolution,  and  that  the  bold    j 
initiative  of  Russia  would  summon  the  proletariat    ■ 
of  all  Europe  to  rise. 

On  these  suppositions,  it  was  of  no  moment  what 
form  was  taken  by  the  Russian  separate  peace,  what 
humiliations  and  burdens  it  placed  on  the  Russian 
people,  and  what  interpretations  it  gave  to  the 
principle  of  the  self-determination  of  peoples.  And 
it  was  also  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  Russia 
was  capable  of  defence  or  not.  According  to  this  j 
theory,  the  European  Revolution  formed  the  best 
defence  of  the  Russian  Revolution,  for  it  would 
bring  to  the  peoples  in  territory  hitherto  Russian 
real  and  complete  self-determination. 

CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  AND  SOVIET      68 

The  Revolution  which  would  bring  about 
Socialism  in  Europe  would  also  be  the  means  of 
removing  the  obstacles  to  the  carrying  through  of 
Socialism  in  Russia  which  are  created  by  the 
economic  backwardness  of  that  country. 

This  was  all  very  logically  thought  out,  and  quite 
well  founded,  provided  the  supposition  was 
granted,  that  the  Russian  Revolution  must 
inevitably  unchain  the  European  Revolution.  But 
what  if  this  did  not  happen  ? 

The  supposition  has  not  yet  been  realised.  And 
now  the  proletariat  of  Europe  is  blamed  for 
leaving  the  Russian  Revolution  in  the  lurch,  and 
betraying  it.  This  is  a  complaint  against  unknown 
people,  for  who  can  be  made  responsible  for  the 
inactivity  of  the  European  proletariat. 

It   is   an    old  Marxist   saying    that   revolutions   j  ^' 
cannot  be  made,  but  arise  out  of  conditions.    The-*^W^_^ 
conditions  of  Western  Europe  are,  however,   so    ^^ 
different  from  those  of  Russia  that  a  revolution     ^ 
there  would  not  necessarily  provoke  one  here. 

When  the  Revolution  of  1848  broke  out  in 
France,  it  immediately  spread  over  that  part  of 
Europe  lying  east  of  it.  It,  however,  halted  at 
the  Russian  boundaries,  and  when  the  Revolution 
was  unchained  in  Russia  in  1905,  it  provoked 
strong  suffrage  movements  in  the  countries  to  the 

si 

64      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PROLETAKIAT 

west,  although  nothing  that  could  be  described  as 
&  revolution. 

But  the  Bolsheviks  must  not  be  too  much 
blamed  for  expecting  a  European  Revolution. 
Other  Socialists  did  the  same,  and  we  are  certainly 
approaching  conditions  which  will  sharply 
accentuate  the  class  struggle,  and  which  may  have 
many  surprises  in  store.  And  if  the  Bolsheviks 
have  up  till  now  been  in  error  in  expecting  a 
Eevolution,  have  not  Bebel,  Marx,  and  Engels 
cherished  a  like  delusion?   This  is  not  to  be  denied. 

But  the  latter  have  never  had  in  mind  a  revolu- 
tion at  a  specific  time,  and  never  elaborated  their 
tactics  in  such  wise  that  the  existence  of  the 
party  and  the  progress  of  the  class  struggle  was 
made  to  be  dependent  on  the  outbreak  of  the 
Eevolution,  so  that  the  proletariat  was  confronted 
with  the  dilemma :  revolution  or  bankruptcy. 

Like  all  politicians  they  too  have  erred  in  their 
expectations.  But  such  errors  have  never  set 
them  on  a  false  track,  and  led  them  into  a  cul-de- 
sac. 

Our  Bolshevist  comrades  have  staked  all  on  the 
card  of  the  general  European  Revolution.  As  this 
card  has  not  turned  up,  they  were  forced  into  a 
course  which  brought  them  up  against  insoluble 
problems.    They  had  to  defend  Russia  without  an 

CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  AND  SOVIET      65 

army  against  powerful  and   implacable  enemies. 
They  had  to  establish  a  regime  of  well-being  for 
all  in  a  state  of  general  dislocation  and  impoverish-      \ 
ment.  !T?he  less  the  material  and  intellectual  con-       1 
ditions  existed  for  all  that  they  aspired  to,  the  more         , 
they  felt  obliged  to  replace  what  was  lacking  by       j 
the   exercise    of  naked    power,    by    dictatorshipT"!    I 
prhey  had  to  do  this  all  the  more  the  greater  th"e 
j  opposition  to  them  amongst  the  masses  became.  -^Jf 
j  So  it  became  inevitable  that  they  should  put  dicta- 
Itorship  in  the  place  of  democracy. 

If  the  Bolsheviks  were  deceived  in  their  expecta- 
tions that  they  only  needed  to  become  the  Govern- 
ment, in  order  to  unchain  the  European  Eevolu- 
tion,  they  were  not  less  so  in  the  anticipation  that 
they  had  only  to  grasp  the  helm  of  State,  and  the 
majority  of  the  population  would  joyously  range  _  „  ^^ 
themselves  behind  them.    As  the  Opposition  under  »   f\'> 
the  conditions  due  to  Russia's  situation,  they  had    p*^ 
indeed  developed^  great  propaganda  strength,'  as  we    \  yj 
have  already  noted.      At   the    beginning   of   the    1 
Revolution  only  a  small  handful,  they  became  so     ! 
strong  eventually  as  to   seize   the  power  of  the     ' 
State.    But  had  they  the  masses  of  the  population 
behind  them?    This  should  have  been  revealed  by 
the   Constituent  Assembly,   which  the  Bolsheviks, 
hke  other  revolutionaries,  had  demanded,  and  for 
a  period  even  violently  demanded ;  the  Constituent 

66      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

Assembly,  to  be  chosen  by  universal,  equal,  direct 
and  secret  suffrage. 

Immediately  after  the  capture  of  the  Govern- 
ment by  the  Bolsheviks,  the  new  regime  was  con- 
firmed by  the  second  AU-Russian  Congress  of 
Soviets,  albeit  in  opposition  to  a  strong  minority, 
which  left  the  Congress  protesting.  But  even  the 
majority  did  not  yet  repudiate  the  idea  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly. 

The  resolution  confirming  the  Soviet  Govern- 
ment began  with  the  words  :  "  Pending  the  calling 
together  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  a  Provisional 
Workers'  and  Peasants'  Government  is  to  be 
formed,  which  is  to  be  called  the  Council  of 
People's  Commissaries.** 

The  Constituent  Assembly  then  is  recognised 
here  as  taking  precedence  of  the  Council 
of  People's  Commissaries.  jOn  November  3  the 
Government  dissolved  the  Town  Council  of  Petro- 
grad  on  the  ground  that  it  was  in  conflict  with  the 
outlook  of  the  people,  as  manifested  bj,  i;lie.  Reyx>- 
lution  of  Ncwember^T,  and  by  *'  the  elections  to  the 
^  y^  Constituent  AssembFy?"  ?  The  new  members  were 
^^  proclaimed  on  the  basis  of  the  existing  general 
franchise.  Soon,  however,  a  defect  was  discovered 
in  the  elections  to  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

On  December  7,  the  All-Russian  Executive  Com- 
mittee of  Soviets  published  a  resolution,  in  ^^hich 

^         CONSTITUEljIT  ASSEMBLY  AND  SOVIET      67  "^ 

it  was  stated  :  '  *  However  the  electoral  arrange- 
ments of  a  body  composed  of  elected  representa- 
tives may  be  devised,  these  can  only  be  considered 
to  be  truly  democratic  and  really  to  represent  the 
will  of  the  people,  when  the  right  of  recalling  their 
members  by  the  electors  is  recognised  and  exer- 
cised. This  principle  of  real  democracy  applies  to 
all  representative  bodies  and  also  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  The  Congress  of  the  Councils  of  Work- 
men's, Soldiers'  and  Peasants*  Delegates,  who  are 
chosen  on  equal  grounds,  has  the  right  to  issue 
writs  for  a  new  election  in  the  case  of  town  and 
parish  councils,  and  other  representative  bodies, 
not  excluding  the  Constituent  Assembly.  On  the* 
demand  of  more  than  half  of  the  electors  of  the 
circumscription  in  question  the  Council  must  order 
a  new  election." 

The  demand  that  the  majority  of  the  voters  may 
at  any  time  recall  a  deputy,  who  is  no  longer  ia  ] 
agreement  with  their  views,  is  entirely  in  accord- 
ance with  the  principles  of  democracy.  But  it  is 
not  clear,  from  this  standpoint,  why  the  Soviets 
should  take  the  step  of  ordering  new  elections. 
However,  at  that  time  this  represented  the  widest 
interference  with  the  Constituent  Assembly  that 
had  been  made.  Neither  the  establishment  of  the 
.Assembly,  nor  the  elections  were  touched. 
I  But  it   was    becoming   ever    clearer    that    the 

m      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETARIAT 

^  Y  elections  had  not  given  the  Bolsheviks  the  majority.] 
Therefore,  the  Pravda  of  December  26,  1917, 
published  a  number  of  propositions  relating  to  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  which  Lenin  had  drawn  up, 
and  the  Central  Committee  had  accepted.  One  of 
them  declared  that  the  elections  had  taken  place 
shortly  after  the  victory  of  the  Bolsheviks,  but 
before  the  Social  Revolutionaries  had  yet  divided. 
The  left  and  the  right  Social  Revolutionaries  had 
therefore  had  a  common  list  of  candidates.  Con- 
sequently, the  elections  gave  no  clear  indication  of 
the  real  voice  of  the  masses. 

Whoever  entertained  this  view,  in  face  of  the 
above-mentioned  proposition  of  December  7,  was 
committed  to  the  conclusion  that  new  elections 
should  be  ordered  to  the  Assembly  in  districts 
which  had  chosen  social  revolutionaries.  To  what 
other  end  had  this  resolution  been  drawn  up  ?  Yet 
•  on  December  26  it  was  already  forgotten.  And 
suddenly  quite  another  song  was  heard  in  the 
other  proposition  j^f  Lenin,  with  which  we  are 
here  concerned.  [Jifter  he^ad  shown  us  that  the 
Assembly  just  elected  was  not  suitable,  because  it 
did  not  express  the  real  voice  of  the  whole  people, 
he  declared  that  any  assembly  elected  by  the 
masses  by  general  suffrage  was  not  suitable  :  "  The 
Soviet  Republic  represents  not  only  a  higher  form 
of  democratic  institutions  (in  comparison  with  the 

•px  ^'^V^^  f^^'^*!^^ 

u 

CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  ANT)  SOVIET      6ff 

middle-class  republic  and  the  Constituent  Assembly  ' 
as  its  consummation)  it  is  also  the  sole  form  which' 
renders   possible  the    least   painful    transition   to 
SociaHsm/     j 

It  is  only  a  pity  that  this  knowledge  was  arrived 
at  after  one  had  been  left  a  minority  in  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  ConjQict  with  the  Assembly 
was  now  inevitable.  \Jt  ended  with  a  victory  for 
the  Soviets,  whose  dictatorship  as  a  permanent 
form  of  government  in  Russia  was  proclaimed./ 

f^ 

\ 

CHAFTER  VII.  ' 

The  Soviet  Bepublic. 

The  Soviet  organisation  was  a  product  of  the  Russian 

r       Revolution  of  1905.     At  that  time  the  proletariat 
engaged  in  mass  action,  for  which  it  required  a 
form  of  mass  organisation.      The  secret  organisa- 
tion of  the  Social  Democrats,  as  also  6J  the  Social 
.  Revolutionaries,     only     comprised     hundreds     of 
members    who    influenced    some    thousands     of 
workers.      Political  and  industrial  mass  organisa- 
tions could  not  be  formed  under  the  Absolutism  of 
I  the  Czai\\  [The   only  mass   organisations  of   the 
i      j  workers  which  existed  when  the  Revolution  came 
'^    j  were  those  which  had  been  brought  into  existence 
I  by  the  capitalists  themselves  and  related  to  single 
I  trades.^  These  now  became  mass  organisations  for 
the  struggle  of  the  proletariat.       Each  trade  was 
now  transformed  from  a  place  where  material  pro- 
V    duction  was  carried  on  into  a  place  of  political 
tX^    j  propaganda    and   action .    \  The   workers   of  each 
'>j^(|  trade   came  together  and    chose  delegates,    who 
yjlj  united  to  form  a  council  of  delegates,  or  a  Soviet^ 
!<**        It  was  the  Mensheviks  who  gave  the  impulse  to 
this  most  significant  movement.      Thus  a  form  of 

70 

THE  SOVIET  EEPUBLIC  71 

proletarian  organisation  was  created,  which 
became  the  most  comprehensive  of  all  because  it 
included  all  wage  earners.  It  has  made  powerful 
action  possible,  and  left  a  deep  impression  in  the 
consciousness  of  the  worker.  When  the  second 
Revolution  broke  out  in  March,  1917,  the  Soviet 
organisation  again  came  to  the  fore,  and  this  time 
upon  a  firmer  basis,  corresponding  with  the 
development  undergone  by  the  proletariat  since 
the  first  Revolution.  The  Soviets  of  1905  were 
local  organisations  confined  to  single  towns. 
Those  of  1917  were  not  only  more  numerous,  but 
closely  knit  together.  Single  Soviets  were  affiliated 
to  a  greater  body,  which  in  its  turn  was  part  of  an 
organisation  comprehending  the  whole  Empire,  its 
organ  being  the  All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets, 
and  a  permanent  Central  Executive  Committee. 

Already  the  Soviet  organisation  can  look  back 
on  a  great  and  glorious  history.  A  more  important 
period  lies  before  it,  and  not  in  Russia  alone. 
Everywhere  it  is  apparent  that  the  usual  methods 
of  the  political  and  economic  struggle  of  the  pro- 
letariat are  not  sufficient  to  cope  with  the  enormous 
strength  at  the  disposal  of  finance  capital  in  the 
economic  and  political  spheres. 

These  methods  need  not  be  abandoned,  as  they 
are  essential  for  ordinary  conditions,  but  at  times 
they  are  confronted  with  tasks  to  which  they  are 

72       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

not  equal,  and  success  is  only  likely  with  a  coni- 
bination  of  all  the  economic  and  political  power  of 
the  proletariat. 

The  Russian  Revolution  of  1905  brought  the 
idea  of  the  mass  strike  to  a  head  in  the  German 
Social  Democracy.  This  fact  was  recognised  by 
the  1905  Congress.  That  of  1906  endeavoured  to 
allay  the  sensibihties  and  fears  of  the  Trade  Union 
officials.  On  the  question  of  the  mass  strike,  it 
resolved  that  when  the  executive  should  consider 
the  necessity  for  the  political  mass  strike  to  exist 
it  should  get  into  touch  with  the  General  Commis- 
sion of  the  Trade  Unions,  and  concert  all  measures 
necessary  to  secure  successful  action. 

After  all  our  experience  with  the  mass  strike, 
we  know  to-day  that  this  resolution  was  funda- 
mentally wrong.  For  one  reason  because  a  mass 
strike  is  likely  to  be  all  the  more  successful  by 
breaking  out  unexpectedly  in  a  particular  situa- 
tion, with  spontaneous  suddenness.  Its  organisa- 
tion by  party  and  Trade  Union  machinery  would 
make  necessary  such  preparations  as  would  lead  to 
its  frustration. 

We,  therefore,  understand  why  the  Trade  Union 
bureaucracy  tends  to  oppose  all  spontaneous 
action  on  a  large  scale.  Trade  Unions  are  abso- 
lutely necessary.  The  proletariat  is  the  stronger 
the  greater  the  number  of  its  members,  and  the 

THE  SOVIET  REPUBLIC  73 

larger  the  financial  resources  of  its  Trade  Unions. 
Widespread  and  permanent  organisations,  with 
many  ramifications,  are  not  possible  without  a 
machinery  for  permanent  administration,  that  is 
a  bureaucracy.  The  Trade  Union  bureaucracy  is 
as  essential  as  the  Trade  Union  itself.  It  has  its 
faults  like  Parhamentarism  and  Democracy,  but  is 
as  indispensable  as  these  for  the  emancipation  of 
the  proletariat. 

This  is  not,  however,  to  say  that  all  its  preten- 
tions must  be  recognised.  It  should  be  restricted 
to  its  first  function,  in  performing  which  it  cannot 
be  replaced;  that  is  the  administration  of  Trade 
Union  funds,  the  extension  of  organisation,  and 
the  giving  advice  to  the  workers  in  their  struggles. 
But  it  is  unsuitable  for  leading  that  powerful  mass 
strike  which  tends  to  become  the  characteristic  of 
the  times. 

By  virtue  of  their  experience  and  knowledge, 
Trade  Union  officials  and  Parliamentarians  may 
here  successfully  assist,  but  the  initiative  tends  to 
fall  into  the  hands  of  Workshop  Committees.  In 
various  countries  outside  Russia,  such  as  in 
England,  these  institutions  (shop  stewards)  have 
played  a  big  part  in  mass  struggles,  side  by  side 
with  ordinary  Trade  Unionism. 

The  Soviet  organisation  is,  therefore,  one  of  the 
most   important    phenomena    of   our    time.        It 

k 

74       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

promises  to  acquire  an  outstanding  significance  in 
the  great  decisive  struggles  between  Capital  and 
Labour  which  are  before  us. 
„^_^Can  we  ask  even  more  than  this  of  the  Soviets? 
,\jrhe  Bolshevists,  who,  together  with  the  left-wing 
Social  Revolutionaries,  obtained  a  majority  in  the 
Russian  Workers'  Councils  after  the  November 
Revolution  of  1917,  after  the  dissolution  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  proceeded  to  make  an  organ 
of  government  of  the  Soviets,  which  hitherto  had 
been  the  fighting  organisation  of  a  class^  They 
did  away  with  the  democratic  institutions  which  had 
been  conquered  by  the  Russian  people  in  the  March 
Revolution.  Quite  properly  the  Bolsheviks  ceased 
to  call  themselves  Social  Democrats,  and  described 
themselves  as  Communists. 

Indeed,  they  did  not  repudiate  democracy 
entirely.  In  his  speech  of  April  28,  Lenin  des- 
cribed the  Soviet  organisation  as  a  higher  type  of 
democracy,  a  complete  break  with  its  "  middle- 
class  distortion."  Entire  freedom  was  now 
secured  to  the  proletarian  and  the  poor  peasant. 

Hitherto  democracy  had  connoted  equal  poli- 
tical rights  for  all  citizens.  The  sections  privi- 
leged by  law  had  always  possessed  freedom  of 
movement.    But  one  does  not  call  that  democracy. 

The  Soviet  Republic  is  to  be  the  organ  of  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  the  only  means,  as 

THE  SOVIET  REPUBLIC  75 

Lenin   expresses   it,    whereby    the    most   painless   l 
transition  to  Socialism  is  made  possible.      This  is 
to  be  done  by  depriving  of  political  rights  all  those 
who  are  not  represented  in  the  Soviets.  J 

Why   should  this  step   make    less  painful   the 

transition  to  Socialism  than  would  be  the  case  with 

universal     suffrage?       Obviously,     because     the 

-capitalists   are    in   this   way    excluded   from   the 

making  of  laws. 

Now  there  are  two  alternatives.       Suppose  the      ^ 
capitalists  and  their  supporters  are  an  insignificant 
handful.    How  could  they  then  prevent  the  transi- 
tion to  Socialism  under  universal  suffrage?      On 
the    contrary,    universal    suffrage    would    reveal 
them  as  an  insignificant  minority,  and  consequently 
they  would  the  sooner  resign  themselves  to  their 
fate  than  if  the  franchise  were  so  shaped  that  no- 
one   could    say   with   certainty  which    party  had 
behind  it  a  majority  of  the  people.       In  reality,    / 
however,    the   capitalists   cannot   be   deprived   of  / 
rights.     What  is  a  capitahst  in  a  legal  sense?    A 
possessor. 

Even  in  a  country  so  highly  developed  econo- 
mically as  Germany,  where  the  proletariat  is  so 
numerous,  the  establishment  of  a  Soviet  RepubHc 
would  disfranchise  great  masses  of  the  people.  In 
1907,  the  number  of  men,  with  their  families, 
belonging   to    occupations  which   comprised   the 

76       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETARIAT 

three   great  groups   of  agriculture,   industry   and 

trade,  that  is,  wage-earners  and  salaried  persons, 

amounted    to    something    over    35,000,000,     as 

against    17,000,000    belonging  to  other  sections. 

A    party    could    therefore    very    well    have    the 

majority  of  wage-earners  behind  it  and  yet  form  a 

j  minority  of  the  population.      On  the  other  hand, 

j  when  the  workers  vote  together,   they  need  not 

I  fear   the  united  votes   of  their   opponents.      By 

obliging  them  to  fight  their  common  foes,  universal 

suffrage    causes    them    to    close    up    their    ranks 

sooner  than  if  the  political  struggle  were  confined 

to  the   Soviets,    from   which   the   opponents   are 

excluded,  and  in  which  the  political  struggle  of  a 

Socialist  party  takes  the  form  of  attacking  another 

Socialist  Party.      Instead   of  class-consciousness, 

I  sectarian  fanaticism  is  thereby  induced. 

Now  for  the  other  alternative.  Suppose  the 
capitalists  and  their  supporters  are  not  a  small 
minority,  but  a  great  mass  which  is  well  able,  in 
a  Parliament  elected  on  the  basis  of  universal 
suffrage,  to  constitute  a  respectable  opposition? 

What  purpose  would  be  served  by  reducing  this 
opposition  to  silence  in  the  governing  body?  The 
capitalists  themselves  are  everywhere  only  a  small 
section.  But  in  comparison  with  the  Socialists, 
their  supporters  may  be  very  numerous.  It 
should  not  be  thought  that  only  personal  interest 

THE  SOVIET  REPUBLIC  77 

or  payment  would  induce  people  to  enter  the  lists 
for  capitalism.  Except  Socialism,  capitalism  is 
to-day  the  only  possible  method  of  production  on  a 
large  scale. 

Who  holds  Socialism  to  be  impossible,  must,  if 
he    thinks    in    a    modern    sense    at    all,    be    for 
capitalism,   even  if  he  be  not  interested  therein. 
Even  of  those  backward  sections,  who  are  opposed 
to  capitahsm,  many  take  their  stand  on  the  basis 
of  private  property  in  the  means  of  production, 
and  therefore  on  the  basis  on  which  capitalism 
grows,    yn^  a  backward   country,   therefore,   the 
number  of  those  in  the  population  who  directly  or 
indirectly  would  protect  capitalism  may  be  very 
large.  [  Their  opposition  would  not  be  lessened  if 
they  were  deprived  of  political  rights.    They  would 
all  the  more  energetically  oppose  the  measures  of 
the  new  tyrannical  regime.    By  universal  suffrage      , 
in  a  real  democracy  all  classes  and  interests  are     j^ 
represented  in  the  governing  body  according  to 
their   strength.      Every   section    and   party  may 
exercise  the  fullest  criticism  upon  each  Bill,  show 
up  all  its  weaknesses,  and  also  make  known  the 
stren^h  of  the  opposition   which  exists   amongst 
the  people.      In  the  Soviet  all  hostile  criticism  is~\ 
excluded,  and  the  weaknesses  of  laws  do  not  come 
so   easily  to  light.      The    opposition  which   they  /  ^ 
arouse  amongst  the  population  is  not  learned  inj! 
the  first  instance.  ' 

78       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

Only  afterwards,  when  the  law  is  promulgated, 
do  criticism  and  opposition  manifest  tuemselves. 
Instead  of  during  the  debates,  the  weaknesses  of 
laws  come  to  light  when  they  are  put  into  operation. 
Even  the  Soviet  Government  has  already,  in  the 
case  of  very  important  laws,  been  obliged,  by 
supplements  and  lax  administration,  to  let  in  by 
the  backdoor  elements  that  it  solemnly  threw  out; 
of  the  front  door. 

That,  as  compared  with  general  suffrage,  vote 
by  occupation  has  a  tendency  to  narrow  the  outlook 
of  the  electors,  we  have  already  shown.  That  by 
this  means  the  transition  to  Sociahsm  is  rendered 
painless  is  very  much  in  doubt. 

Not  less  doubtful  is  the  dictatorship  of  the  prole- 
tariat under  the  Soviet  regime.  Dictatorship, 
certainly.    But  of  the  proletariat? 

In  the  economic  structure  of  Russia  the  Soviet? 
could  only  attain  the  position  of  rulers  in  1917  by 
not  confining  themselves  to  the  industrial  prole- 
tariat of  the  towns,  as  in  1905.  This  time  the 
soldiers  and  peasants  were  also  organised  in 
Soviets.  With  the  disbanding  of  the  army  the 
soldiers  have  lost  their  numerical  importance.  The 
small  army  raised  by  the  People's  Commissaries 
was  more  useful  to  them,  from  the  point  of  view 
of  bayonets  than  of  votes.    Nevertheless,  the  votes 

THE  SOVIET  EEPUBLIC  79 

of  the  Red  Army  have  played  a  considerable  part. 
In  some  Soviets,  for  example,  at  the  latest  elections 
in  Petrograd  the  major  portion  of  the  mandates 
were  reserved  to  its  members.  Of  much  more  im- 
portance, however,  were  the  votes  of  the  peasants, 
who  comprise  the  great  majority  of  the  Russian 
people.  What  is  represented  to  us  as  the  dictator- 
ship of  the  proletariat,  if  it  were  logically  carried 
out  and  a  class  were  able  to  exercise  directly  the 
dictatorship  which  is  only  possible  for  a  party, 
would  turn  out  to  be  the  dictatorship  of  the 
peasants.  It  would  therefore  appear  that  the  least 
painful  transition  to  Socialism  is  effected  when  it  is 
carried  out  by  the  peasants.  Although  the  peasants 
form  the  majority  in  the  Soviet  organisations,  these 
do  not  include  the  whole  of  the  proletariat. 

At  first  it  was  not  clear  who  might  organise  in 
Soviets,  and  which  Soviets  might  affiliate  to  the 
general  organisation.  It  was  thought  by  various 
people  that  every  trade  organisation  might  form 
a  Soviet,  and  be  regarded  as  such. 

On  May  28,  1918,  the  Leipziger  Volkszeitung 
published  an  article  entitled  the  Soviet  Repubhc, 
which  obviously  came  from  Bolshevist  sources.  It 
was  there  stated  : 

**  The  Soviet  representation  is  superior  to 
democratic  representation.  It  concedes  to  all 
citizens  full  and  equal  rights,  and  all  classes  in  the 

80      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETAKIAT 

land  enjoy  the  full  possibility  of  securing  repre- 
sentation in  the  Soviets,  exactly  corresponding  to 
their  strength  and  special  social  importance.  To 
this  end  they  must  be  independently  organised, 
not  in  parties,  as  hitherto,  on  the  lines  of  demo- 
cracy, but  in  special  classes  or  trade  organisa- 
tions." 

Legien  and  his  friends  may  be  very  contented 
with  this  subordination  of  the  Social  Democratic 
Party  to  the  Trade  Unions,  as  well  as  the  reac- 
tionaries who  want  to  substitute  a  class  vote  for 
general  suffrage.  The  champion  of  proletarian 
dictatorship  continues  : 

"  The  middle  classes  as  such  have  hitherto  not 
been  represented  in  the  Soviets,  because  on  the 
one  hand,  they  have  boycotted  them,  and  on  the 
other,  are  not  disposed  to  be  organised  on  the  pro- 
letarian scheme,  but  not  because  they  have  been 
excluded.'* 

Are  they  really  not  so  disposed?  Has  our 
Bolshevist  friend  ever  belonged  to  an  employers' 
association,  and  does  he  think  that  the  capitalist 
isolated  under  general  suffrage  is  really  more 
dangerous  than  an  employers'  association  m  a 
Soviet? 

But  we  are  about  to  learn  wherein  consists  the 
superiority  of  the  Soviet  organisation  over  general 
suffrage  :  **  It  can  obviously  adopt  the  attitude  of 

THE  SOVIET  KEPUBLIC  81 

excluding  any  middle-class  organisation  from  the 
Soviets." 

In  other  wordsfthe  Soviet  organisation  has  the 
advantage  over  general  suffrage  of  being  more 
arbitrary.  It  can  exclude  all  organisations  which 
it  considers  obnoxious.  It  "  concedes  full  and 
equal  rights  to  citizens,"  but  "obviously"  they 
must  only  be  exercised  to  the  liking  of  the  Soviet 
Government  I 

Meanwhile,  it  has  been  discovered  that  this  does 
not  work.  The  last  All-Russian  Congress  of 
Soviets,  which  terminated  on  July  12,  1918, 
drafted  a  constitution  of  the  Russian  Soviet 
Republic.  fThis  lays  it  down  that  not  all  the 
inhabitants  '"of  the  Russian  Empire,  but  only 
specified  cate^ries  have  the  right  to  elect  deputies 
to  the  Soviets.  '  All  those  may  vote  **  who  procure 
their  sustenainie  by  useful  or  productive  work." 
What  is  ' '  useful  and  productive  work  ' '  ?  This  is 
a  very  elastic  term.  Not  less  elastic  is  the  defini- 
tion of  those  who  are  excluded  from  the  franchise. 
They  include  any  who  employ  wage  labourers  for 
profit.  A  home  worker  or  small  master,  with  an 
apprentice,  may  live  and  feel  quite  like  a  prole- 
tarian, but  he  has  no  vote.  Even  more  prole- 
tarians may  become  disfranchised  by  the  defini- 
tion which  aims  at  depriving  private  traders  and 
middle  men  of  the  vote.    The  worker  who  loses  his 

82       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

work,  and  endeavours  to  get  a  living  by  opening  a 
small  shop,  or  selling  newspapers,  loses  his  vote. 

Another  clause  excludes  from  the  franchise 
everyone  who  has  unearned  income,  for  example, 
dividends  on  capital,  profits  of  a  business,  rent  of 
property.  How  big  the  unearned  income  must  be 
which  carries  with  it  loss  of  the  vote  is  not  stated. 
Does  it  include  the  possession  of  a  savings  bank- 
book? Quite  a  number  of  workers,  especially  in 
the  small  towns,  own  a  little  house,  and,  to  keep 
themselves  above  water,  let  lodgings.  Does  this 
bring  them  into  the  category  of  people  with 
unearned  income.  Not  long  since  there  was  a 
strike  at  the  Obuchovist  Factory,  **  this  hotbed  of 
the  Eevolution,"  as  Trotsky  styled  it  in  1909 
(Russia  in  the  Revolution,  page  83).  I  asked  .\ 
Bolshevist  comrade  how  he  explained  this  protest 
against  the  Soviet  Government. 

"  That  is  very  simple,'*  he  said,  **  the  workers 
there  are  all  capitalists  who  own  a  little  house." 

One  sees  how  little  it  takes,  according  to  the 
Constitution  of  the  Soviet  Republic,  to  be  labelled 
a  capitalist,  and  to  lose  the  vote. 

The  elasticity  of  the  definition  of  the  franchise, 
which  opens  the  door  to  the  greatest  arbitrari- 
ness, is  due  to  the  subject  of  this  definition,  and  not 
to  its  framers.  A  juridical  definition  of  the  prole- 
tariat, which  shall  be  distinct  and  precise,  is  not  to 
be  had. 

THE  SOVIET  EEPUBLIC  98 

I  have  not  found  a  reference  to  the  appointment 
of  a  specific  authority  which  shall  verify  each 
person's  vote,  compile  voting  lists,  and  carry  out 
the  election,  either  by  secret  ballot  or  a  show  of 
hands.  Clause  70  determines:  "The  exact  pro- 
cedure of  election  will  be  decided  by  the  local 
Soviets,  in  accordance  with  instructions  from  the 
All-Russian  Central  Committee." 

In  a  speech  of  April  28,  1918,  Lenin  mentioned  . 
the  following  in  connection  with  the  Socialist  ' 
character  of  the  Soviets :  (1)  The  voters  are  th^i 
working  and  exploited  masses,  only  the  middle 
classes  being  excluded;  (2)  All  bureaucratic  for-- 
mality  and  restriction  cease.  The  masses  them- 
selves decide  the  procedure  and  the  date  of  the 
elections. 

It  seems,  then,  that  any  body  of  electors  may 
order  the  electoral  procedure  according  to  their 
whims.  This  would  give  the  greatest  scope  for 
^hitrary-action,  and  make  it  possible  to  get  rid  of 
any  inconvenient  element  of  opposition  within  the 
proletariat  itself. 

It  need  only  be  remarked  in  passing  that  the     . 
— «tection    to   the    regional   Soviet   is    an    indirect^    I  *J 
one,  which  in  any  case  makes  easy  the  influencing 
of  elections  to  the  detriment  of  the  opposition. 

However,  this  has  not  prevented  the  opposition 
from  coming  to  expression  in  the  Soviets. 

84       DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETARIAT 

The  "  least  painful  transition  "  to  Socialism 
obviously  requires  the  silencing  of  all  opposition 
and  criticism.  So  on  June  14,  1918,  the  All-Rus- 
sian    Central   Committee   passed   this   resolution : 

' '  The  representatives  of  the  Social  Revolution- 
ary Party  (the  right  wing  and  the  centre)  are 
excluded,  and  at  the  same  time  all  Soviets  of 
Workers',  Soldiers',  Peasants'  and  Cossacks' 
Deputies  are  recommended  to  expel  from  their 
midst  all  representatives  of  this  fraction." 
\_Tliis  measure  was  not  directed  against  particular 
persons,  who  had  committed  some  punishable 
acts.  Anyone  offending  in  this  way  against  the 
existing  order  would  at  once  be  imprisoned,  and 
there  would  be  no  need  to  exclude  him.  There  is 
no  word  in  the  constitution  of  the  Soviet  Republic 
respecting  the  immunity  of  deputies.  \  Not  par- 
ticular persons  (but  particular  parties  were  thereby 
excluded  from  the  Soviets.  This  means  in  practice 
nothing  less  than  that  all  proletarians,  who  take 
their  stand  on  the  ground  of  party,  lose  their  votes. 
Their  votes  are  no  longer  counted.  For  this  no 
specific  clause  exists.  Clause  23  of  the  Constitu- 
tion  of  the  Soviet  Repubhc  determines  :  \*  XA^Jhe, 
interests  of  the  working  cl^  as  a  whole  the 
Russian  SociaTisfTeHeral  Soviet  RepuBlic^  may 
withdraw  rights  from  any  persons  or  groups  who 
misuse  thep^to  the  detriment  of  the  Socialist 
Revolution."  1 

THE  SOVIET  REPUBLIC  85 

This  declared  the  whole  opposition  to  be  out- 
laws. For  every  Government,  even  a  revolution- 
ary one,  discovers  that  the  opposition  misuse  their 
rights.  Yet  even  this  was  not  sufficient  to  ensure 
the  painless  transition  to  Socialism. 

Scarcely  had  the  Bolsheviks  got  rid  of  the] 
opposition  of  the  Mensheviks  and  the  Centre  and 
Right  Wing  of  the  Social  Revolutionaries  within 
the  Soviets,  when  the  great  fight  broke  out 
between  them  and  the  left  Social  Revolutionaries, 
with  whom  they  had  formed  the  government.  The 
greater  part  of  these  were  now  driven  out  of  the 
Soviets. 

So  within  tKe  proletariat  itself  the  circle  of 
those  who  participate  in  political  rights,  upon 
whom  the  Bolshevist  regime  rests,  becomes  evei 
jmaller.  Starting  out  with  the  idea  of  establish- 
ing the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  the  Bolshevist 
regime  was  bound  to  become  the  dictatorship  of  a 
party  within  the  proletariat.  Yet  it  might  be  for 
a  long  time  the  dictatorship  of  the  majority  of  the 
proletariat  over  the  minority.  To-day  even  that 
.has  become  doubtful. 

Nevertheless,  every  regime,  even  a  dictator- 
ship, is  under  the  necessity  of  ap^earing^to^be  the 
expression  of  the  needs  of  the  majority,  not  merely 
of  the  proletariat,  but  of  the  whole  people.  Even 
the  Bolsheviks  cannot  escape  from  this. 

86      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT         I 

The    Populaire    of    Paris,    on    July    6,    191 8, f 
reported  an    interview   which   Longuet  had  with 
Litvinoff,    the    London    Bolshevik    Ambassador. 
Among  other  things  Longuet  remarked  : 

*'  You  know,  citizen  Litvinoff,  that  even  the 
comrades  in  the  West,  who  have  the  strongest 
sympathy  for  your  movement,  are  pained  by  the 
dissolution  of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  I  had 
already  told  you  this  on  my  own  account,  when  I 
last  saw  you  in  January.  Do  you  not  think  that,  in 
order  to  meet  the  attacks  that  are  made  on  you, 
you  ought  at  any  rate  to  hold  new  elections?  " 

To  which  Litvinoff  replied  : 

"  This  is  not  possible  at  the  moment  in  view  of 
the  present  situation.  Democracy  expressed  m 
the  form  of  the  Soviets — a  more  precise  expres- 
sion of  the  will  of  the  masses — is  the  sole  form  of 
representation  suitable  to  Eussia  at  the  present 
time.  Besides  those  who  protested  against  the 
last  Soviet  elections,  which  were  disastrous  for 
them,  would  also  oppose  elections  for  a  new 
Assembly,  in  which  we  should  certainly  have  the 
majority." 

If  Comrade  Litvinoff  and  his  friends  are  so  sure 
of  this,  why  do  not  they  take  steps  to  hold  such 
elections.  If  these  were  held  in  the  fullest  free- 
dom, and  gave  a  Bolshevist  majority,  the  existing 
Government  would  gain  a  far  stronger  moral  basi? 

THE  SOVIET  REPUBLIC  87 

at  home  and  abroad  than  ever  it  can  win  as  a 
Soviet  Government  on  the  present  methods  of 
election  and  administration.  Above  all,  Socialist 
critics  would  lose  every  ground  of  objection,  and 
the  whole  International  of  the  fighting  proletariat 
would  stand  behind  them  with  unanimity  and 
with  full  force. 

Why  renounce  this  enormous  advantage  if  one  is 
so  sure  of  a  majority?  Because  general  suffrage 
is  not  suitable  to  Russia  at  the  present  time,  and 
only  the  Soviet  organisation  meets  its  require- 
ments? But  how  can  this  assertion  be  proved  r^t  ( 
is  indeed  understandable  when  one  remembers 
that  every  Government  likes  to  identify  itself  with 
the  country,  and  to  declare  that  what  does  not  suit 
it  is  also  not  suitable  for  the  countryTl  t. 

One  thing  can  certainly  be  graiited.  The 
present  situation  is  not  favourable  to  the  sugges- 
tion of  elections  to  a  Constituent  Assembly.  At 
the  time  when  the  elections  to  the  first  Assembly 
were  prepared  and  completed  a  certain  amount  of 
peace  still  prevailed  in  the  interior.  To-day  all 
Russia  is  torn  by  civil  war.  Does,  however,  this 
record  of  nine  months  of  the  Soviet  Republic  fur- 
nish the  proof  that  the  Soviet  organisation  is  the 
most  suitable  to  Russia,  and  the  one  which  least 
painfully  effects  the  transition  to  Socialism? 

v/ 

CHAPTER  Vm. 

The  Object  Lesson. 

The  pernicious  features  of  the  method  of  dictator- 
ship here  discussed  must  now  be  contrasted  with 
more  favourable  aspects.  It  furnishes  a  striking 
object  lesson,  and  even  if  it  cannou  last  it  is  able  to 
accomplish  many  things  to  the  advantage  of  the 
proletariat,  which  cannot  be  lost. 

Let  us  look  closely  at  the  object  lesson.  This 
argument  obviously  rests  on  the  following'  con- 
sideration :  Under  democracy,  by  virtue  of  which 
the  majority  of  the  people  rule,  Socialism  can  only 
be  brought  about  when  a  majority  in  its  favour,  is 
gained.  A  long  and  tedious  way.  We  reach  our 
goal  far  quicker  if  an  energetic  minority  which 
knows  its  aims,  seizes  hold  of  the  power  of  the 
State,  and  uses  it  for  passing  Socialist  measures. 
Its  success  would  at  once  compel  conviction,  and 
the  majority,  which  hitherto  had  opposed,  would 
quickly  rally  to  Socialism. 

This  sounds  very  plausible,  and  sounded  so  in 
the  mouth  of  old  Weitling.  It  has  only  the  one 
defect  that  it  assumes  that  which  has  to  be  proved. 

88 

THE  OBJECT  LESSON  89 

The  opponents  of  the  method  of  dictatorship  con- 
test the  assumption  that  Sociahst  production  can 
be  brought  about  by  a  minority  without  the 
co-operation  of  the  great  mass  of  the  people.  If 
the  attempt  fails,  it  certainly  is  an  object  lesson, 
but  in  the  wrong  sense,  not  by  attracting,  but  by 
frightening. 

People  who  are  influenced  by  such  an  object 
lesson,  and  not  by  examining  and  verifying  social 
relations,  thoughtless  worshippers  of  mere  suc- 
cess, would,  in  the  case  of  the  attempt  failing,  not 
inquire  from  what  causes  it  did  not  succeed.  They 
would  not  seek  for  the  explanation  in  the 
unfavourable  or  unripe  conditions,  but  in 
Socialism  itself,  and  would  conclude  that  Socialism 
is  realisable  under  no  circumstances. 

It  is  apparent  that  the  object  lesson  has  a  very 
dangerous  side. 

How  has  it  been  represented  to  us? 

We  may  popularly  express  the  essentials  of 
Socialism  in  the  words :  Freedom  and  bread  for 
all.  This  is  what  the  masses  expect  from  it,  and 
why  they  rally  to  it.  Freedom  is  not  less  important 
than  bread.  Even  well-to-do  and  rich  classes  have 
fought  for  their  freedom,  and  not  seldom  have 
made  the  biggest  sacrifices  for  their  convictions  in 
Wood  and  treasure.      The  need  for  freedom,  for 

90      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

sell-determination,  is  as  natural  as  the  need  for 
food. 

Hitherto  Social  Democracy  did  represent  to 
the  masses  of  the  people  the  object  lesson  of 
being  the  most  tireless  champion  of  the  freedom  of 
all  who  were  oppressed,  not  merely  the  wage- 
earner,  but  also  of  women,  persecuted  religions 
and  races,  the  Jews,  Negroes  and  Chinese.  By 
this  object  lesson  it  has  won  adherents  quite  out- 
side the  circle  of  wage-earners. 

Now,  so  soon  as  Social  Democracy  attains  to 
power,  this  object  lesson  is  to  be  replaced  by  one 
of  an  opposite  character.  The  first  step  consists 
in  the  suspension  of  universal  suffrage  and  of 
liberty  of  the  Press,  the  disfranchisement  of  large 
masses  of  the  people,  for  this  must  always  take 
place  if  dictatorship  is  substituted  for  democracy. 
In  order  to  break  the  political  influence  of  the 
upper  ten  thousand,  it  is  not  necessary  to  exclude 
them  from  the  franchise.  They  exercise  this 
influence  not  by  their  personal  votes.  As  regards 
small  shopkeepers,  home  workers,  peasants  who 
are  well  off  and  in  moderate  condition,  the  greater 
part  of  the  intellectuals,  so  soon  as  the  dictator- 
ship deprives  them  of  their  rights,  they  are 
changed  at  once  into  enemies  of  Socialism  by  this 
kind  of  object  lesson,  so  far  as  they  are  not 
inimical  from  the  beginning.      Thus  all  those  who 

THE  OBJECT  LESSON  91 

adliere  to  Socialism  on  the  ground  that  it  fights  for 
the  freedom  of  all  would  become  enemies  of  the 
proletarian  dictatorship. 

This  method  will  win  nobody  who  is  not  already 
a  Socialist.       It  can  only  increase  the  enemies  of 
Socialism. 

"^But  we  saw  that  Socialism  not  only  promised 
freedom,  but  also  bread.      This  ought  to  reconcile  =^ 
those  whom  the  Communist  dictatorship  robbed  of 
freedom. 

They  are  not  the  best  of  the  masses  who  are  con- 
soled in  their  loss  of  freedom  with  bread  and 
pleasure.  But  without  doubt  material  well-being 
will  lead  many  to  Communism  who  regard  it  scep- 
tically, or  who  are  by  it  deprived  of  their  rights. 
Only  this  prosperity  must  really  come,  and  that 
quickly,  not  as  a  promise  for  the  future,  if  the 
object  lesson  is  to  be  effective. 

How  is  this  prosperity  to  be  attained?  The 
necessity  for  dictatorship  pre-supposes  that  a  , 
minority  of  the  population  have  possessed  them-  ! 
selves  of  the  power  of  the  State.  A  minority  com- 
posed of  those  who  possess  nothing.  The  greatest 
weapon  of  the  proletariat  is,  however,  its  numbers, 
and  in  normal  times  it  can  only  progress  on  these 
lines,  conquering  the  political  power  only  when  it 
forms  the  majority.  As  a  minority  it  can  only 
achieve  power  by  the  combination  of  extraordin- 

92       DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT 

ary  circumstances,  by  a  catastrophe  which  causes 
the  collapse  of  a  regime,  and  leaves  the  State 
helpless  and  impoverished. 

Under  such  circumstances,  Socialism,  that  is 
general  well-being  within  modern  civilisation, 
would  only  be  possible  through  a  powerful 
development  of  the  productive  forces  which  capi- 
talism brings  into  existence,  and  with  the  aid  of  the 
enormous  riches  which  it  creates  and  concentrates 
in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  class.  A  State  which 
by  a  foolish  pohcy  or  by  unsuccessful  war  has  dissi- 
pated these  riches,  is  by  its  nature  condemned  to 
be  an  unfavourable  starting  point  for  the  rapid 
diffusion  of  prosperity  in  all  classes. 

If,  as  the  heir  of  the  bankrupt  State,  not  a  demo- 
cratic but  a  dictatorial  regime  enters  into  power,  it 
even  renders  the  position  worse,  as  civil  war  is  its 
necessary  consequence.  What  might  still  be  left 
in  the  shape  of  material  resources  is  wasted  by 
anarchy. 

In  fine,  the  uninterrupted  progress  of  produc- 
tion is  essential  for  the  prosperity  of  all.  The 
destruction  of  capitalism  is  not  Socialism.  Where 
capitalist  production  cannot  be  transformed  at  once 
into  Socialist  production,  it  must  go  on  as  before, 
otherwise  the  process  of  production  will  be  inter- 
rupted, and  that  hardship  for  the  masses  will  ensue 

THE  OBJECT  LESSON  93 

which  the  modern  proletariat  so  much  fears  in  the 
shape  of  general  unemployment. 

rnrthose  places  where,  under  the  new  conditions, 
caprtalist  production  has  been  rendered  impossible, 
Socialist  production  will  only  be  able  to  replace  it 
if  the  proletariat  has  acquired  experience  in  self- 
government,  in  trade  unions,  and  on  town  councils, 
and  has  participated  in  the  making  of  laws  and  the 
control  of  government,  and  if  numerous  intel- 
lectuals are  prepared  to  assist  with  their  services 
the  new  methods7\ 

In  a  country  wmch  is  so  little  developed  economi- 
cally that  the  proletariat  only  forms  a  minority, 
such  maturity  of  the  proletariat  is  not  to  be 
expected. 

It  may  therefore  be  taken  for  granted  that  in  all  ^ 
places   where  the  proletariat  can   only    maintain 
itself  in  powder  by  a  dictatorship,   instead  of  by 
democracy,  the  difficulties  with  which  Socialism  is 
confronted  are  so  great  that  it  would  seem  to  be  out   i    k^ 
of  the   question    that   dictatorship   could   rapidly  l'*^ 
bring  about  prosperity  for  all,  and  in  this  manner 
reconcile  to  the  reign  of  force  the  masses  of  the 
people    W'ho    are    thereby    deprived    of    political  j 
rights.  — ! 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  see  that  the  Soviet 
Republic,  after  nine  months  of  existence,  instead 
of  diffusing  general  prosperity,  is  obliged  to  explain 
how  the  general  poverty  arises. 

94       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

We  have  lying  before  us  :  *  *  Theses  respecting 
the  Sociahst  Revolution  and  the  tasks  of  the  pro- 
letariat during  its  dictatorship  in  Russia,"  which 
emanates  from  the  Bolshevist  side.  A  passage 
deals  with  "  the  difficulties  of  the  position." 

Paragraph  28  leads  as  follows:  "28.  The 
proletariat  has  carried  out  positive  organic  work 
under  the  gieatest  difficulties.  The  internal 
difficulties  are  :  The  wearing  out  and  enormous 
exhaustion  of  the  social  resources  and  even  their 
dissolution  in  consequence  of  the  war,  the  policy 
of  the  capitalist  class  before  the  October  revolution 
(their  calculated  policy  of  disorganisation,  in  order, 
after  the  "  Anarchy,'  to  create  a  middle-class 
dictatorship),  the  general  sabotage  of  the  middle- 
class  and  the  intellectuals  after  the  October  revolu- 
tion; the  permanent  counter-revolutionary  revolt 
of  the  ex-officers,  generals  and  middle  classes,  with 
arms  or  without;  lack  of  technical  skill  and  experi- 
ence on  the  fart  of  the  working-class  itself 
(italicised  in  original),  lack  of  organising  experi- 
ence; the  existence  of  large  masses  of  the  small 
middle  class,  which  are  an  unorganised  class, 
par  excellence,  etc." 

This  is  all  very  true.  But  it  does  not  indicate 
^anything  else  than  that  the  conditions  are  not  ripe. 
And  does  it  not  strikingly  show  that  an  object  lesson 

THE  OBJECT  LESSON  05 

on  the  lines  of  Socialism  is,  under  these  conditions 
in  present-day  Russia,  not  to  be  thought  of?  It  is 
a  famous  object  lesson  which  makes  it  necessary  for 
theoretical  arguments  to  be  set  out  why  that 
which  is  to  be  shown  is  not  possible  at  the  moment. 
Will  it  convert  those  who  have  hitherto  opposed 
Socialism,  and  who  are  only  to  be  convinced  by 
its  practical  success  ? 

Of  course,  a  new  regime  will  come  up  against 
unexpected  difficulties.  It  is  wrong  to  lay  the 
blame  for  them  on  this  regime,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  and  to  be  discouraged  by  them  without 
closer  examination  of  the  circumstances.  But  if 
one  is  to  persevere,  in  spite  of  these  difficulties, 
then  it  is  necessary  to  win  beforehand  a  strong 
conviction  of  the  justice  and  necessity  of  this 
regime.  Only  then  will  confusion  be  avoided. 
Success  worshippers  are  always  uncertain  Can- 
tonists. 

So  we  are  driven  back  upon  democracy,  which 
obliges  us  to  strive  to  enlighten  and  convince  the 
masses  by  intensive  propaganda  before  we  can 
reach  the  point  of  bringing  Socialism  about.  We 
must  here  again  repudiate  the  method  of  dictator- 
ship, which  substitutes  compulsory  object  lessons 
for  conviction. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  object  lessons  may  avail 
nothing  in  the  realisation  of  Socialism.       On  the 

96       DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

contrary,  they  can  and  will  play  a  great  part  in 
this,  but  not  through  the  medium  of  dictatorship. 

^      The  various  States  of  the   world  are  at  very 
■^Bifferent  stages  of  economic  and  political  develop- 
ment.    The  more  a  State  is  capitalistic  on  the  one 
*side  and  democratic  on  the  other,  the  nearer  it  is 
^'to  Socialism.      The  more  its  capitalist  industry  is 
developed,  the  higher  is  its  productive  power,  the 
greater  its  riches,  the  more  socially  organised  its 
labour,  the  more  numerous  its  proletariat ;  and  the 
more  democratic  a  State  is,  the  better  trained  and 
organised  is  its  proletariat.    Democracy  may  some- 
times  repress   its  revolutionary  thought,  but  it  is 
the  indispensable  means  for  the  proletariat  to  attain 
that  ripeness  which  it  needs  for  the  conquest  of 
political  power,  and  the  bringing  about  of  the  social 
revolution.   In  no  country  is  a  conflict  between  the 
proletariat  and  the  ruling  classes  absent,  but  the 
more  a  country  is  progressive  in  capitalism  and 
democracy,  the  greater  is  the  prospect  of  the  pro- 
letariat, m  such  a  conflict,  of  not  merely  gaining 

X   a  passing  victory,  but  also  of  maintaining  it. 

Where  a  proletariat,  under  such  conditions, 
gains  control  of  the  State,  it  will  discover  sufficient 
material  and  intellectual  resources  to  permit  it  it 
once  to  give  the  economic  development  a  Socialist 
direction,  and  immediately  to  increase  the  general 
well-being. 

THE  OBJECT  LESSON  97 

This  will  then  furnish  a  genuine  object  lesson  to 
countries  which  are  economically  and  poHtically 
backward.  The  mass  of  their  proletariat  will  now 
unanimously  demand  measures  on  the  same  hues, 
and  also  all  other  sections  of  the  poorer  classes,  as 
well  as  numerous  intellectuals,  will  demand  that 
the  State  should  take  the  same  road  to  general 
prosperity.  Thus,  by  the  example  of  the  pro- 
gressive countries,  the  cause  of  Socialism  will 
become  irresistible  in  countries  which  to-day  are 
not  so  advanced  as  to  ^Uow  their  proletariat  of  its 
own  strength  to  conquer  the  power  of  the  State, 
and  put  Socialism  into  operation. 

And  we  need  not  place  this  period  in  the  distant 
future.  In  a  number  of  industrial  States  the 
material  and  moral  prerequisites  for  Socialism 
appear  already  to  exist  in  sufficient  measure.  The 
question  of  the  political  dominion  of  the  prole- 
tariat is  merely  a  question  of  power  alone,  above 
all  of  the  determination  of  the  proletariat  to  engage  V" 
in  resolute  class  struggle. \ But  Russia  is  not  one  of 
these  leading  industrial  States.  What  is  being 
enacted  there  now  is,  in  fact,  the  last  of  middle 
class,  and  not  the  first  of  Socialist  revolutions]  v 
This  shows  itself  ever  more  distinctly.  Its  present 
Revolution  could  only  assume  a  Socialist  character 
if  it  coincided  with  SociaHst  Revolutions  in  Western 
Europe. 

'\ 

98      DICTAT0K8HIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAEIAT 

That  by  an  object  lesson  of  this  kind  in  the  more 
highly-developed  nations,  the  pace  of  social 
development  may  be  accelerated,  was  already 
recognised  by  Marx  m  the  preface  to  the  first 
edition  of  '  *  Capital ' '  : 

"  One  nation  can  and  should  learn  from  others. 
And  even  when  a  society  has  got  upon  the  right 
track  for  the  discovery  of  the  natural  laws  of  its 
movement — it  can  neither  clear  by  bold  leaps,  nor 
remove  by  legal  enactments  the  obstacles  offered 
by  the  successive  phases  of  its  normal  development. 
But  it  can  shorten  and  lessen  the  biith-pangs." 

In  spite  of  their  numerous  calls  on  Marx,  our 
Bolshevist  friends  seem  to  have  quite  forgotten 
this  passage,  for  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat, 
which  they  preach  and  practise,  is  nothing  but  a 
grandiose  attempt  to  clear  by  bold  leaps  or  remove 
,Nl)y  legal  enactments  the  obstacles  offered  by  the 
successive  phases  of  normal  development.  They 
think  that  it  is  the  least  painful  method  for  the 
delivery  of  Socialism,  for  ' '  shortening  and  lessen- 
ing its  birth-pangs."'  But  if  we  are  to  continue  in 
metaphor,  then  their  practice  reminds  us  more  of 
a  pregnant  woman,  who  performs  the  most  foolish 
exercises  in  order  to  shorten  the  period  of  gesta- 
tion, which  makes  her  impatient,  and  thereby 
causes  a  premature  birth. 

THE  OBJECT  LESSON  99 

The  result  of  such  proceedings  is,  as  a  rule,  a 
child  incapable  of  life. 

Marx  speaks  here  of  the  object  lesson  which  one 
nation  may  afford  anothei".  Socialism  is,  however, 
concerned  with  yet  another  kind  of  object  lesson, 
viz.,  that  which  a  highly-developed  industry  may 
furnish  to  an  industry  which  is  backward. 

To  be  sure,  capitalist  competition  everywhere 
tends  to  displace  old-fashioned  industrial  methods, 
but  under  capitalist  conditions  this  is  so  painful  a 
process  that  those  threatened  by  its  operation 
strive  to  avert  it  by  all  means.  The  Socialist 
method  of  production  would  therefore  find  in  exist- 
ence a  number  of  processes  which  are  technically 
obsolete;  for  example,  in  agriculture,  where  large- 
scale  production  has  made  little  progress,  and  in 
places  is  even  receding. 

Socialist  production  can  only  develop  on  the 
basis  of  the  large  industry.  Socialist  agriculture 
would  have  to  consist  solely  in  the  socialisation  of 
what  large-scale  production  already  exists.  If 
good  results  are  thereby  obtained,  which  is  to  be 
expected,  provided  the  social  labour  of  freely- 
organised  men  is  substituted  for  wage  labour, 
(which  only  produces  very  inadequate  results  in 
agriculture)  the  conditions  of  the  workers  in  the 
large  Socialist  industry  will  be  seen  to  be  more 
favourable  than  those  of  the  small  peasants,  and  it 

100     DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

may  then  be  anticipated  with  certainty  that  the 
latter  will  voluntarily  pass  over  to  the  new  produc- 
tive methods,  when  society  furnishes  them  with  the 
necessary  means.  But  not  before.  In  agriculture 
the  way  for  Socialism  is  not  prepared  by  Capitalism 
in  any  adequate  measure.  And  it  is  quite  hopeless 
to  try  to  convince  peasant  proprietors  of  the 
theoretical  superiority  of  Socialism.  Only  the 
object  lesson  of  the  socialisation  of  peasant  agri- 
culture can  help.  This,  however,  presupposes  a 
certain  extension  of  large-scale  agriculture.  The 
object  lesson  will  be  the  quicker  and  more  effective 
according  to  the  degree  of  development  of  large- 
scale  industry  in  the  country. 

The  policy  of  the  lower  middle  class  democrats, 
which  has  been  taken  up  by  Social  Democrats  of 
the  David  school,  and  in  some  respects  made  more 
extreme,  that  is,  the  destruction  of  any  large-scale 
agriculture  and  its  partition  into  small-scale  indus- 
try, is  sharply  opposed  to  Socialism  as  applied  to 
agriculture,  and  therefore  to  Sociahsm  as  applied 
to  society  generally. 

The  most  striking  feature  of  the  present  Russian 
Revolution  is  its  working  out  on  the  lines  of 
PMuard  David.  He,  and  not  Lenin,  has  given  the 
Revolution  its  peculiar  direction  in  this  respect. 
That  is  the  Socialist  instruction  which  it  imparts. 
It  testifies,  in  fact,  to  its  middle-class  character. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

The  Legacy  of  the  Dictatorship. 
(a)  Agriculture. 

Dictatorship  is  not  only  going  to  furnish  the  best 
object  lesson  for  Socialist  propaganda,  but  will  also 
hasten  progress  towards  Socialism,  by  its  actions, 
in  the  event  of  its  not  maintaining  itself  and 
collapsing  before  the  goal  has  been  reached.  Its 
supporters  expect  that  it  will  leave  behind  much 
that  cannot  be  set  on  one  side,  and  that  it  has 
cleared  out  of  the  way  much  that  cannot  be  again 
established. 

This  conception,  too,  like  so  many  others,  is 
based  on  the  observation  of  the  great  French 
Revolution,  the  middle-class  revolution,  under  the 
influence  of  which  remain  those  who  stigmatise  as 
"middle  class,"  and  reject,  all  that  does  not  suit 
them,  and  for  whom  democracy  is  only  a  middle- 
class  prejudice. 

The  observation  is  correct, but  the  conclusions  to 
be  drawn  are  other  than  those  of  the  supporters  of 
dictatorship.  The  latter  may  be  able  to  achieve  more 
radical  things  than  democracy,  but  what  accom- 
panies it  is  not  always  what  the  dictators  want. 
However  high  the  dictatorship  may  be  raised  above 

101 

102      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

all  other  powers  in  the  State,  it  is  always  dependent 
upon  one  of  them  :  that  is  the  material  foundations 
of  society.  These  conditions,  and  not  the  will  of 
the  dictators,  decide  what  the  final  consequences 
of  the  dictatorship  will  be. 

The  strongest  driving  force  of  the  Reign  of 
Terror  in  the  French  Revolution  was  the  proletariat 
and  the  semi-proletarian  classes  of  Paris.  What 
they  desired  was  the  equalisation  of  all  property, 
the  destruction  of  large  properties.  This  they 
succeeded  in  doing  in  various  ways.  But  they 
destroyed  only  more  thoroughly  than  has  happened 
in  other  parts  of  Europe  the  vestiges  of  feudalism, 
and  thereby  more  effectively  opened  the  way  for 
the  coming  of  the  new  capitalist  large  property, 
which  shot  up  like  a  fungus  immediately  after  the 
downfall  of  the  Reign  of  Terror.  That,  and  in 
nowise  economic  equality,  was  the  legacy  of  that 
dictatorship  of  the  equahtarians. 

In  order  to  understand  what  the  economic  legacy 
of  the  present  dictatorship  of  the  Soviets  will 
be,  we  must  not  only  take  account  of  their 
intentions,  desires  and  measures,  but  of  the 
economic  structure  of  the  Empire.    It  is  decisive. 

This  examination  may  appear  to  many  as  tedious 
pedantry,  incompatible  with  the  revolutionary  fire 
which  burned  in  a  Marx.  No  one  can  say  with 
certainty  what  Marx  would  have  thought  and  done 

I 

AGRICULTURE  103 

in  the  present  situation.  But  it  is  certain  that  this 
tedious  pedantry  is  the  only  procedure  which  is 
compatible  with  historical  raaterialism,  the  founda- 
tion of  which  is  one  of  the  indisputable  merits  of 
Marx.  A  man  who  beheved  that  in  a  question  of 
knowledge  mere  enthusiasm  was  to  be  accounted 
higher  than  experience  would  have  been  pushed  on 
one  side  by  Marx  as  an  empty  phrasemonger.  n 
The  economic  foundation  of  present-day  Russia  \ 
ts  still  agriculture,  and  even  small  peasant  agri-  ) 
culture.  By  it  live  four-fifths,  perhaps  even  five- 
sixths  of  its  inhabitants.  In  the  year  1913  the 
town  population  of  Russia  (excluding  Finland)  was 
computed  at  24  milhons^  and  those  living  by  the  \v 
land  were  147  millions.  The  overwhelming  majority  » 
of  the  latter  are  peasants.  The  Revolution  has 
altered  nothing  in  these  conditions.  During  the 
past  year  they  have  even  been  strengthened. 
Numerous  workers  have  returned  to  the  land.  In 
the  towns  hunger  has  been  more  devastating  than 
amongst  the  peasants. 

Until  the  Revolution  the  peasants  lived  under  a 
semi-feudal  yoke.  Serfage  had  indeed  been 
abolished  by  the  Reform  of  1861,  and  the  peasant 
formally  made  a  free  man.  But  this  was  not  the 
work  of  a  revolution,  but  the  work  of  a  patriarchal 
absolutism,  which  in  a  fatherly  spirit  provided  that 
the  big   landowners  should   lose  nothing  by   the 

104     DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

Eeform,  but  should  rather  gain.  The  peasant  had 
to  pay  for  his  freedom  with  the  loss  of  a  part  of  the 
land  which,  prior  to  the  Reform,  he  had  used,  and 
had  to  pay  dear  for  the  land  which  would  be 
granted  to  him.  The  average  size  of  a  peasant's 
holding  was  certainly  larger  than  in  Western 
Europe.  Before  the  Revolution  the  peasants' 
holdings  of  less  than  five  hectares  in  Russig,  com- 
prised only  10.6  per  cent,  of  the  total,  whereas  in 
France  71.4  per  cent,  of  the  holdings  were  five 
hectares  and  less,  and  in  Germany  76.5  per  cent. 
But  Russian  agriculture  is  so  backward  through 
the  ignorance  of  the  peasants,  primitive  appli- 
ances, lack  of  cattle  and  manure,  that  it  produce* 
far  less  than  in  Western  Europe.  In  France  70.5 
pud  of  wheat  (1  pud  =  16.38  kilogrammes)  is 
raised  from  every  hectare,  in  Germany  77  pud,  but 
in  Russia  only  28.2  pud.  (Massloff :  the  Russian 
Agrarian  Question.) 

The  peasant  was  therefore  soon  after  his  eman- 
cipation in  a  worse  material  position  than  before. 
He  became  impoverished,  and  his  industry  did  not 
progress,  but  rather  declined.  To  avoid  star- 
vation, he  was  obliged  to  rent  plots  of  land  from 
the  large  land-owners,  or,  where  these  were  them- 
selves engaged  in  large-scale  agriculture,  to  work 
for  wages.  Mostly,  he  was  obliged  to  obtain  an 
advance  for  the  work  he  was  to  do,  which  brought 

AGEICULTUEE  105 

him  into  a  state  of  indebtedness  that  was  often 
more  oppressive  and  hopeless  than  his  former 
serfdom.  This  state  of  affairs  was  not  improved 
by  the  peasant  taking  his  produce  to  the  markets, 
whether  home  or  foreign.  This  put  money  in  his 
pocket,  and  made  it  possible  for  him  to  save,  which 
could,  however,  only  be  done  at  the  cost  of  the 
peasant's  sustenance.  Formerly,  he  had  con- 
sumed the  greater  part  of  his  produce  himself, 
because  he  had  no  other  outlet.  Now  that  he 
found  an  outlet,  he  sold  as  much  as  possible,  and 
kept  as  little  as  possible  back.  So  every  year  of 
failure  became  a  year  of  hunger.  So  far  as  the  ' 
peasant  could  save  money,  he  did  not  spend  it  to 
improve  his  methods,  but  to  obtain  more  land. 

In  the  period  between  1863  and  1892,  agricul- 
tural land  in  European  Russia  was 

Million   Roubles. 
Bought.  Sold. 

By  nobles  821         ...         1,459 

By  merchants    318         ...  135 

By  peasants  335         ...  93 

The  land  of  the  nobles  decreased,  and  that  of 
the  peasants  increased  as  compared  with  the 
middle  class  of  the  towns.  But  the  land  population 
mcreased  more  rapidly  still,  and  so  on  the  average 
there  was  a  decrease  in  the  area  belonging  to  each 
peasant,    although    the    total    holdings     of    the 

106     DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT 

peasants  slightly  increased.  At  the  same  time, 
under  the  influence  of  money  transactions,  aided 
by  the  legislature,  the  village  communism,  which 
from  time  to  time  had  been  instrumental  in 
equalising  the  land  holdings  of  individual  peasants, 
disappeared  more  and  more.  Individuals  were 
prosperous,  but  the  others  were  the  more 
impoverished.  Both,  however,  prosperous  and 
poor  peasants,  looked  ever  more  greedily  to  the 
great  land-owners,  from  whom  they  expected 
their  salvation.  They  longed  for  the  overthrow 
of  landed  property,  and  became  a  revolutionary 
class.  Their  longing  found  expression  and  form 
through  the  revolutionary  intellectuals  of  the 
towns.  The  Socialists  of  Eussia  were  agreed 
that  a  revolution  in  the  ownership  of  land  was  as 
essential  for  Russia  as  the  overthrow  of  the  Czarist 
absolutism.  But  the  Socialists  were  divided  mto 
two  sections.  The  one  believed  that  primitive 
village  communism  would  enable  the  peasants,  and 
with  them  all  Russia,  to  attain  to  Socialism  at  one 
bound,  although  it  may  be  a  Socialism  of  their 
own.  This  shade  of  opinion  found  various  expres- 
sions, the  chief  being  the  Social  Revolutionaries. 
The  Marxists  opposed  them  on  the  ground  that 
Eussia,  as  little  as  other  countries,  '*  could  clear 
by  leaps  or  remove  by  legal  enactments  the 
obstacles   offered    by   the    successive    phases   of 

AGRICULTUKE  107 

normal  development,"  that  the  coming  Revolution  < 
could  only  clear  away  the  vestiges  of  Feudalism,  c2. 
and  accelerate  the  capitalist  development,  on  the  ^ 
basis  of  which  would  grow  up  a  proletariat  trained  -X 
by  the  newly-won  democracy,  which,  then,  being  ^ 
on  the  same  level  as  the  proletariat  of  Western  \' 
.^JEurope,  would  be  able  to  achieve  Socialism  at  the  ^ 
same  time  as  the  latter.  ^^ 

All  Socialists  without  distinction  were  agreed  in  ^ 
supporting  the  peasants  in  their  endeavours  to  J^ ; 
remove  the  vestiges  of  Feudalism.  This  was  ,  ' 
distinctly  brought  to  the  mind  of  the  peasant  in  Jjij 
the  Revolution  of  1905.  From  then  onwards  the  (^ 
co-operation  of  peasants  and  Socialists,  namely,  ^^ 
through  the  means  of  the  Social  Revolutionaries,^ 
assumed  a  closer  character.  Thus  after  the 
Revolution  of  1917  the  organisation  of  the  Soviets- 
a  rose  as  not  merely  a  proletarian^  but  also  a  \j  ^  ■ 
peasant^  jnstiJuUgn . 

The  Revolution  made  possession  of  large  estates 
untenable.  This  became  obvious  at  once.  It  was 
inevitable  that  they  should  be  transferred  to  the 
peasant  population,  although  there  was  by  no 
means  agreement  as  to  the  methods  of  carrying 
this  out.  Various  solutions  were  conceivable. 
From  the  Socialist  standpoint,  the  most  rational 
would  have  been  to  transform  the  large  estate* 
into  State  property,  and  have  them  worked  on  a 

/ 

108      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETARIAT 

co-operative  basis  by  the  peasants,  who  had 
hitherto  been  engaged  on  them  as  wage-earners. 
However,  this  solution  presupposed  an  agricultural 
class  which  Russia  did  not  possess.  Another 
solution  would  have  been  for  the  big  landed  estates 
to  become  State  property,  and  to  be  divided  into 
small  parcels  to  be  rented  to  the  peasants  who 
needed  land.  Even  that  would  have  been  a  partial 
realisation  of  Socialism.  But\the  small  peasant 
holders  strove  where  they  could  to  obtam  full 
private  property  in  their  means  of  productionj 
This  character  they  have  hitherto  displayed  every- 
where, and  the  Russian  peasant,  in  spite  of  the 
Itradition  of  village  communism,  is  no  exception. 
The  breaking  up  of  landed  estates  and  their  parti- 
tion— that  was  his  programme,  and  he  was  strong 
enough  to  carry  it  out.  No  one  could  hinder  him. 
In  the  interests  of  the  peasants  themselves,  it 
would  have  been  nevertheless  very  desirable  that 
the  partition  should  be  systematically  carried  out, 
and  the  land  given  to  those  who  needed  it  the 
most,  and  could  also  use  it.  There  was  only  one 
authority  which  could  have  effected  such  a. 
systematic  partition,  and  that  was  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  as  representing  the  collective  will  of 
the  nation,  of  whom  the  great  majority  were 
peasants. 

But  this  was  too  long  to  wait.       The  peasantfl 

AGEICULTUEE  109 

began  everywhere  to  help  themselves,  which 
caused  many  valuable  productive  implements  to  be 
destroyed.  The  Soviet  Organisation  then  removed 
from  the  purview  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  the 
settlement  of  the  Agrarian  question,  and  left  it  to 
the  peasants  of  every  commune  to  seize  the  big 
estates,  and  proceed  with  their  partition  according 
to  their  whim.  One  of  the  first  resolutions  of  the 
Soviet  Government  ordered  that 

(1)  Private  property  in  land  rs  forthwith 
abolished,  without  compensation. 

(2)  The  property  of  the  landlords,  together 
with  the  appurtenances,  cloisters,  and 
church  property,  with  all  live-stock  and 
chattels,  and  other  belongings,  pending  the 
decision  of  the  land  question  by  the  Consti- 
tuent Assembly,  shall  be  placed  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Local  Committees  and  the 
Councils  of  Peasants'  Deputies. 

The  reference  to  the  Constituent  Assembly 
remained  a  dead  letter.  In  practice  the  peasants 
of  the  locahties  took  what  they  wanted  of  the 
estates. 

This  necessarily  excluded  any  equalisation 
between  rich  localities,  containing  many  substan- 
tial peasants,  and  poor  neighbourhoods  contain- 
ing none  but  small  peasants.  Within  the  individual 
communes  no    record  was   made   of  those   who 

110     DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

obtained  the  land.  Where  the  rich  peasants 
dominated,  either  by  their  numbers  or  their 
influence,  they  obtained  the  Hon  share  of  the  big 
estates.  No  general  statistics  regarding  the  parti- 
tion of  the  land  were  compiled,  but  it  was  fre- 
quently stated  that,  as  a  rule,  the  big  peasants 
came  away  with  most  of  the  land  that  was  parti- 
tioned. 

It  is  cei':tain  that  the  Soviet  Republic  has  not 
solved  the  Agrarian  question  on  the  lines  of 
an  equitable  division  of  the  land.  At  the  beginnings 
the  peasant  Soviets  constituted  an  organisation  of 
the  peasants  alone.  To-day  it  is  announced  that 
the  Soviets  represent  the  organisation  of  the  prole- 
tariat and  the  poor  peasants.  The  well-to-do  have 
lost  their  right  of  voting  in  the  Soviets.  The  poor 
peasant  is  here  recognised  as  the  colossal  and 
permanent  product  of  the  Socialist  agrarian  reform 
of  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.  This  peasant 
is  very  likely  in  the  minority  in  many  villages, 
otherwise  there  was  no  object  in  protecting  him  by 
disfranchising  the  prosperous  and  medium 
peasants.  But  in  any  case  he  still  forms  a  very 
considerable  fraction  of  the  Russian  peasantry. 

By  this  partition  of  property  the  Soviet  Republic 
sought  to  appease  the  peasants.  It  would  have 
been  dangerous  for  it  to  interfere  even  slightly 
with  peasant  private  property. 

AGKICULTUBE  111 

To  be  sure  it  encroached  on  the  relations 
between  rich  and  poor  peasants,  but  not  by  a  fresh 
partition  of  the  land.  To  remedy  the  lack  of  food 
in  the  towns  detachments  of  armed  workers  were 
sent  into  the  villages,  to  take  away  from  the  rich 
peasants  their  surplus  food.  Part  of  this  was 
assigned  to  the  population  of  the  towns,  and  part 
to  the  poor  peasants.  These  were  indeed  only 
temporary  measures  of  urgency,  confined  to  certain 
areas,  the  environs  of  the  large  towns.  To  carry 
them  out  thoroughly  the  armed  force  of  the  towns 
Vrould  have  been  quite  inadequate.  In  no  case 
could  such  measures  have  sufficed  to  effect  an 
equalisation  between  the  rich  and  poor  on  the  land, 
even  if  regularly  repeated  year  by  year.  And  in 
the  last  resort  they  might  prove  an  effective  means 
completely  to  ruin  agriculture. 

If  private  production  were  carried  on,  and  its 
produce  calculated  in  such  wise  that  the  producer 
would  have  taken  from  him  everything  over  what 
was  necessary  for  his  needs,  he  would  produce 
only  the  indispensable  minimum.  This  is  one  of 
the  reasons  for  the  decay  of  agriculture  in  many  of 
the  countries  living  under  Oriental  despotism,  in 
which  the  tax  collector  takes  from  the  peasant  the 
surplus  above  that  which  is  indispensable.  A 
similar  fate  is  likely  to  overtake  Russia.  Socialism 
will    effect    an    adjustment    between    economic 

112      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

differences  by  the  socialisation  of  the  means  and 
methods  of  production,  thus  making  society  the 
owner  of  the  products.  By  this  means  it  is  able  to 
increase  production  to  the  maximum,  and  dis- 
tribute the  produce  in  accordance  with  social 
requirements  and  justice. 

On  the  other  hand,  to  allow  private  property  in 
the  means  of  production,  and  private  production 
itself  to  continue,  and  then  regularly  to  confiscate 
the  surplus,  leads  to  the  ruin  of  production, 
whether  it  be  done  in  the  interests  of  an  Oriental 
despotism  or  of  a  proletarian  dictatorship.  Of 
course  in  cases  where  such  proceedings  may  be 
thought  desirable  as  a  temporary  measure  of 
urgency,  this  may  not  happen,  as  it  may  some- 
times be  necessary  to  do  this.  It  is  the  reverse 
with  the  present  expropriation  of  the  well-to-do 
peasants.  This  does  not  alter  in  the  least  the 
structure  of  Eussian  society,  it  only  introduces  a 
new  cause  of  unrest,  and  carries  civil  war  into  the 
domain  of  production,  the  continuance  of  which  is 
so  pressing  a  need  for  the  Government's  peace  and 
security.  Moreover,  if  the  dictatorship  of  the 
Soviets  had  the  will  and  the  strength  to  undertake 
a  fresh  partition  of  the  land,  and  to  do  this  equit- 
ably, it  would  not  help  the  peasants  much,  as  under 
the  present  primitive  methods  the  cultivated  land 

AGEICULTURE  113 

in  Russia  would  not  suffice  to  give  enough  land  to 
each  peasant  to  raise  him  out  of  poverty. 

As  Massloff  rightly  says  in  the  book  already 
quoted  from :  ' '  An  attempt  to  put  agriculture  on 
the  basis  of  equality  would  only  be  realised  as  a 
state  of  general  poverty.  To  try  to  make  all  rich, 
while  maintaining  private  property  in  the  means  of 
production  is  a  vulgar  Utopia  of  the  lower-middle 
classes.  If  this  kind  of  equality  is  not  realisable, 
there  is,  on  the  other  hand,  in  many  countries,  an 
equality  of  poverty  already  existing,  and  any 
extension  of  such  a  state  of  affairs  can  inspire  no 
one.  Whatever  additions  may  be  made  to  peasant 
property,  there  will  always  be  too  little  land  to 
permit  all  peasant  agriculture  to  be  prosperous. 
The  endeavour  to  bring  the  life  of  the  peasant  into 
the  orbit  of  the  lower  middle-class  ideal,  economic 
equahty  of  small  property,  is  not  only  Utopian,  but 
also  reactionary.** 

With  the  present  numbers  of  the  population,  and 
the  existing  area  of  cultivation,  a  general  raising 
of  the  social  standard  of  the  Russian  peasant, 
cannot  be  accomplished  by  any  method  of  parti- 
tioning the  land.  It  can  only  be  achieved  when 
higher  productive  forms  prevail,  which  require  a 
general  improvement  in  the  education  of  the  agri- 
cultural population,  and  a  larger  supply  of  cattle, 
implements,  machinery,  and  artificial  manure  to  be 

114     DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT 

at  their  disposal,  all  of  which  conditions  can  only 
be  introduced  with  difficulty  and  patience  where 
small  agriculture  is  the  rule. 

If  the  conditions  necessary  for  intensive 
capitalist  agriculture  have  only  been  slightly 
developed  in  Russia,  and  have  even  suffered  a 
temporary  set-back  through  the  revolution,  it  is 
clear  that  the  conditions  for  Sociahst  agriculture 
do  not  exist  there,  as  they  can  only  arise  on 
the  basis  of  large-scale  agriculture  with  highly- 
developed  technical  appliances.  Large-scale  pro- 
duction can  only  be  made  to  pay  by  technical 
appliances,  the  application  of  science,  the  most 
complete  equipment  of  machinery,  and  the  use  of 
up-to-date  methods,  accompanied  by  a  consider- 
able division  of  labour.  Therefore,  new  methods 
of  production  can  only  be  introduced  and  become 
permanent  in  places  where  advantages  can  be 
derived,  either  in  the  form  of  an  increased  product 
or  in  that  of  the  saving  of  labour.  In  view  of  the 
primitive  appliances  and  the  ignorance  of  the 
small  Russian  peasants,  it  is  hopeless  to  introduce 
large-scale  agriculture.  To  be  sure,  in  Bolshevist 
circles,  mention  is  made  from  time  to  time  of  the 
introduction  of  Socialist  agriculture,  after  the  big 
estates  have  been  broken  up  and  divided  amongst 
the  peasants.  We  have  already  referred  to  the 
theses  respecting  the  Russian  Revolution  and  the 

AGEICULTUKE  115 

tasks  of  the  proletariat  during  its  dictatorship  in 
Russia.  No.  24  of  these  reads:  "The  complete 
expropriation  of  the  land  owners  must  be  now 
mentioned.  Land  was  decreed  to  exist  for  the 
general  good.  Additional  tasks  are  the  following  : 
organisation  of  agriculture  by  the  State,  collective 
working  of  the  former  big  estates,  association  of 
the  small  holdings  into  larger  unities,  with  collec- 
tive self-government  (so-called  agricultural  com- 
munes)," 

This  which  was  said  to  be  the  task  is,  unfor- 
tunately, not  yet  fulfilled.  Collective  agi'iculture 
is,  for  the  time  being,  in  Russia  condemned  to 
remain  on  paper.  Nowhere,  and  at  no  time,  are 
small  peasants  persuaded,  on  the  ground  of  theory, 
to  go  in  for  collective  production.  The  Peasants' 
Associations  include  all  possible  branches  of 
economy,  and  not  merely  the  fundamental  one  of 
cultivating  the  land.  Small  scale  agriculture 
necessarily  creates  everywhere  the  endeavour  to 
separate  single  plots  of  land  from  one  another,  and 
is  favourable  to  private  property  in  land.  Thus  it 
has  happened  in  Europe  and  America,  and  the  pro- 
cess repeats  itself  throughout  the  world.  Is  the 
Russian  peasant  such  an  exceptional  phenomenon 
as  to  be  exempt  from  the  operation  of  this  general 
law  ?  Whoever  considers  him  as  an  ordinary  man 
and  compares  him  with  the  peasants  of  the  rest  of 

116     DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

the  world  will  declare  it  to  be  an  illusion  that  a 
Socialist  economy  can  be  built  up  on  the  basis  of 
present  Russian  agriculture. 

The  Revolution  has  only  achieved  in  Russia  what 
it  effected  in  France  in  1789  and  what  its  after- 
math achieved  in  Germany.  By  the  removal  of  the 
remains  of  feudalism  it  has  given  stronger  and 
more  definite  expression  to  private  property  than 
the  latter  had  formerly.  It  has  now  made  of  the 
.  peasants,  who  were  formerly  interested  in  the 
jL  overthrow  of  private  property  in  land,  that  is,  the 
big  estates,  the  most  energetic  defenders  of  the 
newly-created  private  property  in  land.  It  has 
strengthened  private  property  in  the  means  of 
production  and  in  the  produce,  which  are 
conditions  from  which  capitahst  production  will 
constantly  arise,  although  it  may  be  disturbed  or 
even  destroyed  for  a  time. 

Even  the  poor  peasants  are  not  thinking  of  giving 

up  the  principle  of  private  property  in  land.    Not 

by  collective  production  do  they  seek  to  improve 

their  lot,  but  by  increasing  their  own  share  of  land, 

that  is,  their  own  private  property.   [That  thirst  for 

land,  which  always  characterises  the  peasant,  has 

now,  after  the  destruction  of  the  big  estates,  made 

\i^of  him  the  strongest  defender  of  private  property 

i:^^    The  peasant  has  shown  himself  to  be  such  in  all 

,v>»^.    countries  where  feudalism  has  been  overcome,  and 

AGKICULTUKE  117 

therefore  he  is  fostered  and  pampered  by  the- 
ruling  classes  as  their  most  trustworthy  defender. 

This  will  be  the  most  certain  and  lasting  result 
of  the  present  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  and 
the  poorest  peasants  in  Eussia. 

The  interest  of  the  peasant  in  the  revolution 
therefore  dwindles  so  soon  as  his  new  private 
property  is  secured.  He  wnll  rise  against  any 
power  which  would  re-estabhsh  at  his  cost  the  old, 
large  land-owners,  but  he  has  no  interest  in  going 
beyond  this.  With  his  interest  in  the  revolution 
will  disappear  his  interest  in  his  erstwhile  allies, 
the  town  proletariat. 

The  less  the  peasant  produces  for  his  own  need 
and  the  more  he  produces  for  the  market,  and  is 
obliged  to  rely  upon  his  money  income,  so  much 
the  greater  becomes  his  interest  in  high  prices  for 
his  produce.  This  becomes  his  dominating  interest 
after  feudalism  has  been  abolished.  This  does  not, 
however,  bring  him  into  antagonism  to  the  large 
land-owners,  whose  interests  are  the  same  as  his, 
and  who  become  his  allies,  but  it  brings  him  into 
opposition  to  the  non-agricultural  and  town  popu- 
lation, above  all,  to  the  workers,  who  must  spend 
a  larger  portion  of  their  incomes  upon  food  than 
the  middle  classes,  and  consequently  have  the 
greatest  interest  in  lowering  the  prices  of  the 
necessaries  of  hfe. 

118     DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

So  long  as  feudalism  exists,  the  peasant  and  the 
lower  classes  in  the  towns  make  the  best  allies. 
This  was  shown  in  their  struggles  from  tlie  time  of 
the  German  Peasants'  War  of  1525  to  the  time  of 
the  French  Revolution  of  1789.  As  soon  as  the 
middle-class  levolution  was  accomplished,  the 
peasants  commenced  to  go  over  to  the  camp  which 
is  opposed  to  the  town  proletariat.  Not  only  the 
prosperous  peasants  are  to  be  found  there  with  the 
big  land-owners,  but  also  the  small  peasants,  even 
in  democratic  republics  like  Switzerland.  The 
small  peasants  do  not  go  over  to  this  side  all  at 
once,  but  gradually,  according  as  the  traditions  of 
feudahsm  become  fainter,  and  production  for  the 
market  replaces  production  for  their  own  need. 
Even  in  our  own  ranks  the  idea  has  been  cherished, 
which  Marx  also  referred  to  in  his  writings  on  the 
Civil  War  in  France,  that  the  peasants  in  the 
coming  proletarian  revolution  would  march  with 
the  proletariat  like  they  did  in  the  middle-class 
revolutions.  Even  yet  the  Governmental  Socialists 
are  looking  for  an  Agrarian  programme  which  will 
instil  in  the  peasants  an  interest  in  the  proletarian 
class  struggle  :  but,  in  practice,  growmg  opposition 
is  everywhere  revealed  between  the  proletariat 
and  the  peasants.  Only  those  dwellers  in  the 
country  have  the  same  interest  as  the  town  prole- 
tariat, who   are   themselves    proletarians,  that  is, 

AGRICULTUEE  119 

who  do  not  live  by  the  sale  of  their  produce,  but 
by  the  sale  of  their  labour  power,  by  wage  labour. 
The  victory  of  the  proletariat  depends  upon  the 
extension  of  wage  labour  in  the  country,  which  is 
a  protracted  process,  a  process  which  is  slowly 
accomplished  by  the  increase  of  large-scale 
agriculture,  but  more  quickly  promoted  by  the 
removal  of  industries  to  the  country.  At  the  same 
time,  the  proletarian  victory  depends  upon  the 
town  and  industrial  population  increasing  more 
rapidly  than  the  country  and  agricultural  popu- 
lation. The  latter  is  a  process  that  goes  rapidly 
forward.  In  most  industrial  States  the  country 
population  suffers  not  only  a  relative,  but  an 
absolute  decrease.  In  the  German  Empire  the 
country  population  comprised  26.2  milhons  out  of 
41  millions,  in  1871,  that  is,  64.4  per  cent,  of  the 
population.  In  1910  it  was  25.8  out  of  65  millions, 
or  40  per  cent.  The  agricultural  population  is 
smaller  still  than  the  country  population.  When 
the  first  occupation  census  was  taken  in  1882,  the 
agricultural  population  was  still  19.2  out  of  45.2 
millions,  or  42.5  per  cent,  of  the  total  population. 
In  1907  it  was  only  17.7  out  of  61.7  millions,  or 
28.7  per  cent.  Of  these  17.7  millions  only  11.6 
millions  were  independent  producers,  5.6  millions 
being  wage-earners  and  the  rest  officials.  The 
peasant   population,    therefore,    only  amounts  to 

120     DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAEIAT 

one-sixth  of  the  total  population  of  the  German 
Empire.  On  the  other  hand,  already  m  1907,  the 
proletariat,  with  about  34  millions,  comprised  more 
than  half  of  the  population.  Since  then,  it  has 
certainly  grown  still  more,  and  is  not  far  off  the 
point  of  becoming  two-thirds  of  tHe  population. 

The  conditions  in  Eussia  are  of  quite  another 
character.  We  have  already  shown  how  over- 
whelming is  the  preponderance  of  the  peasants. 
Their  co-operation  with  the  proletariat  has  made 
possible  the  victory  of  the  revolution,  but  it  also 
testifies  to  the  middle-class  character  of  the 
revolution.  The  more  it  is  completed  and 
strengthened  in  this  sense,  that  is,  the  more  secure 
the  newly-created  peasant  property  is  made,  the 
more  will  the  ground  be  prepared,  on  the  one  side 
for  capitalist  agriculture,  and  on  the  other  for  a 
growing  opposition  between  the  peasant  and 
proletariat.  The  economic  tendencies  working  in_j 
this  direction  are  all-powerful  in  present-day 
Eussia,  and  the  most  forcible  dictatorship  would 
not  avail  to  counteract  them.  Eather  will  it 
strengthen  them  in  the  shape  of  a  dictatorship  of 
the  peasants. 

(h)  Industry. 

The  industry  of  Eussia  is  a  different  thing  from 
its  agriculture.  Eussian  industry  exhibits  many 
primitive  forms,  but  the  capitalist  portion  of  it,  just 

INDUSTRY  121 

because  of  its  recent  growth,  shows  its  most 
modern  and  highly-developed  form.  And  the 
Russian  industrial  working  class,  by  the  side  of 
numerous  illiterates,  who  come  from  the  country 
and  are  still  limited  by  the  narrow  conceptions  of 
the  village,  contains  not  a  few  members  who  have 
absorbed  all  the  modern  culture  that  is  now 
available  to  the  proletariat,  who  are  filled  with  the 
same  interest  in  theory  which  Marx  praised  in  the 
German  workers  half  a  century  ago,  and  are  dis- 
tinguished by  that  thirst  for  knowledge  which  is 
so  often  stifled  amongst  the  workers  of  Western 
Europe  by  the  petty  details  inherent  in  democratic 
conditions. 

Could  not  a  Socialist  system  of  production  be 
constructed  on  this  foundation? 

This  is  only  conceivable  if  Socialism  means  that 
the  workers  in  single  factories  and  mines  should 
appropriate  these  themselves,  in  order  to  administer 
each  one  separately. 

Even  as  I  write  (August  5),  a  speech  of  Lenin's 
in  Moscow,  on  August  2,  is  just  to  hand,  which 
reports  him  as  saying,  '*  The  workers  retain 
possession  of  the  factories  and  the  peasants  will 
not  give  back  the  land  to  the  landlords." 

The  saying  **  The  factories  to  the  workers  and 
the  land  to  the  peasants  ' '  was  recently  not  a  social 
democratic,  but  an  anarchist-syndicahst  demand. 

122      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

Social  democracy  demanded  that  the  factories  and 

land  should  belong  to  society.        The  individual 

peasant  can,  in  case  of  need,  work  his  property 

without  any  connection  with  other  producers.    The 

modern  factory,  on  the  other  hand,  stands  in  a 

network  of  social  connections,  and  its  isolation  is 

inconceivable.     It  is  not  enough  for  the  workers 

to  take  over  a  factory,  even  if  they  are  sufficiently 

intelligent  and  trained  to  direct  it  properly.     A 

factory  cannot  run  for  a  single  day  without  supplies 

from   other   industries,   raw   material,    coal,    and 

auxiliary  products  of  all  kinds,  and  without  the 

^^'egular  sale  of  its  products.     If  raw  material  and 

'^  the  mines  and   transport,  services  fail,  then  the 

^      Vfactory  fails  as  well,    j  Its  operation  on  Socialist 

^-^•tCyj lines  presupposesL  the  creation  of  a  network  of 

\v^     [social  production.  /  (Only  when  society  can  do  this, 

1^^^,  is  Socialist  production  possible^ 

►*^  Social  democracy  does  not  demand  the  trans- 

ference of  factories  to  their  workers,  but  strives 
for  social  production,  that  is,  production  for  the 
needs  of  society  in  place  of  commodity  production, 
and  this  is  only  possible  through  the  social  owner- 
ship of  the  means  of  production.  TEven  the 
Bolshevists  have  declared  for  the  natioi^lisatioji  of 
factories,  not  their  transference  to  the  hands  of  the 
[workers.,  1  The  latter  would  only  mean  a  change  to 
a  new  form  of  capitalism,  as  experience  has  shown 

J\ 

INDUSTRY  128 

in  the  numerous  cases  of  co-operative  production. 
The  new  owners  would  defend  their  property,  as 
giving  them  a  privileged  position,  against  labourers 
seeking  work,  whose  numbers  must  constantly  be 
recruited  through  the  insufficient  share  of  land 
falling  to  the  peasantry. 

A  permanent  conquest  of  capitalism  is  not 
J)ossible  by  giving  over  the  factories  to  tfie  workers 
engaged  in  them,  but  only  by  transferring  the 
means  of  production  to  the  possession  of  society, 
that  is,  the  whole  body  of  consumers,  for  whose 
need  production  is  carried  on.  Thus  they  become 
State  property,  or,  in  the  case  of  local  means  of 
production,  belong  to  the  commune,  and  eventually 
also  to  associations  of  consumers. 

This  has  even  been  attempted  in  Russia  to-day. 
How  far  it  has  been  carried  out  is  not  yet  dis- 
closed. This  side  of  the  Soviet  Republic  is,  in  any 
case,  of  the  greatest  interest  for  us,  but,  unfor- 
tunately, w^e  are  still  completely  in  the  dark. 
There  is,  indeed,  no  lack  of  decrees,  but  trust- 
w^orthy  information  concerning  the  operation  of 
the  decrees  is  absent.  Socialist  production  is 
impossible  without  comprehensive,  detailed,  reliable 
statistics,  which  give  early  information.  Hitherto, 
the  Soviet  Republic  has  not  been  able  to  obtain 
these.  What  we  learn  about  its  economic  effects 
is  highly  contradictory  and  is  not  susceptible  of  any 

124      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

verification.  This  is  again  one  of  the  results  of  the 
dictatorship  and  the  suppression  of  democracy. 
Where  freedom  of  the  Press  and  speech  is  lacking, 
there  can  be  no  central  and  representative  body, 
in  which  all  classes  and  parties  are  represented, 
and  can  express  themselves,  and  the  actual 
dictatorship  is  exposed  to  the  temptation  of  only 
allowing  to  be  published  the  information  which 
suits  it.  Whether  or  not  the  dictators  take  advan- 
tage of  this  possibility,  no  reliance  is  placed  on  their 
information.  This  does  not  silence  criticism,  which 
merely  seeks  underground  channels.  It  is  spread 
by  word  of  mouth  almost  as  quickly  as  a  public 
announcement,  but  without  the  restraint  of 
publicity.  Rumour  knows  no  bounds.  Thus,  we 
are  overwhelmed  from  left  to  right  with  informa- 
tion which  is  contradictory,  and  we  are  obliged  to 
maintain  an  attitude  of  distrust  to.wards  it  all. 

What  results  have  been  forthcoming  from  the 
Socialist  endeavours  of  the  Soviet  Government 
cannot,  therefore,  yet  be  estimated,  not  even 
appioximately.  Is  it  possible  for  it  to  accomphsh 
something  in  this  respect,  which  will  not  again  be 
lost,  but  will  become  permanent,  in  the  event  of 
the  Soviet  Government  not  being  able  to  retain  ite 
power  ? 

That  it  has  radically  destroyed  capitalism  can  be 
accepted  by  no  one.    It  can  certainly  destroy  much 

INDUSTRY  125 

capitalist  property,  and  transform  many  capitalists 
into  proletarians,  but  this  is  not  equivalent  to  the 
establishment  of  a  Socialist  system  of  production. 
So  far  as  it  does  not  succeed  in  doing  this,  capi- 
talism will  again  arise,  and  must  arise.  Probably 
it  will  reappear  very  quickly  and  bring  a  change 
in  the  personnel  of  the  dictatorship  of  the  prole- 
tariat. In  the  place  of  the  former  capitalists,  now 
become  proletarians,  will  enter  proletarians  or 
intellectuals  become  capitalists.  These  people 
will  always  skim  off  the  cream,  and  will  remain  on 
the  side  of  the  Government  which  is  last  on  the 
field,  and  brings  order  out  of  chaos. 

The  Soviet  Government  has  already  been  con- 
strained to  make  various  compromises  with  capital. 
On  April  28,  1918,  Lenin  admitted  in  his  before- 
quoted  speech  (reported  in  the  News  Service  of  the 
International  Socialist  Commission)  that  the  expro- 
priation of  capital  had  proceeded  too  quickly : 
"  If  we  are  to  expropriate  at  this  pace,  we  shall  be 
certain  to  suffer  a  defeat.  The  organisation  of 
production  under  proletarian  control  is  notoriously 
very  much  behind  the  expropriation  of  the  big 
masses  of  capital." 

But  everything  depends  upon  this  organisation. 
There  is  nothing  easier  for  a  dictator  than  to  expro- 
priate.   But  to  create  a  huge  organism  of  social 

126      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETAKIAT 

labour,  and  set  it  in  motion,  a  Decree  and  the  Red 
Guard  will  not  suflEice. 

Even  more  than  Russian  capital,  German  capital 
will  cause  the  Soviet  Republic  to  recoil  and  recog- 
nise its  claims.  How  far  the  capital  of  the  Entente 
will  again  penetrate  into  Russia  is  still  questionable. 
To  all  appearance,  the  dictatorship  of  the  prole- 
tariat has  only  destroyed  Russian  capital  in  order 
to  make  room  for  German  and  American  capital. 

However  this  may  be,  it  is  reasonable  to  antici- 
pate that  the  nationalisation  of  many  branches  of 
industry,  for  which  the  Soviet  Government  has 
paved  the  way,  will  persist,  even  if  the  Soviet 
Repubhc  should  be  destroyed,  and,  after  the  des- 
truction of  the  big  estates,  this  will  constitute  the 
most  considerable  permanent  achievement  of  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat. 

This  is  all  the  more  probable,  as  it  is  part  of  a 
movement  which  is  going  on  in  all  modern  States, 
even  if  they  are  capitalist.  The  needs  of  the 
war  were  responsible  for  it — we  remember  the 
nationalisation  of  the  American  railways — and  the 
needs  of  peace  will  ensure  its  continuance. 

Everywhere  we  must  be  prepared  for  fiscal 
monopoly. 

But  this  shows  that  nationalisation  is  not  yet 
Sociahsm.  Whether  it  is  so  or  not  depends  on  the 
character  of  the  State. 

INDUSTEY  127 

■power -.««oxc*  xic 

IS  as  little  as  eTsewhere  in  a  position  to  exercise 
his  power  directly  in  the  State^  as  his  conditions  of 
Hfe  do  not  fit  him  for  this.   [But  he  will  no  longer  \    / 
suffer  the  rule    of  any  power   which  does    not  \  ^ 
champion  his  interest,  even  if  it  be  th^t  of  the  town  ^       ^ 
proletariat.  |  gy^^  *vA  \^±-  .i^^^^^^*^'^<^  pvo^lr*-/^' ^'^   ' 

Like  peasant  commodity  production,  the  State 
industries  will  also  have  to  produce  for  the  market, 
not  for  the  State's  own  needs.  Their  most  con- 
siderable market— the  home  one— will  comprise 
the  peasants. 

Even  as  much  as  he  is  interested  in  high  prices 
for  agricultural  produce,  which  he  sells,  is  the 
feasant  interested  in  low  prices  for  industrial 
products,  which  he  buys.  As  against  private  enter- 
prise, it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  him  how 
these  low  prices  come  to  pass,  whether  at  the 
^xpense  of  labour  or  of  profit.  He  has  no  interest 
n  high  profits  for  private  industrial  capital. 

It  is,  however,  otherwise  with  State  industry. 
The  higher  the  profits  of  this,  the  lower  is  the 
imount  of  revenue  to  be  provided  by  taxes,  which, 
n  a  peasant  State,  must  be  chiefly  borne  by  the 
beasants.  The  peasant  is  accordingly  as  much 
nterested  in  high  profits  for  State  industry  as  he 

128      DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PKOLETABIAT 

is  in  low  prices  for  its  products  :  this  means  lower 
.    £  wages  for  labour. 
*~j  'r^hus  we  see  here  another  source  of  antagonism 

'**^  -c{  /between     peasant     and     industrial     worker,     an 
'^       *     antagonism  which  will  become   the  more  marked 
Y'  ithe    greater   the    extension  which   State   industry 
^^c>vv,*>^  [undergoes. 

^^'\^"      This  antagonism,  and  not  Socialism,  will  be  the 

"^^  '^   real  legacy  of  the  Russian  Ee volution./ 

jT  V  ^X     It  would,  nevertheless,  be  false  to  ascribe  the 

i/"    ^  wsponsibility  for  this  to  Bolshevism.     Much  of 

^0^-N^  ^hat  they  are  reproached  with  is  the  necessary 

^   v^^  consequence  of  the  conditions   which   confronted 

;^  V"      them,    and    would    have    disclosed    itself    quite 

v^  as  certainly  under  any  other  regime.    Yet  it  is  of 

the  essence  of  dictatorship  that  it  intensifies  all 

existing    antagonisms    and  raises   them   to   their 

,    highest  point. 

The  famine  has  not  been  created  by  the  dictator- 
ship, but  by  the  mismanagement  of  Czarism  and  the 
war.  But  the  fact  that  agriculture  and  the  transport 
services  have  so  slightly  recovered  in  the  half  year 
following  peace  is  the  result  of  the  civil  war,  which, 
under  the  dictatorship,  is  the  only  form  of  opposi-! 
Nj  tion,  and  is  inevitable  when  the  masses  cherish; 
Hvely  political  interest. 

Again,  the  demobilisation  of  the  army  was  a 
process  which  the  Bolsheviks  found  going  on.    Yell 

INDUSTKY  129 

they  have  prided  themselves  on  accelerating  it  to 
the  utmost,  and  thereby  were  obliged  to  conclude 
a  peace  which  is  no  longer  a  source  of  satisfaction 
to  tliem. 

I  In  the  same  way,  the  breaking  up  of  the  big 
estates  among  the  peasants  was  a  proceeding  which 
had  already  started  before  the  Bolsheviks  seized 
the  political  power,  and  which,  owing  to  the  over- 
whelming nuin^rs  of  the  peasants,  nobody  could 
have  hindered.  I  Yet  the  dissolution  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  has  contributed  to  it,  in  that  the 
last  trace  of  social  influence  on  the  assignment  of 
the  expropriated  big  estates  has  been  lost,  and  the 
partition  has  been  left  to  the  naked  arbitrariness 
of  the  interest^  on  the  spot. 

Finally,  rthe  appearance  of  the  antagonism 
between  peasant  and  industrial  worker  is  also 
a  phenomenon  which  could  not  be  avoided,  and 
which  necessarily  arises  out  of  the  prevaihng 
economic  conditions.  Yet  even  here  the 
Bolshevist  rule  has  forced  the  growth  of  condi- 
tions which  have  sharpened  and  deepened  the 
antagonismTlWith  the  dissolution  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  and  the  demobilisation  of  the  Army  the 
two  factors  disappeared  which  could  have  furnished 
Russia  with  the  quickest  protection  against  the 
breaking  up  and  partition  of  the  land.  Precisely 
the  richest  agricultural  tracts  of  former  Russia  are 

130     DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

now  detached  from  it.  If  they  so  remain,  then 
Eussia  will  cease,  especially  if  Siberia  also 
separates,  to  be  altogether  a  corn  or  food  exporting 
country.  The  prices  of  the  agricultural  produce  of 
Kussia  will  then  be  determined  only  by  the  home, 
and  not  by  the  foreign  market. 

Now  this  is  the  condition  in  wnicn,  under 
commodity  production,  the  opposition  between 
peasant  and  industrial  worker  most  quickly 
develops.  In  countries  which  largely  export 
agricultural  produce,  the  opposition  between 
industry  and  agriculture  takes  the  form  of  an 
antagonism  of  States  rather  than  of  classes,  the 
form  of  an  antagonism  between  an  industrial 
State  and  an  agricultural  State.  Eussia,  in 
particular,  has  now,  through  the  peace  of  Brest- 
Litowsk,  ceased  to  be  an  agricultural  exporting 
State,  and  has  shaped  in  such  a  way  as  to_j)romote 
the  most  rapid  and  bitter  economic  struggle 
between  peasants  and  industrial  workers. 

In  any  case,  this  struggle  cannot  be  avoided.  So 
much  the  more  important  is  it  for  a  far-seeing 
policy  to  give  such  a  form  to  the  conditions  in 
which  this  struggle  must  be  carried  on  as  to  make 
possible  to  the  proletariat  the  best  development  of 
its  strength.  To  lay  these  foundations,  not  only 
as  against  capital,  but  also  as  against  agriculture — 
this    was,     during    the    Ee  volution,     the     most 

INDUSTEY  131 

important  task  of  the  representatives  of  the 
Russian  proletariat.  Nothing  else  than  the  secure 
establishment  of  democracy  could  have  done  this. 

This  task  of  the  proletarian  struggle  for 
freedom,  which  is  not  less  important  than  the 
institution  of  social  production,  is,  in  contrast  to 
the  latter,  practicable  in  an  agrarian  State. 

The  peasants,  like  all  sections  of  the  working 
class,  demand  democracy.  They  may  find  them-  ^ 
selves  very  well  off  in  a  democratic  repubUc,  as  is 
shown  in  Switzerland  and  the  United  States  But  | 
the  political  interests  of  the  peasant  seldom 
extend  beyond  the  confines  of  his  village,  in  con- 
trast with  the  industrial  proletarian,  whose 
emancipation  requires  him  to  dominate  the  whole 
machinery  of  the  State,  which  can  be  no  local  act. 
The  peasant  can  also  become  enthusiastic  for  an 
emperor,  who  protects  his  property  and  fosters  his 
interest,  as  he  did  in  the  case  of  Napoleon  the 
First.  The  Russian  peasant  would  oppose  any 
return  of  the  Czarist  regime,  which  in  his  eyes 
was  connected  with  the  return  of  the  old,  deadly- 
hated  landlords.  But  a  dictator,  who  secured  him 
in  his  property,  and  allowed  him  to  devote  all  his 
attention  to  the  cultivation  of  his  fields  and  the  sale 
of  their  produce,  such  a  dictator  might  under 
fircumstances  be  as  welcome  to  him  as  the 
Republic.     For  this  Dictator  the  way  has  been 

132     DICTATOESHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT 

repared  by  the  suspension  of  Democracy,  and  the 
proclamation  of  the  dictatorship  of  a  class,  which 
is  in  reality  the  dictatorship  of  a  party,  and,  as 
Lenin  himself  has  stated,  can  become  the  dictator- 
ship of  a  single  person.  In  his  speech  of  April  28 
he  said :  ' 

*  The  closer  we  approach  the  complete  suppres- 
sion of  the  middle  class,  the  more  dangerous  the 
factor  of  small  middle  class  anarchism  will  be  for 
us.  ^he  struggle  against  it  can  only  be  carried  on 
by  forc^  If  we  are  no  anarchists,  we  must~^ 
recognise  the  necessity  of  a  State,  that  is  a 
forcible  transition  from  Capitalism  to  Socialism. 
The  kind  of  force  will  be  determined  by  the  degree 
of  the  development  of  the  revolutionary  class 
concerned,  as  well  as  by  special  circumstances, 
such  as  reactionary  war  and  the  form  taken  by  the 
opposition  of  the  middle  and  lower  middle  classes. 
Therefore  no  essential  contradiction  can  exist 
between  the  Soviet,  that  is,  the  Socialist  democracy, 
and  the  exercise  of  dictatorial  power  by  a  single 
^person."  ' 

In  the  long  run  nothing  can  be  more  dangerous 
to  the  Eussian  Proletariat  than  to  familiarise  the 
peasant  with  the  idea  that  dictatorship,  the  dis- 
franchising of  all  opponents,  the  suspension  of  the 
suffrage,  and  of  freedom  of  the  Press  and  of 
organisation  as  regards  every  antagonistic  class,  is 

INDUSTEY  133 

the  form  of  government  which  best  corresponds 
to  the  interests  of  the  working  classes.  What  will 
then  become  of  the  town  workers  if  they  come  into 
conflict  with  the  enormous  mass  of  the  Eussian 
peasants  and  a  dictator  who  is  recognised  by  them? 

And  what  will  become  of  the  workers  when  their 
own  dictatorship  collapses?  The  alternative  to  the 
dictatorship  of  a  party  is  its  destruction.  Dictator- 
ship impels  the  party  which  is  in  possession  of 
power  to  maintain  it  by  all  meansi  whether  fair  or 
foul,  because  its  fall  means  its  complete  ruin. 

With  democracy  it  is  quite  otherwise.  Democracy 
signifies  rule  of  the  majority,  and  also  protection 
of  the  minority,  because  it  means  equal  rights  and 
an  equal  share  in  all  political  rights  for  everybody, 
to  whatever  class  or  party  he  may  belong.  The 
proletariat  everywhere  has  the  greatest  interest  in 
democracy.  Where  the  proletariat  represents  the 
majority,  democracy  will  be  the  machinery  for  its 
rule.  Where  it  is  in  the  minority,  democracy 
constitutes  its  most  suitable  fighting  arena  in  which 
to  assert  itself,  win  concessions,  and  develop.  If 
a  proletariat  which  is  in  a  minority  attains  to 
power,  in  alliance  with  another  class,  through  a 
momentary  conjunction  of  forces,  it  is  most  short- 
sighted "  real  "  politics,  that  is,  politics  of  the 
passing  moment,  to  endeavour  to  perpetuate  this 
position  by  the  suppression  of  democracy  and  the 

134     DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETAEIAT 

lights  of  minorities  in  opposition.  It  would  destroy 
the  ground  on  which  alone  a  firm  footing  could  be 
retained,  after  the  passing  of  this  phase,  for  further 
work  and  an  extended  struggle. 

It  is  problematical  whether  the  Hussian 
proletariat  has  now  gained  more  real  and  practical 
acquisitions  through  the  decrees  of  the  Soviet 
Republic  than  it  would  have  gained  through  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  in  which  Socialists,  even  if 
of  another  colour  than  those  in  the  Soviets, 
predominated.  But  it  is  certain  that  if  the  Soviet 
^llepublic  collapses  many  of  its  achievements  are 
likely  to  fall  along  with  it. 

Had  the  Constituent  Assembly  succeeded  in 
strengthening  democracy,  then,  at  the  same  time, 
all  the  advantages  which  the  industrial  proletariat 
might  have  acquired  by  its  agency  would  have  been 
consolidated.  To-day  we  rest  our  expectations 
that  the  Russian  proletariat  will  not  be  cheated  of 
all  the  fruit  of  the  Revolution  only  on  the  supposi- 
tion that  the  dictatorship  will  not  succeed  in  stifling 
democratic  consciousness  in  the  Russian  people, 
and  that,  after  all  the  errors  and  confusions  of  the 
civil  war,  democracy  will  finally  be  triumphant. 

Not  in  dictatorship,  but  in  democracy,  lies  the 
future  of  the  Russian  proletariat. 

CHAPTEK  X. 

The  New  Theory. 

We  have  seen  that  the  method  of  dictatorship  does 
not  promise  good  results  for  the  proletariat,  either 
from  the  standpoint  of  theory  or  from  that  of  the 
special  Russian  conditions;  nevertheless,  it  is 
understandable  only  in  the  light  of  these  conditions.  i 

The  light  against  Ozarism  was  for  a  long  time  a       ^^ 
light  against  a  system  of  government  which  had    ^ 
ceased  to  be  based  on  the  conditions  prevailing,  but  ^   J^ 
was  only  maintained  by  naked  force,  and  only  by<<r*  ^j 
force  was   to  be   overthrown.     This  fact  would   o -*^ 
easily  lead   to   a  cult  of  force   even   among  the      0^  " 
revolutionaries,  and  to  over-estimating  what  could 
be  done  by  the  powers  over  them,  which  did  not 
repose  on  the  economic  conditions,  but  on  special 
circumstances.     Accordingly,  the  struggle  against 
Czarism  was  carried  on  secretly,  and[^e  method  of \       / 
conspiracy  created  the  manners   and   the  habits  1  ^ 
proper  to  dictatorship,  and  not  to  democracy//      ' 

The  operation  of  these  factors  was,  however, 
crossed  by  another  consequence  of  the  struggle 
against  Absolutism.    We  have  already  referred  to 

135 

136     DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETAEIAT 

the  fact  that,  in  contradistinction  to  democracy, 
which  awakens  an  interest  for  wider  relations 
and  greater  objects  side  by  side  with  its  constant 
I  preoccupations  with  momentary  ends.  Absolutism 
arouses  theoretical  interest.  There  is  to-day, 
however,  only  one  revolutionary  theory  of  society, 
that  of  Karl  Marx. 

This  became  the  theory  of  Eussian  Socialism. 
Now  what  this  theory  teaches  is  that  our  desires  and 
capabilities  are  limited  by  the  material  conditions, 
and  it  shows  how  powerless  is  the  strongest  will 
which  would  rise  superior  to  them.  It  conflicted 
sharply  with  the  cult  of  mere  force,  and  caused 
the  Social  Democrats  to  recognise  that  definite 
boundaries  were  set  to  their  participation  m  the 
coming  Eevolution,  which,  owing  to  the  economic 
backwardness  of  Russia,  could  only  be  a  middle- 
class  one. 

Then  the  second  Revolution  came,  and  suddenly 
brought  a  measure  of  power  to  the  Socialists  which 
surprised  them,  for  this  Revolution  led  to  the 
complete  demobilisation  of  the  Army,  which  was 
the  strongest  support  of  property  and  middle  class 
order.  And  at  the  same  time  as  the  physical 
support  collapsed,  the  moral  support  of  this  order 
went  to  pieces,  neither  the  Church  nor  the 
Intellectuals  being  able  to  maintain  their  preten- 
sions.    The  rule  devolved  on  the  lower  classes  in 

THE  NEW  THEORY  137 

the  State,  the  workers  and  peasants,  \but  the 
peasants  do  not  form  a  class  which  is  able  itself  to 
^govern^  They  willingly  permitted  themselves  to  be 
led  by  a  Proletarian  Party,  which  promised  them 
immediate  peace,  at  whatever  price,  and  immediate 
satisfaction  of  their  land  hunger.  The  masses  of 
the  proletariat  rallied  to  the  same  party,  which 
promised  them  peace  and  bread./ 

Thus  the  Bolshevist  Party  gained  the  strength 
which  enabled  it  to  seize  political  pow^er.  Did  this 
not  mean  that  at  length  the  prerequisite  was 
obtained  which  Marx  and  Engels  had  postulated  for 
the  coming  of  Socialism,  viz.,  the  conquest  of  poli- 
tical power  by  the  proletariat?  In  truth,  economic 
theory  discountenanced  the  idea  that  Socialist 
production  was  reahsable  at  once  under  the  social 
conditions  of  Russia,  and  not  less  unfavourable  to 
it  was  the  practical  confirmation  of  this  theory,  that 
the  new  regime  in  no  way  signified  the  sole  rule  of 
the  proletariat,  but  the  rule  of  a  coalition  of 
proletarian  and  peasant  elements,  which  left  each 
section  free  to  behave  as  it  liked  on  its  own 
territory.  The  proletariat  put  nothing  in  the  way 
of  the  peasants  as  regards  the  land,  and  the 
peasants  put  no  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the 
proletariat  as  regards  the  factories.  None  the  less, 
a  Socialist  Party  had  become  the  ruler  in  a  great 
State,  for  the  first  time   in  the  world's  history. 

138     DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PBOLETARIAT 

Certainly  a  colossal  and,  for  the  fighting  proletariat, 
a  glorious  event. 

But  for  what  can  a  Socialist  Party  use  its  power 
except  to  bring  about  Socialism?  It  must  at  once 
proceed  to  do  so,  and,  without  thought  or  regard, 
clear  out  of  the  way  all  obstacles  which  confront  it. 
If  democracy  thereby  comes  in  conflict  with  the 
new  regime,  which,  in  spite  of  the  great  popularity 
which  it  so  quickly  won,  cannot  dispose  of  a 
majority  of  the  votes  in  the  Empire,  then  so  much 
the  worse  for  democracy.  Then  it  must  be  replaced 
by  dictatorship,  which  is  all  the  easier  to 
accomplish,  as  the  people's  freedom  is  quite  a  new 
thing  in  Russia,  and  as  yet  has  struck  no  deep  roots 
amongst  the  masses  of  the  people.  It  was  now  the 
task  of  dictatorship  to  bring  about  Socialism.  This 
object  lesson  must  not  only  suffice  for  the  elements 
in  its  own  country  which  are  still  in  opposition,  but 
must  also  compel  the  proletariat  of  other  capitalist 
countries  to  imitation,  and  provoke  them  to 
Revolution. 

This  was  assuredly  a  train  of  thought  of  out- 
standing boldness  and  fascinating  glamour  for 
every  proletarian  and  every  Socialist.  What  we 
have  struggled  for  during  half  a  century,  what  we 
have  so  often  thought  ourselves  to  be  near,  what 
has  alwavs  asfain  evaded  us,  is  at  length  going  to  be 
accomplished.    No  wonder  that  the  proletarians  of 

THE  NEW  THEORY  139 

all  countries  have  hailed  Bolshevism.  The  reality 
of  proletarian  rule  weighs  heavier  in  the  scale  than 
theoretical  considerations.  And  that  consciousness 
of  victory  is  still  more  strengthened  by  mutual 
ignorance  of  the  conditions  of  the  neighbour.  It  is 
only  possible  for  a  few  to  study  foreign  countries, 
and  the  majority  believe  that  in  foreign  countries  it 
is  at  bottom  the  same  as  with  us,  and  when  this  is 
not  believed,  very  fantastic  ideas  about  foreigners 
are  entertained. 

Consequently,  we  have  the  convenient  concep- 
tion that  everywhere  the  same  Imperialism  prevails, 
and  also  the  conviction  of  the  Russian  Socialists 
that  the  political  revolution  is  as  near  to  the  peoples 
of  Western  Europe  as  it  is  in  Russia,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  belief  that  the  conditions  necessary 
for  Socialism  exist  in  Russia  as  they  do  in  Western 
Europe. 

What  happened,  once  the  Army  had  been- 
dissolved  and  the  Assembly  had  been  proscribed, 
was  only  the  consequence  of  the  step  that  had  been 
taken. 

All  this  is  very  understandable,  if  not  exactly 
encouraging.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  so 
conceivable  why  our  Bolshevist  comrades  do  not 
explain  their  measures  on  the  ground  of  the 
peculiar  situation  in  Russia,  and  justify  them  in  the 
light  of  the  pressure  of  the  special  circumstances j, 

140     DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PBOLETARIAT 

which,  according  to  their  notions,  left  no  choice 
but  dictatorship  or  abdication.  They  went  beyond 
this  by  formulating  quite  a  new  theory,  on  which 
they  based  their  measures,  and  for  which  they 
claimed  universal  application. 

For  us  the  explanation  of  this  is  to  be  found  in 
one  of  their  characteristics,  for  which  we  should 
have  great  sympathy,  viz.,  their  great  interest  in 
theory. 

The  Bolshevists  are  Marxists,  and  have  inspired 

/  the     proletarian     sections    coming    under     their 

/\  influence  with  great  enthusiasm  for  Marxism.  Their 

/    dictatorship,  however,   is  in  contradiction  to  the 

Marxist  teaching  that  no  people  can  overcome  the 

obstacles  offered  by  the  successive  phases  of  theii 

development  by  a  jump,  or  by  legal  enactment. 

How  is  it  that  they  find  a  Marxist  foundation  for 

their  proceedings? 

They  remembered  opportunely  the  expression, 
*'  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,"  which 
Marx  used  in  a  letter  written  in  1875.  In  so  doing 
he  had,  indeed,  only  intended  to  describe  a 
political  condition y  and  not  a  form  of  government. 
Now  this  expression  is  hastily  employed  to  designate 
the  latter,  especially  as  manifested  in  the  rule  of 
the  Soviets. 

Now  if  Marx  had  somewhere  said  that  under 
certain    circumstances    things   might   come   to   a 

THE  NEW  THEOKY  141 

dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  he  has  described 
this  condition  as  one  unavoidable  for  the  transition 
to  SociaUsm.    In  fact,  as  he  declared,  almost  at  the 
same    time   that   in   countries   like    England    and 
America  a  peaceful   transition  to  Socialism  was 
possible,   which  would   only  be  on   tli^^b^^is   of 
democracy  and  not  of  dictatorship,^he  iias  also 
shown  that  he  did  not  m^ean  by  dictaiorship  the 
suspension    of   democracyri     Yet   this   does    not 
disconcert  the  champions  of  dictatorship.   As  Marx 
once  stated  that  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat 
-might  be  unavoidable,  so  they  announce  that  the 
Soviet  Constitution,  and  the  disfranchising  of  its 
opponents,  was  recognised   by  Marx  himself  as  the 
form  of  government  corresponding  to  the  nature  of 
the  proletariat,  and  indissolubly  bound  up  with  its 
rule.    As  such  it  must  last  as  long  as  the  rule  oi  the 
proletariat  itself,  and  until  Socialism  is  generally 
accomplished  and  all  class  distinctions  have  dis- 
appeared. 

In  this  sense  dictatorship  does  not  appear  to  be 
a  transitory  emergency  measure,  which,  so  soon  as 
calmer  times  have  set  in,  will  again  give  place  to 
democracy,  but  as  a  condition  for  the  long  duration 
of  which  we  must  adapt  ourselves.  i 

This  interpretation  is  confirmed  by  Theses  9  and 
10  respecting  the  Social  Revolution,  which  state : 

/ 

V 

142      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETAKIAT 

"  (9)  Hitherto,  the  necessity  of  the  Dictatorship 

of  the  Proletariat  was  taught,  without  enquiring  as 

to  the  fprru  it  would  take.     The  Russian  Sociahst 

Revolution  has  discovered  this  form.    It  is  the  form 

\   of  the  Soviet  Republic  as  the  type  of  the  ^germanent 

I  Dictatorship  of  the  Proletariat  and  (in  Russia)  of 

I  the  poorer  classes   of  peasants.      It   is  therefore 

necessary  to  make  the  following  remarks.    We  are 

speaking  now,  not  of  a  passing  phenomenon,  in  the 

narrower  sense  of  the  word,  but  of  a  particular 

form  of  the  State  during  the  whole  historical  epoch . 

What  needs  now  to  be  done  is  to  organise  a„.ne\v 

form  of  the  State,  and  this  is  not  to  be  confused 

with  special  measures  directed  against  the  middle 

class,  which  are  only  functions  of  a  special  Slate 

organisation  appropriate  to  the  colossal  tasks  and 

struggle. 

"  (10)  The  proletarian  dictatorship  accordingly 
consists,  so  to  speak,  in  a  permanent  state  of  war 
vagainst  the  middle  class.  \Ttjs  also  quite  clear  that 
/lall  those  who  cry  out  about  the  violence  of  the 
Communists  completely  forget  what  dictatorship 
teally  is.  The  Revolution  itself  is  an  act  of  naked 
\orce.  The  word  dictatorship  signifies  in  all 
languages  nothing  less  than  government  by  forced 
The  class  meaning  of  force  is  here  important,  for 
it  furnishes  the  historical  justification  of  revolu- 
tionary force.      It  is  also  quite  obvious  that  the 

THE  NEW  THEORY  143 

more  difficult  the  situation  of  the  Revolution 
becomes,  the  sharper  the  dictatorship  must  be." 

From  the  above  it  is  also  apparent  that  Dictator- 
ship as  a  form  of  government  is  not  only  to  be  a 
permanent  thing,  but  will  also  arise  in  all  countries. 

If  in  Russia  now  the  newly-acquired  general 
freedom  is  put  an  end  to  again,  this  must  also 
happen  after  the  victory  of  the  proletariat  in 
countries  where  the  people's  freedom  is  already 
deeply  rooted,  where  it  has  existed  for  half 
a  century  and  longer,  and  where  the  people 
have  won  it  and  maintained  it  in  frequent 
bloody  revolutions.  The  new  theory  asserts  this 
in  all  earnestness.  And  stranger  still  it  finds 
support  not  only  amongst  the  workers  of 
Russia,  who  still  remember  the  yoke  of  the  old 
Czardom,  and  now  rejoice  to  be  able  to  turn  the 
handle  for  once,  even  as  apprentices  when  they 
become  journeymen  rejoice  when  they  may  give  the 
apprentices  who  come  after  them  the  drubbing 
they  used  to  receive  themselves — no,  the  new 
theory  finds  support  even  in  old  democracies  like 
Switzerland. 

Yet  something  stranger  still  and  even  less 
understandable  is  to  come. 

A  complete  democracy  is  to  be  found  nowhere, 
and  everywhere  we  have  to  strive  after  modifica- 
tions  and   improvements.      Even    in   Switzerland 

144      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PEOLETARIAT 

there  is  an  agitation  for  the  extension  of  the  legis- 
lative powers  of  the  people,  for  proportional 
representation  and  for  woman  suffrage.  In 
America  the  power  and  mode  of  selection  of  the 
highest  judges  need  to  be  very  severely  restricted. 
Far  greater  are  the  demands  that  should  be  put 
forward  by  us  in  the  great  bureaucratic  and 
militarist  States  in  the  interests  of  democracy. 
And  in  the  midst  of  these  struggles,  the  most 
extreme  fighters  raise  their  heads,  and  say  to  the 
opponents  :  That  which  we  demand  for  the  protec- 
tion of  minorities,  the  opposition,  we  only  want  so 
long  as  we  ourselves  are  the  opposition,  and  in  the 
minority.  As  soon  as  we  have  become  the 
majority,  and  gained  the  power  of  government,  our 
first  act  will  be  to  abolish  as  far  as  you  are  con- 
cerned all  that  we  formerly  demanded  for  our- 
selves, viz.,  franchise,  freedom  of  Press  and  of 
organisation,  etc. 

The  Theses  respecting  the  Socialist  Eevolution 
are  quite  unequivocal  on  this  point : 

(17)  "  The  former'  demands  for  a  democratic 
republic,  and  general  freedom  (that  is  freedom  for 
the  middle  classes  as  well)  were  quite  correct  m 
the  epoch  that  is  now  passed,  the  epoch  of  pre- 
paration and  gathering  of  strength.  The  woiker 
needed  freedom  for  his  Press,  while  the  middle- 
class  Press  was  noxious  to  him,  but  he  could  not 

THE  NEW  THEORY  145 

at  this  time  put  forward  a  demand  for  the  suppres- 
sion of  the  middle-class  Press.  Consequently,  the 
proletariat  demanded  general  freedom,  even  free- 
dom for  reactionary  assembHes,  for  black  labour 
organisations. 

(18)  "  Now  we  are  in  the  period  of  the  direct 
attack  on  capital,  the  direct  overthrow  and  des- 
truction of  the  imperialist  robber  State,  and  the 
direct  suppression  of  the  middle  class.  It  is  there- 
fore absolutely  clear  that  in  the  present  epoch  the 
principle  of  defending  general  freedom  (that:  is 
also  for  the  counter-revolutionary  middle  class)  is 
not  only  superfluous,  but  directly  dangerous. 

(19)  *'  This  also  holds  good  for  the  Press,  and 
the  leading  organisations  of  the  social  traitors. 
The  latter  have  been  unmasked  as  the  active 
elements  of  the  counter-revolution.  They  even 
attack  with  weapons  the  proletarian  Government. 
Supported  by  former  officers  and  the  money  bags 
of  the  defeated  finance  capital,  they  appear  on  the 
scene  as  the  most  energetic  organisations  for 
various  conspiracies.  The  proletariat  dictatorship 
is  their  deadly  enemy.  Therefore,  they  must  be 
dealt  with  in  a  corresponding  manner. 

(20)  "As  regards  the  working  class  and  the  poor 
peasants,  these  possess  the  fullest  freedom." 

Do  they  really  possess  the  fullest  freedom? 
The    *'  Social  Traitors  '*   are   proletarians  and 

146      DICTATOKSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETAEIAT 

iSocialists,  too,  but  they  offer  opposition,  and  are 
therefore  to  be  deprived  of  rights  like  the  middle- 
class  opposition.  Would  we  not  display  the 
liveliest  anger,  and  fight  with  all  our  strength  in 
any  case  where  a  middle-class  government 
endeavoured  to  employ  similar  measures  against 
its  opposition? 

Certainly  we  should  have  to  do  so,  but  our 
efforts  would  only  have  a  laughable  result  if  the 
middle-class  government  could  refer  to  Socialist 
precepts  hke  the  foregoing,  and  a  practice  corre- 
sponding with  them. 

How  often  have  we  reproached  the  Liberals 
that  they  are  different  in  Government  from  what 
they  are  in  opposition,  and  that  then  they  abandon 
all  their  democratic  pretensions.  Now  the  Liberals 
are  at  least  sufficiently  prudent  to  refrain  from  the 
formal  abandonment  of  any  of  their  democratic 
demands.  They  act  according  to  the  maxim ;  one 
does  this,  but  does  not  say  so. 

The  authors  of  the  Theses  are  undeniably  more 
honourable;  whether  they  are  wiser  may  be 
doubted.  What  would  be  thought  of  the  wisdom 
of  the  German  Social  Democrats,  if  they  openly 
announced  that  the  democracy,  for  which  they 
fight  to-day,  would  be  abandoned  the  day  after 
victory.  That  they  have  perverted  their  demo- 
cratic principles  to  their  opposites,   or  that  they 

THE  NEW  THEORY  147 

have  no  democratic  principles  at  all;  that  demo- 
cracy is  merely  a  ladder  for  them,  up  which  to 
climb  to  governmental  omnipotence,  a  ladder  they 
will  no  longer  need,  and  will  push  away,  as  soon  as 
they  have  reached  the  top,  that,  in  a  word,  they 
are  revolutionary  opportunists. 

Even   for   the   Eussian   revolutionaries   it   is   a 
short-sighted  policy  of  expediency,  if  they  adopt 
the    method    of   dictatorship,    in    order    to    gain     i    ^ 
power,  not  to  save  the  jeopardised  democracy,  but     1 
in  order  to  maintain   themselves   in  spite    of  it.      \ 

This  is  quite  obvious.  ^ I 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  less  obvious  why  some 

German  Social  Democrats  who  are  not  yet  in  power, 

who  furthermore  only  at  the  moment  represent  a 

weak  opposition,  accept  this  theory.       Instead  of 

i  seeing  something  which  should  be  generally  con- 

i  demned  in   the  method  of  dictatorship,   and  the 

I  disfranchising  of  large  sections  of  the  people,  which 

at  the  most  is  only  defensible  as  a  product  of  the 

exceptional  conditions  prevailing  in  Russia,  they 

go  out  of  their  way  to  praise    this   method   as    ;i 

condition   which  the   German   Social    Democracy 

should  also  strive  to  realise. 

This  assertion  is  not  only  thoroughly  false,   it 

is  in  the  highest  degree  destructive.       If  gener- 

.  ally  accepted,  it  would  paralyse  the  propagandist 

I  strength  of  our  party   to  the   utmost,    for,   with 

148      DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT 

the   exception    of  a   small   handful   of   sectarian 

fanatics,   the  entire   German,   as  also  the  whole 

proletariat    of    the    world,    is    attached    to    the 

principle  of  general  democracy.     pThe  proletariat 

\  would      angrily     repudiate     every     thought     of 

I    \  beginning  its  rule  with  a^new  privileged  class,  and 

^    la   new  disfranchised   class.      It  would   repudiate 

'every    suggestion    of    coupling    its    demand    for 

general  rights  for  the  whole  people  with  a  mental 

reservation,  and  in  reaUty  only  strive  for  privileges 

for  itself.       And  not  less  would  it  repudiate  the 

comic  insinuation  of  solemnly  declaring  now  that 

its  demand  for  democracy  is  a  mere  deceit. 

\  Dictatorship  as  a  form  of  government  in  Russia 
is  as  understandable  as  the  former  anarchism  of 
Bakunin.  But  to  understand  it  does  not  mean  that 
we  should  recognise  it;  we  must  reject  the  former 
as  decisively  as  the  latter.  The  dictatorship  does 
not  reveal  itself  as  a  resource  of  a  Socialist  Party 
to  secure  itself  in  the  sovereignty  which  has  been 
gained  in  opposition  to  the  majority  of  the  people, 
but  only  as  means  of  grappling  with  tasks  which 
are  beyond  its  strength,  and  the  solution  of  which 
exhausts  and  wears  it ;  in  doing  which  it  only  too 
easily  compromises  the  ideas  of  Socialism  itself,\ 
tlie  progress  of  which  it  impedes  rather  than 
assists. 

THE  NEW  THEORY  149 

Happily,  the  failure  of  the  dictatorship  is  not 
jynonymous  with  a  collapse  of  the  Revolution.  It 
■vould  be  so  only  if  the  Bolshevist  dictatorship  was 
;he  mere  prelude  to  a  middle-class  dictator- 
ihip.  The  essential  achievements  of  the  Revolu- 
ion  will  be  saved,  if  dictatorship  is  opportunely 
•eplaced  by  democracy. 

Printed  by  the  N  tion&I  Labour  Preas.  T.td.    30,  RUckTriars  Street, 
Manchester     and  at  Loadoa.     29916 

^{.^ 

^^ 

jf.*.'' 

^'^o-mmn'0     "^(^Aavaan-i^ 

<D130NV'S01^' 

m 

aWEUNIVEW/a 

o 

^mmms-^ 

-< 

%a3AIN(l-3WV^ 

^lllBRi 

^(SfOjnvDJO'^ 

^<!/ojn\( 

.^WE•UNIVER5■/A 

i 

v^lOSANCElfj> 

"^AaaAiNn-awv 

^^cOF•CAllF0% 

o 

•A^OFCAIJ 

^^oxHm 

ii 

^5^iLIBRARY•Q^ 

^<!/0JnV3JO'^ 
^.OFCALIFO% 

%avaaiH^    "^^Aavaan-^ 

.  ^WE■UNIVERS•//^ 

^.ffOJIlVDJO^         ^.TilJONVSOl^ 

^OFCAIIFO%         ^^WEUNIVERS/^ 

%W3NVS01^ 

%a3Alli 

'%a3Al^ 

< 

^^W£UNIVERS'/^      ^IMCElfx^ 

i^i  iiarl 

-^ILIBRARYGr 

^>MLIbr; 

,UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

llHllHl'lll 

AA      000115  933    4 

i^=D^i  s^^l^ 

3  1158  01314  6617 

i  Ml  i  M  mm  i^i 

^OAHvaan^ 

<f3l3DNVS0V"<^       %a3AINn]WV^ 

,^WE•UNIVER5•/A 

n 

>■ 

^  o 

^WEUNIVEBVa 

^•TilJQNVSOl^ 

^^lOSA,«ICEl£fy. 

%a3AiNa]WV^ 

vvlOSANCElfT* 

o  " 

■^/^a3AINfl]WV 

§  1  ir-'  ^ 

^<!/0JnV3JO^ 

^0FCAIIF0% 

^<?Aava8ni^ 

4^lL!BRARY0^ 

^OF-CAIIFOR^ 

'^^Aavaan#' 

-^lllBRARYQ^ 

-^^ILIBRARYQr^ 

^AOJIIVDJO'^ 

^•OfCAllFO/?^ 

'^<tfOJIlV3JO'^ 

^OFCAtim/?^ 

aWEUNIVERJ/a 

o 

AWEUNIVERi"//) 

^lOSANCEl^x 

"^/^ajAiNfiawv 

^lOSMELfx^ 

o  ^ 

*^OAav88n#    *>&Aav}iani'^       <f?ii3NYSoi^     "^aaAiNn-JvW^ 

.^MEUNIVERVa         vvlOSMFlfj> 

i^^l  Ira::! 

>* 

^^ILIBRARY<?/:.       -^^tUBRARYOc
