Hg 
J) PILTDOWN 
FRAGMENTS — 





= Ci 
<r 
= 
a S a 
ae a 
ee 
i cat ; 
ss ae 
a a 
hs 1 Ps 
a % * 
| P x 
r 
2 


es 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2019 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/antiquityofman0001 keit 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 






eo 

RECENT & (7) 

HEA 

PLEISTOCENE GY 
4000 ft ig 
200,000 Yrs. VV 
ee a ee teas a ZA 

’ 

' 
PLIOCENE 
5000 ft. 
250,000 Yrs. H 

7 


ta - - - 
| ELE 
FE} 
























































' 

' 
MIOCENE 
9000 ft. a 
450,000¥rs. EL 

| 













































































4 a one 


oF lke 


wy SSS TE OF 
eS 








| 
EOCENE 
IZOOOFE. 
600 OOOYrs. 
' 





TEM OF 
























































Genealogical tree, showing the ancestral stems and probable lines of 
descent of the higher primates, 


THE 


ANTIQUITY 


OF 


MAN 


BY 


Si AROS We ets! 


M.D. (ABERDEEN), D.Sc. (DURHAM AND MANCHESTER), 
LL.D, (ABERDEEN AND BIRMINGHAM), F.R.C.S. (ENG.), F.R.S, 


Conservator of the Museum and Hunterian Professor, Royal College of Surgeons of England ; 
Past-President of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 
and of the Anatomical Society 


Author of ‘‘ Engines of the Human Body,” ‘‘ Embryology and Morphology,” 
“Ancient Types of Man,” ‘‘ The Human Body”; ‘‘ Menders of 
the Maimed,” Editor of Treves’ ‘‘ Surgical Anatomy,” 
Editor of Hughes’ ‘‘ Anatomy” 


NEW AND ENLARGED EDITION, COMPLETELY REVISED 
AND RESET 


WITH 266 ILLUSTRATIONS 


VOL; I 


PHILADELPHIA 


Jaber PPINCOdT 2 COMPANY 
1928 


os 





First Published, October 1915, cL 
Second Impression, December 1915. 
Third Impression, February 1916. 
fourth Impression, March 1920. 
Second Edition (Revised, Reset, and Enlarged), January 1925. 
Sixth Impression, October 192 OM 


Printed in Great Britain 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 


Concerning the Garden of Eden—The Garden of Eden 
has often been described before. Long ago an account 
of it appeared in the Pentateuch; quite lately it has been 
redescribed in Back to Methuselah. ‘The story as told 
here takes the reader, not to a single sunlit idyllic glade, 
as in former descriptions, but to dank and dark.caves, 
gravel pits, limestone quarries, excavations for new docks, 
and even to trenches cut for sewage pipes, all the world 
over. For in reality the Garden of Eden was world wide. 
Even England was part of it—apparently an important 
part. So were the continent of Europe and the ancient 
lands of Egypt and Mesopotamia. Our search shows that 
it extended to the most distant lands of Africa, Australia, 
Asia, and America. Nor was the drama of the Garden 
enacted in a single morning; it has been going on for a 
million of years and is still unfinished. ‘There have been 
many scenes, and we can see no sign of the curtain being 
rung down on the last of them. The drama of man’s 
evolution—or his “‘ creative evolution,” as Mr Shaw in- 
sists On naming it—was not staged in a favoured meadow 
for a single performance; it is still proceeding in our slums, 
country cottages, and palaces, just as it did in the days 
when man’s only roof was the wide dome of the sky. 
Concerning Crete, Egypt, and Mesopotamia.—F ully ten 
years ago the writer of this book made the round of the 
haunts of ancient man, and in his first edition described 
what he saw and what he thought concerning such things 


as were to be seen. Much has happened since then. On 
Vv 


vi THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


again making a tour of the world—strictly in a meta- 
phorical sense—for the preparation of the present edition, 
it became evident that many new chapters would have 
to be added and many of the old ones recast. As readers 
of the former edition will remember, our survey of the 
evidence relating to man’s antiquity begins in England 
during the Neolithic period. We are at once beyond 
the reach of written history, but the growing recognition 
that what the people of England thought and did then 
was influenced by cultural eddies which travelled slowly 
westwards from Crete, Egypt, and Mesopotamia now 
makes it possible for us to fix approximate dates 
for what was done in prehistoric England. For this 
reason I have found it necessary to introduce in the 
present edition a chapter in which an attempt has been 
made to summarise the evidence relating to man’s 
antiquity in these Eastern lands, and at the same time to 
note the kinds of men who occupied them in early days. 
I was the more willing to add such a chapter, not only 
because our modern city civilisation has its roots in 
these lands, but for another reason. Like other anthro- 
pologists, I am interested in the abstract problem of man’s 
origin and antiquity, but am more directly concerned 
with the concrete question of the origin and antiquity 
of men of our own type. Where and when did the 
European kind of man come into existence? All indi- 
cations point to the East as his evolutionary cradle, but 
so far the oldest human remains found in Egypt and 
Mesopotamia are of people who differ from the present 
inhabitants of these lands in matters of detail only. 
Discoveries in England and France-—In England during 
these last ten years many things have happened which 
alter our outlook on ancient man. ‘To the list of crania 
of Paleolithic Englishmen I have had to add three found 
in a cave in the Mendips by the enthusiastic members 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION vil 


of the Speleological Society of Bristol University, and 
one from Baker’s Hole on the Thames, near Gravesend, 
entrusted to me for examination by Mr Martin A. C. 
Hinton. ‘These bear out the conclusion reached in the 
last edition, that men with long, narrow heads lived in 
England long before the dawn of the Neolithic period. 
In France many discoveries have been made regarding 
the artistic ability and technical skill of prehistoric man, 
but the one which most concerns us here was made at 
Solutré, where in strata of Aurignacian date MM. 
Depéret, Avelin, and Mayet unearthed the skulls of a 
round-headed people, the oldest of this type hitherto 
discovered in Europe. I have also found it necessary 
_ to give a somewhat full description of the Chancelade 
man whose skull and skeleton are preserved in the 
Perigord Museum, Périgueux. He was a man of peculiar 
parts, some of them being of an Eskimo-like nature, and 
on this slight basis the eminent geologist, Professor Sollas, 
has founded a theory that in late glacial times Europe 
was inhabited by a Mongolian race. 

Discoveries in Germany.—In Germany there have been 
several discoveries of importance. ‘The one which is of 
greatest interest to anthropologists is that made at 
Obercassel, near Bonn, where contemporaries of the 
Chancelade man have been found. They were rugged 
examples of the Nordic type—the type which is to be 
seen to-day in Scandinavia. ‘Then at Ehringsdorf, near 
Weimar, there have come to light fossil remains of a 
breed of Neanderthal man, belonging to an older time 
than the Neanderthal men of France, but later than the 
more primitive Neanderthaloid of Heidelberg. It does 
now seem probable that Europe was inhabited by men 
of the Neanderthal stock throughout the greater part of 
the Pleistocene period—right from the beginning of this 
period to the end of Mousterian times—and that this 


vill THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


species of man passed through the later stages of his 
evolution on the continent which became the death-bed 
of his type. We find the work-floors of Neanderthal 
man plentifully in England, but so far not a single fossil 
bone which can be assigned to his body has rewarded an 
ever-constant search. 

Discoveries in Malta, South Africa, and Rhodesia.—In 
this edition, too, I have given more attention to the 
human skulls found in the cave at Ofnet, Bavaria, and to 
those found in the mammoth stratum at Prédmost, in 
Moravia. But the discoveries which required the fullest 
treatment were made on and beyond the bounds of the con- 
tinent of Europe. The conditions found in Ghar Dalam 
cave, Malta, throw, I think, a new and strange light on the 
ways of ancient man. South Africa, as was expected by 
those who had studied the antiquity of its stone imple- 
ments, begins to rival Europe as a scene of prehistoric 
discovery. When preparing the first edition, news came 
of the discovery of human fossil remains at Boskop in the 
Transvaal. Since then we have learned much concerning 
the big-brained Boskop type of South Africa, particularly 
from announcements made by Mr Fitzsimons and Pro- 
fessor Raymond Dart—more than enough to compress 
within the limits ofa chapter. ‘The most startling revela- 
tion of all was that which came from the Broken Hill 
cave, Rhodesia, towards the end of 1921. Here anthro- 
pologists were presented with a fossil skull, primitive in 
many respects beyond any known to them and yet not 
unlike what followers of Darwin had expected to find. 
So important are the bearings of the Rhodesian discovery 
on our conception of man’s evolution that I have devoted 
two chapters to its elucidation. 

Discoveries in Australia, fava, and America—Then 
from Australia has come a significant addition to our 
knowledge of modern man’s early history. The fossil 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 1X 


skull from 'Talgai, Queensland, tells plainly of the settle- 
ment of a sea-girt continent at a remote period by men 
of the modern type. It also revealed the fact that evolu- 
tion has not left untouched the aborigines of Australia 
since Pleistocene times. Professor Dubois, the discoverer 
of Pithecanthropus, has published an account of a remark- 
able people—the Wadjak race—whose fossil remains he 
had found in Java, just before his discovery of Pithec- 
anthropus. As I write, there comes from the western 
frontier of China tidings of fossilised human remains 
found under circumstances which suggest a great 
antiquity for them. From time to time newspaper 
reports have announced discoveries of fossil. man in 
‘America, both North and South, but all have proved 
unimportant, with one exception. ‘This exception is the 
announcement made by Dr Henry Fairfield Osborn, 
that there existed in North America, about the middle 
of the Pliocene period, a high form of Anthropoid, one 
with a decided leaning to the human side, to which he 
has given the name Hesperopithecus. All that is known 
of this very distant relative of ours are two very 
imperfect fossil molar teeth. Even those who have 
faith in Dr Osborn’s experience and judgment, and 
believe in such possibilities as he has announced, regard 
the evidence as insufficient to return more than an open 
verdict. 

The Antiquity of Modern Man.—These are the chief 
discoveries which have caused me to increase the size 
of the present edition. Augmentation, however, is only 
one of the aspects in which this edition differs from its 
predecessor ; ever-increasing evidence is compelling me 
to alter my attitude towards many of the major problems 
of man’s evolution. This is particularly the case as 
regards the antiquity of modern man—the kind of being 
who makes up all living races—white, yellow, brown, and 


x THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


black—all of whom have the right, if they have the 
audacity, to claim the specific name of Homo saptens. 

One of the reasons which led me to write the first 
edition of this book was the belief that modern man, 
particularly his representatives in Europe, was being 
harshly treated by geologists. If human remains were 
found in one of the older Pleistocene deposits, and they 
proved to be modern in size and shape, they were rejected 
as spurious antiques, no matter what the state of their 
fossilisation might be. On the other hand, if these 
remains proved unmodern in character then they were 
accepted as genuinely old, even if only imperfectly 
fossilised. It seemed to me then, as it does now, that, 
in this matter, the geologist’s dice was so heavily loaded 
that it was scarcely possible for modern man to have a 
fair throw. So I espoused his cause and collected all the 
cases in which his remains had been found in older 
Pleistocene strata and believed at the time of their dis- 
covery to be as old as the strata in which they were 
embedded. It was not necessary to prove every instance ; 
it was enough to establish a single case where the geological 
evidence compelled us to believe that human remains of 
modern man had been entombed before the opening 
third of the Pleistocene period was spent. So I selected 
the case of Galley Hill man. Now, all experts agree that 
full-blown modern man made his advent in Europe in 
the latter third of the Pleistocene period. In the opinion 
of the majority of geologists and anatomists, at the present 
time, this was his first appearance in Europe. With 
the evidence of Galley Hill man before me, I held 
that it was not his first but his second appearance. If 
he came from somewhere late in the Pleistocene, might 
he not have come from the same place early in the same 
period ? 

I have to confess that as evidence concerning the con- 


PREFACE -TO SECOND EDITION x1 


dition of man in early Pleistocene times accumulates it 
does not favour my contention. I have expected, during 
these past ten years, that remains of the modern type of 
man would be found under circumstances which would 
prove their early Pleistocene age. No discovery of this 
kind has been made. Nay, one of the discoveries on 
which I leaned—that of the Ipswich  skeleton— 
has given way. ‘The Ipswich man has fallen headlong 
down the scale of time from the farthest to the nearest 
point of the Pleistocene period. ‘The evidence, as it now 
stands, leads us to believe that between the date to which 
Galley Hill man has been assigned and the time which 
marks the final arrival of the European type, Neanderthal 
man was in possession of our part of the world. If 
modern man did make his appearance in Europe early in 
the Pleistocene, his stay could have been little more than 
temporary. ‘Then, other evidence on which I relied to 
prove the permanency of the modern type—to prove how 
resistant it is to evolutionary change—has given way. We 
are so accustomed to hear Egypt spoken of as a land where 
men have bred true to type for 6000 years that we have 
come to accept the statement as an axiomatic truth. The 
statement is not quite true; the type persists, but when 
the aggregate of its representatives is taken into account, 
the Egyptian type has been modified in detail. Even in 
Egypt evolution has not been asleep. ‘Then I relied on 
the resemblance of Englishmen of the Neolithic period 
to Englishmen of to-day. We can still see among the 
men we meet survivals of Neolithic types, and if we con- 
fine our attention to stature, size, and shape of head, we 
shall infer that evolution has left such types untouched. 
It is otherwise if we enter, as I have done these ten 
years past, into a detailed comparison of their teeth, 
jaws, faces, and certain bones of their skeletons. It is 
then that we find that evolution is at work, and that 


xi THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


there are marks by which we can tell the majority of 
modern skulls from those of a former time. 

The Rate of Evolution——The reader may think I attach 
too great importance to the reputed antiquity of Galley 
Hill man. I do not think so, for this reason. We should 
like to know, not only when men of our kind came into 
existence, but the rate at which evolution proceeds in 
the shaping of man. I grew up under the belief that 
evolution proceeded in a leisurely manner and required 
long stretches of time to work out her effects—a belief 
I still cling to. The human brain is an organ of the 
utmost complexity, made up of so many parts, which 
require the nicest adjustment as they are elaborated ; 
it does not seem the kind of machine that could have 
been produced in a hurry. All that we know relating to 
man’s speech and accomplishments seems to indicate 
antiquity. ‘Therefore the early appearance of modern 
man appeared to me to fit in with what we knew of the 
civilisation which has become part of him. The evidence, 
however, is going against this conception. All the early 
Pleistocene men, who are beyond question of that date, 
are more brutal, more simian, than the Galley Hill 
man. ‘To turn the Rhodesian man into an Australian 
aborigine, an evolutionary event which may actually have 
happened, implies a large degree of transformation. To 
turn the Pleistocene Talgai lad into a modern Australian 
aborigine entails a marked reduction of tooth and jaw. 
Heidelberg man required toning down to become a 
representative of late Neanderthal man. Piltdown man, 
modern as he is in skull and brain, had a strain of the 
anthropoid in his teeth and jaws. We cannot run our 
eye over the lines on which early Pleistocene man was 
framed without coming to the conclusion that evolution 
has proceeded at a more rapid pace in the fashioning of 
man than some of us have hitherto thought. The only 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION xiii 


| evidence against such a conclusion is the early Pleistocene 
age ascribed to the remains of modern man found at Galley 
Hill and other sites, this evidence resting on observations 
made by geologists. It becomes easier to doubt this 
evidence than to believe that human evolution ever be- 
comes stationary. Our doubts will be resolved definitely 
'when we find the Pleistocene ancestor of modern man. 
This ancestral form has not been found as yet, and so I 
have left all the evidence relating to the antiquity of the 
modern type of European just as I set it out in 1914. 
Duration of the Pleistocene—The rate at which the 
human body has changed in more recent times depends 
on the length of time we assign to the Pleistocene period. 
At first sight there seems to be no means by which we 
can tell its duration. We proceed in national and personal 
affairs as if the present state of our seas, tides, and rivers was 
fixed and unalterable, and that our weather will continue 
to range within the same limits of heat and cold, drought 
and rain. And yet when we look closely we find sea, 
river, and land all changing. We have not to go 
back far to find the mouth of the Thames situated near 
the Dogger Bank in the North Sea, London high above 
the reach of tides, a land bridge from Dover to Calais, 
and a land barrier crossing the Mediterranean from Italy 
‘to Tunis. The evidence accumulates which shows there 
is an ever-recurring tidal movement in the earth which 
alters the lie of sea to land. We have not to go so far 
back to find England in the grip of an ice age; geologists 
in Europe, as in North America, are agreed that the last 
glacial phase ended some ten thousand years ago. There 
is a tide in climate which seems to accompany the tidal 
movements of the earth itself. 
There are means by which geologists can form a 
conception of the earth changes wrought during the 
Pleistocene period, and a computation made of the time 








XIV THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


involved. Unfortunately it has become the fashion 
amongst academic geologists to hold up their hands in 
horror when asked to compute in centuries or even 
millennia. One would think from this attitude that the 
earth only began to circulate round the sun when history 
began to be written. There was a time when geologists 
were less diffident—particularly before it became evident 
that man’s history stretched to the beginning of the 
Pleistocene period. In 1900 Professor W. J. Sollas made 
quite a courageous and laudable attempt to fix the dura- 
tion of later geological periods by noting the rate at which 
rivers lay down deposits now, and estimating the time 
needed for the accumulation of deposits of past periods. 
He fixed the duration of the Pleistocene period—merely 
to serve as a provisional estimate until a better was found 
—at four hundred thousand years, and of the Pliocene 
at five hundred thousand years. 

These estimates I was glad to use in my first edition ; 

in the present one the reader will find I have reduced 
them by half. This reduction has been forced on me by 
those who are unravelling the sequence and approximate 
duration of the stone cultures used by man during the 
Pleistocene period. With our eyes turned to those ages 
of stone culture we get the impression that in fixing the 
duration of the Pleistocene at two hundred thousand years 
our estimate has been stretched beyond a just limit. Mr 
Reid Moir’s more recent discoveries intensify this feeling. 
Not content with startling the archeological world by 
finding flints fashioned by human hands under the Red 
Crag of Suffolk—in a deposit of mid-Pliocene date—he 
proceeded to show that under the Cromer beds—which 
British geologists have hitherto regarded as marking the 
end of the Pliocene period—there lay buried implements 
of quite a high stone culture—the Chellean. If this is so, 
then Cromer beds are not so ancient as we supposed and 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION XV 


the Pleistocene period will have to undergo another reduc- 
tion, becoming little more than one hundred thousand 
years. If only such a small sum as this is left at our dis- 
posal, then we shall have to conclude that evolutionary 
changes have moulded man during the Pleistocene period 
at a much more rapid pace than we have hitherto con- 
ceived possible. I feel, as Huxley did when Lord Kelvin 
reduced the time limit at the disposal of evolutionists, 
that there must be a mistake somewhere. 

Glacial Periods—Everyone who enters the field of 
prehistory must take note of glacial periods; they are 
geological milestones. In France, Professor Marcelin 
Boule finds clear evidence of only three glacial periods— 
one towards the close of the Pliocene; two in the 
Pleistocene—one near its beginning, the other near its 
end. Professor Marr, Professor Boswell, and many other 
of our leading geologists have come to the same conclusion 
regarding glaciation in England. ‘There are sure signs in 
East Anglia of a late Pliocene glaciation—before the 
deposition of the Cromer beds (fig. 264). Then, after 
these beds were laid down, came the first and greatest of 
the Pleistocene ice ages, during which East Anglia was 
covered by its thick mantle of Chalky Boulder Clay. 
There was later a second Pleistocene glaciation which fell 
on Western Europe during the age of Mousterian culture. 
My difficulty has been in choosing the right names for 
these two Pleistocene glaciations, but I believe I am 
following the customary usage in England when I 
give the term “ Mindel” to the first, “‘ Wiirm ” to the 
second, omitting the “Riss” glaciation of Germany 
altogether. 

The Law of Uniform or Collateral Evolution—My con- 
ception of the rapidity and manner of man’s evolution 
has been altered in recent years by another circumstance. 
I have come to realise that the “law of uniform or 


XV1 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


collateral evolution ”’ has a wider significance than I had 
formerly believed. The reader will find this matter dis- 


CULTURAL CULTURAL 
YEARS. PERIODS. Periops. YEARS. 






PRESENT 


NEOLITHIC 


ipasitianl| 


MAGDALENIAN 
SOLUTREAN | 


AURIGNACIAN 





“GLACIATION 


(Wiirnm) 
~ 













8000 





10,000 





13,000 


5,000 
120,090 










| 
| 20,000 


“GLACIATION 


200,000 


~GLACIATION 
(Giinz) 


300000 SusB- CRAG IMPLS. 





KENTISH 


350,000 EouiTHs 


--------PLIOCENE- -----><-----~ PLEISTOCENE ---------> 


A. 


Time Cuart.—The cultural periods and their duration are those which have 
been adopted in this work. Three periods of glaciation are indicated. 
Chart B is a magnification of the upper part of the main chart, A. 


cussed in my final chapter; here I need merely say that 
such a law implies that species descended from a common 
ancestral stock may assume simultaneously characters 


PREPACESFO SECOND EDITION XVII 


which the ancestral stock did not possess. To explain 
such an occurrence we must assume there was in the 
ancestral stock a latent bias or tendency to give rise to 
such characters, but that the tendency did not become 
operative until the descendants of this stock had broken 
up into divergent species. ‘The matter concerns students 
of man’s evolution in this way. We find the same struc- 
tural changes taking place—apparently independently— 
in diverse races of mankind—changes which are not to be 
seen in any ancestral form. ‘This applies to the most 
distinctive of all the parts of man’s body—the brain. 
In all human forms, even the most primitive of them, 
we find a tendency for the brain to become large and 
complex. We presume that this tendency is a com- 
mon inheritance in all members of the human family. 
The big-brained races of fossil man may not have had a 
big-brained common ancestor; it is enough to suppose 
that the ancestor had a tendency in this direction. And 
if this is so, we must grant that several human races may 
have come by large brains long after they had departed 
from the common ancestral stage. 

Concerning Racial Migrations.—The prehistoric world 
is often described as if it were filled with restless hordes 
which wandered hither and thither, marauding and 
butchering. Such a picture has only a slight basis in 
truth. Migration, I believe, has played only the most 
minor part in shaping the evolution of man. What we do 
see is dominant types extending their lands and suppress- 
ing or extinguishing the previous occupants of these lands. 
This has been the case among animal species as among 
human races since their first appearance. Hybridisation 
may alter a type but it cannot give rise to novel types, such 
as have been produced in the course of evolution over 
and over again. We cannot account for the distribution 


of modern human racial types as seen at the dawn of 
VOL Ts b 


XViil THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


history unless we presume that they have been evolved 
in or near the regions of the earth which they now occupy, 
or did occupy, at, the beginning of historical times. In 
seeking to explain the origin of living races the modern 
ees is apt to age: that the Garden of Eden 

“far away’ and “long ago”’; not here and now. He 
cannot believe that he and the races which he studies are 
still inside the walls of an evolutionary garden—one which 
extends from pole to pole. Yet this is the belief which 
a close study of human races in past and present times 
compels the earnest student to adopt. The more densely 
populated parts of the world are also the centres of most 
rapid evolution. We have to presume, until we can prove 
to the contrary, that each racial type has been evolved in 
that part of the world where now we find it, and we 
have to apply this rule not only to living races but to 
extinct and fossil races of mankind. 

The Piltdown Controversy—When writing the first 
edition of this book, the dispute concerning the status of 
Piltdown man—to be strictly accurate one should rather 
speak of Piltdown woman, but the male sex has always 
been chosen as a racial representative—was still unsettled. 
I had good reason for thinking that the model in which 
Sir A. Smith Woodward had portrayed the features of 
this very ancient Englishwoman was a misrepresentation, 
so in my first edition I set out her structural peculiarities 
at great length, believing that those who were learned in 
the language of the skull would see the reasonableness of 
my contentions. It had become evident by then that 
the long-past history of man had to be written from an 
expert study of craniological hieroglyphs. I knew I 
should tax the patience of ordinary readers by thrusting 
before them matter which was intended chiefly for the 
eye of experts. I had intended to discard these technical 
chapters in the present edition, but seeing how little some 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION XIX 


of my professional brethren have fathomed the art of 
setting cranial fragments together I have thought it 
wiser to leave them untouched. Nay, I fear I have 
become a greater sinner than ever, for I have given a 
whole technical chapter to the facial skeleton of 
Rhodesian man alone. 

The system pursued in this book, wherein the reader 
is taken on a series of tours to prehistoric sites, has certain 
inherent advantages and also certain disadvantages. In 
a more systematic treatise one can take up subject after 
subject, examine each, and give a final verdict. But 
when we proceed to examine evidence by making a series 
of visits, we have to discuss matters as opportunities 
occur, and hence the reader will find that the discussion 
of some subjects occurs sporadically in several chapters. 
To amend this defect the index has been made full and 
explicit. 

As in my first edition, so in this, I owe much to many 
professional colleagues—more than I can name here. 
Especially am I indebted to Mr Hastings Gilford of 
Reading, to Dr Rushton Parker, to Mr Morley Roberts, 
and to Mr Meredith Sanderson for pointing out to me 
verbal and other errors in the text of my first edition. 
The liberality extended to me by the President and 
Council of the Royal College of Surgeons of England I 
gladly acknowledge here. The Museum of the College has 
provided me, as it does all students of the human body, 
with unrivalled advantages. Nor must I forget to mention 
the help which I have received from Mr William Finerty 
and Mr E. Smith in the preparation of diagrams to 
illustrate my text. 


ARTHUR KEITH. 


Royat CoLLecEe oF SURGEONS 
oF ENGLAND, Fan. 1925. 


PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 


Furry fifty years ago—in 1863, to be quite exact—Sir 
Charles Lyell told the story of the antiquity of man 
from a geologist’s point of view. His book! became a 
classic; the geologist came to be regarded as the official 
historian of ancient man. ‘The modern successors of Sir 
Charles Lyell have maintained the position he established 
for them. In the books of Sir William Boyd Dawkins,? 
of Professor W. J. Sollas,? of Dr G. Frederick Wright,* 
and of Professor James Geikie,® the world of our remote 
ancestors is made to live again. ‘The antiquity of man, 
from a geologist’s point of view, has thus been placed 
clearly and fully before the English reading public. In 
1865, Lord Avebury—Sir John Lubbock he was then— 
approached the problem of man’s antiquity from another 
point of view. He was primarily interested in the 
culture, the industry, the civilisation of ancient man; the 
geological details of the prehistoric landscape took a 
secondary place in his pictures of prehistoric times.6 He 
sought to follow the human army to its beginning in 
the remote past by tracing the possessions it had discarded 
while on the march. Lord Avebury wrote the story of the 
antiquity of man from the archzologist’s point of view. 

1 The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man. London, 1863 
(1st edition). 
Cave Hunting, 1874. Early Man in Britain, 1880. 
Ancient Hunters, 1911. 
The Origin and Antiquity of Man, 1913. 
The Antiquity of Man in Europe, 1914. 
Prehistoric Times, Williams & Norgate, 7th edition, 1913. 


xX 


an FF Ww PP 


PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION Xx1 


The problem of man’s antiquity may be approached 
from another point of view—that of the human anatomist. 
The anatomist gives ancient man the centre of the stage ; 
he depends on the geologist and archeologist to provide 
him with the scenery and stage accessories. It is from 
the anatomist’s point of view that the problem of man’s 
antiquity is dealt with in this book. This method of 
approach has its difficulties. ‘Ihe anatomist has to trace 
man into the past by means of fossil skulls, teeth, and 
limb bones—intelligible documents to him, but complex 
and repulsive hieroglyphs in the eyes of most people. 
The publishers have assisted the author to surmount the 
more technical difficulties by allowing a very liberal use 
of explanatory diagrams, which make the arguments 
used in the text more intelligible to the general reader. 
In many respects this book is supplementary to Lord 
Avebury’s classical work—Prebistoric Times. 

The main reason for the appearance of this work at the 
present time is that the “ mystery ” of man’s antiquity 
is now culminating in a critical phase—presenting situa- 
tions which may be described as of almost absorbing 
interest. Indeed the manner in which the story of 
man’s antiquity is now developing recalls the point 
reached by Dickens in his last and unfinished novel— 
The Mystery of Edwin Drood. Many learned men have 
sifted the evidence and tried to solve the problem of 
Drood’s fate—some solving it in this way and some 
in that. At the present time, geologists, archzologists, 
and anatomists are sifting the evidence relating to the 
combined problem of how and when mankind came 
into existence. On the evidence at present available, the 
author is convinced that the true solution cannot differ 
materially from the one presented in a diagrammatic form 
in the frontispiece of this book. ‘The author’s solution 
is only one of many ; time will show which is right. 


Xxii THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


The mystery of Edwin Drood we can never solve ; 
only the novelist knew what fate had in store, and he 
carried the secret to his grave. ‘The mystery of man’s 
antiquity stands in a different position. Every year 
brings new evidence to light—places facts at our disposal 
which take us a step nearer to a true solution. In recent 
years discoveries of fossil man have crowded in upon us, 
yielding such an abundance of new evidence that we have 
had to reconsider and recast our estimates of the antiquity 
of man. No discovery of recent date has had such a 
wide-reaching effect as that made by Mr Charles Dawson 
at Piltdown, Sussex. Hence the reader will find that a 
very considerable part of this book is devoted to the 
significance of that specimen of humanity which Sir A. 
Smith Woodward named Eoanthropus dawsont. 

In accumulating the material and facts on which this 
book is based the author has become deeply indebted to 
many men. ‘The help of some he has acknowledged in 
the text, but there are many whose names do not appear 
there. ‘The omission does not mean that he is not 
grateful to them for their help. He must, however, 
acknowledge here the assistance he has received from 
time to time from the officers of the British Museum, 
from Mr J. Reid Moir, Mr A. S. Kennard, Mr W. H. 
Cook, the Rev. Edwin H. Mullins, and Mr Courtney 
Lyne. For assistance in preparing illustrations for this 
work he is indebted to his friend, Dr Stanley Beale, and 
particularly to Mr William Finerty. 


ARTHUR KEITEE 
July 1914. 


PODITIONAL NOTE TO PREFACE 
OF SETR SSE DELON 


A year has passed since the proofs of this book were 
corrected and its preface written. ‘The events of the year 
have revolutionised the outlook of all of us; we have 
burst suddenly into a critical phase in the evolutionary 
progress of mankind ; we have had to lay aside the pro- 
blems of our distant past and concentrate our thoughts 
and energies on the immediate present. Liége and 
Namur, which figure in this book as the sites of peaceful 
antiquarian discovery, have become the scenes of bloody 
war. And yet, amidst all the distractions of the present 
time, the author hopes there may be some who will wish 
to survey the issues of the present fateful period from 
the distant standpoint of a student of man’s early evolution. 
It is in such a hope that this book is now put forth. 


ee KS 
Fuly 1915. 


Xxili 


: 





CHAP. 


I. 


Io. 


I. 
ee 
13. 
14. 


CONTENTS 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT ° . 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE, EGYPT, AND 


BABYLONIA : ° . . ° . 
THE PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 
THE DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN . : 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN DURING THE LATER 
PALAEOLITHIC PERIODS . . . . 

ENGLISHMEN OF THE LATER PALAZOLITHIC 
PERIODS . . . . . . 


FURTHER EXAMPLES OF LATER PAL/OLITHIC 
MEN IN ENGLAND . . : 


THE MOUSTERIAN PERIOD IN ENGLAND AND 
THE MEN OF THAT PERIOD IN FRANCE 


THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEANDERTHAL MAN IN 
EUROPE . : : . . : . 


THE ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES OF NEANDER- 
THAL MAN . : . 2 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD . 
GALLEY HILL MAN . . . 
PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN IN FRANCE AND ITALY ° 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA ° . 
XXV 


PAGE 


23 
41 
66 
80 
114 
127 
155 


180 


200 
224 


250 


284 


XXV1 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


CHAP, 


I§. ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA (continued) 
16. HEIDELBERG MAN . 3 : , , 
17. IS HOMO SAPIENS AN ANCIENT TYPE? 

18. MALTA AND THE LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 


19. ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA . : 





BW YN H 


nw 


Io. 


iL. 


Tz. 
+3. 


14. 
15. 


16. 


7: 


' Time Chart. The cultural periods and their duration are 


Eist OPSIEEUS ERATIONS 


Genealogical tree, showing the ancestral stems and probable 
lines of descent of the higher primates . . frontispiece 


PAGE 


those which have been adopted in this work. Three 


periods of glaciation are indicated ; Xv1 
. A map of the part of Kent in which eoldnena is inated 4 
. Megalithic monument at Coldrum viewed from the east . 5 
. Surface-plan of the Coldrum monument Ti 
. One of the Coldrum skulls set within a framework of fines 
which bound the chief diameters of a modern skull of 
mean size. The skull is represented in two aspects— 
profile and full-face. On the vault, the anomalous bone 
mentioned in the text is represented . ; : : ro 
. Side and front views of the Trent cranium . 14 
. Side and front views of a skull from a Neolithic Baral 
place in Malta : 15 
. Form of skull of ancient Rev pean of the Sith Dynasty, 
from the side and from the front : 16 
. Ground-plan of an ancient Egyptian Pasta be and Pcie 18 
. Ground-plan of a “ giant’s tomb,” Sardinia, and sketch- 
plan of the Coldrum monument, showing points of 
resemblance . 19 
Skull from a Neolithic popalc red in igettes which fed bes 
trepanned in three places : 21 
Kits Coty House, a pceagete: Pe onaniste near " Maid- 
stone . : . : 22 
Sketch map of Grete. ehowind pies es oe hoseus . - 24 
Diagrammatic section to show the various strata discovered 
by Sir Arthur Evans at the site of Knossus : 25 
Sketch map of Ancient Mesopotamia . 34 
The land-connection between seo and the Continent 
in early Neolithic times . 43 
Diagram to show the various Sera whic Pecied the old 
land surface and the human skeleton at Tilbury . ed 
The Tilbury skull fitted within the standard frame for 
modern British skulls of average size A 45 


XXViL 


XXVill THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


FIG, 


18. 
19. 
20. 
Die 


22h 
Zoe 
24. 
25. 
26, 
27 
28. 
29A. 


29B. 


30. : 
. Diagram of the ancient hearth-strata ere in the 


B2e 
33: 


34. 
35. 


30. 
37: 


38. 
39. 


40. 
41. 


42. 


43. 


Section of the deposits exposed in a site at St Helier, Jersey 
Skull of a woman, from a Neolithic cist, La Motte, Jersey 
Views of the Carnon calvaria, from the side and from above 


Side view of a skull found at a depth of 30 feet in an 
alluvial tin mine at Sennen, Cornwall 


Fragment of skull found at Aberavon, super baposed on an 
outline of the Newport skull ; 


Side and full-face views of the skull found Aun excava- 
tions at Newport 


The Mickleton skull, side a ont 
Views of the Engis skull from the side and from eae 


A section of the cave See ae Lartet, near Aurignac, 
in 1860 . 


Skull of Cromagnon man viewed froin the die hd ioe 
the front 


M. Piette’s section across ile Ses at Mas @ aay 
Section of the limestone cliff and talus near Chancelade . 


Section of the strata under the rock-shelter of Chancelade, 
with the position of the skeleton indicated . 


Drawings of the Chancelade skull 


deposits at Solutré . 
Skull of the tall man of Solutré 


Section of the strata of the Grotte des Bnienes near 
Mentone 3 5 


Profile and full face of the Grimaldi woman 


The upper teeth and palate of the Grimaldi lad, to ee 
their size and to explain the method of estimating the 
palatal area : : 7 ; : ; 

The Brinn skull (No. 1) from the side and from above 


A sketch map to show the chief sites at which discoveries 
of ancient man have been made tal the valleys of the 
Rhine, Meuse, and Danube 


Skull of the man of Obercassel 


The skull of a round-headed woman from the cave at 
Ofnet 


The sequence of strata in the floor of the cave at Ofnet 


A section of the strata at Halling, saan the ee of 
the skeleton ; 


Diagrammatic section across the depocien in the ‘als? of 
the Medway to show the relative ee of the ml 
to the Halling skeleton 


Section across the Medway valley rane west to east, iS 
show the position of its various terraces 


PAGE 
51 
53 
55 


59 


60 
61 


Jo 
72 
75 


78 
81 


81 
83 


88 
92 
96 


100 


102 
104 


105 
107 


LOG 


109g 


116 


118 


119 


FIG. 
44. 
45. 


46. 
47: 


48. 


49. 
50. 


Bi. 
52. 


53: 
54. 


DD: 


56. 


57: 


58. 


59. 


60. 


OW. 


62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


The Halling skull viewed from the side and from above 

A diagrammatic section to show the horizons Mr Mullins 
recognised i in the cave earth at Langwith 

The Langwith skull viewed from the side and from the font 


The upper aspect of the Langwith skull contrasted with 
the Trent skull of Neolithic date 


A sketch map of the Mendips, showing the Poition of 
Wookey Hole, Cheddar Cave, Burrington Combe, and 
Aveline’s Hole 

Section of the strata in the recess of oe cave in ih CC 
Cheddar skeleton was found 


Profile and vertex of the skull of re Cheddan man. 
Oriented on the sub-cerebral plane 


Profile and vertex of skull “ A’ from oes s Hole 


Profiles of skulls ““B’”’ and “C”’ from Aveline’s Hole, 
oriented on the sub-cerebral plane 


Section across the Brixham cave ene ine strata af 
the floor 


A diagrammatic section a Pa strata in the foot of Kent’ s 
Cavern : : 

(A) Right half of pelts ae Kent’ s Creek (B) Left 
half of palate from Combe Capelle ; (C) Right half of 
palate from Tasmanian; (D) Left half of pate from 
modern Englishman ‘ 

Profile and full face of the en re of a man’s skull 
found in Pit 1, Grimes Graves . 

The reach of the Thames above Gravesend, to ane ne 
sites of ancient man : : : : 

Diagram showing the submerged bed, the low or 20-foot 
terrace, the middle or 50-foot terrace in the se of 
the Thames and Medway . 

Profile of the Baker’s Hole skull Bene on ine os 
cerebral plane, with a view of the vertex, on the Frank- 
fort plane : j 

A sketch map of the chief sites of Tretiatorie discovery i in 
the region of the Dordogne, France 

The strata at the rock-shelter at Combe Capelle, corre 
the position of the human skeleton discovered by 
O. Hauser 

Section of the strata ae La rove 

Section of the cave at La Chapelle-aux- Saints, 

Section of the strata at La Quina 

Lyell’s diagram of the Neanderthal cave : : 

Section of the strata encountered in the limestone quarries 
at Taubach 


XX1X 
PAGE 


T21 


I29 
133 


133 


135 
137 


139 
I41 


T42 
144 


146 


147 
152 


158 


162 


166 


167 
170 
173 
178 
186 


IgI 


XXX 


FIG. 


67. 


68. 


69. 
70. 


ic 


2s 


73: 


74: 


75: 


79- 


80. 


81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 


85. 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


A drawing of the upper aspect and dental arcade of the 
Ehringsdorf mandible, contrasted with the correspond- 
ing aspect of the mandible of the Spy man No, 1 

View of the profile of the Ehringsdorf mandible, as seen on 
its right side 

Section of the deposits in the oie teitee at epi 

Skulls of the modern type (Combe Capelle) and of the 
Neanderthal type (La aaa contrasted on their 
lateral aspects 

A skull of the modern Co (Combe Capelte, Sontrastet 
with one of the Neanderthal type (Gibraltar) as seen in 
full face . 

(I.) The supra-orbital Hagan or fonts an ether teatanes a 
the face of a male chimpanzee. (I1.) The form of 
articular cavity for the lower jaw in the Gibraltar skull, 
contrasted with the forms in the gorilla and modern man 


‘The skull of-an orang superimposed on that of a chim- 


panzee to show the presence of a torus STO auc 
in the latter 

Sections of the lower jaw at ae maddie lice or eyaphyee 
of a young gorilla, of a man of the Neanderthal type 
(Spy), of a native of New Caledonia, and of a modern 
Englishman : 7 

Four lower molars, as seen when examined oy X-rays 


. Two series of drawings, the upper to illustrate stages in the 


development of the primitive type of molar retained by 
modern man; the lower, corresponding stages leading 
on to the specialised form of molar found in Neander- 
thal man 


77. Drawing of the palate of ile Gibraltar Skall : 
78. Outlines of the palate of the Gibraltar skull, and of a 


skull of a native Tasmanian, showing a contrast in shape 
Diagram showing the poise of the head in the modern and 
Neanderthal types of man 
Superimposed tracings of the basi- cane axis of the skull 
of a gorilla, of the Gibraltar skull, and of a modern 
English skull, to show the extent of the pituitary angle 
The Neanderthal (Spy) thigh bone contrasted with the 
corresponding bones of modern man and the gorilla 
Swanscombe and neighbouring Paleolithic sites on the 
south side of the valley of the Thames, below London . 
Diagram showing the various deposits of the r1oo-foot 
terrace of the Thames valley at Swanscombe 
Profile drawing of the Dartford cranium and its outline 
from above, at right angles to the view given in profile 
A sketch map of the south-eastern parts of England, 
showing the position of certain sites mentioned in 
the text : . : : : : . . 


PAGE 


193 


194 
196 


201 


201 


208 
210 


212 
213 


214 


218 


220 
ae 
226 
227 


233 


236 


FIG. 


86. 


87. 


88. 
89. 


90. 
ol. 


92. 


93. 
94. 
95. 


96. 


97- 


08. 
99. 


Ioo. 
Tor. 


102. 


103. 


104. 
105. 
106. 


107. 
108. 


109. 
IIo. 


pert. 


II2. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


A section of the deposits in one of the Caddington Hill pits, 
showing the Acheulean work-floor discovered by Mr 
Worthington Smith 

Section of the pit in which the Bury St Edmunds fragment 
was found 

Section of the depose: at Posay ; 

Bury St Edmunds cranial fragment Foes For the 
side and from the front 

The Bury St Edmunds fragment sewed from Suave 

The Galley Hill skull viewed from the side and from the 
front, the face being restored 

Drawings of the Galley Hill skull fom above and ford 
below ; 

Radiograph of the Galley Hill mandible and feet. 

Section of the 30-metre terrace at Abbeville . 

(A) A profile drawing of the Moulin Quignon Pandible: 
(B) A profile drawing of the Galley Hill mandible 

Stippled outline of the Foxhall mandible superimposed on 
a drawing of the Moulin Quignon specimen 

Stippled outline of the Moulin Quignon mandible cass 
posed on the Spy (Neanderthal) specimen . : 

Strata of the gravel pit at Clichy, Paris 

The Denise frontal bone 

The Olmo cranium viewed from the side aad fern fe front 

The Olmo cranium viewed from above, compared with a 
similar view of the vault of the Neanderthal calvaria . 

The shores of the North Sea in late Paleolithic and early 
Neolithic times 

The Pliocene and Pie etocene aepoats of East inela: 
grouped and Sees in the order—or ee a 
order—of age . 

A diagrammatic section of the deposit of ae Glacial 
period at Hoxne 

Sketch of the valley of the Capon to whew Pie locality 
in which the Ipswich skeleton was found 

Sketch of a section across the Gipping valley to shew the 
horizon of the discovery 

The parts of the Ipswich skeleton ented: in feaition 

Drawings of the ous skull from the side and from the 
front 

Sections across a series of dibie oe various races 

Section of the Pleistocene deposits near Cromer, Nortel 

Section of the cliff and foreshore at Cromer, on which is 
indicated the level of the early Chellean “ floor ” 

A diagrammatic section of the deposits revealed in the 
western face of the Foxhall coprolite pit. , 


XXX1 


PAGE 


241 
241 


244 
244 


201 
262 
2604 
268 


272 


274 
277 
279 
280 
281 


286 


288 
291 
294 


204 
296 


297 
298 
304 


306 


397 


Sut THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


FIG. 
Tue 


114. 


II5. 


16. 


Tee 


18. 


IIQ. 


I20. 


EZ. 


IZ2. 


123. 


124. 
125. 


126. 


127m 


128. 
129. 


30) 
Tis 


132. 


M. Rutot’s schematic section showing the number and 
sequence of the strata in the valley deposits of Belgium 

Section of the middle eae terrace at St Prest, near 
Chartres ; 

Diagrammatic section a the ann -pit ae Manet showing 
the depth at which the mandible (A’) was found 

Diagrammatic section of the strata of the sand-pit at 
Mauer, with M. Rutot’s more recent tro) ae 
tion of cultural levels 

The right half of the body and tect of the Heidelberg 
mandible viewed from above 

Reconstruction of the palate of the evdelberss man, 
compared with Professor Boule’s reconstruction of the 
La Chapelle palate . 

Profile of the Heidelberg ents coniparetl with the 
profile of the mandible of an Australian native ; 

Outline of the Heidelberg mandible compared with a draw- 
ing of the lower jaw and face of a female orang . 

Outline of the Heidelberg mandible compared with the 
Spy mandible . . 

Section of the hill es at Neate) at Catenin near 
Brescia . ; 

Woman’s skull founce at Cactencd eles eieted from the 
side and from above 

Map of the Pleistocene land-bridge pee (taly aa Ton 

Section across Ghar Dalam, Ee the strata which make 
up its floor 

Two molar teeth of Neanderthal man found by Mr G. 
Despott in the stratum of red cave earth of Ghar Dalam 

Sketch map of Southern Africa, showing sites mentioned 
in the text : : : 

The Bushman’s skull craw in mate 

A section of the implementiferous gravels erponeds on fhe 
bank of a tributary of the Harts river at Taungs 

The Boskop skull reconstructed and shown in profile 

(A) Vertex view of the Boskop skull. (B) ee 
view of a Bushman’s skull 

Diagram of the strata encountered by Mr FE. W. Fitsinone 
in the floor of the rock-shelter at T’zitzikama 


. The T’zitzikama skull in profile 


PAGE 
315 
317 


321 


323 


325 


320 
327 
329 
330 
335 


337 
343 


346 
349 


on 
359 


363 
367 


S72 


372 
373 


THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


CHAPTER I 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 


THE road from London to Maidstone, once it has made 
a steep descent from the North Downs, winds through a 
district abounding in traces of long-past generations of 
Kentish men. ‘The traveller along this road, with his 
face turned eastwards, be he ever so interested in the 
study of ancient man, cannot fail to note the picturesque- 
ness of the Kentish weald. From time to time he passes 
villages which have preserved, in spite of a whirling 
stream of motor traffic, much of an old-world atmosphere. 
Ever on the left hand, a few miles distant from the road, 
the traveller sees across the hedges and orchards the steep 
flank of the North Downs, which trend eastwards to end 
in the white cliffs of Dover. Here and there he may 
trace the Pilgrims’ Way as it winds along the foot of the 
steep grey face of the Downs, the medizval path to the 
shrine at Canterbury. The great stone monument at 
Coldrum, which is to give us our first glimpse into man’s 
past, could be reached by following the grass-grown 
pilgrims’ path; but then if that route were taken we 
should miss the picturesque village of Ightham and the 
home of the late Mr Benjamin Harrison,! who made 


1 Mr Harrison died at his humble home in Ightham, 30th September 
1921, in his eighty-fourth year. He earned a scanty livelihood as the village 
grocer, his last years being made easier by the grant of a small pension 
from the Civil Service List. In his youth he sought to do for Kent what 
Boucher de Perthes had done for the valley of the Somme, and in his 
search for Paleolithic implements in valley gravels was soon successful. As 


early as 1864 he had noted the kind of chipped flints, afterwards known 
VOL, I, I 


2 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


this part of Kent a Mecca for all students of early man. 
We are in the centre of some of Mr Harrison’s most 
important discoveries. On the plateau of the North 
Downs, stretching northward from the steep slope which 
now faces us until it sinks into the valley of the Thames, 
Mr Harrison gathered those rudely worked flints— 
eoliths—the earliest form of tool ascribed to man. Close 
by Ightham, hid in a wood, are the Oldbury rock-shelters 
where Mr Harrison found over three hundred flints 
worked in exactly the same fashion as those chipped by 
the cave men in the south of France when the rigorous 
climate of the Ice age was giving place to our more 
genial times. On the plateau a few miles away lie the 
oldest and rudest of human tools—for I am assuming that 
the reader admits the humanity of Mr Harrison’s eoliths, 
while here, amongst the earth that has gathered at the 
foot of the projecting rock, almost burying it, are the 
stone implements—paleoliths—which mark the last phase 
of the Paleolithic period. 

We are not concerned at this point with the im- 
measurable stretch of time that lies between the earliest 
of the eoliths and the latest of the paleoliths ; in follow- 
ing man into the past we are to start from that period 
or age of culture which succeeded the Paleolithic—the 
Neolithic. All over this district, on the ploughed fields 
and in the woods, the keen and delicately worked flints 
which are characteristic of the Neolithic stage of man’s 
history can be picked up. How long the Neolithic period — 
lasted in England we cannot yet say with any degree of 
certainty, but we are all agreed that it came to an end 
about 2000 B.c., when bronze became known to the men 
of Western Europe. We have only to visit Rose Wood, 
within a short distance of Mr Harrison’s home in 
Ightham, to see that the passage from the Paleolithic to 
the Neolithic period was marked by a much greater 
change than a mere alteration in the manner in which 
flint implements were fashioned. In Rose Wood is 


© 


as “ eoliths,” in the plateau gravels of Kent. He drew the attention of 
Sir Joseph Prestwich to them in 1888, 


AS NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 3 


the evidence that men were no longer vagabonds and 
wanderers, but had settled down in communities. Hid 
in the undergrowth of this coppice ? is a series of circular 
depressions, some forty in number, marking the sites of 
the pit-dwellings of a Neolithic village.? These ancient 
dwellings were ‘explored over fifty years ago by the Kent 
Archeological Society. They were found to be circular 
Sepasin-like pits, 5 to 10 feet deep and 15 feet in 
diameter.” Round the pits were found fragments of 
rude pottery and numerous flint flakes and implements. 
Near by is Oldbury camp—also the work of the Neolithic 
period. 

As we turn our backs on the pit-dwellings and Oldbury 
camp to gain the main road and again face eastwards, 
it is possible that the significance of what we have just 
seen may escape us. So far as we know at present, the 
men of the more ancient or Paleolithic period had no 
conception of house-building or of settled communities, 
of defence works or of pottery. These were, with 
perhaps the exception of the last, discoveries of the 
Neolithic period. Further, it is manifest that settled 
communities are only possible when the land is tilled and 
cattle are domesticated. Agriculture was the slow and 
laborious invention of the Neolithic age. It does not cut 
the Neolithic age any shorter if we suppose—as we must 
suppose—that agriculture was not evolved in Western 
Europe. In a distant part of the world, as we shall see 
presently, man did slowly and laboriously discover the art 
of bringing plant and beast into his service. ‘The essential 
feature of man’s Neolithic life was not that he fashioned 
stone implements in a certain manner, but that he tilled 
the soil and lived in settled communities. 

Ightham, where we left the main road, is thirty miles 
from London; six miles farther along the road lies the 
village of West Malling (fig. 1). To this village Mr F. J. 


1 For an account of the antiquities of the Ightham district, see [ghtham 
—the History of a Kentish Village, by ¥. J. Bennett, F.G.S., 1907. 

2 For pit-dwellings in Kent, see Geo, Clinch, Fourn. Anthrop. Instit., 
1899, ser. 2, vol. il. p. 124. 


4 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Bennett had retired, after a long and active career in 
the service of the Geological Survey under the British 
Government, to spend his leisure hours in busily interpret- 
ing the traces of ancient manin the county of Kent. The 
Coldrum Megalithic monument, to which we are now 
making our way, was the particular object of his attention 
inthe year 1910. Itis true that the late Mr A. L. Lewis 4 
had recognised the importance of the monument in 1877, 
and published an accurate plan of the arrangement of 
the stones; but it was left for Mr Bennett to reveal its 








9-1 NEW DOCK 
LONDON iA —— 


: i y 


LH 





Ne ee 
\ WHE we i 
pe Ps 
ne), 2 y 
oe wie Ne. ct ct “ KITSCOTY 
AP? 4 
Wo WSS ZR 
a oeosuay, ae W. MALLING 
a” fC GHTHAM “So MAIDsToNE 
Rosewoog 
WEALD 


Fic. 1.—A map of the part of Kent in which Coldrum is situated. 


secrets and the light it could throw on the Neolithic 
inhabitants of Kent.2 To reach Coldrum we follow a 
farm track which opens from the main road before the 
village of West Malling is reached. Before us, to the 
north, and some three miles distant, is the grey, dry 
pasture-land that clothes the sharp foe of the North 
Downs. Sweep away the snug farms which lie sheltered 
in the weald below the Downs and on the uplands of the 
plateau above them, replace the hedged fields with little 


1 See Fourn. Anthrop. Instit., Nov. 1877. 

2 Research on this monument is being continued by Mr E. W. Filkins. 
_ This and other Megalithic monuments of Kent are being studied by Mr 
J. H. Evans of Rochester and Mr W. H. Cook of Snodland (1924), 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 5 


terraced cultivated plots, and we have before us exactly 
the country that Neolithic man inhabited four or five 
thousand years ago. On our right, as we proceed north- 
wards, we see the same valley of the Medway opening 
out before us as it did before him, except that the smoke 
which sweeps towards us from the cement works of the 
gorge, by which the Medway makes its way northwards 
through the Downs to reach the Thames, was unknown 





aay 


Fic. 2.—Megalithic monument at Coldrum viewed from the east 
(Dr Stanley Beale). 


in his time. When we reach the monument, a little 
distance short of the Downs, we see that it is not as 
Neolithic man left it. Time and circumstance have 
defaced it. We pass the farm and reach the raised 
corner of a field on which the monument stands. Half 
a mile farther to the north is the Pilgrims’ Way along the 
foot of the steep escarpment. We climb the slope that 
takes us to the main or central chamber situated on the 
eastern side of the monument (fig. 2). 

The great stone which closed the eastern end has 


6 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


fallen forwards and exposed the interior of the chamber, 
or as we may now name it—for the nature of such 
chambers is well known—the tomb. It is a commodious 
chamber,! 12 feet 3 inches in length, east to west, and 
5 feet 8 inches in width, from north to south. When 
Mr Lewis first saw the central chamber, a great vertical 
slab divided it into an eastern and western half, each 
being sufficiently long to provide a wide bed for a six-foot 
man. ‘The flat massive stone which forms the southern 
wall of the chamber shows that the Neolithic men of 
Kent were engineers of no mean ability. It stands 
7 feet 3 inches high, is 11 feet 3 inches long, and 1 foot 
g inches thick—thus weighing many tons. ‘That mass 
the men who lived in pit-dwellings transported and 
set up on this elevated spot. Three other verti 
stones make up the northern and western walls. No 
covering or roofing stone is now present ; the chamber 
lies open to the sky. On the opposite or eastern side of 
the Medway valley, another Megalithic monument—Kits 
Coty House—retains the great roofing stone (fig. 11). 
The central chamber is only part of the Coldrum 
monument; as Mr Filkins’ plan shows, an irregular 
series of blocks surrounds the central chamber, enclosing 
a space, now overgrown with weeds and bushes, about 
50 feet square. The monument was evidently set 
within and formed part of the eastern side of this square. 
In its original state the central chamber was probably 
roofed, the encircling stones formed the retaining wall 
of a great mound which covered the tomb, the entrance 
being from the eastern side (fig. 9). Whatever its exact 
original form may have been, this at least is certain: the 
minds of those ancient inhabitants of Kent must have 
been deeply moved by a faith in things unseen and firmly 
convinced of a human existence untrammelled by the flesh. 
On 16th April 1910, Mr Bennett visited the central 
chamber. In the Megalithic monument at Addington, 
about a mile due south of Coldrum, he had picked up 


* For a detailed description, see Mr Bennett’s paper, Journ. Roy. 
Anthrop. Instit., 1913, vol. xliii. p. 76. 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 7 


Neolithic flakes ; he was now searching for similar traces 
of Neolithic man at Coldrum. ‘‘ No sooner,” he writes, 
“had I put my fork in near the west wall than I at once 
turned up, and under only a few inches of chalky soil, 
some human bones. This find I kept to myself, and 
determined to do no more without someone present to 


Wes, 


South, 





—_— 
\ 


a ae 


iv 
\ 


Eas, 


Fic. 3.—Surface-plan of the Coldrum monument, from a survey made 
by Mr E. W. Filkins. 


keep and record further finds in an area apparently so full 
of human remains.” With the consent of the Lord of 
the Manor, the Hon. R. P. Nevill, and with the assistance 
of Mr E. W. Filkins, Mr Bennett made a systematic 
examination of the central chamber, digging deeply into 
its floor. Besides human bones, only a few fragments 
of a rude pottery and a flint saw were found. Not a 


1 Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1913, vol. xliii. p. 81. 


8 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


trace of any object belonging to a culture later than that 
of the Neolithic age came to light. 

There is not any doubt in my mind that the bones 
thus discovered by Mr Bennett were those of the people 
primarily interred in this Megalithic tomb. Once chalk 
has permeated the porous texture of bones, preservation 
is secured. The Coldrum bones ring like porcelain when 
struck; the tongue adheres to the freshly fractured 
surface, showing that the bones no longer contain animal 
matter. In this manner we came by the material which 
provides us, for the first time, with the means of forming 
a true picture of what the Neolithic people of Kent must 
have looked like in the flesh—the people whose beliefs 
‘ were centred round the Megalithic monuments. I do 
not propose to weary the reader with the details of my 
examination of the bones ; they are already on record ; + 
all I propose here is to give in outline the mental picture 
which my investigation led me to form of the people. 

When I had arranged all the fragments, I found that 
at least twenty-two individuals were represented ; they 
were of all ages, from newly born children to old men 
and women. Unfortunately the skulls, which give us the 
surest evidence of the racial nature of a past people, 
were few and fragmentary. ‘There were only five, out 
of a group of nine, complete enough for our present 
purpose. But a certain feature of these skulls throws 
a curious sidelight on the nature of the monument. In 
a great number of them there were present peculiarities 
in their formation which could only be accounted for by 
supposing that the people buried in the tomb were of 
one family or of nearly related families. ‘Three of the 
nine skulls had anomalous bones set within the joinings 
or sutures of the vault (see fig. 4); some of the others 
showed irregularities in the manner’ in which the sutures 
between the skull bones became closed. 

They were people of short stature; from the length 
of the thigh bones the stature of the men was estimated 
to have been about 5 feet 4% inches (1-648 m.), and 
1 Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1913, vol. xliii. p. 80. 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 9 


that of the women about § feet 1 inch(1°550m.). They 
were thus 2 or 3 inches below our modern British average. 
In size of brain they were apparently not below our 
standard. Indeed, the three male skulls had a capacity 
of 1600 cubic centimetres—an amount considerably above 
the mean for modern men—1480 c.c.; the two female 
skulls had a capacity of 1450 c.c., which is also above the 
modern mean for women—1300 c.c. No importance 
can be attached to figures founded on a group of five 
skulls ; in every race, ancient and modern, the brain is 
found to vary widely as regards size. Such observations 
as those just cited simply show us that Neolithic man, 
as regards brain size, had at least reached our modern 
standard. 

It is also quite apparent that the Neolithic men in this 
part of England did not depart very widely from their 
modern successors as regards form of face and head. 
How near those Coldrum skulls come to modern specimens 
will be seen from fig. 4. I have taken one of the Coldrum 
specimens and set it, as seen in true profile, within a 
standard frame which bounds the chief limits of a modern 
Englishman’s skull of mean size. ‘The dimensions actually 
used are founded on the measurements made by Dr 
Macdonell! on a large number of plague-pit skulls 
(seventeenth century) exhumed in the East End of 
London some years ago. Dr Macdonell determined the 
mean length of the male skulls to be 189:1 mm. ; I have 
made the length of the standard frame in round numbers, 
I90 mm.—just under 7$ inches. The width he found to 
be 140°7 mm.; again I have taken round numbers and 
made it 140 mm. ‘The width is approximately 74 per 
cent. of the length. Any race of men in which the width 
of the head measures 75 per cent. of the length, or less, 
we count long-headed or dolichocephalic ; if the width 
is 80 per cent. or more of the length, then the race falls 
into the short-headed or brachycephalic group; the 
races falling above 75 per cent., and under 80 per cent., 
form an intermediate or mesocephalic group. Amongst 

_} Biometrika, 1904, vol. iil. p. 191. 


10 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


individuals of even the purest races a wide degree of 
variation in head width is found; we determine the 
place of the race by striking the mean of a series of 
measurements on many individuals. 

The height of the vault above the ear-holes is also 
important. In the Whitechapel skulls—those regarded 
as males—the vault rises to 114 mm. above the ear- 
holes; the vaults of the English skull are low pitched. 
In the standard frame I have pitched the vault level at 
115mm. Now, when one of the Coldrum skulls is placed 





Fic. 4.—One of the Coldrum skulls set within a framework of lines which 
bound the chief diameters of a modern skull of mean size. The skull 
is represented in two aspects—profile and full-face. On the vault, 
the anomalous bone mentioned in the text is represented. 


within the standard frame (fig. 4) it is seen to fit fairly 
well. Ifa composite outline were made from the three 
male skulls, the length of the composite skull would be 
19g0'5 mm., its width 140 mm., the height of the vault 
118 mm. ‘The width is 73:3 per cent. of the length. 
The two skulls regarded as females are relatively wider, 
the width index (cephalic index) being 77-9. Clearly 
in form of skull the race with which we have to deal lies 
towards the upper limits of the long-headed range. In 
actual dimensions of the head and in the proportion of 
width to length, this small sample of Neolithic people is 
not materially different from a modern group of English 
people of the industrial class; but they do differ from 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 11 


a sample of the Kentish people who lived at Hythe, on 
the southern coast of Kent, in medieval times. During 
the last few years my friend, Professor F. G. Parsons,! 
has done much to unravel the evolution of the modern 
Englishman. In the crypt of the church at Hythe, he 
examined nearly five hundred skulls of people who lived 
in medieval times. ‘The heads of those Hythe people 
were differently shaped from the Neolithic people of 
Coldrum. ‘They were shorter and broader and higher ; 
the maximum length of the males was only 179 mm., 
the width 142 mm., the height 120 mm., the cephalic 
index 79:9 per cent. The medieval people of Hythe 
were on the border-line of the short-headed class. In 
accounting for the difference in head form between 
Neolithic and medizval people, one has to remember that 
in the Bronze age typical round-headed people invaded 
Kent, and at later dates, both before and during the 
Roman occupation, and also during the Anglo-Saxon 
invasion, many fresh racial elements were imported into 
the population of this county. 

I am lingering round this small group of Coldrum 
people because they have to serve as a standard for our 
subsequent inquiries regarding the bodily features of 
ancient races of men. When a skull is viewed in full 
face (fig. 4) we have an opportunity of standardising 
another series of dimensions. Indeed when we have to 
distinguish one race of mankind from another we obtain 
more assistance from the facial than from the cranial 
parts of the skull. ‘The greatest width of the face is 
measured between the bony arches (zygomatic) which 
can be felt on each side of the head passing from the 
ear to the eye-socket. The width of the face of the male 
Whitechapel skulls is 130 mm.; that we shall use as a 
standard width. The width of the forehead is also 
important. ‘The lower width is taken between the outer 
ends of the ridge which crosses the forehead above the 
orbits—from the outer end of one external angular 


1 See Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1908, vol. xxxvili. p. 419; also 
1910, vol. lx. p. 483. 


i2 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


process to the outer end of the opposite process. ‘The 
upper width (indicated by a stippled line in fig. 4) is 
taken between the temporal lines which bound the areas 
on the sides of the skull (see fig. 4) occupied by the 
temporal muscles—muscles of mastication. ‘The differ- 
ence between these two frontal measurements is of some 
value. In skulls of a primitive race the lower or supra- 
orbital width is much greater than the upper or true 
frontalwidth. As regards the frontal widths, the Coldrum 
individuals show the same relative proportions as modern 
English people. In measuring the length of the face 
the forehead is not included. The forehead is really 
the anterior wall of the brain case; it is not, in/am 
anatomical sense, part of the face. The length one desires 
to measure is from the nasion—the point where the bridge 
of the nose abuts on the forehead—to the lower margin of 
the chin. ‘The lower jaw is so often missing in ancient 
skulls that it is usually impossible to obtain the “ total ” 
face length ; hence we have to rest content with what is 
known as the “upper” face length—the distance as 
measured by calipers between the nasion and the point 
between the roots of the two central upper incisor teeth, 
the gnathion. Even as regards this measurement there 
is only one Coldrum skull available. All we can say, 
taking certain fragmentary parts into account, is that 
the face of this group of Neolithic people was rather 
shorter than in modern people and of about the same 
width. 

When we come to analyse the characters which dis- 
tinguish the people of the Neolithic period from the 
present population of Britain, we see that the changes 
affect, in the first place, the teeth, jaws, and face. 
Amongst modern Kentish folk, as is the case all over 
modern Britain, there is a tendency to crowding and 
irregularities of the teeth; the palate and jaws do not 
grow and expand sufficiently in youth to give room for 
a symmetrical eruption of the teeth. There is a decided 
tendency to a narrowing and elongation of the face—a 
tendency to produce a face of a hatchet-shaped pattern. 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY.OF KENT 13 


The nose is narrow and the palate contracted, and its 
vault is high. The teeth are not worn down as in 
Neolithic men; they are very liable to be attacked by 
caries. ‘The front teeth, when the jaws are closed, do 
not meet edge to edge as in primitive races; like the 
blades of scissors, they overlap, the lower passing behind 
the upper. In the Neolithic people all these modern 
characters are absent. Abscesses or gumboils at the roots 
of the deeply ground teeth, however, were common ; 
but there is not a single carious tooth to be seen in the 
Coldrum collection. The teeth are regular in their 
arrangement, the palates well formed, but in actual 
size the teeth possess the same dimensions as those of 
modern English people. All these changes, which are 
appearing in the teeth and jaws of modern British people, 
arise, we suppose, from the soft nature of our modern 
diet. We believe that were modern men to resume a 
Neolithic diet their teeth and palates would again be 
moulded in the ancient manner. 

It is not only in face and mouth that well-marked 
changes can be recognised. The bones of the lower 
extremities of Neolithic people were shaped in a different 
mould. The upper parts of the shafts of the Coldrum 
thigh bones are flattened in their upper parts, as if they had 
been compressed from front to back; the bones of the leg 
or shin are much more flattened from side to side, and the 
bones which form the ankle and foot are shorter, stouter, 
and show more extensive joint surfaces—evidence of 
freer movement. We cannot explain the disappearance 
of these characters. Perhaps the modern conditions under 
which we live—our clothing, our boots, our roads and 
streets—have brought about a remoulding of the lower 
limbs. The solution of those problems awaits further 
investigation. In the meantime we merely note the 
fact that the men of Kent do differ in certain bodily 
features from their predecessors of four thousand 
years ago. ‘Time and environment appear to have 
worked certain changes in the structure of the human 


body. 


14 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


The Neolithic men of Kent were thus of short stature, 
with rather large heads in which the width was about 
75 per cent. of the length. What were people in other 
parts of England like at this period—the later part of 
the Neolithic age? So far as we know they were all 
long-headed, not very different in size and form from 
those found at Coldrum. ‘The people found in the long 
barrows of the Neolithic period appear to belong to the 
same race as the Coldrum individuals. The skull I wish 
to cite as typical of the Englishman of the Neolithic 
period is that known as the Trent or Muskham skull. 





Fic. 5.—Side and front views of the Trent cranium. 


It was found in an ancient bed of the Trent, at Muskham, 
near Newark, Nottingham, buried naturally in deposits 
laid down by the river. The objects found with it 
show that it is of Neolithic age. Huxley ? described it 
in 1862, and made it the representative of what he named 
the “ river-bed type” (fig. 5). The earliest Neolithic 
skulls we know of in England are of this type; the 
Coldrum and long-barrow skulls are merely variants 


1 The standard article on the stature of prehistoric man is that by 
Professor Karl Pearson in the Philosophical Transactions, 1898, vol. cxcii. 
p- 169. The stature of the modern Englishman he estimates at 1700 mm. 
The mean of the three Coldrum men I have calculated to have been 1648 
mm.—z inches less. 

2 Prehistoric Remains of Caithness, by Samuel Laing. Williams & 
Norgate, 1866. ‘The Muskham or Trent skull is in the museum of the 
Royal College of Surgeons, England. 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 15 


of the type. The “river-bed” form of head is not 
confined to Neolithic England. In an adjoining figure I 
have placed corresponding drawings of a skull from 
Malta—from that subterranean sepulchre of the Neo- 
lithic age, the Hypogeum at Hal-Saflieni—which Dr 
Zammit,! the curator of the museum at Valetta, has 
given me an opportunity of investigating, as well as 
several other Maltese specimens of the Neolithic period. 
When we compare the Neolithic skulls from Coldrum 
and from Malta we see so many points of resemblance 
that we must regard them, not perhaps as of the same 

















z 
B 
40 © 5 eZ 


} 
BALE A . WEOLITHIC. i 


Fic. 6.—Side and front views of a skull from a Neolithic 
burial-place in Malta. 


race, but as belonging to members of a closely related 
group of races. ‘The name which must be given to this 
group of Neolithic races—the races characterised by a 
“‘ river-bed ” type of skull—there also can be no doubt 
about. The veteran Italian anthropologist, Professor 
Sergi,” has clearly proved that the type of skull repre- 
sented by the Maltese specimen (fig. 6) is characteristic 
of the people who lived in the lands which bound the 
Mediterranean—from the Levant to the Straits of 
Gibraltar—during the Neolithic period. Sergi’s Mediter- 
ranean race had heads which in size and form were of the 

1 See Reports of Explorations of Hal-Saflieni Prehistoric Hypogeum., 


Malta, 1911, 1912. 
2 The Mediterranean Race, London, 1gol. 


16 THE ANTI®UITY OF MAN 
“river-bed ” type. The back of the head, in place of 


being flattened, projected backwards as a boss or cap— 
the occipital boss seen in the Coldrum skulls. The ancient 
Egyptians were also members of the Mediterranean 
group—perhaps rather aberrant members. In fig. 7 I 
reproduce a composite diagram, made from the measure- 
ments of five specimens, representing the skull-form of 
male Egyptians of the Sixth Dynasty—of men who were 
living in Egypt between four thousand and five thousand 
years ago. When the Egyptian, Maltese, and Kentish 


130 





Fic. 7.—Form of skull of ancient Egyptians of the Sixth Dynasty, 
from the side and from the front. 


skulls of the Neolithic period—at least Neolithic as far 
as England is concerned, for in Egypt and along the 
shores of the Mediterranean the use of copper and bronze 
was already known—are compared, it will be seen that 
they differ in detail, but in general form are of the “ river- 
bed” type. We find the same type in the Neolithic 
people of Spain, France, Switzerland, North Germany, 
and Scandinavia. 

We see, then, that the little group of folk whose 
remains were buried in the central chamber at Coldrum 
was not an isolated patch of people; they were a sample 
of the kind of men who lived in Western Europe in the 
Neolithic period. ‘The same, or a closely allied race, was 
spread eastwards along the shores of the Mediterranean, 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 17 


both on the European and on the African side. Already 
in the Neolithic period the Mediterranean type of man, 
with a well-defined form of head or skull, was differentiated 
into local groups or varieties. It must not be thought 
that the people who built the Coldrum monument are 
counterparts of the people who built the pyramids. 
They were men of the same type, and we must suppose, 
in order to account for their resemblances, that they 
arose, at some remote period, from a common race or 
stock. We can detect, however, in the ancient Maltese 
and in the ancient Egyptian skulls certain negroid 
features—features which are absent in the skulls of the 
Neolithic people of Western Europe. Further, we know 
that at the very dawn of the Neolithic period a great 
wedge of round-headed humanity had been thrust into 
central Europe—with its base in the East and its ad- 
vancing Western edge almost on the shores of the North 
Sea. If one of these ancient men of Coldrum had applied 
himself to the study of anthropology and sought to 
account for the origin and distribution of the races of 
Europe, he would have had to face just the same com- 
plicated problems as we have to grapple with now. 
Mankind was then already old; the human web already 
universal. 

~The Coldrum people not only shared their physical 
characters with the people of Western Europe, but they 
also participated in the mental life of their time. The 
monument itself is proof of this. We must infer that 
the people who set up such monuments along the shores 
of the Mediterranean and in Western Europe during 
Neolithic times must have been stirred by a common 
code of beliefs concerning life and death. In seeking 

_ for an explanation of the Coldrum monument, I follow 
the lead of Professor Elliot Smith.t In his opinion, the 
birthplace of such monuments is ancient Egypt; the time 
of their evolution there—the five or six centuries which 


1 See Ancient Egyptians, Harper Brothers, 1911; 2nd edition, 1923. 
Essays and Studies presented to William Ridgeway on his Sixtieth Birthday, 
Cambridge, 1923. Man, 1913, vol. xiii. p. 193. 

VOL, I, 2 


18 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


mark the establishment of the early dynasties—from 
3300 B.c. onwards. During this period, the original 
simple Egyptian grave became an elaborate home for 
the dead—such as is shown in the accompanying diagram 
(fig. 8). Such a grave consisted of a mound or tumulus 
bounded by four retaining stone walls. ‘The approach 
to the tomb was usually placed facing the Nile, on the 
eastern side, where the retaining walls were extended to 











ae ae 


STELA 


Fic. 8.—Ground-plan of an ancient Egyptian mastaba and tomb - 
(Elliot Smith). 


form a vestibule or chapel, in which offerings were made 
to the dead. Within the mound or tumulus was a small 
chamber—the serdab—‘‘ the home of the dead man or 
of his disembodied spirit,” an opening in the stela allowing 
the spirit access to the offerings in the chapel. Under 
the tumulus lay the burial chamber, connected with the . 
mound or tumulus by a vertical shaft. Such is the type 
of structure which had been elaborated in the course of 
centuries by a highly organised and ancient Egyptian 
community. In the Neolithic tombs of Sardinia—the 
giants’ tombs !—the structure is somewhat simpler (fig. 9). 


1 See Dr Duncan Mackenzie’s article in Memnon, 1909, vol. ii, 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT 19 


The spirit chamber or serdab and the burial chamber are 
not separated; the common central chamber of the 
tumulus or mound now represents, in the opinion of 
Professor Elliot Smith, the united serdab and burial 
chamber. ‘The supporting walls of the mastaba are 
prolonged on one side to form an approaching chamber 
or chapel. The plan of the Sardinian tomb proves of 
assistance when we come to interpret the various parts of 
the Coldrum monument. It possesses the great central 
chamber, originally approached by the declivity on the 







TOMB ia 3 


RETAINING 
WALL * 





ae RPO HF 


Vp 


ULE 






Fic. 9.—On the left, a ground-plan of a “ giant’s tomb,” Sardinia. On 
the right, a sketch-plan of the Coldrum monument altered to show 
points of resemblance to the “ giant’s tomb.” 


eastern side (fig. 9). ‘The stones, now disposed irregularly 
round the central chamber, evidently formed a supporting 
wall for the mastaba or mound—long since removed. 
At the eastern end, it is evident from the disposition of the 
outlying stones (fig. 9) that the retaining wall on each side 
of the approach or entrance was carried forwards to enclose 
a chamber—similar to the chapel of the Egyptian tombs. 
In the monument, then, we have evidence that the 
Coldrum people participated in the beliefs which swayed 
the people of Western and Southern Europe in the 
Neolithic period. ‘The Megalithic monuments represent 
the mosques, the churches, and chapels of the Neolithic 
age—concrete expressions of inward beliefs. 


20 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


I have selected Coldrum as a starting-point for a 
survey of ancient man because it provides us with a 
series of facts which show that in the essentials of life 
and of bodily form the Englishman of the Neolithic 
period—of four thousand years ago—was not materially 
different from his modern successors. We have changed 
the form of our beliefs, we have transformed our clothes 
and our homes and revolutionised our means of livelihood, 
but in brain and body we have changed only in minor 
details. We may presume that evolution works slowly 
so far as the human body is concerned. 

One other point may serve to show that the status of 
Neolithic man was higher than is usually supposed. 
In various parts of France the people of this period 
buried their dead in caves or large artificially prepared 
subterranean chambers. None of these Neolithic 
sepulchral chambers has been more systematically and 
scientifically investigated than the one accidentally dis- 
covered in 1908 on the side of a hill, at Vendrest, some 
sixty miles to the east of Paris.1 Remains of over a 
hundred and twenty individuals, representing both sexes 
and all ages, were found within this ancient tomb. A fall 
of earth and rocks had buried the doorway of the sepulchre 
about the close of the Neolithic period, for all the worked 
flints and ornaments found within the sepulchre were of 
that age of culture; no traces of the Bronze or Iron 
periods were found. No less than eight of the skulls had 
been opened during life by the operation known as 
trepanning or trephining. It is clear, too, that in the 
majority of cases those Neolithic men undertook and 
successfully carried out operations which even modern 
surgeons hesitate to perform (fig. 10). 

When we try to fathom the reasons which led men so” 
long ago to practise these daring surgical. procedures, we 
have to study the art of surgery as practised amongst 
modern primitive races. Lately, Dr W. E. Redman 
presented to the museum of the Royal College of 


1 La sépulchre néolithique de Belleville 4 Vendrest: Rapport général 
par Dr Marcel Badouin. Société Préhistorique Frangaise, 1911. 


A NEOLITHIC COMMUNITY OF KENT a1 


Surgeons, England, five skulls showing how the 
operation of trepanning is carried out by the natives 
of New Ireland, one of the islands in the Bismarck 
Archipelago, to the east of New Guinea. Accompanying 
the skulls are the sharp obsidian flakes with which 
the operation was performed and the vegetable bandage 
which was applied to secure the dressings over the 
wound. Recent discoveries have explained why an 
opening in the skull may 
relieve certain forms of 
headache, and it is probable 
that the operation is some- 
times performed amongst 
primitive people for such a 
condition. At other times, 
perhaps, trepanning is per- 
formed to allow the demon 
of insanity, or of epilepsy, 
to escape. Trepanning was 
frequently performed by 
the ancient Peruvians. 
During the Neolithic 
period this operation was 


apparently unusual in Eng- Fic. 10—Skull from a Neolithic 


E sepulchre in France, which had 
land, for recorded examples been trepanned in three places. 


are very few.! The patient had recovered, for 
The reader may draw the Wt ahaa of the openings are 
conclusion that an operation 
performed by the natives of New Ireland cannot be 
regarded as a mark of a high state of mental evolution. 
Such an inference is scarcely just: a people who practise 
the operation of trepanning must entertain certain beliefs 
concerning the constitution of the human body—beliefs 
which provide them with the principles on which their 
actions are based. 
The instances I have just cited have other bearings on 
the problem of man’s antiquity. How does it come 





1 See article by Dr Wilson Parry, Lancet, 1914, 1. p. 1699. Proc. Roy. 
Soc. Med., 1921, vol. xiv. p. 1 (History of Med. Sect.). 


22 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


about that in ancient Peru, in Neolithic France, in the 
New Ireland of to-day, we find the same daring and 
difficult operation carried out ? Has each people dis- 
covered the practice for itself, or—as seems to me more 
probable—was it not evolved so long ago that it has per- 
meated the whole stock of modern man? Further, the 
operation of trepanning shows us that a civilisation which 
prevailed four thousand years ago in one part of the world 
is to this day represented in the modern world. There 
are many modern races still in the stage of culture which 
was reached by the people of Europe four or five thousand 
years ago. ‘The Neolithic culture, although ancient, is 
still modern. It requires many thousands of years to 
move the whole world up a stage in civilisation. 





Fic. 11.—Kits Coty House, a Megalithic monument near Maidstone. 


GEA PALE Raat 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE, EGYPT, AND 
BABYLONIA 


Ir we would understand what was happening in the East 
about the year 2000 B.c., when the community we have 
been studying in Kent was burying its dead in the dolmen 
at Coldrum, we must visit the island of Crete, involving a 
sea journey of some 2700 miles. Its white cliffs, gleaming 
in the sun, remind passengers on outward-bound steamers, 
as they coast along its southern shores, with 500 miles 
still to be crossed before Port Said is reached, of the 
white chalk cliffs of Kent, only they miss the green 
verdure which crowns our English coast, for at a distance 
Crete seems dry and barren. The island is 140 miles 
long, has an average width of 25 miles, and is three times 
the size of the county of Kent. From its backbone of 
hills, near the middle of the island, Mount Ida raises its 
crest some 8000 feet above the level of the sea. Away 
beyond Mount Ida, and situated on the northern shore, 
near the middle of the island, is its modern capital, 
Candia. A few miles to the east of Candia a small 
stream—the Kairatas—issues from a ravine in the hills, 
and takes a northward course of some 4% miles across the 
coastal plateau to reach the sea. 

In 1893 a scholarly Englishman, Arthur Evans, son of 
a distinguished sire, landed at Candia in search of a 
legendary civilisation and the fabulous Palace of Minos. 
By 1900 he had discovered the site of the palace hidden 
beneath the terraced fields on the western side of the 
valley or ravine where the Kairatas issues from the hills. 


23 


24 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Season after season he returned with his army of labourers 
to the side of this ravine, and after twenty-three years of 
intrepid application and the expenditure of a fortune, 
he not only brought to light the Palace of Minos at 
Knossus, but restored to Europe the most important of 
all the chapters which are missing from her early history. 

Under the soil of the fields, where modern Cretan 
peasants still raise their crops, extending to a depth of 
over 43 feet, there was layer upon layer of refuse and soil 





MYCEN‘E 200 Miles 


TROY 350Miles 


CANDIA 
“ KNOSSUS 


ROR 
ewe 


SICILY ex 5 
460 Miles a g 320 Miles 


180 Miles P 
: EGYPT 320 Miles ° 


oO 10 20 30 40 50 60 
ht ———— rt ———— 














Fic. 12.—A sketch map of Crete, showing the site of Knossus. 


which long-past generations of men had trampled under- 
foot. Every layer as it accumulated became laden with 
traces of the people who trod it down—sherds of house- 
hold crockery, vases, ornaments, clay figures, objects of 
art, idols, implements of husbandry, and weapons of 
war. By comparing the objects found in the various 
strata at Knossus with others of a like kind and of known 
date, recovered from ruins in Ancient Egypt, Babylonia, 
Asia Minor, the site of Troy, and at sites in Ancient 


* Sir Arthur Evans, The Palace of Minos: A Comparative Account of 
the Successive Stages of the Early Cretan Civilisation as Illustrated by the 
‘Discoveries at Knossus. Vol. i.: The Neolithic, Early, and Middle 
Minoan Ages, 1921. 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 25 


Greece, Sir Arthur Evans obtained the means of esti- 
mating the length of time which has elapsed since these 
various layers were laid down. ‘The series of deposits end 
about 1200 B.c.—a date which takes us just beyond the siege 


SURFACE DEPOSIT ZA 









1200 B.C..343-4F' tS 





LATE MINOAN 




























































































; ZL, z/ 
1580 B.C...:35-2 5 Lire = < Zizi» 
; i MIODLE MINOAN eS Ze DD 
4. 9 £E. Tee fee eee ee 
2/00 B.C...:30-3 FF AD Gg FL. 
EARLY MINOAN DGG! ZE 
4-3F¢ gE PEALE 
3.400 B.C...:26 Fo | eee EE fa 
S== UPPER NEOLITHIC yo Ae op 
= SS DEPOSIT = FE SECTION 
x 9-6ft sess OF Z 
; aa SSS SIDE Zee 
16-4 FE Sse ZZ or LEZ 
AMIDDLE NEOLITHICZ HILL 
Zs DEPOSITS yy FIFE Eg 
Z Zi arte GIP ZLEL_=__ALE > 
Z Se DY JGIELLPBA EB Y_EE"E 
\8-2 feet p= ‘ (Eggi EL 
= LOWER NEOLITHIC £4 = 
‘ = DEPOSIT === EE = Z 
== s.2¢t SS Le 








Fic. 13.—A diagrammatic section to show the various strata discovered 
by Sir Arthur Evans at the site of Knossus. The depths at which 
strata occur are given in feet, and the dates appended to the strata 
are those given by their discoverer. 


of Troy; the Minoans had deserted by then the site of 
Knossus, which had been the dwelling-place of men and 
women during a continuous period—so Sir Arthur Evans 
has estimated—of about seven thousand years. 

The strata which have the chief bearing on our present 
search are those to which their discoverer has given the 


name “ Middle Minoan” (fig. 13). This series begins 


26 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


about 2100 B.c.—approximately the same date at which 
the Coldrum people set up their rude Megalithic tomb. 
But in Crete at this date the Minoans were building 
palaces—great bastioned edifices, covering six acres ot 
ground, with magnificently pillared stone staircases and 
corridors, paved courtyards of large size, a throne-room, 
and all the conveniences needed to accommodate a king 
and his regal court. 

Under the foundations of the great palace lay strata 
formed during the “ Early Minoan” age, covering a 
period of some thirteen hundred years, and carrying the 
history of the community of Knossus back to a date about 
3400 B.c., when metals were still unknown in Crete. The 
Cretans of this period were still in the Neolithic age. 
The oldest deposits of this time were laid down in the 
Neolithic age, but very soon copper came into use, and 
towards the end bronze was introduced, so that the 
Cretans passed from a stone to a bronze civilisation about 
a thousand years before the people of England made 
the corresponding change. These early Minoans built - 
houses with brick and timber walls and thatched roofs, 
not unlike some of the older dwellings still to be seen in 
the country villages of the south and east of England. 
They buried their dead in underground but commodious 
stone-built huts, shaped like bee-hives and approached 
by a passage ; or in stone graves, shaped after the manner 
of a dolmen, or in rock-cut tombs after the manner of 
the early dynasties of Egypt. ‘They had constructed a 
road from Knossus across the island to Phestos on the 
southern coast of Crete, from which ships sailed the open 
sea to Egypt—320 miles distant—and to the ports of the 
Levant and Asia Minor, thus coming into touch with 
Babylon, to the opposite coast of Africa and to Sicily— 
involving a voyage across 460 miles of sea. Sir Arthur 
Evans has produced convincing evidence that in the 
fourth millennium s.c. the Mediterranean was already 
a highway of communication between the peoples who 
occupied the various lands along its shores. 

We must break our survey of the discoveries at Knossus 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 27 


for a moment in order to realise the bearing of what has 
just been noted in Crete upon the origin of the Coldrum 
dolmen. How are we to account for the existence of 
similar tombs along those North African shores which 
extend from Tunis to Morocco? Why are they scattered 
along the coasts of Spain, across France from the Medi- 
terranean to the English Channel, along both shores of 
the Irish Sea, along the West Coast of Scotland, and then 
on to Scandinavia? Civilisation in Crete, as we have 
seen, was moving a thousand years ahead of that of Eng- 
land; with the introduction of bronze, early in the third 
millennium before Christ, there grew up a demand for 
copper and for tin. Professor W. J. Perry } has adduced 
good reasons for believing that the search for precious 
metals during the later part of the third millennium gives 
a satisfying explanation of the distribution of Megalithic 
tombs in these countries just mentioned, the distribution 
of such tombs having a close correspondence to that of 
ancient mines. No doubt the search for gold and precious 
metals urged men to undertake desperate adventures in 
those early times when our modern civilisation was dawn- 
ing, but there is also a stronger and perhaps older impulse 
which sends men from their homes into foreign lands— 
namely, missionary zeal. Does not the distribution of 
these Megalithic tombs, so intimately connected with rites 
paid to the dead, indicate the spread of certain beliefs 
relating to a life after death ? We shall find evidence of 
such beliefs as far back as we can trace the history of 
Neolithic man. 

Having interrupted our account of the discoveries at 
Knossus to indicate their bearing on the history which 
lies behind the tomb at Coldrum, we return again to our 
survey in Crete to call attention to the remarkable fact 
that underneath the Minoan deposits there lay 26 feet of 
material trampled underfoot by pre-Minoans who knew 


1 Professor W. J. Perry, Mem. and Proc. Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc., 
1916, vol. vi. pt. 1. See also Professor G. Elliot Smith, The Evolution of 
the Rock-cut Tomb and Dolmen; Essays and Studies to Sir Wm. Ridgeway, 
Cambridge, 1913. 


28 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


nothing of metals. Even at the base of the deposit 
polished stone axes, and burned, well-finished, hand-made 
pottery were found, showing that the people who first 
settled on the site of Knossus, where long afterwards 
palaces were to rise, had already moved up several 
rungs of the ladder of Neolithic civilisation. Sir Arthur 
Evans holds it justifiable to assume that these Neolithic 
people settled at the site of Knossus about the beginning 
of the eighth millenniums.c. ‘This estimate is founded on 
the assumption that deposits would accumulate at much 
the same rate during the Neolithic periods as in the 
Minoan age. If it took two thousand two hundred 
years for 17 feet of Minoan strata to accumulate, it 
should take some three or four thousand years to account 
for the growth of the 26 feet of Neolithic deposits. We 
shall be near the mark if we suppose that Neolithic man 
began to live at Knossus in the latter part of the seventh 
millennium B.c. 

However this may be, Sir Arthur Evans found the most 
convincing evidence in these older deposits that the 
Neolithic people of Crete were already in communication 
with Egypt, Asia Minor, Babylonia, and ‘Turkestan. 
They had seals of a design which occurs in the more ancient 
graves of Egypt—predynastic graves; their stone maces 
and their black pottery have duplicates in Ancient Egypt 
and Babylon; their clay figures or idols, caricatures in 
miniature of a very fat type of woman, are also found in 
Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Turkestan, as well as in ancient 
graves of Mediterranean countries to the west. Man had 
conquered the sea at a much earlier date than has been 
supposed hitherto. 

The kind of men who lived in Crete during Neolithic 
times we have no means of telling; their bones have not 
yet been found. But we have every reason to suppose 
that they were long-headed, dark-haired, brown-skinned 
members of the Mediterranean stock. In early Minoan 
times there was already an admixture with a round- 
headed type of invader from Eastern lands. 

In our search for the men who first tilled the soil, kept 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 29 


cattle, and thus introduced the basis of our modern way 
of living, we must pass from Ancient Crete to still more 
Ancient Egypt. At the beginning of the second 
millennium when Megalithic tombs were being raised in 
Kent and palaces in Crete, the people inhabiting the 
valley of the Nile, from Alexandria on the Mediterranean 
to Aswan at the First Cataract, a stretch of 600 miles, were 
living under a highly organised dynastic government. 
Nay, at the date of which we write, 2000 B.c., the 
Egyptians had already seen come and go eleven dynasties 
of kings. Menes, who first united the peoples of Upper 
and of Lower Egypt and thus founded the first of the 
dynasties, was certainly in power by 3300 B.c., if not 
earlier. The land of Egypt is but a long and narrow 
strip saved from the desert by the fertilising waters of 
the Nile. Every century 4 inches of new mud are 
deposited, burying and preserving records of the genera- 
tions who till the fields. In Lower Egypt sherds of 
pottery have been found in strata which now lie 70 feet 
below the surface of the soil. Some day the records of 
Ancient Egypt which lie buried in the accumulated silt 
of the lower valley will be explored; in the meantime 
we have to depend on the records obtained from ceme- 
teries. Throughout dynastic times, and earlier, the 
Egyptians buried their dead on the edge of the desert, 
just beyond reach of the Nile floods. The dry sands of 
the desert deal kindly with the dead entrusted to them. 
Thus it has come about that the fertile banks of the Nile, 
from Nubia to the Delta, are fringed by a continuous series 
of cemeteries belonging to every period of its history. 
At all times, as far back as cemeteries can carry history, 
the Egyptians have furnished their dead with a material 
outfit for a life after death, and as the nature of this 
outfit, as well as the fashion in tombs, has changed from 
dynasty to dynasty it has become possible for skilled 
archeologists to give dates to cemeteries and to arrange 
them in their order of antiquity. In 1894 Sir Wm. 
Flinders Petrie discovered a cemetery at Naquada, in 
Upper Egypt, which proved to be of a more ancient date 


30 THE ANTIQUITY: OF MAN 


than the foundation of the First Dynasty of kings; it 
was predynastic. It contained remains of the people and 
of the civilisation which prevailed in Egypt before Menes 
united the two crowns. ‘Thereafter predynastic ceme- 
teries of various degrees of antiquity were discovered so 
that archeologists came to divide predynastic times into 
three periods, namely, early, middle, and late. 

In 1907, before raising the height of the Aswan dam, 
the Government of Egypt resolved to make a survey of 
the antiquities and cemeteries which would become sub- 
merged when the engineers had accomplished their task. 
Colonel H. G. Lyons was most fortunate in the men he 
placed in charge of the Archzological Survey.t Dr 
G. A. Reisner, assisted and afterwards succeeded by Mr 
C. M. Frith, was archeologist in charge; the examina- 
tion of the human remains was entrusted to Professor 
G. Elliot Smith, who had the assistance first of Professor 
F. Wood Jones, and afterwards of Professor Douglas E. 
Derry. It was under such circumstances that we came 
by a knowledge of the people who had lived in the narrow 
valley of the Nile, above the First Cataract, for a con- 
tinuous period of at least six thousand years. 

Dr Reisner came across cemeteries of all dates, but only 
those which belong to the predynastic age have a bearing 
on our present problem. He found some which were 
early predynastic in date, others had to be assigned to a 
middle period, while there were still others which just 
preceded the establishment of the first dynasty and were 
therefore named late predynastic. ‘The late predynastic 
people are assigned provisionally to a period between 
3300-3500 B.c.; they had learned the use of copper and 
were thus in a transitional stage of culture corresponding 
to the older phase of the Early Minoan civilisation of 
Crete. The late predynastic Egyptians were, as regards 
the evolution of their civilisation, several centuries in 
advance of the Earlv Minoans. The people of the middle 

1 The Archeological Survey of Nubia. Bulletins and Reports, accom- 


panied by magnificent plates, were issued from time to time by the 
Government of Egypt between 1908-1915. 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 31 


and of the early predynastic cemeteries were found to be 
still in a Neolithic phase of civilisation—the phase 
represented by the lower 26 feet of accumulated deposits 
at Knossus. 

To see what kind of men these early predynastic 
Egyptians were and what manner of life they led, we 
may take as an example a cemetery on the left bank, 
numbered “ 79” by Dr Reisner. In this cemetery were 
found sixty-two graves belonging to the early predynastic 
period. The bodies were so well preserved that husks 
of barley and of millet were recovered from their stomachs. 
These people grew and spun flax, for their bodies were 
found to be wrapped in woven linen of a fine texture ; 
they were highly skilled potters, making vessels in a number 
of shapes and sizes. Samples of their skill were placed 
in the grave for the service of the dead ; they had finely 
wrought vessels in stone ; their flint weapons and imple- 
ments are of exquisite workmanship. ‘Their women were 
provided with paint palettes, in slate or ivory, to be used 
for the embellishment of their complexions; they were 
given necklaces strung with beads of crystal, cornelian, 
or of garnet; also hair-pins and combs made of ivory ; 
the men had stone axes and maces. Little ivory figures 
or idols and amulets were laid with the dead. It is clear 
that the people who lived in the valley of the Nile at 
the beginning of the fourth millennium before the birth 
of Christ, probably at a still earlier date, had travelled a 
long way up the ladder which leads from man’s primitive 
state to that which he now enjoys. They formed settled 
agricultural communities and required cemeteries. The 
oldest cemeteries known in England are four thousand 
years later than those of Upper Egypt.? 

What kind of men lived in Egypt during early pre- 
dynastic times? ‘The statement is often made, and it 
is one which is true in a broad sense, that the Egyptian 
is physically the same man to-day as he was six thousand 

1 Professor Thos. Cherry has given reasons for believing that agri- 


culture was first practised by people of the Nile valley. Proc. Australian 
Ass. for Advan. of Science, Melbourne, 1921. 


32 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


years ago. Evolution, as concerns brain and body, appears 
to have been stationary in Egypt. ‘The problem as to 
whether or not a physical change has taken place in the 
Egyptians is difficult to solve for this reason. Professor 
C. S. Myers ! found that as one descends the Nile valley 
from Aswan to Alexandria, the tint of the skin gets less dark, 
the head increases in dimensions, particularly as regards 
its width, and the face grows longer. Professor Elliot 
Smith 2 has found that substantially the same is true as 
regards the head form of the Ancient Egyptians. The 
predynastic men of Upper Egypt had, on an average, 
narrow, small heads. Were we to fit a representative 
skull of a predynastic man into such a frame as is shown in 
fig. 7 (p. 16) it would be found to fall 6 mm. short of the 
standard length—while in width it would fall short by 
8 mm.; whereas a representative ancient skull from 
Lower Egypt, even of the earliest dynastic period, 
while it would still fall about 6 mm. short of the standard 
length, would almost fill the standard width. ‘The people 
of Lower Egypt are distinguished from those of Upper 
Egypt by a greater prevalence of prominent noses and 
strong shelf-like chins even as early as predynastic times. 
Professor Elliot Smith found that the higher type of 
Lower Egypt was sporadically represented in Upper 
Egypt. It is this mixture of types which makes it so 
difficult to measure the degree of evolutionary change 
which has taken place among the natives of Egypt. As 
our methods improve in precision and scope and the 
number of our observations increases, it will probably 
be found that evolution has not been quiescent in that 
branch of the Mediterranean stock which has evolved 
along the valley of the Nile. 

Our search along the Nile has not revealed the be- 
ginnings of Egyptian civilisation; it is said, perhaps 


1 Professor C. S. Myers, Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1905, vol. xxxv. 
p- 80; 1906, vol. xxxvi. p. 237; 1908, vol. xxviii. p. 89. See also C. G. 
Seligman, ibid., 1913, vol. xlili. p. 593. 

* Professor G. Elliot Smith, The Ancient Egyptians, revised edition, 
1923. 


NEOLITHIC. COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 33 


with truth, that its oldest traces are buried 70 feet deep 
in the deposits of the Delta.1 However this may be, 
one cannot forget that in predynastic graves of Upper 
Egypt are found vases decorated with paintings of sea- 
going ships, as are other objects which indicate a very 
early trafic between Egypt and Mesopotamia; we must 
therefore pay a cursory visit to ancient Babylonia to see 
what bearing recent discoveries made in this land have 
on the problem of man’s antiquity. 

If we proceed from Upper Egypt to Mesopotamia in 
a straight line, we must cross the Red Sea and 800 miles 
of desert ; if we take the land route, which leads through 
Palestine, we shall have to cover some 1350 miles; if 
we proceed by sea, as the predynastic people are supposed 
to have done, we have to make a longer voyage than that 
made by ships when they cross the Atlantic from Liver- 
pool to New York. The ancient Garden of Eden— 
Mesopotamia—lying between the lower reaches of the 
Tigris and Euphrates, is a great alluvial plain which has 
been gradually formed and extended by mud deposited 
at the mouths of these great rivers. ‘The delta of the 
Nile has been formed in the same way and during the same 
recent geological period. When this large plain was 
drained and irrigated, as it was in ancient days, the extent 
of land available for cultivation and for the support of 
man was three times greater than in Egypt. 

We shall glance at the sites of three ancient cities of 
this land—cities which have long ceased to be the abode 
of man. We select Ur of the Chaldees first, because 
about the year 2000 B.c.—the date of the Coldrum tomb 
—Khammurabi, the Semite King, established himself in 
Babylon and Ur fell from its high estate. About this 
time, too, Abraham, accompanied by a retinue of 318 men, 
made his way from Ur to Canaan, involving a journey of 
about 1000 miles. In the present year (1924) an expedi- 
tion sent out by the British Museum and the University 


1 See Professor P. E. Newberry, Nature, 1923, vol. cxii. 940 ; 
Professor J. H. Breasted, 4 History of Egypt, aie Jande Morgan 
ese eeiiete 1921, vol. xxxi. p. 185. 


34 THE ANTI@UITY OF MAN 


of Pennsylvania to explore the site of Ur, reports the 
discovery of definite evidence of the foundation of the city 
which goes back, at the lowest estimate, to the beginning 
of the fourth millennium B.c. 

Some 60 miles farther inland than Ur, and situated 





iM 
t 


) 
al Mg Py py 


a 


Hal N NW 7 
AGH VW 


o 








Fic. 14.—A sketch map of Ancient Mesopotamia. 


between the rivers and very possibly serving as a seaport 
in the infancy of Babylonia, are the ruins of Erech. 
These ruins cover an area of 120 acres. There are 
records which prove that Erech is an older city than 
Ur of the Chaldees. Then some go miles farther 
inland, also situated between the rivers and 8 miles to 
the east of the ruins of Ancient Babylon, are the buried 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 35 


foundations of Kish, the oldest and largest city yet 
discovered in Ancient Mesopotamia. ‘Traces of the city 
extend over an area measuring 5 miles by 2. In the 
present year an excavating expedition, sent out by 
the Oxford and Field Museums, exposed the foundations 
of one of the larger buildings of Kish. Its courts were 
paved with a kind of brick which is known to have been 
in fashion at the close of the fourth millennium B.c. 
Underneath this ancient floor, excavations were carried 
out to a depth of 15 feet, but even at the lowest level 
reached, pottery-laden deposits were not exhausted. 
Nowhere in Mesopotamia have the real beginnings of 
its ancient cities been tapped by the explorer’s spade. 
Copper was already in use at the lowest levels reached. 
It is clear that the inception of man’s Neolithic way of 
living must lie many thousands of years behind the 
building of the city of Kish. 

Away on the margin of the great alluvial plain, some 
230 miles due east of the site of Ancient Babylon, and 
buried near the foot of the Persian hills, lie the ruins of 
the ancient Elamite city of Susa. M. J. de Morgan} 
found that people had lived here as a settled community 
for so great a period that the deposits which had been 
trampled underfoot by generation after generation 
formed an accumulation totalling 130 feet in depth. 
The upper 65 feet of strata in the mound-shaped accumu- 
_ lation were formed during the Copper and Bronze ages. 
The lower 65 feet contained flint flakes and obsidian 
implements ; pottery of artistic and excellent workman- 
ship extends to the very deepest layer of the deposit. 
The first settlers on this site had already left the beginning 
of the Neolithic civilisation far behind them. M. de 
Morgan estimates, from the known rate at which the 
upper deposits accumulated, that the oldest strata must 
have been laid down eighteen thousand years ago. It is 
possible that such deposits may have grown at a greater 
rate than either M. de Morgan or Sir Arthur Evans have 

1 J. de Morgan, Premieres Civilisations, Paris, 1909. See also The 
Cambridge Ancient History, vol. 1., 1923. 


36 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


estimated, but even if we make all allowances on this 
score, it is certain that the inception of Neolithic life 
in the East must lie some ten thousand years or more 
before the birth of Christ. 

Before giving up our search for the exact region 
of the world in which agriculture was first practised, 
and for the kind of man who thus laid the basis of 
Neolithic culture, I would beg the reader to return with 
me once again to Upper Egypt and look westwards 
across the Nile from Luxor. On the other side of the 
river appear the hills of the desert plateau, and the barren 
hot valley containing the tombs of dynasties of Egyptian 
Pharaohs. During 1923 and 1924 Mr Howard Carter 
unveiled in® this valley the splendour with which 
Tutankhamen had been buried about 1350 B.c. From 
these bare, sunburnt hills issues a ravine or valley, usually 
dry, but which, in ancient times, had been the course of 
a rushing river, with well-filled banks. As the water- 
course debouches from the plateau on the side of the Nile 
valley it is flanked on each side by three terraces rising 
one above the other. The lowest is 172 feet above the 
level of the adjoining reach of the Nile; the second, or 
middle terrace, 286 feet; while the third, or highest 
terrace, reaches 364 feet. These terraces of sorames 
represent old beds of the river which issued from the 
hills and plateau. The gravel beds and terraces were 
formed at a time when rain fell plentifully on the 
plateau and its hills; to-day the plateau is but part of 
the great desert. “These terraces speak of a period, not 
so very remote from a geologist’s point of view, when the 
Nile valley was submerged and was filled by a series of 
lakes, the waters rising at one time to the level of the 
highest terrace. As the land rose and the valley became 
drained, the middle and the lowest terraces were laid 
down. Even in the lowest and most recent terrace, the 
gravel is solidified into a hard conglomerate cliff, on the 
face of which are open rock-cut tombs of Ancient 
Egyptians. ‘Tourists, as they enter the ravine leading 
to the Valley of the Kings, are familiar with these cliffs 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 37 


and tombs. Here, in 1881, came General Pitt Rivers,! 
the most exact and enterprising of all British archzologists, 
and as he passed along the cliff-like face of the ancient 
terrace he observed, embedded in its substance, stone 
_implements of the older or Paleolithic kind. Here, 
too, in 1914, came Dr Charles G. Seligman? to make 
a systematic search for traces of early man, and he also 
discovered the existence of stone implements of various 
types in all three terraces of the lower ravine. The 
gravels of these terraces, with their included tools of 
stone, represent the burdens which ancient rivers and 
torrents had washed from the surface of the plateau 
and had swept down their courses, ultimately depositing 
them on the margins of the Nile valley. On the face 
of the wide wastes of desert which stretch away from 
each side of the Nile are the courses of ancient rivers 
and streams; here and there, on hard surfaces exposed 
by eddying winds of the desert, are to be picked up 
various kinds of stone implements which ancient man 
is known to have fashioned. We have the most definite 
evidence ? that there was a time when these great expanses 
of parched desert, which flank the Lower Nile both to 
the right and to the left, were green and fertile, providing 
an ample home for man and beast. 

As to the kind of man who lived on this ancient land, 
now turned desert, we cannot tell, for we have found no 
evidence as yet. The oldest human remains so far dis- 
covered are those found in predynastic graves, with 
perhaps one exception. In 1922 Mr Brunton, when 
digging on behalf of the Egyptian Exploration Fund 
at Qau,* on the right bank of the river, about 160 
miles below Luxor, came across a strange assortment of 

1 Fourn. Anthrop. Instit., 1882, vol. xi. p. 390. 

2 C. G. Seligman, “‘ The Older Palzolithic Age in Egypt,” Fourn. Roy. 
Anthrop. Instit., 1921, vol. xxi. p. 115. 

3 For evidence, see C. E. P. Brooks, The Evolution of Climates, London, 
1922; Hume and Craig, Brit. Ass. Reports, 1911, p. 382. 

4 On exploring this site in 1924, Sir William Flinders Petrie discovered 


ancient levels of human habitation. On the lower levels pottery was 
found and also numerous worked flints, of a late Paleolithic type. 


38 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


fragmentary human bones, all of them deeply mineralised. 
They were apparently part of the stock-in-trade of some 
artisan of late dynastic times who had fashioned handles 
for tools out of them. ‘Their condition is exactly that 
of the bones of hippopotamus and elephant found deeply 
embedded in the silt of the Lower Nile. Professor 
Douglas E. Derry? has given an account of their charac- 
ters. [hey indicate the existence of a people of slender 
build and short stature, and although they do show minor 
peculiarities, must be assigned to a variety of the same 
stock as that to which the predynastic Egyptians belonged. 

How long ago is it since the northern half of the Sahara 
and the whole of the Arabian Peninsula formed a green 
and well-watered land? The area of this ancient land— 
a Pleistocene Atlantis—was equal in size and in fertility 
to the modern continent of Europe. Why is it that the 
great desert belt which crosses North Africa and the 
Arabian Peninsula continues to creep towards the Medi- 
terranean and towards the Caspian ? In its march north- 
wards there has been an ebb and flow, but the flow clearly 
gains on the ebb. In past times we have concentrated 
our attention on the flow and ebb of the ice-sheet ; it is 
only in recent years that it has become apparent to 
students that the ebb and flow of the desert belt has a 
closer bearing on the story of man’s evolution. It was 
Professor Albrecht Penck? who first clearly recognised 
that as the edge of the Polar ice-sheet crept southwards 
over Northern Europe, the northern edge of the great 
desert belt of Africa and Arabia retreated towards the 
Equator; the climate and fertility of South Europe 
crossed the Mediterranean and advanced southwards 
almost to the heart of the Sahara; the climate of Asia 
Minor passed to the deserts of Arabia. As North Europe 
became a desert of snow and ice, the great African desert 
of sand began to be covered by vegetation, and to offer 


1 A communication made to the Anatomical Society of Great Britain 
at Cambridge, 1923. 

2 Professor Albrecht Penck, Scottish Geograph. Mag., 1914, vol. xxx. 
p- 281. 


NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES IN CRETE 39 


a home for bird, beast, and man. Whenthe African 
Atlantis became again a howling wilderness of sand, North 
Europe became green and once more offered a home for 
man.+ ‘Those who have studied the climatic conditions 
which prevailed in Europe during the last geological 
period—the Pleistocene—which preceded the period in 
which we live, are of opinion that the climatic pendulum, 
which swings the climatic belts across Europe and North 
Africa, has made three complete excursions ; three times 
the desert has become the home of man, three times it 
has become reduced to a waste of sand. 

In our search for the men who gave the world a know- 
ledge of agriculture and invented the culture of Neolithic 
times, our footsteps have been guided in this chapter to 
the eastern part of the desert belt. Parts of this belt 
have been preserved as a fit home for man by the waters 
of the Nile, Euphrates, and Tigris; their fertile valleys 
may be looked upon as rafts which have floated into our 
time, survivors from the wreck of a continent. The basal 
element in the population of Egypt and Arabia is the 
same; the essential Egyptian and Arab are so fashioned 
as to form evolutionary links between the Mediterranean 
type of Europe and the prevalent type amongst the natives 
of India. We may thus presume that the ancient Garden 
of Eden, which stretched from the Indian Ocean to the 
Atlantic, was inhabited by men of the Arab and Egyptian 
types. 

Ne geologists agree that the last Ice age in Europe was 
nearing its end about ten or twelve thousand years ago; 
they also agree that this later phase of the Ice age had 


1 These changes in climate and their cause have been very ably dis- 
cussed by Mr Ellsworth Huntington, who had worked out a theory of 
climatic belts and the cause of their shift quite independently of Professor 
Penck, Civilisation and Climate, New York, 1915; Principles of Human 
Geography (in collaboration with Mr S. W. Cushing), New York, 1921. 

My friend Professor Griffiths Taylor of Sydney University has been a 
pioneer in this department of knowledge. See “Climate Cycles and 
Evolution,” Geograph. Rev., 1919, vol. viii. p. 288; “Evolution and 
Distribution of Race, Culture, and Language,” ibid., 1921, vol. xi. p. 54. 

See also Mr C. E. P. Brook’s The Evolution of Climate, London, 1922. 


40 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


endured for a period which is estimated to have lasted some 
twenty or thirty thousand years. When North Europe 
was in the grip of an unbroken Arctic winter, the deserts 
of Africa and Arabia enjoyed a temperate climate. We 
may, therefore, infer that from about 40,000 B.c. down 
to about 20,000 B.c. the people occupying these lands 
prospered. By 20,000 s.c. the northward swing of the 
desert belt had set in; and by 10,000 B.c. the flaming 
sword of drought had driven out or destroyed the inhabi- 
tants of these fertile lands, save such as found refuge in 
the valleys of the Nile, Euphrates, and ‘Tigris, or on the 
fertile islands left stranded in a sea of sand. One can 
best explain all the facts relating to these forgotten phases 
of man’s history by assuming that the art of agriculture 
and all the other arts which came to be practised in 
Neolithic times were already discovered by inhabitants 
of these ancient lands of Asia and Africa. They 
carried these arts with them when they were driven 
from their wide upland plains to the narrow con- 
fines of three river valleys. We are thus presuming that 
Neolithic culture is at least fifteen thousand years old, and 
that the men who introduced it were not unlike those of 
Southern Europe in size of brain and build of body. 
The antiquity of this human type is a problem to which 
we shall refer again. 

In the next chapter we must return to England and 
seek to trace the history of its inhabitants towards the 
night of the Ice age, but while we are carrying out this 
part of our search we must ever keep in mind the happier 
conditions which prevailed in those lands which lie to 
the south and to the south-east of Europe, lands now 
reduced to wastes of sand and rocky desert. ‘The home 
of the European type of man and the cradle of his civilisa- 
tion lie in that part of the world where Asia merges into 


Africa. 


CHAPTERS LIS 
THE PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 


Tue Megalithic monuments and the people who built 
them belong to the closing phases of the Neolithic period. 
We are now to seek traces of the people who lived in 
England towards the commencement of that period. 
The records of the time are not beyond recall, for we now 
know that large tracts of country over which the early 
Neolithic people roamed and hunted, perhaps established 
their village communities and, in all likelihood, cultivated 
their little plots of ground, are preserved beneath the 
waters of surrounding seas. At various parts of the 
English coast a low tide exposes the fringes of these 
Neolithic territories along the foreshore. The old land 
surfaces are easily recognised when they are marked, as is 
the case in some localities, by the blackened stumps of 
trees, still rooted to the soil on which they flourished long 
ago. Remnants of these submerged forests are to be seen 
along the West, South, and East coasts of England, round 
the Channel Islands, and along the North-West coast of 
France. They extend far out into the bed of the North 
Sea. The Dogger Bank (see Mr Clement Reid’s map, 
fig. 15), now covered by 60 feet of water at low tide, still 
yields, when dredged, peat and the remains of the marsh- 
plants which once grew where now great steamers come 
and go. Even at greater depths—at levels which lie 120- 
130 feet below the surface of the sea—the same evidences 
of an old land surface are to be found.!_ Mr Clement Reid 

1 See the late Mr Clement Reid’s excellent manual on Submerged Forests, 
Cambridge University Press, 1913. 

41 


42 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


has studied the plants which grew on the Dogger Bank 
when it formed part of Continental England, and in his 
opinion they are modern in character. ‘They represent 
living species, of the kind which favour a moderate climate 
and marshy surroundings. My friend, Mr J. Sinel,? has 
studied the submerged forests off the coasts of Jersey. 
He has traced the old land surface, on which the forest 
grew, right out into the English Channel, until a depth 
of 140 feet is reached. When that land surface was in 
existence, it is highly probable, as already stated, England 
was joined to the continent of Europe. Now, at various 
places and at various times, worked flints have been 
discovered on and under this old land surface. ‘They have 
always been worked in the style adopted by the men of 
the Neolithic period. The remains of the animals which 
have been unearthed at the “ submerged-forest ” level 
are those of beasts which are known to belong to the 
Neolithic period. 

The Neolithic territories which lie deep beneath the 
sea are beyond our reach; at some future and far-distant 
period, perhaps, they may again become dry land and 
afford the anthropologists of the time ample means of 
studying some of their Neolithic ancestors, whose bones, 
no doubt, lie preserved there for all time. Fortunately 
for us, there are certain marginal corners of the sub- 
merged-forest land within our reach. As the sea crept 
upon the land at so slow a rate, we must suppose that 
its gain was not apparent in the lifetime of a generation. 
The estuaries of the sea invaded our river valleys. The 
estuary of the Thames, for instance, before the subsidence 
of the Neolithic period began, was far out in the North 
Sea; London, we must presume, lay far above the tidal 
limit (fig. 15). In the course of time, as subsidence pro- 
ceeded, the meadows and woodlands lying along the 
bottom of the valley became submerged in times of flood. 
Every flood or high tide left a veneer of slime behind, 
coating the floor of the valley and turning forest and 
meadow land into marsh. In the course of centuries, 

1 Prehistoric Times and Men of the Channel Islands, Jersey, 1914. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 43 


the marsh became a slimy expanse of mud, and the old 
land surface became buried under many feet of alluvial 
deposit or river sediment. That such has been the 


( ~ a 49 2254 
SS 
SSS 





Fic. 15.—The land-connection between England and the Continent in 
early Neolithic times (Mr Clement Reid). 


recent history of the Thames valley we have the most 
ample evidence. Some time ago a trench, over 100 
yards wide, a mile in length and 4o feet in depth, was 
cut across the marshland of the Thames valley to 
form a new dock for London (see fig. 1). Along the 
whole length of the exposed sides of the trench—about 


44 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


30 feet below the marsh level—could be traced a thick 
layer of peat, strewn with the trunks of great trees, all 
of them uprooted; not one was to be seen standing as it 
grew on the ancient land surface. They represent, we 
suppose, the crop of trees which flourished when the 
backwaters of the Thames first invaded the forests 
which grew on its banks. Below the marsh deposit and 
Med Sow anenee the peat is a thick 

7 ek, a oe ene stratum of ballast 























ae __rwen _____~— gravel — water-rolled 

a= <= stones, many of which 

“4 LO a ee iderabl 
OG TTD wes _— are of considerable 









Tee Lira t// hed ,) 
ie ve Lif ly, a, oe / 
Neg eae Effie y. LL pe 

AS SOER eS oe . 


“=== «size, deposited mime 
== iriver” bed} whenmeea 





SBP My, TN - ‘Thames was a power- 
ae BRS EA ful; rapid stream. 93a 
27-08 sc ri 2 


26-0 Ee LULL places, the ballast 
- = ; gravel is so thick that 
its deepest layer lies 
60 or 80 feet below 
the present bed of the 
river. The bottom 
layer of the ballast 
are ae oan gravel marks the time 
face and the human skeleton at Tilbury. when the land had 
reached its highest 
point of elevation, and the estuary of the river reached 
its farthest limit in the North Sea. 

‘The trench just described gives us a section across the 
floor of the valley of the Thames, five miles below the 
central part of London. ‘To ascertain the kind of people 
who lived in England when the old land surface was clad 
with a flourishing forest, we have to go down the river 
still further, to Tilbury docks, situated on the marsh- 
land on the north bank of the river, twenty miles below 
London. When these docks were being made in 1883, 

the old land surface—the Neolithic valley bottom—was 
met with at a depth of 32 feet below the level of the 
marsh, 363 feet below the limit reached by the water at 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 45 


high tide. ‘Three feet beneath that old land surface was 
found the skeleton of the Tilbury man. Whenacomplete 
skeleton, or rather, representative parts of a complete 
skeleton, are found together, it is almost certain the 
person to whom that skeleton belonged was buried by 
human hands. 

It could happen that the entire body of an individual 
might come to rest in a deep, quiet, muddy pool, 
and thus become naturally entombed, but in the bed 





TILBURY 


Fic. 17.—The Tilbury skull fitted within the standard frame for 
modern British skulls of average size. 


of a quick-flowing river, such as the Thames then was, 
this fate is improbable. As decay set in, the various 
parts of the body would become dismembered and 
scattered. We may reasonably presume, when a com- 
plete human skeleton is found, that we have to do with 
a burial. In 1883, when the Tilbury remains were 
found, men were not on the alert for the evidence which 
might have confirmed such a supposition; no one ex- 
pected to find “ buried ” human remains at such a depth. 
By the fortunate find at Tilbury, an Englishman of the 
submerged-forest age was revealed to us. When the 
skull is placed within the frame which fits the head of 
the average modern Englishman, it is seen that the 


46 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


ancient man of Tilbury reaches our modern standard. 
There is no feature of his head which marks him off 
from his successors of to-day. Like the people of 
Coldrum, he has a skull of the river-bed type. In brain 
capacity he is the equal of the average man of to-day, 
his capacity being just under 1500 c.c. In height he 
was about the same as the Coldrum men—about 5 
feet 4 inches (1:630 m.). He has the same flattening 
of the thigh and leg bones as is to be seenin them. The 
skeleton lay 3 feet below the old land surface, laid to 
rest there, we presume, by the hands of his comrades. 
Neither he nor they could ever have dreamed of the day 
when great steamers would sail over the land which was 
their home. Such worked flints and animal remains as 
have been found, indicate that the old land surface—the 
submerged-forest surface—was inhabited at an early part 
of the Neolithic period. 

Can we form any reasonable estimate of the centuries 
which have passed since the Tilbury man lived? When ~ 
the Tilbury docks were being cut, it was noted that an 
old land surface, “‘ strewn with Roman refuse,” lay about 
7 feet below the present surface level. At first sight this 
observation seems to show that the land surface at 
Tilbury had sunk 7 feet since the Roman occupation 
of England ended some fifteen centuries ago. The 
ford by which the Romans crossed the Medway at 
Rochester, and the road which led to the ford, are now 
about 8 feet below the level of mean tides. ‘The borough 
surveyor of Rochester is of opinion that there has been 
a subsidence of about 8 feet since the Romans used the 
ford. If the subsidence of the Thames valley had 
proceeded at an equal rate, century after century, then 
the antiquity of the Tilbury man could be easily estimated. 
If it has taken fifteen hundred years for the Roman surface 
to sink 8 feet, then we may infer that it has taken six 
thousand seven hundred years for the land surface on 
which Neolithic man lived to subside to a depth 
of 36 feet below high-water level. If this estimate 
could be relied on we should have to give the Tilbury 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 47 


man an antiquity greater than that assignable to any 
predynastic’ Egyptian. 

It is clear that if the process of subsidence is not 
continuous, but takes place at irregular intervals, with 
upward as well as downward movements, our calculations 
may be seriously upset. Besides the deepest old-land 
surface represented by the submerged-forest zone, there 
may occur, in the submerged-land deposits, other two 
zones of peat or vegetable matter, which seem to indicate 
two later stationary periods—intervals in which sub- 
sidence did not occur, or took place very slowly.! 

The lowest layer of peat was formed above the land 
surface on which Tilbury man lived (fig. 16). Now, 
in other parts of England. peat is formed at the same 
horizon and is found to contain Neolithic implements 
which are assignable to a date about the end of the 
fourth millennium s.c., the time at which dynastic rule 
was first established in Egypt. The middle stratum of 
peat, seen in section at Tilbury (fig. 16), probably repre- 
sents the layer formed in late Neolithic and early Bronze 
times, about the end of the third millennium B.c., while 
the upper stratum is a growth of pre-Roman times. 

A discovery made on the flat coast of Essex, at Walton- 
on-Naze, fifty miles from ‘Tilbury as the crow flies, throws 
some light on the antiquity of Tilbury man. The 
tide here beats against a bank of rain-washed clay 10 
feet in thickness, exposing at its base an old land surface. 
Every high tide exposes more and more of this surface, 
strewing the beach with débris washed out from it— 
including finely worked Neolithic flints and fragments 
of pottery. On a September afternoon of 1910 Mr 
Hazzeldine Warren and his companion, Mr Miller 
Christy, while searching the beach for washed-out flints, 
were surprised to see the bones of a human leg exposed 
on the face of the beach 2 feet below the prehistoric 
level and 12 feet beneath the present land surface. 
They set to work and exposed a complete skeleton, 


1 W. H. Cook, “ Alleged Depression of the Land in South-East England 
in post-Roman Times,” Medway Scientific Research Soc. 1914. 


48 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


which lay on its left side, with arms folded on the breast, 
knees bent and thighs flexed close against the body. 
An examination of the state of the bones and its position 
in the bank showed that this ‘‘ crouched” burial had 
been made by the people who lived on the old land 
surface and worked the Neolithic flints. The skeleton 
proved to be that of a young, well-built woman, § feet 
4 inches in height, with a rather small but finely pro- 
portioned head, a face with regular features, a somewhat 
prominent nose and well-formed chin.1 All her teeth 
were sound and regular, being set on a well-spread palate. 
Her skull was 176 mm. long, 137 mm. wide, the width 
being 76 per cent. of the length. Her cranial dimensions 
are those which are still prevalent among English women. 
Amongst her ribs was found a heap—nearly a pint—of the 
seeds of the wild blackberry and dog-rose, but whether 
these represented a last meal, or a store provided by 
relatives for her journey after death, one cannot tell. 
Clearly she died in the autumn of the year. As to the 
period at which she lived there can be little doubt. | 
The kind of flint tools and the fragments of pottery— 
of an early “‘ beaker type ”—are those common in England 
about 2000 B.c. ; 

Is this land surface exposed by the tide at Walton-on- 
Naze the same as the one that contractors laid bare at 
Tilbury ? Mr Hazzeldine Warren is of opinion it may 
well be the same, for if we suppose that the Tilbury 
man was buried just above the level of high tide and that 
the Walton-on-Naze woman had been buried in a part 
of the land which lay 36 feet above high-water level, 
then if the land subsided 36 feet, or if the level of the sea 
had risen this amount, the skeletons would have reached 
the levels of the respective strata at which they were 
found. Beyond doubt Tilbury man and Walton-on- 
Naze woman belong to the same racial type. Yet I 
think it will be found that Tilbury man belongs to the 
level of the older peat and may be placed at a date of 
about 3000 B.c. 

1 For fuller details, see Ancient Types of Man, 1911. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 49 


An attempt to fix the antiquity of Tilbury man 
brings us face to face with a problem which will beset 
us all through this book—the instability of land and sea. 
The elevations and depressions of the land have to serve 
us as geological milestones as we follow man’s history 
into the remote past. It is difficult to realise that 
England is not founded on a rigid, solid, and fixed part 
of the earth’s crust. We build our seaports, harbours, 
docks, railways, roads, and cities in the firm belief that 
the level of the sea on our shores will not alter. Our 
experience of the last eight hundred years seems to justify 
our trust. There is no gainsaying the fact, however, that 
the southern part of England has sunk at least 36 feet 
since the days of Tilbury man, which may be no more 
than five thousand years ago. 

The position of ‘Tilbury man in the Neolithic scale of 
time may be approached from another point of view. 
From evidence obtained from glacial deposits in Sweden, 
it is estimated that the edge of the ice-sheet on its retreat 
northwards had reached the latitude of Stockholm about 
8000 B.c. As the ice-sheet was in these last stages of its 
retreat, a people appeared in Western and North-Western 
Europe who shaped their stone weapons in the earliest 
of the new or Neolithic style, one which gradually 
replaced the last of the older or Paleolithic fashions. 
About the time at which this transition of fashion in 
flint tools occurred, the southern part of England stood 
100 feet above its present level, and the Thames at Tilbury 
occupied a channel at least 70 feet deeper than its present 
one—the estuary of the river lying far out in the North 
Sea. From the ballast gravel which fills the buried 
Neolithic channel of the Thames Mr Frank Corner has 
gathered flint weapons worked in the earliest Neolithic 
manner. We have therefore in the lower valley of the 
Thames Neolithic deposits ranging over a period of about 
six thousand years—from 8000 B.c. to about 2000 B.c. If, 
then, we regard the Tilbury man as a sample of the men 
who occupied the Thames valley towards the end of the 
Neolithic period, we have still to find the men who lived 

VOL, I, 4 


50 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


in it during the earlier phases of this period. We there- 
fore set forward in our search. 

The records of the Neolithic period which we have 
just deciphered at Tilbury are not confined to the lower 
valley of the Thames. When we cross the English 
Channel we find that contemporary deposits were 
accumulating in the Island of Jersey. We meet with 
traces of the same men, the same Neolithic culture, the 
same evidence of subsidence. As the steamer carries us 
along the south coast of the island in the early morning, 
past the rocky cliffs on the left, where remains of 
Neanderthal man were discovered by Dr Marett in 1910, 
we come presently in sight of the capital town, St Helier, 
descending ftom the uplands of the plateau to extend 
itself on the low-lying lands surrounding the harbour. 
Near the harbour are the offices and the museum of the 
Société Jersiaise, a centre of prehistoric research. ‘The 
Jersey Society has devoted particular attention to the 
Megalithic monuments and other records of the Neo- 
lithic period in which the island is particularly rich. 
Among its members no one has given his time and ability 
to the study of this period with greater success than the 
curator of the museum, Mr J. Sinel.t We propose to 
follow him to a deep excavation which was made for 
the foundation of a new building in the lower part of the 
town. Mr Sinel’s diagram (fig. 18) shows the various 
strata which were cut through ; they have a certain degree 
of correspondence with the section at Tilbury. Beneath 
the surface layer of sand and clay, about 4 feet deep, is 
a layer of peat, containing fragments of pottery of the 
Roman period. ‘That layer of peat was a “‘ land surface ” 
in Roman times. Beneath the peat comes a stratum laid 
down by the sea—made up of clay, containing stones 
and shells. ‘That stratum bespeaks a passing period of 
subsidence, which might have occurred at Tilbury and 
left no trace behind. Then, beneath the marine stratum, 
comes the submerged-forest zone, here represented by 
a layer of vegetable débris—of oak, alder, hazel, etc,— 

1 See reference, p. 42, 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 51 


ranging in thickness from 5 to 14 feet. So great an 
accumulation shows how long the forest age must 
have flourished here. Beneath the forest zone comes 
another sea deposit, a stratum of marine clay, sand, 
and shells, 3 to 5 feet in thickness, indicating a period 
of subsidence prior to the 
forest age. This zone 


D7 
4 


may represent a deposit eile 
contemporary with the 

ballast gravel. Beneath 

the marine deposit comes I to art 
one of clay with stones 

—rubble drift—a mark 2to SFE 
of the colder or glacial <3 
period. It was known, LY <GHED 

when this excavation was Gof is Ley 

made in St Helier, that LOWER "od, Stoiart 


flints, pottery, and re- 
mains of animals of the 
Neolithic period occurred xs 
Gaerne: preat bediof peat) |S wakine \ronwarion’ | 3bo 6Ft 
representing the forest |/ sites exa%i5 3 

period. Mr Sinel ob- 
Perved= «these traces of 
Neolithic man, not only 
at various depths of the 
peat zone, but also in the 
upper part of the marine 
deposit. The marine de- Fic. 18.—Section of the deposits ex- 
posit formed the land pen’ eam ee 
surface on which the 

submerged forest first grew. Men of the Neolithic 
culture were thus in Jersey at the very commencement 
of the forest era. The ancient forest land surface can be 
traced to the coast of France and far into the English 
Channel—to a depth, according to the observations of 
Mic) Sinel, of 140 feet. In.the earlier part of the 
Neolithic period, Jersey and Guernsey—all the Channel 
Islands—were, like England, joined to the Continent, 


=| 6to Bft 


3to4ft 





52 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


When we come to measure the antiquity of that time, we 
must keep in mind the width and depth of the English 
Channel and of the Straits of Dover. ‘They were carved 
out of Neolithiclands. Itis twenty-two miles from Dover 
to Calais and we cross water over 200 feetindepth. When 
we suppose such changes have happened in eight thousand 
or ten thousand years, we seem to set Time, with all the 
forces she can command, a task beyond her power. 

The fortune which attended the sinking of the docks 
at Tilbury did not follow the excavation in St Helier. 
Mr Sinel discovered remains of a Neolithic man neither 
in nor below the forest zone; but in a small island—La 
Motte, or the green island—on the south coast of Jersey 
and three miles to the east of St Helier, remains of 
Neolithic man were found. Dr R. R. Marett has given 
a full account of this discovery.1 At no very distant 
period La Motte had formed a small peninsula, but now 
its connection with the shore is broken, and it is accessible 
on foot only when the tide is out. At high-water the 
waves beat round the base of the island—it is so small 
that its final demolition is almost in sight—wearing away 
its substance and exposing to full view an exact section of 
its strata. The islet rises 30 feet above high-water mark. 
No sign is to be seen of the forest zone, but the yellow 
clay—a glacial deposit—on which the forest bed should 
rest forms the basis of the islet. Over the basal 15 feet 
of yellow clay lies a stratum of sand and clay—a loess— 
4 feet in thickness. Above that, and forming the surface 
stratum, is a layer of blown sand covered with vegetation. 
Below the blown sand lies the surface on which Neolithic 
man lived, for here are abundant remains of a “‘ kitchen- 
midden ”—charcoal, bones of ox, pig, red deer, shells of 
limpets, fragments of Neolithic pottery, and abundance 
of flint chips. In 1911 a landslide from the side of the 
island exposed a fresh section, in which Mr Sinel’s son 
detected the projecting ends of a stone cist. It did 
not lie at the level of the kitchen-midden, but 4 feet 


1 “ Further Observations on Prehistoric Man in Jersey,” Archeologia, 
1912, vol. lxili. p. 203. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 53 


deeper, at the junction of the loess with the glacial 
clay. A careful exploration, undertaken by the Société 
Jersiaise, showed that there was a series of stone cists 
placed side by side, underlying the stratum of loess. 
The cists were filled with clay, from which Mr Sinel, by 
exercising great care, was able to remove some of the 
remains of the people who had been buried in these 
Neolithic tombs. He was able to restore, from fragments, 
three of the skulls. ‘To me it seems reasonable to suppose 
that the people buried in these cists were members of 












i 
Z 


YY 3 y 








Fic. 19.—Skull of a woman, from a Neolithic cist, La Motte, Jersey. 


» the community who occupied the site of the kitchen- 
midden. At a much earlier period—1861—a skull was 
found in La Motte. It lay within the glacial deposit, 
at a depth of 18 or 20 feet below the surface of the 
island. This skull is exactly similar in type to those 
recovered from the cists, and it is safest to presume that 
it reached the depth at which it was found in a fall of 
earth from the level of the tombs. 

On the occasion of a visit to Jersey, some years ago, 

I had an opportunity of making a close examination of 

the skulls from the cists at La Motte.1 All are of the 

river-bed type. In fig. 19 I have placed one of them— 

that of a woman, aged about thirty—within the standard 
1 See Bulletin de la Société Fersiatse, 1913, vol. xxxviil. p. 306. 


54 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


frame of lines employed in the case of other Neolithic 
skulls. In size and shape the Jersey specimen differs 
very little from the skull from the monument at Coldrum, 
represented in fig. 4 (p. 10). In the Neolithic period, 
that human stock, to which the name “‘ Mediterranean ”’ 
has been given, had reached Jersey as well as England. 
In the early part of the Neolithic period the people with 
the river-bed type of head could reach both Jersey and 
England by land. 

We are now to recross the English Channel to take up 
the study of Neolithic man in Cornwall—the extreme 
south-west corner of England. Jersey and Cornwall 
have much in common. On the uplands of both, 
Megalithic monuments of the Neolithic period abound. 
Beneath the blown sand of the “links”? occur, as at 
Harlyn Bay, the same serried cist tombs, the same Neo- 
lithic kitchen-middens.t. On the foreshore of Cornwall, 
as of Jersey, we can see at low tide remnants of the same 
ancient land surface, marked by the peat-stained stumps 
of the trees of the submerged forest. In Cornwall, 
remains of the men who lived on that ancient land 
surface have been found. In their day the cliffs of 
Cornwall overlooked wooded plains where now coasting 
steamers come and go. ‘The submerged forest is not 
confined to the foreshore of Cornwall. It creeps up the 
estuaries of the streams which drain the tin-producing 
hills of the inlands. In those estuaries of the Cornish 
coast, the submerged forest lies buried, as in the valley 
of the lower Thames, beneath 30 to 50 feet of deposits 
laid down by the streams as the land sank and the in- 
vading sea crept inland. ‘The submerged forest in the 
Thames valley grew on the “ ballast-gravel ” bed of the 
Thames. In the Cornish estuaries the submerged forest 
rests on a corresponding deposit laid down in the original 
or deepest bed of the streams. The Cornish streams, 
in ancient times, brought from the weathered granite of 

1 In 1917 I had an opportunity of examining the flagstone graves at 


Harlyn Bay, and the remains contained in them. Although covered by 
blown sand, they are of late Celtic date. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 58 


the hills, not only the débris but also tin ore, which 
came to rest in the bottom stratum of the valleys and 
estuaries. 

To the student of ancient man, this proved a fortunate 
circumstance, for the tin miners had frequently to 
expose and explore the old forest bed overlying the 
tin-producing stratum. In the museum of the Royal 
College of Surgeons of England there is the roof and 
sides of a skull from the horizon of the Cornish sub- 
merged’ forest. It was found in 1809, at a depth of 
36 feet, in the Carnon Stream Tin Works, which were, 
for these river-bed workings came to an end nearly a 

































































Fic. 20.—Views of the Carnon calvaria, from the side and from above. 


century ago, situated on a western branch of that inlet 
of the sea which pierces Cornwall at Falmouth. Fortu- 
nately, we have a record of the strata exposed at the 
Carnon Works in 1807—two years before the skull was 
discovered, the record being made by Mr Edward 
Smith.! The strata lying over the skull-containing layer, 
our enumeration beginning from the surface, were the 
following : (1) mud and sand, 7 feet ; (2) granitic gravel, 
shells with traces of charcoal, 4 feet ; (3) fine gravel, mud, 
and shells, 12 feet; (4) another thick stratum of gravel, 
sand, and shells, 19 feet; making 42 feetinall. Just below 
the last-mentioned stratum were found human skulls, 
and a piece of wood evidently shaped by man. ‘The skulls 


1 See Memoirs of the Geological Survey : Geology of Falmouth and Truro, 
1906. 


56 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


lay immediately on the tin-producing stratum, and are 
therefore as old or older than the submerged forest. 
What became of the skulls mentioned by Mr Smith is 
not known. The specimen in the College of Surgeons 
may be one of them, but the record which has come down 
with it is that it was found in 1809, two years after the 
date at which Mr Smith’s account was written, and the 
depth at which it was found is said to be, not 42 feet, but 
36 feet. The condition of preservation or fossilisation 
of the Carnon skull is remarkable. Although that of a 
comparatively young person, as we may see from the open 
conditions of the sutures between the bones, and the 
characters show it is a woman’s skull, yet it is very heavy 
and rather thicker than we expect in modern skulls of 
young people, even of the male sex. It is 8 mm. thick 
along the roof. The colour is a dull stone-grey, as if 
impregnated with some unusual substance, not black as 
are skulls which have been buried in peat. In size and 
shape the Carnon skull or calvaria shows all ine river-bed 
characters. ‘The maximum length is 184 mm.; its maxi- 
mum width 137 mm.; the height above the ear-holes is 
estimated to have pes 117 or 118 mm. ‘The width is 
74°5 per cent. of the length; the brain capacity must 
have been about 1380 c.c.—slightly above the average for 
modern women. 

An accurate record of another of these Cornish Neo- 
lithic skulls has been preserved by one of the best English 
anthropologists of the mid-Victorian era—Mr George 
Busk. In 1862, Mr Busk gave an account of the 
famous Neandemnnl skull discovered in 1857.1 He also 
gave accurate drawings of certain other ancient skulls. — 
Amongst these he included one from an alluvial tin mine 
at Sennen, close to Land’s End. ‘The skull was found at 
a depth of 30 feet. ‘That is all we know of the Sennen 
skull, except that it was found beneath the level of the 
sea. Where that skull is now we do not know—probably 
destroyed, so careless are we of our records of ancient 
history. There can be no reasonable doubt, however, 
1 Natural Hist. Rev., 1861, vol. i. p. 155. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 57 


that the Sennen skull also comes from the submerged- 
forest zone. Mr Busk’s drawing of the skull I have 
copied and reproduced here. He does not, unfortunately, 
represent it either from above or from the front. The 
skull is that of aman. Its maximum length is 196 mm., 
somewhat longer than is usually the case in the river- 
bed type. The height of the vault is 116 mm. above the 


ear-holes. In all its markings it is modern in shape and 





SENNEN. 1 60 


Fic. 21.—Side view of a skull found at a depth of 
30 feet in an alluvial tin mine at Sennen, 
Cornwall. 


size. ‘There are thousands of men in England to-day 
with skulls of the same size and form. 

We owe many of the discoveries of ancient man to 
industrial enterprises. ‘The mining operations of the 
Cornish engineers brought them face to face with the 
records of the Neolithic period; house-builders revealed 
the submerged forest and Neolithic flints in the foun- 
dations of St Helier; Tilbury man came to light 
because deep docks were needed for great steamships. 
Along the south coast of Wales, which forms the northern 
shore of the Bristol Channel, the dock engineer has 
brought traces of the submerged forest and of Neolithic 
man to the light of day. It is to this region we are now 


58 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


directing our steps. At various points along the coast 
of South Wales, as on the opposite or southern side of 
the Bristol Channel, remnants of the submerged forest 
are exposed when the tide is low, especially after a storm. 
At various points along the coast, docks have been cut 
and the land surfaces of Neolithic times exposed. ‘There 
seems to be no doubt that subsidence has been in progress 
along this coast since the Roman period. Major ‘Thomas 
Gray has supplied me with evidence that the land has 
sunk at least 8 feet, perhaps more, since the Roman occu- 
pation—quite as much as at Tilbury and Rochester on 
the east side of England. Some years ago, Dr Arnalt 
Jones presented to the museum of the Royal College of 
Surgeons the’ frontal part of a skull which was found 
when docks were being made at Aberavon on the 
South Welsh coast, a few miles east of Swansea. ‘This 
fragment came from a submerged layer of peat. Side by 
side with it was the pelvis of the great Irish deer or elk, 
which became extinct in England before the end of the 
Neolithic period. ‘The layer of peat, 2% feet thick, lay 
at a depth of 15 feet, beneath strata of sand and clay. 
The peat may represent the submerged-forest zone, or 
one of the later land surfaces. At least it belongs to the 
Neolithic period. ‘This case is of some interest because 
it raises the question: Is a fragment of a skull, such as 
that found at Aberavon (fig. 22), sufficient to indicate 
the kind of man of which it formed a part? The frag- 
ment, consisting of the frontal bone, forming the fore- 
head, and a small part of the parietal bone, forming the 
vault, is shown in fig. 22. It has been superimposed 
on the outline of another skull—one found at Newport— 
also of Neolithic date. It fits that skull not quite accu- 
rately, but sufficiently well to show that it was part of a 
skull of similar shape, although of rather larger dimensions. 
We are therefore at liberty to infer that it formed part 
of a skull very similar to the usual type of Neolithic 
crania. ‘The Aberavon fragment, however, has certain 
characters which deserve attention. The eyebrow ridges 
are particularly well developed ; it shows a robustness in 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 59 


the lines of attachment of the temporal muscles which is 
not usual in modern skulls. Major Gray has also given 
me the opportunity of examining a skull dredged in 1840 
from the same peat deposit as the Aberavon fragment 
came from. ‘This is a complete specimen, and, in the 
frontal region, is a counterpart of the fragment just 
described. 

In all these finds of Neolithic man in England, the 
reader will note an unfortunate deficiency; there is a 
complete absence of any record of the culture of the 
people ; in not one single case is the discovery mentioned 


o 160 120 so ao ° 
a eee 


‘ 
1 
' 

a 
4 

4 
‘ 
1 


enna 





ABERAVON 60 


Fic. 22.._Fragment of skull found at Aberavon, superimposed on an 
outline of the Newport skull. 


of a typical example of a Neolithic implement or of even 
a flint chip. ‘That is because we are only now awakening 
to the kind of evidence which is required to give our 
discoveries a true value as historical documents. ‘The 
need of such evidence is exemplified in the next dis- 
covery I am to mention—one made when new docks 
were constructed at Newport, which lies also on the 
south coast of Wales, almost on the estuary of the Severn. 
Mr J. D. C. Couper, the resident engineer, made most 
careful records of the sections which were cut in the 
alluvial deposits at the mouth of the Ebbw, covering the 
old submerged-forest zone. ‘The excavations exposed a 
deep layer of silt or mud overlying an equally deep layer 
of gravel. Lying within the gravel, at a depth of 60 feet 


60 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


below the surface level of the land and 20 feet below the 
Ordnance datum level, was found a human skull;! also 
remains of the wolf, of the red deer, the pelvis of a large 
ox (curiously ground and polished on one aspect, as if it 
had been used as a sledge on ice), of the horse, all being 
mammals which flourished in Neolithic times. ‘These 
were found at the same level, or near the same level, as 
the human skull. Worked flints were also found, but, 
unfortunately, no record was kept of them. We are thus 
not certain that the skull found is that of Neolithic man ; 
the evidence, however, does justify us in presuming that 


190 160 [40 {120 {00 





Fic. 23.—Side and full-face views of the skull found during excavations 
at Newport. 


it is of that date. The outlines of the skull are given in 
fig. 23, and again it will be seen we have to deal with a 
man’s skull of the type we have already seen from other 
Neolithic horizons. 

It is not necessary to multiply such examples. I may 
refer, however, to a skull ? which was discovered when the 
Manchester Ship Canal was being made in 1890. It lay 
in a deposit of fine, sharp sand, covered by silt and other 
strata, amounting to 27 feet. No record was made of 
any objects of culture found in the same stratum as the 
skull. Sir Aubrey Strahan, who has investigated the 
geology of the district in which the skull was found, is 


1 See Reports of Newport Museum, 1911. 
2 Now in the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, England. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 61 


of opinion that the deposits which lay over this skull 
may have been formed in the last two thousand years, and 
that a skull found at such a depth may not be Neolithic. 
In characters the skull agrees absolutely with the river- 
bed type. Another skull of this type was shown to me 
by Mr Robert Newstead, curator of the museum at 
Chester. The skeleton of which it formed part lay at 
a depth of 5 feet 3 inches, in a clay deposit in the valley 
Boerne: Dee, near Chester, ‘le skeleton) is ;certainly 
older than the Roman period, for, at a depth of 1 foot 
in the clay, pottery of that period was found. The 






130 16y_i4y 120 1Ga_ 80 

> ea eS ees 
ee Z- 
EZ 


} MICKLETON 


Fic. 24.—The Mickleton skull, side and front. 


exact age of the remains cannot now be fixed; evidence 
for regarding them as Neolithic is merely presumptive. 
In this group of doubtful early Neolithic English skulls 
recovered from the river-bed deposits, we must place the 
“Mickleton”’ skull, one which gave rise to much dis- 
cussion in pre-Darwinian days. In 1852, the railway 
from Oxford to Worcester was being made. It crossed 
the Cotswold Hills in the northern part of Gloucestershire, 
where a tunnel had to be cut, near the village of Mickleton. 
During the excavations at one end of the tunnel a human 
skull was found, now preserved in the museum of the 
Royal College of Surgeons. The skull lay 17 feet 
beneath the surface of the land, within a stratum of blue 
clay, 5 feet in thickness, Over the clay was a layer of 


62 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


peat, 9 feet in thickness, containing remains of pig, fox, 
etc. Over the peat was a surface stratum, 3 feet in 
depth, made up of loam, sand, and gravel. The date of 
the discovery is 1852. Darwin had not then published the 
Origin of Species (1859), but the Vestiges of Creation was 
passing into a tenth edition. Orthodox minds were being 
disturbed by the discovery of facts which seemed to be 
at variance with Biblical tradition. ‘The antiquity of the 
Mickleton skull + became a matter of public controversy. 
A learned Scottish clergyman publicly censured Professor 
Baden Powell of Oxford University for countenancing a 
“‘pre-Adamite”’ date for the Mickleton skull.2 Mr Gavey, 
who discovered the Mickleton specimen, was of opinion 
that the age of the deposit was clearly indicated by the 
presence of a human skull: the deposit could not be 
earlier than the historical date assigned to the act of man’s 
creation. In Mr Gavey’s opinion, the skull of this 
reputed “‘ pre-Adamite ” was probably that of a “‘ drunken 
sheep-stealer, drowned in the bottom of a hill pond, in all 
likelihood not more than eighteen hundred years ago.” 
There is something to be said for Mr Gavey’s contention. 
The layer of clay in which the skull rested is the silt formed 
in the bottom of a hill pool; the deep layer of peat, 
9% feet thick, may have formed over the silt in a thousand 
years, and the superficial stratum, 3 feet in thickness, at 
arapid pace. The animal remains found in the peat may 
be Neolithic or medieval in date. The value of worked 
flints as a means of dating a deposit was then unknown ; 
no evidence of this kind was looked for. ‘The Mickleton 
skull is a typical example of the river-bed type, and the 
manner in which it has been preserved provides an 
excellent illustration of how the earth records its own 
history and stores within itself traces of the living things 
which inhabit it. 

Our survey of the Neolithic period in England reveals 
a remarkably uniform and unchanging race of people—of 
less than medium stature, with well-shaped heads of rather 

1 Edinburgh New Philosophical Fourn., 1856, vol. iti. p. 247. 
* Quart. Fourn. of Geol., 1853, vol. ix. p. 29. 


PEOPLE OF THE SUBMERGED FOREST 63 


more than average size. If we centre our attention 
merely on the physique of the people and note how little 
it changes, we may be led to the belief, if we think our 
bodily characters must change during the lapse of long 
periods, that the Neolithic period in England could not 
have covered the great space of time we have assigned to 
it—namely, from 8000 to 2000 B.c. The animals which 
accompanied man in this period also changed very little ; 
the natural plants of the country remained the same. 
Such changes as are noted in the fauna and flora are, we 
have every reason to think, due to the direct influence of 
man. In the four thousand years which have come and 
gone since the Neolithic period closed, we have revolu- 
tionised the conditions of life. From time to time, fresh 
blood, drawn from many racial stocks, has been introduced 
into Britain ; the tongue spoken in England has changed 
several times, yet the backbone of the British population 
at the present time is a direct continuation and perpetua- 
tion of the river-bed stock of the Neolithic period. 

If we reckon time by the degree of change wrought on 
the human body, we must count the Neolithic a short 
period. When, however, we note the changes which 
have occurred in the configuration of the land, our minds 
are drawn in an opposite direction. Our leading geologists 
are convinced that, at the commencement of this period, 
England and the Channel Islands were joined to the 
Continent. A common estuary received the Rhine and 
Thames. English forest lands were continuous with 
those of France. And now, where those forests grew, 
are the wide Straits of Dover, the North Sea, the English 
Channel, and silted-up estuaries. When we come to 
estimate the period of time in which those changes could 
have been effected, we are met at once with our ignorance 
of the causes which underlie earth-movements. Mr 
Clement Reid has given years of study to the matter, 
and, in his opinion, such changes might have been effected 
in a short period of time—fifteen hundred years. Those, 
however, who base their speculations regarding what has 
happened in the past on what is happening in the present, 


64 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


will allow a much longer period ; but all must admit that 
our estimates are, at present, little better than guesses. 
‘To account reasonably for all the facts we have at present 
at our disposal, we must, I think, allow a period of at 
least six thousand years for the Neolithic period in 
Britain. 

There is a considerable body of evidence in favour of 
explaining the elevation and depression of the land in 
relation with the periods of glaciation. ‘The elevation of 
the southern part of England is believed to have occurred 
when the ice-sheet of the last glaciation was retreating 
northwards. When subsidence was taking place in 
England, elevation was evidently at work in Scotland, for, 
as we have just seen, the Neolithic beaches of England 
are submerged, while those in Scotland are situated 
25 feet, 50 feet, and-more, above the present shore-line. 
A line drawn across the north of Ulster to Flamborough 
head on the Yorkshire coast corresponds in a broad way 
with the points where the submerged shore-lines of South 
Britain pass into the corresponding raised beaches of 
North Britain. In one of these raised beaches, on the 
south shore of the Firth of Forth, Dr Edward Ewart 
discovered Neolithic flints in abundance, and certain 
burials apparently of the same period. The skulls of 
these ancient Scots are also of the river-bed type—very 
similar in size and form to the Coldrum skulls. Farther 
north, in the Scandinavian Peninsula, elevation is now 
taking place atarapidrate. Beyond the northern limits of 
Scandinavia lies the edge of the great perpetual ice-sheet. 

It is believed 1 that the accumulation of a sheet of ice, 
several thousand feet in thickness, will depress that part 
of the earth’s crust on which it rests. On the other hand, 
the part of the crust which lies immediately to the south 
of the ice-sheet will well upwards, it is believed, in the 
form of a wave, giving rise to such an elevation as is 
occurring in Scandinavia now. Still farther south, beyond 
the wave of elevation, there is a secondary trough or 


* See article by Dr John W. Evans, Nature, 1911, vol. Ixxxvii. p. 438. 
See also Evolution of Climate, by C. E. P. Brooks, 1922. 


PEOPLE OF -“THESSUBMERGED FOREST 65 


depression. At the commencement of the Neolithic 
period, if we entertain the explanation just given, the ice- 
sheet was disappearing from North Britain, and England 
was elevated on the wave which follows the retreating 
edge of the ice. During the Neolithic period, as the ice- 
margin retreated farther to the north, England was over- 
taken in the succeeding wave of depression—which 
apparently still continues. Such a hypothesis, purely 
speculative in nature, helps us to explain some of the 
phenomena with which we have to deal in future chapters. 
At least, it fixes in our minds the fact that the Neolithic 
age lies wholly within the milder period which followed 
the last long spell of glaciation. 

Later we shall see that there is reason to believe that 
the same forces which act on our open seas and gather 
their waters into tides may also act on the solid globe 
itself, giving rise to rhythmical changes in the shape of the 
crust of the earth, causing terrestrial tides which ebb and 
flow from the poles (see p. 313). How far changes in 
climate are due to terrestrial tides and how far such tides 
may be accounted for by astronomers, are problems 


beyond the scope of this book. 


VOL, I. 5 


CHAPTER IV 
THE DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 


In tracing the various kinds of men who lived in the 
Neolithic period, the open country, the river valleys, and 
the submerged land surfaces served us very well. When, 
however, we try to follow man beyond the bounds of the 
Neolithic period—beyond the time at which the Thames 
was depositing the deepest layers of ballast gravel in her 
ancient bed—we must seek sequestered nooks where the 
earth keeps a more orderly register of events than in the 
turmoil of flooded valleys. ‘The ideal place we seek is a 
cave, particularly a limestone cave, for the drip from the 
roof, laden with lime salts, seals up with a covering of 
stalagmite any bones which chance to lie on the floor. 
The floor of such a cave is always having additions made 
to it. If men make their hearths on it, human débris 
accumulates. Chips and dust are always falling from the 
roof ; the mud washed in by rain or flood is added to 
other accumulations. In course of time the floor may 
grow until it actually reaches the roof, thus obliterating 
the cave. If no living thing has visited the cave as it 
became filled up, then the strata of the floor are “ sterile ” ; 
but if men have used the cave as a habitation or as a 
passing shelter, or if they chance to die or are buried 
there, then the earth-buried stratum of that time becomes 
a page of history. It has taken us nearly a century to 
understand that caves may contain historical documents 
of the most precious kind. By a study of cave records, 
we have come by a knowledge of the races which preceded 
the men of the Neolithic period—the races of the 
Paleolithic period. 


66 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 67 


We cannot begin a brief survey of how the very ancient 
world of Paleolithic man has been revealed to us more 
profitably than by taking our stand on the south coast of 
Wales, where we studied Neolithic man of the submerged- 
forest period. To the west of Aberavon and Swansea, 
the peninsula of Gower juts southwards, exposing its 
limestone cliffs, 100 feet high, on the shore of the Bristol 
Channel. ‘The Paviland cave opens on the seaward face 
of the cliffs, 30 feet above the tide, but not beyond the 
reach of the waves in time of storm. In the latter part 
of the eighteenth century news of the discovery of extinct 
forms of animals—elephant, rhinoceros, bear, lion, and 
hyena—in the strata of caves in South Germany had 
spread abroad, and the antiquarians of South Wales were 
led to seek for and to find similar remains in the floor of 
the Paviland cave. This discovery brought Dean Buck- 
land, then reader of Geology in the University of Oxford, 
hot-foot to South Wales in 1822. The Dean found 
abundance of the bones of these extinct animals in the 
strata of the floor; he also discovered the skeleton ! of a 
tall man, coloured red with ochre, buried side by side 
with the bones of extinct animals. Curiously shaped 
flint implements, with ornaments and implements worked 
in bone and in ivory, lay in the same stratum. The Dean 
was able to explain the occurrence of a human skeleton 
side by side with the bones of extinct animals in a manner 
satisfactory both to himself and the men of his time. 
The animals were pre-diluvian; they had been swept 
within the Paviland cave by the great Flood through which 
the ark rode in safety. The human remains were post- 
diluvian ; they had been buried there by people who had 
settled in Britain after the universal Deluge. It was then 
an article of faith that man did not exist in Western 
Europe before the Flood. 

About the same time a Roman Catholic priest, the 
Rey. J. MacEnery, stationed near Torquay, became in- 
terested in caves. In 1825, in one of the wooded dales 


1 See Professor Sollas’s Huxley Lecture, Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 
1913, vol. xliii. p, 1. 


68 THE ANTI@UITY OF MAN 


lying behind the picturesque town of Torquay, on the 
south coast of Devonshire, Mr MacEnery began to 
explore that great rambling subterranean series of 
chambers known as Kent’s Cavern. In the dense layer 
of stalagmite covering the floor of the cave, he found 
implements in stone and in bone, shaped by the hand of 
man, mingled with the bones of the same extinct animals 
as Dean Buckland had found at Paviland. The priest 
had the courage to draw a just conclusion from these 
observations in Kent’s Cavern, and to face the opposi- 
tion of the Dean and of the opinion of his time. Mr 
MacEnery was convinced that man had lived in England 
as a contemporary of the mammoth, the rhinoceros, the 
cave-bear, and all those animals which we now know were 
native to Europe before our present climatic conditions 
dawned with the advent of Neolithic man. Mr MacEnery 
did not dare to even publish his records; they were 
discovered and published by the Torquay Natural History 
Society many years after his death.t It was thus a priest 
who first broke into the world of Paleolithic man—at 
least in England. 

How slowly a belief in man’s antiquity made headway 
will be realised if we follow Sir Charles Lyell in his 
journey abroad in 1833. He, the great geologist, was 
preparing a third edition of his Principles, and, as was 
his habit, visited every site in Europe where any discovery 
of note had been made. In 1833 his way lay through 
Belgium, and he stopped at Liége to see one of the 
Professors at the University—Dr Schmerling. The 
banks of the Meuse, before this river reaches Liége, are 
flanked by steep limestone cliffs, often 200 feet in height. 
On their vertical face open many rambling caves. Dr 
Schmerling had been caught in the vortex of cave explora- 
tion, and was able to place before the English geologist in 
1833 the results gained by four years of severe toil 
in over forty caves. The collection represented those 
extinct forms of animals which Dean Buckland discovered 


1 See a Memoir of William Pengelly, by Hester Pengelly (Mrs Forbes 
Julian), London, 1897. 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 69 
in the Welsh cave, but Dr Schmerling had found them 


in greater abundance and in greater variety. ‘The same 
evidences of man’s presence were found mingled with 
the fossil remains of animals—worked flint implements, 
weapons and ornaments in ivory and in bone. In one 
of the caves—that of Engis—Dr Schmerling found a 
human skull, besides other fragments in the same 
cemented stratum of stalagmite as contained the fossil 
penes, ~~ Lhe. cranium,” says Dr Schmerling,*® “was 
met with at a depth of a metre and a half (nearly 5 feet), 
hidden under an osseous breccia, composed of the 
remains of small animals, and containing one rhinoceros 
tusk. . . . The earth which contained this human skull 
exhibited no trace of disturbance; teeth of rhinoceros, 
horse, hyena, bear, surrounded it on all sides.” Dr 
Schmerling had thus advanced our knowledge of man’s 
antiquity a point beyond that reached by the Rev. Mr 
MacEnery at Kent’s Cavern. Not only had he found 
proof of man’s existence with animals now extinct— 
animals which had disappeared from the face of Europe 
before the Neolithic age dawned—but he had actually 
discovered Paleolithic man himself. Sir Charles Lyell 
was a true scientist, with an open and just mind, but 
he turned away from Dr Schmerling’s discovery—still 
sceptical. Thirty years after the date just mentioned 
(1833), Sir Charles published a work which convinced 
thinking minds that man’s antiquity was infinitely greater 
than usually believed. It took the scientific world thirty 
years to assimilate Schmerling’s discovery. ‘The discovery 
of the remains of a human being as the contemporary of 
extinct animals was more than even the open, well- 
balanced mind of Sir Charles Lyell could admit in 1833. 
Schmerling’s work, like that of other pioneers, had to 
wait for a new generation. 

We shall examine presently the facts which afterwards 
convinced Sir Charles Lyell that Dr Schmerling had made 
a great discovery. In the meantime, let us see what kind 

1 Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles découverts dans les cavernes de la 
province de Liége, 1833. 


“0 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of man he discovered—the man who lived when the 
mammoth and woolly rhinoceros had a home in Belgium. 
When an exact drawing of the Engis skull is placed within 
the standard frame—the one we have employed in the case 
of Neolithic skulls—we see that in shape and size it is merely 
a variant of the river-bed type. It is longer, higher, and 
rather narrower; it is very similar to the skull of the 
Neolithic man found at Sennen, in Cornwall. ‘The skull 
is that of a man of middle age. ‘The maximum length 
is 198 mm.; the width, 140 mm., is 70-7 per cent. of 
the length. The height of the vault above the ear-holes 
is 121 mm.; the calculated brain capacity 1500 c.c.— 





Fic. 25.—Views of the Engis skull from the side and from above. 


a little above the modern average. ‘There is not a single 
feature that marks this skull off from men of the Neolithic 
or of modern times. No doubt, if the face and the jaws 
had been found we should recognise certain points of 
difference in them, but, unfortunately, these parts were 
not recovered. If we believe that the human frame 
must change during the lapse of a long period, then 
we shall be inclined to regard the evidence of the Engis 
cave with scepticism. If, however, we regard Dr 
Schmerling as a competent and truthful observer—and 
I think the time has come when belated justice must 
be done to him—then we must conclude that a human 
type can be reproduced for many generations and over 
a very long period of time, and still remain almost un- 
changed. ‘The man who lived in Belgium with the 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 71 


extinct animals of the Pleistocene period was reproduced 
in the Neolithic period, and still abounds in modern times. 
When Sir William Boyd Dawkins wrote his classical work 
on Cave Hunting,+ he was not convinced on the evidence 
produced by Schmerling that the skull was contem- 
poraneous with the fossil animals. Once again my friend, 
Dr Rutot, has, in company with Professor Fraipont, 
examined the Engis skull, and he, too, is inclined to place 
it in the list of doubtful specimens.” It is true, as we 
shall see presently, that people of the Neolithic period 
did use caves as sepulchres, but there is no instance of 
Neolithic man having dug a hole in the hard breccia of 
a cave floor and buried his dead at a depth of 5 feet: 
Schmerling has placed it on record that the breccia was 
intact, and therefore we must admit that the river-bed 
type of skull was already evolved in the Palzolithic period. 

The discovery which cleared away all doubts as to the 
great antiquity of man—which carried home the con- 
viction that he was contemporary with extinct animals 
—takes us to the year 1860. ‘The discoverer was Edouard 
Lartet, then aged fifty-nine. He had, in his early years, 
forsaken law for geology, and latterly had been caught in 
the passion for cave exploration. ‘The year 1860 found 
him visiting the caves of Southern France, particularly 
those situated in the Departments lying among the 
northern spurs of the Pyrenees. We have to deal with 
two of these particular Departments of France—Haute 
Garonne and Ariége, drained by rapid-running tributaries 
of the Garonne. Lartet’s excursion took him to the 
village of Aurignac, in Haute Garonne (see fig. 60, p. 166). 
Near by the town is a little hill; on the side of the 
hill a cave had been discovered buried beneath a mass 
of débris which had fallen from the face of a cliff. 
Apparently in ancient times the cave had opened on the 
face of the cliff. In fig. 26 I reproduce the drawing 
with which Lartet illustrated his discovery. When the 

1 Cave Hunting, Macmillan & Co., 1874. 


2 “Coup d’veil synthétique sur l’époque des cavernes,” Bull. de la Soc. 
Belge de Géologie, 1909, vol. xxiii. p. 227. 


72 THE TANTIORSITY OF Viki 


débris which hid the cave was removed, the opening 
was found to be closed by a great vertical slab of stone. 
Before Lartet’s arrival, the human skeletons seen piled 
up within the cave (fig. 26) had been given a Christian 
burial by order of the Mayor. We now know, although 
Lartet was not then aware of the fact, that the pile of 
skeletons—representing at least seventeen individuals of 
various ages—were in reality the remains of Neolithic 
people. It was the Neolithic men who set up the slab 
at the entrance and used the cave as a sepulchre, a 





coon 


Y 
y 
YY 
NEOLITHIC BURIALS 





Fic. 26.—A section of the cave explored by Lartet, near Aurignac, in 1860. 


custom of the period. But when Lartet came to ex- 
plore the floor of the cave—z to 3 feet in thickness—he 
found it to abound in evidences of human habitation, and 
to contain the remains of extinct animals, which were 
charred, cut, and artificially broken, showing that man 
not only lived at the same time as extinct animals, but 
actually used them as sources of his food supply. He 
found remains of the cave-bear, the cave-lion, the cave- 
hyena, the mammoth, the woolly rhinoceros, the wild 
pig, the Irish deer, the bison ; and also remains of animals 
which live in our time. He found, further, as will be 
seen from his drawing, that the strata of the floor extended 
out to cover the little terrace in front of the cave. Under 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 73 


the floor of the terrace he found abundance of charcoal 
and remains of hearths. Embedded in the débris of the 
floor he found implements and ornaments of that form 
of human culture which is now known as Aurignacian— 
the same culture as was exposed at Paviland and at Engis. 
The flint implements of all three caves were worked in 
the same style—in all there were the same carvings in 
ivory, the same ornaments, necklaces of shells and per- 
forated teeth, the same kind of barbed implements in 
bone, antlers of reindeer, and in ivory. When we con- 
sider that the culture of the people on the South Welsh 
coast was the same as that at the northern foot of the 
Pyrenees, we begin to realise that even in the Pleisto- 
cene period—when animals now extinct abounded in 
Europe—interchange and intercommunication had already 
made Europeans sharers in a common culture. Lartet 
also found amongst the undisturbed débris in the floor of 
the cave, fragments of human bones—not enough to tell 
us what kind of men these ancient Aurignacians were, 
but sufficient to indicate their bodily presence. It was 
the discovery at Aurignac which convinced Sir Charles 
Lyell that man went beyond the Neolithic horizon, and 
with his conversion, the new conception of man’s antiquity 
made rapid progress. 

Eight years later, in 1868, M. Lartet’s son, Louis, dis- 
covered the actual men of the Aurignacian culture. The 
scene of the discovery is not in the region of the Garonne, 
but in the watershed of a companion river, the Derdogne, 
which, rising in southern central France, joins the 
Garonne at Bordeaux (see fig. 60, p. 166). The Vézére 
is a northern tributary of the Dordogne. ‘The caves and 
rock-shelters in the limestone cliffs which border the 
Vézére have yielded some of the most important and most 
complete records of ancient man. In 1868, when a rail- 
way was being made along the lower part of the valley of 
the Vézére to unite the town of Périgueux with the main 
line along the Dordogne valley, an old rock-shelter was 
opened at Cromagnon, a little above the picturesque 
cliff-set village of Les Eyzies. The strata on the floor of 


74 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the rock-shelter, a recess at the foot of the cliff, were 
marked by hearths and the culture of the Aurignacian 
period. In the upper strata were found the remains of 
five skeletons, four being of adults. They were tall 
people ; the men were about § feet 11 inches in height 
(1-8 m.)—tall, lanky fellows, more like, so far as bodily 
physique is concerned, the tall Sikhs of the Punjaub than 
any race now living. ‘The proportion of their limbs was 
somewhat peculiar; their tibiz or leg bones were rela- 
tively long, their humeri or upper arm bones short. 
Individuals with similar limb proportions still occur 
amongst negroid races, but no modern European race 
can show the negroid limb proportions of the Cromagnon 
race—men of the Aurignacian period. The skeleton 
which Dean Buckland had found in the Paviland cave, 
regarded by him as that of a woman buried in Neolithic 
times, but which we now know, as proved by Professor 
Sollas,! to be of Aurignacian age, was also a tall, slender 
man—about § feet Io inches in stature. ‘The skull of the 
Paviland man is not known, but we do know the form of 
head which characterised the Cromagnon men. ‘Their 
skulls cannot be classed in the river-bed groups; they 
are too large and too much flattened on the vault to be 
assigned to that type. They differ from the Aurignacian 
man of Engis, who, we have seen, had a skull of the 
river-bed type. At Cromagnon, then, we meet with 
another race of men. ‘They had massive skulls, large in 
all dimensions, as will be seen from fig. 27, where the 
skull of the “old man of Cromagnon ” is fitted within 
the standard frame used for Neolithic and for modern 
skulls. It is much too large for the conventional modern 
frame. ‘The maximum length is 203 mm., half an inch 
beyond the modern or Neolithic mean; the width, 150 
mm., Io mm. beyond; the height of the vault, 125 mm., 
also 10 mm. above the modern mean for British men. 
It will be observed, however, that although the actual 
dimensions are greater, in the relative proportions of the 
diameters the Cromagnon skulls are not unlike those of 
1 See reference, p. 67. 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 75 


the river-bed type. The width is very nearly 74 per 
cent. of the length, just as in skulls of the river-bed 
type. The brain capacity is much greater—roughly 
1660 c.c., being 180 c.c. above the modern average. 
We have to remember that a certain amount—a small 
amount—of that is due simply to a big body; a big 
body needs a bigger brain for its animal administration. 
We have come across, in those large heads, a puzzling 
and unexpected fact ; we are naturally astonished to find 
that men who have preceded us so long ago—men of a 





Fic. 27.—Skull of Cromagnon man viewed from the side and from the front. 


former geological epoch—should so far outstrip their 
successors of to-day who regard themselves as “‘ the 
survival of the fittest,’ and believe the fittest to be the 
race with the biggest brains. We cannot quarrel with 
the facts, but how are we to explain them? The con- 
clusion to be drawn is, not that brain mass, on the 
average, is to be rejected as an index of brain power, but 
that there are other virtues or characters which go to 
ensure success of a human race in the struggle of life 
—other than brain power. A philosopher may be 
miserable and die childless, when a brainless savage or an 
industrious labouring man of mediocre ability may be 
happy and leave a large family. 

Since 1868, as we shall see later, many further dis- 


76 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


coveries of the Cromagnon race have been made. Mean- 
time, we simply note that, although in dimensions—in 
stature and in size of body—these Cromagnon people far 
outstrip the river-bed type of the Neolithic period, and 
probably also of the Paleolithic period, the two types are 
not radically different. ‘To me, they seem to represent the 
“longs”? and the “ shorts”? derived from a common stock. 

At all those sites—at Paviland, Kent’s Cavern, Engis, 
Aurignac, and Cromagnon—the discoverers of man’s early 
history stumbled across a stage in human evolution which 
was manifestly older than the Neolithic phase; but how 
much more ancient they could not then tell. That 
secret they soon set out to discover. When the skeletons 
were found at’ Cromagnon (1868), it was becoming 
apparent to the explorers of the French caves that the 
Paleolithic period, into which they had forced a way, had 
seen the dawn and the close of many phases of human 
culture, and that, in the floors of the caves, there was 
clear evidence that these phases passed in an orderly 
succession. It became clear to them that, as in historical 
times, a new form of culture arose gradually, and as 
gradually replaced the older modes of life. Hence we 
find, from this time forwards, that the investigators of 
France bent all their efforts to distinguish the various 
cultures represented in the caves, and to establish the 
order of their succession. As early as 1869, M. Gabriel 
de Mortillet + elaborated an orderly classification of the 
cave cultures; but the exact position represented by the 
culture of the caves at Aurignac and at Cromagnon was 
not finally settled until 1905, when the Abbé Breuil 
finally proved that at least two periods of culture, the 
Solutrean and the Magdalenian, intervene between the 
end of the Aurignacian and the dawn of the Neolithic 
period.” During those intervening periods, the climate 


1 See Musée préhistorique, by G. and A. de Mortillet, 1903. 

2 See Bibliography of the Abbé Breuil’s researches from 1899-1910, 
published at Fribourg, Switzerland, 1910. His more recent publica- 
tions will be found in full or in abstract in that excellent periodical 
L’ Anthropologie. 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 77 


of Europe continued cold; the mammoth, the woolly 
rhinoceros, the cave-bear, the cave-lion, the cave-hyena 
disappeared; the reindeer became the characteristic 
animal in Europe in the closing phases of the Paleolithic 
period. 

Aurignac, we have seen, is situated five miles to the 
west of the upper waters of the Garonne; twenty miles 
to the east of the same stretch of the river lies the village 
of Mas d’Azil (fig. 60). Past this village runs a tributary 
of the Garonne—the Arize. Issuing from the hilly ground 
at the foot of the Pyrenees this stream, near Mas d’Azil, 
pierces a spur of limestone rock and runs through a great 
subterranean gallery or tunnel, some 500 yards in length. 
When the public road, which follows the tunnel made by 
the Arize, was being repaired, the strata on the banks of 
this subterranean stream revealed the hearths and imple- 
ments of ancient man. In 1887, M. Edouard Piette, a 
magistrate, who spent his leisure hours and his income most 
liberally in advancing our knowledge of ancient man, 
began a systematic exploration of the strata in the recesses 
of the cavern of Mas d’Azil, and discovered cultures 
which mark the transition from Paleolithic to Neolithic 
times. In 1895 he published? a section (fig. 28) showing 
the various strata which are piled one above the other on 
the western bank of the Arize, as it issues from the tunnel. 
The uppermost, and therefore latest stratum, is situated 
13°60 m. (44 feet) above the level of the stream. The two 
upper deposits, composed of black clay with intermingled 
débris, amounting to a depth of 5 feet, were formed 
between the closing phase of the Neolithic period and 
the time of the Roman occupation, for they contained 
abundant traces of the civilisation which came and went 
during that interval of time—some two thousand years. 
The third stratum, counting from the surface downwards, 
is little more than a foot and a half in thickness, and, 
composed of a laminated assortment of differently coloured 
clays, brings us well within the Neolithic period, for the 

1 “Etudes d’ethnographie préhistorique,” L’ Anthropologie, 1895, 
vol, vi. p. 276. 


78 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


objects of culture are such as are found in the kitchen- 
middens. The fourth stratum reveals the transition 
culture, the one now distinguished as Azilian. ‘The 
fourth or Azilian stratum is only half a metre thick 
(19:6 inches), intensely red in colour, due to the 
abundance of oxide of iron which it contains. Beneath 
the Axilian stratum lie five others, forming collectively 
a deposit over 17 feet in thickness, all of them marked 
by the culture of the last great Paleolithic period—the 
Magdalenian. The deepest Magdalenian stratum, made 
of gravel, lies on the bed-rock, 23 feet above the present 





LATE. NEOLITHIC, BRONZE,CELTIC-” “RS 
NEOLITHIC =;-+7-2 PE-- 
AZILIAN-* - 





Fic. 28.—M. Piette’s section across the strata at Mas d’Azil. 


bed of the Arize. ‘The men of the Magdalenian period 
settled on the ancient gravel bed of the Arize. In the 
bottom stratum occur the remains of their hearths. 
The period during which these Palzolithic deposits were 
being formed was marked by two great intervals of flood 
or submergence, for the various strata, showing periods 
of human occupation, are separated by two thick deposits 
of yellow loam—the products of great and continuous 
floods. In all the Magdalenian strata, remains of the 
reindeer occur abundantly. In the Azilian stratum, 
which follows the Magdalenian strata in orderly sequence, 
the reindeer disappears ; its place is taken by the stag, 
the remains of extinct mammals no longer occurring in 
the Azilian layer. The human culture, however, did not 
change much. The Azilians worked their flints in the 


DISCOVERY OF PRE-NEOLITHIC MAN 79 


Magdalenian manner; they fashioned the same carved 
and barbed harpoons and arrow-heads from bone and 
from antlers. ‘They were partial to the use of red ochre 
as a pigment. Rounded pebbles, marked with coloured 
hieroglyphics, formed a peculiar and enigmatical part of 
their civilisation. Perhaps they had taken the first steps 
in agriculture; at least M. Piette found in the Azilian 
stratum traces of wheat husks and stones of cherry 
and plum. 

In this way M. Piette revealed at Mas d’Azil the long 
records of the closing phases of the Paleolithic period 
and the opening stages of the next or Neolithic period. 
In the Azilian stratum he found two sepulchres, but the 
human remains discovered by him are insufficient to give 
an accurate picture of the people. So far as our evidence 
goes, it supports the opinion that the Europeans of the 
Azilian civilisation were members of the Mediterranean 
race, and had heads of the river-bed type. Although 
numerous Azilian stations have been discovered in recent 
years, particularly in France, none has revealed the peoples 
of the period. 

We have no reason to suppose that the transition 
from the Paleolithic to the Neolithic period was marked 
by the appearance of a new or higher type of man. 
Indeed, in artistic ability, there must have been a decline, 
for the later Paleolithic periods have furnished us with 
the most abundant and surprising evidence of a high 
artistic ability. ‘The people who lived in the south- 
west part of France and the north-west part of Spain in 
all the phases of the Aurignacian period covered the 
walls of their caves with most realistic drawings of the 
animals which were hunted and captured by them. 
The artists often worked within the darkest recesses, 
where they had to rely on such light as their primitive 
lamps could give. ‘They engraved and carved bone and 
ivory with a rare skill. ‘The animals they modelled in 
clay have had implanted on them the poise and spirit of 
life. ‘They were hunters and had leisure as well as 
artistic impulses. 


CHAPTER  V 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN DURING THE LATER 
PALAEOLITHIC PERIODS 


For visiting the abodes of ancient man in the south-west 
of France there’are few towns can rival the attractions and 
conveniences of Périgueux. Its sunlit streets and wide 
places are spread over the flat green meadows of the Isle, 
a tributary of the Dordogne ; at every turn the visitor is 
met with traces of Moorish architecture. <A railway 
journey of twenty-five miles towards the south-east 
carries the traveller to Cromagnon, Les Eyzies and the 
lower valley of the Vézére with its limestone cliffs and 
caves. Our visit to Périgueux on this occasion, however, 
is not to see the famed haunts of ancient man on the 
Vézére; our journey lies northwards along the road 
which runs from Périgueux to Brantéme, and its object is 
to ascertain the circumstances which led to the discovery 
of one of the hunters who lived in this part of France 
during Magdalenian times, and to see what kind of man 
he was. 

Along this road, a little over four miles from Périgueux, 
we pass the village of Chancelade, with its old and ruined 
abbey church ; beyond the village the road winds before 
us, flanked on the right by an irregular wall of limestone 
cliffs. Between the foot of the cliffs and the margin of 
the road is a bank of rubble—a talus—formed by blocks 
and fragments detached from the face of the cliffs by the 
frosts, winds, and rains of past ages. It was beneath the 
talus by the side of this road that the Chancelade man 
was discovered (see fig. 29a). 

80 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 81 


In 1887 two well-known archeologists of Périgueux, 
MM. Hardy and Feaux,4 as they walked towards 
Chancelade, found contractors laying a tramway line, 
and were surprised to observe, scattered amongst the 
material which had been recently laid down to mend the 
road, most beautiful examples of the handicraft of 
Magdalenian man—both in flint and in bone. Having 


LIMESTONE ROCK 


UPPER SHELTER 1 
1 5 






LOWER SHELTER 1F¢3 in, SEE 
A 
ROAD EE 


STREAM Iff Oia. 
' 





MAGDELENIAN i 
RUBBLE piGan ee Ze 
ochre | 
SKULL and SKELETON 
Fic. 294.—Section of the lime- Fic. 29B.—Section of the strata 
stone cliff and talus near under the rock-shelter of 
Chancelade. The site of Chancelade, with the position 
the Magdalenian deposits of the skeleton indicated. 
and floors is indicated. (After M. Hardy.) 


(After M. Hardy.) 


filled their wallets, they made inquiries as to where 
this precious road-dressing had come from and were 
directed to the talus which lay under the cliff. Trenching 
operations undertaken by MM. Hardy and Feaux revealed 
the arrangement of deposits shown in figs. 29a, 29. 
The talus had formed in front of, and hidden completely, 
a recess or shelter in the cliff which had long been the 

1 Michel Hardy, ‘‘ La Station Quaternaire de Raymonden ” (a parish 
to the north of Chancelade), Bull. Soc. Histor. et Archéol. du Perigord, 
1891, t. 18, pp. 65, 121, 195. 

TiO ee Te 6 


‘ 


82 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


home of men during Magdalenian times. On the floor 
of the shelter were found deposits which were 5 feet 
4 inches in depth; five strata could be recognised ; two 
of them (E and B) were sterile, showing long intervals 
in which the cave had been forsaken; three strata, A, 
C, D, represented “ occupation levels,”? and were packed 
with flints and bones worked in the typical Magdalenian 
style as well as with the refuse of meals and the embers 
of hearths left by the cave-dwellers. The remains found 
in the strata were those of animals which are native to 
cold and semi-Arctic countries. 

In 1887 MM. Hardy and Feaux found only some 
bones of a child and the frontal bone of an adult skull, 
but on 1st October 1888 they came across the skeleton 
of a man who had been buried under the deepest and oldest 
of the deposits, and rested on the floor of the rock-shelter 
(fig. 298). ‘The skeleton lay on its left side, in the crouched 
position—arms folded on the breast, lower limbs doubled 
against the body, its head to the south. The upper 
part of the material in which the skeleton lay had been 
powdered over with red ochre—a substance to which 
Paleolithic man seems to have attached a_ peculiar 
significance ; at least its application seems to have formed 
part of his burial service. In this case the bones of the 
skeleton were ochre-stained. ‘The skull, in a somewhat 
crushed state, and the rest of the skeleton, were examined 
and described by Professor L. Testut? of the University 
of Lyons. 

Chancelade man has to shoulder, almost alone, the 
heavy responsibility of representing to us the men of 
Europe during that closing phase of the Ice age which is 
marked by the Magdalenian culture. We must therefore 
look rather closely at his features, more especially because 
an extravagant theory has been built up on them. He was 
a short, somewhat squat man; his thigh bone has, at its 
greatest length, a measurement of 408 mm.; his stature 
may be estimated to have been about 1-570 m. (a little 
under 5 feet 2 inches). ‘The imperfect state of his limb 

1 Bull. Soc. @ Anthropologie de Lyon, 1889, t. viii. p. 131. 


~ 


CONTINENTAL TYPES- OF MAN 83 


bones makes any exact statement relating to the relative 
length of leg to thigh and of forearm to upper arm 
impossible. Professor Testut found the heel relatively 
longer than in modern man, and gives a drawing of the 
bones of the foot, in which the great toe is represented as 
widely separated from the other toes, as if this digit had 
still retained some of the mobility possessed by the 
hallux of anthropoid apes. ‘The shape of the joints and 
bones of the great toe of the Chancelade skeleton in no 


190m.m. 
10 





10 





CHANCELADE. 


Fic. 30.—Drawings of the Chancelade skull as seen in profile (A), 
and in full face (B). (After Testut.) 


way departs from that which is frequently to be seen 
in modern races of mankind which live under primitive 
conditions. As regards his feet, Chancelade man was 
altogether human and European. 

When we turn to his skull, we find he was big-headed ; 
the maximum length of the skull is 193 mm., its greatest 
width 139 mm. ; the width represents 72 per cent. of the 
length ; he was narrow-headed, and the roof of the skull 
was particularly high-pitched ; it rises 124 mm. above the 
ear passages. If we apply to these measurements the 
Lee-Pearson formula + for estimating size of brain we get 
a result of 1530 c.c.—about 50 c.c. above the average for 


1 See p. 596. 


84 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


modern Englishmen. When the anthropologist examines 
the skull, for it is still preserved in Périgueux, he is struck 
by its shape as seen in profile (fig. 30). The forehead, 
which is wide (101 mm.) and furnished with supra- 
orbital ridges of moderate development, rises steeply and 
merges as it passes backwards into the high-pitched roof. 
The hinder part of the roof descends steeply to the occi- 
put, reproducing an outline with which one is familiar in 
round or brachycephalic skulls, in which the hinder end 
or occiput is flattened. As is usual in such skulls, the part 
which contains the cerebellum bulges downwards into the 
root of the neck. From the side the Chancelade skull 
suggests that it belongs to the brachycephalic or rounded 
type, and we are surprised therefore when we look at it 
from above or from the front (fig. 30B) to see that it is 
narrow and long. Some degree of this narrowness may 
be due to compression of the skull by the overlying strata 
of earth ; we may note, at least, that there is more than 
a suspicion of brachycephalism about the Chancelade 
man. ‘The total height of the skull, from basion to 
bregma, is 150 mm.; he hada very narrow and a very high 
head. The sides of the head approximate somewhat 
rapidly as they ascend from the level of the ear passages 
to the roof. One may still observe in various countries 
of Europe men whose skulls are fashioned both as regards 
size and shape in what may be named the Chancelade 
manner. 

To what racial type did the Chancelade man belong ? 
All of us are anthropologists at times; we instantly 
recognise the negro, the Chinaman, and other well- 
differentiated types of mankind who may pass us on the 
road or street. The colour of their skin, the texture and 
colour of their hair, but, above all, the features of their 
face, help us to assign them to their racial type. The 
untrained observer seldom takes the shape of head into 
consideration. When we have to base our opinion, as 
in the present case, on fossilised bones obtained from an 
ancient grave, our task is more difficult. Often we have 
only that part of the skull which contains the brain, and 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 85 


even when we make the most of it, our diagnosis of race 
must remain uncertain; but in the case of the Chancelade 
man we have the face as well. Of the various features 
which are modified by race, perhaps the nose is the most 
helpful. Here we have to deal with a man who had a 
long straight nose; from the nasion at its root to the 
spine projecting from the sill of its bony aperture (fig. 30) 
the nose measures 61 mm.; its width in relation to the 
length 1s moderate, 26 mm.; the width of the nose was 
less than 43 per cent. of its length. Unfortunately a 
part of the bridge was broken away, so we cannot tell 
its degree of prominence, but, seeing that the face as a 
whole was distinctly flat, we may conclude that its bridge 
was not greatly raised. ‘The spine projecting from the 
sill at the nasal opening reaches freely forwards, jib-like, 
and from the side of the spine run off sharp margins of 
bone to become continuous with the two lateral margins 
of the aperture. ‘This configuration of the nasal spine 
and nasal sill is not primitive or simian; it is the very 
opposite. In apes, as in all primitive races of mankind, the 
nasal spine is but a stout, low, ridge-like elevation with, 
on each side of it, a broad gutter leading from the floor 
of the nose to the front of the jaw above the incisor teeth. 
We meet here with a feature which the Chancelade man 
shares with most modern Europeans. Some of us still 
retain traces of our simian heritage. The face of the 
Chancelade man appears to be flat because of the peculiar 
configuration of his cheek-bones and zygomatic arches 
(fig. 30). ‘These bony struts give attachment to a pair 
of the principal chewing muscles; the stronger these 
muscles are the stouter and more prominent are the bony 
arches. [he width of the face, measured between the 
most projecting parts of the zygomatic arches, is 140 mm., 
some 6 mm. more than is usual in modern Englishmen, 
but the essential peculiarity lies in the outward bend 
these arches make as they turn inwards on the face at 
the cheeks. This is a feature which is particularly 
developed in the skulls of Eskimo, and it is chiefly upon 
the possession of this feature that the Chancelade man 


86 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


has had the misfortune to be assigned to a Mongoloid 
race. How well his muscles of mastication were developed 
may be seen from the breadth of the ascending ramus of 
his lower jaw, which measured 43 mm. (fig. 30a)—at least 
7 mm. above the modern average. He had not the pro- 
jecting jowls of the Eskimo; the distance between the 
angles of his lower jaw was only 93 mm., whereas in 
Eskimo and in other races to be mentioned later, this— 
the bigonial diameter—will often amount to I10 mm. or 
even 120 mm. 

Then there is the great development of the chin—a 
feature of highly-evolved man. ‘The chin is massive and 
deep; from its lower margin to the alveolar border 
where the front teeth were implanted measures 41 mm. 
He was long-faced ; I estimate that when in his prime, 
and before all his upper teeth, save the remnants of three 
front ones, had been lost from wear and disease, his face 
had measured about 125 mm., so that, although the 
zygomatic arches are wide in comparison with the width 
of the skull, yet they are in keeping with the facial length.. 
The eye sockets were of moderate dimensions—not deep 
from upper to lower margin as in Eskimo skulls. In the 
Chancelade man we are dealing with a member of a racial 
stock of a true European kind. 

He is estimated to have been between fifty and sixty 
years of age; most of his upper teeth, as already men- 
tioned, had been lost from disease; most of the lower 
teeth remained intact. The three lower molar teeth have 
a combined length of 32-5 mm.—not a great amount, but 
they had this peculiarity—the last molar was the largest 
and the first molar the smallest of the series, certainly a 
primitive proportion, for in most modern Europeans the 
order is reversed, the last molar being the most reduced 
in size and development of parts. Professor ‘Testut 
estimated that the chewing palate—the area included 
within the outer margin of the upper teeth—was 
51 mm. from front to back, quite a moderate measure- 
ment, and 60 mm. in width at the points where the 
second upper molars had been implanted. From which 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 87 


we see that as regards size and shape the palate of 
Chancelade man falls easily within the modern range of 
measurements. 

How many millennia have come and gone since the 
Chancelade man lived in his rock-shelter and hunted 
game in the neighbouring valleys? ‘There is abundant 
evidence to prove that in France, England, and South 
Germany the Magdalenian culture was at its height 
during the last advance and retreat of the ice-sheet which 
marked the final phase of the Ice age. Between the 
Magdalenian and the Neolithic periods in Western Europe 
intervenes that period of transitional culture mentioned in 
my last chapter—the Azilian. We haveseen that there are 
grounds for believing that the earliest formsof Neolithic 
culture appeared in Europe about 8000 B.c. If we allow 
two thousand years for the duration of the transitional 
or Azilian culture, we must place the end of the Mag- 
dalenian age about 10,000 B.c. If we take into account 
the remarkable changes in the climate and in the fauna 
which occurred during Magdalenian times, the modifi- 
cations which the culture of this period underwent and 
the deep deposits which were then formed in the floors 
of caves, we are probably making an underestimate when 
we allow three thousand years for the duration of this 
period. If our estimate is reliable, then the Chancelade 
man should belong to about the twelfth millennium B.c. 

In our search for the kind of man who lived on the 
Continent during the later periods of Palzolithic culture, 
we have to move to another pleasant town of France, 
Macon, on the right bank of the Sadne, forty-three miles to 
the north of Lyons and fully 200 miles from Périgueux as 
the crow flies. It was north of this town that Cesar found 
a large part of the population of Switzerland seeking to 
cross the river and trek across the plain to the west ; it is 
in this direction our footsteps are now bent. A little 
over four miles to the west of Macon the meadowland 
rises into low hills and spurs. On the shoulder of one of 
these spurs is situated the village of Solutré; above the 
village rises the “‘ rock of Solutré,” a bluff of limestone, 


88 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


showing its cliff-like face to the south and to the east. 
In the rough land which slopes upwards from the village 
to the foot of the rock, strewn with blocks of limestone 
detached in ancient times from the face of the rock, lay 
hidden some of the most remarkable of our records con- 
cerning the history of Paleolithic man. 

Hitherto, so far as we have followed man into the 
Paleolithic period, we have sought his traces in caves. 
In 1866, two French antiquaries began a series of explora- 
tions at Solutré which revealed the habitation of Palzo- 
lithic man in the open country. Although MM. Ferry 










SOLUTREAN STRATUM 


eee STRATUM 


SS AURIGNACIAN 
Ls HEARTHS 





Vii 





ph VIL LO : 
i) YUMA AEM EL fT TPE 


Fie, 31.—Diagram of the ancient hearth-strata exposed in the 
deposits at Solutré. 


and Arcelin commenced their investigation in 1866, 
inspired by the writings of Sir Charles Lyell, such was 
the extent of the Paleolithic deposit at Solutré, covering 
as it does more than 2 acres of ground, that its exploration 
occupied one of them—M. Arcelin—until his death in 
1904.4 In a paper which he published in 1890,” he 
reproduced a section of the deposits at Solutré, which 
serves to convey the results of his toil at a glance (fig. 21) 
At the western end of the section, the rock of Solutré 
risés to avheight of 300 ¢eet sl he land slopes eastwards 
from the base of the rock towards the Sadéne, and covers 
the deposit which reveals the hearths of ancient man. 
At certain points the exploring trench had to be sunk 


1 See Dechelette’s Manuel d’archéologie préhistorique, 1912, vol. i. p. 133. 
2 L’ Anthropologie, 1890, vol. i. p. 295. 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 89 


to a depth of 34 feet to reach the original surface of the 
land. Wherever the trench was sunk in this ancient 
and extensive station, one remarkable stratum was always 
encountered, usually at a depth of about 10 feet below 
Bhe present surface. ‘This “‘ equine” layer, varying in 
thickness from 15 to 20 inches, was made up of bones of 
horses, broken, cut, and charred, mixed up with the 
débris which accumulates on and around the hearths of 
ancient man. The implements of flint and bone, the 
ornaments, the works of art, the remains of extinct 
animals, found in the equine: layer, are similar to those 
which occur at Aurignac. ‘The equine layer represents a 
vast kitchen-midden of man during the Aurignacian 
period. It has been calculated that the colony at Solutré 
had consumed at least one hundred thousand horses in 
their time. Beneath the equine stratum occur one, 
occasionally two, older Aurignacian floors, marked by 
extensive hearths (fig. 31). In the deepest of these, 
implements which characterise a still older Paleolithic 
culture were gathered—implements of the Mousterian 
type. ‘Above the equine layer there is a stratum con- 
taining ancient floors which yield abundant evidence 
of a more recent culture, the culture which succeeded 
the Aurignacian, and which has been named, because 
of its discovery here, “Solutrean.” A form of finely 
worked flint implement—shaped like a laurel leaf— 
appears for the first time in Western Europe with this 
new culture. Certain animals of the Aurignacian period 
were dying out ; reindeer were becoming more abundant. 
Art, we know from discoveries elsewhere, still maintained 
a high standard. In the Solutrean period Solutré itself 
ceased to be a site of habitation, for it shows no trace of 
the men of the succeeding Magdalenian period which we 
have been examining at Chancelade, and which we also 
noted at Mas d’Azil. 

The land surface had reached its present level on the 
shoulder of the hill at Solutré when people of the Neo- 
lithic and subsequent ages buried their dead over strata 
containing the remains of two long Paleolithic periods. 


9o THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


During 1922, 1923, renewed explorations of the Palzo- 
lithic field of Solutré ended in discoveries of great im- 
portance. M. Fabien Arcelin, son of the pioneer, was 
joined by M. Ch. Depéret, Professor of Geology in the 
University of Lyons. These ten years past Professor 
Depéret has been setting in order our knowledge of the 
terraces or deposits found along the river valleys of 
Europe, settling their sequence and their age, and linking 
them with raised beaches which occur on the shores of 
the Mediterranean and North Sea. ‘There were problems 
at Solutré which demanded further elucidation. During 
the excavations carried out last century, skulls of round- 
headed people had been found in the upper layer at 
Solutré ; they were at first accepted as authentic repre- 
sentatives of Paleolithic man, but later were rejected as 
intrusions because they did not conform to a precon- 
ception which became prevalent—namely, that ancient 
Europeans were all of the long-headed type. ‘To settle 
this and other problems, deep and wide trenches were 
dug across this classical Paleolithic field from east to 
west, during 1922, 1923, under the direction of MM. 
Depéret, Arcelin, and Mayet.! In the autumn of 1923, 
deep in the stratum which contains the ancient hearths 
of the Aurignacian period, and well under the stratum 
which is packed with bones of horses (fig. 31), also a 
deposit of the Aurignacian period, they exposed complete 
skeletons of three adults, two of men and one of a woman ; 
all three adults were under thirty-five years of age and had 
complete sets of healthy teeth. Near the woman’s skeleton 
were remains of the skeletons of two babies. ‘These three 
adults had been buried in a line running from east to 
west; they lay on their backs, with limbs extended, 
heads to the west and feet to the east ; about two paces 
separated the one grave from the other. ‘The old land 
surface, from which the burials had been made, is now 
covered with the stratum containing the horse bones ; 
over this stratum are the deposits of the Solutrean and 


1 Comptes Rendus, Acad. des Sc., 1923, t. 177, p. 618. L’Lilustration, 
2oth Oct. 1923, p. 389. 


~ 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN gl 


Neolithic ages. At each side of the head of all three 
skeletons stood a flat block of limestone ; the upper ends 
of these two blocks, when the burials were freshly made, 
had projected on the surface to mark the position of the 
dead and to serve as tombstones. It is remarkable, as 
the discoverers have observed, that certain tribes in 
Algeria should still adopt this ancient style of burial with 
double tombstones at the head. 

At Solutré, then, we have an opportunity of ascertaining 
the kind of people who lived along the Saéne valley in the 
full bloom of the Aurignacian culture. One man (No. 2) 
was tall—about 1-800 m. (5 feet 10:8 inches)—thus 
resembling the men of Cromagnon. ‘The other (No. 1) 
had a stature of 1°750 m. (5 feet 9 inches). ‘The woman 
was not tall: she stood about 1-550 m. (5 feet 1 inch). 
It is clear that the Cromagnon race was one in which the 
sexual difference in stature was extreme—the women 
falling short of the average stature of women, while the 
men exceeded the average for men. ‘Their limb bones 
were robust but had none of the peculiarities which 
characterise the limb bones of the men of Cromagnon— 
no front-to-back flattening of the upper shaft of the thigh 
bones, no side-to-side flattening of the leg bones, no great 
bony pilaster behind the shaft of the femur; the leg and 
forearm were not of great relative length. 

We have seen that there is a suspicion of round- 
headedness in the skull of the Magdalenian man of 
Chancelade, this feature is no longer a suspicion in the 
man of Solutré; these much older representatives of the 
Paleolithic people of France are frankly round-headed 
or brachycephalic. At Solutré we come across the first 
definite evidence of the existence of round-headedness in 
Europe, which now characterises so large a part of the 
population of this continent. 

The skull of the tall man (No. 2) is shown in fig. 32, 
set within the standard frame of lines which serves to 
mark the average long skull. Its length is only 184 mm., 
its width 146 mm., the width is 79:3 per cent. of the 
length; it is on the border line of brachycephalism as 


92 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


regards its measurement, but so far as concerns its con- 
formation it is wholly there. In the other man (No. 1) 
the relative head-breadth or cephalic index is 79:1 mm. ; 
in the woman 77:7 mm. It is a curious circumstance 
that in a race which tends to length of head, the men 
should exceed the women in this quality ; if the tendency 
should be towards shortness of head, the men still outdo 
the women; in both cases the woman’s head-form is the 
more conservative, tending towards a mean proportion of 


breadth to length. As regards size of head and capacity 


100 





SOLUTRE’ 


Fic. 32.—The skull of the tall man of Solutré seen in profile (A) and 
in full face (B). (After Mayet.) 


of brain chamber, the tall man of Solutré, on our English 
way of reckoning, had a brain-volume of 1550 c.c.—some 
70 c.c. above the average capacity for men; the shorter 
man, estimated on the same basis, had 1472 c.c.—his 
capacity almost corresponding to our modern mean. 

As regards form of face, these men of Solutré are 
remarkably like the Chancelade type. There is the 
same widely spread zygomatic arches—the bizygomatic 
diameter of the face is 143 mm. in the tall man—the 
same width of face as in the short man of Chancelade. 
There is the same long nose and upper face. In the tall 
man the distance from nasion to alveolar margin is 73 mm. 
—almost the same as in the man of Chancelade. ‘There 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 93 


was the same long nose of moderate width; there was 
the same well-developed chin with the same great depth 
of lower jaw at the symphysis or chin. Their orbits and 
forehead were also modelled in a similar way to those of 
the Chancelade type. There cannot be a doubt that the 
people that lived at Solutré in the Aurignacian period 
were of the same racial stock as the people who long 
afterwards, in the Magdalenian period, lived in the 
neighbourhood of Chancelade. 

It will be noticed that the cave strata at Mas d’Azil 
take up the story of ancient man where the deposits at 
Solutré leave off. In the 60 feet of strata, represented 
at the combined sites, are found the cultures of four con- 
secutive periods—Aurignacian, Solutrean, Magdalenian, 
and Azilian—with superficial traces of the Neolithic period. 
It is plain that we have made a long journey into the past 
to reach the Aurignacian period ; how long we can but 
dimly perceive at present. The formation of a deposit 
30 feet deep at Solutré must have occupied a long space 
of time. ‘The process of its formation is revealed by M. 
Arcelin’s section. ‘The great blocks of stone and the rocky 
débris which lie in the strata between the layers con- 
taining the ancient hearths have been detached from the 
face of the adjacent hill, as its exposed face weathered 
under the frost, the wind, and the rain. ‘The débris 
thus detached from the hill tended to drift down the 
slope in times of rain, snow, and flood, gradually covering 
and burying the human habitations, and sealing them up 
as historical records. 

How much older are these Aurignacians of Solutré 
than the Magdalenians of Chancelade? The beginning 
of the Magdalenian period has been placed, provisionally, 
at 13,000 B.c.; the Magdalenian culture was preceded 
by the Solutrean, which was first recognised at the site we 
have just described. ‘The Solutrean culture may be given 
on such evidence as is now available, a duration equal to 
that of the Azilian or transitional culture—two thousand 
years. We, therefore, date the end of the Aurignacian 
period to about 15,000 B.c. Seeing that the Aurignacian 


94. THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


culture is distributed widely in Europe, North Africa, and 
in the East, that the climate of Europe underwent a marked 
degree of amelioration and also a retrogression of the ice- 
sheet during the development of this culture, and seeing 
that the cave deposits formed during this period are of a 
great depth, we must allow some five thousand years at 
least for the duration of the Aurignacian culture in Europe. 
On this scale of time we date the beginning of the Aurig- 
nacian culture about 20,000 B.c., its end about 15,000 B.c. 
The men of Solutré represent the people who lived in the 
valley somewhere near the middle of the Aurignacian Saéne 
period—round about the eighteenth millennium B.c. 

To examine more fully the characteristics of the men 
who lived in Europe during the Aurignacian period, we 
must leave Solutré and follow the valley of the Rhone 
to the shores of the Mediterranean, and then make our 
way eastwards along the French Riviera to the neigh- 
bourhood of Mentone, particularly to the cliffs and caves 
which here fringe the coast. A little over a mile to the 
east of Mentone, just beyond the French frontier, the 
red rocks of Greil rise from the sea. The caves, 
where ancient man made a home, open on their southward 
face about 60 or 70 feet above the level of the sea. A 
road made along the foot of the cliffs—the Corniche 
road—serves as a highway between France and Italy. 
Indeed, many of the caves open just above the road. In 
1872, M. Emile Riviere discovered remains of ancient 
man in some of the Grimaldi caves. Further discoveries 
were made subsequently, and disputes arose as to their 
authenticity and antiquity. In 1895, the Prince of 
Monaco undertook their investigation. He summoned 
the best talent of France: Canon de Villeneuve to 
write the historical account; M. Cartailhac to describe 
the articles of culture; Professor Boule to investigate 
the geology and the fauna; and Dr Verneau to report on 
the human remains. Systematic work was commenced 
“in 1895, and by 1902 five great caves and several rock- 
shelters had been scientifically explored. Between 1906 
and 1911 two magnificent volumes, issued in separate 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 95 


parts, were published at the expense of the Prince of 
Monaco, thus placing at the disposal of the scientific 
world a rich and instructive harvest of new facts. Alto- 
gether the remains of fifteen individuals were found in 
the seven Grimaldi caves, but of these only six men and 
three women were sufficiently preserved for examination. 
Here we shall deal with those discovered in only one cave 
-—the Grotte des Enfants, so named because the skeletons 
of two children were discovered in its upper strata. 

A summary of what was discovered during the explora- 
tion of the Grotte des Enfants is shown in fig. 33. Over 
5 feet had been removed from the surface of the cave 
deposits before the systematic exploration commenced. 
Twenty-eight feet of accumulations on the original floor 
still remained. ‘len ancient floors were found, marked 
by hearths and the débris of human occupation; they 
occurred from the top to the bottom of the cave strata. 
From the ninth—the second from the bottom—to the 
highest and most recent hearth, the type of culture was 
the same—Aurignacian. ‘The ornaments, the implements 
in stone and bone, were of the same kind as those found 
in the cave at Aurignac. The remains of the same 
extinct animals came to light with a few exceptions ; 
the woolly rhinoceros, and apparently the mammoth, 
never reached the sunny coasts of the Riviera. The 
remains of the cave-bear, the cave-lion, the cave-hyena, 
and ibex occurred. In the upper strata remains of the 
reindeer were found, showing that Arctic conditions had 
reached the south of Europe during the final phases of 
occupation. In the very lowest stratum of all, however, 
were found the remains of a species of rhinoceros, more 
ancient than the woolly form—the kind known as 
Rhinoceros Mercki. ‘The presence of this southern form 
in the deepest stratum of the cave, accompanied by 
remains of the hippopotamus, together with an older form 
of elephant—Elephas antiquus—proves that the Grimaldi 
caves became inhabited at the close, or soon after the 
close, of a mild or warm period, during which Neander- 
thal man occupied Europe. Indeed the lowest stratum 


96 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


contained stone implements of the Mousterian culture. 
Thus in the Grotte des Enfants we have deposits, amount- 


ing to 33 feet in all, which record the last Arctic phase of 


ZEN 


Leff 
LLLP 
LLL. 


LALA FALE 
LL Lp; Lie $F Py 
MT LLL. aay Uy Yi pm 
ATP? LT Lf 
NL fe f/, ie LY WE ft Ly, » 
LL? Lp 


fey 
Lf eg LL TIN 
Why Fb] Vit yp i elias 
By WET 
ATLL, L 

pe TED ee, 


DD, LT ep begs 
ZL LY eed Pd 
YE aimee Zi 


y LETT TAY 
Lath eR, YG ee LD: Ly Lp 


fap 7. pd LLP hy (YER 
PHY 
We Vig; y LNG 











tx 
WLLL LS 
eee LiL ee eps 
Gi EE Le Ae A A LLG “4B 

Heft Lie TALE 


Lees 
ZB : Lipa 


a a a Leo 
CA ec Fi 


phe 






GEE 77 (en oS 
EE VUES 


LAE 
Gy LL 
UZ, cet 


LF 


Fic. 33.—Section of the strata of the Grotte des Enfants, near Mentone 
(After the section given in Professor Boule’s monograph.) 


the Pleistocene period—from a time when the French 
Riviera was warmer than it is in the present day until it 
fell almost to the temperature of Lapland. 

At the level of the second hearth in the Grotte des 
Enfants, I: 


1:70 m. below the surface, was found the 
skeleton of an old woman of small stature, but so broken 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 97 


that a restoration was impossible. It was clear she had 
been buried, and that ornaments of her time (Aurig- 
nacian) had been interred with the remains. At the 
level of the third hearth, 2-70 m. (g ft.) in depth, the 
skeletons of two young children were found, laid on their 
backs, with heads to the west. At the level of the eighth 
hearth, 7-05 m. (23 ft.) below the surface, occurred the 
remains of a very tall man (6 ft. 24 in.)—a representative 
member of the Cromagnon race. He was extended on 
his back, in a grave which had been prepared for him— 
a slab of red clay under his head, a flat stone over it, large 
stones grouped round his feet. A worked piece of a deer’s 
antler lay close by ; the shells and perforated teeth which 
formed his necklace were placed near him. The objects 
of culture were the same as accompanied the men at 
Cromagnon. 

At the level of the underlying ninth and oldest hearth, 
over 33 feet from the surface stratum of the cave, was 
found another grave. It contained two skeletons, one of 
a woman of middle age, the other of a youth of about 
sixteen. ‘The tall Cromagnon man lay extended on his 
back, but these short people lay huddled up in the con- 
tracted posture. ‘The same kind of provision had been 
made for them at their death as for the tall man. Stones 
had been placed to protect the head; the remains of the 
usual kind of necklaces and bracelets were found; near 
by were the worked flints of the period. As is so often 
the case in Aurignacian burials, the skeleton of the lad 
was stained by red ochre. 

It is a feature of the Cromagnon people—the French- 
men of the Aurignacian period—for the men to be very 
tall but for the women to be of moderate or even small 
stature. ‘The little woman found at the level of the 
second hearth was probably of the same race as the tall 
-man found at the level of the eighth. But what of the 
lad and the small woman found at the level of the ninth 


1 If the Lee-Pearson formula is used, the height of this man falls to 
5 feet 10°6 inches. The stature of the Cromagnon people has been 
exaggerated. 

VOL, I. 7 


98 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


and oldest hearth? They are the earliest Aurignacian 
settlers we know of in this part of France—perhaps the 
earliest yet discovered in Europe. ‘They were buried 
with all the ceremonies of their culture but within the 
stratum on which men of the Mousterian period had lit 
their fires and chipped their tools. Dr Verneau had no 
doubt about them; in his opinion they represented a 
negroid race—one not previously discovered in Europe. 
By a negroid race, we understand one in which the skin 
is pigmented ; as regards the Grimaldi people we have 
to judge from the skeleton alone. One important negroid 
feature is absent from both of these Grimaldi skeletons, 
namely, the negroid contour of the forehead. In pure 
negroes and in negroid races, the right and left eminences 
of the forehead—of the frontal bones—tend to fuse 
together in the middle line so as to form a single eminence 
of peculiar shape, such as we have seen in a Neolithic 
skull from Malta (fig. 6, p. 15). In the Grimaldi lad 
and woman, probably his mother—for they are very 
much alike—the forehead is of the European form, the 
frontal bosses are not fused. ‘The skull is long and narrow, 
as is the case in most negroes, but the same head measure- 
ments also occur in white races. When we come to deal 
with the features of the face, we recognise that there are 
some negroid traits. ‘lhe teeth of the lad are very large, 
causing those in front and the parts of the upper and 
lower jaws on which they are set to protrude like a muzzle 
in front of the nasal opening and in front of the chin. 
The lower margin of the nasal opening as seen on the 
skull is not sharp as is so often the case in white races, 
but grooved or guttered as is usual in pigmented races. 
‘The face, too, is short, as in most black races. The orbits, 
although of more than average width, are narrow from 
above downwards—the upper and lower orbital margins 
are unduly approximated, giving the face a sinister look. 
This, we have seen, is also a character of the Cromagnon 
race. "The nose was apparently shaped much as it is in 
native Australians. ‘These two Grimaldi skeletons, then, 
do show certain negroid features, and still, to my mind, 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 99 


a full analysis will prove that they are of the Cromagnon 
race, or of a people nearly allied to that race. 

In the proportion of his limbs, the negro shows certain 
peculiar features which distinguish him from modern 
European races. In the first place, his leg is long as 
compared with his thigh. In the European, the leg bone 
(tibia) is less than 80 per cent. of the thigh bone or 
femur ; in negroes, the tibia is over 80 per cent., usually 
between 81 and 84 per cent. In Cromagnon skeletons— 
from the Paviland cave in Wales, from Cromagnon itself, 
and from the Grimaldi caves—the tibia varies from 81 
to 85 per cent. of the femoral length. In the two negroid 
Grimaldi skeletons the tibial proportions are 83:8 per cent. 
for the woman, 83-7 per cent. for the lad. They agree 
with the Cromagnon race. The same result is obtained 
when we inquire into the proportion which the forearm 
bears to the upper arm. In modern Europeans, the 
tadius of the forearm is about 74 per cent. of the humeral 
or upper arm length ; in modern negroes, the proportion 
of the radius is 79 per cent. The same proportion holds 
true of the Cromagnon race and of the so-called Grimaldi 
negroids ; the radius of the lad is 79 per cent., that of 
the woman 85 per cent. of the length of the humerus. 
The stature of the negroid woman is not low—1-595 m. 
(5 feet 23 inches) ; the lad of sixteen measures 1-560 m. 
(5 feet 1} inches). If he had lived he might have added 
6 or 8 inches to his stature. 

On the palate of the Cromagnon people there is 
usually a bony elevation—the torus palatinus—often 
seen on the palate of primitive negroid races. The 
torus is present in the Grimaldi negroids. The 
woman and the lad share the ample brain capacity of 
the Cromagnon race. The capacity of the woman is 
estimated by Dr Verneau to have been 1375 c.c., that of 
the boy 1580 c.c.1—both above the modern average. 


1 [ have given Dr Verneau’s measurements, but to compare them with 
those made by applying the Lee-Pearson formula, as is usually done in 
England, 8 per cent. has to be deducted. On our English standard the 
brain capacity of the woman is 1265 c.c., that of the lad 1454 c.c. 


100 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Those Aurignacians had large brains. I am of the 
opinion that it is a mistake to separate those two Grimaldi 
individuals, the mother and son, as types of a new race— 
a negroid race indigenous to Europe. To me these 
characters suggest that they are only an aberrant Cro- 
magnon form, perhaps primitive, but nevertheless true 
members of the Cromagnon race. That race, in the 
proportion of its limbs and in certain features of the 
face, does show negroid traits. We shall see, as we 
proceed, that the people who lived in France during the 


4190 160 140 =120 ~100__80 60 40 20 0 

SSS foe 
80 

60 

40 

20 

° 

20 

40 

60 

60 

GRIMALD!. ¢ 100 





120 


Fic. 34.—Profile and full face of the Grimaldi woman. 


Aurignacian period, although often tall, varied widely in 
stature ; we shall find that they differ just as much in 
head-form as do people of any modern nationality, and 
that traits, which may be called negroid or primitive, are 
of frequent occurrence—as they still are among South 
Europeans. But a full study of the Cromagnon people, 
as revealed in their skulls and skeletons, has convinced 
me that they are beyond all doubt of the same racial 
stock as the modern people of Southern and Western 
Europe. 

When one of the skulls of the Grimaldi negroids is 
fitted within the standard frame, which we have applied 
to Neolithic skulls, the fit is seen to be a good one (see 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN IOI 


fig. 34). The maximum length of the woman’s skull 
is I91 mm., its width, 131 mm.; the height of the vault 
above the ear-holes, 115 mm.; the proportion of width to 
length, 68-5 per cent. Her head was long and narrow. 
The corresponding measurements of the lad’s skull are: 
Weneth, 192 mm.; width, 133 mm.; height, 125 mm. 
The width of the skull represents 69:2 per cent. of the 
length. The chief point of difference between the typical 
Cromagnon skulls and those of the two negroids lies 
in the characters of the cranial vault. The flattening 
of the vault seen in Cromagnon specimens is absent in 
the negroid skulls. The vaults are raised as in negro 
skulls. 

(phe presence of /neeroid)@features in these early 
Europeans sends the mind seeking for the cradle of the 
Cromagnon stock in the direction of Africa to the fertile 
lands of the old Sahara pictured in Chapter II. Later 
on, when treating of Malta, there will be occasion to 
discuss the existence of a former land-bridge across the 
Mediterranean, by which these people may have passed 
from Tunis to Italy. In the meantime there is one very 
primitive feature of the Grimaldi lad which deserves 
mention. His teeth and palate are of remarkable size. 
The last molars or wisdom teeth were in process of erup- 
tion at the time of his death, but in fig. 35 they are shown 
in place within the dental series. It will be seen that the 
palatal or chewing area, as measured in fig. 35, has a total 
length of 65 mm., nearly 15 mm. longer than is now the 
rule in modern Europeans. Its width, measured between 
the outer surfaces of the second pair of molar teeth, is 
65 mm., only 2 or 3 mm. more than is usual amongst 
modern European men. The length, as in anthropoid 
palates, is long compared with the width. If we measure 
the area contained within the outer circle of the teeth, 
as may be done by drawing an outline of the palate on 
millimetre paper and counting the number of squares 
thus included, we find, in the case of the Grimaldi lad, 
that the area is 39 cm.”, whereas the palatal area of an 
average modern Englishman is a little under 25 cm.?. 


{02 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


We know that, during the earlier stages of the evolution 
of man, while the brain tended to increase in volume the 
area oti the palate tended to decrease. Later on we shall 
discuss the relationship which exists between area of 
palate and volume of brain (p. 215). In the meantime it is 
sufficient to state that, while in modern British skulls the 
area of the palate to the volume of the brain is as 1: 59, in 


30 20 0 20 30 





8 


35.—The upper teeth and palate of the Grimaldi lad, to show their 
size and to explain the method of estimating the palatal area. 


the Grimaldi lad it was as 1: 37. In the chimpanzee the 
palato-cerebral ratio is as1:9:2. Latter-day civilisation 
has led to a decrease in the area of the palate, but there 
is no evidence of a corresponding increase of brain. ‘The 
Grimaldi lad had reached our modern standard of size 
of brain, but in area of palate he measured half as much 
again as we do. 

Having thus seen the kind of people who lived on the 
shores of the Mediterranean during a long and varying 
phase of the Ice age, and shared in the Aurignacian 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 103 


culture, we again set out on our tour of Ancient Europe. 
To return to the Dordogne so that we might examine the 
locality and grave in which the man of Combe-Capelle 
was found—one of the earliest representatives of the 
Aurignacian people yet discovered—would be inconvenient 
at this point, besides involving us in a journey of 400 miles. 
In any case an account of this important discovery will 
fit in more conveniently on another occasion (p. 165). 
We therefore make our way to the north, beyond the 
Alps, to the plains of Moravia, now included in Czecho- 
Slovakia. ‘The town of Briinn, situated on these plains, 
which ultimately send their waters southward to the 
Danube, is 600 miles from Mentone. Discoveries made 
along the valley of the Danube and those of its tributaries 
have shown that the men who dwelt in the central parts 
of Europe, although they had adopted the Aurignacian 
culture, had modified it in so many details that in their 
hands it had ultimately evolved into that form of culture 
to which the name “ Solutrean” has been given. We 
have already come across this culture in the upper strata 
of the rock of Solutré; it there ousted and succeeded a 
typical form of the Aurignacian culture. The land to 
which we have come may therefore, on the basis of our 
present knowledge, claim to be the cradle of a new culture 
—the Solutrean. 

The kind of man who lived in Moravia in the later 
phases of the Ice age, and modified Aurignacian fashions, 
was first brought to the light of day under the following 
circumstances. In 1891, a canal was being made in 
Briinn, the capital of Moravia, some sixty miles north of 
Vienna, when a human skull was found at a depth of 
15 feet. In the same stratum, and near the skull, were 
found objects of culture—perforated shells and an ivory 
image—and the remains of the extinct animals—the 
mammoth and woolly rhinoceros—which usually accom- 
pany Aurignacian man. ‘The same ancient culture which 
we saw in the deposits of the cave floor at Aurignac 
extended to Wales and to Moravia. When the Briinn 
skull—the larger of the two described by Professor 


104. THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Makowsky 1—is placed in a standard frame (fig. 36) we 
are impressed by its dimensions. ‘The maximum length 
is 206 mm., its width, 144 mm.; the height of the vault 
above the ear-holes, 125 mm.; the width is 69 per cent. 
of the length; the capacity, estimated by the Lee- 
Pearson formula, a little over 1600 c.c. It isyaymiames 
skull, showing strong and rugged characters in the fore- 
head and in the area for attachment to the neck. The 
Briinn type may be regarded as a variant of the Cro- 
magnon—the man was apparently a member of an allied 
race. On my visit to Jersey,? I was surprised to find in 
the museum of the Société Jersiaise a skull which was a 





















































Fic. 36.—The Briinn skull (No. 1) from the side and from above. 


replica of the Briinn example. All that is known of the 
Jersey specimen is that it was brought from South 
America. As is so often the case with the Aurignacian 
skulls,.-the Jersey skull is of a brownish-red colour, as 
if it had been embedded for a long time in soil rich 
in iron.? 

Fifty miles to the east of Briinn—near to the town of 
Prerau, and beyond the battlefield of Austerlitz, is the 


1 “Der diluviale Mensch in Léss von Briinn,” Mztth. Anthrop. 
Gesellsch. in Wien, 1892, vol. xxi. p. 73. 

2 See Bull. Soc. Ferstatse, 1913, vol. xxxviil. p. 310. 

3 In late years I have seen several similar examples from Patagonia, 
but the face of the Patagonian skulls differs from that of the European. 
I have seen similar crania from Neolithic sites along the Mediterranean, 
but in these cases the facial conformation was entirely European. One 
cannot make a reliable diagnosis of racial affinity on the characters of the 
brain-containing part of the skull alone. 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 105 


most famous of all Moravian settlements of ancient man 
—Predmost (fig. 37). Here, as at Solutré, rises up a 
rocky elevation, covered and surrounded by silts, loess, and 
gravels, deposits laid down during the later phases of the 
Iceage. On the shoulder of this elevation, buried under the 
deposits of the glacial period, have been found the hearths, 
home, and dead of the native people of the distant period 


HAMBURG 


*s 
S, 





@ BERLIN 
S g — NEANDERTHAL 
sh OS OUSSELOORF 
Re 
bh zse BONN 
OBERCA 
Vv LIEGE CASSEL WEIMAR _e@TewRINGSOOR 
lok NAMUR' A JENA 
DINANT 
e 
CAM PIGNY e PURFOOZ “Ze, 
: 0 
\ Or. 







; ° HEIDELBERG 
FERE-EN-TARDENOIS \ 


MAUER @ 


NURNBERG as 
BRUNN 






e 
VIENNA 


Fic. 37.—A sketch map to show the chief sites at which discoveries of 
ancient man have been made along the valleys of the Rhine, Meuse, 
and Danube. 


with which we are now dealing. ‘Their chief prey was 
not the horse, as at Solutré, but the mammoth; in one 
stratum the bones of this animal are massed in hundreds. 
Over 30,000 flint implements have been gathered from 
the site; they are worked in the Solutrean manner. In 
one stratum were grouped in regular order, as if in a 
common grave, the remains of over forty individuals— 
men, women, and children. ‘They were a long-headed 
folk, and in stature they almost rivalled the men of 
Cromagnon. Dr K. Absolon, curator of the Govern- 
ment Museum in Briinn, has ‘shown me photographs of 


106 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


wonderful ivory beads, of small statuettes of fat women 
carved out of mammoth tusks, of bone and stone imple- 
ments in great variety, but all conforming to a late 
Paleolithic type. ‘Thus in the Ice age, the plains of 
Moravia had their population of tall, long-headed men, 
skilled in hunting, and showing a high degree of artistic 
development. 

From Briinn we have now to make our way westwards, 
to the upper waters of the Danube, and then down the 
Rhine to the old university town of Bonn, situated on 
the left or south bank of the river, to witness one of the 
most important of recent discoveries of ancient man. 
We have left Briinn some 450 miles to the eastward; the 
shores of the North Sea lie 160 miles to the west ; Diissel- 
dorf, the point of departure for Neanderthal, is forty miles’ 
farther down the Rhine. On the opposite or northern 
bank, just above Bonn, is the village of Obercassel ; 
there the north bank of the Rhine rises up steeply and 
is marked by terraces—old beds of the river. In February 
1914, the quarrymen of Obercassel were extending a pit 
which revealed sections of two of the old terraces—the 
“high ” and “ highest.’ It was seen that the “ highest ” 
terrace at one time had presented a steep face to the 
river and would have provided shelter for men living on 
the terrace just below—the “high” terrace. On the 
platform of this latter terrace was exposed a stratum, 
only 4 inches thick, which contained bones—implements 
worked and engraved, with other objects fashioned by 
ancient man, all of them representative of the Magdalenian 
culture. Over this stratum had accumulated some 13 - 
feet of sand, detached from the crumbling sheltering face 
of the “highest”? terrace. The accumulated material 
had covered and preserved this habitation of Rhinelanders 
of the Magdalenian period. In the stratum lay the 
skeleton of a man and a woman side by side; the bones 
_ were stained red from the ochre which had been used in 
the burial service. The skulls and skeletons were pre- 
sented by the owner of the quarry to the University of 
Bonn; an account of these Magdalenian people and of 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 107 


the circumstances of their discovery has been published 
by Professors attached to the University.! 

In fig. 38 is shown the skull of the man of Obercassel 
in profile and in full face. ‘Those familiar with the head- 
form of the ancient and modern people of Scandinavia, 
will recognise at a glance that we have here an unmis- 
takable representation of the Nordic type—the first 
glimpse we have yet got of the type of man which is still 
dominant in North-Western Europe. ‘The man of Ober- 


190mm 0. 








OBERCASSEL. 





120 





Fic. 38.—The skull of the man of Obercassel in profile and 
in full face. (After Bonnet.) 


cassel, however, was not tall—only 5 feet 3 inches (1600 
-mm.) ; his head was large, the skull measuring 194 mm. in 
length, 144 mrf. in width; the width being 74:6 per 
cent. of the length. ‘The roof is relatively low-pitched— 
rising 115 mm. above the ear-holes. The cranial capacity 
may be estimated at 1500 c.c. Not only are these 
measurements such as are often met with in Nordic 
skulls, but the details of conformation are also Nordic. 
The woman was young, probably twenty years of age ; 
about 5 feet 1 inch (1550 mm.) in stature; her head was 
of a medium size—184 mm. in length, 129 mm. in breadth, 


1M. Verworn, R. Bonnet, G. Steinmann, Der diluviale Menschenfund 
von Obercassel bet Bonn, Wiesbaden, 1919. 


108 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the breadth index being only 70—narrow and long- 
headed. The cranial capacity was 1350 c.c.—about 50 c.c. 
above the average for modern women of the Nordic type. 
That she, too, conformed to the Nordic type there can 
be no doubt. 

The conformation of face, as has already been pointed 
out, is a more reliable indication of breed and of race 
than is the shape of cranium. ‘The man shows the Nordic 
face in its most robust form. It is long, and when we 
note in its profile (fig. 38) the strongly developed shelf- 
like chin, the high-pitched nose, the teeth set regularly 
in an arch of modern size, and the complete absence of 
any muzzle-like projection of the jaws, we see we have 
in this ancient Rhinelander a fine and full-blown represen-\ 
tative of the Nordic stock. As we survey him in full face 
there are two outstanding features which seize our 
attention—the great breadth and strength of his zygo- 
matic arches (he had a bizygomatic diameter of 153 mm.), 
and the outward projection of the angles of his lower jaw 
—his jowls. At this part his face had the great width of 
128 mm. All of these features betoken chewing muscles 
of enormous strength. In the woman, on the other hand, 
the cheeks had the flatness seen in modern women of the 
Nordic type. It is a noteworthy fact that the round- 
headed “ beaker ”” men who invaded the eastern coast of 
Britain late in the Neolithic age, and certainly came from 
the north-west of Europe, had a facial development 
identical with that of the Obercassel man. In the 
earliest inhabitants of Scandinavia the cheeks and jowls 
have seldom the great dimensions just described; but 
that they were of the same lineage as the people who 
lived in the Rhine valley during Magdalenian times there 
cannot be a doubt. The discovery at Obercassel may be 
regarded as proving that men of the Nordic type were 
already in possession of North-Western Europe in the last 
phase of the Ice age—as early as the twelfth millennium 
B.c., and we may regard—so far as our experience goes— 
this part of Europe as the cradle in which the Nordic 
type was evolved. 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 109 


We have to leave Obercassel and retrace our steps 
to the upper waters of the Danube—to the higher 
lands on the boundary between Bavaria and Wiirtem- 
berg. Here, some fifty miles to the south-west of 
Niirnberg, is the cave of Ofnet which Dr R. R. Schmidt 
began to investigate in IgoI. The strata which Dr 
Schmidt found in the floor of the cave are shown dia- 
grammatically in fig. 4o. All the later Paleolithic 
cultures are represented in the deeper strata of the cave 
—Aurignacian, Solutrean, and Magdalenian; so is the 






—a 5Sfeel 
/2-8inches 


4feel 
:2/-Z in. 
2In. 
7-2In 
Bin. 


(1. Bin 


SKULLS 


Strala al OFNET. 





Fic. 39.—The skull ofa round-headed Fic. 40.—The sequence of strata 
woman from the cave at Ofnet. in the floor of the cave at Ofnet. 


Azilian or transitional period. The upper strata had 
been trampled down by men of the Neolithic and Bronze 
ages. In 1907 Dr Schmidt+ made a discovery which 
throws light on certain strange burial customs practised 
by the people who used this cave in Azilian times. Under 
the Azilian stratum were two caches of skulls, 27 in one, 
6 in the second, arranged in orderly circular rows. ‘The 
skulls belonged to people of all ages and of both sexes ; 
they were powdered and stained with red ochre. Mingled 
with them were perforated shells, stag’s teeth, and other 
sure marks of the Azilian culture. What the meaning of 

1R. R. Schmidt, Die diluviale Vorzett Deutschlands, Stuttgart, 1912 
(Anthropology by Dr A. Schliz). ; 


110 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


this peculiar burial custom may be we shall not stop to 
inquire; the main interest lies in the kind of people 
who were represented in this treasure-trove of skulls. 
They are clearly later in date than the long-headed 
type we have seen at Predmost and at Obercassel. Of 
the 21 skulls sufficiently preserved to give a guide to 
head-form, 8 were of the rounded cranial type, 5 
were long, and 8 of an intermediate form. ‘The skull 
of a woman—a good representative of the round-headed 
type—is shown in fig. 39. Its length ‘is 174 mm., its 
width 136 mm., the latter being 78-2 per cent. of the 
length. Although the width falls short of the 80 per 
cent. of length which entitled a skull to be grouped as\ 
brachycephalic, yet in its conformation—its vertical 
hinder end and flat roof—it has the conformation of this 
type. The face is strongly built, but is short relatively 
and rather wide and flat. The discovery at Ofnet tells 
us in an unmistakable manner that the revolution in head- 
form, which was destined to spread so widely in Europe, 
had already set in at the close of the Paleolithic period— 
perhaps at a much earlier date. The people of Ofnet 
were mostly round-headed. ‘There are many varieties of 
round skulls; the skulls of Ofnet are of the bullet-like 
or Mongoloid form—quite unlike the Armenoid type of 
Asia Minor. ‘The long-headed element represented in 
the collection of skulls at Ofnet is of the Nordic type. 
At Ofnet, then, we seem to come across a mingling of 
two peoples, and the round-headedness of the one element 
has dominated and submerged the long-headedness of 
the older type. In the modern population of Central 
Europe, round-headedness, as already mentioned, has 
become dominant everywhere. 

The round-headed Ofnet type must have made its way 
to the west of Europe before the end of the Ice age. 
Exact replicas of these Ofnet skulls were found in the 
Magdalenian stratum of a cave near Furfooz, in Belgium 
(see fig. 37), in 1867 ; Dr Mendes Corréa has found them 
in the most ancient Neolithic shell-heaps of Portugal ; we 
have seen skulls of a very similar type in the Aurignacian 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN III 


strata of Solutré; a skull of a similar kind was discovered 
by Dr von Luschan in a deposit of late Palzolithic date 
_at Nagy-Sap in the valley of the Danube. It was these _ 
same round-headed people who established the oldest pile- 
_ dwellings on the lakes of Switzerland. 

Having thus made the round of Europe in search of 
the kinds of men who lived and evolved upon its lands 
during the later and varying phases of the Ice age, we 
must now make our way back to England to apply the 
knowledge we have gathered. It will repay us, however, 
to make a detour northwards to the large Danish island 
of Zeeland, lying in the mouth of the Baltic. The very 
modern city of Copenhagen is built on its eastern shore, 
while along its western coast are peat mosses which 
contain traces of settlements made by the men who 
followed hard on the retreating edge of the ice-sheet. 
The pioneer settlers of Scandinavia fashioned bone 
harpoons in the Azilian manner, but their art and way of 
living differed from those represented by the culture of 
the south. At Maglemose on the west coast they lived 
on a raft-village built on a lake, and had to row or swim 
350 yards to reach it from the shore. Their arrival in 
Denmark is dated on reliable evidence to the sixth 
millenium B.c. So far no skull or bone of these Magle- 
mose or harpoon people has been found, but one may 
infer that they were of the same stock as the people who 
lived at Obercassel—400 miles to the south of Zeeland. 
As far back as we can trace man in Scandinavia we find 
_ the Nordic type in possession of the country. 

Our interest in the Maglemose or harpoon people lies 
in this: on the east coast of Yorkshire, just north of the 
Humber, and 450 miles across the North Sea from 
Maglemose, Mr A. Leslie Armstrong! has found bone 
harpoons worked in exactly the same manner, and flint 
implements of various kinds fashioned in the same way 
as those which are found at Maglemose. If the reader 
will glance at the map of the North Sea (fig. 15), he will 
see that in the early part of the Neolithic period a shore 

1 Man, 1923, vol. xxiii. p. 135. 


112 ‘THE CAN TIOWELY TOFSMAN 


journey round the North Sea gulf would give the har- 
poon people access to northern England. The Magle- 
mose culture spread through the north of England; it 
has been found by Sir William Boyd Dawkins in the floor 
deposits of the Victoria cave at Settle, just on the borders 
between Yorkshire and Lancashire. It has been found 
at various places in the south of Scotland, but the most 
remarkable site of all is that investigated by Mr A. 
Henderson Bishop + in the island of Oronsay in 1913. 
This small island and its larger northern neighbour, 
Colonsay, lie on the west coast of Scotland, forty-three 
miles from Oban. ‘To reach the island, even now, a stretch, 
of sea ten miles in width has to be crossed, but at the time 
the harpoon people settled on it and heaped the refuse 
of their feasts of shell-fish and of game on the beach the 
sail must have been longer, for in Azilian times the islands 
and the neighbouring mainland stood 30 feet deeper in 
the sea than at present. ‘These ancient people of Oronsay 
hunted deer on the adjacent islands and on the mainland. 
We have evidence at Maglemose and at Oronsay that the 
harpoon people, whom we infer to have been of the 
Nordic stock, were manifesting their inborn aptitude for 
the sea at least as early as the beginning of the Neolithic 
period. 

No skull or trace of the body of the harpoon people 
has been found in the ancient shell-heaps of Oronsay. 
But it is possible that a skull discovered in the M‘Arthur 
cave at Oban in 1894, and described by Sir William 
Turner,” may be of the same stock. The cave had been 
occupied by the harpoon people; ample traces of their 
habitation had been found in a stratum of the floor of 
the cave, 3 feet in depth. The cave was discovered 
accidentally in 1894. ‘The cliff in which it occurs had 
been worked for building stone; an extension of the 
quarry laid open this habitation of ancient man. Its 
original entrance had been closed by a fall of rock from 


1 A. Henderson Bishop, Proc. Soc. Antiquaries of Scotland, 8th December 
LOLS: 
2 Proc. Soc. Antiquaries of Scotland, 1895, vol, xxix. p. 410. 


CONTINENTAL TYPES OF MAN 113 


the face of the cliff—apparently at a remote but uncertain 
date. A skull was found on the floor of the cave—not 
buried in it. Its condition is in favour of its being of 
ancient date. This skull is very similar in form and size 
to that of the man of Obercassel, save that the face is 
narrower and longer, the zygomatic arches and angles of 
the jaws being less prominent. It will thus be seen that 
soon after the close of the Ice age a people probably of 
the Nordic type, and practising a civilisation of the 
Maglemosian type, was scattered on the shores of North- 
Western Europe, from the Baltic to the Hebrides. 


VOLE i: 8 


CHA PH Rasy 1 
ENGLISHMEN OF THE LATER PALAEOLITHIC PERIODS 


In this chapter we again return to England to take up 
the story of ancient man. Our object is to see what 
traces have been discovered of the various cultures 
revealed by the caves of France, and specially to ascer- ~ 
tain what kinds of men lived in England before the 
days of Neolithic man. ‘The scene of our first inquiry is 
again in the south-east corner of England, in the county 
of Kent, and within a few miles of the Megalithic monu- 
ment at Coldrum described in the first chapter. From 
Coldrum, we must follow the Medway northwards as it 
leaves the Weald to enter the valley in the North Downs 
by which it reaches Rochester and Chatham and finally ~ 
ends in the estuary of the Thames (fig. 1). Within this 
valley, and on the western side of the Medway, is the 
busy little town of Halling, robbed somewhat of its 
ancient picturesqueness by the invasion of cement works, 
which throw a pall of smoke, obscuring our view of the 
rising domes of the Downs. Opposite Halling the 
Medway is banked; at high tide the barges with their 
large brown sails seem to float some feet above the level 
of the wide stretch of marshland—half a mile wide— 
which separates Halling from the river. Between Halling 
and the marsh, however, is a natural terrace—8 feet above 
the level of the marsh and 15 feet (4:5 m.) above the 
zero level of the Ordnance Survey (Ordnance datum). 
The terrace follows the margin of the marshy floor of 
the valley as if it represented an ancient bank of the 
Medway, which it probably does. It was in this natural 
114 


PALAZOLITHIC ENGLISHMEN TTS 


terrace, at a depth of 6 feet (1:8 m.), that a human skeleton 
was found—the skeleton of the Halling man. The 
evidence, we shall see, leads us to the conclusion that this 
man belongs to one of the later periods of Paleolithic 
culture. His horizon in time lies in that phase of the 
earth’s history which geologists term the Pleistocene 
epoch. 

The discovery of the skeleton came about in this way. 
In 1912, Halling required a new drainage system, and in 
August of that year, the terrace of brick earth on the 
edge of the marsh was excavated to form a large sewage 
tank. The working face of the trench was 11 feet in 
depth (3:4 m.), exposing nine strata, all laid down in 
running water, the various superimposed layers being 
clearly differentiated. As the men worked, a slip of 
earth occurred from the side of the trench, exposing parts 
of a human skeleton embedded in the fifth stratum from 
the top, and lying 6 feet (1-8 m.) from beneath the 
surface of the terrace. As the fall of earth occurred a 
labourer caught the skull in his hands. The brain space 
was filled with a firm cast of fine loam or brick earth, 
similar to the deposit in which the skeleton lay. By a 
happy chance, part of the skeleton remained embedded 
in its place on the bank. It was also a fortunate circum- 
stance that the scientific study of early man finds a home 
in the valley of the Medway. ‘The engineers in charge 
of the works were alive to the importance of the dis- 
covery, and called in Dr Spencer Edwards and Mr 
W. H. Cook, active members of the Medway Valley 
Scientific Research Society. They proceeded at once 
to investigate and to record all the circumstances con- 
nected with the discovery. They examined the strata 
(fig. 41) overlying the skeleton, and found they were 
unbroken and undisturbed. No one could assert that 
the skeleton had been buried from the present surface 
of the terrace, for the demarcating lines between the 
strata were sharp and unbroken. Dr Edwards observed, 
from the position of the bones which still remained in the 


bank, that the body had been laid on its back, but turned 


116 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


slightly so as to lie on the left arm. Amongst the ribs, 
which had fallen out in a mass of brick earth, lay the 
lower jaw, showing that the head had been bent on the 
breast. ‘The leg bone lay near the shoulder blade, show- 

_ ing that the lower limbs must have been flexed on the 
trunk. ‘The body must have been in the flexed or con- 
tracted posture, for the extreme parts of the skeleton 
were less than 3 feet apart. 


















FE tn. 
Dic Ss 
coe zi BU nt: 
4A DARK RED LOAM 
*6/0-m: 


BUFF COLOURED 
| BRICK EARTH 
"660m: 


2+2 |: 


0-6 BUFF COLOURED SAND 
"HEARTH 2 -150 mm: 
LEVEL“ 


‘| BUFF BRICK EARTH 
- $00 rm: 
1-4 
BUFF BRICK EARTH 
3 -570m: 
t-i = 








BROWN SAND 
+500: 
































BUFF BRICK EARTH 
+300 rm: 











skeleton. The dip in the second stratum, over the skeleton, marks 
the bed of a buried stream. (After W. H. Cook.) 


As they proceeded in their investigation an extremely 
important discovery was made—one which reminds us of 
the buried Palzolithic hearths discovered in the open 
country at Solutré. In another part of the trench, a 
long black stratum was exposed between the deposit in 
which the skeleton lay, the fifth layer, and the overlying 
or fourth deposit (fig. 41). In the black intermediate 
zone, there were unmistakable traces of ancient hearths 
—charcoal, flints splintered by heat—* pot-boilers,” 
chipped flints, worked implements, bones of animals. It 
was clear, from this discovery, that an old land surface 
was represented by the black zone between the fourth 


PALHAOLITHIC ENGLISHMEN T1Z 


and fitth strata. The strata over the black zone were 
unbroken ; the skeleton which lay in the fifth stratum 
was evidently the remains of a man who had lived on the 
old land surface, had sat round the ancient hearths, and 
ultimately had been laid in a superficial grave before the 
upper four strata had been deposited. ‘This was the only 
reasonable explanation of the facts. 

‘The question which then presented itself to Mr Cook ! 
was: How old is that land surface? He collected all 
the flints and animal remains which were to be found on 
it and belowit. The assemblage of implements represent, 
in the opinion of experts—of M. Abbé Breuil, Mr 
Reginald Smith, Mr Reid Moir—a “late cave period,” 
which may mean one anywhere between the Aurignacian 
and Azilian cultures mentioned in the last chapter. 
Further discoveries point definitely to the age of the 
Halling hearths as Aurignacian—the same age as Paviland 
and Cromagnon—and therefore lying well within the 
Pleistocene period. Hence the Halling man must be 
assigned to one of the closing phases of the Ice age. 

It is important, before inquiring into the physical 
appearance of the Halling man, to fix as nearly as possible 
his horizon in time. ‘The flint implements which were 
found in and round the hearths, covering the land 
surface under which he was buried, suggest the Aurignacian 
period. A flint flake with an engraving on its cortex lay 
on the same stratum, but the carvings in bone and in 
ivory, the necklaces x perforated shells and teeth, which 
characterise this period, were not found. If the date is 
such as has been suggested, then in those brick earths of 
the terrace we should find remains of extinct animals, 
such as the mammoth, the woolly rhinoceros, and reindeer. 
The remains of this fauna were not found at the actual 
site of the burial, but they do occur in the same deposits 
on a neighbouring part of the Medway valley.” 


1 In his geological investigations Mr Cook had the help of an expert 
geologist, Mr J. A. Bullbrook. 

2 W. H. Cook, Transactions of the South-Eastern Union of Scientific 
Societies, 1923, p. 67. 


118 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


The corresponding terrace on the opposite or eastern 
side of the Medway valley (fig. 43), a counterpart of the 
Halling terrace, yields abundant remains of Pleistocene 
animals. In the opinion of Mr A. S. Kennard, who 
must be regarded as one of our highest authorities on 
the age and nature of English valley deposits, the brick 
earths of the Halling terrace do belong to the Pleistocene 
period. All the evidence, then, if not definitely proving, 
at least gives us a very high degree of assurance in regard- 
ing Halling man as of the Aurignacian age. 

In our survey of Neolithic man in England, the Tilbury 
skeleton represented the most remote in point of time. 
That skeleton lay 34 feet beneath the submerged marsh 

HIGHER TERRACE 


BRICK EARTH AIGHER TERRACE 3 
ALLUVIUM eh Ti tats 







SLT, 
ha 







R.HMEDWAY 













+ALLING MAN BURIED CHANNEL 
TILBURY MAM 


Tic, 42.—Diagrammatic section across the deposits in the valley of the 
Medway to show the relative position of the Tilbury to the Halling 
skeleton (W. H. Cook). 


surface in the adjoining Thames valley. The Halling 
man lay in a deposit of brick earth which rises 7 feet 
above the level of the marshy floor of the Medway. What 
were the changes which occurred in the neighbouring 
valleys of the Medway and ‘Thames between the times of 
the Tilbury and Halling men? In the first place, we 
must examine, as Mr W. H. Cook and Mr J. A. Bullbrook 
have done, the nature and formation of the Halling 
terrace. We have already seen that there are ateleaes 
nine distinct strata in the terrace. Each of these denotes 
a phase in the action of the Medway—its condition of 
flood, the nature of the débris it was scouring off the 
face of the Weald and depositing on its bank at Halling. 
It is also apparent that in order to have the strata deposited 
one above the other, either the waters of the Medway 


1 See Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., vol. xliv., July 1914. 


_ 


PALHOLITHIC ENGLISHMEN 119 


came down in greater and greater volume, or, as is more 
likely to have been the case, the land was sinking at the 
time the terrace was being formed. ‘There was then in 
operation a process of submergence, with filling up of the 
valley. ‘The subsidence could not have been continuous, 
for under the fourth deposit from the top is the old land 
surface on which Paleolithic man made his hearths. 
Eventually that land surface became covered with 5 feet 
of deposit, and then the formation of the terrace ceased. 
We know why the formation ceased. Under the valley 
of the Medway, recalling the condition seen in the adjoin- 
ing valley of the Thames, is the old buried channel of the 


PLATEAU DRIFT 






LOW TERRACE 
Low TERRACE 











ero 
Ll é Sane 

LI LT 

eee ENA LIE LE 
LLL BLE CEE OLE EL BEE 
















ALLUVIUM of FLINT GRAVEL of 
BURIED CHANNEL BURIED CHANNEL 


Fic, 43.—Section across the Medway valley from west to east, to 
show the position of its various terraces (W. H. Cook). 


river. Its bottom les about 60 feet below the level of 
the Halling terrace. We have seen that it’ was about 
the commencement of the Neolithic period that the land 
reached its highest point of elevation ; it was then that 
the Medway occupied its buried channel. It is thus 
apparent that the formation of the Halling terrace must 
have ceased when the process of elevation set in—the 
process which culminated in the Medway carving out the 
valley to the depth of the buried channel. If Neolithic 
man appeared when the land had reached its highest point 
of elevation, and when the Medway had reached its lowest 
bed, he would have found the Halling terrace, not as we 
see it to-day, only a few feet above the level of the tide, 
but on the sides of the valley, 40 feet or more beyond 
the reach of the greatest floods. ‘Tilbury man did not 


120 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


appear at the point of greatest elevation; submergence 
was well under way—the river valley was being submerged 
and filled up when he was living. Since his day, sub- 
mergence had proceeded, bringing the Halling terrace 
almost back to its original level as regards the river bed. 
Now, it is plain that if we allow five or six thousand years 
for the antiquity of the Tilbury man, we must, if we count 
by the rate of elevation or submergence of the land, allow 
much more than that period to cover the time which 
elapsed between the Halling and the Tilbury men. After 
Halling man was buried, the terrace went on forming ; 
then ensued a period of elevation, during which the 
Medway deepened its valley by 50 feet or more. Then 
the submergence began; at an early phase of the sub- 
mergence, Tilbury man appeared. It seems to me 
that a period of at least eight or ten thousand years 
must be allowed for the Halling-Tilbury interval. Our 
inquiries into the cave formations showed us that the 
depth of the deposits formed during the later Paleolithic 
periods may amount to as much as 60 feet ; we saw, too, 
the succession of various forms of cultures, the extinction 
of many animal species, and a great change in climate. 
But we had no opportunity of forming an estimate of 
time by such means as we find at Halling—the work done 
by rivers, the deepening and the filling up of valleys. I 
do not see, when we take all these considerations into 
account, that we can allow less than twelve or fifteen 
thousand years as the age of the Halling skeleton. Such 
an estimate is in keeping with the antiquity usually 
assigned to the Aurignacian culture. 

We now turn to ascertain what kind of man lived so 
long ago in the Medway valley. We have seen .what 
the Aurignacian men of the Continent were like—the tall, 
lank, rather negroid Cromagnon people, the robust, large- 
headed Briinn type, the river-bed type of Engis, the 
Nordic type at Obercassel, and the round heads of 
Solutré and Ofnet. At Halling, we again meet with 
the river-bed type of skull. In fig. 44, this skull is placed 


within a standard frame, designed to fit the average-sized 


PALZOLITHIC ENGLISHMEN 121 


head of to-day. It is seen to fit the Halling skull very 
closely. The length of the skull is 187 mm.—3 

short of the conventional standard ; the width is 142 mm., 
being 75 per cent. of the length ; the height of the vault 
above the ear-holes is 124 mm.—nearly 9 mm. above the 
mean amount for males.! The size of the brain was, as 
is so often the case in Paleolithic races, above the modern 
average—the cranial capacity in this case being 1500 c.c. 
The measurements cannot be regarded as exact, for, 


EALLINCG 





Fic. 44.—The Halling skull viewed from the side and from above. The 
suture across the skull—the coronal suture—is anomalous in its 
forward projection. 


although the cavity of the skull was filled with a solid 
cast of brick earth, yet all the bones were much broken, 
and, in the replacement of fragments, some degree of 
error may have crept into the reconstruction. ‘There is 
not a single feature of the skull which one can say is 
primitive or ape-like. The forehead is well formed, of 
average size, with supra-orbital ridges moderately de- 
veloped. The areas for the muscles of mastication are 
not larger than in modern skulls. The bones which 
enclose the brain cavity, often 8 or 10 mm. thick in 


1 For full account of skeleton, see Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., vol. 
xliv., July 1914. 


122 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


ancient skulls, are in the vault of this specimen only 
4 to 5 mm. thick—in reality thin bones. ‘The mastoid 
processes and other areas of the skull to which the muscles 
of the neck are attached do not differ in any point from 
those seen in modern races. Indeed, were it not for the 
evidence of the strata in which the skeleton lay and the 
hearths which were superimposed, and particularly the 
condition of the bones themselves, one would not have 
suspected that this was the skull of a man who lived many 
thousands of years ago. ‘The bones when originally found 
were soft; when dried they became hard, porcellanous, 
and brown in colour. Now they have become of a 
light, stone-grey colour, with absolutely no animal 
matter left in them. When placed in dilute hydro- 
chloric acid, they crumble into a fine, grey sediment. 

Of the face, no clear picture can be drawn. All the 
bones between the lower jaw and the forehead had 
become dissolved away in the brick earth. ‘The 
dimensions of the lower jaw suggest a face of moderate 
length, contracted at its lower part, especially at the 
jowls or angles of the mandible, in front of and below 
the ears. The chin is moderately developed, narrow 
and peaked in shape; the height of the mandible at 
the symphysis is 30 mm., its thickness, 14 mm.—both 
moderate dimensions. ‘The width between the angles of 
the jaw was 96 mm.; the bicondylar width, 120 mm.— 
measurements which the expert anatomist will recognise 
as moderate for even present-day men. ‘The zygomatic 
or cheek arches were broken, but the total width of the 
face could not have appreciably exceeded the modern 
average. 

The characters of the skull and skeleton leave no 
doubt as to the sex: the skeleton was that of a man, and 
from the condition of the sutures between the bones of 
the skull—all of which were open—a man not over forty 
years of age, probably considerably under. For a man 
of this age the teeth were in a surprisingly bad condition. 
They were deeply worn; the enamel had disappeared by 
wear from the chewing surfaces of the crowns, exposing 


PALAOLITHIC ENGLISHMEN 123 


the dentine, and, in some cases, the pulp cavities. Of 
the six molar teeth of the lower jaw, five had been lost 
from disease—not from caries, but from abscesses or 
gumboils forming at their roots. One of the premolar 
teeth had also perished before death ; the incisors, canine, 
and premolars, some of which had fallen out after death, 
were much worn. ‘The food of the Halling man was 
rough in nature, and he had suffered severely from dental 
disease. It was possible to estimate the size of his palate. 
It was rather shorter and wider than is common in 
modern Englishmen. A feature altogether unexpected 
in a primitive jaw is the position of the third molar or 
wisdom tooth. It springs, as may be seen from fig. 44, 
not from the body of the jaw, but from the root of the 
ascending branch of the mandible, indicating that there 
was insufficient growth in the jaw to provide accommoda- 
tion for the last tooth to come into its proper position. 
As regards the dimensions of the teeth, such of them as 
have been preserved, there is no point in size or form 
which differentiates them from the teeth of modern 
British people. ‘The criticism may be made that such a 
skull is of no intrinsic interest because it shows no new 
or primitive feature. On the contrary, the discovery 
is of the greatest interest; it shows how steadfastly 
human characters are transmitted from generation to 
generation. If we accept the degree of antiquity I 
have presumed—some fifteen thousand years—and allow 
forty generations to each thousand years, then we see 
that racial characters can be transmitted for six hundred 
generations, and still retain their essential features almost 
unchanged. 

Mention has been made already of the broken condition 
of the bones of the skull. The bones of the skeleton, in 
spite of the greatest care, could not be reconstructed with 
absolute accuracy. ‘The shafts of the long bones, which 
are always dense and compact in structure, were preserved, 
but the spongy texture at their extremities had become 
reduced to dust. ‘The thigh bones were fairly complete. 
Their total length was approximately 435 mm. Applying 


124 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the formula used by Professor Pearson for calculating the 
stature of the individual from the length of the thigh 
bone, we estimate the height of the Halling man at 
1630 mm. (5 feet 4 inches)—somewhat under medium 
height. His collar bones were also short, 130 mm., but 
stout, indicating a man with a narrow, round chest. The 
ribs were broad and strong. Clearly the Halling man 
was not of the tall, Cromagnon breed. His low stature 
agrees with that of the Neolithic river-bed people. Yet 
he differed from them in certain features. In Neolithic 
skeletons, the upper extremity of the thigh bone usually 
shows a marked degree of flattening from front to back. 
In the Halling thigh bone, as is the case in many conti- 
nental skeletons of a Paleolithic date, this feature 1s 
absent.! The thigh bone in this respect is also like that 
of modern man. ‘The head of the thigh bone of the 
Halling man is very massive—52 mm. in diameter, an 
excessive amount when one considers the shortness of the 
bone. His tibia does not show the compression or 
flattening from side to side which appears in races of 
Neolithic and later times. In this respect also, the tibia 
approaches more nearly to that of modern man. We 
have seen, too, that in the proportion of the limbs the 
Cromagnon type resembled negro races, the tibia being 
very long when contrasted with the femur, and the radius 
long when compared with the humerus. Unfortunately, 
the extremities of nearly all the long bones were deficient 
in the Halling skeleton, precluding an exact estimate of 
their lengths, but one can be certain that these negroid 
features were not present—at least not in the marked 
negroid degree found in the Cromagnon men of the 
Aurignacian period. 

One very anomalous and puzzling feature was found 
in the vault of the skull (see fig. 44). The coronal 
suture which crosses the vault between the frontal and 
parietal bones bends towards the forehead as it approaches 
the middle line of the vault. So anomalous is the con- 


1 Details of measurements will be found in the Journ. Roy. Anthrop. 
Instit., vol. xliv., July 1914. 


PALAOLITHIC ENGLISHMEN 125 


dition that, at first, it seemed most likely to arise from an 
error in reconstruction. A full investigation excluded 
such an explanation. In one of the Neolithic skulls 
found at Coldrum, a large Wormian bone was inter- 
polated in the same part of the vault (see fig. 4, p. 10). 
In the Halling skull, the irregularity may arise from the 
presence of such a bone, which has become joined to the 
left parietal bone. It is a remarkable circumstance that 
one should find two ancient skulls from neighbouring 
localities showing such a very uncommon form of 
abnormality. 

When we sum up the lesson to be learned from the 
discovery at Halling, it falls under two heads. First, 
that at this early date the river-bed type of man was 
already in England. We have seen that Dr Schmerling 
had discovered this type in the Engis cave with the 
remains of extinct animals and the culture which charac- 
terises the Aurignacian age. ‘The inference we draw from 
the discovery at Halling is that a human type may be 
transmitted over a long period of time and remain almost 
unchanged as regards size of brain and cranial characters. 

But there is a much more important lesson to be 
learned, namely, that there probably still remain many 
untouched and undiscovered records of Paleolithic man 
in England, similar in nature to the hearths and skeleton 
discovered at Halling. Hitherto, we have sought for 
traces of Paleolithic man in caves; we hardly expected 
to read his history in the open country, in exposed valleys 
and in submerged land surfaces. Near Hastings, on the 
south coast of Sussex, not more than fifty miles from 
Halling, Mr Lewis Abbott discovered work-floors of 
Magdalenian date. Before the Halling discovery had 
been made, Mr J. Reid Moir had discovered and described 
a true Aurignacian floor, marked by hearths and charac- 
teristic flints, in a valley to the north of Ipswich, in 
Suffolk. Almost at the same time, Dr Allen Sturge dis- 
covered a similar floor in another part of Suffolk, near 
Mildenhall. More recently, Mr Reginald Smith, of the 
British Museum, has described a series of Aurignacian 


126 THE ANTIOUITY OF MAN 


floors found in England—all of them buried under sandy 
(loess) deposits. We see, then, that it is possible that there 
may still be found under or near those ancient hearths 
remains of men who were living in England during the 
later phases of the glacial age. Within a year of his first 
discovery, Mr Reid Moir found another Paleolithic floor 
—in the excavations for the foundations of a house in one 
of the streets of Ipswich. ‘The flints were of a more recent 
period than the Aurignacian, namely, the Magdalenian. 


1 See Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., vol. xliv., July 1914. 


CHAR TE hwy 1 


FURTHER EXAMPLES OF LATER PAL/EOLITHIC MEN 
IN ENGLAND 


In our pursuit of Englishmen of the later Palzolithic 
phases of culture, we now pass to the very centre of 
England—to the eastern strip of the county of Derby 
which is crossed by the direct railway route from Mans- 
field, in the neighbouring county of Notts, to Sheffield, 
in the adjoining county of York to the north. Crags of 
magnesian limestone crop up in the eastern part of Derby- 
shire and streams pass eastwards to join the Trent. ‘The 
eye of the passenger, as he journeys to Sheffield through 
this part of Derbyshire, is certain to catch the picturesque 
outlines of the Cresswell Crags, famous for their caves. 
Between 1873 and 1875, the Rev. J. Magens Mello 4 
and Sir W. Boyd Dawkins explored the strata of those 
caves, and found, not only the remains of the various 
extinct animals which characterise the later Paleolithic 
periods, but also—the first discovered in England—one 
of those remarkable engravings on bone which give the 
cultures of the continental caves a high place in the 
estimation of artists. “The carving found represents the 
head of a horse worked in the style of the cave men— 
probably of Magdalenian date. ‘They also found flints 
worked in the same manner as the implements at Solutré. 
The discoveries at Cresswell Crags showed that the 
cultures of the late cave periods existed in England as 
well as France. ‘The cave which is to give us the evidence 

1 Quart. Fourn. Geol. Soc., vols. xxxi. p. 679, XXXii. p. 240, XXXlil. p. 579, 
and xxxv. p. 724. 

127 


128 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of which we are in search—the kind of man who lived 
in England during the Aurignacian period—is near a 
station short of the Cresswell Crags, three miles to the 
south of them, the station of Langwith. A little way 
to the east of the station lies the church and rectory of 
Langwith Bassett. Behind the clump of trees which 
surrounds the church and rectory runs a brook, the 
Poulter, flowing eastwards along a narrow valley. The 
rector, the Rev. E. H. Mullins, is an accomplished 
geologist. He had lived many years in the parish before 
he discovered that in the little valley, just behind the, 
rectory, lay a buried cave rich in records of Palzolithic 
date. The discovery came about in this way. In the 
autumn of 1903 his son, Mr A. F. Mullins, then a Cam- 
bridge undergraduate, along with two college friends, 
was seeking a subterranean passage which tradition said 
existed between the valley and the church. ‘They began 
to explore an old fox’s earth which was hid amongst 
nettles and weeds on the side of the valley, just under a 
projecting outcrop of limestone rock and a little distance 
above the northern side of the stream—the Poulter. 
Forcing their way in on hands and knees, they discovered 
that the cavity widened and led, by spaces they could 
just squeeze their bodies through, to other passages and 
expansions. It was then that it dawned on Mr Mullins 
that they had discovered a buried or filled-up cave which 
might yield similar treasures to those revealed by the 
neighbouring caves in the Cresswell Crags years before. 
The household of the rectory began a systematic and 
laborious exploration of the cave—extending over a 
number of years from 1903 onwards. The net result of 
their labours,t I have represented diagrammatically in 
fig. 45. It will be seen that the cave had become filled 
almost to the roof, the deposit on the floor amounting 
in depth to about 12 feet (3-6 m.). When the entrance’ 
and the first or central chamber (about 13 feet in dia- 
meter) were cleared, the original floor of the cave was 


1 See account by Mr Mullins, Derbyshire Archeological and Natural 
History Society’s Fournal, 1913, p. 1. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 129 


found to be about 8 feet above the stream which flows 
past the entrance—the level of the stream at this point 
being 300 feet above Ordnance datum. In the deposit 
which filled the cave, Mr Mullins recognised three 
horizons, the upper horizon fading into the middle, and 
the middle into the lower zone. The upper horizon, 
about 3 feet in depth, made up of loam similar to that 
forming the surface soil of neighbouring fields, yielded 
remains of modern small animals. The middle horizon, 
varying from 5 to 6 feet in depth, made up of the same 









CENTRAL CHAMBER 
FORMER ENTRANCE 


Peat Mh = SHULL 









Sek Ne ANSP --HEARTHS 
FE = pas re ae 
MME VO MMO BR.POULTE 
HORIZON . “KU Tee 
Bece las MIDDLE HORIZON MM 
Saoikt 


LOWER HORIZON 
Zant 


Fic. 45.—A diagrammatic section to show the horizons Mr Mullins 
recognised in the cave earth at Langwith. 


material as the upper horizon, was studded with blocks 
and chips of limestone, often partially cemented together. 
No layer of stalagmite was seen either above or below 
the middle horizon. The middle stratum yielded abun- 
dant remains of extinct animals, such as characterise the 
later phases of Paleolithic culture. In this stratum, 
near the entrance, at a depth of 2 feet, was found the 
radius of a woolly rhinoceros; in the same stratum of 
the central chamber, the humerus of a cave-bear which 
had been gnawed by a cave-hyena. The lower or bottom 
stratum, made up of a sandy loam, and varying in thickness 
from 2 to 3 feet, yielded abundant evidence of man’s 
occupation. As will be seen from fig. 45, the bottom 
layer of the central chamber extended through the 
VOL. 1, 9 


130 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


entrance towards the present bank of the stream. ‘The 
remains of ancient hearths and floors occurred at all 
levels of the bottom stratum, in the central chamber, at 
the entrance, and on the old terrace in front of the 
entrance. Calcined stones, ‘‘ pot-boilers,” and numerous 
worked flints and a bone pin occurred at this horizon. 
So did the remains of extinct animals—the woolly 
rhinoceros, the cave-bear, brown bear, the reindeer, the 
urus (Bos primigenius), the lemming, the Arctic hare, and 
many other members of a fauna indicating a colder 
climate than the present. Mr Mullins had the advantage, 
of expert advice from Mr E.~I.- Newton, Mr Asie 
Hinton, and Mr A. S. Kennard in identifying the fauna 
yielded by the Langwith cave—a fauna represented by 
sixty different species. As to the flint implements there 
can be no doubt; they represent the culture of the 
Aurignacian, and probably also of the Magdalenian 
period. ‘The remains of the extinct animals found with 
the flints and hearths in the bottom stratum are those 
which usually occur in cave deposits of the Aurignacian 
culture. There can, therefore, be no hesitation in re- 
garding all that lay in the deepest stratum of the Lang- 
with cave as belonging, not to our modern period, but 
to the Pleistocene epoch. 

The following account of the discovery of the remains 
of the man himself, in the deepest stratum, is given in 
Mr Mullins’ own words :—1 


“On the left-hand side of the entrance and g or 
10 feet down, quite close to the floor, and also on 
the side wall of the cave, under what seemed to be 
a natural arch, formed by a fall of the roof in an 
early age (but there is no sign of any such fall in 
the present roof), we found the Langwith skull. 
There were no signs of other bones along with it, 
but it was clear that the skull could not have been 
interred in any historic time by man’s agency. 

How did the rock arch fall after the skull was there ? 


1 Letter to the Author, 12th October 1909. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 131 


How did 9g to Io feet of stone blocks, chips, Pleisto- 
cene bones, sand, clay, etc., completely fill up the 
space near this skull ? ” 


From what we have seen at Solutré, in the caves of 
Mentone and Engis, at Halling and at Paviland, we are 
not surprised to find a skull buried beneath or near the 
hearths of Aurignacian man. We also see the most 
likely explanation of the arch of stones over the skull ; 
it appears to represent part of the grave. At Paviland 
and in the Grimaldi caves, Aurignacian man protected 
the head of the dead by an arrangement of stones. But 
where is the rest of the skeleton? Only the brain case 
of the skull remains—the face, the teeth, and the jaws are 
gone. Parts of the backbone were found—two vertebre 
from the dorsal region; some joints of the fingers were 
recovered in the neighbourhood, but not a trace of the 
long bones of the limbs. We have seen, however, that 
at certain periods hyenas frequented the cave, and their 
presence may explain the disturbed and dismembered 
skeleton. A fragment of the skull of a young child was 
also obtained in the bottom stratum. 

For three reasons, I failed at first to recognise the im- 
portance of the discovery Mr Mullins had made. The 

/skull he put into my hands gave us, for the first time, 
_ positive evidence as to the kind of man living in England 
during the period of Aurignacian culture. My reasons 
or prejudices fell under three heads. The skull seemed 
but a somewhat aberrant form of the specimen found in 
~ the old deposits of the Trent at Muskham—only thirty 
miles to the east of Langwith. The Trent skull is the 
standard example of the river-bed type. I then shared 
the prevalent belief that the river-bed type of skull was 
characteristic of the Neolithic period, and that when we 
passed into that indefinite hinterland of time, known as 
the Pleistocene and characterised by Paleolithic forms of 
culture, we should certainly find a very different type of 
man. Many animals of that time had become extinct ; 
it was probable that Palzolithic races of men shared their 


132 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


fate. Hence I kept searching for evidence which would 
justify me in assigning the Langwith skull to the Neolithic 
period. In the second place, I failed to perceive how 
completely Mr Mullins had proved that the skull was 
contemporaneous with the deepest horizon and that the 
culture of that horizon was truly Paleolithic. My third 
prejudice related to the condition of the skull; it was 
brown in colour, dense and heavy, but so fresh in its 
composition that I could not think it to be really ancient. 
The following note (27th February 1911) from Mr 
Mullins will explain how my doubts on this head were\ 
removed. I made a careful examination, and also records 
of the skull, and returned it to the discoverer, expressing 
my doubts as to its antiquity. Mr Mullins sent the skull 
back to me accompanied by bones of the bison, cave-bear, 
woolly rhinoceros, reindeer, and a bone awl, with the 
accompanying information: “These are sent for Dr 
Keith to note their state of preservation. ‘They all come 
from the same side of the cave and the same horizon, 
except the bone awl, which I believe came from the north- 
west passage of the cave—upper horizon.” 

I had, therefore, to abandon the belief that people 
with heads of the river-bed type did not transcend the 
Neolithic period. Langwith cave revealed the fact that 
this type goes far back into Paleolithic times. ‘The type 
is infinitely older than we had originally supposed. The 
discovery made by Dr Schmerling revealed this river-bed 
type in a cave of Aurignacian date in Belgium. The 
discovery at Halling was not made until 1912. At Pavi- 
land, the skull of the Aurignacian skeleton was not found. 
Here, then, we have the most positive evidence of the 
persistence of certain human types. Skulls of the Lang- 
with type are still quite common among the English 
people of to-day ; they were also in evidence in England 
of the Aurignacian period, some seventeen thousand years 
ago or more. 

The characters of the skull do not require minute de- 
scription. In fig. 46, the skull is set in the conventional 
frame of lines and viewed from the side and the front. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 133 


In fig. 47, it is represented from above and compared 
with the Trent (Neolithic) skull. The brain capacity is 


190 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 O 











LANGWITH 





60 


Fic. 46.—The Langwith skull viewed from the side and from the front. 


low; when measured by filling the cavity of the skull 
with millet seed, the size of the brain is found to be only 


180 




































































































































































































































































LANGWITH SEEN Ty 


Fic. 47.—The upper aspect of the Langwith skull contrasted with the 
Trent skull of Neolithic date. 


1250 c.c.—about 230 c.c. under the modern average. 
In this respect it differs from most skulls of the 
Paleolithic period, which are commonly above the 
modern standard. But, if small, the skull shows no 


134 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


feature which we can call low or primitive, except that, 
as is so often the case in the skulls of Australian natives, 
the brain chamber gives one the impression of being 
imperfectly filled—the sides are flat, approximate as they 
ascend, and the vault rises almost to a keel. Neverthe- 
less, it is a strongly modelled skull, of a man aged between 
forty and fifty years—so we infer from the partly closed 
condition of the sutures between the several bones of 
the vault. Very probably the man was of small stature 
and of slight make, as is usually the case in races with 
the river-bed type of skull. The maximum length of 
the skull is 192 mm., 180 mm. of that measurement being 
due to length of brain, the rest to thickness of bone in 
the frontal and occipital walls. The maximum width, 
just above and behind the ear-holes, is 135 mm., the width 
being 70 per cent. of the length—a narrow skull. The 
height of the vault above the ear-holes, 113 mm.—a small 
amount, especially when one remembers the bone along 
the vault is much thicker (9 mm.) than in most modern 
skulls (5-6 mm.). Another measurement indicating the 
total height of the skull (basi-bregmatic) is 127 mm.— 
alsc a low amount. ‘The distance between the orbits— 
at the root of the nose—is, as in modern British skulls, 
24mm. ‘The eyebrow ridges are pronounced, the frontal 
air sinuses large. ‘The difference between the minimum 
width of the forehead (95 mm.) and the maximum width 
(110 mm.), which is measured between the extremities of 
the supra-orbital ridges, is considerable (15 mm.), certainly 
a primitive character. ‘The temporal muscles of mastica- 
tion are rather larger than usual. At least the lines which 
mark the upper limit of the attachment of those muscles 
are placed, as is often the case in small modern skulls, 
unusually far above the zygomatic or cheek arches. In 
the Langwith skull these lines are situated Ioo mm. 
above the zygomatic arches, and only 48 mm. from the 
middle line along the roof of the skull. As is usual in 
this type of skull, the occiput projects backwards as a 
boss or cap. ‘The area differentiated for the attachment 
of the neck is of moderate dimensions, and the width of 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 135 


the neck behind the ears, the bimastoid width, is 120 
mm. ‘The width of the face (bizygomatic diameter) was 
about 130 mm. It is a small-headed man we have to 
picture in the Langwith cave, but one not showing any 
markedly low or primitive character. 

To continue our survey of the remains of late Palzo- 
lithic man in England, we now move from the centre to 
the south-west of England—to that part of the county 
of Somerset which bounds the eastern shore of the Bristol 























Fic. 48.—A sketch map of the Mendips, showing the position of Wookey 
Hole, Cheddar Cave, Burrington Combe, and Aveline’s Hole. 


Channel. Here a range of carboniferous limestone hills 
—the Mendips—run from east to west (fig. 48). Along 
their southern base flows the Axe, making a westward 
course through a marshy, flat strip of country. Near 
the cathedral town of Wells, only sixteen miles 
distant from the Bristol Channel, the Axe issues from a 
cave in a southern cliff of the Mendips. Close by is the 
famous hyena cave—Wookey Hole—first explored by Sir 
William Boyd Dawkins in 1859, the year before Lartet 
examined the cave at Aurignac. In that year, and in 
the following, he discovered in the buried floor of the cave 
the hearths, the flints, the bone implements, and the 


136 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


extinct animals which Lartet found in the cave at Aurignac 
—only more abundantly ; he found no human remains. 
Sir William arrived at the same conclusion as Lartet, 
namely, that man must have existed as a contemporary 
of the extinct Pleistocene animals. ‘The veteran pioneer 
of “Cave Hunting” + has lived to see a revolution in 
our attitude towards the question of man’s antiquity. 
A passage he wrote in 1860 will show that the truth he 
contended for then is now admitted by all. “It is 
certain that man was contemporary in the district with 
the hyena and the animals on which it preyed, and the 
fact that the ancient implements were found only on 
one spot implies that they were deposited by the hand of 
man. ‘l’o suppose that a savage would take the trouble 
to excavate a trench 24 feet long with miserable imple- 
ments and consequently with great labour, and, having 
excavated it, again to fill it up to the very roof, is little 
less than absurd.” With every word of hice I am 
sure, the reader will agree. Nor will he more easily 
believe that Neolithic man would take the labour to cut 
through the thick stalagmitic floors of such caves to 
bury his dead in a stratum with extinct animals and 
Paleolithic flints, and take pains to cover up the 
date of his deed in order to deceive his cave-hunting 
descendants. 

No human remains were found at Wookey Hole. To 
reach the cave which disclosed the remains of Paleolithic 
man himself, we have to follow the Axe along the 
southern foot of the Mendips, until it guides us to the 
village of Cheddar, half-way between Wells and the coast 
(fig. 48). ‘The caves at Cheddar have been famous for a 
long time, and, with the museum attached to them, form 
a popular resort for summer visitors. ‘The proprietor, 
Mr R. C. Gough, began the excavation of a “ new ” cave 
in 1892. In the débris at the entrance were found, as at 
Wookey Hole, traces of all the cultures which succeeded 
the Neolithic period. The floor of the cave had the 
usual structure—a superficial stratum of recent deposit 

1 Cave Hunting, Macmillan & Co., 1874. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 127, 


2 to 4 feet thick. Then followed a layer of stalagmite, 
5 to 12 inches (10 to 25 cm.) thick (fig. 49). Beneath the 
stalagmite lay a stratum of red cave earth, 6 to 8 feet in 
depth, containing abundant remains of extinct Pleistocene 
animals. ‘There were also found the hearths, the flint and 
bone work of, not the Aurignacian, but—as Mr H. N. 
Davies was the first to recognise—a later Paleolithic 
period, the Magdalenian, the culture found in its re- 
presentative form in the station of La Madeleine in the 
ravine of the lower Vézére, France. 








BLACK EARTH 


6 inches 
UPPER STALAGMITE 
5 inches 


CAVE EARTH 


3h feet 


LOWER s TALAGMITE 
6 inches 


s SANO & PEBBLES 


ROCK 


CHEDDAR CAVE—-RECESS 


Fic. 49.—Section of the strata in the recess of the 
cave in which the Cheddar skeleton was found. 


In December 1903, Mr Gough, to secure better 
drainage for the central chamber of the cave, began to 
open up a side recess or fissure. It was filled with the 
usual red cave earth and capped by a layer of stalagmite. 
Under the stalagmite, and embedded in the cave earth 
to a depth of 1% feet (0-450 m.), he exposed a human 
skeleton, lying back down, and the thighs partly drawn 
upwards, as if it had been placed in the partially con- 
tracted posture (fig. 49). The skeleton was seen and 
examined by Mr H. N. Davies, and all the facts relating 
to the discovery were collected and placed on record 
by him.t Subsequently, these remains were more fully 


1H. N. Davies, Quart. Fourn. Geol. Soc., 1904, vol. lx. p. 335. 


138 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


examined by Professor Parsons. In all its characters, 
the skull falls into the river-bed group. Its length is 
196 mm.; its width, 138 mm., is 70-4 per cent of the 
length; the height of the bregma above the ear passages 
is 115 mm., but the highest point of the vault rises to 
122mm. ‘The brain capacity is estimated to be approxi- 
mately 1450 c.c. It is thus 200 c.c. larger than the 
Langwith skull, and resembles that specimen in several 
of its features, but is less primitive, the brain bulging its 
sides and giving a steep contour to the forehead. ‘The 
vault in both is g mm. thick. The face, however, 1s' 
preserved in the Cheddar specimen, but it shows no 
exceptional feature. The thigh bone is 435 mm. long, 
from which we infer that the Cheddar man was of low 
stature—about 1620 mm. (5 feet 4 inches). ‘The leg 
bone (tibia) shows the side-to-side flattening seen in 
Neolithic races—less commonly in races of Palzolithic 
date. ‘Thus we see, so far as the evidence will take us 
at present, that a people with the river-bed type of head 
inhabited England from the Aurignacian period onwards. 

‘The Cheddar cave lies in a gorge on the southern flanks 
of the Mendips. On the opposite or northern side, little 
more than three miles distant, a ravine or combe, known 
as Burrington Combe, cuts into the strata of mountain 
limestone (fig. 48). ‘This combe, as recent discoveries 
have proved, was also a haunt of Paleolithic man. ‘The 
traveller on entering the mouth or north end of the 
combe, and following the road which leads upwards, along 
its bottom, has on his left a steep, grey, seamed limestone 
cliff, which ascends 150 feet above him. A little way 
along this road the arched mouth of Aveline’s Hole is 
seen to open at the foot of the cliff. “The mouth, although 
a little below the level of the roadway, and, therefore, 
subject to flooding, is almost 300 feet above the level of 


1 Reports of Seventeenth Internat. Med. Congress, 1914, Section I., Part 
IL., p. 91. Professors C. G. Seligman and F. G. Parsons contributed a 
paper on the Cheddar man and his civilisation which appeared in the 
Journ. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1914, vol. xliv. p. 241. The measure- 
ments in the text are those given by Professor Parsons. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 139 


the Bristol Channel, fully ten miles to the west. The 
opening leads into a spacious cave which strikes inwards 
for a distance of 130 feet, and also sinks a little as it goes ; 
its vaulted roof is 10 feet high; but it is narrow—only 
about 12 feet wide. In the floor we find, just as at 
Cheddar, an upper stalagmitic stratum, about a foot in 
thickness, and under this hard and resistant crust, 3 or 4 
feet of red cave earth. It was in this red cave earth and 
in the stalagmitic stratum over it, at a distance of 75 feet 





CHEDDAR MAN. 


Fic. 50.—Profile and vertex of the skull of the Cheddar man. Oriented 
on the sub-cerebral plane. Stalagmitic material still covers the 
maxillary part of the face. 


from the entrance, that there was made a very important 
discovery of early inhabitants of England. 

As in the case of the famous French cave at Aurignac, 
the discovery of Aveline’s Hole was the result of a happy 
accident. ‘Towards the close of the eighteenth century 
two youths were chasing a rabbit in Burrington Combe 
when it escaped into a hole at the foot of the cliffs. They 
dug into the burrow and found themselves at the mouth 
of a cave—now known as Aveline’s Hole. When the 
rubble wall at the entrance was broken down the cave 
was found to contain skulls and bones of some fifty people ; 
for this cave, like that at Aurignac, had been used as a 
burial place by the people who lived in the district during 


140 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 
the Neolithic period. The skulls and skeletons dis- 


appeared, and the cave fell into neglect, until quite 
recently, when the University of Bristol in the flush of 
its youth took the cave under its charge. Just before the 
war, led by their Professor of Anatomy, Dr Edward 
Fawcett, the students of this University formed a Society 
for the exploration of neighbouring caves, and in 1914 
commenced work in the floor of Aveline’s Hole.1 After 
the war they returned, and by 1922 were in the position 
to supply a page or two for a chapter which deals with 
the period of the Transitional or Azilian culture, when 
the old Stone age was coming to an end and when tem- 
perate conditions were shifting the ice-sheet in its final 
retreat to the north. In the cave earth were found 
double-barbed harpoons worked from the antlers of the 
stag, and small and finely worked flints belonging to that 


Paleolithic culture named Tardenoisian, after Fére-en- | 


Tardenois, a village on the Ourcg, twenty-five miles to 
the west of Rheims (fig. 37, p. 105). There were remains 
of a large-antlered stag, of the reindeer, brown bear, 
lemming, and of other animals belonging to the closing 
phase of the Pleistocene period. On the moderate 
chronological scale followed in this work, Paleolithic man 
was living in Aveline’s Hole and hunting his game among 
the combes of the Mendips somewhere between 8000 
and I0,000 B.c. 

What sort of men were they? Parts of eleven indi- 
viduals—of children as well as of adults—were found, 
but only three skulls are sufficiently complete to give a 
sure indication of the form and size of head. One of 
them, skull “A,” represented in fig. 51, was embedded in 
the upper stratum of stalagmite. Its dimensions, it will 
be observed, are very similar to those of the Cheddar 

1 A full account of the exploration of this Society—the Speleological 
Society of the University of Bristol—will be found in its published 
Proceedings, vol. i. No. 1, 1919-1920; No. 2, 1920-1921; No. 3, 192I- 
1922; No. 4, 1923-1924. A full account of the Archeology of the 
cave will be found in No. 3, by Mr J. A. Davies, who regards the 
culture of Aveline’s Hole as Aurignacian, and of the Human Remains 
in Nos. 1, 2, and 4, by Professor E. Fawcett and Sir A. Keith. 


~ 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 141 


skull. Both are a little longer, a little narrower, and a 
little higher than the form of skull now prevalent in 
England, but is it not remarkable that we should find at 
so early a date a.form of skull which approximates so 
closely to the British type? Skull “ A” has a length of 
192 mm., a width of 138 mm.; the width is 72 per cent. 
of the length; the vault rises 116 mm. above the ear 
passages ; its capacity is 1450 c.c., slightly under the 
modern average. Neither this skull nor the two others 





fi " 
hi 

Ht 
bY 


= 


at 


NW, 
HY j Hf 
yy 





Fic. 51.—Profile and vertex of skull “A,” from Aveline’s Hole. The 
profile is represented on the sub-cerebral plane; the vertex on the 
Frankfort plane. 


are thick-walled ; along the roof the thickness varies from 
6to8mm. Unfortunately the face, which is so valuable 
in guiding us in our search for racial affinities, is here 
almost completely missing. Only the cheek bone and the 
zygomatic arch of one side are present. ‘The cheek bones 
were prominent, high, and welled forwards on the face. 
The zygomatic arches, on the sides of the face, were 
strong and well apart; the bizygomatic width was at 
least 140 mm.—Io mm. more than is usual amongst 
modern Englishmen. It will be noticed, too, how promi- 
nent is the upper part of the forehead ; it recedes as it 
descends to the mildly developed supra-orbital ridges. 
There are none of the robust features which mark the 


142 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


skulls of men belonging to a primitive type. The sexual 
characters are not well marked, but, taking all the features 
into consideration, I am of opinion that it is the skull of 
a man who at the time of death was in his fifth or sixth 
decade. 

Skulls ““ B” and ‘‘ C” from Aveline’s Hole, imperfect 
although they be, are particularly worthy of close study. 
We have seen that in the skulls of the Aurignacian period 
which were discovered at Solutré (p. 92) the width 
represented almost 80 per cent. of their length. At 
Ofnet, in a stratum of the same age as that represented, 

















Fic. 52.—Profiles of skulls ““ B’’ and “C’”’ from Aveline’s Hole, 
oriented on the sub-cerebral plane. 


at Aveline’s Hole, we found people who were distinctly 
round-headed mixed with others who had long heads ; 
there were some, too, of an intermediate shape. ‘Thus 
we see that the wave of round-headedness, or brachy- 
cephalism, which was ultimately to impress itself on the 
greater part of the population of Europe, and which, 
apparently, commenced in the East, was making its way 
across the Continent in Paleolithic times. We had no 
reason to believe that it reached Britain at this early date. 
The discovery of Aveline’s Hole, however, now assures us 
that this Paleolithic wave also reached the west of Eng- 
land, for skulls “‘ B”’ and “‘ C”’ have a breadth index of 80. 
These two skulls, imperfect in base and face, have almost 
the same length, 178 mm.; they are short skulls, and 
their width is only moderate—142 mm., as near as one 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 143 


may judge. One of them, “ B,” has the female markings ; 
the other, “‘ C,” those of the male. In both, the vaults 
of the skull are particularly lofty, as if the brain had 
expanded more than usual in an upward direction, thus 
increasing the height of the skull at the expense of its 
length. In “C,” the vault rises 124 mm. above the ear 
passages ; in both, it rises 108 mm. above the sub-cerebral 
plane. Round-headedness occurs in several forms, and 
when we search for the kind met with in these two skulls 
from Aveline’s Hole, it is to the type found at Solutré 
and to the modified variety which is represented by the 
Chancelade skull (p. 83) that we can trace the nearest 
affinity. It must not be thought that because skull “ A” 
has a head width of 72 per cent., while the width in “ B”’ 
and “‘ C”’ is 80 per cent., that two different races of man- 
kind are represented in Aveline’s Hole. A close com- 
parison of their various features shows that all three may 
very well have been members of the same blood-com- 
munity. Only in “B” and “C” some foreign element 
or strain has become manifest. We should remember 
that the introduction of a small leaven of a ‘‘ dominant ” 
character, such as is represented by round-headedness, 
may lead to this feature becoming disseminated through- 
out a long-headed community, and yet the blood of the 
original community be diluted to only a slight extent. 
The discovery in Aveline’s Hole shows us that England 
was not isolated in late Paleolithic times. New blood 
reached her from the Continent ; new fashions in culture 
and manners of living arrived, and replaced old cultures 
and former customs. At the same time wild animals 
from the Continent also came to make a home in England 
as her climate changed. 

In our search for the remains of cave man in England 
we pass from the Mendips and Somerset to the shores of 
Torbay, situated on the south coast of the neighbouring 
county of Devon. The bay, one of the most beautiful in 
England, is bounded by two headlands or horns, about 
five miles apart. Amongst the green terraced hills of 
Devonian limestone, which form the northern headland, 


144 THEVANTIOUITYSOR NaN 


is situated ‘Torquay, with Kent’s Cavern hid in a valley 
in the suburbs of the town; on the southern headland 
is the busy fishing town of Brixham. In 1858, Mr Philip 
of this town was preparing to build on the limestone hill 
above the harbour, when his workmen opened an unknown 
natural subterranean passage or cavern—some 600 feet in 
length—from then onwards known as the Brixham cave. 

In 1858, the question as to whether man did, or did 
mine: Dt; exist with extinct 
i Lae IN oi | animals was being hotly 
ty _ ‘ debated. One of theleads 

p= = ing geologists of the time, 
= Dr Hugh Falconer, in- 
duced two of the premier 
London Societies — the 
Royal and the Geological 
—to explore the cave and 
settle the question. A 
pioneer in cave explora- 
tion, Mr William Pen- 
gelly,undertook todirect 
the work and record the 
results. In fig: 535amm 
Fic. 53.—Section across the Brixham reproduce a copy of his 


cave showing the strata of the floor. E 
At some former period the cave had S€Ct10ON across the caye 


been filled to the height of the tg show the strata of 
“ancient floor.” 
the floor. They corre- 
spond with those just seen in the caves of the Mendips. 
There was a bottom stratum of gravel; a middle stratum 
of 5 to 6 feet in thickness of red cave earth, which con- 
tained bones of the woolly rhinoceros, mammoth, hyena, 
lion, bear, etc. ‘Then over the cave earth came a stratum 
of stalagmite about a foot in thickness, in which an antler 
of the reindeer was embedded ; over the stalagmite was 
a surface stratum of recently-formed earth. In the cave 
earth, mingled with the bones of the extinct animals, 
were found flint tools shaped by man. ‘The exploration 
thus settled the question as to man’s contemporaneity 
1 See reference, p. 145. 












ANCIENT 
FLOOR ~~ 











pce ih 


ay 
Ve 





FURTHER EXAMPLES 145 


with extinct animals, but threw no light on the kind of 
man or the place of his culture in the scheme of human 
evolution. 

To obtain light on those problems, we must pay the 
great neighbouring cave—Kent’s Cavern—a cursory visit. 
In 1846, the Torquay Natural History Society, of which 
William Pengelly was the moving spirit, began to explore 
this vast series of damp, dark passages, vaults, chambers, 
and subterranean corridors. The task was one beyond 
itsmeans. In 1864, Pengelly induced the British Associa- 
tion to take up its exploration. From 1864 to 1880 nearly 
£2000 was spent on the work, and although 50,000 fossil 
specimens were excavated, ened identified and labelled, 
the Herculean task of exploring Kent’s Cavern is little 
more than begun.t The upper strata of the floor are 
the same as at Brixham—a surface earth containing traces 
of all cultures from Neolithic down to the present.” 
Below the superficial débris came (fig. 54) : (1) the upper 
stalagmite, in some places 3 feet thick; then (2) the red 
cave earth, 3 to § feet thick, with bones of extinct animals 
and implements of the later Paleolithic periods, Aurig- 
nacian and Magdalenian. In strata 1 and 2, remains of 
the woolly rhinoceros and of the mammoth were abundant, 
indicating that these layers were deposited during a period 
of great cold. Beneath the cave earth began a second 
and older series of deposits, commencing with (3) the 
lower stratum of stalagmite, covering (4) a great depth of 
breccia, composed of chips of sandstone and slate firmly 
cemented together. The lower or older deposits con- 
tain evidences of early human cultures which do not 
concern us at present, but show us that in this cavern— 


1 See a Memoir on William Pengelly, F.R.S., by his daughter, Mrs 
Forbes Julian, London, 1897. 

2 Tam much indebted to the late Mr Arthur R. Hunt and other members 
of the Torquay Natural History Society for information regarding the 
exploration of Kent’s Cavern, and for opportunities of seeing the collec- 
tions in their museum. See Mr Hunt’s papers on Kent’s Cavern in 
Geological Mag., 1902, vol. ix. p. 1143 Proc. of Geologists’? Assoc., 1900, 
vol. xvi. p. 425; Journ. Torquay Nat. Hist. Soc., 1914, vol.i.p 67. Also 
A Short Account of Kent’s Cavern, Torquay, 1898. 

WOiGeml 10 


146 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the Stonehenge of the caves of Europe—man’s history is 
carried an incredibly long way into the distant past. 

The upper strata, however, have a direct interest for 
us because they belong to the time of the later phases of 
Paleolithic culture. In the upper stalagmite, and in the 







SS ZURECENT DEPOSIT 
aA ROMAN & BRONZE 





BRECCI/A 


ROCK 


Fic. 54.—-A diagrammatic section of the strata in the floor of 
Kent’s Cavern. 


upper layer of cave earth, just under the stalagmite, were 
found implements in bone and stone worked in the last 
Palzolithic phase—the Magdalenian—the same culture as 
characterised the cave at Cheddar. In 1867, Mr Pengelly 
found the right half of a human palate, with four teeth 
still in place, at a depth of 20 inches (0-500 m.) in the upper 
stalagmite. The palate lay unnoticed in its museum case 


at Torquay until 1912, when my friend, Dr W. L. H. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 147 


Duckworth, rescued it from oblivion.t In fig. 55 I give 
a drawing of this specimen—the right half of a palate. 
Side by side I have set the left half of a palate from a 
famous French skull of Aurignacian date, that found at 
Combe Capelle.? In shape and size, these two halves are 
very similar. The teeth, too, agree in dimension, shape, 
and character. In the adjoining drawing in fig. 55 I have 
represented the left half of the palate of a modern English 
skull, and the right half of the palate of a member of an 





KENTS CAVERN COMBE CAPELLE TASMANIAN MODERN ENGLISH. 


AREA 2960mm: 2900 mm: 3680 mm 2830 mm: 
Fic 55.—A. Right half of palate from Kent’s Cavern. 
B. Left a Ae Combe Capelle. 
Cae Rigi ta, fp Tasmanian. 
D. Left 2 a modern Englishman. 


extinct primitive race—the ‘Tasmanian. The area of a 
well-developed palate of a modern Englishman is about 
2800 mm.,*° the area being the space bounded by the 
outer margins of the crowns of the teeth. The hinder 
border of the area is demarcated by a line joining the 
posterior margin of the last or third molar teeth (see 
p- 102). The particular Tasmanian palate represented 


1 See Fourn. Torquay Nat. Hist. Soc., 1913. See also Brit. Assoc. Reps., 
Dundee, 1912. 

ee Seerp Los. 

3 Later investigations have shown me that the estimate given here for 
the size of the “ dental ” palate of the average Englishman is too high ; 
it is approximately 2500 mm. 


148 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


in fig. 55 has an area of 3680 mm., 1200 mm. more than 
in the English palate. In the case of the two palates of 
Paleolithic man represented in fig. 55, the palatal area 
is only about 100 mm. above the average modern English- 
man. ‘The palate and teeth from Kent’s Cavern do show 
a degree of robust development which is uncommon in 
modern mouths, but there is no character present which 
suggests that a strange or unknown race is represented. 

The back-front diameters of the teeth are also given 
on the drawings. Measured along the line of the arch 
of the teeth, the three molars of the Kent’s Cavern palate 
have a combined length of 30°5 mm., which, although 
above the average of our modern molars, is yet rather 
below that of primitive native races such as Australians 
or Africans (see dimensions on fig. 55). ‘The cusps are 
worn off the chewing surfaces of the first and second 
teeth ; they had each four cusps—the full number—but 
the fourth cusp is absent from the last molar. ‘The roots 
of the teeth are long and well separated, and, in my 
opinion—but here I differ somewhat from Dr Duckworth 
—show no trace of those features which characterise that 
peculiar and ancient Paleolithic race—Neanderthal man.t 
Mr George Jackson has shown me similar teeth and palates 
from caves opened near Plymouth. Thus, at Kent’s 
Cavern, we have evidence of a closing phase of the 
Paleolithic culture, and just enough of one of the men 
of the time to show that he was not different from those 
found in other English caves. 

To complete our survey of late Paleolithic man in 
Britain, we must continue our tour by passing eastwards 
along the south coast of England to the summit of the 
South Downs in the county of Sussex. ‘The remarkable 
earthworks or camps on the top of the Downs at Cissbury, 
near Worthing, belong to the Neolithic period ; but the 
circular pits and depressions, about fifty in number, which 
occupy the same site, have yielded a peculiar culture, at 
first supposed to belong to an early part of the Neolithic 
period. In 1868, General Pitt Rivers began an investiga- 

1 See p. 210. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 149 


tion of those pits; the result of his explorations, and of 
others of a later date, was to show that the pits were in 
reality filled-in mouths of vertical shafts which went 
down 30 to 4o feet in the chalk. The significance of 
these shafts or mines was also clear; they were sunk to 
obtain the kind of flint most suitable for working into 
implements. They were flint mines. The veins of 
suitable flints were followed by driving horizontal 
galleries from the vertical shaft. The miners left tools 
behind them—now preserved in the filled-up mines. It 
has been customary to regard the culture of the Cissbury 
miners as representative of the dawn of the Neolithic 
civilisation. Subsequently, Mr Reginald Smith, of the 
British Museum, again examined the Cissbury culture, and 
the objects of the same period obtained from Grimes 
Graves, near Brandon, in Norfolk, and, in the light of 
what is now known of the cave men of the Aurignacian 
period, has come to the conclusion that the Cissbury 
miners were not a Neolithic, but a Paleolithic people. 
The evidence + he has produced is such that most students 
will now agree with Mr Smith that the flint implements 
probably belong to the period of the Aurignacian culture 
—the period of Cromagnon, of Grimaldi, and of Halling. 
Remains of the reindeer, of the mammoth, and of the 
rhinoceros occur in the caves of that period of culture ; 
not a trace of them has been found at Cissbury. The 
ancient ox or urus (Bos primigenius), however, occurs. 
We scarcely expect the fauna of the period to be fully 
represented in mines. In Belgium, similar ancient flint 
mines occur. ‘The Belgian miner—as may be seen in 
the Royal Natural History Museum of Brussels—was a 
short-headed or brachycephalic man, quite different from 
all Aurignacian races ; his civilisation was not Aurignacian, 
but that of the Neolithic period. The miners at Cissbury, 
on the other hand, had heads of the river-bed type. In 
the buried shafts at Cissbury, the skeletons of two indi- 
viduals were found and described by Professor Rolleston. 
One is the skeleton of a man under 5 feet (1-500 m.) in 


1 See Arch@ologia, 1912, ser. 2, vol. xill. p. 109. 


150 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


height, and showing a left-sided palsy, contracted in boy- 
hood. ‘The length of the skull is 184 mm., width 132 
mm., the width index being 71. He had the small brain 
capacity of 1350 c.c., and was buried in the contracted 
posture with his grave protected by blocks of chalk. ‘The 
other skeleton * was that of a woman with a very large 
head (length 195 mm., width 144 mm., the width index 
being 74). ‘The brain capacity was estimated by Professor 
Rolleston to be 1732 c.c.—a great amount, ee 
in a short woman with a stature of only 5 feet. 

The question raised by Mr Reginald Smith concerning 
the Paleolithic culture of these ancient mining folk makes 
it necessary for us, before bringing this chapter to an end, 
to pay a hurried visit to the southern boundary of the 
county of Norfolk, where the Brandon or Little Ouse 
carries its sluggish waters westwards to join the parent 
river—the Great Ouse. In the village of Brandon flint- 
knappers still ply their ancient trade. ‘Three miles along 
the road which leads from Brandon to Norwich we 
reach a plantation, some 20 acres in extent. Stunted 
trees struggle for an existence in the midst of bleak 
surroundings. On the site of this plantation the remote 
ancestors of the Brandon flint-knappers carried on an 
enormous industry over a long period of time. The chalk, 
which contains the veins of flints, is here covered by strata 
of sand and boulder clay some 8 feet in depth ; the Neo- 
lithic miners sank shafts and pits through the superficial 
strata and dug into the chalk to a depth of 27 feet or more, 
undermining and running side galleries to follow up the 
best veins of flints, which lay at the bottom of their pits. 
Some of the pits were of great size, the openings of some 
of them having a diameter of 40 feet. In the plantation 
there can still be counted the hollows and mounds belong- 
ing to 366 of these ancient flint mines. When the supply 
of flints became exhausted in a pit, it was partly filled in, 
and used as a shelter or habitation by the families of the 
early miners. Hence it is that the excavation of these 


1 See Rolleston, Fourn. Anthrop. Instit., 1878, vol. viii. p. 377. 
2 [bid., 1876, vol. vi. p. 20. 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 151 


pits—known as Grimes Graves—has brought to light 
many relics of the miners, and has thrown a flood of 
light on one of England’s earliest industries. 

In 1914 members of the Prehistoric Society of East 
Anglia commenced a systematic exploration of the area 
covered by Grimes Graves. ‘They found clear evidence 
of three periods of occupation: (1) of the Bronze age; 
(2) of the Neolithic age ; and (3) of an older age, possibly 
Palzolithic, for flint nodules engraved in the style of the 
late Paleolithic hunters of France were found, and, as 
at Cissbury, implements worked in Paleolithic fashions, 
some of them exactly in the manner adopted by the cave- 
dwellers of Le Moustier in mid-Pleistocene times.! 

Thus the committee which investigated Grimes Graves 
found that the locality had been mined for flint at various 
periods of time, the earliest being when Palzolithic imple- 
ments were in use. It also discovered parts of the actual 
miners; in Pit 1 the vault of a man’s skull was found ; 
in another pit the scattered remains of the skeleton of a 
young girl. The man’s skull was found in the fifth layer 
of Pit 1, 10 feet 8 inches below the original surface of the 
ground. Although this skull belongs to the Neolithic 
horizon it is worth careful scrutiny, because of the older 
culture which precedes the Neolithic and also is inter- 
mingled with it. ‘The skull is long—1g92 mm. ; its width, 
WALeMi.,.is975°5 per cent. o1 its length (fig: 56). ‘The 
vault, although of more than average height, being 117 
mm. above the ear passages, appears low because of the 
flatness of the crown of the head and the width apart of its 
sides. ‘The supra-orbital ridges were strongly developed 
and the bones along the vault reached a thickness of 
8 mm. The forehead was wide—1oo mm.—and the 

1 Report on the Excavations at Grimes Graves, Weeting, Norfolk, by 
Dr A. E. Peake and others, edited by Mr W. G. Clarke, and issued by 
the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia, 1915. Report on Human Remains, 
by A. Keith, p. 134. See also further Reports by Dr A. E. Peake, Proc. 
Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1917, vol. ii. p. 409; 1919, vol. iii. p. 73. 
“Note on the Fauna,” by W. G. Clarke, 1921, vol. ili. p. 431. 
“Reports on Engraved Stones and Ancient Floors,” by Mr A. Leslie 
Armstrong, 1922, vol. iii. pp. 434, 548; 1924, vol. iv. p. 113. 


452 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


cranial capacity, 1530 c.c., was well above the modern 
average. The cranial type conforms exactly to that 
found at Cissbury, and differs somewhat from the Palao- 
lithic type found at Cheddar, in being wider and having 
a flatter dome. Still, we must regard the Grimes Graves 
and Cheddar skulls as being merely variants of the same 
long-headed type of man. 

How are we to explain the occurrence of flint imple- 
ments worked in the style of Le Moustier in these ancient 
mines ? Did Englishmen actually work flint mines at so 
early a period as that represented by the Mousterian 


O A 100 
| Me =~ 

fi Par i e 
W Bate EERE 


190180 160 














Mizz 


yp 
Zig 


Ls 


Sty 





Fic. 56.—Profile and full face of the cranial vault of a man’s 
skull found in Pit 1, Grimes Graves. 


culture in France-——a culture which is believed to have 
come to an end some twenty thousand years ago, or 
more? Or was it that the ancient miners at Brandon 
and at Cissbury were conservative in their habits, and 
even when the wave of the earliest Neolithic culture was 
spreading over England, they still practised an art which 
came down to them traditionally from Mousterian times ? 
The latter must, I think, be the true explanation, for 
neither at Cissbury nor at Grimes Graves were found the 
fossil remains of those animals which are known to have 
flourished with the Mousterian culture. 

Further evidence of this contention will be found, I 
think, if we call at Ipswich on our way back to London, 
where this chapter is to be brought toanend. At Ipswich 


FURTHER EXAMPLES 153 


the great plateau of Suffolk, capped with chalky boulder 
clay, sinks rapidly from a height of 160 feet O.D. to the 
bottom of the valley of the Gipping. The town rises 
from the railway ‘station, situated in the valley, to the 
shoulders of the plateau, having a fine aspect to the south 
and west. On the western shoulder of the plateau, to the 
north of Ipswich, is a shallow side valley, which Mr Reid 
Moir has made known to all students of ancient man. 
By carefully conducted excavations through deposits 
which had accumulated on one side of this valley, Mr 
Reid Moir exposed two horizons or floors which had been 
occupied by ancient man.’ In the upper floor was found 
clear evidence of an Aurignacian culture; on the lower 
and older level, equally definite evidence of a Mousterian 
culture. In the lower level, too, fragmentary bones of 
man were discovered, but these undoubtedly belonged 
to the type of man found at Grimes Graves and at Ciss- 
bury. In these ancient floors, as at Grimes Graves, the 
fauna characteristic of the Aurignacian and Mousterian 
periods was most meagrely represented. May not these 
discoveries be construed as evidence in support of con- 
servative tendencies on the part of our remote ancestors ? 

To bring this chapter to a’ close, we shall return to the 
very centre of London, to the Horse Guards on the north 
bank of the Thames between Trafalgar Square and 
Westminster. ‘The land here holds the same relationship 
to the Thames as the Halling terrace—at which we started 
—bears to the Medway. In 1892, foundations were 
excavated in this area for a new Admiralty building, 
exposing a section of the north bank, or low terrace of 
the Thames, which was carefully studied and recorded 
by Mr Lewis Abbott.” Eleven feet below high-tide level 
was found an old land surface, bearing in an “ Arctic 
bed ” remains of plants which are natives of a cold climate. 
That bed marks the closing phase of the glacial period, 


1 Mr J. Reid Moir, “Two Ancient Occupation Levels,” Fourn. Roy. 
Anthrop. Instiz., 1917, vol. lvii. p. 367. 

2 Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1892, vol. xii. p. 346. See also Proc. Prehist. Soc. 
East Anglia, 1919, vol. iil. p. 110. 


154 THE*ANTIOUELY, OF “MAN 


evidently corresponding with the date of the formation of 
the lowest terraces of the Thames and Medway valley. 
Mr Hazzeldine Warren! has described an extensive and 
apparently contemporaneous Arctic bed in the valley of 
the Lea, in the east of London. Over the Arctic bed in 
the foundation of the Admiralty building, Mr Abbott 
found a deep bed of gravel, containing remains of Pleisto- 
cene mammals and also a flint implement typical of the 
Solutrean culture—the culture following the Aurignacian, 
but preceding the Magdalenian. We have seen that in 
the cave at Langwith, with the evidence of an Aurig- 
nacian and of a Magdalenian culture, animals of a sub- 
Arctic climate.were present. We are therefore justified 
in concluding that towards the close of the Paleolithic 
period the climatic conditions were much colder than 
now. We are uncertain as to the causes of climatic 
change, but we cannot believe, from our knowledge of 
historic times, that such changes can be brought about 
except by imperceptible degrees extending over a long 
period of time. Yet, long as is the period which has 
elapsed since Arctic conditions last ceased, the type of 
man represented in the caves of Derbyshire and Somerset 
has persisted, with his body altered only in minor details. 


1 Quart. Fourn. Geol., 1912, vol. lxviii. p. 213 ; 1916, vol. lxxi. p. 164. 


CHAPTER VIII 


THE MOUSTERIAN PERIOD IN ENGLAND AND THE 
MEN OF THAT PERIOD IN FRANCE 


In this chapter we are to take another great step back- 
wards into the past. The period of Neolithic man lies 
far behind us; in the two preceding chapters we have 
made a cursory survey of the men of the late Paleolithic 
cultures, and formed, on the limited evidence at our 
disposal, some estimate of their antiquity. As nearly as 
we can guess at present, the point in time which marks 
the beginning of the late Paleolithic age and the close 
of the one preceding it—the middle Palzolithic—lies 
about 20,000 B.c. ‘The period which we are now to 
enter—the middle Palzolithic—was one in which the 
men of Europe worked their stone implements in a very 
characteristic style—the fashion and culture which is 
universally known by the name of Mousterian, because 
the workmanship, in its typical form, was found at an 
early stage of prehistoric exploration (1863) in one of the 
Vézére caves of France, Le Moustier. ‘The Mousterian 
period was probably as long in its duration as the late 
Paleolithic and the Neolithic ages put together—twenty 
thousand years. The evidence on which this statement 
is based will become apparent as we proceed with this 
survey. ‘Thus, we are writing under the belief that the 
Mousterian age commenced some forty or forty-two 
thousand years ago. Very probably these estimates may 
need readjustment in the light of further discoveries. 

A number of circumstances may be mentioned in order 
that the reader may form some conception of the duration 


155 


156 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of the middle Paleolithic or Mousterian period. In the 
early phase of the Mousterian culture Europe had a 
warmer climate than it has now; by the time this culture 
had evolved into another phase, the temperature had so 
fallen that the Arctic conditions of the Wiirm glaciation 
spread southwards as far as the Thames valley. The 
Mousterian culture persisted all through the Wiirm glacia- 
tion, and only disappeared when a milder interval brought 
the Aurignacian culture. This, in turn, as we have 
already seen, was replaced by the Magdalenian culture, 
which came in with the final and temporary return of an 
Icelandic climate. ‘Thus the Mousterian culture lasted 
the round of a climatic cycle, and whatever may be the 
cause of changes of the climate of Europe we cannot 
conceive of them happening in a short period of time. 
Not only did the Mousterian period cover a climatic 
cycle ; within its span lay a round of movements involving 
both sea and land. When it commenced, the Thames was 
over three miles wide at London Bridge ; the tide lapped 
round the high ground on which St Paul’s stands. If this 
condition were to return, half of London would disappear ; 
all buildings standing on or below the 50-foot level would 
be submerged or become uninhabitable. At this low 
level, 50 feet lower than at present, England—at least 
southern England—had stood for a long time before the 
arrival of the people of the Mousterian culture. It was 
during their time that a movement of land elevation set 
in—one which gradually raised the site of London and 
the Thames valley, not only to their present level, but 
50 feet above the level of river and sea we are now familiar 
with. Not only was there this land elevation, amounting 
to about 100 feet, but the people who practised the 
Mousterian culture saw a reverse movement set in, and 
by the time their culture came to an end a subsidence of 
the land had brought our valley not only back to its 
present level, but 20 or 25 feet below where it now stands. 
We do not know the cause of the earth pulsations which 
cause land and sea movements; but they are slow in 
their progress) When we see that the span of the 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 157 


Mousterian culture covers a period in which a great part 
of Europe was raised 100 feet and then gradually subsided 
again 75 feet, we have reason for regarding twenty thousand 
years as none too much for the programme of events here 
set forth. 

The Mousterian culture throughout this long period 
went on evolving slowly. Archzologists recognise at 
least three phases in its evolution—early, middle, and 
late. Perhaps one reason for its slow evolution, as we 
shall see presently, was the kind of man who practised 
this culture. He was big-headed yet a low type of man, 
quite different from any race now living. He was not 
an ancestor of ours but a distant cousin; we have to go 
far back in time—to a dawn-form of mankind—to find a 
type which will serve as a common ancestor for him as 
well as for ourselves. With this brief introduction we 
must now set out in our search for men of the Mousterian 
period—first in England, then on the Continent. 

The story of late Paleolithic man, as told in the last 
chapter, came to an end on the low or 20-foot terrace 
of the north bank of the Thames, at the Admiralty 
buildings. ‘The scene of our search for the records of 
his predecessor—Mousterian man—lies also in the Thames 
valley, on the south bank of the river, ten or twelve 
miles below London. In this region the North Downs 
invade the valley of the Thames, exposing their flanks 
to the enterprise of the makers of cement who have 
attacked them from the strips of flat land bordering the 
river. We may complain of the pestilence of smoke 
with which these manufacturers—both of brick and 
cement—fill the valley below London, but as students 
of ancient man we are deeply indebted tothem. Without 
them, we should never have known that in the stretch of 
bank which faces the full tide of traffic on the Thames, 
early man has left his records more abundantly than in 
almost any other part of the world. ‘The manufacturer 
has exposed the ancient work-floors and the scattered stone 
implements, but the recognition of their nature and 
significance has been the work of an army of voluntary 


158 THEVANTIOUILY OF SNIAN 


students and collectors who, in a brief history like this, 
scarcely receive the mention their labours have well 
earned. 

The records of the Mousterian period—the one which 
is to engage us in this chapter—lie in this stretch on the 
south side of the Thames valley, especially in a side recess 
where the Darenth, breaking through the North Downs 
from the Weald of Kent, receives a tributary—the Cray 
—and joins the Thames (fig. 57). On the western or’ 


——S 


Yyy 
: 


< 
WS 


ES 
SS 


3 e 
DARTFOR : een < 
SKULL ~Q7 . SWANSCOMBES _, }OAKERSNY 
4 


~ 
we 





Fic. 57.—The reach of the Thames above Gravesend to show 
the sites of ancient man. 


London side of the Darenth estuary have been deposited 
the Crayford brick earths, rising 60 feet (18 m.) above 
the level of the river. ‘Those brick earths, deposits of 
the ancient Thames in times of flood, have been studied 
by many men, but the authorities who are to be our chief 
guides are three in number: firstly, Messrs Hinton and 
Kennard,* and secondly, Mr R. H. Chandler.? In fig. 58, 
I have combined the diagrams those authorities have 
drawn embodying observations which they have made 
at Crayford. We see, in the first place, the submerged 
1 See reference, p. 165. 2 See reference, p. 165. 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 159 


Neolithic surface, with the horizon of Tilbury man 
indicated, although Tilbury is a few miles lower down 
the river, and on the opposite or northern bank. Then 
comes, in point of antiquity, the low or 20-foot terrace— 
the terrace in which the Halling man of the Aurignacian 
period was found, but I must also state that the representa- 
tion of this terrace at Crayford has been washed away 
by the Thames long ago. Then, above the level of the 
low or 20-foot terrace come the Crayford brick earths, 


asft 

















MOUSTERIAN 
FLOORS 


Fic, 58.—Diagram showing the submerged bed, the low or 20-foot terrace, 
the middle or 50-foot terrace in the valleys of the Thames and Med- 
way. (After Hinton, Kennard, and Chandler.) 


representing a still older deposit of the Thames—the 
middle or 50-foot terrace. We must examine the struc- 
ture of this terrace. In the first place, its lowest layer or 
stratum is made up of gravel—the ballast gravel which 
marks the ancient bed of the river. That gravel rises 
now 30 feet above the present level, not of the bed 
of the river, but of the river itself. When the begin- 
nings of the middle terrace were being laid down, the 
Thames was flowing on a bed at a level of 50 feet above 
its present bed. ‘Then, above the gravel bed, follow 
strata of sand, about 14 feet in depth, indicating 
that the river was flowing more slowly—the land was 


160 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 
subsiding, and the valley was being filled up. Above 


the sands come another series of beds known as the 
Cyrena beds, containing in abundance the shells of 
certain molluscs and bones of small mammals. Then 
follow the typical brick earths—loamy deposits from the 
backwaters of a muddy and flooded river. From the 
gravel of the old river bed to the surface of the brick 
earth the deposits laid down by the river during a period 
of land subsidence amount to over 30 feet in depth.’ 
In all the strata of the 50-foot terrace, excepting only the 
gravels at the base, the men who lived on the south bank 
of the Thames worked their flint implements in the 
Mousterian manner. At all levels of the brick earths, 
these implements have been recovered. Messrs Hinton 
and Kennard, and Mr Chandler, recognised that the 
implements were Mousterian in type in 1905,! and their 
inferences were fully supported by the collection of 
implements which Mr Brice Higgins obtained from all 
horizons of the Crayford brick earths, and which have 
been described and recorded by Mr Reginald Smith.? 
The section of these brick earths as recorded by Mr 
Chandler and Mr Leach ® (see fig. 58) throws a very 
definite light on the climate both before and after the 
formation of the 50-foot terrace. Over the brick earths — 
lies a deposit technically known to geologists as a drift or 
“trail”’—a mixture of chalky blocks, gravel, sand, and 
sludge. Such a deposit results from the freezing of a 
surface soil, which in the thaw slips bodily down from 
higher to lower ground. After the Crayford brick earths 
were deposited, there evidently followed a cold period— 
marked by the formation of trail. We have seen, from 
the Arctic beds in the low terrace at the Admiralty 
buildings, and from Mr Warren’s discovery in the low 
terrace of the adjoining Lea valley, that during the 
Magdalenian period there was a return to a sub-Arctic 
climate. The drift or covering over the Crayford brick 
1 See reference, p. 165. 


2 See Man, 1914, vol. xiv. p. 4 and p. 31. 
3 See Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1912, vol. xxiii. p. 186, 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 161 


earths may have been produced then; at least it was 
formed after the lower terrace was finished, for that 
terrace shows no disturbance of ice action in its upper 
strata. 

Not only is there a trail over the Crayford brick earths, 
but, as Mr Chandler shows in his section (fig. 58), and as 
has been recognised for a number of years, there are the 
most definite signs of another drift or trail—a frozen 
landslide—on the side of the valley, occupying a period 
in time prior to the deposition of the Crayford brick 
earths in which the tools and culture of Mousterian man 
are embedded. This earlier trail or ice-deposit is known 
in England as ‘“‘ Coombe rock ”—a mixed, contorted mass 
of chalk, sand, and loam, the results of a partially thawed 
landslide. Even before the period of the earlier trail, 
Mousterian man was in the valley of the Thames, for 
under the Coombe rock occur his old work-floors. 

Five miles lower down the valley—almost opposite 
Tilbury—there is another deposit of brick earths, which, 
like those at Crayford, form part of the 50-foot or middle 
terrace. They occur on the western bank of a side valley 
‘by which the Ebbfleet enters the Thames, being exposed 
at an excavation or pit known as Baker’s Hole (fig. 57). 
Here, under the Coombe rock, were found several 
thousands of Mousterian implements—evidently repre- 
senting a tool manufactory or workshop of this remote 
period.? 

When preparing the first edition of this work in 1914, 
rumours reached me that a human skull had been found 
deep in the Coombe rock of Baker’s Hole, but it was not 
until quite recently, thanks to the generosity of Mr A. C. 
Hinton and of Mr Frank Corner, that I had an oppor- 
tunity of making a close examination of this very important 
specimen. No one is more familiar with the Pleistocene 
animals found in the terraces of the Thames valley than 
is Mr Hinton ; in this department of knowledge he is our 
leading authority. Although the exact level at which 

1 See Archeologia, 1911, vol. lxii. p. 522; also G. C. Robson, Trans. 
Oxford University Funior Scientific Club, June 1910, p. 337. 

VOL. I, II 


162 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


this skull lay in the Coombe rock is not known, its mineral- 
ised condition is, in Mr Hinton’s opinion and also in my 
own, exactly similar to that of the bones of mammoth 
and rhinoceros which occur in this deposit. ‘The skull 
lay deep in the Coombe rock, but above the main floor 
which carried such a profusion of the earliest types of 
Mousterian implements, and yet below the uppermost 
level at which implements of this culture did occur. If 
the skull had proved to be that of Neanderthal man, then 
we should have had no hesitation in supposing that at 




















° 


Fia. 59.—Profile of the Baker’s Hole skull oriented on the sub-cerebra] 
plane, with a view of the vertex, on the Frankfort plane. 


last we had found an Englishman of the Mousterian 
period. I had a lively hope that this might prove to be 
the case. A glance at the actual specimen was sufficient 
to convince me that the man’s skull which had been 
found embedded so deeply in the Coombe rock at Baker’s 
Hole was of the same type as that we meet with in 
deposits of the late Palzolithic period. As may be seen 
from fig. 59, the skull belongs to a type we are already 
familiar with. Although its base and a part of the fore- 
head are missing, yet there can be no hesitation in fixing 
‘its original length at 195 mm.—a long skull. The 
supra-orbital ridges, although strongly developed, were 
not more so than is often to be seen in the foreheads of 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 163 


living men. In this ancient man the forehead was of 
good width—1oo mm.—and the brain capacity of the 
skull was 1490 c.c., slightly above the modern average. 
As regards shape, the head was long and narrow—the 
width, 140 mm., being slightly under 72 per cent. of the 
length. ‘The sides were nearly vertical in their ascent ; 
the vault was comparatively flat, its highest point rising 
118 mm. above the ear passages. Thickness of the roof 
varied from 6 to 8 mm., but just over the centre of the 
parietal bone it reached a thickness of 11 mm. The 
man, whose skull-cap has been thus recovered from the 
So0-foot terrace of the Thames valley, undoubtedly 
belonged to the type found at Engis, Langwith, and in 
the caves of the Mendips. ‘The deposit in which his 
remains were discovered was sprinkled with implements 
which were shaped in the Mousterian manner. ‘The 
most likely explanation of this relationship is that the 
man had been interred in the deposit by people of the 
Aurignacian period. ‘There is, however, another possi- 
bility we have to keep in mind: Was the Mousterian 
culture in England the work of men of our type? On 
the Continent this culture is always associated with men 
of the Neanderthal type. 

From the study of the deposits in the valley of the 
Thames, we are able to form some conception of the 
position which the Mousterian period occupies in the 
scale of prehistoric time (fig. 264, p. 717). It is manifest 
that this period is older than the formation of the low or 
20-foot terrace, for when the middle or §0-foot terrace is 
traced towards the river, it is found to dip under, and there- 
fore to have been deposited before the lower or more recent 
terrace. The duration of the Mousterian period was 
sufficiently long to cover a period which saw a wide variety 
of climatic changes in England. The 50-foot terraces on 
both sides of the river are all that remain of the great bed of 
deposits laid down in the valley during the time the men 
of England were in that stage of culture called Mousterian. 

The south side of the Thames valley is not the only 
place where old Mousterian work-floors have been found. 


164 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


In drawing up a list of the deposits of the Thames valley, 
arranged in their order of formation, Messrs Hinton and 
Kennard ! mention the discovery of Mousterian floors 
on the north bank of the Thames—at Grays, almost 
opposite Crayford, at Stoke Newington, over which 
northern London has extended, and at Acton, to the 
west of London. In 1923-24 Mr W. H. Cook discovered 
a most extensive Mousterian floor in the valley of the 
Medway—on the high chalk bank which rises up from the 
river immediately opposite the town of Rochester. No 
true cave-habitation of this date has been found in 
England, but near Mildenhall, in the county of Suffolk, 
East Anglia, Dr Allen Sturge found a Mousterian work- 
station or floor.?. The brick earth, fully 30 feet in depth, 
in which the flints were found by Dr Sturge, is situated 
on the side of a low hill which rises on the eastern slope 
of the valley of the Lark—a tributary stream of the 
Great Ouse. The Mildenhall brick earths are of the same 
geological age as those at Crayford. Further, as Dr 
Allen Sturge discovered, they have been overwhelmed 
by a glacial movement, just as the brick earths at Crayford 
were covered over by “drift.’? Several Mousterian 
floors have been discovered in the neighbourhood of 
Cambridge, Peterborough, and Ipswich,® all of them 
embedded in valley-deposits. 

Thus we have the most ample evidence that England 
was inhabited by men who practised the Mousterian 
culture; but so far not any certain trace of their actual 
bodies have been found. ‘That is the more strange, seeing 
that remains of the animals of the period are well pre- 
served in the brick earths which contain Mousterian 
flints. Two forms of elephants occurred with him in 
the Thames valley—the mammoth and a form nearly 
allied to the African elephant (£. antiquus) ; three forms 
of the rhinoceros; the musk ox, and other mammalian 


1 “ The Relative Ages of the Stone Implements of the Lower Thames 
Valley,” Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1905, vol. xix. p. 76. 

2 See Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1911, vol. i. p. 69. 

3 Mr J. Reid Moir, Man, 1920, vol. xx. p. 84. 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 165 


species associated with a cold climate.t ‘In the brick 
earths of the middle terrace of the Thames,” writes Mr 
Hinton,” ‘‘ we meet with evidence of the invasion of 
England by swarms of mammals which can only have come 
from Siberia and Eastern Europe—the lemming, numerous 
voles, the reindeer, and the saiga antelope.” At some part 
of the Mousterian period—perhaps during its whole 
extent—England was part of the Continent ; otherwise 
such an invasion of mammals which were then new to 
this country could not have taken place. We see, 
therefore, that Mousterian man and his culture could 
have entered England by land. 

To study the men of the Mousterian times, we must 
transfer the scene of our inquiry to the Continent— 
preferably to that part of France we have already visited 
in search of the men of the later Paleolithic periods, 
the region drained by the Dordogne and its tributaries 
(fig. 60). A little over sixty miles from Bordeaux, the 
Dordogne receives a small southern tributary, the Couze. 
In the face of the terraced limestone cliff or hill on one 
side of this valley, at a site known as Combe Capelle 
(fig. 60), a Swiss archeologist, Herr O. Hauser, made an 
important discovery—one which serves exceedingly well 
to introduce us to the Mousterian period of France. 

In the opening months of 1909, he commenced a 
systematic exploration of a terrace, almost on the summit 
of one side of the valley, which was known to yield 
numerous Paleolithic flints, and suspected to have served 
as a rock-shelter for ancient man. His excavation at the 
foot of the sheltering rock exposed the following strata 
(fig. 61): (1) a layer of soil, about a toot in depth, 
containing blocks of limestone detached from the face 
of the rock by exposure to wind, wet, and changes of 
temperature ; (2) a stratum, over a foot in depth, con- 
taining flints and other evidences of the Solutrean culture 
—the one preceding the Magdalenian, the latter being 
unrepresented at Combe Capelle. Then followed three 


1 Messrs Hinton and Kennard, Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1905, vol. xix. p. 83. 
* Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1907, vol. xx. p. 53. 


166 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


strata belonging to various phases of the Aurignacian 
culture—the lower, the middle, and the upper—separated 
by two sterile deposits, showing that during two intervals 
the rock-shelter had been forsaken as a human habitation. 
At the bottom of the lowest Aurignacian stratum a 


R-2 9a, 
2, 


PEDAGUEUX Tis eyties 
RO-MAGNON. 
LA FERRASSIE@® 5 SARLG 


R. Dordogne GOURDO 
BORDSGAUX cComBE CAPELLES ® 


2, E 
LAS J SAINTS 
®@ AWRIL 


oot 
° 
fa. 


Soup 


P TOULOUSE 


o\n 
(f QMALARNAUD 
4 


—LYlgee Ww Se 


W heyyy, Nol \ 
}} Ww OS 





Fic, 60.—A sketch map of the chief sites of prehistoric discovery in the 
region of the Dordogne, France. 


human skeleton was found, with the clearest evidence 
that it had been buried. As was the custom in those 
times, the site selected for the grave was near the place 
of habitation. ‘The position of the skeleton was much 
the same as at Halling, the knees being bent and the 
thighs drawn up. He, the dead man, had been provided 
with abundance of flints, and the perforated shells, which 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 167 


probably ornamented his body in life, were close by. 
What is most important for our present inquiry is that 
P P quiry 









ZZ ZZ SOU GEA CULTURE 


LZ 
fi fa 
il 


Zs 
ET Ee Hil 3 STERILE LAYER 
S| 







ll 
iii 
==: ae 
SS OS = _UPPER AURIGNACIAN 













«= STeRtLe Laver 


se BS RELL 
BE (xg, MIDDLE. AURIGNACIAN 





ea a (LCRA. Kg a PICKLE: Y 
i eee aR 
FRE Ole ee ee il wi I. STERILE LAYER 


ss Ht 

Bly SN 

S SSA: LOWER 

ANN SSSESSKS 4 AURIGNACIAN 







SSB 
SEA DE 
Zo 






MOUSTERIAN 


HUMAN REMAINS 








BASE ROCK 


Fic. 61.—The strata at the rock-shelter at Combe Capelle, showing the 
position of the human skeleton discovered by O. Hauser. 


the bottom stratum of all contained, not objects of the 
Aurignacian culture, but of the preceding or Mousterian 


168 THE ANTIQUITY: OF "MAN 


civilisation. Indeed, one of the implements which lay 
near the skeleton, and was probably interred with the 
body, was a Mousterian ‘‘ point ”—a small, wedge-shaped, 
flint implement or scraper. 

On the evidence observed and recorded by Herr 
Hauser,! we must regard the man found at Combe Capelle 
as representative of a native of the Dordogne about the 
beginning of the Aurignacian period. The type is 
familiar to us—it is a variant of the modern-looking, 
narrow-headed men of the Aurignacian period, a type 
which would excite no comment, if dressed in modern 
garb, in any assemblage of modern Europeans. The 
head is merely.a variety of the Engis type and of other 
late Paleolithic skulls foundin England. It is a type, too, 
which occurred in Malta during the Neolithic period 
and which still abounds amongst modern Sardinians. 
The length of the skull, 198 mm., is 6 mm. longer than the 
Langwith specimen ; its width is only 130 mm.—5 mm. 
narrower.” ‘The narrowness of the head is very apparent 
when a comparison is made of the width and length— 
the width is only 65-7 per cent. of the length, a narrower 
head than even that found at Langwith. The vault of 
the skull is well sprung, its height above the ear-holes 
being 120 mm. ‘The brain capacity is about 1440 c.c.— 
slightly under the modern average. The facial features 
are those we are familiar with to-day. The size of the 
teeth and development of the palate are average, the 
length of the palate being 51 mm.; its width at the 
second molars, 64 mm. (see fig. §5, p. 147). The three 
molar teeth, measured along the line of the crowns, are 
28-5 mm. for the upper, 34 mm. for the lower—rather 
more than is usual in modern dentitions. He was a man 
of small stature, unlike the Cromagnon type, also of the 
Aurignacian period, but in this respect like the river-bed 
people and the so-called negroids of Grimaldi. The 
length of his thigh bone is only 425 mm ; his stature, a 

1 Praehistorische Zeitschrift, 1910, vol. i. p. 273 


2 For full description of skeleton, see Professor Klaatsch’s account, 
Praehistorische Zeitschrift, 1910, vol. i. p. 285. 


wer 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 169 


little over 1550 mm. (5 feet 2 inches). Thus, we see, at 
the close of the Mousterian period and at the beginning 
of the Aurignacian the men in the Dordogne valley were 
people of modern types—the Cromagnon people, tall ; 
the Combe Capelle, short. 

In the autumn of 1900, while Herr Hauser was exposing 
the Aurignacian man at Combe Capelle, M. Peyrony, 
the schoolmaster at Les Eyzies, the picturesque cliff 
village on the Vézére, was uncovering a human skeleton 
in a stratum of Mousterian age. M. Peyrony had de- 
voted many years to the exploration of the prehistoric 
sites along the valley of the Vézére, and, at the time of 
which I write, the autumn of Igo09, was exploring the 
deposits at the foot of a rock-shelter at La Ferrassie 
(fig. 60), on the western side of the valley, four miles above 
the point at which the Vézére joins the Dordogne, and 
nearly twenty miles to the north of the site at which 
Herr Hauser was excavating. M. Peyrony worked in 
conjunction with Professor Capitan of the Collége de 
France, Paris. ‘The deposits at the rock-shelter showed 
the following strata 1 (see fig. 62). The upper stratum, 
4 feet in depth, was made up of soil, with blocks of lime- 
stone which had fallen from time to time from the face of 
the sheltering rock. ‘Then followed three strata of Aurig- 
nacian age—representing three phases of the culture of 
that time—forming a thickness of 6 feet. Ata depth of 
10 feet came the deposit which particularly interests us 
here—a deposit of the Mousterian period. It was about 
20 inches in thickness, and contained the typical flint 
implements and chips of the period, with broken fragments 
of the bones of reindeer, bison, and horse—remnants of 
ancient feasts. In the lower part of this stratum a 
skeleton came to light, lying on its back with the lower 
limbs strongly bent. There was no evident sign of 
grave furniture or of deliberate burial, but we may be 
certain, seeing that a complete skeleton was represented 

1 For an account of this station, see Revue Scientifique, 1910, vol. xlviii. 


p- 193; Bull. et Mém. Soc. d’Anthrop. Paris, 1910, ser. 6, vol. i. p. 48. 
The skeletons are also described by Professor Boule (see reference, p. 174). 


170 THE ANTIOULTY: OF “MAN 


and that the strata had been the site of human habitation, 
that the body had not been entombed by natural means. 
Unfortunately, the skull was broken, but was repaired 
sufficiently to permit a cast of the brain cavity being made. 
The brain was large. Other parts of the skeleton were 
fairly complete, every bone Being marked by those, 


























































































: HUuMUS 

ete SSS 

2.2: LZZ LLL 

-2. & LLL LE VIZ VPPER AURIGNACIAN 

ELLE 
[ZZ Ze CLAY 

25 yea 
———— So 

1.3) eS SS ——— ==| MIDDLE AURIGNACIAN 











SS SS LOWER AURIGNACIAN 
eee | MOUSTERIAN 
7H ee H 
Un Ln LN 
Hes oA 
f Hil i ii ii 

tic 












ACHEULIAN 














| STERILE LAYER 


Fic. 62.—Section of the strata at La Ferrassie. 


peculiar characters which denote, as Professor Capitan | 
recognised, the Neanderthal race. In the same stratum, 
another skeleton showing Neanderthal characters was 
discovered in the following year, 1910. ‘This proved to be 
the skeleton of a woman; parts of three children were 
also recovered. ‘Thus, almost in the same month, and 
less than twenty miles apart, ancient human skeletons 
were discovered, two at La Ferrassie and one at Combe 
Capelle. The last named was found in the oldest 
Aurignacian stratum, and belonged to a man akin to 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 171 


modern races, while the skeletons found at La Ferrassie, 
in the Mousterian stratum, were of a race or type totally 
different from any human race now living. In both 
cases these human remains had been folded down between 
untorn and undamaged pages of the records which 
Nature makes of the earth’s history. As will be seen by 
a comparison of figs. 61 and 62, the La Ferrassie record 
is the older. Men began to live at the rock-shelter of 
Combe Capelle in the Mousterian period ; their records 
cease at the Solutrean. At La Ferrassie, the records 
begin in pre-Mousterian times—it was inhabited when 
the characteristic hand-axes of the Acheulean culture 
were fashioned ; the records at Ferrassie close with the 
Aurignacian period. 

It was not the discovery at La Ferrassie, however, 
which drew the attention of Europe to the unexpected 
fact that the Neanderthal type of man was immediately 
succeeded by men of the modern type. The credit of 
having first demonstrated that Neanderthal man was not 
converted into modern man, during the middle part of 
the Pleistocene period, must be assigned to Herr O. 
Hauser and his colleague, the late Professor Klaatsch of 
Breslau. In 1908, the year before the exploration at 
Combe Capelle, Herr Hauser was excavating on the west 
bank of the Vézére, fifteen miles above La Ferrassie, in a 
cave on the lower terraces behind the little town of Le 
Moustier. . 

The site he had chosen was situated at a lower level 
than the famous cave investigated by Lartet and Christy 
in 1863, where they found the types of flint workman- 
ship which are now regarded as characteristic of the 
Mousterian period. Early in 1908, Herr Hauser’s work- 
men began to expose, at a depth of 5 feet below the 
floor of the cave, and accompanied by objects of the 
Mousterian period, a human skeleton. Further excava- 
tion was stopped until the autumn, when, surrounded by 
a company of German anthropologists, in the heart of 
France, the skeleton was finally extracted from its ancient 
bed, with expert eyes looking on to bear witness to its 


172 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


authenticity and antiquity. ‘The skeleton was that of a 
lad of perhaps sixteen years of age; his canine teeth and 
third molars were not fully erupted; the growth lines of 
the long bones were unclosed. There could be no 
question: he had been deliberately buried. Near his 
right hand was a hand-axe of the Acheulean culture, but ° 
typical implements of the Mousterian period were near 
by. Charred remains of the ancient ox—the urus—were 
noted. The body had been laid on its right side, with 
the face turned down, and a pillow of stones placed under 
the head. The skull was badly crushed, and Professor 
Klaatsch was not altogether fortunate in the reconstruc- 
tion of its fragments. The head was remarkably large 
and capacious, and showed all the curious features of the 
Neanderthal race. Every bone of the body, as Professor 
Klaatsch has described in great detail,1 showed certain 
features which differentiate them from the corresponding 
bones of modern man. ‘The skeleton, or what remained 
of it, was subsequently acquired by the Museum of 
Ethnology, Berlin, where it is now preserved. A more 
accurate reconstruction of the skull has been made. 
Herr Hauser’s discovery of a Neanderthal skeleton in a 
stratum of Mousterian age in 1908, and, in the following 
year, of a skeleton of the modern type in a stratum of 
Aurignacian age, effected a revolution in our attitude 
towards the nature of Neanderthal man, and our con- 
ception of the antiquity of men of the modern type. 

In the autumn of 1909, while these explorations were 
being carried out at La Ferrassie and at Combe Capelle, 
discoveries of even greater importance were being made 
higher up in the valley of the Dordogne. The Vézére, 
as we have seen, is a tributary of the Dordogne. Seventy 
miles higher in its course, the parent river is joined by 
another tributary from the north—a small one—the 
Sourdoire, which has carved a valley out of an agricultural 
country—-a plateau of limestone in the department of 
Corréze. For some years three excellent archeologists, 

1 Archives fiir Anthropologie, 1909, ser. 7, vol. iv. p. 287. Ergebnisse 
der Anatomie und Entwickl., 1907, vol. xvii. p. 431. 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD ra 


the Abbés A. and J. Bouyssonie and Bardon, then stationed 
in that part of France, had investigated local sites of pre- 
historic man with great skill and success. In the autumn 
of 1908, they were exploring a small cave, situated in a 
terraced field rising on the side of the valley ot the 
Sourdoire, near the rustic village of La Chapelle-aux- 
Saints (fig. 60). The cave was of small dimensions—even 
when cleared out it was not high enough for a man to 
stand erect in. At its widest part it only measured about 
13 feet (4 m.), whilst the furthest recess was less than 





SKELETON Lig 
MOUSTERIAN STRATUM 
LATER DEPOSIT 


Fic. 63.—Section of the cave at La Chapelle-aux-Saints (Boule), 


20 feet from the low entrance on the face of the limestone 
terrace. The deposits on the original floor were about 
3 feet in depth, and exhibited two strata or zones (fig. 63) 
—an upper one, rather less than 2 feet in depth, and a 
deeper, a little over a foot in thickness. The upper 
stratum was sterile so far as our present inquiry is con- 
cerned, but the deeper, a yellowish clay laden with 
remains of extinct animals and implements of the 
Mousterian culture, has an immediate bearing on our 
search. The animals represented in the deeper stratum 
were the woolly rhinoceros, the reindeer, a Pleistocene 
form of horse, the boar, the ibex, the bison, the cave- 
hyena, and the Alpine marmot. ‘The implements, over 


174 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


a thousand in number, were the typical products of the 
Mousterian period—the Mousterian “ points,” scrapers, 
and flakes. The remains of two distinct hearths were 
noted near the level of the original floor. 

The Mousterian stratum was observed to dip down , 
into a depression in the floor, near the centre of the cave 
(fig. 63). In this depression, the abbés exposed the 
skeleton of a man—again of the Neanderthal type. The 
body had been laid on its back, head to the west, and 
with knees, thighs, and elbows flexed—the contracted 
posture. The head was protected by an arrangement of 
flat stones, near which was part of the skeleton of the leg 
and foot of an ancient type of ox. Other stones were 
placed round the body, between it and the sides of the 
depression in the floor—regarded by the abbés as a 
grave purposely dug for the body. Numerous beauti- 
fully worked flints of the Mousterian period lay near the 
skeleton. ‘The Mousterian stratum over the gravel was 
intact; the cave had been occupied in the Mousterian 
period long after the body had been laid to rest. Even 
at this early period, a species or kind of man, not directly 
related to modern races, was burying his dead and 
furnishing them with an outfit as provision for a long 
journey. ‘The human mind, even then, held hopes and 
beliefs as to what happened after death. Clearly the 
Mousterian period and Neanderthal man do not represent 
the human dawn. Still, they belong to that remote date 
at which the middle terrace of the Thames valley—on 
which so much of central London is now built—was 
being formed by the action of the river. 

The discovery at La Chapelle-aux-Saints marks a stage 
in the progress of our knowledge of ancient man. We 
see, in 1908, that the methods employed in the explora- 
tion of caves had become exact and systematic, replacing 
the somewhat haphazard efforts of an earlier period. 
The splendid memoir ! written by M. Marcelin Boule, 


1 Annales de Paléontologie, 1911, vol. xi. pp. 1-270, 16 plates. Also 
Fossil Men, translated from the French with an introduction by Jessie 
Elliot Ritchie and James Ritchie, London, 1923. 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD Ty 5 


Professor of Paleontology in the National Museum of 
Natural History, Paris, where the La Chapelle man now 
finds a home, represents the most thorough and exact 
investigation ever made of an ancient human skeleton. 
The man of La Chapelle-aux-Saints was worth all the 
pains which Professor Boule has bestowed on him. ‘The 
skull was broken, parts of the face were defective, some 
parts of the skeleton were missing, but such blanks were 
supplied by the two skeletons of adults found by MM. 
Capitan and Peyrony at La Ferrassie. Professor Boule 
estimates the age of the La Chapelle man at fifty or fifty- 
five years, but the open condition of the sutures between 
the bones of his massive skull suggests a younger age— 
perhaps under forty. For such an age, the teeth, which 
were planted in jaws of exceeding strength and size, are 
in a surprisingly bad state. All the molar or chewing 
teeth had been lost from disease during life. The 
dimensions of the skull (see fig. 70, p. 201) greatly exceed 
those of an average modern man. The maximum length 
is 208 mm.; the width, 156 mm., represents 75 per cent. 
of the length; the skull being thus, in spite of its great 
length, on the border line which separates the long- 
headed and medium-headed groups. ‘The height of the 
vault above the ear-holes is about 118 mm.—a low amount 
for such a long and wide skull. ‘The great capacity—over 
1600 c.c., at least 120 c.c. above the modern average— 
seems inconsistent with the great beetling, ape-like eye- 
brow ridges and massive jaws. Nor was it a simple brain. 
The cast taken from the interior of the skull—the subject 
of a special memoir by Professor Anthony '—shows that 
all the parts of the human brain were already fully repre- 
sented. Like all men of the Neanderthal race,? the 
La Chapelle man was not tall—under § feet 4 inches 
(1-600 m.). He had many characters which may justly be 
called simian or primitive, but he had others which can- 
not be so classed—such as the size of the brain and the rela- 
tive proportion of the limbs. In apes, in certain modern 
and ancient races—-such as the Cromagnon people of the 
1 1’ Anthropologie, 1911, vol. xxii. p. 1. eee p. 221. 


176 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Aurignacian period—the forearm and leg are relatively 
long as compared with the upper arm and thigh, but in 
Neanderthal man the forearm and leg are relatively short, 
even when a modern European is taken as the standard. 
In the evidence provided by the discoveries at Le: 
Moustier, La Ferrassie, and La Chapelle-aux-Saints, one 
is forced to the conclusion that the Dordogne, during 
the Mousterian period, had as its sole inhabitants men 
of the Neanderthal type; in the succeeding period—the 
Aurignacian—men of the modern type took their place. 
At least, men of the modern type have never been found 
in a stratum of Mousterian age in this region; only 
remains of Neanderthal man have been so found. Such 
an inference has the further support of discoveries made 
by Dr Henri Martin? in the Department of Charente, 
adjoining the Department of the Dordogne on the north- 
west (fig. 60). For fifteen years, from 1905 onwards, 
Dr Martin explored a deposit of the Mousterian age, 
situated at the foot of an old rock-shelter: at La Quina 
and buried under débris which had fallen from the cliff. 
Along the valley and near the cliff flows a small stream— 
the Voultron—on its way to join the Dronne, another of 
the northern tributaries of the Dordogne. The deposits 
at La Quina showed three strata, belonging to different 
phases of the Mousterian period. Dr Martin found not 
only the typical implements of the middle and later — 
stages of the period, with remains of the reindeer, the 
horse, and primitive ox (Bos primigenius), but also rude 
implements worked in bone. In 1910, he found a human 
astragalus or ankle-bone which was recognised by its 
peculiar form to be that of a man of the Neanderthal 
type—so distinctive is the structure of this race. In 
September I911, two years after the famous discoveries 
in the region of the Dordogne, Dr Martin found in the 
lowest part of the deeper of the two Mousterian strata, 
a human skeleton, again of the Neanderthal type. The 
bones were embedded in a greenish sandy clay, a silt 
deposited: in the bed of the Voultron when that stream 
1 L’Homme fossile de la Quina, Paris, 1923. 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD | 177 


flowed nearer to the foot of the rock-shelter than it does 
now. ‘The discoverer formed the opinion that the body 
had fallen in the stream and had thus become naturally 
entombed. When we remember the instances already 
cited, where men of both the Mousterian and Aurignacian 
periods have buried their dead near or under the sites of 
habitation, we are inclined to regard La Quina as a similar 
case—one of burial. Altogether parts of about twenty 
individuals were found. ‘The skull of a child aged eight 
years shows distinctive features; the supra-orbital ridges 
are already in process of development, and the eye- 
sockets are remarkably large. 

The skeleton found at La Quina is probably that of 
a woman—the first of her race to be discovered in France. 
Neanderthal women, we shall see, have also been found 
elsewhere—in Croatia. Probably, too, the Gibraltar skull 
is that of a woman. We are familiar with the sexual 
differences which distinguish the average modern man 
from the average woman. Our knowledge is founded 
on the study of hundreds of individuals. When a totally 
new form of mankind is discovered, we cannot foretell 
the manner or the degree of sexual differentiation. Hence 
the uncertainty as regards the sex of the individual 
represented by the La Quina skeleton. The skull is 
long, 203 mm.; rather narrow in comparison with the 
length, 138 mm., giving a head index of 68. The eye- 
brow ridges are as greatly and prominently developed 
as in male skulls, and such is not the case in skulls of 
modern women. ‘The jaws of the La Quina woman are 
strong and the teeth big. ‘The bones of the vault of the 
skull are about 5 mm. in thickness, the same as in modern 
skulls of average thickness, whereas in the skulls of Nean- 
derthal men in particular and Palzolithic men in general, 
the vault has a thickness of 8 or 10 mm. ‘The brain 
capacity of the skull is estimated by Professor Anthony ? 

1 Bull. et Mém. Soc. d’Anthrop., 1920, sér, vii. t. i. p. 113; L’ Anthro- 
pologie, 1921, vol. xxxi. p. 331. 

2 The brain is fully described by Professor Anthony. See reference, 


p- 613. 
VOL. I, 12 


178 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


at 1350 c.c., about the same as for modern women, but 
250 c.c. less than the capacity of the La Chapelle man’s 
skull. The stature is calculated to have been I-500 m., 
about 5 feet. 

The four years between 1907 and IgI1I witnessed a 
remarkable series of discoveries of Neanderthal man in 


- 


P>>> 
ZA 
eZ <a> 


BE 


AZZ 













“igh 
VG; YL 
ZZ YA Vi 
Yu: YG: LLB, 
CZ LAB 
Lb typ 
eg Le 
GY) Lisp Eby 
by; Up 



















7) 


Gee ZED LEE 


és 









LoL, 
EE Lig eM 
ae Ly Gl a8 LEE? 
Lid Uy Yl POSITION 
YP ae SKELETON 


Fic. 64.—Section of the strata at La Quina, the strata removed during 
excavations being represented by stippled lines. (After Dr Henri 
Martin.) 


France. All of them belonged to the Mousterian period. 
Before 1907, several important finds had also been made 
in France. The discovery of a lower jaw in a cave at 
Arcy-sur-Cure, in the Department of Yonne, carries the 
distribution of Neanderthal man to the centre of France. 
This find was made in 1859. In 1889, a lower jaw was 
discovered in the cave of Malarnaud, in the famous 
Department of Ariége, at the foot of the Pyrenees (fig. 60). 
In 1895, in a cave some distance to the west, at Isturitz 
(Basses-Pyrénées), M. ?Abbé Breuil discovered the lower 


\ 


MOUSTERIAN PERIOD 179 


jaw of an individual of the Neanderthal race. Inthe same 
year as the Malarnaud specimen was discovered, M. Piette, 
who explored the Mas d’Azil deposits, found certain frag- 
mentary bones of the face in a cave near Gourdon, in the 
valley of the Cean, a southern tributary of the Dordogne 
(fig. 60). 

The list for France is complete when the discovery of 
three fragments of jaws by M. Favraud, in a Mousterian 
stratum in the Department of Charente, is mentioned. 


CHAPTER IX 


THE DISTRIBUTION OF NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE 


In the light of those later discoveries of Neanderthal 
man in Mousterian strata of South-Western France, we 
may now proceed to give a brief review of similar finds 
made in other parts of Europe. ‘Taking Spain first, there 
is only one discovery to note, but it is an important one. 
It is now proved that the skull found at Gibraltar in 1848 
was the very first recorded discovery of the remains of 
Neanderthal man.! Colonel Kenyon, Commandant of 
the Royal Engineers at Gibraltar in 1910, found the 
following entry in the Minutes of the Gibraltar Scientific 
Society, dated 3rd March 1848 :—“‘ Presented a Human 
Skull from Forbes Quarry, North Front, by the Secretary.” 
The secretary then was Lieutenant Flint of the Royal 
Artillery. The skull was brought to England by Mr 
George Busk in 1862, and presented by him, in 1868, to 
the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, England, 
where it is now preserved. The subsequent history of 
this specimen is instructive. Exhibited at scientific meet- 
ings in England and France, examined by Huxley, Broca, 
Busk, Falconer, who proposed the name of Homo calficus 
(from Calphe, the ancient name for Gibraltar),? the place 
of this skull among the records of ancient man did not 
become apparent until the twentieth century was well 


begun.? ‘The late Dr Gustav Schwalbe, Professor of 


1 See Nature, 1911, vol. lxxxvii. p. 313. 

2 [bid., p. 314. 

3 For a full description of the Gibraltar skull, see Professor Sollas’s 
account, Phil. Trans., 1908, ser. B, vol. cxcix. pp. 281-339. 


180 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE 181 


Anatomy in the University of Strassburg, had by then 
established the separate identity of the Neanderthal race.} 
Anthropologists gradually came to see that the Gibraltar 
skull—hitherto so obscure in its nature—was only a 
variant of the Neanderthal type. Further inquiries were 
made into its history. In 1g10, Dr W. H. L. Duckworth ? 
of Cambridge University explored the site of Forbes 
Quarry from which the skull came. He found the quarry 
was situated under the northern face of the famous rock 
—on the side looking across the flat tongue of land which 
joins the rock to Spain. Even in 1910—sixty-two years 
after the discovery of the skull—there could still be seen 
the remains of a cave in the limestone cliffs of the quarry. 
The operations carried out by the quarrymen also exposed 
a section across the débris of chips and blocks which had 
been detached from the face of the cliff and gathered at 
its foot as a cemented mass or breccia. In the floor of the 
cave Dr Duckworth found alternate layers of stalagmite 
and sea-sand, which had to be explored by blasting, so 
closely were the fragments cemented together. He found 
neither fossils nor implements there. In other caves, 
however, he did make an important discovery—namely, 
flints worked in the Mousterian manner. It was clear 
the rock had been inhabited in Mousterian times. The 
Gibraltar skull itself carries evidence of having come from 
the floor of such a cave as Dr Duckworth saw at Forbes 
Quarry: the nose and orbits are still choked with a 
mixture of sand, limestone, and cement, similar to the 
material in the floor of the cave. In the cemented 
matter on the skull there also remain shell fragments.® 
After sixty-two years of investigation we are now in 
a position to assign this remarkable document—the 


1 See Verhand. der anat. Gesellsch., 1901, p. 443 also see reference, 
- 192. 
s 2 urn Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1911, vol. xli. p. 350; “ An Account of 
a Second Visit,” zbid., 1912, vol. xlii. p. 515. 
3 The north front of the Rock was visited by M. l’Abbé Breuil in 1914, 
1917, and 1919. He examined the site of Forbes Quarry and discovered 
at some distance to the east a Paleolithic rock-shelter of Mousterian date. 


Journ. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1922, vol. lii. p. 46. 


182 THE ANTIOUITY OF MAN 


Gibraltar skull—to its approximate place in time. All 
the skulls of the Neanderthal type have come from 
deposits of Mousterian age; we may allocate the 
Gibraltar individual to that period with some degree of 
certainty. Indeed there is now definite evidence that 
men of the Neanderthal type lived on the shores and 
islands of the Mediterranean during the Mousterian 
period. ‘This culture has been discovered in various 
parts of Spain; a lower jaw, which Dr H. Obermaier 
ascribes to Neanderthal man, has been found in a 
deposit at Bafiolas, south of the eastern end of the 
Pyrenees. 

In spite of the numerous discoveries which have added 
to our knowledge of Neanderthal man, the Gibraltar skull 
still holds a unique place. In no other specimen is the 
base of the skull preserved. ‘The base of the Gibraltar 
skull is remarkably straight and simian in its conformation 
(fig. 80). The face, too, is less broken than in any 
other specimen (fig. 71). The nose is most capacious, 
and reminiscent, in the region of the face surrounding 
the nose, of the condition seen in the skulls of gorillas. 
Yet the upper jaw is not projecting nor simian ; the face 
is not prognathous. ‘The lower jaw, unfortunately, was 
never found, and a part is missing from the vault of the 
skull, leaving some doubt as to the exact size of the brain. 
On a former occasion I estimated the capacity by meas- 
uring the more intact half of the skull with millet seed, 
and found the brain space to be just under I100 c.c.? 
At a subsequent date a brain cast was made of plaster ; 
the cast displaces 1150 c.c. of water. The cast is too flat 
on the vault, and hence a little must be added—perhaps 
So c.c.—making the brain size about 1200 c.c._ Professor 
Sollas and Professor Boule give slightly higher estimates 
—the former 1260 c.c., the latter 1296 c.c. The brain 
is smaller than that of any other Neanderthal individual 


i See thie investigations of Professor G. L. Sera, Archivio per P Antro- 


pologia, 1909, vol. xxxix. pp. 5-66. 
2 See Ancient Types of Man, 1911, Harper Brothers. Also Nature, 1910, 


vol. Ixxxiii. p. 88. 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE 183 


so far discovered. The La Quina specimen makes the 
nearest approach, with a capacity of 1367 c.c. Very 
probably, as Professor Sollas has supposed, the small 
brain may indicate that the skull is that of a woman. 
We shall return to some of the most peculiar features of 
the Gibraltar skull in another chapter.t. The fact which 
we note at present is this, that, whether of the Mousterian 
or of an earlier date, we have in this specimen the most 
definite evidence that the Neanderthal type of man, like 
men of the modern type, was divided into local races or 
varieties, the Gibraltar race differing very materially 
from its allies—perhaps contemporaries—in Central and 
Southern France. As we look into the world of ancient 
man, the problems of human origin become more complex, 
and their solution more intricate and dificult. ‘The world 
of ancient man, although its population was small, yet 
contained a large diversity of types, so different from the 
teeming millions of to-day which represent mere varieties 
of the same type. 

In this cursory survey of Europe in search of the 
discoveries of Neanderthal man, we pass from Spain to 
Jersey. An elevation of 60 feet would unite Jersey with 
the west coast of Normandy by dry land—a union which 
has been made and broken many a time even in recent 
geological history. At St Brelade’s Bay, on the south 
coast of Jersey, granite cliffs rise to a height of 200 or 
poostcers In a cleit on their’ face opens lia Cotte de 
St Brelade—a cavern excavated by the sea when the 
waves beat against the coast, 60 feet above their present 
level. Until 1910 the cave was buried beneath a mass of 
rubble, 30 feet deep. The chance discovery of a flint 
implement on the beach below the site of the cave led to 
its exploration by the Société Jersiaise. Dr R. R. Marett 
of Oxford University has published a full and clear account 
of the discoveries at St Brelade.* In the deeper strata 


1 See p. 220. 

2 See Archeologia, 1911, vol. Ixii. p. 449; vol. lxiil. p. 203; 1916, 
vol. Ixvii. p. 75. Also E. T. Nicolle and J. Sinel, Man, December 1910, 
p- 185. Bull. Soc. Fersiaise, 1912, vol. xxxvii. p. 213. 


184 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of the cave representing ancient floors, remains of 
hearths were discovered. ‘The prehistoric strata of the \ 
floor yielded an abundance of flint implements worked in 
the typical Mousterian manner. Remains of the woolly 
rhinoceros, the reindeer, a species of horse and of ancient 
ox, revealed the sources from which the ancient cave men 
drew their food supply. Near one of the hearths twelve 
human teeth were found, all of them parts of a single set, 
and all of them showing those peculiar features which 
stamp and distinguish the teeth of Neanderthal man.? 
The evidence from Jersey is thus in harmony with that 
obtained from the caves in France—the Europeans of the 
Mousterian period were people of the Neanderthal type. 
Further, we see that this peculiar human species reached 
the western seaboard of the Continent ? in Mousterian 
times. 

From Jersey we proceed to Belgium, where some most 
important discoveries of Neanderthal man have been 
made. In the Royal Natural History Museum at 
Brussels is preserved the famous specimen known as the 
Naulette mandible. Only the region of the chin and the 
left part of the body of the jaw remain—enough to tell 
us that it is from the face of a woman of the Neanderthal 
race. All the teeth had dropped from their sockets after 
death. The region of the chin and the teeth sockets 
show those peculiar features which mark the Neanderthal 
species of man. The Trou de Naulette, in which this 
specimen was discovered in 1866, is one of a series of great 
limestone caves visited by the modern tourist as he passes 
up the valley of the Lesse, on his way to the Ardennes, in 
the eastern part of Belgium. Its exploration belongs to 
the early period, 1865-1866, and was carried out by 
M. Edouard Dupont, aided by a grant from the Belgian 

1 See account of the teeth by Keith and Knowles, Fourn. of Anat. and 
Phystol., 1911, vol. xlvi. p. 2. Also Bull. Soc. Fersiaise, 1912, vol. xxxvil. 
p. 223. [he characters of Neanderthal teeth are again mentioned at 
p. 210 of this book. 


* For a general account, see Prehistoric Man in the Channel Islands, 


by J. Sinel, rg14. Another Jersey cave of Mousterian date is mentioned 
by Mr Sinel. 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE _ 185 


Government. ‘The strata on the floor reached a great 
depth ; the actual stratum in which the mandible was 
found lay 14 feet (4:50 m.) below the present surface. 
Remains of the mammoth, rhinoceros, bear, and reindeer 
occurred in the same horizon, and with them were found 
worked implements of the Mousterian culture. ‘The 
Naulette jaw, like the Gibraltar skull, had to wait until 
the beginning of the twentieth century for its real nature 
to be recognised. 

‘Twenty years later than the exploration of the Naulette 
cave a party of explorers from the University of Liége— 
Marcel de Puydt, Julien Fraipont, and Max Lohest— 
made a discovery of the highest importance. The Lesse, 
on which the Naulette cave is situated, joins the Meuse at 
Dinant (fig. 37, p. 105); fifteen miles farther down (north- 
wards) is the busy town of Namur ; thirty miles beyond 
Namur, Liége. ‘The little valley in which the party from 
Liége made their famous discovery * lies about eight miles 
to the east of Namur. On the eastern side of the valley is 

alimestone cliff sheltering a cave—the “ grotte de Spy.” 
A terrace in front of the cave slopes down to the little 
stream which flows southwards along the valley. The 
skeletons of two men of the Neanderthal type were 
exposed in the terrace at a depth of 14 feet. Strata 
representing three different periods of ancient human 
occupation were passed through. ‘The bodies lay on the 
hearths of the third stratum, a layer only 6 inches 
thick. Later, Dr Rutot ? again examined the evidence 
relating to the antiquity of this stratum, and from the 
remains of the extinct animals, the workmanship of the 
flints, and also a piece of bone used as a human tool, 
concludes that the skeletons are of the same date as the 
men found at Le Moustier, at La Chapelle, and at La 
Quina. These Spy men were typical representatives of 
the Neanderthal species, with large, robust skulls, holding 


1 “Te race humaine de Néanderthal,” par Julien Fraipont et Max 
Lohest, Archives de Biologie, 1887, vol. vii. p. 587. 

* “Ta position réelle des squellettes de Spy,” Bull. Soc. Belge de Gélogie, 
1909, vol. xxiii. p. 235. 


186 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


brains which, in point of size, were above the average 
of the modern European. 

From Belgium we pass northwards to Germany. ‘To 
reach the lower valley of the Rhine, where we propose 
to begin a survey of the discoveries of men of the 
Mousterian period in Germany, we may follow the 
Meuse northwards, or, as will suit our purpose better, 
pass directly to Diisseldorf, situated some sixty miles to 
the north-east of Liége. In the valley of the Diissel, 
which joins the Rhine at Diisseldorf, is situated the cele- 


i60 Z 
Peet: “YG 4 







“NEANDERTHAL CAVE 


Hi ipgm 


Pewee cocevess sone 


i 7 / 
iyigh ify YY, oy 
V4 Vi YY, N RA. OUSSEL My 
{ Yi Yio fy) 
j UY Me Lopinp PFT, yf) 
Vy (s ff SI ph 2, 0; YW 
Li ay 


Fic. 65.—Lyell’s diagram of the Neanderthal cave. 


brated Neanderthal cave (fig. 37, p. 105). This northern 
tributary of the Rhine, after passing Elberfeld, and some 
distance above its termination, enters a deep ravine, with a 
limestone cliff on one side—the left or south side—rising 
to a height of 160 feet. At the time of the discovery, the 
early spring of 1857, the Neanderthal cave opened on the 
face of this limestone cliff, 60 feet above the level of the 
Diissel and 100 feet below the neighbouring plateau 
(fig. 65). By good fortune a physician in the adjacent 
town of Elberfeld, Dr Fuhlrott, was interested in fossil 
remains and in cave exploration, and kept a watch on a 
party of workmen who were quarrying near the cave. 
When the cave was cleared out, Dr Fuhlrott secured 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE _ 187 


from the workmen certain remarkable bones, which at 
first he did not believe to be those of a human being. 
They lay at a depth of 4 or § feet in the loam filling the 
floor of the cave. - Dr Fuhlrott afterwards dispatched the 
various parts of the skeleton—the vault of a skull, right 
and left thigh bones, and right and left humerus (the left 
was imperfect), fragments of the pelvis, shoulder blade, 
and of ribs—to Professor Schaaffhausen of Bonn, an expert 
anatomist. Nothing was found in the cave or observed 
afterwards which gave a clue to the antiquity of the 
Neanderthal skeleton; no remains of extinct animals 
were discovered. No implements were seen or found, 
for at that time (1857) the various cultural phases of the 
Paleolithic period had not been recognised. Professor 
Schaaffhausen had no doubt as to the antiquity or 
humanity of the cave-bones from Neanderthal. In 
1858,1 he published an excellent description of them, 
in which the following passage occurs: ‘‘ Whether the 
cavern in which they were found, unaccompanied with 
any trace of human art, was the place of their interment, 
or whether, like the bones of extinct animals elsewhere, 
they had been washed into it, they may still be regarded 
as the most ancient memorial of the early inhabitants of 
Europe.” 

Now that we are fairly certain as to Neanderthal man’s 
place in time and his relationship to other human races, 
it is interesting to survey the original and classical dis- 
covery as it appeared to a contemporary spectator— 
keenly interested in the problem of man’s antiquity—Sir 
Charles Lyell.2 “I visited the spot in 1860,” he writes, 
“in company with Dr Fuhlrott, who had the kindness to 
come expressly from Elberfeld to be my guide, and who 
brought with him the original fossil skull, and a cast of 
the same, which he presented to me.* From a printed 
letter of Dr Fuhlrott we learn that, on removing the loam, 


1 See translation of paper by Geo. Busk, Nat. Hist. Rev., 1861, vol. i. 
p- 283. The original is in Miiller’s Archives, 1858, p. 453. 

2 Antiquity of Man, 1863, p. 76. 

3 Now in the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, England, 


188 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


which was 5 feet thick, from the cave, the human skull 
was first noticed near the entrance, and farther on the 
other bones lying in the same horizontal plane. It is 
supposed that the skeleton was complete, but the work- 
men, ignorant of its value, scattered and lost most of 
the bones, preserving only the larger ones. .. . On the 
whole, I think it probable that this fossil skull may be of 
about the same age as that found by Dr Schmerling in 
the Liége cavern; but, as no other animal remains were 
found with it, there is no proof that it may not be newer. 
Its position lends no countenance whatever to the 
supposition of its being more ancient. ... When, on 
my return to England, I showed the cast of the cranium 
to Professor Huxley, he remarked at once that it was the 
most ape-like skull he had ever beheld.” 

To Sir Charles Lyell the discovery of the skeleton was 
an isolated and puzzling event. He never guessed it 
was the first representative of a distinct race inhabiting 
Europe during a definite part of the Pleistocene period. 
We see, too, how narrowly the Neanderthal remains 
escaped destruction at the hands of the workmen, and 
how Huxley became interested in fossil man through Sir 
Charles Lyell. Huxley’s contribution to our knowledge 
of Neanderthal man "is certainly one of the most complete 
and incisive analyses ever made of this peculiar fossil man. 
His final judgment was to the effect that, ape-like as many 
of the characters of the skull were, Neanderthal man was 
merely an extreme variant of the modern type of man, 
not a separate species or type. A contemporary of 
Huxley’s, Dr William King, Professor of Anatomy in 
a remote college—Queen’s College, Galway, Ireland— 
reached an opposite conclusion ; 2 but his quietly worded 
verdict was rendered ineffective partly by the vigour and 
emphasis of Huxley’s statement, and partly because at 
that period men were not prepared for a prehistoric 

1 Man’s Place in Nature, 1863. See also Nat. Hist. Rev., 1864, vol. iv. 
- 429. 

2 oT he Reputed Fossil Man of the Neanderthal,” Quart. Fourn. of 
Science, 1864, vol. i. p. 88. 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE ~ 189 


world peopled by different species and different genera of 
mankind. “So closely,” Professor King wrote, ‘ does 
the fossil cranium resemble that of the chimpanzee as to 
lead one to doubt. the propriety of generically placing it 
with man... .” He was inclined to regard the Nean- 
derthal remains as representing not a new species, but a 
new genus of mankind. He was content, seeing that 
only the vault of the skull was known, to create a new 
species—Homo neanderthalensis—for the reception of the 
new species of man discovered by Dr Fuhlrott at Neander- 
thal. Professor King did not know, however, what we 
are now well aware of, that Neanderthal man had a large 
and complex human brain, that he was a skilful artisan, 
that he buried his dead and held certain beliefs regarding 
death. If he had known those things he would not have 
written: “The Neanderthal skull is so eminently simian 
. . . | am constrained to believe that the thoughts and 
desires which once dwelt within it never soared beyond 
those of the brute.” Professor King was not prepared 
to believe that a human brain might be wrapped in an 
ape-like skull, nor that human civilisation was so old that 
since its dawn mankind had lived long enough to become 
actually separated, not into distinct races, as we see in 
the world to-day, but into distinct species, of which 
apparently Neanderthal man represents merely one, while 
all the modern races of mankind represent a second. 

The discovery of the Spy men in 1886, so similar in 
all their characters to the prototype found at Neanderthal, 
dissipated the idea which was held by many anatomists 
that the peculiar characters of the Neanderthal cave bones 

“were due to the chance incidence of disease or to a dis- 
ordered form of growth. It took sixty years to show 
that King was right and Huxley wrong. The researches 
of Professor Schwalbe, of Professor Klaatsch, and, more 
recently, of Professor Boule, have firmly established 
King’s verdict—that Neanderthal man represents a 
separate species. Nor can we doubt, from what has been 
discovered in recent years, that the remains discovered in 
the Neanderthal cave belong to the Mousterian period. 


190 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


A cave in the same locality yielded the remains of the 
extinct kinds of animals which are usually associated with 
implements of the Mousterian culture. 

When it is remembered that the classical discovery of 
Neanderthal man was made in Germany, it is surprising 
that so few traces of him have been found in that country 
during the intervening sixty odd years. ‘That he was 
widely spread throughout the southern parts of Germany, 
there cannot be any doubt, for over eleven stations or 
sites have been found which served him as work-floors. 
The most remarkable of all of these stations is on the 
lower valley of the Ilm, near Weimar, 200 miles to the 
east of Diisseldorf (fig. 37, p. 105). Some eighteen miles 
beyond Weimar, the [lm joins the Saale—the latter, 
flowing northwards, joins the Elbe. We have therefore 
left the watershed of the Rhine and entered that of the 
Elbe. Five miles above Weimar, but on the opposite 
or southern bank of the Ilm, is the village of Taubach, 
where there are pits or quarries, the stone or material 
worked being a fine-grained sand mixed with chalk. 
This deposit or tufa was apparently laid down when the 
Ilm flowed through an inland lake. On the shores of 
this lake lived a race of Neanderthal men, for the workmen 
in the quarries come across numbers of his implements 
in the deeper strata—particularly in one which lies about 
20 feet below the present level of the soil, and which 
appears to have been at one time a land surface (fig. 66). 
In this thin stratum of fine sand and chalk occur fossil 
remains of a fauna which tells in the plainest manner that 
Neanderthal man was living in the valley of the [lm when 
the Germany of that time enjoyed a warmer climate than 
it now does. Fossil remains of the older elephant occur 
(Elephas antiquus), of an early form of rhinoceros (Rhino- 
ceros Merckt), and of other animals which lived in Central 
Europe at the zenith of the long mild interval which 
separated the Mindel (first Pleistocene or Chellean) from. 
the second Pleistocene or Mousterian glaciations (fig. 264, 
p- 717). All the evidence points to this discovery in the 
limestone quarries at Taubach, and in the lower valley of 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE - tor 


the Ilm, as revealing the oldest Mousterian station yet 
known to us. We have fixed 50,000 B.c. as a provisional 
date for the dawn of the Mousterian culture in Europe, 
but at Taubach we seem to have passed beyond our 
provisional limit. 

In the deep stratum (fig. 66), which yields fossil bones, 
flints fashioned in the Mousterian manner, and traces of 
ancient hearths, there were found two human teeth 


see fig. 75, p. 210), a description of which was published 
8: 75>P P P 


SOFT LAMINATED 
CHALKY SAND. 


SOLID 
CHALK-SANO ROCK. 


FOSSIL-BEARING 
LAYER. 














TAUBACH. 


Fic. 66.—Section of the strata encountered in the limestone quarries at 
Taubach, with the bottom stratum on which the fossil bones and 
Mousterian implements occur. 


by Dr Nehring in 1895.1 These teeth have given rise to 
much discussion, some even assigning them to an extinct 
form of anthropoid ape, but that they belong to an early 
variety of Neanderthal man there can be now no doubt ; 
a recent discovery at Ehringsdorf, a suburb of Weimar 
(fig. 37, p. 105), has put to rest any remaining doubt on 
this head. The limestone quarries at Ehringsdorf expose 
the same deposits as occur at T'aubach, only they extend 
to greater depths. On the morning of 8th May 1914, a 


party of workmen were blasting rock in one of these quarries 


1 Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, 1895, vol. xxvii. p. 338. For an account of 
the Taubach strata, see 4us dem Werdegang der Menschheit, by Dr H. von 
Buttel-Reepen, Jena, 1913. 


192 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


at Ehringsdorf when a lucky shot threw out a human lower 
jaw ; the same blast exposed fossil remains of deer, horse, 
ox, bear, and of Merck’s rhinoceros. "The stratum in which 
the human fossil jaw occurred lies 39 feet below the original 
surface of the quarry; another stratum, which is 8% feet 
still deeper, yields implements of the Mousterian culture 
and charred wood derived from ancient hearths. The 
human jaw, like all fossil bones from the Ehringsdorf 
deposits, was soft and fragile when first exposed, 
but it dried and- hardened without distortion. It 
was studied and described by the veteran anthropologist, 
Professor Gustav Schwalbe,! and after his death in 1917, 
was further investigated by Dr Hans Virchow,? son of 
the famous pathologist, who had the good fortune to have 
at his disposal when he prepared his monograph another 
specimen found in the same stratum in 1916—that of a 
child about ten years of age. 

We have only two lower jaws and some teeth to tell 
us what kind of people lived at Taubach and Ehringsdorf 
in these far-distant days, and unfortunately neither 
mandible is complete. A comparison of the Ehringsdorf 
adult mandible with corresponding specimens of Neander- 
thal man leaves little doubt that it was part of a woman’s 
face—a woman with a more prognathous ape-like face 
than is met with in later representatives of Neanderthal 
man. In fig. 67, the upper aspect of the Ehringsdorf 
mandible—the aspect on which the teeth are set—is con- 
trasted with the corresponding view of a typical Neander- 
thal mandible—that of the Spy man No.1. The frame- 
work of lines applied to these drawings is one contrived 
to fit the jaws and dentitions of modern Europeans. A 
line commencing in front, at the incisor teeth, is drawn 
backwards along the middle of the dental arcade ; another 
line crosses the mid-line, 50 mm. behind the incisor teeth 


1 Anat. Anzeiger, 1914, vol. xlvii. p. 337. See also vol. xlix. p. §1, for 
a description of the teeth by Dr P. Adloff. 

2 Die menschlichen Skeletreste ausdem Kampe’schen Bruch in Travertin 
von Ehringsdorf, bet Weimar, Jena, 1920. ‘The two fossil mandibles are 
preserved in the Weimar Museum, 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE 193 


(fig. 67). In the lower jaws of Englishmen the last or 
third pair of molar teeth usually fall in front of the 50 mm. 
line; if in English jaws the hinder borders of the last 
molars are joined by what may be called the “ post- 
molar ”’ line, this line will be found to fall, on the average, 
48 mm. behind the incisor point. In the Ehringsdorf 
jaw the “ post-molar” line falls 63 mm. behind the 
incisor point; in the Spy specimen 54 mm. On the 
other hand, the width of the Ehringsdorf dental arcade, 
as measured between the outer borders of the second pair 








EHRINGSDORF. spy l. 


Fic. 67.—A drawing of the upper aspect and dental arcade of the Ehrings- 
dorf mandible, contrasted with the corresponding aspect of the 
mandible of the Spy man No. 1. 


of molar teeth, is relatively small—64 mm. or less. They 
project about 2 mm. beyond the lateral 30 mm. lines 
shown in fig. 67. This width is greater in the Spy 
specimen—68 mm., whereas in the average English jaw 
it is only 62 mm. We see, then, that in the course of 
evolution the teeth of Neanderthal man tended to become 
arranged in a short and wide arcade. In the Ehringsdorf 
race, a narrow and long palate, resembling that of the 
anthropoid ape, was still retained. Such a shape of jaw 
and palate indicates a prognathous face, the jaws having 
a muzzle-like projection. 

‘There are two features of the dentition of this ancient 
woman of Ehringsdorf which arrest our attention. She 

VOL. I. 13 


194, THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


must, in her youth, have been the subject of a severe 
injury which knocked out the two right incisor teeth, 
and displaced the two on the left, for it will be seen that 
one of them has grown up in the middle line of the jaw 
(fig. 67), while the other leans towards the left canine. 
The crowns of all the teeth are ground down, and there 
are the marks of numerous abscesses or gumboils at their 








90 680 70.60 SO 40 ©30° ~20 to oO 


Fic. 68.—View of the profile of the Ehringsdorf mandible, as seen on its 
right side. (After Schwalbe.) A corresponding view is given of the 
mandible of Spy man No. 1. Both mandibles have been oriented 
on an alveolar plane—one passing parallel to the chewing surfaces 
of the teeth and cutting the alveolar margin at the roots of the middle 
incisor teeth. : 


roots. Further, it will be noted how small are the third 
molar or wisdom teeth—particularly the one on the left 
side. ‘The small size, or reduced nature, of these teeth in 
nowise detracts from the antiquity which has been ascribed 
to the mandible. In many forms of apes—particularly in 
the chimpanzee—there is to be noted a definite tendency 
towards a reduction in the size of the third molar teeth— 
more especially in the upper jaw. 

In fig. 68 there are represented true profiles of the 
Ehringsdorf and Spy mandibles. It will be observed how 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE  ig5 


stoutly the Spy mandible has been developed in the 
region of its chin and symphysis, much more so than in 
the more ancient Ehringsdorf specimen, and yet in this 
respect the latter is the more ape-like or simian. In both, 
as in all varieties or races of Neanderthal man, the tooth- 
carrying, or alveolar, part of the jaw projects far forwards 
—is prognathous—quite overshadowing and masking the 
region of the chin, which retains a retreating ape-like 
contour. An examination of the teeth leaves no doubt 
as to the Neanderthaloid affinities of the Taubach- 
Ehringsdorf people. 

The second mandible, although that of a child of ten 
or eleven years of age, has, just as was the case in the 
child’s skull at La Quina (see p. 177), the primitive 
Neanderthaloid features already emphasised. ‘The ascend- 
ing ramus of the jaw, which serves as a lever for the 
muscles of mastication, has a width of 34 mm. Although 
this child was only about ten years of age the ramus of 
its jaw was as wide as in most adult Englishmen. 

The further discoveries of Neanderthal man in Europe 
need only a brief mention. In Moravia, within the 
northern outskirts of the watershed of the Danube, two 
discoveries have been made of Neanderthal man. In 
both cases only fragments of the lower jaw were found. 
They were found in the floor strata of a cave—one at 
Schipka and another at Ochos in 1906. ‘The remaining 
discovery requiring our attention—one of the very first 
magnitude—takes us beyond the upper end of the 
Adriatic to Croatia, now a province of Yugo-Slavia, and 
right within the base of the Balkan peninsula. We owe 
the discovery to Professor Gorjanovic-Kramberger, a 
Professor in the University of Agram. In 1899, he 
commenced the exploration of a deposit, situated on a 
terrace on the side of a valley near the little town of 
Krapina, and through which the Krapinica flows—an 
early feeder of the Save. A section of the deposits 
exposed in his investigations is shown in fig. 69. He 
began his work at the end of 1899, and in 1906 was in 
a position to publish a splendid monograph embodying 


196 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


his observations and conclusions. As will be seen from 
fig. 69, the deposits he explored on the side of the 
valley, 24 feet in depth, represent the accumulations on 
the floor of a rock-shelter which had been occupied by 
ancient man. On the original floor of the shelter lay a 
bed of gravel deposited when the Krapinica flowed flush 








. BASAL STRATA 
(WITH HEARTHS 


22 SL 
LL LL be, : VELL UY 
“Liza sane sven, Yi R.KRAPINICA 
oe lili 7 DPS Mf Z é es 
as Mit Gp Upset Lif Z Ly 

L4G ee ae “4 fe ( Weds , 





“ 





Fic. 69.—Section of the deposits in the rock-shelter at Krapina (Kram- 
berger). The numbers 1 to 9 indicate the deposits formed during 
periods of human habitation. 


- 


with the floor of the cave—80 feet above its present 
level. ‘The superimposed strata, showing nine different 
horizons marked by human occupation—hearths, tools, 
and débris of meals—proved to be the richest treasury of 
the Neanderthal race ever opened by the explorer’s spade. 
Over two hundred fragments of human skeletons were 
found, representing at least ten individuals of all ages and 
both sexes. One hundred upper and one hundred and 
twenty lower human teeth were collected, all of them 
showing, in a varying degree, the characteristic form we 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE 197 


now associate with the Neanderthal race. Over two 
thousand fragments of bones of the animals of the period 
were found, including those of the same ancient form of 
rhinoceros as occurred at T'aubach (R. Merck1). The 
cave-bear occurred abundantly; it was evidently a 
favourite article of diet. The rhinoceros bones had been 
broken open to extract their marrow. The mammoth 
and many other ancient and modern animals were also 
represented. Some of the human bones were charred, 
and some had been apparently split open: on this 
slender basis the Krapina men have been suspected of 
cannibalism. ‘The implements, like those at ‘Taubach, 
are not of the typical Mousterian forms, but experts 
ascribe them to the culture of that period. Some 
evidence, as at La Quina, was noted of bone having been 
shaped for use as a tool; perhaps wood was also worked. 

Krapina was the first site to provide an opportunity 
for studying the children and the youth of this strange 
species of man. As is well known, there is a close super- 
ficial resemblance between the skulls of man and anthro- 
poid ape during infancy and childhood. The brutal and 
distinguishing features appear on the ape’s skull during 
the years of growth ; the human skull during that period 
changes to a less degree. Hence it is not surprising to 
observe that the children at Krapina are, in the form 
of head and face, more like men of the modern type 
than is the case with their parents. The great simian 
eyebrow ridges do not assume their massive size and 
characteristic Neanderthal form until the later years of 
adolescence are reached. ‘The skulls of the women retain 
the cranial features of the young to a greater degree than 
is the case with the male sex. Hence the Neanderthal 
women were less distinctly marked off from the modern 
type of mankind than was the case with the men. Indeed, 
to account for the variety of forms found at Krapina, 
Professor Klaatsch has suggested that some of the indi- 
viduals may represent captives which Neanderthal people 
had made from their enemies—the contemporary repre- 
sentatives of Homo sapiens. Professor Kramberger is of 


198 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


opinion that, amongst the individuals he discovered, 
there are some which bridge the gap between these two 
types of man—the Neanderthal and the modern. The 
writer has observed no fact which supports such an 
opinion ; the closer the records from Krapina are studied, 
the more one becomes convinced that there are no inter- 
mediate nor hybrid individuals represented. ‘The skulls 
are fragmentary; not one is complete. Yet they are 
sufficiently perfect to show that they carry all the marks 
of the Neanderthal race. Further, as we saw from the 
Gibraltar skull, these Krapina people give us the most 
certain assurance that the Neanderthal species of man, 
like the modern species (Homo sapiens), was separated 
into distinct races. ‘The Krapina and Gibraltar races 
differed from their contemporaries in France, Belgium, 
and Germany. As in modern races, there were, in the 
Neanderthal species, both long-headed and round- 
headed races. ‘The skull from the Neanderthal cave is a 
sample of the long-headed race; those of the Krapina 
people represent a short-headed variety ; the Gibraltar 
skull belongs to an intermediate group. ° 

Thus we see that, in the Mousterian period, in the 
middle Pleistocene age, when the middle or 50-foot 
terrace was being laid down in the Thames valley, 
Europe was inhabited by a peculiar species of mankind— 
of quite a different type from the races which now popu- 
late it. ‘This race spread from Gibraltar in the south 
to Weimar in the north, from Croatia in the east to 
Jersey in the west. The culture of this period has been 
found both in Italy and in England. In neither of these 
countries, however, has any fossil trace of Neanderthal 
man been found so far. ‘The future may make good 
that blank, for we see no reason why he should not have 
occupied both of these countries as well as Central 
Europe. 

The most marvellous aspect of the problem raised 
by the recognition of Neanderthal man as a distinct _ 
type is his apparently sudden disappearance. He is 
replaced, with the dawn of the Aurignacian period, by 


NEANDERTHAL MAN IN EUROPE _ 199 


men of the same type as now occupy Europe. What 
happened at the end of the Mousterian period we can 
only guess, but those who observe the fate of the 
aboriginal races of America and of Australia will have 
no difficulty in accounting for the disappearance of 
Homo neanderthalensis. A more virile form extinguished 
him. He suddenly appears in Europe—from whence, 
future investigations may disclose; the one thing we 
are now certain of is that he was not suddenly converted 
into the modern type of man. 

Before bringing this chapter to a close, mention must 
be made of an event which has an important bearing on 
the history of Neanderthal man. In the autumn of 1917, 
Dr G. Despott, curator of the Museum of Natural 
History, Malta, while excavating a vast cave in the south- 
eastern corner of the island (Ghar Dalam), came across 
unmistakable traces of this strange species of man. 
This discovery, and the one made at Gibraltar almost 
seventy years before, carries the distribution of the 
Neanderthal type to the threshold of Africa. His recog- 
nition in Malta has a particular significance because that 
island is a remnant of the great land bridge which at a 
certain phase of the Pleistocene period united Italy to 
Tunis, and permitted a free exchange of living things 
between two continents. We shall see in another 
chapter (XVIII) that traces of a Mousterian culture— 
the culture practised in Europe by Neanderthal man— 
occur in various parts of Northern Africa, and that there 
has been found, far to the south of the Equator, fossil 
remains of a species of man who was of near kin to the 
species we have just been studying in Europe. All of 
these matters will be discussed when we come to search 
Africa for evidences of man’s antiquity. Meantime we 
must make an examination of the structural characters 
of Neanderthal man and see wherein he differed from all 
living races. 


CHAPTER X 
THE ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES OF NEANDERTHAL MAN 


In the two preceding chapters attention has been con- 
centrated on. the various sites and dates at which the 
remains of Neanderthal man have been found, and on 
the varying place which has been assigned to him by 
anthropologists. We have seen him regarded as the 
product of disease, of Nature in a freakish mood, as an 
ancestral form of man, representing the stage mankind 
passed through during the Pleistocene period, as an 
extreme variant of modern man which had retained an 
undue proportion of simian or ape-like characteristics. 
Then we reached our present concept of him as a separate 
and peculiar species of man, which died out during, or 
soon after, the Mousterian period. All the time we have 
been talking round him, as it were, never attempting to 
lay bare or analyse those features which mark him off 
from all the modern races and varieties of mankind, and 
give him, in the eye of the anthropologist, an altogether 
novel and peculiar position. 

To make the structural differences between the 
Neanderthal and modern species of mankind clear, we 
cannot do better than select those two Pleistocene skulls 
found in the region of the Dordogne—the one at Combe 
Capelle representing the modern type (p. 165), and the 
other from. La Chapelle-aux-Saints, the Neanderthal 
type (p. 172). In the instances chosen, the Neanderthal 
is the larger in all dimensions, save one. It is the more 
capacious, having the larger brain capacity ; it is longer 
and wider, but it is not so high ; its vault is peculiarly low. 


200 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 201 


The depression of the vault is even more marked when the 
Combe Capelle skull is set side by side with the one from 


0 80 60 40 20 


COMBE CAPELLE 





Fic. 70.—Skulls of the modern type (Combe Capelle) and of the Neanderthal 
type (La Chapelle) contrasted on their.lateral aspects. 


Gibraltar. The first rises above the upper limit in the 
conventional linear frame; the second falls far short 





Why COMBE 
i] CAPELLE 





REE EG) 


eS 


* Fic. 71.—A skull of the modern type (Combe Capelle) contrasted with one 
of the Neanderthal type (Gibraltar) as seen in full face. 


(fig. 71). The Neanderthal skull gives us the impres- 


sion of being compressed from above downwards into 


202 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


a bun-like form; the modern skull is flattened in an 
opposite direction, from side to side. All Neanderthal 
skulls show this peculiarly depressed platycephalic form 
—especially apparent in the hinder or occipital region—a 
feature which must have given Neanderthal man in life 
the peculiar appearance of having the hinder part of his 
head buried, apparently, in a thick, bull-like neck (see 
fig. 79). It is true that in certain modern varieties of 
mankind—as in a strain which still occurs in Holland, in 
England, and has been also found in ancient graves in 
America 1—the skull is low-domed or platycephalic, but 
the resemblance to the Neanderthal type is only super- 
ficial. To find a counterpart of the platycephalism of 
Neanderthal skulls we have to go outside the limits of 
human species to the skulls of such anthropoids as the 
gorilla and chimpanzee. ‘The functional meaning of this 
peculiar form of skull, found in anthropoids and in the 
Neanderthal species of man, will be discussed at a later 
stage in this chapter (see p. 217). Meantime we simply 
note the fact that the general form of the brain is modified 
to suit the skull in which that brain is contained. Hence, 
although the brain of Neanderthal man equals or exceeds 
that of the modern type of man in point of size, yet in its 
general conformation it resembles the brain casts taken 
from anthropoid skulls. 

The kind of skull, just described, reveals a radical 
difference in head-formation, and can be readily recog- 
nised in a museum or laboratory. But let us suppose we 
are back in the world of Pleistocene man and are brought 
face to face with Neanderthal man in life—which of his 
features would force themselves on our attention as 
distinctive marks? ‘The colour of the skin, the texture 
of the hair, the cast of countenance, the play of eye and 
lips which distinguish at a glance the better-marked 
varieties of modern mankind—the African, the Mon- | 
golian, the European—are not available, for we have only, 
as regards fossil forms of man, the limited range of 
characters revealed by the dry bones of the face and 


1 See reference, p. 460. 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 203 


limbs. We feel assured, however, that certain features 
of the face would have at once struck us as totally different 
from anything seen on the countenance of modern man. 


To find eyebrow ridges like those of Neanderthal man, 





FO 50 Qa 50 70 
80 | oo 
M | 
| 








80 





120 


(1) (IE) 


Fic. 72.—I. The supra-orbital ridge or torus and other features of the face 
ofamale chimpanzee. II. The form of articular cavity for the lower 
jaw in the Gibraltar skull, contrasted with the forms in the gorilla 
and modern man. 


A. Articular eminence. EE. Digastric fossa. 

B. Post-glenoid spine. F. Occipital condyle. 

C. Meatus of ear. G. Tympanic plate. 

D. Mastoid process. H. Mesial part of articular eminence. 


great continuous horizontal bars of bone, overshadowing 
the orbits—a supra-orbital torus—we have again to 
refer to the anthropoid skull. In the skull of the 
chimpanzee (fig. 72) and of the gorilla we see the same 
development of the forehead and supra-orbital region. In 
modern races the supra-orbital ridges vary enormously in 
form and in degree, but they never assume the anthropoid 


204 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


or Neanderthal form. ‘Their usual development is that 
shown in fig. 71 (Combe Capelle). The supra-nasal or 
middle part of the ridge is quite distinguishable from 
the lateral or temporal part. No doubt these ridges 
tend to become less developed in civilised races. ‘There 
is also no doubt that the supra-orbital ridge or torus is 
part of a bony scaffolding erected on the face and skull 
to serve the purposes of mastication. The outer or 
temporal projection of each supra-orbital ridge gives 
attachment to the chief muscle of mastication—the 
temporal. ‘The upper jaw sends upwards, between the 
eyes, supporting processes to transmit strains from the 
palate to the supra-orbital bar (see fig. 71). On the 
outer side of each orbit, the cheek or malar bone also 
reaches up to the supra-orbital bar, transferring to it the 
strains and stresses caused by another muscle of mastica- 
tion—the masseter—which rises from the cheek bone 
and from the zygomatic arch. A fuller knowledge of 
the mechanism of mastication is likely to throw light on 
the nature of the various shapes and types assumed by 
the supra-orbital ridges. Meantime we simply note the 
fact that Neanderthal man had eyebrow ridges of the 
anthropoid type. 

We have just seen that in general form of cranial 
cavity and of supra-orbital ridge, Neanderthal man 
resembles anthropoid apes, while, in these features, the 
modern type of man differs from them. Are we, then, to 
conclude that Neanderthal man is directly related to, is 
a direct descendant of, an anthropoid form, while modern 
man is not? I do not think so. We must take into 
account the condition of the supra-orbital ridges in all 
anthropoid apes. In the Malayan orang, which is a 
distant cousin to the African anthropoids—the gorilla 
and chimpanzee—the supra-orbital ridges do not form a 
prominent torus. When the outlines of the skull of a 
chimpanzee and orang are superimposed, as in fig. 73, 
some light is thrown on the cause of their great develop- 
ment in the former and slight size in the latter. In the 
orang the face is turned more upwards, and holds such a 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES ~ 205 


relationship to the whole skull that the strains and stresses 
arising during mastication are transmitted, not to the 
forehead, as in the chimpanzee, but to the skull as a whole. 
There is no need in the orang for a frontal scaffolding 
of bone. The retrogression of the supra-orbital ridges 
in the orang is apparently secondary. The gorilla and 
chimpanzee appear to retain the original form—the form 
found in the oldest and most primitive of anthropoid 







CHIMPANZEE — 


FIXATION 


ORANG ~__ 


Of 


OCCIP: CONDYLE 


Fie. 73.—The skull of an orang superimposed on that of a chimpanzee to 
show the presence of a torus supra-orbitalis in the latter. 


apes, the gibbon. On the other hand, the divided or 
bipartite condition of the supra-orbital ridge seen in 
modern human races (fig. 71) is also met with amongst 
old-world monkeys.t If we suppose that the old-world 
monkeys are still more ancient and primitive than the 
anthropoids, then it might be argued that it is modern 
man that has retained the primitive or original form of 
supra-orbital ridge, and that the bony torus, seen in the 
gorilla, chimpanzee, and Neanderthal man, has been 
evolved at a more recent date. 


1D. J. Cunningham, “ The Evolution of the Eyebrow Region of the 
Forehead,” Trans. Roy. Soc, Edin., 1908, vol. xlvi. p. 283. 


206 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


I am discussing at some length the development of the 
supra-orbital ridges, because we could not cite a better 
instance of the kind of evidence we have to use in tracing 
the genealogy of man. We might explain the torus-like 
ridge in Neanderthal man by supposing him to have 
arisen from a gorilla-like stock, and modern man from a 
monkey-like ancestry. That would explain why modern 
man has a forehead of one form and Neanderthal man a 
forehead of quite another type. We should thus fall 
back, as Professor Klaatsch? did, on the theory that 
mankind is multiple in origin—that one human race has 
been evolved from one ancient stock of primates, while 
another race has arisen from another and quite different 
simian stock. But in successfully explaining this one 
and minor feature we should find, if we accept a “ poly- 
phyletic theory ” of man’s origin, that the great majority 
of structural relationships were not capable of being thus 
explained. We must take all the characters of the human 
body into consideration, not one or more isolated features, 
and when we do this it is plain that the Neanderthal type 
and the modern type of man share the great and exceed- 
ingly complex inheritance which is common to the human 
family. We must suppose that this community of 
structure is due to a community of origin—to the fact 
that they have a common ancestry. Further, when we 
begin to analyse the structural nature of man and his 
nearest allies—the gorilla, chimpanzee, and orang—we 
find he shares so much with them, much more than with 
old-world or new-world monkeys, that, to explain the 
widespread community of structure, we are compelled 
to suppose the great anthropoids and all human forms, 
living and fossil, to have arisen from a common stock 
(see Frontispiece). Now in that common stock from 
which anthropoids and men have been evolved we have 
reason to believe that the supra-orbital ridge was of 
the torus type. In the ancestry of modern races it has 
been modified. Indeed, in many living peoples there is a 
tendency to assume the condition seen in feetal or infantile 


1 See Nature, 1911, vol. lxxxv. p. 508. 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 207 


stages, where those ridges are still undeveloped. In 
Neanderthal man, on the other hand, the torus form of 
supra-orbital ridge and the platycephalic shape of cranium 
of the simian ancestor have been retained. 

The great majority of those structural features which 
mark Neanderthal species off from modern races are 
essentially of a simian or anthropoid nature. For 
instance, when the circumnasal region of the Neanderthal 
face is examined (fig. 71) it will be seen to have the 
inflated or blown-out appearance to be observed in the 
gorilla or chimpanzee (fig. 72), differing materially from 
the collapsed or deflated condition seen in the face of the 
existing or modern types of mankind. 

We are surprised to note, however, that one simian 
feature is absent from the nasal region of the Neanderthal 
skull. In the chimpanzee’s skull (fig. 72) the side margin 
of the bony nasal aperture descends towards the teeth, 
bounding a groove or gutter on the floor of the entrance 
to the nasal cavity. ‘These nasal grooves or gutters are 
also present in the skull of many primitive modern races 
—an anthropoid or simian condition. ‘The simian nasal 
gutter is present in the Combe Capelle skull to a slight 
degree, but not a trace of it is present in the Gibraltar 
skull. There, as in the most highly evolved of modern 
skulls, the lateral margins of the nose turn inwards to 
the nasal spine, forming a sharp lower margin at the 
entrance to the nose (fig. 71). The simian nasal gutter 
is a character to be ascribed to the modern type of man 
rather than to the Neanderthal type, although in the 
latter it may, as in the specimen from La Chapelle-aux- 
Saints, have some degree of representation. 

From the time of the discovery of the Naulette jaw in 
1866 it has been recognised that the Neanderthal species 
has certain peculiar markings or characters of the chin 
which have been already touched on in connection with 
the Ehringsdorf jaw (p. 192). In a later chapter (see 
p- 521) it will be necessary to describe in some detail 
the exact manner in which certain muscles of the tongue 
—muscles which play an important réle in articulate 


208 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


speech—make an attachment to the hinder or lingual 
aspect of the mandible in the region of the chin and 
symphysis of the lower jaw. At the present stage it will 
be enough to refer the reader to the diagrams given in 
fig. 74, which represent sections made at the middle line 
or symphysis of the lower jaw. ‘The first figure represents 
a vertical section of the chin region of a very young 
gorilla—under two years of age. ‘The upper or alveolar 
border, on which the incisor teeth are implanted, projects 
well in front of the lower border. Strictly speaking, 
there is no chin—at least no eminence at the lower 





YOUNG GORILLA sPr— NEW 
REANDERTHAL CALEDONIAN. 


MODERN ENGLISH. 


Fic. 74.—Sections of the lower jaw at the middle line or symphysis of a 
young gorilla, of a man of the Neanderthal type (Spy), of a native 
of New Caledonia, and of a modern Englishman. ; 


a, attachment of the genio-glossal muscle; b, of the genio-hyoid muscle; ~ 
c, of the digastric muscle. The arrow points to the genial pit. 


border. On the hinder aspect of the symphysis (ndicated 
by an arrow in fig. 74) there is a pit—the “‘ genial ”’ pit. 
From the lower part of this pit arise the two chief muscles 
of the tongue—the right and left genio-glossal muscles 
(a, fig. 74). Beneath these muscles is a linear impression 
for another pair of muscles, also concerned in the move- 
ments of the tongue, the genio-hyoid muscles (4). Below 
the linear impression and on the lower border or aspect 
of the chin region another pair of shallow impressions 
in the bone marks the attachment of the digastric muscles 
which can depress the jaw and help to open the mouth 
(c, fig. 74). The second section in fig. 74 represents the 
same parts in a Neanderthal mandible—one found at 
Spy. The upper or alveolar border is still the more 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 209 


anterior or projecting ; the lower border and the region 
of the chin recede. There is no chin eminence. On the 
hinder aspect the genial pit is almost filled up, but there 
is still a remnant to be seen (fig. 74). The muscles of the 
tongue arise from areas corresponding to those in the 
gorilla (a, b, c). ‘The next section in fig. 74 shows the 
region of the chin in a representative of a modern 
primitive race—a native of New Caledonia, in the Pacific 
Archipelago. ‘The upper and lower borders of the lower 
jaw are nearly equally prominent; indeed, the chin 
eminence is slightly developed. On the posterior aspect 
of this particular mandible there is a trace of the genial 
pit—a simian trait ; but there are also present below the 
pit special minute projections of bone—tubercles or 
spines from which the special muscles of the tongue 
arise (see fig. 74, a, b). Those tubercles or spines are 
absent in mandibles of the Neanderthal type. Lastly, 
the region of the chin of a modern European is shown. 
The lower border is the more prominent ; there is here a 
well-developed chin eminence. On the posterior aspect 
there is no trace of the genial pit; the genio-glossal 
muscles (a) arise from two projecting points or spines 
of bone. 

We cannot account satisfactorily for the various 
structural features exhibited by the series of specimens 
just described unless we suppose the simian to be the 
ancestral form, and the others—the Neanderthal and the 
modern—to represent modifications of the simian type. 
There can be no doubt that, in the region of the chin, 
Neanderthal man retains a simian condition to a greater 
extent than does the modern type of man. When we 
seek to explain these changes on a functional or physio- 
logical basis we proceed on the belief that they have been 
brought about by the interaction of at least two factors. 
In the first place, the teeth have become smaller ; retro- 
gression in the size of the teeth leads to the front or 
incisor teeth receding in the mouth, leaving the nose 
above and the chin below more prominent. Undoubtedly 
another process has been at work. ‘The lower border of 

VOL. I. 14 


210 THE ANTHOUITY OF MAN 


the mandible, in the region of the chin as well as in the 
region of the cheek, bounds the floor of the mouth. In 
order to secure free movement of the tongue and easy, 
articulate speech, it is highly advantageous to have the 
floor of the mouth opened out. In anthropoids the lower 
border of the mandible encroaches on, and diminishes 
the area of, the floor of the mouth. In the most highly 
evolved forms of men the lower border of the mandible 
is widened or opened out (see fig. 241, p.’ 657). In 
Neanderthal man the expansion of the lower border of 





Fic. 75.—Four lower molars, as seen when examined by X-rays. 


A. Of a chimpanzee. C. A tooth found at Taubach (Adloff). 
B. Of a modern European. D. Of a Krapina individual. 


the mandible is less complete than in man of the modern 
type. . 

It is when we come to study the teeth of Neandertha 
man that we first obtain a real clue to his position among 
the ancestral forms of modern man. In 1907, Professor 
Adloff, then in Konigsberg, published a very important 
series of conclusions he had reached from a study of the 
teeth found by Professor Kramberger at Krapina.t What 
he found is shown in a brief and diagrammatic manner 
in fig. 75. In that figure, A represents the lower molar 
of a chimpanzee, as seen when examined by X-ray 
transillumination. The pulp cavity, in the body or 
crown of the tooth, is small; the fangs, containing 
extensions of the pulp cavity, as far as their tips, are long. 
The lower molar of a modern European—a man of the 

1“ Die Zahne des Homo primigenius von Krapina,” Anat. Anz., 1907, 


vol. xxxi. p. 273. See also Das Gebiss des Menschen und der Anthropo- 
morphen, Berlin, 1908. Also see reference, p. 682. 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 211 


modern type (fig. 75, B)—shows a similar form of pulp 
cavity and of roots. In Neanderthal man the pulp 
cavity attained remarkable dimensions (fig. 75, D); the 
cavity has extended downwards at the expense of the 
roots, which accordingly become very short. ‘The molar 
teeth are large in crown and body and exceedingly short 
'inroot. In C (fig. 75) the lower molar found at Taubach 
fece =p. 191) is represented: It has the Neanderthal 
characters. ‘To this peculiar form of molar tooth which 
became evolved in Neanderthal man I have proposed 
the name of ‘‘ taurodont,” because in general form there 
is a resemblance to the molar teeth of the ox.! To the 
more primitive form, seen in apes and also in modern 
types of men, the name “‘cynodont ” is given, because 
there is a superficial resemblance to the molars of a dog. 
We must admit, then, that in character of teeth Neander- 
thal man had departed widely from the primitive or 
simian type, while races of the modern type have retained 
the older or more simian type of molar tooth. In short, 
with all his primitive or simian features, there are certain 
structural modifications in which Neanderthal man shows a 
greater degree of specialisation than is to be seen in any 
race of living man. How did Neanderthal man come 
by these strangely shaped molar teeth ? Here we touch 
upon one of the most difficult problems presented to 
the student of living things: How do new features 
arise? As regards teeth, we must seek for guidance by 
watching the manner in which they are formed. The 
reader will quickly understand the clue to the present 
problem by examining the two series of drawings, an 
upper and a lower, represented in fig. 76. In the upper 
series we see stages leading on to the formation of the 
second upper molar of a modern man; in the lower series, 
the corresponding stages which lead on to the taurodont 
molar of Neanderthal man—the specimen illustrated 
being a second molar tooth found in the Ghar Dalam Cave, 
Malta. The early stage (A) in both series is the same, 


1 See ‘“‘ Problems relating to the Teeth of the Earlier Forms of Pre- 
historic Man,” Proc. Roy. Soc. of Med., 1913, vol. vi. (Odont. Sect.), p.1. 


212 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the cusps and chewing surface of the crown are formed ; 
in the second stage (B) the side walls of the pulp cavity 
are being formed; the floor for this cavity has appeared 
in the upper but is still absent in the Neanderthal series. 
In the next stage (C) the roots are being formed in 
the upper, but there is no appearance of either floor 








Gian Xe 
4, FISSURE 
- OPERCULUM 





Fic. 76.—Two series of drawings, the upper to illustrate stages in the 
development of the primitive type of molar retained by modern 
man ; the lower, corresponding stages leading on to the specialised 
form of molar found in Neanderthal man. 


E (I), The second upper right molar of a modern European seen 
on its anterior or medial aspect. 
E (II), The corresponding aspect of the same tooth of Neander- 
thalman; the tooth represented was found in the Ghar 
Dalam Cave, Malta. 
I.R., Inner root; A.E.R., anterior external root. 
*, Floor of pulp cavity; **, operculum. 


or separated roots in the corresponding stage of the 
lower. In the final stage (D) the roots are finished in 
the upper series, while in the lower the floor of the 
pulp cavity has at last appeared and thus completes 
the formation of the tooth. No separated roots are 
formed in this extreme example of a taurodont tooth ; 
the floor of the pulp cavity forms a lid or “ oper- 
culum ” at the end of a single swollen root. This new 
form of tooth has been produced in the simplest manner 


possible—simply by delaying the formation of the floor 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 213 


of the pulp cavity from stage B to stage D. We shall see 
that new characters are often formed in the human body 
by altering dates of development. 

In the palate, as well as in the teeth, there is evidence 


of specialisation. The only skull in which the palate 





Fic. 77.—Drawing of the palate of the Gibraltar skull. 


has been preserved nearly intact is that found at Gibraltar ; 
a careful drawing showing the exact dimensions and state 
of that palate is reproduced in fig. 77. It is at once seen, 
not only to be larger than the palate of modern man, but 
also different in shape. Its distinguishing feature is its 
great width, as compared with its length. The primitive 
form of the palate—that seen in anthropoid apes—is one 
with approximately parallel sides, on which the molar and 
premolar teeth are set (see fig. 182, p. 526). In the figure 


214 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


cited the palate of a female chimpanzee is represented. 
The width, measured between the outer margins of the 
second molar teeth, is 58 mm.; its length, represented 
by a line drawn from between the crowns of the middle 
incisor teeth to a point situated at the middle of a line 
joining the hinder borders of the last molar teeth (see 
fig. 78), is 70 mm. ‘The palate is long and narrow, the 
width being 80 per cent. of the length. In fig. 78 the 
outline of the palate of the Gibraltar skull is reproduced 
side by side with the palate of a native ‘'asmanian—the 





GIBRALTAR. TASMANIAN. 


Fic, 78.—Outlines of the palate of the Gibraltar skull, and of a skull of a 
native Tasmanian, showing a contrast in shape. 


latter serving as a representative of a primitive type of 
modern man. It is at once seen that the Tasmanian is 
the more simian in form of palate. Its length is 65 mm., 
its width, 70 mm., the width representing 107 per cent. 
of the length. In the Gibraltar skull the length is much 
less, 54 mm., the width rather greater, 71 mm., repre- 
senting 131 per cent. of the length. Although the La 
Chapelle man had lost most of his teeth from disease, one 
may estimate that the width of his dental arcade at the 
second molars must have been about 74 mm., and its 
length about 64 mm. ‘The width proportion was thus 
about 115 per cent. We have already seen (p. 193) that 
the Ehringsdorf woman retained the simian form of 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 215 


dental arcade. We thus see that not only the teeth but 
also the palate of Neanderthal man had departed more 
widely from the simian type—had undergone a greater 
degree of specialisation—than the palate and teeth of 
races of the modern type. What was the meaning—the 
functional significance—of such a specialisation? ‘The 
Neanderthal teeth, in the writer’s opinion, are of the type 
seen in herbivorous mammals. ‘The wide palate, the wide 
dental crowns and big bodies of the teeth seem to indicate 
powerful side-to-side grinding movements of the mandible 
during mastication. On the evidence of the teeth and 
palate one is inclined to regard Neanderthal man as 
specially adapted to live on a rough vegetable diet. 

In the evolution of the early ancestral form of man 
from an anthropoid type, the palate, jaws, teeth, and other 
parts concerned in mastication appear to have undergone 
retrogression, as the brain became a larger and more 
efficient organ. ‘The brain, by its invention, saved the 
labour of the jaws. The area of the palate (see p. 658) 
may be taken as an index of the extent to which the masti- 
catory system is developed. The capacity of the cranial 
cavity of the skull serves as a rough index of the brain 
power. It will be of interest to inquire how Neanderthal 
man stands in respect of palate and brain development. 
The area of the Gibraltar palate is 31-60 cm.”; the brain 
capacity, 1200 c.c. The ratio of brain to palate is 38 c.c. 
of brain to 1 cm.? of palate. The corresponding area of 
the palate of the La Chapelle man is calculated to have 
been 39:00 cm.” The brain capacity of the La Chapelle 
individual being about 1620 c.c., the brain-palate ratio 
is 41°8:1, a higher brain ratio than in the Gibraltar 
skull. Among anthropoid apes, selecting a female chim- 
panzee as the most favourable example for the purpose 
of comparison, the brain capacity is found to be about 
@501c.c.; the area of the palate, 36-50 cm.”; the brain- 
palate ratio, 8-7: 1—a small brain and a large palate. 
The female chimpanzee and the La Chapelle man have 
palates, although very different in shape, almost of the 
same size. ‘The brain of the chimpanzee, on the other 


216 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


hand, is only a quarter or one-fifth of the La Chapelle 
brain. ‘Taking now a very primitive example of modern 
man, the skull of a native T'asmanian, in the museum of 
the Royal College of Surgeons, England, we find the 
brain capacity to be 1350 c.c.; the palate, 36-70 cm.?; 
the brain-palate ratio, 36-7:1. The palate, in com- 
parison with the brain, is larger than in the two Neander- 
thal specimens just cited. In the Aurignacian man from 
Combe Capelle the area of the palate is approximately 
271 cm.*; the brain capacity, 1440 c.c.; the bras 
palate ratio, 53:3 : I—a ratio which holds true in a large 
proportion of modern races. In the average Englishman 
the brain capacity is 1480 c.c., the area of palate 25 cm.?; 
the brain-palate ratio being 59:1. ‘The palates of 
Neanderthal men were absolutely and relatively large, 
yet the ratio between brain and palate falls within the 
limits of variation seen amongst existing primitive races. 
' In fig. 72 (p. 203) another peculiar feature of Neander- 
thal man is represented. ‘The socket or cavity, in which 
the condyles of the lower jaw are jointed to the base of 
the skull, just in front of the ear passages, is depicted in 
the form seen in the gorilla, in the Gibraltar skull, and 
in a man of the modern type. In the gorilla the socket 
is very shallow, and is placed on a platform or thickening 
of bone at the root of the zygomatic arch—the articular 
surface lying almost flush with the lower border or floor 
of the ear passage (fig. 72). In men of the modern 
type the hinder part of the socket—the glenoid fossa— 
is deep, being excavated to the depth of the roof of the 
ear passage. The front part of the articular platform 
has become developed as in the gorilla, forming an 
articular eminence in front of the socket. It is only the 
hinder or pre-auricular part of the anthropoid articular 
platform which remains undeveloped, giving rise to the 
well-known socket for the jaw—the glenoid cavity. 
_ When the Gibraltar skull—representing the Neanderthal 
type—is examined, this joint is found to resemble that 
of the anthropoid rather than that of modern man. In 
this region of the skull Neanderthal man shows distinctly 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 217 


simian traits. So, too, in the passage of the ear. The 
plate of bone which forms the floor of the passage—the 
tympanic plate—is shaped in Neanderthal man as in the 
gorilla. In the modern type of man it has come to form 
the posterior slanting boundary for the glenoid cavity or 
mandibular socket (fig. 72, II.). 

In the auricular region of the skulls of Neanderthal 
men there is another simian feature to which attention 
may be directed, although it is not concerned in the 
function of mastication. In skulls of the modern type a 
pyramidal-shaped process of bone—the mastoid process— 
descends immediately behind the ear. ‘To this process 
certain muscles of the neck, concerned in moving the 
head, are attached (see fig. 79). It is only slightly 
developed at birth, attaining its full size when the indi- 
vidual has reached adult years. In the gorilla a mastoid 
process is present, but in place of growing downwards to 
form a pyramidal process, it expands into a flange-like 
plate, forming part of the bony occipital platform on which 
the muscles of the neck are implanted (see fig. 72, II.). 
The pit or fossa from which the digastric muscle arises 
is thus left exposed on the anthropoid skull below the 
mastoid process. In skulls of the modern type the pyra- 
midal process covers and hides the digastric fossa (fig. 72). 
In Neanderthal skulls the mastoid process does not assume 
a distinct pyramidal form; in its shape and relations it 
is intermediate to the form seen in young anthropoids 
and that which occurs in men of the modern type. It 
will thus be seen that in the mastoid region Neanderthal 
skulls show a series of characters which may justly be 
regarded as simian in nature and origin. 

Mention has already been made of the flattened platy- 
cephalic skull of anthropoids and of Neanderthal man. 
It is now necessary to look somewhat more closely into 
the nature of this character. In fig. 79 the poise of the 
head in the modern type of man and in the Neanderthal 
type are contrasted. In the Neanderthal poise one has 
the impression that the occipital region of the head was 
partly buried in the neck, owing to the head being tilted 


218 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


or extended backwards. ‘To some degree this is true; 
the head was carried in a more extended or retroflexed 
position, for it will be observed that the muscles of the 
neck have attained a more extensive attachment to the 
occipital region than in the contrasted type. In Nean- 
derthal man the muscles of the neck ascend above the 
posterior end of the lateral blood sinus (see fig. 79, L.8.) 5 
in modern men the muscles of the neck are usually 










Ly Ys 
OS ay 


we 
Y 
go Y) /y' i 















MODERN. NEANDERTHAL. 





Fic. 79.—Diagram showing the poise of the head in the modern and Nean- 
derthal types of man. The Gibraltar skull was used as the basis of 
the drawing of the Neanderthal type, a lower jaw being modelled 
from one of the mandibles found at Spy. 


attached short of this point. Indeed, the head is fixed 
to the neck in the Neanderthal race in much the same 
manner as in young anthropoid apes. We have just 
seen that the mastoid process, which must be counted 
part of the skull which gives attachment to the neck, is 
also partially simian in character. 

It seems to me very probable that this peculiar poise 
of the Neanderthal head is related to the great develop- 
ment of the face and jaws. If the illustrations in fig. 79 
be examined it will be seen that the hinder border of the 
lower jaw lies just in front of the spinal column. If the 
reader will let the head fall forwards on the front of the 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 219 


neck, it will be found difficult to move the jaw, as in 
chewing, because it is wedged behind against the back- 
bone. But if the face be thrown upwards—the occiput, 
of course, sinking backwards and downwards at the same 
time—it will then be found that the mandible has room 
for the most ample movements. It is for a similar reason, 
apparently, that Neanderthal man’s head was fixed in an 
extended pose—-one which gave his lower jaw room 
to move. 

There is another modification in the basal part of the 
skull which tends to throw the face forwards and thus 
give freedom to the lower jaw. In 1863, Huxley! called 
attention to the manner in which the base or axis of the 
skull had become bent during the evolution of the higher 
primates. ‘The greatest amount of bending is seen in 
modern human skulls. Now, in the illustrations given in 
fig. 79, the basal axis of the skull is represented by a 
stippled outline. ‘The pit or fossa for the small pituitary 
body or gland is situated on the upper (intracranial) aspect 
of the basal axis. The part of the base behind ‘the 
pituitary—the postpituitary part—slants downwards and 
backwards, lying over the pharynx; the part in front— 
the. prepituitary part—stretches horizontally forwards, 
towards the root of the nose. In ordinary monkeys the 
prepituitary and postpituitary parts form an almost 
straight line—there is little or no bending. In anthro- 
poids the bending becomes apparent. In fig. 80 the 
degree of bending at the pituitary angle in a gorilla is 
represented; it amounts to 142°. Some years ago 
Professor G. L. Sera 2 drew attention to the fact that 
this angle is very open in the Gibraltar skull—the only 
Neanderthal specimen in which the base is preserved. 
The angle is almost as great as in the gorilla, 140° (fig. 80). 
In skulls of the modern type it varies from 120° to 130°. 
There can be no doubt that the wide, open angle is the 
primitive or simian one; in this respect the Gibraltar 

1 Man’s Place in Nature, and other Essays, p. 192. 


2 “ Nuove Osservazione ed Induzioni sul Cranio Gibraltar,” Archiv. 
Anthropologia, 1909, vol. xxxix. p. 5. 


220 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


skull is very primitive. Wecansee, further, by a reference 
to figs. 79 and 80, that the wide, open angle is related to 
the downward flattening—to the degree of platycephalism 
—of the skull. A widely open pituitary angle, as in the 
Gibraltar skull, tends to pitch the face forwards, thus 
giving room for movements of the mandible. It has the 
same effect as a backward tilt of the head. The pre- 
pituitary part of the cranial base represents the axis of 
the maxillary part of the face as well as of the cranial 


GORILLA 
GAN GIBRALTAR 


NGLISH 






PITUITARY 


OCC: CONOYLE 


Fic. 80.—Superimposed tracings of the basi-cranial axis of the skull of a | 
gorilla, of the Gibraltar skull, and of a modern English skull, to 
show the extent of the pituitary angle. 


cavity. If this anterior part of the cranial base is bent 
downwards—towards the nose and mouth—as in skulls 
of the modern type, the facial parts are also necessarily 
bent downwards and backwards. ‘The long base, the 
wide, open pituitary angle of the cranial axis, the long 
compressed form of the vault, the straight upper margin 
of the squama of the temporal bone, as seen on the side 
of the skull (see fig. 79), are all characters apparently 
correlated with a great maxillary development. ‘They are 
also primitive or simian features. ‘The essential difference 
between the Neanderthal and the modern types of skull 
is that the first, the Neanderthal, is an extended skull— 
the cranial base is opened out or extended at the pituitary 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 225 


angle. Inthe second or modern type the skull is “ flexed” 
—the bending of the cranial axis is increased. 

I have dealt with the Neanderthal skull at some 
length. Every bone of the skeleton has its distinctive 
or specific characters. We have seen that Dr Henri 
Martin was able to identify an astragalus found at La 
Quina as that of a Neanderthal individual. It would 
be impossible to distinguish one modern race from 
another if we were to find merely an astragalus or ankle 
bone. The ribs, too, are peculiarly rounded. Professor 
Schwalbe? and Professor Klaatsch ? published detailed 
analyses of the peculiar characters of the limb bones. 
At a later date, Professor Boule*® restored a complete 
skeleton, and has attempted to give it a life-like pose. 
He represents Neanderthal man as a loose-limbed fellow 
with an easy, shuffling gait—knee and hip joints slightly 
bent. All the parts of his body are as perfectly adapted 
to the upright posture as are those of modern man. He 
was of low stature, varying from 5 feet 1 inch to 5 feet 
5 inches. The height of La Chapelle man is estimated 
to have been 5 feet I inch (1555 mm.). I will content 
myself here by merely giving an outline drawing of the 
thigh bone of one of the Spy men—set between the thigh 
bone of a man of modern type and of a gorilla—as a 
sample to stand for the rest of the skeleton. It will be 
seen at a glance that the Neanderthal thigh bone does 
manifest in its general conformation a more simian 
character than the thigh bone of modern man. In the 
case of the tibia or leg bone, and particularly in the region 
of the ankle, anthropoid affinities are even more marked. 
On the other hand, as regards shortness of forearm and of 
lower leg, he was ultra-human. In anthropoid apes the 
forearm and lower leg, as compared with the upper arm 


1 “ Kritische Besprechung von Boule’s Werk L’homme fossile de la 
Chapelle-aux-Saints,” Zeitschrift fiir Morph. und Anthrop., 1914, vol. xvi. 
Bx 527. 

2 Praehistorische Zeitschrift, 1910, vol. i. p. 272. Ergebnisse der 
Anatomie, 1907, vol. xvii. p. 431. 

3 See reference, p. 174. 


222 THE ANLTIOUITY: OF SMAN 


and thigh, are extremely long, and there are modern 
human races—particularly negro peoples—who show 
some approach to simian proportions. But in this, as 
in his teeth, Neanderthal man had departed farther 
from the simian standard than has modern man. 

A survey of the characters of Neanderthal man—as 























MODERN. NEANDERTHAL. GORILLA. 


Fic. 81.—The Neanderthal (Spy) thigh bone contrasted with the 
corresponding bones of modern man and the gorilla. 


manifested by his skeleton, brain cast, and teeth—has 
convinced anthropologists of two things: first, that we 
are dealing with a form of man totally different from 
any now living; and secondly, that the kind of difference 
far exceeds that which separates the most divergent of 
modern human races. If we were dealing with fossil 
animals which lie outside the pale of humanity we should 
probably give Neanderthal man, not only separate specific, 
but even a separate generic, rank, and distinguish varieties 


ANATOMICAL PECULIARITIES 228 


or even species of Neanderthal men. Further, in most of 
the points in which the Neanderthal man departs from 
modern man he approaches the anthropoids. His 
peculiarities are pronouncedly simian. But not all of 
them; he has also his own peculiar adaptations and 
specialisations. 

It is when we survey the great assemblage of his 
simian characters that we understand how he came at 
first to be regarded as our Pleistocene ancestor. Evolu- 
tion was in the air—evolution from a simian ancestor. 
Here was a human form with simian characters swarming 
in the details of his structure. "The belief in man’s 
recent origin was also, in those early days, dominant. 
Neanderthal man presented himself to the pioneers of 
evolution as a later or Pleistocene stage in man’s evolution. 
When, however, it was realised that men of the modern 
type, just as highly evolved in structure of bone and 
brain as men are now, must have been in existence when 
Neanderthal man was still living, it was apparent that if 
the Neanderthal type did at any stage become converted 
into a man of the modern type, that stage of evolution 
must have occurred before the Mousterian period, the 
one we are now dealing with. 

Further, in size of brain Neanderthal man was not a 
low form. His skill as a flint-artisan shows that his 
abilities were not of a low order. He had fire at his 
command, he buried his dead, he had a distinctive and 
highly evolved form of culture—Neanderthal man was 
certainly not a dawn form of humanity. ‘To find that 
form we must go to a period which lies far beyond the 
mid-Pleistocene age. 


CHAPTER XI 
MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 


Our journey round Europe, described in the previous 
chapters, has led to the conclusion that it was inhabited, 
during the long Mousterian period, by a people altogether 
different from ourselves. When, therefore, we set out to 
seek for pre-Mousterian man, we are naturally on the 
tiptoe of expectation to see what kind of being we shall 
find. Was modern man evolved in some distant part of 
the world, reaching Europe for the first time in the 
Aurignacian period ? Or was he the original inhabitant 
of Europe, being ousted during the time of the Mousterian 
culture by an intrusion or invasion of a foreign and 
strange species of man (Homo neanderthalensis) ? It is 
clear that we must know the past history of the whole 
world before we can answer these questions with certainty. 
Meantime, we must rely on such facts as we now possess. 
We are feeling our way into a very distant period—one 
which lies forty thousand years or more behind the 
present. Naturally, the farther back we go the greater 


1 The times assigned to the various cultural periods dealt with in 
previous chapters are as follows :— 


Neolithic . : : .  2,000— 8,000 B.c. 
Azilian ; : ; .  8,000-10,000 B.c. 
Magdalenian ; : . 10,000-13,000 B.c. 
Solutrean . : . _13,000-15,000 B.c. 
Aurignacian . _15,000-20,000 B.C. 
Mousterian : : . 20,000-40,000 B.C. 


These estimates must be regarded as having a relative rather than an 
absolute value (see fig. 264). 


224 


DENG OPS TE RACIEULEAN PERIOD “225 


become our difficulties and our doubts. Geological 
records, like historical documents, suffer by the lapse of 
time—they become mutilated, destroyed, or completely 
swept away. Seen in a distant perspective, a long period 
of time appears to us a short one. 

The culture of the period we now enter—the Acheulean 
—is sparsely represented in the floor strata of caves and 
rock-shelters. At La Ferrassie, it will be remembered 
(fig. 62, p. 170), the stratum lying under the Mousterian 
contained objects of the older culture—the Acheulean. 
The chief records of this culture lie in deposits along the 
river valleys, in old stream-beds or in upland deposits laid 
down at various intervals during the Pleistocene epoch. 
The site which yields the classic implements of this 
culture (beautifully worked flint hand-axes) is situated at 
St Acheul, near Amiens, in the valley of the Somme. A 
replica of the terrace at St Acheul can be found in 
England, in that stretch of the Thames valley where we 
commenced to study the deposits and culture of the 
Mousterian period, and where I propose to take up the 
search for man of the older or Acheulean period. Fig. 82 
shows the position of the various deposits—remnants of 
ancient beds of the Thames—to be investigated. The 
Mousterian culture was found in the 50-foot terrace— 
the low terrace of continental writers; it is the much 
older terrace—the 100-foot—which is to yield us traces 
of Acheulean man. At Swanscombe, situated on the 
south side of the valley, half-way between Dartford and 
Northfleet, the gravels and loams of the 100-foot terrace 
form an extensive deposit, in some places over 30 feet in 
thickness, resting on the chalk bluffs overlooking the 
river. To obtain the chalk for the production of cement, 
the overlying gravel deposits have to be cleared away. 
In the process of removal thousands of flint implements 
have been discovered at various levels in the gravel 
deposits. ‘They exhibit a variety of styles in workman- 
ship, many of them bearing evidence of great technical 
skill. In former days the implements were gathered by 
the workmen, and, from them, passed into the possession 

VOL. I, a 


226 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of collectors. Swanscombe became renowned for its 
palzeoliths. 

In the corresponding deposits of the Somme valley, 
Professor Commont,! by a careful series of investigations 
extending over the opening decade of the present century, 
observed that the implements were always arranged in 
the same sequence or order when the deposits in which 


e 
“N BAKERSS 
~~’ BOLE g 


= : 
ra 
SWANSCOMBE,, 





Fic. 82.—Swanscombe and neighbouring Paleolithic sites on the south side 
of the valley of the Thames, below London. 


they occur are rightly dated. It was formerly believed 
that there was no cultural sequence of implements in the 
Thames deposits. Collectors believed that in the same 
stratum there may be found unabraded and unrolled 
implements of the most varied types of workmanship. ‘To 
settle the question of sequence, a representative of the 
British Museum, Mr Reginald Smith, and one from 
H.M. Geological Survey, Mr Henry Dewey, were 
delegated, in the summer of 1912, to investigate the 
implements and deposits of the 1o0-foot terrace at 


1 See reference, p. 267. 


NENG PTA ES ACHE ULEAN PERIOD 227 


Swanscombe.! ‘The Associated Portland Cement Manu- 
facturers, the owners of the chief pit at Swanscombe— 
at one time known as the Milton Street pit, but now as 
the Barnfield—gave them every facility and encourage- 
ment in their investigation. In fig. 83, I give, in a 
diagrammatic form, the chief results of their inquiry. 
They found that three series of deposits were represented 
in the 100-foot terrace—each series representing forma- 
tions of a distinct period, each period marked by its own 
form of culture, a distinctive style of flint workmanship. 










4 SOIL 
27! UPPER GRAVEL 


BEDDED SANDS 




















MIDDLE GRAVEL 
1 LOWER LOAM 














Fic. 83.—Diagram showing the various deposits of the 100-foot terrace of 
the Thames valley at Swanscombe, modified from Mr Dewey’s sections. 


The deepest and oldest of the three series of deposits is 
named “ Strepyan” in fig. 83, because the implements 
found in it are of the type which M. Rutot discovered 
and named in the corresponding valley deposits of 
Belgium—especially at Strépy, a village to the west of 
Charleroi, lying within the watershed of the Meuse.? 
‘The Strepyan series of deposits consists of a deep bed of 
gravel (the “lower ” gravel), made up of several layers ; 
over the gravel a deposit of loam (“‘ lower”? loam) (see 
fig. 83). The gravel was laid down in the bed of the 


Thames when the river was flowing at a level of about 


1 See their report : “ Stratification at Swanscombe,” Archeologia, 1912, 


vol. lxiv. p. 177. 
2 Implements showing the Strepyan kind of workmanship are now 
assigned to a miscellaneous early group known as “‘ Pre-Chellean.” 


228 THE ANFIQUITY OF MAN 


100 feet above its present bed. The Strepyan series 
ends with a stratum of loam—a deposit formed in still 
water in times of flood. The second series of deposits, 
lying over the Strepyan, and therefore more recent, 
yielded, in its basal bed of gravel, the same kind of flint 
implement as occurs in the ancient deposits at Chelles, in 
the valley of the Marne, about eight miles to the east of 
Paris. At the time, then, when the second series of 
deposits in the 100-foot terrace began to be deposited, 
culture or civilisation of the natives of the Thames valley 
had entered the “ Chellean” phase or stage. In the 
sands and loam, the later deposits of the second series, 
another culture appears—the older Acheulean, usually 
known as St Acheul I. The third and most recent 
series of the 100-foot terrace again commences with a 
stratum of gravel, in which implements of the later 
Acheulean type occur—St Acheul II. The stratum of 
gravel (“‘ upper ” gravel), marking the commencement of 
the third series, lies under the surface soil (fig. 83). The 
sands and brick earths which were probably present when 
the terrace was finished have been washed away long ago. 
To find the continuation of the third and last series of 
the 100-foot terrace, we must descend to the 50-foot 
terrace. This terrace has been already mentioned—at 
Crayford and at Baker’s Hole (p. 158). Lying at the base 
of the brick earths, in which the culture of the Mousterian 
period is preserved, occur Paleolithic floors of the late 
Acheulean period. Acheulean man lived on the floor of 
the valley before the brick earths of the 50-foot terrace 
were deposited. In 1880, Mr F. C. J. Spurrell + found 
such a floor under the brick earths of the 50-foot terrace 
at Crayford. From the floor he gathered not only a 
finished implement, but also the chips which the workman 
had struck off in fashioning it, and part of the lower jaw 
of a rhinoceros—all of which he presented to the Natural 
History Museum at South Kensington. It is clear, then, 
the period we have now entered—the Acheulean—must be 
one of long duration. At its close the valley of the Thames 
1 Quart. Fourn. Geol. Soc., 1880, vol. xxxvi. p. 544. 


MENS OFS THE SACHEULEAN PERIOD: 229 


was excavated almost to its present depth, for at such a 
level, buried beneath the deposits of the middle terrace, 
we find the work-floors of Acheulean man. It would have 
been more accurate to have written that the valley of the 
Thames was re-excavated in the Acheulean period for, as 
we shall see presently, unabraded Chellean implements are 
found in the gravels at the base of the 50-foot terrace. 

The commencement of the Acheulean period is re- 
corded, as we have just seen, in the upper series of the 
Ioo-foot terrace. It is plain, then, that the Thames 
carried out an enormous task during the Acheulean 
period. At the beginning of the period the floor of the 
Thames valley lay flush from side to side with the 1oo- 
foot terrace. A process of land submergence was then in 
operation, attended by a filling up of the valley, and by 
the formation of the upper series of Acheulean deposits on 
the 100-foot terrace. Afterwards an opposite movement 
set in, one of elevation of the land, leading to a re- 
excavation of the valley almost to its present depth. At 
Swanscombe the magnitude of such an operation is 
apparent, for the corresponding (100-foot) terrace on the 
opposite or north side of the valley lies eight to ten miles 
distant. “The whole width of the valley was apparently 
cut down to an extent of 100 feet during the later part 
of the Acheulean period. It does not matter for our 
present argument whether the Thames cut her valley 
for the first time, or whether, as seems more probable, 
she only cleared out a former channel which had become 
silted up during a previous period of submergence. It is 
clear, when we consider the magnitude of the operations 
involved, that the Acheulean culture covers a long period 
of time, one more than equal to all the later Palzolithic 
periods put together—Mousterian, late Paleolithic, Neo- 
lithic, and Metal phases of human culture. If we pitch 
the commencement of the Mousterian period, as a pro- 
visional hypothesis, at a distance of forty thousand years, 
we must give forty thousand years more to reach the 
opening phases of the Acheulean period. 

Considering the great duration of the Acheulean 


230 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


period, and the abundant evidence of the activity and 
culture of the men of that time, it is surprising that so 
little has been discovered of the men themselves. In 
nearly every case where remains of man have been 
ascribed to the Acheulean period, the authenticity of the 
discovery has been questioned or denied. ‘The very first 
instance I am to cite is one which is placed—and rightly 
placed so—to what the geologist calls a ‘‘ suspense” 
account. ‘These suspense cases often prove the most 
instructive. Such cases should not be allowed to pass 
into oblivion ; the facts ought to be placed on record, to 
await the fate which will be assigned to them in the light 
of discoveries made at a future date. The suspense 
cases may prove false or prove true. They stimulate 
further research. ‘The first discovery I am to mention 
brought to light the “‘ Dartford ” skull—supposed to be 
of Acheulean date. Dartford, as may be seen from 
fig. 82, lies some five miles to the west of Swanscombe, 
situated in the valley of the Darent where that stream 
breaks through the line of the t1oo-foot terrace and 
enters the marshy land on the south bank of the Thames. 
On the western side of the valley of the Darent, on the 


outskirts of the town of Dartford, a pit had been opened — 


in a deposit of gravel, some 18 feet in depth. The 
stratified gravels, containing interpolated patches of loam, 
represent a deposit of the ancient Darent. The sub- 
stratum of chalk on which the gravel rests is about 45 


feet above the Ordnance datum line, and 30 feet above 


the Darent, which is about a third of a mile distant, to 
the east. In 1902, the pit, having proved unprofitable 
from a commercial point of view, was taken over by an 
ardent student of ancient man—Mr W. M. Newton, 
who then resided in Dartford. Between 1902 and 1908 
“every bit of gravel excavated—some 5000 tons— 
passed under the deliberate scrutiny of my workman, 
and every evening his daily finds had my careful examina- 
tion.’ + The majority of the implements discovered 


1 See Mr Newton’s paper on “ Paleolithic Figures of Flint,” Fourn. 
British Archeolog. Assoc., March 1913, p. 3. 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD. 231 


were of the later Acheulean type. They occurred 
especially plentifully near a black band in the gravel, 
which Mr Newton regarded as an indication of an old 
land surface. He also found numerous examples of 
** figure-stones ’”—curiously shaped natural flints, which, 
in some cases, had been deliberately chipped to give a 
semblance to the form of certain animals. Such figure- 
stones received the serious consideration of M. Boucher 
de Perthes (see p. 269). 

The account of the discovery of a human skull, in the 
gravel of the Dartford pit, I shall give in Mr Newton’s 
own words: 


‘““] was, as you know, much interested in the 
gravel as producing implements and other curious 
forms of man-worked flints in the shape of animals 
and heads of animals. I was in the pit almost every 
morning and evening. ‘Two men were working the 
face at the south end of the pit; two—Randall, 
Heron—the face at the north end. It was in the 
north face that the skull was found by the two 
men just named. ‘They had broken into what is 
commonly termed a ‘ pot-hole,’ into which it was 
impossible to see, as it lay 8 feet above the level 
of the floor of the pit, and about the same depth 
below the upper ground level. There was not the 
slightest appearance of any disturbance of the gravel 
such as might be produced by a deep grave above 
the pot-hole, and below the hole there were patches 
of sand, some loosely bedded large flints, and a 
black band that crops out at several points in the 
working. 

“On the morning of 26th May 1902, I entered 
the pit soon after 6 o’clock, when the skull was 
handed to me out of a heap of sand in which it 
had been preserved during the night. I had been 
in the pit the previous evening, after the men had 
left, and noticed that there had been a ‘ fall’ of 


1 A letter to the Author, dated 27th February 1911. 


DED THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


gravel from the north face. The men informed 
me that with the fall the pot-hole disappeared and 
the skull was found in the débris. The men and 
I agreed at the time the skull must have come from 
the pot-hole. 

“‘ In the afternoon of the same day on which 
I obtained the skull, the north face of the pit was 
photographed for me by Mr E. H. Youens. Need- 
less to say, I was impressed with the importance ot 
the discovery. I offered rewards for the jaw, teeth, 
or any other bones ; but, after much careful searching 
and sifting, no other human remains were found 
except the small pieces from the black deposit at a 
subsequent date. I did not publish an account of 
the finding of the skull, as I did not wish to draw 
attention to what I was doing with respect to the 
animal forms—figure-stones.”” 

Before discussing the value of the Dartford skull} as 
an historical document, let us see what kind of man it 
represents—for there can be no doubt as to the sex, so 
strongly are the male characters developed. The skull, 
from which all the face is missing, is of unusual dimensions. 
The brain capacity is 1740 c.c.—fully 250 c.c. above the 
modern average. The great size of the brain need not 
make us sceptical of the antiquity of the skull. Even in 
the Neanderthal race, with all its ape-like characters, we 
have seen that some individuals, as at La Chapelle, went 
far beyond the modern average in mass of brain. Indeed, 
when we have become familiar with the implements of 
Acheulean man, we are prepared to find that the brain 
that conceived and executed such works of art must have 
been one of a high order. 

The great dimensions of the Dartford skull are equally 
apparent when it is measured within the conventional 
frame (fig. 84). ‘The maximum length is 207 mm.—17 
mm. above the average for modern English skulls; the 


1 Mr Newton presented the skull to the museum of the Royal College 
of Surgeons in 1911, where it is now preserved. I am indebted to Mr 
A. 8. Kennard for the first knowledge of Mr Newton’s discovery. 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 233 


width, 150 mm., is Io mm. above the average. The 
width is almost 73 per cent. of the length: it is a 
dolichocephalic skull. The height of the vault is equally 
remarkable ; it rises 129 mm. above the ear passages— 
13 mm. beyond the modern average. ‘The supra-orbital 
ridges are prominent, but moulded as in modern man. 
The width of the forehead at the level of the supra- 
orbital ridges is remarkable—120 mm. ‘The face must 
have been large and strongly developed. The forehead 
is wide, measuring 112 mm. between the temporal lines. 
The neck was thick, and the skull strongly implanted on 


? G Y j ] > : 100 
l] Dy. XI <0 == ———— 


LAY ae 
Kolar 


Cn? == 
























































' 
190 150 100 sO on 199 eo ce 


190 
DARTFORD (PROFILE) DARTFORD (VERTEX) 


Fic. 84.—Profile drawing of the Dartford cranium and its outline from 
above, at right angles to the view given in profile. 


it. ‘The mastoid processes are massive, their apices reach- 
ing 35 mm. below the level of the upper border of the 
ear-holes. The width of the skull taken over the mastoid 
processes is 140 mm. ‘The bones of the vault vary from 
7 to 8 mm. in thickness. 

If the question is put to a modern anthropologist : Does 
the Dartford skull show any feature which at once 
distinguishes it from skulls of the modern type? he 
must return the answer: No, not one! But it must 
also be remembered that the same may be said of every 
skull found in deposits which are later than the Mous- 
terian period—the Combe Capelle, Cromagnon, Briinn, 
Grimaldi crania, not one of these shows any features 
which we are not familiar with in modern skulls. Indeed, 
in many of its characters the Dartford cranium agrees 


234 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


with the Cromagnon type. In some minor characters 
it resembles the Piltdown skull. We thus obtain little 
or no aid from the skull itself in fixing its degree of 
antiquity. [hat must be determined on the evidence 
attending its discovery in the pit at Dartford. 

We have to admit at once that the evidence of the 
Dartford skull being Acheulean in date is purely pre- 
sumptive ; the cranium was found apparently at a depth 
of 8 feet below the surface, in a gravel pit yielding 
abundance of Acheulean implements. It is believed to 
have been embedded at the level of the ‘‘ black band,” 
which may represent an old land surface. ‘The pot-hole 
signifies a local subsidence of the gravel. ~To carry con- 
viction, the cranium should have been seen and examined 
while still embedded in a stratum known to be Acheulean 
in date. We must also be certain that the stratum con- 
taining the skull, and all the more superficial strata, 
were intact and undisturbed. We have no guarantee of 
this kind in the case of the Dartford skull. In commercial 
ventures it is seldom that such a degree of verification is 
possible, and yet, if we insist rigidly on such conditions, 
we may reject the most valuable of documents and records. 
We should further expect that other bones besides those 
of man should occur at the same level, but at the Dart- 
ford pit no animal remains were observed. Further, we 
should expect the skull to show a high degree of mineral- 
isation—or fossilisation—but the Dartford skull is not 
mineralised. Its surface is weathered, pitted, and of a 
light brown colour; when a fragment is broken, the 
freshly fractured surface is grey and chalky. The con- 
dition does not suggest, but it does not exclude, a high 
antiquity. ‘There is one remarkable feature to be seen 
on the inner surface of the cranium. ‘The skull apparently 
lay, while embedded in the gravel, with its right side down 
and its left up. ‘There was a perforation on the upper or 
left side, at which a drip of water must have entered, and 
then have passed round the inner aspect of the vault, 
making its exit at a small hole on the right or deep side 
of the skull. The drip has worn a groove or channel in 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD. 235 


the bone, about 10 mm. wide and 3 mm deep. The ear- 
holes contained a brown, sandy loam similar to that found 
in the pit. Further, the skull shows no signs of battering 
or erosion; it could not have rolled far in the moving 
gravel in the bed of a stream. As a document, then, the 
Dartford skull is inconclusive. We cannot cite it as 
evidence that men of the modern type lived in England 
during the Acheulean period ; yet we cannot reject it, for 
it may be authentic. 

In our search for Englishmen of the Acheulean period, 
we may, on leaving Dartford and the Thames valley, 
turn our steps in several directions. His workmanship * 
has been found in the terraced deposits of the river valleys 
of the Portsmouth district and of Hampshire—both in 
the lower (15-foot) terrace and also in the upper (100-feet) 
terrace, but of the man himself, not a single bone has 
been seen. It is worth our pains, however, to turn 
to the valley of the Lea, were it only to become 
acquainted with the remarkable discoveries of the late 
Mr Worthington G. Smith.? 

The Lea rises in the uplands of South Bedfordshire, 
some thirty-five miles to the north-west of London; the 
lower reach of its valley, as it embouches on that of the 
Thames, separates the northern from the eastern suburbs 
of London. It was at Stoke Newington and Highbury, 
northern suburbs, that Mr Worthington Smith discovered 
the land surface on which Acheulean man had lived and 
worked. He commenced his search in 1878, being then 
a man of forty-five, and by 1883 had traced, by following 
the trail of implements, the land trod by Acheulean man. 
This ancient land surface, he found, had extended over 
miles of a country now covered by streets, houses, and 
cemeteries. He was able to prove that the strata which 
carried the old “‘ work-floors ”’ had, at one time, stretched 
right across the valley of the Lea from Stoke Newington 


iL. S. Palmer and J. H. Cooke, “ Pleistocene Deposits of the Ports- 
mouth District,” Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1923, vol. xxxiv. p. 253. 

2 Mr Worthington G. Smith, born 1835, died 1917, aged eighty-two. 
Author of an excellent book, A/an, the Primeval Savage, London, 1894. 


236 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


on the west to Leyton on the east—a distance of a mile 
and a half. Since the time in which Acheulean man 
lived in these parts, the Lea has deepened its wide valley 
by 20 feet at least, carrying away the old land surface, 


BRANDON 
HOX 


MILDENHAZL 


vas 
carsgnifion 
RC) 
v 


X 
DUNSTABLE ®@ 
CADDINGTON 


LONDON 
quis 
RY 
4 
9D 





Fic. 85.—A sketch map of the south-eastern parts of England, 
showing the position of certain sites mentioned in the text. 


and the strata of brick earth which had formed over and 
buried the Acheulean work-floors. It is important to 
note that the upper layers of the brick earth always show 
a disturbance; they have been twisted and contorted 
under the influence of ice action. 

In 1884 Worthington Smith visited the uplands at 
the source of the Lea, and was surprised to find amongst 
the material which had been used to mend a road at 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 237 


Dunstable Acheulean implements of the Stoke Newing- 
ton type. Determined to trace these to their source, 
he soon afterwards made his home in Dunstable and 
succeeded in the object he had in view. His search 
led him to the brick-makers’ pits on Caddington 
Hill, midway between Dunstable and Luton (fig. 85), 
where the land rises 560 to 595 feet above sea-level. 
A section of the deposits in one of the Caddington 





ee) 











——————— 


ys 





SOUL 
BROWN CLAY 













GRAVEL 











PRESS Ho) 2S 





BROWN CLAY 
GRAVEL 





c 
BRICK EARTH a 


BPE 
FLOOR 
with 
HEAPEO FLINTS 


BRICK EARTH 


TFE 





BFE 


Fic, 86.—A section of the deposits in one of the Caddington Hill pits, 
showing the Acheulean work-floor discovered by Mr Worthington 
Smith. (After Worthington Smith.) 


pits is shown in fig. 86; it reveals a work-floor on 
which the Acheulean flint-knappers shaped their tools. 
On the floor are to be seen rough flints gathered into 
heaps ; between the heaps lay numerous chips and flakes ; 
also imperfect implements which had broken in the 
knappers’ hands or been discarded in a partially worked 
state. The discoverer, by patiently assembling scattered 
flakes, was able, in several instances, to reconstruct the 
original rough block of flint, all save the empty core. 
When plaster of Paris was poured into the empty central 
space it took on the shape of a perfect Acheulean hand- 
chopper. 


238 THE-ANTIOUITY (OFS IMAN 


Although Worthington Smith did not succeed in find- 
ing any fragment of the skeleton of Acheulean man, yet 
his discovery of a work-floor in the brick earths of Cadding- 
ton Hill gives us a glimpse of the kind of life led by 
men in this upland corner of England at a very remote 
period. ‘The flint workings seem more extensive than 
the needs of a local family or even a local tribe would 
demand ; we seem here to have struck a factory for the 
manufacture and export of Acheulean implements. 
However this may be, there can be no doubt, as Worth- 
ington Smith proved, that the work-floor was situated 
on the bottom of a wide dip or hollow, which was. sur- 
rounded by higher ground. As may be seen from fig. 86, 
strata of brick earth—in some places 30 feet in depth— 
lie under the work-floor, representing loams and sands 
which had been washed into the hollow by winter rains 
and summer showers before the flint-knappers chose the 
site as a working place. Later, after the flint heaps were 
abandoned—for what reason we cannot now tell—brick 
earth continued to accumulate, burying the work-floor 
(fig. 86). Thereafter the weather conditions seem to 
have changed markedly ; alternate layers of gravel and 
of clay were washed from the surrounding land surfaces 
into the hollow, filling it up and burying the older brick 
earths. In these gravel-beds were found abraded and 
rolled flint implements of that great period which pre- 
ceded the Acheulean—the Chellean. Swollen rushing 
rivulets had deposited here gatherings from the ancient 
land-surface on which Chellean man had lived. ‘Then, as 
may be seen in fig. 86, these upper strata of gravels and 
clays had subsequently been broken and contorted by the 
pressure and movement of ice. In all upland places 
which yield Acheulean implements the conditions are 
just those which Worthington Smith met with on 
Caddington Hill. ‘The implements are found in deposits 
of brick earth; these have accumulated in ancient 
hollows, lake bottoms, or river beds; the upper strata, 
if they have not been washed away, are broken and 
twisted by glacial conditions. A glacial period set in 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 239 


long after the milder period of Acheulean man had come 
to an end. 

We must say good-bye to Caddington Hill, on the 
southern border of Bedfordshire, and take a journey of 
some sixty miles eastwards to examine an upland deposit 
of brick earth in which a fragment of a human skull was 
found—a fragment assignable to the Acheulean period. 
Our quest takes us to the ancient town of Bury St 
Edmunds in West Suffolk, situated on the Lark, a 
tributary of the Ouse (fig. 85). From the deposits in 
the valley of the Lark, a few miles below—to the north 
of—Bury St Edmunds, the late Dr Allen Sturge gathered 
a collection of implements which represent man’s handi- 
work during all the periods of Palzolithic culture. About 
two miles to the west of Bury St Edmunds lies the rural 
parish of Westley, where the land rises about I00 feet 
above the level of the Lark. On the highest ground, in 
this area, numerous depressions or pockets in the chalk 
occur, some 10 to 14 feet in depth, filled with deposits of 
brick earth. In 1882, Mr Henry Prigg,! a well-known 
archeologist, lived in the neighbourhood, and kept a 
close watch on such pits as were worked for brick earth, 
because they were known to yield implements of that 
type which are now recognised as characteristic of the 
Acheulean culture. Remains of the mammoth also 
occurred ; it was reported that a human skeleton had 
been found at a considerable depth in one of them. 
Late in the autumn of 1882 a workman found part of the 
vault of a human skull at a depth of 74 feet (2:27 m.) in 
the brick earth. Mr Prigg verified the find, and pub- 
lished an account of the fragment and of the palzoliths 
found in neighbouring pits at about the same horizon 
as the skull. Mr Reginald Smith assures me that these 

aleoliths are of the type usually assigned to a late phase 
of the Acheulean period. 

In order to throw a clearer light on the age and 
nature of the brick earths in which the Bury St Edmunds 
find was made, it is advisable, before describing the kind 

1 He afterwards changed his name to Trigg. 


240 THE ANTIOUITY OF MAN 


of man indicated by the fragment, to extend our journey 
twenty miles to the eastward, to Hoxne (fig. 85), where 
implements of the Acheulean type were first discovered. 
It is a cross-country journey, which takes us into the 
shallow valley of the Waveney, a stream flowing east- 
wards on the confines of Suffolk and Norfolk. As long ago 
as 1797, John Frere collected flint ‘‘ spear heads”’ by the 
score from the brick earths of Hoxne, described them,! 
and recognised both their antiquity and their human 
origin. John Frere’s discovery was forgotten until the 
year 1859, when Boucher de Perthes, after a struggle 
of twenty-five years, convinced the world in general and 
the leading English geologists in particular, that the 
curiously shaped flints in the terraces of the Somme— 
particularly those at St Acheul—were of human work- 
manship and fashioned when species of animals now 
extinct were alive. It was then that the importance of 
Frere’s investigations at Hoxne was realised. Sir John 
Evans and Sir Joseph Prestwich visited Hoxne, and 
found the brick earths and Frere’s implements. In 
1895-96, nearly a century after Frere’s discovery, the 
British Association sent a Committee—its most active 
member being Mr Clement Reid—to investigate the 
relationship of the deposit of brick earth to that of the 
chalky boulder clay which was then believed to mark the 
most severe of all the glacial episodes of the Pleistocene 
age. ‘The annexed diagram (fig. 88) is compiled from the 
records of the Committee.” The Committee found that 
the Hoxne brick earths, about 7 feet in thickness, repre- 
sented thetopmost of a series of deposits filling an ancient 
valley which had been about 50 feet in depth. The 
valley had been cut by a stream in the chalky boulder 
clay and the mid-glacial sands ; it was clear the Hoxne 
valley had been formed and filled after the deposition of 
the chalky boulder clay and the close of the major glacia- 
tion. ‘The bottom of this ancient valley is rather below 
the present level of the valley of the Waveney. The 


1 Archeologia, 1800, vol. xili. p. 206. 
2 See Report of British Association for 1896 (Liverpool), Section C, p. 1. 


MEN TOF THE VACHEULEAN PERIOD 241 


lower 20 feet of the deposits filling the valley is composed 
of clay laid down in still, fresh water. Then follows a 
deposit containing remains of plants which prefer a 
temperate climate. ‘Then another deposit, about 20 feet 
in depth, of black loam with remains of Arctic plants. 
Finally, a layer of gravel on which rest the brick earths, 
containing Acheulean flints. 

An inspection of the strata at Hoxne convinces us that 
the Acheulean period occurred long after the time of the 


SAND . LOAM. GRAVEL. LOAM 
WITH PALEOLITHS. WITH ARGTIC PLANTS 


BRICK EARTH 
\ SOIL 




















POS/7/0N 
OF 
SAVULL 
BURY STEDMUNDS. 


Fic. 87.—Sec- 
tion of the 
pit in which 
the Bury St sof 





Edmunds 
fragment 
was found. 
BOULDER CLAY., LIGNITE. CLAY BOULDER CLAY 
TEMPERATE 
HOXNE. PLANTS 


Fic, 88.—Section of the deposits at Hoxne. 


major glaciation ; a valley had been cut to a depth of at 
least 50 feet and filled up again. In the interval between 
the formation of the boulder clay and the brick earth the 
climate has changed at least twice. We have seen, from 
the formation of the 1oo-foot terrace, that the Acheulean 
period is very remote from our day; at Hoxne we see 
that the major glaciation was equally distant from the 
Acheulean period.? 


1 Mr A. S. Kennard, whose opinion regarding the age of Pleistocene 
deposits deservedly carries great weight, believes an error has been made 
in assigning the Acheulean flints to the brick earth above the Arctic bed 
(Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1916, vol. ii. p. 261). He believes they 
came really from below the Arctic bed and that this bed is of the same date 

VOL, I, 16 


242 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Returning now to the pit at Bury St Edmunds, we 
cannot have any doubt that the brick earth, in which the 
fragment of skull was found, is of the same age and 
formed in the same way as the brick earth at Homa 
(figs. 87, 88). ‘They are dated by the later type of Acheu- 
leanimplements. ‘The fragment itself, which is preserved 
in the Moyses Hall Museum at Bury St Edmunds, still 
shows, in its interstices, particles of red brick earth. It 
is stained a light reddish-brown. When struck, it has 
the resonance of porcelain. ‘The freshly fractured surface 
has the colour of chalk, except that the spaces in the 
bone are tinged with the brick earth. It is evident, 
from the brown, weathered, rounded edges of the specimen, 
that only a fragment had been present in the pit; the 
workmen had not detached it from a complete skull. It 
may have been the stray part of a skull, lying on the 
surface of the land in Acheulean times, and washed, with 
other surface deposits, into the pit. At the present time 
the Lark is 100 feet below the level of the pits. 

Unfortunately, the fragment is not sufficient to permit 
one to reconstruct the original skull with any degree of 
certainty. Some time ago! an opportunity was given 
me of making a minute examination of this fragment of 
a human skull. From the appended illustrations the 
extent of the fragment will be seen. The upper two- 
thirds of the frontal bone, and about the anterior third 
of the right and left parietal bones are preserved. In 
attempting to reconstruct the original, I first searched for 
an English skull showing, in the fronto-parietal region, 
the same form and proportion of parts, the same kind of 


as the Arctic bed at Ponder’s End in the Lea valley, which is post-Mousterian 
in age. The writer has again read over Mr Clement Reid’s report and 
cannot see how an error of level could have been made. He therefore 
concludes that the brick earths at Hoxne, lying above the Arctic bed, did 
contain Acheulean implements and that the brick earth; at Hoxne are 
of the same age and origin as those at Caddington Hill. As will be 
mentioned later (see p. 301 of this edition), the boulder clay shown in 
fig. 88 is the deeper and older stratum corresponding in age to the Cromer 
Till. 
1 See Fourn. Anat. and Physiol., 1913, vol. xlvi. p. 73. 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 243 


sutural lines between the bones. Its prototype | found 
in a skull obtained from a gravel deposit in the east 
end of London—of uncertain antiquity. I next tried to 
find a counterpart for it amongst all known examples 
of Neanderthal skulls. The male crania, such as the 
Neanderthal calvaria itself, the specimens from Spy or 
from sites in France, were altogether different. ‘The 
only crania, presumably Neanderthal in nature, which 
at all resembled the Bury St Edmunds specimen, were 
those fragmentary skulls of women and children found 
at Krapina. In none of those, however, was the sharp, 
frontal bend present which is to be seen in the upper 
region of the forehead of the Bury St Edmunds fragment. 
The frontal bone, at this bend, is remarkably thin—only 
3-6 mm.; I cannot believe that on such a forehead great 
simian eyebrow ridges were implanted. In the upper 
part of the frontal bone, and in the parietals, the bones 
thicken to the moderate dimensions of 6to 8 mm. ‘The 
characters, so far as we have examined them, clearly 
indicate a person with a head of the modern type. 
Mr Prigg formed the opinion that it was part of a 
woman’s skull, and with that conclusion Lagree. Further, 
from the fact that the sutures between the separate 
bones are closed on the inner aspect and open on the 
outer, the woman may be regarded as over forty years 
of age. 

The next point I tried to determine was: How much 
of the frontal bone is missing? In an average English 
skull the length of the frontal bone, measured from the 
bregma (see fig. 184, p. 530) to the nasion (at the root of 
the nose), reaches to about 130 mm. ‘The actual amount 
present in the Bury St Edmunds fragment is 89 mm. 
I have presumed that about 35 mm. are missing from 
the lower part. If such an amount is restored, the 
forehead assumes a natural proportion. It is not likely 
that I have underestimated the amount missing, for, in 
the lower part of the frontal bone (see fig. 89), there 
is present an extension of the frontal air sinus. It is 
unusual in skulls of the modern type to find the air 


244 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


sinuses ascending more than 30 mm. above the nasion. 
In Neanderthal skulls the frontal air sinuses have a less 


ie 


50 





! Profile pe BURY ST EDMUNDS 


. 
. ‘ 
Le eons Le 


Seven eee! 


Fie. 89.—Bury St Edmunds cranial fragment viewed from the side 
and from the front. 


extensive development than in skulls of the modern type. 
From the drawings which are given in figs. 89 and go 


190 


100 


















































BURY ST EDMUNDS CPOMAGNON (VERTE™) 


Fic. 90.—The Bury St Edmunds fragment viewed from above. The upper 
aspect of a Cromagnon skull is placed beside it for comparison. 


it will be seen that the Bury St Edmunds fragment can 
be conveniently oriented within the outline of a modern 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 245 


skull. The original skull was certainly, as regards length, 
below the modern average, even for women. I have 
allowed 125 mm. for the length of the parietal bones 
measured along the vault of the skull—a very ample 
allowance. ‘The lambda, at the hinder end of the sagittal 
suture between the parietal bones (see fig. 89), has been 
placed 10 mm. in front of the occipital projection or pole 
of the skull. The length of the skull is thus represented 
as 183 mm. ; it could be made shorter, not longer. The 
vault is remarkably flat on the top—a character in which 
the Bury St Edmunds fragment resembles Neanderthal 
skulls. It may be suspected that the pressure of the 
earth, in which the fragment lay, has produced a post- 
humous flattening, but such an explanation is im- 
probable when the symmetrical character of the coronal 
suture, between the frontal bone and the parietals, is 
observed. From the width and flattening of the vault, 
one infers that the original transverse diameter of the 
skull could not have been less than 148 mm., the width 
being thus 80 per cent. or 81 per cent. of the length. 
Such a skull would be classed as brachycephalic, but it 1s 
of a totally different type from modern brachycephalic 
skulls, the vault is so low. At the utmost, on the allow- 
ances given for the frontal and parietal bones, the height 
of the vault above the ear-holes could not be more 
than 105 mm.! The brain capacity of such a skull, 
using the Lee-Pearson formula, 183x148x105x0-4x 
206=1340 c.c.—a brain capacity about equal to that of 
the modern Englishwoman.” 

Thus of all the people who lived in England during 
the long Acheulean period, fashioning the multitude of 
implements which mark the deposits of their time—many 
of them implements which show high skill and artistic 
tastes—only two documents remain to tell us what kind™ 
of men and women they were. One of these documents, 


1 In my paper in the Fourn. of Anat. the illustrations show the correct 
height, 105 mm., but an error is made in the text. The height is given 
as 115 mm. instead of 105 mm. 

2 For further details of this formula, see p. 596+ 


246 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the Dartford skull, is of very doubtful authenticity ; the 
other, the Bury St Edmunds skull, is such a fragmentary 
document that one may well hesitate in forming any 
certain conclusion as to the type of person it represents. 
We know only their flint implements. Such habitations 
or shelters as they may have built, such implements as 
they fashioned in less durable material than stone, have 
been destroyed by the lapse of time. We have seen that 
valleys, which had been filled up, were again excavated 
during the Acheulean period, except in such cases as 
at Hoxne, where the river system had been changed. 
The filled-up valley at Hoxne, with brick earths on the 
top, containing the implements discovered by Frere, 
remains now as at the close of the Acheulean period. In 
the Thames valley the Acheulean deposits have apparently 
been swept away, all except a fringe or terrace here and 
there. 

Before leaving East Anglia, mention must be made of 
recent excavations which throw further light on Acheulean 
times. ‘The town of Ipswich, to which we shall return 
in a future chapter, looks to the south and west, being 
built on the northern side of the Gipping valley. It rises 
up the terraced incline until it reaches the brow of the 
plateau which stretches away to the north and to the 
east, covered by a great sheet of chalky boulder clay. 
To the east of the town, and situated on this plateau at 
a height of 120 feet above sea-level, is a disused brick-yard 
—known as the Derby Road Brick-yard. The brick 
earths of this yard have a depth of over 28 feet, and in 
them thirteen separate layers may be distinguished. 
They had accumulated here, as at Hoxne and Caddington 
Hill, in an ancient valley or lake. For many years they 
fave been known to yield flint implements, representing 
several types. In 1922, Professor P. G. H. Boswell and 
Mr Reid Moir, in order to settle the exact derivation of 
those implements, determined to explore, in the most 

1 This is not strictly true ; Mr Worthington Smith and Mr Hazzeldine 


Warren found pieces of cut and pointed wooden stakes in deposits of 
Acheulean date. 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 247 


scientific manner possible, a virgin part of this deposit.1 
Beneath the sandy surface soil (2 feet 7 inches in depth) 
they came on two layers (4 feet 3 inches in thickness) 
which yielded implements of the Mousterian type. Then 
followed four strata of brick earths, over g feet in thick- 
ness, which carried implements of the later Acheulean 
type; then, deeper still, a stratum, nearly 2 feet in 
depth, which yielded Acheulean implements of the 
older or earlier type. Then followed various layers, 
over 12 feet in thickness, which were sterile so far as 
worked flints were concerned. Lastly came the chalky 
boulder clay on which these brick earths rested. The 
implements found in the various strata were unabraded ; 
they lay at or near the spot where they had been dropped. 
As at Hoxne, so here, we find a stratum of boulder clay 
under the brick earths of the Acheulean period ; there was, 
therefore, a glacial episode before the appearance of 
Acheulean man in these parts. But in the deeper brick 
earths of the Derby Road yard there was no Arctic bed as at 
Hoxne and no upper contorted drift as at Caddington. 
We have to take all three deposits into account in formu- 
lating a true rendering of that chapter of Pleistocene 
history we are now seeking to decipher. Professor Boswell 
and Mr Reid Moir drew the just conclusion that there 
are two strata of chalky boulder clay—an upper and more 
recent and a deeper and older, the stratum under the 
brick earths of the Derby Road pit being the deeper 
and older sheet which long preceded the appearance of 
Acheulean man. We shall see that Mr Reid Moir regards 
the upper and more recent sheet of chalky boulder clay 
as of Mousterian age. 

As already mentioned, we shall have occasion to return 
to Ipswich and to the Gipping valley, but before returning 
to the valley of the Thames to take up our search for the 
men of the Chellean period—the long period which went 
before the age of the Acheulean culture—there are two 
neighbouring sites which we should visit now because 

1 P. G. Boswell and J. Reid Moir, Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1923, 
vol. lili. p. 229. 


248 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


they throw some light on the conditions of life during 
the distant period with which we have been dealing. 
One lies on the south side of the Gipping valley, almost 
opposite to Ipswich. Here, at a height of 70 feet above 
the level of the river, is a deposit of brick earths which 
have yielded the fossil remains of animals of the later 
part of the Acheulean period and the early Mousterian. 
The deposits in which these fossil remains are found 
have been studied by Miss Nina Layard;1 she found 
there the remains of the great extinct ox (Bos primi- 
genius), of the red deer (Cervus elaphus), and of the 
horse, which tell us of green pasture lands and remove 
the impression likely to be engendered by our ever- 
recurring mention of brick earths, for such suggest that 
the land surface on which men of the Acheulean and 
Mousterian cultures lived was bleak and strewn with 
earth and mud. ‘The wolf was there, so were the cave- 
lion and the cave-bear. ‘The cold-loving mammoth was 
represented by numerous teeth. 

Leaving the neighbourhood of Ipswich and _ follow- 
ing the coast of Essex, we pass Harwich, Walton- 
on-Naze where the skeleton of a Neolithic woman was 
found (see p. 47), and reach, a few miles beyond, Clacton- 
on-Sea (fig. 85). 

Here there 1s a remarkable series of Pleistocene deposits 
which have been described lately by Mr Hazzeldine 
Warren.” In this district there are remains of che 100-foot 
terrace of the Thames valley, containing implements of the 
Chellean type. At Clacton this ancient terrace has been 
cut across by a river or stream which has now vanished. 
At an early part of the Acheulean period its valley 
became silted up and in the brick earths thus deposited 
occur certain peculiar flint implements and animal 
remains which have a direct interest for us now. ‘The 
implements are of an early Acheulean type, such as were 
found by M. Rutot in Belgian deposits and named by 

1 Miss Nina Layard, “‘ The Stoke Bone-Bed,” Proc. Prehist. Soc. East 
Anglia, 1920, vol. iii. p. 210. 

2 Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1922, vol. iii. p. 597. 


MEN OF THE ACHEULEAN PERIOD 249 


him Mesvinian. We seem to have here evidence of 
an intruding culture which never made headway in 
Acheulean England; there are even grounds for sup- 
posing that England may have been thus early the 
subject of invasions. It is also noteworthy that the 
elephant which appears in these early Acheulean de- 
posits at Clacton is not the mammoth—but the older 
and warmth-loving type—Elephas antiquus. It was in 
these same Clacton deposits that Mr Hazzeldine Warren 
found the pointed end of a wooden spear. The more 
we get to know of Acheulean deposits in England, 
with their evidences of mighty alterations in level of sea 
and land, of great changes in climate and in fauna, the 
more convinced we become that the period we have been 
dealing with was one which covered an enormous span of 
years. 

In the next chapter but one, a search will be made 
on the Continent for remains of Acheulean man. ‘The 
Continent, it will be seen, repeats the story of England— 
such remains as have been found of the Acheuleans are, 
with the possible exception of the find at Ehringsdorf, 
not of the Neanderthal but of the modern type. All the 
same, we must recognise that at this period the ancestors 
of both types must have been already in existence in some 
part or other of our world. 


GHAR Aa 
GALLEY HILL MAN 


ln this chapter we again return to the valley of the 
Thames to take up the story of early man in England. 
The period -we are now to enter—the Chellean—is of 
even greater duration than the Acheulean, to which we 
have assigned a length of forty thousand years. In. 
seeking to estimate the duration of these remote periods 
in terms of years, we certainly lay ourselves open to a 
charge of foolhardiness, but it is a form of daring which 
is justified by the present state of our knowledge. One 
cannot review the facts and events which geologists and 
archeologists have gleaned from these remote periods 
of human culture without forming a mental estimate of 
the time which is needed for their execution or evolution. 
Our estimate may prove to be over the mark or under it ; 
we shall soon discover on which side we err if we have in 
our minds a definite term of years to serve as a working 
hypothesis. When we consider the extent of the geo- 
logical changes which occurred during the time Europeans 
shaped their stone implements in the Chellean style, we 
see that the period must have been one of long duration. 
For, in the earlier phases, the bed of the Thames was 
flush with the 1o0-foot terrace—in the later phases the 
river had worn, perhaps re-worn, its valley to the level 
of the lowest gravel beds of the §50-foot terrace. We are 
justified, I think, in assigning a term of fifty thousand 
years to cover the period with which we are now dealing. 
Our estimate thus places the beginning of the full Chellean 
period in Western Europe at so remote a date as one 


250 


GALLEY HILL MAN Zhs 


hundred and thirty thousand years ago ; its end we place 
at about eighty thousand years before the Christian era 
(see fig. 264). 

At this point the reader may put the question: Why 
should the periods of Paleolithic culture become longer 
and longer in their duration as we pass backwards in our 
scale of time? To later Paleolithic periods we assign 
a duration of four thousand and five thousand years; to. 
these more remote periods forty thousand and fifty 
thousand years. All evidence goes to prove that human 
culture follows the rule which holds for sums of money 
placed out at compound interest ; as time goes on the 
rate of increase becomes ever faster. We have to 
remember, too, that in these remote periods Europe was 
sparsely populated and that its few inhabitants had to 
struggle hard to merely hold their own. 

Having thus indicated how remote from us is the 
period with which we are now dealing, we take up our 
search for Chellean man. The site of our first inquiry 
is at Galley Hill, a few hundred yards more to the west, 
and rather nearer the river, than the Barnfield pit at 
Swanscombe (fig. 82, p. 226). The school and school- 
house at Galley Hill stand on the brow of the 100-foot 
terrace, overlooking the river. The London road passes 
behind the school as it threads its way eastwards, along 
the brink of the 100-foot level. In 1888, cement workers 
had quarried into the chalk bluffs both to the north and 
to the west of the school, until they had almost reached 
the London road. Workmen were then—in 1888— 
busy removing the gravel of the 100-foot terrace in order 
to expose the underlying chalk. ‘The stratum of gravel— 
as they approached the road—was between ro and 11 feet 
in thickness. It was while this area was being worked 
near the London road, a little to the west of the school, 
that the skeleton of the Galley Hill man came to light 
—the only representative so far discovered of the 
generations who lived during the period of Chellean 
culture. Our conception of the antiquity of man, 
especially of man of the modern type—for undoubtedly 


252 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the Galley Hill man is formed in the same mould as we 
are—turns on the authenticity of this discovery. It is 
therefore of the greatest importance to examine with 
care every fact relating to the find at Galley Hill. 

The discovery was made late in September 1888. 
The first evidence I am to cite is a letter from Mr Robert 
Elliott 1—a printer by trade, but an enthusiastic collector 
of everything relating to prehistoric times—to Mr E. T. 
Newton, the letter being written when Mr Newton was 
preparing for publication a descriptive account ? of the 
Galley Hill man in 1894—six years after the actual 
discovery : 


“According to my promise, I write to let you 
know the particulars of my find of human remains in 
undisturbed gravel, capping the chalk, at the top of 
Galley Hill, in Kent, at the end of September 1888. 

“It was my custom to visit the pits at Milton 
Street, Swanscombe, Galley Hill, and neighbouring 
excavations every fortnight regularly (in search of 
flint implements) for more than two years before 
the discovery of the human remains—so that I was 
well acquainted with the fact beforehand. 

“It was on one of my fortnightly visits that I 
was informed by a man, named Jack Allsop (who had 
for a long time looked out and saved for me any 
implements or stones of similar shape, obtained while 
screening the ballast), that he had found a skull 
under the gravel. This I could hardly credit at 
first; but on my asking him to show it to me, he 
produced i it in several pieces from the base of a pillar 
of laminated clay and sand, where he had hidden 
it. I asked where the rest of the bones were. He 
pointed to the section opposite this pillar, and a few 


1 Mr Elliott died, at the age of seventy, in 1909. He was a Scot—one of 
the “ black” Elliotts from the Border country. In his old age he fell into 
financial straits, and had not Mr Frank Corner, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), at great 
personal sacrifice, rescued the Galley Hill and other specimens, they 
would have passed into a continental museum. 


2 See Quart. Fourn. Geol. Soc., 1895, vol. li. p. 505. 


GALLEY HILL MAN 253 


feet from it, and told that he had left the other 
bones undisturbed for me to see; and there, sure 
enough, about 2 feet above the top of the chalk and 
8 feet from the top of the gravel, portions of bone 
were projecting from a matrix of clayey loam and 
sand. He also told me that several of the men 
employed at the works, the master of the neighbour- 
ing school, and others had seen the skull. 

“The section of gravel was 10 or 11 feet thick, 
and extended for a considerable distance along the 
south and east end of the pit; several pot-holes or 
pipes running from it, deep into the chalk. I care- 
fully examined the section on either side of the 
remains, for some distance, drawing the attention 
of my son, Richard, who was with me, and of Jack 
Allsop toit. It presented an unbroken face of gravel, 
stratified horizontally in bands of sand, small 
shingle, gravel, and, lower down, beds of clay and 
clayey loam, with occasional stones in it—and it was 
in and below this that the remains were found. We 
carefully looked for any signs of the section being 
disturbed, but failed: the stratification being un- 
broken, and much the same as the section in the 
angle of the pit remaining to this day; but it was 
then clear and not covered by rubbish, as it now is in 
places, all the ‘ callow ’ loam at the top being at that 
time removed to allow of the gravel being got at. 

*“] went on my knees, and with the point of my 
geological hammer and a knife tried to work round 
each piece of bone; but soon gave up the attempt, 
as the bones were so friable and fragile that many 
went to pieces as soon as touched, so that I decided 
to work about a foot each way from the bones. 
Jack Allsop and I went to work, and we were fortunate 
enough to obtain the fragments which are now in 
your keeping [Mr Newton’s]. So friable were they 
that we had to place them on soft, newly screened 
sand to harden in the atmosphere, where I allowed 
them to remain between four and five hours, by 


254 THEVANTIOUTTY *OF *MMAN 


which time they became a little hardened, and I 
carefully wrapped them in soft paper and brought 
them home. ‘These bones had been left im situ by 
Jack Allsop, because of their being too soft for him 
to get out, and also in order that I should see them 
exactly as he found them. Within a few days of my 
obtaining them, you will, I think, remember that I 
brought the skull to you in pieces, and you kindly 
offered to piece the remains together for me; but I 
preferred taking them away, as I then intended to 
work the subject up and describe and publish my 
find. This I have been unable to do, not having the 
necessary leisure from business, and I regret not 
having. placed them in your hands before. The 
remains have been in my museum ever since, and no 
one has interfered with them, except myself and a 
few friends in my presence. So you have them 
exactly as they were found, except that I have dipped 
them in a solution to preserve them. In May last, 
my friend, Mr Frank Corner of Poplar, saw these 
remains and urged me to place them in someone’s 
hands, so that a description of them might be 
published.” 


It will be observed from Mr Elliott’s letter that the 
master in the school, which overlooks the site of discovery, 
also saw the remains when they were still embedded in 
the gravel bank. By good fortune, the schoolmaster, 
Mr Matthew H. Heys, was also interested in prehistoric 
research, and was, as the following letter shows, alive to 
the importance of the find made by the workmen. In 
the summer of 1910, when Mr Frank Corner, into whose 
possession the Galley Hill remains had passed, gave me 
an opportunity of verifying Mr Newton’s description 
of the skull and skeleton, I obtained the following letter 
from Mr Heys :— 


‘“‘ Some time ago, in 1888, my attention was called 
to some bones found in the gravel in close proximity 
to the Galley Hill School, where I was then the head. 


GALLEY HILL MAN 255 


teacher. As soon as the intimation of this find was 
received, I visited the gravel pit, and there saw a 
few bones and about a third part of a skull (part 
of the top and side) just exposed by a workman 
excavating the gravel. To all appearances these 
bones were human. ‘These were so intensely in- 
teresting to me, as I found almost daily Paleolithic 
implements in this gravel, and here might be 
the remains of a man belonging to the clan or 
tribe who had made these very implements. No 
doubt could possibly arise to the observation of 
an ordinary intelligent person of their deposition 
contemporaneously with that of the gravel, for 
there was a bed of loam, in the base of which these 
human relics were embedded. ‘The underneath 
part of the skull, as far as I could see, was resting 
on a sandy gravel. The stratum of loam was 
undisturbed. ‘This undisturbed state of the stratum 
was so palpable to the workman that he said, ‘ The 
man or animal was not buried by anybody.’ ‘The 
gravel underneath the skull, of which I took par- 
ticular notice, was stratified and undisturbed. 

““My next step was to induce the workman to 
desist from exposing these relics further until a 
photograph of them zm sizw had been taken; and 
meanwhile he was to cover them carefully with 
gravel. To my utter astonishment and indignation, 
a day or two after, and before I could get a photo- 
grapher, I found they had been removed by Mr 
R. Elliott, then a stranger to me, and without their 
having been photographed. My anticipated posses- 
sion of them was thus thwarted. I soon learned 
there was a working arrangement between Mr 
Elliott and the workman whereby the latter was 
subsidised to find fossils, implements, etc., for the 
former. 

“For a long time I took but little interest in the 
discovery, and this may account for my meagre 
description given to Mr E, T, Newton at the time 


256 THE ANTJQUITY OF MAN 


when he read a paper before the Geological Society, 
of their Galley Hill skeleton. However, since then, 
I have been reconciled to the loss, for they fell into 
better hands than mine in many respects. 

““T cannot give details of the loamy stratum 
which formed the matrix for these osseous remains, 
nor exact measurements of the position of the 
ancient relics. The gravel bed was about Io feet 
thick, resting directly upon the chalk and the loamy 
stratum, about 2 feet 6 inches from the bottom. 


“ Mattuew H. Heys. 
“2th Fuly 1910.” 


There can be no doubt that in September 1888 the 
Galley Hill skeleton was found at a depth of about 
8 feet in the 100-foot terrace, resting in a stratum of 
loam. The workman, Jack Allsop, Mr Elliott, and 
Mr Heys were all qualified to form an opinion as to 
whether or not the terrace over the skeleton was intact. 
In their opinion it was. That was also the opinion 
which Mr Newton formed in 1894—on an examination 
of all the evidence then available. Mr Newton’s verdict 
must carry weight with all geologists, for he has spent a 
lifetime in laying, soundly and solidly, a foundation for 
our knowledge of the animals which lived during recent 
geological periods. His eminence as a geologist, and 
especially his caution as a thinker, are the best guarantees 
we could have that these human remains belong to a man 
who lived while the 1oo-foot terrace was still in pro- 
cess of formation. For my part, when I commenced a 
systematic examination of these remains in I9gI10 my 
attitude towards them was one of scepticism. ‘The 
discovery of a man—differing only in details from men 
now living in England—in so ancient a formation seemed 
at variance with a belief in the orderly succession of 
evolutionary stages in man’s early history. It was only 
when I saw that there was no possibility of denying the 
authenticity of the discovery without doing an injury to 
truth, that it became apparent to me, as it had done to 


GALLEY HILL MAN 257 


many other inquirers,! that the find at Galley Hill had 
to be accepted as a fact, and that our beliefs regarding 
man’s antiquity must be modified accordingly. 

The gravel terrace in which the Galley Hill skeleton 
was found represents a direct extension of the deposits at 
Swanscombe. As was mentioned in a former chapter, 
Mr Reginald Smith and Mr Dewey found that the 
gravels in the Barnfield pit at Swanscombe represented 
at least three series of deposits of three different ages. 
In which of these three series of deposits were the human 
remains embedded at Galley Hill? In the Barnfield pit 
(see fig. 83) there are two strata of loam—an upper, 
containing implements of the Acheulean period ; a lower, 
resting on the deepest or basal layer of gravel, and lying 
under a bed of gravel containing implements of the 
Chellean age. In the gravels at Galley Hill the same types 
of implements were found as at the Barnfield pit. There 
can be little doubt that the skeleton lay in the lower bed 
of loam—the one under the Chellean gravel. The 
stratum belongs to the oldest or basal series of deposits 
of the 100-foot terrace. In the basal gravel occur the 
Strepyan or pre-Chellean form of Paleolithic implements. 

M. Rutot, who has done so much to systematise and 
date the deposits found in river valleys, not only recog- 
nised that the Galley Hill man lay in a deposit of Strepyan 
age, but regarded him as a representative of that time. 
It is in the deposits of the same period, as M. Rutot 
was the first to demonstrate, that the early Europeans 
really applied themselves to stonecraft in earnest— 
shaping in a rough and crude manner the kind of imple- 
ments which foreshadow the magnificent tools of the 
Chellean age. That the pioneers of the great periods 
of stone culture—the inventors of the paleolith—should 
be highly evolved men with big brains did not surprise 


1M. A. Rutot, “ L’age probable du squelette de Galley Hill,” Bull. 
Soc. Belge de Géol., 1909, vol. xxiii. p. 239. Professor V. Guiffrida- 
Ruggeri, Archiv. per PAntropol., 1910, vol. xl. p. 3. Professor H. 
Klaatsch, Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, 1909, vol. xli. p. §37; Praebist. Zett- 
schrift, 1910, vol. i. p. 296, 
You: 17 


258 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


M. Rutot. When, however, we look more closely at 
the facts revealed at the time of the discovery there is 
good reason for assigning the Galley Hill man to the 
subsequent or Chellean period. When, as at Galley 
Hill and at Halling, representations of a complete 
skeleton are found, with all the parts in close proximity, 
it is almost certain that the remains have not been 
entombed by Nature, but by the hand of man. When 
Mr Newton read his paper before the Geological Society, 
Sir John Evans, who took part in the discussion which 
followed, said that “‘ the occurrence of a nearly perfect 
skeleton was suggestive of an interment,” and “ ventured 
to maintain an attitude of doubt regarding the antiquity 
of the remains.” At that time, twenty-nine years ago, 
the custom of burial was supposed to have been intro- 
duced at a comparatively late stage of human evolution. 
Since then, the discoveries in France have revealed 
deliberate burials as long ago as the Mousterian period. 
If we accept the discovery at Gallev Mill as authentic, 
we must also accept the great antiquity of the human 
custom of burying the dead. We hardly do justice to 
the men who shaped the Chellean weapons if we hold 
them incapable of showing respect for their dead. 
Certain it is that the remains found at Galley Hill are 
not those of a low type of man. In size, and in the rich- 
ness of its convolutions, the brain of the Galley Hill man 
does not fall short of the average man of to-day. 

We must admit, then, that a burial had been made at 
Galley Hill—but when? It was before the Thames had 
laid down the final series of deposits in the 100-foot 
terrace. Mr Elhott, Mr Heys, and Jack Allsop saw that 
the overlying, stratified deposits were unbroken. ‘They 
showed no trace of having been broken by a burial made 
from the present land surface. As at Halling, we must 
search for an old land surface, such as may be repre- 
sented in the Barnfield pit by the stratum of gravel, 
containing implements of the Chellean type, and lying 
over the lower stratum of loam—the one in which the 
human remains were apparently embedded. Weighing 


GALLEY HILL MAN 259 


all the evidence, we are forced to the conclusion that 
the Galley Hill skeleton represents a man of the Chellean 
period, buried when the lower gravel formed a land 
surface. ‘The land surface of Chellean times became 
submerged by the later or Acheulean deposits of the 
wenbace. 

Having thus brought forward the evidence relating to 
the high antiquity of the human remains found at Galley 
Hill, we proceed to ascertain what kind of individual 
they represent. As to the sex there can be no doubt— 
the bones of the skull and limbs show all the characters 
which mark the male. Nor can there be much doubt 
as to his age. ‘The sutures between the bones on the 
vault of the skull are almost closed—represented only 
by traces; he was past middle age, probably about 
fifty. His thigh bones, both of which were found, 
measure 422 mm., indicating a stature of 1600 mm. 
(5 feet 3 inches)—a short man. Unfortunately, neither 
of the leg bones—tibia—is complete, but by compar- 
ing the fragments with complete specimens of both 
Neanderthal and modern types of tibia, an approximate 
estimate may be made of their original length—between 
320-325 mm. ‘The leg was thus about 77 per cent. of 
the length of the thigh—the usual proportion for modern 
man. ‘The relatively long leg of negroid, Aurignacian, 
and of some Neolithic races, was not a character of 
the Galley Hill race. As to the relative proportions of 
the upper limb, little can be said, for the bones of the 
forearm were not found. ‘The lower end of the right 
humerus has been broken away. The original length 
of this bone was probably between 305 and 315 mm.— 
a dimension to be expected in a modern man of § feet 
3 inches. One peculiar feature of his organisation is 
worth noting here. The great pectoral muscle, which 
rises from the inner third of the collar bone or clavicle, 
and from the front of the thorax, and which passes in 
front of the arm-pit to act on the upper end of the 
humerus, was particularly well developed. ‘The impres- 
sions for this muscle on the collar bone and humerus 


260 THE ANFIOUIT Y*<OF MAN 


are extensive and pronounced. The bones are those of 
a well-made man of medium strength. The skeleton 
does not show a single feature which can be called 
Neanderthaloid, nor any simian feature which is not 
also to be seen in the skeletons of men of the modern 
type. The Galley Hill man represents no strange 
species of mankind; he belongs to the same type as 
modern man. 

Such are the general features of the Galley Hill man. 
For students of human races the form of head and face 
has a special significance. In this part of our inquiry a 
special difficulty confronts us. We have seen that the 
bones when first exposed were quite soft; the skull 
warped as it dried. To anthropologists who refuse to 
recognise any but perfect specimens, the Galley Hill skull 
will probably be regarded as an unreliable document. 
Were we to wait for the discovery of perfect prehistoric 
crania, the early story of man might never be written. 
We have to make the best of what is found, and, in the 
case of the Galley Hill skull, it is not difficult to make a 
due allowance for defects which arise from warping or 
earth-pressure. ‘The skull, in all its characters, is of the 
type familiar to students of the human body—it is an 
extremely long, narrow skull, with a low vault. When 
viewed in profile and placed within the conventional 
frame (fig. 91), it is seen to exceed the average modern 
English skull by 14 mm.—fully half an inch—its maximum 
length being 204 mm. From the front the skull appears 
to be flattened from side to side (fig. 91), the width 
having been originally just under 140 mm. The man 
was pronouncedly long-headed, the width being approxi- 
mately 69 per cent. of the length. We have already 
seen that most of the Paleolithic Europeans, especially 
of the Aurignacian period, had exceptionally long heads. 
In any large modern population on the western side of 
Europe, individuals with heads of a very similar size and 
shape could still be found. ‘The height of the vault above 
the ear-holes in this ancient skull is 120 mm.—a low 
amount when compared with the length, and yet in 


GALLEY HILL MAN 261 


absolute amount above the modern average. In size of 
brain the Galley Hill man is not unlike the modern 
average man, but an exact estimate is not possible. From 
direct measurement it was found that the brain mass 
measured between 1350-1400 c.c., but when we employ 
the indirect method and calculate the capacity from the 
diameters of the skull—using the Lee-Pearson formula— 
a capacity of 1500 c.c. is obtained. In actual size of 
brain, the Galley Hill man did not differ materially from 


































sae ae 


Drardogoh 
Renny y 
SM i \s ) oe: 

a wi, - 


a 
. 





/ 
4 


‘. 
~ 


, 








| GALLEY | HILL (PROFILE) ie _Fute FACE) ! | 


Fic. 91.—The Galley Hill skull viewed from the side and from the front, 
the face being restored. 


modern man. ‘The cast of the brain, which Mr F. O. 
Barlow made from the skull, shows that, so far as concerns 
the convolutionary pattern, the Galley Hill man was not 
inferior to the average modern European. The areas or 
lobes which are specially associated with the senses of 
sight, hearing, and touch, were all there; so, too, were 
the convolutions which are concerned in speech and in 
movements of the limbs and body. 

The question of speech naturally leads our inquiry to 
the lower jaw—particularly to the region of the chin. 
Fortunately, the greater part of the left half of the lower 
jaw, and the whole of the region of the chin, were 


262 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 
















recovered. There are no Neanderthal marks at the 
symphysis of the jaw: the markings which indicate the 
origin of the chief muscles of the tongue are shaped and 
placed as in modern man. From the conformation of 
the brain and of the chin—being exactly as in modern 
man—we draw the conclusion that the faculty of speech 
was fully evolved. It is difficult to suppose that the 
race which invented and mastered the high art shown by 


‘90 


i50 


100 





50 


































































































GALLEY HILL (VERTEX) GALLEY HILL (8ASE) 


Fic. 92.—Drawings of the Galley Hill skull from above and from below. 
The latter shows the degree of twisting or torsion. 


Chellean implements had not, long before, attained the 
gift of speech. When it is remembered we are dealing 
with a period—the Chellean—which, so it is estimated 
from the physical changes that have occurred since, lies 
at least one hundred thousand years beyond our time, 
it will be seen that a great claim is made, not only for 
the antiquity of man, but for the antiquity of human 
culture. 

The reader will have a difficulty in believing that 
human remains, to which so great an antiquity is assigned, 
do not show in their structure, as well as in their degree 
of fossilisation, some evidence of their ancient origin. 


GALLEY HILL MAN 263 


They do. In the first place, the condition of preservation 
is peculiar—quite unlike any bones of Neolithic or of 
Paleolithic date I have ever seen. Mr E. T. Newton is 
perfectly familiar with the degree of fossilisation seen 
in bones from the tIoo-foot terrace. He and other 
authorities regard their condition as evidence of their 
high antiquity. Besides, there are in the Galley Hill 
skeleton some minor structural parts which indicate a 
primitive form of man. The skull is thick, the vault 
varying from Io to 12 mm.—altogether an exceptional 
measurement. ‘The eyebrow ridges, although of the 
modern, bipartite form, are yet exceptionally pronounced. 
The maicdle or supraciliary parts are continuous with the 
lateral or malar parts, as in the most uncivilised of 
modern races. In the lower jaw itself, some primitive 
features are present. 

Drawings of the mandible from the side are given in 
figs. 91 and gs. ‘The ascending branch or ramus, which 
articulates with the base of the cranium, by means of the 
articular condyle, does not show the sigmoid notch or 
bay usually seen on its upper border. This notch is 
situated in front of the articular condyle, and behind the 
coronoid process to which the chief muscles of mastica- 
tion are attached. In all modern races, in most of 
the late Palzolithic, and in all Neolithic races, the 
sigmoid notch is deep. In the Galley Hill ascending 
ramus a notch is almost absent. Its absence is a primitive 
feature. The joint on the base of the skull for the condyle 
of the jaw shows, in its shape and size, the characters 
seen on the skulls of primitive races of the modern type. 
The ear-hole is remarkably large; the mastoid process 
behind it, on the other hand, is small. ‘The area for the 
temporal mustle, the chief muscle of mastication on the 
side of the skull, is abnormally extensive, indicating large 
muscles of mastication. 

Five teeth remained implanted in the mandible—the 
two premolars and three molars of the left side. The 
other lower teeth—incisors and canine—had dropped 
from their sockets after death. "The crowns of the molar 


264 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


teeth are worn—not deeply—-in the manner seen in the 
dentitions of races living on a crude, vegetarian diet. 
The teeth themselves are not large, the total length of 
the crowns of the three molar teeth being 34:5 mm. 
The last molar is slightly longer than the second. ‘The 
width of the molars—the diameter between the cheek and 
tongue margins—is less than the length. All of those 
features are such as we expect in an individual of a very 
primitive type: a combination of such characters would 


Ans 
ei eegeb eh Saab ON athe ee ge a ee a a ahead 





on 


Fic. 93.—Radiograph of the Galley Hill mandible and teeth. 


be very difficult to find in any European of modern or of 
Neolithic date. 

When the Galley Hill jaw and teeth are examined by — 
X-rays, we see that there is no trace of the peculiar 
specialisation—the enlargement of the pulp cavity— 
taurodontism—which characterises, in a greater or 
lesser degree, the teeth of Neanderthal man (see p. 210). 
In fig. 93 is reproduced an X-ray photograph of the 
teeth and mandible. ‘The teeth show primitive charac- 
ters; in all their parts they are of an older and a more ~ 
simian type than the molars of Neanderthal man.t The 


1 For an account of the Galley Hill teeth, see reference, p. 252 (Newton), 
p. 211 (Keith). 





GALLEY HILL MAN 265 


pulp cavities, in place of being large, as in adult apes with 
worn teeth, are particularly small. ‘The smallness of the 
cavity is due to the fact that it is being rapidly filled up 
by the formation of secondary dentine—Nature’s way of 
protecting the sensitive pulp from being exposed, as the 
crown is worn by chewing. In shape of root, as well as 
in size and relative proportion of crown, Galley Hill 
teeth show a primitive human type. We need not, then, 
reject the Galley Hill remains on account of the modernity 
of their structure and characters; they do show some 
primitive marks such as might be expected in an ancient 
form of European. 

Mention has been made of the large muscles of mastica- 
tion. The facial parts of the skull are gone, and we 
cannot measure the size of the palate directly. But 
we can estimate its size by an indirect method. More 
than half of the lower jaw is present; the size of the 
arcade, formed by the lower teeth, is known. From the 
lower set we can calculate the form and size of the upper 
set. In this way we reach the conclusion that the area of 
the palate (see p. 102) was between 29 and 30 cm.2—its 
length being 53 mm., its width, 66 or 67 mm. These 
dimensions are not exceptional ; on many modern skulls, 
especially of primitive races, palates of equal or even 
greater dimensions are to be found. 

Why is it, then, that anatomists and geologists have 
been so reluctant to acknowledge the antiquity of the 
Galley Hill remains? The anatomist turns away from 
this discovery because it reveals no new type of man, 
overlooking the much greater revelation—the high 
antiquity of the modern type of man, the extraordinary 
and unexpected conservancy of the type. The geologist 
regards the remains with suspicion for two reasons—first, 
he has grown up with a belief in the recent origin, not 
only of modern civilisation, but of modern man himself. 
He expects a real anatomical change to mark the passage 
of a long period of time. Further, at a much later date 
than the formation of the 100-foot terrace, a very 
primitive type of man survived in Europe—such a 


266 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


type as answers exactly to the evolutionist’s expectation 
of a human ancestral form. ‘Fhe discovery of human 
remains of the Neanderthal type confirmed geologists 
in their opinion that Pleistocene man must be of a 
more primitive—at least of a different—type from modern 
man. Hence the rejection of all remains—such as those 
found at Galley Hill—which do not conform to this 
standard. 

Nor must we shut our eyes to the difficulties we have 
to face if we accept Galley Hill man as an authentic 
representative of Chellean man—man of one hundred 
thousand years ago. We have, if we accept his authen- 
ticity, to believe that the Western European type has | 
come down through this long period of time—involving 
the reproduction of some four thousand generations— 
and yet has undergone but minor changes in structure. 
Either this has been so, or the geological record at Galley 
Hill is at fault. Modern authorities, almost without 
exception, when faced with this alternative, reject the 
geological record, preferring to believe in the rapid 
mutability of the human body and the recent evolution 
of modern man. ‘Time will tell which is in the right ; 
in the meantime we have to accept facts as we find 
them. 





CHAPTER XIII 
PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN IN FRANCE AND ITALY 


A journey of a littlke over one hundred miles from 
Galley Hill lands the traveller at the town of Abbeville, 
situated on the estuary of the Somme in the north-east 
of France. On the higher grounds of the northern 
suburbs of Abbeville, we find an exact counterpart of 
the terrace we have left at Galley Hill. Thanks to the 

ioneer labours of the late M. Commont,! Professor at 
PEcole Normale of Amiens, a city on the Somme fully 
twenty miles above Abbeville, not only the exact structure 
of the roo-foot or 30-metre terrace—also named the 
middle terrace—is known, but also the sequence of flint 
implements contained in the various strata of this terrace. 
Indeed, it was M. Commont’s discoveries in the terrace 
of the valley of the Somme which led to the inquiries 
at Swanscombe by Mr Reginald Smith and Mr Dewey. 
These gentlemen found in the 1o0o-foot terrace of the 
Thames valley, as we have just seen, the same triple 
series of deposits, and the same cultures as M. Commont 
had previously discovered in the 30-metre terrace at 
Abbeville and at Amiens. Even in the most ancient 
Paleolithic times, intercommunication between France: 
and England must have been sufficiently advanced to 
allow a free interchange of culture. In fig. 94 is given 
M. Commont’s section of the roo-foot terrace at 

1 Les gisements paléolithiques d’ Abbeville (Lille, 1910). See also 
L’ Anthropologie, 1908, vol. xix. p. §27; ibid., 1911, vol. xxii, p. 575. 
Compt. Rend., 1911, vol. cliii, p. 1256. Professor Victor Commont died 
in 1918. He was born in 1866, 

267 


268 THE ANTIOULITY OP SMAN 


Abbeville, as shown in the Carpentier gravel pit. The 
lowest series of deposits, resting on the chalk, is made up 
of a gravel, a greenish clay, and a chalky if or marl. 
The worked flints found in this series belong to an older 
culture than the Chellean—they are pre-Chellean. The 
second series of deposits is represented by a gravel and an 
overlying bed of light-coloured sands yielding flints of 
the Chellean period. ‘The third series of deposits begins 


with a seam of flints, or gravel, containing implements 












































ACHEULEAN I 
ACHEULEAN I 


CHELLEAN 








GLA 74 oa 
ts LEG) 


e G4 
$y ‘of df Tae, Le IAF Sop 
Fic. 94.—Section of the 30-metre terrace at Abbeville (V. Commont). 


of the first Acheulean! culture; in the overlying bed of 
red, sandy, laminated loam—‘ limon fendille ”—occur 
the later Acheulean implements of the type found in the 
brick earths at Bury St Edmunds. Often in the deeper 
layers of the last-mentioned stratum occur black bands 
of manganese. At the Carpentier pit, as at the Barnfield, 
the series of deposits ends with the late Acheulean culture ; 
but in other sites in the same terrace, and particularly in 
the lower or 50-foot terrace, deposits of a later date occur, 
containing implements of the Mousterian, Aurignacian, 
and other late Palzolithic cultures. Our visit to Abbe- 


1 St Acheul is near Amiens. 


OO ————— ————————— 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 269 


ville assures us that in the river valleys of the adjoining 
parts of France and England occur the same sequence of 
terraces, deposits, and cultures. 

The investigations of M. Commont belong to the 
commencement of the twentieth century. Seventy 
years before his time even more remarkable discoveries 
were made at Abbeville. In 1825, M. Boucher de Perthes, 
then a man of forty-one, was placed in charge of the 
customs of the town. In the years following the date 
of his appointment, cave exploration was attracting the 
attention of antiquaries. It was in 1833 that Schmerling 
published the results of his investigations at Engis. 
No one had ever looked, or even thought of looking, 
in the gravel deposits of valley terraces for human 
implements until Boucher de Perthes took up his abode 
in the Somme valley. The terraces were known to 
contain the remains of extinct animals, and their formation 
was supposed to predate man’s appearance. About the 
year 1832 this antiquarian exciseman first noticed very 
curiously shaped stones in the gravel pits. ‘These stones, 
we now know, represented human implements of the 
Acheulean type. We are not surprised that he recognised 
in those stones the work of man’s hand and of man’s 
brain, but we have a difficulty in understanding why 
those to whom he showed them did not agree with him. 
Even in 1847, when he had published the first part of 
his great work, Antiquités Celtiques et Antédiluviennes, he 
had not gained a single convert. Indeed, his discovery 
was regarded in the light of a joke. In 1858 the public 
attitude towards Boucher de Perthes’ work began to 
change, and in that change Dr Hugh Falconer, whom we 
have come across before as explorer of the Brixham cave, 
gave a helping hand. He had in his younger days made 
known the extinct animals found in the Siwalik forma- 
tions in India, and in 1858 was searching the caves on 
the shores and islands of the Mediterranean for fossil 
animals. On his way to the caves he had the good 
fortune to call at Abbeville and to meet Boucher de 
Perthes. He realised at once that this local antiquarian, 


270 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


in charge of the customs-house at Abbeville, had made 
a great discovery—one which revealed an ancient and 
unsuspected chapter of human history. Falconer was 
one of a remarkable group of British scientists, embracing 
Sir Charles Lyell, George Busk, who brought the Gibraltar 
skull to England, Joseph Prestwich, a wine merchant and 
geologist, John Evans, a paper manufacturer and ants 
quarian, and John limb ese banker, naturalist, and 
anthropologist. Falconer prevailed on his friends to 
visit Abbeville. ‘The result was that this brilliant school 
of geologists became convinced that Boucher de Perthes’ 
interpretation was right—that the implements were of 
human workmanship and that man had lived when the 
100-foot terrace was being formed. 

In 1863 another famous find by Boucher de Perthes 
brought the English geologists back to Abbeville. The 
discovery was made in the Moulin Quignon pit in the 
1oo-foot terrace at Abbeville, a few hundred yards to 
the east of the Carpentier pit (fig. 94), so thoroughly 
investigated by Commont. 

The Moulin Quignon pit, like others along the valley 
of the Somme, had yielded a rich harvest of Paleolithic 
implements—including Acheulean and Chellean types— 
to Boucher de Perthes, but not a trace of the man who > 
fashioned them, although liberal rewards were held out 
to the workmen in the pits. On 23rd March 1863, the 
long-expected discovery was made; on that day Boucher — 
de Perthes removed with his own hand a human jaw 
from the lower gravels of the Moulin Quignon pit. 
The mandible lay + in a well-known, particularly black 
stratum of sand and gravel which contained many flints 
of the Acheulean type—“‘ coup-de-poing,” or ‘“‘ hand- 
axes,” as they were then called. The black stratum was 
5 m. (164 feet) below the surface of the pit, almost on the 
chalk. ‘The section of the Carpentier pit (fig. 94) shows 
how the upper or third series of deposits may dip down 
almost to the chalk, as they evidently did at Moulin — 

1 For a full account of the discovery of, and conference on, the Moulin 
Quignon jaw, see Nat, Hist. Rev., 1863, vol. iii. p. 423. 





PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 2s 


Quignon. The news of this discovery brought the 
English group of geologists hot-foot to Abbeville. It 
was the first discovery of “ river-drift ””—terrace-gravel 
man. At first the visitors were impressed favourably. 
Then it was found that some of the implements in 
Boucher de Perthes’ collection were forgeries, foisted on 
him by the workmen. The Englishmen returned home 
in doubt, bringing with them the jaw, and also an isolated 
human tooth found in the same stratum. Falconer and 
Busk took the jaw to the museum of the Royal College 
of Surgeons, and cut it across to see the state of fossilisa- 
tion. They also made a section of the isolated tooth. 
The cut surface of the tooth and of the jaw appeared 
surprisingly well preserved and fresh; they were really 
shocked to find it contained as much as 8 per cent. 
animal matter. ‘This was the circumstance which turned 
their suspicion into a serious doubt, although on the 
shelves of the museum in which they had met there was 
a series of specimens, prepared by John Hunter in 1792, 
to show that the bones of Pleistocene animals may contain 
as much as 30 per cent. of animal matter. Gimbernat 
had even made a jelly from the bones of the mammoth. 
Then a curious thing happened. In May of the same 
year, 1863, the English geologists went to Paris to meet 
in solemn conclave their confréres of France and pass 
sentence on the jaw. ‘The conference broke up leaving 
the French section convinced that the Moulin Quignon 
jaw was an authentic document, and the English that 
it was a forgery. French anthropologists continued to 
believe in the authenticity of the jaw until between 1880 
and 1890, when they ceased to include it in the list of 
discoveries of ancient man. At the present time opinion 
is almost unanimous in regarding the Moulin Quignon 
jaw as a worthless relic. We see that its relegation to 
oblivion begins when the belief became fixed that 
Neanderthal man represented a Pleistocene phase in the 
evolution of modern races. ‘That opinion, we have seen, 


is no longer tenable. 
Was Boucher de Perthes tricked ? Let us look at the 


272 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


specimen, or rather at an exact cast of the specimen, for 
it is on that I have had to base my examination. The 
mandible was originally covered by the black specks of 
the stratum in which it lay. Mr Busk found he could 
brush these specks off; that does not invalidate its 
authenticity. The shape of the mandible is remarkable. 
In fig. 95, I reproduce the appearance of the jaw as seen 
from the side, in true profile. Beside the Moulin 
Quignon specimen, I have placed a similar outline of 


¢ 


anes 
fis, 


v 


Deas pets 





M00: ENG: 


oe y, 





(A) MOULIN QUIQNON. (B) GALLEY HILL. 


Fic. 95.—(A) A profile drawing of the Moulin Quignon mandible. (B) A 
profile drawing of the Galley Hill mandible. On the latter a 
stippled outline of a modern English mandible is superimposed. 


the mandible of the Galley Hill man. It is then seen 
that the ascending branch of the Moulin Quignon jaw, 
bearing the articular condyle and coronoid process, is 
altogether of remarkable width—s5o0 mm. at its widest 
part and 35 mm. at its narrowest. ‘The body of the jaw 
is not deep as measured from its upper or tooth-bearing 
border to its lower. Indeed, it is shallow, but its thick- 
ness, measured from the inner to the outer surface in the 
region of the molar teeth, is of more than average amount. 
In the region of the chin and symphysis, all the markings 
and features found in the chin region of modern man are 
present. When a comparison is made with the Galley 


Hill mandible (fig. 95), the Moulin Quignon specimen is, 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 273 


on the whole, the less primitive. Its ascending branch 
is the wider, but the Galley Hill ramus shows the more 
shallow, and therefore more primitive, notch between 
the condylar and coronoid processes. 

Another specimen which attracted the attention of 
Huxley, Busk, and Falconer in 1863, but which dis- 
appeared soon after, has a very remarkable resemblance 
to the Moulin Quignon mandible (fig. 96). This speci- 
men is known as the Foxhall mandible because it was 
found in a sand-pit situated on the Suffolk plateau in 





MOULIN QUIGNON 
FOX-HALL 





Fic. 96.—Stippled outline of the Foxhall mandible superimposed on 
a drawing of the Moulin Quignon specimen. 


the parish of Foxhall, four miles to the east of Ipswich. 
Mr Reid Moir 1 has reinvestigated the deposits in the 
Foxhall pit, particularly the coprolite stratum from which, 
it is believed, the jaw was derived, and has also sought to 
trace the jaw itself. Although in this he has not been 
successful, there can be no doubt that it showed all the 
features we associate with the modern European type, 
including a well-developed chin. A drawing of this 
mandible, given by Dr Robert H. Collyer,? leaves no 
doubt as to its character. In fig. 96, the outline of the 
Foxhall mandible is superimposed on that of the Moulin 


1 Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1921, vol. ili. p. 389. 
2 “The Fossil Human Jaw from Suffolk,” Robert H. Collyer, M.D., 
Anthrop. Rev., 1867, vol. v. p. 221. 
VOLS 1, 18 


274 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Quignon specimen and it will be seen that in size and in 
shape they are almost identical. Difficult as it may be to 
believe in the authenticity of Boucher de Perthes’ find, 
it is more difficult still to accept the Foxhall jaw as a true 
fossil, for, as we shall see later (p. 307), this East Anglian 
specimen comes from a much older geological horizon 
than the French counterpart found in the neighbourhood 
of Abbeville. 

In the figure, 97, I contrast the Abbeville jaw with that 





Fic. 97.—Stippled outline of the Moulin Quignon mandible superimposed 
on the Spy (Neanderthal) specimen. 


of a Neanderthal man—one of the specimens found at 
Spy. It is at once apparent how different they are. 
The Neanderthal (Spy) specimen is by far the more 
simian, and if we did not know that men of the modern 
type must have been contemporaries of the Neanderthal 
species, we should never hesitate in accepting the Spy 
mandible as the true representative of Pleistocene man. 
Were our predecessors right in rejecting the Abbeville 
mandible ? J think not. Boucher de Perthes gives the 
most circumstantial account of its discovery. ‘There is 
not a single point mentioned by Busk or by Falconer 
which makes its antiquity impossible. It was almost an 


1 J. L. Rome, F.G.S., Lhe Abbeville Faw, Hull, 1864. 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 275 


isolated case in 1863, but since then the discoveries at 
Galley Hill, at Bury St Edmunds, at Clichy, and at 
Grenelle have been made. Our predecessors were largely 
influenced by prejudice. We have seen how modern 
man, already fully evolved, appeared suddenly in Europe 
at the end of the Mousterian period. Was this his first 
appearance in Europe or was it a reappearance? ‘Time 
will probably show that the pioneer of Abbeville was not 
only right about the human implements of the terraces, 
but also about the human remains. He died in 1868: it 
was not until 1908 that a statue was erected to him in 
Abbeville. 

In our search for men of the most ancient Paleolithic 
periods, we now move from Abbeville on the estuary of 
the Somme to Paris on the banks of the Seine. The 
greater part of Paris is built on deposits—on terraces— 
laid down by the Seine. The river deposits of Paris 
offer certain advantages for our present purposes. 
Galley Hill and Abbeville lie in the tidal reach of their 
valleys. When submergence of the land sets in, the 
tidal reaches of the valley become filled up. After- 
wards, as the land rises again, the deposits are scoured 
out. All that remains of these deposits are the fragments 
preserved as terraces on the sides of the valley. At Paris 
we are far enough above sea-level to safeguard the valley 
deposits ; they may be disturbed in part, but at many 
places we may expect to find the very oldest deposits 
lying in their original condition on the lowest part of 
the valley. At Chelles, for instance, eight miles to the 
east of Paris, the ancient deposits, with typical speci- 
mens of the Chellean culture, rest on the floor of the 
valley of the Marne. ‘These Chellean strata lie under 
others of the Acheulean period, and these in turn are 
surmounted by deposits of the Mousterian period. If 
ancient river deposits do contain human or other remains, 
there is no place where they were so likely to be dis- 
covered as in the foundations of Paris—for no area has 
been so extensively excavated. 

In the year 1868 a gravel pit was still worked off the 


276 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Avenue de Clichy, right in the heart of that part of 
Paris which lies on the north bank of the Seine. The 
problem of man’s antiquity was still being debated. On 
the 18th of April of that year—1868—M. Eugéne 
Bertrand, then a student in Paris, visited, as was his 
wont, the gravel pit off the Avenue de Clichy to see 
what fossil bones had come to light. The remains of 
extinct Pleistocene mammals had been found from time 
to time. On that morning he was informed that the 
labourers had exposed a human skeleton on the working 
face of the pit. M. Bertrand was an expert observer and 
familiar with the strata of the pit. The depth at which 
the skeleton lay was 5:25 m. (17:3 feet) from the surface. 
It was embedded in the fourth layer from the top. 
Fig. 98, which shows the sequence of the overlying 
strata, is taken from a paper published by M. Rutot. 
M. Bertrand gave an account of his discovery to the 
Anthropological Society of Paris in the same year.! 
The antiquity and authenticity of the Clichy skeleton 
was accepted by all the authorities in France except one 
—M. G. de Mortillet, who believed that the workmen at 
the pit had deceived M. Bertrand. The clear-sighted 
Professor Hamy had no doubt as to any of the facts 
relating to the discovery. In his excellent treatise on 
Ancient Man ? he records all the essential facts bearing 
on the authenticity of M. Bertrand’s observations. 

The same fate overtook the Clichy skeleton as the 
Abbeville jaw. With the acceptance of Neanderthal man 
as our Pleistocene ancestor, it was relegated to oblivion, 
and would probably have remained there had it not been 
for M. Rutot. M. Rutot has spent a lifetime in study- 
ing the river deposits of the valleys of Belgium. He is 
convinced that his observations of the valley deposits of 
Belgium may be applied to the valleys of the adjoining 
countries. He is certain that the terraces of the Seine 
at Paris must have been formed at the same time and in 
the same way as those in the valleys of the Meuse, of the 

1 Bull. Soc. d’ Anthrop., 1868, ser. 2, vol. iii. p. 329. 
2 Préctis de paléontologie humaine, E, T. Hamy, Paris, 1870. 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 277 


Thames, and of the Somme. In igio he visited Paris 
and verified his conclusions.t At Clichy he found the 
same deposits, in the same order as at Abbeville, as at St 
Acheul, and as at Galley Hill. Each stratum carried in 
it the corresponding Paleolithic culture. The skeleton 
at Clichy, he has proved, lay in a depositwhich corre- 
sponds with the one in which the Galley Hill skeleton was 





























SOIL 








"2/|) GRAVEL & RED LOAM 
. RED SANDY CLAY 


‘YELLOW SANDS 


5 : SHARP SANDS 
HUMAN REMAINS | he & 
GRAVELS 


lert 


ee 4 





Fic, 98.—Strata of the gravel pit at Clichy, Paris. (After M. Rutot.) 


embedded. At Galley Hill the human remains lay in 
the loam under the middle gravel, the stratum which 
contains paleoliths of the Chelles period. At Clichy the 
human skeleton lay in a grey loam with bands of gravel 
and of sand which at St Acheul contains the typical 
Chellean industry. 

The discoveries at Clichy and at Galley Hill revealed 
very similar kinds of men. At Clichy parts of an entire 
skeleton were preserved ; we have clearly to do with a 


1 “ Revision stratigraphiques des ossements humains quaternaires de 
VEurope,” Bull. Soc. Belge de Géol., 1910, vol. xxiv. p. 123. 


278 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


burial—one made probably from a Chellean land surface. 
As at Galley Hill, the individual found had a remarkably 
long head, 204 mm., with a width of 138 mm.—almost to 
a millimetre the length and width of the Galley Hill skull. 
Unfortunately, at Clichy the lower part of the forehead 
was broken away, but the bones of the vault have the 
same extreme thickness as those at Galley Hill—io to 
13mm. The height of the vault above the ear-holes is 
almost the same—118 mm., a low roof for such a long 
skull. The ear-holes are wide and the mastoid process 
small—exactly as in the Galley Hill skull. On the other 
hand, there is a difference as regards the lower limbs. 
The Galley Hill tibia was not flattened from side to side ; 
in the Clichy skeleton flattening was present. Both were 
persons of low stature. Can we suppose that the work- 
men at Galley Hill and at Clichy had a supernatural 
knowledge and implanted those two similar but peculiar 
varieties of men in the same geological stratum, and in 
the midst of the same ancient, Paleolithic culture? As 
regards size of brain, the Clichy man, judging from the 
measurements of the skull, should be about the same 
brain capacity as the Galley Hill man—under 1500 c.c. 

I have cited only this one instance from the ancient 
valley deposits of Paris, because it is not necessary to 
prove more than one case—one instance of a modern 
type of man who lived before the Mousterian period, 
the heyday of Neanderthal man in Europe. At Grenelle, 
a suburb of Paris, on the south bank of the Seine, human 


remains of the same type have been found at an even 


greater depth, and others of a different type at more 
superficial horizons. ‘There is no doubt that even in the 
earliest Paleolithic periods—one hundred thousand years 


ago or perhaps more—the culture and the people in the ~ 


valley of the Seine and in the valley of. the Thames 
were very much alike. 

From Paris our present inquiry takes us along the 
valley of the Rhéne towards the north of Italy. At 
Lyons it is well to break our journey and visit Le Puy, 
situated on the upper waters of the Loire in a moun- 


ht 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 279 


tainous country to the north of the Cevennes. In the 
museum of the town is preserved the frontal bone of a 
human skull, which was found embedded in a volcanic 
matrix. ‘The history of the specimen is well known. An 
account of it was published in 1844, but the fullest 
description is that given by Dr Sauvage in 1872.1 In 
1859, Sir Charles Lyell visited Le Puy, and examined the 
volcanic deposits on Mount Denise, where the specimen 
was found. The actual site of discovery is situated in a 


DENISE | FRAGMENT 





Fic. 99.—The Denise frontal bone. 


vineyard terrace near the summit of a hill. The matrix 
in which the specimen is embedded guarantees its 
antiquity. ‘The frontal bone is that of a person who 
lived before the last volcanic eruption which occurred 
in Central France. In the same deposit as the skull are 
found the remains of the cave-hyena and hippopotamus. 
The date of the eruption and of the skull is therefore 
mid-Pleistocene—about the same age as the Bury St 
Edmunds fragment. Perhaps it may be older. Its 
interest for us is that although so ancient it differs in no 
essential particular from the frontal bone of a modern 
skull (fig. 99). From its dimensions one infers that it 


1 “T?homme fossile de Denise,” Rev. d’ Anthrop., 1872, vol. i. p. 289. 


280 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


formed part of a relatively small skull—yet one which 
was somewhat larger than the skull represented by the 
Bury St Edmunds fragment. The frontal bone is not 
thick, only 6-5 mm., and the supra-orbital ridges are not 
pronounced. From other features we infer the Denise 
skull was that of a young woman. Other bones of the 
human skeleton have also been found in the same volcanic 
deposit, but, unfortunately, to meet a demand on the 
part of visitors to Le Puy, many spurious specimens were 
offered for sale, thus throwing doubt on those which are 
undoubtedly genuine. 








OLMO. (PROFILE! OLMD (Fuel Face) 


Fic. 100.—The Olmo cranium viewed from the side and from the front. 


The final discovery I am to cite as evidence that the 
inhabitants of Europe in pre-Mousterian times were 
people, not of the Neanderthal, but of the modern type, 
is that made in 1863 by Signor Cocchi, Curator of the 
Museum of Geology in Florence.t In making the 
railway southwards from Arezzo, in the upper waters of 
the Arno, a cutting or trench over 50 feet deep had to 
be dug. During the excavation the Olmo skull was 
discovered (fig. 100). It lay at a depth of almost 50 feet 
(15 m.) beneath the surface, in a deep stratum of blue 
clav—a deposit formed in the floor of an ancient lake. 


1 “ L’Uomo fossile nell’ Italio Centrale,” Mem. dell. Soc. Ital. de Sc. Nat. 
Milan, 1867, vol. ii., No. 7. Abstract in Bull. Soc. @’ Anthrop., 1868, 
ser. 2, vol. ii., p. 40. See also Professor Guiseppe Sergi, “Su l’uomo 
fossile dell’ Olmo,” Revista di Antropologia, 1917, vol. xxi. pas 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 281 


That the skull lay in this stratum there can be no doubt. 
It is still preserved in the Geological Museum of Florence, 
its cavity being filled—as when found—by a mass of the 
blue clay. Over the blue clay of the railway cutting 
were deposits—about 12 feet in thickness—which Cocchi 
regarded as of late Pleistocene and also of recent forma- 
tion. The blue clay in which the skull was embedded 
he assigned to the older Pleistocene deposits. The 
remains of an elephant (Llephas antiquus, Sergi), and of 

























































SSE ee ES 































































































































































































































































































H 
60. 70 


°o 
50 70 70 


70 50 


° 50 aan 
OLMO (VERTEX) SPY. (NEANDERTHAL), 


Fic. ror.—The Olmo cranium viewed from above, compared with a 
similar view of the vault of the Neanderthal calvaria. 


an early form of Pleistocene horse (Lguus lartett), occurred 
at the same horizon as the skull. Near the skull, charred 
wood marked the site of an ancient hearth. The culture 
of the period is represented by a Paleolithic implement 
which may well belong to the Chellean period. ‘The 
exact cultural horizon to which the skull should be 
assigned cannot be fixed with any degree of certainty, 
but for our present purpose it is sufficient to be convinced 
that the skull is older than the period of Mousterian 
culture. Of that, I think, there can be no doubt. 

The skull is clearly a variant of the modern type. My 
friend, Professor Sera, was good enough to obtain for me 


282 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


an exact cast of the Olmo skull, and it is from this cast 
that the accompanying drawings have been made. When 
viewed in profile, the skull is seen to be of about the same 
length as the Galley Hill and Clichy specimens. Its 
length is 202 mm. ; its width is more difficult to estimate 
exactly, owing to some degree of distortion by earth- 
pressure, but it cannot have been less than 150 mm.— 
giving a head index of 74. The vault is low, about 116 
mm. above the ear passages, and remarkably flat—a 
feature recalling the Bury St Edmunds fragment. As in 
that fragment, the frontal bone is sharply bent, producing 
a wide and vertical forehead. The brain capacity is 
estimated at 1560-1600 c.c.—a large and capacious skull. 
The forehead shows a smaller development of supra- 
orbital ridges than in the skulls of the more primitive of 
modern races. ‘The width of the forehead, at the level 
of the upper margin of the orbits, is only 106 mm. ; the © 
‘minimal width,” taken higher up on the forehead, has 
an ample dimension—namely 100 mm. On the other 
hand, the bones of the vault are remarkably thick—11I mm. 
There is not a single feature in this skull we can call simian. 
In this it agrees with other human skulls of great antiquity. 

We have now completed a tour of Europe in search of 
pre-Mousterian man. The European of the Mousterian 
period—Neanderthal man—-from an anatomist’s point of 
view, was of a most primitive type. He possessed many 
features which are rightly regarded as ape-like. In 
the deposits of the two long periods which preceded 
the Mousterian—the Acheulean and Chellean, probably 
covering between them a stretch of almost one hundred 
thousand years—at least, the Thames filled up and scoured 
out its valley twice during that space of time—we have 
found no trace of Neanderthal man, nor of his ancestor. 
The deposits of the Thames, of the Somme, of the Seine, 
of the Arno, from one side of Europe to the other, have 
revealed the same story—the existence of a man, a mere 
variant of modern man, with a thick skull, a big brain, 
and a long head. How are we to account for this un- 
expected revelation ? There are two ways: we may hold 


PRE-MOUSTERIAN MAN 283 


with the majority of anatomists and geologists, and simply 
refuse to believe in the authenticity of these discoveries 
because they run so contrary to our preconception of how 
and when modern man was evolved. Or, with Sergi and 
with Rutot, we may put our preconceptions aside, and, 
as we are bound to do, accept the revelations of those dis- 
coveries as facts, and alter our conception of man’s evolu- 
tion to harmonise with our facts. We have, in the first 
place, to conclude that man of the modern type is much 
older than we supposed. We expected to find him in a 
process of evolution during the Pleistocene period, but 
we have traversed more than the half of that period and 
find our own species much as we find him at the present 
day. It is clear we must seek for his evolution at an 
earlier time than the Pleistocene. Neanderthal man is a 
different and also, in many respects, but not in all, a 
very primitive species of man. Where and when he was 
evolved we shall have to discuss in connection with the 
Heidelberg jaw (p. 332), and with the remarkable African 
type, known as Rhodesian man (p. 382). As a result of 
recent discoveries we are compelled to take a more complex 
view of the world of ancient man. In our first youthful 
burst of Darwinianism we pictured human evolution as 
a simple procession of forms leading from ape to man. 
Each age, as it passed, transformed the men of the time 
one stage nearer to us—one more distant from the ape. 
The true picture is very different. We have to conceive 
an ancient world in which each region or area was 
sparsely occupied or inhabited by its own particular 
genus or type Ore Mankind sasthese regional genera or 
types were in turn broken up into local species or varieties, 
just as we see to-day in the case of man’s nearest surviving 
relatives—the anthropoid apes of Africa and of Farther 
Asia. ‘Then out of that great welter of ancient human 
forms one species became dominant, and ultimately the 
sole surviving form—the species represented by the 
modern races of mankind. Such must be the working 
hypothesis which the anthropologist takes with him when 
he sets out to unravel the problems of man’s evolution. 


CHAPTER XIV 
ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA 


WHEN investigating the 100-foot terrace of the lower 
valley of the Thames, where the remains of Galley Hill 
man were found, note was made that the materials of 
the terrace represented deposits of three ages. There 
were, first, the uppermost and latest in which Acheulean 
implements were found ; there were, in the second place, 
a middle series which yielded implements of the pure 
Chellean type; and thirdly, deepest and oldest of all, 
were those containing the mixed types to which, at 
present, the provisional name of pre-Chellean is given. 
In this chapter we are to carry our search for ancient man 
back into that vast and remote time which covers the 
evolution of pre-Chellean cultures. We have already 
committed ourselves to the statement that the beginning 
of the true Chellean culture may be placed at so distant 
a date as one hundred and thirty thousand years ago. ‘To 
take us to the beginning of the Pleistocene period we 
cannot allow more than an additional seventy thousand 
years ; even then, as we shall see, the beginning of the 
pre-Chelles stone-culture is not reached (see fig. 264). 

In this chapter we are to leave the lower valley of 
the Thames, where we have traced the footsteps of pre- 
historic Englishmen far into the past, to prosecute our 
search in the three eastern counties of England—Norfolk, 
Suffolk, and Essex, which we may speak of as East Anglia. 
This part of England is comparatively low and flat, a 
tableland scored into valleys by streams which run 
eastwards to the North Sea and westwards to the Great 

284 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 285 


Ouse and Wash. Over it, we shall find a thick mantle of 
glacial deposits, particularly the well-known sheet of 
chalky boulder clay. Underneath its glacial mantle, lie 
a series of deposits which were laid down at that period 
of the earth’s history which saw man rising to his present 
state of body and of brain. Although in 1863, when 
Sir Charles Lyell wrote the first edition of his Antiquity 
of Man, not any trace of man had been recognised in the 
deposits of East Anglia, yet his unerring judgment led 
him to give utterance to the following forecast : “‘ Neither 
need we despair of one day meeting with the signs of 
Man’s existence in the Cromer forest bed (see fig. 103), 
or in the overlying deposits, on the ground of any in- 
congeniality of the climate, or incongruity in the state of 
the animate creation with the well-being of our species.” 
Mr J. Reid Moir, who has done more than any man to 
justify the great geologist’s foresight, has lately written : 
«There is, perhaps, no other area known to archeologists, 
richer in the remains of prehistoric, flint-using man than 
that of East Anglia in England.” ! It is in these deposits 
of East Anglia we are now to seek for traces of pre- 
Chellean man. 

Ere setting out on our excursion it will be helpful 
to discuss certain matters relating to the geological 
deposits of East Anglia before actually leaving the lower 
valley of the Thames. Here we have been dealing with 
deposits laid down by the river on the sides of its valley 
at various times, and the reader may think that the 
geological formation, represented by the broad lands of 
East Anglia, belongs to a totally different order. ‘The 
valley of the Thames is, however, but a small side ex- 
tension of that much greater valley which is now filled 
with the waters of the North Sea. There have been 
times when the North Sea valley has become dry land, 
and along its floor there flowed, in a northerly direction, 
the ancient Rhine, receiving the Thames as a minor 
tributary. 

1 The Great Flint Implements of Cromer, Norfolk. Ipswich: W. E. 
Harrison, 1923. 


286 THE ANTIOUITY OF MAN 


So recently as early Neolithic times (fig. 102) the delta 
of the ancient Rhine lay out in the North Sea, near where 
the Dogger Bank now is. ‘The southern shores of the 





Fic. 102.—The shores of the North Sea in late Paleolithic and 
early Neolithic times. 


North Sea extended then from Yorkshire to Denmark. 
The state of things seen in early Neolithic times was but 
a repetition of land and sea movements which have several 
times chequered the history of the North Sea. One 
particular phase of land-elevation marked the dawn of 
the Pleistocene period, ‘The ancient Rhine, meandering 


ANCIEN ESVANSING HAS hPANGLIAS 287 


down the North Sea valley, would behave as rivers do; 
as the land rose it would deepen its valley, leaving parts 
of its ancient bed as terraces on the valley flanks. As 
the land fell it would tend to fill its valley with fresh 
deposits. We cannot, unfortunately, examine the lower 
and more recent terraces laid down along this valley, for 
they lie to-day under the waters of the North Sea, but 
the older and higher terraces we can investigate, for we 
find them forming the lands of East Anglia. In reality a 
great part of East Anglia represents a high terrace of 
the North Sea valley—a vast terrace of the Pliocene 
period, covered by glacial deposits of the Pleistocene. 
This ancient East Anglian terrace, like that represented at 
the 50-foot level of the Thames valley, is made up of 
two totally different formations. In the deeper parts of 
the 50-foot terrace we find gravels and sands—remnants 
of the ancient river bed; over these are loams and 
brick earths, in which implements of the Mousterian and 
of later Paleolithic cultures are found; these are glacial 
deposits of a much later date than the gravels underneath. 
Similarly in East Anglia we find the older deposits 
covered by a great mantle of clays, loams, brick earths, 
sands, and gravels, laid down when the climate of England 
was sub-Arctic in character. The components of this 
glacial mantle we shall have to enumerate presently, but 
in the meantime we must give our attention to the deeper 
and older deposits which le under the glacial mantle 
because it is in them that Mr Reid Moir and his colleagues 
are discovering most definite evidence of man’s high 
antiquity. 

In fig. 103 is reproduced a conspectus of the deposits 
of East Anglia given by Mr Reid Moir. If we compare 
the deposits thus represented with those of the 50-foot 
terrace of the Thames valley, then all those which are 
above the Arctic fresh-water beds must be compared 
to the glacial deposits on the terrace—the loams, brick 
earths, and Coombe rock, which carry implements of 
Mousterian and post-Mousterian date—while the older 

1 The Great Flint Implements of Cromer, p. 13, fig. 2. 


288 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


deposits, from the Cromerian forest beds above to the 
Coralline Crag below, may be compared to the deep 
gravels and sndsehe essential constituents of the 


















J NEOLITHS 

‘| periveD \ 
MPLEMENTS \ 
>| MADALEINE 


SOLUTRE 
AURIGNAC 































































































WURM , |UPPER&MID. — \ 
aN s|LE MOUSTIER 
GLACIATION » 
f DERIVED i 
I impLtements ™% 
\ G 

‘ 

. x 
EARLY a 

z (|LE mo R 
FE MIDDLE GLACIAL GRAVELS =| or pcueuL & 
gy TABITEEDEE OCC: RIZZI inte 
MINDEL-RISS ERG ACE /A CHELLES m 

DERIVED i 

MUN OE Lone. GLACIAL SANDS.= eee 

GLACIATION INDEL GLACIAL: Zs 

= = if 
ROMER FOREST BEO SERIES "y 
A =|? CHELLES \, 

GUNZ : 
GLACIATION SSeS ony 
SWE BOURNE CAaaN n 

IS CHELLES FORD Bees; S 

eee ee IMPLEMENTS : 

Seen) - HALL z 

HORIZON mh 


a a e 


CORALLINE CRAG ‘ 
LAE E EO Le 


Fic. 103.—The Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits of East Anglia, grouped 
and superimposed in the order—or supposed order—of age. (After 
Reid Moir.) On the left-hand side of Mr Moir’s diagram I have 
introduced the system of nomenclature adopted in this book. Three 
glaciations are recognised: Wiirmian, Mindelian, and Giinzian. 


terraces found in the Thames valley at the 50-foot and 
100-foot level. Our interest for the present moment is 
centred in these older and deeper deposits of East Anglia ; 
to understand the significance of the discoveries which are 
being made in them, we must have a mental picture of 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 289 


the manner in which they have been laid down. When 
we look at what is taking place in the North Sea to-day— 
and we can judge of the past only by observing what 
happens in the present—we see that the Rhine, the 
Thames, and other rivers which pour their waters into 
the upper end of the North Sea valley, are depositing 
the scourings of their watersheds at their mouths. Every 
year these rivers have to carry their burdens just a little 
farther before depositing them, thus tending to fill up 
the upper or south end of the North Sea valley. In the 
Pliocene period a somewhat similar process must have 
been in operation. In fig. 103 the deposits of this period— 
from the Coralline Crag below to the Arctic fresh-water 
beds above—are represented as if they were superimposed 
vertically on one another; in reality, they are arranged 
in an overlapping manner, much like slates on a roof, the 
series beginning in the south, with the deepest and oldest, 
the Coralline Crag, and ending in the north with the 
uppermost and most recent—the Cromer forest beds. 
It is plain that the formation of such extensive deposits 
must have occupied a very long span of time, yet it is 
on and under one of the deeper deposits—the Red Crag— 
that Mr Reid Moir has found flint implements worked 
by the hand of Pliocene man. 

There is another process at work, tending to fill up 
the North Sea valley, with which visitors to the soft, 
sludgy cliffs which form the shore-line of East Anglia are 
already familiar. The sea is steadily eating into East 
Anglia, gnawing it away; fields, woods, houses, villages, 
churches, and graveyards, which fifty years ago seemed 
remote from danger, are now in process of demolition, 
by the merciless action of tides and storms. ‘The cliffs 
and shorelands, made up of the strata shown in fig. 103, 
are being sluiced away, and their materials swept seawards 
by tide and current become incorporated as a component 
part of the present beach and sea bottom. A visitor to 
these shores sees a Crag being slowly formed under his 
eyes. Into the beach or Crag are swept the various strata 
of the cliffs. In the strata thus commingled on the beach 

VOL, I. 19 


290 THE ANFIQUITY OF MAN 


there lie cultures of various ages—cultures which link our 
present civilisation to the rude life of Pliocene man. 
We must be prepared to find a mixture of cultures in 
Crag deposits. Were the North Sea valley once more to 
become dry land, the beach which now fringes the shore 
of East Anglia would then appear as a terrace—a terrace 
skirting the brow of the North Sea valley. This intro- 
duction may assist the reader to understand how a 
“detritus bed’ comes to underlie the Red Crag, and 
why this bed should contain fossil bones and flint imple- 
ments belonging to very different geological epochs. 

Having thus given a brief homily on the geological 
deposits 1 of East Anglia, we now go forward to seek for 
the remains of Chellean and pre-Chellean man in the 
heart of this country, and, failing the discovery of his 
actual bones, to trace man backwards into the Pliocene 
period by means of his implements. 

In our search for Acheulean man (Chapter XII) we 
have already noted on the coast of Essex a fragment of a 
terrace corresponding to the one at the 100-foot level of 
the Thames valley, and the deposits in the valley of the 
Gipping near Ipswich which were explored by Miss 
Layard and are probably of Mousterian date. ‘Then, on 
the edge of the plateau, to the east of Ipswich, mention 


1 For readers who wish to consult authoritative writings the following 
references will be of service :— 


Professor P. F. G. Boswell—‘ The Geology of the Country round 
Cromer and Norwich,” Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1923, vol. xxxiv. p. 207. 
See also Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Inst., 1923, vol. liii. p. 229. 

Professor J. E. Marr.—‘‘ Man and the Ice Age,” Proc. Prehist. Soc. East 
Anglia, 1920, vol. ill. p. 177. See also ibid., 1920, vol. iii. p. 353. 

Mr A. S. Kennard.—“ Pleistocene Succession in England,” Proc. Prehist. 
Soc. East Anglia, 1916, vol. il. p. 249. 

Mr F. W. Harmer.—The Glacial Geology of Norfolk and Suffolk, 
Norwich, 1gIo. 

Mr W. B. Wright.—The Quaternary Ice Age, London, 1914. 

Dr Henry F. Osborn.—“ Pliocene and Early Pleistocene Animals in 
East Anglia,” Geol. Mag., 1922, vol. lix. p. 433. 

Dr Henry F. Osborn and Chester A. Reeds.—‘‘ Old and New Standards 
in Pleistocene Division in Relationship to the Prehistory of Man 
in Europe,” Bull. Geol. Soc. America, 1922, vol. xxiii. pp. 411-490. 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA 291 


has been made of the brick earths explored by Professor 
Boswell and Mr Reid Moir ; they found that these earths 
contained an orderly sequence of implements belonging 
to the Mousterian and Acheulean periods. We have 
also visited the brick-earth pit near Bury St Edmunds 
where a fragment of a human skull was found, and have 
made a cursory journey to the brick-earth deposits at 
Hoxne (see fig. 85, p. 236) where so long ago as 1797 
John Frere gathered Acheulean flints, regarding them as 
ancient “spearheads.” We have come back to this 
classical spot on a definite errand—to settle what relation- 
ship that great glacial mantle—the chalky boulder clay 
—bears to the various cultures of Paleolithic man. A 








SURFACE 

SS eines GRAVEL 
yp m Z BOULDER 

2M C Y CLAY 

ti t WW YY U, Ey 

Z Li gj Ws NUMAN Rreer ee uate Da i! Ly YY asfeel 
GLACIAL 

SANDS 





Fic. 104.—A diagrammatic section of the deposits of the 
Glacial period at Hoxne. 


section of the strata at Hoxne, which are reproduced 
in a diagrammatic manner in fig. 104, seem to give us a 
most decisive answer. ‘This section shows an old vallev 
which has been filled up with the following deposits, 
enumerating them from the most recent at the top to the 
older at the bottom. First come the brick earths some 
7 feet in depth, containing sharp-edged unrolled flints 
worked in the Acheulean manner. In this brick earth also 
occur Mousterian implements (Reid Moir). Then under 
the brick earth occurs an older deposit, a black brick earth, 
13 feet in depth and containing leaves of plants which 
thrive under sub-Arctic conditions, but which yields no 
trace of man. Then under the black earth the still older 
lignite bed, 1 to 3 feet in thickness, containing a flora 
indicating a temperate climate, very similar to that which 
now holds for East England. Under the lignite bed lie 
22 feet of lacustrine clay, the material which first silted up 


292 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the ancient valley and blocked its stream. Neither from 
the clay nor from the lignite bed over it has any trace of 
man been found. A glance at the section (fig. 104) makes 
clear that all these deposits were formed long after 
the sheet of chalky boulder clay, here some 35 feet in 
thickness, had been laid down, for the valley itself has 
been cut in the chalky boulder clay and the stream which 
carved it has actually deepened its floor until the glacial 
sands, which lie under the boulder clay, have been reached 
and excavated. We have here the most definite evidence 
that the deposition of the chalky boulder clay and the 
glaciation which gave rise to it, were ancient history long 
before Acheulean man appeared at Hoxne. From the 
time at which Acheulean man left his implements in the 
upper brick earths of the valley to that at which the 
chalky boulder clay was deposited on the glacial sands, 
there had taken place a series of events which involves the 
passage of a very long period of time. ‘The temperate 
and Arctic deposits of the valley indicate very clearly 
that a climatic cycle intervened between the deposition 
of the brick earths, with their Acheulean implements and 
glaciation, which gave rise to the mantle of chalky boulder 
clay. This glacial landmark of East Anglia seems — 
therefore to be much older than these deposits in the 
100-foot terrace of the Thames valley, which yield 
implements of the Acheulean and typical Chellean forms. 
If, then, we were to find human remains under this great 
stratum of glacial boulder clay, they should be much older 
than those found at Galley Hill or elsewhere in the 100- 
foot terrace. 

This belief was held by all British geologists in 1911, 
when, in October of that year, Mr Reid Moir announced 
the discovery of the Ipswich skeleton; it lay under 
a thin but intact extension of the great stratum of 
chalky boulder clay, which covers so large a part of the 
Suffolk plateau. As will be seen in the sequel, Mr Reid 
Moir and the writer no longer claim such a high antiquity 
for the Ipswich skeleton. And the reader may therefore 
expect me to consign its discovery to the limbo of forgotten 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 293 


things. I am of a different opinion; it often happens 
that we learn more from mistakes than we do from 
successes, and this is certainly true from the Ipswich find. 
Blsewhere 1 are told the circumstances which led to the 
uncovering of this famous skeleton in Bolton and Laughlin’s 
gravel pit, in and near which Mr Reid Moir made 
discoveries of lasting importance ; here we shall touch on 
the problems which were raised by the finding of the 
skeleton, and the manner in which these were finally 
settled. ‘The accompanying sketches, figs. 105 and 106, 
will make clear the site of the discovery and the geological 
surroundings of the skeleton. 

Ipswich is situated in the valley of the Gipping—ten 
miles from the open sea. As has already been mentioned, 
there occur on the floor and sides of the valley the 
same terrace and the same deposits as in the valley of 
the Thames. Passing northwards through Ipswich the 
traveller soon leaves the town and the valley and finds 
himself on a plateau, about 150 feet above the level of the 
sea, and covered everywhere by a thick stratum of chalky 
boulder clay, varying in depth from 15 to 25 feet. The 
plateau slopes gently to the west until it reaches the 
brim of the valley of the Gipping—or rather a side recess 
of the main valley. Messrs Bolton and Laughlin’s 
brick-field is situated on the edge of this minor valley 
—the surface level of the plateau at this spot being 
movreets O.1): 

At the brick-field the chalky boulder clay has become 
reduced to a stratum of about 4 feet in thickness (see 
figs. 105, 106). In parts it is “ weathered ”—the chalk 
and clay being altered in composition and appearance by 
exposure. That the stratum at the brick-field represents 
a direct extension of the great sheet of boulder clay, Mr 
Moir proved by sinking a series of pits from the brick-field 
to the crown of the plateau. In the map prepared by 
the officers of the Geological Survey the chalky boulder 
clay is shown to extend to the pit. 


1 Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1912, vol. xlii. p. 345. Also the first 
edition (1915) of this work, p. 214. 


204 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


The antiquity of the Ipswich skeleton depended on 
the proof of two things: (1) that the stratum which lay 
over the skeleton was truly a part of the great sheet of 
chalky boulder clay, laid down during the period of 


maximum glaciation; (2) that it was absolutely intact 







Yo 
TOF DISCOVERY 
WY a 


ich 





Bour 


Lp 
J Z OERY 











BOULDER CLAY 
1D GLACIAL SANZ. 
Rz0 ss 


Fic, 105.—Sketch of the valley of the Gipping to show the locality in 
which the Ipswich skeleton was found. 


Fic. 106.—Sketch of a section across the Gipping valley to show the horizon 
of the discovery (the line of section is shown in 105). 


and undisturbed since the time of its deposition. Mr 
Moir was keenly alive to the fact that a skeleton found at 
a depth of 4% feet (1°38 m.) was, unless convincing 
evidence to the contrary could be produced, most prob- 
ably placed there by a gravedigger’s spade. He there- 
fore took every means of verifying the unbroken and 
undisturbed nature of the stratum in and under which 


tee 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 295 


the skeleton lay, for it was embedded between the 
weathered boulder clay above and the mid-glacial sands 
below (fig. 106). He and those who worked with him 
satisfied themselves that the overlying stratum was 
continuous and unbroken. We have already seen the 
measures he took to prove the continuity of the stratum 
with the main sheet of chalky boulder clay. 

We then turned to the skeleton itself to see what 
evidence could be obtained of its antiquity by a close 
examination of its state of preservation and of its structure. 
When the blocks of matrix containing the fragmentary 
remains of the skeleton came to the museum of the Royal 
College of Surgeons, we set to work and slowly dissected 
away the boulder clay, leaving the fragments implanted 
on a matrix of glacial sands. By placing the blocks 
together it was easy to reconstruct the original posture 
of the skeleton. From fig. 107 it will be seen that a 
whole skeleton was represented, and that it was placed 
on the right side in the ultra-contracted posture. We 
have already discussed the significance which is usually 
attached to the discovery of a complete human skeleton, 
with all the parts in their natural position. The most 
reasonable explanation is to suppose that it has been placed 
where found by burial. In this case, unfortunately, we 
have no clear idea of the conditions under which the 
chalky boulder clay was deposited—whether in deep 
water or on an old land surface. If, as Mr Moir supposes, 
it was laid down on an old land surface, then it is possible 
that the burial was made from that surface. At least it 
was not made from the present land surface, for the 
overlying stratum was intact. ‘The contracted posture 
scarcely helps us in fixing a date. Contracted burials 
occur at all periods—Neolithic and Paleolithic. 

Nothing was found with or near the skeleton to give 
a clue to date. If the conditions were such as to secure 
the preservation of a human skeleton, it is also probable 
that remains of animals of the same period should be 
preserved in the same stratum. At the horizon at which 
the human skeleton lay no animal remains have been 


296 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


found at Bolton and Laughlin’s pit. In the glacial sands, 
however, bones of Pleistocene animals occur, and in 
many cases the condition of these bones is very similar 







SKULL & “Bee” 


BRAIN cast —~~_iff y 


RIGHT TIBIA 


RIGHT FIBULA, 


———<——$_—$_______—__+ jert renun. 
\eweremren i 

oN a ; 

\ AVERT. COL. 


\ 
/ 
—t— rien iim. 


<9 






RIGHT FEMUR. 







‘ 
ert me mene 
‘ ee we ae 


RIGHT ISCH.UM. 


PEBBLE. 


Fic. 107.—The parts of the Ipswich skeleton replaced in position. 


in their state of preservation to the bones of the Ipswich 
skeleton. ‘The substance of the.bones is grey and chalky 
in appearance, crumbling to a white dry dust on pressure. 
The bones, when dissolved in hydrochloric acid, leave 
no animal matrix behind. No stone implements of any 
kind were found with the skeleton. Whether or not the 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 297 


Ipswich man represents an inhabitant of East Anglia 
prior to the deposition of the chalky boulder clay, there 
is no doubt, as we shall see presently, that men were then 
in this part of England; and in the opinion of those who 
have studied the works of their hands and brains, they 
were workmen who showed a considerable knowledge of 
flint fracture. 

The Ipswich skeleton represents a tall man, 5 feet 
1o# inches (1-800 m.) in height. The cavity of the skull 
was filled with a sandy, chalky loam, giving a fairly 
accurate cast of the brain which had at one time occupied 


aS 

‘ 
‘| \ 
; 


t 
? 
} 


SA 
Ps 





ct x % Y Z 
y CLL NE 
: ets 
: 4 3 ae 
S won ih 
Pewide ferornzA he 


Fic. 108.—Drawings of the Ipswich skull from the side and from the front. 


the space. The skull itself was much broken, but it was 
possible to reconstruct the main features of the head. 
The brain capacity for so tall a man is only 1430 c.c. 
All the characters of the skull are those we are familiar 
with in modern man. ‘The characters we associate with 
Neanderthal man were absent. The forehead was re- 
treating, and the supra-orbital ridges were pronounced, 
but of the divided modern type. When viewed from 
the side and from the front (fig. 108), the skull fits com- 
fortably within the frame designed for modern English 
skulls. "The maximum length is 192 mm., about the same 
as in an average modern Englishman. Its width is 144 
mm., slightly beyond the modern average, giving a 
cephalic index of 75. The vault is flat on the top and 
also remarkably low, only 111 mm.—characters reminding 


298 THE ANHIQUITY OF MAN 


us of the Bury St Edmunds fragment which belongs to 
a time long after the deposition of the chalky boulder clay. 

The characteristic mark of the Ipswich man lay in his 
tibia or shin bone. No human tibia of a similar shape has 
ever been described before, and after a prolonged search 
I have been unable to find any specimen which resembles 
it either in ancient or modern man, in health or in 
disease. As regards the Ipswich tibia, there is no sign 
of inflammation, nor is there any reason to attribute its 


Tr = Oe 
MODERN ENGLISH.» 


IPSWICH IPSWICH 


Moo: ENGLISH. z y CRO MAGNON E)GALLEY HILL 


/PSWICH ma IPSWICK IPSWICH 


Fibula 
F) riaury. @ NeouiTHIC H) @orRiLLa 1) AUSTRALIAN J) AUSTRALIAN 





Fic. 109.—Sections across a series of tibie of various races. A. A section 
across a modern English tibia at the junction of upper third with 
lower two-thirds, compared with similar section of the Ipswich tibia. 
The others represent sections at the mid-point of the tibia, except 
the last, which represents a section of the fibula. 

peculiar features to either a freak of growth or to an 

individual peculiarity. I expect it to prove a character 

of the race. 

To give a clear idea of the peculiar characters of the 
Ipswich tibia, I reproduce in fig. 109 a series of sections 
across the tibiz of various races of men, giving with each 
an outline section of the Ipswich tibia.t 

The peculiar feature of the Ipswich tibia is the absence 
of the sharp, bony crest, which can be felt in all modern 
bones, descending on the front of the leg, just under the 
skin. In place of a sharp crest there is a flat, anterior 
surface. Although the absence of this sharp crest is a 


1 For full description of skeleton, see reference, p. 293. 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 299 


simian character, yet the Ipswich tibia cannot be said to 
resemble the same bone of anthropoid apes (fig. 109, H), 
whereas the tibia of Neanderthal man does show a distinct 
approach to the anthropoid form (fig. 109, C). In the 
Ipswich man the tibia is the opposite of the platycnemic 
leg bone of Neolithic races, in which there is a side-to- 
side flattening (see fig. 109, G)._ In the Ipswich specimen, 
the flattening is from front to back. The functional 
meaning of this peculiar character I cannot explain; I 
look upon it, like the teeth of Neanderthal man, as a 
form of specialisation, the functional significance of both 
characters being unknown. The Ipswich fibula, too, is 
of a peculiar form (fig. 109, J). ‘The femur shows none 
of the flattening in its upper third which is so frequently 
present in Neolithic races. 

Mr Moir and the writer were well aware that the dis- 
covery of human remains so near the surface, so destitute 
of all characters of a primitive or ape-like nature, could 
not carry the conviction of a skeleton found at a depth 
which places its antiquity beyond dispute. If, however, 
the Ipswich skeleton had shown characters as distinctive 
as those of Neanderthal man, or as those of the Piltdown 
man—found at a depth of a little over 3 feet below the 
surface—would anyone have doubted that its age was 
older than the deposition of the boulder clay ? I do not 
think the age would then have been called in question. 
But under the presumption that the modern type of 
man is also modern in origin, a degree of high antiquity 
is denied to such specimens. It is, therefore, all the 
more important that every discovery of human remains, 
made in circumstances which make their high antiquity 
a reasonable presumption, should be placed on record, 
with no fact kept back and none put forward that is not 
fully proven. 

Our account of the Ipswich discovery was published 
in 1912. Its site, as we have seen, was on the brow of 
the valley in which Bolton and Laughlin have their sand- 
pit. The strata to be seen in this pit may be identified 
in fig.106. Above, there is the stratum of chalky boulder 


300 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


clay ; then follow glacial sands; deeper still comes the 
shelly sandy Red Crag, here over 20 feet in thickness. 
The position of these strata in the geological formation 
of East Anglia will be realised by a glance at fig. 103; 
there it will be seen that the Red Crag belongs to the 
upper or more recent of the Pliocene deposits. Some day, 
I hope, Mr Reid Moir will tell the story of how he came 
to search and re-search the “‘ detritus bed’ under the Red 
Crag (fig. 103) of this sand-pit for flints shaped by man 
to serve as implements and tools, and how his search was 
ultimately crowned by success in rgto.! 

After the finding of the Ipswich skeleton, in order to 
throw more light on its history, Mr Moir began to concen- 
trate his attention on the implements found in the more 
superficial strata of the side valley and of the neighbour- 
hood. He discovered, as we have already seen (p. 153), 
buried “floors” carrying implements and remains of the 
Aurignacian and of the Mousterian period of culture. He 
carried his investigations to the brow of the valley and 
found, at about the same level or horizon as that occupied 
by the skeleton, there were scanty remains of an ancient 
floor—“ probably referable to the early Aurignacian 
period.” As a result of this discovery he announced in 
Nature (12th October 1916) that the Ipswich skeleton “‘ was 
referable to a late Paleolithic epoch,” and that it was no 
longer possible to claim for it a “‘ pre-chalky boulder clay 
antiquity.” In this way the Ipswich man fell from his 
high antiquity to take a humble place among men of the 
Aurignacian period. 


1 Yor further details, see p. 307 of this book. 


CHAPTER XV 
ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA (continued) 


Tue ProsBiems oF GLACIAL CHRONOLOGY 


Havince thus displaced the Ipswich skeleton from its high 
estate, Mr Reid Moir turned his attention to the contents 
of the chalky boulder clay—and surprised himself, as well 
as other experts, by finding in it flints chipped in the 
early Mousterian manner.t This must not be taken to 
mean that man lived in Suffolk as the chalky boulder 
clay was being deposited ; it signifies that the great ice- 
sheet, which gave rise to the clay, was formed on a land 
surface where early Mousterian man had lived and left 
his tools. Mr Moir was alive to the crux in which this 
discovery placed him. He was well aware of the section 
at Hoxne (fig. 104), which shows as clearly as can be, that 
a great sheet of chalky boulder clay had been deposited 
not only long before the Mousterian, but also long before 
the Acheulean culture had appeared in England. In- 
vestigation carried out by Professor Boswell and himself ? 
led them to the conclusion that there are two sheets of 
chalky boulder clay, an upper and a lower, of very dif- 
ferent ages. ‘The upper and the later was formed in the 
glacial epoch which set in not long after the Mousterian 
culture was introduced into England, while the other 
belongs to an older glacial period—the one which set 
in when the Chellean culture was still in an early stage 
of its evolution, for in the glacial sands which underlie 
this deeper boulder clay Mr Reid Moir finds traces of 
the workmanship of early Chellean man. 
1 Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1920, vol. 1. p. 135. 
2 [bid., 1923, vol. liii. p. 229. 3 [bid., 1919, vol. xlix. p. 74. 
301 


302 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Up to this point we have alluded to glacial episodes 
in only a passing manner. ‘There has come about a sad 
confusion in the naming of them. The deeper chalky 
boulder clay is assigned by Mr Reid Moir (see fig. 103, 
p- 288) to what Professor Penck named the “ Mindel” 
glaciation, but by others, including M. Boule, is named 
“Riss.” The upper boulder clay is assigned (fig. 103) 
to the “ Riss,” but it corresponds to the “‘ Wirm” of 
M. Boule. Then over the brick earths containing 
Mousterian and Aurignacian implements we find con- 
torted drifts—represented by the upper Coombe rock of 
the Thames valley deposits—the product of the final 
glacial episode—one which reached its climax at the end 
of the Paleolithic culture. ‘This final cold period repre- 
sents the “‘ Wiirm” glaciation of some authorities ; for 
others it is but the concluding episode of the preceding 
glaciation. ‘Thus we have, in the strata just enumerated 
(see fig. 103), evidence of three periods of glaciation, 
which, from their cultural relationships, may be named 
“Karly Chellean,” ‘‘ Mousterian,” and ‘“ Magdalenian.” 

It is clear, I think, that the two last named—the 


1 Amongst those who have sought to harmonise the naming of glacial 
episodes are the following :— 

Mr M. C. Burkitt.—Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1920, vol. iil. p. 311. 

See also his valuable work, Prehistory, Cambridge, 1920. 

Mr H. J. E. Peake-—Man, 1922, vol. xxii. p. 6. 

Mr S. Hazzeldine Warren.—Proc. Geol. Assoc., ist February 1924. 

Here it may be helpful if I reproduce the estimates which Dr Henry 
Fairfield Osborn has given (Men of the Old Stone Age, 1916) of the duration 


of glacial and interglacial stages :— 


I. Giinz (Late Pliocene) . ‘ < . 25,000 years. 

(1st Interglacial). : E : 5 7 5 OOO mms 

II. Mindel (Early Pleistocene) . : E25 COO mE. 
(znd Interglacial) : : : 7 200;000)mEe. 

III. Riss (Pleistocene) . : : : ce 25,000 mares 
(3rd Interglacial) : : : SJ\ 1O0,000-—e, 5 

IV. Wiirm (Late one : j =f iz 5;COOMmN 
(Post-glacial) : ; a 2 (25,0000 ss 


500,000 years, 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA $303 


Mousterian and Magdalenian—are episodes of one glacia- 
tion—the second of the two Pleistocene, and as this is 
becoming universally recognised by the name ‘‘ Wiirm,” 
I have adopted it here. For the first Pleistocene glacia- 
tion, the one which led to the deposition of the deep 
boulder clay, and apparently occurred at an early phase 
of the Chellean culture, I use the name “ Mindel,”’ thus 
omitting altogether the use of “ Riss.” Giinz is the name 
used for the Pliocene glaciation (see fig. 103). Thus I 
proceed on the assumption that in unravelling the pre- 
history of man we have to take three glacial periods into 
consideration—Giinzian, Mindelian, and Wiirmian. But 
we shall see that in the opinion of certain authorities + 
all of the deposits we have enumerated—deep boulder 
clay, upper boulder clay, and contorted drift—should be 
assigned to a single period of glaciation. 

We have been searching the glacial deposits of East 
Anglia for traces of ancient man; we are now to turn our 
attention to the Cromer forest beds, which are deeper 
and older deposits. In some places they may measure as 
much as $0 feet or even 70 feet in thickness. “They were 
laid down in the estuary of the great river which flowed 
down the North Sea valley—the ancient Rhine—the 
climate of Europe being then milder than it now is. 
These Cromer beds are of the utmost importance for 
our present inquiry, for they bring us to the brink of the 
Pliocene period ; the accepted opinion amongst British 
geologists is that they were laid down in the closing part 
of the Pliocene period. If we find implements within 
these deposits, then we shall be dealing with the handi- 
work of late Pliocene man. 

In fig. 110, taken from Sir Charles Lyell’s first edition 
of Antiquity of Man (1863), is represented a section of the 
shore cliffs a few miles to the east of Cromer, the cliff 
being here about 35 feet in height. Over the Cromerian 
deposits, named “forest ” and ‘‘ upper” beds in fig. 110, 
lies a thick sheet of the deeper boulder clay, which, as in 
the section at Hoxne, is seen to have been excavated by a 

1 See references to Holst and Kennard on p.- 310. 


304 THE AN'FIQUITY OF MAN 


stream ; the valley thus formed has become filled up with 
deposits of later Pleistocene date. In this section the 
Cromerian beds tell us of the mild climate of the last 
phase of the Pliocene period; the overlying boulder clay 
brings forcibly before us the Arctic conditions which set 
in early in the Pleistocene period. We realise the transi- 
tion from temperate to Arctic conditions more fully 
if we turn to fig. 103, where it will be seen that certain 
beds—the Leda Myalis and Arctic fresh water —are 
interposed between the Cromerian beds and the deep 
chalky boulder clay. Nowhere else in the world is there 
more striking evidence of change of climate. 









8BVRIED WALLEY 
eel TEE 








LL Le = ee 
LE ELIEL 


LL Z FPS pfx E22 





aoe te “PEATY, beeosit 


Fic. 110.—Section of the Pleistocene deposits near Cromer, Norfolk 
(Sir Charles Lyell). 


The section of the cliff, shown in fig. 110, represents 
the Cromerian beds as resting on chalk, but at more 
favourable sites, as depicted in fig. 103, they are seen to 
succeed two older deposits—the Weybourne Crag and 
Chillesford beds. Now in these two beds there is con- 
tained evidence which tells us that they were laid down 
when cold conditions prevailed. Thus the Cromerian beds 
represent deposits formed in a long (the first) interglacial 
epoch between a late Pliocene glaciation (the first or 
“* Giinz ” of Penck), and an early Pleistocene glaciation 
(the second or “ Mindel”). ‘Then, underlying the 
Chillesford beds come the Norwich Crag and the Red 
Crag (fig. 103), the climate growing more genial as we 
follow these strata backwards in order of deposition. 

We have seen that Sir Charles Lyell was of opinion 
that traces of man would be found in deposits as ancient 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 305 


as the Cromer beds. Before the nineteenth century was 
out his prophecy came true. In 1897, Mr Lewis Abbott 
discovered flints showing unmistakable signs of human 
workmanship in the “ elephant ” stratum of the Cromer 
deposits.1 In 1911, Dr W. L. H. Duckworth? made a 
similar find. As early as 1905, Mr W. G. Clarke? had ob- 
served “ eoliths ” in the stone bed under the Norwich Crag. 
Mr Reid Moir,* who has made a close study of such flakes 
and implements as have been gathered from the Cromer 
beds, is of opinion that this source will yet yield definite 
evidence of Chellean man. Although these beds yield 
abundantly the fossilised remains of animals, belonging to 
species which, for the greater part, are now extinct, yet, 
up to the present, they have not yielded a single bone of 
the ancient Cromerians. 

In 1920, Mr Moir discovered a “‘ working floor,” a site 
used for the knapping of flint implements by early 
Cromerians, under the following circumstances.® On the 
foreshore, immediately to the west of Cromer, he observed 
an area covered with flints, which, from their nature 
and colour, he recognised as being derived from sub- 
Cromerian beds in the adjoining cliff. Amongst these 
scattered rough flint boulders were some which were 
clearly worked in an “early”? Chellean manner. Most 
of them were of great size, there being specimens which 
weighed as much as 22 lbs. I reproduce in fig. 111 the 
section which Mr Moir has given of the cliff at Cromer 
to show the horizon at which he believes the ancient 
work-floor occurs. At this point of section (fig. 111) the 
cliff is nearly 100 feet in height, the greater part being 


1 W. J. Lewis Abbott, “ Worked Flints from the Cromer Beds,” 
Natural Science, 1897, vol. x. p. 89. See also Proc. Prebist. Soc. East 
Anglia, 1919, vol. ill. p. 110. 

2 W. L. H. Duckworth, Cambridge Antiquarian Society Communications, 
I9II, vol. xv. p. 156. 

3 W. G. Clarke, Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1912, vol. i. p. 160. 

4 J. Reid Moir, Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1920, vol. iii. p. 21. 
See also The Great Flint Implements of Cromer, 1923. 

5 The Great Flint Implements of Cromer, Ipswich, 1923. See also 
Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1921, vol. li. p. 385 

VOL aw. 20 


306 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


composed of a glacial deposit—the contorted drift. 
Under this drift lies the Cromer bed series; Mr Moir 
traces the implements to an ancient land surface, or 
level lying under the Cromer forest beds, and they are, 
therefore, pre-Cromerian in date. Mr Moir, however, is 
very willing to admit that the “term Chellean, when 
applied to flint implements, is very elastic,” and that it 
is possible that what he has named “ early Chellean” 
others might call ‘“ pre-Chellean.” However this may 
be, the fact remains that man had attained a certain 
degree of skill—a high degree—before the deposition of 


SURFACE 
SO/L 






CLIFF 
80-100 Ff 


CONTORTED = 
DRIFT 





SCATTERED 
FLINTS 
IMPLEMENT 
LAYER 
WEY BOURNE 
CRAG 


STONE BED 


Fic. 111.—Section of the cliff and foreshore at Cromer, on which is indi- 
cated the level of the early Chellean “ floor.”” (After Reid Moir.) 


even the forest beds of Cromer, beds which carry fossil 
remains of Pliocene animals. Further, authorities of the 
standing of Mr A. S$. Kennard? and Mr A. C. Hinton,? 
who have devoted themselves to a study of the Pleistocene 
fauna of England, are convinced that the Cromer forest 
beds are older than the deposits found in the 100-foot 
terrace of the Thames valley. 

We are now to leave the cliffs of the Cromer coast, 
where we have been following man by his implements 
backwards to the later deposits of the Pliocene period, 
and retracing our steps towards Ipswich, we shall now 
follow the ancients of East Anglia into a still more remote 
past. About four miles to the east of Ipswich, and 


1 Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1916, vol. ii. p. 249. 
® Proc, Geol. Assoc., 1907, vol. xx. p. 53. 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA 307 


situated 70 feet above sea-level, is Foxhall pit, now disused, 
but worked in former years for coprolites—fossil bones and 
other remains of ancient animals. Coprolites were ground 
to a powder and used by farmers as a manure. It was in 
this pit that the Foxhall mandible was found (see p. 273). 
In 1917, Mr Reid Moir # again laid bare the strata of the 


nSURFACE SOUL 
6-l2 inches 








MIDOLE 
GLACIAL 
GRAVEL 
40-12 
Feel. 


FOSSILIFEROUS 
JRON- STONE 
6-9inches 


a /IGPOLEVEL 
*Z| NODULE BED 
=| 2—3 feet 


LAYERS IN 
WHICH 
FLINT 
IMPLEMENTS 
OCCURRED 


PED 
CRAG 
ABOUT 
13 feel 
DETRITUS 
2 BED 
AAbout 1fool 
SAND Ifoot 


Fic. 112.—A diagrammatic section of the deposits revealed in the 
western face of the Foxhall coprolite pit. (After Reid Moir.) 


pit to study their order, nature, and contents. He has 
given a section of its deposits, here reproduced as fig. 112. 
Under the surface soil are 12 feet of glacial sands—which 
underlie the deeper stratum of chalky boulder clay. 
Under the glacial sands come the shelly sands of the Red 
Crag. We have seen (p. 289) that the North Sea is now 
busily engaged in pounding East Anglia into a “ Crag.” 
The Red Crag is all that is left of the fair lands of East 


1 Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1921, vol. ili. p. 389. 


308 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Anglia when the North Sea of Pliocene times had done 
with it. In the upper part of the Red Crag, at the 
16-foot level (see fig. 112), Mr Moir encountered two 
levels at which coprolites occurred. At these levels he 
succeeded in finding definitely worked flint implements. 
They are implements of a kind which may be named 
“ pre-Chellean” ; in Mr Moir’s opinion, they represent 
types out of which have been evolved implements of the 
fully developed Chellean culture. The occurrence of a 
floor of implements on the foreshore at Cromer permits 
us to understand how implements of a still earlier period 
may come to be embedded in the upper strata of the Red 
Crag. Then under the Red Crag of the Foxhall pit, as 
represented in fig. 112, there occurs the famous sub-Crag 
“detritus bed”’—the sweepings of an ancient land- 
surface. The “detritus bed” is well developed in 
Bolton and Laughlin’s pit at Ipswich, and it was while 
searching this bed in 1909 and 1910! that Mr Moir 
discovered evidence of early man’s handiwork. The 
“‘ sub-Crag” culture of the detritus bed yields flint tools 
of several kinds and ages, the predominant and charac- 
teristic type being known as “ Rostro-Carinates.” It is 
clear, then, that England was already inhabited by early 
man before the sea began to pound East Anglia into the 
Pliocene compound known to geologists as Red Crag. 
When the first edition of this book was being written 
in the early months of 1914, the drama of Boucher de 
Perthes was being acted over again in England. All the 
men who then held a position of high authority in the 
world of science received Mr Reid Moir’s announcements 
with incredulity, all save Sir E. Ray Lankester,? whose 
powerful advocacy forced a speedier recognition of the 
truth than fell to the lot of the great Frenchman. In 
this instance, as is so often the case in England, it was the 
amateur who led the advance guard. Mr Moir had to 


1 Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1911, vol. i. p. 17. See also Pre- 
Paleolithic Man, Ipswich, 1921. 

2 Proc. Roy. Soc., 16th November 1911; Special Publication Roy. Anthrop. 
Instit., 1914. 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA = 309 


steal from his business the time he gave to explore the 
deposits of East Anglia in search of ancient man. His 
struggle to have the truth of his discoveries recognised 
may be said to have ended in 1922, when a Commission ! 
of French and Belgian experts visited the scenes of his 
labours and acknowledged that the detritus bed under 
the Red Crag did indeed contain flints which had been 
shaped by human hands. It is given but to few men to 
add a chapter to man’s early history—a chapter which 
covers several hundred thousand years. But of the men 
of this distant past we know nothing save their flint 
implements. 

As early as 1905, Mr W. G. Clarke ? had observed 
“eoliths ” in the stone bed under the Norwich Crag. 
Since then Mr Clarke has collected a series of worked 
flints representing an “industry ”’ of a later date than 
Mr Moir’s series which come from under the Red Crag. 
Thus it will be seen that recent discoveries in East Anglia 
carry the history of man in England to beyond the bounds 
of the Pleistocene epoch—well into the Pliocene period. 
We shall see that M. Rutot, before these discoveries were 
made in East Anglia, had already classified the “ indus- 
ities ~ represented in the Pliocene deposits of “the 
Continent. 

The antiquity represented by the sub-Crag flints 
cannot be calculated with any degree of accuracy. 
Geologists assign to the Pliocene period a duration of 
over a million years. Estimates of the Pleistocene period, 
as we shall see in another chapter, vary from one hundred 
thousand years to one million five hundred thousand 
years. The more I become familiar with the evidence 
relating to this period, the more my judgment is drawn 
towards the lower estimates. The scale employed in 
preceding chapters allows for some two hundred thousand 
years to cover the Pleistocene period. If this allowance 
is accepted, then it would not be unreasonable to allow an 

1 « Les Silex d’Ipswich,” Revue Anthrop., 1923, vol. xxxiil. p. I. 


* Proc. Prehist. Soc. East Anglia, 1912, vol. v. p. 160; 1bid., 1916, 
vol. il. p. 213. 


310 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


almost equal period to take us back to the time of sub- 
Crag man. 

Thus we are supposing that over three hundred 
thousand or four hundred thousand years ago there were 
men and women living in East Anglia who had already 
attained a considerable skill in shaping flints to serve as 
tools. Nor do the sub-Crag implements represent mere 
first attempts. We shall see, when we come to deal with 
Piltdown man, that the “ eoliths ” which Mr Benjamin 
Harrison gathered on the Kentish plateau as long ago as 
1885, are more primitive and older than the sub-Crag 

rostro-carinates.? 

It may be well now, before quitting the geological 
records of East Anglia, to obtain as clear a conception 
as is possible of what geologists mean by the “ Ice age.’ 
Many English geologists ? maintain that, so far as our 
country is concerned, there is evidence of only one period 
of glaciation—that the deep chalky boulder clay seen in 
section at Hoxne and the contorted brick earths which 
cover the later Paleolithic implements are deposits of a 
single glaciation. ‘This is Mr Kennard’s 3 opinion, and it 
is also one which has been urged recently by Dr Nils 
Holst,4 who holds the opinion that the deep chalky 
boulder clay was laid down about twenty-two thousand 
years ago. ‘To get at the truth of this matter we have to 
go outside England to the clearly cut records to be found 
in the lower valleys of the Alps and of the Pyrenees. 
The late Professor James Geikie® gave a lifetime and a 
very sound judgment to a study of the glacial deposits of 
Europe, and by 1894 had reached the conclusion that 


1 Rev. H. G. O. Kendall, “ Middle Glacial and Pre-Crag Implements 
in South Norfolk,” Proc. Prebist. Soc. East Anglia, 1915, vol. ii. p. 31; 
tbid., 1921, vol. ill. p. 333. 

2 See literature and summary given by Mr W. B. Wright, The Quaternary 
Ice Age, London, 1914. 

3 Proc. Prebist. Soc. East Anglia, 1916, vol. ii. p. 249. 

* Geol. Mag., 1919, vol. ii. pp. 418, 434, 504; L’Anthrop., 1917, 
vol. xxvill. p. 291. 

5 The Great Ice Age, 31d edition, 1894. See also his Antiquity of Man 
in Europe, Edinburgh, 1914. 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA © 311 


there was convincing evidence of four periods of glaciation, 
separated by three temperate or interglacial epochs. In 
1903, Professor Penck! of Berlin published the results of his 
investigation. He, too, came to the conclusion that there 
had been four main glaciations with three interglacial 
intervals. ‘The names which he gave to these periods— 
meGrunz, > 2“ Mindel,”*, “* Riss”? ““Wtrm ”’—have, been 
preferred to those given by the Scottish professor. When 
we seek for identifications of these four glaciations in the 
strata of East Anglia, we must assign the “‘ cold” beds 
under the Cromerian series (see fig. 103, p. 288) to the 
“ Giinz”’ or late Pliocene glaciation—one which falls 
between the sub-Crag culture and the pre-Chellean of 
fies Cromers beds, hen to sthes* Mindel” or early 
Pleistocene glaciation we assign the Arctic deposits which 
lie immediately over the Cromer beds—the Cromer Till, 
deep chalky boulder clay and glacial sands. After the 
“Mindel” glaciation came the long interval which 
saw the full evolution of the Chellean culture, the 
Acheulean in all its variations, and the early Mousterian. 
The brick earths which carry Acheulean and Mousterian 
floors we know; they seem to fall into the latter part of 
this, the second interglacial period; the deposits of the 
earlier part, containing the Chellean culture, are not 
known in East Anglia—unless Mr Reid Moir is right in 
regarding Chellean culture as being as old as the Cromerian 
beds. Then to the earlier or Mousterian phase of the 
third glaciation we assign the Coombe rock of the 
Thames and the upper chalky boulder clay with associated 
deposits, and to its later or Magdalenian phase the brick 
earths and Arctic beds which overlie Mousterian and in 
some cases Aurignacian floors.? We have to admit that 
the geological book, represented by the deposits of East 
Anglia, although the best available for our present 
purpose, is still a sadly mangled volume, one in which 


1 “Das Alter des Menschengeschlechtes,” Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologte, 
1908, vol. xl. p. 390. 

2 See p. 302 of this book. 

3 For reference to literature, see p. 290 of this book. 


312 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


there are chapters missing and others very defective. ‘The 
same may be said of the terrace deposits of the Thames. 
And yet a study of flint cultures bids fair to unravel the 
order and age of these imperfect geological records. 
Glacial phases serve the student of ancient man as a 
series of milestones to mark his journey into the past. 
Unfortunately we do not know the circumstances which 
cause the ice-sheets which permanently cover polar lands 
and seas, to slowly extend their territories, to creep over 
and overwhelm lands which formerly had been fair and 
temperate. Nor do we know why a maximum is reached, 
followed by a slow retreat of the ice-sheet. We are not 
certain whether the machinery! involved is purely 
terrestrial, purely celestial, or a combination of the two. 
Ten years ago, when writing the first edition of this book, 
I was drawn towards a celestial machinery—that which 
was set out by the late Major-General Drayson * and 
which is now so warmly advocated by Major R. A. 
Marriott.? Since then have appeared the publications of 
Professor Ch. Depéret + of the University of Lyons. He 
has shown that glaciations are accompanied or preceded 
by changes in land and sea-level. He found, in the 
first place, that the terraces on the sides of river valleys, 
such as we have been studying in the Thames valley, are 
related to periods of glaciation; in the second place, he 
found that the terraces of river valleys are continued as 
raised beaches on the shores of adjacent seas—round the 
Mediterranean and up the western shores of Europe. 
This must mean that glaciation is accompanied by, or 


1 As to the cause or causes of glacial periods, readers are referred to 
The Evolution of Climate, by Mr C. E. P. Brooks (London, 1922). 

2 The Earth’s Past History, 1888. 

3 Changes in the Climate, London, 1914; Warmer Winters and the 
Earth’s Tilt (Exeter, 1921). 

4 The works of Protessor Depéret and also of General de Lamothe have 
been recently summarised by Professor W. J. Sollas, Nature, 30th December 
1922. See also Professor Sollas’s Ancient Hunters, third edition, 1924. 
Professor Depéret’s papers on the “Co-ordination of the Quaternary 
Periods ” are in Comptes Rendus, 1918, vols. clxvi., clxvii.; 1919, vol. clxviii.; 
1920, vol. clxx,; 1922, vol. clxxiv. 


ANCIENT MAN IN EAST ANGLIA — 313 


preceded by, a change in sea level, land level, or of both. 
If the theory put forward by Professor A. E. H. Love of 
Oxford University in 1907 + is really valid we should have 
an approximate explanation of events. He holds that the 
rotating earth seeks continually, but unsuccessfully, to 
reach a state of equilibrium. In its attempts the waters 
of the oceans tend at one time to be heaped towards 
the Equator, at other times towards the poles. The 
polar diameter of the earth tends at one time to lengthen 
and at another to shorten, thus altering the contour of 
the earth’s crust, particularly of regions lying in higher 
latitudes. Such a theory does help us to understand how 
river terraces and raised sea beaches have come into 
existence. Further, the inquiries of Mr C. E. P. Brooks 2 
assist us to perceive how changes in the distribution of 
sea and land—which must come about as a result of 
alterations in sea and land levels—can give rise to glacial 
conditions, independently of any change in the orbit 
or axis of the earth. 


1 Phil. Trans., Series A, 1907, vol. ccvii. p. 171. 
2 The Evolution of Climate, 1922. 


CHAPTER XVI 
HEIDELBERG MAN 


In this chapter we set out from England to make our 
last tour of Europe in search of the remains of ancient 
man. On our former journey (Chapter XIII) attention 
was directed to such remains as could be ascribed to men 
of the Acheulean and Chellean periods. On the present 
occasion we are in search of human remains belonging to a 
still earlier part of the Pleistocene period—to the very 
earliest part of that epoch, which, as we have just seen, is 
represented in East Anglia by the deposits of glacial sands 
and boulder clay. On such a quest our steps are naturally 
directed to Belgium, because of the labours and discoveries 
of M. Rutot, Conservator of the Royal Museum of 
Natural History in Brussels. He has spent a lifetime in 
the study of the various deposits which have accumulated 
in the valleys of Belgium—particularly in the industrial 
southern part of that country, where the valleys have 
been carved out and filled up by streams flowing east- 
wards to join the Meuse. In fig. 113, I reproduce a 
schematic section by M. Rutot, which gives in brief the 
conclusions he has reached concerning the number and 
the order of the deposits laid down in the valley floors 
of Belgium during the Pleistocene period.t From the 
adjoining diagram (fig. 113) it will be seen that M. Rutot 
recognises five series of strata in these deposits; but for 


1 See the following papers by M. Rutot: ‘ Glaciations et humanité,” 
Bull. Soc. Belge de Géol., 1910, vol. xxiv. p. 59. “‘ Revision stratigraphique 
des ossements humains quaternaires,” ibid., 1910, vol. xxiv. p. 123. 
“ Lage de la machoire humaine de Mauer,” ibid., 1908, vol. xxiii. p. 117. 


314 


HEIDELBERG MAN 315 


our present purpose we need only direct attention to 
three of these. In the deepest and oldest series of all— 
lower Pleistocene series—occurs a thick bed of clay to 
which M. Rutot attaches particular importance, and 
names “ glaise moseen,” indicated simply as “clay ” in 
fig. 113. ‘This stratum he regards as marking the great 
floods which followed the break-up of the first and 


MAGDALENIAN 







UPPER 


SOLUTREAN 7 PLEISTOCENE 


FINE LOAM = 
AURIGNACIAN RECENT o£S5 = 


MOUSTERIAN 





ACHEULEAN IL 


MIDOLE 


“ Pp 
ACHEULEAN I ¢ PLEISTOCENE 


CHELLEAN 
STREPYAN 
MESVINIAN ; 
%. LOWER 
MAFFLIAN fe PLEISTOCENE 


Fic, 113.—M. Rutot’s schematic section showing the number and sequence 
of the strata in the valley deposits of Belgium. 


probably the most severe of the Pleistocene ice ages—the 
*“* Mindeliam” The deep chalky boulder clay of East 
Anglia is also looked upon as a product of the same 
glaciation. 

The second of the strata in M. Rutot’s section which 
demands our attention is a mixture of fine sand and clay— 
“ancient loess” or ‘limon gris ”—a deposit which, in 
M. Rutot’s opinion, was laid down during the floods 
following the “ Rissian ”’ or second Pleistocene glaciation. 
The ancient loess was certainly in process of formation 


316 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


during the period of Acheulean culture, for it contains 
implements of this culture (fig. 113). The upper loam 
of the 1oo-foot terrace in the valley of the Thames 
(see fig. 83, p. 227) appears to correspond in time 
and circumstance to the ancient loess. The Bury St 
Edmunds cranial fragment finds its place in this horizon 
of M. Rutot’s scheme. Lastly, in the upper and final 
strata of his scheme, M. Rutot recognises in the brick 
earths and loams the deposits which followed the third 
and last of the Pleistocene ice ages—the ‘‘ Wiirmian.” 
In such deposits are found the implements of the two 
final Paleolithic cultures—the Solutrean and Magdalenian. 
The strata of brick earths which covered the skeleton in 
the low terrace at Halling may be correlated with the 
final deposits of M. Rutot’s scheme. M. Rutot’s 
observations and conclusions have a very direct bearing 
on the inquiry we now have on hand, for he has shown 
that his scheme holds true, not only for Belgium, but is 
also applicable to the valley deposits of the Rhine, the 
Somme, the Seine, and apparently also to those of the 
Thames valley. 

In fig. 113 there is set down opposite each stratum 
the kind of “ flint culture” yielded by it. Under the 
bedded sand which is here marked as the level of the 
Chellean culture, lie three deeper and older beds which 
contain peculiar and primitive kinds of worked flints. 
To these M. Rutot gave, in descending order, the names 
“Strepyan,”’ “ Mesvinian,” and “‘ Mafflian ”’— believing all © 
of them to be eolithic or pre-Chellean in character. In 
1919! he instituted a close comparison between these 
Belgian deposits and the corresponding strata of the low 
(s0-foot) terrace of the Somme valley at Amiens, so 
accurately investigated by the late Professor Commont, 
and found an exact correspondence. But the stratum 
which yields a “ Mafflian” culture in Belgium carries a 
full Chellean culture at Amiens, and the strata which carry 
“ Mesvinian” and “‘ Strepyan”’ correspond with the lower 


1 M. Rutot, “ Le Quaternaire du Nord de la France et de la Belgique,” 
Bull. de la Soc. Belge de Géol., 1920, vol. xxix. pp. 31, 151. 


HEIDELBERG MAN 317 


and middle Acheulean strata of France. He therefore 
infers that in early Pleistocene times the river valleys of 
Belgium were occupied by a people whose culture lagged 
far behind that of their contemporaries of the Somme 
valley. In brief, M. Rutot now admits that the Chellean 
culture extends to the very base of the low terraces of 
river valleys. 

One other observation of M. Rutot, with an important 
bearing on our present inquiry, is reproduced in fig. 114. 





























BRICK EAR Th 

























*., PLEISTOCENE 
DI SANoOY LOAM : 


Il cLay Loam 


It CLAYS 


\, PLIOCENE 
(Glatse Moseen ; 


GRAVEL 


Fic. 114.—Section of the middle (100-foot) terrace at St Prest, 
near Chartres, % 


The figure reproduces M. Rutot’s section of the famous 
gravel deposits at St Prest, situated in the valley of 
the Eure, a tributary of the Seine, about fifty miles 
to the south-west of Paris. The deposits at St 
Prest represent those of the 100-foot terrace — M. 
Rutot’s middle terrace of river valleys. The section at 
St Prest is of particular interest because here the 
Pleistocene deposits of the terrace rest directly on 
formations of a late Pliocene date. It was in the deep 
Pliocene gravels of St Prest, containing remains of a 
Pliocene elephant (Elephas meridtonalts), that M. J. Des- 
noyers! found, in 1863, the bones of extinct animals 

1M. J. Desnoyers, Comptes Rendus, 1863, vol. lvi. pp. 1073, 1199. 


E. T. Hamy, Précis paléontologie humaine, Paris, 1870. M. G. Gourty, 
“Les Dépéts de St Prest,” Bull. Soc. d’ Anthrop., 1913, ser. 6, vol. iv. p. 6. 


318 THE VANS TOUITY “OF iViAN 


showing clear signs of having been cut or hacked by man 
(see p. 511). Four years later, M. Bourgeois found in 
the same Pliocene gravels, flint implements representing 
the last of the Pliocene cultures—to which M. Rutot 
has given the name “St Prestien.”” Over the Pliocene 
strata at St Prest, M. Rutot recognises the usual Pleisto- 
cene deposits of the 100-foot terrace—particularly the 
“* glaise moseen ” (fig. 114). At the horizon represented 
by the junction of the Pliocene and the Pleistocene deposit 
of the 100-foot terrace M. Rutot recognised traces of an 
early Pleistocene culture, which may be assigned to the 
pre-Chellean series. ‘The Cromer forest beds are re- 
garded as of the same age as the deep gravels of St Prest. 
Under the ‘Cromer beds, as we have seen (p. 306), Mr 
Reid Moir found an early Chellean floor. 

Having thus surveyed the early Pleistocene deposits 
of Belgium and of Northern France through the eyes of 
M. Rutot, and the phases of human workmanship which 
he has detected in them, our next step is to seek for the 
remains of the men who lived when such valley deposits 
were being formed. At the present time only one 
specimen is available—the famous Heidelberg mandible. 
The mandible was found in the deepest strata of a 
valley deposit, lying six miles to the south-east of Heidel- 
berg (fig. 37, p. 105). ‘That old University town is situ- 
ated on the Neckar, ten miles above its junction with the 
Rhine at Mannheim. Above Heidelberg, the Neckar is 
joined by the Elsenz, a stream flowing northwards along 
a shallow valley, and through a rich, agricultural country. 
On the eastern side of the valley, fully four miles above 
the junction of the Elsenz with the Neckar, is the rural 
village of Mauer. Close by the village is the sand-pit 
of Mauer—also on the eastern side of the Elsenz valley. 
Opposite the pit, the bottom of the valley stands 134 m. 
(440 feet) above the level of the North Sea, and 260 miles 
distant from the mouth of the Rhine. On the side of 
the valley, where the great sand-pit has been dug, the 
land rises 85 feet above the bottom of the valley, but so 
extensively and so deeply has the pit been worked that 


HEIDELBERG MAN 319 


its floor has almost reached the level of the bed of the 
present stream. The working face of the sand-pit has a 
total depth of 25 m. (82 feet). From these circumstances 
we may conclude that we are dealing with a river deposit 
—one which corresponds with the 50-foot terrace of the 
Thames valley. 

For a long time the Mauer pit has been closely studied 
by geologists on account of its clear representation of 
Pleistocene deposits, and because of the extinct fauna 
preserved in its deeper strata. No site in Europe, it 
was realised, was more likely to yield the bones of early 
Pleistocene man than the sand-pit at Mauer. No one 
was more fully alive to this possibility than Dr Otto 
Schoetensack, Lecturer on Geology in the University of 
Heidelberg. Half an hour’s journey by rail took him 
to the pit almost daily. After waiting and searching for 
twenty years, the owner of the pit, Herr J. Résch, was 
able to inform him, on 21st October 1907, that the object 
of his twenty years’ search had at last been realised. 
mel csterday, he wrote, “‘the desired evidence was 
obtained, for 20 m. below the surface soil, and above the 
floor of my sand-pit, there was found the lower jaw of 
primitive man, in good preservation, and with all its 
teeth.” In the following year, 1908, Dr Schoetensack 
prepared and published a monograph on the lower jaw 
of Homo heidelbergensis, which in exactness, directness, 
and fullness will always serve as an example for future 
discoverers of prehistoric remains.! 

Before discussing the anatomical characters of the 
Heidelberg mandible, it 1s necessary to see what light 
may be obtained on its antiquity. Concerning the 
authenticity of the find there cannot be any doubt; the 
bed in which the mandible lay was covered by a series 
of deposits, amounting in all to 78 feet. In the deposits 
over the mandible Dr Schoetensack recognised twenty- 
four different strata. They fall into three series: (1) 

1 Der Unterkiefer des Homo heidelbergensis: Ein Beitrag xur 


Palaeontologie des Menschen, von Otto Schoetensack, Leipzig, 1908. 
Dr Schoetensack died in 1913. 


320 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the uppermost, formed by recent loess (fig. 115, D), 
a fine earth, a product of floods and drought ; (2) the 
ancient loess (fig. 115, C), a sandy loam, also a deposit 
from muddy waters ; (3) the Mauer sands (fig. 115, A, A, 
B, B). In one of the lower strata of this seriesetie 
mandible was found. In the lower strata, remains of 
the following extinct animals were found :—the lon 
(Felis leo fossilis), an extinct form of cat, a dog (Camts 
neschersensis), two forms of bear, a species of bison, an 
early Pleistocene form of horse, an early form of rhinoceros 
(R. etruscus), and an elephant (£. antiquus). From this 
fauna, Dr Schoetensack concluded that the Mauer sands 
correspond in date of formation “ to the preglacial forest 
beds of Norfolk.” If Dr Schoetensack’s opinion is right, 
then we ought to find the English contemporary of the 
Heidelberg man in those Cromerian beds which lie under 
the chalky boulder clay of East Anglia. Under the 
Cromerian beds, as we have already noted (p. 306), 
Mr Reid Moir discovered an early Chellean work-floor. 
By a different process of reasoning, M. Rutot reached 
the same conclusion as Dr Schoetensack. M. Rutot had 
no implements from the Mauer pit to help him in dating 
the strata; it is a remarkable fact that the sands which 
have given us the most primitive human jaw yet found on 
the continent of Europe, have yielded not a trace of man’s 
handiwork. In dating the strata of the Mauer pit, and 
in assigning to each series its probable cultural level, 
M. Rutot had to depend on the order and composition of 
the various beds. ‘The sands at Mauer represent a valley 
deposit corresponding exactly to those he has studied in 
Belgium, both in age and in manner of formation. In 
fig. 115, | reproduce a diagrammatic section of the strata 
in the sand-pit at Mauer, as interpreted by M. Rutot in 
1914; alaterinterpretation(1919)is giveninfig.116. The 
stratum of recent loess, over 18 feet in depth—the upper- 
most of the Mauer pit—represents, in M. Rutot’s scheme, 
the débris of the last Ice age (Wiirm). The underlying 
strata of ancient loess, over 17 feet in depth, are, in his 
opinion, the product of the third glaciation (Riss). 


PRESENT 


END OF > 
PLEISTOCENE 


a 


4th GLACIATION 


a 
Pre occa ca 


_ eee ee ed we eet 


eeteceee 























(wirm) 
















































































CLIMAX OF 








3°9 GLACIATION 
(Riss) 






































294 GLACIATION 75+ 








(MINDEL) 


80 


85- 


222 -----4--------- 


Fic. 115.—Diagrammatic section of the sand-pit at 
) was found. 


PLIOCENE 


depth at which the mandible (A’ 


tation of the cultural levels (1914). 


VOL. I, 


Coen e OC EN Cr idiant cheer 





IRON CULTURE 
BRONZE CULTURE 


NEOLITHIC CULTURE 


MAGDALENIAN 
CULTURE 


SOLUTREAN 
TURE 


AURIGNACIAN 
CULTURE 


MOUSTERIAN 
CULTURE 


ACHEULEAN 
CULTURE 
(284 PHASE) 


ACHEULEAN 
CULTURE 
(18 PHASE ) 


CHELLEAN 
CULTURE 


STREPYAN 
CULTURE 


MESVINIAN 
CULTURE 


MAFFLIAN 
CULTURE 


REUTELIAN 
CULTURE 


Mauer, showing the 
M. Rutot’s interpre- 
To be compared with fig. 116. 


21 


322 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Although no traces of human culture were found in the 
stratum of recent loess at Mauer, there can be no doubt, 
for the following reasons, that its deposition belongs to 
the later Paleolithic periods. Along the valleys of the 
Rhine and of the Danube the deposits of recent loess are 
known to yield implements belonging to the Aurignacian 
culture. In the same regions, representations of the 
Mousterian period are found under the recent loess, but 
above the ancient loess. The latter deposit corresponds 
to the “limon gris” of Belgium and France, and in this 
deposit occur implements of the Acheulean period. 

Near the middle horizon in the stratified series of 
Mauer sands are thick beds of clay and sandy clay, 
nearly 13 feet in total depth, which M. Rutot identifies 
with the “ glaise moseen ” (A, A in fig. 115), and these 
he regards as deposits of the great floods which marked 
the close of the second and greatest of the glaciations 
(Mindel). ‘The human mandible lay 10 feet below the 
clay bed at Mauer, in sands corresponding to the basal 
beds of the low terraces of Belgium, where M. Rutot 
found his Mafflian industry (see fig. 115). We have seen, 
however, that M. Rutot now recognises that the basal 
beds of the low Belgian terraces are contemporaneous 
with the deep beds of the 50-foot terrace of the Somme 
valley, and these beds contain a Chellean industry. The 
Mauer jaw, therefore, occurs at the horizon of the 
Chellean culture; it is the jaw of a man who lived in the 
time of Chellean culture. This, too, is the opinion of 
our highest authority—Professor Marcelin Boule. 

We are led to the same conclusion by another route. 
We have seen (p. 289) that the Cromerian beds were 
probably deposited by the ancient Rhine when that river 
flowed down the North Sea valley or plain, and had 
its delta near the Dogger Bank. ‘The sands at Mauer 
and the Cromerian beds, although 400 miles apart, are 
apparently contemporary deposits of the same watershed ; 
both represent basal deposits of the low or 50-foot terrace. 
There are corresponding deposits of the same watershed 
in the lower valley of the Thames. These deposits of 


HEIDELBERG MAN 323 


the 50-foot terrace of the Thames yield Chellean imple- 
ments. Mr Reid Moir found an early Chellean floor 
under the forest beds of Cromer. ‘Thus we reach the 


' ' 
PRESENT ae Ieee? | Be Sar + IRON CULTURE 


f J BRONZE CULTURE 
| NEOLITHIC 

1‘ 

' 


' 
' 
eee ' CULTURE 
N ' 4 
‘ 
PLEISTOCENE ' Ee ' MAGDALENIAN 
' | CULTURE 
Leen Soe ee ae ! SOLUTREAN 
CULTURE 







AURIGNACIAN 


' 
3*®° GLACIATION! 
: CULTURE 


(wuURm) ~< 

\ 

MOUSTERIAN 
CULTURE 


ACHEULEAN 


ACHEULEAN 
CULTURE 
(ASEPHASE) 
oh Tee Ll Po pl fo ee eiascanr 
ee JAW 
SSE 
po 
CHELLEAN 
CULTURE 


209 GLACIATION 
(MINOEL) 
HEIDELBERG 

MANDIBLE 


Fic, 116.—Diagrammatic section of the strata of the sand-pit at Mauer, 
with M. Rutot’s more recent (1919) interpretation of cultural levels. 
The glacial periods are marked at levels which correspond with 
statements made in the text of this edition. 


strange conclusion that although no Chellean industry 
has ever been found in Germany, yet the Heidelberg 
man, as known by the Heidelberg jaw, represents a man 
of Chellean times. It will be remembered that we are 


324 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


proceeding under the belief that the Chellean culture was 
fully evolved one hundred and thirty thousand years ago. 
An important inquiry has now to be made: How 
much can be inferred concerning Homo hetdelbergensts, 
seeing that we know only his lower jaw and his lower 
teeth ? In the first place, the characters of the teeth 
leave us in no doubt as to his race; he represents, 
beyond all question, a variety—a primitive variety—of 
Neanderthal man. It is strange that we have not found 
a single trace of this race since we parted from the 
deposits of the Mousterian period until now.’ The 
pre-Mousterian strata have yielded us only remains of 
men of the modern type. Here, however, we come 
across Neanderthal man of a more primitive type than 
any yet found in Mousterian deposits. ‘The teeth show 
those peculiar features which differentiate them from 
those of men of the modern type—the enlarged pulp 
cavities, the swollen crowns and bodies, the curtailed 
roots (see figs. 75 and 249). These are not primitive 
or simian characters, but the reverse ; they are modifica- 
tions confined, so far as we have yet discovered, to this 
peculiar variety or species of man—Ho-no neanderthalensis. 
In these same features, man of the modern type—Homo 
sapiens, as he is named—resembles the apes. Here, then, 
is an important fact—that early in the Pleistocene period 
that peculiar feature of the teeth which characterises 
the Neanderthal species of men was already evolved. 
One other feature of the Heidelberg dentition impresses 
the anatomist. At such an early date as the beginning 
of the Pleistocene period he is prepared to find in the 
canine or eye teeth some resemblance to the pointed 
canine teeth of apes. ‘This expectation is founded on 
the form of the canine teeth of modern man, and the 
peculiar manner of their eruption. In the Heidelberg 
dentition the canines are even less ape-like than in 
modern man—they have subsided into the ranks of 
the ordinary teeth. In this we find a second point 
which bears on the antiquity of man. In this early. 
1 The Ehringsdorf jaw may prove to be Acheulean in date (fig. 116), 


HEIDELBERG MAN 325 


species of man the canine teeth have assumed the 
“human ” form. 

The Neanderthal nature of the Heidelberg mandible 
is rendered apparent by such a comparison as that made 
in fig. 117. ‘The body of the Heidelberg jaw, that part 
of it which carries the teeth, is set beside the opposite 
half of a mandible from Spy. In the adjacent figure 
halves of an English and of a Tasmanian mandible 
are contrasted. The Spy mandible represents the Nean- 
derthal type; the Tasmanian illustrates a primitive 


50 ° 30 40 40 30 ° 30.40 
f 








MODERN ENGLISH. TASMANIAN. SPY. HEIDELBERG 


Fic, 117.—The right half of the body and teeth of the Heidelberg mandible 
viewed from above, and contrasted with halves of the mandibles of 
Spy man, of a Tasmanian, and of a modern European. 


modern type. It is unfortunate for our comparison that 
the molars of the Spy mandible are the smallest known 
ina Neanderthal specimen. ‘Their total length, measured 
pronemtiesarchi of the teeth, is832-2>mm.;—the three 
Heidelberg molars measure 36 mm. Amongst the 
Krapina molar teeth there are many of a larger size than 
those of the Heidelberg mandible. In the ‘Tasmanian 
mandible the molars are particularly large for a modern 
dentition, totalling 36:4 mm., rather more than the 
Heidelberg molars. ‘The front teeth—incisors, canines, 
premolars—of the Heidelberg mandible are of the same 
shape as those in the Spy mandible, only slightly larger. 
The Tasmanian teeth are quite different—more primitive. 

The teeth of Neanderthal man are arranged in an arch 


326 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of characteristic form, the arch being flattened in front 
and the two sides of the arch widely separated (fig. 241). 
These characters are readily recognised in the Heidel- 
berg mandible. In the primitive modern jaw the dental 
arch is elongated and more simian in form. As may be 
seen from fig. 117, the long diameter of the dental arch 
measured 62 mm. in the primitive Tasmanian, 60 mm. 
in the Heidelberg mandible, and 54 mm. in the Spy 
mandible. In width, however, the Neanderthal dental 
arch is much the greater. It measures 68 mm. in the 






t 
' 


+ ere eg een e--- + -- == --- 
' c 


fae iam 


ern 
’ ' 
t 
‘ 


Fig. 118.—Reconstruction of the palate of the Heidelberg man, compared 
with Professor Boule’s reconstruction of the La Chapelle palate. 


Heidelberg specimen, 69 mm. in the Spy, and 61 mm. 
in the Tasmanian mandible. ‘The peculiar adaptation of 
the Neanderthal teeth—their wide crowns, large bodies, 
short roots, and the wide and relatively short dental 
arch, all point to a rough vegetable diet necessitating 
a grinding rather than a cutting manner of mastication. 
From the arch of the lower teeth it is possible to re- 
construct the size and arrangement of the upper teeth 
and palate of the Heidelberg individual. In fig. 118 
this reconstruction has been carried out in order that 
a direct comparison may be made between the palate 
of the Heidelberg man and the Neanderthal variety 
discovered at La Chapelle-aux-Saints (see p. 173). The 


HEIDELBERG MAN 327 


palate in the latter case was broken and the teeth lost. 
Professor Boule was therefore obliged to reconstruct the 
palate in that case also. (Che palatal area in each is 
almost the same—3g9 cm.” in the La Chapelle specimen, 
39°7 cm.” in the Heidelberg specimen, and 36-7 cm.2 in 
the Tasmanian. The width of the two palates shown 
in fig. 118 is almost the same, 72 mm.; and the length 
is nearly the same, 64 mm. in the La Chapelle and 
63 mm. in the Heidelberg palate. From the palate 
we infer that the Heidelberg man cannot have stood 





“ : : 4 #elDELBERG AUSTRALIAN 


oF 


/ 
} 


J 


J | 


20 








Fic, 119.—Profile of the Heidelberg mandible compared with the 
profile of the mandible of an Australian native. 


much lower in the human scale than Neanderthal man 
of the Mousterian period. 

If we confine our attention to the teeth, we have no 
hesitation in assigning the Heidelberg jaw to a primitive 
variety or race of Neanderthal man. From the very 
first, anatomists have been struck by the apparent 
discrepancy between the “humanity ” of the teeth and 
the massive power—almost bestiality—of the jaw itself. 
The impression we obtain from a close inspection is one 
of its great strength. This is very noticeable when a 
comparison is made such as is shown in fig. 119. In 
that figure the Heidelberg mandible is shown in pro- 
file, and placed beside a corresponding view of the 
mandible of an Australian native. The comparison 


328 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


brings out an extreme degree of divergence. This is 
particularly evident in the ascending branch or ramus to 
which the muscles of mastication are attached. ‘The size 
or area of this branch may be taken as an index of the 
size and strength of the muscles of mastication. In 
height the ascending branch of the Australian mandible 
is practically the same as that of the Heidelberg specimen, 
but in width the latter measures 60 mm.—22 mm. more 
than the primitive Australian native. The area re- 
presented by the outer surface of the ramus of the 
ancient mandible is 34 cm.?; the corresponding area in 
the Australian measures 22 cm.”; an average modern 
European mandible, 18 cm.?. These measurements give 
some idea of the surpassing strength which must 
have characterised the masticatory system of the 
Heidelberg man. 

The chief difference, however, is seen in the region of 
the chin and symphysis. In the Australian, although 
there is no prominent chin, yet the anterior or labial 
surface of the mandible ascends almost at right angles 
to the lower border of the jaw. The alveolar border, in 
which the teeth are implanted, is not prolonged forwards 
markedly in advance of the lower border of the mandible. 
The reverse is the case in the Heidelberg jaw—the 
alveolar border is prolonged far forwards and the chin 
recedes almost as in an ape. On its posterior or lingual 
aspect the symphysis of the Heidelberg mandible shows 
the genial pit already described in connection with the 
chin region of Neanderthal man (see p. 208); but there 
is this difference, the pit is deeper, wider, and more ape- 
like than in any specimen belonging to the Mousterian 
period. As regards the markings of the chin—the 
markings connected with the attachment and mode of 
action of the muscles of the tongue—the Australian 
mandible shows all those features which characterise 
modern man. In the Heidelberg mandible, on the other 
hand, we see the same peculiarities as in Neanderthal man, 
but to an exaggerated and to a more primitive degree. 

To show how the Heidelberg mandible compares with 


HEIDELBERG MAN 329 


that of an anthropoid ape, I have superimposed its out- 
line, in fig. 120, on a drawing made from the mandible and 
face of a female orang—both on the same scale. In 
height and area of the ascending branch of the jaw there 
is not much difference between the ape and Heidelberg 
man, but in actual shape, particularly in the form of the 
coronoid process, the anthropoid and Heidelberg types 
depart widely. Although the Heidelberg muscles of 


HEIDELBERG~_}1 





Fic. 120.—Outline of the Heidelberg mandible compared with a drawing of 
the lower jaw and face of a female orang. Both are drawn to the 
same scale. 


mastication must have been of great strength, yet the 
markings for their implantation on the mandible are 
those seen in human jaws—but never on the mandibles 
of anthropoid apes. In the region of the symphysis there 
is also a striking difference. On the posterior aspect of 
the anthropoid symphysis is seen the wide pit or genial 
fossa, bounded at the lower border of the symphysis by 
the simian plate (see fig. 74, p. 208). ‘There is no simian 
plate, nor any trace of it, in the Heidelberg mandible. 
In fig. 121 a final comparison is made to show the 
degree of resemblance between the mandibles from Spy 


330 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


and Heidelberg. The differences are those of degree, 
not of kind. It is true that the ascending branch of the 
Heidelberg specimen is much the larger. As regards 
size and shape, the body of the mandible—the part on 
which the teeth are implanted—is very much alike in 
both cases. In the region of the symphysis the Heidel- 
berg mandible shows more primitive characters; its 
upper or alveolar border is more projecting ; there is no 





a a 
60 40 20 ° 20 ww 


Fic. 121.—Outline of the Heidelberg mandible compared with 
the Spy mandible. 


indication of a chin. In the Spy specimen the rudiment 
of a chin is apparent. Again, on the posterior aspect of 
the symphysis the genial pit—a simian structure—is 
almost filled up in the Spy specimen. This pit is open 
in the Heidelberg mandible almost to the extent seen in 
young gorillas (see also p. 208). 

There is another feature worthy of note, illustrated by 
the various drawings represented in fig. 117. In these 
drawings the Heidelberg, the Spy, a Tasmanian mandible, 
and a European mandible are represented from exactly 
the same point of view—at right angles to the chewing 
plane of the teeth. Such a view gives a clear idea of what 


HEIDELBERG MAN 331 


is meant by the opening out of the floor of the mouth. 
The lower border of the mandible bounds this floor. 
Even in the primitive Tasmanian very little of the 
symphysis or of the lower border of the mandible is seen 
within the arcade of the teeth (fig. 117). In the Heidel- 
berg mandible, and to some degree in that from Spy, the 
lower part of the symphysis encroaches, as in the ape 
(see fig. 239, p. 653), on the floor of the mouth. Yet, in 
spite of this ape-like feature, we must grant, I think, the 
possibility of speech to the Heidelberg man. We 
cannot withhold such a faculty from Neanderthal man, 
such as the one found at La Chapelle-aux-Saints, who 
had a brain above that possessed by the average modern 
man. In the Heidelberg mandible we find the usual 
Neanderthal features of the chin, only they are more 
primitive—more simian in their development. If we 
allow full speech to the Mousterian man, we must, at 
least, assume the beginnings of such a faculty for 
Heidelberg man. 

How does the Ehringsdorf mandible compare with the 
one from the Mauer sands? ‘The Ehringsdorf specimen, 
as we have seen (p. 192), came from a valley deposit near 
Weimar—160 miles to the north-east of Heidelberg, this 
deposit being also a member of the low terrace series. In 
fig. 116 its horizon is indicated as at the level of Acheulean 
culture—thus falling in point of time between the 
Mauer and Spy specimens. Although the Ehringsdorf 
mandible may be unhesitatingly assigned to a person of 
the Neanderthal type, yet this person did not represent 
a phase in the evolution of the Heidelberg into the Spy 
stage. In the Ehringsdorf mandible the dental arcade 
is slightly narrower and also slightly longer than in the 
Heidelberg jaw, and in this respect is the more simian ; 
it also differs from the Heidelberg specimen in being 
shallower in the region of the symphysis or chin, and also 
at the sides—in the molar and premolar regions. We may 
safely infer that the Ehringsdorf people represented an 
early and distinct racial variety of the Neanderthal type. 

When we compare the Heidelberg mandible with one 


230 THE, ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of the later Mousterian men of France or Belgium we see 
the same kind of differences as are to be noted when a 
comparison is made between the mandibles of an Aus- 
tralian aborigine and of a modern European. The one 
shows a robust development of tooth and bone ; the other 
a reduction of tooth size and particularly of bone develop- 
ment. No doubt this change is associated with a change 
of dietary—perhaps with the discovery of fire and the art 
of cooking; yet, as I have sought to show elsewhere,+ 
these changes are probably not due directly to a lessened 
use of the jaws. There seems to be some mechanism 
at work which slowly adjusts the relative development 
of brain and jaws. 

A suggestion made by Professor Elliot Smith has a 
direct bearing on the problem we are now considering. 
He is of opinion that the human brain must have reached 
almost its full development, and that speech was probably 
in process of evolution, before the mandible, tongue, and 
other parts which subserve the purposes of speech had 
become finally and fully adapted to their new functions. 
This is very likely to have been the case. At least, we 
find in men of the Mousterian period a dentition very 
similar to that seen in the Heidelberg individual, and with 
mandibles, perhaps not so robust or so primitive, but yet 
in essential characters like the Heidelberg. In Neander- 
thal man these characters of teeth and jaw were associated 
with a large brain—one which was capable of subserving 
the faculty of speech. We have every reason to suppose, 
then, that the Heidelberg man, with similar characters 
of jaw and teeth, had also reached a high development of 
brain. If Professor Elliot Smith’s suggestion holds true, 
namely, that in the process of human evolution the brain 
leads the way, it is possible that the brain of the Heidelberg 
man may well have been as large as that of Neanderthal 
man. 


1 Huxley Lecture, “The Adaptational Machinery concerned in the 
Evolution of Man’s Body,” Nature (Supplement), 18th August 1923. 

2 See his address as President of the Anthropological Section of the 
British Association at Dundee, 1912. 


HEIDELBERG MAN 333 


In this chapter we have come across a series of facts 
which throw a clear light on the early inhabitants of that 
part of Europe which lies between Central Germany and 
Southern France. From the genial climate of early 
Chellean times, represented by the Mauer sands and 
Cromer beds, to the Arctic climate of late Mousterian 
times, when men had taken to a cave life, we find this 
part of Europe in possession of a Neanderthal stock. We 
have met with evidence which shows that this stock 
changed and evolved in Central and Western Europe. 
We have not so far found a bone of Neanderthal man 
in England—all the remains yet found, including the 
remains of Galley Hill man, have been those of the modern 
type of man. 

This chapter brings us again face to face with an 
important problem. ‘The geological evidence has com- 
pelled us to assign the Heidelberg man to almost the same 
cultural horizon as Galley Hill man ; both belong to the 
period of Chellean culture. Is it possible that a type so 
primitive as that of Heidelberg could have been alive 
in Southern Germany when a type so modern, so like 
ourselves, as that of Galley Hill, was ranging the Kentish 
Downs? In our next chapter further light will be 
thrown on this matter. 


CHAPTER XVII 
IS HOMO SAPIENS AN ANCIENT TYPE? 


No revelation of prehistoric man could be more con- 
vincing than the discovery of the Heidelberg mandible. 
We have no shadow of doubt as to its authenticity or 
significance. We accept as a definite and indisputable 
fact that there lived a primitive form of Neanderthal man 
in South Germany in early Pleistocene times, bestial in 
structure beyond all kinds of men now living. The dis- 
covery we are now to relate is the old and well-known 
story of Castenedolo—the antithesis of the one narrated 
in the last chapter. At Castenedolo, in North Italy, we 
obtain all the details relating to the finding of remains 
of a people of the modern type embedded in strata much 
older than the sands at Mauer. As the student of 
prehistoric man reads and studies the records of the 
‘* Castenedolo ”’ find, a feeling of incredulity rises within 
him. He cannot reject the discovery as false without 
doing an injury to his sense of truth, and he cannot 
accept it as a fact without shattering his accepted beliefs. 
It is clear we cannot pass Castenedolo by in silence: 
all the problems relating to the origin and antiquity of 
modern man focus themselves round it. 

If the map of North Italy be examined, it will be seen 
that the railway between Milan and Verona keeps close 
to the southern flanks of the Alps, and passes the town of 
Brescia on the way. In 1860, Professor Ragazzoni—an 
expert geologist—was a teacher in the Technical Institute 
of Brescia. He was particularly interested in the fossil 
shells of the Pliocene formations which abound in North 


334 


i i i i il i, i iis 


lt ee 


IS HOMO SAPIENS AN ANCIENT TYPE? 335 


Italy. One of the favourite sites for collecting such 
specimens was a low hill, only about 100 feet high, which 
rises from the plain at Castenedolo, about six miles to 
the south-east of Brescia. Fig. 122 reproduces a section 
which he drew to explain the geological formation of the 
hill. ‘The exact number and sequence of the strata do 
not concern us now. We note that the second stratum 
is a deposit of boulder clay indicating one—probably the 
greatest—of the Pleistocene glaciations. ‘The strata 
which have a direct interest for us are those numbered 
8 andg: No. 8 a deposit of greenish-blue clay containing 


71 SOIL 
j 2 RED CLAY. 
i 


120 
oJ 





YELLOW SAND |: 








Fic. 122.—Section of the hill (Colle de Vento) at Castenedolo, near Brescia 
(Ragazzoni). 


shells—about 5 feet in thickness; No. 9 a deposit rich 
in coral débris and in fossil shells. About the age of 
the coral stratum there is no dispute; it was deposited 
when a Pliocene sea lapped against the southern flanks 
of the Alps. Were it to occur in England it would lie 
under the Red Crag of Suffolk, for it belongs to the older 
Pliocene formation. ‘The overlying blue clay, deposited 
from still, muddy waters, is not much later in date than 
the coralline stratum. 

Late in the summer of 1860, Professor Ragazzoni 
visited Castenedolo, and had descended the pit, cut at 
the foot of the hill (see fig. 122), and was searching the 
coralline stratum for Pliocene shells. As he searched he 
uncovered, on the face of the pit between the blue clay 
above and the coral stratum below, the fragmentary vault 


336 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


of a human skull. It was coated and impregnated by 
the clay and shells of the strata between which it lay. 
Ragazzoni examined the overlying strata—one of yellow 
sand, another of grey sand—above the clay, and could 
see no trace of a disturbance at their lines of junction. 
He searched further and found a few other cranial frag- 
ments near the same site. He took his “ finds”? home, 
and showed them to some of his colleagues at the 
Technical Institute. His discovery was received with 
incredulity. 

Until 1880—twenty years after the first discovery— 
nothing further was found in the pit. In that year, 
however, a friend of Ragazzoni’s—who believed in the 
first discovery—commenced to excavate in the pit about 
twenty paces from the site at which the human remains 
were found. In two months he exposed, at the same 
horizon, between strata 8 and 9, numerous and scattered 
fragments of the skeletons of two children. The frag- 
ments were left im situ until seen and examined by 
Professor Ragazzoni. Again the overlying strata were 
found intact. Then a further discovery was made—the 
skeleton of a woman in the contracted posture, com- 
pressed and disturbed by earth-pressure. The woman’s 
skeleton lay within the clay stratum—a little over 34 feet 
from the surface of the bank. ‘The other human remains 
lay at a depth of 63 feet from the top of the bank—the 
surface level of the soil. 

In 1883, Professor Sergi,t then a rising anthropologist, 
visited Ragazzoni at Brescia and saw the human remains 
found in the Pliocene strata at Castenedolo—still covered 
by fragments of the original matrix in which they had 
been embedded. He found that the remains were those 
of people of the modern type. ‘Two children, a man, and 
a woman were represented by the fragments, but only 


1 Professor Sergi has kindly supplied me with copies of the papers he 
has written on the Castenedolo remains. See Archivio per P Antrop. e 
PEtnol., 1884, vol. xiv., No. 3. Ibid., 1886, vol. xvi., No. 3. Rivista de 
Antropologia, 1912, vol. xvii., fas. iii. See especially his later work, 
Le Origine Umane; Ricerche paleontologiche, Torino, 1913, 


IS HOMO SAPIENS AN ANCIENT TYPE? 337 


the skull of the woman was complete enough for a re- 
construction. Professor Sergi was impressed by both the 
discovery and the discoverer. He went with Ragazzoni 
to the pit, made a fresh section of the strata, and was 
convinced that all was as Ragazzoni claimed, namely, that 
he had discovered human remains in undisturbed beds 
of a Pliocene age. ‘The race was of the modern human 
type. Some time before he died, Professor Ragazzoni 
placed the human remains discovered at Castenedolo in 


BREGMA 








190 


i 
$ 
& 
8 


Oo. 5 Qo 50__—70 






' 


pze 


150 






<i 


Seg 






Sect 
eet 
SY 


y 





Hy 
eS 


ie 
a 

SG 
SSSSS 


SSS 





¥: Woy 
Ros 









Ico 














































































































7 
'‘LAMBOA 





CASTENEDOLO ? 


120 120 


——— 


Fic. 123.—Woman’s skull found at Castenedolo, viewed from the side 
and from above. (After Sergi.) 


Professor Sergi’s custody, and they are now preserved 
in his department in the University of Rome. 

In fig. 123, I reproduce two drawings of the woman’s 
skull copied from Professor Sergi’s excellent illustrations, 
but fitted within the conventional standard lines used in 
former illustrations. ‘The length is 189 mm.; the width, 
ier epeine. 71-4 per cent.jot the length. The 
dimensions are above those of the average modern 
European woman. The vault of the skull rises 115 mm. 
above the ear-holes, the pitch of the roof being thus an 
ordinary one. ‘The brain capacity must have been about 
1340 c.c.—the average for modern European women. 

VOL. I, 22 


338 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


The bones of the vault are not thick. The forehead is 
wide (103 mm.) and almost vertical. ‘There is a complete 
absence of supra-orbital ridges. The lower jaw is small, 
the chin pointed, the angle between the ascending ramus 
and body very obtuse (130°), as in women with long, 
narrow, oval faces. It is a long, narrow skull, with not a 
single character we can identify as primitive. Indeed, if 
tested side by side with the skulls of modern women be- 
longing to primitive races, we should select the Castene- 
dolo skull as representing the more highly evolved example 
of the modern type. Yet there is also this striking fact 
to be kept in mind: it is an exact counterpart of the 
skull found at a depth of 50 feet in a Pleistocene deposit 
at Olmo, which lies 150 miles to the south of Brescia. 
The Olmo skull is that of a male, the Castenedolo that 
of a female, but both are of the same race. The 
discovery at Castenedolo convinced Professor Sergi that 
men of the modern type were already evolved in the 
Pliocene period. His sincere and intrepid advocacy 
compelled the attention of his contemporaries. The 
leading anthropologists of Paris gave it a mixed reception. 
Quatrefages believed in the Castenedolo discovery, and 
he and Hamy gave it a place in that Valhalla of ancient 
skulls—the ‘‘ Crania Ethnica.”’ Gabriel de Mortillet and 
Topinard refused to believe in it. Sergi, however, has 
never faltered in his belief. Even, as he himself relates, 
when Ragazzoni summoned him and Professor Issel to 
examine another Castenedolo skeleton exposed im situ in 
1888, and when both were convinced that the skeleton 
represented a comparatively late interment, his faith in 
Ragazzoni’s former discoveries did not waver. ‘To him 
those early discoveries were guarantees that men of the 
modern type were evolved as long ago as the beginning 
of the Pliocene period. 

Castenedolo is a test case: it raises all the issues relating 
to the antiquity of modern man. Are we quite sure Sergi 
is mistaken ? Let us review briefly the principal facts 
on which our knowledge of the antiquity of man rests 
—man as we know him to-day—separating “ certainties ” 


IS HOMO SAPIENS AN ANCIENT TYPE? 339 


from the “ probabilities” and the ‘“ possibilities.” 
Beyond any doubt we have traced men of the modern 
type—men belonging to races as highly evolved in body 
and brain as any race now living—to the beginning of the 
Aurignacian period. ‘The men of Combe Capelle and of 
the Grimaldi caves were as highly evolved as any modern 
people, and yet they may have seen—probably did see 
—the Neanderthal men, and disliked the forbidding 
prominence of their simian brow-ridges. 

‘Towards the close of the period of Mousterian culture 
men of the modern European type appear suddenly in 
lands to the north of the Mediterranean—strong in tooth, 
robust in jaw, big brained and fully developed in type. 
Where did they come from? In which land were they 
evolved ?) We have only circumstantial evidence to guide 
us, but this evidence points to the Pleistocene temperate 
lands, stretching from Afghanistan in the East to Morocco 
in the West—lands which are now reduced to sandy 
wastes, as the homeland of the white man. It was to 
help us in solving our present inquiry that we made a 
survey of Mesopotamia and Egypt in the second chapter 
of this book. Our survey showed us, that although the 
oldest skeletons found in the Nile valley are probably not 
more than six thousand years old, yet there was evidence 
sufficient to support the thesis that the adjacent deserts 
had been fertile lands and inhabited by men during the 
Paleolithic period, and that the men who lived on them 
were of a European type. It is perfectly legitimate for 
us to presume that the men who appeared in Europe at 
the close of the Mousterian period, and who ultimately 
supplanted the Neanderthal stock, came from the Africo- 
Asiatic belt, and that it was somewhere in this wide belt 
that the white stock was evolved. 

Was the arrival of the modern type of man, at the close 
of the Mousterian period, his first appearance in Europe ? 
If we accept the discoveries at Galley Hill, at Clichy, and 
at Olmo as authentic, then it was not ; there was a pre- 
Mousterian as well as a post-Mousterian invasion. If we 
accept a pre-Mousterian invasion then we have to presume 


340 THE ANTfYQUITY OF MAN 


that men of our own type were fully evolved and invaded 
Europe when Germany was occupied by beings so primi- 
tive as the Heidelberg and Ehringsdorf people. We have 
to presume further that their invasion failed, and that 
they were extinguished by men of the Neanderthal stock, 
for only men of this stock have been found in European 
graves of the Mousterian period. When the matter is 
argued thus, it becomes increasingly difficult to accept 
the geological evidence relating to Galley Hill, Clichy, 
and Olmo skeletons. 

There is, however, an alternative interpretation. 
While the Chellean industry abounds in the early Pleisto- 
cene deposits of the valleys of the Somme and Thames it 
is unknown in the contemporary deposits of Germany. 
Is it possible, then, that the Chellean industry was evolved 
in the valleys of the Somme and Thames by men of the 
Galley Hill type (a modern type of European) at a time 
when more northern Europe was inhabited by benighted 
people of the Heidelberg type ? We must, in this case, 
also believe that the Neanderthal people, the progeny of 
the Heidelberg type, ousted the higher form of man from 
Europe before the dawn of Mousterian times. Only 
fresh facts, elicited by further discoveries, can resolve 
these problems. 

Beyond Heidelberg our record ceases in Europe with 
two exceptions—the discovery at Piltdown and the one 
discussed in this chapter, Castenedolo. ‘The latter may 
be dismissed ; the unfossilised condition of the remains 
and other circumstances make us certain we are here 
dealing with intruded burials. Yet one cannot say that 
the existence of man of the modern type in the Pliocene 
period is outside the range of possibilities. Sergi, in 
defending this thesis, cites the geological histories of the 
wolf, the bear, and of that interesting anthropoid ape— 
the gibbon ; all of these had reached their present stages 
of evolution in the Pliocene, and if this were possible for 
them why deny the same possibility to Homo sapiens? 
Indeed there is a line of evidence which compels us to 
postulate a distant date for his evolution. We find him 


IS HOMO SAPIENS AN ANCIENT TYPE? 341 


to-day differentiated into forms so distinctive as the 
negro, the Eskimo, the Australian aborigine, and the 
European; the differentiation of these types implies a 
long period of evolution—one which must have had its 
beginning long before the end of the Pliocene period. 
We cannot tell how ancient the European type of man 
is until we discover his fossilised ancestral stages—and 
discover them amidst geological or archzological sur- 
roundings which permit us to assign them to definite 
dates in the geological or archeological calendar. Up to 
the present day not one of these stages has been found, 
but who can say what a decade may bring forth—par- 
ticularly if lands to the south of the Caspian and of the 
Mediterranean be explored? In the meantime much 
can be learned concerning the antiquity of man from 
explorations made outside the continent of Europe. In 
our next chapter we set out on a world-wide search. 


GEA PARE heey LEE 
MALTA AND THE LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 


In this chapter we are again to turn our faces towards 
Africa to search that great continent for ancient types of 
man. Our visit to Castenedolo, mentioned in the previous 
chapter, took us to Italy, and it is from this country that 
we are to set out on our survey. In ancient days its 
southern or ‘‘ booted” end formed the bridge-head for 
the neck of land which crossed the Mediterranean to 
Tunis, thus making possible a free migration of man and 
beast between Africa and Europe (fig. 124). If there is 
aught of truth in the contentions put forward in the 
previous chapter, that the original homeland of the 
European type lies beyond the Mediterranean, then this 
ancient bridge between Italy and ‘Tunis must be given 
our serious consideration. All of it now lies 1200 feet 
and more under the blue waters of the Mediterranean, all 
save two fragments represented by Sicily and the smell 
island of Malta. Recent discoveries in Malta, we shall 
find, have revealed something of ancient Pleistocene 
times and of the men who lived on the land-bridge. 

In previous chapters mention has often been made of 
“‘raised beaches” and ‘‘river terraces”? which mark 
times when the land stood lower (or the sea rose higher) 
than it does at the present day. They represent times 
of land depression, but until now we have had no oppor- 
tunity of estimating the opposite kind of movement— 
one in which the land rises or the sea recedes—or it 
may be that both factors are concerned. In discussing 
the ancient land-bridge between Italy and Tunis — 


342 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 343 


which for brevity’s sake may be named the “ Sicilian 
bridge ”—we shall speak as if the sea-level were station- 
ary, and as if the movement concerned only the land. 
To reconstitute the Sicilian bridge—to bring the sea 
floor just above the level of the waves—requires an 
upward movement of 1200 feet; it is probable that 
the actual movement involved an elevation of the sea 
floor to twice the amount just stated. Yet there is 


KRAPINA 





Fic. 124.—Map of the Pleistocene land-bridge between Italy and Tunis ; 
some of the sites of Mousterian culture, in Tunis and Italy, are indicated. 


no doubt that this bridge was in existence in the 
latter part of the Pleistocene period. From a study 
of the fossil remains of animals found in Sicily and 
Malta, geologists infer that the bridge was raised and 
again submerged at least twice—once towards the close 
of the Pliocene period and again in late Pleistocene times. 
From evidence collected in Malta, Mr George Sinclair 4 
infers that subsidence of the island has been proceeding 
at the rate of a foot per century since Phoenician times. 
If subsidence of the Sicilian bridge has taken place at 


1 Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1924, vol. lv. 


344 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


this average rate, then the land connection between Italy 
and Tunis was broken 12,000 years ago. We shall see 
that there is evidence of this bridge having been sub- 
merged at least three times during the Pleistocene period. 
If only we could again raise the Sicilian bridge and bring 
into the light of day its ancient beaches and shore-lines 
—beaches which now lie some 2000 feet below the surface 
of the Mediterranean—we could soon settle both its dates 
and heights. For in the submerged beaches and in the 
submarine fields are hidden away traces of the men, 
animals, and plants which knew the land-bridge in its 
heyday. 

Sicily and Malta are isolated areas of the high uplands 
of the old land-bridge. Evidence of another kind throws 
light on the dates at which the land-bridge was in 
existence. In fig. 124 there is shown along the map of 
Italy a series of sites where Mousterian culture has been 
discovered. There are similar stations in Tunis, beyond 
the southern end of the bridge, and there are sites on the 
bridge itself—in Sicily. The Mousterian culture evi- 
dently spread along the bridge, but whether from Europe 
to Africa, or in the reverse direction, we cannot tell. In 
North Africa, just as in Europe, we find the flint 
implements of the Acheulean and Chellean cultures,1 
showing that Europe was directly or indirectly in 
touch with Africa during the earlier phases of Palezo- 
lithic culture. 

The land-bridge has had not only its times of elevation 
—mevements which may have raised its upland parts 
2000 feet or more above the level of the subdivided 
Mediterranean—but it had also its periods of subsidence, 
periods in which it was submerged to a greater depth 
than is now the case. All round the Mediterranean 
General de Lamothe has traced four ancient beaches, 
formed by the Mediterranean during periods of subsi- 
dence. One of these—the latest in date—stands about 
10 to 20 metres above the sea and corresponds to the 
50-foot terrace of the Thames valley. The next in date 

1 Maurice Reygasse, L’ Anthropologie, 1916, vol. xxvii. p. 35. 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 345 


occurs about the 30-metre level and corresponds to our 
100-foot terrace. ‘Two other beaches occur at higher 
levels, namely, at 60 metres and at 100 metres. Professor 
Charles Depéret + proposes to divide the Pleistocene 
period into four ages, each age corresponding to the 
formation of a terrace. ‘The roo-metre terrace does not 
concern us here; on our English scale it falls within the 
Pliocene period. But the other three have an important 
bearing for us now because they fall within our Pleistocene 
scale. ‘The 60-metre terrace was deposited when the 
Chellean culture was still in its infancy. The 30-metre 
terrace marks the period when the Chellean culture was 
at its height ; the 10-20-metre terrace was formed before 
the end of the period of Mousterian culture. Now, as 
these terraces can be traced on to surviving fragments 
of the land-bridge, we may be certain that at the three 
cultural periods just named it had been submerged to 
a greater extent than it is to-day. We cannot tell the 
exact times at which the land-bridge was elevated, 
although the periods at which it became submerged and 
disappeared can be fixed with some degree of accuracy. 
This brief history of the ancient Sicilian bridge will give 
the reader some conception of the magnitude of the 
land (or sea) movements which have taken place, 
and the length of the time which must have elapsed 
since early man appeared on the shore-lands of the 
Mediterranean. 

So far we have been surveying the land-bridge from 
the Italian side. We are now to plant our feet on it— 
or rather on a small unsubmerged area—the island of 
Malta, where a cave known as Ghar Dalam has recently 
yielded strange information concerning the ways of 
ancient men—men of the land-bridge. Away in the 
south-east corner of Malta, some five miles from Valetta, 
there.is a large bay, the Marsa Scirocco, which Pheenician 
sailors used as a harbour. At the head of this bay a 
rocky ravine—the Wied Dalam—cuts into the limestone 
plateau of the island, in a north-westerly direction. 

1 See references given on p. 312. 


346 THE ANTIQUITY. OF wiAN 


Ascending this ravine for about 700 paces the traveller 
finds the mouth of the cave on his right, opening from 
the side of the ravine, the sill of the mouth being 50 feet 
(15-2 metres) above sea-level. When the cave is entered 
it is found to open out in front of the traveller as a long, 
irregular, rambling tunnel, penetrating the limestone 
plateau for a distance of some 700 feet. The first, or 
main part, of the cave, 270 feet long, varies in width 


: SS 
= 2 SS . a 


2 











4s£ Molar 
2°¢ Molar 


= UPPER 
~ LAYERS 


RED 
EARTH 


BONE 
BRECCIA 


CLAY 
S.E. 


FIG. 12 omenar across Ghar Dalam, showing the strata which 
make up its floor. (After George Sinclair.) 


from 20 to 60 feet, while overhead the roof, studded here 
and there with stalactites, is from 10 to 18 feet high.? 
Underfoot are the strata of the cave floor, varying from 
15 to 18 feet in depth. It is important to note that the 
floor of the cave is nearly at the same level throughout, 
being 27 feet (7-1 metres) above the waters of the adjacent 
bay of the Mediterranean. In fig. 125 is shown a section 
across Ghar Dalam, with a representation of the various 
strata which make up its floor. Deepest of all, lying on 


1G. Despott, “ Excavations at Ghar Dalam,” ourn. Roy. Anthrop. 
Instit., 1918, vol. xlviii. p. 215; ibid., 1923, vol. lili. p. 18. Sir Arthur 
Keith and George Sinclair, Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1924, vol. lv. 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 347 


a rocky bottom, is a layer of yellowish clay, some 3 feet 
thick, a deposit laid down in still water but containing 
no fossils. ‘Then comes a remarkable stratum, also about 
3 feet in thickness ; large nodules and smoothed fragments 
of deeply mineralised bone and tooth make up three- 
fourths of its composition ; it is a bone breccia. In this 
stratum are represented parts of thousands of animals, 
the predominant species being a hippopotamus (H. 
pentland1), but there are also representations of three 
species of elephant (£. melitensis, E. mnaidrensis, E. 
falconert) ; there are traces of a species of deer akin to 
red deer. None of these animals are cave-dwellers by 
nature, so presently we shall have to explain how thou- 
sands of great pachyderms and other animals came to be 
entombed in the floor of this cave. ‘This may not be an 
easy question to answer. On the other hand it is not 
difficult to determine how these fossil bones have become 
rolled out into pebble-like pieces. For we can still 
observe that the sides of the cave have been polished and 
undercut by wave action. At one time the floor of the 
cave must have been level with the beach and open to the 
sea. The bone stratum is clearly part of an old sea-beach 
—part of the lower Mediterranean terrace formed towards 
the end of the period of Mousterian culture. The 
skeletons, which have been ground to a bone breccia by 
the action of waves, must have accumulated on the floor 
of the cave before the date of submergence. We can 
speculate with some assurance as to the date when these 
huge accumulations of bones were formed in the cave. 
It must have been after the subsidence of Chellean times, 
when the 30-metre beach was formed and before the 
subsidence of Mousterian times, which gave rise to the 
lowest or 20-metre terrace. We infer, therefore, that 
between these two phases of subsidence Ghar Dalam 
became a charnel-house for hippopotamus and elephant. 
This interval corresponds to late Acheulean and early 
Mousterian cultures. At this stage of cultural evolution 
the land-bridge was in existence. ‘There was also a post- 
Mousterian period of elevation. 


348 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Then above the bone stratum in the floor of the cave 
comes a deposit of red earth, formed by dust and fragments 
which have fallen from the sides and roof of the cave. 
This stratum, which is about 7 feet in thickness, has never 
been submerged. The red cave earth corresponds in 
date to the deposits of the Grimaldi caves in which were 
found the buried remains of men of the Aurignacian 
period (p. 96). The cave deposits at Grimaldi were 
formed upon the lowest of the old sea-beaches ; so was 
the cave earthin Ghar Dalam. Above the red cave earth 
comes a superficial stratum which has been trod down by 
the feet of men of the Neolithic period. 

Late in the summer of 1917, when Europe was aflame 
with war, Mr G. Despott, Curator of the Natural 
History Museum of Malta, was busy in Ghar Dalam, 
carrying out excavations on behalf of the British Associa- 
tion. He was sinking a trench across the floor of the cave, 
110 feet from its mouth, and had dug some depth into 
the red cave earth. He found then, as he and other 
excavators had observed before, that Neolithic man had 
dug deeply into the cave earth, for burial and for other 
purposes. Thus fragments of Neolithic pottery, teeth, 
and fragments of human bones occurred occasionally as 
deep as the fourth foot of the red cave earth. At the 
same level he found the skull of the extinct Malta elephant 
with its neck vertebrz still adjoining it as in life, and the 
bones of a limb of an extinct hippopotamus (/. pentlandt) 
lying in their natural order. We cannot believe that the 
Neolithic people-who first landed on Malta placed these 
fossil bones in the cave earth or saw such animals alive. It 
is these fossil bones and not the Neolithic pottery which 
fix the date of the cave earth. 

As he sank his trench, Mr Despott found a molar tooth 
in the third-foot level of the red cave earth and again 
another in the fourth-foot (counting from the upper level 
of this stratum). ‘These two molars differed from all the 
other teeth he found in being deeply mineralised and of 
a peculiar form; they are represented in fig. 126. One is 
the second upper molar of the right side ; it is fully formed 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 349 


but had been in use for only a short time, the cusps of the 
crown being but slightly worn. The other tooth is the 
last or third upper molar of the same side. It was in 
course of eruption, its root being incompletely formed. 
Both teeth are from the same individual, a young man of 
about twenty years of age, if the wisdom teeth of Nean- 
derthal man cut at the age which is normal for modern 
man. We know of no race in which these taurodont 





OPERCULUM 
FISSURE 


Fic. 126.—Two molar teeth of Neanderthal man found by Mr G. Despott 
in the stratum of red cave earth of Ghar Dalam. On the left, a 
corresponding view of a second upper molar of Neolithic man is 
also represented. 


a.e., Anterior external cusp. 

a.1,, Anterior internal cusp. 

p.t., Posterior internal cusp. 

a.e.y., Anterior external root. 
Cingulum c., Cusp of the cingulum. 


teeth occur except the Neanderthal species.1 Mr Sinclair 
was able to obtain from a cave in Malta over two thousand 
teeth of Neolithic Maltese, but not one showed a trace 
of taurodontism. For forty years past I have had 
opportunities of examining teeth of all races of men; 
I have never come across these peculiar teeth except in 
Neanderthal man. ‘The discovery of these two teeth gives 
a complete assurance that Neanderthal man was still alive 


1 The only exception that I know of is recorded by Dr H. P. Pickerill of 
Otago, New Zealand, who came across an instance in the course of his 


practice (see Proc. Roy. Soc. Med, (Odont, Section), 1908-9, vol. ii. p. 150). 


350 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


in Malta—on the land-bridge—when the red cave earth 
was being deposited, which, as already mentioned, I 
regard as a deposit contemporaneous with the Aurig- 
nacian strata of the Grimaldi caves. Although the 
Mousterian culture has been found in Sicily, not a trace 
of it has been found in treeless Malta, nor of any Palzo- 
lithic culture whatsoever, neither Chellean, Acheulean, 
Mousterian, nor Aurignacian. All we have found of 
Paleolithic man are these two molar teeth. 

When the discoveries at Ghar Dalam were first brought 
to my notice, my interest was centred in the red cave 
earth and its fossil remains. It was only later that I 
sought to explain the presence of such vast accumulations 
of fossil remains in the bone breccia, representing 
thousands.of hippopotami, as well as herds of strange 
elephants. It was not until I read Mr Sinclair’s account 
of the reconstituted land-bridge and found that the bay 
of the Mediterranean—Marsa Scirocco—adjacent to the 
cave, had been a fresh-water lake in the uplands of the 
ancient land-bridge, that I realised the significance of the 
bone breccia in the floor of Ghar Dalam. Such an upland 
lake, as African sportsmen know, must have attracted 
herds of big game. A rocky ravine led from the shores 
of the lake to the mouth of the cave. ‘The memory of 
the stratum of horse bones at Solutré (p. 88) came back 
to me; so, too, did the accumulation of mammoth 
bones at Predmost—the spoil-heaps of Aurignacian 
hunters.t_ The hippopotamus, the elephant, the red deer, 
do not flock to caves to die; they only enter under 
compulsion. Here, too, were all the conditions required 
for the successful corralling of big game—the lake, the 
rocky ravine leading from it to the cave, the open mouth 
of the cave on the side of the ravine, into which ancient 
hunters could have headed herds which had been stam- 
peded up the ravine from the lake. I can see no alterna- 
tive explanation to account for such vast accumulations 
of fossil remains in Ghar Dalam. The bone breccia 
represents the proceeds of hundreds of successful hunts, 

See p. 105. 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 351 


and the hunters were men who lived on the land-bridge 
between Africa and Europe, when hunters shaped their 
stone weapons in the Acheulean style. 

So much for the ancient land-bridge; we must now 
proceed to the deserts and jungles of Africa. Approach- 
ing Africa by the old land-bridge we reach Cape Bon in 
Tunis, and from this point we shall set out to make a 
cursory survey of the more important traces of ancient 
man in that part of the great continent which lies north 
of the Equator. Before us are the great sandy wastes of 
the Sahara, covering an area almost as extensive as Europe 
itself. Between the Sahara and the Mediterranean are 
Tunis and Algiers, where French archeologists have dis- 
covered the same stone cultures as occur in ancient Europe! 
—Chellean, Acheulean, and Mousterian. The Acheulean 
culture is separated from the Chellean less sharply than in 
Europe, and shows tendencies to specialise in unexpected 
directions. The Mousterian culture, too, has elabora- 
tions not found north of the Mediterranean. ‘The 
Aurignacian culture of North Africa has so many dis- 
tinctive features that it is spoken of as Getulian or 
Capsian. We cannot tell as yet whether any or all of 
these ancient cultures were invented in Africa and then 
spread to Europe or if matters fell out in an opposite way. 
It is sufficient for us to note that in ancient times, as 
to-day, the frontiers of Europe extended to what is now 
desert. ‘The Sahara is a great racial frontier ; north of it 
we find men of the European type, south of it men of the 
true African or negro type. 

To pass from Cape Bon in Tunis to Thebes in Upper 
Egypt we have to cross 1500 miles of land which, although 
now desert, was fertile in ancient times (see p. 38). The 
western bank of the Nile at Thebes, as we have seen, 
rises into three terraces which are respectively 360 feet, 
280 feet, and 170 feet above the river; they appear to 
correspond in date of formation to the three lower 
terraces of the Mediterranean. From these terraces 

1 Maurice Reygasse, L’ Anthropologie, 1916, vol. xxvii. p. 35. P. Poel, 
ibid., 1917, vol. xxyiii. p. 351. 


352 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


and from the plateau above, Dr C. G. Seligman! gathered 
representations of all the ancient stone cultures just 
enumerated in Tunis and Algiers. ‘Then, resuming our 
journey and passing over another 1500 miles of country, 
chiefly of a desert kind, we reach Somaliland, where 
Mr H. W. Seton-Karr? found the same ancient stone 
(quartzite) cultures. "To-day Somaliland is inhabited by 
a negroid people, black-skinned, fuzzy-haired, but with 
facial features of the European type. 

From Somaliland it is not a far cry to Uganda, situated 
on the north side of the Equator. The British Protec- 
torate stands on the north shores of the great Victoria 
Lake, right in the midst of the tropical belt and 3000 
miles from our starting-point at Cape Bon. Even here 
we are not.beyond the range of the ancient stone cultures 
of Europe. ‘The discovery of these cultures in Uganda 
we owe to Mr E. J. Wayland, Director of its Geological 
Survey. He observed that Lake Victoria, like the 
Mediterranean, had its old shore-lines and adjoining 
gravel terraces.2 In these terraces and on them, Mr 
Wayland collected quartzite stone implements which 
when classified in a scale of ascending antiquity, read 
thus: (1) Transitional or neo-Paleolithic; (2) Aurig- 


nacian ; (3) Mousterian ; (4) mixed Chellean-Acheulean ; 


(5) pre-Chellean. Between Uganda and East Anglia 
4000 miles of land and sea intervene, and yet in Mr Reid 
Moir’s * opinion—and no one is better able to judge than 
he—the pre-Chellean implements gathered from the gravel 
terraces of Lake Victoria show the same general design 
and workmanship as the shaped flints he discovered in 
the East Anglian terraces of the North Sea. We are apt 
to think of Africa as the dark continent, as a land which 


1 Fourn. Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1921, vol. li. p. 115. 

2 See J. de Morgan, L’ Anthropologie, 1921, vol. xxxi. p. 37. 

3 E. J. Wayland, ‘‘ The Stone Age in Uganda,” Proc. Prebist. Soc. East 
Anglia, 1923, vol. iv. p. 96. Reginald A. Smith and E. J. Wayland, 
Publications of the Geological Survey, Uganda Protectorate, January, 1923. 

4 J. Reid Moir, “ Large Quartzite Implements of Rostro-Carinate and 
Early Paleolithic Types in Uganda,” Mature, 1921, vol. cvii, p. 649. 


— ee 


a 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 353 


became open to European influences for the first time 
in our day, but here we have evidence of penetration of 
culture at the very dawn of man’s Stone age. I do not 
suppose that at any stage of man’s evolution the spread 
of culture depended on its carriage by marauding bands 
or migrating hordes. As far back as our archeological 
records can carry us, humanity seems to have formed a 
sea or rather a series of overlapping seas, and any disturb- 
ance, such as that caused by an important improvement or 
invention, set going a ripple or wave, which, enlarging 
its circumference as it moved, spread abroad until it 
reached the most distant shores of humanity. 

In Africa, as elsewhere, we know much more about 
early cultures than about the men who fashioned and 
used them. ‘The oldest graves of Egypt have yielded the 
same type of man as we still find in the valley of the Nile. 
But if we have not found the actual remains of Paleolithic 
man in Africa north of the Equator, we have evidence 
which confirms us in our belief that a very long time has 
elapsed since the modern type of man appeared in this 
part of the world. ‘The ancestral stock of this type 
has given rise to the European on the one hand, and 
fomineneeto) on the other. “At» Cairo, we have a 
people which merge into the Southern European ‘type. 
If we ascend the valley of the Nile we find by the 
time we reach Khartoum, which is tooo miles distant 
as the aeroplane flies, that we are amongst a people 
. which merge into the negro type; we have crossed the 
threshold of the real Africa. Between Cairo and Khar- 
toum we find an intermediate series which link the 
South European to the negro of the Sudan. It is true 
that there has been much racial intercrossing along the 
Nile valley, but evolution is also true; these transitional 
types between Cairo and Khartoum are not the products 
of hybridity but representative stages of the ancestral stock 
which has given rise to the types of both Europe and 
Africa. All the information at our disposal points to the 
evolution of new races and types as a slow process involving 
the lapse of a long period of time. 

VOL. I, a6 


354 THE ANFIQUITY OF MAN 


That the tall negro type which is found on the Nile 
south of Khartoum is also ancient becomes evident from 
excavations carried out at Gebel Moya, a station situated 
on an arid range of granite hills between the Blue and 
White Niles. In 1910, Mr Henry S. Wellcome com- 
menced a series of explorations at Gebel Moya, and 
discovered a cemetery of prehistoric date. Some of the 
graves may have been dug in the time of the earlier 
Egyptian dynasties. In the deeper graves ‘“‘ fossilised-” 
skeletons of a tall negro people were found, belonging to a 
race not unlike the tall, long-limbed negro tribes which now 
live along the valley of the White Nile. The remains of 
those people have been described by Dr Douglas Derry. 
As in modern negroes of the same region, lip ornaments 
were worn, and in the women the lower incisor teeth were 
extracted. ‘The discovery is important in this respect : 
it shows us that three thousand or four thousand years 
ago a tall negro type was in existence, and inhabited 
this part of the Sudan, practising the same bodily 
mutilations as their modern successors. 

The next point in our journey takes us to Tanganyika 
Territory, formerly known as German East Africa, to the 
south of Lake Victoria. In 1914, Dr Hans Reck dis- 
covered in a stratified deposit at Oldoway, in the northern 
part of German East Africa, a human skeleton, in the 
contracted posture, and exhibiting all the features of a 
typical negro. ‘The stratum in which the skeleton lay— 
one composed of calcareous sand—contained remains of 
extinct animals of the Pleistocene period. ‘The antiquity 
of the skeleton 1s probably not so great as the stratum in 
which it lay, for a complete human skeleton laid in a 
contracted posture signifies a burial, unless the opposite 
can be proved—or, at least, unless a natural entombment 
can be rendered probable. The teeth were artificially 
pointed by having been filed—a custom still prevalent 
among negro tribes of East Africa. It is very probable 
that the negro was fully evolved in early Pleistocene 


1 See Proc. of Seventeenth Internat. Congress of Medicine, London, 1913, 
Sec, I.; “ Anat, and Embryology,” pt. 2, p. 99. 


MALTA AND LAND-BRIDGE TO AFRICA 355 


times, but the evidence from Oldoway cannot be accepted 
as having finally proved this degree of antiquity.+ 

We have finished a cursory survey of what is known 
concerning ancient man in Africa north of the Equator. 
In our next chapter we cross the Equator to find the 
actual remains of Paleolithic man. 


1 See Illustrated London News, 4th April 1914. 


CHAPTER XIX 
ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 


In the previous chapter the reader was conducted to the 
equatorial region of Uganda and now stands with his 
face towards the Cape of Good Hope, some 2500 miles 
distant. We are to enter one of the great culs-de-sac of 
the world in the hope that just such a remote land as 
lies before us may have sheltered some of the ancient 
types of man and that he may be found still living in 
the manner adopted by our forefathers in Europe some 
fifteen thousand years ago. In this hope we shall not 
be disappointed. 

Before setting out on our quest, however, it may be 
well to review very briefly some considerations which may 
serve for our guidance. In Uganda we are well within 
the negro belt; away to our right lies the wide basin of 
the Congo, the great cradle in which the purer negro 
types have become differentiated. The kind of man we 
are now amongst differs in every feature from the fairer 
races of Europe, yet their dissimilarity is bridged by an 
intermediate series which shades from the one type to 
the other. ‘To explain such a series we have to suppose 
that both white and black men have been evolved from a 
common stock—one which must be of great antiquity. 
Further, we must suppose that these types—negro and 
European—have been differentiated in the lands where 
we now find them—the one south of the Sahara, the 
other to the north of it. From their respective cradle 
lands these types have extended their distribution, 
suppressing other types or pushing them into remote 
corners. 

356 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 357 


From his cradle land the European has spread abroad ; 
so has the negro. From Uganda an upland route leads 
southwards, by the great lakes and Rhodesia to the 
Transvaal and Natal. Along this route wave after 
wave of the great negro stock has spread, exterminating 


y) hae 
Vi 
TANGANIKA ff} 


Z 


NG 
Ano ae 





TERRITORY 












> 
+ 
i YN 0 VICTORIA % 
WY FALLS 
a : 
a 
oO 


\ Caan 
KALAHARI 





Lig 
ZPORT ELIZABETH 
ITZIKAMA 





QO 100 200 300 400 500 
a tr 
Miles. 


Fic. 127.—Sketch map of Southern Africa, showing sites mentioned 
in the text. 


the older inhabitants, save such as sought the desert or 
the shelter of secluded nooks. We see here one side of 
the machinery of evolution—that which leads to the 
spread of new types and the extermination of the old. 

e are now to follow the south road from Uganda to 
Cape Colony in search of such remnants of the old races 
of South Africa as may have survived the negro conquest. 
About half-way we cross the Zambesi at Victoria Falls, 


358 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


and are immediately on the outer fringes of the great 
Kalahari desert, where there still may be seen a people 
leading a “‘ Paleolithic ” life—the Bushmen. Only some 
four thousand survive, scattered over an almost rainless 
country, but one which is scarred with ancient river- 
courses, showing that this desert, like the Sahara, was once 
a fertile land. Over this inhospitable land the Bushmen 
are scattered as tribal groups, living as hunters and 
trappers, eking out a scanty dietary by the consumption 
of such creeping things and wild roots as their country 
affords. ‘They scorn the tame lives led by other men, 
both black and white. Although some have adopted the 
black man’s wigwam, their real homes are rock-shelters 
and caves, just as was the case with Europeans of the 
Aurignacian period. Indeed their culture is Aurignacian ; 
they shape their stone weapons, fashion necklaces and 
other ornaments, paint and engrave, and bury their dead 
in the way that was fashionable in Southern Europe some 
fifteen thousand years ago. And yet the Bushman never 
lived in Europe; he has, as we shall see, the most 
distinctive features, and no ancient grave in Europe has 
yielded any trace of his type. No doubt, the Bushman’s 
culture and that of the Aurignacian in Europe came from 
a common source. 

Although the Bushman’s manner of living is primitive, 
yet in build of body and brain he represents a highly 
specialised type, however ancient or recent this type 
may prove to be. In a structural sense, he has departed 
farther from the common simian ancestor than his cousin 
of Europe. The woolly hair of his scalp, growing in 
short tufted screws, his thick, everted lips, and his flat, 
wide nose tell in the plainest terms that he is a branch of 
the great negro stock. But all of these are human 
characters—characters never seen in apes—only in that 
branch of mankind which has its chief home in Africa. 
The Bushman is of short stature—a dwarf, the average 
height for men being under 5 feet. Dwarf races are not 
primitive ; rather the opposite. ‘They are races which 
have been shaped under the influence of a “ Peter Pan ” 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 359 


tendency—a tendency to retain throughout life the 
features of body and traits of mind which characterise 
the youths of a race. The Bushman’s skull, which can 
be easily distinguished from that of all other races, will 
serve to illustrate my meaning, and at the same time help 
us to interpret the significance of certain features which 
are to be met with in some of the ancient skulls of South 


150 
100 
50 


° 
gs 





Basilar part of Mastoid process. 


basi-cranial axis. 


60 


80 


Fic. 128.—The Bushman’s skull drawn in profile. The basi-cranial 
axis and vault are picked out by stippling. 


Africa. In fig. 128, a Bushman’s skull is drawn in profile ; 
the base of the skull, or basi-cranial axis, on which the 
vault is set, is there depicted. ‘There are two parts in 
this axis: a hinder or basilar and an anterior or ethmoidal. 
In the Bushman’s skull the ethmoidal part is usually bent 
downwards, as is shown in fig. 128. In apes and in primi- 
tive races of men it is the opposite: the ethmoidal axis 
rises above the zero line of the skull (fig. 128, 0, 0). In 
embryonic stages, however, both of ape and man, the 
ethmoidal part of the cranial axis is bent down as in 
fig. 128; it becomes unbent as development proceeds. 


360 THE CAN FIOUITY SOR Man 


In the Bushman, and also in certain other races, this 
embryonic or youthful feature tends to be retained. 
One result is to cause the upper part of the forehead to 
bulge forwards (fig. 128). ‘Ihe small mastoid processes, 
the slight development of supra-orbital ridges and many 
other features of the Bushman’s skull, may be construed 
in this manner. So, too, we may explain their yellowish 
brown skins; the Bushman retains a shade of colouring 
which the negro baby passes through before birth. 

We must presume that all branches of the negro stock 
have a tendency to give rise to dwarf varieties. In the 
Congo forests, to the west of Uganda, we find a pygmy 
people, miniatures of the Congo negro; farther north 
are the Akkas, akin to the negro of the Sudan; away in 
the Far East, in the Malay Peninsula, in New Guinea, and 
the Philippines, where isolated fragments of the negro 
belt still persist, we find dwarf representations of the 
taller races of these parts. If this be true, the Bushman 
should also have an ancestry of normal stature. 

If we have not found the actual full-statured ancestor 
of the Bushman, we are familiar with its modern repre- 
sentative. When the Dutch established themselves at 
the Cape in 1652, they found the surrounding country 
occupied by a pastoral people whom they named Hotten- 
tots. In colour of skin, in form of ear, in texture of hair, 
in facial features, and in shape of skull, Hottentots bear a 
close resemblance to the untamable Bushman. Only they 
are “grown-ups”; the average stature of the men is 
5 feet 5 inches; they become dull and sluggish as they 
reach manhood, whereas the Bushman retains the activity, 
playfulness, and brightness of boyhood. The Hottentot 
women had even a greater tendency than the Bushwomen 
to accumulate fat on certain parts of their bodies. We 
may conclude, then, that Bushman and Hottentot come 
of a common stock, but of the two we must suppose that 
the Hottentot most resembles the common ancestor. 
Further, we have every reason to believe that Hottentot 
and Bushman have been evolved in Southern Africa. 

The Hottentot race, the real natives of the Cape, have 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 361 


been squeezed almost out of existence. ‘They were caught 
between two aggressive stocks—the white, or European, 
advancing from the south, and the Black, or Bantu, from 
the north. Although there may still be eighty thousand 
people who have Hottentot blood in their veins, they are 
bastardised representatives of the type. ‘The fate which 
is overtaking the Hottentots seems to have befallen a race 
near akin to them and also to the Bushmen—the Strand- 
loopers. We know of them only by their kitchen-middens, 
and their cliff-shelters which abound along the coast from 
Cape Town to Port Elizabeth (fig. 127). From a study 
of their skulls and skeletons, Dr F. C. Shrubsall + con- 
cludes that the Strandloopers were of the same stock or 
type as the Bushmen and Hottentots but differed in detail 
from both of these. In size of head many of them reached 
European dimensions ; they were large-headed, and their 
faces, particularly their noses, were less negroid than 
either of the living types. Their civilisation was akin to 
that of the ancient cave-dwellers of Europe. 

The culture of the Bushman is Aurignacian, but there 
are very clear traces of still older methods of working 
stone implements in South Africa. So long ago as 1860, 
Mr TT. H. Bowker 2 observed that the gravels of Cape 
Colony, like the river terraces of England, contained 
palzoliths. Mr Bowker’s early observations illustrate in 
a striking manner the rapidity with which news of a 
discovery spreads round the world. It was only in the 
previous year, 1859, that Sir John Evans, having visited 
Boucher de Perthes at Abbeville, returned to England to 
find that the gravel terraces of the Thames valley, like 
those of the Somme, contained the handiwork of ancient 
man. We know now that South Africa almost rivals 
Europe in the richness of its ancient stone cultures. 
We have already traced the ancient cultures of Europe, 
from pre-Chellean downwards, as far south as Uganda; 


1 Dr F.C. Shrubsall, Annals of South African Museum, 1907, vol. v. 
p. 227; 1bid.,-1911, vol. viii. p. 227. 

2 See E. L. Layard, “South African Stone Implements,” Fourn. Anthrop. 
Instit., 1872, vol. i. 


362 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


investigations made in recent years show that these 
ancient cultures have representations throughout the 
whole of South Africa. ‘The high terrace gravels of the 
Zambesi, at Victoria Falls, are rich in paleoliths; in the 
ancient deposits of the Monapo river, to the north of 
the Zambesi, Mr E. J. Wayland discovered the same 
series of ancient implements. ‘They have been found 
in Swaziland and in the gravels throughout the whole 
watershed of the Orange river. These gravels contain 
remains of extinct species of buffalo, horse, gnu, and 
antelope. .Mr Reginald A. Smith? of the British 
Museum has studied the type of implements yielded by 
South African deposits; all the older types of Europe 
are represented, but, as the late Dr L. Péringuey ® was 
wont to insist, the Chellean, Acheulean, and Mousterian 
cultures are not sharply divided into separate time 
periods as in Europe. Stone implements are so abun- 
dant in the gravels of South Africa that Major E. R. 
Collins was able to gather an extensive collection from 
trenches dug during the Boer War. 

The man who has best summarised our knowledge of 
South Africa in prehistoric times—the late Mr J. P. 
Johnson, a young mining engineer—deserves more than 
a passing mention. In his youth he was an ardent student — 
of the implementiferous gravels of England, and in 1902, 
when only twenty-two years of age, had to seek a new 
home in South Africa on account of his health. There, 
in the intervals of business, he devoted himself to a study 
of the traces of ancient man in South Africa, giving the 
world the fruits of his study in two excellent books.* 
Mr Johnson perceived that in South Africa, as in Europe, 


1 Dr R. Broom, Annals of the South African Museum, 1920, vol. xii. 

ities 

2 Mr Reginald A. Smith, Man, 1919, vol. xix. p. 100. 

3 Dr L. Péringuey, Annals of the South African Museum, 1911, vol. viii. 
Dr Péringuey died on zoth February 1924. His publication will be found 
in the Annals of the South African Museum, with which he was connected 
for forty years, ultimately becoming its director. 

4 The Stone Implements of South Africa, 1908 (2nd edition). The — 
Prehistoric Periods of South Africa, 1912 (2nd edition), 





ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 363 


three great periods of stone culture had to be recognised— 
Eolithic, Paleolithic, and Recent. 

To illustrate the conditions under which ancient stone 
implements are found in South Africa, I have reproduced 
in fig. 129 a section of valley gravels taken from a recent 
paper by Mr Neville Jones.1. The scene of Mr Jones’ 
investigation is indicated in fig. 127; it lies north of 
Kimberley, near the railroad to Bulawayo, which here 
skirts the eastern fringe of the Kalahari desert. Down 
this fringe of the desert comes the bed of the Harts river, 
to join that of the Vaal. Mr Jones found that a tributary 





































































ORY BEO 
OF 


STREAM 



































ee a RL. ON TA INING 
PEBBLES IMPLEMENTS 


Fic. 129.—A section of the implementiferous gravels exposed on the bank 
of a tributary of the Hartsriverat Taungs. (After Mr Neville Jones.) 


of the Harts river, at Taungs (fig. 127), had cut a channel 
in, and thus laid open, a valley deposit of gravel. This 
gravel deposit is clearly the bed of an ancient stream. 
The deposit, as shown in fig. 129, consists of (A) 9 feet of 
black silt, the most recent deposit ; above the silt Bush- 
men’s implements are found. Under the silt comes a 
thin stratum (B), only 6 inches in thickness, which contains 
sharp-edged implements of lydianite and shale, shaped in 
the Mousterian style. Then upon the bed-rock comes 
the oldest valley deposit (C), a marl—a mixture of car- 
bonate of lime, sand, and clay—in which pebbles and 
implements are embedded. ‘The implements, of quartzite 


1 “Tmplement-bearing Deposits of Taungs and Tiger Kloof,” ‘fourn. 
Roy. Anthrop. Instit., 1920, vol. 1. p. 412. 


364 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


and other hard stone—for flints do not occur in South 
Africa—were worked in the Acheulean manner. ‘These 
implements were not sharp-edged ; it was clear from their 
appearance that they had been swept by floods from old 
land surfaces and rolled in the bed of the ancient stream. 
In a still older deposit of the Harts river Mr Jones found 
implements which answer to the Chellean and pre-Chellean 
types of Europe. Here, then, is a remarkable state of 
affairs in the pre-history of man. Although 6000 miles 
of jungle, desert, and sea lie between the sites we are now 
dealing with and those which we visited near Ipswich, yet 
we meet with the same order of stone cultures. We must 
infer that from pre-Chellean days onwards both South 
Africans and East Anglians were subject to the various 
cultural waves which slowly crept over the world time 
after time. 

Having thus passed in brief review what is known of 
the ancient stone cultures of South Africa, we now turn 
to see what can be learned concerning the men who used 
them. ‘The implementiferous gravels of the Harts river, 
which we have been examining at T'aungs, lie beyond the 
western frontier of the Transvaal. The scene of the first 
discovery of fossil man in South Africa lies in the Trans- 


vaal, 150 miles to the east of T'aungs, near Boskop, in the | 


Potchefstroom district, to the north of the Vaal (fig. 127). 
A river, the Mooi river, runs southwards to the Vaal; on 
the eastern side of the Mooi Mr J. B. Botha had built his 
farmhouse, separated from the stream by the breadth of a 
field. In the summer of 1913 a drain was being dug 
across this field; the workmen had to cut through (1) a 
black soil, a foot in thickness ; then (2) a subsoil, 4 feet 
3 inches thick, under which came (3) a stratum of 
“lateritic breccia,” consisting of “small pebbles, with 
pellets of chert and sandstone, set in a ferruginous and 
occasionally siliceous matrix.” The bottom of the drain 
reached the deeper part of the subsoil in which irregular 
lumps of the breccia were scattered. When the drain 
had been carried to about 80 yards from the Mooi, 
strange-looking bones were found in the deeper levels of 


NEES a 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 365 


the subsoil, about 4 feet 6 inches below the surface of the 
field and about 12 feet above the bed of the adjacent river. 
There arose a discussion between Mr Botha and a neigh- 
bour as to whether or not the bones were human. They 
were taken to Port Elizabeth, over 500 miles away, where 
Mr F. W. Fitzsimons, Director of the Museum there, not 
only recognised their humanity, but perceived that at 
last fossil man had been discovered in South Africa. He 
at once made the long journey to Mr Botha’s farm, 
examining and exploring the site of the discovery. Later 
he was joined by colleagues from the South African 
Museum at Cape Town, and a further search being made, 
fragments of the leg and arm bones were recovered. 

It was under such circumstances that the Boskop man 
made his appearance in the archeological world. He is 
represented by a remarkable skull-cap, a right temporal 
bone (fig. 130), a large part of the left half of the lower 
jaw, together with fragments of the bones of the forearm, 
thigh, and leg. All are deeply mineralised, and all clearly 
belong to one individual. We may feel certain we are 
dealing, not with a natural inhumation, but an ancient 
burial. ‘The remains were conveyed to the South African 
Museum, Cape Town, where they were examined and 
described by Mr S. H. Haughton.t An endocranial or 
“‘brain”’ cast of the skull was submitted to Professor Elliot 
Smith for a report. Afterwards the parts of the skull 
were brought to England to be examined by Mr W. P. 
Pycraft, of the Natural History Museum, South Kensing- 
ton, when they were exhibited at the Royal Society. The 
description given here is founded on observations made 
on the skull.when it was in England, the drawings being 
made from casts of the skull-fragments supplied to the 
Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. 


1 “ Preliminary Note on the Ancient Skull-remains from the Transvaal, 
by S. H. Haughton, Assistant Director of the South African Museum, 
with Notes appended on the Fragments of the Limb-bones by R. B. 
Thomson, and Fragments of Stone by L. Péringuey, Director of the South 
African Museum,” Trans. Roy. Soc. South Africa, 1917, vol. vi. p. I. 

2 Proc. Manchester Literary and Philosophical Soc., 23rd January 1917. 


366 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


Before passing in review the singularities of the Boskop 
man, it may be well to see if any light can be thrown on 
his antiquity. ‘The mineralised condition of the bones 
does not signify much ; they were impregnated with iron 
and silica from the stratum in which they were embedded. 
The few rudely worked stones from the site of burial may 
prove helpful. At first Dr Péringuey doubted if they 
had been shaped by man; later he thought they might 
be regarded as showing crude Mousterian workmanship. 
We cannot be far wrong in comparing the strata of Mr 
Botha’s field to the valley deposits described by Mr 
Neville Jones at Taungs. On the surface of the basal 
marl or conglomerate at ‘Taungs there was a thin stratum 
which contained Mousterian implements. ‘The Boskop 
skeleton lay.at a corresponding level above the stratum of 
“lateritic breccia,” the skull itself having been encased in 
a mass of this breccia. Provisionally the Boskop man may 
be assigned to the period of Mousterian culture in South 
Africa, which in all likelihood was much later in date 
than the corresponding culture in Europe. I! expect 
future discoveries to prove that the Boskop man was 
contemporary with late Paleolithic man in Europe. 


What kind of race or breed does the Boskop man ~ 


represent ? I shall give here my conclusions, stating 


my reasons briefly as I proceed with the description of — 


the remains. In the first place there can be no doubt 


he falls within the modern type—the type or species — 


(Homo sapiens) which embraces all living varieties or 
races of mankind. He is certainly not a separate or 
new species.!_ When I came to fitting the temporal bone 
to the calvaria (see fig. 130), and tracing the cranial like- 
nesses of the Boskop man, I found that the skulls of Bush- 
men and Hottentots gave me more help than skulls of other 
races. I have no doubt, as will be realised by the reader 
further on, that had there been skulls of Strandloopers 
at my disposal, I should have found them of even greater 

1 Dr Robert Broom regards the Boskop man as a new species which he 


has named Homo capensis (Anthrop. Papers, Amer. Mus, Nat. Hist., 1918, 


yol. xxiii, pt. i1.). 


LC  _ Oa 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 367 


assistance. [he conclusion I have reached is that the 
Boskop man should be regarded as an ancient member of 
the stock now represented in South Africa by Bushman 
and Hottentot. There are reasons which lead us to 
regard South Africa as the homeland—the evolutionary 









2. Temporal 






Digastric fossa 





Mastoid process 


Fic. 130.—The Boskop skull reconstructed and shown in profile. The 
sides of the skull, except the lower jaw, have been reversed to make 
the face look to the left and make this diagram comparable with 
others given in this work. The skull has been placed within the 
framework of lines which fits the skull of an average Englishman. 


cradle—of all members of the Boskop type. Further, we 
must look upon the negro type and the Boskop type as 
divergent branches which have arisen from a common 
stock. 

The most remarkable feature of the Boskop man is 
the size of that part of his skull which contains the brain. 
In fig. 130, the skull has been fitted into the frame of lines 
which serve to bound the skull of an average Englishman, 


368 THE PANTIOULT YaGORSViAN 


As regards length, the skull far exceeds that of the 
average Englishman. In place of being 190 mm. it is 
205mm.inlength. On the other hand, as regards height 
of vault, it just reaches the roo-mm. level (see fig. 130). 
The height of the vault above the ear-holes is 115 mm., 
the same distance as in the average English skull. As may 
be seen from fig. 128 (p. 359), the Bushman’s skull falls 
far short of the standard frame, both in length and 
height, but in proportion of height to length the Boskop 
skull agrees with the Bushman’s. The Boskop man 
had a very wide as well as a long head. In fig. 131, a 
vertex view of the skull is drawn and fitted within 
the standard frame which serves for ancient European 
skulls. ‘The Boskop specimen far exceeds the standard 
width, being 154 mm. The Bushman’s skull (fig. 131), 
although presenting a similar shape, falls far short of the 
standard width. If we apply to these dimensions of the 
skull—length, width, and height—the formula for deter- 
mining its brain capacity+ we find that the measure 
is large, 1630 c.c.—150 c.c. above that of the average 
Englishman. Direct measurement will probably show its 
capacity to be greater—about 1700 c.c. It is the irony 
of fate that the stock of the big-brained Boskop man 
should become extinct while his small-brained relative, 
the Bushman, should still survive. The average cranial 
capacity of the Bushman is only 1300 c.c., of the Hottentot 
1380 c.c., but in the extinct Strandloopers, Dr Shrubsall 
found several individuals with capacities well above 
1500 c.c. A big brain is only one factor in the survival 
of a race ; its significance we shall discuss later.? 

The width of the Boskop skull is 75 per cent. of its 
length, a proportion common in the skulls of Bushmen, 
Hottentots, and Strandloopers. The essential nature of 
the Boskop race was manifested in his forehead. We 
have already discussed the bending of the basi-cranial 
axis in the Bushman (p. 359) and the forward prominence 
of his upper forehead. Similar features are to be recog- 
nised in the Boskop skull and forehead. ‘There is also 

1 See p. 596. 2 See Chapters IV, XXXII, pp. 75, 606. 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 369 


another Bushman feature in the Boskop forehead. It is 
markedly drawn in or constricted across the narrowest 
part of the brow, between the frontal bosses above and 
the supra-orbital ridges below. Below this constriction 
the Bushman’s supra-orbital processes project promi- 
nently at his temples; the Boskop man had the same 
conformation of parts. At its narrowest his forehead 
measured 102 mm. (98 mm. is an average width in 
Englishmen) while its width at the supra-orbital processes 
was 114 mm. 

Another feature of the Boskop skull is its mastoid 
processes (fig. 130), which afford attachment to muscles 
which move the head. They are of a nipple shape, 
leaving exposed behind a wide area of the digastric 
fossa. In the skulls of Bushmen, Hottentots, and Strand- 
loopers we see approaches to this form. We also see 
in them, as in the Boskop skull, a deep groove, above and 
behind the ear, lying between a ridge for the temporal 
muscle above and another below, for giving attachment 
to muscles of the neck. All these points are mentioned 
to bring out the close relationship of the Boskop type 
to that of the Hottentot-Bushman stock. 

Fortunately we have a large fragment of the lower jaw 
to tell us something of the features of the Boskop face. 
In strength and markings this fragment presents a slight 
exaggeration of Bushman qualities. In shape and size 
the teeth and palate must have been in close agreement 
with those of the larger-sized Bushmen. But there 
would have been this difference. The Bushman’s skull 
is small; to attain adequate size of palate the upper jaw 
of the Bushman has to project well in front of the nasal 
opening; he has what is known as “subnasal prog- 
nathism ” (fig. 128). In the Boskop skull the forehead 
and upper part of the face project so far forwards as to 
cover, or come into line with, the projection of teeth and 
jaws. As represented in fig. 130, he must have been 
straight-faced (orthognathous) as are most Europeans. 
Dr Shrubsall observed that in many skulls of Strand- 
loopers there was a tendency to orthognathism. This 

VOL, I, 24 


370 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


character, like big-brainedness, we scarcely expected to 
meet with in the ancient inhabitants of South Africa. 
One other feature of the Boskop skull—one which I 
have come across only in the skulls of African negroes— 
deserves our attention. As may be seen from fig. 130, 
the parietal bone is very thick, measuring in its middle 
part—at the site of the parietal eminence—1I3 to 14 mm. 






























































































































































Fic. 131.—A. Vertex view of the Boskop skull. B. Corresponding view 
of a Bushman’s skull. Both are represented at right angles to 
the plane used in fig. 130. 


But although so thick in its central part, it tapers off to 


half this thickness towards its edges or sutures. It is 


really bun-shaped, the extra thickness of bone having 
been laid down on the more central parts of its outer 
surface. Hence it comes about that along the mid-line 
of the roof of the skull, between the bun-like eminences of 
the two parietals, there is a wide, well-marked groove or 
hollow. ‘This kind of thickening of the parietal bones is 
essentially of a pathological nature, for there is evidence 
which leads us to suppose that such changes are a result 


of wrong feeding during youth. A diet which is lacking 


ced 





ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 371 


in certain substances (vitamins) will produce such states. 
In any case, the negro race seems more susceptible to this 
form of cranial deformation than other races. The Boskop 
skull also shows a peculiar anomaly of the middle ear which 
will be noted more fully when we come to deal with 
Rhodesian man. 

As to the stature and strength of the Boskop man we 
have only fragments of the limb bones to guide us. These 
fragments proclaim most emphatically that he was not a 
pygmy or dwarf, such as the later Strandloopers were, 
but robust and at least as tall as the stronger Hottentots— 
5 feet 6 inches or thereabouts. 

In 1921, eight years after the discovery at Boskop, 
Mr F. W. Fitzsimons, Director of the Museum, Port 
Elizabeth, succeeded in throwing further light on the 
ancient natives of South Africa. About a hundred miles 
to the west of Port Elizabeth the cliffs of T’zitzikama 
(fig. 127) present a rugged face to the sea, providing just 
the caves and rock-shelters which served ancient man as 
dwelling-places. All along the coast are to be found the 
kitchen-middens of the Strandloopers. Some of these 
shell and refuse heaps are of immense size, one measuring 
600 feet in length, 120 feet in width, and 12 feet in depth. 
It was to this locality that Mr Fitzsimons came in 1921, 
bringing his son with him to aid in his archeological 
investigations. He selected for exploration a_ rock- 
sielter ugh up on the cliff face.’ ‘he results of his 
labours are epitomised in fig. 132. The first or uppermost 
stratum (A), 6 feet in depth, contained nothing of interest 
—it had accumulated after the rock-shelter had been 
abandoned as a dwelling-place. In the next stratum 
(B), some 7 feet in thickness, numerous Strandlooper 
burials were encountered amidst remains of fireplaces, 
broken pottery, implements and ornaments in stone and 
bone. Then came the third stratum (C), over 6 feet in 
thickness ; it was while removing this stratum and working 
at a depth of 15 feet below the original floor of the 

1 An account of these explorations, very fully illustrated, was published 
in the JdJustrated London News, 21st December 1921. 


372 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


shelter that Mr Fitzsimons came across graves containing 
remains which differed from those he had met with in the 
stratum above (B). Unfortunately the bones in the lower 
stratum were imperfectly preserved. The graves had 
been partly protected by slabs of stone, some of which 
had been rudely engraved with human figures. There 


were lumps of red ochre, necklaces of shell and bone; 


LEB GEL 
sort QZ 







N 
WN 











DEBRI/S 


FROM 


SHELTER 








a Z OZ GLY Z 
BELZ LAI ZB 
Spe ZZ g ee 










Fic, 132.—Diagram of the strata encountered by Mr F. W. Fitzsimons in 
the floor of the rock-shelter at T’zitzikama. (After a drawing by 
Mr Fitzsimons.) 


there were tools worked in stone andin bone. ‘Then, ina 
still deeper stratum (D), also about 6 feet in thickness, 
there were traces of burials and hearths, but the bones 
had almost mouldered away into dust. 

The human bones from the deeper stratum (C) were 
entrusted for investigation to the young and able Professor 
of Anatomy in the University of the Witwatersrand, — 
Johannesburg, Dr Raymond A. Dart, who has published 
a preliminary account of them.! A brief examination was - 


1 “ Boskop Remains from the South-east African Coast,” Nature, 1923, 
vol, cxii. p. 623. 





ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 373 


sufficient to convince him that the remains unearthed by 
Mr Fitzsimons in the deeper stratum at 'T’zitzikama were 
those of members of the Boskop race or breed. Yet 
T’zitzikama is over 500 miles distant from Boskop as the 
crow flies. ‘The Boskop type must have been spread 
over a wide area. 





Fic. 133.—The T’zitzikama skull in profile. (Drawn from a photograph 
of a reconstruction made by Professor Dart.) 


Altogether Mr Fitzsimons found the remains of twenty- 
three individuals in the strata of the rock-shelter, five of 
these being obtained from the deeper stratum (C). From 
the fragmentary remains found in the deeper stratum 
Professor Dart was able to reconstruct a skull which 
is represented in fig. 133. It is probably the skull of a 
woman and its dimensions are truly remarkable, exceeding 
even those of the original Boskop specimen. ‘The fore- 
head is seen to project 20 mm. beyond the standard 


374 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


frame—the total length of the skull, as estimated by 
Professor Dart, being 210mm. _ Its vault also rises a little 
above the standard frame (fig. 133), its height above the 
ear passages being 117 mm. Like the Bushman’s skull, 
the vault is low in comparison with its total width. ‘This 
skull also possesses in a very high degree a character which 
we have already noted in the skulls of Bushmen, namely, 
the bending of the basi-cranial axis and the forward 
projection of the upper part of the forehead (p. 359). 
Further, the mastoid process and the ridges and grooves 
above and behind the ear are modelled as in the Boskop 
skull. The width of the skull is 150 mm., being 71 per 
cent. of the length; it is long and relatively narrow in 
comparison with its length. ‘The femur, which is believed 
to belong to the same individual as the skull, is 461 mm. 
long; the T’zitzikama woman must have had a stature of 
§ feet 6 inches. Her lumbar curvature, as in the Bush- 
woman, was well marked. 

If we apply to the dimensions of this skull the formula? 
used for estimating the volume of the brain, we obtain 
a cranial capacity of 1600 cubic centimetres. Professor 
Dart was able to construct a model of the brain cavity, 
and this model had a volume of 1750 c.c. It is possible 


that the Lee-Pearson formula may underestimate the ~ 


capacity of large skulls. In any case, the Boskop people 
had brains, which, in point of volume, far exceeded the 
average given to modern Europeans. ‘The two sides of 
the brain were not alike; the frontal pole predominated 
on the right, the occiput on the left; such asymmetry 
indicates a high degree of specialisation in the development 
of the brain. Yet Professor Dart observed certain 
primitive features on the model of the brain cavity. 
As in the brains of primitive races, the insular lobe# 
was imperfectly covered, and the occipital lobe was 


marked by a sulcus lunatus, sometimes spoken of as the — 


simian fissure. 
Here, then, in South Africa, is being revealed an un- 
expected chapter in the history of mankind. From the 
1 See p. 596. a-See p, OFts 


\ 
Ee 


ANCIENT MAN IN SOUTH AFRICA 375 


evidence afforded by gravel deposits we see that this part 
of the world has been the home of man from remote 
times, how remote we cannot yet tell. Amongst its 
ancient inhabitants there has been a race which in volume 
of brain outrivals any people of Europe, ancient or modern, 
and yet this big-brained race has disappeared, while 
small-brained collateral descendants of the same stock 
have survived. Nay, these ancient Boskop people re- 
sembled Europeans, not only in volume of brain but in 
their straight-facedness (orthognathism) and in some 
other features. This may tempt us into supposing 
that they may have originated on the European side 
of the Sahara and wandered southwards, but two 
considerations will keep us from adopting such an 
hypothesis. ‘The first is the close structural affinity 
of the Boskop type to that of Hottentot and Bushman ; 
all three must be products of a common stock. ‘The 
second consideration is that the essential features of 
the African negro type—with which the Boskop type 
must be afhliated—have made their appearance—have 
been evolved or differentiated—in comparatively recent 
times. As we trace the ancestry of the African negro 
backwards in time we shall find him approaching the 
common ancestor from which his and the European 
type were evolved. Of living peoples the nearest 
approach to this ancestral type is represented by 
the aborigines of Australia. We must not be surprised, 
then, to find in South Africa during early times a race 
which is rather less negro and more European than the 
natives who now live in Africa south of the Sahara. 
There is one other matter which deserves the attention 
of the reader before this chapter is brought to an end. 
Between the rock-shelter at T’zitzikama and the caves 
at Grimaldi, there intervene the whole length of the 
continent of Africa and the width of the Mediterranean, 
and yet at both places we find ancient peoples leading 
lives which are almost identical. ‘They buried their 
dead in the floor of their dwelling-place, in the same 
contracted posture, in the same kind of grave, with 


376 THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN 


the same ceremonies, laying with the dead the same 
kind of ornament and tool. Yet they were peoples 
of diverse racial origin. At Grimaldi, cave life and 
Paleolithic culture came to an end at the close of the 
Pleistocene period, whereas in South Africa they have 
persisted into our own time. 







END OF VOL. I. 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY NEJLL AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH. 





="9, 


- 






Bs 77. SSS a AR he ee ae a 
= ; PU a* «tt 


.< 








ce : an Date Due | = , a 
Ye ‘ ee ee ee ee ee 4 





fe : | ine36°S9 
5 8 SORE 


PHILLIPS ACADEMY 


IIT EOWA 


3 1867 00012 2130 





o 


i 
i 
Mr
