The Discovery of Fossil Remains of Man in Java, Australia, and South Africa (Arthur Keith, 1921)
================================================================================================
Keith's 1921 Nature roundup — Wadjak, Talgai and Boskop man in one sweeping survey of the new fossil geography. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (paper-doi-10_1038_106603a0) — Nature, vol. 106, January 6, 1921.


The Discovery of Fossil Remains of Man in Java, Australia, and South Africa.

By Prof, A.


P ROF. EUGENE DUBOIS, the discoverer of
Pithecanthropus, has recently published 1 an
account of fossil remains of man found in a deposit
in Java, which he regards as of Pleistocene age.
In 1890, the year before he made his first find of
the remains of Pithecanthropus at Trinil, Prof.
Dubois was led to search for traces of ancient
man in the district of Wadjak, which lies some
sixty miles to the south-east of the site where
his more famous discovery was made. His atten¬
tion had been directed to the Wadjak district by
the discovery there of a fossilised human skull in
1889. Further excavations of the terrace-like
deposit in which the first skull had been found
placed Prof. Dubois in possession of fragments of

1 “ De Prota-Australische fossiele Mensch van Wadjak (Java),” Kon.
Akad. van Wetensch. te Amsterdam A/dueling) May 29, 1920.

NO. 2671, VOL. 106]


Keith, F.R.S.

the jaws and cranium of a second individual, which
were in the same state of mineralisation as the
skull which first came to light.

Prof. Dubois has only now published a full
account of these discoveries, made thirty years
ago. He finds that the remains unearthed at
Wadjak indicate that java was at one time in¬
habited by a people very like the blacks of Aus¬
tralia, but in some respects even more primitive
than they- The publication of an account of a
fossil human skull found at Talgai, Queensland,
by Dr. Stewart A. Smith 2 in 1918 has appar¬
ently induced Prof. Dubois to reinvestigate the
fossil remains from Wadjak, and to compare them
with the ancient Talgai skull. Thus for the first
time it is possible for anthropologists to compare

2 Phil. Trans., 191P, ser. B, vol. ccviii.. p. 35T


©1921 Nature Publishing Group


604


NATURE


[January 6, 1921


the ancient inhabitants of java and Queensland.
The discovery in 1913 of fossilised human remains
at Boskop, in the Potchefstroom district of the
Transvaal, throws a welcome light on the ancient
inhabitants of South Africa, and gives the means
of comparing the early inhabitants of remote con¬
tinents. An account of the Boskop find was con¬
tributed to Nature for August 5, 1915, voi. xcv.,
p, 615, by Mr. F. W. FitzSimons, of Port Eliza¬
beth Museum, and a detailed description of the
remains has since been published by Mr. S. H.
Haughton. 3 In none of these discoveries,
in Java, in Queensland, or in South Africa, has it
been possible to give a definite geological age
to the deposits in which the human remains oc¬
curred, yet in each case a Pleistocene date has
been assigned to the remains by their deseribers—
an inference which is justified, not only by their
condition and surroundings, but also by the primi¬
tive structural features which are stamped on them.

The more complete fossil skull described by
Prof. Dubois is that of a woman showing features
which characterise Australoid races, save that the
dimensions of the skull are excessive. The length
of this ancient woman’s skull is 200 mm. and its
width 145 mm., measurements which are rarely
met with even in the most robust Australian male
aborigines. Prof. Dubois, allowing for the great
thickness of the cranial wall—io mm. on the
vault—estimates that its cranial capacity or brain
space was 1550 c.c.—more than 200 c.c. above
that of the average modern P-nglishwoman. The
jaws of the second individual found are much
larger and more robustly framed than those of
the woman, and are inferred by Prof. Dubois to
represent the opposite sex. The upper jaw and
palate of this ancient man of Java are such as
have never been seen before in either ancient or
modern man. In anthropoid apes the molar teeth
are set in two approximately parallel rows on
each side of the palate; this arrangement is more
exactly preserved in the extinct natives of Tas¬
mania, and to a less degree in the native tribes
of Australia, than amongst any other existing race
of mankind. But in the Java or Wadjak skulls,
although Australoid in all their cranial and facial
features, the teeth are set on the palate in a horse¬
shoe form, much as is the case in the Pleistocene
European —Homo neanderthalensis. The teeth,
however, show none of the dental characteristics of
that race. The width of the palatal area of the
Wadjak fossil man, measured between the outer
borders of the second molar teeth, is 81 mm.,
7 mm. more than has yet been observed in any
human palate. The length of the palate—
measured from the crowns of the incisors to a line
joining the hinder borders of the last molar teeth
—must have been well above 60 mm.—a measure¬
ment occasionally exceeded in the palates of
modern Australian natives. The palatal area, en¬
closed within the outer border of the dental arch,
is enormous, being, according to Prof. Dubois’
estimate, 41-4 sq. cm., to which some 4 sq. cm.

3 Trans. Roy. Soc. South Africa, 1917, vol. vi., p. 1.

NO. 2671, VOL. I06]


must be added on account of-the missing incisor
crowns. The corresponding area of the average
modern Englishman is 26 sq. cm. ; the largest
measurement in living native races is 36-7 sq. cm.
These figures give some indication of the remark¬
able jaw and face development of the fossil Wad¬
jak race.

The Talgai skull from Queensland, described
by Dr. S. A. Smith, of Sydney University, is that
of a lad of about fifteen or sixteen years of age.
Its cranial walls had been severely crushed by
earth-pressure, but fortunately the palate and face
are in good condition—a most fortunate circum¬
stance, for it becomes more and more evident that
we must trust to facial rather than to cranial
features for the recognition and discrimination of
human races. So far as the cranial features and
dimensions of the Talgai lad are preserved, they
show Australoid characteristics—the cranial
capacity being certainly above that of Australian
aboriginal youths of the present day. Here,
again, the outstanding character of the fossil type
is to be found in the palate, which has been very
fully investigated and described by Dr. S. A.
Smith. In the form of its dental arcade the
Talgai skull possesses the most anthropoid palate
yet discovered. Very probably, were the palate
of Piltdown man to be found, it would show' these
anthropoid features to an even greater degree.
The two canine teeth in the Talgai boy are set
very widely apart, almost as widely as the molar
teeth. The width of the palatal area is 66-5 mm.;
allowing for the unerupted wisdom teeth, its
length amounts to about 70 mm. ; the total area,
although less than on the Javanese fossil Austra¬
loid skull, is still very large, amounting to about
40 sq. cm.

Thus we have evidence which seems to
justify us in supposing that at a certain period
of the Pleistocene age men fashioned in a primi¬
tive Australoid mould, with large brains and mas¬
sive palates, lived in Java and Australia; but so
far as the palate is concerned the fossil stock of
Java had differentiated in one direction, the Aus¬
tralian in another. It is amongst the extinct race,
which inhabited Tasmania down to modern times,
that we find the nearest approach to the anthro-
poidal palate and the massive teeth of the Talgai
boy. On a consideration of all his features we
must place the Talgai boy in the ancestral stock
of the Tasmanian type of Australoids. Dr. S, A.
Smith cites the discovery of the fossil bones of the
dingo in Australian deposits of Pleistocene date
as evidence of the early arrival of man in the
continent of Australia, for it is difficult to believe
that the native dog arrived save in the company
of man. The discoveries made at Talgai, in
Queensland, and at Wadjak, in Java, lend
strong support to this early arrival of man in
Australia. Whether the Talgai lad represents
the first invaders, and whether these early comers
were the primitive ancestors of the aborigines of
Tasmania, are doubts which must be settled by
future discoveries.


©1921 Nature Publishing Group


January 6, 1921]


NATURE


605


In strange contrast to these ancient inhabitants
of Java and Queensland is the ancient type of
South Africa represented by the Boskop man.
The characters ot his skull are so peculiar that
we must regard him as a separate and hitherto
unknown type. As to his facial characters we
know little; his eyebrow ridges and forehead
show certain features which give grounds for the
belief that the face was flattened—much as in
living representatives of the Hottentot and Bush¬
man stocks. From the fragmentary lower jaw
one infers that the teeth and palate were of very
moderate dimensions—not much larger, if any,
than in modern Europeans. The dimensions of the
cranial cavity, on the other hand, are enormous :
the length of the cranium is 205 mm. ; its width
154 mm. ; and its capacity or brain space is
estimated by Mr. Haughton to be 1832 c.c.—about
350 c.c. above the average for Englishmen. The
vault of the skull is thick and flat, two great parietal
bosses of bone rising up on each side of its median
suture and marking the sites of the parietal emin¬
ences. There are also peculiar features in the


region of the mastoid process behind the ear and
in the zygomatic-temporal region in front of it.
The only fossil skull which shows any marked
degree of resemblance to the Boskop specimen is
the Olmo skull found in a Pleistocene deposit
in the north of Italy in 1863. It, too, is a very
wide and long skull, with flat roof and projecting
upper forehead, but showing none of the peculiar
features of the Boskop skull. Mr. Haughton has
rightly recognised that certain traits which are
found in the Hottentot and Bushman skulls, as
well as in the Boskop cranium, can best be ex¬
plained by supposing the Boskop man to
stand in the Pleistocene ancestry of those puzzling
Mongolian negroids of South Africa—the Hotten¬
tots and Bushmen. Further, on the strength of
the evidence referred to in the foregoing,
we find, at a remote period in South Africa
and in Australia, primitive representatives of
the native races now occupying these coun¬
tries ; differentiation from the primitive to
the modern type seems to have taken place
in situ in each case.
