Ancient Types of Man (Arthur Keith, 1911)
=========================================
Keith's 1911 popular survey of fossil man — the book that taught a generation the Piltdown-to-Neanderthal story, with his famous Gibraltar reconstruction. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (ancienttypesofma00keit)


^^'rh^t


M


1  -  \  \


THE  LIBRARY

OF

THE  UNIVERSITY

OF  CALIFORNIA

LOS  ANGELES


Digitized  by  tlie  Internet  Arcliive

in  2008  witli  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/ancienttypesofmaOOkeit


Harper's  Library  of  Living  Thought


\


Reconstruction  of  the  Head  of  the  Gil^raltar  Man.
(One-third  natural  size. )


ANCIENT  •
TYPES  OF  MAN


ARTHUR   KEITH

M.L).,  LL.D.  Abekdekx


HARPER  S
BROTHERS

LONDONXNEWYORK


ANCIENT
TYPES  OE   MAN


BY

ARTHUR    KEEEH

ISI.D.,  LL.D.  Aberdeen

CONSEKVATOR    OF    MUSEUM    AND    HUNTERIAX    PKOFESSOK,

ROYAL  COLLEGE   OF   SURGEONS,    ENGLAND  ;

AUTHOR   OF    "human    EMBRYOLOGY    AND   MORPHOLOGY";

"introduction   to   the  study  of    ANTHROPOID  APES  "  ;

ETC.


HARi'ER     or    BROTHERS

LONDON    AND   NEW  YORK

45    ALBEMARLE    STTnEET,    W.

1911


Puhlislicd  Deieiiibcf  igii


INTRODUCTORY'

IN  this  little  book  the  author  has  tried  to  give
the  chief  conclusions  he  has  reached  after  a
prolonged  study  of  the  remains  of  ancient  man.
The  reader  will  find  that  the  scale  of  time  which
answers  so  well  for  present-day  affairs  will  scarcely
serve  him  when  he  comes  to  place  ancient  man  in
his  })roper  perspective  in  the  past.  Instead  of
reckoning  from  a  date  which  is  dear  to  a  large
part  of  the  world,  viz.  the  Birth  of  Christ,  he
must  begin  at  tlie  ])resent  time  and  count  steadih"
backwards  into  the  past.  The  Metallic  period  is
the  first,  one  in  which  men  have  used  copper,  bronze,
and  iron — a  period  which  we  suppose  to  extend
about  4000  years  back.  The  metallic  period  was
{^receded  hy  one  in  which  Europeans  used  finely
worked  stones  as  implements,  and  hence  it  is
usually  named  the  Neolithic  Period.  It  is  a
long  period,  probably  six  times  as  long  as  the
metallic  ;  it  may  be  fixed  provisionally  at  25,000
3'ears,  but  it  was  verv  probablv  much  longer  than
"that.

Beyond  the  Neolitliic  Period  we  enter  the
Late  Paleolithic  Period — one  which  extended
from  the  Neohthic  Period  to  the  end  of  the  Ice


1264781


INTRODUCTORY


Age  ;  the  length  of  this  period  is  estimated
provisionally  at  about  150,000  years.  On  entering
the  Late  Paleolithic  Period  the  stone  implements
used  by  Europeans  are  seen  to  be  of  a  more
massive  and  rather  rougher  type  of  workmanship.
Animals  were  then  living  in  Central  and  South
Europe  which  have  disappeared — the  reindeer
and  the  mammoth.  The  period  just  named  falls
within  the  latter  part  of  the  geologists'  Pleistocene
Period.

The  Late  Paleolithic  Period  was  preceded  by  the
Early  Paleolithic  Period,  one  of  very  great  but
uncertain  length.  It  hes  within  the  glacial  period,
which  was  broken  by  at  least  three  temperate
intervals.  The  Early  Paleolithic  Period  probably
covers  the  last  two  of  these  intervals.  Its  duration
is  variously  estimated  from  200,000  to  400,000
years.  At  the  beginning  of  this  period  the  dominant
race  of  Europe  was  the  Neanderthal  type  of  man  ;
at  its  close  Europeans  were  of  the  modern  type.

Beyond  the  Early  Paleolithic  Age  is  another
stone  period — the  Eolithic,  one  in  which  man  used
crudely  fashioned  flints  to  serve  his  various  needs.
This  period  is  assigned  provisionally  to  the  first
of  the  interglacial  periods,  and  carries  us  back
to  the  beginning  of  the  Pleistocene  Period.  To  the
Eolithic  Period  a  duration  of  100,000  to  150,000
years  is  assigned.

The  EoHthic  and  Paleolithic  Periods  of  the
Anthropologist  correspond  roughly  to  the  Pleisto-


INTRODUCTORY


cene  of  the  Geologist.  The  duration  of  the
Pleistocene  is  estimated  here  at  from  450,000  to
700,000  years,  but  it  is  right  to  state  that  a  much
higher  figure  is  given  by  most  authorities.  The
reader  will  see  that  the  estimates  are  little  better
than  guesses,  but  it  is  only  by  making  such  rough
calculations  that  we  may  hope  to  obtain  the  facts
on  which  a  more  certain  estimate  may  be  built.

Beyond  the  Pleistocene  we  enter  the  Pliocene
Period  of  the  earth's  History.  Whether  or  not
we  have  found  the  remains  of  Pliocene  man  is  a
question  still  open  to  debate,  but  the  reader  will
find  the  problem  discussed  in  the  chapter  which
deals  with  the  Fossil  Man  of  Java.

All  the  illustrations  are  drawn  from  actual
specimens  by  a  method  employed  by  the  author,
who  is  indebted  to  Mr.  William  Finerty  for
accurately  reproducing  the  original  drawings  in  a
more  finished  form.

A.  Keith.

Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  England.
Sfptentbcr,    igii.


CONTENTS


CHAPTEl;  PAGE

I.     An    Ancient    English    Type    from

Essex  .  .  .         .         i

II.     The  Tilbury  Man         .  .         .10

III.  The  Dartford  Type     .  .         .        22

IV.  The     Galley      Hill      Man.       The

Oldest      Human       Re.mains      yet
FOUND  in  England      .  .         .       28

V.     The    Men    of    Brunn    and    Comp.e-

Capelle         .  .  .         .       46

VI.     The    Grimaldi    or    Negroid    Type

IN    I'^UROPE     .  .  .  .        59

VII.     An    Ancient    Race  of   Tall    Men  :

The  Cro-Magnon         .  .         .       64

VIII.     The  Round-Headed  Type         .         .       74

IX.     Heidelberg  Man  .  .         .       78

X.     Krapina  Men  .  .         .       94


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  PAGE

XI.  Neanderthal  Man    .     .    .  loi

XII.  Neanderthal  Man  in  Belgium  and

France    .       .      .    .  109

XIII.  (iir.RALTAR  Man  .  .         .121

XIV.  Fossil    Man    of    Java— Pithecan-

thropus Erectus         .  .         -131

XV.     Ancient  Types  of  America     .         .     141


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS

Reconstruction ofthelleadoftheGibraltar  Man /'>£';//'/j-/'?>C6'


PAGK


FIGUKE

1.  Diagrammatic   Section  of  Coast  Line,  showing   ex-

posure of   prehistoric    surface,   with   position   of

the  skeleton      .  ■  ■  •         2

2.  Profile  of  the  Skull  of  the  Essex  Woman,  with  soft

parts  indicated.      (One-third  natural  size. )  .  .  5

3.  Section  of  the  strata  at  Tilbury  .  .11

4.  Profile  of  the  cranium  of  the  Tilbury  Man.      .One-

third  natural  size. )  .  •  .  .        18

5.  Diagrammatic   section  across  the  Thames  Valley  to

show  the  terraces  and  buried  river  bed        .  .        23

6.  Profile  of  the  Dartford  cranium  compared  with   the

"river-bed"  type  found  in  Langwith  Cave.    (One-
third  natural  size. )  .  ■         ■       ~5

7.  Profile  of  the  skull  of  the  Galley  Hill  Man  .       36

8.  Galley  Hill  skull— full  face.    (One-third  natural  size. )       38

9.  The   profile  of  the   Briinn    and   Galley    Hill    skulls.

(One-third  natural  size. )  .  .  .  .        48

10.  Section  of  the  strata  in   which   the  ancient   human

remains  were  found  at  Combe-Capelle         .  S-

11.  Profile  of  the  skull  of  the  Combe-Capelle  Man  com-

pared with  the  profile  of  the  Galley  Hill  Man.
(One  third  natural  size. )  .  ■  ■        55


LIST  OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

FIGURE  PAGE

12.  The  site  of  the  discovery  of  the  Cro-Magmm  Race.

The  foreground  represents  a  section.  A  —  Lime-
stone Cliff.  B — Ledge  overhanging  the  Ancient
Shelter.  C — Debris  fallen  from  the  cliff  in  which
the  remains  were  found.  D — Alluvium.  (After
Quatrefages. )    .  .  .  .  .        65

13.  Profile  of  a  Cro-Magnon   skull  with   the  outline   of

the  Dartford  cranium  traced  on  it.  (One-third
natural  size. )     .  .  .  .  .       68

14.  Face  view  of  the   Cro-Magnon    Race.     (One-third

natural  size.)     .  .  ...        70

15.  A    diagram   of  the  strata   of  the    pit    in    which    the

Heidelberg  mandible  was  found.     A  cross  marks

the  spot.     (After  Schoetensack.)     .  .         .       So

16.  Profile  drawing  of  the  Heidelberg  mandible  (in  out-

line) contrasted  with  the  lower  jaw  of  a  Modern
European  (shaded).      (Half  natural  size).    .  .        82

17.  Profile    of  the    Heidelberg    mandible  (outline)   con-

trasted with  that  of  the  mandible  of  a  chimpan-
zee (shaded).      (Half  natural  size. ) .  .  .        84

18.  Heidelberg  mandible  with  attempted  reconstruction

of  the  head.     (One-third  natural  size. )        .         .       ?9

19.  Profiles  of  the  Heidelberg  (outline)  and  .Spy  (shaded)

mandibles  superimposed  for  comparison.  (Half
natural  size.)         .  .  .  .  .        91

20.  Outline  of  Neanderthal  form  of  skull  (shadetl)  com-

pared with  the  Galley  Hill  typs  (outline).  (One-
third  natural  size.)  .  .  .  .      103

21.  Thigh   bone  of   Neanderthal   (outline)  and    modern

man  (shaded)  contrasted.    (One-fifth  natural  size. )     106

22.  Section   of    the    strata    in   wdiich    the    skeleton    was

found  at  Ferrassie  .  .  .  .114


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

FIGURE  lAGE

23.  Section  of  a  talus  or  terrace  at  (Gibraltar  of  similar

formation  to  the  one  in  which  the  famous  skull

was  found.     (H.  D.  Acland. )  .  .  .      123

24.  Profile  of  the  Gibraltar  cranium  (shaded)  compared

with  modern  English  skull  (outline).     (One-third
natural  size.)     .  .  .  .  .      126

25.  Face    view    of    the     Gibraltar    skull.       (One-third

natural  size. )     .  .  .  .  .      128

26.  Profile  of  Gibraltar  skull.      (One-third  natural  size. )     129

27.  Section  of  the  bank  of  the  Bengawan,  showing  the

position   of  the  fossil-bearing  stratum  in   which

the  remains  of  the  fossil  man  were  fnmd    .  .      132

28.  The  profile  of  the  calvaria  of  the  fossil  man  of  Java

(shaded)  compared  with  the  Gibraltar  cranium
(outline).     (One-third  natural  size. )  .  .     135

2y.  A  tracing  of  the  profile  of  the  La  Tigra  cranium
(outline)  compared  with  the  profile  of  the  skull  of
the  Arkansas  loess  man  (shaded).  (One-third
natural  size.)     .  .  ...      I45


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   MAN


CHAPTER    I

AN  ANCIENT    ENGLISH   TYPE   FROM
ESSEX


AS  I  sit  down  to  write  the  story  of  the  various
forms  which  the  body  of  man  has  assumed  in
ancient  times,  I  find  it  difficult  to  determine
whether  I  should  begin  at  tlie  beginning,  or  at  the
end.  Were  the  story  now  complete,  there  \\ouId
be  no  difficulty  ;  it  should  be  told  from  the
beginning.  Some  day,  no  doubt,  it  will  be  told
thus,  but  at  present  the  known  phases  of  man's
early  history  are  so  few,  so  fragmentary  and  so
isolated,  that  a  survey  of  the  later  and  better
known  phases  is  needed  to  place  the  earlier  stages
in  their  proper  perspective.  For  that  reason,  I
propose  to  reverse  the  usual  order,  and  trace  man's
physical  history  from  the  present  into  the  far  past.
The  individual  selected  as  the  first  type  is  one
discovered  in  _iQio.  on  the  ^r^Qcf  nf  F^-^p.v  near
\VVItnn-nri-Na 7b  some  fiftv  miles  north  of  the
estuarv  of   the  Thames.     The  sea  there  washes


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

against  a  flat  coast-line,  cutting  into  and  exposing
on  tlie  beach  reniains  of  a  buried  or  prehistorjc
flooii,  contaimng_rnjji3^^^  Over  this

prehistoric  floor  is  a  stratum — -_8_tQ_jD_ijeet_Jji
depth — of  clay.     The  prehistoric  floor,  now  being


1^     PKtSENT
HB"-      of

'.      OLD
■       FACE

■Hm      BEACH

'.    BEACH

Fig.    I.     Uiagiammatic  Section  of  Coast  Line,  showing  ex-
posure of  prehistoric  surface,  with  position  of  the  skeleton.


exposed  by  the  tide,  has  been  closely  studied  by
Mr.  Hazzeldine  Warren.  It  was  at  one  time  dry
land,  on  which  men  lived  and  worked.  The
number  of  years  which  has  passed  since  then
may  be  roughly  guessed.  Flints  of  the  finished
o^J;^^olithic_ty2e,  certain  forms  of  pottery,  and


AN   ENGLISH   TYPE   FROM   ESSEX

also  traces  of  the  loimdations_ofjiwenm  and  of
lieartS^^l^ found,  from  which  we  infer  that  this
f^oor  must  be  assigned  to  the  encloLtheJvreqHthic,
or  commencejTient  of  the  Bj-onze  Age.  In  round
numbers,  about^^oo  years  a^o.  We  infer,  then,
that  the  east  coast  of  Essex  has_j3een  _slQidy
sinking,  the  prehistoric  surf  ace  _  being  partly  sub-
merged_by_the_sea,  and  partly Jounedbeneatji.  a
deep  layer  of  rain-washed  clay,  which  has  been
deposited  over  it,  thus  preserving  for  us  the  traces

of    a    bygone     civilization.       Beneath t]iis_pre-

historicjicior  Mr.  Warren  has_  found  traces  of  an
older  civilization.

On  a  September  afternoon  of  1910  Mr.  Hazzel-
dine  Warren  and  his  companion,  Mr. filler  Giristy,
were  searching  the  beach  for  washed-out  flints,
when  they  found  that  the  tide  had  exposed — 2  feet
below  the  prehistoric  floor  and  12  feet  below  the
surface  of  the  original  coast-line — the  Jeg^jof^a
human  sj^eleton.  Setting  to  work,  they  quickly
exposed  a  coniplet^iuman  skeleton,  lying  on  its
left  side,  with  the  Jace  tQ,ihe  east  and  tlie_head
to  the  north.  It  was  in  the  "contracted  po^tjire,"
the  limbs  having  been  bound  closely  to  the  body
by  grass  ropes,  remnants  of  which  were  found.
Inside  the  ribs  was  fomid  a  hmp — nearly  a  pint —
oT~Ti-uif3eeds  of  the  blackberry  ^ncTjIog^I^se.
That  discovery  throws  fight  on  thejiature_ol:the
djet  and  the  season  oi  the  year  when  death  over-
took this  individual.    Clearly,  too,  it  was,  a  burial,


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

not  the  chance  interment  which  overtakes  those
who  find  a  last  bed  in  the  sea  or  tlie  river.  Nor
could  it  have  been  a  burial  made  in  recent  times,
for  until  the  other  day  the  grave  lay  twelve  feet
below  the  surface.  Tlie  graveju:as_aLJeast  as  olxl,
and_j)erliaps__older,  than  the  prehistoric  floor.
The  skeleton  was  permeated  by  the  fine  clay  and
sand  in  which  it  lay,  and  so  wonderfully  pre-
served that  a  very  complete  picture  can  be  formed
of  the  person  in  life.  We  have  here  a  specimen  of  a
Late  Neolitliic  Rriton .

It  seems  almost  ridiculous  to  have  to  admit  that
there  was  at  first  some  difficulty  in  determining  the
sex  of  the  individual  thus  discovered.  In  life
even  an  infant  can  tell  a  man  from  a  woman,
but  when  there  is  only  the  skeleton,  tlie  most  ex-
pert anatomist  sometimes  feels  a  difficulty.  As
a  rule  the  pelvis,  because  it  is  so  closely  connected
with  the  functions  of  child-bearing,  provides
the  most  certain  grounds.  In  the  present  case,
the  evidence  of  the  pelvis  was  equivocal  ;  its
cliaracters  were  more  those  of  a  man  than  of  a
woman,  yet  when  its  breadth  was  compared  with
that  of  the  chest,  a  marked  female  character  was
recognized  :  it  was  decidedly  wider  Jlian  the  chest,
whereas  in  man  the  chest  is  usualty  wider  than  the
lower,  or  pelvic,  part  of  the  body.  The  muscular
attachments  to  the  base  of  the  skull  showed  the
delicate  tapering  neck  of  the  woman  ;  the  skull
itself  was  in  all  its  features  feminine.    The  bones


AN   ENGLISH   TYPE   FROM    ESSEX


Fig.  2.      Profile  of  the  Skull  of  the  Essex  VVoiiian,  with
soft  parts  indicated.      (One-third  natural  size.)


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

were  delicately  moulded,  the  lace  was  of  the
narrow  oval  type  so  much  admired  in  modern
times  ;  the  nose  was  narrow  and  finely  moulded.
The  handstand _£eet  were  small,  the  bones  of  the
liiTibs  slender  and  rather  short,  as  compart
to  the  length  of  t lie  body.  The  skeleton  is  clearly
that  of  a  woman,  with  the  lower  part  of  the  body
rather  contracted  and  straight — not  an  uncommon
type.

Although  5  ft.  4  in.  in^height,  rather  above  the
modern  average,  her  slenderness  must  have  made
her  appear  tall.  At  the  time  of  death  she  was
about  twenty^fiyej^ears_o^_age,  for  there  was  evi-
dence that  the  growth  lines  of  her  long  bones  had
recently  closed,  and  all  the  sutures  of  the  skull
were  open  and  tlie  bones^thiii.  Her  lieaxTwaswell
moulded  and  ])oised  and  comiiaratively  small.  Tlie
ca\ity  for  the  brain  measured  1260  cubic  centi-
metres, which,  although  quite  as  large  as  many
modern  women  of  her  build,  is^'et  40  cc.  below  the
modern  female_average.

With  her  relatively  small,  well-poised  head
and  regular  features,  this  woman,  were  she  to
appear  in  a  nrodern  assembly,  would  still  ])ass
as  a  good  representative  of  her  sex  and  race.  Four
thousand  years  seem  to  have  worked  compara-
tively little  change  in  the  best  type  of  British
woman.  In  head-form  she  might  represent  the
students  now  attending  the  Women's  School  of
Medicine,  London.     Mr.  F.  G.  Parsons  measured


AN   ENGLISH   TYPE   FROM   ESSEX

tit't}'  of  these  and  found  the  average  length  of
head  to  be  17.5  mm. — one  mm.  less_than  in  tiie
ancient  Essex  woman  ;  the  greatest  width  of
head  was  the  same  in  both,  viz.  137  mm.  ;  the
height  of  the  head  above  the  ear-holes  was  almost
the  same,  viz.  117  mm.  in  the  modern  women
students  of  medicine  and  116  mm.  in  the  Neolithic
woman.  Thus,  not  only  the  absolute  dimensions,
but  the  relative  proportions  are  almost  the  same,
the  width  of  the  head  being  about  78^_per  cent
of  the  length  in  both.  They  occupy  a  position
intermediate  to  the  long  and  narrow  heads
(dolichocephalic),  which  we  shall  meet  with  in
very  ancient  times  in  Britain,  and  the  extremely
short  and  wide  (brachycephalic)  heads  found  in
Central  Europe  now.

If  time  has  altered  but  little  the  general  type  of
English  woman  since  Neolithic  times,  it  has
affected  some  of  her  features.  In  the  Essex  woman,
not  on^_of__thg__lhirtV2two_teeth — the  zoologist
names  them  permanent  teeth — was  lost  by  disease
or  accident.  The  teeth  were  regularly  placed
and  the"palate  was_well  formed,  whereas  to-day
in  more  than  fift}'  per  cent  of  women,  the  palate
is  apt  to  be  contracted  in  width  and  the  teeth
irregularly  placed.  We  blame  our  food  and  our
modern  conditions  of  life  lor  these  defects,  but
while  we  blame  them,  we  do  not  quite  understand
how  tliev  produce  these  effects  on  the  palate,
and   nose,   and  teeth.     We   can  see   very  plainly


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF    MAN

that  the  act  of  mastication  has  altered.  In  the
great  majority  of  modern  British  people,  the  lower
incisor  teeth  pass  up  behind  the  crowns  of  the
upper,  when  the  jaw  is  closed  in  chewing  ;  in  the
Essex  woman,  as  in  the  majority  of  Neolithic
people  and  as  in  modern  native  races,  the^  incisor
teeth  meet  edge  t^edge.  Our  modern  teeth  are
used  merely  for  crushing  food,  very  little  side  to
side  grinding  movem.ent  taking  place  ;  indeed,
as  the  lower  incisors  pass  behind  the  upper  they
become  locked,  and  little  side  to  side  movement  is
possible.  The  edge  to  edge  bite  in  Neolithic
man  allowed  the  most  free  side  to  side  grinding
movement.  This  movement,  combined  with  the
roughness  or  grittiness  of  the  food  led  to  the  crowns
of  the  teeth  being  worn  down  in  a  manner  not
seen  in  modern  British  teeth.  In  Neohthic  man
the  hard  surface  enamel  was  worn  off  the  crowns,
thus  exposing  the  dentine  which  forms  the  main
body  of  the  tooth.  The  sensitive  pulp  was  rarely
exposed  in  the  teeth  of  Neolithic  man,  because  the
dentine  reacted  to  the  grinding  movement  and
filled  the  pulp  cavity.  Although  only  about
twenty-five  years  of  age,  the  teeth  of  the  Essex
woman  show  the  deirtine  alrea^^reeIy_exposed
on  their  grinding  '  surfaces.  The  well-developed
jaws7and  various  markings  on  the  skull,  point  to
large-sized  muscles  of  mastication.  The  seeds  of
wild  fruits  indicate  the  nature  of  the  diet  ;  we
know,  too,  that  the  Neohthic  people  had  their
8


AN    ENGLISH    TYPE   FROM    ESSEX

con>patches,  their  querns  for  ^rindiiiR,  their  flocks
and  their  looms.  In  every  sense  of  the  term  they
were  a  civihzed  people.  Their  fare,  if  rough,  was
evidently  suited  to  a  healthy  development  of  the
teeth,  mouth,  throat,  and  nose.  The  retrograde
changes  in  the  teeth,  palate,  and  nose  are  the  most
remarkable,  and,  from  a  medical  point  of  view,
the  most  important  evohitionary  changes  seen
in  the  body  of  man  in  recent  times.

One  other  feature  of  the  Essex  woman  deserves
a  brief  mention.  The  bones _of_her  right  arm
show  a  higli  degreejof^pecialization  ;  she  was  not
onT}'  right-handed,  but  the  contour  of  the  shoulder
joint,  the  muscular  impressions  of  the  humerus,
and  the  shape  of  the  forearm  bones  show
clearly  that  she  was_engaged  j^n  smue  occupatj^on
which  required  the  constant  repetition  of  a  set  of
riglit^^^m^  movements.  Whether  these  were
connected  with  the  loom  or  the  ^uer^i  it  is  im-
possible to  sa}'  ;  whetlier  a  lady  of  high  degree,  or
merely  a  handmaiden,  she  had  her  daily  round  of
specialized  toil.


CHAPTER    II
THE  TILBURY   MAN

LEAVING  the  east  coast  of  Essex,  I  propose
_j  to  conduct  the  reader  to  the  valley  of  the
Thames,  and  introduce  a  man  who  lived  there
many  thousands  of  years  before  the  Essex  \\'oman
was  born.  This  indi\'idual  came  to  light  under
the  following  circumstances.  About  half-way
between  London  and  the  sea  there  is  a  stretch  of
flat  marshy  land  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Thames,
where  now  the  Tilbury  Docks  are  situated.  In
1883,  when  they  were  excavated,  a  great  bed  of
stratified  sand  was  reached  at  a  depth  of  31  feet
below  the  marsh  surface.  In  the  upper  layer  of
the  sand-stratum  were  found  pieces  of  deca\'ed  and
blackened  wood  and  other  objects  which  showed
that  at  a  remote  period  the  sand  bed  had  formed
the  exposed  shore  or  bank  of  the  Thames.  About
3  feet  below  this  ancient  surface,  and  34  feet
below  the  present  marsh  le\'cl,  was  found  the
fragmentary  skeleton  of  a  man.  From  the  fact
that  the  whole  skeleton  was  represented,  and  that
it  was  found  below  an  old  surface,  we  may  pre-
sume, as  in  the  last  case,  that  there  had  been  a


THE   TILBURY   MAN


burial,  Init  no  observation  was  made  on  the
position  of  parts  nor  were  any  traces  of  man's
handiworlx;  found.  Whether  his  implements  were
of  the  rough  and  xevy  ancient  Paleolithic  form,  or


VATE.R     G-yyf?


BALI-AST    "^SC/^X


^''&-  3-      Section  of  the  strata  at  Tilljur)-.


of  the  more  recent  and  liner  Neolithic  tyj^e,  we
do  not  know  ;  nor  are  we  certain  of  the  animals
that  then  inhabited  the  Thames  \^allev  ;  but  from
evidence  to  be  produced  the  Tilbury  man  ma\'
be  provisionally  assigned  to  the  Ix'ginning  of  tlie
Neolithic  period.


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF    MAN

It  is  impossible  to  frame  in  years  any  accurate
estimate  of  the  period  that  has  elapsed  since  the
Tilbury  man  was  alive,  but  at  lea^t  a  period  of
30,000  years  seems jiecessary  to~account  for  the
great  changes  which  have  occurred  in  the  lower
Thames  Valley  since  he  was  buried  in  a  stratum
which  now  lies  34  feet  below  the  surface  of  the
land.  We  have  seen  that  a  prehistoric  stratum  on
the  east  coast  of  Essex,  which  is  estimated  to  be
4000  years  old,  has  been  submerged  and  buried
beneath  a  layer  of  clay  varying  from  8  to  10  feet
in  thickness.  If  the  Thames  Valley  had  been  sub-
merged at  the  same  rate — 2  feet  in  a  thousand
years — then  the  Tilbury  prehistoric  stratum
would  have  an  antiquity  of  only  15,000  years.
There  are  reasons  for  supposing  the  submergence
in  the  Thames  Valley,  with  a  corresponding
formation  of  land  over  the  sinking  surface,  to  have
occurred  at  a  much  slower  rate.  No  e\ddence  has
been  found  of  any  appreciable  change  in  the  le\'el
or  contour  of  the  banks  of  the  lower  Thames
during  the  last  2000  years.  Since  the  Roman  in-
vasion of  England  there  seems  to  have  been  little
or  no  subsidence  in  this  region,  yet  it  is  possible
that  changes  have  taken  place  more  rapidly  in
remote  periods  ;  but  there  is  no  positive  evidence
that  bears  out  this  supposition.  The  nature  of  the
strata  which  have  been  found  over  the  prehistoric
surface  at  Tilbury  indicates  that  the  land  changes
have  taken  place  very  gradually.      Immediatel}'


THE   TILBURY   MAN


over  the  buried  surface  hayej2een  formed  15  fe_et
of  alternate  Jayers^pea^t  ancLmu-d,  strata  which
indicate  a  Tow  rate  of  subsidence.  (Fig.  3.)  Over
the  n-iiid-ppat  Inyprs  are  strata  of  mud  and  clay  16
feet  in  thickness.  A  subsidence  of  31  feet,  with  the
foi-mation  of  strata  of  peat,  mud,  and  clay,  implies
an  enormous  cliange  in  physical  characters  of  the
lower  valley  of  the  Thames.  When  fuller  and
more  accurate  c^'idence  as  to  the  rate  of  depression
has  been  accumulated,  it  will  probably  be  found
that  on  an  average  a  jubsidenre  of_a  foot  for  eveiy
i^ooL_yeai:s-is_-a^i^uglij:ath£iiJiiafl^a-Jo\^^
At  least  it  will  be  apparent,  when  we  come  to
examine  the  characters  of  the  skeleton  discovered
at  Tilbury  beneath  31  feet  of  strata,  that  whether
the  period  be  15,000  or  30,000  of  years,  the  plwsi-
cal  characters  of  the  Thames  Valley  have  changed
infinitely  more  than  those  of  its  inhabitants.

It  is  a  fortunate  circumstance  that  the  dis-
coverv  of  the  Tilbury  remains  was  made  at  a  time
when  the  questions  relating  to  man's  antiquity
were  being  chscussed  and  the  importance  of  such
finds  as  historical  documents  realized.  The  re-
mains were  examined  by  the  veteran  zoologist,
Sir  Richard  Owen,  then  approaching  his  eightieth
3'ear,  who  published  a  description  of  them.  They
are  now  preserved  in  the  British  Natural  Histor}^
Museum,  South  Kensington,  where  \'isitors  may
examine  to-day  the  broken  skull  cap,  the  lower
jaw,    the    fragmentary    bones   of    the    limbs    and


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

body  and  turn  aside  from  them,  I  fear,  little
realizing  their  significance.  Their  importance  lies
in  this,  that  these  broken  human  bones,  when
carefully  examined  and  compared  with  modern
specimens,  as  I  have  had  lately  the  privilege  of
doing,  show  us  that  a  type  of  man,  similar  in
stature  and  formation.. still  exists  in  Britain.  He
has  remained  unchanged  during  the  thousands
of  years  that  have  elapsed  since  the  Tilbury
man  walked  on  a  surface  which  l:es  30  feet
and  more  below  that  on  which  the  Roman
soldiers  marched.  In  Owen's  time  those  scientists
who  had  come,  under  Darwin's  influence,  to
believe  in  the  evolution  of  man,  expected  to  find
in  an  individual  so  ancient  as  the  Tilbury  man
some  distinct  trace  of  his  Simian  origin.  That  was
because  there  was  then  in  human  tliought  an
erroneous  idea_o^he  antiquitv  of  man's  oriaii  ;
his  aTitiquity  was  then  measured  by  a  few  thousand
years.

So  far  as  the  physical  appearance  of  the  Tilbury
man  is  concerned,  he  might  be  one  of  us  ;  he
belongs  in  all  his  featiu'es  to  the  modern  type.  It
would  mean  little  to  the  reader  were  I  to  com-
pare him  to  the  average  Briton  of  to-da\-.  We
British,  like  every  nation  under  the  sun,  are  a
diverse  people,  showing  great  variation  in  our
stature  and  proportion  of  limbs,  in  our  form  of
head  and  face,  and  in  our  general  mental  dis-
position.   It  seems  better,  for  the  purpose  of  com-

14


THE   TILBURY   MAN


parison,  to  take  an  indi\icliial — and  the  one  I
select  is  a  notorious  Englishman  of  the  eighteenth
century,  who,  after  a  life  of  crime,  was  hanged,
and  had  his  skeleton  handed  down  to  posterity  in
the  celebrated  ]\Iuseum  of  the  Royal  College  of
Surgeons,  England,  to  tlie  great  benefit  of  many
generations  of  medical  students.  This  Jonathan
Wilde  has  a  thigh  bone  447  mm.  long  and  a  stature
of  1632  mm.  (5  ft.  4"2  in.)  nearly  4  inches  below
the  average  stature.  The  length  of_the_Tllbuiy
man's  thigh  hope  i^jijrnn^t  the  ^ame  as  tliat  of
Jonathan  Wilde,  his  leg  bone,  or  tibia,  is  slightly
longer,  so  we  may  infer  that  his  stature  was  also
ap}W32dmat£ly_the_saiiie.  The  bones  of  the  upper
limb  of  the  Tilbury  man  are  fragmentary,  so  that
their  precise  length  cannot  be  determined  ;  but
in  thickness  and  apparently  in  lengtli  they  agree
closely  with  those  of  his  ill-starred  countryman.
There  is  one  feature,  however,  in  which  they  differ,
and  that  is  in  the  shape  of  the  tibia,  or  shin-bone.
In  the  Tilbury  man  the  shaft  of  the  tibia  is  flattened
from_side  to  side,  almost  like  a  razor,  so  that  the
width  is  only  55  per  cent  of  tlie  front  to  back
diameter;  in  Jonathan  \Mlde,  as  in  nearly  all  modern
Europeans,  it  is  prismatic  in  section,  the  width
being  62  per  cent  of  its  front  to  back  thickness.
In  spite  of  much  research,  it  must  be  owned  that  we
do  not  rightly  understand  the  meaning  of  flattening
of  the  tibia  ;  its  disappearance  in  modern  races
is  somehow  connected  with  posture  and  gait.     All

15


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

we  do  know  for  certain  is  that  it  is  not  an  ape-like
feature,  and  that  it  was  a  character  found  in  all
races  of  the  Neolithic  or  later  stone  period  of  cul-
ture, not  only  in  England,  but  in  Europe  generally.
It  occurred  also  in  the  prehistoric  tribes  of  the
United  States.  It  may  be  added  that  of  the  two
individuals  compared  here,  Jonathan  Wilde's
bones  are  rather  the  thicker,  and  stouter,  shoeing
marks  of  a  fuller  muscular  development.

In  shape  and  size  of  head,  too,  there  is  a  close
agreement  between  the  ancient  and  modern  in-
dividuals compared  here,  so  close  that  we  cannot
doubt  they  are  of  the  same  race.  In  both,  the
head  js  of  moderate_size  ;  they  would  have  taken
a]  6i  fitting  in  h_ats.  The  greatest  length  of  the
head  in  the  Tilbury  man  is  i86  mm.,  its  greatest
width  I4imrn.,its  height,  estimated  from  the  prob-
able position  of  the  ear  passage,  about  115  mm. ;  the
corresponding  measurements  in  Jonathan  Wilde
are  185,  134,  112  mm.,  the  latter  having  a  rather
narrower  and  lower  head.  The  capacity  of  the
cranial  chamber  in  Jonathan  Wilde  is  1425  cubic
centimetres,  in  the  Tilbury  man  it  was  probabh-
considerably  more — about  i=ioc>_cc.,  some\\hat
above  the  average  ca^^city-  of  the  Englishrnan  of
to-day.  If  we  take  into  count,  as  we  ought  to  in
estimating  the  size  of  the  brain,  the  stature  and
bulk  of  bod}^  then  we  must  admit  that  the  size
of  brain  in  the  Tilbury  man  is  relatively  greater
than  in  the  average  man  of  to-da}-.  If  we  seek  to
16


THE   TILBURY   MAN

express  the  shape  of  head  by  stating  the  i)iopor-
tion  of  breadth  to  that  of  length,  then  the  cephajic
or  breadth  index  of  the  Tilbury  man  is  7=;'8.  that  ~7S
of  Jonathan  Wilde,  72-4 — the  head  of  the  latter
being  distinctly  narrower  or  more  dolichocephaUc.
How  closely  the  Tilbury  man  agrees  in  size  and
shape  of  head  with  modern  Englishmen  may  be
seen  from  recent  researches  of  Mr.  F.  G.  Parsons.
In  a  collection  of  crania  belonging  to  men  who
lived  near  RothwelLNorthamptonshire.  about  the
time  of  the  Reformation,  Mr.  Parsons  foimd  the
average  dimensions  to  be  much .  tlie_same_asjji
the  Tilburvman.  In  the  Rothwell  men  the
average  length  of  tlie  skull  is  the  same  as  in  the
Tilburv,  viz.  1S6  mm.  ;  the  average  breadth  was
almost  the  same,  142  mm.,  so  that  the  cephalic
index  is  also  the  same.  Historians  have  led  us
to  believe  that  in  comparatively  recent  centuries
invasions  of  Jutes,  of  Saxons,  and  of  Danes  com-
pletelv  replaced  the  ancient  Britons.  Here,  then,
is  an  important  fact  that  very  many  thousands
of  3'ears  before  written  history  begins,  and  far
bevond  our  most  enduring  traditions,  there
existed  in  the  valley  of  the  Thames,  when  the  river
flowed  in  a  channel  more  than  30  feet  below  its
present  level,  a  man  who,  in  stature  and  in  head
form,  is  plentifulh-  represented  amongst  English-
me^n  of  to-day.

Although  all  the  parts  of  the  face  between  the
forehead  and  the  mouth  of  the  Tilbury  man  have
c  17


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

decayed  and  are  thus  lost  to  us,  enough  of  the
mandible  was  found  to  assure  us  that  in  propor-


T  I  LBURY


Fit


Profile  of  the  cranium  nf  the  Tilbury  Man.
(One  third  natural  size.)


tions  and  in  type  his  face  was  \'ery  similar  to  that
of  Jonathan  \\'ilde.  Beyond  the  circumstances
under  whicli  the  skeleton  was  found  there  is  no
evidence  in  its  sliape  and  characters  of  its  great


THE   TILBURY   MAN


antiquity.  The  chin  is  pronounced  ;  the  markings
on  it  for  the  muscles  of  the  tongue  and  mou.th.
muscles  closehi-Concerned  in  speedi.  show  that
these  parts  were  used  in  the  same  manner  as  to-
dav.  ^^'e  cannot  say  what  his  language  may  have
been,  but  we  can  be  certain  he  spoke.  We  know,
too,  he  was  not  a  young  man  ;  the  degree  to  wliich
the  bones  of  the  skull  have  fused  together  shows
that  hejiad  long  passed  the  meridian  of  life.  His
skeleton  shows  no_traces  of  djseage,  or  of  rheumatic
changes.  One  point  rather  surprises  us  ;  in
nearly  all  the  specimens  of  very  ancient  man  that
have  been  discovered,  the  teeth,  although  worn
with  age  to  the  sockets,  are  rarely  lost,  or  show
signs  of  disease.  Here,  however,  all  the  back  teeth
have  been  lost  during  life.  Tlie  three  front  teeth
preserved — an  iiicisor,  a^canine,  and  a  j^reiiiolar —
are  all  much  \\  qrn  and  their  pulp  cavities  filled  up
by  a  reaction  caused  b\'  hard  use.  As  regards  size
and  shape  tliey_dq_not  differ  fromjiiodern  teeth,
nor  do  the  dimensions  of  the  palate  suggest  a
development  of  jaws  or  of  dentition  in  any  wav
different  from  Britons  of  the  Neolithic  Period.

To  what  race  of  mankind  did  the  Tilbury  man
belong  ?  He  is  abundantly  represented  in  the
population  of  modern  England.  To  what  race,
when  we  see  this  type  of  man  in  the  flesh  to-da\^
do  we  assign  him  ?  He  and  his  successors  are
ancient  British,  if  you  will,  but  it  is  better  to
follow  the  example  of  the  sharp-sighted  Huxley

19


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF    MAN

and  speak  of  a  type  rather  than  of  a  race.  In
1862,  twenty-one  years  be^fOTetlie_Ti]imiy_man
was  discovered,  Huxley  had  recognized  and
described_a  form  of  .prehistoric,  skull  found  in
England  under  the  name  of  tlie  "  river-bed  "
type.  The  Tilbury  cranium  is  of  the  river-bed
type.  The  actual  specimens  described  by  Huxley
are  still  in  tlie  Museum  of  the  Royal  College  of
Surgeons,  England  ;  ojie_js_Jrom_an_j2ld_j3ed_of
the  Rivej-_  Trent,  near  Muskham ;  another  Js
from  a  Dolmen  in  Anglesey.  Lately  another  of
this  Type^vas  discovered  by  the  Rev.  E.  H.
JNIuUins  in  the  floor  of  a  ca\"e^in  Derbyshire,  with
bones  of  the  reindeer,  and  other  animals  long
extinct  in  England.  Indeed,  this  specimen  of  the
river-bed  t^'pe  from  the  Langwith  ca\^e  deserves
fullei  mention,  for  that  able  scientist,  Mr.  Martin
A.  C.  Hinton,  regards  the  fauna  found  with  this
skull  as  of  tlie  Pleistocene  ^  Period,  and  therefore
much  older  than  the  Tilbury  specimen.  Another
of  the  same  type,  also  in  the  Museum  of  the  Royal
College  of  Surgeons,  was  found  beneath  a  layej-^of
peat  and  15  feet  ofblue_clay  when  a  raihvay_cuiting
wa.s  made  in  Gloucester.  The  skull  found  beneath
the  limestone  deposit  of  Gough's  cave  at  Cheddar,
Somerset,  is  also  of  the  river-bed___h^pe.  All  of
these  are  usually  assignee!  to  the  Neolithic  Period,

^  Pleistocene,  the  geological  period  preceding  the  present
one.  The  strata  formed  during  that  period  are  characterized
by  containing  many  extinct  species  of  mammals.


THE   TILBURY   MAN


and  represent  the  prevailing  type  of  Englishman
at  the  commencement  of  that  period  and  i)robabl\'
also  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Paleolithic  Period.
The  skulls  mentioned  may  represent  British  men
and  women  living  thousands  of  years  apart.  They
clearly  belong  to  the  same  race,  which,  for  lack
of  a  better  we  may  name  the  "  river-bed  race."
It  is  the  prevailing  type  in  England  to-da\',  and
from  the  scanty  evidence  at  our  disposal  we  may
presume  that  it  has  been  the  dominant  form  many
thousands  of  3'ears.  Reniaijis  of  the  same  race
have  also  been  found  at  Schweizersbild  in  Switzer-
land. These  remains  of  a  Neolithic  people  have
been  described  recently  by  Dr.  Franz  Schwertz.
All  trace  of  this  race  has  disappeared  in  Switzer-
land, whereas  in  England,  in  sjnte  of  in\"asion  of
Saxon,  Jute,  Dane,  and  Norman,  it  still  thrives
abundantly.  Further  research  will  probal)l\'
show  that  this  race  was  at  one  time  ^\■idely  dis-
tributed throughout  Europe,  where  it  appears
towards  the  close  of  the  Glacial  Period.

References. — Sir  Richard  Owen  :  Antiquity  of
Man  as  deduced  from  the  discovery  0/  a  human
skeleton  dnring  excavations  of  the  East  and  West
India  Docks  at  Tilbury,  London,  1884.

Samuel  Laing  and  Thomas  H.  Huxle\-  :
Prehistoric  Remains  oj  Caithness.  London,
1866.


CHAPTER    III
THE   DARTFORD   TYPE

WE  now  return  to  the  lower  Thames  Valley
to  follow  the  history  of  man  still  further
into  the  past.  The  Thames  itself  is  to  be  our
clock — one  which  has  never  ceased  to  mark  time
and  record  history  on  its  banks  and  valley.  We
have  seen  how  its  banks  at  Tilbury  have  sub-
sided more  than  30  feet  since  the  "  river-bed  "
man  was  buried  there,  and  how  strata  of  peat,  mud,
and  clay  were  laid  down  as  the  land  gradually  sank.
It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  banks  of  the  river  had
been  sinking  many  thousands  of  years  before  the
Tilbury  man  came  on  the  scene.  Beneath  him
are  more  than  30  feet  of  strata- — of  sand  and
gravel  laid  down  by  the  river  when  the  valley  was
still  sinking.  Tliere_are  tlius^o  feet  of  recently
deposited  strata  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames  at
Tilbury'  (Fig.  3,  p.  11).  If,  as  a  provisional  esti-
mate subsidence  is  regarded  as  having  taken  place
at  the  rat_e_QLpneJopt  per  thousand  years,  then
the  60  feet  of  dt'posit  at  Tilbury  represents  a  period
of  60, 000  years.  During  that  period  we  have
every  reason  to  believe  man  lived  in  the  valley


THE   DARTFORD   TYPE


of  the  Thames.  Tliiit  implements  of  a  pecuhar
type  are  fomid  in  the  deep  "  ballast  gravels  ".of
the  Thames  bed,  but  so  far  no  trace  of  human
remains  have  been  foimd  in  the  deeper  strata.

The  strata  just  mentioned  were  laid  do\\n  when
the  land  was  subsiding  and  the  river  was  filling
up  its  bed  and  valley  with  new  deposits.     Before


'

^^

c^^;^

'so%Yp^^^^^^

--^

•iT'TZ

>*!!?!5~^"         Chalk

-;

.   ...:rzz  ■     •

Fig.  5.      Diagrammatic  section  across  the  Thames  Valley  to
show  the  terraces  and  buried  river  bed.


this  period  of  subsidence  of  the  land  there  must
have  been  one  of  elevation — one  in  which  the  river
eroded  its  valley.

At  various  levels  on  the  sides  of  the  present
Thames  Valley  are  found  terraces  of  gravel  laid
down  by  the  ri\'er  at  various  stages  of  its  histor\'.
These  are  roughly  grouped  into  first."  second.
tliird,  and  foujtli  terraces.  The  fom-tli  terrace  is
10  to  25  feet  above  the  present  level  of  the  river,


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

and  70  to  90  feet  above  the  deepest  bed.  Tlie
terrace  was  laid  down  as  a  deposit  in  the  river  bed
when  the  Thames  occupied  much  the  same
cliannel  as  now,  but  when  the  vaHey  was  10  to  25
teet  below  its  present  level  as  regards  the  sea.  No
remains  of  the  human  body  have  been  disco\'ered
in  this  terrace,  but  man's  handiwork  in  the  shape
of  flint  implements  have  been  found,  and  they  are
said  to  mark  the  transition  from  the  ancient  to  the
new  forms — from  Paleoliths  to  Neoliths.  Remains
of  the  bison  and  the  reindeer  are  also  found  in  this
bed.  For  the  purposes  of  our  present  enquir}-,
however,  this  terrace  is  barren.  Man  was  there  ;
his  form  we  do  not  kno\\'  for  certain,  but  we  have
reasons  to  suspect  he  was  of  the  "  river-bed  "  tvpe,
for  the  Langwith  skull  is  probably  older  than  this
terrace.

In  the  third  terrace,  40  to  60  feet  above  the
presenHeyel  of  the  river,  no  remains  of  man,  other
than  his  stone  implements,  have  been  found,  \\'ith
one  possible  exception — the  Dartford  skull.  The
town  of  Dartford  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the
Darenth,  about  two  miles  above  the  point  where
that  stream  joins  the  Thames.  It  is  on  the  south
side  of  the  Thames  Valley  and  seven  miles  above
Tilbury.  On  the  western  side  of  the  Darenth
\'allc\',  about  a  mile  above  Dartford,  there  is  a  bed
of  j^ravel,  about  18  feet  deep,  corresponding  in
leypl_to_the__thir_d  jOozioot)  terrace  of  the  Thames
Valley.     In  that  bed  Mr.  W.  M.  Newton,  of  Dart-


THE    DARTFORD   TYPE


ford,  opened  a  pit  in  tlie  gravel  to  carr\-  out  a
systematic  search  for  traces  of  man.  Palfiolitlik
implciiientsjA-ere  found  and  also  a  hunian  cranium.
Unfortunateh'  the  skull  was  not  seen  in  situ  ;   it


DARTFORD


Fig.  6.      Profile  of  the  Darlford  cranium  compareii  with  the
"  river-bed  "  type  found  in  Langwith  Cave.     (One-third  natural

size.)

was  found  in  a^jall__which  took_j3la££-irQm_yie
worked  face  of  the  pit.  The  surface  from  which
the  fall  took  place,  both  before  and  afterwards,
showed  no  trace  of  a  disturbance  of  stratification
such  as  would  be  caused  by  a  burial.    Mr.  Newton


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

estimated  that  its  position  must  have  been  6  to  8
fee^below  the  surface  of  the  gravel.  No  other
human  remains  were  found.

It  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  the  geological
evidence  in  this  case  is  insufficient  to  assign  to  the
skull  the  same  age  as  to  the  gravel  deposit.
Yet  there  are  certain  features  in  the  skull  which
indicate  for  it  a  great  antiquity.  It  resembles  those
of  the  Paleolithic  race  first  found  at  Cro-Magnon  in
the  south-west ^f  France  so  closely  that  a  relation-
ship to  that  race  cannot  be  doubted.  I  \\ill  leave
the  discussion  of  the  nature  of  this  remarkable
specimen  until  I  come  to  deal  with  the  Cro-Magnon
race.  This,  however,  may  be  said  now,  that  in
strength,  in  stature,  in  physique  as  well  as  in  size
of  brain  the  Cro-Magnon  race  represents  one  of
the  most  stal\\'art  human  races  ever  evolved.  The
discovery  of  such  a  race  at  so  eai-ly  a  date  as  the
deposition  of  the  third  (6o-foot)  terrace  in  the
Thames  Valle}'  is  in  direct  opposition  to  all  \\e
anticipated.  We  expected  to  find  evolution  work-
ing in  an  orderly  manner,  passing  ste])  by  step
from  a  Simian  to  a  modern  type  of  man.  The  Cro-
Magnon  was  a  high  type,  yet  it  appears  to  have
lived  in  the  Thames  Valley  when  the  6o-foot
terrace  was  formed.  The  fauna  of  the  valley
embraced  many  animals  which  are  now  extinct  in
England.  In  tlie_6o-foot  terrace  occur  remains  of
three_sp£cies  of  rhiiioceros,  two_of_elephant,  with
bones  of  the  lion  and  of  the  reindeer.  So  ancient
26


THE   DARTFORD   TYPE


is  the  fauna  tliat  tlie  inclination  is  strong  to  deny
the  possibility  of  so  high  a  type  of  man  as  the  Dart-
ford  existing  tlien.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  that
the  succession  of  human  races  is  disorderly,  and
that  the  race  wiiich  survives  is  not  necessarily  the
one  with  the  big  body  or  with  the  big  brain,  nor
even  that  in  which  there  is  a  combination  of
sucii  characters.


Z^-  //-  C^


27


CHAPTER    IV

THE    GALLEY    HILL    MAN.     THE    OLDEST

HUMAN    REMAINS   YET    FOUND

IN    ENGLAND

1EA\TNG  the  luurtli  and  third  terraces,  one
.^  ascends  to  the  still  older  river  bed,  the
second  terrace,  in  which  the  earliest  known
inhabitant  of  England  was  found.  Galley  Hill,
the  scattered  township  near  which  the  remains
were  found,  is  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the
river  about  midway  between  Dartford  and
Gravesend,  which  is  directly  opposite  to  Tilbury.
Galley  Hill  stands  out  upon  a  chalk  bluff  which
rises  from  the  fiat  strip  of  marsh  and  meadow-land
forming  the  south  bank  of  the  river.  Some  con-
ception of  the  great  period  of  time  which  has
elapsed  since  the  second  terrace  was  laid  down,
and  the  Galley  Hill  man  embedded  and  preserved
in  it,  may  be  formed  by  trying  to  realize  the  con-
dition of  the  valley  when  the  terrace  was  deposited.
The  valley  was  then  level  from  the  loo-foot
terrace  on  the  south  side  to  the  lOO-foot  terrace
on  the  north  side.  The  distance  from  one  terrace  to
the  other  varies  from  six  to  twelve  miles.  Further,
28


THE    GALLEY   HILL    MAN

we  must  imagine  the  south-eastern  jiart  of  England
submerged  until  the  third  or  loo-foot  terrace
has  reached  the  present  level  of  the  river  banks.
Beginning  at  this  point,  conceive  the  land  rising
at  an  imperceptibly  slow  rate,  the  river  wearing
down  its  bed  and  banks  and  eroding  its  wide
valley  as  elevation  occurred.  That  part  of  the
Thames  \'alley  whicli  lies  below  the  loo-foot
level  has  been  gradually  washed  away  by  the
river  since  the  upper  terrace  was  formed.  The
fact  that  traces  of  the  river  bed  are  still  to  be
seen  on  both  sides  of  the  valley,  so  far  as  ten  miles
apart,  shows  how  greatly  the  ri\-er  must  have
meandered  from  side  to  side  and  how  slo^\■  the
process  of  erosion  mmst  have  been.

As  already  mentioned.  Tilbury  and  Galley  Hill
are  not  far  apart.  The  Galley  Hill  remains  were
found  in  the  third  terrace  on  the  south  side  of  the
ri\-er  ;  the  Tilbury  remains  were  found  34  feet
below  the  surface  of  the  Marsh  lands  of  the  north
bank,  form  miles  further  down  the  river.  From
the  time  the  Galley  Hill  man  lived  until  the  age  of
his  Tilliury  successor  the  Thames  liad  done  more
tlian  merely  wear  its  \'alley  down  124  feet — the
difference  in  level  between  the  strata  in  which  these
remains  were  found.  It  had  eroded  and  deposited
an  additional  60  feet  at  least.  If  we  suppose  the
Thames  to  have  worked  on  an  average  at  the  rate
of  a  foot  per  thousand  years — \\-hicli  is  more
than  we  have "  reason  to  think  it  could  do — we
29


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

must  allow  a  period  of  about  180,000  years
between  the  dates  of  those  two  ancient  inhabitants.
In  brief,  we  estimate  the  period  of  the  Galley  Hill
man  to  be  about  200,000  years  distant.  The  re-
mains of  animals  found  in  the  gravel  of  the  loo-foot
terrace  bear  out  this  estimate  of  antiquity.  Bones
of  the  mammoth,  of  the  woolty  rhinoceros  and  of
the  reindeer  are  found,  animals  which  we  associate
with  a  cold  climate.  The  remains  of  the  straight-
tusked  elephant  {E.  antiqims) ,  of  the  hippopotamus,
and  of  the  lion  also  occur,  and  these  we  regard
as  animals  of  a  warmer  climate.  Most  important
of  all,  flint  implements  shaped  by  man,  of  excellent
workmanship,  are  also  found  plentifully.  We  know
that  man  was  present  in  the  Thames  Valley  tlien,
and  now  we  must  see  what  kind  of  man  he  was.

In  the  story  of  the  discovery  of  the  Galley  Hill
man,  Mr.  Robert  Elliott,  a  printer  from  necessity,
an  archaeologist  by  inclination,  })lays  a  leading
part.  On  a  day  towards  the  end  of  September,
1888,  he  and  his  son  Richard  set  out  on  a  customary
visit  to  the  various  gravel  pits  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Galley  Hill,  in  the  hope  of  adding  to  a  growing
archaeological  collection.  At  Galley  Hill,  as
along  both  banks  of  the  lower  Thames,  commerce
had  come  to  the  assistance  of  the  antiquarian.
Cement  works  were  eating  into  the  face  of  the  chalk
ridge  at  Galley  Hill.  The  loo-foot  terrace — the
old  river  bed — lay  over  the  chalk,  and  had  to  be
removed  before  the  cement-makers  could  excavate


THE   GALLEY   HILL   MAN

the  chalk.  On  the  day  of  Mr.  Elhott's  visit  the
men  working  in  the  gravel  pit  between  the  high-
road and  the  face  of  the  chalk  ridge  which  slopes
down  to  the  marshes,  and  immediately  to  the  west
of  the  Schoolhouse,  had  exposed  a  human  skeleton.
The  skull  was  already  removed  ;  the  schoolmaster,
Mr.  Matthew  Hayes,  had  seen  it  in  the  morning
when  it  lay  in  place  in  the  face  of  the  sand-bank,
some  eight  feet  from  the  surface  and  two  feet  al:)ove
the  underlying  chalk.  Mr.  Elliott  examined  the
place  ;  the  stratification  of  the  overlying  sand  and
gra^'el  was  undisturbed  ;  the  various  laj'ers  were
just  as  they  had  been  laid  down  ;  a  burial  would
have  disturbed  them.  Besides,  the  depth  was  too
great  for  a  recent  burial.  On  setting  to  work  Mr.
Elliott  was  able  to  recover  other  bones  of  the
skeleton  from  the  same  loamy  layer — one  e^'identl^•
laid  down  in  a  pool  of  the  old  river  bottom.  The
remains  found  are  sufficient  to  provide  a  fairly
complete  picture  of  one  of  the  race  which  pre-
sumably fashioned  the  flint  implements  found  in
the  loo-foot  terrace.  So  soft  and  fragile  were  the
bones  when  found  that  they  had  to  be  set  in  tlie
sun  to  dry,  and  unfortunately  in  the  drying  the
skull  warped.  The  bones  were  found  in  1888,
but  it  was  not  till  1896  that  a  full  and  excellent
description  of  them  was  published  by  ^Ir.  E.  T.
Newton,  f.r.s.  Later  this  rehc  of  ancient  man
passed  into  the  collection  of  Mr.  Frank  Corner.
To  that  gentleman  my  thanks  are  due  for  placing

31


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

the  skeleton  freely  at  my  disposal,  and  for  the
opportunity  of  making  a  more  minute  investigation
than  had  been  made  previously.  The  first  im-
pression on  examining  the  remains  of  this  earliest
known  inhabitant  of  England  is  one  of  surprise,
almost  of  disappointment  ;  in  all  his  features,  with
a  few  exceptions,  he  is  so  modern  in  build  that
we  might  meet  him  on  the  streets  of  London  to-day
and  pass  him  by  unnoted.  He  was  a  man  of  rather
low  stature,  about  5  ft.  3  or  4  in.  (1600  mm.),
as  may  be  judged  from  his  thigh  bones,  which  are
just  over  420  mm.  long,  the  right  rather  longer
than  the  left.  The  thigh  bones  are  somewhat
peculiar  in  shape  ;  as  in  the  Tilburj^  man  and
Neolithic  races  generally,  the  upper  part  of  the
shaft  is  flattened  from  back  to  front  and  the  neck
of  the  bone  is  long.  Another  peculiar  feature  is
the  wide  separation  of  the  two  condyles  at  the
lower  end  of  the  femur.  No  doubt  these  features
indicate  a  peculiarity  in  the  posture  and  gait,
but  in  spite  of  much  research  we  have  not  3'et
discovered  what  these  peculiarities  are.  All  we
are  certain  of  is  that  we  occasionahy  see  amongst
modern  people  the  same  type  of  thigh  bone,
and  that  such  men  walk  in  the  upright  posture
just  as  easily  as  those  with  rounded  thigh  bones.
Nor  were  the  proportions  of  his  limbs  peculiar.
In  a  modern  man  of  5  ft.  4  in.  we  expect  the
thigh  bone  to  be  about  425  mm.  ;  in  the  Galley
Hill  man  it  is  a  little  over  420  ;    the  tibia  or  leg


THE   GALLEY   HILL    MAN

bone  in  a  modern  man  of  this  stature  is  250  mm.  ;
in  the  Galley  Hill  man  the  tibia  is  broken,  but  its
original  length  may  be  estimated  at  325  mm. — an
inch  shorter  than  we  usually  see  in  modern  men
of  this  stature.  The  humerus  is  also  broken,  but
its  length,  judging  from  the  upper  two-thirds
which  are  preserved,  was  about  310  mm. — about
half  an  inch  longer  than  is  usual  nowadays  in
men  of  his  stature.  Thus,  as  amongst  the  Lapps,
the  leg  bones  were  short  and  the  arms  rather  long,
but  these  may  be  only  features  of  the  individual
and  not  of  the  race.  We  see  thus  that  at  an  early
stage  of  the  erosion  of  the  Tliames  Valley  man's
posture,  gait,  and  proportions  were  already
completely  evolved.  The  modifications  since  then
concern  only  bodily  details.

Another  remarkable  feature  of  this  inhabitant
of  Ancient  Britain  deserves  mention.  The  greater
part  of  the  right  collar-bone  (clavicle)  is  preserved.
The  bone  evidently  was  rather  a  short  one  (130  mm.),
but  on  it  is  an  impression  which  shows  that  the
chief  driving  muscle  of  the  arm — the  pectoralis
major — was  mightily  developed.  The  impression
for  its  insertion  to  the  upper  end  of  the  humerus  is
also  pronounced.  The  great  pectoral  muscle,
which  crosses  outwards  in  front  of  the  armpit,
was  evidently  trained  to  its  full  capacity.  Such
acts  as  tln-usting  a  spear  from  the  shoulder,
or  hurling  a  javelin,  would  entail  a  great  pectoral
development.     The  short  clavicles   indicate    that


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   MAN

he  was  rather  a  narrow-shouldered  man,  and  frag-
ments of  three  ribs  show  us  that  his  cliest  was
rounded  and  strong,  for  the  ribs  are  stouter  than
those  of  modern  men  of  his  stature.

It  is  in  the  head  that  we  must  seek  for  characters
to  fix  the  position  of  the  Gahey  Hill  man  in  the
racial  scale  of  humanity.  With  the  assistance  of
Mr.  F.  0.  Barlow,  I  was  able  to  obtain  a  cast  of
the  cranial  cavit}'  which  shows  very  clearly  the
superficial  features  of  the  brain.  The  arrangement
and  form  of  the  convolutions  and  fissures  show
the  same  features  as  the  brain  of  modern  man.
The  parts  we  connect  with  speech,  with  sight,  ^^'ith
motion  are  all  there.  In  shape  it  is  peculiar  ;  it  is
very  long  and  narrow.  These  are  not  Simian
characters,  nor  have  we  any  reason  to  believe
that  a  short  and  wide  brain  is  better  than  a  long
and  narrow  one.  The  thousands  of  flint  imple-
ments found  embedded  in  the  same  stratum
of  the  loo-foot  terrace  show  that  the  race  to
which  the  Galley  Hill  man  belonged  could  use
their  brains  and  hands  to  carry  out  an  art  which
requires  a  high  degree  of  skill  and  design.  The
imperfect  condition  of  the  skull  precludes  an
exact  estimate  of  the  size  of  the  brain  ;  it  was
over  1350  cubic  centimetres  and  under  1400  cc.
In  an  average  modern  man  of  his  stature  we
should  expect  a  brain  of  1450  to  1475  cc.  ;  but  there
are  many  men  in  England  to-day  witli  smaller
brains  than  the  Galley  Hill  man.     In  Jonathan

34


THE   GALLEY   HILL   MAN

Wilde,  who  was  a  couple  oi  inches  taller,  the  brain
cavity  measured  1425  cc.

The  feature  of  the  Galley  Hill  man  is  the  length
of  his  skull  ;  it  is  8  inches  (203  mm.).  To  the
reader  this  may  mean  little,  but  when  it  is  re-
membered that  the  "  river-bed  "  men,  who  appear
when  the  Thames  Valley  had  reached  its  present
depth,  had  a  maximum  head  length  of  71  inches
.  (184  mm.)  it  will  be  seen  that  it  means  a  great  deal,
especially  if  we  regard  the  specimen  found  at
Galley  Hill  as  representative  of  his  race.  \\'e
find  a  ver}'  ancient  race  on  the  Continent  with  a
similar  form  of  head,  and  that  is  one  of  the  chief
reasons  we  have  for  supposing  we  are  dealing
with  a  representati\'e  individual  in  the  Gallev
Hill  man.  Individuals  with  a  head  equalh*  as  long
as  the  Galle}'  Hill  man  still  occur  in  England.  In
a  hundred  medi:fc^'al  crania  from  Northamptonshire
Mr.  Parsons  found  one  with  a  length  of  205  mm.
and  two  of  200  mm.,  although  the  mean  length
for  the  hundred  is  that  of  the  river-bed  people —
184  mm.  The  length  of  the  skull  in  the  Galley
Hill  man  is  not  due  to  massing  of  bone  in  ridges
over  the  orbits  ;  indeed,  the  supra-orbital  ridges
are  only  slightly  more  marked  than  in  modern
men.  Just  over  the  orbits  the  thickness  of  the
skull  is  14  mm. — a  little  above  the  modern  average.
The  skull,  however,  is  thick  ;  the  frontal  bone  in
place  of  being  6  to  8  mm.  is  12  mm.  thick,  a
feature    which    occurs    in    vcrv     ancient    skulls


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

In  old  people,  too,  the  cranial  wall  is  apt  to  thicken,
but  from  the  wear  of  the  teeth  and  from  the  degree
to  which  the  bones  of  the  skull  have  united  at


GALLEY     HILU.(n?1).


Fig.  7.     Profile  of  the  skull  of  the  Galley  Hill  Man.


their  sutures  the  thickness  in  the  Galley  Hill  man  is
apparently  not  due  to  age  ;  he  was  past  middle
age- — probably  about  fifty.

There  are  certain  circumstances  which  make  an


THE   GALLEY   HILL    MAN

accurate  measurement  of  the  width  of  the  Galley
Hill  skull  difficult.  One  side  is  i)artly  broken
away,  and  in  drying  the  skull  warped.  By  the
use  of  special  methods  and  instruments  the  diffi-
culties can  be  overcome,  and  there  is  no  doubt  its
width  was  at  first  underestimated  ;  in  place  of  being
130  mm.  it  is  138  to  140  mm. — nearly  the  same
width  as  the  ri\-er-bed  crania  and  2  or  3  mm.  less
than  is  the  modern  average.  The  breadth  is  about
69  per  cent  of  the  length  ;  in  the  ri\-er-bed  crania,
the  average  is  the  same  as  in  modern  EngHsh
crania,  74  to  76  per  cent.  In  the  phraseology  of
the  craniologist,  the  Galley  Hill  man  was  markedlv
dolichocephalic.  As  is  common  in  this  tvpe  of
skull  the  forehead  \\as  narrow,  but  of  good
height  and  not  receding.  The  height  of  the  ver-
tex of  the  skull  above  the  ear  passages  is  120  mm.
In  height  of  skull  the  Galley  Hill  man  was  not
peculiar  ;  ]\Ir.  Parsons  gives  120  mm.  as  the  cor-
responding measurement  of  the  Northamptonshire
crania.  Thus  we  see  that  in  England  there  still
persists  here  and  there  a  man  who  shows  cranial
features  very  similar  to  those  found  amongst  the
inhabitants  of  the  Thames  Valley  so  long  ago.

As  is  usually  the  case  in  such  finds,  the  chief
part  of  the  face  had  perished.  Fortunately  the
left  half  of  the  lower  jaw,  carrying  five  teeth,  two
premolars,  and  three  molars,  was  found.  By
placing  the  jaw  in  its  proper  relationship  to  the
skull  it  is  possible  to  reconstruct,  with  a  consider-

37


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

able  degree  of  accuracy,  the  main  outlines  of  the
face.  The  face  was  short  and  relatively  wide.
In    an    average    modern    Englishman    the    face,


GALLEY      HILL     .(N?1)

Fig.  8.      Galley  Hill  skull — full  face.      (One-third  natural  size.)

measured  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  lower
border  of  the  chin,  is  about  120  mm.  ;  in  the
Galley  Hill  man  it  was  about  100  mm.,  the
deficiency  being  due  to  the  shortness  of  the  upper


THE   GALLEY   HILL   MAN


face.  The  nose  was  short,  luit  from  the  con-
formation of  its  root  we  infer  that  it  was  prominent
and  perhaps  rather  wide.  Tlie  extreme  width  of
the  face  was  130  mm.,  5  mm.  in  excess  of  the
average  modern  man.  The  chin,  if  not  so  pro-
nounced as  in  modern  mandibles,  was  certainly
present.  One  sees  on  the  mandible  the  same
muscular  impression  as  in  modern  man — im-
pression caused  by  the  muscles  which  move  the
tongue  and  lips,  ^^'e  may  infer,  therefore,  that
the  tongue  was  used  in  speech  in  much  the  same
way  as  we  use  it  now.  There  is  nothing  anthropoid
in  the  lower  jaw,  and  yet  it  shows  some  primitive
features.  The  coronoid  process  to  which  the
temporal  muscle — the  chief  muscle  of  mastication
— is  attached  is  separated  from  the  articular
process  of  the  jaw  by  a  deep  notch  in  all  modern
specimens.  Here  there  is  no  notch  ;  it  is  filled
up  with  bone  to  give  strength.  The  need  for  a
strong  coronoid  process  is  apparent  when  the
extensive  impressions  for  the  temporal  muscles
are  noted  on  the  sides  of  the  skull.  The  ridges
which  l:)ound  the  origins  of  these  muscles  reach
to  within  40  mm.  of  the  median  line  on  the  vertex
of  the  skull,  whereas  in  modern  crania  they  fall
short  of  it  by  60  mm.  In  anthropoids  these  ridges
may  reach  the  vertex.  We  see  then  that  the
muscles  of  mastication  were  uncommonly  well
developed  in  ancient  man,  but  the  teeth  them-
selves, and  the  palate,  the  size  of  which  can  be

39


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

estimated  from  the  lower  jaw,  are  not  markedly
different  from  the  same  parts  in  modern  man.    In
no   sense   can   the   lower   molar  teeth,    and   they
indicate  the  condition  of  the  upper,  be  said  to  be
primitive  either  in  size  or  shape.     In  apes  with  a
dentition    at    its   highest    point    of   development,
such  as  the  baboon  and  gorilla,  the  last  lower  molar
is  larger  than  the  first  ;  when  retrogression  sets  in,
the  last  is  the  first  to  diminish.    In  a  large-toothed
race,  like  the  extinct  Tasmanians,  the  last  lower
molar  is  equal  in  size  to  the  first ;  the  middle  tooth
being  slightly  smaller.     In  this  race  the  front  to
back  measurement  of  the  crown  of  the  first  lower
molar    may    amount    to    13  mm.    (|  in.),    in    the
Galley  Hill  man  the  crown  of  the  first  molar  is  only
II  mm.,   a   common   dimension   in   modern   man,
while  the  last  molar  is  only  10 '2,  about  the  same  size
as   the   middle    or   second   molar.      Thus   in   the
Galley  Hill  man  retrogression  of  teeth  has  already
commenced  ;    the  last  lower  molar  is  reduced  to
the  size  of  the  second.    In  the  majority  of  modern
Englishmen  it  is  smaller  than  the  second,  dental
retrogression  being  still  more  marked.    The  middle
and  last  molars  have  only  four  cusps  in  the  Galley
Hill  man,  whereas  many  of  the  more  primitive
human    races    still    show    five — apparently    the
original     nimibcr.       The     premolar    teeth     agree
absolutely  in  size  and  shape  with  their  modern
representatives,    the    first    being   7  mm.    and   the
second  7*5  mm.  in  the  front  to  back  diam.eters  of
40


THE   GALLEY   HILL    MAN

their  crowns.  The  teeth  show  no  trace  of  disease,
and  are  worn  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  Neo-
lithic Essex  woman,  but  not  to  such  a  degree,
although  he  appears  to  be  older  than  she  was.
The  size  of  the  palate  was  apparently  very  little
different  from  the  modern  average,  the  modern
being  longer  and  narrower.  For  instance,  the
length  of  the  lower  bite,  measured  from  a  point
between  the  middle  incisors  to  the  mid-point
of  a  line  drawn  transversely  behind  the  cro^\•ns
of  the  last  molars,  is  46  mm.  in  modern  English-
men, and  44  mm.  in  the  Galley  Hill  man.  The
breadth  between  the  outer  borders  of  the  last
molars  is  'j'j  mm.  in  the  Galley  Hill  man,  and
only  68  mm.  in  modern  Englishmen.  There  thus
appears  to  have  been  little  alteration  in  the
development  of  the  palate  and  teeth  during  the
exceedingh'  long  interval  which  elapsed  between
the  dates  of  the  Galley  Hill  and  the  later  NeoHthic
man.  In  that  long  period  the  nature  of  the  diet
remained  the  same.  The  reduction  of  the  teeth
and  palate  evidently  commenced  when  the  more
prosperous  conditions  of  modern  civilization  were
introduced.

Quite  recently  a  second  example  of  a  human
skull  from  the  upper  terrace  (90  to  100  feet)  at
Galley  Hill  was  sent  to  me  for  examination.  I
have  mentioned  the  fact  that  Mr.  ]\Iatthew  Hayes,
the  schoolmaster  of  Galley  Hill,  was  the  first
to  see  the  Galle}-  Hill  skull  when  exposed  by  the

41


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

workmen.  He  was  naturally  disappointed  when
he  found  Mr.  Elliott  had  come  in  the  meantime
and  obtained  possession  of  an  object  he  wished
to  add  to  his  own  collection,  and  hence  took  no
further  interest  in  the  find,  nor  did  he  then  mention
the  skull  I  am  now  to  describe  as  the  second  Galley
Hill  skull.

In  1884,  four  years  prior  to  the  discovery  of  the
famous  specimen,  the  bank  of  gravel  on  the  chalk
cliff  extended  to  the  north  of  the  school,  some
fifty  yards  from  where  the  celebrated  discovery
was  afterwards  made.  Mr.  W.  H.  Steadman,  now
headmaster  of  the  neighbouring  Council  School  at
Northfleet,  was  then  assistant  master  at  Galley
Hill.  The  schoolboys,  playing  on  the  north  face
of  the  gravel,  had  discovered  the  fragments  of  a
human  skull,  with  several  other  bones,  and  brought
them  to  Mr.  Steadman,  who  placed  them  in  his
School  Collection,  where  they  are  now.  To  the
best  of  his  recollection  they  were  about  5  feet
below  the  surface  level  of  the  terrace.  It  was
only  lately,  on  seeing  reports  concerning  the
remains  just  described,  that  he  realized  the  find
made  so  long  ago  as  1884  might  still  be  important.
The  skull  is  sufficiently  perfect  to  recognize  that
it  is  of  the  same  form  as  the  type  specimen.
Its  length  is  just  under  200  mm.  ;  its  width  is
140  mm.,  the  same  as  in  the  original  specimen.
The  width  is  thus  70  per  cent  of  the  length,  the
index  being  70  in  place  of  69  in  the  original
42


THE   GALLEY   HILL   MAN


specimen.  Its  height  is  rather  less — ii6  mm.  ;
the  forehead  is  lOO  mm.  in  width — about  the  same
as  in  tlie  original  ;  its  capacity  is  rather  greater,
and  the  brow  ridges  and  impressions  for  the
muscles  of  mastication  less  pronounced.  The
bones  too  are  thinner,  the  frontal  being  6  to  8  mm.
in  place  of  ii  to  12.  They  do  not  show  the  same
degree  of  erosion  and  weathering.  The  cranium
is  whiter  and  more  permeated  with  calcareous
salts.  The  limb  bones,  however,  are  of  a  totally
different  t^'pe,  and  indicate  a  tall  man  with  the
shafts  of  the  thigh  bones  not  flattened  as  in  the
original,  but  cylindrical  as  in  modern  man.

The  evidence  on  the  whole  is  decidedly  against
the  probability  of  the  second  Galley  Hill  remains
being  of  the  age  of  the  loo-foot  terrace.  Before
passing  a  final  opinion  as  to  their  antiquity  it  will
be  well  to  ^\■ait  and  see  \\hat  future  discoveries
may  tell  us.

The  reader  may  natural!}'  ask  :  To  what  race
does  the  Galley  Hill  man  belong  ?  The  answer  is
that  he  is  a  type  of  a  new  race  which  at  the  same
time  is  verj'  old.  He  represents  a  race  to  which  we
may  rightly  give  the  name  of  "  Galley  Hill."
The  race  is  still  represented  in  the  modern  popula-
tion of  Britain  by  a  scattered  remnant.  The  race
is  both  ancient  and  modern  ;  ancient  in  the  sense
tliat  it  was  evolved  long  before  the  \-alley  system
of  England  had  taken  on  its  present  configuration,
modern  in  the  sense  that  in  all  his  parts,  in  spite

43


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

of  his  long  and  narrow  head,  his  short  and  wide,
rather  negroid  face,  he  stands  as  the  most  ancient
representative  of  the  Europeans  in  their  modern
form.

We  also  know  something  of  the  climate  of
England  during  the  formation  of  the  upper
terrace,  in  which  the  remains  of  the  Galley  Hill
race  are  embedded.  In  it  are  found  the  bones  of
animals  which  indicate  a  warm  climate,  such  as
the  lion  and  the  straight-tusked  elephant  and  the
hippopotamus  ;  in  it  too  are  found  remains  of
the  woolly  rhinoceros  and  the  mammoth,  usually
regarded  as  denizens  of  cold  regions.  We  presume
that  the  Arctic  fauna  succeeded  the  temperate,
for  in  the  lower  and  later  terraces  of  the  Thames
Valley  the  mammoth,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,
joined  subsequently  by  the  reindeer,  still  occur,
when  the  lion  and  hippopotamus  were  extinct  in
England.  The  Galley  Hill  race  evidently  lived
during  a  period  in  which  the  climate  of  the  South
of  England  was  changing  from  a  temperate
to  a  cold  one  and  when  the  land  was  undergoing
elevation  with  consequent  deepening  of  the
Thames  Valley.  Previous  to  the  temperate  period
there  must  have  been  one  of  extreme  cold,  for  the
third  or  loo-foot  terrace  lies  on  boulder  clay  and
other  formations  which  can  only  be  deposited
in  a  country  deeply  covered  with  ice.  The  Galley
Hill  race  flourished  then  in  a  temperate  period
which  was  preceded   by   an  extremely   cold   one

44


THE   GALLEY   HILL   MAN


and  followed  b\'  one  in  which  the  cold  was  less
severe.  Apparently  he  belonged  to  the  last
of  the  temperate  intervals  which  lie  within  the
Glacial  Age.

Referenxes. — Mr.  E.  T.  Newton,  f.r.s.  :  "  On  a
Human  Skull  and  Limb  Bones  found  in  the
Paleolithic  Terrace  Gravel  at  Galley  Hill,
Kent."  Quart.  Jour.  Geo.  Soc,  London,
1895,  Vol.  51,  p.  505.

Mr.  H.  B.  Woodward,  f.r.s.  :  "  The
Geology  of  tlie  London  District."  Memoirs
of  the  Geological  Survey.     London,  1909.


45


CHAPTER    V

THE    MEN    OF    BRUNN    AND    COMBE-
CAPELLE

IT  is  not  likely  that  the  Galley  Hill  race  arose  in
England.  It  was  probably  originally  a  Conti-
nental race,  for  our  early  history  is  a  long  story  of
continual  immigrations  and  invasions.  Western
waves  of  the  Continental  sea  of  humanity  seem  to
have  surged  into  Britain  since  Europe  was  first
inhabited,  and  that  is  many  hundred  thousand
years  ago.  We  modern  British  have  arisen  by  a
process  of  mixture  and  happy  hybridization.  Our
ancestors  of  the  river-bed  type  dominated  Eng-
land for  many  thousand  years,  but,  as  we  shall  see,
they  too  appear  to  have  arisen  on  the  Continent,
and  were  at  first  aliens  in  Britain.  The  Galley
Hill  tyi^ie  and  perhaps  also  the  Cro-Magnon,  pre-
ceded them  in  England.  Both  of  these  types  are
Continental  in  origin.  When  we  in  turn  become
an  invading  race  we  turn  our  faces  westwards  as
did  our  Paleolithic  ancestors..

We  propose  now  to  cross  to  the  Continent  and
search  for  traces  of  the  Galley  Hill  race.    This  type
has  been  found  at  Briinn,  the  chief  town  of  the
40


THE   BRUNN    MAN


Austrian  Province  of  Moravia,  some  sixty  miles
north  .of  Menna.  The  wide  valley  in  which  Briinn
is  situated  is  covered  by  a  thick  stratum  of  loess —
a  chalky  clay.  A  tributaiy  of  the  Danube — the
Ponafa — flows  slowly  down  the  valley  and  has  had
much  to  do  with  the  deposition  of  the  deep  strata
on  which  Briinn  is  built.

The  period  at  which  the  stratum  of  loess  was
laid  down  can  be  dated  with  some  accuracy.  Re-
mains of  the  mammoth  and  of  the  woolly  rhino-
ceros occur  in  it  abundantly,  from  which  it  may
be  safely  inferred  that  its  formation  belongs  to
the  latter  part  of  the  cold  or  Glacial  Period.  In
1891,  when  a  canal  was  being  cut  through  the  city,
a  number  of  mammoth  and  rhinoceros  bones,  with
a  human  skull,  were  found  in  the  undisturbed  loess,
4I  metres  (ii|  feet)  from  the  surface.  The  forma^
tion  is  probably  not  so  old  as  the  loo-foot  terrace
in  which  the  Galley  Hill  remains  were  found  ;  it
corresponds  rather  to  a  date  between  the  50-  and
20-feet  terraces — a  period  perhaps  50,000  years
later  than  the  Galley  Hill  man,  if  the  rough
m.ethod  of  estimation  used  here  can  be  trusted  to
guide  us.  The  civilization  is  very  different  from  that
of  the  Gallev  Hill  man  ;  all  we  know  of  him  are
his  fine  flint  implements  ;  but  we  know  the  art  of
the  man  of  Briinn.  With  the  skull  was  found  the
image  of  a  bearded  man  carved  from  the  ivor\'  of
a  mammoth's  tusk.  We  know  that  he  ornamented
his  body  ;  six  hundred  perforated  small  shells  (Den-

47


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

talia),pai"t  of  his  elaborate  necklace,  were  found  near
the  skull.  The  implements  of  bone  found  with  him
are  highly  finished  scrapers.    We  have  no  evidence


Fig.  9.     The  profile  of  the  Briinn  and  Galley  Hill  skulls.
(One-third  natural  size.)


to  show  that  the  Galley  Hill  man  had  reached  such
an  advanced  point  on  the  road  to  a  higher  civiliza-
tion. We  owe  much  to  Professor  Makowsky  of
Briinn  for  the  records  of  this  discovery,  but  the
48


THE    BRUNN    MAN


merit  of  recognizing  the  aliinities  of  tlie  Man  of
Briinn  to  the  Galley  Hill  race  at  a  later  'date
is  due  to  Professor  Klaatsch  of  Breslau,

Not  only  is  there  a  remarkable  resemblance  in
size  and  shape  between  these  two  ancient  skulls
found  so  far  apart,  but  the  actual  parts  which  have
escaped  natural  decay  are  almost  identical.  In
both,  the  facial  parts  have  perished,  but  the
roof  of  the  skull  and  half  of  the  lower  jaw,
with  some  teeth,  have  been  preserved  in  each
case.  The  Briinn  skull,  like  the  Galley  Hill  one,
is  remarkably  long  and  narrow.  In  the  latter
it  was  203  mm.,  in  the  former  206  mm.  (^  in.
longer).  In  both  one  side  is  deficient,  but  in  the
Briinn  specimen  the  degree  of  post  mortem  dis-
tortion is  less.  The  Briinn  skull  is  wider  than
usually  thought  ;  Makowsky  estimated  its  width
at  139  mm.  (the  same  as  the  Galley  Hill),  but  a
minute  examination  of  the  cast  has  convinced
the  writer  that  it  was  at  least  144  mm.,  the
breadth  or  cephalic  index  being  thus  69  per  cent
— a  figure  corresponding  to  that  of  the  Galley
Hill.  The  capacity  was  probably  greater  than  that
of  the  Galley  Hill,  being  about  1400  cubic  centi-
metres (Makowsky  gives  1350),  and  thus  about
80  cc.  below  the  average  of  modern  Europeans.
He  was  a  more  brawny  individual  than  his  English
counterpart,  for  the  muscular  processes,  especially
those  for  the  muscles  of  his  neck,  are  more  pro-
nounced.    He  was  a  bull-necked  fellow.     He  was

K  49


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

also  an  older  man — at  least  his  teeth,  especially  the
first  and  second  molar  teeth,  are  much  more  worn.
Some  of  the  crowns  are  ground  almost  to  the  roots.
The  wear  of  teeth  depends  as  much  on  the  nature
of  food  as  on  age,  and  hence  is  not  a  reliable  guide.
Nor  does  the  degree  to  which  the  skull  bones  have
united  give  a  sure  clue  to  age,  for  evidently  in
the  Galley  Hill  race  these  became  ossified  together
at  an  early  period  of  manhood.  If  Makowsky's
observation  is  accurate  the  last  lower  molar  was
remarkable.  It  was  much  larger  than  either  tlie
first  or  second  molars,  whereas  in  modern  Euro-
pean races  it  is  smaller.  From  tlie  drawings  given
by  the  discoverer  we  may  infer  that  the  size  of
the  palate  was  similar  to  that  of  the  Galley
Hill  man,  but  apparently  the  prominence  of  the
chin  was  more  pronounced.  The  branch  of  the
mandible  which  ascends  to  articulate  with  the  skull
and  receive  the  muscles  of  mastication  was  longer,
and  in  shape  more  like  the  same  part  in  modern
man.  The  face  of  the  man  of  Brlinn  was  therefore
rathei"  longer  and  more  modern  than  that  of  the
Galley  Hill  man.  In  neither  was  there  such  a
prognathism  as  we  see  in  modern  negro  races,  for
the  good  reason  that  they  had  less  massive  teeth.
The  parallelism  between  the  discoveries  at
Galley  Hill  and  Briinn  may  be  continued  further.
It  will  be  remembered  that  at  Galley  Hill  another
specimen  was  produced  which  had  been  found
some  years  before  the  more  important  discovery.

50


THE   COMBE-CAPELLE   MAN

A  j.econd  Briinn  __skull  was  _  found  in  i8i;>5,  in
the  same  stratum,  but  at  some  distance  from  the
one  now  known  as  the  first.  Like  the  second
Galle}'  HiU  skull  its  history  is  imperfect,  but  its
authenticity  is  more  probable.  Its  length  is  esti-
mated at  192  to  195  mm.  ;  its  breadth  at  139,  its
index  being  thus  75.  It  represents  in  the  writer's
opinion  the  female  ty4;e  of  the  race.  Its  dimen-
sions and  its  muscular  prominences  are  such  as  we
expect  to  find  in  the  woman  of  the  Briinn  type.

In  190^  a  discovery  was  made  in  the  south-west
of  France  which  shows  the  wide  distribution  of
the  Galley  Hill  type  in  ancient  times.  In  the  caves
and  rock  shelters  of  the  limestone  terraces  which
flank  the  valley  of  the  Dordogne,  French  anthro-
pologists have  deciphered  the  history  of  Paleolithic
man.  In  their  hands  cave-research  has  become  a
science.  In  the  present  instance,  however,  the
discovery  of  an  ancient  man  of  the  Galley  Hill
type  in  this  region  was  made  by  a  skilled  Swiss
archaeologist,  Herr  O.  Hauser.  In  the  beginning  ftfoq
of  1909  he  set  his  men  to  work  in  a  narrow  terrace
under  a  limestone  cliff,  just  such  a  spot  as  Paleo-
lithic man  would  choose  for  a  shelter.  The  site  is
known  as  Combe-Capelle,  and  is  situated  on  the
south  side  oi  the  Dordogne,  a  little  way  below  the
place  where  this  river  is  joined  by  the  Vezere.  By
August  of  that  year  his  foresight  was  rewarded  by
the  discovery  of  the  complete  skckton  of  a  man  al  a
depth  of  a  little  over  7  feet  (2 '55  metres).    To  reach


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

this  depth  the  remains  of  three  separate  epochs
of  civiHzation  were  passed  through.  Wlien  the
upper  layer  of  black  soil  was  cleared  away  a  thick
stratum  was  exposed  which  had  been  formed  when
generations  of  men  had  lived  in  the  shelter  of  the


:i01-UTREAN


"ODLE      AORIGNACEAN
-      STERILE       LAYER

R      AURiaNACEAN

OUSTEREAN


Fig.  lo.


Section  of  the  strata  in  which  the  ancient  human
remains  were  found  at  Combe-Capelle.


overhanging  cliff  and  left  remains  of  their  hearths,
of  their  stone  and  bone  implements  and  the  debris
of  their  feasts.  The  drip  from  the  limestone  rock
saturated,  solidified,  and  preserved  these  evidences
of  a  remote  civilization  ;  "C  here  is  no  preservative
for  bones  equal  to  a  continual  drip  laden  with

52


THE   COMBE-CAPELLE   MAN


limestone  in  solution.  It  permeates  the  pores  of
the  bones  and  mineralizes  them.  The  civilization
of  the  upper  la\'er  of  the  Combe-Capelle  shelter  is
of  the  type  assigned  to  the  Salutreen  Period — one
which  falls  in  the  later  tEIrd  of  the  Paleolithic
Period.  Beneath  the  Solutreen  lay  a  sterile  layer,
deposited  when  the  shelter  was  unfrequented  by
man.  Below  this  layer  came  another  stratum
containing  traces  of  man  which  Herr  Hauser
assigns  to  the  later  or  \x)unger  Aurignacien
Period  ;  then  another  sterile  la3'er  followed  by  one
belonging  to  the  middle  Aurignacien,  and  finally
the  _stg]^il,e  -Iq^er  which  overlay  the  stratum  in
which  the  human  skeleton  was  found.  The  last
sterile  layer  apparently  formed  the  floor  of  the
shelter  when  the  man  now  to  be  described  was
buried  in  it — buried  in  the  material  which  had
accumulated  when  he  and  his  forefathers  dwelt
there.  He  did  not  fall  by  chance  to  be  buried  by
the  slow  accumulation  of  debris  detached  from
the  cliff,  for  he  lay  on  his  right  side,  in  the  crouch-
ing posture,  with  his  feet  to  the  south,  head  to
the  north,  and  numerous  flint  implements  placed
round  him  and  in__a_^ave  which  clearly  had  been
preparecT  for  him.  Over  him  lay  the  unbroken
strata  formed  by  the  civilizations  of  succeeding
periods.  Some  remains  of  the  j3ig_and  ^)fj:he  urus
— a  primitive  form  of  _ox — were  found  in  the  same
stratum,  but  nothing  of  the  mammoth  or  woojly
rhinoceros  or  of  animals  which  help  us  to  fix  a


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

geological  date  for  him.  Nor  have  we,  as  in  the
Thames  Valley,  the  ^^•ork  of  the  river  to  give  us
a  rough  indication  of  time.  We  have  only  the
flint  imj^lements  he  used,  and  they  assign  him  to
the  beginning  of  tlie  period  named  the  Aurig-
nacien.  In  England  we  suppose  this  period  to
correspond  to  the  formation  of  the  lowest  _(20-f oot)
terrace  of  the  Thames  Valley,  and  therefore  long
after  the  period  of  the  Galley  Hill  man  and  possibly
also  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  man  of  Briinn.
Professor  Klaatsch,  who  examined  and  de-
scribed the  remains,  unhesitatingly  assigned  the
Combe-Capelle  man  to  the  Galley  Hill  race.  The
maximum  length  of  the  skull  is  198  mm.,  5  or
6  mm.  less  than  the  Galley  Hill  ;  the  maximum
width  is  130  mm.,  about  10  mm.  less,  but  we  see
here  a  head  of  the  same  narrow  long  type.  Indeed,
the  relative  width  is  less,  being  only  about  66
per  cent  of  the  leiigth.  We  must  not  suppose  that
any  two  individuals  showing  long  and  narrow
heads  are  of  the  same  race  ;  we  find  narrmv-
headed  forms  amongst  both  black  and  white  races
which  we  cannot  suppose  to  be  nearly  related.
The  height  of  the  vault  above  the  ear-holes  is
considerably  more  in  the  Combe-Capelle  than  in
the  Galley  Hill  skull — at  least  5  mm.,  and  the
highest  point  of  the  crown  of  the  head  is  further
back — nearer  the  occiput.  We  know  the  face  of
the  Galley  Hill  man  only  from  the  mandible,  but
there   is   sufiicient   to   show   that   the   face   form

54


THE   COMBE-CAPELLE    MAN

differed  from  that  seen  in  the  Cumbe-Capelle  man.
The   teeth   of   the   latter   are   more   massive,   the


GAULEY-  Hll_U
COMBE-CAPELLE  ■


Fig.  II.  Profile  of  the  skull  of  the  Combe-Capelle  Man  c  mi-
pared  with  the  profile  of  the  Galley  Hill  man  (One-third
natural  size. )


palate  is  longer  and  narrower,  characters  which,
with  the  increased  height  of  the  skull,  betoken  a
tendency  towards  features  usually  associated  with

55


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

a  negroid_race.  On  the  other  hand,  the  characters
oftlTeTorehead  are  the  same  in  both  ;  the  width  of
the  face  was  also  about  the  same  (130  mm.)  ;
but  while  the  face  in  the  Combe-Capelle  man
was  of  medium  length  (116  mm.),  that  of  the
Galley  Hill  man  was  decidedly  short  (104  mm.),
and  shortness  of  face  is  frequentjy  a  character  o_f_
negroes.  Both  men  were  of  short  statiu'e,  about
i6oo"rnm.  (5  ft.  3  in.),  but  while  the  thigh  bone
of  the  Combe-Capelle  man  is  only  3  mm.  longer
than  that  of  the  Galley  Hill,  yet  his  leg  bone
(tibia)  is  at  least  40  mm.  more.  Now  a  relatively
long  leg  bone  is  a  feature  which  is  usually  seen  m
negroids,  and  in  this  feature  the  Combe-Capelle
man  is  decidedly  of  that  Xs^ce.  Thus  while  the
writer  is  inclined  to  agree  in  provisionally  assigning
the  Combe-Capelle  man  to  the  Galley  Hill  race
he  beHeves  that  further  discoveries  will  show  that
the  Combe-Capelle  man  belongs  to  a  branch
marked  A\-ith  certain  negroid  features.

Before  quitting  the  Galley  Hill  type  there  are
two  ^'cry  ancient  skulls  \\-hich  deser\-e  mention
because  they  serve  to  bridge  the  gap  between  the
Tilbury  or  river-bed  and  the  Galley  Hill  types.
So  long  ago  as  1833^  Professor  Schmerling,  a  Bel-
gian archaeologist,  on  excavating  the  floor  of  a
limestone  cave — the  Engis  Cave — in  the  valley  of
the  Meuse,  found  at  a  depth'of  5  feet  (i|  metres),
the  roof-part  of  a  human  skull.  With  it  were
found    remains    of    the    mammoth    and    woolly

56


THE   COMBE-CAPELLE   MAN

rhinoceros,  so  wc  may  infer  that  we  are  deaUng  with
a  skull  nearly  if  not  quite  as  old  as  that  at  Briinn
or  Combe-Capelle.  The  skull  is  shorter,  wider,  and
higlier  than  the  Galley  Hill  tyi'e  ;  indeed,  in  all
those  points  it  approaches  the  Tilbury  forjii.  In
the  opinion  of  its  discoverer,  a  very  cautious  and
judicious  scientist,  this  skull  showed  certain
characters  which  approximate  it  "to  the  cranium
of  an  Ethiopian  rather  than  to  that  of  a  European."
It  was  of  this  specimen  that  Huxley  said,  "  It  is,
in  fact,  a  fair  ayerage  human  skull,  which  might
have  belonged  to  a  philosopher  or  might  have  con-
tained the  thoughtless  brains  of  a  savage."  Thus
at  a  very  early  date  there  was  evolved  a  type  of
skull  intermediate  to  the  Galley  Hill  and  river-
bed types,  and  one  in  which  Professor  Schmerling
thought  he  traced  some  features  of  the  Negro.

Another  skull  of  the  same  intermediate  type
was  discovered  in  Bohemia — the  most  western
Province  of  Austria — near  the  town  of  Briix.  It
was  discovered  in  1871,  but  a  knowledge  of  its
exact  nature  we  owe  entirely  to  the  recent  investi-
gation of  Professor  Schwalbe  of  Strassburg.  It
belongs  to  a  later  date  than  the  Engis  specimen,
to  a  period  preceding  that  of  the  Tilbury  skull ,  with
which  it  has  much  in  common.

The  present  evidence  points  to  a  wide  distribu-
tion of  a  race  of  the  Galley  Hill  type  throughout
Europe  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Glacial  Period
and    the    earlier    part    of    the    Post-glacial.      Its

57


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

origin  we  do  not  know.  The  type  is  still  to  be
met  with  amongst  modern  British  people.  It  is
probable  that  the  river-bed  type  was  evolved  from
the  Galley  Hill  type.  Certain  features  of  this  type
point  to  a  relationship  with  negroid  races.

References. — Prof.  Alex.  Makowsky  :  "  Der
diluviale  Mensch  in  Loess  von  Briinn."
Mitth.  A)itJirop.  Gescllschajt  in  Wien,  1892,
Bd.  XXII,  p.  y^.

Prof.  H.  Klaatsch  and  0.  Hauser  :  "  Homo
Am'ignacensis  Hauseri."  PrcBhisior.  Zeit-
schrift,  1910,  Bd.  I,  p.  273.

Prof.  G.  Schwalbe :  "  Das  Schaedel-frag-
ment  von  Briix  und  verwandte.  Schaedel-
formen."  Zeitsdi.  fiir  Morphologic  und
Anthropologic,  1906,  p.  81.

Prof.  Schmerling.  See  Huxley's  Man's
Place  in  Nature.     London,  1863.


CHAPTER    VI

THE   GRIMALDI    OR   NEGROID   TYPE
IN    EUROPE

IN  the  cliffs  which  flank  the  beach  near  Mejj-
toiie  there  are  a  number  jof_  ca^es  which  for
a  long  period  of  time  afforded  a  halntation  for
ancient  man.  At  the  close  of  the  last  and  at  the
beginning  of  the  present  century,  largely  owing
to  the  interest  taken  in  the  history  of  primitive
man  by  the  Prince  of  Monaco,  systematic  excava-
tions were  carried  out  in  deep  strata  of  their  floors.
In  one  of  these,  the  "  Grotte  de^  Enfants,"  usually
named  the  Grimaldi  Cave,  th^-  \arious  strata  of
the  floor  made  up  a  thickness  of  8h  metres  (28
feet).  In  the  lowest  layer  of  all  were  found  two
Skeletons — one  of  a  woman  past  middle  life,  with
a  stature  estimated  at  1570  mm.  (5  ft.  2  in.),  and
the  other  of  a  boy  about  sixt_een  to  seventeen
years  of  age,  and  about  1550  mm.  (5  ft.  i  in.)  in
height.  With  them  were  found  traces  of  a  ci\-iliza-
tion  and  of  a  fauna  which  has  led  anthropologists
to  assign  them  to  the  end  of  the  Mousterien  or
beginning  of  the  Aurignacien  Period — about  the
same  or  perhaps  before  the  period  assigned  to  the

59


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

Combe-Capelle  man.  They  ha\'e  the  narrow  and
long  heads  of  the  Galley  Hill  race.  In  the  woman
the  maximmn  length  of  the  head  is  191  mm.  ;  in
the  boy,  probably  her  son,  it  is  192  ;  the  width
of  the  skull  in  the  mother  is  131  and  in  the  son
133.  The  proportion  of  breadth  to  length  is  about
68  percent — the  same  as  in  the  Galley  Hill  race.
Yet  Dr.  Verneau,  who  has  published  the  results  of
a  minute  examination  of  these  two  ancient  in-
dividuals, from  various  features  seen  in  the  skele-
tons, had  no  hesitation  in  assigning  them  to  a
negroid  race.

It  is  an  easy  matter  to  distinguish  the  skeleton
of  the  true  negro  from  that  of  the  pure  white,  but
there  are  many  intermediate  races — not  hybrids
— which  show  a  puzzling  mixture  of  characters.
The  ancient  Grimaldi  woman  and  boy  are  of  the
mixed  or  negroid  type.  We  associate  large  white
tee_th,  full  prominent  ja\vs,  and  receding  cliin  with
the  races  showing  pigmented  skins.  In  the  old
woman,  a  great  number  of  the  teeth  have  been  lost
during  life  and  the  dental  characters  are  uncertain.
The  shallow,  projecting  incisor  part  of  the  upper
jaw  and  the  characters  of  the  chin  are  certainly
features  of  a  negroid  race.  So  are  the  wide  opening
of  the  nose,  the  prominent  cheek  bones,  the  flat
and  short  face.  Yet  the  bridge  of  the  nose  is  not
flat  as  in  negroes,  but  rather  jnominent  as  jn
Europeans,  and  the  capacity  of  the  skull  (1375  cc.)
is  of  ample  dimensions  for  a  woman  of  her  size.

60


THE  GRIMALDI  TYPE   IN  EUROPE

As  to  the  boy,  his  teeth  arc^  large  and  of  the  negro
type  ;  he  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  the
woman,  and  his  cranial  capacity  (1580  C£.)  indi-
cates a  brain  distinctly  above  the  modern  in  size.
The  leg  bones  of  mother  and  son  are  relatively
long  as  in  negroes.  In  that  race  the  two  eminences
or  bosses  of  the  forehead  usually  meet'  and  join
together  in  a  high  median  prominejice,  whereas
in  white  races  the\'  remain  separated,  and  this  is
the  case  in''the  Grimaldi  skulls.  Indeed,  in  the
features  of  the  forehead  the  Grimaldi  remains  agree
with  the  Galley  Hill  type.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact
that  the  natives  of  the  uplands  of  the  Sandwich
Islands — a  true  negroid  race — reproduce  to-day
the  cranial  features  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of
the  Grimaldi  caves.

.  To  appreciate^the  true  significance  of  a  negroid
race  in  the  south  of  Europe  towards  the  close  of
the  Glacial  Period,  we  must  look  at  the  distribu-
tion^of  modern  races.  A  hne  from  Gibraltar  in  the
West  to  the  Phillipine  Islands  in  the  Far  East
passes  through  a  zone  where  the  fairer  skins  of  the
North  pass  into  the  darker  skins  of  the  South.
To  some  extent  it  may  be  a  zone  in  which  inter-
mixtures of  fairer  and  darker  races  occur,  but  in
the  main  it  is  better  to  regard  it  as  a  zone  in  which
human  races  have  inherited  from  the  ancestral
stock  of  modern  humanity  some  of  the  characters
which  now  distinguish  the  European,  and  some
that  distinguish  the  Negro  ;  but  both  Negro  and
61


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

European  are  higlily  specialized  examples  of  the
modern  type  of  man.  The  discovery  of  the
Grimaldi  race  does  not  indicate  that  we  have
reached  the  common  stock  from  which  black  and
white  races  have  evolved  ;  that  point  must  lie
much  farther  in  the  past.  It  merely  indicates
that  towards  the  end  of  the  Glacial  Period  the
negroid  race  which  we  see  in  the  north  of
Africa  to-day  was  already  evolved,  and  that  it
extended  into  Europe.  The  land  connections
between  Europe  and  Africa  we  know  to  hav£
been  much  closer  in  the  time  of  the  Grimaldi
people  than  they  are  to-day.  There  are  other
evidences  of  a  negroid  race  in  Europe.  The
negroid  traits  of  the  Combe-Capelle  man  have
been  mentioned  ;  but  there  is  also  the  remark-
able fact  that  statuettes  and  engrayings  which
are  assigned  to  this  period  represent  certaiji
bodily  characters  of  the  negro.  The  Grimaldi
people  are  the  earliest  negroid  type  so  far
discovered,  yet  they  are  so  modern  and  highly
evolved  in  character  that  we  cannot  suppose  them
to  represent  a  common  ancestor  of  European  and
African  races.  If,  however,  we  suppose  that  all
races  of  modern  man  have  been  evolved  from  a
common  stock,  we  naturally  expect,  especially
in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  evolution  of  modern
races,  to  find  intermediate  types  between  the  ex-
treme racial  forms  now  found  in  North  Europe  and
Central  Africa.  The  Grimaldi  people  seem  to
62


THE  GRIMALDI   TYPE  IN  EUROPE

represent  an  intermediate  type  in  the  evolution  of
the  typical  white  and  black  races.

Reference. — Dr.  Rene  Verneau  :    Lcs  Grottcs  de
Griiualdi,  Vol.  II.     ^Monaco,  1906.


CHAPTER    VH

AN   ANCIENT    RACE   OF   TALL   MEN:
THE   CRO-MAGNON

THERE  is  a  widely  spread  notion  that  our
remote  ancestors  were  a  race  of  giants.
Hitherto,  as  we  have  passed  from  type  to  type
into  a  remote  past  that  takes  us  well  within  the
Glacial  Period,  the  samples  of  ancient  humanity
preserved  to  us  have  been  one  and  all  people  of  a
low  stature — onlj^  5  feet  or  a  little  over.  Now  we
proceed  to  consider  the  oldest  race  of  great  stature
that  has  yet  been  discovered,  one  which  flourished
in  the  south  of  France  w^hen  the  last  of  the  cold
periods  was  lifting  from  Europe.  The  first  ex-
amples of  this  race  were  discovered  in  1868,  when
a  railway  was  being  constructed  in  the  valley  gf
the  W'ztre,  a  tributaiy  of  the  Dordqgne.  A  cutting
made  in  the  debris  at  the  foot  of  the  limestone
cliffs  which  flank  the  valley  of  the  Vezere  at  Cro-
Magnon,  brought  to  light  the  skeletons  of  a  man,
of  a  woman,  and  part  of  the  skull  of  a  third  in-
dividual. Hence  this  ancient  type  or  race  is
usually'  named  Cro-Magnon.  We  now  know  ten
individuals  of  that  race  of  which  eight  are  men
64


AN  ANCIENT  RACE  OF  TALL  MEN

and  two  are  women.  The  stature  of  five  of  the
men  can  be  estimated  with  some  degree  of  exact-
ness— it  varies  from  1820  to  1870  mm.  (5  ft.  ii|  in.
to  6  ft.  li  ijj.).  Tlie  woman,  as  is  usually  the  case
in  tall  races,  was  evidenth'  of  a  smaller  stature  ;


Fig.  12.  Tlie  site  of  the  discovery  of  the  Cro-Magnon  Race.
The  foreground  represents  a  section.  A — Limestone  Cliff.
B — Ledge  overhanging  the  Ancient  Shelter.  C — Debris  fallen
from  the  cliff  in  which  the  remains  were  found.  D — Alluvium.
(After  Quatrefages. )


we  can  estimate  the  height  of  one  only  ;  she  was
3'oung  and  measured  1560  mm.  (5  ft.  3^  in.).

The  discover}'  of  the  human  remains  at  Cro-
-Magnon in  1868  was  made  at  tlie  time  when
scientists  were  beginning  to  realize  that  the
history  of  ancient  man  could  be  deciphered  in
the  ca\'es  and  old  rock  shelters  along  the  .valleys

F  65


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

of  the  Dordogne  and  Vezere,  and  when  a  band
of  young  men  was  arising  in  France  who
knew  how  to  interpret  the  human  signs  found
there.  We  owe  our  knowledge  of  the  Cro-Magnon
race  to  the  French  School  of  Antliropologists.
Ed.  Lartet,  a  member  of  the  older  school,  recog-
nized the  antiquity  of  the  race  and  defined  its
characteristics  as  found  in  the  south-west  of
France  ;  members  of  the  modern  school,  Verneau,
Boule,  Riviere,  and  Cartailhac,  have  extended  that
knowledge  by  their  researches  in  the  cliff  caves  of
Monaco,  in  the  south-east  of  France.  The  Cro-
Magnon  race  was  discovered  at  a  period  when,
under  Darwin's  influence,  anthropologists  ex-
pected to  find  man  becoming  more  primitive  in
mind  and  body  as  his  history  was  traced  into  the
past.  The  discovery  at  Cro-Magnon  showed  that
the  evolution  of  human  types  was  not  an  orderly
one,  for,  in  size  of  brain,  and  in  stature,  the  race
which  flourished  in  the  south  of  Europe  at  the  close
of  the  Glacial  Period  was  one  of  the  finest  the
world  has  ever  seen.  Yet  they  must  have  been
grim-visaged  and  savage-looking  men.

Wlien  ascending  the  sides  of  the  valley  of  the
Thames,  from  the  more  recent  deposits  where  the
Tilbury  man  was  found  to  the  upper  and  older
terrace  where  the  Galley  Hill  man  was  unearthed,
mention  was  made  of  the  discovery  in  an  inter-
mediate terrace  of  the  Dartford  cranijim  by  Mr.
W.  M.  Newton.  How  closely  it  is  allied  to  the
66


AN  ANCIENT  RACE  OF  TALL  MEN

Cro-Magnon  type  may  be  seen  b\'  comparing  it
with  the  specimens  found  in  France.  The  brain
capacity  of  the  Dartford  cranimn  is  1750  cc,  at
least  250  cc.  abo\'e  the  average  of  modern  men.
The  French  specimens  also  show  an  equally  great
capacity  ;  in  one  case  Verneau  estimates  the  brain
chamber  to  be  capable  of  holding  1800  to  2000  £C.
The  length  of  the  skull  is  great  ;  in  the  Dartford
skull  it  is  207  mm.  ;  in  the  five  French  skulls  the
length  varies  from  194  to  211  mm.  ;  in  length  the
skull  rivalled  or  outstripped  the  crania  of  the
Galley  Hill — a  race  wliich  appeared  long  before
the  Cro-Magnon  in  Europe.  In  the  width  of  the
skull  there  is  a  great  difference  in  these  ancient
types  ;  in  the  Galley  Hill  type  the  width  varies
between  130  and  140  mm.  ;  in  the  Cro-Magnon  it
varies  between  140  and  150  mip.  In  the  Dartford
specimen  it  is  150  imn.  Most  of  the  Cro-Magnon
skulls,  althougli  wide,  are  only  of  medium  height  ;
the  highest  j^oint  in  the  roof  is  usually  not  more
than  120  mm.  above  the  ear  passages.  The  fore-
head is  wide  and  the  eyebrow  ridges  well  marked.
The  contour  of  the  back  of  the  head  is  charac-
teristic. As  in  the  Galley  Hill  race  the  occipital
part  of  the  head  projects  rather  prominently,  but
the  crown  of  the  head,  in  place  of  arching  upwards
from  the  occiput  as  in  the  Galley  Hill  race,  is
flattened,  as  if  the  upper  and  back  part  of  the  crmvn
liad  been  plastic  and  struck  by  a  spjide.  Unfortun-
ately in  the  Dartford  specimen  the  face  is  missing,
67


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

and  it  is  in  the  face  as  well  as  in  the  stature  that
tlie  characteristics  of  the  race  are  to  be  found.


CRO-MAGNON     CI3
DARTFORD


Fig.  13.     Profile  of  a  Cro-Magnon  skull  with  the  outline  of  the
Dartford  cranium  traced  on  it.     (One-third  natural  size.)


Thus,  such  evidence  as  there  is  in  England,  and
admittedly  the  evidence  is  slight,  points  to  the
existence  of  the  Cro-Magnon  race  in  England  at
68


AN  ANCIENT  RACE  OF  TALL  MEN

a  period  long  after  the  Galley  Hill  race.  It  is  in
France  itself  that  we  find  e\-idence  as  to  the
period  at  which  the  Cro-]\Iagnon  men  appeared  in
Europe.  Their  brains  were  large,  and  we  naturally
expect  signs  of  a  high  mental  development.  In
their  hands  art  reached  a  stage  of  reaUsm  which
has  ne\-er  been  surpassed  ;  they  engraved  the
animals  they  hunted  on  bone  and  ivory  with  the
accurate  eye  and  hand  of  the  true  artist.  Their
implements  of  flint  and  bone  are  characteristic  ;
hence  the  strata  in  the  floors  of  caves  formed
during  the  time  of  the  Cro-Magnon  race  can  be
recognized.  The  chief  period  of  the  Cro-Magnon
race  is  named  tlie  Magdelenien,  because  in  the
La  Madeleine  rock  shelter  in  the  valley  of  the
Vezere,  three  miles  above  Cro-Magnon,  remains
of  their  civilization  are  found  abundanth'.  The
strata  of  the  Magdelenien  Period  lie  superficial  to,
and  are  more  recent  tharr,  the  Aurignacien  strata
in  which  Hauser  found  the  long_and  narrow  headed
Combe-Capelle  man  (Fig.  lo,  p.  52),  who  appears
to  represent  the  Galley  Hill  race  in  the  south  of
France.  In  the  long  interval  between  the  Aurig-
nacien and  Magdelenien,  a  third  epoch  is  some-
times distinguished — the  Solutreen.  The  Cro-
Magnon  type  is  also  found  in  this  period.  The
Cro-]\Iagnon  race  thus  appears  in  Europe  later
than  the  Galley  Hill  type,  but  it  is  discovered  witli
its  art  and  its  great  physique  already  in  full
development.  Its  cradle  and  thf  place  of  its
69


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

e\'olution  have  not  been  found  as  yet,  but  from
many  points  in  structure  which  recah  the  Mon-


cro-magnon     type  .


Fig.  14.    Face  view  of  the  Cro-Magnon  Race.
(One-third  natural  size  )

golian    t}'pe  we   may  expect  to   find   tlie    earher
history    of   the    Cro-Magnon  race    wlien    our   re-
searches   have    been    carried  into    the    centre    of
70


I


AN  ANCIENT  RACE  OF  TALL  MEN

Asia  and  the  FarJEast.  The  wide,  short  face,  the
extremel}'  prominent  cheek  boii^s,  the  spread  of
the  palate  and  a  tendency  for  the  upper  incisors
to  project  forwards,  and  the  narrow-pointed  cj^in,
recall  a  facial  type  which  is  best  seen  to-day  in
tribes  living  in  Asia  to  the  north  and  to  the  south
of  the  Himalayas.  In  some  features,  especially  as
regards  their  stature,  the  Cro-Magnon  race  recall
the  Sikhs  living  to  the  south  of  the  Himalayas.
To  some  extent  the\'  resemble  the  Esquimajix,  a
people  that  now  represent  the  Magdelenien  grade
of  civilization.

The  explorations  of  the  caves  on  the  shores  of
the  Ri\iera  near  Mentone,  under  the  auspices  of
the  Prince  of  Monaco,  have  extended  our  know-
ledge of  the  Cro-Magnon  type.  The  remains  of  the
two  negroids  of  Grimaldi,  it  will  be  remembered,
were  found  in  the  Grotte  des  Enfants  below  strata
which  had  accumulated  in  the  course  of  long  ages  to
a  depth  of  8i  metres — over  28  feet.  The  Grimaldi
remains  rested  on  a  stratum  which  was  evidently
formed  in  a  warm  period,  for  it  contained  the
remains  of  animals  which  we  associate  with  a
semi-tropical  climate.  In  a  stratum  nearly  j  feet
above  the  one  containing  the  negroids  was  found
the  skeleton  of  a  splendid  specimen  of  the  Cro-
-Magnon race.  Remains  of  the  fauna  of  a  cooler
climate  then  appear.  If  the  reindeer  then  sought
the  climate  it  now  prefers  we  may  conclude  that
the  temperature  of  the  south  of  France  resembled

71


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

that  which  now  prevails  in  the  north  of  Europe
and  did  so  for  a  long  period,  for  in  the  strata
formed  over  the  Cro-Magnon  burial,  to  the  extent
of^o  feet,  remains  of  the  reindeer  occur.  There
is  evidence  to  show  that  the  Cro-Magnon  type
persisted  in  Europe  throughout  the  long  period
marked  by  the  presence  of  the  reindeer.

The  Cro-Magnon  man  was  t^ll  ;  the  individual
found  in  the  Grotte  des  Enfants  stood  about
6  ft.  3  in.  in  life.  His  long  collar  bones  showjhe
was  wide-shouMered,  with  a  great  breadth  _of
chest.  His  thigh  bones  were  long  and  straight
and  their  shafts  shaped  like  a  razor,  so  strongly
pronounced  was  the  ridge  for  the  attachment  of
muscles  on  its  posterior  aspect.  The  leg  bones,
or  tibiffi,  as  in  the  Grimaldi  and  in  negroid  races,
were  relatively  and  absolutely  long.  There  are  in
this  and  a  number  of  other  features — the  short,
wide  face,  the  prominent  cheek  bones  and  pointed
chin — also  traces  of  the  negroid  in  the  Cro-Magnon
race.

By  the  end  of  the  reindeer  period  the  Cro-
Magnon  race  seems  to  have  been  absorbed  by
other  races.  The  type  has  been  identified  amongst
the  Neolithic  inlial)itants  of  Switzei-land.  In
form  of  head  the  natives  of  England  who  buried
their  dead  in  lon^mounds  or  barrows  have  much
in  common  with  the  Cro-Magnon  race.  Although
there  is  no  race  in  Europe  to-day  that  can  be  re-
garded as  representative  of  this  Paleolithic  people,
72


AN  ANCIENT  RACE  OF  TALL  MEN

yet  in  Germany,  Switzerland,  France,  and  Bintain
individuals  of  tiiis  type  are  not  ^are.  They  are
the  tall  men  of  commanding  mien.  It  is  likety
enough  that  Cro-]\Iagnon  blood  may  be  in  their
veins,  but  time  and  civilization  have  lengthened
their  faces,  reduced  the  prominence  of  their  cheek
bones,  diminished  the  strength  of  their  jaws,  and
opened  out  their  e3'e-sockets,  thus  remo\ing  the
lowering  sour  ^'isage  which  characterized  the  Cro-
Magnon  face.


CHAPTER    VIII
THE    ROUND-HEADED    TYPE

T  TNTIL  the  last  chapter  the  various  types  of
V_J  man  were  followed  in  orderly  sequence  into
the  far  past — from  the  woman  of  the  buried  Neo-
lithic surface  of  Essex  to  the  Galley  Hill  man  in
the  loo-foot  terrace  of  the  Thames  Valley.  The
period  of  time  thus  covered  is  that  involved  in
the  erosion  of  the  deeper  part  of  the  Thames
\'alley,  namely,  the  part  below  the  level  of  the
loo-foot  terrace.  It  was  necessary  to  retrace
our  steps  in  the  last  chapter,  so  that  the  Cro-
Magnon  type  might  be  placed  in  its  proper
sequence.  It  is  now  necessary  to  retrace  our  steps
to  a  more  recent  period  than  that  considered
in  the  last  chapter,  to  find  the  a]ipearance  of
another  type — the  round- luiukd  or  brachycephalic
type.  In  modern  tjnies  the  round  or  short  head
is  the  predominating  type  in  Europe.  All  the
races  we  have  hitherto  considered  have  had  long
and  narrow  heads,  the  form  which  is  still  the  pre-
vailing t3'pe  in  Britain,  the  United  States,  Canada,
Australia,  New  Zealand,  Spain,  and  Norway.  It
is  only  4000  to  5000  years  since  the  round  heads

74


THE   ROUND-HEADED   TYPE

or  Celts  appeared  in  Britain.  In  the  Continent
they  appeared  much  earlier.  In  the  Hmestone
caves  of  Furfooz  in  the  valle\-  of  the  Lesse,  a
tributary  of  the  .Meu-e.  the  Belgian  archaeologist,
Ed.  Dupont,  excavated  in  1867  two  crajiia — one
of  a  man^  the  other  of  a  woman.  They  are  the
types  of  the  Furfooz  rj^e.  The  remains  of  _the
mammoth  were  embedded  in  the  same  layer,  so
the  Furfooz  race  may  have  been  a  contemporary
of  the  Cro-Magnon  race,  and  its  appearance  must
be  assigned  to  the  end  of  the  last  Glacial  Period.
The  skulls  are  >mM.  and  at  once  remind  one  of
the  "  river-bed  "  t\-pe  found  in  England  towards
the  beginning  of  the  Neolithic  Period,  if  not  earlier.
They  are  sliorter  and  wider  than  the  river-bed
skulls  ;  in  the  male  the  length  is  only  174  mm.,  in
the  female  172  mm.  ;  the  width  in  the  male  is
79  per  cent,  and  in  the  female  81  -Qer  cent,  of  the
length.  In  the  opinion  of  the  writer  these  Furfooz
individuals  are  really  of  thr  -anir  race  as  tlje
"  river-bed  "  people  uf  Eni^land,  but  >how  a
marked  tendency  to  a  decrease  in  the  leii^th  and
an  increa>e  in  the  wichli  of  the  skull.  The  Fmiooz
race  was  one  with  small  heads  and  low  statiye.

To  find  a  purer  tyj^e  of  a  round-headed  people
one  must  go  farther ji^ast^  than  Belgium,  to  Gre.n-
I  elle  (a  western  suburban  district  of  Pans),  and
to  Solutre,  in  the  valley  of  the  Rhone  near  Lyons.
From  these  places  Ouatrefages  and  Hamy  ha^•e
described  seven  skulls  found  with  remains  that

75


k}^


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

assign  them  to  the  same  early  age  as  the  Furfooz
type,  but  they  show  a  more  marked  degree  of
brachycephaly.  In  all  of  them  the  width  varies
between  83  and  85  per  cent  of  the  leii^th.  They
are  markedly  and  typically  brachycephalic  ;  the
posterior  or  occipital  part  of  the  head,  instead  of
forming  a  prominent  backward  projection,  is
pressed  forwards  and  flatteiied,  so  that  the  back
of  the  head  seems  to  rise  in  line  with  the  back  of
the  neck.  The  meaning  or  significance  of  this
occipital  flattening  we  do  not  know  ;  all  that  we
are  certain  of  is  that  it  is  not  a  Simian  or  primitive
feature,  but  one  acquired  in  the  course  of  the
evolution  of  the  higher  types  of  man.  It  is  true
that  in  our  modern  way  of  describing  the  head  the
skulls  of  the  anthropoids  are  also  brachyceplialic —
the  width  of  the  cranial  cavity  is  80  per  cent  or,
more_of  its  length,  but  in  their  case  the  width  is
due  to  the  fact  that  the  brain  is  flattened  from
above  downwards.  Brachycephaly  in  the  ape
and  in  man  are  of  quite  different  natures.  The
important  aspect  of  the  discoveries  at  Furfooz
and  Crenelle  for  the  anthropologist  is  the  appear-
ance of  a  round-headed  type  of  man  in  the
north-east  of  France  some  considerable  time
before  the  present  temperate  climate  settled  in
Europe.  Discoveries  have  been  made  showing
long-headed  races  abounded  in  France,  in
Germany,  in  Switzerland,  and  in  Bohemia  in
early  Neolithic  times.  Now  the  case  is  quite
76


THE    ROUND-HEADED   TYPE

different  ;  the  round-headed  type  prevails  in  these
countries  ;  he  seems  to  be  the  conquering  type.
As  the  Neolitliic  Period  comes  to  an  end,  he
becomes  more  and  more  the  predominating  type.
Since  the  close  of  the  Glacial  Period  he  has  suc-
ceeded in  ousting  his  long-headed  brother  from
the  larger  and  richer  countries  of  Europe.  Were
it  not  for  the  discovery  of  new  continents  the  long
and  medium-headed  races  would  have  cut  a  poor
figure  in  the  world  of  to-day.  We  see  now  that
the  round  heads  hold  the  continents  of  Europe
and  Asia  from  France  and  German}-  in  the  West
to  Japan  in  the  Ejist,  and  from  the  shores  of  the
White  Sea  to  those  of  the  Mediterranean.  As
Slav  and  as  ^longolian,  he  is  the  dominating  type.
^^'ithin  historic  and  traditional  times  the  inwading
waves,  so  far  as  Europe  is  concerned,  have  origin-
ated in  Russian  territory.  Russia  Jprrns  tjie
breeding  centre  and  probably  the  cradle  of  tlie
ty^S^  The  origin  of  the  round  head  lies  far  back
in  the  past,  and  its  origin  is  more  likely  to  be  dis-
covered by  archaeological  research  in  the  dominions
of  the  Czar  than  anywhere  else  in  the  world.

Reference.  —  Ouatrefages    et    Hamy.      Crania
Ethnica.     Paris,  1882.


77


CHAPTER    IX
HEIDELBERG    MAN

THE  various  forms  of  ancient  man  so  far
described  are  modern  in  their  build  of  body  ;
were  they  to  appear  again  on  earth  they  would
not  be  out  of  place  amongst  the  various  present
races  of  mankind.  It  would  be  otherwise  with  the
Neanderthal  type  of  man  ;  he  would  be  altogether
out  of  place  in  the  modern  world  ;  an  anatomist
could  distinguish  him  at  a  glance  from  any  modern
man,  black  or  white,  so  many  and  distinct  are  his
characteristic  features.  Indeed,  the  famous  anato-
mist of  Strassburg,  Professor  Schwalbe,  proposed
to  name  all  the  extinct  races  of  the  Neanderthal
t^'pe  by  the  name  of  Homo  primigeniiis,  to  distin-
guish them  from  Homo  sapiens,  to  which  all
modern  races,  savage  and  civilized,  belong.  There
is  no  reason  to  suppose,  however,  that  the
specific  differences  are  so  great  that  representa-
tives of  Homo  sapiens  and  of  Homo  primigenius,
if  mated  together,  would  not  produce  fertile  off-
spring. The  supposition  we  proceed  on  at  the
present  time  is  that  the  Neanderthal  type  is  the
precursor  and  ancestor  of  the  modern  type.     The

78


HEIDELBERG   MAN


Neanderthal  type  represents  an  extinct  stage  in
the  evolution  of  man.  Races  of  the  modern  type
were  certainly  evolved  before  tlie  close  of  the
Glacial  Period  and  long  before  the  Thames  had
cut  its  bed  down  to  the  level  of  the  loo-foot
terrace.  We  may  allow  a  period  of  at  least
200,000  years  to  have  elapsed  since  the  modern
type  of  man  appeared  :  the  probability  is  that  his
antiquity  is  infinitely  greater,  for  he  is  fully  evolved
when  we  meet  him  first.  The  Neanderthal  type
was  certainly  evoh'ed  before  the  beginning  of  the
Pleistocene  or  Glacial  Period,  so  that  the  origin
of  this  type  preceded  the  origin  of  the  modern
type  by  many  hundred  thousand  years.  Some
geologists  estimate  the  length  of  the  Pleistocene
Period  at  ij  million  years.

The  earliest  trace  of  the  Neanderthal  type  of
man  yet  found  was  discovered  in  the  valley  of  the
Neckar,  some  six  miles  above  the  famous  German
University  town  of  Heidelberg.  Only  a  lower  jaw  was
found,  but  no  single  bone  can  tell  more  of  the  body
to  which  it  belonged  than  a  mandible.  The  sands  of
Mauer  in  which  the  jaw  was  found  lie  on  the  south
side  of  the  valley  of  the  Neckar,  some  three  and  a
half  miles  from  the  river.  The  sands  were  laid
down  in  the  bed  of  the  ancient  river  soon  after  the
Pleistocene  Period  began.  We  should  never  have
known  the  secrets  locked  up  in  those  Mauer  sands
had  it  not  been  for  tlie  happy  chance  that  they  are
excavated  and  worked  for  building  purposes.     It

79


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   MAN


is  also  fortunate  that  the  owner  of  tlicse  great
sandpits  was  keenty  interested  in  tlie  fossil  re-
mains, and  gave  Professor  Otto  Schoetensack,  of


MAUti;

SANDS
1-3  ^t


Fig.  15.  A  diagram  of  the  strata  of  the  pit  in  which  the
Heidelberg  mandible  was  found.  A  cross  marks  the  spot.
(After  Schoetensack.)


Heidelberg  University,  every  encouragement  to
examine  and  record  the  strange  things  that  were
found  from  time  to  time.  In  October,  1907,  when
the  mandi]:)le  was  encountered,  the  working  face
80


HEIDELBERG    MAN


of  the  pit  had  reached  a  depth  from  the  surface  of
a  little  over  80  feet.  The  face  shows  three  forma-
tions :  an  upper  deposit  about  19  feet  in  thickness
of  recent  loess — a  chalky  clay  ;  a  second  about
17  feet  in  depth  of  older  loess  containing  remains
of  the  mammoth  and  other  members  of  the  late
glacial  fauna  ;  a  third,  46  feet  deep,  consisting
of  layers  of  sand  laid  down  by  the  ancient  Neckar.
The  layer  in  \\hich  the  mandible  was  found  is
3  feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  third  layer  (Fig.  15).
It  is  very  evident  that  an  enormous  interval  of
time  has  elapsed  since  the  lower  strata  of  the
Mauer  sands  were  laid  down.  The  animals  then
living  in  the  central  part  of  Europe  were  mark-
edly different  from  the  modern  forms.  Bones  and
teeth  of  an  extinct  rhinoceros  {R.  Etriisciis)  are
found  in  the  same  layers  as  the  human  mandible,
and  the  presence  of  this  animal  shows  the  sands
were  laid  down  near  the  beginning  of  the  Pleisto-
cene Period.  A  kind  of  horse  was  also  found  which
indicates  an  early  date.  The  fauna  is  very  similar
to  that  found  in  the  Norfolk  beds  of  England,  and
they  are  deeper  and  much  older  than  the  glacial
boulder  clay.  Although  many  of  the  animal  forms
living  in  the  Neckar  \'alley  then  have  become
extinct,  others,  such  as  the  red  deer,  the  roe  deer,
and  the  pig,  have  come  down  to  modern  times  un-
changed. Man  has  changed,  but  to  a  less  extent  than
anthropologists  of  a  past  generation  anticipated.
The  Heidelberg  man  had  a  massive  jaw,  which
G  81


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   MAN

recalls,  both  by  its  size  and  shape,  the  anthropoid
rather  than  the  modern  human  bone  (Fig.  i6).  In
men  of  the  present  day  tlie  chin  is  prominent,  pro-
jecting in  advance  of  the  lower  incisor  teeth,  while
in  the  Heidelberg  jaw,  as  in  the  anthropoid,  the
opposite  is  the  case.    To  the  superficial  observer  the


Fig  i6.  Profile  drawing  of  the  Heidelberg  mandible  (in
outline)  contrastetl  with  the  lower  jaw  of  a  Modern  European
(shaded).      (Half  natural  size.)

Heidelberg  man  would  appear  chinless,  but  such
is  really  not  the  case,  the  teeth  and  the  alveolar,
or  tooth-carrying  part  of  the  jaw,  are  so  strongly
developed  that  they  mask  the  lower  or  chin  part.
In  modern  Europeans  the  teeth,  in  the  total
length  of  their  grinding  surface,  are  lo  mm.
[f  in.)  less  than  in  the  Heidelberg  man.  There
82


HEIDELBERG    MAN


has  been  a  reduction  in  dental  development,  with
the  result  that  the  teeth  and  the  alveolar  part  of
the  jaw  have  retreated  and  left  the  chin  prominent.
While  the  upper  or  alveolar  part  of  the  jaw  varies
according  to  the  size  of  the  teeth,  the  lower  border
of  the  jaw  on  which  the  chin  is  set  varies  according
to  the  size  of  the  floor  of  the  mouth.  In  order  to
allow  a  free  movement  of  the  tongue  and  of  other
parts  concerned  in  speech  movements,  the  lower
border  of  the  jaw,  wliicli  bounds  the  floor  of  the
mouth,  has  opened  out  in  modern  man.  Speech
requires  that  the  floor  of  the  mouth  should  be
opened  out  to  give  free  mo\'ements  to  all  those
parts  concerned  in  the  easy  production  of  speech.
Now  in  shape  and  size  the  Heidelberg  mandible
shows  a  condition  intermediate  to  the  anthropoid
and  the  modern  human  forms.  The  anthropoid
jaw  is  the  primitive  one  ;  the  mandible  is  framed
to  serve  the  purpose  of  mastication  ;  the  mandible
of  modern  man  is  modified  to  serve  in  speech.  In
the  Heidelberg  man  we  must  admit  that  the
mandible  is  mainly  adapted  for  mastication.  The
various  modifications  we  associate  with  speech
are  also  there,  but  in  a  partially  developed  con-
dition. The  anatomical  features  of  the  mandible
indicate  that  human  speech,  of  a  primitive  nature,
may  have  been  present  in  this  early  form  of  man.
xA.t  least  we  reach  in  the  Heidelberg  remains  a  point
in  the  evolution  of  man  where  the  possibilitv  of
speech  may  be  called  in  question.

83


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

From  tlie  Heidelberg  jaw  we  learn  that  the
luiman  mechanism  of  mastication  was  fully  evolved
at  the  beginning  of  the  Pleistocene  Period.  The
canine  teeth  wliich  are  so  large  and  prominent  in
all  forms  of  anthropoids  have  in  the  Heidelberg


Fig.  17.  Profile  of  the  Heidelberg  mandible  (outline)  con-
trasted with  that  of  the  mandible  of  a  chimpanzee  (shaded).
(Half  natural  size.)


specimen  subsided  to  the  level  of  the  neighbouring
teeth  in  the  dental  series.  We  must  assume  that
at  one  period  in  the  evolution  of  man  the  canines
were  prominent  and  pointed  as  in  the  anthropoids,
for  it  is  only  on  such  a  supposition  that  the
peculiar  form  of  the  human  canine  teeth,  and  their
position  during  development,   can  be  explained.

S4


HEIDELBERG   MAN


To  understand  the  retrogression  of  the  canine
teeth  in  man  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the
mechanism  of  mastication  in  anthropoids  and  the
part  played  in  this  act  l)y  these  great  teetli.  In
anthropoid  apes  the  muscles  of  mastication  are
extremely  strong,  so  that  the  toughest  and  most
resistant  of  edible  things  can  be  crushed  between
the  teeth.  In  exercising  great  force  there  is  a
tendency  for  the  lower  jaw  to  skid  or  slip  side-
ways, but  such  a  movement  is  pre\'ented  by  the
prominent  canines  coming  into  contact  as  the
jaws  close,  thus  preventing  a  false  lateral  move-
ment.

The  canines  may  serve  as  organs  of  defence  or
of  attack  in  the  anthropoid  as  in  the  dog,  but  their
main  purpose  is  that  of  dental  guides  for  the  jaws.
The  peculiarity  of  the  mastication  in  the  ancient
forms  of  man  was  the  side-to-side  and  oblique
movements  of  the  lower  jaw  whereby  the  food  \\'as
crushed  and  pulverized  between  the  upper  and
lower  teeth.  Such  chewing  mo\'ements  were  im-
possible so  long  as  the  canine  teeth  projected
bej'ond  the  level  of  the  other  teeth.  The  retro-
gression of  the  canine  teeth  in  the  primitive  human
stock  and  the  evolution  from  the  anthropoid  to
the  early  human  mechanism  of  mastication  must
be  sought  for  in  the  Pliocene  Period  or  even
earlier.  In  early  Pleistocene  man  the  evolution  of
the  human  dentition  was  already  completed.

A  study  of  the  Heidelberg  mandible  shows  how
S5


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

rough  and  tough  the  precarious  diet  of  this  early
race  of  man  must  have  been.  The  part  of  the
mandible  which  ascends  to  become  jointed  with
the  base  of  the  skull  and  to  receive  the  attachment
of  the  muscles  of  mastication  is  of  enormous  size.
The  area  of  its  outer  surface  is  34  ctm-,  that  of  a
modern  man  is  18  ctm-,  a  little  more  than  half.
The  masseter  muscle  corresponds  in  size  to  the
outer  surface  of  the  ascending  ramus  ;  we  may
assume  that  the  surface  area  of  the  masseter  was
twice  that  of  the  modern  muscle  and  its  thickness
was  correspondingly  great.  The  masseter  was
three  or  four  times  greater  in  the  Heidelberg  man
than  it  is  no^^'  in  most  Europeans  ;  hence  the
massive  and  strong  build  of  his  jaw.  The  crowns
of  the  teeth,  however,  are  not  particularly  large,
nor  are  they  peculiar  in  shape.  Certainly  a  small
proportion  of  modern  Europeans  and  a  large  pro-
portion of  negroid  races  can  show  more  massive
teeth.  Even  at  this  early  point  in  human  evolu-
tion the  cro^\•ns  of  the  teeth  had  assumed  a  truly
human  character  in  size  and  form,  but  it  was  other-
wise with  their  roots.  It  is  plain  that  the  great
strain  to  which  the  teeth  would  be  subjected  in
side-to-side  and  oblique  movements  executed  by
extremely  stout  chewing  muscles  makes  a  firm
and  strong  implantation  in  the  jaws  a  necessity.
Hence  we  find  the  necks  and  roots  of  the  Heidel-
berg teeth  are  peculiar.  Their  necks  are  almost
as  large  as  their  crowns,  and  the  roots  have  be-
86


HEIDELBERG   MAN


come  so  massive,  strong  and  thick  tliat  they  have
grown  together.  In  modern  molars  the  roots  of
the  hinder  teeth  are  apt  to  fuse,  but  in  this  case
the  fusion  is  due  to  an  actual  approximation  of
the  roots,  a  result  of  retrogression  ;  in  the  ancient
Heidelberg  man  the  fusion  was  the  result  of  over-
growth. So  peculiar  are  the  roots,  so  unlike  the
same  structures  in  the  modern  type  of  man  and  in
anthropoids,  that  Dr.  Adloff  thinks  the  Heidelberg
man.  and  the  Neanderthal  type  to  which  he
belongs,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  stage  in  the
evolution  of  modern  man.  In  the  writer's  opinion
the  form  of  root  just  described  is  a  specialization
which  appeared  and  subsequently  disappeared
when  the  special  adaptation  was  no  longer  required.
The  case  is  similar  to  the  biceps  of  the  blacksmith  ;
the  hypertrophy  disappears  when  vigorous  de-
mands cease  to  be  made  on  it.  \Mien  knowledge
ameliorated  the  quality  of  the  human  diet,  the
overgrown  condition  in  the  roots  of  the  teeth  dis-
appeared.

Although  we  know  only  the  lower  jaw,  the  size
and  shape  of  the  palate  of  the  Heidelberg  man
can  be  inferred  with  some  degree  of  accuracy.  The
arrangement  and  size  of  the  teeth  in  the  upper  jaw
have  a  definite  relationship  to  those  of  the  lower
jaw  ;  hence  we  may  estimate  the  size  of  the  palate
from  tlie  lower  teeth.  The  area  of  the  Heidelberg
palate  was  about  3600  mm-,  whereas  the  area  of
the  palate  of  an  average  modern  Englishman  is

s-


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

only  about  2600  mm"-.  The  length  of  the  palate,
when  measured  from  l^etween  the  cro\\ns  of  the
central  incisors  to  a  point  midway  between  the
posterior  borders  of  the  last  molars,  must  have
been  about  62  mm.  in  the  Heidelberg  man,  while
in  the  modern  English  palate  the  length  is  54  mm.
The  width  of  the  palate  as  measured  between  the
outer  borders  of  the  second  molar  teeth  was
probably  72  mm.  in  the  Heidelberg  man  ;  in  the
modern  Englishman  it  measures  on  the  average
about  58  mm.  The  feature  of  the  Heidelberg  palate
was  its  absolute  and  relative  width.  In  anthropoids
the  outstanding  feature  of  the  palate  is  the  gre  .t
length,  absolute  ^nd  relati\'e.  Tlie  width  of  the
palate  in  the  early  Neanderthal  type  of  man  was
probably  due  to  the  side-to-side  movements  in
chewing.  The  evolutionary  forces  then  at  work
had  a  tendency  to  widen  and  not  to  elongate  the
palate,  and  thus  to  obtain  a  wide  but  not  a  project-
ing or  prognathous  development  of  the  upper  jaw.
The  jaws  of  these  early  human  beings  were  primitive
enough,  but  certainly  not  simian.  At  even  this  early
stage  the  simian  condition  was  long  past.  It  is  a  re-
markable fact  that  there  is  a  tendency  to  narrow-
ing of  the  palate  and  jaws  in  modern  civilized
races.

From  the  Heidelberg  lower  jaw  it  is  possible  to

give  an  approximate  reconstruction  of  tlie  whole

liead.     The  manner  in  \\liich  the  u]iper  teeth  can

be  placed  in  j)osition  and  the  size  and  sha})e  of

88


HEIDELBERG   MAN


the  palate  estimated  have  just  been  mentioned.
The  condyle  of  the  jaw  gives  the  situation  of  the


^


.<--'


Fig.  iS.     Heidelberg  mandible  with  attempted  reconstruction
of  the  head.     (One-third  natural  size.)


maxillary  articulation  on  the  base  of  the  skull.
To  this  joint  the  ear,  the  mastoid  process,  and  the
root  of  the  z^'gomatic  arch,  from  which  the  mas-


m^


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN


seter  muscle  arises,  bear  definite  and  constant
relations.  The  width  of  the  ascending  ramus  of
the  jaw  gives  a  clue  to  the  termination  of  the
zygomatic  arch  on  the  face  and  affords  certain
indications  of  the  size  of  the  orbit.  The  width  of
the  jaw,  between  its  codyles,  affords  an  indication
of  the  breadth  of  the  base  of  the  skull.  When,
however,  we  begin  to  construct  the  roof-part
of  the  skull  we  have  to  fall  back  on  certain  definite
rules  \\'hich  have  safely  guided  men  in  the  past
when  reconstructing  extinct  forms.  The  rule  is
that  of  correlationship  of  parts  ;  the  bones  of  any
animal  form  parts  of  a  harmonious  mechanism  ;
if  the  type  of  animal  is  known,  then  the  discovery
of  a  single  bone  indicates  the  nature  and  form  of
the  whole  skeleton.  Now  there  can  be  no  doubt
as  to  the  nature  of  the  Heidelberg  jaw  ;  it  is  of  the
form  known  to  occur  in  the  Neanderthal  type  of
man.  It  is  certainly  stronger  and  more  massive
than  any  sample  yet  found,  but  nevertheless  one
can  be  absolutely  certain  that  the  head  form  of
the  Heidelberg  man  was  of  the  Neanderthal  shape
(Fig.  ig).  In  Neanderthal  man  the  skull  was
peculiarly  fixed  to  the  neck  of  the  individual.
The  head  was  tilted  backwards  and  carried
permanently  in  this  manner,  so  that  the  muscles
of  the  neck  were  attached  much  higher  up  the
occiput  than  in  modern  races.  In  modern  man,
as  in  the  young  of  anthropoids,  the  head  is  balanced
or  evenly  poised  on  the  neck.  In  races  of  the
90


HEIDELBERG   MAN


present  day  this  poise  continues  throughout  hie,
but  in  Neanderthal  man,  as  in  anthroi)oids,  the
position  of  the  head  to  the  neck  changed  as  adult
years  were  reached.  The  sterno-mastoid  muscles
whicli  }ilay  a  leading  part  in  l)alancing  the  head
on    the    neck    are    attached    to    bony    elevations


Fip;.  19     Prufiles  uf  the  Heidelljerg  (outline)  and  Spy  (shaded)
mandibles  superimposed  for  comparison.      (Half  natural  size.)


situated  just  behind  the  ear,  known  as  the  mastoid
processes.  The}-  vary  in  shape  according  to  the
manner  in  which  the  head  is  fixed  to  the  neck.
Hence  in  Neanderthal  man  the  mastoid  processes
are  quite  unlike  the  pyramidal-shaped  processes  of
modern  races.  Indeed,  they  at  once  recall  the
same  processes  in  the  gorilla  skull.    In  the  manner

9'


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF    MAN

of  head  fixation  Neanderthal  man  retains  a  dis-
tinct trace  of  the  anthropoid  form.  The  tilting
back  of  the  head  and  its  carriage  in  this  position
is  a  necessary  result  of  great  jaw  development.
To  make  room  for  a  large  mandible  with  a  corre-
spondingly large  tongue  and  throat,  the  head
must  be  held  in  a  position  of  backward  extension.
The  erect  poise  of  the  head  in  modern  man  is  a
direct  result  of  the  reduction  in  the  masticatory
apparatus.  As  early  as  the  Galley  Hill  man,  and
probably  long  before  his  time,  this  reduction  had
been  accomplished.

To  carry  such  a  jaw  as  the  Heidelberg  the
breadth  of  the  base  of  the  skull  must  have  been
approximately  145  to  150  mm.  wide  and  its  length
over  200  mm.  These  are  dimensions  known  to
occur  in  the  Neanderthal  type  of  man.  The  skulls
were  extremely  massive.  The  strong  ridge  of
bone  which  crossed  the  forehead  just  over  the
orbits  we  may  be  certain  was  present,  because
the  great  muscles  of  mastication  demand  this
additional  strengthening  of  the  face.  The  supra-
orbital ridge  {toyus  supraorhitalis)  is  a  characteristic
of  the  Neanderthal  type  of  man.  When,  however,
we  come  to  estimate  the  brain  capacity  of  the
Heidelberg  cranium,  we  find  the  data  at  our  dis-
posal are  insufficient  to  give  any  certain  indication.
Although  the  mandible  is  more  massive  and  more
primitive  in  form  than  those  of  known  Nean-
derthal individuals  it  is  exactly  of  the  same  type,
92


HEIDELBERG    MAN


and  we  mav  infer  that  the  brain  capacity  was
probably  less  but  not  greatly  less.  Now  it  has
become  known  in  recent  years  that  we  greatly
underrated  tlie  brain  development  of  tlie  Nean-
derthal race  ;  the\'  had  large  brains.  Indeed,  in
some  instances  the}'  are  markedly  above  the
modern  average.  If,  therefore,  we  assign  a  cranial
capacit}'  of  1300  cc.  to  the  Heidelberg  man  we
shall  probably  be  under  rather  than  above  the  truth.
Thus  the  earliest  trace  of  the  skeleton  of  man
yet  found  in  Europe  must  be  assigned  to  a  period
wliich  carries  us  back  many  hundred  tliousands  of
years,  almost  to  the  beginning  of  the  geological
epoch  which  preceded  the  present.  Yet  even  at
that  early  date  we  find  man  already  evolved,
brutish  perhaps  in  appearance,  sa\-age  no  doubt
in  his  nature,  yet  large-brained,  erect  in  posture,
and  in  every  sense  of  the  biologist — a  man.

Referenxes. — Prof.  Otto  Schoetensack  :  Der
Unterkiejer  des  Homo  Heidelhurgensis.  Leip-
zig, 1908.

Prof.  George  G.  MacCurdy  :  "  Recent  Dis-
co^■eries  Bearing  on  the  Antiquity  of  Man
in  Europe."  Smithsonian  Reports,  1909,
PP-  531-83.


93


CHAPTER    X
KRAPINA    MEN

THE  discovery  of  the  Heidelberg  mandible
was  made  in  1907.  In  the  previous  year
Professor  Karl  Gorjano\'ic-Kramberger — known  to
his  German  colleagues  as  G.  K. — published  a  mag-
nificent memoir,  in  which  he  gave  an  account  of  the
remains  of  a  very  ancient  people  discovered  in  the
Hungarian  Province  of  Croatia.  It  is  important
to  note  the  scene  of  the  discovery.  Soon  after
the  Save,  one  of  the  largest  tributaries  of  the
Danube,  crosses  the  north-west  frontier  of  Croatia,
it  is  joined  by  the  Krapinica,  a  small  river  on
which  the  village  of  Krapina  is  situated.  A  little
way  above  Krapina  the  stream  flows  through  a
glen  with  steep  sides  of  sandstone  rock.  It  was
on  the  western  side,  80  feet  (25  metres)  above  the
present  level  of  the  stream,  that  remains  of  the
Krapina  men  were  found.  Extensive  explorations
made  between  1899  and  1905  revealed  an  ancient
cave  completely  filled  up  and  obscured  by  strata
26  feet  in  thickness,  which  had  been  laid  down
when  an  extinct  form  of  rhinoceros  {R.  merckii  or
Icptorhinus)  and  a  Neanderthal  type  of  man  were
living  in  Croatia.    This  form  of  rhinoceros  is  not  so

94


KRAPINA   MEN


ancient  as  the  Etruscan  species  found  with  the
Heidelberg  man,  but  it  is  older  than  the  woolly
rhinoceros  {R.  ticJwrJiinus),  which  flourished  with
a  Neanderthal  man  at  a  later  date  in  the  Pleisto-
cene Period  of  France  and  Belgium.  A  rough
indication  of  the  antiquity  of  the  cave  strata  may
be  obtained  from  the  erosion  of  the  valley.  The
strata  on  the  floor  of  the  cave  were  deposited  by
the  Krapinica  ;  since  then  that  stream  has  worn
out  a  valley  in  the  sandstone  80  feet  below  the
level  of  the  floor  of  the  cave.  The  ice  sheet  never
reached  Croatia,  so  we  must  regard  the  erosion  of
the  valley  as  the  work  of  the  stream  alone.  While
the  strata  on  the  floor  of  the  cave  were  laid  down
by  the  stream  the  upper  layers  of  the  cave  or  rock
shelter  were  formed  by  debris  which  had  fallen
from  time  to  time  from  the  overhanging  cliif.  In
these  strata  as  many  as  nine  distinct  levels  or
floors  were  noted  containing  signs  of  human  habita-
tion. Traces  of  hearths  were  found  as  deep  as  the
stream-formed  layer  on  the  floor  of  the  cave.  Stone
implements  occurred  tinoughout  of  a  primitive
type  ;  some  implements  crudely  shaped  from  the
splintered  bones  of  the  rhinoceros  were  found.
Remains  of  the  cave  bear  abounded,  many  of  the
bones  being  half  burned,  and  all  si)lit  or  broken.
Over  230  human  teeth  and  200  fragments  of  the
human  skeleton  were  recovered  during  the  excava-
tions. The  conditions  of  some  ofj^the  fragments
suggested  to  their  discoverer  that   these  Imman

95


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

bones  were  remains  of  cannibalistic  feasts.
At  least,  no  complete  human  bone  was  found,  and
there  were  no  signs  of  burial.  From  the  fragments
found,  representing  at  least  ten  individuals,  a
fairly  complete  picture  can  be  formed  of  the
ancient  race  of  Krapina.

The  Krapina  men  are  later  than  the  Heidelberg,
but  liow  much  later  it  is  difficult  to  sa}^  The
animals  wliich  accompanied  them  represent  a
more  recent  fauna  than  those  found  in  the  Mauer
sands.  No  implement  or  product  of  the  Heidelberg
man's  workmanship  is  known.  The  implements
of  the  Krapina  men,  according  to  Rutot's  judg-
ment, vary  widely  as  regards  their  design  ;  some
are  of  a  kind  belonging  to  a  period  which  antedates
the  Mousterien  Period — the  one  in  which  the
Neanderthal  race  flourished  in  France,  while
others  are  of  the  Aurignacien  Period,  which  fol-
lowed the  Mousterien.  The  Krapina  implements
do  not  help  us  much  as  regards  date.  Two  things
are  manifest,  however  :  (i)  that  the  shelter  or
cave  excavated  by  Kramberger  must  ha^•e  been
the  home  of  man  for  many  generations — a  floor
which  is  composed  of  24  feet  of  debris  is  not  quickly'
formed  ;  (2)  the  fragments  of  the  skeleton  found
in  these  strata  are  sufticient  to  show  that,  with  a
great  variety  of  form  as  regards  age,  sex,  and
individuals,  there  is  the  same  type  throughout.
The  men  of  Krapina  represent  a  variant  of  the
Neanderthal  type.

96


KRAPINA  MEN


The  Heidelberg  and  Krapina  men  are  probably
separated  by  a  long  interval  of  time,  apparently
represented  by  one  of  the  many  climatic  revolu-
tions which  divide  the  Glacial  Age  into  three  or
more  periods.  If  we  assign  the  Heidelberg  man
to  the  first  Interglacial  Period,  we  should  place
the  Krapina  man  in  the  second.  The  Krapina
man  had  discovered  the  use  of  fire,  a  discovery
which  must  lead  to  a  radical  change  in  the  nature
of  human  diet  and  to  the  conditions  of  life.  One
can  understand  how  such  a  discovery  may  lead
to  a  complete  alteration  in  the  bodily  development
of  man  in  the  course  of  many  generations.

Besides  many  fragments,  a  complete  lower  jaw
was  discovered.  In  all  its  dimensions,  except  two,
this  Krapina  jaw  is  smaller  than  the  Heidelberg
example.  The  two  characters  in  which  it  exceeds
that  specimen  may  be  mentioned  first.  The  depth
of  the  jaw  at  the  sympliysis  or  chin  in  the  Heidel-
berg specimen  is  33  mm.,  not  much  more  than  is
usual  in  modern  jaws  ;  in  the  Krapina  specimen
the  symphysial  depth  was  42  mm.  In  the  Krapina
mandible  the  condyles  of  the  jaw  were  set  half  an
inch  wider  apart  than  in  the  Heidelberg,  and  an
inch  more  than  is  usual  in  modern  men.  That
indicates  a  very  wide  base  to  the  skull.  In  all
other  dimensions  this  singular  jaw  from  Krapina
is  less  than  the  Heidelberg  :  there  was  clearly  a
smaller  development  of  the  muscles  of  mastication.
The  Krapina  palate  was  also  smaller  than  the

H  97


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

Heidelberg  one.  In  length  it  varied  from  55
to  62  mm.,  and  in  width  from  66  to  73  mm.
The  teeth,  however,  retain  the  peculiar  roots,  and  in
the  dimensions  and  characters  of  their  crowns  they
exceed  those  of  the  Heidelberg  man  and  resemble
some  of  the  modern  negroid  races.  The  mandibles
varied  greatly  in  size  and  character  amongst  the
Krapina  folk  ;  some  as  regards  their  ascending
ramus  did  not  differ  very  much  from  modern  races,
but  these  were  probably  the  bones  of  women.

It  is  at  Krapina  we  obtain  our  first  glimpse  of
the  difference  in  the  build  of  the  body  in  man  and
woman,  and  it  is  there,  too,  we  get  our  knowledge
of  children  of  the  Neanderthal  race.  The  women
were  of  a  much  lighter  build  than  the  men  ;  the
supra  orbital  ridges  were  less  developed  and  less
simian.  The  bones  of  the  skulls  were  thinner,  the
jaws  less  massive  and  robust  in  the  women,  and  the
thigh  bones  of  the  two  sexes  showed  as  great,  if  not
greater  differences  than  are  seen  in  modern  races.
In  early  man,  as  is  also  the  case  among  anthropoids,
the  male  was  endowed  \\ith  a  more  massive,  robust,
and  brutish  body  than  the  female.  In  the  progress
towards  the  modern  type,  children  lead  the  way,
women  follow,  and  men  bring  up  the  rear.

Although  no  complete  or  even  approximately
complete  human  skull  was  found  af  Krapina,  it  is
clear  that  they  differ  very  materially  from  all  other
Neanderthal  crania  which  have  been  discovered.
They  are  shorter,  the  longest  being  197  mm.,  and


KRAPINA   MEN


the  common  length  appears  to  have  been  igo  mm.,
or  in  some  cases  much  less.  In  specimens  of  the
Neanderthal  race  found  in  other  parts  of  Europe,  the
length  is  usually  over  200  mm.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Krapina  heads  were  \\dde  ;  the  common  width
was  evidently  about  145  mm.,  but  in  some  cases
it  amounted  to  165  mm.  The  width  of  the  head
varied  from  75  to  85  per  cent  of  the  length,  so  we
have  here  clear  evidence  of  a  tendency  to  round-
headedness  or  brachycephaly.  The  skulls  of
anthropoids  are  brachycephalic  and  also  flattened
on  the  top,  so  that  a  cast  of  the  brain  cavity  ap-
pears flat  and  wide.  This  was  also  the  case  in
the  Krapina  men.  Flattening  of  the  top  is  a
character  of  the  Neanderthal  head.  As  regards
the  size  of  the  brain  the  Krapina  men  had  a  fair
endowment,  the  cranial  capacity  probably  varied
between  1300  and  1500  cc,  not  very  different  from
that  of  modern  men.

We  have  only  one  fragmentary'  specimen  to
guide  us  in  framing  a  picture  of  the  face.  So  far  as
this  specimen  can  be  reconstructed,  it  is  so  similar
to  the  completely  preserved  face  of  the  Gibraltar
skull  that  its  description  may  be  postponed  until
that  example  is  described.  It  is  enough  at  present
to  say  that  the  face  was  massive  and  particularly
long,  the  eye  -  sockets  were  spacious  and  sur-
mounted by  beetling  brows,  the  cheeks  were  full ;
but  although  the  jaw  was  wide  and  massive,  there
was  no  projecting  muzzle  as  in  the  ape.    As  to  the

99


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

colour  of  tlie  skin,  one  can  say  nothing  for  certain,
but  the  characters  of  the  teeth  are  those  we  now
see  in  negroid  races,  and  I  for  one  would  be  sur-
prised to  know  that  the  skins  of  the  Krapina  men
were  European  in  complexion.  If  not  so  dark  as  in
the  typical  negro,  they  were  probably  pigmented.
It  must  be  remembered  that  we  are  dealing  no\\'
with  a  type  of  men  which  preceded  all  races  of  the
modern  type.  All  the  evidence  at  present  at  our
disposal  points  to  the  fair-skinned  European  as  one
of  the  latest  products  of  human  evolution.  The
common  ancestral  stock  from  which  every  modern
race  is  descended  must  have  been  negroid  in
nature.  It  is  possible  that  the  Neanderthal  type
of  man  may  represent  such  a  stock.

Reference. — Prof.  Karl  Gorjanovic-Kramberger  :
Der  Diluviale  Mensch  von  Krapina.  Wies-
baden, 1906.


CHAPTER   XI
NEANDERTHAL    MAN

ON  the  north  side  of  the  valley  of  the  lower
Rhine,  between  Diisseldorf  and  Eberfeld,  a
deep  gorge,  known  as  Neanderthal,  has  been  cut
in  limestone  rocks,  by  a  small  tributary  of  the
Rhine.  On  the  south  side  of  the  gorge,  some
60  feet  above  the  level  of  the  stream  and  100
below  the  top  of  the  cliff,  there  is  a  small  cave  in
which  the  remains  of  the  Neanderthal  type  of  man
were  first  discovered.  The  discovery  was  made
in  the  spring  of  1857.  Certain  bones  found  in  the
loam  of  the  floor  of  the  cave,  at  a  depth  of  4  or  5
feet,  came  into  the  possession  of  Ur.  Fuhlrott.
So  unfamiliar  were  they  in  appearance  that  several
weeks  elapsed  before  their  owner  recognized  them
as  human.  Fairly  complete  examples  of  all  the
long-limb  bones  were  found  as  well  as  the  roof  or
calvaria  of  a  skull.  In  1858  Dr.  Schaafhausen,  a
skilled  antln-opologist,  published  an  excellent  ac-
count of  the  bones  thus  discovered,  and  from  that
date  to  this  these  human  remains  have  puzzled
and  fascinated  anatomists  throughout  the  world
and  been  the  subject  of  many  an  acrimonious  dis-


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

pute.  Huxley  recognized  in  them  the  features  of
a  new  and  very  ancient  type  of  man  ;  Virchow  said
they  were  the  bones  of  a  modern  man  suffering
from  a  pecuUar  disease  ;  in  later  days  Professor
Schwalbe  applied  to  them  his  new  methods  of  in-
vestigation, and  declared  the  Neanderthal  remains
to  be  the  prototype  of  an  extinct  kind  or  species
of  man.  To  this  species  he  gave  the  name  of  Homo
Primigenius,  in  distinction  to  the  modern  type  to
wliich  the  name  of  Homo  sapiens  is  restricted.
We  know  now  that  the  men  who  lived  in  Europe
during  the  earlier  and  greater  part  of  the  Glacial
Period — one  estimated  to  have  extended  over  a
period  of  from  500,000  to  1,500,000  years — were
of  the  Neanderthal  type.

After  the  discovery  of  a  human  skeleton  in  the
cave  at  Neanderthal  attempts  were  made  to
obtain  evidence  as  to  the  probable  antiquity  of  the
remains.  In  the  strata  of  the  floor  of  a  neighbour-
ing cave,  bones  of  the  mammoth  {Ekphas  primi-
genius) and  woolly  rhinoceros  {R.  tichorhinus)  were
found  ;  the  presence  of  these  animals  indicates
a  date  towards  the  end  of  the  Glacial  Age,  probably
the  third  and  last  of  the  interglacial  temperate
periods.  The  date  of  the  Neanderthal  man  would
thus  be  later  than  the  Krapina  race,  which  has  been
assigned  to  the  second  Interglacial  Period.  More
recently,  however,  Konstantin  Koenen  has  found
evidence  in  Neanderthal  that  makes  it  possible  to
assign  these  Croatian  and  South  German  repre-


NEANDERTHAL    MAN


sentatives  of  the  Neanderthal  type  to  the  same
period.

A  comparison  of  the  calvaria'of  the  Neanderthal


SPY      ci

GM-LEY     HILL  -


Fig.  20.  Outline  of  Neanderthal  form  of  skull  (shaded)
compared  with  the  Galley  Hill  type  (outline).  (One-third
natural  size.)

skull  with  the  corresponding  part  of  the  Galley
Hill  man  will  bring  out  its  peculiar  features.  Both
are  very  long  skulls,  the  Neanderthal  being
203  mm.,    the    Galley    Hill    some    2  mm.    more.


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

The  factors  wliich  make  up  the  length  are  different :
in  the  first-named,  the  brain  amounts  to  174  nmi.
of  tlie  length,  tlie  additional  29  mm.  being  due
to  the  thickness  of  the  skull  bones ;  in  the  Galley
Hill  type  the  brain  factor  amounts  to  187  mm.,
the  bones  18  mm.  In  the  one  case  the  great  length
is  due  to  the  thickness  of  the  skull,  in  the  other
to  length  of  brain.  The  supra-orbital  bar  of  bone
which  crosses  the  forehead  of  the  Neanderthal
skull  above  the  orbits  is  so  thick  that  it  makes  up
23  mm.  of  the  total  length,  while  in  the  Galley
Hill  man  the  supra-orbital  thickness  amounts  to
only  13  mm.  The  supra-orbital  bar  or  torus  is  a
feature  of  the  Neanderthal  type,  and,  as  has  been
already  explained,  its  development  is  related  to
the  great  forward  growth  of  the  muscles  of  masti-
cation on  the  frontal  region.  The  extreme  width
of  the  supra-orbital  bar  as  measured  from  one  side
of  the  forehead  to  the  other  is  126  mm,  in  the
Neanderthal  calvaria,  and  only  106 — a  modern
width — in  the  Galley  Hill.  The  great  size  of  the
supra-orbital  torus  gives  the  forehead  of  the  Nean-
derthal man  a  receding  appearance,  and  this  is
emphasized  by  its  great  width  just  above  the
eyes.

A  comparison  of  tlie  manner  in  which  the  skull
is  hafted  or  fixed  to  the  neck  brings  out  another
important  difference  between  the  Neanderthal
man  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Galley  Hill  and
modern  man  on  the  other.  The  permanent  tilting
104


NEANDERTHAL   MAN


back  of  the  head  in  the  more  ancient  type  has
already  been  mentioned,  so  has  the  upgrowth  of
the  muscles  on  the  occiput  of  the  head.  Thus
it  comes  about  that  in  the  Neanderthal  skull  the
inion  which  marks  the  upper  limit  of  the  attach-
ment of  neck  muscles  is  20  to  25  mm.  above  the
upper  limit  of  the  cerebellum.  In  modern  men  the
inion  is  just  below  the  upper  level  of  the  cerebellum.
The  failure  to  recognize  this  important  difference
in  the  position  of  the  inion  has  led  to  an  under-
estimation of  the  height  of  that  part  of  the  skull
which  contains  the  cerebrum.  If  the  height  of
the  skull  is  measured  from  the  level  of  the  inion
the  Neanderthal  skull  appears  very  low  and  thus
comparatively  small  ;  but  if — in  a  more  correct
way — -the  posterior-inferior  angle  of  the  parietal
bone  is  taken  to  mark  the  lower  cerebral  level,
then  the  height  of  the  Neanderthal  and  Galley  Hill
crania  are  not  very  different  ;  in  the  first  the
cerebral  height  is  loomm.,  and  in  the  second  97mm.
As  regards  width  of  brain  and  skull  the  Nean-
derthal is  the  greater  ;  the  skull- width  is  150  mm.,
the  brain-width  is  138  mm.  In  the  Galley  Hill
man  the  width  of  the  skull  is  12  mm.,  and  the  brain
8  mm.  less.  The  size  of  the  cranial  cavity  in  the
Neanderthal  type  was  much  under-estimated.  In
place  of  being  1230  cc,  as  Huxley  supposed,  it  is
over  1500  cc,  as  Manouvrier  and  Boule  have
estimated.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  brain  had
reached,  as  regards  size,  more  than  a  modern
105


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

degree  of  development  in  the  Neanderthal  type  ;
indeed,  1480  cc.  is  usually  accepted  as  an  average
for  modern  man.

It  was  not  only  in  tlie  massiveness  of  his  skull
and  jaws  that  Neanderthal  man  was  peculiar.  The
bones  of  his  limbs  were  very  thick  and  rather
clumsy  as  well  as  short.  The  difference  is  well
illustrated  by  comparing  his  thigh  bone  with  that
of  a  modern  man  of  average  height,  5  ft.  8  in. —


Fig.  21.     Thigh  bone  of  Neanderthal  (outline)  and  modern  man
(shaded)  contrasted.     (One-fifth  natural  size.)

1720  mm.  In^the  Neanderthal  man  the  femur
was  438  mm.  long,  and  the  height  of  his  massive
body  is  estimated  to  have  been  about  5  ft.  4  in.
(1620  mm.).  The  limb  bones  were  shaped  dif-
ferently to  ours.  The  head  of  the  femur  and  its
lower  end  which  forms  part  of  the  knee-joint  are
larger  and  more  clumsy  in  their  build  than  in  the
femur  of  modern  man.  All  the  joints  of  the  body
were  big.  The  shaft  of  the  thigh  bone  of  modern
man  is  rather  straight  and  compressed  from  side
to  side  ;  in  the  Neanderthal  bone  the  shaft  has
106


NEANDERTHAL   MAN


a  marked  bend  forwards  in  the  middle,  and  is
much  wider  from  side  to  side  than  from  before
backwards.  The  explanation  of  these  features
given  by  Fraipont  is  probably  correct.  Modern
man,  when  he  comes  to  the  position  of  "  Atten-
tion "  has  no  difficulty  in  completely  extending
his  legs  at  the  knee-joint,  but  such  a  movement
would  have  been  very  difficult  for  a  Neanderthal
man  in  whom  the  knees  were  kept  slightly  bent
even  when  standing  and  walking.  Still,  it  is  not
correct  to  say  he  had  not  attained  the  upright
posture.  He  walked,  as  modern  men  have  a
tendency  to  do,  with  his  knees  always  bent  to  a
slight  degree,  maintaining  his  posture  by  the
action  of  muscles,  depending  less  on  the  check
action  of  ligaments  than  is  the  case  with  modern
men.  As  in  all  ancient  human  races  the  right
humerus  was  more  massive  and  stronger  than  the
left.  The  impressions  for  the  attachment  of
muscles  were  more  marked  on  the  right  bone  than
on  the  left,  showing  that,  at  this  early  date,  the
right  arm  was  the  more  specialized.  Man  was
already  right-handed.

References. — Thomas  H.  Huxley  :    Man's  Place
in  Nature.    1863.

Prof.  G.  Schwalbe  :    Die  Vorgescliichie  des
Menschen.     Braunsschweig,  1904.     "  Studien
zu  Vorgeschichte  des  Menschen."    Zcitsclirijt
Jiir  Morph.  und  Anthrop.,  1906,  p.  5.
107


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

Prof.  H.  Klaatsch  :  "  Ergebnisse  einer
Studienreise."  ZeitschrijtfiirEihnologie,  1903,
Bd.  35,  p.  92.  "  Die  neuesten  Ergebnisse."
Zeitschriftfiir  Ethnologic,  1909,  Bd.  41,  p.  537.
See  also  Ergebnisse  der  A  natomie  und  Entwicke
lungsgeschichte  (Merkel  and  Bonnet),  between
1899  and  1909.


CHAPTER    XII

NEANDERTHAL   MAN    IN    BELGIUM    AND
FRANCE

LEAVING  Neandertlial  and  turning  soutliwards
_^  across  the  valley  of  the  Rhine,  a  journey  of
one  hundred  miles  brings  the  traveller  into  the
valley  of  the  Meuse,  in  the  south  of  Belgium.  In
this  valley  near  Liege,  Professor  Schmerling  dis-
covered the  Engis  skull  in  1833.  That  skull,  which
we  have  seen  is  intermediate  to  the  Galley  Hill
and  river-bed  types,  was  found  in  the  floor  of  a
limestone  cave  with  remains  of  the  mammoth  and
woolly  rhinoceros.  Some  fifty  miles  further  south
in  the  same  valley  remarkable  discoveries  of
Neanderthal  man  were  made.  In  1865,  eight
years  after  the  discovery  at  Neanderthal,  Dr.  Ed.
Dupont  discovered  part  of  a  mandible  which  we
know  now  must  have  belonged  to  an  ancient
representative  of  the  Neanderthal  race  in  Bel-
gium. It  was  found  in  the  strata  of  the  floor  of
the  limestone  cave  at  La  Naulette  at  a  depth  of
36  feet,  with  remains  of  the  mammoth  and  woolty
rhinoceros.  From  the  characters  of  the  jaw  we
judge  it  to  be  that  of  a  woman,  but  the  teeth  are
large.  In  the  same  district  were  discovered  the
109


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

remains  of  the  two  men  of  Spy,  perhaps  the  most
important  discovery  of  Neanderthal  man  yet
made.  In  the  parish  of  Spy,  not  far  from  Namur,
is  a  wooded  hmestone  hill,  of  no  great  height.  A
small  stream,  the  Orneau,  flows  past  its  base.  On
the  southern  face  of  the  hill,  some  sixty  feet  above
the  level  of  the  stream,  there  is  a  cave  in  the  lime-
stone rock,  with  a  mound-like  terrace  in  front  of
it — just  such  a  cave  and  cliff  as  ancient  man  loved
to  make  his  home.  For  our  purpose  he  could  not
shave  chosen  a  better  site  than  a  limestone  cave,  be-
cause the  drip  of  the  water  from  the  roof  soaks  into
and  preserves  whatever  organic  thing  it  happens
to  fall  on.  In  1885  Marcel  de  Puydt  and  Max
Lohest  began  to  explore  the  strata  on  the  terrace
in  fr^nt  of  the  cave.  The  strata  of  the  terrace  were
comjtpsed  of  debris  which  the  weather  had  de-
tached from  the  face  of  the  cliff,  and  which  had
been  tramped  down  by  generations  of  ancient  men.
Tlie  upper  9  feet  were  barren,  yielding  no  traces
of  human  habitation  ;  but  below  this  upper
layer  the  explorers  entered  a  second,  between  2  and
3  feet  in  thickness,  which  yielded  remains  of  the
mammoth  and  reindeer.  Below  the  second  was
a  third  layer,  with  remains  of  charred  wood,  of
hearths,  and  of  human  habitations.  In  the  fourth
layer,  immediately  above  the  floor  of  the  old  cave,
which  became  more  and  more  exposed  on  the
terrace,  as  the  overhanging  cliff  crumbled '  away,
there  were  found  two  male  human  skeletons.


NEANDERTHAL  MAN  IN  BELGIUM

From  the  position  of  the  remains  the  explorers
concluded  that  these  two  men  had  been  buried.
They  were  of  the  Neanderthal  type.  Evidence
of  their  civilization  was  also  found  ;  their  flints
are  of  the  form  ascribed  to  the  Mousterien  Age,
but  instruments  of  ivorj^  and  of  bone,  with
engravings  on  the  same  material,  show  a  degree
of  progress  when  a  comparison  is  made  with
the  civilization  of  the  Krapina  men.  It  is
said  that  fragments  ^f_pottery  were  also  Jound  ;
thajjiiay  be  so,  but  it  is  possible^  that  these  p  j,^
fragments    may   have    been    obj^ined^rom    the'^  T

more^~siiiperficjal  strata,  for  in  1885  ou^explor-
ator\^  methods  were  still  rather  crude.  Bones  of
the  woolly  rhinoceros,  of  the  mammoth,  hyaena,
ca^'e  bear,  pig  and  Irish  elk  also  occurred  in
the  same  stratum  as  the  human  remains.  The
fauna  and  the  civilization  are  not  so  very  different
from  those  of  the  Engis  man,  and  yet  the  whole
cycle  of  a  Glacial  Period  probably  lies  between
tliem.

Fraipont  and  Lohest  published  an  excellent
description  of  the  .Spy  men  in  1886  ;  since  then
the  bones  have  been  studied  by  several  anatomists,
especially  b\'  Professor  Klaatsch,  of  Breslau.  The
two  men  of  Spy  are  spoken  of  as  No.  i  and  No.  2.
The  head  of  No.  i  is  almost  a  replica  of  the
Neanderthal  man ;  No.  2  shows  also  the  Nean-
derthal characters,  and  yet  he  also  shows  distinct
tendencies  to  the  assumption  of  a  more  modern

III


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

form.  In  No.  i  the  length,  width,  and  cerebral
height  are  the  following  :  205,  147,  and  97  mm.
In  No.  2  the  corresponding  measurements  are  198,
153,  and  107  mm.  No.  2  has  a  remarkably  high
head,  the  width  is  77  per  cent  of  the  length — an
inclination  to  round-headedness,  while  in  No.  i
the  width  index  is  the  same  as  in  the  type  speci-
men found  in  Neanderthal,  namely,  71  per  cent.
The  brains  of  the  Spy  men  were  large,  they  varied
between  1500  and  1650  cubic  centimetres,  being
above  the  modern  average.  We  of  a  later  genera-
tion, with  a  fertility  of  mechanical  invention,  can
little  understand  the  great  brain  which  was
necessary  to  make  the  first  steps  towards  human
civilization.  The  first  stages  of  any  new^  en-
deavour are  notoriously  the  most  difficult.

The  men  of  Spy,  if  large-brained,  were  rather
less  than  the  Neanderthal  man  in  stature^ — they
WTre  only  a  little  over  five  feet,  but  their  bones
show  the  same  stout  and  massive  type  and  the
same  curious  carriage  of  head  and  body.  The  head
of  Spy  No.  2,  as  already  said,  shows  a  tendency
to  assume  more  modern  characters.  In  both,  the
teeth  are  of  a  more  modern  type  than  those  of
the  Heidelberg  and  Krapina  men.  The  size  of  the
necks  of  the  teeth  and  the  form  and  dimensions  of
the  roots  are  rather  of  the  present-day  character.
Their  palates  and  jaws  were  smaller.  If  we  assign
the  Heidelberg  remains  to  the  first  interglacial  epoch
and  the  Krapina  to  the  second,  we  may,  I  think,


NEANDERTHAL   MAN    IN    FRANCE

place  the  Spy  men  alwiit  the  opening  of  the  third
period.  At  least  there  are  signs  in  the  structure
of  the  body  and  in  the  degree  of  civihzation  that
point  to  the  men  of  Spy  as  being  distinctly  later
in  date  than  those  considered  in  the  two  preceding
chapters.

In  the  south-west  of  France,  some  five  lumdred
miles  from  the  habitat  of  the  men  of  Spy,  three
remarkable  discoveries  of  men  of  the  Neanderthal
type  have  been  made  in  quite  recent  years.  The
limestone  cliffs  and  terraces  which  flank  the  upper
valley  of  the  Dordogne  and  of  its  tributaiy,  the
Vezere,  the  region  where  the  remains  of  the  men
of  the  Cro-Magnon  and  Galley  Hill  types  were
found,  were  also  the  scene  of  these  recent  and  im-
portant finds  of  Neanderthal  man.  In  the  be-
ginning of  1908,  Herr  O.  Hauser  discovered  in  a
cave  near  the  village  of  Le  Moustier,  on  the  Vezere,
the  skeleton  of  a  lad,  clearly  of  the  Neanderthal
type.  The  skeleton  thus  obtained  was  investigated
and  described  by  Professor  Klaatsch,  of  Breslau.
The  lad  was  buried  in  a  sleeping  posture,  with
flints  of  his  period  laid  with  him.  Later  in  the
same  year,  also  in  a  floor  of  a  cave,  MM.  les  Abbes
J.  Bouyssonie  and  A.  Bouyssonie  and  L.  Bardon
found  the  skeleton  of  an  old  man  also  of  the  same
type  near  the  village  of  La  Chapelle-aux-Saints,
some  distance  to  the  east  of  Le  Moustier,  in  the
Department  of  Correze.  The  skeleton  was  exam-
ined by  Professor  Boule.    In  the  following  3'ear  a


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

third  skeleton  was  discovered  by  M.  Pergrony  in
the  site  of  an  old  rock  shelter  at  Ferrassie,  also  in
the  valley  of  the  Dordogne.


SOIL.       ANC

RUBBLE.


M  IDDL.E
!_OVV  tR


AURIGN  AC


MOUSTERIEN


ACHEIULEEN


PRE-  ACHEULEEN


Fig.  22.     Section  of  the  strata  in  which  the  skeleton
was  found  at  Ferrassie.


Only  a  preliminary  description  of  the  last-named
discovery  has  been  published  as  yet  by  Professor
Capitan,  who,  however,  has  given  a  very  instruc-
114


NEANDERTHAL   MAN    IN    FRANCE

tive  sketch  of  the  strata  in  which  the  skeleton  was
found.  The  deposits,  which  have  been  gradually
and  slowly  formed  by  the  wash  of  rain  and  the
weathering  of  the  face  of  the  cliff,  extend  to  a
depth  of  14-3  feet.  The  top  stratum  of  soil  and
rubble,  4  feet  in  depth,  contains  no  trace  of  human
habitation  ;  we  may  suppose  it  to  have  been
formed  after  primitive  man  had  abandoned  rock-
shelter  habitations.  The  second  stratum,  5 '6  feet
thick,  contained  many  traces  of  man.  From  the
character  of  the  flint  and  bone  implements,  the
engravings  and  the  remains  of  animals,  these
strata  are  inferred  to  have  been  formed  during  the
Aurignacien  Period.  Three  stages  in  this  period
are  recognized.  In  tlie  oldest  and  lowest  stratum
of  that  period  the  Combe-Capelle  man — of  the
Galley  Hill  race — was  found.  In  the  upper  or
most  recent  layer  the  Cro-Magnon  race  has  left
its  traces.  The  Aurignac  Period  covers  a  long
interval  of  time,  and  is  usually  regarded  as  part
of  the  interval  between  the  third  or  penultimate,
and  the  fourth  or  last  of  the  interglacial  periods.
Below  the  Aurignacien  are  the  formations  of  the
Mousterien  Period.  In  the  section  given  by
Professor  Capitan  (Fig.  22)  the  deposits  of  the
Mousterien  Period  are  i|  feet  thick.  The  skeleton
of  Ferrassie  was  found  at  the  bottom  of  this  laver.
Below  the  Mousterien  were  found  the  formations
of  the  Acheuleen  Period.  These  two  periods,
Mousterien  and  Acheuleen,  are  usually  supposed


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

to  cover  the  time  which  preceded  and  succeeded
the  third  or  penultimate  cold  cycle.  In  the  deeper
or  older  formations  of  the  Mousterien  Period,
Hauser  discovered  the  skeleton  of  the  young  man
at  Le  Moustier  ;  the  skeletons  found  at  La
Chapelle-aux-Saints  belong  apparently  to  the
close  of  the  Mousterien  Period.  Remains  found
during  the  exhumation  show  that  the  reindeer
was  then  in  the  south  of  France.

The  young  lad  found  at  Le  Moustier  is  a  re-
markable example  of  the  Neanderthal  t\'pe.  The
canine  and  wisdom  teeth  were  in  process  of
eruption,  and  the  long  bones  had  not  ceased
growing.  He  was  probably  about  sixteen  years
of  age,  but  already  all  the  characters  of  his  race
were  fully  developed  and  well  marked.  The  skull
was  particularly  massive,  having  the  dimensions
of  the  Neanderthal  skull  and  probably  a  some-
what greater  capacity.  The  teeth  are  remarkably
large  ;  when  fully  grown  his  palate  would  have
had  almost  exacth'  the  same  dimensions  as  those
estimated  for  the  Heidelberg  man.  The  face  was
badly  broken,  and  although  indifferently  restored
we  can  see  that  it  is  very  massive,  its  width  and
length  being  about  an  inch  greater  than  in  modern
men.  The  characteristic  supra-orbital  ridge  is
present,  and  also  the  peculiar  modification  of  the
occiput  to  give  attachment  to  the  massive,  bull-
like neck.  His  height  was  under  five  feet.  The
remains  of  the  young  man  are  now'  preserved  in
1 16


NEANDERTHAL    MAN    IN    FRANCE

the  Musem  of  Ethnology  at  Berhn.    The  price  paid
was  a  fabulous  one,  viz.  160,000  marks.

While  the  skeleton  of  Le  ]\Ioustier  gives  us  a
glimpse  of  Neanderthal  man  in  his  youth,  we  have
a  picture  of  him  in  old  age  at  La  Chapelle-aux-
Saints.  The  skull  of  the  old  man  has  a  length  of
208  mm.,  3  or  4  mm.  greater  than  any  other
known  specimen  of  this  type.  It  is  very  possible
that  in  Neanderthal  men,  as  among  anthropoids,
the  supra-orbital  ridges  and  muscular  crests  kept
slowly  growing  all  through  life.  Professor  Boule
estimates  the  cranial  capacity  at  1625  cubic  centi-
metres— nearly  150  cubic  centimetres  above  the
average  of  modern  Europeans,  and  the  stature
he  calculates  to  have  been  1600  (5  ft.  3  in.).  As
in  the  Le  Moustier  individual,  so  in  this,  the  facial
part  of  the  skull  was  damaged  ;  but  e\-en  if
damaged,  the  parts  are  welcome,  for  we  knew  very
little  of  the  face  of  Neanderthal  man  until  these
discoveries  were  made.  The  length  of  the  face
must  have  been  more  than  an  inch  wider  and
longer  than  in  modern  man,  while  the  neck  was
at  least  three-quarters  of  an  inch  more  in  thickness
when  measured  from  side  to  side  and  half  an  inch
more  when  estimated  from  front  to  l^ack.  The
teeth  were  worn  and  diseased  in  tlie  old  man  of
La  Chapelle-aux-Saints  ;  the  molar  teeth  were
lost  during  life,  a  condition  we  did  not  expect,
for,  as  a  rule,  the  teeth  of  an  ancient  man,  al-
though much  worn,  seldom  show  traces  of  disease.
117


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

Recently  the  teeth  of  Neanderthal  man  have
been  discovered  in  the  Island  of  Jersey  ;  they
are  similar  in  type  to  those  of  Krapina  and  Heidel-
berg. The  teeth  were  found  with  remains  of  the
woolty  rhinoceros  in  the  strata  filling  an  old  cave
on  the  cliff  of  St.  Brelade's  Bay.  Thus  we  have
evidence  that  at  a  distant  time,  dating  from  almost
the  beginning  to  almost  the  end  of  the  Glacial
Period — a  period  variously  estimated  at  from
half  to  one  and  a  half  millions  of  years — Europe
was  occupied  from  the  centre  of  Germany  in  the
north  to  the  Pyrenees  in  the  south,  from  Jersey  in
the  west  to  Croatia  in  the  east,  by  a  type  of  man-
kind quite  unlike  modern  races.  As  yet  we  have
only  obtained  a  few  glimpses  of  the  men  of  this
vast  period.  They  appear  suddenly  and  they
seem  to  disappear  without  leaving  a  trace.  A
fuller  knowledge  will  show  how  this  remarkable
race  stands  to  modern  man.  In  the  writer's
opinion  the  Neanderthal  type  represents  the  stock
from  which  all  modern  races  have  arisen.  At  the
first  glance  the  native  of  Central  Africa  has  little
in  common  as  regards  build  of  bod}'  with  the  native
of  Central  Europe,  and  yet  an  unprejudiced  survey
will  show  that,  on  the  whole,  the  Negro  and  the
European  have  a  greater  similarity  in  structure
than  either  of  these  two  has  to  the  Neanderthal
type.  The  extent  of  the  difference  between  black
and  white  indicates  that  the  racial  separation  of
the  modern  type  of  man  must  be  placed  far  back
ii8


NEANDERTHAL   MAN    IN    FRANCE

in  time.  Yet  the  Neanderthal  type  seems  the
parent  stock,  and  it  is  probable  that  while  Nean-
derthal man  was  the  dominating  race  in  Glacial
Europe,  another  branch  of  the  same  stock  was
shaping  towards  the  modern  form  outside  the
bounds  of  that  continent.

Although  no  remains  of  the  Neanderthal  type
have  been  found  in  a  stratum  which  lies  over  or
is  more  recent  than  one  containing  a  representa-
tive of  a  modern  race,  j^et  there  is  evidence  to  sup-
port the  theory  that  the  Galley  Hill  type  was
contemporary  with  the  Neanderthal  type  in
Europe.  No  intermediate  forms  have  yet  been
discovered  in  Europe  or  elsewhere.  The  transition
from  one  type  to  the  other  appears  to  have  taken
place  suddenly.  In  the  course  of  a  few  thousand
years  Australia  may  offer  a  similar  problem  to  the
anthropoiogist.  Research  in  that  country  would
show  at  a  distant  date  a  sudden  transition  from
one  type  of  mankind  to  another.  The  sudden
change  we,  who  see  the  change  taking  place,  know
to  be  due  to  a  replacement,  not  a  transformation,
of  race.  Glacial  Europe  was  evidently  the  scene
of  a  similar  change  of  type  ;  but  in  this  case
the  change  was  greater  than  that  now  seen  in
Australia,  for  a  very  ancient  species  of  man  was
replaced  by  what  is  here  named  the  modern  type.

In  recent  years  we  have  come  to  know  that  the
growth  of  the  body  is  regulated,  and  its  characters
determined  by  internal  secretions — especially  by
119


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

the  substances  secreted  from  the  thyroid  and
pituitary  glands.  The  pecuhar  characters  of  the
Neanderthal  type  appear  to  be  under  the  particu-
lar domination  of  the  small  pituitary  gland  at
the  base  of  the  brain.  When  this  gland  becomes
enlarged,  as  it  occasionally  does  in  the  disease
known  as  acromegaly,  the  Neanderthal  characters
are  developed  in  the  subjects  of  the  disease  in  an
exaggerated  and  bizarre  form.  The  functions  of
the  pituitary  seem  to  afford  a  key  to  Neanderthal
characteristics.  There  are  grounds  for  believing
that,  as  our  knowledge  of  the  body  increases,  it
may  be  possible  to  reproduce  in  modern  man  by  ex-
perimental methods  all  the  various  features  of  head
and  body  which  characterize  the  Neanderthal  type.

References. — Prof.  Fraipont  et  M.  Loliest  :  "  Le
Race  humaine  de  Neanderthal  en  Belgique."
Archives  de  Biologic,  1887,  T.  7,  p.  587.

Prof.  H.  Klaatsch  and  Herr  O.  Hauser  :
"  Homo  Mousteriensis  Hauseri."  Archiv.  fiir
Anthropologic,  1909,  Bd.  4,  p.  287.

Prof.  Marcellin  Boule  :  "  L'homme  fossile
de  la  Chapelle-aux-Saints."  L'anthropologie,
1908,  T.  19,  p.  519.

Prof.  Capitan  :  "  Les  nouveaux  hommes
fossiles  de  I'epoque  du  Moustier."  Revue
Scicntifique,  1910,  T.  48,  p.  193.

Prof.  A.  Keith  :  "  Teeth  of  Neanderthal
Man  in  Jersey."     Nature,  191 1,  p.  414.


CHAPTER    XIII
GIBRALTAR   MAN

NO  specimen  of  the  Neanderthal  type  has  a
more  remarkable  history  than  the  Gibraltar
cranimii.  In  igio  Colonel  E.  R.  Keynon,  then  in
command  of  the  Royal  Engineers,  Gibraltar,  dis-
covered from  the  minute  book  of  the  long-defunct
"  Gibraltar  Scientific  Society  "  that  this  cranium
was  brought  to  Hght  in  1848  and  presented  to  the
Museum  of  the  Society  b}^  the  Secretary,  Lieu-
tenant Flint.  The  Gibraltar  cranium  was  thus
the  first  discovery  of  the  Neanderthal  type  of  man,
the  famous  specimen  having  been  found  nine
j-ears  later,  in  1857.  The  Gibraltar  find  is  of  the
utmost  value  for  two  reasons — (i)  the  face  and
base  of  the  cranium  are  better  preserved  than  in
any  other  specimen  yet  discovered  ;  (2)  because,
at  least  in  the  opinion  of  the  writer,  it  is  of  a  more
primitive  type  than  any  yet  described,  and  ap-
pears to  bridge  the  gulf  between  the  ancient  man
of  Java  [Pithecanthropus  erediis)  and  the  typical
Neanderthal  man.  It  seems  to  be  Early  Nean-
derthal or  Pre-Neanderthal.

In  1862  the  cranium  came  to  England  with  an


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   MAN

extensive  collection  of  the  remains  of  animals
which  had  been  excavated  in  the  Genista  cave  at
Gibraltar  by  Captain  Brome,  Superintendent  of
the  Gaol.  Captain  Brome's  patriotism  on  behalf
of  Science  led  to  his  being  ignominously  and  most
unjustly  dismissed  the  service  because  his  pioneer
discoveries  had  been  made  by  the  aid  of  prisoners
under  his  charge.  The  collection  which  reached
England  under  those  inauspicious  circumstances
was  examined  and  described  by  two  remarkably
skilled  men — Mr.  George  Busk  and  Dr.  Hugh
Falconer.  Both  were  struck  with  the  human
cranium.  Falconer,  observing  that  certain  features
distinguished  it  from  the  modern  type  of  cranium,
proposed  to  recognize  it  as  a  type  of  a  new  variety
of  mankind,  and  to  name  the  variety  Homo  Calpi-
cus — from  Calfe,  the  old  name  of  Gibraltar.  In
1868  Busk  presented  the  cranium  to  the  Museum
of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of  England,  where
it  is  now  preserved.  It  has  received  the  attention
of  anthropologists  from  the  days  of  Huxley,
Broca,  Ouatrefages  and  Hamy  to  more  recent
days,  when  it  has  been  studied  by  Macnamara,
Klaatsch,  Schwalbe,  Sollas,  and  Sera.  The  point
on  which  all  are  now  agreed  is  that  the  Homo
Calpicus  belongs  to  the  Neanderthal  type  of
Pleistocene  man.

All  the  evidence  relating  to  the  antiquity  of
this  specimen  is  indirect.  The  only  certain  point
is  that  it  was  quarried  out  of  the  terrace  under


GIBRALTAR   MAN


the  north  face  of  the  rock,  at  a  site  then  known
as  Forbes  Ouarr}*.  The  nature  of  the  terrace  we
know  ;  the  accompanying  section  from  a  recent
paper  by  Mr.  H.  D.  Acland  will  give  a  good  idea


FLOOR      BRECCIA


Kig.  23.  Section  of  a  talus  or  terrace  at  (Gibraltar  of  similar
formation  to  the  one  in  which  the  famous  skull  was  found.
(H.  D.  Acland.)


of  the  terrace  or  talus  formations  at  Gibraltar.
The  terrace  is  formed  by  weathering  and  erosion
of  the  face  of  the  limestone  cliff ;  the  chips,  which
fall  from  the  cliff,  are  welded  together  to  form  a
conglomerate  at  the  base.  Mixed  with  the  lime-
stone chips  is  an  addition  of  fine  wind-blo\\n  sand


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF    MAN

from  the  neiglibouring  shore.  A  petrified  mass
of  sandstone  breccia  still  fills  the  nasal  cavities  of
the  Gibraltar  cranium.  Its  rock-like  consistence
defies  removal.  The  part  of  the  terrace  in  which
the  cranium  was  found  was  probably  at  a  former
period  the  floor  of  a  cave.  Part  of  a  cave  still
exists  behind  the  site  of  the  discovery.  The  floor
of  this  cave  was  explored  by  Dr.  W.  H.  L.  Duck-
worth, of  Cambridge,  in  1911  ;  he  found  ten
successive  layers  of  stalagmite,  and  a  la3xr  of
breccia  or  conglomerate  4^  feet  thick  on  the  floor.
No  fossil  remains  were  discovered  by  him.  The
terrace  formation  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  cave
strata  of  the  Dordogne,  but  it  is  impossible  at  the
present  time  to  find  the  exact  geological  period.
It  is  certainly  a  Pleistocene  formation,  and  very
probably  older  than  the  cave  strata  in  the  Dor-
dogne assigned  to  the  Mousterien  Period.  Pro-
fessors A.  C.  Ramsay  and  James  Geikie,  who
investigated  the  geology  of  Gibraltar  in  1877,
saw  evidence  of  a  cold  period  in  these  terrace
formations  of  breccia.  The  fauna  found  in  the
Genista  cave  by  Captain  Bromc  and  described  by
Busk  and  Falconer,  is  very  similar  to  that  found
with  the  Heidelberg  jaw  in  the  sands  of  Mauer.
Rhinoceros  Etruscus  was  present  as  at  Mauer,  and
the  fauna  indicates  an  early  part  of  the  Pleistocene
Period.  In  a  cave  at  Gibraltar  Dr.  Duckworth
foimd  stone  implements  of  the  type  used  in  France
during  the  Mousterien  Age.

124


GIBRALTAR   MAN


The  geological  evidence  permits  one  to  sa\'  that
the  conditions  of  life  at  Gibraltar  at  the  beginning
of  the  Pleistocene  Period  were  such  as  make  it
probable  that  man  may  liave  lived  there  then.
The  real  evidence  of  antiquity  must  be  sought  for
in  the  skull  itself.  Tlie  cranial  capacit}'  is  under
1 100  cubic  centimetres — 200  to  300  less  than  in  the
examples  of  Neanderthal  man  found  elsewhere  with
the  possible  exception  of  one  Krapina  specimen.
Although  the  size  of  the  brain  has  not  shown
a  progressive  increase  with  evolution,  still  we
must  regard  a  small  brain  ca\'ity  in  a  primitive
type  of  skull  as  an  indication  of  antiquity.  The
total  length  of  the  skull  is  192  mm.,  the  brain
making  up  164  mm.  of  this  amount.  In  the
Neanderthal  skull  the  total  length  was  203  mm.,
with  a  brain  length  of  175.  The  proportion  of
the  thickness  of  bone  is  therefore  greater  than  in
the  Neanderthal  skull.  The  width  of  the  Gibraltar
brain  is  130  mm.,  the  skull  142.  The  width  or
cephalic  index  of  the  skull  is  thus  74  per  cent  of
the  length.  There  is  a  slight  indication  of  the
brachycephalic  character  as  seen  in  Krapina  crania.
It  is,  however,  in  the  cerebral  height  that  the
primitive  nature  of  this  skull  is  evident.  The  height,
according  to  the  writer's  method  of  measurement,
is  onh'  88  mm.,  10  to  15  mm.  less  than  in  the  other
Neanderthal  crania,  with  the  possible  exception
of  some  of  the  Krapina  fragments.

The  writer  was  at  first  incUned  to  explain  the

125


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

diminutive  _size^  of_the  _Gibialtai^  cranium  on  the
supposition  thaLitjYas  that  of  a  woman,  a  sugges-
tion first  made_by  Professor  Sollas,  but  further
investigation  of  the  characters  of  the  jaw,  and


GIBRALTAR                 [_^
MODERN     ENGLISH


Fig.  24.     Profile  of  the  Gibraltar  cranium  (shaded)  compared
with  modern  English  skull  (outline).    (One-third  natural  size.)


teeth,  and  face,  and  especially  a  critical  survey  of
the  sexual  differences  ^seen  iii_the_fVagBieiits  ^f
the  Krapina  craflia,  compelled  him  to  abandon  tl].e
se-.xual  explanation  and  adopt  tJiat  of  antigijity-
The    characters    of    the    teeth    are    remarkably


126


GIBRALTAR    MAN


primiti^'e.  The  upper  molars,  which  are  worn
ahiiost  to  the  roots  and  broken,  have  characteristic
roots.  They  are  widely  spread  and  united  to-
gether almost  to  their  tips.  Their  crowns,  as  in  the
Heidelberg  mandible,  are  not  large.  The  first  upper
molar  when  measured  from  front  to  back  along
the  line  of  the  alveolus,  is  ii'5  mm.,  the  second
10-5  mm.,  and  the  last  is  as  large  as  the  first —
\-ery  probably  larger,  for  we  can  only  judge  of  its
size  from  the  space  occupied  by  the  roots.  The
necks  of  the  teeth  were  as  large  or  larger  than
tlie  crowns.  The  length  of  the  palate  is  only
54  mm.,  certainly  shorter  than  the  Heidelberg
palate  ;  its  width  is  70  mm.,  the  same  measure-
ment as  was  estimated  for  the  Heidelberg  palate.
Tlie  dimensions  of  the  face  are  moderate  in
amount,  the  extreme  width  from  one  zygomatic
arch  to  the  other  was  probably  134  mm.  ;  the
length  of  the  face  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the
gum  between  the  upper  incisors,  81  mm.  In  the
La  Chapelle  skull  these  dimensions  are  10  mm.
{'i  in.)  greater.  The  characters  of  the  face  of  the
Gibraltar  skull  are  primitive  ;  a  number  of  its
features  recall  the  corresponding  parts  of  the
gorilla.  The  bridge  of  the  nose  in  its  length  and
breadth  and  the  manner  in  which  the  root  bends
upwards  into  the  supra-orbital  ridge,  are  more
like  the  gorilla  form  than  is  the  case  in  any
other  cranium  of  the  Neanderthal  type.  The  air
sinuses  in  the  upper  jaw  are  inflated  to  almost  the
127


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

same  extent  as  in  the  gorilla.  The  orbits  are
capacious,  as  is  the  case  in  all  crania  of  the  Nean-
derthal type  and  also  in  the  gorilla,  but  in  the
form  of  palate  there  is  no  resemblance  to  the  great


GIBRALTAR


I'ig.  25.    Face  view  of  the  Gibraltar  skull.
(One-third  natural  size.)

anthropoid.  The  projecting  muzzle  of  the  gorilla
is  replaced  by  the  backwardly  compressed  and
wide  upper  jaw  of  the  Neanderthal  type.  One
feature  of  the  face  is  rather  surprising.  The  aper-
ture of  the  nose  is  bounded  by  a  sharp  margin
128


GIBRALTAR    MAN


very  similar  to  the  form  seen  in  modern  man.  The
prenasal  grooves,  seen  in  the  floor  of  the  nasal
aperture  of  anthropoids,  of  Negroid  races,  and  of
the  other  known  specimens  of  Neanderthal  man,
are  absent.     Yet  the  aperture  is  extremely  wide,


I'ig.  26.    Profile  of  Gibraltar  skull.     (One-thinl  natural  size. )


namely,  34  mm.  In  the  Gibraltar  skull  one  seems
to  have  a  foreshadowing  of  the  prominent  Euro-
pean nose.  Were  the  air  sinuses  which  puff  out
the  regions  of  the  nose  and  cheek  to  collapse  to
modern  dimensions,  the  narrow  and  prominent
European  nose  would  be  produced.  The  tj'pe  of
K  129


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF    MAN

nose  seen  in  the  Gibraltar  cranium  could  hardly
be  the  forerunnT?r  of  the  Negro  type.  Further
evidence  of  the  primitive  nature  of  the  Gibraltar
skull  is  seen  in  its  fiat  cranial  base,  which  has  been
studied  closety  by  Dr.  Sera.  Another  primitive
feature  is  the  diminutive  size  of  the  squama  of
the  temporal  bone  ;  it  takes  but  a  small  part  in
forming  the  cranial  cavity.  On  the  other  hand,  the
great  wing  of  the  sphenoid  is  massi^'e — a  feature
which  Professor  Klaatsch  observed  to  occur  in  all
crania  of  the  Neanderthal  type.

Taking  all  the  evidence  into  account — the
anatomical  features  of  the  skull,  the  Pleistocene
fauna  of  Gibraltar,  and  the  formation  of  the  terrace
in  which  the  cranium  was  discovered — we  may
regard  the  human  race  kno\\n  to  us  only  b}'  this
single  cranium,  as  a  very  early  form  of  Pleistocene
man.  The  race  was  certainly  of  the  Neanderthal
type,  but  appears  to  he  an  earlier  and  miore  primi-
tive form  tlian  the  typical  specimens  ciiscovered  in
Belgium  and  France.

Reference. — Prof.  \\'.  G.  Sollas :  "On  the
Cranial  and  Facial  Features  of  the  Nean-
derthal Race  "  Philosophical  Transaciions,
1908,  \o].  igg  B,  p.  281


CHAPTER    XIV

FOSSIL    MAN    OF   JAVA^PITHECANTHROPUS
ERECTUS

THE  Gibraltar  skull  serves  in  some  degree  to
bridge  the  gulf  between  the  Neanderthal
type  of  Europe  and  the  remarkable  type  ol  man
discovered  in  Ja\'a  by  Eugene  Dubois,  now  Pro-
fessor of  Geology  in  the  Universitv  of  Amsterdam.
Professor  Dubois  was  trained  under  that  \-eteran
Dutch  zoologist,  Professor  Max  ^^'eber,  and  went
out  to  Java  in  1889  as  a  mihtary  surgeon.  At
the  request  of  the  Governor-General  of  Java
he  explored  the  fossil  bed  of  Trinil,  a  native
hamlet  in  the  Province  of  Madiun,  near  the  centre
of  Java.  That  province  is  known,  on  account  of
its  tropical  heat,  as  the  "  Hell  "  of  Java.  Through
Madiun,  bending  northwards  to  the  sea,  meanders
the  Solo  or  Bengawan,  a  stream  which  has  cut
its  banks  to  a  depth  of  35  to  40  feet,  thus  exposing
the  strata  of  the  plain.  The  upper  35  feet  are
composed  of  tlie  consoHdated  debris  of  lava
washed  from  the  hills  anel  deposited  on  the  plain
by  the  Bengawan  during  the  Pleistocene  Period.
Under  the  thick  strata  of  \"olcanic  debris  is  a  laver


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF    MAN


50-


60^


ELGETABLE
SOIU


STRATIFIED


RIVER        DEPOSIT


-^


,_.HlGH     vv/ATElK


LOW     WATER


r~^-


:yp^g  ILIH-EROUS       STIJATIJM


CLAY

MARINE       DRECCIA


Tg^;'*<^u.- .


Fig.  27.  Section  of  the  bank  of  the  Bengawan,  showing  the
position  of  the  fossil-bearing  stratum  in  which  the  remains  of
the  fossil  man  were  found.


FOSSIL   MAN   OF   JAVA


which  ma\'  be  regarded  as  a  sejuilchre  for  a  past
fauna  of  the  island.  During  1891  and  1892  Pro-
fessor Dubois  discovered  in  this  deep  fossihferous
stratum  the  remains  of  twenty-seven  species  of
mammals,  belonging  to  twent}'  genera.  Amongst
these  fossil  remains  of  a  long-past  fauna  \\-ere  four
specimens — a  skull  cap,  a  thigh  bone,  and  two
teeth — which  he  assigned  to  an  extinct  animal.
To  this  extinct  form  he  gave  the  name  of  Pithe-
canthropus crectus.  He  regarded  it  as  a  link  w  hich
bridged  the  gulf  between  man  and  anthropoids.
In  a  zoological  sense  the  name  is  justified,  but  so
many  are  the  human  characters  and  so  strong
is  the  suggestion  that  in  this  discover}-  of  Dubois
we  have  a  representation  of  an  actual  stage  in  the
evolution  of  man,  that  it  seems  more  expedient
to  simpty  give  the  name  of  Homo  javenensis,  or
the  fossil  man  of  Ja\'a.

It  is  highly  desirable  to  fix  the  date  of  the  Java
type  of  man  and  see  how  he  stands  as  regards  the
earliest  known  form  of  the  Neanderthal  type.
The  Heidelberg  man,  it  will  be  remembered,  is
assigned  to  an  early  part  of  the  Pleistocene  Period  ;
Dubois  regarded  the  Trinil  fossil  fauna  as  of  older
date,  belonging  to  the  end  of  the  previous  or
Pliocene  Period.  To  fix  with  greater  certainty
the  date  of  the  Trinil  fauna,  Frau  Lenore  Selenka,
the  widow  of  Professor  Emil  Selenka,  who  did  so
much  to  extend  our  knowledge  of  the  Higher
Primates,  led   an  expedition   to   Java  in  1907-8.


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

In  the  opinions  of  the  experts  who  examined  the
fossils  excavated  by  the  expedition,  the  Trinil
fauna,  including  Pithecanthropus,  is  Pleistocene- —
of  the  same  date  or  perhaps  even  later  than  the
Heidelberg  man.  The  difficulties  of  fixing  the
relative  dates  of  a  fauna  of  a  tropical  country
such  as  Java  with  that  of  a  temperate  country,
wliich,  like  Central  Europe,  has  been  subjected  to
many  changes  in  climate,  in  the  scale  of  geological
time,  are  very  great.  It  is  true  that  the  strata
which  succeeded  the  fossil-bearing  layer  of  Trinil
shows  a  flora  of  a  temperate  climate,  but  a  tem-
perate climate  in  volcanic  Java  is  more  likely
due  to  a  great  elevation  of  the  island  than  to  such
a  change  of  climate  as  Pleistocene  Europe  was
sul)jected  to.  In  the  writer's  opinion  Dubois  was
right  ;  the  Trinil  fauna,  judging  from  the  changes
in  the  mammalian  forms,  is  as  old  as  the  Pliocene
of  Europe,  and  is  earlier  than  the  sands  of  Mauer.
Whatever  the  exact  date  may  be,  whether  late
Pliocene  or  early  Pleistocene,  the  characters  of
the  femur  leave  no  doubt,  in  spite  of  minor
peculiar  features,  that  the  fossil  man  of  Java  was
as  completely  adapted  for  erect  posture  and  erect
progression  as  the  man  of  to-day.  There  are  no
features  in  it  which  suggest  the  slouching  gait  of
Neanderthal  man.  Itfis  part  of  a  slim  animal,
human  in  shape  and  in  movement,  who  stood,  on
the  present  method  of  reckoning  stature,  about
5  ft.  6  in.  high.    The  length  of  the  femur  is  455  mm.;

134


FOSSIL   MAN   OF  JAVA


it  shows  a  bony  growth,  pathological  in  nature,  into
the  muscles  of  the  thigh.  The  erect  posture,  as
one  had  good  reason  to  suspect,  even  before
Dubois  had  made  his  important  disco^^ery,  was
evolved  before  the  end  of   the    Pliocene   Period.


PITHECANTHROPUS      E3
GIBRALTAR


Fig.  28.  The  profile  of  the  calvaria  of  the  fossil  man  of  Java
(shaded)  compared  with  the  Gibraltar  cranium  (outline).  (One-
third  natural  size.)


The   modern  human  posture   was   attained   long
before  the  human  brain  rached  its  modern  size^

The  brain  is  the  characteristic  organ  of
man.  Dubois  estimated  that  of  the  fossil  man
of   Java  at   S55    cc,   but    it   is   highly   probable

135


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   MAN

that  the  estimate  is  somewhat  under  the  truth.
In  the  Gibraltar  skuh  the  capacity  is  about
1080  cc,  an  amount  which  exceeds  some
modern  aborigines  of  AustraUa.  On  the  other
hand,  in  crania  of  the  Neanderthal  type  the
ca])acity  equals  or  exceeds  the  modern  average
of  1475  to  1500  cc.  The  capacity  of  the  Java  skull
is  intermediate  to  that  of  the  gorilla — the  male
anthropoid  of  that  genus  may  be  as  much  as
600  cc. — and  the  capacity  of  the  Gibraltar  skull
(1080  cc).  If  we  accept  the  Java  specimen  as
representative  of  late  Pliocene  man,  then  we  must
admit  that  the  human  brain  was  then  in  its  more
primitive  stages  of  development.  When  one  bears
in  mind  the  remarkable  discoveries  by  Mr.  J.
Reid  Moir  of  worked  flints,  the  products  of  human
hands  and  human  brains,  in  the  undisturbed  crag
formations  of  the  east  of  England — formations
which  mark  the  transition  of  the  Pliocene  to  the
Pleistocene  Periods,  and  the  remarkable  size  of
the  brain  of  Neanderthal  man,  one  is  compelled
to  believe  that  the  human  brain  had  attained  a
greater  size  than  that  of  the  Java  man  at  the
end  of  the  Pliocene  Period.  Either  he  is  of  older
date  than  we  now  think,  or  he  was,  as  we  may  see
in  the  world  to-day,  the  sur\'iving  remnant  of  an
old  form  amongst  j^-ogressive  human  cousins.
Even  if  the  primiti^'e  Java  man  had  persisted  to
a  period  when  the  ancestral  race  of  modern  man
had  passed  far  beyond  him,  that  does  not  in  any
136


FOSSIL    MAN    OF   JAVA


way  invalidate  his  claim  to  represent  a  stage  in
human  evolution.

Frau  Selenka's  expedition  discovered  three
pieces  of  evidence  in  favour  of  man,  as  we  now
know  him,  having  been  a  contemporary  of  the
Java  man.  These  are  (i)  in  the  fossiliferous  layer
at  Trinil,  charcoal  and  signs  of  fire  were  found.
The  fire  may  have  been  kindled  by  man — or  it  may
have  been,  as  it  sometimes  is  now  in  Java,  of
^•olcanic  origin.  (2)  Certain  of  the  fossil  bones  were
splintered.  They  may  have  been  splintered  by
man,  by  crushing  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  by  car-
nivorous animals  or  by  heat.  (3)  A  fossil  tooth  was
found  in  the  bed  of  a  neighbouring  stream,  which
Dr.  Walkoff  rightly  regards  as  human  in  charac-
ter. It  is  a  third  lower  molar,  13  mm.  in  length
and  II  mm.  in  breadth.  Dr.  Walkoff  is  probably
right  in  regarding  it  as  the  earliest  trace  of  man's
body  yet  discovered,  but  in  the  writer's  opinion
every  feature  of  that  tooth  is  just  what  is  to  be
expected  in  the  third  lower  molar  of  the  fossil
man  of  Java.  Dr.  Walkoff,  however,  regards  it
as  evidence  of  the  contemporary  existence  of  a
modern  type  of  man.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the
existence  of  the  modern  type  of  man  as  a  con-
temporary of  the  Pliocene  man  of  Java  is  founded
on  verv  slender  evidence.  The  facts  are  most
easilv  explained  by  supposing  that  the  charcoal
and  the  splinters  are  not  of  human  origin,  and  that
the  tooth  is  that  of  Pitliecanthropus.

137


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

An  analysis  of  the  dimensions  and  form  of  the
Trinil  skull  cap  reveals  all  the  characters  of  the
Neanderthal  type  in  a  nascent  or  rudimentary
condition.  It  represents  a  stage  in  the  evolution
of  the  human  head  considerably  below  the  earliest
stages  yet  found  in  Europe.  The  maximum  length
of  the  skull  in  Java  man  was  certainly  185  mm.,
equal  to  the  same  diameter  of  a  modern  man,  but
the  component  parts  of  the  length  are  very  dif-
ferent. In  the  Java  man  the  brain  made  up
155  mm.  and  the  frontal  and  occipital  walls  of  the
skull  the  remainder,  namely,  30  mm.,  which  is
equal  to  i6"2  per  cent  of  the  total  length.  In  a
modern  European,  with  the  same  length  of  head,
the  thickness  of  the  skull  wall  accounts  for  only
8  per  cent  of  the  total  length  ;  in  the  Gibraltar  and
Neanderthal  skulls  the  proportion  of  bone  is  14  per
cent  ;  in  the  gorilla  it  is  20  per  cent.  In  the  evolu-
tion of  man  the  length  factor  due  to  the  brain
gradually  increases,  while  that  due  to  thickness  of
skull  wall  gradually  decreases.  As  regards  width
of  skull  the  Trinil  man  also  falls  within  human
dimensions  ;  the  greatest  width  was  certainly
135  mm.,  with  a  brain  width  of  7  mm.  less.  The
width  index  as  regards  the  length  of  skull  is  72 '5
per  cent  ;  as  regards  the  brain,  its  width  is  82 '6
per  cent  of  its  length.  As  in  anthropoids,  the
roundness  of  the  brain  is  masked  by  a  long  cranial
case.  The  Java  man  shows  in  a  marked  degree
the  flattening  of  the  brain  and  skull  from  above

138


FOSSIL   MAN   OF   JAVA


dowiiAvards — a  feature  of  the  anthropoid  and  also
of  the  Gibraltar  man.  The  cerebral  height  of  the
Java  skull,  on  the  author's  method  of  reckoning,
is  79  mm.,  13  mm.  more  than  in  the  male  gorilla,
9  mm.  less  than  in  the  Gibraltar  cranium,  and
20  mm.  less  than  is  common  in  modern  man
and  in  typical  specimens  of  Neanderthal  man.
In  the  particular  method  by  which  the  skull  was
hafted  to  the  neck — causing  the  high  position
of  the  inion — ^the  Ja^'a  man  shows  the  same
features  as  the  Neanderthal  type  of  Europe,  only
these  features  are  even  more  exaggerated.  Thus
the  Java  man  represents  in  his  skull  a  pre-Nean-
derthal  condition — just  such  a  one  as  we  should
expect  in  Pliocene  man.

Professor  Dubois'  discovery  also  throws  a  clear
light  on  the  evolution  of  the  human  mechanism  of
mastication.  From  the  markings  and  form  of  the
skull  and  from  the  characters  of  the  two  teeth
found — a  last  upper  molar  and  a  second  lower
premolar — there  can  be  no  doubt  the  method  of
mastication  and  form  of  palate  and  dentition  were
similar  to  those  seen  in  the  Neanderthal  type  of
man.  The  retrogression  of  the  canine  teeth  and
the  evolution  of  the  human  mechanism  of  dentition
have  to  be  sought  for  at  an  earlier  stage  of  human
evolution  than  that  represented  by  Homo  javenen-
sis.  The  size  of  the  palate  and  form  of  the  face
were  probably  not  unlike  the  condition  preserved
for  us  in  the  Gibraltar  cranium.

139


ANCIENT  TYPES  OF   MAN

From  a  survey  of  this  extinct  form  of  man  we
can  draw  the  important  inference  that  our  teeth
and  our  posture  were  evolved  at  a  stage  wlien  our
brain,  as  regards  volume  and  shape,  had  passed
through  only  the  earlier  stages  of  the  development
which  has  lifted  it  above  the  anthropoid  condition.
Although  the  geological  evidence  points  to  a  late
Pliocene  or  early  Pleistocene  Period  for  Homo
javenensis,  his  ])hysical  characters  are  best  ex-
plained by  assigning  him  to  an  older  period — one
nearly  at  the  beginning  of  the  PHocene  Period.

REFERE^XES. — Prof.  Eugene  Dubois  :  "  Pithe-
canthropus Erectus,  eine  menschen."  Ueber-
gangsform  aus  Java.     Batavia,  1894.

Prof.  G.  Schwalbe  :  "  Studien  ueber  Pithe-
canthropus Erectus."  Zeitschrift  fiir  Morph.
iind  Anihrop.,  1899,  Bd.  i,  pp.  16-240.


140


CHAPTER    XV
ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   AMERICA

HAMXG  traced  the  various  types  of  man  that
have  appeared  in  the  Old  \Vorld,  from  the
Neolithic  woman  of  Essex  to  the  very  ancient
fossil  man  of  Java,  I  propose  to  turn  to  the  New
^^'orld  and  survey-  briefly  the  most  ancient  kinds
of  man  which  have  been  discovered  there.  So  far
as  concerns  North  America  the  task  is  an  easy  one,
for  onh-  the  other  day  the  American  Bureau  of
Ethnology  issued  a  very  clear  account,  written
bv  Dr.  Ales  Hrdlicka,  of  the  remains  of  ancient
man  which  have  been  found  there.  There  is  no
final  agreement  amongst  American  geologists,  any
more  than  amongst  their  European  colleagues,  as
to  the  exact  number  of  temperate  intervals  which
broke  up  the  long  glacial  epoch  into  periods  ;  in
America  it  is  usual  to  recognize  five  such  intervals,
the  present  temperate  period  being  the  sixth.  We
have  just  seen  that  in  the  Old  \\'orld  remains  of
man  have  been  found  from  about  the  beginning
of  the  first  Interglacial  Period — assigning,  in  our
calculations,  the  first  of  the  cold  periods  to  the
end  of  the  Pliocene  Period.  No  remains  of  the
body  of  man  have  yet  been  found  in  North  America

141


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

in  circumstances  which  permit  us  to  assume  that
they  belong  to  an  earUer  point  than  a  late  date  in
the  present  temperate  period.  Mankind  appears
to  have  attained  its  modern  form  long  before
America  was  first  inhabited.  Of  the  fourteen  dis-
coveries recorded  by  Dr.  Hrdligka,  probably  the
"  Nebraska  loess  men  "  have  the  greatest  claim  to
antiquity.  Parts  of  about  twelve  human  skeletons
were  found.  The  first  find  at  Nebraska  was  made
in  1894  ;  but  it  was  not  until  Mr.  G.  F.  Gilder
undertook  a  systematic  excavation  and  found
human  bones  at  a  depth  of  7  feet  in  an  apparently
undisturbed  and  naturally  formed  stratum  that
attention  was  drawn  to  the  importance  of  the
Nebraska  find.  The  scene  of  the  discovery  was
Long's  Hill,  a  ridge-like  elevation  some  six  hun-
dred yards  in  extent,  composed  of  a  fine  loam
mixed  with  lime,  a  formation  made  in  late  Pleisto-
cene times  by  wind  and  rain.  On  the  top  of  the
hill  was  an  old  burial  mound  in  which  the  upper
human  remains  were  found  ;  the  deeper  remains
were  unearthed  beneath  the  mound  in  loess  which
had  been  apparently  deposited  naturally  over  the
remains.  In  Dr.  Hrdli9ka's  opinion  the  remains
were  those  of  a  people  having  the  same  features  as
are  still  to  be  found  amongst  Indian  tribes.  As
regards  time  it  is  possible  that  the  "  Nebraska
loess  man  "  may  have  been  a  contemporary  of  the
Tilbury  man  in  England,  but  his  date  is  probably
much  later.

142


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   AMERICA


Another  find  may  be  mentioned.  In  1902
Mr.  M.  Cannon,  a  farmer  near  Lansing,  Kansas,
dug  a  tunnel  into  a  terrace  at  tlie  base  of  the
Missouri  River  bluffs.  He  was  surprised  to  find,
at  a  depth  of  20  feet  below  the  surface,  the  skeleton
of  a  man,  and  a  part  of  the  lower  jaw  of  an  infant.
The  terrace,  however,  is  apparently  of  compara-
tively recent  formation,  having  been  probably
laid  down  by  the  stream  issuing  from  the  side
valley.  The  age  is  probably  not  greater  than  that
assigned  to  the  Nebraska  remains.  Perhaps  the
most  famous  of  the  remains  of  prehistoric  man
found  in  America  is  the  Calaveras  skull.  This  was
discovered  by  a  gold  miner,  near  Altaville,  Cali-
fornia, in  1866.  The  bed  of  gravel  in  which  this
skull  is  said  to  have  been  found  lies  130  feet
beneath  the  surface,  and  in  the  opinion  of  those
fit  to  judge,  was  formed  at  a  period  of  the  earth's
history  which  antedates  the  appearance  of  the
fossil  man  of  Java  by  a  long  interval  of  time.  The
Calaveras  skull  is  of  the  modern  human  type,
characterized  by  the  very  prominent  cheek  bones
usually  found  in  the  Mongolian  races.  The  dis-
covery of  a  modern  aeroplane  in  a  church  crypt
which  had  been  bricked  up  since  the  days  of
Queen  Elizabeth  would  form  a  parallel  instance  to
finding  a  modern  human  skull  in  a  Miocene  forma-
tion. To  those  who  have  studied  the  evolution
of  man,  the  one  discovery  is  as  credible  as  the
other.    Dr.  Hrdli9ka  found  the  same  type  of  skull

143


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

in  a  similar  state  of  fossilization  in  the  limestone
caves  of  Calaveras  county.  In  some  manner  one
of  these  had  got  mixed  with  the  deep  gold-bearing
bed  of  gravel.

Dr.  HrdUgka  formed  the  opinion  that  the  skele-
ton discovered  at  Lansing  "  is  practically  identical
with  the  typical  male  skeleton  of  a  large  majority
of  the  present  Indians  of  the  Middle  and  Eastern
States."  As  regards  the  man  of  the  "  Arkansas
loess,"  he  also  is  of  the  Indian  type,  but  there  are
certain  peculiar  features,  namely,  a  low  forehead
which  slopes  backwards  to  a  high  crown.  The  top,
or  crown  of  the  head,  reaches  its  maximum  eleva-
tion towards  the  posterior  part  of  the  head.

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  oldest  type  of
man  yet  discovered  in  South  America  is  the  same
as  the  man  of  tlie  Arkansas  loess.  The  discovery
was  made  when  excavations  were  being  carried
out  to  form  the  docks  at  Buenos  Aires,  on  the
south  bank  of  tlie  La  Plata.  When  the  workmen
had  reached  a  depth  of  35  feet  below  the  present
bed  of  the  river  and  over  100  feet  below  the  level
of  the  neighbouring  plain,  they  found  part  of  a
skull,  including  the  forehead  and  part  of  the
crown.  In  Professor  Schwalbe's  opinion,  with
which  the  writer  is  in  complete  agreement,  the
skull  is,  both  as  regards  its  dimensions  and  its
character,  that  of  a  modern  type  of  man — the
type  just  mentioned  in  the  Arkansas  loess.  In
tiie  opinion  of  that  enthusiastic  pioneer  of  Palaeon-
144


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   AMERICA

tology  in  South  America,  Professor  Ameghino,  the
skull  thus  found  is  that  of  an  ancestral  form  of


Fig.  29.  A  tracing  of  ihe  profile  of  the  La  Tigra  cranium
(outline)  compared  with  the  profile  of  the  skull  of  the  Arkansas
loess  man  (shaded).      (One-thiid  natural  size.)


man    to    which    he    ga\-e    the    name    Diprothomo
platensis.     The  same  authority  assigns  an  extra-

L  145


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF   MAN

ordinary  antiquit\'  to  the  La  Plata  man,  i)lacing
him  near  the  beginning  of  the  PHocene  Period,
a  milHon  or  two  years  old.  Our  attempt  to
give  the  modern  type  of  man  an  antiquity  of
200,000  or  300,000  years  is  modest  when  com-
l^ared  to  Professor  Ameghino's  estimate.

In   forming  an  opinion  as  regards  the  age  in
which  the  35-foot  stratum  of  the  La  Plata  bed
was  formed,   one   must   keep  in  mind  the  many
oscillations  in  the  level  of  the  land  which  occur
in  the  South  American  continent,   and  also  the
volume   of   silt,  and   consequent   land   formation,
brought  down  by  such  a  river  as  the  La  Plata.
We  have  every  reason  to  suppose  that  land  is  of
rapid  formation  in  the  estuary  of  the  La  Plata.
If   30,000   3'ears   is    assigned    to   the    stratum   in
which    the    Tilbury    man    was    found,    half    that
amount    would    be    a    liberal    estimate    for    the
layer  in  which  the  La  Plata  man  was  discovered,
for  the  Thames  is  small  and  its  valley  steadfast,
compared  with  the  great  rivers  of  South  America.
It  is  true  that  Professor  Ameghino  found  extinct
forms  of  South  American  animals  in  strata  super-
ficial  to   the  one  in  which  the  remains  of  man
occurred,  but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that
such  forms  survived  well  into  the  present  period.
A  human  vertebra,  the  first  or  atlas  on  which  the
skull   rests,   has   also   been   discovered   at   Monte
Hermosa   within   the   La   Plata   watershed,   in   a
stratum    which    Professor    Ameghino    regards    as
146


ANCIENT   TYPES   OF   AMERICA

even  older  than  Pliocene  ;  but  this  bone,  like
the  crania  deposited  in  the  estuary  of  the  river,
is  of  the  form  met  with  in  modern  man.

The  skull  found  during  the  excavations  for  the
docks  is  so  fragmentar}'  that  its  complete  form
cannot  be  determined  with  certainty  ;  but  fortu-
natel}-,  in  a  formation  ^\•^licll  Professor  Ameghino
regards  as  also  Pliocene,  yet  more  recent  than  the
35-foot  layer  at  the  docks,  a  complete  skull  (the
La  Tigra  cranium,  Fig.  29)  was  found.  It  belongs
to  the  race  which  Professor  Ameghino  has  named
Homo  Pampceiis.  How  closely  this  skull  resembles
that  of  the  man  of  the  Arkansas  loess  will  be
seen  at  once  in  the  accompanying  figure  where
the  outhne  of  Homo  Pampaeus  is  traced  on  Dr.
Hrdligka's  accurate  drawing  of  the  skull  of  Arkan-
sas man.  Not  only  are  the  skulls  almost  of  the
same  size  and  shape,  but  they  are  both  cast  in  a
mould  so  similar  that  we  cannot  doubt  we  are
dealing  with  indi\iduals  of  the  same  race  although
found  more  than  4000  miles  apart.  Both  are  of
an  Indian  type,  and  ha^'e  reached  a  point  of
physical  development  which  is  seen  in  the  Neo-
lithic races  of  Europe.  The  teeth,  the  jaws,  and
the  shape  of  the  long  bones  are  similar  in  the  types
of  the  East  and  \\'est.

The  date  at  which  man  appeared  on  the  Ameri-
can continent  is  a  puzzHng  problem.  The  very
oldest  type  yet  known  is  very  modern.  Yet  we
know    that    for    thousands    of    3'ears    before    he

147


ANCIENT  TYPES   OF    MAN

appears  to  ha\'e  reached  America  he  was  ah'eady
present  and  widely  distributed  in  the  Old
World.  The  late  date  of  his  appearance  in
America  is  not  easy  of  explanation,  nor  is  the
earliest  type  known — the  La  Plata  or  Arkansas
type — easily  placed  in  the  scale  of  Old  World  races.
There  are  peculiar  features  which  recall  the  Mongol
to  some  degree  and  others  which  resemble  those
of  the  fairer  skinned  inhabitants  of  the  Pacific.
The  cradle  and  affinities  of  the  American  Indians
have  still  to  be  discovered.

References. — Dr.  Ales  Hrdlic^ka  :  "  Skeletal
Remains  of  Early  j\Ian  in  North  America."
Bureau  of  Americ  n  Anthrop(  logy.  Washing-
ton, 1907.

Prof.  G.  Schwalbe  :  "  Studien  zm^  Mor-
phologic des  Slid  Amerikanischen  Primaten
Formen."  Zeitschrift  fiir  Morph.  und  An-
flirop.,  1910,  Bd.  13,  p.  209.


148


INDEX


Acheuleen  Period,  115
Acromegaly  and  Neanderthal

type,  120
Ameghino,  Professor,  ct  scq.,

.\merica,  ancient  types  of  Man

in    141
Aurignacien    Period,    53,   69,

96,  115

Bengawan    river,     section    of

bank  of,  132
Boale,  Professor,  113,  117
Briinn,  46

Briinn  crania,  No.  II,  51
Briinn  Man,  47

Art  of,  47,  48

Teeth  of,  50
Briix  skull,  57
Busk,  Mr.  George,  122

Calaveras  skull,  143
Capitan,  Professor,  114
Combe-Capelle,  51
Combe-Capelle  Man,  53
Corner,  Mr.  Frank,  31
Cro-Magnon  race,  26,  64,  71
Art  and  weapons  of,  69
Bones  of,  72
Civilization  of,  69

Dartford  cranium,  66,  67
Dartford  Man,  22


Diprothonio  platensis,  145
Dordogne,  64,  66

.Stratification    of   terraces
of,   52
I3ubois,  Professor  Eugene,  131
Duckworth,  Dr.  W.  H.  L.,  124
Dupont,  M    Ed.,  75

Elliott,  Mr.  Robert,  23
Engis  cave,  56
Engis  skull,  56,  109
Essex  Woman,  i,  7,  8

Teeth  of,  7

Bones  of,  6,  9

Falconer,  Dr.  Hugh.  122
Ferrassie  skeleton,  114
Forbes  Quarry,  123
Fraipont,  Professor,   1 1 1
Furfooz  race,  7?)  7^

Galley  Hill,  28

Galley  Hill  Man,  28,  103,  104,

105

Bones  of,  32,  33
Brain  of,  34
Teeth  of,  37,  40,  41
Galley  Hill  race,  46,  47,  48,
49,  50,  54,  56,  57,   SS,  60,
61.  67,  69,  119
Galley  Hill  skull.  No.  II,  41,
42


149


INDEX


Gibraltar  skull,  99,  121  et seq.
Antiquity  of,  122,  125
Characters  of  face  of,  127
Importance  of,  121
Teeth  of,  126,  127

Gorjanovic-Krambert^er,   Pro-
fessor Karl,  94

Grenelle,  75

Grimaldi  cave,  59

Grimaldi  skeletons,  59

Grotte  des  Infants,  59

Ha  my,  75

Hauser,  Ilerr  O.,  51,  113
Hayes,  Mr.  Matthew,  41
Heidelberg  Man,  78,  79  (/.sty-
Teeth  of,  84,  86,  87
Heidelberg  skull,   reconstruc-
tion of,  89,  90,  91,  92
Ilinton,  Martin  A.  C.,  20
Homo  pampreus,  147
Hrdli9ka,  Ales,  141,  148
Huxley,  Professor,  19,  20,  102,
105


Inion,  position  of,  105


Java,    antiquity    1
mains  of,  134
fossil  man  of,
canthropus
fossil  remains  of,  13


fossil    re-
.V,('  Pilhe-


Klaatsch,    Professor,    49,    54,

III,  113,  130
Krapina,  94
Krapina  Men,  94  et  scg.
Implements  of,  95,  96
Teeth  of,  98
Krapina     race,     women     and

children  of,  98-
Krapinica,  94,  95


La  Chapelle-aux-Saints,  113

Skeleton,  1 13,  117
La  Madeleine,  69
La  Naulette,  109
La  Plata,  ancient  remains  of,

144
La  Tigra  cranium,  145
Langwith  cave,  20
Lansing  remains,  143
Le  Moustier,  1 13

Skeleton,  113,  1 16
Lohest,  M.,  II!   ■

Magdelenien  Period,  69
Makowsky,  Professor,  48
Mandible,     modifications     or,

for  speech,  83
Mastication,  change  in,  8
Mauer,  fauna  of  sands  of,  81
Sanils  of,  79

Stratification     of     sands
of,'8i
Mentone,  caves  near,  59,  71
Mousterien    Period,   96,    115,

116
Mull  ins.  Rev.  E.  IL,  20


Neanderthal,  loi
Neanderthal  Man,  loi  d  srij.

Bones  of,  106,  107

Teeth  df,  118
Neanderthal     race,     78,     79,
loi,  118,  119,  122

Brain  of,  93,  105
Nebraska  loess  Man,  142
Negroid  type,  60,  61,  62
Newton,  Mr.  E.  T.,  31
Newton,  Mr.  W.  M.,  24,  25


Owen,  Sir  Richard,  13


150


INDEX


Palate  and  jaws,  changes  in,

88
Parsons,   Mr.    F.    G.,    6,    17,

35,  37
Pithecanthropus,  121,  131 ,  133
ct  seq.

Capacity  of  skull  of,  136

Teeth  of,  139

Quatrefages,   Professor.  75

River-bed  type,    20,    21,    24,

37,  46,  75
Round-headed  type,  74,  75

St.  Brelade's  Bay,  Teeth  dis-
covered at,  118

Schaafhausen,  Dr.,  lOi

Schmerling,  Professor,  56

Schoetensack,  Professor  Otto,
80

SchwalUe,   Professor,   57,   78,
102,  144,  148
Remains  in  S.   America,
144,  148

Schweizersbild,  remains  found
at,  21

Schwertz,  Dr.  F.,  21

Sera,  Dr.,  130

Sikhs,  71


SoUas,  Professor,  126

Solutre,  75

Solutreen  Period,  53,  69

Spy,  no

Spy  men,  1 10,  1 11

Civilization  and  fauna  of,
III
Supra-orbital  ridge,  92,  104

Tasmanians,  teeth  of,  40
Teeth,    retrogression    of,    40,

41,  S5
Thames-bed,  Stratification  of,

10,   II,   12,    13,  22

Thames  Valley,  fauna  of,  26,

30,  44

Terraces  of,    23,   24,  26,
28,  29,  30
Tilbury  Man,  10  ct  scq.
Age  of,  12
Teeth  of,  19
Trinil,  131

Vcrneau,  Dr.,  60
Vezere,  51,  64

Walton-on-Naze,  i

Warren,  Mr.  Ilazzeldine,  2,  3

Wilde,   Jonathan,   15,   16.    17,


151


I'KINTHD    BY

WILI  lAM    liKENDON    AND    SON,     LTD.

PLYMOUTH


Harper's  Library  of  Living  Thought

Per  Vol.,  Cloth,  as.  6d.  net;  Leather,  3s.  6d.  net.
Prof    G.  ELLIOT  SMITH

THE  ANCIENT   EGYPTIANS

And  their  Influence  upon  the  Civilization  of  Europe
lUtistrated
An  account  of  the  Egyptians  of  th=  unrecorded  past  uliich
is  revealed  by  the  inve^tigations  of  the  anthropologist.

Prcf.  W.  M.  FLINDERS  PETRIE

THE  REVOLUTIONS  OF  CIVILISATION

Illustrated
A  survey  of  the  wa.xins  and  waning  of  civilisations  as  e^i-
denccd  in  sculpture,  painting,  literature,  mechanics,  and  wcallli.

CHARLES   H.  HAWES.  M.A.,  and
HARRIET   B.  HAWES,  M.A.,  L.H.D.

CRETE,  THE  FORERUNNER  of  GREECE

Ma/>s,  Plans,  <irc.

"  The  story  of  a  great  civilisation  which  flourished  before
Abraham  \v,is  born." — K-ifiihig  Sta?iilaril.

Prof.  SVANTE  ARRHENIUS

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  UNIVERSE

2  Z'ols.      Illustrated

"  There  are  many  for  whom  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis  are
a  subtle  allegory  covering  the  profoundest  truths,  and  we  are
grateful  to  the  author  for  having  set  out  a  mass  of  facts  which
are  vital  to  the  controversy." — I  he  Globe.

Prof.  A.  W.  BICKERTON

THE  BIRTH  OF  WORLDS  AND  SYSTEMS

Illustrated
Preface  by  Prof.  Eunest  Rutherford,  F.R.S.

A  graphic  statement  of  Prof.  Bickerton's  theory  of  "Con-
structive Impact'  — the  formation  of  new  stars  from  the  collision
of  dead  suns  or  other  celestial  bodies.

Prof.  PAUL    VINOGRADGFF

ROMAN  LAW  IN  MEDIEVAL  EUROPE

'  ■  Really  an  important  and  suggestive  study  which  no  student
of  hislorv  can  afford  to  neglect." — Manchc^itr  (iuardmn.


Harper's   Library   of   Living   Thought

Prof.  FREDERICK   CZAPEK

CHEMICAL    PHENOMENA
IN   LIFE

Discusse-  In  clear,  conciie  terms  the  great  ciuestioii  —  "Can
life  be  explained  by  physics  and  chemistry  ?"

Sir  WILLIAM  A.  TILDEN,  F.R.S.

THE  ELEMENTS

Speculations  as  to  their  Nature  &  Origin

Jh'a^>  niiis,  &^c.

Points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  elements  resulted  f  om  a
change  in  some  primal   essence.

Sir  OLIVER  LODGE,  F.R.S.

THE    ETHER    OF    SPACE

"  ]'reci>e  and  lucid,  it  summarises  our  l<no\vledj;e  of  the
all-pervading  substance  which  fills  all  space  and  penetrales  all
matter —  the  substratum  of  matter  itself." — liiiniiiigliaiii  Post.

Prof.   F.  W.   MOTT,  F.R.S.,  M  D.,  etc.

THE   BRAIN    AND    THE   VOICE
IN  SPEECH  AND  SONG

Illustrated
"Much  of  the  information  will  be  a  revelation." — Xatioc.

Sir  WILLIAM  CROOKES,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.

DIAMONDS

lllHstratcd
''  In  clear,  terse  language  he  describes  how  diamonds  occur  in
nature  and  the  methods  by  which  they  are  artificially  manu-
factured."-- Ma>2cliestt->-  Guardian.

ALGERNON  CHARLES  SWINBURNE

THREE
PLAYS    OF   SHAKESPEARE

"These  are  noble  essays,  in  a  style  which  is  as  youtliful,
vigorous,  and  uncompromising  as  in  the  days  '  Before  Sun-
rise." " —  //  'estiiiiiistcr  Gazette.


Harper's   Library   of   Living   Thought

Prof.  JOHANNES  WEISS

PAUL  AND  JESUS

"Argues  that  the  Pauline  theology  was  the  expression  in
terms  neccs'-itated  by  the  age,  iif  a  religious  attitude  directly
derived  Irom  the  teaching  of  Jesus. "—(/V/.v^'t'if  He>-nld.

Prof.  ARNOLD  MEYER

JESUS  OR  PAUL?

"Traces  the  deep  spiritual  relations  betv\een  St.  Paul  and
his  Divin-:  Master." — H''esiern  Morning  Ki-cvs.

Prof.  WILLIAM  WREDE

THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  NEW
TESTAMENT

"An  admiralily  concise,  accurate,  and  temperately  worded
summary  of  the  views  of  the  advanced  school." — Ch}-istian
IVorhi.

Prc^f.  C.  H.  BECKER

CHRISTIANITY  AND  ISLAM

"  Establishes  a  double  parallelism  and  reciprocal  influence
between  the  two  religions." — Glasi^ov  /feialJ.

Prof.  D.  A.  BERTHOLET

THE  TRANSMIGRATION  OF
SOULS

"  Of  considerable  significance  in  the  history  of  humanity."

Pal/y  'relegrajih.

LEO  TOLSTOY

THE    TEACHING    OF   JESUS

"  Will  set  students  thinking  and  freshen  their  appreciation
of  the  essence  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus." — Christian  U'oi  id.


Harper's   Library   of   Living   Thought

Prof.  W.   M.  FLINDERS  PETRIE

PERSONAL  RELIGION  IN  EGYPT
BEFORE  CHRISTIANITY

"The  author  gauges  what  ideals  were  already  part  of  the
religious  thought  in  the  first  century.  The  separation  of
the  new  ideas  in  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  the  Apostles
from  the  general  terms  of  religion  at  the  time  is  the  only  road
to  understanding  what  Christianity  meant  to  those  who
actually  heard  the  teaching. "—.Vo//j-  Guardian.

Prof.  ERNEST  A.  GARDNER

RELIGION  AND  ART  IN
ANCIENT  GREECE

"A  profoundly  interesting  study  in  the  philosophy  of  reli-
gion. He  has  dealt  with  the  religion  of  Gieece  as  it  aft'ected
the  art  of  sculpture,  and  with  the  reaction  of  that  art  upon  the
idcHis  ol  the  people  and  tne  popular  ana  the  euuLatcu  con-
ceptions of  the  gods.  An  epitome  of  the  subject  such  as  readers
can  get  nowhere  else." — Sco/sinan.

The  Hon.  W.  H.  FREMANTLE,  D.D.

(Dean  of  Ripoti)

NATURAL  CHRISTIANITY

To  those  who  wish  to  know  what  the  most  advanced  believers
in  Christianity  really  think,  and  upon  what  grounds,  this  book
will  give  the  gist  of  the  matter  in  readable,  authoritative  form.
The  Dean  discusses  the  constitution  of  the  Church  of  England,
and  such  matters  as  prayer,  miracles,  faith,  immortality  and
the  real  meaning  of  atonement,  election,  absolution,  making
use  of  whatever  light  may  be  had  from  "common  sense"  or
higher  criticism.

Prof.  REINHOLD  SEEBERG

REVELATION   &   INSPIRATION

' '  A  beautiful  exposition  in  which  critical  insight  and  reverent
appreciation  meet.  A  very  careful  statement  in  which  every
word  carries  weight.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  draw  attention  to
this  helpful  little  study." — Methodist   'J'iiiu-s.


c


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY

Los  Angeles
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below.


m*ii^  JAM    5nHp

\

,W        MAR  1  3  19It


^1984


I''


;1)
L9-Series  444


r


V(\       ^  •_  w      X      -^      aJ^O

OEC  0  71995J

REC'D  LDURL

>-^  c  r-  ■■  n

AC  NOV  0419%

SEP  «S  1996


1158  01231  2368


r


ii^m


it


{•it!    P

w


M


■111


itt'i  Mil  -f  1':

!


illlilisiili
iiil


iPil

11
