BALTIMORE LECTURES ON MOLECULAR DYNAMICS AND THE WAVE THEORY OF LIGHT
William Thomson, Lord Kelvin (1824-1907)
Delivered at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, October 1884. London: C. J. Clay and Sons (Cambridge University Press), 1904.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier baltimorelecture00kelvuoft.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

BALTIMORE LECTURES

ON

MOLECULAR DYNAMICS

AND

THE WAVE THEORY OF LIGHT

SonDon: C.  J. OLAY and  SONS,

CAMBRIDGE UNIVEESITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

AVE MARIA  LANE.

©lasaoto: 50,  WELLINGTON  STREET.

ILnpjig: F.  A.  BROCKHAUS.
ISombap.  ant  (Calcutta: MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.

I  All  Eights  reservfd.'\

^

BALTIMORE LECTURES

ON

MOLECULAE DYNAMICS

AND

THE WAVE THEOKY OF LIGHT

FOUNDED ON MR A. S. HATHAWAY'S STENOGEAPHIC REPORT OF

TWENTY LECTURES DELIVERED IN JOHNS HOPKINS

UNIVERSITY, BALTIMORE, IN OCTOBER 1884:

FOLLOWED BY TWELVE APPENDICES ON ALLIED SUBJECTS

BY

LORD KELVIN, O.M.,  G.C.V.O., P.C, F.R.S., &c.

PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH,

FELLOW OF ST PETER'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

AND EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW.

LONDON:

C. J. CLAY AND SONS,

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

AVE MARIA  LANE.

1904

c

(ffaiubritige :

PBINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

PREFACE.

TTAVING  beeu  invited  by  President  Oilman  to  deliver  a
-* — *-  course  of  lectures  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University  after
the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  in  Montreal  in  1884,  on
a  subject  in  Physical  Science  to  be  chosen  by  myself,  I  gladly
accepted  the  invitation.  I  chose  as  subject  the  Wave  Theory
of  Light  with  the  intention  of  accentuating  its  failures ;  rather
than  of  setting  forth  to  junior  students  the  admirable  success  with
which  this  beautiful  theory  had  explained  all  that  was  known
of  light  before  the  time  of  Fresnel  and  Thomas  Young,  and
had  produced  floods  of  new  knowledge  splendidly  enriching  the
whole  domain  of  physical  science.  My  audience  was  to  consist  of
Professorial  fellow-students  in  physical  science ;  and  from  the
beginning  I  felt  that  our  meetings  were  to  be  conferences  of
coefficients,  in  endeavours  to  advance  science,  rather  than  teach-
ings of  my  comrades  by  myself  I  spoke  with  absolute  freedom,
and  had  never  the  slightest  fear  of  undermining  their  perfect
faith  in  ether  and  its  light-giving  waves :  by  anything  I  could
tell  them  of  the  imperfection  of  our  mathematics  ;  of  the  insuffi-
ciency or  faultiness  of  our  views  regarding  the  dynamical  qualities
of  ether;  and  of  the  overwhelmingly  great  difficulty  of  finding
a  field  of  action  for  ether  among  the  atoms  of  ponderable  matter.
We  all  felt  that  difficulties  were  to  be  faced  and  not  to  be
evaded ;  were  to  be  taken  to  heart  ivith  the  hope  of  solving
them  if  possible ;  but  at  all  events  with  the  certain  assurance
that  there  is  an  explanation  of  every  difficulty  though  we  may
never  succeed  in  finding  it.

VI  PREFACE.

It  is  in  some  measure  satisfactory  to  me,  and  I  hope  it  will
be  satisfactory  to  all  my  Baltimore  coefficients  still  alive  in  our
world  of  science,  when  this  volume  reaches  their  hands ;  to  find
in  it  dynamical  explanations  of  every  one  of  the  difficulties  with
which  we  were  concerned  from  the  first  to  the  last  of  our  twenty
lectures  of  1884.  All  of  us  will,  I  am  sure,  feel  sympathetically
interested  in  knowing  that  two  of  ourselves,  Michelson  and  Morley,
have  by  their  great  experimental  work  on  the  motion  of  ether
relatively  to  the  earth,  raised  the  one  and  only  serious  objection*
against  our  dynamical  explanations ;  because  they  involve  the
assumption  that  ether,  in  the  space  traversed  by  the  earth  and
other  bodies  of  the  solar  system,  is  at  rest  absolutely  except  in  so
far  as  it  is  moved  by  waves  of  light  or  radiant  heat  or  variations
of  magnetic  force.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  farther  experiments
will  be  made ;  to  answer  decisively  the  great  question : — is,  or
is  not,  ether  at  rest  absolutely  throughout  the  universe,  except
in  so  far  as  it  is  moved  by  waves  generated  by  motions  of  ponder-
able matter  ?  I  cannot  but  feel  that  the  true  answer  to  this
question  is  in  the  affirmative,  in  all  probability  :  and  provisionally,
I  assume  that  it  is  so,  but  always  bear  in  mind  that  experimental
proof  or  disproof  is  waited  for.  As  far  as  we  can  be  contented
with  this  position,  we  may  feel  satisfied  that  all  the  difficulties
of  1884,  set  forth  in  Lectures  I,  X,  and  XV,  are  thoroughly
explained  in  Lectures  XVIII,  XIX,  and  XX,  as  written  afresh
in  1902  and  1903.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  next  real  advances  to  be  looked  for  in
the  dynamics  of  ether  are  : —

(I)  An  explanation  of  its  condition  in  the  neighbourhood  of
a  steel  magnet  or  of  an  electroma^i^ou,  in  virtue  of  which  mutual
static  force  acts  between  two  magnets  whether  in  void  ether  or  in
space  occupied  also  by  gaseous,  liquid,  or  solid,  ponderable  matter.

(II)  An  investigation  of  the  mutual  force  between  two  moving
electrions,  modified  from  purely  Boscovichian  repulsion;  as  it  must
be  by  the  composition,  with  that  force,  of  a  force  due  to  the  inertia

*  See  Appendix  A  §  18  and  Appendix  B  §  10.

PREFACE.  Vll

of  the  ether  set  in  motion  by  the  motion  of  each  of  the  electrions.
It  seems  to  me  that,  of  these,  (II)  may  be  at  present  fairly  within
our  reach  ;  but  that  (I)  needs  a  property  of  ether  not  included
in  the  mere  elastic-solid-theory  worked  out  in  the  present  volume.
My  object  in  undertaking  the  Baltimore  Lectures  was  to  find  how
much  of  the  phenomena  of  light  can  be  explained  without  going
beyond  the  elastic-solid-theory.  We  have  now  our  answer :  every
thing  non-magnetic;  nothing  magnetic.  The  so-called  "electro-
magnetic theory  of  light "  has  not  helped  us  hitherto  :  but  the
grand  object  is  fully  before  us  of  finding  a  comprehensive  dynamics
of  ether,  electricity,  and  ponderable  matter,  which  shall  include
electrostatic  force,  magnetostatic  force,  electromagnetism,  electro-
chemistry, and  the  wave  theory  of  light.

I  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  the  gratitude  with  which
I  remember  the  hearty  and  genial  cooperation  of  my  coefficients
in  our  meetings  of  19  years  ago  in  Baltimore,  and  particularly
the  active  help  given  me  by  the  late  Prof.  Rowland,  from  day  to
day  all  through  our  work.

I  desire  also  to  specially  thank  one  of  our  number,  Mr  A.  S.
Hathaway,  for  the  care  and  fidelity  with  which  he  stenographically
recorded  my  lectures,  and  gave  his  report  to  the  Johns  Hopkins
University  in  the  papyrograph  volume  published  in  December  1884.
The  first  eleven  lectures,  as  they  appear  in  the  present  volume,
have  been  printed  from  the  papyrograph,  with  but  little  of  even
verbal  correction ;  and  with  a  few  short  additions  duly  dated.

Thirteen  and  a  half  years  after  the  delivery  of  the  lectures,
some  large  additions  were  inserted  in  Lecture  XII.  In  Lectures
XIII,  XIV,  XV,  freshly  written  additions  supersede  larger  and
larger  portions  of  the  papjTOgraph  report,  which  still  formed
the  foundation  of  each  Lecture.  Lectures  XVI — XX  have  been
written  afresh  during  1901,  1902,  1908.

In  my  work  of  the  last  five  years  for  the  present  volume
I  have  received  valuable  assistance  successively  from  Mr  W.  Craig
Henderson,  Mr  W.  Anderson,  and  Mr  G.  A.  Witherington ;  not

a  5

VIU  PREFACE.

only  in  secretarial  affairs,  but  frequently  also  in  severe  mathe-
matical calculation  and  drawing;  and  I  feel  very  grateful  to  them
for  all  they  have  done  for  me.

The  printing  of  the  present  volume  began  in  August,  1885 ;
and  it  has  gone  on  at  irregular  intervals  during  the  19  years
since  that  time ;  in  a  manner  which  I  am  afraid  must  have
been  exceedingly  inconvenient  to  the  printers.

I  desire  to  thank  Messrs  J.  and  C.  F.  Clay  and  the  Cambridge
University  Press  for  their  never-failing  obligingness  and  efficiency
in  working  for  me  in  such  trying  circumstances,  and  for  the
admirable  care  with  which  they  have  done  everything  that  could
be  done  to  secure  accuracy  and  typographical  perfection.

KELVIN.

Netherhall,

January,  1904.

CONTENTS.

LECTURE I.

Introductory.

PAGES
The wave theory  of  Hght ; molecular treatment  by Fresiiel  and

Cauchy  ; molar  by  Green  ........  5-6

Ordinary  dispersion. Anomalous  dispersion  ;  hypotheses  of  Cauchy
and Helmholtz. Time-element in constitution of matter.
"  Electromagnetic  Theory  of  Light." Nature  of  ether ;  tenta-
tive comparison  with  shoemakers'  wax ..... 6-14

Direction  of  the  vibrations  in  polarized  light.  Dynamical  theory
of  refraction  and  reflection  not  complete  ;  differences  of  rigidity
or  of  density  of  the  ether  on  the  two  sides  of  a  reflecting
interface  ;  experiments  of  Prof.  Rood  on  reflectivity  .  .  14-17
Double  refraction ;  its  dithculties.  Explanations  suggested  by
Eankine  and  by  Rayleigh  tested  by  Stokes  ;  and  Huyghens'
Law  verified.  Further  illustration  by  mechanical  model.
Conclusion 17-21

LECTURE U.

Part  I.

Molar.  Dynamics of elastic solid. James Thomson's radian. General

equations  of  energy  and  force. Equations  for  isotropic  material.
Relation  between  Green's  twenty-one  coefficients  and  the  bulk

and  rigidity  moduluses 22-26

.General  equations  of  motion  ;  l^  ^^tication  for  heterogeneousness  ;
case  of  zero  rigidity  ;  compressible  fluid.  Lord  Rayleigh's  work
on  the  blue  sky 26-28

Part  II.

Molecular.  Dynamics  of  a  row  of  connected  particles.  Illustrative  mechanical
model.  The  propagation  of  light  waves  through  the  atmosphere.
Equations  of  motion 28-33

CONTENTS.

Molar.

Molecular.

Molar.

LECTURE III.

Part  I.

Dynamics  of  elastic  solid.  Illustrative  model  for  twenty-one
coefl&cients.  Equations  of  motion  ;  methods  of  solving.  Velo-
cities of  the  condensational  and  distortional  waves.  Leslie's
experiment  on  sound  of  a  bell  in  hydrogen  explained  by  Stokes

Part  II.

Variations  of  complex  serial  molecule,
solution

Continued  fraction  to  aid

Molar.
Molecular.

LECTURE lY.

Equations  of  motion  of  elastic  solid ;  method  of  obtaining  all  possible
solutions.  Energy  of  condensational  waves  of  ether  negligible.
"Electromagnetic  theory  of  light"  wants  dynamical  founda-
tion ;  propagation  of  electric  and  magnetic  disturbances  to  be
brought  within  the  wave  theory  of  light

Solutions  for  condensational  waves  travelling  outwards  from  a  point ;
spherical  waves ;  sphere  vibrating  in  ether ;  two  spheres
vibrating  oppositely  in  line  of  centres  ;  aerial  vibrations  round
tuning  fork ; cone  of  silence

LECTURE V.

Vibrations  of  air  around  a  tuning  fork  continued  ....
Vibrations  of  serial  molecule. Period  and  ratios  of  displacement ;

critical  periods  ; infinite  period  .....

Fluorescence. Finite sequences  of  waves  in  dispersive  medium  ;

beginnings  and  endings  of  light ......

LECTURE VI.

Molar.

Eatio  of  rigidity  to  compressibility.  Velocity-potential.  Conden-
sational wave  ;  vibrations  at  a  distance  from  origin ;  circular
bell,  tuning  fork,  and  elliptic  bell ......

Vibrations  of  a.pproximately  circular  plates ;  planes  of  silence.
Velocity  of  groups  of  waves  through  transparent  substances  .
Molecular.  Vibrations  of  serial  molecule.  Lagrange ;  "  algorithm  of  finite
differences "  ; number  of  terms  in  determinant

LECTURE YII.

Molecular. Vibrations  of  serial  molecule. Solution  in  terms  of  roots  ; deter-
mination of  roots . .

Metallic  reflection ;  Rayleigh  on  Cauchy ;  Sellmeier,  Helmholtz,
Lommel.  Lommel  on  double  refraction,  interesting  but  not
satisfactory  ;  Stokes'  experimental  disproof  of  Rankine's  theory
[if  ether  wholly  incompressible. See  Lecture  xix,  §  184,  below]

PAGES

CONTENTS.

XI

LECTURE VIII.

Molar.  Solutions  for  distortional  waves. Rotational  oscillation  in  origin  ;

illustration  by  wooden  ball  in  jelly.  Double  source  with
contrary  rotations.  Solution  for  waves  generated  by  to-and-fro
vibrator ;  Stokes,  Rayleigh,  and  the  blue  of  the  sky

Molecular.  Sudden  and  gradual  commencements  of  vibration  ;  fluorescence
and  phosphorescence ;  initial  and  permanent  refraction  ;
anomalous  dispersion  fading  after  a  time ....

LECTURE IX.

Molar.  Contrary  vibrators  in  one  line. Sudden  beginning  and  gradual

ending  of  vibrations  in  a  sovu'ce  of  light.  Observations  on
interference  ;  Sellmeier,  Fizeau.  Conference  with  Prof.  Row-
land ;  conclusion  that  subsidence  of  vibrations  of  molecular
source is small in several hundred thousand vibrations

dynamics  invoked

Amount  of  energy  in  the  vibration  of  an  atom.  Sellmeier,
Helmholtz,  and  Lommel,  on  the  loss  of  energy  in  progress
of  waves.  Dynamics  of  absorption  ;  first  taught  by  Stokes,
Sellmeier's  dynamics  of  anomalous  dispersion

Molecular.  Problem  of  seven  vibrating  particles.  Dynamical  explanation
of  ordinary  refraction  ;  mechanical  model ;  expression  for
refractive  index

LECTURE X.

Molar.  Energy  of  waves. Name  for  V" ;  Laplacian  preferred. Geometrical

illustrations of Fourier's theorem for representation of
arbitrary  functions  .........

Cauchy  and  Poisson  on  deep-sea  waves ;  great  contest  of  1815,
Cauchy  or  Poisson  to  rule  the  waves .....

Molecular.  Difticulties  regarding  polarization  by  reflection,  double  refraction ;
form  of  wave-surface.  Anomalous  dispersion,  fluorescence,
phosphorescence,  and  radiant  heat,  discoverable  by  dynamics
alone.  Radiant  heat  from  Leslie  cube.  Refractivity  through
wide  range. Refractivity  of  rock-salt ; Langley .

80-90

90-93

94-99

99-103.

103-107

108-114

114-117

117-121

Molar.

LECTURE XL

"  Anisotropy"  rejected  ;  aeolotropy  suggested  by  Prof.  Lushington.
Aeolotropy  in  an  elastic  solid.  Father  Boscovich  judged
obsolete  in  1884  [reinstated  as  guide  in  1900.  See  Lectures  xv
to  sx  and  Appendices  passim].  Green's  twenty-one  modu-
luses  of  elasticity.  Navier- Poisson  ratio ;  disproof,  and
Green's  full  theory  illustrated  by  mechanical  models.  Most
general  plane  wave  expressed  in  terms  of  the  twenty-one
independent  moduluses . . . . . . .

122-134

Xll

CONTENTS.

LECTURE  XII.

Part  I.
Molar.  Three  .sets  of  plane  waves  with  fronts  parallel  to  one  plane ;  wave-

surface  with  three  sheets  ;  Blanchet ;  Poisson,  Coriolis,  Sturm,
Liouville,  and  Duhamel,  on  Blanchet.  Purely  distortional
wave;  Green.  Incompressihility ;  energy  of  condensational
waves  in  ether; density  of  the  luminiferous  ether

Part  II.
Molecular. Mutual force  between atom and ether. Vibrating molecule;
polarized  source  of  light. Dynamics  of  dispersion ;  Sellmeier's
theory ;  refractivity  formula,  and  Eubens'  experimental  results
for refractivity of rock-salt and sylvin. "  Mikrom " and
"  michron  "..........

Critical  periods,  /u.'-^  =  l,  /a-=0,  ij?  passing  from  -oo  to  +qo.  Con-
tinuity in  undulatory  theory  through  wide  range  of  frequencies ;
mechanical,  electrical,  and  electromagnetic  vibrations  all  in-
cluded in  sound  and  light  .......

LECTURE XIII.

Molecular.  Prof.  Morley's  numerical  solution  for  vibrator  of  seven  periods.
Dynamical  wave  machine

Molar.  iEolotropy  resumed. Direction  of  displacement  and  return  force.

Incompressible seolotropic elastic solid. French classical
nomenclature. Square  seolotropy. Rankine's  nomenclature.
Cubic  seolotropy .........

.Eolotropic  elasticity  without  skewness ;  equalisation  of  velocities
for  one  plane  of  distortion.  Green's  dynamics  for  Fresnel's
wave-surface

Molecular.  Application  of  Sellmeier's  dynamical  theory,  to  the  dark  lines
Z)iZ>2 ;  to  a  single  dark  line.  Photographs  of  anomalous
dispersion  by  prisms  of  sodium-vapour  by  Henri  Becquerel .

PAGES

135-142

142-154

155-162

163-165

165-170

170-175

176-184

LECTURE  XIV.

Molecular. Rowland's  model  vibrator. Motion  of  ether  with  embedded  mole-
cules 185-190

Molar. Mathematical  investigation  of  spherical  waves  in  clastic  solid .  190-219
Stokes'  analysis  into  two  con.stitucnts,  equivoluminal  and  irrota-

tional 193-194

Simplification  of  waves  at  great  distance  from  origin . . .  197

Examples  by  choice  of  arbitrary  functions 199

Details  of  motion,  in  equator,  in  45°  cone,  and  in  axis  of  distm-bance  200-201
Originating  disturbance  at  a  S2)hcrical  .surface  *S' ;  full  solution  for

S  rigid 202-219

Diagrams to illustrate motion of incompressible clastic solid

through  infinite  space  around  a  vibrating  rigid  globe  . .  20G-207

CONTENTS.  XIU

PAGES
Molar. Rate.s  of  transmitting  energy  outwards  by  the  two  waves  . . 211-214
Examples 214-219

LECTURE XV.

Molecular. Model  vibrator;  excitation  of  synchronous  vibrators  in  molecule

by  light 220-221

Molar.  Thiipsinomic  treatment  of  compressibility. Double  refraction;

difficulty;  wave-velocity  depends  on  line  of  vibration;  Stokes;
Cauchy  and  Green's  extraneous  force ;  stress  theory  .  .  221-240
Hypothetical  elastic  solid.  Further  development  of  stress  theory ;
influence  of  ponderable  atoms  on  ether;  Kerr's  observations
unfavourable  to  the  stress  theory  of  double  refraction ;
Glazebrook  founds  successfully  on  ajolotropic  inertia . . 241-259

LECTURE XVL

Molar.  Mechanical  value  of  sunlight  and  jDossible  density  of  ether.
Rigidity  of  ether;  etherial  non-resistance  to  motion  of  pon-
derable matter.  Is  ether  gravitational  ?  ....  260-267
Gravitational  matter  distributed  throughout  a  very  large  volume ;
quantity  of  matter  in  the  stellar  system ;  velocities  of  stars ;
great  velocity  of  1830  Groombridge;  Newcomb's  suggestion.
Total  apparent  ai'ea  of  stars  exceedingly  small.  Number  of
visible  stars  ? Masses  of  stars 267-278

LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  Molecular  dimensions ;  estimates  of  Thomas  Young,  W.  Thomson,
Johnstone  Stoney,  Loschmidt.  Tensile  strength  in  black  spot
of  soap  bubble ;  Newton ;  its  thickness  measured  by  Reinold
and  Rucker. Thinnest  film  of  oil  on  water; Rontgen  and

Rayleigh 279-286

•  Kinetic  theory  of  gases  ;  molecular  difFusivity  ;  theory  of  Clausius
and  Maxwell ;  O.  E.  Meyer.  Inter-diffusivity  of  pairs  of  gases ;
viscosity  of  gases;  experimental  determinations  of  inter-
diflfusivities  by  Loschmidt  and  of  viscosities  by  Obermayer;
Maxwell 286-298

Number  of  molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  gas  estimated.
Stokes  on  the  polarized  light  from  a  cloudless  sky ;  Rayleigh's
theory  of  the  blueness  of  the  sky.  Transparency  of  atmo-
sphere; Bouguer  and  Aitken.  Haze  due  to  larger  particles.
Dynamics  of  the  blue  sky 298-313

Sky -light  over  Etna  and  Monte  Rosa ;  observations  of  Majorana
and  Sella.  Definition  of  Lambert's  "albedo."  Table  of
albedos;  Becker,  Miiller.  Prismatic  analysis  of  sky-light;
Rayleigh;  researches  of  Giuseppe  Zettwuch.  Atmospheric
absorption;  Miiller  and  Becker.  Molecular  dimensions  of
^articular  gaseous  liquid  and  solid  substances . . . 313-322

xiv  CONTENTS.

Molecular.  Vibrations  of  polarized  light  arc  perpendicular  to  plane  of  polari-
zation ;  Stokes'  experimental  proofs ;  experiments  of  Holtzmann
and  Lorenz  of  Denmark ;  confirmation  of  Stokes  by  Rayleigh
and  Lorenz

PAGES

322-323

LECTURE XVIII.

Rkflection  of  Light.

Molar.  Refraction  in  opaque  substances. Translucence  of  metallic  films.

Ideal  silver. Molecular  structure  ; best polish obtainable.

Reflectivity; definition; results  of  Fresnel, Potter,  Jamin,

and  Conroy. Experimental  method  for  reflectivities . . 324-332

Polarizational  analysis  of  reflected  light ;  experiments  of  Fresnel

and  Brewster;  deviations  from  Fresnel's  7-^ — ~. Principal

cos  (^  —  ,^)

incidence and principal azimuth  ; definition ; results for

different  metals  by  Jamin  and  Conroy 332-343

Fresnel's  laws  of  reflection,  and  Green's  theory,  and  observation
graphically  represented  for  water,  glass,  and  diamond  ;  great
deviations  from  Green's  theory.  Tangents  of  principal
azimuth  for  seven  transparent  substances .... 343-351

Suggested  correction  of  Green's  theory  ;  velocity  of  condensational
wave  very  small  instead  of  very  large ;  by  assuming  negative
compressibility  ;  voluminal  instability  and  stability.  Equa-
tions of  motion.  Definition  of  wave-plane.  Reflection  and
refraction  at  an  interface  between  solids.  Solutions  for
vibrations  perpendicular  to  plane  of  incidence.  Total  internal
reflection  of  an  impulse  and  of  sinusoidal  waves  ;  forced
clinging  wave  at  interface  in  less  dense  medium.  Differences
of  density  and  rigidity  in  the  two  mediums  ;  equal  rigidities
proved  by  observation . 351-363

Solutions  for  vibrations  in  plane  of  incidence. Direct  incidence.

Rayleigh  on  the  reflectivity  of  glass. Grazing  incidence  . 363-373

Opacity  and  reflectivity  of  metals ;  metallic  films ;  electromagnetic
screening.  Continuity  of  dynamical  wave-theory  between
light  and  slow  vibrations  of  magnets  to  be  discovered.  Green's
solution  for  vibrations  in  the  })lane  of  incidence  realised  ;  case
of  infinite  density 373-37!)

Quasi  wave-motion  in  medium  of  negative  or  imaginary  density  ;
ideal  silver.  Phase  difterence  between  components  of  reflected
light. Principal  incidence. Adamantine  property . . 379-386

Theory  of  Fresnel's  rhomb.  Phasal  changes  by  internal  reflection.
Reflection  of  circularly  polarized  light.  Tables  of  phasal  back-
set by  single  reflection,  and  of  virtual  advance  by  two  reflec-
tions 386-393

CONTENTS.  XV

PAGES

Molar.  Errors in construction of Fresnel's rhomb determined by

MacCullagli ;  errors  of  two  Fresnel's  rhombs  determined  by
observation.  An  eighty  years'  error  regarding  change  of
phase  in  total  reflection  ........ 39.3-403

Orbital  direction  of  light  from  a  mirror.  Rules  for  the  orbital
direction  of  light ;  circularly  or  elliptically  polarized  light
emerging  from  Fresnel's  rhomb  with  illustrative  diagram . 403-406

Dynamics  of  loss  of  light  in  reflection  ;  principal  azimuth  is  45°  if

reflectivity  perfect 406-407

LECTURE XIX.

Eeconciliation  between  Fresnel  and  Green.

Molecular. Prof. Morley's numerical solutions of the problem of seven

mutually  interacting  particles 408-409

Molar.  Navier-Poisson  doctrine  disproved  for  ordinary  matter  by  Stokes

considering  deviations  in  direction  of  greater  resistance  to
compression,  and  by  Thomson  and  Tait  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion. Bulk-modulus  of  void  ether  practically  infinite  positive  ;
but  negative  just  short  of  -|«  in  space  occupied  by  ponderable
matter  ;  to  reconcile  Fresnel  and  Green.  Velocity  of  conden-
sational-rarefactional  waves  practically  infinite  in  void  ether,
nearly  zero  in  space  occupied  by  ponderable  matter  ;  return
to  hypothesis  of  1887  with  modification  .... 409-412

Molecular. Theory  of  interactions  between  atoms  of  ponderable  matter  and

ether,  giving  dynamical  foundation  for  these  assumptions . 412-415

Molar.  Dynamical  theory  of  adamantinism  ;  imaginary  velocity  of  con-
densational, rarefactional  waves.  Numerical  reckoning  of
adamantinism  defined  (u).  Adamantine  reflection ;  phasal
lag  ;  diagrams  of  phasal  lag  for  diamond.  Principal  incidence,
and  principal  azimuth  in  adamantine  reflection.  Differences
of  principal  incidence  from  Brewsterian  angle  very  small ;
values  of  the  adamantinism  of  different  substances  .  .  415-424
Double  refraction.  Huyghens  construction  confirmed  experimen-
tally by  Stokes.  Fresnel's  wave-surface  verified  in  a  biaxal
crystal  by  Glazebrook.  ^olotropic  inertia,  with  the  assump-
tion of  very  small  velocity  for  the  condensational  wave  in
transparent  matter,  gives  dynamical  explanation  of  Fresnel's
laws  of  polarized  light  in  a  crystal.  Archibald  Smith's  in-
vestigation of  Fresnel's  wave-surface 424-430

Vibrational  line  proved  not  in  wave-plane  but  perpendicular  to
ray  by  Glazebrook  ;  Glazebrook  and  Basset's  construction  for
drawing  the  vibrational  line  ;  calculation  and  diagram  for
arragonite.  Theory  wanted  for  vibrational  amplitude  in  any
part  of  wave-surface 430-435

CONTENTS.

LECTURE  XX.

Molecular.  Chiral  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization.  Electro-etherial  ex-
planation of  eeolotropic  inertia.  Dynamical  explanation  of
chiral  molecule,  called  a  chiroid 436-440

Molar.  Formulas  expressing  chiral  inertia  in  wave-motion ;  given  also  by

Boussinesq  in  1903.  Imaginary  terms  and  absorption  ;  all
terms  real ;  velocity  of  circularly  polarized  light  in  chiral
medium.  Coexistent  waves  of  contrary  circular  motions ;
sign  of  angular  velocities  about  three  mutually  perpendicular
axes  ;  Fresnel's  kinematics  of  coexistent  waves  of  circular
motions.  Left-handed  molecules  make  a  right-handed  medium  440-449
Solution  for  wave-plane  perpendicular  to  a  jarincipal  axis.  Optic
chirality  not  imperceptible  in  a  biaxal  crystal  ;  experiment-
ally determined  in  sugar  by  Dr  H.  C.  Pocklington.  Optic
chirality  in  quartz  crystal ;  two  trial  assumptions  compared  ;
illustrative  diagrams. Modification  of  double  refraction  by

chirality  in  quartz . . 450-458

Mathematical  theories  tested  experimentally  by  McConnel.  Amount
of  rotation  of  vibrational  line  of  polarized  light  travelling
through  various  substances.  Chirality  in  crystals  and  in
crystalline  molecules  ;  Sir  George  Stokes.  Faraday's  mag-
neto-optic rotation . 458-461

Molecular.  Electro-etherial  theory  of  the  velocity  of  light  through  transparent
bodies ;  explanation  of  uniform  rigidity ;  theory  of  refraction.
Energy  of  luminous  waves  in  transparent  substances . . 461-467

APPENDIX A.

On  the  Motion  produced  in  an  Infinite  Elastic  Solid  by
THE  Motion  through  the  Space  occupied  by  it  of  a
Body  acting  on  it  only  by  Attraction  or  Repulsion.

Suggestions  regarding  the  distribution  of  ether  within  an  atom,

and  regarding  force  between  atoms  and  ether  .... 468-475

Absolute  orbits  of  ten  particles  of  ether  disturbed  by  a  moving
atom.  Stream  lines  of  relative  motion  of  21  particles  of
ether • . . 475-481

Kinetic  energy  of  the  ether  within  a  moving  atom ;  extra  inertia
of  ether  moving  through  a  fixed  atom.  Velocity  of  light
through  an  assemblage  of  atoms.  Difficulty  raised  by  Michel-
son's  experiment ;  suggested  explanation  by  Fitzgerald  and
by  Lorentz  of  Leyden 481-485

CONTENTS.  XVH

APPENDIX B.

Nineteenth  Century  Clouds  over  the  Dynamical
Theory  of  Heat  and  Light.

PAGES

Cloud  I.  The  motion  of  ponderable  matter  through  ether,  an
elastic  solid.  Early  views  of  Fresnel  and  Young.  Hypo-
thesis of  atoms  and  ether  occupying  the  same  space ;  uniform
motion  of  atom  unresisted  if  less  than  the  velocity  of  light.
Hypothesis  sufficient  to  explain  the  production  of  light  by
vibrating  atom,  and  consistent  with  aberration.  Difficulty
raised  by  Michelson's  experiment.  Cloud  I  not  wholly  dis-
sipated 486-492

Cloud  II.  Waterstonian-Maxwellian  distribution  of  energies ;
demonstration  by  Tait  for  hard  Boscovich  atoms.  The
Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  of  the  partition  of  energy  ;  its
application  to  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  ;  ratio  of  thermal
capacities  ;  Clausius'  theorem  and  the  B.M.  doctrine  ;  the
latter  not  reconcilable  with  truth  regarding  the  specific  heats
of  gases 493-504

Dynamical  test-cases  for  the  B.M.  doctrine  ;  reflections  of  ball
from  elliptic  boundary ;  kinematic  construction  for  finding
the  paths  within  boundary  of  any  shape  ;  scalene  triangle
with  rounded  corners  ;  deviations  from  B.M.  doctrine . . 504-512

Statistics  of  reflections  from  corrugated  boundary  ;  marlin  spike-
shaped  boundary  ;  chattering  impacts  of  rotators  on  a  fixed
plane  ;  particle  constrained  to  remain  near  a  closed  surface  ;
ball  bounding  from  corrugated  floor  ;  caged  atom  struck  by
others  outside  ;  non-agreement  with  B.M.  doctrine  . . 512-524

B.M.  doctrine  applied  to  the  equilibrium  of  a  tall  column  of  gas  i

under  gravity.  Boltzmann  and  Maxwell  and  Eayleigh  on  the
difficulties  regarding  the  application  of  the  B.M.  doctrine  to
actual  gases.  Simplest  way  to  get  rid  of  the  difficulties  is  to
abandon  the  doctrine,  and  so  dissolve  Cloud  II . . . 524-527

APPENDIX  C.

On  the  Disturbance  produced  by  two  particular  forms  of
Initial  Displacement  in  an  infinitely  long  Material
System  for  which  the  velocity  of  Periodic  Waves
depends  on  the  Wave-length.

Solution  in  finite  terms  for  elastic  rod.  Solution  by  highly  con-
vergent definite  integral  for  all  times  and  places  in  Poisson
and  Cauchy's  deep-water  wave  problem  ;  four  examples  of
results  calculated  by  quadratures  ;  finite  solution  for  deep-
water  waves  due  to  initial  disturbance  .... 528-531

CONTENTS.

APPENDIX D.

Ox  THE  Clustering  of  Gravitational  Matter  in

ANY PART OF THE UNIVERSE.

PAGES

Ether  is  gravitationless  matter  filling  all  space.  Total  amount
of  ponderable  matter  in  the  space  known  to  astronomers.
Total  of  bright  and  dark  star-disc  apparent  areas.  Vast
sphere,  of  perfectly  compressible  liquid,  or  of  uniformly
distributed  atoms,  given  at  rest ;  the  subsequent  motion
under  gravity.  Clustering  of  gravitational  matter  distri-
buted throughout  infinite  space.  Atomic  origin  of  all
things  ; Democritus,  Epicurus,  Lucretius .... 532-540

APPENDIX E.

AePINUS ATOMIZED.

Electrion ;  definition.  Assumptions  regarding  atoms  of  ponderable
matter  and  electrions  and  their  interactions ;  neutralizing
quantum.  Resinous  and  vitreous,  instead  of  positive  and
negative.  Overlapping  of  two  mono-electrionic  atoms  ;  case
(1)  each  atom  initially  neutralized  ;  case  (2)  one  atom  void,
the  other  neutralized  ;  in  each  case,  after  separation,  the  larger
atom  is  left  void  ;  probably  true  explanation  of  frictional
and  separational  electricity  ;  commerce  of  energies  involved 541-550

Stable  equilibrium  of  several  electrions  in  an  atom.  Exhaustion
of  energy  in  stable  groups  of  electrions.  Electrionic  explana-
tion of  Faraday's  electro-inductive  capacity,  of  Becquerel's
radio-activity,  and  of  electric  conductivity .... 550-559

Electrionic  explanation  of  pyro-electricity  and  piezo-electricity ;
di-polar  electric  crystal.  Discoveries  of  Haiiy  and  the
brothers  Curie.  Octo-polar  electric  ^olotropy  explained  in
a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  pairs  of  atoms,  and  in  a
homogeneous  assemblage  of  single  atoms.  Voigt's  piezo-
electricity of  a  cubic  crystal 559-568

APPENDIX F.

Dynamical  illustrations  of  the  magnetic  and  the  heligoidal
rotatory  effects  of  transparent  bodies  on  polarized  light.
Mounting  of  two-period  pendukun  rotated ;  problem  of  the
motion  solved  ;  solution  examined ;  vibrations  in  rotating
long  straight  rod  of  elliptic  cross-section .... 569-577

Interior  melting  of  ice  ;  James  Thomson's  physical  theory  of
the  plasticity  of  ice  ;  illustrated  by  Tyndall's  experiments.
Stratification of vesicular ice by pressure observed in

CONTENTS.

glaciers,  and  experimentally  produced  by  Tyndall  ;  explained
by  the  physical  theory.  Forbes  explains  blue  veins  in
glaciers  by  pressure,  and  the  resultant  plasticity  of  a  glacier
by  the  weakness  of  the  vesicular  white  strata.  Tyndall's
vesicles  produced  in  clear  ice  by  focus  of  radiant  heat ;  all
explained  by  the  physical  theory

APPENDIX G.
Hydrokinetic  Solutions  and  Observations.

Part  I.  On  the  motion  of  free  solids  through  a  liquid.  Eulerian
equations  of  the  motion,  lines  of  reference  ;  axes  fixed  rela-
tively to  the  body  ;  lines  of  reference  fixed  in  space  more
convenient ;  isotropic  heligoid  (now  called  chiroid)  .

Part  II.  Equations  of  motion  when  liquid  circulates  through
holes  in  movable  body

Part  III.  The  influence  of  frictionless  wind  on  waves  in  friction-
less  water;  particular  wind  velocities ;  maximum  wind  velocity
for  level  surface  of  water  to  be  stable . .

Part  IV.  Waves  and  ripples.  Minimum  wave-velocity.  Moving
force  of  ripples  chiefly  cohesion.  The  least  velocity  of  fric-
tionless air  that  can  raise  ripples  on  quiescent  frictionless
water.  Efi:ect  of  viscosity  ;  Stokes  on  the  work  against  vis-
cosity required  to  maintain  a  wave.  Scott  Russell's  Rejjort
on  Waves ;  capillary  waves

Part  V.  Waves  under  motive  power  of  gravity  and  cohesion
jointly  without  wind.  Cohesive  force  of  water.  Fringe  of
ripples  in  front  of  vessel ;  shi2)-waves  abaft  on  each  quarter  ;
influence  of  cohesion  on  short  waves.  An  exi^erimental  deter-
mination of  minimum  velocity  of  solid  to  produce  ripples  or
waves  in  water

APPENDIX H.

On  the  Molecular  Tactics  of  a  Crystal.

Homogeneous  assemblage  of  bodies ;  theorem  of  Bravais.  Thirteen
nearest  neighbours  in  acute-angled  homogeneous  assemblage.
Equilateral  assemblage.  Stereoscopic  representation  of  cluster
of  thirteen  globes  in  contact.  Barlow's  model  of  homogeneous
assemblages.  Homogeneous  assemblage  implies  homogeneous
orientations.  Homogeneous  assemblage  of  symmetrical
doublets

How  to  draw  partitional  boundary  in  three  dimensions  ;  parti-
tional  boundary  for  homogeneous  plane  figures.  Homogeneous
assemblage  of  tetrakaidekahedronal  cells.  Stereoscopic  view
of  equilateral  tetrakaidekahedron.  Equivoluminal  cells  with
minimum  partitional  area ,

XIX

pages

577-583

584-588
588-590

590-593

593-598

598-601

602-609

609-617

XX  CONTENTS.

PAGES

Different  qualities  on  two  parallel  sides  of  a  crystal  ;  oppositely
electrified  by  same  rubber  ?  oppositely  electrified  by  changes
of  temperature ;  and  by  lateral  pressures.  Homogeneous
packing  of  molecules  or  of  continuous  solids,  as  bowls  or
spoons  or  forks ;  case  of  single  contact.  Orientation  for
closest  packing  in  this  case.  Definition  of  "  chiral."  Scalene
convex  solids  homogeneously  assembled.  Ratio  of  void  to
whole  space  in  heaps  of  gravel,  sand,  and  broken  stones.
Orientation  of  molecules  for  closest  packing.  Change  of
configuration  of  assemblage  in  stable  equilibrium  causes
expansion.  Osborne  Reynolds  on  the  dilatation  of  wet  sand
when  pressed  by  the  foot ;  seen  when  glass-plate  is  sub-
stituted for  foot.  Assemblage  of  globular  molecules  (or  of
ellipsoids  if  all  similarly  oriented)  is  rigid  and  constant  in
bulk,  provided  each  molecule  remains  in  coherent  contact
with  twelve  neighbours 617-626

Geometrical  problem  of  each  solid  touched  by  eighteen  neighbours.
Stereoscojjic  view  of  tetrahedron  of  convex  scalene  solids.
Suggestion  for  a  twin-crystal.  Miller's  definition  of  twin-
crystal.  Twin-plane  as  defined  by  Miller,  and  as  defined
by  Stokes  and  Rayleigh.  Successive  twin-j)lanes  regular  or
irregular.  Madan's  change  of  tactics  by  heat  in  chlorate  of
potash  ;  Rayleigh's  experiment.  Stokes  and  Rayleigh  show
that  the  brilliant  colours  of  chlorate  of  potash  crystals  are
due  to  successive  twinnings  at  regular  intervals  ;  cause  of
twinnings  and  counter-twinnings  at  regular  intervals  undis-
covered ........... 626-637

Ternary  tactics  in  lateral  and  terminal  faces  of  quartz.  The
triple  anti-symmetry  required  for  the  piezo-electricity  in
quartz  investigated  by  the  brothers  Curie.  Optic  and  piezo-
electric chirality  in  quartz  and  tourmaline ;  Voigt  and  Riecke.
Orientational  macling,  and  chiral  macling,  of  quartz.  Geo-
metrical theory  of  chirality . 637-642

APPENDIX T.

On  the  Elasticity  of  a  Crystal  according  to  Boscovich.

Crystalline  molecule  and  chemical  molecule ;  crystalline  molecule
probably  has  a  chiral  configuration  in  some  or  all  chiral
crystals ;  Marbach,  Stokes  ;  certainly  however  many  chemical
molecules  have  chirality ;  magnetic  rotation  has  no  chirality.
Forcive  required  to  keep  a  crystal  homogeneously  strained.
Boscovich's  theory.  Only  1.5  coefficients  for  simplest  Bosco-
vichian  crystal  ......... 643-646

Displacement  ratios  and  their  squares  and  products.  Work
against  mutual  Boscovichian  forces. Elastic  energy  of  strained

CONTENTS.  XXI

PAGES

simple  homogeneous  assemblage.  Navier-Poisson  relation
proved  for  simple  assemblage  of  Boscovicb  atoms.  In  an
equilateral  assemblage,  when  each  point  experiences  force
only  from  its  twelve  nearest  neighbours,  the  diagonal  rigidity  .
is  half  the  facial  rigidity,  relatively  to  the  principal  cube  .  646-655
Single  assemblage  in  simple  cubic  order.  Equilateral  assemblage ;
elasticity  moduluses  ;  conditions  for  elastic  isotropy ;  forces
between  points  for  equilibrium.  Scalene  homogeneous  as-
semblage of  points;  scalene  tetrahedron  in  which  perpen-
diculars from  the  four  corners  to  opposite  faces  intersect  in
one  point ;  scalene  assemblage  giving  an  incompressible  solid
according  to  Boscovich.  Twenty-one  coefficients  for  elasticity
of  double  assemblage 655-661

APPENDIX J.
Molecular  Dynamics  of  a  Crystal.

Work  done  in  separating  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  molecules
to  infinite  distances  from  one  another.  Dynamics  of  double
homogeneous  assemblage.  Distances  of  neighbours :  in  single
equilateral  assemblage :  in  double  assemblage.  Scalene  as-
semblage in  equilibrium  if  infinite.  Work-curves  for  two
assemblages 662-671

Stabilities  of  monatomic  and  diatomic  assemblages ;  stability  not
secured  by  positive  moduluses ;  stability  of  infinite  row  of
similar  particles ;  Boscovich's  curve ;  equilibrium  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  ends  of  a  long  row  of  atoms.  Alternating  varia-
tions of  density  seven  or  eight  nets  from  surface  of  crystal . 671-680

APPENDIX K.

On  Variational.  Electric  and  Magnetic  Screening.

Imperfectly  conducting  material  acts  as  screen,  only  against  steady
or  slowly  varying  electrostatic  force.  Blackened  paper  trans-
parent for  Hertz  waves  of  high  frequency;  but  opaque  to
light  waves.  Electro-conductive  plate  acts  as  screen  against
magnetic  changes.  Rotating  conductor  screens  steady  mag-
netic force. Experimental  illustration 681-687

APPENDIX L.

Electric  Waves  and  Vibrations  in  a  Submarine
Telegraph  Wire,

ERRATA.

Page  14,  line  19,  for  "refracted"  read  "reflected."
15,  delete  footnote.

39,  line  7  from  foot,  for  "  vibrations  "  read  "  vibration."
46,  line  7  from  foot,  for  "  F"  read  "v."

48,  in  denominator  of  last  term  of  equation  (18),  for  "  a;^  "  read  "  r^."
70,  in  heading,  for  "  Part  I."  read  "Part  II."

73,  line  5,  before  "the"  insert  "the  reciprocals  of  the  squares  of."

74,  lines  2  and  6,  for  "  e  "  read  "  (."

75,  in  footnote,  for  "Appendix  C  "  insert  "Lect.  XIX.,  pp.  408,  409,"  and
delete  "with  illustrative  curves."

86,  line  10  from  foot,  for  "  dx'^  "  read  "  dt^."

87,  line  10,  delete  "  that."

87,  line  3  from  foot,  for  "■^"<p-  ^-i  ^ ^^^*^ V'0=  -^<^-

88,  line  15,  for  "  words  painting  "  read  "  word-painting."
90  and  92,  in  heading,  for  "Part  I."  read  "  Part  11."

103,  last  line,  for — read -, .
r-  T-

106,  line  14,  for  "Z"  read  "  x  ."

239,  for  marginal  "molecular"  read  "molar."

NOTES OF LE(!TURES

ON

MOLECULAR DYNAMICS

AND

THE WAVE THEORY  OF  LIGHT.

DELIVERED AT THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY, BALTIMORE,

BY

SIR  WILLIAM THOMSON,

PROFESSOR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW.

STENOGRAPHIC  ALLY REPORTED BY
A.  S.  HATHAWAY,

LATELY FELLOW IX MATHEMATICS OF THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY.

1884.

COPYRIGHT BY THE .JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY,

BALTIMORE, MD.

ADVERTISEMENT.

In  the  month  of  October,  1884,  Sir  William  Thomson  of
Glasgow,  at  the  request  of  the  Trustees  of  the  Johns  Hopkins
University  in  Baltimore,  delivered  a  course  of  twenty  lectures
before  a  company  of  physicists,  many  of  whom  were  teacher^  of
this  subject  in  other  institutions.  As  the  lectures  were  not  written
out  in  advance  and  as  there  was  no  immediate  prospect  that  they
would  be  published  in  the  ordinary  form  of  a  book,  arrangements
were  made,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  lecturer,  for  taking  down
what  he  said  by  short-hand.

Sir  William  Thomson  returned  to  Glasgow  as  soon  as  these
lectures  were  concluded,  and  has  since  sent  from  time  to  time
additional  notes  which  have  been  added  to  those  which  were
taken  when  he  spoke.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  under  these
circumstances  he  has  had  no  opportunity  to  revise  the  reports.
In  fact,  he  will  see  for  the  first  time  simultaneously  with  the
public  this  repetition  of  thoughts  and  opinions  which  were  freely
expressed  in  familiar  conference  with  his  class.  The  "papyro-
graph"  process  which  for  the  sake  of  economy  has  been  employed
in  the  reproduction  of  the  lectures  does  not  readily  admit  of  cor-
rections, and  some  obvious  slips,  such  as  Canchy  for  Cauchy,  have
been  allowed  to  pass  without  emendation ;  but  the  stenographer
has  given  particular  attention  to  mathematical  formulas,  and
he  believes  that  the  work  now  submitted  to  the  public  may  be
accepted,  on  the  whole,  as  an  accurate  report  of  what  the  lecturer
said.

A.  S.  HATHAWAY.

Dec,  1884.

LECTURE I.
5  p.m.  Wednesday,  Oct.  1,  1884.

The  most  important  branch  of  physics  which  at  present  makes
demands  upon  molecular  dynamics  seems  to  me  to  be  the  wave
theory  of  light.  When  I  say  this,  I  do  not  forget  the  one  great
branch  of  physics  which  at  present  is  reduced  to  molecular  dyna-
mics, the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  In  saying  that  the  wave  theory
of  light  seems  to  be  that  branch  of  physics  which  is  most  in  want,
which  most  imperatively  demands,  applications,  of  molecular  dyna-
mics just  now,  I  mean  that,  while  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  is  a
part  of  molecular  dynamics,  is  founded  upon  molecular  dynamics,
works  wholly  within  molecular  dynamics,  to  it  molecular  dynamics
is  everything,  and  it  can  be  advanced  solely  by  molecular  dynamics ;
the  wave  theory  of  light  is  only  beginning  to  demand  imperatively
applications  of  that  kind  of  dynamical  science.

The  dynamics  of  the  wave  theory  of  light  began  very  molecu-
larly  in  the  hands  of  Fresnel,  was  continued  so  by  Cauchy,  and  to
some  degree,  though  much  less  so,  in  the  hands  of  Green.  It  was
wholly  molecular  dynamics,  but  of  an  imperfect  kind  in  the  hands
of  Fresnel.  Cauchy  attempted  to  found  his  mathematical  investi-
gations on  a  rigorous  molecular  treatment  of  the  subject.  Green
almost  wholly  shook  off  the  molecular  treatment,  and  worked  out
all  that  was  to  be  worked  out  for  the  wave  theory  of  light,  by  the
dynamics  of  continuous  matter.  Indeed,  1  do  not  know  that  it  is
possible  to  add  substantially  to  what  Green  has  done  in  this  sub-
ject. Substantial  additions  are  scarcely  to  be  made  to  a  thing
perfect  and  circumscribed  as  Green's  work  is,  on  the  explanation
of  the  propagation  of  light,  of  the  refraction  and  the  reflection  of
light  at  the  bounding  surface  of  two  different  mediums,  and  of  the

6  LECTURE I.

propagation  oi'  light  through  crystals,  by  a  strict  mathematical
treatment,  founded  on  the  consideration  of  homogeneous  elastic
matter.  Green's  treatment  is  really  complete  in  this  respect,  and
there  is  uothinor  essential  to  be  added  to  it.  But  there  is  a  great
deal  of  exposition  wanting  to  let  us  make  it  our  own.  We  must
study  it;  we  must  try  to  see  what  there  is  in  the  very  concise  and
sharp  treatment,  with  some  very  long  formulas,  which  we  find  in
Green's  papers.

The  wave  theory  of  light,  treated  on  the  assumption  that  the
medium  through  which  the  light  is  propagated  is  continuous  and
homogeneous,  except  where  distinctly  separated  by  a  bounding
inter-face  between  two  ditferent  mediums,  is  really  completed  by
Green.  But  there  is  a  gi'eat  deal  to  be  learned  from  that  kind  of
treatment  that  perhaps  scarcely  has  yet  been  learned,  because  the
subject  has  not  been  much  studied  nor  reduced  to  a  very  popular
form  hitherto.

Cauchy  seemed  unable  to  help  beginning  with  the  considera-
tion of  discreet  particles  mutually  acting  upon  one  another.
But,  except  in  his  theory  of  dispersion,  he  virtually  came  to  the
same  thing  somewhat  soon  in  his  treatment  every  time  he  began
it  afresh,  as  if  he  had  commenced  right  away  with  the  considera-
tion of  a  homogeneous,  elastic  solid.  Green  preceded  him,  I  believe,
in  this  subject.  I  have  read  a  statement  of  Lord  Rayleigh  that  there
seems  to  have  been  an  attributing  to  Cauchy  of  that  whicli  Green
had  actually  done  before.  Green  had  exhausted  the  subject ;  but
there  is  I  believe  no  doubt  that  Cauchy  worked  in  a  wholly  inde-
pendent way.

•  What  I  propose  in  this  first  Lecture — we  must  have  a  little
mathematics,  and  1  therefore  must  not  be  too  long  with  any  kind
of  preliminary  remarks — is  to  call  your  attention  to  the  outstand-
ing difficulties.  The  first  difficulty  that  meets  us  in  the  dynamics
of  light  is  the  explanation  of  dispersion;  that  is  to  say,  of  the  fact
that  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  light  is  different  for  different
wave  lengths  or  for  light  of  different  periods,  in  one  and  the  same
medium.  Treat  it  as  we  will,  vary  the  fundamental  supj^ositions
as  much  as  we  can,  as  much  as  the  very  fundamental  idea  allows
us  to  vary  them,  and  we  cannot  force  from  the  dynamics  of  a
homogeneous  elastic  solid  a  difference  of  velocity  of  wave  propa-
gation for  different  periods.

Cauchy  pointed  out  that  if  the  sphere  of  action  of  individual

INTRODUCTORY.  7

molecules  be  comparable  with  the  wave  lengths,  the  fact  of  the
difference  of  velocities  for  different  periods  or  for  different  wave
lengths  in  the  same  medium  is  explained.  The  best  way,  perhaps,
of  putting  Cauchy's  fundamental  explanation  is  to  say  that  there  is
heterogeneousness  through  space  comparable  with  the  wave  length
in  the  medium,— that  is,  if  we  are  to  explain  dispersion  by
Cauchy's  unmodified  supposition.  We  shall  consider  that,  a  little
later.  I  have  no  doubt  the  truth  is  perfectly  familiar  already  to
many  of  you  that  it  is  essentially  insufficient  to  explain  the  facts.

Another  idea  for  explaining  dispersion  has  come  forward  more
recently,  and  that  is  the  assumption  of  molecules  loading  the
luminiferous  ether  and  somehow  or  other  elastically  connected  with
it.  The  first  distinct  statement  that  I  have  seen  of  this  view  is  in
Helmholtz's  little  paper  on  anomalous  dispersion.  I  shall  have
occasion  to  speak  of  that  a  good  deal  and  to  mention  other  names
whom  Helmholtz  quotes  in  this  respect,  so  that  I  shall  say
nothing  about  it  historically,  except  that  there  we  have  in  Helm-
holtz's paper,  and  by  some  German  mathematicians  who  preceded
him,  quite  another  departure  in  respect  to  the  explanation  of
dispersion.  The  Cauchy  hypothesis  gives  us  something  comparable
with  the  wave  length  in  the  geometrical  dimensions  of  the  body.
Or,  to  take  a  crude  matter  of  fact  view  of  it,  let  us  say  the  ratio  of
the  distance  from  molecule  to  molecule  (from  the  centre  of  one
molecule  to  the  centre  of  the  next  nearest  molecule)  to  the  wave
length  of  light  is  the  fundamental  characteristic,  as  it  were,  to
which  we  must  look  for  the  explanation  of  dispersion  upon
Cauchy's  theory.

We  may  take  this  fundamental  idea  in  connection  with  the  two
hypotheses  for  accounting  for  dispersion :  that  we  must  have,  in  the
very  essence  of  the  ponderable  medium,  some  relation  either  to
wave  length  or  to  period,  and  it  seems  at  first  sight  (although  this
is  a  proposition  that  may  require  modification)  that  with  very  long
waves  the  velocity  of  propagation  should  be  independent  of  the
period  or  wave  length.  That,  at  all  events,  seems  to  be  the  case
when  the  subject  is  only  looked  upon  according  to  Cauchy's  view.
We  are  led  to  say  then  that  it  seems  that  for  very  long  waves
there  should  be  a  constant  velocity  of  propagation.  Experiment
and  observation  now  seem  to  be  falling  in  very  distinctly  to  affirm
the  conclusions  that  follow  frum  the  second  hypothesis  that  I
alluded  to  to  account  for  dispersion. In  this  second  hypothesis,

8  LECTURE I.

instead  of  having  a  geometrical  dimension  in  the  ponderable
matter  which  is  comparable  with  the  wave  length,  we  have  a
fundamental  time-relation — a  certain  definite  interval  of  time
somehow  ingrained  in  the  constitution  of  the  ponderable  matter,
which  is  comparable  with  the  period.  So  that,  instead  of  a  relation
of  length  to  length,  we  have  a  relation  of  time  to  time.

jNow,  how  are  we  to  get  our  time  element  ingrained  in  the
constitution  of  matter  i  We  need  scarcely  put  that  question
now-a-days.  We  are  all  familiar  with  the  time  of  vibration  of  the
sodium  atom,  and  the  great  wonders  revealed  by  the  spectroscope
are  all  full  of  indications  showing  a  relation  to  absolute  intervals  of
time  in  the  properties  of  matter.  This  is  now  so  well  understood,
that  it  is  no  new  idea  to  propose  to  adopt  as  our  unit  of  time  one
of  the  fundamental  periods— for  instance,  the  period  of  vibration  of
light  in  one  or  other  of  the  sodium  D  lines.  You  all  have  a
dynamical  idea  of  this  already.  You  all  know  something  about
the  time  of  vibration  of  a  molecule,  and  how,  if  the  time  of
vibration  of  light  passing  through  any  substance  is  nearly  the
same  as  the  natural  time  of  vibration  of  the  molecules  of  the
substance,  this  approximate  coincidence  gives  rise  to  absorption.
We  all  know  of  course,  according  to  this  idea,  the  old  dynamical
explanation,  first  proposed  by  Stokes,  of  the  dark  lines  of  the  solar
spectrum.

We  have  now  this  interesting  point  to  consider,  that  if  we
would  work  out  the  idea  of  dispersion  at  all,  we  must  look  definitely
to  times  of  vibration,  in  connection  with  all  ponderable  matter.  To
get  a  firm  hypothesis  that  will  allow  us  to  work  on  the  subject,  let
us  imagine  space,  otherwise  full  of  the  lumiuiferous  ether,  to  be
partially  occupied  by  something  different  from  the  general  lumiui-
ferous ether.  That  something  might  be  a  portion  of  denser  ether,
or  a  portion  of  more  rigid  ether ;  or  we  might  suppose  a  portion  of
ether  to  have  greater  density  and  greater  rigidity,  or  difi:brent
density  and  different  rigidity  from  the  siirrounding  ether.  We  will
come  back  to  that  subject  in  connection  with  the  explanation
of  the  blue  sky,  and,  particularly.  Lord  Rayleigh's  dynamics  of  the
blue  sky.  In  the  meantime,  I  want  to  give  something  that  will
allow  us  to  bring  out  a  very  crude  mechanical  model  of  dis-
persion.

In  the  first  place,  we  nmst  not  listen  to  any  suggestion  that  we
are  tu  look  upon  the  lumiuiferous  ether  as  an  ideal  way  of  putting

INTRODUCTORY.  9

the  thing.  A  real  matter  between  us  and  the  remotest  stars
I  beUeve  there  is,  and  that  light  consists  of  real  motions  of  that
matter,  motions  just  such  as  are  described  by  Fresuel  and
Young,  motions  in  the  way  of  transverse  vibrations.  If  I  knew
Avhat  the  electro-magnetic  theory  of  light  is,  I  might  be  able
to  think  of  it  in  relation  to  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  wave
theory  of  light.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  rather  a  backward
step  from  an  absolutely  definite  mechanical  notion  that  is  put
before  us  by  Fresnel  and  his  followers  to  take  up  the  so-called
Electro-magnetic  theory  of  light  in  the  way  it  has  been  taken  up
by  several  writers  of  late.  In  passing,  I  may  say  that  the  one
thing  about  it  that  seems  intelligible  to  me,  I  do  not  think  is
admissible.  What  I  mean  is,  that  there  should  be  an  electric  dis-
placement perpendicular  to  the  line  of  propagation  and  a  magnetic
disturbance  perpendicular  to  both.  It  seems  to  me  that  when  we
have  an  electro-magnetic  theory  of  light,  we  shall  see  electric  dis-
placement as  in  the  direction  of  propagation,  and  simple  vibrations
as  described  by  Fresnel  with  lines  of  vibration  perpendicular  to  the
line  of  propagation,  for  the  motion  actually  constituting  light.  I
merely  say  this  in  passing,  as  perhaps  some  apology  is  necessary
for  my  insisting  upon  the  plain  matter-of-fact  dynamics  and  the
true  elastic  solid  as  giving  what  seems  to  me  the  only  tenable
foundation  for  the  wave  theory  of  light  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge.

The  luminiferous  ether  we  must  imagine  to  be  a  substance
which  so  far  as  luminiferous  vibrations  are  concerned  moves  as  if
it  were  an  elastic  solid.  I  do  not  say  it  is  an  elastic  solid.
That  it  moves  as  if  it  were  an  elastic  solid  in  respect  to  the  lumini-
ferous vibrations,  is  the  fundamental  assumption  of  the  wave  theory
of  light.

An  initial  difficulty  that  might  be  considered  insuperable  is,
how  can  we  have  an  elastic  solid,  with  a  certain  degree  of  rigidity
pervading  all  space,  and  the  earth  moving  through  it  at  the
rate  the  earth  moves  around  the  sun,  and  the  sun  and  solar  system
moving  through  it  at  the  rate  in  which  they  move  through  space,
at  all  events  relatively  to  the  other  stars  ?

That  difficulty  does  not  seem  to  me  so  very  insuperable,
Suppose  you  take  a  piece  of  Burgundy  pitch,  or  Trinidad  pitch,  or
what  I  know"  best  for  this  particular  subject,  Scottish  shoemaker's
wax. This  is the  substance I used  in  the  illustration  I  intend

10  LECTURE I,

to  refer  to.  I  do  not  know  how  far  the  others  would  succeed
in  the  experiment.  Suppose  you  take  one  of  these  substances,  the
shoemaker's  wax,  for  instance.  It  is  brittle,  but  you  could  form
it  into  the  shape  of  a  tuning  fork  and  make  it  vibrate.  Take  a
long  rod  of  it,  and  you  can  make  it  vibrate  as  if  it  were  a  piece  of
glass.  But  leave  it  lying  upon  its  side  and  it  will  flatten  down
gradually.  The  weight  of  a  letter,  sealed  with  sealing-wax  in  the
old-fashioned  way,  used  to  flatten  it,  will  flatten  it.  Experiments
have  not  been  made  as  to  the  absolute  fluidity  or  non-fluidity  of
such  a  substance  as  shoemaker's  wax ;  but  that  time  is  all  that  is
necessary  to  allow  it  to  yield  absolutely  as  a  fluid,  is  not  an  im-
probable supposition  with  reference  to  any  one  of  the  substances
I  have  mentioned.  Scottish  shoemaker's  wax  I  have  used  in  this
way :  I  took  a  large  slab  of  it,  perhaps  a  couple  of  inches  thick,
and  placed  it  in  a  glass  jar  ten  or  twelve  inches  in  diameter.  I  filled
the  glass  jar  with  water  and  laid  the  slab  of  wax  in  it  with  a
quantity  of  corks  underneath  and  two  or  three  lead  bullets  on  the
ujjper  side.  This  was  at  the  beginning  of  an  Academic  year.  Six
months  passed  away  and  the  lead  bullets  had  all  disappeared,  and
I  suppose  the  corks  were  half  way  through.  Before  the  year  had
passed,  on  looking  at  the  slab  I  found  that  the  corks  were  floating
in  the  water  at  the  top,  and  the  bullets  of  lead  were  tumbled  about
on  the  bottom  of  the  jar.

Now,  if  a  piece  of  cork,  in  virtue  of  the  greater  specific  gravity
of  the  shoemaker's  wax  would  float  upwards  through  that  solid
material  and  a  piece  of  lead,  in  virtue  of  its  greater  specific  gravity
would  move  downwards  through  the  same  material,  though  only  at
the  rate  of  an  inch  per  six  months,  we  have  an  illustration,  it  seems
to  me,  quite  sufficient  to  do  away  with  the  fundamental  difficulty
from  the  wave  theory  of  light.  Let  the  luminiferous  ether  be
looked  upon  as  a  wax  which  is  elastic  and  I  was  going  to  say
brittle,  (we  will  think  of  that  yet — of  what  the  meaning  of  brittle
would  be)  and  capable  of  executing  vibrations  like  a  tuning  fork
when  times  and  forces  are  suitable — when  the  times  in  which  the
forces  tending  to  produce  distortion  act,  are  very  small  indeed,  and
the  forces  are  not  too  great  to  produce  rupture.  When  the  forces
are  long  continued  then  very  small  forces  suffice  to  produce  un-
limited change  of  shape.  Whether  infinitesimally  small  forces
produce  unlimited  change  of  shape  or  not  Ave  do  not  know ;  but
very  small  forces  suffice  to  do  so. All  Ave  need  Avith  respect  to  the

INTRODUCTORY.  11

luminiferous  ether  is  that  the  exceedingly  small  forces  brought
into  play  in  the  luminiferous  vibrations  do  not,  in  the  times  during
which  they  act,  suffice  to  produce  any  transgression  of  limits  of
distortional  elasticity.  The  come-and-go  effects  taking  place  in
the  period  of  the  luminiferous  vibrations  do  not  give  rise  to  the
consumption  of  any  large  amount  of  energy :  not  large  enough  an
amount  to  cause  the  light  to  be  wholly  absorbed  in  say  its  pro-
pagation from  the  remotest  visible  star  to  the  earth.

If  we  have  time,  wc  shall  try  a  little  later  to  think  of  some  of
the  magnitudes  concerned,  and  think  of,  in  the  first  place,  the  mag-
nitude of  the shearing  force  in  luminiferous vibrations  of  some
assumed  amplitude,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  magnitude  of  the
shearing  force  concerned,  when  the  earth,  say,  moves  through  the
luminiferous  ether,  on  the  other  hand. The  subject  has  not  been
gone  into  very fully ;  so that  we do not  know  at  this  moment
whether  the  earth  moves  dragging  the  luminiferous  ether  altogether
with it,  or whether  it  moves  more  nearly  as  if  it  were  through
a  frictionless  fluid. It  is  conceivable  that  it  is  not  impossible  that
the  earth  moves  through  the  luminiferous  ether  almost  as  if  it  were
moving  through  a  frictionless  fluid  and  yet  that  the  luminiferous
ether  has  the  rigidity  necessary  for  the  performance  of  tlie  lumini-
ferous  vibration in periods of from the four hundred million
millionth  of  a  second  to  the  eight  hundred  milhon  millionth of
a  second  corresponding  to  the  visible  rays, or  from  the  periods
which  we  now  know  in  the  low"  rays  of  radiant  heat  as  recently
experimented on  and measured  for  wave  length  by  Abuey  and
Langley,  to  the  high  ultra-violet  rays  of  light,  known  chiefly  by
their  chemical  actions. If  we  consider  the  exceeding  smallness  of
the  period  from  the  ]00  million  millionth  of  a  second  to  the  1600
million  millionth  of  a  second  through  the  known  range  of  radiant
heat  and  light,  we  need  not full}'  despair  of  understanding  the
property  of  the  luminiferous  ether. It  is  no  greater  mystery  at
all  events  than  the  shoemaker's  wax  or  Burgundy  pitch. That  is
a  mystery,  as  all  matter  is ;  the  luminiferous  ether  is  no  greater
mystery.

We  know  the  luminiferous  ether  better  than  we  know  any
other  kind  of  matter  in  some  particulars.  We  know  it  for  its
elasticity ;  we  know  it  in  respect  to  the  constancy  of  the  velocity
of  propagation  of  light  for  different  periods.  Take  the  eclipses  of
Jupiter's  satellites  or  something  far  more  telling  yet,  the  waxings

12  LECTURE I.

and  wanings  of  self-luminous  stars  as  referred  to  by  Prof  Newcomb
in  a  recent  discussion  at  Montreal  on  the  subject  of  the  velocity  of
propagation  of  light  in  the  lurainiferous  ether.  These  phenomena
prove  to  us  with  tremendously  searching  test,  to  an  excessively
minute  degree  of  accuracy,  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  propa-
gation of  all  the  rays  of  visible  light  through  the  luminiferous
ether.

Luminiferous  ether  must  be  a  substance  of  most  extreme
simplicity.  We  might  imagine  it  to  be  a  material  whose  ultimate
property  is  to  be  incompressible ;  to  have  a  definite  rigidity  for
vibrations  in  times  less  than  a  certain  limit,  and  yet  to  have  the
absolutely  yielding  character  that  we  recognize  in  wax-like  bodies
when  the  force  is  continued  for  a  sufficient  time.

It  seems  to  me  that  we  must  come  to  know  a  great  deal  more
of  the  luminiferous  ether  than  we  now  know.  But  instead  of
beginning  with  saying  that  we  know  nothing  about  it,  I  say  that
we  know  more  about  it  than  we  know  about  air  or  water,  glass  or
iron — it  is  far  simpler,  there  is  far  less  to  know.  That  is  to  say,
the  natural  history  of  the  luminiferous  ether  is  an  infinitely
simpler  subject  than  the  natural  history  of  any  other  body.  It
seems  probable  that  the  molecular  theory  of  matter  may  be  so  far
advanced  sometime  or  other  that  we  can  understand  an  excessively
fine-grained  structure  and  understand  the  luminiferous  ether  as
diifering  from  glass  and  water  and  metals  in  being  very  much  more
finely  grained  in  its  structure.  We  must  not  attempt,  however,  to
jump  too  far  in  the  inquiry,  but  take  it  as  it  is,  and  take  the  great
facts  of  the  wave  theory  of  light  as  giving  us  strong  foundations
for  our  convictions  as  to  the  luminiferous  ether.

To  think  now  of  ponderable  matter,  imagine  for  a  moment
that  we  make  a  rude  mechanical  model.  Let
this  be  an  infinitely  rigid  spherical  shell ;  let
there  be  another  absolutely  rigid  shell  inside
of  it,  and  so  on,  as  many  as  you  please.  Na-
turally, we  might  think  of  something  more
continuous  than  that,  but  I  only  wish  to  call
your  attention  to  a  crude  mechanical  ex-
planation, possibly  sufficient  to  account  for  dispersion.  Suppose
we  had  luminiferous  ether  outside,  and  that  this  hollow  space  is
of  very  small  diameter  in  comparison  with  the  wave  length.  Let
zig-zag  springs  connect  the  outer  rigid  Ijoundary  with  boundary

INTRODUCTORY.  13

number  two.  T  use  a  zig-zag,  not  a  spiral  spring  possessing  the
helical  properties  for  which  we  are  not  ready  yet,  but  which  must
be  invoked  to  account  for  such  properties  as  sugar  and  quartz
have  in  disttirbing  the  luminiferous  vibrations.
Suppose  we  have  shells  2  and  8  also  connected
by  a  sufficient  number  of  zig-zag  springs  and
so  on ;  and  let  there  be  a  solid  nucleus  in  the
centre  with  spring  connections  between  it  and
the  shell  outside  of  it.  If  there  is  only  one  of
these  interior  shells,  you  will  have  one  definite
period  of  vibration.  Suppose  you  take  away  everything  except
that  one  interior  shell ;  displace  that  shell  and  let  it  vibrate  while
you  hold  the  outer  sheath  fixed.  The  period  of  the  vibration  is
perfectly  definite.  If  you  have  an  immense  number  of  such
sheaths,  with  movable  molecules  inside  of  them  distributed  through
some  portion  of  the  luminiferous  ether,  you  will  put  it  into  a
condition  in  which  the  velocity  of  the  propagation  of  the  wave
will  be  different  from  what  it  is  in  the  homogeneous  luminiferous
ether.  You  have  what  is  called  for,  viz.,  a  definite  period;  and
the  relation  between  the  period  of  vibration  in  the  light  con-
sidered, and  the  period  of  the  free  vibration  of  the  molecule  Avill
be  fundamental  in  respect  to  the  attempt  of  a  mechanism  of  that
kind  to  represent  the  phenomena  of  dispersion.

If  you  take  away  everything  except  one  not  too  massive
interior  nucleus,  connected  by  springs  with  the  outer  sheath,  you
will  have  a  crude  model,  as  it  were,  of  what  Helmholtz  makes  the
subject  of  his  paper  on  anomalous  dispersion.  Helmholtz,  besides
that,  supposes  a  certain  degree  or  coefficient  of  viscous  resistance
against  the  vibration  of  the  nucleus,  relatively  to  the  sheath.

If  we  had  only  dispersion  to  deal  with  there  would  be  no
difficulty  in  getting  a  full  explanation  by  putting  this  not  in  a
rude  mechanical  model  form,  but  in  a  form  which  would  commend
itself  to  our  judgment  as  presenting  the  actual  mode  of  action  of
the  particles,  of  gross  matter,  whatever  they  may  be  upon  the
luminiferous  ether.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the  conditions  of  the
luminiferous  ether  in  dense  fluids  or  liquids,  and  in  solids;  but
oxygen,  hydrogen,  and  gases  generally,  must,  in  their  detached
particles,  somehow  or  other  act  on  the  luminiferous  ether,  have
some  sort  of  elastic  connection  with  it ;  and  I  cannot  imagine
anything  that commends itself to our ideas better than this

14  LECTURE I.

multiple  molecule  which  I  have  put  before  you.  By  taking
enough  of  these  interior  shells,  and  by  passing  to  the  idea  of
continuous  variation  from  the  density  of  the  ether  to  the  enor-
mously greater  densit}''  of  the  molecule  of  grosser  matter  imbedded
in  it,  we  may  come  as  it  were  to  the  kind  of  mutual  action  that
exists  between  any  particular  atom  and  the  luminiforous  ether.
It  seems  to  me  that  there  must  be  something  in  this  molecular
hypothesis,  and  that  as  a  mechanical  symbol,  it  is  certainly  not
a  mere  hypothesis,  but  a  reality.

But  alas  for  the  difficulties  of  the  undulatory  theory  of  light ;
— refraction  and  reflection  at  plane  surfaces  worked  out  by  Green
differ  in  the  most  irreduceable  way  from  the  facts.  They  cor-
respond in  some  degree  to  the  facts,  but  there  are  differences  that
we  have  no  way  of  explaining.  A  great  many  hypotheses  have
been  presented,  but  none  of  them  seems  at  all  tenable.

First  of  all  is  the  question,  are  the  vibrations  of  light  per-
pendicular to,  or  are  they  in,  the  plane  of  polarization — defining
the  plane  of  polarization  as  the  plane  through  the  incident  and
refracted  rays,  for  light  polarized  by  reflection?  Think  of  light
polarized  by  reflection  at  a  plane  surface  and  the  question  is,  are
the  vibrations  in  the  reflected  ray  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
incidence  and  reflection,  or  are  they  in  the  plane  of  incidence  and
reflection  ?  I  merely  speak  of  this  subject  in  the  way  of  index.
We  shall  consider  very  fully,  Green's  theory  and  Lord  Rayleigh's
work  upon  it,  and  come  to  the  conclusion  with  absolute  certainty,
it  seems  to  me,  that  the  vibrations  must  be  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  incidence  and  reflection  of  light  polarized  by  reflection.

Now  there  is  this  difficulty  outstanding —the  dynamical  theory
of  refraction  and  reflection  which  gives  this  result  does  not  give  it
rigorously,  but  only  approximately.  We  have  by  no  means  so
good  an  approach  in  the  theory  to  complete  extinction  of  the
vibrations  in  the  reflected  ray  (when  we  have  the  light  in  the
incident  ray  vibrating  in  the  plane  of  incidence  and  reflection)  as
observation  gives.  I  shall  say  no  more  about  that  difficulty,  be-
cause it  will  occupy  us  a  good  deal  later  on,  except  to  say  that  the
theoretical  explanation  of  reflection  and  refraction  is  not  satisfac-
tory. It  is  not  complete;  and  it  is  unsatisfactory  in  this,  that  we
do  not  see  any  way  of  amending  it.

But  suppose  for  a  moment  that  it  might  be  mended  and  there
is  a  question  connected  with  it  Avhich  is  this: Is  the  difference

INTRODUCTORY.  15

between  two  mediums  a  difference  corresponding  to  difference  of
rigidity,  or  does  it  correspond  to  difference  of  densit}'?  That  is  an
interesting  question,  and  some  of  the  work  that  had  been  done
upon  it  seemed  most  tempting  in  respect  to  the  supposition  that
the  difference  between  two  mediums  is  a  difference  of  rigidity  and
not  a  difference  of  density.  When  fully  examined,  however,  the
seemingly  plausible  way  of  explaining  the  facts  of  refraction  and
reflection  by  difference  of  rigidity  and  no  difference  of  density  I
found  to  be  delusive,  and  we  are  forced  to  the  view  that  there  is
difference  of  density  and  very  little  difference  of  rigidity.

In  working  out  this  subject  very  carefully,  and  endeavouring  to
understand  Lord  Rayleigh's  work  upon  it,  and  to  learn  what  had
been  done  by  others,  for  a  time  I  thought  it  too  much  of  an
assumption  that  the  rigidity  was  exactly  the  same  and  that  the
whole  effect  was  due  to  difference  of  density.  Might  it  not  be,  it
seemed  to  me,  that  the  luminiferous  ether  on  the  two  sides  of  the
interface  at  which  the  refraction  and  reflection  takes  place,  might
differ  both  in  rigidity  and  in  density.  It  seemed  to  me  then  by  a
piece  of  work  (which  I  must  verify,  however,  before  I  can  speak
quite  confidently  about  it  *)  that  by  supposing  the  luminiferous
ether  in  the  commonly  called  denser  medium  to  be  considerably
denser  than  it  would  be  were  the  rigidities  equal,  and  the  rigidity
to  be  greater  in  it  than  in  the  other  medium,  we  might  get  a
better  explanation  of  the  polarization  by  reflection  than  Green's
result  gives.  Green's  work  ends  with  the  supposition  of  equal
rigidities  and  unequal  densities.  He  puts  the  whole  problem  in
bis  formulae  to  begin  with,  but  he  ends  with  this  supposition  and
his  result  depends  upon  it.

Not  to  deal  in  generalities,  let  us  take  the  case  of  glass  and  a
vacuum,  say.  It  seemed  to  me  that  by  supposing  the  effective
rigidity  of  luminiferous  ether  in  glass  to  be  greater  than  in  vacuum
and  the  density  to  be  greater,  but  greater  in  a  greater  proportion
than  the  rigidity,  so  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  is  less  in  glass
than  in  vacuum,  we  should  get  a  better  explanation  of  the  details
of  polarization  by  reflection  than  Green's  result  gives.

It  is  only  since  I  have  left  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  that  I
have  worked  at  this  thing,  and  going  into  it  with  keen  interest,
I  inquired  of  everybody  I  met  whether  there  were  any  observa-
tions that  would  help  me. At  last  I  was  told  that  Prof  Rood  had

*  See  Appendix  A.

16  LErTITRE T.

done  what  I  desired  to  know,  and  on  lookincr  at  his  paper,  I  found
that  it  settled  the  matter.

My  question  was  this:  Has  there  been  any  measurement  of  the
intensity  of  light  reflected  at  nearly  normal  incidence  from  glass  or
water  showing  it  to  be  considerably  greater  than  Fresnel's  formula

(-1  \  2
- — -\  for  the  ratio  of  the  intensity  of  the

reflected  ray  to  the  intensity  of  the  incident  ray  in  the  case  of
normal  incidence,  or  incidence  nearly  normal.  I  wanted  to  find
out  whether  that  had  been  verified  by  observation.  It  seems  that
nobody  had  done  it  at  all  until  Prof.  Rood,  of  Columbia  College,
New  York,  took  it  up.  His  experiments  showed  to  a  rather
minute  degree  of  accuracy  an  agreement  with  Fresnel's  formula,
so  that  the  explanation  I  was  inclined  to  make  was  disproved  by
it.  I  myself  had  worked  with  the  reflection  of  a  candle  from  a
piece  of  window  glass,  during  a  pleasant  visit  to  Dr  Henry  Field
in  your  beautiful  Berkshire  hills  at  the  end  of  August ;  and  had
come  to  the  same  conclusion,  even  through  such  very  crude  and
roughly  approximate  measurements.  At  all  events,  I  satisfied
myself  that  there  was  not  so  great  a  deviation  from  Fi'esnel's  law
as  would  allow  me  to  explain  the  difficulties  of  refraction  and
reflection  by  assuming  greater  rigidity,  for  example,  in  glass  than
in  air.  We  are  now  forced  very  much  to  the  conclusion  from
several  results,  but  directly  from  Prof.  Rood's  photometrical  ex-
periments, that  the  rigidity  must  be  very  nearly  equal  in  the  two.

There  is  quite  another  supposition  that  might  be  made  that
would  give  us  the  same  law,  for  the  case  of  normal  incidence  ; — the
supposition  that  the  reflection  depends  wholly  upon  difference
of  rigidity  and  that  the  densities  are  equal  in  the  two.  That  gives
rise  to  the  same  intensity  of  perpendicularly  reflected  light,  so  that
the  photometric  measurement  does  not  discriminate  between  these
two  extremes,  but  it  does  prevent  us  from  pushing  in  on  the  other
side  of  generally  accepted  result,  a  supposition  of  equal  rigidities,
in  the  manner  that  I  had  thought  of.

We  may  look  upon  the  explanation  of  polarization  by  reflection
and  refraction  as  not  altogether  unsatisfactory,  although  not  quite
satisfactory : —and  you  may  see  [pointing  to  diagrams  which  had
been  chalked  on  the  board:  see  pp.  12  and  18  above]  that  this
kind  of  modification  of  the  luminiferous  ether  is  just  what  would
give  us  the  virtually  greater  density. How  this  gives  tis  precisely

INTRODUCTORY.

17

the  same  effect  as  a  greater  density  I  shall  show  when  we  work
the  thing  out  mathematically.  We  shall  see  that  this  supposition
is  equivalent  to  giving  the  luminiferous  ether  a  greater  density,
while  making  the  addition  to  virtual  density  according  to  the  period
of  the  vibration.

I  am  approaching  an  end  :  I  had  hoped  to  get  to  it  sooner.
We  have  the  subject  of  double  refraction  in  crystals,  and  here
is  the  great  hopeless  difficulty.

If  we  look  into  the  matter  of  the  distortion  of  the  elastic  solid,  Molar,
we  may  consider,  possibly,  that  that  is  not  wonderful  ;  but
Fresnel's  supposition  as  to  the  direction  of  the  vibration  of  light,  is
that  the  conclusion  that  the  plane  of  vibration  is  perpendicular  to
the  plane  of  polarization  proves,  if  it  is  true,  that  the  velocity
of  propagation  of  light  in  uniaxial  crystals  depends  simply  on
the  direction  of  vibration  and  not  otherwise  on  the  plane  of
the  distortion.  In  the  vibrations  of  light,  we  have  to  consider
the  medium  as  being  distorted  and  tending  to  recover  its  shape.
Let  this  be  a  piece  of  uniaxial  crystal,  Iceland  spar,  for  instance,
a  round  or  square  column,  with  its  length  in  the  direction  of
the  optic  axis,  which  I  will  represent  on  the  board  by  a
dotted  line.

Now  the  relation  between  light  polarized  by  passing
through  Iceland  spar  on  the  one  hand  and  light  polarized
by  reflection  on  the  other  hand,  shows  us  that  if  the  line
of  vibration  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  polarization,  the
velocity  of  propagation  of  light  in  different  directions  through
Iceland  spar  must  depend  solely  on  the  line  of  vibration  and  not
on  the  plane  of  distortion.

There  is  no  way  in  which  that  can  be  explained  by  the  rigidity  Case  I.
of  an  elastic  solid. Look  upon  it  in  this  way. Take  a  cube  of  ^Jq°^^^^^"
Iceland  spar,  keeping  the same  direction  of  the  axis  I  direction

as  before. Let  the light be passing downwards,  as
indicated by the arrow-head. What would be the
mode  of  vibration,  with  such  a  direction  of  propaga-
tion ? Let  us  suppose,  in  the  first  place,  the  vibra-
tions to  be  in  the  plane  of  the  diagram. Then  the  dis-
tortion of  that  portion  of  matter  will  be  of  the  kind,  and  in  the
direction  indicated  by  Fig.  2. A  portion  which  was  rectangular
swings  into  the  shape  represented  by  the  dotted  lines. The  force
tending  to  cause  a  piece  of  matter  which  has  been  so  displaced  to
T.  L.  2

Fig.  1.

of  axis:
vibrations
in  plane  of
diagram.

Fig.  2.

18

LECTURE I.

Molar.

Case  II.
Propaga-
tion per-
pendicular
to  axis:
vibrations
in  plane  of
diagram.

resume  its  original  shape  depends  on  this  kind  of  distortion.  The
mathematical  expression  of  it  would  be  n  a  constant  of  rigidit}',
multiplied  into  a,  the  amount  of  the  distortion.  How  that  is  to  be
reckoned  is  familiar  to  many  of  you,  and  we  will  not  enter  into  the
details  just  now.  But  just  consider  this  other  case,  where  the
direction  of  propagation  of  the  light  is  horizontal,  as  indicated  by
the  arrow-head,  that  is  to  say,  propagated  perjDen-
dicular  to  the  axis  of  the  crystal  (Fig.  3).  What
would  be  the  nature  of  the  distortion  here,  the
vibration  being  still  in  the  plane  of  the  diagram  ?
The  distortion  will  be  in  this  way  in  which  I  move  my
A  portion  which  was  rectangular  will  swing  into  this

The  return  force
But  a  dis-

Fig.  3.

Case  III.

Case  IV.
Propaga-
tion per-
pendicular
to  axis:
vibrations
perpen-
dicular to
plane  of
diagram.

two  hands.

shape,  indicated  by  the  dotted  lines  in  Fig.  3.

will then depend  upon a distortion of  this kind.

tortion  of  this  kind  is  identical  with  a  distortion of  that  kind

(Fig.  2),  and  the  result  must  be,  if  the  effect  depends  upon  the

return  force  in  an  elastic  solid,  that  we  must  have  the  same  velocity

of  propagation  in  this  case  and  in  that  case  (Figs.  3  and  2).

Consider  similarly  the  distortions  produced  b;y  waves  con-
sisting of  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  diagrams,
the  arrow-heads  in  Figs.  2  and  3  still  representing  directions  of
propagation.  The  distortion  in  the  case  of  Fig.  2  will  still  be
as  by  shearing  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  but  in  the  direction
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  diagram,  instead  of  that  repre-
sented by  aid  of  the  dotted  lines  of  Fig.  2.  Hence  on  the  homo-
geneous elastic  solid  theory,  and  in  the  case  of  an  axially  isotropic
crystal,  the  velocity  of  propagation  in  this  case  would  be  the  same
as  in  each  of  the  first  two  cases.  But  with  vibrations  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  of  the  diagram,  and  propagation  perpendicular
to  the  axis,  the  distortion  is  by  shearing  in  the  plane  perpendicular
to  the  line  of  the  arrow  in  Fig.  3,  and  in  the  direction  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  of  the  diagram.  In  the  supposed  crystal,  the
rigidity  modulus  for  this  shearing  would  be  different  from  the
rigidity  modulus  for  the  shearings  of  cases  I.,  II.  and  III.  Hence
cases  III,  and  IV.  would  correspond  to  the  extraordinary  ray,  and
cases  I.  and  II.  the  ordinary  ray.

Now  observe,  that  light  polarized  in  a  plane  through  the  axis,
constitutes  the  ordinary  ray,  and  light  polarized  in  the  plane  per-
pendicular to  the  plane  of  the  ray  and  the  axis  constitutes  the
extraordinary  ray. There  is  therefore  an  outstanding  difficulty  in

TNTROnUCTORY.  19

the  assumption  that  the  vibration  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  Molar,
polarization,  which  is  absolutely  inexplicable  on  the  bare  theory
of  an  elastic  solid.

The  question  now  occurs,  may  we  not  explain  it  by  loading  the
elastic  solid  ?  But  the  difficulty  is,  to  load  it  unequally  in  different
directions. Lord  Rayleigh  thought  that  he  had  got  an  explanation
of  it  in  his  paper  to  which  I  have referred. He  was  not  aware
that  Rankine  had  had  exactly  the  same  idea. Lord  Rayleigh  at
the  end  of  this  paper  puts  forward  the  supposition  that  difference  of
effective  inertias  in  different  directions  may  be  adduced  to  explain
the  difference of  velocity  of  propagation  in Iceland  spar. But
if  that  were  the case  the wave propagation would  not follow
Huyghens'  law. It would follow the law according to which
the  velocity  of  propagation  would  be  inversely  proportional  to  what
it  is  according  to  Huyghens'  law. Huyghens'  geometrical  construc-
tion for  the  extraordinary  ray  in  Iceland  spar  gives  us  an  oblate
ellipsoid  of  revolution  according  to  which  the  velocity  of  propagation
of  light  will  be  found  by  drawing  from  the  centre  of  the  ellipsoid
a perpendicular to the tangent plane. For
example  (Fig.  4),  CiY  will correspond  to the
velocity  of  propagation  of  the  light  when  the
front  is  in  the  direction  of  this  (tangent)  line.
If  the  velocity  is  different  in  different  directions  ^^^'

in  virtue  of  an  effective  inertia,  Lord  Rayleigh's  idea  is  that  Molecular,
the  vibrating  molecules  might  be  like  oblate  spheroids  vibrating  in
a  frietionless  fluid.  The  medium  would  thus  have  greater  effective
inertia  when  vibrating  in  the  direction  of  its  axis  (perpendicular  to
its  flat  side),  and  less  effective  inertia  Avhen  vibrating  in  its  equa-
torial plane.  That  is  a  very  beautiful  idea,  and  we  shall  badly  want
it  to  explain  the  difficulty.  We  would  be  delighted  and  satisfied
with  it  if  the  pushing  forward  of  the  conclusions  from  it  were  veri-
fied by  experiment.  Stokes  has  made  the  experiment.  Rankine
made  the  first  suggestion  in  the  matter,  but  did  not  push  the  ques-
tion further  than  to  give  it  as  a  mode  of  getting  over  the  difficulty
in  double  refraction.  Stokes  took  away  the  possibility  of  it.  He  ex-
perimented on  the  refracting  index  of  Iceland  spar  for  a  variety  of
incidences,  and  found  with  minute  accuracy  indeed  that  Huyghens'
construction  was  verified  and  that  therefore  it  was  impossible  to
account  for  the  unequal  velocity  of  propagation  in  different  direc-
tions by  the  beautiful  suggestions  of  Rankine  and  Lord  Rayleigh.

9 2

20  LECTURE T.

Molecular.  J  have  not  been  able  to  make  a  persistent  suggestion  of  explan-
ation, but  I  have  great  hopes  that  these  spring  arrangements  are
going  to  help  us  out  of  the  difficulty.  I  will,  just  in  conclusion,
give  you  the  idea  of  how  it  might  conceivably  do  so.

We  can  easily  suppose  these  spring  arrangements  to  have
different  strengths  in  different  directions ;  and  their  directional
law  will  suit  exactly.  It  will  give  the  fundamental  thing  we  want,
which  is  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  light  shall  depend  on
the  direction  of  vibration,  and  not  merely  on  the  plane  of  the
distortion.  And  it  will  obviously  do  this  in  such  a  manner  as  to
verify  Huyghens'  law — giving  us  exactly  the  same  shape  of  wave-
surface  as  the  seolotropic  elastic  solid  would  give.

But  alas,  alas,  we  have  one  difficulty  which  seems  still  insuper-
able and  prevents  my  putting  this  forward  as  the  explanation.  It
is  that  I  cannot  get  the  requisite  difference  of  propagational
velocity  for  different  directions  of  the  vibration  to  suit  different
periods.  If  we  take  this  theory,  we  should  have,  instead  of  the  very
nearly  equal  difference  of  refractive  index  for  the  different  periods
in  such  a  body  as  Iceland  spar,  with  dispersion  merely  a  small
thing  in  comparison  with  those  differences  :  we  should,  I  say,  have
difference  of  refractive  index  in  different  directions  comparable
with  dispersion  and  modified  by  dispersion  to  a  prodigious  degree,
and  in  fact  we  should  have  anomalous  dispersion  coming  in  between
the  velocity  of  propagation  in  one  direction  and  the  velocity  of
propagation  in  another.  The  impossibility  of  getting  a  difference
of  wave  velocity  in  different  directions  sufficiently  constant  for  the
different  periods  seems  to  me  at  present  a  stopper.

So  now,  I  have  given  you  one  hour  and  seven  minutes  and
brought  you  face  to  face  with  a  difficulty  which  I  will  not  say
is  insuperable,  but  something  for  which  nothing  ever  has  been
done  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  the  present*  time  that
can  give  us  the  slightest  promise  of  explanation.

I  shall  do  to-morrow,  what  I  had  hoped  to  do  to-day,  give  you
a  little  mathematics,  knowing  that  it  is  not  going  to  explain  every-
thing. But  I  think  that  in  relation  to  the  wave-theory  of  light  we
really  have  an  interest  in  working  out  the  motions  of  an  elastic
solid  and  obtaining  a  few  solutions  that  depend  on  the  equations  of
motion  of  an  elastic  solid. I shall  first  take the case of  zero

*  [I  retract  this statement. See  an  Appendix  near  the  end  of  the  present
vokime. W.  T.  Oct.  28,  1880.]

INTRODUCTORY.  21

rigidity ;  that  will  give  us  sound.  We  shall  take  the  most  elemen-  Molecular.
tary  sounds  possible,  namely  a  spherical  body  alternately  expand-
ing and  contracting.  We  shall  pass  from  that  to  the  case  of  a
single  globe  vibrating  to  and  fro  in  air.  We  shall  pass  from  that
to  the  case  of  a  tuning-fork,  and  endeavour  to  explain  the  cone  of
silence  which  you  all  know  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  vibrating
tuning-fork.  I  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  get  through  that  in  a
short  time  and  pass  on  our  way  to  the  corresponding  solutions
of  the  motions  of  a  wave  proceeding  from  a  centre  in  respect  to  the
wave-theory  of  light.

LECTUKE II.

Oct  2,  5  P.M.

Part  I.  In  the  first  place,  I  will  take  up  the  equations  of
motion  of  an  elastic  solid.  I  assume  that  the  fundamental  prin-
cijsles  are  familiar  to  you.  At  the  same  time,  I  should  be  very
glad  if  any  person  present  would,  without  the  slightest  hesitation,
ask  for  explanations  if  anything  is  not  understood.  I  want  to  be
on  a  conferent  footing  with  you,  so  that  the  work  shall  be  rathiir
something  between  you  and  me,  than  something  in  which  I  shall
be  making  a  performance  before  you  in  a  matter  in  which  many
of  you  may  be  quite  as  competent  as  I  am,  if  not  more  so.

I  want,  if  we  can  get  something  done  in  half  an  hour,  on  these
problems  of  molar  dynamics  as  we  may  call  it,  to  distinguish  from
Molecular  dynamics,  to  come  among  you,  and  talk  Avith  you  for
a  few  moments,  and  take  a  little  rest;  and  then  go  on  to  a  problem
of  molecular  dynamics  to  prepare  the  way  for  motions  depending
on  mutual  interference  among  particles  under  varying  circum-
stances that  may  perhaps  have  applications  in  physical  science  and
particularly  to  the  theory  of  light.
Molar.  The  fundamental  equations  of  equilibrium  of  clastic  solids  are,

of  course,  included  in  D'Alembert's  form  of  the  equations  of
motion.  I  shall  keep  to  the  notation  that  is  employed  in  Thomson
and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,  which  is  substantially  the  same
notation  as  is  employed  by  other  writers.

Let  a,  b,  c  denote  components  of  distortion  :  a,  is  a  distortion  in
the  plane  perpendicular  to  OX  produced  by  slippings  parallel  to
either  or  to  both  of  the  two  co-ordinate  planes  Avhich  intersect
in  OX.

Let  us  consider  this  state  of  strain,  in  which,  without  other
change, a portion  of  the solid in the  plane yz  which  was a

DYNAMICS OF ELASTIC SOLID.  2S

square  becomes  a  rhombic  figure. The  measurement  of  that  state  Molar,
of  strain  is  given  fully in  Thomson  and  Tait's  geometrical  pre-
liminary  for  the  theory of elastic solids, {Natural Philosophy,
^  169—177,  and  §  GG9,  or  Elements,  §§  148—156  and  §  640). It
is called  a  simple  shear. It  may  be  measured
either  by  the  rate  of  shifting  of  parallel  planes  per
unit  distance  perpendicular  to  them, or, which
comes  to  exactly  the  same  thing,  the change  of
the  angle  measured  in  radians. Thus  I  shall  write
down  inside  this  small  angular  space  the  letter  a,
to  denote  the  magnitude  of  the  angle,  measured
in  radians;  the  particular  case  of  strain  considered
being  a  slipping  parallel  to  the  plane  YOX.

I  use  the  word  "  radian " ;  it  is  not,  hitherto,  a  very  common
word ;  but  I  suppose  you  know  what  I  mean.  In  Cambridge
in  the  olden  time  we  used  to  have  a  very  illogical  nomen-
clature,— "the  unit  angle" — a  very  absurd  use  of  the  definite
article  "the'.  It  is  illogical  to  talk  of  an  angle  being  measured  in
terms  of  "  the  "  unit  angle ;  there  is  no  such  thing  as  measuring
anything,  except  in  terms  of  "a"  unit.  The  degree  is  a  unit
angle ;  so  is  the  minute ;  so  is  the  second ;  so  is  the  quadrant ;
so  is  the  round ;  all  of  these  are  units  in  frequent  use  for  angular
measurement.  The  unit  in  which  it  is  most  generally  convenient
to  measure  angles  in  Analytical  Mechanics  is  the  angle  whose  arc
is  radius.  That  used  to  be  called  at  Cambridge  "  the  unit  angle."
My  brother,  James  Thomson,  proposed  to  call  it  "  the  radian'.

There  are  three  principal  distortions,  a,  h,  c,  relative  to  the
axes  of  OX,  OY,  OZ ;  and  again,  three  principal  dilatations — con-
densations of  course  if  any  one  is  negative,  e,  f,  g,  which  are
the  ratios  of  the  augmentation  of  length  to  the  length.

The  general  equation  of  energy  will  of  course  be  an  equation  in
which  we  have  a  quadratic  function  of  e,  f,  g, a,  b,  c,  the  ex-
pression for  which  will  be
1  (lle'+  V2ef+  ISeg  +  Uea  +  loeb  +  IGec  +  21ef+  22/='+  2S/g  +. . .).

We  do  not  here  use  11,  12,... etc.,  as  numbers  but  as  symbols
representing  the  twenty-one  coefiicients  of  this  quadratic  subject
to  the  conditions  12  ==  21,  etc.  If  we  denote  this  quadratic  function
by  E,  then

^"^=  lie  +  12/+  ISg  +  14a  +  156  +  16c.

•24

LECTURE II. PART I.

This  is  a  component  of  the  normal  force  required  to  produce  this
compound  strain  e,  f,  g,  a,  b,  c.  According  to  the  notation  of
Thomson  and  Tait,  let

P

Q  =

clE

_  clE

(IE
da

T  =

dE

~dh

TJ  =

dE

dc

dE
'de  ' ^ df

We  have  then,  the  relation

Pe+  Qf+Bg  +  Sa  +Tb-\-  Uc  =  2E,

the  well-known  dynamical  interpretation  of  which  you  are  of  course
familiar  with.  A  little  later  we  shall  consider  these  21  coefficients,
first,  in  respect  to  the  relations  among  them  which  must  be
imposed  to  produce  a  certain  kind  of  symmetry  relative  to  the
three  rectangular  axes ;  and  then  see  what  further  conditions  must
be  imposed  to  fit  the  elastic  solid  for  performing  the  functions
of  the  luminiferous  ether  in  a  crystal.

Before  going  on  to  that  we  shall  take  the  case  of  a  perfectly
isotropic  material.  We  can  perhaps  best  put  it  down  in  tabular
form  in  this  way :

1

^

33

33

0

0

0

i^

^

33

0

0

0

53

33

m

0

0

0

0

0

0

n

0

0

0

0

0

0

n

0

0

0

0

0

0

01

In  the  first  place  in  this  lower  right-hand  corner-square  which
has  to  do  with  the  distortions  a,  b,  c,  alone,  if  we  let  n  represent  the
rigidity-modulus  the  three  main  diagonal  terms  will  each  be  ??.,  and
those  not  in  the  diagonal  will  be  zero.  Six  of  the  21  coefficients
are  thus  determined  as  follows  :

44  =  55  =  66  =  n,  and  45  =  46  =  56  =  0,

and  other  nine  of  them,  by  the  zeros  in  the  upper  right  and  lower
left  corner-squares, —

14  =  15  =  16  =  24  =  25  -  26  =  34  =  35  =  m  =  0.

DYNAMICS OF ELASTIC SOLID.  25

To  verify  these  zeros  of  the  upper  right-hand  and  lower  left-hand  Molar,
corner-squares,  let  us  consider  what  possible  relations  there  can  be
for  an  isotropic  body  between  longitudinal  strains  and  distortions.
Clearly  none.  No  one  of  the  longitudinal  strains  can  call  into
play  a  tangential  force  in  any  of  the  faces ;  and  conversely,  if  the
medium  be  isotropic,  no  distortion  produced  by  slipping  in  the
faces  parallel  to  the  principal  planes  can  introduce  a  longitudinal
stress — a  stress  parallel  to  any  of  the  lines  OX,  OY,  OZ.  There-
fore we  have  all  zeros  in  these  two  squares.  We  know  that
11  =  22  =  33;  and  each  of  these  will  be  represented  by  Saxon  A  {^).
Now  consider  the  effect  of  a  longitudinal  pull  in  the  direction
of  OX.  If  the  body  be  only  allowed  to  yield  longitudinally,  that
clearly  will  give  rise  to  a  negative  pull  in  the  directions  parallel  to
Oy,  Oz.  We  have  then  a  cross  connection  between  pulls  in  the
directions  OX,  OY,  OZ.  Isotropy  requires  that  the  several
mutual  relations  be  all  equal,  so  that  we  have  just  one  coefficient
to  express  these  relations.  That  coefficient  is  denoted  by  ISaxou  B
(23).  Thus  we  fill  up  our  36  squares,  which  represent  but  21  co-
efficients in  virtue  of  the  relations  12  =  21,  etc.  We  can  now
write  down  our  quadratic  expression  for  the  energy,

Instead  of  these  Saxon  letters  ^,  23,  which  have  very  distinct  and
obvious  interpretations,  we  may  introduce  the  resistance  of  the
solid  to  compression,  the  reciprocal  of  what  is  commonly  called
the  compressibility,  or,  what  we  may  call  the  bulk  modulus,  k.
Then  it  is  proved  in  Thomson  and  Tait,  and  in  an  article  in  the
Encyclopcedia  Britannica  which  perhaps  some  of  you  may  have*,
that  ^  =  k  +  ^ n,  ^  =  k  —  ^n.  The  considerations  which  show
these  relations  with  the  bulk  modulus  also  show  us  that  we  must
have  n  =  ^{^  —  23).  This  is  most  important.  Take  a  solid  cube
with  its  edges  parallel  to  OX,  0  Y,  OZ.  Apply  a  pull  along  two
faces  perpendicular  to  OX  and  an  equal  pressure  on  two  faces
perpendicular  to  OF;  that  will  give  a  distortion  in  the  plane  xy.
Find  the  value  of  that  simple  shear;  it  is  done  in  a  moment.  Find
the  shearing  force  required  to  produce  it  calculated  from  ^  and  23,
and  equate  that  to  the  force  calculated  from  the  rigidity  modulus
11,  and  then  you  find  this  relation. The  relations  for  complete

*  Eeprint  of  Mathematical  and  Fliyslcal  Papers,  Vol.  in.  Ait.  xcii.  now  in  the
Press. [W.  T.  Aug.  7,  1885.]

-^•J

26  LECTURE n. PART I.

isotropy  are  exliibited  here  iu  this quadratic  expression  for  the
energy,  if  in  it  we  take  |  (^  —  23)  in  place  of  n.

We  shall  pass  on  to  the  formation  of  the  equations  of  motion.
For  equilibrium,  the  component  parallel  to  OX  of  the  force  applied
at  any  point  .r,  i/,  z  of  the  solid,  reckoned  per  unit  of  bulk  at  that
point  must  be  equal  to

'(IP_ dUd/F\

,  dx dy dz  )  '

if  the  body  be  held  distorted  in  any  way,  by  bodily  forces  applied

all  through  the  interior ;  because  the  resultant  of  the  elastic  force

on  an  infinitesimal  portion  of  matter  at  the  point  x,  y,  z  is  obviously

(dP dU dT\  _, , , ^  ,  .  , , .^ ,

1-1 — I--T — h  -J-  j  axayclz. lo  prove  this  remark  that  it  the  pull

augments  as  you  go  forward  in  the  direction  OX  there  will,  in

virtue  of  that,  be  a  resultant  forward  pull
u  dp

I  -j—dx.dydz  upon  the  infinitesimal  ele-

ment. The  two  tangential  forces,  U  per-
pendicular to  OY,  and U  perpendicular
to  OX  on  the  one  pair  of  forces  and  the
pair  of  forces  equal  and  in  opposite  di-
rections on  the  other  faces  constitute  two
balancing couples, as it were. If  this
tangential  force  parallel  to  OX  increases
as  we  proceed  in  the  direction  y  positive,  there  will  result  a  positive
force  on  the  element,  because  it  is  pulled  to  left  by  the  smaller
and  to  right  by  the  larger,  and  thus  the  force  in the  direction

dU
of  OX  receives  a  contribution  , dy.dzdx. Quite  similarly  we

dT
find, -r-  dz .  dxdy  as  a  third  and  last  contribution  to  the  force

parallel  to  OX.

Now,  let  there  be  no  bodily  forces  acting  through  the  material,
but  let  the  inertia  of  the  moving  part,  and  the  reaction  against
acceleration  in  virtue  of  inertia,  constitute  the  equilibrating  re-
action against  elasticity.  The  result  is,  that  we  have  the  equation
dP  dU  dT^  ^
dx  dy  dz  ^  df  '
if  by  p  we  denote  the  density  and  by  ^  we  denote  the  displace-
ment from  equilibrium  in  the  direction  OX  of  that  portion  of
matter  having  x,  y,  z  for  co-ordinates  of  its  mean  position.

(>

DYNAMICS OF ELASTIC SOLID.  27

I  said  I  would  use  tlie  notation  of  Tliomson  and  Tait  who  Molar.
employ  a,  /3,  7  to  denote  the  displacements;  but  errors  are  too
common  when  a  and  a  are  mixed  up,  especially  in  print,  so  we
will  take  ^,  t],  f  instead.  I  have  had  trouble  in  reading  Helm-
holtz's  paper  on  anomalous  dispersion,  on  this  account,  very  fre-
quently not  being  able  to  distinguish  Avith  a  magnifying  glass
whether  a  certain  letter  was  a  or  a.

The  values  of  /S',  T,  U,  we  had  better  write  out  in  full,  although
the  others  may  be  obtained  from  the  value  of  any  one  of  the
three  by  symmetry.  The  expenditure  of  chalk  is  often  a  saving
of  brains. They  are  :

\dz ay  J  \dx dzj  \dy dx!

We  have  P=^e4-23  if+o)-  There  are  two  or  three  other  forms
which  are  convenient  in  some  cases,  and  I  will  put  them  down
(writing  in  for  h  +  ^n)

dx dy dzj  \dx dy dz

We  shall  denote  very  frequently  by  8  the  expression

^  +  ^i^  +  ^
dx dy dz  '

so  that  for  example,  the  second  of  these  expressions  is

P  =  {m -  n)  8+2n^^  .

If  we  want  to  write  down  the  equations  of  a  heterogeneous  medium,
as  will  sometimes  be  the  case,  especially  in  following  Lord  Ray-
leigh's  work  on  the  blue  sky,  we  must  in  taking  dP/dx,  dP/dy,  &c.,
to  find  the  accelerations,  keep  the  symbols  m,  n  inside  of  the
symbols  of  differentiation  ;  but  for  homogeneous  solids,  we  treat  m
and  n  as  constant.  I  forgot  to  say  that  8  is  the  cubic  dilatation  or
the  augmentation  of  volume  per  unit  volume  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  point  x,  y,  z,  which  is  pretty  well  known,  and  helps  us
to  see  the  relations  to  compressibility.  If  we  suppose  zero  rigidity,
P  =  iu8  is  the  relation  between  pressure  and  volume.  In  order
to  verify  this  take  the  preceding  expression  for  P  and  make  n  =  0
and  we  obtain  P  =  m8,  the  equation  for  the  compression  of  a
compressible  fluid,  in  which  in  has  become  the  bulk  modulus.

28  LECTURE II. PART II.

This  sort  of  work  I  have  called  molar  dynamics.  It  is  tlie
dynamics  of  continuous  matter;  there  are  in  it  no  molecules,  no
heterogeneousnesses  at  all.  We  are  preparing  the  way  for  dealing
with  heterogeneousnesses  in  the  most  analytical  manner  by  sup-
posing m  and  n  to  be  functions  of  x,  y,  z.  Lord  Rayleigh
studied  the  blue  sky  in  that  way,  and  very  beautifully ;  his  treat-
ment is  quite  perfect  of  its  kind.  He  considers  an  imbedded
particle  of  water,  or  dust,  or  unknown  material,  whatever  it  is
that  causes  the  blue  sky.  To  discover  the  effect  of  such  a  particle,
on  the  waves  of  light,  he  supposes  a  change  of  rigidity  and  of
density  from  place  to  place  in  the  luminiferous  ether;  not  an
absolutely  sudden  change,  but  confined  to  a  space  which  is  small
in  comparison  with  the  wave-length.

Ten  minutes  interval.

Part  II.  I  want  to  take  up  another  subject  which  Avill  pre-
pare the  way  to  what  we  shall  be  doing  afterward,  v/hich  is  the
particular  dynamical  problem  of  the  movement  of  a  system  of  con-
nected particles.  I  suppose  most  of  you  know  the  linear  equations
of  motion  of  a  connected  system — whose  integral  always  leads  to
the  same  formula  as  the  cycloidal  pendulum;  this  result  being
come  to  through  a  determinant  equated  to  zero,  giving  an  alge-
braical equation  whose  roots  are  essentially  real  for  the  square
of  the  period  of  any  one  of  the  fundamental  modes  of  simple
harmonic  motion.

As  an  example,  take  three  weights,  one  of  7  pounds,  another  of
14  pounds,  and  another  of  28  pounds,  say. The  lowest  weight  is
hung  upon  the  middle  weight  by  a  spiral  spring;
^^p  the  middle  is  hung  upon  the  upper  by  a  spiral

^P  spring,  and  the  upper  is  attached  to  a  fixed  point

by  a  spiral  (or  a  zig-gag)  spring.  It  is  a  pretty
illustration;  and  I  find  it  very  useful  to  myself.
I  am  speaking,  so  to  say,  to  professors  who  sym-
pathize with  me,  and  might  like  to  know  an
experiment  which  will  be  instructive  to  their
pupils.

Just  apply  your  finger to any  one of  the
weights,  the  upper  weight,  for  example. You

28

14

soon  learn  to  find  by  trial  the  fundamental  periods. Move  it  up
and  down  gently  in  the  period  which  you  find  to  be  that  of  the

INTRODUCTION TO PART II.  29

three  all  moving  in  the  same  direction.  Yon  will  get  a  very  Molecular,
pretty  oscillation,  the  lowest  weight  moving  through  the  greatest
amplitude,  the  second  through  a  less,  and  the  upper  weight  through
the  smallest.  That  is  No.  1  motion,  corresponding  to  the  greatest
root  of  the  cubic  equation  which  expresses  the  solution  of  the
mathematical  problem.  No.  2  motion  will  come  after  a  little
practice.  You  soon  learn  to  give  an  oscillation  a  good  deal  quicker
than  before,  the  first;  a  second  mode,  in  which  the  lowest  weight
moves  downward  while  the  two  upper  move  upwards,  or  the  two
lower  move  downwards  while  the  upper  moves  upwards,  or  it
might  be  that  the  middle  weight  does  not  move  at  all  in  this
second  mode,  in  which  case  the  excitation  must  be  by  putting  the
finger  on  the  upper  or  the  lower  weight.  These  periods  depend
upon  the  magnitude  of  the  weights,  and  the  strength  of  the
springs  that  we  use,  and  are  soon  learned  in  any  particular  set  of
weights  and  springs.  It  might  be  a  good  problem  for  junior
laboratory  students  to  find  weights  and  springs  which  will  in-
sure a  case  of  the  nodal  point  lying  between  the  upper  and
middle  weisfhts,  or  at  the  middle  weight,  or  between  the  middle
and  lower  weights.  The  third  mode  of  vibration,  corresponding
to  the  smallest  root  of  the  cubic  equation,  is  one  in  which  you
always  have  one  node  in  the  spring  between  the  upper  and  middle
weights,  and  another  node  in  the  spring  between  the  middle  and
lowest  (the  first  and  third  weight  vibrating  in  the  same  direction,  and
the  middle  weight  in  an  opposite  direction  to  the  first  and  third).
It  is  assumed  that  there  is  no  mass  in  the  springs.  If  you
want  to  vary  your  laboratory  exercises,  take  smaller  masses  for  the
weights,  and  more  massive  springs,  and  if  you  omit  the  attached
masses  altogether,  you  pass  on  to  a  very  beautiful  illustration
of  the  velocity  of  sound.  For  that  purpose  a  long  spiral  spring
of  steel  wire,  the  spiral  20  feet  long,  hung  up,  say,  if  you  have
a  lofty  enough  room,  will  answer,  and  you  will  readily  get
two  or  three  of  the  graver  fundamental  modes  without  any
attached  weights  at  all.  In  the  special  problem  which  we  have
been  considering  we  have  three  separate  weights  and  not  a  con-
tinuous spring ;  and  we  have  three,  and  only  three  modes  of  vibra-
tion, when  the  springs  are  massless.  We  have  an  infinite  number
of  modes  when  the  mass  of  the  springs  is  taken  into  account.  In
any  convenient  arrangement  of  heavy  weights,  the  stiffness  of  the
springs  is  so  great  and  their  masses  so  small  that  the gravest

30  LKCTURE II. PART II.

[olccular.  period  of  vibration  of  one  of  the  springs  by  itself  will  be  very  short ;
but  take  a  long  spring,  a  spiral  of  best  pianoforte  steel  wire,  if  you
please,  and  hang  it  up,  with  a  weight  perhaps  equal  to  its  own,
on  its  lower  end,  and  you  will  find  it  a  nice  illustration  for  getting
several  of  the  graver  of  the  infinite  number  of  the  fundamental
modes  of  the  system.

I  want  to  put  down  the  dynamics  of  our  problem  for  an}^
number  of  masses.  You  will  see  at  once  that  that  is  just  the  case
that  I  spoke  of  yesterday,  of  extending  Helmholtz's  singly  vibrat-
ing particle  connected  with  the  luminiferous  ether  to  a  multiple
vibrating  heavy  elastic  atom  imbedded  in  the  luminiferous  ether,
which  I  think  must  be  the  true  state  of  the  case.  A  solid  mass
must  act  relatively  to  the  luminiferous  ether  as  an  elastic  body
imbedded  in  it,  of  enormous  mass  compared  with  the  mass  of  the
luminiferous  ether  that  it  displaces.  In  order  that  the  vibrations
of  the  ether  may  not  be  absolutely  stopped  by  the  mass,  there
must  be  an  elastic  connection.  It  is  easier  to  say  what  must
be  than  to  say  that  we  can  understand  how  it  comes  to  be.  The
result  is  almost  infinitely  difficult  to  understand  in  the  case  of
ether  in  glass  or  water  or  carbon  disulphide,  but  the  luminiferous
ether  in  air  is  very  easily  imagined.  Just  think  of  the  molecules
of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  as  if  each  were  a  group  of  ponderable  par-
ticles mutually  connected  by  springs,  and  imbedded  in  homogene-
ous perfectly  elastic  jelly  constituting  the  luminiferous  ether.
You  do  not  need  to  take  into  account  the  gaseous  motions  of  the
particles  of  oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  carbon  dioxide  in  our  atmosphere
when  you  are  investigating  the  propagation  of  luminous  waves
through  the  air.  Think  of  it  in  this  way :  the  period  of  vibration
in  ultra-violet  rays  in  luminous  waves  and  in  infra  red  heat
waves  so  far  as  known,  is  fi'om  the  1600  million-millionth  of
a  second  to  the  100  million-millionth  of  a  second.  Now  think
how  far  a  particle  of  oxygen  or  nitrogen  moves,  according  to  the
kinetic  theory  of  gases,  in  the  course  of  that  exceedingly  small
time.  You  will  find  that  it  moves  through  an  exceedingly  small
fraction  of  the  wave-length.  For  examjjle,  think  of  a  molecule
moving  at  the  rate  of  50000  centimetres  per  second.  In  the  period
of  orange  light  it  crawls  along  10"'"  of  a  centimetre  which  is  only
1/GOOOOO  of  the  wave-length  of  orange  light.  I  am  fully  confident
that  the  wave  motion  takes  place  independently  of  the  translatory
motion of  the  particles  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen in performing

DYNAMICS OF A ROW OF CONNECTED PARTICLES.

81

tlieir  functions  according  to  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  You  may  Molecular,
therefore  really  look  upon  the  motion  of  light  waves  through  our
atmosphere  as  being  solved  by  a  dynamical  problem  such  as  this
before  us,  applied  to  a  case  in  which  there  is  so  little  of  effective
inertia  due  to  the  imbedded  molecules,  that  the  velocity  of  light  is
not  diminished  more  than  about  one-thirty-third  per  cent,  by  it.
More  difficulties  surround  the  subject  when  you  come  to  consider
the  propagation  of  light  through  highly  condensed  gases,  or  trans-
parent liquids  or  solids.

In  our  dynamical  problem,  let  the  masses  of  the  bodies  be
represented  hy  m^,  vi.^,...mj.  I  am  going  to  suppose  the  several
particles  to  be  acted  upon  by  connecting  springs.  I  do  not  want
to  use  spiral  springs  here.  The  helicalness  of  the  spring  in  these
experiments  has  no  sensible  effect;  but  we  want  to  introduce
a  spiral  for  investigating  the  dynamics  of  the  helical  properties,  as
shown  by  sugar.  It  is  usually  called  the  rotatory  property,  but  this
is  a  misnomer.  The  magneto-optical  property  which  was  dis-
covered by  Faraday  is  rotational,  the  property  exhibited  by  quartz
and  susrar  and  such  thinos,  has  not  the  essential  elements  of
rotation  in  it,  but  has  the  characteristic  of  a  spiral  spring  (a  helical
spring,  not  a  flat  spiral),  in  the  constitution  of  the  matter  that  ex-
hibits it.  We  apply  the  word  helical  to  the  one  and  the  word
rotational  to  the  other.

I  am  going  to  suppose  one  other  connect-
ed particle  F,  which  is  moved  to  and  fro
with  a  given  motion  whose  displacement
downwards  from  a  fixed  point  0,  we  shall  call
^.  Let  Cj  be  the  coefficient  of  elasticity  of
the  first  spring,  connecting  the  particle  P
with  the  particle  m^;  c^  the  coefficient  of
elasticity  of  the  next  spring  connecting  m^
and  m^',  Cj_^,^,  the  coefficient  of  elasticity  of
the  spring  connecting  lUj  to  a  fixed  point.
We  are  not  taking  gravity  into  account ;  we
have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Although  in  the
experiment  it  is  convenient  to  use  gravity,
it  would  be  still  better  if  we  could  go  to  the
centre  of  the  earth  and  there  perform  the
experiment.  The  only  difference  would  be,
these  springs  would  not  be  pulled  out  by  the  weights  hung  upon

82  LECTURE IT. CONCLUSION.

Molecular,  them. In  all  other  respects  the  problem  would  be  the  same,  and

the  same  symbols  would  apply.

We  are  reckoning  displacements  downwards  as  positive,  the

displacement  of  the  particle  m.  being  x.. The  force  acting  upon

?7ij  in  virtue  of  the  spring  connection  between  it  and  P  is  c,  (f  —  x^) ;

and  in  virtue  of  the  spring  connection  between  it  and  m^  is  the

opposing  pull  —  c^  {x^  —  x^  ;  so  that  the  equation  of  motion  of  the

first  particle  is

dj^x
m,  -^i  =  Cj  (^  -  x^)  -  c,  (a?,  -  x^.

For  No.  2  particle  we  have

X

w„

dt

=  Cg  {x^—  x^)  —  C3  (x^  -  x^) ;  and  so  on.

Now  suppose  P  to  be  arbitrarily  kept  in  simple  harmonic  mo-

27rt
tion  in  time  or  period  t  ;  so  that  ^  =  const,  x  cos  — . We  assume

that  every  part  of  the  apparatus  is  moving  with  a  simple  harmonic

motion,  as will be  the case if  there  were  infinitesimal  viscous

resistance  and  the  simple  harmonic  motion  of  P  is  kept  up  long

27rt
enough  ; so  that  we  can  write  x.  =  const,  x  cos  —  ,  etc. I  am

going  to  alter  the  ins  so  as  to  do  away  with  the  47r^  which  comes

771

in  from  differentiation. I  will  let  —4,  denote  the  mass  of  the  first

47r'

particle,  and  7  -|  the  mass  of  the  second  particle,  etc. The  result

will  be  that  the  equations  of  motion  become

-  T^^i  =  Cj  (^  -  ^J  -  c,  (x^  -  x^),  etc.

Our  problem  is  reduced  now  to  one  of  algebra.  There  are
some  interesting  considerations  connected  with  the  determinant
which  we  shall  obtain  by  elimination  from  these  equations.  To
find  the  number  of  terms  is  easy  enough ;  and  it  will  lead  to  some
remarkable  expressions.  But  I  wish  particularly  to  treat  it  with
a  view  to  obtaining  by  very  short  arithmetic  the  result  which  can
be  obtained  from  the  determinant  in  the  regular  way  only  by
enormous  calculation.  We  shall  obtain  an  approximation,  to  the
accuracy  of  which  there  is  no limit  if  you push  it far enough,

LECTURE II. CONCLUSION.  83

that will be exceedingly convenient in performing the  calcu-  MolecuLar.
latious.

In  the  next  lecture,  resuming  the  molar  problem,  we  shall
begin  with  the  solution  for  sound,  of  the  equations  that  are  now
before  you  on  the  board.  We  shall  next  try  to  go  on  a  step  further
with  this  molecular  problem,  of  the  vibrations  of  our  compound
molecule.

T.  L.

LECTURE III.

Oct.  8,  5  p.m.

Molar.  We  will  now  go  on  with  the  problem  of  Molar  dynamics,  the

propagation  of  sound  or  of  light,  from  a  source.  I  advise  you  all
who  are  engaged  in  teaching,  or  in  thinking  of  these  things  for
yourselves,  to  make  little  models.  If  you  want  to  imagine  the
strains  that  were  spoken  of  yesterday,  get  such  a  box  as  this
covered  with  white  paper  and  mark  upon  it  the  directions  of  the
forces  S,  T,  IT.  I  always  take  the  directions  of  the  axes  in  a
certain  order  so  that  the  direction  of  positive  rotation  shall  be
from  y  to  z,  from  z  to  w,  from  x  to  y.  What  we  call  positive  is  the
same  direction  as  the  revolution  of  a  planet  seen  from  the  northern
hemisphere,  or  opposite  to  the  motion  of  the  hands  of  a  watch.  I
have  got  this  box  for  another  purpose,  as  a  mechanical  model  of  an
elastic  solid  with  21  independent  moduluses,  the  possibility  of
which  used  to  be  disproved,  and  after  having  been  proved,  was  still
disbelieved  for  a  long  time.
Let  us  take  our  equations,

d'^^dP dU dT ^^^^^^^
"  df dx dy dz  '

dx  \ay dxl  \dx dz

^^d^_^dn^dX
dx dy dz

We  shall  not  suppose  that  m  and  n  are  variables,  but  take  them
constant.  If  we  do  not  take  them  constant  we  shall  be  ready  for
Lord  Rayleigh's  paper  on  the  blue  sky,  already  referred  to.  I  will
do  the  work  upon  the  board  in  full,  as  it  is  a  case  in  which
the  expenditure  of  chalk  saves  brain  ;  but  it  would  be  a  waste  to

WAVES OR VIBRATIONS OF ELASTIC SOLID.  ,35

print  such  calculations,  for  the  reason  that  a  reader  of  mathematics Molar.
should  always  have  pencil  and  paper  beside  him  to  work  the  thing
out. *  *  *  * The  result  is  that

''d?='"5i+«^f <!>•

We  take  the  symbol

^ dx^'^  df^  dz^'

In  the  case  of  no  rigidity,  or  n  —  0,  the  last  term  goes  out.  We
shall  take  solutions  of  these  equations,  irrespectively  of  the
question  of  whether  we  are  going  to  make  n  —  0  or  not,  and  we
shall  find  that  one  standard  solution  for  an  elastic  solid  is  in-
dependent of  n  and  is  therefore  a  proper  solution  for  an  elastic
fluid.

I  have  in  my  hand  a  printed  report*  of  a  Royal  Institution
lecture  of  Feb.  1883,  on  the  Size  of  Atoms,  containing  a  note  on
some  mathematical  problems  which  I  set  when  I  was  examiner  for
the  Smith's  Prizes  at  Cambridge,  Jan.  30,  1883.  One  was  to  show
that  the  equations  of  motion  of  an  isotropic  elastic  solid  are  what
we  have  here  obtained,  and  another  to  show  that  so  and  so  was  a
solution.  We  will  just  take  that,  which  is  :  Show  that  every  pos-
sible solution  of  these  three  equations  [(1)  etc.]  is  included  in  the
following :

f=^!+-  "=1+^'  ?=!-" (^)-

where  ^,  u,  v,  lu,  are  some  functions  of  x,  y,z,  t\  with  the  condition

that  «,  V,  lu  are  such  that

du dv  ,d^f^_f^  /ON

dx dy dz

If  we  calculate  the  value  of  the  cubic  dilatation,  we  find

^ „ , du dv diu o  ,  /  i  V

^  =  ^■^  +  5+5^  +  37  =  ^* «•

dch
Again,  by  using  ^  =  -^  +  u  in  (1),  we  find  (bearing  in  mind

( d' d(i) d\i\ / , \ idd)  ^ „  ,^.

Hs55  +  d?j  =  ("'  +  "^^i  +  "^" ^'"-

*  Reprinted  in  Vol.  I.  of  Sir  W.  Thomson's  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses.
(Macmillan,  1889).

3—2

36  LECTURE TIT. PART T.

Molar.  Now  we  may  take

''a?s  =  <'"+">^  s '■^^-

The  full  justification  and  explanation  of  this  procedure  is
reserved.  [See  commencement  of  Lecture  IV.  below.]  Multiply
(6)  by  dx,  and  the  corresponding  y  and  z  equations  by  di/,  dz,  and
add.  We  thus  get  a  complete  differential ;  in  other  words,  the
relation  which  cf)  must  satisfy  is

P^^  =  (m  +  ^Ov^^ ^^^-

And  (2)  shows  that  if  </>  satisfies  (7)  we  have  ii,  v,  w,  satisfying
equations  of  the  same  form,  but  with  n  instead  of  (m  +  n);  viz.
dhi  „  d^v  „  d^w  „  ,„.

PW^""^''^ ^^  =  "^^' Plf^''"^'' ^^>-

By  solving  these  four  similar  equations,  one  involving  {m  +  ??),
and  three  involving  n,  we  can  get  solutions  of  (1),  that  is  certain.
That  we  get  every  possible  solution,  I  shall  hope  to  prove
to-morrow. The  velocity  of  the  sound  wave, or  condensational

wave  is  /s^f . The  velocity  of  the  wave  of  distortion  in  the

elastic  solid  is  a  /  -. I  shall  not  take  this  up  because  I  am  very

anxious  to  get  on  with  the  molecular  problem  ;  but  you  see
brought  out  perfectly  well  the  two  modes  of  waves  in  an  isotropic
homogeneous  solid,  the  condensational  wave  and  the  distortional
wave.  The  condensational  wave  follows  the  equations  of  motion
of  sound,  which  is  the  same  as  if  n  were  null ;  and  this  gives  the
solution  of  the  propagation  of  sound  in  a  homogeneous  medium,
like  air,  etc.  The  solution  is  worked  out  ready  to  hand  for  the
distortional  wave  because  the  same  forms  of  equations  give  us
separate  components  u,  v,  w ;  the  same  solution  that  gives  us  the
velocity  potential  for  the  condensational  waves,  gives  us  the
separate  components  of  displacement  for  the  distortional  waves.

What  I  am  going  to  give  you  to-morrow  will  include  a  solution
which  is  alluded  to  by  Lord  Rayleigh.  There  is  nothing  new  in  it.
I  am  going  to  pass  over  the  parts  of  the  solution  which  interpreted
by  Stokes  explain  that  beautiful  and  curious  experiment  of
Leslie's.  Lord  Rayleigh  quotes  from  Stokes,  ending  his  quotation
of  eight  pages  with  "The  importance  of  the  subject  and  the  masterly
manner  in  which  it  has  been  treated  by  Prof.  Stokes  w^ill  probably

WAVES OR VIBRATIONS OP ELASTIC FLUID.  37

be  thought  sufficient  to  justify  this  long  quotation."  I  would  just  Molar.
like  to  read  two  or  three  things  in  it.  Lord  Rayleigh  says  [Theory
of  Sound,  Vol.  II.  p.  207),  "Prof.  Stokes  has  applied  this  solution
to  the  explanation  of  a  remarkable  experiment  by  Leslie,  according
to  which  it  appeared  that  the  sound  of  a  bell  vibrating  in  a
partially  exhausted  receiver  is  diminished  by  the  introduction
of  hydrogen.  This  paradoxical  phenomenon  has  its  origin  in  the
augmented  wave  length  due  to  the  addition  of  hydrogen  in  conse-
quence of  which  the  bell  loses  its  hold  (so  to  speak)  on  the
surrcjunding  gas."  I  do  not  like  the  words  "  paradoxical  pheno-
menon;" "curious  phenomenon,"  or  "interesting  phenomenon"
would  be  better.  There  are  no  paradoxes  in  science.  Lord
Rayleigh  goes  on  to  say,  "  The  general  explanation  cannot  be
better  given  than  in  the  words  of  Prof.  Stokes  :  '  Suppose  a  person
to  move  his  hand  to  and  fro  through  a  small  space.  The  motion
which  is  occasioned  in  the  air  is  almost  exactly  the  same  as  it
would  have  been  if  the  air  had  been  an  incompressible  fluid.
There  is  a  mere  local  reciprocating  motion  in  which  the  air
immediately  in  front  is  pushed  forward  and  that  immediately
behind  impelled  after  the  moving  body,  while  in  the  anterior  space
generally  the  air  recedes  from  the  encroachment  of  the  moving
body,  and  in  the  posterior  space  generally  flows  in  from  all  sides
to  supply  the  vacuum  that  tends  to  be  created ;  so  that  in  lateral
directions,  the  flow  of  the  fluid  is  backwards,  a  portion  of  the
excess  of  the  fluid  in  front  going  to  supply  the  deficiency
behind.' "  It  will  take  some  careful  thought  to  follow  it.  I
wish  I  had  Green  here  to  read  a  sentence  of  his.  Green
says,  "  I  have  no  faith  in  speculations  of  this  kind  unless  they
can  be  reduced  to  regular  analysis."  Stokes  speculates,  but  is
not  satisfied  without  reducing  his  speculation  to  regular  analysis.
He  gives  here  some  very  elaborate  calculations  that  are  also
important  and  interesting  in  themselves,  partly  in  connection
with  spherical  harmonics,  and  partly  from  their  exceeding  instruc-
tiveness  in  respect  to  many  problems  regarding  sound.  Passing
by  all  that  five  or  six  pages  of  mathematics — I  will  not  tax  your
brains  with  trying  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  it  in  the  course
of  a  few  minutes ;  I  am  rather  calling  your  attention  to  a  thing
to  be  read  than  reading  it — Stokes  comes  more  particularly  to
Leslie's  experiments.  Instead  of  a  bell  vibrating,  Stokes  con-
siders the  vibrations  of  a  sphere  becoming  alternately  prolate  and

38

LECTURE III. PART II.

oblate ;  and  he  sIioavs  that  the  principles  are  the  same.  Read  all
this  for  yourselves.  I  have  intended  merely  to  arouse  an  interest
in  the  subject.

Ten  minutes  interval.

To  return  to  the  consideration  of  our  molecules  connected  by
springs,  we  will  suppose  a  good  fixing  at  the  top,  so  firm  and  stiff
that  the  changing  pull  of  the  spring  does  not  give  it  any  sensible
motion.  For  any  one  of  the  springs  let  there  be  a  certain  change
of  pull,  c  per  unit  change  of  length.  This  coefficient  c  measures
what  I  call  the  longitudinal  rigidity  of  the  spring :  its  effective
stiffness  in  fact.  It  is  not  the  slightest  consequence  whether  the
spring  is  long  or  short,  only,  if  it  is  long,  let  it  be  so  much  the
stiffer ;  but  long  or  short,  thick  or  thin,  it  must  be  massless.  I
mean  that  it  shall  have  no  inertia.  The  masses  may  be  equal
or  unequal,  and  are  connected  by  springs.  Let  us
attach  here  something  like  the  handle  of  the  bell
pull  of  pre-electric  ages ; — something  that  you  can
pull  by.  Call  it  P.  This,  in  our  application  to  the
luminiferous  ether,  will  be  the  rigid  shell  lining  be-
tween the  luminiferous  ether  and  the  first  moving  mass.
The  equation  of  motion  for  the  first  mass  be-
comes, on  bringing  ^  to  the  left-hand  side.

-Cil  =  (7^-<^i-C2)«i  +  c,;

and  similarly  for  the  second  mass ;  I  shall  use  i
to  denote  any  integer.  I  find  the  letter  i  too  useful
for  that  purpose  to  give  it  up,  and  when  I  want
to  write  the  imaginary  ^—1,  I  use  c.  Let  us  call
the  first  coefficient  on  the  right  a^,  the  similar
coefficient  in  the  next  equation  a^,  and  so  on,  so  that

CL  =

- C; - C;.

The  iih  equation  will  thus  be

Now  write  down  all  these  j  equations  supposing  the  whole  number
of  the  springs  to  be  j ;  form  the  determinant  by  which  you  find  all
of  the  others  in  terms  of  ^,  and  the  problem  is  solved.

If  we  had  a  little  more  time  I  would  like  to  determine  the
number  of  terms  in this determinant. We will  come  back  to

VIBRATIONS OF SERIAL MOLECULE.  39

that  because  it  is  exceeJiugly  interesting ;  but  I  want  at  once  to  Molecular.
put  the  equations  in  an  interesting  form,  taking  a  suggestion  from
Laplace's  treatment  of  his  celebrated  Tidal  problem. What  we
want  is  really  the  ratios  of  the  displacements,  and  we  shall  there-
fore write

introducing  the  sign  minus,  so  that  when  the  displacements  are
alternately  positive  and  negative  the  successive  ratios  will  be  all
positive. We  have  then,

-X^  '  ' %  '  ' It,  Ui^x

w,  =  aj ;  («_,.+!  =  CO  ).
We  can  now  form  a  continued  fraction  which,  for  the  case  that
we  want,  is  rapidly  convergent. If  this  be  differentiated  with
respect  to  T~^  we  find  a  very  curious  law,  but  I  am  afraid  we
must  leave  it  for  the  present. The  solution  is

u,  =  a,  —

^3

^ a„  —

a

Thus  if  we  are  given  the  spring  connections  and  the  masses,
everything  is  known  when  the  period  is  known.  If  you  develop
this,  you  simply  form  the  determinant ;  but  the  fractional  form
has  the  advantage  that  in  the  case  when  the  masses  are  larger
and  larger,  and  the  spring  connections  are  not  larger  in  pro-
portion, we  get  an  exceedingly  rapid  approximation  to  its  value
by  taking  the  successive  convergents.  The  differential  coefficient
of  this  continued  fraction  with  respect  to  the  period  is  essentially
negative,  and  thus  we  are  led  beautifully  from  root  to  root,  and
see  the  following  conditions  : — First,  suppose  we  move  P  to  and
fro  in  simple  harmonic  motion  of  very  short  period ;  then  when
the  whole  has  got  into  periodic  movement,  it  is  necessary  that  P
and  the  first  particle  move  in  opposite  directions.  The  vibrations
of  the  first  particle  needs  to  be  "  hurried  up "  (if  you  will  allow
me  an  expressive  American  phrase)  when  the  motion  of  P  is
of  a  shorter  period  than  the  shortest  of  the  possible  inde-
pendent motions  of  the  system  with  P  held  fixed.  Now  if  you
want  to  hurry  up  a  vibrating  particle,  you  must  at  each  end  of
its range press it inwards or towards its middle position.

40  LECTURE in. PART 11.

You  meet  this  principle  quite  often ;  it  is  well  known  in
the  construction  of  clock  escapements.  To  hurry  up  the  vibra-
tory motion  of  our  system  we  must  add  to  the  return  force  of
particle  No,  1  by  the  action  of  the  spring  connected  to  the
handle  P,  by  moving  F  always  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the
motion  of  m.  From  looking  at  the  thing,  and  learning  to  under-
stand it  hy  feeling  the  experiment,  if  you  do  not  understand  it  by
brains  alone,  you  will  see  that  everything  that  I  am  saying  is
obvious.  But  it  is  not  satisfactory  to  speak  of  these  things- in
general  terms  unless  we  can  submit  them  to  a  rigorous  analysis.

I  now  set  the  system  in  motion,  managing,  as  you  see,  to  get
it  into  a  state  of  simple  harmonic  vibration  by  my  hand  applied
to  P.  That,  which  you  now  see,  is  a  specimen  of  the  configuration
in  which  the  motion  of  P  is  of  a  shorter  period  than  the  shortest
of  the  independent  motions  with  P  fixed.  Suppose  now,  the
vibration  of  P  to  be  less  rapid  and  less  rapid ;  a  state  of  things
will  come,  in  which,  the  period  of  P  being  longer  and  longer,  the
motion  of  the  first  particle  will  be  greater  and  greater.  That  is
to  say,  if  I  go  on  augmenting  the  period  of  P  we  shall  find  for
the  same  range  of  motion  of  P,  that  the  ranges  of  motion  of  ni^
and  of  the  other  particles  generally  will  be  greatly  increased
relatively  to  the  range  which  I  give  to  P.  In  analytical  words,
if  we  begin  with  a  configuration  of  values  corresponding  to  r
very small, and then, if we increase t to a certain critical

CO

value,  we  shall  find  -^  will  become  infinite. In  the  first  place,  we

begin  with  u^,  u^,...Uj  all  positive;  and  t  small  enough  will  make
them  all  positive  as  you  see.  ISovv  take  the  differential  coefficient
of  u.  with  respect  to  t  and  it  will  be  found  to  be  essentially  nega-
tive. In  other  words,  if  we  increase  r,  we  shall  diminish  u^,  u^

In  every  case  u^  will  first  pass  through  zero  and  become  negative.

When  Wj  is  zero  we  have  the  first  infinity  -^  =  oo  . If  we  diminish

T  a  little  further  ii^  will  pass  through  zero  to  negative  while  u^  is
still  negative.  Diminish  t  a  little  further  and  u^  will  become
zero  and  pass  to  negative,  while  u^  is  still  negative ;  but  in  the
mean  time  u^  may  have  reached  a  negative  maximum  and  passed
through  zero  to  positive,  or  it  may  not  yet  have  done  so.  We
shall  go  into  this  to-morrow  ;  but  I  should  like  to  have  you  know
beforehand  what  is  goings  to  come  from  this  kind  of  treatment  of
the  subject.

LECTURE IV.

Oct.  4,  3.45  P.M.

We  found  yesterday

Molar.

di'

d\)
df

d^
df

dx

dS  „

dy+"'^'^

=  {k  +  in)  j-^  +  n^'i;

=  {k  +

.(i;

and  we  saw  that  we  get  two  solutions,  which  when  fully  inter-
preted, correspond  to  two  different  velocities  of  propagation,  on
the  assumptions  that  were  put  before  you  as  to  a  condensational
or  a  distortional  wave.  We  will  approach  the  subject  again  from
the  beginning,  and  you  will  see  at  once  that  the  sum  of  these
solutions  expresses  every  possible  solution.

In  one  of  our  solutions  of  yesterday,  we  took,  instead  of  ^,  t],  ^,
other  symbols  u,  v,  w,  which  satisfied  the  condition,

du dv dw  _  ^
dx dy dz

In  other  words,  the  u,  v,  w  of  yesterday  express  the  displacements
in  a  case  in  which  the  dilatation  or  condensation  is  zero.  Now,  just
try  for  the  dilatation  in  any  case  whatever,  without  such  restriction.
This  we  can  do  as  follows :  Differentiate  (1)  with  respect  to  x
(taking  account  of  the  constancy  of  m  and  n)  and  the  correspond-
ing equations  with  respect  to  y  and  z,  and  add. We  thus  find

d'8

^  df  ^  ^"'  "^  ''^  ^'^  "  ^^  ^  ^"^  ^'^

.(2).

42  LECTURE IV.

Molar.  This  equation,  you  will  remember,  is  the  same  as  we  had  yesterday
for  </).  We  shall  consider  solutions  of  this  equation  presently ;
but  now  remark,  that  whatever  be  the  displacements,  we  have
a  dilatation  corresponding  to  some  solution  of  this  equation.  It
may  be  zero,  but  it  must  satisfy  (2).  Now  in  any  actual  case,  B  is
a  determinate  function  of  cc,  y,  z,  t;  and  whether  we  know  it  or
not,  we  may  take  ^  to  denote  a  function  such  that

V^(^  =  0  through  all  space (3).

This  function,  ^,  is  determinate. It  is  in  fact  given  explicitly
(as  is  well  known  in  the  theory  of  attraction)  by  the  equation

where  S'  denotes  the  value  of  S  at  {x ,  y',  z).  This  formula  (4)  is
important  as  giving  ^  explicitly ;  and  exceedingly  interesting  on
account  of  the  relations  to  the  theory  of  attraction ;  but  in  the
wave-problem,  when  S  is  given,  (8)  gives  <^  determinately  and  in
the  easiest  possible  way. Putting  now

du  .  dv .  diD
dy

We  have  8  =  vV+i  +  i^  +  i  («' =

and  therefore,  by  (3), g  +  |  +  I"  =  0 (7).

Now,  remembering  that  (1)  are  satisfied  by  d(j)/dx,  d(f)/dy,  d(f)/dz
in  place  of  ^,  77,  ^,  we  see,  by  multiplying  the  first  by  dec,  or  the
second  by  dy,  or  the  third  by  dz,  and  integrating,  that

p'^^  =  {k  +  in)v'<P (8),

and  we  find  the  three  equations  for

fc  _  # ^  _  f^^ ^  _  ^^^
^ dx' ^ dy' ^ dz

reduced,  in  virtue  of  (7),  to  the  following  :

d^u , d% „ d'^iu
P  -^  =  '^V  ^*> P  -^  =  '^V  V, p  ^^2  =  '^V'w (9).

For  any  possible  solutions  of  equations  (1),  we  have  a  value
of  B  which  is  a  function  of  x,  y,  z ;  take  the  above  volume  integral

WAVES OR VIBRATIONS IN ELASTIC SOLID.  4-8

corresponding  to  this  value  of  6  through  all  points  of  space  x'y  z , Molar,
and we  obtain the  corresponding 0  function which fulfils  the

condition  v"0  =  h. Now,  let  us  compound  displacements  —  j  ,  etc.,
with  the  actual  displacements  and  denote  the  resultant  as  follows:
^ dd)  (16  ^ clcfi

and  remarking  that  therefore

du dv dw  _
dx dy dz '

we  see  the  proposition  that  we  had  before  us  yesterday  established.
Hence  to  solve  the  three  equations  (1)  we  have  simply  to  find
8  by  solution  of  the  one  equation

P  ^.  =  ("^  +  «)  V  f>>

and  to  deduce  <^  from  S,  by  (3);  or  to  find  0  direct  by  solution
of  the  equation

d  (b /  ■, -2 ,

p  ^  =  (''i  +  '0  V  </> ;

and  u,  V,  lu  from  the  three  separate  similar  equations  with  n  in  the
place  of  (m  +  n),  subject  to  the  conditions

du dv dw  _  „
dx dy dz

We  shall  take  our  ^  equation  and  see  how  we  can  from  it
obtain  different  forms  of  ^  solutions.  We  can  do  that  for  the
purpose  of  illustrating  different  problems  in  soimd,  and  in  order
to  familiarize  you  with  the  wave  that  may  exist  along  with  the
wave  of  distortion  in  any  true  elastic  solid  which  is  not  incom-
pressible. We  ignore  this  condensational  wave  in  the  theory  of
light.  We  are  sure  that  its  energy  at  all  events,  if  it  is  not  null,
is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  energy  of  the  luminiferous
vibrations  we  are  dealing  with.  But  to  say  that  it  is  absolutely
null  would  be  an  assumption  that  we  have  no  right  to  make.
When  we  look  through  the  little  universe  that  we  know,  and  think
of  the  transmission  of  electrical  force  and  of  the  transmission  of
magnetic  force  and  of  the  transmission  of  light,  we  have  no  right
to  assume  that  there  may  not  be  something  else  that  our  philo-

44  LECTURE IV.

sophy  does  not  dream  of.  We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  there
may  not  be  condensational  waves  in  the  luminiferous  ether.  We
only  do  know  that  any  vibrations  of  this  kind  which  are  excited
by  the  reflection  and  refraction  of  light  are  certainly  of  very  small
energy  compared  with  the  energy  of  the  light  from  which  they
proceed.  The  fact  of  the  case  as  regards  reflection  and  refraction
is  this,  that  unless  the  luminiferous  ether  is  absolutely  incom-
pressible, the  reflection  and  refraction  of  light  must  generally
give  rise  to  waves  of  condensation.  Waves  of  distortion  may
exist  without  waves  of  condensation,  but  waves  of  distortion  cannot
be  reflected  at  the  bounding  surface  between  two  mediums  without
exciting  in  each  medium  a  wave  of  condensation.  When  we  come
to  the  subject  of  reflection  and  refraction,  we  shall  see  how  to
deal  with  these  condensational  waves  and  find  how  easy  it  is  to
get  quit  of  them  by  supposing  the  medium  to  be  incompressible.
But  it  is  always  to  be  kept  in  mind  as  to  be  examined  into,  are
there  or  are  there  not  very  small  amounts  of  condensational  waves
generated  in  reflection  and  refiaction,  and  may  after  all,  the  pro-
pagation of  electric  force  be  by  these  waves  of  condensation  ?

Suppose  that  we  have  at  any  place  in  air,  or  in  luminiferous
ether  (I  cannot  distinguish  now  between  the  two  ideas)  a  body
that  through  some  action  we  need  not  describe,  but  which  is  con-
ceivable, is  alternately  positively  and  negatively  electrified;  may
it  not  be  that  this  will  give  rise  to  condensational  waves  ?  Suppose,
for  example,  that  we  have  two  spherical  condvictors  united  by  a
fine  wire,  and  that  an  alternating  electromotive  force  is  pro-
duced in  that  fine  wire,  for  instance  by  an  "alternate  current"
dynamo-electric  machine;  and  suppose  that  sort  of  thing  goes  on
away  from  all  other  disturbance — at  a  great  distance  up  in  the
air,  for  example.  The  result  of  the  action  of  the  dynamo-electric
machine  will  be  that  one  conductor  will  be  alternately  positively
and  negatively  electrified,  and  the  other  conductor  negatively  and
positively  electrified.  It  is  perfectly  certain,  if  we  turn  the
machine  slowly,  that  in  the  air  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  con-
ductors we  shall  have  alternately  positively  and  negatively  directed
electric  force  with  reversals  of,  for  example,  two  or  three  hundred
per  second  of  time  Avith  a  gradual  transition  from  negative
through  zero  to  positive,  and  so  on;  and  the  same  thing  all
through  space ;  and  we  can  tell  exactly  what  the  potential  and
what  the  electric  force  is  at  each  instant  at  any  point. Now,  does

ELECTRir WAVES.  45

any  one  believe  that  if  that  revolution  was  made  fast  enough  Molar.
the  electro  static  law  of  force,  pure  and  simple,  would  apply  to
the  air  at  different  distances  from  each  globe?  Eveiy  one  believes
that  if  that  process  be  conducted  fast  enough,  several  million  times,
or  millions  of  million  times  per  second,  we  should  have  large  devia-
tion from  the  electrostatic  law  in  the  distribution  of  electric  force
through  the  air  in  the  neighbourhood.  It  seems  absolutely  certain
that  such  an  action  as  that  going  on  would  give  rise  to  electrical
waves.  Now  it  does  seem  to  me  probable  that  those  electrical
waves  are  condensational  waves  in  luminiferous  ether;  and  pro-
bably it  would  be  that  the  propagation  of  these  waves  would  be
enormously  faster  than  the  propagation  of  ordinary  light  waves.

I  am  quite  conscious,  when  speaking  of  this,  of  what  has
been  done  in  the  so-called  Electro-Magnetic  theory  of  light.
I  know  the  propagation  of  electric  impulse  along  an  insulated
wire  surrounded  by  gutta  percha,  which  I  worked  out  myself
about  the  year  18-54,  and  in  which  I  found  a  velocity  comparable
with  the  velocity  of  light*.  We  then  did  not  know  the  relation
between  electro-static  and  electro-magnetic  units.  If  we  work
that  out  for  the  case  of  air  instead  of  gutta  percha,  we  get  simply
"■y,"  (that  is,  the  number  of  electrostatic  units  in  the  electro-
magnetic unit  of  quantity,)  for  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  the
impulse.  That  is  a  very  different  case  from  this  very  rapidly
varying  electrification  I  have  ideally  put  before  you  :  and  I  have
waited  in  vain  to  see  how  we  can  get  any  justification  of  the  way
of  putting  the  idea  of  electric  and  magnetic  waves  in  the  so-called
electro-magnetic  theory  of  light.

I  may  refer  to  a  little  article  of  mine  in  which  I  gave  a  sort
of  mechanical  representation  of  electric,  magnetic,  and  galvanic
forces — galvanic  force  I  called  it  then,  a  very  badly  chosen  name.
It  is  published  in  the  first  volume  of  the  reprint  of  my  papers.
It  is  shown  in  that  paper  that  the  static  displacement  of  an  elastic
solid  follows  exactly  the  laws  of  the  electro-static  force,  and  that
rotatory  displacement  of  the  medium  follows  exactly  the  laws  of
magnetic  force.  It  seems  to  me  that  an  incorporation  of  the
theory  of  the  propagation  of  electric  and  magnetic  disturbances
with  the  wave  theory  of  light  is  most  probably  to  be  arrived  at
by  trying  to  see  clearly  the  view  that  I  am  now  indicating.  In
the  wave  theory  of  light,  however,  we  shall  simply  suppose  the

*  (See  an  Appendix  near  the  end  of  the  present  voUime.)

46  LECTURE IV.

resistance  to  compression  of  the  luminiferous  ether  and  the
velocity  of  propagation  of  the  condensational  wave  in  it  to  be
infinite.  We  shall  sometimes  use  the  words  "practically  infinite"
to  guard  against  supposing  these  quantities  to  be  absolutely
infinite.

I  will  now  take  two  or  three  illustrations  of  this  solution  for
condensational  waves.  Part  of  the  problem  that  I  referred  to
yesterday  says : — prove  that  the  following  is  a  solution  of  (7),  the
equation  of  motion,

6  =  -  sm  -^  {r  —t  .  / — -

or,  if  we  put  for  brevity,

27r  / , /k  +  ^n
P

^=^v-u/-^:-] (10)^

^=^ (11).

The  question  might  be  put  into  more  analytical  form : — to  find
a  solution  of  (7)  isotropic  in  respect  to  the  origin  of  co-ordinates ;
or  to  solve  (7)  on  the  assumption  that  ^  is  a  function  of  r  and  t.
Taking  this  then  as  our  problem,  remark  that  we  now  have  (be-
cause ^  is  a  function  of  r)

v>  =  "i(^'f)-^^*-' a^)-

Hence  (7),  Avith  both  sides  multiplied  by  r^,  becomes

P ^f -(A^+3'^) ^^.2 (13),

of  which  the  general  solution  is

r(f>  =  F{r-  vt)  +f(r  +  vt))

where  ^  =  /^'  ) *'*^'

and  F  and  f  denote  two  arbitrary  functions.

This  result  simply  expresses  wave  disturbance  of  rcj),  with
velocity  of  propagation  \/[(^  +  |^0/p]  •  ^^^  i^  proves  (9),  being
merely  the  case  of  a  simple  harmonic  wave  disturbance  propagated
in  the  direction  of  r  increasing,  that  is  to  say  outwards  from  the
origin.

CONDENSATIONAL WAVES IN SOLID Olt FLUID.  47

Here  then  is  the  determination  of  a  mode  of  motion  which Molar,
is  possible  for  an  elastic  solid. We  shall  consider  the  nature  of

this  motion  presently. The  factor  -  in  (0)  prevents  it  from  being

a  pure  wave  motion.  Passing  over  that  consideration  for  the
present,  we  note  that  it  is  less  and  less  effective,  relatively  to  the
motion  considered  the  farther  we  go  from  the  centre.

In  the  meantime,  we  remark  that  the  velocity  of  propagation
in  an  elastic  solid  is  but  little  greater  than  in  a  fluid  with  the
same  resistance  to  compression,  k  is  the  bulk  modulus  and
measures  resistance  to  compression,  n  is  the  rigidity  modulus.
I  may  hereafter  consider  relations  between  k  and  n  for  real  solids.
k  is  generally  several  times  n,  so  that  ^n  is  small  in  comparison
with  k,  and  therefore  in  ordinary  solids  the  velocity  of  propagation
of  the  condensational  wave  is  not  greatly  greater  than  if  the  solid
were  deprived  of  rigidity  and  we  had  an  elastic  fluid  of  the  same
bulk  modulus.

I  shall  want  to  look  at  the  motion  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  source.  That  beautiful  investigation  of  Stokes,  quoted  by
Lord  Rayleigh,  has  to  do  entirely  with  the  region  in  which  the

change  of  value  of  the  factor  f-j  from  point  to  point  is  consider-
able. Without  looking  at  that  now,  let  us  find  the  components  of
the  displacement  and  their  resultant,  and  study  carefully  all  the
circumstances  of  the  motion.

-^  , -^  , 7 .  are  the  three  components  of  the  displacement.
dx dy dz

Clearly,  therefore,  the  displacement  will  be  in  the  direction  of  the
radius  because  everything  is  symmetrical ; and  its  magnitude  will

be  ~:  and  from  (11)  and  (10)  we  find
dr

deb -1 .  27rl

—  — ^  sm  q  +  ■  —
7'- ^ X ?

^  =  -j-smq+  ^-cosq (L5).

Having  obtained  this  solution  of  our  equations,  let  us  see  what
we  can  make  of  interpreting  it. When  r  is  great  in  comparison

with  5-  ,  the  first  term  becomes  very  small in  comparison  with

48  LECTURE IV.

the  second  and  we  have

d(b  . 27r  1  /i/.\*

-7^  =  - —  cos  a  (16)*.

dr '  \  r ^

Therefore,  wlien  the  distance  from  the origin is a great  many

27r  1
wave-lengths,  the displacement is sensibly  equal  to  — -  cos  q.

A, T

and  is  therefore  approximately  in  the  inverse  proportion  to  the
distance ;  and  the  intensity  of  the  sound  if  the  solution  were
to  be  applied  to  sound,  would  be  inversely  as  the  square  of  the
distance  from  the  source.

I  want  now  to  get  a  second  and  a  third  solution. Take

as  the  velocity  potential  for  a  fresh  solution.  I  take  it  that  you
all  know  that  if  we  have  one  solution  (f),  for  the  velocity  potential,
we  can  get  another  solution  by  yjr  any  linear  function  of

d(f) d^ d(f)

dx  ' dy  ' dz'
Now  let  us  find  the  displacements

(Z-x/r d-y^ dyjr

dx  '  dy  '  dz  '
Here  I  want  to  prove  that  though  this  solution  is  no  longer  sym-
metrical with  respect  to  r,  so  that  there  will  be  motions  other
than  radial  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  source,  yet  still  the
motion  is  approximately  radial  at  great  distances  from  the  source.
Work  it  out,  and  you  will  find  that

d-<^ 277  sin  q
dx  ^ ^' _

9_ „2

The  principal  term  here  is  —  —  -3  sin  q. We  might  go  on  to  the

third  and  fourth  and  higher  differential  coefficients  of  ^,  with
their  larger  and  larger  numbers  of  terms.  The  interpretation  of
this  multiplicity  of  terms,  of  the  terms  other  than  those  which
I  am  now  calling  the  "  principal  terms,"  is  all-important  in  respect
to  the  motion  of  the  air  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  source. It

*  I  use  =  to  denote  approximate  equality.

t  X/27r  is introduced merely for convenience. The solution differs from
\j/  —  d<(>jdx,  only  by  a  constant  factor.

'x' I  X  y  r'  -  Sa;'! cos  o  r"  -  33^

AERIAL WAVES OF SOUND,  49

is  dealt  with  in  that  splendid  work  of  Stokes,  one  of  the  finest  Molar,
things  ever  written  in  physical  mathematics,  of  which  I  read  to
you  this  afternoon,  with  reference  to  the  effect  of  an  atmosphere
of  hydrogen  round  a  bell  killing  its  sound.  But  we  will  drop
those  terms  and  think  only  of  the  terms  which  express  the
efficiency  of  the  vibrator  at  distances  great  in  comparison  with
the  wave-length.

Thus,  for  the  ^-component  displacement  of  the  motion  now
considered,  we  have

This  approximate equality  is  true  for  distances  from  the  centre

great  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length. Let  me  remark,  it  is

the  differentiation  of  cos  q  that  gives  the  distantly  effective  terms

of  the  displacement ;  and  in  differentiating  yjr  with  respect  to  y,

you  have  simjjly  to  differentiate  cos  q  and  to  take  the  differential

coefficient  of  r  now  with  respect  to  y,  instead  of  x  as  formerly.

So  that  we  may  write  down  the  principal  terms  of  the  y  and  z

displacements  by  taking  y/.x  and  z/x  of  the  second  member  of  (19)

as  follows  : —

27r  xy  .  <, 2Tr  xz .

'?  =  --^-^sm^,  r  =  --^-^sm^.

The  three  component  displacements  being  proportional  to  x,  y,  z,
shows  that  the  resultant  displacement  is  in  the  direction  of  the

radius  ;  and  its  magnitude  is  — - — 5  sin  q. If  we  write  x  =  r  cos  i,

this  becomes

^TT  cos  i .

— r sm  q (20),

\ r  ^  ^ '

or  the  displacement  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  distance. If

i  =  0  we  have  a  maximum  ; if  i  =  —  we  have  zero. The  upshot  of

it  is  that  the  displacement  is  a  maximum  in  the  axis  OX,  zero
everywhere  in  the  plane  of  OY,  OZ ;  and  symmetrical  all  round
the  axis  OX.

A  third  solution  is  got  by  taking  -7-^  as  our  velocity  potential.

At  a  distance  from  the  origin,  great  in  comparison  with  the  wave-
T.  L.  4

50  LECTURE IV.

length,  the  displacement  is  in  the  direction  of  the  radius,  and  its

., , . d  d'<h
raaffnitude  is  -^  -^^  .
^  dr  dec"

Now  the  interpretation  of  these  cases  is  as  follows : — The  first
solution,  (velocity  potential  ^)  a  globe  alternately  becoming  larger
and  smaller;  the  second  solution,  (velocity  potential  djy/dx)  a
globe  vibrating  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line  ;  the  third  solution,
(velocity  potential  d^(f>/dx^)  a  characteristic  constituent  of  the
motion  of  the  air  produced  by  two  globes  vibrating  to  and  fro
in  the  line  of  their  centres,  or  by  the  prongs  of  a  vibrating  fork.

This  last  requires  a  little  nice  consideration,  and  we  shall  take
it  up  in  a  subsequent  lecture.  The  third  mode  does  not  quite
represent  the  motion  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  pair  of  vibrating
globes,  or  of  the  prongs  of  a  vibrating  fork  ;  there  must  be  an
unknown  amount  of  the  first  mode  compounded  with  the  third
mode  for  this  purpose.  The  expression  for  the  vibration  in  the
neighbourhood  of  a  tuning  fork,  going  so  far  from  the  ends  of  it
that  we  will  be  undisturbed  or  but  little  disturbed,  by  the  general
shape  of  the  Avhole  thing,  will  be  given by  a  velocity  potential

72  I

A(fi  +  -j-^ . That  will  be  the  velocity  potential  for  the  chief  terms,

the  terms  which  alone  have  effect  at  great  distances.  The  dif-
ferentiation will  be  performed  simply  with  reference  to  the  r  in
the  term  sin  q  or  cos  q ;  and  will  be  the  same  as  if  the  coefficient
of  sin  q  or  cos  q  were  constant.  A  difi"erentiation  of  this  velocity
potential  will  show  that  the  displacement  is  in  the  direction  of
the  radius  from  the  centre  of  the  system,  and  the  magnitude  of

the  displacement  will  be  ^  (^^  "^  T^j  •

A  is  an  unknown  quantity  depending  upon  the  tuning  fork.
I  want  to  suggest  this  as  a  junior  laboratory  exercise,  to  try  tuning
forks  with  different  breadths  of  prongs.  When  you  take  tuning
forks  with  prongs  a  considerable  distance  asunder  you  have  much
less  of  the  0  in  the  solution :  try  a  tuning  fork  with  flat  prongs,
pretty  close  together,  and  you  will  find  much  more  of  the  (f).
The  (f)  part  of  the  velocity  potential  corresponds  to  the  alternate
swelling  and  shrinking  of  the  air  between  the  two  prongs  of  the
timing  fork.  The  larger  and  flatter  the  prongs  are  the  greater  is
the  proportion  of  the  (j)  solution,  that  is  to  say,  the  larger  is  the

AERIAL VIBRATIONS ROUND A TUNING FORK.  51

value  of  A  in  that  formula;  and  the  smaller  the  angle  of  the  cone Molar,
of  silence.

The  experiment  that  I  suggest  is  this :  take  a  vibrating  tuning
fork  and  turn  it  round  until  you  find  the  cone  of  silence,  or  find
the  angle  between  the  line  joining  the  prongs  and  the  line  going  to
the  place  where  your  ear  must  be  to  hear  no  sound.  The  sudden-
ness of  transition  from  sound  to  no  sound  is  startling.  Having
the  tuning  fork  in  the  hand,  turn  it  slowly  round  near  one  ear
until  you  find  its  position  of  silence.  Close  the  other  ear  with  your
hand.  A  very  small  angle  of  turning  round  the  vertical  axis  from
that  position  gives  you  a  startlingly  loud  sound.  I  think  it  is  very
likely  that  the  place  of  no  sound  will,  with  one  and  the  same  fork,
depend  on  the  range  of  vibration.  If  you  excite  it  very  powerfully,
you  may  find  less  inclination  between  the  line  of  vibration  of  the
prongs  and  the  line  to  the  place  of  silence ;  less  powerfully,  greater
inclination. It  will  certainly  be  different  with  different  tuning  forks.

4-2

LECTUHE  V.

Saturday,  Oct.  4,  5  p.m.

Molar:  I  STATED  in  the  last  lecture  that  the  second  solution,  corre-

Eecapitu-  7  ,

lation. spending  to  the  velocity  potential  y^ ,  would  represent  the  effect,

at  a  great  distance  from  the  mean  position,  of  a  single  body  vibrat-
ing to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line.  I  said  a  sphere,  but  we  may  take
a  body  of  any  shape  vibrating  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line;  and  at
a  very  great  distance  from  the  vibrator,  the  motion  produced  will

rich
be  represented  by  the  velocity  potential  ■—-,  provided  the  period

of  the  vibration  is  great  in  comparison  with  the  time  taken  by
sound  to  travel  a  distance  equal  to  the  greatest  diameter  of  the

body. Then  the  velocity  potential  ^^  , in the third solution,

would,  I  believe,  represent  (without  an  additional  term  A(f))  the
motion  at  great  distances,  when  the  origin  of  the  sound  consists
in  two  globes,  let  us  say,  for  fixing  the  ideas,  placed  at  a  distance
from  one  another  very  great  in  comparison  with  their  diameters
and  set  to  vibrate  to  and  fro  through  a  range  small  in  comparison
with  the  distance  between  them,  but  not  necessarily  small  in
comparison  with  their  diameters  :  provided  always  that  the  period
of  the  vibration  is  great  in  comparison  with  the  time  taken  by
sound  to  travel  the  distance  between  the  vibrators.  Suppose
this  is  a  globe  in  one  hand,  and  this  is  one  in  the  other.  I  now
move  my  hands  towards  and  from  each  other — the  motion  of  the
air  produced  by  that  sort  of  motion  of  the  exciting  bodies  would,  at
a  very  great  distance,  be  expressed  exactly  by  the  velocity  potential

But  when  you  have  two  globes,  or  two  flat  bodies,  very  near
one  another,  you  need  an  unknown  amount  of  the  <^  vibration  to

AERIAL VIBRATIONS ROUND A TUNING FORK.  53

represent  tlie  actual  state  of  tlic  case.  That  unknown  amount  Molar:
might  be  determined  theoretically  for  the  case  of  two  spheres,  lation.
The  problem  is  analogous  to  Poisson's  problem  of  the  distribution
of  electricity  upon  two  spheres,  and  it  has  been  solved  by  Stokes
for  the  case  of  fluid  motion  (see  Mem.  de  VInst.,  Paris,  1811,  pp.  1,
1G3;  and  Stokes'  Papers,  Vol.  I.,  p.  230 — "  On  the  resistance  of  a
fluid  to  two  oscillating  spheres").  You  can  thus  tell  the  motion
exactly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  two  spheres  vibrating  to  and  fro
provided  the  amplitudes  of  their  vibrations  are  small  in  comparison
with  the  distance  between  them ;  and  you  can  find  the  value  of
A  for  two  spheres  of  any  given  radii  and  any  given  distance
between  them.  For  such  a  thing  as  a  tuning  fork,  you  could
not,  of  course,  work  it  out  theoretically ;  but  I  think  it  would  be
an  interesting  subject  for  junior  laboratory  work,  to  find  it  by
experiment.

I  suppose  you  are  all  now  familiar  with  the  zero  of  sound  in
the  neighbourhood  of  a  tuning  fork  ;  but  I  have  never  seen  it
described  correctly  anywhere.  We  have  no  easy  enough  theo-
retical means  of  determining  the  inclination  of  the  line  going  to
the  position  of  the  ear  for  silence  to  the  line  joining  the  prongs ;
but  we  readily  see  that  it  is  dependent  upon  the  proportions
of  the  body.  In  turning  the  tuning  fork  round  its  axis,  you
can  get  with  great  nicety  the  position  for  silence ;  and  a  sur-
prisingly small  turning  of  the  tuning  fork  from  the  position  of
silence  causes  the  motion  to  be  heard.  It  would  be  very  curious
to  find  whether  the  position  of  zero  sound  varies  perceptibly  with
the  amplitude  of  the  vibrations.  I  doubt  whether  any  perceptible
diflerence  will  be  found  in  any  ordinary  case  however  we  vary  the
amplitude  of  the  vibrations.  But  I  am  quite  sure  you  will  find
considerable  difference,  according  as  you  take  tuning  forks  with
cylindrical  prongs,  or  with  rectangular  prongs  of  such  proportions
as  old  Marlowe  used  to  make,  or  tuning  forks  like  the  more
modern  ones  that  Koenig  makes,  with  very  broad  flat  prongs.

Now  for  our  molecular  problem.  Molecular.

I  want  to  see  how  the  variable  quantities  vary,  when  we  vary
the  period. Remember  that

a.=  -i  —  c,  -c... \^) ,

54  LECTURE V.

Blolccular.  ^o  that  ,  ,  L,.  =  lit. (2).

air  )

Write  for  the  moment  d  for ,  --  _o, ,  and  differentiate  the  equation
for  u. ;  we  find

dlL  =  111,  +  (^^^'■^^  j dlL^„ dlL^,=  Wi,^,+  (^' j aii,,.,, .  . .  du^  =  111,.

Substitute  successively,  and  we  find,

dii.  =  III.  +  I '"^'  )  ra.

u.

+  ^''^)  "U+- ^-^-^ "h  (3)

This  is  our  expression,  and  remark  the  exceedingly  important
jjroperty  of  it  that  it  is  essentially  positive,  i.  e.  the  variation  of  u.
with  increase  of  t~^  is  essentially  positive. Now

^  =  -2T-'du.:
dr

also  -^  = —  , -^±2.  = i±2 ^  and  so  on.

The  result  (3)  therefore  is  equivalent  to  the  following  expression
(4)  for  the  differential  coefficient  of  u,  with  respect  to  the  period.

du  2 1

This  is  certainly  a  very  remarkable  theorem,  and  one  of  great
importance  with  reference  to  the  interpretation  of  the  solution  of
our  problem.  Remember  that  x^  is  the  displacement  of  m.  at  any
time  of  the  motion.  You  may  habitually  think  of  the  maximum
values  of  the  displacements,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  confine  your-
selves to  the  maximum  values.  Instead  of  x^,  x^,  ...  x^  we  may
take  constants  equal  to  the  maximum values  of  the  a''s,  each

multiplied  into  sin ,  because  the  particles  vibrate  according  to

the  simple  harmonic  law,  all  in  the  same  period  and  the  same
phase,  that  is  all  passing  through  zero  simultaneously,  and  reach-
ing maximums  simultaneously,  every  vibration.  The  masses  are
positive,  and  we  have  squares  of  the  disjDlacements  in  the  several
terms  of  (4) ; so  that  the  second  member of (4) is essentially

VIBRATIONS OF SERIAL MOLECULE.  00

negative. Hence,  as  Ave  augment  the  period,  each  one  of  the  ratios  Molecular.
u.  decreases.

Let  us  now  consider  the  configurations  of  motion  in  our  spring
arrangement,  for  different  given  periods  of  the  exciting  vibrator,  P.
I  am  going  to  suppose,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  period  of
vibration  is  very  small,  and  is  then  graduall}'  increased.  As  you
increase  the  period,  we  have  seen  that  the  value  of  each  one  of  the
quantities  Mj,^^,  ...  decreases.  It  is  interesting  to  remark  that
this  is  so  continuously  throughout  each  variety  of  the  configura-
tions found  successively  by  increasing  r  from  0  to  <X) .  But  we
shall  find  that  there  are  critical  values  of  t,  at  which  one  or  other
of  the  us,  having  become  negative  decreases  to  —  x  ;  then  suddenly
jumps  to  +  00  as  T  is  augmented  through  a  critical  value;  and
again  decreases,  possibly  again  coming  to  +  oo  ,  possibly  not,  while
T  is  augmented  farther  and  farther,  to  infinity.  In  the  first  j)lace,
T  may  be  taken  so  small  that  the  u's  are  all  very  large  positive

quantities; for  u.  being  equal  to  —.}—  c^  —  c._^_^, ^^  may  be  cer-

tainly  made  as  very  large  positive  as  we  please  by  taking  t  small
enough,  if,  at  the  same  time  the  succeeding  quantity,  w.^^,  is  large,
a  condition  which  we  see  is  essentially  fulfilled  where  r  is  very
small,  because  we  have  Uj  =  mjjr^  —  Cj  —  c^^^,  which  makes  Uj  very
great.

Observe  that  the  it's  all  positive  implies  that  ^,  x^,  x^,  x^,  ...  x^
are  alternately  positive  and  negative.  In  other  words  the  handle
P  and  the  successive  particles  ??i, ,  m.^,  ...  m^,  are  each  moving  in  a
direction  opposite  to  its  neighbour  on  either  side.  Since  the
magnitudes  of  the  ratios  w^,  u,^, ...  u^  of  the  successive  amplitudes
decrease  with  the  increase  of  the  period,  the  amplitude  of  particle
111.  is  becoming  smaller  in  proportion  to  the  amplitude  of  the  suc-
ceeding particle  m._^^,  as  long  as  the  vibrations  of  the  successive
particles  are  mutually  contrary-wards.  I  am  going  to  show  you
that  as  every  one  of  these  quantities  u.  decreases,  the  first  that
passes  through  zero  is  necessarily  w^;  corresponding  to  a  motion  of
each  particle  of  the  system  infinitely  great  in  comparison  with
the  motion  of  the  handle  P ;  that  is  to  say,  finite  simple  harmonic
motion  of  the  system  with  P  held  fixed.  This  is  our  first  critical
case.  It  is  the  only  one  of  the  j  fundamental  modes  of  vibration  of
the  system  with  P  fixed,  in  which  the  directions  of  vibration  of  the
successive  particles  are  all  mutually  contrariwise,  and  it  is  the  one

56  LECTURE V.

Molecultii.  of  them  of  which  the  period  is  shortest.  After  that,  as  we  in-
crease T,  Mj  becomes  negative,  and  the  motion  of  P  comes  to  be  in
the  direction  of  the  motion  of  the  first  particle.  As  Ave  go  on
increasing  the  period  we  shall  find  that  the  next  critical  case  that
comes  is  one  in  which  particle  ??ij  has  zero  motion,  or

U,  = -"  =  —  00  .
* —  X

To  prove  this,  and  to  investigate  the  further  progress,  lot  us  look
at  the  state  of  things  when  a  positive  decreasing  u.  has  approached

very  near  to  zero. We  shall  have  u._^ ,  being  equal  to  a._^ ,  a

very  large  negative  quantity.  This  alone  shovv^s  that  u._^  must
have  preceded  il  in  becoming  zero,  since  it  must  have  passed
through  zero  before  becoming  negative. Therefore,  as  we  augment

T,  the  first  of  the  w's  to  become  zero  is  u,  =  -^ ;  or,  as  I  said

' —  X

before,  the  motion  of  particle  ri\  and  also  of  each  of  the  other

particles  is  infioite in  comparison  with the motion  of  F. Just

before  this  state  of  things  all  the  particles  P,  Wj,  ...  nij  are,  as  we

saw,  moving  each  contrary-wards  to  its  neighbour;  just  after  it,  P

has  reversed  its  motion  with  reference  to  the  first  particle,  and  is

moving  in  the  same  direction  with  it.

This continues  to be  the configuration, till  just  before  the

second  critical  case,  in  which  we  have  u^  large  negative,  u^  small

positive,  u^,  ...  Uj,  all  positive. At  this  critical  case,  we  have

Q  t

tij  =  -^  =  +  00  ;  or  *'j  =  ±  0  X  ^.

The  period  of  motion  of  P  that  will  produce  this  state  of  things  is
equal  to  the  period  of  the  free  vibration  of  the  system  of  particles,
with  mass  m^  held  at  rest,  and  each  of  the  other  masses  moving
contrary-wards  to  its  neighbour  on  each  side.  When  the  period  of
the  simple  harmonic  motion  of  P  is  equal  to  a  period  of  motion
of  the  system  with  the  first  particle  held  at  rest,  then  the  only
simple  harmonic  motion  which  the  system  with  all  the  particles
unconstrained  can  have  is  in  that  period,  and  with  the  amplitude
of  vibration  of  the  second  particle  in  one  direction  just  so  great  as
to  produce  by  spring  No.  2,  a  pull  in  that  direction,  on  m^,  equal
to  the  jJuU  exercised  on  it  through  spring  No.  1,  by  P  in  the
opposite  direction ;  so  as  to  let  the  first  particle  be  at  rest. Sup-

VIBRATIONS OF SERIAL MOLECULE.  57

pose  now  T  to  be  continuously  increased  through  this  critical  value.  Molecular.
Immediately  after  the  critical  case,  u^  has  changed  from  large
negative,  through  +  x  ,  to  large  positive,  and  u^  from  small  positive,
through  +  0,  to  small  negative ;  or  the  first  particle  has  reversed
the  direction  of  its  motion  and  come  to  move  same-wards  with  P
and  contrary-wards  to  the  second  particle.

The  third  critical  case  might  be  that  of  the  second  particle
coming  to  rest,  (u,^  =+00,  u^  =  ±  0);  or  it  might  be  u^  =  0  a  second
time :  it  must  be  either  one  or  other  of  these  two  cases.  But  we
must  not  stop  longer  on  the  line  of  critical  cases  at  present*.  I
will  just  jump  over  the  remaining  critical  cases  to  the  final  con-
dition.

It  would  be  curious  to  find  the  solution  when  the  period is

infinitely great out of our equations. When  r is infinite, -^'

[Note  added;  Jan.  11,  1886,  NetherhaU,  Largs.]

*  As  we  go  on  increasing  r  from  the  first  critical  value  (that  which  made  u^  =  0),
the  essential  decreasiugs  of  Hj  (negative)  and  11.2  (still  positive)  bring  u^  to  -  oc  and
«.,  to  0  simultaneously.  With  farther  increase  of  r,  the  decreasings  of  ?fo  (now
negative)  and  of  u.^  (still  positive)  hring  it.-,  to  -  oo  and  M3  to  0,  simultaneously;  and
so  on,  in  succession  from  h^  to  Uj  which  passes  through  zero  to  negative,  but  cannot
become  -  00  and  remains  negative  for  all  greater  values  of  r,  diminishing  to  the
value  -  (Cj  +  C;+i)  as  t  is  augmented  to  infinity.

But  i/j,  after  decreasing  to  -  00  ,  must  pass  to  +  co  and  again  become  decreasing
positive.  It  must  again  pass  through  zero;  and  thus  there  is  started  another
procession  of  zeros  along  the  line  from  P,  through  m-^,  m.2,...  successively,  but  ending
in  w^_., :  not  in  »i;_i  whose  amplitude  [Ujajjcj)  is  made  zero  and  negative  by  the
conclusion  of  the  first  procession,  before  the  second  procession  can  possibly  reach
it. Thus  i(y_i  passes  a  second  and  last  time  through  zero  and  diminishes  to  the

limiting  values  -  c,-,  ( 1 1 l/f 1 ) ,  as  r  is  augmented  to  00  .

Vj+x Cj Cj-J'\<-j--2 0-1/

A  third  procession  of  zeros,  similarly  commencing  with  P, passing  along  the

line,  )»i,  »^.„...and  ending  with  mj_.^,  makes  Uj_„  zero  for  a  third  and  last  time,  and

leaves  it  to  diminish  to  its  limit  (shown  by  the  formula  reported  in  the  text  below,

from  the  lecture,)  as  t  augments  to  x  . Similarly  procession  after  procession,  in

all  J  processions,  commence  with  m^. The  last  begins  and  ends  in  m-^,  and  leaves  u^

to  go  from  zero  to  its  negative  limiting  value

/  1 1  1 1\//  11  1\

-cA — + +...+-  +  -)/ —  +  -  +  ...+-),
Vj+1 Cj  Co Ci)l\cj+^ Cj  C.2)

as  T  augments  to  00  .  There  is  no  general  rule  of  precedence  in  respect  to  magni-
tude of  r,  of  the  different  transitional  zeros  of  the  different  processions.  For
example,  there  is  no  general  rule  as  to  order  of  commencement  of  one  procession,
and  termination  of  its  predecessor.  The  one  essential  limitation  is  that  no
collision  can  take  place  between  the  front  of  one  procession  and  the  rear  of  its
predecessor.

58  LECTURE V.

Molecular,  vanishes,  and  cij  =  —  c^  —  c.^j. That  apj^lied  to  the  e({uations  for  the
as  ought  to  find  the  solution  quite  readily.

You  know,  when  you  think  of  the  dynamics  of  tliis  case,  that
when  T  is  infinitely  great,  P  is  moving  infinitely  slowly,  so  that
the  inertia  of  each  particle  has  no  sensible  effect ;  and  all  the
particles  are  in  equilibrium.  Let  F  be  the  force,  then,  on  the
spring ;  that  is  to  say,  pull  P  slowly  down  with  a  force  F  and  hold
it at rest. What will be the displacements of  the different

F  F F

particles  ? Answer, x.  =  —  ,  x,  ,  = 1 —  ,  and  so  on. Particle

number  j  is  displaced  to  a  distance  equal  to  the  force,  divided  by
the  coefficient  of  elongation  of  the  spring.  To  obtain  the  displace-
ment of  particle  J  —  1,  we  have  to  add  the  displacement  resulting
from  the  elongation  of  the  next  spring  c^,  and  so  on.  The  general
equation  then  is

, 1 1

iW.

....^1

C..a.,/

It  is  a  curious  but  of  course  a  very  simple  and  easy  jDroblem  to
substitute  the  value  of  a.  =  —  c.  —  c^^j  in  the  continued  fraction
which  gives  u.,  and  verify  this  solution.  No  more  of  this  now
however.

It  is  fiddling  while  Rome  is  burning ;  to  be  playing  with
trivialities  of  a  little  dynamical  problem,  when  phosphorescence
is  in  view,  and  when  explanation  of  the  refraction  of  light  in
crystals  is  waiting.  The  difficulty  is,  not  to  explain  phosphor-
escence and  fluorescence,  but  to  explain  why  there  is  so  little  of
sensible  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence.  This  molecular  theory
brings  everything  of  light,  to  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence.
The  state  of  things  as  regards  our  complex  model-molecule  would
be  this:  Suppose  we  have  this  handle  P  moved  backwards  and
forwards  until  everything  is  in  a  perfectly  periodic  state.  Then
suddenly  stop  moving  P.  The  system  will  continue  vibrating  for
ever  with  a  complex  vibration  which  will  really  partake  something
of  all  the  modes. That  I  believe  is  fluorescence.

But  now  comes  Mr  Michelson's  question,  and  Mr  Newcomb's
question,  and  Lord  Rayleigh's  question  ; — the  velocity  of  groups
of  waves  of  light  in  gross  matter. Suppose  a  succession  of  luminous

FINITE SEQUENCES OF WAVES IN A DISPERSIVE MEDIUM. 59

vibrations  commences.  In  the  commencement  of  the  luminous  vi-  Molecular.
brations  the  attached  molecules  imbedded  in  the  luminiferous  ether,
do  not  immediately  get  into  the  state  of  simple  harmonic  vibration
which  constitutes  a  regular  light.  It  seems  quite  certain  that
there  must  be  an  initial  fluorescence.  Let  light  begin  shining  on
uranium  glass.  For  the  thousandth  of  a  second,  perhaps,  after
the  light  has  begun  shining  on  it,  you  should  find  an  initial  state
of  things,  which  differs  from  the  permanent  state  of  things  some-
what as  fluorescence  differs  from  no  light  at  all.

There  is  still  another  question,  which  is  of  j)ro found  interest,
and  seems  to  present  many  difficulties,  and  that  is,  the  actual
condition  of  the  light  which  is  a  succession  of  groups.  Lord
Rayleigh  has  told  us  in  his  printed  paper  in  respect  to  the
agitated  question  of  the  velocity  of  light,  and  then  again,  at  the
meeting  of  the  British  Association  at  Montreal,  he  repeated  very
peremptorily  and  clearly,  that  the  velocity  of  a  group  of  waves
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  wave  velocity  of  an  infinite
succession  of  waves,  and  is  of  necessity  largely  different  from  the
velocity  of  an  infinite  succession  of  waves,  in  every  dispersively
refracting  medium,  that  is  to  say,  medium  in  which  the  velocity
is  different  for  lights  of  different  period.  It  seems  to  be  quite
certain  that  what  he  said  is  true.  But  here  is  a  difficulty  which
has  only  occurred  to  me  since  I  began  speaking  to  you  on  the
subject;  and  I  hope,  before  we  separate,  we  shall  see  our  way
through  it.  All  light  consists  in  a  succession  of  groups.  We  are
all,  already,  familiar  with  the  question ; — Why  is  all  light  not
polarized  ?  and  we  are  all  familiar  with  its  answer.  We  are  now
going  to  work  our  way  slowly  on  until  we  get  expressions  for
sequences  of  vibrations  of  existing  light.  Take  any  conceivable
supposition  as  to  the  origin  of  light,  in  a  flame,  or  a  wire  made
incandescent  by  an  electric  current,  or  any  other  source  of  light ;
we  shall  work  our  way  up  from  these  equations  which  we  have
used  for  sound,  to  the  corresponding  expression  for  light  from
any  conceivable  source.  Now,  if  wc  conceive  a  source  con-
sisting of  a  motion  kept  going  on  with  perfectly  uniform  period-
icity ;  the  light  from  that  source  would  be  plane  polarized,  or
circularly  polarized,  or  elliptically  polarized,  and  would  be  abso-
lutely constant.  In  reality,  there  is  a  multiplicity  of  successions
of  groups  of  waves,  and  no  constant  periodicity.  One  molecule,
of  enormous  mass  in  comparison  with  the  luminiferous  ether  that

60  LECTURE V.

olecular.  it  displaces,  gets  a  shock  and  it  performs  a  set  of  vibrations  until
it  comes  to  rest  or  gets  a  shock  in  some  other  direction ;  and  it
is  sending  forth  vibrations  with  the  same  want  of  regularity  that
is  exhibited  in  a  group  of  sounding  bodies  consisting  of  bells,
tuning  forks,  organ  pipes,  or  all  the  instruments  of  an  orchestra
played  independently  in  wildest  confusion,  every  one  of  which  is
sending  forth  its  sound  which,  at  large  enough  distances  from  the
source,  is  propagated  as  if  there  were  no  others.  We  thus  see
that  light  is  essentially  composed  of  groups  of  waves  ;  and  if  the
velocity  of  the  front  or  rear  of  a  group  of  waves,  or  of  the  centre
of  gravity  of  a  group,  differs  from  the  wave-velocity  of  absolutely
continuous  sequences  of  waves,  in  water,  or  glass,  or  other  dispersively
refracting  mediums,  we  have  some  of  the  ground  cut  from  under  us
in  respect  to  the  velocity  of  waves  of  light  in  all  such  mediums.

I  mean  to  say,  that  all  light  consists  of  groups  following  one
another,  irregularly,  and  that  there  is  a  difficulty  to  see  what  to
make  of  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  vibrations  of  a  group :  and
that  then  there  is  the  question  which  was  talked  over  a  little  in
Section  A  at  Montreal, — will  the  mean  of  the  effects  of  the
groups  be  the  same  as  that  of  an  infinite  sequence  of  uniform
waves,  and  will  the  deviation  from  regular  periodicity  at  the
beginning  and  end  of  each  group  have  but  a  small  influence  on
the  whole  ?  It  seems  almost  certain  that  it  must  have  but  a
small  influence  from  the  known  facts  regarding  the  velocity  of
light  proved  by  the  known,  well-observed,  and  accurately  measured,
phenomena  of  refraction  and  interference.  But  I  am  leading
you  into  a  muddle,  not  however  for  you,  I  hope,  a  slough  of
despond ;  though  I  lead  you  into  it  and  do  not  show  you  the
way  out.  You  will  all  think  a  good  deal  along  with  me  about  the
connections  of  this  subject.

LECTURE VL

Monday,  Oct.  6,  5  p.m.

I  WANT  to  ask  you  to  note  that  when  I  spoke  of  k  +  ^n  not  Molar,
differing  very  much  from  A-  for  most  solids,  I  was  rather  under  the
impression  for  the  moment  that  the  ratio  of  n  to  k  was  smaller
than  it  is ;  and  also  you  will  remember  that  we  had  k  +  In  on
the  board  by  mistake  for  k  +  ^n.  The  scjuare  of  the  velocity  of  a
condensational  wave  in  an  elastic  solid  is  (^■  +  ^n)/p.  For  solids
fulfilling  the  supposed  relation  of  Navier  and  Poisson  between
compi-essibility  and  rigidity  we  have  7i  =  ^k;  and  for  such  cases  the
numerator  becomes  fjc.  It  would  be  k  if  there  were  no  rigidity  ;
it  is  ^k  if  the  rigidity  is  that  of  a  solid  for  which  Poisson's  ratio
has  its  supposed  value.

Metals  are  not  enormously  far  from  fulfilling  this  condition,
but  it  seems  that  for  elastic  solids  generally  oi  bears  a  less  pro-
portion to  k  than  this.  It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  it  fulfils  it
even  approximately  for  metals ;  and  for  india  rubber,  on  the  other
hand,  and  for  jellies,  n  is  an  exceedingly  small  fraction  of  /.;,  so
that  in  these  cases  the  velocity  of  the  condensational  wave  is  but

very  little  in  excess  of /-  . The  velocity  of  propagation  of  a

distortional  wave  is  ./  -',  so  that  for  jellies,  the  velocity  of  propa-
gation of  condensational  wave  is  enormously  greater  than  that  of
distortional  waves.

I  am  asked  by  one  of  you  to  define  velocity  potential.  Those
who  have  read  German  writers  on  Hydrodynamics  already  know
the  meaning  of  it  perfectly  well.  It  is  a  purely  technical  expres-
sion which  has  nothing  to  do  with  potential  or  force.  "  Velocity
potential "  is  a  function  of  the  co-ordinates  such  that  its  rate  of
variation per unit distance in any  direction is equal to the

62  LECTURE  VT. PART  1.

component  of  velocity  in  that  direction.  A  velocity  potential
exists  when  the  distribution  of  velocity  is  expressible  in  this  way ;
in  other  words  when  the  motion  is  irrotational.  The  most  con-
venient analytical  definition  of  irrotational  motion  is,  motion  such
that  the  velocity  components  are  expressed  by  the  differential  co-
efficients of  a  function.  That  function  is  the  velocity  potential.
When  the  motion  is  rotational  there  is  no  velocity  potential.

This  is  the  strict  application  of  the  words  "  velocity  potential "
which  I  have  used.  A  corresponding  language  may  be  used  for
displacement  potential.  It  is  not  good  language,  but  it  is  con-
venient, it  is  rough  and  ready.  And  when  we  are  speaking  of
component  displacements  in  any  case,  whether  of  static  displace-
ment in  an  elastic  solid  or  of  vibrations,  in  which  the  components
of  displacement  are  expressible  as  the  differential  coefficients  of  a
function,  we  may  say  that  it  is  an  irrotational  displacement.  If  from
the  differentiation  of  a  fvmction  we  obtain  components  of  velocity,
we  have  velocity  potential ;  whereas,  if  we  so  get  components  of
displacement,  we  have  displacement  potential.  The  functions  (f),
that  we  used,  are  not  then,  strictly  speaking,  velocity  potentials
but  displacement  potentials.

I  w^ant  you  in  the  first  place  to  remarK  what  is  perfectly  well
known  to  all  who  are  familiar  with  Differential equations,  that

taking  the  solution  0  =  -  .  sin  ^  as  a  primary,  where

we  may  derive  other  solutions  by  differentiations  with  respect  to
the  rectangular  co-ordinates.  The  first  thing  I  am  going  to  call
attention  to  is  that  at  a  distance  from  the  origin,  whatever  be
the  solution  derived  from  this  primary  by  differentiation,  the  cor-
responding displacement  is  nearly  in  the  direction  through  the
oriofin  of  co-ordinates.

Take  any  differential  coefficient  whatever,  ,-^^  , ,  ,;  the  term
•^  axdydz

of  this  which  alone  is  sensible  at  an  infinitely  great  distance  is

that  which  is  obtained  by  successive  differentiation  of  sin  q. That

distance  term  in  every  case  is  as  follows :

/27ry^'^'' /drV /drV /drV 1  sin
V  X  y '  \dajj  '  \dy)  '  \dz)  '  r  cos  ^

CONDENSATIONAL WAVE.  63

It  will  be  sin  q  or  cos  q,  according  as  i  +j  +  Z;  is  even  or  odd. We Molar.

do  not  need  to  trouble  ourselves  about  the  algebraic  sign,  because

we  shall  make  it  positive,  whether  the  differential  coefficient  is

T-T dr X dr y dr z „,
positive  or  negative. JNow  ^-=-, , =" , ^- =  -  . ihus  our
^  ax r dy r dz r

1 X- 1  a^y/  sin  ^,  .  ,1  ,

type  solution hecomes, ,.,';,,.,, q. ihis expresses the most
jf  r  +  +^+'cos  -'  ^

general  type  of  displacement  potential  for  a  condensational  wave
proceeding  from  a  centre,  and  having  reached  to  a  distance  in
any  direction  from  the  centre,  great  in  comparison  with  the  wave-
length. I  have  not  formally  proved  that  this  is  the  most  general
type,  but  it  is  very  easy  to  do  so.  I  am  rather  going  into  the
thing  synthetically.  It  is  so  thoroughly  treated  analytically  by
many  writers  that  it  would  be  a  waste  of  your  time  to  go  into
anything  more,  at  present,  than  a  sketch  of  the  manner  of  treat-
ment, and  to  give  some  illustrations.

But  now  to  prove  that  the  displacement  at  a  distance  from  the
origin  of  the  disturbance  is  always  in  the  direction  of  the  radius
vector.  Once  more,  the  differential  coefficient  of  this  displace-
ment potential,  which  has  several  terms  depending  upon  the
differentiation of  the  ?''s,  x&,  etc.  has one term of  paramount

importance,  and  that  is  the  one  in  which  you  get as  a  factor.

A,

The  smallness  of  \  in  proportion  to  the  other  quantities  makes

27r . .
the  factor  — -  give  importance  to  the  term  in  which  it  is  found.

A,

The  distance  terras  then  for  the  components  of  the  displacement
are

^  _  x^y'z^ 27r x  cos _  n  ^'  cos

e  =  ^.>*^i-  ^  •  7^  sin  ^  ~ 7- sin  ^'

D  V  COS ^ „  ^^  cos
7]  =  R'^ . q, ^  =  R- . q.

r  sill  ^  r  sin  ^

These  are  then  the  components  of  a  displacement  which  is  radial ;
and  the  expression  for  the  amplitude  of  the  radial  displacement  is

The  sum  of  any  number  of  such  expressions  will  express  the
distance  effect  of  sound  proceeding  from  a  source. It  is  interest-

64  LECTURE VI. PART I.

Molar.  ing  to  see  how,  simply  by  making  up  an  algebraic  function  in  the
numerator  out  of  the  x's,  y's  and  ^■'s,  we  can  get  a  formula  that
will  express  any  amount  of  nodal  subdivision  where  silence  is  felt.
The  most  general  result  for  the  amplitude  of  the  radial  displace-

ment  is  i?  =  S  ^i+]+,,+i  • Remark  that  -  ,  ^ ,  -  are  merely  angular

functions  and  may  be  expressed  at  once  as  sin  6  cos  ■\/r,  sin  6  sin  y^r,
cos^;  and  therefore  i?  is  an  integral  algebraic  function  of  sin^cos-v|r,
sin  6  sin  ■^,  cos  6.  It  is  thus  easy  to  see  that  you  can  vary  inde-
finitely the  expressions  for  sound  proceeding  from  a  source  with
cones  of  silence  and  corresponding  nodes  or  lines  in  which  those
cones  cut  the  spherical  wave  surface.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that
even  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  nodes  the  vibration  is  still
perpendicular  to  the  wave  surface ;  so  that  we  have  realized  in
any  case  a  gradual  falling  off  of  the  intensity  of  the  wave  to  zero
and  a  passing  through  zero,  which  would  be  equivalent  to  a  change
of  phase,  without  any  motion  perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector.

The  more  complicated  terms  that  I  have  passed  over  are  those
that  are  only  sensible  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  source.  Sup-
pose, for  instance,  that  you  have  a  bell  vibrating.  The  air  slipping
out  and  in  over  the  sides  of  the  bell  and  round  the  opening  gives
rise  to  a  very  complicated  state  of  motion  close  to  the  bell ;  and
similarly  with  respect  to  a  tuning  fork.  If  you  take  a  spherical
body,  you  can  very  easily  express  the  motion  in  terms  of  spherical
harmonics.  You  see  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sounding
body  there  will  be  a  great  deal  of  vibration  in  directions  perpen-
dicular to  the  radius  vector,  compounded  with  motions  out  and  in ;
but  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  all  except  the  radial  component
motions  become  insensible  at  distances  from  the  centre  large  in  com-
parison with  the  wave-length.  It  is  the  consideration  of  the  motion
at  distances  that  are  moderate  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length
that  Stokes  has  made  the  basis  of  that  very  interesting  investiga-
tion with  reference  to  Leslie's  experiment  of  a  bell  vibrating  in  a
vacuum,  to  which  I  have  already  referred.  (Lecture  iii.,  pp.  36,  37
above.)

We  may  just  notice,  before  I  pass  away  from  the  subject,  two
or  three  points  of  the  case,  with  reference  to  a  tuning  fork,  a  bell,
and  so  on.  Suppose  the  sounding  body  to  be  a  circular  bell.  In
that  case  clearly,  if  the  bell  be  held  with  its  lip  horizontal,  and  if
it  be  kept  vibrating  steadily  in  its gravest ordinary  mode,  the

VIBRATIONS OF A BELL.  65

kind  of  vibration  will  be  this :  a  vibration  from  a  circular  figure  Molar.

4-.-^ into  an  elliptic  figure  U..'^'''.))  along  one  diameter,  and

a  swinging  back  through the circular figure \^T y ^^to an

elliptic  figure ([  X  )) along  the  diameter  at  right  angles  to  the

first.  Clearly  there  would  be  practically  a  plane  of  silence
here  and  another  at  right  angles  to  it  here  (represented  on  the
diagrams  by  dotted  lines).  Hence  the  solution  for  the  radial
component  corresponding  to  this  case,  at  a  considerable  distance

cos  Q

from  the  bell,  is  ii  =  (|  -  cosM) ^  ,  in  order  that  the  component

may  vanish  when  cosM  =  |-,  or  ^  =  +  45° ;  A  being  an  azimuthal
angle  if  the  axis  of  the  bell  is  vertical.

On  the  other  hand,  consider  a  tuning-fork  vibrating  to-and-fro
or  an  elongated  (elliptic)  bell,  which  I  got  from  that  fine  old
Frenchman,  Koenig's  predecessor,  Marloye.  It  makes  an  ex-
ceedingly loud  sound  and  has  an  advantage  in  acoustic  experi-
ments over  a  circular  bell.  If  you  set  a  circular  bell  vibrating
and  leave  it  to  itself  you  always  hear  a  beating  sound,  because
the  bell  is  approximately  but  not  accurately  symmetrical.  Excite
it  with  a  bow,  and  take  your  finger  off,  and  leave  it  to  itself:  and
if  you  do  not  choose  a  proper  place  to  touch  it,  for  a  fundamental
mode,  when  you  take  your  finger  off  it  will  execute  the  re-
sultant of  two  fundamental  modes.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  corresponding  experiment  Avith
circular  plates  is  familiar  to  any  of  you.  I  would  be  glad  to  know
whether  it  is.  I  make  it  always  before  my  own  classes,  in  illus-
trating the  subject.  Take  a  circular  plate — just  one  of  the  ordinary
circular  plates  that  are  prepared  for  showing  vibration  in  acoustic
illustrations.  Excite  it  in  the  usual  way  with  a  violoncello  bow,  and
putting  a  finger,  or  two  fingers,  to  the  edge  to  make  the  quadrantal
vibration.  If  sand  is  sprinkled  on  the  plate,  the  vibrations  toss  it
into  sand-hills  with  ridges  lying  along  two  diameters  of  the  disc,
perpendicular  to  one  another,  one  of  them  through  the  point  or

T.  L.  5

66  LECTURE VI. PART I.

two  of  them  through  the  points  of  the  edge  touched  by  finger.  Nov/
cease  bowing  and  take  your  finger  off  the  edge  of  the  disc.  The
sand-hills  are  tossed  up  in  the  air  and  the  sand  is  scattered  to
considerable  distances  on  each  side,  and  is  continually  tossed  up
and  not  allowed  to  rest  anywhere.  At  the  same  time  you  hear  a
beating  sound.  But  by  a  little  trial,  I  find  one  place  where  if  I
touch  with  the  finger,  and  ply  the  bow  so  as  to  make  a  quadrantal
vibration,  and  if  I  then  cease  bowing  and  take  off  my  finger,  the
sand  remains  undisturbed  on  two  diameters  at  right  angles,  and  no
beat  is  heard.  Then  having  found  one  pair  of  nodal  diameters,
I  know  there  will  be  another  pair  got  by  touching  the  plate  here,
45°  from  the  first  place.  Now  touch  therefore  with  two  fingers,  at
two  points  90°  from  one  another  midway  between  the  first  and
second  pairs  of  nodal  diameters :  cause  the  plate  to  vibrate  and
then  take  off  your  fingers,  and  stop  bowing :  you  will  hear  very
marked  beats;  a  sound  gradually  waxing  from  absolute  silence
to  loudest  sound,  then  gradually  waning  to  silence  again,  and  so
on,  alternating  between  loudest  sound  and  absolute  silence  with
perfect  gradualness  and  regularity  of  waxing  and  waning.

Take  a  division  of  the  circumference  into  six  equal  parts  by
three  diameters,  and  you  find  the  same  thing  over  again.  Go  on
by  trial  touching  the  plate  at  two  points  60°  or  120°  asunder,  and
bowing  it  30°  from  either;  and  you  will  see  the  sand  resting
on  the  three  diameters  determined  by  your  fingers.  Take  off
your  fingers  and  you  will  in  general  see  the  sand  scattered  and
hear  a  beat.  Follow  your  way  around,  little  by  little — it  is  very
pretty  when  you  come  near  a  place  of  no  beat.  The  moment  you
take  off  your  fingers  you  see  the  lines  of  nodes  swaying  to-and-
fro  on  each  side  of  a  mean  position,  with  a  slow  oscillation ;
and  you  hear  a  very  distinct  beat,  though  of  a  soft  but  perfectly
regular  character  from  loudest  to  least  loud  sound.  Get  exactly
the  mean  position,  steadying  the  nodal  sand-hills  while  still  plying
the  bow :  then  cease  bowing  and  suddenly  remove  your  finger  or
fingers  from  the  plate ;  you  will  see  the  nodal  lines  remaining
absolutely  still  and  you  will  hear  a  pure  note  without  beats.  If
you  touch  at  exactly  30°  from  the  nodal  lines  first  found  you  will
have  the  strongest  beat  possible,  which  is  a  beat  from  loud  sound
to  silence.  Advance  your  fingers  another  30°  and  you  will  again  find
the  sand-hills  remain  absolutely  still  when  you  remove  your  fingers.
You  may  go  on  in  this  way  with  eight  and  ten  subdivisions,  and  so

VIBRATIONS OF APPROXIMATELY CIRCULAR PLATES.  67

on ;  but  you  must  not  expect  that  the  places  for  the  sextantal,  Molar,
octantal,  and  higher,  subdivisions  correspond  to  the  places  for  the
quadrantal  subdivisions.  The  places  for  quadrantal  subdivision
will  not  in  general  be  places  for  octantal  subdivision.  You  must
experiment  separately  for  the  octantal  places,  and  you  will  find
generally  that  their  diameters  are  oblique  to  the  quadrantal.

The  reason  for  all  this  is  quite  obvious.  In  each  case,  the
plate  being  only  approximately  circular  and  symmetrical,  the
general  equation  for  the  motion  has  two  approximately  equal
roots  corresponding  to  the  nodes  or  divisions  by  one,  two,  three,  or
four  diameters,  and  so  on.  These  two  roots  always  correspond  to
sounds  differing  a  little  from  one  another.  The  effect  of  putting
the  finger  down  at  random  is  to  cause  the  plate,  as  long  as  your
finger  is  on  it,  to  vibrate  forcedly  in  a  simple  harmonic  vibration
of  period  greater  than  the  one  root  and  less  than  the  other.  But
as  soon  as  you  take  your  finger  off,  the  motion  of  the  plate  follows
the  law  of  superposition  of  fundamental  modes ;  each  fundamental
mode  being  a  simple  harmonic  vibration.  I  have  often,  in  showing
this  experiment,  tried  musicians  with  two  notes  which  were  very
nearly  equal,  and  said  to  them,  "  Now,  which  of  the  two  notes  is
the  graver?"  Rarely  can  they  tell.  The  difference  is  generally  too
small  for  a  merely  musical  ear,  and  the  verdict  is  that  the  notes
are  "the  same  ;"  musicians  are  not  accustomed  to  listen  to  sounds
with  scientific  ears  and  do  not  always  say  rightly  which  is  the
graver  note,  even  when  the  difference  is  perceptible.  Any  person
can  tell,  after  having  made  a  few  experiments  of  the  kind,  that
this  is  the  graver  and  that  the  less  grave  note,  even  though  he
may  have  what,  for  musicians,  is  an  uncultivated  ear,  or  truly  a
very  bad  ear  for  music,  not  good  enough  in  fact  to  guide  him  in
sounding  a  note  with  his  voice,  or  to  make  him  sing  in  tune  if  he
tries  to  sing.  It  is  very  curious,  when  you  have  two  notes  which
you  thoroughly  know  are  different,  that  if  you  sound  first  one  and
then  the  other,  most  people  will  say  they  are  about  the  same.
But  sound  them  both  together,  and  then  you  hear  the  discord  of
the  two  notes  in  approximate  unison.

In  every  case  of  a  circular  plate  vibrating  between  diametral
lines  of  nodes,  there  is  an  even  number  of  planes  of  silence  in  the
surrounding  air;  being  the  planes  perpendicular  to  the  plate,
through  the  nodal  diameters.  If  you  take  a  square  plate  or  bell
vibrating  in  a  quadrantal  mode,  for  instance,  then  you  have  two

5—2

68  LECTURE VI. PART I.

Molar.  vertical  planes  of  silence  at  right  angles  to  one  another.  If  you
make  it  vibrate  with  six  or  more  subdivisions,  you  will  have  a
corresponding  number  of  planes  of  silence.

With  reference  to  the  motions  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
tuning-fork,  you  get  this  beautiful  idea,  that  we  have  essentially
harmonic  functions  to  express  them.  Essentially  algebraic  func-
tions of  the  co-ordinates  appear  in  these  distant  terms,  but  in  the
other  terms  which  Prof  Stokes  has  worked  out,  and  which  have
been  worked  out  in  Prof.  Rowland's  paper  on  Electro-Magnetic
Disturbances*,  quite  that  kind  of  analysis  appears,  and  it  is  most
important.  I  have  not  given  you  a  detailed  examination  of  that
part  of  our  general  solution,  but  only  called  your  attention  specially
to  the  "  distance  terms, '  partly  because  of  their  interest  for  sound
and  partly  because  the  consideration  of  them  prepares  us  for  our
special  subject,  waves  of  light.

To-morrow  we  shall  begin  and  try  to  think  of  sources  of  waves
of  light.  I  want  to  lead  you  up  to  the  idea  of  what  the  simplest
element  of  light  is.  It  must  be  polarized,  and  it  must  consist  of
a  single  sequence  of  vibrations.  A  body  gets  a  shock  so  as  to
vibrate ;  that  body  of  itself  then  constitutes  the  very  simplest
source  of  light  that  we  can  have  ;  it  produces  an  element  of  light.
An  element  of  light  consists  essentially  in  a  sequence  of  vibrations.
It  is  very  easy  to  show  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  of
sequences  in  the  pure  luminiferous  ether  is  constant.  The  sequence
goes  on,  only  varying  with  the  variation  of  the  source.  As  the
source  gradually  subsides  in  giving  out  its  energy  the  amplitude
evidently  decreases  ;  but  there  will  be  no  throwing  off  of  wavelets
forward,  no  lagging  in  the  rear,  no  ambiguity  as  to  the  velocity  of
propagation.  But  when  light,  consisting  as  it  does  of  sequences
of  vibrations,  is  propagated  through  air  or  water,  or  glass,  or
crystal,  what  is  the  result  ?  According  to  the  discussion  to  which
I  have  referred,  the  velocity  should  be  quite  uncertain,  depending
upon  the  number  of  waves  in  the  sequence,  and  all  this  seems
to  present  a  complicated  problem.

But  I  am  anticipating  a  little.  We  shall  speak  of  this  here-
after. One  of  you  has  asked  me  if  I  was  going  to  get  rid  of  the
subject  of  groups  of  waves.  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  ever  get  rid
of  it  in  the  wave  theory  of  light.  We  must  try  to  make  the  best
of  it,  however.

*  Fhil  Mag.  xvii.,  1884,  p.  413.  Am.  Jour.  Math,  vi.,  1884,  p.  359.

NUMBER OF TERMS IN DETERMINANT.  69

Ten  minutes interval.

This  question  of  the  vibration  of  connected  particles  is  a  Molecular.
pecuHarly  interesting  and  important  problem.  I  hope  you  are
not  tired  of  it  yet.  You  see  that  it  is  going  to  have  many  ap-
plications. In  the  first  place  remark  that  it  might  be  made  the
base  of  the  theory  of  the  propagation  of  waves.  When  we  take
our  particles  uniformly  distributed  and  connected  by  constant
springs  we  may  pass  from  the  solution  of  the  problems  for  the
mutual  influence  of  a  group  of  particles  to  the  theory,  say,  of  the
longitudinal  vibrations  of  an  elastic  rod,  or,  by  the  same  analysis,
to  the  theory  of  the  transverse  vibrations  of  a  cord.

I  am  going  to  refer  you  to  Lagrange's  Mecanique  Analytique,
[Part  II.  p.  389].  The  problem  that  I  put  before  you  here  is  given
in  that  work  under  the  title  of  vibrations  of  a  linear  system  of
bodies.  Lagrange  applies  what  he  calls  the  algorithm  of  finite
differences  to  the  solution.  The  problem  which  I  put  before  you
is  of  a  much  more  comprehensive  kind  ;  but  it  is  of  some  little
interest  to  know  that  cases  of  it  may  be  found,  ramifying  into  each
other.

I  wish  to  put  before  you  some  properties  of  the  solution  which
are  of  very  great  importance.  I  want  you  to  note  first  the  number
of  terms.

We  have :

All  the  A-'s  being  expressed  in  this  way  successively  in  terms  of  Xj.
Let  i^;  be  the  number  of  terms  in  Xj,..  These  terms  are  obtained
by  substituting  the  values  of  «,-.,+i,  0Cj,._^_^  in  the  formula

—  Cj.i+i  ^j-i=  ^j-i+i  ^j-i+i  +  "o'-i+a  ^j-i+1'

None  of  the  terms  can  destroy  one  another  except  for  special
values,  and  the  conclusion  is  that  we  have  the  following  formula
for  obtaining  the  number  of  terms  :

This  is  an  equation  of  finite  differences. Apply  the  algorithm

70  ■  LECTURE VI. PART I.

Molecular,  of  finite  differences,  as  Lagrange  says ;  or,  which  is  essentially  the
same,  we  may  try  for  solutions  of  this  equation  by  the  following
formula : N^  =  zN-.y We  thus  find

2 ,  -, l±\/5
^^  =  ^  +  1,  or  ^  =  —

2

We  can  satisfy  our  equation  by  taking  either  the  upper  or  the
lower  sign. The  general  solution  is,  of  course,

where  C,  C  are  to  be  determined  by  the  equation  iV(,=  1,  ^,=  1.
It  is  rather  curious  to  see  an  expression  of  this  kind  for  the
number  of  terms  in  a  determinant.  You  will  find  that,  of  the  more
general  equation

the  following  is  a  solution:

F,  =  K  ^ ~+  bK  ^— ^ ,

^ r  —  s  r  —  s

where  ?•,  s  arc  the  two  roots  of  the  equation  x^  =  ax  +  b.  Remark
that  the  coefficients  of  N^,  N^,  being  symmetrical  functions  of  the
two  roots,  are,  as  they  must  of  course  be,  integral  functions  of  a
and  b.

If  one  of  the  roots,  s,  for  example,  be  less  than  unity,  we  may
omit  the  large  powers  of  s,  and  therefore  for  large  values  of  i  we
may  be  sure  of  obtaining  iV.  to  within  a  unit,  and  therefore  the
absolutely  correct  value,  by  calculating  the  integral  part  of

b

r

It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  the  numerical  value  of  this
formula  differs  less  and  less  from  an  integer  the  greater  is  i,  and
differs  infinitely  little  from  an  infinitely  large  integer  when  i  is
infinitely  great.

The  values  of  N.  up  to  t*=12  for  the  case  of  our  problem
(a-6=iV„  =  iVj  =  l)are,

i  =  2, 3, 4, 5, G, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
N,  =  2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233.

LECTURE  VII.

Tuesday,  Oct.  7,  3.30  p.m.

Lagrange,  in  the  second  section  of  the  second  part  of  his  Me-  Molecular.
canique  Analytique  on  the  Oscillation  of  a  Linear  System  of  Bodies,
has  worked  out  very  fully  the  motion  in  the  first  place  for  bodies
connected  in  series,  and  secondly  for  a  continuous  cord.  The  case
that  we  are  working  upon  is  not  restricted  to  equal  masses  and
equal  connecting  springs,  but  includes  the  particular  linear  system
of  Lagrange,  in  which  the  masses  and  springs  are  equal.  I  hope  to
take  up  that  particular  case,  as  it  is  of  great  interest.  We  shall
take  up  this  subject  first  to-day,  and  the  propagation  of  disturbances
in  an  elastic  solid  second.

It  was  pointed  out  by  Dr  Franklin  that,  for  the  particular  case
iVj  =  aN^,  which  is  the  case  of  our  particular  question  as  to  the
number  of  terms  in  our  determinant,  the  formula  becomes

[a +6— -]N^

\ r  —  s  r  —  s J

and  may  be  thus  simplified.

We  have  r^  =  ar  +  b,  or  multiplying  by  r' "^  r''^^  =  ar'  +  hr''^.  So
that  the  expression  simplifies  down  to

N.  =  ^L' — —.

" r  —  s

This  may  be  obtained  directly,  by  determining  C,  C",  in  terms  of
N^,  with  iV_j  =  0,  to  make  If,  =  CY  +  C's\

We  have,  in  our  case,  a  =  h  =  1  :  whence

r-s  =  j5,r  =  ^"^^ =  1-618,  s  N  -  -618.

72  LECTURE VII. PART I.

Molecular.  If  we  work  this  out  by  very  moderate  logarithms  for  the  case

^^ r  —  s
dropping  s",  we  find

13  log  1-618  -  log/5  =  13  X  -209  -  -3495  =  2-3675  =  log  233,

which comes out exact ; and this  working  with only  4-place-
logarithms.

I  want  to  call  your  attention  to  something  far  more  important
than  this.  The  dynamical  problem,  quite  of  itself,  is  very  interest-
ing and  important,  connected  as  it  is  with  the  whole  theory  of
modes  and  sequences  of  vibration  ;  but  the  application  to  the
theory  of  light,  for  which  we  have  taken  this  subject  up,  gives  to
it  more  interest  than  it  could  have  as  a  mere  dynamical  problem.
I  want  to  justify  a  fundamental  form  into  which  we  can  put  our
solution,  which  is  of  importance  in  connection  with  the  application
we  wish  to  make.

— ;B
Algebra  shows  that  we  must  be  able  to  throw  -—  into  the  form

^  +  ^^^  +  ...

T  T  T

where  q^,  cy---qj  ai'e  determinate  constants,  and  k^,  k^,...k.  are  the

values  of  the  period  t  for  which  —~  becomes  infinite. We  can

put  it  into  this  form  certainly,  for  if  x\  and  ^  be  expressed  in  terms  of
Xj,  they  will  be  functions  of  the  {j  —  1)"'  oxidif^  degrees,  respectively,

in  -5 . This  is  easily  seen  if  we  notice  that  a;,.  ,  =  — ^'  x.  is  of  the

T^  '  Cj '

first  degree  in  —^ ,  and  that  the  degree  of  each  x  is  raised  a  unit

111'-

above  that  of  the  succeeding  x  by  the  factor  cij  =  —i  —  c^  —  c,_^i  in
the equation  —  c,^i-i  =  «j^"i+ c^4-i^',+i. Therefore,  writing  z  for — ,

T

we  have

-  x^  _Az'-'  +  A'z^'''+  ...

SOLUTION IN TERMS OF ROOTS.  73

This,  on  being  expanded  into  partial  fractions,  becomes  Molecular.

K K^

Kj

1 ' 1  ^

1

2 ^ 2

'-^'

which  takes  the  previously  written  form  if  we  put  K^k^  =  q^.

We  know  that  the  roots  of  the  equation  of  the  i"'  degree  in  z

which  makes  ~  J^  become infinite are all real; they are the

periods  of  vibration  of  a  stable  system  of  connected  bodies.  We
have  formal  proof  of  it  in  the  work  which  we  have  gone  through
in  connection  with  such  a  system.  I  am  putting  our  solution  in
this  form,  because  it  is  convenient  to  look  upon  the  characteristic
feature  of  the  ratio  of  t  to  one  or  other  of  the  fundamental
periods.  In  the  first  place  it  is  obvious  that  if  we  know  the  roots
/Cj,  Ac.^,...,  the  determination  of  (/j,  q^,...  is  algebraic.  Another  form
which  I  shall  give  you  is  an  answer  to  that  algebraic  question,
what  are  the  values  of  q^,  J'a---  ?  It  is  an  answer  in  a  form  that  is
particularly  appropriate  for  our  consideration  because  it  introduces
the  energy  of  the  vibrations  of  the  several  fundamental  modes  in  a
remarkable  manner. We  will  just  get  that  form  down  distinctly.

c  f
Take the differential coefficients of -~- with respect to

-2,  and  denoting  ^,-1,  -1  -  1, ,  for  brevity,  by  Dj,  D,, we

T  T  T

find

For  the  case  r  =  k„  our  differential  coefficient  becomes  -  ,  which
determines

^^ ^ dr —  x^
Now  you  will  remember  that  we  had

dr^  —  x^ ^ ^  \xj

For  the  moment,  take  the  expression  for  the  simple  harmonic
motion,  and  you  see  at  once  that  that  comes  out  in  terms  of  the
energy. Adopt the temporary notation of representing the

74  LECTURE VII. PART I.

Molecular,  maximum  value  by  au  accented  letter. Then  we  have  at  any  time

2
of  the  motion  x.  =  x .  sin ,  if  we  reckon  our  time  from  an  era  of

each  particle  passing  through  its  middle  position,  remembering
that  all  the  particles  pass  the  middle  position  at  the  same  instant.
We  have  therefore  for  the  velocity  of  particle  No.  1,

27r , 27re
X.  =  —  X .  cos .

'  T ^  T

The energy which at any time is partly kinetic and partly

potential,  will  be  all  kinetic  at  the  instant  of  passing  through  the

middle  position. Take  then  the  energy  at  that  instant. For  ^  =  0

27r
we  have  x^^  =  0,  x^^  =  —  x\. Denoting the  whole energy by E

(and  remembering  that  the  mass  =  j^A  we  have

E=^  {m^x^^  +  7H,<'  +  . . .  m/cP)  -, .

Thus,  the  ratio  of  the  whole  energy  to  the  energy  of  the  first
particle  /  — ,  .^  \  being  denoted  by  Br\  we  have

^  dr  ^  —  x^

This  is  true  for  any  value  of  t  whatever.  From  this  equation  find
then  the  ratios  of  the  whole  energy  to  the  energy  of  the  first
particle  when  t  =  k^,  k^, — Denoting  these  several  ratios  by  R~^,

R~^...,  we  find  a.  =  -^ — - ,  q^  =  — ^ — ^ , Our  solution  becomes

then

This  is  a  very  convenient  form,  as  it  shows  us  everything  in  terms
of  quantities  whose  determinations  are  suitable,  and  intrinsically
important  and  interesting,  viz.  the  periods  and  the  energy-ratios.

It  remains,  lastly,  to  show  how,  from  our  process  without  cal-
culating the  determinants,  we  can  get  everything  that  is  here
concerned.  Our  process  of  calculating  gives  us  the  w's  in  order,
beginning  with  Uj_^.  That  gives  us  the  x'?,  in  order,  and  thus
we  have  all  that  is  embraced  in  the  differential  coefficient  with

DETERMINATION OF ROOTS.  75

respect  to  -^ . Everything  is  done,  if  we  can  find  the  roots. I  Molecular.

will  show  how  you  can  find  the  roots  from  the  continued  fraction,
without  working  out  the  determinant  at  all.  The  calculation  in
the  neighbourhood  of  a  root  gives  us  the  train  of  x's  corresponding
to  that  root,  and  then  by  multiplying  the  squares  of  the  ratios  of
the  xs  to  i^'j,  by  the  masses,  and  adding,  we  have  the  corresponding
energy.

The  case  that  will  interest  us  most  will  be  the  successive
masses  greater  and  greater;  and  the  successive  springs  stronger
and  stronger,  but  not  in  proportion  to  the  masses  so  that  the
periods  of  vibration  of  limited  portions  of  the  higher  numbered
particles  of  the  linear  system  shall  be  very  large :  so  that  if  we
hold  at  rest  particles  4  and  6,  the  natural  time  of  vibration  of
particle  5  will  be  longer  than  No.  2's  would  be  if  we  held  Nos.  1
and  3  at  rest  and  set  No.  2  to  vibrate,  and  so  on.

We  will  just  put  down  once  more  two  or  three  of  our  equations  :

Without  considering  whether  w.^j  is  absolutely  large  or  small,  let
us  suppose  that  it  is  large  in  comparison  with  c.^^;
u.  will  then  be  of  the  order  a.;  u._^  of  the  order  a._^',  and  so  on.
We  are  to  suppose that  a^,  a^,  ...a.  are  in  ascending  order  of

magnitude. Now,  u^  u^...  il  =  (-)'  c^  . . .  c.  -^ . We  thus  have  this

important  proposition,  that  the  magnitudes  of  the  vibrations  of
the  successive  particles  decrease  from  particle  No.  1  towards  No. /';
and  x^  is  exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  ^,  even  though
there  is  only  a  moderate  proportion  of  smallness  with  respect  to

the  ratios  — ,  —  ,  ...  — . Thus  see  how  small  is  the  motion  at  a

u, u^  u.

considerable  distance  from  the  point  at  which  the  excitation  is
applied,  under  the  suppositions  that  we  have  been  making.

Now,  as  to  the  calculations.  I  do  not  suppose  anybody  is
going  to  make  these  calculations*,  but  I  always  feel  in  respect  to
arithmetic somewhat as Green has expressed in reference to

*  Happily  this  negative  prognostication  was  not  fulfilled.  See  (Appendix  C)
Numerical  Solution  with  Illustrative  Curves,  by  Prof.  E.  W.  Morley,  of  the  case  of
seven  connected  masses,  proposed  in  Lecture  IX.

76  LECTURE VII. PART I.

analysis.  I  have  no  satisfaction  in  formulas  unless  I  feel  their
arithmetical  magnitude — at  all  events  when  formulas  are  intended
for  definite  dynamical  or  physical  problems.  So  that  if  I  do  not
exactly  calculate  the  formulas,  I  would  like  to  know  how  I  could
calculate  them  and  express  the  order  of  the  magnitudes  concerned
in  them.  We  are  not  going  to  make  the  calculations,  but  you  will
remark  that  we  have  every  facility  for  doing  so.  In  the  first
place,  is  the  exceeding  rapidity  of  convergence  of  the  formulas.

The  question  is  to  find  —^ ;  everything,  you  will  find,  depends

upon  that.  The  exceeding  rapidity  of  the  convergence  is  mani-
fest. Since  u^  is  large,  u^  is  equal  to  a^  with  a  small  correction ;
similarly  u^  =  a^  with  a  small  correction,  and  so  on  ;  so  that  two  or
three  terms  of  the  continued  fraction  will  be  sufficient  for  cal-
culating the  ratio  denoted  by  ^i^.  The  continued  fractions  con-
verge with  enormous  rapidity  upon  the  suppositions  we  have  been
making. We  thus  know  the  value  of  the  differential  coefficient

^f^—1^. . We  can  in  this  way  obtain  several  values  of  w,  and  begin

d  (t  ')  -^  1  O

to  find  it  coming  near  to  zero.  Then  take  the  usual  process.
Knowing  the  value  of  the  differential  coefficient  allows  you  to
diminish  very  much  the  number  of  trials  that  you  must  make  for
calculating  a  root.  The  process  of  finding  the  roots  of  this  con-
tinued fraction  will  be  quite  analogous  to  Newton's  process  for
finding  the  roots  of  an  algebraic  equation ;  and  I  tell  any  of  you
who  may  intend  to  work  at  it,  that  if  you  choose  any  particular
case  you  will  find  that  you  will  get  at  the  roots  very  quickly.

I  should  think  something  like  an  arithmetical  laboratory  would
be  good  in  connection  with  class  work,  in  which  students  might  be
set  at  work  upon  problems  of  this  kind,  both  for  results,  and  in
order  to  obtain  facility  in  calculation.

I  hinted  to  you  in  the  beginning  about  the  kind  of  view  that
1  wanted  to  take  of  molecules  connected  with  the  luminiferous
ether,  and  affecting  by  their  inertia  its  motions.  I  find  since  then
that  Lord  Rayleigh  really  gave  in  a  very  distinct  way  the  first
indication  of  the  explanation  of  anomalous  dispersion.  I  will  just
read  a  little  of  his  paper  on  the  Reflection  and  Refraction  of  Light
by  intensely  Opaque  Matter  {Phil.  Mag.,  May,  1872).  He  com-
mences, "  It  is,  I  believe,  the  common  opinion,  that  a  satisfactory
mechanical  theory  of  the  reflection  of  light  from  metallic  surfaces

RAYLEIGH ON CAUCHY's METALLIC REFLECTION.  77

has  been  given  by  Caucliy,  and  that  his  formulce  agree  very  well  Molecular.
with  observation.  The  result,  however,  of  a  recent  examination  of
the  subject  has  been  to  convince  me  that,  at  least  in  the  case  of
vibrations  performed  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  his  theory  is
erroneous,  and  that  the  correspondence  with  fact  claimed  for  it  is
illusory,  and  rests  on  the  assumption  of  inadmissible  values  for  the
arbitrary  constants.  Cauchy,  after  his  manner,  never  published
any  investigation  of  his  formulae,  but  contented  himself  with  a
statement  of  the  results  and  of  the  principles  from  which  he
started.  The  intermediate  steps,  however,  have  been  given  very
concisely  and  with  a  command  of  analysis  by  Eisenlohr  (Pogg.
Ann.  Vol.  civ.  p.  368),  who  has  also  endeavoured  to  determine
the  constants  by  a  comparison  with  measurements  made  by  Jamin.
I  propose  in  the  present  communication  to  examine  the  theory  of
reflection  from  thick  metallic  plates,  and  then  to  make  some
remarks  on  the  action  on  light  of  a  thiii  metallic  layer,  a  subject
which  has  been  treated  experimentally  by  Quincke.

"  The  peculiarity  in  the  behaviour  of  metals  towards  light  is
supposed  by  Cauchy  to  lie  in  their  opacity,  which  has  the  effect  of
stopping  a  train  of  waves  before  they  can  proceed  for  more  than  a
few  lengths  within  the  medium.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
in  this  Cauchy  was  perfectly  right;  for  it  has  been  found  that
bodies  which,  like  many  of  the  dyes,  exercise  a  very  intense
selective  absorption  on  light,  reflect  from  their  surfaces  in  ex-
cessive proportion  just  those  rays  to  which  they  are  most  opaque.
Permanganate  of  potash  is  a  beautiful  example  of  this  given  by
Prof.  Stokes.  He  found  (Phil.  Mag.,  Vol.  VL  p.  293)  that  when
the  light  reflected  from  a  crystal  at  the  polarizing  angle  is  ex-
amined through  a  Nicol  held  so  as  to  extinguish  the  rays  polarized
in  the  plane  of  incidence,  the  residual  light  is  green ;  and  that,
when  analyzed  by  the  prism,  it  shows  bright  bands  just  where
the  absorption-spectrum  shows  dark  ones.  This  very  instructive
experiment  can  be  repeated  with  ease  by  using  sunlight,  and
instead  of  a  crystal  a  piece  of  ground  glass  sprinkled  with  a  little
of  the  powdered  salt,  which  is  then  well  rubbed  in  and  burnished
with  a  glass  stopper  or  otherwise.  It  can  without  difficulty  be  so
arranged  that  the  two  spectra  are  seen  from  the  same  slit  one
over  the  other,  and  compared  with  accuracy.

"With  regard  to  the  chromatic  variations  it  would  have  seemed
most  natural  to  suppose  that  the  opacity  may  vary  in  an  arbitrary

78  LECTURE VII. PART I.

Molecular,  manner  Avith  the  wave-length,  while  the  optical  density  (on  which
alone  in  ordinary  cases  the  refraction  depends)  remains  constant,
or  is  subject  only  to  the  same  sort  of  variations  as  occur  in  trans-
parent media.  But  the  aspect  of  the  question  has  been  materially
changed  by  the  observations  of  Christiansen  and  Kundt  (Pogg.
Ann.  vols.  CXLI.,  cxliii.,  cxliv.)  on  anomalous  dispersion  in
Fuchsin  and  other  colouring-matters,  which  show  that  on  either
side  of  an  absorption-band  there  is  an  abnormal  change  in  the
refrangibility  (as  determined  by  prismatic  deviation)  of  such  a
kind  that  the  refraction  is  increased  below  (that  is,  on  the  red
side  of)  the  band  and  diminished  above  it.  An  analogy  may  be
traced  here  with  the  repulsion  between  two  periods  which  frequently
occurs  in  vibrating  systems.  The  effect  of  a  pendulum  suspended
from  a  body  subject  to  horizontal  vibration  is  to  increase  or  diminish
the  virtual  inertia  of  the  mass  according  as  the  natural  period  of
the  pendulum  is  shorter  or  longer  than  that  of  its  point  of  suspen-
sion. This  may  be  expressed  by  saying  that  if  the  point  of  support
tends  to  vibrate  more  rapidly  than  the  pendulum,  it  is  made  to  go
faster  still,  and  vice  versa' — I  cannot  understand  the  meaning  of  the
next  sentence  at  all.  There  is  a  terrible  difficulty  with  writers  in
abstruse  subjects  to  make  sentences  that  are  intelligible.  It  is
impossible  to  find  out  from  the  words  what  they  mean  ;  it  is  only
from  knowing  the  thing*  that  you  can  do  so — "Below  the  absorp-
tion-band the  material  vibration  is  naturally  the  higher,  and  hence
the  effect  of  the  associated  matter  is  to  increase  (abnormally)  the
virtual  inertia  of  the  aether,  and  therefore  the  refrangibility.  On
the  other  side  the  effect  is  the  reverse."  Then  follows  a  note,  "See
Sellmeier,  Pogg.  Ann.  vol.  cxliii.  p.  272."  Thus  Lord  Rayleigh
goes  back  to  Sellmeier,  and  I  suppose  he  is  the  originator  of  all
this.  "  It  would  be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  these
facts  from  the  point  of  view  of  theoretical  optics,  but  it  lies
beside  the  object  of  the  present  paper  to  go  further  into  the  ques-
tion here."

There  is  the  first  clear  statement  that  I  have  seen.  Prof
Rowland  has  been  kind  enough  to  get  these  papers  of  Lord
Rayleigh  for  me.  I  am  most  grateful  to  him  and  others  among
you, by whom, with great trouble kindly taken for me, an

*  In  the  next  sentence,  for  "  the refrangibility,"  substitute iu refractivity.
W.  T. Feb.  9,  1892.

SELLMEIER, HELMHOLTZ, LOMMEL.  79

iTnmensc  number  of  books  have  been  brought  to  me,  in  every  one  Molecular,
of  which  I  have  found  something  very  important.

Selhneier,  Lord  Rayleigh,  Helmholtz,  and  Lommel  seem  to  be
about  the  order.  Lommel  does  not  quote  Hehnholtz.  I  am  rather
surprised  at  this,  because  Lommel  comes  three  or  four  years  after
Helmholtz  :  1874  and  1878  are  the  respective  dates.  Lommel's
paper  is  published  in  Helmholtz's  Journal  {Ann.  der  PJiysik  unci
Cheniie,  1878,  vol.  in.  p.  339),  Helmholtz's  paper  is  excellent.
Lommel  goes  into  the  subject  still  further,  and  has  worked  out
the  vibrations  of  associated  matter  to  explain  ordinary  dispersion.

I  only  found  this  forenoon  that  Lommel  {Ann.  dei'  Ph.  tend
Chem.  1878,  vol.  IV.  p.  55)  also  goes  on  to  double  refraction  of  light
iu  crystals — the  very  problem  I  am  breaking  my  head  against.
He  is  satisfied  with  his  solution,  but  I  do  not  think  it  at  all  satis-
factory. It  is  the  kind  of  thing  that  I  have  seen  for  a  long  time,
but  could  not  see  that  it  was  satisfactory ;  and  I  do  see  reason  for  its
not  being  satisfactory.  He  goes  on  from  that  and  obtains  an
equation  which  would  approximately  give  Huyghens'  surface.  I
have  not  had  time  to  determine  how  far  it  may  be  correct,  but  I
believe  it  must  essentially  differ  from  Huyghens'  wave-surface  to
an  extent  comparable  with  that  experimentally  disproved  by
Stokes  in  his  experimental  disproof  of  Rankine's  theory  explaining
optical  aeolotropy  by  difference  of  inertia  in  different  directions.
The  exceedingly  close  agreement  of  Huyghens'  surface  with  the
facts  of  the  case  which  Stokes  has  found,  absolutely  cuts  the
ground  from  imder  a  large  number  of  very  tempting  modes  of  ex-
plaining double  refraction.

LECTUKE VIII.

Tuesday,  Oct.  7,  5  p.m.

We  shall  take  some  fundamental  solutions  for  wave  motion
such  as  we  have  already  had  before  us,  only  we  shall  consider  them
as  now  applicable  to  non-condensational  distortional  waves,  instead
of  condensational  waves. We  can  take  our  primary  solution  in  the

form  rf)  =  -  sin  — -  (r  —  ct),  where  c  =  \/ ^  if  the  wave  is  con-

»■  A,  ^ P

densational,  and  a  /  -  if  the  wave  is  distortional.  But  for  a  dis-
tortional wave  we  must  also  have  8=0.

In  the  first  place,  if  our  value  of  c  is  a  /  - ,  we  know  that  «/>

satisfies  p  -^  =  wy^^. [I  want  very  much  a  name  for  that  symbol

V^  (delta  turned  upside  down).  I  do  not  know  whether,  Prof.
Ball,  you  have  any  name  for  it  or  not ;  your  predecessor,  Sir
William  Hamilton,  used  it  a  great  deal,  and  I  think  perhaps  you
may  know  of  a  name  for  it.]  The  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  the
three  components  of  displacement,  ^,  77,  ^,  of  a  distortional  wave
are,  in  the  first  place,

and  we  must  have  besides

dx dy dz

Thus  f,  7],  ^  must  be  three  functions,  each  fulfilling  the  same
equation.  There  is  a  fulfilment  of  this  equation  by  functions  0 ;
and  as  we  have  one  solution,  we  can  derive  other  solutions  from

ROTATIONAL OSCILLATION IN ORIGIN.  81

that  by  ditferentiation.  Let  us  see  then,  if  we  can  derive  three  Molar,
solutions  from  this  value  of  (f>  which  shall  fulfil  the  remaining  con-
dition. It  is  not  my  purpose  here  to  go  into  an  analytical  investi-
gation of  solutions ;  it  is  rather  to  show  you  solutions  which  are
of  fundamental  interest.  Without  further  preface  then,  I  will
put  before  you  one,  and  another,  and  then  I  will  interpret  them
both.

Take  for  example  the  following,  which  obviously  fulfils  the

d^ dv dt n
equation  -^  -\-~  +  ^  =  {)  :

ax ay dz

^ ' ^ dz' ^ dy-

In  each  case  the  distance-terms  only  of  our  solution  are  what  we
wish. Thus

dd)  , '2'ir z  i, d(b 27r i/

i;  =  —  J-  =  -  -  - . -2 .  cos  q, ^  =  -/-  =  --.  i^ cos  q.
dz  X r^ ^  dy \ r^ ^

Remark  that  in  this  solution  the  displacement  at  a  distance  from
the  source  is  perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector ;  i.  e.  we  have

f.  ^  d6 d(b ^

Before  going  further,  it  will  be  convenient  to  get  the  rotation.  It
is  an  exceedingly  convenient  way  of  finding  the  direction  of  vibra-
tion in  distortional  displacements.  The  rotations  about  the  axes  of
X,  y,  z  will  be :

,fd^ dv\_ 2'rr^f+z\

^[dy dz)- \'~ r« ''"^'

•'  [dz dx) •  \' r'  '"'  ^'

''{dx dy) • V r'^'"'^-

These  rotations  are  proportional  to  -3 , -f^ , -^  ; that is

to  say,  besides  an  x  component  equal  to  — ,  we  have  an  r  com-

tXj

ponent  equal  to  -^ . We  have  a  rotation  around  the  radius  vector
T.L.  6

82  LECTURE VIII. PART I.

Molar. r, and a  rotation around  the  axis  of  x, whose  magnitudes  are

X  1

proportional  to  -^  and -  .

If  you  think  out  the  nature  of  the  thing,  you  will  see  that
it  is  this  :  a  globe,  or  a  small  body  at  the  origin,  set  to  oscillating
rotationally  about  Ox  as  axis.  You  will  have  turning  vibrations
everywhere ;  and  the  light  will  be  everywhere  polarized  in  planes
through  Ox.  The  vibrations  will  be  everywhere  perpendicular  to
the  radial  plane  through  Ox.

In  the  first  place  we  have  (omitting  the  constant  factor  —1

1  =  0,  '7  =  --,cosg, ^=4cos5.

Hence  for  (y  =  0,  z  =  0,)  the  displacements  are  zero,  or  we  have
zero  vibration  in  the  axis  of  x.  Everywhere  else  the  displacements
are  not  null  and  are  perpendicular  to  Ox  (since  we  always  have
^  =  0) ;  and  being  perpendicular  also  to  the  radius  vector,  they  are
perpendicular  to  the  radial  plane  through  the  axis  of  x.

Let  us  consider  the  state  of  things  in  the  plane  yz. Suppose

we  have  a  small  body  here  at  the  origin  or  centre  of  disturbance,

and  that  it  is  made  to turn  forwards  and backwards

^^\ in  this  way  (indicating  a  turning  motion  about  an  axis

)j perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper)  in  any  given

period. What  is  the  result  ? Waves  will  proceed  out

in  all  directions  from  the  source,  and  the  intersections  of  the  wave

fronts  with  the  plane  [yz)  of  the  paper  will  be  circles. We  shall

have  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector ;  of  magnitude

,  which  is  the  same  in  all  directions. The  rotation  (molecu-

X, r

lar  rotation  about  the  axis  of  x,  or  in  the  plane  yz^  '^^  \'i  — H  •

There  is  therefore  zero  displacement  where  the  rotation  or  the
distortion  is  a  maximum  (positive  or  negative) :  and  vice  versa,  at
a  place  of  maximum  displacement  (positive  or  negative)  there  is
zero  rotation  and  zero  distortion.  The  rotation  is  clearly  equal
to  half  the  distortion  in  the  plane  yz  by  shearing  (or  differential
motion)  perpendicular  to  rx,  of  infinitesimal  planes  perpendicular

REALIZED ILLUSTRATION IN JELLY.  83

to  r. The  result  is  polarized  light  consisting  of  vibrations  in  the  Molar,
plane  yz  and  perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector,  and  therefore
the  plane  of  polarization  is  the  radial  plane  through  OX.

Here  we  have  a  simple  source  of  polarized  light;  it  is  the
simplest  form  of  polarization  and  the  simplest  source  that  we  can
have.  Every  possible  light  consists  of  sequences  of  light  from
simple  sources.  Is  it  probable  that  the  shocks  to  which  the  par-
ticles are  subjected  in  the  electric  light,  or  in  fire,  or  in  any
ordinary  source  of  light,  would  give  rise  to  a  sequence  of  this  kind  ?
No,  at  all  events  not  much ;  because  there  cannot  be  much  ten-
dency in  these  shocks  or  collisions,  to  produce  rotatory  oscillations
of  the  gross  molecules.  We  can  arbitrarily  do  it,  for  we  can  do
what  we  will  with  the  particle.  That  privilege  occurred  to  me
in  Philadelphia  last  week,  and  I  showed  the  vibrations  by  having
a  large  bowl  of  jelly  made  with  a  ball  placed  in  the  middle  of  it.
I  really  think  you  will  find  it  interesting  enough  to  try  it  for
yourselves.  It  allows  you  to  see  the  vibrations  we  are  speaking
of  I  wish  I  had  it  to  show  you  just  now,  so  that  you  might  see
the  idea  realized. It  saves  brain  very  much.

I  had  a  large  glass  bowl  quite  filled  with  yellowish  transparent
jelly,  and  a  red-painted  wooden  ball  floating  in  the  middle  of  it.
Try  it,  and  you  will  find  it  a  very  pretty  il-
lustration. Apply  your  hand  to  the  ball,  and
give  it  a  turning  motion  round  its  vertical
diameter,  and  you  have  exactly  the  kind
of  motion  expressed  by  our  equations.  The
motion  in  any  oblique  direction,  such  as  at
this  point  P  {x,  y,  z)  represents  that  of  polarized  light  vibrating
perpendicularly  to  the  radial  plane  (or  plane  through  the  vertical
central  axis). The  amplitude  of  the  vibration  here  (in  the  vertical

axis)  is  zero  ;  here  at  the  surface  (in  the  plane  yz)  it  is  -  cos  q ;  and

if  you  use  polar  coordinates,  calling  this  angle  6  (indicating  on  the

diagram)  then the  amplitude  here  (at  P)  is  -  cos  q  sin  6,  giving

when  ^  is  a  right  angle  the  previous  expression.

I  say  that  this  is  the  simplest  source  and  the  simplest  system  of
polarized  light  that  we  can  imagine.  But  it  can  scarcely  be  induced
naturally. The  next  simplest  is  a  globe  or  small  body  vibrating  to-

6—2

84  LECTURE VIII. PART I.

Molar.  and-fro  in  one  line.  We  will  take  the  solution  for  that  presently.
Still  we  have  not  got  up  to  the  essential  complexity  of  the
vibration  produced  naturally  by  the  simplest  natural  vibrator
with  unmoved  centre  of  inertia.  I  may  take  my  hand  and,
instead  of  the  torsional  oscillations  which  we  have  been  con-
sidering, I  may  give  vertical  oscillations  to  the  globe  in  the
jelly  (and  that  makes  a  very  pretty  modification  of  the  experi-
ment), and  people  all  call  out,  "  O,  there  is  the  natural  time  of
the  vibration,  if  you  only  leave  the  globe  to  itself,"  oscillating
up  and  down  in  the  jelly.  But  the  case  is  not  proper  for  an
illustration  of  undulatory  vibrations  spreading  out  from  a  centre.
We  are  troubled  here  also  by  reflection  back,  as  it  were,  from  the
containing  bowl,  just  as  in  experiments  on  a  stretched  rope  to
show  waves  running  along  it,  we  are  troubled  by  the  rope  not
being  infinitely  long.  You  can  always  see  sets  of  vibrations
running  along  the  rope,  and  reflected  back  from  the  ends.  But  in
this  experiment  with  the  jelly  in  the  bowl,  you  do  not  see  the
waves  travelling  out  at  all  because  the  distance  to  the  boundary
is  not  large  enough  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length ;  and  what
you  really  see  is  a  certain  set  of  standing  vibrations,  depending  on
the  finiteness  of  the  bowl.  But  just  imagine  the  bowl  to  be
infinitely  large,  and  that  you  commence  making  torsional  oscilla-
tions ;  what  will  take  place  ?  A  spreading  outwards  of  this  kind
of  vibrations,  the  beginning  being,  as  we  shall  see,  abrupt.  We
shall  scarcely  reach  that  to-day,  but  we  shall  perhaps  another  day
consider  if  the  motion  in  the  source  begins  and  ends  abruptly,  the
consequent  abruptness*  of  the  beginnings  and  endingsof  the  vibra-
tions throughout  an  elastic  solid  ;  in  every  case  in  which  the
velocity  of  propagation  is  independent  of  the  wave-length.

When  you  apply  your  hands  and  force  the  ball  to  perform
those  torsional  vibrations,  you  have  waves  proceeding  from  it ;
but  if  you  then  leave  it  to  itself,  there  is  no  vibrating  energy  in
it  at  all,  except  the  slight  angular  velocity  that  you  leave  it  with.
A  vibrator  which  can  send  out  a  succession  of  impulses  independ-
ently of  being  forced  to  vibrate  from  without,  must  be  a  vibrator
with  the  means  of  conversion  of  potential  into  kinetic  energy  in
itself  A  tuning-fork,  and  a  bell,  are  sample  vibrators  for  sound.
The  simplest  sample  vibrator  that  we  can  imagine  to  represent  the

*  This  is  in  fact  proved  by  the  solntiou  of  Lecture  TV.  expressed  by  (14)  in  terms
of  an  arbitrary  function.

DOUBLE  SOURCE  WITH  CONTRARY  ROTATIONS. 85

ori£>'in  of  an  independent  sequence  of  light  may  be  like  a  tuning-fork.  Molar.
Two  bodies,  joined  by  a  spring  would  be  more  symmetrical  than  a
tuning-fork.  Two  rigid  globes  joined  by  a  spring — that  will  give
you  the  idea  ;  or  (which  will  be  a  vibration  of  the  same  type  still)
one  elastic  spherical  body  vibrating  from  having  been  drawn  into
an  oval  shape,  and  let  go.

I  will  look,  immediately,  at  a  set  of  vibrations  produced  in  an
elastic  solid  by  a  sample  vibrator.  But  suppose  you  produce
vibrations  in  your  jelly  elastic  solid  by  taking  hold  of  this  ball
and  moving  it  to-and-fro  horizontally,  or  again  moving  it  up  and
down  vertically  and  think  of  the  kinds  of  vibrations  it  will  make
all  around.  Think  of  that,  in  connection  with  the  formulas,  and
it  will  help  us  to  interpret  them.  This  is  in  fact  the  kind  of
vibration  produced  in  the  ether  by  the  rigid  spherical  containing
shell  of  our  complex  molecule  (Lecture  II.).  Or  think  of  the
vibrations  due  to  the  higher  though  simpler  order  of  vibrator,  of
which  we  have  taken  as  an  example  a  very  dense  elastic  globe
vibrating  from  prolate  to  oblate  and  back  periodically.  We  might
also  have  those  torsional  vibrations ;  but  among  all  the  possible
vibrations  of  atoms  in  the  clang  and  clash  of  atoms  that  there  is
in  a  flame,  or  other  source  of  light,  a  not  very  rare  case  I  think
would  be  that  which  I  am  going  to  speak  of  now.  It  consists  of
opposite  torsional  vibrations  at  the  two  ends  of  an  elongated  mass.
To  simplify  our  conception  for  a  moment,  imagine  two  globes  con-
nected by  a  columnar  spring;  twist  them  in  opposite  directions,  and
let  them  go.  There  you  have  an  imaginable  source  of  vibrations.
If  in  any  one  of  our  cases  the  potential  energy  of  the  spring  is  very
large  in  comparison  with  the  energy  that  is  carried  off  in  a
thousand,  or  a  hundred  thousand  vibrations,  you  will  have  a
nearly  uniform  sequence  of  vibrations  such  as  those  we  have  been
considering,  but  gradually  dying  down.

Before  passing  on  to  the  to-and-fro  vibrator  we  will  think  of
this  motion  for  a  moment,  but  we  will  not  work  it  out,  because  it
is  not  so  interesting.  To  suit  our  drawing  we  shall  suppose  one
globe  here,  and  another  upon  the  opposite  side  on  a  level  with  the
first,  so  that  the  line  of  the  two  is  perpendicular  to  the  board.
Give  these  globes  opposite  torsional  vibrations  about  their  common
axis,  and  what  will  the  result  be  ?  A  single  one  produces  zero
light  in  the  axis  and  maximum  light  in  the  equatorial  plane.  The
two  going  in  opposite directions  will produce  zero light  in  the

86  LECTURE VIII. PART I.

equatorial  plane  and  zero  light  in  the  axis ;  so  that  you  will
proceed  from  zero  in  the  equatorial  plane  to  a  maximum  between
the  equatorial  plane  and  the  poles,  and  zero  at  the  poles ;  and  you
will  have  opposite  vibrations  in  each  hemisphere.  That  constitutes
a  possible  case  of  vibrations  of  polarized  light,  proceeding  from  a
possible  independent  vibrator.

One  of  the  most  simple  and  natural  suppositions  in  respect  to
an  independent  vibrator  is  afforded  by  the  illustration  of  a  bell,  or
a  tuning-fork,  or  an  elastic  body  deformed  from  its  natural  shape
and  left  to  vibrate.  In  all  these  cases,  as  also  in  the  case  of  our
supposed  complex  molecule  (Lecture  I.),  remark  that  the  centre
of  gravity  of  the  vibrator  is  at  rest ;  except  for  the  comparatively
very  small  reaction  of  the  ether  upon  it  ;  and  this  is  essential  to  an
independently  acting  vibrator.  The  vibrator  must  have  potential
energy  in  itself,  for  many  thousand  vibrations  generating  waves
travelling  outwards  through  ether ;  and  its  centre  of  gravity  must
be  at  rest,  except  in  so  far  as  the  reaction  of  the  medium  upon
it  causes  a  slight  motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity.

I  will  put  down  the  solution  which  corresponds  to  a  to-and-fro
vibration  in  the  axis  of  ^,  viz.:

^  ~ A,''  ^ dx^ '  dydx '  dzdx '

0  is  our  old  friend,

but  with  n  now  in  place  of  the  n  +  |A'  which  we  had  formerly  when
we  were  dealing  with  condensational  waves.  First  remark  that
we  know  that

P  ^~2  =  «V  ^.  etc.,

are  satisfied,  because  ^  and  all  its  differential  coefficients  satisfy
this  relation.  We  have  therefore  only  to  verify  that  the  dilatation  is
zero.  Instead  of  merely  going  through  the  verification,  I  wish  to  help
you  to  make  the  solution  your  own  by  showing  you  how  I  obtained
it.  I  will  not  say  that  there  is  anything  novel  in  it,  but  it  is  simply
the  way  it  occurred  to  me.  I  obtained  it  to  illustrate  Stokes'
explanation  of  the  blue  sky.  I  afterwards  found  that  Lord  Rayleigh
had  gone  into  the  subject  even  more  searchingly  than  Stokes,  and

1  read  his  work  upon  it.

WAVES GENERATED BY TO-AND-FRO VIBRATOR.  87

The  way  I  found  the  solution  was  this :  ^  is  clearly  the  dis-  Molar

placement-potential  for  an  elastic  fluid,  corresponding  to  a  source
of  the  kind,  constituted  by  an  immersed  solid  moving  to-and-fro
along  the  axis  of  x.  The  displacement  function  of  which  the
displacements  are  the  differential  coefficients  would  take  simply  that
form  if  the  question  were  of  sound  in  air  or  other  compressible
fluid,  and  not  of  light,  or  of  waves  in  an  incompressible  solid,  or  of
waves  of  distortion  in  a  compressible  solid.  It  was  a  question  of
condensational  vibrations  wdth  us  several  days  ago.  I  did  not  go
into  the  matter  in  detail  then,  but  we  saw  that  for  condensational
vibrations  proceeding  from a  vibrator  vibrating  to-and-fro  along

the  axis  of  x  that , was  the  displacement  potential ; and  it  is

obvious,  if  we  start  from  the  very  root  of  the  matter  that  it  must  be  so.

Hence  we  may  judge  that  the  differential  coefficients  j~ »  j~  >  j~

of  -^  ,  with  n  in  place  of  n  +  ik,  must  therefore  be  at  all  events

dx  ^  ■^

constituents  of  the  components  of  displacement  in  the  case  of
light,  or  of  distortional  waves,  from  such  a  source  :  but  neither  they
nor  the  differential  coefficients  of  any  function  can  be  simply
equal  to  the  displacement-components  of  our  present  problem,  in
which  the  motion  is  essentially  rotational.  The  irrotational  dis-
placements in  the  condensational  wave  problem  are  displacements
which  fulfil  certain  of  the  conditions  of  our  present  problem :  but
they  do  not  fulfil  the  condition  of  giving  us  a  purely  distoi'tional
wave,  unless  we  add  a  term  or  terms  in  order  to  make  the  dilata-
tion zero. This  is  done  in  fact,  as  I  found,  by  the  addition  of  the

spherically  symmetric  term  —2  (f>  to  -^  -^  ,  for  the  ^--component  of

displacement. Just  try  for  the  dilatation. We  have

47J-2

in  which  we  may  substitute  j-  for  0. Thus

dx  ~ \^ '  dx  '

88  LECTURE VIII. PART I.

We  verify  therefore  in  a  moment  that  the  displacements  given  by
the  formulas  satisfy

dx dy dz '
and  thus  Ave  have  made  up  a  solution  which  satisfies  the  con-
ditions  of  being  rigorously non-condensational,  (no  condensation
or  rarefaction  anyw^here,)  and  of  being  symmetrical  round  the  axis
oi  oc.

In  the  first  place,  taking  the  distant  terms  only,  we  have

47r^  xy .

4, 47r^iC.2r .

It  is  easy  to  verify  that  these  displacements  are  perpendicular  to
the  radius  vector,  i.  e.  that  we  have  x^  +  yi]  +  2^=0.  Just  look  at
the  case  along  the  axis  of  x,  and  again  in  the  plane  yz.  It  is
written  down  here  in  mathematical  words  painting  as  clearly  and
completely  as  any  non-mathematical  words  can  give  it.  Take
y  =  0,z^O,  and  that  makes  ^  =  0,  v  ^^>  ^  =  0.  Therefore,  in  the
direction  of  the  axis  of  x  there  is  no  motion.  That  is  a  little
startling  at  first,  but  is  quite  obviously  a  necessity  of  the  funda-
mental supposition.  Cause  a  globe  in  an  elastic  solid  to  vibrate
to-and-fro.  At  the  very  surface  of  the  globe  the  points  in  which
it  is  cut  by  Ox  have  the  maximum  motion ;  and  throughout  the
whole  circumference  of  the  globe,  the  medium  is  pulled,  by  hypo-
thesis, along  with  the  globe.  But  this  is  not  a  solution  for  that
comparatively  complex,  though  not  difficult,  problem.  I  am  only
asking  you  to  think  of  this  as  the  solution  for  the  motion  at  a  great
distance.  It  may  not  be  a  globe,  but  a  body  of  any  shape  moved  to-
and-fro.  To  think  of  a  globe  will  be  more  symmetrical.  In  the  im-
mediate neighbourhood  of  the  vibrator  there  is  a  motion  produced  in
the  line  of  vibration ;  the  motion  of  the  elastic  solid  in  that  neigh-
bourhood consists  in  a  somewhat  complex,  but  very  easily  imagined
state  of  things,  in  which  we  have  particles  in  the  axis  of  x,  moving
out  and  in  directly  along  the  radius  vector ;  in  all  other  places
except  the  plane  of  yz,  slipping  around  with  motions  oblique  to  the
radius  vector  ;  and  in  the  plane  of  yz  moving  exactly  perpendicular

WAVES GENERATED BY TO-AND-FRO VIBRATOR.  89

to  the  radius  vector.  All,  however,  except  motions  perpendicular  Molar,
to  the  radius  vector,  become  insensible  at  distances  very  great  in
comparison  with  the  wave-length.  We  have  taken,  simply,  the
leading  terms  of  the  solution.  These  represent  the  motion  at
great  distances,  quite  irrespectively  of  the  shape  of  the  body,
and  of  the  comparatively  complicated  motion  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  vibrating  body.

Take  now  ^-  =  0,  and  think  of  the  motions  in  the  plane  yz.
The  vibrator  is  supposed  to  be  vibrating  perpendicular  to  this
plane. We  have

^=^-sin(/, 1)^0, ^=0.

A, /

What  does  that  mean  ?  Clearly,  that  the  vibrations  are  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  yz.  We  have  the  wave  spreading  out  uni-
formly in  all  directions  in  that  plane,  and  "  polarized  in "  that
plane,  the  vibrations  being  perpendicular  to  it.  That  is  exactly
what  Stokes  supposed  was  of  necessity  the  dynamical  theory  of
the  blue  light  of  the  sky.  Lord  Rayleigh  showed  that  it  was  not
so  obvious  as  Stokes  had  supposed.  He  elaborately  investigated
the  question,  "  Whether  is  the  blue  light  of  the  sky,  (which  we
assume  to  be  owing  to  particles  in  the  air,)  due  to  the  particles
being  of  density  different  from  the  surrounding  luminiferous  ether,
or  being  of  rigidity  different  from  the  surrounding  luminiferous
ether?"  The  question  would  really  be,  If  the  particles  are  water,
what  is  the  theory  of  waves  of  light  in  water ;  does  it  differ  from
air  in  being,  as  it  were,  a  denser  medium  with  the  same  effective
rigidity,  or  is  it  a  medium  of  the  same  density  and  less  effective
rigidity,  or  does  it  differ  from  ether  both  as  to  density  and  as  to
rigidity  ?

Lord  Rayleigh  examined  that  question  very  thoroughly,  and
finds,  if  the  fact  that  the  cause  were,  for  instance,  little  spherules
of  water,  and  if  in  the  passage  of  light  through  water  the  propaga-
tion is  slower  than  in  air  were  truly  explained  by  less  rigidity  and
the  same  density  we  should  have  something  quite  different  in  the
polarization  of  the  sky  from  what  we  would  have  on  the  other
supposition.  On  the  other  hand,  the  observed  polarization  of  the
sky  supports  the  other  supposition  (as  far  as  the  incertitude
of  the  experimental  data  allows  us  to  judge)  that  the  particles,
whether  they  be  particles  of  water,  or  motes  of  dust,  or  whatever

90  LECTURE VIII. PART I.

they  may  be,  act  as  if  they  were  little  portions  of  the  luminiferous
ether  of  greater  density  than,  and  not  of  different  rigidity  from,
the  surrounding  ether.  Hence  our  present  solution,  which  has  for
us  such  special  interest  as  being  the  expression  of  the  disturbance
produced  in  the  ether  by  our  imbedded  spring-molecule,  acquires
farther  and  deeper  interest  as  being  the  solution  for  dynamical
action  which  according  to  Stokes  and  Rayleigh  is  the  origin  cause
of  the  blue  light  coming  from  the  sky.  I  will  call  attention  a
little  more  to  Lord  Rayleigh's  dynamics  of  the  blue  sky  in  a
subsequent  lecture.  Meantime,  returning  to  our  solution,  we
may  differentiate  once  more  with  respect  to  x,  in  order  to  get
a  proper  form  of  function  to  express  the  motion  from  a  double
vibrator  vibrating  to-and-fro  like  this — vibrating  my  hands  to-
wards and  from  each  other.  Then  we  shall  have  a  solution  which
will  express  another  important  species  of  single  sequence  of  vibra-
tions, of  which  multitudes  may  constitute  the  whole,  or  a  large
part,  of  the  light  of  any  ordinary  source.

A  question  is  now  forced  upon  us, — what  is  the  velocity  of  a
group  of  waves  in  the  luminiferous  ether  disturbed  by  ordinary
matter  ?  With  a  constant  velocity  of  propagation,  as  in  pure  ether,
each  group  remains  unchanged.  But  how  about  the  propagation
of  light-sequences  in  a  transparent  medium  like  glass  ?  It  is  a
question  that  is  more  easily  put  than  answered.  We  are  bound
to  consider  it  most  carefully.  I  do  not  despair  of  seeing  the
answer.  I  think,  if  we  have  a  little  more  patience  with  our
dynamical  problem  we  shall  see  something  towards  the  answer.

Here  is  a  perfectly  parallel  problem.  Commence  suddenly  to
give  a  simple  harmonic  motion  through  the  handle  P  to  our
system  of  particles  m^,  m^,...mj,  which  play  the  part  of  a  molecule.
If  you  commence  suddenly  imparting  to  the  handle  a  motion  of
any  period  whatever,  only  avoiding  every  one  of  the  fundamental
periods,  if  there  be  a  little  viscosity  it  will  settle  into  a  state  of
things  in  which  you  have  perfectly  regular  simple  harmonic  vibra-
tion. But  if  there  be  no  viscosity  whatever,  what  will  the  result
be  ?  It  will  be  composed  of  simple  harmonic  motions  in  the
period  of  our  applied  motion  at  the  bell-handle  P ;  with  the  ampli-
tude of  each  calculated  from  our  continued  fraction ;  and  super-
imposed upon  it,  a  jangle  as  it  were,  consisting  of  coexistent  simple
harmonic  vibrations  of  all  the  fundamental  periods.  If  there  is  no
viscosity,  that  state  of  things  will  go  on  for  ever. I  cannot  satisfy

SUDDEN AND GRADUAL COMMENCEMENTS OF VIBRATION. 91

myself  with  viscous  terms  in  these  theories  not  only  because  the  Molecular.
assumption  of  viscosity,  in  molecular  dyixamics,  is  a  theoretic
violation  of  the  conservation  of  energy  ;  but  because  the  smallest
degree  of  viscosity  of  ether  sufficing  to  practically  rid  us  of  any
of  this  jangling,  or  to  have  any  sensible  influence  in  any  of  the
motions  we  have  to  do  with  in  sources  or  waves  of  light,  would  not
allow  a  light-sequence  through  ether  to  last,  as  we  know  it  lasts,
through  millions  of  millions  of  millions  of  millions  of  vibrations.
But  if  we  have  no  viscosity  at  all,  whatever  energy  of  any  vibra-
tions, regular  or  irregular,  we  have  at  any  time  in  our  complex
molecule  must  show  in  the  vibrations  of  something  else,  and
that  is  what  ?  In  studying  that  sort  of  vibration  with  which  we
have  been  occupied  in  the  molecular  part  of  our  course,  we  must
account  for  these  irregular  vibrations  somehow  or  other.  The
viscous  terms  which  Helmholtz  and  others  have  introduced  re-
present merely  an  integral  effect,  as  it  were,  of  actions  not  followed
in  detail,  not  even  explained,  in  the  theory.  By  viscous  terms,  I
mean  terms  that  assume  a  resistance  in  simple  proportion  to
velocity.

But  the  state  of  things  with  us  is  that  that  jangling  will  go  on
for  ever,  if  there  is  no  loss  of  energy;  and  we  want  to  coax  our
system  of  vibrators  into  a  state  of  vibration  with  an  arbitrarily
chosen  period  without  viscous  consumption  of  energy.  Begin
thus:  commence  suddenly  acting  on  P  just  as  we  have  already
supposed,  but  with  only  a  very  small  range  of  motion  of  P.  The
result  will  be  just  as  I  have  said,  only  with  very  small  ranges
of  all  the  constituent  motions.  After  waiting  a  little  time  increase
the  range  of  the  motion  of  P ;  after  waiting  a  little  longer,  in-
crease the  range  farther,  and  so  go  on,  increasing  the  range  by
successive  steps.  Each  of  those  will  superimpose  another  state  of
vibration.  There  would  be,  I  believe,  virtually  an  addition  of  the
energies,  not  of  the  amplitudes,  of  the  several  janglings  if  you  make
these  steps  quite  independent  of  one  another.

For  example,  suppose  you  proceed  thus :  In  the  first  place,
start  right  off  into  vibrations  of  your  handle  P  through  a  space,
say  of  80  inches.  You  will  have  a  certain  amount  of  energy,  J,
in  the  irregular  vibrations  (the  "jangling").  In  the  second  place,
commence  with  a  range  of  three  inches.  After  you  have  kept
P  vibrating  three  inches  through  many  periods,  suddenly  increase
its  range  by  three  inches  more,  making  it  six  inches. Then,  some-

92  LECTURE VIII. PART I.

Molecular,  time  after,  suddenly  increase  the  range  to  nine  inches  ;  and  so  on
in  that  way  by  ten  steps.  The  energy  of  the  jangle  produced  by
suddenly  commencing  through  the  range  of  three  inches,  which
is  one-tenth  of  30  inches,  will  be  exactly  one-hundredth  of  /,  the
energy  of  jangle  which  you  would  have  if  you  commenced  right
away  with  the  vibration  through  30  inches.  Each  successive
addition  of  three  inches  to  the  range  of  P  will  add  an  amount
of  energy  of  jangling  of  which  the  most  probable  value  is  the  one-
hundredth  of  J;  and  the  result  is  that  if  you  advance  by  these
steps  to  the  range  of  30  inches,  you  will  have  in  the  final  jangle
ten-hundredths,  that  is  to  say  one-tenth,  of  the  energy  of  jangle
which  you  would  get  if  you  began  at  that  range  right  away.
Thus,  by  very  gradually  increasing  the  range,  the  result  will  be
that,  without  any  viscosity  at  all  there  will  be  infinitely  little  of
the  irregular  vibrations.

But  there  are  cases  in  which  we  have  that  tremendous  jangling
of  the  molecules  concerned  in  luminous  vibrations ;  for  instance,
the  fluorescence  of  such  a  thing  as  uranium  glass  or  sulphate
of  quinine  which  lasts  for  several  thousandths  of  a  second  after
the  exciting  light  is  taken  away,  and  then  again  in  phosphorescence
that  lasts  for  hov^rs  and  days.  There  have  been  exceedingly
interesting  beginnings,  in  the  way  of  experiments  already  made,
in  these  subjects,  but  nobody  has  found  whether  initial  refraction
is  exactly  the  same  as  permanent  refraction.  For  this  purpose
we  might  use  Becquerel's  phosphoroscope  or  we  might  use  methods
such  as  those  of  Fizeau  or  Foucault,  or  take  such  an  appliance  as
Prof.  Michelson  has  been  recently  using,  for  finding  the  velocity  of
light,  and  so  get  something  enormously  more  searching  than  even
Becquerel's  phosphoroscope,  and  try  whether  in  the  first  hundredth
of  a  second,  or  the  first  millionth  of  a  second,  there  is  any
indication  of  a  different  wave  velocity  from  that  which  we  find
from  the  law  of  refraction,  when  light  passes  continuously  through
a  transparent  liquid  or  solid.  If,  with  the  methods  employed  for
ascertaining  the  velocity  of  light  in  a  transparent  body  (to  take
account  of  the  criticisms  that  they  have  received  at  the  British
Association  meeting,  to  which  I  have  referred  several  times),  we
combine  a  test  for  instantaneous  refraction,  it  seems  likely  that
we  should  not  get  negative  results,  but  rather  find  phenomena
and  properties  of  ultimate  importance.  We  might  take  not  only
ordinary  transparent  sulids  and  liiiuids,  but  also  bodies  in  which,

FLUORESCENCE AND PHOSPHOKESCENCE.  93

like  uranium  glass,  the  phosphorescence  lasts  only  a  few  Molecular.
thousandths  of  a  second  ;  and  then  again  bodies  in  which  phos-
phorescence lasts  for  minutes  and  hours.  With  some  of  those
we  should  have  anomalous  dispersion,  gradually  fading  away  after
a  time.  I  cannot  but  think  that  by  experimenting,  in  some  such
way,  we  should  find  some  very  interesting  and  instructive  results
in  the  way  of  initial  fluorescence.

LECTURE IX.

Wednesday,  Oct.  8,  5  p.m.

We  shall  go  on  for  the  present  with  the  subject  of  the
propagation  of  waves  from  a  centre.  Let  us  pass  to  the  case  of
two  bodies  vibrating  in  opposite  directions,  by  superposition  of
solutions  such  as  that  which  we  have  already  found  for  a  single
to-and-fro  vibrator,  which  was  expressed  by

t  _  ^^^  A, d  d4> _  d  d(f)  d  d(f>

V  ^ doc  dx'  dy  dx '  dz  dx'

We  verified  that

dx dy dz

so  that  this  expresses  rigorously  a  distortional  wave.  It  is  obvious
that  this  expresses  the  result  of  a  to-and-fro  motion  through  the
origin  in  the  line  OX.  Remark,  for  one  thing,  that  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  origin,  at  such  moderate  distance  from  it
that  the  component  motion  in  the  direction  OX  is  not  insensible,
we  have  on  the  two  sides  of  the  origin  simultaneously  positive
values.  ^  is  the  same  for  a  positive  value  of  x  as  for  the  negative
of  that  value.  At  distances  from  the  origin  in  the  line  OX  which
are  considerable  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length  the  motion
vanishes  as  we  have  seen.

Pass  on,  now,  to  this  case:  a  positive  to-and-fro  motion  on  the
one  side  of  the  origin,  and  a  simultaneous  negative  to-and-fro
motion  on  the  other  side  of  the  origin ;  that  is  to  say,  two  simul-
taneous co-periodic  vibrations  of  portions  of  matter  on  the  two
sides  of  the  origin  moving  simultaneously  in  opposite  directions.
I  will  indicate  these  motions  by  arrow-heads,  contiinious  arrow-
heads to  indicate  directions  of  motion  at  one  instant  of  the  period.

CONTRARY VIBRATORS IN ONE LINE.

95

and  dotted  at  the  instant  half  a  period  earlier  or  later. The  first  Molar,
case  already  considered

Fig.  1.

y

^>

■^—

X;

the  second  case

The  effect  in  the  first  case  being  expressed  by  the  displacements
f,  7),  ^,  already  given,  the  effect  in  the  second  case  will  be
expressed  by  displacement-coefiicients  respectively  equal  to

d^ dr] d^

dx^ dx' dx'

This  configuration  of  displacement  clearly  implies  a  motion  of
which  the  component  parallel  to  OX  has  opposite  signs,  and  the
components  perpendicular  to  OX  are  equal  with  the  same  sign,  for
equal  positive  and  negative  values  oi  x;  it  is  a  simultaneous  out
and  in  vibration  on  the  two  sides  of  the  origin  in  the  line  OX,  and
a  simultaneous  in  and  out  vibration  perpendicular  to  OX,  every-
where in  the  plane  yz.  A  motion  of  the  matter  at  distances  from
the  origin  moderate  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length  will  be
accurately  expressed  by  these  functions.  Passing  now  from  Fig.  2
which  shows  the  germ  from  which  we  have  developed  the  idea  of
this  configuration  of  motion,  and  the  functions  expressing  it; look

96  LECTURE IX. PART I.

Molar. to  Fig.  3  illustrating  the  in  and  out  vibration  perpendicular  to  OX

which  accompanies  the  out  and  in  vibration  along  OX  from  which

we started. The configuration of  arrow-heads on  the  circle  in

Fig.  3  shows  the  component  motions  perpendicular  to  the  radius

vector at any  distance,  small  or  great,  from  the  origin ; which

constitute  sensibly  the  whole  motion  at  the  great  distances. To

express  this  motion,  take  only  the  "  distance -terms  "  (as  in  previous

-  Stt'
cases,)  and  drop  the  factor  — -3 ,  from  the  differential  coefficients

A.

indicated  above. We  thus  find,  for  the  three  components  of  the
displacement  at  great  distances  from  the  origin,

J, . (a?  —  r^)  . x^y  ^ a?z

^  =  oc  — -^ —  cos  q, ri=^ cos q, ^ -  ^  cos q.

To  satisfy  ourselves  that  the  radial  component  of  the  displace-
ment is  zero  verify  that  we  have  xl^-\- y'r]-\-  zt,  =  0.

To  think  of  the  kind  of  "  polarization  "  that  will  be  found,  when
the  case  is  realized  in  a  sequence  of  waves  of  light,  remark  that  the
motion  is  everywhere  symmetrical  around  the  axis  of  x,  and  is  in
the  radial  plane  through  OX.  Therefore,  we  have  light  polarized
in  the  plane  through  the  radius  to  the  point  considered  and
perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  OX.

This  is,  next  to  the  effect  of  a  single  to-and-fro  rigid  vibrator,
the  simplest  set  of  vibrations  that  we  can  consider  as  proceeding
from  any  natural  source  of  light.  As  I  said,  we  might  conceive  of
a  pair  of  equal  and  opposite  torsional  motions  at  the  two  ends  of
a  vibrating  molecule.  That  is  one  of  the  possibilities,  and  it
would  be  rash  to  say  that  any  one  possible  kind  of  motion  does  not
exist  in  so  remarkably  complex  a  thing  as  the  motion  of  the
particles  from  which  light  originates.

The  motion  we  have  just  now  investigated  is  perhaps  the  most
interesting,  as  it  is  obviously  the  simplest  kind  of  motion  that  can
proceed  from  a  single  independent  non-rotating  vibrator  with
unmoved  centre  of  inertia.  If  you  consider  the  two  ends  of  a
tuning-fork,  neglecting  the  prongs,  so  that  everything  may  be
symmetrical  around  the  two  moving  bodies,  you  have  a  way  by
which  the  motion  may  be  produced.  Or  our  source  might  be
two  balls  connected  by  a  spring  and  pulled  asunder  and  set  to
vibrating  in  and  out ;  or  it  might  be  an  elastic  sphere  which  has
experienced  a  shock.  An  infinite  number  of  modes  of  vibration
are  generated  when  an  elastic  ball  is  struck  a  blow,  but  the  gravest

SUDDEN BEGINNINGS AND GRADUAL SUBSIDENCES.  97

mode, which  is  also  no  doubt  the one in  which  the  energy  is  Molar.
greatest,  if  the  impinging  body  be  not  too  hard,  consists  of  the
globe  vibrating  from  an  oblate  to  a  prolate  figure  of  revolution ;
and  this  originates  in  the  ether  the  motion  with  Avhich  we  have
just  now  been  occupied.

The  kind  of  thing  that  an  elemental  source  of  light  in  nature
consists  of,  seems  to  me  to  be  a  sudden  initiation  of  a  set  of
vibrations  and  a  sequence  of  vibrations  from  that  initiation  which
will  naturally  become  of  smaller  and  smaller  amplitude.  So  that
the  graphic  representation  of  what  we  should  see  if  we  could  see
what  proceeds  from  one  element  of  the  source,  the  very  simplest
conceivable  element  of  the  source,  would  consist  of  polarized  waves
of  light  spreading  out  in  all  directions  according  to  some  such  law
as  we  have  here.  In  any  one  direction,  what  will  it  be  ?  Suppose
that  the  wave  advances  from  left  to  right ;  you  will  then  see  what
is  here  represented  on  a  magnified  scale.

I  have  tried  to  represent  a  sudden  start,  and  a  gradual  falling
off  of  intensity.  Why  a  sudden  start  ?  Because  I  believe  that
the  light  of  the  natural  flame  or  of  the  arc-light,  or  of  any  other
known  source  of  light,  must  be  the  result  of  sudden  shocks  upon
a  number  of  vibrators.  Take  the  light  obtained  by  striking  two
quartz  pebbles  together.  You  have  all  seen  that.  TJiere  is  one
of  the  very  simplest  sources  of  light.  Some  sort  of  a  chemical  or
ozoniferous  effect  connected  with  it  which  makes  a  smell,  there  must
be.  As  to  what  the  cause  of  this  peculiar  smell  may  be,  I  suppose
we  are  almost  assured,  now,  that  it  proceeds  from  the  generation
of  ozone.  What  sort  of  a  thing  can  the  light  be  that  proceeds
from  striking  two  quartz  pebbles  together  ?  Under  what  cir-
cumstances can  we  conceive  a  group  of  waves  of  light  to  begin
gradually  and  to  end  gradually  ?  You  know  what  takes  place  in
the  excitation  of  a  violin  string  or  a  tuning  fork  by  a  bow.  The
vibrations  gradually  get  up  from  zero  to  a  maximum  and  then,
when  you  take  the  bow  off,  gradually  subside.  I  cannot
see  anything  like  that  in  the  source  of  light.  On  the  contrary,
it  seems  to  me  to  be  all  shocks,  sudden  beginnings  and  gradual
subsidences;  rather  like  the  excitation  of  a  harp  string  plucked
in  the  usual  manner,  or  of  a  pianoforte  string  struck  by  the
T.  L.  7

98  LECTURE IX. PART I.

Molar.  hammer ;  and  left  to  itself  to  give  away  all  its  energy  gradually
in  waves  of  sound.

I  say  this,  because  I  have  just  been  reading  very  interesting
papers  by  Lommel  and  Sellmeier*,  both  touching  upon  this  subject.
Helmholtz  remarks  that  Sellmeier  gets  into  a  difficulty  in  his
dynamics  and  does  not  show  clearly  what  becomes  of  the  energy
in  a  certain  case ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  Sellmeier  really  takes
hold  of  the  thing  with  great  power.  He  goes  into  this  case
very  fully,  and  in  a  way  with  which  we  are  all  now  more  or
less  familiar.  He  remarks  that  Fizeau  obtained  a  suite  of  50,000
vibrations  interfering  with  one  another,  and  judges  from  that  that,
though  ordinary  light  consists  of  polarized  light,  circularly-,  or  ellipti-
cally-,  or  plane-polarized  as  I  said  to  you  myself,  one  or  two  days  ago,
with  (what  I  did  not  say)  the  plane  of  polarization,  or  one  or  both
axes  of  the  ellipse  if  it  be  elliptically  polarized,  gradually  varying,
and  the  amplitude  gradually  changing,  the  changing  must  be
so  gradual  that  the  whole  amount  of  the  change,  whether  of
amplitude  or  of  mode  of  polarization  or  of  phase,  in  the  course
of  50,000  or  100,000,  or  perhaps  several  million  vibrations  cannot
be  so  great  as  to  prevent  interference.  In  fact,  I  suppose  there  is
no  perceptible  difference  between  the  perfectness  of  the  annul-
ments in  Fizeau's  experiment,  with  50,000  vibrations  and  with
1,000 ;  although  I  speak  here  not  with  confidence  and  I  may  be
corrected.  You  have  seen  that  with  your  grating,  have  you  not,
Prof.  Kowland  ?

Prof.  Eowland.  Yes;  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  get  the
interferences.

Sir  Wm.  Thomson.  But  when  you  do  get  them,  the  black
lines  are  very  black,  are  they  not  1

Prof.  Rowland.  I  do  not  know.  They  are  so  very  faint
that  you  can  hardly  see  them.

Sir  Wm.  Thomson. What  do  you  infer  from  that  ?

Prof.  Rowland.  That  there  is  a  large  number.  The  narrow-
ness of  the  lines  of  the  spectrum  indicates  how  perfectly  the  light
interferes  ;  and  with  a  grating  of  very  fine  lines  I  find  exceedingly
'perfect  interference  for  at  least  100,000  jjen'ods  I  should  think.

Sir  Wm.  Thomson.  That  goes  further  than  Fizeau.  Sellmeier
says  that  probably  a  great  many  times  50,000  waves  must  pass
before  there  can  be  any  great  change. He  goes  at  the  thing  very

*  Sellmeier;  Ann.  der  Phi/,  u.  Chan.  1872,  Vols,  cxlv.,  cxlvii.

AMOUNT OF ENERGY IN THE VIBRATION OF AN ATOM. 99

admirably  for  the  foundation  of  his  dynamical  explanation  of  Molar.
absorption  and  anomalous  refraction.  The  only  thing  that  I  do
not  fully  agree  with  him  in  his  fundamentals  is  the  gradualness  of
the  initiation  of  light  at  the  source.  I  believe,  in  the  majority  of
cases  at  all  events,  in  sudden  beginnings  and  gradual  endings.
Prof  Rowland  has  just  told  us  how  gradual  the  endings  are.
Fizeau  could  infer  that  the  amplitude  does  not  fall  off  greatly  in
50,000  vibrations.  It  is  quite  possible  from  all  we  know,  that  the
amplitude  may  fall  off  considerably  in  100,000  vibrations,  is
it  not  ?

Prof.  Rowland. The  lines  are  then  very  sharp.

Sir  Wm.  Thomson.  It  would  not  depend  on  the  sharpness  of
the  lines,  would  it  ?

Prof.  Rowland.  O,  yes.  It  would  draw  them  out  of
fineness.

Sir  Wm.  Thomson.  Would  it  broaden  them  out,  or  Avould
it  leave  them  fine,  but  throw  a  little  light  over  a  place  that  should
be  dark  ?

Prof.  Rowland. It  would  broaden  them  out.

Sir  Wm.  Thomson.  It  is  a  very  interesting  subject ;  and
from  the  things  that  have  been  done  by  Prof  Rowland  and  others,
we  may  hope  to  see,  if  we  live,  a  conquering  of  the  difficulties
quite  incomparably  superior  to  what  we  have  now.  I  have  no
doubt,  however,  but  that  some  now  present  will  live  to  see
knowledge  that  we  can  have  hardly  any  conception  of  now,  of  the
way  of  the  extinction  of  \dbrations  in  connection  with  the  origin
and  the  propagation  of  light.  We  are  perfectly  certain  that  the
diminution  of  amplitude  in  the  majority  of  sequences  in  any
ordinary  source,  must  be  exceedingly  small — practically  nil — in
1,000  vibrations;  we  can  say  that  probably  it  is  practically  nil
in  ,50,000  vibrations ;  we  know  that  it  is  nearly  nil  in  100,000
vibrations.  Is  it  practically  nil  in  two  or  three  hundred  thousand
vibrations,  or  in  several  million  vibrations?  Possibly  not.  Dy-
namical considerations  come  into  play  here.  We  shall  be  able
to  get  a  little  insight  into  these  things  by  forming  some  sort  of  an
idea  of  the  total  amount  of  energy  there  can  possibly  be  in  one
elemental  vibrator,  in  a  source  of  light,  and  what  sequences  of
waves  it  can  supply.  That  the  whole  energy  of  vibration  of
a  single  freshly  excited  vibrator  in  a  source  of  light  is  many
times  greater  than  what  it  parts  with  in  the  course  of  100,000

7-2

100  LECTUEE IX. PART T.

Molar.  molar-vibrations,  is  a  most  interesting  experimental  conclusion,
drawn  from  Fizeau's  and  Rowland's  grand  observations  of  inter-
ference.

In  speaking  of  Sellmeier's  work,  and  Helmholtz's  beautiful
paper  which  is  really  quite  a  mathematical  gem,  I  must  still  say
that  I  think  Helmholtz's  modification  is  rather  a  retrograde  step.
It  is  not  so  perhaps  in  the  mathematical  treatment;  and  at  the
same  time  Helmholtz  is  perfectly  aware  of  the  kind  of  thing  that
is  meant  by  viscous  consumption  of  energy.  He  knows  perfectly
well  that  that  means,  conversion  of  energy  into  heat ;  and  in
introducing  viscosity  he  is  throwing  up  the  sponge,  as  it  were,
so  far  as  the  fight  with  the  dynamical  problem  is  concerned.

Mr  Mansfield  brought  me  another  quarter  hundred  weight  of
books  on  the  subject  last  night.  I  have  not  read  them  all
through.  I  opened  one  of  them  this  forenoon,  and  exercised
myself  over  a  long  mathematical  paper.  I  do  not  think  it  will
help  us  very  much  in  the  mathematics  of  the  subject.  What  we
want  is  to  try  and  see  if  we  cannot  understand  more  fully  what
Sellmeier  has  done,  and  what  Lommel  has  done.  I  see  that  both
stick  firmly  to  the  idea  that  we  must  in  the  particles  themselves
account  for  the  loss  of  energy  from  the  transmitted  wave.  That  is
what  I  am  doing;  and  we  shall  never  have  done  with  it  until  we
have  explained  every  line  in  Prof.  Rowland's  splendid  spectrum.
If  we  are  tired  of  it,  we  can  rest,  and  go  at  it  again.

Lommell  and  Sellmeier  do  not  go  very  fully  into  these
multiple  modes  of  vibrations,  although  they  take  notice  of  them.
But  they  do  indicate  that  we  must  find  some  way  of  distributing
the  energy  without  supposing  annulment  of  it.  That  is  the
reason  why  I  do  not  like  the  introducing  of  viscous  terms  in  our
equations.  It  is  very  dangerous,  in  an  ideal  sense,  to  introduce
them  at  all.  This  little  bit  of  viscosity  in  one  part  of  the  system
might  run  away  with  all  our  energies  long  before  50,000  vibrations
could  be  completed.  If  there  were  any  sensibly  effective  viscosity
in  any  of  the  material  connected  with  the  moving  particle  it  might
be  impossible  to  get  a  sequence  of  one-hundred  thousand  or  a  million
vibrations  proceeding  from  one  initial  vibration  of  one  vibrator.

What  the  dynamical  problem  has  to  do  for  us  is  to  show  how
we  can  have  a  system  capable  of  vibrations  in  itself  and  acted  upon
by  the  luminiferous  ether,  that  under  ordinary  circumstances  does
not  absorb  the  light  in  millions  of  vibrations,  as  for  transparent

DYNAMICS OF ABSORPTION FIRST TAUGHT BY STOKES. 101

liquids  or  solids,  or  in  huudreds  of  thousands  of  millions  of  vibra-  Molar,
tions  as  in  our  terrestrial  atmosphere.  That  is  the  case  with
transparent  bodies ;  bodies  that  allow  waves  to  pass  through  them
one-hundred  feet  or  fifty  miles,  or  greater  distances ;  transparent
bodies  with  exceedingly  little  absorption.  If  we  take  vibrators,
then,  that  will  perform  their  functions  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  a
proper  velocity  of  propagation  for  light  in  a  highly  transparent
body,  and  yet  which,  with  a  proper  modification  of  the  magnitudes
of  the  masses  or  of  the  connecting  springs,  will,  in  certain  complex
molecules,  such  as  the  molecules  of  some  of  those  compounds  that
give  rise  to  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence,  take  up  a  large
quantity  of  the  energy,  so  that  perhaps  the  whole  suite  of
vibrations  from  a  single  initiation  may  be  absolutely  absorbed
and  converted  into  vibrations  of  a  much  lower  period,  which  will
have,  lastly,  the  effect  of  heating  the  body,  I  think  we  shall  see
a  perfectly  clear  explanation  of  absorption  without  introducing
viscous  terms  at  all;  and  that  idea  we  owe  to  Sellmeier.

I  would  like,  in  connection  with  the  idea  of  explaining
absorption  and  refraction,  and  lastly,  anomalous  refraction  and
dispersion,  to  just  point  out  as  a  matter  of  history,  the  two
names  to  which  this  is  owing, — Stokes  and  Sellmeier.  I  would
be  glad  to  be  corrected  with  reference  to  either,  if  there  is  any
evidence  to  the  contrary;  but  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  very  first
idea  of  accounting  for  absorption  by  vibrating  particles  taking  up,
in  their  own  modes  of  natural  vibration,  all  the  energy  of  those
constituents  of  mixed  light  trying  to  pass  through,  which  have
the  same  periods  as  those  modes,  was  from  Stokes,  He  taught
it  to  me  at  a  time  that  I  can  fix  in  one  way  indisputably.
I  never  was  at  Cambridge  once  from  about  June  1852  to  May
1865;  and  it  was  at  Cambridge  walking  about  in  the  grounds
of  the  colleges  that  I  learned  it  from  Stokes.  Something  was
published  of  it  from  a  letter  of  mine  to  Helmholtz,  which  he
communicated  to  Kirchhoff  and  which  was  appended  by  Kirchhoff
in  his  postscript  to  the  English  translation  (published  in  Phil.
Mag.,  July  1860)  of  his  paper  on  the  subject  which  appeared  in
Poggendorff's  Annalen,  Vol.  Cix.  p.  275.

In  the  postscript  you  will  find  the  following  statement  taken
from  my  letter : —

"  Prof.  Stokes  mentioned  to  me  at  Cambridge  some  time  ago,
probably  about  ten  years,  that  Prof.  Miller  had  made  an  experiment

102  LECTURE IX. PART I.

:\rolar.  testing  to  a  very  high  degree  of  accuracy  the  agreement  of  the
double  dark  line  D  of  the  solar  spectrum,  with  the  double  bright
line  constituting  the  spectrum  of  the  spirit  lamp  with  salt.  I
remarked  that  there  must  be  some  physical  connection  between
two  agencies  presenting  so  marked  a  characteristic  in  common.
He  assented,  and  said  he  believed  a  mechanical  explanation  of
the  cause  was  to  be  had  on  some  such  principle  as  the  following: —
Vapour  of  sodium  must  possess  by  its  molecular  structure  a  ten-
dency to  vibrate  in  the  periods  corresponding  to  the  degrees  of
refrangibility  of  the  double  line  D.  Hence  the  presence  of  sodium
in  a  source  of  light  must  tend  to  originate  light  of  that  quality.
On  the  other  hand,  vapour  of  sodium  in  an  atmosphere  round  a
source  must  have  a  great  tendency  to  retain  in  itself,  i.e.  to  absorb,
and  to  have  its  temperature  raised  by,  light  from  the  source,  of
the  precise  quality  in  question.  In  the  atmosphere  around  the
sun,  therefore,  there  must  be  present  vapour  of  sodium,  which,
according  to  the  mechanical  explanation  thus  suggested,  being
particularly  opaque  for  light  of  that  quality  prevents  such  of  it  as
is  emitted  from  the  sun  from  penetrating  to  any  considerable
distance  through  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  The  test  of  this
theory  must  be  had  in  ascertaining  whether  or  not  vapour  of
sodium  has  the  special  absorbing  power  anticipated.  I  have  the
impression  that  some  Frenchman  did  make  this  out  by  experiment,
but  I  can  find  no  reference  on  the  point.

"  I  am  not  sure  whether  Prof.  Stokes'  suggestion  of  a  me-
chanical theory  has  ever  appeared  in  print.  I  have  given  it  in
my  lectures  regularly  for  many  years,  always  pointing  out  along
with  it  that  solar  and  stellar  chemistry  were  to  be  studied  by
investigating  terrestrial  substances  giving  bright  lines  in  the
spectra  of  artificial  flames  corresponding  to  the  dark  lines  of  the
solar  and  stellar  spectra*."

*  [The  following  is  a  note  appended  by  Prof.  Stokes  to  his  translation  of  a  paper
by  Kirchhoff  in  Fhil.  Mag.,  March  1860,  p.  196: — "The  remarkable  phenomenon
discovered  by  Foucault,  and  rediscovered  and  extended  by  Kii-chhoff,  that  a  body
may  be  at  the  same  time  a  source  of  Ught  giving  out  rays  of  a  definite  refrangibility,
and  an  absorbing  medium  extinguishing  rays  of  the  same  refrangibility  which
traverse  it,  seems  readily  to  admit  of  a  dynamical  illustration  borrowed  fi'om  sound.
We  know  that  a  stretched  string  which  on  being  struck  gives  out  a  certain  note
(suppose  its  fundamental  note)  is  capable  of  being  tin-own  into  the  same  state  of
vibration  by  aerial  vibrations  corresponding  to  the  same  note.  Suppose  now  a  por-
tion of  space  to  contain  a  great  number  of  such  stretched  strings  forming  thus  the

sellmeier's  dynamics  of  anomalous  dispersion. 103

What  I  have  read  thus  far  is  with  reference  not  to  the  Molar,
origin  of  spectrum  analysis,  but  to  the  definite  point,  of  Stokes'
suggested  dynamics  of  absorption.  There  is  no  hint  there  of  the
effect  of  the  reaction  of  the  vibrating  particles  in  the  luminiferous
ether  in  the  way  of  affecting  the  velocity  of  the  propagation  of
the  liofht  through  it.  Sellmeier's  first  title  has  reference  to  that
effect ;  he  explains  ordinary  refraction  through  the  inertia  of
these  jDarticles  and  he  shows  how,  when  the  light  is  nearly  of  the
period  corresponding  to  any  of  the  fundamental  periods  of  the
embedded  vibrators,  there  will  be  anomalous  dispersion.  He  gives
a  mathematical  investigation  of  the  subject,  not  altogether  satis-
factory, perhaps,  but  still  it  seems  to  me  to  formulate  a  most
valuable  step  towards  a  wholly  satisfactory  treatment  of  the  thing.
Lord  Rayleigh,  Helmholtz  and  others  have  quoted  Sellmeier.
Lommel  begins  afresh,  I  think,  but  he  notices  Sellmeier  also,  so
the  idea  must  have  originated  with  Sellmeier,  and  it  seems  to  me
a  very  important  new  departure  with  respect  to  the  dynamical
explanation  of  light.

Ten  minutes  interval.
Now,  let  us  look  at  this  problem  of  vibrating  particles  once  Molecular,
more.  I  have  a  little  exercise  to  propose  for  the  ideal  arithmetical
laboratory.  Just  try  the  arithmetical  work  for  this  problem  for
7  particles.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  will  work  out  well  or  not.
I  have  not  the  time  to  do  it  myself,  but  perhaps  some  of  you  may
find  the  time,  and  be  interested  enough  in  the  thing,  to  do  it.
Take  the  m'^  in  order,  proceeding  by  ratios  of  4 ;  and  the  c's  in
order,  proceeding  by  differences  of  1  :

Wj,  m.^,  m^,  m^,  m^,  m^,  m^  =  1,  4,  16,  64,  256,  1024,  4096,
Ci-  c.,,  C3,  c^,  Cj,  Cg,  c,,  C3=  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8.

There  will  be  7  roots  to  find  by  trial.  I  would  like  to  have
some  of  you  try  to  find  some  of  these,  if  not  all ;  also  the  energy
ratios. You  will  probably  find  it  an  advantage  in  the  calculation

if  you  proceed  thus  :  put  -^=  z,  and  by  " roots  "  let  us  understand

analogue  of  a  "medium."  It  is  evident  that  such  a  medium,  on  being  agitated,
would  give  out  the  note  above  mentioned,  while  on  the  other  hand,  if  that  note  were
sounded  in  air  at  a  distance,  the  incident  vibrations  would  throw  the  strings  into
vibration  and  consequently  would  themselves  be  gradually  extinguished  since  other-
wise there  would  be  a  creation  of  vis  viva.  The  optical  application  of  this  illustra-
tion is  too  obvious  to  need  comment. — G.  G.  S." H.]

104  LECTURE IX. PART II.

Molecular,  values  of  z,  making  |  =  0,  which  implies,  and  is  secured  by,  ii^  =  0.
We  have

a^  =  z  —  S, a^  =  4!Z-5, a^  =  16z  —  7, a^  =  64^  -  9,

a^=2o6z-ll, ae=  1024^-13, a,  =  4096^-15.

You  will  have  to  take  values  of  z  by  trial  until  you  get  near  a
root.  The  convergence  of  the  continued  fraction  (p.  39)  will  be
so  rapid  that  you  will  have  very  little  trouble  in  getting  the
largest  roots.  Begin  then  with  the  largest  2^-root,  corresponding
to  the  shortest  of  the  critical  periods  t,  and  proceed  downwards,
according  to  the  indications  of  pp.  55 — 58.  In  the  course  of
the  process,  you  will  have  the  whole  series  of  the  w's  for  each
root ;  by  multiplying  these  in  order,  you  have  the  xs  for  each  par-
ticular root,  and  then  you  can  calculate  the  energy  ratios  for  each
root.  We  shall  then  be  able  to  put  our  formula  into  numbers ;  and
I  feel  that  I  understand  it  much  better  when  I  have  an  example
of  it  in  numbers  than  when  it  is  merely  in  a  symbolic  form.

I  want  to  show  you  now  the  explanation  of  ordinary  refraction.
Let  us  go  back  to  our  supposition  of  spherical  shells,  or,  if  you  like,
our  rude  mechanical  model.  Suppose  an  enormous  number  of
spherical  cavities  distributed  equally  through  the  space  we  are  con-
cerned with.  Let  the  quantity  of  ether  thus  displaced  be  so
exceedingly  small  in  proportion  to  the  whole  volume  that  the
elastic  action  of  the  residue  will  not  be  essentially  altered  by  that.
These  suppositions  are  perfectly  natural.  Now,  what  is  unnatural
mechanically,  is,  that  we  suppose  a  massless  rigid  spherical  lining  to
this  spherical  cavity  in  the  luminiferous  ether  connected  with  an
interior  rigid  massive  shell,  m^,  by  springs — in  the  first  place
symmetrical.  We  shall  try  afterwards  to  see  if  we  cannot  do  some-
thing in  the  way  of  aeolotropy ;  but  as  I  have  said  before  I  do  not
see  the  way  out  of  the  difficulties  yet.  In  the  meantime,  let  us
^•'-'"^■^-"v,^^  suppose  this  first  shell  m^  to
?^\Sericlf'cavl?^Sj /A^i;^ be  isotropically  connected  by

luminiferous  ether.  )  / /  ^r^^^^  \ \  •  •,i .i  • -j i n

L  I  t ^ \  \ \ springs  With  the  rigid  shell

Shell  No.  1,  mi  p.  Pg  J  /  7 liiiiiig  of  the  spherical  cavity

Shell  No.  2,  m.  Va^^.^-^^  / i^  the  ctlier. When  I  say

\^^[^[^^]^^^^^  isotropically  connected  I
mean  distinctly  this:  that  if  you  draw  this  first  shell  m^  aside
through  a  certain  distance  in  any  direction,  and  hold  it  so,  the

DYNAMICAL EXPLANATION OF ORDINARY REFRACTION. 105

required  force  will  be  independent  of  the  direction  of  the  displace-  Molecular.
ment.  Certain  springs  in  the  drawing — the  smallest  number
would  be  three — placed  around  in  proper  positions  will  rudely
represent  the  proper  connections  for  us.  Similarly,  let  there
be  another  shell  here,  m^,  in  the  interior  of  u\,  isotropically
connected  with  it  by  springs ;  and  so  on.

This  is  the  simplest  mechanical  representation  we  can  give  of  a
molecule  or  an  atom,  imbedded  in  the  luminiferous  ether,  unless
we  suppose  the  atom  to  be  absolutely  hard,  which  is  out  of  the
question.  If  we  pass  from  this  problem  to  a  problem  in  which  we  :j  ^^
shall  have  continuous  elastic  denser  matter  instead  of  a  series  of
connections  of  associated  particles,  we  shall  be,  of  course,  much
nearer  the  reality.  But  the  consideration  of  a  group  of  particles
has  great  advantage,  for  we  are  more  familiar  with  common  algebra
than  with  the  treatment  of  partial  differential  equations  of  the
second  order  with  coefficients  not  constant,  but  functions  of  the
independent  variable, — which  are  the  equations  we  have  to  deal
with  if  we  take  a  continuous  elastic  molecule,  instead  of  one  made
up  of  masses  connected  by  springs  as  we  have  been  supposing.

Let  us  suppose  the  diameters  of  these  spherical  cavities  to  be
exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave  length.  Practically
speaking,  we  suppose  our  structure  to  be  infinitely  fine-grained.
That  will  not  in  the  least  degree  prevent  its  doing  what  we  want.
The  distance  also  from  one  such  cavity,  containing  within  it  a
series  of  shells,  to  another  such  cavity,  in  the  luminiferous  ether,  is
to  be  exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave  length,  so
that  the  distribution  of  these  molecules  through  the  ether  leaves
us  with  a  body  which  is  homogeneous  when  viewed  on  so  coarse  a
scale  as  the  wave  length ;  but  it  is,  if  you  like,  heterogeneous
when  viewed  with  a  microscope  that  will  show  us  the  millionth  or
million-millionth  of  a  wave  length.  This  idea  has  a  great  advan-
tage over  Cauchy's  old  method,  in  allowing  an  infinitely  fine-
grainedness  of  the  structure,  instead  of  being  forced  to  suppose
that  there  are  only  several  molecules,  ten  or  twelve,  to  the  wave
length,  as  we  are  obliged  to  do  in  getting  the  explanation  of
refraction  by  Cauchy's  method.

I  wish  to  show  you  the  effect  of  molecules  of  the  kind  now
assumed  upon  the  velocity  of  light  passing  through  the  medium.

Let  -~  denote  the  sum  of  all  the  masses  of  shells  No.  1  m  any
47r

106  LECTURE IX. PART II.

Molecular,  volume  divided  by  the  volume;  let  j- ^  denote  the  sum  of  the  masses

of  No.  2  interior  shell  in  any  volume  divided  by  the  volume ;  and
so  on.  We  will  not  put  down  the  equations  of  motion  for  all
directions,  but  simply  take  the  equations  corresponding  to  a  set  of
plane  waves  in  which  the  direction  of  the  vibration  is  parallel  to
OX,  and the direction of  the propagation is parallel to OY.

If  we  denote  by  -~,^  the  density  of  the  vibrating  medium,  (I  am

taking  -—^  instead  of  the  usual  p  for  the  reason  you  know,  viz. :  to

get rid of  the factor 47r^ resulting  from differentiation). Let

——J,, (instead of n as formerly,) denote the rigidity of the

luminiferous  ether.  The  dynamical  equation  of  motion  of  the  ether
and  embedded  cavity-linings  will  clearly  be

For  waves  of  period  T,  we  have  f  =  const.  Jf  sin  27r  [  -  —  ^J .

The  second  differential  coefficients  of  this  with  respect  to  t  and  cc

f  47r^

r2  ^>  — rs"  f  respectively. Ther
A,

I /. x,\ ^  . ^  ^r

47r^  4'7r^

will  be  — ^2  ^y  — ^2"  f  respectively. Therefore  our  equation  be-

1  A,

comes  7^2  =  r-2  +  Cj  ( 1  —  -^  j . Let  us  find  — ^ ,  which  is  the  reciprocal

of  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  propagation. You  may  write  it-j
if  you  like,  or  fi^,  the  square  of  the  refractive  index. We  have,

r 1

Substitute  our  value  (Lecture  VII.)  for  —  xj^-,
and  this  becomes

)

This  is  the  expression  for  the  square  of  the  refractive  index  as
it  is  affected  by  the  presence  of  molecules  arranged  in  the  Avay  we

DYNAMICAL EXPLANATION OF ORDINARY REFRACTION. 107

have  supposed.  It  is  too  late  to  go  into  this  for  interpretation  Molecular,
just  now,  but,  I  will  tell  you  that  if  you  take  T  considerably  less
than  /Cj,  and  very  much  greater  than  k.^,  you  will  get  a  formula
with  enough  of  disposable  constants  to  represent  the  index  of
refraction  by  an  empirical  formula,  as  it  were;  which,  from  what  we
know,  and  what  Sellmeier  and  Ketteler  have  shown,  we  can  accept
as  ample  for  representing  the  refractive  index  of  ordinary  trans-
parent substances.

We  shall  look  into  this  farther,  a  little  later,  and  I  will  point
out  the  applications  to  anomalous  dispersion.  We  must  think  a
good  deal  of  what  can  become  of  vibrations  in  a  system  of  that
kind  when  the  period  of  the  vibration  of  the  luminiferous  ether
is  approximately  equal  to  any  one  of  the  fundamental  periods  that
the  internal  complex  molecule  could  have  were  the  shell  lining  in
the  ether  held  absolutely  at  rest.

LECTURE X.

Thursday,  October  9,  5  p.m.

We  shall  now  think  a  little  about  the  propagation  of  waves
with  a  view  to  the  question,  what  is  the  result  as  regards  waves
at  a  distance  from  the  source,  the  source  itself  being  discontinuous
in  its  action.  In  the  first  place,  we  will  take  our  expression  for  a
plane  wave.  The  factor  in  our  formulas  showing  diminution  of
amplitude  at  a  distance  from  a  source  does  not  have  effect
when  we  come  to  consider  plane  waves.  So  we  just  take  the
simple  expression  for  plane  harmonic  waves  propagated  along  the
axis  of  y  with  velocity  v ;

^  =  a  cos  -z—{y  —  vt).

Let  us  consider  this  question: — what  is  the  work  done  per
period  by  the  elastic  force  in  any  plane  perpendicular  to  the  line
of  propagation  of  the  wave.  We  shall  think  of  the  answer  to
that  question  with  the  view  to  the  consideration  of  the  possibility
of  a  series  of  waves  advancing  through  space  previously  quiescent.
Suppose  I  draw  a  straight  line  here  for  the  line  of  propagation
and  let  this  curve  represent  a  succession  of  waves  travelling  from
left to right and penetrating into an  elastic solid previously

JET

It

quiescent.  Take  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  propa-
gation of  the  waves,  and  think  of  the  work  done  by  the  elastic
solid  upon  one  side  of  this  plane  upon  the  clastic  solid  on  the

ENERGY OF WAVES.  109

other  side,  in  the  course  of  a  period  in  the  vibration.  We  shall  Molar,
take  an  expression  for  the  tangential  force  in  the  plane  XOZ,
and  in  the  direction  OX,  which  we  denote  by  T  (according
to  our  old  notation  of  *Si,  T,  U,  P,  Q,  R).  We  shall  virtually  in-
vestigate here  the  formula  for  the  propagation  of  the  wave  in-
dependently of  our  general  formula  in  three  dimensions.  Taking
T  to  denote  the  tangential  force  of  the  elastic  medium  on  the  one
side  of  the  plane  XOZ,  the  downward  direction  of  the  arrow-head
which  I  draw  being  that  direction  in  which  the  medium  on  the
left  pulls  the  medium  on  the  right,  I  put  infinitely  near  that  in
the  medium  on  the  right  another  arrow-head.  Imagine  for  the
moment  a  split  in  the  medium  to  indicate  the  reaction  which  the
medium  on  the  right  exerts  on  the  medium  on  the  left  by  this
plane ;  and  imagine  the  medium  on  the  left  taken  away,  and  that
you  act  upon  the  plane  boundary  of  the  medium  on  the  right,
with  the  same  force  as  in  the  continuous  propagation  of  waves.
The  medium  upon  the  left  acts  in  this  way  upon  the  plane  inter-
face : — that  is  an  easy  enough  conception.  I  correctly  represent
it  in  my  diagram  by  an  arrow-head  pointing  down  infinitely  near
to  the  plane  on  the  left-hand  side.  The  displacement  of  the
medium  is  determined  by  a  distortion  from  a  square  figure  to  an
oblique  figure,  and  there  is  no  inconsistency  in  putting  into  this

little  diagram  an  exaggeration  of  the  obliquity,  so  as  to

Ir'''  || show  the  direction  of  it. The  force  required  to  do  that

.,-- is  clearly  as  our  diagram  lies,  upward  on  the  right  and

downward  on  the  left.
Let  us  consider  now  the  work  done  by  that  force. Calling
^  the  displacement  of  a  particle  from  its  mean  position, T.  |  is

the  work  done  by  that  tangential  force  per  unit  of  time. —  is

the  shearing  strain  experienced  in  the  medium  so  that

n$  =  -T.
dy

In  this  particular  position  which  we  have  taken,  ^  increases  with  y
so  that  the  sign  minus  is  correct  according  to  the  arrow  heads.

Let  there  be  simple  harmonic  waves  propagated  from  left  to
right  with  velocity  v. This  is  the  expression  for  it

indicating  |  =  ^  cos  —  {y  —  vt)

110

LECTURE X. PART I.

Hence,

j: 27r . d^ 27r
^ X ^ dy \

and  the  rate  of  doing  work  is

— -^  a  vn  sm  q.
A,

a  sm  q  ;

That  is  the  rate  at  which  this  plane,  working  on  the  elastic  solid
on  the  right-hand  side  of  it,  does  work  ("per  unit  area  of  the
plane"  understood).  Multiply  this  by  dt  and  integrate  through
a  period  t  =  X/v. Now

/•t  frl  f'^l  1

I sin^  qdt  =1 ^  (1  —  cos  2q)  dt=  \ ^  dt  =  g  r.

The  rate  of  doing  work  then,  per  period,  is

27r'' „  27r^a^n

X^  X

If  it  is  possible  for  a  set  of  waves  to  advance  uniformly  into
space  previously  undisturbed,  then  it  is  certain  that  the  work  done
per  period  must  be  equal  to  the  energy  in  the  medium  per  wave
length. Let  us  then  work  out  the  energy  per  wave  length.

It  is  easily  proved  that,  in  waves  in  a  homogeneous  elastic
solid,  the  energy  is  half  potential  of  elastic  stress,  and  half  kinetic
energy ;  and  it  will  shorten  the  matter,  simply  to  calculate  the
kinetic  energy  and  double  it,  taking  that  as  the  energy  in  the
medium  per  wave  length. In  our  notation  of  yesterday,  we  took

J'-r,  as  the  density. Multiply  this  by  dy,  to  get  the  mass  of  an

infinitesimal  portion  (per  unit  of  area  in  the  plane  of  the  wave).
The  kinetic  energy  of  this  mass  is

Integrating  this  through  a  wave  length,  and  doubling  it  so  as  to

-I  2 2

get  the  whole  energy,  we  have  - . Compare  that  with  the

Ij X

1  a^  I

work  done  per  period,  viz.  -  —  /,  if  j— 2  denote  as  yesterday  the

rigidity  instead  of  n. We  see  that  they  are  equal,  because  (velocity

ENERGY OF WAVES.  Ill

of  propagation)  v  =  a  /  -  as  we  find  from  the  elementary  equation  Molar.

r

of  the  wave  motion,

df p  dif '

Thus  the  work  done  per  period  is  equal  to  the  energy  per  wave
length.

This  agrees  with  what  we  know  from  the  ordinary  general
solution  of  the  equation  of  motion  by  arbitrary  functions  that  it
is  possible  for  a  discontinuous  series  of  waves  to  be  propagated
into  the  elastic  medium,  previously  quiescent : — and  is  coex-
tensive with  the  case  of  velocity  of  propagation  independent  of
wave  length,  for  a  regular  simple  harmonic  endless  succession  of
waves.  But  if  our  present  energy  equation  did  not  verify,  it
would  be  impossible  to  have  a  discontinuous  series  of  waves
propagated  forward  without  change  of  form  into  a  medium
previously  quiescent.  I  wanted  to  verify  the  energy  equation  for
the  case  of  the  homogeneous  elastic  solid,  because  we  are  con-
cerned with  a  case  in  which  this  is  not  verified ;  that  is  to  say,
when  we  put  in  our  molecules.  In  this  case,  the  work  done  per
period  is  less  than  the  energy  in  the  medium  per  wave  length,
and  therefore  it  is  impossible  for  the  waves  to  advance  without
change  of  form.

Before  we  go  on  to  that,  let  us  stay  a  little  longer  in  a
homogeneous  elastic  solid,  and  look  at  the  well-known  solution  by
discontinuous  functions. The  equation  of  motion  is

P  df~ df  '

Although  I  said  I  would  not  formally  prove  this  now,  it  is  in
reality  proved  by  our  old  equation

I  took  the  liberty  of  asking  Professor  Ball  two  days  ago  whether
he  had  a  name  for  this  symbol  y^;  and  he  has  mentioned  to  me
nabla,  a  humorous  suggestion  of  Maxwell's.  It  is  the  name  of  an
Egyptian  harp,  which  was  of  that  shape.  I  do  not  know  that
it  is  a  bad  name  for  it.  Laplacian  I  do  not  like  for  several  reasons
both  historical  and  phonetic.  [Jan.  22,  1892.  Since  1884  I  have
found  nothing  better,  and  I  now  call  it  Laplacian.]

112  LECTURE X. PART I.

I  should  have  told  you  that  this  is  the  case  of  a  plane  wave
propagated  in  the  direction  of  OY,  with  the  plane  of  the  wave
parallel  to  XZ;  for  which  case, nahla  of  ^  (that  is  to  say  y^^)

becomes  simply  ,  \ .  The  time-honored  solution  of  this  equa-
tion is

^=f(y-vt)  +  F(ij  +  vt),

where  f  and  F  are  arbitrary  functions.  You  can  verify  that  by
differentiation.  This  solution  in  arbitrary  functions  proves  that  a
discontinuous  series  of  waves  is  possible  ;  and  knowing  that  a  discon-
tinuous series  is  possible,  you  could  tell  without  working  it  out,  that
the  work  done  per  period  by  the  medium  on  the  one  side  of  the
plane  which  you  take  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  propagation
must  be  equal  to  the  energy  of  the  medium  per  wave  length.

Before  passing  on  to  the  energy  solution  for  the  case  in  which
we  have  attached  molecules,  in  which  this  equality  of  energy  and
work  does  not  hold,  with  the  result  that  you  cannot  get  the
discontinuous  single  pulse  or  sequence  of  pulses,  I  want  to  suggest
another  elementary  exercise  for  the  anticipated  arithmetical  labo-
ratory. It  is  to  illustrate  the  propagation  of  waves  in  a  medium
in  which  the  velocity  is  not  independent  of  the  wave  length,  and
to  contrast  that  with  the  propagation  of  waves  when  the  velocity
is  independent  of  the  wave  length  in  order  that  you  may  feel
for  yourselves  what  these  two  or  three  symbols  show  us,  but  which
we  need  to  look  at  from  a  good  many  points  of  view  before  we
can  make  it  our  own,  and  understand  it  thoroughly. To  realize

that  this  equation  -~  =  const,  x ,--2  gives  us  constant  velocities

for  all  wave  lengths,  and  that  constant  velocities  for  all  wave
lengths  implies  this  equation,  and  to  see  that  that  goes  along  with
the  propagation  of  a  discontinuous  pulsation  without  change  of
figure,  or  a  discontinuous  succession  of  pulsations  without  change
of  character,  I  want  an  illustration  of  it,  by  the  consideration  of  a
case  in  which  the  condition  of  constancy  of  velocity  for  different
wave  lengths  is  not  fulfilled.

1  ask  you  first  to  notice  the  formula

1  (  1 _  g2N

S=^ — 1^  ^ .,  =^ +  ecos<7  +  e'* cos  27-1- ...

1  —  2e  cos  q  +  e

ENERGY OF WAVES.

113

which is familiar  to  all  mathematical  readers  as leading  up to  Molar.
Fourier's  harmonic  series  of  sines  and  cosines. It  is  proved  by
taking

2  cos  5  =  €'9  +  e-'?,

and  resolving  ^S'  into  two  partial  fractions.  Poisson  and  others*
make  this  series  the  foundation  of  a  demonstration  of  Fourier's
theorem. If  e  <  1  the  series  is  convergent ;  when  e  =  1  it  ceases

to  converge.  If  we  take  q  =  ^^-^  and  draw  the  curve  whose  de-
pendent coordinate  is  x  =  S,  what  have  we  ?

Take  t  =  0  and  measure  off  lengths  from  the  origin
2/  =  a, 2a,  ...
The  curve  represented  will  be  this  (heavy  curve).

The  heavy  curve  is
X  =

28

{a  =  l,  e  =  i).

5  —  3  cos  27rj/

It  is  here  drawn  by  the  points

{y,x)  =  iO,l),{h^)AhU(hi),
and  symmetrical  continuation.

The  dotted  curve  is

3/2

X  =

(a  =  l,  e  =  i).

5  —  4  cos  27ry
It  is  here  drawn  by  the  points

(y,  ^)  =  (o,  f),  (h  T^),  a,  ^),  (h,  i),

and  symmetrical  continuation.

I  want  the  arithmetical  laboratory  to  work  this  out  and  give

*  See  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,  §  77.
T.  L.  8

114

LECTURE X. PART 1,

Molar. graphic  representations  of  the  periodic  curves  for  several  different

values  of  e.  The  particular  numerical  case
that  I  am  going  to  suggest  is  one  in  which
the  curve  will  be  more  like  this  second
curve  which  I  draw ;  it  is  much  steeper
and  comes  down  more  nearly  to  zero.  Take
the  extreme  case  of  e  =  1,  and  what  happens  ?
>S'  is  infinitely  great  for  q  infinitely  small,  and
is  infinitely  small  for  all  other  values  of  q  less
than  a.  For  any  value  of  e,  the  maximum
and  minimum  ordinates  of  the  curve  (corre-
sponding respectively  to  q  =  0°,  and  q=  180°)
are

J 1  +  e 1 J 1  -  6_

9  •  ^ !  and  -g- , *

^ \-e  ^ 1  +e'

_ and  therefore  the  minimum  is

il-eri{l  +  ey

of  the  maximum. Thus,  if  for  example  we  take  e  =  '9,  we  find  the

minimum  ordinate  to  be  1/361  of  the  maximum. I  suggest,  as  a

mathematical  exercise, to  draw the curve for  this  case  by  the

finite  formula:  and,  as  an  arithmetical  exercise,  to  calculate  as

many  as  you  please  of  the  ordinates  by  the  series. You  will  find

its  convergence  tediously  slow.

[(•9)«  =  -0108,  (-9)^^  =  -0097]:
you  must  take  more  than  43  or  44  terms  to  reach  an  accuracy  of
one  per  cent,  in  the  result. So  I  do  not  think  you  will  be  inclined
to  calculate  very  many  of  the  ordinates  by  the  series.

I  would  also  advise  those  who  have  time  to  read  Poisson's  and
Cauchy's  great  papers  on  deep-sea  waves.  (Poisson's  Memoire  sur
la  theorie  des  ondes.  Paris,  Mem.  Acad.  Sci.  i.,  1816,  pp.  71 — 186  ;
Annal.  de  Chemie,  v.,  1817,  pp.  122 — 142.  Cauchy,  Memoire  sur  la
theorie  de  la  propagation  des  ondes  a  la  surface  d'nn  fluide  pesant
d'une  profondeur  indefinie  [1815],  Paris,  Mem.  Sav.  Strang,  i.,
1827,  pp.  3 — 312.)  Those  papers  are  exceedingly  fine  pieces  of
true  mathematics ;  and  they  are  very  strong.  But  you  might
have  the  hydrodynamical  beginnings  presented  much  more  fasci-
natingly. If  you  know  the  elementary  theory  of  deep-sea  waves,
well  and  good :  then  take  Poisson  and  Cauchy  for  the  higher
analytical treatment. Those  who do not know the theory  of

ENERGY OF WAVES.  115

deep-sea  waves  may  read  it  up  in  elementary  books. The  best  ^^<^l^r •  ^^"

. .  gression,

text-books  I  know  for  Hydrokinetics  are  Besant's  and  Lamb's. Deep-sea

The  great  struggle  of  1815,  not  that  fought  out  on  the  plains  "^^^^•
of  Belgium,  was,  Avho  was  to  rule  the  waves,  Cauehy  or  Poisson.
Their  memoirs  seem  to  me  of  very  nearly  equal  merit.  I  have  no
doubt  the  judges  had  good  reason  for  giving  the  award  to  Cauehy,
but  Poisson's  paper  also  is  splendid.  I  can  see  that  the  two  writers
respected  each  other  very  much,  and  I  suppose  each  thought  the
other's  work  as  good  as  his  own  (?  and  sometimes  better  !).

The  problem  which  they  solve  is  this,  in  their  high  analytical
style :  Every  portion  of  an  infinite  area  of  water  is  started  initially
with  an  arbitrarily  stated  infinitesimal  displacement  from  the
level  and  an  arbitrarily  stated  velocity  up  or  down  from  the  level,
and  the  inquiry  is,  what  will  be  the  result  ?  It  is  obvious  that
3^ou  have  the  solution  of  that  problem  from  the  more  elementary
problem,  what  is  the  result  of  an  infinitesimal  displacement  at
a  single  point,  such  as  may  be  produced  by  throwing  a  stone
into  water  ?  Let  a  solid,  say,  cause  a  depression  in  any  place,  the
velocity  of  the  solid  performing  the  part  of  giving  velocity  and
displacement  to  the  surface  of  the  water :  then  consider  the  solid
suddenly  annulled.  The  same  thing  in  two  dimensions  is  exceed-
ingly simple.  Take,  for  example,  waves  in  an  infinitely  deep
canal  with  vertical  sides.  Take  a  sudden  disturbance  in  the  canal,
equal  over  all  its  breadth,  and  inquire  what  will  the  result  be  ?

I  wish  now  to  help  you  toward  an  understanding  of  Cauchy's
and  Poisson's  solutions.  They  only  give  symbols  and  occasionally
numerical  results  :  they  do  not  give  any  diagi'ams  or  graphical  repre-
sentations ;  and  I  think  it  would  repay  any  one  who  is  inclined  to  go
into  the  subject  to  work  it  out  with  graphic  representations  thus  : —
first  I  must  tell  you  that  the  elementary  Hydrokinetic  solution  for
deep-sea  waves  is  simply  a  set  of  waves,  or  a  set  of  standing  vibra-
tions (take  which  you  please):  the  propagational  velocity  of  the  waves

being  f.  hL- ■,  and  therefore  for  different  waves  directly  propor-
tional to  the  square  root  of  the  wave-length  ;  and  the  vibrational

,  also

y

directly  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  wave-length.
Thus,  so  far  as  concerns  only  the  varying  shape  of  the  disturbed
water  surface,  the  whole  result  of  the  elementary  Hydrokinetics  of

8—2

no  LECTURE X. PART T.

Molar :  Di-  deep-sea Ava ve-motion is expressed by one or other of  these

gression,  ^ .  .  ^  ''

Deep-sea equations  which  1  write  down  ; —

, 27r  / _  , /^M  ,  sin  Stt?/  sin  , /^Trr/

X  =  /'  cos  — ?/  +  ^  ,  /  i^ ; or  x  =  h — -^ ^  ^  / — ^  .
X V  V 27r/  cos \ cos V X

Superposition  of  two  motions  represented  by  either  formula
gives  a  specimen  of  single  motion  represented  by  the  other,  as  you
all  know  well  by  your  elementary  trigonometry.

And  now,  in  respect  to  Poisson's  and  Cauchy's  gi-eat  mathe-
matical work  on  deep-sea  waves,  it  will  be  satisfactory  to  you
to  know  that  it  consists  merely  in  the  additions  of  samples
represented  by  whichever  of  these  formulas  you  please  to  take.
The  simple  formula,  or  summation  of  it  with  different  values  of  h
and  \,  represents  waves  with  straight  ridges,  or  generally  straight
lines  of  equal  displacement :  or,  as  we  may  call  it,  two-dimensional
wave-motion.  Every  possible  case  of  three-dimensional  wave-
motion  (including  the  circular  waves  produced  by  throwing  a
stone  into  water)  is  represented  by  summation  of  the  samples  of
the  formula,  as  it  stands,  and  with  z  substituted  for  y ;  y  and  z
representing  Cartesian  coordinates  in  the  horizontal  plane  of  the
undisturbed  water-surface,  and  x  representing  elevation  of  the
disturbed  water-surface  above  this  plane.

And  now,  confining  ourselves  to  the  two-dimensional  wave-
motion,  I  suggest  to  our  arithmetical  laboratory,  to  calculate  and
draw  the  curve  represented  by

s  =  -|  4-  e  cos q■^  +  e"  cos  2^2  +  e^  cos  3^3  -\-  ...  &  cos  iqi  +  ...

where  qi=  —  {y  —  Vjt)  ; with  Vi=  -p.

Calculate  the  curve  corresponding  to  any  values  you  please  of
e  and  of  t.  Also  calculate  and  draw  curves  representing  the  sum
of  values  of  s  with  equal  positive  and  negative  values  of  vi.

I  suggest  particularly  that  you  should  perform  this  last
described  calculation  for  the  cases,  e=^  and  e  =  ^.  You  have
already  the  curves  for  ^  =  0  in  these  cases  shown  on  the  diagram
of  page  113,  and  you  will  find  it  interesting  to  work  out,  in  con-
siderable detail,  curves  for  other  values  of  t  which  you  can  do
without  inordinately  great  labour,  as  the  series  are  very  rapidly
convergent.  You  will  thus  have  graphic  repi-esentations  of  the
two-dimensional  case  of  Cauchy  and  Poisson's  problem  for  infinitely
deep  water  between  two  fixed  parallel  vertical  planes.

ENERGY OF WAVES.  Il7

Lastly,  I  may  say that  if there are  some  among you who  Molar:  Di-
will  not  shrink  from  the  labour  of  calculating  and  adding  forty  or  fJeep-sea
fifty  terms  of  the  series,  I  advise  you  to  do  the  same  for  e  =  '9 ;  Waves.
and you will  have splendid  graphical  illustrations of the two-
dimensioual  problem of deep-sea waves initiated by a single
disturbance  along  an  endless  straight  line  of  water. If  you  do  so,
or  if  you  spend  a  quarter-of-an-hour  in  planning  to  begin  doing  so,
you  will  learn  to  thank  Cauchy  and  Poisson  for  their  magnificent
mathematical  treatment  of their  problem  by  definite  integrals,
and  for  their  results  from  which,  with  very  moderate  labour,  you
may  calculate  the  answer  to  any  particular  question  that  may  be
reasonably  put  with  reference  to  the  subject ;  and  may  work  out
very  thorough  graphical  illustrations  of  all  varieties  of  the  problem
of  deep-sea  waves*.

We  are  going  to  take  our  molecules  again,  and  put  them  in  the  Molecular,
ether;  and  look  at  the  question,  what  is  the  velocity  of  propagation
of  waves  through  it  under  some  suppositions  which  we  shall  make
as  to  the  masses  of  these  embedded  molecules,  and  how  much  they
will  modify  the  velocity  of  propagation  from  what  it  is  in  pure
ether.  Then  we  shall  look  at  the  matter,  with  respect  to  the
question  of  the  work  done  upon  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  line
of  propagation,  and  we  shall  see  that  the  energy  per  wave-length
is  greater  than  the  work  done  per  period,  and  that  therefore  it  is
impossible  under  these  conditions  for  waves  to  advance  uniformly
into  space  previously  occupied  by  quiescent  matter.

You  wall  find,  in  Lord  Rayleigh's  book  on  sound,  the  question
of  the  work  done  per  period,  and  the  energy  per  wave  length,  gone
into :  and  the  application  of  this  principle,  with  respect  to  the
possibility  of  independent  suites  of  waves  travelling  without  change
of  form,  thorovighly  explained.

To-morrow  we  shall  consider  investigations  respecting  the
difference  of  velocity  of  propagation  in  different  directions  in  an
aeolotropic  elastic  solid,  for  the  foundation  of  the  explanation  of
double  refraction  on  mere  elastic  solid  idea. The  thing  is  quite

*  [Note  of  May,  1898.  For  some  of  these  see  my  papers: — "On  Stationary
Waves  in  Flowing  Water,"  Phil.  Mag.  1886,  Vol.  22,  pp.  353,  445,  517;  1887,
Vol.  23,  p.  52.  "On  the  Front  and  Rear  of  a  Free  Procession  of  Waves  in  Deep
Water,"  Phil.  Mag.  1887,  Vol.  23,  p.  113;  and,  "On  the  Waves  produced  by  a
Single  Impulse  in  Water  of  any  depth  or  in  a  Dispersive  Medium,"  Phil.  Mag.
1887,  Vol.  23,  p.  252.]

118  LECTURE X. PART II.

Molecular,  familiar  to  many  of  you,  no  doubt,  and  you  also  know  that  it  is  a
failure  in  regard  to  the  explanation  of  the  propagation  of  light  in
biaxal  crystals.  It  is,  however,  an  important  piece  of  physical
dynamics,  and  I  shall  touch  upon  it  a  little,  and  try  to  show  it  in
as  clear  a  light  as  I  can.

Ten minutes interval.

Now  for  our  proper  molecular  question.  The  distance  from
cavity  to  cavity  in  the  ether  is  to  be  exceedingly  small,  in
comparison  with  the  wave-length,  and  the  diameter  of  each
cavity  is  to  be  exceedingly  small,  in  comparison  with  the  distance
from  cavity  to  cavity.  Let  the  lining  of  the  cavity  be  an
ideal  rigid  massless  shell. Let  the  next  shell  within  be  a  rigid

shell of  mass  -t\. I represent  the  thing in  this diagram  as

T?7r

if  we  had  just  two  of  these  massive  shells
and  a  solid  nucleus.  The  enormous  mass  of
the  matter  of  the  grosser  kind  which  exists
in  the  luminiferous  ether  when  permeated
by  even  such  a  comparatively  non-dense
body  as  air,  would  bring  us  at  once  to  very
great  numbers  in  respect  to  the  masses  which
we  will  suppose  inside  this  cavity,  in  comparison  with  the  masses
of  comparable  bulks  of  the  luminiferous  ether.  If  there  is  time
to-morrow,  we  shall  look  a  little  to  the  possible  suppositions  as  to
the  density  of  the  luminiferous  ether,  and  what  limits  of  greatness
or  smallness  are  conceivable  in  respect  to  it.  At  present  we  have
enough  to  go  upon  to  let  us  see  that,  even  in  air  of  ordinary
density,  the  mass  of  air  per  cubic  centimetre  must  be  enormously
great,  in  comparison  with  the  mass  of  the  luminiferous  ether  per
cubic  centimetre.  We  must  therefore  have  something  enormously
massive  in  the  interior  of  these  cavities.  We  shall  think  a  good
deal  of  this  yet,  and  try  to  find  how  it  is  we  can  have  the  large
quantity  of  energy  that  is  necessary  to  account  for  the  heating  of
a  body  such  as  water  by  the  passage  of  light  through  it,  or  for
the  phosphorescence  of  a  body  which  is  luminous  for  several  days
after  it  has  been  excited  by  light.  I  do  not  think  we  shall  have
the  slightest  difficulty  in  explaining  these  things. These  are  not

DIFFICULTIKS IN WAVE THEORY OF LIGHT.  119

the  difficulties.  The  difficulties  of  the  wave  theory  of  light  are  Molecular,
difficulties  which  do  not  strike  the  popular  imagination  at  all.
They  are  the  difficulties  of  accounting  for  polarization  by  reflection
with  the  right  amount  of  light  retiected ;  and  of  accounting  for
double  refraction  with  the  form  of  wave-surface  guessed  by
Huyghens  and  proved  experimentally  by  Stokes.  With  the
general  character  of  the  phenomena  we  have  no  difficulty  what-
ever ;  the  great  difficulty,  in  respect  to  the  wave  theory  of  light,
is  to  bring  out  the  proper  quantities  in  the  dynamical  calculation
of  these  effects.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  explaining  the  energy  required  for
heating  a  body  by  radiant  heat  passing  through  it,  nor  how  it  is
that  it  sometimes  comes  out  as  visible  light  and,  it  may  be,  so
slowly  that  it  may  continue  appearing  as  light  for  two  or  three
days.  All  these  properties,  wonderful  as  they  are,  seem  to  come
as  a  matter  of  course  from  the  dynamical  consideration.  So  much
so  that  any  one  not  knowing  these  phenomena  would  have  dis-
covered them  on  working  out  the  subject  dynamically.  He  would
discover  anomalous  dispersion,  fluorescence,  phosphorescence,  and
the  well-knowu  visible  and  invisible  radiant  heat  of  longer  periods
emitted  by  a  body  which  has  been  heated  and  left  to  cool.  All
these  phenomena  might  have  been  discovered  by  dynamics  ;  and
a  dynamical  theory  that  discovers  what  is  afterwards  verified  by
experiment  is  a  very  estimable  piece  of  physical  dynamics.

I  speak  with  confidence  in  this  subject  because  I  am  ashamed  -/-
to  say  that  I  never  heard  of  anomalous  dispersion  until  after  I
found  it  lurking  in  the  formulas.  And,  when  I  looked  into  the
matter,  I  found  to  ray  shame  that  a  thing  which  had  been  known
by  others  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years*  I  had  not  known  until  I
found  it  in  the  dynamics.

Take  our  concluding  formula  of  yesterday  (p.  106  above),  with
some  changes  of  notation

1 e  +  ^.-  J  _  1  +  ?if  (^^  ^ + -f^^  +  &c)\ ,

^- )i n [  nil  \T^  —  K^ -r  —  k;  ))

where  ^  denotes  the  propagational  velocity  of  waves  of  period  t  ;

*  Leroux,  "Dispersion  anomale  de  la  vapeur  d'iode,"  Coviptes  Rendus,  lv.,  1862,
pp.  126—128:  Fogg.  Ann.  cxvii.,  1862,  pp.  659,  660.  Christiansen,  "Ueber  die
Brechungsverbaltnisse  einer  weingeistigen  Losung  des  Fuchsins,"  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.
cxLi,  1870,  pp.  479,  480:  Fhil.  Mag.,  xli.,  1871,  p.  244;  Annales  de  Chimie,  xxv.,
1872,  pp.  213,  214.

120  LECTURE X. PART II.

Molecular,  n,  p,  and  Till  denote  now  respectively  the  rigidity  of  the  ether,
the  mass  of  the  ether  in  unit  volume  of  space,  and  the  sum
of  the  masses  of  the  first  interior  shells  of  the  embedded
molecules  in  unit  volume  of  space ;

Ci  the  force  of  the  first  spring,  per  unit  elongation,  multiplied  by
the  number  of  molecules  embedded  in  the  ether  per  unit
volume  of  space ;

/c,  K^,  K^^,  &c.,  in  order  of  ascending  magnitude,  the  fundamental
periods  of  the  molecule  when  the  outer  shell  is  held  fixed ;

R,  R^,  R^^,  &c.,  denote  for  the  separate  fundamental  vibrations  the
ratio  of  the  energy  of  the  first  interior  shell  to  the  whole
energy  of  the  complex  vibrator.

Let  us  consider  what  the  wave-period  r  may  be  relatively  to
the  fundamental  periods  k,  k^,  k^^,  ...  of  the  vibrator  on  the  sup-
position of  the  bounding  shell  held  fixed,  to  give  us  a  good
reasonable  explanation  of  dispersion,  in  accordance  with  the  facts
of  observation  with  respect  to  the  difference  of  velocity  for
different  periods.  To  help  us  with  this  consideration,  take  our
previous  auxiliary  formulas

1 _  P  ClT- foe,  _  ^

^' n iir-'n  \  ^

k-Rt' k'^Rj'^ „ ,

where  ^  and  Xj^  denote  respectively  the  simultaneous  maximum
displacements  of  the  outermost  massless  shell  and  the  first  of  the
massive  shells  within  it.

If  T  were  less  than  the  smallest  of  the  fundamental  periods,

-^  would  be  negative,  the  wave-velocity  would  be  greater  than  in

free  ether,  and  the  refractive  index  would  be  less  than  unity.
But  in  all  known  cases  the  refractive  index  is  greater  than  unity ;

and  when  this  is  so,  -^  —  1  must  be  positive. I  want  to  see  if

we  can  get  our  formula  to  cover  a  range,  including  all  light  from
the  highest  ultra-violet  photographic  light  of  about  half  the
wave-length  of  sodium  light  down  to  the  lowest  we  know  of,
which  is  the  raeliant  heat  from  a  Leslie  cube  with  a  wave-length

REFRACTIVITY THROUGH WIDE RANGE.  121

that  I  hear  from  Prof.  Langley  since  I  spoke  to  you  on  the  Molecular,
subject  a  week  ago  is  about  -^q^xj  of  a  centimetre  or  17  times  the
wave-length  of  sodium  light.  That  will  be  a  range  of  about
forty  to  one.  The  highest  invisible  ultra-violet  light  hitherto
determined,  by  its  photographic  action,  has  a  period  about  1/40
of  the  period  of  the  lowest  invisible  radiation  of  radiant  heat  that
has  yet  been  experimented  upon.

It  is  probable  that  all  or  many  colourless  transparent  liquids
and  solids  are  mediums  for  which  throughout  every  part  of  that
range  there  are  no  anomalous  dispersions.  I  think  it  is  almost
certain  that  for  rock-salt,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  range,  there
are  no  anomalous  dispersions  at  all.  In  fact  Langley 's  experiments
on  radiant  heat  are  made  with  rock-salt ;  and  in  all  experiments
made  with  rock-salt,  it  seems  as  if  little  or  no  radiant  heat  is
absorbed  by  it.  At  all  events,  we  could  not  be  satisfied  unless  we
can  show  that  this  kind  of  supposition  will  account  for  dispersion
through  a  range  of  period  from  one  to  forty.  It  is  obvious  that
if  we  are  to  have  continuous  refraction  without  anomalous  dis-
persion through  that  wide  range  of  periods,  there  cannot  be  any
of  the  periods  k,  k^,  k,^,  ...  within  it.

To-morrow  we  shall  consider  the  case  in  which  the  wave-period
is  longer  than  the  longest  of  the  molecular  periods ;  and  we  shall
find  that  on  this  supposition  our  formula  serves  well  to  represent
all  we  have  hitherto  known  by  experiment  regarding  ordinary
dispersion.  \_Added  Jidy  7,  1898.  This  was  true  in  October  1884  ;
but  measurements  by  Langley  of  the  refractivity  of  rock-salt  for
radiant  heat  of  wave-lengths  (in  air  or  ether)  from  '43  of  a  mikron
to  5"3  miki'ons,  (the  "  mikron  "  being  lO"*^  of  a  metre  or  10""^  of  a
centimetre),  published  in  1886  {Phil.  Mag.  1886,  2nd  half-year),
showed  that  there  must  be  a  molecular  period  longer  than  that
corresponding  to  wave-length  5'3.  In  an  addition  to  Lecture
XII,  Part  II,  we  shall  see  that  subsequent  measurements  of
refractivity  by  Rubens,  Paschen,  and  others,  extend  the  range
of  ordinary  dispersion  by  rock-salt  to  wave-lengths  of  23  mikrons ;
and  give  results  in  splendid  agreement  with  our  formula,  which
is  identical  with  Sellmeier's  expression  of  his  own  original  theory,
through  a  range  of  from  '4  of  a  mikron  to  23  mikrons,  and
indicate  56  mikrons  as  being  the  probable  wave-length  of  radiant
heat  in  ether  of  which  the  period  is  a  critical  period  for  rock-salt.]

LECTUEE XI.

Friday,  October  10,  3.30  p.m.

We  shall  now  take  up  the  subject  of  an  elastic  solid  which  is
not  isotropic.  As  I  said  yesterday,  we  do  not  find  the  mere
consideration  of  elastic  solid  satisfactory  or  successful  for  explain-
ing the  properties  of  crystals  with  reference  to  light.  It  is,  how-
ever, to  my  mind  quite  essential  that  we  should  understand  all
that  is  to  be  known  about  homogeneous  elastic  solids  and  waves
in  them,  in  order  that  we  may  contrast  waves  of  light  in  a  crystal
with  waves  in  a  homogeneous  elastic  solid.

Aeolotropy  is  in  analogy  with  Cauchy's  word  isotropy  which
means  equal  properties  in  all  directions.  The  formation  of  a  word
to  represent  that  which  is  not  isotropic  was  a  question  of  some
interest  to  those  who  had  to  speak  of  these  subjects.  I  see  the
Germans  have  adopted  the  term  anisotropy.  If  we  used  this  in
English  we  should  have  to  say :  "  An  anisotropic  solid  is  not  an
isotropic  solid  "  ;  and  this  jangle  between  the  prefix  an  (privative)
and  the  article  an,  if  nothing  else,  would  prevent  us  from  adopting
that  method  of  distinguishing  a  non-isotropic  solid  from  an
isotropic  solid.  1  consulted  my  Glasgow  University  colleague
Prof.  Lushington  and  we  had  a  good  deal  of  talk  over  the  subject.
He  gave  me  several  charming  Greek  illustrations  and  wound  up
with  the  word  aeolotropy.  He  pointed  out  that  aloXo^  means
variegated;  and  that  the  Greeks  used  the  same  word  for  variegated
in  respect  to  shape,  colour  and  motion ;  example  of  this  last,  our
old  friend  " KopvOaioXo^  "EKrcop."  There  is  no  doubt  of  the
classical  propriety  of  the  word  and  it  has  turned  out  very  con-
venient in  science.  That  which  is  different  in  different  directions,
or  is  variegated  according  to  direction,  is  called  aeolotropic.

The  consequences  of  aeolotropy  upon  the  motion  of  waves,  or
the  equilibrium  of  particles,  in  an  elastic  solid  is  an  exceedingly

AEOLOTROPY  IN  AN  ELASTIC  SOLID.  123

interesting  fundamental  subject  in  physical  science ;  so  that  there  Molar.
is  no  need  for  apology  in  bringing  our  thoughts  to  it  here  except,
perhaps,  that  it  is  too  well  known.  On  that  account  I  shall  be
very  brief  and  merely  call  attention  to  two  or  three  fundamental
points.  I  am  going  to  take  up  presently,  as  a  branch  of  molar
dynamics,  the  actual  propagation  of  a  wave;  and  in  the  mathe-
matical investigation,  I  intend  to  give  you  nothing  but  what  is
true  of  the  propagation  of  a  plane  wave  in  an  elastic  solid,  not
limited  to  any  particular  condition  of  aeolotropy ;  in  an  elastic  solid,
that  is  to  say,  which  has  aeolotropy  of  the  most  general  kind.

Before  doing  that,  which  is  strictly  a  problem  of  continuous  or
molar  dynamics,  I  want  to  touch  upon  the  somewhat  cloud-land
molecular  beginning  of  the  subject,  and  refer  you  back  to  the  old
papers  of  Navier  and  Poisson,  in  which  the  laws  of  equilibrium  or
motion  of  an  elastic  solid  were  worked  out  from  the  consideration
of  points  mutually  influencing  one  another  with  forces  which  are
functions  of  the  distance.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  mathe-
matical validity  of  investigations  of  that  kind  and  of  their  interest
in  connection  with  molecular  views  of  matter;  but  we  have  long
passed  away  from  the  stage  in  which  Father  Boscovich  is  accepted
as  being  the  originator  of  a  correct  representation  of  the  ultimate
nature  of  matter  and  force.  Still,  there  is  a  never-ending  interest
in  the  definite  mathematical  problem  of  the  equilibrium  and  motion
of  a  set  of  points  endowed  with  inertia  and  mutually  acting  upon
one  another  with  any  given  forces.  We  cannot  but  be  conscious
of  the  one  splendid  application  of  that  problem  to  what  used  to  be
called  physical  astronomy  but  which  is  now  more  properly  called
dynamical  astronomy,  or  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  But
it  is  not  of  these  grand  motions  of  mutually  attracting  particles
that  we  must  now  think.  It  is  equilibriums  and  infinitesimal
motions  which  form  the  subject  of  the  special  molecular  dynamics
now  before  us.

Many  waiters  [Navier  (1827),  Poisson  (1828),  Cauchy,  F.  Neu-
mann, Saint- Venant,  and  others]  who  have  worked  upon  this
subject  have  come  upon  a  certain  definite  relation  or  set  of
relations  between  moduluses  of  elasticity  which  seemed  to  them
essential  to  the  hypothesis  that  matter  consists  of  particles  acting
upon  one  another  with  mutual  forces,  and  that  the  elasticity  of  a
solid  is  the  manifestation  of  the  forcive  required  to  hold  the
particles  displaced  infinitesimally  from  the  position  in  which  the

124  LECTURE XI.

mutual  forces  will  balance.  This,  which  is  sometimes  called
Navier's  relation,  sometimes  Poisson's  relation,  and  in  connection
with  which  we  have  the  well-known  "Poisson's  ratio,"  I  want  to
show  you  is  not  an  essential  of  the  hypothesis  in  question.  Their
supposed  result  for  the  case  of  an  isotropic  body  is  interesting,
though  now  thoroughly  disproved  theoretically  and  experimentally.
Doubtless  most  of  you  know  it ;  it  is  in  Thomson  and  Tait,  and
I  svipjjose  in  every  elementary  book  upon  the  subject.  I  will  just
repeat  it.

An  isotropic  solid,  according  to  Navier's  or  Poisson's  theory,
would  fulfil  the  following  condition  :  if  a  column  of  it  were  pulled
lengthwise,  the  lateral  dimensions  would  be  shortened  by  a
quarter  of  the  proportion  that  is  added  to  the  length ;  and  the
proportionate  reduction  of  the  cross-sectional  area  would  therefore
be  half  the  proportion  of  the  elongation.  Stokes  called  attention
to  the  viciousness  of  this  conclusion  as  a  practical  matter  in
respect  to  the  realities  of  elastic  solids.  He  pointed  out  that  jelly
and  india-rubber  and  the  like,  instead  of  exhibiting  lateral
shrinkage  only  to  the  extent  of  one  quarter  of  the  elongation,  give
really  enough  of  shrinkage  to  cause  no  reduction  in  volume  at  all.
That  is  to  say,  india-rubber  and  such  bodies  vary  the  area  of  the
cross-section  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  elongation  so  that  the
product  of  the  length  into  the  area  of  the  cross-section  remains
constant.  Thus  the  proportionate  linear  contraction  across  the
line  of  pull  is  half  the  elongation  instead  of  only  quarter  as
according  to  Navier  and  Poisson,

Stokes*  also  referred  to  a  promise  that  I  made,  I  think  it
was  in  the  year  1856,  to  the  effect  that  out  of  matter  fulfilling
Poisson's  condition  a  model  may  be  made  of  an  elastic  solid,
which,  when  the  scale  of  parts  is  sufficiently  reduced,  will  be  a
homogeneous  elastic  solid  not  fulfilling  Poisson's  condition.  That
promise  of  mine  which  was  made  30  years  ago,  I  propose  this
moment  to  fulfil,  never  having  done  so  before.

Let  this  box  help  us  to  think  of  8  atoms  placed  at  its  8
corners,  with  the  box  annulled.  The  kind  of  elastic  model  I  am
going  to  suppose  is  this :  particles  or  atoms  arranged  equidistantly
in  equidistant  parallel  rows  and  connected  by  springs  in  a  certain

*  [Report  to Brit.  Association,  Cambridge, 1862. "  Uu  JJouble  Kefraction, "
p.  262,  at  bottom.]

green's  theory  reatjsed  in  mechanicat.  model. 125

definite  way.  I  am  going  to  show  you  that  we  can  connect  Molar.
neighbouring  particles  of  a  Boscovich  elastic  solid  with  a  special
appliance  of  cord,  and  a  sufficient  number  of  springs,  to  fulfil  the
condition  of  giving  18  independent  moduluses  ;  then  by  trans-
forming the  coordinates  to  an  orientation  in  the  solid  taken  at
random,  we  get  the  celebrated  21  coefficients,  or  moduluses,  of
Green's  theory.  I  suppose  you  all  know  that  Green  took  a  short-
cut to  the  truth  ;  he  did  not  go  into  the  physics  of  the  thing  at
all,  but  simply  took  the  general  quadratic  expression  for  energy  in
terms  of  the  6  strain  components,  with  its  21  independent  coeffi-
cients, as  the  most  general  supposition  that  can  be  made  with
regard  to  an  elastic  solid.

To  make  a  model  of  a  solid  having  the  21  independent  coeffi-
cients of  Green's  theory,  think  of  how  many  disposable  springs  we
have  with  which  to  connect  8  particles  at  the  corners  of  a  parallel-
epiped. Let  them  be  connected  by  springs  first  along  the  12
edges  of  the  parallelepiped.  That  clearly  will  not  be  sufficient  to
give  any  rigidity  of  figure  whatever,  so  far  as  distortions  in  the
principal  planes  are  concerned.  These  12  springs  connecting  in
this  way  the  8  particles  would  give  resistances  to  elongations
in  the  directions  of  the  edges ;  but  no  resistance  whatever  to
obliquity ;  you  could  change  the  configuration  from  rectangular,
if  given  so  as  in  the  box  before  you,  into  an  oblique  parallelepiped,
and  alter  the  obliquity  indefinitely,  bringing  if  you  please  all
the  8  atoms  into  one  plane  or  into  one  line,  without  calling  any
resisting  forces  into  play.  What  then  must  we  have,  in  order
to  give  resistance  against  obliquity  ?  We  can  connect  particles
diagonally.  We  have  in  the  first  place,  the  two  diagonals  in  each
face  although  we  shall  see  that  the  two  will  virtually  count  as  but
one  ;  and  then  we  have  the  four  body  diagonals.

Now  let  me  see  how  many  disposables  we  have  got.  Remark
that  each  edge  is  common  to  four  parallelepipeds  of  the  Boscovich
assemblage.  Hence  we  have  only  a  quarter  of  the  number  of
the  twelve  edge  springs  independently  available.  Thus  we  have
virtually  three  disposables  from  the  edge  springs.  Each  face  is
common  to  two  parallelepipeds ;  therefore  from  the  two  diagonals
in  each  face  we  have  only  one  disposable,  making  in  the  six  faces,
six  disposables.  We  have  the  four  body  diagonals  not  common  to
any  other  parallelepipeds  and  therefore  four  disposables  fiom  them.
We  have  thus  now  13  disposables  in  the  stiffnesses  of  13  springs.

126  LECTURE XI.

And  we  have  two  more  disposables  in  the  ratios  of  edges  of
the  parallelepiped.  Lastly  we  have  three  angles  of  three  of  the
oblique  parallelograms  constituting  the  faces  of  our  oblique  parallel-
epiped. Thus  we  have  in  all  18  disposables.  But  these  18
disposables  cannot  give  us  18  independent  moduluses  because  it  is
obvious  that  they  cannot  give  us  infinite  resistance  to  compression
with  finite  isotropic  rigidity,  a  case  which  is  essentially  included
in  18  independent  moduluses.  Hence  I  must  now  find  some
other  disposable  or  disposables  that  will  enable  me  to  give  any
compressibility  I  please  in  the  case  of  an  isotropic  solid,  and  to
give  Green's  21  independent  coefficients,  for  an  aeolotropic  solid.
For  this  purpose  we  must  add  something  to  our  mechanism  that
can  make  the  assemblage  incompressible  or  give  it  any  compres-
sibility we  please ;  so  that,  for  example,  we  can  make  it  represent
either  cork  or  india-rubber,  the  extremes  in  respect  to  elasticity  of
known  natural  solids.

I  must  confess  that  since  1856  when  I  promised  this  result  I
have  never  seen  any  simple  definite  way  of  realising  it  until  a  few
months  ago  when  in  making  preparations  for  these  lectures  I
found  I  could  do  it  by  running  a  cord  twice  round  the  edges  of
our  parallelepiped  of  atoms  as  you  see  me  now  doing  on  the  model
before  you.  It  is  easier  to  do  this  thus  with  an  actual  cord  and
with  rings  fixed  at  the  eight  corners  of  a  cubic  box,  than  to
imagine  it  done.  There  is  a  vast  number  of  ways  of  doing  it :
I  cannot  tell  you  how  many,  I  wish  I  could.  It  is  a  not  unin-
teresting labyrinthine  puzzle  to  find  them  all  and  to  systematise
the  finding. You  see  now  we  are  finding  07ie  way.

Here  it  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  coordinates  of  the  corners
as  we  have  taken  them  in  succession.

(000)  (001)  (Oil)  (010)  (000)  (001)  (011)(010)(000)(100)(110)(010)
(110)(111)(011)(111)(101)(001)(101)(111)(110)(100)(101)(100)

[April  14,  1898.  For  the  accompanying  very  clear  diagram
(fig.  1)  representing  another  of  the  vast  number  of  Avays  of  laying
a  cord  round  the  edges  of  a  parallelepiped,  I  am  indebted  to
M.  Brillouin  who  has  added  abstracts  of  some  of  the  present
lectures  to  a  translation  by  M,  Lugol  of  Vol.  i.  of  my  Popular
Lectures  and  Addresses.  M.  Brillouin  describes  his  diagram  as
follows : — "  J'ai  modifie  I'ordre  indique  par  Thomson  en  permutant
le  6®  et  le  8^  sommet,  pour  que  la  corde  suive  chaque  cote  en  sens

green's  theory  realised  in  mechanical  model. 127

oppose  a  ses  deux  trajets. Dans  I'ordre  primitif,  la  face  (000)  Molar.
(001)  (Oil)  (010)  dtait  parcourue  deux  fois  dans  le  meme  sens."]

You  see  I  have  drawn  the  cord  just  three  times  through  each
corner  ring  and  I  now  tighten  it  over  its  whole  length  and  tie  the
ends  together.  Remark  now  that  if  the  cord  is  inextensible  it
secures  that  the  sum  of  the  lengths  of  the  1 2  edges  of  the  parallel-
epiped remains  constant,  whatever  change  be  given  to  the  relative
positions  of  the  8  corners.  This  condition  would  be  fulfilled  for
any  change  whatever  of  the  configuration ;  but  it  is  understood
that  it  always  remains  a  parallelepiped,  because  our  application  of
the  arrangement  is  to  a  homogeneous  strain  of  an  elastic  solid
according  to  Boscovich.  A  cord  must  similarly  be  carried  twice
round  the  4  edges  of  every  one  of  the  contiguous  parallelepipeds  ;
and  eight  of  these  have  a  common  corner,  at  which  we  suppose
placed  a  single  ring. Hence  every  ring  is  traversed  three  times

(011)

(101)

y;,(100)

(010)

Fig. 1.

by  each  one  of  eight  endless  cords.  Each  edge  is  common  to  four
contiguous  parallelepipeds  and  therefore  it  has  two  portions  of
each  of  four  endless  cords  passing  along  it.

Suppose  now  for  example  the  parallelepiped  to  be  a  cube.
Inextensible  cords  applied  in  the  manner  described  between
neighbouring  atoms,  keep  constant  the  sum  of  the  lengths  of  the
12  edges  of  each  cube,  and  therefore  secure  that  its  volume  is
constant  for  every  infinitesimal  displacement.  Consider  for  a
moment  the  assemblage  of  ring  atoms  thus  connected  by  endless
cords.  In  itself  and  without  further  application  to  molecular
theory  we  see  a  very  interesting  structure  which,  provided  the
cords  are  kept  stretched,  occupies  a  constant  volume  of  space  and
yet  is  perfectly  without  rigidity  for  any  kind  of  distortion. You

128

LECTURE XI.

Molar.  see  if  I  elongate  it  in  one  of  the  three  directions  of  the  parallel
edges  of  the  cubes,  it  necessarily  shrinks  in  the  perpendicular
directions  so  as  to  keep  constant  volume.  This  kind  of  deforma-
tion gives  us  two  of  the  five  components  of  distortion  without
change  of  bulk ;  and  the  other  three  are  given  by  the  shearings
which  we  have  called  a,  b,  c  ;  of  which,  for  instance,  a  is  a  distor-
tion such  that  the  two  square  parallel  faces  of  the  cube  perpen-
dicular to  OX  become  rhombuses  while  the  other  four  remain
square.

[Aprill'i!,  1898.  The  cube  (fig.  1)  with  an  endless  cord  twice
along  each  edge  is,  at  least  mechanically,  somewhat  interesting  in
realising  an  isolated  mechanism  for  securing  constancy  of  volume
of  a  hexahedron,  without  other  restriction  of  complete  liberty  of
its  eight  corners  than  constancy  of  volume  requires:  provided  only
that  the  hexahedron  is  infinitely  nearly  cubic,  and  that  each  face
is  the  (plane  or  curved)  surface  of  minimum  area  bounded  by  four
straight  lines.  Two  years  ago  in  preparing  this  lecture  for  the
press  from  Mr  Hathaway 's  papyrograph,  a  much  simpler  mechan-
ism of  cords  for  securing  constancy  of  volume,  occupied  by  an
assemblage  of  a  vast  number  of  points  given  in  cubic  order,  than
is  provided  by  the  linking  together  of  cubes  separately  fulfilling
this  condition,  occurred  to  me. It  was  not  till  some  time  later

Fig.  2.

that  I  found  myself  anticipated  by  M.  Brillouin.  I  am  much
pleased  to  find  that  he  has  interested  himself  in  the  subject  and
has  introduced  a  new  idea,  by  which  the  condition  of  constant
volume  is  realised  in  the  exceedingly  simple  and  beautiful  mechan-
ism of  endless  cords  represented  in  the  annexed  diagram  (fig.  2),
copied  from  one  of  his  articles  in  the  volume  already  referred  to.
This  diagram  represents  endless  cords  of  which  just  one  is  shown

green's  theory  realised  in  mechanical  model. 129

complete.  These  cords  pass  through  rings  not  shown  in  fig.  2.  Molar.
Fig.  3  shows  one  of  the  rings  viewed  in  the  direction  of  a  diagonal
of  the  cube  and  seen  to  be  traversed  twelve  times  by  four  endless
cords  of  which  one  is  shown  complete.  In  an  assemblage  of  a  vast
number  of  rings  thus  connected  by  endless  cords  and  arranged  in
cubic,  or  approximately  cubic,  order,  one  set  of  three  conterminous
edges  of  each  cube  is  kept  constant,  and  therefore  for  the  exactly

Fig.  3.

cubic  order  the  volume  is  a  maximum.  This  method,  inasmuch
as  it  implies  only  two  lines  of  cord  along  each  edge  common  to
four  cubes,  is  vastly  simpler  than  the  original  method  described
above  as  in  my  lecture  at  Baltimore,  which  required  eight  lines  of
cord  along  each  common  edge.  The  kinematic  result  with  its
dynamic  consequences,  is  the  same  in  the  two  methods.

To  avoid  the  assumption  of  an  inextensible  elastic  cord,  place
at  each  corner,  common  to  eight  cubes,  six  bell-cranks  properly
pivoted  to  produce  the  effect  of  cords  running,  as  it  were,  round
pulleys,  which  we  first  realised  by  the  six  cords  running  through
the  ring  of  fig.  3.  And  instead  of  each  straight  portion  of  cord,
substitute  an  inextensible  bar  of  rigid  matter,  hooked  at  its  two
ends  to  the  arm-ends  of  the  proper  bell-cranks ;  just  as  are  the
two  ends  of  each  copper  bell-wire,  so  well  known  in  the  nineteenth
and  preceding  centuries,  but  perhaps  to  be  forgotten  early  in  the
T.L.  9

130  LECTURE XI.

Molar.  twentieth  century,  when  children  grow  up  who  have  never  seen
bell-cranks  and  bell-wires  and  only  know  the  electric  bell.  Remark
now  that  our  connecting-rods,  being  rigid,  can  transmit  push  as
well  as  pull ;  instead  of  merely  the  pull  of  the  flexible  cord
with  which  we  commenced.  Our  model  now  may  be  constructed
wholly  of  matter  fulfilling  the  Poisson-Navier  condition,  and  it
gives  us  a  molecular  structure  for  matter  violating  that  condition.

Suppose  now  we  ideally  introduce  repulsions  in  the  lines  of
the  body  diagonals  between  the  four  pairs  of  corners  of  each  cube.
This  will  keep  stretched,  all  the  cords  between  rings,  or  con-
necting-rods between  arm-ends  of  bell-cranks ;  and  will  give  a
cubically  isotropic  elastic  solid  with  a  certain  definite  aeolotropic
quality.  If  besides  we  introduce  mutual  forces  in  the  edges  of
the  cubes  between  each  atom  and  its  nearest  neighbour,  we  can
give  complete  isotropy,  or  any  prescribed  aeolotropy  consistent
with  cubic  isotropy.  All  this  is  for  an  incompressible  solid.  But
lastly,  by  substituting  india-rubber  elastics  for  the  cords,  or  ideal
attractions  or  repulsions  (Boscovichian)  instead  of  the  connecting-
rods  between  bell-crank-arm-ends,  we  allow  for  any  degree  of
compressibility,  and  produce  if  we  please  a  completely  isotropic
elastic  solid  with  any  prescribed  values  for  the  moduluses  of
rigidity  and  resistance  to  compression,  fulfilling  or  not  fulfilling
Poisson's  ratio.  It  is  mechanically  interesting  to  work  out  details
for  this  problem  for  the  case  suggested  by  cork,  that  is,  a  perfectly
isotropic  elastic  solid,  having  rigidity  much  gi'eater  in  proportion
to  resistance  to  compression  than  in  the  case  of  Poisson's  ratio,
and  just  sufficient  to  produce  constancy  of  cross-section  in  a
column  compressed,  or  elongated,  by  forces  applied  to  its  ends.
It  is  also  interesting  to  go  further  and  produce  a  solid  of  which  a
column  shall  shrink  transversely  when  compressed  merely  by
longitudinal  force.

In  my  lecture  at  Baltimore  I  indicated,  without  going  into
details,  how  by  taking  a  parallelepiped  of  unequal  edges  instead
of  a  cube  and  introducing  different  degrees  of  elasticity  in  the
portions  of  the  cords  lying  along  the  different  edges  of  each
parallelepiped,  and  by  introducing  also  forces  of  attraction  or
repulsion  among  neighbouring  atoms,  we  can  produce  a  model
elastic  solid  with  the  twenty-one  independent  moduluses  of
Green's  theory.

But  the  method  by  cords  and  pulleys  or  bell-cranks  which  we

green's  theory  realised  in  mechanical  model. 131

have  been  considering,  though  highly  interesting  in  mechanics,  Molar,
and  dignified  by  its  relationship  to  Lagrange's  original  method  of
proving  his  theorem  of  "  virtual  velocities  "  (law  of  work  done)  in
mathematical  dynamics,  lost  much  of  its  interest  for  molecular
physics  when  I  fovmd*  that  the  restriction  to  Poisson's  ratio  in
an  elastic  solid  held  only  for  the  case  of  a  homogeneous  assemblage
of  single  Boscovich  point-atoms :  and  that,  in  a  homogeneous  as-
semblage of  pairs  of  dissimilar  atoms,  laws  of  force  between  the
similar  and  between  the  dissimilar  atoms  can  readily  be  assigned,
so  as  to  give  any  prescribed  rigidity  and  any  prescribed  modulus  of
resistance  to  compression  for  an  isotropic  elastic  solid :  and  for
an  aeolotropic  homogeneous  solid,  Green's  21  independent  modu-
luses  of  elasticity,  or  18  when  axes  of  coordinates  are  so  chosen
as  to  reduce  the  number  by  three.]

I  want  now  to  go  through  a  piece  of  mathematical  work  with
you  which,  though  indicated  by  Green-f,  has  not  hitherto,  so  far
as  I  know,  been  given  anywhere,  except  partially  in  my  Article
on  "Elasticity"  in  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica.  It  is  to  find  the
most  general  possible  plane  wave  in  a  homogeneous  elastic  solid  of
the  most  general  aeolotropy  possible,  expressed  in  terms  of  Green's
21 independent moduluses :]:. Taking Green's general formula

*  [_Proc.  R.  S.  E.  July  1  and  15,  1889:  Math,  and  Phijs.  Papers,  Vol.  iir.  Art,
xcvii.,  p.  395 :  also  "  On  the  Elasticity  of  a  Crystal  according  to  Boscovich,"  Proc.
E.  S.,  June  15,  1893,  and  republished  as  an  Appendix  to  present  volume.]

+  Green's  Mathematical  Papers  (Macmillan,  1871),  pp.  307,  308.

X  {June  16,  1898.— Through  references  in  Todhunter  and  Pearson's  Elasticity
I  have  recently  found  three  very  important  and  suggestive  memoirs  by  Blanchet  in
Liouville's  Journal,  Vols.  v.  and  vii.  (1840  and  1842),  in  which  this  problem  is
treated  on  the  foundation  of  36  independent  coefficients  in  the  six  linear  equations
expressing  each  of  the  six  stress-components  in  terms  of  the  six  strain-components.
In  respect  to  the  history  of  the  doctrine  of  energy  in  abstract  dynamics,  it  is  curious
to  find  in  a  Report  to  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences  by  Poisson,  Coriolis,  and
Sturm  {Comptes  Reudus,  Vol.  vii.,  p.  1143)  on  the  first  of  these  memoirs  (which  had
been  presented  to  the  Academy  on  August  8,  1838),  the  following  sentence: — "Les
equations  diff^rentielles  auxquelles  sont  assujetis  les  deplacements  d'un  point
quelconque  du  milieu  ^carte  de  sa  position  d'equilibre  renferment  36  coefficients
constants,  qui  dependent  de  la  nature  du  milieu,  et  qu'on  ne  pourrait  reduire  a  un
moindre  nomhre  sans  faire  des  hypotheses  stir  la  disposition  des  molecules  et  stir  les
lois  de  leurs  actions  mutuelles."  (The  italicising  is  mine.)  Blanchet's  second
memoir,  also  involving  essentially  36  independent  coefficients,  was  presented  to  the
Academy  of  Sciences  on  June  14,  1841,  and  was  reported  on  by  Cauchy,  Liouville,
and  Duhamel  without  any  protest  against  the  36  coefficients.  In  Green's  memoir
"On  the  Propagation  of  Light  in  crystallized  Media,"  read  May  20,  1839  to  the
Cambridge  Philosophical  Society,  the  expression  for  the  energy  of  a  strain  as  a

9—2

132

LECTURE XI.

.(1).

Molar. with  the  notation  with  which  I  put  it  before  you  in  Lecture  II.
Part  I.  (pp.  22,  23,  24),  we  find

P  =  lie  +  12/+  13^  +  14a  +  156  +  ie&
Q  =  12e+  22/+  23f^  +  24a  +  256  +  26c
i^  =  13e  +  23/+  33^^  +  34a  +  356  +  36c
/Sf  =  14e  +  24/  +  34f)r  +  44a  +  456  +  46c
T=  15e  +  2.5/+  Sag  +  45a  +  556  +  56c
f7  =  16e  +  26/  +  36^  +  46a  +  566  +  66c

Now,  considering  an  ideal  infinitesimal  parallelepiped  of  the
solid  SwSySz,  remark  that,  in  virtue  of  the  stress  components
P,  Q,  a,  S,  T,  U,  it  experiences  pairs  of  opposing  forces  parallel  to
OX  on  its  three  pairs  of  faces  as  follows,

(p^ldP
\ -2dx

U  +

IdU
2  dy'

IdT

Bx  ]  By  .  Sz ;
By]  Sz  .Sx ;

{T±l%.B^)B..Br.

and  the  total  resultant  component  parallel  to  OX  is  therefore
(dP dU dT

\dx

+

(2).

Hence  if  we  denote  hy  {x  +  ^,  y  -\-  t],  z  +  ^)  the  coordinates  at
time  ^  of  a  point  of  the  solid  of  which  {x,  y,  z)  is  the  equilibrium,
we  have,  as  we  found  in  Lecture  II.  (p.  26  above).

dP dU dT]

dx dy dz

d^_dU dQ dS\

df"

d'^

Pdt^

dx
dT

dz

_ dS dR
dx dy dz

.(3).

Now  a  plane wave,  or  a  succession of  plane  waves,  or  the
motion  resulting  from  the  superposition  of  sets  of  plane  waves

quadratic  function  of  the  six  strain-components  had  been  fundamentally  used  ;  and
by  it  the  fifteen  equalities  among  the  36  coefficients  in  the  linear  equations  for  stress
in  terms  of  strain,  reducing  the  number  of  independent  coefficients  to  21,  had  been
demonstrated  without  hypothesis.]

GREEN*S  THEORY  REALISED  IN  MECHANICAL  MODEL. 133

travelling  in  the  same  or  in  contrary  directions,  may  be  defined  Molar,
generally  as  any  motion  of  the  solid  in  which  every  infinitely  thin
lamina  parallel  to  some  fixed  plane  experiences  a  motion  which  is
purely  translational ;  or  in  other  words,  a  motion  in  which  ^,  rj,  ^
are  functions  of  {p,  t),  where  p  denotes  the  perpendicular  from  0
to  the  plane  through  (x,  y,  z)  parallel  to  the  wave-front.  If  I,  m,  n
denote  the  direction-cosines  of  this  perpendicular,  we  have

p  =  lx  +  my  -\-  nz

.(4),

and  therefore

d  _  J  d
dx dp'

A- A.

dy dp '

d  _ d
dz dp'

•(5),

when  these  symbols  are  applied  to  any  function  of  {p,  t).

Hence,  according  to  the  definitions  of  e,  f,  g,  a,  h,  c  which  I
gave  you  in  Lecture  II.  (pp.  22,  23),  we  have

e  =  l

dp'

f=m

dt]
dp

g  =  n

d^
dp

dv dK 7 ,rfC d^  dP ,dr]

dp dp  dp dp  dp dp

Hence  by  (8),  (5),  (1)  and  (6)  we  find

.(6).

•in

dr^^d^
dt^ dp

(B'^  +  A'rj  +  COl

where

A  =  11^-  +  66»i2  +  Don"  +  2  X  16/m  4-  2  x  56mn  +  2x  lonl
B  =  6QI'  +  227?r  +  Un-  +  2  x  26/»i  +  2  x  24mn  +  2  x  mnl
C  =  551'  +  44^2  +  Son-  +  2  x  4^5lm  +  2  x  Mmn  +2x  '35nl

A'  =  5QI-  +  24»i-  4-  34/1-  +  (25  +  46)  Im  +  (23  -f-  U)mn  +(S6+4<5)nl
B'  =151"  +  46m^  +  35n2  +  (14  -f  56)  Im  +  (36  -t-  45)m;i  -h(13  +  55) nl
C  =  161^  +  26m-'  +  45n-  +  (12-1-66)  Im  +  (25  +  46)7/m  +( 14  +  56) n^

(8)-

Now,  for  our  plane  waves  travelling  in  either  direction,  ^,  tj,  ^

134  LECTURE XI.

Molar. must  each  be  a  function  of  (p  +  vi),  where  v  denotes  the  propaga-
tional  velocity  of  the  wave  :  hence

d^^  ^dr^ d'v_  .d^  d^_ ^dr^

dt^ ''dp'' dt'~'"'dp^' dt'~'"'dp'' ^^^•

Hence  if  we  denote  the  acceleration  components  by  ^,  Vj,  t„
equations  (7)  become

{A-pv^)'i-\- G'r, + B% =0\

C''^+(B-pv')v+ ^'l =0>  (10).

The  determinant  of  these  equations  equated  to  zero  gives,  for
v',  three  essentially  real  values  v^,  v^^,  v^-;  which  are  essentially
positive  if  the  coefficients  11,  6Q,  &c.,  are  of  any  values  capable  of
representing  the  elastic  properties  of  a  stable  elastic  solid.  And
for  each  value  of  v'^,  equations  (10)  give  determinate  values,  X,  /x,
for  the  ratios  tj/^,  ^/^  which  we  may  denote  by  Xj,  /x^;  X^,  /u^;
X3,  /JL3;  so  that  finally  we  have,  for  the  complete  solution  of  our
problem,  superimposed  sets  of  three  waves  expressed  as  follows,

^:=<p,(p  +  v,t)  +  c^2  {p  +  V2O  +  </>3  (i?  +  v,t)
+  fi  (p  -  V,t)  +  y\r,  (p  -  v.,t)  +  -</r3  {p  -  v^t)
rj  =  \,  ((f>,  +  ^|r,)  +  Xo  (<^o  +  a/r.)  +  X3  (0.  +  yjr,)
K=  H-i  (<^i  +  "^i)  +  ^^■2  (<^2  +  -^'^  +  /A3  (</>3  +  -^z)
where  (/>!,  ^^,,  ^3,  -v|ri,  -v/r.^,  -v^^  denote  arbitrary  functions.

This  solution  and  the  relative  formulas  will  be  very  useful  to
us  to-morrow  when  we  shall  be  considering  the  corresponding
"  wave-surface  "  in  all  its  generality  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  surface
touched  by  planes  perpendicular  to  {I,  m,  ?t)  and  at  distances  from
an  ideal  origin  of  disturbance  equal  to  v^t,  vJ,,  v^t.

•(11)>

LECTUEE XII.

Friday,  October  10,  5  p.m.

We  will  look  a  little  more  at  this  wave  problem.  Our  conclusion  Molar,
is,  that  if  you  choose  arbitrarily,  in  any  position  whatever  relatively
to  the  elastic  solid,  a  set  of  parallel  planes  for  wave-fronts,  there
are  three  directions  at  right  angles  to  one  another  (each  generally
oblique  to  the  set  of  planes)  which  fulfil  the  condition,  that  the
elastic  force  is  in  the  direction  of  the  displacement ;  and  the
equations  we  have  put  down  express  the  wave-motion.  Each  of  the
three  waves  will  be  a  wave  in  which  the  oscillation  of  the  matter
in  its  front  is  as  I  am  performing  it  now,  i.e.,  an  oscillation  to  and
fro  in  a  line  oblique  to  the  plane  of  the  wave-front,  represented  by
this  piece  of  cardboard  which  I  hold  in  my  hand.  You  will  find
the  vibrations  of  the  three  waves  corresponding  to  the  three  roots
of  the  determinantal  cubic,  whether  they  are  oblique  or  not  oblique
to  the  wave-front,  are  in  directions  at  right  angles  to  one  another.

[Thirteen  and  a  half  years  interval. Here  is  a  very  short
proof In  equations  (10)  of  Lecture  XL,  put

and

^=^va  +  7;\/y8  +  ^\/7  i

With  this  notation  equations  (10)  give

^-py-^-A  +  a' '^ pv'-B  +  /3' ^ pv'-G  +  y ^ ^•

Multiplying  these  by  J  a,  J  ^,  Jy  respectively  and  adding;  and
dividing  both  sides  of  the  resulting  equation  by  S,  we  find

1  =  «  +  ^  ^.  y  (14)

pv^-  A  +  a pv^-B  +  l3 pv^-G  +  j

136  LECTURE XII. PART I.

This  is  a  form  of  the  determinantal  cubic  for  the  reduction  of
a  homogCDeous  quadratic  function  of  three  variables,  which  I  gave
fifty-three  years  ago  in  the  Cambridge  Mathematical  Journal
{Math,  and  Physical  Papers,  Art.  XV.  Vol.  I.  p.  55).

Writing  down  this  equation  for  roots  Vj^,  v^,  and  taking  the
difference,  we  find

+

{pv^  -  ^  +  a)  {pvi  -  ^  +  a)
^

Hence  if  v^,  v^  are  equal,  the  second  factor  of  this  expression  may
have  any  value.  If  they  are  unequal  it  must  be  zero,  and  (13)
gives

y2  +  ^i^2  +  ?iC2  =  0  (16),

which  shows  that  the  lines  of  the  vibration  in  any  two  of  our
three  waves  are  necessarily  perpendicular  to  one  another*,  except
in  the  case  when  the  two  propagational  velocities  are  equal.  In
this  case  the  two  waves  become  one,  and  the  line  of  vibration  may
be  in  any  direction  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  line  given  by
the  third  root.  The  case  of  three  equal  roots  may  also  occur  :  in
it  the  three  waves  become  one,  and  the  line  of  vibration  may  be
in  any  direction  whatever.  Both  in  this  case  and  in  the  case  of
two  equal  roots,  each  particle  may  describe  a  circular  or  elliptic
orbit,  or  may  move  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  Hue.  One  equation
among  {I,  m,  n)  gives  a  cone,  such  that,  for  the  plane  wave-front
perpendicular  to  any  one  of  its  generating  lines,  two  of  the  three
wave-velocities  are  equal.  Two  equations  among  (l,  m,  n)  give  a
line  normal  to  a  wave-front,  or  wave-fronts,  for  which  the  three
wave-velocities  are  equal.]

The  consideration  of  the  three  sets  of  plane  waves  with  three
different  propagational  velocities,  but  with  their  fronts  all  parallel
to  one  plane,  leads  us  to  a  wave-surface  different,  so  far  as  I  know,

*  This  important  proposition  does  not  hold  for  the  three  directions  of  vibration
found  by  Blanchet  (footnote  above),  which,  for  three  unequal  roots  of  his  cubic,
are  necessarily  not  all  at  right  angles  to  one  another  unless  Green's  fifteen
equalities  are  all  fulfilled.  Compare  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,
§§  344,  345.

blanchet's  three-sheet  wave.  137

from  anything  that  has  been  worked  out  hitherto  in  the  dynamics  Molar.
of  elastic  solids — a  wave-surface  in  which  there  will  be  three
sheets  instead  of  only  two,  as  in  Fresnel's  wave-surface :  and  in
which  there  will  be  condensation  and  rarefaction  at  each  point  of
each  sheet,  instead  of  the  pure  distortion  of  the  ether  at  every
point  of  each  of  the  two  sheets  of  Fresnel's  wave-surface.  It  is
a  geometrical  problem  of  no  contemptible  character  to  work  out
this  wave-surface.

[Mai/  1^'  1898.  Here  is  the  problem  fully  worked  out,  except
the  performance  of  the  final  elimination  of  I,  in,  n.  In  (14)
above,  for  v  put  Ix  -}-  my  -h  nz  and  for  n,  wherever  it  occurs,  put
J\  —P  —  m^.  Let  ^  (I,  m,  x,  y,  z)  denote  what  the  second  member
of  (14)  then  becomes. Take  the  following  three  equations  : —

*=i^ f =«^ st=« (i^)'

and  eliminate  I,  m  between  them.  The  resulting  equation  ex-
presses the  wave-surface;  that  is  to  say,  the  surface,  whose  tangent
plane  at  points  of  it  where  the  direction  cosines  are  I,  m,  n,  is  at
distance  v  from  the  origin.  I  need  scarcely  say  that  a  symmetrical
treatment  of  I,  m,  n  may  be  preferred  in  the  process  of  the  elimin-
ation.]

The  wave-surface  problem,  in  words,  is  this  : — Let  the  solid
within  any  small  volume  of  space  round  the  origin  of  coordinates,
0,  be  suddenly  disturbed  in  any  manner  and  then  left  to  itself.
It  is  required  to  find  the  surface  at  every  point  of  which  a  pulse
of  disturbance  is  experienced  at  time  t\t—\'\n  the  mathematical
solution  above].

[June  16,  1898.  This  problem  I  now  find  was  stated  very  clearly
and  attacked  with  great  analytical  power  by  Blanchet  in  his
"  Memoire  sur  la  Propagation  et  la  Polarisation  du  Mouvement
dans  un  milieu  elastique  indefini,  cristallise  d'uue  maniere  quel-
conque,"  the  first  of  the  three  memoirs  referred  to  in  the  footnote
above.  At  the  end  of  this  paper  he  sums  up  his  conclusion  as
follows :

"  1". Dans  un  milieu  elastique,  homogene,  indefini,  cristal-  ■
lise  d'une  maniere  quelconque,  le  mouvement  produit  par  un
ebranlement  central  se  propage  par  une  onde plus  ou  moins
compliquee  dans  sa  forme.

138

LECTURE XII. PART 1.

"  2".  Pour  chaque  nappe  de  I'onde,  la  vitesse  de  propagation
est  constante  dans  une  meme  direction,  variable  avec  la  direction
suivant  une  loi  qui  depend  de  la  forme  de  I'onde.

"  3°.  Pour  une  meme  direction,  les  vitesses  de  vibration
sont  constamment  paralleles  entre  elles  dans  une  meme  nappe
de  I'onde  pendant  la  duree  du  mouvement,  et  paralleles  a  des
droites  differentes  pour  les  differentes  nappes,  ce  qui  constitue
une  veritable  polarisation  du  mouvement."

In  2°  and  3°  of  this  statement  "  direction  "  must  be  interpreted  as
meaning  direction  of  the  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  plane,  and
to  S°  it  is  to  be  added  that  the  three  "  droites  differentes  "  mentioned
in  it  are  mutually  perpendicular,  because  of  the  fifteen  necessary
equalities  not  assumed  by  Blanchet  among  the  thirty-six  coefficients.
The  second  and  third  of  Blanchet's  memoirs  (Liouville's  Journal,
Vol.  VII.,  1842)  are  entitled  "  Memoire  sur  la  Delimitation  de  I'onde
dans  la  propagation  des  Mouvements  Vibratoires,"  and  "  Memoire
sur  une  circonstance  remarquable  de  la  Delimitation  de  I'onde."
They  contain  some  exceedingly  interesting  conclusions,  which
Blanchet  on  the  invitation  of  Liouville  had  worked  out  as  ex-
tensions to  a  crystallised  body  of  results  previously  found  by
Poisson  for  an  isotropic  solid,  regarding  the  space  throughout
which  there  is  some  movement  of  the  elastic  solid  at  any  time
after  the  cessation  of  the  disturbing  action  within  a  small  finite
space.  Cauchy  had  also  worked  on  the  same  subject  and  had
given  an  analytical  method,  his  "  Calcul  des  Residus,"  which
Blanchet  used  with  due  acknowledgment.  The  two  authors,
working  nearly  simultaneously,  seem  to  have  found,  each  for  him-
self, all  the  main  results,  and  each  to  have  appreciated  loyally  the
other's  work.  It  is  interesting  also  to  find  Poisson,  Coriolis,  Sturm,
Cauchy,  Liouville,  and  Duharael  reporting  favourably  and  suggest-
ively on  Blanchet's  memoirs,  and  Liouville  helping  him  with  advice
in  the  course  of  his  investigations.

As  part  of  his  conclusion  regarding  "  delimitation "  Blanchet
says,  "  II  n'y  a,  en  general,  ni  ddplacement  ni  vitesse  au-dela  de
la  plus  grande  nappe  des  ondes " ;  and  Cauchy  on  the  same
subject  in  the  Comptes  Rendus,  xiv.  (1842),  p.  13,  excluding
condensational-rarefactional  waves,  says,  "Les  deplacements  et
par  suite  les  vitesses  des  molecules  s'6vanouiront  par  tons  les
points  situes  en  dehors  ou  en  dedans  des  deux  ondes  propagees.

CAUCHY ON BLANCHET.  139

M.  Blanchet  a  remarque  avec  justesse  qu'on  ne  pouvait,  en  Molar.
general,  en  dire  autant  des  points  situds  entre  les  deux  ondes.
Toutefois  il  est  bon  d'observer  que,  meme  en  ces  derniers  points,
les  deplacements  et  les  vitesses  se  reduisent  a  zero  quand  on
suppose  nulle  la  dilatation  du  volume...,  c'est  a  dire,  en  d'autres
termes,  quand  les  vibrations  longitudinales  disparaissent."*]

Green  treats  the  subject  of  waves  in  an  aeolotropic  elastic
solid  in  a  peculiar  and  most  interesting  manner  for  the  purpose  of
forming  a  dynamical  theory  of  "  the  propagation  of  light  in
crystallized  media."  He  investigates  conditions f  that  "transverse
vibrations  shall  always  be  accurately  in  the  front  of  the  wave,"  or,
in  modern  language,  that  the  wave  may  be  purely  distortional.
He  finds  j  14  relations  among  his  21  coefficients  by  which  this  is
secured  for  a  double-sheeted  wave-surface,  which  he  finds  to  be
identical  with  Fresnel's.  There  is  necessarily  a  third  sheet,
although  Green  does  not  mention  it  at  all.  It  is  ellipsoidal,  and
corresponds  essentially  to  a  condensatioual-rarefactional  wave  with
vibrations  at  every  point  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  plane.
It  is  quite  disconnected  from  the  double-sheeted  surface  of  the
distortional  wave;  and  a  disturbing  source  can  be  so  adjusted  as
to  produce  only  distortional  wave-motion  with  the  double-sheeted
wave-surface,  or  only  the  condensatioual-rarefactional  wave-motion
with  the  ellipsoidal  wave-surface,  or  both  kinds  simultaneously.
The  three  principal  axes  of  the  ellipsoidal  wave-surface  coincide
with  the  three  axes  of  symmetry  found  for  the  wave-surface  of  the
distortional  Fresnel-Green  wave-motion.

This  dynamics  of  waves  in  an  elastic  solid  is  a  fine  subject  for
investigation,  and  I  am  sorry  now  to  pass  from  it  for  a  time.

But  if  the  war  is  to  be  directed  to  fighting  down  the  difficulties
which  confront  us  in  the  undulatory  theory  of  light  it  is  not  of
the  slightest  use  towards  solving  our  difficulties,  for  us  to  have
a  medium  w^hich  kindly  permits  distortional  waves  to  be  pro-
pagated through  it,  even  though  it  be  aeolotropic.  It  is  not
enough  to  know  that  though  the  medium  be  aeolotropic  it  can  let
purely  distortional waves  through it, and that  two  out  of  the

*  These  quotations  are  copied  from  a  very  interesting  accoiint  of  the  work  of
Blanchet  and  Cauchy  on  this  subject  on  pp.  627 — 634  of  Todhunter  and  Pearson's
Elasticity,  Vol.  i.

+  Green's  Mathematical  Papers  :  "  On  Propagation  of  Light  in  Crystallized
Media,"  p.  293  :  Keprint  from  Trans.  Cambridge  Philosophical  Society,  May  20, 1839.

X  Ibid.  p.  309.

140  LECTURE XII. PART 1.

three  waves  will  be  purely  distortional.  What  we  want  is  a
medium  which,  when  light  is  refracted  and  reflected,  will  under
all  circumstances  give  rise  to  distortional  waves  alone.  Green's
medium  would  fail  in  this  respect  when  waves  of  light  come  to  a
surface  of  separation  between  two  such  mediums.  All  that  Green
secures  is  that  there  can  be  a  purely  distortional  wave ;  he  does
not  secure  that  there  shall  not  be  a  condensational  wave.  There
would  generally  be  condensational  waves  from  the  source.  White-
hot  bodies,  flames  as  of  candles  or  gaslights,  electric  light  of
all  kinds,  would  produce  condensational  waves,  whether  in  an
aeolotropic  or  isotropic  medium,  so  far  as  Green's  conditions  here
spoken  of,  go.  What  we  want  is  a  medium  resisting  condensation
sufficiently ;  a  medium  with  an  infinite  or  practically  infinite
bulk-modulus — so  great  that  the  amount  of  energy,  developed
in  the  shape  of  condensational  waves,  has  not  been  discovered
by  observation.

As  an  essential  in  every  reflection  and  refraction  there  may
be  a  little  loss  of  energy  from  the  want  of  perfect  polish  in  the
surface,  but  as  a  rule,  we  have  practically  no  loss  of  light  in
reflection  and  refraction  at  surfaces  of  glass  and  clear  crystals.
There  perhaps  is  some  but  we  have  not  discovered  it.  The
medium  that  gives  us  the  luminiferous  vibrations  must  be  such
that  if  there  is  any  part  of  the  energy  of  the  wave  expended  in
condensational  waves  after  refraction  and  reflection,  the  amount  of
it  must  be  so  small  that  it  has  not  been  discovered.  Numerical
observations  have  been  made  with  great  accuracy,  in  which,  for
example,  Fresnel's  formula  for  the  ratio  of  normally  incident  and

reflected  light  (- — =-]  is  verified  within  closer  than  one  per  cent,

I  believe.  Still  a  half  per  cent  or  a  tenth  per  cent  of  the  energy
may  for  oblique  incidences  be  converted  into  condensational  waves,
for  all  we  know.  Bat  if  any  large  percentage  were  converted  into
condensational  waves,  there  would  be  a  great  deal  of  energy  in
condensational  waves  going  about  through  space,  and  (to  use  for  a
moment  an  absurd  mode  of  speaking  of  these  things)  there  would
be  a  "  new  fuixe  "  that  we  know  nothing  of.  There  would  be  some
tremendous  action  all  through  the  universe  produced  by  the  enei'gy
of  condensational  waves  if  the  energy  of  these  were  one-tenth,  or
one-hundredth  per  cent  of  the  energy  of  the  distortional  waves.
I  believe  that  if  in  oblique  reflection  and  refraction  of  light  at

QUESTION OF CONDENSATIONAL WAVES.  141

any  surface,  or  in  case  of  violent  action  in  the  source,  there  are  Molar,
condensational  Avaves  produced  with  anything  like  a  thousandth
or  a  ten-thousandth  of  the  energy  of  the  light  and  radiant  heat
which  we  know,  we  should  have  some  prodigious  effect,  but  which
might,  perhaps,  have  to  be  discovered  by  some  other  sense  than
we  have.  The  want  of  indication  of  any  such  actions  is  sufficient
to  prove  that  if  there  are  any  in  nature,  they  must  be  exceedingly
small.  But  that  there  are  such  waves,  I  believe  ;  and  I  believe
that  the  velocity  of  the  unknown  condensational  wave  that  we  are
speaking  of  is  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  electro-static  force.

I  say  "  believe  "  here  in  a  somewhat  guarded  manner.  I  do
not  mean  that  I  believe  this  as  a  matter  of  religious  faith,  but
rather  as  a  matter  of  strong  scientific  probability.  If  this  is  true
of  propagation  of  electro-static  force,  it  is  true  that  there  is
exceedingly  little  energy  in  the  waves  corresponding  to  the
propagation  of  an  electro-static  force.  That  is  however  going
beyond  our  tether  of  Molecular  Dynamics.  What  I  proposed
in  the  introductory  statement  with  reference  to  these  Lectures
was  to  bring  what  principles  and  results  of  the  science  of  molecular
dynamics  I  could  enter  upon,  to  bear  upon  the  wave  theory  of
light.  We  are  sticking  closely  to  that  for  the  present,  and  we
may  say  that  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  condensational  waves.
Our  medium  is  to  be  incompressible,  and  instead  of  Green's
fourteen  equations,  we  have  merely  one  condition, — that  the
medium  is  incompressible.  It  is  obvious  that  this  condition
suffices  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  a  wave  of  condensation  at  all
and  reduces  our  wave-surface  to  a  surface  with  two  sheets,  like
the  Fresnel  surface.  But  before  passing  away  from  that  beautiful
dynamical  speculation  of  Green's,  if  we  think  of  what  the  con-
densational wave  must  be  in  an  aeolotropic  solid  fulfilling  Green's
condition  that  it  can  have  purely  distortional  waves  proceeding  in
all  directions — the  condition  that  two  of  the  three  waves  which
we  investigated  three-quarters  of  an  hour  ago  shall  be  purely
distortional — I  think  we  shall  find  also  condensational  waves,  and
that  the  wave-surfaces  for  them  will  be  a  set  of  concentric  ellipsoids.
It  will  be  a  single-sheeted  surface,  that  is  certain,  because  you
have  only  one  velocity  corresponding  to  each  tangent  plane  at  the
wave-surface.

I  shall  now  leave  this  subject  for  the  present.  We  shall  come
back upon it again,  perhaps,  and look  a little more  into the

142  LECTURE XII. PART T.

question  of  moduluses  of  elasticity.  We  shall  work  up  from  an
isotropic  solid  to  the  most  general  solid ;  and  we  shall  work  do^\Ti
from  the  most  general  solid  to  an  isotropic  solid.  We  shall  take
first  the  most  general  value  for  the  compressibility ;  we  shall  then
come  to  this  subject  again  of  assuming  incompressibility.  We
shall  then  begin  with  the  most  general  solid  possible,  and  see  what
conditions  we  must  impose  to  make  it  as  symmetrical  as  is  necessary
for  the  Fresnel  wave-surface.  The  molecular  problem  will  prepare
your  way  a  good  deal  for  this.

I  had  intended  to  prepare  something  about  the  mass  of  the
luminiferous  ether.  I  have  not  had  time  to  take  it  up,  but  I
certainly  shall  do  so  before  we  have  done  with  the  subject.  We
shall  go  into  the  question  of  the  density  of  the  luminiferous  ether,
giving  superior  and  inferior  limits.  We  shall  also  consider  what
fraction  of  a  gramme  may  be  in  one  of  these  molecules  and  show
what  an  enormously  smaller  fraction  of  a  gramme  we  may  suppose
it  to  displace  in  the  luminiferous  ether.  We  shall  try  to  get  into
the  notion  of  this,  that  the  molecule  must  be  elastic  and  that  there
must  be  an  enormous  mass  in  its  interior.  Its  outer  part  feels
and  touches  the  kiminiferous  ether.  It  is  a  very  curious  sup-
position to  make,  of  a  molecular  cavity  lined  with  a  rigid  spherical
shell ;  but  that  something  exists  in  the  luminiferous  ether  and
acts  upon  it  in  the  manner  that  is  faultily  illustrated  by  our
mechanical  model,  I  absolutely  believe.

Just  think  of  the  effect  of  a  shock  consisting  say  of  a  collision
between  that  and  another  molecule.  Instead  of  its  being  broken
into  bits,  let  us  suppose  an  unbroken  spherical  sheath  around  it.
It  will  bound  away,  vibrating.  Just  imagine  the  central  nucleus
vibrating  in  one  direction  while  the  shell  vibrates  in  the  other,  and
you  have  a  molecule  with  two  parts  going  in  opposite  directions ;
but  differing  from  what  I  thought  of  the  other  day  (Lecture  IX.
p.  96  above)  in  that  one  part  is  inside  the  other.  The  ether  gets
its  motion  from  the  outside  part.  Therefore  I  say  that  the  most
fundamental  supposition  we  can  make  with  reference  to  the  origi-
nating source  of  a  sequence  of  waves  of  light  is  that  illustrated
by  a  globe  vibrating  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line.

We  have  already  investigated  (Lecture  VIII.  pp.  86 — 89)  the
solution  corresponding  to  that.  Consider  the  spherical  waves ;  no
vibrations  for  points  in  one  certain  diameter  of  the  sphere  ;  maxi-
mum vibrations  in all  points of  the equatorial plane of  that

POLARISED SOURCE OF LIGHT.  143

diameter  and  perpendicular  to  that  plane  ;  for  all  points  in  the  Molecular.
quadrant  of  an  arc  of  the  spherical  surface  extending  from  axis  to
equator,  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  and  tangential  to  the  arc;  and
of  magnitude  proportional  to  the  cosine  of  the  latitude  or  angular
distance  from  the  equator  and  of  intensity  proportional  to  the
square  of  the  cosine  of  the  latitude.  Then  in  a  wave  travelling
outwards,  let  the  amplitude  vary  inversely  as  the  distance  from
the  centre,  and  therefore  the  intensity  inversely  as  the  square  of
the  distance  from  the  centre  ;  and  you  have  a  correct  word-painting
of  the  very  simplest  and  most  frequent  sequence  of  vibrations
constituting  light.

Ten  minutes  interval.

Let  us  return  to  the  consideration  of  the  dynamics  of  refraction,
ordinary  dispersion,  anomalous  dispersion,  and  absorption.  Begin-
ning with  our  formulas  as  we  left  them  yesterday  (p.  120  above),
let  us  consider  what  they  become  for  the  case  t  =  oo  ;  that  is  to
say,  for  static  displacement  of  the  containing  shell.  The  inertia
of  the  molecules  will  now  not  be  called  into  play,  and  the  case
becomes  simply  that  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  set  of  springs  whose
stiffnesses  we  have  denoted  by  Cj,  C2,  ... ,  Cj,  Cj+i,  when  S,  the  end
of  Ci  remote  from  nii,  is  displaced  through  a  space  ^,  and  F,  the
end  of  Cj+i  remote  from  nij,  is  fixed.

C;+l

Denoting  by  X  the  force  with  which  S  pulls  and  F  resists,
which,  as  inertia  does  not  come  into  play,  is  therefore  the  force
with  which  each  spring  is  stretched,  we  have

X  =  Cj+iXj  =  Cj  (ccj_-^ -Xj)=  ...  =  c.2  (^1  - oe^)  =  Cj  (^ - ^1). . .(1 ) ;
or,  as  we  may  write  it,

OCj Xj_,  -Xj_  x,-x, ^-x,

T^~l^ — •••" 1 ~^^ ^^^'

Cj+1  Cj  C2  Ci

whence

i

144  LECTURE XII. PART IT.

ilolecular. Hence,  unless  at  least  one  of  Cj,  c^,  ... ,  C;-|_i  is  zero,  ^  —  1  is

negative  for  t  =  oo ,  and  therefore  y,  diminishes  to  —  oo  as  t-  in-
creases to  +  30  .  Hence  a  large  enough  finite  value  of  t  makes
■p^=0,  and  all  larger  values  of  r"  make  -p„  negative. This  is  a

particular,  and  an  extreme,  case  of  a  very  important  result  with
which  we  shall  have  much  to  do  later,  in  following  the  course  of
our  formula  when  the  period  of  the  light  is  increased  from  any
molecular  period  to  the  next  greater  molecular  period ;  and  we
may  get  quit  of  it  for  the  present  by  assuming  Cj+i  to  be  zero.  We
may  recover  it  again,  and  perceive  its  true  physical  significance,
by  supposing  nij  to  be  infinitely  great ;  and  therefore  we  lose
nothing  of  generality  by  taking  Cj^-i  =  0. This,  in  our  formulas  of

to-day,  makes  X  =  0  and  ^^  =  1- The  latter,  by  putting  t  =  oo  in

our  last  formula  of  Lecture  X.  (p.  120  above),  gives

Subtracting  this  from  our  last  formula  of  Lecture  X.  with
T  general,  we  find

whence,  by  the  preceding  formula  of  Lecture  X.,  (p.  120)

Q~ n l07r*mi?i  \T^  — «- r  —  k/ r  —  K^;  J

A  convenient  modification  of  this  formula  is  got  by  putting  in  it

H'-' <^>'

and  0.  =  ^- (8).

Thus  jji  denotes  the  refractive  index  of  the  medium;  and  k^
denotes  the  period  which  m^  would  have  as  a  vibrator,  if  the
shell  lining  the  ether  were  held  fixed,  and  if  the  elastic  connection
between  m-^  and  interior  masses  were  temporarily  annulled.  With
these  notations  (6)  becomes
^^^^^^  ^ „_VC^ ^ ™^ ^

DYNAMICS OF DISPERSION.  145

When  the  period  of  the  light  is  very  long  in  comparison  with  Molecular.
the  longest  of  the  molecular  periods  of  the  embedded  molecules,  it
is  obvious  that  each  material  particle  will  be  carried  to  and  fro
with  almost  exactly  the  same  motion  as  the  shell,  in  fact  almost
as  if  it  were  rigidly  connected  with  the  shell ;  and  therefore  the
velocity  of  light  will  be  sensibly  the  same  as  if  the  masses  of  the
particles  were  distributed  homogeneously  through  the  ether  without
any  disturbance  of  its  rigidity.

Let  us  consider  now  how,  when  the  period  of  the  light  is  not
infinitely  long  in  comparison  with  any  one  of  the  molecular  periods,
the  internal  vibrations  of  the  molecule  modify  the  transmission
of  light  through  the  medium.  For  simplicity  at  present  let  us
suppose  our  molecule  to  have  only  one  vibrating  particle,  the  mj  of
our  formulas,  which  we  will  now  call  simply  m,
being  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  vibrators
per  unit  volume  of  the  ether.  Imagine  it  con-
nected with  the  shell  or  sheath,  8,  surrounding
it,  by  massless  springs  (as  in  the  accompanying
diagram),  through  which  it  acts  on  the  ether
surrounding  the  sheath.  Its  influence  on  the
transmission  of  light  through  the  medium  can
be  readily  understood  and  calculated  from  the  diagrams  of  p.  147,
representing  the  well-known  elementary  dynamics  of  a  pendulum
vibrating  in  simple  harmonic  motion,  when  freely  hung  from  a
point  S,  (corresponding  to  the  sheath  lining  our  ideal  cavity  in
ether),  which  is  itself  compelled  by  applied  forces  to  move  horizon-
tally with  simple  harmonic  motion.  Figs.  1  and  2  illustrate  the
cases  in  which  the  period  of  the  point  of  suspension,  *S^,  is  longer
than  the  period  of  the  suspended  pendulum  with  8  fixed  ;  and
figs.  3  and  4  cases  in  which  it  is  shorter.  In  each  diagram  OM
represents  the  length  of  an  undisturbed  simple  pendulum  whose
period  is  equal  to  that  of  the  motion  of  8,  the  point  of  support  of
our  disturbed  pendulum  SM.  Thus  if  we  denote  the  periods  by
T  and  K  respectively,  we  have  03I/8M=t^Ik^.  Hence  if  |  and  x
denote  respectively  the  simultaneous  maximum  displacements  of
8  and  M,  we  have

e  =  M=_ZL_  (10)

If  now  for  a  moment  we  denote  by  w  the  mass  of  the  single
vibrating  particle  of  our  diagrams,  the  horizontal  component  of  the
T.  L.  10

146  LECTURE XII. PART II.

Molecular,  pull  exerted  by  the  thread  MS  on  S  at  the  instant  of  maximum
displacement  is  w(27r/Tyx  ;  and  with  m  in  place  of  w,  we  have
the  sum  of  the  forces  exerted  by  all  the  molecules  per  unit  volume
of  the  ether  at  the  instant  of  maximum  displacement  of  ether  and
molecules  at  any  point.  This  force  is  subtracted  from  the  re-
stitutional  force  of  the  ether's  elasticity,  when  the  period  of  the
light  is  greater  than  the  molecular  period  (figs.  1  and  2) ;  and  is
added  to  it,  when  the  period  of  the  light  is  less  than  the  molecular
period  (figs.  3  and  4).

Now  if  the  rigidity  of  the  ether  be  taken  as  unity,  its  elastic
force  per  unit  of  volume  at  any  point  at  the  instant  of  its  maximum
displacement  is  {^irjlf,  where  I  is  the  wave-length  of  light  in
the  ether  with  its  embedded  molecules.  Hence  the  total  actual
restitutional  force  on  the  ether  is

mf-™fvT-

which  must  be  equal  to  ( —  j  ^  if  the  density  of  the  ether  be

taken  as  unity.  Hence  dividing  both  members  of  our  equation  by
{^TrJTf^,  and  denoting  by  ^  the  velocity  of  light  through  the
medium  consisting  of  ether  and  embedded  molecules,  and  by  /i  its
refractive  index,  we  have

whence  by  (10),

'''=p=(iy=i+'"^' (12).

By  quite  analogous  elementary  dynamical  considerations  we  find

^,'^=\  +  ,n^^^m,^^^  +  m,,-^^^^^^^^ (13),

if,  instead  of  one  set  of  equal  and  similar  molecules,  there  are
several  such  sets,  the  molecules  of  one  set  differing  from  those
of  the  others.  The  period  k,  or  k,,  or  k„,  &c.,  of  any  one  of  the
sets  is  simply  the  period  of  vibration  of  the  interior  mass,
when  the  rigid  spherical  lining  of  the  ether  around  it,  which  for
brevity  we  shall  henceforth  call  the  sheath  of  the  molecule,  is
held  fixed.  Instead  of  calling  this  sheath  massless  as  hitherto
we  shall  suppose  it  to  have  mass  equal  to  that  of  the  displaced

DYNAMICS OF DISPERSION.

147

Molecular.

si-is'

MO  Om'

Fig.1.

Fig.  2.

m'© Om

Fig.  3.

SrnS'

o

m'Am

Fig.  4.

10—2

148  LECTURE XII. PART II.

Molecular,  ether ;  so  that  if  there  were  no  interior  masses  the  propagation
of  light  would  be  sensibly  the  same  as  in  homogeneous  un-
disturbed ether.  The  condition  which  we  originally  made,  that
the  distance  from  molecule  to  molecule  must  be  very  great  in
comparison  with  the  diameter  of  each  molecule  and  very  small
in  comparison  with  the  wave-length,  must  be  fulfilled  in  respect
to  the  distances  between  molecules  of  different  kinds.  The
number  of  molecules  of  each  kind  in  a  cube  of  edge  equal  to
the  wave-length  must  be  very  great ;  and  the  numbers  in  any
two  such  cubes  must  be  equal,  this  last  being  the  definition  of
homogeneity.  These  are  substantially  the' conditions  assumed  by
Sellmeier*,  and  our  equation  (13)  is  virtually  identical  with  his
original  expression  for  the  square  of  the  refractive  index.

It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  our  formula  (9)  for  the  effect
on  the  velocity  of  regular  periodic  waves  of  light,  of  a  multitude
of  equal  and  similar  complex  vibrating  molecules  embedded  in
the  ether,  shows  that  it  is  the  same  as  the  effect  of  as  many
sets  of  different  simple  vibrators  as. there  are  fundamental  periods
in  our  one  complex  vibrator :  and  that  the  masses  of  the  equi-
valent simple  vibrators  are  given  by  the  equations

m^K^R  tUiKi^R,  m,K,^R,, „ ,,  ..

m  =  — !— -; m,  = ^~^': m„  = --^' \  Sic.....{l^).

p/C,'  pic,'  pK,'

But  although  the  formula  for  the  velocity  of  regular  periodic
waves  is  the  same,  the  distribution  of  energy,  kinetic  and  potential,
is  essentially  different  on  the  two  suppositions.  This  difference
is  of  great  importance  in  respect  to  absorption  and  fluorescence,
as  we  shall  see  in  considering  these  subjects  later.

[Added  Sept.  23f,  1898.  The  dynamical  theory  of  dispersion,
as  originally  given  by  Sellmeier*,  consisted  in  finding  the  velocity
of  light  as  affected  by  vibratory  molecules  embedded  in  ether,

*  Sellmeier,  Fogg.  Aim.,  Vol.  145,  1872,  pp.  399,  520  ;  Vol.  147,  1872,  pp.  387,
525.

t  [The  substance  of  this  was  communicated  to  Sec.  A  of  the  British  Association
at  Bristol  on  September  9,  1898,  in  two  papers  under  the  titles  "  The  Dynamical
Theory  of  Refraction,  Dispersion,  and  Anomalous  Dispersion,"  and  "  Continuity  in
Undulatory  Theory  of  Condensational-rarefactional  Waves  in  Gases,  Liquids,  and
Solids,  of  Distortional  Waves  in  Solids,  of  Electric  and  Magnetic  Waves  in  all
Substances  capable  of  transmitting  them,  and  of  Radiant  Heat,  Visible  Light,
Ultra- Violet  Light  and  Rontgen  Rays."]

sellmeier's  theory  of  dispersion.  149

such  as  those  which  had  been  suggested  by  Stokes*  to  account  Molecular.
for  the  dark  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum.  Sellmeier's  mathematical
work  was  founded  on  the  simplest  ideal  of  a  molecular  vibrator,
which  may  be  taken  as  a  single  material  particle  connected  by  a
massless  spring  or  springs  with  a  rigid  sheath  lining  a  small  vesicle
in  ether.  He  investigated  the  propagation  of  distortional  waves,
and  found  the  following  expression  (which  I  give  with  slightly
altered  notation)  for  the  square  of  the  refractive  index  of  light
passing  through  ether  studded  with  a  very  large  number  of
vibratory  molecules  in  every  volume  equal  to  the  cube  of  the
wave-length : —

fi-=l  +  1)1  — +  m, ^  +  m„  — +  &c.

t^—k'  r- —  k,-  r  —  K,,

where  t  denotes  the  period  of  the  light ;  k,k,,  k„,  &c.,  the  vibratory
periods  of  the  embedded  molecules  on  the  supposition  of  their
sheaths  held  fixed;  and  m,  m,,  m„,  &c.,  their  masses.  He  showed
that  this  formula  agreed  with  all  that  was  known  in  1872  regard-
ing ordinary  dispersion,  and  that  it  contained  what  we  cannot
doubt  is  substantially  the  true  dynamical  explanation  of  anomalous
dispersions,  which  had  been  discovered  by  Fox-Talbot-f*  for  the
extraordinary  ray  in  crystals  of  a  chromium  salt,  by  Leroux  j  for
iodine  vapour,  and  by  Christiansen§  for  liquid  solution  of  fuchsin,
and  had  been  experimentally  investigated  with  great  power  by
Kundt**.

Sellmeier  himself  somewhat  marred  ff  the  physical  value  of  his
mathematical  work  by  suggesting  a  distinction  between  refractive
and  absorptive  molecules  ("  refractive  und  absorptive  Theilchen  "),
and  by  seeming  to  confine  the  application  of  his  formula  to  cases
in  which  the  longest  of  the  molecular  periods  is  small  in  com-
parison with  the  period  of  the  light.  But  the  splendid  value
to  physical  science  of  his  non-absorptive  formula  has  been  quite
wonderfully proved by Rubens (who, however, inadvertently

*  See  Kirchhoff-Stokes-Thomson,  Phil.  Mag.,  March  and  July  1860.
t  Fox-Talbot,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Edin.,  1870—71.
X  Leroux,  Comptes  rendus,  55,  1862,  pp.  126 — 128.

§  Christiansen,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.,  141,  1870,  pp.  479,  480; Phil.  Mag.,  41,
1871,  p.  244 ;  Annales  de  Chimie,  25,  1872,  pp.  213,  214.
**  Kundt,  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vols.  142,  143,  144,  145,  1871—72,
ft  Pogg.  Ann.,  Vol.  147,  1872,  p.  525.

150  LECTURE Xll. PART II.

lolecular.  quotes*  it  as  if  due  to  Ketteler).  Fourteen  years  ago  Langleyf
had  measured  the  refractivity  of  rock-salt  for  light  and  radiant
heat  of  wave-lengths  (in  air  or  ether)  from  -43  of  a  mikrom|  to
5-3  mikroms  (the  mikrom  being  10"*'  of  a  metre,  or  10~^  of  a
centimetre),  and  without  measuring  refractivities  further,  had
measured  wave-lengths  as  great  as  15  mikroms  in  radiant  heat.
Within  the  last  six  years  measurements  of  refractivity  by  Rubens,
Pasehen,  and  others,  agreeing  in  a  practically  perfect  way  with
Laugley's  through  his  range,  have  given  us  very  accurate  know-
ledge of  the  refractivity  of  rock-salt  and  of  sylvin  (chloride  of
potassium)  through  the  enormous  range  of  from  A  of  a  mikrom  to
23  mikroms.

Rubens  began  by  using  empirical  and  partly  theoretical
formulas  which  had  been  suggested  by  various  theoretical  and
experimental  writers,  and  obtained  fairly  accurate  representations
of  the  refractivities  of  flint-glass,  quartz,  fluorspar,  sylvin,  and
rock-salt  through  ranges  of  wave-length  from  "4  to  nearly  12
mikroms§.  Two  years  later,  further  experiments  extending  the
measure  of  refractivities  of  sylvin  and  rock-salt  for  light  of  wave-
lengths up  to  23  mikroms,  showed  deviations  from  the  best  of  the
previous  empirical formulas increasing largely  with increasing

*  Wied.  Ann.,  Vol.  53,  1894,  p.  267.  In  the  formula  quoted  by  Rubens  from
Ketteler,  substitute  for  yuQothe  value  of  /x.  found  by  putting  r=ooin  Sellmeier's
formula,  and  Ketteler's  formula  becomes  identical  with  Sellmeier's.  Remark  that
Ketteler's  "  M"  is  Sellmeier's  "  mk"^  "  according  to  my  notation  in  the  text.

t  Langley,  Phil.  Mag.,  1886,  2nd  half-year.

J  [For  a  small  unit  of  length  Langley,  fourteen  years  ago,  used  with  great
advantage  and  convenience  the  word  "mikron"  to  denote  the  millionth  of  a
metre.  The  letter  n  has  no  place  in  the  metrical  system,  and  I  venture  to  suggest
a  change  of  spelling  to  "mikrom"  for  the  millionth  of  a  metre,  after  the  analogy
of  the  English  usage  for  millionths  (mikrohm,  mikro-ampere,  mikrovolt).  For  a
conveniently  small  corresponding  unit  of  time  I  further  venture  to  suggest
"  michron  "  to  denote  the  period  of  vibration  of  light  whose  wave-length  in  ether
is  1  mikrom.  Thus,  the  velocity  of  light  in  ether  being  3  x  10**  metres  per  second,
the  michron  is  i  x  10~"  of  a  second,  and  the  velocity  of  light  is  1  mikrom  of  space
per  michron  of  time.  Thus  the  frequency  of  the  highest  ultra-violet  light  investi-
gated by  Schumann  ('1  of  a  mikrom  wave-length,  Sitzungsber.  d.  k.  Gesellsch.  d.
Wissensch.  zu  Wien,  cii.  pp.  415  and  625,  1893)  is  10  periods  per  michron  of  time.
The  period  of  sodium  light  (mean  of  lines  D)  is  •58J32  of  a  michron  ;  the  periods
of  the  "  Reststrahlen  "  of  rock-salt  and  sylvin  found  by  Rubens  and  Aschkinass
{Wied.  Ann.  lxv.  (1898),  p.  241)  are  51-2  and  61-1  michrons  respectively.  No
practical  inconvenience  can  ever  arise  from  any  possible  confusion,  or  momentary
forgetfulness,  in  respect  to  the  similarity  of  sound  between  michrons  of  time  and
mikroms  of  space. — K.]

§  Rubens,  Wied.  Ann.,  Vols.  53,  54,  1894—95.

RUBENs' RESULTS FOR ROCK-SALT AND SYLVIN.  151

wave-lengths. Rubens  then  fell  back*  on  the  simple  unmodified  Molecular.
Sellmeier  formula,  and  found  by  it  a  practically  perfect  expression
of  the  refractivities  of  those  substances  from  "434  to  22'3  mikroms.

And  now  for  the  splendid  and  really  wonderful  confirmation  of
the  dynamical  theory.  One  year  later  a  paper  by  Rubens  and
Aschkinass"f*  describes  experiments  proving  that  radiant  heat  after
five  successive  reflections  from  approximately  parallel  surfaces  of
rock-salt;  and  again  of  sylvin  ;  is  of  mean  wave-length  51'2  and
61"1  mikroms  respectively.  The  two  formulas  which  Rubens  had
given  in  February  1897,  as  deduced  solely  from  refractivities
measured  for  wave-lengths  of  less  than  23  mikroms,  made  yu,^
negative  for  radiant  heat  of  wave-lengths  from  37  to  55  mikroms
in  the  case  of  reflection  from  rock-salt,  and  of  wave-lengths
from  45  to  67  mikroms  in  the  case  of  reflection  from  sylvin!
{fi?  negative  means  that  waves  incident  on  the  substance  cannot
enter  it,  but  are  totally  reflected).

These  formulas,  written  with  a  somewhat  important  algebraic
modification  serving  to  identify  them  with  Sellmeier's  original
expression,  (13)  above,  and  thus  making  their  dynamical  meaning
clearer,  are  as  follows : —

Rock-salt fx?  =  1-1875  +  11410  - — J"  ^^^  +  2-8504

T^- -01621  T-- 3419-3"

Sylvin ^^  =  1-5329  + -6410  ^^.-^^ +  2-3792  ^^^^  •

The  accompanying  diagi-ams  (pp.  152, 153)  represent  the  squares  of
the  refractive  index  of  rock-salt  and  sylvin,  calculated  from  these
formulas  through  a  range  of  periods  from  -434  of  a  michron  to
100  michrons.  In  each  diagram  the  scale  both  of  ordinate  and
abscissa  from  0  to  10  michrons  is  ten  times  the  scale  of  the
continuation  from  10  to  100  michrons.  Additions  and  sub-
tractions to  keep  the  ordinates  within  bounds  are  indicated  on
the  diagrams.  The  circle  and  cross,  on  portion  b  of  each  curve,
represent  respectively  the  points  where  fj?  =  1  and  /x-  =  0.  The
critical  periods  exhibited  in  the  formula  are
for  rock-salt,

-1273  and  56-116,  being  the  square  roots  of  '01621  and  3149-3 ;
for  sylvin,

•1529  and  67-209, „ „ „ „ '0234 „ 4517-1.
*  Rubens  and  Nichols,  Wted.  Ann.,  Vol.  60,  1896—97,  p.  454.
+  Rubens  and  Aschkinass,  Wied.  An)i.,  Vol.  65,  1898,  p.  241.

152

LECTURE XII. PART II,

Molecular.

/

/

^

^

i

'f

^;

1 \

1

v!i

1

1

_jj

^

^

"

r

^

/

1

1

/

/

\o

- V:^

yi

/

1 + ^ T 1 1

"i\|2"i|0"d.|2"d.|2 |-

—

5 = :; = =

1  I'

M ^ . -

O -^ - - = a

1

(

.

^ = » * -^ -s

/

<;

a

1

y

^""  ^""^

o

o  c-

RUBENS' RESULTS FOR ROCK-SALT AND SYLVIN.

153

Molecular.

1

/

i

-j^

^

1

i

■ i

1

'-n

■>3

j'_  "■r---.

1 L..-J

VJ

4

^

/

^

J

/

1

I

\

^

T + ; ? T 1 1

"d-  "d.l2  "ijS  ''d-lS  "i|2  "i-lS t"

—

1 = . = . .
is

c/

1

^ a s = . = :S

N * =

J

_________

o

O  £.

O

154  LECTURE XII. PART II.

Molecular.  The  value  of  fjb-  passes  from  —  ao  to  +  oo  as  t  rises  through  these
values,  and  we  have  accordingly  asymptotes  at  these  points,
represented  by  dotted  ordinates  in  the  diagrams.

The  agreement  with  observation  is  absolutely  perfect  through
the  whole  range  of  Langley,  Rubens,  and  Paschen  from  •434  of  a
michron  to  22'3  michrons.  The  observed  refractivities  are  given
by  them  to  five  significant  figures,  or  four  places  of  decimals ;  and
in  a  table  of  comparison  given  by  Rubens  and  Nichols*  the
calculated  numbers  agree  with  the  observed  to  the  last  place  of
decimals,  both  for  rock-salt  and  sylvin.

While  in  respect  to  refractivity  there  is  this  perfect  agreement
with  Sellmeier's  formula  through  the  range  of  periods  from  "434
of  a  michron  to  fifty-one  times  this  period  (corresponding  to
nearly  six  octaves  in  music),  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  with
radiant  heat  of  22  3  michrons  period,  Rubens  found,  both  for
rock-salt  and  sylvin,  so  much  absorption,  increasing  with  increasing
periods,  as  to  prevent  him  from  carrying  on  his  measurements
of  refractivity  to  longer  periods  than  22  or  23  michrons,  and  to
extinguish  a  large  proportion  of  the  radiant  heat  of  23  michrons
period  in  its  course  through  his  prisms.  Hence  although  Sellmeier's
formula  makes  no  allowance  for  the  large  absorptivity  of  the  trans-
parent medium,  such  as  that  thus  proved  in  rock-salt  and  sylvin  with
radiant  heat  of  periods  less  than  half  the  critical  period  k  in  each
case,  it  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  large  as  it  is  the  absorptivity
produces  very  little  effect  on  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  radiant
heat  through  the  medium.  This  indeed  is  just  what  is  to  be
expected  from  dynamical  theory,  which  shows  that  the  velocity
of  propagation  is  necessarily  affected  but  very  little  by  the  forces
which  produce  absorption,  unless  the  absorptivity  is  so  great  that
the  intensity  of  a  ray  is  almost  annulled  in  travelling  three  or
four  times  its  wave-length  through  the  medium.

In  an  addition  to  a  later  lecture  I  intend  to  refer  again  to
Helmholtz's  introduction  of  resisting  forces  in  simple  proportion
to  velocities,  by  which  he  extended  Sellmeier's  formula  to  include
true  bodily  absorption,  and  to  recent  modifications  of  the  extended
formula  by  himself  and  by  Ketteler.  Meantime  it  is  interesting,
and  it  may  correct  some  misapprehension,  to  remark  that  so  far

*  Wied.  Ann.,  Vol.  60,  1896-97,  p.  454.

THREE KINDS OF CRITICAL PERIOD.  155

as  the  dynamics  of  Sellmeier's  single  vibrating  masses,  or  of  my  Molecular.
complex  molecule,  goes,  there  is  no  necessity  to  expect  any
absorption  at  all,  even  for  light  or  radiant  heat  of  one  of  the  chief
critical  periods  k,  as  we  shall  see  by  the  following  general  view  of
the  circumstances  of  this  and  other  critical  periods.  We  shall  see
in  fact  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  critical  period,

(1)  a  period  for  which  yu,-  =  1,  or  velocity  in  the  medium
equal  to  velocity  in  pure  undisturbed  ether ;

(2)  a  period  for  which  /*■'  =  0,  or  wave-velocity  infinite  in
the  medium  ;

(8)  a  period  (any  one  of  the  /c-periods)  such  that  if  we
imagine  passing  through  it  with  augmenting  period,  yu,'  changes
from  —  00  to  +  00  .

The  dynamical  explanation  of  points  where  fx?=\  (marked
by  circles  on  the  curves),  is  simpler  with  my  complex  molecule
than  with  Sellmeier's  several  sets  of  single  vibrators.  With  my
complex  molecule  it  means  a  case  in  which  No.  1  spring,  that
between  m-^  and  the  sheath,  experiences  no  change  of  length.  In
order  that  this  may  be  the  case,  the  period  of  the  light  must  be
equal  to  some  one  of  the  free  periods  of  the  complex  molecule,
detached  from  the  sheath  (Ci  temporarily  annulled).  With  Sell-
meier's arrangement,  it  is  a  case  in  which  tendency  to  quicken
the  vibrations  of  the  ether  by  one  set  of  vibrators,  is  counter-
balanced by  tendency  to  slow  them  by  another  set,  or  other  sets.
It  is  a  case  which  could  not  occur  with  only  one  set  of  equal  and
similar  simple  vibrators.

The  case  we  have  next  to  consider,  /t^  =  0  (or  ^"  =  oo  ),  marked
with  crosses  on  the  curve,  occurs  essentially  just  once  for  a  single
set  of  simple  vibrators ;  and  it  occurs  as  many  times  as  there  are
sets  of  vibrators,  if  there  are  two  or  more  sets  with  different
periods;  or,  just  once  for  each  of  the  critical  periods  k,  k,,  k„,  Szc.
of  my  complex  molecule.  The  dynamical  explanation  is  particu-
larly simple  for  a  single  set  of  Sellmeier  vibrators ;  it  is  the  whole
ether  remaining  undistorted  and  vibrating  in  one  direction,  while
the  masses  m  all  vibrate  in  the  opposite  direction;  the  whole
system  being  as  it  were  two  masses  E  and  M  connected  by
a  single  massless  spring,  and  vibrating  to  and  fro  in  opposite
directions  in  a  straight  line  with  their  common  centre  of  inertia

156  LECTURE XII, PART II.

Molecular,  at  rest.  Thus  we  see  exactly  the  meaning  of  wave-velocity
becoming  infinite  for  the  critical  cases  marked  with  a  cross  on
the  curves.

Increase  of  the  period  beyond  this  critical  value  makes  /*-
negative  until  we  reach  the  next  one  of  our  critical  values  k,  k,,
K„,  &c.,  or  the  one  of  these,  if  there  is  only  one.  The  meaning
clearly  is  that  light  cannot  penetrate  the  medium  and  is  totally
reflected  from  it  wherever  it  falls  on  it.  Thus  for  light  or  radiant
heat  of  all  periods  corresponding  to  the  interval  between  a  point
on  one  of  our  curves  marked  with  a  cross  and  the  next  asymptotic
ordinate,  the  medium  acts  as  silver  does  to  visible  light;  that
is  to  say,  it  is  impervious  and  gives  total  reflection.  When  we
increase  the  period  through  one  of  our  chief  critical  values  k,  k,,
K,,,  &c.,  jjT  passes  from  —  oo  to  +  oo .  With  exactly  the  critical
period  we  have  infinitely  small  velocity  of  propagation  of  light
through  the  medium,  and  still  total  reflection  of  incident  light.
There  would  be  infinitely  great  amplitude  of  the  molecular
vibrators,  if  the  light  could  get  into  the  medium ;  but  it  cannot
get  in.  With  period  just  a  little  greater  than  one  of  these  critical
values,  the  reflection  of  the  incident  light  is  very  nearly  total ;
the  velocity  of  propagation  of  the  light  which  enters  is  very
small;  and  the  energy  (kinetic  and  potential)  of  the  molecular
vibrators  is  very  great  in  comparison  with  the  energy  (kinetic
and  potential)  of  the  ether.

Lastly,  if  there  were  no  greater  critical  period  than  this  which
we  have  just  passed,  we  should  now  have  ordinary  refraction  with
ordinary  dispersion,  at  first  large,  becoming  less  and  less  with
increased  period,  and  /x-  diminishing  asymptotically  to  the  value

~-- — ,  where  p  denotes  the  density  of  the  ether,  and M  the

sum  of  all  the  masses  within  the  sheaths  and  connected  to
them  by  springs.  But  when  we  consider  that  the  whole  mass
of  the  ponderable  matter  is  embedded  in  the  ether,  and  we
cannot  conceive  of  merely  an  infinitesimal  portion  of  it  clogging
the  ether  in  its  luminiferous  or  electric  vibrations,  and  that
therefore  for  glass,  or  water,  or  even  for  rarefied  air,  M  must  be
millions  of  millions  of  times  p,  we  see  how  utterly  our  dynamical
theory  fails  to  carry  us  with  any  tolerable  comfort,  in  trying  to
follow  and  understand  the  nature  of  waves  and  vibrations  of
periods  longer  than  the  60  michrons  (or  2  x  10~"  of  a  second)

CONTINUITY IN UNDULATORY THEORY.  157

touched  by  Rubens  and  Aschkinass*,  up  to  10""  of  a  second,  or  Molar,
further  up  to  one  thousandth  of  a  second,  or  up  to  still  longer
periods.

Yet  we  must  try  somehow  to  find  and  thoroughly  understand
continuity  in  the  undulatory  theory  of  condensational-rarefactional
waves  in  gases,  liquids,  and  solids,  of  distortional  waves  in  solids,
of  electric  and  magnetic  waves  in  all  substances  capable  of  trans-
mitting them,  and  of  radiant  heat,  visible  light,  ultra-violet  light
and  Rontgen  rays.

Consider  the  following  three  analogous  ca.ses  : — I.  mechanical ;
II.  electrical ; III.  electromagnetic.

I.  Imagine  an  ideally  rigid  globe  of  solid  platinum  of  12
centim.  diameter,  hung  inside  an  ideal  rigid  massless  spherical
shell  of  13  centim.  internal  diameter,  and  of  any  convenient
thickness.  Let  this  shell  be  hung  in  air  or  under  water  by  a  very
long  cord,  or  let  it  be  embedded  in  a  great  block  of  glass,  or  rock,
or  other  elastic  solid,  electrically  conductive  or  non-conductive,
transparent  or  non-transparent  for  light.

I.  (1)  By  proper  application  of  force  between  the  shell  and
the  nucleus  cause  the  shell  and  nucleus  to  vibrate  in  opposite
directions  with  simple  harmonic  motion  through  a  relative  total
range  of  10~^  of  a  centimetre.  We  shall  first  suppose  the  shell
to  be  in  air.  In  this  case,  because  of  the  small  density  of  air
compared  with  that  of  platinum,  the  relative  total  range  will  be
practically  that  of  the  shell,  and  the  nucleus  may  be  considered
as  almost  absolutely  fixed.  If  the  period  is  gL  of  a  second,
(frequency  32  according  to  Lord  Rayleigh's  designation), a  humming
sound  will  be  heard,  certainly  not  excessively  loud,  but  probably
amply  audible  to  an  ear  within  a  metre  or  half  a  metre  of  the
shell.  Increase  the  frequency  to  256,  and  a  very  loud  sound  of
the  well-known  musical  character  (Case)  will  be  heard  f.

Increase  the  frequency  now  to  32  times  this,  that  is  to  8192
periods  per  second,  and  an  exceedingly  loud  note  5  octaves  higher
will  be  heard. It  may  be  too  loud  a  shriek  to  be  tolerable ;  if  so,

*  Wied.  Ann.,  Vol.  64,  1898.

t  Lord  Kayleigh  has  found  that  with  frequency  256,  periodic  condensation  and
rarefaction  of  the  marvellously  small  amount  6  x  10"^  of  an  atmosphere,  or
"addition  and  subtraction  of  densities  far  less  than  those  to  be  found  in  our  highest
vacua,"  gives  a  perfectly  audible  sound.  The  amplitude  of  the  aerial  vibration,  on
each  side  of  zero,  correspondincr  to  this,  is  1-27  x  10"^  of  a  centimetre. — Sound,  Vol.  ii,
p.  439  (2nd  edition).

158  LECTURE XTT. PART II.

diminish  the  range  till  the  sound  is  not  too  loud.  Increase  the
frequency  now  successively  according  to  the  ratios  of  the  diatonic
scale,  and  the  well-known  musical  notes  will  be  each  clearly  and
perfectly  perceived  through  the  whole  of  this  octave.  To  some
or  all  ears  the  musical  notes  will  still  be  clear  up  to  the  G  (24756
periods  per  second)  of  the  octave  above,  but  we  do  not  know
from  experience  what  kind  of  sound  the  ear  would  perceive
for  higher  frequencies  than  25000.  We  can  scarcely  believe
that  it  would  hear  nothing,  if  the  amplitude  of  the  motion  is
suitable.

To  produce  such  relative  motions  of  shell  and  nucleus  as  we
have  been  considering,  whether  the  shell  is  embedded  in  air,  or
water,  or  glass,  or  rock,  or  metal,  a  certain  amount  of  work,  not
extravagantly  great,  must  be  done  to  supply  the  energy  for  the
waves  (both  condensational  and  rarefactional),  which  are  caused
to  proceed  outwards  in  all  directions.  Suppose  now,  for  example,
we  find  how  much  work  per  second  is  required  to  maintain  vibra-
tion with  a  frequency  of  1000  periods  per  second,  through  total
relative  motion  of  10~^  of  a  centimetre.  Keeping  to  the  same
rate  of  doing  work,  raise  the  frequency  to  10^  10^  10^  10^  10'-,
500  X  10'^  We  now  hear  nothing ;  and  we  see  nothing  from  any
point  of  view  in  the  line  of  the  vibration  of  the  centre  of  the
shell  which  I  shall  call  the  axial  line.  But  from  all  points  of
view,  not  in  this  line,  we  see  a  luminous  point  of  homogeneous
polarized  yellow  light,  as  it  were  in  the  centre  of  the  shell,  with
increasing  brilliance  as  we  pass  from  any  point  of  the  axial  line
to  the  equatorial  plane,  keeping  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre.
The  line  of  vibration  is  everywhere  in  the  meridional  plane,  and
perpendicular  to  the  line  drawn  to  the  centre.

When  the  vibrating  shell  is  surrounded  by  air,  or  water,  or
other  fluid,  and  when  the  vibrations  are  of  moderate  frequency,  or
of  anything  less  than  a  few  hundred  thousand  periods  per  second,
the  waves  proceeding  outwards  are  condensational-rarefactional,
with  zero  of  alternate  condensation  and  rarefaction  at  every  point
of  the  equatorial  plane  and  maximum  in  the  axial  line.  When
the  vibrating  shell  is  embedded  in  an  elastic  solid  extending  to
vast  distances  in  all  directions  from  it,  two  sets  of  waves,  distor-
tional  and  condensational-rarefactional,  according  respectively  to
the  two  descriptions  which  have  been  before  us,  proceed  outwards
with  different  velocities,  that  of  the  former  essentially  less  than

CONTINUTTY IN UNDULATORY THEORY.  150

that  of  the  latter  in  all  known  elastic  solids*.  Each  of  these  Molar.
propagational  velocities  is  certainly  independent  of  the  frequency
up  to  10^  10^  or  10",  and  probably  up  to  any  frequency  not  so
high  but  that  the  wave-length  is  a  large  multiple  of  the  distance
from  molecule  to  molecule  of  the  solid.  When  we  rise  to  fre-
quencies of  4  X  10l^  400  X  10l^  SOO  x  lO'-,  and  3000  x  10>-,  cor-
responding to  the  already  known  range  of  long-period  invisible
radiant  heat,  of  visible  light,  and  of  ultra-violet  light,  what
becomes  of  the  condensational-rarefactional  waves  which  we  have
been  considering  ?  How  and  about  what  range  do  we  pass  from
the  propagational  velocities  of  3  kilometres  per  second  for  distor-
tional  waves  in  glass,  or  5  kilometres  per  second  for  the  condensa-
tional waves  in  glass,  to  the  200,000  kilometres  per  second  for
light  in  glass,  and,  perhaps,  no  condensational  wave  ?  Of  one
thing  we  may  be  quite  sure ;  the  transition  is  continuous.  Is  it
probable  (if  ether  is  absolutely  incompressible,  it  is  certainly
possible)  that  the  condensational-rarefactional  wave  becomes  less
and  less  with  frequencies  of  from  10"  to  4  x  10",  and  that  there  is
absolutely  none  of  it  for  periodic  disturbances  of  frequencies  of
from  4  X  10'-  to  3000  x  10'-  ?  There  is  nothing  unnatural  or
fruitlessly  ideal  in  our  ideal  shell,  and  in  giving  it  so  high  a
frequency  as  the  500  x  10'"  of  yellow  light.  It  is  absolutely
certain  that  there  is  a  definite  dynamical  theory  for  waves  of
light,  to  be  enriched,  not  abolished,  by  electromagnetic  theory ;
and  it  is  interesting  to  find  one  certain  line  of  transition  from  our
distortional  waves  in  glass,  or  metal,  or  rock,  to  our  still  better
known  waves  of  light.

I.  (2)  Here  is  another  still  simpler  transition  from  the  dis-
tortional waves  in  an  elastic  solid  to  waves  of  light.  Still  think
of  our  massless  rigid  spherical  shell,  13  centim.  internal  diameter,
with  our  solid  globe  of  platinum,  12  centim.  diameter,  hung  in  its
interior.  Instead  of  as  formerly  applying  simple  forces  to  produce
contrary  rectilinear  vibrations  of  shell  and  nucleus,  apply  now
a  proper  mutual  forcive  between  shell  and  nucleus  to  give  them
oscillatory  rotations  in  contrary  directions.  If  the  shell  is  hung
in  air  or  water,  we  should  have  a  propagation  outwards  of  dis-
turbance due  to  viscosity,  very  interesting  in  itself;  but  we  should
have  no  motion  that  we  know  of  appropriate  to  our  present
subject  until  we  rise to  frequencies  of  10^  10  x  10'-,  400  x  10'-,

*  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Vol.  iii.  Art.  civ.  p.  522.

160  LECTURE XIT. PART II.

800  X  10'^  or  3000  x  10^-,  when  we  should  have  radiant  heat,  or
visible  light,  or  ultra-violet  light  proceeding  from  the  outer  surface
of  the  shell,  as  it  were  from  a  point-source  of  light  at  the  centre,
with  a  character  of  polarization  which  we  shall  thoroughly  con-
sider a  little  later.  But  now  let  our  massless  shell  be  embedded
far  in  the  interior  of  a  vast  mass  of  glass,  or  metal,  or  rock,  or  of
any  homogeneous  elastic  solid,  firmly  attached  to  it  all  round,  so
that  neither  splitting  away  nor  tangential  slip  shall  be  possible.
Purely  distortional  waves  will  spread  out  in  all  directions  except
the  axial.  Suppose,  to  fix  our  ideas,  we  begin  with  vibrations  of
one-second  period,  and  let  the  elastic  solid  be  either  glass  or  iron.
At  distances  of  hundreds  of  kilometres  (that  is  to  say,  distances
great  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length  and  great  in  comparison
with  the  radius  of  the  shell),  the  wave-length  will  be  approxi-
mately 3  kilometres*.  Increase  the  frequency  now  to  1000
periods  per  second :  at  distances  of  hundreds  of  metres  the  wave-
length will  be  about  3  metres.  Increase  now  the  frequency  to
10"  periods  per  second;  the  wave-length  will  be  3  millim.,  and
this  not  only  at  distances  of  several  times  the  radius  of  the  shell,
but  throughout  the  elastic  medium  from  close  to  the  outer  surface
of  the  shell;  because  the  wave-length  now  is  a  small  fraction
of  the  radius  of  the  shell.  Increase  the  frequency  further  to
1000  X  10®  periods  per  second ;  the  wave-length  will  be  3  x  10~^  of
a  millim.,  or  3  mikroms,  if,  as  in  all  probability  is  the  case,  the
distance  between  the  centres  of  contiguous  molecules  in  glass  and
in  iron  is  less  than  a  five-hundredth  of  a  mikrom.  But  it  is
probable  that  the  distance  between  centres  of  contiguous  molecules
in  glass  and  in  iron  is  greater  than  10~'  of  a  mikrom,  and  there-
fore it  is  probable  that  neither  of  these  solids  can  transmit  waves
of  distortional  motion  of  their  own  ponderable  matter,  of  so  short
a  wave-length  as  10~^  of  a  mikrom.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  if
we  increase  the  frequency  of  the  rotational  vibrations  of  our  shell
to  one  hundred  thousand  times  1000  x  10^  that  is  to  say,  to
100  X  10'^  no  distortional  wave  of  motion  of  the  ponderable
matter  can  be  transmitted  outwards ;  but  it  seems  quite  certain
that  distortional  waves  of  radiant  heat  in  ether  will  be  produced
close  to  the  boundary  of  the  vibrating  shell,  although  it  is  also
probable  that  if  the  surrounding  solid  is  either  glass  or  iron,
these  waves  will  not  be  transmitted  far  outwards,  but  will  be

*  Math,  and  Phijs.  Papers,  Vol.  iii.  Art.  civ.  p.  522.

CONTINUITY OF UNDULAT0R7 THEORY.  161

absorbed,  that  is  to  say  converted  into  non-undulatory  thermal  Molar,
motions,  within  a  few  mikroms  of  their  origin.

Lastly,  suppose  the  elastic  solid  around  our  oscillating  shell
to  be  a  concentric  spherical  shell  of  homogeneous  glass  of  a  few
centimetres,  or  a  few  metres,  thickness  and  of  refractive  index
1"5  for  D  light.  Let  the  frequency  of  the  oscillations  be  increased
to  5"092  X  10"  periods  per  second,  or  its  period  reduced  to  •58932
of  a  michron :  homogeneous  yellow  light  of  period  equal  to  the
mean  of  the  periods  of  the  two  sodium  lines  will  be  propagated
outwards  through  the  glass  with  wave-length  of  about  |  x  "58932
of  a  mikrom,  and  out  from  the  glass  into  air  with  wave-length
of  '58932  of  a  mikrom.  The  light  will  be  of  maximum  intensity
in  the  equatorial  plane  and  zero  in  either  direction  along  the  axis,
and  its  plane  of  polarization  will  be  everywhere  the  meridional
plane.  It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  the  axis  of  rotation  of  the
ether  for  this  case  coincides  everywhere  with  the  line  of  vibration
of  the  ether  in  the  case  first  considered ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the
case  in  which  the  shell  vibrated  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line,
instead  of,  as  in  the  second  case,  rotating  through  an  infinitesimal
angle  round  the  same  line.

A  full  mathematical  investigation  of  the  motion  of  the  elastic
medium  at  all  distances  from  the  originating  shell,  for  each  of  the
cases  of  I.  (1)  and  I.  (2),  will  be  found  later  (p.  190)  in  these
lectures.

II.  An  electrical  analogy  for  I.  ( 1 )  is  presented  by  sub-
stituting for  our  massless  shell  an  ideally  rigid,  infinitely  massive
shell  of  glass  or  other  non-conductor  of  electricity,  and  for  our
massive  platinum  nucleus  a  massless  non-conducting  globe  elec-
trified with  a  given  quantity  of  electricity.  For  simplicity  we
shall  suppose  our  apparatus  to  be  surrounded  by  air  or  ether.
Vibrations  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line  are  to  be  maintained  by
force  between  shell  and  nucleus  as  in  I.  (1).  Or,  consider  simply
a  fixed  solid  non-conducting  globe  coated  with  two  circular  caps  of
metal,  leaving  an  equatorial  non-conducting  zone  between  them,
and  let  thin  wires  from  a  distant  alternate-current  dynamo,  or
electrostatic  inductor,  give  periodically  varying  opposite  electri-
fications to  the  two  caps.  For  moderate  frequencies  we  have
a  periodic  variation  of  electrostatic  force  in  the  air  or  ether  sur-
rounding the  apparatus,  which  we  can  readily  follow  in  imagination,
and  can  measure  by  proper  electrostatic  measuring  apparatus.
T.  L.  11

162  LECTURE XII. PART II.

lolar.  Its  phase,  with  moderate  frequencies,  is  very  exactly  the  same
as  that  of  the  electric  vibrator.  Now  suppose  the  frequency  of
the  vibrator  to  be  raised  to  several  hundred  million  million
periods  per  second.  We  shall  have  polarized  light  proceeding  as
if  from  an  ideal  point-source  at  the  centre  of  the  vibrator  and
answering  fully  to  the  description  of  I.  (1).  Does  the  phase  of
variation  of  the  electrostatic  force  in  the  axial  line  outside  the
apparatus  remain  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  the  vibrator  ?  An
affirmative  answer  to  this  question  would  mean  that  the  velocity
of  propagation  of  electrostatic  force  is  infinite.  A  negative
answer  would  mean  that  there  is  a  finite  velocity  of  propagation
for  electrostatic  force.

III.  The  shell  and  interior  electrified  non-conducting  massless
globe  being  the  same  as  in  II.,  let  now  a  forcive  be  applied
between  shell  and  nucleus  to  produce  rotational  oscillations  as
in  I.  (2).  When  the  frequency  of  the  oscillations  is  moderate,
there  will  be  no  alteration  of  the  electrostatic  force  and  no
perceptible  magnetic  force  in  the  air  or  ether  around  our  ap-
paratus. Let  now  the  frequency  be  raised  to  several  hundred
million  million  periods  per  second ;  we  shall  have  visible  polarized
light  proceeding  as  if  from  an  ideal  point-source  at  the  centre
and  answering  fully  to  the  description  of  the  light  of  I.  (2).
The  same  result  would  be  obtained  by  taking  simply  a  fixed
solid  non-conducting  globe  and  laying  on  wire  on  its  surface
approximately  along  the  circumferences  of  equidistant  circles  of
latitude,  and,  by  the  use  of  a  distant  source  (as  in  II.),  sending
an  alternate  current  through  this  wire.  In  this  case,  while  there
is  no  manifestation  of  electrostatic  force,  there  is  strong  alter-
nating magnetic  force,  which  in  the  space  outside  the  globe  is
as  if  from  an  ideal  infinitesimal  magnet  with  alternating  magneti-
zation, placed  at  the  centre  of  the  globe  and  with  its  magnetic
axis  in  our  axial  line.]

LECTURE  XIIL

Saturday,  October  11,  8  r.M.

Prof.  Morley  has  already  partially  solved  the  definite  dyna-  Molecular.
mical  problem  that  I  proposed  to  you  last  Wednesday  (p.  103
above)  so  far  as  determining  four  of  the  fundamental  periods;
and  you  may  be  interested  in  knowing  the  result.  He  finds  roots,
«~^  /c -^  &c.,  =  3-46,  1005,  -298,  -087;  each  root  not  being  very
different  from  three  times  the  next  after  it.  I  will  not  go  into  the
affair  any  further  just  now.  I  just  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  what
Prof  Morley  has  already  done  upon  the  example  that  I  suggested
for  our  arithmetical  laboratory.  I  think  it  will  be  worth  while
also  to  work  out  the  energy  ratios*  (p.  74).  In  selecting  this
example,  I  designed  a  case  for  which  the  arithmetic  would  of
necessity  be  highly  convergent.  But  I  chose  it  primarily  because
it  is  something  like  the  kind  of  thing  that  presents  itself  in
the  true  molecule : — An  elastic  complex  molecule  consisting  of  a
finite  number  of  discontinuous  masses  elastically  connected  (with
enormous  masses  in  the  central  parts,  that  seems  certain):  the
whole  embedded  in  the  ether  and  acted  on  by  the  ether  in  virtue
of  elastic  connections  which,  unless  the  molecule  were  rigid  and
embedded  in  the  ether  simply  like  a  rigid  mass  embedded  in  jelly,
must  consist  of  elastic  bonds  analogous  to  springs.

I  think  you  will  be  interested  in  looking  at  this  model  which,
by  the  kindness  of  Prof  Rowland,  I  am  now  able  to  show  you.
It  is  made  on  the  same  plan  as  a  wave  machine  which  I  made
many  years  ago  for  use  in  my  Glasgow  University  classes,  and
finally  modified  in  preparations  for  a  lecture  given  to  the  Royal

"^  This  was  done  by  Mr  Morley  who  kindly  gave  his  results  to  the  "Coeffi-
cients "  on  the  17th  Oct. See  Lecture  XIX.  below.

11—2

164

LECTURE  Xlir.

Molecular.  Institution  about  two  years  ago  on  "  The  Size  of  Atoms*." I
think  those  who  are  interested  in  the  illustration  of  dynamical

r

problems  will  find  this  a  very  nice  and  convenient  method. If

you  will  look  at  it,  you  will  see  how  the  thing  is  done  :  Pianoforte

wire,  bent  around  three  pins  in  the  way  you

— I see  here,  supports  each  bar. These  pins  are
S slanted  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  the  wire

^ to  press  in  close  to  the  bar  so  as  to  hold  it

quite  firm.  The  wood  is  slightly  cut  away
to  prevent  the  wire  from  touching  it  above  and  below  the  pins,
so  that  there  may  be  no  impairment  of  elastic  action  due  to  slip  of
steel  on  wood.  The  wire  used  is  fine  steel  pianoforte  wire ;  that
is  the  most  elastic  substance  available,  and  it  seems  to  me,  indeed,
by  far  the  most  elastic  of  all  the  materials  known  to  us  [except
crystals;  Jan.  19,  1899].  A  heavy  weight  is  hung  on  the  lower
end  of  the  wire  to  keep  it  tightly  stretched.

Prof  Rowland  is  going  to  have  another  machine  made,  which
I  think  you  will  be  pleased  with — a  continuous  wave  machine.
This  of  mine  is  not  a  wave  machine,  but  a  machine  for  illus-
trating the  vibrations  of  a  finite  group  of  several  elastically
connected  particles.  The  connecting  springs  are  represented  by
the  torsional  springiness  of  the  three  portions  of  connecting  wire
and  the  fourth  portion  by  which  the  upper  mass  is  hung.  In  this
case  gravity  contributes  nothing  to  the  effect  except  to  stretch
the  wire. If  we  stretch  the  wire  between  two  sides  of  a  portable

*  February  3,  1883  ;  Proc.  Royal  Institution,  Vol.  x.  p.  185  ;  Popular  Lectures
and  Addresses,  Vol.  i.  p.  154.

^OLOTROPY OF ELASTIC QUALITY.  165

frame,  we  might  take  our  model  to  an  ideal  lecture-room  at  the  Molecular,
centre  of  the  earth,  and  it  would  work  exactly  as  you  see  it  working
now.  You  will  understand  that  these  upper  masses  correspond
to  nil,  in^,  wij.  In  all  we  have  four  masses  here,  of  which  the
lowest  represents  the  spherical  shell  lining  the  ether  around
our  ideal  cavity.  I  will  just  apply  a  moving  force  to  this  lower
mass,  P.  To  realize  the  circumstances  of  our  case  more  fully,  we
should  have  a  spring  connected  with  a  vibrator  to  pull  P  with,
and  perhaps  we  may  get  that  up  before  the  next  lecture.  [Done
by  Professor  Rowland;  see  Lecture  XIV.]  I  shall  attempt  no
more  at  present  than  to  cause  this  first  particle  to  move  to  and
fro  in  a  period  perceptibly  shorter  than  the  shortest  of  the  three
fundamental  periods  which  we  have  when  the  lowest  bar  is  held
fixed.  The  result  is  scarcely  sensible  motion  of  the  others.
I  do  not  know  that  there  would  be  any  sensible  motion  at  all  if
I  had  observed  to  keep  the  greatest  range  of  this  lowest  particle
to  its  original  extent  on  the  two  sides  of  its  mean  position.

The  first  part  of  our  lecture  this  evening  I  propose  to  be  a
continuation  of  our  conference  regarding  seolotropy.  The  second
part  will  be  molecular  dynamics.  I  propose  to  look  at  this  question
a  little,  but  I  want  to  look  very  particularly  to  some  of  the  points
connected  with  the  conceivable  circumstances  by  which  we  can
account  for  not  merely  regular  refraction,  but  anomalous  dispersion,
and  both  the  absorption  that  we  have  in  liquids  and  very  opaque
bodies  and  such  absorption  as  is  demonstrated  by  the  very  fine
dark  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum  which  are  now  shown  more
splendidly  than ever  by Prof  Rowland's  gratings.

I  shall  speak  now  of  seolotropy.  The  equations  by  which  Molar.
Green  realized  the  condition  that  two  of  the  three  waves  having
fronts  parallel  to  one  plane  shall  be  distortional,  are  in  this  respect
equivalent  to  a  very  easily  understood  condition  that  I  may
illustrate  first  by  considering  the  more  general  problem.  That
problem  is  similar  to  another  of  the  very  greatest  simplicity,
which  is  the  well-known  problem  of  the  displacement  of  a  particle
subject  to  forces  acting  upon  it  in  different  directions  from  fixed
centres.  An  infinitesimal  displacement  in  any  direction  being
considered,  the  question  is,  when  is  the  return  force  in  the
direction  of  the  displacement  ?  As  we  know,  there  are  three
directions  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  in  which  the  return
force  is  in  the  direction  of  the  displacement. The  sole  difference

166  LECTURE XIII.

between  that  very  trite  problem  and  our  problem  of  yesterday
(Lecture  XII.  p.  135),  is  that  in  yesterday's  the  question  is
put  with  reference  to  a  whole  infinite  plane  in  an  infinite
homogeneous  solid,  which  is  displaced  in  any  direction  between
two  fixed  parallel  planes  on  its  two  sides,  to  which  it  is  always
kept  parallel.  Considering  force  per  unit  of  area,  we  have  the
same  question,  when  is  the  return  force  in  the  direction  of  the
displacement  ?  And  the  answer  is,  there  are  three  directions
at  right  angles  to  one  another  in  which  the  return  force  is  in
the  direction  of  the  displacement.  Those  three  directions  are
generally  oblique  to  the  plane ;  but  Green  found  the  conditions
under  which  one  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane,  and  the
other  two  in  the  plane.

I  shall  now  enter  upon  the  subject  more  practically  in
respect  to  the  application  to  the  wave  theory  of  light,  and  begin
by  preparing  to  introduce  the  condition  of  incompressibility.
Take  first  the  well-known  equations  of  motion  for  an  isotropic
solid  and  express  in  them  the  condition  that  the  body  is  incom-
pressible. The  equations  are :

dt^ ^ ^ ^  dx

d^V /  7 ^ .d8 _„

d^t ,, , ^d8 ^  ^

Suppose  now  the  resistance  to  compression  is  infinite,  which
means,  make  A;  =  oo  at  the  same  time  that  we  have  S  =  0.  What
then  is  to  become  of  the  first  term  of  the  second  members  of
these  equations? We  simply  take  (k+  ^n)8=2h  and  write  the

second  members  -i^  +  nV"-|, &c., accordingly. This requires  no

hypothesis  whatever.  We  may  now  take  k  =  co  ,  8  =  0,  without
interfering  with  the  form  of  our  equations.  These  equations,
without  any  condition  whatever  as  to  ^,  rj,  ^,  with  the  condition
p  =  {k-\-^n)8,  are  the  equations  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the
problem.  On  the  other  hand,  if  k  =  qc  ,  the  condition  that  that
involves  is

dx dy dz '

FRENCH CLASSICAL NOMENCLATURE,  167

which  gives  four  equations  in  all  for  the  four  unknown  quantities  Molar.

I.  V,  ?,  im-
precisely the  same  thing  may  be  done  in  respect  to  equations

(1),  (2), (3) of  p. 182 above  for  a  solid with  21 independent

coefficients. We will have this equation, S  =  0, again for  an

seolotropic  body,  and  a  corresponding  equality  to  infinity. I  am

not  going to introduce any  of  these  formulas at present. In

the meantime, I tell you a principle that is obvious. In

order to introduce the condition ^  +  ^~  +  ^  =  0 into our

ax ay dz

general  equation  of  energy  with  its  21  coefficients,  which  involves

a quadratic expression  in  terms  of the six  quantities  that  we

have  denoted  by  e,  f,  g,  a,  b,  c,  we  must  modify  the  quadratic

into  a  form  in  which  we  have  {e+f+gf  with  a  coefficient. That

coefficient equated to infinity, and e+f+g  =  0,  leave  us  the

general  equations  of  equilibrium  of  an  incompressible  seolotropic

elastic  solid.

I  want  to  call  your  attention  to  the  kind  of  deviation  from
isotropy  which  is  annulled  by  Green's  equations  among  the
coefficients  expressing  that  two  out  of  the  three  waves  shall  be
purely  distortional,  and  the  third  shall  be  condensational-rare-
factional.

The  next  thing  to  an  isotropic  body  is  one  possessing  what
Eankine  calls  cyboid  asymmetry.  Rankine  marks  an  era  in
philology  and  scientific  nomenclature.  In  England,  and  I
believe  in  America  also,  there  has  been  a  classical  reaction,
or  reform,  according  to  which,  instead  of  taking  all  our
Greek  words  through  the  French  mill  changing  k  (kappa)  into
c,  and  V  (upsilon)  into  y,  we  spell  in  English,  and  we  pronounce
Greek  words,  and  even  some  Latin  words,  more  nearly  according
to  what  we  may  imagine  to  be  the  actual  usage  of  the  ancients.
We  cannot  however  in  the  present  generation  get  over  Kuros
instead  of  Cyrus,  Kikero  instead  of  Cicero.  Rankine  is  a  curious
specimen  of  the  very  last  of  the  French  classical  style.  Rankine
was  the  last  writer  to  speak  of  cinematics  instead  of  kinematics.
Cyboid,  which  he  uses,  is  a  very  good  word,  but  I  do  not  know
that  there  is  any  need  of  introducing  it  instead  of  Cubic.  Cubic
is  an  exception  to  the  older  classical  derivation  in  that  u  is  not
changed  into  y;  it  should  be  cybic,  and  cube  should  be  cybe
(I  suppose  a:u/3o9  to  be  the  Greek  word), Cyboid  obviously  means

168  LECTURE XIII.

Molar.  cube-like,  or  cubic,  and  it  is  taken  from  the  Greek  in  Rankine's
manner,  now  old-fashioned.

Rankine  gives  the  equations  that  will  leave  cubic  asymmetry.
He  afterwards  makes  the  very  apposite  remark  that  Sir  David
Brewster  discovered  that  kind  of  variation  from  isotropy  in
analcime.  I  only  came  to  tins  in  Rankine  two  or  three  days  ago.
But  I  remember  going  through  the  same  thing  m3^self  not  long
ago,  and  I  said  to  Stokes — (I  always  consult  my  great  authority
Stokes  whenever  I  get  a  chance) — "  Surely  there  may  be  some-
thing found  in  nature  to  exemplify  this  kind  of  asymmetry;
would  it  not  be  likely  to  be  found  in  crystals  of  the  cubic  class  ?"
Stokes — he  knows  almost  everything — instantly  said,  "  Sir  David
Brewster  thought  he  had  found  it  in  cubic  crystals,  but  there
is  another  explanation  ;  it  may  be  owing  to  the  effect  of  the
cleavage  planes,  or  the  separation  of  the  crystal  into  several
crystalline  laminas" — I  do  not  remember  all  that  Stokes  said,
but  he  distinctly  denied  that  Brewster's  experiment  showed  a  true
instance  of  cubic  optical  asymmetr}''.  He  pointed  out  that  an
exceedingly  slight  deviation  from  cubic  isotropy  would  show
very  markedly  on  elementary  phenomena  of  light,  and  might  be
very  readily  tested  by  means  of  ordinary  optical  instruments.
The  fact  that  nothing  of  the  kind  has  been  discovered  is
absolute  evidence  that  the  deviation,  if  there  is  any,  from  optic
isotropy  in  a  crystal  of  the  cubic  class,  is  exceedingly  small  in
comparison  with  the  deviation  from  isotropy  presented  by  ordinary
doubly  refracting  crystals.

Molecular.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  square  seolotropy  is  found  in  a  pocket
handkerchief  or  piece  of  square-woven  cloth,  supposing  the  warp
and  woof  to  be  accurately  similar,  a  supposition  that  does  not
hold  of  ordinary  cloth.  Take  wire- cloth  carefully  made  in
squares;  that  is  symmetrical  and  equal  in  its  moduluses  with
reference  to  two  axes  at  right  angles  to  one  another.  There
will  be  a  vast  difference  according  as  you  pull  out  one  side
and  compress  the  other,  or  pull  out  one  diagonal  and  compress  the
other.  Take  the  extreme  case  of  a  cloth  woven  up  with  inex-
tensible  frictionless  threads,  and  there  is  an  absolute  resistance  to
distortion  in  two  directions  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and
no  resistance  at  all  to  distortion  of  the  kind  that  is  presented
in  changing  it  from  square  to  rhombic  shape.  That  is  to  say,  a
framework of this  kind  has no resistance  to  shearing  parallel

RANKINE  S NOMENCLATURE.

169

to the sides ; in other words, to the distortion produced  Molecular.
by lengthening one diagonal and  shortening the
other. Now imagine  cut  out  of  this  pocket  hand-
kerchief, a square with sides parallel  to  the  dia-
gonals, making  a  pattern of  this  kind. There is
a  square  that has  infinite  resistance  to  shearing  parallel  to  its
sides, and zero resistance to pulling out in the
direction  perpendicular  to  either  pair  of  sides. This
is not altogether  a  trivial illustration. Surgeons
make  use  of  it  in  their  bandages. A  person  not
familiar  with  the  theory  of  elastic  solids  might cut a  strip  of
cloth  parallel  to  warp  or  woof;  but  cut  it  obliquely  and  you  have
a  conveniently  pliable and longitudinally seraielastic  character
that  allows  it  to  serve  for  some  kinds  of  bandage.

Imagine  an  elastic  solid  made  up  in  that  kind  of  way,  with
that  kind  of  deviation  from  isotropy ;  and  you  have  clearly  two
different  rigidities  for  different  distortions  in  the  same  plane.
I  remember  that  Rankine  in  one  of  his  early  papers  proved  this
to  be  impossible !  He  proved  a  proposition  to  the  effect  that
the  rigidity  was  the  same  for  all  distortions  in  the  same  plane.
That  was  no  doubt  founded  on  some  special  supposition  as  to
arrangement  of  molecules  and  may  be  true  for  the  particular
arrangement  assumed ;  but  it  is  clearly  fallacious  in  respect  to
true  elastic  solids.  Rankine  in  his  first  paper  made  too  short  work
of  the  elastic  solid  in  respect  to  possibilities  of  »olotropy.  He
soon  after  took  it  up  very  much  on  the  same  foundation  as  Green
with  his  21  coefficients,  but  still  under  the  bondage  of  his  old
proposition  that  rigidity  is  the  same  for  all  distortions  in  the
same  plane.  Yet  a  little  later  he  escaped  from  the  yoke,  and
took  his  revenge  splendidly  by  giving  a  fine  Greek  name  "  cyboid
asymmetry"  to  designate  the  special  crystalline  quality  of  which
he  had  proved  the  impossibility  !

I  must  read  to  you  some  of  the  fine  words  that  Rankine  has  Molar,
introduced  into  science  in  his  work  on  the  elasticity  of  solids.
That  is  really  the  first  place  I  know  of,  except  in  Green,  in
which  this  thing  has  been  gone  into  thoroughly.  It  is  not
really  satisfactory  in  Rankine  except  in  the  way  in  which  he
carries  out  the  algebra  of  the  subject,  and  the  determinants
and  matrices  that  he  goes  into  so  very  finely.  But  what  I  want
to  call  attention  to  now is his grand  names. I  do  not  know

iVO  LECTURE XIII.

whether  Prof.  Sylvester  ever  looked  at  these  names  ;  I  think  he
would  be  rather  pleased  with  them.  "  Thlipsinomic  transforma-
tions," "  Umbral  surfaces,"  and  so  on.  Any  one  who  will  learn  the
meaning  of  all  these  words  will  obtain  a  large  mass  of  knowledge
with  respect  to  an  elastic  solid.  The  simple,  good  words,  "  strain
and  stress,"  are  due  to  Rankine ;  "potential"  energy  also.  Hear
also  the  grand  words  "  Thlipsinomic,  Tasinomic,  Platythliptic,
Euthytatic,  Metatatic,  Heterotatic,  Plagiotatic,  Orthotatic,  Pan-
tatic,  Cybotatic,  Goniothliptic,  Euthythliptic,"  &c.

You  may  now  understand  what  cyboid  asymmetry  is,  or  as  I
prefer  to  call  it,  cubic  aeolotropy.  Rankine  had  not  the  word
seolotropy;  that  came  in  from  myself*  later.  Cyboid  or  cubic
aeolotropy  is  the  kind  of  jBolotropy  exhibited  by  a  cubic  grating ;
as  it  were  a  structure  built  up  of  uniform  cubic  frames.  There
[Feb.  14,  1899;  a  skeleton  cube,  of  twelve  equal  wooden  rods  with
their  ends  fixed  in  eight  india-rubber  balls  forming  its  corners]
is  a  thing  that  would  be  isotropic,  except  for  its  smaller  rigidity
for  one  than  for  the  other  of  the  two  principal  distortions  in  each
one  of  the  planes  of  symmetry.

I  will  go  no  further  into  that  just  now;  but  I  hope  that  in
the  next  lecture,  or  somehow  before  we  have  ended,  we  may  be
able  to  face  the  problem  of  introducing  the  relations  among  the
21  moduluses  which  are  sufficient  to  do  away  with  all  obliquities
with  reference  to  three  rectangular  axes.  But  you  can  do  this  in
a  moment — equate  to  zero  enough  of  the  21  coefficients  to  fulfil
two  conditions,  (1)  that  if  you  compress  a  cube  of  the  body  by
three  balancing  pairs  of  pressures,  equal  or  unequal,  perpendicular
to  its  three  pairs  of  faces,  it  will  remain  rectangular,  and  (2)  that
if  you  apply,  in  four  planes  meeting  in  four  parallel  edges,  balanc-
ing tangential  forces  perpendicular  to  these  edges,  the  angles  at
these  edges  will  be  made  alternately  acute  and  obtuse,  and  the
angles  at  the  other  eight  edges  will  remain  right  angles.  [Feb.  14,
1899  ;  here  are  the  required  annulments  of  coefficients  to  fulfil
those  two  conditions,  with  OX,  OY,  OZ  taken  jjarallel  to  edges  of
the  undisturbed  cube,  and  with  the  notation  of  Lecture  II.  p.  23  : —

42  =  0;  43  =  0;  51=0;  53  =  0;  61  =  0;  62  =  01
41=0;  52  =  0;  63  =  0; 56  =  0  ;  64  =  0  ;  45  =  0j""^  ^'

*  See  p.  118  above.

iEOLOTROPlC ELASTICITY WITHOUT SKEWNESS.  1*71

Thus  the  formula  for  potential  energy  becomes  reduced  to  Molar.

2^=  lle^  +  22/-=  +  33(7^  +  2  (23/y7  +  Slge  +  12ef)

.(2).

With  these  nine  coefficients,  11,  22,  33;  23,  31,  12;  44,  55,
66  ;  all  independent;  the  elastic  solid  would  present  two  different
rigidities  for  the  two  distortions  of  each  of  the  planes  (yz),  {zx),  {xy),
one  by  shearing  motion  parallel  to  either  of  the  two  other  planes,
the  other  by  shearing  motion  parallel  to  either  of  the  planes
bisecting  the  right  angles  between  those  planes.  The  values  of
these  rigidities  are  as  follows  for  the  cases  of  shearing  motions
parallel,  and  at  45°,  to  our  principal  planes : —

Distortion

Plane  of  Distortion

Line  of  Motion

Rigidity

a
f-9

(f)

y  or  z
45°  to  y  and  z

44
i{i(22  +  33)-23}

h
g-e

(zx)

z  OV  X

45°  to  z  and  x

55
1(1(33 +  11) -31}

c

e-f

i^y)

.r  or  y
45°  to  .:;;  and  y

66

Hi  (11 +  22) -12}

From  the  fact  that  squares  only  of  a,  h,  c  appear  in  the  equa-
tion of  energy,  we  see  that  in  equilibrium*  these  distortions  are
separately  balanced  by  the  tangential  stresses  S,  T,  U.  And  we
conclude  that  there  can  be  plane  waves  of  purely  longitudinal
motion  (condensational-rarefactional)  and  waves  of  pure  distortion
travelling  in  the  directions  x,  y,  z  with  their  fronts  perpendicular
to  these  directions ;  and  that  their  velocities  "f"  are  as  shown  in  the
following  table  : —

*  Lecture  LI.  p.  24.

t  Equations  (1)  above,  with  equations  (4),  (7),  (8)  of  Lecture  XL  p.  133,  applied
respectively  to  the  cases

m  =  0,  n=0,|  =  0; n=0,  J  =  0,  i?:=0  j 1  =  0,  m=^0,  g^^Q.

1Y2

LECTURE XIII.

Wave-front

Line  of  Vibration

Quality

Velocity

X

condensational-rarefactional

^7

{y^)

y

purely  distortional

zee
V7

z

^^ »

Vf

y

condensational-rarefactional

x/f

{zx)

z

purely  distortional

V?

X

» j>

/66

V7

z

condensational-rarefactional

x/?

i^-y)

X

purely  distortional

/55
V P

y

jj >»

/44

V7

Selecting  from  these  the  purely  distortional  waves,  and  taking
them  in  pairs  having  equal  velocities,  we  have  the  following
convenient  table  : —

Wave-front

Line  of  Vibration

Plane  of  Distortion

Velocity

k^y)

{xz)

y

z

(y^)

^'i

z

X

(zx)

^1

{zx)

i^y)

X

y

{xy)

V?

EQUALISATION  OF  VELOCITIES  FOR  ONE  PLANE  OF  DISTORTION. l73

In  this  table  we  find  one  and  the  same  velocity,  V44//3,  for  two  Molar.
different  waves  with  fronts  parallel  to  x,  and  having  their  lines  of
vibration  parallel  to  y  and  z  respectively,  and  therefore  each  having
yz  for  its  plane  of  distortion.  If  now  we  apply  the  formulas  of
Lecture  XI.,  p.  133,  to  investigate  the  velocities  of  other  waves
having  the  same  plane  of  distortion — for  instance,  waves  with
fronts  parallel  to  x  and  lines  of  vibration  at  45°  to  y  and  z, — we
find  different  propagational  velocities  unless

44  =  1(1(22 +  33) -23}*,

which  makes  them  all  equal.  Thus,  and  by  similar  considerations
relatively  to  y  and  z,  we  see  that  each  of  the  three  propagational
velocities  given  in  the  preceding  table  is  the  same  for  all  waves
having  the  same  plane  of  distortion,  if  the  following  conditions
are  fulfilled : —

44  =  i{i(22  +  33)-23h

55=i{n33  +  ll)-31} (3).

66  =  i{Hn  +  22)-12})

These  three  equations  simply  express  the  condition  that  in
each  of  the  three  coordinate  planes  the  rigidity  due  to  a  shear
parallel  to  either  of  the  two  other  coordinate  planes  is  equal  to
the  rigidity  due  to  a  shear  parallel  to  either  plane  bisecting  the
right  angle  between  them.

Green-j-  found  fourteen  equations  among  his  21  coefficients  to
express  that  there  can  be  a  purely  distortional  wave  with  wave-
front  in  any  plane  whatever.  Three  more  equations^  express
further  that  the  planes  chosen  for  the  coordinates  are  planes
of  symmetry.  The  conditions  which  we  have  considered  have
given  us,  in  (1)  and  (3)  above,  fifteen  equations  which  are  identical
with  fifteen  of  Green's. His  other  two  are

11  =  22  =  33 (4).

With  all  these  seventeen  equations  among  the  coefficients,  the
equation  of  energy  becomes  reduced  to

2^=ll(e+/+(7)-+44(a2-4/5r)+55(6"-4^e)-f-66(o2-4e/)...(5).

*  Compare  with  formula  ?i=  J  (^  - 13)  in  Lecture  II.  p.  25,  which  is  the  condition
that  the  rigidity  is  the  same  for  all  distortions  in  any  one  of  the  three  coordinate
planes  for  the  case  of  11  =  22  =  33,  there  considered.

t  Collected  Papers,  p.  309.

+  Ibid.,  pp.  303,  309.

174

LECTURE XIIT.

It  is  easy  now  to  verify  Green's  result.  Remember  that  if  we
denote  by  ^,  t),  ^  infinitesimal  displacements  of  a  point  of  the
solid  from  its  undisturbed  position  {w,  y,  z),  we  have

dx'

9  =

dX
dz

dy dz  '  dz dx

^^dri_^dl
dx dy

.(6).

Denoting  now  by  1 1 1  dxdydz  integration  throughout  a  volume

V,  with  the  condition  that  f ,  r],  ^  are  each  zero  at  every  point  of
the  boundary,  we  find  by  a  well-known  method  of  double  integra-
tion by  parts*,

\\\dxdydz  1 f^\l\d.dydz g 1

1 1  dxdydz -^ -^  = dxdydz -j- -j-
JJJ ^ dz dx JJJ ^ dx dz

^ (7)

jfjd.dyd. 1 |=///rf^rfy& 1 g

\.iid  by  aid  of  this  transformation  we  find

2fjjd.dyd.  E=jfjd.dyd. n(|  +  |  +  fy

H-(f/......j«(|-t)%5.(|-DV6e(|-|

(8).

Let  now  V  be  the  space  between  two  infinite  planes,  parallel
to  the  fronts  of  any  series  of  purely  distortional  waves  traversing
the  space  between  them,  these  planes  being  taken  at  places  at
which  for  an  instant  the  displacement  is  zero.  They  may,  for
instance,  be  the  planes,  half  a  wave-length  asunder,  of  two
consecutive  zeros  of  displacement  in  a  series  of  simple  harmonic
waves.  Let  P  be  any  plane  of  the  vibrating  solid  parallel  to
them  ;  let  p  be  its  distance  from  the  origin  of  coordinates  ; and

q,  its  displacement  at  any  instant. Then  ^  -j^  is  the  molecular

*  Compare  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Art.  xcix.  Vol.  iii.  p.  448  ;  and  "  On  the
Reflexion  and  Refraction  of  Light,"  Phil.  Mag.  1888,  2nd  half-year.

green's  dynamics  for  fresnel's  wave-surface. 175

rotation  of  the  solid  infinitely  near  to  this  plane  on  each  side  ;  and  Molar,
by  the  rectangular  resolution  of  rotations,  we  have

ldq^d^_dv^ ^^^dq^d^_dX. ^^^^_^ /gx
dp dy dz ' dp dz dx' dp dec dy  '" '

where  I,  m,  n  denote  the  direction  cosines  of  the  line  in  P  perpen-
dicular to  the  direction  of  q,  this  being  the  axis  of  the  molecular
rotation.  Using  these  new  values  in  (8),  and  remarking  that  the
first  chief  term  vanishes  because  the  displacement  is  purely
distortional,  we  have

2  III dxdydz  E  =  (UP  +  5om-  +  66n')  |[[ dxdydz (^\\ .  .(10).

Hence  we  see  that  no  condensation  or  rarefaction  accompanies
our  plane  distortional  waves,  and  that  their  velocity  of  propagation
is

''44/^  +  55/71^  +  66n-

^/-

•(11).

This  is  Fresnel's  formula  for  the  propagational  velocity  of  a
plane  wave  in  a  crystal  with  (I,  m,  n)  denoting  the  direction  of
vibration  ;  while  in  Green's  theory  (I,  m,  n)  is  the  line  in  the
wave-front  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  vibration.  The
wave-surface  is  identical  with  Fresnel's.]

I  will  read  to  you  Green's  own  statement  of  the  relative
tactics  of  the  motion  in  his  and  in  Fresnel's  waves.  Here  it
is  at  the  bottom  of  page  304  of  Green's  Collected  Papers :  "  We
"  thus  see  that  if  we  conceive  a  section  made  in  the  ellipsoid
"to  which  the  equation  (10)  belongs,  by  a  plane  passing  through
"its  centre  and  parallel  to  the  wave's  front,  this  section,  when
"  turned  90  degrees  in  its  own  plane,  will  coincide  with  a  similar
"section  of  the  ellipsoid  to  which  the  equation  (8)  belongs,  and
"  which  gives  the  directions  of  the  disturbance  that  will  cause
"  a  plane  wave  to  propagate  itself  without  subdivision,  and  the
"velocity  of  propagation  parallel  to  its  own  front.  The  change
"  of  position  here  made  in  the  elliptical  section  is  evidently
"  equivalent  to  supposing  the  actual  disturbances  of  the  ethereal
"  particles  to  be  parallel  to  the  plane  usually  denominated  as  the
"plane  of  polarization."

Before  we  separate  this  evening,  return  for  a  few  minutes
to  our  problem of  vibratory  molecules  embedded  in  an elastic

176  LECTURE XIII.

Molecular,  solid ;  and  let  us  consider  particularly  the  application  of  this
dynamical  theory  to  the  Fraunhofer  double  dark  line  D  of  sodium-
vapour.

\^March  1,  1899.*  For  a  perfectly  definite  mechanical  repre-
sentation of  Sellmeier's  theory,  imagine  for  each  molecule  of
sodium-vapour  a  spherical  hollow  in  ether,  lined  with  a  thin  rigid
spherical  shell,  of  mass  equal  to  the  mass  of  homogeneous  ether
which  would  fill  the  hollow.  This  rigid  lining  of  the  hollow  we
shall  call  the  sheath  of  the  molecule,  or  briefly  the  sheath.
Within  this  put  two  rigid  spherical  shells,  one  inside  the  other,
each  moveable  and  each  repelled  from  the  sheath  with  forces,  or
distribution  of  force,  such  that  the  centre  of  each  is  attracted
towards  the  centre  of  the  hollow  with  a  force  varying  directly  as
the  distance.  These  suppositions  merely  put  two  of  Sellmeier's
single-atom  vibrators  into  one  sheath.

Imagine  now  a  vast  number  of  these  diatomic  molecules,  equal
and  similar  in  every  respect,  to  be  distributed  homogeneously
through  all  the  ether  which  we  have  to  consider  as  containing
sodium-vapour.  In  the  first  place,  let  the  density  of  the  vapour
be  so  small  that  the  distance  between  nearest  centres  is  great  in
comparison  with  the  diameter  of  each  molecule.  And  in  the
first  place  also,  let  us  consider  light  whose  wave-length  is  very
large  in  comparison  with  the  distance  from  centre  to  centre  of
nearest  molecules. Subject  to  these  conditions  we  have  (Sellmeier's

formula)

- =1+  - — .+  o-^-:, (1);

Vol  T-  —  K- T-  —  K,"

where  m,  m^  denote  the  ratios  of  the  sums  of  the  masses  of  one
and  the  other  of  the  moveable  shells  of  the  diatomic  molecules  in
any  large  volume  of  ether,  to  the  mass  of  undisturbed  ether  filling
the  same  volume ;  k,  k^  the  periods  of  vibration  of  one  and  the
other  of  the  two  moveable  shells  of  one  molecule,  on  the  supposition
that  the  sheath  is  held  fixed ;  Vg  the  velocity  of  light  in  pure
undisturbed  ether;  Vg  the  velocity  of  light  of  period  r  in  the
sodium-vapour.

*  This  replaces  the  concluding  portion  of  the  Lecture  as  originally  delivered.  It
was  read  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  on  Feb.  6,  1899,  and  reprinted  in
PJnl.  Miifj.  for  March,  1S99,  under  the  title  "  Application  of  Sellmeier's  Dynamical
Theory  to  the  Dark  Lines  D,,  J*^  produced  by  Sodium-Vapour."

DYNAMICS OF FRAUNHOFER's DARK LINES ZJjDg.  177

For  sodium-vapour,  according  to  the  measurements  of  Rowland  Molecular.
and  Bell*,  published  in  1887  and  1888  (probably  the  most
accurate  hitherto  made),  the  periods  of  light  corresponding  to  the
exceedingly  fine  dark  lines  D^,  D^  of  the  solar  spectrum  are
•589618  and  '589022  of  a  michronf.  The  mean  of  these  is  so
nearly  one  thousand  times  their  difference  that  we  may  take

K=\{K■]rK){\-,^^■  K=^{K  +  K)(l  + ,.^.^ (2).

2000y' ' '^ "\ 2000y
Hence  if  we  put

T  =  i(«  +  o(i  +  ii^) (3);

and  if  x  be  any  numeric  not  exceeding  4  or  5  or  10,  we  have

©'^' - im^^^^y'  (^'T^  1- roVo(2--i> w;

whence

T^ ^  1000 r- . 1000
T*  -  /c2  ~^  2a;  +  1  ' T- -  a:/ ^  2a;  -  1 ^ ''

Using  this  in  (1),  and  denoting  by  /i  the  refractive  index  from
ether  to  an  ideal  sodium-vapour  with  only  the  two  disturbing
atoms  m,  m^,  we  find

' „ , 1000m 1000m,

=  '''=i+5^i+^^:rT' (6)-

When  the  period,  and  the  corresponding  value  of  x  according
to  (3),  is  such  as  to  make  /x^  negative,  the  light  cannot  enter  the
sodium-vapour.  When  the  period  is  such  as  to  make  ^"^  positive,
the  proportion,  according  to  Fresnel  and  according  to  the  most
probable  dynamics,  of  normally  incident  light  which  enters  the
vapour  would  be

-e-iir (^>'

if  the  transition  from  space,  where  the  propagational  velocity  is
Ve,  to  medium  in  which  it  is  Vg,  were  infinitely  sudden.

Judging  from  the  approximate  equality  in  intensity  of  the

*  Rowland,  Phil.  Mag.  1887,  first  half-year;  Bell,  Phil.  Mag.  1888,  first  half-
year.

t  See  footnote,  p.  150.

T.  L.  12

vj

178  .  LECTURE XIII.

Molecular,  bright  lines  Dj,  D.^  of  incandescent  sodium-vapour;  and  from  the
approximately  equal  strengths  of  the  very  fine  dark  lines  D^,  D^
of  the  solar  spectrum ;  and  from  the  approximately  equal  strengths,
or  equal  breadths,  of  the  dark  lines  D^,  D^  observed  in  the
analysis  of  the  light  of  an  incandescent  metal,  or  of  the  electric
arc,  seen  through  sodium-vapour  of  insufficient  density  to  give
much  broadening  of  either  line ;  we  see  that  m  and  m,  cannot  be
very  different,  and  we  have  as  yet  no  experimental  knowledge  to
show  that  either  is  greater  than  the  other.  I  have  therefore
assumed  them  equal  in  the  calculations  and  numerical  illustrations
described  below.

At  the  beginning  of  the  present  year  I  had  the  great  pleasure
to  receive  from  Professor  Henri  Becquerel,  enclosed  with  a  letter
of  date  Dec.  81,  1898,  two  photographs  of  anomalous  dispersion
by  prisms  of  sodium-vapour*,  by  which  I  was  astonished  and
delighted  to  see  not  merely  a  beautiful  and  perfect  demonstration
of  the  "anomalous  dispersion"  towards  infinity  on  each  side  of  the
zero  of  refractivity,  but  also  an  illustration  of  the  characteristic
nullity  of  absorption  and  finite  breadth  of  dark  lines,  originally
shown  in  Sellmeier's  formula f  of  1872  and  now,  after  27  years,
first  actually  seen.  Each  photograph  showed  dark  spaces  on
the  high  sides  of  the  Z)j,  D^  lines,  very  narrow  on  one  of  the
photographs ;  on  the  other  much  broader,  and  the  one  beside
the  D^  line  decidedly  broader  than  the  one  beside  the  D^  line  ;
just  as  it  should  be  according  to  Sellmeier's  formula,  according
to  which  also  the  density  of  the  vapour  in  the  prism  must  have
been  greater  in  the  latter  case  than  in  the  former.  Guessing
from  the  ratio  of  the  breadths  of  the  dark  bands  to  the  space
between  their  D^,  D^  borders,  and  from  a  slightly  greater  breadth
of  the  one  beside  D.^,  I  judged  that  m  must  in  this  case  have  been
not  very  different  from  "0002 ;  and  I  calculated  accordingly  from
(6)  the  accompanying  graphical  representation  showing  the  value

of  1 ,  represented  by  y  in  fig.  1. Fig.  2  represents  similarly

the  value  of  1  —  for  in  =  '001,  or  density  of  vapour  five  times

r'

*  A  description  of  Professor  Beequerel's  experiments  and  results  will  be  found
in  Comptes  Rendus,  Dec.  5,  1898,  and  Jan.  16,  1899.

t  Sellmeier,  Fogg.  Ann.  Vol.  cxlv.  (1872)  pp.  399,  520;  Vol.  cxlvii.  (1872)
pp.  387,  525.

DYNAMICS OF FRAUNHOFER'S DARK LINES D^D^.  179

Fip.  1*.  w  =  -0002.  Molecular.

1

t>.

0,

y\

c

v:

.

9!

6

9<

\7

9!

'f)

9<

19

L°

V.

A.

ym/}

r^^ff

4'=  0302

y

O.A

f^m,

7^^

.

K

I0(

n

1

001

1

002

1

003

^

Fig.

2.

7)

=  •001.

1

1

D.

V

ir'

«

P6

9

P7

Q

58

1

\"^

V,

—

A.

y^/

icie,

$.-(

^0.

V

>t —

).y5iy

■nptc

"?

lOO'O

1

001

1

m

1

003

1

004

-rz

\

■ :

1

1

V-

*  In  figs.  1  and  2  the  Dj ,  D2  lines  are  touched  by  curves  of  finite  curvature  at
2/  =  +  1 ;  and  in  figs.  3,  4,  and  5  at  2/  =  0.  The  left-hand  side  of  each  dark  band  is
an  asymptote  to  the  curves  of  figs.  1  and  2,  and  a  tangent  aty  —  Q  to  the  curves  of
figs.  3,  4,  and  5.  The  diagrams  could  not  show  these  characteristics  clearly  unless
•  on  a  much  larger  scale.

12—2

180

LECTURE XIII.

Molecular,  that  in  the  case  represented  by  fig.  1. Figs.  3  and  4  represent
the  ratio  of  intensities  of  transmitted  to  normally  incident  light

Fig.  3.

m  =  -0002.

m

99Q  S99 Of iO30  D, 1001  1002

Fig.  4. m  =  '001.

1

~

m

f-

1

r

P

99

8

999 [j>j 10

30 0), 10

01

10

0?

X

Fig.  5.

m  =  -003.

J '^

1

\/o.

un

\

1

^/^ n. ,r^

_,

,-.

no

^

996 9S7  998 999 ^  1000 °i 1001  WZ

for  the  densities  corresponding  to  figs.  1  and  2,  and  fig.  5  repre-
sents the  ratio  for  the  density  corresponding  to  the  value  m  =  '003.
The  following  table  gives  the  breadths  of  the  dark  bands  for
densities  of  vapour  corresponding  to  values  of  m  from  '0002  to
fifteen  times  that  value ;  and  fig.  6  represents  graphically  the
breadths  of  the  dark  bands  and  their  positions  relatively  to  the
bright  lines  Dj,  Dg  for  the  first  five  values  of  m  in  the  table.

Values  of  m

Breadths  of  Bands

-Di

D,

•0002

-09

•217

•293

•340

-371

•392

•408

•419

•11

•383
•707
1^060
1-429
1-808
2-192
2-581

•0006

•0010

•0014

•0018

•0022

•0026

•0030

DYNAMICS OF FRAUNHOFER  S DARK LINES D^D.

181

According  to  Sellmeier's  formula  the  light  transmitted  through  Molecular.
a  layer  of  sodium- vapour  (or  any  transparent  substance  to  which

Fig.  6.

VaWIS  trin

the  formula  is  applicable)  is  the  same  whatever  be  the  thickness
of  the  layer  (provided  of  course  that  the  thickness  is  many  times
the  wave-length).  Thus  the  Di,  Do  lines  of  the  spectrum  of  solar
light,  which  has  traversed  from  the  source  a  hundred  kilometres
of  sodium-vapour  in  the  sun's  atmosphere,  must  be  identical
in  breadth  with  those  seen  in  a  laboratory  experiment  in  the
spectrum  of  light  transmitted  through  half  a  centimetre  or  a
few  centimetres  of  sodium- vapour,  of  the  same  density  as  the
densest  part  of  the  sodium-vapour  in  the  portion  of  the  solar
atmosphere  traversed  by  the  light  analysed  in  any  particular
observation.  The  question  of  temperature  cannot  occur  except
in  so  far  as  the  density  of  the  vapour,  and  the  clustering  in  groups
of  atoms  or  non-clustering  (mist  or  vapour  of  sodium),  are  con-
cerned.

A  grand  inference  from  the  experimental  foundation  of  Stokes'
and  Kirchhoff's  original  idea  is  that  the  periods  of  molecular
vibration  are  the  same  to  an  exceedingly  minute  degree  of
accuracy  through  the  great  differences  of  range  of  vibration  pre-
sented in  the  radiant  molecules  of  an  electric  spark,  electric  arc,
or  flame,  and  in  the  molecules  of  a  comparatively  cool  vapour
or  gas  giving  dark  lines  in  the  spectrum  of  light  transmitted
through  it.

It  is  much  to  be  desired  that  laboratory  experiments  be  made,
notwithstanding  their  extreme  difficulty,  to  determine  the  density
and  pressure  of  sodium-vapour  through  a  wide  range  of  temperature,
and  the  relation  between  density,  pressure,  and  temperature  of
saseous  sodium.

182

LECTURE XIII.

Passing  from  the  particular  case  of  sodium,  I  add  an  applica-
tion of  Sellmeier's  formula,  (1)  above,  to  the  case  of  a  gas  or
vapour  having  in  its  constitution  only  a  single  molecular  period  k.
Taking  m,  =  0  in  (1),  we  see  that  the  square  of  the  refractive
index  for  values  of  r  very  large  in  comparison  with  /c  is  1  +  m.
And  remembering  that  the  dark  line  or  band  extends  through
the  range  of  values  for  which  {Vejvsf  is  negative,  and  that  {Velv^Y
is  zero  at  the  higher  border,  we  see  from  (1)  that  the  dark  band
extends  through  the  range  from

T  =  K  to  T  =

VH-

.(8).

m

As  an  example  suitable  to  illustrate  the  broadening  of  the
dark  line  by  increased  density  of  the  gas,  I  take  m  =  a  x  10~*,
and  take  a  some  moderate  numeric  not  greater  than  10  or  20.
This  gives  for  the  range  of  the  dark  band  from

T  =  K  to  T  =  /c(l-ia  X  10-^) (9);

and  for  large  values  of  t  it  makes  the  refractive  index
l-l-^axlO~^  and  therefore  the  refractivity,  ^a  x  10~*.  If  for
example  we  take  a  =  6,  the  refractivity  would  be  '0003,  which  is
nearly  the  same  as  the  refractivity  of  common  air  at  ordinary
atmospheric  density.

Fig.  7.

998

999

1000

1001

1002

DYNAMICS Of A SINGLE DARK LINE.  183

Taking  /c  =  1000,  we  have,  for  values  of  r  not  differing  from  Molecular.
1000  by  more  than  10  or  20,

T^ ^  1000
Thus  we  have

where  ^  =  t-1000  (10).

^  =  \/l  +  20. ^11>-

In  fig.  7  the  curve  marked  /j,  represents  the  values  of  the  refractive
index  corresponding  to  values  of  t  through  a  small  range  above
and  below  k,  taking  a  =  4.  The  other  curve  represents  the
proportionate  intensity  of  the  light  entering  the  vapour,  calculated
from  these  values  of  /u,  by  (7)  above.

The  table  on  next  page  shows  calculated  values  for  the  ordi-
nates  of  the  two  curves ;  also  values  (essentially  negative)  for  the
formvila  of  intensity  calculated  from  the  negative  values  of  /j,
algebraically  admissible  from  (11).

The  negative  values  of  /j,  have  no  physical  interpretation  for
either  curve ;  but  the  consideration  of  the  algebraic  prolongations
of  the  curves  through  the  zero  of  ordinates  on  the  left-hand  side
of  the  dark  band  illustrates  the  character  of  their  contacts.  The
physically  interpreted  part  of  each  curve  ends  abruptly  at  this
zero  ;  which  for  each  curve  corresponds  to  a  maximum  value  of  x.
The  algebraic  prolongation  of  the  fi  curve  on  the  negative  side  is
equal  and  similar  to  the  curve  shown  on  the  positive  side.  But
the  algebraic  prolongation  of  the  intensity  curve  through  its  zero,
as  shown  in  the  table,  differs  enormously  from  the  curve  shown  on
the  positive  side.  To  the  degree  of  approximation  to  which  we
have  gone,  the  portions  of  the  intensity  curve  on  the  left  and
right  hand  sides  of  the  dark  band  are  essentially  equal  and
similar.  This  proves  that  so  far  as  Sellmeier's  theory  represents
the  facts,  the  penumbras  are  equal  and  similar  on  the  two  sides
of  a  single  dark  line  of  the  spectrum  uninfluenced  by  others.  It
is  also  interesting  to  remark  that  according  to  Sellmeier  as  now
interpreted,  the  broadening  of  a  single  undisturbed  dark  line,
produced  by  increased  density  of  the  gas  or  vapour,  is  essentially
on  the  high  side  of  the  finest  dark  line  shown  with  the  least
density,  and  is  in  simple  proportion  to  the  density  of  the  gas.]

184

LECTURE XIII.

-1-0
-•9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2
-•1
0
+  •1
+  •2
+  •3
+  •4
+  •5
+  •6
+  •7
+  •8
+  •9
+  1-0

M

•894
•882
•866
•845
•816
•774
•707
•577

0

imaginary

•732

•414
•291
•247
•183
•155
•134
•118
•105
■095

\M+lj

/i  positive

•993

•988

•984

•971

•928
0
imaginary
0

•928

•971

•984

•988

•993

fx  negative

-  141^9

-82-3

-61^5

-335

-12-9

0
imaginary

0
-12-9
-335
-61^5
-82^3
-141-9

LECTURE XIV.

Monday,  October  13,  8  p.m.

At this lecture were seen,  immediately  behind the model  Molecular,
heretofore  presented,  two  wires  extending  from the  ceiling  and

bearing  a  long  heavy  bar  about  three  feet  above  the  floor  by
means  of  closely-fitting  rings.  By  slipping  these  rings  along  the
bar,  the  period  of  vibration  of  this  bifilar  suspension  could  be
altered  at  will. Two  parallel  pieces  of  wood,  jointed  at  each  end.

186  Lecture  xiv.

[olecular.  served  to  transmit  the  azimuthal  motion  of  this  vibrator  to  the
lower  bar  P  of  the  model.

Let  us  look  at  this  and  see  what  it  does.  I  have  not  seen  it
before,  and  it  is  quite  new  to  me.  Oh,  see,  you  can  vary  the
period;  that  is  very  nice,  that  is  beautiful.  We  are  going  to
study  these  vibrations  a  little,  just  as  illustrations.  Prof  Rowland
has  kindly  made  this  arrangement  for  us,  and  I  think  we  will  all
be  interested  in  experimenting  with  it.  We  have  this  bar  P,
moved  by  this  bifilar  pendulum  H,  which  is  so  massive  that  its
period  is  but  little  affected,  I  suppose,  by  being  connected  with  P.
It  takes  some  time  before  the  initial  free  vibrations  in  the  model
are  got  quit  of  and  the  thing  settles  into  simple  harmonic  motion
corresponding  to  the  period  of  the  bifilar  pendulum.  If  we  keep
this  pendulum  going  long  enough  through  nearly  a  constant  range,
the  masses  P,  m^,  mg,  mg  will  settle  into  a  definite  simple  har-
monic motion,  through  the  subsidence  of  any  free  vibrations  which
may  have  been  given  to  them  in  the  start.  We  see  the  whole
apparatus  now  performing  very  nearly  a  simple  harmonic  motion.
We  will  now  superimpose  another  vibration  on  this  by  altering
the  period  of  the  pendulum  very  slightly.  That,  you  see,  seems
to  have  diminished  very  much  the  vibrations  of  the  system.  They
are  now  increasing  again.  That  will  go  on  for  a  long  time.  I
shall  give  this  pendulum  a  slight  impulse  when  I  see  it  flagging,
to  keep  its  range  constant.  When  it  is  in  its  middle  position,
I  apply  a  working  couple.  We  will  give  no  more  attention  to  it
than  just  to  keep  it  vibrating,  while  we  look  at  these  notes  which
you  have  in  your  hands,  and  which  I  have  prepared  for  you  so
as  to  shorten  our  work  on  the  black-board.

[These  notes  related  to  the  tasinomic  treatment  of  seolotropy.
The  discussion  of  them  was  interrupted  at  intervals  to  continue
experiments  and  observations  on  Professor  Rowland's  model.  That
part  of  the  Lecture  has  been  omitted  from  the  print  as  the  subject
has  been  treated  in  the  addition  of  date  February  14,  1899  to
Lecture  XIIL,  pp.  170—175.]

Let  us  stop  and  look  at  our  vibrating  apparatus.  It  has  been
going  a  considerable  time  with  the  exciter  kept  vibrating  through
a  constant  range,  and  you  see  but  small  motion  transmitted  to
the  system.  That  is  an  illustration  of  the  most  general  solution
of  our  old  problem*.  Our  "  handle  "  P  is  in  firm  connection  with
*  Lecture  III.  Pt.  2,  p.  38.

Rowland's  model  vibrator.  187

the  bifilar  pendulum  (the  exciter)  and  is  forced  to  agree  with  it.  Molecular.
Let  us  bring  the  system  to  rest.  Now  start  the  exciter  and  keep
it  going.  In  time  the  viscosity  will  annul  the  system  of  vibrations,
representing  the  difference  between  zero  and  the  permanent  state
of  vibration  which  the  three  particles  will  acquire.  If  there  were
no  loss  of  energy  whatever,  the  result  would  be  that  this  initial
jangle,  which  you  now  see,  would  last  for  ever ;  consisting  of
a  simple  harmonic  motion  in  the  exciter  and  a  compound  of  the
three  fundamental  modes  of  these  three  particles  viewed  as  a
vibrating  system  with  the  bar  P  held  fixed.  Let  the  system  with
the  bar  P  held  fixed  be  set  to  vibrate  in  any  way  whatever;  then  its
motion  will  be  merely  a  compound  of  those  three  fundamental
modes.  But  now  set  the  exciter  going,  and  the  state  of  the  case
may  be  looked  on  as  thus  constituted ; — the  exciter  and  the  whole
system  in  simple  harmonic  motion  of  the  same  period,  and,  superim-
posed upon  that,  a  compound  of  the  three  modes  of  simple  harmonic
vibration  that  the  system  can  perform  with  the  exciter  fixed.  We
cannot  improve  on  the  mathematical  treatment  by  observation ;
and  really  a  model  of  this  kind  is  rather  a  help  or  corrective  to  brain
sluggishness  than  a  means  of  observation  or  discovery.  In  point
of  fact,  we  can  discover  a  great  deal  better  by  algebra.  But
brains  are  very  poor  after  all,  and  this  model  is  of  some  slight
use  in  the  way  of  making  plain  the  meaning  of  the  mathematics
we  have  been  working  out.

The  system  seems  to  have  come  once  more  into  its  permanent
state.  Let  us  stop  the  exciter  and  see  how  long  the  system  will
hold  its  vibration.  The  reaction  on  the  exciter  is  very  slight,  it  is
very  nearly  the  same  as  if  that  massive  bar  H  were  absolutely
fixed.  But  the  motion  actually  communicated  to  it,  since  it  is
not  absolutely  fixed,  will  correspond  to  a  considerable  loss  of
energy.  A  very  slight  motion  of  H  with  its  great  length  and
mass  has  considerable  energy  compared  even  with  the  energy  of
our  particle  of  greatest  mass;  so  that  our  system  will  come  to
rest  far  sooner  than  if  H  were  absolutely  fixed.  The  model  is  at
present  illustrating  phosphorescence.  You  see  the  particles  {m^,
m^,  rria)  have  gone  on  vibrating  for  a  whole  minute,  and  nii  must
have  performed  a  couple  of  dozen  vibrations  at  least.  A  true
phosphorescence  of  a  hundred  seconds'  duration  is  quite  analogous
to  the  giving  back  of  vibrations  which  you  see  in  our  model,
only  instead  of  our  two  or  three  dozen  vibrations,  we  have  in

188  Lecture  xiv.

lecular.  phosphorescence  40,000  million-million  vibrations  during  a  hundred
seconds.  Now,  we  cannot  get  1000  residual  vibrations  in  our
model  because  of  the  dissipation  of  energy  arising  from  imperfect
elasticity  in  the  wire,  friction  between  parts  of  the  model,  and  the
resistance  of  the  air.  That  dissipation  of  energy  is  simply  the
conversion  of  energy  from  one  state  of  motion,  (the  visible  motions
which  we  have  been  watching),  into  another  (heat  in  the  wire,
heat  of  frictions,  and  heat  in  the  air).  In  molecular  dynamics,  we
have  no  underground  way  of  getting  quit  of  energy  or  carrying  it
off.  We  must  know  exactly  what  has  been  done  with  it  when  the
vibration  of  an  embedded  molecule  ends,  even  though  this  be
not  before  a  thousand  million-million  periods  have  been  performed.
[Marxh  6, 1899.  Imagine  a  homogeneous  mass  of  rock — granite  or
basalt,  for  example — as  large  as  the  earth,  or  as  many  times  larger  as
you  please,  but  with  no  mutual  gravitation  between  its  parts  to
disturb  it.  Let  there  be,  anywhere  in  it  very  far  from  a  boundary,
a  spherical  hollow  of  5  cms.  radius,  and  let  a  violin-string  be
stretched  between  two  hooks  fixed  at  opposite  ends  of  a  diameter
of  this  hollow,  and  tuned  to  vibrations  at  the  rate  of  1000  per
second.  Let  this  string  be  set  in  vibration  (for  the  present,  no
matter  how)  according  to  its  gravest  fundamental  mode,  through  a
range  of  one  millimetre.  Let  the  elasticit}^  of  the  string  and  of  the
granite  be  absolutely  perfect,  and  let  there  be  no  air  in  the  hollow
to  resist  the  vibrations.  They  will  not  last  for  ever.  Why  not  ?
Because  two  trains  of  waves,  respectively  condensational-rare  fac-
tional and  purely  distortional,  will  be  caused  to  travel  outwards,
carrying  away  with  them  the  energy  given  first  to  the  vibrating
string  (see  below  §  28  of  addition  to  Lecture  XIV.).]  We  must
suppose  the  elasticity  of  our  matter  and  molecules  to  be  perfect,  and
we  cannot  in  any  part  of  our  molecular  dynamics  admit  unaccounted
for  loss  of  energy ;  that  is  to  say,  we  cannot  admit  viscous  terms
unless  as  an  integral  result  of  vibrations  connected  with  a  part  of
the  system  that  is  not  convenient  for  us  to  look  at.

In  three  minutes  our  system  has  come  very  nearly  to  rest.
We  infer  therefore  that  in  three  minutes  from  a  commencement  of
vibration  of  the  exciter  we  shall  have  nearly  reached  the  permanent
state  of  things.

Now  we  vary  the  period  of  the  exciter,  making  it  as  nearly  as
we  can  midway  between  two  fundamental  periods  of  our  complex
molecule. We  will  keep  this  going  in  an  approximately  constant

MOTION OF ETHER WITH EMBEDDED MOLECULES.  189

range  for  a  while  and  look  at  the  vibrations  which  it  produces  in  Molecular,
the  system.

Now  you  see  very  markedly  the  difference  in  the  vibrations
of  our  system  after  it  has  been  going  for  several  minutes  with
the  exciter  in  a  somewhat  shorter  period  of  vibration  than  that
with  which  we  commenced.  Here  is  another  still  shorter.  In
the  course  of  two  or  three  minutes  the  superimposed  vibrations
will  die  out.  See  now  the  tremendous  difference  of  this  case  in
which  the  period  of  the  exciter  is  approximately  equal  to  one
of  the  fundamental  periods  of  the  system,  or  the  periods  for  the
case  in  which  the  lowest  bar  is  held  absolutely  fixed.

I  had  almost  hoped  that  I  would  see  some  way  of  explaining
double  refraction  by  this  system  of  molecules,  but  it  seems  more
and  more  difficult.  I  will  take  you  into  my  confidence  to-morrow,
if  you  like,  and  show  you  the  difficulties  that  weigh  so  much  upon
me.  I  am  not  altogether  disheartened  by  this,  because  of  the
fact  that  such  grand  and  complicated  and  highly  interesting
subjects  as  I  have  named  so  often,  absorption,  dispersion  and
anomalous  refraction,  are  all  not  merely  explained  by  their
means  but  are  the  inevitable  results  of  this  idea  of  attached
molecules.

There  is  one  thing  I  want  to  say  before  we  separate,  and  that
is,  when  I  was  speaking  last  of  the  subject,  I  saw  what  seemed
to  me  to  be  a  difficulty,  but  on  further  consideration,  I  find  it
no  difficulty  at  all.  Not  very  many  hours  after  I  told  you  it
was  a  difficulty,  I  saw  that  I  was  wrong  in  making  it  appear
to  be  a  difficulty  at  all.  I  do  not  want  to  paint  the  thing  any
blacker  than  it  really  is  and  I  want  to  tell  you  that  that  question
I  put  as  to  the  ether  keeping  straight  with  the  molecules  is
easily  answered  when  there  is  a  large  number.  Our  assumption
was  a  large  number  of  spherical  cavities,  lined  with  rigid  spherical
shells  and  masses  inside  joined  by  springs  or  what  not :  and  the
distance  from  cavity  to  cavity  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave-
length. It  then  happens  that  the  motion  of  the  medium  rela-
tively to  the  rigid  shells  will  be  exceedingly  small  and  a  portion
of  the  medium  that  will  contain  a  large  number  of  these  shells  will
all  move  together  (see  below,  addition  to  Lee.  XIV.).  If  the  distance
from  molecule  to  molecule  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the
wave-length,  then  you  may  look  upon  the  thing  as  if  the  structure
were  infinitely  fine,  and  you  may  take  it  that  the  ether  moves

190  LECTURE XIV.

jlecular.  quite  straight  with  them  all,  and  not  in  and  out  among  them,
as  I  said.  It  is  evident  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  wave-
length of  the  light  traversing  the  medium  is  moderate  in
comparison  with  the  distance  between  the  molecules,  that  it
must  move  out  and  in  among  them.  But  if  the  stiffness  of  the
medium  is  such  as  to  make  the  wave-length  large  in  comparison
with  the  distance  from  molecule  to  molecule,  this  stiffness  is  suf-
ficient to  keep  them  all  together,  and  you  may  regard  these  rigid
shells  as  bonds  of  attachment  by  which  the  molecule  is  pulled
this  way  and  that  way,  so  that  we  may  suppose  our  reactionary
forces,  of  which  Cj  (^  —  ^i)  is  a  sample,  to  be  absolutely  the  same
in  their  effect  upon  the  medium  as  if  they  were  uniformly
distributed  through  it.

That  takes  away  one  part  of  our  discontent.  The  only  diffi-
culty that  I  see  just  now  is  that  of  explaining  double  refraction.
The  subject  grows  upon  us  terribly,  and  so  does  our  want  of
time.  If  it  is  not  too  much  for  you  I  must  have  one  of  our
double  lectures  to-morrow.

[Twice*  in  this  Lecture,  and  indeed  many  times  in  preceding
and  subsequent  Lectures,  I  felt  the  want  of  a  full  mathematical
investigation  of  spherical  waves  originating  in  the  application  of
force  to  an  elastic  solid  within  a  limited  space.  I  have  therefore
recently  undertaken  this  work^f,  and  I  give  the  following  statement
of  it  as  an  addition  to  Lecture  XIV.

,y^  §  1. The  complete  mathematical  theory  of  the  propagation  of

motion  through  an  infinite  elastic  solid,  including  the  analysis  of
the  motion  into  two  species,  equivoluminal  and  irrotational,  was
first  given  by  Stokes  in  his  splendid  paper  "On  the  Dynamical
Theory  of  Diffraction ij:."  The  object  of  the  present  communication
is  to  investigate  fully  the  forcive  which  must  be  applied  to  the
boundary,  S,  of  a  hollow  of  any  shape  in  the  solid,  in  order  to
originate  and  to  maintain  any  known  motion  of  the  surrounding
solid ; and to  solve  the  inverse  problem  of  finding  the motion

*  p.  188,  and  pp.  189,  190.

t  Communicated  to  R.  S.  E.  on  May  1,  1899,  and  published  in  Phil.  3Iag.  May,
Aug.  and  Oct.,  1899  under  the  title  "  On  the  Application  of  Force  within  a  Limited
Space,  required  to  produce  Spherical  Solitary  Waves,  or  Trains  of  Periodic  Waves,
of  both  species,  Equivoluminal  and  Irrotational,  in  an  Elastic  Solid."

X  Stokes,  Mathematical  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  p.  2i3.

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

191

when  the  forcive  on,  or  the  motion  of,  S  is  given,  for  the  particular  Molar,
case  in  which  S  is  a.  spherical  surface  kept  rigid.

§  2.  Let  ^,  7),  ^  denote  the  infinitesimal  displacement  at  any
point  of  the  solid,  of  which  {x,  y,  z)  is  the  equilibrium  position.
The  well-known  equations  of  motion*  are

d^^

dS

pd=(^  +  »^+nV%

dt

dx

dh) /J ^ \  dS _,

dt

d^i;

d8

Pdh^^  +  i'^^dz+'^'^'j

(1),

where  8  denotes  -r  +  ^  +  ^ . Using  the  notation  of  Thomson
dx dy dz  °

and  Taitf  for  strain-components  (elongations ; and  distortions),
e,  f,  g; a,  b,  c;  we  have

e  =

dl.

dx  '

dr) d^
dz dy'

J dy'

dx dz '

9  =

dX
dz'

d^ dr)
dy dx

■m\

and  with  the  corresponding  notation  F,  Q,  R;  S,  T,  U,  for  stress-
components  (normal  and  tangential  forces  on  the  six  sides  of  an
infinitely  small  rectangular  parallelepiped),  we  have

P=(k  +  ln)e  +  (k- inXf+g);  Q={k  +  in)f+{k - ln)(g  +  e);)

R  =  ik  +  in)  g+{k-  |w)  (e  +/)  (3).

S=na;  T=nb;  U=nc  J

Let  now  a  be  an  infinitesimal  area  at  any  point  of  the  surface
S;  \,  /M,  V  the  direction-cosines  of  the  normal ;  and  Xa,  Ycr,  Za
the  components  of  the  force  which  must  be  applied  from  within  to
produce  or  maintain  the  specified  motion  of  the  matter  outside.
We  have

-Z=P\+  UiM+Tv\

-Y=Q^Ju+Sv  +U\\ (4);

-  Z  =  Rv  +  T\  +  Sfx]

*  See  my  paper  "  On  the  Reflexion  and  Refraction  of  Solitary  Plane  Waves,  &c."
Proc.  R.  S.  E.  Dec.  1898,  and  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1899  ;  reprinted  below  in  the  present
volume.

t  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,  §  669,  or  Elements,  §  610.

192  LECTURE XIV.

whence  by  (3)

-  Z  =  (A;  -  |w)x8  +  n  (2\e  +  fic  +  vh)  \

-  T  =  {k  -  In)  fjih  +  n{2fif+  va  +  \c)\ (5).

-Z  ={k-  |?i)  vh  +  n  {2vg  +  X6  +  imo))

These  equations  give  an  explicit  answer  to  the  question,  What
is  the  forcive  ?  when  the  strain  of  the  matter  in  contact  with  8  is
given.  We  shall  consider  in  detail  their  application  to  the  case  in
which  S  is  spherical,  and  the  motions  and  forces  are  in  meridional
planes  through  OX  and  symmetrical  round  this  line.  Without
loss  of  generality  we  may  take

z^O;  giving  i/  =  0,  a  =  0,  6  =  0,  Z  =  0 (6).

Equations  (5)  therefore  become

-X  =  {k-ln)\h+n  (2Xe  +  /ic)]
-Y^{k-  |n)  yuS  +  n  (2//+  \c)\

.CI).

§  3.  In  §§  5 — 26  of  his  paper  already  referred  to,  Stokes  gives
a  complete  solution  of  the  problem  of  finding  the  displacement
and  velocity  at  any  point  of  an  infinite  solid,  which  must  follow
from  any  arbitrarily  given  displacement  and  velocity  at  any
previous  time,  if  after  that,  the  solid  is  left  to  itself  with  no
force  applied  to  any  part  of  it.  In  a  future  communication  I
hope  to  apply  this  solution  to  the  diffraction  of  solitary  waves,
plane  or  spherical.  Meantime  I  confine  myself  to  the  subject
stated  in  the  title  of  the  present  communication,  regarding  which
Stokes  gives  some  important  indications  in  |§  27 — 29  of  his  paper.

§  4. Poisson  in  1819  gave  a  complete  solution  of  the  equation

^  =  ^'^'^ (8)

in  terms  of  arbitrary  functions  of  w,  y,  z,  representing  the  initial
values  of  w  and  -^  ;  and  showed  that  for  every  case  in  which  w
depends  only  on  distance  (r)  from  a  fixed  point,  it  takes  the  form

'"=M^('-i)+^('+3 ^'^'

where  ^  and  /  denote  arbitrary  functions.  In  my  Baltimore
Lectures  of  1884  (pp.  46,  86,  87  above)  I  pointed  out  that  solutions

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.  193

expressinf^  spherical  waves,  whether  equivoluminal  (in  which  there  Molar,
is  essentially  different  range  of  displacement  in  different  parts  of
the  spherical  sinface)  or  ii'rotational  (for  which  the  displacement
may  or  may  not  be  different  in  different  parts  of  the  spherical
surface),  can  be  very  conveniently  derived  from  (9)  by  differen-
tiations with  respect  to  x,  y,  z.  It  may  indeed  be  proved,  although
I  do  not  know  that  a  formal  proof  has  been  anywhere  published,  that
an  absolutely  general  solution  of  (8)  is  expressed  by  the  formula

r  =  sj\_{x-xj^{y-yj^{z-z)^ (10),

where  S  denotes  sums  for  different  integral  values  of  h,  i,  j,  and
for  any  different  values  of  cc',  y',  z  .

§  5.  I  propose  at  present  to  consider  only  the  simplest  of  all
the  cases  in  which  motion  at  every  point  {x,  0,  0)  and  (0,  y,  z)  is
parallel  to  X'X ;  and  for  all  values  of  y  and  z,  ^  is  the  same  for
equal  positive  and  negative  values  of  x.  For  this  purpose  we  of
course  take  x'  =  y'  =  z'  =  0;  and  we  shall  find  that  no  values  of  h,
i,j  greater  than  2  can  appear  in  our  expressions  for  ^,  t],  ^,  because
we  confine  ourselves  to  the  simplest  case  fulfilling  the  specified
conditions.  Our  special  subject,  under  the  title  of  this  paper,
excludes  waves  travelling  inwards  Irom  distant  sources,  and  there-
fore annuls  f{t  +  rjv).

§  6.  In  §§  5 — 8  of  his  paper  Stokes  showed  that  any  motion
whatever  of  a  homogeneous  elastic  solid  may,  throughout  every
part  of  it  experiencing  no  applied  force,  be  analysed  into  two
constituents,  each  capable  of  existing  without  the  other,  in  one  of
which  the  displacement  is  equivoluminal,  and  in  the  other  it  is
irrotational.  Hence  if  we  denote  by  (^j,  t^i,  ^j)  the  equivoluminal
constituent,  and  by  (^o,  t).^,  Q  the  irrotational  constituent,  the
complete  solution  of  (1)  may  be  written  as  follows : —

f=li  +  e.;  v  =  v.-\-v.\  r  =  ?:  +  ?. (11).

where  ^i,  771,  ^1  and  fo,  772,  ^2  fulfil  the  following  conditions,  (12)
and  (13),  respectively: —

dx dy dz '

T.  L.  13

...(12);

194  LECTURE XIV.

_  ^""^  _  c?w  _dw '

^^~^'  '^'"rfy'  ^"'Tz'

w  being  any  solution  of  V  (13).

_., dhu  k  +  f^n

The  first  equation  of  (12)  shows  that  in  the  (fi,  t/j,  ^i)  con-
stituent of  the  solution  there  is  essentially  no  dilatation  or  con-
densation in  any  part  of  the  solid  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  displacement
is  equivoluminal.  The  first  three  equations  of  (13)  prove  that  in
the  {^2,^2,  K'i)  constituent  the  displacement  is  essentially  irrota-
tional.

I  7.  We  can  now  see  that  the  most  general  irrotational
solution  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  §  5  is

.  =  *^..=_iL^..  .=JL^  (14)

^^ dx"  r  ' '" dxdy  r  ' ^' dxdz  r ^ ^'

giving

dx dy dz v^  dx  r

and  the  most  general  equivoluminal  solution  fulfilling  the  same
conditions  is

^'~dx^r u-'r'  '^' dxdyr' ^' dxdz  r ^ ^'

giving

§^  +  "^  +  §^  =  0 (150,

dx dy dz

where  F^  and  F.,  are  put  for  brevity  to  denote  arbitrary  functions
of  I  ^ )  and  f  ^ j  respectively.  Hence  the  most  general  solu-
tion fulfilling  the  conditions  of  §  5  is

dx^  r ?tV  '  dxdy  r  ''  dxdz  r

where  for  brevity  <}>  denotes  a  function  of  r  and  t,  specified  as
follows : —

4>(r,t)  =  F,{t-'^yF,(t-l^ (17).

Denoting  now  by  accents  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  r,

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

195

and  retaining  the  Newtonian  notation  of  dots  to  signify  differential Molar,
coefficients  with  reference  to  t,  we  have

Working  out  now  the  differentiations  in  (IG),  we  find

I ^.3  ^,4  ^.5 J  ^.2  ^.a  ^^2j.

(4>"  3(f)'  3(6

.(18).

.(19).

§  8.  For  the  determination  of  the  force-components  by  (7),  we
shall  want  values  of  S,  e,f,  and  c.  Using  therefore  (2)  and  going
back  to  (16)  we  see  that

"  dx u-  dy  r

.(20).

Hence,  and  by  (19),  we  find

c  =  yri

/^'_6^ 150'_15^\ (f>^  _^ H

^*4  ^.5  ^*6  ^.7 /  ,^»3  ^.4  ^»5

1  F, 1  i^i

.(21).

By  (16),  (W),  and  (15')  we  find

. 1 d  F.  /I  ^. 1  F.

w-  (Xa;  r  V?'-  v^ 7'^  v^

.(22);

and  by  (19)  directly  used  in  (2)  we  find

y2  ^fS  J.3  ^^:

~ (' V  r* r"  ?•"  ?•''  )

■J  j I ^4  ^5 "■" y.6  T"^ ]  V^  )'*  T^

yi  ^.* ' ^.5 ' "■" » - "^ '

(23).

Remark  here  how  by  the  summation  of  these  three  formulas  we
find  for  e  +/+  g  the  value  given  for  S  in  (22).

13—2

196

LECTURE XIV,

§  9.  These  formulas  (22)  and  (23),  used  in  (5),  give  the  force-
components  per  unit  area  at  any  point  of  the  boundary  (/Sf  of  §  1)
of  a  hollow  of  any  shape  in  the  solid,  in  order  that  the  motion
throughout  the  solid  around  it  may  be  that  expressed  by  (19).
Su^oposing  the  hollow  to  bo  spherical,  as  proposed  in  §  2,  lot  its
radius  be  q. We  must  in  (23)  and  (5)  put

(fk;  y  =  cnx\  z-^qv

•(24);

and  putting  v  =  0,  we  have,  as  in  (7),  the  two  force-components  for
any  point  of  the  surface  in  the  meridian  z  =  0,  expressed  as
follows : —

X  =  {k-  %n)  av  -  n  [^\'A  +  2  (2\=  +  1)  5  -f  (\=  -h  1)  C,]

Y  ={k-  p)  C.AfJu  -  nXfx  {2A  +  4<B  +  C.)

where

..(25),

A=

r

c\

qu^

t

q'

3^'

-?-  +

3cl>

^x

qhi''

S,

.(26),

qv^ q^v^
<l>  and  S^  denoting  0  and  F  with  q  for  r.

§  10.  Returning  now  to  (19),  consider  the  character  of  the
motion  represented  by  the  formulas.  For  brevity  we  shall  call
XX'  simply  the  axis,  and  the  plane  of  YY',  ZZ'  the  equatorial
plane.  First  take  y  =  0,  2^  =  0,  and  therefore  x  =  r.  We  find  by
aid  of  (18)

(axial)  ^  =  -:^^  +  4f-  +  -U^(i^i  +  i^.);  ^  =  0;  r=0...(27).

Next  take  x  =  0  and  we  find

(equatorial)  |=-1  J- 1  (^^  +  f )  -  ^3(^1 +^0;  V  =  0;  ^=0

(28).

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID,  197

Hence  for  very  small  values  of  r  we  have  Molar.

(29);

(axial)^=.^3(i^,  +  i^,)

(equatorial)  |  =  -  1  (iP,  +  F.;}
and  for  very  large  values  of  r,

(axial)  t=. 7

(30).
1  V
(equatorial)  ^  = \

Thus  we  see  that  for  very  distant  places,  the  motion  in  the
axis  is  approximately  that  due  to  the  irrotational  wave  alone  ;  and
the  motion  at  the  equatorial  plane  is  that  due  to  the  equivoluminal
wave  alone :  also  that  with  equal  values  of  F^  and  Fn,  the  equi-
voluminal and  the  irrotational  constituents  contribute  to  these
displacements  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  propagational
velocities  of  the  two  waves.  On  the  other  hand,  for  places  very
near  the  centre,  (29)  shows  that  both  in  the  axis  and  in  the
equatorial  plane  the  irrotational  and  the  equivoluminal  con-
stituents contribute  equally  to  the  displacements.

§  11,  Equations  (25)  and  (26)  give  us  full  specification  of
the  forcive  which  must  be  applied  to  the  boundary  of  our  spherical
hollow  to  cause  the  motion  to  be  precisely  through  all  time  that
specified  by  (19),  with  F^  and  F.^  any  arbitrary  functions.  Thus
we  may  suppose  F^  (t  —  qju)  and  F,,  (t  —  q/v)  to  be  each  zero  for  all
negative  values  of  t,  and  to  be  zero  again  for  all  values  of  t  exceed-
ing a  certain  limit  r.  At  any  distance  r  from  the  centre,  the
disturbance  will  last  diirincf  the  time

!- (31).

from  t^'^—^ to t=' — ^+T,

V  V

V  —  Q  V  —  q I

and  from  t  = to t=  +  r

XL  u  I

Supposing  V  >  u,  we  see  that  these  two  durations  overlap  by
an  interval  equal  to

V  u I

.(32),

198

LECTURE XIV.

On  the  other  hand,  at  every  point  of  space  outside  the  radius
q  +  rjilju  —  Ajv)  the  wave  of  the  greater  propagational  velocity
passes  away  outwards  before  the  wave  of  the  smaller  velocity
reaches  it,  and  the  transit-time  of  each  wave  across  it  is  r.  The
solid  is  rigorously  undisplaced  and  at  rest  throughout  all  the  spaces
outside  the  more  rapid  wave,,  between  the  two  waves,  and  inside
the  less  rapid  of  the  two.

§  12.  The  expressions  (25)  and  (26)  for  the  components  of  the
surface-forcive  on  the  boundary  of  the  hollow  required  to  produce
the  supposed  motion,  involve  S^i  and  ^2-  Hence  we  should  have
infinite  values  for  t  —  0  or  t  =  r,  unless  F^  and  Fo  vanish  for  t  —  0
and  t  =  T,  when  r  =  q.  Subject  to  this  condition  the  simplest
possible  expression  for  each  arbitrary  function  to  represent  the  two
solitary  waves  of  §  11,  is  of  the  form

S^  ={l  —  X'Y, where ^^  =  —  •

1.

.(33).

Hence,  by  successive  differentiations,  with  reference  to  t,

24

4(S

.(34).

The  annexed  diagram of  four  curves  represents  these four
functions  (33)  and  (34).

§  13. Take  now  definitively

i^,(i-Q=c//(l-xf)^^

.(35),

Xi=  t-

2  '

r-q

x^-  =  [i--, — ^

It -^i.

.(36).

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

199

Molar.

Scale  of  '^— \ scale  of  F.
J'= 1^ „ F.

-jnz '»

200

LECTURE XIV.

Consider  now  separately  the  equivoUiminal  and  the  irrotational
motions.  Using  (19),  (IS),  (35),  (34),  and  taking  the  eqni-
voluminal  constituents,  we  have  as  follows : —

(Equatorial,  cc  =  0  ;  »?i  =  0,
V^  r-i(T  ru-T^ J

Cone  of  latitude  45°,  x^  =  xy  —  \r", \

( q^  60^  12o^ N

^i  =  ^1  [^  -3  ^'1  +  ^^  ^V-,:^  ^^^")

f Axial,  X-  —  r^,  'r]i  =  0,
'2q^  ..  ,  24>f

.(37),

.(38),

V  *  1 UT  )  ]

.(39);

where

^i  =  (1  -  X^' ;  ^^(=-  (1  -  X^-fX^ ;  ^^V  =  -  l  +  6;^^^  -  S^/. .  .(40)
§  14. Similarly  for  the  irrotational  constituents;
[Equatorial,  ^  =  0  ;  7/0  =  0,

'Cone  of  latitude  45°,  x"  —  xy  —  ^r-, ^

•(«);

7'^i;t

?'?;-T^

(*2)i

Axial,  x"  =  r",  rj.,  =  0,

V  ?'•*  r-vr  rvT-

•(43);

where  t^t  &c.  are  given  by  (40)  with  ^.,  for  ^1 ;  %i  and  ^^2  heing
given  by  (36).

§  15.  The  character  of  the  motion  throughout  the  solid,  which
is  fully  specified  by  (19),  will  be  perfectly  understood  after  a
careful  study  of  the  details  for  the equatorial, conal,  and  axial

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.  201

places,  shown  clearly  by  (37)... (43)  for  each  constituent,  the  equi-  Molar,
voluminal  and  the  irrotational,  separately.  The  curve  J^  in  the
diagram  of  §  12  shows  the  history  of  the  motion  that  must  be  given
to  any  point  of  the  surface  S,  for  either  constituent  alone,  and
therefore  for  the  two  together,  in  any  case  in  which  q  is  exceed-
ingly small  in  comparison  with  the  smaller  of  the  two  quantities
UT,  VT,  which  for  brevity  we  shall  call  the  wave-lengths.  The  curve
S'  shows  the  history  of  the  motion  produced  by  either  wave  when
it  is  passing  any  point  at  a  distance  from  the  centre  very  great  in
comparison  with  its  own  wave-length.  But  the  three  algebraic
functions  J^,  S',  S  all  enter  into  the  expression  of  the  motion
due  to  either  wave  when  the  faster  has  advanced  so  far  that  its
rear  is  clear  of  the  front  of  the  slower,  but  not  so  far  as  to  make
its  wave-length  (which  is  the  constant  thickness  of  the  spherical
shell  containing  it)  great  in  comparison  with  its  inner  radius.
Look  at  the  diagram,  and  notice  that  in  the  origin  at  S,  a  mere
motion  of  each  point  in  one  direction  and  back,  represented  by  .3^,
causes  in  very  distant  places  a  motion  (^)  to  a  certain  displace-
ment d,  back  through  the  zero  to  a  displacement  1"36  x  (i  in  the
opposite  direction,  thence  back  through  zero  to  d  in  the  first
direction  and  thence  back  to  rest  at  zero.  Remark  that  the
direction  of  d  is  radial  in  the  irrotational  wave  and  perpendicular
to  the  radius  in  the  equivuluminal  wave.  Remark  also  that  the
d  for  every  radial  line  varies  invex^sely  as  distance  from  the
centre.

§  16.  Draw  any  line  OPK  in  any  fixed  direction  through
0,  the  centre  of  the  spherical  surface  S  at  which  the  forcive
originating the whole motion is applied. In the particular

case  of  §§  1 2 ...  1 5, and  in any  case in which F^  [  ^  —  -  j and

Fo{t  —  -\  are  each  assumed  to be, from  ^=0  to  t=T,  of  the

form  t^  {t  —  t)'  AiP,  where  i  denotes  an  integer,  the  time-history
of  the  motion  of  P  is  -Bo  +  ^i^+  •••  +i?a+i^"+',  and  its  space-history
{t  constant  and  r  variable)  is  6'_3?-~^-t-  (7_.2r~-  +  ...  -f-  Gr^^iV^^^)  the
complete  formula  in  terms  of  t  and  r  being  given  explicitly  by  (19).
The  elementary  algebraic  character  of  the  formula :  and  the  exact
nullity  of  the  displacement  for  every  point  of  the  solid  for  which
r>q  +  vt; and between r  =  q  +  v{t  —  T) and r  =  q-\-ut, when

202  LECTURE XIV.

v(t  —  t)>  lit ;  and  between  r  =  q  and  r  =  q  +  u  (t  —  t),  when  t>  r;
these  interesting  characteristics  of  the  solution  of  a  somewhat
intricate  dynamical  problem  are  secured  by  the  particular  character
of  the  originating  forcive  at  S,  which  we  find  according  to  |§  8,  9
to  be  that  which  will  produce  them.  But  all  these  characteristics
are  lost  except  the  first  (nullity  of  motion  through  all  space  out-
side the  spherical  surface  r  =  q  +  vt),  if  we  apply  an  arbitrary
forcive  to  6'*,  or  such  a  forcive  as  to  produce  an  arbitrary  deforma-
tion or  motion  of  8.  Let  for  example  8  be  an  ideal  rigid  spherical
lining  of  our  cavity ;  and  let  any  infinitesimal  arbitrary  motion
be  given  to  it.  We  need  not  at  present  consider  infinitesimal
rotation  of  8:  the  spherical  waves  which  this  would  produce,
particularly  simple  in  their  character,  were  investigated  in  my
Baltimore  Lectures f,  and  described  in  recent  communications  to
the  British  Association  and  Philosophical  Magazine^.  Neither
need  we  consider  curvilinear  motion  of  the  centre  of  8,  because
the  motion  being  infinitesimal,  independent  superposition  of  a;-,  y-,
^■-motions  produces  any  curvilinear  motion  whatever.

§  17.  Take  then  definitively  S{t),  or  simply  ^,  an  arbitrary
function  of  the  time,  to  denote  excursion  in  the  direction  OX,  of
the  centre of  8  from  its  equilibrium-position. Let  d~'^  S,  d~-S

denote  1  dtS  and I  dt  I  dtS. Our  problem  is,  supposing  the  solid

JO  J  0  J  0

to  be  everywhere  at  rest  and  unstrained  when  t  =  0,to  find  (f,  ij,  ^)
for  every  point  of  the  solid  (/■  >  q)  at  all  subsequent  time  {t  posi-
tive); with

at  r=q, ^=S{t), r]=0, ^=0 (44).

These,  used  in  (19),  give

^^j^_^^(0^3|ir^_^^'

+  ^.[^i(0  +  ^.(0]

v  15'  L '^^  V J q-

(45),

*  If  the  space  inside  S  is  filled  with  solid  of  the  same  quality  as  outside,  the
solution  remains  alKebraic,  if  the  forcive  formula  is  algebraic,  though  discontinuous.
The  displacement  of  S  ends,  not  at  time  t  —  r  when  the  forcive  is  stopped,  but  at
time  t  =  T  +  2qlu  when  the  last  of  the  inward  travelling  wave  produced  by  it  has
travelled  in  to  the  centre,  and  out  again  to  r  =  g.

t  Pp.  81—83  and  159,  160  above.

+  B.  A.  Report,  1898,  p.  783;  Fhil.  Mag.  Nov.  1898,  p.  494.

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

203

and

S(t)  =  -

Molar.

Ait)  ,  S:M

u  V

.(46).

Adding  Sq  x  (46)  to  (4.5),  we  find

1 \ /  ,j^2  y.

■W;

whence

:^M  =  2^^^  +  Sqd-'S(t)  (48);

and  by  this  eliminating  .JX2  from  (46),

9  T

where  9  denotes  d/dt,  and

^^.(0  =  ^(0 (49),

^Xt)  =  -qu"'(l+jd-^+~d--]S{t) (50).

§  18.  I  hope  hxter  to  work  out  this  problem  for  the  case  of
motion  commencing  from  rest  at  t  =  0,  and  S'{t)  an  arbitrary
function ;  but  confining  ourselves  meantime  to  the  case  of  S
having  been,  and  being,  kept  perpetually  vibrating  to  and  fro  in
simple  harmonic  motion,  assume

S(t)  =  Asin  cot (51).

With  this,  (50)  gives

r/3v^ ^ .  Sv  1

c^(t)  =  }iqu" -7— — 1 sineo^H cos  w^ (52).

\_\q-w' )  9''"  J

To  solve  (49)  in  the  manner  most  convenient  for  this  form  of  c^(0,
we  now  have

^i(0  =

a- + -  (m  +  2v)  a  +  \  (u"  +  2v-)

q  q-

At)

a^  +  4  (w'  +  2y^)  --(a  +  2v)  a

-~^- ^ '.m

d'  +  -Xu'  +  2v-)

12

{u  +  2v)  a

204

LECTURE XIV.

[olar.

=  hqu-  X

fSv- .  „ ^  „^ 1  /  o o  „x o) • , u  —  vf^uv „,

--—  (u^  +  zr)  +  -„  iv  +  Svu  —  U-)  +  w-y  sm  wt  H — r-  +  or cos  wt

[q^w-  (£_ _^^\ qoi \  (^

\R

:^(u^+2i;^)-

+  ^(«+2t;)^

With  J^i  thus  determined,  (48)  gives  S'-i  as  follows,

^;(0 2^,(0 3Ag . ,
v^  ir  &)-

.(53).
(54).

For  f,  ?;,  ^  by  (19)  we  now  have

^=^B{T,t)x'-\

U  V

r}  =  B  (r,  t)  xy
^  =  B  (r,  t)  xz

where,  with  notation  corresponding  to  (2G)  above,
1

(55),

B{v,t)

a-  V-

3

'SM  ^  ^,{t^

r—q

r  —  q

.(56).

§  19. The  wave-lengths  of  the  equivoluminal  and  rotational

waves  are  respectively —  and  . ror  values  oi  r  very  great

in  comparison  with  the  greater  of  these,  the  second  members  of
(55)  become  reduced  approximately  to  the  terms  involving  F^  and
F^.  These  terms  represent  respectively  a  train  of  equivoluminal
waves,  or  waves  of  transverse  vibration,  and  a  train  of  irrotational
waves,  or  waves  of  longitudinal  vibration ;  and  the  amplitude  of
each  wave  as  it  travels  outwards  varies  inversely  as  r.

§  20. For  the  case  of  an  incompressible  solid  we  have  v  =  oo  ,
which  by  (53)  gives

=  —  1%  sin  &)i (57) ;

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID,
and  by  (55)  we  have,  for  r  very  great,

f  ~  —  f/?gsin  wt  r—  —

205

Molar.

r

7)'=  —  ^hq  sin  cot

xy

.(58),

^  =  —  Tjliqiiiw  (at  —

which  fully  specify,  for  great  distances  from  the  origin,  the  Avave-
motion  produced  by  a  rigid  globe  of  radius  q,  kept  moving  to  and
fro  according  to  the  formula  A  sin  wt.

§  21.  The  strictly  equivoluminal  motion  thus  represented
consists  of  outward-travelling  waves,  having  direction  of  vibration
in  meridional  planes,  and  very  approximately*  perpendicular  to

the  radial  direction,  and  ami)litude  of  vibration  equal  to  f  A-  sin  6,

where  6  denotes  the  angle  between  r  and  the  axis.  The  gradual
change  from  the  simple  motion  ^=Asinw^  at  the  surface  of  the
rigid  globe,  through  the  elastic  solid  at  distances  moderate  in
comparison  with  q,  out  to  the  greater  distances  where  the  motion
is  very  approximately  the  pure  wave-motion  represented  by  (58),
is  a  very  interesting  subject  for  detailed  investigation  and  illustra-
tion. The  formulas  expressing  it  are  found  by  putting  'y=  oo  in
(45),  and  using  this  equation  to  determine  Fo{t)  in  terms  of  i^j  {t);
then  using  (47)  to  determine  F^  (t)  in  terms  of  S(t)  given  by  (51) ;
and  then  using  (55)  and  (56),  for  which  v  =  cc  makes  i,  =  t,  to
determine  ^,  ?;,  ^. They  are  as  follows : —

^  =  B  (r,  t)  x"

qyh

rj  2

, 3(r\ . ^ Sic- . ^ Su

1 ^^, sm  tof  -I-— ;— ;;  sin  (oti coswt

q-(o-J  q-w  qo)

q\"  Sh  u  ^ q  3/t .

- -z COS  &)Ji  -f  -  — ~  sin  wt,

rJ z  qoi  r  2

7]  =  B  (?',  t)  xy  \ ^  =  -S  (r,  t)  xz

.(59),

Rigorously  so,  if  the  wave-length  and  q  are  each  infinitely  small  in  comparison

with  r.

olar.

20G
where

LECTURE XIV.

, Sun  . , ^u"  . ^ Su

1 sin  (i)t  +  — — „sm  coti cos  cot

q'-co-J  (/-ft)-  q(o

t,  =  t-

qV  dh  u  , q  ^h .

+ - -^ cos  (i)ti—--7r  sm  cot,

\rj 2  qco  r  2

1 —  q

.(60).

Y

\

*'^

;

'jV

/

EF

'

V

7(T

X

:

47

>

\  /

1

^

\

/

V

/

>

^

i

--.

^

^

^

^

N

A^

%

■\

\

K'

\y'

7c*^Vf SH

;/v/*

AL L

'5'*^'*

C/*"/"

erf

)*t

'f.o,^.rs.

ovo

^eu

i-

/

\^

"7

f

\

J

A

,-'

£

f

/

s

\

-^

/

\

/

/

Oxi

cr/0/

/OT'

OTIO,

V

/

/

\

L_

__,

/,

1 ,

^

— «

Fig.  1.

t/

^/

For  the  particular  case  of  the  wave-length  equal  to  the  radius  we
have

(l  =  ^r (^1)'

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

207

which  enables  us  to  write  simply  I/Stt  for  ulqw  in  equations  (59)  Molar,
and  (60). For  graphic  representation  of  this  case  we  take  z  =  0,
which  makes  all  the  displacements  lie  in  the  plane  {xy).

§  22.  The  accompanying  drawings  help  us  to  understand
thoroughly  the  character  of  the  motion  of  the  solid  throughout
the  whole  infinite  space  around  the  vibrating  rigid  globe.  They
show  displacements  and  motions  of  points  of  which  the  equilibrium
positions  are  in  the  equatorial  plane,  in  the  cone  of  45°  latitude,

y

/

/

4

M

\t

/

/

P

"J

/

A

\

^i

>

\

V

^rr

'\

^

\

-T

-^

:t

r

\

\

/

\

y

,

\

(\

/i

r

>

-^

^

-^

^

-,'j

V-

^^~

^

\

\

V-

u

::'":

^

~\

>N

^

'\y

"^^^

.

t\-

V

■^

^^

,'

^\

\

^

\

/

'

V

\

"'fl

SHO

VIKA

Tea  .

niAi  a

f/SU

CALC

^

^

^

^

.'

\

\-

i

/

1

i

1

4

1

i.

i

/

,"

\

,'

',

m~

*■

/'"

^M£

"'""■

7o^'

To",^

7tZ

n

AJI^  D

FftC

1m,,:

',

;  >

K

c

^.--5

1

°

;

" -,

1/"' y If

FiK.  2.

and  in  the  axial  line.  Fig.  1  represents  displacements  at  an
instant  when  the  globe  is  moving  rightwards  through  its  middle
position.  Fig.  2  shows  displacements  a  quarter-period  later,  when
the  globe  is  at  the  end  of  its  rightward  motion. Each  figure  shows

208  LECTURE XIV.

Molar.  also  the  orbit  of  a  single  particle  of  which  the  equilibrium  position
is  in  the  45°  cone,  at  a  distance  ^q  from  the  centre  of  the  globe.
The  orbital  motion  is  in  the  direction  of  the  hands  of  a  watch.  It
is  interesting  to  see  illustrated  in  fig.  2  how  the  axial  motion  is
gradually  reduced  from  +  h  at  the  surface  of  the  globe  to  a  very
small  range  at  distance  q  from  the  surface,  or  2g  from  the  centre,
and  we  are  helped  to  understand  its  gradual  approximation  to
zero  at  greater  and  greater  distances  by  the  little  auxiliary
diagrams  annexed,  in  which  are  shown  by  ordinates  the  magnitudes
of  the  axial  displacements  at  the  two  chosen  times.

§  23.  The  gradual  transition  from  motion  h  sin  cot  parallel  to
the  axis  at  the  surface  of  the  globe,  to  motion

—  -  -  h  sin  6  sin  wt
2  r

at  great  distances  from  the  globe  in  any  direction,  is  interestingly
illustrated  by  the  conal  representations  in  the  two  diagrams  for
the  case  6  =  45".  It  should  be  remarked  that  in  reality  h  ought
to  be  a  small  fraction  of  q,  the  radius  of  the  globe,  practically  not
more  than  ^h),  in  order  that  the  strains  may  be  within  the  limits
of  elasticity  of  the  most  elastic  solid,  and  that  the  law  of  simple
proportionality  of  stresses  to  strains  (Hooke's  Ut  tensio  sic  vis)  may
be  approximately  true.  In  the  diagram  we  have  taken  h  =  ^q;
but  if  we  imagine  every  displacement  reduced  to  -^^  of  the  amount
shown,  and  in  the  direction  actually  shown,  we  have  a  true,  highly
approximate  representation  of  the  actual  motions,  which  would  be
so  small  as  to  be  barely  perceptible  to  the  eye,  for  a  globe  of  6  cms.
diameter.

§  24.  Return  now  to  our  solution  (53),  (54),  (55),  (56)  for
arbitrary  or  periodic  motion  of  a  rigid  globe  embedded  in  an
isotropic  elastic  solid  of  finite  resistance  to  compression  and  finite
rigidity.  For  distances  from  the  globe  very  great  in  comparison
with  q,  its  radius,  that  is  to  say  for  q/i^  very  small,  (55)  and  (56)
become

^  =  i?(r,0^-^--^^  1

^ ^^'  I  (62);

7]'=  B  (r,  t)xy\ ^'=  B  (r,  t)  xz  J

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.
1

209

r^B  (r,  t)  =

'^M_^^.2{t-^'

If

V-

Molar,

where

t,  =  t-

9.

L  =  t-'^^

.(63).

Putting  now  in the equations  (62)  the value  of  B  (r,  t)  from
(63),  and  eliminating  S-iit^  by  (47),  we  find

^N-

r^  —  X'  ,j7i  (^,)  ^  x"
7^ u" r^

[9^1(^2)

V-.

^y  ^i  (^i)  ,  ^2/

y.3 ^^2 ■•" ^3

r2^x(^2)

?N

a;^  J,  (^i) .7-^

+  3g#(^,)

\

.(64).

The  terms  of  these  formulas,  having  t^  and  to  respectively  for
their  arguments,  represent  two  distinct  systems  of  wave-motion,
the  first  equivoluminal.the  second  irrotational,  travelliag  outwards
from  the  centre  of  disturbance  with  velocities  u  and  v.

§  25.  I  reserve  for  some  future  occasion  the  treatment  of  the
case  in  which  S  (t)  is  discontinuous,  beginning  with  zero  when
^  =  0  and  ending  with  zero  when  t=T.  I  only  remark  at  present
in  anticipation  that  J^j  {t),  determined  by  the  differential  equation
(49),  though  commencing  with  zero  at  ^  =  0,  does  not  come  to  zero
at  t  =  r,  but  subsides  to  zero  according  to  the  logarithmic  law
(e"'-')  as  t  goes  on  to  infinity ;  and  that  therefore,  as  the  same
statement  is  proved  for  ^^_  (t)  by  (48),  neither  the  equivoluminal
nor  the  irrotational  wave-motion  is  a  limited  solitary  wave  of
duration  r,  but  on  the  contrary  each  has  an  infinitely  long
subsidential  rear.

§  26.  For  the  general  problem  of  the  globe  kept  in  simple
harmonic  motion,  hsinwt,  parallel  to  OX,  we  may  write  (53)
for  brevity  as  follows  : —

T.  L.

14

210

LECTURE XIV.

J^j  (t)  =  ^  (K  sin  oit  +  L  COS  04),

where

3^2  1

-  ,  (m'^  +  2v-)  + „  ,  (^'  +  3i'«  -  ?/-)  +  1

-^(u'  +  'lv^-  1

u  —  v  /Suv

q-Qi-

.(65).

L  =

qco xq-o)

+  1

-^^  (16^  +  2v-)  -  1

+  ^r-T,  (w  +  2«)-

In  terms  of  this  notation,  (64)  gives  for  great  distances  from  the
centre

^  =  i^  j  ^' ~*'  ( A^sin  a)t,  +  L cos  cot,)  +  -  [( 3  -  2/i ) sin  coL  -  2Z  cos « ^ '- 1
^._hq  |_^(^-gi^^^^^ ^ ZcoswO  +^[(3-2/Osina>4-2Zcosa)^J

^  ^  ^  |_^(7^gin„^^+Xcosft)^i)+'^f  [(3-2/Osinft>i2-2Xcosa>4]|

(66).

These  equations  represent  two  sets  of  simple  harmonic  waves,
equivoluminal  and  irrotational,  for  which  the  wave-lengths  are
respectively  ^irujo),  2'Trv/o).  The  maximum  displacements  in  the
two  sets  at  points  of  the  cone  of  semi-vertical  angle  6  and  axis  OX,
are  respectively,

.(67).

(equivoluminal) sin  6  —  i^{K"  4-  L^) ;  }

(irrotational)  cos  ^  ^  V  [(3  -  2Kf  +  4  L~]

§  27.  The  rate  of  transmission  of  energy  outwards  by  a
single  set  of  waves  of  either  species  is  equal,  per  period,  to  the
sum  of  the  kinetic  and  potential  energies,  or,  which  is  the  same,
twice  the  whole  kinetic  energy,  of  the  medium  between  two
concentric  spherical  surfaces,  of  radii  differing  by  a  wave-length.
Now  the  average  kinetic  energy  throughout  the  wave-length  in
any  part  of  the  spherical  shell  is  half  the  kinetic  energy  at  the
instant  of  maximum  velocity. Hence  the  total  energy  transmitted

J

.(68).

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID,  211

2)er  period  is  equal  to  the  wave-length  multiplied  into  the  surface-  Molar.

integral,  over  the  whole  spherical  surface,  of  the  maximum  kinetic

energy  at  any  point  per  unit  of  volume :  and  therefore  the  energy

transmitted  jjer  unit  of  time  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  propa-

gational  velocity  into  this  surface-integral. Thus  we  find  that  the

rates  per  unit  of  time  of  the  transmission  of  energy  by  the  two

sets  of  waves,  of  amplitudes  represented  by  (67),  are  respectively

as  follows: —

47r
(equivoluminal) —  pJr(f(o-  (K^  +  X-)  u

27r
(irrotational)  --  plrifw-  [(8  —  2 A')-  +  4L'-] v

o

§  28.  The  sum  of  these  two  formulas  is  the  whole  rate  of
transmission  of  energy  per  unit  of  time,  and  must  be  equal  to
the  average  rate  of  doing  work  by  the  vibrating  rigid  globe  upon
the  surrounding  elastic  solid.  Hence  if  w  denote  this  rate,  we
must  have

w=^  hY(o'  {2n  (IC-  +  D)  +  v  [(3  -  2Ky  +  4Z^]|  . .  .(69).

o

§  29.  To  verify  this  proposition,  let  us  first  find  the  resultant
force,  P,  with  which  the  globe  presses  and  drags  the  elastic
solid,  and  then  the  integral  work  which  P  does  per  period,  and
thence  the  average  work  per  unit  time.  Going  back  to  §  9,  we
see  that  P  is  the  surface-integral  of  X  over  the  spherical  surface
of  radius  q.  Hence  by  the  first  of  equations  (25),  which,  in  virtue
of  the  equations

k  +  in  =  pv^; n  =  pu^ (70),

we  may  write  as  follows : —

X  =  p  [CX'v'  -  [p^  {A  +  a)  +  2  (2\^  -h  1)  5  +  (X^  +  1)  G,]  u'']  . .  .(71),

we  find

P  =  ^^  [G.^"'  -  2  (^  -f-  55  -f-  26^  +  G,)  II?

3 Xqv <f \qu (f

=  ^\2{v-u)^^+2{v^'-ii^)f\-^^vS+^s\ (72),

q  {  qu^  q  u-  q )

14—2

212

LECTURE XIV.

jMolecular.  where  Q  denotes  ^-rrq^p,  being  the  mass  which  our  rigid  globe
would  have  if  its  density  were  equal  to  that  of  the  elastic  solid.
Hence  by  (65),  for  simple  harmonic  motion  in  period  27r/ft),

P  =  Qco%  \  f  ^K'"^^  _  2Z  ""— ^  +  8 !^^ )  sin  a^t

+

r2/f^-^^  +  2i^*^V^)coso.^

3v
qao,

.(72');

V  qo3  q'

or,  substituting  the  values  of  K  and  L  from  (65),  and  denoting  by
D  the  common  denominator,

Qarh

P  =

1^:  (.=  +  2v^  +  ^w)  -  A  (,.  _  ,j + J^^  (4«,  -  .^)

sin  o>i

cos  (W^l-

j

(72").

This  may  be  written  for  brevity

P  =  h  (a  sin  (ot  +  h  cos  &)^) (72'").

Finally  for  ?w  we  have,  denoting  the  period  by  t,

r

rf^  cos-  (at  =  ^hrbo) (73)

rJo  TJo

Qoyh-
2D

q  \q*co* q-w J q  VfM^ q-co'

...(73').

§  30.  To  verify  the  agreement  of  this  direct  formula  for  the
work  done,  with  (69)  which  expresses  the  effect  produced  in
waves  travelling  outwards  at  great  distances  from  the  centre,
is  a  very  long  algebraical  process,  with  K  and  L  in  (69)  given
by  (65).  But  it  becomes  very  simple  by  the  aid  of  the  following
modified  formulas  for  Si(t)  and  S'..(t),  which  are  also  useful
for  other  purposes.  From  (48),  (49),  and  (50),  by  eliminating
v9^i,  we  get  an  equation  for  JX^  similar  to  (49),  viz..

where

3-  +  -  (u  +2v)d  +  -^  (w"  +  2v"-)

q  r

.(74).

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

213

We  may  now  write  (50)  in  the  form

^\t)  =  hqu'G  sin  {wt  +  a),  |
and  similarly  i . .  C^S),

where the values of  G,  H,  a,  jS, are given by  the  following
equations : —

Molecular,

Or  COS  a  =  -7-,  —  1 ; (r  sin  a  =  —
q-w  qoi

q-Q)-

Hsin^  =

Su
qct)

.(76).

.(77),

From  the  second  of  equations  (53)  we  therefore  have
(Y /^\ 1 „^  ^/^sin  (ft)^  +  a)  —  iV^cos  (&)^  + a)  '

^,/^  (0  =  ''qi'''G W+W'

and

•^■2  Ki^J  -  nqu  n  M'^  +  N^ ~

where  if-  and  iV"-'  denote  the  terms  of  the  denominator  of  the
third  of  equations  (53).  By  the  same  method  of  investigation
as  that  which  gave  us  (69),  we  now  find  for  the  sum  of  the  rates
of  transmission  of  energy

w^-Ph^q^.- ^_^^, (78).

Substituting  the  values  of  G,  H,  M,  N,  and  introducing  the
notation  Q,  we  obtain

- (79).

q-w

(/  Vfco* q'(o-

q^co

,(<(-+2y-)-l

q-0)"

This  agi-ees  with  the value  of  lu  given  by  (73') ;  and  thus  the
verification  is  complete.

§  31.  In  (78)  the  numerator  of  the  last  factor  shows  the
parts  due  to  the  equivoluminal  and  irrotational  waves  respectively.
Denoting  by  J  the  ratio  of  the  energy  of  the  equivoluminal  wave
to  that  of  the  irrotatioual,  we  have

J  =

2uG'

.(80).

214

LECTURE XIV.

§  32. Consider  the  following  four  cases  : —

(a) qco  very  large  in  comparison  with  the  larger  ^

of  u  and  v.

2m

J  =

(6) q(o  =  V.

J  =

26

V 3u du^
-  +  —  +  —

(c) qco

V...(81).

r 2  [u 3w 9v
13  V'y H '«(

of  u  and  v.

g&)  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  smaller

J-  —

If  V  =x> ,  cases  (a)  and  (b)  cannot  occur ;  and  in  cases  (c),  (d)
we  see  by  (81)  that  J—oo;  that  is  to  say,  the  whole  energy  is
carried  away  by  the  equivoluminal  waves.  If  v  is  very  small  in
comparison  with  u,  we  find  that  although  J  is  infinite  in  cases  (a)
-^-^  and  (c),  it  is  zero  in  cases  (b)  and  (d).  This  to  my  mind  utterly
disproves  my  old  hypothesis*  of  a  very  small  velocity  for  irrotational
wave-motion  in  the  undulatory  theory  of  light.

§  33.  Let  us  now  work  out  some  examples  such  as  that
suggested  in  an  addition  of  March  6,  1899,  to  this  Lecture
(p.  188),  but  with  the  simplification  of  assuming  a  rigid  massless
spherical  lining  for  the  cavity,  which  for  brevity  I  shall  call  the
sheath.  But  first  let  us  work  out  in  general  the  problem  of
finding  what  force  in  simple  proportion  to  velocity  must  be
applied  to  a  mass  m  mounted  on  massless  springs  as  described
in  p.  145  above,  to  keep  the  sheath  vibrating  in  simple  harmonic
motion  h  sin  cot,  and  therefore  to  do  the  work  of  sending  out  the
two  sets  of  waves  with  which  we  have  been  concerned.  Let  y
be  the  required  force  per  unit  of  velocity  of  m ;  so  that  ye  is
the  working  force  that  must  be  applied  to  m,  at  any  time  when
e  is  its  displacement  from  its  mean  position.  Now  the  springs,
which  must  act  on  the  sheath  with  the  force  F  of  (72')  above,
must  react  with  an  equal  force  on  m  because  they  are  massless ;

*  "  On  the  Reflexion  and  Refraction  of  Light,"  Phil.  Mag.  1888,  2ud  half  year.

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.

215

SO  that  the  equation  of  motion  of  in  is

»l?=-^+^s («^>-

And,  by  the  law  of  elastic  action  of  the  springs,  we  have

P  =  c(e- A  sin  0)0 (83),

where  c  denotes  what  I  call  the  "stiffness  "  of  the  spring-system.

Molar.

§  34. For  e,  (83)  and  (72'")  give
and  with  this  in  (82)  we  find

1  -f  - sni  (i)t-\--  cos  wt
cJ  c

.(84);

1 ^A  ■ . ^

I  H — sni  (ot  +  -  cos  cot

cJ  c

a  +yco-j  sm  cot  +

JO, (l  +  f)

sin  cot.

which  requires  that

( 1  +  - )  mco''  =  a  +  -  jco, and  -  mco-  =  h  —  il  + -jyco;

by  which,  solved for  two  unknown  quantities,  yco  and  mco",  we

find

he"  Q^s

and

vico'

(a  +  cf  +  b'

c  [a  (a  +  c)  +  h-]

.(86).

(a  +  cy  +  ¥

If  we  suppose  co  and  c  known,  these  equations,  with  (72"),  (72"')
for  a  and  6,  tell  what  mjQ  must  be  in  order  that  the  force
applied  to  maintain  the  periodic  motion  of  the  sheath  shall  vary
in  simple  proportion  to  the  velocity ;  and  they  give  7,  the  mag-
nitude of  this  force  per  unit  velocity.

§  85. If  we  denote  by  E  the  maximum  kinetic  energy  of  m,
we  find  immediately  from  (84),

E

^li-nico^

1  +  -) +^
CJ \c

.(87).

And  by  (73)  we  have,  for  the  work  per  period  done  on  the  sheath

byP,

(88).

TW  =  ^rh'cob.

216

LECTURE XIV.

ilolecular.  This  ought  to  agree  with  the  work  done  by  76  per  period,  being

/:

dt'e 76,  which,  by  (84),  is  ^Tyw^"^

, ay fbV

,.(89).

The  agreement  between  (89)  and  (88)  is  secured  by  (85).

§  36. By  ( 87),  (89),  and  t«  =  27r ;  and  by  (86),  (85),  we  find
E  _m  _  moy^  _a{a-\-  0)  +  }}^  ,„^.

rw Tj 27770)  27r6c

which,  as  we  shall  see,  is  a  very  important  result,  in  respect  to
storage  of  energy  in  vibrators  for  originating  trains  of  waves.

§  37.  Remark  now  that  a,  h,  c  are  each  of  the  dimensions
of  a  "longitudinal  stiffness,"  that  is  to  say  Force -^Length,  or
Mass  -^  (Time)^ ;  and  for  clearness  write  out  the  full  expressions
for  a  and  h  from  (72")  and  (72'")  as  follows;

du~v^  fv?  +  2?;^

a  =  y&)-

q-Q}-

+  1

)-&')

—  v^Y 4<uv  —  v'^\

+

q-ar

u~  +  2v-

2u  /  dv'

+

q-(o

-1 +

+  1

6  =  Q«^22L1££-_2Z

u  +  2'«\-

qa>
9u'

qoi  yq'^co'^ gW

.(91).

u^  +  2v^ y (u  +  2v\-

^'60-

qca

§  38. Let  qw  be  very  large  in  comparison  with  the  larger  of  w
or  V  (Case  I.  of  §  32). We  have

therefore

a  =  Uoy  — ; b  =  Uw  —

(/W  qco

b ' ' TW ■  27rc

.(92).

This  case  is  interesting  in  connection  with  the  dynamics  of
waves  in  an  elastic  solid,  but  not  as  yet  apparently  so  in  respect
to  light.

§  39. Let  qo)  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  smaller  of
u  or  V  (Case  IV.  of  §  32). We  have

therefore ^  ^  0^7^;+ 2)^Vga> ^^aja  +  c)

.(93).

SPHERICAL  WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.  217

This  case  is  supremely  important  in  respect  to  molecular  sources  Molar.
of  light.

§  40. Let  c  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  a  +  Jf-ja. We

have

E  .  a'lh  +  h . he" ,  ,„.,

—  =  — k ; 7&)=^i, — TT, ; 'mco-  =  c (94).

§  41. Let  c  =  00  . We  have

—  =  ,r — i  ; 7(u  =  6; 111(0'  =  a (95).

TW zirh ' '  '

This  is  the  simple  case  of  a  rigid  globe  of  mass  m  embedded
firmly  in  the  elastic  solid,  and  no  other  elasticity  than  that  of  the
solid  around  it  brought  into  play.  It  is  interesting  in  respect  to
Stokes'  and  Rayleigh's  theory  of  the  blue  sky.

§  42. Let  V  =  cc  . We  have

This  case  is  of  supreme  interest  and  importance  in  respect  to
the  Dynamical  Theory  of  Light.

§  43.  Take  now  the  particular  example  suggested  in  the
addition  of  March  6,  189!)  (p.  188  above),  which  is  specially
interesting  as  belonging  to  cases  intermediate  between  those  of
§  38  and  §  39 ;  a  vast  mass  of  granite  with  a  spherical  hollow  of
ten  centimetres  diameter  acted  on  by  an  internal  simple  harmonic

vibrator  of  1006^^  periods  per  second  (being  1000  a/^t)- This

makes  w-  =  40  x  10«,  q-co-  =  10^,  w  =  6324,  qco  =  31620.  Now  the
velocities  of  the  equivoluminal  and  the  irrotational  waves  in
granite*  are  about  2-2,  and  4  kilometres  per  second;  so  we  have
w  =  2-2  X  10^,  y  =  4  X  10^ Hence,  and  by  (80)  and  (91),

-  =  6-957; -^,=  48-4; -—  =  2342-56 ;  \

qo)  q-ar  q^w*

—  =12-649;  -1^=160; ^ =25600;  I. ..(97).

qw  q^oy  q^w*  ^

J=  11-96; a=189-lxQ«^; h  =  2559  x  Qco^-,  |  =  7-390
*  Gray  and  Milue,  Phil.  3Iag.,  Nov.  1881.

218  LECTURE XIV.

olecular.  And  by  (85),  (8G),  (90) ;  with  for  brevity  c  =  sQco~,

25-09.S'  „. VI  _  [189-1  (189-1  +  s)  +  654-8]  s)

^"^ (189-1  +  sy  +  654-8  ^  ^'^' ' Q- (189-1  +  sf  +  654-8 '

B 7-390(189-1  +  5) +25-59 ,  ,^^ 226

~  = ^ ^ ^ =  1-176  +  —

TW  zirs  s

.(98).

§  44.  As  a  first  sub-case  take  (§  41)  c  =  oo  :  we  find  by  (95),
(97),  m=  1891Q;  and -fi'/rit;  =  1-176.  These  numbers  show  that
the  kinetic  energy  of  m  at  each  instant  of  transit  through  its
mean  position,  supplies  only  1-176  of  the  energy  carried  away  in
the  period  by  the  outward  travelling  waves ;  though  its  mass  is
as  much  as  189  times  that  of  granite  enough  to  fill  the  hollow.
Hence  we  see  that  if  the  moving  force  76  were  stopped  the  motion
of  m  would  subside  very  quickly  and  in  the  course  of  six  or  seven
times  T  it  would  be  nearl}^  annulled.  The  not  very  simple  law  of
the  subsidence  presents  an  extremely  interesting  problem  which  is
easily  enough  worked  out  thoroughly  according  to  the  methods
suitable  for  §  25  above.  Meantime  we  confine  ourselves  to  cases
in  which  Ejrw  is  very  large.

§  45.  Such  a  case  we  have,  under  §§  39,  41,  if  instead  of  1006^
periods  per  second  we  have  only  1-0065;  which  makes  5^  =  1000;
qa>  =  10  VIO  =  31-620  ;  and,  by  (93),  (95)  with  still  our  values  of  u
and  V  for  granite,

a=l-892xl0«x  Qco"- ■ f  =  7394  ; -  =1177 (99).

Hence  the  kinetic  energy  of  m  in  passing  through  the  middle
of  its  range  is  nearly  1200  times  the  work  required  to  maintain
its  vibration  at  the  rate  of  10065  periods  per  second  :  and  the
value  found  for  a,  used  in  (95),  shows  that  m,  supposed  to  be  a
rigid  globe  filling  the  hollow,  must  be  189  million  times  as  dense
as  the  surrounding  granite,  in  order  that  this  period  of  vibration
can  be  maintained  by  a  force  in  simple  proportion  to  velocity.
(See  §  40.)  It  is  now  easy  to  see  that  if  the  maintaining  force
is  stopped,  the  rigid  globe  will  go  on  vibrating  in  very  nearly  the
same  period,  but  subsidentially  according  to  the  law

-J_lr  2 J.

he  ^^''  sin  (100);

SPHERICAL WAVES IN ELASTIC SOLID.  219

and  there  will  be  the  corresponding  subsidence  in  the  amplitudes  Molecular,
of  the  two  sets  of  waves  travelling  outwards  in  all  directions  at
great distances from the origin, when, according to  the  pro-
pagational velocities  u,  v,  the effects of  the stoppage of  the
maintaining  force  reach  any  particular  distance.

It  is  quite  an  interesting  mathematical  problem,  suggested  at
the  end  of  §  44,  to  fully  determine  the  motion  in  all  future  time,
when  m  is  left  with  no  applied  force,  after  any  given  initial
conditions,  with  any  value,  large  or  small,  of  m/Q.

§  4G.  Returning  now  to  the  maintenance  of  vibrations  at
the  rate  of  1006^  periods  per  second;  and  «,  v  for  granite;  and
q  =  5  cm.,  all  as  in  §  43 ;  see  (98)  and  remark  that,  to  make
J^/t2v  very  large,  s  must  be  a  very  small  fractional  numeric  ;  and
this  makes  m/Q  =s.  To  take  a  vibrator  not  differing  greatly  in
result  from  the  violin  string  suggested  in  the  addition  of  March  6
(p.  188),  let  tu  be  a  little  ball  of  granite  of  -^  cm.  diameter.  This
makes  m  =  Q/8000,  and  therefore  (§  40)  s  =  1/8000.  Hence  by
(98),  E/Ttu=  1808001,  from  which,  with  what  we  know  of  wave-
motion,  we  infer  that  if  m  be  projected  with  any  given  velocity,  V,
from  its  position  of  equilibrium,  it  will  for  ever  after  vibrate,
with  amplitude  diminishing  according  to  the  formula

Oe^^«°"-sin  ^- (101).

T

Thus  during  3,616,002  periods  the  range  of  m  will  be  reduced  in
the  ratio  of  e  to  1  (say  approximately  2f  to  1),  by  giving  away  its
energy  to  be  transmitted  outwards  by  the  two  species  of  waves,
of  which,  according  to  J  of  (97),  the  equivoluminal  takes  twelve
times  as  much  as  the  irrotational.]

LECTURE  XY.

Tuesday,  October  14,  5  p.m.

leeular.  RETURNING  to  our  model,  we  shall  have  in  a  short  time  a  state
of  things  not  very  different  from  simple  harmonic  motion,  if  we
get  up  the  motion  very  gradually.  We  have  now  an  exciting
vibration  of  shorter  period  than  the  shortest  of  the  natural
periods.  We  must  keep  the  vibrator  going  through  a  uniform
range.  We  are  not  to  augment  it,  and  it  will  be  a  good  thing
to  place  something  here  to  mark  its  range.  [This  done.]  Keep  it
going  long  enough  and  we  shall  see  a  state  of  vibration  in  which
each  bar  will  be  going  in  the  opposite  direction  to  its  neighbour.  If
we  keep  it  going  long  enough  we  certainly  will  have  the  simple
harmonic  motion ;  and  if  this  period  is  smaller  than  the  smallest
of  the  three  natural  periods,  we  shall,  as  we  know,  have  the  alternate
bars  going  in  opposite  directions.  Now  you  see  a  longer-period
vibration  of  the  largest  mass  superimposed  on  the  simple  har-
monic motion  we  are  waiting  for.  I  will  try  to  help  towards
that  condition  of  affixirs  by  resisting  the  vibration  of  the  top
particle.  In  fact,  that  particle  will  have  exceedingly  little  motion
in  the  proper  state  of  things  (that  is  to  say,  when  the  motion  is
simple  harmonic  throughout),  and  it  will  be  moving,  so  far  as  it
has  motion  at  all,  in  an  opposite  direction  to  the  particle  im-
mediately below  it.  It  is  nearly  quit  of  that  superimposed
motion  now.  We  cannot  give  a  great  deal  of  time  to  this,  but
I  think  we  may  find  it  a  little  interesting  as  illustrating
dynamical  principles.  Prof  Mendenhall  is  here  acting  the  part
of  an  escapement  in  keeping  the  vibrator  to  its  constant  range.
We  cannot  get  quit  of  the  slow  vibration  of  the  particle.  A
touch  upon  it  in  the  right  place  may  do  it. A  very  slight  touch

EXCITATION OF SYNCHRONOUS VIBRATOR BY LIGHT. 221

is  more  than  enough.  I  have  set  it  the  wrong  way.  Now  we  Molecular,
have  got  quit  of  that  vibration  and  you  see  no  sensible  motion
of  ms  at  all.  These  two,  {m.^,  m^),  are  going  in  opposite  directions,
and  the  lower  one  in  opposite  direction  to  the  exciter.  There-
fore this  is  a  shorter  vibration  than  the  shortest  natural  period.
Now  I  set  it  to  agree  with  the  shortest  of  the  periods,  the  first
critical  position.  If  we  get  time  in  the  second  lecture  to-day,
I  am  going  to  work  upon  this  a  little  to  tr}^  to  get  a  definite
example  illustrating  a  particle  of  sodium.  Before  we  enter  upon
any  hard  mathematics,  let  us  look  at  this  a  little,  and  help  our-
selves to  think  of  the  thing.  What  I  am  doing  now  is  very
gradually  getting  up  the  oscillation.  I  am  doing  to  that  system
exactly  what  is  done  to  the  sodium  molecule,  for  example,  when
sodium  light  is  transmitted  through  sodium  vapour.  We  may  feel
quite  certain,  however,  that  the  energy  of  vibration  of  the
sodium  molecule  goes  on  increasing  during  the  passage  through
the  medium  of  at  least  two-hundred  thousand  waves,  instead
of  two  dozen  at  the  most  perhaps  that  I  am  taking  to  get  up
this  oscillation.  But  just  note  the  enormous  vibration  we  have
here,  and  contrast  it  with  the  state  of  things  that  we  had  just
before.  The  upper  particle  is  in  motion  now  and  is  performing
a  vibration  in  the  same  period  and  phase  as  the  lower  particle,
only  through  comparatively  a  very  small  range.  The  second
particle,  I  am  afraid,  will  overstrain  the  wire.  (By  hanging  up  a
watch,  bifilarly,  so  that  the  period  of  bifilar  suspension  approxi-
mately agrees  with  the  balance  wheel,  you  get  likewise  a  state
of  wild  vibration.  But  if  you  perform  such  experiments  with  a
watch,  you  are  apt  to  damage  it.)  This,  which  you  see  now,  is
a  most  magnificent  contrast  to  the  previous  state  of  things  when
the  period  of  the  exciter  was  very  far  from  agreeing  with  any  of
the  fundamental  periods.

We  will  now  return  to  our  molar  subject,  the  elastic  solid.
You  will  see  a  note  in  the  paper  of  yesterday  to  which  I  have
referred,  stating  that  the  thlipsinomic  method  is  more  convenient
than  the  tasinomic  for  dealing  with  incompressibility,  and  in
point  of  fact  it  is  so.

I  explained  to  you  yesterday  Rankine's  nomenclature  of
thlipsinomic  and  tasinomic  coefficients,  according  to  which,  when
the  six  stress-components  are  expressed  in  terms  of  strain-
components,  the  coefficients  are  called  tasinomic;  and  when  the

}

222  LECTURE XV.

strain-components  are  expressed  in  terms  of  the  stress-components,
the  coefficients  are  called  thlipsinomic.  [Thus,  going  back  to
Lecture  XI.  (p.  132  above),  we  see,  in  the  six  equations  (1),  36
tasinomic  coefficients  expressing  the  six  stress-components  as
linear  functions  of  the  six  strain-components :  and  we  see,  in
virtue  of  15  equalities  among  the  36  coefficients,  just  21  indepen-
dent values,  being  Green's  celebrated  21  coefficients.  Use  now
those  six  equations  to  determine  the  six  quantities  e,f,  g,  a,  h,  c  in
terms  of  P,  Q,  R,  S,  T,  U. Thus  we  find

e  =  (PF)  P  +  {PQ)  Q  +  (PR)  R  +  (PS)  S  +  (PT)  T+(PU)U^
f  =  (QP)P  +  {QQ)  Q+{QR)R  +  {QS)  S  +  (QT)  T+  (QU)  U
g  =  {RP)  P  -f-  {Ri})  Q  +  (RR)  R  +  (RS)  S  -l-'  (RT)  T+{RU)  U
a  =  (8P)  P+{SQ)  Q  +  {SR)  R  +  {SS)  S  +  (ST)T  +  {8U)  U
b  =  (TP)  P  +  (TQ)  Q  +  (TR)  R  +  (TS)  S  +  (TT)  T  +  (TIT)  U
c  =  (UP)P  +  {UQ)Q  +  {UR)R  +  {US)S+(UT)T  +  (Uir)U}

in

where  (PP),  (PQ),  &c.,  denote  algebraic  functions  of  11,  12,  22,
&c.,  found  by  the  process  of  elimination.  This  process,  in  virtue
of  the  15  equalities  12  =  21,  &c.,  gives  (PQ)  =  (QP),  &c.;  15
equalities  in  all.  The  21  independent  coefficients  (PP),  (PQ),  &c.,
thus  found,  are  what  Rankine  called  the  thlipsinomic  coefficients.
Taking  now  from  Lecture  II.,  p.  24,

E^^(Pe+Qf+Rg  +  Sa+Tb+Uc) (2),

and  eliminating  P,  Q,  R  from  this  formula  by  the  equations  (1)
of  Lecture  XL,  (p.  132),  we  find  the  tasinomic  quadratic  function
for  the  energy  which  we  had  in  Lecture  II.  (p.  23).  And  eliminat-
ing e,  f,  g,  a,  h,  c  from  it  by  our  present  six  equations,  we  find  the
corresponding  thlipsinomic  formula  for  the  energy  with  21  inde-
pendent coefficients  (PP),  (PQ),  &c.*]  In  a  certain  sense,  these
coefficients,  both  tasinomic  and  thlipsinomic,  may  be  all  called
moduluses  of  elasticity,  inasmuch  as  each  of  them  is  a  definite
numerical  measurement  of  a  definite  elastic  quality.  I  have,
however,  specially  defined  a  modulus  as  a  stress  divided  by  a
strain,  following  the  analogy  of  Young's  modulus.  If  we  adhere
to  this  definition,  then  the  tasinomic  coefficients  are  moduluses,
and  the  thlipsinomic  coefficients  are  reciprocals  of  moduluses.

*  Compare  Thomson  and  Tail,  §  G73,  (12)— (20).

THLIPSINOMIC TREATMENT OF COMPRESSIBILITY.  223

In the  Lecture  notes  in  your  hands  for  today  you  see  the  Molar,
thlipsinomic  discussion  of  the  question  of  compressibility  or  in-
compressibility ; which is much simpler than our tasinomic
discussion  of  the  same  subject  in  which  we  failed  yesterday. You
see  that  if  the  dilatation,  e  -\-f+g,  be  denoted  by  8,  you  have

S  =  [(PP)  +  {QP)  +  (RP)]  P  +  [(PQ)  +  (QQ)  +  (RQ)]  Q

+  [{PR)  +  (QR)  +  (RR)]  R  +  [(PS)  +  (QS)  +  (RS)]  S

+  [(PT)  +  (QT)  +  {RT)]T  +  [{PU)  +  {QU)  +  (RU)]U (8).

Thus  if  P  is  the  sole  stress,  a  dilatation  [(PP)  +  (QP)  +  (RP)]  P
is  produced  ;  and  if  S  is  the  sole  stress,  a  dilatation

[(PS)  +  (QS)  +  (RS)]S

is  produced.  We  see  therefore  that  *S',  a  kind  of  stress  Avhich  in
an  isotropic  solid  would  produce  merely  distortion,  may  produce
condensation  or  rarefaction  in  an  a^olotropic  solid.  The  coefficients
of  P,  Q,  R,  S,  T,  U  in  our  equation  for  S  may  be  called  compressi-
bilities. Their  reciprocals  are  (according  to  my  definition  of  a
modulus)  moduluses  for  compressibility.  In  an  isotropic  solid,
each  of  the  last  three  coefficients  vanishes ;  and  the  reciprocal  of
each  of  the  others  is  three  times  what  I  have  denoted  by  k
(Lecture  IL,  p.  25),  and  called  the  compressibility-modulus  or  the
bulk-modulus,  being  P/B,  where  P  denotes  equal  pull,  or  negative
pressure,  in  all  directions.

An  ffiolotropic  solid  is  incompressible  if,  and  is  compressible
unless,  each  of  the  six  coefficients  in  our  formula  for  S  vanishes.
That  is  to  say,  it  is  necessary  and  sufficient  for  incompressibility
that

(PP)  +  (QP)  +  (RP)  =  0

(PQ)+(QQ)+(RQ)  =  0

(PR)  +  (QR)  +  (RR)  =  0

(PS)  +(QS)+(RS)=0

(PT)  +  (QT)  +  (RT)  =  0

(PU)-v(QU)+(RU)=()

(4).

Thus  we  see  that  six  equations  among  the  21  coefficients  suffice
to  secure  that  there  can  be  no  condensational-rarefactional  wave,
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  that,  in  every  plane  wave,  the  vibration
must  be  rigorously  in  the  plane  of  the  wave-front ;  and  therefore
that  Green  was  not  right  when,  in  proposing  to  confine  himself

224  LECTURE XV.

olar.  "  to  the  consideration  of  those  media  only  in  which  the  directions
of  the  transverse  vibrations  shall  always  be  accurately  in  the
front  of  the  wave,"  he  said*,  "This  fundamental  principle  of
Fresnel's  theory  gives  fourteen  relations  between  the  twenty-one
constants  originally  entering  into  our  function."  What  Green
really  found  and  proved  was  fourteen  relations  ensuring,  and
required  to  ensure,  that  there  can  be  plane  waves  with  direction
of  vibration  accurately  in  the  plane  of  the  wave,  if  there  can  also
be  condensational-rarefactional  waves  in  the  medium.  What  we
have  now  found  is  that  not  fourteen,  but  only  six,  equations  suffice
to  secure  inconipressibility  and  therefore  to  compel  the  direction
of  the  vibration  in  any  actual  plane  wave  to  be  accurately  in  the
plane  of  the  wave.

[March  7,  1899. — I  have  only  today  found  an  interesting  and
instructive  mode  of  dealing  with  those  six  equations  of  incom-
pressibility,  which  I  gave  in  this  Baltimore  Lecture  of  October  14,
1884.  By  the  first  three  of  them,  eliminating  (PP),  (QQ),  (RR),
and  by  the  other  three,  (PS),  (QT),  (RU)  from  the  equation  of
energy,  we  find

2E  =  -[(QR)(Q-  Ry  +  (RP)  (R  -Py-  +  (  PQ)  (P  -  Qf]

+  2{[(QU)U-{RT)T]{Q-R)+[{RS)S-(PU)U](R-P)

+  [{PT)T-m)S]{P-Q)]
+  (SS)  S"~  +  (TT)  T"'  +  ( UU)  U'
+  2[{TU)TU+{US)  lTS  +  iST)ST] (5).

In  this,  P,  Q,  R  appear  only  in  their  differences,  which  is  an
interesting  expression  of  the  dynamical  truth  that  if  P  =  Q  =  i2,
they  give  no  contribution  to  the  potential  energy.

The  three  differences  Q  —  R,  R  —  P,  P  —  Q,  are  equivalent  to
only  two  independent  variables ;  thus  if  we  put  P  -  Q=  V  and
P  —  R=  W,  we  have  Q  —  R=  W  —  V,  and  the  expression  for  E
becomes  a  homogeneous  quadratic  function  of  the  five  indepen-
dents V,  W,  S,  T,  U,  with  fifteen  independent  coefficients,  which
we  may  write  as  follows : —

E=l{(  VV)  V^  +  {WW)  W^-  +  (.S'^')  ;S'-=  +  (TT)  T'  +(UU)  U^]
+  {VW)VW  +{V8)VS +{VT)VT  +  {VU)VU
-\-{WS)W8 +{WT)^¥T+{WU)WU
+  (8T)ST +(8U)SU  +{TU)TU  (6).

*  Green,  Collected  Papers,  p.  293.

THLIPSINOMIC TREATMENT  OF COMPRESSIBILITY.

225

The  differential  coefficients  of  this  with  reference  to  S,  T,  f/"  Molar.
are of  course as before,  a, b,  c. Denote now  by  h and  i  its
differential  coefficients  with  reference  to  V  and  W. Thus  we  find

h=  (VV)V+  (VW)W+  {VS)S+  (VT)T+  (VU)U\
i  =  {WV)V  +  (WW)W  +  {WS)S  +  {WT)T  +  (WU)U
a= {SV)V+  (SW)W+ (SS)S+  (ST)  T  +  {SU)u[---0);
h=  {TV)V+  (TW)W+ (TS)S+  (TT)T+  (TU)  U
c=  (UV)V+  {UW)W+  (U8)S+  (UT)T+(UU)U,

and  we  have

E^^{hV  +  {W+aS  +  bT+cU) (8).

The  dynamical  interpretation  shows  that  h  must  represent  —  f,
and  i  must  represent  —  g,  when  V  and  W  represent  P  —  Q,
and  P-R.

Solving  the  five  linear  equations  (7)  for  V,  W,  S,  T,  U,  we
find  the  tasinomic  expressions  for  the  five  stress-components  in
terms  of  the  five  strain-components,  which  we  may  write  as
follows : —

V  =  (hh)  h  +  (hi)  i  +  (ha)  a  +  (hh)b  +  (he)  c\
W  =  (ih)  h  +  (ii)  i  -f  (ia)  a  -\-  (ib)  b  +  (ic)  c

S  =  (ah)  h  +  (ai)  i  -{■  (aa)  a  +  (ab)  b  +  (ac)  c  V  (9).

T  =  (bh)  h  +  (bi)  i  +  (ba)  a  +  (bb)  b  +  (be)  c  I
U  =  (ch)  h  +  (ci)  i  +  (ca)  a  +  (cb)  b  +  (cc)  cj
The  algebraic  process  shows  us  that

(hi)  =  (ih);  (ha)  =  (ah);  &c (10);

so  that  we  have  now  found  the  15  independent  tasinomic  coeffi-
cients from  the  15  thlipsinomic.  Lastly,  eliminating  by  (9)
V,  W,  S,  T,  U  from  (8),  we  find  the  tasinomic  quadratic  expressing
the  energy.]

As  I  said  in  the  first  lecture,  one  fundamental  difficulty  is
quite  refractory  indeed.  In  the  wave-theory  of  light  the  velocity
of  the  wave  ought  to  depend  on  the  plane  of  distortion.  If  you
compare  the  details  of  motion  in  the  wave-surface*  worked  out
for  an  incompressible  seolotropic  elastic  solid,  with  equalities
enough  among  the  coefficients  to  annul  all  skewnesses,  you  will
see  that  it  agrees  exactly  with  Fresnel's  wave-surface  but  that
instead  of  the  direction  of  the  line  of  vibration  of  the  particles  as

*  Lecture  XII.,  p.  137 ;  Lecture  XIH.,  p.  175.
T.  L.  15

226

LECTURE XV.

in  Fresnel's  construction  we  have  the  normal  to  the  plane  of  distor-
tion as  the  direction  on  which  the  propagational  velocity  depends.
I  see  no  way  of  getting  over  the  difficulty  that  the  return
forces  in  an  elastic  solid — the  forces  on  which  the  vibration
depends — are  dependent  on  the  strain  experienced  by  the  solid
and  on  that  alone.  I  have  never  felt  satisfied  with  the  ingenious
method  by  which  Green  got  over  it.  Stokes  quotes  in  his  report
on  Double  Refraction,  page  265  (British  Association  1862):  "In
"  his  paper  on  Reflection,  Green  had  adopted  the  supposition  of
"  Fresnel  that  the  vibrations  are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
"  polarization.  He  was  naturally  led  to  examine  whether  the  laws
"  of  double  refraction  could  be  explained  on  this  hypothesis.
"  When  the  medium  in  its  undisturbed  state  is  exposed  to  pressure
"  differing  in  different  directions,  six  additional  constants  are  intro-
"  duced  into  the  function  0,  or  three  in  the  case  of  the  existence  of
"  planes  of  symmetry  to  which  the  medium  is  referred.  For  waves
"  perpendicular  to  the  principal  axes,  the  directions  of  vibration
"  and  squared  velocities  of  propagation  are  as  follows  : —

Wave  normal

X

y

z

Direction  of  vibration  -i
\

X

G  +  A

_N+B

M+C

y

N  +  A

H  +  B

L  +  C

z

M  +  A

L  +  B

I+C

"Green  assumes,  in  accordance  with  Fresnel's  theory,  and  with
"observation  if  the  vibrations  in  polarized  light  are  supposed
"perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  polarization,  that  for  waves
"  perpendicular  to  any  two  of  the  principal  axes,  and  propagated
"  by  vibrations  in  the  direction  of  the  third  axis,  the  velocity  of
"  propagation  is  the  same."

Let  us  see  what  this  statement  means  before  considering
whether  it  may  be  verified,  as  Green  supposes,  by  the  introduction
of  "extraneous  pressure."  Consider  waves  having  their  fronts
parallel  to  the  sides  N  and  W  (North  and  West)  of  this  box,  which
are  perpendicular  to  two  of  the  three  principal  axes  of  the  crystal,
and  such  having  its  vibrations  in  the  direction  of  the  third  axis  (up
and  down). Take  first  the  wave  that  is  propagated  south  as  I  hold

WAVE VELOCITY DEPENDS ON LINE OF VIBRATION.

227

the  box. There  is  the  plane  of  the  wave  (iV}. The  vibration  up  Molar.
and  down  with  N  held  fixed  will  give  a  shear  like  that  marked  1,

in  which  a  square  becomes  a  rhombic  figure.  That  represents  the
strain  in  the  solid  corresponding  to  this  first  state  of  motion.  Simi-
larly the  wave  propagated  in  the  eastward  direction  will  give  rise
to  a  shear  of  this  kind  marked  2,  the  vibration  still  being  upward.
The  assumption  is  that  one  of  these  sets  of  waves  is  propagated
at  the  same  speed  as  the  other.  That  is  to  say,  the  waves  which
have  their  shear  in  this  west  plane  have  the  same  velocity  as
the  waves  which  have  their  shear  in  this  north  plane.  The
essence  of  our  elastic  solid  is  three  different  rigidities,  one  for
shearing  in  this  plane  W,  one  for  shearing  in  this  plane  N,  and
one  for  shearing  in  the  other  principal  plane  (the  horizontal  plane
of  our  box).  The  incongruous  assumption  is  that  the  velocities  of
propagation  do  not  depend  on  the  planes  of  the  shearing  strain,
and  do  depend,  simply  and  solely,  on  the  direction  of  the  vibration.
The  introduction  by  Green  (in  order  to  accomplish  this)  of
what  he  calls  "  extraneous  force,"  which  gives  him  three  other
coefficients  has  always  seemed  to  me  of  doubtful  validity.  In
the  little  table  above,  taken  from  Stokes,  L,  M,  JSf  are  the  three
principal  rigidities,  the  44,  55,  66  of  our  own  notation.  A,  B,  C
are  the  effects  of  extraneous  pressure.  The  table  gives  the  squared
velocities  of  propagation  and  waves  of  different  wave-normals  and
directions  of  vibration  along  the  axes.  The  principal  diagonal  refers
only  to  condensational  waves,  or  waves  in  which  the  direction
of  vibration  coincides  with  the  wave-normal. Green's  assumption

15— 2^

228  LECTURE XV.

makes,  for  vibrations  in  the  ^--direction,  N  +  B  =  M+C;  which,
with  the  two  corresponding  equations  for  vibrations  in  the
directions  y,  z,  gives

A-L=B-M=G-K

[March  7,  1899.  Addition.  On  Cauchy's  and  Green's
Doctrine  of  Extraneous  Force  to  explain  dynamically
Fresnel's  Kinematics  of  Double  Refraction*.

§  1.  Green's  dynamics  of  polarization  by  reflexion,  and  Stokes'
dynamics  of  the  diffraction  of  polarized  light,  and  Stokes'  and
Rayleigh's  dynamics  of  the  blue  sky,  all  agree  in,  as  seems  to  me,
irrefragably,  demonstrating  Fresnel's  original  conclusion,  that  in
plane  polarized  light  the  line  of  vibration  is  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  polarization;  the  "plane  of  polarization"  being  defined
as  the  plane  through  the  ray  and  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting
surface,  when  light  is  polarized  by  reflexion.

§  2.  Now  when  polarized  light  is  transmitted  through  a  crystal,
and  when  rays  in  any  one  of  the  principal  planes  are  examined,  it
is  found  that —

(1)  A  ray  with  its  plane  of  polarization  in  the  principal
plane  travels  with  the  same  speed,  whatever  be  its  direction
(whence  it  is  called  the  "  ordinary  ray  "  for  that  principal  plane) ;
and  (2)  A  ray  whose  plane  of  polarization  is  perpendicular  to  the
principal  plane,  and  which  is  called  the  "  extraordinary  ray "  of
that  plane,  is  transmitted  with  velocity  differing  for  different
directions,  and  having  its  maximum  and  minimum  values  in  two
mutually  perpendicular  directions  of  the  ray.

§  3.  Hence  and  by  §  1,  the  velocities  of  all  rays  having  their
vibrations  perpendicular  to  one  principal  plane  are  the  same ;  and
the  velocities  of  rays  in  a  principal  plane  which  have  their  direc-
tions of  vibration  in  the  same  principal  plane,  differ  according  to  the
direction  of  the  ray,  and  have  maximum  and  minimum  values  for
directions  of  the  ray  at  right  angles  to  one  another.  But  in  the
laminar  shearing  or  distortional  motion  of  which  the  wave-motion
of  the  light  consists,  the  "plane  of  the  shear-f-"  (or  "plane  of
the  distortion,"  as  it  is  sometimes  called)  is  the  plane  through  the

*  Reprinted,  with  additions,  from  the  Proc.  R.  S.  E.,  Vol.  xv.  1887,  p.  21,  and
Phil.  Mag.,  Vol.  xxv.  1888,  p.  116.

t  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,  §  171  (or  Elements,  §  150).

CAUCHY  AND  GREEN'S  EXTRANEOUS  FORCE. 229

direction  of  the  ray  and  the  direction  of  vibration  ;  and  therefore  Molar,
it  would  be  the  ordinary  ray  that  would  have  its  line  of  vibration
in  the  principal  plane,  if  the  ether's  difference  of  quality  in
different  directions  were  merely  the  seolotropy  of  an  unstrained
elastic  solid*.  Hence  ether  in  a  crystal  must  have  something
essentially  different  from  mere  intrinsic  seolotropy ;  something
that  can  give  different  velocities  of  propagation  to  two  rays,  of
one  of  which  the  line  of  vibration  and  line  of  propagation  coincide
respectively  with  the  line  of  propagation  and  line  of  vibration
of  the  other.

§  4.  The  difficulty  of  imagining  what  this  something  could
possibly  be,  and  the  utter  failure  of  dynamics  to  account  for  double
refraction  without  it,  have  been  generally  felt  to  be  the  greatest
imperfection  of  optical  theory.

It  is  true  that  ever  since  1839  a  suggested  explanation  has
been  before  the  world ;  given  independently  by  Cauchy  and
Green,  in  what  Stokes  has  called  their  "  Second  Theories  of
Double  Refraction,"  presented  on  the  same  day,  the  20th  of
May  of  that  year,  to  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences  and  the
Cambridge  Philosophical  Society.  Stokes,  in  his  Report  on  Double
Refraction f,  has  given  a  perfectly  clear  account  of  this  explana-
tion. It  has  been  but  little  noticed  otherwise,  and  somehow  it
has  not  been  found  generally  acceptable  ;  perhaps,  because  of  a
certain  appearance  of  artificiality  and  arbitrariness  of  assumption
which  might  be  supposed  to  discredit  it.  But  whatever  may  have
been  the  reason  or  reasons  which  have  caused  it  to  be  neglected
as  it  has  been,  and  though  it  is  undoubtedly  faulty,  both  as  given
by  Cauchy  and  by  Green,  it  contains  what  seems  to  me,  in  all
probability,  the  true  principle  of  the  explanation,  and  which  is,
that  the  ether  in  a  doubly  refracting  crystal  is  an  elastic  solid,
unequally  pressed  or  unequally  pulled  in  different  directions,  by
the  \mmoved  ponderable  matter.

§  5.  Cauchy 's  work  on  the  wave-theory  of  light  is  complicated
throughout,  and  to  some  degree vitiated,  by  admission  of  the

*  The  elementary  dynamics  of  elastic  solids  shows  that  on  this  supposition
there  might  be  maximum  and  minimum  velocities  of  propagation  for  rays  in
directions  at  45°  to  one  another,  but  that  the  velocities  must  essentially  he  equal  for
every  tioo  directions  at  90°  to  one  another,  in  the  principal  plane,  when  the  hne  of
vibration  is  in  this  plane.

t  British  Association  Report,  1862.

230  LECTURE XV.

Molar.  Navier-Poisson  false  doctrine*  that  compressibility  is  calculable
theoretically  from  rigidity ;  a  doctrine  which  Green  sets  aside,
rightly  and  conveniently,  by  simply  assuming  incompressibility.
In  other  respects  Cauchy's  and  Green's  "  Second  Theories  of
Double  Refraction,"  as  Stokes  calls  them,  are  almost  identical.
Each  supposes  ether  in  the  crystal  to  be  an  intrinsically  seolotropic
elastic  solid,  having  its  seolotropy  modified  in  virtue  of  internal
pressure  or  pull,  equal  or  unequal  in  different  directions,  produced
by  and  balanced  by  extraneous  force.  Each  is  faulty  in  leaving
intrinsic  rigidity-moduluses  (coefficients)  unaffected  by  the  equi-
librium-pressure, and  in  introducing  three  fresh  terms,  with
coefficients  (A,  B,  G  in  Green's  notation)  to  represent  the  whole
effect  of  the  equilibrium-pressure.  This  gives  for  the  case  of  an
intrinsically  isotropic  solid,  augmentation  of  virtual  rigidity,  and
therefore  of  wave- velocity,  by  equal  pullf  in  all  directions,  and
diminution  by  equal  positive  pressure  in  all  directions ;  which  is
obviously  wrong.  Thus  definitively,  pull  in  all  directions  outwards
perpendicular  to  the  bounding  surface  equal  per  unit  of  area  to
three  times  the  intrinsic  rigidity-modulus,  would  give  quadrupled
virtual  rigidity,  and  therefore  doubled  wave-velocity  !  Positive
normal  pressure  inwards  equal  to  the  intrinsic  rigidity-modulus
would  annul  the  rigidity  and  the  wave-velocity — that  is  to  say,
would  make  a  fluid  of  the  solid.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  nega-
tive pressure,  or  outward  pull,  on  an  incompressible  liquid,  would
give  it  virtual  rigidity,  and  render  it  capable  of  transmitting
laminar  waves !  It  is  obvious  that  abstract  dynamics  can  show
for  pressure  or  pull  equal  in  all  directions,  no  effect  on  any  physical
property  of  an  incompressible  solid  or  fluid.

§  6.  Again,  pull  or  pressure  unequal  in  different  directions,  on
an  isotropic  incompressible  solid,  would,  according  to  Green's
formula  (A)  in  p.  303  of  his  collected  Mathematical  Papers,  cause
the  velocity  of  a  laminar  wave  to  depend  simply  on  .the  wave-
front,  and  to  have  maximum,  minimax,  and  minimum  velocities

*  See  Stokes,  "On  the  Friction  of  Fluids  in  Motion  and  on  the  Equilibrium  and
Motion  of  Elastic  Solids,"  Camh.  Phil.  Trans.,  1845,  §§  19,  20;  reprinted  in  Stokes'
Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Vol.  i.  p.  123;  or  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural
Philosophy,  §§  684,  685;  or  Elements,  §§  655,  656.

t  So  little  has  been  done  towards  interpreting  the  formulas  of  either  writer  that
it  has  not  been  hitherto  noticed  that  positive  values  of  Cauchy's  G,  H,  I,  or  of
Green's  A,  B,  C,  signify  pulls,  and  negative  values  signify  pressures.

STEESS-THEORY OF DOUBLE REFRACTION.  281

for  wave-fronts  perpendicular  respectively  to  the  directions  of  Molecular.
maximum  pull,  minimax  pull,  and  minimum  pull ;  and  would
make  the  wave-surface  a  simple  ellipsoid !  This,  which  would  be
precisely  the  case  of  foam  stretched  unequally  in  different  direc-
tions, seemed  to  me  a  very  interesting  and  important  result,  until
(as  shown  in  §  19  below)  I  found  it  to  be  not  true.

§  7.  To  understand  fully  the  stress-theory  of  double  refraction,
we  may  help  ourselves  effectively  by  working  out  directly  and
thoroughly  (as  is  obviously  to  be  done  by  abstract  dynamics)
the  problem  of  §  6,  as  follows  : — Suppose  the  solid,  isotropic
when  unstrained,  to  become  strained  by  pressure  so  applied  to
its  boundary  as  to  produce,  throughout  the  interior,  homogeneous
strain  according  to  the  following  specification  : —

The  coordinates  of  any  point  M  of  the  mass  which  were  ^,  rj,  ^
when  there  was  no  strain,  become  in  the  strained  solid

^V«. ^VA ?V7 (1);

Va,  VA  s/y,  or  the  "Principal  Elongations*,"  being  the  same
whatever  point  M  of  the  solid  we  choose.  Because  of  incompres-
sibility  we  have

oi^7=l (2).

For  brevity,  we  shall  designate  as  (a,  /3,  7)  the  strained  condition
thus  defined.

§  8.  As  a  purely  kinematic  preliminary,  let  it  be  required  to
find  the  principal  strain-ratios  when  the  solid,  already  strained
according  to  (1),  (2),  is  further  strained  by  a  uniform  shear,  cr,
specified  as  follows ;  in  terms  of  x,  y,  z,  the  coordinates  of  still  the
same  particle,  M,  of  the  solid  and  other  notation,  as  explained
below : —

X  =  ^  \/a  +  apl  1

y  =  r]^/^  +  a2)m[ (3),

z  =  ^  \/y  +  o-pn  J

where  p^  OP  =  X^  \/a  + firj  ^//3  +  vt,^y (4),

with  ^- -f- m- 4- h'^  =  1, A." -I- yu,'- -f  I/- =  1 (5),

and  l\  -|-  in\x  -\-  nv  =  0 (6);

*  See  chap.  iv.  of  "Mathematical  Theory  of  Elasticity"  (W.  Thomson),  Trans.
Roy.  Soc.  Lond.  1856,  reprinted  in  Vol.  in.  of  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,
now  on  the  point  of  being  published,  or  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,
§§  160,  164,  or  Elements,  §§  141,  158.

232  LECTURE XV.

X,  fjb,  V  denoting  the  direction-cosines  of  OP,  the  normal  to  the
shearing  planes,  and  I,  in,  n  the  direction-cosines  of  shearing  dis-
placement. The  principal  axes  of  the  resultant  strains  are  the
directions  of  OM  in  which  it  is  maximum  or  minimum,  subject  to
the  condition

r+'?^+r^=i = (7);

and  its  maximum,  minimax,  and  minimum  values  are  the  three
required  strain-ratios. Now  we  have

0  if  -  =  x"" -\- y""  +  z-

=  ^'a  +  7;2/3  -I-  ^^7  +  2a  {l^  sja  +  mrj  V/S  +  n^  ^/y)p  +  (tY-  .  .(8),

and  to  make  this  maximum  or  minimum  subject  to  (7),  we  have

diJOM^)  di^OAP)  dgOM^) ^ ...

where  in  virtue  of  (7),  and  because  OM^  is  a  homogeneous  quad-
ratic function  of  ^,  i],  ^,

p  =  OM^

The  determinantal  cubic,  being

(S4-p)-  ¥  {M-  p)  -  c^  C^-  />)  4-  2abG  =  0 (10),

where  S€  =  ol{1  +  2al\  +  o-^X^) . ^^  13  (1  +  2(rmfx  +  a^)  ;

'^=7(l  +  2(r>iz^-l-o-V) (11)

and a  =  \/{^<y)[(T{mv  +  n[x)  + a-fjiv}]  h  =  \/{<yoL)\_a{n\-\-lv)+a^v\\;

c  =  \/{a/3)  [a  {l/j,  +  m\)  +  a-Xp,] (12),

gives  three  real  positive  values  for  p,  the  square  roots  of  which
are  the  required  principal  strain-ratios.

§  9.  Entering  now  on  the  dynamics  of  our  subject,  remark
that  the  isotropy  (§1)  implies  that  the  work  required  of  the
extraneous  pressure,  to  change  the  solid  from  its  unstrained
condition  (1,  1,  1)  to  the  strain  (a,  /3,  7),  is  independent  of  the
direction  of  the  normal  axes  of  the  strain,  and  depends  solely  on
the  magnitudes  of  a,  /3,  7.  Hence  if  E  denotes  its  magnitude  per
unit  of  volume ;  or  the  potential  energy  of  unit  volume  in  the
condition  (a,  /3,  7)  reckoned  from  zero  in  the  condition  (1,  1,  1) ;
we  have

E  =  f(cc,/3,ry) (13),

STKESS-THEOllY OF DOUBLE IIEFKACTION.

233

where  yjr  denotes  a  function  of  which  the  magnitude  is  unaltered  Molar.
when  the  values  of  a,  /3,  7  are  interchanged.  Consider  a  portion
of  the  solid,  which,  in  the  unstrained  condition,  is  a  cube  of  unit
side,  and  which  in  the  strained  condition  (a,  /3,  7),  is  a  rectangular
parallelepiped  \/a  •  V/^  •  Vt-  In  virtue  of  isotropy  and  symmetry,
we  see  that  the  pull  or  pressure  on  each  of  the  six  faces  of  this
figure,  required  to  keep  the  substance  in  the  condition  (a,  /3,  7),  is
normal  to  the  face.  Let  the  amounts  of  these  forces  per  unit  area,
on  the  three  pairs  of  faces  respectively,  he  A,  B,  G,  each  reckoned
as  positive  or  negative  according  as  the  force  is  positive  pull,
or  positive  pressure. We  shall  take

A+B  +  G  =  0 (14),

because  normal  pull  or  pressure  uniform  in  all  directions  produces
no  effect,  the  solid  being  incompressible.  The  work  done  on  any
infinitesimal  change  from  the  configuration  (a,  /3,  7)  is

A  V(/37)  d  ( Va)  +  B  ^(7^)  d  ( V/S)  +  G  V(a/3)  d  (^y),  ^
or  (because  a;87  =  1)

^  da  +  -^r^dp  +  ^  ay
2a  2^ ^ ly '

.(15).

§  10. Let  Sa,  SyS,  S7  be  any  variations  of  a,  yS,  7  consistent
with  (2),  so  that  we  have

(a+8a)(/3  +  8/3)(7  +  S7)=l|

and

Now  suppose  Sot,  8/3,  87  to  be  so  small  that  we  may  neglect  their

cubes  and  corresponding  products,  and  all  higher  products. We

have

Sci_^88 8y^  ^g^g _^  ^g  g^  ^ g^g^  ^  ^ ^^^^ .

a /3 7

whence

Say  _(8^ h

whence,  and  by  the  symmetrical  expressions,

28782  =

(18).

234  LECTURE XV.

§  11.  Now,  if  E  -\-  SE  denote  the  energy  per  unit  bulk  of  the
solid  in  the  condition

(a  +  5a,  /3+SI3,  y  +  Sy),
we  have,  by  Taylor's  theorem,

where  H^,  H.,,  &c.  denote  homogeneous  functions  of  ha,  h^,  Sy  of
the  1st  degree,  2nd  degree,  &c.  Hence,  omitting  cubes,  &c.,  and
eliminating  the  products  from  Ho,  and  taking  H^  from  (15),  we
find

where  G,  H,  I  denote  three  coefficients  depending  on  the  nature  of
the  function  \|r  (13),  which  expresses  the  energy.  Thus  in  (19),
with  (14)  taken  into  account,  we  have  just  five  coefficients  inde-
pendently disposable.  A,  B,  G,  H,  I,  which  is  the  right  number
because,  in  virtue  of  a^y  =  1,  E  is  b.  function  of  just  two  indepen-
dent variables.

§  12. For  the  case  of  a  =  1,  /3  =  1,  7  =  1,  we  have
J.  =  5  =  (7 .-=  0  and  G  =  H  =1  =  G^,  suppose  ;
which  give  8E=^G^  (80"  +  S/3^  +  By^-).

From  this  we  see  that  2Gi  is  simply  the  rigidity-modulus  of  the
unstrained  solid ;  because  if  we  make  Sy  =  0,  we  have  8ol  =  —  8^,
and  the  strain  becomes  an  infinitesimal  distortion  in  the  plane
(wy),  which  may  be  regarded  in  two  ways  as  a  simple  shear  of
which  the  magnitude  is  Sa*  (this  being  twice  the  elongation  in
one  of  the  normal  axes).

§  13.  Going  back  to  (10),  (11),  and  (12),  let  a  be  so  small
that  cr^  and  higher  powers  can  be  neglected.  To  this  degree
of  approximation  we  neglect  abc  in  (10),  and  see  that  its  three
roots  are  respectively

^~  T?i ^~^ as  '  V (20),

*  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosopluj,  §  175,  or  Elements,  §  154

%^-

-a

m

-64

c-

a'

a

-^

^

-3

a?

¥

STRESS-THEORY OF DOUBLE REFRACTION.

235

provided  none  of  the  differences  constituting  the  denominators  is  Molar,
infinitely  small. The  case  of  any  of  these  differences  infinitely
small,  or  zero,  does  not,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  conclusion,  require
special  treatment,  though  special  treatment  would  be  needed  to
interpret  for  any  such  case  each  step  of  the  process.

§  14.  Substituting  now  for  £4,  M,  ^,  a,  b,  c  in  (20),  their
values  by  (11)  and  (12),  neglecting  a^  and  higher  powers,  and
denoting  by  8a,  8/3,  S7  the  excesses  of  the  three  roots  above
a,  /3,  7  respectively,  we  find

8cc  =  a  \2alX  +  a"

X--

8/3=^  \2am/u,+a-
8y  =  y  <2a))v  +  a'-

M'-

7  -  a
a

/3

(?i\  +  Iv)'

p

{ifM  +  vixy — ^

/3  ""

y^ (lu  +  rnXy

/3  —  a

'^

(mv  +  n/j,)"

H21X

^ (mv  +  nu)' (nX  +  IvY

p -y  a  — 7  ^

and  using  these  in  (19),  we  find

8E  =  a(AlX  +  Bnifi  +  Cnv)

+  h^(T-{AX''  +  B/i"-^  Cv''

+  L  {mv  +  nfxf  +  M  {nX  +  Iv)"  +  N{lfi+  mXf]

+  2(7^  {GPX''  +  Hni'iJi-  +  In-v^

L..(22),

where

L  =

By-Cl3

M  =

Co-Ay  ^  A^-Ba

/S  — 7  7  —  a

§  15. Now  from  (5)  and  (6)  we  find

{mv  +  nixy  =  1  -l^  ~x^  +  2  (/^V - m''/j? - if-v"-) (24),

which,  with  the  symmetrical  expressions,  reduces  (22)  to
8E=a{AlX  +  Bmfx,  -f  Cnv)  +  ^a'  {L  +  M  +  N
+  {A  - L)X'  +  {B -  31)  fi'  +  {C - N)  v'
-  LP  -  Mm'  -  Nil"  +  2  [{2G  +  L-M-N)  PX-
+  {2H  +  M-N-L)  m'fi'  +  {2I+N-L-  M)  n'v^] )

(25).

§  16.  To  interpret  this  result  statically,  imagine  the  solid
to  be  given  in  the  state  of  homogeneous  strain  (a,  /3,  7)  through-
out, and  let  a  finite  plane  plate  of  it,  of  thickness  h,  and  of  very
large  area  Q,  be  displaced  by  a  shearing  motion  according  to  the
specification  (3),  (4),  (5),  (6)  of  §  8  ;  the  bounding-planes  of  the

236  LECTURE XV.

plate  being  unmoved,  and  all  the  solid  exterior  to  the  plate  being
therefore  undisturbed  except  by  the  slight  distortion  round  the
edge  of  the  plate  produced  by  the  displacement  of  its  substance.
The  analytical  expression  of  this  is

<^=f{p) (26),

where /denotes  any  function  of  OP  such  that

\'dpf{p)  =  Q (27).

Jo

If  we  denote  by  W  the  work  required  to  produce  the  supposed
displacement,  we  have

W=Q\^dphE  +  W (28),

Jo

BE  being  given  by  (25),  with  everything  constant  except  a,  a
function  of  OP ;  and  ^/J  denoting  the  work  done  on  the  solid
outside  the  boundary  of  the  plate.  In  this  expression  the  first
line  of  (25)  disappears  in  virtue  of  (27);  and  we  have

+  {A-L)\'  +  (B-  M)  ix-'  +  iG-N)  v^'

-  LI'  -  Mm'  -Nn^+2[(2G  +  L-M-N)  I'X' )-  •  •  -(29).

+  {2H  +  M-N-(L)mY

+  {2l  +  N-L-M) n'v-]\  I ' dpa'

Jo

When  every  diameter  of  the  plate  is  infinitely  great  in  comparison
with  its  thickness,  ^/Q  is  infinitely  small ;  and  the  second
member  of  (29)  expresses  the  work  per  unit  of  area  of  the  plate,
required  to  produce  the  supposed  shearing  motion.

§  17.  Solve  now  the  problem  of  finding,  subject  to  (5)  and
(6)  of  §  8,  the  values  of  I,  m,  n  which  make  the  factor  {  |  of  the
second  member  of  (29)  a  maximum  or  minimum.  This  is  only
the  problem  of  finding  the  two  principal  diameters  of  the  ellipse
in  which  the  ellipsoid

[2  {2G  +  L  -  M  -  N)\'  -  L]x'  +  {2{2H  +  M  -  N  -  L)  fj?  -  M]y'

+  \2{2I  +  N-L-M)v''-N]z"-  =  co^&t (30)

s  cut  by  the  plane

\x  +  fjiij  +  vz=0 (31).

STRESS-THEORY OF DOUBLE REFRACTION.  237

If  the  displacement  is  in  either  of  the  two  directions  {I,  m,  n)  thus  Molar,
determined,  the  force  required  to  maintain  it  is  in  the  direction  of
displacement ;  and  the  magnitude  of  this  force  per  unit  bulk  of
the  material  of  the  plate  at  any  point  within  it  is  easily  proved
to  be

Wj' (32),

where  {M]  denotes  the  maximum  or  the  minimum  value  of  the
bracketed  factor  of  (29).

§  18.  Passing  now  from  equilibrium  to  motion,  we  see  at
once  that  (the  density  being  taken  as  unity)

V'={M} (33),

where  V  denotes  the  velocity  of  either  of  two  simple  waves  whose

wave-front  is  perpendicular  to  (\,  fj,,  v). Consider the  case  of

wave-front perpendicular  to  one  of  the  three  principal planes ;

(yz) for instance: we  have  \=0; and,  to make {  } of  (29)  a

maximum  or  minimum,  we  see  by  symmetry  that  we  must  either

have

(vibration  perpendicular  to  principal  plane)  \

1=1, m= 0, n  =  o\ (34).

(vibration  in  principal  plane). .  .^  =  0, m  =  —  v, n  =  fi)

Hence,  for  the  two  cases,  we  have  respectively :

YihraXion  perpendicular  to  yz  \ .„_.

Vibration  in  yz...V'  =  L  + B/ju'  +  Cv^  +  ^iH  + 1  - L) /m'v-  . . .(36).

§  19.  According  to  Fresnel's  theory  (35)  must  be  constant,  and
the  last  term  of  (36)  must  vanish.  These  and  the  corresponding
conclusions  relatively  to  the  other  two  principal  planes  are  satisfied
if,  and  require  that,

A-L  =  B-M=C-N (37),

and  H  +  I=L;  I+G  =  M;  G  +  H=N (38).

Transposing  M  and  N  in  the  last  of  equations  (37),  substituting
for  them  their  values  by  (23),  and  dividing  each  member  by  jS^,
we  find

^7-a/3 78-^7 ^ >'

238  LECTURE XV.

whence  (sum  of  numerators  divided  by  sum  of  denominators),
B-C C-A A-B

(40).

ya  —  a^ a^  —  ^y I3y  —  ya

The  first  of  these  equations  is  equivalent  to  the  first  of  (37)  ;  and
thus  we  see  that  the  two  equations  (87)  are  equivalent  to  one
only ;  and  (39)  is  a  convenient  form  of  this  one.  By  it,  as  put
symmetrically  in  (40),  and  by  bringing  (14)  into  account,  we  find,
with  q  taken  to  denote  a  coefficient  which  may  be  any  function  of
(«,  yS,  7)  :

A  =  q(S-/3y); B  =  q{S-ya); C=q(8-a/3)

(41)  •
where  S  =  ^  {^y  +  ya  +  a/3)  j*"^ ^'

and  using  this  result  in  (23),  we  find

L  =  q[a(^+y)-S]; M  =q[/3  (y  +  a)- S];  \

iV  =  ?[7(«  +  /3)-'Sn ...(42).
or L  =  q{2S-l3y);  M  =  q(28-ya);  N=q(2S-a^)]

By  (2)  we  may  put  (41)  and  (42)  into  forms  more  convenient  for
some  purposes  as  follows : —

A=q{8-1); B  =  q{s-l); ^=g(^'-^) ...(43),
L  =  q[28-l);  3I  =  q{2S-^);  N=q{2S-}^)...{U),

Next,  we  find  G,  H,  I ;  by  (38),  (44),  and  (45)  we  have

G  +  H+I  =  ^(L  +  M+N)  =  lq8  =  iq(^^  +  ^  +  ]^)...{^6),
whence,  by  (88)  and  (44),

G^  =  ?Q-4'S); H=q(^^-^8y, /  =  5(^-|,s)...(47).

§  20. Using  (43)  and  (47)  in  (19),  we  have

^^\ ce 13^ y-  \a (3 y)

8a- S;S- §7- ,  ^  (loL^ S/3' By'\]

.(48).

STRESS-THEORY OF DOUBLE REFRACTION.  239

Now  we  have,  by  (2),  log  (a^y)  —  0. Hence,  taking  the  variation  Molecular,
of  this  as  far  as  terms  of  the  second  order,

«5  +  f  +  «7_x(«4  +  f +  «I=)=0  (49);

a y8 7 \  a- p^ 'f )

which  reduces  (48)  to

Remembering  that  cubes  and  higher  powers  are  to  be  neglected
we  see  that  (50)  is  equivalent  to

iE=i,s{l  +  l  +  l) (51).

Hence  if  we  take  q  constant,  we  have

''Ml^h'y-') <'''

It  is  clear  that  q  must  be  stationary  (that  is  to  say,  8q  =  0)  for
any  particular  values  of  a,  /9,  7  for  which  (52)  holds ;  and  if  (52)
holds  for  all  values,  q  must  be  constant  for  all  values  of  a,  /S,  7.

§  21.  Going  back  to  (29),  taking  Q  great  enough  to  allow
^I'/Q  to  be  neglected,  and  simplifying  by  (46),  (43),  and  (44),  we
find

W (P 111" n-\  [^j,  ,.ox

7T  =  ^  r  +  ^  +  - dp''  (^3);

Q  na  '  /S  7/^0
and  the  problem  (§  17)  of  determining  I,  m,  n,  subject  to  (5)
and  (6),  to  make  Pja  +  m^//S  +  ifjiy  a  maximum  or  minimum  for
given  values  of  \  /x,  v,  yields  the  equations

&)X,  —  o)'^  +  -  =  0  ;  &)yci  —  w'm  +  ^  =  0  ;  cov  —  co'n  +  -  =  0 (54),

a  P  7

w,  ft)'  denoting  indeterminate  multipliers ;  whence

, P m^ n-  .^^.

"=5  +  ^  +  7  ^'"'^•

„=  =  ;=(„-_l)V,,„.(„'_iy+ „=(„-_!)' (36X

,  / 1  —  P m- 71-
V a  p 7

fp 1  —  m" n"\  .  ^.

'»"='"(; -^^+7)-  ^ ^"^^-

fP m^ 1  —w
(ov  =  n  \  ~  +  -=r  —

a (3  7

240  LECTURE XV.

These  formulas  are  not  directly  convenient  for  finding  I,  m,  n
from  X,  jjb,  V,  cf.  §  83  (the  ordinary  formulas  for  doing  so  need  not  be
written  here) ;  but  they  give  \,  /m,  v  explicitly  in  terms  of  I,  m,  n
supposed  known  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  solve  the  problem  of  finding
the  wave-front  of  the  simple  laminar  wave  whose  direction  of
vibration  is  (I,  m,  n). The  velocity  is  given  by

fP m^ n^\  .^„.

"'^[a  +  J  +  y) (5«>-

It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  this  depends  solely  on  the  direction
of  the  line  of  vibration ;  and  that  (except  in  special  cases,  of
partial  or  complete  isotropy)  there  is  just  one  wave-front  for  any
given  line  of  vibration.  These  are  precisely  in  every  detail  the
conditions  of  Fresnel's  Kinematics  of  Double  Refraction.

§  22.  Going  back  to  (35)  and  (36),  let  us  see  if  we  can  fit
them  to  double  refraction  with  line  of  vibration  in  the  plane
of  polarization.  This  would  require  (86)  to  be  the  ordinary  ray,
and  therefore  requires  the  fulfilment  of  (38),  as  did  the  other
supposition  ;  but  instead  of  (37)  we  now  have  [in  order  to  make
(36)  constant]

A=B  =  C (59),

and  therefore  each,  in  virtue  of  (14),  zero  ;  and

a=/3  =  y  =  l;

so  that  we  are  driven  to  complete  isotropy.  Hence  our  present
form  (I  7)  of  the  stress-theory  of  double  refraction  cannot  be  fitted
to  give  line  of  vibration  in  the  plane  of  polarization.  We  have
seen  (§  21)  that  it  does  give  line  of  vibration  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  polarization  with  exactly  Fresnel's  form  of  wave-surface,
when  fitted  for  the  purpose,  by  the  simple  assumption  that  the
potential  energy  of  the  strained  solid  is  expressed  by  (52)  with
q  constant !  It  is  important  to  remark  that  q  is  the  rigidity-
modulus  of  the  unstrained  isotropic  solid,

I  23.  From  (58)  we  see  that  the  velocities  of  the  waves  corre-
sponding to  the  three  cases,  /  =  1,  m=  1,  n  =  1,  respectively  are
/^(q/a),  \J{ql^),  sJiqj'y)-  Hence  the  velocity  of  any  wave  whose
vibrations  are  parallel  to  any  one  of  the  three  principal  elongations,
multiplied  by  this  elongation,  is  equal  to  the  velocity  of  a  wave  in
the  unstrained  isotropic  solid.

HYPOTHETICAL  ELASTIC  SOLID.  241

[§§  24... 34,  added  March 1899.]  Molar

§  24.  To  fix  and  clear  our  understanding  of  the  ideal  solid,
introduced  in  §  7  and  defined  in  §  20  (52)  and  in  §  22,  take  a  bar
of  it  of  length  I  when  unstrained,  and  of  cross-sectional  area  A.
For  our  present  purpose  the  cross-section  may  be  of  any  shape,
provided  it  is  uniform  from  end  to  end.  Apply  opposing  forces  P
to  the  two  ends ;  nnd,  when  there  is  equilibrium  under  this  stress,
let  the  length  and  cross-section  be  x  and  A'.  We  have  A'  =  lA/oc,
because  the  solid  is  incompressible.  The  proportionate  shortenings
of  all  diameters  of  the  cross-section  will  be  equal,  as  there  is  no
lateral  constraint.  Hence  if  the  a,  /3,  7  of  (52)  refer  to  the  length
of  our  bar  and  two  directions  perpendicular  to  it,  we  have

a  =  |; ^  =  y  =  l (60);

and  therefore  by  (52)

^=k(^!  +  2f-3);^ (^i>'

where  E  denotes  the  whole  work  required  to  make  the  change
from  I  to  sc  in  the  length  of  our  bar,  of  which  the  bulk  is  lA.
Hence,  as  P  =  dEjdx,  we  find

P  =  q(-t^^\\lA,  and  8P=fic/^Sa; (62).

Hence,  denoting  by  M  the  Young's  modulus  for  values  of  w  differ-
ing not  infinitely  little  from  I,  and defining  it  by  the  formula

BP-^A' . ,
,  we  find

Sx-r-

^=39^ (63).

Hence  augmentation  of  length  from  I  to  oc  diminishes  the  Young's
modulus,  as  defined  above,  in  the  ratio  of  /-  to  a;-.

§  25.  The  property  of  our  ideal  solid  expressed  by  the  con-
stancy of  q,  to  which  we  have  been  forced  by  the  assumption  of
Fresnel's  laws  for  light  traversing  a  crystal,  is  interesting  in
respect  to  the  extension  of  theory  and  ideas  regarding  the
elasticity  of  solids  from  infinitesimal  strains,  for  which  alone  the
dynamics  of  the  mathematical  theory  has  hitherto  been  developed,
to  strains  not  infinitesimal.  To  contrast  the  law  of  relation
between  force  and  elongation  for  a  rod  of  our  ideal  substance,
as  expressed  in  (62)  above,  and  for  a  piece  of  indiarubber  cord  or
T.  L.  16

242  LECTURE XV.

indiariibber  band,  as  shown  by  experiment,  is  quite  an  instructive
short  lesson  in  the  elements  of  the  extended  theory.

§  26.  Ten  years  ago,  because  of  pressure  of  other  avocations,
I  reluctantly  left  the  stress  theory  of  Fresnel's  laws  of  double
refraction  without  continuing  my  work  far  enough  to  find  complete
expressions  for  the  equilibrium  and  motion  of  the  elastic  solid  for
any  infinitesimal  deviation  whatever  from  the  condition  (a,  ^,  7).
Here  is  the  continuation  which  I  felt  wanting  at  that  time.
Let  {xq,  2/0,  z^)  be  the  coordinates  of  a  point  of  the  solid  in  its
unstrained  condition  (a  =  l,)S=l,7  =  l);  and  {x,  y,  z),  the  co-
ordinates of  the  same  point  in  the  strained  condition  (a,  /S,  7).
If  the  axes  of  coordinates  are  the  three  lines  of  maximum,  mini-
max,  and  minimum  elongation,  (which  are  essentially*  at  right
angles  to  one  another),  we  have

x  =  Xo\/oL\ y=yo^J/3; z  =  Za\/y  (64).

Let  the  matter  at  the  point  (x,  y,  z)  be  displaced  to  {x  +  ^,  y  +  v,
■^  +  0;  f.  V,  K  having  each,  subject  only  to  the  condition  of  no
change  of  bulk,  any  arbitrary  value  for  every  point  {x,  y,  z)
within  some  finite  space  >S',  outside  of  which  the  medium  remains
in  the  condition  (a,  /3,  7)  undisturbed.

Let  now  the  variation  of  the  displacement  {^,  tj,  ^)  from  point
to  point  of  the  solid  be  so  gradual  that  each  one  of  the  nine
ratios

d^ d^ d^ , drj dv drj d^ d^ d^  .

dx ' dy' dz' dx' dy ' dz' dx' dy' dz

is  an  infinitely  small  numeric.  Consider  the  system  of  bodily
forces,  which  must  be  applied  to  the  solid  within  the  disturbed
region  S,  to  produce  the  specified  displacement  (f,  rj,  ^).  Let
Xfl,  Yd,  Zn  denote  components  of  the  force  which  must  be
applied  to  any  infinitesimal  volume,  H,  of  matter  around  the  point
(x,  y,  z).  Our  directly  solvable  problem  is  to  determine  A^,  Y,  Z
for  any  point,  ^,  r],  ^  being  given  for  every  point.

§  27.  Our  supposition  as  to  infinitesimals,  which  is  that  the
infinitesimal  strain  corresponding  to  the  displacement  (^,  rj,  ^),  is
superimposed  upon  the  finite  strain  (a,  /3,  7),  implies  that  if  instead

*  See  Thomson  and  Tait,  §  104.

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.

248

of  (1^,  7;.  ^),  the  displacement  be  (c^,cr},  c^),  whore  c  is  any  numeric  Molar,
less  than  unity  having  the  same  value  for  every  point  of  the
disturbed  region,  the  force  required  to  hold  the  medium  in  this
condition  is  such  that  instead  of  X,  Y,  Z,  we  have  cX,  cY,  cZ.
Hence  if  8E  denote  the  total  work  required  to  produce  the
displacement  (^,  rj,  ^),  we  have

8E=^j dxdydz  {X^+Yr)  +  Zi;) (66),

where  1 1 1  dxdydz  denotes  integration  throughout  S.

.(67),

§  28. Now  according  to  (52)  we  have

=  i</  ffjihdydz  (lij'  +  7V  +  a'/3'  -  ^7  -  7a  -  «/3)J

where  a',  /S',  7'  denote  the  squares  of  the  principal  elongations
(§  7  above)  as  altered  from  a,  /3,  7,  in  virtue  of  the  infinitesimal
displacement  (^,  7;,  f ).

To  find  a,  /3',  7',  draw,  parallel  to  our  primary  lines  of  reference
OX,  OY,  OZ,  tempoi-ary  lines  of  reference  through  the  point
(■'■  +  I'  ;'/  +  V,  2  +  0>  which  for  brevity  we  shall  call  Q.  Let  P  be
a  point  of  the  .solid  infinitely  little  distant  from  Q,  and  let  (f,  g,  h)
be  its  coordinates  relatively  to  these  temporary  reference  lines.
Relatively  to  the  .same  lines,  let  {f^,  g„,  //„)  be  the  coordinates  of
the  position,  P^,  which  P  would  have  if  the  whole  .solid  were
unstrained. We  have

^-fj'M'-'^y^^

h

+  |/W7

l  +  f")/^V7

From  these  we  find

PoQ'  =/,,-  +  g,r  +  Ih,"  ,

.(68).

f p^Y  =  Al-  +  Bm-  +  Cif  +  2  {amn  +bnl  +  dm) (69),

where  I,  m,  11  denote

/o Jfo hj^
P,Q'  PM'  PM'

16—2

244

LECTURE XV.

A=a

dxj \axj \dx

B  =  ^1('^-^T  +  (l+''''

dy

<l'J

--{(ST-u.

dr)

hi

1  +

dz

1  +

.(70).

[dy  dz \ dy/  dz dy

(V dxJ  dz dx  dz dx\ dz/]

[\ dx/  dy dx  \ dy/ dx  dy]

The  values  of  a',  ^',  7'  are  the  maximum,  minimax,  and
minimum  values  of  (69),  subject  to  the  condition  P  +  m^  +  w"=  1  ;
and  therefore  according  to  the  well-known  solution  of  this  problem,
they  are  the  three  roots,  essentially  real,  of  the  cubic

{A-p){B-p){C-p)

-  a'  (A  - p)  -b-"  {B  -  p)  -  c-{G -  p)  +  2ahc  =  0 (71).

Hence,  by  taking  the  coefficient  of  p  in  the  expansion  of  this,  we
find

/3'7'  +  7'a'  +  a'/S'  =  BC  +  CA  +  AB  -  a"  -Jf-c"

=  {1  +  F)l3'y+{1^  G)  ya  +  {l+H)a^  ..  (72),

where  F,  G,  H  are  symmetrical  algebraic  functions  of  the  fourth
degree  of  the  nine  ratios  (05).  Omitting  all  terms  above  the
second  degree,  we  have

jf  =  2  f^ + ^U  f^^^Y + f^^Y  +  f^Y +

\dy dz) \dyl \dz ) \dy/

dy  dz dz  dy'

.(73),

and  .symmetrical  expressions  for  G  and  H.  Going  back  now  to
(67)  and  remembering  that  a^ry=l  and  a'l3'y'  =  l,  and  that
a,  /3,  7  are  constant  throughout  the  solid,  we  find,  by  (67),

BE  =  \q  (^  [f [ dxdydzF  + 1  [ff  dxdydzG  +  ^  jlj d^rdydzH) ...{ 74).

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.  24."

To  find  1 1 1  dxdydzF  by  (73),  remark  first  that  by  simple  in-  Molar,
tegration  with  respect  to  y  and  with  respect  to  z  we  obtain

jjjdxdydz  ^^  ^  0  ;  jjj  dxdydz  ^J  =  0 (75),

because  t]  and  ^  each  vauisli  through  all  the  space  outside  the
space  S.  For  the  same  reason  wo  find  by  the  well-known  integra-
tion by  parts  [Lecture  XIII.,  equations  (7)  above]

We  thus  have
///,..,..^  =  jJ/.U.,..{(|)%(|)V(J4f)]..,77).

§  29. Now  the  condition  a'/^V  =  1  gives

d^ dii dK ^ .  , .

-7^  -h  J +  , =  0  +  terms  involving  powers,

and  products  of"  the  ratios (78).

Therefore,  neglecting  higher  powers  than  squares,  we  get

(rM)'=(iJ (^'*

and  (77)  becomes

\\l^iyd..F  =  \ll^dya.  {(§)%  (|;  +  (f  )]...(S0);

and  we  have  corresponding  symmetrical  equations  for  G  and  H.
With  these  used  in  (74),  it  becomes

,..(81).

Taking  any  one  of  the  nine  terms  of  (81),  the  third  for  example,
and  applying  to  it  the  process  of  double  integration  by  parts,  we
find

Ij^dxdydz  (gy  =  - jjjc^.%c^.|g (82).

246  LECTURE XV.

Hence  treating  similarly  all  the  other  terms,  we  have

§  30.  This  expression  for  8E  must  be  equal  to  that  of  (66)
above,  for  every  possible  value  of  |,  rj,  ^.  If  all  values  were
possible,  we  should  therefore  have  tbc  coefficients  of  ^,  ?/,  ^  in  (66)
equal  respectively  to  the  coefficients  of  ^,  77,  ^  in  (80).  But  in
reality  only  values  of  ^,  r},  ^  are  possible  which  fulfil  the  condition
of  bulk  everywhere  unchanged ;  and  Lagrange's  method  of  inde-
terminate multipliers  adds  to  the  second  member  of  (83),  the
following

i///"^^-(i+|+'lj («^)-

This,  treated  by  the  method  of  double  integration  by  parts,
becomes

-=-K2-|-i) (««>•

§  31.  We  must  now,  according  to  Lagrange's  splendidly
powerful  method,  equate  separately  the  coefficients  of  ^,  ?/,  ^
in  (66)  to  their  coefficients  in  (83)  with  (85)  added  to  it.  Thus
we  find

a ^ dx'  13  dy  y  dz ^ ^

as  the  ec|uations  of  ecjuilibrium  of  our  solid  with  every  point  of
its  boundary  fixed,  and  its  interior  disturbed  from  the  finitely
strained  condition  (a,  P,  7)  by  forces  X,  Y,  Z,  producing  infini-
tesimal displacements  (^,  rj,  ^) ;  subject  only  to  the  condition

^f  +  *?  +  ^=0 (88),

dx ay dz

to  provide  against  change  of  bulk  in  any  part.  If  this  equation
were  not  fulfilled,  the  equations  (87),  with  ot  given  by  (86),  would
be  the  solution  of  a  certain  definite  problem  regarding  a  compres-
sible homogeneous  solid,  having  certain  definite  (juality  of  perfect
elasticity,  in  respect  to  changes  of  shape  and  bulk,  defined  by  the
coefficients  q  and  \. From  this  problem  to  our  actual  problem  there

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.  247

is  continuous  transition  by  making  A,  everywhere  infinitely  great,  Molar,
and  therefore  the  first  member  of"  (88),  being  the  dilatation,  zero ;
and  leaving  ot  as  a  quantity  to  be  determined  to  fulfil  the  condi-
tions of  any  proposed  problem.  Thus  in  (87),  (88),  supposing
X,  Y,  Z  given,  we  have  four  equations  for  determining  the  foiu'
unknown  quantities  tn-,  ^,  /;,  ^.

§  32.  Suppose  now  that  the  solid,  after  having  been  in-
finitesimally  disturbed  by  applied  forces  from  the  (a,  /t?,  7)
condition,  is  left  to  itself  According  to  D'Alembert's  principle,
the  motion  is  determined  by  what  the  e(|uations  of  equilibrium,
(87),  become  with  — /c^,  —  pv,  —  pK  substituted  for  X,  Y,  Z ,  p
denoting  the  density  of  the  solid.  Thus  we  hnd  for  the  equations
of  motion

Pdf'~a '^~dx' Pdt^~^ ''^~dy'' Pdl'~y'^~dz

(89).

§  33.  We  are  now  enabled  by  these  equations  to  work  out
the  problem  of  wave-motion  by  a  more  direct  and  synthetical
process  than  that  by  which  we  were  led  to  the  solution  in  §  21
above.  The  simplest  mathematical  expression  defining  plane
waves  in  an  elastic  solid  in  terms  of  the  notation  of  (89)  is

^  =  Ifip  -  vt)  ■ V  =  nifip  -  vt) ; r  =  nf(p  -  vt) .  •  .(90) ;

'ST  =  F{p-Vt)  )

where  X,  fi,  v  are  the  direction -cosines  of  the  wave-normal,  and
I,  m,  H  those  of  the  line  of  vibration.  Our  constraint  to  incom-
pressibility  gives

IX  +  mp.  +  nv  =  0 (91).

Eliminating  ^,  ij,  ^,  ot  from  (89)  by  (90),  we  find
I  {pv- -  qor^)  =  Xqw  \ iii{pv'- —  ql3~^)  =  pqco  ; n  {pv"  —  qy~^)  =  vqo)

(92),

where

q  dpi  dp-

These  equations  agree  with  (.54)  if  for  pv^  we  take  qto'.

248  LECTURE XV.

§  34. Multiplying  equations  (92)  by

\lipv-  -  qa-'), fi/(pv-  -  q^-'), vjipv-  -  q^y"')
respectively,  adding,  and  using  (91),  we  find

,^' _i+ .^\^,+ .-'  ~_,=^0 (94).

pv^  —  qoL  1 pv  —  qp ' pv  —  qy^

This  is  a  quadratic  tor  the  determination  of  v'-,  with  its  two  roots
essentially  real  and  positive. Again,  by  the  equation

l^+  nv  +  ?i-=  1,
we  find  from  (92)

^^  "  iU— ga-0  +  [pv^^M  "^  [pV'-qri-')  \  "•^^^'^■

Equations  (94)  and  (95)  give  us  v~  and  w  ;  and  (92)  now  gives
explicitly  I,  m,  n,  when  \,  fi,  v  are  given.  Thus  we  complete  the
determination  of  {I,  m,  )i),  the  direction  of  vibration,  in  terms  of
(A,,  fi,  v),  the  wave-normal,  and  the  constant  coefficients

qa.-^, q0-\ qy-\

Our  solution  is  identical  with  Fresnel's,  and  implies  exactly  the
same  shape  of  wave-surface.

[§§  35... 47,  added  Ajyril  1901.]
§  35. It  will  be  convenient  henceforth  to  take  n,  b,  C  instead
of  a-i,  I3~^,  y-K Thus,  according  to  §  7 (1),  if  w^,  2/o,  ^o  and
X,  y,  z  denote  respectively  the  coordinates  of  one  and  the  same
particle  in  the  unstrained  and  in  the  strained  solid,  we  have*,

^=f;  y=f;  ^=f 06),

l-a , i-b  l-c

where  e  =  ^"; /=^~-^'; 9  =  '-^ (98).

**'0  iJO  ■*0

From  (97)  we  get

"=1^-.;  ^=ilr  '^ihj ^»»>'

whence  (i  +  e)(i +/)  ,i +j,)=  _L  =  1 (iqo).

*  It  would  have  been  better  from  the  beginning  to  have  taken  single  letters
instead  of  a" ^,  /3"^,  7""^.

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.  249

The principal elongations to pass from the unstrained to  the  Molar,
strained  solid  are  a~S  \)~\  C~^ ;  and  the  principal  ratios  of  elonga-
tion from  the  strained  to  the  unstrained  solid  are  n,  t),  C. And  if
E  denote  the  work  per  unit  volume  required  to  bring  the  solid
from  the  unstrained  to  the  strained  condition,  we  have  by  (52)
E  =  i^q{a"'  +  ¥  +  t'-'S) (101).

From  this,  remembering  that  nbc  =  1,  we  find

P  =  -(qa-^  +  ^)- Q^-(qh'+r^); R  ^  -  (qt^  +  ^) ....(102);

F=eq^^^ly,-^-q;

Q=f^(^y-^-r,^ (i«3)

^  =W7i \.  -■^  —  q

-^^l  +  gf  ^ .

where  P,  Q,  R  denote  the  normal  components  of  force  per  unit  area
(pulling  outward  when  positive)  on  the  three  pairs  of  faces  of  a
rectangular  parallelepiped  required  to  keep  it  in  the  state  of  strain
a,  i),  t,  with  principal  elongations  perpendicular  to  the  pairs  of
faces ;  and  zs  denotes  an  arbitrary  pressure  uniform  in  all  direc-
tions. The  proof  is  as  follows  : — Consider  a  cube  of  unit  edges  in
the  unstrained  solid.  In  the  strained  condition  the  lengths  of  its
edges  are  1/fl,  1/b,  1/C,  and  the  areas  of  its  faces  are  a,  i),  C.
Hence  the  equation  of  work  done  to  augmentation  of  energy  pro-
duced in  changing  a,  b,  C,  to  a  -I-  Sa,  b  +  hh,  i  +  hi,  is

PaS  ^  +  QbS  g  +  PcS  J  =  5S^  =  (/(aSa  +  b8b  +  cSc) (104);

and  by  abc  =  1  (constancy  of  volume)  we  have

^-«  +  «''  +  ^  =  0 (103).

abc  ^

Hence  by  Lagrange's  method

_l'ga-^8b--8c
abc

=  (5a-h^)ga-H(gb-f^)8b  +  (ryc  +  ^)sc (106),

where  -sr  denotes  an  "  indeterminate  multiplier " ;  and  we  have
definitively

-  P  =  5a- -1- CT  ; -^  =  gb--f-CT; -R  =  qt"  +  vT (107),

250  LECTURE XV.

which  prove  (102).  The  meaning  of  -ur  here,  an  arbitrary  magni-
tude, is  a  pressure  uniform  in  all  directions,  which,  as  the  solid
is  incompressible,  may  be  arbitrarily  applied  to  the  boundary  of
any  portion  of  it  without  altering  any  of  the  effective  conditions.

§  36.  By  §  3.S  (02),  we  see  that  the  propagational  velocities
of  waves  whose  lines  of  vibration  are  parallel  to  OX,  OY,  OZ  are
respectively

V^  '^y  '\/l <^"«>-

Thus  the  propagational  velocity  of  a  wave  whose  front  is  parallel
to  the  plane YOZ  (A.  =  1, /u,-U, 1^  =  0)  is  ^a/^^ if its line  of

vibration  is  parallel to  OY  (1=0,  7/i=l, ii  =  0), and  is  C  * /-

if  its  line  of  vibration  is  parallel  to  OZ  {I,  =  0,  m  =  0,  ti  =^1) ;
and  siuiilarly  in  respect  to  waves  whose  ironts  are  parallel  to
ZX  and  XY.

For  brevity  we  shall  call  A  a/-,  ^  \/  >  ^  \/  ^^^^  prin-
cipal velocities  of  light  in  the  crystal,  and  OX,  OY,  OZ  its  three
principal  lines  of  symmetry.  We  arc  precluded  from  calling
these  lines  optic  axes,  by  the  ordinary  usage  of  the  word  axis  in
respect  to  uni-axial  and  bi-axial  crystals.

§  37.  To  help  us  to  thoroughly  understand  the  dynamics  of
the  stress  theory  of  double  refraction,  consider  as  an  example
aragonite,  a  bi-axial  crystal  of  which  the  three  principal  refractive
indices  are  1"5301,  1'6816,  1*6859.  If,  as  according  to  our  stress-
theory,  optic  asolotropy  is  due  to  unequal  extension  and  con-
traction in  different  directions  of  the  ether  within  the  crystal
with  volume  unchanged,  the  principal  elongations  being  in  simple
proportion  to  the  three  principal  velocities  of  light  Avithin  it,
annulment  of  the  extension  and  contraction  would  give  isotrojjy
with  refractive  index  1'6309,  being  the  cube  root  of  the  product
of  the  three  principal  indices.  Hence,  if  we  call  V  the  pro-
pagational velocity  corresponding  to  this  mean  index,  the  three
principal  velocities  in  the  actual  crystal  (being  inversely  as  the
refractive indices)  are 10G59F, '9687  F,  -90797,  of  which the

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.

251

product  is  V'^. Hence  according  to  our  notation  of  §  7  and  §  85  Molar.
above  we  have

a-10G59; b  =  -y687; C  =  -9679.

§  38.  Let  the  slotted  ellipse  in  the  diagram  represent  a  cross
section  of  an  elliptic  cylindric  portion  of"  aragoiiite  having  its
axis  of  figure  in  the  direction  of  maximum  elongation  of  the
ether. Let the diameter A' A be the direction of maximum

Fig.  1.

contraction,  and  B'B  that  of  minimax  (elongation-contraction),
being  in  fact  in  this  case  a  line  along  which  there  is  elongation.
The  circle  in  the  diagram  shows  the  undisturbed  positions  of  the
particles  of  ether,  Avhich  in  the  crystal  are  forced  to  the  positions
shown  by  the  dotted  ellipse. The  axes  of  the  ellipse  are  equal

252  LECTURE XV.

respectively  to  1/10659  and  1/1)087  of  the  diameter  of  the
circle.

First,  consider  waves  whose  fronts  are  parallel  to  the  plane
of  the  diagram.  If  their  vibrations  are  parallel  to  OA,  the
direction  of  maximum  contraction,  their  velocities  of  propagation
are  10059  V.  If  their  vibrations  are  parallel  to  OB  their
velocities  are  '9087  V.

Secondly,  consider  waves  whose  fronts  arc  perpendicular  to
the  plane  of  the  diagram.  The  propagational  velocity  of  all  of
them  whose  vibrations  are  perpendicular  to  this  plane  is  "9079  V,
their  lines  of  vibration  being  all  in  the  direction  of  maximum
elongation.  If  their  vibrations  are  in  the  plane  of  the  diagram
and  parallel  to  OA,  their  velocity  is  1"0059  V.  If  their  vibrations
are  parallel  to  OB,  their  velocities  are  "9087  V.  The  former  of
these  is  the  greatest  and  the  latter  the  least  of  the  propagational
velocities  of  all  the  waves  whose  vibrations  are  in  this  plane :  the
ratio  of  the  one  to  the  other  is  1100.

§  89.  It  is  interesting,  on  looking  at  our  diagram,  to  think
how  slight  is  the  distortion  of  the  ether  required  to  produce  the
double  refraction  of  aragonite.  If  the  diagram  had  been  made
for  the  plane  ZOX  containing  the  lines  of  vibration  for  greatest
and  least  velocities  (ratio  of  greatest  to  least  I'lOl),  the  increase
of  ellipticity  of  the  ellipse  would  not  have  been  perceptible  to  the
eye.  Only  about  one  and  a  half  per  cent  greater  ratio  of  the
difference  of  the  diameters  of  the  ellipse  to  the  diameter  of  the
circle  would  be  shown  in  the  corresponding  diagram  for  Iceland
spar  (ratio  of  greatest  to  least  refractivity  =  I'llS).  For  nitrate
of  soda  the  ratio  is  somewhat  greater  still  (1188).  For  all  other
crystals,  so  far  as  I  know,  of  which  the  double  refraction  has  been
measured  it  is  less  than  that  of  Iceland  spar.  With  such  slight
distortions  of  ether  within  the  crystal  as  the  theory  indicates  for
all  these  known  cases,  we  could  scarcely  avoid  the  constancy  of
our  coefficient  q,  to  the  assumption  of  which  we  were  forced,
§§  20,  25  above,  in  order  to  fit  the  theory  to  Fresnel's  laws  for
light  traversing  a  crystal,  irrespectively  of  smallness  or  greatness
of  the  amount  of  double  refraction.  Hence  we  see  that,  in  fact,
without  any  arbitrary  assumption  of  a  new  property  or  new  pro-
perties of  ether,  we  have  arrived  at  what  would  be  a  perfect
explanation of  the  main phenomena  of  double refraction,  if  we

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.  253

could  but  see  how  the  molecules  of  matter  could  so  act  upon  Molecular,
ether  as  to  give  a  stress  capable  of  producing  the  strain  with
which  hitherto  we  have  been  dealing. Inability  to  see  this  has
prevented  me,  and  still  prevents  me,  from  being  convinced  that
the  stress-theory  gives  the  true  explanation  of  double  refraction.
( 4  ■>  /

§  40.  Now,  quite  recently,  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  the
difficulty  might  possibly  be  overcome  if,  as  seems  to  me  necessary
on  other  grounds,  we  adopt  a  hypothesis  regarding  the  motion  of
ponderable  matter  through  ether,  which  I  suggested  a  year  ago  in
a  Friday  Evening  Lecture,  April  27th,  1900,  to  the  Royal  Insti-
tution (reproduced  in  the  present  volume  as  Appendix  B)  and
with  somewhat  full  detail  in  a  communication*  of  last  July  to  the
Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  and  to  the  Congres  Internationale
de  Physiquef  in  Paris  last  August  (Appendix  A,  below).  Accord-
ing to  this  hypothesis  ether  is  a  structureless  continuous  elastic
solid  pervading  all  space,  and  occupying  space  jointly  with  the
atoms  of  ponderable  matter  wherever  ponderable  matter  exists ;
and  the  action  between  ponderable  matter  and  ether  consists  of
attractions  and  repulsions  throughout  the  volume  of  space  occupied
by  each  atom.  These  attractions  and  repulsions  would  be  essen-
tially ineffective  if  ether  were  infinitely  resistant  against  forces
tending  to  condense  or  dilate  it,  that  is  to  say,  if  ether  were
absolutely  incompressible.  Hence,  while  acknowledging  that  ether
resists  forces  tending  to  condense  it  or  to  dilate  it,  sufficiently  to
account  for  light  and  radiant  heat  by  waves  of  purely  transverse
vibration  (equi-voluminal  waves  as  I  have  called  them),  it  must,
by  contraction  or  dilatation  of  bulk,  yield  to  compressing  or
dilating  forces  sufficiently  to  account  for  known  facts  dependent
on  mutual  forces  between  ether  and  ponderable  matter.  I  have
suggested  J  that  there  may  be  oppositely  electric  atoms  which
have  the  properties  respectively  of  condensing  and  rarefying  the
ether  within  them.  But  for  the  present,  to  simplify  our  sup-
positions to  the  utmost,  I  shall  assume  the  law  of  force  between
the  atom  and  the  ether  within  it  to  be  such  that  the  average
density  of  the  ether  within  the  atom  is  equal  to  the  density  of

*  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Edin.  July,  1900  ;  Phil.  Mag.  Aug.  1900.
t  Reports,  Vol.  ii.  page  1.

X  Conijres  Internationule  de  Physique,  Reports,  Vol.  ii.  p.  19 ;  also  Phil.  Mag.
Sept.  1900.

254

LECTURE XV.

olecnlar.  the  undisturbed  ether  outside,  and  that  concentric  spherical  sur-
faces within  the  atom  are  surfaces  of  equal  density.  The  forces
between  ether  and  atoms  we  can  easily  believe  to  be  enormous  in
comparison  with  those  called  into  play  outside  the  atoms,  in  virtue
of  undulatory  or  other  motion  of  ether  and  elasticity  of  ether;
as  for  instance  in  interstices  between  atoms  in  a  solid  body,  or
in  the  space  traversed  by  the  molecules  of  a  gas  according  to
the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  or  in  the  vacuum  attainable  in  our
laboratories,  or  in  interstellar  space.

§  41.  To  fix  our  ideas  let  ether  experience  condensation  in
the  central  part  of  the  atom  and  rarefaction  in  the  outer  part
according  to  the  law  explained  generall}^  in  the  first  part  of  §  5,
Appendix  A,  and  represented  particularly  by  the  formulas  (9)  and
(11)  of  that  section,  and  fully  described  with  numerical  and
graphical  illustrations  for  a  particular  case  in  §§  5 — 8. Looking

Fig.  2.

to  cols.  8  and  4  of  Table  I,  Appendix  A,  we  see  that,  at  distance
r—'5()  from  the  centre  of  the  atom,  the  densit}^  of  the  ether  is
equal  to  the  undisturbed  density  outside  the  atom  ;  and  that  from
r  =  56  to  7*  =  1  the  density  decreases  to  a  minimum,  •85,  at
7'='865,  and  augments  thence  to  the  undisturbed  density,  1,  at
the  boundary  of  the  atom  (?'  =  1).  In  each  of  the  two  atoms
represented  in  fig.  2,  the  spherical  surface  of  undisturbed  density
is  indicated  by  a  dotted  circle,  that  of  minimum  density  by  a  fine
circle,  and  the  boundary  of  the  atom  by  a  heavy  circle.  Because
the  ethereal  density  decreases  uninterruptedl}'  from  the  centre  to

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.  255

the  surface  of  minimum  densit3%  the  force  exerted  by  the  atom  on  Molecular.
the  ether  must  be  towards  the  centre  throughout  this  spherical
space ;  and  because  the  ethereal  density  increases  uninterruptedly
outwards  from  the  surfixce  of  minimum  density  to  the  boundary  of
the  atom,  the  force  exerted  by  the  atom  on  the  ether  must  be
repulsive  in  every  part  of  the  shell  outside  that  surface.

§  42.  Suppose  now  two  atoms  to  be  somehow  held  together  in
some  such  position  as  that  represented  in  fig.  2,  overlapping  one
another  throughout  a  lens-shaped  space  lying  outside  the  surftxce
of  minimum  ethereal  density  in  each  atom.  The  rarefaction  of
the  ether  in  this  lens-shaped  space  is,  by  the  combined  action  of
the  two  atoms,  greater  than  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre  in
non-overlapping  portions  of  both  the  atoms.  Hence,  remembering
that  each  atom  while  attracting  the  ether  in  its  central  parts
repels  the  ether  in  every  part  of  it  outside  the  spherical  surface  of
minimum  density,  we  see  that  the  repulsion  of  each  atom  on  the
ether  in  the  lens-shaped  volume  of  overlap  is  less  than  its  repulsion
in  the  contrary  direction  on  an  equal  and  similar  portion  of  the
ether  within  it  on  the  other  side  of  its  centre.  Hence  the  re-
actions of  the  ether  on  the  atoms  are  forces  tending  to  bring  them
together;  that  is  to  say  apparent  attractions.  These  apparent
attractions  are  balanced  by  repulsions  between  the  atoms  them-
selves if  two  atoms  rest  stably  as  indicated  in  fig.  2.  It  seems  not
improbable  that  these  are  the  forces  concerned  in  the  equilibrium
of  the  two  atoms  of  the  known  diatomic  simple  gases  No,  O.,,  Ho.
I  assume  that  the  law  of  force  between  ether  and  atoms  and  the
law  of  elasticity  of  the  ether  under  this  force  to  be  such  that  no
part  of  the  ether  outside  the  atoms  experiences  any  displacement
in  consequence  of  the  displacements  actually  produced  within  the
space  occupied  separately  and  jointly  by  the  two  atoms.  This
implies  that  the  ether  drawn  away  from  the  lenticular  space  of
overlap  by  the  extra  rarefaction  there,  is  taken  in  to  the  central
regions  of  the  two  atoms  in  virtue  of  the  attractions  of  the  atoms
on  the  ether  in  those  regions.  In  an  addition  to  Lecture  XVIII.
on  the  reflection  and  refraction  of  light,  I  shall  have  occasion  to
give  explanation  and  justification  of  this  assumption.

§  43.  As  a  representation  of  an  optically  isotropic  crystal,
consider  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  atoms  for  simplicity  taken

25G  LECTURE XV.

jlecular.  in  cubic  order  as  shown  in  fig.  3.  Each  one  of  the  outermost
atoms  experiences  resultant  force  inwards  from  the  ether  within
it,  and  this  force  is  bakinced  by  repulsion  exerted  upon  it  by  the
atom  next  it  inside.  For  every  atom  except  those  lying  in  the
outer  faces,  the  forces  which  it  experiences  in  different  directions
from  the  ether  within  it  balance  one  another  :  and  so  do  the  forces
which  it  experiences  from  the  atoms  around  it.  But  each  of  the
outermost  atoms  experiences  a  resultant  repulsion  from  the  other

Fig.  3.

atoms  in  contact  with  it,  and  this  repulsion  outwards  is  balanced
by  a  contrary  attraction  of  the  ether  on  the  atom.  Hence  the
outermost  atoms  all  round  a  cube  of  the  cr3^stal  exert  an  outward
pull  upon  the  ether  within  the  containing  cube.  In  accordance
with  the  assumption  stated  at  the  end  of  §  42,  the  position  and
shape  of  every  particle  of  ether  outside  the  atoms  is  undisturbed
by  the  forces  exerted  by  the  atoms  in  the  spaces  occupied  by  them
separately  and  jointly;  and  it  is  only  in  these  spaces  that  the
ether  is  disturbed  by  the  action  of  the  atoms.

§  44.  Suppose  now  that  by  forces  applied  to  the  atoms  as
indicated  by  the  arrow-heads  in  fig.  4,  the  distances  between  the
centres  of  contiguous  atoms  are  increased  and  diminished  as  shown
in  the  diagram.  With  this  configuration  of  the  atoms  the  ether
is  pulled  outwards  by  the  atoms  with  stronger  forces  in  the
direction  parallel  to  AC,  BD  than  in  directions  parallel  to  AB
and  CD.  Hence  as  (§§  42,  43  above)  the  ether  is  unstressed  and
unstrained  in  the  interstices  between  the  atoms,  the  ether  within
the  atoms  experiences  an  excess  of  outward  pulling  stress  in  the

FUBTHEK DEVELOPMENT OF STKESS-THEORY.  257

direction  parallel  to  A  C  and  BD  above  outward  pulling  stress  in  Molecular,
the  direction  perpendicular  to  these  lines :  and  therefore,  if  there
luere  no  wolotropy  of  inertia,  and  if  the  stress  theory  which  we
have  worked  out  (§§  35,  36)  for  homogeneous  ether  is  applicable

Fig.  4.

to  average  action  of  the  whole  ether  with  its  great  inequalities  of
density  in  the  space  occupied  by  the  assemblage  of  atoms,  the
propagational  velocity  of  distortional  waves  would  be  greater  when
the  direction  of  vibration  is  parallel  to  ^Cand  BD  than  when  it
is  parallel  io  AB  and  CD.  But  alas!  this  is  exactly  the  reverse
of  what,  thirteen  years  ago,  Kerr,  by  experimental  research  of  a
rigorously  testing  character,  found  for  the  bi-refringent  action  of
strained  glass*,  the  existence  of  which  had  been  discovered  by
Sir  David  Brewster  seventy  years  previously.  We  are  forced  to
admit  that  one  or  both  of  our  two  "  if"'&  must  be  denied.

I  45.  It  seems  to  me  now  worthy  of  consideration  whether
the  true  explanation  of  the  double  refraction  of  a  natural  crystal
or  of  a  piece  of  strained  glass  may  possibly  be  that  given  by
Glazebrook  in  another  paperi*  in  the  same  volume  of  the  Philo-
sophical Magazine  as  Kerr's  already  referred  to. Glazebrook  made

*  "Experimeuts  on  the  Birefiingent  Action  of  Strained  Glass,"  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.
1888,  p.  339.

t  "On  the  Application  of  Sir  William  Thomson's  Theory  of  a  Contractile
Ether  to  Double  Refraction,  Dispersion,  Metallic  Reflexion,  and  other  Optical
Problems." Phil  Mag.  Dec.  1888,  p.  524.

T.  L.  17

258  LECTURE XV.

Molar,  the  remarkable  discovery  expressed  in  his  equation  (14)  (p.  525)
that,  when  the  propagational  velocity  of  the  condensational-
rarefactional  wave  is  zero,  the  two  propagational  velocities  due  to
aeolotropic  inertia  in  a  distortional  wave  with  same  wave-front*
are  the  same  as  those  given  by  my  equation  (94),  and  originally  by
Fresnel ;  from  Avhich  it  follows  that  the  wave-surface  is  exactly
Fresnel's.  It  is  certainly  a  most  interesting  result  that  the  wave
surface  should  be  exactly  Fresnel's,  whether  the  optic  seolotropy  is
due  to  difference  of  stress  in  different  directions  in  an  incompres-
sible elastic  solid,  or  to  aeolotropy  of  inertia  in  an  ideal  elastic
solid  endowed  with  a  negative  compressibility  modulus  of  just
such  value  as  to  make  the  velocity  of  the  condensational-rare-
factional  wave  zero.  In  Glazebrook's  theory  the  direction  of
vibration  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  the  ray,  and  in  the
vibratory  motion  the  solid  experiences  a  slight  degree  of  change
of  bulk  combined  with  pure  distortion.  In  the  stress  theory  of
§§  7... 34  the  line  of  vibration  is  exactly  in  the  wave-front  or
perpendicular  to  the  wave  normal  and  there  is  no  change  of  bulk.

§  46.  In  Lecture  XVIII,  when  we  are  occupied  with  the
reflection  and  refraction  of  light,  we  shall  see  that  Fresnel's
formula  for  the  three  rays,  incident,  reflected,  and  refracted,  when
the  line  of  vibration  is  in  their  plane,  is  a  strict  dynamical  conse-
quence of  the  assumption  of  zero  velocity  for  the  condensational-
rarefactional  wave  in  both  the  mediums,  or  in  one  of  the  mediums
only  while  the  other  medium  is  incompressible.  But  the  difficulties
of  accepting  zero  velocity  for  condensational-rarefactional  wave,
whether  in  undisturbed  ether  through  space  or  among  the  atoms
of  ponderable  matter,  are  not  overcome.

§  47.  It  will  be  seen,  (§§  3,  4,  7,  21,  22,  24,  25,  33,  35,  37,  38,
39,  40,  45  above,)  that  after  earnest  and  hopeful  consideration  of
the  stress  theory  of  double  refraction  during  fourteen  years,
I  am  unable  to  see  how  it  can  give  the  true  explanation
either  of  the  double  refraction  of  natural  crystals,  or  of  double
refraction  induced  in  isotropic  solids  by  the  application  of  unequal
pressures  in  different  directions.  Nevertheless  the  mathematical
investigations  of  §§  7... 21  and  §§  24... 34,  interesting  as  they  are

*  I,  VI,  n  are  the  direction-cosines  of  the  normal  to  the  wave-front  in  Glaze-
brook's  paper,  and  X,  /u,,  v,  in  my  §§  18,  21,  33,  34  above,

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF STRESS-THEORY.  259

in  the  abstract  dynamics  of  a  homogeneous  incompressible  elastic  Mola
solid,  have  an  important  application  in  respect  to  the  influence  of
ponderable  matter  on  ether.  They  prove  in  fact  the  truth  of  the
assumption  at  the  end  of  §  42,  however  the  forces  within  the  atoms
are  to  be  explained ;  because  any  distortion  of  ether  in  the  space
around  a  crystal,  even  so  slight  as  that  illustrated  in  fig.  1,  §  38
above,  would  produce  double  refraction  in  air  or  vacuum  outside
the  crystal,  not  quite  as  intense  outside  as  inside ;  not  vastly  less,
close  to  the  outside  ;  and  diminishing  with  distance  outside  but
still  quite  perceptible,  to  distances  of  several  diameters  of  the
mass.

17—2

LECTURE  XVI.

Wednesday,  October  15,  5  p.m.

[This  was  a  double  lecture ;  but  as  the  substance  of  the  hrst
part,  with  amplification  partly  founded  on  experimental  discoveries
by  many  workers  since  it  was  delivered,  has  been  already  repro-
duced in  dated  additions  on  pp.  148 — 157  and  176 — 184  above,
only  the  second  part  is  here  given.]

I  want  now  to  go  somewhat  into  detail  as  to  absolute
magnitudes  of  masses  and  energies,  in  order  that  there  may  be
nothing  indefinite  in  our  ideas  upon  this  part  of  our  subject ;  and
I  commence  by  reading  and  commenting  on  an  old  article  of  mine
relating  to  the  energy  of  sunlight  and  the  density  of  ether.

[Nov.  20,  1899... Ma rcA  28,  1901.  From  now,  henceforth  till
the  end  of  the  Lectures,  sections  will  be  numbered  continuously.]

Note  on  the  Possible  Density  of  the  Luminiferous
Medium  and  on  the  Mechanical  Value  of  a  Cubic
MiLE*t  OF  Sunlight.

[From  Edin.  Royal  8oc.  Trans.,  Vol.  xxi.  Part  i.  May,  1854 ;  Phil.  Mag.
IX.  1854  ;  Comptes  Rendus,  xxxix.  Sept.  1854  ;  Art.  Lxvii.  of  Math,  and
Phys.  Papers.']

Molar.  §  1.  That  there  must  be  a  medium  forming  a  continuous
material  communication  throughout  space  to  the  remotest  visible
body  is  a  fundamental  assumption  in  the  undulatory  Theory
of Light. Whether or not this medium is (as appears^ to

*  [Note  of  Dec.  22,  1892.  The  brain-wasting  perversity  of  the  insular  inertia
which  still  condemns  British  Engineers  to  reckonings  of  miles  and  yards  and  feet
and  inches  and  grains  and  pounds  and  ounces  and  acres  is  curiously  illustrated  by
the  title  and  numerical  results  of  this  Article  as  originally  published.]

t  [Oct.  13,  1899.  In  the  present  reproduction,  as  part  of  my  Lee.  XVI.  of
Baltimore,  1884,  I  suggest  cubic  kilometre  instead  of  "cubic  mile"  in  the  title  and
use  the  French  metrical  system  exclusively  in  the  article.]

:J:  [Oct.  13,  1899. — Not  so  now. I  did  not  in  1854  know  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.]

UNDISTURBED DENSITY OF HOMOGENEOUS ETHER.  261

me  most  probable)  a  continuation  of  our  own  atmosphere,  Molar,
its  existence  is  a  fact  that  cannot  be  questioned,  when  the
overwhelming  evidence  in  favour  of  the  undulatory  theory  is
considered ;  and  the  investigation  of  its  properties  in  every
possible  way  becomes  an  object  of  the  greatest  interest.  A  first
question  would  naturally  occur,  What  is  the  absolute  density  of
the  luminiferous  ether  in  any  part  of  space  ?  I  am  not  aware  of
any  attempt  having  hitherto  been  made  to  answer  this  question,
and  the  present  state  of  science  does  not  in  fact  afford  sufficient
data.  It  has,  however,  occurred  to  me  that  we  may  assign  an
inferior  limit  to  the  density  of  the  luminiferous  medium  in  inter-
planetary space  by  considering  the  mechanical  value  of  sunlight
as  deduced  in  preceding  communications  to  the  Royal  Society
[Trans.  R.  8.  E.;  Mechanical  Energies  of  the  Solar  System;  re-
published as  Art.  LXVI.  of  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers]  from  Pouillet's
data  on  solar  radiation,  and  Joule's  mechanical  equivalent  of
the  thermal  unit.  Thus  the  value  of  solar  radiation  per  second
per  square  centimetre  at  the  earth's  distance  from  the  sun,
estimated  at  1235  cm. -grams,  is  the  same  as  the  mechanical
value  of  sunlight  in  the  luminiferous  medium  through  a  space
of  as  many  cubic  centimetres  as  the  number  of  linear  centimetres
of  propagation  of  light  per  second.  Hence  the  mechanical  value
of  the  whole  energy,  kinetic  and  potential,  of  the  disturbance
kept  up  in  the  space  of  a  cubic  centimetre  at  the  earth's  distance

1235  412

from  the  sun*,  is  3  ^  -^q,,  >  or  ^0  ^f  a  cm.-gram.

§  2.  The  mechanical  value  of  a  cubic  kilometre  of  sunlight  is
consequently  412  metre-kilograms,  equivalent  to  the  work  of  one
horse-power  for  5'4  seconds.  This  result  may  give  some  idea  of
the  actual  amount  of  mechanical  energy  of  the  luminiferous
motions  and  forces  within  our  own  atmosphere.  Merely  to  com-
mence the  illumination  of  eleven  cubic  kilometres,  requires  an
amount  of  work  equal  to  that  of  a  horse-power  for  a  minute ;
the  same  amount  of  energy  exists  in  that  space  as  long  as
light  continues  to traverse  it ; and,  if  the source  of  light  be

*  The  mechanical  value  of  sunlight  in  any  space  near  the  sun's  surface  must
be  greater  than  in  an  equal  space  at  the  earth's  distance,  in  the  ratio  of  the  square
of  the  earth's  distance  to  the  square  of  the  sun's  radius,  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of
46,000  to  1  nearlj'. The  mechanical  value  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  sunlight  near

the  sun  must,  therefore,  be  -^^— — t-t^q —  or  about  "0019  of  a  cm.-gram.

262  LECTURE  xvr.

Molecular,  suddenly  stopped,  must  pass  from  it  before  the  illumination
ceases*.  The  matter  which  possesses  this  energy  is  the  lumini-
ferous  medium.  If,  then,  we  knew  the  velocities  of  the  vibratory
motions,  we  might  a.scertain  the  density  of  the  luminiferous
medium ;  or,  conversely,  if  we  knew  the  density  of  the  medium,
we  might  determine  the  average  velocity  of  the  moving  particles.

I  3.  Without  any  such  definite  knowledge,  we  may  assign  a
superior  limit  to  the  velocities,  and  deduce  an  inferior  limit  to  the
quantity  of  matter,  by  considering  the  nature  of  the  motions
which  constitute  waves  of  light.  For  it  appears  certain  that  the
amplitudes  of  the  vibrations  constituting  radiant  heat  and  light
must  be  but  small  fractions  of  the  wave-lengths,  and  that  the
greatest  velocities  of  the  vibrating  particles  nuist  be  very  small
in  comparison  with  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  the  waves.

§  4.  Let  us  consider,  for  instance,  homogeneous  plane  polarized
light,  and  let  the  greatest  velocity  of  vibration  be  denoted  by  v ;
the  distance  to  which  a  particle  vibrates  on  each  side  of  its
position  of  equilibrium,  by  A;  and  the  wave-length,  by  \.  Then,
if  V  denote  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  light  or  radiant  heat,
we  have

and  therefore  if  J.  be  a  small  fraction  of  X,  v  must  also  be  a  small
fraction  (27r  times  as  great)  of  V.  The  same  relation  holds  for
circularly  polarized  light,  since  in  the  time  during  which  a  particle
revolves  once  round  in  a  circle  of  radius  J.,  the  wave  has  been  pro-
pagated over  a  space  equal  to  \.  Now  the  whole  mechanical  value
of  homogeneous  plane  polarized  light  in  an  infinitely  small  space
containing  only  particles  sensibly  in  the  same  phase  of  vibration,
which  consists  entirely  of  potential  energy  at  the  instants  when
the  particles  are  at  rest  at  the  extremities  of  their  excursions,
partly  of  potential  and  partly  of  kinetic  energy  when  they  are
moving  to  or  from  their  positions  of  equilibrium,  and  wholly  of
kinetic  energy  when  they  are  passing  through  these  positions,  is
of  constant  amount,  and  must  therefore  be  at  every  instant  equal
to  half  the  mass  multiplied  by  the  square  of  the  velocity  which  the
particles  have  in  the  last-mentioned  case. But  the  velocity  of  any

*  Similarly  we  find  4140  horse-power  for  a  minute  as  the  amount  of  work
required  to  generate  the  energy  existing  in  a  cubic  kilometre  of  light  near  the  sun.

KINETIC AND POTENTIAL ENERGY OF LIGHT.  263

particle  passing  through  its  position  of  equilibrium  is  the  greatest  Molecular,
velocity  of  vibration.  This  we  have  denoted  by  v ;  and,  there-
fore, if  p  denote  the  quantity  of  vibrating  matter  contained  in  a
certain  space,  a  space  of  unit  volume  for  instance,  the  whole  me-
chanical value  of  all  the  energy,  both  kinetic  and  potential,  of  the
disturbance  within  that  space  at  any  time  is  ^pv-.  The  mechani-
cal energy  of  circularly  polarized  light  at  every  instant  is  (as  has
been  pointed  out  to  me  by  Professor  Stokes)  half  kinetic  energy
of  the  revolving  particles  and  half  potential  energy  of  the  dis-
tortion kept  up  in  the  luminiferous  medium  ;  and,  therefore,  v
being  now  taken  to  denote  the  constant  velocity  of  motion  of  each
particle,  double  the  preceding  expression  gives  the  mechanical
value  of  the  whole  disturbance  in  a  unit  of  volume  in  the  present
case.

§  5.  Hence  it  is  clear,  that  for  any  elliptically  polarized  light
the  mechanical  value  of  the  disturbance  in  a  unit  of  volume  will
be  between  ^/o?/-  and  pv-,  if  v  still  denote  the  greatest  velocity  of
the  vibrating  particles.  The  mechanical  value  of  the  disturbance
kept  up  by  a  number  of  coexisting  series  of  waves  of  different
periods,  polarized  in  the  same  plane,  is  the  sum  of  the  mechanical
values  due  to  each  homogeneous  series  separately,  and  the  greatest
velocity  that  can  possibly  be  acquired  by  any  vibrating  particle  is
the  sum  of  the  separate  velocities  due  to  the  different  series.
Exactly  the  same  remark  applies  to  coexistent  series  of  circularly
polarized  waves  of  different  periods.  Hence  the  mechanical  value
is  certainly  less  than  half  the  mass  multiplied  into  the  square  of
the  greatest  velocity  acquired  by  a  particle,  when  the  disturbance
consists  in  the  superposition  of  different  series  of  plane  polarized
waves ;  and  we  may  conclude,  for  every  kind  of  radiation  of  light
or  heat  except  a  series  of  homogeneous  circularly  polarized  waves,
that  tJie  'mechanical  value  of  the  disturbance  kept  up  in  any  space
is  less  than  the  product  of  the  mass  into  the  square  of  the  greatest
velocity  acquired  by  a  vibrating  particle  in  the  varying  phases  of  its
motion.  How  much  less  in  such  a  complex  radiation  as  that  of
sunlight  and  heat  we  cannot  tell,  because  we  do  not  know  how
much  the  velocity  of  a  particle  may  mount  up,  perhaps  even  to
a  considerable  value  in  comparison  with  the  velocity  of  propaga-
tion, at  some  instant  by  the  superposition  of  different  motions
chancing  to  agree ;  but  we  may  be  sure  that  the  product  of  the

264  LECTURE XVI.

[olecular.  mass  into  the  square  of  an  ordinary  maximum  velocity,  or  of  the
mean  of  a  great  many  successive  maximum  velocities  of  a  vibrat-
ing particle,  cannot  exceed  in  any  great  ratio  the  true  mechanical
value  of  the  disturbance.

§  6.  Recurring,  however,  to  the  definite  expression  for  the
mechanical  value  of  the  disturbance  in  the  case  of  homogeneous
circularly  polarized  light,  the  only  case  in  which  the  velocities
of  all  particles  are  constant  and  the  same,  we  may  define  the
mean  velocity  of  vibration  in  any  case  as  such  a  velocity  that
the  product  of  its  square  into  the  mass  of  the  vibrating  par-
ticles is  equal  to  the  whole  mechanical  value,  in  kinetic  and
potential  energy,  of  the  disturbance  in  a  certain  space  traversed
by  it ;  and  from  all  we  know  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  undula-
tions, it  seems  certain  that  this  velocity  must  be  a  very  small
fraction  of  the  velocity  of  propagation  in  the  most  intense  light
or  radiant  heat  which  is  propagated  according  to  known  laws.
Denoting  this  velocity  for  the  case  of  sunlight  at  the  earth's
distance  from  the  sun  by  v,  and  calling  W  the  mass  in  grammes  of
any  volume  of  the  luminiferous  ether,  we  have  for  the  mechanical
value  of  the  disturbance  in  the  same  space,  in  terms  of  terrestrial
gravitation  units,

W ,

—  -y-,

9
where  g  is  the  number  981,  measuring  in  (c.G.S.)  absolute  units
of  force,  the  force  of  gravity  on  a  gramme. Now,  from  Pouillet's
observation, we found in the last footnote on §  1 above,

1235x46000 „ .,  u • i i •  .• '.

j^ tor the mechanical value, m centimetre-grams,

of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  sunlight  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
sun;  and  therefore  the  mass,  in  grammes,  of  a  cubic  centimetre
of  the  ether,  must  be  given  by  the  equation,

981  X  1235  X  46000
If  we  assume  v  =  -  V,  this  becomes

71

™  981  X  1235  X  46000 „  981  x  1235  x  46000

^= F^ ^  ^'  = (3x10^0/ ^  "■

20-64

=  "10^  x^^'gm-;

RIGIDITY OF ETHER.  265

and  for  the  mass,  in  grammes,  of  a  cubic  kilometre  we  have  Molecular.

20-64

10^

X  IV

§  7.  It  is  quite  impossible  to  fix  a  definite  limit  to  the  ratio
which  V  may  bear  to  V;  but  it  appears  improbable  that  it  could
bo  more,  for  instance,  than  J^,  for  any  kind  of  light  following  the
observed  laws.  We  may  conclude  that  probably  a  cubic  centimetre
of  the  luminiferous  medium  in  the  space  near  the  sun  contains
not  less  than  516  x  10~^°  of  a  gramme  of  matter;  and  a  cubic
kilometre  not  less  than  516  x  10~^  of  a  gramme.

§  8.  [Nov.  16,  1899.  We  have  strong  reason  to  believe  that
the  density  of  ether  is  constant  throughout  interplanetary  and
interstellar  space.  Hence,  taking  the  density  of  water  as  unity
according  to  the  convenient  French  metrical  system,  the  preceding
statements  are  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  density  of  ether  in
vacuum  or  space  devoid  of  ponderable  matter  is  everywhere
probably  not  less  than  5  x  10~'*.

Hence  the  rigidity,  (being  equal  to  the  density  multiplied
by  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light),  must  be  not  less  than
4500  dynes*  per  square  centimetre.  With  this  enormous  value
as  an  inferior  limit  to  the  rigidity  of  the  ether,  we  shall  see  in  an
addition  to  Lecture  XIX.  that  it  is  impossible  to  arrange  for  a
radiant  molecule  moving  through  ether  and  displacing  ether  by
its  translatory  as  well  as  by  its  vibratory  motions,  consistently
with  any  probable  suppositions  as  to  magnitudes  of  molecules
and  ruptural  rigidity-modulus  of  ether;  and  that  it  is  also
impossible  to  explain  the  known  smallness  of  ethereal  resistance
against  the  motions  of  planets  and  comets,  or  of  smaller  ponder-
able bodies,  such  as  those  we  can  handle  and  experiment  upon  in
our  abode  on  the  earth's  surface,  if  the  ether  must  be  pushed
aside  to  make  way  for  the  body  moving  through  it.  We  shall  find
ourselves  forced  to  consider  the  necessity  of  some  hypothesis  for
the  free  motion  of  ponderable  bodies  through  ether,  disturbing  it
only  by  condensations  and  rarefactions,  with  no  incompatibility
in  respect  to  joint  occupation  of  the  same  space  by  the  two
substances.] See  Phil.  Mag.  Aug.  1900,  pp.  181—198.

*  See  Math,  and  Pliys.  Papers,  Vol.  iii.  p.  522  ;  and  in  last  line  of  Table  4,
for  "  /3  >  10~2-  "  substitute  "  p  <  10~--."

260  LEOTURE XVI.

§  9.  I  wish  to  make  a  short  calculation  to  show  how  much  com-
pressing force  is  exerted  upon  the  luminiferous  ether  by  the  sun's
attraction.  We  are  accustomed  to  call  ether  imponderable.  How
do  we  know  it  is  imponderable  ?  If  we  had  never  dealt  with  air
except  by  our  senses,  air  would  be  imponderable  to  us ;  but  we
know  by  experiment  that  a  vacuous  glass  globe  shows  an  increase
of  weight  when  air  is  allowed  to  flow  into  it.  We  have  not  the
slightest  reason  to  believe  the  luminiferous  ether  to  be  imponder-
able. [Nov.  17,  1899.  I  now  see  that  we  have  the  strongest
possible  reason  to  believe  that  ether  is  imponderable,]  It  is  just
as  likely  to  be  attracted  to  the  sun  as  air  is.  At  all  events  the
onus  of  proof  rests  with  those  who  assert  that  it  is  imponderable.
I  think  we  shall  have  to  modify  our  ideas  of  what  gravitation  is,
if  we  have  a  mass  spreading  through  space  with  mutual  gravita-
tions between  its  parts  without  being  attracted  by  other  bodies.
[Nov.  17,  1899.  But  is  there  any  gravitational  attraction  between
different  portions  of  ether  ?  Certainly  not,  unless  either  it  is
infinitely  resistant  against  condensation,  or  there  is  only  a  finite
volume  of  space  occupied  by  it.  Suppose  that  ether  is  given  uni-
formly spread  through  space  to  infinite  distances  in  all  directions.
Any  large  enough  spherical  portion  of  it,  if  held  with  its  surface
absolutely  fixed,  would  by  the  mutual  gravitation  of  its  parts  become
heterogeneous ;  and  this  tendency  could  certainly  not  be  counter-
acted by  doing  away  with  the  supposed  rigidity  of  its  boundary
and  by  the  attraction  of  ether  extending  to  infinity  outside  it.
The  pressure  at  the  centre  of  a  spherical  portion  of  homogeneous
gravitational  matter  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  radius,
and  therefore,  by  taking  the  globe  large  enough,  may  be  made  as
large  as  we  please,  whatever  be  the  density.  In  fact,  if  there
were  mutual  gravitation  between  its  parts,  homogeneous  ether
extending  through  all  space  would  be  essentially  unstable,  unless
infinitely  resistant  against  compressing  or  dilating  forces.  If  we
admit  that  ether  is  to  some  degree  condensible  and  extensible,
and  believe  that  it  extends  through  all  space,  then  we  must
conclude  that  there  is  no  mutual  gravitation  between  its  parts,
and  cannot  believe  that  it  is  gravitationally  attracted  by  the  sun
or  the  earth  or  any  ponderable  matter;  that  is  to  say,  we  must
believe  ether  to  be  a  substance  outside  the  law  of  universal
gravitation.]

WEIGHT OF ETHER, IF GRAVITATIONAL.  267

§  10.  In  the  meantime,  it  is  an  interesting  and  definite  question  Molar,
to  think  of  what  the  weight  of  a  column  of  luniiniferous  ether  of
infinite  height  resting  on  the  sun,  would  be,  supposing  the  sun
cold  and  quiet,  and  supposing  for  the  moment  ether  to  be
gravitationally  attracted  by  the  sun  as  if  it  were  ponderable
matter  of  density  5  x  10~^^.  You  all  know  the  theorem  for  mean
gravity  due  to  attraction  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance
from  a  point.  It  shows  that  the  heaviness  of  a  uniform  vertical
column  AB,  of  mass  iv  per  unit  length,  and  having  its  length  in  a
line  through  the  centre  of  force  C,  is

miu mw  tmu  -c  nn

where  ni  denotes  the  attraction  on  unit  of  ma.ss  at  unit  distance.
Hence  writing  for  mwjCA,  mwCA/CA'-,  we  see  that  the  attraction
on  an  infinite  column  under  the  influence  of  a  force  decreasing
according  to  inverse  square  of  distance,  is  ei:iual  to  the  attraction
on  a  column  equal  in  length  to  the  distance  of  its  near  end  from
the  centre,  and  attracted  by  a  uniform  force  equal  to  that  of
gravity  on  the  near  end.  The  sun's  radius  is  697  x  10®  cms.  and
gravity  at  his  surface  is  27  times*  terrestrial  gravity,  or  say
27000  dynes  per  gramme  of  mass.  Hence  the  sun's  attraction  on
a  column  of  ether  of  a  square  centimetre  section,  if  of  density
o  X  10~'®  and  extending  from  his  surface  to  infinity,  would  be
9'4  X  10~^  of  a  dyne,  if  ether  were  ponderable.

§  11.  Considerations  similar  to  those  of  November  1899  in-
serted in  I  9  above  lead  to  decisive  proof  that  the  mean  density  of
ponderable  matter  through  any  very  large  spherical  volume  of
space  is  smaller,  the  greater  the  radius  ;  and  is  infinitely  small  for
an  infinitely  great  radius.  If  it  were  not  so  a  majority  of  the
bodies  in  the  universe  would  each  experience  infinitely  great
gravitational  force.  This  is  a  short  statement  of  the  essence  of
the  following  demonstration.

§  12.  Let  V  be  any  volume  of  space  bounded  by  a  closed
surface,  S,  outside  of  which  and  within  which  there  are  ponderable
bodies ;  M  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  all  these  bodies  within  S ;

*  This  is  founded  on  the  following  values  for  the  sun's  mass  and  radius  and  the
earth's  radius: — sun's  mass  =  324000  earth's  mass;  sun's  radius  =  097000  kilo-
metres; earth's  radius  =  6371  kilometres.

2(l8  LECTURE XVI.

Molar,  and  p  the  mean  density  of  the  whole  matter  in  the  volume  V.

We  have

M  =  pV (1).

Let  Q  denote  the  mean  value  of  the  normal  component  of  the
gravitational  force  at  all  points  of  S. We  have

QS  =  4>7rM  =  4!7rpV (2),

by  a  general  theorem  discovered  by  Green  seventy-three  years
ago  regarding  force  at  a  surface  of  any  shape,  due  to  matter
(gravitational,  or  ideal  electric,  or  ideal  magnetic)  acting  according
to  the  Newtonian  law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance.  It
is  interesting  to  remark,  that  the  surface-integral  of  the  normal
component  force  due  to  matter  outside  any  closed  surface  is  zero
for  the  whole  surface.  If  normal  component  force  acting  inwards
is  reckoned  positive,  force  outwards  must  of  course  be  reckoned
negative.  In  equation  (2)  the  normal  component  force  may  be
outwards  at  some  points  of  the  surface  *S',  if  in  some  places  the
tangent  plane  is  cut  by  the  surface.  But  if  the  surface  is
wholly  convex,  the  normal  component  force  must  be  everywhere
inwards.

§  18. Let  now  the  surface  be  spherical  of  radius  r. We  have

^'  =  47rr^ V^^^^^^; V  =  ^rS (3).

Hence,  for  a  spherical  surface,  (2)  gives

Q  =  ^''P  =  V^ ^^^-

This  shows  that  the  average  normal  component  force  over  the
surface  S  is  infinitely  great,  if  p  is  finite  and  r  is  infinitely  great,
which  suffices  to  prove  §  11.

§  14. For  example,  let

r  =150.  10'' .  200  .  10"  =  8-09  .  lO'^  kilometres (5).

This  is  the  distance  at  which  a  star  must  be  to  have  parallax  one
one-thousandth  of  a  second ;  because  the  mean  distance  of  the
earth  from  the  sun  is  one-hundred-and-fifty-million  kilometres,  and
there  are  two-hundred-and-six-thousand  seconds  of  angle  in  the
radian. Let  us  try  whether  there  can  be  as  much  matter  as  a

GRAVITATIONAL MATTER WITHIN VERY LARGE VOLUME. 269

thousand-million  times  the  sun's  mass,  or,  as  we  shall  say  for  Molar,
brevity,  a  thousand-million  suns,  within  a  spherical  surface  of  that
radius  (5).  The  sun's  mass  is  324,000  times  the  earth's  mass;  and
therefore  our  quantity  of  matter  on  trial  is  3*24  .  10"  times  the
earth's  mass.  Hence  if  we  denote  by  g  terrestrial  gravity  at  the
earth's  .surface,  we  have  by  (4)

Hence  if  the  radial  force  were  equal  over  the  whole  spherical
surface,  its  amount  would  be  1"37.]0~"  of  terrestrial  surface-
gravity  ;  and  every  body  on  or  near  that  surface  would  experience
an  acceleration  toward  the  centre  equal  to

1*37  .  10~^^  kilometres  per  second  per  second (7),

because  (j  is  approximately  1000  centimetres  per  second  per
second,  or  "01  kilometre  per  second  per  second.  If  the  normal
force  is  not  uniform,  bodies  on  or  near  the  spherical  surface  will
experience  centreward  acceleration,  some  at  more  than  that  rate,
some  less.  At  exactly  that  rate,  the  velocity  acquired  per  year
(thirty-one  and  a  half  million  seconds)  would  be  4*32 .  10""  kilo-
metres per  second.  With  the  same  rate  of  acceleration  through
five  million  years  the  velocity  would  amount  to  21 'G  kilometres
per  second,  if  the  body  started  from  rest  at  our  spherical  surface ;
and  the  space  moved  through  in  five  million  years  would  be
"17  .  10^"  kilometres,  which  is  only  Obo  of  r  (5).  This  is  so  small
that  the  force  would  vary  very  little,  unless  through  the  accident
of  near  approach  to  some  other  body.  With  the  same  acceleration
constant  through  twenty-five  million  years  the  velocity  would
amount  to  108  kilometres  per  second;  but  the  space  moved  through
in  twenty-five  million  years  would  be  4*25  .  10'"  kilometres,  or
more  than  the  radius  r,  which  shows  that  the  rate  of  acceleration
could  not  be  approximately  constant  for  nearly  as  long  a  time  as
twenty-five  million  years.  It  would,  in  fact,  have  many  chances
of  being  much  greater  than  108  kilometres  per  second,  and  many
chances  also  of  being  considerably  less.

§  15.  Without  attempting  to  solve  the  problem  of  finding
the  motions  and  velocities  of  the  thousand  million  bodies,  we  can
see  that  if  they  had  been  given  at  rest*  twenty-five  million  years

*  "  The  potential  energy  of  gravitation  may  be  in  reality  the  ultimate  created

270  LECTURE XVI.

Molar,  ago  distributed  uniformly  or  non-uniformly  through  our  sphere  (5)
of  309  .  10^®  kilometres  radius,  a  very  large  proportion  of  them
would  now  have  velocities  not  less  than  twenty  or  thirty  kilometres
per  second,  while  many  would  have  velocities  less  than  that ;  and
certainly  some  would  have  velocities  greater  than  108  kilometres
per  second;  or  if  thousands  of  millions  of  years  ago  they  had
been  given  at  rest,  at  distances  from  one  another  very  great  in
comparison  with  r  (5),  so  distributed  that  they  should  temporarily
now  be  equably  spaced  throughout  a  spherical  surface  of  radius  r'
(5),  their  mean  velocity  (reckoned  as  the  square  root  of  the  mean
of  the  squares  of  their  actual  velocities)  would  now  be  50'4  kilo-
metres per  second*.  This  is  not  very  unlike  what  we  know  of
the  stars  visible  to  us.  Thus  it  is  quite  possible,  perhaps  pro-
bable, that  there  may  be  as  much  matter  as  a  thousand  million
suns  within  the  distance  corresponding  to  parallax  one  one-
thousandth  of  a  second  (3"09  .  10^^  kilometres).  But  it  seems
perfectly  certain  that  there  cannot  be  within  this  distance  as
much  matter  as  ten  thousand  million  suns ;  because  if  there  were,
Ave  should  find  much  greater  velocities  of  visible  stars  than
observation  shows;  according  to  the  following  tables  of  results,
and  statements,  from  the  most  recent  scientific  authorities  on  the
subject.

"  antecedent  of  all  the  motion,  heat,  and  light  at  present  in  the  universe."  See
Mechanical  Antecedents  of  Motion,  Heat,  and  Lifiht,  Art.  lxix.  of  my  Collected
Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Vol.  ii.

*  To  prove  this,  remark  that  the  exhaustion  of  gravitational  energy

1 f+^  r+^  r+x

Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,  Part  II.  g  o4'J)  when  a  vast  number,  N,  of
equal  masses  come  from  rest  at  infinite  distances  from  one  another  to  an  equably
spaced  distribution  through  a  sphere  of  radius  r  is  easily  found  to  be  3/10  Fr,
where  F  denotes  the  resultant  force  of  the  attraction  of  all  of  them  on  a  material
point,  of  mass  equal  to  the  sum  of  their  masses,  placed  at  the  spherical  surface.
Now  this  exhaustion  of  gravitational  energy  is  spent  wholly  in  the  generation  of

1  3

kinetic  energy;  and  therefore  we  have  2  -  viv-  =  j~^  Fr,  and  by  (7)  F=1'37  .  10~^^Zvi;

whence

zm o

which,  for  the  case  of  equal  masses,  gives,  with  (5)  for  the  value  of  r,

/l!^  =  ^/(i  1-37  .  10-'»  .  3-09  .  10i«)  =50-4  kilometres  per  second.

VELOCITIES OF STARS.

271

From  the  Annuaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes  (Paris,  1901). Molar.

Magni-
tude

Name  of  Star

Distance
from  earth,

in  million

million
Kilometres

Annual
proper
motions

Parallax

Velocities
perpendicular

to  line  of
sight,  in  kilo-
metres per
second

0-7
6-8
51
-1-4
8-2
7-9
7-5
0-5
9  0
6-5
8-5
4-7
3-6
0-2
90
0-9
5-2
4-5
2-4
1-0
7  0
4  1
0-2
2-2

a  Centauri

43 3''62
64 4-75

0'72
n-A.fi

23-9

47-1

55-7

170

31-3

43-5

118-5

22-2

55-7

27-2

87-1

36-5

27-0

9-8

30-2

15-2

109-5

113-2

Ifi-Q

21185  Lalande

61  Cygni

70 5-17 0-44
83 1-32 0-37
88 2-30 0-35
99 2-83 0-31
110 6-97 0-28
110 1-26 0-27
119 305 0-26
123 1-43 0-25
128 4-40 0-24
128 1-84 ; 0-24
147 1-19 0-21
147 ! 0-43 0-21
154 1-27 0-20
154 0-64 0-20
154 ! 4-60 0-20
181 4-05 0-17
193 0-57 0-16

Sirius

18609  Arg.-(Eltzen...

34  Groombridge

9352  Lacaille

Procyon

11677  Arg.-CEltzen...

1643  Fedorenko

21258  Lalande

<T  Draconis

t]  Cassiopeise

a  Aurig£e

17415  Arg.-CEltzen...
a  Aquilffi

e  "Indien  "

d^  Eridani

fS  Cassiopeiffi

o  Tauri

1831  Fedorenko

p'  Ophiuchi

206 0-19 0-15 60
206 0-42 1 015 13-3
206 1-13 ; 0-15 35-8
206 036 0-1. <? 11-4.

Vesa

a  Urs.  Min.  (Polaris)

440

0-05

0-07

3-4

Stars  which  have  largest  of  observed  Velocities  in  the  Line  of
Sight.  (Extract  by  the  Astronomer  Royal  from  an  Article
in  the  Astroplujsical  Journal  for  1901,  January,  by  W.  W.
Campbell,  Director  of  Lick  Observatory.)

Magni-
■ tudes

4-6

4-2
4-1

Star

R.  A.

e  Andromeda ..
/i  Cassiopeias . .

5  Leporis

8  Canis  Majoris

I  Pegasi

fi  Sagittarii

h.
0
1
5
6
21
18

33
0
47
50
17

Dec.

+  28
+  54
-20
-11
+  19
-21

46
20
54
55
23
1

Velocity

84  km.  per  sec.
97

+  95
+  96
-76
-76

The  +  sign  denotes  recession,  the  -  sign  approach,

272

LECTURE XVI.

Molar.  Motions  of  Stars  in  the  Line  of  Sight  determined  at  Potsdam
Observatory,  1889-1891.  (Communicated  by  Professor  Becker,
University  Observatory,  Glasgow.)

Star

Magni-
tude

a  AndromedEe ..,

/3  Cassiopeiae

a  Cassiopeiae

y  Cassiopeiae

/3  Andromedae  . . .
a  Ursffi  Miuoiis  . . .
7  AndromedcC , . .

a  Arietis

^  Persei

a  Persei

a  Tauri

a  Aurigfe

^  Orionis

7  Orionis

i3  Tauri

5  Orionis

e  Orionis

f  Orionis

a  Orionis

/3  Aurigae

7  Geminorum  ...
a  Canis  Majoris...
a  Geminorum  ...
a  Canis  Minoris...
P  Geminorum  ...
a  Leonis

2  0
21
var.
2-0
2-3
20
2-4
20
var.
2-0
1-0
10
10
20
20
2-5
2-0
2-0
var.
2-0
2-3
1-0
2-3
10
1-3
1-3

Velocity ;
relative  to
the  Sun

km.
+  4-5
+  5-2
-15-2

-  3-5
+  11-2
-25-9
-12-9
-14-7

-  1-5
-10-3
+  48-5
+  24-5
+  16-4
+  9-2
+  8-0
f  0-9
+  26-5
+  14-8
+ 17-2
-28-1

-  16-6
-lo'6
-29-7

-  9-2
+ 1-1

-  91

Star

7  Leonis

/3  Ursfe  Majoris  . . .
a  Ursffi  Majoris  ...

5  Leonis

P  Leonis

7  Ursffi  Majoris ...
e  Ursa3  Majoris  ...

a  Virginia

f  Ursae  Majoris  ...
7]  Ursae  Majoris  ...

a  Bootis

e  Bootis

/3  Ursae  Minoris ...

jS  Librffi

a  Coronas

a  Serpentis

/3  Herculis

a  Opbiuchi

a  Lj'rae

a  Aquilae

7  Cygni

a  Cygni

e  Pegasi

^  Pegasi

a  Pegasi

Magni-! ^^^^^^^y
*.,^„ 1  relative  to
^^'^^ the  Sun

2-0
2-3
20
2-3
2-0
2-3
20
1-0
21
20
1-0
2-0
2-0
20
20
2-3
2-3
2-0
10
1-3
2-4
1-6
2-3
var
2-0

km.
-38-5
-29-3
-11-9
-14-4
-12-2
-26-6
-303
-14-8
-81-2
-26-2

-  7-7
-16-3
-I-14-2

-  9-6
+  320
+  22-3
-35-3
+  19-2
-15-3
-36-9

-  6-4

-  80
+  8-0
+  6-7
+  1-3

The  velocity  of  the  sun  relatively  to  stars  in  general  according
to  Kempf  and  Risteen  is  probably  about  19  kilometres  per  second*.
In  respect  to  greatest  proper  motions  and  velocities  Sir  Norman
Lockyer  gives  me  the  following  information: — "The  star  with
"  the  greatest  known  proper  motion  (across  the  line  of  sight)  is
"  243  Cordoba  =  8"'7  per  annum.  Velocity  in  kilometres  not
"  known.

"  1830  Groombridge  has  a  proper  motion  of  7"0  per  annum
"  and  a  paralla.x  of  0""089,  from  which  it  results  that  the  velocity
"across  the  line  of  sight  is  370  kms.  per  second.  Various  esti-
"  mates  of  the  parallax,  however,  have  been  made  and  this  velocity
"  is  somewhat  uncertain.  The  star  with  the  greatest  known
"  velocity  in  the  line  of  sight  is  ^  Herculis,  which  travels  at
"  70  kms.  per  second.

*  See  footnote  on  §  10  of  Appendix  B.

VELOCITIES OF  STARS.  273

"  The  dark  liae  component  of  Nova  Persei  was  approaching  Molar,
"the  earth  with  a  velocity  of  over  1100  kms.  per  second."  This
last-mentioned  and  greatest  velocity  is  probably  that  of  a  torrent
of  gas  due  to  comparatively  small  particles  of  melted  and  evaporat-
ing fragments  shot  out  laterally  from  two  great  solid  or  liquid
masses  colliding  with  one  another,  which  may  be  many  times
greater  than  the  velocity  of  either  before  collision ;  just  as  we  see
in  the  trajectories  of  small  fragments  shot  out  nearly  horizontally
when  a  condemned  mass  of  cast-iron  is  broken  up  by  a  heavy
mass  of  iron  falling  upon  it  from  a  height  of  perhaps  twenty  feet
in  engineering  works.

§  16.  Newcomb  has  given  a  most  interesting  speculation
regarding  the  very  great  velocity  of  1830  Groombridge,  which  he
concludes  as  follows: — "If,  then,  the  star  in  question  belongs  to
"  our  stellar  system,  the  masses  or  extent  of  that  system  must
"  be  many  times  greater  than  telescopic  observation  and  astro-
"  nomical  research  indicate.  We  may  place  the  dilemma  in  a
"  concise  form,  as  follows  : —

"  Either  the  bodies  which  compose  our  universe  are  vastly
"  more  massive  and  numerous  than  telescopic  examination  seems
"  to  indicate,  or  1830  Groombridge  is  a  runaway  star,  flying  on  a
"  boundless  course  through  infinite  space  with  such  momentum  that
"  the  attraction  of  all  the  bodies  of  the  universe  can  never  stop  it.

"  Which  of  these  is  the  more  probable  alternative  we  cannot
"  pretend  to  say.  That  the  star  can  neither  be  stopped,  nor  bent
"  far  from  its  course  until  it  has  passed  the  extreme  limit  to
"which  the  telescope  has  ever  penetrated,  we  may  consider
"  reasonably  certain.  To  do  this  will  require  two  or  three  millions
"  of  years.  Whether  it  will  then  be  acted  on  by  attractive  forces
"of  which  science  has  no  knowledge,  and  thus  carried  back  to
"  where  it  started,  or  whether  it  will  continue  straightforward  for
"  ever,  it  is  impossible  to  say.

"  Much  the  same  dilemma  may  be  applied  to  the  past  history
"  of  this  body.  If  the  velocity  of  two  hundred  miles  or  more  per
"  second  with  which  it  is  moving  exceeds  any  that  could  be  pro-
"  duced  by  the  attraction  of  all  the  other  bodies  in  the  universe,
"  then  it  must  have  been  flying  forward  through  space  from  the
"  beginning,  and,  having  come  from  an  infinite  distance,  must  be
"  now  passing  through  our  system  for  the  first  and  only  time."
T.  L.  18

274  LECTURE XVI.

§  17.  In  all  these  views  the  chance  of  passing  another  star  at
some  small  distance  such  as  one  or  two  or  three  times  the  sun's
radius  has  been  overlooked;  and  that  this  chance  is  not  excessively
rare  seems  proved  by  the  multitude  of  Novas  (collisions  and  their
sequels)  known  in  astronomical  history.  Suppose,  for  example,
1830  Groombridge,  moving  at  370  kilometres  per  second,  to  chase
a  star  of  twenty  times  the  sun's  mass,  moving  nearly  in  the  same
direction  with  a  velocity  of  50  kilometres  per  second,  and  to
overtake  it  and  pass  it  as  nearly  as  may  be  without  collision.  Its
own  direction  would  be  nearly  reversed  and  its  velocity  would  be
diminished  by  nearly  100  kilometres  per  second.  By  two  or  three
such  casualties  the  greater  part  of  its  kinetic  energy  might  be
given  to  much  larger  bodies  previously  moving  with  velocities  of
less  than  100  kilometres  per  second.  By  supposing  reversed,  the
motions  of  this  ideal  history,  we  see  that  1830  Groombridge  may
have  had  a  velocity  of  less  than  100  kilometres  per  second  at  some
remote  past  time,  and  may  have  had  its  present  great  velocity
produced  by  several  cases  of  near  approach  to  other  bodies  of  much
larger  mass  than  its  own,  previously  moving  in  directions  nearly
opposite  to  its  own,  and  with  velocities  of  less  than  100  kilometres
per  second.  Still  it  seems  to  me  quite  possible  that  Newcomb's
brilliant  suggestion  may  be  true,  and  that  1830  Groombridge  is  a
roving  star  which  has  entered  our  galaxy,  and  is  destined  to  travel
through  it  in  the  course  of  perhaps  two  or  three  million  years,  and
to  pass  away  into  space  never  to  return  to  us.

I  18.  Many  of  our  supposed  thousand  million  stars,  perhaps
a  great  majority  of  them,  may  be  dark  bodies ;  but  let  us  suppose
for  a  moment  each  of  them  to  be  bright,  and  of  the  same  size  and
brightness  as  our  sun ;  and  on  this  supposition  and  on  the  further
suppositions  that  they  are  uniformly  scattered  through  a  sphere
(5)  of  radius  8'09  .  10^®  kilometres,  and  that  there  are  no  stars  out-
side this  sphere,  let  us  find  what  the  total  amount  of  starlight
would  be  in  comparison  with  sunlight.  Let  n  be  the  number  per
unit  of  volume,  of  an  assemblage  of  globes  of  radius  a  scattered
uniformly  through  a  vast  space.  The  number  in  a  shell  of  radius
q  and  thickness  dq  will  be  n .  ^tirq-dq,  and  the  sum  of  their
apparent  areas  as  seen from the centre  will be

—  n .  4>7rq'dq  or  n .  '^ir^a-dq.

TOTAL APPARENT AREA OF STARS.  275

Hence  by  integrating  from  q  =  0  to  q  =  r  we  find  Molar.

n.47r2aV (8)

for  the  sum  of  their  apparent  areas. Now  if  N  be  the  total  number
in  the  sphere  of  radius  r  we  have

»=^/(t'^') w-

Hence  (8)  becomes  N .Sv  (-]  ;  and  if  we  denote  by  a  the  ratio  of
the  sum  of  the  apparent  area.s  of  all  the  globes  to  47r  we  have

n  =

4 \r) (!«)•

(1  —  «)/«,  very  approximately  equal  to  1/a,  is  the  ratio  of  the
apparent  area  not  occupied  by  stars  to  the  sum  of  the  apparent
areas  of  all  their  discs.  Hence  a.  is  the  ratio  of  the  apparent
brightness  of  our  star-lit  sky  to  the  brightness  of  our  sun's  disc.
Cases  of  two  stars  eclipsing  one  another  wholly  or  partially  would,
with  our  supposed  values  of  r  and  a,  be  so  extremely  rare  that
they  would  cause  a  merely  negligible  deduction  from  the  total  of
(10),  even  if  calculated  according  to  pure  geometrical  optics.  This
negligible  deduction  would  be  almost  wholly  annulled  by  diffraction,
which  makes  the  total  light  from  two  stars  of  which  one  is  eclipsed
by  the  other,  very  nearly  the  same  as  if  the  distant  one  were  seen
clear  of  the  nearer,

§  19. According  to  our  supposition  of  §  18,  we  have  iV^=  10^

a  —  7.10'' kilometres, and therefore r/a  =  4*4  .  10'". Hence

by  (10)

a  =  3-87. 10-'^ (11).

This  exceedingly  small  ratio  will  help  us  to  test  an  old  and
celebrated  hypothesis  that  if  we  could  see  far  enough  into  space
the  whole  sky  would  be  seen  occupied  with  discs  of  stars  all  of
perhaps  the  same  brightness  as  our  own  sun,  and  that  the
reason  why  the  whole  of  the  night-sky  and  day-sky  is  not  as
bright  as  the  sun's  disc  is  that  light  suffers  absorption  in
travelling  through  space.  Remark  that  if  we  vary  r  keeping
the  density  of  the  matter  the  same,  N  varies  as  the  cube  of  r.
Hence  by  (10)  a  varies  simply  as  ?■;  and  therefore  to  make  a
even as great as 387/100, or, say,  the  sum  of  the apparent

18—2

276  LECTURE XVI.

areas  of  discs  4  per  cent,  of  the  whole  sky,  the  radius  must  be
10". r  or  S'OO.IO^''  kilometres.  Now  light  travels  at  the  rate
of  300,000  kilometres  per  second  or  9-45.10^-  kilometres  per  year.
Hence  it  would  take  3-27.10"  or  about  3:^.10^*  years  to  travel
from  the  outlying  suns  of  our  great  sphere  to  the  centre.  Now
we  have  irrefragable  dynamics  proving  that  the  whole  life  of
our  sun  as  a  luminary  is  a  very  moderate  number  of  million
years,  probably  less  than  50  million,  possibly  between  50  and  100.
To  be  very  liberal,  let  us  give  each  of  our  stars  a  life  of  a  hundred
million  years  as  a  luminary.  Thus  the  time  taken  by  light  to
travel  from  the  outlying  stars  of  our  sphere  to  the  centre  would
be  about  three  and  a  quarter  million  times  the  life  of  a  star.
Hence,  if  all  the  stars  through  our  vast  sphere  commenced
shining  at  the  same  time,  three  and  a  quarter  million  times  the
life  of  a  star  would  pass  before  the  commencement  of  light
reaching  the  earth  from  the  outlying  stars,  and  at  no  one
instant  would  light  be  reaching  the  earth  from  more  than  an
excessively  small  proportion  of  all  the  stars.  To  make  the  whole
sky  aglow  with  the  light  of  all  the  stars  at  the  same  time  the
commencements  of  the  different  stars  must  be  timed  earlier
and  earlier  for  the  more  and  more  distant  ones,  so  that  the  time
of  the  arrival  of  the  light  of  every  one  of  them  at  the  earth
may  fall  within  the  durations  of  the  lights  at  the  earth  of  all
the  others !  Our  supposition  of  uniform  density  of  distribution
is,  of  course,  quite  arbitrary;  and  (§§  13,  15  above)  we  ought,  in
the  greater  sphere  of  §  19,  to  assume  the  density  much  smaller
than  in  the  smaller  sphere  (5);  and  in  fact  it  seems  that  there
may  not  be  enough  of  stars  (bright  or  dark)  to  make  a  total  of
star-disc-area  more  than  10"^-  or  10~"  of  the  whole  sky.  See
Appendix  D,  "  On  the  Clustering  of  Gravitational  Matter  in  any
"  part  of  the  Universe."

§  20.  To  understand  the  sparseness  of  our  ideal  distribution
of  1000  million  suns,  divide  the  total  volume  of  the  supposed
sphere  of  radius  r  (5)  by  10^  and  we  find  123"5.10*'  cubic  kilo-
metres as  the  volume  per  sun.  Taking  the  cube  root  of  this
we  find  4"98 .  10"  kilometres  as  the  edge  of  the  corresponding
cube.  Hence  if  the  stars  were  arranged  exactly  in  cubic  order
with  our  sun  at  one  of  the  eight  corners  belonging  to  eight
neighbouring  cubes,  his  six nearest neighbours  would  be  each

NUMBER  OF VISIBLE STARS.  277

at  distance  i"98.10'^  kilometres;  wliich  is  the  distance  corre- Molar,
spending  to  parallax  0"  62.  Our  sun  seen  at  so  great  a  distance
would  probably  be  seen  as  a  star  of  something  between  the  first
and  second  magnitude.  For  a  moment  suppose  each  of  our
1000  million  suns,  while  of  the  same  mass  as  our  own  sun,  to
have  just  such  brightness  as  to  make  it  a  star  of  the  first  magni-
tude at  distance  corresponding  to  parallax  1"'0.  The  brightness
at  distance  r  (5)  corresponding  to  parallax  0"'001  would  be  one
one-millionth  of  this,  and  the  most  distant  of  our  assumed
stars  would  be  visible  through  powerful  telescopes  as  stars  of  the
sixteenth  magnitude.  Newcomb  {Popular  Astronomy,  1883,
p.  424)  estimated  between  30  and  50  million  as  the  number  of
stars  visible  in  modern  telescopes.  Young  {General  Astronomy,
p.  448)  goes  beyond  this  reckoning  and  estimates  at  100  million
the  total  number  of  stars  visible  through  the  Lick  telescope.
This  is  only  the  tenth  of  our  assumed  number.  It  is  never-
theless probable  that  there  may  be  as  many  as  1000  million
stars  within  the  distance  r  (5) ;  but  many  of  them  may  be
extinct  and  dark,  and  nine-tenths  of  them  though  not  all  dark
may  be  not  bright  enough  to  be  seen  by  us  at  their  actual
distances.

§  21.  I  need  scarcely  repeat  that  our  assumption  of  equable
distribution  is  perfectly  arbitrary.  How  far  from  being  like  the
truth  is  illustrated  by  Herschel's  view  of  the  form  of  the  universe
as  shown  in  Newcomb's  Popular  Astronomy,  p.  469.  It  is  quite
certain  that  the  real  visible  stars  within  the  distance  r  (5)  from
us  are  very  much  more  crowded  in  some  parts  of  the  whole
sphere  than  in  others.  It  is  also  certain  that  instead  of  being
all  equally  luminous  as  we  have  taken  them,  they  differ  largely
in  this  respect  from  one  another.  It  is  also  certain  that  the
masses  of  some  are  much  greater  than  the  masses  of  others ;
as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  table,  which  has  been  compiled
for  me  by  Professor  Becker  from  Andre's  Traite  d/Astronomie
Stellaire,  showing  the  sums  of  the  masses  of  the  components  of
some  double  stars,  and  the  data  from  which  these  have  been
determined.

278

LECTURE XVI.

Parallax

i  Major  axis

Period,
in

years

M+M',

in  units

of  the

sun's  mass

in  seconds

in  terms  of
semi-major

axis  of
earth's  orbit

a  Centauri

0-75
0-44
0-39
0-27
0-19
0'15
0-15

18-17
29-48
8-31
5-84
5-72
8-20
4-60

25

68
24
4
28
39
30

84

783

52

40

176

190

■ 88

2-0
0-5
3-2
6-3
0-9
4-3
3-6

61  Cygui

Sirius

Procyon

0"  Eridani

■q  Cassiopeia

p  Ophiuchi

-y  Virginis

0-05 1
0-02  +

3-99
1-98

79* 1 194
102  * 407

15-0
6-5

7  Leonis

§  22.  There  may  also  be  a  large  amount  of  matter  in  many
stars  outside  the  sphere  of  3.10^"  kilometres  radius,  but  however
much  matter  there  may  be  outside  it,  it  seems  to  be  made  highly
probable  by  §§  11 — 21,  that  the  total  quantity  of  matter  within
it  is  greater  than  100  million  times,  and  less  than  2000  million
times,  the  sun's  mass.

I  wish,  in  conclusiou,  to  express  my  thanks  to  Sir  Norman
Lockyer,  to  the  Astronomer  Royal  Mr  Christie,  to  Sir  Robert
Ball,  and  to  Prof  Becker,  for  their  kindness  in  taking  much
trouble  to  give  me  information  in  respect  to  astronomical  data,
which  has  proved  most  useful  to  me  in  §|  11 — 21  above.

*  From  spectroscopic  observations  by  Belopolsky  of  Poulcowa,  combined  with
elements  of  orbit.

t  Parallax  calculated  from  dynamical  determinations  of  ratio  of  semi-major
axis  of  double-star's  orbit  to  semi-major  axis  of  earth's  orbit.

LECTURE XVII.

Thursday,  October  16,  3.30  p.m. Altered  (1901,  1902)  to
extension  of  Lee.  XVI.

§  23.  Hitherto  in  all  our  views  we  have  seen  nothing  of  abso-  Molecular,
lute  dimensions  in  molecular  structure,  and  have  been  satisfied  to
consider  the  distance  between  neighbouring  molecules  in  gases,
or  liquids,  or  crystals,  or  non-crystalline  solids  to  be  very  small  in
comparison  with  the  shortest  wave-length  of  light  with  which  we
have  been  concerned.  Even  in  respect  to  dispersion,  that  is  to
say,  difference  of  propagational  velocity  for  different  wave-lengths,
it  has  not  been  necessary  for  us  to  accept  Cauchy's  doctrine  that
the  spheres  of  molecular  action  are  comparable  with  the  wave-
length. We  have  seen  that  dispersion  can  be,  and  probably  in
fact  is,  truly  explained  by  the  periods  of  our  waves  of  light  being
not  infinitely  great  in  comparison  with  some  of  the  periods  of
molecular  vibration ;  and,  with  this  view,  the  dimensions  of
molecular  structure  might,  so  far  as  dispersion  is  concerned,  be  as
small  as  we  please  to  imagine  them,  in  comparison  with  wave-
lengths of  light.  Nevertheless  it  is  exceedingly  interesting  and
important  for  intelligent  study  of  molecular  structures  and  the
dynamics  of  light,  to  have  some  well-founded  understanding  in
respect  to  probable  distances  between  centres  of  neighbouring
molecules  in  all  kinds  of  ponderable  matter,  while  for  the  present
at  all  events  we  regard  ether  as  utterly  continuous  and  structure-
less. It  may  be  found  in  some  future  time  that  ether  too  has  a
molecular  structure,  perhaps  much  finer  than  any  structure  of
ponderable  matter ;  but  at  present  we  neither  see  nor  imagine
any  reason  for  believing  ether  to  be  other  than  continuous  and
homogeneous  through  infinitely  small  contiguous  portions  of
space  void  of  other  matter  than  ether.

§  24. The  first  suggestion,  so  far  as  we  now  know,  for  estimat-
ing the  dimensions  of  molecular  structure  in  ordinary  matter  was

280  LECTURE XVII.

lolecular.  given  in  1805  by  Thomas  Young*,  as  derived  from  his  own  and
Laplace's  substantially  identical  theories  of  capillary  attraction.
In  this  purely  dynamical  theory  he  found  that  the  range  of  the
attractive  force  of  cohesion  is  equal  to  ST/K;  where  T  denotes
the  now  well-known  Young's  tension  of  the  free  surface  of  a
liquid,  and  K  denotes  a  multiple  integral  which  appears  in
Laplace's  formulas  and  is  commonly  now  referred  to  as  Laplace's
K,  as  to  the  meaning  of  which  there  has  been  much  controversy
in  the  columns  of  Nature  and  elsewhere.  Lord  Rayleigh  in  his
article  of  1890,  "  On  the  Theory  of  Surface  Forces-f,"  gives  the
following  very  interesting  statement  in  respect  to  Young's  estimate
of  molecular  dimensions  : —

§  25.  "  One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  Young's  treatise
"  is  his  estimate  of  the  range  a  of  the  attractive  force  on  the  basis
"  of  the  relation  T  =  ^aK.  Never  once  have  I  seen  it  alluded  to  ;
"  and  it  is,  I  believe,  generally  supposed  that  the  first  attempt  of
"  the  kind  is  not  more  than  twenty  years  old.  Estimating  K  at
"  23000  atmospheres,  and  T  at  3  grains  per  inch.  Young  finds  that
" '  the  extent  of  the  cohesive  force  must  be  limited  to  about  the
"'250  millionth  of  an  inch  [10~*  cm.]';  and  he  continues,  'nor  is
" '  it  very  probable  that  any  error  in  the  suppositions  adopted  can
" '  possibly  have  so  far  invalidated  this  result  as  to  have  made  it

"'very  many  times  greater  or  less  than  the  truth' Young  con-

"  tinues : — '  Within  similar  limits  of  uncertainty,  we  may  obtain
'"something  like  a  conjectural  estimate  of  the  mutual  distance
" '  of  the  particles  of  vapours,  and  even  of  the  actual  magnitude
" '  of  the  elementary  atoms  of  liquids,  as  supposed  to  be  nearly  in
" '  contact  with  each  other ;  for  if  the  distance  at  which  the  force
" '  of  cohesion  begins  is  constant  at  the  same  temperature,  and  if
" '  the  particles  of  steam  are  condensed  when  they  approach  within
" '  this  distance,  it  follows  that  at  60°  of  Fahrenheit  the  distance
" '  of  the  particles  of  pure  aqueous  vapour  is  about  the  250
" '  millionth  of  an  inch ;  and  since  the  density  of  this  vapour  is
" '  about  one  sixty  thousandth  of  that  of  water,  the  distance  of  the
"  '  particles  must  be  about  forty  times  as  great ;  consequently  the
" '  mutual  distance  of  the  particles  of  water  must  be  about  the

*  "On  the  Cohesion  of  Fluids,"  rhU.  Trans.  1805;  Collected  Works,  Vol.  i.  p.  461.
t  Phil.  Mag.  Vol.  xxx.  1890,  p.  474.

EARLIEST ESTIMATES OF MOLECULAR DIMENSIONS.  281

"'ten thousand millionth of  an inch*  ['025  x  10~^  cm.]. It  is  Molecular,
" '  true  that  the  result  of  this  calculation  will  differ  considerably

"'according to  the  temperature  of  the  substances  compared

"  '  This  discordance  does  not  however  wholly  invalidate  the  general
"  '  tenour  of  the  conclusion... and  on  the  whole  it  appears  tolerably
" '  safe  to  conclude  that,  whatever  errors  may  have  affected  the
" '  determination,  the  diameter  or  distance  of  the  particles  of
" '  water  is  between  the  two  thousand  and  the  ten  thousand
"  '  millionth  of  an  inch'  [between  •125  x  10~^  and  '025  x  10~^  of  a
"  cm.].  This  passage,  in  spite  of  its  great  interest,  has  been  so
"  completely  overlooked  that  I  have  ventured  briefly  to  quote  it,
"  although  the  question  of  the  size  of  atoms  lies  outside  the  scope
"  of  the  present  paper."

§  26.  The  next  suggestion,  so  far  as  I  know,  for  estimating  the
dimensions  of  molecular  structure  in  ordinary  matter,  is  to  be
found  in  an  extract  from  a  letter  of  my  own  to  Joule  on  the
contact  electricity  of  metals,  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical  Societyf,  Jan.  21,  1862,
which  contains  the  following  passage : — "  Zinc  and  copper  con-
"  nected  by  a  metallic  arc  attract  one  another  from  any  distance.
"  So  do  platinum  plates  coated  with  oxygen  and  hydrogen  respec-
"  tively.  I  can  now  tell  the  amount  of  the  force,  and  calculate
"  how  great  a  proportion  of  chemical  affinity  is  used  up  electrically,
"  before  two  such  discs  come  within  1/1000  of  an  inch  of  one
"  another,  or  any  less  distance  down  to  a  limit  within  which
"  molecular  heterogeneousness  becomes  sensible.  This  of  course
"  will  give  a  definite  limit  for  the  sizes  of  atoms,  or  rather,  as  I  do
"  not  believe  in  atoms,  for  the  dimensions  of  molecular  structures."
The  theory  thus  presented  is  somewhat  more  fully  developed  in  a
communication  to  Nature  in  March  1870,  on  "The  Size  of  Atoms;):,"
and  in  a  Friday  evening  lecture§  to  the  Royal  Institution  on  the

*  Young  here,  curiously  insensible  to  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  supposes  the
molecules  of  vapour  of  water  at  60°  Fahr.  to  be  within  touch  (or  direct  mutual
action)  of  one  another;  and  thus  arrives  at  a  much  finer-grainedness  for  liquid
water  than  he  would  have  found  if  he  had  given  long  enough  free  paths  to  molecules
of  the  vapour  to  account  for  its  approximate  fulfilment  of  Boyle's  law.

t  Reproduced  as  Art.  22  of  my  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism.

X  Republished  as  Appendix  (F)  in  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,
Part  II.  Second  Edition.

§  Republished  in  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,  Vol.  i.

282  LECTURE XVII.

jlecular.  same  subject  on  February  3,  1883;  but  to  illustrate  it,  information
was  wanting  regarding  the  heat  of  combination  of  copper  and
zinc.  Experiments  by  Professor  Roberts- Austen  and  by  Dr  A.
Gait,  made  within  the  last  four  years,  have  supplied  this  want ;
and  in  a  postscript  of  Feljruary  1898  to  a  Friday  evening  lecture
on  "  Contact  Electricity,"  which  I  gave  at  the  Royal  Institution
on  May  21,  1897,  I  was  able  to  say  "We  cannot  avoid  seeing
"  molecular  structures  beginning  to  be  perceptible  at  distances  of
"  the  hundred-millionth  of  a  centimetre,  and  we  may  consider  it
"  as  highly  probable  that  the  distance  from  any  point  in  a  molecule
"  of  copper  or  zinc  to  the  nearest  corresponding  point  of  a  neighbour-
"  iug  molecule  is  less  than  one  one-hundred-millionth,  and  greater
"than  one  one-thousand-millionth  of  a  centimetre";  and  also  to
confirm  amply  the  following  definite  statement  which  I  had
given  in  my  Nature  article  (1870)  already  referred  to: — "Plates
"  of  zinc  and  copper  of  a  three  hundred-millionth  of  a  centimetre
"  thick,  placed  close  together  alternately,  form  a  near  approxima-
"  tion  to  a  chemical  combination,  if  indeed  such  thin  plates  could
"  be  made  without  splitting  atoms."

§  27.  In  that  same  article  thermodynamic  considerations  in
stretching  a  fluid  film  against  surface  tension  led  to  the  following
result : — "  The  conclusion  is  unavoidable,  that  a  water-film  falls
"  off  greatly  in  its  contractile  force  before  it  is  reduced  to  a  thick-
"  ness  of  a  two  hundred-millionth  of  a  centimetre.  It  is  scarcely
"  possible,  upon  any  conceivable  molecular  theory,  that  there  can
"  be  any  considerable  falling  off  in  the  contractile  force  as  long  as
"  there  are  several  molecules  in  the  thickness.  It  is  therefore
"  probable  that  there  are  not  several  molecules  in  a  thickness  of  a
"  two-hundred-millionth  of  a  centimetre  of  water."  More  detailed
consideration  of  the  work  done  in  stretching  a  water-film  led  me
in  my  Royal  Institution  Lecture  of  1883  to  substitute  one  one-
hundred-millionth  of  a  centimetre  for  one  two-hundred-millionth
in  this  statement.  On  the  other  hand  a  consideration  of  the
large  black  spots  which  we  now  all  know  in  a  soap-bubble  or  soap-
film  before  it  bursts,  and  which  were  described  in  a  most  interest-
ing manner  by  Newton*,  gave  absolute  demonstration  that  the
film  retains its  tensile  strength in  the  black spot  "  where the

*  Newton's  Optics,  pix  187,  191,  Edition  1721,  Second  Book,  Part  i.:  quoted  in
my  Royal  Institution  Lecture,  Pup.  Lectures  and  Addresses,  Vol.  i.  p.  175.

REINOLD AND RUCKER, RONTGEN, RAYLEIGH.  283

"  thickness  is  clearly  much  less  than  1/60000  of  a  centimetre,  Molecular,
"this  being  the  thickness  of  the  dusky  white"  with  which  the
black  spot  is  bordered.  And  further  in  1883  Reinold  and
Rlicker's*  admirable  application  of  optical  and  electrical  methods
of  measurement  proved  that  the  thickness  of  the  black  film  in
Plateau's  "  liquide  glycerique"  and  in  ordinary  soap  solution  is
between  one  eight-hundred-thousa,ndth  of  a  centimetre  and  one
millionth  of  a  centimetre.  Thus  it  was  certain  that  the  soap-film
has  full  tensile  strength  at  a  thickness  of  about  a  millionth  of  a
centimetre,  and  that  between  one  millionth  and  one  one-hundred-
millionth  the  tensile  strength  falls  off  enormously.

§  28.  Extremely  interesting  in  connection  with  this  is  the
investigation,  carried  on  independently  by  Rontgen-f"  and  Ray-
leigh;}:  and  published  by  each  in  1890,  of  the  quantity  of  oil
spreading  over  water  per  unit  area  required  to  produce  a  sensible
disturbance  of  its  capillary  tension.  Both  experimenters  ex-
pressed results  in  terms  of  thickness  of  the  film,  calculated  as  if
oil  were  infinitely  homogeneous  and  therefore  structureless,  but
with  very  distinct  reference  to  the  certainty  that  their  films  were
molecular  structures  not  approximately  homogeneous.  Rayleigh
found  that  olive  oil,  spreading  out  rapidly  all  round  on  a  previously
cleaned  surface  of  water  from  a  little  store  carried  by  a  short
length  of  platinum  wire,  produced  a  perceptible  effect  on  little
floating  fragments  of  camphor  at  places  where  the  thickness  of
the  oil  was  10*6  x  10"*^  cm.,  and  no  perceptible  effect  where  the
thickness  was  8'1  x  10~*  cm.  It  will  be  highly  interesting  to
find,  if  possible,  other  tests  (optical  or  dynamical  or  electrical  or
chemical)  for  the  presence  of  a  film  of  oil  over  water,  or  of  films
of  various  liquids  over  solids  such  as  glass  or  metals,  demonstrat-
ing by  definite  effects  smaller  and  smaller  thicknesses.  Rcintgen,
using  ether  instead  of  camphor,  found  analogous  evidence  of  layers
5'6  X  10~^  cm.  thick.  It  will  be  very  interesting  for  example  to
make  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  electric  conductance  of  a
clean  rod  of  white  glass  of  highest  insulating  quality  surrounded
by  an atmosphere  containing measured  quantities  of  vapour  of

*  "  On  the  Limiting  Thickness  of  Liquid  Films,"  Roy.  Soc.  Proc.  April  19,  1883;
Phil.  Trans.  1883,  Part  ii.  p.  645.

t  Wied.  Ann.  Vol.  xli.  1890,  p.  321.

+  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Vol.  xlvii.  1890,  p.  364.

284  LECTURE XVII.

olecular.  water.  When  the  glass  is  at  any  temperature  above  the  dew-
point  of  the  vapour,  it  presents,  so  far  as  we  know,  no  optical
appearance  to  demonstrate  the  pressure  of  condensed  vapour  of
water  upon  it  :  but  enormous  differences  of  electric  conductance,
according  to  the  density  of  the  vapour  surrounding  it,  prove  the
presence  of  water  upon  the  surface  of  the  glass,  or  among  the
interstices  between  its  molecules,  of  which  electric  conductance
is  the  only  evidence.  Rayleigh  has  himself  expressed  this  view  in  a
recent  article,  "  Investigations  on  Capillarity"  in  the  Philosophical
Magazine*  From  the  estimates  of  the  sizes  of  molecules  of  argon,
hydrogen,  oxygen,  carbonic  oxide,  carbonic  acid,  ethylene  (C2H4),
and  other  gases,  which  we  shall  have  to  consider  (§  47  below),  we
may  judge  that  in  all  probability  if  we  had  eyes  microscopic
enough  to  see  atoms  and  molecules,  we  should  see  in  those  thin
films  of  Rayleigh  and  Rontgen  merely  molecules  of  oil  lying
at  greater  and  less  distances  from  one  another,  but  at  no  part
of  the  film  one  molecule  of  oil  lying  above  another  or  resting
on  others.

§  29.  A  very  important  and  interesting  method  of  estimating
the  size  of  atoms,  founded  on  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  was
first,  so  far  as  I  know,  thought  of  by  Loschmidtj*  in  Austria  and
Johnstone  Stoney  in  Ireland.  Substantially  the  same  method
occurred  to  myself  later  and  was  described  in  Nature,  March  1870,
in  an  article  +  on  the  "  Size  of  Atoms  "  already  referred  to,  §  26
above,  from  which  the  quotations  in  §§  29,  30  are  taken.

"  The  kinetic  theory  of  gases  suggested  a  hundred  years  ago
"  by  Daniel  Bernoulli  has,  during  the  last  quarter  of  a  century,
"  been  worked  out  by  Herapath,  Joule,  Clausius,  and  Maxwell
"  to  so  great  perfection  that  we  now  find  in  it  satisfactory^  ex-
"planations  of  all  non-chemical"  and  non-electrical  "properties  of
"  gases.  However  difficult  it  may  be  to  even  imagine  what  kind
'*  of  thing  the  molecule  is,  we  may  regard  it  as  an  established
"  truth  of  science  that  a  gas  consists  of  moving  molecules  dis-
"  turbed  from  rectilinear  paths  and  constant  velocities  by  collisions
"  or  mutual  influences,  so  rare  that  the  mean  length  of  nearly

* Phil.  Mag.  Oct.  1899,  p.  337.

+  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Vienna  Academy,  Oct.  12,  1865,  p.  395.
X  Reprinted as  Appendix  (F) in Thomson  and  Tait's Natural  Philosophy,
Part  11.  p.  499.

LOSCHMIDT, JOHNSTONE STONEY, KELVIN.  285

"  rectilinear  portions  of  the  path  of  each  molecule  is  many  times  Molecular

"  greater than the average distance from the centre of each

"  molecule  to  the  centre  of  the  molecule  nearest  it  at  any  time.

"  If,  for  a  moment,  we  suppose  the  molecules  to  be  hard  elastic

"globes all of  one  size,  influencing  one  another  only  through

"  actual  contact,  we  have  for  each  molecule  simply  a  zigzag  path

"  composed  of  rectilinear  portions,  with  abrupt  changes  of  direc-

"  tion But  we  cannot  believe  that  the  individual  molecules

"  of  gases  in  general,  or  even  of  any  one  gas,  are  hard  elastic
"globes.  Any  two  of  the  moving  particles  or  molecules  must  act
"  upon  one  another  somehow,  so  that  when  they  pass  very  near
"  one  another  they  shall  produce  considerable  deflexion  of  the
"  path  and  change  in  the  velocity  of  each.  This  mutual  action
"  (called  force)  is  different  at  different  distances,  and  must  vary,
"  according  to  variations  of  the  distance,  so  as  to  fulfil  some
"  definite  law.  If  the  particles  were  hard  elastic  globes  acting
"  upon  one  another  only  by  contact,  the  law  of  force  would  be
"...zero  force  when  the  distance  from  centre  to  centre  exceeds
"  the  sum  of  the  radii,  and  infinite  repulsion  for  any  distance  less
"  than  the  sum  of  the  radii.  This  hypothesis,  with  its  '  hard  and
"'fast'  demarcation  betAveen  no  force  and  infinite  force,  seems  to
"  require  mitigation."  Boscovich's  theory  supplies  clearly  the
needed  mitigation.

§  30.  To  fix  the  ideas  we  shall  still  suppose  the  force  absolutely
zero  when  the  distance  between  centres  exceeds  a  definite  limit,  X ;
but  when  the  distance  is  less  than  \,  we  shall  suppose  the  force
to  begin  either  attractive  or  repulsive,  and  to  come  gradually  to
a  repulsion  of  very  great  magnitude,  with  diminution  of  distance
towards  zero.  Particles  thus  defined  I  call  Boscovich  atoms.  We
thus  call  ^\  the  radius  of  the  atom,  and  X  its  diameter.  We
shall  say  that  two  atoms  are  in  collision  when  the  distance
between  their  centres  is  less  than  X.  Thus  "  two  molecules  in
"  collision  will  exercise  a  mutual  repulsion  in  virtue  of  which  the
"  distance  between  their  centres,  after  being  diminished  to  a  mini-
"  mum,  will  begin  to  increase  as  the  molecules  leave  one  another.
"  This  minimum  distance  would  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  radii,
"  if  the  molecules  were  infinitely  hard  elastic  spheres ;  but  in
"  reality  we  must  suppose  it  to  be  very  different  in  different
"  collisions."

286  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular.  §  31.  The  essential  quality  of  a  gas  is  that  the  straight  line
of  uniform  motion  of  each  molecule  between  collisions,  called
the  free  path,  is  long  in  comparison  with  distances  between  centres
during  collision.  In  an  ideal  perfect  gas  the  free  path  would
be  infinitely  long  in  comparison  with  distances  between  centres
during  collision,  but  infinitely  short  in  comparison  with  any  length
directly  perceptible  to  our  senses ;  a  condition  which  requires  the
number  of  molecules  in  any  perceptible  volume  to  be  exceedingly
great.  We  shall  see  that  in  gases  which  at  ordinary  pressures
and  temperatures  approximate  most  closely,  in  respect  to  com-
pressibility, expansion  by  heat,  and  specific  heats,  to  the  ideal
perfect  gas,  as,  for  example,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbon-
monoxide,  the  free  path  is  probably  not  more  than  about  one
hundred  times  the  distance  between  centres  during  collisions,
and  is  little  short  of  10~^cm.  in  absolute  magnitude.  Although
these  moderate  proportions  suffice  for  the  well-known  exceedingly
close  agreement  with  the  ideal  gaseous  laws  presented  by  those
real  gases,  we  shall  see  that  large  deviations  from  the  gaseous
laws  are  presented  with  condensations  sufficient  to  reduce  the  free
paths  to  two  or  three  times  the  diameter  of  the  molecule,  or  to
annul  the free paths  altogether.

§  32.  It  is  by  experimental  determinations  of  diffusivity  that
the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  affords  its  best  means  for  estimating
the  sizes  of  atoms  or  molecules  and  the  number  of  molecules
in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  gas  at  any  stated  density.  Let  us
therefore  now  consider  carefully  the  kinetic  theory  of  these
actions,  and  with  them  also,  the  properties  of  thermal  conductivity
and  viscosity  closely  related  to  them,  as  first  discovered  and
splendidly  developed  by  Clausius  and  Clerk Maxwell.

§  33.  According  to  their  beautiful  theory,  we  have  three
kinds  of  diffusion  ;  diffusion  of  molecules,  diffusion  of  energy,  and
diffusion  of  momentum.  Even  in  solids,  such  as  gold  and  lead,
Roberts-Austen  has  discovered  molecular  diffusion  of  gold  into
lead  and  lead  into  gold  between  two  pieces  of  the  metals  when
pressed  together.  But  the  rate  of  diffusion  shown  by  this  ad-
mirable discovery  is  so  excessively  slow  that  for  most  purposes,
scientific  and  practical,  we  may  disregard  wandering  of  any
molecule  in  any  ordinary  solid  to  places  beyond  direct  influence  of

CLAUSIUS, MAXWELL.  287

its  immediate  neighbours.  In  an  elastic  solid  we  have  diffusion  Molecular
of  momentum  by  wave  motion,  and  diffusion  of  energy  consti-
tuting the  conduction  of  heat  through  it.  These  diffusions  are
effected  solely  by  the  communication  of  energy  from  molecule  to
molecule  and  are  practically  not  helped  at  all  by  the  diffusion  of
molecules.  In  liquids  also,  although  there  is  thorough  molecular
diffusivity,  it  is  excessively  slow  in  comparison  with  the  two  other
diffusivities,  so  slow  that  the  conduction  of  heat  and  the  diffusion
of  momentum  according  to  viscosity  are  not  practically  helped  by
molecular  diffusion.  Thus,  for  example,  the  thermal  diffusivity*
of  water  (002,  according  to  J.  T.  Bottomley's  first  investigation,
or  about  "OOlo-f-  according  to  later  experimenters)  is  several
hundred  times,  and  the  diffusivity  for  momentum  is  from  one  to
two  thousand  times,  the  diffusivity  of  water  for  common  salt,  and
other  salts  such  as  sulphates,  chlorides,  bromides,  and  iodides.

§  34.  We  may  regard  the  two  motional  diffusivities  of  a  liquid
as  being  each  almost  entirely  due  to  communication  of  motion  from
one  molecule  to  another.  This  is  because  every  molecule  is  always
under  the  'influence  of  its  neighbours  and  has  no  free  path.  When
a  liquid  is  rarefied,  either  gradually  as  in  Andrew's  experiments
showing  the  continuity  of  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states,  or
suddenly  as  in  evaporation,  the  molecules  become  less  crowded
and  each  molecule  gains  more  and  more  of  freedom.  When  the
density  is  so  small  that  the  straight  free  paths  are  great  in  com-
parison with  the  diameters  of  molecules,  the  two  motional  diffu-
sivities are  certainly  due,  one  of  them  to  carriage  of  energy,  and
the  other  to  carriage  of  monientum,  chiefly  by  the  free  rectilinear
motion  of  the  molecules  between  collisions.  Interchange  of
energy  or  of  momentum  between  two  molecules  during  collision
will  undoubtedly  to  some  degree  modify  the  results  of  mere
transport ;  and  we  might  expect  on  this  account  the  motional
diffusivities  to  be  approximately  equal  to,  but  each  somewhat
greater  than,  the  molecular  diffusivity.  If  this  view  were  correct,
it  would  follow  that,  in  a  homogeneous  gas  when  the  free  paths
are  long  in  comparison  with  the  diameters  of  molecules,  the
viscosity  is  equal  to  the  molecular  diffusivity  multiplied  by  the

*  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Vol,  iii.  p.  226. For  explanation  regarding  diffusi-
vity and  viscosity  see  same  volume,  pp.  428 — 435.

t  See  a  paper  by  Milner  and  Chattock,  Phil.  Mag.  Vol.  xlviii.  1899.

288  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  density,  and  the  thermal  conductivity  is  equal  to  the  molecular
diffusivity  multiplied  by  the  thermal  capacity  per  unit  bulk,
pressure  constant :  and  that  whatever  deviation  from  exactness  of
these  equalities  there  may  be,  would  be  in  the  direction  of  the
motional  diffusivities  being  somewhat  greater  than  the  molecular
diffusivity.  But  alas,  we  shall  see,  §  45  below,  that  hitherto
experiment  does  not  confirm  these  conclusions :  on  the  contrary
the  laminar  diffusivities  (or  diffusivities  of  momentum)  of  the
only  four  gases  of  which  molecular  diffusivities  have  been  de-
termined by  experiment,  instead  of  being  greater  than,  or  at
least  equal  to,  the  density  multiplied  by  the  molecular  diffusivity,
are  each  somewhat  less  than  three-fourths  of  the  amount  thus
calculated.

§  35.  I  see  no  explanation  of  this  deviation  from  what
seems  thoroughly  correct  theory.  Accurate  experimental  deter-
minations of  viscosities,  whether  of  gases  or  liquids,  are  easy  by
Graham's  transpiration al  method.  On  the  other  hand  even  roughly
approximate  experimental  determinations  of  thermal  diffusivities
are  exceedingly  difficult,  and  I  believe  none,  on  corre"ct  experi-
mental principles,  have  really  been  made*;  certainly  none  un-
vitiated  by  currents  of  the  gas  experimented  upon,  or  accurate
enough  to  give  any  good  test  of  the  theoretical  relation  between
thermal  and  material  diffusivities,  expressed  by  the  following
equation,  derived  from  the  preceding  verbal  statement  regarding
the  three  diffusivities  of  a  gas,

where  6  denotes  the  thermal  conductivity,  /j,  the  viscosity,  p  the
density,  Kp  the  thermal  capacity  per  unit  bulk  pressure  constant,
K  the  thermal  capacity  per  unit  mass  pressure  constant,  c  the
thermal  capacity  per  unit  mass  volume  constant,  and  k  the  ratio
of  the  thermal  capacity  pressure  constant  to  the  thermal  capacity
volume  constant. It  is  interesting  to  remark  how  nearly  theo-

*  So  far  as  I  know,  all  attempts  hitherto  made  to  determine  the  thermal  con-
ductivities of  gases  have  been  founded  on  observations  of  rate  of  communication  of
heat  between  a  thermometer  bulb,  or  a  stretched  metallic  wire  constituting  an
electric  resistance  thermometer,  and  the  walls  of  the  vessel  enclosing  it  and  the  gas
experimented  upon.  See  Wiedemann's  ^xnaiew,  1888,  Vol.  xxxiv.  p.  623,  and  1891,
Vol.  XLiv.  p.  177. For  other  references,  see  O.  E.  Meyer,  §  107.

MOLECULAR DIFFUSIVITY.  289

retical  investigators*  have  come  to  the  relation  6=  kc/x;  Clausiiis  Molecular,
gave  d=^c/j,;  0.  E.  Meyer,  ^=  l-6027cyu,,  and  Maxwell,  d=^c/j,.
Maxwell's  in  fact  is  ^  =  kcfu,  for  the  case  of  a  monatomic  gas.

§  36.  To  understand  exactly  what  is  meant  by  molecular
diffusivity,  consider  a  homogeneous  gas  between  two  infinite
parallel  planes,  GGG  and  RRR,  distance  a  apart,  and  let  it  be
initially  given  in  equilibrium  ;  that  is  to  say,  with  equal  numbers
of  molecules  and  equal  total  kinetic  energies  in  equal  volumes,
and  with  integral  of  component  momentum  in  any  and  every
direction,  null.  Let  N  be  the  number  of  molecules  per  unit
volume.  Let  every  one  of  the  molecules  be  marked  either  green
or  red,  and  whenever  a  red  molecule  strikes  the  plane  GGG,  let  its
marking  be  altered  to  green,  and,  whenever  a  green  molecule
strikes  RRR,  let  its  marking  be  altered  to  red.  These  markings
are  not  to  alter  in  the  slightest  degree  the  mass  or  shape  or  elastic
quality  of  the  molecules,  and  they  do  not  disturb  the  equilibrium
of  the  gas  or  alter  the  motion  of  any  one  of  its  particles;  they
are  merely  to  give  us  a  means  of  tracing  ideally  the  history  of  any
one  molecule  or  set  of  molecules,  moving  about  and  colliding  with
other  molecules  according  to  the  kinetic  nature  of  a  gas.

§  37.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  initial  distribution  of  the
greens  and  reds,  it  is  clear  that  ultimately  there  must  be  a  regular
transition  from  all  greens  at  the  plane  GGG  and  all  reds  at  the
plane  RRR,  according  to  the  law

where  g  and  ?•  denote  respectively  the  number  of  green  molecules
and  of  red  molecules  per  unit  volume  at  distance  x  trom  the
plane  RRR.  In  this  condition  of  statistical  equilibrium,  the
total  number  of  molecules  crossing  any  intermediate  parallel
plane  from  the  direction  GGG  towards  RRR  will  be  equal  to  the
number  crossing  from  RRR  towards  GGG  in  the  same  time ;  but
a  larger  number  of  green  molecules  will  cross  towards  RRR  than
towards  GGG,  and,  by  an  equal  difference,  a  larger  number  of  red
molecules  will  cross  towards  GGG  than  towards  RRR.  If  we
denote  this  difference  per  unit  area  per  unit  time  by  QN,  we  have

*  See  the  last  ten  lines  of  O.  E.  Meyer's  Look.
T.  L.  19

290  LECTURE XVII,

Molecular,  for  what  I  call  the  material  diffusivity  (called  by  Maxwell,  "  co-
efficient of  diffusion"),

D=^Qa (2).

We  may  regard  this  equation  as  the  definition  of  diffusivity.
Remark  that  Q  is  of  dimensions  LT~^,  because  it  is  a  number  per
unit  of  area  per  unit  of  time  (which  is  of  dimensions  L~'T''^)
divided  by  N,  a  number  per  unit  of  bulk  (dimensions  L~^).  Hence
the  dimensions  of  a  diffusivity  are  UT~^\  and  practically  we
reckon  it  in  square  centimetres  per  second.

§  88.  Hitherto  we  have  supposed  the  Q  and  the  R  particles
to  be  of  exactly  the  same  quality  in  every  respect,  and  the  dif-
fusivity^ which  we  have  denoted  by  D  is  the  inter-diflfusivity  of
the  molecules  of  a  homogeneous  gas.  But  we  may  suppose  G  and
R  to  be  molecules  of  different  qualities ;  and  assemblages  of  G
molecules  and  of  R  molecules  to  be  two  different  gases.  Every-
thing described  above  will  apply  to  the  inter-diffusions  of  these
two  gases ;  except  that  the  two  differences  which  are  equal  when
the  red  and  green  molecules  are  of  the  same  quality  are  now  not
equal  or,  at  all  events,  must  not  without  proof  be  assumed  to
be  equal.  Let  us  therefore  denote  by  Q,jN  the  excess  of  the
number  of  G  molecules  crossing  any  intermediate  plane  towards
RRR  over  the  number  crossing  towards  GGG,  and  by  QrN  the
excess  of  the  number  of  R  molecules  crossing  towards  GGG  above
that  crossing  towards  RRR.  We  have  now  two  different  dififusivities
of  which  the  mean  values  through  the  whole  range  between  the
bounding  planes  are  given  by  the  equations
B^  =  Q^a ;  D,.  =  Q,a ;
one  of  them,  Dg,  the  diffusivity  of  the  green  molecules,  and  the
other,  />,.,  the  diffusivity  of  the  red  molecules  through  the  hetero-
geneous mixture  in  the  circvmistances  explained  in  §  37.  We
must  not  now  assume  the  gradients  of  density  of  the  two  gases
to  be  uniform  as  expressed  by  (1)  of  §  37,  because  the  homogeneous-
ness  on  which  these  equations  depend  no  longer  exists.

§  39.  To  explain  all  this  practically*,  let,  in  the  diagram,  the
planes  GGG,  and  RRR,  be  exceedingly  thin  plates  of  dry  porous
material  such  as  the  fine  unglazed  earthenware  of  Graham's  experi-

*  For  a  practical  experiment  it  might  be  necessary  to  allow  for  the  difference  of
the  proportions  of  the  G  gas  on  the  two  sides  of  the  RRR  plate  and  of  the  R  gas
on  the  two  sides  of  the  GGG  plate.  This  would  be  exceedingly  difficult,  though
not  impossible,  in  practice. The  difficulty  is  analogous  to  that  of  allowing  for  the

INTER-DIFFUSION OF EQUAL AND SIMILAR MOLECULES. 291

ments. Instead  of  our  green  and  red  marked  molecules  of  the  same  Molecular.
kind,  let  us  have  two  gases,  which  we  shall  call  G  and  E,  supplied  in
abundance  at  the  middles  of  the  two  ends  of  a  non-porous  tube  of

G  G  G

R R^  R

< -s ^^ ^  ^-—>^  >

electric  resistances  of  the  connections  at  the  ends  of  a  stout  bar  of  metal  of  which
it  is  desired  to  measure  the  electric  resistance.  But  the  simple  and  accurate
"  potential  method "  by  which  the  difficulty  is  easily  and  thoroughly  overcome
in  the  electric  case  is  not  available  here.  I  do  not,  however,  put  forward  the
arrangement  described  in  the  text  as  an  eligible  plan  for  measuring  the  inter-
diffusivity  of  two  gases.  Even  if  there  were  no  other  difficulty,  the  quantities  of  the
two  pure  gases  required  to  realize  it  would  be  impracticably  great.

19—2

292  LECTURE XVIT.

Molecular,  glass  or  metal,  and  guided  to  flow  away  radially  in  contact  with
the  end-plates  as  indicated  in  the  diagram.  If  the  two  axial
supply-streams  of  the  two  pure  gases  are  sufficiently  abundant,
the  spaces  OGG,  RRR,  close  to  the  inner  sides  of  the  porous
end-plates  will  be  occupied  by  the  gases  G  and  R,  somewhat  nearly
pure.  They  could  not  be  rigorously  pure  even  if  the  velocities  of
the  scouring  gases  on  the  outer  sides  of  the  porous  end-plates
were  comparable  with  the  molecular  velocities  in  the  gases,  and
if  the  porous  plates  were  so  thin  as  to  have  only  two  or  three
molecules  of  solid  matter  in  their  thickness.  The  gases  in  contact
with  the  near  faces  of  the  porous  plates  would,  however,  probably
be  somewhat  approximately  pure  in  practice  with  a  practically
realizable  thinness  of  the  porous  plates,  if  a,  the  distance  between
the  two  plates,  is  not  less  than  five  or  six  centimetres  and  the
scouring  velocities  moderately,  but  not  impracticably,  great.
According  to  the  notation  of  §  37,  Qg  is  the  quantity  of  the  G  gas
entering  across  GGG  and  leaving  across  RRR  per  sec.  of  time  per
sq.  cm.  of  area ;  Qr  is  the  quantity  of  the  R  gas  entering  across
RRR  and  leaving  across  GGG  per  sec.  of  time  per  sq.  cm.  of  area ;
the  unit  quantity  of  either  gas  being  that  which  occupies  a  cubic
centimetre  in  its  entry  tube. The  equations

where  g  and  r  are  the  proportions  of  the  G  gas  at  R  and  of  the  R
gas  at  G,  define  the  average  diffusivities  of  the  two  gases  in  the
circumstances  in  which  they  exist  in  the  different  parts  of  the
length  a  between  the  end-plates.  This  statement  is  cautiously
worded  to  avoid  assuming  either  equal  values  of  the  diffusivities
of  the  two  gases  or  equality  of  the  diffusivity  of  either  gas  through-
out the  space  between  the  end-plates.  So  far  as  I  know  difference
of  diffusivity  of  the  two  gases  has  not  been  hitherto  suggested  by
any  writer  on  the  subject.  What  is  really  given  by  Loschmidt's
experiments,  §  43  below,  is  the  arithmetic  mean  of  the  two
diffusivities  Dg  and  D,..

§  40.  In  1877  O,  E.  Meyer  expressed  the  opinion  on  theoreti-
cal grounds,  which  seem  to  me  perfectly  valid,  that  the  inter-
diffusivity  of  two  gases  varies  according  to  the  proportions  of  the
two  gases  in  the  mixture.  In  the  1899  edition  of  his  Kinetic
Theory  of  Gases*  he  recalls  attention  to  this  view  and  quotes
results  of  various  experimenters,  Loschmidt,  Obermayer,  Waitz,
*  Baynes'  translation,  p.  264.

INTER-DIFFUSIVITY OF TWO GASES.  293

seeming  to  support  it,  but,  as  he  says,  not  quite  conclusively.  On  Molecular.
the  other  hand.  Maxwell's  theory  (§  41  below)  gives  inter-diffu-
sivity  as  independent  of  the  proportions  of  the  two  gases ;  and
only  a  single  expression  for  dififusivity,  which  seems  to  imply  that
the  two  diffusivities  are  equal  according  to  his  theory.  The
subject  is  of  extreme  difficulty  and  of  extreme  interest,  theoretical
and  practical;  and  thorough  experimental  investigation  is  greatly
to  be  desired.

§  41.  In  1873  Maxwell*  gave,  as  a  result  of  a  theoretical
investigation,  the  following  formula  which  expresses  the  inter-
diffusivity  (A2)  ^f  two  gases  independently  of  the  proportion  of  the
two  gases  in  any  part  of  the  mixture:  each  gas  being  supposed  to
consist  of  spherical  Boscovich  atoms  mutually  acting  according  to
the  law,  force  zero  for  all  distances  exceeding  the  sum  of  the  radii
(denoted  by  51.2)  and  infinite  repulsion  when  the  distance  between
their  centres  is  infinitely  little  less  than  this  distance  :

1 y ll\ \\\

where  lu^,  iv.,  are  the  masses  of  the  molecules  in  the  two  gases
in  terms  of  that  of  hydrogen  called  unity ;  V  is  the  square  root  of
the  mean  of  the  squares  of  the  velocities  of  the  molecules  in
hydrogen  at  0°  C;  and  N  is  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  cubic
centimetre  of  a  gas  (the  same  for  all  gases  according  to  Avogadro's
law)  at  0°  C.  and  standard  atmospheric  pressure.  I  find  the
following  simpler  formula  more  convenient

^-2V6k;?^(^-  +  ''='> <^>'

where  V^"^,  V./  are  the  mean  squares  of  the  molecular  velocities  of
the  two  gases  at  0°  C,  being  the  values  of  Spjp  for  the  two  gases,
or  three  times  the  squares  of  their  Newtonian  velocities  of  sound,
at  that  temperature.  For  brevity,  we  shall  call  mean  molecular
velocity  the  square  root  of  the  mean  of  the  squares  of  the
velocities  of  the  molecules.  The  same  formula  is,  of  course,
applicable  to  the  molecular  diffusivity  of  a  single  gas  by  taking
Vi  =  Fo  =  F  its  mean  molecular  velocity,  and  s\.i  =  s  the  diameter
of  its  molecules ;  so  that  we  have

i)=-^i:  ,3).

*  "  On  Loschmidt's  Experiments  on  Diffusion  in  relation  to  the  Kinetic  Theory
of  Gases,"  Nature,  Aug.  1873;  Scientific  Papers,  Vol.  11.  pp.  343 — 350.

294

LECTURE XVII.

Molecular.  §  42.  It  is  impossible  by  any  direct  experiment  to  find  the
molecular  ditfusivity  of  a  single  gas,  as  we  have  no  means  of
mprking  its  particles  in  the  manner  explained  in  §  36  above;  but
Maxwell's  theory  gives  us,  in  a  most  interesting  manner,  the
means  of  calculating  the  diffusivity  of  each  of  three  separate
gases  from  three  experiments  determining  the  inter-diffusivities
of  their  pairs.  From  the  inter-diffusivity  of  each  pair  determined
by  experiment  we  find,  by  (2)  §  41,  a  value  of  512^(2  '^SttN)  for
each  pair,  and  we  have  Sjo  =  ^  (si  +  Si)*  whence

Sl  =  5io  +  Si3  -  6'o3  ; So  =  Sjo  +  5o3  -  6'i3  ; Ss  =  Si3  +  5,3  -  Sio. . . . ,  .(1).

Calculating  thus  the  three  values  of  s  \/(2  VSTriV),  and  using
them  in  (3)  §  41,  we  find  the  molecular  diffusivities  of  the  three
separate  gases.

§  43.  In  two  communications*!-  to  the  Academy  of  Science
of  Vienna  in  1870,  Loschmidt  describes  experimental  determin-
ations of  the  inter-diffusivities  of  ten  pairs  of  gases  made,  by
a  well-devised  method,  with  great  care  to  secure  accuracy.  In
each  case  the  inter-diffusivity  determined  by  the  experiment
would  be,  at  all  events,  somewhat  approximately  the  mean  of  the
two  diffusivities,  §  39  above,  if  these  are  unequal.  The  results
reduced  to  0°  C.  and  standard  atmospheric  pressure,  and  multi-
plied by  2'78  to  reduce  from  Loschmidt's  square  metres  per  hour
to  the  now  usual  square  centimetres  per  second,  are  as  follows : —

Table  of  inter-diffusivities  D.

Pairs  of  gases

D

in  sq.  cms.  per  sec.

Ho, Oo

•7214

Ho, CO

•6422

Ho, COo

•5558

Oo, CO

•1802

Oo, COo

•1409

CO, COo

■1406

COo,  Air

•1423

COo,  NO

•0.,.84

COo,  CH4

•1587

SOo,  H,

•480'J

*  This  agrees  with  Maxwell's  equation  (4),  but  shows  his  equation  (6)  to  be
incorrect.

t  "  Experimental-Untersuchungen  iiber  die  Diffusion  von  Gasen  ohne  porose
Scheidewande,"  Sitz.  d.  k.  Akad.  d.  Wisseiisch.,  March  10  and  May  12,  1870.

loschmidt's  determinations  of  inter-diffusivities. 295

In  the  first  six  of  these,  each  of  the  four  gases  Ho,  O^,  CO,  COo  Molecular.
occurs  three  times,  and  we  have  four  sets  of  three  inter-diffusivities
giving  in  all  three  determinations  of  the  diffusivity  of  each  gas  as
follows  : —

Gases

O,  .
CO.
CO.,.

•(1)

•(2)
.(8)
.(4)

Pairs  of  gases  Dj

(12,  13,  23) 1-32

(12,  14,  24) 1-35

(13,  14,  34) 1-26

Pairs  of  gases  D.^

(12,  13,  23) 193

(12,  14,  24) 190

(23,  24,  34) -183

Mean  131

(12,  13,  23) -169

(13,  14,  34) 175

(23,  24,  34) 178

Mean  -189

^4

(12,  14,  24) -106

(13,  14,  34) Ill

(23,  24,  34) -109

Mean  "174

Mean  '109

Considering  the  great  difficulty  of  the  experimental  investiga-
tion, we  may  regard  the  agreements  of  the  three  results  for  each
separate  gas  as,  on  the  whole,  very  satisfactory,  both  in  respect  to
the  accuracy  of  Loschmidt's  experiments  and  the  correctness  of
Maxwell's  theory.  It  certainly  is  a  very  remarkable  achievement
of  theory  and  experiment  to  have  found  in  the  four  means  of  the
sets  of  three  determinations,  what  must  certainly  be  somewhat
close  approximations  to  the  absolute  values  for  the  four  gases,
hydrogen,  oxygen,  carbon-monoxide,  and  carbon-dioxide,  of  some-
thing seemingly  so  much  outside  the  range  of  experimental
observation,  as  the  inter-ditfusivity  of  the  molecules  of  a  separate
gas.

§  44.  Maxwell,  in  his  theoretical  writings  of  different  dates,
gave  two  very  distinct  views  of  the  inner  dynamics  of  viscosity  in
a  single  gas,  both  interesting,  and  each,  no  doubt,  valid.  In  one*,
viscous  action  is  shown  as  a  subsidence  from  an  "  instantaneous
rigidity  of  a  gas."  In  the  other-f*,  viscosity  is  shown  as  a  diffu-
sion of  momentum :  and  in  p.  347  of  his  article  quoted  in  |  41

*  Trans.  Roy.  Soc,  May  1866;  Scientific  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  p.  70.

+  "  Molecules,"  a  lecture  delivered  before  the  Brit.  Assoc,  at  Bradford,  Scientific
Papers,  Vol.  ii.  p.  378.  See  also  0.  E.  Meyer's  Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases  (Baynes'
trans.  1899),  §§  74—76.

296

LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  above  he  gives  as  from "the theory," but without  demonstra-
tion, a  formula  (5),  which,  taken  in  conjunction  with  (1),  makes

^  =  i)
P

•(1);

p  denoting  the  density,  /j,  the  viscosity,  and  D  the  molecular
diflfusivity,  of  any  single  gas.  On  the  other  hand,  in  his  1866
paper  he  had  given  formulas  making*

.(2).

^=•6481)

P

1 45.  Viewing  viscosity  as  explained  by  diffusion  of  momentum
we  may,  it  has  always  seemed  to  me  (§  34  above),  regard  (1)  as
approximately  true  for  any  gas,  monatomic,  diatomic,  or  polyatomic,
provided  only  that  the  mean  free  path  is  large  in  comparison  with
the  sum  of  the  durations  of  the  collisions.  Unfortunately  for  this
view,  however,  comparisons  of  Loschmidt's  excellent  experimental
determinations  of  diffusivity  with  undoubtedly  accurate  determin-
ations of  viscosity  from  Graham's  original  experiments  on  trans-
piration, and  more  recent  experiments  of  Obermayer  and  other
accurate  observers,  show  large  deviations  from  (1)  and  are  much
more  nearly  in  agreement  with  (2).  Thus  taking  -0000900,
•001430,  -001234,  001974  as  the  standard  densities  of  the  four
gases,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  carbon-monoxide,  and  carbon-dioxide,
and  multiplying  these  respectively  by  the  dififusivities  from
Loschmidt's  experiments  and  Maxwell's  theory,  we  have  the
following  comparison  with  Obermayer's  viscosities  at  0°  C  and
standard  pressure,  which  shows  the  discrepance  from  experiment
and  seeming  theory  referred  to  in  §  34.

Col.  1

Col.  2

Col.  3 Col.  4

Gas

Viscosity  calculated

by  Maxwell's  theory

from  Loschmidt's

difl'usivities

Viscosities  according
to  Obermayer

Katio  oi'  values  in

Col.  3  to  those

in  Col.  2

CO

CO.,

•000119
•000269
•000212
•000218

•0000822
•0001873
•0001630
•0001414

•691
•696
•769
•649

*  The  formula  for  viscosity  {Sci.  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  p.  68)  taken  with  the  formula
for  molecular  diffusivity  of  a  single  gas,  derived  from  the  formula  of  iuter-diffusivity

maxwell's  theory.  297

§  46. Leaving  this  discrepance  unexplained,  and  eliminating  Molecular.
D  between  (1)  of  §  44  and  (3)  of  §  41,  we  find  as  Maxwell's  latest
expression  of  the  theoretical  relation  between  number  of  molecules
per  cubic  centimetre,  diameter  of  the  molecules,  molecular  velocity,
density,  and  viscosity  of  a  single  gas,

Ns'  =  ^^  ^  =  -1629^ (1).

The  number  of  grammes  and  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  cubic
centimetre  being  respectively  p  and  N,  pjN  is  the  mass  of  one
molecule  in  grammes  ;  and  therefore,  denoting  this  by  in,  we  have

m  =  2\/3'7r^s^=  6-140  ^s^ (2).

In  these  formulas,  as  originally  investigated  by  Maxwell  for  the
case  of  an  ideal  gas  composed  of  hard  spherical  atoms,  s  is
definitely  the  diameter  of  the  atom,  and  is  the  same  at  all
temperatures  and  densities  of  the  gas.  When  we  apply  the
formulas  to  diatomic  or  polyatomic  gases,  or  to  a  monatomic  gas
consisting  of  spherical  atoms  whose  spheres  of  action  may  over-
lap more  or  less  in  collision  according  to  the  severity  of  the
impact,  6'  may  be  defined  as  the  diameter  which  an  ideal  hard
spherical  atom,  equal  in  mass  to  the  actual  molecule,  must  have  to
give  the  same  viscosity  as  the  real  gas,  at  any  particular  tem-
perature. This  being  the  rigorous  definition  of  s,  we  may  call  it
the  proper  mean  shortest  distance  of  inertial  centres  of  the  mole-
cules in  collision  to  give  the  true  viscosity ;  a  name  or  expression
which  helps  us  to  understand  the  thing  defined.

§  47.  For  the  ideal  gas  of  hard  spherical  atoms,  remembering
that  V  is  independent  of  the  density  and  varies  as  t^  {t  denoting
absolute  temperature),  §  46  (2)  proves  that  the  viscosity  is  inde-
pendent of  the  density  and  varies  approximately  as  t^.  Rayleigh's
experimental  determinations  of  the  viscosity  of  argon  at  different
temperatures  show  that  for  this  monatomic  gas  the  viscosity  varies
as  t'^^^ ;  hence  §  46  (2)  shows  that  s-  varies  as  t~'^^^,  and  therefore
s  varies  as  t~'^'^.  Experimental  determinations  by  Obermayer*  of
viscosities  and  their  rates  of  variation  with  temperature  for  car-
bonic acid,  ethylene,  ethylene-chloride,  and  nitrous  oxide,  show

IX A
of  two  gases  of  equal  densities,  gives  —r-  =  — f- ,  which  is  equal  to  "e-lS  according  to

pD oA^

the  values  of  A^  and  A^  shown  in  p.  42  of  Vol.  ii.,  Sci.  Papers.

*  Obermayer,  Wieii.  Akad.  1876,  Mar.  16th,  Vol.  73,  p.  433.

298

LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  that  for  these  the  viscosity  is  somewhat  nearly  in  simple  propor-
tion to  the  absolute  temperature :  hence  for  them  s-  varies  nearly
as  t"'^.  His  determinations  for  the  five  molecularly  simpler  gases,
air,  hydrogen,  carbonic  oxide,  nitrogen,  and  oxygen  show  that  the
increases  of  /u.,  and  therefore  of  s~^,  with  temperature  are,  as
might  be  expected,  considerably  smaller  than  for  the  more  complex
of  the  gases  on  which  he  experimented.  Taking  his  viscosities
at  0"  Cent.,  for  carbonic  acid  and  for  the  four  other  simple  gases
named  above,  and  Rayleigh's  for  argon,  with  the  known  densities
of  all  the  six  gases  at  0"  C.  and  standard  atmospheric  pressure,
we  have  the  following  table  of  the  values  concerned  in  §  46  (1):

Col.  1

Col.  2 ■

Col.  3

Col.  4

Col.  5

Col.  6

Col.  7

Col.  8

Col.  9

Mean  free

IJatio  of

patlis  ac-

volume oc-

Hence taking

iV=102"(§50)

we  liave

Taking
iV=10»
we  have

cording  to
Maxwell's
formula*

cupied  by
molecules  to
whole  volume

Gas

p

ft

V

Ns^

s  at  0°  Cent.

1

.V|.3

in  terms  of

in  terms

in  terms  of

in  terms  of

in  terms  of

in  terms  of

grammes  per

of  dynes

centimetres

(centimetre)  - 1

centimetres

grammes

ill  terms  of
centimetres

cubic  centi-
metre

per  square
centimetre

per  second

CO.,

•001974

•0001414

39200

89200

2^99  .  10-**

19^74. 10-2-*

2^52. 10-B

l-390.10-»

H,

•0000900

•0000822

184000

32800

1^81 „

•90 „

6^89 „

•311 „

CO

•001234

•0001G30

49000

61200

2^47 „

12-34 „

3^68 „

•792 ,,

No

•001257

•0001635

49200

61600

2^48 „

12-57 „

3^66 „

•800 „

0.

•00143

•0001873

46100

57300

2-39 „

14-3 „

3^93 „

•719 „

Argon

•001781

•0002083

41300

57500

2-40 „

17-81 „

3^91 „

•722 .,

§  48.  The  meaning  of  "s,"  the  diameter,  as  defined  in  §  46,  is
simpler  for  the  monatomic  gas,  argon,  than  for  any  of  the  others  ;
and  happily  we  know  for  argon  the  density,  not  only  in  the  gaseous
state  (-001781)  but  also  in  the  liquid  state  (l-42)t.  The  latter
of  these  is  797  times  the  former.  Now,  all  things  considered,  it
seems  probable  that  the  crowd  of  atoms  in  the  liquid  may  be
slightly  less  dense  than  an  assemblage  of  globes  of  diameter  s  just
touching  one  another  in  cubic  order ;  but,  to  make  no  hypothesis
in  the  first  place,  let  qs  be  the  distance  from  centre  to  centre
of  a  cubic  arrangement  of  the  molecules  797  times  denser  than
the  gas  at  0°  C.  and  standard  atmospheric  pressure ;  q  will  be
greater  than  unity  if  the  liquid  is  less  dense,  or  less  than  unity

*  Maxwell's  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  p.  348,  eqn.  (7). The  formula  as  printed
in  this  paper  contains  a  very  embarrassing  mistake,  ij2Tr  for  ^2  .  w.
t  See  Baly  and  Donan,  Chem.  Jour.,  July,  1902.

NUMBER  OF  MOLECULES  IN  A  CUBIC  CENTIMETRE  OF  GAS. 299

il'  thu  liquid  is  denser,  than  the  cubic  arrangement  with  molecules,  Molecular.
regarded  as  spherical  of  diameter  s,  just  touching. We  have

797N  =ll(qsy (3),

and  tor  argon  we  have  by  §  4G  (1),

Ns^  =  57500  (4).

Eliminating  s  between  these  equations  we  find

iY=797^  57500=' (/  =  1 -21.  lO-o.^y" (5).

If  the  atoms  of  argon  were  ideal  hard  globes,  acting  on  one
another  with  no  force  except  at  contact,  we  should  almost  cer-
tainly have  q  ^1  (because  with  closer  packing  than  that  of  cubic
order  it  seems  not  possible  that  the  assemblage  could  have
sufficient  relative  mobility  of  its  parts  to  give  it  fluidity)  and
therefore  N  would  be  ^  1-21 .  10^«.

§  49.  For  carbonic  acid,  hydrogen,  nitrogen,  and  oxygen,  we
have  experimental  determinations  of  their  densities  in  the  solid  or
liquid  state ;  and  dealing  with  them  as  we  have  dealt  with  argon,
irrespectively  of  their  not  being  monatomic  gases,  we  find  results
for  the  five  gases  as  shown  in  the  following  table  :

Col.  1

Col.  2

Col.  3

Col.  4

Col.  5

Ratio  of

Values  of  7  (§  48)

solid  or

Number  of

according  to

liquid

molecules  per

(y-6=l-21  for  argon

Gas

Solid  or  liquid  density

density  to

cubic  centimetre

(liquid  compared

standard

of  gas  at  standard

witli  gas  at  0°  and

gaseous

density

atmospheric

density

pressure)

N

CO,

Solid

1-58

800

4-55  .1020.  gfi

-777

H.,

Liquid  at  17°  absolute . . .

•090

1000

-352

1-191

N.

^liquid

1047

833

1-62

-923

1  solid

1-400

1114

2-90

-837

0,

liquid  at  its  freezing  pt.

1-27

888

1-49

-936

Argon

^liquid  at  84°  absolute  ...

1-42

797

1-21

■969

\  solid

1-396*

784

1-17

•974

In  this  table,  q  denotes  the  ratio  to  s  of  the  distance  from
centre  to  centre  of  nearest  molecules  in  an  ideal  cubic  assemblage
of  the  same  density  as  the  solid  or  liquid,  as  indicated  in  cols.  3
and  2.

*  From  information  communicated  by  Prof.  W.  Eamsay,  July  23,  1901.

300  LECTURE XVII.

§  50.  According  to  Avogadro's  doctrine,  the  number  of  mole-
cules per  cubic  centimetre  is  the  same  for  all  "  perfect "  gases  at
the  same  temperature  and  pressure ;  and  even  carbonic  acid  is
nearly  enough  a  "  perfect  gas  "  for  our  present  considerations.  Hence
the  actual  values  of  (f  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  numbers
by  which  they  are  multiplied  in  col.  8  of  the  preceding  table.
Now,  as  said  in  §  48,  all  things  considered,  it  seems  probable  that
for  argon,  liquid  at  density  1"42,  q  may  be  somewhat  greater,  but
not  much  greater,  than  unity.  If  it  were  exactly  unity,  N  would
be  1-21. 10-";  and  I  have  chosen  5  =(1-21)-^  or  -969,  to  make  N
the  round  number  10'-".  Col.  6,  in  the  table  of  §  47  above,  is
calculated  with  this  value  of  J\^;  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  the
true  value  of  N  may  be  considerably  greater  than  10'-"*.

§  51.  As  compared  with  the  value  for  argon,  monatomic,  the
smaller  values  of  q  for  the  diatomic  gases,  nitrogen  and  oxygen,
and  the  still  smaller  values  for  carbonic  acid,  triatomic,  are  quite
as  might  be  expected  without  any  special  consideration  of  law  of
force  at  different  distances  between  atoms.  It  seems  that  the
diatomic  molecules  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen  and  still  more  so  the
triatomic  molecule  of  carbonic  acid,  are  effectively  larger  when
moving  freely  in  the  gaseous  condition,  than  when  closely  packed
in  liquid  or  solid  assemblage.  But  the  largeness  of  q  for  the
diatomic  hydrogen  is  not  so  easily  explained :  and  is  a  most  in-
teresting subject  for  molecular  speculation,  though  it  or  any  other
truth  in  nature  is  to  be  explained  by  a  proper  law  of  force  accord-
ing to  the  Boscovichian  doctrine  which  we  all  now  accept  (many

*  Maxwell,  judging  from  "molecular  volumes"  of  chemical  elements  estimated
by  Loreutz,  Meyer  and  Kopp,  unguided  by  what  we  now  know  of  the  densities
of  liquid  oxygen  and  liquid  hydrogen  and  of  the  liquid  of  the  then  undiscovered  gas
argon,  estimated  ^=•19.10-0  (Maxwell's  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  11.  p.  350)  which  is
rather  less  than  one-fifth  of  my  estimate  lO^o.  On  the  same  page  of  his  paper
is  given  a  table  of  estimated  diameters  of  molecules  which  are  about  3-2  or  3-3  times
larger  than  my  estimates  in  col.  6  of  the  table  in  §  47.  In  a  previous  part  of
his  paper  (p.  348)  Maxwell  gives  estimates  of  free  paths  for  the  same  gases,  from
which  by  his  formula  (7),  corrected  as  in  col.  8  of  my  table  in  §  47,  I  find  values  of
N  ranging  from  6-05  .  lO'^  to  6-96 .  lO^s  or  about  one-third  of  -19  .  10'^».  His
uncorrected  formula  J'iir  (instead  of  J2 .  w)  gives  values  of  N  which  are  Jir  times,
or  1-77  times  as  great,  which  are  still  far  short  of  his  final  estimate.  The  discrepance
is  therefore  not  accounted  for  by  the  error  in  the  formula  as  printed,  and  I  see  no
explanation  of  it.  The  free  paths  as  given  by  Maxwell  are  about  1-3  or  1-4  times
as  large  as  mine.

rayleigh's  theory  of  the  blue  of  the  sky. 301

of  ns  without  knowing  that  we  do  so)  as  the  fundamental  hypo-  Molecular,
thesis  of  physics  and  chemistry. I  hope  to  return  to  this  question
as  to  hydrogen  in  a  crystallographic  appendix.

I  am  deeply  indebted  to  Professor  Dewar  for  information
regarding  the  density  of  liquid  hydrogen,  and  the  densities  of
other  gases,  liquefied  or  frozen,  which  he  has  given  me  at  various
times  within  the  last  three  years.

§  52.  A  new  method  of  finding  an  inferior  limit  to  the  number
of  molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  a  gas,  very  different  from
anything  previously  thought  of,  and  especially  interesting  to  us
in  connection  with  the  wave-theory  of  light,  was  given  by  Lord
Rayleigh*,  in  1899,  as  a  deduction  from  the  dynamical  theory  of
the  blue  sky  which  he  had  given  18  years  earlier.  Many  previous
writers,  Newton  included,  had  attributed  the  light  from  the  sky,
whether  clear  blue,  or  hazy,  or  cloudy,  or  rainy,  to  fine  suspended
particles  which  divert  portions  of  the  sunlight  from  its  regular
course;  but  no  one  before  Rayleigh,  so  far  as  I  know,  had  published
any  idea  of  how  to  explain  the  blueness  of  the  cloudless  sky.
Stokes,  in  his  celebrated  paper  on  Fluorescence  f,  had  given  the
true  theory  of  what  was  known  regarding  the  polarization  of  the
blue  sky  in  the  following  "significant  remark"  as  Rayleigh  calls  it :
"  Now  this  result  appears  to  me  to  have  no  remote  bearing  on  the
"  question  of  the  directions  of  the  vibrations  in  polarized  light.
"  So  long  as  the  suspended  particles  are  large  compared  with  the
"  waves  of  light,  reflection  takes  place  as  it  would  from  a  portion  of
"  the  surface  of  a  large  solid  immersed  in  the  fluid,  and  no  con-
"  elusion  can  be  drawn  either  way.  But  if  the  diameter  of  the
"  particles  be  small  compared  with  the  length  of  a  wave  of  light,  it
"  seems  plain  that  the  vibrations  in  a  reflected  ray  cannot  be  per-
"pendicular  to  the  vibrations  in  the  incident  ray";  which  impliee
that  the  light  scattered  in  directions  perpendicular  to  the  exciting
incident  ray  has  everywhere  its  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  the  incident  ray  and  the  scattered  ray;  provided  the
diameter  of  the  molecule  which  causes  the  scattering  is  very  small
in  comparison  with  the  wave-length  of  the  light.  In  conversation
Stokes  told me of  this  conclusion,  and explained to me with

*  Rayleigh,  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  i.  Art.  viii.  p.  87.

t  "On  the  Change  of  Refrangibility  of  Light,"  Phil.  Trans.  1852,  and  Collected
Papers,  Vol.  m.

302  LECTURE XVII.

perfect  clearness  and  completeness  its  dynamical  foundation  ;
and  applied  it  to  explain  the  polarization  of  the  light  of  a  cloud-
less sky,  viewed  in  a  direction  at  right  angles  to  the  direction
of  the  sun.  But  he  did  not  tell  me  (though  I  have  no  doubt  he
knew  it  himself)  why  the  light  of  the  cloudless  sky  seen  in  any
direction  is  blue,  or  I  should  certainly  have  remembered  it.

§  53.  Rayleigh  explained  this  thoroughly  in  his  first  paper
(1871),  and  gave  what  is  now  known  as  Rayleigh's  law  of  the  blue
skj^;  which  is,  that,  provided  the  diameters  of  the  suspended  particles
are  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave-lengths,  the  proportions  of
scattered  light  to  incident  light  for  different  wave-lengths  are
inversely  as  the  fourth  powers  of  the  wave-lengths.  Thus,  while
the  scattered  light  has  the  same  colour  as  the  incident  light
when  homogeneous,  the  proportion  of  scattered  light  to  incident
light  is  seven  times  as  great  for  the  violet  as  for  the  red  of  the
visible  spectrum ;  which  explains  the  intensely  blvie  or  violet
colour  of  the  clearest  blue  sky.

§  54.  The  dynamical  theory  shows  that  the  part  of  the  light
of  the  blue  sky,  looked  at  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the
direction  of  the  sun,  which  is  due  to  sunlight  incident  on  a  single
particle  of  diameter  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave-
lengths of  the  illuminating  light,  consists  of  vibrations  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  of  these  two  directions :  that  is  to  say,  is
completely  polarized  in  the  plane  through  the  sun.  In  his  1871
paper*,  Rayleigh  pointed  out  that  each  particle  is  illuminated,  not
only  by  the  direct  light  of  the  sun,  but  also  by  light  scattered
from  other  particles,  and  by  earth-shine,  and  partly  also  by  sus-
pended particles  of  dimensions  not  small  in  comparison  with  the
wave-lengths  of  the  actual  light ;  and  he  thus  explained  the
observed  fact  that  the  polarization  of  even  the  clearest  blue  sky
at  90°  from  the  sun  is  not  absolutely  complete,  though  it  is  very
nearly  so.  There  is  very  little  of  polarization  in  the  light  from
white  clouds  seen  in  any  direction,  or  even  from  a  cloudless  sky
close  above  the  horizon  seen  at  90"  from  the  sun.  This  is  partly
because  the  particles  which  give  it  are  not  small  in  comparison
Avith  the  wave-lengths,  and  partly  because  they  contribute  much
to  illuminate  one  another  in  addition  to  the  sunlight  directly
incident  on  them.

*  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  i.  p.  94.

rayleigh's  theory  of  the  blue  of  the  sky. 303

§  55.  For  his  dynamical  foundation,  Rayleigh  definitely  Molecular,
assumed  the  suspended  particles  to  act  as  if  the  ether  in  their
places  were  denser  than  undisturbed  ether,  but  otherwise  unin-
fluenced by  the  matter  of  the  particles  themselves.  He  tacitly
assumed  throughout  that  the  distance  from  particle  to  particle
is  very  great  in  comparison  with  the  greatest  diameter  of  each
particle.  He  assumed  these  denser  portions  of  ether  to  be  of  the
same  rigidity  as  undisturbed  ether ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  this
last  assumption  could  not  largely  influence  the  result,  provided
the  greatest  diameter  of  each  particle  is  very  small  in  comparison
with  its  distance  from  next  neighbour,  and  with  the  wave-lengths
of  the  light :  and,  in  fact,  I  have  found  from  the  investigation  of
§§  41,  42  of  Lecture  XIV.  for  rigid  spherical  molecules  embedded
in  ether,  exactly  the  same  result  as  Rayleigh's  ;  which  is  as  follows

, SiT^n  /B'-D  TV ^^^^ (D'-DTV

where  A,  denotes  the  wave-length  of  the  incident  light  supposed
homogeneous ;  T  the  volume  of  each  suspended  particle ;  D  the
undisturbed  density  of  the  ether ;  B'  the  mean  density  of  the
ether  within  the  particle ;  n  the  number  of  particles  per  cubic
centimetre ;  and  k  the  proportionate  loss  of  homogeneous  incident
light,  due  to  the  scattering  in  all  directions  by  the  suspended
particles  per  centimetre  of  air  traversed. Thus

1  -e-*^ (2)

is  the  loss  of  light  in  travelling  a  distance  x  (reckoned  in  centi-
metres) through  ether  as  disturbed  by  the  suspended  particles.

It  is  remarkable  that  D'  need  not  be  uniform  throughout  the
particle.  It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  shape  of  the  volume  T
may  be  anything,  provided  only  its  greatest  diameter  is  very
small  in  comparison  with  X.  The  formula  supposes  T  {U  —  D)
the  same  for  all  the  particles.  We  shall  have  to  consider  cases  in
which  differences  of  T  and  D'  for  different  particles  are  essential  to
the  result ;  and  to  include  these  we  shall  have  to  use  the  formula

where  %

\D'  -D)T

{D'-D)T
D

denotes  the  sum  of

D

the  particles  in  a  cubic  centimetre.

(3),

\D'  -D)T

D

for all

804  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular.  §  56.  Supposing  now  the  number  of  suspended  particles  per
cubic  wave-length  to  be  very  great,  and  the  greatest  diameter
of  each  to  be  small  in  comparison  with  its  distance  from  next
neighbour,  we  see  that  the  virtual  density  of  the  ether  vibrating
among  the  particles  is

n  +  lT{D'-D) (4);

and  therefore,  if  u  and  u'  be  the  velocities  of  light  in  pure  ether,
and  in  ether  as  disturbed  by  the  suspended  particles,  we  have
(Lecture  VIII.  p.  80)

ur  =  u^  \l  +  z, j:

.(5).

Hence,  if  /a  denote  the  refractive  index  of  the  disturbed ether,
that  of  pure  ether  being  1,  we  have

and  therefore.

\^^Tiiy-m

■(<!);

,^-,=sW^ (7).

§  57.  In  taking  an  example  to  illustrate  the  actual  trans-
parency of  our  atmosphere,  Rayleigh  says* ;  "  Perhaps  the  best
"  data  for  a  comparison  lare  those  afforded  by  the  varying  bright-
"  ness  of  stars  at  various  altitudes.  Bouguer  and  others  esti-
"  mate  about  "8  for  the  transmission  of  light  through  the  entire
"atmosphere  from  a  star  in  the  zenith.  This  corresponds  to  8'3
"  kilometres  (the  "  height  of  the  homogeneous  atmosphere "  at
"  10°  Cent.)  of  air  at  standard  pressure."  Hence  for  a  medium  of
the  transparency  thus  indicated  we  have  e-ssoooot  _ -g .  which  gives
1/A;=  3720000  centimetres  =  37-2  kilometres.

§  58.  Suppose  for  a  moment  the  want  of  perfect  trans-
parency thus  defined  to  be  luholly  due  to  the  fact  that  the
ultiinate  molecules  of  air  are  not  infinitely  small  and  infinitely
numerous,  so  that  the  "  suspended  particles  "  hitherto  spoken  of
would  be  merely  the  molecules  Ng,  Og;  and  suppose  further
(D'  —  D)T  to  be  the  same  for  nitrogen  and  oxygen. The  known

*  Phil.  Mm).  April,  1899,  p.  382.

NUMBER OF MOLECULES PER CUBJC CENTIMETRE OF GAS. 805

refractivity of  air  (/i  —  1  =  "OOOB),  nearly  enough the  same  for  Molecular,
all  visible  light,  gives  by  equation  (7)  above,  with  n  instead  of  2,

-Mrm.  .0006.

Using  this  in  (1)  we  find

I. 29-76  ,„,

for  what  the  rate  of  loss  on  direct  sunlight  would  be,  per  centi-
metre of  air  ti'aversed,  if  the  light  were  all  of  one  wave-length,  X.
But  we  have  no  such  simplicity  in  Bouguer's  datum  regarding
transparency  for  the  actual  mixture  which  constitutes  sunlight :
because  the  formula  makes  ^'~'  proportional  to  the  fourth  power
of  the  wave-length  ;  and  every  cloudless  sunset  and  moonset  and
sunrise  and  moonrise  over  the  sea,  and  every  cloudless  view  of
sun  or  moon  below  the  horizon  of  the  eye  on  a  high  mountain,
proves  the  transparency  to  be  in  reality  much  greater  for  red
light  than  for  the  average  undimmed  light  of  either  luminary,
though  probably  not  so  much  greater  as  to  be  proportional  to  the
fourth  power  of  the  wave-length.  We  may,  however,  feel  fairly
sure  that  Bouguer's  estimate  of  the  loss  of  light  in  passing
vertically  through  the  whole  atmosphere  is  approximately  true
for  the  most  luminous  part  of  the  spectrum  corresponding  to
about  the  D  line,  wave-length  5"89 .  10~''  cm.,  or  (a  convenient
round  number)  6  .  10~''  as  Rayleigh  has  taken  it.  With  this  value
for  X,  and  372  .  10''  centimetres  for  A'~\  (8)  gives  n  =  8-54 .  10^^  for
atmospheric  air  at  10°  and  at  standard  pressure.  Now  it  is  quite
certain  that  a  very  large  part  of  the  loss  of  light  estimated  by
Bouguer  is  due  to  suspended  particles ;  and  therefore  it  is  certain
that  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  gas,  at
standard  temperature  and  pressure,  is  considerably  greater  than
8-54 .  10^8.

§  59.  This  conclusion  drawn  by  Bayleigh  from  his  dynamical
theory  of  the  absorption  of  light  from  direct  rays  through  air,
giving  very  decidedly  an  inferior  limit  to  the  number  of  molecules
in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  gas,  is  perhaps  the  most  thoroughly  well
founded  of  all  definite  estimates  hitherto  made  regarding  sizes  or
numbers  of  atoms.  We  shall  see  (§§  78... 79,  below)  that  a  much
larger  inferior  limit  is  found  on  the  same  principles  by  careful
T.  L.  20

306  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  consideration  of  the  loss  of  light  due  to  the  ultimate  molecules
of  pure  air  and  to  suspended  matter  undoubtedly  existing  in  all
parts  of  our  atmosphere,  even  where  absolutely  cloudless,  that  is
to  say,  warmer  than  the  dew-point,  and  therefore  having  none  of
the  liquid  spherules  of  water  which  constitute  cloud  or  mist.

§  60.  Go  now  to  the  opposite  extreme  from  the  tentative
hypothesis  of  §  58,  and,  while  assuming,  as  we  know  to  be  true,
that  the  observed  refractivity  is  wholly  or  almost  wholly  due  to
the  ultimate  molecules  of  air,  suppose  the  opacity  estimated  by
Bouguer  to  be  wholly  due  to  suspended  particles  which,  for
brevity,  we  shall  call  dust  (whether  dry  or  moist).  These  par-
ticles may  be  supposed  to  be  generally  of  very  unequal  magni-
tudes :  but,  for  simplicity,  let  us  take  a  case  in  which  they  are  all
equal,  and  their  number  only  1/10000  of  the  8-54 ,  10'^  which
in  §  59  we  found  to  give  the  true  refractivity  of  air,  with
Bouguer's  degree  of  opacity  for  X,  =  6.10-^  With  the  same
opacity  we  now  find  the  contribution  to  refractivity  of  the
particles  causing  it,  to  be  only  1/100  of  the  known  refractivity
of  air.  The  number  of  particles  of  dust  which  we  now  have  is
8*54.10"  per  cubic  centimetre,  or  184  per  cubic  wave-length,
which  we  may  suppose  to  be  almost  large  enough  or  quite  large
enough  to  allow  the  dynamics  of  §  56  for  refractivity  to  be
approximately  true.  But  it  seems  to  me  almost  certain  that
8*54 .  10"  is  vastly  greater  than  the  greatest  number  of  dust
particles  per  cubic  centimetre  to  which  the  well-known  haziness
of  the  clearest  of  cloudless  air  in  the  lower  regions  of  our
atmosphere  is  due ;  and  that  the  true  numbers,  at  different  times
and  places,  may  probably  be  such  as  those  counted  by  Aitken*
at  from  42500  (Hydros,  4  p.m.  April  5,  1892)  to  43  (Kingairloch,
Argyllshire,  1  p.m.  to  1.30  p.m.  July  26,  1891).

§  61.  Let  us,  however,  find  how  small  the  number  of  par-
ticles per  cubic  centimetre  umst  be  to  produce  Bouguer's  degree
of  opacity,  without  the  particles  themselves  being  so  large  in
comparison  with  the  wave-length  as  to  exclude  the  application  of
Rayleigh's  theory.  Try  for  example  1^=  10~^.  X.^  (that  is  to  say,
the  volume  of  the  molecule  1/1000  of  the  cubic  wave-length,  or

*  Trans.  B.  S.  K.  1894,  Vol.  xxxvii.  Part  ni.  pp.  (;75.  fi72.

HAZE  DUE  TO  PARTICLES  TOO  LARGE  FOR  RAYLEIOH'S  THEORY. 307

roughly,  diameter  of  molecule  1/10  of  the  wave-length)  which  Molecular,
seems  small  enough  for  fairly  approximate  application  of  Ray-
leigh's  theory ;  and  suppose,  merely  to  make  an  example,  D'  to  be
the  optical  density  of  water,  D  being  that  of  ether ;  that  is  to  say,
D'lD  =  (1-3337)'  =  1-78.  Thus  we  have  {D'  -  D)  T/D  =  •00078\^:
and  with  X-6.10-^  and  with  k-'  =  S-72  .  10",  (1)  gives  ??  =  1-485. 10«,
or  about  one  and  a  half  million  particles  per  cubic  centimetre.
Though  this  is  larger  than  the  largest  number  counted  for  natural
air  by  Aitken,  it  is  interesting  as  showing  that  Bouguer's  degree  of
opacity  can  be  accounted  for  by  suspended  particles,  few  enough
to  give  no  appreciable  contribution  to  refractivity,  and  yet  not  too
large  for  Rayleigh's  theory.  But  when  we  look  through  very
clear  air  by  day,  and  see  how  far  from  azure  or  deep  blue  is  the
colour  of  a  few  hundred  metres,  or  a  few  kilometres  of  air  with
the  mouth  of  a  cave  or  the  darkest  shade  of  mountain  or  forest,
for  background ;  and  when  in  fine  sunny  weather  we  study  the
appearance  of  the  grayish  haze  always,  even  on  the  clearest  days,
notably  visible  over  the  scenery  among  mountains  or  hills ;  and
when  by  night  at  sea  we  see  a  lighthouse  light  at  a  distance  of
45  or  50  kilometres,  and  perceive  how  little  of  redness  it  shows ;
and  when  we  see  the  setting  sun  shorn  of  his  brilliance  sufficiently
to  allow  us  to  look  direct  at  his  face,  sometimes  whitish,  oftener
ruddy,  rarely  what  could  be  called  ruby  red ;  it  seems  to  me  that
we  have  strong  evidence  for  believing  that  the  want  of  perfect
clearness  of  the  lower  regions  of  our  atmosphere  is  in  the  main
due  to  suspended  particles,  too  large  to  allow  approximate  ful-
filment of  Rayleigh's  law of  fourth  power  of  wave-length.

§  62.  But  even  if  they  were  small  enough  for  Rayleigh's
theory  the  question  would  remain.  Are  they  small  enough  and
numerous  enough  to  account  for  the  refractivity  of  the  atmo-
sphere ?  To  this  we  shall  presently  see  we  must  answer  un-
doubtedly "No";  and  much  less  than  Bouguer's  degree  of  opacity,
probably  not  as  much  as  a  quarter  or  a  fifth  of  it,  is  due  to  the
ultimate  molecules  of  air.  In  a  paper  by  Mr  Quirino  Majorana  in
the  Transactions  of  the  R.  Accademia  dei  Lincei  (of  which  a
translation  is  published  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  May,
1901),  observations  by  himself  in  Sicily,  at  Catania  and  on  Mount
Etna,  and  by  Mr  Gaudenzio  Sella,  on  Monte  Rosa  in  Switzerland,
determining  the  ratio  of  the  brightness  of  the  sun's  surface  to  the

20—2

308  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  brightness  of  the  sky  seen  in  any  direction,  are  described.  This
ratio  they  denote  by  r.  One  specially  notable  result  of  Mr
Majorana's  is  that  "  the  value  of  r  at  the  crater  of  Etna  is  about
five  times  greater  than  at  Catania."  The  barometric  pressures
were  approximately  53-6  and  76  cms.  of  mercury.  Thus  the  atmo-
sphere above  Catania  was  only  1-42  times  the  atmosphere  above
Etna,  and  yet  it  gave  five  times  as  much  scattering  of  light  by  its
particles,  and  by  the  particles  suspended  in  it.  This  at  once
proves  that  a  great  part  of  the  scattering  must  be  due  to  sus-
pended particles ;  and  more  of  them  than  in  proportion  to  the
density  in  the  air  below  the  level  of  Etna  than  in  the  air  above  it.
In  Majorana's  observations,  it  was  found  that  "  except  for  regions
"  close  to  the  horizon,  the  luminosity  of  the  sky  had  a  sensibly
"  constant  value  in  all  directions  when  viewed  from  the  summit  of
"  Etna."  This  uniformity  was  observed  even  for  points  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  sun,  as  near  to  it  as  he  could  make  the
observation  without  direct  light  from  the  sun  getting  into  his
instrument.  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  apparent  uniformity
was  only  partial.  It  is  quite  certain  that  with  sunlight  shining
down  from  above,  and  with  light  everywhere  shining  up  from
earth  or  sea  or  haze,  illuminating  the  higher  air,  the  intensities
of  the  blue  light  seen  in  different  directions  above  the  crater
would  be  largely  different.  This  is  proved  by  the  following
investigation  ;  which  is  merely  an  application  of  Rayleigh's  theory
to  the  question  before  us.  But  from  Majorana's  narrative  we
may  at  all  events  assume  that,  as  when  observing  from  Catania,
he  also  on  Etna  chose  the  least  luminous  part  of  the  sky  (Phil.
Mag.,  May  1901,  p.  5CA),  for  the  recorded  results  (p.  562)  of  his
observations.

§  63.  The  diagram,  fig.  1  below,  is  an  ideal  representation  of
a  single  molecule  or  particle,  T,  with  sunlight  falling  on  it  indi-
cated by  parallel  lines,  and  so  giving  rise  to  scattered  light  seen
by  an  eye  at  E.  We  suppose  the  molecule  or  particle  to  be  so
massive  relatively  to  its  bulk  of  ether  that  it  is  practically  un-
moved by  the  ethereal  vibration ;  and  for  simplicity  at  present  we
suppose  the  ether  to  move  freely  through  the  volume  T,  becoming
effectively  denser  without  changing  its  velocity  when  it  enters
this  fixed  volume,  and  less  dense  when  it  leaves.  In  §§  41,  42,  of
Lecture  XV.  above,  and  in  Appendix  A,  a  definite  supposition,

DYNAMICS OF BLUE SKY.  309

attributing  to ether  no  other  property  than elasticity  as  of  an  Molecular,
utterly homogeneous  perfectly  elastic  solid,  and  the exercise  of
mutual force between  itself  and  ponderable  matter occupying
the  same  space,  is  explained:  according  to  which  the  ether  within

the  atom  will  react  upon  moving  ether  outside,  just  as  it  would
if  our  present  convenient  temporary  supposition  of  magically
augmented  density  within  the  volume  of  an  absolutely  fixed
molecule  were  realized  in  nature.  For  our  present  purpose,  we
may  if  we  please,  following  Rayleigh,  do  away  altogether  with
the  ponderable  molecule,  and  merely  suppose  T  to  be  not  fixed,
but  merely  a  denser  portion  of  the  ether.  And  if  its  greatest
diameter  is  small  enough  relatively  to  a  wave-length,  it  will
make  no  unnegligible  difference  whether  we  suppose  the  ether  in
T  to  have  the  same  rigidity  as  the  surrounding  free  ether,  or
suppose  it  perfectly  rigid  as  in  §§  1 — 46  of  Lecture  XIV.  dealing
with  a  rigid  globe  embedded  in  ether.

§  64.  Resolving  the  incident  light  into  two  components  having
semi-ranges  of  vibration  ct,  p,  in  the  plane  of  the  paper  and
perpendicular  to  it ; consider  first the component in  the  plane

310  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  having  vibrations  symbolically  indicated  by  the  arrow-heads,  and
expressed  by  the  following  formula

157  Sin  — —  ,
A

where  u  is  the  velocity  of  light,  and  \  the  wave-leugth.  The
greater  density  of  the  ether  within  T  gives  a  reactive  force  on
the  surrounding  ether  outside,  in  the  line  of  the  primary  vibration,
and  against  the  direction  of  its  acceleration,  of  which  the  magni-
tude is

T  (U  -  D)  m  ^iru liriit

D x'''-^ -(^^

This  alternating  force  produces  a  train  of  spherical  waves  spread-
ing out  from  T  in  all  directions,  of  which  the  displacement  is,  at
greatest,  very  small  in  comparison  with  ot  ;  and  which  at  any
point  E  at  distance  r  from  the  centre  of  T,  large  in  comparison
with  the  greatest  diameter  of  T,  is  given  by  the  following  ex-
pression*

^  cos  -—  {ut  —  r),

A,

with  ^  =  t^^'^^^^^^cos6> (10),

where  0  is  the  angle  between  the  direction  of  the  sun  and  the
line  TE.  Formula  (10),  properly  modified  to  apply  it  to  the  other
component  of  the  primary  vibration,  that  is,  the  component  per-
pendicular to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  gives  for  the  displacement  at
E  due  to  this  component

27r
1]  cos  — {at  —  r),

A,

Hence  for  the  t[uantity  of  light  falling  from  T  per  unit  of  time,

*  This  formula  is  readily  found  from  §§  41,  42  of  Lecture  XIV.  The  complexity
of  the  formulas  in  §§  8 — 40  is  due  to  the  inclusion  in  the  investigation  of  forces  and
displacements  at  small  distances  from  T,  and  to  the  condition  imposed  that  T
is  a  rigid  spherical  figure.  The  dynamics  of  §§  33 — 36  with  c-Q,  and  the  details  of
§§  37 — 39  further  simplified  by  taking  u  =  qo  ,  lead  readily  to  the  formulas  (10)  and
(11)  in  our  present  text.

BRIGHTXb:SS OF BLUE SKY.  311

on  unit  area  of  a  plane  at  E,  perpendicular  to  ET,  reckoned  in  Molecular.
convenient  temporary  units,  we  have

-nTiD'  -D)

r+T=

'\-D

{^■' cos' 0  +  p-") (12).

§  65.  Consider  now  the  scattered  light  emanating  from  a  large
horizontal  plane  stratum  of  air  1  cm.  thick.  Let  T  of  fig.  1  be  one
of  a  vast  number  of  particles  in  a  portion  of  this  stratum  sub-
bending  a  small  solid  angle  D,  viewed  at  an  angular  distance  /3
from  the  zenith  by  an  eye  at  distance  r.  The  volume  of  this
portion  of  the  stratum  is  H  sec  /3  r-  cubic  centimetres ;  and  there-
fore, if  S  denotes  summation  for  all  the  particles  in  a  cubic  centi-
metre, small  enough  for  application  of  Rayleigh's  theory,  and
q  the  quantity  of  light  shed  by  them  from  the  portion  ft  sec  /9  r^
of  the  stratum,  and  incident  on  a  square  centimetre  at  E,  per-
pendicular to  ET,  we  have

T(D'-Dy

D

-T  nseCyQ(fl72cos2^4-/3-) (13).

Summing this expression for the contributions  by  all  the
luminous  elements  of  the  sun  and  taking

to  denote  this  summation,  we  have  instead  of  the  factor

•S7-  cos-  6  +  p',

cos-  6  j'ST'  +  Ip' :

and  we  have  jiff'-  =  I p^  =  ^S (14),

where  S  denotes  the  total  quantity  of  light  from  the  sun  falling
perpendicularly  on  unit  of  area  in  the  particular  place  of  the
atmosphere  considered.  Hence  the  summation  of  (13)  for  all  the
sunlight  incident  on  the  portion  11  sec  /3  r"-  of  the  stratum,  gives

Q  =  t^

^^^i) ^^Tasec^(icos^^  +  |)>Sf (15).

§  QQ.  To  define  the  point  of  the  sky  of  which  the  illumination
is  thus  expressed,  let  ^  be  the  zenith  distance  of  the  sun,  and  i/r
the  azimuth,  reckoned  from  the  sun,  of  the  place  of  the  sky  seen

312

LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  along  the  line  ET.  This  place  and  the  sun  and  the  zenith  are  at
the  angles  of  a  spherical  triangle  SZT,  of  which  ST  is  equal  to  6.
Hence  we  have

cos  6  =  cos  ^cos  13  +  sin  ^sin  jB  cos  ^1^ (16).

Let  now,  as  an  example,  the  sun  be  vertical:  we  have  ^— 0,
0  =  fS,  and  (15)  becomes

T{D'-D)~

D

n.^  (cob  ^  + sec  13)  S (17).

This  shows  least  luminosity  of  the  sky  around  the  sun  at  the
zenith,  increasing  to  oo  at  the  horizon  (easily  interpreted).  The
law  of  increase  is  illustrated  in  the  following  table  of  values  of
^  (cos  yS  +  sec  /3)  for  every  10°  of  /g  from  0°  to  90°.

/3

^  (cos  /3  +  sec  j8)

1

/3

^  (cos/3  +  sec/3)

0°

1-000

50°

1-099

10°

I'OOO

G0°

1  -250

20°

1-002

, 70°

1-633

30°

1-010

80°

2-966

40°

1-036

90°

GO

§  67.  Instead  now  of  considering  illumination  on  a  plane
perpendicular  to  the  line  of  vision,  consider  the  illumination  by
light  from  our  one-centimetre-thick  great*  horizontal  plane
stratum  of  air,  incident  on  a  square  centimetre  of  horizontal
plane.  The  quantity  of  this  light  per  unit  of  time  coming  from
a  portion  of  sky  subtending  a  small  solid  angle  H  at  zenith
distance  (3  is  Qcos^.  Taking  D.  =  sin/3d^d'y{r  and  integrating,
we  find  for  the  light  shed  by  the  one-centimetre-thick  horizontal
stratum  on  a  horizontal  square  centimetre  of  the  ground,

/•2t  fi

dyfr

Jo Jo

"'^  d^jr  l^^d^  sin  ^.Q~^

47r"
3X'

T{D'-D)
D

S.

.(18).

Now each molecule  and  particle of  dust sheds  as  much  light
upwards as downwards. Hence (18) doubled expresses the

*  We  are  neglecting  the  curvature  of  the  earth,  and  supposing  the  density  and
comijosition  of  the  air  to  be  the  same  throughout  the  plane  horizontal  stratum  to
distances  from  the  zenith  very  great  in  comparison  with  its  lieight  above  the
ground.

SKY-LIGHT OVER ETNA AND MONTE ROSA.  313

quantity  of  light  lost  by  direct  rays  from  a  vertical  sun  in  cross-  Molecular,
ing  the  one-centiraetre-thick  horizontal  stratum. It  agrees  with
the  expression  for  k  in  (1)  of  §  55,  as  it  ought  to  do.

§  68.  The  expression  (15)  is  independent  of  the  distance  of
the  stratum  above  the  level  of  the  observer's  eye.  Hence  if  H
denote  the  height  above  this  level,  of  the  upper  boundary  of  an
ideal  homogeneous  atmosphere  consisting  of  all  the  ultimate
molecules  and  all  the  dust  of  the  real  atmosphere  scattered  uni-
formly through  it,  and  if  s  denote  the  whole  light  on  unit  area  of
a  plane  at  E  perpendicular  to  ET,  from  all  the  molecules  and  dust
in  the  solid  angle  12  of  the  real  atmosphere  due  to  the  sun's  direct
light  incident  on  them,  we  have

|  =  ^sec/3^>

T{D'  -D)

n.i(cos-^6'-|-l) (19);

provided  we  may,  in  the  cases  of  application  whatever  they
may  be,  neglect  the  diminution  of  the  direct  sunlight  in  its
actual  course  through  air,  whether  to  the  observer  or  to  the
portion  of  the  air  of  which  he  observes  the  luminosity,  and  neglect
the  diminution  of  the  scattered  light  from  the  air  in  its  course
through  air  to  the  observer.  This  proviso  we  shall  see  is  prac-
tically fulfilled  in  Mr  Majorana's  observations  on  the  crater  of
Etna  for  zenith  distances  of  the  sun  not  exceeding  60°,  and  in
Mr  Sella's  observation  on  Monte  Rosa  in  which  the  sun's  zenith
distance  was  50°.  But  for  Majorana's  recorded  observation  on
Etna  at  5.50  a.m.  Avhen  the  sun's  zenith  distance  was  81°*71,  of
which  the  secaut  is  6'928,  there  may  have  been  an  important
diminution  of  the  sun's  light  reaching  the  air  vertically  above  the
observer,  and  a  considerably  more  important  diminution  of  his
light  as  seen  direct  by  the  observer.  This  would  tend  to  make
the  sunlight  reaching  the  observer  less  strong  relatively  to  the
sky-light  than  according  to  (19);  and  might  conceivably  account
for  the  first  number  in  col.  8  being  smaller  than  the  first  number
in  col.  4  of  the  Table  of  §  69  below ;  but  it  seems  to  me  more
probable  that  the  smallness  of  the  first  two  numbers  in  col.  3,
showing  considerably  greater  luminosity  of  sky  than  according  to
(19),  may  be  partly  or  chiefly  due  to  dust  in  the  air  overhead,
optically  swelled  by  moisture  in  the  early  morning.  Indeed  the
largeness  of  the  luminosity  of  the  sky  indicated  by  the  smallness

314

LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  of  the  first  three  numbers  in  col.  3,  in  comparison  with  the  corre-
sponding numbers  of  col.  4,  is  explained  most  probably  by  gray
haze  in  the  early  morning,

§  69.  The  results  of  Majorana's  observations  from  the  crater
of  Etna  are  shown  in  the  following  Table,  of  which  the  first  and
third  columns  are  quoted  from  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for
May,  1901,  and  the  second  column  has  been  kindly  given  to  me
in  a  letter  by  Mr  Majorana.  The  values  of  Bjs  shown  in  col.  4
are  calculated  from  §  68  (19),  with  the  factor  of  sec  ^  (cos^  ^  +  1)
taken  to  make  it  equal  to  Majorana's  r  for  sun's  zenith  distance
44°*6,  on  the  supposition  that  the  region  of  sky  observed  was  in
each  case  (see  §  62  above)  in  the  position  of  minimum  luminosity
as  given  by  (21). It  is  obvious  that  this  position  is  in  a  vertical

Col.  1

Col.  2

Col.  3

Col.  4

Col.  5

Time

Zenith
distance
of  sun.

Eatio  of

luminosity  of

sun's  disc  to

luminosity  of

sky.

r

S
s

Zenith  distance
of  least  lumi-
nous part  of
sky.
i8

5.50  A.M.
7
8
9
11

81-7
68-0
56-1
44-6
29-9

2570000
3125000
3650000
3930000
3760000

4820000
4610000
4310000
3930000
3370000

5-5
14-4
21-7
27-8
33-6

great  circle  through  the  sun,  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
zenith  from  the  sun;  and  thus  we  have  d  =  ^+/3.  Hence  (19)
becomes

T(D'-Dy

D

O .  i  sec  )8  [cos- (^  + /3)  +  1] . .  .(20).

.(21).

To  make  (20)  a  minimum  we  have

2sin2(;S  +  0

''^'"'^-s^^cosYi^+O

The  value  of  /3  satisfying  this  equation  for  any  given  value  of
^  is  easily  found  by  trial  and  error,  guided  by  a  short  preliminary

SKY-LIGHT OVER ETNA.  315

tabic  of  values  of  j3  for  assumed  values  of  /3  +  ^. Col.  5  shows  Molecular,
values  of  y8  thus  found  approximately  enough  to  give  the  values  of
Sjs  shown  in  col.  4  for  the  several  values  of  ^.

§  70.  Confining  our  attention  now  to  Majorana's  observations
at  9  a.m.  when  the  sun's  altitude  was  about  44<"'6  ;  let  e  be  the
proportion  of  the  light  illuminating  the  air  over  the  crater  of
Etna  which  at  that  hour  was  due  to  air,  earth,  and  water  below ;
and  therefore  1  —  e  the  proportion  of  the  observed  luminosity  of
the  sky  which  was  due  to  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun,  and  expressed
by  §  68  (19).  Thus,  for  /3  =  27"-8,  ^=W%  and  6  =  72°-4,  we  have
S/s  =  3930000/(1  -  e),  instead  of  the  S/s  of  col.  4,  §  69.  With  this,
equation  (20)  gives

'n^'-^)T.^^_^).4.1.S.10-. (22).

Here,  in  order  that  the  comparison  may  be  between  the  whole
light  of  the  sun  and  the  light  from  an  equal  apparent  area  of  the
sky,  we  must  take

12  =  7r/214-6-*  =  1/14660,

being  the  apparent  area  of  the  sun's  disc  as  seen  from  the  earth.
As  to  H,  it  is  what  is  commonly  called  the  "  height  of  the  homo-
geneous atmosphere"  and,  whether  at  the  top  of  Etna  or  at
sea-level,  is

7-988 .  10^  [  1  +  ^^o)  centimetres  ;

where  t  denotes  the  temperature  at  the  place  above  which  H  is
reckoned. Taking  this  temperature  as  15°  C,  we  find

H  =  8-43 .  10'  centimetres.
Thus  (22)  becomes

'T(D'-Dy

D

xni-e).-728.10-'' (23).

§  71.  Let  us  now  denote  by  /  and  1  — /  the  proportions  of
(23)  due  respectively  to  the  ultimate  molecules  of  air  and  to
dust. We  have

D

*  The  sun's  distance  from  the  earth  is  214-6  times  his  radius.

■  =  A,y(l  -  e)  .  -728  .  10-» (24)  ;

316  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular,  where  n  denotes  the  number  of  the  ultimate  molecules  in  a  cubic
centimetre  of  the  air  at  the  top  of  Etna  ;  and  T  (D'  —  D)/D  relates
to  any  one  of  these  molecules ;  any  difference  which  there  may  be
between  oxygen  and  nitrogen  being  neglected.  Now  assuming
that  the  refractivity  of  the  atmosphere  is  practically  due  to  the
ultimate  molecules,  and  that  no  appreciable  part  of  it  is  due  to  the
dust  in  the  air,  we  have  by  §  56  (7),

.0002=,/J^-^) (25),

the  first  number  being  approximately  enough  the  refractivity  of
air  at  the  crater  of  Etna  (barometric  pressure,  53'6  centimetres  of
mercury). Hence

T(B'-D)
D

and  using  this  in  (24)  we  find

=  -„l-6.10-^ (26),

71'  ^ '

220

-=xy(rr^) ^2^>-

Here,  as  in  |  58  in  connection  with  Bouguer's  estimate  for  loss
of  light  in  transmission  through  air,  we  have  an  essential  un-
certainty in  respect  to  the  effective  wave-length ;  and,  for  the
same  reasons  as  in  §  58,  we  shall  take  A,  =  6 .  10~^  cm.  as  the
proper  mean  for  the  circumstances  under  consideration.  With
this  value  of  X,  (27)  becomes

n^,,,  "^ -,  1-69. 10^"  (28).

f{\  -e)  ^ ^

§  72.  In  Mr  Sella's  observations  on  Monte  Rosa  the  zenith
distance  of  the  sun  was  50°,  and  the  place  of  the  sky  observed  was
in  the  zenith.  He  found  the  brightness  of  the  sun's  disc  to  be
about  5000000  times  the  brightness  of  the  sky  in  the  zenith.
Dealing  with  this  result  as  in  §§  70,  71,  with  ^=0  in  (20),
and  supposing  the  temperature  of  the  air  at  the  place  of  obser-
vation to  have  been  0°  C,  we  iind

n'=^r^_^^2-M.m^ (29).

where  e,  _/",  and  n  are  the  values  of  e,  f,  and  n,  at  the  place  of
observation  on  Monte  Rosa,  Denoting  now  by  N  the  number  of
molecules  in a cubic centimetre of  air at 0°  C.  and pressure

SKY- LIGHT OVER MONTE ROSA.

317

75  centimetres  of  mercury,  we  have,  by  the  laws  of  Boyle  and  Molecular.
Charles,  on  the  supposition  that  the  temperature  of  the  air  was
15"  on  the  summit  of  Etna,  and  0°  on  Monte  Rosa

75 /, 15  \ ,75

or  iY  =  l-48/i  =  l-537i'

From  these,  with  (28)  and  (29),  we  find

2-50 ,  „.„  3-58

.(30).

""^ff^-"''

•/'(l-O

10^

.(31).

§  73.  To  estimate  the  values  of  e  and  e'  as  defined  in  §§  70,  72,
consider  the  albedos*  of  the  earth  as  might  be  seen  from  a  balloon
in  the  blue  sky  observed  by  Majorana  and  G.  Sella  over  Etna  and
over  Monte  Rosa  respectively.  These  might  be  about  2  and  "4,
the  latter  much  the  greater  because  of  the  great  amount  of  snow
contributing  to  illuminate  the  sky  over  Monte  Rosa.  With  so
much  of  guess-work  in  our  data  we  need  not  enter  mi  the  full
theory  of  the  contribution  to  sky-light  by  earth-shine  from  below
according  to  the  principle  of  §§  67,  08,  interesting  as  it  is;  and  we
may  take  as  very  rough  estimates  '2  and  '4  as  the  values  of  e  and
e'. Thus  (3 1 )  becomes

N  =

H2

/

.101

5-97
/'

10'

.(32).

§  74.  Now  it  would  only  be  if  the  whole  light  of  the  sky  were
due  to  the  ultimate  molecules  on  which  the  refractivity  depends
that  /  or  /'  could  have  so  great  a  value  as  unity.  If  this  were
the  case  for  the  blue  sky  seen  over  Monte  Rosa  by  G.  Sella  in

*  Albedo  is  a  word  introduced  by  Lambert  150  years  ago  to  signify  the  ratio  of
the  total  light  emitted  by  a  thoroughly  unpohshed  solid  or  a  mass  of  cloud  to  the
total  amount  of  the  incident  light.  The  albedo  of  an  ideal  perfectly  white  body
is  1.  My  friend  Professor  Becker  has  kindly  given  me  the  following  table  of  albedos
from  Miiller's  book  Die  Photometrie  der  Gestirne  (Leipsic,  1897)  as  determined  by
observers  and  experimenters.

Mercury  0-14

Uranus 0-60

Venus 0-76

Neptune 0-52

Moon 0-34

Snow 0-78

Mars 0-22

White  Paper 0-70

Jupiter 0-62

White  Sandstone  0-24

Saturn 0-72

Damp  Soil 0-08

318  LECTURE XVII.

Molecular.  1900,  we  should  have  /'  =  1 ,  and  therefore  N  =  5-07  .  10".  But  it
is  most  probable  that  even  in  the  very  clearest  weather  on  the
highest  mountain,  a  considerable  portion  of  the  light  of  the  sky
is  due  to  suspended  particles  much  larger  than  the  ultimate
molecules  N.,  Oo,  of  the  atmosphere ;  and  therefore  the  observa-
tions of  the  luminosity  of  the  sky  over  Monte  Rosa  in  the  summer
of  1900  render  it  probable  that  N  is  greater  than  5-97  .  10".  If
now  we  take  our  estimate  of  §  50,  for  the  number  of  molecules  in
a  cubic  cm.  of  air  at  0°,  and  normal  pressure,  N  =  10^°,  we  have
1  -/=  -088  and  1  -/'  =  '403 ;  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the
several  assumptions  we  have  made,  "688  of  the  whole  light  of  the
portion  of  sky  observed  over  Etna  by  Majorana  was  due  to  dust,
and  only  '403  of  that  observed  by  Sella  on  Monte  Rosa  was  due
to  dust.  It  is  quite  possible  that  this  conclusion  might  be  exactly
true,  and  it  is  fairly  probable  that  it  is  an  approximation  to  the
truth.  But  on  the  whole  these  observations  indicate,  so  far  as
they  can  be  trusted,  the  probability  of  at  least  as  large  a  value  as
10-"  for  N.

§  75.  All  the  observations  referred  to  in  §§  57 — 74  are  vitiated
by  essentially  involving  the  physiological  judgment  of  perception
of  difference  of  strengths  of  two  lights  of  different  colours.  In
looking  at  two  very  differently  tinted  shadows  of  a  pencil  side  by
side,  one  of  them  blue  or  violet  cast  by  a  comparatively  near
candle,  the  other  reddish-yellow  cast  by  a  distant  brilliantly  white
incandescent  lamp  or  by  a  more  distant  electric  arc-lamp,  or  by
the  moon  ;  when  practising  Rumford's  method  of  photometry;  it  is
quite  wonderful  to  find  how  unanimous  half-a-dozen  laboratory
students,  or  even  less  skilled  observers,  are  in  declaring  This  is
the  stronger!  or.  That  is  the  stronger!  or.  Neither  is  stronger
than  the  other!  When  the  two  shadows  are  declared  equally
strong,  the  declaration  is  that  the  differently  tinted  lights  from
the  two  shadowed  places  side  by  side  on  the  white  paper  are,
according  to  the  physiological  perception  by  the  eye,  equally
strong.  But  this  has  no  meaning  in  respect  to  any  definite
component  parts  of  the  two  lights;  and  the  unanimity,  or  the
greatness  of  the  majority,  of  the  observers  declaring  it,  only  proves
a  physiological  agreement  in  the  perceptivity  of  healthy  average
eyes  (from  which  colour-blind  eyes  would  no  doubt  differ  wildly).
Two circular areas of  white paper in Sella's observations on

PRTS^fATIC ANAT.YSTS OF SKY-LTfiTTT.  319

Monte  Rosa,  a  circle  and  a  surrounding  area  of  ground  glass  in  Molecular.
Majorana's  observations  with  his  own  beautiful  sky-photometer
on  Etna,  are  seen  illuminated  respectively  by  diminished  sunlight
of  unchanged  tint  and  by  light  from  the  blue  sky.  The  sun-lit
areas  seem  reddish-yellow  by  contrast  with  the  sky-lit  areas  which
arc  azure  blue.  What  is  meant  when  the  two  areas  differing  so
s]»londidly  are  declared  to  be  equally  luminous?  The  nearest
approach  to  an  answer  to  this  ([uostion  is  given  at  the  end  of
§  71  above,  and  is  eminently  unsatisfactory.  The  same  may  be
truly  said  of  the  dealing  with  Bouguer's  datum  in  §  57,  though
the  observers  on  whom  Uouguer  founded  do  not  seem  to  have
been  disturbed  by  knowledge  that  there  was  anything  indefinite
in  what  they  were  trying  to  define  or  to  find  by  observation.

§  7G.  To  obtain  results  not  vitiated  by  the  imperfection  of
the  physiological  judgment  described  in  §  75,  Newton's  prismatic
analysis  of  the  light  observed,  or  something  equivalent  to  it,  is
necessary.  Prismatic  analysis  was  used  by  Rayleigh  himself  for
the  blue  light  of  the  sky,  actually  before  he  had  worked  out
his  dynamical  theory.  He  compared  the  prismatic  spectrum  of
light  from  the  zenith  with  that  of  sunlight  diffused  through
white  paper ;  and  by  aid  of  a  curve  drawn  from  about  thirty
comparisons  ranging  over  the  spectrum  from  C  to  beyond  F,
found  the  following  results  for  four  different  wave-lengths.

C

Wave-length 656'2

Observed  brightness ... 1
Calculated  according  to  \~^  . 1

On  these  he  makes  the  following  remarks  : — "  It  should  be
"  noticed  that  the  sky  compared  with  diffused  light  was  even
"  bluer  than  theory  makes  it,  on  the  supposition  that  the  diffused
"  light  through  the  paper  may  be  taken  as  similar  to  that  whose
"  scattering  illuminates  the  sky.  It  is  possible  that  the  paper
"  was  slightly  yellow  ;  or  the  cause  may  lie  in  the  yellowness
"  of  sunlight  as  it  reaches  us  compared  with  the  colour  it
"  possesses  in  the  upper  regions  of  the  atmosphere.  It  would
"  be  a  mistake  to  lay  any  great  stress  on  the  observations  in
"  their  present  incomplete  form  ;  but  at  any  rate  they  show  that
"a  colour  more  or  less  like  that  of  the  sky  would  result  from

D

h

F

589-2

517-3

48G-2

1-64

2-84

8-60

1-54

2-52

3-34

320  LECTURE XYII.

Molecular.  "  taking  the  elements  of  white  light  in  quantities  proportional
"  to  \~*.  I  do  not  know  how  it  may  strike  others ;  but  in-
"  dividually  T  was  not  prepared  for  so  great  a  difference  as  the
"  observations  show,  the  ratio  for  F  being  more  than  three  times
"as  great  as  for  G."  For  myself  I  thoroughly  agree  with  this
last  sentence  of  Rayleigh's.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the
trustworthiness  of  his  observational  results;  but  it  seems  to  me
most  probable,  or  almost  certain,  that  the  yellowness,  or  orange-
colour,  of  the  sunlight  seen  through  the  paper,  caused  by  larger
absorption  of  green,  blue,  and  violet  ra^^s,  explains  the  extreme
relative  richness  in  green  blue,  and  violet  rays  which  the  results
show  for  the  zenith  blue  sky  observed.

§  77.  An  elaborate  series  of  researches  on  the  blue  of  the
sky  on  twenty-two  days  from  July,  1900,  to  February,  1901,  is
described  in  a  very  interesting  paper,  "  Ricerche  sul  Bleu  del
Cielo,"  a  dissertation  presented  to  the  Royal  University  of  Rome
by  Dr  Giuseppe  Zettwuch,  as  a  thesis  for  his  degree  of  Doctor
in  Physics.  In  these  researches,  prismatically  analysed  light  from
the  sky  was  compared  with  prismatically  analysed  direct  sunlight
reduced  by  passage  through  a  narrow  slit ;  and  the  results  were
therefore  not  vitiated  by  unequal  absorptions  of  direct  sunlight
in  the  apparatus.  A  translation  of  the  author's  own  account
of  his  conclusions  is  published  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine
for  August,  1902;  by  which  it  will  be  seen  that  the  blueness
of  the  sky,  even  when  of  most  serene  azure,  was  always  much
less  deep  than  the  true  Rayleigh  blue  defined  by  the  X~*  law.
Hence,  according  to  Rayleigh's  theory  (see  §  53  above)  much  of
the  light  must  always  have  come  from  particles  not  exceedingly
small  in  proportion  to  the  wave-length.  Thus  in  Zettwuch's
researches  we  have  a  large  confirmation  of  the  views  expressed
in  §§  54,  58,  61,  74  above,  and  §§  78,  79  below.

§  78.  Through  the  kindness  of  Professor  Becker,  I  am  no^v
able  to  supplement  Bouguer's  170-year  old  information  with  the
results  of  an  admirable  extension  of  his  investigation  by  Professor
Muller  of  the  Potsdam  Observatory,  in  which  the  proportion
(denoted  by  p  in  the  formula  below)  transmitted  down  to  sea-level
of  homogeneous  light  entering  our  atmosphere  vertically  is  found
for  all  wave-lengths  from  4"4.10~^  to  6"8.10~'',  by  comparison  of

ATMOSPHERIC  ABSORPTION  ANALYSED  BY  MULLER  AND  BECKER.  321

the  solar  spectrum  with  the  spectrum  of  a  petroleum  flame,  for  Molecular,
different  zenith  distances  of  the  sun.  It  is  to  be  presumed,
although  I  do  not  find  it  so  stated,  that  only  the  clearest
atmosphere  available  at  Potsdam  was  used  in  these  observations.
For  the  sake  of  comparison  with  Rayleigh's  theory,  Professor
Becker  has  arithmetically  resolved  Mtiller's  logarithmic  results
into  two  parts ;  one  constant,  and  the  other  varying  inversely  as
the  fourth  power  of  the  wave-length.  The  resulting  formula*,
modified  to  facilitate  comparison  with  §§  57 — 59  above,  is  as
follows  :

p  ^  g-( -0887+ •0772^^1)  _  ■2lf)9,€~'°''^^^~* (33),

where  z  =  \-^6  .  10~®.  In  respect  to  the  two  factors  here  shown,
we  may  say  roughly  that  the  first  factor  is  due  to  suspended
particles  too  large,  and  the  second  to  particles  not  too  large,  for
the  application  of  Rayleigh's  law.  For  the  case  of  A,  =  6  .  10~^
(^  =  1)  this  gives

p  = -9152. -9258  =  -847 (34).

§  79. Taking  now  the last  term  in the  index  and  the  last

factor  shown  in  (34)  and  dealing  with  it  according  to  §§  57 — 59

above;  and  still,  as  in  §  55,  using  k  to  denote  the  proportionate

loss  of  light per  centimetre  due to  particles  small  enough for

Rayleigh's theory,  whether "  suspended particles " or ultimate

molecules  of  air,  or  both ;  we have e~*'^''°"°^  =  '9258  which gives

^^-1  =  10"76 .  10'' cms. Hence if,  as in §  58,  we  suppose for a

moment the want of perfect transparency  thus  defined to be

wholly  due  to  the  ultimate  molecules  of  air,  we  should  have,  by

T  (jD'  —  D)
the  dynamics  of  refractivity,  n -^^-y^ =  '0006  ;  and  thence  by

(1)  of  §  55  with  X  =  6.10~^  we  should  find  for  the  number  of
molecules  per  cubic  centimetre  n  =  2"47 .  10^".  But  it  is  quite
certain  that  a  part,  and  most  probable  that  a  large  part,  of  the  want
of  transparency  produced  by  particles  small  enough  for  Rayleigh's
theory  is  due  to  "  suspended  particles  "  larger  than  the  ultimate
molecules :  and  we  infer  that  the  number  of  ultimate  molecules
per  cubic  centimetre  is  greater  than,  and  probably  very  much
greater  than,  247  .  10^**.  Thus  from  the  surer  and  more  complete
data  of Miiller  regarding  extinction  of  light  of  different  wave-

*  Miiller,  Die  Photometrie  der  Gestirne,  p.  140.
T.  L.  21

322

LECTURE XVII.

Moleculai-.  lengths  traversing  the  air,  we  find  an  inferior  limit  for  the  number
of  molecules  per  cubic  centimetre  nearly  three  times  as  great  as
that  which  Rayleigh  showed  to  be  proved  from  Bouguer's  datum.

§  80.  Taking,  somewhat  arbitrarily,  as  the  result  of  §§  23 — 77
that  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  cubic  centimetre  of  a  perfect
gas  at  standard  temperature  and  pressure  is  lO'-",  we  have  the
following  interesting  table  of  conclusions  regarding  the  weights
of  atoms  and  the  molecular  dimensions  of  liquefied  gases,  of  water,
of  ice,  and  of  solid  metals.

Mass  of  atom

Number  of
atoms,  or

Distance  in  cm.
from  centre
to  centre  if

ranged  in  cubic

Substance

or  of  H2O

Density

of  molecules

in  grammes

H2O,  in
cub.  cm.

order  with
actual  density

H

0-45 .  10-2^

liquid  at  17°  absolute

•090

200  .  1021

1-71 .  10-s

0

7-15 „

,, ,,  freezing  point

1-27

178 „

1-78 „

HjO

8-05 „

water

100

124 ,,

200 „

H2O

8-05 „

ice

•917

114 ,,

2-06 „

H2O

8-05 „

vapour  at  0°  C. -487  .  IQ-s

605 .  1015

118-2

N

6-29 „

liquid

1-047

166 .  1021

1-82 „

Argon

17-81 „

^^

1-42

79-7,,

2-32 „

Gold

88-52 „

solid

19-32

218 ,,

1-66 „

Silver

48-47 „

>)

10-53

217 ,,

1-66 „

Copper

28-43 „

,,

8-95

315 „

1-47 „

Iron

25-15 „

,,

7^86

313 ,,

1-47 „

Zinc

29-80 „

"

7^15

245 „

1-60 „

§  81.  In  the  introductory  Lecture  (p.  14)  we  considered  the
question  "  are  the  vibrations  of  light  perjyendicular  to,  or  are  they
"  in,  the  plane  of  polarization  ? — defining  the  plane  of  polarization
"as  the  plane  through  the  incident  and  reflected  rays,  for  light
"polarized  by  reflection."  We  are  now  able  to  answer  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  of  polarization,  with  great  confidence  founded
on  two  experimental  proofs  both  given  by  Stokes,  and  each  of
them  alone  sufficient,  I  believe,  for  the  conclusion.

I.  The  observed  fact  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  light  of
the  blue  sky  looked  at  in  any  direction  perpendicular  to  the
direction  of  the  sun,  and  not  too  nearly  horizontal,  is  polarized  in
the  plane  through  the  sun ;  interpreted  according  to  the  dynamics
of  Lecture  VIIL,  pp.  88,  89,  90,  and  of  Lecture  XVIL,  §§  52,  54,
63.

II.  Observation  of  the  change  of  the  plane  of  polarization  ex-
perienced by  plane  polarized  light  when  diffractionally  changed  in

STOKES, HOLTZMANN, LORENZ, RAYLEIGH.  323

direction  through  a  large  angle  by  passage  across  a  Fraunhofer  Molar,
grating;  described  and  interpreted  in  Part  II.  of  his  great  paper
"  On  the  Dynamical  Theory  of  Diffraction*."  In  a  short  Appendix,
pp.  327,  828,  added  to  his  Reprint,  Stokes  notices  experiments
by  HoItzniann-|-,  published  soon  after  that  paper,  leading  to
results  seemingly  at  variance  with  its  conclusions,  and  gives  a
probable  explanation  of  the  reason  for  the  discrepance;  and  he  refers
to  later  experiments  agreeing  with  his  own,  by  Lorenz  of  Denmark.

Thus  we  find  in  II.  confirmation  of  the  conclusion,  first  drawn
by  Stokes  from  I.,  that  the  vibrations  in  plane  polarized  light
are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  polarization.

§  81',  Finally,  we  have  still  stronger  confirmation  of  Stokes's
original  conclusion,  in  fact  an  irrefragable  independent  demonstra-
tion, that  the  vibrations  of  light  are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
polarization,  by  Rayleigh ;  founded  on  a  remarkable  discovery,
made  independently  by  himself  and  Lorenz  of  Denmark,  regarding
the  reflection  of  waves  at  a  plane  interface  between  two  elastic
solids  of  different  rigidities  but  equal  densities :  That,  when  the
difference  of  rigidities  is  small,  and  when  the  vibratians  are  in
the  plane  of  incidence,  there  are  two  angles  of  incidence  (tt/S
and  Stt/S),  each  of  which  gives  total  extinction  of  the  reflected
light.  That  is  to  say  ;  instead  of  one  "  polarizing-angle,"  tan~i/x;
there  are  two  "  polarizing-angles  "  22°.5  and  67°'5  ;  which  is  utterly
inconsistent  with  observation.  The  old-known  fact  (proved  in  §  123
below)  that,  if  densities  are  equal  and  rigidities  unequal,  vibrations
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence  give  reflected  light  obeying
Fresnel's  "  tan^^ent "  law  and  therefore  vanishing  when  the  angle
of  incidence  is  tan~'  fx,  had  rendered  very  tempting,  the  false
supposition  that  light  polarized  by  reflection  at  incidence  tan~^  jjl
has  its  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence ;  but  this  supposition
is  absolutely  disproved  by  the  two  angles  of  extinction  of  the
reflected  ray  which  it  implies  for  vibrations  in  the  plane  of
incidence  and  reflection.

We  may  consider  it  as  one  of  the  surest  doctrines  through  the
whole  range  of  natural  philosophy,  that  plane-polarized  light  consists
of  vibrations  of  ether  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  polarization.

*  Reprint  of  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  pp.  290 — 327.
t  Poggendorff's  Annalen,  Vol.  xcix.  (1856),  p.  446,  or  Philosophical  Magazine,
Vol.  XIII.  p.  135.

21—2

LECTURE  XVIII.

Thursday,  October  16,  5  p.m. Written  cifresh  1902.

Refection  of  Light.

Molar.  I  82.  The  subject  of  this  Lecture  when  originally  given  was
"Reflection  and  Refraction  of  Light,"  I  have  recently  found  it
convenient  to  omit  "Refraction"  from  the  title  because  (§  130
below),  if  the  reflecting  substance  is  transparent,  and  if  we
know  the  laws  of  propagation  of  ethereal  waves  through  it,  we
can  calculate  the  amount  and  quality  of  the  refracted  light  for
every  quality  of  incident  light,  and  every  angle  of  incidence,
when  we  know  the  amount  and  quality  of  the  reflected  light.
When  the  reflecting  substance  is  opaque  there  is  no  "  refracted  "
light ;  but,  co-periodic  with  the  motion  which  constitutes  the
incident  light,  there  is  a  vibratory  motion  in  the  ether  among
the  matter  of  the  reflecting  body,  diminishing  in  amplitude
according  to  the  exponential  law,  6~™°,  with  increasing  distance
I)  from  the  interface.  When  m~^  is  equal  to  10,000  wave-lengths,
say  half-a-centimetre,  the  amplitude  of  the  disturbance  at  one-
half  centimetre  inwards  from  the  interface  would  be  e~^  of  the
amplitude  of  the  entering  light,  and  the  intensity  would  be  e"^,
or  l/7'39,  of  the  intensity  of  the  entering  light.  The  substance
might  or  might  not,  as  we  please,  be  called  opaque ;  but  it  would
be  so  far  from  being  perfectly  opaque  that  both  theoretically
and  experimentally  we  might  conveniently  deal  with  the  case
according  to  tlie  ordinary  doctrine  of  "  reflected  "  and  "  refracted  "
light.  The  index  of  refraction  might  be  definitely  measured  by
using  very  small  prisms,  '  ot  thicker  than  1  mm.  in  the  thickest
part.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  opacity  is  so  nearly
perfect  that  in~^  is  ten  wave-lengths,  or  two  or  three  wave-
lengths, or  less  than  a  wave-length,  we  have  no  proper  application
of  the  ordinary  law  of  refraction,  and  no  modification  of  it  can
conveniently  be  used.  Omission  to  perceive  this  negative  truth
has  led  some  experimenters  to  waste  precious  time  and  work  in
making,  and experimenting  with,  transparent metal prisms of

TRANSLUCENCE OF METALLIC FILMS.  325

thickness  varying  from  as  nearly  nothing  as  possible  at  the  edge,  Molar,
to  something  like  the  thickness  of  ordinary  gold-leaf  at  distance
of  two  or  three  millimetres  from  the  edge.

§  83.  A  much  more  proper  mode  of  investigating  the  pro-
pagation of  ethereal  vibrations  through  metals  is  that  followed
first,  I  believe,  by  Quincke,  and  afterwards  by  other  able  experi-
menters ;  in  which  an  exceedingly  thin  uniform  plate  of  the  solid
is  used,  and  the  retardation  of  phase  (found  negative  for  metals
by  Quincke  !)  of  light  transmitted  through  it  is  measured  by  the
well-known  interferential  method.  Some  mathematical  theorists
have  somewhat  marred  their  work  by  holding  on  to  "  refraction,"
and  giving  wild  sets  of  real  numbers  for  refractive  indices*  of
metals  (different  for  different  incidences !),  in  their  treatment  of
light  reflected  from  metals ;  after  MacCullagh  and  Cauchy  had
pointed  out  that  the  main  observed  results  regarding  the  reflection
of  light  from  metals  can  be  expressed  with  some  approach  to
accuracy  by  Fresnel's  formulas  with  fi  =  tp  +  q,  where  p  and  q
are  real  numbers,  and  p  certainly  not  zero :  q  very  nearly  zero  for
silver,  or  quite  zero  for  what  I  propose  to  call  ideal  silver  (§§  150,
151  below).  It  was  consideration  of  these  circumstances  which
led  me  to  drop  "  Refraction  "  fi'om  the  title  of  Lecture  XVIII.

I  84.  The  theory  of  propagation  of  the  ethereal  motion
through  an  opaque  solid,  due  to  any  disturbance  in  any  part  of
it,  including  that  produced  by  light  incident  on  its  surface,  is  a
most  important  subject  for  experimental  investigation,  and  for
work  in  mathematical  dynamics.  The  theory  to  be  tried  for
(§  159)  is  that  of  the  propagation  of  vibratory  motion  through
ether,  when  under  the  influence  of  molecules  of  ponderable  matter,
causing  the  formulas  for  wave-motion  to  be  modified  by  making
the  square  of  the  propagational  velocity  a  real  negative  quantity,
or  a  complex.  We  shall  see  in  §  159  below  that  a  new  molecular
doctrine  gives  a  thoroughly  satisfactory  dynamical  theory  of
what  I  li^:e  called  ideal  silver,  a  substance  which  reflects  light
without  loss  at  every  incidence  and  in  every  polarizational
azimuth ;  its  quality  in  wave-theory  being  defined  by  a  real
negative  quantity  for  l-he  square  of  the  propagational  velocity
of  imaginary  waves through ether  within  it. Liquid  mercury,

*  yu,  is  essentially  the  ratio  of  the  propagational  velocities  in  the  two  mediums,
one  of  which  may,  with  good  dynamical  reason,  be  a  complex  imaginary.  See
§8  144—152.

826  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  or  quicksilver  as  it  used  to  be  called,  may  possibly,  when  tested
with  a  very  perfectly  purified  surface,  be  found  to  reflect  light  as
well  as,  or  nearly  as  well  as,  Sir  John  Conroy  succeeded  in  getting
a  silver  surface  to  do  (§  88  below) ;  and  may  therefore  fulfil  my
definition  of  ideal  silver:  though  Rayleigh  found  only  "753  of  the
incident  light,  to  be  reflected  from  fairly  clean  mercury  under  air*.

§  85.  Without  any  scientific  photometry,  any  one  can  see  that
the  light  reflected  from  gold,  steel,  copper,  brass,  tin,  zinc,  however
well  polished,  is  very  much  less  than  from  silver,  and  hence  very
much  less  than  the  whole  incident  light.  Though  many  excellent
investigations  have  been  made  by  many  able  experimenters  on
the  polarizational  analysis  of  light  reflected  from  all  these  metals,
few  of  them  have  given  results  as  to  the  proportion  of  the  whole
reflected,  to  the  whole  incident,  light.  It  seems  indeed  that,
besides  Rayleigh,  only  two  observers,  Potterf  and  Conroy;]:,  have
directly  compared  the  whole  light  reflected  from  metals  with  the
whole  incident  light  (see  §  88  below).  Conroy,  using  his  most
perfect  silver  mirror,  and  angle  of  incidence  30°,  found  the  propor-
tion of  reflected  light  to  incident  light  to  be  97  o  percent.,  for  light
vibrating  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence,  and  99'9  per
cent,  for  light  vibrating  in§  the  plane  of  incidence ;  and  therefore
98'6  per  cent,  for  common  un  polarized  light.  With  speculum-metal
and  steel  and  tin  mirrors,  for  30°  of  incidence,  and  unpolarized
light,  he  found  the  reflected  light  to  be ; — speculum-metal  66'9
per  cent.,  steel  54*9  per  cent.,  and  tin  44'4  per  cent.||  From  these
measurements,  as  well  as  from  ordinary  non-scientific  observation,
we  see  that  there  is  essentially  much  light  lost  in  reflection  from
otlier  metals  than  silver;  and,  as  the  light  does  not  travel  through
the  metal,  it  is  quite  certain  that  its  energy  must  be  converted
into  heat  in  an  exceedingly  thin  surface-region  of  the  metal
(certainly  not  more  than  two  or  three  wave-lengths).  Hence  the
square  of  the  imaginary  velocity  of  the  imaginary  light-wave  in
other metals than silver cannot  be a  real negative  quantity;

*  Phil.  Mag.  1892  ;  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  iv.

t  Edinburgh  Journal  of  Science,  Vol.  in.  1830,  pp.  278—288.

+  Proc.  R.  S.  Vol.  xxvni.  Jan.  1879,  pp.  242—250;  Vol.  xxxi.  Mar.  1881,
pp.  486—500;  Vol.  xxxv.  Feb.  1883,  pp.  26—41;  Vol.  xxxvi.  Jan.  1884,  pp.  187—
198 ;  Vol.  XXXVII.  May,  1884,  pp.  36—42.

§  I  have  found  no  other  recorded  case  of  greater  reflectivity  of  vibrations  in
than  of  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence.

II  Proc.  R.  S.  Feb.  1883,  Vol.  xxxv,  pp.  31,  32.

MOLECULARLY SMOOTH; NEAREST TO PERFECT POLISH. 327

because,  as  we  readily  see  from  the  mathematical  treatment,  this  Molar,
would  imply  no  conversion  of  light-energy  into  heat,  an4  would
therefore  (§§  150,  157  below)  imply  total  reflection  at  every  angle
of  incidence.  Dynamical  theory  is  sviggested  in  §  159,  to  explain
conversion  of  incident  light  into  heat,  among  the  molecules
within  two  or  three  wave-lengths  of  the  boundary  of  the  metallic
mirror.  This  is  only  an  outlying  part  of  the  whole  field  of  in-
vestigation required  to  explain  all  kinds  of  opacity  in  all  kinds
of  matter,  solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous.

§  86.  Let  us  think  now  of  the  reflection  of  light  from  perfectly
polished  surfaces.  If  the  substance  is  infinitely  fine-grained  the
polish  may  be  practically  perfect ;  eo  that  no  light  is  reflected
except  according  to  the  law  of  equal  angles  of  incidence  and
reflection.  But  in  reality  the  molecular  structure  of  solids  gives
a  surface  which  is  essentially  not  infinitely  fine-grained  :  and  the
nearest  approach  to  perfect  polish  produced  by  art,  or  found  in
nature,  on  the  surfaces  of  liquids  and  on  crystalliue  or  fractured
surfaces  of  solids,  is  illustrated  by  a  gravel-covered  road  made  as
smooth  as  a.  steam-roller  can  make  it.  Optically,  the  polish  would
be  little  less  than  perfect  if  the  distances  between  nearest  neigh-
bours in  the  molecular  structure  are  very  small  in  comparison  with
the  wave-length  of  the  incident  light.  In  §  80  we  estimated  the
distances  between  nearest  molecular  neighbours  in  ordinary  solids
and  liquids  at  from  lb  .  10~*  to  2  .  10~*  cm.,  which  is  from  1/4000
to  1/3000  of  the  mean  wave-length  of  visible  light  (6 .  10~^  cm.).
The  best  possible  polish  is  therefore  certainly  almost  quite  practi-
cally perfect  in  respect  to  the  reflection  of  light.  But  if  the  work
of  the  steam-roller  is  anything  less  than  as  perfect  as  it  can  pos-
sibly be,  there  are  irregular  hollows  (bowls  or  craters)  of  breadths
extending,  say,  to  as  much  as  1/200  of  the  wave-length  of  mean
visible  light;  and  the  polish  would  probably  not  be  optically  perfect.
The  want  of  perfectness  would  be  shown  by  a  very  faint  blue  light,
scattered  in  all  directions  from  a  polished  mirror  illuminated  only
by  a  single  lamp  or  by  the  sun.  The  best  way  to  look  for  this
blue  light  would  be  to  admit  sunlight  into  an  otherwise  dark  room
through  a  round  hole  in  a  window-shutter  or  a  metal  screen,  as
thoroughly  LHckened  as  possible  on  the  side  next  the  room ;  and
place  t>.e  mirror  to  be  tested  in  the  centre  of  the  beam  of  light  at
a  convenient  distance  from  the  hole.  If  the  polish  is  optically
perfect,  no  light  is  seen  from  any  part  of  the  mirror  by  an  eye

328  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  placed  anywhere  not  in  the  course  of  the  properly  reflected  light
from  sun  or  sky.  That  is  to  say,  the  whole  room  being  dark,  and
the  screen  around  the  hole  perfectly  black,  the  whole  mirror  would
seem  perfectl}^  black  when  looked  at  by  an  eye  so  placed  as  not  to
see  an  image  (of  the  hole,  and  therefore)  of  any  part  of  the  sky  or
sun.  A  condition  of  polish  very  nearly,  hut  not  quite,  optically
perfect,  would  be  shown  by  a  faint  violet-blue  light  from  the
surface  of  the  mirror  instead  of  absolute  blackness.  The  tint  of
this  light  would  be  the  true  Rayleigh  \~*  blue,  if  the  want  of  per-
fectness  of  the  polish  is  due  to  craters  small  in  comparison  with
the  wave-length  (even  though  large  in  comparison  with  distances
between  nearest  molecular  neighbours).  When  this  condition  is
fulfilled,  the  blue  light  due  to  want  of  perfectness  in  the  polish,
seen  on  the  surface  if  viewed  in  any  direction  perpendicular  to  the
direction  of  the  incident  beam,  would  be  found  completely  polar-
ized in  the  plane  of  these  two  directions.  Everything  in  §  86  is
applicable  to  reflection  from  any  kind  of  surface,  whether  the
reflecting  body  be  solid  or  liquid,  or  metallic,  or  opaque  with  any
kind  of  opacity,  or  transparent.  Experimental  examination  of  the
polish  of  natural  faces  of  crystals  will  be  interesting.

§  87.  Valuable  photometric  experiments  with  reference  to
reflection  of  light  by  metals  have  been  made  by  Bouguer,  Biot,
Brewster,  Potter,  Jamin,  Quincke,  De  Senarmont,  De  la  Provostaye
and  Desains,  and  Conroy*.  But  much  more  is  to  be  desired,  not
only  as  to  direct  reflection  from  metals,  but  as  to  reflection  at
all  angles  of  incidence  from  metals  and  other  opaque  and  trans-
parent solids  and  liquids.  In  each  case  the  intensity  of  the
whole  reflected  light  should  be  compared  with  the  intensity  of
the  whole  incident  light ;  in  the  first  place  without  any  artificial
polarization  of  the  incident,  and  without  polarizational  analysis
of  the  reflected,  light.  It  is  greatly  to  be  desired  that  thorough
investigation  of  this  kind  should  be  made.  It  would  be  quite  an
easy  kind  of  work-f-  because  roughly  approximate  photometry  is

*  Bouguer,  Traite  d'Optique,  1760,  pp.  27,  131:  Biot,  Ann.  de  Chimie,  1815,
Vol.  xciv.  p.  209:  Brewster,  A  Treatise  on  new  Philosophical  Instruments,  Edin.
1813,  p.  347;  Phil.  Trans.  1830,  p.  69:  Potter,  Edin.  Jour,  of  Science,  1830:  De  la
Provostaye  and  Desains,  Aim.  de  Chim.  et  de  Phys.  [3],  1849,  Vol.  xxvii.  p.  109,  and
1850,  Vol.  XXX.  pp.  159,  276:  Conroy,  Proc.  E.  S. ;  see  §  84  above.  See  Mascart,
Traite  d'Optique,  Vol.  ii.  1891,  pp.  441—459.

t  Bouguer,  Traite  d'Optique,  1760,  pp.  27, 131 :  Arago,  (Euvres  Completes,  Vol.  x.
pp.  150,  185,  216,  468. See  Mascart,  Traite  d'Optique,  Vol.  ii.  1891,  pp.  441—501.

reflectivities; fresnel,  potter,  jamin,  and  conroy. 329

always  easy,  except  when  rendered  impossible  by  difference  of  Molar,
colour  in  the  lights  to  be  compared.

Absolute  determinations  of  reflected  lig)  t  per  unit  of  incident
light  cannot  be  made  with  great  accuracy  b"  cause  of  the  inherent
difficulty,  or  practical  impossibility,  of  very  accurate  photometric
observations,  even  when,  as  is  largely  the  case  for  reflected  lights,
there  is  no  perceptible  difference  of  tint  between  the  lights  to  be
compared.

§  88.  The  accompanying  diagram,  fig.  1,  shows,  for  angles  of
incidence  from  10°  to  80°,  the  reflectivities*  of  silver,  speculum-

u

—i

»

sPc

» — ,

a

& —

"^

vei

'  /

V7,

Tl

>— «

> — ■

j

1

1

•1

s

/f>e

'fy

-  /

J

/.

;|

i
^

y-

— <;

>■'*<

■\^c

\^

Mi

^t  I

u

^

»■ — «

1

y

(!'.■

1

^ ^

■--«

L^

t

k--<

1 r

~  -(
<

>""(

(

f  ;

f

St

ee

I

*"-i

L  'vJ

^

>*-(

p,_

y--"

7

' i

'-

■ \

'"^

1

' N

y

,  ^

1 — <

y

6

^

<^

r

JTL,

r^

^

— *

y^

k

4

(

^-i-

1

/

/

'/i

1

y

^j

7

inl

fd

^

z'

/

/

2

Uo

Uy/f

/

/

o  7  /"

if^S\

A

.A

/

F

'^n

t  (.

PI'

^

ri'

^^

20"

30°

60'

.2 SM

.';3 O O D
02 Q Q pR

Fig.  1.

*  I  propose  the  word  "reflectivity"  to  designate  the  ratio  of  the  whole  reflected
light  to  the  whole  incident  light,  whether  the  incident  light  is  unpolarized  as  in
fig.  1;  or  plane  polarized,  either  in  or  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence,
as  in  figs.  4 — 7;  and  whether  it  is  oi-dinary  white  light,  or  homogeneous  light,  or
light  of  any  mixed  tint.

830  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  metal,  steel,  and  tin,  according  to  the  observations  of  Potter,
Conroy,  and  Jamin ;  and  for  all  incidences  from  0''  to  90°  the
reflectivities  of  diamond,  flint-glass,  and  water,  calculated  from
Fresnel's  admirable  formulas.  These  are,  for  almost  all  trans-
parent bodies  even  of  so  high  refractivity  as  diamond,  (§§  96,  100
below),  probably  very  much  nearer  the  truth  than  any  photo-
metric observations  hitherto  made,  or  possible  to  human  eyes.
The  ordinates  represent  the  reflected  light  in  percentage  of  the
incident  light,  at  the  angles  of  incidence  represented  by  the
abscissas.  The  reflectivities  thus  given  for  the  three  transparent
bodies  are  the  means  of  the  reflectivities  given  in  figs.  4,  5,  6  of  §  102
below  for  light  polarized  in,  and  perpendicular  to,  the  plane  of
incidence  and  reflection.  Jamin's  results*  for  steel  are  given  by
himself  as  the  means  of  the  reflectivities  for  light  polarized  in,
and  perpendicular  to,  the  plane  of  incidence  and  reflection ;  each
determined  photometrically  by  comparison  with  reflectivities  of
glass  calculated  from  Fresnel's  formulas.  The  six  curves  for  metals,
of  this  diagram  (fig.  1),  show  I  believe  all  the  reflectivities  that
have  hitherto  been  determined  by  observation ;  except  those  of
Jaminf  for  normal  incidence  of  homogeneous  lights  from  red  to
violet  on  metals,  and  Rayleigh'sJ  for  nearly  normal  incidence  of
white  light  on  mercury  and  glass.  All  the  curves  meet,  or  if
ideally  produced  meet,  in  the  right-hand  top  corner,  showing  total
reflection  at  grazing  incidence.

§  89.  The  accompanying  sketches  (figs.  2  a,  2  b)  represent
what  (on  substantially  the  principle  of  Bouguer,  Potter,  and
Conroy)  seems  to  me  the  best  and  simplest  plan  for  making
photometric  determinations  of  reflectivity.  The  centres  of  lamps,
mirror,  and  screen,  are  all  in  one  horizontal  plane,  which  is  taken
as  the  plane  of  the  drawings.  The  screens  and  reflecting  face  of
the  mirror  are  vertical  planes.  R  is  the  reflecting  surface,  shown
as  one  of  the  faces  of  an  ^cute-angled  prism.  L,  L'  are  two  as
nearly  as  may  be  equal  and  similar  lamps  (the  smaller  the
horizontal  dimensions  the  better  §,  provided  the  light  shed  on  the

*  Mascart,  Traite  d'Optique,  Vol.  ii.  pp.  534,  536.  t  Ibid.  p.  544.

+  Scientific  Papers,  Vols.  ii.  and  iv. ;  Proc.  R.S.  1886,  Phil.  Mag.  1892.

§  The  best  non-electric  light  I  know  for  the  purpose  is  the  ordinary  flat-wicked
paraffin-lamp,  with  a  screen  having  a  narrow  vertical  slot  placed  close  to  the  lamp-
glass,  with  its  medial  line  in  the  middle  plane  of  the  flat  flame.  The  object  of  the
screen  is  to  cut  off  light  reflected  from  the  glass  funnel,  without  intercepting  any
of  the  light  of  the  flame  itself;  the  width  of  the  slot  should  therefore  he  very

EXPERIMENTAL METHOD FOR REFLECTIVITIES.

331

mirror  is  sufficient). 11  is  too  far  from  R  to  allow  its  true  position  Molar,
to  be  shown  on  the  diagram,  but  its  direc,  on  as  seen  from  K  is
indicated  by  a  broken  straight  line. W  is  an  opaque  screen  coated

W

H

^

t

U

Fig.  2  b.

Fig.  2  a,

slightlj  greater  than  the  thickness  of  the  flame.  This  arrangement  gives  a  much
finer  and  steadier  Hne  of  light  than  any  unscreened  candle,  and  vastly  more  light;
and  it  gives  more  light  than  comes  through  a  slot  of  the  same  width  from  a
round-wicked  paraffin-lamp.  An  electric  lamp  of  the  original  Edison  "hair-pin"
pattern,  with  a  slotted  screen  to  cut  off  reflected  light  from  the  glass,  would  be
more  convenient  than  the  paraffin-lamp,  and  give  more  light  with  finer  shadows.

332  LECTUKE XVIII.

Molar,  with  white  paper  on  the  side  next  E,  the  eye  of  the  observer.
Fig.  2  a  and  fig.  2  h  show  respectively  the  positions  for  very
nearly  direct  incidence,  and  for  incidence  about  60".  Each
drawing  shows,  on  a  scale  of  about  one-tenth  or  one-twentieth,
approximately  the  dimensions  convenient  for  the  case  in  which
the  mirror  is  a  surface  of  flint-glass  of  refractive  index  1"714;
and,  as  according  to  Fresnel's  theory,  represented  by  the  mean  of
the  ordinates  of  curves  1  and  2  of  fig.  6  (§  102  below),  having  re-
flectivities 1/14  and  1/4  at  incidences  0°  and  60°.  The  eye  at  E
sees  a  narrow  portion  of  the  white  screen  next  the  right-hand  edge
illuminated  only  by  I,  the  image  of  X  in  the  mirror;  and  all  of  the
screen  on  the  left  of  that  portion,  illuminated  by  the  distant  lamp
L'.  The  distant  lamp  is  moved  nearer  or  farther  till  the  light  is
judged  equal  on  the  two  sides  of  the  border  line  between  the
illumination  due  to  I,  the  image  of  L,  and  the  direct  illumination
due  to  L'.  By  shifting  L'  slightly  to  the  right,  or  slightly  to  the
left,  we  may  arrange  to  have  either  a  very  narrow  dark  space,  or
a  space  of  double  brightness,  between  the  two  illuminations ;  and
thus  the  eye  is  assisted  in  judging  as  to  the  perfect  equality  of
the  two.  When,  as  in  fig.  2  h,  the  angle  of  incidence  exceeds
45°  a  dark  screen  DD  is  needed  to  prevent  the  light  of  L  from
shining  directly  on  the  white  screen,  W.  The  method,  with  the
details  I  have  indicated,  is  thoroughly  convenient  for  reflecting
solids,  whether  transparent  or  metallic  or  of  other  qualities  of
opacity ;  provided  the  mirror  can  be  made  of  not  less  than  two
or  three  centimetres  breadth.  But,  as  in  the  case  of  diamond,
when  only  a  very  small  mirror  is  available,  modification  of  the
method  to  allow  direct  vision  of  the  lights  to  be  compared  (with-
out projection  on  a  white  screen)  would  be  preferable  or  necessary.

'  For  liquids,  of  course,  modification  would  be  necessary  to  suit  it
for  reflection  in  a  vertical  plane.

§  90.  As  remarked  at  the  end  of  §  87,  absolute  determinations
of  reflectivities  cannot  be  made  with  great  accuracy,  because  of  the
imperfectness  of  perceptivity  of  the  eye  in  respect  to  relative
strengths  of  light,  even  when  the  tints  are  exactly  the  same.  On
the  other  hand,  a  very  high  degree  of  accuracy  is  readily  attainable
by  the  following  method*,  when  the  problem  is  to  compare,  for
any  or  every  angle  of  incidence,  the  reflected  lights  due  to  the

*  Given  originally  by MacCuUagh. See his Collected Works,  p.  239; also
Stokes,  Collected  Works,  Vol.  iii.  p.  199.

POLARIZATIONAL ANALYSIS OF REFLECTED LIGHT.  833

incidence  of  equal  quantities  of  light  vibrating  in,  and  vibrating  Molar,
perpendicular  to,  the  plane  of  incidence.

Use  two  Nicol's  prisms,  which,  for  brevity,  I  shall  call  iVj  and
No,  in  the  course  of  the  incident  and  reflected  light  respectively.
Use  also  a  Fresnel's  rhomb  (F)  between  the  reflecting  surface
and  N^.  Set  iVo,  and  keep  it  permanently  set,  with  its  two
principal  planes  at  45°  to  the  plane  of  reflection,  but  with  facilities
for  turning  from  any  one  to  any  other  of  the  eight  positions  thus
defined,  to  secure  any  needful  accuracy  of  adjustment.  For  brevity,
I  shall  call  the  zeros  of  N^  and  F,  positions  when  their  principal
planes  are  at  angles  of  45°  to  the  plane  of  incidence  and
reflection.  In  the  course  of  an  observation  iVj  and  F  are  to  be
turned  through  varying  angles,  n  and  /,  from  their  zeros,  till
perfect  extinction  of  light  coming  through  No  is  obtained.

§  91.  To  begin  an  observation,  with  any  chosen  angle  of
incidence  of  the  light  on  the  reflecting  surface,  turn  N^  to  a
position  giving  as  nearly  as  possible  complete  extinction  of  light
emerging  from  N.^.  Improve  the  extinction,  if  you  can,  by  turning
F  in  either  direction,  and  get  the  best  extinction  possible  by
alternate  turnings  of  JSfi  and  F.  Absolutely  complete  extinction
is  thus  obtained  at  one  point  of  the  field  if  homogeneous  light
is  used,  and  if  the  Nicols  and  rhomb  are  theoretically  perfect
instruments.  The  results  of  the  completed  observation  are  the
two  angles  {n,  f)  through  which  iV^  and  F  must  be  turned  from
their  zero  positions  to  give  perfect  extinction  by  N^.  From  /
thus  found  we  calculate  by  two  simple  formulas,  (7)  of  §  93,
the  ratios  of  the  vibrational  amplitudes  of  the  two  constituents
defined  below,  {^,  g),  of  the  reflected  vibrations  in  the  plane  of
reflection,  to  the  vibrational  amplitude  ((7)  of  the  reflected  vibra-
tions perpendicular  to  that  plane.  The  definite  constituents  here
referred  to  are  {^)  vibrations  in  the  same  phase  as  G;  and  {g)
vibrations  in  phase  advanced  by  a  quarter-period  relatively  to  G.
It  is  clear  that  if  ^  =  0,  complete  extinction  would  be  had  without
turning  F  from  its  zero  position,  and  would  be  found  by  the
same  adjustment  of  N-^  as  if  there  were  no  Fresnel's  rhomb  in  the
train. (0  corresponds  to  the  C"  of  §§  117,  123,  below.)

I  92.  Figs.  3a,  36,  are  diagrams  in  planes  respectively  perpen-
dicular to  the  reflected,  and  to  the  incident,  light.  Let  0  be  a  point
in  the  course  of  the  light  between  the  reflecting  surface  and  the

334

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  Fresnel's  rhomb. Let  OG  be  the  plane  of  reflection  of  the  light  from
tlie  reflecting  surface,  and  let  OZ  be  perpendicular  to  that  plane.

O

Fig.  3  a.

Let  ON^  be  the  vibrational  plane*  of  the  second  Nicol;  and  OP
its  "plane  of  polarization  "  (being  perpendicular  to  OiVj).  Let  OF
be  the  plane  through  the  entering  ray,  and  perpendicular  to  the
facial  intersectionsj"  of  the  Fresnel's  rhomb  ;  shown  in  the  diagram
as  turned  through  an  angle  /=  N^OF  from  the  zero  position
ON^.  Let  OK  be  perpendicular  to  OF.  In  respect  to  signs  we
see  by  §  158^  (1)  that  in  fig.  3a,  for  reflected,  and  36  for  incident,
vibrations,  OG  is  positive.

Considering  the  light  coming  from  the  reflecting  surface  and
incident  on  the  Fresnel,  let  G  sin  at  be  the  component  along  OZ,
and  c^  sin  oat  —  g  cos  at  be  the  component  along  OG,  of  the  dis-
placement at  time  i  of  a  particle  of  ether  of  which  0  is  the
equilibrium  position,  ^'jC  and  gjC  are  two  functions  of  the  angle
of  incidence  to  be  determined  by  the  observation  now  described.
By  proper  resolutions  and  additions  for  vibrational  components
in  the  principal  planes  of  the  Fresnel,  we  find  as  follows  :

sino)^

sinwi

c/  cos

c^sin

and

—  cos  ft)

t  g  cos  {^  -Jj  along  OF  '

along  OF

OK

—  cos  at  g  sin

■>)

OK

•in

.(2).

*  I  use  this  expression  for  brevity  to  denote  the  plane  of  the  vibrations  of  light
transmitted  through  a  Nicol.

t  An  expression  used  to  denote  the  intersections  of  the  traversed  faces  and  the
reflecting  surfaces. See  §  158^  below.

POLARIZATIONAL ANALYSIS OF REFLl  ITED LIGHT.

335

By  the  two  total  internal  reflections  at  the  oblique  faces  of  the  Molar.
Fresnel,  vibrational  components  in  the  plane  OF  are  advanced  a
quarter-period  relatively  to  the  vibrational  components  perpen-
dicular to  OF.  Hence  to  find  the  vibrational  components  at  time
<  at  a  point  in  the  course  of  the  light  emerging  from  the  Fresnel,
we  must,  in  the  components  along  OF  of  (1)  and  (2),  change  the
sin  (ot  into  cos  wt,  and  change  the  cos  at  into  —  sin  wt ;  and  leave
unchanged  the  components  along  OK.  Thus  we  find  for  the
vibrational  components  at  the  chosen  point  in  the  course  of  the
light  from  the  Fresnel  towards  the  second  Nicol,  as  follows :

sin  mt g  cos
sin  wt

and

/3in(^-y)+Ccos(^-/)
—  cos  wt g  sin  (  -  —  f\

cos  (ot

along  OF
„ OK

along  OF
,. OK

...(3),

...(4).

^  93.  For  extinction  by  the  second  Nicol,  the  sum  of  all  the
vibrational  components  parallel  to  OiYo  of  the  light  reaching  it
must  be  null;  and  therefore,  by  the  proper  resolutions  and
additions,  and  by  equating  to  zero  separately  the  coefficients
of  s'm  cot  and  cos  cot  thus  found,  we  have

c^  sin  (^  -  /)  +  C  cos  (^  -  fj sinf  +  g  cos  [^  -  fj  cos/=  0

(5),

^  cos  (^  -/)  -  C'sin  (^  -  fj cos/+  g  sin  (^|  -/)  sin/=  0

(6).

Solving  these  equations  for  c^  and  g,  we  find

1+C0S4/ 2  sin  2/
^~2  +  sin4/^'  ^~2  +  sin4/'' ^  ^•

§  94.  Go  back  now  to  the  light  emerging  from  the  first
Nicol and incident on the reflecting surface. Let / be its

336

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  vibrational  amplitude. The  vibrational  amplitudes  of  its  com-
ponents in,  and  perpendicular  to,  the  plane  of  incidence  are

/  cos  i  ^  —  n

and

/  sin  ( —

when  the  Nicol  is  turned  from  its  zero  position,  OQ,  through  the
angle  n,  as  indicated  in  fig.  Sb  ;  ON-^  being  the  vibrational  plane  of
the  first  Nicol.

§  94'.  Let  S  be  the  ratio  of  reflected  to  incident  vibrational
amplitude  for  vibrational  component  'perpendicular  to  the  plane
OG.  Considering  next  the  component  of  the  incident  light  having
vibrations  in  the  plane  OG  ;  let  T  and  E  be  the  ratios  of  the  vibra-
tional amplitudes  of  two  particular  constituents  of  its  reflected
light  both  vibrating  in  the  plane  OG,  to  the  vibrational  amplitude
of  the  incident  component ;  these  two  constituents  being  respec-
tively in  the  same  phase  as  the  component  of  the  reflected  light
vibrating  perpendicular  to  OG,  and  in  phase  behind  it  by  a  quarter-
period*. We  have

C=-I

T

S'

s.

I  COS

"JT

.4

From  these  and  (7)  we  have

E

1  -I-  cos  4/  , (it
1^ ■ — r?  tan -

2  +  sm4/ V4

S

T, g  =  Icosrj-n]E...(8)

.(9).

-  2  sin  2f  , iTT
-. — fj  tan -r  -

2  +  sm4/ V4

*  When  the  reflecting  body  is  glass, or  other  transparent  isotropic  solid  or
liquid,  Fresnel's  prophecy  (we  cannot  call  it  physical  or  dynamical  theory)  declares

S=^

sin  (i  -  ,t)
sin  (i  +  ,t) '

T=  -

tan  (i  -  ,1)

E  =  0.

tan  (i  +  /)

The  notation  in  the  text  is  partially  borrowed  from  Rayleigh  (Scientific  Papers,
Vol.  III.  pp.  496 — 512)  who  used  S,  and  T,  to  denote  respectively  the  "sine-formula,"
and  the  "tangent-formula,"  of  Fresnel.  What  I  have  denoted  in  the  text  by  E  is,
for  all  transparent  solids  and  liquids,  certainly  very  small ;  and  though  generally

POLARIZATION AL ANALYSIS OF KEFLECTEb LIGHT,  337

Thus  our  experimental  result  (/,  n)  gives  the  two  constituents  Molar.
{T,  E)  of  the  reflected  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  reflection,  when
the  single  constituent  {S)  of  the  refiected  vibrations  perpendicular
to  the  plane  of  reflection,  is  known.

§  95.  Going  back  to  §  90,  note  that  there  are  four  independent
variables  to  be  dealt  with  : — the  angle  of  incidence,  the  orientations
of  the  tw^o  Nicol's  prisms,  and  the  orientation  of  the  Fresnel's
rhomb.  Any  two  of  these  four  variables  ma}'  be  definitely  chosen
for  variation  while  the  other  two  are  kept  constant ;  to  procure,
when  homogeneous  light  is  used,  extinction  of  the  light  which
enters  the  eye  from  the  centre  of  the  field  ;  that  is  to  say,  to
produce  perfect  blackness  at  the  central  point  of  the  field.  Theo-
retically there  is,  in  general,  just  one  point  of  the  field  (one  point
of  absolute  blackness)  where  the  extinction  is  perfect ;  and  always
before  the  desired  adjustment  is  perfectly  reached  a  black  spot  is
conceivably  to  be  seen,  but  not  on  the  centre  of  the  field.  By
changing  any  one  of  the  four  independent  variables  the  black  spot
is  caused  to  move ;  and  generally  two  of  them  must  be  varied
to  cause  it  to  move  towards  the  centre  of  the  field  for  the  desired
adjustment.  What  in  reality  is  generally  perceived  is,  I  believe,
not  a  black  spot,  but  a  black  band ;  and  this  is  caused  to  travel
till  it  passes  through  the  middle  of  the  field  when  the  nearest
attainable  approach  to  the  desired  adjustment  is  attained.  When
faint  or  moderate  light,  such  as  the  light  of  a  white  sky,  is  used,
the  whole  field  may  seem  absolutely  dark,  and  may  continue  so
while  any  one  of  the  four  variable  angles  is  altered  by  half  a
degree  or  more.  For  more  minutely  accurate  measurements,  more
intense  light  must  be  used ;  a  brilliant  flame ;  or  electric  arc-
light  ;  or  lime-light ;  or,  best  of  all,  an  unclouded  sun  as  in
Rayleigh's  very  searching  investigation  of  light  reflected  from
water  at  nearly  the  polarizing  angle,  of  which  the  result  is  given
in  §  105  below.

§  95'.  An  easy  way  to  see  that  j  ust  two  independent  variables  are
needed  to  obtain  the  desired  extinction,  is  to  confine  our  attention
to  the  centre  of  the  field,  and  imagine  the  light  reaching  the  eye

believed  to  be  perceptible  for  substances  of  high  refraugibility  such  as  diamond,
Eayleigh  has  questioned  its  existence  for  any  of  them,  and  suggested  that  its  non-
nullity  may  be  due  to  extraneous  matter  on  the  reflecting  surface.  I  believe,  however,
that  Airy,  and  Brewster,  and  Stokes  who  called  it  the  adamantine  property,  and
Fresnel  himself  though  it  was  outside  his  theory,  were  right  in  beheving  it  real.
See  §  158,  below.

T.  L.  '22

338  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  from  it  when  the  extinction  is  not  perfect,  to  be  polarizationally
resolved  into  two  components  having  their  vibrational  lines
perpendicular  to  one  another.  The  desired  extinction  requires  the
annulment  of  each  of  these  two  components,  and  nothing  else.
Proper  change  of  the  two  chosen  independent  variables  deter-
minately  secures  these  two  annulments  when  what  is  commonly
called  homogeneous  light,  that  is,  light  of  which  all  the  vibrations
are  of  the  same  period,  is  used.

§  95".  In  the  detailed  plan  of  §§  90 — 94  the  two  independent
variables  chosen  are  the  orientation  of  the  first  Nicol,  and  the
orientation  of  the  Fresnel's  rhomb.  This  is  thoroughly  convenient  if
N^  is  mounted  on  a  proper  mechanism  to  give  it  freedom  to  move
in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  its  axis,  and  to  keep  its  orientation
round  this  axis  constant.  The  Fresnel  should  be  mounted  so  as
to  be  free  to  move  round  an  axis  fixed  in  the  direction  of  the  light
entering  it :  and  it  should  carry  a  short  tube  round  the  light
emerging  from  it  into  which  N.2  fits  easily.  Thus,  when  the
Fresnel  is  turned  round  the  line  of  the  light  reflected  from  the
mirror,  it  carries  No  round  in  a  circle  (as  it  were  with  a  hollow
crank-pin),  so  that  it  is  always  in  the  proper  position  for  carrying
the  emergent  light  to  the  eye  of  the  observer.

Two  other  choices  of  independent  variables,  each,  I  believe,
as  well-conditioned  and  as  convenient  as  that  of  §§  90 — 94,  but
simpler  in  not  wanting  the  special  mechanism  for  carrying  N.,
are  described  in  §  98  below.

§  96.  Nothing  in  §|  90 — 95  involves  any  hypothesis :  and  we
have,  in  them,  an  observational  method  for  fully,  without  any
photometry,  determining  TjS  and  EjS;  which  are,  for  incident
vibrations  at  45°  to  the  plane  of  incidence,  the  intensities  of  the
two  constituents  of  the  reflected  light  vibrating  in  the  plane  of
incidence,  in  terms  of  the  intensity  of  the  component  of  the  re-
flected light  vibrating  perpendicularly  to  that  plane.  Fully  carried
through,  it  would  give  interesting  and  important  information,  for
transparent  liquids  and  solids,  and  for  metals  and  other  opaque
solids,  through  the  whole  range  of  incidence  from  0°  to  90°.  It  can
give  extremely  accurate  values  of  TjS  for  transparent  liquids  and
solids;  and  it  will  be interesting  to  find  how  nearly  they  agree

COS  (%  ~\~  1^

with  the  formula '  ;. '.,  ,  which  Fresnel's  "tangent-law"  and

cos  {l  —  ,l)  °

"  sine-law  "  imply.

POLAIUZATIONAL ANALYSIS OF REFLECTEl LIGHT.  339

§  90'. Freynel himself  used it* for reflection from water  Molar,
and  from  gla.ss  with  incidences  from 24 to  89°  (not  using  the

T

Fresuel's  rhomb), and found values for  tan~^  -;r, differing  from

, _, cos  (i  + ,{) .  .  1,01-11

tan ~. by sometimes  more  than  1 ; but  it  has  been

cos  {%  —  ,%)•'  '

supposed  that  these  differences  may  be  explained  by  the  im-
perfection of  his  apparatus,  and  by  the  use  of  white  lightf.
Similar  investigation  was  continued  by  Brewster  j,  on  several
species  of  glasses  and  on  diamond. With,  for  example,  a  glass  of

T

refractive  index  1"4826,  his  observed  results  for  tan~i  ^  differed

cos  (%  -l-  %^
from  tan~^  — )-. — '-4-  by  +  1°  4'; which  he  considered  might  be

COS(i  — ,l) J -  '  6

within  the  limits  of  his  observational  errors. For  diamond,  he

found  greater  deviations  which  seemed  systematic,  and  not  errors

of  observation. With  a  Fresnel's  rhomb  used  according  to  the

method  of  §§  90 — 94  he  might  probably  have  found  the  definite

correction  on  Fresnel's  formula,  required  to  represent  the  polari-

zational analysis  of  reflection from diamond. Can it be that

both  Fresnel  and  Brewster  underestimated  the  accuracy  of  their

own  experiments,  and  that  even  for  water  and  glasses,  devia-

pos  (i  "4"  ?  \

tions  which  they  found  from  Fresnel's  7^ — ^{  may  have  been

"^  cos(i  — ,i) "^

real,  and  not  errors  of  observation  ? The  subject  urgently  demands

full  investigation  according  to  the  method  of  §§  90 — 98,  with  all

the  accuracy  attainable  by  instruments  of  precision  now  available.

§  97.  The  reader  may  find  it  interesting  to  follow  the  formulas
of  §  94  through  the  whole  range  of  incidences  from  0'  to  90°.
For  the  present,  consider  only  the  case  of  the  angle  of  incidence
which  makes  T=0.  This,  being  the  incidence  which,  when  the
incident  light  is  polarized  in  any  plane  oblique  to  the  plane  of
incidence,  gives  90°  difference  of  phase  for  the  components  of  the
reflected  light  vibrating  in  that  plane  and  perpendicular  to  it,  has
been  called  by  Cauchy,  and  I  believe  by  all  following  writers,  the
principal  incidence.  We  shall  see  presently  (§§  97",  99,  105)  that,
for  every  transparent  substance,  observation  and  dynamics  show  one
incidence,  or  an  odd  number  of  incidences,  fulfilling  this  condition.

*  Fresnel,  (Euvres,  Vol.  i.  p.  646.

t  Mascart,  Traite  d'Optiqiie,  Vol.  11.  p.  466.

J  Brewster,  Phil.  Trans.  1830. See  also  Mascart,  Vol.  11.  p.  466.

22—2

340  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  By  observation  and  dynamics  we  learn  (§81  above),  that  it  is
fulfilled  not  by  the  vanishing  of  S,  but  by  the  vanishing  of  T.
To  make  T  =0  we  have  by  (9)  for  the  case  of  principal  incidence,
1  +  cos  4/=  0,  and  therefore  /=  ±  45°.  This,  by  (9),  makes  (if  we
take  /=  +  45°)  for  Principal  Incidence,

^/>S^  =  tan  (n  -  7r/4)  =  A; (10).

§  97'.  The  k  here  introduced  is  Jamin's  notation,  adopted
also  by  Rayleigh.  It  is  the  ratio  of  the  vibrational  amplitude  of
reflected  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence  to  the  vibrational
amplitude  perpendicular  to  it,  when  the  incident  light  is  polarized
in  a  plane  inclined  at  45°  to  the  plane  of  incidence,  and  when  the
angle  of  incidence  is  such  as  to  make  the  phases  of  those  two  com-
ponents of  the  reflected  light  differ  by  90°.  A:  is  positive  or
negative  according  as  the  phase  of  the  reflected  vibration  in  the
plane  of  incidence  lags  or  leads  by  90°  relatively  to  the  component
perpendicular  to  it.  It  is  positive  when  (as  in  every  well  assured
case*  whether  of  transparent  or  of  metallic  mirrors)  the  obser-
vation makes  n  >  45° ;  it  would  be  negative  if  n  <  45°.

§  97".  The  angle  n  —  jrj^i  found  by  our  observation  of  §  97  is
called  the  "Principal  Azimuth."  See  §  158"^"  below.  It  has  been
the  usage  of  good  writers  regarding  the  polarization  of  light,  par-
ticularly in  relation  to  reflection  and  refraction,  to  give  the  name
"azimuth "I""  to  the  angle  between  two  planes  through  the  direction
of  a  ray  of  light ;  for  instance,  the  angle  between  the  plane  of  in-
cidence and  the  plane  of  vibration  of  rectilineally  polarized  light.
A  "Principal  Azimuth,"  for  reflection  at  any  polished  surface,  I
define  as  the  angle  between  the  vibrational  plane  of  polarized  light
incident  at  Principal  Incidence,  and  the  plane  of  the  incidence,
to  make  the  reflected  light  circularly  polarized.  There  is  one,  and
only  one.  Principal  Incidence  for  every  known  mirror :  except
internal  reflection  in  diamond  and  other  substances  whose  refrac-
tive indices  exceed  2'414 ;  these  have  three  Principal  Incidences
(§  158'"  below).  The  number  is  essentially  odd:  on  this  is  founded
the  theory  of  the  polarization  of  light  by  reflection.

*  See  Jamin,  Cours  de  Physique,  Vol.  ii.  pp.  694,  695  ;  also  below,  §§  105,  154,
158%  159"',  179,  192.

t  This,  when  understood,  is  very  convenient ;  though  it  is  not  strictly  correct.
Azimuth  in  astronomy  is  essentially  an  angle  in  a  horizontal  plane,  or  an  angle
between  two  vertical  planes.  A  reader  at  all  conversant  with  astronomy  would
naturally  think  this  is  meant  when  a  writer  on  optics  uses  the  expression
"Principal  Azimuth,"  in  writing  of  reflection  from  a  horizontal  mirror.

PRINCIPAL INCIDENCE AND PPJNCIPAL A.  IMUTH.  841

§  98.  The  vibrational  plane  of  the  incident  light  is  inclined  Molar,
to  the  plane  of  incidence  at  an  angle  of  n  —  45° ;  which,  for  the
Principal  Incidence,  is  such  as  to  render  the  two  components
of  the  reflected  light  equal ;  and  therefore  to  make  the  light
circularly  polarized.  However  a  Fresnel's  rhomb  is  turned,  circu-
larly polarized  light  entering  it,  leaves  it  plane  polarized.  In
the  observation,  with  the  details  of  §§  90 — 94,  it  is  turned  so
that  the  vibrational  plane  of  the  light  emerging  from  it  is  per-
pendicular to  the  fixed  vibrational  plane  of  N^.  Hence  it  occurs
to  us  to  think  that  a  useful  modification  of  those  details  might
be; — to  fix  the  Fresnel's  rhomb  with  its  principal  planes  at  45°
to  the  plane  of  reflection,  and  to  mount  No  so  as  to  be  free
to  turn  round  the  line  of  light  leaving  the  Fresnel's  rhomb.
Alternate  turnings  of  N.,  and  A\  give  the  desired  extinction  for
any  angle  of  incidence.  Take  /=  0  in  (1),  (2),  (8),  (4);  which
makes  GOF  =  4:5°  in  fig.  3  a.  Let  )h  be  the  angle  (clockwise  in
the  altered  fig.  3  a)  from  OF  to  ON^;  and  put  n  =  ^tt  +  a  in  fig.  3  b.
Eliminating  c^  and  g  from  (3),  (4),  by  (8)  and  proceeding  as  in
§  93,  we  find

T/S  =  tan  a  cos  2iu  ;  E/S  =  -  tan  a  sin  2n, ;  EIT=-  tan  2n^...{W).

If  a  is  positive  observation  makes  Wo  negative  when  taken  acute.
For  principal  incidence  it  is  -  45°,  and  EjS  =  tan  a.  The  phasal
lag  of  (E,  T)  behind  {S)  is  -  ^n^.  Negative  is  anti-clockwise  in
fig.  8  a. See  §  158-^

ixvii

§  99.  The  following  table  shows,  for  six  different  metals,
determinations  of  principal  incidences  and  principal  azimuths
which  have  been  made  by  Jamin  and  Conroy,  experimenting
on  light  from  different  parts  of  the  solar  spectrum.  This  table
expresses,  I  believe,  practically  almost  all  that  is  known  from
observations  hitherto  made  as  to  the  polarizational  analysis  of
homogeneous  light  reflected  from  metals.  The  differences  between
the  two  observers  for  silver  are  probably  real,  and  dependent  on
differences  of  condition  of  the  mirror-surfaces  at  the  times  of
the  experiments,  as  modified  by  polishing  and  by  lapses  of  time.
It  will  be  seen  that  for  each  colour  Jamin's  ¥  is  intermediate
between  Conroy 's  two  values  for  the  same  plate,  after  polishing
with  rouge  and  Avith  putty  powder  respectively.  On  the  other
hand,  each  of  Conroy's  Principal  Incidences  for  silver  is  greater

842

LECTURE XVIII.

-ti

"bbi-  XI  CD

a

^  ^  Gq  fC

_ 1~

H

^  %  1j f^

^

>.|

05  r-l  ^
f^l '-'^ ^

i^  ^  ,-,1

'-°§

•^ s  ^

0 o (M

o o C5

o c CD

CD  CO  Oi

•^  ec  00

^  CO  00

i

t-  -t •

t-  -*  •

t^  Tt< •

S^

^ OJ -

CO  tc a)

1^  1— '  1^

O  OD —,

^-

o P

-^g^

<^^o

^*^g

H

Pi O

o 0 r— 1

o o t-

o

Ph

CD  CM  '*

iC  lO  »c

CM  C5  CD

o
O

r-  fC  •

t^  CO •

i>  eoi  ■

,a

i^  ^  -.

2^^S

^ ^ ^ ^

o o O

n O CD

O 0 r-H

rt CO '^

fO  ^  00

I— 1 r-l |>.

I:-  O  iC

t^  ^  •

I- -* •

CO  CO •

,zl O

Gold  pol
Cham

Kouge

'— '  f— '  w

CO  05  l^

'^  ^  CD

(M  M  O

CM ^

o o >— '

CO IC r-<

o o O

^  o  t-

(M  O  i^

00  CO  -*

i^  ^

r^  -^  ■

CO  CO

h

^

^

t3

^

6

'o

«

pq

^-  o  ^

^  ■«  o

^  CD  _

^  »«  ro

CM-*  2?

00  CO  .

fM  ^  .^

00  00  ^

a

CM^g

co^:g

^^  .-^  ^
^  "^  CO

ic^

o o 00

o o O

O 0 I—H

o o O

o o t^

o o CM

t;>!

iC  lO  o

-*  00  1— 1

-* 00 rl

CO l-H r-i

CM  CM  l-H

l-H  iC  CM

t^ l-H •

1--  1— 1  •

!>.  1— 1 •

t^  CM •

1^  CM •

I>  CM •

"S

^^ig

k??-

O  00  ^

-t  -*  ;i|

^ss

00  05  r^
CM  2

0^  t^  rM

CO 2^

-4J

o o QC

o r, X

o o OS

0 o Oi

O o i~H

n n CO

02

1-CD  O

CO  CD  O

CD  CD  O

O  I-  o

lO  00 .-H

-r CD rH

I^  r-l ■

I- !— 1 •

t^  1— (  ■

t^ T-( •

l>  l-H •

t^  CM •

CD  To  _
■^  "^  OC

O  00  _

00  ^  ^

o)^  ^

^  lb  ,_

5<i  ^  _„

••  00

CM  CO  °$

CMO§

t^S

0 O T— 1

o o 05

0 0 05

0 o CM

o o C75

o 0 00

iO  CI  fC

-*  00  CM

«  00  CM

CM  lO  CM

l-H CO l-l

O CO l-H

1-  CN •

r-  CN •

1-  CM •

1^  CM ■

1>  CM •

1-  cjq  •

s

3  -t?

2^  CD

CD  O  -a

'^5^12

O  OQ  _

CO  iQ  [^

rj<  lb  ^
'"'  CO

'^^"s^

a  ^

n o f— *

o o CD

o o CD

O o CO

r, o -:t<

t> o 00

*

sS

CD  C5  CO

^  1^  (>^

"*  t^  (M

CO  O  CM

CO  CD  CM

r^ 00 CM

p»;

a*^

t-  CN •

I^  (fq ■

I-  (M •

t-  CM ■

1^  CM •

t-  CM •

s

^

t»

•^  t-  rM

-M A^ SI

05

00  f^  ,_

O  OS  r^
CO ^

O  05  _,

^^§S

co^g

o 0 00

o o ^

0 o 1— 1

o o CM

o o O

o o OS

cc

iC rH t^

(M  O  t-

CM  O  1^

i-H  O  t^

C5  0>  CD

CO  <35  CD

t- Tj< •

t^  •* •

t^  -* •

I-  ^ •

CO  CO ■

CD  CO •

II II II

II II II

II II II

II 11 J

li II  Jl

II II 1!

•-^ C2;

■~  CJ^

•-^  e2i

'"^ i  <;

■■^ X  ~ii

■^  cjSi

I^R^

a;  as"

^a,-

ft^ft^

^s  "S

a^o;

.-

■^^^^ — '

■ — , — -

. •

~ —  •  — '

— , — -

TS

P

5

C

-

^

CJ

iD

CJ

o

-i3

i

ci

^

"

"

o

^

C«q

=^

t3^

POLARIZATIONAL ANALYSIS OF REFLECTED LIGHT.  848

than  Jamin's ;  and  by  greater  dififerences  for  the  yellow  and  blue  Molar,
light  than  for  the  red.

Experimental  determinations  of  TIS  and  EjS,  (9)  or  (10'),
through  the  whole  range  of  incidence  below  and  above  the
Principal  Incidence  are  still  wanting.

§  100.  As  for  transparent  solids  and  liquids,  we  ma}'  consider
it  certain  that  Fresnel's  laws,  giving

_^^sin(t-,^) _^^t^n(^^ ^^^

sin(t  +  ,t)  tan(i  +  ,t)

are  ver}^  approximately  true  through  the  whole  range  of  incidence
from  0°  to  90";  but,  as  said  in  §  95,  it  is  still  much  to  be  desired
that  experimental  determinations  of  TjS  should  be  made  through
the  whole  range ;  in  order  either  to  prove  that  it  differs  much  less

COS  \%  "4" %\

from  p — ^  than  found  experimentally  by  Fresnel  himself  and

Brewster;  or,  if  it  differs  discoverably  from  this  formula,  to  deter-
mine the  dififerences.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  at  the  Principal
Incidence  the  agreement  with  Fresnel's  formula  (implying  £*=  0  in
the  notation  of  §  94')  is  exceedingly  close ;  but  the  very  small
deviations  from  it  found  experimentally  by  Jamin  and  Rayleigh
and  represented  by  the  values  of  k  shown  in  the  table  of  §  105
below,  are  probably  real.  An  exceedingly  minute  scrutiny  as  to
the  agreement  of  the  Principal  Incidence  with  tan~^yu,,  Brewster's
estimate  of  it ; — a  scrutiny  such  as  Rayleigh  made  relatively  to
the  approach  to  nullity  of  k  for  purified  water  surfaces ;  is  still
wanted;  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  not  hitherto  been  attempted
for  water  or  any  transparent  body. See  §§  180,  182  below.

Hitherto,  except  in  §§  81,  84,  86,  we  have  dealt  exclusively
with  what  may  be  called  the  natural  history  of  the  subject,  and
have  taken  no  notice  of  the  dynamical  theory ;  to  the  considera-
tion of  which  we  now  proceed.

§  101.  Green's  doctrine*  of  incompressible  elastic  solid  with
equal  rigidity,  but  unequal  density,  on  the  two  sides  of  an  interface,
to  account  for  the  reflexion  and  refraction  of  light,  brings  out  for
vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence  (§  128  below)
exactly  the  sine-law  which  Fresnel  gave  for  light  polarized  in  the
plane of  incidence. On the other hand,  for  vibrations  in  the

*  Camh.  Phil.  Soc,  Dec.  1837  ;  Green's  Collected  Papers,  pp.  2-16,  258,  267,  268.

844  LECTURE XVIU.

Molar,  plane  of  incidence  it  gives  a  formula  (|§  104,  105,  14G  below)
which,  only  when  the  refractive  index  differs  infinitely  little  from
unity,  agrees  with  the  tangent-law  given  by  Fresnel  for  light
polarized  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence; — but  differing
enormously  from  Fresnel,  and  from  the  results  of  observation,  in
all  cases  in  which  the  refractive  index  differs  sufficiently  from
unity  to  have  become  subject  of  observation  or  measurement.

§  102.  The  accompanying  diagrams,  figs.  4,  5,  6,  illustrate,
each  by  a  single  curve  (Curve  1),  the  perfect  agreement  between
Green  and  Fresnel  for  the  law  of  reflection  at  different  incidences
when  the  vibrations  are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence ;
and  by  two  other  curves  the  large  disagreement  when  the  vibra-
tions are  in  the  plane  of  incidence.

Curve  1  in  each  diagram  shows  for  vibrations  perpendicular  to
the  plane  of  incidence  the  ratio  of  the  reflected  to  the  incident
light  according  to  Fresnel's  sine-law

sin  {i  —  ,iy

sin  (i  +  ,i)_

dynamically  demonstrated  by  Green  on  the  hypothesis  of  equal
rigidities  and  unequal  densities  of  the  two  mediums.

Curve  2  shows,  for  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  the
ratio  of  the  reflected  to  the  incident  light  according  to  Fresnel's
tangent -law,

"tan  {%  —  ,^y
tan  {i  4-  ,i)

Curve  3  shows,  for  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  the
ratio  of  reflected  to  incident  activity  (rate  of  doing  work)  per
unit  area  of  wave-plane,  rigorously  demonstrated  by  Green  (§  146
below)  for  plane  waves  incident  on  a  plane  interface  between
elastic  solids  of  different  densities  but  the  same  rigidity;  on  the
supposition  that  each  solid  is  absolutely  incompressible,  and  that
the  two  are  in  slipless  contact  at  the  interface.

In  each  diagram  abscissas  from  0°  to  90°  represent  "  angles  of
incidence,"  that  is  to  say,  angles  between  wave-normals  and  the
line-normal  to  the  interface,  or  angles  between  the  wave-planes
and  the  interface.

§  108.  Curves  2  and  3  of  fig.  4  show  for  water  a  seemingly  fair
agreement  between  Fresnel  and  Green  for  vibrations  in  the  plane

FRESNEL,  GREEN,  AND  TRUTH.

345

of  reflection.  But  the  scale  of  the  diagrani  is  too  small  to  show  Molar,
important  differences  for  incidences  less  than  60  or  65°,  especially
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  polarizing  angle,  53°"1 :  this  want  is
remedied  by  the  larger  scale  diagram  fig.  7  showing  Curves  2  and
3  of  fig.  4;  on  a  scale  of  ordinates  48*5  times  as  large,  in  which,
for  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  the  unit  for  intensity
of  light  is  the  reflected  light  at  zero  angle  of  incidence,  instead

u

9

I

1

8

1

1

•7

1

J

j

6

/

1

/

/

5

/

/;

4

/

/

3

/

//

/

1

2

/

I

1

A^,

//

•1

vi-

V

,?/

'h

^

X

t

>>^J

Y4

^

■

^

ky

(

:>'

1

0°

2

0°

3

0°

4

0°

5

0°

6

0°

7

0°

8

0"

9

Fig.  4. Water, (^r^  1-334)

of  the  incident  light  at  incidence  i  as  in  the  other  diagrams.
Curve  2  in  figs.  4  and  7  shows,  for  water,  the  absolute  extinction
at  angle  of  incidence  tan~^/z  given  by  Fresnel's  formula.  Curve  3
(Green's  formula)  shows,  for  a  slightly  smaller  angle  of  incidence
(50°'0  instead  of  53°*  1),  a  minimum  intensity  equal  to  "295  of
that  of  directly  reflected  light ; that  is  to  say  Green's  formula

346

LECTURE XVTTI.

Molar,  makes  the  directly  reflected  light  from  water  only  3^  times
as  strong  as  the  light  reflected  at  the  angle  which  gives  least
of  it.

§  104.  To  test  whether  Fresnel  or  Green  is  more  nearly  right,
take  a  black  japanned  tray  with  water  poured  into  it  enough  to
cover  its  bottom,  and  look  through  a  Nicol's  prism  at  the  image

•u

9

i

1

8

/I

'1

7

1

•6

1

1

•n

1

1

/

L

A

/

/

/

/

1

/

.Q

/

/

/

y

/

/

O

f^>

f

/

f

/

y

5^

/

/

1

.1

^

rN>'

f

/

i

■ '

^

f^

f

__

^

9-

10°

20°

30° 40°

50°

60°

70

80°

90°

Fig.  5. Flint  Glass. (m=  1-714)

of  a  candle  in  the  water-surface.  You  will  readily  find  in  half-a-
minute's  trial  a  proper  inclination  of  the  light  and  orientation  of
the  Nicol  to  give  what  seems  to  you  extinction  of  the  light.  To
test  the  approach  to  completeness  of  the  extinction  let  an  assistant
raise  and  lower  alternately  a  piece  of  black  cloth  between  the  candle
and  the  water  surface,  taking  care  that  it  is  lowered  sufficiently
to  eclipse  the  image  of  the  candle  when  it  is  not  extinguished  by

FRESNEL, GREEN, AND TRUTH.

847

the  Nicol.  By  holdino-  the  Nicol  very  steadily  in  your  hand,  and  Molar,
turning  to  give  the  best  extinction  you  can  produce  by  it,  you
will  find  no  difference  in  what  you  see  whether  the  screen  is  down
or  up,  which  proves  a  very  close  approach  to  perfect  extinction.
Judging  by  the  brilliance  of  the  image  of  the  candle  when  viewed
through  the  Nicol  at  nearly  normal  incidence,  and  distances  at

10

■^

/

•9

i

7

7

/

•b

/

/

•7

-7^'"-

A

11

u,l.

-x'

/

t

•6

-

/

f—

/

1

•5

/

1

•/

/

•4

co'

aY

^/

1

y

(""

1

•3

y

y

5^

>y

1

^

^

y

^

y

•?

^

^

^

_^^

y

J/

— '

■^

/

.

•1

"^

^^

^

1

'

^

\^

/

^^

y

/

10" 20°

30°

40°

50°

60° 70°

80° 90°

Fig.  G. Diamond. (m  =  2-434)

which  this  image  can  be  seen,  I  think  we  may  safely  guess  that  the
light  reflected  from  the  water  at  normal  incidence  was  at  least  500
(instead  of  Green's  S^)  times  as  strong  as  the  imperceptible  light
of  the  nearest  approach  to  extinction  which  the  Nicol  gave  at  the
polarizing  angle  of  incidence.  And  from  Rayleigh's  accurate  experi-
ments (§  105  below)  we  know  that  it  is  25,000,000  times,  when  the
water  surface  is  uncontaminated  by  oil  or  scum  or  impurity  of  any

348

LECTURE XVTTT.

Molar,  kind.  It  would  be  only  3^  times  if  Green's  dynamics  were  applicable
(without  change  of  hypotheses)  to  the  physical  problem.  Hence,
looking  at  fig.  7,  we  see  that,  for  water,  Green's  theory  (Curve  3)
diflFers  enormously  from  the  truth,  while  Fresnel's  formula
(Curve  2)  shows  perfect  agreement  with  the  truth,  at  the  angle  of
incidence  53^*1. Looking  at  fig.  4  we  see  still  greater  differences

10

•3

'^

f^

N

' — >

\^

\

\

nN

V

\

\

V

\

1

\

\

V

i

\

\

'^i

\

k\

\

\

4/

\i

\

\

'J

1  9J

\

\

/ 1

:?

\

\

J

'

CI

\

K

J

)

[

\

\

1

\

\

\

"^^

/

0"

1

0°

2

0'

3

0'

4

<y

5

0'

60'

7

0°

8

0°

9

0

Fig.  7. Water.

between  Curves  2  and  3  even  at  as  high  angles  of  incidence  as
75",  though  there  is  essentially  a  perfect  concurrence  at  90°.

§  105.  Looking  at  Curve  3  in  figs.  5  and  6  we  see  that  for  flint
glass  Green's  theory  gives  scarcely  any  diminution  of  reflected
light,  while  for  diamond  it  actually  gives  increase,  when  the  angle
of  incidence  is  increased  from  zero  to  tan->,  Brewster's  polarizing

FRESNEL, GREEN, AND TRUTH.  349

angle.  Yet  even  a  hasty  observation  with  no  other  apparatus  Molar.
than  a  single  Nicol's  prism  shows,  both  for  flint  glass  and  diamond,
diminution  from  the  brightness  of  directly  reflected  light  to  what
seems  almost  absolute  blackness  at  incidence  tan->,  when  the
reflection  is  viewed  through  the  Nicol  with  its  plane  of  polariza-
tion perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  reflection  (that  is  to  say,  its
transmitted  light  having  vibration  in  the  plane  of  reflection).

One  readily  and  easily  observed  phenomenon  relating  to
polarization  by  reflection  is: — with  a  Nicol  turned  so  as  to  transmit
the  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  reflection,  diminution  of  reflected
light  to  nearly  zero  with  angle  of  incidence  increasing  to  tan~y ;
and  after  that  increase  of  the  reflected  light  to  totality  when  the
angle  of  incidence  is  farther  increased  to  90^.

Another  is: — for  light  reflected  at  a  constant  angle  of  incidence,
diminution  from  maximum  to  minimum  when  the  Nicol  is  turned
90°  round  its  axis  so  as  to  bring  the  direction  of  vibration  of  the
light  transmitted  by  it  from  being  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
reflection  to  being  in  this  plane.  This  diminution  from  maximum
to  minimum  is  the  difference  between  the  ordinates  of  two  curves
representing,  respectively  for  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane
of  incidence  and  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  the  intensity
of  the  reflected  light  at  all  angles  of  incidence.  These  two  curves,
if  drawn  with  absolute  accuracy,  would  in  all  probability  agree
almost  'perfectly  with  Fresnel's  sine-law  and  Fresnel's  tangent-law
(Curves  1  and  2  of  the  diagrams)  for  all  transparent  substances.
We  have,  however,  little  or  no  accurately  measured  observational
comparisons  except  for  light  incident  at  very  nearly  the  polariza-
tional  angle.  By  a  very  different  mode  of  experimenting  from
that  indicated  in  §  95  above,  Jamin*  found  for  eight  substances
having  refractive  indices  from  2-454  to  1'334,  results  shown  in
the  following  table ;  to  which  is  added  a  measurement  made  by
Rayleigh  for  water  with  its  surface  carefully  purified  of  oil  or
scum  or  any  other  substance  than  water  and  air.

*  Ann.  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  1850,  Vol.  xxix.,  p.  303,  aud  1851,  Vol.  x.xxi.,
p.  179  ;  and  p.  174  corrected  by  pp.  180,  181.  (Confusion  between  Cauchy's  e  and
Jamin's  k  is  most  bewildering  in  Jamin's  papers.  After  much  time  sadly  spent  in
trying  to  find  what  was  intended  in  mutually  contradictory  Tables  of  results,
I  have  given  what  seems  to  me  probably  a  correct  statement  in  the  Table  belonging
to  §  105.)

350

LECTURE XVII 1.

Substance

M

Angle  of
Incidence

tan~'  ya

Ratios  of  vibrational  ampli-
tudes, and  of  strengths,  of
reflected  lights  due  to  equal
incident  lights  vibrating  in
and periDendicular to  the
plane  of  incidence

"Siilfure  d'arseuic  trans-
parent "  (Realgar) . . .

"  Blende  ti-ansparente  "
(zinc  sulphide)

2-454

2-371
2-434
1-714
1-487
1-441
1-366
1-334

1-334

67^-8

67°-l
• 67°-7
59°-7
56°-l
55°-2
53°-8
53°-l

53°-l

k
4-  -0850

+  -0420
+  -0190
+  -0180
+  -0060

-  -0084
+  -00208

-  -00577

+  -0002

k-
1/138

1/567

1/2770

1/3086

1/27778

1/14172

1/231160

1/30030

1/25,000,000

Diamond

Flint  Glass

"Verre"

Fluorine

Absolute  Alcohol

Water  (Jamin)

Water,  with  specially  puri-
fied surface  (Rayleigh)

Molar.  The  greatest  numeric  in  the  last  column,  1/138,  would  be  barely
perceptible  on  the  diagram,  fig.  7  ;  and  none  of  those  for  the  other
seven  substances  would  be  perceptible  at  all  without  a  large
magnification  of  the  scale  of  ordinates.

§  106.  Although  these  results  are  related  only  to  the  ratio  of
the  ordinates  of  Curve  1  to  those  of  Curve  2  for  one  angle  of
incidence  in  each  case,  and  do  not  touch  the  absolute  values  of  the
reflection  due  to  unit  quantities  of  incident  light,  we  may  infer  as
almost  absolutely  certain,  or  at  all  events  (§§  100,  125)  highly
probable,  that  Curve  1  (Fresnel's  sine-law)  and  Curve  2  (Fresnel's
tangent-law)  are  each  of  them  about  as  nearly  correct  at  all  other
incidences  as  at  the  critical  incidences  for  which  the  observations
were  made.  We  shall  see  in  fact  (§§  125,  133  below)  in  the  dy-
namical theory  to  which  we  proceed,  that  the  sine-law  is  absolutel}^
accurate  for  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence,  on
the  supposition  that  the  rigidities  of  the  two  mediums  are  equal
and  their  densities  unequal:  and  that  the  only  correction  of  Green's
dynamical  postulates  which  can  procure  approximate  annulment,
for  the  reflected  light,  of  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence  at
the  angle  tan~'/i,  gives  correspondingly  close  agreement  with
Fresnel's  tangent-law  throughout  the  whole  range  of  incidences
from  0'  to  90°!

DYNAMICAL THEORY OF REFLECTION AND REFRACTION. 351

(The  following,  §§107... Ill,  is  quoted  from  a  paper  written  Molar,
by  myself  in  September — October,  1888,  and  published  in  the
Philosophical  Magazine  for  1888,  second  half  year.)

§  107.  "  Since  the  first  publication  of  Cauchy's  work  on  the
"  subject  in  1830,  and  of  Green's  in  1837,  many  attempts  have
"  been  made  by  many  workers  to  find  a  dynamical  foundation
"  for  Fresnel's  laws  of  reflection  and  refraction  of  light,  but  all
"hitherto  ineffectually.  On  resuming  my  own  efforts  since  the
"meeting  of  the  British  Association  at  Bath,  I  first  ascertained
"  that  an  inviscid  fluid  permeating  among  pores  of  an  incom-
"  pressible,  but  otherwise  sponge-like,  solid  does  not  diminish,  but
"  on  the  contrary  augments,  the  deviation  from  Fresnel's  law  of
"reflection  for  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence.  Having
"  thus,  after  a  great  variety  of  previous  efforts  which  had  been
"  commenced  in  connexion  with  preparations  for  my  Baltimore
"  Lectures  of  this  time  four  years  ago,  seemingly  exhausted
"  possibilities  in  respect  to  incompressible  elastic  solid,  without
"  losing  faith  either  in  light  or  in  dynamics,  and  knowing  that
"the  condensational -rare  factional  wave  disqualifies*  any  solid  of
"  positive  compressibility,  I  saw  that  nothing  was  left  but  a  solid
"  of  such  negative  compressibility  as  should  make  the  velocity  of
"  the  condensational-rarefactional  wave,  zero  or  small.  So  I  tried
"  it  and  immediately  found  tliat,  with  other  suppositions  unaltered
"  from  Green's,  it  exactly  fulfils  Fresnel's  '  tangent-law  '  for  vibra-
"  tions  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  and  his  '  sine-law '  for  vibrations
^'perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence.  I  then  noticed  that
"  homogeneous  air-less  foam,  held  from  collapse  by  adhesion  to
"  a  containing  vessel,  which  may  be  infinitely  distant  all  round,
"  exactly  fulfils  the  condition  of  zero  velocity  for  the  condensational-
"  rarefactional  wave ;  while  it  has  a  definite  rigidity  and  elasticity
"  of  form,  and  a  definite  velocity  of  distortional  wave,  which
"can  be  easily  calculated  with  a  fair  approximation  to  absolute
"  accuracy.

§  108.  "  Green,  in  his  original  paper  '  On  the  Reflexion  and
"  Refraction  of  Light '  had  pointed  out  that  the  condensational-
"  rarefactional  wave  might  be  got  quit  of  in  two  ways,  (1)  by  its
"  velocity  being  infinitely  small,  (2)  by  its  velocity  being  infinitely

"  Green's  Collected  Papers,  p.  246.

352  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  "  great.  But  he  curtly  dismissed  the  foruier  and  adupted  the
"latter,  in  the  following  statement:  'And  it  is  not  difficult  to
" '  prove  that  the  equilibrium  of  our  medium  would  be  unstable
"'unless  AIB>i/3.  We  are  therefore  comijelled  to  adopt  the
"'latter  value  of  AjB*,'  (oo)  'and  thus  to  admit  that  in  the
" '  luminiferous  ether,  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  waves  pro-
"'pagated  by  normal  vibrations  is  very  great  compared  with  that
'"of  ordinary  light.'  Thus  originated  the  'jelly-'  theory  of  ether
"  which  has  held  the  field  for  fifty  years  against  all  dynamical
"  assailants,  and  yet  has  hitherto  failed  to  make  good  its  own
"  foundation.

§  109.  "  But  let  us  scrutinize  Green's  remark  about  instabilit}-.
"Every  possible  infinitesimal  motion  of  the  medium  is,  in  the
"elementary  dynamics  of  the  subject,  proved  to  be  resolvable  into
"coexistent  equi-voluminal  wave-motions,  and  condensational-
"  rarefactional  wave -motions.  Surely,  then,  if  there  is  a  real
"  finite  propagational  velocity  for  each  of  the  two  kinds  of  wave-
"  motion,  the  equilibrium  must  be  stable  !  And  so  I  find  Green's
"  own  formula "f"  proves  it  to  be  provided  zue  either  suppose  the
"  mediiitn  to  extend  all  thorough  boundless  space,  or  give  it  a  fixed
"  containing  vessel  as  its  boundary.  A  finite  portion  of  Green's
"  homogeneous  medium  left  to  itself  in  space  will  have  the  same
"kind  of  stability  or  instability  according  as  ^/5  >  4/3,  or
"  AJB  <  4/3.  In  fact  A  —  ^B,  in  Green's  notation,  is  what  I  have
"called  the  'bulk-modulus'|  of  elasticity,  and  denoted  by  k
"  (being  infinitesimal  change  of  pressure  divided  by  infinitesimal
"  change  from  unit  volume  produced  by  it :  or  the  reciprocal  of
"what  is  commonly  called  'the  compressibility').  B  is  what
"  I  have  called  the  '  rigidity,'  as  an  abbreviation  for  '  rigidity-
"  modulus,'  and  which  we  must  regard  as  essentially  positive,
"  Thus  Green's  limit  A/B  >  4/3  simply  means  positive  compres-
"sibility,  or  positive  bulk-modulus:  and  the  kind  of  instability
"  that  deterred  him  from  admitting  any  supposition  of  A/B<  4/3,
"  is  the  spontaneous  shrinkage  of  a  finite  portion  if  left  to  itself

*  A  and  B  are  the  squares  of  velocities  of  the  condensational  and  distortional
waves  respectively ;  supposing  for  a  moment  the  density  of  the  medium  unity.

t  Collected  Papers,  p.  253  ;  formula  (C).

J  Encyclopaedia  Britannicu,  Article  "Elasticity":  reproduced  in  Vol.  iii.  of  my
Collected  Papers.

VOLUMINAL INSTABILITY  AND STABILITY.  853

"  in  a  volume  infinitesimally  less,  or  spontaneous  expansion  if  Molar.
"  left  to  itself  in  a  volume  infinitesimally  greater,  than  the
"volume  for  equilibrium.  This  instability  is,  in  virtue  of  the
"  rigidity  of  the  medium,  converted  into  stability  by  attaching
"  the  bounding  surface  of  the  medium  to  a  rigid  containing  vessel.
"  How  much  smaller  than  4/3  may  AjB  be,  we  now  proceed  to
"investigate,  and  we  shall  find,  as  we  have  anticipated,  that  for
"  stability  it  is  only  necessary  that  A  be  positive.

§  110.  "Taking  Green's  formula  (C);  but  to  make  clearer  the
"  energy-principle  which  it  expresses  (he  had  not  even  the  words
"'energy,'  or  'work'!),  let  W  denote  the  quantity  of  work  re-
"  quired  per  unit  volume  of  the  substance,  to  bring  it  from  its
"unstressed  equilibrium  to  a  condition  of  equilibrium  in  which
"  the  matter  which  was  at  {x,  y,  z)  is  at  {x  -\-  ^,  y  -\-  r),  z  +  ^) ;
"  ^,  V>  K  being  functions  of  x,  y,  z  such  that  each  of  the  nine
"  differential  coefficients  d^/dx,  d^/dy,  . . .  drj/dx  . . .  etc.  is  an  in-
"  finitely  small  numeric ;  we  have

2  ( \dx dy dz

+  B

\dy dz) \dz dxJ \dx dy)  _

-4,b(^  ^+^  ^  +  ^  ^^1  ..  (1)

\dy  dz dz  dx dx  dy)]

"This,  except  difference  of  notation,  is  the  same  as  the  formula
"  for  energy  given  in  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,
"§693(7).

§  111. "To  find  the  total  work  required  to  alter  the  given
"  portion of  solid from unstrained equilibrium to  the strained

"condition  (^,  rj,  ^)  we  must  take IjidxdydzW  throughout  the

"rigid  containing  vessel.  Taking  first  the  last  line  of  (1);
"integrating  the  three  terms  each  twice  successively  by  parts
"in  the  well-known  manner,  subject  to  the  condition  f  =0,  r]  =  0,
"  ^  =  0  at  the  boundary ;  we  transform  the  factor  within  the  last
"  vinculum  to

///■

•^ ^  dz dy dx  dz dy  dx

T.  L.  23

354  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  "  Adding  this  with  its factor  —  45 to  the  other  terms  of  (1)
"under  H  ldxdi/dz,  we  find  finally

jjjdxdydzW=  Ijfjdxdydz  1^  (g

d^ dv d^\'

dy dz

+  B

dy dz) \dz dec  J \dx dy)  ^

.(2).

"This  shows  that  positive  work  is  needed  to  bring  the  solid  to
"  the  condition  (f ,  rj,  ^)  from  its  unstrained  equilibrium,  and
"  therefore  its  unstrained  equilibrium  is  stable,  if  A  and  B  are
"  both  positive,  however  small  be  either  of  them."

§  112.  The  equations  of  motion  of  the  general  elastic  solid
taken  direct  from  the  equations  of  equilibrium,  with  p  to  denote
density,  are,  as  we  found  in  Lecture  II.  pp.  25,  26

drl_dP dU dT
dt^ dec dy dz

dhi^dU dQ dS

dp
d'^

dx
dT

dz
dR

•(3);

'^  dt"^ dx dy dz  )

where  f ,  r],  ^  denote  (as  above  from  Green)  displacements ;  P,  Q,  R,
normal  components  of  pull  (per  unit  area)  on  interfaces  respec-
tively perpendicular  to  x,  y,  z;  and  ;S^,  T,  U  respectively  the
tangential  components  of  pull  as  follows  : —

q{=  pull  parallel  to  y  on  face  perpendicular  to  z
1= » „ z „ „ „ „ y

T

U

,, ,, 4/

> }> })

' ^

>, ,y Z

y }> >}

, X

,1 „ sc

> 5> )>

, z

„ ,, X

J » >}

> y

y

} » »

, X

,..(4).

§  113. For  an  isotropic  solid  we  had  in  Lecture  XIV.  (p.  191,
above).

GENERA.L SOLUTION FOR MOTION OF ELASTIC SOLID.

355

where

(k  -  In)  S  +  2n  ^ ;  Q  =  (A:  -  ln)S+  2n  ^ ;  ^
Il  =  (k-ln)8  +  2nf^

doc dy dz

Using  these  values  of  S,  T,  U,  P,  Q,  R  in  (3)  we  find

d-ri , , . xdS „„

Molar.

....(6):

.(7).

dt
d'^

.(8).

dS

^=(k  +  i-)^  +  ^^'^

I  114. Taking  d/dx  of  the  first  of  equations  (8),  d/dy  of  the
second,  and  d/dz  of  the  third,  and  adding  we  find

''S=^^=« (^>'

where  A  =  k  +  |m (10),

this  being  Green's  "A"  as  used  in  §§  108,  111  above.
Put  now

d

^^  =  ^-i^-''-^ ^^  =  ^--dy^-''

^.  =  ^-gv-^s

dx dy dz

.(11),
.(12):

which  implies

and  we  find,  by  (8),

Equations  (9),  (12),  and  (13)  prove  that  any  infinitesimal  dis-
turbance whatever  is  composed  of  specimens  of  the  condensa-
tional-rarefactional  wave  (9),  and  specimens  of  the  distortional
wave  (13),  coexisting;  and  they  prove  that  the  displacement  in
the  condensational-rarefactional  wave  is  irrotational,  because  we
see  by  (11)  that  an  absolutely  general  expression  for  its  com-
ponents, ^  —  ^i,  v  —  Vi^  K—  ti.  if  denoted  by  f,,  V-i,  ?2,  is

_d^ _d^ _d<ir
^'~  dx  ' '^'~  dy  ' ^'~  dz

(14),

23—2

356

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  where,  when  8  is  known,  "^  is  determined  by

V^  =  B*

.(15).

Hence,  as  8  satisfies  (9),  we  have

dV"

=  AV"'^r

.(16);

and  we  see,  finally,  that  the  most  general  solution  of  the  equations
of  infinitesimal  motions  is  given  by

r=?i  +  ^2, ^='71+^2, ^=ri  +  ^2 (17):

provided  |i,  t]^,  ^i  satisfy  (12)  and  (13);  and  fa,  %,  ?2  satisfy  (14)
and  (16).

§  115.  The  general  solutions  of  (11)  and  (12)  for  plane  equi-
voluminal  waves,  and  of  (14)  and  (16)  for  plane  condensational-
rarefactional  waves  are  as  follows  (easily  proved  by  differentia-
tions) : —

p^ vt. f.  / nr.  .T  -4-  R,  11  A-  <M,^\  \

A

B G ^  \  u  I

with

with

= /  -,  and  a^A  +  jS.B  +  ^^0^0

0

^  =  '^±  =  k  =  Hf(t-  °f^^+^^+  'y^^Al

a2 /32 72  V  V

»=y

k  +  in

.(18),

.(19);

where  J?  is  a  constant,  equal  to  the  displacement  in  the  con-
densational-rarefactional  wave  when  /=  1 ;  A,  B,  C,  are  constants
equal  to  the  x-,  y-,  ^^-components  of  the  displacement,  due  to
the  equivoluminal  wave  when/=0;  («!,  /3i,  71),  (oj,  /^o,  7.1)  are
the  direction-cosines  of  the  normals  to  the  wave-planes f  of  the

*  Poisson's  well-known  fundamental  theorem,  in  the  elementary  mathematics
of  force  varying  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  tells  us  that  when  5  is
known, or  given  arbitrarily  through  all  space,  V'^S is determinate; being  the

—  A
potential  of  an  ideal  distribution  of  matter,  of  which  the  density  is  equal  to  j-  .

+  By  "wave-plane"  of  a  plane  wave  I  mean  any  plane  passing  through  particles
all  in  one  phase  of  motion.  For  example,  in  sinusoidal  plane  waves  the  "wave-
plane  "  may  be  taken  as  one  of  the  planes  containing  particles  having  no  displace-
ment but  maximum  velocity,  or  it  may  be  taken  as  one  of  the  planes  having
maximum  displacement  and  no  velocity.  For  an  arbitrary  impulsive  wave  (as
expressed  in  the  text  with  /  an  arbitrary  function  through  a  finite  range,  and  zero
for  all  values  of  the  argument  on  either  side  of  that  range)  the  "  wave-plane  "  may

REFLECTION  AND  REFRACTION  AT  INTERFACE  BETWEEN  SOLIDS.  357

two  waves ;  and  u,  v  are  the  propagational  velocities  of  the  equi-  Molar.
voluminal  and  condensational-rarefactional  waves  respectively. In
the  condensational-rarefactional  wave  in  an  isotropic  medium,  the
displacement  or  line  of  vibration  is  in  the  direction  (a.,,  ^.,,  y^),
normal  to  the  wave-plane,

§  116.  For  the  problem  of  reflection  and  refraction  at  an
interface  between  two  mediums,  which  (following  Green)  we  shall
call  the  upper  medium  and  the  lower  medium  respectively,  let  the
interface  be  XOZ,  and  let  this  plane  be  horizontal.  Let  the
wave-planes  be  perpendicular  to  XOY.  This  makes  71  =  0,  72  =  0
in  (18)  and  (19).  For  brevity  we  shall  frequently  denote  by  P,
the  plane  of  incidence  and  reflection.

§  117.  Beginning  now  with  vibrations  perpendicular  to  P,
we  have  A  =  0,  B  =  0;  and  (18)  becomes,  for  an  incident  wave  as
represented  in  fig.  8,

^=Cf{t-ax  +  by) (20),

where

a  =  sin  iju,  and  b  =  cos  i/u,  with  tc  ^ - (21).

I'^

Y

\^^^

X'

0

^^v  «-'

,1-^

X

Fig.  8.

OZ  is  perpendicular  to  the  diagram  towards  the  eye.

The  wave-planes  of  incident  (/),  reflected  (/'),  and  refracted
(,7),  waves  are  shown  in  fig.  8  for  the  particular  case  of  inci-
dence at  30°,  and  refractive-index  for  flint-glass  =  1"724;  which
makes  ,i  =  16°"9.

be  taken  as  any  plane  through  particles  all  in  the  same  phase  of  motion.  In  this
case  we  have  a  wave-front  and  a  wave-rear ;  in  the  sinusoidal  wave  we  have  no
front  and  no  rear.  I  have  therefore  introduced  the  word  "wave-plane"  in  prefer-
ence to  the  generally  used  word  "  wave-front."

358  LECTURE XVIII.

\^^it\i,u  =  J'- (22),

where

Molar. For  the  reflected  and  refracted  waves  we  may  take  respectively
180°  —  i,  and  ,i  instead  of  i,  and  C",  ,0  instead  of  C. We  have
sin  ,z sin  i
,u  u  ' "W  ,p

and  C  and  ,G  by  equations  (28)  below. Thus  for  the  displace-
ments in  the  two  mediums,  due  to  the  three  waves,  we  have
^+^'=  Cf(t  —  ax  +  by)  +  C'J (t  —  ax  —by)  in  upper  medium... (23),
and

X  =  ,Gf  {t  —  ax  +  ,hy)  in  lower  medium... (24),

,6  =  cos  ,il,u,  with  ,u  =  . /  — (25);

V ,p

fi  and  ,u  being  both  positive. Remember  that  y  is  negative  in

the  lower  medium. Remark  that,  by  (21),  (22),  (25),  we  have

b^  =  u-'-a\ ,}f- =  ,u-^ -  a" (25)'.

The  sole  geometrical  condition  to  be  fulfilled  at  the  interface  is

l;+^'=X  when  y=0,  which  gives  C  + (7'  =  ,C  ...(26).
The  sole  dynamical  condition  is  found  by  looking  to  §  113  (5). It  is

S=,S  when  2/  =  0  ;  giving  nb  (C  -  C")  =  ,n,b,C  . .  .(27).

From  these  we  find

^,hi-,bn^  2bn^  .

,b,n  +  bn  ,b,n  +  bn

§  118.  The  interpretation  of  these  formulas  is  obvious  when
the  quantities  denoted  by  the  several  symbols  are  all  real.  But  in
an  important  and  highly  interesting  case  of  a  real  incident  wave,
expressed  by  the  first  term  of  (23)  with  all  the  symbols  real,
imaginaries  enter  into (24) and (25) by ,b being imaginary ;

which  it  is  when

a~^  <  ,u (29);

or,  in  words,  when  the  velocity  of  the  trace  of  tlie  wave-planes  on
the  interface  is  less  than  the  velocity  of  the  wave  in  the  lower
medium.  In  this  case  a^  —  ,w~^  is  positive:  denoting  its  value  by  q^
we  may  put  ,b  =  —  iq*,  where  q  is  real;  positive  to  suit  notations
in  §  119. Thus  (28)  becomes

^,  _  bn  -\-  iq,n  „  _  b'n^  —  (^,n^  -f  2iqbn,n  ^ |

bn  —  iq,n  bV  +  q^,n^  \  /^q\

„  _ 2bn ^  _  2bn  (bn  +  cq,n)  ^
' bn  —  Lq,n  bhi^ -\- q^  ,71^

*  See  foot-note  on  §  158"  below.

TOTAL REFLECTION OF EQUI-VOLUMINAL WAVES.  859

We  have  also  in  (24)  an  imaginary,  ,h  =  —  2q,  in  the  argument  of  jT Molar,
for  the  lower  medium.

§  119.  To  get  real  results  we  must  choose  /  conveniently  to
make  f(t  —  ax  —  iqy)  =  F  +  cG,  where  F  and  G  are  real.  We  may
do  this  readily  in  two  ways,  (31),  or  (32),  by  taking  t,  an  arbitrary
length  of  time,  and  putting

/.,, .  , s 1  t  —  aoc  +  by  —  tT

^^ t-  ax  +  hy  +  LT  {t  -  ax  +  by)"  +  t"^
This  makes

/./, 1 7 \ ^  _  t  —  ax—t{T  —  qy)

...(31),

or

f(t  —  ax+  by)  =  e'-'i^-^^+^J"  =  cos  o)  (t- ax  +  by)  + 1  sin  tw  (^  —  ax+by)

f(t-  a^+,%)  =e"-'*-«=«-'92'>  =  e^^y  [cos  (o(t-ax)  +  t  sin  (o{t-  ax)]

(32).

The  latter  of  these  is  the  proper  method  to  show  the  results
following  the  incidence  of  a  train  of  sinusoidal  waves  ;  the  former,
which  we  shall  take  first,  is  convenient  for  the  results  following
the  incidence  of  a  single  pulse.

§  120.  With  (23),  (24),  and  (30),  it  gives  for  the  incident  wave
in  the  upper  medium

?=,-;-''"+fV'".g (33).

(t  —  ax  +  by)-  +  T^  ^ ^

and  for  the  reflected  wave  in  the  upper  medium

[(6''n^-g^,?2^)(^-ga;-6y)+2^&?t,?jT]+f[2g67i,n(^-a/g-%)-(6^?i^-g^w^)T]
{bni"  +  q^Tv")  [{t  -ax-  byf  +  t^]

(34),

and  for  the  disturbance  in  the  lower  medium

2  [[6W  {t  —  ax)  +  qbn,n  (t  —  qy)]  +  t,  {qbn,n  (t  —  ax)  —  bhi^  (t  -  qy)]}  „
'^~  (b'-ii'  +  q\n')  [(t  -  axf  +  (r  -  qyf]

(35).

The  real  parts  of  these  three  formulas  represent  a  certain  form
of  arbitrarily  given  incident  wave  :  and  the  consequent  reflected
wave in the upper medium,  and disturbance  (a surface-wave.

360  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  analogous  to  a  forced  sea-wave)  in  the  lower  medium.  The
imaginary  parts  with  c  removed,  represent  another  form  of  incident
wave  and  its  consequences  in  the  upper  and  lower  mediums.  In
neither  case  does  any  wave  travel  into  the  lower  mediiim  away
from  the  interface,  and  therefore  the  whole  activity  of  the  incident
wave  is  in  each  case  carried  on  by  the  reflected  wave  in  the  upper
medium ;  that  is  to  say,  we  have  total  reflection.  It  is  interesting
to  see  that  in  this  total  reflection,  the  reflected  wave  in  each  case
differs  in  character  from  the  incident  wave,  except  for  direct
incidence ;  and  it  differs  by  being  compounded  of  two  constituents,
one  of  the  same  character  as  the  incident  wave  for  that  case,
and  the  other  of  the  same  character  as  the  incident  wave  for
the  other  case.  This  corresponds  to  the  change  of  phase  (§§  152
and  158'^,  below)  by  total  internal  reflection  of  waves  of  vibration
perpendicular  to  P.

§  121.  The  accompanying  diagram  (fig.  9)  shows  the  characters
of  the  two  forms  of  incident  wave,  and  of  two  constituents  of  the
forced  surface-wave  in  the  lower  medium,  referred  to  in  |  120.
The  two  curves  represent,  from  t  =  —  <x)  to  t  =  +  oo  ,  the  part  of
the  displacement  of  any  particle  in  the  upper  medium,  due  to
one  or  other  alone  of  the  two  forms  of  incident  wave.  The
abscissa in each  curve is  t. The  ordinates  of  the  two  curves

are  as  follows

Curve  1, ,-; r,  and  Curve  2,

The  unit  of  ordinates  in  each  case  is  t~^

The  disturbance  in  the  lower  medium  is  a  forced  wave,  of
character  represented  by  a  combination  of  these  two  curves,
travelling  under  the  interface  at  speed  a~\

§  122.  All  the  words  of  §  120  apply  also  to  the  total  reflection
of  sinusoidal  waves,  with  this  qualification,  that  the  two  char-
acters of  incident  wave  are  expressed  respectively  by  a  cosine
and  a  sine,  and  the  "  difference  "  becomes  simply  a  difference  of
phase.  Thus  having  taken  the  real  parts  of  the  formulas  we
get  nothing  new  by  taking  the  imaginary  parts.  The  real  parts
of  (23)  and  (24),  with  (32)  for  /  and  with  (30)  for  C  and  ,C,
give  us
Incident  wave,  G  cos  co  (t  —  ace  +  hy) (36) ;

TOTAL  REFLECTION OF EQUI-VOLUMINAL  PULSES.  361

\

\

\

\

1

\

V

l

A

^

t

r

^

y

OX

-— -

^

^

A

>  (

' c

■ *=

) I

> '

< c

» c

3 F-

t

■

■^

^

^

* C

<> 0

0 r

J« I

3

<^

c

^

N

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

362  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  ^Reflected  wave,  \

<  ^  {b-n^  -q'^  ,n'^)cos(o(t  -  ax-by)  — 2qbn  ,nsm(a(t— ax-by)  r  •  -y^'  ^ '
[  6VT5>^  J

[Forced  wave  in  lower  medium,  "1

I  „  2bn e~'"92'  [hn  cos  o}(t  —  ax)  —  q,n sin  (o{t—  ax)'\ <

[  b-n^  +  q\7i^  J

.(38).

Thus  we  see  that  the  amplitude  of  the  resultant  reflected  wave
is  C;  that  its  phase  is  put  forward  ta,n~^  [2qbn,nl{b^n^  —  q^i'n^)];
and  that  the  phase  of  the  forced  wave-train  in  the  lower  medium
is  before  that  of  the  incident  wave  by  tan~^  {q,nlbn).

§  123.  Leaving  for  §  158',  the  case  of  total  reflection,  and
returning  to  reflection  and  refraction,  that  is  to  say,  b  and  ,6  both
real,  we  see  that  equations  (28)  give  for  the  case  of  equal  rigidities

—  (^'  _,l>  —  b  _  cot  /i  —  cot  i  _  sin  (i  —  ,i)
C fb  +  b cot,*  +  coti sin  (^  +  ,*)

which is Fresnel's "sine-law"; and, belonging to it for the

refracted  ray,

,G  2  cot  i  2  cos  i  sin  ,i  , ,  ^,

-7^  = -. .=  —. — —. . (40).

C cot  ,1  +  cot  % sm  {,%  -{-%)

In  the  case  of  equal  densities  and  unequal  rigidities  we  have
njiii  =  sin^  tysin*^  ,1  and  equations  (28)  give

cos  i  sin  ,i

C  _  cos  ,i  sin  i  _  sin  2i  —  sin  2,{  _  tan  (i  —  ,{)

G cos  %  sin  ,1 sin  2i  +  sin  2,i tan  (t  +  ,i)

cos  fi  sin  i

which  is  Fresnel's  "tangent-law";  and, belonging  to  it  for  the
refracted  ray,

,C  2  sin  { cos  i  sin  2i  , ,  ^.

—  z=  - — . , — ,  =  ^, , (42).

G sin  ,i  cos  ,t  -I-  sin  i  cos  i sin  2  ,i  +  sin  2i

The  third  member  of  (41)  is  in  some  respects  more  convenient
than  Fresnel's  beautiful  "  tangent-formula."

§  124.  These  formulas,  valid  for  pulses  as  well  as  for  trains
of  sinusoidal  waves,  show,  without  any  hypothesis  in  respect  to
compressibility  or  non-compressibility  of  ether,  that,  if  the  densities

DISPLACEMENTS PERPENDICULAR TO PLANE OF INCIDENCE. 363

of  the  mediums  are  equal  on  the  two  sides  of  the  interface,  Molar.
Fresnel's  "tangent-law"  is  fulfilled  by  the  reflected  waves,  if  the
vibrations  are  parallel  to  the  interface ;  and  therefore  the  reflected
light  vanishes  when  the  angle  of  refraction  is  the  complement  of
the  angle  of  incidence.  Hence  non-polarized  light  incident  at
the  angle  which  fulfils  this  condition  would  give  reflected  light
consisting  of  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  the  incident  and  reflected
rays.  Now  (§  81)  we  have  seen  from  Stokes'  dynamical  theory  of
the  scattering  of  light  from  particles  small  in  comparison  with
the  wave-length,  as  in  the  blue  sky,  and  also  from  his  grating
experiments  and  their  theory,  and  (^§  81')  confirmation  by  Rayleigh
and  by  Lorenz  of  Denmark,  that,  in  light  polarized  by  reflection,
the  vibrations  are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  polarization
defined  as  the  plane  of  the  incident  and  reflected  rays ;  that  is  to
say  the  vibrations  in  the  reflected  ray  are  parallel  to  the  interface.
Hence  it  is  certain  that  the  densities  of  the  mediums  are  not
equal  on  the  two  sides  of  the  interface ;  and  that  the  densities
and  rigidities  must  be  such  as  not  to  give  evanescent  reflected  ray
for  any  angle  of  incidence,  when,  as  in  §  123,  the  vibrations  are
parallel  to  the  interface.

§  125.  On  the  other  hand,  formulas  (39),  (40)  show  that  the
supposition  of  equal  rigidities  not  only  does  not  give  evanescent
ray  for  any  angle  of  incidence,  but  actually  fulfils  Fresnel's
"sine-law"  of  reflection  for  all  angles  of  incidence  when  the  vibra-
tions are  parallel  to  the  interface.  Looking  back  to  (28)  and  (39),
we  see  that  Fresnel's  "  sine-law "  is  expressed  algebraically  by

>b>n-bn^,bj-b

fb,n  +  bn ,b  +  b  \ /-

If  this  equation  is  true  for  any  one  value  of  b/,b  other  than  0
or  X  ,  we  must  have  71/, n  =  1.  Hence  if,  with  vibrations  parallel
to  the  interface,  Fresnel's  "sine-law"  is  exactly  true  for  any  one
angle  of  incidence  other  than  90°,  the  rigidities  of  the  mediums
on  the  two  sides  are  exactly  equal,  and  the  "  sine-law"  is  exactly
true  for  all  angles  of  incidence ;  a  very  important  theoi^em.

§  126.  Going  back  now  to  the  more  difficult  case  of  vibrations
in  the  plane  of  incidence,  let  us  still  take  the  interface  as  XOZ
and  horizontal;  and  the  wave-planes  perpendicular  to  XOY.
Instead  of  the  single  displacement-component,  ^,  and  the  single

364

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  surface-pull-component,  S,  of  §§  117 — 125,  we  have  now  two  dis-
placement-components, ^,  7) ;  and  two  surface-pull-components,  Q,
perpendicular  to  the  interface,  and  U  parallel  to  the  direction  X
in  the  interface.  The  interfacial  conditions  are  that  each  of  these
four  quantities  has  equal  values  on  the  two  sides  of  the  inter-
face. We  have  now  essentially  the  further  complication  of  two
sets  of  waves,  equivoluminal  and  condensational-rarefactional,
which  are  essentially  to  be  dealt  with.  We  might  suppose  the
incident  waves  in  the  upper  medium  to  be  simply  equivoluminal
or  simply  condensational-rarefactional ;  but  incidence  on  the  inter-
face between  two  mediums  of  different  densities  or  different
rigidities  would  give  rise  to  reflected  waves  of  both  classes  in  the
upper  medium,  and  to  refracted  waves  of  both  classes  in  the
lower  medium.  It  will  therefore  be  convenient  to  begin  with
incident  waves  of  both  classes  in  the  upper  medium.

§  127. Going  back  now  to  §  115,  according  to  the  details  chosen
in  I  126,  and  taking  J  for  the  angle  of  incidence  of  condensational-
rarefactional  waves,  we  have  7i  =  0,  C  =  0,  7.2  =  0  5  and  we  may  put
«!  =  sin  z,  A  =  Gcosi, a^  —  sinj,

ySi  =  —  cos  i; B  =  G  sin  i; ySa  =  —  cos  j.

Thus  instead  of  (18)  and  (19)  we  now  have

.(44).

cos  I

sin  i

with

^  .  / , a;  sin  i  —  y  cos  i\
=  Gf(t / j.

/n
V  P

.(45),

V2

smj

;=Hf[t-

X  Bin  J  —  y  cosj

with

k  +  in

.(46),

as  the  two  constituents  for  the  incident  waves.  Let  now  ,u,  ,G,  ,i,
and  ,v,  ,H,  ,j  be  the  values  of  the  constants  for  the  waves  in  the
lower  medium.

For  the  reflected  waves  in  the  upper  medium  we  have  —  cos  i,
—  cosj,  instead  of  cos  i,  cos  j;  while  sin  i,  sin  J  are  the  same  as  for
the  incident  waves.  Let  —  G',  +  H',  be  the  constants  for  the
magnitudes  of  the  reflected  rays  corresponding  to  G,  H,  for  the

DISPLACEMENTS IN PLANE OF INCIDENCE.

365

incident  rays. Thus  for  the  total  displacement-components due  Molar,
to  the  four  waves  in  the  upper  medium  we  have

i. •  r-i ,  ( , a;  sin  I  —  v  cos  I \ . .  TT,  I . a;  sin  i  —  w  cos  9\"\
^=cosiG;/u ^ j  +  sin_;i(/ U ^ — ^ ^j

■  r^i  fl . X  sin  %  -f- 11  cos  i\ . .  tt,  ,^  I ^  sin  /  4-  v  cos  i
+  cos  %Gf[t "^^ +  sm  J  H't  [t -^ — "^ ^

•  • />^  /. a;  sin  I  —  ■?/ cos  i\ ■  rr  r  ( . ^sinj  —  ycosj\
V  =  smiGf  [t ^ j-CQS:)Hf(t --L-^ ^j

•  ■ri'j'f^ o)  sin  i  +  y  cos  i\ •  rr/^ /^ a;  sin  i  +  1/ cos  i\
—  sm  I  Gf  1 1 j  +  cos  J  11  f  f  t — )

•(47),

and  for  total  displacement-components  in  the  lower  medium  the
same  formulas  with  ,i,  ,j,  ,u,  ,v,  ,G,  ,H,  0,  0,  in  place  of  {,  j,  u,  v,
G,  H,  G',  H'  respectively.

I  128.  Taking  from  these  formulas  the  resultants  of  the  (f,  rj)
components  of  the  displacements  in  the  several  waves,  we  have  as
follows : —

X  sin  i  —  y  cos  i^

Incident,  Gf

Equivoluminal  wave \  Reflected,  G'f

(Refracted,  ,Gf

[Incident,  Hf

s  Reflected,  H'f

Refracted,  ,Hf

Condensational-rare-
factional  wave

t-

X  sin  i  +  y  cos  i\
u  J

X  sin  ,i  —  y  cos  ,i\
,u  J

xsin  j  —  y  cos  j\

V  )

X  sin  j  +  y  cos  j\

^ V ;

^  _  X  sin  ,j  -  y  cos  ,j\
,v  )'

§  129.  Putting  now  y  =  Q  to  find  displacement-components  at
the  interface,  and  equating  values  on  the  two  sides,  we  see  in  the
first  place  that  the  arguments  of/  with  y  zero  must  be  all  equal ;
and  that  the  coefficient  of  x  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  velocity  of  the
trace  of  each  of  the  four  waves  on  the  interface ;  and  if  we  denote
this  velocity  by  a~^  we  have

_  sm  ^  _  sin  ,i  _  sm  j sm  ,j
ti  ,u  V  ,v

.(48).

366

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  The  last  three  of  these  equations  express  the  laws  of  refi'action
of  waves  of  either  class  in  the  lower  medium  consequent  on  waves
of  either  class  in  the  upper  medium.  They  show  that  the  sines  of
the  angles  of  incidence  and  refraction  are  inversely  as  the  propa-
gational  velocities  in  the  two  mediums,  whether  the  two  waves
considered  are  of  the  same  species  or  of  the  two  different  species.
For  brevity  in  what  follows  we  shall  put

cost ,

u  '

cos,r

A

cos^

=  c,

COS , ;

.V

=  ,c

.(49),

from  which  we  find

a^  +  c-  =  v~

a^  +  ,h^  =  iir"'  =  —  ; a^  +  ,c-  =  ,v~'^  =

,n

k  +  ^n

,k  +  i,n

.(50).

§  130. Putting  now  f{t  —  ax)  =  -v/r,  we  find  by  (47)  with  y  =  0

^=[bu{G  +  G')  +  av(H+H')]ir |

7]  =  [au(G-G')  +  cv(-H+H')]fl  ^'^  ^'

as  the  displacement-components  of  the upper medium at  the
interface.

Using  now  (47)  to  find  Q  and  U  by  (6)  and  (5)  of  §  113,  and
putting  ;?/  =  0  we  find,  as  the  components  of  surface-pull  of  the
upper  medium  at  the  interface

Q  =  n[2abu  (G  +  G')  -  hv  (H  +  H')]  f^

U  =  n[gu{G-G')  +  2acv(H-H')]yir^

where  g  =  }f  —  a-,

nh  =  {k -  f 7i) u-2 -1-  2wc2  =  p  +  27i (c^ - y-^)  =  p-  2na\

Taking  the  terms  of  (51)  and  (52)  which  contain  G,  and  H,
and  in  them  substituting  ,G,  ,H,  ,6,  ,c,  ,g,  ,h,  ,v,  ,n,  ,k  for  G,  H,  h,  c,
g,  h,  V,  n,  k,  we  find  for  the  two  refracted  waves  in  the  lower
medium  the  displacement-components,  and  the  surface-pull-com-
ponents, at  the  interface,  as  folloAvs : —

,^  =  {,h,u,G  +  a,v,H)y^

,7]  =  {a,u,G-,c,v,H)y\r

,Q  —  in  [2a,h,u,G  —  ,h,v,H'\  ■^  I

,  U=  ,n  [,g,u,G  +  2a,c,v,H]  yjr

.(52);
..(53).

.(54).

SOLUTION FOR  DISPLA.CEMENTS IN PLANE  OF IN^CIDENCE. 367

Equating  each  component  for  the  two  sides,  as  said  in  §  126,  Molar,
we find the following  four  equations for  determining  the four
required quantities,  ,0,  ,H, G\  H',  in terms of  the two  given
quantities  G,  H,

bu{0+G') +av{H  +  H')=  ,h,ii,G+ a,v,H  ]

au(G-G') -cv{H-H')  =  a,u,G- ,c,v,H

7i[2abu{G+G') -hv{H+ H')]  =  ,n[2a,b,u,G- ,h,v,H]\
n  [gu  (G  -  G')  +  2acv  {H -  H')]  = ,n  {,g,u,G  +  2a,c,v,Hy

,.(55).

§  131.  Considering  for  the  present  G  —  G'  and  H  +  H'  as  the
known  quantities,  and  G  +  G',  H—H',  ,G,  ,H,  as  unknown;  first
find  two  values  oi  G  ■\-G'  from  the  first  and  third  of  equations  (55),
and  two  values  of  H  —  H'  from  the  second  and  fourth  of  (55).
Thus  we  have

av

G  +  G'  =  j^(,h,u,G+a,v,H)-P{H  +  H')
bu  bu

{H  +  H')

,.(56).

H-H'  =  --{a,u,G-,c,v,H)  +  —  {G-G')

The  equalities  of  the  second  and  third  members  of  these  two
double  equations  may  be  taken  as  two  equations  for  the  deter-
mination of  ,(t,  ,H  in  terms  of  G  +  G',  and  H+H'.  With  some
simplifying  reductions  they  become

2a,b(n  -  ,n),u,G  +  [,p  +  2{n  -  ,n)a^],v,H  =  pv  {H+H')
[,p  +  2(?i  —  ,n)  a^]  ,UiG—  2a, c  (n  —  ,n)  ,v,H  =  pu  (G  —  G')

.(57).

Finding  ,G  and  ,H  from  these,  and  using  the  results  in  either
the  firsts  or  the  seconds  of  the  pairs  of  equations  (56),  we  have
G  +  G'  and  H-H'  in  terms  oi  G  -  G'  s^nd  H+H'.  These  last
two  equations  may  be  used  to  find  G'  and  H'  in  terms  of  G  and  H.
Thus  we  have  finally  G',  H',  ,G,  ,H  in  terms  of  the  given
quantities  G,  H.  This,  of  course,  might  have  been  found  directly
from  the  four  equations  (55)  by  forming  the  proper  determinants.
The  algebraic  work  is  somewhat  long  either  way.

368  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  §  132.  But  the  process  we  have  followed  in  §  131  has  the
advantage  of  giving  us  the  two  intermediate  equations  (57);
wdth  the  great  simplification  which  they  present  in  the  case
n  =  ,n,  for  which  they  become

,p,v,H  =pv{H  +  H'), ,p,u,G  =  pu{G-Q') (58).

Let  us  now  work  this  case  out  to  the  end,  with  the  further
simplification  H=0;  because  the  particular  problem  which  we
wish  to  solve  is  to  find  the  two  reflected  waves  (G',  H')  and  the
two  refracted  waves  {,G,  ,H)  due  to  a  single  incident  equi-
voluminal  wave  {G).  Eliminating  ,G,  ,H  from  the  first  two  of  (55),
by  (58)  with  H  =  0;  and  then  finding  G'  and  H'  from  the  two
equations  so  got,  we  have

-«'=5-^S^« (•^«).

-H'=2^'P-'Y r-G  (60),

,pb  +  p,o  +  L  V  \ /'

where  L  =  ^'P~P^''''  (61).

,pc  ■\-p,c

Lastly  (58)  gives  ,«=  2  -^-^^^^  G (62),

P^  I

-,H=^J'P-pY  /^G (63).

,pb  +  p,b  +  L,v  ^ ^

This  completes  the  theory  of  the  reflection  and  refraction  of
waves  at  a  plane  interface  of  slipless  contact  between  two  ordinary
elastic  solids,  with  any  given  bulk-moduluses  and  rigidities.

§  133. Remark  now  that  by  equations  (49),  (48),  we  have

,b u  cos  ,i sin i  cos ,i  ,^,^

j-= .=  -• — -■ -. (64);

0 ,u  cos  I sin  ,1  cos  i  v / '

and  by  (50)  with  7i  =  ,n, p/,p  =  ,u^/it,^  (65);

whence,  by  (64),  p|  ^  sin^cos^'

,po sm  t  cos  I

Hence,  we  see  that  if  Z  =  0  we  have

—  G'  _  sin  2i  —  sin  2,t  _  tan  (i  —  ,%)  ^

G sin  2i  +  sin  2,i  ~  tan  (t  +  ,t) ^ ^'

which  is  Fresnel's  formula  for  reflection  when  the  vibrations  are  in
the  plane  of  incidence.

TRIAL OF UNEQUAL RIGIDITIES.  369

Looking  to  (61)  we  see  that  this  could  only  be  the  case  for  Molar,
other  than  direct  incidence  by  either  c,  or  ,c,  or  both  being
infinitely  great;  because,  §  129  (48),  a  can  only  be  zero  for  direct
incidence  (i  =  0).  By  (50)  we  see  that  to  make  c  or  ,c  very  great,
we  must  have  v  or  ,v  very  small.  Returning  to  this  suggestion  in
(Lect.  XIX.  §  167),  we  shall  find  good  physical  reason  to  leave,  for
undisturbed  ether,  ?;  =  oo  as  Green  made  it :  and  to  let  ,v  be  small
enough,  to  make  L  not  absolutely  zero  but  as  small  as  required
to  give  the  closeness  of  approximation  to  truth  which  observation
proves  for  Fresnel's  formulas  for  the  great  majority  of  transparent
liquids  and  solids,  including  optically  isotropic  crystals ;  and  yet
large  enough  to  give  modified  foimulas  representing  the  devia-
tions from  Fresnel  found  in  diamond,  sulphide  of  zinc,  sulphide  of
arsenic,  etc.  (see  §  105  above  and  §  182  below).

§  134.  Meantime  we  shall  consider  some  interesting  and
important  characteristics  of  the  general  problem  of  §  130  without
the  limitation  n  =  ,n :  and  of  its  solution  for  the  case  n  =  ,n
expressed  by  §  123  (89),  (40)  and  §  132  (59)... (63),  with  the
modification  due  to  v  —  co  in  space  containing  no  ponderable
matter ;  and  with  the  special  further  modification  regarding  waves
or  vibrations  of  ether  in  the  space  occupied  by  metals  (solid  or
liquid)  to  account  for  the  observational ly  discovered  facts  of
metallic  reflection.

§  135.  Consider  first  direct  incidence,  whether  of  an  equi-
voluminal  or  of  a  condensational-rarefactional  wave.  For  this  we
have  in  §§  129,  130,

*  =  ,*"=j  =  /i  =  0; a  =  0; c  =  v-'; ,c  =  ,v~';\

u-^  =  h"-  =  g  =  k=P-- ^u-^  =  ^^.  =  ^g  =  ^k  =  'j^. [•

These  details  reduce  (55)  to

G  +  G'= ,Q\
H-H'= ,h\

Pv{H+H')=,p,v,h\

pu(G-G')-=  ,p,u,G  j

The  first  and  fourth  of  these  give  G'  and  ,G  in  terms  of  G ;  the
T.  L.  24

.(68).

.')70  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  second  and  third  give  H'  and  ,^in  terms  of  H.  Thus  our  formulas
verify  what  is  obvious  without  them  ;  that  a  directly  incident  wave,
if  equivoluminal,  gives  equivoluminal  reflected  and  transmitted
waves ;  and  if  condensational-rarefactional,  gives  condensational-
rarefactional  reflected  and  transmitted  waves.  For  direct  incidence,
remark  that  in  the  equivoluminal  waves  the  displacement  is  parallel
to  the  reflecting  surface,  and  in  the  x  direction ;  in  the  conden-
sational-rarefactional waves  it  is  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting
surface,  which  is  the  y  direction.  For  ratios  of  these  displace-
ments we  find,  as  follows,  from  (68) ; —

(Equivoluminal)  -,f^  =  '^'^^-^^ '^^.1p^ (69);

^  ^ 6r ,p,u  +  pu G ,p,u  +  pu

(Condensational-rarefactional) ,^  =  '-- , '-n  = —

H ,p,v  +  pv H ,p,v -\- pv

(70).

In  respect  to  the  general  theory  of  the  reflection  of  waves  at
a  plane  interface  between  two  elastic  solids  of  different  quality,
it  is  interesting  to  see  that,  provided  only  they  are  sliplessly
connected  at  the  interface,  we  have,  for  the  case  of  direct  incidence,
the  same  relations  between  the  displacements  of  the  reflected  and
transmitted  waves  and  of  the  incident  wave  in  terms  of  densities
and  propagational  velocities,  for  equivoluminal  waves  of  transverse
vibration,  as  for  condensational-rarefactional  waves  (vibrations  in
the  line  of  transmission).  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  connection
between  the  two  solids  were  merely  by  normal  pressure,  and  if
the  surfaces  of  the  two  solids  at  the  interface  were  perfectly
frictionless,  and  allowed  perfect  freedom  for  tangential  slipping ;
the  reflection  in  the  case  of  directly  incident  waves  of  transverse
vibration  would  be  total,  and  there  would  be  no  transmission  of
waves  into  the  other  solid.

§  136.  In  respect  to  physical  optics  the  solution  (69)  is  ex-
ceedingly interesting. If  we  eliminate  p,  ,p  from  it  by

p  =  mr^, ,p  =  ,n,u-'\
we  find

—  G' ,nu  —  n,u ,G 2n,u

^ -  , ^-  (71).

Cr ,nu-\-n,u G ,riu  +  n,u

Hence,  denoting  ?t/,?/  by  jjl  (tlie  refractive  index),  we  see  that,

DIRECT  REFLECTIVITY  PROVES  EQUAL  RIGIDITIES  OR  DENSITIES. 371

for  the  reflected  wave,  in  the  two  cases  of  equal  rigidities  and  Molar.
equal  densities,  we  have  respectively,

—  -  -^— ^ and  —  -  ^^^  (12)

Thus  G'/G  is  equal  but  with  opposite  signs  in  the  two  cases ;
and  therefore,  as  the  ratio  of  the  intensity  of  the  reflected  light
to  the  intensity  of  the  incident  light  ia  equal  to  (G'jGy,  we  see
that  it  is  equal  to

(^;iJ (^^>'

and  is  the  same  in  the  two  cases  of  equal  densities  and  equal
rigidities ;  an  old  known  and  very  important  result  in  physical
optics.  It  was,  I  believe,  first  given  by  Thomas  Young ;  it  is
also  found  by  making  i  =  0  in  Fresnel's  formulas  for  reflection  of
polarized  light  at  any  incidence.  But  lull  dynamical  theory
proves  that,  if  the  refractivity  yu,  —  1  is  prodiiced  otherwise  than
by  either  equal  rigidities  or  equal  densities,  the  ratio  of  reflected
light  to  incident  light  would  not  be  exactly  equal  to  (73).  This
dynamical  truth  was  referred  to  in  my  introductory  Lecture
(pp.  15,  16,  above);  and  I  had  then  come  to  the  conclusion  from
Professor  Rood's  photometric  experiments  that  the  observed
amount  of  reflected  light  from  glass  agrees  too  closely  with  (73)
to  allow  any  deviation  from  either  equal  rigidities  or  equal
densities,  sufficient  to  materially  improve  Green's  dynamical
theory  of  the  polarization  of  light  by  reflection.  This  conclusion
is  on  the  whole  confirmed  by  Rayleigh's  very  searching  investi-
gation of  the  reflection  of  light  from  glasses  of  different  kinds*;
but  the  great  differences  of  reflectivity  which  he  found  in  the
surface  of  the  same  piece  of  glass  in  different  states  of  polish,
rendered  it  impossible  to  get  thoroughly  satisfactory  results  in
respect  to  agreement  with  theory;  as  we  see  by  the  following
statement  which  he  gives  as  a  summing-up  of  his  investigation.

"  Altogether  the  evidence  favours  the  conclusion  that  recently
"  polished  glass  surfaces  have  a  reflecting  power  differing  not  more
"  than  1  or  2  per  cent,  from  that  given  by  Fresnel's  formula ;  but

*  "  On  the  Intensity  of  Light  Reflected  from  certain  surfaces  at  nearly  Perpen-
dicular Incidence,"  Proc.  R.  S.,  xli.  pp.  275 — 294,  1880;  and  Scientific  Papers,  ii.
pp.  522—542.

24—2

372  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  "  that  after  some  months  or  years  the  reflection  may  fall  off  from
"  10  to  30  per  cent.,  and  that  without  any  apparent  tarnish.

"  The  question  as  to  the  cause  of  the  falling  off,  I  am  not  in
"  a  position  to  answer  satisfactorily.  Anything  like  a  disintegration
"  of  the  surface  might  be  expected  to  reveal  itself  on  close  in-
"  spection,  but  nothing  of  this  kind  could  be  detected.  A  super-
"  ficial  layer  of  lower  index,  formed  under  atmospheric  influence,
"even  though  no  thicker  than  1/100000  inch,  would  explain  a
"  diminished  reflection.  Possibly  a  combined  examination  of  the
"  lights  reflected  and  transmitted  by  glass  surfaces  in  various
"  conditions  would  lead  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  matter.
"If  the  superficial  film  act  by  diffusion  or  absorption,  the  trans-
"  mitted  light  may  be  expected  to  fall  off.  On  the  other  hand,
"the  mere  interposition  of  a  transparent  layer  of  intermediate
"  index  would  entail  as  great  an  increase  in  the  transmitted  as
"  falling  off  in  the  reflected  light.  There  is  evidently  room  here
"  for  much  further  investigation,  but  I  must  content  myself  with
"  making  these  suggestions."

§  137.  Consider  next  grazing  incidence  (i  =  90°,  6  =  0,  a  =  ■u~'^)
of  an  equivoluminal  wave  of  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence,
and  therefore  very  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting  surface.
We  see  immediately  that  equations  (55)  are  satisfied  by
H  =  0,  H'  =  0,  ,H=0,  ,G  =  0,  G-G'  =  0.
This  shows  that,  whether  for  equal  or  unequal  rigidities,  we  have
approximately  total  reflection,  and  that  the  phase  of  the  reflected
light  corresponds  to  G' =  G.  Looking  now  to  §136(71),  we  see
that  in  the  case  of  equal  rigidities  of  the  two  mediums  G'/G  is
negative  for  direct  incidence,  while  we  now  find  it  to  be  positive
for  grazing  incidence.  Hence  if  it  is  real  for  all  incidences  it
must  be  zero  for  one  particular  incidence.  This  is  fundamental
in  the  dynamics  of  polarization  by  reflection  and  of  principal
incidences.

§  138.  On  the  other  hand,  for  equal  densities  and  unequal
rigidities,  look  to  §  135  (69);  and  we  see  that  G' j  G  is  positive  for
direct  incidence :  and  by  §  137  it  is  + 1  for  grazing  incidence.
Hence,  it  cannot  vanish  just  once  or  any  odd  number  of  times
when  i  is  increased  from  0°  to  90°;  but  it  can  vanish  twice  or
an  even  number  of  times. This  is  essentially  concerned  in  the

OPACITY  AND  REFLECTIVITY  OF  METALS. 373

explanation  of  the  remarkable  discovery  of  Lorenz  and  Rayleigh,  Molar.
referred  to  in  §  81  above.

§  138'.  Lastly;  going  back  to  §  123,  we  see  that  our  notation
has  secured  that,  for  direct  incidence,  C'/G  is  negative  or  positive
just  as  is  G'/Gy  according  as  the  rigidities  or  the  densities  of  the
two  mediums  are  equal.  But  at  grazing  incidence,  C'/G,  while
still  negative  for  equal  rigidities,  is  positive  for  equal  densities.

§  139.  So  far  everything  before  us,  djaiamical  and  experi-
mental, confirms  Green's  original  assumption  of  equal  rigidities
and  ditferent  densities  to  account  for  light  reflected  from  and
transmitted  through  transparent  bodies.  Before  going  on  in
Lecture  XIX.  to  the  promised  reconciliation  between  Fresnel  and
dynamics  for  transparent  substances,  let  us,  while  keeping  to  the
supposition  of  equal  rigidity  of  ether  throughout  vacant  space  and
throughout  space  occupied  by  ponderables  of  any  kind,  briefly
consider  what  suppositions  we  must  make  in  respect  to  our
solution  of  §  132  [(59) — (63)],  to  ex'^lain  known  truths  regarding
the  reflection  of  light  from  metals  or  other  opaque  bodies.

§  140.  The  extremely  high  degree  of  opacity  presented  by  all
metals  for  light  of  all  periods,  from  something  considerably  longer
than  that  of  the  extreme  red  of  the  visible  spectrum  (2"5  .10~"  sees.
for  A  line)  to  something  considerably  less  than  that  of  the  extreme
violet  (r3 .  10"^'  sees,  for  H  line),  is  the  most  definite  of  the  visible
characteristics  of  metals :  while  the  great  brilliance  of  light  re-
flected from  them,  either  directly  or  at  any  angle  other  than
grazing  incidence*, compared  with  that  reflected  from  glass  or

*  As  obliquity  of  incident  light  is  increased  to  approach  more  and  more  nearly
grazing  incidence,  the  brilliance  of  the  reflected  light  approaches  more  and  more
nearly  to  equality  with  the  incident  light.  At  infinitely  nearly  grazing  incidence
we  find  theoretically  (§  137)  total  reflection  from  every  polished  surface;  polish
being  defined  as  in  §  86  above.  Indeed  we  find  observationally  in  surfaces  such  as
sooted  glass,  which  could  scarcely  be  called  polished  according  to  any  definition,  a
manifest  tendency  towards  total  reflection  when  the  angle  of  incidence  is  increased
to  nearly  90°.

A  striking  illustrative  experiment  may  be  made  by  placing,  on  a  table  covered
with  a  black  cotton-velvet  tablecloth,  two  pieces  of  plate  glass  side  by  side,  with  an
arrangement  of  light  and  screen  as  indicated  in  the  accompanying  sketch.  Z,  is  a
lamp  which  may  be  held  by  hand,  and  raised  or  lowered  slightly  at  pleasure.  00'
is  an  opaque  screen.  PP'  is  a  screen  of  white  paper  resting  on  the  table.  It  would
be  startling,  if  we  did  not  expect  the  result,  to  see  how  much  light  is  reflected  from

374

LECTUKE XVIII.

Molar,  crystals  or  from  the  most  brilliantly  polished  of  commonly  known
and  seen  non-metallic  bodies,  is  their  most  obvious  and  best  known
quality.  The  opacity  of  thin  metal  plates  hitherto  tested  for  all
visible  lights  from  red  to  violet  has  been  found  seemingly  perfect
for  all  thicknesses  exceeding  3. 10"^  cm.  (or  half  the  wave-length
of  yellow  light  in  air).  "When,  in  the  process  of  gold-beating,
the  thickness  of  the  gold-leaf  is  reduced  to  about  2 . 1 0"^  cm.  (or
about  one-third  of  the  wave-length  of  yellow  light)  it  begins  to
be  perceptibly  translucent,  transmitting  faint  green  light  when
illuminated  by  strong  white  light  on  one  side.  The  thinnest  of
ordinary  gold-leaf  (-7.10"°  cm.,  or  about  one-eighth  of  the  wave-
length of  yellow  light)  is  quite  startlingly  translucent,  giving  a
strong  green  tinge  to  the  transmitted  light.  Silver  foil  1"5 .10~-'  cm.
thick  (considerably  thinner  than  translucent  gold-leaf)  is  quite
opaque  to  the  electric  light  so  far  as  our  eyes  allow  us  to  judge  ;

the  soot  above  the  bouudary  of  the  shadow  of  OiJ'.  The  experiment  is  rendered
still  more  striking  by  placing  a  flat  plate  of  polished  silver  beside  the  two  glass
plates,  and  seeing  how  nearly  both  the  sooted  and  the  clean  glass  plates  come  in
rivalry  with  the  silver  plate  in  i-espect  to  totality  of  reflection,  when  L  is  lowered  to

P  o

o

p  1

*L

more  and  more  nearly  grazing  incidence  of  its  light.  It  is  interesting  also  to  take
away  the  paper  screen,  and  view  the  three  plates  and  the  lamp  by  an  eye  placed  in
positions  to  receive  reflected  light  from  the  three  mirrors,  sooted,  polished  glass,
and  polished  silver.

Another  interesting  experiment  may  be  made  by  looking  vertically  downwards
through  a  Nicol  at  the  three  surfaces,  or  at  a  clean  surface  of  mercury  or  water,
illuminated  by  light  from  L  at  nearly  grazing  incidence  in  a  dark  room.  A  sur-
prisingly large  amount  of  light  is  seen  from  the  sooted  surface,  and  is  found
to  be  almost  wholly  polarized  to  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  L
and  the  line  of  vision.  If  the  glass  and  silver  are  very  well  polished  and  clean,
little  or  no  light  will  be  seen  from  them ;  unless  L  is  very  intense,  when  probably
a  faint  blue  light,  polarized  just  as  is  the  light  from  the  soot,  will  be  visible,
indicating  want  of  molecular  perfectness  in  the  polish,  or  a  want  of  optical
perfectness  in  the  most  perfect  polish  possible  for  the  molecular  constitution  of
the  solid  or  liquid,  according  to  the  principles  indicated  in  §  86  above.

ELECTROMAGNETIC SCKEENING AND TRANSPARENCY. 375

but  it  is  transparent  to  an  invisible  violet  light  through  a  small  Molar.
range of  wave-length from about 3"07.10~^ to 3'32 .10~-'cm.*
(periods  from  1-02. 10~i'^  to  I'll.lO"!'  of  a  second).

§  141.  The  extreme  opacity  of  metals  is  quite  lost  for  Roentgen
rays  (which  are  probably  light  of  much  shorter  period  than  10~^'  of
a  second);  sheet  aluminium  of  thicknesses  up  to  two  or  three
centimetres  being  transparent  for  them.  For  some  qualities  of
Roentgen  rays  even  thick  sheet  lead  is  not  perfectly  opaque.

§  142.  We  have  no  experimental  knowledge  in  respect  to  the
opacity  of  exceedingly  thin  metallic  films  for  radiant  heat  of
longer  periods  than  that  of  the  reddest  visible  light.  It  seems
not  improbable  that  through  the  whole  range  of  periods  up  to
2.1()~"  of  a  second,  through  which  experiments  on  the  refractivity
and  reflectivity  of  rock-salt  and  sylvin  have  been  made  by  Langley,
Rubens,  Paschen,  Rubens  and  Nicols,  and  Rubens  and  Aschkinaas
(see  above,  Lecture  XII.  p.  loO),  the  opacity  of  gold-leaf  and  other
of  the  thinnest  metal  foils  man  be  as  complete,  or  nearly  as  com-
plete, as  it  is  for  visible  light.

§  143.  But,  when  we  go  to  very  much  longer  periods,  we
certainly  find  these  thin  metal  foils  quite  transparent  for  variations
of  magnetic  force.  Thus,  sheet  copper  of  thickness  7.10"^ cm.
(about  a  wave-length  of  orange  light  in  air),  though  almost  per-
fectly opaque  to  variation  of  magnetic  force  of  period  one-third  or
one-fourth  of  1/(8.10'')  of  a  second,  is  almost  perfectly  transparent
for  periods  of  magnetic  force  of  three  or  four  times  1/(8.10")  of
a  second,  and  for  all  longer  periods.

Taking  greater  thicknesses,  we  find  a  copper  plate  two  milli-
metres thick,  almost  a  perfect  screen,  that  is,  almost  perfectly
opaque,  in  respect  to  the  transmission  of  the  magnetic  influence
of  a  little  bar-magnet  rotating  8000  times  per  second f;  somewhat
opaque,  but  not  wholly  so,  when  the  speed  is  100  times  per  second;
almost,  but  not  perfectly,  transparent,  that  is  to  say,  very  slightly

*  See  pp.  185,  186  of  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,  Vol.  i.,  Ed.  1891  (Fiiday
Evening  Eoyal  Institution  Lecture,  Feb.  .3, 1883),  where  experiments  illustrating  the
reflectivity  and  the  transparency  of  some  exceedingly  thin  films  of  platinum,  gold,
and  silver,  supplied  to  me  through  the  kindness  of  Professor  Dewar,  are  described.

t  See  §  3  of  Appendix  K,  "Variational  Electric  and  Magnetic  Screening,"
reprinted  from  Proc.  E.  S.  Vol.  xlix.  April  9,  1891 ;  also  3Iat}i.  and  Phys.  Papers,
Vol.  III.  Art.  oil.  "Ether,  Electricity,  and  Ponderable  Matter,"  §  35.

376  LEcTUKK  xvm.

Molar,  if  perceptibly  obstructive,  when  the  speed  is  once  per  second  ;  not
perceptibly  obstructive,  when  the  period  is  10  seconds  or  more.
Now,  according  to  what  is  without  doubt  really  valid  in  the
so-called  electro-magnetic  theory  of  light,  we  ma}'^  regard  as  a
lamp,  a  bar-magnet  rotating  about  an  axis  perpendicular  to  its
length,  or  having  one  pole  caused  to  vibrate  to  and  fro  in  a  straight
line.  We  may  regard  it  as  a  lamp  emitting  light  of  period  equal
to  the  period  of  the  rotation  or  of  the  vibration.  For  the  light
of  this  lamp,  sheet  copper  two  millimetres  thick  is  almost  per-
fectly transparent  if  the  period  is  anything  longer  than  one  second  ;
but  it  is  almost  perfectly  opaque  if  the  period  is  anything  less  than
1/8000  of  a  second  down  to  one  eight  hundred  million  millionth  of
a  second  (the  period  of  extreme  violet  light);  and  is  probably  quite
opaque  for  still  smaller  periods  down  to  those  of  the  Roentgen
rays,  if  we  regard  these  rays  as  due  to  vibrators  giving  after  each
shock  a  sufficient  number  of  subsiding  vibrations  to  allow  a  period
to  be  reckoned.  Whatever  the  distinctive  characteristic  of  the
Roentgen  light,  sheet  copper  two  millimetres  thick  is  perceptibly
translucent  to  it,  and  sheet  aluminium  much  more  so.

§  144.  We  may  reasonably  look  for  a  detailed  and  satisfactory
investigation,  mathematical  and  experimental  intelligence  acting
together,  by  which  we  shall  thoroughly  understand  the  continuous
relation  between  the  reflection  and  translucence  of  metals  and
transparent  bodies,  and  the  phenomena  of  electric  and  magnetic
vibrations  in  insulating  matter,  in  non-magnetic  metals,  in  soft
iron,  and  in  hardened  steel,  for  all  vibrational  periods  from  those  of
the  Roentgen  rays  to  ten  or  twenty  seconds  or  more.  The  in-
vestigation must,  of  course,  include  non-periodic  motions  of  ether
and  atoms.  It  cannot  but  show  the  relation  between  the  electric
conductivity  of  metals  and  their  opacity.  It  must  involve  the
consideration  of  molecular  and  atomic  structures.  Maxwell's
electro-magnetic  theory  of  light  was  essentially  molar*;  and  there-
fore not  in  touch with the dynamics of  dispersion essentially

*  "  Suppose,  however,  that  we  leap  over  this  difficulty  [regarding  electrolysis]  by
"simply  asserting  the  fact  of  the  constant  value  of  the  molecular  charge,  and  that
"we  call  this  constant  molecular  charge,  for  convenience  in  description,  one
"molecule  of  electricity.

"This  phrase,  gross  as  it  is,  and  out  of  harmony  with  the  rest  of  this  treatise,
"will  enable  us  at  least  to  state  clearly  what  is  known  about  electrolysis,  and  to
"appreciate  the  outstanding  difficulties."  Maxwell,  Electricity  and  Magnetism,
Vol.  I.  p.  312.

green's  dynamics  of  reflection  and  refraction. 377

involved  in  metallic  reflection  and  translucency ;  though,  outside  Molar,
his  electro-magnetic  theory,  he  was  himself  one  of  the  foremost
leading  molecularists  of  the  nineteenth  century :  witness  his
kinetic  theory  of  gases ;  and  his  estimates  of  the  sizes  and
weights  of  atoms;  and  his  anticipation  of  the  Sellmeier-Helmholtz
molecular  dynamics  of  ordinary  and  anomalous  dispersion,  in  a
published*  Cambridge  Examination  question.

§  145.  First,  however,  without  any  molecular  hypothesis,  and
without  going  beyond  Green's  purely  molar  theory  of  infinite
resistance  to  compression,  and  equal  effective  rigidities  of  ether  in
all  bodies  and  in  space  void  of  ponderable  matter,  let  us  try  how
nearly  we  can  explain  the  high  reflectivity  and  the  great  opacity
of  metals.  Either  great  rigidity,  or  great  density,  or  both  great
rigidity  and  great  density,  of  ether  in  metals  would  explain  these
two  properties :  but  we  have  agreed  not  to  assume  differences  of
rigidity,  and  there  remains  only  great  density.  It  is  interesting
to  remark  however,  that  infinite  rigidity  would  give  exactly  the
same  law  as  infinite  density ;  because  each  extreme  hypothesis
would  simply  keep  the  ether  at  the  interface  absolutely  unmoved  ;
and  this  even  if  we  allow  the  ether  to  be  compressible  within
liquids  and  solids,  as  we  are  going  to  do  later  on.

§  146.  Go  back  now  to  §  132  (59)— (63),  and,  following
Green,  make  v  =  x  ,  and  ,y  =  x  .  This  makes,  by  (50),  c  =  ,c  =  —  aff;
and  reduces  (61)  and  (59)  to

L  =  KaL (74),

and

-G' ,pb-p,h-Kcu /(,ph-p,h)-  +  Khi\ .  ,  , ,  v ■ /jl, »\n]

where K  J'^' P^\ <^  =  tan- ^^  , ./.  =  tan-  ^^^^  i
,p+p  ,po-p,h "^  ,po  +  p,bj

(75).

*  Eayleigh,  in  a  footnote  appended  in  1899  to  the  end  of  his  paper  "On  the
Reflexion  and  Refraction  of  Light  by  Intensely  Opaque  Matter"  (Phil.  Mag.  1872;
republished  as  Art.  xvi.  of  his  Scientific  Papers,  Vol.  i.),  writes  as  follows:

"I  have  lately  discovered  that  Maxwell  had  (earlier  than  Sellmeier)  considered
"  the  problem  of  anomalous  dispersion.  His  results  were  given  in  the  Mathematical
"Tripos  Examination,  Jan.  21,  1869  (see  Cambridge  Calendar  for  that  year),"

In  this  examination  question  the  I'iscous  term,  subsequently  given  by  Helmholtz,
is  included.

t  Take  -at  (not  +at),  a  being  positive,  in  order  that,  in  §  128,  //,  of  the  upper
medium  may  have  extinctional  factor  e~"'*^,  and,  H,  of  the  lower,  may  have
extinctional  factor  e""^. See  footnote  on  §  158". See  also  §  128  and  (49),  and  (54).

.S78

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar. This  agrees  with  Greta's  result*; and  the  square  of  the  first

—  C
factor  of  the  final  expression  for j^ i^  ^^^  formula  by  which

curve  3  of  figs.  4,  5,  6,  for  water, flint-glass,  and  diamond,  in
§§  102,  103  above,  were  calculated.

§  147. To  realize  this  solution  in  the  most  convenient  w^ay  for
physical  optics,  put

/(6')  =  e-^  =  cos  ft)^  +  i  sin  w^ (76);

and  take

for  incident  wave

U

■an

with  same  continued  for  reflected  wave,  where  s  denotes  a  space
in  the  path  of  the  incident  ray,  continued  in  the  reflected  ray.

Use  these  in  |  128,  and  for  the  real  problem  take  the  real  part
of  each  expression  so  found.  We  thus  have,  for  the  vibrational
displacements,

Incident  wave,
Reflected  wave,

G  cos  wit

u

wit--)-(4>  +  f)

...(78).

I  148.  Let  now  for  a  moment  ,p/p  =  go  .  This  makes
K/,p  =  1 ;  (j)  —yp'  =  i]  and  gives,  for  vibrational  displacement  in
the  reflected  wave

—  (rsin

CO  it--

2i

G  sin

t--]  +  7r-2i
n.

Thus  the  formulas  show,  for  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  inci-
dence, that,  at  every  incidence,  the  reflection  is  total  (which  we
know  without  the  mathematical  investigation,  because  there  is
no  loss  of  energy) ;  and  that  the  reflected  ray  is  advanced  in  phase
TT  —  2i  relatively  to  the  incident  ray.  The  former  proposition  is
proved  for  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence  by
the  formula  (39)  of  §123;  but  with  just  tt  for  phasal  change.
Hence  incidence  at  45°  instead  of  the  70°  to  76°  of  melals  (§  99
above),  gives  90°  of  phasal  difference ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  from

Green,  Mathematical  Papers,  p.  2G7.

QUASI  WAVE-MOTION  WITH  NEGATIVE  OR  IMAGINARY  DENSITY. oTD

the  formulas  that  values  of  ,plp  large  enough  to  give  the  Molar,
brilliance  of  metallic  reflections  could  not  give  any  approach
to  the  elliptic  and  circular  polarizations  which  observations  show
(§  99  above)  in  all  metallic  reflections.  Thus,  though  our  trial
hypothesis  of  great  effective  density  of  the  ether  in  the  substance
could  give  reflections,  and  therefoi-e  general  appearances,  un-
distinguishable  to  the  naked  eye  from  what  we  see  in  real  metals,
it  foils  utterly  to  explain  the  qualities  of  the  reflected  light
discovered  by  pidarizational  analysis.  Seeing  thus  that  no  real
positive  effective  density  in  the  substance  can  explain  the  qualities
of  metallic  reflection,  we  infer  that  the  effective  density  is  negative
or  imaginary ;  and  thus  we  are  led  by  strictly  dynamical  reasoning
to  the  brilliant  prevision  of  MacCullagh  and  Cauchy  that  metallic
reflection  is  to  be  explained  by  an  imaginary  refractive  index.

§  149.  In  §  159  below  we  shall  find,  by  a  new  molecular
theor}'  to  which  I  had  been  led  by  consideration  of  very  different
subjects,  a  perfectly  clear  and  simple  dynamical  explanation  of  a
real  negative  quantity  for  effective  density  of  ether  traversed
by  light-waves  of  any  period  within  certain  definite  limits,  in  a
space  occupied  by  a  solid  or  liquid  or  gas.  We  shall  also  find
definite  molecular  and  dimensional  conditions  which  may  possibly
give  us  a  sure  molecular  foundation  for  an  imaginary  effective
density;  though  we  are  still  very  far  fi-om  a  thorough  working-
out  of  the  full  dynamical  theory.

We  conclude  the  present  Lecture  with  a  short  survey  of  the
quasi  wave-motion  which  can  exist  in  an  elastic  medium  having
a  definite  negative  or  imaginary  effective  density  ,p ;  and  of  the
reflection  of  light  at  a  plane  surface  of  such  a  medium.

§  150.  Let  the  rigidity  be  n,  real ;  and  the  density  ,/3,  an
unrestricted  complex  as  follows

,p  =  -S7  (cos  0  —  i  sin  (^) (79),

where  zr  and  (f)  are  real,  and  for  simplicity  may  be  taken  both
positive.  This  gives  for  propagational  velocity  of  equivoluminal
waves

^u  =  w  (cos  ^(f)  +  L  sin  ^^) ; ,u-^  =  w~^  (cos  h,^  -  i  sin  |0),'

,  /n  . . .  r...(80).

where  10  =  ^/  —  ,  a  real  velocity

380  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  For  displacement  at  time  t,  considering  only  equivoluminal  wave-
motion,  let  7]  -f  LT]'  denote  displacement  in  a  wave-plane  perpen-
dicular to  OX ;  and  choosing  for  our  arbitrary  function

f{e)  =  e-\

we  have  rj  +  tr]' =  e""('-^^'") (81);

whence,  taking  ,u~^  from  (80),  we  find,  as  a  real  solution,

?7  =  €-"^'" ***/'"  cos  (u(^- cos  |-</)«/w) (82).

This  shows  that  the  wave-plane  travels  in  the  -f-  ^-direction  with
velocity  lu  sec  ^^,  and  with  vibrational  amplitude  diminishing
according  to  the  exponential  law  e - <" si»  ^■^ Ww  It  ig  interesting  to
remark  that  the  propagational  velocity  of  this  subsidential  wave  is,
in  virtue  of  the  factor  sec|^,  essentially  greater  than  the  velocity
in  a  medium  of  real  density  equal  to  the  modulus,  ct,  of  our
imaginary  density;  and  is  infinite  when  ^</)  =  90°.  This  illustrates
Quincke's  discovery  of  greater  velocity  of  light  through  a  thin
metallic  film  than  through  air.

§  151.  Remark  now  that,  according  as  the  real  part  of  the
complex,  ,p,  is  positive  or  negative,  (f)  is  <90°,  or  >90'' ;  that,  in  the
extreme  case  of  ,p  real  positive,  (f)  is  zero;  and  that,  in  the  other
extreme  case  (,p  a  real  negative  quantity),  cf)  is  180^  In  every
case  between  those  extremes,  ^(f)  is  between  0°  and  90°,  and
therefore  both  cos  ^(f)  and  sin  ^(f)  are  positive.  This  implies  loss
of  energy  in  the  inward  travelling  wave:  except  in  the  second
extreme  case,  ^^  =  90°,  when  its  propagational  velocity  is  infinite  ;
and  (82)  becomes

V  =  e-'-^/'^sin  (ot (83),

which  represents  standing  vibrations  of  ether  in  the  substance,
diminishing  inwards  according  to  the  exponential  law  ;  and
therefore  proves  no  continued  expenditure  of  energy.  We  con-
clude that,  for  our  ideal  silver,  the  effective  quasi-density  of
ether  in  the  metal  is  essentially  real  negative:  but  that  for  all
metals  of  less  than  perfect  reflectivity  it  must  be  a  complex,  of
which  the  real  part  may  be  either  negative  or  positive.

§  152.  Confining  our  attention  for  the  present  to  ideal  silver,
and  to  merely  molar  results  of  the  molecular  theory  promised  for
Lecture  XIX.,  let  us  put,  in  §§  123,  132,

-fx'  =  i'- (8-i),

INFINITE  VELOCITY  DISPROVED  FOR  CONDENSATIONAL  WAVES. 381

where  v^  denotes  a  real  positive  numeric ;  and  let  us  find  the  Molar,
difference  of  phase  between  the  two  components,  given  respec-
tively by  §§  123  and  132,  due  to  incident  light  polarized  in
any  plane  oblique  to  the  plane  of  incidence.  That  difference  of
phase  is  90°  for  Principal  Incidence  (see  §  97  above).  I  have
gone  through  the  work  with  Green's  supposition  ^=00,  ,?;  =  00  ,
in  §  132 ;  and  using  the  formula  for  G' \G  so  given  in  §  147,  I  have
found  that  for  all  values  of  v"-  from  0  to  x  it  makes  the  Principal
Incidence  between  0°  and  45".  Now  observation  gives  the
Principal  Incidences  for  all  colours  of  light  and  all  metals,
between  45°  and  90°  (see  table  of  §  99,  showing  for  all  cases
of  metallic  reflection  hitherto  made,  so  far  as  generally  known,
Principal  Incidences  ranging  from  66°  to  78°).  Hence  polarizational
analysis  of  the  reflected  light  as  thoroughly  disproves,  for  metallic
reflection,  Green's  assumption  of  propagational  velocity  infinite
for  condensational-rarefactional  waves  within  the  metal,  as  it  was
disproved  for  transparent  substances  in  §§  104,  105  by  mere
observation  of  unanalysed  reflectivities.

I  153.  Hence,  anticipating  Lecture  XIX.  as  we  did  in  §  133
above,  let  us,  while  still  keeping  v  =  go  in  the  ether  outside  the
metal,  now  make  ,v  small  enough  inside  the  metal  to  practically
annul  L. This  reduces  (39)  and  (59)  of  §  123  and  §  132,  to

-C _,b-b_ -  G' ^,ph-  p,b  .

C ,b  +  b' G ,pb  +  p,b  ^ ^"

Putting  now  in  (39)  and  in  this

'-='-,-, ^  =  -v'; ~  =  -.^* (86),

b ,u p  ,u

cos, I ^/{v•'+B\\\-i)  ^

where  r  = -.  = -. K^' )'

cos  I  V  cos  I

c  A  ~G' -  Lvr  -  1 vr  - 1  , .

G —  Lvr  +  1 w  +  t

-G' v-ir  .„„.

and  — j^f— = (o9)-

G v  +  ir  ^ '

*  The  sign  minus  is  chosen  here  in  order  that  e^^  not  e~Pi'  may  be  the  reducing
factor  of  ,G;  j}'^  being  a  positive  length. See  foot-notes  on  §§  146,  158".

382  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  Pat  now  tan-1— =  6', tan-i  -  =  ^ (90).

vr  V

This  reduces  (88)  and  (89)  to

-C cos^-tsin^  .

-—pr-  =  — -^ ; — ;^  =  cos2^-  tsin  26  (91),

6' cos  ^  +  4  sin  6  ^ '

-0' cos  ^  - 1  sin  ^  ocv • ot^  /no\

and  —i^r-  = ^^ •  ^r  =  cos  2^  —  t  sin  2^ (92).

Lt cos  ^  +  t  sin  ^

These  formulas  express  total  reflection  for  the  two  cases  re-
spectively of  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence,
and  vibrations  in  this  plane ;  and  they  give  us  20  and  2^,  which
we  may,  for  brevity,  call  "  the  phases  of  the  vibrations."  Thus,
calling  P  the  plane  of  incidence  and  reflection,  we  find

Phase  of  vibration  perpendicular  to  P  —  phase  of  vibration  in  P

=  2(^-6*) (93)

This  means  that  the  vibration  perpendicular  to  P  precedes  the
other  by  2  (^  -  d).

Whatever  positive  value  v"  has,  this  difference  is  essentially
zero  for  i=  0;  and  we  find  that  it  increases  through  +  90°  to
+  180°  when  i  is  increased  from  0°  to  90°;  as  illustrated  in  the
accompanying  tables  for  the  two  cases,  v-  =  'o,  i/-=10.

i

6'=tan-i  —
vr

V

2  (^  -  0)

o

o

o

o

0

54-7

54-7

0-0

10

53-5

55-9

4-8

20

50-1

591

18-0

30

45-0

63-4

36-8

40

38-7

68-2

59-0

50

31-7

72-9

82-4

53-2

29-3

74-3

90-0

60

24-1

77-4

106-6

70

16-2

81-7

131-0

80

8-2

85-9

155-4

90

0-0

90-0

180-0

PHrNCIPAL INCrDENCE

"^OR IDEAL SILVER.

388

0 I  jK,:^

10  17.0  l'"5  I  ^.„

20  ift.r  17-8  yX

Qn  ^"'^  7S-7  ^'0

^^  15-7  '  ^  '  4-J,

^^  11-9  ^  7«-S

60  ^oi  26-8  .;??

7^-ft  44-0  ^ ^

0-0  I ^0.^  118-6

^  ^  180-0

^^=lofthJ?^-''"^^^  ^^  incidence f53°-2  fn .

f^ifference  2  ^^ ^  ''^^^  "^^^^^Is  observafinn  \  -P^ncipal

ence  2(^_^^ tQ  j^ positive fi 7  "^  ^^^^^s  the  phase

- hepJa^eofreiieetiontofagt^^^^^  .s  to  sa,,  the  vibratC

^'J  It; as  we  finri  u  ^ •  1 ^  ^eniiiu  the  vib}-flfi"r.n

^  ^^^  ^ '"'^^^^^^^^«^^-^-byd,.an7itr;::^^^^^^^^^^

^"nciparineLtcr?f!  "^"^^^^^^-^i^-I method  for fi,,- ,
follows. For  P  ' ''  ^''y  ^i^en  value  of ^  f '"^  ^^^

^oi  Pnncipal  Incidence  we  have "  ''  ''^^'^'^'''  ^'

■^^isgivestan2^tan2^--_7 • ,  W.

I'O^'m  algebra,  from  (.90)

whence,  S'^^^^^^lJCz.Jr^)  =  -  1 ^^.^^

Taking  the  greater  root  of  .K-  ~ W-

given by  (87)  fo.  •  •  ^^  -!)/(-+ 1)

•>  ^^O  for^  in  terms  of  ^  and  .  ^ ^

""^  ^^  ^^^  «"d  tan^V  for  the

Molar.

384

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  Principal  Incidence. (The  less  root  of  ilie  quadratic  is  rejected,
because  it  makes  tan-i  negative.)

The  following  table  has  been  thus  calculated  directly,  to  show
for  fourteen  values  of  v  or  v'-,  the  Principal  Incidence,  /.

V

^2

tan  I

I

0-00

0-00

1-000

45°0

0-50

0-25

1-193

50-0

0-71

0-50

1-333

53-1

1-00

1-00

1-554

57-2

1-41

2-00

1-887

62-1

2-00

4-00

2-387

67-2

2-45

6-00

2-786

70-3

3-16

10-00

3-438

73-8

3-74

14-00

3-982

75-9

4-00

16-00

4-223

76-6

4-47

20-0

4-680

77-9

6-00

36-0

6-160

80-8

10-00

100  0

10-10

84-3

14-00

196-0

14-07

85-9

20-00

400-0

20-05

87-1

§  15G.  The  converse  problem  of  finding  v-  for  any  given
Principal  Incidence,  by  (96)  and  (97),  yields  a  cubic  equation
for  v^.  The  table  of  §  155  proves  that  this  cubic  equation  has
one,  and  only  one,  real  positive  root  for  every  value  of  /  between
45"  and  90° ;  and  no  real  positive  root  for  values  of  /  between
0°  and  45°.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  most  easily  solved  by
trial  and  error,  aided  by  the  table  of  §  155.  I  have  thus  found  for
the  three  Principal  Incidences  measured  by  Conroy  for  red,
yellow,  and  blue  light  respectively,  incident  on  his  silver  film
polished  with  putty  powder  (table  of  §  99  above),  the  following
values  of  v  and  v^.

I

V

V-

Red

76°  29'
74°  37'
71°  33'

3-9
3-3

2-7

15-2
10-9
7-29

Yellow

Blue

§  157.  The  diagram  of  §  88  shows  that  Conroy 's  silver  film,
polished  as  he  polished  it  with  putty  powder,  may  be  regarded  as
almost our ideal silver: this view is confirmed by  his  three

"adamantinism"  and  unequal  rigidities  in  metals? 385

Principal  Azimuths,  43°  51',  43° 52',  43° 0',  being  each  as  nearly  Molar.
a  good  approximation  to  45°  as  it  is.  (See  §  159"  below.)  But
their  shortcomings  of  from  one  to  two  degrees  below  45°  are  no
doubt  real,  and  point  to  the  correction  of  the  real  values  of  v-
by  the  addition  of  small  purely  imaginary  terms.  Thus,  to  fit
the  formulas  of  §  150  to  Conroy's  silver,  we  may,  keeping  ts  a
positive  quantity,  take  <^  =  180°  — %;  where  %,  which  would  be
zero  for  ideal  silver,  may  for  real  silver,  have  some  small  value  of
a  few  degrees.

§  158.  It  would  be  interesting  to  pursue  the  subject  further,
and  include  with  silver,  other  metals  for  which  we  have  the
experimental  data  such  as  those  shown  in  the  table  of  §  99.
To  do  this,  we  may  conveniently  in  (87),  (88),  (89),  put

i/2  =  j3(cos%-tsin;^)  (98);

and  use  the  experimental  data  of  Principal  Incidence  and
Principal  Azimuth  to  determine  in  each  case  the  two  unknown
quantities  p  cos  "^  and  p  sin  ^  :  but  time  forbids.  This  would
be,  in  fact,  a  working  out  of  the  theory,  or  empirical  formula,  of
MacCullagh  and  Cauchy,  to  comparison  with  observational  results
regarding  metallic  reflection,  such  as  has  been  done  by  Eisenlohr,
Jamin,  Conroy,  and  others*.  The  agreement  of  the  theory  with
observation  has  been  found  somewhat  approximately,  but  not
wholly,  satisfactory.  Stokes,  as  communicator  of  Conroy's  paper,
No.  III.  {Proc.  R.8.,  Feb.  15,  1883),  comments  on  this  want  of
perfect  agreement;  and  suggests  that  it  is  to  be  accounted  for  by
the  inclusion  in  respect  to  metallic  reflection  of  what  he  proposes  to
call  "the  adamantine  property"  of  a  substance  ;  being  the  property
required  to  explain  the  deviation,  from  Fresnel's  law  of  reflection
of  light  by  transparent  bodies,  discovered  more  than  eighty  years
ago  by  Airy,  in  diamond.  This  adamantine  property,  as  we
shall  see  in  Lecture  XIX.,  §  173,  is  to  be  explained  dynamically
by  assuming  a  small  imaginary  iq,  for  the  velocity  of  condensa-
tional-rarefactional  waves  in  the  substance ;  not  small  enough  to
utterly  annul  L  in  our  formulas  of  §  132.  Its  magnitude  is
measured  by  the  ratio  qju,  which  I  propose  to  call  adamantinism.
Some  deviation  from  exact  equality  between  the  effective  rigidities
of  ether  in  the  two  mediums  might  also  be  invoked  to  aid  in
procuring  agreement  between  dynamical  theory  and  observation,

*  Basset,  Physical  Optics,  §§  371,  380;  Mascart,  Traite  cVOptique,  Vol.  ii.
T.  L.  25

386  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  for  reflection  of  light  from  all  substances,  transparent,  or  metallic
or  otherwise  opaque.

§  158'.  Meantime,  I  finish  this  Lecture  XVIII.  on  the  Re-
flection of  Light  with  an  application  of  §  123  (39),  and  §  132  (59)
with  Z  =  0,  to  the  theory  of  Fresnel's  rhomb.

Let  the  medium  in  which  u  is  the  velocity  of  light  be  a  trans-
parent solid  or  liquid ;  and  let  the  other  medium  be  undisturbed
ether.  We  cannot  now  continue  Green's  convenient  usage  adopted
in  §  116,  and  call  the  former  "the  upper"  and  the  latter  "the  lower."
We  now  have
,n>v\  p>  ,p;  ,i>i\  ,ulu=/j,;  p/,p=fjir;  sin  ,i  =  pu  sm  i ;  b=cosi/u;  fb=cos,{/,u...(9^

For  convenience,  to  suit  the  case  of  ,t  >  i,  write  as  follows,
the  equations  cited  above, —

^'_6-^6. G'_p,b-,ph

C b  +  ,b' 0 p,b  +  ,pb ^^^  ^'

the  sign  minus  being  transfen-ed  from  their  first  members  because,
in  virtue  of  ,i  >  i,  C'/G  is  now  positive  through  the  whole  range  of
non-total  reflection,  [t  =  0  to  i  =  sin~^  {1  / /x)  giving  ,t  =  90°];  and
G'/G  is  positive  through  the  range  up  to  the  Brewsterian  angle  of
zero  reflected  ray  [i  =  0  to  t  =  tan~i  (1//^)]-  From  i  =  tan~i  (1  //x.)  to
i  =  sm~^(l/lj,),  G'jG  decreases  from  0  to  —1;  and  it  is  imaginary-
complex  of  modulus  1,  through  the  whole  range  of  total  reflection
[i  =  sin-i(l//i)  to  t  =  90°].

§  158".  When  i  is  between  sin-i(l//x)  and  90°,  ,6^  is  real
negative;  and,  denoting  its  value  by  —q^  (as  in  §  118),  we  have

,6  =  -ig*;  whereg^ft^^^'^'"^''"-^  (98'").

yU-COSZ  ^

Remark  that  q  increases  from  0  to  oo  when  i  is  increased  from

sin-i  {lip)  to  90°. Using  (98'")  in  (98")  we  find,
G'_h+iq. G'_p?q-cb
G b-iq' G~  p?q+Lb ^^^  '''

whence,  by  De  Moivre's  theorem,

C  C

-^  =  cos  2\/r  -I- 1  sin  2>/r ; --:^  =  cos  2;^  - 1  sin  2;)^ (98'),

where  A|r  =  tan-i|; ;;^  =  tan-^ -^ (98^').

6'

p.'q

*  The  sign  minus  is  here  chosen  in  order  that  el'^y,  not  e"*"^',  may  be  the
reducing  factor  of  ,C  and  ,G  for  the  disturbance  in  the  ether  outside,  see  §  128  ;
y  being  zero  at  the  reflecting  surface,  and  negative  outside.

PHASAL CHANGES BY INTERNAL REFLECTION.

387

By  (98"')  and  (98"')  we  see  that  ^|r  increases  from  0°  to  90°  and  Molar.
X  decreases  from  90°  to  0°,  when  i  is  increased  from

sin-'ifj,-')  to  90°.

§  158'". Putting  for  a  moment  qlh  =  x,  we  find

.(98^")-

Equating  this  to  zero  we  find,  for  {'^  +  x)  ^  minimum,

q/b  =  fi-\  which  makes  yfr  =  x  =  tan-^  (/x-^) (98"");

and  to  make  q/b  =  fj,~\  we  have  tan'-i  =  2/{/j,^  —  !)•  We  infer  that
when  i  is  increased  from  sin~'  (/i""0  to  tan~^  \/[2/(/u.^  —  1)],  {^jr  +  x)
decreases  from  90°  to  2  tan~^  (/^^O  ^^^  then  increases  to  90°
again,  when  i  is  increased  to  90°.  This  will  be  useful  to  us
in  S  158^

§  158'^  Realising  now,  as  in  §  147,  we  find  real  solutions  as
follows,  for  vibrations  perpendicular  to,  and  in,  the  plane  (P)  of
incidence  and  reflection  : —

Vibrations
perpendi-
cular to  P

Vibrations  J
inP

Incident  wave  G  cos  o)  i  t

u

Reflected  wave  C  cos

(*-i)  +  2V.'

Incident  Avave  G  cos  wit

V u

Reflected  wave  G  cos

^-9-^%jl

...(98'0;

\  ...(980.

Thus  we  see  that  the  reflected  vibrations  in  P  are  set  back  in
phase  by  2(ylr  +  x)  relatively  to  the  reflected  vibi'ations  perpendi-
cular to  P.  By  §  158'"  we  see  that  this  back-set  is  180°  at  the
two  incidences,  i  =  sin"^  (/^~0.  and  i  =  90°  (the  limits  of  total
reflection);  and  that  it  decreases  to  a  minimum,  4  tan~^  (fi~^),  at
the  intermediate  angle  of  incidence  i  =  tan~i  V[2/(/i^  —  1)].

The  back-sets  of  the  phase  through  the  whole  range  of  total
reflection  for  four  refractive  indices,  146,  I'o,  I'ol,  and  I'G  are
shown  in  the  Table  II.  of  §  158''  below.

Column  1  represents  angles  of  incidence.

25—2

388

LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  Columns  2  and  3  of  Table  II.  represent  the  absolute  back-sets
of  phase  by  reflection  respectively  in,  and  perpendicular  to,  P.

Column  4  represents  the  back-set  of  phase  of  vibrations  in  P,
relatively  to  vibrations  perpendicular  to  P,  produced  by  a  single
reflection.

The  numbers  in  Column  4,  doubled,  are  the  total  back-sets  by
two  reflections,  at  the  same  angle  of  incidence  i,  of  vibrations  in,
relatively  to  vibrations  perpendicular  to,  P.  Each  of  these  numbers
is  between  180°  and  360°;  and  therefore  it  indicates  virtually  a
setting-forward  of  the  phase  of  vibrations  in  P,  relatively  to  the
phase  of  those  perpendicular  to  P,  by  the  amount  to  which  each
number  falls  short  of  360°.  Hence  the  numbers  in  Column  5  of
Table  II.  represent  virtual  advances  of  phase  of  the  vibrations  in,
relatively  to  the  vibrations  perpendicular  to,  P,  after  two  reflections.

§  158\  It  will  be  seen  that  all  the  phasal  differences  shown
in  Column  4  of  Table  II.  are  obtuse  angles  :  with  minimum  values
shown  in  Table  I.,  which  is  extended  to  include  zinc  sulphide,

Total  Internal  Reflection. Table  I.

Refractive  index

Brewsteriaii

angle
tan-i  (1//.)

Limiting  inci-
dence for  total

Incidence  for
minimum  phasal

Minimum
phasal

/*

reflection
sin-i(l/M)

dilFerence

tan-\/[2/(M--l)]

diff'erence
4  tan-i  (l/ju)

1-46

34° 24'-5

43° 14'

53° 3'

137° 38'

1-50

33 41-25

41 49

51 40

134 45

1-51

33 30-75

41 28

51 20

134 3

1-60

32 0-25

38 41

48 83

128 1

(Zinc  Sulphide)  2-371

22 52

24 57

33 20

91 28

M  =  cot  22°i  =  2-414

22 30

24 28

32 46

90 0

(Diamond)  2-434

22 20

24 15

32 31

89 20

(Realgar)  2-454

22 10

24 3

32 15

88 40

diamond,  and  realgar.  By  Table  I.  we  see  that  the  phasal  differ-
ences for  internal  reflection  in  glasses,  and  all  known  transparent
bodies  of  refractive  index  less  than  2-414,  are  obtuse  for  all  angles
of  incidence  through  the  whole  range  of  total  internal  reflection.
This  conclusion  was  very  startling  to  myself,  because  for  eighty
years  we  have  been  taught  that,  for  total  internal  reflection  in
glass,  the  phasal  difference  was  an  acute  angle  in  a  single  re-
flection ;  and  that  it was  45°  for  each  reflection  in  the  Fresnel

REFLECTION OF ClllCULARLY POLARIZED LIGHT.  389

rhomb,  instead  of  135°  which  we  now  know  it  is. How  it  is  so,  Molar.
we  can  easily  see  by  the  following  simple  considerations.

(1)  Circularly  polarized  light  in  every  case  of  direct  incidence
and  reflection  (metallic  or  vitreous,  external  or  internal),  has  its
circular  orbital  motions  in  the  same  absolute  directions  in  the
direct  and  the  reflected  waves.  Hence  if  the  orbital  motion  ideally
seen  by  an  eye  receiving  the  incident  light  is  anti-clockwise,  it  is
clockwise  to  an  eye  receiving  the  reflected  light.  (Hence  the
arrangement  in  respect  to  signs  in  figs.  3  a  and  3  6  of  §  92  above
is  explained  thus : — First  imagine  the  two  diagrams  as  corre-
sponding to  normal  incidence:  for  the  incident  light,  fig.  36,  with
its  face  down,  looked  up  to;  and  for  the  reflected  light,  fig.  3a,
with  its  face  up,  looked  down  on.  Then  incline  the  two  planes
continuously  to  suit  all  incidences  from  i  =  0,  to  i  =  90°.)

(2)  Taking  first,  external  reflection  of  light,  of  circular  anti-
clockwise orbits,  incident  on  glass  of  negligible  adamantinism* ;
increase  the  angle  of  incidence  from  0"  to  the  Brewsterian  tan~^/A.
The  motion  constituting  the  reflected  light  is  in  clockwise  elliptic
orbits,  of  increasing  ellipticity,  with  long  axes  perpendicular  to
the  plane  of  reflection,  till  at  tan~^/u,  it  is  rectilineal.  Increase
now  the  angle  of  incidence  to  90° :  the  orbital  motions  are  elliptic
anti-clockwise  with  diminishing  ellipticity  (long  axes  still  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  of  reflection) ;  and  become  infinitely  nearly
circular  when  the  incidence  is  infinitely  nearly  grazing.

(3)  Proceed  now  as  in  (2),  but  with  internal  instead  of
external  reflection  at  a  glass  surface :  the  incident  circularly
polarized  light  being  anti-clockivise.  With  increasing  incidences
from  i=0,  the  reflected  light  is  clockwise  elliptic  with  increasing
ellipticity,  till  it  becomes  rectilineal  at  the  Brewsterian  tan"~^(l//i).
Increase  i  farther  :  the  reflected  light  is  now  anti-clockiuise  elliptic,
with  diminishing  ellipticity  till  it  becomes  circular  at  the  limit  of
total  internal  reflection,  sin~^(l//i).  Increase  i  farther  up  to  90°:
the  reflected  light  is  elliptic,  still  anti-clockiuise,  with  ellipticity
increasing  to  a  maximum  when  *  =  sin~^  \/[2/(Ai'"  —  1)]  and
diminishing  till  the  orbit  becomes  again  infinitely  nearly  circular
when  i  is  infinitely  little  less  than  90°.

*  For  the  change  from  the  present  statement,  required  by  adamantinism  when
perceptible,  see  below,  §§  178 — 182.

390  LECTURE XVUI.

Molar.  (4)  With,  instead  of  glass,  an  ideal  substance  whose  refrac-
tive index  is  2-414;  anti-clockwise  circularly  polarized  light,
incident  at  angles  increasing  from  24"  28',  gives  total  reflection,
and  anti-clockwise  circular  orbits,  becoming  elliptic,  with  ellip-
ticities  increasing  to  rectilineal  vibrations  when  i  =  32°  46'.
Farther  increase  of  i  up  to  90"  gives  elliptic  orbits  of  ellipticities
diminishing  to  circularity  at  i  =  90°:  all  anti-clockwise.

(5)  Diamond  and  realgar,  and  all  other  substances  having
fji  >  2*414,  have  three  principal  incidences  for  internal  reflection ;
one  with  non-total  i-eflection  at  the  Brewsterian  angle  tan~'(l//u.) ;
and  two  within  the  range  of  total  reflection ;  one  less,  the  other
greater,  than  the  incidence  which  makes  the  phasal  difference
a  minimum.  Anti- clockwise  circularly  polarized  light,  incident
at  any  angle  between  the  last-mentioned  two  principal  incidences,
gives  clockwise  elliptic  orbits  for  the  reflected  light ;  presenting
a  minimum  deviation  from  circularity  (minimum  ellipticity  we
may  call  it)  at  some  intermediate  angle.

(6)  It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  in  every  case,  according
as  the  phasal  difference  is  obtuse  or  acute,  the  reflected  light  is
anti-clockwise  or  clockwise,  when  the  incident  light  is  circular
anti-clockwise.  This  with  §  158^^''  gives  a  simple  means  for  ex-
perimentally verifying  the  statements  (1),  (2),  (3),  (4),  (5).  The
experimental  proof  thus  given  of  the  truth,  that  the  phasal
difference  in  every  case  of  approximately  grazing  incidence  is  180"",
is  very  easy  and  clear;  as  it  can  be  arranged  to  show  simul-
taneously to  the  eye  the  incident  and  the  reflected  light ;  both
extinguished  simultaneously  by  the  same  setting  of  the  analysing
fresnel  (or  quarter-wave  plate)  and  nicol.

(7)  The  rule  of  signs  referred  to  in  (1)  of  the  present  section,
and  illustrated  in  figs.  3  a  and  3  6  of  §92,  must  be  taken  into
account  to  interpret  the  meaning  of  phasal  difference  of  two  recti-
lineal components  of  reflected  light,  due  to  incident  recti  lineally
vibrating  light.  Thus  we  see  that  if  the  vibrational  plane  of  the
incident  light  is  turned  anti- clockivise  front  P,  the  orbital  motions
of  the  reflected  light  are  anti-clockwise,  or  clockwise,  according  as
the  component  vibrating  in,  is  set  back  or  advanced,  relatively  to
the  component  perpendicular  to  P. See  §  158""  below.

Total  Internal  Reflection. Table  II.

Total  Internal  Reflection. Table  IL  continued.

CoL  1

CoL  2

CoL  3

CoL  4

CoL  5

\Ij  and  X  calculated  only

2('l'+x) ;  beinp  actual

3(5()*-4(.A  +  x); being

to  the  nearest  minute,

phasal  back-set  of

virtual  phasal  ad-

except in the  case  of

vibrations  in,  rela-

vance of  vibrations

their  equality

tively  to  vibrations

in,  relatively  to  vi-  !

i

perpendicular to,
P,  produced  by  one
reflection

brations perpen-  |
dicular  to,  P,  pro-
duced  by  two  reflec-

2^

2x

tions

(1=1-51

41°  28'-3

0° 0'

180° 0'

180° 0'

0° 0'

42

14 40

147 16

161 56

36 8

43

25 6

126 8

151 14

57 32

44

32 30

112 46

145 16

69 28

45

38 38

102 46

141 "24

77 12

46

44 0

94 42

138 42

82 36

47

48 54

87 42

136 36

86 48

48

53 30

82 4

135 34

88 52

49

57 46

76 58

134 44

90 32

50

61 50

72 26

134 16

91 28

51

65 44

68 20

134 4

91 52

51  20-41

67 1-7

67 1-7

134 3-4  (min.)

91 53-2  (max.)

52

69 30

64 36

134 6

91 48

53

73 6

61 12

134 18

91 24

54

76 38

58 2

134 40

90 40

54  37

90 0

55

80 6

55 6

135 12

89 36

56

83 26

52 22

135 48

88 24

57

86 44

49 48

136 32

86 56

58

89 58

47 22

137 20

85 20

59

93 8

45 4

138 12

83 36

60

96 16

42 54

139 10

81 40

70

125 40

25 22

151 2

57 56

80

154 4

11 32

165 36

28 48

90

180 0

0 0

180 0

0 0

M  =  l-60

38 40-9

0 0

180 0

180 0

0 0

39

10 48

152 48

163 36

32 48

40

22 12

126 40

148 52

62 16

41

29 36

111 50

141 26

77 8

42

35 38

101 6

136 44

86 32

43

40 56

92 36

133 32

92 56

44

45 42

85 40

131 22

97 16

45

50 4

79 48

129 52

100 16

46

54 18

74 38

128 56

102 8

47

58 14

70 6

128 20

103 20

48

62 0

66 4

128 4

103 52

48 33-0

64 0-6

64 0-6

128 1-2  (min.)

103 57-6  (max.)

49

65 38

62 24

128 2

103 56

50

69 6

59 6

128 12

103 36

51

72 34

56 2

128 36

102 48

52

75 54

53 14

129 8

101 44

53

79 6

50 38

129 44

100 32

54

82 18

48 10

130 28

99 4

55

85 24

45 52

131 16

97 28

56

88 28

43 42

132 10

95 40

57

91 30

41 40

133 10

93 40

58

94 30

39 42

134 12

91 36

58  44

90 0

59

97 26

37 52

135 18

89 24

60

100 20

36 6

136 26

87 8

70

128 2

21 34

149 36

60 48

80

154 18 10 12

164 30

31 0

90

180 0 0 0

180 0

0 0

FRESNEL  S RHOMB.

393

§  158^'.  That  most  exquisite  invention,  Fresnel's  rhomb,  Molar,
produces  a  difference  of  phase  of  90°  between  vibrations  in,  and
vibrations  perpendicular  to,  P.  By  §  158'"  we  see  that  this  can
only  be  with  glass  of  refractive  index  greater  than  1*496.  Thus,
the  table  for  refractive  index  1*46  shows  84°  44'  for  the  maximum
value  in  Column  5.  The  other  three  tables  show,  for  refractive
indices  To,  I'ol,  and  1'6  respectively,  maximum  values  in  Column  5,
90°28'-8,  91°53'-2,  and  103°57'-6.  In  each  of  these  cases,  there
are  of  course  two  incidences  which  make  the  difference  of  phase
exactly  90".  Fresnel  pointed  out*  that  the  larger  of  the  two  is  to
be  preferred  to  the  smaller;  because,  with  the  larger,  the  differ-
ences of  refractivity,  for  the  different  constituents  of  white  light,
make  less  error  from  the  desired  90°  difference  of  phase.  The
larger  of  the  two  incidences  is  to  be  preferred,  also,  because  small
differences  from  it  make  less  error  on  the  90°  phasal  differences,
than  equal  differences  from  the  other.  For  the  same  reason,  the
less  the  refractive  index  exceeds  1'496,  the  better.  Fresnel's  first
rhomb  was  made  of  glass,  of  refractive  index  1*.51,  from  the
factory  of  Saint  Gobain  :  our  tables  show  that  1"5  would  reduce
the phasal  errors to  about  half  those  given  by  1'51,  for  equal

Fig.  9'.

small  errors  in  the  direction  of  the  ray.  It  would  thus  give  an
appreciably  better  instrument  than  Fresnel's  own.  The  accom-
panying diagram,  figure  9',  represents  a  section  perpendicular  to

*  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  i.  p.  792;  original  date  1823.

394  LECTURE XVIII.

.raloM  the  traversed  faces  and  the  reflecting  surfaces  of  the  rhomb,  for
refractive  index  1'51,  as  cut  by  Fresnel;  with  acute  angles  of
54°  87',  so  that  the  rays  for  its  proper  use  may  enter  and  leave
perpendicularly  to  the  traversed  faces.  If  p  denote  the  perpen-
dicular distance  between  the  two  long  sides  of  the  parallelogram,
the  length  of  the  long  side  is  2ptant  (or  p.  2"816  with  i=  54°  37'):
the  length  of  the  short  side  is  j9.  cosec  ?*  (or  jj.  1'226).  The
perpendicular  distance  between  the  entering  and  the  leaving  rays
is /).  2  sin t  (or  p.  1-6306).

§  158"'.  The  length  of  the  long  side  is  chosen  such  that  a
ray,  entering  perpendicularly*  through  the  centre  of  one  face,
passes  out  perpendicularly  through  the  centre  of  the  parallel  face,
Fresnel's  diagram  is  far  from  fulfilling  this  condition;  and  so  are
many  of  the  diagrams  in  text-books,  and  scientific  papers  on  the
subject.  The  last  diagram  I  have  seen  shows  only  about  a  quarter
of  normally  entering  light  to  suffer  two  reflections;  and  rather
more  than  half  of  it  to  pass  straight  through  without  any  reflection
at  all.  Airy's  and  Jamin's  diagrams  are  correct  and  very  clear.
Fresnel  must,  in  1823,  have  given  clear  instructions  to  his  work-
man (with  or  without  a  diagram);  and,  to  this  day,  opticians  make
Fresnel's  rhombs  of  right  proportions  to  fulfil  the  proper  condition
in  respect  to  the  entering  and  leaving  rays.  But  twenty  years
after  Fresnel's  invention  we  learn  from  MacCuUaghf  that  Fresnel
rhombs  were  made  by  DoUond  (and  probably  also  by  other
opticians  ?),  with  Fresnel's  54°  37'  for  the  acute  angle,  but  with
refractive  indices  differing  from  his  lol.  I  am  assured  that
some  opticians  of  the  present  day  make  the  acute  angle  correct
according  to  the  refractive  index  of  the  glass,  to  give  exactly  90°
phasal  difference  of  the  components  of  the  normal  ray.  I  do  not
know  if  they  realize  the  importance  of  having  glass  of  refractive
index  as  little  above  1'496  as  possible.

I  158^'"'.  MacCullagh  appreciated  the  beauty  and  value  of
Fresnel's  rhomb,  and  as  early  as  1837  had  begun  using  it  for
research.  But  he  was  at  first  much  perplexed  by  unexpectedly
large  errors,  until  he  found  means  of  taking  them  into  account,

*  This,  for  brevity,  I  call  a  "  normal  ray."

t  "  On  the  Laws  of  Metallic  Eeflection  and  the  mode  of  making  experiments  upon
Elliptic  Polarization,"  Froc.  Royal  Irish  Academy,  May  8,  1843.  MacCullagh's
Collected  Papers,  p.  240.

ERRORS  FOUND  BY  MACCULLAGH,

895

"and  of  making  the  rhomb  itself  serve  to  measure  and  to  eliminate  Molar,
"them."  He  good-naturedly  adds; — "The  value  of  the  rhomb  as
"an  instrument  of  research  is  much  increased  by  the  circumstance
"that  it  can  thus  determine  its  own  effect,  and  that  it  is  not  at  all
"necessary  to  adapt  its  angle  exactly  to  the  refractive  index  of  the
"glass."  This  proves  a  very  forgiving  spirit:  perplexity  and  loss
of  time  in  his  research  gratefully  accepted  in  consideration  of  his
having  been  led  to  an  enlarged  view  of  the  value  of  the  Fresnel
rhomb  as  an  accurate  measuring  instrument !

§  158'\  MacCullagh  had  two  rhombs  from  the  same  maker
each  "cut  at  an  angle  of  54^°  as  prescribed  by  Fresnel."  He  found
one  of  them  wrong  phasally  by  .'3°,  the  other  by  8° !  He  does  not
say  whether  the  errors  were  of  excess  or  defect ;  but  we  see  that
they  must  have  been  excess  above  90°,  because-  no  refractive  index
greater  than  1"5,  with  i  =  .54°  37',  gives  as  large  a  defect  below  90°,
as  3°. This  we  see  by  looking  at  the  following  Table,  calculated

M

i

2^

2X

2(V  +  X)

360°

-4(V  +  X)

Excess
above  90°

1-5

1-51

1-6

1-7

1-8

54°  37'

78°  4'
78  48
84  14
'88  32
91  44

57°  28'
56  12
46  44
39 4
33  20

135°  32'
135 0
130  58
127  36
125 4

88°  56'

90 0

98 4

104  48

109  52

-1°  4'
0 0

+  8 4
14  48
19  52

according  to  §  158^  with  i  =  54°  37',  for  four  refractive  indices,
other  than  Fresnel's  I'ol.  We  also  see  that  the  refractive  indices
of  the  rhombs,  supplied  by  Dollond  to  MacCullagh,  must  have
been  between  1'51  and  1'6.

§  158^  Notwithstanding  MacCullagh's  good-natured  remark,
it  is  important  that  the  acute  angle  of  a  Fresnel  rhomb  should  be
made,  as  accurately  as  possible,  such  that  the  phasal  difference
shall  be  exactly  90°,  for  light  of  definitely  specified  period  (sodium
light  for  example),  when  the  direction  of  the  ray  is  exactly  per-
pendicular to  the  entering  and  leaving  faces.  But  however
trustworthy  may  be  the  instrument-maker's  work,  MacCullagh's
principle  of  determining  the  error  in  the  practical  use  of  the
instrument,  and  eliminating  it  if  it  is  perceptible,  is  highly  im-
portant and  interesting. It  may  be  carried  out,  either,  as  he  did

396  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  it  himself,  by  means  of  observations  on  metallic  reflection :  or,
as  he  suggested,  by  observations  on  total  reflection  at  a  sepa-
rating surface  of  glass  and  air;  a  much  simpler  subject  than
metallic  reflection.  Or,  as  simplest  method  when  two  Fresnel's
rhombs  are  available,  we  may  place  them  with  leaving  face  of
one,  and  entering  face  of  the  other,  parallel  and  close  together,
and  mount  the  two  rhombs  so  as  to  turn  independently  round
a  common  axis  perpendicular  to  these  surfaces  through  their
centres.  The  arrangement  is  completed  by  mounting  two  nicols
so  as  to  turn  independently,  one  of  them  round  the  central
ray  entering  the  first  rhomb,  and  the  other  round  the  central  ray
leaving  the  second  rhomb  :  and  providing  three  graduated  circles,
by  which  differences  of  angles  turned  through  between  the  first
nicol  and  first  fresnel;  between  the  two  fresnels;  and  between  the
second  fresnel  and  the  second  nicol ;  may  be  measured.  The
mechanism  to  do  this  is  of  the  simplest  and  easiest.  The  experi-
ment consists  in  letting  light ;  entering  through  the  first  nicol
and  traversing  the  two  fresnels  and  the  second  nicol ;  be  viewed
by  an  eye  seeing  through  the  second  nicol.  The  best  approach  to
extinction  that  can  be  had,  is  to  be  produced  by  varying  the
three  measured  angles.  For  simplicity  we  may  suppose  that  the
three  zeros  of  the  three  pointers,  on  the  three  circles,  are  set  so
that,  using  for  brevity  facial  intersections  to  denote  intersections
of  the  traversed  faces  and  reflecting  surfaces  of  a  fresnel,  we  have
as  follows : —

(1)  When  the  first  index  is  at  zero  on  the  first  circle,  the
vibrational  lines  of  the  light  emerging  from  the  first  nicol  are
perpendicular  to  the  facial  intersections  of  the  first  fresnel.

(2)  When  the  second  pointer  is  at  zero  on  its  circle,  the  facial
intersections  of  the  first  fresnel  are  parallel  to  those  of  the  second,

(3)  When  the  third  index  is  at  the  zero  of  the  third  circle,
the  facial  intersections  of  the  second  fresnel  are  perpendicular  to
the  vibrational  lines  of  light  entering  the  second  nicol.

Thus  if  ?ii,  a,  ??.,  denote  the  readings  on  the  three  circles;  ??i  is
the  inclination  of  the  vibrational  lines  of  the  first  nicol  to  the
reflectional  plane*  of  the  first  fresnel ;  a  is  the  inclination  of  the
facial  intersections  of  the  first  fresnel  to  those  of  the  second ;  and

*  For  brevity  I  call  "reflectional  plane"  of  a  fresnel,  the  plane  of  reflection  of  a
normal  ray. It  is  perpendicular  to  the  facial  intersections.

ERRORS OF TWO FRESNELS DETERMINED.

397

oi-iis  the  inclination  of  the  reflectional  plane  of  the  second  fresnel  to  Molar,
the  vibrational  lines  of  the  light  emerging  from  it.  The  diagram,
figure  9",  shows  these  angles  all  on  one  circle,  ideally  seen  by  an  eye
looking  through  the  second  nicol.  OV^,  OF^,  OF.^,  OV-^,  represent
planes  through  the  central  emergent  ray  respectively  parallel  to  the
vibrational  lines  of  the  first  nicol,  the  reflectional  plane  of  the

Fig.  9".

first  fresnel,  the  reflectional  plane  of  the  second  fresnel,  and  the
vibrational  lines  of  the  second  nicol  set  to  let  pass  all  the  light
coming  from  the  second  fresnel.  OKi,  OK.,,  represent  planes
through  the  common  axis  perpendicular  to  OFi  and  OF2.

§  158'''.  Let  now  sin  t  denote  the  displacement  at  time  t,  of  a
point  of  ether  in  the  light  passing  from  the  first  nicol  to  the  first
fresnel.  This  implies  a  special  unit  of  time,  convenient  for  the
occasion,  according  to  which  the  period  of  the  light  is  27r ;  and  it
takes  as  unit  of  length,  the  maximum  displacement  of  the  ether
between  the  first  nicol  and  the  first  fresnel.  Following  the  light
through  the  apparatus; — ^first  resolve  the  displacement  into  two
components,  cos  n^  sin  t,  sin  ■/?!  sin  t,  parallel  to  OF^  and  OKi.  The
phase  of  the  former  of  these  is  advanced  90°  +  ei  relatively  to  the
latter  by  the  two  total  reflections  in  the  first  fresnel,  if  e^  denote
its  error,  which  ought  to  be  zero.  Thus,  at  any  properly  chosen
point  in  the  space  traversed  by  the  light  between  the  two  fresnels,
the  displacement  of  the  ether  at  time  t  is

cos  /ij  cos  (t  +  e,)  parallel  to  OF^ ;  sin  ??.i  sin  t  parallel  to  OK^.

398  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  Resolving  each  of  these  into  two  components,  we  have,  for  the
light  entering  the  second  fresnel,

cos  a  cos  7ti  cos  {t  +  ei)  —  sin  a  sin  n^  sin  t  parallel  to  OF^ . .  .(98^') ;
sin  a  cos  n^  cos  (t  +  gj)  +  cos  a  sin  n^  sin  t  parallel  to  OK^. .  .(98'^'').

The  former  of  these  is  advanced  90° +  62  relatively  to  the  latter,
by  the  two  reflections  in  the  second  fresnel,  e.,  being  its  error ;  and
thus,  at  any  properly  chosen  point  in  the  light  passing  from  the
second  fresnel  to  the  second  nicol,  the  displacement  of  the  ether
at  time  t  is

—  cos  a  cos  7ii  sin  (t  +  e^  +  e.^  —  sin  a  sin  n^  cos  {t  +  e.^,

parallel  to  Oi^.... (98-^"')  ;
sin  a  cos  i^  cos  {t  +  e^  +  cos  a  sin  n^  sin  t,  parallel  to  OK^ . .  .(98'^'^).

We  have  now  to  find  the  condition  that  the  resultant  of  these
shall  be  rectilineally  vibrating  light.  This  simply  implies  that
(98'''")  and  (98^'^)  are  in  the  same  phase  ;  and,  OV^  being  the  line
of  the  resultant  vibration,  we  have

A B

2-'  =  ^'  =  -cot». (98"),

where  A,  B  and  A',  B'  denote  the  coefficients  found  by  reducing
(98^»')  and  (98"^)  to  the  forms  A  cos  t  +  Bsm t,  and  A' cos  t  +  B' sin  t.
Thus,  performing  the  reductions,  and  putting

tan  Wj  =  Ai, tann2  =  A2, tan  a  =  j (98=^^'),

we  find

—  1  _  —  sin  (ei  +  62)  —  Kj  cos  ^2  _  —  cos  {e^  4-  e<^  +  h^j  sin  gj
A-a  j  cos  61  —  j  sin  61  +  hi

(98^™).

These  are  two  equations  for  finding  the  two  unknowns,  61,^2;  when
^1,  fh,jy  are  all  known;  one  of  them  being  chosen  arbitrarily,  and
the  other  two  determined  by  observation,  worked  to  produce
extinction  of  the  emergent  pencil  (compare  §§  95,  95',  above).  0  V^
in  the  diagram  (fig.  9")  is  perpendicular  to  the  position  of  the
vibrational  line  of  the  second  nicol  when  set  for  extinction.

§  158^"'.  The  experimenter  will  be  guided  by  his  mathematical
judgment,  or  by  trial  and  selection,  to  get  the  best  conditioned
values  of  hi,  h,^,j,  for  determining  gj,  e^.  We  must  not  take  y^i  =  1
(that  is  to  say,  we  must  not  set  the  entering  nicol  fixed  with  its
vibrational  lines  at  45°  to  the  principal  planes  of  the  first  fresnel)

,.  +  ,,=,-(J__,,); ;.  _,„,,=  !  (|i_l) (98").

SIMPLIFICATION WHEN ERRORS ARE SMALL.  899

because  in  the  case  Ci  =  0  (the  tirst  fresnel  true),  the  light  entering  Molar,
the  second  fresnel  would  be  circularly  polarized,  and  therefore  the
turning  of  the  second  fresnel  would  have  no  effect  on  the  quality
of  the  emergent  light ;  which  would  be  plane  polarized  if,  and  only
if,  this  fresnel,  like  the  first,  is  true  (compare  §  98  above).  We
must  not  fix  h^  =  0,  because  this  would  render  the  first  fresnel
nugatory. It  occurs  therefore  to  take  n^  =  22^°  which  makes

hr'-k  =  2  and  h,  =  -^U2 (98""')-

Probably  this  may  be  found  a  good  selection  if,  for  any  reason,  it
is  thought  advisable  to  fix  /ij  and  leave  j  variable.

If  Ci,  e.i  are  so  small  that  we  may  neglect  e^^,  e^,  e^e^,  (98^"')
becomes

whence  we  have  two  simple  equations  for  gj,  e^

Bi J  _ 1  fhi
J

From  these  we  see  that,  as  e^  and  e.2  are  small,  the  observation  must
make  h^  and  h^  each  very  nearly  unity  unless  j  is  taken  either  very
small  or  very  great.  It  may  be  convenient  to  fix  y  =  1,  (a  =  45°),
and  to  find  n^,  n.,  by  experiment.

§  158^"'.  When  both  the  fresnels  are  perfectly  true  (^i  =0,  e.j=0),
formula  (98^^)  shows  that  h^  =  hi,  if  j  =  0 ;  and  /^  =  l/^*i'  if  i  =  ^  :
but  if  J  has  any  value  between  0  and  go  ,  we  must  have  n^  =  n^  =  45",
■  while  a  may  have  any  value.  That  is  to  say,  the  first  fresnel
produces  exactly  circular  orbits  and  the  second  rectifies  them.
When  ??i  is  any  angle  between  0  and  90°,  we  have  elliptically
or  circularly  polarized  light,  represented  by  (98^')  and  (98^")  with
ei  =  0.  This  is  light  leaving  the  first  and  entering  the  second
fresnel.  In  passing  through  the  second  fresnel  it  becomes  con-
verted into  rectilineally  vibrating  light,  represented  by  (98^'")  and
(98^'^)  with  ei  =  0  and  e,  =  0.  Thus  we  see  that  §§  158^—158^",
with  gj  =  0  and  e^  =  0  passim,  expresses  simply  and  fully  the  theory
of  the  conversion  of  rectilineally  vibrating  light  into  elliptically
or  circularly  polarized  light,  and  vice  versa ;  by  one  true  Fresnel's
rhomb.  A  diagram  with  rules  as  to  directions  in  the  use  of
Fresnel's rhomb is given  below  in  §  158''''". §§  90 — 98  above

400  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  contain  the  application  of  the  theory  to  ordinary  reflection  at
the  surfaces  of  transparent  solids,  or  liquids,  or  metals :  the  first
fresnel  of  §  158'^  being  done  away  with,  and  the  reflection  substi-
tuted for  it.  The  corresponding  application  to  total  internal
reflection  is  much  simpler,  because  the  intensities  of  incident
and  reflected  components  are  equal.  It  allows  the  difference  of
phase,  produced  by  the  reflection,  to  be  measured  with  great
accuracy ;  and  a  careful  experimental  research,  thus  carried  out,
would  no  doubt  prove  the  difference  of  phase,  produced  between
the  two  components  by  the  reflection,  to  agree  very  accurately
with  the  obtuse  angles  calculated  for  different  incidences  according
to  (98")  and  |  158'".

§  158"'^.  About  a  year  ago,  in  making  some  preliminary
experiments  by  aid  of  a  Fresnel's  rhomb,  to  illustrate  §§  90 — 100,
152,  153,  I  interpreted  the  phasal  difference  of  the  rhomb  ac-
cording to  Airy's  Tracts ;  but  found  error,  or  confusion,  in  respect
to  phasal  change  by  one  internal  reflection  in  glass,  and  by  metallic
reflection.  I  looked  through  all  the  other  books  of  reference
and  scientific  papers  accessible  to  me  at  the  time ;  and  I  have
continued  the  inquiry  to  the  present  time,  by  aid  of  the  libraries
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  and  the  University  of  Glasgow ;
but  hitherto  without  success,  in  trying  to  find  an  explicit  state-
ment as  to  which  of  the  two  components  is  advanced  upon  the
other  in  the  Fresnel's  rhomb.  I  have  therefore  been  obliged  to
work  the  problem  out  myself  mathematically  for  the  Fresnel's
rhomb ;  and  with  the  knowledge  thus  obtained,  to  find  by  experi-
ment which  of  the  two  components  is  advanced  on  the  other  by
metallic  reflection.  Of  all  the  authors  I  have  hitherto  had  the
opportunity  of  studying,  only  Airy  in  respect  to  Fresnel's  rhomb,
and  Jamin,  and  Stokes  *,  and  Basset  in  respect  to  metallic  re-
flection, have  explicitly  stated  which  component  of  the  light  is
advanced in  phase.

In  Airy's  Tracts,  2nd  edition  (1831),  page  364,  I  find  a
thoroughly  clear  statement,  agreeing  with  Fresnel's  own,  regard-
ing the  Fresnel's  rhomb  and  total  internal  reflection : — "  If  the
"light  be  twice  reflected  in  the  same  circumstances  and  with  the
"  same  plane  of  reflection,  the  phase  of  vibrations  in  the  plane  of
"  incidence  is  more  accelerated  than  that  of  the  other  vibrations

*  Mathematical  and  Physical  Pajjcm,  Vol.  ii.  p.  360.

EIGHTY years' ERROR REGARDING TOTAL REFLECTION. 401

"  by  90°." In  truth,  the  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence  are  Molar,
not  advanced  90°,  but  set  back  270". They  are  therefore  virtually
advanced  90°,  relatively  to  the  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  incidence.

In  Basset's  Physical  Optics  (Cambridge  1892),  page  339, 1  find,
stated  as  a  law  arrived  at  by  Jamin  by  experiment,  with  reference
to  metallic  reflection,  the  following : —

"(1)  The  ivave  which  is  polarized  perpendicularly  to  the  plane
"  of  incidence,  is  more  retarded  than  that  which  is  polarized  in  the
"plane  of  incidence."

By  experiment  I  have  verified  this,  working  with  a  Fresnel's
rhomb,  interpreted  according  to  Airy,  and  §  158^'  above.  In  reading
Jamin's  experimental  paper  I  had  felt  some  doubt  as  to  his  mean-
ing because  his  expression  "  vibrations  polarisees  dans  le  plan  de
I'incidence  "  (I  quote  from  memory)  may  have  signified,  not  that
the  plane  of  polarization*,  but  that  the  line  of  vibration,  was
in  the  plane  of  incidence.  That  Basset's  interpretation  was
correct  is  however  rendered  quite  certain  by  a  clear  statement  in
Jamin's  Cours  de  Physique,  Vol.  ii.  page  690,  describing  relative
advance  of  phase  of  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  inci-
dence of  light  reflected  from  a  polished  metal.  This  phasal  relative
advance  he  measured  by  a  Babinet's  compensator,  and  found  it  to
increase  from  zero  at  normal  incidence,  to  90°  at  the  principal
incidence,  I;  and  up  to  180°  at  grazing  incidence.  He  would
have  found  not  advance,  but  back-set,  if  he  had  used  a  Fresnel's
rhomb  interpreted  according  to  the  mathematical  theory  given  (by
himself  as  from  Fresnel)  in  pages  783  to  787  of  the  same  volume,
with  the  falsified  formulas  (98^^").

§  1.58^^.  The  origin  of  the  long  standing  mistake  regarding
the  Fresnel's  rhomb  is  to  be  found  in  Fresnel's  original  paper,
"  Memoire  sur  la  loi  des  modifications  que  la  reflexion  imprime
"  a  la  lumiere  polarisde " :  reproduced  in  Volume  i.  of  Collected
Papers,  Paris 1876,  pages  767 to  799. In  page  777 we  find

*  Considering  the  inevitable  liability  to  ambiguity  of  this  kind,  I  have  abandoned
the  designation  "plane  of  polarization";  and  have  resolved  always  to  specify  or
describe  with  reference  to  vibrational  lines.  Abundant  examples  may  be  found  in
the  earlier  parts  of  the  present  volume  illustrating  the  inconvenience  of  the  desig-
nation "plane  of  polarization."  In  fact  "polar"  and  "polarization"  were,  as  is
now  generally  admitted,  in  the  very  beginning  unhappily  chosen  words  for
differences  of  action  in  different  directions  around  a  ray  of  light.  These  differences
are  essentially  not  according  to  what  we  now  understand  by  polar  quality.

T.  L.  26

402  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar.  Fresnel's  own  celebrated  formulas,  for  reflected  vibrational  ampli-
tudes and  their  ratio,  correctly  given  as  follows  : —

tan  {i  -  ,i)  sin  {i  -  ,i) ^  cos  (i-,i)  „;

tan  (i  +  ,i) '  sin  {i  +  ,i) '  cos  {i  +  ,i)  '"^

It  is  obvious  that  the  first  two  of  these  expressions  must  have
the  same  sign,  because  at  very  nearly  normal  incidences  the
tangents  are  approximately  equal  to  the  sines,  and  at  normal
incidences,  the  two  formulas  mean  precisely  the  same  thing ;
there  being,  at  normal  incidence,  no  such  thing  as  a  difference
between  vibrations  in,  and  vibrations  perpendicular  to,  a  plane  of
incidence.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the  manifest  absurdity  of  giving
different  signs  to  the  "  tangent  formula  "  and  the  "  sine  formula "
of  Fresnel,  we  find  in  a  footnote  on  page  789  (by  Verdet,  one  of
Fresnel's  editors),  the  formulas  changed  to

tan  {i  —  ,i)  sin  {i  —  ,i)

tan  {i  +  ,i) '  sin  {%  +  ,i)

.(98""),

in  consequence  of  certain  "considerations"  set  forth  by  Fresnel
on  pages  788,  789.  I  hope  sometime  to  return  to  these  "  con-
siderations "  and  to  give  a  diagram  showing  the  displacements  of
ether  in  a  space  traversed  by  co-existent  beams  of  incident  and
reflected  light,  by  which  Fresnel's  "  petite  difiiculte  "  of  page  787
is  explained,  and  the  erroneous  change  from  his  own  originally
correct  formulas  is  obviated.  The  falsified  formulas  (98"")  have
been  repeated  by  some  subsequent  writers ;  avoided  by  others.
But,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  author  has  hitherto  corrected  the  conse-
quential error,  which  gives  an  acute  angle  instead  of  an  obtuse
angle  for  phasal  difference  in  one  total  internal  reflection;  and  gives
90°  phasal  difference  instead  of  270°  in  the  two  reflections  of  the
Fresnel's  rhomb ;  and  gives  90°  back-set,  instead  of  the  truth
which  is  90°  virtual  advance,  of  vibrations  in  the  plane  of  incidence,
relatively  to  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence,  in
a  Fresnel's  rhomb.  The  serious  practical  error,  in  respect  to  which
of  the  two  components  experiences  phasal  advance  in  the  Fresnel's
rhomb,  does  not  occur  in  any  published  statement  which  I  have
hitherto  found.  Airy  accidentally  corrected  it  by  another  error.
All  the  other  authors  limit  themselves  to  saying  that  there  is  a
phasal  difference  of  90°  between  the  two  components,  without
saying  which  component  is  in  advance  of  the  other.

ORBITAL DIRECTION IN LIGHT FROM ANY MIRROR.  403

§  ISS'"'.  In  Fresnel  (page  782),  and  Airy  (page  362),  where  Molar.
^—1  is  first  introduced  with  the  factor  \/(/j?sin-i  —  1),  the  positive
sign  is  taken  accidentally,  without  reference  to  any  other  con-
sideration. A  reversal  of  sign,  wherever  J— I  occurs  in  the
subsequent  formulas,  would  have  given  phasal  advance  instead
of  phasal  back-set,  or  back-set  instead  of  advance,  in  each  con-
clusion. If  the  authors  had  included  the  refracted  wave  (Airy,
page  358)  in  the  new  imaginary  investigation  so  splendidly  dis-
covered by  Fresnel,  they  would  have  found  it  necessary,  either  to
reverse  the  sign  of  V— 1  throughout,  or  to  reverse  the  interpreta-
tion of  it  in  respect  to  phasal  difference,  given  as  purely  con-
jectural by  Fresnel,  and  by  Airy  (page  363)  quoting  from  him  :
because  with  this  interpretation,  and  with  the  signs  as  they  stand,
they  would  have  found  for  the  "  refracted  wave,"  a  displacement
of  the  ether  increasing  exponentially,  instead  of  diminishing
exponentially,  with  distance  from  the  interftice  (see  footnote  on
§  158"  above).  It  is  exceedingly  interesting  now  to  find  that  an
accidentally  wrong  choice  of  signs,  in  connection  with  V—  1,
served  to  correct  in  the  result  of  two  reflections,  the  practical
error  of  acute  instead  of  obtuse  for  the  phasal  difference  due
to  one  reflection,  which  is  entailed  by  the  deliberate  choice  of
a  false  sign  in  the  real  formulas  of  (98''^'') :  and  that,  thus  led,
Airy  gave  correctly  the  only  statement  hitherto  published,  so  far
as  I  know,  as  to  which  of  the  two  components  experiences  phasal
advance  in  Fresnel's  rhomb.

I  158^^".  Note  on  circular  polarization  in  metallic  or  vitreous
or  adamantine  reflection.  Referring  to  Basset's  Physical  Optics,
page  329,  edition  1892,  I  find  Principal  Azimuth  defined  as  the
angle  between  the  plane  of  polarization  of  the  reflected  light,
and  the  plane  of  the  reflection,  when  the  incident  light  is  circularly
polarized  light  incident  at  the  angle  of  principal  incidence.  This
really  agrees  with  the,  at  first  sight,  seemingly  different  definition
of  Principal  Azimuth,  given  in  §  97"  above :  because  it  is  easily
proved  that  when  rectilineally  vibrating  light,  is  converted  into
circularly  polarized  light  by  metallic  or  other  reflection ;  the
azimuth  of  the  vibi'ational  plane  of  the  incident  light,  is  equal  to
the  azimuth  of  the  plane  of  polarization  of  the  reflected  light
when  circularly  polarized  light  is  converted  into  rectilineally
vibrating  light  by  reflection  on  the  same  mirror. The  fact  that  k

26—2

404  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  is  positive  for  every  case  of  j^rincipal  incidence  (§  97')  is  included
and  interpreted  in  the  following  statement : —

Consider  the  case  of  plane  polarized  light  incident  on  a
polished  metallic,  or  adamantine,  or  vitreous,  reflector.  For  sim-
plicity of  expressions  let  the  plane  of  the  reflector  be  horizontal.
To  transmit  the  incident  light  let  a  nicol,  mounted  with  its  axis
inclined  to  the  vertical  at  any  angle  i,  carry  a  pointer  to  indicate
the  direction  of  the  vibrational  lines  of  the  light  emerging  from  it,
and  incident  on  the  mirror.  First  place  the  pointer  upwards
in  the  vertical  plane  through  the  axis ;  which  is  the  plane  of
incidence  of  the  light  on  the  mirror.  The  reflected  light  is  of
rectilineal  vibrations  in  the  same  plane.  Now  turn  the  pointer
anti-clockwise  through  any  angle  less  than  90°.  The  reflected
light  consists  of  elliptic,  or  circular,  anti-clockwise  orbital  motions.

If  i  =  1,  the  principal  incidence ;  the  two  axes  of  each  elliptic
orbit  are,  one  of  them  horizontal  and  perpendicular  to  the  plane
of  incidence  and  reflection;  the  other  in  this  plane.

To  avoid  any  ambiguity  in  respect  to  "  clockwise  "  and  "  anti-
clockwise," the  observer  looks  at  the  nicol,  and  at  the  circle  in
which  its  pointer  turns,  from  the  side  towards  which  the  light
emerges  after  passing  through  it :  and  he  looks  ideally  at  the
orbital  motion  of  the  reflected  light  from  the  side  towards  which
the  reflected  light  travels  to  his  eye. See  §  98  above.

In  external  reflection  of  rectilineally  vibrating  light  by  all
ordinary  transparent  reflectors,  including  diamond  (but  not  realgar),
the  deviation  from  rectilineality  of  the  reflected  light  is  small,
except  for  incidences  within  a  few  degrees  of  the  Brewsterian
tan~^/i.  See  diagram  of  §  178  below  (figures  11  and  12),  for
diamond.

§  158^^"'.  The  rules  for  directions  in  elliptic  and  circular
polarization  by  a  Fresnel's  rhomb  are  represented  by  the  annexed
diagram,  figure  9'".  0'  and  0  are  the  centres  of  the  entering  and
exit  faces.  OK  is  a  line  parallel  to  the  facial  intersections.  OF
represents  the  plane  of  the  reflections  in  the  rhomb,  being  a  plane
perpendicular  to  the  four  optically  effective  faces.

Cases  tti,  a^,  a^.  Plane  polarized  light  enters  by  0'.  OVi,
OV^,  OFj,  are  parallels  through  0  to  the  vibrational  lines  of  the
entering  light ;  they  are  of  equal  lengths,  to  represent  the  displace-
ments as  equal  in  the  three  cases. The  orbits  of  the  exit  light  in

RULES FOR ORBITAL DIRECTION.

405

the  three  cases  are  represented  by  (1)  ellipse,  (2)  circle,  (3)  ellipse;  Molar.
being  drawn  according  to  the  geometrical  construction  indicated
in  one  quadrant  of  the  diagram.

Cases  bi,  62,  &$•  The  orbits  in  three  cases  of  equally  strong
circularly  and  elliptically  polarized  entering  light,  having  axes
along  OF  and  OK,  shown  with  their  centres  transferred  to  0,  are
represented  by  (1)  ellipse,  (2)  circle,  (3)  ellipse.  OV,',  OV^,  OV,',
represent  the  displacements  in  the  exit  light,  which  in  each  of
these  three  cases  consists  of  rectilineal  vibrations.

Fig.  9"

The  direction  of  the  orbital  motions  of  the  exit  light  in  cases  a,
and  of  the  entering  light  in  cases  h,  is,  in  each  of  the  six  cases,
anti-clockwise,  as  indicated  by  the  arrowheads  on  the  ellipses  and
circle.

Thus  we  have  the  following  two  rules  for  directions : —

Rule  (a). When  the  vibrational  plane  of  entering  light  must

406  LECTURE XVIII.

Molar,  be  turned  anti-clockwise  to  bring  it  into  coiucidence  with  OK,
the  orbital  motions  in  the  exit  light  are  anti-clockwise.

Rule  {h).  When  the  orbital  motion  of  circularly  or  elliptically
polarized  entering  light,  having  axes  parallel  to  OK  and  OF,  is
anti-clockwise,  the  vibrational  plane  of  the  exit  light  is  turned
anti-clockwise  from  OK:

These  rules,  and  the  diagram,  hold  with  a  "quarter-wave
plate"  substituted  for  the  fresnel,  provided  homogeneous  light  of
the  corresponding  wave-length  is  used.  The  principal  plane  of
the  quarter-wave  plate  in  which  are  the  vibrations  of  waves  of
greatest  propagational  velocity,  is  the  OF  of  the  diagram.

§  159.  The  beautiful  discovery  made  seventy  years  ago  by
MacCullagh  and  Cauchy,  that  metallic  reflection  is  represented
mathematically  by  taking  an  imaginary  complex  to  represent  the
refractive  index,  fi,  still  wants  dynamical  explanation.  In  1884
we  saw  (Lee.  XII.  pp.  155,  156)  that  —  yu,-  is  essentially  real  and
positive  through  a  definite  range  of  periods  less  than  any  one  of
the  fundamental  periods,  according  to  the  unreal  illustrative  mech-
anism of  unbroken  molecular  vibrators  constituting  the  ponderable
matter;  embedded  in  ether,  and  acting  on  it  only  by  resistance
between  ether  and  the  atoms  against  simultaneous  occupation  of
the  same  space.  This  gave  us  a  thoroughly  dynamical  foundation
for  metallic  reflection  in  the  ideal  case  of  no  loss  of  light,  and  for
the  transmission  of  light  through  a  thin  film  of  the  metal  with
velocity  (as  found  by  Quincke),  exceeding  the  velocity  of  light  in
void  ether.  It  however  gave  us  no  leading  towards  a  dynamical
explanation  of  the  manifestly  great  loss  of  light  suffered  in  reflection
at  the  most  perfectly  polished  surfaces  of  metals  other  than  silver
or  mercury  (see  §  88  above).  But  now  the  new  realistic  electro-
ethereal  theory  set  forth  in  Appendices  A  and  E,  and  in  §§  162...  168
below,  while  giving  for  non-conductors  of  electricity  exactly  the  same
real  values  of  fj?,  negative  and  positive,  as  we  had  from  the  old
tentative  mechanism,  seems  to  lead  towards  explaining  loss  of
luminous  energy  both  in  reflection  from,  and  in  transmission
through,  a  substance  which  has  any  electric  conductivity,  however
small.  In  App.  E  §  30,  J.  J.  Thomson's  theory  of  electric  conduction
through  gases  is  explained  by  the  projection  of  electrions  out  of
atoms.  If  this  never  took  place,  the  electro-ethereal  theory  would,
like  our  old  mechanical  vibrator,  give  loss  of  energy  from  trans-
mitted light  only  in  the  exceedingly  small  proportion  due  to  the

PERFECT  OPACITY  WITH  PERFECT  REFLECTIVITY. 407

size  of  the  atoms  according  to  Rayleigh's  theory  of  the  blue  sky  Molecular
(§  58  above).  Ou  the  other  hand  the  crowds  of  loose  electrions
among  under-loaded  atoms,  throughout  the  volume  of  a  metal,  by
which  its  high  electric  conductivity  is  explained  in  App.  E  §  30,  may
conceivably  give  rise  to  large  losses  of  energy  from  reflected
light ;  losses  spent  in  heating  a  very  thin  surface  layer  of  the
metal  by  irregular  motions  of  the  electrions.  This  seems  to  me
probably  the  true  dynamical  explanation  of  the  imaginary  term
in  v^  of  §  158  (98). See  also  §  84  above.

§  159'.  In  every  case  of  practically  complete  opacity  (that  is
to  say,  no  perceptible  translucency  from  the  most  brilliant  light
falling  on  a  plate  of  any  thickness  greater  than  three  or  four
wave-lengths,  or  about  2  .  lO"-*  cm.),  measurement  of  the  principal
azimuth,  which  can  be  performed  with  great  accuracy  by  aid  of
two  nicols  and  a  Fresnel's  rhomb  (§§  97 — 97"  above),  gives  an
interesting  contribution  to  knowledge  regarding  loss  of  luminous
energy  in  the  reflection  of  light. The  notation  of  §  94'  gives

^^  sin^  a  +  (T- +  £'0  cos- a (98'=^')

as  the  reflectivity  for  light  vibrating  in  azimuth  a  from  the
plane  of  incidence  (§  88,  foot-note);  so  that  in  every  case  of
practical  opacity,

1  -  [;S'2  sin=  a  +  (T-^ -f- ^")  cos^  a] (98^'")

represents  loss  of  luminous  energy  by  conversion  into  heat  in  a
thin  surface  stratum  of  less  than  2  .  10"''  cm.  thickness.

§  159".  For  perfect  reflectivity  (98^''")  must  be  zero  for  every
value  of  a,  and  for  every  incidence.  Hence,  as  S,  T,  E  are  inde-
pendent of  a,  we  have,  at  every  incidence,

S-'^T"--^E^  =  1  (98-"'").

Hence  for  the  incidence  making  T=0  (that  is  the  principal
incidence),  S"^  =  E'^  =  1 :  which  makes  E/S  =  ±  1  in  every  case  of
perfect  reflectivity,  in  total  internal  reflection  for  instance.  There-
fore the  principal  azimuth,  being  tan~^  {EjS)  for  principal  inci-
dence, is  ±  45°,  if  the  reflectivity  is  perfect. (See  §  lo7  above.)

§  159'".  Observation  and  mathematical  theory  agree  that  the
principal  azimuth  is  positive  in  every  case :  for  interpretation  of
this  see  §  loS'"'"  above.  They  also  agree  that  in  every  case  short
of  perfect  reflectivity  the  principal  azimuth  is  <  45°,  not  >  45°.

LECTURE  XIX.

Friday,  October  17,  3.30  p.m.,  1884. Written  afresh,  1903.

Reconciliation  between  Fresnel  and  Green.

Molecular.  This  Lecture  or  "  Conference  "  began  with  the  consideration
of  a  very  interesting  report,  presented  to  us  by  one  of  our  twenty-
one  coefficients,  Prof.  E.  W.  Morley,  describing  a  complete  soki-
tion,  worked  out  by  himself,  of  the  dynamical  problem  of  seven
mutually  interacting  particles,  which  I  had  proposed  nine  days
previously  (Lecture  IX.  p.  103  above)  as  an  illustration  of  the
molecular  theory  of  dispersion  with  which  we  were  occupied.
His  results  are  given  in  the  following  Table.

Solution  for  Fundamental  Periods,  Displacement,  and  Energy
Ratios  of  a  System  of  Spring-connected  Particles.  By  Edward
W.  Morley,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

m^\,  4,  16,  64,  256,  1024,  4096.
C'=l, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Fundamental  Periods  corresponding  to  outer  ends  of
Springs  1  and  8  held  fixed.

t'^

•2889

•9952

3-350

11-362

39^12

137-89

680-2

1

t2~

3-4618

1-00483

0-29849

0-0880078

0-0255607

0-0072564

0-0014701

1 _

T

1-860

1^002

•546

•296

•159

•0851

•0383

A PROBLEM OF SEVEN VIBRATIONAL MODES SOLVED. 409

(X-
—
X-t

Molecular.

^1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

X2

-•231

1-000

1-351

1-456

1-487

1^496

1^499

^3

•014

-•341

1^047

1-589

1-761

1^813

1-829

X4

-•III  27

•025

-•431

1^129

1-787

1^997

2-066

^5

•vl5

-•III  50

•033

--511

1-223

1^960

2^216

Xg

-  •VIII  26

•v30

-  •HI  68

-040

-•581

1^322

2^203

Xj

•XI 13

-  -viiiSl

•v39

--III  81

•045

-•628

1^717

Energy  Ratios,  or  values  of

niiXi

»»l-l-l^

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

m^«'

•213

3^998

7-30

8-48

8-85

8-96

8-99

WlyTj'

•n33

1^864

17-54

40-41

49-64

52-58

53^54

m^x;-

•v47

•039

11-88

81-66

204-35

255-34

273^14

"'o-''5'

•1x61

•IV  65

•28

66-73

382-71

983-10

1157^52

m^x-^

•XIV  7

•VIII  9

•III  47

1-62

345-60

1788-13

4968^41

"'7^7'

•XX  7

•XII  1

•VII 63

-002

8-42

1616^99

12080-04

Sum

1^216

6^902

38^0004

199-90

1000-57

4706^10

18542-64

At  present  our  subject  is  the  dynamical  reconciliation  between  Molar.
Fresnel  and  Green,  not  only  in  respect  to  reflection  and  refrac-
tion at  an  interface  between  two  isotropic  transparent  bodies,
as  promised  in  Lecture  XVIII.  §§  188,  189,  but  also  in  respect  to
the  propagation  of  light  through  a  transparent  crystal  (double
refraction)  as  promised  in  Lecture  XV.  §  45.

§  160.  In  my  paper  on  the  reflection  and  refraction  of  light
{Fhil.  Mag.  1888,  2nd  half-year),  an  extract  from  which  is  quoted
in  §§  107—111  of  Lecture  XVIII.,  I  have  shown  (§§  109—111)
that  a  homogeneous  portion  of  an  elastic  solid  with  its  boundary

410  LECTURE XIX.

Molar,  held  fixed  is  stable  if  its  rigidity  (n)  is  positive ;  even  though  its
bulk-modulus  (^■)  is  negative  if  not  less  than  —^n.  And  in  §  115
it  is  shown  that  the  propagational  velocity  (v)  of  condensational-
rarefactional  waves  in  any  homogeneous  elastic  solid  (or  fluid  if
n  =  0)  is  given  by  the  equation

"V^^' w

In  virtue  of  this  equation  it  had  always  been  believed  that  the
propagational  velocity  of  condensational-rarefactional  waves  in  an
elastic  solid  was  essentially  greater  than  that  of  equivoluminal

waves,  which  is  .  /-. The  Navier-Poisson  doctrine,  upheld  by

many  writers  long  after  Stokes  showed  it  to  be  wrong  (see
Lecture  XI.  pp.  123,  124  above,  and  Appendix  I  below),  made
k  =  |w  (see  Lecture  VI.  p.  61  above),  and  therefore  the  velocity  of
condensational-rarefactional  waves  =  \/3  times  that  of  the  equi-
voluminal wave.  The  deviations  of  real  substances,  such  as  metals,
glasses,  india-rubber,  jelly,  to  which  Stokes  called  attention,  were
all  in  the  direction  of  making  the  resistance  to  compression  greater
than  according  to  the  Navier-Poisson  doctrine ;  but  it  was  pointed
out  in  Thomson  and  Tait  (§  685)  that  cork  deviates  in  the  opposite
direction  and  is,  in  proportion  to  its  rigidity,  much  less  resistant
to  compression  than  according  to  that  doctrine.  In  truth,  without
violating  any  correct  molecular  theory,  we  may  make  the  bulk-
modulus  of  an  elastic  solid  as  small  as  we  please  in  proportion  to
the  rigidity  provided  only,  for  the  sake  of  stability,  we  keep  it
positive.  A  zero  bulk-modulus  makes  the  velocity  of  condensational-
rarefactional  waves  equal  to  \/|  times  that  of  equivoluminal  waves.
But  now,  to  make  peace  between  Fresnel  and  Green,  we  want  for
ether ;  if  not  all  ether,  at  all  events  ether  in  the  space  occupied  by
ponderable  matter,  a  negative  bulk-modulus  just  a  little  short  of

—  |w,  to  make  the  velocity  (v)  very  small  in  comparison  to  a/--

And  now,  happily  (§  167  below),  a  theory  of  atoms  and  electrions
in  ether,  to  which  I  was  led  by  other  considerations,  gives  us
a  perfectly  clear  and  natural  explanation  of  ether  through  void
space  practically  incompressible,  as  Green  supposed  it  to  be ;  while
in  the  interior  of  any  ordinary  solid  or  liquid  it  has  a  large  enough
negative  bulk-modulus to render  the  propagational velocity  of

RETURN TO HYPOTHESIS OF 1887 WITH MODIFICATION. 411

condensational-rarefactional  waves  exceedingly  small  in  comparison  Molar.

with  that  of  equivoluminal  waves.

( :'

§  161.  In  my  1888  Article  I  showed  that  if  v  is  very  small,
or  infinitely  small,  in  proportion  to  the  propagational  velocity  of
equivoluminal  waves  in  the  two  mediums  on  the  two  sides  of  a
reflecting  interface,  or  quite  zero,  Fresnel's  laws  of  reflection  and
refraction  are  very  approximately,  or  quite  exactly,  fulfilled.  About
fourteen  years  later  I  found  that,  as  said  in  §  46  of  Lecture  XV.,
it  is  enough  for  the  fulfilment  of  Fresnel's  laws  that  the  velocity
of  the  condensational-rarefactional  waves  in  one  of  the  two  mediuvis
be  exceedingly  small.  During  those  fourteen  years,  I  had  been
feeling  more  and  more  the  great  difficulty  of  believing  that  the
compressibility-modulus  of  ether  through  all  space  couM  be  nega-
tive, and  so  much  negative  as  to  make  the  propagational  velocity
of  condensational-rarefactional  waves  exceedingly  small,  or  zero.
One  chief  object  of  the  long  mathematical  investigation  regarding
spherical  waves  in  an  elastic  solid,  added  to  Lecture  XIV.  (pp.  191
— 219  above),  was  to  find  whether  or  not  smallness  of  propaga-
tional velocity  of  condensational-rarefoctional  waves  through  ether
void  of  ponderable  matter  could  give  practical  annulment  of  energy
carried  away  by  this  class  of  waves  from  a  vibrator  constituting  a
source  of  light.  I  found  absolute  proof  that  the  required  practical
annulment  was  not  possible  ;  and  I  therefore  felt  forced  to  the
conclusion  stated  in  §  32,  p.  214:  "This,  to  my  mind,  utterly
"disproves  my  old  hypothesis  of  a  very  small  velocity  for  irro-
"  tational  wave-motion  in  the  undulatory  theory  of  light."  Now,
most  happily,  seeing  that  it  is  enough  for  the  dynamical  verification
of  Fresnel's  laws  that  the  velocity  of  the  condensational-rare-
factional wave  be  exceedingly  small  for  either  one  or  other  of  the
mediums  on  the  two  sides  of  the  interface,  I  can  return  to  my  old
hypothesis  with  a  confidence  I  never  before  felt  in  contemplating
it.  It  is,  I  feel,  now  made  acceptable  by  assuming  with  Green
that  ether  in  space  void  of  ponderable  matter  is  practically  incom-
pressible by  the  forces  concerned  in  waves  proceeding  from  a  source
of  light  of  any  kind,  including  radiant  heat  and  electro-magnetic
waves;  while,  in  the  space  occupied  by  liquids  and  solids,  it  has  a
bulk-modulus  largely  enough  negative  to  render  the  propagational
velocity  of  condensational-rarefactional  waves  exceedingly  small  in
comparison  with  that  of  equivoluminal  waves  in  pure  ether. We

412  LECTURE XIX.

Molar,  have  now  no  difficulty  with  respect  to  getting  rid  of  the  condensa-
tional-rare  factional  waves  generated  by  the  incidence  of  light  on  a
transparent  liquid  or  solid.  They  may,  with  very  feeble  activity,
travel  about  through  solids  or  liquids,  experiencing  internal  re-
flections, almost  total,  at  interfaces  between  solid  or  liquid  and  air
or  vacuous  ether;  but  more  probably  (§  172  below)  they  will  be
absorbed,  that  is,  converted  into  non-undulatory  thermal  motion,
among  the  ponderable  molecules,  without  ever  travelling  as  waves
through  more  than  an  exceedingly  small  space  containing  ponder-
able matter  (solid,  or  liquid,  or  gas).  Certain  it  is  that  neither
ethereal  waves,  nor  any  kind  of  dynamical  action,  within  the  body,
can  give  rise  to  condensational-rarefactional  waves  through  void
ether  if  we  frankly  assume  void  ether  to  be  incompressible.

ecular.  §  162.  So  far,  we  have  not  been  supported  in  our  faith  by
any  physical  idea  as  to  how  ether  could  be  practically  incom-
pressible when  undisturbed  by  ponderable  matter ;  and  yet  may  be
very  easily  compressible,  or  may  even  have  negative  bulk-modulus,
in  the  interior  of  a  transparent  ponderable  body.

Do  moving  atoms  of  ponderable  matter  displace  ether,  or  do
they  move  through  space  occupied  by  ether  without  displacing  it?
This  is  a  question  which  cannot  be  evaded:  when  we  are  concerned
with  definite  physical  speculations  as  to  the  kind  of  interaction
which  takes  place  between  atoms  and  ether;  and  when  we
seriously  endeavour  to  understand  how  it  is  that  a  transparent
body  takes  wave-motion  just  as  if  it  were  denser  than  the
surrounding  ether  outside,  and  were  otherv/ise  undisturbed  by
the  presence  of  the  ponderable  matter.  It  is  carefully  considered
in  Appendix  A,  and  in  Appendix  B  under  the  heading  "  Cloud  I."
My  answer  is  indicated  in  the  long  title  of  Appendix  A,  "  On  the
"  Motion  produced  in  an  Infinite  Elastic  Solid  by  the  motion
"  through  the  space  occupied  by  it,  of  a  body  acting  on  it  only  by
"  Attraction  or  Repulsion."  This  title  contradicts  the  old  scholastic
axiom,  Tivo  different  j)ortions  of  matter  cannot  simultaneously
occupy  the  same  space.  I  feel  it  is  impossible  to  reasonably  gain-
say the  contradiction.

§  163.  Atoms  move  through  space  occupied  by  ether.  They
must  act  upon  it  in  some  way  in  order  that  motions  of  ponderable
matter  may  produce  waves  of  light,  and  in  order  that  the  vibratory

REAL  MOLECULAR  EXPLANATION.  413

motion  of  the  waves  may  act  with  force  on  ponderable  matter.  Molecula
We  know  that  ether  does  exert  force  on  ponderable  matter  in
producing  our  visual  perception  of  light ;  and  in  photographic
action ;  and  in  forcibly  decomposing  carbonic  acid  and  water  by
sunlight  in  the  growth  of  plants;  and  in  causing  expansion  of
bodies  warmed  by  light  or  radiant  heat.  The  title  of  Appendix  A
contains  my  answer  to  the  question  What  is  the  character  of  the
action  of  atoms  of  matter  on  ether?  It  is  nothing  else  than
attraction  or  repulsion.

§  164.  But  if  ether  were  absolutely  incompressible  and  in-
extensible,  an  atom  attracting  it  or  repelling  it  would  be  utterly
ineffectual.  To  render  it  effectual  I  assume  that  ether  is  capable
of  change  of  bulk ;  and  is  largely  condensed  and  rarefied  by  large
positive  and  negative  pressures,  due  to  repulsion  and  attraction
exerted  on  it  by  an  atom  and  its  neutralising  quantum  of  electrions.
As  in  Appendix  A,  §§  4,  5,  I  now  for  simplicity  assume  that  an
atom  void  of  electrions  repels  the  ether  in  it  and  around  it  with
force  varying  directly  as  the  distance  from  the  centre  for  ether
within  the  atom,  and  varying  inversely  as  the  square  of  the
distance  for  ether  outside.  I  assume  that  a  single  separate
electrion  attracts  ether  according  to  the  same  laws;  the  radius
of  the  electrion  being  very  small  compared  with  the  radius  of  any
atom.  I  assume  that  all  electrions  are  equal  and  similar,  and
exert  equal  forces  on  ether.

§  165.  While  keeping  in  view  the  possibility  referred  to  in
§  6  of  Appendix  E,  I  for  the  present  assume  that  the  repulsion  of
a  void  atom*  on  ether  outside  it  is  equal  to  an  integral  number  of
times  the  attraction  of  one  electrion  on  ether ;  same  distances
understood.  An  atom  violating  this  equation  cannot  be  unelec-
trified.  I  continue  to  make  the  same  assumptions  as  in  Appendix  D
in  respect  to  mutual  electric  repulsion  between  void  atoms  and
void  atoms ;  attraction  between  void  atoms  and  electrions ;  and
repulsion  between  electrions  and  electrions.  And  as  in  Appendix  A
an  "  unelectrified  atom  "  is  an  atom  having  its  saturating  quantum
of  electrions  within  it.

*  For  brevity  I  use  the  expression  "  void  atonj "  to  signify  an  atom  having  no
electrion  within  it.

414  LECTURE XIX.

Molar.  §  166.  I  assume  that  the  law  of  compressibility  of  ether  is
such  as  to  make  the  mean  density  of  ether  within  any  space  which
contains  a  large  number  of  unelectrified  atoms,  exactly  equal  to
the  natural  density  of  ether  undisturbed  by  ponderable  matter.
If  there  were  just  one  electrion  within  each  atom  this  assumption
would  exactly  annul  displacement  of  the  ether  outside  an  atom  by
the  repulsion  of  the  atom  and  the  attraction  of  the  electrion ;  and
would  very  nearly  annul  it  when  there  are  two  or  more  electrions
inside.  Thus  the  ether  within  each  atom  is  somewhat  rarefied
from  the  surface  inwards:  and  farther  in,  it  is  condensed  round  each
electrion.  In  a  mono-electrionic  atom,  the  spherical  surface  of
normal  density  between  the  outer  region  of  rarefaction  and  the
central  region  of  condensation,  I  call  for  brevity,  the  sphere  of  con-
densation. In  a  poly-electrionic  atom  the  density  of  the  ether
decreases  from  enormous  condensation  around  the  centre  of  each
electrion  to  exactly  normal  value  at  an  enclosing  surface,  the  space
within  which  I  shall  call  the  electrion's  sphere  of  condensation.
It  is  very  approximately  spherical  except  when,  in  the  course  of
some  violent  motion,  two  electrions  come  very  nearly  together.

§  167.  I  assume  that  the  law  of  compressibility  of  ether  is
such  as  to  make  the  equilibrium  described  in  §  166  stable ;  but  so
nearly  unstable  that  the  propagational  velocity  of  condensational-
rarefactional  waves  travelling  through  ether  in  space  occupied  by
ponderable  matter,  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  propa-
gational velocity  of  equivoluminal  waves  through  ether  undisturbed
by  ponderable  matter.

§  168.  Lastly  I  assume  that  the  effective  rigidity  of  ether  in
space  occupied  by  ponderable  matter  is  equal  to  that  of  pure  ether
undisturbed  by  ponderable  matter.  This  is  not  an  arbitrary
assumption :  we  may  regard  it  rather  as  a  proposition  proved
by  experiment,  as  explained  in  Lecture  I.  pp.  15, 16  and  §§  81',  136
of  Lectures  XVII.  and  XVIII.  But,  as  will  be  shown  in  Lee.  XX.,
§  237  below,  it  is  somewhat  satisfactory  to  know  that  it  follows
directly  from  a  natural  Avorking  out  of  the  set  of  assumptions  of
§§  163—167.

§  169.  Return  now  to  §  132.  This  is  merely  Green's  wave-
theory  extended  to  include  not  only  the  equivoluminal  waves  but

DYNAMICAL THEORY OF ADAMANTINISM.  415

also  the  condensational-rarefactional  waves  resulting  from  the  Molar,
incidence  of  plane  equivolnminal  waves  on  a  plane  interface
between  two  sliplessly  connected  elastic  solids  of  equal  rigidities,
each  capable  of  condensation  and  rarefaction.  Let  us  suppose
that  in  either  one  or  other  of  the  two  mediums  the  propagational
velocity  of  the  condensational-rarefactional  wave  is  very  small.
This  makes  L  very  small  as  we  see  by  using  (48)  and  (50)  to
eliminate  a,  c,  and  ,c  from  (Gl)  which  gives

jr^ (,p-pysmHu--  ...(100).

fp  \/{v~^  — sin^  iu~^)  +  p '\/{,v~^ —  sin' iu~^)

§  170.  If  either  the  upper  or  the  lower  medium  be  what  we
commonly  call  vacuum,  (in  reality  ether  void  of  ponderable  matter),
the  upper  for  example,  we  have  y  =  oo  ,  and  (100)  becomes

I  ^ i'P-  p)\sm[  iirl ^

,pL  sin  iu''^  +  p  ^/{fV'^  —  sin"  iu~^)

whence  when  ,v  is  very  small

li^(>P-  py  sin''  nr\v (102),

P

where  =  denotes  approximate  equality. If  v  and  ,v  are  each  very

small  (100)  becomes

-  j^.J^_pyBmHu-^v,v

,p,v  +  pv

thus  by  (100),  (102)  and  (103),  we  see  not  only,  as  said  above  in
§  133,  that  Fresnel's  Laws  are  exactly  fulfilled  if  either  v  or  ,v  is
zero.  We  see  farther  how  nearly,  to  a  first  approximation,  they  are
fulfilled  if  V  =  00 ,  and  ,v  is  very  small;  also  if  v  and  ,v  are  both
very  small.

Probably  values  of  ,v,  or  of  v  and  ,v,  as  small  as  m/500  or  ?//1000
may  be  found  small  enough,  but  w/lOO  not  small  enough,  to  give
as  close  a  fulfilment  of  Fresnel's  Laws  as  is  proved  by  observation.
See  §  182  below.

§  171.  Thus  so  far  as  the  reflection  and  refraction  of  light  are
concerned,  the  reconciliation  between  Fresnel  and  Green  is  com-
plete :  that  is  to  say  we  have  now  a  thoroughly  realistic  dynamical
foundation  for  those  admirable  laws  which  Fresnel's  penetrating
genius  prophesied  eighty  years  ago  from  notoriously  imperfect
dynamical  leadings. (See  §§  106,  107  above.)

416  LECTURE XIX.

Molar.  §  172.  The  only  hitherto  known  deviation  from  absolute
rigour  in  Fresnel's  Laws  for  the  reflection  and  refraction  of  light
at  the  surface  of  a  transparent  body  in  air  or  void  ether,  or  at  the
interface  between  two  transparent  bodies  liquid  or  solid,  is  that
which  was  discovered  by  Sir  George  Airj'  for  diamond  in  air  more
than  eighty  years  ago,  and  many  years  afterwards  was  called  by
Sir  George  Stokes  the  adamantine  property.  (See  §  158  above.)
It  is  shown  in  the  Table  of  §  105  above  along  with  corresponding
deviations  discovered  subsequently  by  Jamin  in  other  transparent
bodies  solid  and  liquid.  It  now  appears  by  (102)  and  (103)  that
the  explanation  of  these  deviations  from  Fresnel,  which  even  in
diamond  are  exceedingly  small,  is  to  be  found  by  giving  very  small
imaginary  values  to  ,v,  or  to  v  and  ,v.  To  suit  the  case  of  light
travelling  through  vacuum  or  through  air  and  incident  on  a  trans-
parent solid  or  liquid,  we  should  take  v  =  x  if  the  incident  light
travels  through  vacuum ;  or  if  through  air,  v  perhaps  =  oc ,  but
certainly  very  great  in  comparison  with  ,v.  Hence  in  either  case
the  proper  approximate  value  of  L  is  given  by  (102).

§  173.  Looking  to  (59)  and  (67)  of  §  132  we  see  that  if  ,v  have
a  small  real  value  (positive  of  course)  the  reflected  ray,  of  vibrations
in  the  plane  of  incidence,  will  vanish  for  an  angle  of  incidence
slightly  less  than  the  Brewsterian  angle  tan~^  /i.  If  we  give  to  ,v
a  complex  value  ,p  +  i,,q  with  ,p  positive,  we  have  the  adamantine
property,  and  principal  incidence  slightly  less  than  with  ,p  =  0.
Hitherto  we  have  no  very  searching  observations  as  to  the  perfect
exactness  of  tan~^/u,  whether  for  the  polarizing  angle  when  the
extinction  is  seemingly  perfect  or  for  the  principal  incidence  in
cases  of  perceptible  adamantine  property.  For  the  present  there-
fore we  have  no  reason  to  attribute  any  real  part  to  ,v;  and  we
may  take

,v-=-q^; ,v  =  iq  (104),

where  q  denotes  a  real  velocity.  Using  this  in  the  last  formula  of
§  128  and  eliminating  sin  ,j/,v  by  (48)  and  cos  ,j/,v  and  ,c  by  (49)
and  (50)  we  find  for  the  displacement  in  the  refracted  conden-
sational-rarefactional  wave

,Hf[t-ax-L^/{l+aY)ylq]  (105).

Looking  now  to  (63)  and  (102)  we  see  that  in  /H/G  there  is  an
imaginary  part  which  is  exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  the

IMAGINARY VELOCITY OF CONDENSATIONAL WAVES. 417

real  part,  because,  by  (102),  Z/,v  is  real  and  not  small,  while  L  is  Molar.
imaginary  and  exceedingly  small.  For  our  present  approximate
estimates  we  suppose  G  to  be  real  and  therefore  ,H  to  be  real.
Taking  now  f{t)  =  e"-^  in  (105)  and  taking  the  half-sum  of  the
two  imaginary  expressions  as  given  with  +  l,  we  find  for  the  real
refracted  condensational-rarefactional  displacement  the  following
expression ;  with  approximate  modification  due  to  qa  being  a  very
small  fraction ;

D  =  ,H  cos  CO  (t-  a^)  e<-v/(i+«V)2//3  ==  ^J{  cos  co{t-  ax)  e'-'^i. .  .(106).
Hence  q  is  positive.  (See  footnote  on  §  158".)  The  direction  of
this  real  displacement  is  exceedingly  nearly  OF'  of  §  117,  that  is
to  say  the  direction  of  Y  negative,  because  the  imaginary  angle  ,j
differs  by  an  exceedingly  small  imaginary  quantity  from  90°.  It
would  be  exactly  90°  if  ,v  were  exactly  zero;  and  it  would  be
less  than  90°  by  an  exceedingly  small  real  quantity  if  ,v  were  an
exceedingly  small  real  velocity.

§  174.  The  motion  represented  by  (106)  is  not  a  wave
travelling  into  the  denser  medium :  it  is  a  clinging  wave  travelling
along  the  interface  with  velocity  a-\  The  direction  of  the  displace-
ment is  approximately  perpendicular  to  the  interface.  Its  magni-
tude decreases  inwards  from  the  interface  according  to  the  law  of
proportion  represented' by  the  real  exponential  factor;  distance
inwards  from  the  interface  being  —  y.  The  period  of  the  wave  is
27r/&) ;  and  the  space  travelled  in  this  time  with  velocity  q  is  lirqloj.
Hence  the  displacement  at  a  distance  from  the  interface  equal  to
this  space,  is  1/e-"  or  1/535  of  the  displacement  at  the  interface.

§  175.  Consideration  of  the  largeness  of  any  such  distance  as
2 .  10~^  cm.  (§  80  above)  between  centres  of  neighbouring  atoms,
and  of  the  smallness  of  i)  if  real,  will  probably  give  good  dynamical
reason  for  the  assumption  of  ,v  a  pure  imaginary.  It  is  a  very
important  assumption,  inasmuch  as  it  implies  that  there  is  no
inward  travelling  condensational-rarefactional  wave  carrying  away
energy  from  tlie  equivoluminal  reflected  and  refracted  rays.

§  176.  Let  us  now  find  the  value  of  qju,  the  adamantinism
(§  158);  to  give  any  observed  amount  of  the  adamantine  property,
as  represented  by  the  tangent  of  the  Principal  Azimuth,  which  is
Jamin's  k. In  (59)  of  §  132  take  for  L  the  value  given  by  (102),

andput  ilP—Pl^N; ,v=iq; ^  =  o" (107),

T.  L. '  27

418

Molar,  thus  we  find

LECTURE XIX.

—  G'_u  (ipb  —  p,b)  —  iNcr  Bm^  i  _

P-cQ

G u i,ph  +  p ,b)  +  iNa  sin-  i u- {,ph  +  p,by+(Na- sin^*  iy

(108)*

where  P  =  u'  [( ,pby  -  (p,6)^]  -  {Na  sin^  ^>|

Q=2ii,pbN'a-smH  i

Hence  taking  in  §  128,/(^)  =  e""^;  and  realising  by  taking  half-sum

of  solutions  for  +  t,  we  find  displacement

in incident  wave

G  cos  (o  it  —

in  reflected  wave  =  —  G  \/{T~  ■\-  E-)  cos

_  ^ /w^  ( ,pb-p^y-^{N(jBmHy
V  ti'itpb  +  p,bf  +  {No-  sin"  if

cos

„(*-  )-0

0){t-

where

=  tan'

0  =  tan  ^  -^  =  tan"^  ^

2/^,2  (^2  _  1)  o-  cos  i  sin- 1
/x^  cos^  i  —  sin^  i  —  (/^^  —  1  )^  cr^  sin'*  z

...(110),
...(111),

...(lll')t,
...(112).

The  developed  form  of  QIP  here  given  is  found  by  putting

,p/p  =  fx^; 2ib  =  cos  i; ii  ^b  =  fi  cos  ,i ; cos^,i  =  l ^-.,.(113),

and  by  dividing  numerator  and  denominator  by  (pr—  l)//x-.

According  to  the  notation  of  §  94'  we  have  QIP  =  EIT,  and
P

T^

and  E--

u"^  {,pb  +  p,by-  +  (N  sin-  i  qlu)'^  u'  (,pb  +  p,hf  +  {N  sin*  i  qju)'^  '

+  This  alternative  form  (111')  comes  from  (111)  by  resolving  P''+ Q^  into  two
factors  according  to  the  algebraic  identity

(a2  -  62  -  c2)2  +  4rt V-  =  [{a  +  hf  +  c-]  [(a-hf  +  c"-].

But  it  is  found  directly  by  treating  (108)  as  we  treated  a  similar  formula  in  (75),
following  Green,  on  a  plan  which  is  simpler  in  respect  to  the  resultant  magnitude,
but  less  simple  in  respect  to  the  phase,  than  the  plan  of  (111).

ADAMANTINE REFLECTION.

419

§  177. By  (111)  and  the  notation  of  §  94',  we  have

\,pb  +  p,bj  |_tan  (i  +  ,i)_

4;p,ph,h  {No- sin^  if

Molar.

( ,pb  +  p,b)-  [u'  (,pb  +  p,bf  +  (No-  sin^  if]
or  approximately

T'  +  E--

tan  {i  —  ,i)'

'  _  ^PiP^i^  {^^  sin-  iy
u-{,pb  +  p,by

.(114),

.(115).

tan  {i  +  ,i)

In  (114)  and  (115)  T-  +  E-  denotes  the  whole  intensity  of  the
reflected  light,  due  to  incident  light  of  unit  intensity  vibrating
in  the  plane  of  incidence,  and  the  smallness  of  the  right-hand
members  of  these  equations  shows  how  little  this  exceeds  that
calculated  according  to  Fresnel's  formula

tan  (i  —  ,i)l  ^
_tan  {i  +  ,t)J

Compare  §§  103 — 105  above.

Fig.  10.

§  178.  In  (110)  and  (111),  s  denotes  a  length  AEF  (fig.  10)
in  the  line  of  the  incident  ray  produced  through  E  the  point  of
incidence,  or  AEF'  an  equal  length  in  the  path  of  the  incident
and  the  reflected  ray.  Thus  we  see  that  the  reflection  causes
a  phasal  set-back  ^  which  increases  from  0°  through  90°  to  180°
when  the  angle  of  incidence  is  increased  from  0°  to  90°,  as  shown  by
(112);  because  (112)  shows  that  tan  (^  increases  through  positive
values  from  0  to  -H  cc  when  i  increases  from  0  to  a  value  slightly
less  than  tan"~^  p. :  and,  when  i  increases  farther  up  to  90°,  tan  ^
increases  through  negative  values  from  —  oo  to  0.  These  variations
are  illustrated  by  the  accompanying  diagrams  (figs.  11,  12)  drawn
according  to  the  following  Table  of  values  of  tan  ^  and  (/>  calculated

27-2

420

LECTURE XIX.

3
o
d
a.

OS

4»-

o
o

T  cb  rvq  ents of

Phasui DiJ'ftrervc&s

DIAGRAM OF I'HASAL LAG IN ADAMAMTINE REFLECTION. 421

from (112)  with  a- = '00293 as for  diamond according  to  §  181  Molar.
below. Note  how  very  slowly  tan  (f>  and  (f>  increase  for  increasing

Diamond fi  =z2-i3i <»•= -00293

[  n.c  id  p  n  c  c

Fig.  12.

i

tan^

•^

i

tan<^

<P

0°

•0

0

I

±00

90°

1°

•000008798

0°  -03'

67°-7

-14-87770

93°  51'

10°

•0008890

0°3'

67°-75

-6-95857

98°  11'

20°

•003678

0°13'

67°-8

-4-53967

102°  25'

30°

■008835

0°30'

67°-9

-2-67607

110°  29'

40'

•01772

1°1'

68°-0

-1-89599

117°  49'

50°

•03469

1°  59"

68°-l

-1-46724

124°  17'

60°

•08784

5°1"

68°-2

-1  19615

129°  54'

65°

•25164

14°  7'

68°-3

-1-00921

134°  44'

67°

1^00386

45°  7'

68°-4

-  -872514

138°  54'

67°-l

1-18360

49°  48'

70°

-  -27083

164°  51'

67° -2

1-44216

55°  16'

75°

-  -07694

175°  36'

67° -3

1-85085

61°  37'

80°

-  -01640

179°  4'

67° -4

2-56306

68°  41'

89°

-  -00299

179°  50'

67°-5

4-20197

76°  37'

90°

•00000

180°  0'

67° -55

618014

80°  49'

67° -6

11-70150

85°  7'

tan~V

-0°-00883  =  /

90°  0'

422  LECTUKb: XIX.

Molar,  incidences,  except  those  very  slightly  less  than,  and  very  slightly
greater  than,  the  Principal  Incidence,  67"'65.  Note  also  how  very
suddenly  tan  </>  rises  from  a  small  positive  value  to  +  oo  and  from
—  GO  to  a  very  small  negative  value  when  the  incidence  increases
through  the  Principal  Incidence.  Note  also  how  suddenly  there-
fore (f),  the  phasal  retardation,  increases  from  a  small  positive
quantity  up  to  90°  when  the  incidence  reaches  67°"65  ;  and,  when
the  incidence  increases  to  slightly  above  this  value,  how  suddenly
the  phasal  retardation  rises  to  very  nearly  180°.  But  carefully
bear  this  in  mind  that  tan  0  is  essentially  zero  for  i  =  0,  and  for
i  =  90°,  as  shown  by  (112).

§  179.  The  sign  minus  before  G  in  (111)  signifies  a  phasal
advance  or  back-set  of  180°.  For  incidence  and  reflection  of  rays
having  vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence,  we  have
also  essentially  the  sign  minus  before  C  in  (116)  below,  taken
from  (20)  and  (23)  of  §  117  and  (39)  of  §  123  as  corresponding
to  (110)  and  (111). Thus  for  amplitudes  we  have

5\

incident  wave  C  cos  co  \t i

u

.(116).

reflected  wave  —  G  '^ ^  cos

,b  +  b

Here  there  is  neither  retardation  nor  acceleration  corresponding  to
the  (f)  of  (111).  We  infer  that  if  plane  polarized  light  falls  on  the
reflecting  surface  with  its  vibrational  plane  inclined  at  any  angle  a
to  the  plane  of  incidence,  and  if  we  resolve  it  ideally  into  two
components  having  their  vibrational  planes  in  and  perpendicular
to  that  plane,  the  component  of  the  reflected  light  due  to  the
former  will  be  phasally  behind  that  due  to  the  latter  by  the
retardation  <^  given  by  (112).  Hence  for  every  incidence  the
reflected  light  will  be  elliptically  polarized  ;  or  circularly  in  case  of
phasal  difference  90",  and  equal  amplitudes,  of  the  two  reflected
components.  The  values  of  i  and  of  a  which  make  the  reflected
light  circularly  polarized,  are  called  the  "  Principal  Incidence "
and  "  Principal  Azimuth  "  (see  §  97  above).

I  180.  The  Principal  Incidence,  I,  is  the  value  of  i  which
annuls  the  denominator  of  E/T  as  seen  in  (112).  It  is  therefore
given  by  the  equation

tan'-/  =/x'-  —{/J,-—  1)^0-- tan-/  sin"/ (117).

PRINCIPAL INCIDENCE IN ADAMANTINE REFLECTION. 4-23

Notwithstanding  the  greatness  of  (y^-— l)"  for  substance  of  high  Molar.
refractivity  (Example  126'7  for  Sulphuret  of  Arsenic)  the  second
term  of  the  second  member  of  (117)  is  very  small  relatively  to  the
first  because  of  the  smallness  of  (q/uY  for  all  transparent  substances
for  which  we  have  the  observational  data  from  Jamin.  (See  §  182
below.)  Hence  in  that  second  term  we  may  take  /j,^  for  tan-  /
and  fi^K/jL- +  1)  for  sin^/.  Thus  instead  of  (117)  to  determine  the
Principal  Incidence  /  we  have

tan  /  ■■

.(118).

§  181.  To  find  the  Principal  Azimuth  a;  let  D  be  the  vibra-
tional amplitude  of  plane  polarized  incident  light ;  and  D  cos  oc,
D  sin  a  the  vibrational  amplitudes  of  the  components  in  and
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence.  Thus  with  the  notation
of  §§  176,  179  we  may  take

G=D  coHa, C'-i)  sin  a  (119).

These  must  be  such  as  to  make  the  two  components  of  the  reflected
light  equal  when  the  angle  of  incidence  is  that  given  by  (117)
(the  Principal  Incidence);  tliat  is  to  say,  the  value  of  i  which
makes  P=  0  ;  or  approximately  according  to  (109),  ,pb  =  p,b.  This
makes  the  amplitude  of  (111)  approximately  equal  to  —  GE,  or

-G-r-^.„, or -Gj'^f^l^.a-  (120).

4^{ii,pby'  2V(/^'  +  l)  ^

Equating  this  to  the  second  line  of  (116)  and  using  (119),  we  see
that  the  condition  for  circular  polarization  is

(/M'-iy . ,b-b  . ,

cos  a  - , . , — --  cr  =  sma  , , (1"1)-

Now  the  angle  of  incidence  is  approximately  tan~^  /j, ;  for  which
Ave  have

^f  =  4^- (122),

,b  +  b fjP  +  1  ^ ^' .

and  therefore  for  a,  the  principal  azimuth,  we  have

tana=HM'-l)\/(/i'  +  l)- (123).

424

LECTURE XIX.

Molar.  I  182.  The  Table  of  §  105  above  gives  Jamin's  values  of  tan  a
(his  "^•")  for  eight  substances,  and  the  result  of  a  very  rigorous
examination  by  Kayleigh  for  water  with  specially  purified  surface
to  be  substituted  for  Jamin's  which  was  probably  vitiated  by
natural  impurity  on  the  water  surface.  Omitting  fluorine  because
of  its  exceptional  negative  value  for  tan  a,  which  if  genuine  must
be  explained  (see  §  158  above)  otherwise  than  by  my  assumption
of  fV  =  iq  and  v  =  qo  ,  and  omitting  water  because  of  the  practical
nullity  of  the  Adamantine  Property  for  it  proved  by  Rayleigh,
we  have  positive  values  of  tan  a  for  six  substances,  from  which,
for  these  substances,  the  following  Table  of  values  of  q/u ;  and
of  tan~^  1^  —  I,  the  differences  of  the  Principal  Incidence  from  the
Brewsterian  angle;  has  been  calculated  according  to  (123)  and
(118).  The  smallness  of  these  last  mentioned  differences  is  very
remarkable.

Substance

<T  ~  qlu

"Sulfure  d'arsenic  trans-
parent "  (Kealgar)

"  Blende transparente  "
( Zinc  sulphide)

Diamond

Flint  Glass

"  Verre  "

Absolute  Alcohol

•01277

•00706
•00293
•00936
•00553
•00284

tan~^  /JL- 1

tau-i  fji

0°-08873

67° -83

0°^04289

67°-13

0°-00883

67°^67

0°-00593

59°-89

©^•000496

56°-08

0°-0000465

53°^13

§  183.  Another  great  fundamental  province  of  Optics,  luminous
waves  travelling  through  transparent  crystals,  was  successfully
explored  by  Fresnel  more  than  eighty  years  ago.  This  he  did
with  utterly  imperfect  dynamical  leadings ;  but  nevertheless  he
discovered  what  we  now  know  to  be,  in  every  detail  except  his
equivoluminal  condition,  the  true  laws  of  light-waves  in  a  crystal.

§  184.  One  notable  detail  of  Fresnel's,  which  I  described  in
my  introductory  lecture  (Oct.  1st,  1884),  was  that  he  made  the
propagational  velocity  of  light  in  a  crystal  depend  on  the  direction
of  the  vibration,  and  not  on  the  axis  of  the  shearing  rotational

HUYGHENS CONFIRMED EXPERIMENTALLY BY STOKES, 425

strain  as  the  elastic  solid  theory  has  seemed  to  require.  See  Molar.
Lecture  I,  pages  17,  18,  particularly  the  words  "If  the  effect
"  depends  upon  the  return  force  in  an  elastic  solid."  In  the  same
lecture  (page  19)  I  told  of  an  explanation  of  this  difficulty
suggested  first  by  Rankine  and  afterwards  by  Stokes  and  by
Rayleigh,  to  the  effect  that  the  different  propagational  velocities
of  light  in  different  directions  through  a  crystal  are  due,  not  to
seolotropy  of  elastic  action,  but  to  seolotropy  of  effective  inertia.
But  I  had  also  to  say  that  Stokes  working  on  this  idea,  which
had  occurred  to  himself  independently  of  Rankine's  suggestion,
had  been  compelled  to  abandon  it  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the
following  reproduction  of  a  short  paper  of  twenty-one  lines  which
appeared  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  October,  1872 ;  and
which  is  all  that  he  published  on  the  subject : —

"  It  is  now  some  years  since  I  carried  out,  in  the  case  of  Iceland
"  spar,  the  method  of  examination  of  the  law  of  refraction  which
"  I  described  in  my  report  on  Double  Refraction,  published  in  the
"  Report  of  the  British  Association  for  the  year  1862,  p.  272.
"A  prism,  approximately  right-angled  isosceles,  was  cut  in  such
"  a  direction  as  to  admit  of  scrutiny,  across  the  two  acute  angles,
"  in  directions  of  the  wave-normal  within  the  crystal  comprising
"  respectively  inclinations  of  90°  and  45°  to  the  axis.  The  directions
"  of  the  cut  faces  were  referred  by  reflection  to  the  cleavage-
"  planes,  and  thereby  to  the  axis.  The  light  observed  was  the
"  bright  D  of  a  soda-flame.

"  The  result  obtained  was,  that  Huyghens'  construction  gives
"  the  true  law  of  double  refraction  within  the  limits  of  errors  of
"  observation.  The  error,  if  any,  could  hardly  exceed  a  unit  in
"  the  fourth  place  of  decimals  of  the  index  or  reciprocal  of  the
"  wave- velocity,  the  velocity  in  air  being  taken  as  unity.  This
"  result  is  sufficient  absolutely  to  disprove  the  law  resulting  from
"  the  theory  which  makes  double  refraction  depend  on  a  diflerence
"  of  inertia  in  different  directions.

"  I  intend  to  present  to  the  Royal  Society  a  detailed  account
"  of  the  observations ;  but  in  the  meantime  the  publication  of
"  this  preliminary  notice  of  the  result  obtained  may  possibly  be
"  useful  to  those  engaged  in  the  theory  of  double  refraction."

It  is  well  that  the  essence  of  the  result  of  this  very  important
experimental  investigation  was  published :  it  is  sad  that  we  have

426  LECTUKE XIX.

Molar,  not  the  Author's  intended  communication  to  the  Royal  Society
describing  his  work.

The  corresponding  experimental  test  for  a  Biaxal  Crystal,
resulting  also  in  a  minutely  accurate  verification  of  Fresnel's
wave-surface,  was  carried  out  a  few  years  later  by  Glazebrook*.
Must  we  therefore  give  up  all  idea  of  explaining  the  ditferent
velocities  of  light  in  different  directions  through  a  crystal  by
seolotropic  inertia  ?  Yes,  certainly,  if,  as  assumed  by  Green  and
Stokes,  ether  in  a  crystal  is  incompressible.

§  185.  But  Glazebrook  has  pointed  out  as  a  consequence  of
my  suggestion  of  approximately  zero  velocity  of  condensational-
rarefactional  waves  in  a  transparent  solid  or  liquid,  that  with  this
assumption  seolotropic  inertia  gives  precisely  Fresnel's  shape  of
wave-surface  and  Fresnel's  dependence  of  velocity  on  direction
of  vibration,  irrespectively  of  the  direction  of  the  strain-axis.
Thus  after  all  we  have  a  dynamical  explanation  of  Fresnel's  laws
of  light  in  a  crystal  which  we  may  accept  as  in  all  probability
absolutely  true.  To  prove  this  let  us  first  investigate  the  con-
ditions for  a  plane  wave  in  an  isotropic  clastic  solid  with  any
given  values  for  its  two  moduluses  of  elasticity;  k  bulk-modulus
and  n  rigidity-modulus ;  and  with  a^olotropic  inertia  in  respect  to
the  motion  of  any  small  part  of  its  substance.  This  seolotropy  of
effective  inertia  of  ether  through  the  substance  of  a  transparent
crystal  follows  naturally,  we  may  almost  say  inevitably,  from
the  Molecular  Theory  of  §§  162—168.  In  Lecture  XX.  details
on  which  we  need  not  at  present  enter  will  be  carefully  con-
sidered.

§  186.  Meantime  we  may  simply  assume  that  Bp^,  Bpy,  Bp^
are  the  virtual  masses,  or  inertia-equivalents,  relatively  to  motions
parallel  to  x,  y,  z,  of  ether  within  a  very  small  volume  B  containing
a  large  number  of  the  ponderable  atoms  concerned :  so  that

^^•f- ^"^t- ^"'f (124)

are  the  forces  which  must  act  upon  the  ether  to  produce  com-
ponent accelerations  d^/dt,  etc. Hence  the  equations  of  molar

*  "An  expeiimeutal  determination  of  the  Values  of  the  Velocities  of  Normal
Propagation  of  Plane  Waves  in  different  directions  in  a  Biaxal  Ciystal,  and  a  Com-
parison of  the  Results  with  theory."  By  R.  T.  Glazebrook,  Communicated  by
J.  Clerk  Maxwell. Phil  Trajis.  Boy.  Soc,  1870,  Vol.  170.

iEOLOTROPlC INERTIA FOR WAVE-MOTION IN A CRYSTAL. 427

motions  of  the  ether  will  be  (8)  of  §  113,  modified  by  substituting  Molar,
for  p  in  their  first  members  p^,  py,  Pz  respectively.

§  187. To  express  a  regular  train  of  plane  waves,  take

v-mt-"^^^^"'},  }

f  =  ^/('(_'^tW  +  w

.(125),

where  X,  /n,  v  denote  the  direction  cosines  of  a  perpendicular  to  the
wave-planes ;  and  a,  /3,  7  the  direction  cosines  of  the  lines  of
vibration. These,  used  in  (7)  of  §  113,  give

8  =

—  cos  ^  d

/(-

\x-\-  fiy  +  vz'

wher(

u dt  " \  u

cos  ^  =  aX  +  /3/Lt  +  ^v.

.(126),
.(127).

Thus  ^  is  the  inclination  of  the  direction  of  the  displacement,  to
the  wave-normal.

Using  (124), (125),  (126)  in the equations  of  motion, and
removing  from  each  side  of  each  the  factor

/^ \x  +  fLy-^vz

we  find

df

,, 1.x  cos  ^ a
p^a  =  {k  -}-  \n)  —^^  +  n  ~  ;

^ , , , ,  ii  cos  ^ B
^ , , .  V  cos  ^ 7

n ry  =  {k  +  hi) 1-  U  —

.(128),

.(129).

I  187'.  From  these  equations  we  determine  the  direction-
cosines  (a,  13, 7)  of  the  vibration ;  and  the  propagational  velocity,  11,
of  the  plane  wave  (X,  fi,  v) ;  thus :  First  solving  for  a,  /3,  7,  and
putting

p^=nla\ py  =  n/b-, pr^n/c- (129'),

428
Molar,  we  find

^=

whence  by

sec^  ^  =

k  +  inV

LECTURE XIX.

k  +  ^n  \a^  cos  ^

11 u^  —  a- '

k  +  ^n  fib'  cos  ^
n 11^  —  6^

k  +  ^n  vc^  cos  ^
n u"^  —  c^

a^  +  /32  +  7-  =  l,

.(130),

i/C

.(131).

Multiplying  the  first  of  (130)  by  \,  the  second  by  /i,  the  third  by
V  and  adding ;  and  removing  the  common  factor  cos  ^ ;  we  find

_  ^  +  i^^  /  X'g'  /a'6'

+

VX''

.(132).

M^  —  a- u^  —  h^ u^  —  c^

This  is  a  cubic  for  determining  u^,  the  square  of  the  propagational
velocity.  The  three  roots  are  all  obviously  real ;  one  greater  than
the  greatest  of  a-,  If,  c-,  and  the  other  two  between  the  values  of
these  quantities.  For  each  value  of  iC-  the  corresponding  direction
of  vibration  is  given  by  (130).

§  187".  Calling  Ui",  u.'  two  of  the  three  roots  of  (132)  we  find,
by  writing  down  the  equation  for  each  of  these  and  subtracting
one  equation  from  the  other,  the  following

0

k  +  ^n

\-a"

+

fi'b'

(ui-  —  a-)  {u„'  —  a-) {Ui^  —  If)  {ui  —  hr')

+

V^C"^

iii^-u^  (132').

{u^  —  C-)  {ui  —  c^)_
And  taking  the  corresponding  notation  in  (130)  we  find

ttitto  +  /3i/3,  +  7i7,  = ^

\"a'

+

fj?¥

{ii^^  -  a-)  {ui  -  a?) (z<i^  -  h")  (u^  -  b-)

+

v^c*

(«i-  —  c^)  {ui  —  C-)

cos  ^1  COS  ^, (132").

Comparing  these  two  equations,  we  see  that  otiOa  +  A^a  +  7i7i
cannot  generall}'  be  zero  :  that  is  to  say  the  vibrational  lines
corresponding  to  parallel  wave-planes  travelling  with  different
velocities  cannot  generally  be  perpendicular  to  one  another. This

CONDENSATIONAL-EAREFACTIONAL WAVE VERY SLOW. 429

result  for  the  new  theory,  in  which  dififerences  of  velocity  are  due  Molar,
to  inertial  feolotropy,  presents  an  interesting  contrast  to  the
theorem  of  Lecture  XII.,  page  136,  that  the  vibrational  lines  in
any  two  of  the  three  waves  are  mutually  perpendicular;  when  there
is  no  inertial  aeolotropy,  and  the  differences  of  velocity  are  due  to
seolotropy  of  elasticity.

§  188.  In  each  of  the  two  extreme  cases  of  A;  =  co  and  k  =  —  |n
the  cubic  sinks  to  a  quadratic,  as  we  most  readily*  see  by  (in
virtue  of  X^  +  fji-  +  v"^  =  V)  writing  (132)  thus

X'w'  fihi^  v'v? _  k  +  |7i  /  a'\^  ?>>'  c^v'^ \

ii^-a'^  n'-h''^  u^-c"' n W -a' ^r- -  b- v?-cV

(133).

§  189.  From  this  we  see  that  if  k^-^n  is  very  great,  one  root
of  the  cubic  for  iC^  is  very  great,  being  given  approximately  by

«-  =

k-\-^n

n

{X'a^ -V  ix'jf- +  v^c")  (134);

while  the  other  two  roots  are  approximately  the  roots  of  the
quadratic,

J*!^4.iV +_^!^  =  0  (135).

u"^  —  a? i\?  —  b- u-  —  c

This  agrees  with  the  propagational  velocities  for  a  given  wave-
plane  (A,,  /!.,  v),  found  by  Stokes  and  by  Rayleigh  from  Rankine's
hypothesis  of  seolotropic  inertia,  and  Green's  assumption  of  a
virtually  infinite  resistance  against  compression.  It  implies  a
wave-surface  proved  observationally  by  Stokes  for  Iceland  spar
(uniaxal),  and  by  Glazebrook  for  arragonite  (biaxal),  to  differ  from
the  truth  by  far  greater  differences  than  could  be  accounted  for
by  errors  of  observation.

§  190. But  ifk  +  fw  is  very  small,  one  of  the  three  values  of  u"
given  by  (133)  is  very  small  positive,  being  given  approximately

(^:-^S)--^ (^^«>^

*  Another  way  of  managing  this  detail  will  be  found  in  the  investigation  of
chiral  waves  in  §  200  of  Lee.  XX.

480  LECTURE XIX.

Molar,  while  the  other  two  are  approximately  the  roots  of  the  quadratic

""' • ''' +.-/^=0 (137).

v?-(i^ 'le  -  h'' v:'  -  &

This  is  Fresnel's  equation  [see  (94)  of  Lecture  XV.]  for  the
two  jDropagational  velocities  for  a  given  direction  of  wave-plane
(X,  fi,  v). It  implies  precisely  Fresnel's  celebrated  wave-surface

^2  _  ^2  "■ ^,2 ^2  "*"  y.2  p2  ~  VJ-'J<-A

or  7--  {a-x^  -f  6-1/-  +  cV)  —  a^  (¥  +  c-)  ar  —  ¥  (c-  +  a-)  2/^  —  c"  (a-  +  h")  z"

-l-a-6V-  =  0...(138').

This  equation  is  got,  not  now  "  after  a  very  troublesome  algebraic
process,"  as  said  by  Airy*  in  1831,  but  b}'  a  very  short  and  easy
symmetrical  method  given  by  Archibald  Smith  in  1835  f;  the
problem  being  to  find  the  envelope  of  all  the  planes  given  by  the
equation

\x  +  fjiy  +  vz  =  ii\

with  X'' +  ,j?  +  v"  =  \^r  (138").

and  (137)  for  u  )

§  191.  The  theorems  of  Glazebrook  and  Basset,  stated  in
§  195  below,  are  readily  proved  by  using  (139)  in  connection  with
Archibald  Smith's  now  well-known  investigation  of  Fresnel's  wave-
surface.  But  the  theory  on  which  it  is  founded  implies  essen-
tially condensation  and  rarefaction  and  therefore  a  direction  of
vibration  not  in  the  wave-plane ;  and  not  agreeing  with  Fresnel's
which  is  exactly  in  the  ivave-plane  (corresponding  as  it  does  to
strictly  equivoluminal  waves).  For  our  present  case  of  A:  -f  ^n  =  0,
the  vibrational  direction  (a,  /3,  7)  as  given  by  (130)  is

a-Xcos^ ^ h'-acos^ o-Vcos^  /,r.r.\

a  =  - , — , I3  =  - \ ;„ , 7  = T. i- (139);

ur  —  a-  n-  —  0-  u-  —  c^

and  (131)  for  ^,  the  angle  between  the  vibrational  direction  and
the  wave-normal,  becomes

sec^a  =  (-#:MV  (4>  y  +  f /-^y (uo).

\u-  —  a-/ V"  —  t>  / V'"  —0/

*  Aire's  Mathematical  TractHy  p.  3.53.

t  Trans.  Cambridge  Phil.  Soc.  Vol.  vi.  p.  85;  also  Phil.  May.  Vol.  xii.  1838  (1st
half-year),  p.'  335.

VIBRATIONAL LINES NOT EXACTLY IN WAVE-PLANE. 481

§  192. For  an  example,  take  arragonite  with,  as  in  Lee.  XV.  Molar,
§  37,  (and  n  =  l  for  simplicity)

1/a  =  1-5301  ; a  =  -65355  ; a'  =  -42713"!

1/6  =  1-6816; i  =  -59467; 6' = -353631  ...  (141);

1/0=1-6859; c  = -59315  ; c' = -35183]

and  let  us  find  the  two  propagational  velocities  (iii,  U2)  and  the
inclinations  (^1,  ^2)  of  the  vibrational  lines  to  the  wave-normal,  for
the  case  in  which  the  wave-normal  is  equally  inclined  to  the  three
principal  axes (X  =  /ii=  v  =  l/J'S).  By  the  solution  of  the  quadratic
(137)  and  by  using  the  roots  in  (139)  we  find

Mi2  = -40234; «r'  =  1-576.58  ; ^^  =  81°  37'-68 )

L.(142).

w/  = -35272; wr'  =  1-68377; ^o  =  89°49''24 )

Remarking  that  Uj~^  and  v.r^  are  the  indices  of  refraction  for  the
two  waves  of  which  the  normals  are  each  equally  inclined  to  the
three  principal  axes  (x,  y,  z)  it  is  interesting  to  notice  how  nearly
the  greater  of  them  is  equal  to  ^(1-6816-1-1-6859),  the  mean  of  the
two  greater  of  the  three  principal  refractive  indices.  This,  and  the
nearness  of  ^2  to  90°,  are  due  to  the  smallness  of  the  difference
between  the  two  greater  principal  indices :  that  is  to  say,  the
smallness  of  the  difference  between  arragonite  and  a  uniaxal
crystal.  In  fact  u^-,  the  second  of  our  solutions  of  the  quadratic,
corresponds  to  what  would  be  the  ordinary  ray  if  the  two  greater
principal  indices  were  equal.

§  193.  To  help  in  thoroughly  understanding  the  condensations
and  rarefactions  which  the  theory  gives  us  in  any  j'jZa^^e  wave
througli  a  hiaxal  crystal,  take  as  wave-plane  any  plane  parallel  to
one  of  three  principal  axes,  OY  for  instance.  It  is  clear  without
algebra  that  the  directions  of  vibration  in  the  two  waves  for
every  such  direction  of  wave-plane  are  respectively  parallel  and
perpendicular  to  OY.  The  former  corresponds  to  the  ordinary
ray:  its  vibrational  direction  is  parallel  to  OY :  it  has  propa-
gational velocity  \/{nlpy),  or  h,  according  to  (129').  It  is  a  strictly
equivoluminal  wave.  All  this  we  verify  readily  in  our  algebra  by
putting  /u.=  0;  which  gives  for  one  root  of  the  quadratic  (185)
1/^=  h'-,  and  gives  by  (139)  sec^^  =  (X>  and  therefore  ^  =  90°.

432  LECTURE XIX.

Molar. ^  194. For  the  other  root  of  the  quadratic  (135)  we  have

.(143).

u^  —  a^ u^  —  c
whence  u-  =  c^X,-  +  a-v'^ ;

^2  _  f^2  =  (g2  _  ^2^  ^2

u^  —  c^  =  (a^  -  C-)  V-
Using  these  in  (139)  we  find

^„=S (1^*)-

Putting  now  y  =  0\n  (138'),  the  equation  of  Fresnel's  wave-
surface,  we  find  for  its  intersection  with  the  plane  XOZ

(r'  -  b')  (aV  +  cV  -  aY)  =  0 (145).

This  expresses,  for  the  ordinary  ray,  a  circle  r  =  b;  and  for  the
extraordinary  ray  an  ellipse,

^'+-'=1  (146).

c^ or

The  wave-plane  touches  this  ellipse  at  the  point  {x,  z);  hence

-=^ (147).

V cz

Taking  this  for  \/v  in  (144)  we  see  that  the  vibrational  line  is
perpendicular  to  the  ray-direction,  which  is  the  radius  vector  of
the  ellipse  through  the  point  (x,  z).  This  is  only  a  particular  case
of  the  general  theorem  given  by  Glazebrook,  Phil.  Mag.  Dec.  1888
page  528,  that  the  direction  of  vibration  is  perpendicular  to  the
ray  in  the  new  theory  of  double  refraction  founded  on  seolotropic
inertia.

§  195.  Moreover  in  this  theory*  Basset  has  given  a  most
interesting  theorem  f  to  the  effect  that  the  direction  of  the  vibration
is  a  line  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector  from  the  foot
of  the  perpendicular  to  any  plane  touching  the  wave-surface  (the
perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector  being  drawn  from  the  centre  of

*  Basset's  Physical  Optics  (Cambridge,  1892),  §  265.

t  Given  also  for  a  very  different  dynamical  theory  involving  zero  velocity  of  con-
densational-rarefactional  wave,  by  Sarrau  in  his  Second  Paper  on  the  Propagation
and  the  Polarization  of  Light  in  Crystals ;  Liouville^s  Journal,  Vol.  xiii.  1868,  p.  86.

GLAZEBROOK  AND  BASSET'S  DRAWING  FOR VIBRATIONAL  LINE. 433

the  wave-surface  to  the  tangent-plane  and  to  its  point  of  contact).  Molar.
This  includes  Glazebrook's  theorem  and  appends  to  it  a  simpler
completion  of  the  problem  of  drawing  the  vibrational  line  than
that  given  by  Glazebrook  in  pages  529,  530  of  the  volume  of  the
Philosophical  Magazine  already  referred  to.  The  construction  is
illustrated  in  figure  13,  drawn  exactly  to  scale  for  the  principal
section  through  greatest  and  least  principal  diameters  of  wave-
surface  for  arragonite.  P  is  the  point  of  contact  of  the  tangent-
plane  KM.  OP  is  the  radius  vector  (optically  the  ray).  F  is  the
foot  of  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  of  the  wave-surface.
FN,  perpendicular  to  OP,  not  shown  in  the  diagram,  is  the  direc-
tion of  the  vibration.  It  would  be  interesting  to  construct  on
a  tenfold  scale  a  portion  of  figure  13  around  ^P;  but  it  is  perhaps
more  instructive  to  calculate  the  angle  NFP  (which  is  equal  to
FOP)  and  the  radius  of  curvature,  at  P,  of  the  ellipse.  Figure  13
illustrates  the  construction  for  any  wave-plane  whatever  touching
the  wave-surface  in  the  point  P ;  though  it  is  drawn  exactly  to
scale  only  for  the  extraordinary  ray  in  the  principal  section  of
arragonite,  through  the  greatest  and  least  principal  diameters.

FiK. 13.

T.  L.

28

434  LECTURE XIX.

Molar.  ^  iQQ  Going  back  now  to  §  194  we  see  that  the  intersections
of  Fresnel's  wave-surface  with  the  three  planes  YOZ,  ZOX,  XOY,
are  expressed  respectively  by  the  following  equations

(r*  -  d")  (by  +  c'^'  -  b^c")  =  0  ^

(?■»  -  b')  (cV  +  a'x'  -  c'a')  =  ol (148),

(r^  -  c")  (aV  +  6y  -  ^a"")  =  0  J

which  prove  that  each  intersection  consists  of  an  ellipse  and  a
circle ;  the  ellipse  corresponding  to  the  extraordinary  ray,  and  the
circle  to  the  ordinary.

§  197.  Lastly  consider  wave-planes  perpendicular  to  one  or
other  of  OX,  OY,  OZ.  Take  for  example  OX;  we  see  that  the
two  propagational  velocities  are  b  and  c,  with  vibrational  lines
respectively  parallel  to  OF  and  OZ.  The  physical  explanation
is  much  more  easily  understood  than  anything  which  we  thought
of  in  Lecture  I.  pages  17  to  20,  when  we  were  believing  that
differences  of  velocity  were  due  to  seolotropy  of  elasticity.  We
•  now  see  that  the  two  waves  travelling  a;-wards  have  different
velocities  because  of  greater  or  less  effective  inertias  of  the  moving
ether  in  its  vibrations  parallel  respectively  to  0  F  and  OZ.

§  198.  The  fundamental  view  given  by  Fresnel  for  the
determination  of  his  wave-surface  by  considering  an  infinite
number  of  wave-planes  in  all  directions  through  one  point,  and
waves  starting  from  them  all  at  the  same  instant,  is  most  im-
portant and  interesting ;  truly  an  admirable  work  of  genius  I
It  leaves  something  very  definite  to  be  desired  in  respect  to  the
geometry  and  the  dynamics  of  a  real  source  of  light  travelling
in  all  directions  from  a  small  portion  of  space  in  which  the  source
does  its  work.  It  therefore  naturally  occurs  to  consider  what  may
be  the  very  simplest  ideal  element  of  a  source  of  light.

§  199.  Preparation  was  made  for  this  in  the  "molar"  divisions
of  Lectures  III.... VI.  and  VIII....XIV.  and  particularly  in  pages
190  to  219  of  the  addition  to  Lecture  XIV.  What  we  now  want
is  an  investigation  of  the  motion  of  ether  in  a  crystal  due  to  an
ideal  molecular  vibrator  moving  to  and  fro  in  a  straight  line  in
any  direction.  The  problem  is  simplified  by  supposing  the  direc-
tion to  be  one  of  the  three  lines  OX,  0  Y,  OZ,  of  minimum,  and  of
minimax,  and  of  maximum  effective  inertia  of  ether  in  the  crystal.

THEORY  FOR  VIBRATIONAL  AMPLITUDE  IN  WAVE-SURFACE. 435

It  seeins  to  me  that  this  should  be  found  to  be  a  practicable  Molar,
problem.  Towards  its  solution  we  have  Fresnel's  wave-surface
as  the  isophasal  surface  of  the  outward  travelling  disturbance  or
wave-motion  :  and  we  have  the  direction  of  the  vibration  in  each
part  of  the  surface  by  the  theorems  of  Glazebrook  and  Basset
(§  195  above).  What  remains  to  be  found  in  our  present  problem
is  the  amplitude  of  the  vibration  at  any  point  of  the  wave-surface.
One  thing  we  see  without  calculation  is,  that  at  distances  from
the  origin  great  in  comparison  with  the  greatest  diameter  of  the
source,  the  vibrational  amplitude  is  zero  at  the  four  points  in
which  the  wave-surface  is  cut  by  the  vibrational  line  produced
in  both  directions  from  the  source ;  when  this  line  coincides  with
one  of  the  three  axes  of  symmetry  OX,  OY,  OZ.  The  general
solution  of  the  problem  is  to  be  had  by  mere  superposition
of  motions  from  the  solutions  for  vibrations  of  the  source  in  the
three  principal  directions.  For  the  present  I  must  regretfully
leave  the  problem  hoping  to  be  able  to  return  to  it  later.

28—2

LECTUEE XX.

Friday,  October  17,  5  p.m.,  1884. Written  afresh,  1903.

Molecular.  §  200.  CONSIDERING  how  well  Rankine's  old  idea  of  seolotropic
inertia  has  served  us  for  the  theory  of  double  refraction,  it  natur-
ally occurs  to  try  if  we  can  found  on  it  also  a  thorough  dynamical
explanation  of  the  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization  of  light  in
a  transparent  liquid,  or  crystal,  possessing  the  chiral  property.
I  prepared  the  way  for  working  out  this  idea  in  a  short  paper
communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  in  Session
1870—71  under  the  title  "On  the  Motion  of  Free  Solids  through
a  Liquid  "  which  was  re-published  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine
for  November  1871  as  part  of  an  article  entitled  "  Hydrokinetic
Solutions  and  Observations,"  and  which  constitutes  the  greater
part  of  Appendix  G  of  the  present  volume.  The  extreme  diffi-
culty of  seeing  how  atoms  or  molecules  embedded  in  (ether),  an
elastic  solid  could  experience  resistance  to  change  of  motion
practically  analogous  to  the  quasi-inertia  conferred  on  a  solid
moving  through  an  incompressible  liquid  has,  until  a  few  weeks
ago,  prevented  me  from  attempting  to  explain  chiral  polarization
of  light  by  aeolotropic  inertia.  Now,  the  explanation  is  rendered
easj^and  natural  by  the  hypothesis  explained  in  §§162 — 164  above
and  in  §§  204,  205  below  and  in  Appendix  A.

§  201.  To  explain  seolotropic  inertia,  whether  chiral  or  not,  of
molecules  in  ether,  from  the  rudimentary  statements  in  Appendix  A,
take  first  the  very  simplest  case;  a  diatomic  molecule  {A-^,  A^  con-
sisting of  two  equal  and  similar  atoms  held  together  by  powerful
attraction ;  so  as,  with  a  single  electrion  in  each,  to  constitute  a
rigid  system  when,  as  we  shall  at  first  suppose,  the  forces  and
motions with which we are concerned are  so  small  that the

ELECTRO-ETHERIAL  EXPLANATION  OF  ^OLOTROPIC  INERTIA. 487

electrions  have only  negligible motion  relatively  to the atoms.  Molecular.
This supposition will be  definitely  modified  when  we  come,  in
§§  232 — 242,  to  explain  chromatic  dispersion  on  the  new  theory.

§  202.  In  fig.  14  the  circles  represent  the  bounding  spherical
surfjices  of  the  two  atoms.  According  to  the  details  suggested  for
the  sake  of  definiteness  in  Appendix  A  and  illustrated  by  its
diagram  of  stream-lines  (fig.  5),  the  two  atoms  must  overlap  as
indicated  in  our  present  diagram  fig.  14,  if  the  stream-lines  of
ether  through  each  atom  are  disturbed  by  the  presence  of  the
other.  Without  attempting  any  definite  solution  of  the  extremely
difficult  problem  of  determining  stream-lines  of  ether  through  our
double  atom  we  may  be  at  present  contented  to  know  that  the
quasi-inertias  of  the  disturbed  motion  of  ether  within  the  molecule,
in  the  two  cases  in  which  the  motion  of  the  ether  outside  is  parallel
to  A^A„,  and  is  perpendicular  to  AiAo,  must  be  different. It  seems

Fig.  14.

to  me  probable  that  the  former  must  be  less  than  the  latter:  I  shall
only  assume  however  that  they  are  different,  which  is  certainly
true :  and  I  denote  the  former  by  a  and  the  latter  by  /8.  This
means  that  if  the  molecule  is  at  rest,  and  the  ether  outside  it  is
moving  uniformly  according  to  velocity-components  (f,  ^)  respec-
tively parallel  to  A1A.2,  and  perpendicular  to  it  in  the  plane  of
the  diagram,  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  whole  etherial  motion  will
be  greater  by  |  (a^-  -t-  /3^^)  than  if  the  ether  had  the  uniform
motion  (^,  tj)  everywhere. Thus  if  B  denote  any  volume  of  space

488  LECTURE XX.

Molecular,  completely  surrounding  one  molecule  but  not  including  another,
and  if  p  be  the  undisturbed  density  of  ether,  the  kinetic  energy  of
etherial  motion  within  B  is

h[Bp(t  +  v')  +  <=^t  +  ^v'] ...(149).

Throughout  §§  202 — 20.5  we  are  supposing  the  different  constituent
molecules  of  the  assemblage  to  occupy  separate  spaces.  In  §  225
we  shall  find  ourselves  obliged  to  assume  overlapping  complex
molecules  of  silica  in  a  quartz  crystal.

§  203.  This  gives  a  clear  and  definite  explanation  of  the
seolotropy  of  inertia  (§  184  above)  suggested  by  Rankine  for
explaining  double  refraction.  First  for  a  uniaxal  crystal,  consider
any  homogeneous  assemblage  (Appendix  H,  §§  3,  6,  15,  16,  17,  18,
19)  of  our  diatomic  molecules  and  let  B  be  the  volume  of  space
allotted  to  each  of  them.  The  homogeneousness  of  the  assemblage
implies  that  the  lines  A^Ao  in  all  the  molecules  are  parallel.  Take
this  direction  for  OX;  and  for  OY,  OZ  any  two  lines  perpendicular
to  it  and  to  one  another.  In  respect  to  double  refraction  it  is  of
no  consequence  what  the  character  of  the  homogeneous  assemblage
may  be :  though  it  may  be  expected  to  be  symmetrical  relatively
to  the  direction  of  A-^A^  because  the  equilibrium  of  the  assemblage,
and  the  forces  of  elasticity  called  into  play  by  deformation,  depend
on  mutual  forces  between  the  molecules  not  directly  concerned
with  the  elasticity  and  motions  of  the  ether  called  into  play  in
luminous  waves.  In  short,  the  essence  of  our  assumption  is  that
the  molecules  are  unmoved,  while  the  ether  is  moved,  by  waves  of
light. Write  (149)  as  follows

B
where

^ (p  +  D r + i (p  + 1) '^^  -B.\ (p.r + pyii^). . . (150),

This  shows  clearly  the  meaning,  and  the  physical  explanation,
of  the  px,  py,  pz  assumed  in  §  186  as  virtual  densities  of  ether
relatively  to  motions  in  the  three  rectangular  directions.  With
diatomic  molecules  having  their  axes  parallel  to  OZ,  we  have
essentially  py  =  p^-  This  gives  the  optical  propez'ties  of  a  uniaxal
crystal,  which  essentially  present  no  difference  between  different
directions  perpendicular  to  the  axis ; though  the  homogeneous

DYNAMICAL EXPLANATION OF  A  CHIRAL MOLECULE. 431)

assemblage of  molecules,  constituting the  crystal,  presents  es-  Molecular
sentially  the  differences  in  different  directions  corresponding to
tactics  of  square  order,  or  of  equilateral-triangle  order.

§  204.  When  instead  of  the  mere  diatomic  molecule  of  §  201  we
have  in  each  molecule  a  molecular  structure  which  is  isotropically
symmetrical  (square  order  or  equilateral- triangle  order)  in  planes
perpendicular  to  one  line  OZ,  we  still  have  py  =  p^,  giving  the
axially  isotropic  optical  properties  of  a  uniaxal  crystal :  and  this
quite  independently  of  any  symmetry  of  the  homogeneous  assem-
blage of  molecules  constituting  the  crystal,  if  the  virtual  inertia
contributed  to  the  ether  by  each  molecule  is  independent  of  its
neighbours.  If  the  structure  of  each  molecule  has  no  chirality
(Appendix  H,  §  22,  footnote)  the  homogeneous  assemblage  has  no
chirality.  And  if  each  molecule  is  geometrically  and  dynamically
symmetrical  with  reference  to  three  rectangular  axes  {OX,  OY,  OZ),
but  not  isotropic  in  respect  to  these  axes,  we  have  generally  three
different  values  for  p^,  p,/,  pz',  and  (§§  187,  190  above)  exactly
Fresnel's  wave-surface.  This  is  quite  independent  of  any  sym-
metry of  the  homogeneous  assemblage  constituting  the  crystal :  it
is  merely  because  the  axes  of  symmetry  of  all  the  molecules  are
parallel  in  virtue  of  the  assemblage  being  homogeneous.  For
brevity  I  now  call  a  molecule  which  has  chirality,  a  chiroid.

§  205.  When  each  molecule  is  a  chiroid  it  may  (Appendix  G,
Part  1)  contribute  a  chiral  property  to  the  inertia  of  ether  oscil-
lating to  and  fro  in  the  space  occupied  by  the  assemblage.  To
understand  this  chiral  inertia,  consider  a  volume  B  of  ether,  very
small  in  all  its  diameters  in  comparison  with  a  Avave-length  of
light,  and  exactly  equal  in  volume  to  the  volume  of  space  allotted
(§201)  to  each  molecule.  Let  (^,  r,,  ^)  and  (^,  ^,  ^)  be  the  components
of  displacements  and  velocity  of  ether  within  B  but  not  within
the  part  or  parts  of  B  occupied  by  the  atoms  of  the  molecule.
The  components  round  x,  y,  z,  of  rotational  velocity  (commonly,
but  perhaps  less  conveniently,  called  angular  velocity)  of  ether  in
space  in  the  neighbourhood  of  B  and  not  within  any  atom,  are

i/4_^v v^_^v v^_^^ /n2^

2U2/ dzj' "Adz dxj' Adx dy)  ^' ^'

Let ')(^y.,  %)/,  %z  be coefficients  which  we  may  call  the  inertial
chiral ities  of  the  molecule  relative  to  x,  y,  z  respectively. The

440  LECTURE XX.

Molecular,  chiral  inertia  with  which  we  are  concerned  may  be  defined  by
asserting  that  acceleration  of  any  one  of  the  three  components
(152)  of  angular  velocity  of  the  ether,  implies  a  mutual  force
between  the  molecule  and  the  ether,  in  the  direction  of  the  axis
of  the  rotational  acceleration,  which  may  be  expressed  by  the
following  equations*

^""dtAdij dzj' ^~ ^"dt'Kdz dx)'  '^'dAdx'dy

(153);

where  P,  Q,  R,  denote  components  of  force  per  unit  of  volume,
exerted  by  the  molecules  on  the  moving  ether.  Hence  the
X,  y,  2;-components  of  the  elastic  force  on  ether  per  unit  of  its
volume  acting  against  inertial  reaction  are  equal  to

P^

J-^' Pv-d-Q^ p^-A-R (i-^4)-

dt"

The  equations  of  motion  of  ether  occupying  the  same  space  as
our  homogeneous  assemblage  of  molecules  will  be  found  by  substi-
tuting (154)  for  the  first  members  of  (8)  in  §  113.  Thus  with  (153)
we  find

d^^  d"  idK dr)\ .. , .  d  fd^ dn d^\ -..j,

(155),

and  the  symmetricals  in  relation  to  y  and  z ;  three  equations  to
determine  the  three  unknowns  |,  t],  ^.

§  206.  The  method  of  treatment  by  an  arbitrary  function,  as
in  §§  115,  120,  121,  127,  180,  would  be  interesting;  but  because  of
the  triple  differentiations  in  the  chiral  terms  it  is  not  convenient.
All  that  it  can  give  is  in  reality,  in  virtue  of  Fourier's  theorems,

*  The  negative  sign  is  prefixed  to  x  i^^  these  equations  in  order  to  make  %
positive  for  a  medium  in  which  right-handed  circularly  polarized  light  travels  faster
than  left-handed  (see  §  215  below).  Such  a  medium  is  by  all  writers  on  the  subject
called  a  right-handed  medium,  because  the  vibrational  line  of  plane  polarized  light
travelling  through  it  turns  clockwise  as  seen  by  a  person  testing  it  with  a  Nicol's
prism  next  his  eye.  The  molecule  which,  according  to  our  inertial  theory,  produces
this  result  is  analogous  to  a  left-handed  screw-propeller  in  water  and  is  therefore
properly  to  be  called  left-handed.  Thus  left-handed  molecules  produce  an  optically
right-handed  medium.

FORMULAS EXPRESSING CHIRAL INERTIA IN WAVE-MOTION. 44-1

included  in  the  more  convenient  method  of  periodic  functions;  of  Molar,
which  the  most  convenient  form  for  our  present  problem  is  given
by  the  use  of  imaginaries  with  the  assumption  ^,  77,  ^  equal  to
constants  multiplied  into

e'^^  « ^ (156),

where  \,  /.i,  v  denote  the  direction-cosines  of  a  perpendicular  to
the  wave-plane,  and  u  the  propagational  velocity. This  gives

d  _ io)\ d  iwfjb d  _ Lwv ^,  ay^ d"

dx  u ' drj  tc ' dz  u '  u"' dt^

(157),

which  reduces  (loo)  and  its  symmetricals  to

^x«'|  +  tXx  ^  (^'?  -  ^^0  =  Q-  +  i'O  ^  (^1  +  l^V  +  v^)  +  n  ^^  ^

Pyfo-T)  +  iXy  ^  {H  -  v^)  =  (^-  +  i'O  ^  (^^  +  M  +  ^^)  +  fi'^,V^

Pz<^-^  +  ^Xz  ~  (^?  -  ^'?)  =  (^'  +  i'O  ^  (^^  +M  +  vt)  +  n  ^,  ^

(158)*

Multiplying  each  member  of  these  equations  by  U'w~'  and  arrang-
ing in  order  of  ^,  t],  ^,  we  find

(A  —  //A,")  ^  4-  (iXxUf^v  —  k'X/ji)  7}  +  (—  iXxUco/j.  —  k'vX)  ^  =  0  \

{—  tXvUcov  —  k'\/jb)  ^  +  (B  —  k' fjir) 7}  +  (+  LXyUoiX—h'iJbv)  ^=  ok. .(159),

(+  iXz^w/i  —  k'vX)  ^  +  (—  iXzUwX  —  k'fiv)  T]+{C—  k'v^)  f  =  0 j

where

A  =  p^ti^  —  n: B  =  p,jU-  —  n; C  =  p^u^  —  n  ; k'  =  {k  +  ^n). .  .(160).

Forming  the  determinant  for  elimination  of  the  ratios  ^,  7),  f;  and
simplifying  as  much  as  possible,  with  reductions  involving

\''  +  fM'  +  v'=l  (161);

and  putting

^  =  (%.-%./)^+(%.-%.)^  +  (X-/-%.)C

=  u'  [(Xz  -  Xy)  Px  +  (Xx  -  Xz)  Pu  +  iXv  -  Xx)  pz]

=  U'  IXx  (py  -  Pz)  +  Xy  (Pz  -  Px)  +  Xz  (Px  -  py)]  •  •  ..(162),

*  These  formulas,  implying  as  they  do  that  the  chirality  expressed  by  them  is
due,  not  to  chirality  of  elasticity  but  to  chirality  of  virtual  inertia,  are  given  by
Boussinesq  on  p.  456  of  Vol.  11.  (1903)  of  his  Theorie  Analytiqiic  de  la  Chaleur.

442
Molar,  we  find
ABC

LECTURE XX.

-.(

A'^B'^G

+  mk'Eco\fMv=0  (163).

In  (163)  we  have  an  equation  of  the  sixth  degree  for  the
determination  of  u,  the  propagational  velocity  of  waves  whose
wave-normal  has  X,  fi,  v  for  its  direction-cosines.

This  equation  is  greatly  simplified  by  our  assumption  of
practically  zero  propagational  velocity  of  condensational-rare-
factional  waves;  which  makes  k'  =  —  n,  and  therefore  by  (160),
and  (129')

-X-.

u-  —  a- w  —  a-
This,  with  corresponding  formulas  for  ijrjB  and  v-fC,  gives

1

^''(^+^V"

X-

B  '  G

^y  k'  =  —  n,  we  also  have

A  —  k'  =  pxU' ; B  —  k'
Thus  (163)  is  reduced  to

u-  —  a-

:. +

H-'

-b-

+

PyU-

G-k'-

ir  —  c

/3z«'

^  2  „2

PxPypz  (W  -  or)  (a"-  -  ¥)  (w^  -  c^)  ( ^^^— ^^  +  ^j--^^

+

-  «'"'  (XvXzP^c'^'  +  XzXxPyP'-  +  XxXvPz'-''')

—  mnEcoXfiv  =  0 ...  (163').

§  207.  The  imaginary  term  in  (163),  unless  it  vanishes,  makes
every  one  of  the  six  values  of  u  imaginary.  The  realisation  of  the
corresponding  result  according  to  the  principles  of  §§  150,  151,
above  will  be  very  interesting.  It  essentially  demands  an  ex-
tension of  the  dynamical  theory  to  include  the  conversion  of  the
energy  of  wave-motion  into  thermal  energy, — energy  of  irregular
interraolecular  motions ;  that  is  to  say  the  dynamics  of  the
absorption  of  luminous  waves  travelling  through  an  assemblage
of  atoms  or  of  groups  of  atoms.

§  208.  Remark  first  that  when  E  does  not  vanish,  the
imaginary  term  in  (163)  vanishes  if,  and  only  if,  one  of  the  three

SPEED  OF  CIRCULARLY  POLARIZED  LIGHT  IN  CHIRAL  MEDIUM, -i^o

direction-cosines  \,  /a,  v,  vanishes ;  that  is  to  say  if  the  wave-plane  Molar,
is  parallel  to  one  of  the  three  principal  axes.  It  is  certainly  a
curious  result  that  plane  waves  can  be  propagated  without
absorption  if  their  plane  is  parallel  to  any  one  of  the  principal
axes ;  while  there  is  absorption  for  all  waves  not  fulfilling  this
condition :  in  other  words  that  the  crystal  should  be  perfectly
transparent  for  all  rays  perpendicular  to  a  principal  axis,  and
somewhat  absorptive  for  all  rays  not  perpendicular  to  a  principal
axis.  No  such  crystal  is  known  in  Nature  or  in  chemical  art.
Time  forbids  us  to  go  farther  at  present  into  this  most  interesting
subject.

§  209.  Considering  now  cases  in  which  E  vanishes  and  there-
fore (103)  has  all  its  terms  real,  we  see  that  in  all  such  cases  it
becomes  a  cubic  in  u^.  A  first  and  simplest  case  of  this  condition
is  indicated  by  the  third  member  of  (162),  which  shows  that  E
vanishes  w^hen  px  =  Py  =  pz. For  this  case  (163)  becomes

(pa--  n  -  //)  [{pit'  -  nf  -  u^co'ixyXz^^-^  XzXxH'''+  XxXy^')]  =  ^]  .....
where  p  =  p^  =  p^  =  p^  j^

The  three  roots  of  this  cubic  are  given,  one  of  them  by  equating
the  first  factor  to  zero,  and  the  two  others  by  the  quadratic  in  u^
obtained  by  equating  the  second  factor  to  zero.  No  crystals  are
known  to  present  the  optical  properties  thus  indicated  for  unequal
values  of  ^x,  %>/.  %z-  But  it  is  conceivable  that  these  properties
may  be  found  in  some  crystals  of  the  cubic  class,  which  might
conceivably,  while  isotropic  in  respect  to  ordinary  refraction,  give
different  degrees  of  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization  of  polarized
rays  travelling  in  different  directions  relatively  to  the  three  rect-
angular lines  of  geometrical  symmetry.

§  210.  For  the  case  of  x.v  =  Xy  —  Xz  ^^^  quadratic  of  (lOi)
becomes  {pit- —  lif  =  orx'U"  whence

pu-  —  n  =  ±  (o-)(,ii (165).

In  all  known  cases,  I  think  we  may  safely  say  in  all  conceivable
cases,  whether  of  chiral  crystals,  or  of  chiral  liquids,  (oxk  is  very
small  in  comparison  with  n;  in  other  words  (§213  below)  the
difference  between  the  propagational  velocities  of  right-handed
and  left-handed  circularly  polarized  light  is  exceedingly  small
in  comparison  with  the  mean  of  the  two  velocities.  Hence  we
lose  practically  nothing  of  accuracy  by  taking  a  =  '^{njp)  in  the

444  LECTURE XX.

Molar,  second  member  of  (165).  Thus  if  we  denote  by  v^,  u^  the  two
positive  values  of  u  given  by  (165)  and  by  u  a  mean  of  the  two,
we  find  by  (165)

"h'^J^  =  2^^; and  '"^^^^  =  ^^  =  ^ (166).

a-  n  u  n pu

And,  in  accordance  with  (182),  putting

"^  =  9 .(166'X

we  have

u,-u„  =  g (166").

§  211.  To  interpret  this  result  go  back  to  (158)  simplified  by
making  p^  =  py  =  p^  and  ^^  =  ^^  =  p^^.  The  medium  being  isotropic
in  respect  to  all  directions  of  the  wave-plane,  we  lose  nothing  of
generality  by  putting  A,  =  1,  /x  =  0,  v  =  0.  With  these  simplifi-
cations, the  first  of  the  three  equations  (158)  gives  f  =  0  and  the
second  and  third  multiplied  by  u'^/o)"  become

{pu^  —  7i)r}  =  —  i-^o)ut,\ {pu"  —  n)  ^=  LX^^^V (167).

Equating  the  product  of  the  first  members  to  the  product  of  the
second  members  of  these  equations  we  find  (pu"  —  n)-  =  x'^^^u",
which  verifies  the  determinantal  quadratic  as  given  at  the
beginning  of  |  210.

Using  (165)  to  eliminate  (pu'^  —  n)  from  (167)  Ave  find

^=±tv (168).

Hence  as  an  imaginary  solution  according  to  (156)  of  §  206  we
have  for  ^,  77,  ^  respectively

0; Cr  ('"«); ±.Ce""('"'^) (169).

Changing  the  sign  of  c  gives  another  imaginary  solution ;  and
taking  the  half-sum  of  the  two  imaginary  solutions,  we  find  as
a  real  solution

1  =  0; v  =  CcoHay(t-^]; ^  =  + Csino}  (t-^....(llO);

§  212.  The  interpretation  of  this  is,  sinusoidal  vibrations  of
equal  amplitudes,  parallel  respectively  to  0  F  and  OZ ;  the  former

COEXISTENT WAVES OF CONTRARY CIRCULAR MOTIONS.

445

being  a  quarter  of  a  period  behind  or  before  the  latter,  according  Mola
as  we  choose  the  upper  or  the  lower  of  the  two  signs  in  each
formula. The  resultant  {y,  z)  motion  of  the  ether*,  in  the  case

Fig.  15.

*  This  (y,  z)  component  is  irrotational.  The  [x,  y)  component  of  the  etherial
motion  is  rotational  having  OZ  as  axis;  and  the  (x,  z)  component  is  rotational  havin"
or  as  axis.  We  are  not  concerned  with  this  view  at  present.  But  we  meet  it
necessarily  when  we  think  out  the  geometry  of  §  205  (152) ;  and  it  brings  to  us  a
very  simple  synthetic  investigation  of  the  velocity  of  circularly  polarized  light  in  a
chiral  liquid  or  in  an  isotropic  chiral  solid.

446  LECTURE XX,

Molar,  represented  by  the  lower  signs,  is  in  circular  orbits  in  the  direction
shown  as  anti-clockwise  in  the  annexed  diagram  (fig.  15).  This
motion  is  the  same  in  phase  for  all  points  of  the  ether  in  every
plane  perpendicular  to  OX,  that  is  to  say  every  wave-plane ;  and
it  varies  from  wave-plane  to  wave-plane  so  as  to  constitute  a  wave
of  circularly  polarized  light  travelling  ic-wise  with  velocity  m.  The
motion  corresponding  to  the  upper  signs  is  another  circularly
polarized  wave  with  opposite  orbital  motion,  that  is  to  say  clock-
wise direction.  The  radius  of  the  orbit  is  the  same,  C,  in  the  two
cases.  If*  when  looking  to  fig.  15,  we  take  the  positive  OX  as
towards  the  eye,  a  line  of  particles  of  the  ether  which  is  parallel  to
OX  when  undisturbed,  becomes,  in  the  wave  of  clockwise  orbits,
a  right-handed  spiral ;  and  in  the  wave  of  anti-clockwise  orbits  a
left-handed  sjm'al.  Thus  the  two  waves  are  of  opposite  chiralities :
the  former  are  called  right-handed,  the  latter  left-handed.  The
steps  of  the  two  spirals  (screws)  are  slightly  different,  being  the
spaces  travelled  by  the  two  waves  in  their  common  period ;  that
is  to  say  the  wave-lengths  of  the  two  waves.  To  understand  this
look  at  fig.  16  showing  a  right-handed  spiral  RRR  of  step  6  cm.
and  a  left-handed  spiral  LLL  of  step  5  cm.;  having  a  common
axis  OX,  and  both  wound  on  a  cylinder  of  radius  1^  cm.  repre-
senting G  of  (170).  If  the  radius  of  this  cylinder  were  reduced  to
a  thousandth  -or  a  millionth  of  the  step  of  either  screw,  and  if  the
step  were  reduced  to  about  4. 10~^  cm.,  either  spiral  might  represent
the  line  in  which  particles  of  ether  lying  in  OX  when  undisturbed
are  displaced  by  homogeneous  yellow  or  yellow-green  circularly
polarized  light,  travelling  in  the  direction  of  OX  positive,  through
a  transparent  liquid  or  solid  of  refractive  index  of  about  I'o.  With
this  understanding  as  to  the  scale  of  the  diagram  consider  the
resultant  of  the  two  equal  coexisting  displacements  of  wave-planes
represented  at  any  instant  by  the  two  spirals. At  points  of  inter-

*  This  is  a  convention  which  I  have  uniformly  followed  for  sixty  years  in
respect  to  the  positive  and  negative  directions  in  three  mutually  perpendicular  lines
OX,  OY,  OZ.  It  makes  the  positive  direction  for  angular  velocities  be  from  OX  to
or,  from  or  to  OZ,  and  from  OZ  to  OX.  This  agrees  with  the  ordinary  conven-
tions of  English  as  well  as  foreign  books  on  trigonometry,  and  geometry  of  two
dimensions,  which  make  anti-clockwise  rotation  be  positive.  It  is  convenient  for
inhabitants  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere  as  it  makes  positive  the  anti-clockwise
orbital  and  rotational  motions  of  the  sun  and  planets  as  viewed  from  space  above
our  North  Pole,  which  we  may  call  the  north  side  of  the  mean  plane  of  the
planetary  motions.

fresnel's  kinematics  of  coexistent  waves.  447

section  of  the  two  spirals,  for  example  D,  D',  D",  the  resultant  Molar.
displacement  of  each  of  the  corresponding  wave-planes  is  2C,  the
sum  of  the  two  equal  components. The  resultant  displacement
of  the  wave-plane  through  AB  is  twice  the  distance  from  OX  of
the  middle  point  of  AB,  that  is  to  say  2  >J{C-  —  IAB-).

§  213.  Suppose  now  the  two  spirals  to  rotate  in  opposite
directions,  with  equal  angular  velocity  co,  round  the  axis  OX;
the  right-handed  spiral  clockwise  and  the  left-handed  anti-clock-
wise when  viewed  from  X  towards  0.  This  may  be  realised  in  an
instructive  model  having  one  spiral  wound  on  a  brass  or  wooden
cylinder,  and  the  other  on  a  glass  tube  fitting  easily  around  it.
The  two  moving  spirals  will  represent  the  motions  of  the  ether  in
two  circularly  polarized  waves  travelling  .-?;- wards  with  velocities

"■=2^' "==2^' ("2)-

Xi,  \o  denoting  the  steps  of  the  two  screws.  The  motion  of  the
ether  in  any  fixed  plane  perpendicular  to  OX,  the  plane  through
AB  for  instance  in  the  diagram,  will  be  found  by  the  geometrical
construction  of  §  212.  Thus  we  see  that  a  very  short  time  after
the  time  of  the  configuration  shown  in  the  diagram,  the  point  D
will  come  to  the  plane  through  AB,  and  the  points  A,  B  will
come  together  at  D:  immediately  after  this  they  will  separate,
A  leftwards  in  the  diagram,  B  rightwards.  Considering  the  whole
movement  we  see  that  in  any  one  fixed  plane  through  OX,  a
wave-plane  of  the  ether  moves  to  and  fro  in  a  fixed  straight  line.
The  point  D  will  travel  a?-wards  with  a  velocity  equal  to

"/^" - ^  (173),

1-4.1] l(^ 1
2  V^i xj 2  Ui  "^  Uo

being  the  harmonic  mean  of  the  velocities  of  the  two  compounded
circular  waves ;  and  will  revolve  slowly  clockwise  round  the
cylinder  of  radius  (7  at  a  rate,  in  radians  per  unit  of  distance
travelled  a;-wise,  equal  to

Compare  with  (179)  and  (180)  below.

448  LECTURE XX.

Molar.  §  214.  The  short  algebraic  expression  and  proof  of  all  this  is
found  by  taking  the  two  solutions  represented  by  (170),  (171)  and
writing  down  their  sum  with  modification  as  follows : —

,=  cosei)  it 1  +  cos  CO  { t

, -£)

/,  X  0)  \  (lilX x\  ,-,^.\

=  2  cos  ft)  U  -  ^, ^r- cos  ^ (17o) ;

-^  =  —  sin  CO  \t )  +  sin  ft)  ( < )

{  X,  X\ . (O  ( X  X\  /-,y,n\

=  -2cosft>^-^-„  - sm^ (176).

For  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  resultant  of  these  we  find

V(T+n  =  2Ccos»(«-^^-2^3  (177),

and

?  =  -tan^f-^-^) (178).

These equations express rectilinear vibration through a total
range  46'  in  period  — ,  in  the  line  whose  azimuth  is

(H (  X  X

.,  , (179).

This  shows  that  the  vibrational  line  in  plane  polarized  light
revolves  clockwise  in  the  wave-plane  at  a  rate  r,  in  turns  per  unit
of  space  travelled,  expressed  by

_ ft) / 1 \\  _  (a  u-i—iu_  _  .u-^  —  xii  /,  Qn.s^

47r  V'2 '^^1/ ^iTT ^1^2 ^ Ta-
in the  last  member  t  denotes  the  period  of  the  vibrations,  and  a
denotes  Vwjt^a, or  the  "geometric  mean"  of  the propagational
velocities,  of  the  two  waves.

§  215. Returning  now  to  figure  16  we  see  that,  as  virtually
said  in  §§212,  218;

I.  The  orbital  motions  in  right-handed  circularly  polarized
light  coming  towards  the  eye  are  clockwise,  and  in  left-handed
anti- clockwise.

LEFT-HANDED  MOLECULES  MAKE  A  RIGHT-HANDED MEDIUM. 449

II.  The  vibrational  line  of  plane  polarized  light  traversing  Molar.
a chiral medium towards the eye, turns clockwise when the
velocity  of  right-handed  circularly  polarized  light  is  greater,  and
anti-clockwise  when  it  is  less,  than  that  of  left-handed  circularly
polarized  light.

III.  A  chiral  medium  is  called  optically  right-handed  or
left-handed  according  as  the  propagational  velocity  of  right-handed
or  of  left-handed  circularly  polarized  light  travelling  through  it
is  the  greater.

All  this  (§§  212 — 215)  is  Fresnel,  pure  and  simple.  It  is  his
kinematics  of  the  optical  right-handed  and  left-handed  chirality
discovered  by  Arago  and  Biot  in  quartz,  and  by  Biot  in  turpentine
and  in  a  vast  number  of  other  liquids.

§  216.  For  the  dynamical  explanation  take  the  third  member
of  (180);  and  look  back  to  (152)  and  (153)  which  show  that,
according  to  our  notation,  twice  the  acceleration  of  angular  velocity
of  moving  ether  multiplied  by  ;^  is,  when  ;;^  is  negative,  a  force
per  unit  bulk  of  the  ether  in  the  positive  direction  in  the  axis  of
the  angular  velocity,  exerted  on  the  ether  by  the  fixed  chiral
molecules.  If  %  is  positive,  the  chiral  molecule  is,  as  said  in  the
footnote  on  §  205,  analogous  to  a  left-handed  screw  and  its  chirality
is  properly  to  be  called  left-handed :  because  (|  205  above)  if  the
ether  concerned  is  viewed  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  the
angular  velocity,  the  force  of  left-handed  molecule  on  ether  is
toward  the  eye  (or  positive)  when  the  acceleration  of  the  angular
velocity  of  the  ether  is  clockwise  (or  negative  according  to  my
convention  regarding  direction  of  rotation,  stated  in  the  footnote
on  §  212).  With  this  statement  the  simple  synthetic  investigation
of  the  velocity  of  circularly  polarized  light  in  a  chiral  medium,
indicated  in  the  first  footnote  of  §  212,  is  almost  completed;  and
by  completing  it  we  easily  arrive,  by  a  short  cut,  at  the  solution
expressed  in  the  third  member  of  (180),  for  an  isotropic  medium  ;
without  the  more  comprehensive  analytical  investigation  of  §§  205
to  214.

By  (166)  we  saw  that  the  left-handed  molecule  (x  positive)
gives  the  greater  propagational  velocity  (w,)  for  right-handed
circularly  polarized  light,  and  therefore  (§  215,  III.)  the  medium
is  optically  right-handed.  Thus  our  conventions  necessarily  result
in  left-handed  molecules  making  a  right-handed  medium  and
right-handed  molecules  a  left-handed  medium.

T.  L.  29

450  LECTURE XX.

Molar.  §  217.  Going  back  now  to  §§  206,  207,  208,  for  light  traversing
a  chiral  medium  with  three  rectangular  axes  of  symmetry  cor-
responding to  maximum,  minimax  and  minimum  wave  velocities,
let  us  work  out  the  solution  for  wave-plane  perpendicular  to  one
of  the  principal  axes,  OZ  for  example.  This  makes  X  =  0,  yu,  =  0,
v=l;  and,  with  (160),  reduces  the  determinantal  equation  (162)
to

(C  -  k')  [{p^ii^  -  n)  (pyu-  -  n)  -  u'co'XccXy]  =  0  ...  (181).

Hence,  removing  the  first  factor  (which,  when  k'  =  -  n,  gives  u  =  0,
for  the  condensational-rarefactional  wave)  and  putting

^  =  a- ^  =  6- "^XM^g. (182),

Px  py  Pxpy

we  find

{u^-a^){u''-h'')  =  g'-u'  (183);

a  quadratic  of  which  the  two  roots  are  the  squares  of  the  velocities
of  the  ^•-ward  waves.  The  third  of  equations  (158)  makes  z  =  0
for  each  of  these  waves ;  and  therefore  they  are  both  exactly
equivoluminal.  When  x^Xv  '^^  positive  the  two  roots  of  the  quad-
ratic are  both  positive  ;  one  of  them  >  a^,  the  other  <  6^  if  a^  >  h~.

§  218.  In  these  formulas  a  and  h  denote  the  velocities  of
light  having  its  vibrational  lines  parallel  to  OX  and  OY  respec-
tively; and  ^  is  a  comparatively  very  small  velocity  measuring
the  chiral  quality  of  the  crystal.  Judging  by  all  that  has  been
hitherto  discovered  from  observation  of  chiro-optic  properties  of
gases,  liquids  and  solids,  we  may  feel  sure  that  g  is  in  every  case
exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  either  a  or  6 :  it  is  about
one  twenty-thousandth  in  quartz :  and  in  cinnabar,  which  has  the
greatest  optic  chirality  hitherto  recorded  for  any  liquid  or  solid  so
far  as  I  know,  g  seems  to  be  about  fifteen  times  as  great  as  in
quartz.  Suppose  now  that  g'^  is  very  small  in  comparison  with
the  difference  between  a-  and  Tf,  we  see,  by  the  form  of  (183),  that
the  two  values  of  u^  given  by  the  quadratic  must  be  to  a  first
approximation  equal  to  a^  and  Jf  respectively:  hence  to  a  second
approximation  we  have  (taking  forms  convenient  for  the  case  of
a"  >  h%

<-'-„-^,; ^'-»=-a-S» (!«*>■

§  219.  To  find  the  character  of  the  two  Avaves  corresponding
to  the  two  roots  of  (183),  put  X  =  0,  /a  =  0,  i^  =  1  in  the  first  and

OPTIC CHIRALITY IMPERCEPTIBLE IN A BIAXAL CRYSTAL. 451

second  of  (158),  each  multiplied  by u-a)~^; which,  with  (182),  Molar.
reduces  them  to

(u-  — a-)  ^=  — 7/ ; {u^  —  b-)r]  =  -^^ —  f  ...(185).

px  py

Equating  the  product  of  the  fii\st  members  to  product  of  the
second  members  of  these  equations  we  verify  the  determinantal
quadi-atic  (183).  With  either  value  of  u^  given  by  (183),  either
one  or  other  of  equations  (185)  may  be  used  to  complete  the
solution.  The  first  of  (185),  however,  is  the  more  convenient  for
the  root  approximately  equal  to  b' ;  and  the  second  for  the  root
approximately  equal  to  a".  Taking  them  accordingly  and  realising
in  the  usual  manner,  we  find  as  follows  for  two  completed  in-
dependent solutions  with  arbitrary  constants  C^,  G.,:

sm  0)  [t

■Ml

u,>a: ^  =  C,  cos 0)  it ; r,  =  -  G^ ^^ '[J^

V Ml/  ^1 —  0^

n,<b; ^=-C,'-^^?^?-^sina)f^--'); rj  =  G.cos  (o  (t -

z
it,/ ;

(186)

§  220.  The  exceeding  smallness  of  gja*  has  rendered  fruitless
all  attempts  hitherto  made,  so  far  as  I  know,  to  discover  optic
chirality  in  a  "biaxal  crystal,"  that  is  to  say  a  crystal  having
three  principal  axes  at  right  angles  to  one  another  of  minimum,
minimax  and  maximum  wave-velocities.  If  it  were  discoverable
at  all,  it  certainly  would  be  perceptible  in  light  travelling  along
one  of  these  three  principal  axes.

[Dec.  19,  1903.  I  have  only  to-day  seen  in  Phil.  Mag.,  Oct.
1901  that  Dr  H.  C.  Pocklington  has  found  rotations,  per  cm,,
22°  anti-clockwise,  and  64°  clockwise,  of  the  vibrational  line  in
polarized  light  travelling  through  crystallized  sugar  along  two
"  axes,"  of  which  the  first  is  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  cleavage
plane :  a  most  interesting  and  important  discovery.]

I  221. For  light  travelling  along  the  axis,  OZ,  of  a  uniaxal

crystal,  take  a  =  6 in  (183) — (186),  in  this  case,  and  we  have

by  (183)

ii2_a2=  ±gu (187).

*  For  sodium-light  in  quartz  it  is  -4605 .  10-* ;  and  it  may  be  expected  to  be
correspondingly  small  in  biaxal  crystals.

29—2

452  LECTURE XX.

Molar. And,  taking  py=  p^,  and  Xy  =  %«>  we  have,  by  (182),

</  =  ™f" (188).

Px

With  this  notation  and  with  (187),  (186)  becomes

Ui>a;  ^  = Ci  cos  oo  U ) ;  7)  =  -  C^sm  co  (t ]

^ ^'^^  ^ "'^ I  ...(188').

UoK  a;  f  =  —  C2  sin  co  (t );''?= C'o  cos  colt )

Thus  we  see  that  for  light  travelling  along  the  axis  of  a  uniaxal
crystal  the  velocities  of  right-handed  and  of  left-handed  circularly
polarized  light,  and  the  rotation  of  the  vibrational  line  of  plane
polarized  light,  are  in  every  detail  the  same  as  we  found  in  §§  211,
212  for  a  medium  wholly  isotropic.  But  we  shall  see  presently
(§  226  below)  that  two  or  three  degrees  of  deviation  from  the  axis
produces  a  great  change  from  the  phenomena  of  a  chiral  isotropic
medium  ;  and  that  for  rays  inclined  30°  or  more  up  to  90°,  the
chirality  is  almost  wholly  swamped  by  the  asolotropy,  even  when
the  a^olotropy  is  as  small  as  it  is  for  quartz  (§  223  below).  As
remarked  in  §  220,  there  is  no  direction  of  light  in  a  crystal,
having  three  unequal  values  for  a,  b,  c,  in  which  the  chiro-optic
effect  is  not  masked  by  the  seolotropy ;  and  therefore  it  is  not
so  interesting  to  work  out  for  a  biaxal  crj^stal  the  realised
details  of  the  solution  (159),  (162),  (163).  But  it  is  exceedingly
interesting  to  work  them  out  for  a  uniaxal  crystal,  because  of  the
great  exaltation  of  the  chiral  phenomena  when  the  ray  is  nearly  in
the  direction  of  the  axis,  and  because  of  the  beautiful  phenomena  of
Airy's  spirals  due  to  this  exaltation  ;  and  because  of  the  admirable
experimental  investigation  of  the  wave-surface  in  quartz  crystal
by  McConnel  referred  to  in  |  228  below.

§  222.  For  waves  transmitted  in  any  direction  through  a
uniaxal  crystal;  choose  OZ  as  the  axis,  and  therefore  let  px  =  Py,
and  Xcc  =  Xy>  in  (158)— (163)  of  §  206.  This  reduces  (163)  to
E  =  0  and  therefore  makes  the  waves  in  all  directions  real :  that  is
to  say  transmissible  with  no  change  of  motional  con ligu ration.
Corresponding  to  (182)  we  may  now  put

—  =— =a2; -  =  c-; ^^  =  g; -^  =  h (189).

px Py  Pz  Px  Pz

OPTIC  CHIRALITY  IN  QUARTZ  CRYSTAL. 453

Without loss of.  generality, we may simplify (158) — (162)  by  Molar.

taking

^^=0; \-=sin2^; i^-  =  cos-^  (190);

with  these,  (163')  of  §  206  gives

(u^  -  a-)  [ii'  -  a"  +  (a-  -  c^)  sin'^  0]=g[g-(g-  h)  sin^  6]  u\ .  .(191).

This  is  a  quadratic  equation  for  the  determination  of  the
squares  of  the  velocities  of  the  two  plane  waves  whose  wave-
normals  are  inclined  at  the  same  angle  6  to  OZ.  For  6  =  90°  we
fall  back  on  the  case  of  §§  217,  218,  219,  but  with  c  instead  of  b;
and  for  ^  =  0°  we  fall  back  directly  on  §  221,  The  exceedingly
interesting  transition  from  the  subject  of  §  221  to  our  present
subject  is  fully  represented  by  the  solution  of  the  quadratic
equation  for  u- :  and  is  best  explained  by  tables  of  values  of  the
two  roots  from  ^  =  0°  to  6=  90°  for  some  particular  case  or  cases  ;
or  graphic  representation  by  curves  as  in  figs.  17,  18,  19.
I  have  chosen  the  case  of  quartz  crystal  traversed  by  sodium-
light  ;  for  which  observation  shows  the  rotation  of  the  vibrational
line  to  be  217°  per  centimetre  of  space  travelled  along  the  axis.
This  makes  g=  4'60o  .  10~^  a;  as  we  find  by  putting  in  the  first
member  of  (180),  r  =  217/360  :  and  in  the  last  member  Ui  —  U2  =  g;
and  a  =  -647593,  the  reciprocal  of  1-54418,  the  smallest  refractive
index  of  quartz  at  18°,  according  to  Rudberg;  and  r  =  -58932,  the
period  in  decimal  of  a  michron,  of  the  mean  of  sodium-lights
DiD^;  the  michron  being  the  unit  of  time  which  makes  the
velocity  of  light  unity  when  the  unit  of  space  is  the  michron  (or
millionth  of  a  metre), (See  footnote  on  p.  150  above.)

As  two  sub-cases  I  have  chosen  h  =  0  and  h  =  —  g ;  because  .
for  all  that  our  theory  tells  us,  (§  223),  h/g  might  be  negative ;  or
might  be  zero  or  might  have  any  positive  value  less  than,  or  equal
to,  or  greater  than,  unity.  McConnel's  experimental  investigation
seems  (§  228  below)  to  make  it  certain  that  h/g  for  quartz  is  less
than  unity  and  probable  that  it  is  negative,  and  as  small  as  —  1,
or  perhaps  smaller.  As  for  g\  (189)  shows  that  its  value  is
inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  period  of  the  light,
if  Xx  is  the  same  for  light  of  all  periods;  g  is  positive  or  negative
according  as  the  crystal  is  optically  right-handed  or  left-handed.

§  223.  c/a  is  the  ratio  of  the  smallest  to  the  greatest  refrac-
tive index  of  quartz;  that  is  1-54418/1-55328, according  to  the

454  LECTURE XX.

Molar,  figures  used  by  McConnel ;  being  (as  I  see  in  Landolt  and
Bornstein's  Tables)  Rudberg's  results  for  temperature  18°  and
sodium-light.  From  this  we  have  {claf  =  "98832  and  (191)
becomes

.(192),

a- J  \a? J a-
or  ^  -  (1  +  w^  +  ^)  ^  =  -  w^

where  1 -^2= -01168  sin2^=  ^^^^  (1 -cos  26*)  ...(193),

and  q  =  a~^g[g  —  (g  —  h)  sin" 6] (194).

If  Ui^,  u.^  denote  the  greater  and  less  roots  of  (191),  we  have

a-2  (wi^  +  ui)  =  1  +  w^  +  g (195) ;

a-2  (mi=^  -  ui)  =  V[(l  -  w^)  +  2  (1  +  wO  g  +  ?'].. .  (196).

Remark  that  when  6*  =  90°,  1  -  w^  = -001168,  q  =  a-^gk.  Hence
~a~^gh  might  be  positive,  and  as  great  as  ^  .  10~^(1"168)-,  or  a
little  greater,  without  making  the  radical  imaginary.

§  224.  In  fig.  17,  Curves  1  and  2  represent,  from  ^  =  0°  to
^  =  30°,  ^  [a~" {ui^  —  u^^)  —  (1  —  w^)]  for  the  sub-cases  h=g,  and
h=:  —  g ;  and  Curve  3  represents  |  (1  —  iv^)  on  the  same  scale  from
^  =  0°  to  6  =  5°-3.  In  fig.  18,  Curves  1  and  2  represent,  from
^  =  30°  to  6>  =  90°,  ^[a-^{ui^-u^'')-(l-w')]  for  the  sub-cases
h=  g  and  A  =  —  ^,  on  a  scale  of  ordinates  ten  times,  and  abscissas
half,  that  of  fig.  17.

Throughout  the  whole  range  of  figs.  17  and  18,  Curves  1  and
2  represent  chiral  differences  from  the  squares  of  the  seolotropic
wave-velocities  calculated  according  to  the  non-chiral  constituent
of  the  seolotropy  of  quartz  crystal;  Curve  3  of  fig.  17,  and
equations  (193) — (196),  show  that  through  the  range  from  ^  =  0°
to  ^=  5°-3,  the  values  of  a~^Ui,  a~M/2,  and  q  differ  from  unity  by
less  than  5-1  .  10~®.  Hence,  through  this  range,  we  have,  very
approximately,

1  [a-' «  -  u,')  -  (1  -  w')]  =  "^1:1^  -{l-w) ...  (197).

TWO TRIAL ASSUMPTIONS FOR QUARTZ COMPARED.

455

1

1

/

,

fV

M

^

^f

STOt^

^

^

^

^

-^

f

^

I  o

456

LECTURE XX.

CM

>

o

>

o

lO

MODIFICATION  OF  DOUBLE  REFRACTION  BYCHIRALITYIN  QUARTZ.  457

§  225,  Fig.  19  illustrates  the  critical  features  of  the  crystal-  Molar,
line  influence,  and  of  the  combined  crystalline  and  chiral  influence,
of  quartz-crystal  on  light  traversing  it  with  wave-normal  inclined
to  the  axis  at  any  angle  up  to  14°.  The  crystalline  influence
alone  is  represented  in  Curve  8  by  downward  ordinates  equal  to
the  excess  of  the  velocity  of  the  ordinary  ray  above  the  velocity

-£

> 2° 4° 6° e

J° 1

0° 1

2° 14

5.10

Cl

^ve  1

— .

0  "
5..

—

<^

>'0

'^^>^

^

10"

X

^

15"

20"

25"

\

30"

\

\

rtS"

\

6°  Q"

Fig.  19.

10'

12'

14°

of  the  extraordinary  ray,  divided  by  the  former ;  in  an  ideal  crystal,
corresponding  to  the  mean  of  a  right-handed  and  a  left-handed
quartz-crystal.  Curve  1  represents  the  excess  of  the  greater  of
the  two  wave- velocities  in  a  real  quartz-crystal  above  the  velocity
of  the  ordinary  ray  in  the  ideal  mean  crystal,  divided  by  the
latter.  Curve  2  represents  the  excess  (negative)  of  the  less  of
the  two  wave-velocities  in  a  real  quartz-crystal  above  the  velocity
of  the  extraordinary  ray  in  the  ideal  mean  crystal,  divided  by  the
latter.  According  to  our  notation  of  §  223,  the  ordinates  of  Curves
8,  1,  2  are  equal  respectively  to

^  111  ^2

w  —  1; 1 ; —

a  a

.(198).

458  LECTURE XX.

Molar.  §  226.  From  (198)  we  see  that  Curve  3  continued  through  the
whole  range  from  ^  =  0°  to  6  ^  90°,  represents  the  distance  between
a  tangent  plane  on  a  prolate  ellipsoid  of  revolution  of  unit  axial
semi-diameter,  and  the  parallel  tangent  plane  on  the  circumscribed
spherical  surface  of  unit  radius  (the  ellipsoid  and  the  sphere
constituting  the  wave-surface  for  the  ideal  uniaxal  crystal  cor-
responding to  the  mean  of  right-handed  and  left-handed  quartz).
Curves  1  and  2  represent  similarly  the  projections,  outward  from
the  sphere  and  inwards  from  the  ellipsoid,  of  the  two  sheets  of
the  wave-surface  in  a  real  quartz-crystal  whether  right-handed  or
left-handed.  In  each  case  6  is  the  inclination  to  the  equatorial
plane,  of  the  two  tangent  planes  whose  distance  is  represented  by
ordinates  in  the  diagram.  It  is  interesting  to  see  and  judge  by
Curve  1  how  closely  at  ^  =  14°,  and  thence  up  to  ^  =  90\  one  of
the  sheets  of  the  wave-surface  in  quartz  agrees  with  the  spherical
surface:  and  to  see  by  Curves  2  and  3  how  nearly,  at  and  above  14°,
the  other  sheet  agrees  with  the  inscribed  ellipsoid.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  interesting  to  see  by  the  three  curves  how  prepon-
derating is  chirality  over  seolotropy,  from  ^  =  0°  to  ^  =  2° ;  and
to  see  how  the  preponderance  gradually  changes  from  chirality
to  geolotropy  when  6  increases  from  2°  to  14°.

§  227.  The  characters  of  the  two  plane  waves,  whose  wave-
normals  are  inclined  at  angle  6  to  the  axis  of  a  quartz  crystal,  are
to  be  discovered  by  commencing  as  in  §  222 ;  and,  for  the  case
there  defined,  working  out  a  realised  solution  from  (159)  of  §  206.
We  thus  find  that,  for  ^  =  0  each  wave  is  circularly  polarized ;
and,  for  all  values  of  6  between  0°  and  90°,  each  wave  is
elliptically  polarized ;  the  axes  of  the  elliptic  orbit  being,  one  of
them  perpendicular  to,  and  the  other  in,  the  plane  through  the
wave-normal  and  the  axis  of  the  crystal.  The  former  is  the
greater  of  the  two  axes  for  the  wave  which  has  the  greater
velocity  («i) ;  the  latter  is  the  greater  for  the  wave  having  the
less  velocity  {11.2).  For  all  values  of  9  greater  than  six  or  seven
degrees  the  less  axis  of  the  elliptic  orbit  is  very  small  in  com-
parison with  the  greater :  that  is  to  say  each  wave  consists  of  very
nearly  rectilinear  vibrations,  or  is  very  nearly  "  plane  polarized  " ;
and  one  of  the  two  waves  approximates  closely  to  the  "  ordinary  ray,"
the  other  to  the  "extraordinary  ray  "in  the  ideal  non-chiral  crystal
corresponding  to  the  mean  of  right-handed  and  left-handed  quartz.

MATHEMATICAL THEORIES TESTED EXPERIMENTALLY. 459

§  228.  Looking  at  the  two  sub-cases  represented  by  Curve  1  Molar,
and  Curve  2  of  figures  17  and  18,  we  see  that  the  difference
between  them  is  very  small,  probably  quite  imperceptible  to  the
most  delicate  observation  practicable,  when  6  <Q°.  At  6  =  10°
the  difference  of  the  ordinates  for  the  two  curves  is  about  1/17
of  the  ordinates  for  either ;  and  might  be  perceptible  to  observa-
tion, though  it  represents  an  exceedingly  small  proportion,  about
1/500,  of  the  whole  difference  of  velocities  between  the  two  rays.
This  difference,  as  shown  in  figure  19,  is  itself  very  small,  being
only  about  18.10~^  of  a,  the  mean  velocity  of  the  right-handed  and
left-handed  axial  rays.  How  exceedingly  searching  McConnel's
experimental  investigation  was  may  be  judged  by  the  fact  shown
in  his  figure  3,  page  321*,  that  from  6>  =  14°  to  ^  =  30°  he  found
definite  systematic  differences  between  "  MacCallagh's  Theory "
and  '■'  Sarrau's  Theory."  The  results  of  MacCullagh's  Theory  are
expressed  by  our  Curve  1  ;  and  our  Curve  2  shows  results  differing
from  MacCullagh's  in  the  same  direction  as  Sarrau's  but  some-
what more.  Thus  McConnel's  investigation  was  more  than  amply
sensitive  to  distinguish  between  our  two  sub-cases  represented  by
Curves  1  and  2  of  figures  17  and  18.  Looking  at  McConnel's
figure  3,  and  remarking  that  "003794  is  the  value  of  a  —  6  (our
a  —  c),  which  he  took  as  correct  according  to  his  statement  of
Rudberg's  results,  we  see  that  what  he  takes  as  Sarrau's  Theory
under-corrects  the  error  of  MacCullagh's  :  and  our  sub-case  2,
which  I  chose  on  this  account,  must  make  the  correction  very
nearly  perfect.  But  I  see  on  looking  to  Sarrau's  paperf  that
his  theory  was  not,  as  supposed  by  McConnel,  confined  to  rela-
tively small  deviations  from  q  =  ~  cos'*  6  (McConnel's  notation  of

his  page  314  translated  into  ours  of  §  226);  and  that  proper
values  of  his  constants  (without  the  restriction  of  f-^  and  g^
relatively  small,  stated  by  McConnel),  may  be  found  to  give  a
perfect  agreement  with  McConnel's  observations.  The  same  may
be  said  of  Voigt's  theory  as  pointed  out  by  McConnel  (p.  314).
Thus  we  may  take  it  that  Sarrau's  and  Voigt's  theories  lead
to  results  perfectly  consistent  with  McConnel's  observations.
Theories  of  MacCullagh,  Clebsch,  Lang,  and  Boussinesq,  are  re-
ferred to  by  McConnel  as  giving  a  constant  for  what  we  have

*  Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc,  Part  I.,  1886.

+  Sarrau,  Liouville,  s6v.  2,  tome  xiii.  (1868),  p.  101.

460

LECTURE XX.

Molar,  denoted  by  q,  and  as  giving  a  fairly  good  approximation  to  the
results  of  his  observations;  but  decidedly  less  good  than  Sarrau
and  Voigt,  who  allowed  q  to  vary  with  6.  All  these  theories  agree
in  taking  the  mutual  forces  between  different  parts  of  the  vibrating
medium  as  the  origin  of  the  chiral  property,  and  differ  essentially
from  my  theory  which  (§§  162 — 166,  200 — 205)  finds  it  in  virtual
inertia  of  the  ether  as  disturbed  by  chiral  groups  of  atoms.

§  229.  The  following  Table  shows,  in  degrees  per  centimetre,
the  rotation  of  the  vibrational  line  of  polarized  light  travelling
through  various  substances ;  crj^stalline  solid,  and  liquid ;  taken
from  Landolt  and  Bornstein's  Tables,  Edition  1894.

Substance

Quality
of  Light

Direction

of
Eotation  *

Eotation  of
vibrational

line  in
degrees  per
centimetre

Observer

Solid  crystals :
Cinnabar

Eed

f ^i
\  D  (mean)

D
D

D

D
D
D
D

D
D

E.
L.

2700  to  3000

217-27 )
217-05 \
216-84 j

55-31

83-85

19-3

21-7
31-04
31-6
2330

1-4147  x(Zt
16-155  xdf

Descloizeaux

Soret&Sarasin

Pape
Pape

H.  Traube

H.  Traube
Guye
Sohncke
Groth

Landolt
Landolt

Quartz

Lead  Hyposulpbate  +  4  aq

Potash  Hyposulpbate . . .

Potassium  Sulphate —  \
Lithium  Chromate
K2S04  +  Li2Cr04 j

Sodium  Bromate

Sodium  Chlorate

Sodium  Periodate  +  3  aq
Liquids :

Turpentine  Cir,H,c

Nicotine  CjoHj^N,,

*  Clockwise  as  seen  by  the  observer  is  called  right-handed  (E.),  anti-clockwise,
left-banded  (L.).

t  Where  d  denotes  the  specific  gravity  of  the  fluid.  See  p.  450  of  Landolt  and
Bornstein.  I  do  not  see  any  good  reason  for  the  necessity  of  introducing  d  in  the
manner  indicated  in  my  table  in  the  text,  and  rendered  necessary  by  the  notation
adopted  in  the  tables  of  Landolt  and  Bornstein.  Some  other  embarrassing  peculiari-
ties in  their  notation  have  prevented  me  from  venturing  to  quote  any  one  of  the
numerous  examples  of  the  rotatory  effect  of  "active"  substances  dissolved  in
"  non-active"  liquids  given  in  pp.  450 — 458  of  these  tables.

Faraday's  magneto-optic  rotation.  461

§  230.  Important  and  interesting  information  regarding  chiro-  Molar,
optic  properties  of  liquids  and  solids  is  to  be  found  in  Mascart's
Traite  d'Optique,  Volume  ii.,  Edition  1891,  pages  247  to  369 ;  and
regarding  Faraday's  magneto-optic  rotation  of  the  vibrational  line
in  pages  870  to  392.  The  first  section  of  Appendix  I  in  the
present  volume  contains  an  important  statement,  given  to  me  by
the  late  Sir  George  Stokes,  regarding  chirality  in  crystals,  and
in  crystalline  molecules.  Appendix  H  (Molecular  Tactics  of  a
Crystal,  §  22  footnote,  §§  47 — 52)  contains  statements  of  funda-
mental principles  in  the  pure  geometry  of  chirality.  Appendix  G
contains  a  complete  mathematical  theory  of  the  quasi-inertia  of
a  solid  of  any  shape  moving  through  a  perfect  liquid,  with  special
remarks  on  chirality  of  this  quasi-inertia.

§  231.  Lecture  XX.  as  originally  given,  and  fully  reported  in
the  papyrograph  edition,  and  an  appendix  to  it  entitled  "Improved
Gyrostatic  Molecule,"  contained  unsatisfactory  dynamical  efforts  to
illustrate  or  explain  Faraday's  magneto-optic  rotation.  These  are
not  reproduced  in  the  present  volume :  but  instead,  an  old  paper
of  date  1856  entitled  "  Dynamical  Illustration  of  the  Magnetic
and  the  Heli^oidal  Rotatory  Effects  of  Transparent  Bodies  on
Polarized  Light "  is  reproduced  as  Appendix  F.  This  paper  con-
tains a  statement  of  dynamical  principles  concerned  in  the  two
kinds  of  rotation  of  the  vibrational  line  of  plane  polarized  light
travelling  through  transparent  solids  or  fluids,  which  I  believe
may  even  now  be  accepted  as  fundamentally  correct.  When  we
have  a  true  physical  theory  of  the  disturbance  produced  by  a
magnet  in  pure  ether,  and  in  ether  in  the  space  occupied  by
ponderable  matter,  fluid  or  solid,  there  will  probably  be  no
difficulty  in  giving  as  thoroughly  satisfactory  explanation  of  the
magneto-optic  rotation  as  we  now  have  of  the  chiro-optic.

I  232.  In  conclusion,  let  us  consider  what  modification  of  the
original  Maxwell-Sell meier  dynamics  of  ordinary  and  anomalous
dispersion  must  be  made  when  we  adopt  the  atomic  hypothesis  of
Appendices  A  and  E  and  of  Lee.  XIX.,  §§  162 — 168.

In  App.  A  it  is  temporarily  assumed,  for  the  sake  of  a  definite
illustration,  that  the  enormous  variation  of  the  etherial  density
within  an  atom  is  due  to  a  purely  Boscovichian  force  acting  on
the  ether,  in  lines  through  the  centre  of  the  atom  and  varying

462  LECTURE XX.

Molecular,  as  a  function  of  the  distance.  This  makes  no  provision  for
vibrator  or  vibrators  within  an  atom ;  and,  for  the  explanation  of
molecular  vibrators,  it  only  grants  such  molecular  groups  of  atoms,
as  we  have  had  for  fifty  years  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,
according  to  Clausius'  impregnable  doctrine  of  specific  heats  with
regard  to  the  partition  of  energy  between  translational  and  other
than  translational  movements  of  the  molecules.  Now,  in  App.  E,
and  in  applications  of  it  suggested  in  §§  162 — 168  of  Lee.  XIX.,
we  have  foundation  for  something  towards  a  complete  electro-
etherial  theory,  of  the  Stokes- Kirchhoff  vibrators*  in  the  dynamics
of  spectrum-analysis,  and  of  the  Maxwell-Sellmeier  explanation  of
dispersion.

§  233.  In  our  new  theory,  every  single  electrion  within  a
mono-electrionic  atom,  and  every  group  of  two,  three,  or  m,ore,
electrions,  within  a  poly-electrionic  atom,  is  a  vibrator  which,  in
a  source  of  light,  takes  energy  from  its  collision  with  other  atoms,
and  radiates  out  energy  in  waves  travelling  through  the  sur-
rounding ether.  But  at  present  we  are  not  concerned  with  the
source ;  and  in  bringing  this  last  of  our  twenty  lectures  to  an
end,  I  must  limit  myself  to  finding  the  effect  of  the  presence  of
electrionic  vibrators  in  ether,  on  the  velocity  of  light  traversing  it.

§  234.  The  "fundamental  modes"  of  which,  in  Lee.  X.,  p.  120,
we  have  denoted  the  periods  by  k,  k,,  k„,  ...  are  now  modes  of
vibration  of  the  electrions  within  a  fixed  atom,  when  the  ether
around  it  and  within  it  has  no  other  motion  than  what  is  produced
by  vibrations  of  the  electrions.  It  is  to  be  remarked  however  that
a  steady  motion  of  the  atom  through  space  occupied  by  the  ether,
will  not  affect  the  vibrations  of  the  electrions  within  it,  relatively
to  the  atom.

§  235.  To  illustrate,  consider  first  the  simple  case  of  a  mono-
electrionic  atom  having  a  single  electrion  within  it.  There  is  just
one  mode  of  vibration,  and  its  period  is

K=27r  .h  =  ^-'^  ^1^' (199),

where  a  denotes  the  radius  of  the  atom,  e  the  quantity  of  resinous
electricity  in  an  electrion,  and  m  its  virtual  mass ;  and  c  denotes

*  See  Lee.  IX.  pp.  101,  102,  103.

ELECTRO-ETHERIAL EXPLANATION OF UNIFORM RIGIDITY. 463

e"a~^. This  we  see  because  the  atom,  being  mono-electrionic,  has  Molecular,
the  same  quantity  of  vitreous  electricity  as  an  electrion  has  of
resinous ;  and  therefore  (App.  E,  §  4)  the  force  towards  the  centre,
experienced  by  an  electrion  held  at  a  distance  x  from  the  centre,
is  e-or'-^x ;  which  is  denoted  in  §  240  by  ex.

§  236.  Consider  next  a  group  of  i  electrions  in  equilibrium,
or  disturbed  from  equilibrium,  within  an  ■i-electrionic  atom.  The
force  exerted  by  the  atom  on  any  one  of  the  electrions  is  ie^a~^D,
towards  the  centre,  if  D  is  its  distance  from  the  centre.  Let  now
the  group  be  held  in  equilibrium  with  its  constituents  displaced
through  equal  parallel  distances,  x,  from  their  positions  of  equi-
librium. Parallel  forces  each  equal  to  ie^or^x,  applied  to  the
electrions,  will  hold  them  in  equilibrium* ;  and  if  let  go,  they  will
vibrate  to  and  fro  in  parallel  lines,  all  in  the  same  period

4-.— Vma^  (200).

i\Ji e

This  therefore  is  one  of  the  fundamental  modes  of  vibration  of
the  group ;  and  it  is  clearly  the  mode  of  longest  period.  Thus
we  see  that  the  periods  of  the  gravest  vibrational  modes  of  different
electrionic  vibrators  are  directly  as  the  square  roots  of  the  cubes
of  the  radii  of  the  atoms  and  inversely  as  the  square  roots  of  the
numbers  of  the  electrions ;  provided  that  in  each  case  the  atom
is  electrically  neutralised  by  an  integral  number  of  electrions.
Compare  App.  E,  §  6.

I  237.  I  now  propose  an  assumption  which,  while  greatly
simplifying  the  theory  of  the  quasi  inertia-loading  of  ether  when
it  moves  through  space  occupied  by  ponderable  matter  as  set  forth
in  App.  A,  perfectly  explains  the  practical  equality  of  the  rigidity
of  ether  through  all  space,  whether  occupied  also  by,  or  void  of,
ponderable  matter.  My  proposal  is  that  the  radius  of  an  electrion
is  so  extremely  small  that  the  quantity  of  ether  luithin  its  sphere  of
condensation  (Lee.  XIX.,  §  166)  is  exceedingly  small  in  comparison
with  the  quantity  of  undisturbed  ether  in  a  volume  equal  to  the
volume  of  the  smallest  atom.

This  assumption,  in  connection  with  §§  164,  166  of  Lee.  XIX.,
makes  the  density  of  the  ether  exceedingly  nearly  constant  through

*  Compare  App.  E,  §  23.

464  LECTURE XX.

Molecular,  all  space  outside  the  spheres  of  condensation  of  electrions.  This
is  true  of  space  whether  void  of  atoms,  or  occupied  by  closely
packed,  or  even  overlapping,  atoms ;  and  the  spheres  of  con-
densation occupy  but  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  whole  space
even  where  most  densely  crowded  with  poly-electrionic  atoms.
The  highlj'  condensed  ether  within  the  sphere  of  condensation
close  around  each  electrion  might  have  either  greater  or  less
rigidity  than  ether  of  normal  density,  without  perceptibly  marring
the  agreement  between  the  normal  rigidity  of  undisturbed  ether,
and  the  working  rigidity  of  the  ether  within  the  atom.  This
seems  to  me  in  all  probability  the  true  explanation  of  what
everyone  must  have  felt  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  difficulties  in
the  dynamical  theory  of  light; — the  equality  of  the  rigidity  of
ether  inside  and  outside  a  transparent  body.

§  238.  The  smallness  of  the  rarefaction  of  the  ether  within  an
atom  and  outside  the  sphere  or  spheres  of  condensation  around  its
electrions,  implies  exceedingly  small  contribution  to  virtual  inertia
of  vibrating  ether,  by  that  rarefaction ;  so  small  that  I  propose  to
neglect  it  altogether.  Thus  if  an  atom  is  temporarily  deprived  of
its  electrion  or  electrions  (rendering  it  vitreousl}^  electrified  to  the
highest  degree  possible),  ether  vibrating  to  and  fro  through  it  will
experience  the  same  inertial  resistance  as  if  undisturbed  by  the
atom.  Its  presence  will  not  be  felt  in  any  way  by  the  ether
existing  in  the  same  place.  Thus  the  actual  inertia-loading  of
ether  to  which  the  refraction  of  light  is  due,  is  produced  prac-
tically by  the  electrions,  and  but  little  if  at  all  perceptibly  by
the  atoms,  of  the  transparent  body.

I  239.  For  the  present  I  assume  an  electrion  to  be  massless,
that  is  to  say  devoid  of  intrinsic  inertia,  and  to  possess  virtual
inertia  only  on  account  of  the  kinetic  energy  which  accompanies
its  steady  motion  through  still  ether.  This  is  in  reality  an  energy
of  relative  motion ;  and  does  not  exist  when  electrion  and  ether
are  moving  at  the  same  speed.  See  App.  A  passim,  and  equation
(202)  §  240  below.

§  240.  Come  now  to  the  wave- velocity  problem  and  begin
with  the  simplest  possible  case, — only  one  electrion  in  each  atom.
Consider  waves  of  a;-vibration  travelling  y-wards  according  to  the
formula  (203)  below.  Take  a  sample  atom  in  the  wave-plane  at
distance  y  from  XOZ. The  atom  is  unmoved  by  the  ether- waves ;

ELECTRO-ETHERIAL THEORY OF REFRACTION.  465

while the electrion is set vibrating to and fro through its  Molecular,
centre.

At  time  t,  let  x  be  the  displacement  of  the  electrion,  from  the
centre  of  the  atom  (or  its  absolute  displacement  because  at  present
we  assume  the  atom  to  be  absolutely  fixed) :

f  the  displacement  of  the  ether  around  the  atom  :

p  the  mean  density  of  the  ether  within  and  around  the  atom,
being,  according  to  our  assumptions,  exactly  the  same  as  the
normal  density  of  undisturbed  ether :

n  the  rigidity  of  the  ether  within  and  around  the  atoms,  being,
according  to  our  assumptions,  very  approximately  the  same  at
every  point  as  the  rigidity  of  undisturbed  ether :

iV^  the  number  of  atoms  per  unit  of  volume  :

ex  the  electric  attraction  towards  the  centre  of  its  atom,
experienced  by  the  electrion  in  virtue  of  its  displacement,  x  :

m  the  virtual  mass  of  an  electrion  :

E  a  cube  of  ether  equal  to  1/N  of  the  unit  of  volume,  having
the  centre  of  one,  and  only  one,  atom  within  it.

The  equation  of  motion  of  E,  multiplied  by  N,  is

''J  =  "lf-^^^ <201);

and  the  equation  of  motion  of  the  electrion  within  it,  is

m^^^|^  =  -c^ (^^2>-

§  241.  The  solution  of  these  two  equations  for  the  regular
regime  of  wave-motion  is  of  the  form

f  =  C  sin  ft)  (« -  ^)  ; X  =  C  sin  (oft-  ^) (203),

where  o)  is  given. Our  present object is  to  find  the  two  un-
knowns GjC  (or  ^/x),  and  v. By  (203)  we  see  that

d'  „ d'

=  -ft)2

ft)-

dt^  ' dy^ v^

This  reduces  (201)  and  (202)  to

.(204).

T.  L.  30

466  LECTURE XX.

Molecular,  from  which  we  find

|  =  -i^=^, (200).

and  -  =  -  + !-■?=-  + ■> 2  C^^^)-

V- n n \ ^J n n t-  —  k^

The  last  member  is  introduced  with  the  notation

-'^■'  '=^V? '''''■'

where  t  denotes  the  period  of  the  waves,  and  k  the  period  of  an
electrion  displaced  from  the  centre  of  its  atom,  and  left  vibrating
inside,  while  the  surrounding  ether  is  all  at  rest  except  for  the
outward  travelling  waves,  by  which  its  energy  is  carried  away  at
some  very  small  proportionate  rate  per  period ;  perhaps  not  more
than  10~^.  It  is  clear  that  the  greater  the  wave-length  of  the
outgoing  waves,  in  comparison  with  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of
condensation  of  the  vibrating  electrion,  the  smaller  is  the  pro-
portionate loss  of  energy  per  period.  (Compare  with  the  more
complex  problem,  in  which  there  are  outgoing  waves  of  two
different  velocities,  worked  out  in  the  Addition  to  Lee.  XIV.,
pp.  190 — 219.  See  particularly  the  examples  in  pp.  217,  218,
219.)

§  242.  Look  back  now  to  the  diagram  of  Lee.  XII.,  p.  145,
representing  our  complex  molecular  vibrator  of  Lee.  I.,  pp.  12,  13,
reduced  to  a  single  free  mass,  7n ;  connected  by  springs  with  the
rigid  sheath,  the  lining  of  an  ideal  spherical  cavity  in  ether.  In
respect  to  that  old  diagram,  let  cc  now  denote  what  was  denoted
on  p.  14.5  by  ^  —  cc;  that  is  to  say  the  displacement  of  the  ether,
relatively  to  m.  Thus  in  the  old  illustrative  ideal  mechanism,
ex  denotes  a  resultant  force  of  springs  acting  on  m  :  in  the  new
suggestion  of  an  electro-etherial  reality  ex  denotes  simply  the
electric  attraction  of  the  atom  on  its  electrion  m,  when  displaced
to  a  distance  x  from  its  centre.  In  the  old  mechanism  it  is  the
pulls  on  ether  by  the  springs,  equal  and  opposite  to  their  forces
on  m,  by  which  m  acts  on  the  ether  (always  admittedly  an  unreal
kind  of  agency,  invoked  only  by  way  of  dynamical  illustration).
In  the  new  electric  design,  m  acts  directly  on  the  ether,  in  simple
proportion  to  acceleration  of  relative  motion.  It  does  so  because,
in  virtue  of  the  ether's  inertia  when  m  is  being  relatively  accelerated

END OF LECTURE XX.  467

the  ether  is  less  dense  before  than  behind  m,  and  therefore  the  Molecular,
resultant  of  m's  attraction  on  it  is  backwards.

It  is  interesting  to  see  that  every  one  of  the  formulas  of
§§  240,  241  (with  the  new  notation  of  w,  in  the  old  dynamical
problem),  are  applicable  to  both  the  old  and  the  new  subjects  :
and  to  know  that  the  solution  of  the  problem  in  terms  of  periods
is  the  same  in  the  two  cases,  notwithstanding  the  vast  difference
between  the  artificial  and  unreal  details  of  the  mechanism  thought
of  and  illustrated  by  models  in  1884,  and  the  probably  real  details
of  ether,  electricity  and  ponderable  matter,  suggested  in  1900 —
1903.

§  243.  The  interesting  question  of  energy  referred  to  in
Lee.  X.,  11.  18 — 21  of  p.  Ill  becomes  more  and  more  interesting
now  when  we  seem  to  understand  its  real  quadruple  character  in

(I)  kinetic  energy  of  pure  ether,

(II)  potential  energy  of  elasticity  of  ether,

(III)  electric  potential  energy  of  mutual  repulsions  of  elec-

trions  and  of  attractions  between  electrions  and  atoms,

(IV)  potential  energy  of  attraction  of  electrions  on  ether.

It  is  slightly  and  imperfectly  treated  in  App.  C.  It  must,  when
fully  worked  out,  include  a  dynamical  theory  of  phosphorescence.
For  the  present  I  must  leave  it  with  much  regret,  to  allow  this
Volume  to  be  prepared  for  publication.

80—2

APPENDIX A.

ON  THE  MOTION  PRODUCED  IN  AN  INFINITE  ELASTIC  SOLID
BY  THE  MOTION  THROUGH  THE  SPACE  OCCUPIED  BY  IT
OF  A  BODY  ACTING  ON  IT  ONLY  BY  ATTRACTION  OR
REPULSION*

§  1,  The  title  of  the  present  communication  describes  a
pure  problem  of  abstract  mathematical  dynamics,  without  in-
dication of  any  idea  of  a  physical  application.  For  a  merely
mathematical  journal  it  might  be  suitable,  because  the  dynamical
subject  is  certainly  interesting  both  in  itself  and  in  its  relation
to  waves  and  vibrations.  My  reason  for  occupying  myself  with
it,  and  for  offering  it  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  is  that
it  suggests  a  conceivable  explanation  of  the  greatest  difficulty
hitherto  presented  by  the  undulatory  theory  of  light ; — the
motion  of  ponderable  bodies  through  infinite  space  occupied  by
an  elastic  solid -f-.

§  2. In  consideration  of  the  confessed  object,  and  for  brevity,

I  shall  use  the  word  atom  to  denote  an  ideal  substance  occupying

a  given  portion  of  solid  space,  and  acting  on  the  ether  within  it

and  around  it,  according  to  the  old-fashioned  eighteenth  century

idea  of  attraction  and  repulsion. That  is  to  say,  every  infinitesimal

volume  A  of  the  atom  acts  on  every  infinitesimal  volume  JB  of  the

ether  with  a  force  in  the  line  PQ  joining  the  centres  of  these  two

volumes,  equal  to

Af{P,PQ)pB  (1),

*  Communicated  to  the  Phil.  Blag,  by  the  author,  having  been  read  before  the
Boyal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  July  16th,  1900;  and  before  the  "Congr^s"  of  the
Paris  Exhibition  in  August  1900.

t  The  so-called  "electro-magnetic  theory  of  light"  does  not  cut  away  this
foundation  from  the  old  undulatory  theory  of  light.  It  adds  to  that  primary  theory
an  enormous  province  of  transcendent  interest  and  importance ;  it  demands  of  us
not  merely  an  explanation  of  all  the  phenomena  of  light  and  radiant  heat  by
transverse  vibrations  of  an  elastic  solid  called  ether,  but  also  the  inclusion  of
electric  currents,  of  the  permanent  magnetism  of  steel  and  lodestone,  of  magnetic
force,  and  of  electrostatic  force,  in  a  comprehensive  etherial  dynamics.

FORCE  BETWEEN  ETHER  AND  ATOM.  469

where  p  denotes  the  density  of  the  ether  at  Q,  and  /(P,  PQ)
denotes  a  quantity  depending  on  the  position  of  P  and  on  the
distance  PQ.  The  whole  force  exerted  by  the  atom  on  the
portion  pB  of  the  ether  at  Q,  is  the  resultant  of  all  the  forces
calculated  according  to  (1),  for  all  the  infinitesimal  portions  A
into  which  we  imagine  the  whole  volume  of  the  atom  to  be
divided.

§  3.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  the  potential  in  the  well-
known  mathematical  theory  of  attraction,  we  find  rectangular
components  of  this  resultant  as  follows : —

d  d  \

^  =  p^:rA^^'y'^)

•(2),

dz

where  x,  y,  z  denote  coordinates  of  Q  referred  to  lines  fixed  with
reference  to  the  atom,  and  </>  denotes  a  function  (which  we  call
the  potential  at  Q  due  to  the  atom)  found  by  summation  as
follows : —

where  ///J. denotes  integration throughout the volume of  the
atom.

§  4.  The  notation  of  (1)  has  been  introduced  to  signify  that
no  limitation  as  to  admissible  law  of  force  is  essential ;  but  no
generality,  that  seems  to  me  at  present  practically  desirable,  is
lost  if  we  assume,  henceforth,  that  it  is  the  Newtonian  law  of  the
inverse  square  of  the  distance. This  makes

f{P,PQ)=^,  (4),

r*  a

and  therefore  drf{P,r)=^y^ (5),

J  PQ  ^H

where  a  is  a  coefficient  specifying  for  the  point,  P,  of  the  atom,

the  intensity  of  its  attractive  quality  for  ether. Using  (5)  in  (3)

we  find

^-\\\^n (•')■

and  the components  of  the resultant force are  still expressed
by  (2). We  may  suppose  a  to  be  either  positive  or  negative

470  APPENDIX A.

(positive  for  attraction  and  negative  for  repulsion) ;  and  in  fact
in  our  first  and  simplest  illustration  of  the  problem  we  suppose
it  to  be  positive  in  some  parts  and  negative  in  other  parts  of  the
atom,  in  such  quantities  as  to  fulfil  the  condition

//M«  =  0 (7).

§  5.  As  a  first  and  very  simple  illustration,  suppose  the  a^om
to  be  spherical,  of  radius  unity,  with  concentric  interior  spherical
surfaces  of  equal  density.  This  gives,  for  the  direction  of  the
resultant  force  on  any  particle  of  the  ether,  whether  inside  or
outside  the  spherical  boundary  of  the  atom,  a  line  through  the
centre  of  the  atom.  We  may  now  take  A  =  4<7rr^dr.  The  further
assumption  of  (7)  may  thus  be  expressed  by

drr'-a^O (8);

Jo

and  this,  as  we  are  now  supposing  the  forces  between  every
particle  of  the  atom  and  every  particle  of  the  ether  to  be  subject
to  the  Newtonian  law,  implies,  that  the  resultant  of  its  attractions
and  repulsions  is  zero  for  every  particle  of  ether  outside  the
boundary  of  the  atom.  To  simplify  the  case  to  the  utmost,  we
shall  further  suppose  the  distribution  of  positive  and  negative
density  of  the  atom,  and  the  law  of  compressibility  of  the  ether,
to  be  such,  that  the  average  density  of  the  ether  within  the  atom
is  equal  to  the  undisturbed  density  of  the  ether  outside.  Thus
the  attractions  and  repulsions  of  the  atom  in  lines  through  its
centre  produce,  at  different  distances  from  its  centre,  condensa-
tions and  rarefactions  of  the  ether,  with  no  change  of  the  total
quantity  of  it  within  the  boundary  of  the  atom;  and  therefore
produce  no  disturbance  of  the  ether  outside.  To  fix  the  ideas,
and  to  illustrate  the  application  of  the  suggested  hypothesis  to
explain  the  refractivity  of  ordinary  isotropic  transparent  bodies
such  as  water  or  glass,  I  have  chosen  a  definite  particular  case  in
which  the  distribution  of  the  ether  when  at  rest  within  the  atom
is  expressed  by  the  following  formula,  and  partially  shown  in
the  accompanying  diagram  (fig.  1),  and  tables  of  calculated
numbers : —

^''^  1+^(1-/)^ ^^^•

Here,  r'  denotes  the  undisturbed  distance  from  the  centre  of  the
atom,  of  a  particle  of  the  ether  which  is  at  distance  7'  when  at

ARBITRARY EXAMPLE OF DENSITY-DISTURBANCE.

471

rest  under  the influence  of  the  attractive  and  repulsive forces.

4f7r
According  to  this  notation  ^-  S  (r^)  is  the  disturbed  volume  of  a

o

spherical  shell  of  ether  whose  undisturbed  radius  is  ?''  and  thick-

Hence,  if  we  denote  the  disturbed

47r
ness  Si''  and  volume  —  B  (r'^).
o

and  undisturbed  densities  of  the  ether  by  p  and  unity  respectively,

we  have

p8{r')  =  8{r'') (10);

whence,  by  (9),

P  =

8  +  A'(3-r')(l-r')'

.(11).

This  gives  \  +  K  for  the  density  of  the  ether  at  the  centre
of  the  atom.  In  order  that  the  disturbance  may  suffice  for
refractivities  such  as  those  of  air,  or  other  gases,  or  water,  or
glass,  or  other  transparent  liquids  or  isotropic  solids,  according
to  the  dynamical  theory  explained  in  |  16  below,  I  find  that  K
may  for  some  cases  be  about  equal  to  100,  and  for  others  must
be  considerably  greater.  I  have  therefore  taken  K  =  100,  and
calculated  and  drawn  the  accompanying  tables  and  diagram
accordingly.

Table  I.

Col.  1

Col.  2

Col.  3

Col.  3'

Col.  4

Col.  5

r'

/3

r

r'-r

P

{p-l)r^

0-00

101  •o

0-000

0-000

101^0

0-000

•05

91^25

•Oil

•039

88-1

•Oil

•10

. 82^0

•023

•077

75-3

•039

•20

65-0

•049

•151

55-8

•132

•30

50-0

•082

•218

39-1

•256

•40

37^0

•120

•280

25-8

•357

•50

26^0

•169

•331

15^8

•423

•60

17-0

•233

•367

8^76

•423

•70

10  0

•325

•375

4^17

■338

•80

50

•468

•332

1^60

•131

•85

3-25

•578

■272

0^90

-0-033

•90

2^00

•715

•185

0-50

- -256

•95

1^25

•865

•085

•35

- -486

•96

1^16

•897

•063

•36

•  - -515

•97

1-09

•928

•042

•39

- -525

•98

1^04

•957

•023

•46

- -495

•99

1^01

•982

•008

•61

- ^376

1^00

1-00

1^000

•000

1-00

-  •ooo

472

APPENDIX A.

Table  II.

Col.  1

Col.  2

Col.  3

Col.  4

9

Col.  5

r

r'

r  -  r'

(/,- 1)7-2

000

0-000

0-000

101-00

0-000

■02

•091

•071

78-5

•030

•04

•169

•129

64-4

•191

•06

•235

•175

49-6

•175

•08

•297

•217

39-5

•246

•10

•351

•251

31-8

•308

•20

•551

•351

11-8

•432

•30

•677

•377

5-00

-360

•40

•758

•358

2-46

•234

•50

•816

•316

1-34

•085

•60

•858

•258

0-82

-0-065

•70

•895

•195

0-53

- ^231

•80

•929

•129

0-38

- ^397

•90

•961

•061

0-36

- ^518

100

1^000

•000

1^00

•000

§  6.  The  diagram  (fig.  1)  helps  us  to  understand  the  dis-
placement of  ether  and  the  resulting  distribution  of  density,
within  the  atom.  The  circular  arc  marked  100  indicates  a
spherical portion  of  the  boundary  of  the atom  ; the  shorter  of

the  circular  arcs  marked  95,  "90,  20,  '10  indicate  spherical

surfaces  of  undisturbed  ether  of  radii  equal  to  these  numbers.
The  positions  of  the  spherical  surfaces  of  the  same  portions  of
ether  under  the  influence  of  the  atom,  are  indicated  by  the  arc
marked  1"00,  and  the  longer  of  the  arcs  marked  "95,  "90,  ...  '50,
and  the  complete  circles  marked  "40,  'SO,  "20,  'lO.  It  may  be
remarked  that  the  average  density  of  the  ether  within  any  one
of  the  disturbed  spherical  surfaces,  is  equal  to  the  cube  of  the
ratio  of  the  undisturbed  radius  to  the  disturbed  radius,  and  is
shown  numerically  in  column  2  of  Table  I.  Thus,  for  example,
looking  at  the  table  and  diagram,  we  see  that  the  cube  of  the
radius  of  the  short  arc  marked  "50  is  26  times  the  cube  of  the
radius  of  the  long  arc  marked  'bO,  and  therefore  the  average
density  of  the  ether  within  the  spherical  surface  corresponding  to
the  latter  is  26  times  the  density  (unity)  of  the  undisturbed  ether
within  the  spherical  surface  corresponding  to  the  former.  The
densities  shown  in  column  4  of  each  table  are  the  densities  of  the
ether  at  (not  the  average  density  of  the  ether  within)  the  con-
centric spherical  surfaces  of  radius  r  in  the  atom. Column  5  in

DIAGRAM OF DENSITY-DISTURBANCE.

473

each  table  shows  l/47re  of  the  excess  (positive  or  negative)  of  the
quantity  of  ether  in  a  shell  of  radius  r  and  infinitely  small
thickness  e  as  disturbed  by  the  atom  above  the  quantity  in  a

•00

1-00

•95

•90

•80

•70

•60

•50

•95

'90

•80

•70.

•60

•50

•40

Fig.  1.

1-00

•95

•50

•80

•70

■60

•50

474

APPENDIX A.

shell  of  the  same  dimensions  of  undisturbed  ether.  The  formula
of  col.  2  makes  ?•  =  1  when  r'  —  1,  that  is  to  say  the  total  quantity
of  the  disturbed  ether  within  the  radius  of  the  atom  is  the  same
as  that  of  undisturbed  ether  in  a  sphere  of  the  same  radius.
Hence  the  sum  of  the  quantities  of  ether  calculated  from  col.  5
for  consecutive  values  of  r,  with  infinitely  small  differences  from
r  =  0  to  r  =  1,  must  be  zero.  Without  calculating  for  smaller
differences  of  r  than  those  shown  in  either  of  the  tables,  we  find
a  close  verification  of  this  result  by  drawing,  as  in  fig.  2,  a  curve
to  represent  (p  — l)r^  through  the  points  for  which  its  value  is
given  in  one  or  other  of  the  tables,  and  measuring  the  areas  on
the  positive  and  negative  sides  of  the  line  of  abscissas.  By
drawing  on  paper  (four  times  the  scale  of  the  annexed  diagram),
showing  engraved  squares  of  "5  inch  and  "1  inch,  and  counting
the  smallest  squares  and  parts  of  squares  in  the  two  areas,  I  have
verified  that  they  are  equal  within  less  than  1  per  cent,  of  either
sum,  which  is  as  close  as  can  be  expected  from  the  numerical
approximations  shown  in  the  tables,  and  from  the  accuracy
attained  in  the  drawinsr.

/^

^

/

\

/

\

\

\

\

1

\

J

\,

1

N

0

1

;

i

4

5

\;

6

7

B

»

\,

\

\,

-

\

\

\

I

\

\

/

\

/

^

.J

Fig.  2.

§  7. In  Table  I.  (argument  r')  all  the  quantities  are  shown
for  chosen  values  of  r',  and  in  Table  II.  for  chosen  values  of  r.

ATOM MOVING THROUGH SPACE OCCUPIED BY ETHER. 475

The  calculations  for  Table  I.  are  purely  algebraic,  involving
merely  cube  roots  beyond  elementary  arithmetic.  To  calculate
in  terms  of  given  values  of  r  the  results  shown  in  Table  II.
involves  the  solution  of  a  cubic  equation.  They  have  been
actually  found  by  aid  of  a  curve  drawn  from  the  numbers  of
col.  3  Table  I.,  showing  r  in  terms  of  r'.  The  numbers  in  col.  2
of  Table  II.  showing,  for  chosen  values  of  r,  the  corresponding
values  of  r,  have  been  taken  from  the  curve ;  and  we  may  verify-
that  they  are  approximately  equal  to  the  roots  of  the  equation
shown  at  the  head  of  col.  2  of  Table  I.,  regarded  as  a  cubic  for  r'
with  any  given  values  of  r  and  K.

Thus,  for  example,  taking  r  =  "929  we  calculate  r  =  "Sll,
„ r'  =  -816  „  r  =  -498,

„ 7''  =  -677  „  r  =  -301,

„ r'  =  -091  „  r  =  -0208,

where  we  should  have  r  =  "8,  '5,  '3,  and  "02  respectively.  These
approximations  are  good  enough  for  our  present  purpose.

§  8.  The  diagram  of  fig.  2  is  interesting,  as  showing  how,
with  densities  of  ether  varying  through  the  wide  range  of  from
•35  to  101,  the  whole  mass  within  the  atom  is  distributed  among
the  concentric  spherical  surfaces  of  equal  density.  We  see  by  it,
interpreted  in  conjunction  with  col.  4  of  the  tables,  that  from  the
centre  to  '56  of  the  radius  the  density  falls  from  101  to  1.  For
radii  from  "56  to  1,  the  values  of  (p  —  !)?•-  decrease  to  a  negative
minimum  of  "525  at  r  =  "93,  and  rise  to  zero  at  r  =  1.  The  place
of  minimum  density  is  of  course  inside  the  radius  at  which
(p  —  1)  r-  is  a  minimum  ;  by  cols.  4  and  8  of  Table  I.,  and  cols.  4
and  1  of  Table  II.,  we  see  that  the  minimum  density  is  about  '35,
and  at  distance  approximately  '87  from  the  centre.

§  9.  Let  us  suppose  now  our  atom  to  be  set  in  motion  through
space  occupied  by  ether,  and  kept  in  motion  with  a  uniform
velocity  v,  which  we  shall  first  suppose  to  be  infinitely  small  in
comparison  with  the  propagational  velocity  of  equivoluminal*
waves  through  pure  ether  undisturbed  by  any  other  substance
than  that  of  the  atom. The velocity  of  the earth in  its  orbit

*  That  is  to  say,  waves  of  transverse  vibration,  being  the  only  kind  of  wave  in
an  isotropic  solid  in  which  every  part  of  the  solid  keeps  its  volume  unchanged
during  the  motion. See  Phil.  Mag.,  May,  August,  and  October,  1899.

476  APPENDIX A.

round  the  sun  being  about  1/10,000  of  the  velocity  of  light,  is
small  enough  to  give  results,  kinematic  and  dynamic,  in  respect
to  the  relative  motion  of  ether  and  the  atoms  constituting  the
earth  closely  in  agreement  with  this  supposition.  According  to
it,  the  position  of  every  particle  of  the  ether  at  any  instant  is  the
same  as  if  the  atom  were  at  rest ;  and  to  find  the  motion  produced
in  the  ether  by  the  motion  of  the  atom,  we  have  a  purely
kinematic  problem  of  which  an  easy  graphic  solution  is  found
by  marking  on  a  diagram  the  successive  positions  thus  determined
for  any  particle  of  the  ether,  according  to  the  positiims  of  the
atom  at  successive  times  with  short  enough  intervals  between
them,  to  show  clearly  the  path  and  the  varying  velocity  of  the
particle.

§  10,  Look,  for  example,  at  fig.  3,  in  which  a  semi-circum-
ference of  the  atom  at  the  middle  instant  of  the  time  we  are
going  to  consider,  is  indicated  by  a  semicircle  Cgo^Co,  with
diameter  CoC^2o  equal  to  two  units  of  length.  Suppose  the  centre
of  the  atom  to  move  from  right  to  left  in  the  straight  line  GqC^^
with  velocity  '1,  taking  for  unit  of  time  the  time  of  travelling  1/10
of  the  radius.  Thus,  reckoning  from  the  time  when  the  centre
is  at  Co,  the  times  when  it  is  at  Ca,  G^,  Cm,  Cjg,  G^o  are  2,  5,  10,
18,  20.  Let  Q'  be  the  undisturbed  position  of  a  particle  of  ether
before  time  2  when  the  atom  reaches  it,  and  after  time  18  when
the  atom  leaves  it.  This  implies  that  Q'G^  =  Q'G^^  =  1,  and
C2C10  =  CjoCis  = '8,  and  therefore  CjoQ' =  "6.  The  position  of  the
particle  of  ether,  which  when  undisturbed  is  at  Q',  is  found  for
any  instant  t  of  the  disturbance  as  follows  : —

Take  GJJ  =  t/10;  draw  Q'G,  and  calling  this  r'  find  r'  —  7'  by
formula  (9),  or  Table  I.  or  II. :  in  Q'G  take  Q'Q  =  r  —  r.  Q  is
the  position  at  time  t  of  the  particle  whose  undisturbed  position
is  Q'.  The  drawing  shows  the  construction  for  t  =  2,  and  t  =  5,
and  t=  18.  The  positions  at  times  2,  3,  4,  5,  ...  15,  16,  17,  18
are  indicated  by  the  dots  marked  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  0,  1,  2,  3,  4,
5,  6,  7,  8  on  the  closed  curve  with  a  corner  at  Q',  which  has  been
found  by  tracing  a  smooth  curve  through  them.  This  curve,
which,  for  brevity,  we  shall  call  the  orbit  of  the  particle,  is
clearly  tangential  to  the  lines  Q'Cs  and  Q'G^s.  By  looking  to  the
formula  (9),  we  see  that  the  velocity  of  the  particle  is  zero  at
the  instants  of  leaving  Q'  and  returning  to  it. Fig.  4  shows  the

AN ABSOLUTE ORBIT AND ITS RELATIVE STREAM-LINE. 477

478  APPENDIX A.

particular  orbit  of  fig.  3,  and  nine  others  drawn  by  the  same
method ;  in  all  ten  orbits  of  ten  particles  whose  undisturbed
positions  are  in  one  line  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  motion  of
the  centre  of  the  atom,  and  at  distances  0,  "1,  '2,  ...  "9  from  it.
All  these  particles  are  again  in  one  straight  line  at  time  10,  being
what  we  may  call  the  time  of  mid-orbit  of  each  particle.  The
numbers  marked  on  the  right-hand  halves  of  the  orbits  are  times
from  the  zero  of  our  reckoning;  the  numbers  1,  2,  3  ...  etc.  on
the  left  correspond  to  times  11,  12,  13  ...  of  our  reckoning  as
hitherto,  or  to  times  1,  2,  3  ...  after  mid-orbit  passages.  Lines
drawn  across  the  orbits  through  1,  2,  3  ...  on  the  left,  show
simultaneous  positions  of  the  ten  particles  at  times  1,  2,  3  after
mid- orbit.  The  line  drawn  from  4  across  seven  of  the  curved
orbits,  shows  for  time  4  after  mid-orbit,  simultaneous  positions
of  eight  particles,  whose  undisturbed  distances  are  0,  "1,  ...  "7.
Remark  that  the  orbit  for  the  first  of  these  ten  particles  is  a
straight  line.

§  11.  We  have  thus  in  |  10  solved  one  of  the  two  chief
kinematic  questions  presented  by  our  problem : — to  find  the
orbit  of  a  particle  of  ether  as  disturbed  by  the  moving  atom,
relatively  to  the  surrounding  ether  supposed  fixed.  The  other
question,  to  find  the  path  traced  through  the  atom  supposed  fixed
while,  through  all  space  outside  the  atom,  the  ether  is  supposed
to  move  uniformly  in  parallel  lines,  is  easily  solved,  as  follows : —
Going  back  to  fig.  3,  suppose  now  that  instead  of,  as  in  §  10,  the
atom  moving  from  right  to  left  with  velocity  1  and  the  ether
outside  it  at  rest,  the  atom  is  at  rest  and  the  ether  outside  it  is
moving  from  left  to  right  with  velocity  "1.  Let  '2,  '3,  '4,  '5,  '6,  '7,
'8,  '9,  0,  '1,  '2,  '3,  '4,  '5,  '6,  '7,  '8  be  the  path  of  a  particle  of  ether
through  the  atom  marked  by  seventeen  points  corresponding  to
the  same  numbers  unaccented  showing  the  orbit  of  the  same
particle  of  ether  on  the  former  supposition.  On  both  suppositions,
the  position  of  the  particle  of  ether  at  time  10  from  our  original
era,  (§  10),  is  marked  0.  For  times  11,  12,  13,  etc.,  the  positions
of  the  particle  on  the  former  supposition  are  marked  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,
6,  7,  8  on  the  left  half  of  the  orbit.  The  positions  of  the  same
particle  on  the  present  supposition  are  found  by  drawing  from  the
points  1,  2,  3,  ...  7,  8  parallel  lines  to  the  right,  1  '1,  2  '2,  3  '3,  ...
7  '7,  8  '8,  equal  respectively  to 1,  -2,  -3,  ...  -7,  "8  of  the  radius  of

ABSOLUTE ORBITS OF TEN PARTICLES OF ETHER.

479

the  atom,  being  our  unit  of  length.  Thus  we  have  the  latter  half
of  the  passage  of  the  particle  through  the  atom  ;  the  first  half  is
equal  and  similar  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  atom. Applying

the  same  process  to  every  one  of  the  ten  orbits  shown  in
fig.  4,  and  to  the  nine  orbits  of  particles  whose  undisturbed
distances  from  the  central  line  on  the  other  side  are  "1,  "2,  ...  '9,
we  find  the  set  of  stream-lines  shown  in  fig.  5  (p.  480).  The
dots  on  these  lines  show  the  positions  of  the  particles  at  times

480

APPENDIX A.

0,  1,  2,  ...  19,  20  of  our  original  reckoning  (§  10).  The  numbers
on  the  stream-line  of  the  particle  whose  undisturbed  distance
from  the  central  line  is  -6  are  marked  for  comparison  with  fig.  3.

Fig.  6.

The  lines  drawn  across  the  stream-lines  on  the  left-hand  side  of
fig.  5  show  simultaneous  positions  of  rows  of  particles  of  ether
which,  when  undisturbed,  are  in  straight  lines  perpendicular  to

KINETIC ENERGY OF ETHER WITHIN A MOVING ATOM. 481

the  direction  of  motion.  The  quadrilaterals  thus  formed  within
the  left-hand  semicircle  show  the  figures  to  which  the  squares
of  ether,  seen  entering  from  the  left-hand  end  of  the  diagram,
become  altered  in  passing  through  the  atom.  Thus  we  have
completed  the  solution  of  our  second  chief  kinematic  question.

§  12.  The  first  dynamic  question  that  occurs  to  us,  returning
to  the  supposition  of  moving  atom  and  of  ether  outside  it  at  rest,
is : — What  is  the  total  kinetic  energy  (k)  of  the  portion  of  the
ether  which  at  any  instant  is  within  the  atom  ?  To  answer  it,
think  of  an  infinite  circular  cylinder  of  the  ether  in  the  space
traversed  by  the  atom.  The  time-integral  from  any  era  ^  =  0  of
the  total  kinetic  energy  of  the  ether  in  this  cylinder  is  tK]  because
the  ether  outside  the  cylinder  is  undisturbed  by  the  motion  of  the
atom  according  to  our  present  assumptions.  Consider  any  circular
disk  of  this  cylinder  of  infinitely  small  thickness  e.  After  the
atom  has  passed  it,  it  has  contributed  to  Ik,  an  amount  equal  to
the  time-integral  of  the  kinetic  energies  of  all  the  orbits  of  small
parts  into  which  we  may  suppose  it  divided,  and  it  contributes
no  more  in  subsequent  time.  Imagine  the  disk  divided  into
concentric  rings  of  rectangular  cross-section  edr'.  The  mass  of
one  of  these  rings  is  ^irr'dr'e  because  its  density  is  unity;  and
all  its  parts  move  in  equal  and  similar  orbits.  Thus  we  find  that
the  total  contribution  of  the  disk  amounts  to

iTrei"  dr'r'Us'ldt (12),

Avhere  fds^/dt  denotes  integration  over  one-half  the  orbit  of  a
particle  of  ether  whose  undisturbed  distance  from  the  central
line  is  r' ;  (because  ^ds^jdi"^  is  the  kinetic  energy  of  an  ideal
particle  of  unit  mass  moving  in  the  orbit  considered).  Now  the
time-integral  Kt  is  wholly  made  up  by  contributions  of  successive
disks  of  the  cylinder.  Hence  (12)  shows  the  contribution  per
time  ejq,  q  being  the  velocity  of  the  atom ;  and  (k  being  the
contribution  per  unit  of  time)  we  therefore  have

K  =  2'Trqj dr'r'lds^jdt  (13).

I  13. The  double  integral  shown  in  (13)  has  been  evaluated
with  amply  sufficient  accuracy  for  our  present  purpose  by  seem-
ingly rough  summations ;  firstly,  the  summations  jds-jdt  for  the
T.  L.  31

482

APPENDIX A.

ten  orbits  shown  in  fig.  4,  and  secondly,  summation  of  these  sums
each  multiplied  by  dr'r.  In  the  summations  for  each  half-orbit,
ds  has  been  taken  as  the  lengths  of  the  curve  between  the  con-
secutive points  from  which  the  curve  has  been  traced.  This
implies  taking  dt  =  l  throughout  the  three  orbits  corresponding
to  undisturbed  distances  from  the  central  line  equal  respectively
to  0,  '6,  "8 ;  and  throughout  the  other  semi-orbits,  except  for  the
portions  next  the  corner,  which  correspond  essentially  to  intervals
each  <  1.  The  plan  followed  is  sufficiently  illustrated  by  the
accompanying  Table  III.,  which  shows  the  whole  process  of
calculating  and  summing  the  parts  for  the  orbit  corresponding
to  undisturbed  distance  "7.

Table  IV.  shows  the  sums  for  the  ten  orbits  and  the  products
of  each  sum  multiplied  by  the  proper  value  of  r',  to  prepare  for
the  final  integration,  which  has  been  performed'  by  finding  the
area  of  a  representative  curve  drawn  on  conveniently  squared
paper  as  described  in  |  6  above.  The  result  thus  found  is  •02115.
It  is  very  satisfactory  to  see  that,  within  "1  per  cent.,  this  agrees
with  the  simple  sum  of  the  widely  different  numbers  shown  in
col.  3  of  Table  IV.

Table  III.
Orbit  r  =  -7.

Table  IV.

ds

ds2

dt

ds^jdt

•006

■000036

0^14

■000257

•137

•018769

1-00

•018769

•112

■012544

1^00

•012544

•077

■005929

1^00

•005929

•050

■002500

1^00

•002500

•048

■002804

100

•002304

•050

■002500

1^00

•002500

•052

•002704

1-00

•002704

Sum

•047507

r'

jds'^ldt

■l.r'.jds^jdt

•0

•0818

•00000

•1

■0804

•00080

•2

■0781

•00156

•3

■0769

•00231

•4

■0722

■00289

■5

•0670

•00335

•6

•0567

■00310

•7

•0475

•00332

•8

•0310

•00248

•9

•0114

•00102

Sum

•02113

§  14. Using  in  (13)  the  conclusion  of  §  13,  and  taking  g  =  1,
we  find

/c  =  27r. -002115 (14).

A  convenient  way  of  explaining  this  result  is  to  remark  that  it  is

EXTRA  INERTIA  OF  ETHER  MOVING  THROUGH  A  FIXED  ATOM. 483

Mtj-  1  \  .

•634  of  the  kinetic  energy  f- -('l)-]  of  an  ideal  globe  of  rigid

matter  of  the  same  bulk  as  onr  atom,  moving  with  the  same
velocity.  Looking  now  at  the  definition  of  k  in  the  beginning
of  §12,  we  may  put  our  conclusion  in  words,  thus: — The  dis-
tribution of  etherial  density  within  our  ideal  spherical  atom
represented  by  (11)  with  K  =  100,  gives  rise  to  kinetic  energy
of  the  ether  within  it  at  any  instant,  when  the  atom  is  moving
slowly  through  space  filled  with  ether,  equal  to  "634  of  the  kinetic
energy  of  motion  with  the  same  velocity  through  ideal  void  space,
of  an  ideal  rigid  globe  of  the  same  bulk  as  the  atom,  and  the
same  density  as  the  undisturbed  density  of  the  ether.  Thus  if
the  atom,  which  we  are  supposing  to  be  a  constituent  of  real
ponderable  matter,  has  an  inertia  of  its  own  equal  to  /  per  unit
of  its  volume,  the  effective  inertia  of  its  motion  through  space

occupied by  ether  will be ^s^(/+"684); the  diameter of  the

atom  being  now  denoted  by  s  (instead  of  2  as  hitherto),  and  the
inertia  of  unit  bulk  of  the  ether  being  still  (as  hitherto)  taken  as
unit  of  inertia.  In  all  that  follows  we  shall  suppose  /  to  be  very
great,  much  greater  than  10";  perhaps  greater  than  10^1

§  15.  Consider  now,  as  in  §  11  above,  our  atom  at  rest;  and
the  ether  moving  uniformly  in  the  space  around  the  atom,  and
through  the  space  occupied  by  the  atom,  according  to  the  curved
stream-lines  and  the  var3ang  velocities  shown  in  fig.  5.  The
effective  inertia  of  any  portion  of  the  ether  containing  the  atom
will  be  greater  than  the  simple  inertia  of  an  equal  volume  of  the

ether  by  the  amount  w  s^  x  '634. This  follows  from  the  well-known

dynamical  theorem  that  the  total  kinetic  energy  of  any  moving
body  or  system  of  bodies  is  equal  to  the  kinetic  energy  due  to  the
motion  of  its  centre  of  inertia,  plus  the  sum  of  the  kinetic  energies
of  the  motions  of  all  its  parts  relative  to  the  centre  of  inertia.

§  16.  Suppose  now  a  transparent  body — solid,  liquid,  or
gaseous — to  consist  of  an  assemblage  of  atoms  all  of  the  same
magnitude  and  quality  as  our  ideal  atom  defined  in  §  2,  and
with  /  enormously  great  as  described  in  §  14.  The  atoms  may
be  all  motionless  as  in  an  absolutely  cold  solid,  or  they  may  have
the  thermal  motions  of  the  molecules  of  a  solid,  liquid,  or  gas  at

31—2

484  APPENDIX A.

any  temperature  not  so  high  but  that  the  thermal  velocities  are
everywhere  small  in  comparison  with  the  velocity  of  light.  The
effective  inertia  of  the  ether  per  unit  volume  of  the  assemblage
will  be  exceedingly  nearly  the  same  as  if  the  atoms  were  all
absolutely  fixed,  and  will  therefore,  by  §  15,  be  equal  to

l+iV^Js^-634 (15),

o

where  N  denotes  the  number  of  atoms  per  cubic  centimetre  of  the
assemblage,  one  centimetre  being  now  our  unit  of  length.  Hence,
if  we  denote  by  V  the  velocity  of  light  in  undisturbed  ether,  its
velocity  through  the  space  occupied  by  the  supposed  assemblage
of  atoms  will  be

V  /(l+N'^s'-QS^y (16).

§  17.  For  example,  let  us  take  iV=  4  x  10^°* ;  and,  as  I  find
suits  the  cases  of  oxygen  and  argon,  s  =  1*42  x  10~®,  which  gives

iV'^s^  =  "60  X  10~l The  assemblage  thus  defined  would,  if  con-
6

densed  one-thousand-fold,  have  "6  of  its  whole  volume  occupied  by

the  atoms  and  '4  by  undisturbed  ether ;  which  is  somewhat  denser

than  the  cubic  arrangement  of  globes

[space  unoccupied  =  1  —  ^  =  '4764  j ,

and  less  dense  than  the  densest  possible  arrangement

( space  unoccupied  =  1  —  ^—j^  =  "2590  j .

Taking  now  iV^  s'  =  '60  x  10~^  in  (16),  we  find  for  the  refractive

index  of  our  assemblage  1'00019,  which  is  somewhat  smaller  than
the  refractive  index  of  oxygen  (1  000273).  By  taking  for  K  a  larger
value  than  100  in  (11),  we  could  readily  fit  the  formula  to  give,  in

*  I  am  forced  to  take  this  very  large  number  instead  of  Maxwell's  19  x  10^*,
as  I  have  found  it  otherwise  impossible  to  reconcile  the  known  viscosities  and  the
known  condensations  of  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen  with  Maxwell's  theoretical
formulas.  [In  §  50  of  Lect.  XVII.  of  the  present  volume  we  saw  that  the  smaller
value  10-"  is  admissible  and  probably  may  be  not  far  from  the  truth.]  It  must  be
remembered  that  Avogadro's  law  makes  N  the  same  for  all  gases.

DIFFICULTY RAISED BY MICHELSON's EXPERIMENT.  485

an  assemblage  in  which  "6  x  10~"  of  the  whole  space  is  occupied
by  the  atom,  exactly  the  refractive  index  of  oxygen,  nitrogen,  or
argon,  or  any  other  gas.  It  is  remarkable  that  according  to  the
particular  assumptions  specified  in  §  5,  a  density  of  ether  in  the
centre  of  the  atom  considerably  greater  than  100  times  the
density  of  undisturbed  ether  is  required  to  make  the  refractivity
as  great  as  that  of  oxygen.  There  is,  however,  no  difficulty  in
admitting  so  great  a  condensation  of  ether  by  the  atom,  if  we
are  to  regard  our  present  problem  as  the  basis  of  a  physical
hypothesis  worthy  of  consideration,

§  18.  There  is,  however,  one  serious,  perhaps  insuperable,
difficulty  to  which  I  must  refer  in  conclusion :  the  reconciliation
of  our  hypothesis  with  the  result  that  ether  in  the  earth's
atmosphere  is  motionless  relatively  to  the  earth,  seemingly  proved
by  an  admirable  experiment  designed  by  Michelson,  and  carried
out  with  most  searching  care  to  secure  a  trustworthy  result,  by
himself  and  Morley*.  I  cannot  see  any  flaw  either  in  the  idea
or  in  the  execution  of  this  experiment.  But  a  possibility  of
escaping  from  the  conclusion  which  it  seemed  to  prove  may  be
found  in  a  brilliant  suggestion  made  independently  by  Fitzgerald f,
and  by  Lorentz;;:  of  Leyden,  to  the  effect  that  the  motion  of  ether
through  matter  may  slightly  alter  its  linear  dimensions ;  according
to  which  if  the  stone  slab  constituting  the  sole  plate  of  Michelson
and  Morley 's  apparatus  has,  in  virtue  of  its  motion  through  space
occupied  by  ether,  its  lineal  dimensions  shortened  one  one-hundred-
millionth  §  in  the  direction  of  motion,  the  result  of  the  experiment
would  not  disprove  the  free  motion  of  ether  through  space  occupied
by  the  earth.

*  Phil.  Mag.,  December,  1887.

t  Public  Lectures  in  Trinity  College,  Dublin.

J  Versuch  einer  Theorie  der  electrischen  und  optischen  Erscheinungen  in  bewegten
Korperri. Leiden,  1895.

§  This  being  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  earth's  velocity  round  the  sun
(30  kilometres  per  sec.)  to  the  velocity  of  light  (300,000  kilometres  per  sec).

APPENDIX B.

NINETEENTH CENTURY CLOUDS OVER THE DYNAMICAL
THEORY OF HEAT  AND LIGHT*.

(Friday  evening  Lecture,  Royal  Institution,  April  27,  1900.)

[In  the  present  article  the  substance  of  the  lecture  is  repro-
duced— with  large  additions,  in  which  work  commenced  at  the
beginning  of  last  year  and  continued  after  the  lecture,  during
thirteen  months  up  to  the  present  time,  is  described — with  results
confirming  the  conclusions  and  largely  extending  the  illustrations
which  were  given  in  the  lecture.  I  desire  to  take  this  opportunity
of  expressing  my  obligations  to  Mr  William  Anderson,  my  secretary
and  assistant,  for  the  mathematical  tact  and  skill,  the  accuracy  of
geometrical  drawing,  and  the  unfailingly  faithful  perseverance  in
the  long-continued  and  varied  series  of  drawings  and  algebraic
and  arithmetical  calculations,  explained  in  the  following  pages.
The  whole  of  this  work,  involving  the  determination  of  results
due  to  more  than  five  thousand  individual  impacts,  has  been
performed  by  Mr  Anderson. — K.,  Feb.  2,  1901.]

§  1.  The  beauty  and  clearness  of  the  dynamical  theory,  which
asserts  heat  and  light  to  be  modes  of  motion,  is  at  present  ob-
scured by  two  clouds.  I.  The  first  came  into  existence  with  the
undulatory  theory  of  light,  and  was  dealt  with  by  Fresnel  and
Dr  Thomas  Young;  it  involved  the  question.  How  could  the  earth
move  through  an  elastic  solid,  such  as  essentially  is  the  lumini-
ferous  ether  ?  II.  The  second  is  the  Maxwell-Boltzmann  doctrine
regarding  the  partition  of  energy.

§  2.  Cloud  I. — Relative  Motion  of  Ether  and  Ponder-
able Bodies;  such  as  movable  bodies  at  the  earth's  surface,
stones,  metals,  liquids,  gases ;  the  atmosphere  surrounduig  the
earth;  the  earth  itself  as  a  whole; meteorites,  the  moon,  the  sun,

*  Journal  of  the  Eoijal  Institution. Also  Phil.  Maij.  July,  1901.

MOTION OF ETHEK  THROUGH PONDERABLE  MATTER.  487

and  other  celestial  bodies.  We  might  imagine  the  question  satis-
factorily answered,  by  supposing  ether  to  have  practically  perfect
elasticity  for  the  exceedingly  rapid  vibrations,  with  exceedingly
small  extent  of  distortion,  which  constitute  light;  while  it  behaves
almost  like  a  fluid  of  very  small  viscosity,  and  yields  with  ex-
ceedingly small  resistance,  practically  no  resistance,  to  bodies
moving  through  it  as  slowly  as  even  the  most  rapid  of  the
heavenly  bodies.  There  are,  however,  many  very  serious  objections
to  this  supposition;  among  them  one  which  has  been  most  noticed,
though  perhaps  not  really  the  most  serious,  that  it  seems  in-
compatible with  the  known  phenomena  of  the  aberration  of  light.
Referring  to  it,  Fresnel,  in  his  celebrated  letter*  to  Arago,  wrote
as  follows:

"  Mais  il  parait  impossible  d'expliquer  I'aberration  des  etoiles
"dans  cette  hypothese;  je  n'ai  pu  jusqu'a  present  du  moins  con-
"cevoir  nettement  ce  phenomene  qu'en  supposant  que  I'ether
"  passe  librement  au  travers  du  globe,  et  que  la  vitesse  communi-
"  quee  a  ce  fluide  subtil  n'est  qu'une  petite  partie  de  celle  de  la
"terre;  n'en  excede  pas  le  centieine,  par  exemple.

"Quelque  extraordinaire  que  paraisse  cette  hypothese  au  premier
"  abord,  elle  n'est  point  en  contradiction,  ce  me  semble,  avec  I'idee
"  que  les  plus  grands  physiciens  se  sont  faite  de  I'extreme  porosite
"  des  corps."

The  same  hypothesis  was  given  by  Thomas  Young,  in  his
celebrated  statement  that  ether  passes  through  among  the  mole-
cules or  atoms  of  material  bodies  like  wind  blowing  through  a
grove  of  trees.  It  is  clear  that  neither  Fresnel  nor  Young  had
the  idea  that  the  ether  of  their  undulatory  theory  of  light,  with
its  transverse  vibrations,  is  essentially  an  elastic  solid,  that  is  to
say,  matter  which  resists  change  of  shape  with  permanent  or
sub-permanent  force.  If  they  had  grasped  this  idea  they  must
have  noticed  the  enormous  difficulty  presented  by  the  laceration
which  the  ether  must  experience  if  it  moves  through  pores  or
interstices  among  the  atoms  of  matter.

§  3.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that,  without  contravening  any-
thing we  know  from  observation  of  nature,  we  may  simply  deny
the  scholastic  axiom  that  two  portions  of  matter  cannot  jointly

*  Annales  de  Chimie,  1818  ;  quoted  in  full  by  Larmor  in  his  recent  book,  yEther
and  Matter,  pp.  320—322.

488  APPENDIX B.

occupy  the  same  space,  and  may  assert,  as  an  admissible  hypo-
thesis, that  ether  does  occupy  the  same  space  as  ponderable
matter,  and  that  ether  is  not  displaced  by  ponderable  bodies
moving  through  space  occupied  by  ether.  But  how  then  could
matter  act  on  ether,  and  ether  act  on  matter,  to  produce  the
known  phenomena  of  light  (or  radiant  heat),  generated  by  the
action  of  ponderable  bodies  on  ether,  and  acting  on  ponderable
bodies  to  produce  its  visual,  chemical,  phosphorescent,  thermal,
and  photographic  effects  ?  There  is  no  difficulty  in  answering
this  question  if,  as  it  probably  is,  ether  is  a  compressible  and
dilatable*  solid.  We  have  only  to  suppose  that  the  atom  exerts
force  on  the  ether,  by  which  condensation  or  rarefaction  is  pro-
duced within  the  space  occupied  by  the  atom.  At  present -f-  I
confine  myself,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  to  the  suggestion  of  a
spherical  atom  producing  condensation  and  rarefaction,  with  con-
centric spherical  surfaces  of  equal  density,  but  the  same  total
quantity  of  ether  within  its  boundary  as  the  quantity  in  an
equal  volume  of  free  undisturbed  ether.

§  4.  Consider  now  such  an  atom  given  at  rest  anywhere  in
space  occupied  by  ether.  Let  force  be  applied  to  it  to  cause  it  to
move  in  any  direction,  first  with  gradually  increasing  speed,  and
after  that  with  uniform  speed.  If  this  speed  is  anything  less
than  the  velocity  of  light,  the  force  may  be  mathematically  proved
to  become  zero  at  some  short  time  after  the  instant  when  the
velocity  of  the  atom  becomes  uniform,  and  to  remain  zero  for
ever  thereafter. What  takes  place  is  this  :

§  0.  During  all  the  time  in  which  the  velocity  of  the  atom  is
being  augmented  from  zero,  two  sets  of  non-periodic  waves,  one
of  them  equi-voluminal,  the  other  irrotational  (which  is  therefore
condensational-rarefactional),  are  being  sent  out  in  all  directions
through  the  surrounding  ether.  The  rears  of  the  last  of  these
waves  leave  the  atom,  at  some  time  after  its  acceleration  ceases.
This  time,  if  the  motion  of  the  ether  outside the atom,  close

*  To  deny  this  property  is  to  attribute  to  ether  indefinitely  great  resistance
against  forces  tending  to  condense  it  or  to  dilate  it — which  seems,  in  truth,  an
infinitely  difficult  assumption.

t  Further  developments  of  the  suggested  idea  have  been  contributed  to  the
Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  and  to  the  Congr^s  International  de  Physique  held  in
Paris  in  August.  {Froc.  R.S.E.  July  1900 ;  Vol.  of  reports,  in  French,  of  the  Cong.
Inter.]  and  Phil.  Mag.,  Aug.,  Sept.,  1900.)

UNIFORM  MOTION  OF  ATOM  RESISTED  IF  QUICKER  THAN  LIGHT. 489

beside  it,  is  infinitesimal,  is  equal  to  the  time  taken  by  the  slower
wave  (which  is  the  equi-voluminal)  to  travel  the  diameter  of  the
atom,  and  is  the  short  time  referred  to  in  §4.  When  the  rears
of  both  waves  have  got  clear  of  the  atom,  the  ether  within  it  and
in  the  space  around  it,  left  clear  by  both  rears,  has  come  to  a
steady  state  of  motion  relatively  to  the  atom.  This  steady  motion
approximates  more  and  more  nearly  to  uniform  motion  in  parallel
lines,  at  greater  and  greater  distances  from  the  atom.  At  a
distance  of  twenty  diameters  it  differs  exceedingly  little  from
uniformity.

§6.  But  it  is  only  when  the  velocity  of  the  atom  is  very
small  in  comparison  with  the  velocity  of  light,  that  the  dis-
turbance of  the  ether  in  the  space  close  round  the  atom  is
infinitesimal.  The  propositions  asserted  in  §  4  and  the  first  sen-
tence of  §5  are  true,  however  little  the  final  velocity  of  the  atom
falls  short  of  the  velocity  of  light.  If  this  uniform  final  velocity
of  the  atom  exceeds  the  velocity  of  light,  by  ever  so  little,  a
non-periodic  conical  wave  of  equi-voluminal  motion  is  produced,
according  to  the  same  principle  as  that  illustrated  for  sound  by
Mach's  beautiful  photographs  of  illumination  by  electric  spark,
showing,  by  changed  refractivity,  the  condensational- rare  factional
disturbance  produced  in  air  by  the  motion  through  it  of  a  rifle
bullet.  The  semi-vertical  angle  of  the  cone,  whether  in  air  or
ether,  is  equal  to  the  angle  whose  sine  is  the  ratio  of  the  wave
velocity  to  the  velocity  of  the  moving  body*.

*  On  the  same  principle  we  see  that  a  body  moving  steadily  (and,  with  little
error,  we  may  say  also  that  a  fish  or  water-fowl  propelling  itself  by  fins  or  web-feet)
through  calm  water,  either  fioating  on  the  surface  or  wholly  submerged  at  some
moderate  distance  below  the  surface,  produces  no  wave  disturbance  if  its  velocity  is
less  than  the  minimum  wave  velocity  due  to  gravity  and  surface  tension  (being  about
23  cms.  per  second,  or  -44  of  a  nautical  mile  per  hour,  whether  for  sea  water  or  fresh
water);  and  if  its  velocity  exceeds  the  minimum  wave  velocity,  it  produces  a  wave
disturbance  bounded  by  two  lines  inclined  on  each  side  of  its  wake  at  angles  each
equal  to  the  angle  whose  sine  is  the  minimum  wave  velocity  divided  by  the  velocity
of  the  moving  body.  It  is  easy  for  anyone  to  observe  this  by  dipping  vertically  a
pencil  or  a  walking-stick  into  still  water  in  a  pond  (or  even  in  a  good-sized  hand-
basin),  and  moving  it  horizontally,  first  with  exceeding  small  speed,  and  afterwards
faster  and  faster.  I  first  noticed  it  nineteen  years  ago,  and  described  observations
for  an  experimental  determination  of  the  minimum  velocity  of  waves,  in  a  letter  to
William  Froude,  published  in  Nature  for  Oct.,  in  Phil.  Mag.  for  Nov.  1871,  and
in  App.  G  below,  from  which  the  following  is  extracted.  "[Recently,  in  the
"  schooner  yacht  Lalla  Rookh],  being  becalmed  in  the  Sound  of  Mull,  I  had  an
"  excellent  opportunity,  with  the  assistance  of  Professor  Helmholtz,  and  my  brother

490  APPENDIX B.

§  7.  If,  for  a  moment,  we  imagine  the  steady  motion  of  the
atom  to  be  at  a  higher  speed  than  the  wave  velocity  of  the
eondensational-rarefactional  wave,  two  conical  waves,  of  angles
corresponding  to  the  two  wave  velocities,  -will  be  steadily  pro-
duced ;  but  we  need  not  occupy  ourselves  at  present  with  this
case  because  the  velocity  of  the  eondensational-rarefactional  wave
in  ether  is,  we  are  compelled  to  believe,  enormously  great  in
comparison  with  the  velocity  of  light.

§  8.  Let  now  a  periodic  force  be  applied  to  the  atom  so  as  to
cause  it  to  move  to  and  fro  continually,  with  simple  harmonic
motion.  By  the  first  sentence  of  §  5  we  see  that  two  sets  of
periodic  waves,  one  equi-voluminal,  the  other  irrotational,  are
continually  produced.  Without  mathematical  investigation  we
see  that  if,  as  in  ether,  the  eondensational-rarefactional  wave
velocity  is  very  great  in  comparison  with  the  equi-voluminal  wave
velocity,  the  energy  taken  by  the  eondensational-rarefactional
wave  is  exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  that  taken  by  the
equi-voluminal  wave ;  how  small  we  can  find  easily  enough  by
regular  mathematical  investigation.  Thus  we  see  how  it  is  that
the  hypothesis  of  §  3  suffices  for  the  answer  suggested  in  that
section  to  the  question,  How  could  matter  act  on  ether  so  as  to
produce  light  ?

§  9.  But  this,  though  of  primary  importance,  is  only  a  small
part  of  the  very  general  question  pointed  out  in  §  3  as  needing
answer. Another  part,  fundamental  in  the  undulatory  theory  of

"  from  Belfast  [the  late  Professor  James  Thomson],  of  determining  by  observation
"  the  minimum  wave-velocity  with  some  ai^proach  to  accuracy.  The  fishing-line
"  was  hung  at  a  distance  of  two  or  three  feet  from  the  vessel's  side,  so  as  to  cut  the
"water  at  a  point  not  sensibly  disturbed  by  the  motion  of  the  vessel.  The  speed
"was  determined  by  throwing  into  the  sea  pieces, of  pajier  previously  wetted,  and
"  observing  their  times  of  transit  across  parallel  planes,  at  a  distance  of  912  centi-
"  metres  asunder,  fixed  relatively  to  the  vessel  by  marks  on  the  deck  and  gunwale.
"By  watching  carefully  the  pattern  of  ripples  and  waves  which  connected  the
"  ripples  in  front  with  the  waves  in  rear,  I  had  seen  that  it  included  a  set  of
"  parallel  waves  slanting  off  obliquely  on  each  side  and  presenting  appeai'ances
"  which  proved  them  to  be  waves  of  the  critical  length  and  corresponding  minimum
"  speed  of  propagation."  When  the  speed  of  the  yacht  fell  to  but  little  above  the
critical  velocity,  the  front  of  the  ripples  was  very  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  line
of  motion,  and  when  it  just  fell  below  the  critical  velocity  the  ripples  disappeared
altogether,  and  there  was  no  perceptible  disturbance  on  the  surface  of  the  water.
The  sea  was  "glassy";  though  there  was  wind  enough  to  propel  the  schooner  at
speed  varying  between  ^  mile  and  1  mile  per  hour.

MOTION  OF  THE  EARTH  THROUGH  SPACE  OCCUPIED  BY  ETHER. 491

optics,  is,  How  is  it  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  smaller  in  trans-
parent ponderable  matter  than  in  pure  ether?  Attention  was
called  to  this  particular  question  in  ray  address,  to  the  Royal
Institution,  of  last  April ;  and  a  slight  explanation  of  my  pro-
posal for  answering  it  was  given,  and  illustrated  by  a  diagram.
The  validity  of  this  proposal  is  confirmed  [in  App.  A]  by  a  some-
what elaborate  discussion  and  mathematical  investigation  of  the
subject  worked  out  since  that  time  and  communicated  under  the
title,  "  On  the  Motion  produced  in  an  Infinite  Elastic  Solid  by  the
Motion  through  the  Space  occupied  by  it  of  a  Body  acting  on  it
only  by  Attraction  or  Repulsion,"  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edin-
burgh on  July  17,  and  to  the  Congres  International  de  Physique
for  its  meeting  at  Paris  in  the  beginning  of  August.

§  10.  The  other  phenomena  referred  to  in  §  3  come  naturally
under  the  general  dynamics  of  the  undulatory  theory  of  light,
and  the  full  explanation  of  them  all  is  brought  much  nearer  if
we  have  a  satisfactory  fundamental  relation  between  ether  and
matter,  instead  of  the  old  intractable  idea  that  atoms  of  matter
displace  ether  from  the  space  before  them,  when  they  are  in
motion  relatively  to  the  ether  around  them.  May  we  then  sup-
pose that  the  hypothesis  which  I  have  suggested  clears  away  the
first  of  our  two  clouds  ?  It  certainly  would  explain  the  "  aber-
ration of  light"  connected  with  the  earth's  motion  through
ether  in  a  thoroughly  satisfactory  manner.  It  would  allow  the
earth  to  move  with  perfect  freedom  through  space  occupied  by
ether  without  displacing  it.  In  passing  through  the  earth  the
ether,  an  elastic  solid,  would  not  be  lacerated  as  it  would  be
according  to  Fresnel's  idea  of  porosity  and  ether  moving  through
the  pores  as  if  it  were  a  fluid.  Ether  would  move  relatively  to
ponderables  with  the  j)erfect  freedom  wanted  for  what  we  know
of  aberration,  instead  of  the  imperfect  freedom  of  air  moving
through  a  grove  of  trees  suggested  by  Thomas  Young.  According
to  it,  and  for  simplicity  neglecting  the  comparatively  very  small
component  due  to  the  earth's  rotation  (only  "46  of  a  kilometre  per
second  at  the  equator  where  it  is  a  maximum),  and  neglecting
the  imperfectly  known  motion  of  the  solar  system  through  space
towards  the  constellation  Hercules,  discovered  by  Herschel*,  there

*  The  splendid  spectroscopic  method  originated  by  Huggins  thirty-three  years
ago,  for  measuring  the  component  in  the  line  of  vision  of  the  relative  motion  of  the

492  APPENDIX B.

would  be  at  all  points  of  the  earth's  surface  a  flow  of  ether  at  the
rate  of  30  kilometres  per  second  in  lines  all  parallel  to  the  tangent
to  the  earth's  orbit  round  the  sun.  There  is  nothing  inconsistent
with  this  in  all  we  know  of  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  terrestrial
optics;  but,  alas!  there  is  inconsistency  with  a  conclusion  that
ether  in  the  earth's  atmosphere  is  motionless  relatively  to  the
earth,  seemingly  proved  by  an  admirable  experiment  designed  by
Michelson,  and  carried  out,  with  most  searching  care  to  secure  a
trustworthy  result,  by  himself  and  Morley*.  I  cannot  see  any
flaw  either  in  the  idea  or  in  the  execution  of  this  experiment.
But  a  possibility  of  escaping  from  the  conclusion  which  it  seemed
to  prove  may  be  found  in  a  brilliant  suggestion  made  indepen-
dently by  Fitzgerald  f  and  by  LorentzJ  of  Ley  den,  to  the  effect
that  the  motion  of  ether  through  matter  may  slightly  alter  its
linear  dimensions,  according  to  which  if  the  stone  slab  constituting
the  sole  plate  of  Michelson  and  Morley's  apparatus  has,  in  virtue
of  its  motion  through  space  occupied  by  ether,  its  lineal  dimensions
shortened  one  one-hundred-millionth  §  in  the  direction  of  motion,
the  result  of  the  experiment  would  not  disprove  the  free  motion
of  ether  through  space  occupied  by  the  earth.

§  11.  I  am  afraid  we  must  still  regard  Cloud  No.  I.  as  very
dense.

earth,  and  any  visible  star,  has  been  carried  on  since  that  time  with  admirable
perseverance  and  skill  by  other  observers,  who  have  from  their  results  made
estimates  of  the  velocity  and  direction  of  the  motion  through  space  of  the  centre
of  inertia  of  the  solar  system.  My  Glasgow  colleague,  Professor  Becker,  has  kindly
given  me  the  following  information  on  the  subject  of  these  researches  :

"  The  early  (1888)  Potsdam  photographs  of  the  spectra  of  51  stars  brighter  than
"  '2i  magnitude  have  been  employed  for  the  determination  of  the  apex  and  velocity
"  of  the  solar  system.  Kempf  [Astronomische  Nachrichteii,  Vol.  132)  finds  for  the
"  apex  :  right  ascension,  206°  ±  12";  dechnation,  46°  =t  90°;  velocity,  19  kilometres
"  per  second  ;  and  Risteen  (Astronomical  Journal,  1^93)  finds  practically  the  same
"  quantities.  The  proper  motions  of  the  fixed  stars  assign  to  the  apex  a  position
"  which  may  be  anywhere  in  a  narrow  zone  parallel  to  the  Milky-way,  and  extending
"  20°  on  both  sides  of  a  point  of  Eight  Ascension  275°  and  Declination  +  80°.  The
"authentic  mean  of  13  values  determined  by  the  methods  of  Argelander  or  Airy
"gives  274°  and  +35°  (Andr^,  Traite  d'Astronomie  Stellaire)."

*  Phil.  Mag.,  December  1887.

t  Public  Lectures  in  Trinity  College,  DubUn.

X  Versuch  einer  Theorie  der  electrischen  und  optischen  Erscheiniingen  in  bewegten
Korpern. Leiden,  1895.

§  This  being  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  earth's  velocity  round  the  sun
(30  kilometres  per  sec.)  to  the  velocity  of  light  (300,000  kilometres  per  sec).

WATERSTONIAN-MAXWELLIAN DISTRIBUTION OF ENERGIES. 493

§  12.  Cloud  II.  Waterston  (in  a  communication  to  the  Royal
Society,  now  famous,  which,  after  lying  forty-five  years  buried
and  almost  forgotten  in  the  archives,  was  rescued  from  oblivion
by  Lord  Rayleigh  and  published,  with  an  introductory  notice  of
great  interest  and  importance,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal
Society  for  1892),  enunciated  the  following  proposition :  "  In  mixed
"media  the  mean  square  molecular  velocity  is  inversely  propor-
"  tional  to  the  specific  Aveight  of  the  molecule.  This  is  the  law
"  of  the  equilibrium  of  vis  viva."  Of  this  proposition  Lord
Rayleigh  in  a  footnote*  says,  "This  is  the  first  statement  of  a
"very  important  theorem  (see  also  Brit.  Assoc.  Rep.,  1851).  The
"demonstration,  however,  of  §10  can  hardly  be  defended.  It
"bears  some  resemblance  to  an  argument  indicated  and  exposed
"  by  Professor  Tait  {Edinburgh  Trans.,  Vol.  33,  p.  79,  1886).  There
"is  reason  to  think  that  this  law  is  intimately  connected  with
"the  Maxwellian  distribution  of  velocities  of  which  Waterston
"  had  no  knowledge."

§13.  In  Waterston 's  statement  the  "specific  weight  of  a
molecule"  means  what  we  now  call  simply  the  mass  of  a  mole-
cule ;  and  "  molecular  velocity "  means  the  translational  velocity
of  a  molecule.  Writing  on  the  theory  of  sound  in  the  Phil.  Mag.
for  1858,  and  referring  to  the  theory  developed  in  his  buried
paper  f,  Waterston  said,  "The  theory ...  assumes ...  that  if  the
"  impacts  produce  rotatory  motion  the  vis  viva  thus  invested  bears
"a  constant  ratio  to  the  rectilineal  vis  viva."  This  agrees  with
the  very  important  principle  or  truism  given  independently  about
the  same  time  by  Clausius  to  the  effect  that  the  mean  energy,
kinetic  and  potential,  due  to  the  relative  motion  of  all  the  parts
of  any  molecule  of  a  gas,  bears  a  constant  ratio  to  the  mean
energy  of  the  motion  of  its  centre  of  inertia  when  the  density  and
pressure  are  constant.

1 14.  Without  any  knowledge  of  what  was  to  be  found  in
Waterston's  buried  paper.  Maxwell,  at  the  meeting  of  the  British
Association  at  Aberdeen,  in  1859 1,  gave  the  following  proposition

*  Phil.  Trans.  A,  1892,  p.  16.

t  "  On  the  Physics  of  Media  that  are  Composed  of  Free  and  Perfectly  Elastic
Molecules  in  a  State  of  Motion." Phil.  Trans.  A,  1892,  p.  13.

X  "Illustrations  of  the  Dynamical  Theory  of  Gases,"  Phil.  Mag.,  .January  and
July  1860,  and  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  i.  p.  378.

494  APPENDIX  B,

regarding  the  motion  and  collisions  of  perfectly  elastic  spheres :
"  Two  systems  of  particles  move  in  the  same  vessel ;  to  prove
"  that  the  mean  vis  viva  of  each  particle  will  become  the  same
"in  the  two  systems."  This  is  precisely  Waterston's  proposition
regarding  the  law  of  partition  of  energy,  quoted  in  §  12  above  ;
but  Maxwell's  1860  proof  was  certainly  not  more  successful  than
Waterston's.  Maxwell's  1860  proof  has  always  seemed  to  me
quite  inconclusive,  and  many  times  I  urged  my  colleague,  Pro-
fessor Tait,  to  enter  on  the  subject.  This  he  did,  and  in  1886
he  communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  a  paper*
on  the  foundations  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  which  contained
a  critical  examination  of  Maxwell's  1860  paper,  highly  appreciative
of  the  great  originality  and  splendid  value,  for  the  kinetic  theory
of  gases,  of  the  ideas  and  principles  set  forth  in  it ;  but  showing
that  the  demonstration  of  the  theorem  of  the  partition  of  energy
in  a  mixed  assemblage  of  particles  of  different  masses  was
inconclusive,  and  successfully  substituting  for  it  a  conclusive
demonstration.

§  15.  Waterston,  Maxwell,  and  Tait,  all  assume  that  the
particles  of  the  two  systems  are  thoroughly  mixed  (Tait,  §  18),
and  their  theorem  is  of  fundamental  importance  in  respect  to
the  specific  heats  of  mixed  gases.  But  they  do  not,  in  any  of
the  papers  already  referred  to,  give  any  indication  of  a  proof  of
the  corresponding  theorem,  regarding  the  pa,rtition  of  energy
between  two  sets  of  equal  particles  separated  by  a  membrane
impermeable  to  the  molecules,  while  permitting  forces  to  act
across  it  between  the  molecules  on  its  two  sidesf,  which  is  the
simplest  illustration  of  the  molecular  dynamics  of  Avogadro's
law.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  that  Tait's  demonstration  of  the
Waterston-Maxwell  law  may  possibly  be  shown  to  virtually  include,
not  only  this  vitally  important  subject,  but  also  the  very  interest-
ing, though  comparativel}'  unimportant,  case  of  an  assemblage  of
particles  of  equal  masses  Avith  a  single  particle  of  different  mass
moving  about  among  them.

*  Phil.  Trans.  B.S.E.,  "On  the  Foundations  of  the  Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases,"
May  14  and  December  6,  1886,  and  January  7,  1887.

+  A  very  interesting  statement  is  given  by  Maxwell  regarding  this  subject  in  his
latest  paper  regarding  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine.  "  On  Boltzmann's  Theorem
on  the  Average  Distribution  of  Energy  in  a  System  of  Material  Points,"  Camb.  Phil.
Trans.,  May  6,  1878;  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  n.  pp.  713—741.

VALID PRINCIPLE OF WATERSTON AND CLAUSIUS.  495

§  16.  In  §§  12, 14,  15,  "  particle  "  has  been  taken  to  mean  what
is  commonly,  not  correctly,  called  an  elastic  sphere,  but  what  is  in
reality  a  Boscovich  atom  acting  on  other  atoms  in  lines  exactly
through  its  centre  of  inertia  (so  that  no  rotation  is  in  any  case
produced  by  collisions),  with,  as  law  of  action  between  two  atoms,
no  force  at  distance  greater  than  the  sum  of  their  radii,  infinite
force  at  exactly  this  distance.  None  of  the  demonstrations,  unsuc-
cessful or  successful,  to  which  I  have  referred  would  be  essentially
altered  if,  instead  of  this  last  condition,  we  substitute  a  repulsion
increasing  with  diminishing  distance,  according  to  any  law  for
distances  less  than  the  sum  of  the  radii,  subject  only  to  the
condition  that  it  would  be  infinite  before  the  distance  became
zero.  In  fact  the  impact,  oblique  or  direct,  between  two  Boscovich
atoms  thus  defined,  has  the  same  result  after  the  collision  is
completed  (that  is  to  say,  when  their  spheres  of  action  get  outside
one  another)  as  collision  between  two  conventional  elastic  spheres,
imagined  to  have  radii  dependent  on  the  lines  and  velocities  of
approach  before  collision  (the  greater  the  relative  velocity  the
smaller  the  effective  radii);  and  the  only  assumption  essentially
involved  in  those  demonstrations  is,  that  the  radius  of  each
sphere  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  average  length  of
fi'ee  path.

§17.  But  if  the  particles  are  Boscovich  atoms,  having  centre
of  inertia  not  coinciding  with  centre  of  force;  or  quasi-Boscovich
atoms,  of  non-spherical  figure ;  or  (a  more  acceptable  supposition)
if  each  particle  is  a  ckister  of  two  or  more  Boscovich  atoms ;
rotations  and  changes  of  rotation  would  result  from  collisions.
Waterston's  and  Clausius'  leading  principle,  quoted  in  §  13  above,
must  now  be  taken  into  account,  and  Tait's  demonstration  is  no
longer  applicable.  Waterston  and  Clausius,  in  respect  to  rotation,
both  wisely  abstained  from  saying  more  than  that  the  average
kinetic  energy  of  rotation  bears  a  constant  ratio  to  the  average
kinetic  energy  of  translation.  With  magnificent  boldness  Boltz-
mann  and  Maxwell  declared  that  the  ratio  is  equality ;  Boltzmann
having  found  what  seemed  to  him  a  demonstration  of  this  re-
markable proposition,  and  Maxwell  having  accepted  the  supposed
demonstration  as  valid.

§  18. Boltzmann  went  further*,  and extended  the  theorem

*  "  Studien  liber  das  Gleichgewicbt  der  lebendigen  Kraft  zwiscben  bewegten
materielle"  PnnVtpn." f^itzh K.  Aknd Wipn Oo±ohpr  « I8fi«

496  APPENDIX B.

of  equality  of  mean  kinetic  energies  to  any  system  of  a  finite
number  of  material  points  (Boscovich  atoms)  acting  on  one
another,  according  to  any  law  of  force,  and  moving  freely  among
one  another ;  and  finally,  Maxwell  *  gave  a  demonstration  extend-
ing it  to  the  generalised  Lagrangian  coordinates  of  any  system
whatever,  with  a  finite  or  infinitely  great  number  of  degrees  of
freedom.  The  words  in  which  he  enunciated  his  supposed  theorem
are  as  follows :

"  The  only  assumption  which  is  necessary  for  the  direct  proof
"  is  that  the  system,  if  left  to  itself  in  its  actual  state  of  motion,
"  will,  sooner  or  later,  pass  [infinitely  nearly}-]  through  every  phase
"which  is  consistent  with  the  equation  of  energy"  (p.  714),  and
again  (p.  716)  :

"  It  appears  from  the  theorem,  that  in  the  ultimate  state  of
"the  system  the  average;]:  kinetic  energy  of  two  portions  of  the
"  system  must  be  in  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom
"  of  those  portions.

"  This,  therefore,  must  be  the  condition  of  the  equality  of
"  temperature  of  the  two  portions  of  the  system."

I  have  never  seen  validity  in  the  demonstration  §  on  which
Maxwell  founds  this  statement,  and  it  has  always  seemed  to  me
exceedingly  improbable  that  it  can  be  true.  If  true,  it  would
be  very  wonderful,  and  most  interesting  in  pure  mathematical
dynamics.  Having  been  published  by  Boltzmann  and  Maxwell
it  would  be  worthy  of  most  serious  attention,  even  without  con-

*  "  On  Boltzmann's  Theorem  on  the  Average  Distribution  of  Energy  in  a
System  of  Material  Points,"  Maxwell's  Collected  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  pp.  713—741,  and
Camh.  Phil.  Trans.,  May  6,  1878.

t  I  have  inserted  these  two  words  as  certainly  belonging  to  Maxwell's  meaning.
— K.

J  The  average  here  meant  is  a  time-average  through  a  sufficiently  long  time.

§  The  mode  of  proof  followed  by  Maxwell,  and  its  connection  with  antecedent
considerations  of  his  own  and  of  Boltzmann,  imply,  as  included  in  the  general
theorem,  that  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  any  one  of  three  rectangular  com-
ponents of  the  motion  of  the  centre  of  inertia  of  an  isolated  system,  acted  upon
only  by  mutual  forces  between  its  parts  is  equal  to  the  average  kinetic  energy  of
each  generalised  component  of  motion  relatively  to  the  centre  of  inertia.  Consider,
for  example,  as  "parts  of  the  system"  two  particles  of  masses  m  and  m'  free  to  move
only  in  a  fixed  straight  line,  and  connected  to  one  another  by  a  massless  spring.
The  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  asserts  that  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  the
motion  of  the  inertial  centre  is  equal  to  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  the  motion
relative  to  the  inertial  centre.  This  is  included  in  the  wording  of  Maxwell's  state-
ment in  the  text  if,  but  not  unless,  m  =  m'.  See  footnote  in  §  7  of  my  paper,  "On
some  Test-Cases  for  the  Boltzmanij-Maxwell  Doctrine  regarding  Distribution  of
Energy."  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  June  ll.'xlSM.

ATOMIC ACTION AT DISTANCE.  497

sicleration  of  its  bearing  on  thermo-dynamics.  But,  when  we
consider  its  bearing  on  thermo-dynamics,  and  in  its  first  and
most  obvious  application  we  find  it  destructive  of  the  kinetic
theory  of  gases,  of  which  Maxwell  was  one  of  the  chief  founders,
we  cannot  see  it  otherwise  than  as  a  cloud  on  the  dynamical
theory  of  heat  and  light.

§  19.  For  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  let  each  molecule  be
a  cluster  of  Boscovich  atoms.  This  includes  every  possibility
("  dynamical,"  or  "  electrical,"  or  "  physical,"  or  "  chemical")  re-
garding the  nature  and  qualities  of  a  molecule  and  of  all  its
parts.  The  mutual  forces  between  the  constituent  atoms  must
be  such  that  the  cluster  is  in  stable  equilibrium  if  given  at  rest ;
which  means,  that  if  started  from  equilibrium  with  its  consti-
tuents in  any  state  of  relative  motion,  no  atom  will  fly  away
from  it,  provided  the  total  kinetic  energy  of  the  given  initial
motion  does  not  exceed  some  definite  limit.  A  gas  is  a  vast
assemblage  of  molecules  thus  defined,  each  moving  freely  through
space,  except  when  in  collision  with  another  cluster,  and  each
retaining  all  its  own  constituents  unaltered,  or  only  altered  by
interchange  of  similar  atoms  between  two  clusters  in  collision.

§  20.  For  simplicity  we  may  suppose  that  each  atom.  A,  has
a  definite  radius  of  activity,  a,  and  that  atoms  of  different  kinds,
A,  A',  have  different  radii  of  activity,  <x,  a  ;  such  that  A  exercises
no  force  on  any  other  atom,  A',  A",  when  the  distance  between
their  centres  is  greater  than  a  +  a  or  a  +  a".  We  need  not  per-
plex our  minds  with  the  inconceivable  idea  of  "  virtue,"  whether
for  force  or  for  inertia,  residing  in  a  mathematical  point*  the
centre  of  the  atom ;  and  without  mental  strain  we  can  distinctly
believe  that  the  substance  (the  "  substratum  "  of  qualities)  resides
not  in  a  point,  nor  vaguely  through  all  space,  but  definitely  in
the  spherical  volume  of  space  bounded  by  the  spherical  surface
whose  radius  is  the  radius  of  activity  of  the  atom,  and  whose
centre  is  the  centre  of  the  atom.  In  our  intermolecular  forces
thus  defined  we  have  no  violation  of  the  old  scholastic  law,
"Matter  cannot  act  where  it  is  not,"  but  we  explicitly ' violate
the  other  scholastic  law,  "Two  portions  of  matter  cannot  simul-
"  taneously  occupy  the same space." We leave to  gravitation,

*  See  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Vol,  iii.  Art.  xcvii.  "  Molecular  Constitution  of
Matter,"  §  14.

T.  L.  32

498  APPENDIX B.

and  possibly  to  electricity  (probably  not  to  magnetism),  the  at
present  very  unpopular  idea  of  action  at  a  distance.

§  21.  We  need  not  now  (as  in  §  16,  when  we  wished  to  keep
as  near  as  we  could  to  the  old  idea  of  colliding  elastic  globes)
suppose  the  mutual  force  to  become  infinite  repulsion  before  the
centres  of  two  atoms,  approaching  one  another,  meet.  Following
Boscovich,  we  may  assume  the  force  to  vary  according  to  any
law  of  alternate  attraction  and  repulsion,  but  without  supposing
any  infinitely  great  force,  whether  of  repulsion  or  attraction,  at
any  particular  distance ;  but  we  must  assume  the  force  to  be  zero
when  the  centres  are  coincident.  We  may  even  admit  the  idea
of  the  centres  being  absolutely  coincident,  in  at  all  events  some
cases  of  a  chemical  combination  of  two  or  more  atoms ;  although
we  might  consider  it  more  probable  that  in  most  cases  the
chemical  combination  is  a  cluster,  in  which  the  volumes  of  the
constituent  atoms  overlap  without  any  two  centres  absolutely
coinciding.

§22.  The  word  "collision"  used  without  definition  in  §19
may  now,  in  virtue  of  §§20,  21,  be  unambiguously  defined  thus:
Two  atoms  are  said  to  be  in  collision  during  all  the  time  their
volumes  overlap  after  coming  into  contact.  They  necessarily  in
virtue  of  inertia  separate  again,  unless  some  third  body  intervenes
with  actioii  which  causes  them  to  remain  overlapping;  that  is  to
say,  causes  combination  to  result  from  collision.  Two  clusters  of
atoms  are  said  to  be  in  collision  when,  after  being  separate,  some
atom  or  atoms  of  one  cluster  come  to  overlap  some  atom  or  atoms
of  the  other.  In  virtue  of  inertia  the  collision  must  be  followed
either  by  the  two  clusters  separating,  as  described  in  the  last
sentence  of  §  19,  or  by  some  atom  or  atoms  of  one  or  both  systems
being  sent  flying  away.  This  last  supposition  is  a  matter-of-fact
statement  belonging  to  the  magnificent  theory  of  dissociation,
discovered  and  worked  out  by  Sainte-Clair  Deville  without  any
guidance  from  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  In  gases  approxi-
mately fulfilling  the  gaseous  laws  (Boyle's  and  Charles'),  two
clusters  must  in  general  fly  asunder  after  collision.  Two  clusters
could  not  possibly  remain  permanently  in  combination  without  at
least  one  atom  being  sent  flying  away  after  collision  between  two
clusters  with  no  third  body  intervening*.

*  See  Kelvin's  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Vol.  in.  Art.  xcvii.  §  33.  In  this
reference,  for  "scarcely"  substitute  "not."

CLAUSIUS'  THEOREM  REGARDING  RATIO  OF  THERMAL  CAPACITIES.  499

§  23.  Now  for  the  application  of  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell
doctrine  to  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases :  consider  first  a  homo-
geneous single  gas,  that  is,  a  vast  assemblage  of  similar  clusters
of  atoms  moving  and  colliding  as  described  in  the  last  sentence  of
§  19 ;  the  assemblage  being  so  sparse  that  the  time  during  which
each  cluster  is  in  collision  is  very  short  in  comparison  with  the
time  during  which  it  is  unacted  on  by  other  clusters,  and  its  centre
of  inertia,  therefore,  moves  uniformly  in  a  straight  line.  If  there
are  i  atoms  in  each  cluster,  it  has  Si  freedoms  to  move,  that  is  to
say,  freedoms  in  three  rectangular  directions  for  each  atom.  The
Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  asserts  that  the  mean  kinetic  energies
of  these  'M  motions  are  all  equal,  whatever  be  the  mutual  forces
between  the  atoms.  From  this,  when  the  durations  of  the  col-
lisions are  not  included  in  the  time-averages,  it  is  easy  to  prove
algebraically  (with  exceptions  noted  below)  that  the  time-average
of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  component  translational  velocity  of
the  inertial  centre*,  in  any  direction,  is  equal  to  any  one  of  the
Si  mean  kinetic  energies  asserted  to  be  equal  to  one  another  in
the  preceding  statement.  There  are  exceptions  to  the  algebraic
proof  corresponding  to  the  particular  exception  referred  to  in
the  last  footnote  to  §18  above;  but,  nevertheless,  the  general
Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  includes  the  proposition,  even  in
those  cases  in  which  it  is  not  deducible  algebraically  from  the
equality  of  the  Si  energies.  Thus,  without  exception,  the  average
kinetic  energy  of  any  component  of  the  motion  of  the  inertial
centre  is,  according  to  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine,  equal  to

.  of  the  whole  average  kinetic  energy  of  the  system. This  makes

the  total  average  energy,  potential  and  kinetic,  of  the  whole
motion  of  the  system,  translational  and  relative,  to  be  3*(1  +^)
times  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  one  component  of  the  motion
of  the  inertial  centre,  where  P  denotes  the  ratio  of  the  mean
potential  energy  of  the  relative  displacements  of  the  parts  to
the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the  whole  system.  Now,  according
to  Clausius'  splendid  and  easily  proved  theorem  regarding  the
partition  of  energy  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  the  ratio  of
the  difference  of  the  two  thermal  capacities  to  the  constant-
volume  thermal  capacity  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  twice  a  single

*  This  expression  I  use  for  brevity  to  signify  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  whole
mass  ideally  collected  at  the  centre  of  inertia.

32—2

500  APPENDIX B.

component  of  the  translational  energy  to  the  total  energy.  Hence,
if  according  to  our  usual  notation  we  denote  the  ratio  of  the
thermal  capacity  pressure-constant  to  the  thermal  capacity  volume-
constant  by  k,  we  have,

'" ^~3i(l+P)'

§  24.  Example  1.  For  first  and  simplest  example,  consider  a
monatomic  gas.  We  have  i=\,  and  according  to  our  supposition
(the  supposition  generally,  perhaps  universally,  made)  regarding
atoms,  we  have  P  =  0. Hence,  k  —  l=^.

This  is  merely  a  fundamental  theorem  in  the  kinetic  theory  of
gases  for  the  case  of  no  rotational  or  vibrational  energy  of  the
molecule ;  in  which  there  is  no  scope  either  for  Clausius'  theorem
or  for  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine.  It  is  beautifully  illus-
trated by  mercury  vapour,  a  monatomic  gas  according  to  chemists,
for  which  many  years  ago  Kundt,  in  an  admirably  designed  ex-
periment, found  k  —  1  to  be  very  approximately  f:  and  by  the
newly  discovered  gases  argon,  helium,  and  krypton,  for  which  also
k  —  \  has  been  found  to  have  approximately  the  same  value,  by
Rayleigh  and  Ramsay.  But  each  of  these  four  gases  has  a  large
number  of  spectrum  lines,  and  therefore  a  large  number  of  vibra-
tional freedoms,  and  therefore,  if  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine
were  true,  k—1  would  have  some  exceedingly  small  value,  such
as  that  shown  in  the  ideal  example  of  §  26  below.  On  the  other
hand,  Clausius'  theorem  presents  no  difficulty;  it  merely  asserts
that  A;  —  1  is  necessarily  less  than  f  in  each  of  these  four  cases,
as  in  every  case  in  which  there  is  any  rotational  or  vibrational
energy  whatever;  and  proves,  from  the  values  found  experi-
mentally for  k  —  \  in  the  four  gases,  that  in  each  case  the  total
of  rotational  and  vibrational  energy  is  exceedingly  small  in
comparison  with  the  translational  energy.  It  justifies  admirably
the  chemical  doctrine  that  mercury  vapour  is  practically  a  mon-
atomic gas,  and  it  proves  that  argon,  helium,  and  krypton,  are
also  practically  monatojnic,  though  none  of  these  gases  has  hitherto
shown  any  chemical  affinity  or  action  of  any  kind  from  which
chemists  could  draw  any  such  conclusion.

But  Clausius'  theorem,  taken  in  connection  with  Stokes'  and
Kirchhoff's  dynamics  of  spectrum  analysis,  throws  a  new  light  on
what  we  are  now  calling  a  "  practically  monatomic  gas." It  shows

RATIOS OF CAPACITIES BY BOLTZMANN-MAXWELL DOCTRINE. 501

that,  unless  we  admit  that  the  atoms  can  be  set  into  rotation  or
vibration  by  mutual  collisions  (a  most  unacceptable  hypothesis),
each  atom  must  have  satellites  connected  with  it  (or  ether  con-
densed into  it  or  around  it)  and  kept,  by  the  collisions,  in  motion
relatively  to  it  with  total  energy  exceedingly  small  in  comparison
with  the  translational  energy  of  the  whole  system  of  atom  and
satellites.  The  satellites  must  in  all  probability  be  of  exceedingly
small  mass  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  chief  atom.  Can  they
be  the  "  ions "  by  which  J.  J.  Thomson  explains  the  electric  con-
ductivity induced  in  air  and  other  gases  by  ultra-violet  light,
Rontgen  rays  and  Becquerel  rays  ?

Finally,  it  is  interesting  to  remark  that  all  the  values  of  A;  —  1
found  by  Rayleigh  and  Ramsay  are  somewhat  less  than  | ;  argon
•64,  61 ;  helium  "652 ;  krypton  '666.  If  the  deviation  from  -667
were  accidental  they  would  probably  have  been  some  in  defect  and
some  in  excess.

Example  2.  As  a  next  simplest  example  let  i  =  2,  and  as  a
very  simplest  case  let  the  two  atoms  be  in  stable  equilibrium
when  concentric,  and  be  infinitely  nearly  concentric  when  the
clusters  move  about,  constituting  a  homogeneous  gas.  This  sup-
position makes  P  =  \,  because  the  average  potential  energy  is
equal  to  the  average  kinetic  energy  in  simple  harmonic  vibrations ;
and  in  our  present  case  half  the  whole  kinetic  energy,  according
to  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine,  is  vibrational,  the  other  half
being  translational. We  find  Z;  —  1  =  |  =  "2222.

Example  3.  Let  i  =  2;  let  there  be  stable  equilibrium,  with
the  centres  C,  C  of  the  two  atoms  at  a  finite  distance  a  asunder,
and  let  the  atoms  be  always  very  nearly  at  this  distance  asunder
when  the  clusters  are  not  in  collision.  The  relative  motions  of  the
two  atoms  will  be  according  to  three  freedoms,  one  vibrational,
consisting  of  very  small  shortenings  and  lengthenings  of  the
distance  CC,  and  two  rotational,  consisting  of  rotations  round
one  or  other  of  two  lines  perpendicular  to  each  other  and  perpen-
dicular to  CG'  through  the  inertial  centre.  With  these  conditions
and  limitations,  and  with  the  supposition  that  half  the  average
kinetic  energy  of  the  rotation  is  comparable  with  the  average
kinetic  energy  of  the  vibrations,  or  exactly  equal  to  it  as  according
to  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine,  it  is  easily  proved  that  in
rotation  the  excess  of  GC  above  the  equilibrium  distance  a,  due
to centrifugal  force,  must be  exceedingly  small in  comparison

502  APPENDIX B.

with  the  maximum  value  of  CC -a  due  to  the  vibration.  Hence
the  average  jDotential  energy  of  the  rotation  is  negligible  in
comparison  with  the  potential  energy  of  the  vibration.  Hence,
of  the  three  freedoms  for  relative  motion  there  is  only  one  con-
tributory to  P,  and  therefore  we  have  P  =  ^. Thus  we  find

^■  -  1  =  I  =  -2857.

The  best  way  of  experimentally  determining  the  ratio  of  the
two  thermal  capacities  for  any  gas  is  by  comparison  between  the
observed  and  the  Newtonian  velocities  of  sound.  It  has  thus
been  ascertained  that,  at  ordinary  temperatures  and  pressures,
k-1  differs  but  little  from  '406  for  common  air,  which  is  a  mixture
of  the  two  gases  nitrogen  and  oxygen,  each  diatomic  according
to  modern  chemical  theory ;  and  the  greatest  value  that  the
Boltzmann^MaxAvell  doctrine  can  give  for  a  diatomic  gas  is  the
•2857  of  Ex.  3.  This  notable  discrepance  from  observation  suffices
to  absolutely  disprove  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine.  What  is
really  established  in  respect  to  partition  of  energy  is  what  Clausius'
V  theorem  tells  us  (§  23  above).  We  find,  as  a  result  of  observation
and  true  theory,  that  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  translation
of  the  molecules  of  common  air  is  '609  of  the  total  energy,
potential  and  kinetic,  of  the  relative  motion  of  the  constituents
of  the  molecules.

§  25.  The  method  of  treatment  of  Ex.  3  above,  carried  out  for
a  cluster  of  any  number  of  atoms  greater  than  two  not  in  one  line,
j  +  2  atoms,  let  us  say,  shows  us  that  there  are  three  translational
freedoms ;  three  rotational  freedoms,  relatively  to  axes  through
the  inertial  centre ;  and  Sj  vibrational  freedoms. Hence  we  have

i  1

P  =  .  "^ ^  ,  and  we  find  /j  —  1  =  ^,-7^. ^, . The  values  of  ^•  —  1  thus

J  +  2'  _  3(l+j)

calculated  for  a  triatomic  and  tetratomic  gas,  and  calculated  as

above  in  Ex.  3  for  a  diatomic  gas,  are  shown  in  the  following

table,  and  compared  with  the  results  of  observation  for  several

such  gases.

It  is  interesting  to  see  how  the  dynamics  of  Clausius'  theorem

is  verified  by  the  results  of  observation  shown  in  the  table. The

values  of  k—1  for  all  the  gases  are  less  than  f ,  as  they  must  be

when  there  is  any  appreciable  energy  of  rotation  or  vibration  in

the  molecule. They  arc  different  for  different  diatomic  gases ;

ENORMOUSLY  GREAT  ERRORS  PROVED  BY  SPECTRUM- ANALYSIS. 503

ranging  from  "42  for  oxygen  to  '32  for  chlorine,  which  is  quite  as
might  be  expected,  when  we  consider  that  the  laws  of  force
between  the  two  atoms  may  differ  largely  for  the  different  kinds
of  atoms. The  values  of  ^— 1  are,  on  the  whole,  smaller  for  the

Gas

Values  of  A-1

According  to  the

By

H.-M.  doctrine.

Observation.

Air

f  =  -2857

•406

H„

•40

0."

•41

ci;

•32

CO

»» n

•39

NO

•39

COo

J  =  -1667

•30

N2O

>i 1)

•331

NH,

^  =  •1111

•311

tetratomic  and  triatomic  than  for  the  diatomic  gases,  as  might  be
expected  from  consideration  of  Clausius'  principle.  It  is  probable
that  the  differences  of  ^  —  1  for  the  different  diatomic  gases  are
real,  although  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  with  regard  to
the  observational  results  for  all  or  some  of  the  gases  other  than
air.  It  is  certain  that  the  discrepancies  from  the  values,
calculated  according  to  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine,  are
real  and  great ;  and  that  in  each  case,  diatomic,  triatomic,  and
tetratomic,  the  doctrine  gives  a  value  for  ^  —  1  much  smaller
than  the  truth.

§  26.  But,  in  reality,  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  errs
enormously  more  than  is  shown  in  the  preceding  table.  Spectrum
analysis  showing  vast  numbers  of  lines  for  each  gas  makes  it
certain  that  the  number  of  freedoms  of  the  constituents  of  each
molecule  is  enormously  greater  than  those  which  we  have  been
counting,  and  therefore  that  unless  we  attribute  vibratile  quality
to  each  individual  atom,  the  molecule  of  every  one  of  the  ordinary
gases  must  have  a  vastly  greater  number  of  atoms  in  its  consti-
tution than  those  hitherto  reckoned  in  regular  chemical  doctrine.
Suppose,  for  example,  there  are  forty-one  atoms  in  the  molecule
of  any  particular  gas ;  if  the  doctrine  were  true  we  should  have
y  =  39.  Hence  there  are  117  vibrational  freedoms,  so  that  there
might  be  117  visible  lines  in  the  spectrum  of  the  gas;  and  we

504  APPENDIX B.

have k  —  1= ^  =  -0083. There is,  in fact,  no possibility  of

reconciling  the  Boltzraann-Maxwell  doctrine  with  the  truth  re-
garding the  specific  heats  of  gases.

§  27.  It  is,  however,  not  quite  possible  to  rest  contented  with
the  mathematical  verdict  not  proven,  and  the  experimental  verdict
not  true,  in  respect  to  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine.  I  have
always  felt  that  it  should  be  mathematically  tested  by  the  con-
sideration of  some  particular  case.  Even  if  the  theorem  were
true,  stated  as  it  was  somewhat  vaguely,  and  in  such  general
terms  that  great  difficulty  has  been  felt  as  to  what  it  is  really
meant  to  express,  it  would  be  very  desirable  to  see  even  one  other
simple  case,  besides  that  original  one  of  Waterston's,  clearly  stated
and  tested  by  pure  mathematics.  Ten  years  ago*  I  suggested
a  number  of  test  cases,  some  of  which  have  been  courteously
considered  by  Boltzmann ;  but  no  demonstration  either  of  the
truth  or  imtruth  of  the  doctrine  as  applied  to  any  one  of  them  has
hitherto  been  given.  A  year  later,  I  suggested  what  seemed  to
me  a  decisive  test  case  disproving  the  doctrine ;  but  my  statement
was  quickly  and  justly  criticised  by  Boltzmann  and  Poincare;
and  more  recently  Lord  Rayleighf  has  shown  very  clearly  that
my  simple  test  case  was  quite  indecisive.  This  last  article  of
Rayleigh's  has  led  me  to  resume  the  consideration  of  several
different  classes  of  dynamical  problems,  which  had  occupied  me
more  or  less  at  various  times  during  the  last  twenty  years,  each
presenting  exceedingly  interesting  features  in  connection  with  the
double  question :  Is  this  a  case  which  admits  of  the  application
of  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine ;  and,  if  so,  is  the  doctrine
true  for  it  ?

§  28.  Premising  that  the  mean  kinetic  energies  with  which
the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  is  concerned  are  time-integrals
of  energies  divided  by  totals  of  the  times,  we  may  conveniently
divide  the  whole  class  of  problems,  with  reference  to  which  the
doctrine  comes  into  question,  into  two  classes.

Class  I. Those  in  which  the  velocities  considered  are  either

*  "On  some  Test-Cases  for  the  Maxwell-Boltzmann  Doctrine  regarding  Distribu-
tion of  Energy,"  Proc.  Boy.  Soc,  June  11,  1891.

t  Phil.  Mag.,  Vol.  xxxiii.  1892,  p.  356,  "Eemarks  on  Maxwell's  Investigation
respecting  Boltzmann's  Theorem."

CLASSIFIED CASES FOR THE B.-M. DOCTRINE.  505

constant  or  only  vary  suddenly — that  is  to  say,  in  infinitely  small
times — or  in  times  so  short  that  they  may  be  omitted  from  the
time-integration. To  this  class  belong  :

(a)  The  original  Waterston-Maxwell  case  and  the  collisions
of  ideal  rigid  bodies  of  any  shape,  according  to  the  assumed  law
that  the  translatory  and  rotatory  motions  lose  no  energy  in  the
collisions.

(6)  The  frictionless  motion  of  one  or  more  particles  constrained
to  remain  on  a  surface  of  any  shape,  this  surface  being  either  closed
(commonly  called  finite  though  really  endless),  or  being  a  finite  area
of  plane  or  curved  surface,  bounded  like  a  billiard-table,  by  a  wall
or  walls,  from  which  impinging  particles  are  reflected  at  angles
equal  to  the  angles  of  incidence.

(c)  A  closed  surface,  with  non-vibratory  particles  moving
within  it  freely,  except  during  impacts  of  particles  against  one
another  or  against  the  bounding  surface.

(d)  Cases  such  as  (a),  (b),  or  (c),  with  impacts  against
boundaries  and  mutual  impacts  between  particles,  softened  by
the  supposition  of  finite  forces  during  the  impacts,  with  only
the  condition  that  the  durations  of  the  impacts  are  so  short  as
to  be  practically  negligible,  in  comparison  with  the  durations  of
free  paths.

Class  11.  Cases  in  which  the  velocities  of  some  of  the  particles
concerned  sometimes  vary  gradually  ;  so  gradually  that  the  times
during  which  they  vary  must  be  included  in  the  time-integration.
To  this  class  belong  examples  such  as  (d)  of  Class  I.  with  durations
of  impacts  not  negligible  in  the  time-integration.

§  29.  Consider  first  Class  I.  (b)  with  a  finite  closed  surface  as
the  field  of  motion  and  a  single  particle  moving  on  it.  If  a  particle
is  given,  moving  in  any  direction  through  any  point  /  of  the  field,
it  will  go  on  for  ever  along  one  determinate  geodetic  line.  The
question  that  first  occurs  is,  Does  the  motion  fulfil  Maxwell's  con-
dition (see  §  18  above) ;  that  is  to  say,  for  this  case,  if  we  go  along
the  geodetic  line  long  enough,  shall  we  pass  infinitely  nearly  to
any  point  Q  whatever,  including  /,  of  the  surface  an  infinitely
great  number  of  times  in  all  directions  ?  This  question  cannot  be
answered  in  the  affirmative  without  reservation.  For  example,
if  the  surface  be  exactly  an  ellipsoid  it  must  be  answered  in  the
negative,  as  is  proved  in  the  following  §§  30,  31,  32.

506  APPENDIX B.

§  30.  Let  AA',  BB',  CC  be  the  ends  of  the  greatest,  mean,
and  least  diameters  of  an  ellipsoid.  Let  Ui,  U^,  Us,  U^  be  the
umbilics  in  the  arcs  AC,  CA',  A'C,  G'A.  A  known  theorem  in
the  geometry  of  the  ellipsoid  tells  us  that  every  geodetic  through
C/i  passes  through  U-^,  and  every  geodetic  through  U.  passes  through
Ui.  This  statement  regarding  geodetic  lines  on  an  ellipsoid  of
three  unequal  axes  is  illustrated  by  fig.  1,  a  diagram  showing
for  the  extreme  case  in  which  the  shortest  axis  is  zero,  the  exact
construction  of  a  geodetic  through  Ui  which  is  a  focus  of  the
ellipse  shown  in  the  diagram.  U^,  C,  C/4  being  infinitely  near  to
Ui,  G,  U.2  respectively  are  indicated  by  double  letters  at  the  same

Fig. 1.

points.  Starting  from  JJi  draw  the  geodetic  UiQU^',  the  two  parts
of  Avhich  U-^Q  and  QU^  are  straight  lines.  It  is  interesting  to
remark  that  in  whatever  direction  we  start  from  f/j  if  we  continue
the  geodetic  through  U^,  and  on  through  U^  again  and  so  on
endlessly,  as  indicated  in  the  diagram  by  the  straight  lines
UiQ,  UsQ',  UiQ",  UsQ'",  and  so  on,  we  come  very  quickly  to  lines
approaching  successively  more  and  more  nearly  to  coincidence  with
the  major  axis.  At  every  point  where  the  path  strikes  the  ellipse
it  is  reflected  at  equal  angles  to  the  tangent.  The  construction  is
most  easily  made  by  making  the  angle  between  the  reflected  path
and  a  line  to  one  focus,  equal  to  the  angle  between  the  incident
path  and  a  line  to  the  other  focus.

REFLECTIONS  OF  BILLIARD-BALJ.  FROM  ELLIPTIC  BOUNDARY. 507

§  31.  Returning  now  to  the  ellipsoid: — From  any  point  1,
between  U-^  and  U^,  draw  the  geodetic  IQ,  and  produce  it  through
Q  on  the  ellipsoidal  surface.  It  must  cut  the  arc  A'C'A  at  some
point  between  U^  and  11^,  and,  if  continued  on  and  on,  it  must  cut
the  ellipse  AGA'C'A  successively  between  f/j  and  f/o,  or  between
f/3  and  f/4;  never  between  U..  and  U^,  or  Ui  and  Ui.  This,  for
the  extreme  case  of  the  smallest  axis  zero,  is  illustrated  by  the
path  IQQ'Q'Q"'Q''Q'  in  fig.  2.

§  32.  If  now,  on  the  other  hand,  we  commence  a  geodetic
through  any  point  /  between  Ui  and  U^^,  or  between  Un  and  t/3,  it
will  never  cut  the  principal  section  containing  the  umbilics,  either
between  U^  and  U^  or  between  f/3  and  U^.  This  for  the  extreme
case  of  GC  =  0  is  illustrated  in  fig.  3.

§  33.  It  seems  not  improbable  that  if  the  figure  deviates  by
ever  so  little  from  being  exactly  ellipsoidal,  Maxwell's  condition
might  be  fulfilled.  It  seems  indeed  quite  probable  that  Maxwell's
condition  (see  §§  13,  29,  above)  is  fulfilled  by  a  geodetic  on  a
closed  surface  of  any  shape  in  general,  and  that  exceptional  cases.

in  which  the  question  of  §  29  is  to  be  answered  in  the  negative,
are  merely  particular  surfaces  of  definite  shapes,  infinitesimal
deviations  from  which  will  allow  the  question  to  be  answered  in
the  affirmative.

508

APPENDIX B.

§  34.  Now  with  an  affirmative  answer  to  the  question — is
Maxwell's  condition  fulfilled  ?— what  does  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell
doctrine  assert  in  respect  to  a  geodetic  on  a  closed  surface  ?  The
mere  wording  of  Maxwell's  statement,  quoted  in  §  13  above,  is
not  applicable  to  this  case,  but  the  meaning  of  the  doctrine  as
interpreted  from  previous  writings  both  of  Boltzmann  and  Maxwell,
and  subsequent  writings  of  Boltzmann,  and  of  Rayleigh*,  the  most
recent  supporter  of  the  doctrine,  is  that  a  single  geodetic  drawn
long  enough  will  not  only  fulfil  Maxwell's  condition  of  passing
infinitely  near  to  every  point  of  the  surface  in  all  directions,  but
will  pass  with  equal  frequencies  in  all  directions;  and  as  many
times  within  a  certain  infinitesimal  distance  +  8  of  any  one  point
P  as  of  any  other  point  P'  anywhere  over  the  whole  surface.  This,
if  true,  would  be  an  exceedingly  interesting  theorem.

Fig.  3.

§  35.  I  have  made  many  efforts  to  test  it  for  the  case  in  which
the  closed  surface  is  reduced  to  a  plane  with  other  boundaries
than  an  exact  ellipse  (for  which  as  we  have  seen  in  §|  30,  31,  32,
the  investigation  fails  through  the  non-fulfilment  of  Maxwell's
preliminary  condition).  Every  such  case  gives,  as  we  have  seen,
straight  lines  drawn  across  the  enclosed  area  turned  on  meeting
the  boundary,  according  to  the  law  of  equal  angles  of  incidence
and  reflection,  which corresponds  also to the  case of  an ideal

*  Phil.  Mail.,  January  1900.

REFLECTIONS  OF  BALL  FROM  BOUNDARY  OF  ANY  SHAPE.

)09

perfectly  smooth  non-rotating  billiard-ball  moving  in  straight  lines
except  when  it  strikes  the  boundary  of  the  table ;  the  boundary
being  of  any  shape  whatever,  instead  of  the  ordinary  rectangular
boundary  of  an  ordinary  billiard-table,  and  being  perfectly  elastic.
An  interesting  illustration,  easily  seen  through  a  large  lecture-
hall,  is  had  by  taking  a  thin  wooden  board,  cut  to  any  chosen
shape,  with  the  corner  edges  of  the  boundary  smoothly  rounded,
and  winding  a  stout  black  cord  round  and  round  it  many  times,
beginning  with  one  end  fixed  to  any  point,  /,  of  the  board.  If  the
pressure  of  the  cord  on  the  edges  were  perfectly  frictionless  the
cord  would,  at  every  turn  round  the  border,  place  itself  so  as  to
fulfil  the  law  of  equal  angles  of  incidence  and  reflection,  modified
in  virtue  of  the  thickness  of  the  board.  For  stability  it  would  be
necessary  to  fix  points  of  the  cord  to  the  board  by  staples  pushed
in  over  it  at  sufficiently  frequent  intervals,  care  being  taken
that  at  no  point  is  the  cord  disturbed  from  its  proper  straight
line  by  the  staple.  [Boards  of  a  considerable  variety  of  shape
with  cords  thus  wound  on  them  were  shown  as  illustrations  of
the  lecture.]

§  36.  A  very  easy  way  of  drawing  accurately  the  path  of  a
particle  moving  in  a  plane  and  reflected  from  a  bounding  wall  of
any  shape,  provided  only  that  it  is  not  concave  externally  in  any
part,  is  furnished  by  a  somewhat  interesting  kinematical  method
illustrated  by  the  accompanying  diagram  (fig.  4). It  is  easily

Fig.  4.

realised  by  using  two  equal  and  similar  pieces  of  board,  cut  to  any
desired  figure,  one  of  them  being  turned  upside  down  relatively

510  APPENDIX B.

to  the  other,  so  that  when  the  two  are  placed  together  with
corresponding  points  in  contact,  each  is  the  image  of  the  other
relative  to  the  plane  of  contact  regarded  as  a  mirror.  Sufficiently
close  corresponding  points  should  be  accurately  marked  on  the
boundaries  of  the  two  figures,  and  this  allows  great  accuracy  to
be  obtained  in  the  drawing  of  the  free  path  after  each  reflection.
The  diagram  shows  consecutive  free  paths  74"6 — 32'9  given,  and
32*9 — 54-7,  found  by  producing  74*6 — 32-9  through  the  point  of
contact.  The  process  involves  the  exact  measurement  of  the
length  (l) — say  to  three  significant  figures — and  its  inclination  (6)
to  a  chosen  line  of  reference  XX'.  The  summations  ^l  cos  26
and  XI  sin  26  give,  as  explained  below,  the  difference  of  time-
integrals  of  kinetic  energies  of  component  motions  parallel  and
perpendicular  respectively  to  XX',  and  parallel  and  perpendicular
respectively  to  KK',  inclined  at  45°  to  XX'.  From  these  differ-
ences we  find  (by  a  procedure  equivalent  to  that  of  finding  the
principal  axes  of  an  ellipse)  two  lines  at  right  angles  to  one  another,
such  that  the  time-integrals  of  the  components  of  velocity  parallel
to  them  are  respectively  greater  than  and  less  than  those  of  the
components  parallel  to  any  other  line.  [This  process  was  illustrated
by  models  in  the  lecture.]

§  37.  Virtually  the  same  process  as  this,  applied  in  the  case
of  a  scalene  triangle  ABC  (in  which  BG=  20  centimetres  and  the
angles  A  =  97°,  B  =  29-5°,  C=  53-5°),  was  worked  out  in  the  Royal

R

Fig.  5.

Institution  during  the  fortnight  after  the  lecture,  by  Mr  Anderson,
with  very  interesting  results.  The  length  of  each  free  path  (/),
and  its  inclination  to  BC{6),  reckoned  acute  or  obtuse  according
to  the  indications  in  the  diagram  (fig.  5),  were  measured  to  the

REFLECTIONS  OF  BALL  SHOW  ERRORS  FROM  B.-M.  DOCTRINE. 511

nearest  millimetre  and  the  nearest  integral  degree.  The  first  free
path  was  drawn  at  random,  and  the  continuations,  after  599  reflec-
tions (in  all  600  paths),  were  drawn  in  a  manner  illustrated  by
fig.  5,  which  shows,  for  example,  a  path  PQ  on  one  triangle
continued  to  QR  on  the  other.  The  two  when  folded  together
round  the  line  AB  shows  a  path  PQ,  continued  on  QR  after
reflection.  For  each  path  I  cos  26  and  /  sin  26  were  calculated
and  entered  in  tables  with  the  proper  algebraic  signs.  Thus,  for
the  whole  600  paths,  the  following  summations  were  found  :

2^  =  3298; S/cos  26*  = +  128-8; S^  sin  2^  =  -  201-9.

Remark,  now,  if  the  mass  of  the  moving  particle  is  2,  and  the

velocity  one  centimetre  per  second,  ^l  cos  26  is  the  excess  of  the

time-integral  of  kinetic  energy  of  component  motion  parallel  to

BG  above  that  of  component  motion  perpendicular  to  BG,  and

^l  sin  26  is  the  excess  of  the  time-integral  of  kinetic  energy  of

component  motion  perpendicular  to  KK'  above  that  of  component

motion  parallel  to  KK' ;  KK'  being  inclined  at  45"*  to  BG  in  the

direction shown in the  diagram. Hence the positive value of

'1,1  cos  26  indicates  a preponderance of  kinetic energy due to

component  motion  parallel  to  BG  above  that  of  component  motion

perpendicular  to  BG ;  and  the  negative  sign  of  ^l  sin  26  shows

preponderance  of  kinetic  energy  of  component  motion  parallel

to  KK',  above  that  of  component  motion  perpendicular  to  KK'.

Deducing  a  determination  of  two  axes  at  right  angles  to  each

other, corresponding respectively to maximum and minimum

kinetic energies,  we find LL', being inclined to KK'  in the

,. . ,  , ,  128-8 .

dn^ection  shown, at  an  angle  =  ^  tan~^  ^_^„  ,  is  what we may

call  the  axis  of  maximum  energy,  and  a  line  perpendicular  to  LL'
the  axis  of  minimum  energy ;  and  the  excess  of  the  time-integral
of  the  energy  of  component  velocity  parallel  to  LL'  exceeds  that
of  the  component  perpendicular  to  LL'  by  239-4,  being

Vl28-82-t- 201-9^.

This  is  7*25  per  cent,  of  the  total  of  2^  which  is  the  time-integral
of  the  total  energy.  Thus,  in  our  result,  we  find  a  very  notable
deviation  from  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine,  which  asserts  for
the  present  case  that  the  time-integrals  of  the  component  kinetic
energies  are  the  same  for  all  directions  of  the  component. The

512  APPENDIX B.

percentage  which  we  have  found  is  not  very  large  ;  and,  most
probably,  summations  for  several  successive  600  flights  would
present  considerable  differences,  both  of  the  amount  of  the  devia-
tion from  equality  and  the  direction  of  the  axes  of  maximum  and
minimum  energy.  Still,  I  think  there  is  a  strong  probability  that
the  disproof  of  the  Boltzmann- Maxwell  doctrine  is  genuine,  and
the  discrepance  is  somewhat  approximately  of  the  amount  and
direction  indicated.  I  am  supported  in  this  view  by  scrutinising
the  thirty  sums  for  successive  sets  of  twenty  flights :  thus  I  find
Xl  cos  26  to  be  positive  for  eighteen  out  of  thirty,  and  "Zlsin  26  to
be  negative  for  nineteen  out  of  the  thirty.

§  38.  A  very  interesting  test-case  is  represented  in  the  ac-
companying diagram,  fig.  6 — a  circular  boundary  of  semicircular
corrugations.  In  this  case  it  is  obvious  from  the  symmetry  that
the  time-integral  of  kinetic  energy  of  component  motion  parallel

Fig.  6.

to  any  straight  line  must,  in  the  long  run,  be  equal  to  that  parallel
to  any  other.  But  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  asserts,  that
the  time-integrals  of  the  kinetic  energies  of  the  two  components,
radial  and  transversal,  according  to  polar  coordinates,  would  be

STATISTICS OF REFLECTIONS FROM CORRUGATED BOUNDARY. 513

equal.  To  test  this  I  have  taken  the  case  of  an  infinite  number
of  the  semicircular  corrugations,  so  that  in  the  time-integral  it
is  not  necessary  to  iuclude  the  times  between  successive  impacts
of  the  particle  on  auy  one  of  the  semicircles.  In  this  case  the
geometrical  construction  would,  of  course,  fail  to  show  the  precise
point  Q  at  which  the  free  path  would  cut  the  diameter  AB  of  the
semicircular  hollow  to  which  it  is  approaching;  and  I  have  evaded
the  difficulty  in  a  manner  thoroughly  suitable  for  thermodynamic
application,  such  as  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  I  arranged  to
draw  lots  for  one  out  of  the  199  points  dividing  AB  into  200  equal
parts.  This  was  done  by  taking  100  cards*,  0,  1...98,  99,  to
represent  distances  from  the  middle  point,  and,  by  the  toss  of  a
coin,  determining  on  which  side  of  the  middle  point  it  was  to
be  (plus  or  minus  for  head  or  tail,  frequently  changed  to  avoid
possibility  of  error  by  bias).  The  draw  for  one  of  the  hundred
numbers  (0...99)  was  taken  after  very  thorough  shuffling  of  the
cards  in  each  case.  The  point  of  entry  having  been  found,  a  large
scale  geometrical  construction  was  used  to  determine  the  successive
points  of  impact  and  the  inclination  6  of  the  emergent  path  to  the
diameter  AB.  The  inclination  of  the  entering  path  to  the  diameter
of  the  semicircular  hollow  struck  at  the  end  of  the  flight  has  the
same  value  6.  If  we  call  the  diameter  of  the  large  circle  unity
the  length  of  each  flight  is  sin  6.  Hence,  if  the  velocity  is  unity
and  the  mass  of  the  particle  2,  the  time-integral  of  the  whole
kinetic  energy  is  sin  0 ;  and  it  is  easy  to  prove  that  the  time-
integrals  of  the  squares  of  the  components  of  the  velocity,  per-
pendicular to  and  along  the  line  from  each  point  of  the  path
to  the  centre  of  the  large  circle,  are  respectively  6  cos  0  and
sin  ^  -  ^  cos  6. By  summation  for  143  flights  we  have  found

S  sin  6>=  121-3; S^  cos  ^  =  54-15  ;
whence  2  (sin  (9  -  ^  cos  6>)  =  S^  cos  0  +  13-0.

This  is  a  notable  deviation  from  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doc-
trine, which  makes  S  (sin  6  —  6  cos  6)  equal  to  ^6  cos  6. We  have

*  I  had  tried  numbered  billets  (small  squares  of  paper)  drawn  from  a  bowl,  but
found  this  very  unsatisfactory.  The  best  mixing  we  could  make  in  the  bowl  seemed
to  be  quite  insufficient  to  secure  equal  chances  for  all  the  billets.  Full-sized  cards
like  ordinary  playing-cards,  well  shuffled,  seemed  to  give  a  very  fairly  equal  chance
to  every  card.  Even  with  the  full-sized  cards,  electric  attraction  sometimes  inter-
venes and  causes  two  of  them  to  stick  together.  In  using  one's  lingers  to  mix  dry
billets  of  caid,  or  of  paper,  in  a  bowl,  very  considerable  disturbance  may  be  expected
from  electrification.

T.  L.  33

514  APPENDIX B.

found  the  former  to  exceed  the  latter  by  a  difference
which  amounts  to  10"7  of  the  whole  S  sin  6.

Out  of  fourteen  sets  of  ten  flights  I  find  that  the
time-integral  of  the  transverse  component  is  less  than
half  the  whole  in  twelve  sets,  and  greater  in  only  two.
This  seems  to  prove  beyond  doubt  that  the  deviation
from  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  is  genuine ;  and
that  the  ultimate  time-integral  of  the  transverse  com-
ponent is  certainly  smaller  than  the  time-integral  of
the  radial  component.

§  39.  It  is  interesting  to  remark  that,  on  Brewster's
kaleidoscopic  principle  of  successive  images,  our  present
result  is  applicable  (see  §  38  above)  to  the  motion  of
a  particle,  flying  about  in  an  enclosed  space,  of  the
same  shape  as  the  surface  of  a  marlin-spike  (fig,  7),
with  its  angle  any  exact  submultiple  of  360°,  (360°-^-^)*.
Symmetry  shows  that  the  axes  of  maximum  or  minimum
kinetic  energy  must  be  in  the  direction  of  the  middle
line  of  the  length  of  the  figure  and  perpendicular  to  it.
Our  conclusion  is  that  the  time-integral  of  kinetic
energy  is  maximum  for  the  longitudinal  component
and  minimum  for  the  transverse.  In  the  series  of
flights,  corresponding  to  the,  143  of  fig.  6  which  we
have  investigated,  the  number  of  flights  is  of  course
many  times  143  in  fig.  7,  because  of  the  reflections
at  the  straight  sides  of  the  marlin-spike.  It  will  be
understood,  that  we  are  considering  merely  motion  in
one  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  marlin-spike.

§  40.  The  most  difficult  and  seriously  troublesome
statistical  investigation  in  respect  to  the  partition  of
energy  which  I  have  hitherto  attempted,  has  been  to
find  the  proportions  of  translational  and  rotational
energies  in  various  cases,  in  each  of  which  a  rotator
experiences  multitudinous  reflections  at  two  fixed
parallel  planes  between  which  it  moves,  or  at  one
plane  to  which  it  is  brought  back  by  a  constant  force
through  its  centre  of  inertia,  or  by  a  force  varjdng
directly as the distance from the plane. Two

*  See  my  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism,  §  208,  for  same  principle
as  to  electric  images.

CHATTERING IMPACTS OF  ROTATORS ON A FIXED PLANE. 515

different  rotators  were  considered,  one  of  them  consisting  of
two  equal  balls,  fixed  at  the  ends  of  a  rigid  massless  rod,  and
each  ball  reflected  on  striking  either  of  the  planes;  the  other
consisting  of  two  balls,  1  and  100,  fixed  at  the  ends  of  a  rigid
massless  rod,  the  smaller  ball  passing  freely  across  the  plane
without  experiencing  any  force,  while  the  greater  is  reflected
every  time  it  strikes.  The  second  rotator  may  be  described,
in  some  respects  more  simply,  as  a  hard  massless  ball  having  a
mass  =  1  fixed  anj^where  eccentrically  within  it,  and  another
mass  =  100  fixed  at  its  centre.  It  may  be  called,  for  brevity,
a  biassed  ball.

§  41.  In  every  case  of  a  rotator  whose  rotation  is  changed  by
an  impact,  a  transcendental  problem  of  pure  kinematics  essentially
occurs  to  find  the  time  and  configuration  of  the  first  impact ;  and
another  such  problem  to  find  if  there  is  a  second  impact,  and,  if  so,
to  determine  it.  Chattering  collisions  of  one,  two,  three,  four,  five
or  more  impacts,  are  essentially  liable  to  occur,  even  to  the  extreme
case  of  an  infinite  number  of  impacts  and  a  collision  consisting
virtually  of  a  gradually  varying  finite  pressure.  Three  is  the
greatest  number  of  impacts  w^e  have  found  in  any  of  our  calcula-
tions. The  first  of  these  transcendental  problems,  occurring
essentially  in  every  case,  consists  in  finding  the  smallest  value
of  0  which  satisfies  the  equation

^_,-  =  ^Vl_sin^);

V

where  co  is  the  angular  velocity  of  the  rotator  before  collision ;
a  is  the  length  of  a  certain  rotating  arm ;  i  its  inclination  to  the
reflecting  plane  at  the  instant  when  its  centre  of  inertia  crosses
a  plane  F,  parallel  to  the  reflecting  plane  and  distant  a  from  it ;
and  V  is  the  velocity  of  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  rotator.  This
equation  is,  in  general,  very  easily  solved  by  calculation  (trial  and
error),  but  more  quickly  by  an  obvious  kinematic  method,  the
simplest  form  of  which  is  a  rolling  circle  carrying  an  arm  of
adjustable  length.  In  our  earliest  work  we  performed  the  solution
arithmetically,  after  that  kinematically.  If  the  distance  between
the  two  parallel  planes  is  moderate  in  comparison  with  2a  (the
effective  diameter  of  the  rotator),  i  for  the  beginning  of  the
collision  with  one  plane  has  to  be  calculated  from  the  end  of
the  preceding  collision  against  the  other  plane  by  a  transcendental

33—2

516  APPENDIX B

equation,  on  the  same  principle  as  that  which  we  have  just  been
considering.  But  I  have  supposed  the  distance  between  the  two
planes  to  be  very  great,  practically  infinite,  in  comparison  with  2a,
and  we  have  therefore  found  i  by  lottery  for  each  collision,  using
180  cards  corresponding  to  180°  of  angle.  In  the  case  of  the
biassed  globe,  different  equally  probable  values  of  i  through  a
range  of  360°  was  required,  and  we  found  them  by  drawing  from
the  pack  of  180  cards  and  tossing  a  coin  for  plus  or  minus.

§  42.  Summation  for  110  flights  of  the  rotator,  consisting  of
two  equal  masses,  gave  as  the  time-integral  of  the  whole  energy
200"03,  and  an  excess  of  rotatory  above  translatory  42'05.  This
is  just  21  per  cent,  of  the  whole ;  a  large  deviation  from  the
Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine,  which  makes  the  time-integrals  of
translatory  and  rotatory  energies  equal.

§  43.  In  the  solution  for  the  biassed  ball  (masses  1  and  100)
we  found  great  irregularities  due  to  "  runs  of  luck  "  in  the  toss  for
plus  or  minus,  especially  when  there  was  a  succession  of  five  or  six
pluses  or  five  or  six  minuses.  We  therefore,  after  calculating  a
sequence  of  200  flights  with  angles  each  determined  by  lottery,
calculated  a  second  sequence  of  200  flights  with  the  equally
probable  set  of  angles  given  by  the  same  numbers  with  altered
signs.  The  summation  for  the  whole  400  gave  555"55  as  the
time-integral  of  the  whole  energy,  and  an  excess,  82"5,  of  the
time-integral  of  the  translatory,  over  the  time-integral  of  the
rotatory  energy.  This  is  nearly  15  per  cent.  We  cannot,  how-
ever, feel  great  confidence  in  this  result,  because  the  first  set  of
200  made  the  translatory  energy  less  than  the  rotatory  energy  by
a  small  percentage  (2'8)  of  the  whole,  while  the  second  200  gave
an  excess  of  translatory  over  rotatory  amounting  to  35'9  per  cent,
of  the  whole.

§  44.  All  our  examples  considered  in  detail  or  worked  out,
hitherto,  belong  to  Class  I.  of  §  28.  As  a  first  example  of  Class  11.
consider  a  case  merging  into  the  geodetic  line  on  a  closed  surface  S.
Instead  of  the  point  being  constrained  to  remain  on  the  surface,
let  it  be  under  the  influence  of  a  field  of  force,  such  that  it  is
attracted  towards  the  surface  with  a  finite  force,  if  it  is  placed
anywhere  very  near  the  surface  on  either  side  of  it,  so  that  if  the
particle  be  placed  on  S  and  projected  perpendicularly  to  it,  either

PARTICLE  CONSTRAINED  TO  REMAIN  NEAR  A  CLOSED  SURFACE. 517

inwards  or  outwards,  it  will  be  brought  back  before  it  goes  farther
from  the  surface  than  a  distance  h,  small  in  comparison  with  the
shortest  radius  of  curvature  of  any  part  of  the  surface.  The  Boltz-
mann-Maxwell  doctrine  asserts  that  the  time-integral  of  kinetic
energy  of  component  motion  normal  to  the  surface  would  be  equal
to  one-third  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  component  motion  at  right
angles  to  the  normal;  by  normal  being  meant,  a  straight  line  drawn
from  the  actual  position  of  the  point  at  any  time  perpendicular  to
the  nearest  part  of  the  surface  S.  This,  if  true,  would  be  a  very
remarkable  proposition.  If  h  is  infinitely  small  we  have  simply
the  mathematical  condition  of  constraint  to  remain  on  the  surface,
and  the  path  of  the  particle  is  exactly  a  geodetic  line.  If  the
force  towards  S  is  zero,  when  the  distance  on  either  side  of  8  is
+  h,  we  have  the  case  of  a  particle  placed  between  two  guiding
surfaces  with  a  very  small  distance  2h  between  them.  If  8  and
therefore  each  of  the  guiding  surfaces,  is  in  every  normal  section
convex  outwards,  and  if  the  particle  is  placed  on  the  outer  guide-
surface  and  projected  in  any  direction  in  it  with  any  velocity,
great  or  small,  it  will  remain  on  that  guide-surface  for  ever,  and
travel  along  a  geodetic  line.  If  now  it  be  deflected  very  slightly
from  motion  in  that  surface,  so  that  it  will  strike  against  the
inner  guide-surface,  we  may  be  quite  ready  to  learn  that  the
energy  of  knocking  about  between  the  two  surfaces  will  grow  up
from  something  very  small  in  the  beginning  till,  in  the  long  run,
its  time-integral  is  comparable  with  the  time-integral  of  twice  the
energy  of  component  motion  parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  of
either  surface.  But  will  its  ultimate  value  be  exactly  one-third
that  of  the  tangential  energy,  as  the  doctrine  tells  us  it  would  be  ?
We  are,  however,  now  back  to  Class  I. ;  we  should  have  kept  to
Class  II.  by  making  the  normal  force  on  the  particle  always  finite,
however  great.

§  45.  Very  interesting  cases  of  Class  II.  §  28  occur  to  us
readily  in  connection  with  the  cases  of  Class  I.  worked  out  in
§§  38,  41,  42,  43.

§  46.  Let  the  radius  of  the  large  circle  in  §  38  become  in-
finitely great :  we  have  now  a  plane  F  (floor)  with  semicircular
cylindric  hollows,  or  semicircular  hollows  as  we  shall  say  for
brevity ;  the  motion  being  confined  to  one  plane  perpendicular
to  F,  and  to  the  edges  of  the  hollows. For  definiteness  we  shall

518

APPENDIX B.

take  for  F  the  plane  of  the  edges  of  the  hollows.  Instead  iiuw  of
a  particle  after  collision  flying  along  the  chord  of  the  circle  of  §  38
it  would  go  on  for  ever  in  a  straight  line.  To  bring  it  back  to  the
plane  F,  let  it  be  acted  on  either  (a)  by  a  force  towards  the  plane
in  simple  proportion  to  the  distance,  or  (/3)  by  a  constant  force.
This  latter  supposition  (/8)  presents  to  us  the  very  interesting  case
of  an  elastic  ball  bouncing  from  a  corrugated  floor,  and  describing
gravitational  parabolas  in  its  successive  flights,  the  durations  of

BALL BOUNCING FROM CORRUGATED FLOOR.  519

the  different  flights  being  in  simple  proportion  to  the  component
of  velocity  perpendicular  to  the  plane  F.  The  supposition  (a)
is  purely  ideal ;  but  it  is  interesting  because  it  gives  a  half
curve  of  sines  for  each  flight,  and  makes  the  times  of  flight
from  F  after  a  collision  and  back  again  to  F  the  same  for  all  the
flights,  whatever  be  the  inclination  on  leaving  the  floor  and  return-
ing to  it.  The  supposition  {j3)  is  illustrated  in  fig.  8,  with  only
the  variation  that  the  corrugations  are  convex  instead  of  concave,
and  that  two  vertical  planes  are  fixed  to  reflect  back  the  particle
instead  of  allowing  it  to  travel  indefinitely,  either  to  right  or
to  left.

§  47.  Let  the  rotator  of  |§  41  to  43,  instead  of  bouncing  to
and  fio  between  two  parallel  planes,  impinge  only  on  one  plane  F,
and  let  it  be  brought  back  by  a  force  through  its  centre  of  inertia,
either  (a)  varying  in  simple  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the  centre
of  inertia  from  F,  or  (/3)  constant.  Here,  as  in  §  46,  the  times  of
flight  in  case  (a)  are  all  the  same,  and  in  (/3)  they  are  in  simple
proportion  to  the  velocity  of  its  centre  of  inertia  when  it  leaves  F
or  returns  to  it.

§  48.  In  the  cases  of  §§  46,  47  we  have  to  consider  the  time-
integral  for  each  flight  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  component
velocity  of  the  particle  perpendicular  to  F,  and  of  the  whole
velocity  of  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  rotator,  which  is  itself
perpendicular  to  F.  If  q  denotes  the  velocity  perpendicular  to  F
of  the  particle,  or  of  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  rotator,  at  the
instants  of  crossing  F  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  flight,  and
if  2  denotes  the  mass  of  the  particle  or  of  the  rotator  so  that  the
kinetic  energy  is  the  same  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  the  time-
integral  is  in  case  (a)  ^q-T,  and  in  case  (/3)  ^^(fT,  the  time  of  the
flight  being  denoted  in  each  case  by  T.  In  both  (a)  and  (y8),  §  46,
if  we  call  1  the  velocity  of  the  particle,  which  is  always  the  same,
we  have  (f  =  sin^  6,  and  the  other  component  of  the  energy  is  cos-  6.
In  §  47  it  is  convenient  to  call  the  total  energy  1 ;  and  thus  l  —  q-
is  the  total  rotational  energy  which  is  constant  throughout  the
flight.  Hence,  remembering  that  the  times  of  flight  are  all  the
same  in  case  (a)  and  are  proportional  to  the  value  of  q  in  case  (/8) ;
in  case  (a),  whether  of  §  46  or  §  47,  the  time-integrals  of  the  kinetic
energies  to  be  compared  are  as  ^Xq^  to  S(l  —  q^),  and  in  case  {^)
they  are  as  J  Sg^  to  Xq  (1  —  q").

520  APPENDIX B.

InM6

§  49. Hence  with  the  following  notation : —

(time-integral  of  kinetic  energy  perpendicular  to  F,  =  V
I  „  „  parallel  to  F,  =  U

„  translatory  energy  =  V

„  rotatory  „ =  R

In  §  47
we  have

V-U

v+u

( X(ff/-l) .  ,  ,

§  49'.  By  the  processes  described  above  q  was  calculated  for
the  single  particle  and  corrugated  floor  (§  46),  and  for  the  rotator
of  two  equal  masses  each  impinging  on  a  fixed  plane  (§§  41,  42),
and  for  the  biassed  ball  (central  and  eccentric  masses  100  and  1
respectively,  §§  41,  43).  Taking  these  values  of  q,  summing  q,  f
and  (f  for  all  the  flights,  and  using  the  results  in  §  48,  we  find  the
following  six  results  :

Single  particle  bounding  from  corrugated  floor  (semicircular
hollows),  143  flights:—

Y  -JJ  {  =  ^  -197  for  isochronous  sinusoidal  flights.

F+  ?7  [  =  +  "loG  for  gravitational  parabolic „

Rotator  of  two  equal  masses,  bounding  from  plane  floor,  110
flights  :—

V  —  R  {  =  -  -179  for  isochronous  sinusoidal  flights.

V+  R\  =  —  -loO  for  gravitational  parabolic „
Biassed  ball,  bounding  from  jDlane  floor,  400  flights : —

V  —  R  (  =  +  -025  for  isochronous  sinusoidal  flights.

V  +  R  I  =  —  '014  for  gravitational  parabolic „

The  smallness  of  the  deviation  of  the  last  two  results,  from  what
the  Boltzmann- Maxwell  doctrine  makes  them,  is  very  remarkable
when  we  compare  it  with  the  1.5  per  cent,  which  we  have  found
(§  43  above)  for  the  biassed  ball  bounding  free  from  force,  to  and
fro  between  two  parallel  planes.

CAGED ATOM STRUCK BY OTHERS OUTSIDE.  521

§  50.  The  last  case  of  partition  of  energy  which  we  have
worked  out  statistically  relates  to  an  impactual  problem,  belong-
ing partly  to  Class  I.  §  28,  and  partly  to  Class  II.  It  was  designed
as  a  nearer  approach  to  practical  application  in  thermodynamics
than  any  of  those  hitherto  described.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  one-dimen-
sional illustration  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  Suppose  a  row
of  a  vast  number  of  atoms,  of  equal  masses,  to  be  allowed  freedom
to  move  only  in  a  straight  line  between  fixed  bounding  planes  L
and  K.  Let  P  the  atom  next  K  be  caged  between  it  and  a  parallel
plane  G,  at  a  distance  from  it  very  small  in  comparison  with  the
average  of  the  free  paths  of  the  other  particles;  and  let  Q,  the
atom  next  to  P,  be  perfectly  free  to  cross  the  cage-front  G,  without
experiencing  force  from  it.  Thus,  while  Q  gets  freely  into  the  cage
to  strike  P,  P  cannot  follow  it  out  beyond  the  cage-front.  The
atoms  being  all  equal,  every  simple  impact  would  produce  merely
an  interchange  of  velocities  between  the  colliding  atoms,  and  no
new  velocity  could  be  introduced,  if  the  atoms  were  perfectly  hard
(§16  above),  because  this  implies  that  no  three  can  be  in  collision
at  the  same  time,  I  do  not,  however,  limit  the  present  investigation
to  perfectly  hard  atoms.  But,  to  simplify  our  calculations,  we  shall
suppose  P  and  Q  to  be  infinitely  hard.  All  the  other  atoms  we
shall  suppose  to  have  the  property  defined  in  §  21  above.  They
may  pass  through  one  another  in  a  simple  collision,  and  go  asunder
each  with  its  previous  velocity  unaltered,  if  the  differential  velocity
be  sufficiently  great ;  they  must  recoil  from  one  another  with  inter-
changed velocities  if  the  initial  differential  velocity  was  not  great
enough  to  cause  them  to  go  through  one  another.  Fresh  velocities
will  generally  be  introduced  by  three  atoms  being  in  collision  at
the  same  time,  so  that  even  if  the  velocities  were  all  equal,  to
begin  with,  inequalities  would  supervene  in  virtue  of  three  or
more  atoms  being  in  collision  at  the  same  time ;  whether  the
initial  differential  velocities  be  small  enough  to  result  in  two
recoils,  or  whether  one  or  both  the  mutual  approaches  lead  to  a
passage  or  passages  through  one  another.  Whether  the  distribu-
tion of  velocities,  which  must  ultimately  supervene,  is  or  is  not
according  to  the  Maxwellian  law,  we  need  not  decide  in  our  minds ;
but,  as  a  first  example,  I  have  supposed  the  whole  multitude  to  be
given  with  velocities  distributed  among  them  according  to  that
law  (which,  if  they  were  infinitely  hard,  they  would  keep  for  ever
after); and  we  shall  further  suppose  equal  average  spacing  in

522

APPENDIX B.

different  parts  of  the  row,  so  that  we  need  not  be  troubled  with
the  consideration  of  waves,  as  it  were  of  sound,  running  to  and  fro
along  the  row  because  of  inequalities  of  density.

§  51.  For  our  present  problem  we  require  two  lotteries  to  find
the  influential  conditions  at  each  instant,  when  Q  enters  F'a  cage
— lottery  I.  for  the  velocity  (v)  of  Q  at  impact ;  lottery  II.  for  the
phase  of  P's  motion.  For  lottery  I.  (after  trying  837  small  squares
of  paper  with  velocities  written  on  them  and  mixed  in  a  bowl,  and
finding  the  plan  unsatisfactory)  we  took  nine  stiff  cards,  numbered
1,  2... 9,  of  the  size  of  ordinary  playing-cards  with  rounded  corners,
with  one  hundred  numbers  written  on  each  in  ten  lines  of  ten
numbers.  The  velocities  on  each  card  are  shown  on  the  follow-
ing table.

Table  showing  the  Number  of  the  Different  Velocities
ON  the  Different  Cards.

A'elocity

•1

•2

•3

•4

•5

•6

•7

•8

•9

1-0

1-1

1-2

1-3

1-4

1-5

1-6

l-T

1-8

1-9

2-0

2-1

2-2

Cardl

100

„ 2

7

93

„ 3

10

90

„ 4

9

91

,, 5

1

84

15

,, 6

60

40

„ 7

26

57

17

„ 8

31

40

29

,, 9

3

26

19

15

11

9

6

4

3

2

1

1

2y

Sums  of  ]
1  velocities )'

1
107 103

99

92

84

75

66

57

48

40

32

26

19

15

11

9

6

4

3

2

1

1  1

1

900

The  number  of  times  each  velocity  occurs  was  chosen  to  fulfil

as  nearly  as  may  be  the  Maxwellian  law,  which  is  Cdve  ^  =  the
number  of  velocities  between  v  +  ^dv  and  v  —  \dv.  We  took
k  =  \,  which,  if  dv  were  infinitely  small,  would  make  the  mean
of  the  squares  of  the  velocities  equal  exactly  to  "5 ;  we  took
dv  =  '\  and  Cc?'V=  108  to  give,  as  nearly  as  circumstances  w^ould
allow,  the Maxwellian law,  and to make the total number  of

OAGED ATOM KEEPS LESS ENERGY TliAN FKEE ASSAILANT. 528

different  velocities  !)00.  Tlie  sum  of  the  squares  of  all  these  900
velocities  is  468-4,  which  divided  by  900  is  -52.  In  the  practice
of  this  lottery  the  numbered  cards  were  well  shutiBed  and  then
one  was  drawn ;  the  particular  one  of  the  hundred  velocities  on
this  card  to  be  chosen  was  found  by  drawing  one  card  from  a  pack
of  one  hundred  numbered  1,  2... 99,  100.  In  lottery  II.  a  pack  of
one  hundred  cards  is  used  to  draw  one  of  one  hundred  decimal
numbers  from  -01  to  I'OO.  The  decimal  drawn,  called  a,  shows
the  proportion  of  the  whole  period  of  P  from  the  cage-front  C,
to  K,  and  back  to  C,  still  unperformed  at  the  instant  when  Q
crosses  C.  Now  remark,  that  if  Q  overtakes  P  in  the  first  half  of
its  period  it  gives  its  velocity  v  to  P,  and  follows  it  inwards ;  and
therefore  there  must  be  a  second  impact  when  P  meets  it  after
reflection  from  K,  and  gives  it  back  the  velocity  v  which  it  had  on
entering.  If  Q  meets  P  in  the  second  half  of  its  period,  Q  will,
by  the  first  impact,  get  P's  original  velocity,  and  may  with  this
velocity  escape  from  the  cage.  But  it  may  be  overtaken  by  P
before  it  gets  out  of  the  cage,  in  Avhich  case  it  will  go  away  from
the  cage  with  its  own  original  velocity  v  unchanged.  This  occurs
always  if,  and  never  unless,  u  is  less  than  va;  P's  velocity  being
denoted  by  u,  and  Q's  by  v.  This  case  of  Q  overtaken  by  P  can
only  occur  if  the  entering  velocity  of  Q  is  greater  than  the  speed
of  P  before  collision.  Except  inthis  case  P's  speed  is  unchanged
by  the  collision.  Hence  we  see  that  it  is  only  when  P's  speed  is
greater  than  Q's  before  collision  that  there  can  be  interchange,  and
this  interchange  leaves  P  with  less  speed  than  Q.  If  every  collision
involved  interchange,  the  average  velocity  of  P  would  be  equalised
by  the  collisions  to  the  average  velocity  of  Q,  and  the  average
distribution  of  different  velocities  would  be  identical  for  Q  and  P.
Non-fulfilment  of  this  equalising  interchange  can,  as  we  have  seen,
only  occur  when  Q's  speed  is  less  than  P's,  and  therefore  the  average
speed  and  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  P  must  be  less  than  the
average  kinetic  energy  of  Q.

§  52.  We  might  be  satisfied  with  this,  as  directly  negativing
the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine  for  this  case.  It  is  however,
interesting  to  know,  not  only  that  the  average  kinetic  energy  of
Q  is  greater  than  that  of  the  caged  atom,  but,  further,  to  know
how  much  greater  it  is.  We  have  therefore  worked  out  sum-
mations  for 300 collisions between  P and  Q,  beginning with

524  APPENDIX E.

II?  =  o  (u  =  •*I1),  being  approximately  the  mean  of  v'^  as  given  by
the  lottery.  It  would  have  made  no  appreciable  difference  in  the
result  if  we  had  begun  with  any  value  of  u,  large  or  small,  other
than  zero.  Thus,  for  example,  if  we  had  taken  100  as  the  first
value  of  u,  this  speed  would  have  been  taken  by  Q  at  the  first
impact,  and  sent  away  along  the  practically  infinite  row,  never  to
be  heard  of  again;  and  the  next  value  of  w  would  have  been  the
first  value  drawn  by  lottery  for  v.  Immediately  before  each  of
the  subsequent  impacts,  the  velocity  of  P  is  that  which  it  had
from  Q  by  the  preceding  impact.  In  our  work,  the  speeds  which
P  actually  had  at  the  first  sixteen  times  of  Q's  entering  the  cage
were  71,  "5,  -3,  %  %  -1,  -1,  %  %  "5,  "7,  %  "3,  "6,  I'o,  -5— from
which  we  see  how  little  effect  the  choice  of  '71  for  the  first  speed
of  P  had  on  those  that  follow.  The  summations  were  taken  in
successive  groups  of  ten;  in  every  one  of  these  ^v^  exceeded  Si'A
For  the  300  we  found  tv'-  =  148-53  and  2it='  =  61-62,  of  which  the
former  is  2*41  times  the  latter.  The  two  ought  to  be  equal
according  to  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell  doctrine.  Dividing  2v-  by
800  we  find  -495 ;  which  chances  to  be  more  nearly  equal  to  the
intended  -5  than  the  -52  which  is  on  the  cards  (§51  above).  A
still  greater  deviation  from  the  B.-M.  equality  (2-71  instead  of
2-41)  was  found  by  taking  '^v^  and  Sm'^w  to  allow  for  greater
probability  of  impact  with  greater  than  with  smaller  values  of
V ;  11 being  the  velocity  of  P  after  collision  with  Q.

§  53.  We  have  seen  in  §  52  that  l,u^  must  be  less  than  Sl^^
but  it  seemed  interesting  to  find  how  much  less  it  would  be  with
some  other  than  the  Maxwellian  law  of  distribution  of  velocities.
We  therefore  arranged  cards  for  a  lottery,  with  an  arbitrarily
chosen  distribution,  quite  different  from  the  Maxwellian.  Eleven
cards,  each  with  one  of  the  eleven  numbers  1,  3...  19,  21,  to  cor-
respond to  the  different  velocities  -1,  -3...  1-9,  2-1,  were  prepared
and  used  instead  of  the  nine  cards  in  the  process  described  in  §  51
above.  In  all  except  one  of  the  eleven  tens,  '^v^  was  greater  than
^u^,  and  for  the  whole  110  impacts  we  found  2?;"=  179-90,  and
Xu"  =  97-66;  the  former  of  these  is  1-84  times  the  latter.  In  this
case  we  found  the  ratio  of  %v^  to  ^u'^v  to  be  1-87.

§  54.  In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  refer,  in  connection  with  Class  II.
§  28,  to  a  very  interesting  and  important  application  of  the  doctrine,
made  by  Maxwell  himself,  to  the  equilibrium  of  a  tall  column  of

GAS UNDER INFLUENCE OF GRAVITY IN VERTICAL TUBE. 525

gas  under  the  influence  of  gravity.  Take,  first,  our  one-dimen-
sional gas  of  §  50,  consisting  of  a  straight  row  of  a  vast  number
of  equal  and  similar  atoms.  Let  now  the  line  of  the  row  be
vertical,  and  let  the  atoms  be  under  the  influence  of  terrestrial
gravity,  and  suppose,  first,  the  atoms  to  resist  mutual  approach,
sufficiently  to  prevent  any  one  from  passing  through  another  with
the  greatest  relative  velocity  of  approach  that  the  total  energy
given  to  the  assemblage  can  allow.  The  Boltzmann-Maxwell
doctrine  (§  18  above)  asserting  as  it  does  that  the  time-integral
of  the  kinetic  energy  is  the  same  for  all  the  atoms,  makes  the
time-average  of  the  kinetic  energy  the  same  for  the  highest  as
for  the  lowest  in  the  row.  This,  if  true,  would  be  an  exceedingly
interesting  theorem.  But  now,  suppose  two  approaching  atoms
not  to  repel  one  another  with  infinite  force  at  any  distance
between  their  centres,  and  suppose  energy  to  be  given  to  the
multitude  sufficient  to  cause  frequent  instances  of  two  atoms
passing  through  one  another.  Still  the  doctrine  can  assert  nothing
but  that  the  time-integral  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  any  one  atom
is  equal  to  that  of  any  other  atom,  which  is  now  a  self-evident
proposition,  because  the  atoms  are  of  equal  masses,  and  each  one
of  them  in  turn  will  be  in  every  position  of  the  column,  high  or
low.  (If  in  the  row  there  are  atoms  of  different  masses,  the
Waterston-Maxwell  doctrine  of  equal  average  energies  would,  of
course,  be  important  and  interesting.)

§  55.  But  now,  instead  of  our  ideal  one-dimensional  gas,  con-
sider a  real  homogeneous  gas,  in  an  infinitely  hard  vertical  tube,
with  an  infinitely  hard  floor  and  roof,  so  that  the  gas  is  under
no  influence  from  without,  except  gravity.  First,  let  there  be
only  two  or  three  atoms,  each  given  with  sufficient  velocity  to
fly  against  gravity  from  floor  to  roof.  They  will  strike  one  an-
other occasionally,  and  they  will  strike  the  sides  and  floor  and
roof  of  the  tube  much  more  frequently  than  one  another.  The
time-averages  of  their  kinetic  energies  will  be  equal.  So  will
they  be  if  there  are  twenty  atoms,  or  a  thousand  atoms,  or  a
million,  million,  million,  million,  million  atoms.  Now  each  atom
will  strike  another  atom  much  more  frequently  than  the  sides
or  floor  or  roof  of  the  tube.  In  the  long  run  each  atom  will  be
in  every  part  of  the  tube  as  often  as  is  every  other  atom.  The
time-integral  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  any  one  atom  will  be  equal

526  APPENDIX B.

to  the  time-integral  of  the  kinetic  energy,  of  any  other  atom.
This  truism  is  simply  and  solely  all  that  the  Boltzmann-Maxwell
doctrine  asserts  for  a  vertical  column  of  a  homogeneous  monatomic
gas.  It  is,  I  believe,  a  general  impression  that  the  Boltzmann-
Maxwell  doctrine,  asserting  a  law  of  partition  of  the  kinetic  part
of  the  whole  energy,  includes  obviously  a  theorem  that  the  average
kinetic  energies  of  the  atoms  in  the  upper  parts  of  a  vertical  column
of  gas,  are  equal  to  those  of  the  atoms  in  the  lower  parts  of  the
column.  Indeed,  with  the  wording  of  Maxwell's  statement,  §  18,
before  us,  we  might  suppose  it  to  assert  that  two  parts  of  our
vertical  column  of  gas,  if  they  contain  the  same  number  of  atoms,
must  have  the  same  kinetic  energy,  though  they  be  situated,  one
of  them  near  the  bottom  of  the  column,  and  the  other  near  the
top.  Maxwell  himself,  in  his  1866  paper  (-'The  Dynamical  Theory
of  Gases")*,  gave  an  independent  synthetical  demonstration  of
this  proposition,  and  did  not  subsequently,  so  far  as  I  know,  regard
it  as  immediately  deducible  from  the  partitional  doctrine  general-
ised by  Boltzmann  and  himself  several  years  after  the  date  of
that  paper.

§  56.  Both  Boltzmann  and  Maxwell  recognised  the  experi-
mental contradiction  of  their  doctrine  presented  by  the  kinetic
theory  of  gases ;  and  felt  that  an  explanation  of  this  incompatibility
was  imperatively  called  for.  For  instance,  Maxwell,  in  a  lecture
on  the  dynamical  evidence  of  the  molecular  constitution  of  bodies,
given  to  the  Chemical  Society,  Feb.  18,  1875,  said:  "1  have  put
"  before  you  what  I  consider  to  be  the  greatest  difficulty  yet  en-
"  countered  by  the  molecular  theory.  Boltzmann  has  suggested
"  that  we  are  to  look  for  the  explanation  in  the  mutual  action
"  between  the  molecules  and  the  ethereal  medium  which  surrounds
"  them.  I  am  afraid,  however,  that  if  we  call  in  the  help  of  this
"  medium  we  shall  only  increase  the  calculated  specific  heat,
"  which  is  already  too  great."  Rayleigh,  who  has  for  the  last
twenty  years  been  an  unwavering  supporter  of  the  Boltzmann-
Maxwell  doctrine,  concludes  a  paper  "  On  the  Law  of  Partition  of
Energy,"  published  a  year  ago  in  the  Phil.  Mag.,  Jan.  1900,  with
the  following  words:  "The  difficulties  connected  with  the  appli-
"  cation  of  the  law  of  equal  partition  of  energy  to  actual  gases
"  have  long  been  felt. In  the  case  of  argon  and  helium  and

*  Addition,  of  date  December  17,  1800. Collected  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  p.  76.

ABANDON THE DOCTRINE CONSTITUTING CLOUD IT.  527

"mercury  vapour,  the  ratio  of  specific  heats  (1"67)  limits  the
"  degrees  of  freedom  of  each  molecule  to  the  three  required  for
"  translatory  motion.  The  value  (1-4)  applicable  to  the  principal
"  diatomic  gases,  gives  room  for  the  three  kinds  of  translation  and
"  for  two  kinds  of  rotation.  Nothing  is  left  for  rotation  round
"  the  line  joining  the  atoms,  nor  for  relative  motion  of  the  atoms
"  in  this  line.  Even  if  we  regard  the  atoms  as  mere  points,  whose
"rotation  means  nothing,  there  must  still  exist  energy  of  the
"  last-mentioned  kind,  and  its  amount  (accordiug  to  law)  should
"  not  be  inferior.

"  We  are  here  brought  face  to  face  with  a  fundamental  difficulty,
"  relating  not  to  the  theory  of  gases  merely,  but  rather  to  general
"dynamics.  In  most  questions  of  dynamics,  a  condition  whose
"  violation  involves  a  large  amount  of  potential  energy  may  be
"treated  as  a  constraint.  It  is  on  this  principle  that  solids  are
"  regarded  as  rigid,  strings  as  inextensible,  and  so  on.  And  it  is
"  upon  the  recognition  of  such  constraints  that  Lagrange's  method
"  is  founded.  But  the  law  of  equal  partition  disregards  potential
"  energy.  However  great  may  be  the  energy  required  to  alter
"  the  distance  of  the  two  atoms  in  a  diatomic  molecule,  practical
"  rigidity  is  never  secured,  and  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  relative
"  motion  in  the  line  of  junction  is  the  same  as  if  the  tie  were  of
"  the  feeblest.  The  two  atoms,  however  related,  remain  two  atoms,
"  and  the  degrees  of  freedom  remain  six  in  number.

"What  would  appear  to  be  wanted  is  some  escape  from  the
"  destructive  simplicity  of  the  general  conclusion."

The  simplest  way  of  arriving  at  this  desired  result  is  to  deny
the  conclusion;  and  so,  in  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century,
to  lose  sight  of  a  cloud  which  has  obscured  the  brilliance  of  the
molecular  theory  of  heat  and  light  during  the  last  quarter  of  the
nineteenth  century.

APPENDIX  C.

ON  THE  DISTURBANCE  PRODUCED  BY  TWO  PARTICULAR
FORMS  OF  INITIAL  DISPLACEMENT  IN  AN  INFINITELY
LONG  MATERIAL  SYSTEM  FOR  WHICH  THE  VELOCITY
OF PERIODIC  WAVES DEPENDS ON THE WAVE-LENGTH.

§  1, One  of  the  chosen  forms  of  initial  displacement  is

ce-^"-'""- (1),

where  x  is  distance  from  0,  the  centre  of  the  origin  of  the
disturbance ;  a  is  a  length-parameter  of  the  initial  disturbance ;
and  c  is  a  length  very  small  (regarded  in  the  mathematics  as
infinitely  small)  in  comparison  with  a.

§  2. Let  the  displacement  at  (oc,  t)  in  an  infinite  train of
periodic  waves  be  expressed  by

D  cos  q(a;  —  a  —  vt) (2).

Here  27r/q  is  the  wave-length ;  and  v  is  the  propagational
velocity  which  we  may  regard  as  a  function  of  q ;  and  a  is  the
distance  from  0  of  a  point  where  the  displacement  is  a  positive
maximum  at  time,  t  =  0.  Any  number  of  solutions  such  as  (2)
with  different  values  of  D,  q,  and  a,  or  with  —v  for  v,  super-
imposed, give  a  complex  solution,  found  by  simple  summation
because  the  displacements  and  their  sums  are  infinitely  small.
Hence  a  solution,  the  solution  for  standing  vibrations  of  period
27rfqv,  is  found  by  taking  the  half-sum  of  (2)  for  ±v;  being
this:—

D  cos  q  (x  —  a)  cos  vt (3).

And  a  summation  of  (3)  for  our  present  purpose  gives  a  solution,

r)=-\ dq  I dae''^^/'^' cosq(x  —  a)  cosvt (4).*

When  t  =  0  this  gives  d/dt  ??  =  0 ;  and,  by  "  Fourier's  theorem,"
the  second  member  becomes  ce~*"''*^  which  agrees  with  (1).  Hence
(4)  expresses  the  solution  of  our  problem.

*  Sec  Lee.  X.  Part  i.,  top  of  p.  IIG.

TRANSVERSE WAVES IN ELASTIC ROD: FINITE SOLUTION. 529

§  3. If  in  (4)  we  expand  cos  q{x—  a),  the  factor  of  sin  qx

disappears  in  the  summation  I da ;  and  the  factor  of  cos  qx,  being

J —00
/•OO

I dcLe~°-'^"''  cos  ga,  is  equal  to  \/7rae~5-«-/^  according  to  an  evaluation

J -  00

given  by  Laplace  in  1810*. Thus  we  reduce  (4)  to  the  following
simpler  form

ca  f"
•»7  =  -y-  I dqe~'^'"'^''*  cos  qx  cos  qvt (5).

The  verification  that  this  becomes  ce"^''*^  when  ^  =  0,  is  most
interesting :  it  is  done  by  a  second  application  of  the  same  evalua-
tion of  Laplace's  with  a  curiously  inverted  notation.

§  4.  Whatever  function  v  may  be  of  the  wave-length,  27r/g,
we  have  in  (5)  a  thoroughly  convenient  solution  of  our  problem ;
calculable  by  highly  convergent  quadratures  whether  the  definite
integral  is  reducible  to  finite  terms  or  not.  For  one  very  interest-
ing case,  an  infinitely  long  elastic  rod,  taken  as  an  example  by
Fourier  f,  the  definite  integral  is  reducible  to  finite  terms.

In  this  case  the  velocity  of  periodic  waves  is  inversely  as  the
wave-length,  and,  by  choosing  our  units  conveniently,  we  may
put  v  =  q,m  (5). Thus,  and  by  taking  a=  1,  and  by  substituting

-  I dq  for  I dq,  we  find

2 ./  _ 00  Jo

7)= -J I dqe'^^i*  COS  q^t  COS  qx  (6).

2  xJtt  j  _qo

Denoting  by  R  the  half-sum  for  ±  t,  we  may  write  this  thus ;

rj  =  -^R  r c?ge-[<i-'«?'-'3^] (7).

2  VTr J  -00

Putting  l  —  d  =  h-,  we reduce the  index of the exponential to

-  (hq  -  cxj2hy  -  {xjVif  ;  and  putting  hq  -  ix/2h  =  z,  we  find  for
the  definite  integral.

h-

[ c^ze-^^e-<^'27l)^  =  '^^g-W2A)= (8).

*  Memoires  de  Vlnstitut,  1810. See  Gregory's  Examples,  p.  480.
t  Chaleur,  Chap.  xix.  Article  406.

T.  L.  34

530  APPENDIX C.

Hence  (7)  becomes

^ '  -a:^(l+4(0

n  =  ^cRh''€-^''''''^'=^cRh-'€ ^+'^'' (9).

Now  1/h  =  (yV  +  t')"'  (cos  i(/)  +  i  sin  i(/)),

if  </)  =  tan-i4«  (10).

Hence,  if  we  put  fTTrTa  ^  ^ (^^)'

—  .r2

we  find  by  (9), 7;  =  c(l  +  16^=)"*  eT+^*^cos(|<^  -  ^) (12).

§  5.  This  is  a  very  interesting  solution  in  "  finite  terms."
To  illustrate  it  let  first  ^  =  0 ; we  have,  ^  =  0,  and

r}  =  c{l  +  I6t')-i  cos  hA  =  a/^^  '  where  t  =  V(l  +  16f-). . .(13).

Hence  the  middle  point  of  the  originally  displaced  part  of  the
rod  subsides  to  its  undisturbed  position  not  vihrationally,  but
continuously,  and  ultimately  in  proportion  to  t~^  when  t  is  very
great.  And  when  t  is  very  great  we  may  neglect  ^  in  (12),  and
we  have  6  =  xjr ;  so  that  we  find

r)  =  CT"^  e~^^l''^  cos  — (14).

T

This  shows  that,  in  going  from  the  origin  we  first  find  a  zero
of  displacement  at  a;  =  \/{7rr/2) ;  and  beyond  this  there  is  an
infinite  number  of  zeros,  and  vibratory  subsidence  to  repose.
Interesting graphic  illustrations  will require but little labour,

§  6.  As  another  even  more  interesting  case,  take  the  two-
dimensional  case  of  the  old  deep-water  wave  problem  of  Poisson
and  Cauchy.  In  it  the  velocity  of  periodic  waves  is  proportional
to  \/\  and  we  may  therefore  conveniently  take  v  =  q'^.  This  in
(5),  with  a  =  l,  gives

r)=-, I dqe~'i'^'^  cos  qx  cos  \/qt (15),

VTT  Jo

an  irreducible  definite  integral  which  expresses  the  displacement
of  the  water  at  time  t  and  distance  x  from  the  origin  of  the
disturbance ;  by  a  convergent  formula  thoroughly  convenient  for
calculation  by  quadratures  for  all  values  large  or  small  of  the
two  variables.  Analytical  expedients  may  no  doubt  be  found  to
diminish  the  labour :  but  it  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  the
method  of  quadratures,  with  moderate  labour,  gives  very  interest-
ing illustrations ;  though  great  labour  would  be  needed  for  full
graphical  illustrations  by  time-curves  and  space-curves.

TWO-DIMENSIONAL DEEP-WATER WAVES: FINITE SOLUTION. 531

§  7.  My  assistant  Mr  Witherington  has  evaluated  77  by  (15)
with  cj/^TT  =  2  ;  for  four  cases  as  follows  :

Case  1.  ^'  =  0,  ^=0;  77= 1-763; V^r  =  1-77245,

„ 2.  x  =  0,  t=l;  77= -911

„ 3.  x  =  0,  t  =  2;  7)  =  -  -451

„ 4.  x=2,  t  =  2;  7]= -559.

Case  1  was  worked  as  a  test  for  accuracy  in  a  first  trial  of
quadrature.  The  result  is  about  2/3  per  cent,  too  small ;  the
correct  result  being  ^/ir.  The  accuracy  of  the  quadratures  is
sufficient  for  merely  illustrative  purposes.

§  8.  Interesting  as  is  the  solution  by  quadratures  for  water-
waves  resulting  from  the  initial  disturbance  (1),  it  is  less  important
than  the  following  solution  in  finite  terms  for  anotlier  form  of
initial  dishirbance,  which  was  given  in  my  short  paper  "  On  the
Front  and  Rear  of  a  Procession  of  free  Waves  in  Deep  Water"*: —

(16).

Here  (^,  ij)  denote  the  displacement  of  the  particle  of  water
whose  equilibrium-position  is  (w,  y) ;  r  denotes  {x^  -f  y"^)^ ;  and
g,  gravity.  According  to  a  beautiful  discovery  of  Cauchy  and
Poisson,  for  waves  in  infinitely  deep  water,  the  pressure  is  con-
stant at  all  the  particles  {x  +  ^q^  y  +  Vo)  for  any  constant  value,  y^,
of  y ;  and  therefore  the  water  above  every  such  surface  may  be
removed  without  disturbing  the  motion  of  the  water  below  it.
Hence  770  is  the  vertical  displacement  of  any  point  in  a  free  surface
of  particles  whose  undisturbed  position  is  3/  =  yo-  The  value  of  770
for  t  =  0,  from  (16),  is

c  (ro^  -  ro2/o  -  22/o")/?V  (r,  +  ?/o)^  (17).

This,  with  any  value  we  please  to  assign  to  y^,  is  the  initiating
free-surface  for  (16) ;  ro  denotes  (x"^  -f  yo^)-.

I  hope  to  reproduce,  with  extensions,  for  early  publication,
curves  of  the  wave-motion  expressed  by  (16),  shown  in  Section  A
of  the  British  Association,  Sep.  1886,  and  in  the  Royal  Society  of
Edinburgh,  Dec.  20,  1886.

*  Proc.  R.S.E.  Jan.  7,  1887;  Phil.  Mag.  Feb.  1887.

34—2

APPENDIX D.

ON THE CLUSTERING OF GRAVITATIONAL MATTER IN ANY
PART OF THE UNIVERSE*.

Gravitational  matter,  according  to  our  ideas  of  universal
gravitation,  would  be  all  matter.  Now  is  there  any  matter  which
is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  gravitation  ?  I  think  I  may  say  with
absolute  decision  that  there  is.  We  are  all  convinced,  with  our
President,  that  ether  is  matter,  but  we  are  forced  to  say  that  we
must  not  expect  to  find  in  ether  the  ordinary  properties  of  molar
matter  which  are  generally  known  to  us  by  action  resulting
from  force  between  atoms  and  matter,  ether  and  ether,  and
atoms  of  matter  and  ether.  Here  I  am  illogical  when  I  say
between  matter  and  ether,  as  if  ether  were  not  matter.  It  is
to  avoid  an  illogical  phraseology  that  I  use  the  title  "  gravi-
tational matter."  Many  years  ago  I  gave  strong  reason  to  feel
certain  that  ether  was  outside  the  law  of  gravitation.  We
need  not  absolutely  exclude,  as  an  idea,  the  possibility  of  there
being  a  portion  of  space  occupied  by  ether  beyond  which  there
is  absolute  vacuum — no  ether  and  no  matter.  We  admit  that
that  is  something  that  one  could  think  of;  but  I  do  not  believe
any  living  scientific  man  considers  it  in  the  slightest  degree
probable  that  there  is  a  boundary  around  our  universe  beyond
which  there  is  no  ether  and  no  matter.  Well,  if  ether  extends
through  all  space,  then  it  is  certain  that  ether  cannot  be  subject
to  the  law  of  mutual  gravitation  between  its  parts,  because  if
it  were  subject  to  mutual  attraction  between  its  parts  its  equi-
librium would  be  unstable,  unless  it  were  infinitely  incom-
pressible. But  here,  again,  I  am  reminded  of  the  critical
character  of  the  ground  on  which  we  stand  in  speaking  of  pro-
perties of  matter  beyond  what  we  see  or  feel  by  experiment.  I
am  afraid  I  must  here  express  a  view  different  from  that  which

*  Communicated  by  the  Author  to  the  Phil.  Mag.,  having  been  read  before  the
British  Association  at  the  Glasgow  meeting.

ETHER IS GRAVITATIONLESS  MATTER FILLING ALL SPACE. 538

Professor  Rlicker  announced  in  his  Address,  when  he  said  that
continuity  of  matter  implied  absolute  resistance  to  condensation.
We  have  no  right  to  bar  condensation  as  a  property  of  ether.
While  admitting  ether  not  to  have  any  atomic  structure,  it  is
postulated  as  a  material  which  performs  functions  of  which  we
know  something,  and  which  may  have  properties  allowing  it  to
perform  other  functions  of  which  we  are  not  yet  cognisant.  If
we  consider  ether  to  be  matter,  we  postulate  that  it  has  rigidity
enough  for  the  vibrations  of  light,  but  we  have  no  right  to  say
that  it  is  absolutely  incompressible.  We  must  admit  that  suf-
ficiently great  pressure  all  round  could  condense  the  ether  in  a
given  space,  allowing  the  ether  in  surrounding  space  to  come  in
towards  the  ideal  shrinking  surface.  When  I  say  that  ether
must  be  outside  the  law  of  gravitation,  I  assume  that  it  is  not
infinitely  incompressible.  I  admit  that  if  it  were  infinitely  in-
compressible, it  might  be  subject  to  the  law  of  mutual  gravitation
between  its  parts ;  but  to  my  mind  it  seems  infinitely  improbable
that  ether  is  infinitely  incompressible,  and  it  appears  more  con-
sistent with  the  analogies  of  the  known  properties  of  molar
matter,  which  should  be  our  guides,  to  suppose  that  ether  has
not  the  quality  of  exerting  an  infinitely  great  force  against
compressing  action  of  gravitation.  Hence,  if  we  assume  that  it
extends  through  all  space,  ether  must  be  outside  the  law  of
gravitation — that  is  to  say,  truly  imponderable.  I  remember  the
contempt  and  self-complacent  compassion  with  which  sixty  years
ago  I  myself — I  am  afraid — and  most  of  the  teachers  of  that
time  looked  upon  the  ideas  of  the  elderly  people  who  went  before
us,  and  who  spoke  of  "  the  imponderables."  I  fear  that  in  this,  as
in  a  great  many  other  things  in  science,  we  have  to  hark  back  to
the  dark  ages  of  fifty,  sixty,  or  a  hundred  years  ago,  and  that  we
must  admit  there  is  something  which  we  cannot  refuse  to  call
matter,  but  which  is  not  subject  to  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation.
That  the  sun,  stars,  planets,  and  meteoric  stones  are  all  of  them
ponderable  matter  is  true,  but  the  title  of  my  paper  implies  that
there  is  something  else.  Ether  is  not  any  part  of  the  subject  of
this  paper ;  what  we  are  concerned  with  is  gravitational  matter,
ponderable  matter.  Ether  we  relegate,  not  to  a  limbo  of  impon-
derables, but  to  distinct  species  of  matter  which  have  inertia,
rigidity,  elasticity,  compressibility,  but  not  heaviness.  In  a  paper
I  have  already  published  I  gave  strong  reasons  for  limiting  to  a

534  APPENDIX D.

definite  amount  the  quantity  of  matter  in  space  known  to  astro-
nomers. I  can  scarcely  avoid  using  the  word  "  universe,"  but  I
mean  our  universe,  which  may  be  a  very  small  afifair  after  all,
occupying  a  very  small  portion  of  all  the  space  in  which  there  is
ponderable  matter.

Supposing  a  sphere  of  radius  3"09.10^'^  kilometres  (being  the
distance  at  which  a  star  must  be  to  have  parallax  0""001)  to  have
within  it,  uniformly  distributed  through  it,  a  quantity  of  matter
equal  to  one  thousand  million  times  the  sun's  mass ;  the  velocity
acquired  by  a  body  placed  originally  at  rest  at  the  surface  would,
in  five  million  years,  be  about  20  kilometres  per  second,  and  in
twenty-five  million  years  would  be  108  kilometres  per  second  (if
the  acceleration  remained  sensibly  constant  for  so  long  a  time).
Hence,  if  the  thousand  million  suns  had  been  given  at  rest
twenty-five  million  years  ago,  uniformly  distributed  throughout
the  supposed  sphere,  many  of  them  would  now  have  velocities  of
20  or  30  kilometres  per  second,  while  some  would  have  less  and
some  probably  greater  velocities  than  108  kilometres  per  second;
or,  if  they  had  been  given  thousands  of  million  years  ago  at  rest
so  distributed  that  now  they  were  equally  spaced  throughout  the
supposed  sphere,  their  mean  velocity  would  now  be  about  50  kilo-
metres per  second*.  This  is  not  unlike  the  measured  velocities
of  stars,  and  hence  it  seems  probable  that  there  might  be  as
much  matter  as  one  thousand  million  suns  within  the  distance
309.10^'^  kilometres.  The  same  reasoning  shows  that  ten  thousand
million  suns  in  the  same  sphere  would  produce,  in  twenty-
five  million  years,  velocities  far  greater  than  the  known  star
velocities :  and  hence  there  is  probably  much  less  than  ten
thousand  million  times  the  sun's  mass  in  the  sphere  considered.
A  general  theorem  discovered  by  Green  seventy-three  years  ago
regarding  force  at  a  surface  of  any  shape,  due  to  matter  (gravi-
tational, or  ideal  electric,  or  ideal  magnetic)  acting  according  to
the  Newtonian  law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance,  shows
that  a  non- uniform  distribution  of  the  same  total  quantity  of
matter  would  give  greater  velocities  than  would  the  uniform  dis-
tribution. Hence  we  cannot,  by  any  non-uniform  distribution  of
matter  within  the  supposed  sphere  of  3'09 .  10^®  kilometres  radius,
escape from the conclusion limiting the total  amount of the

*  Phil.  Mag.  August  1901,  pp.  169,  170.

TOTAL  BRIGHT OR  DARK STAR-DISC APPARENT  AREA. 535

matter  within  it  to  something  like  one  thousand  million  times
the  sun's  mass.

If  we  compare  the  sunlight  with  the  light  from  the  thousand
million  stars,  each  being  supposed  to  be  of  the  same  size  and
brightness  as  our  sun,  we  find  that  the  ratio  of  the  apparent
brightness  of  the  star-lit  sky  to  the  brightness  of  our  sun's  disc
would  be  3*87.10~^l  This  ratio*  varies  directly  with  the  radius
of  the  containing  sphere,  the  number  of  equal  globes  per  equal
volume  being  supposed  constant ;  and  hence  to  make  the  sum  of
the  apparent  areas  of  discs  3"87  per  cent,  of  the  whole  sky,  the
radius  must  be  3-09.10-''  kilometres.  With  this  radius  light  Avould
take  3^.10^^  years  to  travel  from  the  outlying  stars  to  the  centre.
Irrefragable  dynamics  proves  that  the  life  of  our  sun  as  a  luminary
may  probably  be  between  twenty-five  and  one  hundred  million
years ;  but  to  be  liberal,  suppose  each  of  our  stars  to  have  a  life  of
one  hundred  million  years  as  a  luminary :  and  it  is  found  that  the
time  taken  by  light  to  travel  from  the  outlying  stars  to  the  centre"
of  the  sphere  is  three  and  a  quarter  million  times  the  life  of  a
star.  Hence  it  follows  that  to  make  the  whole  sky  aglow  with
the  light  of  all  the  stars  at  the  same  time  the  commencements
of  the  stars  must  be  timed  earlier  and  earlier  for  the  more  and
more  distant  ones,  so  that  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  light  of
every  one  of  them  at  the  earth  may  fall  within  the  durations  of
the  lights  of  all  the  others  at  the  earth.  My  supposition  as  to
uniform  density  is  quite  arbitrary;  but  nevertheless  I  think  it
highly  improbable  that  there  can  be  enough  of  stars  (bright  or
dark)  to  make  a  total  of  star-disc  area  more  than  10~^-  or  10~"  of
the  whole  sky.

To  help  to  understand  the  density  of  the  supposed  distribution
of  one  thousand  million  suns  in  a  sphere  of  3-09. 10^*^  kilometres
radius,  imagine  them  arranged  exactly  in  cubic  order,  and  the
volume  per  sun  is  found  to  be  123-5. 10^^  cubic  kilometres,  and
the  distance  from  one  star  to  any  one  of  its  six  nearest  neighbours
would  be  4-98.10^^  kilometres.  The  sun  seen  at  this  distance
would  probably  be  seen  as  a  star  of  between  the  first  and  second
magnitudes  ;  but  supposing  our  thousand  million  suns  to  be  all  of
such  brightness  as  to  be  stars  of  the  first  magnitude  at  distance
corresponding  to  parallax  l"-0,  the  brightness  at  distance  3-09.10^'*
kilometres  would  be  one  one-millionth  of  this ;  and  the  most
*  Phil.  Mag.  August  1901,  p.  175.

536  APPENDIX D.

distant  of  our  stars  would  be  seen  through  powerful  telescopes
as  stars  of  the  sixteenth  magnitude.  Newcomb  estimated  from
thirty  to  fifty  million  as  the  number  of  stars  visible  in  modern
telescopes.  Young  estimated  at  one  hundred  million  the  number
visible  through  the  Lick  telescope.  This  larger  estimate  is  only
one-tenth  of  our  assumed  one  thousand  million  masses  equal  to
the  sun,  of  which,  however,  nine  hundred  million  might  be  either
non-luminous,  or,  though  luminous,  too  distant  to  be  seen  by  us
at  their  actual  distances  from  the  earth.  Remark,  also,  that  it  is
only  for  facility  of  counting  that  we  have  reckoned  our  imiverse
as  one  thousand  million  suns;  and  that  the  meaning  of  our
reckoning  is  that  the  total  amount  of  matter  within  a  sphere  of
S'OQ.IO'"  kilometres  radius  is  one  thousand  million  times  the
sun's  mass.  The  sun's  mass  is  1"99.10^''  metric  tons,  or  TOO.IO'*^
grammes.  Hence  our  reckoning  of  our  supposed  spherical  uni-
verse is  that  the  ponderable  part  of  it  amounts  to  1'99.10*^
grammes,  or  that  its  average  density  is  1'61.10~^^  of  the  density
of  water.

Let  us  now  return  to  the  question  of  sum  of  apparent  areas.
The  ratio  of  this  sum  to  47r,  the  total  apparent  area  of  the  sky
viewed  in  all  directions,  is  given  by  the  formula*:

SN  faV

provided  its  amount  is  so  small  a  fraction  of  unity  that  its  dimi-
nution by  eclipses,  total  or  partial,  may  be  neglected.  In  this
formula,  2Vis  a  number  of  globes  of  radius  a  uniformly  distributed
within  a  spherical  surface  of  radius  r.  For  the  same  quantity  of
matter  in  iV'  globes  of  the  same  density,  uniformly  distributed
through  the  same  sphere  of  radius  r,  we  have

i^  ~  w)

and  therefore  —  =  —  .

a a

With  N=10\  r  =  3-09.10i«  kilometres;  and  a  (the  sun's  radius)
=  7.10^  kilometres;  we  had  a  =  3-87.1  Q-^^  Hence  a  =  7  kilo-
metres gives  a'=  3*87. 10~^;  and  a"=  1  centimetre  gives  a"=  1/369.
Hence  if  the  whole  mass  of  our  supposed  universe  were  reduced

*  Phil.  Mag.  August  1901,  p.  175.

VELOCITIES  DUE  TO  DISTANT  ATTRACTIONS  BETWEEN  ATOMS. 537

to  globules  of  density  r-l  (being  the  sun's  mean  density),  and  of
2  centimetres  diameter,  distributed  uniformly  through  a  sphere
of  309.10'''  kilometres  radius,  an  eye  at  the  centre  of  this  sphere
would  lose  only  1/369  of  the  light  of  a  luminary  outside  it!
The  smallness  of  this  loss  is  easily  understood  when  we  consider
that  there  is  only  one  globule  of  2  centimetres  diameter  per
864,000,000  cubic  kilometres  of  space,  in  our  supposed  universe
reduced  to  globules  of  2  centimetres  diameter.  Contrast  with
the  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  by  a  natural  cloud  of  water  spherules,
or  by  the  cloud  of  smoke  from  the  funnel  of  a  steamer.

Let  now  all  the  matter  in  our  supposed  universe  be  reduced
to  atoms  (literally  brought  back  to  its  probable  earliest  condition).
Through  a  sphere  of  radius  r  let  atoms  be  distributed  uniformly
in  respect  to  gravitational  quality.  It  is  to  be  understood  that
the  condition  "  uniformly "  is  fulfilled  if  equivolurainal  globular
or  cubic  portions,  small  in  comparison  with  the  whole  sphere,
but  large  enough  to  contain  large  numbers  of  the  atoms,  contain
equal  total  masses,  reckoned  gravitational ly,  whether  the  atoms
themselves  are  of  equal  or  unequal  masses,  or  of  similar  or  dis-
similar chemical  qualities.  As  long  as  this  condition  is  fulfilled,
each  atom  experiences  very  approximately  the  same  force  as  if
the  whole  matter  were  infinitely  fine-grained,  that  is  to  say,
utterly  homogeneous.

Let  us  therefore  begin  with  a  uniform  sphere  of  matter  of
density  p,  gravitational  reckoning;  with  no  mutual  forces  except
gravitation  between  its  parts,  given  with  every  part  at  rest  at
the  initial  instant :  and  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  subsequent
motion.  Imagining  the  whole  divided  into  infinitely  thin  con-
centric spherical  shells,  we  see  that  every  one  of  them  falls
inwards,  as  if  attracted  by  the  whole  mass  within  it  collected
at  the  centre.  Hence  our  problem  is  reduced  to  the  well  known
students'  exercise  of  finding  the  rectilinear  motion  of  a  particle
attracted  according  to  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  from  a

fixed  point. Let  a^o  be  the  initial  distance,  -~-ocq  the  attracting

mass,  V  and  x  velocity  and  distance  from  the  centre  at  time  t.
The  solution  of  the  problem  for  the  time  during  which  the  particle
is  falling  towards  the  centre  is

47rp  ^  3  /'I 1
^3"  '^'

538  APPENDIX D.

Ix
where  Q  denotes  the  acute  angle  whose  sine  is  a  /  —  • This  shows

that  the  time  of  falling  through  any  proportion  of  the  initial
distance  is  the  same  whatever  be  the  initial  distance;  and  that
the  time  (which  we  shall  denote  by  T)  of  falling  to  the  centre  is

^TT / — , Hence  in  our  problem  of  homogeneous  gravitational

matter  given  at  rest  within  a  spherical  surface  and  left  to  fall
inwards,  the  augmenting  density  remains  homogeneous,  and  the
time  of  shrinkage  to  any  stated  proportion  of  the  initial  radius
is  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  density.

To  apply  this  result  to  the  supposed  spherical  universe  of
radius  S'OD.K)^"  kilometres,  and  mass  equal  to  a  thousand  million
times  the  mass  of  our  sun,  we  find  the  gravitational  attraction  on
a  body  at  its  surface  gives  acceleration  of  1-37. 10~^'^  kilometres

per  second  per  second. This  therefore is  the value of —^Xq,

with  one  second  as  the  unit  of  time  and  one  kilometre  as  the
unit  of  distance;  and  we  find  T=  52'8.10^^  seconds  =  168  million
years. Thus  our  formulas  become

l2v''  =  V^1A0-''x,{^-\

i;  =  5-2:3.19-^  ya;o(|"-l)

ad

«  =  52-8.10"

2d  ( sin  26

hence,  when  sin  6  is  very  s

mall,

4^
«  =  52-8.10^(1---

Let  now,  for  example,  a?o  =  •j'09.10^''  kilometres,  and  —=10'';

and,  therefore,  sin  6'=  ^  =  316.10-'';  whence,  v  =  291,000  kilo-
metres per  second,  and  t^T -  7080  seconds  =  T  —2  hours  ap-
proximately.

By  these  results  it  is  most  interesting  to  know  that  our  sup-
posed sphere  of  perfectly  compressible  fluid,  beginning  at  rest
with  density  1-G1.10~-'^  of  that  of  water,  and  of  any  magnitude

CONDENSATION  FROM  UNIFORM  ASSEMBLAGE  GIVEN  AT  REST. 539

large  or  small,  and  left  imclogged  by  ether  to  shrink  under  the
influence  of  mutual  gravitation  of  its  parts,  would  take  nearly
seventeen  million  years  to  reach  -0161  of  the  density  of  water,
and  about  two  hours  longer  to  shrink  to  infinite  density  at  its
centre.  It  is  interesting  also  to  know  that  if  the  initial  radius  is
3'09.10^^  kilometres,  the  inward  velocity  of  the  surface  is  291,000
kilometres  per  second  at  the  instant  when  its  radius  is  3"09.10"
and  its  density  01  Gl  of  that  of  water.  If  now,  instead  of  an
ideal  compressible  fluid,  we  go  back  to  atoms  of  ordinary  matter
of  all  kinds  as  the  primitive  occupants  of  our  sphere  of  3"09.10i''
kilometres  radius,  all  these  conclusions  (provided  all  the  velocities
are  less  than  the  velocity  of  light)  would  still  hold,  notwith-
standing the  ether  occupying  the  space  through  which  the  atoms
move.  This  would,  I  believe*,  exercise  no  resistance  whatever
to  uniform  motion  of  an  atom  through  it ;  but  it  would  certainly
add  quasi-inertia  to  the  intrinsic  Newtonian  inertia  of  the  atom
itself  moving  through  ideal  space  void  of  ether;  which,  according
to  the  Newtonian  law,  would  be  exactly  in  proportion  to  the
amount  of  its  gravitational  quality.  The  additional  quasi-inertia
must  be  exceedingly  small  in  comparison  with  the  Newtonian  in-
ertia, as  is  demonstrated  by  the  Newtonian  proofs,  including  that
founded  on  Kepler's  laws  for  the  groups  of  atoms  constituting  the
planets,  and  movable  bodies  experimented  on  at  the  earth's  surface.
In  one  thousand  seconds  of  time  after  the  density  '0161  of  the
density  of  water  is  reached,  the  inward  surface  velocity  would  be
305,000  kilometres  per  second,  or  greater  than  the  velocity  of
light ;  and  the  whole  surface  of  our  condensing  globe  of  gas  or
vapour  or  crowd  of  atoms  would  begin  to  glow,  shedding  light
inwards  and  outwards.  All  this  is  absolutely  realistic,  except
the  assumption  of  uniform  distribution  through  a  sphere  of  the
enormous  radius  of  3-09. 10^"  kilometres,  which  we  adopted  tem-
porarily for  illustrational  purpose.  The  enormously  great  velocity
(291,000  kilometres  per  second)  and  rate  of  acceleration  (13-7
kilometres  per  second  per  second)  of  the  boundary  inwards,  which
we  found  at  the  instant  of  density  "0161  of  that  of  water,  are  due
to  greatness  of  the  primitive  radius,  and  the  uniformity  of  density
in  the  primitive  distribution.

*  See  App.  A,  "On  the  Motion  produced  in  an  Infinite  Elastic  Solid  by  the
Motion  through  the  Space  occupied  by  it  of  a  Body  acting  on  it  only  by  Attraction
and  Repulsion."

540  APPENDIX D.

To  come  to  reality,  according  to  the  most  probable  judgment
present  knowledge  allows  us  to  form,  suppose  at  many  millions,
or  thousands  of  millions,  or  millions  of  millions  of  years  ago,  all
the  matter  in  the  universe  to  have  been  atoms  very  nearly  at
rest*  or  quite  at  rest;  more  densely  distributed  in  some  places
than  in  others ;  of  infinitely  small  average  density  through  the
whole  of  infinite  space.  In  regions  where  the  density  was  then
greater  than  in  neighbouring  regions,  the  density  would  become
greater  still ;  in  places  of  less  density,  the  density  would  become
less ;  and  large  regions  would  quickly  become  void  or  nearly  void
of  atoms.  These  large  void  regions  would  extend  so  as  to  com-
pletely surround  regions  of  greater  density.  In  some  part  or
parts  of  each  cluster  of  atoms  thus  isolated,  condensation  would
go  on  by  motions  in  all  directions  not  generally  convergent  to
points,  and  with  no  perceptible  mutual  influence  between  the
atoms  until  the  density  becomes  something  like  10"**  of  our
ordinary  atmospheric  density,  when  mutual  influence  by  collisions
would  begin  to  become  practically  effective.  Each  collision  would
give  rise  to  a  train  of  waves  in  ether.  These  waves  would  carry
away  energy,  spreading  it  out  through  the  void  ether  of  infinite
space.  The  loss  of  energy,  thus  taken  away  from  the  atoms,
would  reduce  large  condensing  clusters  to  the  condition  of  gas
in  equilibrium f  under  the  influence  of  its  own  gravity  only,  or
rotating  like  our  sun  or  moving  at  moderate  speeds  as  in  spiral
nebulas,  &c.  Gravitational  condensation  would  at  first  pi'oduce
rise  of  temperature,  followed  later  by  cooling  and  ultimately
freezing,  giving  solid  bodies ;  collisions  between  which  would
produce  meteoric  stones  such  as  we  see  them.  We  cannot  regard
as  probable  that  these  lumps  of  broken-looking  solid  matter
(something  like  the  broken  stones  used  on  our  macadamised
roads)  are  primitive  forms  in  which  matter  was  created.  Hence
we  are  forced,  in  this  twentieth  century,  to  views  regarding  the
atomic  origin  of  all  things  closely  resembling  those  presented  by
Deraocritus,  Epicurus,  and  their  majestic  Roman  poetic  expositor,
Lucretius.

*  "  On  Mechanical  Antecedents  of  Motion,  Heat,  and  Light,"  Brit.  Assoc.  Rep.,
Part  2,  1854 ;  Edin.  New  Phil.  Journ.  Vol.  i.  1855 ;  Comptes  Rendus,  Vol.  xl.  1855 ;
Kelvin's  Collected  Math,  and  Fhys.  Papers,  Vol.  ii.  Art.  Ixix.

t  Homer  Lane,  American  Journal  of  Science,  1870,  p.  57  ;  Sir  W.  Thomson,
Phil.  Mag.  March  1887,  p.  287.

APPENDIX E.

AEPINUS  ATOMIZED*.

§  1.  According  to  the  well-known  doctrine  of  Aepinus,
commonly  referred  to  as  the  one-fluid  theory  of  electricity,  positive
and  negative  electrifications  consist  in  excess  above,  and  deficiency
below,  a  natural  quantum  of  a  fluid,  called  the  electric  fluid,
permeating  among  the  atoms  of  ponderable  matter.  Portions  of
matter  void  of  the  electric  fluid  repel  one  another ;  portions  of  the
electric  fluid  repel  one  another ;  portions  of  the  electric  fluid  and
of  void  matter  attract  one  another.

§  2.  My  suggestion  is  that  the  Aepinus'  fluid  consists  of
exceedingly  minute  equal  and  similar  atoms,  which  I  call  elec-
trionsf ,  much  smaller  than  the  atoms  of  ponderable  matter ;  and

*  From  the  Jubilee  Volume  presented  to  Prof.  Boscha  in  November,  1901.

t  I  ventured  to  suggest  this  name  in  a  short  article  published  in  Nature,
May  '27,  1897,  in  which,  after  a  slight  reference  to  an  old  idea  of  a  "one-fluid
theory  of  electricity  "  with  resinous  electricity  as  the  electric  fluid,  the  following
expression  of  my  views  at  that  time  occurs  :  "  I  prefer  to  consider  an  atomic  theory
' '  of  electricity  foreseen  as  worthy  of  thought  by  Faraday  and  Clerk  Maxwell,  very
"  definitely  proposed  by  Helmholtz  in  his  last  lecture  to  the  Eoyal  Institution,  and
•' largely  accepted  by  present-day  workers  and  teachers.  Indeed  Faraday's  law  of
"  electro-chemical  equivalence  seems  to  necessitate  something  atomic  in  electricity,
"  and  to  justify  the  very  modern  name  electron  [given  I  believe  originally  by
Johnstone  Stoney,  and  now  largely  used  to  denote  an  atom  of  either  vitreous  or
resinous  electricity].  The  older,  and  at  present  even  more  popular,  name  io7i
•'given  sixty  years  ago  by  Faraday,  suggests  a  convenient  modification  of  it;  elec-
"  trion,  to  denote  an  atom  of  resinous  electricity.  And  now,  adopting  the  essentials
"of  Aepinus'  theory,  and  dealing  with  it  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Father  Bos-
"  covich,  each  atom  of  ponderable  matter  is  an  electron  of  vitreous  electricity;
"  which,  with  a  neutralizing  electron  of  resinous  electricity  close  to  it,  produces  a
'■  resulting  force  on  every  distant  electron  and  electrion  which  varies  inversely  as  the
"  cube  of  the  distance,  and  is  in  the  direction  determined  by  the  well-known  re-
"  quisite  application  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces."  It  will  be  seen  that  I  had
not  then  thought  of  the  hypothesis  suggested  in  the  present  communication,  that
while  electrions  permeate  freely  through  all  space,  whether  occupied  only  by  ether
or  occupied  also  by  the  volumes  of  finite  spheres  constituting  the  atoms  of  pon-
derable matter,  each  electrion  in  the  interior  of  an  atom  of  ponderable  matter  ex-
periences electric  force  towards  the  centre  of  the  atom,  just  as  if  the  atom  contained
within  it,  fixed  relatively  to  itself,  a  uniform  distribution  of  ideal  electric  matter.

542  APPENDIX E.

that  they  permeate  freely  through  the  spaces  occupied  by  these
greater  atoms  and  also  freely  through  space  not  occupied  by  them.
As  in  Aepinus'  theory  we  must  have  repulsions  between  the
electrions  ;  and  repulsions  between  the  atoms  independently  of  the
electrions ;  and  attractions  between  electrions  and  atoms  without
electrions.  For  brevity,  in  future  by  atom  I  shall  mean  an  atom  of
ponderable  matter,  whether  it  has  any  electrions  within  it  or  not.

§  3.  In  virtue  of  the  discovery  and  experimental  proof  by
Cavendish  and  Coulomb  of  the  law  of  inverse  square  of  distance
for  both  electric  attractions  and  repulsions,  we  may  now  suppose
that  the  atoms,  which  I  assume  to  be  all  of  them  spherical,  repel
other  atoms  outside  them  with  forces  inversely  as  the  squares  of
distances  between  centres ;  and  that  the  same  is  true  of  electrions,
which  no  doubt  occupy  finite  spaces,  although  at  present  we  are
dealing  with  them  as  if  they  were  mere  mathematical  points,
endowed  with  the  property  of  electric  attraction  and  repulsion.
We  must  now  also  assume  that  every  atom  attracts  every  electrion
outside  it  with  a  force  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance
between  centres,

§  4.  My  assumption  that  the  electrions  freely  permeate  the
space  occupied  by  the  atoms  requires  a  knowledge  of  the  law  of
the  force  experienced  by  an  electrion  within  an  atom.  As  a  tenta-
tive hypothesis,  I  assume  for  simplicity  that  the  attraction  ex-
perienced by  an  electrion  approaching  an  atom  varies  exactly
according  to  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  from  the  centre,
as  long  as  the  electrion  is  outside ;  has  no  abrupt  change  when
the  electrion  enters  the  atom ;  but  decreases  to  zero  simply  as  the
distance  from  the  centre  when  the  electrion,  approaching  the
centre,  is  within  the  spherical  boundary  of  the  atom.  This  is
just  as  it  would  be  if  the  electric  virtue  of  the  atom  were  due
to  uniform  distribution  through  the  atom  of  an  ideal  electric
substance  of  which  each  infinitely  small  part  repels  infinitely
small  portions  of  the  ideal  substance  in  other  atoms,  and  attracts
electrions,  according  to  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance.  But
we  cannot  make  the  corresponding  supposition  for  the  mutual
force  between  two  overlapping  atoms  ;  because  we  must  keep  our-
selves free  to  add  a  repulsion  or  attraction  according  to  any  law  of
force,  that  we  may  find  convenient  for  the  explanation  of  electric,
elastic,  and  chemical  properties  of  matter.

VITREOUS RESINOUS INSTEAD OF POSITIVE NEGATIVE, 543

§  5.  The  neutralizing  quantum  of  electrions  for  any  atom  or
group  of  atoms  has  exactly  the  same  quantity  of  electricity  of  one
kind  as  the  atom  or  group  of  atoms  has  of  electricity  of  the
opposite  kind.  The  quantum  for  any  single  atom  may  be  one  or
two  or  three  or  any  integral  number,  and  need  not  be  the  same
for  all  atoms.  The  designations  mono-electrionic,  dielectrionic,
trielectrionic,  tetraelectrionic,  polyelectrionic,  etc.,  will  accordingly
be  convenient.  It  is  possible  that  the  differences  of  quality  of
the  atoms  of  different  substances  may  be  partially  due  to  the
quantum-numbers  of  their  electrions  being  different ;  but  it  is
possible  that  the  differences  of  quality  are  to  be  wholly  explained
in  merely  Boscovichian  fashion  by  differences  in  the  laws  of  force
between  the  atoms,  and  may  not  imply  any  differences  in  the
numbers  of  electrions  constituting  their  quantums.

§  6.  Another  possibility  to  be  kept  in  view  is  that  the
neutralizing  quantum  for  an  atom  may  not  be  any  integral  number
of  electrions.  Thus  for  example  the  molecule  of  a  diatomic  gas,
oxygen,  or  nitrogen,  or  hydrogen,  or  chlorine,  might  conceivably
have  three  electrions  or  some  odd  number  of  electrions  for  its
quantum  so  that  the  single  atoms,  O,  N,  H,  CI,  if  they  could  exist
separately,  must  be  either  vitreously  or  resinously  electrified  and
cannot  be  neutral.

§  7.  The  present  usage  of  the  designations,  positive  and
negative,  for  the  two  modes  of  electrification  originated  no  doubt
with  the  use  of  glass  globes  or  cylinders  in  ordinary  electric
machines  giving  vitreous  electricity  to  the  insulated  prime  con-
ductor, and  resinous  electricity  to  the  not  always  insulated  rubber.
Thus  Aepinus  and  his  followers  regarded  the  prime  conductors  of
their  machines  as  giving  the  true  electric  fluid,  and  leaving  a
deficiency  of  it  in  the  rubbers  to  be  supplied  from  the  earth.  It
is  curious,  in  Beccaria's  account  of  his  observations  made  about
1760  at  Garzegna  in  Piedmont  on  atmospheric  electricity,  to  read
of  "  The  mild  excessive  electricity  of  the  air  in  fair  weather."
This  in  more  modern  usage  would  be  called  mild  positive
electricity.  The  meaning  of  either  expression,  stated  in  non-
hypothetical  language,  is,  the  mild  vitreous  electricity  of  the  air
in  fair  weather.

I  8.  In  the  mathematical  theory  of  electricity  in  equilibrium,
it  is  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference  which  of  the  opposite  electric

544

APPENDIX E.

manifestations  we  call  positive  and  which  negative.  But  the
great  diflFerences  in  the  disruptive  and  luminous  effects,  when  the
forces  are  too  strong  for  electric  equilibrium,  presented  by  the  two
modes  of  electrification,  which  have  been  known  from  the  earliest
times  of  electric  science,  show  physical  properties  not  touched  by
the  mathematical  theory.  And  Varley's  comparatively  recent
discovery*  of  the  molecular  torrent  of  resinously  electrified
particles  from  the  "kathode"  or  resinous  electrode  in  apparatus
for  the  transmission  of  electricity  through  vacuum  or  highly
rarefied  air,  gives  strong  reason  for  believing  that  the  mobile
electricity  of  Aepinus'  theory  is  resinous,  and  not  vitreous  as  he
accidentally  made  it.  I  shall  therefore  assume  that  our  electrions
act  as  extremely  minute  particles  of  resinously  electrified  matter ;
that  a  void  atom  acts  simply  as  a  little  globe  of  atomic  substance,
possessing  as  an  essential  quality  vitreous  electricity  uniformly
distributed  through  it  or  through  a  smaller  concentric  globe ;  and
that  ordinary  ponderable  matter,  not  electrified,  consists  of  a  vast
assemblage  of  atoms,  not  void,  but  having  within  the  portions  of
space  which  they  occupy,  just  enough  of  electrions  to  annul  electric
force  for  all  places  of  which  the  distance  from  the  nearest  atom  is
large  in  comparison  with  the  diameter  of  an  atom,  or  molecular
cluster  of  atoms.

§  9. This  condition  respecting  distance  would,  because  of  the

Fig.  1.

Fig.  2.

Badii  3  and  1

C"C  =  2-7 C'£'  =  -1458 C£=:-0462

inverse  square  of  the  distance  law  for  the  forces,  be  unnecessary
and the electric  force  would be  rigorously  null  throughout  all

Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Vol.  xix.  1871,  pp.  239,  240.

OVERLAPPING MONO-ELECTIIIONIC ATOMS.  545

space  outside  the  atoms,  if  every  atom  had  only  a  single  electrion
at  its  centre,  provided  that  the  electric  quantities  of  the  opposite
electricities  (reckoned  according  to  the  old  definition  of  mathe-
matical electrostatics)  are  equal  in  the  atom  and  in  the  electrion.
But  even  if  every  neutralized  separate  atom  contains  just  one
electrion  in  stable  equilibrium  at  its  centre,  it  is  obvious  that,
when  two  atoms  overlap  so  far  that  the  centre  of  one  of  them  is
within  the  spherical  boundary  of  the  other,  the  previous  equi-
librium of  the  two  electrions  is  upset,  and  they  must  find  positions
of  equilibrium  elsewhere  than  at  the  centres.  Thus  in  fig.  1  each
electrion  is  at  the  centre  of  its  atom,  and  is  attracted  and  repelled
with  equal  forces  by  the  neighbouring  atom  and  electrion  at  its
centre.  In  fig.  2,  if  E  and  E'  were  at  the  centres  C,  C,  of  the
two  atoms,  E  would  be  repelled  by  E'  more  than  it  would  be
attracted  by  the  atom  A'.  Hence  both  electrions  being  supposed
free,  E  will  move  to  the  right ;  and  because  of  its  diminished
repulsion  on  E',  E'  will  follow  it  in  the  same  direction.  The
equations  of  equilibrium  of  the  two  are  easily  written  down,  not
so  easily  solved  without  some  slight  arithmetical  artifice.  The
solution  is  correctly  shown  in  fig.  2,  for  the  case  in  which  one
radius  is  three  times  the  other,  and  the  distance  between  the
centres  is  2'7 times  the  smaller  radius*. The investigation in

*  Calling  e  the  quantity  of  electricity,  vitreous  or  resinous,  in  each  atom  or
electrion :  f  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  the  atoms ;  a,  a'  the  radii  of  the
two  atoms;  x,  x'  the  displacements  of  the  electrions  from  the  centres;  A',  X'  the
forces  experienced  by  the  electrions ;  we  have

L a^^{^+x-x'f 0.'-^  y

^^  "  ''  L a'=*  +  (s-  -  x'f (f  +  X  -  x'YA

Each  of  these  being  equated  to  zero  for  equilibrium  gives  us  two  equations  which
are  not  easily  dealt  with  by  frontal  attack  for  the  determination  of  two  unknown
quantities  x,  x';  but  which  may  be  solved  by  a  method  of  successive  approximations,
as  follows: — Let  x^,  x^,...  x^,  x^' ,  .-r/,  ...  .r/,  be  successive  approximations  to  the
values  of  x  and  x',  and  take

where  Bi"={^+Xi- x^)".  As  an  example,  take  a  =  l,  a'  =  3.  To  find  solutions  for
gradual  approach  between  centres,  take  successively  f=2-9,  2-8,  2*7,  2-6.  Begin
with  Xu-0,  V=0.  we  find  ^4  = -01243,  X4'=-0297,  and  the  same  values  for  x^,
and  x.,'.  Take  next  f=2-8,  Xo  =  -01243,  Xo'  =  -0297;  we  find  X4=X5--0269,
x4'  =  x5'  =  -0702. Thus we have the solution for the second  distance between

T.  L.  35

546

APPENDIX E.

the  footnote  shows  that  if  the  atoms  are  brought  a  little  nearer,
the  equilibrium  becomes  unstable ;  and  we  may  infer  that  both
electrions  jump  to  the  right,  E'  to  settle  at  a  point  within  the
atom  A  on  the  left-hand  side  of  its  centre;  and  E  outside  A',  to

settle  at  a  point  still  within  A.  If,
lastly,  we  bring  the  centres  closer
and  closer  together  till  they  coincide,
E  comes  again  within  A',  and  the
two  electrions  settle,  as  shown  in
fig.  3  at  distances  on  the  two  sides  of
the  common  centre,  each  equal  to

13/  9

2

1 1

a^ a.

's

Fig.  3.
£C'  =  C£  = -622

which  for  the  case  a  —  3a  is

2-27
28

=  •622a.

§  10.  Mutual  action  of  this  kind  might  probably  be  presented
in  such  binary  combinations  as  Og,  N.,,  Ho,  CL,  CO,  SO,  NaCl  (dry
common  salt)  if  each  single  atom,  0,  N,  H,  CI,  C*,  S,  Naf,  had
just  one  electrion  for  its  neutralizing  quantum.  If  the  combina-
tion is  so  close  that  the  centres  coincide,  the  two  electrions  will
rest  stably  at  equal  distances  on  the  two  sides  of  the  common
centre  as  at  the  end  of  §  9.  I  see  at  present  no  reason  for  con-
sidering it  excessively  improbable  that  this  may  be  the  case  for
SO,  or  for  any  other  binary  combinations  of  tiuo  atoms  of  different
quality  for  neither  of  which  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  its
neutralizing  quantum  is  not  exactly  one  electrion.  But  for  the
binary  combinations  of  two  atoms  of  identical  quality  which  the

centres.  Next  take  ^-=2-7,  x^  = -0269,  a;o'  =  -0702;  we  find  Xg  =  .r^  = -0462,
^-^'  =  3;/=  •1458.  Working  similarly  for  s''=2-6,  we  do  not  find  convergence,  and
we  infer  that  a  position  of  unstable  equilibrium  is  reached  by  the  electrions  for
some  value  of  f  between  2-7  and  2-6.

*  The  complexity  of  the  hydrocarbons  and  the  Van  't  Hoff  and  Le  Bel  doctrine
of  the  asymmetric  results  (chirality)  produced  by  the  quadrivalence  of  carbon
makes  it  probable  tliat  the  carbon  atom  takes  at  least  four  electrions  to  neutralize
it  electrically.

+  The  fact  that  sodium,  solid  or  liquid,  is  a  metallic  conductor  of  electricity
makes  it  probable  that  the  sodium  atom,  as  all  other  metallic  elements,  takes
a  large  number  of  electrions  to  neutralize  it. (See  below  §  30.)

FRICTIONAL AND SEPARATIONAL ELECTRICITY.  547

chemists  have  discovered  in  diatomic  gases  (0^,  No,  etc.)  there
must,  over  and  above  the  electric  repulsion  of  the  two  similar
electric  globes,  be  a  strong  atomic  repulsion  preventing  stable
equilibrium  with  coincident  centres,  however  strongly  the  atoms
may  be  drawn  together  by  the  attractions  of  a  pair  of  mutually
repellent electrions  within  them;  because  without  such  a  repulsion
the  two  similar  atoms  would  become  one,  which  no  possible  action
in  nature  could  split  into  two.

§  11.  Returning  to  §  9,  let  us  pull  the  two  atoms  gradually
asunder  from  the  concentric  position  to  which  we  had  brought
them.  It  is  easily  seen  that  they  will  both  remain  within  the
smaller  atom  A,  slightly  disturbed  from  equality  of  distance  on
the  two  sides  of  its  centre  by  attractions  towards  the  centre  of  ^';
and  that  when  A'  is  infinitely  distant  they  will  settle  at  distances
each  equal  to  ^a  \/2  =  ■62996a  on  the  two  sides  of  C,  the  centre
of  A.  If,  instead  of  two  mono-electrionic  atoms,  we  deal  as  in
§  9  with  two  polyelectrionic  atoms,  we  find  after  separation  the
number  of  electrions  in  the  smaller  atom  increased  and  in  the
larger  decreased  ;  and  this  with  much  smaller  difference  of  magni-
tude than  the  three  to  one  of  diameters  which  we  had  for  our
mono-electrionic  atoms  of  §  9.  This  is  a  very  remarkable  conclusion,
pointing  to  what  is  probably  the  true  explanation  of  the  first
known  of  the  electric  properties  of  matter ;  attractions  and
repulsions  produced  by  rubbed  amber.  Two  ideal  solids  consisting
of  assemblages  of  mono-electrionic  atoms  of  largely  different  sizes
would  certainly,  when  pressed  and  rubbed  together  and  separated,
show  the  properties  of  oppositely  electrified  bodies;  and  the
preponderance  of  the  electrionic  quality  would  be  in  the  assem-
blage of  which  the  atoms  are  the  smaller.  Assuming  as  we  do
that  the  electricity  of  the  electrions  is  of  the  resinous  kind,  we
say  that  after  pressing  and  rubbing  together  and  separating  the
two  assemblages,  the  assemblage  of  the  smaller  atoms  is  resinously
electrified  and  the  assemblage  of  the  larger  atoms  is  vitreously
electrified.  This  is  probably  the  true  explanation  of  the  old-
known  fact  that  ground  glass  is  resinous  relatively  to  polished
glass.  The  process  of  polishing  might  be  expected  to  smooth  down
the  smaller  atoms,  and  to  leave  the  larger  atoms  more  effective  in
the  surface.

§  12. It  probably  contains  also  the  principle  of  the  explana-

35—2

548

APPENDIX E.

tion  of  Erskine  Murray's*  experimental  discovery  that  surfaces  of
metals,  well  cleaned  by  rubbing  with  glass-paper  or  emery-paper,
become  more  positive  or  less  negative  in  the  Volta  contact
electricity  scale  by  being  burnished  with  a  smooth  round  hard
steel  burnisher.  Thus  a  zinc  plate  brightened  by  rubbing  on
glass-paper  rose  by  "23  volt  by  repeated  burnishing  with  a  hard
steel  burnisher,  and  fell  again  by  the  same  difference  when  rubbed
again  with  glass-paper.  Copper  plates  showed  differences  of
about  the  same  amount  and  in  the  same  direction  when  similarly
treated.  Between  highly  burnished  zinc  and  emery-cleaned
copper,  Murray  found  a  Volta-difference  of  1'13  volts,  Avhich  is,
I  believe,  considerably  greater  than  the  greatest  previously  found
Volta-difference  between  pure  metallic  surfaces  of  zinc  and
copper.

§  13.  To  further  illustrate  the  tendency  (§  9)  of  the  smaller
atom  to  take  electrions  from  the  larger,  consider  two  atoms ;  A' ,
of  radius  a',  the  greater,  having  an  electrion  in  it  to  begin  with ;
and  A,  radius  a,  the  smaller,  void.

By  ideal  forces  applied  to  the  atoms  while  the  electrion  is  free
let  them  approach  gradually  from  a  very  great  distance  apart.
The  attraction  of  A  draws  the  electrion  from  the  centre  of  A'\  at
first  very  slightly,  but  farther  and  farther  as  the  distance  between
the  atoms is diminished. What will be the position of  the

Fig.  4.

a'  =  l C'C  =  2 C"£  =  -38

Fig.  5.
C'C=l-89 C'£  =  0-63

electrion  when  the  distance  between  the  centres  is,  as  in  fig.  4,
2a'?  Without  calculation  we  see  that  the  electrion  would  be  in
equilibrium  if  placed  at  the  point  in  which  the  surface  of  ^'  is
cut  by  the  line  of  centres  ;  but  the  equilibrium  would  be  obviously

*  "  On  Contact  Electricity  of  Metals,"  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Vol.  lxiii.  1898,  p.  113.
See  also  Lord  Kelvin,  "  Contact  Electricity  of  Metals,"  Phil.  Mag.  Vol.  xlvi.  1898,
pp.  90—98.

SMALLER ATOM TAKES ELECTRION FROM LARGER.  549

unstable,  and  a  simple  calculation*  shows  that  the  stable  position
actually  taken  by  the  electrion  is  'SSa'  from  C",  when  the  distance
between  the  centres  is  2a'  (fig.  4).  If  the  distance  between  the
centres  is  now  diminished  from  2a'  to  l'89a'  (a  being  now
supposed  to  be  anything  less  than  Sda)  the  electrion  comes
gradually  to  distance  'GSa'  from  C  (fig.  5) ;  its  equilibrium  there
becomes  unstable ;  and  it  jumps  out  of  A'  towards  A  (like  a  cork
jumping  out  of  a  bottle).  It  will  shoot  through  A  (A'  and  A
being  held  fixed);  and  after  several  oscillations  to  and  fro,  perhaps-f-
ten  or  twenty  [or  perhaps  a  million  (K.,  Aug.  9,  1903)],  if  it  has
only  quasi-inertia  due  to  condensation  or  rarefaction  j  produced  by
it  in  ether ;  or  perhaps  many  times  more  if  it  has  intrinsic  inertia
of  its  own ;  it  will  settle,  with  decreasing  range  of  excursions,
sensibly  to  rest  within  A,  attracted  somewhat  from  the  centre
by  A'.  If,  lastly,  A'  and  A  be  drawn  asunder  to  their  original
great  distance,  the  electrion  will  not  regain  its  original  position
in  A\  but  will  come  to  the  centre  of  A  and  rest  there.  Here
then  we  have  another  illustration  of  the  tendency  found  in  §  9,
of  the  smaller  atom  to  take  electrions  from  the  larger.

§  14.  In  preventing  the  two  atoms  from  rushing  together
by  holding  them  against  the  attractive  force  of  the  electrion,  we
shall  have  gained  more  work  during  the  approach  than  we  after-
wards spent  on  the  separation  ;  and  we  have  now  left  the  system

*  Denoting  by  f  the  distance  between  the  centres,  and  by  X  the  force  on  E  when
its  distance  from  C  is  x',  we  have

^~^L{^-xr  «'d

1  x'

Hence  for  equilibrium ,:„  —  -7, . This  is  a  cubic  for  .i-'  of  which  the  proper

(^-x'f a  3

root (the  smallest  root)  for  the  case  f=2a'  is  -SSa'. The formula  for  A'  has

a  minimum  value  when  'g-x'  —  a  ^2,  which  makes

•-?^G*-a

Hence  the  value  of  .r'  for  equilibrium  coincides  with  the  value  of  X,  a  minimum,

3  V2
and  the  equilibrium  becomes  unstable,  when  f  is  diminished  to  — |—  a'  —  l'890a'.

^!/2

For  this,  the  value  of  x  is  -^  a  =:-63a'.

t  "  On  the  Production  of  Wave  Motion  in  an  Elastic  Solid,"  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.
1899,  §  44.

+  "  On  the  Motion  of  Ponderable  Matter  through  Space  occupied  by  Ether,"
Phil.  Mag.  Aug.  1900,  §§  15,  17. [Reproduced  in  the  present  Volume  as  App.  A.]

550  APPENDIX E.

deijrived  of  the  farther  amount  of  energy  carried  away  by  etherial
waves  into  space.

§  15.  The  system  in  its  final  state  with  the  electrion  at  the
centre  of  the  smaller  atom  has  less  potential  energy  in  it  than  it
had  at  the  beginning  (when  the  electrion  was  at  the  centre  of  A'),
by  a  difference  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  work  Avhich  we  gained
during  the  approach  above  that  which  we  spent  on  the  final
separation  of  A'  and  A,  plus  the  amount  carried  away  by  the
etherial  waves.  All  these  items  except  the  last  are  easily  calcu-
lated from  the  algebra  of  the  footnote  on  §  13;  and  thus  we  find
how  much  is  our  loss  of  energy  by  the  etherial  waves.

§  16.  Very  interesting  statical  problems  are  presented  to  us
by  consideration  of  the  equilibrium  of  two  or  more  electrions
Avithin  one  atom,  whether  a  polyelectrionic  atom  with  its  saturat-
ing number,  or  an  atom  of  any  electric  strength  with  any  number
of  electrions  up  to  the  greatest  number  that  it  can  hold.  To  help
to  clear  our  ideas,  first  remark  that  if  the  number  of  electrions  is
infinite,  that  is  to  say  if  we  go  back  to  Aepinus'  electric  fluid,  but
assume  it  to  permeate  freely  through  an  atom  of  any  shape
whatever  and  having  any  arbitrarily  given  distribution  of  elec-
tricity of  the  opposite  kind  fixed  within  it,  the  greatest  quantity
of  fluid  which  it  can  take  is  exactly  equal  to  its  own,  and  lodges
with  density  equal  to  its  own  in  every  part.  Hence  if  the  atom
is  spherical,  and  of  equal  electric  density  throughout  as  we  have
supposed  it,  and  if  its  neutralizing  quantum  of  electrions  is  a  very
large  number,  their  configuration  of  equilibrium  will  be  an
assemblage  of  more  and  more  nearly  uniform  density  from  surface
to  centre,  the  greater  the  number.  Any  Bravais  homogeneous
assemblage  whatever  would  be  very  nearly  in  equilibrium  if  all
the  electrions  in  a  surface-layer  of  thickness  a  hundred  times  the
shortest  distance  from  electrion  to  electrion  were  held  fixed ;  but
the  equilibrium  would  be  unstable  except  in  certain  cases.  It
may  seem  probable  that  it  is  stable  if  the  homogeneous  assemblage
is  of  the  species  which  I  have  called*  equilateral,  being  that  in
which  each  electrion  with  any  two  of  its  twelve  next  neighbours
forms  an  equilateral  triangle. If  now  all  the  electrions  in  the

*  Molecular  Tactics  of  a  Crystal,  §  4,  being  the  second  Kobert  Boyle  Lecture,
delivered  before  the  Oxford  University  Junior  Scientific  Club,  May  16,  1893
(Clarendon  Press,  Oxford). [Reproduced  in  the  present  Volume  as  App.  H.]

STABLE EQUILIBRIUM  OF SEVERAL ELECTRIONS IN  AN  ATOM. 551

surface  layer  are  left  perfectly  free,  a  slight  rearrangement  among
themselves  and  still  slighter  among  the  neighbouring  electrions
in  the  interior  will  bring  the  whole  multitude  (of  thousands  or
millions)  to  equilibrium.  The  subject  is  of  extreme  interest,
geometrical,  dynamical  and  physical,  but  cannot  be  pursued
further  at  present.

§  17.  To  guide  our  ideas  respecting  the  stable  equilibrium  of
moderate  numbers  of  electrions  within  an  atom,  remark  first  that
for  any  number  of  electrions  there  may  be  equilibrium  with  all
the  electrions  on  one  spherical  surface  concentric  with  the  atom.
To  prove  this,  discard  for  a  moment  the  atom  and  imagine  the
electrions,  whatever  their  number,  to  be  attached  to  ends  of  equal
inextensible  strings  of  which  the  other  ends  are  fixed  to  one
point  C.  Every  string  will  be  stretched  in  virtue  of  the  mutual
repulsions  of  the  electrions ;  and  there  will  be  a  configuration  or
configurations  of  equilibrium  with  the  electrions  on  a  spherical
surface.  Whatever  their  number  there  is  essentially  at  least  one
configuration  of  stable  equilibrium.  Remark  also  that  there  is
always  a  configuration  of  equilibrium  in  which  all  the  strings  are
in  one  plane,  and  the  electrions  are  equally  spaced  round  one
great  circle  of  the  sphere.  This  is  the  sole  configuration  for  two
electrions  or  for  three  electrions :  but  for  any  number  exceeding
three  it  is  easily  proved  to  be  unstable,  and  is  therefore  not  the
sole  configuration  of  equilibrium.  For  four  electrions  it  is  easily
seen  that,  besides  the  unstable  equilibrium  in  one  plane,  there  is
only  one  stable  configuration,  and  in  this  the  four  electrions  are  at
the  four  corners  of  an  equilateral  tetrahedron.

§  18.  For  five  electrions  we  have  clearly  stable  equilibrium
with  three  of  them  in  one  plane  through  C,  and  the  other  two  at
equal  distances  in  the  line  through  G  perpendicular  to  this  plane.
There  is  also  at  least  one  other  configuration  of  equilibrium  :  this
we  see  by  imagining  four  of  the  electrions  constrained  to  remain
in  a  freely  movable  plane,  which  gives  stable  equilibrium
with  this  plane  at  some  distance  from  the  centre  and  the  fifth
electrion  in  the  diameter  perpendicular  to  it.  And  similarly
for  any  greater  number  of  electrions,  we  find  a  configuration  of
equilibrium  by  imagining  all  but  one  of  them  to  be  constrained
to  remain  in  a  freely  movable  plane.  But  it  is  not  easy,  without
calculation,  to  see,  at  all  events  for  the  case  of  only  five  electrions,

552  APPENDIX E.

whether  that  equilibrium  would  be  stable  if  the  constraint  of  all
of  them  but  one,  to  one  plane  is  annulled.  For  numbers  greater
than  five  it  seems  certain  that  that  equilibrium  is  unstable.

§  19.  For  six  we  have  a  configuration  of  stable  equilibrium
with  the  electrions  at  the  six  corners  of  a  regular  octahedron ;
for  eight  at  the  corners  of  a  cube.  For  ten,  as  for  any  even
number,  we  should  have  two  configurations  of  equilibrium  (both
certainly  unstable  for  large  numbers)  with  two  halves  of  the
number  in  two  planes  at  equal  distances  on  the  two  sides  of  the
centre.  For  twelve  we  have  a  configuration  of  stable  equilibrium
Avith  the  electrions  at  positions  of  the  twelve  nearest  neighbours
to  G  in  an  equilateral  homogeneous  assemblage  of  points*;  for
twenty  at  the  twenty  corners  of  a  pentagonal  dodecahedron.  All
these  configurations  of  §  19  except  those  for  ten  electrions  are
stable  if,  as  we  are  now  supposing,  the  electrions  are  constrained
to  a  spherical  surface  on  which  they  are  free  to  move.

§  20.  Except  the  cases  of  §  18,  the  forces  with  which  the
strings  are  stretched  are  the  same  for  all  the  electrions  of  each
case.  Hence  if  we  now  discard  the  strings  and  place  the  electrions
in  an  atom  on  a  spherical  surface  concentric  with  it,  its  attraction
on  the  electrions  towards  the  centre  takes  the  place  of  the  tension
of  the  string,  provided  it  is  of  the  proper  amount.  But  it  does
not  secure,  as  did  the  strings,  against  instability  relatively  to
radial  displacements,  different  for  the  different  electrions.  To
secure  the  proper  amount  of  the  radial  force  the  condition  is

— —  =  T ;  where  i  deiiotes  the  number  of  electrions  ;  e  the  electric

Q,3  5

quantity  on  each  (and  therefore,  §  8,  ie  the  electric  quantity  of
vitreous  electricity  in  the  atom) ;  r  denotes  the  radius  of  the
spherical  surface  on  which  the  electrions  lie :  a  the  radius  of  the
atom ; and T  the  tension  of  the  string  in  the  arrangement  of

§  17. We  have  generally  T=q~  where  g-  is  a  numeric  depending

on  the  number  and  configuration  of  the  electrions  found  in  each

case  by  geometry. Hence  we  have  ~  =  a  /  •  for  the  ratio  of  the

radius  of  the  smaller  sphere  on  which  the  electrions  lie  to  the
radius  of  the  atom. For  example,  take  the  case  of  eight  electrions

*  App.  H,  "  Molecular  Tactics  of  a  Crystal,"  §  4.

EXHAUSTION OF ENERGY  IN  STABLE  GROUPS  OF  ELECTRIONS, OOo

at the eight corners of  a cube. T is the resultant of"  seven
repulsions, and we easily find 5'  =  f  (\/3  +  Vf  +  i) and finally

T

-  =  "6756. Dealing  similarly  with  the  cases  of  two,  three,  four,

and six electrions, we have  the following table of values of

-  j  and  -  ;  to  which  is  added  a  last  column  showing  values  of

.„  3a-  —  r- ^  a . . a ,. ,  ,  . .  ,

I -iz-T, i  T^ ,  being ,  01 the  work required to  remove the

2a-  D  "  e-  ^

electrions  to  infinite  distance. D  is  the  distance  between  any  two
of  the  electrions.

"  X  work

Number

of
Electrions

Configuration

©■'

r
a

reqiiired  to  re-
move the  elec-
trions to  infi-
nite distance

=  U'

1

At  the  centre

0

0

1-500

2

At  quarter  points  from  the
ends  of  a  diameter

1

8

•5000

4-500

3

At  the  corners  of  an  equi-
lateral triangle

1
3^3

•5774

9^000

•4

At  the  corners  of  a  square

J2 I
8 16

•6208

14-750

4

At  the  corners  of  an  equi-
lateral tetrahedron

3 /3
16  V 2

•6124

15-000

6

At  the  corners  of  an  equi-
lateral octahedron

1  +  V2
24

•6522

33-335

8

At  the  corners  of  a  cube

3^2(^^+\/ 2

^l)

•6756

52-180

§  21.  In  the  configurations  thus  expressed  the  equilibrium  is
certainly  stable  for  the  cases  of  two  electrions,  three  electrions,
and  four  electrions  at  the  corners  of  a  tetrahedron.  It  seems  to  me,
without  calculation,  also  probably  stable  for  the  case  of  six,  and
possibly  even  for  the  case  of  eight.  For  the  case  of  twenty  at  the
corners  of  a  pentagonal  dodecahedron  the  equilibrium  is  probably
not  stable ;  and  even  for  the  cases  of  twelve  electrions  and  ten
electrions,  the  equilibrium  in  the  configurations  described  in  §§  18,
19  may  probably  be  unstable,  when,  as  now,  we  have  the  attraction
of  the  atom  towards  the  centre  instead  of  the  inextensible  strings.

§  22. In  fact  when  the  number  of  electrions  exceeds  four,

554  APPENDIX E.

we  must  think  of  the  tendency  to  be  crowded  out  of  one  spherical
surface,  which  wdth  very  large  numbers  gives  a  tendency  to
uniform  distribution  throughout  the  volume  of  the  atom  as
described  in  §  16  above.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  five  electrions,
§  18  shows  a  configuration  of  equilibrium  in  which  the  two
electrions  lying  in  one  diameter  are,  by  the  mutual  repulsions,
pushed  very  slightly  further  from  the  centre  than  are  the  three
in  the  equatorial  plane.  In  this  case  the  equilibrium  is  clearly
stable.  Another  obvious  configuration,  also  stable,  of  five  elec-
trions within  an  atom  is  one  at  the  centre,  and  four  on  a  concentric
spherical  surface  at  the  corners,  of  a  tetrahedron.  From  any  case
of  any  number  of  electrions  all  on  one  spherical  surface,  we  may
pass  to  another  configuration  with  one  more  electrion  placed  at
the  centre  and  the  proper  proportionate  increase  in  the  electric
strength  of  the  atom.  Thus  from  the  cases  described  in  §  19,  we
may  pass  to  configurations  of  equilibrium  for  seven,  nine,  eleven,
thirteen,  and  twenty-one  electrions.  All  these  cases,  with  questions
of  stability  or  instability  and  of  the  different  amounts  of  work
required  to  pluck  all  the  electrions  out  of  the  atom  and  remove
them  to  infinite  distances,  present  most  interesting  subjects  for
not  difficult  mathematical  work ;  and  I  regret  not  being  able  to
pursue  them  at  present.

§  23.  Consider  now  the  electric  properties  of  a  real  body,
gaseous,  liquid,  or  solid,  constituted  by  an  assemblage  of  atoms
with  their  electrions.  It  follows  immediately  from  our  hypothesis,
that  in  a  monatomic  gas  or  in  any  sufficiently  sparse  assemblage
of  single  atoms,  fixed  or  moving,  Faraday's  "  conducting  j^ower  for
lines  of  electric  force,"  or  luhat  is  noiu  commonly  called  tJie  sjjecijic
electro-inductive  capacity,  or  the  electro-inductive  permeability,
exceeds  unity  by  three  times  the  ratio  of  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of
the  atoms  to  tlie  whole  volume  of  space  occupied  by  the  assemblage,
whether  the  atoms  be  mono-electrionic  or  polyelectrionic,  and  how-
ever much  the  electrion,  or  group  of  electrions,  within  each  atom
is  set  to  vibrate  or  rotate  with  each  collision,  according  to  the
kinetic  theory  of  gases.  To  prove  this,  consider,  in  a  uniform
field  of  electrostatic  force  of  intensity  F,  a  single  atom  of  radius  a;
and,  at  rest  within  it,  a  group  of  i  electrions  in  stable  equi-
librium. The  action  of  F  produces  simply  displacements  of  the
electrions  relatively  to  the  atom,  equal  and  in  parallel  lines,  with
therefore  no  change  of  shape  and  no  rotation ;  and,  x  denoting  the

ELECTRO-INDUCTIVE CAPACITY.  555

amount  of  this  displacement,  the  equation  tor  the  equilibrium  of

each  electrion  is  — ~  =  F. This  oives  iex  =  a~F  for  the  electric

moment  of  the  electrostatic  polarization  induced  in  the  atom  by  F.
In  passing,  remark  that  ol^F  is  also  equal  to  the  electric  moment
of  the  polarization  produced  in  an  insulated  unelectrified  metal
globe  of  radius  a,  when  brought  into  an  electrostatic  field  of
intensity  F:  and  conclude  that  the  electric  inductive  capacity  of
a  uniformly  dense  assemblage  of  fixed  metallic  globules,  so  sparse
that  their  mutual  influence  is  negligible,  is  the  same  as  that  of
an  equal  and  similar  assemblage  of  our  hypothetical  atoms,  what-
ever be  the  number  of  electrions  in  each,  not  necessarily  the  same
in  all.  Hence  our  hypothetical  atom  realizes  perfectly  for  sparse
assemblages  Faraday's  suggestion  of  "  small  globular  conductors,
as  shot"  to  explain  the  electro-polarization  which  he  discovered  in
solid  and  liquid  insulators. {Experimental  Researches,  §  1679.)

§  24.  Denoting  now  by  N  the  number  of  atoms  per  unit
volume  we  find  NVol^F  as  the  electric  moment  of  any  sparse
enough  assemblage  of  uniform  density  occupying  volume  V  in
a  uniform  electric  field  of  intensity  F.  Hence  No?  is  what
(following  the  analogy  of  electro-magnetic  nomenclature)  we  may
call  the  electro-inductive  susceptibility*  of  the  assemblage;  being
the  electric  moment  per  unit  bulk  induced  by  an  electric  field  of
unit  intensity.  Denoting  this  by  /a,  and  the  electro-inductive
permeability  by  w  we  have  [Electrostatics  and  Magnetism,  §  629,

(14)].

which  proves  the  proposition  stated  at  the  commencement  of  §  28.

§  25.  To  include  vibrating  and  rotating  groups  of  electrions
in  the  demonstration,  it  is  only  necessary  to  remark  that  the  time-
average  of  any  component  of  the  displacement  of  the  centre  of
inertia  of  the  group  relatively  to  the  centre  of  the  atom  will,  under
the  influence  of  F,  be  the  same  as  if  the  assemblage  were  at  rest
in  stable  equilibrium.

§  26.  The  consideration  of  liquids  consisting  of  closely  packed
mobile  assemblages  of  atoms  or  groups  of  atoms  with  their  elec-

*  Suggested  in  my  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism,  §§  628,  629.

556  APPENDIX E.

trions,  forming  comp;Hind  molecules,  as  in  liquid  argon  or  helium
(monatomic),  nitrogen,  oxygen,  etc.  (diatomic),  or  pure  water,  or
water  with  salts  or  other  chemical  substances  dissolved  in  it,
or  liquids  of  various  complex  chemical  constitutions,  cannot  be
entered  on  in  the  present  communication,  further  than  to  remark
that  the  suppositions  we  have  made  regarding  forces,  electric  and
other,  between  electrions  and  atoms,  seem  to  open  the  way  to  a
very  definite  detailed  dynamics  of  electrolysis,  of  chemical  affinity,
and  of  heat  of  chemical  combination.  Estimates  of  the  actual
magnitudes  concerned  (the  number  of  molecules  per  cubic  centi-
metre of  a  gas,  the  mass  in  grammes  of  an  atom  of  any  substance,
the  diameters  of  the  atoms,  the  absolute  value  of  the  electric
quantity  in  an  electrion,  the  effective  mass  or  inertia  of  an  elec-
trion)  seem  to  show  that  the  intermolecular  electric  forces  are
more  than  amply  great  enough  to  account  for  heat  of  chemical
combination,  and  every  mechanical  action  manifested  in  chemical
interactions  of  all  kinds.  We  might  be  tempted  to  assume  that
all  chemical  action  is  electric,  and  that  all  varieties  of  chemical
substance  are  to  be  explained  by  the  numbers  of  the  electrions
required  to  neutralize  an  atom  or  a  set  of  atoms  (§  6  above) ;  but
we  can  feel  no  satisfaction  in  this  idea  when  we  consider  the  great
and  wild  variety  of  quality  and  affinities  manifested  by  the
different  substances  or  the  different  "chemical  elements";  and  as
we  are  assuming  the  electrions  to  be  all  alike,  we  must  fall  back
on  Father  Boscovich,  and  require  him  to  explain  the  difference  of
quality  of  different  chemical  substances,  by  different  laws  of  force
between  the  different  atoms.

§  27.  Consider  lastly  a  solid  ;  that  is  to  say,  an  assemblage  in
which  the  atoms  have  no  relative  motions,  except  through  ranges
small  in  comparison  with  the  shortest  distances  between  their
centres*.  The  first  thing  that  we  remark  is  that  every  solid
would,  at  zero  of  absolute  temperature  (that  is  to  say  all  its  atoms
and  electrions  at  rest),  be  a  perfect  insulator  of  electricity  under
the  influence  of  electric  forces,  moderate  enough  not  to  pluck
electrions  out  of  the  atoms  in  which  they  rest  stably  when  there
is  no  disturbing  force. The  limiting  value  of  F  here  indicated

*  I  need  scarcely  say  that  it  is  only  for  simplicity  in  the  text  that  we  con-
veniently ignore  Roberts- Austen's  admirable  discovery  of  the  interdiffusion  of  solid
gold  and  solid  lead,  found  after  a  piece  of  one  metal  is  allowed  to  rest  on  a  piece  of
the  other  for  several  weeks,  months,  or  years.

RADIO-ACTIVITY EXPLAINED BY ELECTRIONS SHOT OUT. 557

for  perfect  insulation,  I  shall  for  brevity  call  the  disruptional
force  or  disruptional  intensity.  It  is  clear  that  this  disruptional
force  is  smaller  the  greater  the  number  of  electrions  within  an
atom.

§  28.  The  electro-inductive  permeability  of  a  solid  at  zero
temperature  is  calculable  by  the  static  dynamics  of  §  24,  modified
by  taking  into  account  forces  on  the  electrions  of  one  atom  due  to
the  attractions  of  neighbouring  atoms  and  the  repulsions  of  their
electrions.  Without  much  calculation  it  is  easy  to  see  that
generally  the  excess  of  the  electro-inductive  permeability  above
unity  will  be  much  greater  than  three  times  the  sum  of  the
volumes  of  the  electric  atoms  per  unit  volume  of  space,  which  we
found  in  §  24  for  the  electro-inductive  permeability  of  an  assem-
blage of  single  atoms,  sparse  enough  to  produce  no  disturbance
by  mutual  actions.  Also  without  much  calculation,  it  is  easy  to
see  that  now  the  induced  electric  moment  will  not  be  in  simple
proportion  to  F,  the  intensity  of  the  electric  field,  as  it  was
rigorously  for  a  single  atom  through  the  whole  range  up  to  the
disruptional  value  of  F\  but  will  tend  to  increase  more  than  in
simple  proportion  to  the  value  of  F ;  though  for  small  practical
values  of  F  the  law  of  simple  proportion  is  still  very  nearly
fulfilled.

I  29.  Raise  the  temperature  now  to  anything  under  that  at
which  the  solid  would  melt.  This  sets  the  electrions  to  per-
forming wildly  irregular  vibrations,  so  that  some  of  them  wdll
occasionally  be  shot  out  of  their  atoms.  Each  electrion  thus  shot
out  will  quickly  either  fall  back  into  the  atom  from  which  it
has  been  ejected,  or  will  find  its  way  into  another  atom.  If  the
body  be  in  an  electric  field  F,  a  considerable  proportion  of  the
electrions  which  are  shot  out  will  find  their  way  into  other  atoms
in  the  direction  in  which  they  are  pulled  by  F;  that  is  to  say,
the  body  which  was  an  infinitely  perfect  insulator  at  zero  absolute
temperature  has  now  some  degree  of  electric  conductivity,  which
is  greater  the  higher  the  temperature.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  this  is  a  matter-of-fact  explanation  of  the  electric  con-
ductivity, which  so  nearly  perfect  an  insulator  as  the  flint  glass
of  my  quadrant  electrometer  at  atmospheric  temperatures  shows,
when  heated  to  far  below  its  melting  point  (according  to  Professor
T.  Gray*,  -98 .  10-="  at  60°  Cent.;  4-9  .  lO"--'  at  100°;  8800 .  10-="  at

*  Proc.  U.  S.  Vol.  XXXIV.  Jan.  12,  1882. The  figures  of  the  text  are  in  c.  a.  s.

558  APPENDIX E.

200"  Cent.).  It  explains  also  the  enormous  increase  of  electric
conductivity  of  rare  earths  at  lising  temperatures  above  800°  C,
so  arlmii'ably  taken  advantage  of  by  Pi-f^fessor  Nernst  in  his  now
celebrated  electric  lamp.

§  30.  If  the  hypotheses  suggested  in  the  present  communica-
tion are  true,  the  electric  conductivity  of  metals  must  be  explained
in  the  same  way  as  that  of  glass,  gutta-percha,  vulcanite,  Nernst
filament,  etc.,  with  only  this  difference,  that  the  metallic  atom
must  be  so  crowded  with  electrions  that  some  of  them  are  always
being  spilt  out  of  each  atom  by  the  intermolecular  and  electrionic
thermal  motions,  not  only  at  ordinary  atmospheric  temperatures,
and  higher,  but  even  at  temperatures  of  less  than  16°  Centigrade
above  the  absolute  zero  of  temperature.  I  say  16°  because  in
Dewar's  Bakerian  Lecture  to  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  June
13,  1901,  The  Nadir  of  Temperature,  we  find  that  platinum,  gold,
silver,  copper  and  iron  have  exceedingly  high  electric  conductivity
at  the  temperature  of  liquid  hj'drogen  boiling  under  30  mms.  of
mercury,  which  must  be  something  between  20°"5,  the  boiling
point  of  hydrogen  at  760  mms.  pressure,  and  16°,  the  temperature
of  melting  solid  hydrogen,  both  determined  by  Dewar  with  his
helium  thermometer.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  the
electrions  in  each  of  the  metallic  atoms  are  so  numerous  that
though  they  rest  in  stable  equilibrium  within  the  atoms,  closely
packed  to  constitute  the  solid  metal  at  0°  absolute,  and  may  move
about  within  the  atom  with  their  wildly  irregular  thermal  motions
at  1°  of  absolute  temperature,  they  may  between  1°  and  2°  begin
to  spill  from  atom  to  atom.  Thus,  like  glass  or  a  Nernst  filament
below  300°  absolute,  a  metal  may  be  an  almost  perfect  insulator
of  electricity  below  1°  absolute :  may,  like  glass  at  838°  absolute,
show  very  notable  conductivity  at  2°  absolute :  and,  like  glass  at
473°  absolute  as  compared  with  glass  at  333°  absolute,  may  show
8000  times  as  much  electric  conductivity  at  2°"8  as  at  2°.  And,
like  the  Nernst  filament  at  1800°  or  2000°  absolute,  our  hypo-
thetical metal  may  at  6°  absolute  show  a  high  conductivity,  com-
parable with  that  of  lead  or  copper  at  ordinary  temperatures.
The  electric  conductivity  in  the  Nernst  filament  goes  on  increasing
as  the  temperature  rises  till  the  filament  melts  or  evaporates.
Nevertheless  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  in  our  hypothetical  metal
with  rising  temperature  from  2°  to  16°  absolute  the  electric  con-
ductivity may  come  to  a  maximum  and  decrease  with  further  rise

ELECTRIONIC EXPLANATION OF ELECTRIC CONDUCTIVITY. 559

of  temperature  up  to  and  beyoud  ordinary  atmospheric  tempera-
tures. In  fact,  while  some  extent  of  thermal  motions  is  necessary
for  electric  conductivity  (because  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as
"  lability  "  in  electrostatic  equilibrium),  too  much  of  these  motions
must  mar  the  freedom  with  which  an  electrion  can  thread  its
way  through  the  crowd  of  atoms  to  perform  the  function  of  electric
conduction.  It  seems  certain  that  this  is  the  matter-of-fact
explanation  of  the  diminution  of  electric  conductivity  in  metals
with  rise  of  temperature.

§  31.  Regretting  much  not  to  be  able  (for  want  of  time)  to
include  estimates  of  absolute  magnitudes  in  the  present  com-
munication, I  end  it  with  applications  of  our  hypothesis  to  the
pyro-electricity  and  piezo-electricity  of  crystals.  A  crystal  is  a
homogeneous  assemblage  of  bodies.  Conversely,  a  homogeneous
assemblage  of  bodies  is  not  a  crystal  if  the  distance  between
centres  of  nearest  neighbours  is  a  centimetre  or  more ;  it  is  a
crystal  if  the  distance  between  nearest  neighbours  is  10"*^  of  a  cm.
or  less.  Pyro-electricity  and  piezo-electricity  are  developments
of  vitreous  and  resinous  electric  forces  such  as  would  result  from
vitreous  and  resinous  electrification  on  different  parts  of  the
surface  of  a  crystal,  produced  respectively  by  change  of  tem-
perature and  by  stress  due  to  balancing  forces  applied  to  the
surfaces.

§  32.  To  see  how  such  properties  can  or  must  exist  in  crystals
composed  of  our  hypothetical  atoms  with  electrions,  consider  first

Fig.  6.

merely  a  row  of  equal  tetra-electrionic  atoms  in  a  straight  line,
each  having  its  quantum  of  four  electrions  within  it.  Fig.  6
shows  a  configuration  of  stable  equilibrium  of  the  electrions  not,
however,  truly  to  scale.  The  sets  of  three  dots  indicate  trios  of
electrions  at  the  corners  of  equilateral  triangles,  the  middle  dot
in  each  row  being  alternately  on  the  far  side  and  the  near  side  of
the  plane  of  the  paper,  which  contains  the  centres  of  the  atoms
and  the  remainini^  electrion  of  each  four. Let  f\,  C,  C,  be  the

560  APPENDIX E.

centres  of  the  atoms  Ay,  A,  A'.  An  easy  calculation  shows  that
the  quartet  of  electrions  within  A,  regarded  for  the  moment  as  a
group  of  four  material  points  rigidly  connected,  is  attracted  to  the
left  with  a  less  force  by  ^i  than  to  the  right  by  A'  (in  making  the
calculation  remember  that  A^  attracts  all  the  electrions  within  A
as  if  it  were  a  quantity  e  of  vitreous  electricity  collected  at  C\,
and  similarly  in  respect  to  A').  There  are  corresponding  smaller
differences  between  the  opposite  attractions  of  the  more  and  more
remote  atoms  on  the  two  sides  of  A.  Let  8  denote  the  excess  of
the  sum  of  the  rightwards  of  these  attractions  above  the  leftwards.
The  geometrical  centre  of  the  electrions  within  A  is  displaced

rightwards  from  C  to  a  distance,  I,  equal  to  ^^  •

§  33.  Imagine  now  a  crystal  or  a  solid  of  any  shape  built  up
of  parallel  rows  of  atoms  such  as  those  of  §  32.  The  amount  of
the  displacing  force  on  each  quartet  of  electrions  will  be  some-
what altered  by  mutual  action  between  the  rows,  but  the  general
character  of  the  result  will  be  the  same ;  and  we  see  that
throughout  the  solid,  except  in  a  thin  superficial  layer  of  perhaps
five  or  tens  atoms  deep,  the  whole  interior  is  in  a  state  of  homo-
geneous electric  polarization,  of  which  the  electric  moment  per
unit  of  volume  is  4!eNl ;  where  N  is  the  number  of  atoms  per
unit  volume,  and  I  is  the  displacement  of  the  geometrical  centre
of  each  quartet  from  the  centre  of  its  atom.  This  is  the
interior  molecular  condition  of  a  di-polar  pyro-electric  crystal,
which  I  described  in  1860*  as  probably  accounting  for  their
known  pyro-electric  quality,  and  as  in  accordance  with  the  free
electro-polarities  of  fractured  surfaces  of  tourmaline  discovered
by  Canton  f.  If  a  crystal,  which  we  may  imagine  as  given  with
the  electrions  wholly  undisturbed  from  their  positions  according

*  Collected  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Vol.  i.  p.  315.

t  Wiedemann  {Die  Lehre  von  der  Elektricitdt,  Second  Edition,  1894,  Vol.  ii.
§  378)  mentions  an  experiment  without  fully  describing  it  by  which  a  null  result,
seemingly  at  variance  with  Canton's  experimental  discovery  and  condemnatory  of
my  suggested  theory,  was  found.  Interesting  experiments  might  be  made  by
pressing  together  and  reseparating  fractured  surfaces  of  tourmaline,  or  by  pressing
and  rubbing  polished  surfaces  together  and  separating  them.  It  would  be  very
difficult  to  get  trustworthy  results  by  breakages,  because  it  would  be  almost
impossible  to  avoid  irregular  electrifications  by  the  appliances  used  for  making
the  breakage.  The  mode  of  electric  measurement  followed  in  the  experiment
referred  to  bv  Wiedemann  is  not  described.

AEPINUS' DISCOVERY OF PYRO-ELECTRICITY EXPLAINED. 561

to  §  82,  is  dipped  in  water  and  then  allowed  to  dry,  electrions
would  by  this  process  be  removed  from  one  part  of  its  surface  and
distributed  over  the  remainder  so  as  to  wholly  annul  its  external
manifestation  of  electric  quality.  If  now  either  by  change  of
temperature  or  by  mechanical  stress  the  distances  between  the
atoms  are  altered,  the  interior  electro-polarization  becomes  neces-
sarily altered ;  and  the  masking  superficial  electrification  previously
got  by  the  dipping  in  water  and  drying,  will  now  not  exactly
annul  the  electrostatic  force  in  the  air  around  the  solid.  If  at
the  altered  temperature  or  under  the  supposed  stress  the  solid
is  again  dipped  in  water  and  dried,  the  external  electric  force
will  be  again  annulled.  Thus  is  explained  the  pyro-electricity
of  tourmaline  discovered  by  Aepinus.

§  34.  But  a  merely  di-polar  electric  crystal  with  its  single
axis  presents  to  us  only  a  small,  and  the  very  simplest,  part  of  the
whole  subject  of  electro-crystallography.  In  boracite,  a  crystal  of
the  cubic  class,  Hully  found  in  the  four  diagonals  of  the  cube,  or
the  perpendiculars  to  the  pairs  of  faces  of  the  regular  octahedron,
four  di-polar  axes :  the  crystal  on  being  irregularly  heated  or
cooled  showed  as  it  were  opposite  electricities  on  the  surfaces  in
the  neighbourhood  of  opposite  pairs  of  corners  of  the  cube,  or
around  the  centres  of  the  opposite  pairs  of  triangular  faces  of  the
octahedron.  His  discoveries  allow  us  to  conclude  that  in  general
the  electric  aeolotropy  of  crystals  is  octo-polar  with  four  axes,  not
merely  di-polar  as  in  the  old-known  electricity  of  the  tourmaline.
The  intensities  of  the  electric  virtue  are  generally  different  for
the  four  axes,  and  the  directions  of  the  axes  are  in  general  un-
symmetrically  oriented  for  crystals  of  the  unsymmetrical  classes.
For  crystals  of  the  optically  uniaxal  class,  one  of  the  electro-polar
axes  must  generally  coincide  with  the  optic  axis,  and  the  other
three  may  be  perpendicular  to  it.  The  intensities  of  the  electro-
polar  virtue  are  essentially  equal  for  these  three  axes  :  it  may  be
null  for  each  of  them  :  it  may  be  null  or  of  any  value  for  the  so-
called  optic  axis.  Haiiy  found  geometrical  differences  in  respect
to  crystalline  facets  at  the  two  ends  of  a  tourmaline ;  and  between
the  opposite  corners  of  cubes,  as  leucite,  which  possess  electro-
polarity.  There  are  no  such  differences  between  the  two  ends  of
a  quartz  crystal  (hexagonal  prism  with  hexagonal  pyramids  at  the
two  ends)  but  there  are  structural  differences  (visible  or  invisible)

T.  L.  36

562  APPENDIX E.

between  the  opposite  edges  of  the  hexagonal  prism.  The  electro-
polar  virtue  is  null  for  the  axis  of  the  prism,  and  is  proved  to
exist  between  the  opposite  edges  by  the  beautiful  piezo-electric
discovery  of  the  brothers  Curie,  according  to  which  a  thin  flat
bar,  cut  with  its  faces  and  its  length  perpendicular  to  two  parallel
faces  of  the  hexagonal  prism  and  its  breadth  parallel  to  the  edges
of  the  prism,  shows  opposite  electricities  on  its  two  faces,  when
stretched  by  forces  pulling  its  ends.  This  proves  the  three  electro-
polar  axes  to  bisect  the  120°  angles  between  the  consecutive  plane
faces  of  the  prism.

§  35.  For  the  present  let  us  think  only  of  the  octo-polar
electric  aeolotropy  discovered  by  Haiiy  in  the  cubic  class  of
crystals.  The  quartet  of  electrions  at  the  four  corners  of  a
tetrahedron  presents  itself  readily  as^  possessing  intrinsically  the
symmetrical  octo-polar  quality  which  is  realized  in  the  natural
crystal.  If  we  imagine  an  assemblage  of  atoms  in  simple  cubic  order
each  containing  an  equilateral  quartet  of  electrions,  all  similarly
oriented  with  their  four  faces  perpendicular  to  the  four  diagonals
of  each  structural  cube,  we  have  exactly  the  required  seolotropy ;
but  the  equilibrium  of  the  electrions  all  similarly  oriented  would
probably  be  unstable ;  and  we  must  look  to  a  less  simple  assem-
blage in  order  to  have  stability  with  similar  orientation  of  all  the
electrionic  quartets.

§  36.  This,  I  believe,  we  have  in  the  doubled  equilateral
homogeneous  assemblage  of  points  described  in  §  69  of  my  paper
on  Molecular  Constitution  of  Matter  republished  from  the  Trans-
actions of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  for  1889  in  Volume  ill.
of  my  Collected  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers  (p.  426) ;
which  may  be  described  as  follows  for  an  assemblage  of  equal  and
similar  globes.  Beginning  with  an  equilateral  homogeneous
assemblage  of  points,  A,  make  another  similar  assemblage  of
points,  B,  by  placing  a  5  in  the  centre  of  each  of  the  similarly
oriented  quartets  of  the  assemblage  of  A'q.  It  will  be  found  that
every  A  is  at  the  centre  of  an  oppositely  oriented  quartet  of
the  jB's.  To  understand  this,  let  A^,  A^,  A^,  A^,  be  an  equilateral
quartet  of  the  ^'s  ;  and  imagine  A.^,  A^,  A^,  placed  on  a  horizontal
glass plate* with  A-^ above it. Let B^ be at the centre of

*  Parallel  glass  plates  carrying  little  white  or  black  or  coloured  paper-circles  are
useful  auxiliaries  for  graphic  construction  and  illustrative  models  in  the  molecular
theory  of  crystals.

EQUILIBRIUM OF ELECTRIONS IN DOUBLED ASSEMBLAGE. 563

Ai,  A2,  Ai,  Ai,  and  let  B^,  B^,  B3,  B^,  be  a  quartet  of  the  B's
similarly  oriented  to  A^,  A^,  A3,  A^.  We  see  that  B^,  B3,  B^,  lie
below  the  glass  plate,  and  that  the  quartet  ^1,  B^,  B3,  B^,  has
none  of  the  A's  at  its  centre.  But  the  vertically  opposite  quartet
Bi,  B2  ,  B3,  Bi,  contains  A^  within  it;  and  it  is  oppositely  oriented
to  the  quartet  A^,  A^,  A3,  A^.  Thus  we  see  that,  while  the  half
of  all  the  quartets  of  A's  which  are  oriented  oppositely  to
Ai,  A^,  A3,  Ai,  are  void  of  B's,  the  half  of  the  quartets  of  B's
oppositely  oriented  to  A^,  A^,  A3,  A^,  have  each  an  A  within  it,
while  the  other  half  of  the  quartets  of  the  B's  are  all  void
of  A's.

§  37.  Now  let  all  the  points  A  and  all  the  points  B,  of  §  36,
be  centres  of  equal  and  similar  spherical  atoms,  each  containing  a
quartet  of  electrions.  The  electrions  will  be  in  stable  equilibrium
under  the  influence  of  their  own  mutual  repulsions,  and  the  at-
tractions of  the  atoms,  if  they  are  placed  as  equilateral  quartets
of  proper  magnitude,  concentric  with  the  atoms,  and  oriented  all
as  any  one  quartet  of  the  A's  or  B's.  To  see  that  this  is  true,
confine  attention  first  to  the  five  atoms  A^,  Ao,  A3,  Ai,  B^.  If  the
electrions  within  ^1,  A^,  A3,  A^  are  all  held  similarly  oriented  to
the  quartet  of  the  centres  of  these  atoms,  the  quartet  of  electrions
within  Bi  must  obviously  be  similarly  oriented  to  the  other
quartets  of  electrions.  If  again,  these  be  held  oriented  oppositely
to  the  quartet  of  the  atoms,  the  stable  configuration  of  the
electrions  within  B^,  will  still  be  similar  to  the  orientation  of  the
quartets  within  A^,  A^,  A3,  A^,  though  opposite  to  the  orientation
of  the  centres  of  these  atoms.  If,  when  the  quartets  of  electrions
are  all  thus  similarly  oriented  either  way,  the  quartet  within  B^^
is  turned  to  reverse  orientation,  this  will  cause  all  the  others  to
turn  and  settle  in  stable  equilibrium  according  to  this  reversed
orientation.  Applying  the  same  consideration  to  every  atom  of
the  assemblage  and  its  four  nearest  neighbours,  we  have  proof  of
the  proposition  asserted  at  the  commencement  of  the  present
section.  It  is  most  interesting  to  remark  that  if,  in  a  vast  homo-
geneous assemblage  of  the  kind  with  which  we  are  dealing,  the
orientation  of  any  one  of  the  quartets  of  electrions  be  reversed
and  held  reversed,  all  the  others  will  follow  and  settle  in  stable
equilibrium  in  the  reversed  orientation.

§  38. This  double  homogeneous  assemblage  of  tetra-electrionic

36—2

564

APPENDIX E.

atoms  seems  to  be  absolutely  the  simplest*  molecular  structure  in
which  Haiiy's  octo-polar  electric  quality  can  exist.  To  see  that  it
has  octo-polar  electric  quality,  consider  an  octahedron  built  up
according  to  it.  The  faces  of  this  octahedron,  taken  in  proper
order,  will  have,  next  to  them,  alternately  points  and  triangular
faces  of  the  electrionic  quartets  within  the  atoms.  This  itself  is
the  kind  of  electric  ffiolotropy  which  constitutes  octo-polar  quality.
Time  prevents  entering  fully  at  present  on  any  dynamical  investi-
gation of  static  or  kinetic  results.

§  39.  [Added  Oct.  23, 1901.]  Since  what  precedes  was  written,
I  have  seen  the  explanation  of  a  difficulty  which  had  prevented
me  from  finding  what  was  wanted  for  octo-polar  electric  seolotropy
in  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  single  atoms.  I  now  find  (§  40
below)  that  quartets  of  electrions  will  rest  stably  in  equilibrium,
under  the  influence  of  the
mutual  repulsion  between
electrion  and  electrion  and
attraction  between  atom
and  electrion,  in  an  equi-
lateral homogeneous  as-
semblage in  the  configura-
tion indicated  in  fig.  7.
The  quartets  of  electrions
are  supposed  to  have  their
edges  parallel  to  the  six
lines  of  symmetry  of  the
assemblage.  The  plane  of
the  paper  is  supposed  to
be  that  of  the  centres  of
the  seven  atoms.  The  central  point  in  each  circle  represents  a
simple  electrion  which  is  at  distance  r,  according  to  the  notation
of  §  20  above,  from  the  plane  of  the  paper  on  the  near  side ;  and
therefore  the  other  three  at  the  corners  of  an  equilateral  triangle
at  distance  ^r  on  the  far  side  to  make  the  electric  centre  of  gravity
of  the  quartet  coincide  with  the  centre  of  its  atom. The  radius  of

the  circle  on  which  these  three  lie  is  — ^  r  or  -94. The  diagram

is  drawn  correctly  to  scale according  to the value "6123  given

Fig.  7.

Not  the  simplest. See  §  40  below.

QUARTETS IN EQUILIBRIUM ARE ALL ORIENTED ONE WAY. 565

for  r  in  the  table  of  §  20,  on  the  supposition  that  the  circles
shown  iu  the  diagram  represent  the  electric  spheres  of  the  atoms
in  contact.

§  40.  Imagine  now  the  electrions  of  each  quartet  to  be  rigidly
connected  with  one  another  and  given  freedom  only  to  rotate
about  an  axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper.  To  all  of
them  apply  torques ;  turning  the  central  quartet  of  the  diagram
slowly  and  keeping  all  the  others  at  rest.  It  is  clear  that  the
first  60°  of  turning  brings  the  central  quartet  to  a  position  of
unstable  equilibrium,  and  60°  more  to  a  position  of  stable  equi-
librium corresponding  to  the  first  position,  which  we  now  see  is
stable  when  the  others  are  all  held  fixed.  We  are  now  judging
simply  from  the  mutual  actions  between  our  central  quartet  and
the  six  shown  around  it  in  the  diagram ;  but  it  may  be  easily
proved  that  our  judgment  is  not  vitiated  by  the  mutual  action
between  the  central  quartet  and  all  around  it,  including  the  six
in  the  diagram.  Similarly  we  see  that  any  one  quartet  of  the
assemblage,  free  to  turn  round  an  axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane
of  the  paper  while  all  the  others  are  fixed,  is  in  stable  equilibrium
when  oriented  as  are  those  shown  in  the  diagram.  And  similarly
again  we  see  the  same  conclusion  in  respect  to  three  other
diagrams  in  the  three  other  planes  parallel  to  the  faces  of  the
tetrahedrons  or  corresponding  octahedrons  of  the  assemblage.
Hence  we  conclude  that  if  the  axial  constraints  are  all  removed,
and  the  quartets  left  perfectly  free,  every  one  of  them  rests  in
stable  equilibrium  when  oriented  either  as  one  set  or  as  the  other
set  of  equilateral  tetrahedronal  quartets  of  the  assemblage.  It  is
interesting  to  remark  that  if,  after  we  turned  the  central  quartet
through  60°,  we  had  held  it  in  that  position  and  left  all  the  others
free  to  rotate,  rotational  vibrations  would  have  spread  out  among
them  from  the  centre ;  and,  after  losing  in  waves  spreading
through  ether  outside  the  assemblage  the  energy  which  we  gave
them  by  our  torque  acting  on  the  central  quartet,  they  would  come
to  stable  equilibrium  with  every  one  of  them  turned  60°  in  one
direction  or  the  other  from  its  primitive  position,  and  oriented
as  the  central  quartet  in  the  position  in  which  we  held  it.

§  41.  We  have  thus  found  that  an  equilateral  homogeneous
assemblage  of  atoms  each  having  four  electrions  within  it,
arranges  these  electrions  in  equilateral  quartets  all  oriented  in  one

566  APPENDIX E.

or  other  of  two  ways.  The  assemblage  of  atoms  and  electrions
thus  produced  is  essentially  octo-polar.  Of  the  two  elementary
structural  tetrahedi'ons,  of  the  two  orientations,  one  will  have
every  one  of  its  electrionic  quartets  pointing  towards,  the  other
from,  its  faces.  The  elementary  structural  octahedron  has  four  of
its  faces  next  to  corners,  and  four  next  to  triangles,  of  its  electrionic
quartets.  This  is  essentially  a  dynamically  octo-polar*  assemblage ;
and  it  supplies  us  with  a  perfect  explanation  of  the  piezo-electric
quality  to  be  inferred  from  the  brothers  Curie's  experimental
discovery,  and  Voigt's  mathematical  theory.

§  42.  Look  at  the  diagram  in  §  39 ;  and  remember  that  it
indicates  a  vast  homogeneous  assemblage  consisting  of  a  vast
number  of  parallel  plane  layers  of  atoms  on  each  side  of  the
plane  of  the  paper,  in  which  seven  atoms  are  shown.  The
quartets  of  electrions  were  described  as  all  similarly  oriented,  and
each  of  them  equilateral,  and  having  its  geometrical  centre  at  the
centre  of  its  atom ;  conditions  all  necessary  for  equilibrium.

§  43.  Let  now  the  assemblage  of  atoms  be  homogeneously
stretched  from  the  plane  on  both  sides  to  any  extent,  small  or
great,  without  any  component  motions  of  the  centres  of  the  atoms
parallel  to  the  planes  of  the  layers.  First  let  the  stretch  be  very
great ;  great  enough  to  leave  undisturbed  by  the  other  layers
the  layer  for  which  the  centres  of  atoms  are,  and  the  geometrical
centres  of  the  quartets  were,  in  the  plane  of  the  paper.  The
geometrical  centres  of  the  quartets  are  not  now  in  the  plane  of
the  paper.  The  single  electrions  on  the  near  side  seen  in  the
diagram  over  the  centres  of  the  circles  are  drawn  towards  the
plane  of  the  paper ;  the  equilateral  triangles  on  the  far  side  are
also  drawn  nearer  to  the  paper ;  and  the  equilateral  triangles  are
enlarged  in  each  atom  by  the  attractions  of  the  surrounding
atoms.  The  contrary  inward  movements  of  the  single  atoms  on
one  side  of  the  plane,  and  of  the  triplets  on  the  other  side,  cannot

*  The  octo-polar  pyro-electricity,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  proved  by
Haiiy's  experiment,  must  have  been  due  to  something  seolotropic  in  the  heating.
Uniform  heating  throughout  a  regular  cube  or  octahedron  could  not  give  opposite
electric  manifestations  in  the  four  pairs  of  alternate  corners  of  the  cube,  or
alternate  faces  of  the  octahedron.  Nevertheless  the  irregular  finding  of  electric
octo-polarity  by  Haiiy  is  a  splendid  discovery ;  of  which  we  only  now  know  the
true  and  full  significance,  through  the  experimental  and  mathematical  labours  of
the  brothers  Curie,  of  Friedel,  and  of  Voigt.

voigt's  octo-polar  piezo-electricity  of  cubic  crystal.  567

in  general  be  in  the  proportion  of  three  to  one.  Hence  the
geometrical  centres  of  gravity  of  the  quartets  are  now  displaced
perpendicularly  to  the  plane  of  the  paper  to  far  side  or  near  side ;
I  cannot  tell  which  without  calculation.  The  calculation  is  easy
but  essentially  requires  much  labour;  involving  as  it  does  the
determination  of  three  unknowns,  the  length  of  each  side  of  the
equilateral  triangle  seen  in  the  diagram,  the  distance  of  each  of
its  corners  from  the  electrion  on  the  near  side  of  the  paper,  and
the  displacement  of  the  geometrical  centre  of  gravity  of  the  four
to  one  side  or  other  of  the  plane.  Each  one  of  the  three  equations
involves  summations  of  infinite  convergent  series,  expressing  force
components  due  to  all  the  atoms  surrounding  any  chosen  one  in
the  plane.  A  method  of  approximation  on  the  same  general  plan
as  that  of  the  footnote  to  §  9  above  would  give  a  practicable
method  of  calculation.

§  44.  Return  to  §  42 ;  and  consider  the  diagram  as  represent-
ing a  crystal  in  its  natural  unstressed  condition,  consisting  of  a
vast  train  of  assemblages  of  atoms  with  centres  in  the  plane  of
the  paper,  and  in  parallel  planes  on  each  side  of  it.  We  now  see
that  the  forces  experienced  by  the  electrions  of  one  quartet  from
all  the  surrounding  atoms  in  the  plane  of  the  paper  would,  if
uncompensated,  displace  the  geometrical  centre  of  gravity  of  the
quartet  to  one  side  or  other  of  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and  we
infer  that  the  forces  experienced  from  all  the  atoms  on  the  two
sides  of  this  plane  give  this  compensation  to  keep  the  centre  of
gravity  of  the  quartet  in  the  plane.  Stretch  now  the  assemblage
to  any  degree  equally  in  all  directions.  The  quartets  remain
equilateral  with  their  centres  of  gravity  in  the  plane  of  the  paper
and  parallel  planes.  Lastly  stretch  it  farther  equally  in  all  direc-
tions parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  with  no  component  motion
perpendicular  to  this  plane.  This  last  stretching  diminishes
the  influence  of  all  the  atoms  whose  centres  are  in  the  plane  of
the  paper  tending  to  displace  the  centres  of  gravity  of  their
electrions  in  one  direction  from  this  plane ;  and  therefore  leaves
all  the  atoms  out  of  this  plane  to  predominate,  and  to  cause  a
definite  calculable  displacement  of  the  centres  of  gravity  of  all
the  quartets  in  the  contrary  direction  to  the  former.

§  45.  To  realize  the  operations  of  §  44,  cut  a  thin  hexagonal
plate  from  the  middle  between  two  opposite  corners  of  a  cubic

568  APPENDIX E.

crystal,  or  parallel  faces  of  an  octahedron.  Fix  clamps  to  the  six
edges  of  this  plate,  and  apply  forces  pulling  their  pairs  equally  in"
contrary  directions.  The  whole  material  of  the  plate  becomes
electro-polar  with  electric  moment  per  unit  bulk  equal  to  4iVea;;
of  which  the  measurable  result  is  uniform  electrostatical  potentials  *
in  vacuous  ether  close  to  the  two  sides  of  the  plate,  differing  by
47r .  4  iVea;^ ;  where  t  denotes  the  thickness  of  the  plate,  cc  the
calculated  displacement  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  each  quartet
from  the' centres  of  the  atoms  parallel  to  the  two  faces  of  the
plate,  e  the  electric  mass  of  an  electrion,  and  iV  the  number  of
atoms  per  cubic  centimetre  of  the  substance.  This  crystal  of  the
cubic  class  is,  in  Voigt's  mathematical  theory,  the  analogue  to
the  electric  effect  discovered  in  quartz  by  the  brothers  Curie,  and
measured  by  aid  of  thin  metal  foils  attached  to  the  two  faces  of
the  plate  and  metrically  connected  to  the  two  principal  electrodes
of  an  electrometer.

*  See  my  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism,  §  512,  Cor.  3.

APPENDIX F.

(Having  been  in  type  more  than  twelve  years  as  Articles  XCIII. — XCVII.
for  projected  Vol.  iv.  of  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers.)

Art.  XCIII.  Dynamical  Illustrations  of  the  Magnetic
and  the  heligoidal  rotatoky  effects  of  transparent
Bodies  on  Polarized  Light.

[From  the  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  Vol.  viii.,  June  1856  ;  Phil.  Mag.,  March  1857.]

The  elastic  reaction  of  a  homogeneously  strained  solid  has  a
character  essentially  devoid  of  all  helicjoidal  and  of  all  dipolar
asymmetry.  Hence  the  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization  of
light  passing  through  bodies  which  either  intrinsically  possess  the
heli9oidal  property  (syrup,  oil  of  turpentine,  quartz  crystals,  &c.),
or  have  the  magnetic  property  induced  in  them,  must  be  due  to
elastic  reactions  dependent  on  the  heterogeneousness  of  the  strain
through  the  space  of  a  wave,  or  to  some  heterogeneousness  of  the
luminous  motions*  dependent  on  a  heterogeneousness  of  parts  of
the  matter  of  lineal  dimensions  not  infinitely  small  in  comparison
with  the  wave  length.  An  infinitely  homogeneous  solid  could
not  possess  either  of  those  properties  if  the  stress  at  any  point  of
it  was  influenced  only  by  parts  of  the  body  touching  it ;  but  if
the  stress  at  one  point  is  directly  influenced  by  the  strain  in
parts  at  distances  from  it  finite  in  comparison  with  the  wave
length,  the  heli9oidal  property  might  exist,  and  the  rotation  of
the  plane  of  polarization,  such  as  is  observed  in  many  liquids  and
in  quartz  crystals,  could  be  explained  as  a  direct  dynamical
consequence  of  the  statical  elastic  reaction  called  into  play  by
such  a  strain  as  exists  in  a  wave  of  polarized  light.  It  may,
however,  be  considered  more  probable  that  the  matter  of  trans-
parent bodies  is  really  heterogeneous  from  one  part  to  another  of
lineal  dimensions  not  infinitely  small  in  comparison  with  a  wave

*  As  would  be  were  there  different  sets  of  vibrating  particles,  or  were  Eankine's
important  hypothesis  true,  that  the  vibrations  of  luminiferous  particles  are  directly
affected  by  pressure  of  a  surrounding  medium  in  virtue  of  its  inertia.  [In  Lectures
XIX.  and  XX.  we  have  seen  reason  to  believe  that  this  is  true.]

570  APPENDIX F.

length,  than  that  it  is  infinitely  homogeneous  and  has  the  property
of  exerting  finite  direct  "molecular"  force  at  distances  comparable
with  the  wave  length  :  and  it  is  certain  that  anj^  spiral  hetero-
geneousuess  of  a  vibrating  medium  must,  if  either  right-handed
or  left-handed  spirals  predominate,  cause  a  finite  rotation  of  the
plane  of  polarization  of  all  waves  of  which  lengths  are  not
infinitely  great  multiples  of  the  steps  of  the  structural  spirals.
Thus  a  liquid  filled  homogeneously  with  spiral  fibres,  or  a  solid
with  spiral  passages  through  it  of  steps  not  less  than  the  forty-
milUonth  of  an  inch,  or  a  crystal  with  a  right-handed  or  a  left-
handed  geometrical  arrangement  of  parts  of  some  such  lineal
dimensions  as  the  forty-millionth  of  an  inch,  might  be  certainly
expected  to  cause  either  a  right-handed  or  a  left-handed  rotation
of  ordinary  light  (the  wave  length  being  T^^th  of  an  inch  for
homogeneous  yellow).

But  the  magnetic  influence  on  light  discovered  by  Faraday
depends  on  the  direction  of  motion  of  moving  particles.  For
instance,  in  a  medium  possessing  it,  particles  in  a  straight  line
parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  displaced  to  a  helix  round
this  line  as  axis,  and  then  projected  tangentially  with  such  veloci-
ties as  to  describe  circles,  will  have  different  velocities  according
as  their  motions  are  round  in  one  direction  (the  same  as  the
nominal  direction  of  the  galvanic  current  in  the  magnetizing
coilj,  or  in  the  contrary  direction.  But  the  elastic  reaction  of  the
medium  must  be  the  same  for  the  same  displacements,  whatever
be  the  velocities  and  directions  of  the  particles ;  that  is  to  say,
the  forces  which  are  balanced  by  centrifugal  force  of  the  circular
motions  are  equal,  while  the  luminiferous  motions  are  unequal.
The  absolute  circular  motions  being  therefore  either  equal  or  such
as  to  transmit  equal  centrifugal  forces  to  the  particles  initially
considered,  it  follows  that  the  luminiferous  motions  are  only  com-
ponents of  the  whole  motion ;  and  that  a  less  luminiferous  com-
ponent in  one  direction,  compounded  with  a  motion  existing  in
the  medium  when  transmitting  no  light,  gives  an  equal,  resultant
to  that  of  a  greater  luminiferous  motion  in  the  contrary  direction
compounded  ^v^th  the  same  non-luminous  motion.  I  think  it  is
not  only  impossible  to  conceive  any  other  than  this  dynamical
explanation  of  the  fact  that  circularly  polarized  light  transmitted
through  magnetized  glass  parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetizing  force,
with  the  same  quality,  right-handed  always,  or  left-handed  always,

MOUNTING OF TWO-PERIOD PENDULUM ROTATED.  571

is  propagated  at  different  rates  according  as  its  course  is  in  the
direction  or  is  contrary  to  the  direction  in  which  a  north  magnetic
pole  is  drawn ;  but  I  believe  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  no
other  explanation  of  that  fact  is  possible.  Hence  it  appears  that
Faraday's  optical  discovery  affords  a  demonstration  of  the  reality
of  Ampere's  explanation  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  magnetism ;
and  gives  a  definition  of  magnetization  in  the  dynamical  theory
of  heat.  The  introduction  of  the  principle  of  moments  of  momenta
("  the  conservation  of  areas ")  into  the  mechanical  treatment  of
Mr  Raukine's  hypothesis  of  "  molecular  vortices,"  appears  to  in-
dicate a  line  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  resultant  rotatory
momentum  ("  the  invariable  plane ")  of  the  thermal  motions  as
the  magnetic  axis  of  a  magnetized  body,  and  suggests  the  resultant
moment  of  momenta  of  these  motions  as  the  definite  measure  of
the  "  magnetic  moment."  The  explanation  of  all  phenomena  of
electro-magnetic  attraction  or  repulsion,  and  of  electro-magnetic
induction,  is  to  be  looked  for  simply  in  the  inertia  and  pressure
of  the  matter  of  which  the  motions  constitute  heat.  Whether
this  matter  is  or  is  not  electricity,  whether  it  is  a  continuous  fluid
interpermeating  the  spaces  between  molecular  nuclei,  or  is  itself
molecularly  grouped;  or  whether  all  matter  is  continuous,  and
molecular  heterogeneousness  consists  in  finite  vortical  or  other
relative  motions  of  contiguous  parts  of  a  body ;  it  is  impossible
to  decide,  and  perhaps  in  vain  to  speculate,  in  the  present  state
of  science.

I  append  the  solution  of  a  dynamical  problem  for  the  sake  of
the  illustrations  it  suggests  for  the  two  kinds  of  effect  on  the
plane  of  polarization  referred  to  above.

Let  the  two  ends  of  a  cord  of  any  length  he  attached  to  tiuo
points  at  the  ends  of  a  horizontal  arm  made  to  rotate  round  a
vertical  qaHs  through  its  middle  point  at  a  cotistant  angular  velocity^
0),  and  let  a  second  cord  bearing  a  weight  he  attached  to  the  middle
of  the  first  cord.  The  two  cords  being  each  perfectly  light  and
fiexihle,  and  the  weight  a  material  point,  it  is  required  to  determine
its  motion  when  infinitely  little  disturbed  from  its  position  of  equi-
librium*.

Let  I  be  the  length  of  the  second  cord,  and  m  the  distance  from

*  By  meaus  of  this  arrangement,  but  without  the  rotation  of  the  bearing  arm,
a  very  beautiful  experiment,  due  to  Professor  Blackburn,  may  be  made  by  attach-
ing to  the  weight  a  bag  of  sand  discharging  its  contents  through  a  fiue  aperture.

572  APPENDIX F.

the  weight  to  the  middle  point  of  the  arm  bearing  the  first.  Let
X  and  y  be,  at  any  time  t,  the  rectangular  coordinates  of  the
position  of  the  weight,  referred  to  the  position  of  equilibrium  0,
and  two  rectangular  lines  OX,  OY,  revolving  uniformly  in  a  hori-
zontal plane  in  the  same  direction,  and  with  the  same  angular
velocity  as  the  bearing  arm  ;  then,  if  we  choose  OX  parallel  to
this  arm,  and  if  the  rotation  be  in  the  direction  with  OY  preceding
OX,  we  have,  for  the  equations  of  motion,

df "^^ ^"^  dt~ Z^'

d'^y „ ^ dx q
If  for  brevity  we  assume

we  find,  by  the  usual  methods,  the  following  solution : —

^  =  J.  cos  { [ft)'  +  n'  +  (X*  +  Wwfft  +  a]

+  B  cos  {[ft)'  +  n'-  (V  +  47iV)^]^^  +  y8},

2ft)'^-A,'+(V  +  4wW)* , . ^

w  = ^ -^r^  A  sm  d)

^  2ft)  [(^'  +  n^  +  (V  +  Woi')^Y

2ft,^  -  V'' -  (\*  +  47iV)^ „  . ,
-Ti/sm>|r,

2ft)[ft)'  +  w'-(X*+4^W)']^

where  A,  a,  B,  /3  are  arbitrary  constants,  and  cf)  and  -v/r  are  used  for
brevity  to  denote  the  arguments  of  the  cosines  appearing  in  the
expression  for  x.

The  interpretation  of  this  solution,  when  (o  is  taken  equal  to
the  component  of  the  earth's  angular  velocity  round  a  vertical  at
the  locality,  affords  a  full  explanation  of  curious  phenomena  which
have  been  observed  by  many  in  failing  to  repeat  Foucault's  admir-
able pendulum  experiment.  When  the  mode  of  suspension  is
perfect,  we  have  X  =  0  ;  but  in  many  attempts  to  obtain  Foucault's
result,  there  has  been  an  asymmetry  in  the  mode  of  attachment
of  the  head  of  the  cord  or  wire  used,  or  there  has  been  a  slight
lateral  unsteadiness  in  the  bearings  of  the  point  of  suspension,
which  has  made  the  observed  motion  be  the  same  as  that  expressed
by  the  preceding  solution,  where  \  has  some  small  value  either

PROBLEM OF THE MOTION SOLVED.  573

greater  than  or  less  than  o),  and  n  has  the  vakie  *  /'^  • The  only

case,  however,  that  need  be  considered  as  illustrative  of  the  subject
of  the  present  communication  is  that  in  which  co  is  very  great  in
comparison  with  n.  To  obtain  a  form  of  solution  readily  inter-
preted in  this  case,  let

[(o'  +  n'  +  (X*  +  ^nWf]  ^  =  (o  +  p, [fo'+  n'  -  {\'  +  ^nWf]  ^  =  co-a,

l  +  e,

The  preceding  solution  becomes

os=  A  cos  {{(o  +  p)t+  a]  +  B  cos  {(ft)  —  a)t+  /3]

y  =  —  Asm{(Q)  +  p)t  +  a]—B  sin  {(&>  —  a)t  +  ^}

-  eA  sin  {(w  +  p)t-\-a]  +fB sin  {(&>  -a)t  +  /3|.

To  express  the  result  in  terms  of  coordinates  ^,  r),  with  reference
to  fixed  axes,  instead  of  the  revolving  axes  OX,  OY,  we  may
assume

^  =  X  cos  oit  —  y  sin  cot,

rj=  X  sin  cot  +  y  cos  cot.
Then  we  have

1^  =  J.  cos  ipt  +  a)  -\-  B  cos  {at  -  /3)

+  {eA  sin  {{co  +  p)  t  +  a]  -fB  sin  \{co  —  a)  t  +  ^])  sin  cot

7)  =  — A  sin  {pt  + a) +B  sin  {a-t  — ^)

+  {-  eA  sin  {{co  +  p)  t  +  1}  +  fB  sin  {{oo  -  a)  t  +  /3})  cos  cot.

When  CO  is  very  large,  e  and  f  are  both  very  small,  and  the  last
two  terms  of  each  of  these  equations  become  very  small  periodic
terms,  of  very  rapidly  recurring  periods,  indicating  a  slight  tremor
in  the  resultant  motion.  Neglecting  this,  and  taking  a  =  0  and
/3  =  0,  as  we  may  do  without  loss  of  generality,  by  properly  choosing
the  axes  of  reference,  and  the  era  of  reckoning  for  the  time,  we
have  finally,  for  an  approximate  solution  of  a  suitable  kind,

^=  A  cos  pt  +  B  cos  at,

7]  =  —  A  sin  pt  +  B  sin  at.

574  APPENDIX F.

The  terms  B,  in  this  expression,  represent  a  circular  motion  of

27r
period ,  in  the  positive  direction  (that  is,  from  the  positive  axis

O"

of  ^  to  the  positive  axis  of  rj),  or  in  the  same  direction  as  that  of

the  rotation  co;  and  the  terms  A  represent  a  circular  motion,  of

27r
period  — -,  in  the  contrary  direction. Now,  o)  being  very  great,

p  and  a  are  very  nearly  equal  to  one  another ;  but  p  is  rather  less
than  a,  as  the  following  approximate  expressions  derived  from
their  exact  values  expressed  above,  show : —

1 V 1  X*  1 V 1  \^

'^  8  con 8  CO  8  co^n 8  co

Hence  the  form  of  solution  simply  expresses  that  circular  vibrations
of  the  pendulum  in  the  contrary  directions  have  slightly  different

periods,  the  shorter,  — - ,  when  the  motion  of  the  pendulum  follows

2'jr
that  of  the  arm  supporting  it,  and  the  longer,  — ,  when  it  is  in  the

r

contrary  direction.  The  equivalent  statement,  that  if  the  pendulum
be  simply  drawn  aside  from  its  position  of  equilibrium,  and  let  go
without  initial  velocity,  the  vertical  plane  of  its  motion  will  rotate
slowly  at  the  angidar  rate  |  (cr— p),  is  expressed  most  shortly  by
taking  A  —  B,  and  reducing  the  preceding  solution  to  the  form

I  =  2^  cos  ■sri  cos  n't,

7)  =  2A  sin  'srt  cos  n't,

where  n  =  ^  (cr  +  p),  or,  approximately,  n  =  n  +~ ^ ,

^  o  CO  n

1  IX*

and  OT  =  -  (cr  —  p),  or,  approximately,  tn-  =  -  — 3 .

Z  8  ft)

It  is  a  curious  part  of  the  conclusion  thus  expressed,  that  the

faster  the  bearing  arm  is  carried  round,  the  slower  does  the  plane

of  a  simple  vibration  of  the  pendulum  follow  it.  When  the  bearing

arm  is  carried  round  infinitely  fast,  the  plane  of  a  vibration  of  the

pendulum  will  remain  steady,  and  the  period  will  be  w ;  in  other

words,  the  motion  of  the  pendulum will  be  the  same  as  that  of

2
a  simple  pendulum  whose  length  is ^,  or  a  harmonic  mean

-  +  -
e m

SOLUTION EXAMINED.  575

between  the  effective  lengths  in  the  two  principal  planes  of  the
actual  pendulum.

It  is  easy  to  prove  from  this,  that  if  a  long  straight  rod,  or
a  stretched  cord  possessing  some  rigidity,  unequally  elastic  or  of
unequal  dimensions,  in  different  transverse  directions,  be  made  to
rotate  very  rapidly  round  its  axis,  and  if  vibrations  be  maintained
in  a  line  at  right  angles  to  it  through  any  point,  there  will  result,
running  along  the  rod  or  cord,  waves  of  sensibly  rectilineal  trans-
verse vibrations,  in  a  plane  which  in  the  forward  progress  of  the
wave,  turns  at  a  uniform  rate  in  the  same  direction  as  the  rotation

27r
of  the  substance ;  and  that  if  —  be  the  period  of  rotation  of  the

CO

substance,  and  I  and  in  the  lengths  of  simple  pendulums  respec-
tively isochronous  with  the  vibrations  of  two  plane  waves  of  the
same  length,  a,  in  the  planes  of  maximum  and  of  minimum
elasticity  of  the  substance,  when  destitute  of  rotation,  the  period
of  vibration  in  a  wave  of  the  same  length  in  the  substance  when

made  to  rotate  will  be

27r

1 X'

and  the  angle  through  which  the  plane  of  vibration  turns,  in  the
propagation  through  a  wave  length,  will  be

or  the  number  of  wave  lengths  through  which  the  wave  is  pro-
pagated before  its  plane  turns  once  round,  will  be

8n(o'
where,  as  before,

and  ft)  denotes  the  angular  velocity  with  which  the  substance  is
made  to  rotate.

If  next  we  suppose  the  rod  or  cord  to  be  slightly  twisted  about
its  axis,  so  that  its  directions  of  maximum  and  minimum  elasticity
shall  lie  on  two  rectangular  heli9oidal  surfaces  (heligo'ides  gauches),
and  if,  while  regular  rectilineal  vibrations  are  maintained  at  one

576  APPENDIX F.

point  of  it  with  a  period  to  which  the  wave  length  corresponding

is  a  very  large  multiple  of  the  step  of  the  screw,  the  substance  be

made  to  rotate  so  rapidly  as  to  make  the  velocity  of  a  point  carried

along  one  of  the  screw  surfaces  in  a  line  parallel  to  the  axis  be

equal  to  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  a  wave,  it  is  clear  that  a

series  of  sensibly  plane  waves  will  run  along  the  rod  or  cord  with

no  rotation  of  the  plane  of  vibration. The  period  of  vibration

of  a  particle  will  be,  approximately,  the  same  as  before,  that  is,

27r
approximately, equal  to  — . Its velocity of  propagation will

n

na

therefore  be  —  ,  and,  if  s  be  the  step  of  the  screw,  the  period  of

rotation  of  the  substance,  to  fulfil  the  stated  condition,  must  be

,  or  its  angular  velocity  —  . Now  it  is  easily  seen  that  the

effects  of  the  rapid  rotation,  and  the  effects  of  the  slight  twist,
may  be  considered  as  independently  superimposed ;  and  therefore
the  effect  of  the  twist,  with  no  rotation  of  the  substance,  must  be
to  give  a  rotation  to  the  plane  of  vibration  equal  and  contrary  to
that  which  the  rotation  of  the  substance  would  give  if  there  were
no  twist.  But  the  effect  on  the  plane  of  vibration,  due  to  an
angular  velocity  tw,  of  rotation  of  the  substance,  is,  as  we  have

seen,  one  turn  in ^ wave  lengths ;  and  therefore  it  is  one  turn

A/

in  8  —J  -3  wave  lengths  when  the  angular  velocity  is  — . Hence

A* o  o

the  effect  of  a  twist  amounting  to  one  turn  in  a  length,  s,  a  small
fraction  of  the  wave  length,  is  to  cause  the  plane  of  vibration  of  a
wave  to  turn  round  with  the  forward  propagation  of  the  wave,  at

the  rate  of  one  turn  in  8  -^  ^  wave  lengths,  in  the  same  direction

\.  s

as  that  of  a  point  kept  on  one  of  the  screw  surfaces.

From  these  illustrations  it  is  easy  to  see  in  an  infinite  variety
of  ways  how  to  make  structures,  homogeneous  when  considered  on
a  large  enough  scale,  which  (1)  with  certain  rotatory  motions  of
component  parts  having,  in  portions  large  enough  to  be  sensibly
homogeneous,  resultant  axes  of  momenta  arranged  like  lines  of
magnetic  force,  sliall  have  the  dynamical  property  by  which  the
optical  phenomena  of  transparent  bodies  in  the  magnetic  field  are
explained;  (2)  with  s^piral  arrangements  of  component  parts,  having
axes  all  ranged  parallel  to  a  fixed  line^  shall  have  the  axial  rotatory

INTERIOR MELTING OF ICE.  577

propey^ty  cori^esponding  to  that  of  quartz  C7'ystal ;  and  (3)  with
spiral  arrangements  of  component  groups,  having  axes  totally  un-
arranged,  shall  have  the  isotropic  rotatory  property  possessed  by
solutionis  of  sugar  and  tartaric  acid,  by  oil  of  turpentine,  and  many
other  liquids.

Art.  XCIV. Sui  fenomeni  magnetocristalline.

[jYtcovo  Cimento,  IV.,  1856.]
[Electrostatics  and  Magnetism,  Art.  xxx.]

Art.  XCV. On  the  Alteration  of  Temperature  accompany-
ing Changes  of  Pressure  in  Fluids.

\_rroc.  Roy.  Soc,  June,  1857  ;  Pltil.  Mag.,  June  Suppl.,  1858.]

The  subject  of  this  paper  is  given  in  Mathematical  and  Physical
Papers,  Art.  xlviii.  (Vol.  i.).

Art.  XCVI. Remarks  on  the  interior  JVLelting  of  Ice.

[Part  of  a  letter  to  Prof.  Stokes  ;  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  ix.,  Feb.  1858.]

In  the  Number  of  the  Proceedings  just  published,  which  I
received  yesterday,  I  see  some  very  interesting  experiments  de-
scribed in  a  communication  by  Dr  Tyndall,  "  On  some  Physical
Properties  of  Ice."  I  write  to  you  to  point  out  that  they  afford
direct  ocular  evidence  of  my  brother's  theory  of  the  plasticity  of
ice,  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  7th  of  May  last ;  and  to
add,  on  my  own  part,  a  physical  explanation  of  the  blue  veins
in  glaciers,  and  of  the  lamellar  structure  which  Dr  Tyndall  has
shown  to  be  induced  in  ice  by  pressure,  as  described  in  the  sixth
section  of  his  paper.

Thus,  my  brother,  in  his  paper  of  last  May,  says,  "  If  we
"  commence  with  the  consideration  of  a  mass  of  ice  perfectly  free
"  from  porosity,  and  free  from  liquid  particles  diffused  through  its
"  substance,  and  if  we  suppose  it  to  be  kept  in  an  atmosphere  at
"  or  above  0°  Cent.,  then,  as  soon  as  pressure  is  applied  to  it,  pores
"  occupied  by  liquid  water  must  instantly  be  formed  in  the  com-
"  pressed  parts,  in  accordance  with  the  fundamental  principle  of
"  the  explanation  I  have  propounded — the  lowering,  namely,  of  the
T.  L.  87

578  APPENDIX F.

"  freezing-point  or  melting-point,  by  pressure,  and  tbe  fact  that  ice
"  cannot  exist  at  0°  Cent,  under  a  pressure  exceeding  that  of  the
"  atmosphere."  Dr  Tyndall  finds  that  when  a  cylinder  of  ice  is
placed  between  two  slabs  of  box-wood,  and  subjected  to  gradually
increasing  pressure,  a  dim  cloudy  appearance  is  observed,  which
he  finds  is  due  to  the  melting  of  small  portions  of  the  ice  in  the
interior  of  the  mass.  The  permeation  into  portions  of  the  ice,
for  a  time  clear,  "by  the  water  squeezed  against  it  from  such
parts  as  may  be  directly  subjected  to  the  pressure,"  theoretically
demonstrated  by  my  brother,  is  beautifully  illustrated  by  Dr  Tyn-
dall's  statement,  that  "  the  hazy  surfaces  produced  by  the  com-
"  pression  of  the  mass  were  observed  to  be  in  a  state  of  intense
"  commotion,  which  followed  closely  upon  the  edge  of  the  surface
"  as  it  advanced  through  the  solid.  It  is  finally  shown  that  these
"  surfaces  are  due  to  the  liquefaction  of  the  ice  in  planes  perpen-
"  dicular  to  the  pressure."

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  "oscillations"  in  the
melting-point  of  ice,  and  the  distinction  between  strong  and  weak
pieces  in  this  respect,  described  by  Dr  Tyndall  in  the  second
section  of  his  paper,  are  consequences  of  the  varying  pressures
which  different  portions  of  a  mass  of  ice  must  experience  w^hen
portions  within  it  become  liquefied.

The  elevation  of  the  melting  temperature  which  my  brother's
theory  shows  must  be  produced  by  diminishing  the  pressure  of  ice
below  the  atmospheric  pressure,  and  to  which  I  alluded  as  a
subject  for  experimental  illustration,  in  the  article  describing  my
experimental  demonstration  of  the  lowering  effect  of  pressure
{Proceedings,  Roy.  Soc.  Edin.  Feb.  1850),  demonstrates  that  a
vesicle  of  water  cannot  form  in  the  interior  of  a  solid  of  ice
except  at  a  temperature  higher  than  0"  Cent.  This  is  a  conclusion
Avhich  Dr  Tyndall  expresses  as  a  result  of  mechanical  considera-
tions :  thus,  "  Regarding  heat  as  a  mode  of  motion,"  "  liberty  of
"  liquidity  is  attained  by  the  molecules  at  the  surface  of  a  mass  of
"  ice  before  the  molecules  at  the  centre  of  the  mass  can  attain  this
"  liberty."

The  physical  theory  shows  that  a  removal  of  the  atmospheric
pressure  would  raise  the  melting-point  of  ice  by  4foths  of  a  degree
Centigrade.  Hence  it  is  certain  that  the  interior  of  a  solid  of
ice,  heated  by  the  condensation  of  solar  rays  by  a  lens,  will  rise
to  at  least  that  excess  of  temperature  above  the  superficial  parts.

STRATIFICATION OF VESICULAR ICE BY PRESSURE.  579

It  appears  very  nearly  certain  that  cohesion  Avill  prevent  the
evoUition  of  a  bubble  of  vapour  of  water  in  a  vesicle  of  water
forming  by  this  process  in  the  interior  of  a  mass  of  ice,  until  a
high  "  negative  pressure  "  has  been  reached,  that  is  to  say,  until
cohesion  has  been  called  largely  into  operation,  especially  if  the
water  and  ice  contain  little  or  no  air  by  absorption  (just  as  water
freed  from  air  may  be  raised  considerably  above  its  boiling-point
under  any  non-evanescent  hydrostatic  pressure).  Hence  it  appears
nearly  certain  that  the  interior  of  a  block  of  ice  originally
clear,  and  made  to  possess  vesicles  of  water  by  the  concentration
of  radiant  heat,  as  in  the  beautiful  experiments  described  by
Dr  Tyndall  in  the  commencement  of  his  paper,  will  rise  very
considerably  in  temperature,  while  the  vesicles  enlarge  under  the
continued  influence  of  the  heat  received  by  radiation  through  the
cooler  enveloping  ice  and  through  the  fluid  medium  (air  and  a
watery  film,  or  water)  touching  it  all  round,  which  is  necessarily
at  0°  Cent,  where  it  touches  the  solid.

I  find  I  have  not  time  to  execute  my  intention  of  sending  you
to-day  a  physical  explanation  of  the  blue  veins  of  glaciers  which
occurred  to  me  last  May,  but  I  hope  to  be  able  to  send  it  in
a  short  time.

Art.  XCVII. On  the  Stratification  of  Vesicular  Ice
BY  Pressure.

[Part  of  a  letter  to  Prof.  Stokes  ;  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  ix.,  April,  1858.]

In  my  last  letter  to  you  I  pointed  out  that  my  brother's
theory  of  the  effect  of  pressure  in  lowering  the  freezing-point  of
water,  affords  a  perfect  explanation  of  various  remarkable  pheno-
mena involving  the  internal  melting  of  ice,  described  by  Professor
Tyndall  in  the  Number  of  the  Proceedings  which  has  just  been
published.  I  wish  now  to  show  that  the  stratification  of  vesicular
ice  by  pressure  observed  on  a  large  scale  in  glaciers,  and  the
lamination  of  clear  ice  described  by  Dr  Tyndall  as  produced  in
hand  specimens  by  a  Bramah's  press,  are  also  demonstrable  as
conclusions  from  the  same  theory.

Conceive  a  continuous  mass  of  ice,  with  vesicles  containing
either  air  or  water  distributed  through  it ;  and  let  this  mass  be
pressed  together  by  opposing  forces  on  two  opposite  sides  of  it.

37—2

580  APPENDIX F.

The  vesicles  will gradually  become arranged in strata perpen-
dicular to  the  lines  of  pressure,  because  of  the  melting  of  ice  in  the
localities  of  greatest  pressure  and  the  regelation  of  the  water  in  the
localities  of  least  jiressure,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  groups  of  these
cavities. For, any  two vesicles  nearly  in the direction of  the
condensation  will  afford  to  the  ice  between  them  a  relief  from
pressure,  and  will occasion  an aggravated pressure in the ice
round  each  of  them  in  the  places  farthest  out  from  the  line  join-
ing their  centres ;  while  the  pressure  in  the  ice  on  the  far  sides
of  the  two  vesicles  will  be  somewhat diminished from what  it
Avould  be  were  their  cavities  filled  up  with the solid,  although
not  nearly  as  much  diminished  as  it  is  in  the  ice  between  the
two. Hence,  as  demonstrated by  my  brother's theory  and my
own  experiment,  the  melting  temperature  of  the  ice  round  each
vesicle  will  be  highest  on  its  side  nearest  to  the other vesicle,
and  lowest  in  the  localities  on  the  whole  farthest  from  the  line
joining  the  centres. Therefore, ice will melt fro?Ti these last-
mentioned  localities,  and,  if  each  vesicle have water in it,  the
partition  between  the  two  will  thicken  by  freezing  on  each  side
of  it. Any  two  vesicles,  on  the  other  hand,  which  are  nearly  in
a line perpendicular to the direction  of  pressure  will  agree  in
leaving  an  aggravated  pressure  to  be  borne  by  the  solid  between
them,  and  will  each  direct  away  some  of  the  pressure  from  the
portions  of  the  solid  next  itself  on  the  two sides farthest from
the  plane  through  the  centres,  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  pres-
sure. This  will  give  rise  to  an  increase  of  pressure  on  the  whole
in  the  solid  all  round  the  two  cavities,  and  nearly  in  the  plane
perpendicular to the pressure,  although nowhere  else  so  much
as  in  the  part  between them. Hence these two vesicles will
gradually extend towards one another by  the melting of  the
intervening  ice, and  each  will  become flattened in  towards  the
plane  through  the  centres  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  pres-
sure, by  the  freezing  of  water  on  the  parts  of  the  bounding  surface
farthest  from  this  plane. It  may  be similarly  shown that two
vesicles  in  a  line  oblique  to  that  of  condensation  will  give  rise  to
such  variations  of  pressure  in  the  solid  in  their  neighbourhood,  as
to  make  them,  by  melting  and  freezing,  to  extend,  each  obliquely
towards  the  other  and  froon  the  parts  of  its  boundary  most  remote
from  a  plane  midway  between  them,  perpendicular  to  the  direction
of  pressure.

FORBES EXPLAINS BLUE VEINS IN GLACIERS  BY PRESSURE. 581

Tlic  general  tendency  clearly  is  for  the  vesicles  to  become
flattened  and  arranged  in  layers,  in  planes  perpendicular  to  the
direction  of  the  pressure  from  without.

It  is  clear  that  the  same  general  tendency  must  be  experienced
even  when  there  are  bubbles  of  air  in  the  vesicles,  although  no
doubt  the  resultant  effect  would  be  to  some  extent  influenced  by
the  running  down  of  water  to  the  lowest  part  of  each  cavity.

I  believe  it  will  be  found  that  these  principles  afford  a  satis-
factory physical  explanation  of  the  origin  of  that  beautiful  veined
structure  which  Professor  Forbes  has  shown  to  be  an  essential
organic  property  of  glaciers.  Thus  the  first  effect  of  pressure  not
equal  in  all  directions,  on  a  mass  of  snow,  ought  to  be,  according
to  the  theory,  to  convert  it  into  a  stratified  mass  of  layers  of
alternately  clear  and  vesicular  ice,  perpendicular  to  the  direction
of  maximum  pressure.  In  his  remarks  "  On  the  Conversion  of  the
Nevd  into  Ice*,"  Professor  Forbes  says,  "  that  the  conversion  into  ice
is  simultaneous"  (and  in  a  particular  case  referred  to  "identical")
"with  tJie  formation  of  the  blue  hands;...  and  that  these  bands  are
"  formed  where  the '  pressure  is  most  intense,  and  where  the  dif-
"  ferential 'motion  of  the  parts  is  a  maximum,  that  is,  near  the  walls
"  of  a  glacier."  He  farther  states,  that,  after  long  doubt,  he  feels
satisfied  that  the  conversion  of  snow  into  ice  is  due  to  the  effects
of  pressure  on  the  loose  and  porous  structure  of  the  former ;  and
he  formally  abandons  the  notion  that  the  blue  veins  are  due  to
the  freezing  of  infiltrated  water,  or  to  any  other  cause  than  the
kneading  action  of  pressure.  All  the  observations  he  describes
seem  to  be  in  most  complete  accordance  with  the  theory  indicated
above.  Thus,  in  the  thirteenth  letter,  he  says,  "  the  blue  veins
"  are  formed  where  the  pressure  is  most  intense  and  the  differential
"  motion  of  the  parts  a  maximum."

Now  the  theory  not  only  requires  pressure,  but  requires  differ-
ence of  pressure  in  different  directions  to  explain  the  stratification
of  the  vesicles.  Difference  of  pressure  in  different  directions  pro-
duces the  "  differential  motion "  referred  to  by  Professor  Forbes.
Further,  the  difference  of  pressure  in  different  directions  must  be
continued  until  a  very  considerable  amount  of  this  differential
motion,  or  distortion,  has  taken  place,  to  produce  any  sensible
degree  of  stratification  in  the  vesicles.  The  absolute  amount  of
distortion experienced by any portion of the viscous mass is

"  Thirteenth  Letter  on  Glacier.s,  section  (2),  dated  Dec.  18-10.

582  APPENDIX F.

therefore  an  index  of  the  persistence  of  the  differential  pressure,
by  the  continued  action  of  which  the  blue  veins  are  induced.
Hence  also  we  see  why  blue  veins  are  not  formed  in  any  mass,
ever  so  deep,  of  snow  resting  in  a  hollow  or  corner.

As  to  the  direction  in  which  the  blue  veins  appear  to  lie,  they
must,  according  to  the  theory,  be  something  intermediate  between
the  surfaces  perpendicular  to  the  greatest  pressure,  and  the  sur-
faces of  sliding ;  since  they  will  commence  being  formed  exactly
perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  greatest  pressure,  and  will,  hy
the  differential  motion  accompanying  their  formation,  become
gradually  laid  out  more  and  more  nearly  parallel  to  the  sides  of
the  channel  through  which  the  glacier  is  forced.  This  circum-
stance, along  with  the  comparatively  weak  mechanical  condition
of  the  white  strata  (vesicular  layers  between  the  blue  strata),
must,  I  think,  make  these  white  strata  become  ultimately,  in
reality,  the  surfaces  of  "  sliding "  or  of  "  tearing,"  or  of  chief
differential  motion,  as  according  to  Professor  Forbes's  observations
they  seem  to  be.  His  first  statement  on  the  subject,  made  as
early  as  1842,  that  "the  blue  veins  seem  to  be  perpendicular  to
the  lines  of  maximum  pressure,"  is,  however,  more  in  accordance
with  their  mechanical  origin,  according  to  the  theory  I  now
suggest,  than  the  supposition  that  they  are  caused  by  the  tearing
action  which  is  found  to  take  place  along  them  when  formed.  It
appears  to  me,  therefore,  that  Dr  Tyndall's  conclusion,  that  the
vesicular  stratification  is  produced  by  pressure  in  surfaces  per-
pendicular to  the  directions  of  maximum  pressure,  is  correct  as
regards  the  mechanical  origin  of  the  veined  structure;  while  there
seems  every  reason,  both  from  observation  and  from  mechanical
theory,  to  accept  the  view  given  by  Professor  Forbes  of  their
function  in  glacial  motion.

The  mechanical  theory  I  have  indicated  as  the  explanation
of  the  veined  structure  of  glacial  ice  is  especially  applicable  to
account  for  the  stratification  of  the  vesicles  observed  in  ice
originally  clear,  and  subjected  to  differential  pressure,  by  Dr
Tyndall ;  the  formation  of  the  vesicles  themselves  being,  as  re-
marked in  my  last  letter*,  anticipated  by  my  brother's  theory,
published  in  the  Pi^oceedings  for  May,  1857.

I  believe  the  theory  I  have  given  above  contains  the  true
explanation  of  one  remai'kable  fact observed by  Dr  Tyndall in

'''  8ee  rivceediiiiis  for  February  '2o,  ItiiJS.

tyndall's  vesicles  in  clear  ice  at  focus  of  radiant  heat.  583

connexion  with  the  beautiful  set  of  phenomena  which  he  dis-
covered to  be  produced  by  radiant  heat,  concentrated  on  an
internal  portion  of  a  mass  of  clear  ice  by  a  lens ;  the  fact,  namely,
that  the  planes  in  which  the  vesicles  extend  are  generally  parallel
to  the  sides  when  the  mass  of  ice  operated  on  is  a  flat  slab  ;  for
the  solid  will  yield  to  the  "  negative "  internal  pressure  due  to
the  contractility  of  the  melting  ice,  most  easily  in  the  direction
perpendicular  to  the  sides.  The  so-called  negative  pressure  is
therefore  least,  or  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  positive  pressure
is  greatest  in  this  direction.  Hence  the  vesicles  of  melted  ice,
or  of  vapour  caused  by  the  contraction  of  melted  ice,  must,  as
I  have  shown,  tend  to  place  themselves  parallel  to  the  sides  of
the  slab.

The  division  of  the  vesicular  layers  into  leaves  like  six-petaled
flowers  is  a  phenomenon  which  does  not  seem  to  me  as  yet  so
easily  explained ;  but  I  cannot  see  that  any  of  the  phenomena
described  by  Dr  Tyndall  can  be  considered  as  having  been  proved
to  be  due  to  ice  having  mechanical  properties  of  a  uniaxal  crystal.

[It  now  seems  to  me  most  probable  Tyndall  was  right  in
attributing  the  six-rayed  structure  to  the  molecular  mechanics  of
a  uniaxal  crystal. K.,  Dec.  13,  1903.]

APPENDIX G.

HYDROKINETIC SOLUTIONS AND OBSERVATIONS.

Part  I. On  the  Motion  of  Free  Solids  through  a  Liquid.

This  paper  commences  with  the  following  extract  from  the
author's  private  journal,  of  date  January  6,  1858: —

"  Let  ^,  ^,  2;,  %,  JWl,  ^  be  rectangular  components  of  an
impulsive  force  and  an  impulsive  couple  applied  to  a  solid  of
invariable  shape,  with  or  without  inertia  of  its  own,  in  a  perfect
liquid,  and  let  u,  v,  w,  ot,  p,  a  be  the  components  of  linear  and
angular  velocity  generated.  Then,  if  the  vis  viva*  (twice  the
mechanical  value)  of  the  whole  motion  be,  as  it  cannot  but  be,
given  by  the  expression

Q  =  [u^  ti\  u^  +  [v,  v]v"  i- ...  +2  [v,  u]  VII,  +  2  [w,  u]  tun  -\- ...

+  2  [ot, m]  CTIA  +  .  . ,  ,

where  —\ii,u\  \y,v\  &c.  denote  21  constant  coefficients  deter-
minable by  transcendental  analysis  from  the  form  of  the  surface
of  the  solid,  probably  involving  only  elliptic  transcendentals  when
the  surface  is  ellipsoidal :  involving,  of  course,  the  moments  of
inertia  of  the  solid  itself: we  must  have

[u,  w]  u  4-  \y,  (/]  v  +  [iv,  it]  IV  +  [ot,  »]  vs  +  [p,  li]  p  +  [o-,  li]  a  =  .^,  &c.,

\ll,  -ar]  a  +  \y,  -ar]  v  +  [w,  ct]  w  +  [ct,  ot]  -27  +  [p,  w]  /3  +  [o",  w]  o"  =  H,  &c.

If  now  a  continuous  force  Z,  Y,  Z,  and  a  continuous  couple
L,  M,  N,  referred  to  axes  fixed  in  the  body,  are  applied,  and  if
X,  . . . , &c. denote the impulsive force and couple capable of

*  Parts  I.  and  II.  fiom  the  Frocecdbujs  of  the  Royal  Societij  of  Edinburgh,
1870-71.  Parts  III.  and  IV.  from  letters  to  Professor  Tait  of  August  1871.
Part  V.  from  Phil.  Macj.  November,  1871.

In  Part  II.,  T,  instead  of  ^  Q,  is  used  to  denote  the  "  mechanical  value,"  or,  as  it
is  now  called,  the  "  kinetic  energy  "  of  the  motion.

t (i).

MOTION OF A FREE SOLID THROUGH LIQUID.  585

generating  from  rest  the  motion  a,  v,  w,  ot,  p,  a,  which  exists  in
reality  at  any  time  t ;  or,  merely  mathematically,  if  3C  &c.  denote
for  brevity  the  preceding  linear  functions  of  the  components  of
motion,  the  equations  of  motion  are  as  follow : —

f-l.  +  S,  =  X, f  =  &c.

'^  -  '^'^  +  ^^^  -  iat!^  +  iLo-  -  i¥,
'^-  aey  +|9u-  lip  ^mt^=N  ,

Three  first  integrals,  when

j:  =  o, f=o, z=o, x  =  o, j/  =  o, i\^  =  o...(2),

must  of  course  be,  and  obviously  are,

X^  +  ^"  + -^2  =  const (3),

resultant  momentum  constant ;

TLX  +  iWH  +  iaSS  =  const (4),

resultant  of  moment  of  moinentam  constant ;  and

11^  +  v|9  +  w%  +  ^1L  +  pilia  +  cria  =  Q  =  const.  . .  .(5)."

These  equations  were  communicated  in  a  letter  to  Professor
Stokes,  of  date  (probably  January)  1858,  and  they  were  referred
to  by  Professor  Rankine,  in  his  first  paper  on  Stream-lines,
communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  of  London*,  July  1863.

They  are  now  communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edin-
burgh, and  the  following  proof  is  added : —

Let  P  be  any  point  fixed  relatively  to  the  body ;  and  at  time  t,
let  its  coordinates  relatively  to  axes  OX,  OY,  OZ,  fixed  in  space,
be  X,  y,  z.  Let  PA,  PB,  PC  be  three  rectangular  axes  fixed
relatively  to  the  body,  and  {A,  X),  {A,  Y),  ...  the  cosines  of  the
nine  inclinations  of  these  axes  to  the  fixed  axes  OX,  OY,  OZ.

*  These  equations  will  be  very  conveniently  called  the  Eulerian  equations  of  the
motion.  They  correspond  precisely  to  Euler's  equations  for  the  rotation  of  a  rigid
body,  and  include  them  as  a  particular  case.  As  Euler  seems  to  have  been  the  first
to  give  equations  of  motion  in  terms  of  coordinate  components  of  velocity  and  force
referred  to  lines  fixed  relatively  to  the  moving  body,  it  will  be  not  only  convenient,
but  just,  to  designate  as  "  Eulerian  equations"  any  equations  of  motion  in  which  the
lines  of  reference,  whether  for  position,  or  velocity,  or  moment  of  momentum,  or
force,  or  couple,  move  with  the  body,  or  the  bodies,  whose  motion  is  the  subject.

580

APPENDIX (J.

Let  the  components  of  the  "impulse*"  or  generalized  mo-
mentum parallel  to  the  fixed  axes  be  ^,  t],  ^,  and  its  moments
round  the  same  axes  \,  fi,  v;  so  that  if  A'',  Y,  Z  be  components
of  force  acting  on  the  solid,  in  line  through  P,  and  i,  M,  N
components  of  couple,  we  have

d^  _  Y drj
dt~ ' dt

dX
dt

dfjb
di

dv

=  L  +  Zy -  Yz, ~  =  M  +  Xz  - Zx, ^=N+  Yx  - Xi/

(6).

Let  3C,  ^,  Z  and  %,  JW,  ^  be  the  components  and  moments
of  the  impulse  relativ^ely  to  the  axes  FA,  PB,  PC  moving  with
the  body. We  have

^  =  X  (.1,  X)  +  II  {B,  X)  +  %  {C,  X\  \

X  =  llL{A,X)  +  m (B,  X)  +  M (C,  X)  +  %y - ^z,

.(7).

Now  let  the  fixed  axes  OX,  OY,  OZ  be  chosen  coincident
with  the  position  at  time  t  of  the  moving  axes  PA,  PB,  PC:  we
shall  consequently  have

dz

dx  _ dy  _

rf^~"' dt^"^' dt^^"]

{A,X)  =  {B,Y)  =  {G,Z)  =  1,

{A,  Y)  =  {A,  Z)  =  {B,  X)  =  (5,  Z)  =  {C,  X)  =  {C,  Y)  =  0,

•(8),

d{A,Y)
dt

d{A,Z)
dt

o-,

d{B^X)

dt
d{B,Z)

dt

=  -  cr,

d(C,X)
dt

djC,  Y)
dt

.(9).

Using  (7),  (8),  and  (9)  in  (6),  we  find  (1).

One  chief  object  of  this  investigation  was  to  illustrate  dyna-
mical effects  of  heli^oidal  property  (that  is,  right  or  left-handed
asymmetry).  The  case  of  complete  isotropy,  with  heli9oidal
quality,  is  that  in  which  the  coefficients  in  the  ([uadratic  ex-
pression Q  fulfil  the  following  conditions: —

*  See  "  Vortex  Motion,"  §  C,  Trans.  Roij.  Soc.  Edin.  (1868).

AXES FIXED RELATIVELY TO BODY OR FIXED ABSOLUTELY. 587

.(10);

[u,  ii]  =  [v, v]  =  [w,  lu] (let  m  bo  their  common  value)/

[^,-=7]  =  [p,  p]  =  [o-,  0-] „ n

[w,  tn-]  =  [y,  p]  =  [tu,  a] „ h  ,,  „  „

[v,  tu]  =  [lu,  u]  =  [u, y]  =  0  ;  [p,  cr]  =  [a-,  ot]  =  [ct,  p]  =  0,

and

[h,  p]  =  [a,  a]  =  [v,  a]  =  [v,  ct]  :=  [w,  -sr]  =  [w,  p]  =  0

so  that  the  formula  for  Q  is

Q  =  III  {a-  +  V'  +  W-)  +  II  (ot-  +  p-  +  cr-)  +  2/i  (wot  +  vp  +  iDa).  ..(11).
For  this  case,  therefore,  the  Eulerian  equations  (1)  become
d  (inu  +  A-ar)

and

dt
d  (war  +  hu)

—  ni(v<r  —  tup)  =  X,  &c.,
L,  &c.

V...(ii').

-Lines  of  reference  fixed  relatively

dt

[Memorandum :
to  the  body.]

But  inasmuch  as  (11')  remains  unchanged  when  the  lines  of
reference  are  altered  to  any  other  three  lines  at  right  angles  to
one  another  through  P,  it  is  easily  shown  directly  from  (6),  (7),
and  (9)  that  if,  altering  the  notation,  we  take  u,  v,  w  to  denote
the  components  of  the  velocity  of  P  parallel  to  three  fixed
rectangular  lines,  and  ■ur,  p,  a  the  components  of  the  body's
angular  velocity  round  these  lines,  we  have

and

d  (mu  +  hur)
dt

d^ii'ST  +  hu)
dt "

=  A^  &c..

d  {mv  +  hp)
~dt

=  F,

+  h  (av  —  pw)  =  L,  &c.

...(12),

[Memorandum  : — Lines  of  reference  fixed  in  space],  ^

which  are  more  convenient  than  the  Eulerian  equations.

The  integration  of  these  equations,  when  neither  force  nor
couple  acts  on  the  body  (A''  =  0  &c.,  L  —  0  &c.),  presents  no
difficulty;  but  its  result  is  readily  seen  from  §21  ("Vortex
Motion")  to  be  that,  when  the  impulse  is  both  translatory  and
rotational,  the  point  P,  round  which  the  body  is  isotropic,  moves
uniformly  in  a  circle  or  spiral  so  as  to  keep  at  a  constant
distance  from  the  "  axis  of  the  impulse,"  and  that  the  components

5yS  APPENDIX G.

of  angular  velocity  round the  three  fixed rectangular  axes  are
constant.

An  isotropic  heli9oid  [chiroid  as  I  now  call  it ;  Lee.  XX.,
§  204]  may  be  made  by  attaching  projecting  vanes  to  the  surface
of  a  globe  in  proper  positions ;  for  instance,  cutting  at  45°  each,
at  the  middles  of  the  twelve  quadrants  of  any  three  great  circles
dividing  the  globe  into  eight  quadrantal  triangles.  By  making
the  globe  and  the  vanes  of  light  paper,  a  body  might  probably  be
obtained  rigid  enough  and  light  enough  to  illustrate  by  its  motions
through  air  the  motions  of  an  isotropic  helic;oid  through  an  incom-
pressible liquid.  But  curious  phenomena,  not  deducible  from  the
present  investigation,  will,  no  doubt,  on  account  of  viscosity,  be
observed.

Part  II.

Still  considering  only  one  movable  rigid  body,  infinitely
remote  from  disturbance  of  other  rigid  bodies,  fixed  or  movable,
let  there  be  an  aperture  or  apertures  through  it,  and  let  there  be
irrotational  circulation  or  circulations  (§  60,  "  Vortex  Motion ")
through  them.  Let  f ,  77,  ^  be  the  components  of  the  "  impulse  "
at  time  t,  parallel  to  three  fixed  axes,  and  A,,  fi,  v  its  moments
round  these  axes,  as  above,  with  all  notation  the  same,  we  still
have  (§  26,  "  Vortex  Motion  ")

(6)  (repeated).

|  =  X  +  ^,-F.,&c.j

But,  instead  of  for  ^Q  a  quadratic  function  of  the  com.ponents  of
velocity  as  before,  we  now  have

T=E  +  hJ^[u,a'\u:'^...+'2[a,v\uv^  ...]  (13),

where  E  is  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  fiuid  motion  when  the  solid
is  at  rest,  and  h  [[u,  lil  n' +  ■  •  •]  is  the  same  quadratic  as  before.
The  coefficients  [w,  u\  [«.,  v],  &c.  are  determinable  by  a  tran-
scendental analysis,  of  which  the  character  is  not  at  all  influenced
by  the  circumstance  of  there  being  apertures  in  the  solid. And

dT

instead  of  ^  —  -^,  &c.,  as  above,  we  now have
du

LIQUID CIRCULATING THROUGH HOLE IN MOVABLE BODY. 589

^ dT J,  dT , ^ dT ^

^=  ~j^  +11, r]= , +  Im, ^=  :i-  +  In,

du  dv  div

-...(14),

dT
X,  =  ^ — I-  /  {ny  —  mz)  +  Gl, /u,  =  &c., v  =  &c.  J

where  /  denotes  the  resultant  "impulse"  of  the  cyclic  motion
when  the  solid  is  at  rest,  I,  vi,  )i  its  direction-cosines,  G  its
"  rotational  moment "  (§  6,  "  Vortex  Motion "),  and  .r,  y,  z  the
coordinates  of  any  point  in  its  "resultant  axis."  These,  (14)
with  (13),  used  in  (6)  give  the  equations  of  the  solid's  motion
referred  to  fixed  rectangular  axes.  They  have  the  inconvenience
of  the  coefficients  \ii,  ii\,  \ii,  w],  &c.  being  functions  of  the  angular
coordinates  of  the  solid.  The  Eulerian  equations  (free  from  this
inconvenience)  are  readily  found  on  precisely  the  same  plan  as
that  adopted  above  for  the  old  case  of  no  cyclic  motion  in  the
fluid.

The  formulae  for  the  case  in  which  the  ring  is  circular,  has  no
rotation  round  its  axis,  and  is  not  acted  on  by  applied  forces,
though,  of  course,  easily  deduced  from  the  general  equations
(14),  (13),  (0),  are  more  readily  got  by  direct  application  of  first
principles.  Let  P  be  such  a  point  in  the  axis  of  the  ring,  and
C  A,  B  such  constants  that  hiOLto^  +  An- +  Bv-)  is  the  kinetic
energy  due  to  rotational  velocity  ty  round  D,  any  diameter
through  P,  and  translational  velocities  n  along  the  axis  and  v
perpendicular  to  it.  The  impulse  of  this  motion,  together  with
the  supposed  cyclic  motion,  is  therefore  compounded  of

. T ^,  , r.  f^?' +/ along  the  axis,

momentum  m  fines  through  P  k  ,,  ^- ,

[Bv  perpendicular  to  axis,

and  moment  of  momentum  (Bco  round  the  diameter  D.

Hence  if  OX  be  the  axis  of  resultant  momentum,  (x,  y)  the
coordinates  of  P  relatively  to  fixed  axes  OX,  OY;  0  the  inclina-
tion of  the  axis  of  the  ring  to  0 ;  and  |  the  constant  value  of  the
resultant  momentum,  we  have

^cose  =  Au  +  I; -^sm0  =  Bv; ^y  =  Q!.(o: 1

and d;  =  ticosd —  vsind  \ y  =  usm6  +  vcosd; O^coj

Hence  for  0  we  have  the  differential  equation

.(15).

^<.-^

/  sm  ^  + ^ ^  sm  2^

=  0 (16),

590  APPENDIX O.

which  shows  that  the  ring  oscillates  rotationally  according  to  the
law  of  a  horizontal  magnetic  needle  carrying  a  bar  of  soft  iron
rigidly  attached  to  it  parallel  to  its  magnetic  axis.

When  6  is  and  remains  infinitely  small,  6,  y,  and  if  are  each
infinitely  small,  x  remains  infinitely  nearly  constant,  and  the
ring  experiences  an  oscillator}'^  motion  in  period

9^ /  ^^

-^  Y  [7  ^  {A  -  B)  x]{I  +  AxY

compounded  of  translation  along  OY  and  rotation  round  the
diameter  D.  This  result  is  curiously  comparable  with  the  well-
known  gyroscopic  vibrations.

Part  III.  The  Influence  of  frictionless  Wind  on  Waves  in  water
supposed  frictionless.  {Letter  to  Professor  Tait,  of  date
August  16,  1871.)

Taking  OX  vertically  downwards  and  OF  horizontal,  let

X  =  h  sin  n(y  —  at) (1)

be  the  equation  of  the  section  of  the  water  by  a  plane  perpen-
dicular to  the  wave-ridges ;  and  let  h  (the  half  wave-height)  be

infinitely  small  in  comparison  with  (the  wave-length). The

ic-component  of  the  velocity  of  the  water  at  the  surface  is  then

—  nah  cos  niy  —  at)  (2).

This  (because  h  is  infinitesimal)  must  be  the  value  of  t-  for

the  point  (0,  y),  if  ^  denote  the  velocity-potential  at  any  point
{x,  y)  of  the  water. Now  because

^  +  ^  =  0
dx- dy-

and  ^  is  a  periodic  function  of  y,  and  a  function  of  x  which  (as
we  suppose  the  water  infinitely  deep)  becomes  zero  when  x=  cc  ,
it  must  be  of  the  form

P  cos  {ny  —  e)  e""^,
where  P  and  e  are  independent  of  x  and  y. Hence,  taking  -p  ,
putting  ./■  =  0  in  it,  and  equating  it  to  (2),  we  have
—  Pn  cos  (ny  —  e)  =  —  nah  cos  (ny  —  not) ;

FRICTIONLESS INFLUENCE OF WIND ON WAVES IN WATER. 591

and  therefore  F  =  ah,  and  e  =  neat ;  so  that  we  have

(f)  =  a/ie~"*'  cos  /I  (?/  —  ai) (3).

This,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  results  simply  from  the  assumptions
that  the  water  is  frictionless,  that  it  has  been  at  rest,  and  that  its
surface  is  moving  in  the  manner  specified  by  (1).

If  the  air  were  a  frictionless  liquid  moving  irrotatioually,  with
a  constant  velocity  V  at  heights  above  the  water  (that  is  to  say,
values  of  —  x)  considerably  exceeding  the  wave-length,  its  velocity-
potential  T^,  found  on  the  same  principle,  would  be

^|r  =  {V-a) he^'^  cos  71  (y- at)  +  Vy (4).

Let  now  q  denote  the  resultant  velocity  at  any  point  {x,  y)  of  the
air. Neglecting  infinitesimals  of  the  order  {nKf,  we  have

Lq'^  =  :LV--V{V  -  a)  nhe^''  sin  n(y-(xt) (5).

Now,  if  ])  denote  the  pressure  at  any  point  (cc,  y)  in  the  air,  and
a  the  density  of  the  air,  we  have  by  the  general  equation  for
pressure  in  an  irrotationally  moving  fluid.

o-P-^Q  +  W-9^) (fi).

Using  (4)  and  (5)  in  this  and  putting  C  =  ^(tV\  we  find

p^a-  [nh ( V -  afe"'''  sin  n{y-at)+gx] (7).

Similarly  if  p'  denote  the  pressure  at  any  point  {x,  y)  of  the
water,  since  in  this  case  q^  is  infinitesimal,  we  have

—  p'  =  -^  —  g^  =  nha^e"^^  sin  n  (y  —  at)  —  gx (8),

the  density  of  the  water  being  taken  as  unity.

Now  let  T  be  the  cohesive  tension  of  the  separating  surface  of

air  and  water. The  curvature  of  this  surface  being  -^  derived

from  (1),  is  equal  to

—  n^Ji  sin  n{x  —  at) (9).

Hence  at  any  point  in  the  water-surface,

p  —p'  =  Tn%  Hmn{x  —  at) (10) :

and  by  (7)  and  (8),  with  for  x  its  value  by  (1)  (which,  as  //  is
infinitesimal,  may  be  taken  as  zero  except  in  their  last  terms),  we
have

p  -p  =h  {n  [a{V  —  a)'"  +  a"]  ~  g(l  —  a)]  sinn{x  —  at)...{ll).

This,  compared  with  (10),  gives

n[cT(V-a)"-  +  a:']-g{l-a)^Tn' (12).

592  APPENDIX G.

-  V^^fr^' <^^>'

which  (being  the  value  of  a  for  V=0)  is  the  velocity  of  propa-

gation  of  waves  with  no  wind,  when the  wave-length is —  .
Then  (12)  becomes
a-  +  cr(F-g>^^^^,  whence  a'  =  (l  +  a)w~- a-(V- ay...{U).

1  +  (T

This  determines  a,  the  velocity  of  the  waves  when  there  is  wind,
of  velocity  V,  in  the  direction  of  their  advance.  It  shows  that,
for  given  wave-length,  27r/n,  the  greatest  wave-velocity  is

w  V(l  +  0-),
which  is  reached  when  this  is  the  velocity  of  the  wind.  It  is
interesting  to  see  that  with  wind  of  any  other  speed  than  that  of
the  waves,  and  in  the  direction  of  the  waves,  their  speed  is  less.
For  instance,  the  wave-speed  with  no  wind,  which  is  tv,  is  less  by
approximately  ha-  of  w,  (or  about  1/1650,)  than  the  speed  when  the
wind  is  with  the  waves  and  of  their  speed.  The  explanation
clearly  is  that  when  the  air  is  motionless  relatively  to  the  wave
crests  and  hollows  its  inertia  is  not  called  into  play.  Solving  (14)
for  a,  as  a  quadratic,  we  have

«  =  iT^±f (TT^4  ^''^-

This  result  leads  to  the  following  conclusions  : —

(1)  When F/»  =  /i^=2,S-7x(n-^^).

one  of  the  values  of  a  is  zero,  that  is  to  say,  static  corrugations
of  wave-length  27r/n,  would  be  equilibrated  by  Avind  of  velocity

w  V[(l  +  o-)/(r].
But  the  equilibrium  would  be  unstable.

(2)  When  ^/'^'=^X^'^^^'^''i^'^ST5)'
the  two  values  of  a  are  equal.

(8) When  V/w>^^,

both  values  of  a  are  imaginary,  and  therefore  the  wind  would  blow
into  spin-drift,  waves  of  length  27r/??  or  shorter.

1

WAVES AND RIPPLES.  593

Looking  back  to  (13),  we  see  that  it  gives  a  minimum  value
for  tu  equal  to

^'^'^'^^ («)•

Hence  the  water  with  a  plane  level  surface  would  be  unstable,
even  if  air  were  frictionless,  when  the  velocity  of  the  wind  exceeds

y

yziti^') („',,

cr

W.  T.

Part  IV. (Letter  to  Professor  Tait,  of  date  August  23,  1871.)

Defining a ripple as any wave on water whose length

/T'
<  27r  A  /  -y  *, where

T
and  r  =

l+<7

•(17);

(cr  =  "00121),  you  always  see  an  exquisite  pattern  of  ripples  in
front  of  any  solid  cutting  the  surface  of  water  and  moving
horizontally  at  any  speed,  fast  or  slow  [if  not  less  than  about
23  cm.  per  sec.].  The  ripple-length  is  the  smaller  root  of  the
equation

^^T'  +  ^^g'^w^ (18),

where  iv  is  the  velocity  of  the  solid.  The  latter  may  be  a  sailing-
vessel  or  a  row-boat,  a  pole  held  vertically  and  moved  horizontally,
an  ivory  pencil-case,  a  penknife-blade  either  edge  or  flat  side
foremost,  or  (best)  a  fishing-line  kept  approximately  vertical  by
a  lead  weight  hanging  down  below  water,  while  carried  along  at
about  half  a  mile  per  hour  by  a  becalmed  vessel.  The  fishing-line
shows  both  roots  admirably ;  ripples  in  front,  and  waves  of  same
velocity  (X  the  greater  root  of  same  equation)  in  rear.  If  so
fortunate  as  to  be  becalmed  again,  I  shall  tr}^  to  get  a  drawing  of
the  whole  pattern,  showing  the  transition  at  the  sides  from  ripples

*  Which  for  pure  water  =  1-7  centim.  (see  Part  V.).
T.  L.  38

594  APPENDIX G.

to  waves. When  the  speed  with  which  the  fishing-line  is  dragged
is  diminished  towards  the  critical  velocity

J  2  ^Jg'T,

which is  the minimum velocity  of  a  wave,  being  [see  Part  V.

below] for pure water 23 centims. per second (or -^ of  a

nautical  mile  per  hour),  the  ripples  in  front  elongate  and  become
less  curved,  and  the  waves  in  rear  become  shorter,  till  at  the
critical  velocity  waves  and  ripples  seem  nearly  equal,  and  with
ridges  nearly  in  straight  lines  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  motion.
(This  is  observation.)  It  seems  that  the  critical  velocity  may
be  determined  with  some  accuracy  by  experiment  thus  [see
Part  V.  below] : —

Remark  that  the  shorter  the  ripple-length  the  greater  is  the
velocity  of  propagation :  and  that  the  moving  force  of  the  ripple-
motion  is  partly  gravity,  but  chiefly  cohesion ;  and  with  very
short  ripple-length  it  is  almost  altogether  cohesion,  i.e.  the  same
force  as  that  which  makes  a  dew-drop  tremble.  The  least
velocity  of  frictionless  air  that  can  raise  a  ripple  on  rigorously
quiescent  frictionless  water  is  [(16')  above]

660  centimetres  per  second
[being  — - —  x  minimum  wave-velocity j

—  12  8  nautical  miles  per  hour.

Observation  shows the  sea to  be ruffled  by  wind  of  a much

smaller  velocity  than  this. Such ruffling,  therefore,  is  due to

viscosity  of  the  air.

W.  T.

Postscript  to  Part  IV.  {October  17,  1871).

The  influence  of  viscosity  gives  rise  to  a  greater  pressure  on
the  anterior  than  on  the  posterior  side  of  a  solid  moving  uniformly
relatively  to  a  fluid.  A  symmetrical  solid,  as  for  example  a
globe,  moving  uniformly  through  a  frictionless  fluid,  experiences
augmentation  of  pressure  in  front  and  behind  equally ;  and
diminished  pressure  over  an  intervening  zone. Observation  (as

Stokes's  work  against  viscosity  to  maintain  wave. 595

for  instance  in  Mr  J.  R.  Napier's  experiments  on  his  "pressure
log,"  for  measuring  the  speed  of  vessels,  and  experiments  by
Joule  and  myself*,  on  the  pressure  at  different  points  of  a  solid
globe  exposed  to  wind)  shows  that,  instead  of  being  increased,
the  pressure  is  sometimes  actually  diminished  on  the  posterior
side  of  a  solid  moving  through  a  real  fluid  such  as  air  or  water.
Wind  blowing  across  ridges  and  hollows  of  a  fixed  solid  (such  as
the  furrows  of  a  field)  must,  because  of  the  viscosity  of  the  air,
press  with  greater  force  on  the  slopes  facing  it  than  on  the
sheltered  slopes.  Hence  if  a  regular  series  of  waves  at  sea
consisted  of  a  solid  body  moving  with  the  actual  velocity  of  the
waves,  the  wind  would  do  work  upon  it,  or  it  would  do  work
upon  the  air,  according  as  the  velocity  of  the  wind  were  greater
or  less  than  the  velocity  of  the  waves.  This  case  does  not  afford
an  exact  parallel  to  the  influence  of  wind  on  waves,  because  the
surface  particles  of  water  do  not  move  forward  with  the  velocity
of  the  waves  as  those  of  the  furrowed  solid  do.  Still  it  may  be
expected  that  when  the  velocity  of  the  wind  exceeds  the  velocity
of  propagation  of  the  waves,  there  will  be  a  greater  pressure  on
the  posterior  slopes  than  on  the  anterior  slopes  of  the  waves ;
and  vice  versa,  that  when  the  velocity  of  the  waves  exceeds  the
velocity  of  the  wind,  or  is  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  of
the  wind,  there  will  be  a  greater  pressure  on  the  anterior  than
on  the  posterior  slopes  of  the  waves.  In  the  first  case  the
tendency  will  be  to  augment  the  wave,  in  the  second  case  to
diminish  it.  The  question  whether  a  series  of  waves  of  a  certain
height  gradually  augment  with  a  certain  force  of  wind  or  gradually
subside  through  the  wind  not  being  strong  enough  to  sustain
them,  cannot  be  decided  offhand.  Towards  answering  it  Stokes's
investigation  of  the  work  against  viscosity  of  water  required  to
maintain  a  wavef,  gives  a  most  important  and  suggestive  instal-
ment. But  no  theoretical  solution,  and  very  little  of  experimental
investigation,  can  be  referred  to  with  respect  to  the  eddyings  of
the  air  blowing  across  the  to|)s  of  the  waves,  to  which,  by  its
giving  rise to  greater pressure on the  posterior  than on the

*  "Thermal  Effects  of  Fluids  in  Motion,"  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  1860;  Phil.  Mag.
1860,  Vol.  XX.  p.  552.

t  Trans.  Camh.  Phil.  Soc.  1851  ("Effect  of  Internal  Friction  of  Fluids  on  the
Motion  of  Pendulums,"  §  V.).

38—2

596  APPENDIX G.

anterior slopes, the influence of the wind in sustaining and
maintaining  waves  is  chiefly  if  not  altogether  due.

My  attention  having  been  called  three  days  ago,  by  Mr  Froude,
to  Scott  Russell's Report on  Waves  (British  Association,  York,
1844),  I  find  in  it  a  remarkable  illustration  or  indication  of  the
leading  idea  of  the theory  of  the influence  of  wind  on  waves,
that  the  velocity  of  the  wind  must  exceed  that  of  the  waves,  in
the  following  statement :— "  Let  him [an  observer  studying  the
surface  of  a  sea  or  large  lake,  during  the  successive  stages  of  an
increasing  wind,  from  a  calm  to  a  storm]  begin  his  observations
"in  a  perfect  calm,  when  the  surface  of  the  water  is  smooth  and
"reflects  like  a  mirror  the  images  of  surrounding  objects. This
"  appearance  will  not  be  affected  by  even  a  slight  motion  of  the
"  air,  and  a  velocity  of  less  than  half  a  mile  an  hour  (8^  in.  per
"  sec.)  does  not  sensibly  disturb  the  smoothness  of  the  reflecting
"surface. A  gentle  zephyr  flitting  along  the  surface  from  point
"  to  point, may  be  observed to destroy  the perfection of  the
"  mirror  for  a  moment,  and  on  departing,  the  surface  remains
"  polished  as  before ;  if  the  air  have  a  velocity  of  about  a  mile  an
"  hour,  the  surface  of  the  water  becomes  less  capable  of  distinct
"reflexion,  and  on  observing  it  in  such  a  condition,  it  is  to  be
"  noticed  that  the  diminution  of  this  reflecting  power  is  owing
"to  the  presence  of  those  minute  corrugations  of  the  superficial
"film  which  form  waves  of  the  third  order. These  corrugations
"  produce  on  the  surface  of  the  water  an  effect  very  similar  to  the
"  effect  of  those  panes  of  glass  \vhich  we  see  corrugated  for  the
"  purpose  of  destroying  their  transparency,  and  these  corrugations
"  at  once  prevent  the  eye  from  distinguishing  forms  at  a  consider-
"able  depth,  and  diminish  the  perfection  of  forms  reflected  in
"  the water. To fly-fishers this appearance is  well  known as
"diminishing  the  facility  with  which  the  fish  see  their  captors.
"  This  first  stage  of  disturbance  has  this  distinguishing  circum-
"  stance, that the phenomena on the surface cease almost
"simultaneously  with  the  intermission  of  the  disturbing  cause,
"so  that  a  spot  which  is  sheltered  from  the  direct  action  of  the
"  wind  remains  smooth,  the  waves  of  the  third order  being  in-
"  capable  of  travelling  spontaneously  to  any  considerable  distance,
"  except  when  under  the  continued  action  of  the  original  disturb-
"ing  force. This condition is  the indication of  present force,
"  not  of  that  which  is  past. While  it  remains  it  gives  that  deep

SCOTT  Russell's  capillary  waves.  597

"  blackness  to  the  water  which  the  sailor  is  accustomed  to  regard
"  as  an  index  of  the  presence  of  wind,  and  often  as  the  forerunner
"  of  more.

"  The  second  condition  of  wave  motion  is  to  be  observed  when
"the  velocity  of  the  wind  acting  on  the  smooth  water  has  in-
"  creased  to  two  miles  an  hour.  Small  waves  then  begin  to  rise
"  uniformly  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  water ;  these  are  waves
"of  the  second  order,  and  cover  the  water  with  considerable
"  regularity.  Capillary  waves  disappear  from  the  ridges  of  these
"waves,  but  are  to  be  found  sheltered  in  the  hollows  between
"  them,  and  on  the  anterior  slopes  of  these  waves.  The  regularity
"  of  the  distribution  of  these  secondary  waves  over  the  surface  is
"  remarkable ;  they  begin  with  about  an  inch  of  amplitude,  and
"  a  couple  of  inches  long ;  they  enlarge  as  the  velocity  or  duration
"  of  the  wave  increases ;  by  and  by  conterminal  waves  unite  ;  the
"  ridges  increase,  and  if  the  wind  increase  the  waves  become
"  cusped,  and  are  regular  waves  of  the  second  order.  They  con-
"  tinue  enlarging  their  dimensions ;  and  the  depth  to  which  they
"  produce  the  agitation  increasing  simultaneously  with  their
"  magnitude,  the  surface  becomes  extensively  covered  with  waves
"  of  nearly  uniform  magnitude."

The  "  Capillary  waves  "  or  "  waves  of  the  third  order  "  referred
to  by  Russell  are  what  I,  in  ignorance  of  his  observations  on  this
branch  of  his  subject,  had  called  "ripples."  The  velocity  of
8^  inches  (21 J  centimetres)  per  second  is  precisely  the  velocity
he  had  chosen  (as  indicated  by  his  observations)  for  the  velocity
of  propagation  of  the  straight-ridged  waves  streaming  obliquely
from  the  two  sides  of  the  path  of  a  small  body  moving  at  speeds
of  from  12  to  36  inches  per  second ;  and  it  agrees  remarkably
with  my  theoretical  and  experimental  determination  of  the
absolute  minimum  Avave-velocity  (23  centimetres  per  second ;
see  Part  V.).  Russell  has  not  explicitly  pointed  out  that  his
critical  velocity  of  8|  inches  per  second  was  an  absolute  minimum
velocity  of  propagation.  But  the  idea  of  a  minimum  velocity  of
waves  can  scarcely  have  been  far  from  his  mind  when  he  fixed
upon  8^  inches  per  second  as  the  minimum  of  wind  that  can
sustain  ripples.  In  an  article  to  appear  in  Nature  on  the
26th  of  this  month,  I  have  given  extracts  from  Russell's  Report
(including  part  of  a  quotation  which  he  gives  from  Poncelet
and  Lesbros  in  the  memoirs  of  the  French  Institute  for  1829),

598  APPENDIX G.

showing  how  far  my  observations  on  ripples  had  been  anticipated.
I  need  say  no  more  here  than  that  these  anticipations  do  not
include  any  indication  of  the  dynamical  theory  which  I  have
given,  and  that  the  subject  was  new  to  me  when  Parts  III.,  IV.,
and  V.  of  the  present  communication  were  written.

Part  V. Waves  under  motive  power  of  Gravity  and
Cohesion  jointly,  without  wind.

Leaving  the question  of  wind,  consider  (13),  and introduce
notation  of  (16),  (17)  in  it. It  becomes

w"  =  ^--^T'n (19).

n  ^ ^

o 9

r|2 •?_

This  has  a  minimum  value,

"^^"  ,. \ (20).

^  =  VF

In  applying  these  formulas  to  the  case  of  air  and  water,  we
may  neglect  the  difference  between  g  and  g',  as  the  value  of  a  is
about  -^Iq  ;  and  between  T  and  T',  although  it  is  to  be  remarked
that  it  is  T'  rather  than  T  that  is  ordinarily  calculated  from
experiments  on  capillary  attraction.  From  experiments  of  Gay-
Lussac's  it  appears  that  the  value  of  T'  is  about  *074  of  a
gramme  weight  per  centimetre ;  that  is  to  say,  in  terms  of  the
kinetic  unit  of  force  founded  on  the  gramme  as  unit  of  mass,

r  =  ^x-073.

To  make  the  density  of  water  unity  (as  that  of  the  lower  liquid
has  been  assumed),  we  must  take  one  centimetre  as  unit  of  length.
Lastly,  with  one  second  as  unit  of  time,  we  have

5r  =  982;
and  (18)  gives

w  =  A  /  982  f-  +  -074  X  n

for  the wave-velocity  in centimetres  per  second,  corresponding

'lir  1 /

to  wave-length . When -  =  V-078  =  '27 (that is, when the
n  n

FRINGE OF RIPPLES IN FRONT, SHIP-WAVES ABAFT, 599

wave-length  is  I'T  centimetre),  the  velocity  has  a  minimum  value
of  23  centimetres  per  second.

The  part  of  the  preceding  theory  which  relates  to  the  effect  of
cohesion  on  waves  of  liquids  occurred  to  me  in  consequence  of
having  recently  observed  a  set  of  very  short  waves  advancing
steadily,  directly  in  front  of  a  body  moving  slowly  through  water,
and  another  set  of  waves  considerably  longer  following  steadily
in  its  wake.  The  two  sets  of  waves  advanced  each  at  the  same
rate  as  the  moving  body ;  and  thus  I  perceived  that  there  were
two  different  wave-lengths  which  gave  the  same  velocity  of  pro-
pagation. When  the  speed  of  the  body's  motion  through  the
water  was  increased,  the  waves  preceding  it  became  shorter,  and
those  in  its  wake  became  longer.  Close  before  the  cut-water  of
a  vessel  moving  at  a  speed  of  not  more  than  two  or  three  knots*
through  very  smooth  water,  the  surface  of  the  water  is  marked
with  an  exquisitely  fine  and  regular  fringe  of  ripples,  in  which
several  scores  of  ridges  and  hollows  may  be  distinguished  (and
probably  counted,  with  a  little  practice)  in  a  space  extending  20
or  30  centimetres  in  advance  of  the  solid.  Right  astern  of  either
a  steamer  or  sailing  vessel  moving  at  any  speed  above  four  or
five  knots,  waves  may  generally  be  seen  following  the  vessel  at
exactly  its  own  speed,  and  appearing  of  such  lengths  as  to  verify
as  nearly  as  can  be  judged  the  ordinary  formula

for  the  length  of  waves  advancing  with  velocity  w,  in  deep
water.  In  the  well-known  theory  of  such  waves,  gravity  is
assumed  as  the  sole  origin  of  the  motive  forces.  When  cohesion
was  thought  of  at  all  (as,  for  instance,  by  Mr  Froude  in  his
important  nautical  experiments  on  models  towed  through  water,
or  set  to  oscillate  to  test  qualities  with  respect  to  the  rolling  of
ships  at  sea),  it  was  justly  judged  to  be  not  sensibly  influential
in  waves  exceeding  5  or  10  centimetres  in  length.  Now  it
becomes  apparent  that,  for  waves  of  any  length  less  than  5  or
10  centimetres,  cohesion  contributes  sensibly  to  the  motive
system ; and that,  when the length is a small fraction of  a

*  The  speed  'one  knot'  is  a  velocity  of  one  nautical  mile  per  hour,  or  51'5  centi-
metres per  second.

600  APPENDIX G.

centimetre,  cohesion  is much more influential than  gravity as
"  motive  "  for  the  vibrations.

The  following  extract  from  part  of  a  letter  to  Mr  Froude,
forming  part  of  a  communication  to  Nature  (to  appear  on  the
26th  of  this  month,  October  1871),  describes  observations  for  an
experimental  determination  of  the  minimum  velocity  of  waves  in
sea- water : —

"  About  three  weeks  later,  being  becalmed  in  the  Sound  of
"Mull,  I  had  an  excellent  opportunity,  with  the  assistance  of
"  Professor  Helmholtz,  and  my  brother  from  Belfast,  of  deter-
"  mining  by  observation  the  minimum  wave-velocity  with  some
"  approach  to  accuracy.  The  fishing-line  was  hung  at  a  distance
"  of  two  or  three  feet  from  the  vessel's  side,  so  as  to  cut  the  water
"at  a  point  not  sensibly  disturbed  by  the  motion  of  the  vessel.
"  The  speed  was  determined  by  throwing  into  the  sea  pieces  of
"paper  previously  wetted,  and  observing  their  times  of  transit
"across  parallel  planes,  at  a  distance  of  912  centimetres  asunder,
"  fixed  relatively  to  the  vessel  by  marks  on  the  deck  and  gunwale.
"  By  watching  carefully  the  pattern  of  ripples  and  waves  which
"  connected  the  ripples  in  front  with  the  waves  in  rear,  I  had  seen
"  that  it  included  a  set  of  parallel  waves  slanting  off  obliquely  on
"  each  side,  and  presenting  appearances  which  proved  them  to  be
"  waves  of  the  critical  length  and  corresponding  minimum  speed
"  of  propagation.  Hence  the  component  velocity  of  the  fishing-
"line  perpendicular  to  the  fronts  of  these  waves  was  the  true
"minimum  velocity.  To  measure  it,  therefore,  all  that  was
"  necessary  was  to  measure  the  angle  between  the  two  sets  of
"  parallel  lines  of  ridges  and  hollows  sloping  away  on  the  two
"  sidef-  of  the  wake,  and  at  the  same  time  to  measure  the  velocity
"  with  which  the  fishing-line  was  dragged  through  the  water.
"  The  angle  was  measured  by  holding  a  jointed  two-foot  rule,
"with  its  two  branches,  as  nearly  as  could  be  judged  by  the  eye,
"  parallel  to  the  set  of  lines  of  wave  ridges.  The  angle  to  which
"the  ruler  had  to  be  opened  in  this  adjustment  was  the  angle
"  sought.  By  laying  it  down  on  paper,  drawing  two  straight
"  lines  by  its  two  edges,  and  completing  a  simple  geometrical
"construction  with  a  length  properly  introduced  to  represent
"  the  measured  velocity  of  the  moving  solid,  the  required
"  minimum  wave-velocity  was  readily  obtained.  Six  observa-
"  tions  of  this  kind  were  made,  of  which  two  were  rejected as

MINIMUM  VELOCITY  OF  SOLID  TO  PRODUCE  RIPPLES  OR  WAVES. 601

"  not  satisfactory. The following  are the results of  the other
"  four : —

Velocity  of  moving
solid.

51  centimetres  per  second.

26
24

Deduced  minimum  wave-
velocity.

23"0 centimetres  per  second.

23-8

23-2

22-9

Mean 2322

"  The  extreme  closeness  of  this  result  to  the  theoretical
"  estimate  (23  centimetres  per  second)  was,  of  course,  merely  a
"  coincidence ;  but  it  proved  that  the  cohesive  force  of  sea- water
"  at  the  temperature  (not  noted)  of  the  observation  cannot  be
"  very  different  from  that  which  I  had  estimated  from  Gay-
"  Lussac's  observations  for  pure  water."

APPENDIX  H.

ON  THE  MOLECULAR  TACTICS  OF  A  CRYSTAL*.

§  1.  My  subject  this  evening  is  not  the  physical  properties
of  crystals,  not  even  their  dynamics ;  it  is  merely  the  geometry  of
the  structure — the  arrangement  of  the  molecules  in  the  constitu-
tion of  a  crystal.  Every  crystal  is  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of
small  bodies  or  molecules.  The  converse  proposition  is  scarcely
true,  unless  in  a  very  extended  sense  of  the  term  crystal  (§  20
below).  I  can  best  explain  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  molecules
by  asking  you  to  think  of  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  people.
To  be  homogeneous  every  person  of  the  assemblage  must  be  equal
and  similar  to  every  other :  they  must  be  seated  in  rows  or  stand-
ing in  rows  in  a  perfectly  similar  manner.  Each  person,  except
those  on  the  borders  of  the  assemblage,  must  have  a  neighbour
on  one  side  and  an  equi-distant  neighbour  on  the  other :  a  neigh-
bour on  the  left  front  and  an  equi-distant  neighbour  behind  on
the  right,  a  neighbour  on  the  right  front  and  an  equi-distant
neighbour  behind  on  the  left.  His  two  neighbours  in  front  and  his
two  neighbours  behind  are  members  of  two  rows  equal  and  similar
to  the  rows  consisting  of  himself  and  his  right-hand  and  left-hand
neighbours,  and  their  neighbours'  neighbours  indefinitely  to  right
and  left.  In  particular  cases  the  nearest  of  the  front  and  rear
neighbours  may  be  right  in  front  and  right  in  rear;  but  we  must
not  confine  our  attention  to  the  rectangularly  grouped  assemblages
thus  constituted.  Now  let  there  be  equal  and  similar  assemblages
on  floors  above  and  below  that  which  we  have  been  considering,
and  let  there  be  any  indefinitely  great  number  of  floors  at  equal
distances  from  one  another  above  and  below.  Think  of  any  one
person  on  any  intermediate  floor  and  of  his  nearest  neighbours  on
the  floors  above  and  below. These  three  persons  must  be  exactly

*  The  Eobert  Boyle  Lecture,  delivered  before  the  Oxford  University  Junior
Scientific  Club,  May  16,  1893.

HOMOGENEOUS ASSEMBLAGE OF BODIES.

608

in  one  line ;  this,  in  virtue  of  the  homogeneousness  of  the  assem-
blages on  the  three  floors,  will  secure  that  every  person  on  the
intermediate  floor  is  exactly  in  line  with  his  nearest  neighbours
above  and  below.  The  same  condition  of  alignment  must  be
fulfilled  by  every  three  consecutive  floors,  and  we  thus  have  a
homogeneous  assemblage  of  people  in  three  dimensions  of  space.
In  particular  cases  every  person's  nearest  neighbour  in  the  floor
above  may  be  vertically  over  him,  but  we  must  not  confine  our
attention  to  assemblages  thus  rectangularly  grouped  in  vertical
lines.

§  2.  Consider  now  any  particular  person  C  (fig.  1)  on  any
intermediate  floor,  D  and  D'  his  nearest
neighbours,  E  and  E'  his  next  nearest
neighbours  all  on  his  own  floor.  His
next  next  nearest  neighbours  on  that
floor  will  be  in  the  positions  F  and  F'
in  the  diagram.  Thus  we  see  that
each  person  C  is  surrounded  by  six
persons,  DD',  EE',  and  FF',  being  his
nearest,  his  next  nearest,  and  his  next
next  nearest  neighbours  on  his  own
floor.  Excluding  for  simplicity  the
special  cases  of  rectangular  grouping

we  see  that  the  angles  of  the  six  equal  and  similar  triangles  CDE,
GEF,  &LC.,  are  all  acute :  and  because  the  six  triangles  are  equal
and  similar  we  see  that  the  three  pairs  of  mutually  remote  sides
of  the  hexagon  DEFD'E'F'  are  equal  and  parallel.

§  3.  Let  now  A,  A',  A",  &c.,  denote  places  of  persons  of  the
homogeneous  assemblage  on  the  floor  immediately  above,  and
B,  B',  B",  &c.  on  the  floor  immediately  below,  the  floor  of  G.  In
the  diagram  let  a,  a',  a"  be  points  in  which  the  floor  of  GDE  is  cut
by  perpendiculars  to  it  through  A,  A',  A"  of  the  floor  above,  and
h,  b',  h"  by  perpendiculars  from  5,  B\  B"  of  the  floor  below.  Of  all
the  perpendiculars  from  the  floors  immediately  above  and  below,
just  two,  one  from  each,  cut  the  area  of  the  parallelogram  GDEF:
and  they  cut  it  in  points  similarly  situated  in  respect  to  the
oppositely  oriented  triangles  into  which  it  is  divided  by  either  of
its  diagonals.  Hence  if  a  lies  in  the  triangle  GDE,  the  other  five
triangles  of  the  hexagon  must  be  cut  in  the  corresponding  points,

/
Fig.  1

604  APPENDIX H.

as  shown  in  the  diagram.  Thus,  if  we  think  only  of  the  floor  of  C
and  of  the  floor  immediately  above  it,  we  have  points  A,  A',  A"
vertically  above  a,  a\  a".  Imagine  now  a  triangular  pyramid,  or
tetrahedron,  standing  on  the  base  CDE,  and  having  A  for  vertex :
we  see  that  each  of  its  sides  AGD,  ABE,  ABC  is  an  acute-angled
triangle  because,  as  we  have  already  seen,  CDE  is  an  acute-angled
triangle,  and  because  the  shortest  of  the  three  distances  CA,  DA,
EA  is  (§  2)  greater  than  CE  (though  it  may  be  either  greater  than
or  less  than  DE).  Hence  the  tetrahedron  CDE  A  has  all  its  angles
acute  ;  not  only  the  angles  of  its  triangular  faces,  but  the  six  angles
between  the  planes  of  its  four  faces.  This  important  theorem
regarding  homogeneous  assemblages  was  given  by  Bravais,  to
whom  we  owe  the  whole  doctrine  of  homogeneous  assemblages  in
its  most  perfect  simplicity  and  complete  generality.  Similarly
we  see  that  we  have  equal  and  similar  tetrahedrons  on  the  bases
D'CF,  E'F'C ;  and  three  other  tetrahedrons  below  the  floor  of  C,
having  the  oppositely  oriented  triangles  CDE',  &c.  for  their  bases
and  B,  B',  B"  for  their  vertices.  These  three  tetrahedrons  are
equal  and  heterochirally*  similar  to  the  first  three.  The  con-
sideration of  these  acute-angled  tetrahedrons  is  of  fundamental
importance  in  respect  to  the  engineering  of  an  elastic  solid,  or
crystal,  according  to  Boscovich.  So  also  is  the  consideration  of
the  cluster  of  thirteen  points  C,  and  the  six  neighbours  DEFD'E'F'
in  the  plane  of  the  diagram,  and  the  three  neighbours  AA'A"  on
the  floor  above,  and  BB'B"  on  the  floor  below.

§  4.  The  case  in  which  each  of  the  four  faces  of  each  of
the  tetrahedrons  of  §  3  is  an  equilateral  triangle  is  particularly
interesting.  An  assemblage  fulfilling  this  condition  may  con-
veniently be  called  an  '  equilateral  homogeneous  assemblage,'  or,
for  brevity,  an  '  equilateral  assemblage.'  In  an  equilateral  assem-
blage Cs  twelve  neighbours  are  all  equi-distant  from  it.  I  hold
in  my  hand  a  cluster  of  thirteen  little  black  balls,  made  up  by
taking  one  of  them  and  placing  the  twelve  others  in  contact  with
it  (and  therefore  packed  in  the  closest  possible  order),  and  fixing
them  all  together  by  fish-glue.  You  see  it  looks,  in  size,  colour,
and  shape,  quite  like  a  mulberry.  The  accompanying  diagram
shows  a  stereoscopic  view  of  a  similar  cluster  of  balls  painted
white  for  the  photograph.

*  See  footnote  on  §  22  below.

THIRTEEN  NEAREST  NEIGHBOURS  IN  HOMOGENEOUS  ASSEMBLAGE.  605

§  5. By  adding  ball  after  ball  to  such  a  cluster  of  thirteen,
and always  taking  care to place each additional ball  in  some

Fiff.  2.

position  in  which  it  is  properly  in  line  with  others,  so  as  to  make
the  whole  assemblage  homogeneous,  we  can  exercise  ourselves  in  a
very  interesting  manner  in  the  building  up  of  any  possible  form  of
crystal  of  the  class  called  '  cubic '  by  some  writers  and  '  octahedral '
by  others.  You  see  before  you  several  examples.  I  advise  any  of
you  who  wish  to  study  crystallography  to  contract  with  a  wood-
turner, or  a  maker  of  beads  for  furniture  tassels  or  for  rosaries,  for
a  thousand  wooden  balls  of  about  half  an  inch  diameter  each.
Holes  through  them  will  do  no  harm,  and  may  even  be  useful ;
but  make  sure  that  the  balls  are  as  nearly  equal  to  one  another,
and  each  as  nearly  spherical  as  possible.

p

■^-#^

Fig.  3.

606

APPENDIX H.

£

§  6.  You  see  here  before  you  a  large  model  which  I  have
made  to  illustrate  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  points,  on  a  plan
first  given,  I  believe,  by  Mr  William  Barlow  {Nature,  December  20
and  27,  1883).  The  roof  of  the  model  is  a  lattice-frame  (fig.  3)
consisting  of  two  sets  of  eigiit  parallel  wooden  bars  crossing  one
another,  and  kept  together  by  pins  through  the  middles  of  the
crossings.  As  you  see,  I  can  alter  it  to  make  parallelograms  of  all
degrees  of  obliquity  till  the  bars  touch,  and  again  you  see  I  can
make  them  all  squares.

§  7.  The  joint  pivots  are  (for  cheapness  of  construction)  of
copper  wire,  each  bent  to  make  a  hook  below  the  lattice  frame.
On  these  sixty-four  hooks  are  hung  sixty-four
fine  cords,  firmly  stretched  by  little  lead  weights.
Each  of  these  cords  (fig.  4)  bears  eight  short
perforated  wooden  cylinders,  which  may  be
slipped  up  and  down  to  any  desired  position*.
They  are  at  present  actually  placed  at  distances
consecutively  each  equal  to  the  distance  from
joint  to  joint  of  the  lattice  frame.

I  8.  The  roof  of  the  model  is  hung  by  four
cords,  nearly  vertical,  of  independently  variable
lengths,  passing  over  hooks  from  fixed  points
above,  and  kept  stretched  by  weights,  each
equal  to  one-quarter  of  the  weight  of  roof  and
pendants.  You  see  now  by  altering  the  angles
of  the  lattice-work  and  placing  it  horizontal  or
in  any  inclined  plane,  as  I  am  allowed  to  do
readily  by  the  manner  in  which  it  is  hung,
I  have  three  independent  variables,  by  varying
which  I  can  show  you  all  varieties  of  homo-
geneous assemblages,  in  which  three  of  the
neighbours  of  every  point  are  at  equal  distances
from  it.  You  see  here,  for  example,  we  have  the  equilateral
assemblage.  I  have  adjusted  the  lattice  roof  to  the  proper  angle,
and  its  plane  to  the  proper  inclination  to  the  vertical,  to  make
a  wholly  equilateral  assemblage  of  the  little  cylinders  of  wood  on

*  The  holes  in  the  cylinders  are  bored  obliquely,  as  shown  in  fig.  4,  which
causes  them  to  remain  at  any  desired  position  on  the  cord,  and  allows  them  to  be
freed  to  move  up  and  down  by  slackening  the  cord  for  a  moment.

Fig.  4.

HOMOGENEOUS  ASSEMBLAGE  HAS  HOMOGENEOUS  ORIENTATIONS.  GOT

the  vertical  cords,  a  case,  as  we  have  seen,  of  special  importance.
If  I  vary  also  the  distances  between  the  little  pieces  of  wood  on
the  cords ;  and  the  distances  between  the  joints  of  the  lattice
work  (variations  easily  understood,  though  not  conveniently  pro-
ducible in  one  model  without  more  of  mechanical  construction
than  would  be  worth  making),  I  have  three  other  independent
variables.  By  properly  varying  these  six  independent  variables,
three  angles  and  three  lengths,  we  may  give  any  assigned  value  to
each  edge  of  one  of  the  fundamental  tetrahedrons  of  §  3.

§  9.  Our  assemblage  of  people  would  not  be  homogeneous
unless  its  members  were  all  equal  and  similar  and  in  precisely
similar  attitudes,  and  were  all  looking  the  same  way.  You  under-
stand what  a  number  of  people  seated  or  standing  on  a  floor  or
plain  and  looking  the  same  way  means.  But  the  expression
'looking'  is  not  conveniently  applicable  to  things  that  have  no
eyes,  and  we  want  a  more  comprehensive  mode  of  expression.
We  have  it  in  the  words  '  orientation/  '  oriented,'  and  (verb)  '  to
orient,'  suggested  by  an  extension  of  the  idea  involved  in  the
word  'orientation,'  first  used  to  signify  positions  relatively  to  east
and  west,  of  ancient  Greek  and  Egyptian  temples  and  Christian
churches.  But  for  the  orientation  of  a  house  or  temple  we  have
only  one  angle,  and  that  angle  is  called  '  azimuth '  (the  name
given  to  an  angle  in  a  horizontal  plane).  For  orientation  in  three
dimensions  of  space  we  must  extend  our  ideas  and  consider  position
with  reference  to  east  and  west  and  up  and  down.  A  man  lying
on  his  side,  with  his  head  to  the  north  and  looking  east,  would  not
be  similarly  oriented  to  a  man  standing  upright  and  looking  east.
To  provide  for  the  complete  specification  of  how  a  body  is  oriented
in  space  we  must  have  in  the  body  a  plane  of  reference,  and  a  line
of  reference  in  this  plane,  belonging  to  the  body  and  moving  with
it.  We  must  also  have  a  fixed  plane  and  a  fixed  line  of  reference
in  it,  relatively  to  which  the  orientation  of  the  moveable  body  is
to  be  specified;  as,  for  example,  a  horizontal  plane,  and  the  east
and  west  horizontal  line  in  it.  The  position  of  a  body  is  completely
specified  when  the  angle  between  the  plane  of  reference  belonging
to  it  and  the  fixed  plane  is  given  ;  and  when  the  angles  between
the  line  of  intersection  of  the  two  planes  and  the  lines  of  reference
in  them  are  also  given.  Thus  we  see  that  three  angles  are  neces-
sary and  sufficient  to  specify  the  ox'ientation  of  a  moveable  body.

608

APPENDIX H.

and  we  see  how  the  specification  is  conveniently  given  in  terms  of
three  angles.

§  10.  To  illustrate  this  take  a  book  lying  on  the  table  before
you  with  its  side  next  the  title-page  up,  and  its  back  to  the  north.
I  now  lift  the  east  edge  (the  top  of  the  book),  keeping  the  bottom
edge  north  and  south  on  the  table  till  the  book  is  inclined,  let  us
say,  20"  to  the  table.  Next,  without  altering  this  angle  of  20°,
between  the  side  of  the  book  and  the  table,  I  turn  the  book  round
a  vertical  axis  through  45°  till  the  bottom  edge  lies  north-east
and  south-west.  Lastly,  keeping  the  book  in  the  plane  to  which
it  has  been  thus  brought,  I  turn  it  round  in  this  plane  through  35°.
These  three  angles  of  20°,  45°,  and  35°  specify,  with  reference  to
the  horizontal  plane  of  the  table  and  the  east  and  west  line  in  it,
the  orientation  of  the  book  in  the  position  to  which  you  have  seen
me  bring  it,  and  in  which  I  hold  it  before  you.

§  11.  In  figs.  5  and  6  you  see  two  assemblages,  each  of
twelve  equal  and  similar  molecules  in  a  plane.  Fig.  5,  in  which
the  molecules  are  all same-ways  oriented,  is  one  homogeneous

Fig.  5.

HOMOGENEOUS ASSEMBLAGE OF SYMMETRICAL DOUBLETS. 609

assemblage  of  twenty-four  molecules.  Fig.  6,  in  which  in  one  set
of  rows  the  molecules  are  alternately  oriented  two  different  ways,
may  either  be  regarded  as  two  homogeneous  assemblages,  each  of
twelve  single  molecules ;  or  one  homogeneous  assemblage  of  twelve
pairs  of  those  single  molecules.

Fig.  6.

I  12.  I  must  now  call  your  attention  to  a  purely  geometrical
question*  of  vital  interest  with  respect  to  homogeneous  assemblages
in  general,  and  particularly  the  homogeneous  assemblage  of  mole-
cules constituting  a  crystal : — what  can  ive  take  as  '  the '  boundary
or  '  a '  boundary  enclosing  each  molecule  with  whatever  portion  of
sjKice  around  it  we  are  at  liberty  to  choose  for  it,  and  separating  it
from  neighbours  and  their  j^ortions  of  space  given  to  them  in  homo-
geneous fairness  ?

§  13.  If  we  had  only  mathematical  points  to  consider  we
should  be  at  liberty  to  choose  the  simple  obvious  partitioning  by
three  sets  of  parallel  planes. Even  this  may  be  done  in  an  infinite

*  "  On  the  Homogeneous  Division  of  Space,"  by  Lord  Kelvin,  Royal  Society
Proceedings,  VoL  lv.,  Jan.  18,  1894.

T.  L.  39

610  APPENDIX H.

number  of  ways,  thus : — Beginning  with  any  point  P  of  the
assemblage,  choose  any  other  three  points  A,  B,  G,  far  or  near,
provided  only  that  they  are  not  in  one  plane  with  P,  and  that
there  is  no  other  point  of  the  assemblage  in  the  lines  PA,  PB,  PC,
or  within  the  volume  of  the  parallelepiped  of  which  these  lines  are
conterminous  edges,  or  within  the  areas  of  any  of  the  faces  of  this
parallelepiped.  There  will  be  points  of  the  assemblage  at  each  of
the  corners  of  this  parallelepiped  and  at  all  the  corners  of  the
parallelepipeds  equal  and  similar  to  it  which  we  find  by  drawing
sets  of  equi-distant  planes  parallel  to  its  three  pairs  of  faces.
(A  diagram  is  unnecessary.)  Every  point  of  the  assemblage  is
thus  at  the  intersection  of  three  planes,  which  is  also  the  point
of  meeting  of  eight  neighbouring  parallelepipeds.  Shift  now  any
one  of  the  points  of  the  assemblage  to  a  position  within  the  volume
of  any  one  of  the  eight  parallelepipeds,  and  give  equal  parallel
motions  to  all  the  other  points  of  the  assemblage.  Thus  we  have
every  point  in  a  parallelepipedal  cell  of  its  own,  and  all  the  points
of  the  assemblage  are  similarly  placed  in  their  cells,  which  are
themselves  equal  and  similar.

§  14.  But  now  if,  instead  of  a  single  point  for  each  member
of  the  assemblage,  we  have  a  group  of  points,  or  a  globe  or  cube
or  other  geometrical  figure,  or  an  individual  of  a  homogeneous
assemblage  of  equal,  similar,  similarly  dressed,  and  similarly
oriented  ladies,  sitting  in  rows,  or  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of
trees  closely  planted  in  regular  geometrical  order  on  a  plane  with
equal  and  similar  distributions  of  molecules,  and  parallel  planes
above  and  below,  we  may  find  that  the  best  conditioned  plane-
faced  parallelepipedal  partitioning  which  we  can  choose  would  cut
off  portions  properly  belonging  to  one  molecule  of  the  assemblage
and  give  them  to  the  cells  of  neighbours.  To  find  a  cell  enclosing
all  that  belongs  to  each  individual,  for  example,  every  part  of  each
lady's  dress,  however  complexly  it  may  be  folded  among  portions
of  the  equal  and  similar  dresses  of  neighbours  ;  or,  every  twig,  leaf,
and  rootlet  of  each  one  of  the  homogeneous  assemblage  of  trees ;
we  must  alter  the  boundary  by  give-and-take  across  the  plane
faces  of  the  primitive  parallelepipedal  cells,  so  that  each  cell  shall
enclose  all  that  belongs  to  one  molecule,  and  therefore  (because
of  the  homogeneousness  of  the  partitioning)  nothing  belonging  to
any  other  molecule. The  geometrical  problem  thus  presented,

HOW  TO  DRAW  PARTITIONAL  BOUNDARY  IN  THREE  DIMENSIONS. 611

wonderfully  complex  as  it  may  be  in  cases  such  as  some  of  those
which  I  have  suggested,  is  easily  performed  for  any  possible  case
if  we  begin  with  any  particular  parallelepipedal  partitioning  deter-
mined for  corresponding  points  of  the  assemblage,  as  explained  in
§  13,  for  any  homogeneous  assemblage  of  single  points.  We  may
prescribe  to  ourselves  that  the  corners  are  to  remain  unchanged,
but  if  so  they  must  to  begin  with  be  either  in  interfaces  of  contact
between  the  individual  molecules,  or  in  vacant  space  among  the
molecules.  If  this  condition  is  fulfilled  for  one  corner  it  is  fulfilled
for  all,  as  the  corners  are  essentially  corresponding  points  relatively
to  the  assemblage.

§  1.5.  Begin  now  with  any  one  of  the  twelve  straight  lines
between  corners  which  constitute  the  twelve  edges  of  the  parallel-
epiped, and  alter  it  arbitrarily  to  any  curved  or  crooked  line  between
the  same  pair  of  corners,  subject  only  to  the  conditions  (1)  that  it
does  not  penetrate  the  substance  of  any  member  of  the  assemblage,
and  (2)  that  it  is  not  cut  by  equal  and  similar  parallel  curves*
between  other  pairs  of  corners.

Considering  now  the  three  fours  of  parallel  edges  of  the
parallelepiped,  let  the  straight  lines  of  one  set  of  four  be  altered
to  equal  and  similar  parallel  curves  in  the  manner  which  I  have
described  ;  and  proceed  by  the  same  rule  for  the  other  two  sets  of
four  edges.  We  thus  have  three  fours  of  parallel  curved  edges
instead  of  the  three  fours  of  parallel  straight  edges  of  our  primitive
parallelepiped  with  corners  (each  a  point  of  intersection  of  three
edges)  unchanged.  Take  now  the  quadrilateral  of  four  curves
substituted  for  the  four  straight  edges  of  one  face  of  the  parallel-
epiped. We  may  call  this  quadrilateral  a  curvilineal  parallelogram,
because  it  is  a  circuit  composed  of  two  pairs  of  equal  parallel
curves.  Draw  now  a  curved  surface  (an  infinitely  thin  sheet  of
perfectly  extensible  india-rubber  if  you  please  to  think  of  it  so)
bordered  by  the  four  edges  of  our  curvilineal  parallelogram,  and
so  shaped  as  not  to  cut  any  of  the  substance  of  any  molecule  of
the  assemblage.  Do  the  same  thing  with  an  exactly  similar  and
parallel  sheet  relatively  to  the  opposite  face  of  the  parallelepiped ;
and  again  the  same  for  each  of  the  two  other  pairs  of  parallel
faces. We  thus  have  a  curved-faced  parallelepiped  enclosing  the

*  Similar  curves  are  said  to  be  parallel  when  the  tangents  to  them  at  correspond-
ing points  are  parallel.

89—2

612

APPENDIX H.

whole  of  one  molecule  and  no  part  of  any  other ;  and  by  similar
procedure  we  find  a  similar  boundary  for  every  other  molecule
of  the  assemblage.  Each  wall  of  each  of  these  cells  is  common
to  two  neighbouring  molecules,  and  there  is  no  vacant  space  any-
where between  them  or  at  corners. Fig.  7  illustrates  this  kind  of

Fig.  7.

partitioning  by  showing  a  plane  section  parallel  to  one  pair  of
plane  faces  of  the  primitive  parallelepiped  for  an  ideal  case.  The
plane  diagram  is  in  fact  a  realization  of  the  two-dimensional
problem  of  partitioning  the  pine  pattern  of  a  Persian  carpet  by
parallelograms  about  as  nearly  rectilinear  as  we  can  make  them.
In  the  diagram  faint  straight  lines  are  drawn  to  show  the  primitive
parallelogrammatic  partitioning.  It  will  be  seen  that  of  all  the
crossings  (marked  with  dots  in  the  diagram)  every  one  is  similarly
situated  to  every  other  in  respect  to  the  homogeneously  repeated
pattern  figures :  A,  B,  C,  D  are  four  of  them  at  the  corners  of  one
cell.

§  16.  Confining  our  attention  for  a  short  time  to  the  homo-
geneous division  of  a  plane,  remark  that  the  division  into
parallelograms  by  two  sets  of  crossing  parallels  is  singular  in
this  respect — each  cell  is  contiguous  with  three  neighbours  at
every  corner. Any  shifting,  large  or  small,  of  the  parallelograms

PARTITIONAL  BOUNDARY  FOR  HOMOGENEOUS  PLANE  FIGURES. 613

by  relative  sliding  in  one  direction  or  another  violates  this  con-
dition, brings  us  to  a  configuration  like  that  of  the  faces  of
regularly  hewn  stones  in  ordinary  bonded  masonry,  and  gives
a  partitioning  which  fulfils  the  condition  that  at  each  corner
each  cell  has  only  two  neighbours.  Each  cell  is  now  virtually
a  hexagon,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F  in  the
diagram  fig.  8. A  and  D  are  to  be  reckoned  as  corners,  each

Fig.  8.

with  an  interior  angle  of  180°.  In  this  diagram  the  continuous
heavy  lines  and  the  continuous  faint  lines  crossing  them  show
a  primitive  parallelogrammatic  partition  by  two  sets  of  continuous
parallel  intersecting  lines.  The  interrupted  crossing  lines  (heavy)
show,  for  the  same  homogeneous  distribution  of  single  points  or
molecules,  the  virtually  hexagonal  partitioning  which  we  get  by
shifting  the  boundary  from  each  portion  of  one  of  the  light
lines  to  the  heavy  line  next  it  between  the  same  continuous
parallels.

Fig.  8  his  represents  a  further  modification  of  the  boundary
by  which  the  180°  angles  A,  D  become  angles  of  less  than  180°.
The  continuous  parallel  lines  (light)  and  the  short  light  portions
of  the  crossing  lines  show  the  configuration  according  to  fig.  8,
from  which  this  diagram  is  derived.

§  17.  In  these  diagrams  (figures  8  and  8  bis)  the  object
enclosed  is  small  enough  to  be  enclosable  by  a  primitive  parallelo-
grammatic partitioning  of  two  sets  of  continuous  crossing  parallel
straight  lines,  and  by  the  partitioning  of  '  bonded '  parallelograms
both  represented  in  fig.  8,  and  by  the  derived  hexagonal  partition-

614

APPENDIX H.

ing  represented  in  fig.  8  his,  with  faint  lines  showing  the  primitive
and  the  secondary  parallelograms.  In  fig.  7  the  objects  enclosed
were  too  large  to  be  enclosable  by  any  rectilinear  parallelogram -

Fig.  8  Ms.

matic  or  hexagonal  partitioning.  The  two  sets  of  parallel  faint
lines  in  fig.  7  show  a  primitive  parallelogram  matic  partitioning,
and  the  corresponding  pairs  of  parallel  curves  intersecting  at  the
corners  of  these  parallelograms,  of  which  A,  B,  C,  D  is  a  specimen,
show  a  corresponding  partitioning  by  curvilineal  parallelograms.

Fig.  9.

Fig.  9  shows  for  the  same  homogeneous  distribution  of  objects
a  better  conditioned  partitioning  by  hexagons,  in  each  of  which
one pair  of  parallel  edges  is curved. The  sets  of  intersecting

HOMOGENEOUS  ASSEMBLAGE  OF  TETRAK AIDER AHEDRONAL  CELLS.  615

parallel  straight  lines  in  fig.  9  show  the  same  primitive  parallelo-
grammatic  partitioning  as  in  fig.  7,  and  the  same  slightly  shifted
to  suit  points  chosen  for  well-conditionedness  of  hexagonal  par-
titioning.

§  18.  For  the  division  of  continuous  three-dimensional  space*
into  equal,  similar,  and  similarly  oriented  cells,  quite  a  correspond-
ing transformation  from  partitioning  by  three  sets  of  continuous
mutually  intersecting  parallel  planes  to  any  possible  mode  of
homogeneous  partitioning,  may  be  investigated  by  working  out
the  three-dimensional  analogue  of  §§  16 — 17.  Thus  we  find  that
the  most  general  possible  homogeneous  partitioning  of  space  with
plane  interfaces  between  the  cells  gives  us  fourteen  walls  to  each
cell,  of  which  six  are  three  pairs  of  equal  and  parallel  parallelo-
grams, and  the  other  eight  are  four  pairs  of  equal  and  parallel
hexagons,  each  hexagon  being  bounded  by  three  pairs  of  equal
and  parallel  straight  lines.  This  figure,  being  bounded  by  four-
teen plane  faces,  is  called  a  tetrakaidekahedron.  It  has  thirty-six
edges  of  intersection  between  faces ;  and  twenty-four  corners,  in
each  of  which  three  faces  intersect.  A  particular  case  of  it,  which
I  call  an  orthic  tetrakaidekahedron,  being  that  in  which  the  six
parallelograms  are  equal  squares,  the  eight  hexagonal  faces  are
equal  equilateral  and  equiangular  hexagons,  and  the  lines  joining
corresponding  points  in  the  seven  pairs  of  parallel  faces  are
perpendicular  to  the  planes  of  the  faces,  is  represented  by  a
stereoscopic  picture  in  fig.  10.  The  thirty-six  edges  and  the
twenty-four  corners,  which  are  easily  counted  in  this  diagram,
occur  in  the  same  relative  order  in  the  most  general  possible
partitioning,  whether  by  plane-faced  tetrakaidekahedrons  or  by
the  generalized  tetrakaidekahedron  described  in  §  19.

I  19.  The  most  general  homogeneous  division  of  space  is  not
limited  to  plane-faced  cells ;  but  it  still  consists  essentially  of
tetrakaidekahedronal  cells,  each  bounded  by  three  pairs  of  equal
and  parallel  quadrilateral  faces,  and  four  pairs  of  equal  and
parallel  hexagonal  faces,  neither  the  quadrilaterals  nor  the
hexagons  being  necessarily  plane.  Each  of  the  thirty-six  edges
may  be  straight  or  crooked  or  curved  ;  the  pairs  of  opposite  edges,
whether  of  the  quadrilaterals  or  hexagons,  need  not  be  equal  and

*  See  footnote  to  §  12  above.

616

APPENDIX H.

parallel ;  neither  the  four  corners  of  each  quadrilateral  nor  the  six
corners  of  each  hexagon  need  be  in  one  plane.  But  every  pair  of
corresponding  edges  of  every  pair  of  parallel  corresponding  faces,

EQUIVOLUMINAL CELLS WITH MINIMUM PARTITIONAL AREA. 617

whether  quadrilateral  or  hexagonal,  must  be  equal  and  parallel.
I  have  described  an  interesting  case  of  partitioning  by  tetrakai-
dekahedrons  of  curved  faces  with  curved  edges  in  a  paper*
published  about  seven  years  ago.  In  this  case  each  of  the
quadrilateral  faces  is  plane.  Each  hexagonal  face  is  a  slightly
curved  surface  having  three  rectilineal  diagonals  through  its
centre  in  one  plane.  The  six  sectors  of  the  face  between  these
diagonals  lie  alternately  on  opposite  sides  of  their  plane,  and  are
bordered  by  six  arcs  of  plane  curves  lying  on  three  pairs  of  parallel
planes.  This  tetrakaidekahedronal  partitioning  fulfils  the  con-
dition that  the  angles  between  three  faces  meeting  in  an  edge  are
everywhere  each  120°;  a  condition  that  cannot  be  fulfilled  in  any
plane-faced  tetrakaidekahedron.  Each  hexagonal  wall  is  an  anti-
clastic  surface  of  equal  opposite  curvatures  at  every  point,  being
the  surface  of  minimum  area  bordered  by  six  curved  edges.  It
is  shown  easily  and  beautifully,  and  with  a  fair  approach  to
accuracy,  by  choosing  six  little  circular  arcs  of  wire,  and  soldering
them  together  by  their  ends  in  proper  planes  for  the  six  edges
of  the  hexagon ;  and  dipping  it  in  soap  solution  and  taking
it  out.

§  20.  Returning  now  to  the  tactics  of  a  homogeneous  assem-
blage remark  that  the  qualities  of  the  assemblage  as  a  whole
depend  both  upon  the  character  and  orientation  of  each  molecule,
and  on  the  character  of  the  homogeneous  assemblage  formed  by
corresponding  points  of  the  molecules.  After  learning  the  simple
mathematics  of  crystallography,  with  its  indicial  system  j-  for
defining  the  faces  and  edges  of  a  crystal  according  to  the  Bravais
rows  and  nets  and  tetrahedrons  of  molecules  in  which  we  think
only  of  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  points,  we  are  apt  to  forget
that  the  true  crystalline  molecule,  whatever  its  nature  may  be,
has  sides,  and  that  generally  two  opposite  sides  of  each  molecule
may  be  expected  to  be  very  different  in  quality,  and  we  are  almost
surprised  when  mineralogists  tell  us  that  two  parallel  faces  on  two
sides  of  a  crystal  have  very  different  qualities  in  many  natural
crystals.  We  might  almost  as  well  be  surprised  to  find  that  an
army  in  battle  array,  which  is  a  kind  of  large-grained  crystal,

*  "On  the  Division  of  Space  with  Minimum  Partitional  Area,"  Philosophical
Magazine,  Vol.  xxiv.,  1887,  p.  502,  and  Acta  Mathematica  of  the  same  year.

t  A.  Levy,  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Journal,  April,  1822 ;  Whewell,  Phil.  Trans.
Royal  Society,  1825  ;  Miller,  Treatise  on  Crystallography.

618  APPENDIX H.

presents  very  different  appearance  to  anyone  looking  at  it  from
outside,  according  as  every  man  in  the  ranks  with  his  rifle  and
bayonet  faces  to  the  front  or  to  the  rear  or  to  one  flank  or  to  the
other.

§  21.  Consider,  for  example,  the  ideal  case  of  a  crystal  consist-
ing of  hard,  equal  and  similar  tetrahedronal  solids  all  same-ways
oriented.  A  thin  plate  of  crystal  cut  parallel  to  any  one  set  of  the
faces  of  the  constituent  tetrahedrons  would  have  very  different
properties  on  its  two  sides ;  as  the  constituent  molecules  would  all
present  points  outwards  on  one  side  and  flat  surfaces  on  the  other.
We  might  expect  that  the  two  sides  of  such  a  plate  of  crystal
would  become  oppositely  electrified  when  rubbed  by  one  and  the
same  rubber;  and,  remembering  that  a  piece  of  glass  with  part  of
its  surface  finely  ground  but  not  polished  and  other  parts  polished
becomes,  when  rubbed  with  white  silk,  positively  electrified  over
the  polished  parts  and  negatively  electrified  over  the  non-polished
parts,  we  might  almost  expect  that  the  side  of  our  supposed
crystalline  plate  towards  which  flat  faces  of  the  constituent
molecules  are  turned  would  become  positively  electrified,  and
the  opposite  side,  showing  free  molecular  corners,  would  become
negatively  electrified,  when  both  are  rubbed  by  a  rubber  of
intermediate  electric  quality.  We  might  also  from  elementary
knowledge  of  the  fact  of  piezo-electricity,  that  is  to  say,  the
development  of  opposite  electricities  on  the  two  sides  of  a  crystal
by  pressure,  expect  that  our  supposed  crystalline  plate,  if  pressed
perpendicularly  on  its  two  sides,  would  become  positively  electrified
on  one  of  them  and  negatively  on  the  other.

§  22.  Intimately  connected  with  the  subject  of  enclosing  cells
for  molecules  of  given  shape,  assembled  homogeneously,  is  the
homogeneous  packing  together  of  equal  and  similar  molecules
of  any  given  shape.  In  every  possible  case  of  any  infinitely  great
number  of  similar  bodies  the  solution  is  a  homogeneous  assem-
blage. But  it  may  be  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  single  solids
all  oriented  the  same  way,  or  it  may  be  a  homogeneous  assemblage
of  clusters  of  two  or  more  of  them  placed  together  in  different
orientations.  For  example,  let  the  given  bodies  be  halves  (oblique
or  not  oblique)  of  any  parallelepiped  on  the  two  sides  of  a  dividing
plane  through  a  pair  of  parallel  edges. The  two  halves  are  homo-

CASE OF SINGLE CONTACT BETWEEN NEIGHBOURS.

619

chirally*  similar;  and,  being  equal,  we  may  make  a  homogeneous
assemblage  of  them  by  orienting  them  all  the  same  way  and
placing  them  properly  in  rows.  But  the  closest  packing  of  this
assemblage  would  necessarily  leave  vacant  spaces  between  the
bodies :  and  we  get  in  reality  the  closest  possible  packing  of  the
given  bodies  by  taking  them  in  pairs  oppositely  oriented  and
placed  together  to  form  parallelepipeds.  These  clusters  may  be
packed  together  so  as  to  leave  no  unoccupied  space.

Whatever  the  number  of  pieces  in  a  cluster  in  the  closest
possible  packing  of  solids  may  be  for  any  particular  shape  we
may  consider  each  cluster  as  itself  a  given  single  body,  and
thus  reduce  the  problem  to  the  packing  closely  together  of
assemblages  of  individuals  all  same-ways  oriented ;  and  to  this
problem  therefore  it  is  convenient  that  we  should  now  confine  our
attention.

§  23.  To  avoid  complexities,  such  as  those  which  we  find  in
the  familiar  problem  of  homogeneous  packing  of
forks  or  spoons  or  tea-cups  or  bowls  of  any  ordinary
shape,  we  shall  suppose  the  given  body  to  be  of  such
shape  that  no  two  of  them  similarly  oriented  can
touch  one  another  in  more  than  one  point.  Wholly
convex  bodies  essentially  fulfil  this  condition ;  but  it
may  also  be  fulfilled  by  bodies  not  wholly  convex,  as
is  illustrated  in  fig-.  11.

§  24.  To  find  close  and  closest  packing  of  any
number  of  our  solids  *S^i,  Sn,  S-^...  of  shape  fulfilling
the  condition  of  §  23  proceed  thus  : —

(1)  Bring  So  to  touch  Si  at  any  chosen  point  jj
of  its  surface  (fig.  12).

(2)  Bring  S3  to touch Si  and S.,  at  r and q  ^^'
respectively.

(3)  Bring  >S'4  (not  shown  in the  diagram)  to  touch  ^1,  So,
and  >S^o.

*  I  call  any  geometrical  figure,  or  group  of  points,  chiral,  and  say  that  it  has
chirality  if  its  image  in  a  plane  mirror,  ideally  realized,  cannot  be  brought  to
coincide  with  itself.  Two  equal  and  similar  right  hands  are  homochirally  similar.
Equal  and  similar  right  and  left  hands  are  heterochirally  similar  or  '  allochirally '
similar  (but  heterochirally  is  better).  These  are  also  called  '  enantiomorphs,'  after
a  usage  introduced,  I  believe,  by  German  writers.  Any  chiral  object  and  its  image
in  a  plane  mirror  are  heterochirally  similar.

620

APPENDIX H.

(4)  Place  any  number  of  the  bodies  together  in  three  rows
continuing  the  lines  of  S1S.2,  S^Ss,  S^S^,  and  in  three  sets  of
equi-distant  rows  parallel  to  these.  This  makes  a  homogeneous
assemblage.  In  the  assemblage  so  formed  the  molecules  are
necessarily  found  to  be  in  three  sets  of  rows  parallel  respectively
to  the  three  pairs  SoS^,  8^84,  8^82.  The  whole  space  occupied  by
an  assemblage  of  n  of  our  solids  thus  arranged  has  clearly  6n  times
the  volume  of  a  tetrahedron  of  corresponding  points  of  81,  82,
83,  84.  Hence  the  closest  of  the  close  packings  obtained  by
the  operations  (1)...(4)  is  found  if  we  perform  the  operations
(1),  (2),  and  (3)  as  to  make  the  volume  of  this  tetrahedron  least
possible.

§  25.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  operations  (1)  and  (2)  leave
for  (3)  no  liberty  of  choice  for  the  place  of  84,  except  between  two
determinate  positions  on  opposite  sides  of  the  group  8^,  82,  83.

Fig.  12.

The  volume  of  the  tetrahedron  will  generally  be  different  for  these
two  positions  of  ^4,  and,  even  if  the  volume  chance  to  be  equal  in
any  case,  we  have  differently  shaped  assemblages  according  as  we
choose  one  or  other  of  the  two  places  for  >Si4.

This  will  be  understood  by  looking  at  fig.  12,  showing  81  and
neighbours  on  each  side  of  it  in  the  rows  of  8^82,  8183,  and  in  a
row  parallel  to  that  of  82S3.  The  plane  of  the  diagram  is  parallel
to  the  planes  of  corresponding  points  of  these  seven  bodies,  and
the  diagram  is  a  projection  of  these  bodies  by  lines  parallel  to  the
intersections  of  the  tangent  planes  through  p  and  r.  If  the  three
tangent  planes  through  p,  q,  and  r,  intersected  in  parallel  lines,
q  would  be  seen  like  p  and  r  as  a  point  of  contact  between  the
outlines  of  two  of  the  bodies ;  but  this  is  only  a  particular  case,

SCALENE CONVEX SOLIDS HOMOGENEOUSLY ASSEMBLED. 621

and  in  general  q  must,  as  indicated  in  the  diagi-am,  be  concealed
by  one  or  other  of  the  two  bodies  of  which  it  is  the  point  of
contact.  Now  imagining,  to  fix  our  ideas  and  facilitate  brevity
of  expression,  that  the  planes  of  corresponding  points  of  the  seven
bodies  are  horizontal,  we  see  clearly  that  >§,  may  be  brought  into
proper  position  to  touch  *S*i,  S^  and  >S^3  either  from  above  or  from
below ;  and  that  there  is  one  determinate  place  for  it  if  we  bring
it  into  position  from  above,  and  another  determinate  place  for  it
if  we  bring  it  from  below.

I  26.  If  we  look  from  above  at  the  solids  of  which  fig.  12
shows  the  outline  we  see  essentially  a  hollow  leading  down  to
a  perforation  between  8i,  S^,  S3,  and  if  Ave  look  from  below  we  see
a  hollow  leading  upwards  to  the  same  perforation  :  this  for  brevity
we  shall  call  the  perforation  pqi:  The  diagram  shows  around  Si
six  hollows  leading  down  to  perforations,  of  which  two  are  similar
to  pqi%  and  the  other  three,  of  which  p'q'r'  indicates  one,  are  similar
one  to  another  but  are  dissimilar  to  pqr.  If  we  bring  ^4  from
above  into  position  to  touch  S^,  S2  and  S3,  its  place  thus  found  is
in  the  hollow  pq7-,  and  the  places  of  all  the  solids  in  the  layer
above  that  of  the  diagram  are  necessarily  in  the  hollows  similar  to
pqr.  In  this  case  the  solids  in  the  layer  below  that  of  the  diagram
must  lie  in  the  hollows  below  the  perforations  dissimilar  to  pqr,  in
order  to  make  a  single  homogeneous  assemblage.  In  the  other
case  S^  brought  up  from  below  finds  its  place  on  the  under  side  of
the  hollow  pqr,  and  all  solids  of  the  lower  layer  find  similar  places  :
while  solids  in  the  layer  above  that  of  the  diagram  find  their
places  in  the  hollows  similar  to  p'q'r .  In  the  first  case  there  are
no  bodies  of  the  upper  layer  in  the  hollows  above  the  perforations
similar  to  p)'q'r',  and  no  bodies  of  the  lower  layer  in  the  hollows
below  the  perforations  similar  to  p>qr.  In  the  second  case  there
are  no  bodies  of  the  upper  layer  in  the  hollows  above  the  perfora-
tions similar  to  pqr,  and  none  of  the  under  layer  in  the  hollows
below  the  perforations  similar  to  p'q'r'.

§  27.  Going  back  now  to  operation  (1)  of  §  24,  remark  that
when  the  point  of  contact  ])  is  arbitrarily  chosen  on  one  of  the  two
bodies  Si,  the  point  of  contact  on  the  other  will  be  the  point  on  it
corresponding  to  the  point  or  one  of  the  points  of  Si,  where  its
tangent  plane  is  parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  at  p. If  Si  is  wholly

622  APPENDIX H.

convex  it  has  only  two  points  at  which  the  tangent  planes  are
parallel  to  a  given  plane,  and  therefore  the  operation  (1)  is  deter-
minate and  unambiguous.  But  if  there  is  any  concavity  there
will  be  four  or  some  greater  even  number  of  tangent  planes
parallel  to  any  one  of  some  planes,  while  there  will  be  other
planes  to  each  of  which  only  one  pair  of  tangent  planes  is  parallel.
Hence,  operation  (1),  though  still  determinate,  will  have  a  multi-
plicity of  solutions,  or  only  a  single  solution,  according  to  the
choice  made  of  the  position  of  j^-  [-^ny  change  of  configuration
of  the  assemblage  in  stable  equilibrium  causes  expansion  !  K. ;
Holwood,  May  23,  1896.]

Henceforth,  however,  to  avoid  needless  complications  of  ideas,
we  shall  suppose  our  solids  to  be  wholly  convex ;  and  of  some  such
unsymmetrical  shape  as  those  indicated  in  fig.  12  of  §  25,  and
shown  by  stereoscopic  photograph  in  fig.  13  of  §  36.  With  or
without  this  convenient  limitation,  operation  (1)  has  two  freedoms,
as  j9  may  be  chosen  freely  on  the  surface  of  8i ;  and  operation  (2)
has  clearly  just  one  freedom  after  operation  (1)  has  been  performed.
Thus,  for  a  solid  of  any  given  shape,  we  have  three  disposables,  or,
as  commonly  called  in  mathematics,  three  '  independent  variables,'
all  free  for  making  a  homogeneous  assemblage  according  to  the
rule  of  §22*.

*  The  following  is  information  regarding  ratio  of  void  to  whole  space  in  heaps
of  gravel,  sand,  and  broken  stones,  extracted  from  books  of  reference  for  engineers  :

Hurst's  Focket-Book.
Thames  Ballast  20  cub.  ft.  per  ton
Gravel  coarse 19 ,, ,,
Sandpit  22 ,,

Shingle  23

Haswell's  Pocket-Book.
Voids  in  a  cub.  yard  of  Stone  broken  to  gauge  of  2-5"  10 cub.  ft.

2" 10-66 „

1-5"  11-33 „

Shingle  9  ,,

Thames  Ballast  (containing  sand)  4-5 ,,

Law  and  Burrell's  Civil  Engineering.
(Road  Metal.)
"  A  cub.  yard  of  broken  stone  metal  of  an  ordinary  size — 2"  or  2^"  cube — when
"  screened  and  beaten  down  in  regular  layers  6"  thick  contains.  ..11  cub.  ft.  of  inter-
"  spaces,  as  tested  by  filling  up  the  metal  with  liquid.". ..Herr  E.  Bokeberg  found
that  in  a  cubic  yard  of  loosely  heaped  broken  stones  the  void  space  was  50  °/g  of
the  whole.

ORIENTATION OF MOLECULES FOR CLOSEST PACKING. 623

§  28.  In  the  homogeneous  assemblage  defined  in  §  24  each
solid,  St^,  is  touched  at  twelve  points,  being  the  three  points  of
contact  with  >S2,  83,84,  and  the  three  3's  of  points  on  S^  correspond-
ing to  the  points  on  8^,  83,  8i,-Sit  which  these  bodies  are  touched
by  the  others  of  the  quartet.  This  statement  is  somewhat  difficult
to  follow,  and  we  see  more  clearly  the  twelve  points  of  contact  by
not  confining  our  attention  to  the  quartet  81,  82,  S3,  84  (convenient
as  this  is  for  some  purposes),  but  completing  the  assemblage  and
considering  six  neighbours  around  Si  in  one  plane  layer  of  the
solids  as  shown  in  fig.  12,  with  their  six  points  pr-q'p'r'q"  of
contact  with  8^ ;  and  the  three  neighbours  of  the  two  adjacent
parallel  layers  which  touch  it  above  and  below.  This  cluster
of  thii-teen,  8^  and  twelve  neighbours,  is  shown  for  the  case  of
spherical  bodies  in  the  stereoscopic  photograph  of  §  4  above.  We
might  of  course,  if  we  pleased,  have  begun  with  the  plane  layer  of
which  81,  8.,,  8^  are  members,  or  with  that  of  which  8^,  83,  84  are
members,  or  with  the  plane  layer  parallel  to  the  fourth  side  S.28384
of  the  tetrahedron:  and  thus  we  have  four  different  ways  of
grouping  the  twelve  points  of  contact  on  >S^i  into  one  set  of  six  and
two  sets  of  three.

§  29.  In  this  assemblage  we  have  what  I  call  '  close  order '  or
'  close  packing.'  For  closest  of  close  packings  the  volume  of  the
tetrahedron  (§  24)  of  corresponding  points  of  >S^j,  82,  S3,  and  84
must  be  a  minimum,  and  the  least  of  minimums  if,  as  generally
will  be  the  case,  there  are  two  more  different  configurations  for
each  of  which  the  volume  is  a  minimum.  There  will  in  general
also  be  configurations  of  minimax  volume  and  of  maximum  volume,
subject  to  the  condition  that  each  body  is  touched  by  twelve
similarly  oriented  neighbours.

§  30.  Pause  for  a  moment  to  consider  the  interesting  kine-
matical  and  dynamical  problems  presented  by  a  close  homogeneous
assemblage  of  smooth  solid  bodies  of  given  convex  shape,  whether
perfectly  frictionless  or  exerting  resistance  against  mutual  sliding
according  to  the  ordinarily  stated  law  of  friction  between  dry  hard
\golid  bodies.  First  imagine  that  they  are  all  similarly  oriented
/and  each  in  contact  with  twelve  neighbours,  except  outlying
individuals  (which  there  must  be  at  the  boundary  if  the  assem-
blage is  finite,  and  each  of  which  is  touched  by  some  number  of
neighbours  less than tAvelve). The coherent assemblage  thus

624  APPENDIX H,

defined  constitutes  a  kinematic  frame  or  skeleton  for  an  elastic
solid  of  very  peculiar  properties.  Instead  of  the  six  freedoms,  or
disposables,  of  strain  presented  by  a  natural  solid  it  has  only
three.  Change  of  shape  of  the  whole  can  only  take  place  in
virtue  of  rotation  of  the  constituent  parts  relatively  to  any  one
chosen  row  of  them,  and  the  plane  through  it  and  another  chosen
row.

§  31.  Suppose  first  the  solids  to  be  not  only  perfectly  smooth
but  perfectly  frictionless.  Let  the  assemblage  be  subjected  to
equal  positive  or  negative  pressure  inwards  all  around  its  boundary.
Every  position  of  minimum,  minimax,  or  maximum  volume  will
be  a  position  of  equilibrium.  If  the  pressure  is  positive  the
equilibrium  will  be  stable  if,  and  unstable  unless,  the  volume  is
a  minimum.  If  the  pressure  is  negative  the  equilibrium  will  be
stable  if,  and  unstable  unless,  the  volume  is  a  maximum.  Con-
figurations of  minimax  volume  will  be  essentially  unstable.

§  32.  Consider  now  the  assemblage  of  §  31  in  a  position  of
stable  equilibrium  under  the  influence  of  a  given  constant  uniform
pressure  inwards  all  round  its  boundary.  It  will  have  rigidity  in
simple  proportion  to  the  amount  of  this  pressure.  If  now  by
the  superposition  of  non-uniform  pressure  at  the  boundary,  for
example  equal  and  opposite  pressures  on  two  sides  of  the  assem-
blage, a  finite  change  of  shape  is  produced :  the  whole  assemblage
essentially  swells  in  bulk.  This  is  the  '  dilatancy  '  which  Osborne
Reynolds  has  described*  in  an  exceedingly  interesting  manner
with  reference  to  a  sack  of  wheat  or  sand,  or  an  india-rubber  bag
tightly  filled  with  sand  or  even  small  shot.  Consider,  for  example,
a  sack  of  wheat  filled  quite  full  and  standing  up  open.  It  is  limp
and  flexible.  Now  shake  it  down  well,  fill  it  quite  full,  shake
again,  so  as  to  get  as  much  into  it  as  possible,  and  tie  the  mouth
very  tightly  close.  The  sack  becomes  almost  as  stiff  as  a  log  of
wood  of  the  same  shape.  Open  the  mouth  partially  and  it  be-
comes again  limp,  especially  in  the  upper  parts  of  the  bag.  In
Reynolds'  observations  on  india-rubber  bags  of  small  shot  his
*  dilatancy '  depends,  essentially  and  wholly,  on  breaches  of  some
of  the  contacts  which  exist  between  the  molecules  in  their  configu-
ration of  minimum  volume :  and  it  is  possible  that  in  all  his  cases

*  Philosophical  Magazine,  Vol.  xx.,  1885,  second  balf-year,  p.  469,  and  British
Association  Report,  1885,  Aberdeen,  p.  896,

WET SAND WHITENED BY PRESSURE OF GLASS PLATE, 625

the  dilatations  which  he  observed  are  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  due  to
such  breaches  of  contact.

But  it  is  possible,  it  almost  seems  probable,  that  in  bags  or
boxes  of  sand  or  powder,  of  some  kinds  of  smooth  rounded  bodies
of  any  shape,  not  spherical  or  ellipsoidal,  subjected  persistently  to
unequal  pressures  in  different  directions,  and  well  shaken,  stable
positions  of  equilibrium  are  found  with  almost  all  the  particles
each  touched  by  twelve  others.

Here  is  a  curious  subject  of  Natural  History  through  all  ages
till  1885,  when  Reynolds  brought  it  into  the  province  of  Natural
Philosophy  by  the  following  highly  interesting  statement : —
"A  well-marked  phenomenon  receives  its  explanation  at  once
"  from  the  existence  of  dilatancy  in  sand.  When  the  falling  tide
"  leaves  the  sand  firm,  as  the  foot  falls  on  it,  the  sand  whitens  and
"  appears  momentarily  to  dry  round  the  foot.  When  this  happens
"  the  sand  is  full  of  water,  the  surface  of  which  is  kept  up  to  that
"of  the  sand  by  capillary  attractions;  the  pressure  of  the  foot
"  causing  dilatation  of  the  sand  more  water  is  required,  which  has
"  to  be  obtained  either  by  depressing  the  level  of  the  surface
"against  the  capillary  attractions,  or  by  drawing  water  through
"  the  interstices  of  the  surrounding  sand.  This  latter  requires
"  time  to  accomplish,  so  that  for  the  moment  the  capillary  forces
"  are  overcome ;  the  surface  of  the  water  is  lowered  below  that  of
"the  sand,  leaving  the  latter  white  or  drier  until  a  sufficient
"  supply  has  been  obtained  from  below,  when  the  surface  rises  and
"  wets  the  sand  again.  On  raising  the  foot  it  is  generally  seen
"  that  the  sand  under  the  foot  and  around  becomes  momentarily
"  wet ;  this  is  because,  on  the  distorting  forces  being  removed,  the
"  sand  again  contracts,  and  the  excess  of  water  finds  momentary
"  relief  at  the  surface."

This  proves  that  the  sand  under  the  foot,  as  well  as  the  surface
around  it,  must  be  dry  for  a  short  time  after  the  foot  is  pressed
upon  it,  though  we  cannot  see  it  whitened,  as  the  foot  is  not
transparent.  That  it  is  so  has  been  verified  by  Mr  Alex.  Gait,
Experimental  Instructor  in  the  Physical  Laboratory  of  Glasgow
University,  by  laying  a  small  square  of  plate-glass  on  wet  sand  on
the  sea-shore  of  Helensburgh,  and  suddenly  pressing  on  it  by  a
stout  stick  with  nearly  all  his  weight.  He  found  the  sand,  both
under  the  glass  and  around  it  in  contact  with  the  air,  all  became
white  at  the  same  moment. Of  all  the  two  hundred  thousand

T.  L.  40

626  APPENDIX H.

million  men,  women,  and  children  who,  from  the  beginning  of  the
world,  have  ever  walked  on  wet  sand,  how  many,  prior  to  the
British  Association  Meeting  at  Aberdeen  in  1885,  if  asked,  "Is  the
sand  compressed  under  your  foot  ? "  would  have  answered  otherwise
than  "  Yes  ! "  ?

(Contrast  with  this  the  case  of  walking  over  a  bed  of  wet
sea-Aveed !)

§  33.  In  the  case  of  globes  packed  together  in  closest  order
(and  therefore  also  in  the  case  of  ellipsoids,  if  all  similarly  oriented),
our  condition  of  coherent  contact  between  each  molecule  and
twelve  neighbours  implies  absolute  rigidity  of  form  and  constancy
of  bulk.  Hence  our  convex  solid  must  be  neither  ellipsoidal  nor
spherical  in  order  that  there  may  be  the  changes  of  bulk  which
we  have  been  considering  as  dependent  on  three  independent
variables  specifying  the  orientation  of  each  solid  relatively  to  rows
of  the  assemblage.  An  interesting  dynamical  problem  is  presented
by  supposing  any  mutual  forces,  such  as  might  be  produced  by
springs,  to  act  between  the  solid  molecules,  and  investigating
configurations  of  equilibrium  on  the  supposition  of  frictionless
contacts.  The  solution  of  it  of  course  is  that  the  potential  energy
of  the  springs  must  be  a  minimum  or  a  minimax  or  a  maximum
for  equilibrium,  and  a  minimum  for  stable  equilibrium.  The
solution  will  be  a  configuration  of  minimum  or  minimax,  or
maximum,  volume,  only  in  the  case  of  pressure  equal  in  all
directions.

§  34.  A  purely  geometrical  question,  of  no  importance  in
respect  to  the  molecular  tactics  of  a  cr3^stal  but  of  considerable
interest  in  pure  mathematics,  is  forced  on  our  attention  by  our
having  seen  (§  27)  that  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  solids  of
given  shape,  each  touched  by  twelve  neighbours,  has  three  freedoms
which  may  be  conveniently  taken  as  the  three  angles  specifying
the  orientation  of  each  molecule  relatively  to  rows  of  the  assemblage
as  explained  in  §  30.

Consider  a  solid  8^  and  the  twelve  neighbours  which  touch  it,
and  try  if  it  is  possible  to  cause  it  to  touch  more  than  twelve  of
the  bodies.  Attach  ends  of  three  thick  flexible  wires  to  any  places
on  the  surface  of  S^ ;  carry  the  wires  through  interstices  of  the
assemblage,  and  attach  their  other  ends  at  any  three  places  of
A,  B,  G,  respectively,  these  being  any  three  of  the  bodies  outside

GEOMETRICAL  PROBLEM  OF  EACH  SOLID  TOUCHED  BY  EIGHTEEN. 627

the  cluster  of  8^  and  its  twelve  neighbours.  Cut  the  wires  across
at  any  chosen  positions  in  them ;  and  round  off  the  cut  ends,  just
leaving  contact  between  the  rounded  ends,  which  we  shall  call
/y,  g'g,  h'h.  Do  homogeneously  for  every  other  solid  of  the
assemblage  what  we  have  done  for  S^.  Now  bend  the  wires
slightly  so  as  to  separate  the  pairs  of  points  of  contact,  taking
care  to  keep  them  from  touching  any  other  bodies  which  they
pass  near  on  their  courses  between  ^i  and  A,  B,  G  respectively.
After  having  done  this,  thoroughly  rigidify  all  the  wires  thus
altered.  We  may  now,  having  three  independent  variables  at
our  disposal,  so  change  the  orientation  of  the  molecules  relatively
to  rows  of  the  assemblage,  as  to  bring  f'J,  g'g,  and  h'h  again  into
contact.  We  have  thus  six  fresh  points  of  S^ ;  of  which  three  are
f,  g ,  h' ;  and  the  other  three  are  on  the  three  extensions  of  Si
corresponding  to  the  single  extensions  oi  A,  B,  G  respectively,
which  we  have  been  making.  Thus  Ave  have  a  real  solution  of
the  interesting  geometrical  problem  : — It  is  required  so  to  form
a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  solids  of  any  arbitrarily  given  shape
that  each  solid  shall  be  touched  by  eighteen  others.  This  problem
is  determinate,  because  the  making  of  the  three  contacts  /'/,  g'g,
h'h,  uses  up  the  three  independent  variables  left  at  our  disposal
after  we  have  first  formed  a  homogeneous  assemblage  Avith  twelve
points  of  contact  on  each  solid.  But  our  manner  of  finding  a  shape
for  each  solid  which  can  allow  the  solution  of  the  problem  to  be
real  proves  that  the  solution  is  essentially  imaginary  for  every
wholly  convex  shape.

§  35.  Pausing  for  a  moment  longer  to  consider  afresh  the
geometrical  problem  of  putting  arbitrarily  given  equal  and  similar
solids  together  to  make  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  which  each
member  is  touched  by  eighteen  others,  Ave  see  immediately  that  it
is  determinate  (whether  it  has  any  real  solution  or  not),  because
Avhen  the  shape  of  each  body  is  given  Ave  have  nine  disposables  for
fixing  the  assemblage :  six  for  the  character  of  the  assemblage  of
the  corresponding  points,  and  three  for  the  orientation  of  each
molecule  relatively  to  roAvs  of  the  assemblage  of  corresponding
points.  These  nine  disposables  are  determined  by  the  condition
that  each  body  has  nine  pairs  of  contacts  Avith  others.

Suppose  now  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  the  given  bodies,
in  open  order  Avith  no  contacts,  to  be  arbitrarily  made  according

40—2

628  APPENDIX H.

to  any  nine  arbitrarily  chosen  values  for  the  six  distances  between
a  point  of  Si  and  the  corresponding  points  of  its  six  pairs  of  nearest
and  next  nearest  neighbours  (§  1  above),  and  the  three  angles
(§  9  above)  specifying  the  orientation  of  each  body  relatively  to
rows  of  the  assemblage.  We  may  choose  in  any  nine  rows  through
;S^i  any  nine  pairs  of  bodies  at  equal  distances  on  the  two  sides  of
^1  far  or  near,  for  the  eighteen  bodies  which  are  to  be  in  contact
with  >S^i.  Hence  there  is  an  infinite  number  of  solutions  of  the
problem  of  which  only  a  finite  number  can  be  real.  Every  solution
of  the  problem  of  eighteen  contacts  is  imaginary  when  the  shape
is  wholly  convex.

§  36.  Without  for  a  moment  imagining  the  molecules  of
matter  to  be  hard  solids  of  convex  shape,  we  may  derive  valuable
lessons  in  the  tactics  of  real  crystals  by  studying  the  assemblage
described  in  §§  24  and  25,  and  represented  in  figs.  12  and  13.
I  must  for  the  present  forego  the  very  attractive  subject  of  the
tactics  presented  by  faces  not  parallel  to  one  or  other  of  the  four

Fig.  13.

faces  of  the  primitive  tetrahedrons  which  we  found  in  §  24,  and
ask  you  only  to  think  of  the  two  sides  of  a  plate  of  crystal  parallel
to  any  one  of  them,  that  is  to  say,  an  assemblage  of  such  layers
as  those  represented  geometrically  in  fig.  12  and  shown  in
stereoscopic  view  in  fig.  13. If,  as  is  the  case  with  the  solids*

*  The  solids  of  the  photograiih  are  castings  in  fine  plaster  of  Paris  from  a
scalene  tetrahedron  of  paraffin  wax,  with  its  corners  and  edges  rounded,  used  as
a  pattern.

SUGGESTION FOR A TWIN-CRYSTAL.  629

photographed  in  fig.  13,  the  under  side  of  each  solid  is  nearly
plane  but  slightly  convex,  and  the  top  is  somewhat  sharply  curved,
we  have  the  kind  of  difference  between  the  upper  and  under  of  the
two  parallel  sides  of  the  crystal  which  I  have  already  described  to
you  in  §  21  above.  In  this  case  the  assemblage  is  formed  by  letting
the  solids  fall  down  from  above  and  settle  in  the  hollows  to  which
they  come  most  readily,  or  which  give  them  the  stablest  position.
It  would,  we  may  suppose,  be  the  hollows  jjq'r ,  not  "pqr  (fig.  12,
§  25),  that  would  be  chosen  ;  and  thus,  of  the  two  formations
described  in  §  25,  we  should  have  that  in  which  the  hollows  above
p'q'7^'  are  occupied  by  the  comparatively  flat  under-sides  of  the
molecules  of  the  layer  above,  and  the  hollows  below  the  apertures
pqr  by  the  comparatively  sharp  tops  of  the  molecules  of  the  layer
below.

I  37.  For  many  cases  of  natural  crystals  of  the  wholly  asym-
metric character,  the  true  forces  between  the  crystalline  molecules
will  determine  precisely  the  same  tactics  of  crystallization  as  would
be  determined  by  the  influence  of  gravity  and  fluid  viscosity  in  the
settlement  from  water,  of  sand  composed  of  uniform  molecules  of
the  wholly  unsymmetrical  convex  shape  represented  in  figs.  12
and  13.  Thus  we  can  readily  believe  that  a  real  crystal  which  is
growing  by  additions  to  the  face  seen  in  fig.  12  would  give  layer
after  layer  regularly  as  I  have  just  described.  But  if  by  some
change  of  circumstances  the  plate,  already  grown  to  a  thickness
of  many  layers  in  this  way,  should  come  to  have  the  side  facing
from  us  in  the  diagram  exposed  to  the  mother-liquor,  or  mother-
gas,  and  begin  to  grow  from  that  face,  the  tactics  might  probably
be  that  each  molecule  would  find  its  resting-place  with  its  most
nearly  plane  side  in  the  wider  hollows  under  p'q^r,  instead  of  with
its  sharpest  corner  in  the  narrower  and  steeper  hollows  under  pqr,
as  are  the  molecules  in  the  layer  below  that  shown  in  the  diagram
in  the  first  formation.  The  result  would  be  a  compound  crystal
consisting  of  two  parts,  of  differently  oriented  quality,  cohering
perfectly  together  on  the  two  sides  of  an  interfacial  plane.  It
seems  probable  that  this  double  structure  may  be  found  in  nature,
presented  by  crystals  of  the  wholly  unsymmetric  class,  though  it
may  not  hitherto  have  been  observed  or  described  in  crystallo-
graphic  treatises.

§  38. This  asymmetric  double crystal becomes simply  the

630  APPENDIX H.

well-known  symmetrical  '  twin-crystal*  '  in  the  particular  case  in
which  each  of  the  constituent  molecules  is  symmetrical  on  the
two  sides  of  a  plane  through  it  parallel  to  the  plane  of  our
diagrams,  and  also  on  the  two  sides  of  some  plane  perpendicular

Fig.  14.

to  this  plane.  We  see,  in  fact,  that  in  this  case  if  we  cut  in  two
the  double  crystal  by  the  plane  of  fig.  14,  and  turn  one  part
ideally  through  180°  round  the  intersection  of  these  two  planes,
we  bring  it  into  perfect  coincidence  with  the  other  part.  This
we  readily  understand  by  looking  at  fig.  14,  in  which  the  solid
shown  in  outline  may  be  either  an  egg-shaped  figure  of  revolution,
or  may  be  such  a  figure  flattened  by  compression  perpendicular  to
the  plane  of  the  diagram.  The  most  readily  chosen  and  the  most
stable  resting-places  for  the  constituents  of  each  successive  layer
might  be  the  wider  hollows  'p'qr  :  and  therefore  if,  from  a  single

*  "A  twin-crystal  is  composed  of  two  crystals  joined  together  in  such  a  manner
"  that  one  would  come  into  the  position  of  the  other  by  revolving  through  two  right
"  angles  round  an  axis  which  is  perpendicular  to  a  plane  which  either  is,  or  may  be,
"a  face  of  either  crystal.  The  axis  will  be  called  the  twin-axis,  and  the  plane  to
"  which  it  is  perpendicular  the  twin-plane."  Miller's  Treatise  on  Cri/stallography,
p.  103.  In  the  text  the  word  '  twin-plane,'  quoted  from  the  writings  of  Stokes  and
Eayleigh,  is  used  to  signify  the  plane  common  to  the  two  crystals  in  each  of  the
cases  referred  to:  and  not  the  plane  perpendicular  to  this  plane,  in  which  one  part
of  the  crystal  must  be  rotated  to  bring  it  into  coincidence  with  the  other,  and  which
is  the  twin-plate  as  defined  by  Miller.

Twinning  in  which  each  molecule  turns  (iV.  P.  P.  Vol.  in.  xcvii.  §§  60,  61)  must
also  be  considered.  Here  all  the  molecules  are  not  necessarily  of  same  orientation.
See  1.  12  from  foot  of  §  37. K.,  Oct.  12,  189G.

Turning  in  the  plane  of  the  paper,  as  contemplated  by  Miller,  could  not  bring
molecules  into  coincidence  with  big  and  little  ends :  but  turning  round  the  axis  AB
does  bring  them  into  coincidence. K.,  Oct.  12,  1896.

SUCCESSIVE TWIN PLANES REGULAR OR IRREGULAR. 631

layer  to  begin  with,  the  assemblage  were  to  grow  by  layer  after
layer  added  to  it  on  each  side,  it  might  probably  grow  as  a  twin-
crystal.  But  it  might  also  be  that  the  presence  of  a  molecule  in
the  wider  hollow  p'^'V  on  one  side,  might  render  the  occupation
of  the  corresponding  hollow  on  the  other  side  by  another  molecule
less  probable,  or  even  impossible.  Hence,  according  to  the  con-
figuration and  the  molecular  forces  of  the  particular  crystalline
molecule  in  natural  crystallization,  there  may  be  necessarily,  or
almost  necessarily,  the  twin,  when  growth  proceeds  simultaneously
on  the  two  sides  :  or  the  twin  growth  may  be  impossible,  because
the  first  occupation  of  the  wider  hollows  on  one  side  may  compel
the  continuity  of  the  crystalline  quality  throughout,  by  leaving
only  the  narrower  hollows  pqr  free  for  occupation  by  molecules
attaching  themselves  on  the  other  side.

§  39.  Or  the  character  of  the  crystalline  molecule  may  be
such  that  when  the  assemblage  grows  by  the  addition  of  layer
after  layer  on  one  side  only,  with  a  not  very  strongly  decided
preference  to  the  wider  hollows  p'(^r\  some  change  of  circumstances
may  cause  the  molecules  of  one  layer  to  place  themselves  in  a
hollow  pcir.  The  molecules  in  the  next  layer  after  this  would  find
the  hollows  p'qr  occupied  on  the  far  side,  and  would  thus  have
a  bias  in  favour  of  the  hollows  pqv.  Thus  layer  after  layer  might
be  added,  constituting  a  twinned  portion  of  the  growth,  growing,
however,  with  less  strong  security  for  continued  homogeneousness
than  when  the  crystal  was  growing,  as  at  first,  by  occupation  of
the  wider  hollows  p'q'r'.  A  slight  disturbance  might  again  occur,
causing  the  molecules  of  a  fresh  layer  to  settle,  not  in  the  narrow
hollows  pqr,  but  in  the  wider  hollows  p'q'r ,  notwithstanding  the
nearness  of  molecules  already  occupying  the  wider  hollows  on  the
other  side.  Disturbances  such  as  these  occurring  irregularly  during
the  growth  of  a  crystal  might  produce  a  large  number  of  successive
twinnings  at  parallel  planes  with  irregular  intervals  between  them,
or  a  large  number  of  twinnings  in  planes  at  equal  intervals  might
be  produced  by  some  regular  periodic  disturbance  occurring  for  a
certain  number  of  periods,  and  then  ceasing.  Whether  regular
and  periodic,  or  irregular,  the  tendency  would  be  that  the  number
of  twinnings  should  be  even,  and  that  after  the  disturbances  cease
the  crystal  should  go  on  growing  in  the  first  manner,  because  of
the  permanent  bias  in  favour  of  the  wider  hollows  p'q'r'. These

632  APPENDIX H.

changes  of  molecular  tactics,  which  we  have  been  necessarily  led
to  by  the  consideration  of  the  fortuitous  concourse  of  molecules,
are  no  doubt  exemplified  in  a  large  variety  of  twinnings  and
counter-twinnings  found  in  natural  minerals.  In  the  artificial
crystallization  of  chlorate  of  potash  the}^  are  of  frequent  occurrence,
as  is  proved,  not  only  by  the  twinnings  and  counter-twinnings
readily  seen  in  the  crystalline  forms,  but  also  by  the  brilliant
iridescence  observed  in  many  of  the  crystals  found  among  a  large
multitude,  which  was  investigated  scientifically  by  Sir  George
Stokes  ten  years  ago,  and  described  in  a  communication  to  the
Royal  Society  "  On  a  remarkable  phenomenon  of  crystalline  reflec-
tion" {Proc.  R  S.,  Vol.  XXXVIII.,  1885,  p.  174).

§  40.  A  very  interesting  phenomenon,  presented  by  what  was
originally  a  clear  homogeneous  crystal  of  chlorate  of  potash,  and
was  altered  by  heating  to  about  245° — 248°  Cent.,  which  I  am
able  to  show  you  through  the  kindness  of  Lord  Rayleigh,  and  of
its  discoverer,  Mr  Madan,  presents  another  very  wonderful  case
of  changing  molecular  tactics,  most  instructive  in  respect  of  the
molecular  constitution  of  elastic  solids.  When  I  hold  this  plate
before  you  with  the  perpendicular  to  its  plane  inclined  at  10°
or  more  to  your  line  of  vision  you  see  a  tinsel-like  appearance,
almost  as  bright  as  if  it  were  a  plate  of  polished  silver,  on  this
little  area,  which  is  a  thin  plate  of  chlorate  of  potash  cemented
for  preservation  between  two  pieces  of  glass;  and,  when  I  hold
a  light  behind,  you  see  that  the  little  plate  is  almost  perfectly
opaque  like  metal  foil.  But  now  when  I  hold  it  nearly  perpen-
dicular to  your  line  of  vision  the  tinsel-like  appearance  is  lost.
You  can  see  clearly  through  the  plate,  and  you  also  see  that  very
little  light  is  reflected  from  it.  As  a  result,  both  of  Mr  Madan's
own  investigations  and  further  observations  by  himself.  Lord
Rayleigh  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  almost  total  reflection
of  white  light  which  you  see  is  due  to  the  reflection  of  light  at
many  interfacial  planes  between  successive  layers  of  twinned  and
counter-twinned  crystal  of  small  irregular  thicknesses,  and  not  to
any  splits  or  cavities  or  any  other  deviation  from  homogeneousness
than  that  presented  by  homogeneous  portions  of  oppositely  twinned-
crystals  in  thorough  molecular  contact  at  the  interfaces.

§  41.  When  the  primitive  clear  crystal  was  first  heated  very
gradually  by  Madan  to  near  its  melting-point  (359°  according  to

madan's  change  of  tactics  by  heat  in  chlorate  of  potash.  633

Carnelly)  it  remained  clear,  and  only  acquired  the  tinsel  appear-
ance after  it  had  cooled  to  about  245°  or  248°  *.  Rayleigh  found
that  if  a  crystal  thus  altered  was  again  and  again  heated  it  always
lost  the  tinsel  appearance,  and  became  perfectly  clear  at  some
temperature  considerably  below  the  melting-point,  and  regained  it
at  about  the  same  temperature  in  cooling.  It  seems  therefore
certain,  that  at  temperatures  above  248°  and  below  the  melting-
point,  the  molecules  had  so  much  of  thermal  motions  as  to  keep
them  hovering  about  the  positions  of  pqr,  p'c[r'  of  our  diagrams,
but  not  enough  to  do  away  with  the  rigidity  of  the  solid ;  and  that
when  cooled  below  248°  the  molecules  were  allowed  to  settle  in
one  or  other  of  the  two  configurations,  but  with  little  of  bias  for
one  in  preference  to  the  other.  It  is  certainly  a  very  remarkable
fact  in  Natural  History,  discovered  by  these  observations,  that
when  the  molecules  come  together  to  form  a  crystal  out  of  the
watery  solution,  there  should  be  so  much  more  decided  a  bias  in
favour  of  continued  homogeneousness  of  the  assemblage  than  when,
by  cooling,  they  are  allowed  to  settle  from  their  agitations  in  a  rigid,
but  nearly  melting,  solid.

§  42. But even in crystallization from watery  solution  of
chlorate  of  potash  the  bias  in  favour  of  thorough  homogeneousness

*  "  A  clear  transparent  crystal  of  potassium  chlorate,  from  which  the  inevitable
"  twin -plate  had  been  ground  away  so  as  to  reduce  it  to  a  single  crystal  film  about
"  1  mm.  in  thickness,  was  placed  between  pieces  of  mica  and  laid  on  a  thick  iron
"  plate.  About  3  cm.  from  it  was  laid  a  small  bit  of  potassium  chlorate,  and  the
"heat  of  a  Bunsen  burner  was  applied  below  this  latter,  so  as  to  obtain  an  indication
"  when  the  temperature  of  the  plate  was  approaching  the  fusing-point  of  the  substance
"  (359°  C.  according  to  Prof.  Carnelly).  The  crystal  plate  was  carefully  watched
"  during  the  heating,  but  no  depreciation  took  place,  and  no  visible  alteration  was
"  observed,  up  to  the  point  at  which  the  small  sentinel  crystal  immediately  over  the
"  burner  began  to  fuse.  The  lamp  was  now  withdrawn,  and  when  the  temperature
"  had  sunk  a  few  degrees  a  remarkable  change  spread  quickly  and  quietly  over  the
"  crystal  plate,  causing  it  to  reflect  light  almost  as  brilliantly  as  if  a  film  of  silver
"  had  been  deposited  upon  it.  No  further  alteration  occurred  during  the  cooling ;
"  and  the  plate,  after  being  ground  and  polished  on  both  sides,  was  mounted  with
"  Canada  balsam  between  glass  plates  for  examination.  Many  crystals  have  been
"similarly  treated  with  precisely  similar  results;  and  the  temperature  at  which
"the  change  takes  place  has  been  determined  to  lie  between  245°  and  248°,  by
"  heating  the  plates  upon  a  bath  of  melted  tin  in  which  a  thermometer  was  im-
"  mersed.  With  single  crystal  plates  no  decrepitation  has  ever  been  observed,
"  while  with  the  ordinary  twinned-plates  it  always  occurs  more  or  less  violently,
"  each  fragment  showing  the  brilliant  reflective  power  above  noticed." — Nature,
May  20,  1886.

634  APPENDIX H.

is  not  in  every  contingency  decisive.  In  the  first  place,  beginning,
as  the  formation  seems  to  begin,  from  a  single  molecular  plane
layer  such  as  that  ideally  shown  in  fig.  14,  it  goes  on,  not  to  make
a  homogeneous  crystal  on  the  two  sides  of  this  layer,  but  probably
always  so  as  to  form  a  twin-crystal  on  its  two  sides,  exactly  as
described  in  §  38,  and  if  so,  certainly  for  the  reason  there  stated.
This  is  what  Madan  calls  the  "inveterate  tendency  to  produce
twins  (such  as  would  assuredly  drive  a  Malthus  to  despair)*";
and  it  is  to  this  that  he  alludes  as  "  the  inevitable  twin-plate "
in  the  passage  from  his  paper  given  in  the  footnote  to  |  41
above,

§  43.  In  the  second  place,  I  must  tell  you  that  many  of  the
crystals  produced  from  the  watery  solution  by  the  ordinary  process
of  slow  evaporation  and  crystallization  show  twinnings  and  counter-
twinnings  at  irregular  intervals  in  the  otherwise  homogeneous
crystal  on  either  one  or  both  sides  of  the  main  central  twin-plane,
which  henceforth  for  brevity  I  shall  call  (adopting  the  hypothesis
already  explained,  which  seems  to  me  undoubtedly  true)  the
'  initial  plane.'  Each  twinning  is  followed,  I  believe,  by  a  counter-
twinning  at  a  very  short  distance  from  it ;  at  all  events  Lord
Rayleigh's  observations *}-  prove  that  the  whole  number  of  twinnings
and  counter-twinnings  in  a  thin  disturbed  stratum  of  the  crystal
on  one  side  of  the  main  central  twin-plane  is  generally,  perhaps
always,  even ;  so  that,  except  through  some  comparatively  very
small  part  or  parts  of  the  whole  thickness,  the  crystal  on  either
side  of  the  middle  or  initial  plane  is  homogeneous.  This  is  exactly
the  generally  regular  growth  which  I  have  described  to  you  (§  39)
as  interrupted  occasionally  or  accidentally  by  some  unexplained
disturbing  cause,  but  with  an  essential  bias  to  the  homogeneous
continuance  of  the  more  easy  or  natural  one  of  the  two  con-
figurations.

§  44.  I  have  now  great  pleasure  in  showing  you  a  most
interesting  collection  of  the  iridescent  crystals  of  chlorate  of
potash,  each  carefully  mounted  for  preservation  between  two  glass
plates,  which  have  been  kindly  lent  to  us  for  this  evening  by
Mr Madan. In March, 1854, Dr W. Bird Herapath sent to

*  Nature,  May  20,  1886.

t  Philosophical  Magazine,  1888,  second  half-year,  p.  260.

SUCCESSIVE TWINNINGS EXPLAIN BRILLIANT COLOURS. 635

Prof.  Stokes  some  crystals  of  chlorate  of  potash  showing  the
brilliant  and  beautiful  colours  you  now  see,  and,  thirty  years
later.  Prof.  E.  J.  Mills  recalled  his  attention  to  the  subject  by
sending  him  ''  a  fine  collection  of  splendidly  coloured  crystals
"  of  chlorate  of  potash  of  considerable  size,  several  of  the  plates
"  having  an  area  of  a  square  inch  or  more,  and  all  of  them  being  thick
"  enough  to  handle  without  difficulty."  The  consequence  was  that
Stokes  made  a  searching  examination  into  the  character  of  the
phenomenon,  and  gave  a  short  but  splendidly  interesting  com-
munication to  the  Royal  Society,  of  which  I  have  already  told
you.  The  existence  of  these  beautifully  coloured  crystals  had
been  well  known  to  chemical  manufacturers  for  a  long  time,  but
it  does  not  appear  that  any  mention  of  them  was  to  be  found  in
any  scientific  journal  or  treatise  prior  to  Stokes's  paper  of  1885.
He  found  that  the  colour  was  due  to  twinnings  and  counter-
twinnings  in  a  very  thin  disturbed  stratum  of  the  crystal  showing
itself  by  a  very  fine  line,  dark  or  glistening,  according  to  the
direction  of  the  incident  light  Avhen  a  transverse  section  of  the
plate  of  crystal  was  examined  in  a  microscope.  By  comparison
with  a  spore  of  lycopodium  he  estimated  that  the  breadth  of  this
line,  and  therefore  the  thickness  of  the  disturbed  stratum  of  the
crystal,  ranged  somewhere  about  the  one-thousandth  of  an  inch.
He  found  that  the  stratum  was  visibly  thicker  in  those  crystals
Avhich  showed  red  colour  than  in  those  which  showed  blue.  He
concluded  that  "  the  seat  of  the  coloration  is  certainly  a  thin
twinned  stratum  "  (that  is  to  say,  a  homogeneous  portion  of  crystal
between  a  twinning  and  a  counter-twinning),  and  found  that
"  a  single  twin-plane  does  not  show  anything  of  the  kind."

§  45.  A  year  or  two  later  Lord  Rayleigh  entered  on  the
subject  with  ^n  exhaustive  mathematical  investigation  of  the
reflection  of  light  at  a  twin-plane  of  a  crystal  (Philosophical
Magazine,  September,  1888),  by  the  application  of  which,  in  a
second  paper  "  On  the  remarkable  Phenomenon  of  Crystalline
Reflection  described  by  Prof  Stokes,"  published  in  the  same
number  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine,  he  gave  what  seems
certainly  the  true  explanation  of  the  results  of  Sir  George  Stokes's
experimental  analysis  of  these  beautiful  phenomena.  He  came
very  decidedly  to.  the  conclusion  that  the  selective  quality  of  the
iridescent  portion  of  the crystal,  in  virtue of  which it reflects

636  APPENDIX H,

almost  totally  light  nearly  of  one  particular  wave-length  for  one
particular  direction  of  incidence  (on  which  the  brilliance  of  the
coloration  depends),  cannot  be  due  to  merely  a  single  twin-stratum,
but  that  it  essentially  is  due  to  a  considerable  number  of  parallel
twin-strata  at  nearly  equal  distances.  The  light  reflected  by  this
complex  stratum  is,  for  any  particular  direction  of  incident  and
reflected  ray,  chiefly  that  of  which  the  wave-length  is  equal  to
twice  the  length  of  the  period  of  the  twinning  and  counter-
twinning,  on  a  line  drawn  through  the  stratum  in  the  direction
of  either  the  incident  or  the  reflected  ray.

§  46.  It  seems  to  me  probable  that  each  twinning  is  essentially
followed  closely  by  a  counter-twinning.  Probably  three  or  four  of
these  twin-strata  might  suffice  to  give  colour ;  but  in  any  of  the
brilliant  specimens  as  many  as  twenty  or  thirty,  or  more,  might
probably  be  necessary  to  give  so  nearly  monochromatic  light  as
was  proved  by  Stokes's  prismatic  analysis  of  the  colours  observed
in  many  of  his  specimens.  The  disturbed  stratum  of  about  a  one-
thousandth  of  an  inch  thickness,  seen  by  him  in  the  microscope,
amply  suffices  for  the  5,  10,  or  100  half  wave-lengths  required  by
Rayleigh's  theory  to  account  for  perceptible  or  brilliant  coloration.
But  what  can  be  the  cause  of  any  approach  to  regular  periodicity
in  the  structure  sufficiently  good  to  give  the  colours  actually
observed  ?  Periodical  motion  of  the  mother-liquor  relatively  to
the  growing  crystal  might  possibly  account  for  it.  But  Lord
Rayleigh  tells  us  that  he  tried  rocking  the  pan  containing  the
solution  without  result.  Influence  of  light  has  been  suggested,
and  I  believe  tried,  also  without  result,  by  several  enquirers.  We
know,  by  the  beautiful  discovery  of  Edmond  Becquerel,  of  the
prismatic  colours  photographed  on  a  prepared  silver  plate  by  the
solar  spectrum,  that  '  standing  waves '  (that  is  to  say,  vibrations
with  stationary  nodes  and  stationary  places  of  maximum  vibration),
due  to  co-existence  of  incident  and  reflected  waves,  do  produce
such  a  periodic  structure  as  that  which  Rayleigh's  theory  shows
capable  of  giving  a  corresponding  tint  when  illuminated  by  white
light.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  not  to  think  that  light  may  be
effective  in  producing  the  periodic  structure  in  the  crystallization
of  chlorate  of  potash,  to  which  the  iridescence  is  due.  Still,
experimental  evidence  seems  against  this  tempting  theory,  and
we  must  perforce be  content  with  the  question  unanswered : —

TERNARY  TACTICS  IN  LATERAL  AND  TERMINAL  FACES  OF  QUARTZ. 637

What  can  be  the  cause  of  5,  or  10,  or  100  pairs  of  twinning  and
counter-twinning  following  one  another  in  the  crystallization  with
sufficient  regularity  to  give  the  colour:  and  why,  if  there  are
twinnings  and  counter-twinnings,  are  they  not  at  irregular  intervals,
as  those  produced  by  Madan's  process,  and  giving  the  observed
white  tinsel-like  appearance  with  no  coloration  ?

§  47.  And  now  I  have  sadly  taxed  your  patience  :  and  I  fear
I  have  exhausted  it  and  not  exhausted  my  subject !  I  feel  I  have
not  got  half-way  through  what  I  hoped  I  might  be  able  to  put
before  you  this  evening  regarding  the  molecular  structure  of
crystals.  I  particularly  desired  to  speak  to  you  of  quartz  crystal
with  its  ternary  symmetry  and  its  chirality*;  and  to  have  told
you  of  the  etchingf  by  hydrofluoric  acid  which,  as  it  were,
commences  to  unbuild  the  crystal  by  taking  away  molecule  after
molecule,  but  not  in  the  reverse  order  of  the  primary  up-building ;
and  which  thus  reveals  differences  of  tactics  in  the  alternate  faces
of  the  six-sided  pyramid  which  terminates  at  either  end,  some-
times at  both  ends,  the  six-sided  prism  constituting  generally  the
main  bulk  of  the  crystal.  I  must  confine  myself  to  giving  you
a  geometrical  symbol  for  the  ternary  symmetry  of  the  prism  and
its  terminal  pyramid.

§  48.  Make  an  equilateral  equiangular  hexagonal  prism,  with
its  diagonal  from  edge  to  edge  ninety-five  hundredths;]:  of  its
length.  Place  a  number  of  these  close  together,  so  as  to  make
up  a  hexagonal  plane  la^'er  with  its  sides  perpendicular  to  the
sides  of  the  constituent  hexagonal  prisms :  see  fig.  15,  and
imagine  the  semicircles  replaced  by  their  diameters.  You  see
in  each  side  of  the  hexagonal  assemblage  edges  of  the  constituent
prisms,  and  you  see  at  each  corner  of  the  assemblage  a  face  (not
an  edge)  of  one  of  the  constituent  prisms.  Build  up  a  hexagonal
prismatic  assemblage  by  placing  layer  after  layer  over  it  with  the
constituent  prisms  of  each  layer  vertically  over  those  in  the  layer
below ; and finish the assemblage  with  a  six-sided  pyramid  by

*  See  footnote  to  §  22  above.

t  Widmanstiitten,  1807.  Leydolt  (1855),  Wien.  Akad.  Ber.  15,  59,  T.  9,  10.
Baumhauer,  Pogg.  Ann.  138,  563  (1869);  140,  271;  142,  324;  145,  460;  150,  619.
For  an  account  of  these  investigations  see  Mallard,  Traite  de  Crystallographie
(Paris,  1884),  Tome  ii.  chapitre  xvi.

+  More  exactly  -9525,  being  f  x  cot  38°  13' ;  see  §  48,

638  APPENDIX H,

building  upon  the  upper  end  of  the  prism,  layer  after  layer  of
diminishing  hexagonal  groups,  each  less  by  one  circumferential
row  than  the  layer  below  it.  You  thus  have  a  crystal  of  precisely
the  shape  of  a  symmetrical  specimen  of  rock  crystal,  with  the
faces  of  its  terminal  pyramid  inclined  at  38°  13'  to  the  faces  of
the  prism  from  which  they  spring.  But  the  assemblage  thus
constituted  has  '  senary '  (or  six-rayed)  symmetry.  To  reduce  this
to  ternary  symmetry,  cut  a  groove  through  the  middle  of  each
alternate  face  of  the  prismatic  molecule,  making  this  groove  in
the  first  place  parallel  to  the  edges :  and  add  a  corresponding
projection  or  fillet  to  the  middles  of  the  other  three  faces,  so  that
two  of  the  cylinders  similarly  oriented  would  fit  together,  with
the  projecting  fillet  on  one  side  of  one  of  them  entering  the  groove
in  the  anti-corresponding  side  of  the  other.  The  prismatic  portion
of  the  assemblage  thus  formed  shows  (see  fig.  15),  on  its  alternate

Fig.  15.

edges,  faces  of  molecules  with  projections  and  faces  of  molecules
with  grooves ;  and  shows  only  orientational  differences  between
alternate  faces,  Avhether  of  the  pyramid  or  of  the  prism.  Having
gone  only  so  far  from  '  senary '  symmetry  we  have  exactly  the
triple,  or  three-pair  anti-symmetry  required  for  the  piezo-electricity
of  quartz  investigated  so  admirably  by  the  brothers  Curie*,  who
found  that  a  thin  plate  of  quartz  crystal  cut  from  any  position
perpendicular  to  a  pair  of  faces  of  a  symmetrical  crystal  becomes

*  J.  and  p.  Curie  and  C.  Friedel,  Comptes  Eendiis,  1882,  1883,  1886,  1892.

OPTIC AND PIEZO-ELECTRIC CHIRALITY IN QUARTZ.

639

Plan  of  Top.

Plan  of  Top.

positively  electrified  on  one  side  and  negatively  on  the  other
when  pulled  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  those  faces.  But  this
assemblage  has  not  the  chiral  piezo-
electric quality  discovered  theoreti-
cally by  Voigt*,  and  experimentally
in  quartz  and  in  tourmaline  by  himself
and  Rieckef,  nor  the  well-known  optic
chirality  of  quartz.

§  49.  Change  now  the  directions  of
the  grooves  and  fillets  to  either  of  the
oblique  configurations  shown  in  fig.  16,
which  I  call  right-handed,  because  the
directions  of  the  projections  are  tan-
gential to  the  threads  of  a  three-thread
right-handed  screw,  and  fig.  17  (left-
handed).  The  prisms  with  their  grooves  and  fillets  will  still  all
fit  together  if  they  are  all  right-handed,  or  all  left-handed,
fig.  18  shows  the  upper  side  of  a  hexagonal  layer  of  an  assemblage

Elevation.
Fig.  17.

Fig.  18.

thus  composed  of  the  right-handed  molecule  of  fig.  16.  Fig.  15
unchanged,  still  represents  a  horizontal  section  through  the  centres
of  the  molecules. A  prism  built  up  of  such  layers,  and  finished

*  "Allgemeine  Theorie  der  piezo-  unci  pyroelectrischen  Erscheinungen  an
Krystallen,"  W.  Voigt,  Konigl.  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Gottingen,  August
2,  1890.

t  Wiedemann's  Aimalen,  1892,  xlv.  p.  923.

640  APPENDIX H.

at  each  end  with  a  pyramid  according  to  the  rule  of  §  48,  has  all
the  qualities  of  ternary  chiral  symmetry  required  for  the  piezo-
electricity of  quartz ;  for  the  orientational  differences  of  the
alternate  pairs  of  prismatic  faces ;  for  the  absolute  difference
between  the  alternate  pairs  of  faces  of  each  pyramid  which  are
shown  in  the  etching  by  hydrofluoric  acid ;  for  the  merely
orientational  difference  between  the  parallel  faces  of  the  two
pyramids;  and  for  the  well-known  chiro-optic*  property  of  quartz.
Look  at  two  contiguous  faces  A,  B  oi  our  geometrical  model
quartz  crystal  now  before  you,  with  its  axis  vertical.  You  will
see  a  difference  between  them  :  turn  it  upside  down ;  B  will  be
undistinguishable  from  what  A  was,  and  A  will  be  undistinguish-
able  from  what  B  was.  Look  at  the  two  terminal  pyramids,  and
you  will  find  that  the  face  above  A  and  the  face  below  B  are
identical  in  quality,  and  that  they  differ  from  the  face  above  B
and  below  A.  This  model  is  composed  of  the  right-handed
constituent  molecules  shown  in  fig.  16,  It  is  so  placed  before
you  that  the  edge  of  the  prismatic  part  of  the  assemblage  nearest
to  you  shows  you  filleted  faces  of  the  prismatic  molecules.  You
see  two  pyramidal  faces ;  the  one  to  your  right  hand,  over  B,
presents  complicated  projections  and  hollows  at  the  corners  of  the
constituent  molecules;  and  the  pyramidal  face  next  your  left
hand,  over  A,  presents  their  unmodified  corners.  But  it  will  be
the  face  next  your  left  hand  which  will  present  the  complex
bristling  corners,  and  the  face  next  your  right  hand  that  will
present  the  simple  corners  if,  for  the  model  before  you,  you
substitute  a  model  composed  of  left-handed  molecules,  such  as
those  shown  in  fig.  17.

§  50.  To  give  all  the  qualities  of  symmetry  and  anti-symmetry
of  the  pyro-electric  and  piezo-electric  properties  of  tourmaline,
make  a  hollow  in  one  terminal  face  of  each  of  our  constituent
prisms,  and  a  corresponding  projection  in  its  other  terminal
face.

§  51.  Coming  back  to  quartz,  we  can  now  understand  perfectly
the  two  kinds  of  macling  which  are  well  known  to  mineralogists
as  being  found  in  many  natural  specimens  of  the  crystal,  and
which  I  call  respectively  the  orientational  macling,  and  the  chiral
macling. In  the  orientational  macling  all  the  crystalline  molecules

*  Generally  miscalled  '  rotational.'

ORIENTATIONAL MACLING AND CHIRAL MACLING OF QUARTZ. 641

are  right-handed,  or  all  left-handed ;  but  through  all  of  some  part
of  the  crystal,  each  of  our  component  hexagonal  prisms  is  turned
round  its  axis  through  60"  from  the  position  it  would  have  if  the
structure  were  homogeneous  throughout.  In  each  of  the  two  parts
the  structure  is  homogeneous,  and  possesses  all  the  electric  and
optic  properties  which  any  homogeneous  portion  of  quartz  crystal
presents,  and  the  facial  properties  of  natural  uncut  crystal  shown
in  the  etching  by  hydrofluoric  acid ;  but  there  is  a  discontinuity
at  the  interface,  not  generally  plane  between  the  two  parts,  which
in  our  geometrical  model  would  be  shown  by  non-fittings  between
the  molecules  on  the  two  sides  of  the  interface,  while  all  the
contiguous  molecules  in  one  part,  and  all  the  contiguous  molecules
in  the  other  part,  fit  into  one  another  perfectly.  In  chiral  macling,
which  is  continually  found  in  amethystine  quartz,  and  sometimes
in  ordinary  clear  quartz  crystals,  some  parts  are  composed  of  right-
handed  molecules,  and  others  of  left-handed  molecules.  It  is  not
known  whether,  in  this  chiral  macling,  there  is  or  there  is  not
also  the  orientational  macling  on  the  two  sides  of  each  interface ;
but  we  may  say  probably  not ;  because  we  know  that  the  orienta-
tional macling  occurs  in  nature  without  any  chiral  macling,  and
because  there  does  not  seem  reason  to  expect  that  chiral  macling
would  imply  orientational  macling  on  the  two  sides  of  the  same
interface.  I  would  like  to  have  spoken  to  you  more  of  this  most
interesting  subject;  and  to  have  pointed  out  to  you  that  some
of  the  simplest  and  most  natural  suppositions  we  can  make  as
to  the  chemical  forces  (or  electrical  forces,  which  probably  means
the  same  thing)  concerned  in  a  single  chemical  molecule  of  quartz
SiOo,  and  acting  between  it  and  similar  neighbouring
molecules,  would  lead  essentially  to  these  molecules
coming  together  in  triplets,  each  necessarily  either  right-
handed  or  left-handed,  but  with  as  much  probability  of
one  configuration  as  of  the  other :  and  to  have  shown
you  that  these  triplets  of  silica  3  (SiOa)  can  form  a
crystalline  molecule  with  all  the  properties  of  ternary  pj  jg
chiral  symmetry,  typified  by  our  grooved  hexagonal
prisms,  and  can  build  up  a  quartz  crystal  by  the  fortuitous
concourse  of  atoms.  I  should  like  also  to  have  suggested  and
explained  the  possibility  that  a  right-handed  crystalline  molecule
thus  formed  may,  in  natural  circumstances  of  high  temperature,
or  even  of  great  pressure,  become  changed  into  a  left-handed
T.  L.  41

642  APPENDIX H.

crystal,  or  vice  versa. My  watch,  however,  warns  me  that  I  must
not  enter  on  this  subject.

§  52.  Coming  back  to  mere  molecular  tactics  of  crystals,
remark  that  our  assemblage  of  rounded,  thoroughly  scalene  tetra-
hedrons, shown  in  the  stereoscopic  picture  (§  36,  fig,  13  above),
essentially  has  chirality  because  each  constituent  tetrahedron,  if
wholly  scalene,  has  chirality*.  I  should  like  to  have  explained
to  you  how  a  single  or  double  homogeneous  assemblage  of  points
has  essentially  no  chirality,  and  how  three  assemblages  of  single
points,  or  a  single  assemblage  of  triplets  of  points,  can  have
chirality,  though  a  single  triplet  of  points  cannot  have  chirality.
I  should  like  indeed  to  have  brought  somewhat  thoroughly  before
you  the  geometrical  theory  of  chirality ;  and  in  illustration  to
have  explained  the  conditions  under  M^hich  four  points  or  two
lines,  or  a  line  and  two  points,  or  a  combination  of  point,  line  and
plane,  can  have  chirality :  and  how  a  homogeneous  assemblage
of  non-chiral  objects  can  have  chirality ;  but  in  pity  I  forbear,  and
I  thank  you  for  the  extreme  patience  with  Avhich  you  have  listened
to  me.

*  See  footnote  to  §  22  above.

APPENDIX I.

ON THE ELASTICITY OF A CRYSTAL ACCORDING
TO BOSCOVICH*.

I  1.  A  CRYSTAL  in  nature  is  essentially  a  homogeneous
assemblage  of  equal  and  similar  molecules,  which  for  brevity  I
shall  call  crystalline  molecules.  The  crystalline  molecule  may
be  the  smallest  portion  which  can  be  taken  from  the  substance
without  chemical  decomposition,  that  is  to  say,  it  may  be  the
group  of  atoms  kept  together  by  chemical  affinity,  which  con-
stitutes what  for  brevity  I  shall  call  the  chemical  molecule ;  or
it  may  be  a  group  of  two,  three,  or  more  of  these  chemical
molecules  kept  together  by  cohesive  force.  In  a  crystal  of  tartaric
acid  the  crystalline  molecule  may  be,  and  it  seems  to  me  probably
is,  the  chemical  molecule,  because  if  a  crystal  of  tartaric  acid  is
dissolved  and  recrystallised  it  always  remains  dextro-chiral.  In
a  crystal  of  chlorate  of  soda,  as  has  been  pointed  out  to  me  by
Sir  George  Stokes,  the  crystalline  molecule  probably  consists  of
a  group  of  two  or  more  of  the  chemical  molecules  constituting
chlorate  of  soda,  because,  as  found  by  Marbachf,  crystals  of  the
substance  are  some  of  them  dextro-chiral  and  some  of  them  levo-
chiral ;  and  if  a  crystal  of  either  chirality  is  dissolved  the  solution
shows  no  chirality  in  its  action  on  polarised  light;  but  if  it  is
recrystallised  the  crystals  are  found  to  be  some  of  them  dextro-
chiral  and  some  of  them  levo-chiral,  as  shown  both  by  their
crystalline  forms  and  by  their  action  on  polarised  light.  It  is
possible,  however,  that  even  in  chlorate  of  soda  the  crystalline
molecule  may  be  the  chemical  molecule,  because  it  may  be  that
the  chemical  molecule  in  solution  has  its  atoms  relatively  mobile
enough  not  to  remain  persistently  in  any  dextro-chiral  or  levo-

*  From  Proc.  R.  S.  June  8,  1893.

t  Pofjp.  Ann.  Vol.  xci.  pp.482 — 487  (18o4);  or  Ann.  de  Chimie,  Vol.  XLiii,  (liV.),
pp.  252—255.

41—2

644  APPENDIX I.

chiral  grouping,  and  that  each  individual  chemical  molecule
settles  into  either  a  dextro-chiral  or  levo-chiral  configuration  in
the  act  of  forming  a  crystal.  See  "  Molecular  Tactics,"  Oxford
Lecture,  §  52,  reproduced  as  App.  H  in  the  present  volume.

§  2.  Certain  it  is  that  the  cr3'stalline  molecule  has  a  chiral
configuration  in  every  crystal  which  shows  chirality  in  its  crystal-
line form  or  which  produces  right-  or  left-handed  rotation  of  the
plane  of  polarisation  of  light  passing  through  it.  The  magnetic
rotation  has  neither  right-handed  nor  left-handed  quality  (that  is
to  say,  no  chirality).  This  was  perfectly  understood  by  Faraday
and  made  clear  in  his  writings,  yet  even  to  the  present  day  we
frequently  find  the  chiral  rotation  and  the  magnetic  rotation  of
the  plane  of  polarised  light  classed  together  in  a  manner  against
which  Faraday's  original  description  of  his  discovery  of  the
magnetic  polarisation  contains  ample  warning.

§  3.  These  questions,  however,  of  chirality  and  magnetic
rotation  do  not  belong  to  my  present  subject,  which  is  merely
the  forcive*  required  to  keep  a  crystal  homogeneously  strained
to  any  infinitesimal  extent  from  the  condition  in  which  it  rests
when  no  force  acts  upon  it  from  without.  In  the  elements  of
the  mathematical  theory  of  elasticity  f  we  find  that  this  forcive
constitutes  what  is  called  a  homogeneous  stress,  and  is  specified
completely  by  six  generalised  force-components,  j)^,  p.,,  ps,  ...,  j^e,
which  are  related  to  six  corresponding  generalised  components
of  strain,  s^,  80,83,  ...,  s^,  by  the  following  formulas: —

w  =  ^{p,8,+p.,8.+  ...  +2hSe)  (IX

where  w  denotes  the  work  required  per  unit  volume  to  alter  any
portion  of  the  crj^stal  from  its  natural  unstressed  and  unstrained
condition  to  any  condition  of  infinitesimal  homogeneous  stress  or
strain : —

dw  dw  ,_,

^•  =  ds~ '''  =  3^ (^>'

where  -^  ,  •  •  • ,  ;t-  denote  dififerential  coefficients  on  the  supposition

~  This  is  a  word  introduced  by  my  brother,  the  late  Professor  James  Thomson,
to  designate  any  .system  of  forces.

t  Phil.  Trans.  April  24,  1856,  reprinted  in  Vol.  iii.  Math,  and  Phya.  Papers
(Sir  W.  Thomson),  pp.  84—112.

ONLY  15  COEFFICIENTS  FOR  SIMPLEST  BOSCOVICHIAN  CRYSTAL. 645
that w is expressed as a homogeneous  quadratic function of

*'l  ) •  •  •  ) ^6  •

_dio  _dw  ,

''-dp^,"-'''-~dp, ^''^'

f)  ?)

where ,,...,  , denote  differential  coefficients  on  the  supposi-
dpi  dps

tion  that  w  is  expressed  as  a  homogeneous  quadratic  function  of

§  4.  Each  crystalline  molecule  in  reality  certainly  experiences
forcive  from  some  of  its  nearest  neighbours  on  two  sides,  and
probably  also  from  next  nearest  neighbours  and  others.  What-
ever the  mutual  forcive  between  two  mutually  acting  crystalline
molecules  is  in  reality,  and  however  it  is  produced,  whether  by
continuous  pressure  in  some  medium,  or  by  action  at  a  distance,
we  may  ideally  reduce  it,  according  to  elementary  statical
principles,  to  two  forces,  or  to  one  single  force  and  a  couple  in  a
plane  perpendicular  to  that  force.  Boscovich's  theory,  a  purely
mathematical  idealism,  makes  each  crystalline  molecule  a  single
point,  or  a  group  of  points,  and  assumes  that  there  is  a  mutual
force  between  each  point  of  one  crystalline  molecule  and  each
point  of  neighbouring  crystalline  molecules,  in  the  line  joining  the
two  points.  The  very  simplest  Boscovichian  idea  of  a  crystal  is  a
homogeneous  group  of  single  points.  The  next  simplest  idea  is  a
homogeneous  group  of  double  points.

§  5.  In  the  present  communication,  I  demonstrate  that,  if
we  take  the  very  simplest  Boscovichian  idea  of  a  crystal,  a
homogeneous  group  of  single  points,  we  find  essentially  six
relations  between  the  twenty-one  coefficients  in  the  quadratic
function  expressing  w,  whether  in  terms  of  Sj,  ...,  ««  or  of  p^,  ...jp^.
These  six  relations  are  such  that  incompressibility,  that  is  to  say
infinite  resistance  to  change  of  bulk,  involves  infinite  rigidity.  In
the  particular  case  of  an  equilateral*  homogeneous  assemblage
with  such  a  law  of  force  as  to  give  equal  rigidities  for  all  directions
of  shearing,  these  six  relations  give  Sk=5n,  which  is  the  relation

"  That  is  to  saj',  an  assemblage  iu  which  the  lines  from  any  point  to  three
neighbours  nearest  to  it  and  nearest  to  one  another  are  inclined  at  00°  to  one  another ;
and  these  neighbours  are  at  equal  distances  from  it.  This  implies  that  each  point
has  twelve  equidistant  nearest  neighbours  around  it,  and  that  any  tetrahedron  of
four  nearest  neighbours  has  for  its  four  faces  four  equilateral  triangles.

646  APPENDIX I.

found  by  Navier  and  Poisson  in  their  Boscovichian  theory  for
isotropic  elasticity  in  a  solid.  This  relation  was  shown  by  Stokes
to  be  violated  by  many  real  homogeneous  isotropic  substances,
such,  for  example,  as  jelly  and  india-rubber,  which  oppose  so  great
resistance  to  compression  and  so  small  resistance  to  change  of
shape,  that  we  may,  with  but  little  practical  error,  consider  them
as  incompressible  elastic  solids.

§  6.  I  next  demonstrate  that  if  we  take  the  next  simplest
Boscovichian  idea  for  a  crystal,  a  homogeneous  group  of  double
points,  we  can  assign  very  simple  laws  of  variation  of  the  forces
between  the  points  which  shall  give  any  arbitrarily  assigned  value
to  each  of  the  twenty-one  coefficients  in  either  of  the  quadratic
expressions  for  w.

§  7.  I  consider  particularly  the  problem  of  assigning  such
values  to  the  twenty-one  coefficients  of  either  of  the  quadratic
formulas  as  shall  render  the  solid  incompressible.  This  is  most
easily  done  by  taking  w  as  a  quadratic  function  of  pj,  ...,p^i,  and
by  taking  one  of  these  generalised  stress  components,  say  ^h,  as
uniform  positive  or  negative  pressure  in  all  directions.  This
makes  s^  uniform  compression  or  extension  in  all  directions,  and
makes  Si,  ...,  Ss  five  distortional  components  with  no  change  of
bulk.  The  condition  that  the  solid  shall  be  incompressible  is
then  simply  that  the  coefficients  of  the  six  terms  involving  jh  are
each  of  them  zero.  Thus,  the  expression  for  w  becomes  merely
a  quadratic  function  of  the  five  distortional  stress-components,
2h,  •••,p-o,  with  fifteen  independent  coefficients  :  and  equations  (3)
of  §  3  above  express  the  five  distortional  components  as  linear
functions  of  the  five  stress-components  with  these  fifteen  in-
dependent coefficients.

Added  July  18,  1893.

§  8.  To  demonstrate  the  propositions  of  §  5,  let  OX,  0  Y,  OZ
be  three  mutually  perpendicular  lines  through  any  point  0  of  a
homogeneous  assemblage,  and  let  x,  y,  z  be  the  coordinates  of  any
other  point  P  of  the  assemblage,  in  its  unstrained  condition.  As
it  is  a  homogeneous  assemblage  of  single  points  that  we  arc  now
considering,  there  must  be  another  point  P\  whose  coordinates
are  —  x,  —  y,  —  z.  Let  (cc  ■\-hx,  y  -\-  By,  z  +  Sz)  be  the  coordinates
of the  altered  position of  P  in any condition  of  infinitesimal

DISPLACEMENT-RATIOS AND THEIR SQUARES AND PRODUCTS. G47

strain,  speciticd  by  the  six  symbols  e,  f,  [/,  a,  b,  c,  according  to
the  notation  of  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  Philosophy,  Vol.  i.,
Pt.  XL,  §  669.  In  this  notation,  e,  /  cj  denote  simple  infinitesimal
elongations  parallel  to  OX,  OY,  OZ  respectively;  and  a,  h,  c
infinitesimal  changes  from  the  right  angles  between  three  pairs
of  planes  of  the  substance,  which,  in  the  unstrained  condition,  are
parallel  to  (XOY,  XOZ),  (YOZ,  YOX),  {ZOX,  ZOY)  respectively
(all  angles  being  measured  in  terms  of  the  radian).  The  definition
of  ((,  h,  c  may  be  given,  in  other  words,  as  follows,  with  a  taken  as
example  :  a  denotes  the  difference  of  component  motions  parallel
to  OF  of  two  planes  of  the  substance  at  unit  distance  asunder,
kept  parallel  to  YOX  during  the  displacement ;  or,  which  is  the
same  thing,  the  difference  of  component  motions  parallel  to  OZ  of
two  planes  at  unit  distance  asunder  kept  parallel  to  ZOX  during
the  displacement.  To  avoid  the  unnecessary  consideration  of
rotational  displacement,  we  shall  suppose  the  displacement  corre-
sponding to  the  strain-component  a  to  consist  of  elongation
perpendicular  to  OX  in  the  plane  through  OX  bisecting  YOZ,
and  shrinkage  perpendicular  to  OX  in  the  plane  through  OX
perpendicular  to  that  bisecting  plane.  This  displacement  gives
no  contribution  to  Bx,  and  contributes  to  8y  and  Sz  respectively
^az  and  hay.  Hence,  and  dealing  similarly  with  b  and  c,  and
taking  into  account  the  contributions  of  e,  f,  g,  we  find

hx  =  ex  +  ^  {bz  -\-  cyy\

Sy=/y  +  Mc*'  +  «^)  W

hz  =  gz+\  (ay  +  bx)j

§  9.  In  our  dynamical  treatment  below,  the  following  formulas,
in  which  powers  higher  than  squares  or  products  of  the  infini-
tesimal ratios  Sx/r,  by/r,  Bz/r  (r  denoting  OP)  are  neglected,  will
be  found  useful.

Br xBx  +  ySy  +  zBz ^  Bx'^  +  By- +  Bz^ .  fxBx  +  yBy  +  zBzV .
r  r-  "  r-  '  \  r^  J

Now  by  (-i)  we  have

xBx  +  yBy  +  zBz  =  ex-  +  fy"  +  gz-  +  ayz  +  bzx  +  cxy  . . .(6),
and

Bx-  +  By-  +  Bz"  =  e-x^  \py"  +  g^-z-

+  ¥  [«'  {V'  +  ^)  +  ^'  (^'  +  ^)  +  c'  (*•'  +  f)\
+  \U)o  +  (/+ g) «]  yz  +  l\ca  ^-{g\e)  b^zx  +  \\ab  +  (e  -f/)  c\xy. .  .(7).

648  APPENDIX I.

Using  (6)  and  (7)  in  (5),  we  find

—  =  r-2  {ex-  +ff  +  gz-  +  ai/z  +  bzx  +  cxij)  +  q  {e,  f,  g,  a,  h,  c). .  .(8),

where  ([  denotes  a  quadratic  function  of  e,  f,  &c.,  with  coefficients
as  follows : —

x- af

Coefficient  of  ^  e"  is  —  —

1^. ,y^^_vy:

fg »  -

ifz-

he

1  y^ ^-yz

ea

x-yz

eh

J  zx X'Z

" 2 „^o  — T

.(9)

and  corresponding  symmetrical  expressions  for  the  other  fifteen
coefficients.

§  10.  Going  back  now  to  §  3,  let  us  find  w,  the  work  per  unit
volume,  required  to  alter  our  homogeneous  assemblage  from  its
unstrained  condition  to  the  infinitesimally  strained  condition
specified  by  e,  f,  g,  a,  b,  c.  Let  ^(r)  be  the  work  required  to
bring  two  points  of  the  system  from  an  infinitely  great  distance
asunder  to  distance  r.  This  is  what  I  shall  call  the  mutual
potential  energy  of  two  points  at  distance  ?•.  What  I  shall  now
call  the  potential  energy  of  the  whole  system,  and  denote  by  W,
is  the  total  work  which  must  be  done  to  bring  all  the  points  of  it
from  infinite  mutual  distances  to  their  actual  positions  in  the
system ; so  that  we  have

Tf=i22<^(r) (10),

where  S^  (r)  denotes  the  sum  of  the  values  of  (j)  (?")  for  the
distances  between  any  one  point  0,  and  all  the  others;  and
SS^(r)  denotes  the  sum  of  these  sums  with  the  point  0  taken
successively  at  every  point  of  the  system.  In  this  double  sum-
mation <f){r)  is  taken  twice  over,  whence  the  factor  ^  in  the
formula  (10).

WORK AGAINST MUTUAL BOSCOVICHIAN FORCES.  649

§  11.  Suppose  now  the  law  of  force  to  be  such  that  <f){r)
vanishes  for  every  value  of  r  greater  than  v\,  where  X,  denotes
the  distance  between  any  one  point  and  its  nearest  neighbour,
and  V  any  small  or  large  numeric  exceeding  unity,  and  limited
only  by  the  condition  that  v\  is  very  small  in  comparison  with
the  linear  dimensions  of  the  Avhole  assemblage.  This,  and  the
homogeneousness  of  our  assemblage,  imply  that,  except  through
a  very  thin  surface  layer  of  thickness  v\,  exceedingly  small  in
comparison  with  diameters  of  the  assemblage,  eveiy  point  ex-
periences the  same  set  of  balancing  forces  from  neighbours  as
every  other  point,  whether  the  system  be  in  what  we  have  called
its  unstrained  condition  or  in  any  condition  Avhatever  of  homo-
geneous strain.  This  strain  is  not  of  necessity  an  infinitely  small
strain,  so  far  as  concerns  the  proposition  just  stated,  although  in
our  mathematical  work  we  limit  ourselves  to  strains  which  are
infinitely  small.

§  12.  Remark  also  that  if  the  whole  system  be  given  as  a
homogeneous  assemblage  of  any  specified  description,  and  if  all
points  in  the  surface-layer  be  held  by  externally  applied  forces  in
their  positions  as  constituents  of  a  finite  homogeneous  assemblage,
the  whole  assemblage  will  be  in  equilibrium  under  the  influence
of  mutual  forces  between  the  points ;  because  the  force  exerted  on
any  point  0  by  any  point  P  is  balanced  by  the  equal  and  opposite
force  exerted  by  the  point  P'  at  equal  distance  on  the  opposite
side  of  0.

I  13.  Neglecting  now  all  points  in  the  thin  surface  layer,
let  N  denote  the  whole  number  of  points  in  the  homogeneous
assemblage  within  it.  We  have,  in  §  10,  by  reason  of  the  homo-
geneousness of  the  assemblage,

tXcl>(r)  =  Nt<f>(r) (11),

and  equation  (10)  becomes

Tr=iiY2:</>(r) (12).

Hence,  by  Taylor's  theorem,

BW  =  ^NX{cl>'ir)Br  +  ^cf>"(r)Sr] (13);

and  using  (8)  in  this,  and  remarking  that  if  (as  in  §  14  below)  wc
take  the  volume  of  our  assemblage  as  unity,  so  that  N  is  the

G50

APPENDIX I.

number  of  points  per  unit  volume,  8  W  becomes  the  tu  of  §  o ;
we  find

^u  =  ^iVS  ] ^  \~  {ex-  -^-fif  +  (jz-  +  a]}z  +  hzx  +  Qxy)

+  r(l)'{r)q{e,f,g,a,b,c)

+  ^  —-,--  (ex-  +ff  +  gz-  +  ayz  +  hzx  +  cxij)- L . .(14).

§  14.  Let  us  now  suppose,  for  simplicity,  the  whole  assemblage,
in  its  unstrained  condition,  to  be  a  cube  of  unit  edge,  and  let  P  be
the  sum  of  the  normal  components  of  the  extraneous  forces  applied
to  the  points  of  the  surface-layer  in  one  of  the  faces  of  the  cube.

z

•

/

T

TT

^\

^

— z:^

J  -

r'^-i

^

^

0

>

T

f

Fisr.  1.

The  equilibrium  of  the  cube,  as  a  whole,  requires  an  equal  and
opposite  normal  component  P  in  the  opposite  face  of  the  cube.
Similarly,  let  Q  and  R  denote  the  sums  of  the  normal  components
of  extraneous  force  on  the  two  other  pairs  of  faces  of  the  cube.
Let  T  be  the  sum  of  tangential  components,  parallel  to  OZ,  of  the
extraneous  forces  on  either  of  the  YZ  faces.  The  equilibrium  of
the  cube  as  a  whole  requires  four  such  forces  on  the  four  faces
parallel  to  OY,  constituting  two  balancing  couples,  as  shown  in
the  accompanying  diagram.  Similarly,  we  must  have  four
balancing  tangential  forces  8  on  the  four  faces  parallel  to  OX,
and  four  tangential  forces U  on  the  four  faces  parallel  to  OZ.

§  15.  Considering  now  an  infinitely  small  change  of  strain  in
the  cube  from  (e, /,  g,  a,  h,  c)  to  (e  +  cZe,  f-\-df,  g  +  dg,  a-\-da,
b  +  db,  c  +  dc) ; the  work  required  to  produce  it,  as  we  see  by

ELASTIC ENERGY OF SIMPLE  HOMOGENEOUS ASSEMBLAGE. 651

considering  the  definitions  of  the  displacements  e,  f,  g,  a,  b,  c,
explained  above  in  §  8,  is  as  follows,

diu  =  Fde  +  Qdf+  Rdrj  +  Sda  +  Tdb  +  Udo (15).

Hence  we  have

P  =  dw/de ;  Q  =  diu/df;  R  =  dw/d<j ;

S  =  dw/da ;  T  =  dwjdh ;  U  =  dw/dc ;

Hence,  by  (14),  and  taking  L,  L  to  denote  linear  functions,  we

.(16).

.(17),

find

P  =  liYS  l'^'^^'"'^  X'  +L{e,f,  g,  a,  b,  c)

S  =  liYS  1*'^^'-^  yz  +  L  {e,f,  g,  a,  b,  c)
and  symmetrical  expressions  for  Q,  R,  T,  U.

§  16.  Let  now  our  condition  of  zero  strain  be  one*  in  which
no  extraneous  force  is  required  to  prevent  the  assemblage  from
leaving  it.  We  must  have  P  =  0,  (^  =  0,  P=0,  a^  =  0,  T=0,
U=0,  when  e  =  0,  /=  0,  ^r  =  0,  (t  =  0,  6  =  0,  c  =  0.  Hence,  by
(17),  and  the  other  four  symmetrical  formulse,  we  see  that

2*>:>^  =  0, 2  *'<'•>»■-  =

2*^:>y^=o, si^,.=o.

r

^'(r)

xij=  0

,.(18).

Hence,  in  the  summation  for  all  the  points  x,  y,  z,  between
which  and  the  point  0  there  is  force,  we  see  that  the  first  term  of
the  summed  coefficients  in  q,  given  by  (9)  above,  vanishes  in
every  case,  except  those  of  fg  and  ea,  in  each  of  which  there  is
only  a  single  term; and  thus  from  (9)  and  (14)  we  find

w  =  hN  Ue-^St^r  $  +  (fg  +  |cO  S^  ^

+  (be  +  ea)  Stn-

x-yz

+  eb'^m  --  +  &c.
r*

.(19),

where

—  r<^'  (r)  +  f'(^"  (r)  =  •or

.(20).

*  The  consideration  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  thin  surface  layer,  in  these  circum-
stances, under  the  influence  of  merely  their  proper  mutual  forces,  is  exceedingly
interesting,  both  in  its  relation  to  Laplace's  theory  of  capillary  attraction,  and  to  the
physical  condition  of  the  faces  of  a  crystal  and  of  surfaces  of  irregular  fracture.
But  it  must  be  deferred. [See  App.  J,  §§  2'J,  30.]

652  APPENDIX I.

The  terms  given  explicitly  in  (19)  suffice  to  show  by  symmetry
all  the  remaining  terms  represented  by  the  "  &c."

§  17.  Thus  we  see  that  with  no  limitation  whatever  to  the
number  of  neighbours  acting  with  sensible  force  on  any  one
point  0,  and  with  no  simplifying  assumption  as  to  the  law  of
force,  we  have  in  the  quadratic  for  w  equal  values  for  the
coefficients  of  ^  and  ^cv^;  ge  and  ^b'-;  ef  and  ^c";  he  and  ea;
ca  and  eb ;  and  ab  and  ec.  These  equalities  constitute  the  six
relations  promised  for  demonstration  in  §  5.

§  18.  In  the  particular  case  of  an  equilateral  assemblage,
with  axes  OX,  OY,  OZ  parallel  to  the  three  pairs  of  opposite
edges  of  a  tetrahedron  of  four  nearest  neighbours,  the  coefficients
which  we  have  found  for  all  the  products  except /f/,  (/e,  e/"  clearly
vanish ;  because  in  the  complete  sum  for  a  single  homogeneous
equilateral  assemblage  we  have  ±x,  ±y,  ±  z  in  the  symmetrical
terms. Hence,  and  because  for  this  case

2,^  -  =  Sot  '^,  =  Sot  -  , and Sot  '-  -  =  Sct  -  -r  =  Sot  ^r  •  •  -(21),

(19)  becomes
w  =  \^{e^-\-f'  +  (f)  +  M{fg^ge  +  ef)  +  \n{(e  +  b"-  +  c^)...{^-l),

where  ^  =  ^NX^'^-, and 33  =  n  =  ^iVSOT  ^'f (23).

§  19.  Looking  to  Thomson  and  Tait's  Natural  FldlosopJuj,
§  695  (7)*,  we  see  that  the  23  of  that  formula  is  now  proved  to
be,  in  our  present  simplest  form  of  Boscovichian  assumption,  equal
to  the  n  of  our  present  formula  (22)  which  denotes  the  rigidity-
modulus  relative  to  shearings  parallel  to  the  planes  YOZ,  ZOX,
XOY:  and  that  if  we  denote  by  n^  the  rigidity-modulus  relative
to  shearing  parallel  to  planes  through  OX,  OY,  OZ,  and  cutting
{OY,  OZ),  {OZ,  OX),  {OX,  OY)  at  angles  of  45°,  and  if  h  denote
the  compressibility-modulus,  we  have

'  o 1. r

7i:  =  H^-23);  ^  =  H^  +  2a3))  ^'

*  This  formula  is  given  for  the  case  of  a  body  which  is  wholly  isotropic  in  respect
to  elasticity  moduluses;  but  from  the  investigation  in  §§  681,  682  we  see  that  our
present  formula,  (22)  or  (25),  expresses  the  elastic  energy  for  the  case  of  an  elastic
solid  possessing  cubic  isotropy  with  unequal  rigidities,  n^,  n,  in  respect  to  these  two
sets  of  shearings.

NAVIER-POISSON  RELATION  PROVED  FOR  SIMPLE  ASSEMBLAGE. 653

and  the  previous  expression  for  the  elastic  energy  of  the  strained
solid  becomes,  for  the  case  of  cubic  symmetry  without  any  re-
striction,

+  ?i  (a=  +  6- +  cv .,..(25).

§  20. Comparing  this  with  (22),  for  our  present  restricted

case,  we  find

3A;  =  2«i  +  3?i ..(26).

This  remarkable  relation  between  the  two  rigidities  and  the
compressibility  of  an  equilateral  homogeneous  assemblage  of
Boscovich  atoms  was  announced  without  proof  in  §  27  of  my
paper  on  the  "Molecular  Constitution  of  Matter*."  In  it  n
denotes  what  I  called  the  facial  rigidity,  being  rigidity  relative
to  shearings  parallel  to  the  faces  of  the  principal  cubef :  and  n^
the  diagonal  rigidity,  being  rigidity  relative  to  shearings  parallel
to  any  of  the  six  diagonal  planes  through  pairs  of  mutually
remotest  parallel  edges  of  the  same  cube.  By  (24)  and  (23)  we
see  that  if  the  law  of  force  be  such  that

2=r?;  =  32^2/;j'  (27),

we  have  ?i  =  ?2j,  and  the  body  constituted  by  the  assemblage  is
wholly  isotropic  in  its  elastic  quality.  In  this  case  (26)  becomes
3^•  =  on,  as  found  by  Navier  and  Poisson ;  and  thus  we  complete
the  demonstration  of  the  statements  of  §  5  above.

I  21.  A  case  which  is  not  uninteresting  in  respect  to  Bosco-
vichian  theory,  and  which  is  very  interesting  indeed  in  respect  to
mechanical  engineering  (of  which  the  relationship  with  Bosco-
vich's  theory  has  been  pointed  out  and  beautifully  illustrated
by  M.  Brillouinj),  is  the  case  of  an  equilateral  homogeneous
assemblage  with  forces  only  between  each  point  and  its  twelve
equidistant  nearest  neighbours.  The  annexed  diagram  (fig.  2)
represents  the  point  0  and  three  of  its  twelve  nearest  neighbours

*  R.  S.  E.  Proc,  July,  1889  ;  Art.  xcvii.  of  my  Math,  and  Phyn.  Papers,
VoL  HI.

t  That  is  to  say,  a  cube  whose  edges  are  parallel  to  the  three  pairs  of  opposite
edges  of  a  tetrahedron  of  four  nearest  neighbours.

X  Conferences  Seientifiques  et  Allocutions  (Lord  Kelvin),  traduites  et  annotees;
P.  Lugol  et  M.  Brillouin:  Paris,  1893,  pp.  320—325.

654

APPENDIX I.

(their  distances  X),  being  in  the  middles  of  the  near  faces  of  the
principal  cube  shown  in  the  diagram ;  and  three  of  its  six  next-
nearest  neighbours  (their  distances  XV^),  being  at  X,  Y,  Z,  the
corners  of  the  cube  nearest  to  it ;  and,  at  other  corners  of  the
cube,  three  other  neighbours  K,  L,  M,  which  are  next-next-next-
nearest  (their  distances  2X).  The  points  in  the  middles  of  the
three  remote  sides  of  the  cube,  not  seen  in  the  diagram,  are
next-next-nearest  neighbours  of  0  (their  distances  X^S).

Fig.  2.

§  22.  Confining  our  attention  now  to  O's  nearest  neighbours,
we  see  that  the  nine  not  shown  in  the  diagram  are  in  the  middles
of  squares  obtained  by  producing  the  lines  YO,  ZO,  XO  to  equal
distances  beyond  0  and  completing  the  squares  on  all  the  pairs  of
lines  so  obtained.  To  see  this  more_  clearly,  imagine  eight  equal
cubes  placed  together,  with  faces  in  contact  and  each  with  one
corner  at  0.  The  pairs  of  faces  in  contact  are  four  squares  in
each  of  the  three  planes  cutting  one  another  at  right  angles
through  0 ;  and  the  centres  of  these  twelve  squares  are  the
twelve  nearest  neighbours  of  0.  If  we  denote  by  X  the  distance
of  each  of  them  from  0,  we  have  for  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z  of
these  twelve  points  as  follows : —

X ^ X

0

'  V2

V2
\ X

V2  V2 '

(-

72,
^ 0  ^\

V2 '  '  V2; '

"'V2' V2/' V  ' V2' V2/
V2' ' ^/2J' [ V2' ' V2/

V2 ' V2 '

0

V2'

V2'

V2' V2''',
(28).

SINGLE ASSEMBLAGE IN SIMPLE CUBIC ORDER.  655

§  23.  Suppose  now  0  to  experience  force  only  from  its  twelve
nearest  neighbours :  the  summations  %  of  §  18  (23)  will  include
just  these  twelve  points  with  equal  values  of  -57,  which  we  shall
denote  by  ■cto,  for  all.  These  yield  eight  terms  to  "Zicc^r*),  and
four  to  %(y-z-/r^);  and  the  value  of  each  term  in  these  sums  is  J.
Thus  we  find  that

^  =  N7^„  and  23=:n  =  |-iVOTo (29).

Hence  and  by  (24),  we  see  that

—  1

n  (30).

Thus  we  have  the  remarkable  result  that,  relatively  to  the
principal  cube,  the  diagonal  rigidity  is  half  the  facial  rigidity
when  each  point  experiences  force  only  from  its  twelve  nearest
neighbours.  This  proposition  was  announced  without  proof  in
§  28  of  "Molecular  Constitution  of  Matter*."

§  24.  Suppose  now  the  points  in  the  middles  of  the  faces  of
the  cubes  which  in  the  equilateral  assemblage  are  O's  twelve
equidistant  nearest  neighbours  to  be  removed,  and  the  assemblage
to  consist  of  points  in  simplest  cubic  order;  that  is  to  say,  of
Bcscovichian  points  at  the  points  of  intersection  of  three  sets
of  equidistant  parallel  planes  dividing  space  into  cubes.  Fig.  2
shows  0 ;  and,  at  X,  Y,  Z,  three  of  the  six  equidistant  nearest
neighbours  which  it  has  in  the  simple  cubic  arrangement.
Keeping  X  with  the  same  signification  in  respect  to  fig.  2  as
before,  we  have  now  for  the  coordinates  of  O's  six  nearest .
neighbours :

(\  V2,  0,  0),  (0,  X^/2,  0),  (0,  0,  X  V2),

(-  \  V2,  0,  0),  (0,  -  X  V2,  0),  (0,  0,  -  X  V2).

Hence,  and  denoting  by  CTi  the  value  of  tn-  for  this  case,  we
find,  by  §  18  (23),

^  =  N^,  and  33  =  n  =  0 (31).

The  explanation  of  n  =  0  (facial  rigidity  zero)  is  obvious  when  we
consider  that  a  cube  having  for  its  edges  twelve  equal  straight
bars,  with  their  ends  jointed  by  threes  at  the  eight  corners,  affords
no  resistance  to  change  of  the  right  angles  of  its  faces  to  acute
and  obtuse  angles.

*  Math,  and  Phys,  Papers,  Vol.  iii.  p.  403.

656  APPENDIX I.

§  25.  Replacing  now  the  Boscovich  points  in  the  middles  of
the  faces  of  the  cubes,  from  which  we  supposed  them  temporarily
annulled  in  §  24 ;  putting  the  results  of  §  23  and  §  24  together ;
and  using  (24)  of  §  19 ;  we  find  for  our  equilateral  homogeneous
assemblage,  its  elasticity-moduluses  as  follows  : —

23  =  7i  =  ii\^^o [ (32),

where,  as  we  see  by  §  16  (20)  above.

f2f

•(33);
-sTi  =  \  ^/2F  {\  V2)  -  2\'F'  {\  V2))

F(r)  being  now  taken  to  denote  repulsion  between  any  two  of  the
points  at  any  distance  r,  which,  with  ^(r)  defined  as  in  §  10,  is
the  meaning  of  —(^'{r).  To  render  the  solid,  constituted  of  our
homogeneous  assemblage,  elastically  isotropic,  we  must,  by  §  19
(24),  have  0-33  =  2?i,  and  therefore,  by  (32),

^,  =  2t;^, (34).

By  (33)  we  see  that  the  distant  forces  contribute  to  n-^,  and
not  to  n,

§  26.  The  last  three  of  the  six  equilibrium  equations,  §  16
(18),  are  fulfilled  in  virtue  of  symmetry  in  the  case  of  an  equi-
lateral assemblage  of  single  points  whatever  be  the  law  of  force
between  them,  and  whatever  be  the  distance  between  any  point
and  its  nearest  neighbours.  The  first  three  of  them  require  in
the  case  of  §23  that  i^(X)  =  0;  and  in  the  case  of  (24)  that
Fi\^J2)  =  Q,  results  of  which  the  interpretation  is  obvious  and
important.  ^

§  27.  The  first  three  of  the  six  equilibrium  equations,  §  16
(18),  applied  to  the  case  of  §  25,  yield  the  following  equation  : —

^/\F{\^I2)  =  -F{\)  (35);

that  is  to  say,  if  there  is  repulsion  or  attraction  between  each
point  and  its  twelve  nearest  neighbours,  there  is  attraction  or
repulsion  of  V2  of  its  amount  between  each  point  and  its  six
next-nearest  neighbours,  unless  there  are  also  forces  between
more  distant  points.  This  result  is  easily  verified  by  simple
synthetical  and  geometrical  considerations  of  the  equilibrium
between a point and its twelve  nearest  and six  next-nearest

SCALENE HOMOGENEOUS ASSEMBLAGE OF POINTS.  657

neighbours  in  an  equilateral  homogeneous  assemblage.  The  con-
sideration of  it  is  exceedingly  interesting  and  important  in  respect
to,  and  in  illustration  of,  the  engineering  of  jointed  structures
with  redundant  links  or  tie-struts.

§  28.  Leaving,  now,  the  case  of  an  equilateral  homogeneous
assemblage,  let  us  consider  what  we  may  call  a  scalene  assemblage,
that  is  to  say,  an  assemblage  in  which  there  are  three  sets  of
parallel  rows  of  points,  determinately  fixed  as  follows,  according
to  the  system  first  taught  by  Bravais*: —

I.  Just  one  set  of  rows  of  points  at  consecutively  shortest

distances  Xj.

II.  Just  one  set  of  rows  of  points  at  consecutively  next-

shortest  distances  X^-

III.  Just  one  set  of  rows  of  points  at  consecutive  distances  X3
shorter  than  those  of  all  other  rows  not  in  the  plane
of  I.  and  II.

To  the  condition  X^  >  X2  >  ^1  we  may  add  the  condition  that
none  of  the  angles  between  the  three  sets  of  rows  is  a  right  angle,
in  order  that  our  assemblage  may  be  what  we  may  call  wholly
scalene.

§  29.  Let  A'OA,  BOB,  COG  be  the  primary  rows  thus
determinately  found  having  any  chosen  point,  0,  in  common ;  we
have

A'O  =  0A=  K

B'0  =  OB=Xo\  (36).

CO  =  00  =  \,^

Thus  A'  and  A  are  O's  nearest  neighbours ;  and  B'  and  B,  O's
next-nearest  neighbours ;  and  C  and  C,  O's  nearest  neighbours
not  in  the  plane  AOB.  (It  should  be  understood  that  there  may
be  in  the  plane  AOB  points  which,  though  at  greater  distances
from  0  than  B  and  B',  are  nearer  to  0  than  are  C  and  C.)

§  30.  Supposing,  now,  BOG,  B'OG' ,  &c.,  to  be  the  acute  angles
between  the  three  lines  meeting  in  0 ; we  have  two  equal  and

*  Journal  de  VEcole  Poll/technique,  tome  xix.  cahier  xxxiii.  pp.  1 — 128 ;  Paris,
1850.

T.  L.  42

658  APPENDIX I.

dichirally  similar*  tetrahedrons  of  each  of  which  each  of  the  four
faces  is  a  scalene  acute-angled  triangle.  That  every  angle  in  and
between  the  faces  is  acute  we  readily  see,  by  remembering  that
OC  and  OC  are  shorter  than  the  distances  of  0  from  any  other  of
the  points  on  the  two  sides  of  the  plane  AOB^.

§  31.  As  a  preliminary  to  the  engineering  of  an  incompressible
elastic  solid  according  to  Boscovich,  it  is  convenient  now  to  con-
sider a  special  case  of  scalene  tetrahedron,  in  which  perpendiculars
from  the  four  corners  to  the  four  opposite  faces  intersect  in  one
point.  I  do  not  know  if  the  species  of  tetrahedron  which  fulfils
this  condition  has  found  a  place  in  geometrical  treatises,  but  I  am
informed  by  Dr  Forsyth  that  it  has  appeai^ed  in  Cambridge
examination  papers.  For  my  present  purpose  it  occurred  to  me
thus: — Let  QO,  QA,  QB,  QC  be  four  lines  of  given  lengths  drawn
from  one  point,  Q.  It  is  required  to  draw  them  in  such  relative
directions  that  the  volume  of  the  tetrahedron  OABC  is  a
maximum.  Whatever  be  the  four  given  lengths,  this  problem
clearly  has  one  real  solution  and  one  only ;  and  it  is  such  that
the  four  planes  BOC,  CO  A,  AOB,  ABC  are  cut  perpendicularly  by
the  lines  AQ,  BQ,  CQ,  OQ,  respectively,  each  produced  through  Q.
Thus  we  see  that  the  special  tetrahedron  is  defined  by  four
lengths,  and  conclude  that  two  equations  among  the  six  edges
of  the  tetrahedron  in  general  are  required  to  make  it  our  special
tetrahedron.

§  32.  Hence  we  see  the  following  simple  way  of  drawing  a
special  tetrahedron.  Choose  as  data  three  sides  of  one  face  and
the  length  of  the  perpendicular  to  it  from  the  opposite  angle.
The  planes  through  this  perpendicular,  and  the  angles  of  the
triangle,  contain  the  perpendiculars  from  these  angles  to  the
opposite  faces  of  the  tetrahedron,  and  therefore  cut  the  opposite
sides  of  the  triangle  perpendicularly.  (Thus,  parenthetically,  we
have  a  proof  of  the  known  theorem  of  elementary  geometry  that
the  perpendiculars  from  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  to  the

*  Either  of  these  may  be  turned  round  so  as  to  coincide  with  the  image  of  the
other  in  any  plane  mirror.  Either  may  be  called  a  pervert  of  the  other ;  as,
according  to  the  usage  of  some  writers,  an  object  is  called  a  pervert  of  another  if
one  of  them  can  be  brought  to  coincide  with  the  image  of  the  other  in  a  plane
mirror  (as,  for  example,  a  right  hand  and  a  left  hand).

t  See  "Molecular  Constitution  of  Matter,"  §  (45),  (h),  (/),  Blath.  and  Phys.  Papers,
Vol.  III.  pp.  412—413.

SCALENE ASSEMBLAGE GIVING AN INCOMPRESSIBLE SOLID. 659

opposite  sides  intersect  in  one  point.)  Let  ABC  be  the  chosen
triangle  and  S  the  point  in  which  it  is  cut  by  the  perpendicular
from  0,  the  opposite  corner  of  the  tetrahedron,  AS,  BS,  GS,
produced  through  S,  cut  the  opposite  sides  perpendicularly,  and
therefore  we  find  the  point  S  by  drawing  two  of  these  perpen-
diculars and  taking  their  point  of  intersection. The  tetrahedron

Fig.  3.

is  then  found  by  drawing  through  S  a  line  SO  of  the  given
length  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  ABG.  (We  have,  again
parenthetically,  an  interesting  geometrical  theorem.  The  per-
pendiculars from  A,  B,  C  to  the  planes  of  OBC,  OCA,  OAB
cut  OS  in  the  same  point ;  SO  being  of  any  arbitrarily  chosen
length.)

I  33.  I  wish  now  to  show  how  an  incompressible  homogeneous
solid  of  wholly  oblique  crystalline  configuration  can  be  constructed
without  going  beyond  Boscovich  for  material.  Consider,  in  any
scalene  assemblage,  the  plane  of  the  line  A'OA  through  any
point  0  and  its  nearest  neighbours,  and  the  line  B'OB  through
the  same  point  and  its  next-nearest  neighbours.  To  fix  the  ideas,
and  avoid  circumlocutions,  we  shall  suppose  this  plane  to  be
horizontal.  Consider  the  two  parallel  planes  of  points  nearest
to  the  plane  above  it  and  below  it.  The  corner  C  of  the  acute-
angled  tetrahedron  OABG,  which  we  have  been  considering,  is
one  of  the  points  in  one  of  the  two  nearest  parallel  planes,  that
above  AOB  we  shall  suppose.  And  the  corner  C"  of  the  equal
and  dichirally  similar  tetrahedron  OA'B'G'  is  one  of  the  points  in
the  nearest  parallel  plane  below.  All  the  points  in  the  plane
through  G  are  corners  of  equal  tetrahedrons  chirally  similar  to
OABG,  and  standing  on  the  horizontal  triangles  oriented  as  BOA.

42—2

660  APPENDIX I.

All  the  points  C"  in  the  nearest  plane  below  are  corners  of  tetra-
hedrons chirally  similar  to  OA'B'C  placed  downwards  on  the
triangles  oriented  as  B'OA'.  The  volume  of  the  tetrahedron
OABC  is  ^  of  the  volume  of  the  parallelepiped,  of  which  OA,
OB,  00  are  conterminous  edges.  Hence  the  sum  of  the  volumes
of  all  the  upward  tetrahedrons  having  their  bases  in  one  plane
is  ^  of  the  volume  of  the  space  between  large  areas  of  these
planes  :  and,  therefore,  the  sum  of  all  the  chirally  similar  tetra-
hedrons, such  as  OABG,  is  ^  of  the  whole  volume  of  the
assemblage  through  any  larger  space.  Hence  any  homogeneous
strain  of  the  assemblage  which  does  not  alter  the  volume  of  the
tetrahedrons  does  not  alter  the  volume  of  the  solid.  Let  tie-struts
OQ,  AQ,  BQ,  CQ  be  placed  between  any  point  Q  within  the
tetrahedron  and  its  four  corners,  and  let  these  tie-struts  be
mechanically  jointed  together  at  Q,  so  that  they  may  either  push
or  pull  at  this  point.  This  is  merely  a  mechanical  way  of  stating
the  Boscovichian  idea  of  a  second  homogeneous  assemblage,  equal
and  similarly  oriented  to  the  first  assemblage  and  placed  with
one  of  its  points  at  Q,  and  the  others  in  the  other  corresponding
positions  relatively  to  the  primary  assemblage.  When  it  is  done
for  all  the  tetrahedrons  chirally  similar  to  OABG,  we  find  four
tie-strut  ends  at  every  point  0,  or  A,  or  B,  or  C,  for  example,
of  the  primary  assemblage.  Let  each  set  of  these  four  ends  be
mechanically  jointed  together,  so  as  to  allow  either  push  or  pull.
A  model  of  the  curious  structure  thus  formed  was  shown  at  the
conversazione  of  the  Royal  Society  of  June  7,  1893.  It  is  for
three  dimensions  of  space  what  ordinary  hexagonal  netting  is  in
a  plane.

§  34.  Having  thus  constructed  our  model,  alter  its  shape
until  we  find  its  volume  a  maximum.  This  brings  the  tetra-
hedron, OABC,  to  be  of  the  special  kind  defined  in  §  31.  Suppose
for  the  present  the  tie-struts  to  be  absolutely  resistant  against
push  and  pull,  that  is  to  say,  to  be  each  of  constant  length.  This
secures  that  the  volume  of  the  whole  assemblage  is  unaltered  by
any  infinitesimal  change  of  shape  possible  to  it ;  so  that  we  have,
in  fact,  the  skeleton  of  an  incompressible  and  inextensible  solid*.

*  This  result  was  given  for  an  equilateral  tetrahedronal  assemblage  in  §  67
of  "Molecular  Constitution  of  Matter,"  Math,  and  Phys,  Papers,  Vol.  in.  pp.  425 —
426.

21  COEFFICIENTS FOR ELASTICITY OF DOUBLE ASSEMBLAGE. 661

Let  now  any  forces  whatever,  subject  to  the  law  of  uniformity  in
the  assemblage,  act  between  the  points  of  our  primary  assemblage
(and,  if  we  please,  also  between  the  points  of  our  second  as-
semblage ;  and  between  other  pairs  of  points  than  the  nearests
of  the  two  assemblages).  Let  these  forces  fulfil  the  conditions  of
equilibrium ;  of  which  the  principle  is  described  in  §  16  and
applied  to  find  the  equations  of  equilibrium  for  the  simple  case
of  a  single  homogeneous  assemblage  there  considered.  Thus
we  have  an  incompressible  elastic  solid ;  and,  as  in  §  17  above,
we  see  that  there  are  just  fifteen  independent  coefficients  in  the
quadratic  function  of  the  strain-components  expressing  the  work
required  to  produce  an  infinitesimal  strain.  Thus  we  realise  the
result  described  in  §  7  above.

§  35.  Suppose  now  each  of  the  four  tie-struts  to  be  not
infinitely  resistant  against  change  of  length,  and  to  have  a  given
modulus  of  longitudinal  rigidity,  which,  for  brevity,  we  shall  call
its  stiffness.  By  assigning  proper  values  to  these  four  stiffnesses,
and  by  supposing  the  tetrahedron  to  be  freed  from  the  two  con-
ditions making  it  our  special  tetrahedron,  we  have  six  quantities
arbitrarily  assignable,  by  which,  adding  these  six  to  the  former
fifteen,  we  may  give  arbitrary  values  to  each  of  the  twenty-one
coefficients  in  the  quadratic  function  of  the  six  strain-components
with  which  we  have  to  deal  when  change  of  bulk  is  allowed.
Thus,  in  strictest  Boscovichian  doctrine,  we  provide  for  twenty-
one  independent  coefficients  in  Green's  energy-function.  The
dynamical  details  of  the  consideration  of  the  equilibrium  of  two
homogeneous  assemblages  with  mutual  attraction  between  them,
and  of  the  extension  of  §§  9 — 17  to  the  larger  problem  now  before
us,  are  full  of  purely  scientific  and  engineering  interest,  but  must
be  reserved  for  what  I  hope  is  a  future  communication.

APPENDIX  J.

MOLECULAR DYNAMICS OF A CRYSTAL*.

§  1.  The  object  of  this  communication  is  to  partially  realise
the  hope  expressed  at  the  end  of  my  paper  of  July  1  and  July  15,
1889,  on  the  Molecular  Constitution  of  Matter f: — "The  mathe-
matical investigation  must  be  deferred  for  a  future  communication,
when  I  hope  to  give  it  with  some  further  developments."  The
italics  are  of  present  date.

Following  the  ideas  and  principles  suggested  in  §§  14 — 20  of
that  paper  (referred  to  henceforth  for  brevity  as  "  M.  C.  M."),  let
us  first  find  the  work  required  to  separate  all  the  atoms  of  a
homogeneous  assemblage  of  a  great  number  n  of  molecules  to
infinite  distances  from  one  another.  Each  molecule  may  be  a
single  atom,  or  it  may  be  a  group  of  i  atoms  (similar  to  one
another  or  dissimilar,  as  the  case  may  be)  which  makes  the  whole
assemblage  a  group  of  i  assemblages,  each  of  n  single  atoms,

§  2.  Remove  now  one  molecule  from  its  place  in  the  assem-
blage to  an  infinite  distance,  keeping  unchanged  the  configuration
of  its  constituent  atoms,  and  keeping  unmoved  every  atom
remaining  in  the  assemblage.  Let  W  be  the  work  required  to  do
so.  This  is  the  same  for  all  the  molecules  within  the  assemblage,
except  the  negligible  number  of  those  (§  30  below)  which  are
within  influential  distance  of  the  surface.  Hence  ^nW  is  the
total  work  required  to  separate  all  the  n  molecules  of  the  assem-
blage to  infinite  distances  from  one  another.  Add  to  this  n
times  the  work  required  to  separate  the  i  atoms  of  one  of  the
molecules  to  infinite  distances  from  one  another,  and  we  have  the
whole  work  required  to  separate  all  the  in  atoms  of  the  given
assemblage.

*  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Edin.,  May,  1902.

+  Proc.  Roy. Soc.  Edin.,  and  Vol.  ni.  of  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,
Art.  xcvii.

DYNAMICS OF DOUBLE HOMOGENEOUS ASSEMBLAGE.  6G3

Another  procedure,  sometimes  more  convenient,  is  as  follows: —
Remove  any  one  atom  from  the  assemblage,  keeping  all  the  others
unmoved.  Let  w  be  the  work  required  to  do  so,  and  let  Sw
denote  the  sura  of  the  amounts  of  work  required  to  do  this  for
every  atom  separately  of  the  whole  assemblage.  The  total  amount
of  work  required  to  separate  all  the  atoms  to  infinite  distances
fi-om  one  another  is  ^-Sw.  This  (not  subject  to  any  limitation
such  as  that  stated  for  the  former  procedure)  is  rigorously  true  for
any  assemblage  whatever  of  any  number  of  atoms,  small  or  large.
It  is,  in  fact,  the  well-known  theorem  of  potential  energy  in  the
dynamics  of  a  system  of  mutually  attracting  or  repelling  particles;
and  from  it  we  easily  demonstrate  the  item  ^nW  in  the  former
procedure.

§  3.  In  the  present  communication  we  shall  consider  only
atoms  of  identical  quality,  and  only  two  kinds  of  assemblage.

I.  A  homogeneous  assemblage  of  N  single  atoms,  in  which  the
twelve  nearest  neighbours  of  each  atom  are  equidistant  from  it.
This,  for  brevity,  I  call  an  equilateral  assemblage.  It  is  fully
described  in  "  M.  C.  M.,"  §§  46,  50  ...  57.

II.  Two  simple  homogeneous  assemblages  of  ^N  single  atoms,
placed  together  so  that  one  atom  of  each  assemblage  is  at  the
centre  of  a  quartet  of  nearest  neighbours  of  the  others.

For  assemblage  II.,  as  well  as  for  assemblage  I.,  w  is  the  same
for  all  the  atoms,  except  the  negligible  number  of  those  within
influential  distance  of  the  boundary.  Neglecting  these,  we  there-
fore have  -w  =  Nw,  and  therefore  the  whole  work  required  to
separate  all  the  atoms  to  infinite  distances  is —

iA^w (1).

§  4.  Let  cf)  (D)  be  the  work  required  to  increase  the  distance
between  two  atoms  from  J)  to  oo  ;  and  let  f{D)  be  the  attraction
between  them  at  distance  D. We  have

f{D)  =  -^^{D) (2).

For  either  assemblage  I.  or  assemblage  II.  we  have

w  =  (^(D)  +  </)(i)')  +  (^(i)")  +  etc (3);

where  D,  D',  D",  etc.,  denote  the  distances  from  any  one  atom  of
all  neighbours,  including  the  farthest  in  the  assemblage,  which
exercise  any  force  upon  it.

664

APPENDIX J.

§  5.  To  find  as  many  as  we  desire  of  these  distances  for
assemblage  I.  look  at  figs.  1  and  2.  Fig.  1  shows  an  atom  A,  and
neighbours  in  one  plane  in  circles  of  nearest,  next-nearest,  next-
next-nearest,  etc.  Fig.  2  shows  an  equilateral  triangle  of  three
nearest  neighbours,  and  concentric  circles  of  neighbours  in  the
same  plane  round  it.  The  circles  corresponding  to  r^  and  r^  of
§  7  below,  are  not  drawn  in  fig.  2.  In  all  that  follows  the  side  of
each  of  the  equilateral  triangles  is  denoted  by  X.

§  6.  All  the  neighbours  in  assemblage  I.  are  found  by  aid  of
the  diagrams  as  follows  : —

Fig.  1.

(a)  The  atoms  of  the  net  shown  in  fig.  1.  The  plane  of  this
net  we  shall  call  our  "  middle  plane."  Let  lines  be  drawn  per-
pendicular to  it  through  the  atom  A,  and  the  points  marked  h,  c,
to  guide  the  placing  of  nets  of  atoms  in  parallel  planes  on  its  two
sides.

(6) Two  nets  of  atoms  at  equal  distances  X\/|  on  the  two

DISTANCES OF NEIGHBOURS IN SINGLE ASSEMBLAGE. 665

sides  of  the  "  middle  plane."  These  nets  are  so  placed  that  an
atom  of  one  of  them,  say  the  near  one  as  we  look  at  the  diagram,
is  in  the  guide  line  b ;  and  an  atom  of  the  far  one  is  in  the  guide
line  c.

(c)  Two  parallel  nets  of  atoms  at  equal  distances,  2X  Vf,  on
the  two  sides  of  the  "  middle  plane,"  so  placed  that  an  atom  of  the
near  one  is  in  the  guide  line  c,  and  an  atom  of  the  far  one  is  in
the  guide  line  b.

(d)  A  third  pair  of  parallel  planes  at  equal  distances,  3X\/f  >
from  the  "  middle  plane,"  and  each  of  them  having  an  atom  in
guide  line  A.

(e)  Successive triplets of parallel nets with their atoms

Fig. 2.

cyclically  arranged  Abe,  Abe...  at  greater  and  greater  distances
from  A  on  the  near  side  of  the  paper,  and  Acb,  Acb  ...  at  greater
and  greater  distances  on  the  far  side.

I  7. Let  ^1,  go,  ^g ...  be  the  radii  of  the  circles  shown  in  fig.  1,
and  rj,  r^,  r^...  be  the  radii  of  the  circles  shown  in  fig.  2;  and

666  APPENDIX J.

for  brevity  denote  X-Vf  by  k. The  distances  from  A  of  all  the
neighbours  around  it  are  : —

In  our  "middle  plane":  6  each  equal  to  71 ;  6,  ggJ  6,  q-i]  12,  q^;

6,  g-s;...-

In  the  two  parallel  nets  at  distances  k  from  middle  :  6  each

equal  to  s/ {k"  +  i\^) ;  6,  ^(/c^  +  ?f )  ;  12,  V(«-  +  n');  12,  V(«-  +  r/);

6,  V(«'  +  ^'/);  12,  V(«'  +  7-6^);  6,  V(«'  +  r/-').

In  the  two  parallel  nets  at  distances  2«  from  middle  :  the  same
as  {B)  altered  by  taking  2«  everywhere  in  place  of  k.

In  the  two  parallel  nets  at  distances  3/c  from  centre :  the  same
as  {A)  altered  by  taking  v'(9«'+  ^x),  v'(9«^+  ^2^),  etc.,  in  place  of
q^,q.,  etc.

In  nets  at  distances  on  each  side  greater  than  3/c :  distances  of
atoms  from  A,  found  as  above,  according  to  the  cycle  of  atomic
configuration  described  in  (e)  of  §  6.

§  8. By  geometry  we  find

q,  =  \; 7,  =  V3\=1-732X; q^^^X;

7,  =  ;^7X  =  2-646X;  q,  =  ZX:

ri  =  V^X  =  -o77\; 1\  =  2  sJ^X  =  \-lb^\;  \  /^x

r,  =  ^Jl\^Vb2l\; r4  =  V^\  =  2-082\

r5  =  4ViX=2-308X; r^=  ^J^X^2^bl'J\
r,  =  h  ^Jl\  =  2-887X.

§  9.  Denoting  now,  for  assemblage  I.,  distances  from  atom  A
of  its  nearest  neighbours,  its  next-nearests,  its  next-next-nearests,
etc.,  by  Dj,  A,  D3,  etc.,  and  their  numbers  by  ji,  j^,  ja,  etc.,  we
find  by  §§  7,  8  for  distances  up  to  2X,,  for  use  in  §  12  below,

Di  =  \, A  =  1-414X, A  =  l-732\, D,=  2\,

§  10.  Look  back  now  to  §  5,  and  proceed  similarly  in  respect
to  assemblage  II.,  to  find  distances  from  any  atom  J.  to  a  limited
number  of  its  neighbours.  Consider  first  only  the  neighbours
forming  with  A  a  single  equilateral  assemblage :  we  have  the  same
set  of  distances  as  we  had  in  §  9.  Consider  next  the  neighbours
which  belong  to  the  other  equilateral  assemblage.  Of  these,  the
four  nearest  (being  the  corners  of  a  tetrahedron  having  A  at  its
centre)  are  each  at  distance  f  V|^,  and  these  are  A's  nearest
neighbours  of  all  the  double  assemblage  II.  Three  of  these  four
are  situated  in  a  net  whose  plane  is  at  the  distance  I  \/|X  on  one

SCALENE ASSEMBLAGE IN EQUILIBRIUM  IF INFINITE. 667

side  of  our  "middle  plane"  through  A,  and  having  one  of  its
atoms  on  either  of  the  guide  lines  h  or  c.  The  distances  from  A
of  all  the  atoms  in  this  net  are,  according  to  fig.  2,

^(^K-'  +  r,'), V(tV«'  +  ^2').  etc (5).

The  remaining  one  of  the  four  nearests  is  on  a  net  at  distance
f  \/f  A'  from  our  "middle  plane,"  having  one  of  its  atoms  on  the
guide  line  through  A.  The  distances  from  A  of  all  the  atoms  in
this  net  are,  according  to  fig.  1,

fV|\ \^(j%'c"'  +  qi% s/ijl^c^'  +  q-i),  etc (6).

All  the  other  atoms  of  the  equilateral  assemblage  to  which  A
does  not  belong  lie  in  nets  at  successive  distances  k,  2k,  Sk,  etc.,
beyond  the  two  nets  we  have  already  considered  on  the  two  sides
of  our  "middle  plane";  the  atoms  of  each  net  placed  of  course
according  to  the  cyclical  law  described  in  (e)  of  §  6.

§  11.  Working  out  for  the  double  assemblage  II.  for  ^'s
nearest  neighbours  according  to  §  10,  we  find  four  nearest  neigh-
bours at  equal  distances  f  Vf^  = '613A,;  twelve  next-nearests  at
equal  distances  X  ;  and  twelve  next-next-nearests  at  equal  distances
V^A- =  1'173X-.  These  suffice  for  §12  below.  It  is  easy  and
tedious,  and  not  at  present  useful,  to  work  out  for  D^,  D^,  Dq,  etc.

§  12. Using  now  §§  9,  11  in  (8)  of  §  4  we  find, —
for  assemblage  I.,

IV  =  120  (\)  +  Q(f>  (1-414X)  +  18</)  (l-732\)  +  6</)  (2X)  +  ...
for  assemblage  II.,

w;  =  40  (-eiSA.)  +  120  (X)  +  120  (1-173X)  +  . . .

These  formulas  prepare  us  for  working  out  in  detail  the  practical
dynamics  of  each  assemblage,  guided  by  the  following  statements
taken  from  §§  18,  16  of  "  M.  C.  M."

§  13.  Every  infinite  homogeneous  assemblage  of  Boscovich
atoms  is  in  equilibrium.  So,  therefore,  is  every  finite  homogeneous
assemblage,  provided  that  extraneous  forces  be  applied  to  all
within  influential  distance  of  the  frontier,  equal  to  the  forces
which  a  homogeneous  continuation  of  the  assemblage  through
influential  distance  beyond  the  frontier  would  exert  on  them.
The  investigation  of  these  extraneous  forces  for  any  given  homo-
geneous assemblage of single atoms — or  groups of  atoms as

...(7).

668

APPENDIX J.

explained above (§  1) — constitutes the Boseovich equilibrium-
theory  of  elastic  solids.

It  is  wonderful  how  much  towards  explaining  the  crystallo-
graphy and  elasticity  of  solids,  and  the  thermo-elastic  properties
of  solids,  liquids,  and  gases,  we  find ;  without  assuming,  in  the
Boscovichian  law  of  force,  more  than  one  transition  from
attraction  to  repulsion.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  mutual
force  between  two  atoms  is  zero  for  all  distances  exceeding  a
certain  distance  /,  which  we  shall  call  the  diameter  of  the  sphere
of  influence ;  is  repulsive  when  the  distance  between  them  is  <  ^;
zero  when  the  distance  is  =  ^;  and  attractive  when  the  distance  is
>  ^  and  <  /.

I  14.  Two  different  examples  are  represented  on  the  two
curves  of  fig.  3,  drawn  arbitrarily  to  obtain  markedly  diverse  con-
ditions of  equilibrium  for  the  monatomic  equilateral  assemblage
I.,  and  also  for  the  diatomic  assemblage  II. The  abscissa  (x)

Fig.  3.

of  each  diagram,  reckoned  from  a  zero  outside  the  diagram  on  the

left,  represents  the  distance  between  centres  of  two  atoms ;  the

ordinates  (y)  represent  the  work  required  to  separate  them  from

dv
this  distance  to  go  . Hence  —  -~  represents  the  mutual  attraction

at  distance  x.  This  we  see  by  each  curve  is  —  oo  (infinite  repulsion)
at  distance  I'O,  which  means  that  the  atom  is  an  ideal  hard
ball  of  diameter  I'O.  For  distances  increasing  from  I'O  the  force
is  repulsive  as  far  as  1'61  in  curve  1,  and  1'55  in  curve  2.  At
these  distances  the  mutual  force  is  zero ;  and  at  greater  distances
up  to  1*8  in  curve  1,  and  1'9  in  curve  2,  the  force  is  attractive.
The  force  is  zero  for  all  greater  distances  than  the  last  mentioned

WORK-CURVES FOR TWO ASSEMBLAGES.

G69

in  the  two  examples  respectively.  Thus,  according  to  my  old
notation, we  have  f  =  1-61,/ =  18  in  curve  1;  and  ^=  1-55,  I=V9
in  curve  2.  The  distances  for  maximum  attractive  force  (as  shown
by  the  points  of  inflection  of  the  two  curves)  are  1-68  for  curve  1,
and  1"76  for  curve  2.

According  to  our  notation  of  §  4  we  have  y  =  (f)  (D),  \i  x  =  D
in  each  curve.

§  15.  The  two  formulas  (7),  §  12,  are  represented  in  fig.  4  for
curve  1,  and  in  fig.  5  for  curve  2;  with  x  =  \  for  Ass.  I.,  and
X  =  i)l2\  for  Ass.  II.  In  each  diagram  the  abscissa,  x,  is  distance
between  nearest  atoms  of  the  assemblage. The  heavy  portions  of

Fig.  4. Law  of  Force  according  to  Curve  1.

the  curves  represent  the  values  of  w  calculated  from  (7).  The
light  portions  of  the  curves,  and  their  continuations  in  heavy
curves,  represent  4^  (x)  and  1 2^  (x)  respectively  in  each  diagram.
The  point  where  the  light  curve  passes  into  the  heavy  curve  in
each  case  corresponds  to  the  least  distance  between  neighbours  at
which  next-nearests  are  beyond  range  of  mutual  force.  All  the
diagrams  here  reproduced  were  drawn  first  on  a  large  scale  on
squared  paper  for  use  in  the  calculations  from  (7);  which  included
accurate  determinations  of  the  maximum  and  minimum  values  of
w  and  the  corresponding  distances  between  nearest  neighbours  in

670

APPENDIX J,

each  assemblage.  The  corresponding  densities,  given  in  the  last
column  of  the  following  table  of  results,  are  calculated  by  the
formula  \/2/X-''  for  assemblage  I.,  and  2  ^^2/^,^  for  assemblage  II.;

y^nT'^

7

n  '

/ \

?n"'

\

\

m'

1  la-forJss.I.

\

■8 -9 1-0

/

'1

\-2 1-

3 1-4 1-5 1-6 1

7 1-8 \-9

Fig.  5. Law  of  Force  according  to  Curve  2.

"density"  being  in  each  case  number  of  atoms  per  cube  of  the
unit  of  abscissas  of  the  diagram.  This  unit  is  (|  14)  equal  to  the
diameter  of  the  atom.  For  simplicity  we  assume  the  atom  to  be
an  infinitely  hard  ball  exerting  (§  13)  on  neighbouring  atoms,  not
in  contact  with  it,  repulsion  at  distance  between  centres  less  than
^  and  attraction  at  any  distance  between  ^  and  /.

§  16.  To  interpret  these  results,  suppose  all  the  atoms  of  the
assemblage  to  be  subjected  to  guidance  constraining  them  either
to  the  equilateral  homogeneousness  of  assemblage  I.,  or  to  the
diatomic  homogeneousness  of  assemblage  II.,  with  each  atom  of
one  constituent  assemblage  at  the  centre  of  an  equilateral  quartet
of  the  other  constituent  assemblage.  It  is  easy  to  construct
ideally  mechanism  by  which  this  may  be  done ;  and  we  need  not
occupy  our  minds  with  it  at  present.  It  is  enough  to  know  that
it  can  be  done.  If  the  system,  subject  to  the  prescribed  constrain-
ing guidance,  be  left  to  itself  at  any  given  density,  the  condition
for  equilibrium  without  extraneous  force  is  that  xu  is  either  a
maximum  or  a  minimum ;  the  equilibrium  is  stable  when  w  is  a
maximum,  unstable  when  a  minimum. It  is  interesting  to  see  the

STABILITIES OF MONATOMIC AND DIATOMIC ASSEMBLAGES. 671

two  stable  equilibriums  of  assemblage  I.  according  to  law  of  force
1,  and  the  three  according  to  law  of  force  2;  and  the  two  stable
equilibriums  of  assemblage  II.  with  each  of  these  laws  of  force.

Assemblage  I.

Assemblage  II.

Distances  be-
tween centres
of  nearest
atoms  for
maxinuiui  and
mininiuni
values  of  w.

Maximum  and

minimum

values  of  w.

Densities.

Distances  be-
tween centres
of  nearest
atoms  for
maximum  and
minimum
values  of  w.

Maximum  and
minimum
values  of  w.

Densities.

Law  of  Force  according  to  Curve  1.

1-16
1-23
1-61

8-28  (max.)

5-22  (min.)

14-76  (max.)

-904

-759
-338

1-00
1-10
1-61

11-52  (max.)

•76  (min.)

4-92  (max.)

-652

-490
-158

Law  of  Force  according  to  Curve  2.

1-00
1-07
1-22
1-28
1-53

11-58  (max.)
3-78  (min.)

10-44  (max.)
9-36  (min.)

15-60  (max.)

1-414

1-146

-774

-671

-393

1-00
115
1-53

12-36  (max.)
0-16  (min.)
5-20  (max.)

-652
-433

-184

§  17.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  it  is  only  with  the  specified
constraining  guidance  (§  16)  that  we  are  sure  of  these  equili-
briums being  stable.  It  is  quite  certain,  however,  that  without
guidance  the  monatomic  assemblage  would  be  stable  for  the  small
density  corresponding  to  the  point  7n  of  each  of  the  diagrams,
because  for  infinitesimal  deviations  each  atom  experiences  forces
only  from  its  twelve  nearest  neighbours,  and  these  forces  are  each
of  them  zero  for  equilibrium.  It  may  conceivably  be  that  each  of
the  maximums  of  w,  whether  for  the  monatomic  or  the  diatomic
assemblage,  is  stable  without  guidance.  But  it  seems  more  pro-
bable that,  for  assemblage  I.  and  law  of  force  2,  the  intermediate
maximum  in'  (close  to  a  minimum)  is  unstable.  If  it  is  so,  the
assemblage  left  to  itself  in  this  configuration  would  fall  away,  and
would  (in  virtue  of  energy  lost  by  waves  through  ether,  that  is  to
say,  radiation  of  heat)  settle  in  stable  equilibrium  corresponding
to  the  maximum  7n  (single  assemblage),  or  either  of  the  maxi-
mums m"  (single  assemblage),  or  m'"  (double  assemblage). It  is

672  APPENDIX J.

also  possible  that  for  law  of  force  1  the  maximum  m  for  the  single
assemblage  is  unstable.  If  so,  the  system  left  to  itself  in  this
configuration  would  fall  away  and  settle  in  either  of  the  configu-
rations m  (single  assemblage)  or  m"  (double  assemblage).  Or  it
is  possible  that  with  either  of  our  arbitrarily  assumed  laws  of  force
there  may  be  stable  configurations  of  equilibrium  with  the  atoms
in  simple  cubic  order  (§  21  below):  and  in  double  cubic  order ;  that
is  to  say,  with  each  atom  in  the  centre  of  a  cube  of  which  the
eight  corners  are  its  nearest  neighbours.

§  18.  It  is  important  to  remark  further,  that  certainly  a  law
of  force  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  |  13  may  be  found,  according
to  which  even  the  simple  cubic  order  is  a  stable  configuration ;
though  perhaps  not  the  only  stable  configuration.  The  double
cubic  order,  which  has  hitherto  not  got  as  much  consideration  as
it  deserves  in  the  molecular  theory  of  crystals,  is  certainly  stable
for  some  laws  of  force  which  would  render  the  simple  cubic  order
unstable.  Meantime  it  is  exceedingly  probable  that  there  are  in
nature  crystals  of  elementary  substances,  such  as  metals,  or  frozen
oxygen,  or  nitrogen,  or  argon,  of  the  simple  cubic,  and  double
cubic,  and  simple  equilateral,  and  double  equilateral,  classes.  It
is  also  probable  that  the  crystalline  molecules  in  crystals  of  com-
pound chemical  substance  are  in  many  cases  simply  the  chemical
molecules,  and  in  many  cases  are  composed  of  groups  of  the
chemical  molecules.  The  crystalline  molecules,  however  consti-
tuted, are,  in  crystals  of  the  cubic  class,  probably  arranged  either
in  simple  cubic,  or  double  cubic,  or  in  simple  equilateral,  or  double
equilateral,  order.

§  19.  It  will  be  an  interesting  further  development  of  the
molecular  theory  to  find  some  illustrative  cases  of  chemical
compound  molecules  (that  is  to  say,  groups  of  atoms  presenting
different  laws  of  force,  whether  between  two  atoms  of  the  same
kind  or  between  atoms  of  different  kinds),  which  are,  and  others
which  are  not,  in  stable  equilibrium  at  some  density  or  densities
of  equilateral  assemblage.  In  this  last  class  of  cases  the  molecules
make  up  crystals  not  of  the  cubic  class.  This  certainly  can  be
arranged  for  by  compound  molecules  with  law  of  force  between
any  two  atoms  fulfilling  the  condition  of  §  13 ;  and  it  can  be
done  even  for  a  monatomic  homogeneous  assemblage  very  easily,  if
we  leave  the  simplicity  of  §  13  in  our  assumption  as  to  law  of  force.

\
V

STABILITY NOT SECURED BY POSITIVE MODULUSES,  673

§  20.  The  mathematical  theory  wants  development  in  respect
to  the  conditions  for  stability.  If,  with  the  constraining  guidance
of  §  16,  w  is  either  a  maximum  or  a  minimum,  there  is  equi-
librium with  or  without  the  guidance.  For  lu  a  maximum  the
equilibrium  is  stable  with  the  guidance ;  but  may  be  stable  or  un-
stable without  the  guidance.  A  criterion  of  stability  which  will
answer  this  last  question  is  much  wanted ;  and  it  seems  to  me  that
though  the  number  of  atoms  is  quasi-infinite  the  wanted  criterion
may  be  finite  in  every  case  in  which  the  number  of  atoms  exerting
force  on  any  one  atom  is  finite.  To  find  it  generally  for  the  equi-
librium of  any  homogeneous  assemblage  of  homogeneous  groups,
each  of  a  finite  number  of  atoms,  is  a  worthy  object  for  mathe-
matical consideration.  Its  difficulty  and  complexity  is  illustrated  in
§§  21,  22  for  the  particularly  simple  case  of  similar  atoms  arranged
in  simple  cubic  order ;  and  in  §§  23-29  for  a  still  simpler  case.

§  21.  Consider  a  group  of  eight  particles  at  the  eight  corners
of  a  cube  (edge  X)  mutually  acting  on  one  another  with  forces  all
varying  according  to  the  same  law  of  distance.  Let  the  magni-
tudes of  the  forces  be  such  that  there  is  equilibrium ;  and  in  the
first  place  let  the  law  of  variation  of  the  forces  be  such  that  the
equilibrium  is  stable.  Build  up  now  a  quasi-infinite  number  of
such  cubes  with  coincident  corners  to  form  one  large  cube  or  a
crystal  of  any  other  shape.  Join  ideally,  to  make  one  atom,  each
set  of  eight  particles  in  contact  which  we  find  in  this  structure.
The  whole  system  is  in  stable  equilibrium.  The  four  forces  in
each  set  of  four  coincident  edges  of  the  primitive  cubes  become
one  force  equal  to  the  force  between  atom  and  atom  at  distance  X.
The  two  forces  in  either  diagonal  of  the  coincident  square  faces  of
two  cubes  in  contact  make  one  force  equal  to  the  force  between
atoms  at  distance  X^J2.  The  single  force  in  each  body-diagonal
of  any  one  of  the  cubes  is  the  force  between  atom  and  atom  at
distance  X  \/3.  The  three  moduluses  of  elasticity  (compressibility-
modulus,  modulus  with  reference  to  change  of  angles  of  the  square
faces,  and  modulus  with  reference  to  change  of  angles  between
their  diagonals)  are  all  easily  found  by  consideration  of  the  dynamics
of  a  single  primitive  cube,  or  they  may  be  found  by  the  general
method  given  in  "  On  the  Elasticity  of  a  Crystal  according  to
Boscovich*."  (In  passing,  remark  that  neither  in  this  nor  in  other

*  Proc.  R.S.L.  Vol.  liv.  June  8,  1893. App.  I.
T.  L,  43

674  APPENDIX J.

cases  is  it  to  be  assumed  without  proof  that  stability  is  ensured  by
positive  values  of  the  elasticity  moduluses.)

§  22.  Now  while  it  is  obvious  that  our  cubic  system  is  in
stable  equilibrium  if  the  eight  particles  constituting  a  detached
primitive  cube  are  in  stable  equilibrium,  it  is  not  obvious  without
proof  that  this  condition,  though  sufficient,  is  necessary  for  the
stability  of  the  combined  assemblage.  It  might  be  that  though
each  primitive  cube  by  itself  is  unstable,  the  combined  assemblage
is  stable  in  virtue  of  mutual  support  given  by  the  joining  of  eight
particles  into  one  at  the  corners  of  the  cubes  which  we  have  put
together.

§  23.  The  simplest  possible  illustration  of  the  stabilit}^  question
of  §  20  is  presented  by  the  exceedingly  interesting  problem  of  the
equilibrium  of  an  infinite  row  of  similar  particles,  free  to  move
only  in  a  straight  line.  The  consideration  of  this  linear  problem
we  shall  find  also  useful  (§|  28,  29  below)  for  investigation  of  the
disturbance  from  homogeneousness  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
bounding  surface,  experienced  by  a  three-dimensional  homogeneous
assemblage  in  equilibrium.  First  let  us  find  a,  the  distance,  or
one  of  the  distances,  from  atom  to  atom  at  which  the  atoms  must
be  placed  for  equilibrium ;  and  after  that  try  to  find  whether  the
equilibrium  is  stable  or  unstable.

§  24. Calling  f{D)  (as  in  §  4)  the  attraction  between  atom

and  atom  at  distance  D,  we  have  for  the  sum,  P,  of  attractions

between  all  the  atoms  on  one  side  of  any  point  in  their  line,  and

all  the  atoms  on  the  other  side,  the  following  finite  expression

having  essentially  a  finite  number  of  terms,  greater  the  smaller

is  a :

/(a)  +  2/(2a)  +  3/(3a)+ =P  (8).

Hence  a,  for  equilibrium  with  no  extraneous  force,  is  given  by  the
functional  equation

/(a)  +  2/(2a)+3/(3a)  + =0  (9);

which,  according  to  the  law  of  force,  may  give  one  or  two  or  any
number  of  values  for  a  :  or  may  even  give  no  value  (all  roots
imaginary)  if  the  force  at  greatest  distance  for  which  there  is
force  at  all,  is  repulsive.  The  solution  or  all  the  solutions  of  this
equation  are  readily  found  by  calculating  from  the  Boscovich
curve  representative  of  /(B)  a  table  of  values  of  P,  and  plotting

BOSCOVICHS CURVE.

675

them  on  a  curve,  by  formula  (8),  for  values  of  a  from  a  =  I  (the
limit  above  which  the  force  is  zero  for  all  distances)  downwards
to  the  value  which  makes  P  =  — oo,  or  to  zero  if  there  is  no
infinite repulsion. The accompanying diagram, fig. 6, copied

Fig.  6.

from  fig.  1  of  Boscovich's  great  book*,  with  slight  modifications
(including  positive  instead  of  negative  ordinates  to  indicate
attraction)  to  suit  our  present  purpose,  shows  for  this  particular
curve  three  of  the  solutions  of  equation  (8).  (There  are  obviously
several  other  solutions.)  In  two  of  the  solutions,  respectively,
Aq,  A',  and  Aq,  A",  are  consecutive  atoms  at  distances  at  which
the  force  between  them  is  zero.  These  are  configurations  of
equilibrium,  because  A^B,  the  extreme  distance  at  which  there  is
mutual  action,  is  less  than  twice  A^A',  and  less  than  twice  A^A".
In  the  other  of  the  solutions  shown,  Aq,  Ai,  A„,  A3,  A^,  A^,  Ae
are  seven  equidistant  consecutive  atoms  of  an  infinite  row  in
equilibrium  in  which  A^  is  within  range  of  the  force  of  A^,  and
Ae  is  beyond  it.  The  algebraic  sum  of  the  ordinates  with  their
proper  multipliers  is  zero,  and  so  the  diagram  represents  a  solution
of  equation  (9).

*  Theoria  Philosophise  Naturahs  redacta  ad  unicam  legem  virium  in  natura
existentium,  auctore  P.  Eogerio  .Josepho  Boscovich,  Societatis  Jesu,  nunc  ab  ipso
perpolita,  et  aucta,  ac  a  plurimis  prascedentium  editionum  mendis  expurgata.
Editio  Veneta  prima  ipso  auctore  prssente,  et  corrigente.  Venetiis,  mdcclxhi.
Ex  Typographia  Eemondiniana  superiorum  permissu,  ac  privilegio.

43—2

676  APPENDIX J.

§  25.  In  the  general  linear  problem  to  find  whether  the  equi-
librium is  stable  or  not  for  equal  consecutive  distances,  a,  let
(as  in  §  4)  ^  (D)  be  the  work  required  to  increase  the  distance
between  two  atoms  from  D  to  qc  .  Suppose  now  the  atoms  to
be  displaced  fron^  equal  distances,  a,  to  consecutive  unequal
distances —

...  a  i-  Ui_2,  a  +  tfi_i,  a  +  Ui,  a  +  u^+j,  a  +  «j-+2, (10).

The  equilibrium  will  be  stable  or  unstable  according  as  the
work  required  to  produce  this  displacement  is,  or  is  not,  positive

for  all  infinitely  small  values  of...  ^/^_l,  Ui,  Wj+i, Its  amount

is  Wq—  W;  where  W  denotes  the  total  amount  of  work  required
to  separate  all  the  atoms  from  the  configuration  (10)  to  infinite
mutual  distances.

According  to  §  2  above  W  is  given  by

W  =  ^i...+Wi.,  +  Wi  +  tVi+,  +  ...) (11);

where

Wi=  cl){a  +  Ui) +  ^  (2a  +  Ui_i  +  Ui) -l-^(3a  +  Mj:-2  + Wj-i  +  Wi) +...

+  (f>{a  +  Mi+i)  ■+  (f)(2a  +  Ui+^  +  z^i+2)+0(3a  +  Mj+i  +  Mj+o  +  Ui+3)+  •  • .

+ (12).

Expanding  each  term  by  Taylor's  theorem  as  far  as  terms  of  the
second  order,  and  remarking  that  the  sum  of  terms  of  the  first
order  is  zero  for  equilibrium*  at  equal  distances,  a,  and  putting
(f)"(D)  =  -f  {!)),  we  ^nd

Wo-W  =  it{f'(a)(ue  +  u%,)

+/'  (2a)  [(Wi_i  +  UiY  +  (Ui+,  +  Ui+,y]

+/'  (3a)  [(Mi_2  +  Ui-i  +  Uif  +  (Wi+i  +  ?<i+2  +  2<i+3)']

+ etc.  etc.  etc.  etc.}  ...(13);

where  S  denotes  summation  for  all  values  of  i,  except  those  corre-
sponding to  the  small  numbers  of  atoms  (§§  28,  29  below)  within
influential  distances  of  the  two  ends  of  the  row.

§  26.  Hence  the  equilibrium  is  stable  if /'(a),/' (2a), /' (3a),
etc.,  are  all  positive ; but  it can be stable  with  some of  them

It  is  interesting  and  instructive  to  verify  this  analytically  by  selecting  all  the

dW
s  in  W  which  contain  u^,  and  thus  finding  - —  . This
*  dUi

values  of  ...!/j_i,  i/j,  »,+!,...  gives  equation  (9)  of  the  text.

dW
terms  in  W  which  contain  it^,  and  thus  finding  - —  . This  equated  to  zero,  for  zero

EQUILIBRIUM  IN  NEIGHBOURHOOD  OF  ENDS  OF  ROW  OF  ATOMS. 677

negative.  Thus,  according  to  the  Boscovich  diagram,  a  condition
ensuring  stability  is  that  the  position  of  each  atom  be  on  an  up-
slope  of  the  curve  showing  attractions  at  increasing  distances.
We  see  that  each  of  the  atoms  in  each  of  our  three  equilibriums
for  fig.  6  fulfils  this  condition.

§  27.  Fig.  7  shows  a  simple  Boscovich  curve  drawn  arbitrarily
to  fulfil  the  condition  of  §  13  above,  and  with  the  further  simpli-
fication for  our  present  purpose,  of  limiting  the  sphere  of  influence
so  as  not  to  extend  beyond  the  next-nearest  neighbours  in  a  row
of  equidistant  particles  in  equilibrium,  with  repulsions  between
nearests  and  attractions  between  next-nearests.  The  distance,  a,
between  nearests  is  determined  by

/(a)  +  2/(2a)  =  0 (14),

being  what  (9)  of  §  24  becomes  when  there  is  no  mutual  force
except  between  nearests  and  next-nearests.  There  is  obviously
one  stable  solution  of  this  equation  in  which  one  atom  is  at  the
zero  of  the  scale  of  abscissas  (not  shown  in  the  diagram)  and  its
nearest  neighbour  on  the  right  is  at  ^,  the  point  of  zero  force  with
attraction  for  greater  distances  and  repulsion  for  less  distances.
The  only  other  configuration  of  stable  equilibrium  is  found  by
solution  of  (14)  according  to  the  plan  described  in  §  24,  which  gives
a  =  -680.  It  is  shown  on  fig.  7  hy  Ai,  ^i+i,  as  consecutive  atoms
in  the  row.

§  28.  Consider  now  the  equilibrium  in  the  neighbourhood  of
either  end  of  a  rectilinear  row  of  a  very  large  number  of  atoms
which,  beyond  influential  distance  from  either  end,  are  at  equal
consecutive  distances  a  satisfying  §  27  (14).  We  shall  take  for
simplicity  the  case  of  equilibrium  in  which  there  is  no  extraneous
force  applied  to  any  of  the  atoms,  and  no  mutual  force  between
any  two  atoms  except  the  positive  or  negative  attraction  f{D).
But  suppose  first  that  ties  or  struts  are  placed  between  con-
secutive atoms  near  each  end  of  the  row  so  as  to  keep  all  their
consecutive  distances  exactly  equal  to  a.  For  brevity  we  shall
call  them  ties,  though  in  ordinary  language  any  one  of  them
would  be  called  a  strut  if  its  force  is  push  instead  of  pull  on  the
atoms  to  which  it  is  applied.  Calling  Ai,  A^,  A3 ...  the  atoms  at
one  end  of  the  row,  suppose  the  tie  between Ai  and  A^  to  be

678

APPENDIX J.

removed,  and  A^  allowed  to  take  its  position  of  equilibrium.
A  single  equation  gives  the  altered  distance  A^A^,  which  we  shall
denote  by  a  +  iX^.  Let  an  altered  tie  be  placed  between  A^  and
A2  to  keep  them  at  this  altered  distance  during  the  operations
which  follow.  Next  remove  the  tie  between  Ao  and  ^3,  and  find
by  a  single  equation  the  altered  distance  a +  1X0.  After  that
remove  the  tie  between  A3  and  A^  and  find,  still  by  a  single  equa-

Fig.  7.

tion,  the  altered  distance  a+  1X3,  and  so  on  till  we  find  ^x^  or  ^Xg,  or
^Xi,  small  enough  to  be  negligible.  Thus  found,  ^x-^,  jXo,  1X3,...  ^Xi
give  a  first  approximation  to  the  deviations  from  equality  of
distance  for  complete  equilibrium. Repeat  the  process  of  removing

VARIATIONS  OF  DENSITY  SEVEN  OR  EIGHT  NETS  FROM  SURFACE.  679

the  ties  in  order  and  replacing  each  one  by  the  altered  length  as
in the first  set of  approximations,  and we find a second set

2^1  >  2^2)  2^3 Go  on  similarly  to  a  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth...

approximation  till  we  find  no  change  by  a  repetition  of  the  process.
Thus,  by  a  process  essentially  convergent  if  the  equilibrium  with
which  we  started  is  stable,  we  find  the  deviations  from  equality  of
consecutive  distances  required  for  equilibrium  when  the  system  is
left  free  in  the  neighbourhood  of  each  end,  and  all  through  the
row  (except  always  the  constraint  to  remain  in  a  straight  line).
By  this  proceeding  applied  to  the  curve  of  fig.  7  and  the  case  of
equilibrium  a  =  "680,  the  following  successive  approximations  were
found  : —

Xi

Xa

•"'3

^4

^5

Xg

^7

1st  Approximation .

+  •018

-•009

+  •004

-  ^002

+  •001

-•001

•000

2nd

+  •026

-•014

+  •007

-  ■OOS  i  +  ^002

3rd

+  •031

-•018

+  •009

-  •OOS +  ^003

4th

+  •034

-  -020

+  ■011

-  •ooe

5th

+  •036

-  ^022

+  ■012

-•007

6th

+  •037

-•023

+  •013

7th

+  •038

-•024

8th

+  •039

Thus  our  final  sohition,  with  a  =  680,  is
x,  =  +  •039, cco^  =  -  -024,
0^3  =  +  -013, ^,  =  --007,
0:5=  + -003, a;s  =  --001,
Xj  =  000.

§  29.  It  is  exceedingly  interesting  to  remark  that  the  devia-
tions of  the  successive  distances  from  a  are  alternately  positive
and  negative,  and  that  they  only  become  less  than  one-seventh  per
cent,  of  a  for  the  distance  between  A^j  and  A^.  Thus,  if  we  agree
to  neglect  anything  less  than  one-seventh  per  cent,  in  the  distance
between  atom  and  atom,  the  influential  distance  from  either  end
is  7a,  although  the  mutual  force  between  atom  and  atom  is  null  at
all  distances  exceeding  2"2a.

§  30.  If,  instead  off(D)  denoting  the  force  between  two  atoms
in  a  rectilinear  row,  it  denotes  the  mutual force  between  two

680  APPENDIX J.

parallel  plane  nets  in  a  Bravais  homogeneous  assemblage  of  single
atoms,  the  work  of  §§  27,  28  remains  valid  ;  and  thus  we  arrive  at
the  very  important  and  interesting  conclusion  that  when  there  is
repulsion  between  nearest  nets,  attraction  between  next-nearests,
and  no  force  between  next-next-nearests  or  any  farther,  the  dis-
turbance from  homogeneousness  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
bounding  plane  consists  in  alternate  diminutions  and  augmenta-
tions of  density  becoming  less  and  less  as  we  travel  inwards,  but
remaining  sensible  at  distances  from  the  boundary  amounting  to
several  times  the  distance  from  net  to  net.

APPENDIX K.

ON VARIATIONAL ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC SCREENING*.

§  1.  A  SCREEN  of  imperfectly  conducting  material  is  as
thorough  in  its  action,  when  time  enough  is  allowed  it,  as  is  a
similar  screen  of  metal.  But  if  it  be  tried  against  rapidly  varying
electrostatic  force,  its  action  lags.  On  account  of  this  lagging,  it  is
easily  seen  that  the  screening  effect  against  periodic  variations  of
electrostatic  force  will  be  less  and  less,  the  greater  the  frequency
of  the  variation.  This  is  readily  illustrated  by  means  of  various
forms  of  idiostatic  electrometers.  Thus,  for  example,  a  piece  of
paper  supported  on  metal  in  metallic  communication  with  the
movable  disc  of  an  attracted  disc  electrometer  annuls  the  at-
traction (or  renders  it  quite  insensible)  a  few  seconds  of  time
after  a  difference  of  potential  is  established  and  kept  constant
between  the  attracted  disc  and  the  opposed  metal  plate,  if  the
paper  and  the  air  surrounding  it  are  in  the  ordinary  hygrometric
condition  of  our  climates.  But  if  the  instrument  is  applied  to
measure  a  rapidly  alternating  difference  of  potential,  with  equal
differences  on  the  two  sides  of  zero,  it  gives  very  little  less  than
the  same  average  force  as  that  found  when  the  paper  is  removed
and  all  other  circumstances  kept  the  same.  Probably,  with
ordinary  clean  white  paper  in  ordinary  hygrometric  conditions,
a  frequency  of  alternation  of  from  50  to  100  per  second  will
more  than  suffice  to  render  the  screening  influence  of  the  paper
insensible.  And  a  much  less  frequency  will  suffice  if  the  atmo-
sphere surrounding  the  paper  is  artificially  dried.  Up  to  a
frequency  of  millions  per  second,  we  may  safely  say  that,  the
greater  the  frequency,  the  more  perfect  is  the  annulment  of
screening  by  the  paper;  and  this  statement  holds  also  if  the
paper  be  thoroughly  blackened  on  both  sides  with  ink,  although

*  Froc.  M.S.,  April, 1891.

682  APPENDIX K.

possibly  in  this  condition  a  greater  frequency  than  50  to  100
per  second  might  be  required  for  practical  annulment  of  the
screening,

§  2.  Now,  suppose,  instead  of  attractive  force  between  two
bodies  separated  by  the  screen,  as  our  test  of  electrification,
that  we  have  as  test  a  faint  spark,  after  the  manner  of  Hertz.
Let  two  well  insulated  metal  balls,  A,  B,  be  placed  very  nearly
in  contact,  and  two  much  larger  balls,  E,  F,  placed  beside  them,
with  the  shortest  distance  between  E,  F  sufficient  to  prevent
sparking,  and  with  the  lines  joining  the  centres  of  the  two  pairs
parallel.  Let  a  rapidly  alternating  difference  of  potential  be
produced  between  E  and  F,  varying,  not  abruptly,  but  according,
we  may  suppose,  to  the  simple  harmonic  law.  Two  sparks  in
every  period  will  be  observed  between  A  and  B.  The  inter-
position of  a  large  paper  screen  between  E,  F,  on  one  side,  and
A,  B,  on  the  other,  in  ordinary  hygrometric  conditions,  will
absolutely  stop  these  sparks,  if  the  frequency  be  less  than,  per-
haps, 4  or  5  per  second.  With  a  frequency  of  50  or  more,  a  clean
white  paper  screen  will  make  no  perceptible  difference.  If  the
paper  be  thoroughly  blackened  with  ink  on  both  sides,  a  fre-
quency of  something  more  than  50  per  second  may  be  necessary ;
but  some  moderate  frequency  of  a  few  hundreds  per  second  will,
no  doubt,  suffice  to  practically  annul  the  effect  of  the  interposition
of  the  screen.  With  frequencies  up  to  1000  million  per  second,
as  in  some  of  Hertz's  experiments,  screens  such  as  our  blackened
paper  are  still  perfectly  transparent,  but  if  we  raise  the  frequency
to  500  million  million,  the  influence  to  be  transmitted  is  light,
and  the  blackened  paper  becomes  an  almost  perfect  screen.

§  3.  Screening  against  a  varying  magnetic  force  follows  an
opposite  law  to  screening  against  varying  electrostatic  force.  For
the  present,  I  pass  over  the  case  of  iron  and  other  bodies  possess-
ing magnetic  susceptibility,  and  consider  only  materials  devoid
of  magnetic  susceptibility,  but  possessing  more  or  less  of  electric
conductivity.  However  perfect  the  electric  conductivity  of  the
screen  ma}^  be,  it  has  no  screening  efficiency  against  a  steady
magnetic  force.  But  if  the  magnetic  force  varies,  currents  are
induced  in  the  material  of  the  screen  which  tend  to  diminish
the  magnetic  force  in  the  air  on  the  remote  side  from  the  varying
magnet. For  simplicity,  we  shall  suppose  the  variations  to  follow

ELECTRO-CONDUCTIVE PLATE SCREENS MAGNETIC CHANGES. 683

the  simple  harmonic  law.  The  greater  the  electric  conductivity
of  the  material,  the  greater  is  the  screening  effect  for  the  same
frequency  of  alternation ;  and,  the  greater  the  frequency,  the
greater  is  the  screening  effect  for  the  same  material.  If  the
screen  be  of  copper,  of  specific  resistance  1640  sq.  cm.  per  second
(or  electric  diffusivity  130  sq.  cm.  per  second),  and  with  frequency
80  per  second,  what  I  have  called  the  "  mhoic  effective  thickness*"
is  0"71  of  a  cm.;  and  the  range  of  current  intensity  at  depth
%  X  0*7 1  cm.  from  the  surface  of  the  screen  next  the  exciting
magnet  is  e~"  of  its  value  at  the  surface.

Thus  (as  e''  =  20'09)  the  range  of  current-intensity  at  depth
2"13cm.  is  2'o  ^f  its  surface  value.  Hence  we  may  expect  that
a  sufficiently  large  plate  of  copper  2|  cm.  thick  will  be  a  little
less  than  perfect  in  its  screening  action  against  an  alternating
magnetic  force  of  frequency  80  per  second.

§  4.  Lord  Rayleigh,  in  his  "  Acoustical  Observations  "  (Phil.
Mag.,  1882,  first  half-year),  after  referring  to  Maxwell's  statement,
that  a  perfectly  conducting  sheet  acts  as  a  barrier  to  magnetic
force  {Electricity  and  Magnetism,  §  %Qo),  describes  an  experiment
in  which  the  interposition  of  a  large  and  stout  plate  of  copper
between  two  coils  renders  inaudible  a  sound  which,  without  the
copper  screen,  is  heard  by  a  telephone  in  circuit  with  one  of  the
coils  excited  by  electromagnetic  induction  from  the  other  coil,
in  which  an  intermittent  current,  with  sudden,  sharp  variations
of  strength,  is  produced  by  a  "  microphone  clock  "  and  a  voltaic
battery.  Larmor,  in  his  paper  on  '"  Electromagnetic  Induction
in  Conducting  Sheets  and  Solid  Bodies  "  {Phil.  Mag.,  1884,  first
half-year),  makes  the  following  very  interesting  statement : — "  If
"  we  have  a  sheet  of  conducting  matter  in  the  neighbourhood  of
"  a  magnetic  system,  the  effect  of  a  disturbance  of  that  system
"  will  be  to  induce  currents  in  the  sheet  of  such  kind  as  will  tend
"  to  prevent  any  change  in  the  conformation  of  the  tubes  [lines]
"  of  force  cutting  through  the  sheet.  This  follows  from  Lenz's
"  law,  which  itself  has  been  shown  by  Helmholtz  and  Thomson  to
"be  a  direct  consequence  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  But  if
"  the  arrangement  of  the  tubes  [lines  of  force]  in  the  conductor
"is  unaltered,  the  field  on  the  other  side  of  the  conductor  into
"  which  they  pass  (supposed  isolated  from  the  outside  spaces  by

*  Math,  and  Phys.  Papers,  Vol.  iii.  Art.  cii,  g  35.

684  APPENDIX K.

"  the  conductor)  will  be  unaltered.  Hence,  if  the  disturbance  is
"  of  an  alternating  character,  with  a  period  small  enough  to  make
"  it  go  through  a  cycle  of  changes  before  the  currents  decay
"  sensibly,  we  shall  have  the  conductor  acting  as  a  screen.

"  Further,  we  shall  also  find,  on  the  same  principle,  that  a
"  rapidly  rotating  conducting  sheet  screens  the  space  inside  it  from
"  all  magnetic  action  which  is  not  symmetrical  round  the  axis  of
"  rotation."

Mr  Willoughby  Smith's  experiments  on  "  Volta-electric  induc-
tion," which  he  described  in  his  inaugural  address  to  the  Society
of  Telegraph  Engineers  of  November,  1883,  afforded  good  illus-
trations of  this  kind  of  action  with  copper,  zinc,  tin,  and  lead,
screens,  and  with  different  degrees  of  frequency  of  alternation.
His  results  with  iron  are  also  very  interesting :  they  showed,  as
might  be  expected,  comparatively  little  augmentation  of  screening
effect  with  augmentation  of  frequency.  This  is  just  what  is  to
be  expected  from  the  fact  that  a  broad  enough  and  long  enough
iron  plate  exercises  a  large  magnetostatic  screening  influence  ;
which,  with  a  thick  enough  plate,  v/ill  be  so  nearly  complete  that
comparatively  little  is  left  for  augmentation  of  the  screening
influence  by  alternations  of  greater  and  greater  frequency.

I  5.  A  copper  shell  closed  around  an  alternating  magnet
produces  a  screening  effect  which  on  the  principle  of  |  3  we  may
reckon  to  be  little  short  of  perfection  if  the  thickness  be  2^  cm.
or  more,  and  the  frequency  of  alternation  80  per  second.

§  6.  Suppose  now  the  alternation  of  the  magnetic  force  to  be
produced  by  the  rotation  of  a  magnet  M  about  any  axis.  First,
to  find  the  effect  of  the  rotation,  imagine  the  magnet  to  be  repre-
sented by  ideal  magnetic  matter.  Let  (after  the  manner  of  Gauss
in  his  treatment  of  the  secular  perturbations  of  the  solar  system)
the  ideal  magnetic  matter  be  uniformly  distributed  over  the
circles  described  by  its  different  points.  For  brevity  call  /  the
ideal  magnet  symmetrical  round  the  axis,  which  is  thus  con-
stituted. The  magnetic  force  throughout  the  space  around  the
rotating  magnet  will  be  the  same  as  that  due  to  /,  compounded
with  an  alternating  force  of  which  the  component  at  any  point
in  the  direction  of  any  fixed  line  varies  from  zero  in  the  two
opposite  directions  in  each  period  of  the  rotation.  If  the  copper
shell  is  thick  enough,  and  the  angular velocity  of  the  rotation

ROTATING CONDUCTOR SCREENS STEADY MAGNETIC FORCE. 685

great  enough,  the  alternating  component  is  almost  annulled  for
external  space,  and  only  the  steady  force  due  to  /  is  allowed  to
act  in  the  space  outside  the  copper  shell.

§  7.  Consider  now,  in  the  space  outside  the  copper  shell,  a
point  P  rotating  with  the  magnet  M.  It  will  experience  a  force
simply  equal  to  that  due  to  M  when  there  is  no  rotation,  and,
when  M  and  P  rotate  together,  P  will  experience  a  force  gradu-
ally altering  as  the  speed  of  rotation  increases,  until,  when  the
speed  becomes  sufficiently  great,  it  becomes  sensibly  the  same  as
the  force  due  to  the  symmetrical  magnet  /.  Now  superimpose
upon  the  whole  system  of  the  magnet,  and  the  point  P,  and  the
copper  shell,  a  rotation  equal  and  opposite  to  that  of  M  and  P.
The  statement  just  made  with  reference  to  the  magnetic  force
at  P  remains  unaltered,  and  we  have  now  a  fixed  magnet  M  and
a  point  P  at  rest,  with  reference  to  it,  while  the  copper  shell
rotates  round  the  axis  around  which  we  first  supposed  M  to
rotate.

§  8.  A  little  piece  of  apparatus,  constructed  to  illustrate  the
result  experimentally,  is  submitted  to  the  Royal  Society  and
shown  in  action.  In  the  copper  shell  is  a  cylindric  drum,  1'25  cm.
thick,  closed  at  its  two  ends  with  circular  discs  1  cm.  thick.  The
magnet  is  supported  on  the  inner  end  of  a  stiff  wire  passing
through  the  centre  of  a  perforated  fixed  shaft  which  passes
through  a  hole  in  one  end  of  the  drum,  and  serves  as  one  of
the  bearings ;  the  other  bearing  is  a  rotating  pivot  fixed  to  the
outside  of  the  other  end  of  the  drum.  The  accompanying  sections,
drawn  to  a  scale  of  three-fourths  full  size,  explain  the  arrange-
ment sufficiently.  A  magnetic  needle  outside,  deflected  by  the
fixed  magnet  when  the  drum  is  at  rest,  shows  a  great  diminution
of  the  deflection  when  the  drum  is  set  to  rotate.  If  the  (triple
compound)  magnet  inside  is  reversed,  by  means  of  the  central
wire  and  cross  bar  outside,  shown  in  the  diagram,  the  magneto-
meter outside  is  greatly  affected  while  the  copper  shell  is  at  rest ;
but  scarcely  affected  perceptibly  while  the  copper  shell  is  rotating
rapidly.

§  9.  When  the  copper  shell  is  a  figure  of  revolution,  the  mag-
netic force  at  any  point  of  the  space  outside  or  inside  is  steady,
whatever  be  the  speed  of  rotation  ;  but  if  the  shell  be  not  a  figure
of  revolution,  the  steady  force  in  the  external  space  observable

686

APPENDIX K.

when  the  shell  is  at  rest  becomes  the  resultant  of  the  force  due
to  a  fixed  magnet  intermediate  between  M  and  /  compounded

with  an  alternating  force  with  amplitude  of  alternation  increasing
to  a  maximum,  and  ultimately  diminishing  to  zero,  as  the  angular
velocity  is  increased  without  limit.

1

EXPERIMENTAL ILLUSTRATION.  687

§  10.  If  71/  be  symmetrical,  with  reference  to  its  northern  and
southern  polarity,  on  the  two  sides  of  a  plane  through  the  axis  of
rotation,  /  becomes  a  null  magnet,  the  ideal  magnetic  matter  in
every  circle  of  which  it  is  constituted  being  annulled  by  equal
quantities  of  positive  and  negative  magnetic  matter  being  laid
on  it.  Thus,  when  the  rotation  is  sufficiently  rapid,  the  magnetic
force  is  annulled  throughout  the  space  external  to  the  shell.  The
transition  from  the  steady  force  of  M  to  the  final  annulment  of
force,  when  the  copper  shell  is  symmetrical  round  its  axis  of
rotation,  is,  through  a  steadily  diminishing  force,  without  alter-
nations. When  the  shell  is  not  symmetrical  round  its  axis  of
rotation,  the  transition  to  zero  is  accompanied  with  alternations
as  described  in  §8.

I  11.  When  31  is  not  symmetrical  on  the  two  sides  of  a  plane
through  the  axis  of  rotation,  /  is  not  null ;  and  the  condition
approximated  to  through  external  space  with  increasing  speed
of  rotation  is  the  force  due  to  /,  which  is  an  ideal  magnet
symmetrical  round  the  axis  of  rotation.

§  12.  A  very  interesting  simple  experimental  illustration  of
screening  against  magnetic  force  may  be  shown  by  a  rotating
disc  with  a  fixed  magnet  held  close  to  it  on  one  side.  A  bar
magnet  held  with  its  magnetic  axis  bisected  perpendicularly  by
a  plane  through  the  axis  of  rotation  would,  by  sufficiently  rapid
rotation,  have  its  magnetic  force  almost  perfectly  annulled  at
points  in  the  air  as  near  as  may  be  to  it,  on  the  other  side  of
the  disc,  if  the  diameter  of  the  disc  exceeds  considerably  the
length  of  the  magnet.  The  magnetic  force  in  the  air  close  to
the  disc,  on  the  side  next  to  the  magnet,  will  be  everywhere
parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  disc.

APPENDIX L.

ON ELECTRIC WAVES AND  VIBEATIONS IN A SUBMARINE
TELEGRAPH  WIRE*.

§  1.  To  simplify  our  problem,  by  avoiding  the  interesting
subject  of  alternating  electric  currents  of  electricity  in  a  solid
conductor  dealt  with  in  §§  9,  19,  29 — 35  of  Art.  cii.  of  my
Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Vol.  ill.,  I  suppose  for  the
present  the  central  conductor  and  the  surrounding  sheath  to  be
exceedingly  thin  copper  tubes ;  so  thin  that  the  electric  current
carried  by  each  is  uniformly  distributed  through  its  substance,
with  the  highest  frequency  of  alternation  which  we  shall  have  to
consider.  To  simplify  farther,  by  avoiding  the  exceedingly  com-
plex question  of  electric  currents  in  the  water  above  the  cable  and
wet  ground  below  it,  I  for  the  present  suppose  the  outer  sheath  to
be  perfectly  insulated.  This  supposition  will  make  exceedingly
little  difference  in  respect  to  the  solution  of  our  problem  for  such
frequencies  of  alternation  as  are  used  in  submarine  signalling;  but
it  makes  a  vast  difference  and  simplification  for  the  very  high
frequencies,  up  to  those  of  the  vibrations  constituting  light,  which
must  be  considered.  For  brevity  I  shall  call  the  system  of  two
conductors,  with  air  or  gutta-percha  or  other  insulating  material
between  them,  the  cable.  For  simplicity  we  shall  suppose  the
cable  to  be  laid  straight ;  and  shall  specify  any  place  in  tiie  cable
by  X,  its  distance  from  any  chosen  point  of  reference  0  in  the  axis
of  the  inner  conductor.  But  all  our  calculations  will  be  applicable
though  the  cable  be  not  laid  straight ;  provided  its  radius  of
curvature  everywhere  is  very  large  in  comparison  with  the  radius
of  the  sheath  in  cross-section ;  and  provided  x  is  distance  from  0
measured  along  the  length  of  the  cable.

*  This  is  the  Appendix  promised  in  the  footnote  on  Lecture  IV.,  page  45,  of  the
present  volume.  A  partial  statement  of  results  was  given  in  Nichol's  Cyclopedia
(1860)  under  title  "  Electricity,  Velocity  of,"  republished  Mathematical  and
Physical  Papers,  Vol.  ii. Article  lxxxi.

ELECTROKINEMATIC CONDITIONS.  689

§  2. Let  r  and  r'  be  the  radii  of  the  inner  conductor  and  the
sheath (1) ;

R,  the  sum  of  the  resistances  of  the  two  conductors  per
unit  of  length  of  each (2) ;

c,  the  quantity  of  electricity  on  unit  length  of  each
conductor  when  the  difference  of  potentials  be-
tween them  is  unity  (3);

II,  the  electromagnetic  quasi-inertia  of  a  circuit  made
ideally  by  metallically  connecting  the  inner  con-
ductor with  the  sheath  at  two  cross-sections  with
the  length  I  between  them  large  in  comparison
with  r'  —  r  (4);

7,  the  current  in  either  of  the  two  conductors  at  time
t  and  place  x (5) ;

^,  the  difference  of  potentials  between  the  two  con-
ductors at  time  t  and  place  x (6);

q  dx,  the  quantity  of  electricity  on  a  length  dx  of
either  conductor  at  time  t  and  place  x (7).

In  all  these  items  of  electric  reckoning  we  shall  use  electro-
magnetic measure.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  every  part
of  the  cable  the  electi'ic  currents  in  the  central  conductor,  and  in
the  sheath  are  equal  and  opposite :  also  that  the  total  quantities
of  electricity  at  every  instant  on  the  smaller  convex  surface  of
the  central  conductor,  and  the  larger  concave  surface  of  the
sheath,  are  equal  and  opposite  :  and  that  there  is  no  electricity
on  the  inner  surface  of  the  central  conductor,  and  no  electricity
on  the  outer  surface  of  the  sheath.  The  notation  (3)  above,
in  terms  of  my  original  definition  *  of  electrostatic  capacity,  means
that  c  is  the  electrostatic  capacity,  reckoned  in  electromagnetic
measure,  of  unit  length  of  the  central  conductor;  regarded  as  if
it  were  part  of  a  Leyden  phial. By  (3)  and  (7)  we  have

q  =  C(f> (8).

I  3. Changes  of  electrification  of  the  opposed  surfaces  of  the
two conductors can only  take place through more electricity

*  "On  the  Electrostatical  Capacity  of  a  Leyden  Phial  and  of  a  Telegraph  Wire
insulated  in  the  Axis  of  a  Cylindrical  Conducting  Sheath."  First  published  in
Phil.  Mag.  1855,  1st  haK-year;  republished  in  my  volume  of  Electrostatics  and
Magnetism,  §§  51 — 56.

T. L.  44

690  APPENDIX L.

flowing  into,  than  flowing  out  of,  any  portion.  This  electro-
kinematic  principle  gives  us  the  following  equation :

^A^yjl /m

dt dx  ""^  ''

The  dynamical  equation  of  our  problem  is  as  follows :

^-4l=-rt <i»)-

Here  the  first  term  of  the  first  member  expresses  the  ohmic
anti-electromotive  force ;  the  second  term  the  inertial  anti-
electromotive  force.  Eliminating  q  and  0  from  these  three
equations  we  find

^  dt^^  dt'~  c'dx'^ ^^^^•

§  4,  For  small  frequencies,  such  as  those  of  submarine  cable
signalling,  the  ohmic  resistance  dominates ;  and  the  inertial
resistance  is  imperceptible :  thus we have

<t--'Z 0.)-

§  5.  For  very  high  frequencies  the  inertial  resistance  dominates;
and  the  ohmic  is  ultimately  almost  imperceptible :  thus  we  have

^^"^-t (1^)-

§  6.  According  to  the  principles  set  forth  in  Part  III.,  "  Elec-
tricity in  Motion*,"  of  a  paper  "On  the  Mechanical  Values  of
Distributions  of  Electricity,  Magnetism,  and  Galvanism f,"  pub-
lished originally  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Glasgow  Philosophical
Society  for  January  1853,  we  find  It  most  readily  by  imagining
the  temporarily  closed  circuit  described  in  (4)  of  §  2  to  be  divided
into  a  very  great  number  of  parts  by  meridional  planes  through
the  axis  of  the  two  cylindrical  conductors,  and  imagining  any  one
of  these  parts  to  be  removed  to  any  position  outside,  while  the
currents  are  kept  constant  in  all  the  parts :  and  calculating  the
work  done  in  this  movement  against  the  attractive  force  between

*  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Vol.  i.  pp.  530 — 533.

t  By  this  ill-chosen  word  I  then  meant  electric  currents  in  closed  circuits.

VELOCITY OF ELECTRIC WAVES IN A SUBMARINE CABLE. 691

the  portion  of  the  circuit  removed  and  the  remainder.  The  full
synthetic  working-out  of  this  plan  gives

lyHog(r'/7^) (14)

for  the  total  work  spent  in  taking  the  whole  circuit  to  pieces
separated  by  infinite  distances  from  one  another.  Hence,  for  the
quasi-inertia  of  the  current,  per  unit  length  of  cable,  in  the  circuit
before  dissection,  we  have

/  =  21og(r7r) (15).

§  7.  By  Electrostatics  and  Magnetism,  §  55,  we  have  for  c
in  electrostatic  measure  ^kjlog  (r'/r) ;  where  fc  is  what  Faraday
called  the  specific  inductive  capacity  of  the  insulating  material
between  the  core  and  the  sheath.  Now  if  we  denote  by  N  the
number  of  electrostatic  units  in  the  electromagnetic  unit  of
electric  quantity,  it  is  also  the  number  of  electrostatic  units  in  the
electromagnetic  unit  of  potential.  Hence  N~  is  the  number  of
electrostatic  units  in  the  electromagnetic  unit  of  capacity :  and  we

have  accordingly

c  =  N-'k/-2  log  {r'/r)  =  k/N'I (16).

Using  this  in  (11)  we  find

lidydry^N^cPry

I  dt^  df" k  dx'' ^ ^'

and  (13)  becomes

drry.^N^d^y

dt' ■ k  dx' ^ ^'

which  shows  that  the  propagational  velocity  of  the  wave  is  more
and  more  nearly  equal  to  Njsjk,  the  higher  the  frequency;  subject
to  the  restriction  of  §  8.  Numerous  and  varied  experimental  in-
vestigations have  shown,  probably  within  ^  per  cent.,  that  N  is
equal  to  3 .  IQi".

§  8.  Our  demonstration  [see  §  2  (4)]  involves  essentially  the
supposition  that  the  wave-length  is  long  in  comparison  with  the
thickness  r'  —  r  of  the  dielectric  between  the  outer  and  inner
conductors.

I  9. A  complete  solution  of  (17)  is

7  =  sin  mx  {Ae^^  +  Bec'*) (18),

where  m  denotes  iir  divided  by  the  wave-length,  and

-R

21) -T''''

.(19);

692

APPENDIX L.

which  is  real  when

mN/'^k<R/2I (20).

But  when  (20)  is  not  fulfilled,  the  radical  in  (19)  is  zero  or
imaginary;  and,  instead  of  (18),  we  may  take,  as  a  convenient
solution  for  standing  waves,

=  sin  mx  sin  t

k

m-  —

-Rt
.  2/

.(21).

This  expresses  a  subsidential  oscillation,  with  ratio  of  subsidence
per  unit  of  time,  e~^^l^\  which  is  independent  of  the  wave-length  ;
a  very  important  and  interesting  result.  What  we  call  the
period*  of  the  oscillation  is

T^'^-  27

27r,

.(22);

which  becomes  more  and  more  nearly  equal  to  (2iTjm)l{NlyJk),
the  greater  is  m,  subject  to  the  restriction  of  §  8.

§  10.  The  complicated  subsidential  law  expressed  by  (18),
with  two  ratios  of  subsidence,  each  dependent  on  the  wave-length,
one  of  them  with  ratio  diminishing,  the  other  with  ratio  increasing,
when  the  wave-length  is  diminished  from  infinity,  is  also  very
interesting.  It  is  interesting  to  see  how,  with  very  small  values
of  m  (very  great  wave-lengths),  the  solution  blends  with  the
solution  of  (12)  above ;  and  how,  with  the  greatest  values  of  iii
fulfilling  (20),  the  solution  (18)  blends  into  (21).

§  11.  As  a  single  example  take  the  Atlantic  Cable  of  1865,
for  which  we  had

R  =  23000  c.G.s,  per  cm.  of  length  ;  r'jr  =  S'o  ;  whence  /  =  176

(23);

^^  =  3;  A^/^/^■=  1-732. 10";  c=  1894.  lO--^^ (24).

By  (23)  we  find  ii^//=6534.  Hence,  when  (20)  is  not  ful-
filled, the  ratio  of  extinction  for  1/6534  of  a  second  is  e~\  and
for  a  millionth  of  a  second  it  is  6~"°°^^**,  or  approximately  "99347.
And  the  limiting  condition  between  fulfilment  and  non-fulfilment
of  (20)  is,  by  (24),  m  <  3-772  .  10"^ ;  or,  if  \  denote  the  wave-length.

*  This  is  according  to  common  usage  ;  but  it  is  not  strictly  correct,  because
subsiding  vibratory  motion  is  not  periodic.

ELECTRIC  VIBRATIONS  IN  ONE  KILOMETRE  OF  ATLANTIC  CABLE. 693

X<167  kilometres.  Hence,  if  we  take  a  length  of  anything  less
than  167  kilometres  of  the  cable,  and  somehow  manage  to  give  it
initially  a  sinusoidal  distribution  of  current,  varying  through  its
length  from  zero  at  one  end,  through  maximum  and  minimum,
to  zero  at  the  other  end,  and  leave  it  to  itself;  the  electric  distri-
bution will  subside  vibrationally  to  zero.  A  millionth  of  a  second
from  the  beginning  the  vibrational  amplitude  will  be  "99347  of  its
initial  value  ;  and  in  1/6534  of  a  second  it  will  have  subsided  to
e""^  of- its  initial  value.  Instead  now  of  the  impracticable  manage-
ment to  begin  with  a  sinusoidal  distribution  of  current,  apply  a
voltaic  battery  to  maintain,  for  a  very  short  time,  say  a  hundred-
thousandth  of  a  second,  a  difference  of  potential  between  sheath
and  interior  conductor  at  one  end,  and  leave  it  to  itself  This
will  give  us  an  initial  disturbance  represented,  according  to
Fourier,  by  a  sum  of  sinusoidal  currents,  each  zero  at  both  ends
of  the  cable.  Every  one  of  these  components  will  subside  vibra-
tionally, all  with  the  same  ratio  of  subsidence  in  the  same  time.
The  periods  of  the  different  sinusoidal  components  will  be  those
expressed  by  (22) ;  with,  for  m,  the  successive  values  27r/A.,  2  ,  27r/X,
S.^tt/X,  ...,  where  X  denotes  the  length  of  the  cable.  If  this
length  of  the  cable  is  16'7  kilometres,  the  second  term  within  the
brackets  of  (22)  will  be  only  1/100  of  the  first,  and  for  this  or  any
shorter  length  it  may  be  neglected.  Thus,  for  a  length  of  one
kilometre,  the  period  of  the  gravest  sinusoidal  vibration,  as  we
see  by  (24)  and  (22),  is  1071-732  .  10^"  or  -577  .  IQ-^  of  a  second.
The  ratio  of  subsidence  in  this  time  is  e"'"^^" ;  so  that  26^  periods
of  vibration  will  be  performed  before  subsidence  to  e~^  of  the
initial  value.

§  12.  Consider,  in  conclusion,  how  thin  the  copper  must  be  to
fulfil  the  first  simplifying  condition  of  §  1,  when  the  vibrational
period  is  so  short  as  -577.10"^  of  a  second.  This  is  1/2166  of
1/80,  the  period  for  which  I  found  714  cm.  as  the  mhoic  thick-
ness* of  copper  of  specific  resistance  1610  c.  G.  s.  Hence  mhoic
thickness  for  period  -577  .  lO"''  is  -714/^/2166,  or  '0153  cm.  Now
without  going  farther  into  the  theory  of  the  diffusion  of  alternate
currents  of  electricity  through  a  metal,  we  may  safely  guess  that,
if  the  thickness  of  the  sheet  is  anything  less  than  one-third  of  the

*  Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers,  Vol.  in,  Art.  cii,  §  35  (May,  1890).

694

APPENDIX L.

mhoic  thickness  for  any  particular  period,  the  current  will  be
nearly  uniform  through  the  whole  thickness.  Hence,  to  satisfy  the
first  simplifying  condition  of  §  1,  the  copper  need  not  be  thinner
than  1/200  of  a  cm.  Taking  this  as  the  thickness,  let  us  find
what  r  and  ?•',  with  the  ratio  r  Ir  =  3*3,  must  be  to  make  the  sum
of  the  resistances  in  a  cm.  of  the  inner  tube  and  a  cm.  of  the  outer
tube  equal  to  23000  C.  G.  s.  If  we  take  the  specific  resistance  of
copper  as  1610  square  centimetres  per  second,  our  equation  to
determine  r  and  r  is

.(25);

1610.200  /I 1 \ ^^^^^

o -+^ =23000

by  which  we  have  r  =  2-9  and  r'  =  9"6.  It  must  be  noted  that  it
is  only  for  the  gravest  fundamental  vibration  that  1/200  cm.  thick-
ness of  the  metal  would  be  small  enough  to  give  the  law  and  rate
of  subsidence  determined  above.

CAMBRIDGE  : PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

INDEX.

Aberration  of  light,  487

—  ethei'ial  explanation  of,  491
Abney,  low  rays  of  radiant  heat, 11
Absorption,  8

—  explanation  due  to  Sellmeier  and
Stokes,  101

—  atmospheric,  320

Acoustic illustrations with circular

plates,  65
Action  at  a  distance,  497
Adamantine  property,  385

—  reflection,  phasal  lag  of,  419
Adamantinism,  explanation  of,  416
^olotropic  elastic  solid,  20

—  elasticity  without  skewness,  170
iEolotropy,  165

—  defined,  122

—  of  square  woven  cloth, 168

—  of  inertia,  426

—  electric,  explained, 562
Aepinus,  one  fluid  theory  of,  541

—  on  pyro-electricity  of  tourmaline,
561

Airy  on  reflection  of  diamond,  385

—  "Tracts,"  400,  430
Albedo  of  Lambert  defined,  317
Algorithm  of  finite  difl'erences,  69
Amplitudes  after  reflection,  Jamin  on,

350
Analcime,  property  of,  168
Aragonite,  250

—  wave  surface  for,  429
Argon,  viscosity  of,  297
Arsenic,  sulphuret  of,  423
Aschkinass,  experiments  on  sylvin  and

rock  salt,  151
Asymmetry,  cubic,  168
Atmospheric  electricity,  Beccaria  on,  543
Atoms,  number  of  per  cu.  cm.,  Eayleigh

on,  305
T. L.

Atoms,  size  of,  35,  164,  281

—  table  of  weights  of,  322

Babinet's  compensator,  401
Barlow's  crystal  model,  606
Basset,  construction  for  vibrational  line,
432

—  "Physical  Optics,"  401
Beccaria  on  atmospheric  electricity,  543
Becker  on  atmospheric  absorption,  320

—  velocities  of  stars,  270
Becquerel's  phosj^horoscope,  92

—  prismatic colour photographs,
636

—  rays,  effect  on  electric  conduction
explained,  501

Bell,  elliptic,  of  Marlowe,  65

—  vibrating,  64

Belopolsky,  spectroscopic  observations,

278
Biaxal  crystals,  118
Blackburn's  pendulum  experiment,  571
Blanchet's  three  sheet  wave  surface,  137
Blue  sky,  brightness  of,  311

—  case  of  elastic  solid  relating  to
Stokes  and  Rayleigh's  theory  of,  217

—  Eayleigh  on,  28,  89,  302

—  spectrum  of,  319

—  Stokes  on,  89

—  Zettwuch  on,  320
Boltzmann  on  partition  of  energy,  495

—  -Maxwell  doctrine,  errors  in,  503

—  -Maxwell  doctrine,  tests  for  errors
in,  515

Boltzmann's  theorem,  Rayleigh  on,  504
Boracite,  Haiiy  on, 561
Bornstein,  table  of  chirality,  460
Boscovich, 125,  131

—  atom  defined,  285

—  curve,  675

45

696

INDEX.

Boscovich  equilibrium  theory  of  elastic
solids,  668

—  on  different  laws  of  atomic  force,
556

—  theory, relation to mechanical
engineering,  653

—  wrongly  judged  obsolete,  123
Boscovich's  idea  of  a  crystal,  645
Bottomley on thermal diffusivity of

water,  287
Bouguer,  varying  brightness  of  stars,  304
Boussinesq,  "Theorie  Analytique  de  la

Chaleur,"  441
Bravais,  homogeneous  assemblages,  604

—  scalene  assemblage  of  molecules,
657

Brewster,  double  refraction  of  strained
glass,  257

—  on  deviation  from  Fresnel's  tan-
gent law,  339

—  property  of  analcime,  168
Brightness  of  stars,  Bouguer  on  varying,

304

—  of  10^  stars,  at  a  certain  radius,
535

Brillouin,  relation  of  Boscovich's  theory

to  mechanical  engineei'ing,  653
Bulk  modulus,  medium  with  infinite,  140
■ — of  ether,  negative,  410

Cable,  Atlantic,  of  1865,  692

—  submarine,  electric  wave  velocity
in,  691

—  subsidential  law  of  wave  velocity
in,  692

Caged  atom,  impacts  on,  521
Campbell,  velocities  of  stars,  270
Canton  on  electric-polarity  of  tourma-
line, 560
Capillarity,  Kayleigh's  investigation  on,

284
Capillary  wave  of  Scott  Eussell,  596
Carbonic  acid,  viscosity  of,  297
Catania,  observations  from,  307
Cauchy,  molecular treatment of wave
theory,  5

—  explanation  of  dispersion, 6

—  on  deep  sea  waves,  114,  530

—  "  Calcul  des  Residus,"  138

—  on  double  refraction,  228

—  imaginary  refractive  index,  379
Cell  surface,  maximum  partitional  area

of,  617

Chirality,  436

—  of  biaxal  crystal,  Pocklington  on,
451

—  of  cinnabar,  450

—  of  crystals,  Stokes  on,  461

—  of  chlorate  of  soda  crystal,  643

—  non- chirality,  of  Faraday's  mag-
netic polarization,  644

—  Fresnel  on,  449

—  of  quartz,  449,  637

—  of  tartaric  acid,  643
• — of  turpentine,  449

—  effect  on  double  refraction,  457

—  table  of,  460

Chiral  medium,  speed  of  circularly  po-
larized light  in,  443

—  properties of quartz, curves
showing,  454

—  results.  Van  't  Hoff  and  Le  Bel,
546

—  theories,  459
Chiroid  defined,  439

—  model  of,  588

Chlorate  of  potash  crystals,  Herapath's,
634

—  optical  effects  of  heat  on,  632

—  Rayleigh  and  Stokes  on  colours
of,  635

—  twinning,  etc.  of,  632

—  soda  crj'stals,  chirality  in,  643
Christiansen  on  anomalous  dispersion  in

fuchsin,  149
Clausius  on  energy  of  gases,  493

—  thermal  capacities,  499

—  viscosity,  286

Clustering  of  gravitational  matter,  540

Coefficients,  only  fifteen  for  simplest
Boscovich  crystal,  645

Cohesive  force,  280

Collision  defined,  498

Colour  photographs,  Becquerel  on  pris-
matic, 636

Condensational  waves,  36

—  energy  of,  43

—  probability  of  existence  of,  140

—  produced by reflection and  re-
fraction, 44

—  solution  for  points  distant  from
the  source,  63

—  or  sound  waves,  non-symmetrical
solution  for,  48

Conductivities  of  metals  at  low  tempera-
tures, 558

INDEX.

697

Conductivity,  electric,  caused  by  certain

light  rays,  501
Conroy,  "ideal  silver,"  326

—  on  reflected  light,  341
Continuity  in  uudulatory  theory,  157
Copper  and  zinc,  heat  of  combination

of,  282
Cork cited as substance disproving

Poisson's  condition,  130
Critical  periods  of  a  medium,  three  kinds

of,  155
Crystals,  biaxal,  118

—  Barlow's  model  of,  606

—  boundary  of,  610

—  Green  on  propagation  of  light  in,
139

—  molecularly  defined,  559

—  pyro-electric,  560

—  with  ternary  symmetry,  638
— ■ — chiral  symmetry,  640

Curie  brothers,  on  piezo-electricity,  562

D'Alembert's  equations  of  motion,  22
Democritus  on  atomic  origin,  540
Deville's  theory  of  dissociation,  498
Dewar's  "Nadir  of  Temperature,"  558
Diamond,  Airy  on  reflection  of, 385
Diffraction,  Stokes  on,  190
Diffusion,  inter-,  of  solids,  556

—  molecular,  of  lead  and  gold,  286
Diffusivity,  292

—  thermal,  of  water,  Bottoniley  on,
287

—  material,  290
Dilatancy  of  sand,  624
Dilatation,  cubic,  27
Discontinuous  source,  waves  from  a,  108
Dispersion, anomalous,  Helmholtz  on,

7,  13

—  ■ — in chromium salt crystals,
iodine  vapour,  fuchsin,  149

—  — Lommel  on,  79

—  — Eayleigh  on,  76

—  — Sellmeier's  dynamics  of,  103

—  Cauchy's  explanation  of,  7

—  dynamics  of,  145

—  Maxwell  on,  337

—  mechanical  explanation  of,  12

—  Sellmeier's  theory  of,  149
Displacement  potential,  62
Dissociation,  theory  of,  498
Distortional  waves,  36

—  condition  for  purely, 173

Distortional  fundamental  solution,  80
Distortion  of  elastic  solid,  energy  of,  23

—  model  with  twenty-one  coefficients
of,  34

—  relation  between  coefficients  of,
in  isotropic  bodies,  25

—  twenty-one  coefficients  of,  24

Eisenlohr,  on  metallic  reflectivities,  385
Elasticity,  Todhuuter  and  Pearson's,  139
Electric  asolotropy  explained,  562
Electrical  waves  in  ether,  energy  of,  550
Electric  force,  suggestion  as  to  the  pro-
pagation of,  44
Electricity,  contact-,  of  metals,  548

—  friction  al,  atomic  explanation  of,
547

Electric screening by imperfect con-
ductors, 681
— ■ waves,  45

—  — velocity of, in submarine
cable,  691

Electrification,  Hertz'  test  for,  682
Electrions  in  an  atom,  equilibrium  of,

551
Electro-inductive  capacity,  554
Electro-magnetic  disturbances,  Rowland

on,  68

—  induction in conducting sheets
and  solid  bodies,  683

—  theory  of  light,  9,  45,  376
Elliptically  polarized  light,  energy of,

263
Elongations,  principal,  231
Energy  of  electric  etherial  waves,  550

—  partition  of,  493

—  potential,  of  distorted  solid,  232

—  rate  of  transmission  of  in  solid,  204
Epicurus  on  atomic  origin,  540
Equations  of  motion  for  elastic  body,

22,  26

—  heterogeneous  elastic  body,  27
— - incompressible  solid,  166,  167

Etching,  molecular  action  of  hydro-
fluoric acid,  637

Ether,  arbitrary  distribution  of,  in  atom,
470

—  density  of,  260

—  distribution  of,  in  an  atom,  254
— ■ effect of its passage through

matter,  485

—  illustration  of,  by  fluid  quality  of
shoemaker's  wax,  10

698

INDEX.

Ether,  inertia  of,  483

—  kinetic  energy  of,  481

—  negative  bulk  modulus  of,  410

—  not  gravitational,  533

—  orbit  of,  in  an  atom,  476

—  properties  of  luminiferous,  9

—  relative  motion  of,  and  of  ponder-
able bodies,  486

—  rigidity  of,  265

—  sphere  of  condensation,  414

—  stream lines through an  atom,
480

—  amplitudes  of  vibrations  of,  262

—  vs^eight  of,  if  gravitational,  267

—  with  embedded  molecules,  motion
of,  189

Ethylene- chloride,  viscosity  of,  297
Ethylene,  viscosity  of,  297
Etna,  observations  from, 307
"  Extraneous  force  "  of  Green,  227

Faraday,  conductivity  for  lines  of  force,
554

—  effect of  magnetic  force  on cir-
cularly polarized  light,  570

—  magnetic polarization, non-chi-
rality  of,  644

—  magneto-optic  rotation  of  vibra-
tional line,  461

Films,  translucence  of  metallic,  324
Fitzgerald  on  expansion  of  matter  due
to  passage  of  ether  through  it,  485
Fizeau  on  interference,  98

—  velocity  of  light,  92
Fluorescence,  molecular  explanation  of,

58

—  Stokes  on,  301

—  of  sulphate  of  quinine,  92

—  of  uranium  glass,  59,  92
Forbes  on  blue  veins  in  glacier,  581
Foucault,  pendulum  experiment, 572

—  velocity  of  light,  92
Fourier's  series,  formula  leading  to,  112
Fox-Talbot, anomalous disi^ersion in

chromium  salt  crystals, 149
Fraunhofer, line of sodium vapour,

double  dark,  176
Fresnel,  chirality,  449

—  electro-magnetic  theory,  9

—  formula for intensity of light
after  reflection,  16

—  relative motion of ether and
matter,  486

Fresnel's  laws  and  Green's  theory  com-
pared, 343

—  — arrived  at  by  theory,  362

—  rhomb,  errors  in,  394

—  — phasal  changes  in,  387

—  — theory  of,  386

—  wave-surface,  Glazebrook  on,  426
Frictional  electricity,  atomic  explanation

of,  547
Froude,  nautical  experiments,  599
Fuchsin,  78

Gait,  A., experiment on dilatancy of
sand,  625

—  on  heat  of  combination  of  copper
and  zinc,  282

Gases,  kinetic  theory  of,  5,  30
Gas  under  gravity,  equilibrium  of,  524
Glaciers,  blue  veins  in,  581
Glazebrook  on  double  refraction,  257

—  Fresnel's  wave-surface,  426

—  wave-surface  of  aragonite,  429

—  vibrational  line, 432

Gold  leaf,  etc.,  translucency  of,  374
Graham  on  transpiration,  296
Granite,  vibrations  in,  219
Grating  of  Prof.  Kowland,  98
Gravel,  void  space  in  a  heap  of,  622
Green  on  Fresnel's  wave-surface, 175

—  double  refraction,  228

—  propagation  of  light  in  crystals,
139

—  results  on  reflection  and  refrac-
tion, 14

Green's  extraneous  force,  227

—  dynamical  theory,  correction  in,.
352

—  theory  and  Fresnel's  laws  com-
pared, 343

Groombridge, 1830,  Newcomb  on,  273
Groups  of  waves,  velocities  of,  58,  59,
90

Haiiy  on  boracite,  561

Haze,  cause  of, 307

Heating  of  water  by  light, 118

Heat,  radiant,  of  a  Leslie  cube,  120

Helmholtz,  anomalous  dispersion,  7,  13

—  on  Lenz'  law,  683

—  on  viscous  consumption  of  energy,
100

Herapath's  crystals  of  chlorate  of  potash,
634

INDEX.

699

Hercules,  motion  of  solar  system  to-
wards, 491

Herscbel's  discovery  of  solar  system's
motion,  491

Hertz'  test  of  electrification,  682

Huggins'  method  for  relative  motion  of
earth  and  star,  491

Huyghens'  law  of  double  refraction,
19

Hydrofluoric  acid,  molecular  etching
action  of,  637

Hydrokinetic  solutions  and  observations,
436

Iceland  spar,  17,  252

— - — wave-surface  for,  429
Ice,  physical  properties  of,  577
"Ideal  silver,"  326
Ideal  solid,  241

Incompressible  solid,  equations  of  motion
of,  166,  167

—  formed  by  scalene  assemblage  of
molecules,  659

Inertia,  aeolotropic,  426

—  — explained,  438
Institution  Lecture,  Royal,  85
Intensity  of  light  after  reflection, 16
Inter-action  of  ether  and  matter,  253
Inter-diffusion  of  solids,  Eoberts-Austen

on,  556

—  Loschmidt  on,  294

—  Maxwell  on,  293
Interference,  Fizeau  on,  98

—  perfectness  of,  for  100,000  periods,
98

Ions,  for  explanation  of  electric  con-
ductivity caused  by  ultra-violet  and
other  rays,  501

Iridescence  and  twinning  of  chlorate
of  potash  crystals,  632

Jamin  on  amphtudes  after  reflection,
350

—  metallic  reflectivities,  385

—  reflected  light,  341

Joule,  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,
261

—  "Thermal effects of fluids in
motion,"  595

Jupiter's  satellites,  eclipses  of,  11

Kelvin,  Lord,  "  Thermal  effects  of  fluid
in  motion,"  595

Kelvin,  Lord, "Hydrokinetic  solutions
and  observations,"  436

—  "Mathematical  Theory  of  Elas-
ticity," 231

—  ' '  Mechanical  values  of  electricity,
magnetism  and  galvanism,"  436

—  on  Lenz'  law,  683
Kempf  on  velocity  of  sun,  272

Kerr on  double  refraction  of  strained

glass,  257
Ketteler  on  refractive  index,  107
Kinetic  energy,  disappearance  of,  188

—  theory  of  gases,  5,  30
Koenig,  tuning  fork,  53

Kundt, thermal capacity of mercury
vapour,  500

Lagrange,  algorithm  of  finite  diflereuces,

69
Lambert's  albedo  defined,  317
Landolt,  table  of  chirality,  460
Langley,  measurements  of  wave-length,

11
Laplace,  tidal  problem,  39
"Laplacian"  adopted  for  V">  HI
Larmor,  electro-magnetic  induction  in

conducting  sheets  and  solid  bodies,

683
Le  Bel,  chiral  results,  546
Lenz'  law,  683
Leroux on anomalous dispersion in

iodine  vapour,  149
Leslie's  cube,  radiant  heat  of  a,  120

— • experiment  in  sound,  37,  64
Lockyer,  Sir  Norman,  velocity  of  stars,

270
Lommel,  double  refraction,  79

—  ordinary  dispersion,  79
Lorentz, expansion of  matter due  to

passage  of  ether  through  it,  485
Loschmidt  on  determination  of  inter-
diffusivity,  294

—  diffusivity,  292

— - molecular  dimensions,  284
Lucretius  on  atomic  origin,  540

MacCuUagh on imaginary refractive
index,  379

—  errors  in  Fresnel's  rhomb,  394
MacCuUagh's  chiral  theory,  459
Macling  of  quartz,  641

Madau,  optical  effects  of  heat  on  chlorate
of  potash  crystals,  632

45—3

700

INDEX.

Magnetic  force,  effect  on  circularly  po-
larized light,  570

—  polarization, non  -  chirality of
Faraday's,  644

—  screen in teleijhone circuit,
683

—  — ,  rotating  conductor  is  a,  685
Magneto- optical  properties  of  sugar  and

quartz,  31
Majorana,  observations  at  Catania  and

Mount  Etna,  307
Marbacb,  chirality  of  chlorate  of  soda,

643
Marlowe,  tuning  fork,  53
Mascart, "Traite  d'Optique,"  461
Maxwell  on  Boltzmann's  theorem,  494

—  dispersion,  377

—  dynamics  of  viscosity,  295

—  dynamical  theory  of  gases,  526

—  inter-diffusivity,  293

—  partition  of  energy,  494

—  viscosity,  286

Maxwell's electro-magnetic theory of

light,  376
McConnel, wave-surface in quartz-
crystal,  452
Meyer,  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  292
Mhoic  effective  thickness,  683
Michelson  on  relative  motion  of  ether
and  matter,  485

—  velocity  of a  group of waves,
58

—  — light,  92
Mikrom,  150
Mikron,  121,  150

Model  of  solid  of  constant  volume  and

no  rigidity,  127
Moduluses,  model  of  elastic  solid  with

eighteen  independent,  124

—  of  elastic  body, 24,  25
Molecular  dimensions,  279,  284

—  — table  of,  322

—  model,  28

Molecules,  closest  packing  of,  619
Morley,  fundamental  periods  of serial
molecule,  163

—  relative motion of ether and
matter,  485,  492

—  solution  for  serial  molecule,  408
Motion  of  an  elastic  solid,  possible,  46
Miiller  on  atmospheric  absorption,  320
Murray  on  contact  electricity  of  metals,

548

"  Nabla,"  suggested  name  for  V'>  HI
"Nadir  of  Temperature,"  Dewar,  558
Napier's  "pressure  log,"  595
Nature of elemental source of light,

probable,  97
Navier, relation between rigidity and

compressibility,  61
Navier's  relation  unnecessary,  124
Nernst  on  conductivity,  557
Newcomb  on  1830  Groombridge,  273

—  velocity  of  groups  of  waves,  58

—  waxing and waning of self-
luminous  stars,  12

Newton  on  black  spots  on  soap  bubbles,

282
Nitrous  oxide,  viscosity  of,  297
Nomenclature,  French  classical,  167

—  Rankine's,  169

Obermayer  on  diffusivity,  292

—  viscosity  of  carbonic  acid,  etc.,
297

Oil  films,  thickness  of,  283
Opacity,  magnetic,  375

—  of  i^ermanganate  of  potash,  77
Orbital  direction  in  light  from  mirror,

403

Pendulum  experiment  of  Blackburn,  571

—  of  Foucault,  572
Phosphorescence,  energy  theory  of,  467

—  mechanically  illustrated,  187
Phosphoroscope  of  Becquerel, 92
Piezo-electricity,  Curie  brothers  on,  562

—  Voigt's  theory  of,  566

Pitch,  Burgundy  or  Trinidad,  a  property

of,  9
Plane  wave  defined,  132

—  in  EBolotropic  homogeneous  elas-
tic solid,  most  general,  131

Pocklington on chirality of biaxal

crystal,  451
Poisson  on  deep  water  waves,  114,  430

—  distribution  of  electricity  on  two
spheres,  53

—  relation between rigidity and
compressibility,  61

—  — not  essential,  124

, ,.  „  d-iv „ ., ,„„

—  solution  of  -n2='v-'^-w,  192

Polarizational  analysis  of  reflected  light,

332
Polarization,  plane  of,  defined,  14

INDEX.

70.

Polarized  light,  direction  of  vibrations
in,  14

—  illustrated  by  wood  ball  in  jelly,
83

Polish,  detection  of  imperfect,  327
Pouillet  on  solar  radiation,  261
Pyro-electric  crystal,  560

Quartz  crystal,  chirality  of,  637

—  — macling  of,  641

—  — wave  surface  in,  452

—  magneto-optical  properties  of,  31
Quincke,  experiment  on  the  translucency

of  metallic  films,  325
Quinine,  fluorescence  of  sulphate  of,  92

Eadian  of  James  Thomson,  23
Ramsey,  densities  of  certain  substances
in  the  solid  and  liquid  states,  299

—  thermal  capacitiesof  argon,  helium
and  krypton,  500

Eankine,  double  refraction,  19

—  molecular  vortices,  571

—  nomenclature  of,  169

—  on  stream  lines,  585
Eayleigh,  Lord,  on  anomalous  dispersion,

76

—  — blue  sky,  28,  89,  302

■ — — Boltzmann's  theorem,  504

—  — capillarity,  284

—  —  colours  of  chlorate  of  potash
crystals,  633

—  — double  refraction,  19

—  —  explanation  of  an  effect  of
heat  on  chlorate  of  potash  crystals,
633

—  — intensity  after  reflection,  371

—  —  magnetic  screen  in  telephone
circuit,  683

—  — Maxwell's  theory,  377

—  —  number  of  atoms  per  cu.  cm.,
305

—  —  proof  of  direction  of  vibra-
tions in  polarized  light,  322

—  — spectrum  of  blue  sky,  319

—  —  "Theory  of  Surface  Forces,"
280

—  —  thermal  capacity  of  argon,
helium  and  krypton, 500

—  — thickness  of  oil  films,  283

—  —  velocity  ■  of  groups  of  waves,
58,  59

—  — viscosity  of  argon,  297

Reflection  after  direct  incidence,  369

—  — grazing  incidence,  372

—  displacements  in  the  jDlaue  of  in-
cidence, 364

—  — perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
incidence,  363

—  dynamical  theory  of,  14,  351

—  intensity  after,  371
Reflectivities,  329,  385
Refraction,  double,  Cauchy  on,  228

—  — effect  of  chirality  on,  457

—  — Glazebrook  on,  257

—  — Green  on,  228

—  — Huyghens'  law  for,  19

—  — Lommel  on,  79

—  — of  strained  glass,  257

—  — Rankine  on,  19

—  — Rayleigh  on,  19

—  -- Stokes  on,  226,  425

—  — — verification  of  Huyghens'
law  for,  19

—  dynamical  theory  of,  14,  104,  351
Refractive  index,  expression  for, 146

—  imaginary,  379

—  Ketteler  and  Sellmeier  on,  107
Refractivity  through  wide  range  of  wave-
lengths of  rock-salt,  121

Reiuold,  "On  the  limiting  thickness  of

liquid  films,"  283
Reynolds,  Osborne,  dilatancy  of  sand,

624
Rigidity  of  ether,  265
Ripples,  593

Risteen  on  the  velocity  of  the  sun,  272
Roberts- Austen,  heat  of  combination  of

copper  and  zinc,  282

—  interdiffusion  of  solids,  556

—  molecular diffusion  of  lead  and
gold,  286

Rock-salt,  curve  of  refractivity  for,  152
Rcintgen  rays, 157

—  thickness  of  oil  films,  283
Rood,  intensity  of  light  after  reflection,

16
Rosa,  Monte,  observations  on,  307
Rotating  rod,  vibrations  in a  rapidly,

575
Rotational  waves,  282
Rowland,  electro-magnetic  disturbances,

68

—  on  his  {^"ating,  98

—  model  vibrator,  185

—  wave-machine,  163

/ 7r02

INDEX.

■  Rubens,  experiments  on  sylvin  and  rock-
salt,  151
Riicker,  "On  the  limiting  thickness  of

liquid  films,"  283
Rudberg  on  sodium  light,  454
Russell,  Scott,  capillary  waves,  596

Sand,  dilatancy  of,  624
Sarrau,  chiral  theory,  459
Sella,  observation  on  Monte  Rosa,  307
Sellmeier, exjDlanation of absorption,
101

—  dynamics  of  anomalous  dispersion,
103,  149

• — ■ on  refractive  index,  107
Sellmeier's  formula  applied  to  gas  with

only  one  molecular  period,  182
Serial  molecule,  arithmetical  values  for,

103

—  — critical  values  of  period  of,  55

—  — determinant, numberof  terms
in,  70

—  — fundamental  periods  of,  163

—  — jangling  of,  91

—  — roots  of  equation  for,  75

—  — solution  for,  408

—  — vibrations  of,  39

Shocks  are  the  most  probable  source  of
light,  97

Silence,  cones  of,  indicated  in  displace-
ment potential,  64

—  — for  tuning  fork,  51,  53
Silver, "ideal,"  326

Smith,  Archibald,  on  Fresnel's  wave
surface,  430

—  Willoughby,  on  volta-electric  in-
duction, 684

Smith's  Prizes  examination,  35

Soap  bubbles, Newton  on black  spots

on,  282
.  Soda,  nitrate  of,  252
Sodium  atom  period,  8

—  light,  Rudberg  on,  454

—  vapour,  double  dark  Fraunhofer
line  of,  176

—  — probable  moleaular  structure
of,  102

Solar  radiation,  Pouillet  on,  261

Solution,  general,  of  certain  simultaneous
partial  differential  equations,  35

Sound,  velocity  of,  29

Source  of  light,  simplest  vibrator  re-
presenting, 84

Source of light, probable nature of

elemental,  97
Spheres, distribution of electricity  on

two,  53

—  resistance  of  a  fluid  to  two  os-
cillating, 53

Stability  of  molecular  assemblages,  671

—  — not  secured  by  positive  modu-
luses,  673

Starhght,  total,  275

Stars,  self-luminous,  waxing  and  waning

of,  12
Star  velocities  calculated,  534
Steeple  curve,  114
Stokes,  adamantine  property,  385

—  blue  sky,  89

—  chirality  in  crystals,  461

—  — of  chlorate  of  soda  crystals,
643

—  colours of chlorate of potash
crystals,  635

—  double  refraction,  226,  425

— • dynamical explanation of dark
line  in  solar  spectrum,  8

—  theory  of  diffraction, 190

—  equivoluminal and irrotational
constituents  of  dispersion,  193

—  exj)lanation  of  absorption,  101

—  fluorescence,  301

^ iridescence and twinning of
chlorate  of  potash  crystals,  632

—  on  Leslie's  experiment,  37, 64

—  proof  of  direction  of  vibration  in
polarized  light,  322

—  resistance  of  a  fluid  to  two  oscil-
lating spheres,  53

—  verification  of  Huyghens'  law  of
double  refraction,  19

—  wave-surface  for  Iceland  spar,  429

—  work  against  viscosity  to  maintain
a  wave,  595

Stoney,  molecular  dimensions,  284
Sugar,  magneto-oijtical  properties  of,  31
Sunlight,  energy  of,  260
Surface  forces,  Rayleigh  on,  280

—  tension,  282
Sylvin,  151,  154

—  curve  of  refractivity  for,  153

Tait,  foundations  of  kinetic  theory  of

gases,  494
Tartaric  acid  crystal,  chirality  of,  643
Tasinomic  coefficients  explained, 223

INDEX.

703

Telephone  circuit,  magnetic  screen  in,

683
Tetrakaidekahedron,  615
Thermal  capacities,  Clausius  on,  499
Thermal  capacities  of  mercury  vapour,

etc.,  500
Thlipsonomic  coefficients  explained,  223
Thomson,  James,  plasticity  of  ice,  577

—  — radian,  23

—  — "forcive"  of,  644
Thomson,  J. J., "Electric  conduction

through  gases,"  406

—  — ions explaining conduction
caused  by  certain  light  rays,  501

Tidal  problem  of  Laplace,  39

Time  relation  between  periods  in  ether

and  matter,  8
Tourmaline,  electro-polarity  of,  560

—  pyro-electricity  of,  561
Transluceney  of  gold  leaf,  etc.,  374

—  metallic  films,  324
Tuning-forks  of  Marlowe  and  Koenig,  53
Twinning  of  chlorate  of  potash  crystals,

632
Twin  or  double  crystal,  629
Tyndall  on  some  physical  properties  of

ice,  577

Ultra-violet  rays,  effect  of, on  electric

conduction  explained,  501
Uranium  glass,  fluorescence  of,  50,  92

Van  't  Hoff,  chiral  results,  546
Varley's  kathode  torrent,  544
Velocity  of  light,  92

—  propagation of waves through
ether  with  embedded  molecules,  117

—  stars,  270

—  sun,  272
Velocity-potential  defined,  62

—  — for  oscillating  sjjhere,  50,  52

—  — for  radially  vibrating  sphere,
50,  52

—  — for  vibrating  fork, 50,  52
Vibrating  particle,  extension  of  Helm-

holtz',  30

—  serial  molecule,  39
Vibration  to  and  fro  of  two  globes,  86
Vibrational  line,  432

—  —  magneto-optic  rotation  of,  461
Vibrations, direction of, in polarized

light,  322

Vibrations  in  rapidly  rotating  rod,  575
Vibrators,  contrary,  in  one  line,  94
Viscosity, Clausius and Maxwell on,

286
Viscous  consumption  of  energy,  Helm-

holtz  on,  100
Voigt,  chiral  theory,  459

—  theory  of  piezo-electricity,  566
Volta-electric  induction,  684
Vortices,  molecular,  571

Waitz  on  diffusivity,  292

Waterston,  law  of  partition  of  energy,
493

Wave-lengths,  measurements  of,  11

Wave  machine,  163

Wave-motion,  quasi-,  in  medium  with
complex  density,  379

Wave  theory,  difficulties  of, 119

Waves,  condensational;  see  "Condensa-
tional "

—  condition  for  no  condensational,
223

—  deepwater,of  CauchyandPoisson,
530

—  distortional,  36,  80

—  energy  of,  109

—  — electric  etherial-,  550

—  from a discontinuous source,
108

—  in  incompressiblf solid,  204

—  in  elastic  solid,  solution for,  in
finite  terms,  529

- "On  reflection  and  refraction  of
cwlitary  plane  waves,"  191

—  spherical,  in  an  elastic  solid,  190
Wave-surface  in  quartz  crystal,  452
Wind,  effect  of,  on  water  waves,  590
Work  against  viscosity to maintain a

wave,  595

—  curves  for  assemblages  of  mole-
cules, 669

Young,  equal  densities  or  rigidities  of
media,  371

—  on  molecular  dimensions,  280

—  relative motion of ether and
matter,  486

Zettwuch  on  blue  sky,  230
Zinc  and  copper,  heat  of  combination
of,  320
