TREATISE ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, PART 1
William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) (1824-1907) and Peter Guthrie Tait (1831-1901)
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1879. (Part 1; the complete Treatise as published.)
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier bub_gb_D9dJAAAAMAAJ.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

TREATISE  ON

NATURAL

PHILOSOPHY

William  Thomson  Baron
Kelvin,  Peter  Guthrie  Tait

Digitized  by  Google

Uiyiiizeo  by  ^^OOglc

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

PUBLICATIONS.

ELEMENTS  OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY.  By
Professors  Sir  W.  Thomson  and  P.  G.  Tait.  Part  I.  Second
EdiHoH.  8vo.  doth,

THE  ELFXTRICAL  RESEARCHES  OF  THE
HONOURABLE  HENRY  CAVENDISH,  F.R.S.  Written  be-
tween  1771  and  1781,  Edited  from  the  original  manuscripts  in  the
possession  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  K.G.,  by  J.  Ci  f  rk  Af  AXWELi.,
F.R.S.  [Nearly  ready.

MATHEMATICAL  AND  PHYSICAL  TAPERS.  By
George  GAimiEL  Stokes,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  of
Pembroke  College  and  Lucasian  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the
University  of  Oimbridge.  Reprinted  from  the  Original  Journals  and
Transactions,  with  Additional  Notes  by  the  Author. [In  tkt  Press,

HYDRODYNAMICS,  a  Treatise  on  the  Mathematical
Theory  of  Fluid  Motion,  by  HoRACB  LAMB,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge;  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the
University  of  Adelaide.  [/«  ths  Press.

THE  ANALYTICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT.  By
Joseph  Fourier.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  A.  Freeman,  M.A.,
Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge.  Demy  Octavo.  i6r.

AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  QUATERNIONS.
By  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the
University  of  Edinburtjh ;  formerly  FeUow  of  St  Peter's  College,
Cambridge. Second  Edition. Demy  8va  I4.r.

dtomhribjie :

AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.

ftonlion:  CAMBRIDGE  WAREHOUSE,  17,  Patern'oster  Row.
teWbgi:  DEIGHTON,  BELL,  AND  CO.

.  J ..y  Google

NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY.

Uoudon:

C  A  M  B  K 1 D  G  E  W  A  TU-  f  J  < )  T  S  K,
17.  PATBRNOSTBU  ttOW,

Digitized  by  Gof  gle

TBEATISE

OK

NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY

SIR  WILLIAM  THOMSON, ^LL.D,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,

PBOnSSOB  OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY  IK  THE  UKIVHRS^ITT  OF  OIiABaOW^

no/Low  or  bt  pxtsb's  collsoe,  CA>ii>Bii>a£,

P£T£&  GUTHRI£  TAIT,  MA,
nofMsoB  0*  wmut  ranotoFsr  nr  m  mnntBun  ov  nmiBOBaB,

fOBIUILT  WaUMW  W  WS  OOUMI,  OAMBSXMI.

VOL.  L PART  I.
NEW  EDITION.

AT  THE  UNIVEBSITY  PRESS.

1879

{Tki  rigkU  of  trmuitUian  and  risfoduetion  Qt$  reserved,]

Digitized  by  Google

I

PBINTED BY C.  J.  CLAY,  H.A.
AX  ZHX  UHITSBSm  fftBM.

Digitized  by  Google

PREFACE.

Les  caases  primordialos  ne  aoas  sont  point  connues;  mais  cllcs  sont  anm-
jetties  k  des  Van  aimplM  tt  MMuteiitM,  que  Ton  peal  dteomrir  par  TobMT-
iKtion,  «l  dont  r4tnde  Ml  I'oljel  4«  J*  phfloaophie  vaAmOHer^aouu,

The  tenn  Natural  Philosophy  was  used  by  Newton,  and  is
fltill  used  in  British  UniYersitiefl,  to  denote  the  investigation  of
laws  in  the  material  world,  and  the  deduction  of  results  not
directly  observed. Observation,  classification,  and  description

of  phenomena  necessarily  precede  Natural  Philosophy  iu  every
department  of  natural  science.  The  earlier  stage  is,  in  some
branches,  commonly  called  Natural  History;  and  it  might  with
equal  propriety  be  so  called  in  all  others.

Our  otject  is  twofold :  to  give  a  tolerably  complete  account
of  what  is  now  known  of  Natural  Philosophy,  in  language
adapted  to  the  non-mathematical  readur ;  and  to  furnish,  to
those  who  liave  the  privilecfe  which  high  mathematical  acquire-
ments confer,  a  connected  outlinr  of  the  analytical  processes  by
which  the  greater  part  of  that  knowledge  has  been  extended
into  regions  as  yet  uneiplored  by  experiment.

We  commence  with  a  chapter  on  Moticn,  a  subject  totally
independent  of  the  existence  of  Matter  and  Force,  In  this
we  are  naturally  led  to  the  consideration  of  the  curvature  and
tortuosity  of  curves,  the  curvature  of  surfaces,  distortions  or
strains,  and  various  other  purely  geometrical  subjects.

63

Digitized  by  Google

PBEFACE.

The  LawB  of  Motion,  the  Law  of  OravUation  and  of  Eledrio

and  Magnetic  Attractions,  Huokes  Law,  and  other  lunJauieutal
principles  derived  directly  from  experiment,  lead  by  mathe-
matical processes  to  interesting  and  UBeful  results,  for  the  full
testing  of  which  our  most  delicate  experimental  methods  are  as
yet  totally  insufficient.  A  large  part  of  the  present  volume  is
devoted  to  these  deductions;  which,  though  not  immediately
proved  by  experiment,  arc  as  certainly  true  as  the  elementai'y
laws  from  which  mathematical  analysis  has  evolved  them.

The  analytical  processes  wliich  we  have  employed  are,  as  a
rule»  such  as  lead  most  directly  to  the  results  aimed  at,  and  are
therefore  in  great  part  unsuited  to  the  general  reader.

We  adopt  the  suggestion  of  Aicp&re,  and  use  the  term
Kinemiities  for  the  purely  geometrical  science  of  motion  in
the  abstract.  Keeping  in  view  the  pro])rieties  of  language,  and
following  the  example  of  the  most  logical  writers,  we  employ
the  term  DywrnAoa  in  its  true  sense  as  the  science  which  treats
of  the  action  offeree,  whether  it  maintains  relative  rest,  or  pro-
duces acceleration  of  relative  motion.  The  two  oorreaiponding
divisions  of  Dynamics  are  thus  conveniently  entitled  StaUea  and
Kinetics.

One  object  which  we  have  constantly  kept  in  view  is  the
grand  principle  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy.  According  to
modem  experimental  results,  especially  those  of  Joule,  Eneigy
is  as  real  and  as  indestructihle  as  Matter.  It  is  satisfactoiy  to
find  that  Niswton  anticipated,  so  fiur  as  the  state  of  experi*
mental  science  in  his  time  permitted  him,  this  magniliceut
modem  generalization.

Wo  desire  it  to  be  remarked  that  in  much  of  our  work,
where  we  may  appear  to  have  rashly  and  needlessly  interfered
with  methods  and  systems  of  proof  in  the  present  day  generally
accepted,  we  take  the  position  of  Restorers,  and  not  of  Lmo-
vators.

In  our  introductory  chapter  on  Kinematics,  the  consideration
of  Uaimouic  Motion  naturally  leads  us  to  Fourier  s  Theorem,

Digitized  by  Google

PBEFACH  Vii

one  of  the  most  importaot  of  all  analytical  results  as  r^jards
usefulness  in  physical  science.  In  the  Appendices  to  that  chapter
we  have  introduced  an  extension  of  Greens  Theorem,  and  a
treatise  on  the  remarkable  functions  known  as  Laplace's  Co-
ejjicients.  There  can  be  but  one  opinion  as  to  the  beauty  and
utility  of  this  analysis  of  Laplace ;  but  the  manner  in  which  it
has  heen  hitherto  presented  has  seemed  repulsive  to  the  ablest
mathematicians,  and  difficult  to  ordinary  mathematical  students.
In  the  simplified  and  symmetrical  form  in  which  we  give  it,  it
will  be  found  quite  within  the  reach  of  readers  moderatuly
familiar  with  modern  mathematical  methods.

In  the  second  chapter  we  give  Newton's  Laws  of  Motion  in
his  own  words,  and  with  some  of  his  own  comments— ^veiy
attempt  that  has  jet  been  made  to  supersede  them  having
ended  in  utter  failure.  Perhaps  nothing  so  simple,  and  at
the  same  time  so  comprehensive,  htis  ever  been  given  as  the
foundation  of  a  system  in  any  of  the  sciences.  The  dynamical
use  of  the  Generalized  Coordinates  of  Lagrange,  and  the  Vary*
ing  Action  of  Hamilton,  with  kindred  matter,  complete  the
chapter.

The  third  chapter,  "  Experience,**  treats  briefly  of  Observa-
tion and  Experiment  as  the  basis  of  Natural  Philosophy.

The  fourth  chapter  deals  with  tlie  fundamental  Units,  "and
the  chief  Listruments  used  for  the  measurement  of  Time,  Space«
and  Force.

Thus  doses  the  First  Division  of  the  work,  which  is  strictly
preliminaiy,  and  to  which  we  have  limited  the  present  issue.

This  new  edition  has  been  thoroughly  revised,  and  very
considerably  extended.  The  more  important  additions  are  to
be  found  in  the  Appendices  to  the  first  chapter,  especially  that
devoted  to  LaplQjoe*9  Coefficients;  also  at  the  end  of  the  second
chapter,  where  a  very  full  investigation  of  the  **cyckndal
motion**  of  systems  is  now  given;  and  in  Appendix  K,  which
describes  a  number  of  continuous  calculating  machines  invented
and  constructed  since  the  publication  of  our  first  edition.  A

Digitized  by  Google

great  improvement  has  been  made  in  the  treatment  of  Xo*
grang^9  OmieraUged  Equaiicna  o/MoHon.

We  believe  tbat  the  mathematical  reader  will  especially

profit  by  a  perusal  of  the  large  type  portion  of  this  volume ;  as
he  will  thus  bo  forced  to  think  out  for  himself  what  he  has
been  too  often  accustomed  to  reach  by  a  mere  mochaoical
application  of  analysis.  Nothing  can  be  more  fatal  to  progress
than  a  too  confident  reliance  on  mathematical  symbola ;  for  the
Btndent  is  only  too  apt  to  take  the  easier  course,  and  oonaider  the
formula  and  not  the  fact  as  the  physical  reality.

In  issuing  this  new  edition,  of  a  work  which  has  been  for
several  years  out  of  print,  we  recognise  with  legitimate  satis-
laction  the  very  great  improvement  which  has  recently  taken
place  in  the  more  elementary  works  on  Dynamics  published  in
this  country,  and  which  we  cannot  but  attribute,  in  great
part,  to  our  having  efiectually  recalled  to  its  deserved  posi-
tion Newton's  system  of  elementary  definitions,  and  Laws  of
Motion.

We  are  much  indebted  to  Mr  BuBNSiDE  and  Prof.  Chrystal
for  the  pains  they  have  taken  in  reading  proofisi  and  verifying
formulas ;  and  we  confidently  hope  that  few  enatums  of  serious
oonaequence  will  now  be  found  in  the  work.

W.  THOMSON.
P.  G.  TAIT.

Digitized  by  Google

CONTENTS.

DIVISION  I.— PRELIMINARY.

Chaptkb  I.~KINEMATICa.  '

Objects  of  the  Chapter  .  ,  ,  ,  i.  2

Motion  of  a  Point  .  .  ,  ,  3^  4

Cniratore  of  a  Plane  Carve .  .  .  « 5.  6

Cnrvataro  and  Tortnosity  of  a  Torttionfl  Cnrve .  .  7—9

Integral  Cxuratnre  of  a  Curve  (compare  §  136) 10—13

Flexible  Line— Cord  in  Mechanism  ,  , 14  ifi

Evolnte  and  Involute  .  ,  ;  ^ 17—19

^'elocity .  ,  ^  ^ 20—24.

Resolution  of  Velocity  ,  .  , 25.  26

Composition  of  Yelocitiea  ;  5  ,  .  22

Acceleration  .  .  ,  .  . gft— 30

Resolution  and  Composition  of  Accelerations  . an  sa

Determination  of  the  Motion  from  given  Velocity  or  Ac-

eeleration  ,  .  ^  , 33  3S

Acceleration  directed  to  a  Fixed  Centre .  .  .  Sfi

Hodograph .  ,  ,  .  . 37— 3ft

Carves  of  Parsmt .  ,  .  ,  ^

Angular  Velocity  and  Acceleration  .  . 41—4-1

Relative  Motion  ;  j  .  , 45  4^

Resultant  Motion ,  ,  , 50,  51

Harmonic  Motion ..... 52  57

Composition  of  Simple  Harmonic  Motions  in  one  Line 58—61

Mechanism  for  compounding,  and  Graphical  Representation  of.

Harmonic  Motions  in  one  Line  j  .  ,  ftg

Composition  of  S.  H.  M.  in  different  directions,  including

Composition  of  two  Uniform  Circalar  Motions 63—74

Fonrier's  Theorem .  ^  , 75  77

z

CONTENTS.

Dinplacemcntfl  of  a  Plane  Fipnrc  in  its  Piano— Composition
of  notations  qlwnt  Parallel  Axes — Compo^^ition  of  Rota-
tions and  Translations  in  One  Plane — SupenwHition  of
Small  Motions — RolliuK  of  Curve  on  Curve — Cycloids  and
Trochoids— Propertlea  of  tLe  Cycloid — Epicjcloid,  Hy-
pocycloitls,  etc. .  .  .  ,  .

Motion  of  a  Ri^id  Body  aboat  a  Fixed  Point— Euler's  Tlieorcm
— Rodrijipiee'  Co-ordinatt  a— Composition  of  Rotationa —
Composition  of  Angtilar  Velocities — Composition  of  sne-
cessivo  Finite  Rotations — Rolling  Cones — Position  of  the
Boily  due  to  given  Rutations  .  .  .

^fost  general  Motion  of  a  Rigid  Body

Precessional  Rotation — Model  illustrating  Procession  of  Equl-
noisa  .  ^  ....

Free  rotation  of  a  Body  kinetically  symmetrical  about  an  axia

Communication  of  Angular  Velocity  equally  between  Inclined
Axes — Hooke's  Joint — Universal  Flexure  Joint — Elastio
Universal  Flexure  Joint  —  Moving  Body  attached  to  a
Fixed  Object  by  a  Universal  Flexure  Joint— Two  Degrees
of  Freedom  to  move  enjoyed  by  a  Body  thus  suspended  .

General  Motion  of  one  Rigid  Body  toucliing  another — Curve
rolling  on  Cnrve — Plane  Ciirvea  not  in  sainc  Plane —
Curve  rolling  on  Curve;  two  degrees  of  freedom — Curve
rolling  on  {Surface;  three  degrees  of  freedom — Trace
prescribed  and  no  Spinning  permitted ;  two  degrees  of
freedom — Angular  Velocity  of  direct  Rolling  —  Angular
Velocity  round  Tangent  —  Surfiic^  on  Surface  —  Both
traces  prescribed  ;  one  degree  of  frec<lQm  .

Twist — Estimation  of  Integral  Twist  in  a  Plane  Curve;  in
a  Curve  consisting  of  plane  portions  in  different  Planes;
in  a  continuously  Tortuous  Curve — DjTiamics  of  Twixt
in  Kinks  .  ^  .  .  .

Surface  rolling  on  Surface ;  both  traces  given

Burfitcc  rolling  on  Surface  without  spinning

Examples  of  Tortuosity  and  Twist  .

Curvature  of  Surface — Synclastic  and  Anticlastic  Surfaces —
Mennier's  Tbeorpm  —  Enler'a  Theorem  —  Definition  of
liine  of  Ciu'vature — Shortest  Line  between  two  points
on  a  Surface  —  Spherical  Excess  —  Area  of  Spherical
Polygon — Reciprocal  Polars  on  a  Sphere — Integral  change
of  direction  in  a  Surface — Change  of  direction  in  a  Sur.
face  of  any  arc  traced  on  it  •

Inti  gral  Curvature — Ciin'utura  intrffra — Horograph — Change
of  direction  round  the  boundary  in  the  surface,  together
witli  area  of  horograph,  equals  four  right  angles;  or  "In-
tt^Tul  Curvature"  equals  *' Cnrratura  inti'fim"

Annlti^^y  between  Lines  and  Surfaces  as  regards  Curvature —
111  r>vMiiph Area  vl  tlic  HorngrHi'h .  .

RFPTIOXS

7B-94

m

102,

103

104-

107

10ft

109

110— lis

119-12?t

m
12a

126.  127

12ft— 1  a.';

130.  137
138

)Ogl.

0

CONTENTS.

Flexible  and  Inextensible  Surface — Flexure  of  inexteneible
Developable — Edge  of  Kegression — Practical  Construction
of  a  Developable  from  its  edge — General  property  of
Inextenniblo  Surface — Surface  of  constant  Specific  Cur-
vature—Geodetic Triangles  on  such  a  Surface  .

Strain — Definition  of  Homogeneous  Strain — Propertica  of  Ho«
mogeneona  Strain— Strain  Ellipsoid— Change  of  Volume
— Axea  of  a  Strain— Elongation  and  Change  of  Direction
of  any  Line  of  the  Body — Change  of  Plane  in  the  Body-
Conical  Surface  of  equal  elouKation — Two  Planes  of  no
distortion,  being  the  Circular  Sections  of  the  Strain  Ellip-
soid— Distortion  in  Parallel  Pianos  without  Change  of
Vohimc— Initial  and  altered  Position  of  Lines  of  no
Elongation — Simple  Shear — Axea  of  a  Shear — Measure
of  a  Shear — Ellipsoidal  specification  of  a  Shear — Analysis

BECTI0N3

fif  ft  Strain

Displacement  of  a  Body,  rigid  or  not,  one  point  of  which  is
held  fixed  .  .  ,  .  .

AjLialysis  of  a  Strain  into  Distortion  and  Rotation  .

Pure  Strain — Composition  of  Pure  Strains

Displacement  of  a  Curve — Tangential  Displacement — Tan-
gential Displacement  of  a  Closed  Curve — Rotation  of  a
Rigid  Closed  Curve — Tangential  Displacement  in  a  Solid,
in  terms  of  Components  of  Strain — Heterogeneous  Strain
— Homogeneous  Strain — Infinitely  small  Strain — Most
general  Motion  of  Matter — Change  of  Position  of  a  Rigid
Body— Non-rotational  Strain — Displacement  Function  .

"Equation  of  Continuity" — Integral  Equation  of  Continuity-
Differential  Equation  of  Continuity- "Steady  Motion"
defined  ......

Freoilom  and  Constraint— Of  a  Point— Of  a  Rigid  Body— Geo-
metrical Clamp — Geometrical  SUde — Examples  of  Geo-
metrical Slide— Examples  of  Geometrical  Clamps  and
Slides — One  Degree  of  Constraint  of  the  most  general
character— Mechanical  Illustration— One  Degree  of  Con-
straint expressed  analytically  .  •

Generalized  Co-ordinates  —  of  a  Point  —  of  any  system  —
Generalized  Componenta  of  Velocity — Examples  .

139—153

154—179

180.  181
182
183—185

186—190

191—194

195—201
202=201

ApPKypiT  Aft. — Expression  in  Generalized  Co-ordinatea  for  Poisson'e
Extension  of  Laplace's  Equation.

AprgNDix  A. — Extension  of  Green's  Theorem.

Apfexdix  B.— Spherical  Harmonic  Analysis.

Xll  CONTENTS.

Chapteb  IL-DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLE9.

BECTIOXfl

Ideaa  of  Matter  timl  Forftn  intrtxlnnpia— ^fnttpr— Fr>r<>ft— Murh
—Density — Measurement  of  Mass — Momentum — Change
of  Momentum — Itato  of  chango  of  Momcntiun — Kinetic
Energy — Particlo  and  Point — Inertia  .  .  . 205 — 216

Force — Specification  of  a  Force — Place  of  Application — Direc-
tion— Magnitude — Accolerative  Effect — Measure  of  Force 217 — 220

Standards  of  Weight  are  Masses,  and  not  primarily  intended
for  Measnrement  of  Force— Clairaut'a  Formula  for  the
Amount  of  Gravity — Gauss's  absolute  Unit  of  Force —

Maxwell's  two  suggestions  for  Absolute  Unit  of  Time —
Third  suggestion  for  Absolute  Unit  of  Time — British

Absolute  Unit — Comparison  with  Gravity

•

221-

-220

Resolution  of  Forces — Effective  Component  of  a  Force

«

227,

228

Geometrical  Theorem  preliminary  to  Definition  of  Centre

of

Inertia — Centre  of  Inertia  .

229,

230

Moment— Moment  of  a  Force  abont  a  Point— Moment  of

a

Force  about  an  Axis

t

231.

232

Digression  on  Projection  of  Areas

•

2aa

Couple — its  Moment,  Arm,  and  Axis .  .

«

231

Moment  of  Velocity — Moment  of  Momentum — Moment  of

a

Bectilineal  Displacement — For  two  Forces.  Motions,  Ye-
locities,  or  Momontums,  in  one  Plane,  the  Sum  of  their
Moments  proved  cgnal  to  the  Moment  of  their  Resultant
round  any  point  in  that  Plane— Any  number  of  Momenta
in  one  Plane  compoimdcd  by  addition — Moment  round
an  Axis — Moment  of  a  whole  Motion  round  an  Axis — Re-
Bultaut  Axis  ,  ,  .  .  , 235.  236

Virtnal  Velocit,y — Virtual  Moment  .  ,  .  232

Work — Practical  Unit — Scientifio  Unit — Work  of  a  Force —
Work  of  a  Couple — Transformation  of  Work— Potential
Energy  .  ....

Newton's  Laws  of  Motion — First  Law — Rest  —  Time — Ex-
amples of  the  Law — Directional  Fixedness  —  The  "In-
variable Piano"  of  the  Solar  System  —  Second  Law —
Composition  of  Forces — Measurement  of  Force  and  Mass
— Translations  from  the  Kinematics  of  a  Point — Third
Law — D'Alembert's  Principle — Mutual  Forces  between
Particles  of  a  Rigid  Body — Motion  of  Contre  of  Inertia
of  a  Rigid  Body  —  Moment  of  Momentum  of  a  Rigid
Body — Conservation  of  Momentum,  and  of  Moment  of
Momentum — The  "Invariable  Plane"  is  a  Plane  through
the  Centre  of  Inertia,  perpendicular  to  the  Resultant  Axis
— Terrestrial  Application — Rate  of  doing  work — Horse-
power— Energy  in  Abstract  Dynamics

238^241

242—270

CONTENTS.

xiii

BECTIOXB

Conservative  System — Foundation  of  the  Tlieory  of  Energy —
Physical  axiom  that  "the  Perpetual  Motion  is  impossible"
introduced — Potentii.1  E  ler^^*  of  Conservative  System

271-

274

Inevitable  loss  of  Energy  of  Visible  Motions — Efifect  of  Tidal
Friction — Ultimate  tendency  of  the  Solar  System

276-

-277

Conservation  of  Energy  ....

278,

279

Kinetic  Energy  of  a  System — Moment  of  Inertia — Moment  of
Momentum  of  a  Rotating  Kigid  Body — Radius  of  Gy  ration
— Fly-wheel — Moment  of  Inertia  about  any  Axis

280,  281

Momcntal  Ellipsoid — Equilibration  of  Centrifugal  Forces —
Definition  of  Principal  Axes  of  Inertia— Principal  Axes —
Binet's  Theorem — Central  EUipsoid — Kinetic  SjTnmetry
round  a  Point ;  round  an  Axis .  .

282-

-285

EnergT  in  Abstract  Dynamics  ....

286—288

Eqnihbrinm — Principle  of  Virtual  Velocities — Neutral  Equi-
librium— Stable  EauiUbrium — Unstable  Eouilibrium —
Test  of  the  nature  of  Equilibrium

289-

-292

Deduction  of  the  Equations  of  Motion  of  any  System — Inde-
terminate Equation  of  Motion  of  any  System — of  Conser-
Tative  Si'stem — Equation  of  Enercy — Constraint  intro-
duced into  the  Indeterminate  Equation — Determinate
Equations  of  ilotion  deduced — Gausa's  Principle  of  Least
Constraint  .....

293

Impact — Time-integral — Ballistic  Pendulum — Direct  Impact
of  Spheres — Effect  of  Elasticity— Newton's  Experiments —
Distribution  of  Eucrpy  after  Impact --Newton's  experi-
mental Law  consistent  with  perfect  Elasticity .  .

294-

-306

Moment  of  an  Impact  about  an  Axis— Ballistic  Pendulum —
Work  done  by  Impact — Equations  of  Impulsive  Motion  ,

307-

-310

Theorem  of  Enler.  extended  by  Lagrange — Liquid  set  in  Motion
impulsively — Impulsive  Motion  referred  to  Generalized
Co-ordinates — Generalized  Expression  for  Kinetic  Energy
— Generalized  Components  of  Force — of  Impulse — Im-
pulsive Generation  of  Slotion  referred  to  Generalized
Co-nnlinatfffl — MomnntnmH  in  ifimifl  of  Vfllocitifta — Kint^tin
Energy  in  terms  of  MomentimiB  and  Velocities  —  VelO'
cities  in  terms  of  Momeutums — Ik-ciprocal  relation  be»
tweeu  Momcnttims  and  Velocities  in  two  Motions — Ap-
pUcation  of  Generalized  Co-ordinates  to  Theorems  of
§  311 — Problems  whose  data  involve  Impulses  and  Velo-
cities— General  Problem  (compare  §  312) — Kinetic  Energy
a  minimum  in  this  case — Examples  ;  . 311 — 817

Lagrange's  Equations  of  Motion  in  terms  of  Generalized  Co-
ordinates deduced  direct  by  transformation  from  the
Equations  of  Motion  in  terms  of  Cartesian  Co-ordinates
—Equation  of  Energy— Hamilton's  Form — "  Canonioal  ,

I
I

xiv  CONTENTS.  |

RF.CTlOSa

fom"  ot  Hamilton'a  general  EqnationB  of  Motion  o(  a
Conscrvativo  System — Exam  pic  a  of  the  nse  of  Lagrange's
Generalized  Equationa  of  Motion— GyroscopcB  and  Gy-
rostata — Gyroscopio  Pendoliun — Ignoration  of  Co-ordi-
natfifl  .  .  .  .  t  :  318.  319

Kinetics  of  a  perfect  flaid— Effect  of  a  Rigid  Plane  on  the
Motion  of  a  Ball  through  a  Liquid — Seeming  Attraction
between  two  sLipB  moving  side  by  Bide  in  the  Bamo  |
direction — Quadrantal  Pendulum  defined — Motion  of  a
Solid  of  Kevolutionwith  its  axis  always  in  one  plane  tlirough
a  Liquid — Observed  phenomena — Applications  to  Nautical
Dynamics  and  Gunnery  —  Action  —  Time  Average  of
Energy — Space  Average  of  MomontamB — Least  Action —
Principle  of  Least  Action  applied  to  find  Lagrange's
Generalized  Equations  of  Motion — Why  called  "Station-  i
ary  Action"  by  Hamilton  —  Varying  Action  —  Action  ^
expressed  as  a  Function  of  Initial  and  Final  Co-ordinates
and  the  Energy;  its  differential  Coefiicients  equal  re-
spectively to  Initial  and  Final  Momentums,  and  to  the
time  from  beginning  to  end — Same  Propositions  for  Ge-
neralized Co-ordinates — Hamilton's  "  Characteristic  Equa-
tion" of  Motion  in  Cartesian  Co-ordinates — Hamilton's  ■
Characteristic  Equation  of  Motion  in  Generahzed  Co-or-
dinates—Proof tliat  the  Characteristic  Equation  defines
the  Motion,  for  free  particles — Same  Proposition  for  ft
Connected  System,  and  Generalized  Co-ordinates — Ha»
miltonian  form  of  Lagrange's  Generalized  Equations  de-
duced from  Characteristic  Equation  ,  «  .  320 — 330

Character] Btic  Function — Characteristic  Equation  of  Motion —
Complete  Integral  of  Characteristic  Equation — General
Solution  derived  from  complete  Integral — Practical  In-
terpretation of  the  complete  Solution  of  the  Characteristic  I
Equation — Properties  of  Surfaces  of  Equal  Action —
Examples  of  Varying  Action — Application  to  common
Optics  or  Kinetics  of  a  Single  Particle — Application  to
System  of  free  mutually  influencing  Particles — and  to
Generalized  System  .  ,  •  • 331 — 336  I

Slightly  disturbed  Ennilibrium— Simultaneous  Transformation
of  two  Quadratic  Functions  to  Sums  of  Squares — Gene-
ralized Orthogonal  Trausfonnation  of  Co-ordinates — Sim-
plified expressions  for  the  Kinetic  and  Potential  Euergiea
— Integrated  Equati^»n^^  of  Motion,  expressing  the  fun-
damental modes  of  Vibration ;  or  of  falling  away  from
Configuration  of  Unstable  Equilibrium — Infinitely  small
Disturbance  from  Unstable  Equilibrium — Potential  and
Kinetic  Energies  expressed  as  Functions  of  Time—'
Example  of  Fundamental  Modes ;  ;  837

CONTENTS.

XV

0«n«nl  TliMiNBi  of  PwidBntntri  IfodM  ol  infinitelj  small
Ifolioii  alwat  ft  Coofigoiatkni  of  Equilibiliim— Notnul

Displacements  from  Eqaililiiriiim^Theorem  of  Kinetic
Energy — Of  Potential  Energy — Infinitesimal  Motions  in
neighbourhood  of  Confignnition  uf  Unstubk  Equilibrium  S3d

Case  of  Equality  among  Periods — Graphic  lUipresentation —
Dissipative  Systems — Views  of  Stokes  on  Kesistance  to  a
Solid  moving  Shnmi^  «  Liquid — Friotton  of  Solids—
BssislOTOss  yasying  as  YolooitioB— Effeel  of  RssisiaDoa
Tarjing  as  Yelooity  in  a  simple  Motion .  .  889—841

Infinitely  prnnll  Motion  of  a  Diasipativo  System — Cycloidal
System  defined — Positional  and  Motional  Forces — Differ-
ential Equations  of  Complex  Cycloidal  Motion — Their
Bolution — Algebra  of  Linear  Eqoaiions — Minors  of  a  De«
twiiifiiant  Bfll^*'***  •wifttig  ihft  Jifinom  of  an  Eyanososnt
Doteiminaint  Oaso  of  Equal  Boofta^Gase  of  Equal  Boola
and  Evanescent  Minors — Bonth's  Theorem — Case  of  no
Motional  Forces — Conservative  Positional,  and  no  Mo.
tirmal.  Forces — ^E^uation  ol  Energy  in  Uoaiizod.  (ieueral
Bulution  .....  3^ — 3-43 p

Artificial  or  Ideal  Accomalative  System— Criterion  of  Sta*
Inliliy— Cyckidal  Slystam  with  Gonastrvativo  Positional
Focosa  and  Unrestricted  Motional  Forces— Dissipativity
defined— Lord  Bayleigh's  Theorem  of  Dissipativity— In-
tegral Equation  of  Enorpy — Real  part  of  esery  liout  of
Determinantal  Equation  pruvtd  nc]i^ativo  wlien  roteutiol
Energy  is  positive  for  all  real  Co-ordinates ;  positive  for
soma  Boots  wlian  Folsntial  Enengy  haa  nsgatiTa  valoaa;
Inil  always  nsgalifa  lor  soma  Boots— Non-osoillatoty  snb-
sidence  to  Stable  Eqnilibriam,  or  falling  away  from  Un»
stable—Oscillatory  subsidence  to  Stable  Equilibrium,  or
falling  away  from  Unstable — Falling  away  from  wholly
Unstable  Equilibrium  is  Msentially  non -oscillatory  if
Motional  Foioaa  wbolly  visoona— Stability  of  Dissipative
Systom— Yariooa  origina  of  Gytoaoopie  Tenna— Eqnatibn
of  Energy— Oyrostatie  C<MisenratiTe  System — simplifiea*
tion  of  its  Equations — Determinant  of  G}'rostatic  Conser*
Tative  System — Square  Boots  of  Skew  Symmetric  De-
terminants— Gyroatatic  System  with  Two  Freedoms — Gy-
rostatio  lufiueuce  dominant— Gyrostatic  Stability — Ordi-
nary Gyrostata-^Gyvoatafts,  <m  gimliala;  on  oniTsnal
flsn»a-joiniinp]aoaof|^bnlMls;  onstilta;l)iflIariyaIimgin
four  ways-^Oymatatio  System  with  Three  Freedoms — Be*
duced  to  a  mere  rotating  System — Quadruply  free  Gyro,
static  System  without  force— Excepted  case  of  failing  gy-
roBtatio  predominance— Quadruply  free  Cycloidal  System,
gyfostatioally  dominated— Four  Irrotational  Stabilities
oocdbmod,  four  Irrotational  lastalnlitioB  rendered  staUo,

Digitized  by  Google

xvi

CONTENTS.

BECnOKS

by  Gyrogtatio  Links — Combined  Dynamic  and  GvTostfttio
Btnbility  gyrostatically  couutoractotl — licalizatiou  of  Com-
pleted Solution — RfBultant  Motion  reduced  to  Motion  of
a  Conservative  Sy-stem  with  four  fandmnental  perioda
egnal  two  and  two — Orthogonalities  proved  between
two  comiX)nent8  of  one  fandamental  oscillation;  and
equality  of  their  Energies— OrthoponaUtieB  ])roved  be-
tween different  fundamental  oscillationa — Case  of  Equal
Periods — Completed  Solution  for  case  of  Equal  Perioda
—Two  hiKher,  and  two  lower,  of  the  Four  Funda-
mental Oscillations,  similarly  dealt  with  by  Solution
of  two  similar  Quadratics,  provided  that  g^Tostatic  in-
fluence be  fully  dominant  —  Limits  of  smallest  and
second  smallest  of  the  four  periods — Limits  of  tlie  next
preateat  and  greatest  of  the  four  periods — Quadruply
free  Cycloidal  S^'xtem  with  non-dominant  gyrostatic  in-
fluences— G>Tostatic  System  with  any  number  of  freedoms
— Case  of  Equal  Roots  with  stability — Ap]>licatiou  of
Bouth's  Theorem — Equal  Roots  with  instability  in  tran-
sitional cases  between  Stability  and  Instability — Condi-
tions of  gyrostatic  domination — GjTostatic  Lmks  ex-
plained— (iyrostatically  dominated  System :  its  adynamic
oscillations  (very  rapid)  ;  and  processional  oscillations
(very  slow) — Comparison  between  Adynamic  Frequencies,
Rotational  Frequencies  of  the  Fly-wheels,  Precessional
Frequencies  of  the  System,  and  Frequencies  or  Rapidities
of  the  System  with  Fly-wheels  deprived  of  Rotation —
Proof  of  reality  of  Adjmamic  and  of  Precessional  Periods
when  system's  Irrotational  Periods  are  either  all  real  or
all  imaginary — Algebraic  Theorem .  ,  3-44 — 345**^"

Kinetic  Stability — Conservative  disturbance  of  motion — Ki-
netic Stability  and  Instability  tliscriminated — Examples
— Circular  Simple  Pendulum — Kinetic  Stability  in  Cir-
cular  Orbit— Kinetic  Stability  of  a  Particle  moving  on  a
Smooth  Surface — Incommensurable  Oscillations — Oscil-
latory Kinetic  Stability — Limited  Kinetic  Stability —
Kinetic  Stability  of  a  Projectile — General  criterion — Ex-
amplos — Motion  of  a  Particle  on  an  anticlastio  Surface,
unstable; — on  a  synclastio  Surface,  stable — Differential
Equation  of  Disturbed  Path  ;  ,  « 846 — 355

General  investigation  of  Disturbed  Path — Differential  Equa-
tion of  Disturbed  Path  of  Single  Particle  in  a  Plane — Ki-
netic Foci — Theorem  of  Minimum  Action — Action  never  a
Minimum  in  a  course  including  Kinetic  Foci — Two  or  more
Courses  of  Minimum  Action  possible — Cose  of  two  mini-
mum, and  one  not  minimum.  Geodetic  Lines  between  two
Points — Difference  between  two  sides  and  the  third  of  a
Kinetic  Triangle — Actions  on  different  courses  infinitely

CONTENTS.

zvii

nonoMfl

near  one  another  between  two  conjugate  Kinetic  Foci,
proved  ultimately  equal — If  ivro  hides,  deviating  infinitely
little  from  the  third,  are  togetlier  equal  to  it,  tliey  con-
Btitate  an  joMkm  nfttaraleotita*— Natural  oohzm  proved
not  ft  ooima  of  Ifiiriimnn  AetioOf  begrond  a  Bnotio  Fbou
course  which  includes  no  Focus  conjugate  to  cither
extremity  inclu  lcs  no  pair  of  conjugate  Foci — How  many
Kinetic  Foci  in  any  ca^<e — Theorem  of  Maximum  Action
—-Applications  to  two  Degrees  of  Freedom — Uamilton's
Second  Form— LionvilIe*s  Kinetic  Theorem .  .  86C — 868

Cbapteb  m.— EXPElilENCE.

Obsenation  and  Experiment — Rules  for  the  conduct  of  Ex-
periments— Residual  phenomena — Uuexpccied  agreement
ordiaoQcdeiiMof  feetdtsof  diffeieDttrtala  .  869--888

Hypothfloee— JDednetioii  of  moet  probable  result  firom  » inim*
ber  of  observations— Law  of  Enmr— Probable  Error—
Probable  Error  of  a  Sum,  Difference,  or  Multiple — Prac-
tical appliCHiiun — Method  of  Least  Squares — Methods  ro-
{treseutiug  experimental  results — Curves — Interpolation
and  Empirieal  FomraUB .  .  .  •  888—898'

Chaptkb  IV.— measures  AND  INSTRUMENTS.

Necessity  of  accurate  Measurements — Classes  of  Insimmenta
—jQalwilating  Manhinea  'Angnlar  Measure— -Measure  ol
Time— NeeessHyforaFennnial  Btaadard.  A  Spring  tng-
geeted— Measme  of  Length,  founded  on  artificial  Metallio
Standards— HeasnreB  ol  Length,  Snrfaoet  Yoliun^  Haas
and  Work  .....  899—418

Clock — Electrically  controlled  Clocks — Chroiio?cope — Diagonal
Scale  —  Yemier  —  Screw  —  Screw  -  Micrometer  —  Sphero-
meter— Oathetonieter—Balaaee  Toraion»balanco— Pen,
dulnm— BifllarBalftiieo  Rfihr  Ifagaetometer— Almolate
MMsmement  of  Temafarial  Magoetie  Foroe— Srgomeler
— FkiotknBrakea-  ....  414—487

Amma  F.-00NTINT70US  CALOULATINQ  MACHINES.

I.  Tide-predicting  Machine.

n. Machine  for  the  Solution  of  Simnltaneone  Linear  Equations,
m.  An  Into^rrntin;?  >rachine  having  a  New  Xiaflmatio  Prinriplc  Piik ,

Globe-,  and  Cylinder-Integrator.
IV.  An  Instnuuent  for  calculating  /<p  (x)  ^  («)  dee,  the  Integral  oi  the

Pkodnet  of  two  fjjbmk  FimetionB*
Y.  Meehanlflal  lolegration  of  Linear  Diifevential  Eqoatioiia  of  tin

BeooBd  Order  with  YarjaUe  Ooeffieienie.
YL  if^iiMiWi  Integration  <d  Oie  general  Unear  Differential  Equation

of  any  Order  with  Variable  CoeflBcients.
VIL Harmonic  Analyzer — Tidal  Ilnrmoiuc  Analyzer — Secondary,  ter-

tiaiy,  quaternary,  eto.>  tides,  doe  to  inHueuoe  of  shallow  water.

Digitized  by  Google

DIVISION  I.

CHAPTB»  L— KINKMATICS.

1.  TiiFiRE  arc  many  properties  of  motion,  displacement,  and
deformation,  which  may  be  considered  altogether  independently
of  8uch  physical  ideas  as  force,  mass,  elasticity,  temperature,
magnetiBiD,  electricity.  The  preliminary  consideration  of  such
properties  in  ihe  abstract  is  of  very  great  use  for  Natural  Philo-
sophy, and  we  devote  to  it»  accordingly,  the  whole  of  this  our  .
first  chapter ;  which  will  form,  as  it  were,  the  Geometry  of  our
Buhject,  embiaciug  what  can  be  observed  or  concluded  with  re-
gard to  actaal  motions,  as  long  as  the  cause  is  not  sought.

2.  In  this  category  we  shall  take  up  first  the  free  motion  of
a  point,  then  the  motion  of  a  point  attached  to  an  inextensible
cord,  then  the  motions  and  displacements  of  rigid  systems — and
finally,  the  deformations  of  surfaces  and  of  solid  or  fluid  bodies.
Incidentally,  we  shall  be  led  to  introduce  a  good  deal  of  ele-
mentary geometrical  matter  connected  with  the  curvature  of
lines  and  surfaces.

3.  When  a  point  moyts  from  one  position  to  another  it  must  Motion  of*

.  .  .  polnli,

evidently  describe  a  continuous  line,  which  may  be  curved  or

straight,  or  even  made  up  of  portions  of  curved  and  straight

lines  meeting  each  other  at  any  angles. If  the  mot  ion  be  that

of  a  material  partioU,  however,  there  cannot  generally  be  any

such  abrupt  changes  of  direction,  since  (as  we  shall  afterwards

see)  this  would  imply  the  action  of  an  infinUe  force,  except  in

the  case  in  which  the  velodty  becomes  zero  at  the  angle.  ]t

is  ussfbl  to  eonndifr  at  the  outset  various  theorems  connected

vol*  I.  1

Digitized  by  Google

2

P&EUICINABV.

[3

Motion  Ola  with  the  geometrical  notion  of  tlio  path  described  by  a  moving
point,  and  these  we  shall  now  take  up,  deferring  the  considera-
tir>n  of  Velocity  to  a  future  t>ectioa,  as  being  more  closely  con-
nected with  physical  ideas.

4.  The  direction  of  motion  of  a  moviDg  point  is  at  each
instant  the  tangent  drawn  to  its  path,  if  the  path  he  a  curve,  or
the  path  itself  if  a  straight  line.

of*apSSa  ^'  ^^^^  "piith  be  not  straight  the  direction  of  motion
changes point  to  point»  and  the  rate  of  this  change,  per

^  according  to  the  notation  helowj  ,

is  called  the  curvature.  To  exemplify  this»  suppose  two  tangents
drawn  to  a  circle,  and  radii  to  the  points  of  contact  The  angle
between  the  tangents  is  the  change  of  direction  required,  and
the  rate  of  change  is  to  be  measured  by  the  relation  between
this  angle  and  the  length  of  the  dreular  are.  Let  I  be  the
angle,  c  the  arc,  and  p  the  radius.  Wo  see  at  once  that  (as
the  angle  between  the  radii  is  equal  to  the  angle  between
the  tangents)

p/=  c,

and  therefore  -  =  - . Hence  the  curvature  of  a  cirde  is  in«

verst^ly  as  its  nodius,  and,  measured  in  terms  of  the  proper  unit
of  curvature,  is  simply  the  reciprocal  of  the  radius.

6.  Any  small  portion  of  a  curve  may  be  approximately
taken  as  a  circular  arc,  the  approximation  bemg  closer  and
closer  to  the  truth,  as  the  assumed  arc  is  smaller.  The  curvar
ture  IB  then  the  reciprocal  of  the  radius  of  this  cirde.

If  SO  be  the  allele  Kotwecn  two  Uiiigcnts  at  points  of  a  curve
distant  by  an  arc  69,  the  definition  of  curvature  gives  us  at  once

as  its  meagnre,  the  limit  of  ^  when  &  is  diminished  without

limit ;  or,  according  to  the  notation  of  the  differential  oalculus,
d$

-1- .  But  we  hate
at

ax

if,  the  curve  being  a  plane  curves  we  refer  it  to  two  rectangular

Digitized  by  Gpogle

6.]  KINEMATIG8.  3

axes  OX,  OY.  accorcUiif'  to  the  Cart<?sian  methcxl,  and  if  ^denote  Curvature

.  of  ft  p'""-'

the  iudiQAtion  of  its  tangent,  at  any  point y,  to  OX. Ueuce  curre.

ami,  hy  diifereatiation  with  reference  to  any  independent  variable
t,  we  have

xebs/ _  dx  (Vy  -dy  d'X

[fix)

Also,  da^(dx^-¥dy')K

Heuoe,  if  p  dtnote  ihe  fadim  of  eorvwlitire,  bo  tliftt

1  dB

we  conclude  -  =  -4  ^-i— (2),

Although  it  is  genendly  convenient,  in  kinematical  and
kinetic  formulae,  to  regard  time  as  the  independent  variable,  and
all  the  changing  geometrical  elcineuts  as  functions  of  it,  there
are  cases  in  which  it  is  useful  to  regard  the  length  of  the  arc  or
path  described  by  a  point  as  the  independent  variable.  On  this
supposition  we  have

0  =  d  {ds*)  =  d(daf  +  dy')  =  2{dx  d,'x  +  dy  d^y),

where  we  denote  by  the  suffix  to  the  letter  d,  the  indepoidrat
variable  underatood  in  tiio  difierantiatioii.  Henoe

dx  _ dy^  _  (da^+d^

dfy'" d^'m ~  {^d;yy  +  O^x)^ '

and  using  these,  with  d^  =  djif  +  dy\  to  eliminate  dx  and  dy
from  (2),  we  hare

P  d^  '

or,  according  to  the  usual  short,  although  not  quite  complete,
notation,

p  lUv  Uv  j  *

7. If  all  points  of  the  curve  He  in  ono  plane,  it  is  called  a  Vattamu

plane  curve,  and  in  the  same  way  we  speak  of  a  plane  polygon
or  broken  line.  If  various  points  of  the  lino  do  not  lie  in  one
plane,  we  have  in  one  case  what  is  called  a  citrve  of  double

1—2

Digitized  by  Google

4

rE£LIMINAEY.

[7.

Tnrtaotu  curvature,  in  the  other  a  gauche  pohjgon.  The  term  'curve  of
double  curvature'  is  very  bad,  and,  though  in  very  general  use,
is,  we  hope,  not  ineradicable.  The  fact  is,  that  there  are  not
two  curvatures,  but  only  a  curvature  (as  above  defined),  of  which
the  plane  is  continuously  changing,  or  twisting,  round  the
tangent  line;  thus  exhibiting  a  torsion.  The  course  of  such
a  curve  is,  in  common  language,  well  called  'tortuous;'  and
the  measure  of  the  corresponding  property  is  convenientlj
called  Tmiwmly,

8.  The  nature  of  this  will  be  best  understood  by  consider-
ing the  curve  as  a  polygon  whose  sides  are  indefinitely  small.
Any  two  con.secutive  sides,  of  course,  lie  in  a  plane — and  in
that  plane  the  curvature  is  measured  as  above,  but  in  a  curve
which  is  not  plane  the  third  side  of  the  polygon  will  not  be  in
the  same  plane  with  the  first  two,  and,  therefore,  the  new  plane
in  which  the  curvature  is  to  be  measured  is  different  from  the
old  one.  The  plane  of  the  curvature  on  each  side  of  any  point
of  a  tortuous  curve  is  sometimes  called  the  Osculating  F/ane  of
the  curve  at  that  point.  As  two  successive  positions  of  it  con-
tain the  second  side  of  the  polygon  above  mentioned,  it  is
evident  that  the  osculating  plane  passes  from  one  position  to
the  next  by  revolving  about  the  tangent  to  the  curve.

Oarff»tar»  9.  Thus,  as  we  proceed  alonff  such  a  curve,  the  curvature
•lid  fono^  ,  .

in  general  varies ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  plane  in  which  the
curvature  lies  is  turning  about  the  tangt^nt  to  the  curve.  The
tortuosity  is  therefore  to  be  measured  by  the  rate  at  which  the
osculating  plane  turns  about  the  tangent»  per  unit  length  of  the
curva

To  express  the  ladios  of  oarvatara,  the  diieotioo  oosinea  of
the  osculating  plane^  and  the  tortuosity,  of  a  curve  not  in  one
plane^  in  tenns  of  CSartesian  triple  co-ordinates,  let^  aa  befoie,
^  be  the  angle  between  the  tangents  at  two  points  at  a  distance
St  from  one  another  along  the  cnrve^  and  let  be  the  angle
between  the  oseulating  iihrnes  at  these  points.  Thus,  denoting
by  p  the  radius  of  curvature,  and  r  the  tortooeity,  we  have

1  d9

Digitized  by  Go05?Ie

9.]  KINEMATICS.  6

accorUmg  to  tiie  re^^mr  uotatioii  for  the  limiting  vulues  of  ^ ,  a^uutu-

and ,  when  89  is  diminished  without  limit Let  OL,  OL'

be  lineB  dimwn  through  aoy  fixed  point  0  pmllel  to  aaj  two
sneoeanre  podtioiifl  of  a  moving  line  PT,  each  in  the  directionB
indicated  bj  the  Ofder  of  the  letten.  Draw  OS  perpendicobir
to  their  phine  in  the  dixeetion  from  0,  Buoh  that  OL^  OL',  OS
lie  in  the  same  relative  order  in  Bpaoe  as  the  positive  axes  of
ooHndinatfli»  OZ,  07,  OZ.  Let  OQ  bisect  LOL\  and  let  OR
biaeot  the  angle  between  OV  and  JU)  prodttoed  through  0,

Let  the  direction  codneB  of

OL

be

a,b,e;

on

»

OQ

I,  m,  »;

OB

>»

«>  Ay;

OS

n

X,  f:

and  let  SO  denote  tlio  angle  LOL.  Wo  iuive,  b^-  tlie  clemcutti  of
analytical  geometry,

O06£$^aa'-i-(6'+<»'  (3);

'"=^5^tW'  '^^-oi^jW

" L>.sm4a^' ''-2aini8^' 2  sin  ^bt^

^ be  -  be  ca-c'a  ab' -a'b

Now  let  the  two  saocessiye  positions  o{  PT  be  tHn£,'ents  to  a
curve  at  points  seimrated  by  an  arc  of  length  Is. We  have

1 W 2sii,  AS^^sinSf

p hs  6s  fit

when  £s  is  iofinitely  small  ^  and  in  the  same  limit

,  dx  dy  dz

'"S'  "'Si

•'—4-  »'-»"4'  ^—''2  (8)'

ic'-J',=^^d^-^*d;'f.ic  (9);

at d9 da d*  ^  "

Digitized  by  Google

PRELOnNABT.  [9.

and  a,  fif  y  become  the  directioD  ooBmes  of  the  normal,  PCy
drawn  towards  the  oentre  of  curvature,  C ;  and  A,  ft,  v  those  of
the  perpendicular  to  the  oaoulating  plane  drawn  in  the  dii-co-
tion  rdatiyelj  to  PT  and  PC,  eoneeponding  to  that  of  OZ
relatively  to  OX  and  OT,  Then,  using  (8)  and  (9),  with  (7),
in  (5)  and  (6)  respectivelj,  we  have

«^  /»  <fe  /1A\

— ^- ^=PX'  <^">'

<^  _ ^  di/  dz  j  dx (Ix  ^dz  djD  ^  dy dy  ^  dx

ds ds da ds'  d8~ds da dt da ds ds  ....

'Tdi — • — •  "  <">•

The  simplest  expression  for  the  curvature,  witli  choice  of  inde-
pendent variable  left  arbitrary,  is  the  following,  taken  from  (10) :

p  "  z

This,  modified  by  dififerentiation,  and  aj)plication  of  the  formula
d8d^s^d»d'x  +  dyd*^+dzd'9  (13)^  ^

becomes

1  ^  jl(^zy-i-{d;jy^-(dfzf-(d'.r\

Anothw  formula  for  1  is  obtained  immediately  from  equations

(11);  but  thf^o  e(|uations  may  be  put  into  the  following  simpler
form,  by  dill'ereutiation,  <fec.,

^ dyd^z-dzd'y dzd'x-dx(Pz  dxd^y-dyd'x

*-^^<5-^"'=-i^-d^-'''

fiom  whioh  we  find

 ~j  ^16^.

Eadi  of  these  several  expressions  for  the  curvature^  and  for  the
directions  of  the  relative  lines,  we  shall  find  has  its  own  special
significance  in  the  kinetics  of  a  particle,  and  the  statics  of  a
flexible  cord.

To  find  the  tortuosity,  ~ ,  w©  have  only  to  apply  the  gcncml
equation  alx)ve,  with  A,  fx^  v  8ul>atitut©d  for m,  7i,  and  -  ~  ,

Digitized  by  Google

9.]  KINEMATICS.  7

(f dv (IfiV ( d\ ^dy\* /dn d\\*)h  Currntun

where  X,  ^  r,  denote  the  direotton  oounee  of  the  iwir^fating

plane,  given  by  the  preceding  formnle.

10.  The  integral  curvature,  or  whole  clianne  of  direction  of  intojrrai  ^
au  arc  oi  a  plane  curve,  is  the  angle  through  winch  the  taneent  of»rurvo

.  (csompanj

has  turned  as  we  pass  from  one  extremity  to  the  other.  The  iua)*
average  curvature  of  any  portion  is  its  whole  curvature  divided
by  its  length.  Suppose  a  line,  drawn  from  a  fixed  point,  to
move  so  as  always  to  be  parallel  to  the  direction  of  motion  of
a  point  describing  the  curve:  the  angle  through  which  this
turns  during  t-he  motion  of  the  point  exhibits  what  we  have
thus  defined  as  the  integral  curvature.  In  estimating  this,  we
must  of  course  take  the  enlarged  modem  meaning  of  an  angle,
including  angles  greater  than  two  right  angles,  and  also  nega-
tive angles.  Thus  thr  integral  curvature  of  any  closed  curve,
whether  everywhere  concave  to  the  interior  or  not,  is  four  right
angles,  provided  it  dues  not  cut  itself.  That  of  a  Lemuiscate,  or

figure  of  3  >  is TiiaX  of  the  Epicycloid  ^  is  eight  rig^t
angles ;  and  so  on.

11.  The  definition  in  last  section  may  evidently  be  extended
to  a  nlane  polygon,  and  the  integral  change  of  direction,  or  tlio
angl'-  l>»-t\veen  tlic  first  and  last  sides,  is  then  the  sum  of  its
exterior  angles,  all  the  sides  being  produced  each  in  the  direc-
tion in  which  the  moving  point  describes  it  while  piissing  round
the  figure.  This  is  true  whether  the  polygon  be  closed  or  not.
If  dosed,  then,  as  long  as  it  is  not  crossed,  this  sum  is  four
right  angles, — ^an  extension  of  the  result  in  Euclid,  where  all
re-^ntroM  polygons  are  excluded.  In  the  case  of  the  star-shaped

figure ,  it  is  ten  right  angles,  wanting  the  sum  of  the  five

acute  angles  of  the  figure ;  that  is,  eight  right  angles.

12*  The  inUgrol  curvaJture  and  the  average  curvature  of  a
curve  which  is  not  plane,  may  be  defined  as  follows : — Let  suc-
cessive lines  be  drawn  from  a  fixed  point,  parallel  to  tangents
at  successive  points  of  the  curve. These  lines  will  form  a

conical  surface.  Suppose  this  to  be  cut  by  a  sphere  of  unit
radius  having  its  centre  at  tlie  fixed  point. The  length  of  the

Digitized  by  Google

B  PRELIMINARY.  [12.

^'^iSIfL  curve  of  iotenecUon  measures  the  inUgrai  curvature  of  the
toaaSS!  ^^^^  curve.  The  average  curvature  is,  as  in  the  case  of  a
I  iiSr.  plane  curve,  the  integral  curvature  divided  by  the  length  of  the
curve.  For  a  tortuous  curve  approximately  plane,  the  int^fral
curvature  thus  defined,  approximates  (not  to  the  integral  cur-
vature according  to  the  proper  definition,  §  10,  for  a  plane
curve,  but)  to  the  sum  of  the  integral  curvatures  of  all  the
parts  of  ail  approximately  ci>iiicidLiit  plane  curve,  each  taken  as
positive.  Consider,  lor  examples,  varieties  of  James  Beriiouilli's
plane  elastic  curve,  §  Gil,  ami  approximately  coincident  tor-
tuous curves  of  fine  steel  piano-forte  wire.  Take  particularly
the  plane  leumiscate  and  an  approximately  coincident  tortuous
closed  curve.

18.  Two  consecutive  tangents  lie  in  the  osculating  plane.
This  plane  is  therefore  parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  to  the  cone
described  in  the  preceding  section.  Thus  the  tortuosity  may
be  measured  by  the  help  of  the  spherical  curve  which  we  have

just  used  for  defining  integral  curvature.  We  cannot  as  yet
complete  the  explanation,  as  it  depends  on  the  theory  of  rolling,
which  will  be  treated  afterwards  (§§  110 — 137).  But  it  is  enough
at  present  to  remark,  that  if  a  plane  roll  on  tlie  sphere,  along
the  spherical  curve,  turning  always  round  an  instantaneous  axis
tangential  to  the  sphere,  the  integral  curvature  of  the  curve  of
contact  or  trace  of  the  rollings  on  the  plane,  is  a  proper  measure
of  the  whole  torsion,  or  integral  of  tortuosity.  From  this  and
§  12  it  follows  that  the  curvature  of  this  plane  curve  at  any
pointy  or,  which  is  the  same,  the  projection  of  the  curvature  of
the  spherical  curve  on  a  tangent  plane  of  the  spherical  surface,
is  equal  to  the  tortuosity  divided  by  the  curvature  of  the  ^ven
curve.

Let  ^  be  the  curvature  and  t  the  tortaosity  of  the  given

curve,  and  d9  an  elenaent  qS' it»  length.  Then and  j rds,  each

integral  extended  over  any  stated  length,  2^  of  the  curve^  are
respeodvely  the  integml  curvature  and  the  integral  tortuosity.
The  mean  eurvatnre  and  the  mean  tortaosity  are  respectively

tIj  }/""•

Digitized  by  Google

13.]  KIKEBiATICS.  9

Infinite  toituonty  will  be  easilj  nndentood,  by  oonadering  ^{]^^^[|||^
a  belix,  of  incluiatioo  a,  deaoribed  on  a  ridit  circular  eylinder  of  or »  curv«

1  ^aCTapare

radius  r. The  curratore  in  a  circular  section  being  -* ,  that  of

J*

COi^a  .  sinaooBa

the  helix  is,  of  oonne,  . The  tortuosity  is  ,  or

I*  I*

tan  a  x  curvature. Hence,  if  a  =  ^  the  curvature  and  tortuosity

are  equal.

1  r
Let  the  curvature  be  denoted  by  - ,  so  that  coe'a  »  - . Let  p

P  P
icmain  finite,  and  let  r  diminiah  without  limit The  ttep  of  the

helix  being  23irtanas2v ^1  — ,  is,  in  the  limits  Zwijfr,

which  ifi  infinitely  amalL  Thus  the  motion  of  a  point  in  the
curve,  though  infinitely  nearly  in  a  straight  line  (the  path  being
always  at  the  infinitely  small  diatauce  r  from  the  fixed  straight

line^  the  axis  of  the  cylinder),  will  have  finite  enrvature  ^  The

1  \ /  r\h

tortnonty,  being  -  tan  a  or  -7=  (  ^  -  - )  »  will  in  the  limit  bea

P  ^pr  \  p/

ino-.iTi  proportional  between  the  curvature  of  the  circular  section
of  the  cylinder  and  the  finite  curvature  of  the  curve.

The  acceleration  (or  force)  required  to  produce  sndb  a  motion
of  a  point  (or  material  particle)  will  be  afterwaids  investi-
gated (§  35

14.  A  chain,  cord,  or  fine  im,  or  a  fine  fibre,  filament,  or  jnoiue
bair,  may  suggest  what  is  not  to  be  found  among  natural  or
artificial  productions,  a  perfectly  flexible  and  inextensible  line.

The  elementary  kiiicmatics  of  tliis  subject  require  no  investiga-
tion. The  mathematical  condition  to  be  expressed  in  any  case
of  it  is  simply  that  the  distance  measured  along  the  line  from
any  one  point  to  any  other,  remains  constant,  however  the  line
be  bent

15.  The  use  of  a  cord  in  mechanism  presente  us  with  many
practical  applications  of  this  theory,  which  are  in  general  ex*
tremely  simple ;  although  curious,  and  not  always  very  easy,

geometrical  problems  occur  in  connexion  with  it  We  Bball
say  nothing  here  about  the  theory  of  knots,  knitting,  weuviug,

Digitized  by  Google

10

PRELnUNART.

[15.

FIritbto

plaiting;  etc.,  but  wc  intend  to  retiim  to  the  sabjeo^  under
vortex-motion  in  H^drokinetics.

16.  In  the  medianical  tracing  of  cun  es,  a  flexible  and

ineztensible  cord  is  often  supposed. Thus,  in  drawing  an

ellipse,  tilt'  focal  property  of  the  curve  shows  us  that  by  tixiu^^
the  Qiida  of  such  a  cortl  to  the  foci  and  keepiug  it  stretched  by
a  pencil,  the  j)eucil  will  trace  the  ciu  ve.

By  a  ruler  moveable  about  one  locus,  and  a  string  attached
to  a  point  in  the  ruler  and  to  the  other  focus,  the  hyperbola
may  be  described  by  the  help  of  its  analogous  focal  property ;
and  so  on.

17.  But  the  consideration  of  evolates  is  of  some  importance

in  Natural  Philosophy,  esjiecially  in  certain  dynamical  and
(.ijaical  questions,  and  wc  .shall  therefore  devote  a  suction  or
two  to  this  application  of  kiiitinatics.

Def.  If  a  flexible  and  inextensible  string  be  fixed  at  one
point  of  a  plane  curve,  and  stretclied  along  the  curve,  and  be
then  unwound  in  the  plane  of  the  curve,  its  extremity  will
describe  an  Involute  of-  the  curve.  The  original  curve^  Con»
sidered  with  reference  to  the  other,  is  called  the  Evoluie*

18.  It  will  be  observed  that  we  speak  of  an  involute,  and
of  tlie  evolute,  of  a  curve.  In  fact,  as  will  be  easily  seen,  a  curve
can  have  but  one  evolute,  but  it  has  an  infinite  nuud)er  of
involutes.  For  all  that  we  have  to  do  to  vary  an  involute,  is
to  change  the  point  of  the  curve  from  which  the  tracing  point
starts,  or  consider  the  involutes  described  by  different  points  of
the  string,  and  the.se  will,  in  general,  be  different  curves.  The
following  section  shows  that  there  is  but  one  evolute.

19.  Let  AB  be  any  curve,  PQ  a  portion  of  an  involute,
pP,  gQ  positions  of  the  free  part  of  the  string'. It  will  be  seen

at  onc.'e  that  these  must  be  tauireuts
to  the  arc  AH  Jit  p  and  q.  Also  (see
.§  .90),  the  string  at  any  stage,  as
pP,  revolves  about  p.  Hence  pP  is
normal  to  the  curve  PQ.  And  thus
the  evolute  of  PQ  is  a  definite  curv^
viz.«  the  envelope  of  the  normals  drawn  at  every  point  of  PQ^

Digitized  by  Google

KINE1CATIC&

11

Off  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  locus  of  the  centres  of  curv»-  Bvointo.
tare  of  the  curve  PQ,  And  we  may  merely  mention,  as  an
obvious  result  of  the  mode  of  txacing,  that  the  arc  pq  is  equal  to
the  difference  oi  qQ  and  pP,  or  that  the  arc  pA  is  equal  to  pP,

20.  The  rate  of  motion  of  a  point,  or  its  rate  of  change  of  Veioottj.
position,  is  called  its  Velocity.  It  is  greater  or  less  as  the  space
passed  over  in  a  given  time  is  greater  or  less :  and  it  may  be
vjitybnii* the  same  at  every  instant ;  or  it  may  be  variable.

Uniform  velocity  is  measured  by  the  space  passed  over  in

unit  of  time,  and  is,  in  general,  expressed  in  feet  per  second ;
if  very  threat,  as  in  the  case  of  light,  it  is  sometimes  popularly
reckoned  in  miles  per  second.  It  is  to  be  obi^crved,  that  time
is  here  nsfd  In  the  abstract  sense  of  a  uniformly  increasing
quantity — what  in  the  differential  calculus  is  called  an  inde>
pendent  variable.  Its  physical  definition  is  given  in  the  next
chapter.

21.  Thus  a  point,  which  moves  imiformly  with  velocity  v,
describes  a  space  of  v  feet  each  second,  and  therefore  vt  ieet  in
t  seconds,  t  being  any  mimber  whatever.  Putting  8  for  the
space  described  in  t  seconds,  we  have

Thus  with  unit  velocity  a  point  describes  unit  of  space  in  unit
of  time.

82.  It  is  well  to  observe  here,  that  since,  by  our  formula,
we  have  generally

8

and  since  nothing  has  been  said  as  to  the  magnitudes  of  5  and  t,
we  may  take  these  as  small  as  we  choose.  Thus  we  get  Hie
same  result  whether  toe  derive  r  from  the  space  descnbed  in  a
million  secondSt  or  Jrom  that  described  in  a  millionth  of  a  second.
This  idea  is  veiy  useful,  as  it  makes  our  results  intelligible
when  a  variable  velocity  has  to  be  measured,  and  we  find  our-
selves obliged  to  approximate  to  its  value  by  considering  the
space  described  in  an  interval  so  short,  that  during  its  lapse  the
velocity  does  not  sensibly  alter  iu  value.

Digitized  by  Google

PBELHUNABT.

[23.

v«iooilr.  23.  When  the  point  does  not  move  uniformly,  the  velocity
is  variable,  or  different  at  different  successive  instants ;  but  we
define  the  average  velocity  during  any  time  as  the  space  de-
scribed in  that  time,  divided  by  the  time,  and,  the  less  the
intenral  vt^  the  more  nearly  does  the  average  velocity  coindde
with  the  actual  velocity  at  any  instant  of  the  interval  Or
again,  we  define  the  exact  velocity  at  any  instant  as  the  space
which  the  point  would  have  described  in  one  second,  if  for  one
second  its  velocity  remained  unchanged.  That  there  is  at  ever}'
instant  a  definite  value  of  the  velocity  of  any  moving  body,  is
evident  to  all,  and  is  matter  of  everyday  conversation.  Thus,  a
railway  train,  after  starting,  gradually  increases  its  speed,  and
every  one  understands  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  at  a  par-
ticular instant  it  moves  at  the  rate  of  ten  or  of  fifty  miles  an
hour, — although,  in  the  course  of  an  hour,  it  may  not  have
moved  a  mile  altogether.  Indeed,  we  may  imagine,  at  any
instant  during  the  motion,  the  steam  to  be  so  adjusted  as  to
keep  the  train  running  for  some  time  at  a  perfectly  uniform
velocity.  This  would  be  the  velocity  which  the  train  had  at
the  instant  in  (question.  Without  supposing  any  such  definite
adjustment  of  the  driving  power  to  be  made,  we  can  evidently
obtain  an  approximation  to  this  instanUiueuus  velocity  by  con-
sidering the  motion  for  so  short  a  time,  that  during  it  the  actual
variation  of  speed  may  bo  small  enough  to  be  neglected.

24. In  fact,  if  v  be  the  velocity  at  either  beginning  or
end,  or  at  any  instant  of  the  interval,  and  8  the  space  actually

described  in  time  t,  the  equation  v^jiB  more  and  more  nearly

true,  as  the  velocity  is  more  nearly  uniform  during  the  interval
t;  so  that  if  we  take  the  interval  small  enough  the  equation
may  be  made  as  nearly  exact  as  we  choose.  Thus  the  set  of
values —

Space  described  io  one  second,

Ten  times  the  space  described  in  the  first  tenth  of  a  second,
A  hundred  „  „  „ huudrnlth  „

and  so  on,  give  nearer  and  nearer  approximations  to  the  velocity
at  the  beginning  of  the  first  second. The  whole  foundation  of

Digitized  by  Google

24.]  KINEMATICS.  13

the  differential  calculus  is,  in  fact,  contaiued  in  this  simple  Veiooilif.
question,  "What  is  the  rate  at  which  the  space  described  iu-
creases  ? "  i.e.,  What  is  the  velocity  of  the  moving  point?
Newton's  notation  for  the  velocity,  ?*.  e.  the  rate  at  which  a
increases,  or  the  fiuxion  of  s,  is  8.  This  notation  is  veiy  con-
yenient,  as  it  saves  the  introduction  of  a  second  letter.

Let  a  point  which  has  deserihed  a  space  s  in  time  I  proceed
to  desorihe  an  additional  space  t»  in  time  U,  and  let  he  the
greatest^  and  the  leasts  velocity  which  it  has  daring  the  in-
temd  IL  Then,  evidently,

ha

But  as  S(  diminishes,  the  values  of  and  «g  become  more  and
more  nearly  equal,  and  in  the  limit,  each  is  equal  to  the  velodtj
at  time  i.  Hence

25.  The  preceding  definition  of  veiocitj  is  equally  applica-  ^^j^i^
Ue  whether  the  point  move  in  a  straight  or  carved  line ;  but»
since  in  the  latter  case  the  direction  of  motion  continually
changes,  the  mere  amount  of  the  velocity  is  not  sufficient  com-
pletely to  describe  the  motion,  and  we  must  have  in  every  such
case  additional  data  to  remove  the  uncertainty.

In  such  cases  as  this  the  method  commonly  employed,
whetlier  we  deal  with  velocities,  or  as  we  sliall  do  farther  on
with  accelerations  and  forces,  consists  mainly  in  studying,  not
the  velocity,  acceleration,  or  force,  directly^  but  its  components
paiailel  to  any  three  assumed  directions  at  right  angles  to  each
other.  Thus,  for  a  train  moving  up  an  incline  in  a  N£  direo-
iioD,  we  may  have  given  the  whole  velocity  and  the  steepness
of  the  incline,  or  we  may  express  the  same  ideas  thus — ^the  train
is  moving  simultaneously  northward,  eastward,  and  upward —
and  the  motion  as  to  amount  and  direction  will  be  completely
known  if  we  know  separately  the  northward,  eastward,  and  up-
ward velocities — these  beinj^  called  the  components  of  the  whole
velocity  in  the  three  muLuuliy  perpendicular  directions  N,  E,
and  up.

Digitized  by  Google

14  PBBUMINABT.  [25.

iioMiution .  In  genend  tlia  velocity  of  a  point  at  x,  .»/, is  (aa  we  hare

Of  velocity.  ^ .  . ^ .  j

seen)  ^ ,  or,  wiuch  is  the  same,  +  U/  i  '

Nov  denotmg  by  u  the  nte  at  wbieh  c  ineraases,  or  the  velo-
city panUel  to  tiba  aada  of and  so  by  i\ for  the  other  two ;

we  have  ^-^^^  Hence,  calling  a,  A  y  the

angles  which  the  direction  of  notion  nakea  with  the  azesi  and

putting  9«»^t  ^  hAY^

dx dt  u
d9 ^  q
dt

Uence  u  =  q  cos  a,  and  therefore

26.  A  vebcity  in  any  direction  may  be  resolved  in,  and
perpendicular  to,  any  other  direction.  The  firat  compoDeDt  is
found  by  multiplying  the  velocity  by  the  cosine  of  tiie  angle

between  the  two  directions — the  second  by  using  as  factor  the

sine  of  tlie  .same  angle.  Or,  it  may  be  resolved  into  componeuts
in  any  three  rectangular  direetions,  each  component  being
formed  by  multiplying  the  whole  velocity  by  the  cosine  of  the
angle  between  its  direction  and  that  of  the  component.

It  is  usefid  to  vsmark  that  if  the  axes  of  ae^  y,  a  are  not  rect-
angular, ^>  ^>  ^  ^  Telocities  parallel  to  the
axeSi  but  we  shall  no  longer  have

AVc  leave  as  an  exercise  for  the  student  the  determination  of  the
correct  expression  for  the  whole  velocity  in  terms  of  its  com-
ponents.

If  we  resolve  the  velocity  along  a  line  whose  inclinations  to
the  axes  are  X,  /x,  and  which  makes  an  angle  6  with  the  di-
rection of  motion,  we  find  the  two  exprcssioDs  below  (which
must  of  oonrse  he  equal)  aooording  as  we  resolve  q  directly  or
by  its  components,  u,  v,  to,

9ooe0sf«cosX-i-vooS|i4toco8K

Digitized  by  Google

2^]  KINEIUTICB.  15

Sabstitute  in  this  equation  the  values  of  «,  v,  w  already  given,  J^jjjjjf
§  25,  and  we  have  the  well-known  geometncal  theoreni  for  tlie
angle  betweea  two  straight  lines  which  make  given  angtes  with
tbe  axes,

cos  0  s  ooB  a  cos  X  +  cos cos H- cos  y  ooe
From  the  above  ezproBsion  we  see  at  onoe  that

27.  The  velocity  resolved  in  any  direction  is  the  sum  of  the  compo*i-
components  (in  that  direction)  of  the  three  rectangular  com-
ponents of  the  whole  velocity.  And,  if  we  consider  motion  in
one  plane,  thi^'  h  still  true,  only  we  have  but  two  rectangular
oomponentSL  These  propositions  are  virtually  equivalent  to  the
following  obvious  geometrical  construction : —
To  compound  any  two  velodties  as  OA,  OB  in  the  figure ;

from  A  draw  A  C  parallel  and  equal
to  OB.  Join  OC:— thou  00  is  the
resultant  velocity  in  magnitude  and
direction.

00  is  evidently  the  diagonal  of  the
parallelogram  two  of  whose  sides  are
OA,  OB.

Hence  the  resultant  of  velocities  represented  by  the  sides  of
any  cloeed  polygon  whatever,  whether  in  one  plane  or  not,  taken
all  in  the  same  order,  is  zero.

Hence  also  the  resuUant  of  velocitii!s  represented  by  all  the
sides  of  a  polygon  but  one,  taken  in  order,  is  represented  by
that  one  taken  in  the  opposite  direction.

When  there  are  two  velocities  or  three  velocities  in  two  or
in  three  rectangular  directions,  the  resultant  is  the  square  root
of  the  sum  of  their  squares — and  the  cosines  of  the  inclination
of  its  direction  to  the  given  directions  are  the  ratios  of  the  com-
ponents to  the  resultant.

It  is  emy  to  see  &at  as  3^  in  the  limit  may  be  resolved  into^
and  rB$,  where  r  and  $  are  polar  coordinates  of  a  plane  corve^

^  and  r  ~  are  the  resolved  parts  of  the  velocity  along,  and

perpendioolar  to,  the  radius  vector. We  may  obtain  the  eame
result  thus,  x^rcm 0^  y=rmn$.

Digitized  by  Google

16

Compcmi*

tion  of

▲ooelcm*

Hence

dx
dt

PBKLIMfNABT.

rfy  dr

dr  .  ^dB

dx  d

But  Wy  §  26  the  whole  velocity  along  r  is  ^©o*^  +

i.  e.f  by  the  above  valueSi  ^ . SinilLirly  the  transverse  velocity  is

28.  The  velocity  of  a  point  is  said  to  be  accelerated  or  re-
tarded according  as  it  increases  or  diminiaheB,  but  the  word
acoderaiiiijn  is  generally  used  in  either  sense,  on  the  underatand-
ing  that  we  may  regard  its  quantity  as  either  positive  or  nega-
tive. Acceleration  of  velocity  may  of  course  he  either  nnifiorm
or  variable.  It  is  said  to  be  uniform  when  the  velocity  receives
eqnal  increments  in  equal  times,  and  is  then  measured  by  the
actual  increase  of  velocity  per  unit  of  time.  If  we  choose  as  the
unit  of  acceleratiuu  that  which  adds  a  unit  of  velocity  per  unit
of  time  to  the  velocity  of  a  point,  an  acceleration  measured  by  %
will  add  a  units  of  velocity  in  unit  of  time — and,  therefore,  at
units  of  velocity  in  t  units  of  time.  Hence  if  F  be  the  change
in  the  velocity  during  the  interval

V  =  at,  or  a  =  —  .

29.  Acceleration  is  variable  when  the  point's  velocity  does
not  receive  equal  increments  in  successive  L'i[vui\  periods  of  time^
It  is  then  measured  by  the  increment  of  velocity,  which  would
have  been  generated  in  a  unit  of  time  had  the  acceleration  re-
mained throughout  that  interval  the  same  as  at  its  commence-
ment. The  average  acceleration  during  any  time  is  the  whole
velocity  gained  during  that  time,  divided  by  the  time.  In
Newton's  notation  v  is  used  to  express  the  acceleration  in  the
direction  of  motion ;  and»  if  v  b as  in  §  24«  we  have

astf«s.

Let  V  be  the  velocity  at  time  t,  ?ir  its  change  in  the  interval
3/,  a,  and  tlio  greatest  and  lea.st  values  of  the  acceleration
during  the  interval Tlien,  eridently,

Digitized  by  Goo<?Ie

S9.]  KIKEILLTIGS.  17

Acioatonk

As  &  is  taken  Bmaller  and  smaller,  the  values  of  a,  and  a,  ap-
proximats  infinitely  to  each  oQim,  and  to  that  of  a  the  nqnired
acoebtatiaii  at  time  i  Hence

dv

It  is  useful  to  observo  that  we  may  alao  write  (bj  changiog
the  indepeudeat  variable)

dv  ds  dv
""'dadr'^di'

Since  ^'-^f  ^^'d^*  ^  evident  from  similar

reaaoning  tiiat  the  oomponent  aooeleiations  peiaUel  to  the  axes

are ,  ^* it  is  to  be  carefully  obeerved  that  ^

la  no<  genenUy  the  reenltant  of  the  three  eompooent  aoodenk
tionii^  bat  is  to  only  when  either  the  enrvatnre  of  the  path,  or
the  Tolooity  is  lero ;  for  [§  9  (U)]  we  have

/(TsS*  /^»V 1  ^*

The  dixeetion  ooainea  of  the  tangent  to  the  fiath  at  any  point
fl^]f,san

1  dx \  dy \  dz
vdi*  vdi*  vdi'

Those  of  the  line  of  xesoltant  acceleration  are

1  rf^ 1  1

f'de'fd^'fde'

where,  for  brevity,  we  denote  V)y  /  the  rosiiltant  acceleration.
Hence  the  direction  ooained  of  the  plane  of  these  two  lines  are

  dyd^z~d»ffy

ii  etc*

-.^^..-^.^ ^^^y-.*^^^,  ,

These  (§  9)  show  that  this  plane  is  the  osculating  ]>Iane  of  the
curve.  Again,  if  6  denote  the  angle  between  the  two  linee,  we
have

.  - {(djytf's  -  <faf y)'  -f  (dgd?x  -  dxd*zy  (darf* y  -  dyd^»Y\^
TOL.  I.  2

Digitized  by  Google

IS  PBELDONABT.  [29;

or,  aocordiog  to  the  expression  for  the  curvature  9),

fwjU?  /p'

Henoe  /dn  0^  .

p

Heuce  ycos  $  »  ^ »  and  therefore

 lotion 30. The  whole  acceleration  iu  any  direction  is  the  sum  of

fiitinn  of  ac-  the  components  (in  that  direction)  of  the  accelerationB  parallel
ceieratious.  ^^^^  three  rectaDgulftT  axes — each  component  acceleration
being  found  by  the  same  rule  as  component  velocities,  that
is,  by  multiplying  by  the  cosine  of  the  angle  between  the  di-
rection of  U&e  aoceleiatioa  and  the  line  along  which  it  is  to
be  resolved.

dl.  When  a  point  moves  in  a  curve  the  whole  acceleratioa
may  be  resolved  into  two  parts,  one  in  the  direction  of  the
motion  and  equal  to  the  acceleration  of  the  velocity — ^the  other
towards  the  centre  of  curvature  (perpendicular  therefore  to  the
direction  of  motion),  whose  magnitude  is  proportional  to  the
square  of  the  velocity  and  also  to  the  curvature  of  the  path,
l^e  former  of  these  changes  the  velocity,  the  other  affects  only
the  form  of  the  path,  or  the  direction  of  motion.  Hence  if  a
raoviug  point  be  subject  to  an  acceleration,  constant  or  not,
"whose  direction  is  continually  ptTpeudicular  to  the  direction  of
motion,  tlie  velocity  will  not  be  altered — and  the  only  effect
of  the  acceleration  will  be  to  make  the  point  move  in  a  curve
whose  curvature  is  proportional  to  the  acceleration  at  each
instant

32.  In  other  words,  if  a  point  movo  in  a  curve,  whether
with  a  uniform  or  a  varj'ing  velocity,  its  change  of  direction
is  to  be  reirardcd  as  constitutinjj  an  acceleration  towards  the
centre  of  curvature,  equal  in  amount  to  the  square  of  the
velocity  divided  by  the  radius  of  curvature.  The  whole  accele-
radoQ  will,  in  eveiy  case^  be  the  resultant  of  the  acceleration.

Digitized  by  Google

33.J  KDTEICATIGS.  19

thus  measuring  change  of  direction,  and  the  acceleration  of  ^^^^^^
actual  Telocity  along  the  curve.  SSStinir

We  may  take  anotlier  mode  of  resolving  acceleration  for  a
plane  curve,  which  is  HomctiDies  useful ;  alonj:i^,  and  perpendicular
to,  the  radiiLs-vector.  By  a  method  similar  to  that  employed  in
§  27,  we  easily  fiud  for  the  compoueut  along  the  rodiuii-vector

and  for  that  popendicnlar  to  the  ndius-veotor

Id  /  .d^

38. If  for  any  case  of  motion  of  a  point  we  have  edven  tiie  DeUrmina.
whole  velocity  and  its  direction,  or  simply  the  components  of  motion  from
the  velocity  in  three  rectangular  directions,  at  any  time,  or,  as  ^{,^ygffr
is  most  commonly  the  case,  for  any  position,  the  determination
of  the  form  of  the  path  described,  and  of  other  drcumstanoes  of
the  motion,  is  a  question  of  pure  mathematics,  and  in  all  cases
b  capable,  if  not  of  an  exact  solution,  at  all  events  of  a  solution
to  any  degree  of  approximation  that  may  be  desired.

The  same  is  true  if  the  total  acceleration  and  its  direction
at  every  in8tant»  or  simply  its  rectangular  components,  be  given,
provided  the  velocity  and  direction  of  motion,  as  well  as  the
position,  of  the  point  at  any  one  instant,  be  given.

For  we  have  in  the  first  case

ox  /  '

^  3  u  »  9  cos  a,  etc,  ,\

three  aimnltaneous  equations  which  can  contain  only  x,  y,  and
i,  and  which  therefore  suffice  when  integrated  to  determine  ar,  y,

and  z  in  terms  of  ^  By  eliminating^  t  among  these  efinations,  wo
obtain  two  equations  among  x,  y,  and  z — each  of  w  liich  repre-
sents a  surface  on  which  lies  the  path  described,  and  whose
intersection  therefore  completely  determines  it.

In  the  second  case  we  have

_  _  o  _

^.-s ^-Pj  5?"*^^

to  which  equations  the  same  remarks  apply,  except  that  here
each  has  to  be  twice  integrated.

2—2

Digitized  by  Google

20  PBBUMINABT.  [33L

Detonnins-  The  arbitrary  constants  introduced  by  mt^ration  an  deler-

motionftlom  mined  at  once  if  we  know  the  co-ordinatea,  and  the  oomponenta
cit7'o7l!:^ of  tbe  Yelocitgr»  of  the  point  at  a  given  epoch,

oeleration.

Sam^of 8^ From  the  principles  alrecody  laid  down,  a  great  many
'^"^ interesting  results  may  be  deduced^  of  which  we  enunciate  a
few  of  the  most  important.

a.  If  the  velocity  of  a  mo^ng  point  be  unifonn,  and  if  its
direction  revolve  tudfoimly  in  a  plane^  the  path  described  is
a  oirde.

Let  a  be  the  velocity,  and  a  the  angle  through  which  its  direc-
tion turns  in  unit  of  time ;  then,  by  properly  chooeiDg  the
we  have

dx  dy

whence  (x  -  Ay  +  (y  -  -C)*  =

h.  If  a  point  moves  in  a  plane,  and  if  its  component  velo-
city parallel  to  each  of  two  rectangular  axes  is  proportional  to
it«  distance  from  that  axis,  the  path  is  an  ellipse  or  hyperbola
whose  principal  diameters  coincide  with  those  axes;  and  the
acceleration  is  directed  to  or  from  the  origin  at  eveiy  instant

Henoe  ^-/ofx,  ^  whole  aooaUcmtion  is

towards  or  from  0.

^  = fi^m  which  uf^^vt^^Cf  an  ellipaa  or  hyper-

ax fi  1/  *^  ^

bola  referred  to  its  principal  axes. (Compare  §  65.)

e.  When  the  velocity  is  unifonn,  but  in  direction  revolving
uniformly  in  a  right  circalar  cone,  the  motion  of  the  point  is  in
a  circular  helix  whose  axis  is  parallel  to  that  of  the  cona

ExAmples  of  85.  a.  When  a  point  moves  uniformly  in  a  circle  of  radius
'^""^ with  vek>city  V,  the  whole  acceleration  is  directed  towards

the  centre,  and  has  the  constant  value See  §  31.

Digitized  by  Google

35.]  KINEMATICS.  21

K  With  imiforai  aooeleration  in  the  direetion  of  motioD,  aitemi^«f
point  deacrihoB  spaces  proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  times  S£^
elapsed  since  the  oommencement  of  the  motion.

In  this  case  the  space  described  in  any  interval  is  that
which  would  be  described  in  the  same  time  by  a  point  moving
uniformly  with  a  velocity  equal  to  that  at  the  middle  of  the
interval.  In  other  words,  the  average  velocity  (when  the
acoeleration  is  uniform)  is,  during  any  interval,  the  arithmeti-
cal mean  of  the  initial  and  final  velocities.  This  is  the  ease  of
a  stone  foiling  TertieaUy.

For  if  the  acceleration  be  parallel  to  x,  we  have
^  =  a,  therefore  ^  «  »  =  ai>  and  x  ■  jo**,

And  we  may  write  the  equation  g  29)  v  ~  s  a,  whence  ^  -  «ub.

If  at  time  <  =  0  the  velocity  was thsse  equatiomi  become  at
once

V*  V

vrnV-k-otf  x»Vt  +  ia^9  and  ^sy  +  oA

And  initial  velocity  =  Fi

final „ ss  V+at;
Axithmetioal  mean  «

X

wbence  the  second  part  of  the  above  statement

e»  When  there  is  uniform  acceleration  in  a  constant  direc-
tion, the  path  described  is  a  parabola,  whose  axis  is  parallel  to
that  direction.  This  is  the  case  of  a  projectile  moving  in
vacunm.

For  if  the  axis  of  y  he  parallel  to  the  acceleration  a,  and  if  the
plane  of be  that  of  motion  at  any  time,

^=0, ^  =  0,  z=0,

and  Ifaerelbre  tlie  motion  is  wboUy  in  the  plane  ofay.

Digitized  by  Google

22  FfiELlMIKABT.  [35.

Exampifltcf and  by  intognitum

wbere V,  a,  b  are  ooiutantfl.

The  elimination  of  t  gires  tht'  e>iuation  of  a  parabola  of  which  the

U'

axis  k  panlld  to  y,  parameter  ^ ,  and  yertes  the  point  whose  oo-
ordinates  are

U  V .  V
x^a  ,  y=s6-

2a

d..  As  an  Ulastration  of  aooeleratioii  in  a  tortnona  conre,  we
take  the  case  of  §  13,  or  of  §  34,  e.

Let  a  poiut  move  in  a  circle  of  radius  r  with  uniforra  angular
velocity  to  (about  the  centre),  aud  let  this  circle  move  perpen-
dicular to  its  plane  with  velocity  V.  The  point  deiicribes  a
helix  on  a  cylinder  of  radius  r,  and  the  inclination  a  is  given  by

tana=-.

1 r'ti}*  rto*
The  cuivature  of  the  path  is  -  — 5-=  or  -rrj  and  the

V  Vu>

tortuosity

The  acceleratioiL  ia  n*',  directed  perpendieQlailj  towards  the
axis  of  the  cylinder. — Call  thia  A.

Lot  A  be  finite^  r  indefiaitely  small,  and  therefore  m  indefinitely
great

Cturatnre  (in  the  limit)  =  ^ .

Tortuosity  ( „ )  =  p  •

Thus,  if  we  hare  a  material  particle  moving  in  the  manner  ipeei-
fied,  and  if  we  consider  the  force  (see  Chap.  H.)  required  to  pro-
dnoe  the  aooeleratioDi  we  find  that  a  finite  force  perpendicniar  to

Digitized  by  Google

35.]  J1IN£>IATJCS.  23

tli«  line  of  motum,  in  a  direotion  revolving  vith  an  infinitely  ^f^j^^^^
great  angular  veloeitj,  maintaina  constant  infinitely  small  de-  tton.
flection  (in  a  direction  opposite  to  its  own)  from  the  line  of  un-
distarbed  motion,  ^tls  carratute^  and  infinite  tortnosity.

e.  Wlien  the  acceleration  is  ixTpondiciilar  to  a  given  plane
and  proportional  to  the  distance  from  it,  the  path  is  a  plane
curve,  which  is  the  harmonic^  rurve  if  the  acceleration  be  iowarr/^
the  plane,  and  a  more  or  less  fore-shortened  catenaty  (§  580)
if  from  the  plana

As  in  case  c,  ^  =  0,  ^  =  ^>  i£  the  axis  of  «  be

perpendicolar  to  the  acceleration  and  to  the  direction  of  motion
at  any  instant Also,  if  we  choose  the  origin  «t  the  plane,

Hence  ^  «  const »  a  (suppose),

This  gives,  if  /a  is  negative,

y  sPcos  0 ,  the  hsrmomc  curve,  or  curve  of  sines.

Iffi  be  positive^ y»Pc^  +  <?ii~^;

and  by  sbifUng  the  origm  aloog  the  asds  of  x  this  can  be  put  in

the  form

which  is  the  catenaiy  if  ^R=^h\  otherwise  it  is  the  catenaiy
stretched  or  fitroHdiortened  in  the  direction  of  y.

36.  [C.)mpare  §§  233—236  below.]  a.  \Mien  the  jg^^
ration  is  directed  to  a  fixed  point,  the  path  is  in  a  plane  passing
thnragh  thai  point;  and  in  this  plane  the  areas  traced  out  by
the  radius-vector  are  proportional  to  the  times  empbyed.  This
includes  the  case  of  a  satellite  or  planet  reyoWing  about  its
primary.

Evidently  there  is  no  acceleration  perpendicular  to  the
plane  containiog  the  filled  and  moving  points  and  the  direction

Digitized  by  Google

24  P££LIMINABT.  [36.

Acceleration  of  motion  of  the  sccond  at  any  inKtant;  and,  there  beinc:  no

directed  to  A  .  i. ,  . , .  ^

flndooitre.  velocity  perpendicular  to  this  plane  at  starting,  there  is  there-
fore none  throughout  the  motion ;  thus  the  point  moves  in  the
plan&  And  had  there  been  no  acceleration,  the  point  would
have  described  a  straight  line  with  uniform  velocity,  so  that  in
this  case  tbe  areas  described  by  the  radius-vector  would  have
been  proportional  to  the  times.  Also,  tbe  area  actually  described
in  any  instant  depends  on  the  length  of  the  radius-vector  and
the  velocity  perpendicular  to  it^  and  is  shown  below  to  be
unaffected  by  an  acceleration  paraUel  to  the  xadioa-vector.
Hence  ibe  second  part  of  the  proposition.

wi»«  ^=p«.  ^=i'».  ^^r'-.

r dtr  dt  r

the  fixed  point  beuig  the  origin,  and  F  heing  some  function  of
m,y,»i  in  nature  a  fonotion  of  r  onlj.

Henoe  e^c**

whifdi  give  on  intsgimtioii

dM dy ^ das dz ^ dy dx  ^

"si-'-s-^"  'Tt-'di-^"  'i-yirr^'

Henoe  at  once  C,x  +  Cjf  +  C^z  ~  0,  or  the  motion  is  in  a  plane
through  the  origin.  TaJce  this  as  the  planeof  ay,  then  we  have
only  the  one  equation

In  polar  co-ordinates  tiiis  is

if  A  he  the  area  intercepted  bj  the  curve,  a  fixe<l  melius- vector,
and  the  radius-voctor  of  the  moving  point.  Henoe  the  area  in-
creases uniformly  with  the  time.

5.  In  the  same  case  the  velocity  at  any  point  is  inversely  aa
the  perpendicular  from  the  fixed  point  upon  the  tangent  to  the

patli,  the  momentary  direction  of  motion.

For  evidently  the  product  of  this  perpendicular  and  the
velocity  gives  double  the  area  described  in  one  second  about  the
fixed  point

Digitized  by  Google

36.]  KINEICATICS.  25

Or  thvfr— if  |i  be  the  perpendienkr  on  the  tuigeiity  ^S^t^2

du  dx

If  we  refer  the  motion  to  co-ordiuates  in  its  own  plane,  wo
have  ouljr  the  equations

dt^~  r  '  r  *

wlieiioeb  as  befora^  f*^sA.

I( the  help  of  this  last  eqnstion,  we  eUmuutte  I  from

^^-~^f  substituting  polar  for  rectangular  co-ordinates^  we
■RiTe  at  the  polar  differential  eqvatum  of  the  path.

For  Tarietji  we  maj  derive  it  from  the  formulse  of  §  32.
_  <IV fdd\* „ ,de  .

Putting  ^  =  u,  we  have

Also  ^ =  AV,  the  snbatitatioa  of  irhleh  values  gives  vs

tiie  equation  xequii^.  The  integral  of  this  equation  involves
two  arbitrary  constants  besides  and  the  remaining  constant
bdonging  to  the  two  differential  equations  of  the  second  order
above  is  to  be  introdnoed  on  the  fiurther  integration  of

5=A»'  (2).

when  the  value  of  « In  temis  of  0  is  substitated  from  the  equ*-
tion  of  the  path.

d

But-

Digitized  by  Google

nSEUMlNABY.

[361

Other  examples  of  these  principles  will  be  met  with  in  the
chapters  on  Kinetics.

Hodogniph.  37.  If  from  any  fixed  point,  lines  be  drawn  at  every  instant,
representing  in  magnitude  and  direction  the  velocity  of  a  point
describing  any  path  in  any  manner,  the  extremities  of  these
lines  form  a  curve  winch  is  called  the  Uodogvaph.  The  inven-
tion of  this  construction  is  due  to  Sir  W.  R.  Hamilton.  One  of
the  most  beautiful  of  the  many  remarkable  theorems  to  which
it  led  him  is  that  of  §  38.

Since  the  ndliis-Tector  cf  the  hodograph  represents  the
Yelodly  at  each  instant,  it  is  evident  (§  27)  that  an  elementary
arc  represents  the  velocity  which  must  be  compounded  with  the
velocity  at  the  b^rinning  of  the  corresponding  interval  of  time,
to  find  the  velocity  at  its  end.  Hence  the  velocity  in  the  hodo-
graph is  equ;Ll  to  the  acceleratiuu  in  the  path;  and  the  tangent
to  the  hodograph  is  parallel  to  the  direction  of  the  acceleration
inthepath.

If y,  s  be  the  oo-ordinates  of  the  moving  puint,  6  %  C  those

of  the  e(»Tesponiing  point  of  the  hodograph,  then  evidently

^~dt'  ''-di'
andtheiefore  ^  =

<ft* ^  ^

or  <iie  tangent  to  the  hodogra^  is  panilld  to  the  aooelenitkm  in
the  orbit  A1k>^  if  cr  be  the  ans  of  the  hodograph,

■S=  v/(l)XlHi)'

or  the  velocity  in  the  hodogiaph  is  eqiud  to  the  rate  of  aooelers-
tion  in  the  path.

HodoffTaph 38. The  hodograph  for  the  motion  of  a  planet  or  comet  is
fom.TdV-'^  always  a  drde,  whatever  he  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the  orbit
Krpkr^ir'^  In  the  motion  of  a  planet  or  comet,  the  acceleration  is  directed
towards  the  sun's  centre.  Hence  (§  36,  h)  the  velocity  is  in-

Digitized  b^S^OQ^^

38.]  KINEMATICS.  ^7

Tersely  as  the  perpendicular  from  that  point  upon  the  tangent  Hodogrnph
to  the  orbit The  orbit  we  assume  to  be  a  conic  section,  whose  comet.  de>
foctts  is  the  8un*8  centre. But  we  know  that  the  intersection  k«pM
of  the  perpendicular  with  the  tangent  lies  in  the  circle  whose
diameter  is  the  major  axis,  if  the  orbit  be  an  ellipse  or  hyper-
bola; in  the  tangent  at  the  vertex  if  a  parabola. Measure  otf
on  the  perpendicular  a  third  proportional  to  its  own  length  and
any  constant  line;  this  portion  will  thus  represent  the  velocity
in  magnitude  and  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  its  own —
so  that  the  locus  of  the  new  points  in  each  perpendicular  will  be
the  hodograph  turned  through  a  right  angle. But  we  see  by
geometry*  that  the  locus  of  these  points  is  always  a  circle.
Hence  the  proposition.  The  hodograph  surrounds  its  origin  if
the  orbit  he  an  ellipse,  passed  thh)ugh  it  if  a  parahola^  and  the
origin  is  without  the  hodograph  if  the  orhit  is  a  hyperbola.

For  a  projectile  unresisted  by  tlie  air,  it  will  be  shewn  in
Kinetics  that  we  have  the  equations  (assumed  in  §  35|  c)

if  the  axis  of  y  be  tiikcn  vertically  upwards
Hence  for  the  hodograph

or  i-Cf  rj=^C'-gtf  and  the  hodograph  is  a  vertical  straight
hne  along  which  the  describing  point  moves  uniformly.

For  the  caBo  of  a  planet  or  comet,  instead  of  aiffiTning  as  Hodograph
above  that  the  orbit  is  a  conic  with  the  sun  in  one  focus,  assume  vim^dc-^^
(l^ewton's  deduction  from  that  and  the  law  of  areas)  that  the  NewtLfi^'^
aooelerBtion  is  in  the  direction  of  the  radius- vector,  and  varies  °'
inveiBely  aa  the  square  of  the  diatanoe. We  have  obTiously

where  r'=a»  +  y*.

Hence,  as  in  §  36, *  ^  "  2^  ^  =  ^*  W»

*  Bee  oar  smaller  work,  §  61.

Digitized  by  Googlc

28

[38.

Hodofraph

for  pMnetor
comet,  de-
duced from
Newton's
law  ot  force.

Curves  of

ponuik

and  therofore

dy  dx

fix

X

1^

A

^dt  ^di

dt  A  r

(2)  .

(3)  .

Similarly
Hflnoe  for  the  liodogra{»Ii

the  oirole  as  before  stated.
We  may  merely  meation  that  Uie  equation  of  the  cMt  will  be

Iband  at  onoe  by  eliminating  ^  and  ^  among  the  three  first

integnb (IX  (2)^  (3)  ahove.  Wethnaget

-A+-iy-^«=^r,

a  conic  section  of  which  the  origin  is  a  focus.

88.  The  intensity  of  heat  and  light  emanating  from  a  point,
or  from  an  uniformly  radiating  apberical  suifaoe^  diminishes  with
increasing  distance  according  to  the  same  law  as  gmvitation.
Hence  the  amount  of  heat  and  lights  which  a  planet  receives
from  the  sun  during  any  interval,  is  proportional  to  the  time
integral  of  the  acceleration  during  that  interval,  i,e,  (§  37)  to
the  corresponding  arc  ot  the  hodograph.  From  this  it  is  easy
to  see,  for  example,  that  if  a  comet  move  in  a  parabola,  the
amount  of  heat  it  receives  from  the  sun  in  any  interval  is  pro-
portional to  the  angle  tli rough  which  its  direction  of  motion
turns  during  that  interval  There  is  a  corresponding  theorem
for  a  planet  moving  in  an  ellipse,  but  somewb&t  more  com-
plicated.

40.  If  two  points  move,  each  with  a  definite  unifinm  velo-
city, one  in  a  given  curve,  the  other  at  eveiy  instant  directmg

its  course  towards  the  first  describes  a  path  which  is  called  a

Digitized  by  Google

40.]

KINEMATICS.

29

Ovsrat  af  JPursuit The  idea  is  said  to  have  been  snffeeBted  curvM  of
hy  the  old  rule  of  steeriDg  a  privateer  always  diiectly  for  the
vessel  pursued. (Bouguer,  M4m,  de  VAcad.  1732.) It  is  the
curve  described  by  a  dog  running  to  its  msster.

The  simplest  cases  are  of  course  those  iu  which  the  first
p)int  moves  in  a  straight  line,  and  of  these  there  are  tliree,  for
the  velocity  of  the  first  point  may  be  greater  than,  equal  to,
or  less  than,  that  of  the  second. The  figures  in  the  text  below
represent  the  curves  in  these  cases,  the  velocities  of  the  pur-
suer being  |«  1,  and  ^  of  those  of  the  pursued,  respectively.  In
the  second  and  third  cases  the  second  point  can  never  over-
take the  firs^  and  consequently  the  line  of  motion  of  the  first
is  an  asymptoteL  In  the  first  case  the  second  point  overtakes
the  firsts  and  the  carve  at  that  point  touches  the  line  of  motion
of  the  first The  remainder  of  the  curve  satisfies  a  modified
form  of  statement  of  the  original  question,  and  is  called  the
Curve  of  Flight,

Digitized  by  Google

30  PBELDONABT.  a  [-^0.

Curves  of  We  will  inci  t  ly  form  the  difi'ereutiaJ  equation  of  the  curve,

paqpit  integrated  form,  leaving  the  work  to  the  student.

Suppose  Ox  to  he  the  line  of  motion  of  the  first  point,  whoee
Telocity  i&Vy  AT  the  curve  of  pmauit^  in  which  the  velocity  is  tt,
then  the  tangent  at  P  always  passes  through  Qj  the  instan-
taneona  poBition  of  the  first  point.  It  will  be  evident,  on  a
nuanent's  Cfmsiderationf  that  the  curve  AP  must  have  a  tangent

lierpendieular  to  Ox. Take  tliis  as  the
axis  of and  let  OA  =  a. Then,  if
0Q  =  (,  AP^s,  and  if y  be  the  00-
ordinatea  of  P,  we  have
AP  OQ

1L

  beeatue  A^  0  and  Py  Q  are  pairs  of  si-

Q '  mnltaneoiis  pontiooa  of  the  two  pcnnta.

ThiagLves  ^«8efs=a-y^.

From  this  we  find,  unless  0  =  1,

andife=l, 2 +  ^)  =  ^-a log.|,

the  onljr  oaae  in  whieh  we  do  not  get  an  algebraic  coira  Hie
axia  of « ia  easDy  aeen  to  be  an  aaymptote  if  « 1.

Anipiiar  41.  When  a  point  moves  in  any  manner,  the  line  joining
it  with  a  fixed  point  generally  changes  its  direction.  If,  for
simplicitjri  we  consider  the  motion  as  confined  to  a  plane
passing  through  the  fixed  point,  the  angle  which  the  joining
line  makes  with  a  fixed  line  in  the  plane  is  oontinnally  alter-
ing, and  its  rate  of  alteration  at  any  instant  is  called  the
Angular  Vetocitjf  of  the  first  point  about  the  second.  If
uniform,  it  is  of  oourse  measured  by  the  angle  described  in
unit  of  time;  if  yariable,  by  the  angle  which  would  have
l/eeii  described  in  unit  of  time  if  ibc  angular  velocity  at  the
instant  in  (juestion  were  maintained  constant  for  so  long.  In
this  respect,  the  process  is  precisely  similar  to  that  which  we
have  already  explained  for  the  measurement  of  velocity  and
acceleration.

Digitized  by  Google

m.]  KIKEICATICa  31

Unit  of  angular  Telocity  is  that  of  a  point  which  describes,  ^^^J
or  would  describe,  unit  .angle  about  a  fixed  point  in  unit  of
time. The  usual  unit  angle  is  (as  explained  in  treatises  on
plane  trigonometry)  that  which  subtends  at  the  centre  of  a  circle
an  arc  whose  length  is  equal  to  the  radius;  being  an  angle  of

^  «  5r. 29578 ...  =  57*  17' 44".8  nearly.

if  or  brevity  we  shall  call  this  angle  a  radian.

42.  The  rate  of  increase  or  diminution  of  the  angular  velo-  ^^^^^^^
city  when  variable  is  called  the  atujHlar  acceleration,  and  is
measured  in  the  same  way  and  by  the  same  unit.

By  methods  precisely  similar  to  those  employed  for  linear
Telocity  and  aooeleiation  we  see  that  if  be  the  angle*Teotor
of  a  point  moTing  in  a  plane — ^the

Angalar  velodfy  is «» » ,  and  the

Angular  ModemtMH  I.  ^  -  ^  =  »  .

Since  ({  27)  ^ ^  the  Telocity  perpendicular  to  the  radins-

'vector,  we  see  that

The  angular  Telocity  of  a  point  in  a  plane  is  found  by
dividing  the  Telocity  perpendicular  to  the  ladius-Tector  by  the
length  of  the  radius-vector.

43.  When  one  point  describes  uniformly  a  circle  about  An^ruiar
another,  the  time  of  describing  a  complete  circumference  being

T,  we  have  the  angle  29r  described  uniformly  in  T\  and,  there-

27r

fore,  the  angular  velocity  is  .  £ven  when  the  angular  velo-
city is  not  uniform,  as  in  a  planet's  motion,  it  is  useful  to
introduce  the  quantity-^,  which  is  then  called  the  mean

angular  velocity.

When  a  point  moves  unifonnly  in  a  straight  line  its  angular
velocity  evidently  diminishes  as  it  recedes  from  the  point  about
which  the  angles  are  measured.

Digitized  by  Google

[43.

AngnUr

et  A  r»l»na

BeUtire

82  PfiBLOCINABT.

The  polar  equation  of  a  straight  Hue  is

Bat  the  lengUi  of  the  line  between  the  ii»nT*=«"g  angles  0  and^
liatentf,  adul  this  iiumasee  with  umfoniiTelocitj  0.  Henoe

v«^(ataQO-asecPtf^=-^.

Henoe  ^"*'^»  tberefore  inmselj  as  the  aqvaie  of  die

radius-vector.

Similarly  £ar  the  angular  aooelerfttiony  we  have  hf  a  seoond
differentiatkniy

*****  ^= — "f*/  *  ultimately  vanes  inversely  as
the  third  power  of  the  rsdins-Teetor.

44.  We  may  also  talk  of  the  angular  velocity  of  a  moving
plane  with  respect  to  a  fixed  one,  as  the  rate  of  increase  of  the
angle  contained  by  them — but  unless  their  line  of  intersection
xemain  fixed,  or  at  all  events  parallel  to  itself,  a  somewhat
more  laboured  statement  is  required  to  give  definite  iii£Dnii»*
tion.  This  will  be  supplied  in  a  subsequent  section.

45.  All  motion  that  we  are,  or  can  be,  acquainted  wnth,  is
Relative  merely.  We  can  calculate  from  astronomical  data  for
any  instant  the  direction  in  which,  and  the  velocity  with  which
we  are  moving  on  account  of  the  earth's  diurnal  rotation.  We
may  compound  this  with  the  similarly  calculable  velocity  of  the
earth  in  its  orbit.  This  resultant  again  we  may  compound
with  the  (roughly  known)  velocity  of  the  sun  relativdy  to  the
so-caUed  fixed  stars;  but>  even  if  all  these  elements  were  accu-
rately known,  it  could  not  be  said  that  we  had  attuned  any
idea  of  an  a&solvte  velocity;  for  it  is  only  the  sun*8  relative
motion  among  the  stars  that  we  can  observe ;  and,  in  jall  pro-
bability, sun  and  stars  arc  moving  on  (possibly  with  very  great
rapidity)  relatively  to  other  bodies  in  space.  We  must  there-
fore consider  how,  from  the  actual  motions  of  a  set  of  points,  we
may  find  their  relative  motions  with  r^ard  to  any  one  of  them;

Digitized  by  Google

45.]

KINIICATIGS,

33

aod  how,  havine  eiven  the  relative  motionB  of  all  but  one  with  R^intirc

•  ^  *  motion.

regard  to  the  latter,  and  the  aetoal  motion  of  the  latter,  we
may  find  the  actual  motions  of  alL  The  question  is  yeiy
easily  answered.  Consider  for  a  moment  a  number  of  pas-
sengers wslkiog  on  the  deck  of  a  steamer.  Their  relative
motions  with  regard  to  the  deck  are  what  we  immediately
observe,  but  if  we  compound  with  tliese  the  vehjcity  of  the
steamer  itself  we  get  evidently  their  actual  motion  relatively
to  the  earth.  Again,  in  order  to  get  the  relative  motion  of
all  with  regard  to  t}ie  deck,  we  abstract  our  ideas  from  the
motion  of  the  steamer  altogether — that  is,  we  alter  the  velocity
of  each  by  compounding  it  with  the  actual  velocity  of  the  vessel
taken  in  a  reversed  direction.

Hence  to  find  the  relative  motions  of  any  set  of  points  with
regard  to  one  of  their  number,  imagine,  impressed  upon  each  in
composition  with  its  own  velocity,  a  velocity  equal  and  opposite
to  the  velocity  of  that  one ;  it  will  be  reduced  to  rest,  and  the
motions  of  the  others  will  be  the  same  with  regard  to  it  as
before.

Thus,  to  take  a  very  simple  example,  two  traius  are  running
in  opposite  directions,  say  north  and  south,  one  with  a  velocity
of  fifty,  the  other  of  thirty,  miles  an  hour.  The  relative  velocity
of  the  second  with  regard  to  the  firf^t  is  to  be  found  by  im-
pressing on  both  a  southward  velocity  of  tifty  milos  an  hour ;
the  effect  of  this  being  to  bring  the  first  to  rest^  and  to  give  the
second  a  southward  velocity  of  eighty  miles  an  hour,  which  is
the  required  relative  motion.

Or,  given  one  tnun  moving  north  at  the  rate  of  thirty  miles
an  hour,  and  another  moving  west  at  the  rate  of  forty  miles  an
hour.  The  motion  of  the  second  relatively  to  the  first  is  at
tbe  rate  of  fifty  miles  an  hour,  in  a  south-westerly  direction
indined  to  the  due  west  direeUon  at  an  angle  of  tan~*  f .  It
is  needless  to  multiply  such  examples,  as  they  must  occur  to
every  one.

46.  Exactly  the  same  remarks  apply  to  relative  as  compared
with  absolute  aooebration,  as  indeed  we  may  see  at  once,  since
aooeierations  are  in  all  cases  resolved  and  compounded  by  the
same  law  as  velocities.

VOL.  L  3

Digitized  by  Google

34  PBEUMINABT.  [4^.

lUtUtivQ  If  X,  »/,  «,  and  x',  y\  z\  be  the  co-ordinates  of  two  points

rpfemxl  to  axes  rcganled  aa  tixodi  aud  ^,  ij,  (|  their  relative
co-ordiuateh — we  Lave

and,  differentiating,

whloh  give  tlie  relative,  in  terms  of  the  absolute^  velocittes  j  and

tPx

pro\  ing  our  assortiou  about  relative  and  absolate  accelerations.

The  corre8{)onding  expressions  in  polar  oo-ordioates  in  a  plane
are  somewhat  complicated,  and  by  no  means  convenient.  The
student  can  easily  write  them  down  for  himselC

47.  The  following  proposition  in  relative  motion  is  ci  oon-

Biderable  importance : —

Any  two  moving  points  describe  similar  paths  relatively  to
each  other,  or  relatively  to  any  point  which  divides  in  a  con-
stant ratio  the  line  Joining  them.
Let  A  and  £  be  any  simultaneous  positions  of  the  points.

Take  <?  or in  AB  such  that  the  ratio

^ ^ ^  ^ or has  a  constant  value.  Then

as  the  form  of  the  relative  path  depends  only  upon  the  length
and  direction  of  the  line  joining  the  two  points  at  any  instant,  it

is  obvious  that  these  will  be  the  same  for  A  with  n  ganl  to  B,
as  for  B  witli  regard  to  A,  saving  only  the  inversion  of  the
direction  of  the  joining  line.  Hence  B  s  path  about  A,  is  ^4*3
about  B  turned  through  two  ri^ht  antjles.  And  with  rcfjard  to
and  G'  it  is  evident  that  the  directions  remain  the  same,  while
the  lengths  are  altered  in  a  given  ratio ;  but  this  is  the  definition
of  similar  curves.

48.  As  a  good  example  of  relative  motion,  let  us  consider

that  of  the  two  points  involved  in  our  definition  of  the  curve  of
pursuit,  §  40.  Since,  to  find  the  relative  position  and  motion  of
the  pursuer  with  regard  to  the  pursued,  we  must  impress  on
both  a  velocity  equal  and  opposite  to  that  of  the  latter,  we  see

.  J  i^ud  by  Google

48.]

KINEICATICS.

35

at  uiice  that  tlic  pn*blt  in  becomes  the  same  as  the  followinf;^.  A  iletaUtre
boat  crossing  a  stream  is  impelled  by  the  oars  with  uniform
velocity  relatively  to  the  water,  and  always  towards  a  fixed
point  in  the  opposite  bank ;  but  it  is  also  carried  down  stream
at  a  uniform  rate ;  determine  the  path  described  and  the  time  of
crossiDg. Here,  as  in  the  former  problem,  there  are  three  cases,
figured  below. In  the  first,  the  boat^  moving  faster  than  the
cttnent^  reaches  the  desired  point ;  in  the  second,  the  velocities
of  boat  and  stream  being  equal,  the  boat  gets  across  only  after
an  infinite  time — descriUng
a  parabola — but  dues  not  huid
at  the  desired  point,  which  is
indeed  the  focus  of  the  j)ara-
bola,  while  the  landing  point
is  the  vertex. In  the  third
case,  its  proper  velocity  being
less  than  that  of  the  water,  it
never  reaches  the  other  bank,
and  is  carried  indefinitely
down  stream. The  compari-
son of  the  figures  in  §  40  with  those  in  the  preset  section  cannot
&il  to  be  instractive. Th«y  are  drawn  to  the  same  scale,  and
for  the  same  relative  velocities.  The  horizontal  lines  represent
the  fiwrther  bank  of  the  river,  and  the  vertical  lines  the  path  of
Uie  boat  if  there  wore  no  current.

We  leave  the  solntioii  of  this  question  as  an  exennse,  merely
noting  that  the  equation  of  the  ourve  is

in  one  or  other  of  the  three  cases,  according  as  e  is  >,  =^ ,  or  <  1.

When  s  1  this  becomes

B — 2ax,  the  parabola.

The  time  of  crossing  is

wkioh  is  finite  only  .for  9<l,  because  of  connie  a  n«^tive  value

IS

3-2

Digitized  by  Google

36  P&ELDUNABT.  [49.

Bdatifftt  49.  Another  excellent  example  of  tlie  transformation  of  rela-
roTttiOTi," , .  .  .

tive  iuto  absolute  motion  is  afFonleJ  by  the  family  of  c\  cloitls.

We  shall  in  a  future  section  consider  their  mcclianical  descrip-
tion, by  the  rolling  of  a  circle  on  a  fixed  straight  line  or  ciivlr.
In  the  mean  time,  we  take  a  ditTi  rent  form  of  enunciation,
which,  however,  leads  to  precisely  the  same  result.

Pind  the  actual  path  of  a  point  which  revolves  uniformly  in
a  circle  about  another  point — the  latter  moving  uniformly  in  a
straight  line  or  dide  in  the  same  plane.

Take  the  former  case  first :  let  a  be  the  radius  of  the  relative

circidar  orbit,  and  u)  the  angular  velocity  in  it,  v  being  the
velocity  of  its  centre  along  the  straight  line.

Ihe  relatire  co-ordinates  of  the  point  in  the  circle  are  aeos*if
and  a  sin  w/,  and  the  actual  co-ordinates  of  the  centre  sie  vt
end  0. Hence  for  the  actual  path

Hence suT^^-i-^a'-i^,  an  equation  whidi,  by  giving

different  values  to  v  ami  a>,  may  be  made  to  represent  the  cycloid
itself,  or  either  form  of  trochoid. See  §  92.

For  the  epicycloids,  let  6  be  the  radius  of  the  cinde  which  B
describes  about  A, the  angnlar  velocity;  a  the  radius  of  A*%
path,  •»  the  angulsr  velocity.

Also  at  time  <  =  0,  let  be  in  the  mdius
OA  of  ^'s  path.  Then  at  time  f,  if  A\  B
be  the  posLtiona,  we  see  at  once  that

L  AOA'^tti, I  BCA^^^t

Hence,  taking  OA  as  axis  of

«aacostt<-i-6  oo6«»,<,  y=a  siuttf-i-^  siuM,!,

which,  by  the  elimination  of  give  an  algebraic  equaUon  between
X  and  y  whenever  a»  and are  commensurable.

Thus,  for  <Dj  =  2(1),  suppose  iU  =  $t  and  we  have

«Baoos0  +  &cos2^, ysasin^-f 68in2^,

or,  by  an  easy  reduction,

Digitized  by  Google

Tv<-snlt«uit

UiOliUtU

49.]  KINEICATICS.  37

Put  x-h  for  «,  ie.,  change  the  erigin  to  a  diatance  AB  to  the  H«tativo
left  of  Of  the  equation  beoomeB  motum.

a*(a^  +  /)=(a^  +  Sf'-2to)*

or,  in  poUur  co-ordmates,

o'  -=  (/•  -  26  cos  Oy^ r  -a  +  2b  cos  0,
and  when  2b-a,  r  =^a(l+GOB6),  the  cardioid. (See  §  94.)

60.  As  an  additional  illustration  of  this  part  of  oar  subject,
we  may  define  as  follows

If  one  point  A  executes  any  motion  whatever  with  reference
to  a  second  point  ^ ;  if  ^  executes  any  other  motion  with  refer-
ence to  a  third  point  C ;  and  so  on — the  first  is  said  to  execute,
witli  reference  to  tlie  last,  a  movement  which  is  the  resultant  of
these  several  movements.

The  relative  position,  velocity,  and  acceleration  are  in  such  a
case  the  geometrical  resultants  of  the  various  components  com-
hined  according  to  preceding  rules.

61.  The  following  practical  methods  of  effectbg  such  a  com-
bination in  the  simple  case  of  the  movements  of  two  points  are
useful  in  scientific  illustrations  and  in  certain  mechanical  arrange-
ments. Let  two  moving  points  be  joined  by  an  elastic  string  ;
the  middle  point  of  this  string  will  evidently  execute  a  move-
ment which  is  half  the  resultant  of  the  motions  of  the  two
points.  But  for  drawing,  or  engraving,  or  for  other  mechanical
appUcations,  the  following  method  is  preferable  :—

CF  and  £D  are  rods  of  equal  length
moving  freely  round  a  pivot  at  P,  which
passes  through  the  middle  point  of  each —
CA,AD,  EB,  and  BF,  are  rods  of  half  the
length  of  the  two  former,  and  so  pivoted

to  them  as  to  form  a  pair  of  equal  rhombi

CA  EFt  whose  angles  can  be  altered  at  ^
will  Whatever  motions,  whether  in  a  plane,  or  in  space  of  three
dimensions,  be  given  to  xi  and  i?,  P  will  evidently  be  subjected
to  li.ilf  their  resultant.

52.  Amongst  the  most  important  classes  of  motions  which
we  have  to  consider  in  Natural  Philosophy,  there  is  one,  namely,
'^ormoftte  Motion,  which  is  of  such  immense  use,  not  only  in

Digitized  by  Google

Bimpto

38  PBKUMINART.  [52.

lUnsooio  ordinar)'  kiuetics,  but  in  the  theories  of  sound,  light,  heat,  etc.,
that  we  make  no  apology  for  entering  here  into  oonsiderable
detail  regarding  it

53.  Def.  WLcu  u  point  Q  moves  uniformly  in  a  circle,  the

perpendicular  QP  drawn  from  its  position
at  any  instant  to  a  fixed  diameter  A  A'  of
the  circle, intersects  the  diameter  in  a  point
P,  whose  position  ciianges  bj  a«Mn^  Aar*
monic  motion.

Thus,  if  a  planet  or  satellite,  or  0&e  of
the  constituents  of  a  double  star,  supposed
to  move  uniformly  in  a  circular  orbit  about
its  primary,  be  viewed  from  a  very  distant  position  in  the  plane
of  its  orbit,  it  will  appear  to  move  backwards  and  fonvaids  in  a
straight  line,  with  a  simple  harmonic  motion.  This  is  nearly
the  case  with  such  bodies  as  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  wh^  seen
from  the  earth.

Physically,  the  interest  of  such  motions  consists  in  the  huct
of  their  being  approximately  those  of  the  simplest  vibrations  of
sounding  bodies,  such  as  a  tuning-fork  or  pianoforte  wire  ;  whence
their  name  ;  and  of  the  various  media  in  which  waves  uf  sound,
light,  heat,  etc.,  aie  propagated.

64.  The  AmplUud$  of  a  simple  harmonic  motion  is  the
range  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  middle  point  of  the  course,
t.a,  OA  or  OA'  in  the  figure.

An  arc  of  the  cirde  referred  to,  measured  from  any  fixed
point  to  the  uniformly  moving  point  Q,  is  the  Argument  of
the  harmonic  motion.

The  distance  of  a  point,  performing  a  simple  harmonic  motion,
from  the  middle  of  its  course  or  range,  is  a  simple  harmonic  func-
tion of  the  time.  The  argument  of  this  function  is  what  we  have
defined  as  the  argument  of  the  motion.

The  Epoch  in  a  sini})le  harmonic  motion  is  the  interval  of  time
which  elapses  from  the  era  of  reckoning  till  the  moving  point
first  Comes  to  its  greatest  elongation  in  the  direction  reckoned
as  positive,  from  its  mean  position  or  the  mid<lle  of  its  range.
Kpoch  in  angular  measure  is  tlie  angle  described  on  the  circle  of
reference  in  the  period  of  time  defined  as  the  epoch.

Digitized  by  Google

54.]  KINEMATICS.  39

The  IMod  af  a  simple  harmonic  motion  is  the  time  which  »impto
elapaes  firom  any  instant  nntil  the  moving  point  again  moves  in  motion.  °
the  same  direction  through  the  same  position.

The  Phase  of  a  simple  harmonic  motion  at  any  instant  is  the

fiTiction  of  the  whole  period  which  ha-s  elapsed  since  the  moving
point  last  passed  through  its  middle  position  in  the  positive
direction.

65. Those  common  kinds  of  mechanism,  for  prodncing  recti-  Bmpit^
bneal  from  curcuuur  motion,  or  tnce  versa,  m  which  a  crank  n>"tion  m
moving  in  a  circle  works  m  a  straight  slot  helonging  to  a  hody
which  can  only  move  in  a  straight  line,  fulfil  strictly  the  definition
of  a  ample  harmonic  motion  in  the  part  of  which  tlic  motion  is
rectilineal,  if  the  motion  of  tlie  rotating  part  is  uniform.

The  motion  of  tlie  treadle  in  a  spinning-wheel  approximates
to  the  same  con<iiri m  wlion  the  wheel  moves  uniformly;  the
approximation  being  the  closer,  tlie  smaller  is  the  angular  motion
of  the  treadle  and  of  the  connecting  string.  It  is  also  approx-
imated to  more  or  less  closely  in  the  motion  of  the  piston  of  a
steam-engine  connected,  by  any  of  the  several  methods  in  use,
with  the  crank,  provided  always  the  rotatory  motion  of  the
crank  he  imiform.

56. The  velocity  of  a  point  executing  a  simple  harmonic  Vriocitjr
. . . , "i  ....  ,  ,  H.

motion  IS  a  simple  liarmonic  lunction  ot  the  time,  a  (piarter  ot  moiiou.

a  period  earlier  in  phase  than  tlie  displacement,  and  having  its

maximum  value  equal  to  the  velocity  in  the  circular  motion  hy

which  the  given  function  is  defined.

For,  in  the  tig.  of  §  53,  if  F  be  the  velocity  in  the  circle,  it

may  be  represented  by  OQ  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  its

own,  and  therefore  by  OP  and  PQ  in  directions  perpendicular  to

those  linea That  is,  the  velocity  of  P  in  the  simple  harmonic

y

motion  is PQ ;  which,  when  P  is  at  0,  becomes  V.

67. The  acceleration  of  a  point  executing  a  simple  harmonic  ^JJ^jjJ'jj^
motion*  is  at  any  time  simply  proportional  to  the  displacement
from  the  middle  point,  hut  in  opposite  direction,  or  always
towards  the  middle  point. Its  maximum  value  is  that  with
which  a  velocity  equal  to  that  of  the  circular  motion  would

Digitized  by  Google

40  PBELIMINART.  [57.

Acopiem.  bo  aoquiied  in  the  time  in  which  an  arc  equal  to  the  radius
•^^""'^iadeicribecL

V*

For,  in  the  tig.  of  §  53,  the  acceleration  of  C  (^y  §  35,  a)  is

along  QO,  Supposing,  for  a  moment,  to  represent  the  mag-
nitude of  this  acceleration,  we  may  resolve  it  in  QP,  PO.  The
acceleration  of  P  is  therefore  represented  on  the  same  scale  by

V*  PO  V*

PO,  Its  magnitude  is  therefore •  ^  = PO,  which  is

yt

proportional  to  PO,  and  has  at  A  its  maximum  value,  .-^^  ,  an
acceleration  uuder  which  the  velocity  V  would  be  acquired  in
the  time  ^  as  stated.

Let  a  be  the  amplitude,  c  the  epoch,  and  T  the  period,  of  a
simple  harmonic  motion.  Then  if  «  be  the  dii^ikoeiiient  from
middle  position  at  time we  have

<  =  acoB^^^-€j.

Uenoe^  for  velooily,  we  have

ds 2tra  . /2irl  \

=5« — r'^i-T-')-

Henoe  F,  the  mazunnm  valne^  is ,  as  above  stated  (§  56).
Again,  for  aooeleratiaii,

^=-^'co8(^-«)  =  -^.«.  (See§67.)

liMtly,  for  the  maximum  value  of  the  aooeleratioii,

4ir»a  _  r

T

^^heie^  it  may  be  remarked, is  the  time  of  describing  an  aio
equal  to  radius  in  the  rslstive  etieular  motion.

coTDTXMi- 68. Any  two  simple  hannonic  motions  in  one  line,  and  of
s^^ii^M.  in  one  period,  give^  when  compounded,  a  single  simple  harmonic
motion ;  of  the  same  period ;  of  amplitude  equal  to  the  diagonal
of  a  parallelogram  described  on  lengths  equal  to  their  amplitudes
measured  on  lines  meeting  at  an  angle  equal  to  their  difference

Digitized  by  Google

-r

58.J

KINEMATICS.

41

of  epochs;  and  of  epoch  differing  from  thuir  epoclis  by  ''^"^,'1^8  [jJJJJ^-
equal  to  those  which  this  diagonal  makesi  with  the  two  aides  of  £J*m J'  ^
the  p.irallt:logram.  Let  F  and  1^  be
two  points  executing  simple  harmonic
motions  of  one  period,  and  in  one  line
B'BCAA'.  Let  Q  and  C  be  the  uni-
formly moving  points  in  the  relative
circles.  On  CQ  and  CQ  describe  a
panllelogram  SQCQf ;  and  through  8
draw  8R  perpendicular  to  £'A'  pro-
duced. 'Wehaveolmoiisly  FJ^aCP
(being  projections  of  the  equal  and
panOlel  lines  QfS,CQ,oa  CS),  Henoe
CR^  CP-\-  CF ;  and  therefoie  the

point  R  executes  the  resultant  of  the  motions  P  and  P'.  But
CS,  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram,  is  cousUuit,  and  therefore
the  resultant  motion  is  simple  harmonic,  of  amplitude  CS^  and
of  epoch  exceeding  that  of  the  motion  of  P,  and  falling  short
of  that  of  the  motion  of  by  the. angles  QCS  and  SCQ  re-
spectively.

This  geometrical  ronst ruction  has  been  usefully  applied  by  the
tidal  committee  of  the  British  Association  for  amedianical  tide-
indicator  (compare  §  60,  below).  An  arm  CQ  turning  round  G
carries  an  arm  Q  8  turning  round  Q[,  Toothed  wheels  one  of
them  fixed  witb  its  axis  through  0,  and  the  others  pivoted  on  a
framework  carried  by  CQ^,  are  so  arranged  that  Q'^  turns  very
approximately  at  the  rate  of  once  round  in  12  mean  lunar  hours,
if  CQ  be  turned  uniformly  at  the  rate  of  once  round  in  12  mean
solar  hours.  Days  and  half- days  are  marked  by  a  counter  geared
to  CQ .  The  distance  of  S  from  a  fixed  line  through  C  shows
the  deviation  from  mean  sea-level  due  to  the  sum  of  mean  solar
and  mean  lunar  tides  for  the  time  of  day  and  year  marked  by
C(J  and  the  counter.

An  analytioal  proof  of  the  same  proposition  ia  useful,  being  as
follows:—  2^  ^^^^

s(acosc-<-a  oos€)oo« -jf  +(a8m€  +  a  Bmc)sw-^srooBr^-^J  ,

Digitized  by  Google

42  PBELIMINABY.  [58.

CoiaiMMi. * whera  - rs{(ttcoBc  +  a'oOBc)'  +  (a8iiic-i>a'8inc')'}^

tiofi  of

oh© line,' •  s=  {o*  +  a'  +  2aa  cos (e - c')

,  . ^ asmc-i-a  sine

aud  tan  0  ■=

aco8«  +  a  oosc

59. Tlie  construction  described  in  tlie  precedin*^  section  ex-
hibits the  resultant  of  two  simple  harmonic  motions,  w  lietlier  of
the  same  period  or  not. Only,  if  they  are  not  of  tlie  same  period,
the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram  ^Yiii  not  be  constant,  but  will
diminish  from  a  maximum  value,  the  sum  of  the  component
amplitudes,  which  it  has  at  the  instant  when  the  phases  of  the
component  motions  agree ;  to  a  minimum,  the  difference  of  thorj
amplitudes,  which  is  its  value  when  the  phases  di£fer  by  half
a  period. Its  direction,  which  always  must  be  nearer  to  the
greater  than  to  the  less  of  the  two  radii  constituting  the  sides
of  the  parallelogram,  will  oscillate  on  each  side  of  the  greater
radius  to  a  maximum  deviation  amounting  on  either  side  to  the
angle  whose  sine  is  the  less  radius  divided  by  the  greater,  and
reat  liLd  when  the  less  radius  deviates  more  than  this  by  a
quartt-r  circumference  frnin  the  gi-eater. The  full  period  of  this
oscillaiion  is  the  time  in  which  either  radius  gains  a  full  turn
on  the  otlier. The  resultant  motion  is  therefore  not  simple
harmonic,  but  is,  as  it  were,  simple  harmonic  v^'ith  periodically
increasing  and  diminishing  amplitude,  and  with  periodical  ac-
celeration and  retardation  of  phase. This  view  is  particularly
appropriate  for  the  case  in  which  the  periods  of  the  two  com-
ponent motions  are  nearly  equal,  but  the  amplitude  of  one  of
them  much  greater  than  that  of  the  other.

To  express  the  rcsult^mt  motioTi,  lot  .s-  be  the  (iisjilaccmcnt  at
time  f;  iiiul  let  a  be  tlic  greater  of  the  two  component  liaif-
amplitudeu.

«  s  a  COS  (n<  —  c)  +  a' cos  (n't  -  c')

a:  a  COS  {?it  —  c) a'  COS  [nt  —  «  +  ^)

«  (a  f  a' COB  ^)  cos  (ttt  -  c)  -  o' sin  ^  ain  (n<  -  c),
if  ii^{n't'€)-(nt-€)i
or,  finally, •  e  r  cos c  +

Digitized  by  Google

1

Kl^iEMATlCS.  43

if  r  »  (a*  <«-  taafuM^  +  a*^*

,  . .  8°HrM.  in

and  tao^a  >--^.

a-¥a  0089

The  maximum  Talue  of  tan^  in  the  last  of  time  equations  is

IT  (I  tt'

foimd  by  making  ^  =  ^  +  sm''  — ,  and  is  equal  to 1 ,

and  henoe  tlie  maatimum  Tslue  of  ^  itself  is  sin'*  .  The  geo-
metrical methods  indicated  above  (§  58)  lead  to  this  wmdosion
by  the  following  very  simple  oonstraction.

To  find  the  time  and  the  amount  of  the  maximum  acceleration
or  retardation  of  phase,  let  CA  bo  tlic  greater  half-amplitude.
From  A  am  centre^  with  the  less  half-amplitude  as  radius,  de-
scribe a  circla  CB  touching  this  circle  is  the  generating  radius
of  the  most  deviated  resultant  Hence  CBA  is  a  right  angle ;
and  r,^^  .  AB

60. A  most  interesting  application  of  this  case  of  the  com-  Exomplesof
position  of  harmonic  motions  ia  to  the  lunar  and  solar  tides ;  of  s'T^"
which,  except  in  tidal  rivers,  or  long  channels,  or  deep  bays,
follow  each  very  nearly  the  simple  harmonic  law,  and  produce,  as
the  actual  result,  a  variation  of  level  equal  to  the  sum  of  varia-
tions that  would  be  produced  by  the  two  causes  separately.

The  amount  of  the  lunar  equilibrium-tide  (%  812)  is  about  2*1
times  that  of  the  solar.  Hence,  if  the  actual  tides  conformed  to
the  equilibrium  theory,  the  spring  tides  would  be  .31,  and  the
neap  tides  only  11,  each  reckoned  in  terms  of  the  solar  tide;
and  at  spring  and  neap  tides  the  hour  of  high  water  is  that  of
the  lunar  tide  alone.  The  greatest  deviation  of  the  actual  tide
from  the  phases  i  high,  low,  or  mean  water)  of  tlio  lunar  tide
alone,  would  be  about  '95  of  a  lunar  hour,  that  is,  '98  of  a  solar
hour  (being  the  same  part  of  12  lunar  hours  that  28^  2^,  or  the

1  .

angle  whose  sine  is ,  is  of  360*^). This  maximum  deviation

would  be  in  advance  or  in  arrcar  according  as  the  crown  of  the
solar  tide  precedes  or  follows  the  crown  of  the  lunar  tide  ;  and  it
would  be  exactly  xeached  when  the  interval  of  phase  between

Digitized  by  Google

44  PBELDONART.  [60.

SxampiMoi  the  two  component  tides  is  3  95  lunar  hours. That  is  to  say,
or?.**HL  *L*  there  would  be  maximum  advance  of  the  time  of  high  water  4^
inooeiiue.  ^^^^^  after,  and  maximum  retardation  the  same  number  of  days
before,  spring  tides  (compare  §  811).

61.  We  may  consider  next  the  case  of  equal  amplitudes  in
the  two  given  motions.  If  their  periods  are  equal,  their  re-
sultant is  a  simple  harmonic  motion,  whose  phase  is  at  every
instant  the  mean  of  their  phases^  and  whose  amplitude  is  equal
to  twice  the  amplitude  of  either  multiplied  by  the  cosine  of  half
the  difference  of  their  phases.  The  resoltant  is  of  course  nothing
when  their  phases  differ  by  half  the  period,  and  ia  a  motion  of
double  amplitude  and  of  phase  the  same  as  theirs  wlien  they  are
of  the  same  phase.

When  their  periods  are  very  nearly,  but  not  quite,  equal  (their
amplitudes  being  still  supposed  equal),  the  motion  passes  very
slowly  from  the  ioiuicr  (zero,  or  no  motion  at  all)  to  the  latter,
and  back,  in  a  time  equal  to  that  in  which  the  faster  has  gone
once  oftcner  through  its  period  than  the  slower  has.

In  practice  we  meet  with  many  excellent  examples  of  this
case,  which  will,  however,  be  more  conveniently  treated  of  when
we  come  to  apply  kinetic  principles  to  various  subjects  in  acou-
stics, physical  optics,  and  practical  mechanics  ;  such  as  the  sym-
pathy of  pendulums  or  tuning-forks,  the  rolling  of  a  turret  ship
at  sea,  the  marching  of  troops  over  a  suspension  bridge,  etc

Moc^nism  62.  If  any  number  of  pulleys  be  so  phiced  that  a  cord
passing  from  a  fixed  point  half  round  each  of  them  has  its

jjjjjj^  free  parts  all  in  pjirallel  lines,  and  if  their  centres  be  moved
with  simple  harmonic  motions  of  any  ranges  and  any  periods
in  lines  parallei  to  those  lines,  the  unattached  end  of  the
cord  moves  with  a  complex  harmonic  motion  equal  to  twice
the  sum  of  the  given  simple  harmonic  motions.  This  is  the
principle  of  Sir  W.  Thomson's  tide-predicting  machine,  con-
structed by  the  British  Association,  and  ordered  to  be  placed
in  South  Kensington  Museum,  availably  for  general  u.sc  in
calculating  beforehand  fur  any  port  or  other  place  on  the  .sea
for  which  the  simple  harmonic  constituents  of  the  ti(K'  have
been  determined  by  the  "harmonic  analysis"  applied  to

Digitized  by  Google

61]  XIK£MATIC&  43

previous  observaiioDS*.  We  may  exhibit,  graphically,  any  case  Oj^jg;^^
of  single  or  compound  simple  harmonic  motion  in  one  line  by  L'""
curves  in  which  the  abscissae  represent  intervab  of  time,  and  the  ^^j^^

•  See  British  Association  Tidal  Committee'B  Kcporti?,  1868,  1872,1876;  or
Lecture  on  Inks,  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  (Collins,  Glaagow,  1876).

Digitized  by

46  PBELIMIHABT.  [62.

Ongiiad^  ordinates  the  corresponding  distances  of  the  moving  point  from
tion  of its  mean  position.  In  the  case  of  a  single  simple  harmonic
ooc  'iiae/'^  motion,  the  corresponding  curve  woald  be  that  described  by  the
point  P  in  §  53,  if,  while  Q  maintained  its  uniform  circular
motion,  the  circle  were  to  move  with  uniform  velocity  in  any
direction  perpendicular  to  OA. This  construction  gives  the
harmonic  curve,  or  cuitcs  of  sines,  in  which  the  ordinates  are
proportional  to  the  sines  of  the  abscissie,  the  straight  line  in
which  0  moves  being  the  axis  of  abscissa?. It  is  the  simplest
i|>ossible  form  assumf^d  by  a  vibrating  string. When  the  har-
monic motion  is  complex,  but  in  one  line,  as  is  the  case  for  any
point  in  a  violin-,  harp-,  or  pianoforte^string  (difTering,  as  these
do,  from  one  another  in  tlieir  motions  on  account  of  the  different
modes  of  excitation  used),  a  similar  construction  may  be  made.
Investigadon  regarding  complex  harmonic  functions  has  led  to
results  of  the  highest  importance,  having  their  most  general
expression  in  Fwriei's  Theorem,  to  which  we  will  presently  devote
several  pages. We  give,  on  page  45,  graphic  representations  of
the  composition  of  two  simple  harmonic  motions  in  one  line,  of
equal  amplitudes  and  of  periods  which  are  as  1  :  2  and  as  2  :  3,
for  differences  of  epoch  corresponding  to  0,  1,  2,  etc.,  sixteenths
of  a  circumference. In  each  ca.se  the  epoch  of  tlie  component  of
greater  period  is  a  quarter  of  its  own  period. In  tlie  fir.si,  second,
third,  etc.,  of  each  series  respectively,  tlie  epocli  of  the  component
of  shorter  period  is  less  than  a  quarter-period  by  0,  1,  2,  etc.,
siictccnths  of  the  period.  The  successive  horizontal  lines  are  the
axes  of  abscissffi  of  tlie  successive  curves  ;  the  vertical  line  to  the
left  of  each  series  being  the  common  axis  of  ordinatea In  each
of  the  first  set  the  graver  motion  goes  through  one  com]dete
period,  in  the  second  it  goes  through  two  periods.

1:2  2:3

(Octave) *  (Fifth)

Bothy  firom  «-  0  to Ss-;  and  for 0, 1,  2  15,  in  saooessioii.

These,  and  similar  cases,  when  the  periodic  times  are  not  com-
mensurable, will  be  again  treated  of  under  Acoustics.

Digitized  by  Google

69L]  KlNEMATIca  47

68. We  Imvc  next  to  consider  the  composition  of  simple  bar-  S-H-

...  *  tionibi

raonic  motions  in  different  directions. In  the  firat  place,  we  see  (|ifrer«nt

UiXVCLlOllS.

that  any  number  of  simple  haimonic  motions  of  one  period,  and
of  the  same  phase,  superimposed,  produce  a  single  simple  har-
monic motion  of  the  same  phase.  For,  the  displacement  at  any
instant  being,  according  to  the  principle  of  the  composition  of
motions,  the  geometrical  resultant  (see  above,  §  50)  of  the  dis-
placements due  to  the  component  motions  sopaiately,  tliesc  com-
ponent displacements,  in  the  case  supposed,  all  vary  in  simple
proportion  to  one  another,  and  are  in  constant  directions.  Hence
the  resultant  displacement  will  vary  in  si  tuple  proportion  to  each
of  tliem,  and  will  bo  in  a  constant  direction.

But  if,  while  their  periods  arc  the  same,  the  phfises  of  the
eeveial  component  motions  do  not  agree,  the  resultant  motion
will  generally  be  elliptic,  with  equal  areas  described  in  equal
times  by  the  radiuft-vector  from  the  centre ;  although  in  par-
ticalar  cases  it  may  be  uniform  circular,  or,  on  the  other  hand,
rectilineal  and  simple  harmonic.

W.  To  prove  this,  we  may  first  consider  the  case  in  which
we  have  two  equal  simple  harmonic  motions  given,  and  these  in
perpendicular  lines,  and  differing  in  phase  by  a  quarter  period.
Their  resultant  is  a  uniform  circular  motion.  For,  let  BA,  B'A'
be  their  ranges;  and  from  0,  their  common  middle  point,  as
centre,  describe  a  circle  through  AA'BB,  The  given  motion  of  F
in  BA  will  be  (§  53)  defined  by  the  motion
of  a  point  Q  round  Uie  circumference  of
this  drde ;  and  the  same  pointy  if  moving
in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  arrow,  will
give  a  simple  harmonic  motion  of  in
BA\  a  quarter  of  a  period  behind  that  of
the  motion  of  P  in  BA,  But,  since  A'  OA,
QPO,  and  QF  0  are  right  angles,  the  figure
QFOP  is  a  parallelogram,  and  therefore  Q  is  in  the  position  of
the  displacement  eompounded  of  OP  and  OP'.  Hence  two  ei  jual
simple  harmonic  motions  in  perpendicular  lines,  of  phases  dif-
termg  by  a  quarter  period,  are  ecpiivalent  to  a  uniform  circular
motion  of  radius  equal  to  the  maximum  displacement  of  either
siogly,  and  in  the  direction  from  the  positive  end  of  the  range  of

.  ij  i^ud  by  Google

48  PRBLIlUKABlr.  [64.

So"  in^  the  component  in  advance  of  the  other  towards  the  positive  end
^iS^SSL  of  the  range  of  this  latter.

65.  Now,  orthogonal  projections  of  simple  harmonic  mot  ion>
are  clearly  simple  harmonic  with  unchanged  phase.  Heuce,  if
we  project  the  case  of  §  Gt  on  any  plane,  we  get  motion  in  an
ellipse,  of  which  the  projections  of  the  two  component  ranges
are  conjugate  diametors,  and  in  which  the  radius-vector  from  the
centre  describes  ei\ua\  areas  (being  the  projections  of  the  areas
described  by  the  radius  of  the  circle)  in  equal  timea  But  the
plane  and  position  of  the  circle  of  which  this  projection  is  taken
may  deariy  he  found  so  as  to  fulfil  the  condition  of  hayiog  the
projections  of  the  ranges  coinddent  with  any  two  given  mutually
bisecting  lines.  Hence  any  two  given  simple  harmonic  motions,
equal  or  unequal  in  range,  and  oblique  or  at  right  angles  to  one
another  in  direction,  provided  only  tliey  differ  by  a  quarter
period  in  phase,  produce  elliptic  motion,  having  their  ranges  for
conjugate  axes,  and  describing,  by  the  radius-vector  from  the
centre,  equal  areas  in  equal  times  (compare  §  '6^,  b),

66.  Returning'  to  the  composition  of  any  number  of  simple
harmonic  motions  of  one  period,  in  lines  in  all  directions  anil  of
all  phases :  each  component  simple  hannonic  motion  may  be  de-
terminatcly  resolved  into  two  in  the  same  line,  differing  in  phase
by  a  quarter  period,  and  one  of  them  having  any  given  epoch.
We  may  therefore  reduce  the  given  motions  to  two  sets,  difieriu^
in  phase  by  a  quarter  period,  those  of  one  set  agreeing  in  phase
wiUi  any  one  of  the  given,  or  with  any  other  simple  hannonic
motion  we  please  to  choose  (ie,,  having  their  epoch  anything
we  please).

All  of  each  set  may  (g  58)  he  compounded  into  one  simple
hannonic  motion  of  the  same  phase,  of  determinate  amplitude,
in  a  determinate  line ;  and  thus  the  whole  system  is  reduced  to
two  simple  fully  determined  harmonic  motions  difleiing  from

one  another  in  phase  by  a  quarter  period.

Now  the  resultant  of  two  simple  harmuuic  motions,  one  a
quarter  of  a  period  in  atlvance  of  the  other,  in  different  lines,  hsm
been  proved  {§  65)  to  be  motion  in  an  ellipse  of  which  the  ranf^»\s
of  the  component  motions  are  conjugate  axes, and  in  which  equal

Digitized  by  Google

66.]  KINEMATICS.  49

«nas  are  desciibed  by  the  ladiae-vector  from  the  centre  in  equal  ^ions  in
times.  Hen

Let

the  general  pcopoeition  of  §  63.

S.  H.  mo-
tions in
diAsrait

»I  =  <^OS  {uit  -  €,),j

y,=wt/f,cos  H-€,),  (1)^

=  n^a,  COS  (ftrf-i J,

be  the  Oartenaa  spedfication  of  the  fint  of  the  given  motions;
and  lo  with  Taried  sofBzes  ^  the  others;

ltm,n  dftnoting  the  direction  cosiiiea,
a M M  half  amplitude^
« „  „  epoch,

»»

(2)

the  proper  suffix  being  attached  to  each  letter  to  apply  it  to  eacli
case,  and  w  denoting  the  common  relative  angular  velod^.  The
leeultant  motum,  qtecified  hjx,jf,z  'without  aolBzea^  is

X  s  S/jO,  COS -  c,)  =  COB  «)/!S/,a,  cos +  sin  utt^ja^  sin  c^,

y~etc.;  ^seta;

or,  aa  we  nmy  write  for  brevity,

X  -  y  V-as + sLri  o><,^
y^Q  CDS 4-  (/  sin  (ot,
g=Rcc»uU  +  JC  siucti^,

where  l^a^ooac,,  1^  =  %  l/i^tm€^A

Q e lm^a^  ooe (/= Im^a^ nn c, ,>  (3)

jRsSii,a,  coBc,,  i?'v2n,a,ain«j.)

The  restiltant  motion  tl^us  specified,  in  terms  of  six  comj>onent
Himple  harmonic  motions,  may  be  retUiced  to  two  by  couipouuding
J\ Hf  and  F', J^,  in  the  elementary  way. Thus  jif

R

1-^

the  required  motion  will  he  the  resultant  of  {oos«f  in  the  Une
(X,  m  r),  and  rnniif  in  the  Hne  (X',  v).  It  is  therefore  mo-
tion in  an  ellipse,  of  which  and  2C  in  those  directions  are
YOL.  I.  4

Digitized  by  Google

50  TBSLIiaNABT.  [66.

8.H.flM> ooigugate  diuuetora;  with  radiua-yector  from  centre  traciiig

tIfliM  in  2^

diraSona. equal  areas  in^ual  ttmea;  and  of  i>eriod  •

H.  motion* 67. We  miist  next  take  tlie  case  of  the  oompoaition  of  simple

in"(Ufftf^t  ^^""^^^^  motions  of  different  periods  and  in  different  lines.  In
general,  whether  these  lines  be  in  one  plane  or  not,  the  line
of  motion  returns  into  itself  if  the  periods  are  commensurable;
and  if  not,  not. This  is  evident  without  proof.

If  a  be  tlie  ampUtade,  €  the  epoch,  and  n  the  angular  velodtgr
in  the  relative  dieular  motion,  for  a  component  in  a  line  whose
direction  cosines  are  A,  /i,  v — and  if  £  if,  {  be  the  oo-ordinates  in
the  resultant  motion,

^  =  2.A.,a,  co8(n,<-e,),  i7  =  S./i,a,cos  (n,<-€,),  ^  =  2. cos  (n,<- c,).

Now  it  is  evident  that  at  time  t  +  T  the  values  of  ^,  17,  ^  will  recur
as  soon  as  n^T,  n^T,  etc.,  are  multiples  of  2v,  that  is,  when  T  is

the  least  oommon  multiple  of  — ,  — ,  etc.

If  there  be  such  a  common  multiple,  the  tri<i:()nometrical  func-
tions may  be  eliminated,  and  the  equations  (or  equation,  if  the
motion  is  iu  cue  plane)  to  the  path  are  algebraic.  If  not,  they
are  transoeudentah

68.  From  the  above  we  see  generallj  that  the  composition

of  any  number  of  simple  harmonic  motions  in  any  directions

and  uf  any  periods,  may  be  effected  by  compounding,  according
to  previously  explained  methods,  their  resolved  parts  in  each
of  any  three  rectangular  directions,  and  then  compounding  the
final  resultants  in  these  directions.

8.  H.  no-  69.  By  &r  the  most  inteiestin^  ease,  and  the  simplest^  is
rBctauytiw  that  of  two  simple  harmonic  motions  of  any  periods,  whose  di-
rections must  of  course  be  in  one  plane.

Mechanical  methods  of  obtaining  such  combinations  will  be
afterwards  described,  as  well  as  cases  of  their  occurrence  in
Optics  and  Acoustics.

We  may  suppose,  for  simplicity,  the  two  compont^nt  motions
to  take  place  in  perpendicular  directions.  Also,  as  we  can  only
have  a  re-entering  curve  when  their  periods  are  commensur-
able»  it  will  be  advisable  to  commence  with  such  a  case.

Digitized  by  Google

c

oombmaiioii  of  simple  harmonic  motions  of  equal  amplitude  in

two  rectangular  directions,  the  periods  of  the  components  being
as  1:2,  and  the  epochs  difTering  successively  by  0,  1,  2,  etc.,
sixteenths  of  a  circumference.

In  the  case  of  epochs  equal,  or  differing  l»y  a  multiple  of  tt,
the  curve  is  a  portion  of  a  parabola,  and  is  gone  over  twice
in  opposite  directions  by  the  moving  point  in  each  complete
period.

For  Uie  case  figured  above^

a;  =  aooB(2n<— c),  y^aeoani,

Henoe asBaJoosSnlcosf  +  sinSnlsinc}

wliich  for  any  given  value  of  €  ia  the  equation  of  the  coiTCsponU-
ing  curve. Thus  for  c  =  0,

-  -=  ^  —  1,  or  y*  =  ^  (as  +  o),  the  pai-abola  as  above.

4—2

. ..y  Google

PKELIMli^AKY.  [69.

For€  =  |wehave^  =  2|^l-^,  or  «V=V(»'-y'),

the  equation  of  the  5th  aiid  13th  of  the  above  curves.
In  general

from  which  <  u  to  be  eliminated  to  find  the  Cartesian  equation  of
tlie  curve.

Compoai. 70. Another  very  important  case  is  that  of  two  groups  of

tion  of  two

uniform t  WO  simple  haimonic  motions  in  one  plane,  such  that  the  resultant

motioiM. of  each  group  is  uniform  circular  motion.

If  their  periods  are  equal,  we  have  a  case  belonging  to  those
already  treated  (§  63),  and  conclude  that  the  resultant  is,  in
general,  motion  in  an  ellipse,  equal  areas  being  described  in
equal  times  about  the  centre.  As  particular  cases  we  may  have
simple  harmonic,  or  uniform  circular,  motion. (Compare  §  01.)

If  the  drcular  motions  are  in  the  same  direction,  the  resultant
is  evidently  circular  motion  in  the  same  direction.  This  is  the
case  of  the  motion  of  iS  in  §  58,  and  requires  no  further  comment,
as  its  amplitude,  epoch,  etc.,  are  seeu  at  once  from  the  figure.

71.  If  the  periods  of  the  two  are  very  nearly  equal,  the  re-
sultant motion  will  be  at  any  moment  very  nearly  the  circular

motion  given  by  tlio  preceding  construction.  Or  we  may  regard
it  as  rigorously  a  motion  in  a  circle  with  a  varying  radius  de-
creasing from  a  maximum  valiic,  the  sum  of  the  radii  f>f  the  two
component  motions,  to  a  minimum,  their  difference,  and  increas-
ing again,  alternately  ;  the  direction  of  the  resultant  radius
oscillating  on  each  side  of  that  of  the  greater  component  (as  in
corresponding  case,  §  59,  above).  Hence  the  angular  velocity
of  the  resultant  motion  is  periodicaliy  variable.  In  the  case  of
equal  radii,  next  consideredi  it  is  constant

72.  When  the  radii  of  the  two  component  motions  are  equal,
we  have  the  very  interesting  and  important  case  figured  below.
Here  the  resultant  radius  bisects  the  angle  bet«  een  the  com-
ponent radii.  The  resultant  angular  velocity  is  the  arithmetical
mean  of  its  components. We  will  explain  in  a  future  section

52

S  H  jno
tioiiii  in  two
rectaiiinUar
direoUooiL

Digitized  by  Google

72.]

KINEMATIC&

53

how  this  epitrocfaoid  is  traced  by  the  rolling  of  one  cirde

on  another. (The  particular  case  above  delineated  is  that  d  a

non-reeutrant  curve.)

73.  Let  the  uniform  circular  motions  be  in  oppaaite  direc-
tions; ihen,  if  the  periods  are  eqnal,  we  may  easily  see,  as
before,  §  66,  that  the  resultant  is  in  general  elliptic  motion,
including  the  particular  cases  of  uniform  circular,  and  simple
harmonic,  motion.

If  the  periods  are  vety  nearly  equal,  the  resultant  will  be
easily  found,  as  in  the  case  of  §  59.

71  If  the  radii  of  the  component  motions  are  equal,  we  have
eases  of  very  great  importance  in  modem  physics,' one  of  which
is  figured  below  (like  the  preceding,  a  non-re6ntrant  curve).

Digitized  by  Google

54  PBKUmNlRT.  [74.

 ,  This  is  intimately  connected  with  the  explauation  of  two  sets  of

uniform  important  phenomena, — the  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization
of  light,  by  quartz  and  certain  fluids  on  the  one  hand,  and  by
tiansparent  bodies  nnder  magnetic  forces  on  the  other.  It  is
a  case  of  the  hypotrochoid,  and  its  corref^nding  mode  of
description  will  be  described  in  a  future  section.  It  will  also
appear  in  kinetics  as  the  path  of  a  pendulum-bob  which  oontains
a  gyroscope  in  rapid  rotation.

Fourier's 75.  Bofore  Icaviug  for  a  time  the  subject  of  the  composition

of  harmonic  motions,  we  must,  its  promised  in  §  62,  devote  some
pages  to  tlic  consideration  of  Fourier's  Theorem,  which  is  not
only  one  of  the  most  beautiful  results  of  modern  analysis,  but
may  be  said  to  furnish  an  indispensable  instrument  in  tlie  treat-
ment of  nearly  every  recondite  question  in  niotlern  physics.  To
mention  only  sonorous  vibrations,  the  propagation  of  electric
signals  along  a  telegraph  wire,  and  the  conduction  of  heat  by
the  earth's  crust,  as  subjects  in  their  generality  intractable  with-
out it^  is  to  give  but  a  feeble  idea  of  its  importance.  The  follow-
ing seems  to  be  the  most  intelligible  form  in  which  it  can  be
presented  to  the  general  reader : —

TfiEOR£\[. — A  complex  harmonic  /unction,  with  a  constant  tei^
added,  ie  the  proper  expression,  in  foathemaiiicai  language,
fir  anjf  arbitrary  periodic  function  ;  and  consequently  can
express  any  function  ufkatever  between  dejinite  valuee  of
the  variable.

76.  Any  arbitrary  periodic  function  whatever  being  i^ven,
the  amplitudes  and  epochs  of  the  terms  of  a  complex  harmonic
function  which  shall  be  equal  to  it  for  every  value  of  the  inde-
pendent variabloi  may  be  investigated  by  the  method  of  inde-
terminate coefficients.*'

Assume  equaUon  (14)  below. Multiply  both  memhera  first

by  cos  di  and  intcginto  from  0  to  p:  then  multiply  by

P

bin  '  ~  -  and  integrate  between  same  limits.  Thus  instantly
yon  find  (13).

Digitized  by  Google

I

7d.]  KINEMATICS,  55

This  investigation  is  sufficient  as  a  sdution  of  the  problem,  Fouricrja
•^to  find  a  complex  harmonic  function  expressing  a  given  arbi-
trary periodic  function, — when  once  we  are  assured  that  the
problem  is  possible;  and  when  we  have  this  assurancef  it  proves
that  the  resolution  is  determinate;  that  is  to  say,  that  no
other  complex  harmonic  function  than  the  one  we  have  found
can  satisfy  the  conditions.

For  description  of  an  integrating  machine  by  which  the
coefii<  !«  iits  Ai,  in  the  Fourier  expression  (14)  for  any  given
arbitrary  function  may  be  obtained  with  exceedingly  little
labour,  and  with  all  the  accuracy  practically  needed  for  the
harmonic  analysis  of  tidal  and  meteorological  observations,  see
Proceedings  of  the  Boyal  Society,  Feb.  1876,  or  Cbtap,  Y,  below.

77.  The  full  theory  of  the  expression  investigated  in  §  76
will  be  made  more  intelligible  by  an  investigation  from  a
different  p<nnt  of  view.

Let  F{x)  be  any  perifxlic  function,  of  j>eriod  p. That  18  to
say,  let  •^(s)  be  any  function  fulfilling  the  condition

iP(«+y)  =  J'(«)  (1),

where  t  denotes  any  positive  or  native  integer. Consider  the

L

where  a,  c  denote  any  three  given  quantities.  Its  value  is
)>mm^F(z)\ J^,  .ad  grMter  tliui  F^z")  f  it,

and  z  denote  the  values  of  x,  either  equal  to  or  interinodiatc
between  the  Umits  c  and  tf,  for  which  J!\x)  is  greatest  and  least
req»ectiveljr*  But

-g— i=-(tan — tan (2),

luid  therefore

and  „ >  Fi/)  ^tan"*  ^  -  tan

(3)

Digitized  by  Google

I

FOaritr't

56

PRBLOONABT.

[77.

Hence  if  ^  be  the  greatest  of  all  the  values  of  F(x),  and  B  the
least)

Aibo,  similarly,

a

I

(«)

(«)

Adding  the  first  membera  of  (3),  (4),  and  (5),  and  compariiig
with  the  corresponding  sums  of  the  second  members,  we  find

But,  by  (1),

£^=t«-{^-Ui^)}

Koir  if  we  denote  J~  1  by  v,

1 _  1  / 1 ^ 1  \
TT^B+^ijr 2a*\«+^-av  x+ip+avj*

and  iberafotre^  teUng  the  terms  ooneaponding  to  pontive  and
eqiial  negatiT«  'valoM  of  •  t^gether^  and  tiw  temifl  finr  IbO
lately,  we  have

«  +  au  rjp"  -  («  +  aw)"  j

=  _^  /cot^^^^::^>-«(*£fc±f5!il

2apv  ( jp  P '  J

w .  2iratf

- —  sin

2apv

apv

oor  008* — eoa  oca

P  P

ina  iwa

P

P

ap

€  '  —  2  cos

+  c

twu

'  P

Digitized  by  Google

77.]  KIKEILLTIC&  57

Hanoe,  ftorig'*

]  €'  -SOOB  +  €  '

Kezi»  denoting  iemiHmml7,  for  brevity,  <  '  by  &  and  putting

 (9)»

= .  ( 1  +  2«  cos  —  +  2«"  COB  +  2e  cos  —  +  etc  ) .

Hence,  according  to  (8)  and  (9),
J~  =  ^  jf  Jf  (x)<fo +  2,  cos  ^  +  aiPeo.  ^  +  etc.). . .  (10).

Kence,  by  (6),  we  infer  that

F{z)  (tan-»  i  -  taa- '  ^ il ^  tw-'  %  tan- » ^  >

and ^(«')  (tna-*  ^ -  taa"' + -  ton"*^+  tan"'  <

^  j^F{x)dse + &  coa  ^ + etc.^ .

Kowlet  ^s^c and  ^

^'  being  a  variable,  and  $  constant,  so  far  as  the  integration  is
oonoemed  ;  and  let

and  tbexefore ^(-)  =  (^(^•^2;),

Digitized  by  Google

PBXUMIKAKT.

[77.

The  preceding;  pair  of  inequalities  becomes
and ^(^+«')-2tan-»|  +  i?^7r-2tan-»0< [  (II)

where  ^  denotes  taaj  periodic  function  whatever,  of  period  p.

Now  let  c  be  a  very  small  fraction  of  p.  In  the  limit,  where  e
is  infinitely  BinaU,  the  greatest  and  least  values  of  <^(^')  for  values
of  ^  between  i  +  e  and  $-c  will  be  infinitelj  nearly  equal  to  one
another  and  to  ^($);  that  is  to  say,

Next,  let  a  be  an  infinitely  small  fraction  of  c. In  the  limit

tan-»-

and

V

c "  =1.

Hence  the  coinjianKon  (11)  bocomos  in  the  limit  an  equation
which,  if  we  divide  both  members  by  v,  gives

This  is  the  celebrated  theorem  discovered  by  Fonrier*  for  the
development  of  an  arbitrary  periodic  function  in  a  aeries  of  simple
hamonio  terms.  A  formnla  included  in  it  as  a  particular  case
had  been  giTen  preTionsly  by  Lagrsogef.

for  008  "'^^  ~ ,  we  take  its  value

P

St»r 9iir(  2tir^'  2irr^

COS 008 — -f  sm  Bin — -

P P  P  P

and  introduce  the  following  notation

2  f

am —  (it.
P

(13;

*  Th(orUtauUytiqu«d$inCkaUwr.  Fttis^l8».
t  Aneiem  Mkmka  dt  VAeMide  de  TmHtk

Digitized  by  Google

aenm.

77.]  KIKEBIATICa  59

we  reduoe  (12)  to  this  fam  Fourier'a

=  ^»  + ^«  COB  —  +  5,., Bin (U),

Avhich  is  the  general  exjiivs-sion  of  aii  arbitrary  fuaction  ill  terms
of  a  aeriefi  of  coidueB  and  of  ainoa. Or  if  we  take

=  (^/+  M^')\ and  tan = ^*  (15),

«We  ♦(©-^,  +  s;:ri'.oo8(?J^-..)  (16),

which  is  the  genml  expfeasion  in  a  series  of  single  8im|)le  har-
monic tenns  of  the  suooeeslve  multiple  peiiods.

Each  of  the  equations  and  comparmonB  (2),  (7),  (8),  {10),  and  Converg.
(11 )  is  a  true  arithmetical  expreasion,  and  may  be  yerified  by  actual  loSrier't
calculation  of  the  numbemBi  for  any  partioular  case ;  provided  only
that  F{x)  haa  no  infinite  Talue  in  ita  period.  Henoe,  with  tfak
exoeption,  (13)  or  either  of  its  equivalenta^  (14),  (16),  is  a  true
arithmetioal  expieaBitm ;  and  the  aeriee  whidi  it  involyea  is  there-
fine  oonyeiigent  Henoe  we  may  with  peilbot  rigour  oondude
that  even  the  extreme  eaae  in  whieh  the  arbitrary  function  ex-
perienoea  an  abrupt  finite  change  in  its  value  when  the  inde-
pendent variable^  incceaauig  continuously,  paaaes  through  some
particular  value  or  values,  is  included  in  the  general  theorem.
In  such  a  caae^  if  any  value  be  given  to  the  independent  variable
difiering  however  little  from  one  which  correspcnds  to  an  abrupt
change  in  the  value  of  the  Amotion,  the  series  must,  as  we  may
infer  firom  the  preceding  investigation,  oomveige  and  give  a
definite  value  for  the  Ibnotion.  But  if  exaetiy  the  critical  value
is  assigned  to  the  independent  variable^  the  series  cannot  con-
verge to  any  definite  valuer  ^e  oonsideration  of  the  limiting
valuee  ahown  in  the  comparison  (11)  does  away  with  all  difficulty
in  undeistanding  how  the  series  (1 2)  gives  definite  values  having
a  finite  difierence  for  two  particuhir  values  of  the  independent
variable  on  the  two  sides  of  a  eritieal  value,  but  difiering  in-
finitely little  from  one  another.

If  the  difierential  coefficient  -^1^^  is  finite  for  eveiy  value  of

i  within  the  period,  it  too  is  arithmetically  expreaaible  by  aserisa
of  harmonio  tenns,  which  cannot  be  other  than  the  aeries  ob:
tained  by  difibrentiating  the  series  for  ^  {$).  Hence

Digitized  by  Google

60  PBEUMINABT.  [77.

encjof  -^tV-  -  2,  ,»^»On( (17),

and  this  series  is  convergent ;  and  we  may  therefore  oonclade  that
the  series  for  is  more  coiiTeifgoiit  thtm  a  harmonio  series
with

h h h h  o<«-t

for  its  coeffidents. If  — has  no  infinite  Talues  within  the

at

pericHl,  we  may  differentiate  both  menilnii's  of  (17)  and  still  have
an  equation  aritlunetically  true;  and  so  on.  We  conclude  that
if  the  n"*  differential  coefficient  of  <f>{$)  has  no  infinite  values,
the  harmonic  seri^  for  ^(^)  must  oonver;ge  more  rapidly  than  a
harmonic  series  with

- 1 1 i  .
* 2" ' 3"  *  4" '  ^^'^

for  its  coeffici^ts.

78*  We  now  pass  to  the  oonsideration  of  the  displaoement
of  a  rigid  body  or  group  of  points  whose  relative  positions  are
analterable.  The  simplest  case  we  can  consider  is  that  of  the
motion  of  a  plane  fignre  in  its  own  plane,  and  thia^  as  far  as
kinematics  is  concerned,  is  entirely  snmmed  up  in  the  result  of
the  next  section.

Displace- 79. If  a  plane  figure  be  displaced  in  any  way  in  its  own
giMae^are  plane,  there  is  always  (with  an  exception  treated  in  §  81)  one
' point  of  it  common  to  any  two  positions ;  that  is,  it  may  be
moved  from  any  one  position  to  any  other  by  rotation  in  its  own
plane  aboat  one  point  held  fixed.

To  prove  this^  let  A,  B  be  any  two  points  of  the  plane  figure
in  its  first  positioB,  A\  B  the  positions  of  the  same  two  alter

a  displacement  The  lines  AA\  BB  will
not  be  parallel,  except  in  one  case  to  be
presently  considered.  Hence  the  line  equi*
distant  from  A  and  A!  will  meet  that  equi-
distant from  B  and  B'  in  some  point  O.
Join  OA,  OB,  OA',  OB'.  Then,  t  vi.l.  ntly,
because  OA'  =  OA,  OB  =  UB  and  A' B
=  AB,  the  triangles  OA' B'  and  OAB  are
equal  and  similar.  Hence  0  is  similarly
situated  with  regard  to  AB  and  AB,  and  is  therefore  one  and

Digitized  by  Google

7y.]  XINEMATICS.  CI

the  some  point  of  the  phine  fienre  in  its  two  positions. If,  for  ri  pi>i«>-
the  sake  of  illustration,  we  actually  trace  the  triangle  O^ifi  upon  g*^"^^
the  plane,  it  heoomes  OA'S^  in  the  second  position  of  the  figure.

80.  If  from  tlip  e<inal  angles  A'OB',  ADD  of  tlicse  similar
triangles  we  take  the  common  part  A'OB,  we  have  tlie  remaining
angles  AOA\  BOS'  eqiial,  and  each  of  them  is  clearly  equal  to
the  angle  through  which  the  figure  must  have  turned  round  the
point  O  to  bring  it  from  the  first  to  the  second  position.

The  preceding  simple  construction  therefore  enables  us  not
only  to  demonstrate  the  general  proposition,  §  79,  but  also  to
determine  from  the  two  positions  of  one  terminated  line  AB,
A'B^  of  the  figure  the  common  centre  and  the  amount  of  the
angle  of  rotation.

81i.  The  lines  equidistant  fiom  A  and  -4',  and  from  B  and  B',
are  parallel  if  is  parallel  to  A'B ;  and  therefore  the  con-
struction fails,  the  point  0  being
infinitely  distant^  and  the  theorem
becomes  nugatory.  In  this  case  the
motion  is  in  fiict  a  simple  trans-
lation of  the  figure  in  its  own

plane  without  rotation — mnce,  AB  being  parallel  and  equal  to
A'  B^y  we  have  A  A'  parallel  and  equal  to  BB ;  and  instead  of

there  being  one  point  of  the  figure  common  to  both  positions,

the  lines  joining  the  two  successive  positions  of  all  points  in  the
figure  2u-e  equal  and  parallel.

82. It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  the  figure  to  be  a  mere  flat
disc  or  plane— for  the  preceding  statements  apply  to  any  one  of
a  set  of  parallel  planes  in  a  rigid  body,  moving  in  any  way
subject  to  the  condition  that  th»  points  of  any  one  plane  in  it-
remain  always  in  a  fixed  plane  in  space.

68.  There  is  yet  a  case  in  which  the  construction  in  §  79  is
nugator}^ — that  is  when  AA'  is  paral-
lel to  BB,  but  the  lines  of  AB  and
A'B  intersect  In  this  case,  how-
ever, the  point  of  intersection  is  the
point  0  required,  although  the  former
method  would  not  have  enabled  us  to'  find  it.

Digitized  by

62

PBELIMINA&Y.

[84.

BxMniilH  84.  Very  many  interesting  applications  of  this  principle  may
mentinonebc  made,  of  which,  howevor,  few  belong  stricth^  to  our  subject,
and  we  shall  tin  ivfore  give  only  an  example  or  two.  Thus  wo
know  that  ii  a  line  of  given  length  AB  move  with  its  extremities

always  in  two  fixed  lines  OA,  OB,
any  point  in  it  as  P  describes  an
ellipse. It  is  required  to  find  the
direction  of  motion  of  P  at  any  in-
stant, i.e.,  to  draw  a  tangent  to  the
ellipse. BA  will  pass  to  its  next
position  by  rotating  about  the  point
Q;  found  by  the  method  of  §  79
by  drawing  perpendiculars  to  OA
and  OB  at  A  and  B.  Hence  P  for  the  instant  revolves  about  Q,
and  thus  its  direction  of  motion,  or  the  tangent  to  the  ellipse,  is
perpendicular  to  QP. Also  AB  in  its  motion  always  touches  a
curve  (called  in  geometry  its  envelop)  ;  and  the  same  priiiciplo
enables  us  to  find  the  point  of  the  envelop  which  lies  in  AB,  for
the  niMtion  of  tliat  point  must  evidently  be  ultimately  (that  is
for  a  very  small  displaceiiu  iit)  along  AB,  and  the  only  point
which  so  moves  is  the  intersection  of  AB  with  the  perpen-
dicular to  it  firom  Q. Thus  our  construction  would  enable  us
to  trace  the  envelop  by  points. (For  more  on  this  subject
see  §  91.)

85.  Again,  suppose  A  Bio  be  the  beam  of  a  stationary  engine
having  a  reciprocating  motion  about  A,  and  by  a  link  BD
turning  a  crank  CD  about  C.  Determine  the  relation  between
the  angular  velocities  oi  AB  and  CD  in  any  position.  Evi-
dently the  instantaneous  direction  of  motion  of  B  is  trans-
verse to  ABf  and  of  D  transverse  to  CD — henoe  if  AB,  CD
produced  meet  in  O,  the  motion  of  BD  is  for  an  instant  as  if

»  Q it  turned  about  0.  From  this

^ it  may  be  easily  seen  that  if
the  angular  velocity  of  be

«,thatof  6'i>is-^-^«.  A

^  similar  process  is  of  course

applicable  to  any  combination  of  machinery,  and  we  shall  find  it

Digitized  by  Google

83.]  KINEMjLTICS.  63

very  convenient  when  we  come  to  consider  various  dvnaimcal  Bx«mpiei

1-1  'of  displace-

problems  connected  with  virtual  velocities.  S^"^  ^

86.  Since  m  fi^eneral  any  movement  of  a  pLane  fijnire  in  its  Compo«iiion
1  i-  ii  X-  .  of  routioa*

plane  may  be  cousideroa  as  a  rotation  about  one  point,  it  is  about

evident  that  two  such  rotations  may  in  general  be  compounded
into  one;  and  therefore,  of  course,  the  same  may  be  done  with
any  namber  of  rotations. Thus  let  A  and  B  be  the  points  of
the  figure  about  which  in  succession  the  rotations  are  to  take
place. By  a  rotation  about  A,  B  is  brought  say  to and  by  a
rotation  about  B,AhB  brought  to  A\  ^e  construction  of  §  79
gives  us  at  once  the  point  0  and  the  amount  of  rotation  about  it
-which  singly  gives  the  same  effect  as  those  about  A  and  B  in
succession. But  there  is  one  case  of  exception,  viz.,  when  the
rotations  about  A  and  B  are  of  equal
amount  an<l  in  opposite  directions.  In
this  case  A  li  is  evidently  parallel  to
AB,  and  therefore  the  compound  result

is  Si  translation  ou\y.  That  is,  if  a  body  B
revolve  in  succession  through  equal  angles,  but  in  opposite  di-
rections, about  two  parallel  axes,  it  finally  takes  a  position  to
which  it  could  have  been  brought  by  a  simple  translation  per-
pendicular to  the  lines  of  the  body  in  its  initial  or  final  position,
which  were  successively  made  axes  of  rotation ;  and  inclined  to
their  plane  at  an  angle  equal  to  half  the  supplement  of  the
Gommcn  angle  of  rotation.

87.  Hence  to  compound  into  an  equivalent  rotation  a  rota-  compoiitioii
tion  and  a  translation,  the  latter  beine  effected  parallel  to  the  and  tranaia.
plane  of  the  former,  we  may  decompose  the  translation  into  two  nbm^
rotations  of  equal  amount  and  opposite  direction,  compound  one
of  them  with  the  given  rotation  by  §  86,  and  then  compound
the  other  with  the  resultant  rotation  by  the  same  process.  Or
we  may  adopt  the  following  far
simpler  method.  Let  OA  be  the
translation  common  to  all  points

in  the  plane,  and  let  BOC  be  the
angle  of  rotation  about  0,  BO
being  drawn  so  that  OA  bisects  the  exterior  angle  COB,  Take

Digitized  by  Google

I

64  PBBUMINABY.  [87.

Sfrouiiiiu point in  BO  produced,  sncli  tliat  RC,  ihe  spftoe  thxougli
!£mS«n»  ^^^^^ rotation  carries  it,  is  (([ual  and  opposite  to  OA.  This
I*'"* point  retain.s  its  former  position  after  the  performance  of  the
compound  operation  ;  so  that  a  rotation  and  a  translation  in
one  plane  can  be  compouuded  into  an  equal  rotation  about  a
dififereut  axi&

In  general,  if  the  origin  be  taken  as  the  point  about  which
rotation  takes  place  in  the  plane  of  ay»  and  if  it  be  through  an
angle  6,  a  point  whose  oo-ofdinates  were  originally  x,  y  will  have
them  changed  to

ot,  if  the  rotation  be  very  small,

Omission  t  f  88.  In  considering  the  composition  of  angular  velocities
and  hiK^  about  diffiuBnt  axes,  and  other  similar  cases,  we  may  deal  with

orders  or,_,,  m  *  «

>^<^quMw  mfimtely  small  displacements  only ;  and  it  results  at  once  from
the  principles  of  the  differential  calculus,  that  if  these  displace-
ments be  of  the  first  order  of  small  ((uantities,  any  point  whose
displacement  is  of  the  second  order  of  small  quantities  is  to  be
considered  as  rigorously  at  rest.  Hence,  for  instance,  if  a  body
revolve  through  nn  angle  of  the  first  order  of  small  quantities
about  an  axis  (belonging  to  the  body)  which  during  the  revolu-
tion is  displaced  through  an  angle  or  spare,  also  of  the  first
order,  the  displacement  of  any  point  of  the  body  is  rigorously
what  it  would  have  hten  had  the  axis  been  fixed  during  the
rotation  about  it,  and  its  own  displacement  made  either  before
or  after  this  rotation.  Hence  in  any  case  of  motion  of  a  rigid
system  the  angular  velocities  about  a  system  of  axes  moving  vnth
the  system  are  the  same  at  any  instant  as  those  about  a  system
fixed  in  spaoe^  provided  only  that  the  latter  coincide  at  the
instant  in  question  with  the  moveable  ones.

89,  From  similar  considerations  follows  also  the  general  prin-
ciple of  StqterpositioH  of  small  nufUtms,  It  asserts  that  if  several
causes  act  stmuUaneou^  on  the  same  particle  or  rigid  body,  and
if  the  et)ect  produced  by  each  is  of  the  first  order  of  small quaa-
tities*  the  joint  efiect  will  be  obtained  if  we  consider  the  causes
to  act  mcMtsniWjr.  each  taking  the  point  or  8y«t«m  in  the  poei-

Digitized  by  Google

89.]  KINEMATICS.  65

tion  in  which  the  preceding  one  lelb  it  It  is  evident  at  onoe  gj^^^;
that  this  18  an  immediate  deduotbn  from  the  fact  that  the  aeoond  wa^am^*^
Older  of  infinitely  small  quantities  may  be  with  rigorous  accmacy
n^lected. This  principle  is  of  veiy  great  nse,  as  we  shall  find

in  the  sequel ;  its  applications  are  of  constant  occurrence.

A  plane  figure  has  given  angular  velocities  about  gmsi  »-'rt>^
perpendiculai'  to  its  plane,  find  the  i-esultant.

Let  there  be  an  angular  velocity  <i>  about  an  axis  pftnmng
through  the  point  a,  h.

The  consecpient  motion  of  the  point  fc,  y  iu  tlie  time  5^  is,  as
we  have  just  seen  .^7),

~ —  6)<«<^^  parallel  to  x, and  (x  -  a) <oBt  parallel  to  y.

Hence,  by  the  sa|ieqpositaoa  of  small  i&otioiia»  the  whole  notion
psnllal  toasis

and  that  parallel  to  y {xXta  -  Som)^
Hflooe  the  point  whose  oo-ordinates  are

, law , ,  ^Jxa

is  st  rest,  and  the  resoltant  aads  passes  throng^  il  Any  other
point  X,  y  moves  timnigh  spaoes

—  (ySw  —  Ubw)  8^, {x%ii)  —  2a<*>}  ht.

But  if  the  whole  had  turned  about  x',  y'  with  Telocity  Q,  we  ahould
have  had  for  the  displacements  of  x,  y,

Ckunparing,  we  find  0=  Soi.

Henoe  if  the  sum  of  the  angular  velocities  be  zero,  there  is  no
lotation,  and  indeed  the  above  formuko  show  that  there  is  then
merely  translation,

a(iti)ai  parallel  to  «^ and  -  S(a«»)Si  parallel  to  y.
These  ftnnnhs  sofBoe  for  the  considenition  of  any  problem  on
thesnlgeot

90. Any  motion  whatever  of  a  plane  figure  in  its  own  plane  RoUinicof
might  be  produced  by  the  rolling  of  a  curve  fixed  to  the  figure  ounrS."'
upon  a  curve  fixed  in  the  plane.

For  we  may  consider  the  whole  motion  as  made  up  of  suo-
oessive  elementaiy  displacements,  each  of  which  corresponds^  as
we  have  seen,  to  an  elementaiy  rotation  about  some  point  in

YOL.  !•  5

66  PBELmiNABT,  [90L

EMip^ot  the  plane. X^et  o,,  o,,  Og,  etc.,  be  the  successive  points  of
the  moving  figure  about  which  the  lotatioxis  take  place,  0,,
0^9  0,,  etc.,  the  positions  of  these  points  when  each  is  the
iD8taiitaneou8  centre  of  rotation. Then  the  figure  rotates  about
(or  Oj,  which  coinddes  with  it)  till ooinddee  with  Og,  then

about  the  latter  till  o,  coincides  wiili
Og,  and  80  on.  Hence,  if  we  join  o^,
0,*  0,,  etc.,  in  the  plane  of  the  figure,
and  0,,  0,,  0,,  etc.,  in  the  filed  plane,
the  motion  will  be  the  same  as  if  the
polygon  OjOjO,,  etc., rolled  ujx)n  the  iixed
polygon  OjOjOg,  etc.  By  supposing  the
successive  disphiccments  small  enough
the  sides  of  these  {K)lygous  gradually  diminish,  and  the  polygons
finally  become  continuous  curves. Hence  the  theorem.

From  this  it  immediately  follows,  that  any  displacement  of  a
xigid  solid,  which  is  in  directions  wholly  perpendicular  to  a  fixed
line,  may  be  produced  by  the  rolling  of  a  cylinder  fixed  in  the
solid  on  another  cylinder  fixed  in  space,  the  axes  of  the  cylinders
being  parallel  to  tiie  fixed  lina

91.  As  an  interesting  example  of  this  theorem,  let  us  recur
to  the  case  of  §  84 : — A  circle  may  evidently  be  circumscribed
about  OBQA  ;  and  it  must  be  of  invariable  magnitude,  since  in
it  a  chord  of  given  length  AB  subtends  a  given  angle  0  at  the
circumference.  Also  OQ  is  a  diameter  of  this  circle,  and  is  there-
fore constant.  Hence,  as  Q  is  momentarily  at  rest,  the  motion
of  the  circle  circumscribing  OBQA  is  one  of  internal  rolling  on
a  drde  of  double  its  diameter.  Hence  if  a  circle  roll  internally
on  another  of  twice  its  diameter,  any  point  in  its  circumferenoe
describes  a  diameter  of  the  fixed  cude,  any  other  point  in  ita
plane  an  ellipsa  This  is  precisely  the  same  proposition  as  that
off  70|  although  the  ways  of  arriTing  at  it  are  yeiy  differsEni.
As  it  presents  us  with  a  particular  case  of  the  Hypocyd(»d,  it
warns  us  to  return  to  the  condderatioii  of  these  and  kindred
eurre^  which  give  good  instances  of  kinematical  tiieotems,  hut
which  heddes  are  of  great  use  in  physics  generally.

92.  Wlicn  a  circle  rolls  upon  a  straight  lino,  a  point  in  its
circumference  describes  a  Cycloid ;  an  internal  point  describes  a

Digitized  by  Google

92.J

KINElCATICa

67

Pkokte^  an  external  one  a  Ourtate,  Cycloid.  The  two  latter
varieties  are  aometimes  called  Troehddfl.

The  general  fonn  of  theae  carves  will  he  seen  in  the  annexed
Qgores;  and  in  what  follows  we  flhall  confine  our  remarhs  to  the
cycloid  itself,  as  of  immensely  greater  consequence  than  the
others.  The  next  section  couUiius  a  simple  investigation  of  those
properties  of  the  cycloid  which  are  most  useful  in  our  subject.

98.  Let  ulJ9  he  a  diameter  of  the  geneKatii^(or  rolling  drcle,^^^

BC  the  line  on  which  it  tolls.

The  points  A  and  B  describe
similar  and  equal  cycloids,  of
"which  AQG  and  BS  are  portions.
li  PQR  be  any  sul)sG([uent  posi-
tion of  the  generating  circle,  Q
and  S  the  new  positions  of  A  and
B,  ^QPS  is  of  course  a  right
angle.  If,  therefore,  QR  be  drawn
parallel  to  PS,  FR  is  a  diameter

5—2

Digitizeu  w-j  ^jQOgle

68

PBELDUNABV.

[93.

Propertio*  of  the  rolling  circle. Produce  QR  to  T,  making  UT=  Qli—PS.

carctoid.  Evidently  the  curve  A  T,  ^\}lich  is  the  locus  of  T,  is  similax  and
equal  to  BS^  and  is  therefore  a  cycloid  similar  and  equal  to  AO,
But  QE  is  perpendicular  to  PQ,  and  is  therefore  the  instanta-
neous direction  of  motion  of  Q,  or  is  the  tangent  to  the  cycloid
AQC.  Similarly,  PS  is  perpendicular  to  the  cycloid  BS  at  8,
and  80  is  therefore  TQ  to  AT  at  T,  Henoe  (§  19)  AQC  ia  the
evdate  of  AT,  and  aic  ilQ-Q^'-SQA

94.  When  the  circle  rolk  upon  another  circle,  the  curve
described  by  a  point  in  its  circumference  is  called  an  Epicycloid,
or  a  Hypocycloid,  as  the  rolling  circle  is  without  or  within  the
fixed  circle;  and  when  the  tracing  point  is  not  in  the  circum-
ference^ ve  have  Epitrochoida  and  Hypotrochoids.  Of  the  latter

we  have  already  met  with  examples,  §§  70»
91,  and  others  will  be  presently  mentioned.
Of  the  former,  we  have  in  the  first  of  the
appended  figures  the  ease  of  a  circle  rolling
externally  on  another  of  equal  size.  The
turve  in  this  case  is  called  the  Cardioid

Epicycloids,
Hjrpo-

{§  49).

In  the  second  diagram,  a  circle
rolls  externally  on  another  of  twice
its  radius.  The  epicycloid  so  de-
scribed is  of  importance  in  Optics,

and  will,  with  others,  be  rererred
to  when  we  consider  the  subject  of
Caustics  by  reflexion.

In  the  third  diagram,  we  have
a  hypocycloid  traced  by  the  rolling
of  cue  circle  internally  on  another
of  four  times  its  radius.

Digiti^uu  uy  Google

94.]  kinemaugs.  69

«

The  curve  figured  in  §  72  is  an  epitrochoid  described  by  a  Kpicjcioid*.
point  ill  the  plane  of  a  larj^e  circular  disc  which  rolls  upon  a  <^oSdMt«.
circular  cylinder  of  small  diameter,  so  that  the  point  passes
through  the  axis  of  the  cylinder.

That  of  §  74  is  a  hypotrochoid  described  by  a  point  in  the
plane  of  a  circle  which  rolls  internally  on  another  of  rather
more  than  twice  its  diameter,  the  tracing  point  pjissiug  through
the  centre  of  the  fixed  circle.  Hatl  the  diameters  of  the  circles
been  exactly  as  1  :  2,  §72  or  §  01  shows  that  this  curve  would  .
have  been  reduced  to  a  single  straight  line.

Ttud  general  eqnaiioiui  of  tiiis  cUun  of  ooms  mb
«  s  (a  6)  008  0  -  e6  ooB  ,

where  a  is  the  ndins  of  the  fixed,  d  of  the  foUing  eizde;  and  a6
Is  the  distance  of  the  tnuang  point  from  the  oentro  of  the  latter.

93. If  a  rigid  solid  body  move  in  any  way  whatever,  sab-  ^tj^"
ject  only  to  the  condition  that  one  of  ita  points  remainB  fixed,  andpoiai.
there  is  always  (without  exception)  one  line  of  it  through  this
point  common  to  the  body  in  any  two  positions. This  most

important  theorem  is  due  to  Euler.  To  prove  it,  consider  f^j^^
a  splK-rical  surface  within  the  body,  witli  its  centre  at  the
fixed  point  C.  All  points  of  this  sphere  attached  to  the
body  will  move  on  a  sphere  fixed  in  space.  Hence  the
coustniction  of  §  70  may  be  made,  but  with  great  circles
instead  of  straight  lines ;  and  the  same  reasoning  will  apply  to
prove  that  the  point  0  thus  obtained  is  common  to  the  body
in  its  two  positions.  Hence  every  point  of  the  body  in  the
line  OC,  joining  0  with  the  fixed  point,  must  be  common  to  it
in  the  two  positions.  Hence  the  body  may  p<ass  from  any  one
position  to  any  other  by  rotating  through  a  definite  angle  about
a  definite  axis.  Hence  any  position  of  the  body  may  be  speci-
fied by  specifying  the  tm,  and  the  angle,  of  rotation  by  which
it  may  be  brong^t  to  that  position  from  a  fixed  position  of  re-
ference, an  idea  due  to  Euler,  and  revived  by  Bodrigues.

Digitized  by  Google

.  PBELIMINABT.  [95.

Let  OXf  OT,  OZ  be  any  three  fixed  axes  through  the  fixed
point  0  roirnd  which  the  body  turns.  Let  A,  /n,  v  be  the
direction  cosines,  referred  to  iheae  axes,  of  the  axis  01  lonnd
which  the  body  nrast  turn,  and  x  the  angle  throu^  whkh  it
must  torn  round  this  axis,  to  bring  it  fiom  aome  aero  poaitum  to
any  other  position.  This  other  poaiticni,  being  apeeified  by  the
four  co-ordiuatea  X,  /x,  v,  x  (reducible,  of  oourae,  to  three  by
the  relation  X"  +  /x'  +  v*  =  1 ),  will  be  called  for  brevity  (X,  ft,  v,  x)«
Let  OAf  OB,  OC  be  three  rectangular  lines  moving  with  the
body,  which  in  the  ''aero"  position  coincide  respectively  with
OX,  or,  OZ;  and  put

(X.1),  {YA),  (ZA),  (XB),  (YB),  (ZB),  (XC),  (YC),  (ZC),
for  the  nine  direction  cosines  of  OA,  OB,  OC,  each  referred  to
OX,  OY,  OZ.  These  nine  direction  cosines  are  of  course  rediUBf-
ble  to  three  independent  coordinates  by  the  well-known  mx
relations.  Let  it  bo  required  now  to  express  these  nine  direotion
cosines  in  terms  of  Rodiigucs'  coordinates  Af  m  v,  x«

Let  the  lengths  OX,  OAf  01  be  equal,  and  call  each
unity :  and  deaeri1>e  from  0  as  (^ntre  a  sphnical  surface  of  umt
radius ;  so  that  X,  Y,  Z,  A,  B,  0,  /  ahall  be  points  on  this  sup-
free.  Let  J[Af  TA, ...  XB,  denote  arcs,  and  XAY,  AXB^  ...
angles  between  arcs,  in  the  spherical  diagrun  thus  obtained.
We  have  TA  =  IX  =  coe^A,aad  XTi  ^x*  Henoe  by  the  iaoaoeles
apherical  triangle  XIA,

ooa  XA  s  008*  IX  ■¥  ahi'/X  cos  x>

or  ( J^)  =  X'  +  (1  -  X')  cos  X  (1).

And  by  the  spherical  triangle  XIB,

CMXB=^ooBlXooBJB+mnIXmikIBiMXI3

=  Xf*  +  7(1 -A')  (1-/)  cos  XIB  (2).

Now  XlB^XTY+YIB^^XIY  +  xi  ^y  the  spherical
triangle  XI Y  we  have

008 =  0  =  cos /X  C08  7  F  +  sin /X  Bin /r  ooa  JT/F

Hence  J  (I  -  K')  {I  ~  fi')  cos  XI  Y  =  -\ft,

and  ain  XIY^  J(i  -X*  -fi*)  -  r  ;

by  whioli  we  hare

7(l-X*)(l-ft')  008  (XIT-h  x)  =  -Xftco8x-»'8inx;

Digitized  by  Go

95.]

KINEHATIOS.

71

Bod

OO-Ol

and  using  this  in  (2),

oos^iS  =  Afi(l  -oosx)  "OUix  (3)-

Similarly  we  find

tiimATs\lk{\-^m')(^-¥¥mtix

The  other  six  formulae  may  be  written  out  by  a^Tnmetry  from
(1),  (3),  and  (4) ;  and  thus  for  the  nine  directiou  cosines  we  find

(.Y^)=X'  +  {l-X')coBx;  (X/?)=X/t(l-coBx)-r8mx;  (r^)=X/t(l-C0ix)  +  »8inx;
(rz?)=M«  +  (l-/i«)00Bx;  (rC)=iuy(l-co8x)-XBinx;  (Z5)=Ai*(l-0O8x)  +  XBin
(Z(;)s>*4>(l~»*)0Mx;  (Zil)Bi'X(l-«Nix)-/*>inx;  (Z(7)sBrX(l-ooax)+Mnnx

Adding  the  three  first  equations  of  these  three  lines,  and  re-
membering that

V+/  +  K»  =  l  (6),

we  dedwiOP

«6X  «  «(^^)  ^(YB)^  (^0)  - 1]  (7) ;

and  tlien,  by  the  three  equations  separately,

any.  '

i-f(XJ)-(O)~(Z0  1

1-{XA)^{YB)-{ZC)

''3-(jri4)-(Kfi)-{ir(;)*

.  _  1-{XA)-(YB)  +  {ZG)

(8)

These  formula,  (8)  and  (7),  express,  in  terms  of  {XA),  (Yli),
{ZC)f  three  out  of  the  nine  direction  cosines  {XA\  the
direction  cosines  of  the  axis  round  which  the  body  must  turn,
and  the  cosine  of  the  angle  through  which  it  must  turn  round
this  axiH,  to  bring  it  from  the  aero  position  to  the  position
specified  by  those  three  direction  eosines.

By  aid  of  Enler^s  theorem  above,  suoeesnve  or  aimultaiieous  qoapo-
rotations  about  any  number  of  axes  through  the  fixed  point  roteiioM.

may  be  compountled  into  a  rotation  about  one  axis.  L>oiiig  this
for  infinitely  small  rotations  we  find  the  law  of  composition  of
angular  velocities.

Let  OA,  OB  be  two  axes  about  which  a  body  revolYes  with  composi

angular  yeloeities p  respectively.

With  radius  unity  describe  the  arc  ABf  and  in  it  take  any

tionofaiiRU-
lar  vdoel*
Mm,

Digitized  by  Google

72

PBKUMINABT.

[95.

uompon*
tioiiofr

lOCMIMh

firnim  of
anpilnr

point  /. Draw  /a,  Ifi  perj>endicular  to  OA^  OB  respectively.

Let  the  rotations  al>out  the  two  axes  be
such  that  tliat  about  (J  11  t-tmcLs  to  raise  I
above  tlie  plane  of  the  pajK-r,  and  tliat
about  OA  to  depress  it.  In  an  infinitely
fcliort  interval  of  time  t,  the  amounts  of
these  displacements  will  be  p//3.  t  and
—  rffla.T.  The  point  /,  and  therefore
every  point  in  the  line  01,  will  be  at  rest
during  the  interval  t  if  the  sum  of  these
displacements  is  zero,  that  is  if  p .  7/3  =  xcr.  /a.  Hence  tlie  lino
01  ia  instantaneously  at  rest,  or  the  ttco  rotations  about  OA  and
OB  may  be  comjKjunded  into  one  almut  01.  Draw  /;>,  /y,
parallel  to  OB,  OA  resi)ectively.  Then,  expressing  in  two  ways
the  area  of  the  parallelogram  IpOq,  we  have

Oq  I  Op  :

Hence,  if  along  the  axes  OA^  OB,  we  measure  oflf  from  0  lines
Op,  Oq,  proportional  respectively  to  the  angular  velocities  alxDut
these  axes — the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram  of  which  these  are
contiguous  sides  is  the  resultant  axis.

Aj^un,  if  Bh  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  OAf  and  if  O  be  the
angular  velocity  about  01^  the  whole  displacement  of  B  itmf
evidently  be  represented  either  by  «.  JI(  or  O.  /jS.
Henoe

O  : M  I  ip  ::  mnBOA  :  malOB  ::  tinipQ  :  anpIO^

11  01  I  Op.,

Thus  it  is  proved  that, —

If  lengths  proportional  to  the  respective  angular  velocitiee
about  tbem  be  measured  off  on  the  component  and  resultant
axes,  the  lines  so  determined  will  be  the  sides  and  diagonal  of
a  parallelogram.

cnniTv>«i  86.  Henco  the  single  angular  velocity  equivalent  to  three
bTvei^'i^'  co-eziatent  angular  veloeitiea  about  three  mutually  perpen-
uea  nK«(.  diculaT  axes,  is  determined  in  magnitude,  and  the  direction  of
vS!Sk^  its  axis  is  found  (§  27),  as  follows : — ^The  square  of  the  resultant
angular  velocity  is  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  its  components^

Digitized  by  Google

96.]  KINEIUTICS.  73

and  the  ratios  of  the  three  components  to  the  resultant  are  the
direction  connes  of  the  azia.  !?);{l"ut
Hence  Bmraltaneoas  rotetions  about  any  nmnber  of  axe^fni^lnr^
w^wting  in  a  point  may  be  oomponnded  thna: — ^Let  m  be  the'^*"^
■"g"^ftr  Telocity  aboat  one  of  them  whoae  direction  ooaineB  ate
^  m,  n ;  O  tlie  angidar  Telocity  and  A,  |t,  v  the  direction  coBEDca
of  the  reanltiint.

whence  fi*  =  2*  (Iw)  +  V  (ww)  +  2»  (ruo),

Heooe  also,  an  angular  velodty  ahout  any  line  may  be  re-
Mhred  into  three  aboat  any  set  of  rectangular  lines,  the  resoln*

tion  in  each  case  being  (like  that  of  simple  yelocities)  effected

hy  multiplying  by  the  cosine  of  the  anisic  between  the  directions.

Hence,  just  as  in  §  31  a  uniform  acceleration,  perpendicular
to  the  direction  of  motion  of  a  point,  produces  a  change  in  the
direction  of  motion,  but  does  not  influence  the  velocity;  so,  if  a
body  be  rotating  about  an  axis,  and  be  sabjected  to  an  action
tending  to  produce  rotation  about  a  perpendicular  axis,  the
result  will  be  a  change  of  directicn  of  the  axis  about  which  the
body  revolTes»  bat  no  change  in  the  angular  ffdocUy.  On  this
kinematical  principle  is  founded  the  djmamical  explanation  of
the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes  (§  107)  and  of  some  of  the
seemingly  marreUous  performances  of  gyroscopes  and  gyrostats.

The  folluwing  method  of  treating  the  subject  is  useful  m
connexion  with  the  ordinary  methods  of  co-ordinate  geometry.
It  contains  also,  as  will  be  seen,  an  independent  demonstration
of  the  parallelogram  of  angular  velocities : —

Angular  Telodties  v,  p,9  about  the  axes  of  ds^ and  c
leqwotiTely,  produce  in  time  it  displaaements  of  the  point  at

(p9^9y)St\\x,  {aX~wz)Bl\\i/,  {mi/-px)U\\Sh
Hence  points  for  which

are  not  displaced. These  are  therrtfore  the  oc^uutious  of  the  axis.

Digitized  by  Google

74

PBELIMIHABT.

[96.

Now  llie  peq>endicular  from  any  point «  to  tliia  lino  is,
by  co-ordinate  geometry,

wlioln  (lisplacCTiiBnt  of  g,  y,  g

The  actual  di.sj)lacement  of  x,  y,  2;  is  therefore  the  same  9B  would
have  been  producetl  in  time  ht  by  a  single  angular  Telocity,

n  ^  Jvt'  +  p"  +  a*,  about  the  axia  determined  by  the  preceding
equations.

Son  Smo- ^*  usefol  tiheoieiKis  relating  to  the

«H|gttfliiito  oomponlion  of  suooeasive  ySntto  rotations.

If  a  pyramid  or  cone  of  any  form  roll  on  a  heterocluTally

similar*  pyramid  (the  image  in  a  plane  mirror  of  the  first  posi-
tion of  the  first)  all  round,  it  clearly  comes  back  to  its  primitive
position.  This  (as  all  rolling  of  cones)  is  conveniently  exhibited
by  taking  the  intersection  of  each  with  a  spherical  surface.
Thus  we  see  that  if  a  spherical  polygon  turns  about  its  angular
points  in  succession,  alwajrs  keeping  on  the  spherical  surface,
and  if  tbe  angle  through  which  it  turns  about  each  point  is
twice  the  supplement  of  tbe  angle  of  the  polygon,  or,  which
will  oonie  to  the  same  thing,  if  it  be  in  tbe  other  direction,
but  equal  to  twice  the  angle  itself  of  the  poljgon,  it  will  be
brought  to  its  original  position.

The  polar  theorem  (compare  §  134,  bebw)  to  this  i^  that  a
body,  after  suooessive  rotations,  represented  by  the  donbles  of
the  snocessive  sides  of  a  spherical  polygon  tsken  in  order,  is
restored  to  its  original  position ;  which  also  is  self-evident

96.  Another  theorem  is  the  following
If  a  pyramid  rolls  over  all  its  sides  on  a  plane,  it  leaves  its
track  behind  it  as  one  plane  angle,  cciual  to  the  sum  of  the

plane  angles  at  its  vertex.

•  The  Bimilarity  of  n  right-Land  and  a  left-band  is  cnlleti  lictorocliiral :  tlmt
of  two  right-bands,  homochiral.  Any  object  and  its  image  in  a  piano  mirror
118  beteroohixAl^  dmilw  (TluuiiMa,  JVm.  A.  5.  MMnUfwrgk,  1873).

Comi>osi-
tion  ofani^*
lar  v(>kx*i-
t  i*  8  about
mxea  meet-
infill  ft
point*

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

98.]  KIKKICATIGS.  75

Oiherwiso: — in  a  spherical  surface,  a  Bplierical  polvefon  havincf  composition
roUed  over  all  its  sides  along  a  great  circle,  is  found  in  the  fjjg^jjjf
aame  position  as  if  the  side  first  lying  along  that  circle  had
been  simply  shifted  along  it  through  an  arc  equal  to  the  poly*
gon's  periphery.  The  polar  theorem  is : — if  a  body  be  made  to
take  saeoessiFe  rotations,  represented  by  the  sides  of  a  spherical
polygon  taken  in  order,  it  will  finally  be  as  if  it  had  revolved
about  tiie  axis  through  the  first  angular  point  of  the  polygon
ihrongb  an  angle  eqoal  to  the  spherical  excess  (§  134)  or  area
of  the  polygon.

99.  The  investigation  of  §  90  also  appli^''  to  thi?  case;  and  it  Motion

is  thus  easy  to  show  that  the  most  general  motion  of  a  spherical  point.  Roll-
Qgure  on  a  fixed  spherical  suifaoe  is  obtained  by  the  rolling
a  curve  fixed  in  the  figure  on  a  curve  fixed  on  the  sphere.
Henoe  as  at  each  instant  the  line  joining  O  and  0  contains  a
set  of  points  of  the  body  which  are  momentarily  at  rest,  the
most  general  motion  of  a  rigid  body  of  which  one  point  is  fixed
conrists  in  the  rolling  of  a  cone  fixed  in  the  body  upon  a  cone
fixed  in  space — the  vertices  of  both  being  at  the  fixed  point.

100.  Given  at  each  instant  the  angular  velocities  of  the^»»|^"of

^  thebodydue

body  about  three  rectangular  axes  attached  to  it,  determine
its  podtion  in  space  at  any  time.

From  the  given  angular  velocities  about  OA,  OB^  OC,  we
know,  §  95,  the  position  of  the  instantaneous  axis  01  with  re-
ference to  the  body  at  c\  ery  instant.  Hence  we  know  the
conical  surface  in  the  body  which  rolls  on  the  cone  fixed  in
space.  The  data  are  sufficient  also  for  the  determination  of
this  other  cone;  and  these  cones  being  kno'WTi,  and  the  lines  of
them  which  are  in  contact  at  any  given  instant  being  deter-
mined, the  position  of  the  moving  body  is  completely  deter-
mined.

If  X,  fly  V  be  the  direetioii  ooBineB  of  01  referred  to  OA,  OB,
00 1  tr,^ir  the  aogolar  velocitifiBy  and  « their  nsoltant:

vr p~  a-"  to'

by  §  95.  These  equations,  in  whicli  or,  p,  cr,  w  are  given  functions
of  t,  express  explicitly  tho  position  of  01  relatively  to  OA^  OB^

Digitized  by  Google

76

PBELIMINABT.

[100*

OCy  and  therefore  determine  the  cone  fixed  in  the  body.  For
the  cone  fixed  in  space :  if  r  be  the  radius  of  cui-vature  of  its
intersection  with  the  unit  sphere,  r'  the  same  for  the  rolling
cone,  we  find  from  §  105  below,  that  if  «  be  the  length  of  the
arc  of  either  spherical  curve  from  a  common  initial  point,

which,  as  «,  /  and  m  are  known  in  tenns  of  ^  giTes  r  in  terms
of  ty  or  of  8y  as  we  please.  Hence,  hy  a  Binglo  qnadiattire^  the
**intnnsic''  equatkm  of  the  fixed  oooei

101.  An  unsymmetrical  system  of  angular  co-ordinates
for  specifying  the  position  of  a  rigiil  body  by  aid  of  a  line  OB
and  a  plane  xi  OB  moving  with  it,  and  a  line  OY  and  a  plane
YOX  fixed  in  space,  which  is  essentially  proper  for  many
physical  problems,  such  as  the  Precession  of  the  £quinoxes  and
the  spinning  of  atop,  the  motion  of  a  g3rroscope  and  its  gimbals^
the  motion  of  a  compass-card  and  of  its  bowl  and  gimbals,  is  con-
venient  for  many  oiberB,  and  has  been  nsed  by  the  greatest
mathematicians  often  eyen  when  symmetrical  methods  would
hare  been  more  convenient^  mnst  now  be  deacribed.

ON  being  the  intersection  of  the  two  planes,  let  YON^^^
and  KOB^^i  and  let  ^  be  the  angle  from  the  fixed  plane^
produced  through  0^  to  the  portion  NOB  of  the  moveable
plane.  (Example,  B  the  "obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,"  ^  the
longitude  of  the  autumnal  equinox  reckoned  from  OF,  a  fixed
lino  iu  the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit  supposed  fixed  ;  <f>  the
hour-angle  of  the  autumnal  equinox  ;  B  being  in  the  earth's
equator  and  in  the  meridian  of  Greenwich  :  thus  yjr,  6,  <f}  are
angular  co-ordinates  of  the  earth.)  To  show  the  relation  of
this  to  the  symmetrical  system,  let  OA  be  perpendicular  to  07?,
and  draw  00  perpendicular  to  botli ;  OX  perpendicular  to  OY,
and  draw  OZ  perpendicular  to  OY  and  OA";  so  that  OA,  OB,
DC  arc  three  rectangular  axes  fixed  relatively  to  the  body,
and  OXf  OY,  OZ  fixed  in  space.  The  annexed  diagram  shows
^,  ^,  ^  in  angles  and  are,  and  in  arcs  and  angles,  on  a  spherical
Burfiioe  of  unit  radius  with  centre  at  0,

To  illustrate  the  meaning  of  these  angular  co-ordinates,  sup-
pose A,  B,  0  initiaUy  to  coincide  with  X,  Y,  Z  respectively.

VtaWonor

tlwbody

daetogirea

ntatioiM.

Digitized  by  Google

lOl.J

KINEMATICa

77

Then,  to  bring  the  body  into  the  position  specified  by  ft  f,  -^r,  f^^^^P^
rotate  it  round  OZ  through  on  angle  equal  to + thus  (^uetoKivm

Letter  0  at  cen-
tre of  sphere
concealed  by

r.

bringing  A  and  B  from  X  and  Y  to  A'  and  B  respectively ;
and,  (taking  ^^as^,)  rotate  the  body  round  ON  through  an
angle  equal  to  ft  thus  bringing  A,  and  C  from  the  positions
A\  B,  and  Zrespeotively,  to  the  positions  marked  O  in
the  diagram*  Or  rotate  first  round  ON  through  6^  so  bringing
O  fipom  Z  to  the  position  marked  C7,  and  then  rotate  round
OC  through  ^Ir  +  ijy,  Or,  while  OC  is  turning  from  OZ  to  the
position  shown  on  the  diagram,  let  the  body  turn  round  00
relatively  to  the  plane  ZCZ'O  through  an  angle  equal  to  ^.
It  will  be  in  the  position  specified  by  these  three  angles.

Let  i  XZC^^  \p,  I  ZCA  =  ir -  0,  and  £C^$,  and  vr,  p,  <t  mean
the  same  as  in  §  100.  By  considering  in  sacoession  instantaneous
motions  of  0  along  and  perpendicular  to  iTC,  and  the  motion  of
AB  in  its  own  planer  we  have

^  8  «  sin  ^  +  p  cos9^

sin^^aspsin^-CTCOS^

and

ThB  nine  direction  cosines  (XA),  (YB),  &o.,  aooording  to  the
notation  of  §  95,  are  given  at  once the  spherical  trian^^

78

PBEIJHINART.

[101.

tiMtedy^'  XiV^J,  YNBy  kc. ;  each  having  N  for  one  angular  point,  with  $,
Tt1itttimiL*°  supplement  or  its  complement,  for  the  angle  at  this  point.

Thus,  by  the  solution  in  each  case  for  the  cosine  of  one  aide  in
terms  of  the  cosine  of  the  opposite  angle,  and  the  oosinee  and
smes  of  the  two  other  aides,  we  find

( JT^)  - — COB  ^  COS  ^  sin  ^ — sin  ^  008  ^

{YA)  — coa  ^  hiu  1^  cos  ^  +  cua  i// sin  ^.

(75)  s  -  008  aiii  ^  am  ^  «!•  008  ^  oos  ^

{YC)=  aintfaini^,

{ZB)  = sin  ^  sin  ^.

(ZC)^  ooatf,

{ZA)~-mn.$cicm^,

(A'C)  = sin  ^  cos  i/^.

Jjl^ori^  102.  We  fiibaU  next  oonnder  the  moat  general  possible  motion
tisiAbodj.  Qf  1^  rigid  hoAy  of  which  no  point  is  fixed — and  first  we  must
prove  the  following  theorem.  There  is  one  set  of  parallel  planes
in  a  rigid  body  which  are  parallel  to  each  other  in  any  two
positions  of  the  body.  The  parallel  lines  of  the  body  perpen-
dicular to  these  planes  are  of  course  parallel  to  each  other  in
the  two  positions.

Let  C  and  C  be  any  point  of  the  body  in  its  first  and  second
positions.  Move  the  body  without  rotation  from  its  second
position  to  a  third  in  which  the  point  at  C  in  the  second  posi-
tion shall  occupy  its  original  position  C.  Tlie  proreding  de-
monstration shows  that  there  is  a  line  CO  common  to  the  body
in  its  first  and  third  positions.  Hence  a  line  CO'  of  the  body
in  its  second  position  is  parallel  to  the  same  line  CO  in  the  first
position.  This  of  course  clearly  applies  to  every  line  of  the
body  parallel  to  00,  and  the  planes  perpendicular  to  these
lines  also  remain  paralleL

Let  8  denote  a  plane  of  the  body,  the  two  positions  of  which
are  parallel  Move  the  body  from  its  first  position,  withont
rotation,  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  j6f,  till  ^  comes  into  the
plane  of  its  second  position.  Then  to  get  the  body  into  its
actual  position,  auch  a  motion  as  is  treated  in  §  70  is  iarther

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

102.]

KIlfEMATICS.

79

required.  But  by  S  79  this  may  be  effected  by  rotation  about  oeru  r»!
a  certain  aads  perpendicnlar  to  the  plane  B,  nnleaa  the  motion  >*giiibodjr.
required  belongs  to  the  exceptional  case  of  pure  translation.
Hence  [this  case  excepted]  the  body  may  be  brought  from  the
first  position  to  the  second  by  translation  through  a  determinate
distance  perpendicular  to  a  given  plane,  and  rotation  through  a
deteniiiiKite  angle  about  a  tlutorminate  axis  perpendicular  to
that  plane. Thi^  is  precisely  the  motion  of  a  screw  in  its  nut.

108.  In  the  excepted  case  the  whole  motion  consists  of  two
translations,  which  can  of  course  be  compounded  into  a  single
one ;  and  thus;,  in  this  case»  there  is  no  rotation  at  all,  or  every
plane  of  it  fulfils  the  specified  condition  for  5  of  §  102.

104.  Returning  to  the  motion  of  a  rigid  body  with  one  point
fixed,  let  us  consider  the  case  in  which  the  guiding  cones,  §  99,
are  both  circular.  The  motion  in  this  case  may  be  caUed  Prs-
ceBtional  EoUttion,

The  plane  througb  the  instantaneous  axis  and  the  axis  of
the  fixed  cone  passes  throi^b  the  axis  of  the  rolling  cone.  This
plane  turns  round  the  axis  of  the  fixed  cone  with  an  angular
velocity  fl  (see  §  105  below),  which  must  clearly  bear  a  con-
giant  ratio  to  the  angular  velocity  a>  of  the  rigid  body  about
its  instantaneous  axis.

105.  The  motion  of  the  plane  containing  these  axes  is
called  the  preoesnon  in  any  such  case.  What  we  have  denoted
by  O  is  the  angular  velocity  of  the  precession,  or,  as  it  is  some-
times called,  the  rate  of  precessioa

The  angular  motions  oi,  H  are  to  one  another  inversely  as
tlic  disUiiices  of  a  ])oint  in  the  axis  of  the  rolling  cone  from  the
instantaneous  axis  and  from  the  axis  of  the  fixed  cone.

For,  let  OA  be  the  axis  of  the  fixed  .
cone,  OB  that  of  the  rolling  cone,  and  01
the  instantaneous  axis.  From  any  point
P  in  OB  draw  FN  perpendicular  to  07,
and  FQ  pei-pendicular  to  OA*  Then  we  ^
perceive  that  P  moves  always  in  the
circle  whose  centre  is  Q,  radius  PQ,
and  plane  perpendicular  to  OA,  Hence

80

PBELDONABT.

[105.

g^ojMwonai  the  actual  velocity  of  the  point  P  is  £iQP,  But,  by  the
principles  explained  above,  §  99,  the  velocity  of  P  is  the
same  as  that  of  a  point  moving  in  a  circle  whose  centre  is  N",
plane  perpendicular  to  OiV,  and  radius  XP,  which,  as  this  radiua
levolTeB  with  angular  velocity  is  oaAP.  Hence
n.  9P«».  JfP,  or  c»  :  n  ::  QP  :  NR

Let  a  be  the  semivertical  angle  of  the  fixed,  /9  of  the  rolling,
cone.  Each  of  these  may  be  supposed  for  simplicity  to  be
acute,  and  their  sum  or  difference  less  than  a  right  angle —
though,  of  course,  the  formulae  so  obtained  are  (like  all
trigonometrical  results)  applicable  to  every  possible  case.  We
have  the  following  three  cases

I.  Convox
cone  rolling

cooourau

11.  Obnvez
cone  rolUng
iniido  oon*
cavo.

III.OonoKftt
c«in«  rolling
<*utMid»ooii>
vcau

w  sin  ^  =  n  sin  (a  +
where  AOI^a^IOB^^

Let  P  be  negative,  and  let  P'  =  —  ^  i
then  fi'  is  positive,  and  we  Lave

—  0)  sin  Z?*  =  Q  sin  (a  —

In  the  prooediDg  let  /8'>  a.
It  may  then  be  conveniently
written

o>  bin  /2'  -  n  hin  (yT  —  a),
where  AOI=a,  BOT=^,
a  and  fi'  being  still  positive.

^12^01^  108.  I(  as  illustrated  by  the  first  of  these  diagrams*  the
case  is  one  of  a  convex  cone  rolling  on  a  convex  cone^  the  pre*
cessional  motion,  viewed  on  a  hemispherical  sor&ce  having  A
for  its  polo  and  0  for  its  centre,  is  in  a  similar  direction  to

Digui^uu  uy  Google

106J

KINIQIATICS.

81

that  of  the  angular  rotation  about  the  ingtantaneouB  i^^SSiSif
This  we  shall  call  potiltm  piecessbnal  rotation*  It  is  the  case  "BtaUm.
of  a  common  spinning-top  (peeiy)^  spinning  on  a  Teiy  fine
point  which  remains  at  rest  in  a  hollow  or  hole  bored  by  itself ;
not  sleeping  upright,  nor  nodding*  but  sweeping  its  axis  round
in  a  circular  cone  whose  axis  is  yertical.  In  Case  m.  also  we
hx^Q  positive  precession.  A  good  example  of  this  occurs  in  the  case
of  a  coin  spinning  on  a  table  when  its  plaxic  i*i  iicarly  iiorizontal.

107.  Case  n.,  that  of  a  convex  cone  rolling  inside  a  concave
ono,  gives  an  example  of  negative  precession:  for  when  viewed
as  before  on  the  hemiapherieal  surface  the  direction  of  angular
rotation  of  the  instantaneous  axis  is  opposite  to  that  of  the
rolling  oone.  This  is  the  case  of  a  symmetrical  cup  (or  figure  .
of  revolution)  supported  on  a  points  and  stable  when  balanced,
t.sL,  haying  its  centre  of  gravity  below  the  pivot;  when  in*
dined  and  set  spinning  non-nutationally.  For  instance^  if  a
Troughton's  top  be  placed  on  its  pivot  in  any  inclined  position,
and  then  spun  off  with  very  great  angular  velocity  about  its
axis  of  figure,  the  nutation  will  be  insensible  i  but  there  will
be  slow  precession.

To  this  case  also  belongs  the  preceaaional  motion  of  the  earth's  m oii«i
axis ;  for  which  the
angle  a  =  23' 2r  28",
the  period  of  the  ro-
tation m  the  sidereal
day;  that  of  H  is
25^  yean.  If  the
second  diagram  re-
present a  portion  of
the  earth's  surfaco
loiiud  tilt'  pole,  the
are  AI  8,552,000
feet,  antl  therefore
the  circumfereucc  of
the  circle  in  which
/  moves =52,240,000
feet  Imagine  this
circle  to  be  Uie  in-

YOL.  I.

Digitized  by  Google

82  PRELIMINABT.  [107.

grwMsiorn  ncr  edge  of  a  fixed  ring  in  q»ace  (dircctionally  fixed,  that  is
miM.^^  to  say,  but  having  the  same  translational  motion  as  the
earth's  centre),  and  imagine  a  circular  post  or  pivot  of
radius  BI  to  be  fixed  to  the  earth  with  its  centre  at  K
This  ideal  pivot  roiling  on  the  inner  edge  of  the  fixed
ring  travels  once  roand  the  52,240,000  feet-ciieiimference  in
25,868  years,  and  therefore  its  own  circumference  must  be
5*53  feet.  H^ce  B/»0-88  feet;  and  angle  BOI,  or  A
=  0"00867.

Free  rote-  Verv'  intcrestinii  examples  of  Cases  I.  and  ill.  arc  fur-

tionoia  -  or

Jj;^]''*  nishcd  by  prnjcctiles  of  difTerent  forms  rotating  about  any  axis,
abouti  Tli^s  the  gyrations  of  an  oval  body  or  a  rod  or  bar  flung  into
the  air  beloog  to  Class  i.  (the  body  having  one  axis  of  less
moment  of  inertia  than  the  other  two,  equal);  and  the
seemingly  iiTegular  evolutions  of  an  ill-thrown  quoit  belong
to  Class  III.  (the  quoit  having  one  axis  of  greater  moment  of
inertia  than  the  other  two,  which  are  equal)*  Case  IIL  has
therefore  the  following  very  interesting  and  important  appli-
cation.

If  by  a  geological  convidsion  (or  by  the  transference  of  a  few
million  tons  of  matter  froni  one  part  of  the  world  to  another)
the  earth's  instantaneous  axis  01  (diagram  ill.,  §  105)  were  at
any  time  brought  to  non-coincidence  with  its  principal  axis  of
least  moment  of  inertia,  which  (§§  825,  285)  is  an  axis  of
approximate  kinetic  symmetry,  the  instantaneous  axis  will,  and
the  fixed  axis  OA  will,  relatively  to  the  solid,  travel  round  the
solid's  axis  of  greatest  moment  of  inertia  in  a  period  of  about
d06  days  [this  number  being  the  reciprocal  of  the  most  probable
<7—  A

value  of  — —  (§  828) J;  and  the  motion  is  represented  by  the

diagram  of  Case  in.  with  BI^  306  x  AI.  Thus  in  a  very  little

less  than  a  day  (leas  by when  BOI  is  a  small  angle)

/  revolves  round  A.  It  is  OA,  as  has  been  remarked  by
Maxwell,  that  is  found  as  the  direction  of  the  celestial  pole
by  observations  of  the  meridional  zenith  distances  of  stars,  and
this  line  being  the  resultant  axiii  oi'  the  earth's  moment  of

Digitized  by  Google

KINEMATICS.

83

momentum  (§  267),  would  remain  invariable  in  space  did  no  ^^j^
external  influence  sncli  as  that  of  the  moon  and  sun  disturb  tho  |^
earth's  rotation.  When  we  neglect  precession  and  nutation,

the  polar  distances  of  the  stai's  are  constant  notwithstanding*^
the  ideal  motion  of  the  fixed  axis  which  we  are  now  consider-
ing; and  the  effect  of  this  motion  will  be  to  make  a  periodic
variation  of  the  latitude  of  every  place  on  the  earth's  surface
having  for  rnnije  on  each  side  of  its  mean  value  the  angle  BOA,
and  for  its  period  306  days  or  thereabouts.  Maxwell*  ex-
amined a  four  years  series  of  Greenwich  observations  of  Polaris
(1891-2-3-4),  and  concluded  that  there  was  during  those,
years  no  variation  exceeding  half  a  second  of  angle  on  each
side  of  mean  range,  but  that  the  evidence  did  not  disprove
a  variation  of  that  amount,  but  on  the  contraiy  gave  a  veiy
slight  indication  of  a  minimum  latitude  of  Oreenwidi  belonging
to  the  set  of  months  Mar.  '51^  Feb,  '52,  Dec.  *52,  Nov.  *53,
Sqpi.  *54*

'•This  result^  however,  is  to  be  regarded  as  very  doubtftil

"and  more  observations  would  be  required  to  establish  the
existence  of  so  small  a  variation  at  ail.

"I  therefore  condude  that  the  earth  has  been  for  a  long  time
"  revolving  about  an  axis  very  near  to  the  axis  o£  figure,  if  not
"coinciding  with  it. The  cause  of' this  near  coincidence  is

"  either  the  original  softness  of  the  earth,  or  the  present  fluidity
"  of  its  interior  [or  the  existence  of  water  on  its  surface].
"The  axes  of  the  earth  are  so  nearly  equal  that  a  con-
"  sidcrable  elevation  of  a  tract  of  country  might  produce  a
"•leviation  of  the  principal  axis  within  the  limits  of  observa-
"  tion,  and  the  only  cause  which  would  restore  the  uniform
*'  motion,  would  be  the  action  of  a  fluid  which  would  gradually
"diminish  the  oscillations  of  latitude.  The  permanence  of
"  latitude  esseiltially  depends  on  the  inequality  of  the  earth's
"  axes^  for  if  they  had  all  been  equal,  any  alteration  in  the
"  crust  of  the  earth  would  have  produced  new  principal  axes,
"  and  the  axis  of  rotation  would  travel  about  those  axes^  alter-

*  On  •  Djmamloal  Top^  TVaiw.  R,  8.  E,,  1S67,  p.  659.

6—2

Digitized  by  Google

84

PRELIMINARY.  [1^

fully  iym.
nuarical
about  aa

Fr««  rota- ing  the  latitudos  of  all  places,  and  yet  not  in  tbe  least  altering
<*  the  position  of  the  axis  of  rotation  among  the  stam."

Perhaps  by  a  more  extensive  "search  and  analysis  of  the
"observations  of  different  obserwitorics,  the  nature  of  the
"  periodic  variation  of  latitude,  if  it  exist,  may  be  deternniied,
*'  I  am  not  aware*  of  any  calculations  having  boon  made  to  pro\  c
«  its  non-existence,  although,  on  dynamical  grounds,  we  have
**  every  reason  to  look  for  some  rery  small  variation  having  the
**  periodic  time  of  325  6  days  nearly"  [more  nearly  806  days],
''a  period  which  is  clearly  distinguished  from  any  other  astio-
^  nomical  cycle,  and  therefore  easily  lecognisedf."

The  periodic  variation  of  the  earth's  instantaneous  axis  thus

anticipated  by  Maxwell  must,  ii  it  exists,  give  rise  to  a  tide
of  306  days  period  (§  801).  The  amount  of  this  tide  at  the
equator  would  be  a  rise  and  fall  amounting  only  to  5J  centi-
metres above  and  below  mean  for  a  deviation  of  the  instan-
taneous axis  amounting  to  1"  from  its  mean  position  OB,  or
for  a  deviation  BI  on  the  earth's  surface  amounting  to
31  metres.  This,  although  discoverable  by  elaborate  analysis
of  long-continued  and  accurate  tidal  observations,  would  be  less
easily  discovered  than  the  periodic  change  of  latitude  by  astro-
nomical observations  according  to  Maxwell's  method|.

•  (Written  twenty  years  Rgo).

t  M&xwell;  Tran$action$  of  Hit  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh^  20th  April,  1857.
;(  Prof.  Maxwell  now  refers  us  to  Peters  (Recherehe$  ntr  la  panUlaxe  det
fMU$Jls€$,  St  Ptitewlmigh  Obtemloiy  Pftpwi,  YdL  i.,  1868),  wlio  ieeau  to
ham  been  tiia  fixst  to  laleo  this  inteirestiog  and  important  qnoetian.  He  foimd
from  the  PoDunra  obBervations  of  Polaris  from  Ifarch  11,  1842  till  April  30,
1843  an  angular  radius  of  0"  079  (probable  error  0"-017),  for  the  circle  round
its  mean  position  dcecribod  by  the  in<!tantanconB  axis,  and  for  the  timo,
within  that  interval,  when  the  latitude  of  i?ulkoTa  was  a  maximuui.  Not.  16, 1842.
The  period  (oalenlated  from  the  djnamieal  theory)  whioh  Peten  aenuned  was
804  mean  solar  days:  the  rata  therefore  1*201  turns  per  annum,  or,  nearly
enough,  12  turns  per  ton  jean.  Thus  if  Peters'  result  wore  gannllMk  and
remained  constant  for  ten  years,  the  latitude  of  Pulkova  would  bo  a  maximum
about  the  IGth  of  Nov.  a«nin  in  1852,  and  Pulkova  being  in  30<*  East  longitude
from  Greenwich,  the  latitude  of  Greenwich  would  be  a  maTimnm  ^  of  the  i^eriod^
or  aboQiSS  di^  earlier,  that  ia  to  aigr  about  Oet  98, 1889.  But  MaxweU  s  ex-
awiifialion  of  ofaeerratlona  aeemedto  indieato  mere  nmAj  tha  mfafamm  tatitndo
of  Oreeiiwich  about  the  same  time.  This  diacrepauco  is  altogether  in  aoeordaneo
nith  a  oontiiMiation  of  Peten'  inveetigatioa  by  Dr  Nyaen  of  the  Pulkova  Ob-

Digitize 0  by  CiOpgle

lOD.]  KIKEHA.TICS,  85

109. In  various  illustrations  and  an-ansfemcnts  of  apparatus  commoni.

^  '  *  cation  of

useful  in  Natural  Philosophy,  as  well  as  in  Mechanics,  it  is

i J  '  velocity

required  to  connect  two  bodies,  so  that  when  either  turns  about  "iu«iiy  bo-

a  certain  axis,  the  other  shall  tuia  with  an  equal  angular "^"^

velocity  about  another  axis  in  the  same  plane  with  the  former,

bat  inclined  to  it  at  any  angle. This  is  accomplished  in

mecbaiiisni  hj  means  of  equal  and  similar  bevelled  wheelef»  <v

rolling  cx>ne8;  when  the  mntnal  inclination  of  two  axes  is  not

to  be  varied.  It  is  approximately  aeoomplished  by  means  of

Hooke's  jointj  when  the  two  axes  are  nearly  in  the  same  line,

bat  are  required  to  be  free  to  vary  in  their  mntoal  inefimition.

A  chain  of  an  infinitely  great  number  of  Hooke's  joints  may  be  Fiextbiebufc

• .  . .  .  .  iintwiatr*'**'

imagined  as  constituting  a  perfectly  flexible,  untwistable  cord,  cord,
which,  if  its  end-links  are  rigidly  attached  to  the  two  bodies,
connects  them  so  as  to  fulfil  the  condition  rigorously  without
the  restriction  that  the  two  axes  remain  in  one  plane.  If  we  JJ^iJ^Sli
imagine  an  infinitely  short  length  of  such  a  chain  (still,  how-
ever, having  an  infinitely  great  number  of  links)  to  have  its
ends  attached  to  two  bodies^  it  will  fulfil  rigorously  the  con-
dition stated,  and  at  the  same  time  keep  a  definite  point  of  one
body  infinitely  near  a  definite  point  of  the  other ;  that  is  to  say^
it  will  accomplish  predsely  for  every  angle  of  inclination  what
Hookers  joint  does  approximately  for  small  inclinations.

The  same  is  dynamically  accomplished  with  perfect  accuracy
for  every  angle,  by  a  short,  naturally  straight,  elastic  wire  of

r,lB  wUab,  hj  a  Murefal  lentiayof  serenl  senesof  Pnlkovaolwamlkioi

between  the  years  1842... 1872,  he  ooncladed  that  there  is  no  constancy  of
ina^itade  or  phase  in  the  deviation  sought  for.  A  similar  negative  conclusion
was  arrived  at  by  Professor  Kewcomb  of  the  United  States  Kaval  Observatory,
WMhington,  who  at  oar  request  kindly  undertook  an  investigation  of  the  ten>
month  pariod  of  btitode  from  the  WMbington  Primo  Yortiaol  ObMrmtUmt
from  1S6S  to  1867.  His  lesnlts,  as  did  those  of  Peters  and  Nywn  and  Mftzwell,
seemed  to  indicate  real  variations  of  the  earth's  instantaneous  axis  amounting
to  possibly  na  much  as  J"  or  J"  from  its  mean  position,  but  altogether  irregular
both  La  amount  and  direction ;  in  fact,  just  such  as  might  be  expected  from
irregular  heapings  up  of  the  oceans  bj  winds  in  different  localities  of  the

Wehiindtoxetiimto  this  iulqeet  and  to  oooiidcr  oognata  qoMtions  Xigitd^

ing  irregularities  of  the  earth  as  a  timekeeper,  and  variations  of  its  figure  and
of  the  distribution  of  matter  within  it,  of  the  ocean  on  its  surface,  and  of  the
Atmosphere  surrounding  it,  in  §§  367. 276, 405.  406,  830. 832, 845,  846.

Digitized  by  Googlc

86

PftELDOKiJir.

[109

BlMtic  uni-
versal

flaxurejomt.

Moving
body  at<
taclied  to  a

byaanunBr-
Ml  fltti
Joint.

truly  circular  section,  provided  the  forces  giving  rise  to  any  re-
sistance to  equality  of  angular  velocity  between  the  two  bodies
are  infinitely  small.  In  many  practical  cases  this  mode  of  con-
nexion is  useful,  and  permits  very  little  deviation  from  the  con*
ditioQS  of  a  true  universal  flexure  joint.  It  is  used,  for  instance^
in  the  suspension  of  the  gyroscopic  pendulum  (§  74)  with  perfect
success.  The  dentist's  tooth-mill  is  an  interesting  illustration
of  the  elastic  universal  flexure  joint  In  it  a  long  ^iral  spring
of  steel  wire  takes  the '  place  of  the  naturally  straight  wire
suggested  above.

Of  two  bodies  connected  by  a  universal  flexure  joint,  let  one

be  held  fixed. The  motion  of  the  other,  as
long  as  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  axes
remains  constant,  will  be  exactly  that  figured
in  Case  i.,  §  105,  above,  with  the  angles  a  and
y8  made  erjual. Let  0  be  the  joint;  A  0  the
axis  of  the  fixed  body ;  OB  the  axis  of  the
moveable  body.  The  supplement  of  the  angle
A  OB  is  the  mutual  inclination  of  the  axes  ;
and  the  angle  AOB  itself  is  bisected  by  the
instantaneous  axis  of  th^  moving  body.  Tho
diagram  shows  a  case  of  this  motion,  in  which  the  mutual  in-
dination^  0,  of  the  axes  is  acuta.  According  to  the  fonnulae
of  Case  L,  §  105,  we  have

0

cu  bill  a  =  11  sin  2a,

or

e>  s  212  oosa  as  211  nn  g ,

Tirod<>in«ei
of  ft-eedom
toiDor««n«
Kt»^  by  •
Dody  thai

where  09  is  the  angular  velocity  of  the  moving  body  about  its
instantaneous  axis,  0/,  and  O  is  the  angular  velocity  of  its  pre>
cession ;  that  is  to  say,  the  angular  velocity  of  the  plane  through
the  fixed  axis  AA^  and  the  moving  axis  OB  of  the  moving
body.

Besides  this  motion,  the  moving  body  may  clearly  have  any
angular  velocity  whatever  about  an  axis  through  0  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane  AOBy  which,  compounded  with  »  round

01,  gives  the  resultant  angular  velocity  and  instantaneous  axia

Two  co-ordinutes,  6-A'(>n,  ami  (/>  imasurcd  in  a  plane  pcr-
peudiculftr  to  ^C^,  from  a  tixed  plane  of  refui-enoo  to  tho  plane

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

109.]  KINEMATICS.  87

AO  By  full/  specify  the  position  of  the  moveable  body  in  this

case.

110.  Suppose  a  rigid  body  bounded  by  any  carved  saiface  ^|^^f
to  be  touched  at  any  point  by  another  such  body. Any  motion  bSS/'uI**

ot  one  on  the  (ither  must  be  of  one  or  more  of  the  forms  sliding^  >"«
rolling,  ui  spinning. The  consideration  of  the  first  is  so  simple
as  to  require  no  comment.

Any  motion  in  which  there  is  no  slipping  at  the  point  of
contact  must  be  rolling  or  apiiming  separately,  or  combined.

Let  one  of  the  bodies  rotate  about  successive  instantaneous
axes^  all  lying  in  the  common  tangent  plane  at  the  point  of
instantaneous  contact,  and  each  passing  through  this  point —
the  other  body  being  fixed.  This  motion  is  what  we  call  rolling,

or  simple  rolling,  of  the  moveable  body  on  the  fixed.

On  the  other  hand,  let  the  instantaneous  axis  of  the  moving
body  be  the  common  normal  at  the  point  of  contact.  This  is
pure  spinning,  and  does  not  change  the  point  of  contact

Let  the  moving  body  move,  so  that  its  instantaneous  axis,
still  passing  through  Uie  point  of  contact,  is  neither  in,  nor
perpendicular  to,  the  tangent  plane.  This  motion  is  combined
rolling  and  spinning.

111.  When  a  body  rolls  and  spins  on  another  body,  theTrac«iot
trace  of  either  on  the  other  is  the  curved  or  straight  line  along  '^"^*
which  it  is  successively  touched.  If  the  instantaneous  axis  is
in  the  iiormal  plane  perpendicular  to  the  traces,  the  rolling
is  called  direct  If  not  direct,  the  rolling  may  be  resolved  into
a  direct  rolling,  and  a  rotation  or  twisting  round  the  tangent
line  to  the  traces.

When  there  is  no  spinning  the  projections  of  the  two  traces
on  the  conmion  tangent  plane  at  the  point  of  contact  of  the
two  surfaces  have  equal  and  same-way  directed  curvature:  or

they  have contact  of  the  second  order." M^en  there  is

spinning,  the  two  projections  still  touch  one  another,  but  with
contact  of  the  first  order  only  :  their  curvatures  differ  by  a
quantity  e(jual  to  the  .-mgular  velocity  of  spinning  divide<l
by  the  velocity  of  tlie  point  of  contact.  This  last  we  .^ee  hy
noticing  that  the  rate  of  change  of  direction  along  the  pro*

Digitized  by  Google

88  PBEUMINABT.  [111.

Direct  jection  of  the  fixed  trace  must  be  equal  to  the  rate  of  change
of  direction  along  tlie  projection  of  the  moving  trace  if  held
fixed  plufi  the  angular  Telocity  of  the  spinning.

AtanyinBtaoitlefe  Staia^+SCay-i-iy  (1)

and  2^-ilV  +  2Cay+J'y'  (2)

be  the  equations  of  the  fixed  and  moveable  surfaces  -S'  ami  -6"
infinitely  neai-  the  ]>oint  of  contiict  0,  referred  to  axes  OX,  O  Y
in  their  comraoTi  hui^ciit  plane,  and  OZ  jxTjicndicular  to  it  :
let  t«r,  p,  a  be  the  three  eomponents  of  the  instantaneous  anijular
velocity  of  »S";  and  let  x,  y,  be  co-ordinates  of/*,  the  point  of
contact  at  an  infinitely  small  time  t,  later :  the  third  co-ordinate,
z,  in  given  by  (1).

Let  P'  be  the  point  of  *S"  which  at  this  later  time  coincides  with  P.
The  co-ordinates  of  P'  at  the  first  instant  are  x  +  ay*,  y  —  trxt ;
and  the  corresponding  value  of  «'  is  given  by  (2).  This  point  is
infinitely  near  to  (a^  y,  «'),  and  therefore  at  the  first  instant  the
direction  cosines  of  the  normal  to  S'  through  it  diffinrbut  infinitely
httlo  fi*om

-(il'«  +  (ry), +  1.

But  at  time  t  the  normal  to  *S"  at  P"  coincides  with  the  normal
to  -5  at  Py  and  therefore  its  direction  cosines  change  irom  tiie
preceding  values,  to

-(J^+C//), -{Cx  +  Btj),  1:
that  is  to  say,  it  rotates  through  angles

{C'-C)x  +  {B'-B)y  loond  OX,
and  -{(il'-^)af+((7'-(7)y} „  QY.

Henoe  ««=((7'-C)«+(i?'-JB)y  \

or  {C''-C)x^(B--B)y  \

p  =  --{{A'-^A)±^(C'-C)y}]
i£  £j  y  denote  the  com}>onent  velocities  of  the  point  of  contact.

Put  q-J(^-^f)  (5),

and  take  oomponents  of  vi  and  p  round  the  tangent  to  the  traces
and  the  perpendicular  to  it  in  the  eoomum  tangent  plane  of  the
two  suifiMes,  thus :

(twisting  oomponent)  -  v  +  ~p

.(C--C)^t^[(B-B)-(4;-£A^  (6).

Digitized  by  Google

111.]  KiHxiaTica  89

and  'H??**
(direet-ioniiig  component)  |  *  ~  ^  P

=.1  [M'-^);^'  +  2  (C  -  C)  ;^  +  (i?'  - (7).

CLoose  OX,  or 80  that  (7-(7'«0,  and  put  A'-A=a,  B'-B^P
(6)  and  (7)  become

(twistiiig  oomponeut) -  ^  +  ~  P  =  O^-a)  y  (8),

(direot-ioUiiig  oomponeut)  (^)*

[Compare  l^low,  §  124  (2)  and  (1).]

And  for  c,  the  angular  velocity  of  spinning,  the  obvious  pro-
position stated  in  the  preceding  large  print  gives

e-f)  <■«>.

plane  of  the  fixed  and  moveable  ti'acoa  [Compare  below,  ^124
(3).]

From  (1)  and  (2)  it  follows  that

When  one  of  the  surfaces  is  a  plane,  and  the  trace  on  the
other  is  a  line  of  currature  (§  130),  the  rolling  is  direct

When  ihe  trace  on  each  body  is  a  line  of  carratuiey  the
rolling  is  direct  Oeneralfy,  the  roUing  is  direct  when  the  twists
of  infinitely  narrow  hands  (§  120)  of  the  two  snrfaoes,  along  the
tiaoea^  aie  equal  and  in  the  same  direction.

112.  Imagine  the  traces  constructed  of  rigid  matter,  and  all
the  rest  of  each  body  removed.  We  may  repeat  the  motion
with  these  curves  alone.  The  difierence  of  the  circumstances
now  sappoeed  will  only  be  experienced  if  we  vary  the  directioij
of  the  instantaneous  am  In  the  former  case^  we  can  only  do
this  by  introdndng  more  or  less  of  spinning,  and  if  we  do  so
we  alter  ike  trace  on  each  body.  In  the  latter,  we  have  always
the  same  moveable  curve  rolling  on  the  same  fixed  carve;  and
therefore  a  determinate  line  perpendicular  to  their  common
tangent  for  one  component  of  the  rotation ;  but  along  with  this
we  may  give  arbitrarily  auy  velocity  of  twisting  round  the
common  tangent. The  consideration  of  this  case  is  very  in-

Digitized  by  Google

90

FBBLIXIKABT.

[112.

Curve
roiling  on
curve.

structive.  It  may  be  rouglily  imitated  in  practice  by  two  stiff
wires  bent  into  tlie  forms  of  the  given  curves,  and  prevented
from  crossing  each  other  by  a  short  piece  of  elastic  tube  clasping
them  together.

Fintk  let  them  be  both  plane  curves,  and  kept  in  one  plane.
We  have  then  rolling^  as  of  one  (^linder  on  another.

Let  p  be  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  rolling,  p  of  the  fixed,
cylinder ;  w  the  angular  velocity  of  the  former,  Fthe  linear  velo-
city of  the  point  of  contact. We  have

For,  In  the  figure,  suppose  P  to  be  at  anj  tiine
the  point  of  contact^  and  and  ^the  points  whidi
are  to  be  in  contaot  after  an  infinitely  email
interval  t;  0,  <X  tlie  centres  of  ourvatore;  rOQ

=  e,  ro'Q'  =  er.

Then  PQ^FQ^^Bptuoe  deeoribed  by  point  of
contact In  sjrmbole  p$  -  p9  »  Yt

Also,  before  (/Qf  and  OQ  can  oolneiife  \xl  d!ieo>
tion,  the  former  must  evidently  tnni  through  an
angle  ^  +  ^.

Therefore  \  and  by  eliminating  Q  and

Q\  and  dividing  by  t,  we  get  the  above  result.

It  is  to  bo  understood,  that  as  the  radii  of  curvature  have
been  considered  positive  here  when  both  surfaces  are  convex,
the  negative  sign  must  be  introduced  for  either  radius  when  the
corresponding  curve  is  concave.

Hence  the  angular  velocity  of  the  rolling  curve  is  in  this
^itni'lSli^ft  case  cc^ual  to  the  product  of  the  linear  velocity  of  the  point  of
contact  by  the  sum  or  difference  of  the  curvatures,  according
as  the  curves  are  both  convex,  or  one  concave  and  the  other
convex.

ARgnlar

Piano
curvai  not
in  MinM

113.  WTien  the  curves  are  both  plane,  but  in  different
planes,  the  plane  in  which  the  rolling  takes  place  divides  the
angle  between  the  plane  of  one  of  the  curves,  and  that  of  the
other  produced  through  the  common  tangent  line^  into  parts
whose  suies  are  inversely  as  the  curvatures  in  them  respec*
tively;  and  the  angular  velocity  is  equal  to  tho  linear  velocity

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

KINK1IATIC&

91

of  tlie  point  of  contact  multiplied  by  the  difference  of  the  pro-  ^^^^^
jections  of  the  two  curvatures  on  this  plane.  The  projcctioDS  of
the  circles  of  the  two  curvatures  on  the  plane  of  the  common
tangent  and  of  the  instantaneous  axis  coincide.

For,  let  PQt  Pp  be  equal  aies  of  the  two  carves  as  heftne,  and
let  FR  be  taken  in  the  common  tangent  (i.e.,  the  intersection  of
the  planes  of  the  curves)  equal  to  eacL  Then  Qli^  pR  are
ultimately  perpendicular  to  PR,

Hence  pR  =  ^ ,

Also,  L  QRp  =:  Of  the  angle  between  the  planes  of  the  curves.

Qp'^ ( ,  + ,  - cos  a).

We  have  _

Therefore  if  «  be  the  velocity  of  rotation  as  before,

3  oosa

Also  the  Instaatsneous  axis  is  evidently  peipendicnlar,  and  these-
fore  the  phme  of  rotation  parallel,  to  Qp»  Whence  the  abova
In  the  case  of  asw,  this  agrees  with  the  result  cf  §  113.

A  good  example  ol"  this  is  the  case  of  a  coin  spinning  on  a
table  (mixed  rolling  and  spinning  motion),  as  its  plane  becomes
gradually  horizontal.  In  this  ca.se  the  curvatures  become  more
and  more  nearly  equal,  and  the  angle  between  the  planes  of  the
curves  smaller  and  smaller.  Thus  the  resultant  angular  velo-
city becomes  exceedingly  small,  and  the  motion  of  the  point
of  contact  veiy  great  compared  with  it.

114.  The  preceding  results  are,  of  course,  applicable  to  tor-  [JlJJ^^"^''*
tuous  as  well  as  to  plane  curves ;  it  is  merely  requisite  to  sub-
stitnte  the  osculating  plane  of  the  former  for  the  plane  of  the  '^ocaom.
latter.

115.  We  come  next  to  the  case  of  a  curve  rolling,  with  orCarwwD.
without  spinning,  on  a  surface.  fco»s  thwe

-  ,  de#cree9  0f

It  may,  of  course,  roll  on  aiiy  cur\^e  traced  on  the  surface,  ireedom.
When  this  curve  is  given,  tlie  moving  curve  may,  while  rolling
along  it,  revolve  arbitrarily  round  the  tangent But  the  com-

92  PBBLDDNA&T.  [115.

Ourferoii-  poncnt  instantaneous  axis  perpendicular  to  the  common  tan-
hw»:  tinre  gent,  that  is,  the  axis  of  the  (Hrect  rolling  of  one  curve  on  the
AmdMB.  other,  is  determinate,  §  113.  If  this  axis  does  not  lie  in  the
surface,  there  is  spinning.  Hence,  when  the  trace  on  the  surface
is  given,  there  are  two  independent  variables  in  the  motion ;
the  space  trayersed  by  the  point  of  contact,  and  the  inclination
of  the  moving  curve's  oscdating  plane  to  the  tangent  plane  of
the  fixed  suxfkce.

Tnco  i>r«. HQ.  If  tho  trscB  is  given,  and  it  be  prescribed  as  a  condi-
no^it|mng  tion  that  thoTe  shall  be  no  spinning,  the  angular  position  of  the
rolling  curve  round  the  tangent  at  the  point  of  contact  is  deter-
minate. For  in  this  case  the  instantaneous  axis  must  be  in  the

tangent  plane  to  the  surfeoe. Hence,  if  we  resolve  the  rotation

into  components  round  the  tangent  line,  and  round  an  rixis  per-
pendicular to  it,  the  latter  must  be  in  the  tangent  plane.  Thus
the  rolling,  as  of  curv^e  on  curve,  must  be  in  a  normal  plane  to
the  surface;  and  therefore  (§§  ll^,  113)  the  rolling  curve  must
Twodmimia  he  alwavs  so  situated  relatively  to  its  trace  on  the  surface  that

<lf  tWtHHJilll.

the  prujections  of  the  two  curves  on  the  tangent  plane  may  be
of  coincident  curvature.

The  curve,  as  it  rolls  on,  must  continually  revolve  about  the
tangent  line  to  it  at  the  point  of  contact  with  the  surfiuse,  so  as
in  every  position  to  fulfil  this  condition.

Let  a  denote  the  inclination  of  the  jilane  of  curvature  of  the
trace,  to  the  normal  to  the  surface  at  any  pointy  a  the  same  for

the  plane  of  the  rdUing  oar?e; \  their  curvainns.  We

P  P

ivckon  a  as  obtuse,  and  a'  acute,  wIk  ii  the  two  curves  lie  on
opposite  sides  of  the  tangent  plane.  Then

1  . , 1  .
-,sma  =  -  sma,

P  P

whieh  fixes  a  or  the  positiuu  of  the  rolling  curve  when  the  point
ol"  contact  is  given.

AiijsMiiiir  vc-  Let  o>  he  tile  auguhir  velwity  of  lulling  about  ;in  axis  perpon-

iwt  roikug' dicular  to  the  tangent, that  ol  twisting  about  the  tiingent,and  let

The  the  linear  velocity  of  the  point  of  contaot  Then,  sinoe  noosa'

Digitized  by  Google

116.]  KINEICATICS.  93

and  -  -  008  a  (each  positiye  when  the  eaxrea  lie  on  opposite  sides  ^^^^

of  the  tangent  plane)  are  the  projections  of  the  two  curvatores  on
A  plane  threogh  the  normal  to  the  snr&oe  oontaining  their  oom- ,
mon  tangent^  ire  have^  by  §  112,

=  r cos  *  ~  ~  Ji

a'  hmng  determined  by  the  preoeding  equation.  Let  r  and  r
denote  the  torfeooiitieB  of  the  tcaoe^  and  of  the  rolling  oorve^  le-
Bpeotively,  Then,  fint^  if  the  enme  were  both  plane^  we  see
that  one  rolling  on  t|ie  other  about  an  axis  always  pevpendionlar
to  their  oonunon  tangent  oonld  never  ehaqge  the  incilinatuni  of
their  planes.  Hence,  secondly,  if  they  are  both  tortnous,  snoh
rolling  will  alter  the  inclination  of  their  osculating  planee  by  an
indefinitely  small  amount  (r—T*)€U  dnring  rolling  which  shifts  Anroiar  vc.
thepoint  of  oontaetoveranaredk  Now  a  is  a  known  ftinction
of  « if  the  tnwe  is  ^ven,  and  therefore  so  also  is  a\  But  a-of
is  the  inclination  of  the  osoolating  pUnes,  henoe

117.  Next,  for  one  surface  rolling  and  spinning  on  another.  SiutMe on
First,  if  the  trace  on  each  is  given,  we  have  the  case  of  §  113
or  §  115,  one  curve  rolling  on  another,  with  this  farther  con-
dition, that  the  former  must  revoke  round  the  tangent  to  tho
two  curves  so  as  to  keep  the  tangent  planes  of  the  two  suiiaoes
coincident.

It  is  well  to  observe  that  when  the  points  in  contact,  and  the  Both  tnu m
two  traces,  are  given,  the  position  of  the  moveable  sni&oe  IS  Olio  d(*KnH)
quite  determinate,  being  found  thus : — ^Plaoe  it  in  contact  with  ^
the  fixed  surface,  the  given  points  together,  and  ^;>fii  it  about
the  common  normal  till  the  tangent  lines  to  ti&e  tiaoes  cmnoidei

Hence  when  both  the  traces  are  given  the  condition  of  no
spinning  cannot  be  imposed.  During  the  rolling  there  must  in
general  be  spinning,  such  as  to  keep  tho  tangents  to  tho  two
traces  coincitlcnt.  The  rolling  along  the  trace  is  due  to  rotation
round  the  line  perpendicular  to  it  in  the  tangent  plane.  The
whole  rolling  is  the  resultant  of  this  rotation  and  a  rotjition
about  the  tangent  line  required  to  keep  the  two  tangent  planes
coincident

Digitized  by  Google

94  PEKUMINIBT.  [117.

8urfti<»on  In  this  ca.se,  then,  there  is  but  one  independent  variable — the
b<'i»>  tnicy  space  passed  over  by  the  point  of  contact :  and  when  the  velocity
or'fivedmn  ^^'^  point  of  contact  is  given,  the  resultant  angular  velocity,
and  the  direction  of  tiie  instantaneous  axis  of  the  rolling  boiiy
are  determinate.  We  have  thus  a  suffidently  clear  view  of  the
general  character  of  the  motion  in  question,  but  it  is  right  that
ve  consider  it  more  closely,  as  it  introduces  us  very  naturally
to  an  important  question,  Uie  measurement  of  the  iwist  of  a  rod,
wire,  or  narrow  platen  a  quantity  wholly  distinct  from  ihe  tor-
tuonttf  of  its  axis  (§  7).

118.  Suppose  all  of  each  surface  cut  away  except  an  infinitely
narrow  strip,  including  the  trace  of  the  rolling.  Then  we  have
the  rolHng  of  one  of  these  strips  upon  the  other,  each  having  at
every  point  a  definite  curvature,  tortuosity,  and  twist

Twist. 119. Suppose  a  flat  bar  of  small  section  to  have  been  bent

(the  requisite  amount  of  stretching  and  contraction  of  its  edges

being  admissible)  so  that  its  axis  assumes  the  form  of  any  plane
or  tortuous  curve.  If  it  be  unbent  without  twisting,  i.e.,  if  the
curvature  of  each  element  of  the  bar  be  removed  by  bending  it
through  the  requisite  angle  in  the  osculating  plane,  and  it  be
found  untwisted  when  thus  rendered  straight,  it  had  no  twist  iii
its  original  form.  This  case  is,  of  course,  included  in  the  general
theory  of  twist,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  following  sectiona

AxisMid  120.  A  bent  or  straight  rod  of  circular  or  any  other  form  of
section  being  given,  a  line  through  the  centres,  or  any  other
chosen  points  of  its  sections,  may  be  called  its  aj:i8.  Mark  a
line  on  its  side  all  along  its  length,  such  that  it  shall  be  a
straight  line  parallel  to  the  axis  when  the  rod  is  unbent  and
untwisted.  A  line  drawn  from  any  point  of  the  axis  perpen-
dicular to  this  side  line  of  reference,  is  called  the  traneverae  of
the  rod  at  this  point.

The  whole  twist  of  any  length  of  a  straight  rod  is  the  angle
between  the  tiansverses  of  its  ends.  The  average  twist  is  the
integral  twist  divided  by  the  length.  The  twist  at  any  point
is  the  average  twist  in  an  infinitely  short  length  through  this
point ;  in  otiier  words,  it  is  the  rate  of  rotation  of  its  transverse
per  unit  of  length  along  iU

Digilizea  by  G(.)0^le

120.]

KINEKATIGS.

95

The  twist  of  a  curved,  plane  or  tortuous,  rod  at  any  point  is  TwM»
the  rate  of  component  rotation  of  its  transverse  round  its  tangent
lin^  per  unit  of  length  along  it.

If  I  be  the  twist  at  any  pointy  JWm  over  any  length  is  the
integral  twist  in  this  length.

121.  Inte^al  twist  in  a  curved  rod,  although  readily  de-
fined,  as  above,  in  the  language  of  the  integral  calcuiusi,  can-
not be  exhibited  a^s  the  angle  between  any  two  lines  readily
oonstructible.  Tlic  following  considerations  show  how  it  is  to
be  reckoned,  and  lead  to  a  geometrical  construction  exhibiting
it  in  a  spherical  diagram,  for  a  rod  bent  and  twisted  in  any
manner:—

122.  If  tho  axis  of  the  rod  forms  a  plane  curve  lying  in  one  Estimation
plane,  the  integral  twist  is  clearly  the  difference  between  the  twiS!?^
inclinations  of  the  transverse  at  its  ends  to  its  plane. For  in  a  plana
if  it  be  simply  unbent,  without  altering  the  twist  in  any  part,  ,
the  inclination  of  each  transverse  to  the  plane  in  which  its
curvature  lay  will  remain  unchanged ;  and  as  the  axis  of  the

rod  now  has  become  a  straight  line  in  this  plane,  the  mutual
inclination  of  the  transverses  at  any  two  points  of  it  has  become
equal  to  the  difference  of  theur  inclinations  to  the  plane.

123.  No  ample  application  of  this  rule  can  be  ma^Jc  to  a
tortuous  curve,  in  consequence  of  the  change  of  the  plane  of
curvature  from  point  to  point  along  it ;  but,  instead,  we  may
proceed  thus

Urst^  Let  us  suppose  the  plane  of  curvature  of  the  axis  of  in  a  curve
the  wire  to  remain  constant  through  finite  portions  of  the  curve,  or  plano"^
and  to  change  abruptly  by  finite  angles  from  one  such  portion  SiSn«I*°
to  the  next  (a  supposition  which  involves  no  angii-
lar  points,  that  is  to  say,  no  infinite  curvature,  In  £\  \
the  curve).  Let  planes  parallel  to  the  planes  of  cur-
vature of  three  successive  portions,  PQ,  Qli,  US  (nut
shown  in  the  diagram),  cut  a  spherical  surface  in  the
great  circles  GAG',  AC  A',  CE.  The  radii  of  the
sphere  parallel  to  the  tau<:^cnts  at  the  points  (^and  R
of  the  curve  where  its  curvature  changes  will  cut  its
surface  in  A  and  C,  the  intersections  of  these  circles.

96  PRELmiNART.  [123*

Let  0  be  the  point  in  which  the  radius  of  the  spliere  parallel  to

the  tangent  at  P  cuts  the  surface ;  and  let  GH,  AB,  CD  (lines
Estimation  necessarily  in  tangent  phmes  to  tiie  spherical  surface),  be  paral-
iwiHt:1na  lels  to  the  transverses  of  the  bar  drawn  from  the  points  P,  Q,  H
•ijitii«or  of  its  axia.  Then  (§  122)  the  twist  from  P  to  Q  is  equal  to  the
Eonsin°^  difference  of  the  aneles  HGA  and  BAG';  and  the  twist  from  Q

to  £  is  equal  to  the  differenoe  between  BAG  toad  DCA'.  Hence

the  whole  twist  from<P  to  £  is  equal  to

HGA  ^BAG'  +  BAC-D CA\
CMT,  which  is  the  same  thing;

A'CE^  G'AC-  {DC K- HGA),

Continuing  thus  through  any  length  of  rod,  made  up  of  portions
curved  in  different  planes,  we  infer,  that  the  integral  twist  be-
tween any  two  points  of  it  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  exterior
angles  in  the  spherical  diagram,  wanting  the  excess  of  the  in^
dination  of  the  transverse  at  the  second  point  to  the  plane  of
curvature  at  the  second  pdnt  above  the  inclination  at  the  first
point  to  the  plane  of  curvature  at  the  first  point  The  sum  of
those  exterior  angles  is  what  is  defined  below  as  the  "change  of
direction  in  the  spherical  sur&ce"  from  the  first  to  the  last  side
of  the  polygon  of  great  circles.  When  the  polygon  is  closed,  and
tlic  sum  includes  all  its  exterior  angles,  it  is  (§  IS-l-)  equal  to
27r  wanting  the  area  enclosed  if  the  radius  of  the  spherical  sur-
face be  unity.  The  construction  we  have  made  obviously  holds
in  the  limiting  case,  when  the  lengths  of  the  plane  portions  are
infinitely  small,  and  is  therefore  applicable  to  a  wire  forming  a
tortuous  curve  with  continuously  varying  plane  of  curvatures,  lor
which  it  gives  the  following  conclusion : —
In  ft  oon-  Let  a  point  move  uniformly  along  the  axis  of  the  bar :  and,
t'.Ku^^  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  every  instant,  draw  a  radius  of  a
sphere  cutting  the  spherical  suriace  in  a  curves  the  hodpgraph
of  the  moving  point  From  points  of  this  hodogrtqfkh  draw  par-
allels to  the  transverses  of  the  corresponding  points  the  bar.
The  excess  of  the  change  of  direction  (§  135)  from  any  point  to
anotiier  of  thehodograph,  above  the  increase  of  its  inclination  to
the  transverse,  is  equal  to  the  twist  in  the  corresponding  part
of  the  bar.

curve.

Digitized  by  Google

123.]  KINEMATICS.  97

The  annexed  diagram,  showing  the  hodograpli  and  ^^^^  K^*[^matjon
pmUek  to  the  transverses,  illustrates  this  rule.  Thus,  for  ii^*  ^ritj^^lf*
stance,  the  excess  of  the  change  of  direction  in  the  spherical  gjjj,^^
BurfiMie  aloDg  the  hodograph  from  A  to  0,  above  DCS— BAT,
Is  equal  to  the  twist  in  the  bar  between  the  points  of  it  to
which  A  and  C  eorrespond.  Or,
i^gaiUf  if  we  oonaider  a  portion  of
the  bar  from  any  point  of  it»  to
another  point  at  which  the  tangent
to  its  axis  is  parallel  to  the  tan-
gent at  its  first  point,  we  shall  have
a  closed  curve  as  the  spherical  hodograph  ;  and  if  -4  be  the
point  of  the  hodograph  corresponding  to  them,  and  AB  and
AR  the  parallels  to  the  tran3ver8cs,  the  whole  twist  in  tho
included  part  of  the  bar  will  be  equal  to  the  change  of  direction
all  round  the  hodograph,  wanting  the  excess  of  the  exterior
angle above  the  angle  BAT;  that  is  to  say,  the  whole
twist  will  be  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  angle  BAS  above
the  ana  enclosed  by  the  hod<^gFaph.

The  principles  of  twist  thus  developed  are  oC  vital  import-
ance in  the  theory  of  rope-making,  especially  tbe  construction
and  the  dynamics  of  wire  ropes  and  submarine  cables,  elastic
bars,  and  spiral  springs.

For  example :  take  a  piece  of  steel  pianoforte-wire  carefully  nynamhs
stiaightened,  so  that  when  free  from  stress  it  is  straight :  bend  kiniw?^
it  into  a  circle  and  join  the  ends  securely  so  that  there  can  be
no  turning  of  one  relatively  to  the  other.  Do  this  first  without
tonion:  then  twist  tbe  ring  into  a  figure  of  8,  and  tie  the  two
parts  together  at  the  crossing.  The  area  of  the  spherical  hodo<
graph  is  zero,  and  therefore  there  is  one  full  turn  (Zir)  of  twist;
which  d  600  below)  is  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the
length  of  the  wire.  The  form  of  the  wire,  (which  is  not  in  a
plane,)  will  be  investigated  in  §  610.  Meantime  we  can  sec
that  the  "torsional  co\iplcs"  in  tlic  normal  sections  farthest,
from  the  crossing  give  rise  to  forces  by  which  the  tic  at  the
crossing  is  pulled  in  opposite  directions  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  the  crossing.  Thus  if  tlio  tie  is  cut  the  wire  springs
back  into  the  circular  form.  Kow  do  the  same  thing  again,
VOL  I.  *  7

Digitized  by  Google

98  PREUHIMABY.  [123.

D/namica  bcfinninjj  with  a  straii^lit  wire,  but  giving  it  one  full  turn
kini^  (27r)  of  twist  before  beiuluig  it  into  the  circle.  Ihe  wire  will
stay  in  the  8  form  witliout  any  pull  on  tlie  tie.  Whether
the  circular  or  the  8  form  is  stable  or  unstable  depends
on  the  relations  between  torsional  and  iiexural  rigidity.  If
the  torsional  rigidity  is  small  in  comparison  with  the  flexural
rigidity  [aa  (§§  703,  704,  705,  709)  wouKi  be  the  caae  if,
instead  of  round  wire,  a  rod  of  +  shaped  section  were  used],
the  circular  form  would  be  stable,  tbe  8  unstable.

Lastly,  suppose  any  degree  of  twist,  either  more  or  less
tban  2?r,  to  be  given  before  bending  into  the  circle.  The
circular  form,  which  is  always  a  figure  of  free  equilibrium,  may
be  stable  or  unstable,  according  as  the  ratio  of  torsional  to
llexural  rigi<lity  is  more  or  less  than  a  certain  value,  depending
on  the  actual  degree  of  twist.  The  tortuous  8  form  is  not  (except
in  the  case  of  whole  twist  =  Stt,  when  it  becomes  the  plane
elastic  lemniscate  of  Fig.  4,  §  GIO,)  a  continuous  figure  of  free
equilibrium,  but  involves  a  positive  pressure  of  the  two  cross-
ing parts  on  one  another  when  the  twist  >  ^tt,  and  a  negative
pressure  (or  a  pull  on  the  tie)  between  them  when  twist  <2ir;
and  with  this  force  it  is  a  figure  of  stable  equilibrium.

Butece  roll- 121.  Retumiug  to  the  motion  of  one  surface  rolling  and

inir  on  Kur- , ,  • « .  •

fnoo;  both  spmmng  on  another,  the  trace  on  each  being  given,  we  may
consider  that,  of  each,  the  curvature  (§  G),  the  tortuosity  (§  7),
and  the  twist  reckoned  according  to  transverses  in  the  tangent
plane  of  the  surface,  are  known;  and  the  subject  is  fiilly  spe-
cified in  §  117  above.

Let  \  and  -  be  the  curvatnies  of  the  traoes  on  the  roUing

P  P

and  fixed  surfaces  respectively;  a'  and  o  the  inclinations  of  thtir
planes  of  curvature  to  the  normal  to  the  tangent  plane,  reckoned
aa  in  §  116;  r  and  t  their  tortuosities;  t'  and  (  their  twists;
and  q  the  velocity  of  the  point  of  contact  All  these  being
known,  it  is  required  to  find : —

<o  the  augidnr  velocity  of  rotjition  about  the  transverse  of  the
traces;  that  is  to  say,  the  line  in  the  tangent  plane  perpendicular
to  their  tangent  hne,

vj  the  angular  velocity  of  roUition  about  the  tangent  line,  and

IT „ „ of  spinning.

Digitized  by  Qo

124.]  KINEMATICS.  i)0

W6  lutVO  Surface  rolU

itiK  on  »ur.

/I  , 1  \  ftM^V-sboth

«  =  J COS  a  cos  a  J (1 ),  tnoesgiTea.

w-,(«-0=j('^'5-(r-T')} (2),

SDd «rB9  ^,sino'-^  sin (3).

lliefie  three  fbrmolas  are  reepectivelj  eqiiivBleat  to  (9),  (8),
and  (10)  of  Sill.

SurffirerolN
itiK  on  SU1
fiu:ewUho
■pinning.

125.  In  the  same  case,  suppose  the  trace  on  one  only  of

• niK  on  8ur-

the  amttces  to  be  giyen.  We  may  evidently  impose  the  con-  J^i^*'^''**"*
dition  of  no  spinniogt  and  then  the  trace  on  the  other  is  deter-
minate.  This  ease  of  motion  is  thoroughly  examined  iu  §  137,
below.

The  condition  is  that  the  projections  of  the  curvatures  of  the
two  traces  on  the  common  tangent  plane  must  coincide.

1  1

If  ^  and  ~  be  the  curvattues  of  the  rolling  and  stationary

snrlhoes  in  a  normal  section  of  each  through  the  tangent  line  to
the  trace,  and  if  a,  a ,  p,  p*  have  their  meaningB  of  §  124,

p'  =  r'  cos  a ,  p  =  r  COB  a  (Meunier's  Theoi^m,  §  129,  below),

1,1  r'

But  ->  sin  «'  a  -  sin  OL  heuce  tau  a'  =  —  tan  a,  the  condition  re-
P  P  r  '

126.  If  a  straight  rod  with  a  straight  line  marked  on  one  ^^,';2<^J^^°'
side  of  it  be  bent  along  any  curve  on  a  spherical  snrlaee,  go^^'^**

that  the  marked  Hue  is  laid  in  contact  witli  the  spherical  sur-
face, it  acquires  no  twist  in  the  operation.  For  if  it  is  laid
so  alon«r  any  finite  arc  of  a  small  circle  there  will  cleaily  be
no  twist.  And  no  twist  is  produced  in  continuing  from  any
point  along  another  small  circle  having  a  common  tangent  with
the  £rat  at  this  point.

If  a  rod  be  bent  round  a  cylinder  so  that  a  line  marked
along  one  side  of  it  may  lie  in  contact  with  the  cylinder,
or  if,  what  presents  somewhat  more  readily  the  view  now  de-

7-2

Digitized

100  PRELUUNARY.  [126.

Exmpiesof  siredy  we  wind  «  Btiaight  ribbon  sptially  on  a  cylinder,  the
•aAiwiSL  axis  of  bending  is  penllel  to  that  of  the  cylinder,  and  therefore
obliqne  to  the  axis  of  the  rod  or  ribbon. We  nay  therefore

resolve  the  instantaneons  rotation  which  constitutes  the  bending
at  any  instant  into  two  components,  one  round  a  line  perpen-
dicular to  the  axis  of  the  rod,  which  is  pure  bending,  and  the
other  round  the  axis  of  the  rod,  which  is  pure  twist.

The  twist  at  any  point  in  a  rod  or  ribbon,  so  woond  on  a
etreolar  cylinder,  and  oonstitating  a  nnifonn  helix,  is

r  '

if  r  be  the  rM^at  of  the  finder  and  a  the  indinatSon  of  tlie
spiral. For  if  F  be  the  veloeity  at  whieh  the  bend  prooeeda

along  the  previously  straight  wire  or  ribbon,  — - —  will  be  the

angular  yelooiiy  of  the  initantaneona  rotation  roend  the  line  of
bending  (parallel  to  the  axu),  and  therafore

TooBa  • ,  Feoaa

■  aina  and— ^^ooia

r  r

are  the  angular  velocities  of  twisting  and  of  pure  bending  respeo-

tively.

From  the  latter  Component  we  may  infer  that  the  curvature  of
tlie  helix  is

cos  "g

a  known  result^  which  agrees  with  the  expression  used  above
613).

137.  The  bodograph  in  this  case  Is  a  tmall  circle  of

the  sphere.  If  tlic  specified  condition  as  to  the  mode  of
laying  on  of  the  rod  on  the  cylinder  is  fulfilUd,  the  trans-
verses  of  the  spiral  rod  will  be  parallel  at  points  along  it  sepa-
rated by  one  or  more  whole  turns.  Hence  the  integral  twist
in  a  single  turn  is  equal  to  the  excess  of  four  right  angles
above  the  spherical  area  enclosed  by  the  hodograph.  If  a  be
the  inclination  of  the  spiral,  ^tt  —  a  will  be  the  arc-radius  of  the
hodograph,  and  therefore  its  area  is  2^  (I  —  sin  a).  Hence  the
integral  twist  in  a  turn  of  the  spiral  is  2ir  sin  a,  which  agrees
with  the  reiult  previously  obtained  (§  126).

Digitized  by  Google

128.]  KINEMATICS.  101

138.  As  a  preliimnary  to  the  ibrtber  oondilenitlon  of  the  Curr^twt
rolling  of  one  sarfiuse  on  another,  and  as  useful  in  various  parts
of  our  subject,  we  may  now  take  up  a  few  points  connected
with  the  curv  ature  of  surfaces.

The  tangent  plane  at  any  point  of  a  surface  may  or  may  not
cut  it  at  that  point.  In  the  former  case,  the  surface  bends  away
firom  the  tangent  plane  partly  towards  one  side  of  it,  and  partly
towards  the  other,  and  has  thus,  in  some  of  its  normal  sections^
corvatures  oppositely  direotod  to  those  in  otheis.  In  the  latter
casei,  the  snrfiice  on  every  side  of  the  point  heads  airay  from
the  same  side  of  its  tangent  plane,  and  the  curvatures  of  all
notmal  seetions  are  similarly  dhreeted.  Thns  we  may  divide
carved  smfiices  into  AnUdadic  and  S^nekuUe.  A  saddle  gives  STjoiMtio
a  good  example  of  the  former  class ;  a  hall  of  the  latter.  Cur-  eMBto^
vatures  in  opposite  directions,  with  reference  to  the  tangent
plaue,  have  of  course  different  si^nis.  The  outer  portion  of  an
anchor-ring  is  synclastic,  the  inner  anticlastic

129.  Meuniera  Theorem. — The  curvature  of  an  oblique  sec-  Curvature
tion  of  a  surface  is  equal  to  that  of  the  normal  stiction  through  Mi^^b*
the  same  tangent  line  multiplied  by  the  secant  of  tlie  inclina-
tion of  the  planes  of  the  sections. This  is  evident  from  the
most  elementary  considerations  regarding  projections,

180.  Euler  a  Theorem. — There  are  at  every  point  of  a  syn-
clastic  surface  two  normal  sections,  in  one  of  which  thu  cur-
vature is  a  maximum,  in  the  other  a  minimum;  and  these  are
at  fight  angles  to  each  other.

In  an  antidastio  snrfaee  there  is  mazimnm  corvature  (but
in  oppodte  directions)  in  the  two  normal  sections  whose  planes
bisect  the  angles  between  the  lines  in  which  the  surface  cuts
its  tangent  plane.  On  account  of  the  difference  of  sign,  these
may  be  considered  as  a  maximum  and  a  minimum.

Generally  the  sum  of  the  curvatures  at  a  point,  in  any  two  JJSi2S^
normal  planes  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  is  independent  of  {jJJ^***
the  position  of  these  planes.  Se!^***

TiUog  the  tangent  pkae  as  that  of  it^  3f,  and  the  origlaat  the
point  of  eontaot^  and  patting

PBELDCINARY.  [130.

©.=^'(<i).='^'(^).=^'

we  have  «  =  g  (-^u,-*  4  2Bxi/  +  Cy^)  +  etc.  (1)

Tlic  curvature  of  the  normal  isoiaoii  which  posaes  through  the

iK>mt  x^y^z  m  (in  the  limit)

If  the  aeetion  be  indined  at  an  angle  0  to  tlie  plane  of  XZ^  Uua
beoomes

i  =  il  cob'^  +  2jB  hin^  cos5  +  C sin'^.  (2)

Hence,  if  -  and  -  be  curv^atures  in  normal  aeotions  at  rii;ht
angles  to  each  either,

-•i-^sii+Cs  constant,
r  «

(2)  may  be  written

i=  +coB20)-i-2i?Bin204C(l-OQs20)}

=  i  [TVC  +X^^  COS  2tf  +  32?  sin  20} ,

or  if ^(^l-C)==i?cos2a,  B^Btm^a,

that  18 B^  - C)' and  tan 2a=^^,

wehaTe p=  ^(4  +  C)+ (-4-C)«+^Jcae2(0-a).

The  maximum  and  minimum  curvatures  are  therefore  thoae  in
mnmal  places  at  right  angles  to  each  other  for  which  and

sa+ and  are  respectiyely

Hence  their  product  is -  if*.

If  this  be  positive  we  have  a  syndastici  if  negative  an  anti-
clastiCi  surfiMe.  If  it  be  zero  we  have  one  curvature  only,  and  tho
snrihoe  is  eyHndrioal  at  the  point  considered.  It  is  demonstrated

130.]  KDffBHATICS.  103

(§  152,  below)  that  if  this  condition  is  fulfilled  at  eveiy  pointy  the  Prinrinai
•nrfiioe  is developable"  (§  139,  below).  Sm,

Bj  (1)  a  plane  paiallel  to  the  tangunt  plane  and  yery  near  it
cuts  the  surface  in  an  ellipse,  hyperbola,  or  tvro  paralleL  straight
lines,  in  the  three  cases  respectively.  This  section,  whose
nature  informs  us  as  to  whether  the  curvature  be  syndastic,
antidastio^  or  oylindiioal,  at  any  point,  was  called  by  Dupm
the  It¥lieairix,

A  line  of  curvature  of  a  surface  is  a  line  which  at  every  point  i>pflnition

IS  cotiingentiai  witii  iiurmai  section  ui  maxiinum  or  minimum  CamtuPk
curvature.

131.  Let  P,  phe  two  points  of  a  surface  infinitely  near  to  gwy

each  other,  and  let  r  be  the  radius  of  curvature  of  a  normal  twewi  two
section  passing  through  them.  Iheii  the  radius  oi  curvature  »urf*oe.
of  an  oblii[iie  section  through  the  same  points,  inclined  to  the
former  at  an  angle  a,  is  {§  129)  r  cos  a.  Also  the  lengtli  along
the  normal  section,  from  P  to  p,  is  less  than  that  along  the
oblicjue  section — since  a  given  chord  cuts  oflf  an  arc  from  a
circle^  longer  the  less  the  radius  of  that  circle.

If  a  be  the  length  of 'the  chord  Pp,  we  have
IMstanoe  Fp  along  normal  section  =.  2r  sin~^  ~  s  a  ^1  +  »

„ oblique  seclioii-a(l +55^;,^).

188.  Hence,  if  the  shorfcest  possible  line  be  drawn  from  one
point  of  a  surface  to  another,  its  plane  of  corvature  ia  eveiy*

where  perpendicular  to  the  surface.

Such  a  curve  is  called  a  Geodetic  line. And  it  is  easy  to  see  Gfodetio
that  it  is  the  line  in  which  a  flexible  and  inextensible  string
would  touch  the  surface  if  stretched  between  those  points,  the
surface  being  supposed  smooth.

133.  If  an  infinitely  narrow  ribbon  be  laid  on  a  surface
along  a  geodetic  line,  its  twist  is  equal  to  the  tortuosity  of  its
axis  at  each  point.  \Vc  have  seen  (§  12.5)  that  when  one  body
rolls  on  another  without  spinning,  the  projections  of  the  traces
on  the  common  tangent  piano  agree  in  curvature  at  the  point

Digitized  by  Google

104

pbeldhnart.

[18S

titoMi of  contact. Heuce,  if  one  of  the  surfaces  be  a  plane,  and  the
twu  ii  two  trace  on  the  other  be  a  geodetic  line,  the  trace  on  the  plane  is  a
mtriM, straight  line.  Omversely,  if  the  trace  on  the  plane  be  a  straight
line,  that  en  the  surface  is  a  geodetic  lino.

And,  quite  generally,  if  the  given  trace  be  a  geodetic  line,
the  other  tnice  is  also  a  geodetic  Uue.

aghtricri 134.  The  area  of  a  spherical  triangle  (on  a  sphere  of  nnit

radms)  is  known  to  be  equal  to  the  "  spherical  excess,"  i.e,,  the
excess  of  the  sum  of  its  angles  over  two  right  angles,  or  the
excess  of  four  right  angles  over  the  sum  of  its  exterior  angles.
Arraof  The  area  of  a  spherical  iiolvffon  whose  n  sides  are  portions
pvijrsQd.  of  great  circles — i.e.,  geodetic  lines — is  to  that  of  the  hemi-
sphere as  the  excess  of  four  right  angles  over  the  sum  of  its
exterior  angles  is  to  four  right  angles.  (We  may  call  this  the
"  spherical  excess**  of  the  polygon.)

For  the  area  of  a  spherical  triangle  is  known  to  be  equal  to

Divide  the  poljfgon  into  n  such  triangles,  with  a  oomnum
vertex,  the  angles  about  which,  of  course,  amount  to  Sr.
Area-sum  of  anterior  angles  of  trianglea— iMr

s  2«  +  smn  of  interior  angles  of  polygon-iur

s  2r  -  anm  of  exterior  angle  of  polygon.

R.r iproc^i  Giveu  an  open  or  closed  spherical  polygon,  or  line  on  the
•piMfe.""  sni&ce  of  a  sphere  composed  of  consecutive  arcs  of  great  circles.
Take  either  pole  of  the  first  of  these  arcs,  and  the  correspcmdii^
poles  of  all  the  others  (all  the  poles  to  be  on  the  right  hand,  or
all  on  the  left,  of  a  traveller  advancing  along  the  given  great
circle  arcs  in  order).  Draw  great  circle  arcs  from  the  first  of
these  poles  to  the  second,  the  second  to  the  third,  and  so  on  in
order.  Another  closed  or  open  polygon,  constituting  what  is
called  the  polar  diagram  to  the  given  i)olygon,  is  thus  obtained.
The  sides  of  the  second  polygon  are  evidently  equal  to  the
exterior  angles  in  the  first;  and  the  exterior  angles  of  the
second  are  equal  to  the  sides  of  the  first.  Hence  the  relation
bi'tween  the  two  diagrams  is  reciprocal,  or  each  is  pnlar  to  the
other. The  polar  figure  to  any  continuous  curve  on  a  spherical

Digitized  by  Google

134.]  KINEMATICS.  105

Bttrfim  ia  the  locua  of  the  ultimate  interaections  of  great  ciieles  Reciprocal
to  points  takon  infinitelj  near  each  other  along  it^

The  area  of  a  closed  spherical  figaie  is»  consequently,  ao-
cording  to  what  we  have  just  seen,  equal  to  the  excess  of  Sir
above  the  periphery  of  its  polar,  if  the  radius  of  the  sphere  be
unity.

239.  If  a  pcnnt  move  on  a  surfiice  along  a  figure  whose  inteimi
sides  are  geodetic  tines,  the  sum  of  the  exterior  angles  of  this
polygon  is  defined  to  be  the  iaUgiral  change  of  the  dxnciMn  in
ike  twrfaee.

In  great  circle  sailing,  unless  a  vessel  sail  on  the  equator,  or
on  a  meridiaD,  her  course,  as  indicjited  by  points  of  the  com-
pass  (true,  not  magnetic,  for  tlie  latter  change  even  ou  a  meri-
dian), perpetually  changes.  Yet  just  as  we  say  her  direction
does  not  change  if  she  sail  in  a  meridian,  or  in  the  ec^uator,  so
we  ou[,dit  to  say  lier  direction  does  not  change  if  she  moves  in
any  great  circle.  Now,  the  great  circle  is  the  geodetic  hue  on
the  q»here,  and  by  extending  these  remarks  to  other  curved
surfiioefl^  we  see  the  connexion  of  the  above  definition  with  that
in  the  case  of  a  plane  polygon  (§  10).

NoU. — We  cannot  define  integral  change  of  directicm  here  by  cbnffe  of
any  angle  directly  construcUble  from  the  first  and  last  tangents
to  the  path,  as  was  done  $  10}  in  the  case  of  a  plane  curve  or  taMSontt.
polygon;  but  from  §§  125  and  133  we  have  the  following
statement  z—The  whole  change  of  direction  in  a  curved  surface,
from  one  end  to  another  of  any  arc  of  a  curve  traced  on  it»  \b
equal  to  the  change  of  direction  from  end  to  end  of  the  trace  of
this  arc  uu  a  plane  by  pure  rolling.

136.  Def.  The  excess  of  four  right  angles  above  the  inte-  int^mi
gral  change  of  direction  from  one  side  to  the  same  side  next

time  in  going  round  a  closed  polygon  of  geodetic  lines  on  a
curved  surface,  is  the  integral  curvature  of  the  enclosed  portion
of  surface.  This  excess  is  zero  in  the  case  of  a  polygon  traced
on  a  plane.  We  shall  presently  see  that  this  corresponds  exactly
to  what  Gauss  has  called  the  curvaUira  Integra.

Def.  (Gauss.)  The  curvatura  Integra  of  any  given  portion  a^tunk
of  a  curved  surface,  is  the  area  enclosed  on  a  spherical  suriace

Digitized  by  Google

106

PBEUMINART.

[13G.

of  unit  radius  by  a  strni'j^lit  line  drawn  from  its  centre,  panillel
to  a  normal  to  the  sui  tace,  the  normal  being  cairied  round  the
boundary  of  the  given  portion.
Horagnph. The  curve  thus  traced  on  the  sphere  is  called  the  Horograph
of  the  given  portion  of  curved  surface.

The  average  curtfoture  of  any  portion  of  a  curved  sut&ce  is
the  integral  curvature  divided  by  the  area.  The  ^^Jie  curpa-
ture  of  a  curved  surface  at  any  point  is  the  average  curvature
of  an  infinitely  small  area  of  it  round  that  point

Chanjce  of

direction
rt)und  tlio
boundary  in
the  Mirfiu'c,
topetluT
with  are*  ot
th<-  horo*

•  tmnls  four
ri|rhtanKl«w
or  "  Into-
gral  Curm*
ture"  equals
'Cwmxum

137.  The  excess  of  'Zir  ahuve  the  change  of  direction,  in  a  sur-
face, of  a  point  moving  round  any  closed  curve  on  it,  is  equal  to
the  area  of  the  horograph  of  the  enclosed  portion  of  surface.

Let  a  tangent  plane  roll  vitlioat  spinning  on  the  saifaoe  over
every  point  of  the  bounding  lina (Its  instantaneous  axis  will
always  lie  in  it^  and  pass  through  the  point  of  oontaet^  but  will
not^  as  we  have  seen,  be  at  right  angles  to  the  given  bounding
curve,  except  when  the  twist  of  a  nanow  ribbon  of  the  surface
along  this  curve  is  nothing.) Considering  the  auxiliary  sphere
of  unit  radius,  used  in  Gauss's  definition,  and  the  moving  line
through  its  centre,  we  peroeive  that  the  motion  of  this  line  is,  at
each  instant,  in  a  plane  per[>endicoIar  to  the  instantaneous  axis
of  the  tangent  plane  to  the  given  sui&oe. The  direetloiL  of
modon  of  the  point  which  cuts  out  the  area  on  the  spherical
surface  is  therefore  per])endicular  to  this  instantaneous  axis.
Hence,  if  we  roll  a  tangent  plane  on  the  spherical  surface  also,
making  it  keep  time  with  the  other,  the  trace  on  this  tangent
plane  will  be  a  curve  always  perpendicular  to  the  instantaneous
axis  of  each  tangent  plane. The  change  of  direction,  in  the
flpherioal  surface,  of  the  point  moving  round  and  cutting  out  the
area,  being  equal  to  the  change  of  direction  in  its  own  trace  on
its  own  tangent  plane 135),  is  therefore  equal  to  the  <diange
cf  direction  of  the  instantaneous  axis  in  the  tangent  plane  to  the
given  muiuob  reckoned  from  a  line  fixed  relatively  to  this  plane.
But  having  rolled  all  round,  and  being  in  position  to  roll  round
again,  the  instantaneous  axis  of  the  fresh  start  must  be  inclined
to  the  trace  at  the  same  angle  aa  in  the  beginning Hence  the
change  of  direction  of  tiie  instantaneous  axis  in  either  tangent
plane  is  equal  to  the  change  of  direction,  in  the  given  suiftce^  of

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

.137.]

KINEMATICS.

107

A  point  going  all'  rcmiul  the  bonndaiy  of  the  given  portion  of  it  cnrvatura
3  135);  to  whioh,  therefoie,  the  ohange  of  direction,  in  ih^tmSn^
spherical  Bufiioe,  of  the  point  going  all  round  the  spherical  area
ia  eqvaL  But,  hy  the  well-known  theorem  (§  134)  of  the
**8pheiical  oceas,"  tiiia  change  of  direction  subtracted  from  2r
leftvea  the  spherical  area.  Hence  the  spherical  area,  called  by
Qanas  the  aurvaiMra  vnUgra,  is  equal  to  2ir  wanting  the  change
of  direction  in  goiBg  round  the  boundary.

It  will  be  peroeiTed  that  when  the  two  rollings  we  have  con-
ndered  are  each  complete,  each  tangent  plane  will  have  come
back  to  be  parallel  to  its  origiual  position,  but  any  fixed  line  in
H  wiU  haTO  changed  direction  through  an  angle  equal  to  the
equal  changes  of  direction  just  considered.

Kote. — The  two  rollmjj  tanf,'pnt  pianos  nre  at  each  in>t;int
parallel  to  one  anotlitr,  uiiJ  a  lixt  <1  lint'  k  hitively  to  one  drawn
at  any  time  j>arall<'l  to  a  lixtd  line  rtlutiveiy  to  the  other,  re-
mains j)anillel  to  the  last-mentioned  line.

Jf,  instead  of  the  closed  curve,  we  have  a  clospd  polygon  of
geodetic  lines  on  the  given  surface,  the  trace  of  the  rolling  of
its  tangent  plane  will  be  an  unclosed  i-ectilineal  polygon.  If
each  geodetic  were  a  plane  curve  (which  could  only  be  if  the
given  surfiice  were  H|)herical),  the  instantaneous  axis  would  be
always  perpemlieular  to  the  particular  side  of  this  polygon  which
is  rolled  on  at  llie  instant;  and,  of  course,  the  spherical  ami  on
the  auxiliary  .sphere  would  be  a  similar  j)olygon  to  the  given
one.  But  the  giv«n  surface  iM'ing  other  than  spherical,  thei-o
must  (except  in  the  particular  case  of  some  of  the  geo<letics
being  lines  of  curvature)  be  tortuosity  in  every  geodetic  of
the  closed  ]»olygou;  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  twist  in
the  corresponding  ribbons  of  the  surface.  Hence  the  portion
of  the  whole  trace  on  the  second  rolling  tjingent  ]>lane  which
corresponds  to  any  one  side  of  the  given  geodetic  polygon,  must
in  general  be  a  curve;  and  as  there  will  getiemlly  be  finite  angles
in  the  second  rolling  corresponding  to  (V)Ut  not  equal  to)  those  in
the  first,  the  trace  of  the  second  on  its  tangent  plane  will  Ijo  an
unclosed  polygon  of  curves.  The  trace  of  the  .same  rolling  on
the  spherical  surface  in  which  it  ttikes  place  will  generally  bo
a  sphwical  polygon,  not  of  great  circle  arcs,  but  of  other  curves.
Ihe  sum  of  the  exterior  angles  of  this  polygon,  and  of  the
changes  of  direction  from  one  end  to  the  other  of  each  of  its  sides,
is  the  whole  change  of  direction  considered,  and  is,  by  the  propei*

Digitized  by  Google

Currainrt

intt)ffra,»nA

1U8

application  of  the  theorem  ui  §  134,  et^iud  to  2s-  wanting  the
Bpherical  area  enclosed.

Or  again,  if,  instead  of  a  geodetic  polygon  as  the  given  curve,

PEBUMIKIET.

we  have  a  polygon  of  curves,  each  fulfilling  the  condition  that
the  nonual  to  the  surface  through  any  point  of  it  i.s  {Kirallel  to  a
fixed  plane ;  one  plane  for  the  first  curve,  another  for  the
second,  and  ho  on;  then  the  figure  on  the  auxiliary  spherical
surface  will  be  a  ])olygoii  of  arcs  of  great  circles ;  its  trace  on  its
tangent  plane  will  be  an  unclosed  rectilineal  polygon  ;  and  the
tiiice  of  the  given  curve  on  the  tangent  pliine  of  the  first  rolling
will  be  an  unclosed  jKjlygou  of  curves.  The  sura  of  diangvy  of
direction  in  these  curves,  and  of  exterior  an^'les  in  jjasaing  from
one  to  another  of  them,  is  of  coui-se  equal  to  the  change  of
direction  in  the  giveji  surface,  in  going  round  the  given  polygon
of  curves  on  it.  The  change  of  direction  in  the  other  will  be
simply  the  simi  of  the  exterior  anglea  of  the  sj)herical  polygon,
or  of  its  rectilineal  trace.  Remark  that  in  this  ca.se  tlie  in-
stantimeous  axis  of  the  first  rolling,  being  always  perpendicular
to  that  plane  to  which  the  normals  are  all  parallel,  remains
parallel  to  one  line,  fixed  with  reference  to  the  Umgent  plane,
during  rolling  along  each  curved  sid^  and  also  remains  parallel
to  a  fixed  line  in  space.

Lastly,  remark  that  although  the  whole  change  of  direction  of
the  trace  in  one  tangent  plane  is  equal  to  that  in  the  trace  on
the  other,  when  the  rolling  is  completed  round  the  given  circuit ;
the  changes  of  direction  in  the  two  are  generally  unequal  in  any
part  of  the  ciixiuit.  They  may  be  equal  for  particular  jmrta
of  the  circuit,  viz.,  Wtween  those  jwints,  if  any,  at  which  the  in-
st^uitaneouB  axis  is  equally  inclined  to  the  direction  of  the  trace
on  the  first  tangent  plane.

Any  difficulty  which  may  have  been  felt  in  reading  this  Section
will  be  removed  if  the  following  exercises  on  the  subject  be
performed.

(1)  Find  the  horograph  of  an  infinitely  small  circular  area  of
any  continuous  curved  surface.  It  is  an  elli})80  or  a  hyj>erbola
according  as  the  surface  is  syncla.stic  or  anticlastic  (§  128).  Pind
the  axes  of  the  ellipse  or  hyperbola  in  either  case.

(2)  Find  the  horograph  of  tlic  area  cut  off  a  synclastic  surface
by  a  phmo  j)arallel  to  the  tangent  plane  at  any  given  point  of  it,
and  infinitely  near  tliis  point.  Find  and  interpret  the  corre-
sponding result  for  the  case  in  which  the  surface  is  anticlastic
in  the  neighbourhood  of  tlie  given  point

Digitized  by  Google

SINiaiATtCS.

100

(3)  Let  a  tangent  plane  roll  without  spinning  over  ii^^  iZ^a!il!d
boiuidaiy  of  a  j^ven  clofled  curve  or  geodetic  polygon  on  any  ImwwpIi.
eorred  surface. Show  that  the  points  of  the  trace  in  the  tangent

plane  which  snccessively  touch  the  same  point  of  the  giTen
surface  are  at  equal  distances  successively  on  the  circumference
of  a  circle,  tlie  angular  values  of  the  intcniiediate  arcs  heing  each
2w  —  K  i£  taken  in  the  direction  in  which  the  trace  is  actually
described,  and  K  if  taken  in  the  contrary  direction^  £  being
the  "intognd  curvatoie"  of  the  portion  of  the  curved  surface
encloeed  by  the  given  curve  or  geodetic  polygon.  Hence  if  K
be  commensurable  with  v  the  trace  on  the  tangent  plane,  how-
ever compliotedly  autoiomic  it  may  be,  ia  a  finite  okMod  curve
or  polygon.

(4)  The  trace  by  a  tangent  plane  rolling  snooenively  over
three  principal  quadrants  bonnding  an  eighth  part  of  tiie  cir-
cumference of  an  ellipsoid  is  represented  in  the  accompanying
diagnnii  the  whole  of  which  is  tnMsed  when  the  tangent  plane  is

ir

rolled  four  times  over  the  stated  boundary.  A,  B,  C ;  A\  R,  C\
&c.  represent  the  points  of  the  tangent  plane  touched  in  order
by  ends  of  the  mean  principal  axis  [A),  the  gix>atest  principal
axLs  [B),  atul  legist  principal  axis  (C),  and  AM,  MC,  CA!  are  the
lengths  of  the  three  principal  quadrants.

138.  It  appears  from  what  precedes,  that  the  same  equality  ^JjJJS^JJf
or  identity  subsists  between  "  whole  curvature "  in  a  plane  J"^^jJ5iJ*
arc  and  the  excess  of  w  above  the  angle  between  the  terminal  corv^^ure.

110  PKELUnNABT.  [13&

AnniniTThc-  tanffcnts,  OS  bc'tween  "  whole  ciirvatiiro"  and  excess  of  27r  above
8»  i^pinis ^^^g^  direction  along  the  bounding  line  in  the  surface  for
curvature,  any  portion  of  a  curved  surfiu^.

Or,  according  to  Gauss,  whereas  the  wlu^lo  curvature  in  a
plane  arc  is  the  angle  between  two  lines  parallel  to  the  terminal
normals,  the  whole  curvature  of  a  portion  of  curve  surface  is
the  solid  angle  of  a  cone  formed  by  drawing  lines  from  a  point
parallel  to  all  normals  through  its  boundary.

. . X • 1 •  cbanse  of  direction
Affun.  average  curvature  m  a  plane  curve  «. j

and  specific  curvature,  or,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  ciwature,

. chance  of  direction  in  infinitely  small  lemrth
at  any  pomt  of  it=  — — =  lUI^T^Oi

Thus  average  curvature  and  specific  curvature  are  for  surfaces

analogous  to  the  corresponding  terms  for  a  plane  curve.

Lastly,  in  a  plane  arc  of  uniform  curvature,  i.e.,  in  a  circular
chanfje  of  direction 1  4j...

 ^ l.n,H.  p-  ^  '* ^  V»>v^  («  below)

that^  in  a  surface  throughout  which  the  specific  curvature  is
2ir  —  chan[,'o  of  direction in tefn-sd  curvature 1  ,

uniform, ,  or  —  » =  —  ,  where

uifii  '  aica  pp

p  and  p  are  the  principal  radii  of  cnrvaturo.  Hence  in  a  sur-
face, whether  of  uniform  or  non-uniibmi  speciiic  curvature,  the

specific  curvature  at  any  point  is  equal  to  — , .  In  geometry  of

PP

three  dimensions,  pp'  (an  area)  is  clearly  analogous  to  p  in  a
curve  and  plane.

Consider  a  portion  .S*,  of  a  surfjice  of  any  curvaturo,  bounded
b}'  a  given  closed  curve.  Let  tlieix^  be  a  8})horical  surface,  raxiius
r,  and  centre  C.  Draw  a  nulius  CQ^  jMiraUel  to  the  normal  at
any  point  P  of  S.  If  this  bo  done  for  every  i)oint  of  the  bound-
Horograph.  ^^y^  *h^'  line  so  obtained  onclases  the  spheneal  area  use<i  in
Gaus.Vs  (letiiiition.  Now  let  there  be  an  intinitely  small  rect-
angle on  at  P,  having  for  its  sides  arcs  of  angles  ^  and  ^,  on
the  nornial  sections  of  c:r«'atest  and  least  cur\'ature,  and  let  their
r:\dii  of  curvature  be  denoted  Ijy  p  and  p.  The  lengtlis  of  these
sides  will  be  pt,  and  p'^  resjx'ctively.  Its  area  will  tlieif-fore  be
ppXC'  Tlie  cormsponding  tigni*e  at  Q  on  the  sjihorical  surface
will  be  bounded  by  arcs  of  angles  equal  to  those,  and  therefore  of

Digitized  by  GoogI

138.]

KINEMATICS.

Ill

lengths  r(  and  r^'  rcKpecti\  ( ly,  and  its  area  will  Ik?  r'^^.  Henoe  ^^JJpmph!
if  (Ur  denote  this  area,  the  urea  of  the  infinitely  small  poiiion  of

the  given  waxhob  will  be  .  In  a  snrfaoe  for  which  pp*  is
constant^  the  area  is  theiefore«  ^  jjlv^pp*^  integral eurvatuiei

189.  A  perfectly  flexible  but  inextensible  surfS&oe  is  sug-  ^j^J^^j^
gested,  although  not  realized,  by  paper,  thin  sheet  metal,  on

cloth,  when  tliu  surface  is  plarR'  ;  and  by  sheaths  of  pods,  seed
Vessels,  or  the  like,  when  it  is  not  capable  of  being  stretched
Bat  without  tearing.  The  process  of  clianging  the  form  of  a
surface  by  Ltinling  is  called  "  develop) nr/'^  But  tlio  term  "i)e-
velopahle  Surface"  is  corn uionly  restricted  to  such  inextensible
surfaces  as  am  bo  developed  into  a  plane,  or,  in  common  Ian-
guage, "  smoothed  flat"

140.  Tlic  geometry  or  kinematics  of  this  subject  is  a  great
contrast  to  tliat  of  the  flexible  line  (§  14),  and,  in  its  merest
elements,  presents  ideas  not  very  easily  apprehended,  and  sub-
jects of  investigation  that  have  exercised,  and  perhaps  even
overtasked,  the  powers  of  some  of  the  greatest  mathematicians.

141.  Some  care  is  required  to  form  a  correct  conception  of
what  is  a  perfectly  flexible  inextensible  surface.  First  let  us
consider  a  plane  sheet  of  paper.  It  is  very  flexible,  and  we
can  easily  form  the  conception  from  it  of  a  sheet  of  ideal
matter  perfectly  flexible.  It  is  very  inextensible;  that  is  to
say,  it  yields  very  little  to  any  application  of  force  tending  to
poll  or  stretch  it  in  any  direction,  np  to  the  strongest  it  can
bear  without  tearing.  It  does,  of  course,  stretch  a  little.  It
b  easy  to  test  that  it  stretches  when  under  the  influence  of
foroe,  and  that  it  contracts  again  when  the  force  is  removed,
although  not  always  to  its  original  dimensions,  as  it  may  and
generally  does  remain  to  some  sensible  extent  permanently
stretched.  Also,  flexure  stretches  one  side  and  condenses  the
oth.  r  temporarily ;  and,  to  a  less  extent,  permanently.  Under
ehusticity  (§§  717,  718,  710)  we  shall  return  to  this.  In  the
meantime,  in  considering  illustrations  of  our  kincmatical  propo-
sitions, it  is  necessary  to  anticipate  such  physical  circumstances.

112

PRSUMINART.

[142.

Surface 142. Clotli  WOVCII  ill  tlic  siiiiplc  conunon  wav,  very  fine

inextensiblo  - .  ...  *  • i •  -i  i

intwodi-  musliii  for  instance,  illustrates  a  surtace  periectly  inextensiblc
in  two  directions  (those  of  the  warp  and  the  woof),  but  suscept-
ible of  any  amount  of  extension  from  1  up  to  along  one
diagonal,  with  contraction  from  1  to  0  (each  degree  of  extension
along  one  diagonal  having  a  corresponding  determinate  degree
of  contraction  along  the  other,  the  relation  being  ^-^e^^tmi,
where  1 : 0  and  1 :  e'  are  the  ratios  of  elongation,  which  will  be
contraction  in  the  case  in  which  0  or is  <  1)  in  the  other.

"EiMiio  148.  The  flexure  of  a  sur^Me  fulfilling  any  case  of  the
niu'iia  geometrical  condition  just  stated,  presents  an  interesting  sub-
ject  for  investigationy  which  we  are  reluctantly  obliged  to
forego.  The  moist  pa]>er  drapery  that  Albert  IKUer  used  on
his  little  lay  figures  must  hang  very  dififerently  firom  doth.
Perhaps  the  stifihess  of  the  drapery  in  his  jnctures  may  be  to
some  extent  owing  to  the  fiict  that  he  used  the  moist  paper  in
preference  to  cloth  on  account  of  its  superior  flexibility,  while
unaware  of  tlie  great  distinction  between  them  as  regards
extensibility.  Fine  muslin,  prepared  with  starch  or  gum,  is,
during  the  proc^  of  drying,  kept  moving  by  a  machine,  which,
by  producing  a  to-and-fro  relative  angular  motion  of  warp  and
woof,  stretches  and  contracts  the  diagonals  of  its  structure  alter-
nately, and  thus  prevents  the  parallelograms  from  becoming
8ti£Gsned  into  rectanglea

Flexure  of  144.  The  flexure  of  an  inextensiblc  surface  which  can  be
^imi^io^  plane,  is  a  subject  which  has  been  well  worked  by  geomctriail
investigators  and  writers,  and,  in  its  elements  at  least,  presents
little  difficulty.  The  first  elementary  conception  to  be  formed
is,  that  such  a  surfiMse  (if  perfectly  flexible),  taken  plane  in
the  first  place,  may  be  bent  about  any  straight  line  ruled  on
it,  so  that  the  two  plane  parts  may  make  any  angle  witii  one
another.

Such  a  line  is  called  a  ''generating  line  "  of  the  surface  to  be
formed.

Next,  we  may  bend  one  of  these  plane  parts  about  any  other
line  which  does  not  (within  the  limits  of  the  sheet)  intersect

tlie  former ;  and  so  on. If  these  lines  arc  infinite  in  number,

Digitized  by  Google

145.]

KINESIATIGS.

118

and  the  an^rlfs  of  bending  infinitely  small,  but  such  that  their  Flexure  of

^  o  J  '  ^  inextensihio

sum  may  bo  fiuitc,  we  have  our  plane  surface  bent  into  a  d«»«*op»bie.
curved  surface,  wliich  is  of  course  "  developable  "  (§  139).

145.  Lift  a  square  of  paper,  free  from  folds,  creases,  or
ragged  edges,  gt'utly  by  one  comer,  or  otherwise,  without
crushing  or  forcing  it,  or  very  gently  by  two  points.  It  will
hang  in  a  form  wliich  is  very  rigorously  a  developable  surface ;
for  although  it  is  not  absolutely  inextcnsible,  yet  the  forces
Trhich  tend  to  stretch  or  tear  it,  when  it  is  treated  as  above
described,  are  small  enough  to  produce  no  sensible  stretching.
Indeed  the  greatest  stretching  it  can  experience  without  tear-
ing»  in  any  direction,  is  not  such  as  can  affect  the  form  of  the
surface  much  when  sharp  flexures,  singular  points,  etc.,  are
kept  clear  of.  *

146.  Prisms  and  cylinders  (when  the  lines  of  bending,  §  144,
are  parallel,  and  finite  in  number  with  finite  angles,  or  infinite
in  number  with  infinitely  small  angles),  and  pyramids  and
cones  (the  lines  of  bending  meeting  in  a  point  if  produced),  are
clearly  included.

147.  If  the  generating  lines,  or  line-edges  of  the  angles  of
bending,  are  not  parallel,  they  must  meet,  since  they  are  in  a
l^e  when  the  siur&ce  is  plane.  If  they  do  not  meet  all  in  one
pointy  they  must  meet  in  several  points :  in  general,  each  one
meets  its  predecessor  and  its  successor  in  different  points.

148.  There  is  still  no  difficulty  in  understanding  the  form  of,
say  a  square,  or  circle,  of  the  plane  surface  when  bent  as  explained
above,  provided  it  does  not  include  any

of  these  points  of  intersection. When  the  \
number  is  infinite,  and  the  surface  finitely  \^
enrred,  the  developable  lines  will  in  gene-  \
nl  be  tangents  to  a  curve  (the  locus  of  the  (^k
points  of  intersection  when  the  number  is
infinite).  This  curve  is  called  the  edge  of
regression.  The  surface  must  clearly,  when
complete  (according  to  mathematical  ideas),
consist  of  two  sheets  meeting  in  this  edge

VOL.  L  8

Digitized  by  Google

PBEUMINABT.

Edge  or

[148.

of  regref?sion  (just  as  a  cone  consists  of  two  sheets  meeting  in

the  vertex),  because  eacli  t:iii<]^ent  msiy  be  produced  beyond
the  point  of  coutact,  instead  of  stopping  at  it,  as  in  tlie  annexed
diagram.

pmc*|o>> 149.  To  construct  a  complete  developable  smfiiod  in  two

ronrtruc-  .  .

ihmtoiMble  from  its  edge  of  regression —

framiu "Lay  one  piece  of  perfectly  flat,  uu wrinkled,  smooth-cut
paper  on  the  top  of  another. Trace  any  curve  on  the  uji]>er,

and  let  it  have  no  point  of  inflec-
tion, but  everywlicre  finite  curvature.
Cut  the  two  papers  along  the  curve
and  remove  the  convex  portions.  If
the  curve  traced  is  closed,  it  must  be
cut  open  (see  second  diagram).
Attach  the  two  sheets  together  by  very  slight  paper  or
muslin  clamps  gammed  to  them  along  the  common  carved
edge.  These  must  be  so  slight  as  not  to  interfere
sensibly  with  the  flexure  of  the  two  sheets.  Take
hold  of  one  comer  of  one  sheet  and  lift  the  whole.
The  two  will  open  out  into  the  two  sheets  of  a
developable  surface,  of  which  the  cune,  bending
into  a  curve  of  double  curvature,  is  the  edge  of
regies-sion.  The  tangent  to  the  curve  drawn  in
one  direction  from  the  p<:)int  of  contact,  will
always  lie  in  ono  of  the  sheets,  and  its  continuation  on  the
other  side  in  the  other  sheet  Of  course  a  double-sheeted
developable  polj^hedron  can  be  constructed  by  this  process,  by
starting  from  a  polygon  instead  of  a  curve.

Gvaend  150.  A  flexible  but  perfectly  inextensible  surface,  altered
inntaiuibia  m  lorm  m  auy  way  possible  for  it^  must  keep  any  line  traced
on  it  unchanged  in  length ;  and  hence  any  two  intersecting
lines  unchanged  in  mutual  inclination.  Henoe»  also,  geodetic
lines  must  remain  geodetic  lines.  Hence  "the  change  of
direction"  in  a  surface,  of  a  point  going  round  any  portion  of
it,  must  be  the  same,  however  this  portion  is  bent  Hence
(§  1S6)  the  integral  curvature  remains  the  same  in  any  and
every  portion  however  the  surface  is  bent Hence  (§  138»

Digitized  bv  Coo<^le

1^.]  KINEMATICS.  115

0aim*8  Theorem)  the  product  of  the  principal  radii  of  carvature  o<m«^^
at  each  point  remains  unchanged.  GSSSwe

161.  The  general  statement  of  a  converse  proposition,  ex-
pressing the  condition  that  two  given  areas  of  curved  surfiftces
may  be  bent  one  to  fit  the  other,  involves  essentially  some
mode  of  specifying  corresponding  points  on  the  .two.  A  full
investigation  of  the  circumstances  would  be  out  of  place  here.

152.  In  oTie  case,  however,  a  statement  in  the  simplest  Surface
pos<ihle  terms  is  applicable. Any  two  surfaces,  in  each  of  JJJjjJj^
which  the  specific  curvature  is  the  same  at  all  points,  and
equal  to  that  of  the  other,  may  be  bent  one  to  fit  the  other.

Thus  any  tsadace  of  uniform  positive  specific  curvature  {Le,,
wholly  convex  one  side,  and  concave  the  other)  may  be  bent
to  fit  a  sphere  whose  radius  is  a  mean  proportional  between  its
principal  ladii  of  curvature  at  any  points  A  surface  of  uniform
negative,  or  antidastic,  curvature  would  fit  an  imaginary  sphere,
but  the  interpretation  of  this  is  not  understood  in  the  present
condition  of  science.  But  practically,  of  any  two  surfaces  of  uni-
form anticlastic  curvature,  either  may  be  bent  to  fit  the  other.

153.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  geodetic  trigonometry  on  Geodetic
any  surfiice  of  uniform  positive^  or  8yncla8ti<^  curvature,  is^Sffti"""
identical  with  spherical  trigonometry.

If  a~-^-^,  b^^JL-^,  es-^,  where are  the  lengths

Jpp JPP J  PR

of  three  geodetic  lines  joining  three  points  on  tlio  surface,  and

if  A,  B,  C  denote  the  angles  between  the  t.nngent.s  to  the  g»^detic
lines  at  tliese  })oint.s;  we  have  six  quantities  which  agree  perfectly
with  the  three  Bides  and  the  three  anf,des  of  a  certain  R})hencal
tiiangle.  A  corresponding  anticlastic  trigonometry  exists,  al-
though we  are  not  aware  that  it  lias  hitherto  been  noticed,  for  any
surface  of  uniform  anticlastic  curvature.  In  a  geodetic  trianrjlo
on  an  anticlastic  surface,  the  sum  of  the  three  angles  is  of  coui-so
less  than  three  nght  aui^lrs.  and  the  difference,  or  "  anticlastic
defect"  (like  the  "spherical  excess"),  is  equal  to  the  area  divided
by  px—p,  where  p  and  —p  are  positive.

164.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  very  important  kinemar  strain,
tical  conditions  presented  by  the  changes  of  volume  or  figure

8—2

Digitized  by  Google

116  PRELIHINAAY.  [154.

siniiii. experienced  by  a  solid  or  liquid  mass,  or  1^  a  group  of  pointaf^
whose  positions  with  regard  to  each  other  are  subject  to  known
conditions.  Any  such  definite  alteration  of  form  or  dimensions

is  called  a  Strain.

Thus  a  rod  wliich  becomes  lonorer  or  shorter  is  strained.

o

Water,  when  compressed,  is  strained.  A  stone,  beam,  or  mass
of  metal,  in  a  building  or  in  a  piece  of  fratnework,  if  condensed
or  dilated  in  any  direction,  or  bent,  twisted,  or  distorted  in  any
way,  is  said  to  experience  a  strain.  A  ship  is  said  to  "  strain"
if,  in  launching,  or  when  working  in  a  heavy  sea^  the  different
parts  of  it  experience  relative  motions.

oMiomo"*  when  the  matter  occupying  any  space  is  strained

s?"*""  in  any  way,  all  pairs  of  points  of  its  substance  wliich  are  initially
at  equal  distances  from  one  another  in  parallel  lines  remain
equidistant,  it  may  be  at  an  altered  distance ;  and  in  parallel
lines,  altered,  it  may  be,  from  their  initial  direction;  the  strain
is  said  to  be  homogeneous.

^o^*^  166.  Hence  if  any  straight  line  be  drawn  through  the  body
in  its  initial  state,  the  portion  of  the  body  cut  by  it  will  con-
tinue to  be  a  straight  line  when  the  body  is  homogeneously
strained.  For,  if  ABC  be  any  such  line,  AB  and  BC,  being

parallel  to  one  line  in  the  initial,  remain  paiallcl  to  one  lino  in
the  altered,  state ;  and  therefore  remain  in  the  same  straight
line  with  one  another.  Thus  it  follows  that  a  plane  remains
.  a  plane,  a  parallelogram  a  parallelogram,  and  a  parallelepiped
a  parallelepiped.

157.  Hence,  also,  similar  figures,  whether  constituted  by
actual  portions  of  the  substance,  or  mere  geometrical  sur&ces^
or  straight  or  curved  lines  passing  through  or  joining  certain
portions  or  points  of  the  substance,  similarly  situated'  (i.e.,
having  corresponding  parameters  parallel)  when  altered  ac-
cording to  the  altered  condition  of  the  body,  remain  similar
and  similarly  situated  among  one  another.

168.  The  lengths  of  parallel  lines  of  the  body  remain  in
the  same  proportion  to  one  another,  and  hence  all  are  altered
in  the  same  proportion.  Hence,  and  from  §  156,  we  infer  that
any  plane  figure  becomes  altered  to  another  plane  figure  which

^ i^  -o  l  y  Google

laS]  KIMSMATICS.  117

^  a  diminlsbed  or  magnified  orthosimphxfi  lodection  of  the  fiist

,  «  J .J,  i«. • « •  .  ofbomo-

on  tome  plane.  For  example,  if  aa  ellipse  be  altered  mto  a  ireneou^
cude,  its  principal  axes  become  radii  at  right  angles  to  one
another.

The  elongation  of  the  body  along  any  line  is  the  proportion
■which  the  addition  to  the  distance  between  any  two  points  iu
that  line  bears  to  their  primitive  distance.

159.  Every  orthogonal  projection  of  an  ellipse  is  an  ellipse
(the  case  of  a  circle  being  included).  Hence,  and  from  §  158,
we  see  that  an  ellipse  remains  an  ellipse ;  and  an  ellipsoid  le-
mains  a  suifiice  of  which  every  plane  section  is  an  ellipse;
that  is,  renuuns  an  ellipsoid.

A  plane  curve  remainB  (§  156)  a  plane  enrve.  A  system  of
two  or  of  three  straight  lines  of  refisienoe  (Oartasian)  remains
a  redalineal  system  of  lines  of  refeienoe;  but,  in  general,  a
rectangular  system  beoomes  oblique.

be  the  equation  of  an  ellipse  referred  to  any  rectilineal  conjugate
axes,  in  the  substance,  of  the  body  in  its  initial  state.  Tiot  a  and
/3  be  the  proportions  in  which  lines  respectively  parallel  to  OX
and  OY  &rQ  altered.  Thus,  if  we  call  ^  and  ij  the  altered  values
of  X  and  y,  we  have

Stenoe  7^\*  —

{any  (/J6)

which  also  is  the  equation  of  an  ellipse,  refi  rred  to  oblique  axes
at,  it  nuiv  be,  a  differeut  angle  to  one  another  from  that  of  the
given  axes,  in  the  initial  condition  of  the  body.

v'  z'

Orsgsio,let  i^^d'^c*"^

be  the  equatioa  of  an  eUipsoid  referred  to  three  conjugate  diar
metral  planes,  as  oblique  or  rectangular  planes  of  reference,  in  the
initial  condition  of  the  body.  Let  a,  fi,  y  he  the  proportion
in  which  lines  parallel  to  OX,  OTf  02  are  altered;  so  that  if
^> {  be  the  altered  values  of y,  s^  we  have

^mox,  n^fijf,  l^fh

Digitized  by  Google

118

P&BUUINAEY.

[159.

PropevtiM

OtlHNDO*

Btisin
ellijMoU.

which  is  the  equation  of  au  ellipsoid,  referred  to  conjugate  dia-
metral planes,  altered  it  maybe  in  mutual  inclination  from  those
of  the  given  pliuxes  of  reference  in  the  initial  condition  of  the
bod/.

160.  The  ellipsoid  which  any  snrftice  of  the  body  initially
spherical  becomes  iu  the  altered  condition,  may,  to  avoid  cir-
cumlocutions»  be  called  the  strain  ellipsoid.

161.  In  any  absolutely  unrestricted  homogeneous  strain  there
are  three  directions  (the  three  principal  axes  of  the  strain  ellip-
soid), at  right  angles  to  one  another,  which  remain  at  right
angles  to  one  another  in  the  altered  condition  of  the  body
(§  158).  Along  one  of  these  the  elongation  is  greater,  and
along  another  less,  than  aloDg  any  other  direction  in  the  body.
Along  the  remaining  one,  the  elongation  is  leas  than  in  any
other  line  in  the  plane  of  itself  and  the  first  mentioned,  and
greater  than  along  any  other  line  in  the  plane  of  itself  and  the
second.

Note. — Contraction  is  to  be  reckoned  as  a  negative  elongation:
the  maximum  elongation  of  the  precoding  enunciation  may  be
a  minimum  contraction:  the  minimum  t^longation  may  be  a
maximum  contraction.

162.  The  ellipsoid  into  which  a  sphere  becomes  altered  may
be  au  ellipsoid  of  revolution,  or,  as  it  is  called,  a  spheroid,  pro-
late, or  oblate.  There  is  thus  a  maximum  or  mininuim  elonga-
tion along  the  axis,  and  equal  minimum  or  maximum  elongation
along  all  lines  perpendicular  to  the  axis*

Or  it  may  be  a  sphere ;  in  which  case  the  elongations  are
equal  in  all  directions.  The  effect  is,  in  this  case,  merely  an
alteration  of  dimensions  without  change  of  figure  of  any  part.
chjMijseof The  original  volume  (sphere)  ia  to  the  new  (ellipsoid;  evi-
dently ad  1  :  a/Jy.

Aamiof»
Slmin.

163.  The  principal  axes  of  a  strain  are  the  principal  axes
of  the  ellipsoid  into  wliich  it  converts  a  sphere.  The  principal
elongations  of  a  strain  are  the  elongations  in  the  direction  of  its
principal  axes.

Digitized  by  Google

164.]  KINEMATICS.  IIU

16C  When  the  pontidn  of  the  principal  axes,  and  the  maoni-  ^^tion

»  *  *  w and  ctiniiKO

tadea  of  the  principal  elongations  of  a  strain  are  giyen»  the  ^'^^-iUf
elongation  of  any  line  of  the  hody,  and  the  alteration  of  angle  ^  ^Mj.
between  any  two  lines,  may  he  obviously  determined  by  a  sim-
ple geouietrieal  construction,

Analytically  thus: — let  a— 1,^-1,  y-1  denote  the  principal
elongations,  so  that  a,  j8,  y  may  be  now  the  ratios  of  altenitiou
along  the  three  principal  axes,  as  we  used  them  formerly  fur  the
ratios  for  any  three  oblique  or  rectangular  lines.  Let  /,  m,  n
be  the  direction  cosines  of  any  line^  with  reference  to  the  three
iniocLpal  axes.  Thu%

Ir,  mr,  ur

being  tlie  three  initial  co-ordinates  of  a  point  1]  at  a  distance
0/*=  r,  from  the  orii,'in  in  the  direction  I,  m,  n;  the  co-ordinates
of  the  same  point  of  the  body,  with  reference  to  the  same  rect-
angnlar  ascesy  become,  in  the  altered  state,

tJr,  fimr,  ywr,
Heoee  the  altered  length  of  OP  is

end  therefore  the  "elongation"  of  the  body  in  that  diixx;tiou  ia

For  hievi^,  let  this  he  denoted  by 1,  i«.
let  f=(aT  +  )3'm"  +  /n')i.

The  directLon  cosines  of  OF  in  its  altered  position  are

al fim  yn

andOieraforo  the  an^eaXOP,  TOP,  JOP  axe  altered  to  having
their  oostnes  of  these  values  respectively,  from  having  them  of
the  values

Tbn  oosme  of  the  ang^  between  sny  two  lines  OP  and  OP',
specified  in  the  initial  condition  of  the  body  by  the  direction
cosines vC,  n\  is

27  +  mm'  -i-  mi',
in  the  initisl  condition  cf  the  body,  and  becomes

a*fl'  +  ft' mm'  +  y'na

in  the  altered  condition.

Digitized  by  Google

120  PRBLDIIHAST.  [165.

CThangg^of  ^ 165.  With  the  same  data  the  alteration  of  angle  between
Sodx! any  two  planes  of  the  body  may  also  be  easily  detenninedi
either  geometrically  or  analytically.

Let  m,  n  be  the  ooemee  of  the  angke  whidi  a  jdane  makee
with  the  planM  YOZ,  ZOX,  ZOT,  rMpectively,  in  the  initial
oondition  of  the  body.  The  eflfeeto  of  the  change  being  the  eame
on  ell  panUel  phmes,  we  may  Bappoee  the  plane  in  qocBtion  to
paai  thxouj^  0;  and  therefore  its  equation  wiU  be

Ix  + 7iz  =  0.

In  the  altered  condition  of  the  body  we  shall  have,  as  before^

i^tae,  C^yt,

for  tlio  altered  co-ordinates  of  any  point  initially  a;,  y,  z.  Hence
tho  equation  of  the  altered  plane  is

a-  y

Bnt  the  planes  of  refei'ence  are  still  rectangular,  according  to  our
present  supposition.  Hence  the  cosines  of  the  inclinations  of
the  plane  in  question,  to  YOZ^  ZOX^  XOY,  in  the  altered  con-
dition of  the  body,  are  altered  firom m,  n  to

I m  n
^'  W

respectively,  where  for  brevity

If  we  have  a  second  plane  similarly  specified  by  f»',  n',  in  the
initial  condition  of  the  body,  the  cosine  of  the  ang^  between  the
two  planes,  which  is

in  the  initial  condition,  becomes  altered  to

W mm'  nn'

Coniaiitur-  166.  Returning  to  elongations,  and  considering  that  these  are
generally  different  in  different  directions,  we  perceive  that  all
lines  through  any  point,  in  which  the  elongations  have  any  one

Digitized  by  Google

166.]  KIKEBIA.TIC&  121

Tolue  mtermediate  between  the  greatest  and  leasts  must  lie  on  conicai  rar.

,  ,  race  of  equal

a  detenninate  conical  stuface.  This  is  easuy  proved  to  be  in  ekm^iiaa.
general  a  cone  of  the  second  degree.

For,  in  a  doeetion  denoted  hy  direction  cosines  lfm,n,  m
have

where  {  denotes  the  ratio  of  elongatien,  intermediate  between  a
the  greatest  and  y  the  least  This  is  the  eqoation  of  a  cone  of
the  aecond  degree^  i,m,n  being  the  direction  cosines  of  a  gene-
rating Una

167.  Ill  one  particulur  case  tliis  cone  becomes  two  planes.  Two  planes
the  planes  of  the  circular  sections  of  the  strain  ellipsoid,  tortion,

TiCt  ^*^« The  preceding  equation  becomes
aV  +  yV-)8'(l-m')  =  0,
or,  since  1  -  m'  ^  ^  +  n',

(a«_^')i«-(^_/)n'  =  0.
The  first  member  being  the  product  of  two  factors,  the  equation
is  satisfied  by  putting  either  ^  0,  and  therefore  the  eqoation  re-
preaents  the  two  planes  whose  equations  are

J(a"-)f)l  +  »(j8«-/)*  =  0,
and  /(a'-^i-nO'-y')**©,
respectavdy.

This  is  the  case  in  which  the  given  elongation  is  equal  ^*J[JJ*
to  that  alone:  the  mean  principal  axis  of  the  strain  ellipsoid.  »pciioniof
The  two  planes  are  planes  tlirough  the  mean  principal  a.xis  of  •'I'P^"^
the  ellipsoid,  equally  inclined  on  the  two  sides  of  either  of  the
other  axes. The  lines  along  which  the  elongation  is  equal  to
the  mean  principal  elongation,  ;iU  lie  in,  or  parallel  to,  either
of  these  two  planes. This  is  easily  proved  as  follows^  without
any  analytical  investigation.

168.  Let  the  ellipse  of  the  annexed  diagram  represent  the

section  of  the  etrtan  ellipsoid  through  the  greatest  and  least

principal  axes.  Let  S'OS,  TOT  he  the
two  diameters  of  this  ellipse,  which  are
enual  to  the  mean  principal  axis  of  the
ellipsoid.  P'very  phine  tliroui,di  0,  per-
pendicular to  the  plane  of  the  diagram,
cuts  the  ellipsoid  in  an  ellipse  of  which

Digitized  by  Google

X22

PBBUMINABT.

[168.

Distortion
in  parailel
pianos  with'
out  ctuuiKe

Two  planes  ODG  principal  axis  is  the  diameter  in  which  it  cuts  the  ellipse  of
tor^o^ the  diagram,  and  the  other,  the  mean  principal  diameter  of  the
^gw^  ellipoid. Hence  a  plane  through  eitiier  iSST,  or  TT^  perpen-
eUiiwoidf ^^^u^^  ^ plane  of  the  diagram,  eutB  the  ellipsoid  in  an
ellipse  of  which  the  two  principal  axes  are  equal,  that  is  to  say,
in  a  circle.  Hence  the  elongations  along  all  lines  in  either  of
these  planes  are  equal  to  the  elongation  along  the  mean  princi-
pal axis  of  the  strain  ellipsoid

169.  The  consideration  of  the  circular  sections  of  the  strain
ellipsoid  is  highly  instructive,  and  leads  to  important  views
with  reference  to  the  analysis  of  the  most  general  character  of
a  strain.  Firsts  let  us  suppose  there  to  be  no  alteration  of
Yolume  on  the  whole,  and  neither  elongation  nor  contraction
along  the  mean  prindpal  am  That  is  to  say,  let  fi^X^

and7«i  (§1G2).

Let  OX  and  OZ  be  the  directions  of  elongation  a— 1  and

contraction  1  -  ^  respectively.  Let  A  be  any  point  of  the

body  iu  its  primitive  condition,
and  the  same  point  of  the
altered  body,  so  that  0A=  aOA.

Now,  if  we  take  00=  (9.1,,
and  if  be  the  position  of  that
point  of  the  body  which  was  in
the  position  0  initially,  we  shall

have  0(7  s  -  0(7,  and  therefore

00^^ OA*  Hence  the  two  tri-
angles CO  A  and  C,OA^  are  equal  and  similar.

Hence  CA  experiences  no  alteration  of  length,  but  takes
the  altered  position  GA^  in  the  altered  position  of  the  body.

Similarly,  if  we  measure  on  XO  produced,  OA'  and  OA'  equal
respectively  to  0^1  and  OA  ,  we  find  that  the  line  C  A'  exj^eri-
enccs  no  alteratiuii  iu  length,  but  takes  the  altered  position  CA'.

Consider  now  a  plane  of  the  body  initially  through  CA  per-
pendicular to  the  plane  of  the  diagram,  wliich  will  be  altered
into  a  plane  through also  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of

Initial  and
altvedpoai*
tionof  liim
oTnodoin*

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

169.]

KINEKAnCS,

128

the  diagram. All  lines  mitiaUy  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  Initial  and
the  diagram  remain  so,  and  remain  unaltered  in  length.  AC  tion  of  li^s
has  just  been  proved  to  remain  unaltered  in  length. Hence  %iS£^'
^  158)  all  lines  in  the  plane  we  have  just  drawn  remain  un-
altered in  length  and  in  mutual  inclination. Similarly  we  see
that  all  lines  in  a  plane  through  CA\  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  the  diagram,  altering  to  a  plane  through  CA'^,  per«
pendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  diagram,  remain  unaltered  in
length  and  in  mutual  mciination,

170.  The  precise  character  of  the  strain  we  have  now  under
consideration  will  he  elucidated  by  the  following: — Produce
CO,  and  take  OC  and  OC'  respectively  equal  to  OC  and  OC^*
Join  CA,  CA',  C;A^  and  C/^/,  by  piain  and  dotted  lines  as
in  the  diagram.  Then  we  see  that  the  rhombus  GACAl  (plain
lines)  of  the  body  in  its  initial  state  becomes  the  rhombus
C^A^ClAl  (dotted)  in  the  altered  condition.  Now  imagine
the  body  thus  strained  to  be  moved  as  a  rigid  body  (t.e.,
with  its  state  of  strain  kept  unchanged)  till  A^  coincides
with  ^l,  and  6'/  with  C,  kuepiug  all  the  lincb  u£  the  diagram
still  in  the  same  plane. A[G^  will  take  a
position  in  CA  produced,  as  shown  in  the
new  diagram,  and  tlio original and  the
altered  parallelogram  will  be  on  the  same
base  AC\  aud  between  the  same  parallels
AC  and  CA]^  and  their  other  sides  will  be
equally  inclined  on  the  two  sides  of  a  per-
pendicular to  these  parallels.  Hence,  irre-
flpectively  of  any  rotation,  or  other  absolute  motion  of  the  body
not  involving  change  of  form  or  dimensions,  tiie  strain  under  con*
sideration  may  be  produced  by  holding  &st  and  unaltered  tiie
plane  of  the  body  through  A  C  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
the  diagram,  and  making  every  plane  parallel  to  it  slide,  keep-
ing the  same  distance,  through  a  space  proportional  to  this
diistancc  {/.  e.,  different  planes  parallel  to  the  fixed  plane  shdu
through  spaces  proportional  to  their  distances).

171. This  kind  of  strain  is  called  a  simple  shear. The  simple
plane  of  a  shear  is  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  uridistorted
planes,  and  parallel  to  the  lines  of  their  relative  motion.  It

Digitized  by

124  PBEUMIMARY.  [171.

SLmpie has  (1)  thu  property  that  one  set  of  parallel  planes  remain
each  unaltered  in  itself;  (2)  that  another  set  of  parallel  planes

remain  each  unaltered  in  itself.  This
other  set  is  found  when  the  first  set  and
the  degree  or  amount  of  shear  are  given,
thus : — Let  CC^  be  the  motion  of  one
point  of  one  plane,  relative  to  a  plane
KL  held  fixed — the  diagram  being  iu  a
plane  of  the  shear.  Bisect  CO^  in
Draw  NA  perpendicular  to  it.  A  plane
perp^dicular  to  the  plane  of  the  dia-
gram,  initially  through  AC,  and  finally  through  AC^  remains
unaltered  in  its  dimensions.

172.  One  set  of  parallel  undistorted  plaues,  and  the  amount
of  their  relative  parallel  shifting  having  been  given,  we  have
just  seen  how  to  find  the  other  set.  The  shear  may  be  other*
wise  viewed,  and  considered  as  a  shifting  of  this  second  set  of
parallel  planes,  relative  to  any  one  of  them.  The  amount  of
ibis  relative  shifting  is  of  course  equal  to  that  of  the  first  sel^
relatively  to  one  of  them.

173.  The  principal  axes  of  a  shear  arc  the  lines  of  maxi-
mum elongation  and  of  maximum  contraction  respectively.
They  may  be  found  from  the  preceding  construction  (§  171),
thus : — In  tlie  plane  of  the  shear  bisect  the  obtuse  and
acute  angles  between  the  planes  destined  not  to  become  de-
formed. The  former  bisecting  line  is  the  principal  axis  of
elongation,  and  the  latter  is  the  principal  axis  of  contraction,
in  their  initial  positions.  The  former  angle  (obtuse)  becomes
equal  to  the  latter,  its  supplement  (acute),  in  the  altered  con-
dition of  the  body,  and  the  lines  bisecting  the  altered  angles
are  the  principal  axes  of  the  strain  in  the  altered  hody.

Otherwise,  taking  a  plane  of  shear  for  the  plane  of  the
diagram^  let  AB  he  a  line  in  which  it  is  cut  by  one  of  either

set  of  parallel  planes  of  no  distortion.
On  any  portion  AB  of  this  as  diameter,
describe  a  semicircle.  Through  C,  its
miiidle  point,  draw,  by  the  preceding
construction,  CD  the  initial,  and  CE

Digitized  by  Go

173.1  KINBBIATIC&  125

the  fiual,  position  of  an  nnstretched  line. Join  DA,  DB,
EE. DA ,  DB  are  the  initial,  and  EA,  EB  the  final,  positions
of  the  piindpal  axes.

17^  The  ratio  of  a  shear  is  the  ratio  of  elongation  or  con-  Hnuureoc
traction  of  its  principal  Uxes.  Thus  if  one  principal  axis  is
elongated  in  the  ratio  1  :a»  and  the  other  therefore  (§  169)  con-
tracted in  the  ratio  a  :  1,  a  is  called  the  ratio  of  the  shear.  It
will  be  convenient  generally  to  reckon  this  as  the  ratio  of
elongation ;  that  is  to  say,  to  make  its  numerical  measure
greater  than  unity.

In  the  dia^am  of  §  173,  the  ratio  of  DB  to  EB,  or  o(  EA  to
DA,  is  the  ratio  of  the  shear.

175.  The  amount  of  a  shear  is  the  amount  of  relative
motion  per  unit  distance  between  planes  of  no  distortion.

It  is  easily  proved  that  this  is  e(iual  to  the  excess  of  the
ratio  of  the  shear  above  its  rcciprocaL

1  '^a
Since  DC  A  =  WBA,  und  Uu  DBA  =  -  we  have  tan  DC  A  -  .

a  a  —  1

Bat DE^  2Cir  tui  DCy^  2eircot  DCA.

176.  The  planes  of  no  distortion  in  a  simple  shear  arc  k  i  r  v  lai
dearly  the  drcular  sections  of  the  strain  ellipsoid.  In  the  t>^f  a
ellipeoid  of  this  case,  be  it  remembered,  the  mean  axis  remains
unaltered,  and  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  greatest  and

the  least  axis.

177.  If  we  now  suppose  all  lines  perpendicular  to  the  plane  ^f/^ii!'"'*
of  the  shear  to  be  elongated  or  contracted  in  any  proportion,

without  altering  lengths  or  angles  in  the  plane  of  the  shear,  combined.

and  if,  lastly,  we  suppose  every  line  in  tlie  body  to  be  elongated

or  contracted  in  some  other  fixed  ratio,  we  have  clearly  {§  161)

the  most  general  possible  kind  of  strain. Thus  if  «  be  the  ratio

of  the  simple  shear,  for  which  case  9, 1,  ^  are  the  three  principal

8

ratios,  and  if  we  elongate  lines  perpendicular  to  its  plane  in  the

Digui^uu  uy  Google

126  FBBUiailABT.  [177.

Bii.  nr.  Him  ratio  1  I  fii,  witlioiit  any  otlier  change,  we  have  a  strain  of
tion.  and which  the  principal  ratios  are

expansion,  *  *

combined.  1

8,  in.  -  ,
S

If,  lastlj,  we  elongate  all  lines  in  the  latio  1 :  n»  we  have  a
stiaiii  in  which  the  principal  ratioe  are

n
9  '

where  it  is  dear  that  ns,  nm,  and  j  may  have  any  valaes

whatever.  It  is  of  coarse  not  nece^^f^ary  tlint  nm  be  the  mean
principal  ratio.  Whatever  they  are,  if  we  call  them  a,  A  7  re-
spectively, we  have

-  ;ii»V»y;  andm=^.

Va7

astoi^^ 178.  Hence  any  strain  (9, 0, 7)  whatever  may  be  viewed  as
compounded  of  a  uniform  dilatation  in  all  directions,  of  linear

ratio  Very,  snperimpoeed  on  a  simple  elongation  ^

direction  of  the  principal  axis  to  which  /3  refers,  superimposed
on  a  simple  shear,  of  ratio  (or  of  amount  —  y^^)
in  the  plane  of  the  two  other  principal  axes.

179.  It  is  clear  that  these  three  elementary  component

strains  may  be  applied  in  any  other  order  as  well  as  that
stated.  Thus,  if  tiic  simple  elongation  is  made  first,  the  body
thus  altered  must  get  just  the  same  shear  in  planes  perpen-
dicular to  the  line  of  •  Imigation,  as  the  oriq-inally  unaltered
body  gets  when  the  ordt  r  first  stated  is  followed.  Or  the
dilatation  may  be  first,  then  the  elongation,  and  finally  the
shear,  and  so  on.

Dispinpo- 180.  In  the  preceding  sections  on  strains,  we  have  con-

b(Sy,  rii^d  sldered  the  alterations  of  lengths  of  lines  of  the  body,  uiu\  of

or  not.  ono  i i ,  i  •  11  /.  • ,  11  •

ixjint^of angles  between  lines  and  planes  of  it ;  and  we  nave,  in  parti-
beldflxed.  cular  cases,  founded  on  particular  suppositions  (the  principal
axes  of  the  strain  remaining  fixed  in  direction,  §  169,  or  one

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

KnrSKATICSL

127

of  either  set  of  undistorted  planes  in  a  simple  shear  remain-  Dispiaoe-
inor  fixed,  S  170),  considered  the  actual  displacements  of  parts

o  '  <f  /'  ^  sr  r  or  not,  one

of  the  bodv  from  their  on'fnnal  positions. But  to  complete

,  ^  *^ which  IS

the  kinematics  of  a  non-rigid  solid,  it  is  necessary  to  take  a
more  general  view  of  the  relation  between  displacements  and
strains.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  UB  to  suppose  one  point  of
the  body  to  remain  fixed,  as  it  is  easy  to  see  tbe  eifect  of  snpcr-
imposing  upon  any  motion  with  one  point  fixed,  a  motion  of
tianalatioii  without  strain  or  rotation*

181.  Let  OS  therefore  suppose  one  point  of  a  body  to  be
held  fixed,  and  any  displacement  whatever  given  to  any  point
or  points  of  it,  subject  to  the  condition  that  the  whole  substance
if  strained  at  all  is  homogeneously  strained.

Let  OXy  OTf  OZ  be  any  three  rectangular  axes,  fixed  with
reference  to  the  initial  position  and  oondition  of  the  })ody.  Let
flc^  y, «  be  the  initial  co-ordinates  of  any  point  of  the  body,  and
x^,  y,,  2,  be  the  co-onUnates  of  the  same  point  of  the  altered  body,
with  reference  to  tboee  axes  «ti^^<Mr*g«M*-  The  condition  that  the
strain  is  homogeneons  Uuoa^oat  is  expressed  by  the  following
eiiiiatians

ar,  =  [Xj-]  X  4-  [Xy]  y  +  [Xz\  z,  ]

y^  =  [Yx\x^[Yy]y^.[Yz\z,  [  (1)

where  [Xx],  [Xy],  etc.,  are  nine  quantitiesy  cf  absolutely  arbi-
trary Tallies,  the  aame  for  all  Taluea  of  a:,  2^,  «.

[Xx]y  [Yx],  [Zx]  denote  the  three  final  co-ordinates  of  a  point
originally  at  unit  distance  along  OA',  from  0,  They  are,  of
course,  proportoial  to  the  direction-cosines  cf  the  altered  posi-
tion of  the  line  primitively  coinddix^  with  OX,  Similarly  for
[Xyl  [Yyl  [Zy\  etc;

Let  it  he  reqidred  to  find,  if  possible,  a  IiM  of  the  body  which
unaltered  in  direction,  during  the  change  specified  by
[A>],  etc.  Let  Xj  y^  z,  and  x,,  y^,  z^,  be  the  co-ordinates  of  the
primitiTC  and  altered  porition  cf  a  point  in  snch  a  lioe.  We

must  have  -J=^a~'s;l-).c,  where  c  is  the  elongatioa  of  the
X y 9 '  ^

line  in  question.

Digitized  by  Google

PREUMINART.

[181.

Tims  we  have  a;,  =  (1  +  e)j!,  etc.,  and  therefore  if  ^  =  1  +  e

[}x>  +  {[ry]-i7}.y  +[r^>  =  0, }  (2)

+[-24f]y  +  {[Z«]-i,}»  =  0.  '

From  these  equations,  hy  eliminating  the  ratios  a;  :  y  : «  according
to  the  well-known  ulgebniic  process,  we  find

(tXa;]-„)([ry]-,)([^]-,)

-  [rz][Zi;]([X.']  --n)-  [Zx]  [A*.]  ([  Yy]  -rj)-  [Xy][Y^]{[Zz]  - 1,)
+  [Xz]  lTx][Zi/]  +  [Ay]  [r«]  [Zx]  0.

ThiB  cuino  equatLon  is  neoesBanly  aatisM  1>7  at  least  one  real
value  of  1^  and  the  two  othen  are  dtfaer  both  real  or  both  ima^
ginafj.  Eaeh  real  Talue  of  i|  gLvee  a  real  solutioii  of  the  problem,
Bmoe  anjtwo  of  the  preceding  three  equations  with  it,  in  place  of
If,  determine  real  Taluea  of  the  ratios  xiyiz.  If  the  body  is
rigid  if  the  displacements  are  subject  to  the  condition  of
producing  no  strain),  we  know  (anUf  %  96)  that  there  is  just  one
line  common  to  the  body  in  its  two  positions,  the  aads  round
which  it  must  turn  to  pass  from  one  to  the  other,  except  in  the
peculiar  cases  of  no  rotation,  and  of  rotation  through  twf  rig^t
angles,  which  are  treated  below.  Hence,  in  this  case^  the  cubio
equation  has  only  one  real  root,  and  therefore  it  has  two  ima^-
naiy  roots.  The  equations  just  fbrmed  aolve  the  problem  of  finding
the  axis  of  rotation  when  the  data  are  the  actual  displacementa
of  the  points  primitively  lying  in  three  given  fixed  axes  of
reference;  OX,  07,  0Z\  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the
practical  solution  of  this  problem  is  founded  on  the  one  real  root
of  a  cubic  which  has  two  imaginary  roots.

Again,  on  the  other  hand,  let  the  given  displacement!  be
made  so  as  to  produce  a  strain  of  the  body  with  no  angokr
displacement  of  the  principal  axes  of  the  strain.  Thus  three
lines  of  the  body  remain  unchanged.  Hence  there  must  be
three  real  roots  of  the  equation  in  17,  one  for  each  such  axis;  and
the  three  lines  determined  by  tiiem  are  necessarily  at  rij^tanglea
to  mie  another.

But  if  neither  of  these  conditions  holds,  we  may  have  three
real  solutions  and  three  oblique  lines  of  directional  identity ;  or
we  may  have  only  one  real  root  and  only  one  line  of  directional
identity.

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

181.  J  KINEMATICS.  129

An  analytical  proof  of  Uieae  oondoBioiui  may  easily  be  given;  J^*^
thus  we  may  write  the  cubic  in  the  fetin—  bodr.tlsid

or  not,  ono

[Xx],  [X,j],  [.V.],_  r[ry],  [i'zU  [Zz], +  [Xy]h

,(rx],  [iv], [mi  '(^[^i,],  [^.]|  [Xz],[.\'a:]  i[rx].[r»ii

|[Z»J,  t^].  [^ijl +,'{iA»]  +  [ry]  +  [Z.])-,'  =  0  (3)

In  the  partienlar  case  of  no  atnin,  aiiioe  [^x]^  etc,  are  then
tqual,  not  merely  proportkml,  to  the  dizeotiaci  oosinea  of  three
nratoally  perpendicular  linea,  we  have  by  well-known  gBometiical
theorems

[Xr],  [X,j].  [Xz]

\[rx],[yvi{Vz]

=  l,and  []>],  [  »]j  =  etc.

Hence  the  cubie  beoomea

!-(,-,•)  {[X«]  + +  [Z»]J  - =  0,

of  which  one  roei  is  evidently  fi=^\.  This  leads  to  the  above
explained  lotational  solntiony  the  line  determined  by  the  value  1
of  If  being  the  aads  of  votation. Dividing  out  the  fiwtor  1
we  get  fi>r  the  two  remaining  roo^  the  equation

1  +  ( 1  -  [ jr«]  -  [  i>]  -  [Zzi)  + V  -  0,

whoae  roots  are  imaginary  if  the  coefficient  of  if  lies  between
4  2  and  -  2.  Now  -  3  is  evidently  its  Uad  value^  and  for  that
ease  the  roots  are  real,  eaeh  being  unity.  Here  there  is  no
rotation.  Also  -I-  2  is  its  gnaM  valne^  and  this  gives  ns  a  pair
of  valnes  each  »^  1,  of  wldoh  the  interpretation  is^  that  there  is
rotation  thioogh  two  right  anglesL  In  this  case,  as  in  general,
one  line  (the  axis  of  rotation)  is  determined  by  the  equations  (2)
with  the  value  -i- 1  f<Hr  if;  but  with  if 1  these  equationa  are
satisfied  by  any  line  perpendicular  to  the  former.

The  limiting  case  of  two  equal  roots^  when  there  is  strain,  is
an  interesting  snljeet  whioh  may  be  left  as  an  exeroisa  It
separates  the  cases  in  which  there  is  only  one  axis  of  directional
identity  from  those  in  which  there  are  three.

Let  it  nest  be  proposed  to  find  those  lines  id  the  body  whoee
elongations  are  greatest  or  least  For  this  purpose  we  must  find
the  equations  expressing  that +  y*  +  s,'  is  a  maximum,  when

+  ^-(- a*  sf*,  a  constant  Firstywehave

X*  + + = + +  Cz'  +  2  {nijz  + +  cxy)  (4),

VOL.  I.  9

Digitized  by  Google

130

FREUIUNART.

[181.

— ^  where
EX  riSi  A  =  [Xx]*  +  [  Fx]'  +  [Zx]'

.(6).

a  =  [A>]  [X^l  +  [ }  y]  [  1  ^]  -h  [^y  ]  [Zs  ]
(  ^  [Xz]  [Xx]  +  [ F;^]  [Y.t]  +  [Z« ]  [^a;]
e  =  [Xx]  [Xy]  +  [Fx]  [Fy]  +  [Zx]  [ZyJ

The  equation

As^^-Bi^+W-t-S  {ayz  ^hB»-¥ = r,'  (6),

■where  r,  is  any  constant,  represents  clearly  the  ellipsoid  which  a
spherical  surface,  radius  r,,  of  the  altered  body,  would  become  if
the  body  were  restored  to  its  primitive  condition.  The  problem
of  making  a  maximum  when  r  is  a  given  coiiiitaut,  leads  to  the
following  equations : —

aP+Z+^^r*  (7),

On  the  other  hand,  the  problem  of  making  r  s  mazinnmi  or
rauunniiii  whan  is  given,  that  is  to  saj,  the  problem  of  finding
mftTimnm  and  minimnm  diameters,  or  principal  axes,  of  the
ellipaoid  (6),  leads  to  these  same  two  differential  equations  (8),
and  inilj  diflfon  in  having  equation  (6)  instead  of  (7)  to  oomplete
tiie  detormination  of  the  aXiwlato  Talnes  of  y,  and  t;  TL&om
the  ifttioi  miff  I  z  will  be  the  Mme  in  one  problem  as  in  tlie
other;  and  tiieiefoire  the  dxrediUm»  determined  axe  thoae  of  the
prinoiiial  axes  of  the  ellipaoid  (6).  We  know,  therefiwe,  by  the
propertieB  of  the  ellipioid,  that  there  are  three  real  eolntioiiiy
and  that  the  ^reetiooB  oif  the  three  radii  eo  determined  aie
mntoally  rectangular.  Hie  ordinaiy  method  (Lagrange's)  for
dealing  with  the  diflhrential  equations,  being  to  multiply  one  of
them  bj  aa  arbitraiy  multiplier,  then  add,  and  equate  the  oo-
eiBeienta  of  the  separate  diffeientiala  to  lero,  gives,  if  we  take
aa  tiie  aibitnuy  multiplier,  and  the  first  of  the  two  eqoattona
tlie  one  multiplied  by  it,

(A-rfjiX -^cy +  hz  =  0,  »

e»-^(B-ri)y  +a5=0,  \  (9)
Ix +at/+  {C  -rj)z  =  0.  >

We  may  find  what  iy  meaaa  if  we  multiply  the  firrt  of  these  by

Digitized  by  Go

181.]  KINEMATICS.  131

the  seoond  by and  the  third  by  z,  and  add;  beoanse  we  thus  DiipiMe-

, .  mcnt  of  •

obtain  body,  rigid

or  not.  one

^+  JB^-i-  W+  2  (ays  -^hx^  cay)  -  if  (**+ a*) = ^»  jSkii^i
or  r^'-V'^^O,  WdiSd.

which  gives  '"(r)'

ElimiimtinE:  the  mtios  .t :  y.  z  from  (9),  by  the  tunial  method,  W6
have  the  well-known  determinant  cubic

(il-i,)(ir-,)(a-v)-a*(ii-'f)-*'(^-'f)-A<?--v)  +  2a6«  =  a...{ll),

of  which  the  three  roots  are  known  to  be  all  real  Any  one  of
the  three  roots  if  used  forij^  In  (9),  harmoniaes  these  three  equa-
tions for  the  trae  ratios  «:y  :s;  and,  making  the  ooeffidents  of
«,  y,  «  in  them  all  known,  allows  ns  to  detennine  fhe  required
ratios  by  uny  two  of  the  equations,  or  symmetrically  from  the
three,  by  the  proper  algebraic  processes.  Thus  we  have  only  to
determine  the  absolnte  magnitudes  of  y,  and  z,  which  (7)
enables  us  to  do  when  their  ratios  are  known.

It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  when  [Yz]  ^  [Zy\  [Zx\  =  [Xz\  and
[Xy]  =  [Yx\  equation  (3)  beeomea *  culne,  the  squares  of  whose
roots  are  the  roots  of  (11),  and  that  the  three  lines  determined
by  (2)  in  this  case  are  identical  with  those  determined  by  (9).
The  reader  will  find  it  a  good  analytical  ezercifle  to  prove  this
directly  from  the  equations.  It  is  a  necessary  consequence  of
f  163,  bebw.

We  have  precisely  the  same  problem  to  solve  when  the  question
proposed  is,  to  find  what  radii  of  a  sphere  remain  perpendicular
to  the  snr&ce  of  the  altered  figurok  This  is  obvious  when  viewed
geometrically.  The  tangent  plane  is  perpendicular  to  the  radius
when  the  radius  is  a  T«ftT!mim  or  minimum.  Therefore^  eveiy
plane  of  the  body  parallel  to  such  tangent  plane  is  perpendicular
to  the  radius  in  the  altered,  as  it  was  in  the  initial  condition.

The  analytical  investigaticii  of  the  problem,  presented  in  the
seoond  way,  is  as  ibllows : —

Let  l^x^  +  w*,y,  +  n^z^  -  0 (12)

be  the  equation  of  any  plane  of  the  altered  substance,  through
the  origin  of  co-orilinate.s,  tlie  axes  of  co-ordinatca  being  the
same  fixed  axes,  OX,  Or,  OZ,  which  we  have  used  of  late.  The
direction  cosines  of  a  perpendicular  to  it  are,  of  course,  propor-
tional to m,, If,  now,  for y,,  s^,  we  substitute  their

9—2

Digitized  by  Google

132

prelimt:7A11t.

[181.

nent  of  a
body,  rinld

or  not,  c>no
point  of
vrbich  is
bekl  Ozed.

An«l.r«1aora

Mmin  into
dlMtort  Kin

Mild  roU-

valuoR,  as  in  (1),  in  terms  of  tlie  co-oixUnates  wliicb  tlie  samo
point  of  the  substance  had  initially,  we  find  the  equation  of  the
same  plane  of  the  body  in  its  initial  positiony  whicb|  when  the
terms  are  grouped  properl/,  is  this —

VSXx]  +  m,[Tx\ + nJi^]\x  +  ft[Xy]  +  «,[  Fy]  +  nJi^]\^

+  {l^[Xz]  + r«]  +  7i,[Z2]} «  =  0  (13).

!rhe  direction  cosines  of  the  peipendicular  to  the  phuie  are  pro-
portiooal  to  the  co-effidents  d  x,  z.  Now  tibSM  m  to  be  the
direction  cosines  of  the  tame  line  of  the  subetanoe  as  was  altered
into  the  line  /,  :  m, :  n,.  Hence,  if  ^ :  m  :  n  are  quantities  propor-
tional to  the  direction  oonnes  of  this  line  in  its  initial  poaition,
we  must  have

l^Xx]  +  m,[  Yx]  +  n,[Zx]  »  ^

/.[Xy] m.[  Yy]  ^  n.[^y]  « 19m  >  (U),

l,[Xz]  +m,[re]  »iti»  J

■where  17  is  arbitrary.  Suppose,  to  fix  the  ideas,  that  ,  m,,  n,
are  the  co-ordinates  of  a  certain  point  of  tlic  substance  u\  its
altered  state,  and  that  I,  7»,  n  are  j)roix)rtioual  to  tlic  initial  c<>
ordinabes  of  the  same  point  of  the  substance.  Then  wc  bhall
have,  by  the  f untlamental  equations,  the  expi*essions  for  /, ,  m, ,  « ^
in  terms  of  /,  m,  n.  Using  these  in  the  first  members  of  (14),
and  takinf^  advantage  of  the  abbre\'iated  notation  (5),  we  have
precisely  the  same  equations  for  I,  m^n  »&  (9)  for  x,  y,  z  above.

182.  From  the  preceding  analjraiB  it  follows  that  any  homo-
geneouB  Btiain  whatever  applied  to  a  body  geneialfy  ehangee  a
sphere  of  the  body  into  an  ellipsoid,  and  causes  tiie  latter  to
rotate  aboat  a  definite  axis  through  a  definite  angle.  In  par-
ticakr  cases  the  sphere  may  remain  a  sphere.  Also  there
may  be  no  rotation.  In  the  general  case,  when  there  is  no
rotiition,  there  are  three  directions  in  the  body  (the  axes  of  the
ellipsoid)  which  remain  fixed  ;  when  there  is  rotation,  therp
are  j^'encrally  three  such  directions,  but  not  rectangular.  Some-
times, however^  there  is  but  one.

188.  When  the  axes  of  the  ellipsoid  are  lines  of  the  body

whose  directions  do  not  change,  the  strain  is  said  to  be  pure,

or  unaccompanied  by  rotation.  The  strains  we  have  already
considered  were  more  general  than  this,  being  pure  strains

Digitized  by  Google

183.]  KINEMATICS.  133

aocantpaoied  hy  rotatioiL  We  proceed  to  find  the  analytical  Ponatniii.
conditions  of  the  existence  of  a  pure  strain.

Let  OS,  OH',  03"  be  the  tlirce  principal  axes  of  the  8traiii|
and  let  m,  n, l\m',n\ T,  m",  n",

he  their  direction  cosines.  Let  a,  a',  a"  be  the  principal  «lottg»*
tlona  Then,  if  ^,  he  the  position  of  a  pcnnt  cf  the  nn-
altersd  body,  with  reference  to  0B>  OB,\  OB",  its  podtion  in
the  body  when  sltered  will  be  a^,  a'T*  But  if  ib,  ^  she
its  initial,  and  x,,  y,,  its  final,  positions  with  reference  to
OY,  OZ,  we  have

^»&+my+*Mi,  f  «etc.,  f'-etc  (15),

and x^  =  la$  +  ta'$'  +  Z  a  ^ y,  =  etc., -  etc

Fcr  4  ^'r  i"  substitute  their  values  (1 5),  snd  we  have  «|,  $f^,  »^  in
tenns  of y,  s^  expremcd  by  the  following  eqnalaons  i-^

Mg^itJfi  +  a'?"  +  o"  r'*)x+  (aim  +armf  +a"rm")y+{aln  +o'IV  +«f1*ii'»)  «|

p^  =  {aml+a'mr+a"mfT')x  +  {am}  +a'm'^  +  o"  w"«)y+(omn  +  a'mV+a"m'V')x

Hence^  comparing  with  (1)  of  {  181,  we  have

[Xx]  =  a?  +  ar+a"r»  eta;  \

[Zfj]  =  [  Yz]  =  amn  +  aWn'  +  a' WV,  etc.  j ^

In  these  equations,  I,  l\  l'\  m,  ni,  m",  n,  n\  n",  are  deducible
from  three  inde[)endent  elements,  the  three  angular  co-ordinatee
(S  1^*^'  above)  of  a  ngid  body,  of  which  one  point  is  held  fixed ;
and  therefore,  along  with  a,  a',  a",  constituting  in  all  six  in-
dependent elements,  may  be  determined  so  as  to  make  the  six
members  of  these  equations  have  any  six  prescribed  values.
Hence  the  conditions  necessary  and  sufficient  to  insure  no  rotation
are

t-^]  =  [r4  [A«]  =  [M  [Ay]  =  £rx]  (18).

184.  If  a  body  experience  a  succession  of  strains,  each  im-  fompoBi-
accompanied  by  rotation,  its  resulting  condition  will  generally  stnUnt.**"'*
be  producible  by  a  strain  and  a  rotation.  From  this  follows
the  remarkable  corollary  that  three  pure  strains  produced  one
after  another,  in  any  piece  of  matter,  each  without  rotation,
may  he  so  a4in8ted  as  to  leave  the  body  unstrained,  but  rotated
through  some  angle  about  some  axis.  We  shall  have,  later,
meet  impofrtant  and  interesting  applications  to  fluid  motion.

Digitized  by  Google

134  PBEUMINARY.  [184-

Comport-  which  (Chap.  II.)  will  be  ijroved  to  be  iiistaiitaiieou.slv,  or  dif-  ,
tirtti  of  pure  .  .  .  .,  ,

Btnunm fcieiitially,  irrotational  ;  but  which  may  result  in  leaving  a

whole  fluid  mass  merely  turned  round  from  its  primitive  ])osi-  I
tion,  as  if  it  had  been  a  riirid  bodv. The  f<  llowinrr  elemeniarv
geometrical  investigation,  though  not  briiii^ang  out  a  thoroughly
comprehensive  view  of  the  subject,  affords  a  rigorous  demon^
Btration  of  the  proposition,  by  proying  it  for  a  particular  case.

Let  JOB  consider,  as  above  (§  171),  a  simple  shearing  motion.
A  point  0  being  held  fixed,  suppose  the  matter  of  the  body  in
a  plane,  cutting  that  of  the  diagram  perpendicularly  in  CD,  to
move  in  this  plane  from  right  to  left  parallel  to  2>(7;  and  in
Giber  planes  parallel  to  it  let  there  be  motions  proportional  to
their  distances  from  0.  Consider  first  a  shear  from  P  to  ;
then  from  Pj  on  to  P, ;  and  let  0  be  taken  in  a  line  through

P,, perpendicular  to
CD.  During  the  ^^llear
from  P  to  Pj  a  point
Q  moves  of  course  to
Q,  throuiih  a  distance
QQi  =  P^'i- Clioose  Q  midway  between  P  and  1\,  so  that
PjQ  =  QP  -  iPjP. Now,  as  we  have  seen  above  (§  152),  the
line  of  the  body,  which  is  the  principal  axis  of  contraction  in  the
shear  from  Q  to  Q^,  is  OA,  bisecting  the  angle  QOE  at  the  be-
ginning, and  OA^,  bisecting  QfiE  at  the  end,  of  the  whole
motion  considered.  The  angle  between  these  two  lines  is  half
the  angle OQ,  that  is  to  say,  is  equal  to  PfiQ. Hence,  if  the
plane  CD  is  rotated  through  an  angle  equal  to  PfiQ,  in  the
plane  of  the  diagram,  in  the  same  way  as  the  hands  of  a  watch,
during  the  shear  from  Q  to  Q^,  or,  which  is  the  same  tiling,  the
shear  from  P  to  I\,  this  shear  will  be  effected  williout  final
rotation  of  its  principal  axes. (Imagine  the  diagram  tumeil
round  till  OA^  lies  along  OA. The  actual  and  the  newly
imagined  position  of  CD  will  show  how  this  plane  of  the  body
has  moved  during  such  non-rotalioual  shear.)

Now,  let  the  second  step,  P,  to  P.,  be  made  so  as  to  complete
the  whole  shear,  F  to  P,,  which  we  have  proposed  to  consider.
Such  second  partial  shear  may  be  made  by  the  common  shear-
ing process  parallel  to  the  new  position  (imagined  in  the  preced-

Digitized  by  Google

184.]

KDVEMATIGS.

195

ing  parenthesis)  of  CD,  and  to  make  itself  also  non-rotational,  gompod-
as  ite  piedecesaor  has  been  made,  we  must  turn  further  round,  •tniiM.
in  the  same  dixection,  through  an  angle  equal  to  QfiF^.  Thus
in  these  two  steps,  each  made  non-rotational,  we  have  turned
the  plane  CD  round  through  an  angle  equal  to  QfiQ.  But  now,
we  have  a  whole  shear  PP.;  and  to  make  this  as  one  non-rota-
tional shear,  we  must  turn  CD  through  an  angle  PftP  only,
which  is  less  than  QflQ  by  the  excess  of  P,OQ  above  QOP.
Hence  the  resultant  of  the  two  shears,  PP^,  each  sepa-

rately deprived  of  rotation,  is  a  single  shear  Pl\,  and  a  rota-
tion of  its  principal  axes,  in  the  direction  of  the  hands  of  a  watch,
through  an  angle  equal  to  QOF^-^FOQ.

185.  Make  the  two  partial  shears  each  non-rotationally.  Ke-
tnm  from  their  resultant  in  a  single  non-rotational  shear :  we
oondude  with  the  body  unstrained,  but  turned  through  the  angle
QOP^—POQ,  in  the  same  duection  as  the  hands  of  a  watch.

a:,  =  Ax  +  cy  +bz
ex  +  Bi/  +  az
bx  +  ai/  +  Cz

is  (§  183)  the  most  general  possihle  expression  for  the  displace-
ment of  any  point  of  a  body  of  which  one  point  is  held  fixed,
stnined  according  to  any  three  lines  at  right  angles  to  one
another,  as  principal  axes,  which  ai-e  kept  fixed  in  direction,
relfttively  to  the  lines  of  reference  OX,  OY,  OZ.

Similarly,  if  the  body  thus  stniined  be  i^ain  non-rotationally
strsined,  the  most  general  possible  expressions  for  a;,,  y„
the  coordinates  of  the  position  to  which y^, will  be  brought,
aie

Snhstitntang  in  tbsse^  for  y,,  s^,  their  preceding  expressions,
in  terms  of  the  primitiTe  co-ordinates^  0,  y,  s^  we  baTe  the  follow-
ing ezpteesions  for  the  ooerdinatss  of  the  position  to  which  the
point  in  question  is  brought  by  the  two  strains

= +  CjC  +  6,6)  a;  4-  (^,c  + c,jB+ ft^a)  y  +  (^,6 +  c,a  +  6,(7) «

f/j  =  {c^A  +  B^c  +  ah)x-¥{cfi  +£^B  +  a,a)  y  +  (cfi  +  B^a  4-  afi)  z

-  (b^A  +  a,c  +  Cfi)  X  +  (6,c + afi  + y  +  {pfi  +  afl  +  Cfi)  z.

Digitized  by  Google

136  PBBLIMIKABT.  [185.

Compod-  The  residtant  displacement  thus  represent<Ml  ia  not  treneniHv  of

tion  of  pure  .  .  o  J

•tniim.  the  non -rotational  character,  the  conditions  (18)  of  §  183  not

being  fulfilled,  a.s  wo  Hce  immediately.  Thus,  for  instance,  we
see  that  the  coefficient  of  y  in  the  expression  for  is  not
necessarily  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  x  in  the  expi-ession  for  y  .

Cor. — If  both  strains  are  intinitely  snmll,  tlie  resultant  displace-
ment is  a  pure  strain,  without  rotation.  For  A,  B,  C,  jB,,  (7,
are  each  infinitely  n«irly  unity,  and  o,  i,  etc.,  each  infinitely
small.  Hence,  neglectinj,'  the  products  of  these  infinitely  small
quantities  among  one  auotbor,  und  of  any  of  tliem  with  the  dilfer-
ences  between  the  fonner  and  unity,  we  liave  a  resultant  dia-
placement

af,=  A^Ax +(c  +  c,)y  +  (6  +  6J«

•t  *  ft  +  J)  «  +  (a,  'i'a)tf+C,CM,

w  hich  re|)ru3eiit8  a  pure  stiuin  unaccompanied  by  rotation.

186.  The  measuremeikt  of  rotation  in  a  strained  elastic  solid,
am  * or  in  a  moving  fluid,  is  mnch  facilitated  by  considering  sepa-
rately tlie  displacement  of  any  line  of  the  substance.  We  are

therefore  led  now  to  a  short  digression  on  the  displacement
of  a  curve,  whicli  luay  cither  belong  to  a  continuous  solid  or
fluid  mass,  or  may  be  an  elastic  cord,  given  in  any  position.
The  propositions  at  which  we  shall  arrive  are,  of  course,  appli-
cable to  a  flexible  but  inextensible  cord  (§  14,  above)  as  a
particular  case.

It  must  be  remarked,  that  the  displacements  to  be  considered
do  not  depend  merely  on  the  curves  occupied  by  the  given  line
in  its  successive  positions,  but  on  the  corresponding  points  of
these  curves.

Tn  urontiai  What  WO  shall  call  tangential  displacement  is  to  be  thus
ilmu^  reckoned: — Divide  the  undisplaced  curve  into  an  infinite  num*
ber  of  infinitely  small  equal  parts.  The  sum  of  the  tangential
components  of  the  displacements  from  all  the  points  of  division,
multiplied  by  the  length  of  each  of  the  infinitely  small  parts,
is  the  entire  tangential  displacement  of  the  curve  reckoned  aUmg
the  undisplaced  curve.  The  same  reckoniug  carried  out  in  the
displaced  curve  is  the  entire  tangential  displacement  reckoned
on  tlie  dis^ace4  curve*

Digitized  by  Google

187]  KINEMATICS.  137

187.  The  whole  tangential  displacement  of  a  curye  reckoned  TwomkM*
along  the  displaced  curve,  exceeds  the  whole  tangential  dis-  fcentwidi^
placement  reckoned  along  the  ondisplaoed  curve  by  half  the
rectangle  under  the  sum  and  difference  of  the  absolute  tenninal
displacements,  taken  as  positive  when  the  displacement  of  the
end  towards  which  the  tangential  components  are  if  positive
exceeds  that  at  the  other.  This  theorem  may  be  proved
by  a  geometrical  demonstration  which  the  reader  may  easily
supply.

Analytically  thiis : — Let  Xy  y,  z  he  the  coordinates  of  any
point,  Pj  in  the  undisplaced  curve;  y,,  those  of  P,  the
point  to  which  the  same  point  of  the  curve  is  displaced.  Let
dx,  dyj  dz  be  the  increments  of  the  three  co-ordinates  corre-
sponding to  any  infinitely  small  aroy  d!i,  of  the  first ;  so  that

sod  let  corresponding  notation  apply  to  the  corresponding
element  of  the  displaced  curve.  Let  $  denote  the  ang^  between
the  line  FP^  and  the  tangent  to  the  undisplaced  curve  tliroiigh
P  ;  so  that  we  have

A  _  «,  - ^^-^ .V,  -  ?l  dy z^-z  (Iz

where  for  brevity

i)-U«,-«)'+(y,-y)'+(,._,)')i,
being  the  ahsdnte  space  of  displacement  Hence

I>m0d9^{m^-»)dx'¥  (y^  -y)dy  + - 2)dk
Bimilariy  we  have

J)  COS  $,d$^  =  («,  -  x)dx^+  (y,  -y)  rfy,  +
and  therefore

/>O0S  ^,d!f,  -Decs  Ml  =  (»i-«)d{x^  -x)  +  iy^  -  y)d{y^  -  y)

or  DcMe^d$^-DQMedt^\d(D*),

To  find  the  difference  of  the  tangential  dkpkcements  reckoned
the  two  waysy  we  have  only  to  integrate  this  expression.  Thus
we  obtain

/Decs  $^d8^  ^JDUM  M8m{(iy  -  2)'*)  =  J(Z)"  +  2)^  (ly-jO'),
where  J/'  and  J)'  denote  the  displacements  of  the  two  ends.

Digitized  by  Google

138

PBELDHNABT.

[188.

T»ii|ce»tial
displace-
ment of  ft

Rotation
of  I*  ririrt
clowd  curve.

Tangential

ineiit  in  a

boliil,  in

t'TlliS  i)f

oomponenU

188.  The  cDtire  tangential  displacement  of  a  closed  curve
is  the  same  whether  reckoned  along  the  uodisphified  or  the
displaced  curve.

189.  The  entire  tangential  displacement  from  one  to  another
of  two  coiitcrmiuous  arca^  is  the  same  reckoned  along  either  as
along  the  other.

190.  The  entire  tangential  displacement  of  a  rigid  closed
cun-e  when  rotated  tlirougli  any  angle  about  any  axis,  is  equal
to  twice  the  area  of  its  projection  on  a  plane  perpendicular  to
the  axis,  multiplied  by  the  sine  of  the  angle.

(a)  Frop,^ThB  entire  tangential  diaplaoemeBt  roand  a  dosed
emre  of  a  homogeneously  stanuned  solid.  Is  equal  to

whore  P,  Q,  R  denote,  for  its  initial  position,  the  areas  of  its
pr«)jections  on  the  planes  YOZ^  ZOX^  XOY  respectively,  and
jSf  pf  o-  are  as  follows  : —

»-«[W|-[Xy]}.

To  [)n>ve  this,  let,  farther,

e-«[ra,]  +  tXyB.

Thus  we  have

0

z^~bx-^ay-¥Cz  +  px  —  my.

Hence,  according  to  the  previously  inveBtigated  expression,  we
have,  for  the  tangential  displaoementy  reckoned  along  the  undis*
placed  curves

j{{x^-x)dx  +  (y,  - y)dy  +  (c,  - z)dz]
=:/[Jc?{(iJt  -  1)  x«+  (Z?  -  1) y  +  (C  -  l)s'  +  2  {ayz  +  hzx-^cxy)\

+  ur  (ffdi — zd^)  ^  p  (tdx  »  xdt)  4-  ir  (xtfy  -  ydx)}.
The  first  part,  j^d[  },  vanishes  for  a  closed  cun  e.

Digitized  by  Google

190.]  KINEMATICS.  139

The  remainder  of  the  expreeaion  is  TMj|rntiai

whidi,  aocoTcUng  to  tbe  formnln  ibr  ])rojectU}fii  of  areas,  in  equal

uf  ttnlii*

For,  as  in  §  36  (a),  we  have  in  the  plane  of  xy

J(xdy~ffdx)^ff'd$,

doaUe  the  area  of  the  orthogonal  projectioii  of  the  carve  on  that
plane;  and  similarly  for  the  other  integnJs,

(b)  From  this  and  §  190,  it  follows  that  if  the  body  is  ngid,
and  therefore  only  rotationally  displaced,  if  at  all,  [Zt/]  -  [Yz]
is  equal  to  twice  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  rotation  mulUpUed  hj
the  cosine  of  the  inclination  of  the  axis  of  rotadon  to  the  line
of  reference  OX,

(c)  And  in  general  [Zt/]  -  [  Yz]  measnres  the  entire  tangential
displacement  divided  by  the  area  on  ZOT,  of  any  closed  cnrve
given,  if  a  plane  curve,  in  the  plane  TOZ,  or,  if  a  tortuous  curve,
given  so  as  to  have  sero  area  pnijections  on  ZOX  and  XOT,
The  entire  tangential  di^laoement  of  any  dosed  curve  given  in
a  plane,  A,  perpendicular  to  a  line  whose  directum  cosines  are
proportional  to  «,  p,  or,  is  equal  to  twice  its  area  multiplied  by

+  p'  4*  cr*).  And  the  entire  tangential  displacement  of  any
dosed  curre  whatever  is  equal  to  twice  the  area  of  its  projection
on  Af  multiplied  by  J{zff'  +  p'  +

In  the  tnmalbnnation  of  oo-ordinates,  ze,  p,  <r  trsnslbnn  by  the
elementary  cosine  law,  and  of  course  p'  +  o*  is  an  invariant;
that  is  to  say,  its  value  is  unchanged  by  transformatioii  from  one
set  of  rectangular  axes  to  another.

{d)  In  non-rotational  homogeneous  strain,  the  entire  tangential
dii^ilacenient  along  any  curve  from  the  fixed  point  to  (x,  y,  z),
reckoned  along  the  undisplaced  curve,  is  equal  to

l\{A-l)x*  +  {B-l)y'  +  (C-l)::^  +  2{ai/z  +  bzx  +  cxfj)),
Eeckoned  along  displaced  curve^  it  is,  from  this  and  §  187,
- 1)  «•  +  (J  - 1)  y»  +  (C  - 1)  aP  +  2 + +  «y)}
-¥  1[[{A  - 1)  a:  +  cy  + [«»+ y +0*]'

And  the  entire  tangential  displacement  from  one  |K}int  along
any  curve  to  another  i)oint,  is  indejK-ndent  of  the  curve,  i.e.,
is  the  same  along  any  number  of  conterminous  curves,  this  of

Digitized  by  Google

140  PBELDONABT.  [190.

oonrse  whether  reckoned  in  each  case  along  the  undispkoed  or

along  the  displaced  curv  e.
UHcra-  ('')  Given  the  absolute  displacement  of  every  point,  to  find  the

stniin.  Let  a,  /?,  y,  be  the  components,  relative  to  fixetl  axes,
OX,  OVf  OZ,  of  the  displacement  of  a  particle,  /*,  initially  in
the  position  .r.  z.  That  is  to  say,  let  a*  +  a,  y  +  ^,  z  +  y  be  the
co-ordinates,  in  the  strained  bodjr,  of  the  point  of  it  which  was
initially  at  z,  y,  z.

Consider  the  matter  all  round  this  [X)int  in  its  first  and  second
positions. Taking  this  point  P  as  moveable  origin,  let  ^,  17,
be  the  initial  co-ordinates  of  any  other  point  near  it^  and  1^
the  final  coordinates  of  tlie  same.

The  initial  and  tinal  co-ordinates  of  the  la-st-mentioned  pointy
with  reference  to  the  hxed  axes  OX,  0¥,  OZ,  will  be

and  tf  +  fi*%t  «+y  +  C„

jnapectiirely ;  that  is  to  say,

are  the  components  of  the  di8j)lacement  of  the  point  which  had
initially  the  co-ordinates  x  +  $,  y  -i-ij,  «  +  ^  or,  which  is  the  same
thing,  are  the  values  of  a, y,  when «  are  changed  into

»+^»  y+n*  *+t

Henoe^  hj  Taylor's  tlieorain,

. . da  . da da  ^

/  r^'^y  t.'^y  „.^y J-

the  higher  powers  and  prrnlucts  of  rj,  ^  being  neglected.  Com-
paring these  expressions  with  (1)  of  §  181,  we  see  that  they  ex-
press the  changes  in  the  co-ordinates  of  any  displaced  point  of
a  body  relatively  to  three  rectangular  axes  in  fixed  directions
through  one  point  of  it,  when  all  other  points  of  it  are  displaced
relatively  to  this  one,  in  any  manner  subject  only  to  the  con-
dition of  giving  a  homogeneous  stniin.  Hence  we  perceive  that
at  distances  all  round  any  point,  ho  Kniall  tlint  tlio  first  terms
only  of  the  expressions  by  Taylor's  theorem  for  the  differences  of
displaoement  are  sensible)  the  strain  is  sensibly  homogeneous,

Digui^uu  uy  Google

lOO.]  KINEMATICSL  141

and  we  conclude  tliat  the  directions  of  the  principal  axes  of  the  Hetero-
Htrain  at  any  j>uiiit  {x,  y,  z),  and  the  amounts  of  the  elongations  ttnUou*
of  the  matter  along  them,  and  the  tangential  displacement*!  in
closed  curves,  are  to  l>o  found  according  to  the  general  methods
deacnbed  above,  bj  taking

If  each  of  these  nine  quantities  is  constant  (i.e.,  the  same  for  all  Womo-
Talaes  of  X, z),  the  strain  is  homogeneous  :  not  unless.  strain.
{/)  The  condition  that  the  ittrain  maj  be  infinitely  small  ia  that  ill"itfi^in.

da da  da
ie'  d^'  d»'

dfi dfi  dfi
dn*  dy'  d»'

dy dy  dy

di'  dk'

mnst  be  each  intmit^'ly  small.

(fj) These  formulaB  apply  to  the  moat  general  possible  motion  Most
of  any  substnnce,  and  they  may  be  considered  as  the  fimdament^il  tionoC
equations  of  kinematics. If  we  introduce  time  as  independent
variable,  we  have  for  component  velocities  «,  v,  to,  parallel  to
the  fixed  axes  OX,  OY,  OZ,  the  following  expressions; y,s,  t
being  independent  Tariables,  and  a,  jS,  y  {unctions  of  tliem  ^—

da  dfi  dy

(A)  If  we  introduce  the  condition  that  no  line  of  tlie  body  ex-
periences any  elongation,  we  have  the  general  equations  for  the
kinematics  of  a  rigid  bodv,  of  which,  however,  we  have  had  <'h«»n«of
enough  already. The  equations  of  condition  to  exprcBs  tliis  r.gid  body.

irill  be  six  in  niunber,  among  the  nine  qoantities  ^ ,  eto.,  which

(^)  are,  In  this  case,  each  constant  relatively  to  a;,  ^,  s.  There
are  left  three  independent  arbitrary  elements  to  express  any
angular  motion  of  a  rigid  body.

Digitized  by  Google

PBELIHINART.  [190.

(t)  If  tlie  dmturbed  eondition  Is  so  related  to  tbe  initial  oon-
ditiou  that  wery  portion  of  the  hody  can  pass  from  its  initial  to
its  dirtnrbed  positioin  and  strain,  by  a  translation  and  a  strain
without  rotation ;  is.,  if  the  three  principal  axes  of  the  strain  at
any  pdnt  are  lines  of  the  substance  which  retain  thidr  paralldisin,
we  must  have,  §  183  (18),

dfi  _(Jy ily  _  f/u  da

d» dy^  dx dz^  dy  dx'

and  if  these  equations  are  fulfilled,  the  strain  is  non-rotational,  as
specified.  But  these  three  equations  express  neither  more  nor
less  than  that  adx  +  ^d>/+ydz

is  the  (liflTerential  of  a  futiction  of  three  independent  variables.
Hence  we  have  the  remarkable  proposition,  and  its  converse,  that
if  F  (x,  y,  z)  denote  any  function  of  the  co-oniinatos  of  any  jK^int
of  a  body,  and  if  every  such  point  1x3  disjilaecd  from  its  given
position  (x,  y,  z)  to  the  point  whoso  co-ordinates  are

dF  dF  dF

the  principal  axes  of  the  strain  at  efwy  p(nnt  are  lines  of  the
substance  which  have  retained  their  parallelisnL  The  displace-
ment back  from  (x^,  y^,  z^)  to  (x,  z)  fulfils  the  same  condition,
and  therefore  we  must  have

<fK

*=«^.+^.y=!r»+^y;,«««.^^;

dF

where denotes  a  function  of  a?,,  y,, and -' ,  etc.,  its

partial  diflorential  coefBcients  with  reference  to  this  qrstom  of
vaiiables. The  relation  between  F  and  F^  is  clearly

F^F,^-^iiy  (3),

where  2>'«  4-  -f  -  ^  +  U\
where  D 4- + „  ^^^^ +  _  (4).

This,  of  course^  may  be  proved  by  ordinary  analytical  methods,
applied  to  find  x,  y,  z  in  terms  of  x^f  y,,  s,,  when  the  latter  are
given  by  (1)  in  terms  of  the  former.

(/ )  Let  a,  ^,  y  be  any  three  functions  of  x,  y,  s.  Let  dS  be
any  element  of  a  sur&ce ;  ^  n  the  direction  cosines  of  its
normal.

Digitized  by  Google

190.]  KINEMATICS.  143

^  J{(ulx  ■^I3df/  +  ydz)  (5),

the  former  inte;jral  iK'ing  over  any  curvilinear  area  bounded  by  a
closed  curve  ;  and  the  latter,  which  may  be  written

dx  (h\

. .  /  dx ^dy  dz\

being  Tooml  the  periplieiy  of  this  enrre  line*.  To  demonstrate
thi%  begiii  with  the  part  of  the  firat  member  of  (5)  depending  on
«;  that  Is

and  to  evaluate  it  divide  S  into  bands  by  planes  parallel  to  £0T,
and  each  of  these  bands  into  rectangles. The  breadth  at  s^

of  the  band  between  the  planes 2-5 cZ« and  x  +  \dx  ia-^^ ,  if  6

demote  the  inclination  of  the  tangent  plane  of  Sfo  the  plane  x.
Hence  if  ds  denote  an  element  of  the  cnrre  in  whidi  the  plane
X  cots  the  toiftoe  S,  we  may  take

dS^  ".■^  A  dx  dt,

KLBLV

And  we  have  I^osmB,  and  therefore  may  put
fnstintfcQe^  Assin^sin^

Hepca

= jjdx  ds^= Jadx.

The  limits  of  the  8  integration  being  i)roperly  attended  to  wo  see
thai  the  remaining  integration,  JadXj  must  be  performed  ronnd
the  periphery  of  the  ourre  bounding  S.  By  this,  and  correspond-
ing evaluations  of  the  parts  of  the  first  member  of  (5)  depending
on  p  and  y,  the  equation  is  proved.

*  This  theorem  was  given  by  Stokes  in  his  Smith's  Prize  paper  for  1854
(Cambridge  Universiti/  CnUn^nr,  1854).  The  demonstration  in  the  text  is  an
expansion  of  that  iudicatetl  in  oar  first  edition.  A  more  synthetical  proof  is
gtren  in  S  69  (9)  of  Six  W.  Thomson's  paper  on  "Vortex  Motion,"  Tran».  R.  S.  E.
1M9.  A  thoioagfaly  snsljtiesl  proof  is  given  I17  Fkot  Clsrk  Usswdl  in  his
EUetHeitg  asd  Jfa^KMs  d  94).

Digitized  by  Google

144

FRCUMIKARY.

(k)  It  is  roniuUble  tliai

//<^KS-f)-e-^)-S4;)}

is  the  same  for  all  surfaces  having  common  c\irvilint'ar  l>oundary;
and  when  a,  ^,  y  arc  the  components  of  a  cUsplacement  from  y,  s,
it  is  the  entire  tangential  dlspliicement  round  the  wiid  cuni-
lineai"  boundary,  boinf;^  a  closed  curve.  It  is  therefore  thus  tliat  is
nothinrr  when  tlic  dLsplacement  of  eviry  ]inrt  is  non-rotationul.
And  wlien  it  Ls  not  nothing,  we  see  by  the  aiujvo  ])iX)i>o8ition8  and
corollaries  precisely  what  the  measnre  of  tlie  rotation  is.

{I)  Lftsthj^  \\e  see  wliat  the  meaning,  for  the  case  of  no  rota-
tion, of  \{ailx  +  (S<fi/  +  y<h),  or,  as  it  has  been  calle  l,  "  the  dis-
placement function,"  is.  It  is,  the  entire  tangential  di.splacein^'nt
along  any  curve  from  the  fix<^d  jK)int  0,  to  the  ]M>int  P  (./",  ?/,  z).
And  the  entire  tangential  displaceiuent,  being  in  this  case  the
tsamo  along  all  diffemit  curAes  procee<ling  from  one  to  another
of  any  two  points,  is  equal  to  the  differeuce  of  the  values  of  the
displacement  functions  at  those  points.

191.  As  there  can  be  neither  aninhilation  nor  generation
tinniiir/'  of  matter  in  any  natural  motion  or  action,  the  whole  quantity
of  a  fluid  within  any  space  at  any  time  must  be  equal  to  the
quantity  originally  in  that  space,  increased  by  the  whole  quan-
tity that  has  entered  it  and  diminished  by  the  whole  quantity
that  has  left  it.  This  idea  when  expressed  in  a  perfectly  com-
prehensive manner  for  every  portion  of  a  fluid  ia  motion  con-
atitutes  what  is  called  the  *'$qu(Uion  of  continuity,**  an  unhappily
chosen  ezpressicn.

intrgrai 192. Two  wavs  of  i^roceedincr  to  express  this  idea  present

equation  of  i  o  l  t

oouUuuitjr.  themselves,  each  affording  instructive  views  regarding  the  pro-
perties of  fluids.  In  one  we  consider  a  definite'  portion  of  the
fluid  ;  follow  it  in  its  motions  ;  and  declare  that  the  average
density  of  the  substance  varies  inversely  as  its  volume.  We
thus  obtain  the  equation  of  continuity  in  an  integral  fonn.

Let  a»  0  be  the  comt^dinatei  of  any  point  of  a  moving  floidt
at  a  paitiettkr  em  of  leokoniiig^and  let  so,  y, «  be  the  co-ofdmates
of  the  posidon  it  hai  reeohed  at  any  time  I  from  that  eia.  To
specify  completely  the  motion,  is  to  give  eeoh  of  these  three  vary-
ing oo-ordinates  as  a  fimction  of bt  e,  t

Hetero-

tuciit  fillip*
Uon.

«lani

Digitized  by  Google

191]

KINEMATICS.

145

Lefe  8a»  £6,  &  denote  the  edgea^  penllel  to  the  axes  of  <KH>rdi-  intagni  ^
iiate^  of  a  veiy  small  rwctangnlar  paialldepped  of  the  fluid,  when  eonHimttr.
I  s  0.  Anj  portion  of  the  fluid,  if  onlj  small  enough  in  all  its
dimensions,  must  (J  190,  e),  in  the  motion,  approidmatdj  fulfil
the  eondition  of  a  body  wUfoirmlj  stnined  throughout  its  volume.
Henoe  if  So^  S6,  So  are  talcen  infinitely  small,  the  corresponding
portion  of  fluid  must  (§  106)  remain  a  parallelepiped  during  the
motion.

If  6,  ebe  the  initial  co-ordinates  of  one  angular  point  of  this
parallelepiped :  and  a-i>  &§,  &,  e ;  a,  6  +  S5,  e;  a,  5,  e  +  8e ;  those
of  the  other  eitremities  of  the  three  edges  that  meet  in  it :  the
coocdinates  of  the  same  points  of  the  fluid  at  time  t,  will  be

dx  - dy  « c&  ,

dx  . dy  ^ dz  ^

y+i**.

Henoe  the  lengths  and  directioii  cosines  of  the  edges  aie  rft-
speotively—

/(fx* dy' dz^\K  da  .

W'  ^' di  ^Ai-^

W  ^  <^  ^  da')
(d^ dy' dz*\\  m  .

\d4f  d^^ de)"^'  M  djl  dM'

The  Tdume  of  this  parallelepiped  is  therefore

/dxdydz dxdy  dz  ^dxdydz dxdydz  ^dxdydz ^^'^'^ JaJ^Jg
\^d^dc dadcdb dbdcda dbdadc dcdadb  dcdOda)

VOL.  I.  10

140

PBEUKINART.

[192.

Intenrn)
eqoAiiwi  of
oonHiuiitif*

or,  aa

it  ia  now  usually  wriUeiiy

dse

dx

dx
A'

da'

di'

dt

3^

dz
db
dz
de

hahbhe.

17ow  as  there  can  be  neither  increase  nor  diinination  of  the
quantity  of  matter  in  any  portion  of  the  fluiti,  the  density,  or  the
quantity  of  matter  per  unit  of  volume,  in  the  infinitely  mnall  \>ot-
tion  wo  have  been  oonsiflering,  must  vary  inversely  as  its  volume
if  this  varies.  Ht'iico,  if  p  denote  the  density  of  the  fluid  in  the
neighbourhood  of  (a;,  ^,  z)  at  time  i,  and  the  initial  densitj,
we  have

da'

dx

d^'
dx
db'
dx
di'

dy
db

dy
dc

dz\
dn  I
dz\
db\
dz
dc\

OX

T>i)Trn''ntiBl
«  <4uation  of

whiish  18  the  integnl equation  of  oontinuity.'*

193.  The  form  under  which  the  equation  of  continuity  is
most  commonly  i:!:iven,  or  tlic  differential  equation  of  continuity,
fts  we  may  call  it,  expresses  that  the  rate  of  dimiuntion  of  the
density  bears  to  the  density,  at  any  instant^  the  same  ratio  as
the  rate  of  increase  of  the  Tolurae  <^  an  infinitely  small  portion
bears  to  the  volume  of  this  portion  at  the  same  insti^it.

To  find  it,  let  a,  6,  c  denoto  the  co-oniinates,  not  wlion  f  -  0,
but  at  any  time  t  —  dt,  of  the  {)oint  of  fluid  whose  oo-oixUnates
are y,  «  at  ^ ;  so  that  we  have

dx  d\i  dz

•ooording  to  the  Cfdinaiy  notation  ibr  partial  dilforential  eo-
eflBcientB ;  or,  if  we  denote  by  ti,  r,  tn,  the  oomponeiitB  of  the
▼elooity  of  this  point  of  the  fluid,  parallel  to  the  axes  of  oo-
ordinate^

x-a^udt,  y-bstvdi,  z^e-wU.

Digitized  by  GoogI

193.]

KINEMATICS.

147

-If ^ — di  - dt' ^'

da~ da '  da"  da * da"  da  *

dx (hi  . dy t dv  J dz dw  ,^
dx du  . dv dv  , dz ^ (h'l  ,

tead,  as  we  murt  r^eet  all  temiB  involTing  higher  powen  of  dt
thaa  tli0  BxBt,  the  determinant  beoomeB  simplj

J  ^  /du  ^dv  ^  dw\  ^
\da db de )

This  therefoi*©  expresses  the  ratio  iu  which  the  vohimo  is  aug-
iiiente<l  in  time  dt.  The  corresponding  ratio  of  variation  of
density  in

P

if  Dp  <lenote  the  differential  of  p,  the  density  of  one  and  the  sjimo

portion  of  fluid  an  it  moves  from  the  position  (a,  h,  c)  to  (a;,  y,  z)

in  the  interval  of  time  from  t-dt  to  L  Ileuce

1  Dp  ^  du  ^dv  ^  dw  ^
p  (U dn db dc ••••••••  \  /•

Here  p,u^v,ui  are  regarded  as  functions  of  a,  6,  c,  and  ^  and

the  Tariatkni  ef  p  Implied  In  ^  is  the  »te  of  the  actual  ^variation

of  the  denfiity  of  an  indofinitoly  small  jwrtion  of  the  fl\iid  as  it
moves  away  from  a  lixwl  jiosition  (a,  6,  c).  If  wo  alter  the
princii>lo  of  the  notation,  and  consider  p  a.s  the  density  of  what-
ever j»oi  tii)U  of  the  fluid  is  at  time  t  in  the  ucif^hbonrhood  of  the
fixed  jMjint  (a,  6,  c),  and  ii,  v,  the  component  velocities  of  the
fluid  passing  the  same  point  at  the  same  time,  we  shall  have

-dt-^-dt^''da'-''db^'^'<h  <^>-

Omitting  again  the  suffixes,  according  to  the  usual  im|
notation  for  partial  differential  oo-efficients,  which  on  our*
undersUinding  can  cause  no  embarrassment^  we  thus  haye^  in
virtae  of  the  preceding  equation,

1  (dp
?  \dt

dp dp dp\ du dv dw  .

dp d(pu) d  (pv) d  (pw)

10-^2

148  PBKLnUNART.  [103.

1MlliH«ntM  which  is  the  dififerential  equatioa  of  oontiniiitj.  in  the  fonn  in
•ontiDiiiir. wmoh  it  is  most  oommonlj  giToii,

194.  The  other  way  referred  to  hhove  (§  192)  leads  im-
mediately to  the  differential  equation  of  contiuuity.

Imagine  a  space  fixed  in  the  interior  of  a  fluid,  and  consiiier
the  fluid  wliich  flows  into  tliis  space,  and  the  fluid  wliicl)  flows
out  of  it,  across  ditiercnt  parts  of  its  boundinij  surface,  in  any
time.  If  the  fluid  is  of  the  same  density  anti  iucumprossible,
the  whole  quantity  of  matter  in  the  space  in  question  must  re-
main constant  at  all  times,  and  therefore  the  quantity  flowinc^
in  must  be  equal  to  the  quantity  flowing  out  in  any  time.  If,
on  the  contrary,  during  any  period  of  motion,  more  fluid  enters
than  leaves  the  fixed  spaoe^  there  will  be  condensation  of
matter  in  that  space ;  or  if  more  fluid  leaves  than  enters^  there
will  be  dilatation.  The  late  of  augmentation  of  the  average
density  of  the  fluid,  per  unit  of  timey  in  the  fixed  space  in
question,  hears  to  the  actual  density,  at  any  instant^  the  same
zatio  that  the  rate  of  acquisition  of  matter  into  that  space  heais
to  the  whole  matter  in  that  space.

Let  the  space  (5?  be  an  infinitely  small  parallelepiped,  of  wliii  h
the  edges  a,  (3,  y  are  parallel  to  the  axes  of  co-ordinates,  and  let
X,  z  he  the  co-ordinates  of  its  centre  ;  so  that  x=fc  ia,  7/±  A/3,
« sfc  |y  are  the  co-ordinates  of  its  angular  points.  Li*t  p  be  the
density  of  the  fluid  at  {x^  y,  z),  or  the  mean  density  through  the
space  Sf  at  the  time  t.  The  density  at  the  time  t  +  dt  will  be
dp

p+^dt;  and  henoe  the  qnantitus  of  fluid  contained  in  the

space  *S*,  at  the  times  t,  and  t  +  dty  are  respectirely  pafiy  and
***  ^^^)  ^®  quantity  of  fluid  lost  (there  will  of

course  be  an  abeolute  gain  if  ^  be  positive)  in  the  time  dt  is

 (•)•

Now  let  w,  V,  w  be  the  three  components  of  the  velncitv  of  the
fluid  (or  of  a  fluid  particle)  at  P. These  quantities  will  Ix?  func-
"sti?n<lr  tions  of  x,  ?/,  z  (iMvohiiifj  also  t,  except  in  the  case  of  "steady

^"flQfKi.  motion"),  nnd  ^\ill  in  geneml  vary  gnuluully  from  point  to  point

of  the  fluid ;  althou|;h  the  aoalysiB  which  follows  is  not  restricted

Digitized  by  Google

194.]  KINE^UTICa.  149

■

by  tlus  ooDgidenttion,  Imi  holds  even  in  cases  wbere  in  oertaia
places  of  the  fluid  there  an  abrapt  tnmsltions  in  the  -velocity,
as  may  be  seen  by  considering  them  as  UmitSng  esses  of  motions
in  which  there  are  very  sodden  contimtomi  transitiops  of  Tdodty.
If  «•  be  a  small  plane  ares^  petpendicolar  to  the  aads  of  x,  and
having  its  centre  of  gravi^  at  tiie  Tolume  of  flnid  which
flows  across  it  in  the  time  tU  will  be  equal  to  umU^  and  the
masi  or  quantity  will  be  piundL  If  we  substitute  fiy  for  m,
the  quantity  which  flows  across  either  ct  the  faces  ^  y  of  the
parallelepiped  will  differ  from  this  only  on  aooount  of  the
▼axiation  in  tiie  value  ot  pu;  and  therefore  the  quantities  which
flow  across  the  two  sides  fiy  are  respectively

and

Hence  a^^^^ydt,  or  ^  [^'^^afiydt,  is  the  excess  of  the  quantity

of  fluid  wliich  leaves  the  parallelepiped  across  one  of  the  faces
/3y  uUjve  that  wliich  entei-a  it  across  the  other.  By  considering
in  addition  the  ctft'ct  of  the  motion  across  the  other  faces  of  the
parallelepipeti,  we  lind  for  the  total  quantity  of  iiuid  lost  £rom  the
space  Sf  In  the  time  dt,

Equating  tiiis  to  the  ezpraadon  (a),  previously  found,  we  have

and  we  deduce

<i  jpu)  _^d(pv) d(pw) dp  .  .

which  is  the  required  equation.

19S.  Several  references  have  been  made  in  preceding  Pr«edoai
sections  to  the  number  of  independent  variables  in  a  dis-
placement, or  to  the  degrees  of  freedom  or  constraint  under
which  the  displcocement  takes  place.  It  may  be  well,  there-
fore, to  take  a  general  view  of  this  part  of  the  subject  by
itself.

Digitized  by  Google

150  PRELimNART.  [196.

Ofa  point.  ^  free  point  has  three  degrees  of  freedom,  inasmuch

as  the  most  general  displacement  which  it  can  take  is  re-
solvable into  three,  parallel  respectively  to  any  three  directions,
and  independent  of  each  other.  It  is  generally  convenient  to
choose  these  three  directions  of  resolution  at  right  angles  to
one  another.

If  the  point  be  constrained  to  remain  always  on  a  given
surfiice,  one  degree  of  constraint  is  introduced,  or  there  are
left  but  two  degrees  of  fireedom.  For  we  may  take  the
normal  to  the  surfituse  as  one  of  three  rectangular  directions  of
resolution.  No  displacement  can  be  effected  parallel  to  it:
and  the  other  two  displacements,  at  right  angles  to  each  other,
in  the  tangent  plane  to  the  surface,  are  independent.

It'  the  point  be  coustraincH.1  to  remain  on  each  of  two  sur-
faces, it  loses  two  degrees  of  freedom,  and  there  is  left  but
one.  In  fact,  it  is  constrained  to  remain  on  the  curve  which
is  common  to  both  surfaces,  and  along  a  curve  there  is  at  each
point  but  one  direction  of  displacement.

gJ^rtgW  197.  Taking  next  the  case  of  a  free  rigid  body,  we  have
evidently  six  de^rL'cs  of  freedom  to  consider — t/tree  inde-
pendent translations  in  rectangular  directions  as  a  point  has,
and  tliree  independent  rotations  about  three  mutually  rect-
angular axes.

If  it  have  one  point  fixed,  it  loses  three  degrees  of  fireedom;

Jtr^i^'ra  in  fact,  it  has  now  only  the  rotations  just  mentioned.
riKid  body.  socond  point  be  fixed,  the  body  loees  two  more  degrees

of  freedom,  and  keeps  only  one  freedom  to  rotate  about  the

line  joining  the  two  fixed  points.
If  a  third  pointy  not  in  a  line  with  the  other  twc^  be  fixed,

the  body  is  fixed.

198.  If  a  rigid  body  is  forced  to  touch  a  smooth  surface,
one  degrpe  of  freedom  is  lost;  there  remain  Jive,  two  dis-
placements parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  to  the  surface,  and
three  rotations.  As  a  degree  of  freedom  is  lost  by  a  constraint
of  the  body  to  touch  a  smooth  surface,  sim  such  conditions
completely  determine  the  position  of  the  body.  Thus  if  six
r points  on  the  barrel  and  stock  of  a  rifie  rest  on  six  convex

Digitized  by  Google

198.]  KINEMATIGS.  151

portions  of  the  surface  of  a  fixed  rigid  body,  the  rifle  may  be  i'n'«-doui
placed,  and  replaced  any  numl)er  of  times,  m  precisely  Jjgj"^^^
same  position,  and  always  left  quite  free  to  recoil  when  fired,
for  the  purpose  of  testing  its  accuracy.

A  fixed  V  under  the  barrel  near  the  muzzle,  and  another
under  the  swell  of  the  stock  close  in  front  of  the  trigger-guard,
give  four  of  the  contacts,  bearing  the  weight  of  the  HHe.  A
fifUi  (the  one  to  be  broken  by  the  recoil)  is  supplied  by  a
nearly  vertical  fixed  plane  close  behind  the  second  to  be
touched  by  the  trigger-guaid,  the  rifle  being  piesaed  forward
in  its  Y's  as  &r  as  this  obstruction  aUows  it  to  go.  This
contact  may  be  dispensed  with  and  nothing  sensible  of  accuracy
loet^  by  having  a  mark  on  the.  second  V,  and  a  corresponding
maik  on  barrel  or  stock,  and  sliding  the  bairel  backwards  or
forwards  in  the  V's  till  the  two  marks  are,  as  nearly  as  can
be  judged  by  eye,  in  the  same  plane  perpendicular  to  the
barrel's  axis.  The  sixth  contact  may  be  dispensed  witli  by
aiiju-stiug  two  marks  on  the  heel  and  toe  of  the  butt  to  be
as  nearly  as  need  be  in  one  vertical  plane  judged  by  aid  of
a  plummet.  This  method  retjuires  less  of  costly  apparatus,
and  is  no  doubt  mdre  accurate  and  trustworthy,  and  mure
quickly  and  ea,sily  executed,  tliMii  the  ordinary  metliod  of
clamping  the  riiie  in  a  massive  metal  cradle  set  on  a  heavy
mechanical  slide.

A  geometrical  clamp  is  a  means  of  applying  and  main-  Geometnaa
tatning  six  mutual  pressures  between  two  bodies  touching
one  another  at  six  points.

A  "geometrical  slide is  any  airangement  to  apply  fiyeO<miMMeii
degrees  of  constraint^  and  leave  one  degree  of  freedom,  to
the  relative  motion  of  two  rigid  bodies  by  keeping  them
pressed  together  at  just  five  points  of  their  surfiacesL

Ex.  1. The  transit  instrument  would  be  an  instance  Jf  J^jJJJpjjj^f
one  end  of  one  pivot,  made  slightly  convex,  were  pressed
against  a  fixed  vertical  end-plate,  by  a  spring  pushing  at
the  other  end  of  the  axis. The  other  four  guiding  points  are
the  points^  or  small  areas,  of  contact  of  the  pivots  on  the  Y 's.

Ex.  2.  Let  two  rounded  ends  of  legs  of  a  three-legged
stool  rest  in  a  straight^  smooth,  V-shaped  canal,  and  the  third

Digitized  by  Google

152

PBELDOMABY.

[198.

on  a  smooth  horizontal  plane*.  Gravity  maintains  positive
determinate  pressures  on  the  five  bearing  points ;  and  there
is  a  determinate  distribution  and  amount  of  friction  to  be
overcome,  to  produce  the  rectilineal  trauslatioual  motion  thus
accurately  provided  for.

■m*!2«'  Ex.  3.  Let  only  one  of  the  feet  rest  in  a  V  canal,  and  let
«i«BP>  another  rest  in  a  trihedral  holhnvf  in  line  with  the  canal,  the
third  still  resting  on  a  horizontal  plane.  There  are  thus  six
bearing  points^  one  on  the  horizontal  plane^  two  on  the  sides  of
the  canal,  and  three  on  the  sides  of  the  trihedral  hollow :  and
the  stool  is  fixed  in  a  determinate  position  as  long  as  all  these
nx  contacts  are  nnhroken.  Snhstitute  for  gravity  a  spring,
or  a  screw  and  not  (of  not  infinitely  rigid  material),  binding
the  stool  to  the  rigid  body  to  which  these  six  planes  belong.
Thus  we  have  a  "geometrical  clamp,"  which  clamps  two  l)odie9
together  with  perfect  firmness  in  a  perfectly  definite  position*

•  Thomson's  reprint  of  Electrof-tatic»  ami  MagnetUm,  %  346.

t  A  conical  hollow  is  more  easily  made  (as  it  can  be  bored  ont  at  once  bj  an
ordinaiy  drill),  and  fulfils  netxlj  enon^  for  ommI  practical  appUcations  the
gwnnetrieal  prindjil**  A  Moieal,  k/k  oIlMnHw  vomidad,  hollow  is  tovdMd  it
fhiM  points  by  knobe  or  ribs  projecting  from  a  round  foot  resting  in  il^  and
thus  again  the  geometrical  principle  is  ri(^oreasIy  fulfilled.  The  virtue  of  the
geometrical  principle  is  well  illustrated  by  its  possible  violation  in  this  very
case.  Snppoee  the  boUow  to  have  been  drilled  out  not  quite  "tme,"  and
inataad  ot  being  a  dxoular  oone  to  havo  slightly  elliptic  horizontal  sections
A  hwnisphwrical  foot  wiU  not  rest  steadily  in  St^  bm  will  be  liable  to  %  digiil
horizontal  displacement  in  the  direction  parallel  to  the  major  axes  of  tha
elliptic  sectious,  besides  the  legitimate  rotation  round  any  axis  through  the
centre  of  tlie  heniis)>}ioricn!  pnrface:  in  fact,  on  this  8upp<)5*ition  thrre  are  jiwt
two  points  of  contact  uf  the  foot  in  the  hollow  instead  of  three.  When  the  foot
and  hollow  are  large  enongh  in  any  particular  case  to  allow  the  poeaibility  of
tiiis  defect  to  bo  of  momenkt  it  is  to  be  obviated,  not  by  any  vain  attempt  to
torn  the  hollow  and  the  foot  each  perfectly  '*  troe  «ven  if  this  could  be  dooo
the  desired  restilt  would  be  lost  by  the  smalleat  particle  of  matter  such  as  a
chip  of  wood,  or  a  frfiKUient  of  paper,  or  a  hair,  getting  itjto  the  hollow  when,
at  Auy  time  in  the  use  of  the  instrument,  the  foot  is  taken  out  and  put  in  again.
On  the  contrary,  the  true  geometrical  method,  (of  which  the  general  principle
waa  taai^t  to  one  of  ms  by  the  late  PraCaeaor  Willis  thirty  yeaii  ago,)  is  to
alter  one  or  other  of  the  two  nurfuces  so  as  to  render  it  manifestly  not  a  llgnra
of  revolution,  thus: — Roughly  tile  three  round  notches  in  the  hollow  so  as  to
render  it  somethint'  between  a  trihedral  pyramid  and  a  circular  cone,  leaNnng
the  foot  Hpproximat4.>ly  round ;  or  else  roughly  file  at  three  places  of  the  rounded
foot  so  that  horizontal  sections  through  and  a  little  above  and  below  the  pointo
of  oontaet  maj  be  (roughly)  a^nOataral  triaaglia  withionndad  oonaia.

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

198.]

nNBHATICS.

15S

without  the  aid  of  friction  (except  in  the  screw,  if  a  screw  ££S|l£

is  used);  and  in  various  practical  applications  gives  veiy
readily  and  conveniently  a  more  securely  firm  connexion  by
one  screw  slightly  pressed,  than  a  damp  such  as  those  com-
monly made  hitherto  by  mechanicians  can  give  with  three
strong  screws  forced  to  the  utmost.

Do  away  with  the  canal  and  let  two  feet  (instead  of  only  oncO  ^xAmpie  of
rest  on  the  plane,  the  other  still  resting  in  the  conical  hoUow.
The  number  of  contacts  is  thus  reduced  to  five  (three  in  the
hollow  and  two  on  the  plane),  and  instead  of  a  "  clamp"  we
have  again  a  slide.  This  form  of  slide, — a  three-legged  stool
with  two  feet  resting  on  a  plane  and  one  in  a  hollow, — will
]>e  found  very  useful  in  a  large  variety  of  applications,  in  which
motion  about  an  axis  is  desired  when  a  material  axis  is  not
conveniently  attainable.  Its  first  application  was  to  the
"  azimuth  mirror "  an  instrument  placed  on  the  glass  cover  of
a  mariner's  compass  and  used  for  taking  aramuths  of  sun  or
stars  to  correct  the  compass,  or  of  landmarks  or  other  terrestrial
objects  to  find  the  ship's  position*  It  has  also  been  applied  to
the  Deflector/'  an  adjustible  magnet  laid  on  the  glass  of  the
compass  bowl  and  used,  according  to  a  principle  first  we  believe
given  by  Sir  Edward  Sabine^  to  discover  tiie  semidreular"
error  produced  by  the  ship's  iron.  Tho  movement  may  be
made  very  firictionless  when  the  plaae  is  horizontal,  by  weight-
ing the  moveable  body  so  that  its  centre  of  gravity  is  very  nearly
over  the  foot  that  rests  in  the  hollow.  One  or  two  guard  feet,
not  to  touch  the  plane  except  in  case  of  accident,  ought  to  be
added  to  give  a  broad  enough  biuse  tV)r  safety.

The  geometrical  slide  and  the  geovnetrical  clamp  have  both
been  found  very  useful  in  electrometers,  in  the  "siphon  re-
corder," and  in  an  instrument  recently  brought  into  use  for
automatic  sig-nalliuLC  throTigh  submarine  cables.  An  infinite
variety  of  forms  may  be  given  to  the  geometrical  slide  to  suit
varieties  of  application  of  the  general  principle  on  which  its
definition  is  founded.

An  old  fonn  of  the  geometrical  clamp,  with  the  six  pressures
produced  by  gravity,  is  the  three  V  grooves  on  a  stone  slab
bearing  the  three  legs  of  an  astronomical  or  magnetic  instru-

Digilizeo  by  GoOglc

IH  PftSLmiNART.  [19&

Bxnmpie  of  ment. It  is  not  generally  liuwover  so  "well-conditioned"  as
cfciHiide. tlie  triliedral  hole,  tlie  V  groove,  and  the  horizoutal  plane
contact,  described  above.

For  investigation  of  the  pressures  on  the  contact  surfaces
of  a  geometrical  slide  or  a  geometrical  clamp,  see  §  551,  below.

There  is  much  room  for  improvement  by  the  introduction  of
geometrical  slides  and  geometrical  clamps,  in  the  mechanUoi
of  mathematical^  optical>  geodetic^  and  astronomical  instru-
ments: whioh  AB  made  at  present  are  remarkable  for  disregard
of  geometrical  and  dynamical  principles  in  their  slides,  mi-
crometer screws,  and  clamps.  Qood  woi^manship  cannot  com-
pensate for  had  design,  whether  In  the  safety-valve  of  an  iron-
dad,  or  the  movements  and  adjustments  of  a  theodolite.

199.  If  one  point  be  constrained  to  remain  in  a  curve,  there
remain  four  degrees  of  freedom.

If  two  points  be  constrained  to  remain  in  given  curves,  there
are  four  degrees  of  constraint,  and  we  have  left  two  degrees  of
freedom.  One  of  these  may  be  regarded  as  being  a  simple
rotation  about  the  line  joining  the  constrained  points,  a  motion
which,  it  is  dear,  the  body  is  free  to  recdve.  It  may  be  shown
that  the  other  possible  motion  is  of  the  most  general  cliaracter
for  one  degree  of  freedom;  that  is  to  say,  translation  and  rota-
tion in  any  fixed  proportions  as  of  the  nut  of  a  screw.

If  one  line  of  a  rigid  system  be  constrained  to  remain  parallel
to  itself,  as,  for  instance,  if  the  body  be  a  three-legged  stool
standing  on  a  perfectly  smooth  board  fixed  to  a  common  window,
diding  in  its  frame  with  perfect  freedom,  there  remain  ikres
translations  and  one  rotation.

But  we  need  not  further  pursue  this  subject,  as  the  number
of  combinations  that  might  be  considered  is  endless ;  and
those  already  given  suffice  to  show  how  simple  is  the  detenni-
nation  of  the  degrees  of  freedom  or  constraint  in  any  case  that
may  prcseut  itself.

One  d.  Krea 200.  Ouo  degree  of  constraint,  of  the  most  general  character,
St  mint  of  is  not  produdble  by  constraining  one  point  of  the  body  to  a
K  -m  n/r curve  surface :  but  it  consists  in  stopping  one  line  of  the  body
from  longitudinal  motion,  except  accompanied  by  rotation  round
this  line,  in  fixed  proportion  to  the  longitudinal  motion,  and

Digitized  by  Go

KIHEICATICS.

155

leaving  tinimpeded  every  other  motion :  that  is  to  say,  free
rotation  about  any  axis  perpendicular  to  this  line  (two  degrees  of
freedom);  and  translation  in  any  direction  perpendicular  to  the
same  line  (two  degrees  of  freedom).  These  four,  with  the  one
degree  of  freedom  to  screw,  constitute  the  five  degrees  of  freedom,
which,  with  one  degree  of  constraint^  make  up  the  six  elements.
Remark  that  it  is  only  in  case  (6)  helow  (§  201)  that  there  is
any  point  of  the  hody  which  cannot  move  in  every  direction.

201.  Let  a  screw  be  cut  on  one  shaft,  -4,  of  a  Hooke's  joint* and  JjjjJJjJSSi
let  the  other  shaft,  be  joined  to  a  fixed  shaft,  by  a  second
Hooke's  joint  A  nut,  turning  on  A,  has  the  most  general
kind  of  motion  admitted  by  one  degree  of  constraint;  or
it  is  subjected  to  just  one  degree  of  constraint  of  the  most
general  character.  It  has  five  degrees  of  freedom ;  for  it  may
move,  IH,  by  screwing  on  A,  the  two  Hooke's  joints  being
at  rest;  %i,  it  may  rotate  about  either  axis  of  the  first  Hooke*s
joint,  or  any  axis  in  their  plane  (two  more  degrees  of  freedom :
being  freedom  to  rotate  about  two  axes  through  one  point) ;
3(i,  it  may,  by  the  two  Hooke's  joints,  each  bending,  have
irroUitional  translation  in  any  direction  perpendicular  to  the
link,  L,  which  connects  the  joints  (two  more  degrees  of  freedom).
But  it  cannot  have  a  trauslati(ja  parallel  to  the  line  of  the
shafts  Jind  link  without  a  definite  proportion  of  rotation  round
this  Yuw,  nor  caTi  it  have  rotation  round  this  line  without  a
definite  proportion  of  translation  parallel  to  it.  The  same
statements  apply  to  the  motion  oiB  'iLNvi  held  fixed ;  but  it
is  now  a  fixed  axis,  not  as  before  a  moveable  one  round  which
the  screwing  takes  place.

No  simpler  mechanism  can  be  easily  imagined  for  producing
one  d^ree  of  constrainLpfthe  most  general  kind.

Particular  case  (a).-]rSlf$  of  screw  infinite  (straight  rifling),
f.0.,  the  nut  may  slide  freely,  but  cannot  turn.  Thus  the
one  degree  of  constraint  is,  that  there  shall  be  no  rotation  about
a  certain  axis,  a  fixed  axis  if  we  take  the  case  of  ^  fixed  and  B
moveable.  This  is  the  kind  and  degree  of  freedom  enjoyed
by  the  outer  ring  of  a  gyroscope  with  its  fly-wheel  revolving
infinitely  fast.  The  outer  ring,  supj  i  scd  taken  off  its  stand,
and  held  in  the  hand,  cuuuut  revolve  about  an  lutis  peipeu-

Digitized  by  Google

166  PBELIMIKAfiT.  [201.

Mwhanimi  dicular  to  the  plane  of  the  inner  ring*  but  it  may  revolve
freely  about  either  of  two  axes  at  right  anf,^les  to  this,  namely,
the  axis  of  the  tiy-wheel,  and  the  axis  of  the  inner  ring
relative  to  the  outer;  and  it  is  of  course  perfectly  free  to
translation  in  any  direction^,  ^

Particular  case  (6).^8t(  p  of  the  screw »0.  In  this  case
the  nut  may  run  round  freely,  but  cannot  move  along  the  axis
of  the  shaft  Hence  the  constraint  is  simply  that  the  body
can  have  no  transUtion  parallel  to  the  line  of  shafts,  but  may
have  every  other  motion.  This  is  the  same  as  if  any  point  of  the
body  in  this  line  were  held  to  a  fixed  surface.  This  constraint
may  be  produced  less  frictionally  by  not  using  a  guiding  sur-
face, but  the  link  and  second  Hooke's  joint  of  the  present
arrangement^  the  first  Hooke's  joint  being  removed,  and  by
pivoting  one  point  of  the  body  in  a  cup  on  the  end  of  the
linL  Otherwise,  let  the  end  of  the  link  be  a  continuous
surface,  and  let  a  continuous  surface  of  the  body  press  on  it,
rolling  or  spinning  when  required,  but  not  permitted  to  slide.

J*******  A  single  degree  of  constraint  is  expresaed  by  a  single  equation

Jjjjjj^  among  the  six  co-ordinates  specifying  the  position  of  one  rigid

jwjjjtt*  body,  relatively  to  another  considf^^red  fixed. The  eflfect  of  this

on  the  body  in  any  particular  pooiUon  in  to  prevent  it  from  getting
out  of  this  position,  except  by  means  of  componsiit  velocities  (or
infinitely  small  motionB)  fulfilling  a  certain  linesr  equation  among
themselves.

Thus  if  «r,,  «^  «^  or^  ttg,  tr^  be  the  six  o<Hirdinatea»  and
 )  s  0  the  condition;  tiien

is  the  linear  equation  w  liicb  guides  the  motion  through  any  par-
ticular |)08ition,  the  special  values  of  xo*,,  m^,  Wg,  etc,  for  the

(IF  dF

particular  positioin,  being  used  in -  ,  - — ,

Now,  whatever  may  be  the  co  ordinate  systotn  adopted,  we  may,
if  we  pUiise,  reduce  this  efjuatinii  to  one  between  three  velocitiea
of  tiunslation v,  u;,  and  thi'oe  anyiiar  velocities  or,  p,  <r.

*  **  The  plane  of  fha  inner  xinif  is  the  plane  of  llie  ana  ol  the  fiij-iibnA
and  of  the  alia  of  the  inner  ring  liy  which  it  is  pivoted  on  the  enter  ring.

Digitized  by  Go

201.]  KINBILLTIG&  157

Jjst  ihia  equation  be  one  degroe

*  of  con-

Tliis  18  equiTalent  to  tbe  following : —  eSu?^'

if  q  denote  the  coraponeut  velocity  along  or  parallel  to  the  line
whose  direction  cosines  are  proportional  to

A,  £,  C,

•>  the  component  angular  velocity  round  an  axis  throui^  the
origiii  and  in  the  dtraotioii  whose  direction  oosines  are  proper*
tional  to  A\

andlasUy,  ^-g^j^^.

It  might  be  supposed  that  by  altering  the  origin  of  co-ordinatee
we  could  do  away  with  the  angular  velocities,  and  leave  only  a
linear  equation  among  the  oomponenta  of  translational  velodty.
It  la  not  80 ;  for  let  the  origin  be  ahlfted  to  a  point  whose  oo-
orduiatea  are  ^,  17,  t  ^  angular  velodtieB  aboat  the  new  axes,
parallel  to  the  old,  will  be  imoiianged ;  bat  the  linear  velocitiee
whidi,  in  oompomtion  with  these  angolar  velodte  about  the
new  axes,  give  vr,  p,  a,  u,  v,  to,  with  leferenoe  to  the  old,  are
(§89)

W  —  p$  +  vrq  =  1©'.

Hence  the  equation  of  constraint  becomes

Au'  +  -fi©'  +  Cu;'  +  -  Cij)  w  +  etc.  =  0.

Now  we  cannot  generally  determine  ^,  17,  C»  bo  as  to  make  «,
etc.,  diBappear,  because  this  would  require  three  conditions)
whereas  their  coefficientsi,  as  functions  ^  i%  %  K$  ^  >Mit  in-
d^»aident,  since  there  eadsts  the  relation

A{^~O'n)^B(Ct''At^A'C{Ari-B^^0,

The  simplest  form  we  can  reduce  to  is

lu'  +mv'  +  nvo'  +  a  (Im  +  mp  +na)  =  0,

that  is  to  say,  every  longitudinal  motion  of  a  certain  axis  must  be
aooompanied  by  a  definite  proportion  of  rotation  about  it»

202.  These  principles  constitute  in  reality  part  of  the  general
theory  of  "co-ordinates"  in  geometry. The  three  co-ordinates

Digitized  by  Google

158  PBELDOHABT.  [202.

Qrnorniizcd  of  cithcr  of  tlic  Ordinary  systems,  rectangular  or  polar,  required

(ii-iirtii-  •  r 1  • '  f  •  1  11

ii»t«i.  to  specify  tho  position  of  a  point,  correspond  to  the  three
0(»pQint.  degrees  of  fnxMlom  enjoyed  by  an  unconstrained  point.  The
most  general  system  of  co-ordinates  of  a  point  consists  of
three  sets  of  surfaces,  on  one  of  each  of  wliich  it  lies.  When
one  of  these  surfaces  only  is  given,  the  point  may  be  any-
ivhere  on  it,  or,  in  the  language  we  have  been  using  above,  it
enjojB  two  degrees  of  freedom.  If  a  second  and  a  third  sur-
face, on  each  of  which  also  it  must  lie,  it  has,  as  we  have  seen,
no  freedom  left :  in  other  words,  its  position  is  completely
speciBed,  being  the  point  in  which  the  three  soifaces  meet.
The  analytical  ambiguities,  and  their  interpretation,  in  cases  in
which  the  specifjfing  surfaces  meet  in  more  than  one  point,
need  not  oceapy  us  here.

To  express  tins  analyticaUy,  let  ^^a,  ^^fi,  O^y,  where
^,^Bm  innctions  of  the  position  of  the  pointy  and  a,0,y
constants,  be  the  equations  of  the  three  sets  of  snrfiioee,  different
yalnes  of  each  constant  giving  the  diflRsrent  surfaces  of  the  cor-
responding set  Any  one  yalue,  for  instance,  of  a,  will  determine
one  surfiice  of  the  first  set,  and  so  for  the  others :  and  three
particular  values  of  the  three  constants  specify  a  particular
point,  P,  being  the  intersection  of  the  tliree  surfaces  which
they  determine.  Thus  a,  /3,  y  are  the  "co-ordinates"  of  P;
which  may  be  referred  to  as  "  the  point  (a,  ^,  7)."  The  fonn
of  the  co-ordinate  surfaces  of  the  (yjr,  0,  6)  system  is  defined
in  terms  of  co-ordinates  (x,  y,  z)  on  any  other  system,  plane
rectangular  co-ordiuates  for  instance,  '}£  '^,^,6  are  given  each
as  a  function  of  (a?,  y,  s).

Orijrinofthe 203. Component  velocities  of  a  movinj?  point,  parallel  to
ctticuJui. the  three  axes  of  co-ordinates  01  the  ordinary  plane  ivctaniinlar
system,  are,  as  we  have  seen,  the  rates  of  au<iUienUiliuii  of
the corresj)onding co-ordinates. These, according to  the
I^ewtonian  tiuxional  notation,  are  written  a?,  y,  i ;  or,  according

to  Leibnitz's  notation,  which  we  have  used  above,  ^ , ,  ^  .

at at  at

Lagrange  has  combined  the  two  notationswith  admirable  skill  and
ta»te  in  the  first  edition*  of  hiB  M^nique  AnalyHque,  as  we  shall

*  In  laUt  editioM  the  KeivtcaiiaA  notalion  ii  iwj  nabappUy  altaied  I17  the

Digitized  by  Googlc

20S.]  KINEMATIGB.  159

see  in  Chap.  ii.  In  specifying  the  motion  of  a  point  according  to
the  generalized  system  of  oo-ordinatea, $  must  be  considered

as  varying  with  the  time :  (j>,  6,  or  ,  ,  ,  will
then  be  the  generalized  components  of  velocity:  and ^,  i,  or

^'  ^'  ''''  •  """^  ^  the  generalized

components  of  acceleration.

flOi.  On  precisely  the  same  principles  we  may  arrange  sets  co  ordi-
of  oo-ordinates  for  specifying  l^e  pontion  and  motion  of  a«rM«n.*^
material  system  consisting  of  any  finite  number  of  rigid  bodies,
or  material  points^  connected  together  in  any  way.  Thus  if
^>  ^*  Qta,  denote  any  number  of  elements,  independently
variable,  which,  when  all  given,  fully  specify  its  position  and
configuration,  being  of  course  equal  in  number  to  the  degrees
of  freedom  to  move  enjoyed  by  the  system,  these  elements  are
its  co-ordinates.  When  it  is  actually  moving,  their  rates  of
variation  per  unit  of  time,  or  >/r,  ^,  etc.,  express  what  we  shall
call  its  generalized  component  velocities  ;  and  the  rates  at  which

^,  etc.,  augment  per  unit  of  time,  or  i/r,  ^,  etc.,  its  component
accelerations.  Thus,  for  example,  if  the  system  consists  of  of  velocity,
a  single  rigid  body  quite  free,  ^,  0,  etc.,  in  number  six,  may  be
three  common  oo-ordinates  of  one  point  of  the  body,  and  three
angular  co-ordinates  (§  101,  above)  fixing  its  position  relatively
to  axes  in  a  given  direction  through  this  point  Then  ^,  etc.,  .
will  be  the  three  components  of  the  velocity  of  this  point,  and
the  velocities  of  the  three  angular  motions  ezphiined  in  §  101,
as  corresponding  to  variations  in  the  angular  co-ordinates.  Or,
again,  the  system  may  consist  of  one  rigid  body  supported  on
a  fixed  axis;  a  second,  on  an  axis  fixed  relatively  to  tiie  first ;
a  third,  on  an  axis  fixed  relatively  to  the  second,  and  so  on«
There  will  be  in  this  case  only  as  many  co-ordinates  an  there
are  of  rigid  bodies.  These  co-ordinates  might  be,  for  instance,
the  angle  between  a  plane  of  the  first  body  and  a  fixed  plane,
through  the  hrst  axis;  the  angle  between  planes  through  the

Bubstitution  of  accents,  '  and for  the  *  and  **  siguH^-ing  velooiUeB  and
accelerations.

Digitized  by  Google

160  PBELIMINART.  [204.

GcncnUsed  8eoond  ftzifl,  fixed  relatively  to  the  first  and  second  bodies,  and

OCNBWniMltt

idfSat»9'  SO  on;  and  the  component  velocities, etc  would  then  be

IimmiiliM.  the  angular  velocity  of  the  first  body  relatively  to  directions
fixed  in  space ;  the  augular  velocity  of  the  second  body  re-
latively to  the  first;  of  the  third  relatively  to  the  second,  and
so  on.  Or  if  the  system  be  a  set,  {  in  number,  of  material
points  perfectly  free,  one  of  its  Si  co-ordinates  may  be  the  sum
of  the  squares  of  their  distances  from  a  certain  point,  either
fixed  or  moving  in  any  way  relatively  to  the  system,  and  the
remaining  3*  — 1  may  be  angles,  or  may  be  mere  ratios  of
distances  between  individual  points  of  the  system.  But  it  is
needless  to  multiply  examples  here.  We  shall  have  iUustiations
enough  of  the  principle  of  generalised  co-ordinates*  bj  actual
use  of  it  in  Chap.  IL,  and  other  parts  of  this  book.

APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  L

A^. — EXBRESSION  IN  GENERALIZED  CO-ORDIXATES  FOR

Poisson's  extension  of  Laplac£*s  equation.

(a)  In  §  491  (c)  below  is  to  be  found  Poisson's  eztsosioin
of  Jjapkce's  equation,  expressed  in  leatilinesl  rectangular  oo-oidi*
nates ;  and  in  §  492  an  equivalent  in  a  fiHrm  quite  independent
cf  the  particular  kind  of  oo-ordinates  chosen :  all  with  referenoe
to  the  theory  of  attraction  aoooidizig  to  the  Newtonian  law.
The  same  analysis  is  largely  applicable  through  a  great  range  of
physieal  mathematics,  indudiug  bydro-ldnematics  (the  **  equation
of  continuity  '  §  192),  the  equilibrium  of  elastic  solids  Cg734X
the  vibcatioos  of  dastio  solids  and  fluids  (YbL  il),  Fouriet^a
tfaeory  of  heat,  Ac.  Hence  detaching  the  analytical  sulgect  from
particular  physical  applications,  conrider  the  equation

d'U d^U d^U .  ...

l^'^W^-^^'^  <^>

where  p  Ls  a  given  function  of  a?,  y,  s,  (arbitrary  and  discontinuons
it  may  be).  Let  it  be  required  to  express  in  terms  of  generalized

Digitized  by  Google

A,  (a).]  KINEBfATIGS.  161

co-ordinates t'.  the  property  of  U  which  this  equation  ex-  lApitioo  H
presses  in  terms  of  rectanfniliir  rectilinear  co-ordinates. This  generaUa«d
may  be  done  of  course  directly  [i^  (m)  IxilowJ  by  analytical  trans-
formatioii,  iindiug  the  expi-ession  in  terms  of  ^,  ^,  i'\  for  the

operatioii  ^  ^3  * ^  ^ ^  the  fbim  most  can*

venient  for  physical  aj>plications  much  more  ensily  as  follows,  l)y
tjikiug  advantage  of  the  fonnula  of  §  492  which  expresses  tli«
same  property  of  U  indejK'ndently  of  any  {tarticular  system  of
oo-ordinatea. This  expression  is

JJWdS=-^JJJpdB  (2),

whcie//<£S^4leiioteeintegrslioii  over  the  whole  of  adoBed  sarfiMse
S,  fff  dB  iniegralaoii  tluroughoat  the  Toluiiie  B  enoloaed  by  iX,
and  W the  rate  of  Tariation  c£  Wat  any  point  of  S,  per  unit  of
length  in  the  direction  of  the  nonnal  outwards.

(b)  Fear  B  take  an  infinitely  small  oorvilineal  parallelepiped
having  Ita  oentre  at ^,  f^,  and  angohur  points  at

{$^hH,  ^'^h^'r  r^jsr).

Let  i?Sf,  B'B^'j  7?"8^"  l^e  tlie  lengths  of  the  edges  of  the  paral-
lelepiped, and  a,  a',  a"  the  angles  between  tlicm  in  order  of
symmetry,  so  that  li'R"  sin  a  8^'^',  *tc.,  ai^  the  areas  of  its  faces.

Let  iJf^,  DT,  D"!"^  denote  the  rates  of  variation  of  U,  per
unit  of  length,  pcqniudicular  to  the  tliree  surfaces  const.,
^  =  const., =  const,,  intt^rsecting  in  ^")  the  centre  of  tha

pjirallelej»ij»t'd.  Tlu'  value  of  JjBU^dS  (or  a  section  of  the  paral-
lelepiped by  the  surface  ^  =  const,  through  {f,  i', will  be

BUt'Knah^Zi'DU.

Henoe  the  -valnes  i^fflU dS  for  the  two  oonrasponding  sides
of  the  paral1ele|uped  are

Henoe  the  value  of  jjhU dS  for  the  pair  of  sides  is
^  iJffB^'  sin  a  W D  U) .

or ^  {li'li:'  2maDU)hih^  8^".

Dealing  similarly  with  the  two  other  pairs  of  sides  of  the
parallelepiped  and  adding  we  find  the  first  member  of  (2).  Ita

VOL.  1.  11

Digilizoo  by  Google

162

PEELUilKABT.

[A.  (h).

La  place's
equation  in
P  neralizcd
cx>-or-

second  memUr  is  -  -^vp  .  Q  .  1\R' Ji"  8^  B^'  ",  if  Q  denote  tJie  ratio
of  the  bulk  of  the  pur;illeh'pi|)e<l  to  a  rcctanpilar  one  of  equal
edges.  Hence  equating  and  dividing  both  sides  hy  the  bulk  of
the  jjarallele|>i|)ed  we  find

^,|^^{jrjr«na2)r)  +  ^(ir'i?Bna'2)'e7)

+  ~  {RR rin a^irU)^  =  -  4»p ...  (8).
(e)  Itraiii«i»toei|raB2>27,  iXlT^iX'frmiew

Defcuifee  l]r Z  tbe  two  pointe ^,  D  >»d  (^+S^,
¥nm  It  (not  shown  in  tlie  dugnon)  draw-  LM  peipendicnlar  to

the  Riifuse  ^scon>t  throa|^  K,
lUdng  an  infimtelj  small  portion
of  thia  SQxlBoe  for  tho  plane  of  our
diagnuoD,  let  A',  he  the  lines
in  K^udi  it  is  cutiespeetiTely  hy  the
BulMeB  ^eoonst  and  ^scooBt.
through  JT.  Draw  US  parallel  to
^ ^ ff'JE;  and  MQ  perpendieiilar  to  KS.

Let  now/)  denote  the  angle  ZAMT,

A*

It

We  liave
ML  =  K/j  bin  p  =  R  sin  p  S^,

itrjf s oosec  a  s  i^X  ooseo  «  oot  il' =  i2  nnp  ooseo  a  oot  X

Sunflarly  Ey^BmapcoteeaeHtA^'U,
if  ii"  denotes  an  angle  corresponding  to  ul' ;  so  that  A'  and  A"
are  respeetively  the  anj^es  at  which  the  suftoes  ^'s const  and
^  s  const,  eat  the  plane  of  the  diagrsm  in  the  lines  JTB'  and  JW.

Now  the  difierence  of  yalnea  of  f  for and  If  ia  -j^.

» *» »f ^  It  "j^"

Hence  if  CT (A'),  ^'(.1/),  U{L)  denote  the  values  of  U  respectively
at  the  points  K,  J/, we  haye

and

ir(i)-ir(ir)+^«f.

Digitized  by  Google

{C).]  KIUEMATICS.  .  163

U(L)-U(Af)  Upw.

But  J)U=^ ^ 'r  t  eqiauonm

oo-or-

and  10  naing  tlie  pfeoeding  expreesioiis  in  tbe  tenns  inyolved  we  ^i""*^
find

nng  iJii0  and  tfaa  fljmmetrieal  expreBOOoa  tat  J/U  and  D^tT,
in  (3),  we  hvn  the  required  equation.

{d) It  is  to  be  remarked  that  a,  a'y  a"  are  the  tiiree  aides  of
a  spherical  triangle  d  "which  A,  A\  A"  are  the  angles,  and  p  the
peq)eiidion]ar  fixnn  the  angle  A  to  the  opposite  8idei»
Henoe  hj  spherical  trigonometrj

- cos  a  — cos  rt  cos  a'
•  coa^ g  ■  —J

sin  a  sill  a  '

' A  iy(l-ooe'a-CQe'a'-ooB'a"4-2ooBao(Md^oo8a")

ainaama  ^  '

ain  jvssin^'aini^

_ -co8*a--cos*a'-coB*o"-t'2ooBocosa  cosa")

sill  a /•

To  find  Q  remark  that  tlio  volume  of  the  parallelepiped  ifl
equal  U>/aap  .ghana  if/, A  be  its  edges :  therefore

Qsainpiina  (7)^

whence  by  (6)

Q  =  J{1-  <'0.s  '  a  -  cos'  a'  -  cos*  a "  +  2  cos  a  cos  a'  cos  a")  (8),

Laatij  by  (5)  and  (8)  we  have

tan  A  = (9).

ooaa-eoaa  ooea  ^  ^

(e) Using  these  in  (4)  we  find

1 /sin'  g  </ ^ coBg^'-eoeaoogg^  rfCT

coaa^-coR  aooaqf'  dU\  .

TTaiBg  tibia  and  the  two  flymmetiieal  expressions  in  (3)  and
adopting  a  common  notation  [App.  B  (^),  §  491  (c),  ^
aoooiding  to  whidi  Fbiason's  equation  is  written

V*C^=-4'P  (H),

11-2

Digitized  by  Google

164  .  PRELDUNARY.  [A,  (e).

iApiaoe'8 we  find  for  the  symbol in  tenna  of  the  gnieraliaedoo-ordiiiates

o(Hir>

+ i?'(ooi  a'' 008  »  -  COB  a')  ^„  j

^di'Q  L —  *  ^ rt'coear'- COS  a)

+ /J"  (cob  a  cos  a' -  COB  a")  ^ J  ,

•f  J?(oo8a'ooBa''-oo8a)^jj  -  (IS),

where  for its  value  bj  (8)  in  teiinB  of  a,  a',  a"  is  to  he  uaedt
aiul  a,  a^,  a", i?',  iS*  are  all  known  Amotions  of  ^,  ^|  ^  when
the  8ystem  of  OfHudinates  is  completely  defined.
Cue  of  (/) For  the  case  of  reotangoUff  co-ordinates  whether  plane

Zo^^^  w carved ama'^ti'^A^A'^A'*^ 90^ and  ^  =  1,  and therafim
^i^or we  have

t  _^  i'lfEEl'^\  A-f^K^^W

which  is  the  fonnnla  originally  given  hy  Lam6  for  expressing
in  terms  of  his  orUiogona]  carved  co-otdinate  tytAi&Bk  the  Foorier
eqnationB  of  the  oondnotioin  of  heat.  Hie  proof  of  the  more
general  fotmnla  (12)  given  above  is  an  eztensiony  in  purely
analytical  fonn,  of  »  demonstration  of  Lam^  finmnla  (13)  whidi
was  given  in  terms  relating  to  thermal  conduction  in  an  article
«<  On  the  eqoations  of  Motion  of  Heat  referred  to  carvilinear
c(H»idinate8  in  the  CamMdge  MaihmaUeol  Jowmal  (1843)w

(0)  IVnr  the  partioalar  case  of  polar  c(HNrdinate%  r,  $,  ^
considering  the  rectangular  paaraUelepiped  concqranding  to  fir,
89,  fi^  we  see  in  a  moment  that  the  lengths  of  its  edges  are  fir,
sin Hence  in  the  preceding  notation 1,  JS'sr,
i2"  s  r  nn  9,  and  Lam^s  fonnula  (13)  gives

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

A.  (A).]  KnmaTiCB.  165

(h) Aizain  let  the  co-ordinates  be  of  the  kind  which  has  Laplaoe'i.

^ ' ^  _  ^  «'(]ualiOii  in

been  called  "columnar":  that  is  to  say,  distance  from  an  txjiumnar
axis  (r),  angle  fi*oni  a  plane  of  reference  through  this  axis  to  din»tea.
ft  plane  through  Uie  axis  and  the  specified  point  {<f>),  and  distance
from  a  plane  of  reference  i>erpendicular  to  the  axis  («).  Xhe
co-ordinate  suriaoes  here  are

ooBzal  cuonlar  cjlliiden  (r  a  oonst)^

planes  through  the  axis  (^s  const.),
planes  perpendicular  to  the  axis  (z  »  const.).

Hm  three  edges  cf  tlie  infinitedmal  rectangular  parallelepiped
are  now  dr,  rd^  and  d».  Hence  Jlal,  li'ssr,  Sf*^\,  and
JjuaitfB  formula  giTee

-'-'dX^^h ^  iff  m

which  is  Tery  useful  for  many  physical  problem^  sadl  as  the
conduction  of  heat  in  a  aoUd  circular  column,  the  magnetization
of  a  round  bar  or  wire,  the  vibrations  of  air  in  a  closed  eLroalar
^linder,  the  vibiatiomi  of  a  Tortes  cdnmn,  Ac

(f)  Eor  plane  rectangular  co^ndinates  we  have  J?« JTs J2"j  AiRebrtie
80  in  this  case  (13)  becomes  (with  x,  y,  z  for  ^,  ^,  f  .'),  snSktooT

from  plane

^=^^^"s  (^<'>'  »££:

whidi  is  Lap]aoe*s  and  Fourier's  original  lonn.

(J)  Suppoee  now  it  be  desired  to  pass  from  plane  rectangular
oo-ordinates  to  the  generalized  co-ordinates.

Let  X,  1/f  zhe  expressed  as  funotious  of  ^,  ^, j  then  putting
for  brevity .  .

S^^'  1  =  ''  1=^'  J  =  ^',^.;  ^,  =  2:'^&c....(17);

we  have  Bx  =  X^  +  X'S^'  +  X"B^'A

8y=  +  Y^'Bti (18);

whence

^ = Ji^"* + r*^ +  (19),

Digitized  by  Google

PKELIMINAHT.

from  plan*

TCOteniute

to  genera-
lised oo«

and  the  direction  cosines  of  the  three  edges  of  ^tho  inEnitesimal
parallelepiped  corresponding  to  8^,  B$\  B^"  are

Hqnoo

oosa  =

"WW

008  0^  a

cos  o  =

.(21).

^RRR*mn.a*

(21);

(A;)  It  is  impoi'tant  to  remark  that  when  these  expressions
for  cos  a,  cos  a',  cos  a",  7?,  7?',  in  terms  of  X,  (fcc.  are  used  in
(8),  Q*  becomes  a  complete  square,  so  tluit  QRR'R"  is  a  rational
homogeneous  function  of  the  3rd  derrrop  of  X, Z,  X\  kc.

For  the  ordinary  ])rocess  of  finding  from  the  direct  iou  cosines
(20)  of  three  linos,  the  sine  of  the  angle  between  one  of  them  and
the  plane  of  the  other  two  gives

X,  r,  z

Knp  ~  X%  Y*f

fipOTO  thiB  and  (7)  we  see  tl)at  QRR'R"  is  equal  to  the  deter-
minant. From  this  and  (8)  we  see  that

Bqn«i  Of  a  iX'  +  r' + Z*){X'*  + + Z'*)  iX  "*  +  r'" + Z"^

-  (X" + Y"* + z'*)(xx' + rr + zzy

+  2  (JT'X'+r  7" + Z'Z"){X"X-¥Y"Y^Z"ZYXX''^TY%ZZ^

X, Y, Z,  '

X\ r,  Z', (22),

X  ",  Y",  Z  \

an  algeibraie  idenitlj  whioh  may  he  verified  hj  erpaaduig  hoth
members  and  comparing.

(Q  Denoting  now  hj  ^  the  oomplete  detemunant^  wo
have

T

Q=—

.(23),

and  namg  this  for  Q  in  (12)  we  have  a  fonnnia  fbr  v*  m  which
onlj  rational  ftindions  of  X,  7,  Z,  X\  ius.  appear,  and  whldi

Digitized  by  Google

A,  (I).]  KINEMATICS.  167

is  nadiljr  verified  by  oomparing  with  the  foUowing  derived  from  Aigebmio
(16)  bj  direot  tmufomiatioii.  mation
(m)*  Gk>  beck  to  (18)  and  xeBdTe  for  a^,  8^,  8^'.  We  find  nXllluTar

to  ^'onera-

«  =  5i&+f  ^y+^S^  fir-Ac,  fi^"»dta,

where

L  =  rZ"-T\Z',  M=Z'X"-Z"X\  N=X'Y"-X"Y';

L'=Y"Z-YZ'\ M'=Z"X-ZX",  N'=X"Y-XY",  \  (24).

L'^YZ'-YZ, M'^ZX^'-ZX,  JS'^^XY'-XY,

Hflnoe

d L  d L'  d L'  d d  d  ,

dx Tdl  ^T  di''^  2' '  Uj/^ '  dz^^

and  thus  we  have

*-f^£  £A  KAS  (--  —A  ^A\'

V \Tdi'^  Td€^  T  d€')  ^\Tdi^  T  d€^  T  d^'J

tK d N*  d  d\*

"■{Tdi^'T^^-Fde')  (^^^

d*  d^

Expanding  this  and  comparing  the  coeffioiente  of  ^  ,  ^^^^^ ,
d

<Scc  with  thoae  of  the  correBponding  tenoB  of  (12)  with  (21)
and  (28)  we  find  the  two  fonrndaa^  (12)  and  (20),  ^dffitffa].

A.— ExTENSiov  OF  Green's  Theobsh.

It  is  oonvenient  that  we  should  here  give  the  demonstratioii
of  a  few  theoietns  of  pure  analysis,  of  which  we  shall  have
many  and  most  important  applications,  not  only  in  the  subject
of  spherical  harmomcs,  which  follows  immediately,  but  in  the
general  theories  of  attraction,  of  fluid  motion,  and  of  the  con-
duction of  heat,  and  in  the  most  practical  investigations  regard-
ing electricity,  and  magnetic  and  electro-magnetic  force.

(a)  Let  U  and  U'  denote  two  functions  of  three  independent
Tariablefli  y,  z,  which  we  may  conveniently  regard  as  rect-
annfnlar  co-ordinates  of  a  point  and  let  a  denote  a  quantity
which  may  be  either  constant,  or  any  arbitraiy  function  of  the

Liyiiized  by  Google

168  PRELDCINART.  [A  (a).

variuLles. Let  jjjdxdydz  denote  integiation  throughout  a  finite*
s^iiiyly  contintums  space  bouiuh'd  hy  a  close  surface  *S';  let  /'/V/.S'
denote  integration  over  the  whole  Hurfaee  /V ;  and  let  8,  pretixed
to  any  function,  denote  its  rate  of  variation  at  any  jH^int  of
per  unit  of  length  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  tS  outwards.
Then

fff,/dUdir  dUdir  dudu'\  ,  ,  ,

d(  d(  '^"i d(  ^'^^  '

dxdydz

idxdydz

(1).

For,  taking  one  term  of  the  first  member  alone,  and  integmting;
"  by  parta^"  we  have

the  firrt  integnl  being  between  lunits  oomspondi^g  to  tiie  bop-
ftoe  8;  that  is  to  mj,  being  from  the  negatiTe  to  the  positive
end  of  the  portion  within  S,ct  id  each  portion  within  S,  d  the
line  « throoi^  the  point  (0,  s).  Nowif^i,  and  J,  denote  the
inclination  of  the  outward  normal  of  the  sui^Mse  to  this  line^  at
points  where  it  enten  and  emerges  from  8  reepectiTelj,  and  if

and  d8^  denote  the  elements  of  the  snrfiuse  in  whioh  it  is  cat

At  these  poukts  hy  the  xeotangolar  prism  standing  on  djfdz,  we
have

dydz  =  -  008 =  COB  J  ^dS^,
Thus  the  first  integral^  between  the  proper  limits,  involves  tlie

elements  Vtf^oos  A, dS„  and  ^V*a*^«MA,dS',  the  latter
«» * '  dx '  '

of  which,  as  oorresponding  to  the  lower  limit,  is  subtracted.

Uence,  there  being  in  the  whole  of an  element  d8^  lor  eaeh

element  dS^,  the  first  integmi  is  simplj

Digitized  by  Google

A  (a).]  KINEMATICS.  169

for  the  irhole  surface.  Adding  tlie  oomsponding  tonus  for  y«eoiwteat
and  z,  and  remarking  that  {ibMirOTn  of

GroBii'i*

dU . dU  dU  ^

006  ay  ax

Bqnaiion  «C

where  B  and  C  denote  the  inclinationB  of  the  oatward  normal
through  dS  to  lines  drawn  throngb  dS  in  the  pontive  direetions
parallel  to  y  and  a  reepectiTely,  we  perodve  the  truth  of  (1).

(6)  Again,  let  U  and  U*  denote  two  fimetions  of  se,  which
have  equal  Taluea  at  eveiy  point  of  and  of  whidi  the  fint
fulfils  the  equation

4:l,±S.±S,a

dx  dy  dz  ^  '*

for  every  point  within  S.
Than  if  (/'  -  27=11^  we  have

M('f)"H«fy^(«f)'j-^-

Por  the  first  member  is  equal  identicaUjr  to  the  second  member
with  the  addition  of

^/dUdu dUdu dUdu\  ,  ,  ,
But,  I7  (1),  iUt  b  aqma  to

i^"*^)  ''(-•f)  ''f-'T))

of  which  each  term  vanishes;  the  first,  or  the  double  integral,
because,  by  hypothesis,  u  is  equal  to  nothing  at  every  point  of  iSf
and  the  second,  or  the  triple  integral,  because  of  (2).

(c)  The  second  tcnn  of  the  second  member  of  (3)  is  essentially  propertyof
positive,  provided  a  luis  a  real  value,  whether  ])08itive,  zero,  or  ^'^j^'jr
negative,  for  every  |>oint  (x,  y,  z)  within  S. Hence  the  first  g^ow
member  of  (3)  necus-sarily  exceeds  the  first  term  of  tlie  second
member. But  the  sole  characteristic  of  f/"  is  that  it  satisfies  (2).  solution
Hence  V  cannot  also  satisfy  (2). That  is  to  say,  U  being  any

Digitized  by  Google

170  PBSUHINA&Y.  [A  (c).

1M  dalifmi-  one  Bolution  of  (2),  there  can  be  no  other  solution  agreeing  with
it  at  every  point  of  JS,  but  difiering  from  it  for  some  part  of  the
space  within  S.

woved  to  {d)  One  solution  of  (2)  exists,  satisfying  the  condition  that  IT

lias  an  arbitrary  value  for  every  point  of  the  surface  S.  For  let
U  denote  any  function  whatever  which  has  the  given  arbitrary
value  at  each  point  of let  ?*  be  any  function  whatever  which
is  equal  to  nothing  at  each  point  of  ^S^,  and  which  is  of  any  real
Unite  or  infinitely  small  value,  of  the  same  sign  as  the  value  of

ax  dy  dz

at  each  internal  point,  and  therefore,  of  course,  equal  to  nothing
at  every  intenial  point,  if  any,  for  which  the  value  of  this  ex-
pression nothing;  and  let  U' ~  U+6u,  where  6  denotes  any
constant.  Then,  using  the  formulie  of  (b),  modifie<l  to  suit  the
altered  circumstances,  and  taking  Q  and  Q'  for  brevity  to  denote

and  ibe  oonmponding  integnl  Ibr  V,  we  ha,re

The  coefficient  of  - 1$  liere  is  essentially  positive,  in  consequence
of  the  condition  under  which  u  is  chosen,  unless  (2)  is  satisfied,
in  which  case  it  is  nothing;  and  tlie  coefficient  of  6*  is  essentially
])ositive,  if  not  zero^  because  all  the  quantities  iny^dved  are  real.
Hence  the  equation  may  be  written  thus

where  m  and  n  are  each  posltLm  This  shew*  that  if  any  pontiTe
value  less  than  n  is  assigned  to  ^,  ^  is  made  smaller  than  Q ;
that  is  to  say,  unless  (2)  is  satisfied,  a  fbnction,  having  the  same
value  at  i9  aa  U,  may  be  found  which  shall  make  the  Q  integral
smaller  than  for  V,  In  oiher  words,  a  function  IT,  which,
having  any  preiciibed  value  over  the  sur&ce  S,  makes  the
integral  Q  for  the  interior  aa  small  aa  possible,  must  satisfy
equation  (2).  But  the  Q  integral  is  essentially  positive,  and
therefore  there  is  a  limit  than  which  it  cannot  be  made  smaller.

Digitized  by  Google

A  (d).]  KINEHATICB.  171

Hence  there  is  a  solution  of  (2)  subject  to  the  preacnbed  surface  fiointion

...  \  * •  «  proved

condition.  powlbJA.

(e)  We  have  seen  (c)  that  there  is,  if  one,  onlj  one^  solution

of  (2)  subject  to  the  prescribed  surface  condition,  and  now  we

see  that  there  is  one. To  recapitulate, — we  conclude  that,  if

the  value  oi  Uhe  given  arbitrarily  at  every  point  of  any  olosed

8ui£iwe^  tlie  equation

ax\  a»/ aff\ dy)  dzj

determines  its  value  without  ambiguity  for  every  point  within
thai  sui&oe.  That  this  important  proposition  hdds  also  fbr  the
whole  Infinite  space  without  the  snrfiuse  8^  follows  from  the  pte-
ceding  denumstration,  with  only  the  prscaution,  that  the  diffisrent
functions  dealt  with  must  be  so  takoi  ss  to  render  all  the  triple
integrals  eonveigent  8  need  not  be  merely  a  single  dosed
snrfiuse,  but  it  may  be  any  number  of  sur&oes  enciosing  isolated
portions  of  qiaoei  The  extreme  ease,  too,  of  S,  or  any  detached
part  ciS^  an  open  shsU,  that  is  a  finite  unclosed  snrfisce,  is  dearly
included.  Or  lastly,  8,  or  any  detadied  part  of  may  be  an
infinitely  extended  surface,  provided  the  value  of  U  aibitnuily
assigned  over  it  be  so  assigned  as  to  render  the  triple  and  double
integrals  invidved  all  oonvergcut.

B. — Spherical  Habmonic  Ai^alysis.

The  mathematical  method  which  has  been  commonly  referred  ^^^^

to  by  Ensrlish  writers  as  that  of  "Laplace's  CocflBcients,"  but  iiarmonlo
. .  .  .  analfita,

■which  is  here  called  spherical  harmonic  dualysis,  h;xs  for  its

object  the  expression  of  an  arbitrary  periodic  function  of  two
independent  variables  in  the  proper  form  for  a  large  class  of
physical  problem involving  arbitrary  dnta  over  a  spherical  sur-
face, and  the  deduction  of  solutions  for  every  point  of  space.

(a)  A  ^pUmiooil  karmame/uinetion  is  defined  as  a  Komogeneoxis  Definition
function,  Vf€ix,y,M,  which  satisfies  the  equation  hurnlai[i^

funoUona.

<pr  tPr  4FV  „  ...
■^^W*^'^

Its  (le^ec  may  lx>  any  poHitive  or  negative  integer;  or  it  may
be  fractional;  or  it  may  be  imaginary.

Digitized  by  Google

172  FBELDOKABT.  [B  (a).

Exsmpiesof  ExAMPLKa. The  functions  written  bclovr  are  spherical  liar-

iianuomoj. moiucti  ol'  Ui©  degrees  noted;  r  represeutiug  —

I.

1;  kff  .

m.

IV.

t«n-»^- tan-' ?^  loir •  •  J^^_

tan ^, tan „log^_^, ^^^^.j.  ,  («'+y')'-

' Gttimlly,  In  Tirtae  of  (^)  (15)  and  (13)  below,

rfr rfr  dT^

if  denote  any  harmonic  of  degree  0 ;  for  iiistance,  group  III.
.below.

Generalljj  in  virtue  of  ((7)  (15),  (13),  below,

whfiTO  7^  denotes  any  spherical  bamumic  of  Int^gnl  degree,  j,

and  B^,  S,^.^  bomogeneous  integral  functions  of  ^»  ^>  ^  »

of  degress  n  and  f»-j-l  lespeedTely:  Ibr  iiMtan«s  "O^b^  <^
gronp  II.  above^  and  groups  Y.  and  VL  below.

<f-'(r^-') ^  a;

il*  tan"'  ^

v..

Keumrk  that

t«n-»|=:--^— -log

and  therefore

il"  tan"*  ^

_r-2  =  (-l)-l.J...(n-l)J!!l!5L.

Digitized  by  Google

(a).]  KiNEiCA.Tica.  173

go  tik6  procediiif  yiolds  Exampic^sof

*  '  ,  .  aphi-ncul

Bin  ,  bfuiuouioi.

where  ^  denotes  taa~'  - .

Li

r.ss-  log

or

*•  -  s^rr {(i  *  I {i-i  ^^0] •

find

where  ^  denotes  differentiation  with  reference  to  r  on  the  sup-

d  .

pohition  of  z  constant,  and  ^  differentiation  witii  reference  to
on  sappoaition  of  x  and  y  constant

JJtgree  -i-1,  or  +  i,  aiid  type  H{z,  ^(x*  +  y')}  ^n^

H  denoting  a  bomogeneons  fVinction;  n  anj  integer;  and  %
any  positive  integer.

Let  V^'J  and  V  '^  denote  functions  yielded  by  V.  and  VI.  pre-
ceding. The  following  axe  the  two*  distinct  functiona  of  the
doirrees  and  types  now  soug^t^  and  found  in  Tirtiie  of  (y)  (15)
below:—

IT**  -  ^  77'"' r'"'  ^^*lv  '

-•-«  dr
•  8ee  KOhelow.

Digitized  by  G

174

Ezftmpiptof or  explicitly

spluTical
harmoniofc

PSSLIMINABT.

[B  (a).

I.

cos

,r<^ d-*'(r*"-*)  Bin

In  tbe  particuliir  case  of  i»sO,  these  two  are  not  distinct,
of  them  yields

as

The  other  harmoiuc  of  the  same  degree  and  type  is

/ To  obtain  the  harmooicB  of  the  same  types,  but  of  degree  i,
XII.  <  multiply  each  of  the  preceding  groups  L  and  II.  by  r*'^',  in
I  virtue  of  (^)  (13)  belov.

Generally,  in  ^^rtuc  of  (y) below,  any  of  the  preceding
functions  of  dei^co  zero  diWdt  d  by  r;  or,  in  virtue  of  (^)  (15),
the  differential  coellicient  of  any  of  them  with  reference  to  x,
^  or  y,  or  «. For  instance^

n-jf*

ir « r r— « r 0 r— s

X  jce  a;

Digitized  by  Google

B  (a).]  KINEKATIC&  175

Exampleiof

Degrees  —2  and  +1.  SJiilZiS*

{X y  z
p,  p;  y,

p»««r-ri-;»i .!<«  — -2r.

WWf'  W^/f'

COS Bin  2<f> C08  2^ r"  sin  20

1  /, r+s 2r::  \  +  « 2rc  \

log  + , , ) X ; (log  - +  ^ —  , )  a?

(tLo  former  being  ^  of  III.  2  clegi-ee  —  1,  and  the  latter  being
^-Jdz  of  VL  degree  0  with  »=  1).

S7i«  Ratuynal  Integral  Harmonica  of  Degree  2.
I. Frve  diatiiioi  fbnetkosy  Ibr  imttannfl^

^-tf  'i  y«;  ««;  ay.
'  Or  one  function  with  fire  u^trary  canat^

{whei

where  a+&4>«s0.

Degrees  -n  - 1,  and  +  n  (n  any  integer).

With  fltme  notation  and  same  references  for  proof  as  abore  for

Degi-ec  0,  groap  TV,

Smapln

>1nor

Partial

170  PBEUMIKART.  [B  (a).

Degrees  e-f«^  and  —e  — 1— i^
(v  denoting  V- 1»  and  e  ukd/taj  real  qoantiUeB.)

i[(«  +  vi^)^-Hr+  (x-i»y)«+Hr]; ~  [(x  +  vy)*+t/'-(a;-vy>'+'/]:
or ^•♦'«^oob[(«  +  ^)«A];  q»*^mxi[(e+^)ifi,
where j'=iy(«'  +  y*)  and  ^  =  toii~*|:

or  icn*  +  €- hT) •  ^3*+'«^[€»<«'+h/)#  -  c-  »(*  +H/'>*] :

or I { [c-os  (/  log  q  -  e<f>)  +  V  Bin  (/  log  7  -  e4)]
\ +  €-/^  [cos  (/  log  g  +  e^)  +  V  sin  (y*  log  g  +  e^)]};

{Sir
the  eame  with  -~  +  e<f>  instead  of  e^

or

or

(6)

Jr-f  -  Vp*  [«»  (/1<«^-  «*) +»«i«>  (/l<«p  -•♦)]

+  r-*  [00.  (/kg  J + + •  bh  (/kg  ^♦•♦)]  J .

A  jpAerMoi  wwtface  harmonic  is  the  functioii  of  two
angular  co-ordinates,  or  epheiioal  snrfiice  coordinatee,  which  a
spherical  harmonic  becomes  at  any  s|iherical  surface  described
from  0,  the  origin  of  OHirdinates,  as  centre.  Sometimes  a  func-
tion  which,  aoeording  to  the  definition  (a),  is  simply  a  spherical
harmonic,  will  be  called  a  tpherical  solid  hannomc^  when  it
is  desired  to  oall  attentioii  to  its  not  being  confined  to  a  spherical
snrfooe.

(0)  A  cMni^Isfe  ijpWwal  Aomoiile  is  one  iridch  is  finite  sad
of  sb^e  Talne  for  all  finite  yalnes  of  the  ooKirdinates.

A  pariOal  harmonii/o  is  a  spherical  harmonie  which  either  does
not  oontinnoosly  latiBl^  the  fundamental  equation  (4)  for  spaoe
completely  sunounding  the  centre^  or  does  not  retam  to  the
same  Talne  in  going  onoe  round  every  dosed  curve.  The
''partial"  harmonic  is  as  it  were  a  harmonio  for  a  part  of  the
s|^erical  suffooe:  but  it  may  be  for  a  part  which  is  greater  then
the  whole^  or  a  part  of  which  portions  jointly  and  independently
occupy  the  same  apaoeu

Digitized  by  Google

(d).]  XIN0UTIO8.  177

(f/) It  will  be  sliown,  later,  §  (//),  tluit  a  complete  spherical  Alitebraic
liurinouic  is  necessarily  either  a  ratioiiHl  integral  functioi
oo-ordinatfiw,  or  reducible.to  one  bjr  a  factor  of  the  form

m  being  an  integer.

(0)  The  general  problem  of  finding  harmonic  functions  is  DUhNntfai
most  oondaely  stated  thus : —

To the  most  general  integral  of  the  equation

subject  to  the  condition

du (lit  du

se  T-  +  V  j~  +  z  -J-  -  nu  ,

ax '  ay  dz

[iMtlmwor
amrmenle
of  dcBVwu.

the  second  of  these  e(|u;i(iuns  \)v\nif  merely  the  analytical  expres-
sion of  the  conilition  that  i'  is  a  lumiogoneous  function  of  a:,  y,  z
of  the  degn'e  which  may  Ik;  any  whole  number  pobitive  or
uegative,  any  fraction,  or  any  iuiaginaiy  (quantity.

Let  P+vQ  be  a  harmonio  of  detgree  «  +  ^  /*, e^/  being

real.

We  have
d  d

DifTtTpntial
rquatioii  (ur
real  ronati*
tuentsofft
homaKrafH
on«  ftinctian
of  imavi-

and  therefore

dp dP dP p  .^^

dz

dQ dQ  dQ

irhenee

and

(/)

Analytif-nl  exjii-essions  in  yariotis  forms  for  an  absolutely  Vaineof
<^neral  iiit(  (^ration  of  tliese  equations,  may  be  found  without  ^mbolical
much  difficulty  ;  hut  with  us  the  only  value  or  interest  which
any  such  investigation  can  have,  de|)ends  on  the  STailability  of

vou  I.  12

Use  of  com'
pletenpheri*

cal  har-
inoiiicN  in
physical

llsrs  f)f  in»
conijili-to

harmonics
in  physical

Working
formuls.

178  PBKUXINAKT.  [B(/).

its  results  for  Rolutions  fulfilling  the  conditions  at  bounding  sur-
faces presented  by  pLysical  problems.  In  a  very  large  and  most
important  class  of  physical  problems  reganling  space  bounded  by
a  complete  sphoncal  surfnco,  or  by  two  complete  concentric
spherical  surfiiocH,  or  by  cl«>st'<l  surfaces  differing  very  little  from
si)hericiil  surfaces,  the  case  of  n  any  positiv  e  or  negative  integer,
integrated  particularly  unde,r  the  restriction  htsitetl  in  (d),  is  of
pai-amount  importsJice.  It  will  bo  wm  ked  out  thoroughly  btlDW.
Ajjain,  in  similar  problems  regarding  sections  cut  out  of  spheriwil
spaces  by  two  diametral  planes  making  any  angle  with  one
another  not  a  sub-mtdtiple  of  two  rvj/if  avgleg,  or  regarding  spac*-s
boinided  by  two  circular  conos  having  a  common  vort^'x  and
axis,  and  by  the  included  j>ortion  of  two  spheriail  Hui-fucos
descriV)ed  from  their  vertex  as  centre,  solutions  for  chkos  of
fractional  and  imaginary  values  of  n  are  useful.  Lastly,  when
the  subject  is  a  soli<l  or  fluid,  shaped  as  a  section  cut  from  the
last-mentioned  spaces  by  two  planes  through  the  axis  of  the
cones,  inclined  to  one  another  at  any  ani:lt',  whether  a  sub-
multiple  of  IT  or  not,  we  meet  with  the  csise  of  n  either  integral
or  not,  but  to  Ije  integi-atcMl  under  a  restriction  differing  from
that  specificil  in  (d).  We  shall  accordingly,  after  investi;L;;itiiig
general  expressions  for  complete  spherical  harmonica,  give  sorne
indications  as  to  the  determination  of  the  incomplete  harrnoiiii  s,
whether  of  fnutioiml,  uf  iiuagiuary,  or  of  integral  degrees,  which
are  required  for  the  solution  of  problems  regarding  such  portions
of  spherical  spaces  as  we  have  just  descrilxMl.

A  few  formula^,  which  will  l>e  of  ct:)nstant  use  in  what  follows,
ttre  brought  together  in  the  first  place.

(ff)  Oslling  0  tbe  origin  of  oo^ordinates,  and  P  the  point
y,  c»  let  OP^r,  so  that  a^-t>^+s*si^. Let  ^  prefizod  to
any  function,  denote  its  rate  of  variation  per  unit  of  apaoe  in
the  direction  OP ;  so  that

If  //  denote  any  homogeneous  function  of  as,  «  of  order  n,  we
have  clearly

 (7);

whence  ar— • +y  — +  « -^-^tiF.  (5)  or  (8),

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

B  ig).]  KUnOEATIGB.  179

the  woll-known  dilTorential  equation  uf  a  lioniof^oneoiis  function;  Working
in  wliich,  of  course,  n  may  have  any  value,  jx).sitive,  integnil,
negative,  fractional,  or  imaginary. Again,  denoting,  for  brevity,

d'  d*

+ by  V*»  'w'o  liftve,  by  differentiation,

 (9).

AUo,  if  u,  u'  denote  any  two  functions,
whence^  if  u  and  1/  are  both  solatioins  of  (4),

or,  by  taking  u—  V^a,  harmonic  of  degree  n,  and  u' - r^,

or,  by  (8)  and  (9),

^•(r^  rj  =  m  (2n  +  m  +  l)r— (12).

Ttom  this  last  it  fellows  that  r~**~'  is  a  harmonio  j  which,
bei^g  of  degree  — n- 1,  maj  be  denoted  bj  Fl.,.|,  eo  that  wa
hare

F..  r

if  »■•■«'  — 1

(13).

a  formula  showing  a  reciprocal  i"elation  between  two  solid  har-
monics which  give  the  Ranie  form  of  surface  hannonic  at  any
spherical  sni-face  described  from  0  as  centre.  Again,  by  taking
m  =  —  1,  Hi we  have

r*i=0  (U).

Hence  ^  is  a  harmonic  of  degi*ee  —  1. "We  shall  see  later

§  (A),  that  it  is  the  only  con^iUte  karmonie,  of  this  degree.
If  «  be  any  solntion  of  the  equation  v'<*  =  0,  we  have  also

12—2

Digitized  by  Google

180

PRELIMINABY.

furmulsp.

Tlieorem
line  to

of  l.hi'«>n»in
of  Laplace
to  partial
liAraKmtc*.

iumI  fio  oa  for  any  number  of  diflerentiationai Hence  if  is

a  harmonic  of  any  degree  i,  ^^^^^  ia  a  harmonic  of  d^i^ee
fj^k-l;  or,  as  we  may  write  it^

<i^<iy^>^'-^'''"'  <^^>'

Again,  we  have  a  moet  important  theorem  expreaaed  the
following  equations : —

ffS^fdv^O  (16),

where  dm  denotes  an  element  of  a  spherical  surface,  described
fix>m  0  as  centre  with  radius  ui\ity ;  //  an  int^pnation  over  the
whole  of  this  surface;  and  S^,  two  complete  snriSue  harroonicB,
of  which  the  degrees,  i  and  if  are  neither  equal  to  one  another,
nor  such  that  i  +  For,  denoting  the  solid  harmonics

t*S.  and  r*Sf  by  and  for  any  point  (ar,  y,  2),  we  have,  by
the  general  theorem  (1)  of  A  (a),  above,  applied  to  the  space
between  any  two  »pherical  surfaces  having  0  for  their  common
centre,  and  a  and  o,  their  radii ; —

\iU  dx dy  dy dz di  /

But>  according  to  (7),  8rr=  -  V^,  and  SFi--  r«. And  for  the

portions  of  the  bounding  surface  constituted  by  tlie  two  spherical
surfaces  respectively,  d(T = a'cfar,  and  da  -  a*dv.  Hence  the  two
hist  equal  members  of  the  preoeding  douUe  equatiooa  becooie

to  satisfy  which,  when  i  differs  from  t',  and  a'**'**  from  a^***"^*,
(IC)  must  hold.

Tlie  coiTespondiug  theorem  for  partial  liaimonics  lb  this ; —

Let  Siy  tSi^  denote  any  two  different  partial  surface  harmonics
of  degi'ees  t,  t",  having  their  sum  different  from  -  1  ;  and  further,
fulfilling  the  condition  that,  at  every  point  of  the  boundary  of
some  one  part  of  the  sj)herical  Biirface  either  each  of  them
vanishes,  or  the  rate  of  variation  of  each  of  them  peq)endicular
to  this  boundary  vanishes,  and  that  each  is  6nite  and  single  in
its  v«lue  at  everj'  point  of  the  enclosed  portion  of  surface;  then,
with  the  intention  //  limited  to  the  portion  of  surface  in

Digilizeo  by  GoOglc

B  (ff).]  KINEHATICS.  181

qut\sti()n,  C(iuuti<)n  (IG)  holds.  The  proof  diffei'S  fi-oiu  the  •^'tt">8i'>"
luecodin;;  only  in  this,  that  iiustoad  of  takiiii'  the  whole  8i>ace  of  Lapiat-o

.  .  »  to  partial

bt'tween  two  concentiic  splierical  surtaces,  we  must  now  take  Uuruiuuiw.
only  the  part  of  it  enclosed  by  the  cone  liaving  0  for  vertejt,  and
containing  the  boimdary  of  the  spherical  area  considered.

(//)  Proceeding  now  to  iho  inTCstigation  of  complete  harmonics,  Jj^^**,****  .
we  shall  first  prove  thatemr  such  fimc^aiB  either lational  and  oompieto
integral  in  terms  of  the  oo^>rdiQateB  x,  y,  z,  or  is  made  bo  by
a  factor  of  the  form  r".

Xiet  V  be  any  function  o£x,y,9,  satisfying  the  equation

T*r=0  (17)

at  eveiy  point  within  a  aphetical  sur&oe,  S,  described  from  0  as
centra,  with  any  radina  a.  Ita  valae  at  this  auxfaoe,  if  a  known
function  of  any  aibitraiy  character,  may  be  expanded  according
to  the  genend  theorem  of  §  51,  below,  in  the  following  aeries : —

(r  =  a),  r==S,^S,  +  S,-^  +.S'i  +  etc.  (18)

where  .S'j,  S^,...S^  tlenoto  the  surface  values  of  solid  spherical
harmonics  of  degrees  1,  2,...i,  each  a  rational  int^ral  function
for  every  point  within  aS'.  But

r  f*
S^  +  S~  +  S,—,-i- ...  +  «S',  -.  +  etc  (19)  HMrmonie

Green's  pro*

is  a  fonction  lulfillins;  these  conditions,  and  tliorofore,  as  was  biem  for  the
proved  above,  A(<;),  V  cannot  differ  from  it. Now,  as  a  parti-  asipht  ricai
cnlar  case,  let  F  be  a  hannonio  function  of  positive  dflgree  i,

r*

which  may  be  denoted  hy  St^:  wo  must  have

^,  -  =  .SL  +  ,S^,  -  + -,+  ...  +  -S, +  etc.

This  cannot  be  nnleas  i^i,  S^rzSi,  and  all  the  other  functions
S^,  S^,  Sj,  etc.,  Taaish. Hence  there  can  be  no  complete  spheri-

r*

cal  harmonic  of  positive  degree,  which  is  not,  as  /S*!^,  of  integral

of  |>ositiTe

degree  and  an  integral  rational  function  of  the  oo-ovdinateaL  dcicroca,

Agaiii,  let  r  be  any  function  aatiafying  (17)  for  eveiy  pcont  ntionaiMui
without  the  apherical  sutftce  S,  and  vaniahing  at  an  in6nite  dis-  ^'^'"'^

tanee  in  eveiy  direction;  and  let^  as  before,  (18)  express  its  surface  iirtnnonio^
value  at  8, We  similarly  prove  that  it  cannot  differ  from n  rron  h  i  ro.

blfiia  for

'^^'^^^'^  .^'-t.  wS-

Digilizeo  by  Cookie

ia2

pjlELIMIliAEY.

Hannonlo
tolutfun  of
Or«en'ipTO>

blera  for
Bpac}  ex-
ternal to  a
tpbericai

("nmplf't«?
li.'iriiioiiirs

of  negmliTO

dflftraM  of

eomplete
harmonic*.

CS«nera]
expre»»iona
for  complete
hamionioit

•Btifttloin  of

-1.

Hence  if,  as  a  particular  case,  V  be  any  complete  harmonic
OF

side  JS,

of  n^tiye  degree  «,  we  most  have,  for  all  points  out-

a*

aS^ a'S,  a*S,

■which  requires  thut  *c  --(I'-f- 1),  S\^S(,  and  that  all  the  otlior  func-
tions «S'p  /S^f  etc.,  vanifik.  Hence  a  complete  spherical  harmonic

of  negative  degree  cannot  be  other  than  -pvr »  o^*  "pm^/^t

where  S\r'  is  not  only  a  rational  integiiil  function  of  tlio  eo-
onlinutcA,  as  assei'ted  in  the  enunciation,  but  is  ituelf  a  spherical
harmonic.

(i)  Thus  we  have  proved  that  a  complete  qAierical  harmonic^
if  oi  positive,  is  neoessarily  of  integral,  degree,  and  is,  besides,  a
rational  integral  function  of  the  co-ordinateB,  or  if  of  negiative

V

degree,  -(t  +  1),  is  necessarily  of  the  form  -piln  where  l\  is

a  harmonic  of  positive  degree,  t.  We  shall  therefore  call  the  ordtr
of  a  complete  spherical  harmonic  of  negati%'e  degree,  the  degree
or  order  of  the  complete  harmonic  of  positive  degree  allied  to  it;
and  we  sltall  call  the  order  of  a  surface  harmonic,  the  d^ree  or
order  of  the  solid  harmonic  of  positive  degree,  or  the  order  of  the
solid  hannonic  of  negative  d^gree^  which  agreea  with  it  at  the
spherical  sur&oe.

(J)  To  obtain  general  ezpreasionii  finr  complete  splierical  liar-
monies  of  all  orden,  we  may  first  remark  that^  inasmnch  as  a
constant  is  the  only  rational  Integral  function  of  degree  0,  a  com-
plete harmonic  of  degree  0  is  neoesBarily  constant  Hence,  by
what  we  have  just  seen,  a  complete  harmonic  of  the  degree  - 1

is  necessarily  of  the  foim  - . That  this  function  is  a  harmonic

we  knew  before,  by  (14).

Hence,  by  (15),  we  see  that

(21).

if  j^k-^l^i

where  denotes  a  baimomc^  whidi  la  clearly  a  complete
harmonic,  of  degree 1).  The  diflerential  coeffident  here  in-

Digitized  by  Google

£  (j).]  KINEMATICS.  183

dicttted,  when  worked  out,  is  easily  found  to  be  a  fraction,  of  which  By  difr  >r-

...  etitiatiuii  of

the  numerator  is  a  rational  integral  function  ox  degree and  the  iixrmonic  or
denominator  is  9***^ By  what  we  have  just  seen,  the  nume-  ^^^^  ^
imtor  must  be  a  hannonio;  and,  denoting  it  hj  Fi,  we  thus  have

The  nmuber  of  independent  hannonics  of  order  %,  whidi  we  Number  or

I  *  in(lep(>ndent
ca.u  tiius  derive  by  UiiTereutiation  from is  2t  +  1.  For,  although  |jf  j^"*^

tliei-e  are uinerential  coefficieuta  j-j-rxjii?  »or

^  tuerayrdsf

"whidi  j  +  k  +  l  -  i,  ouly  2t  +  1  of  these  are  independent  wiion  i

is  the  floljeot  of  differentiation,  itiasmiioh  as

which  gives  =  (-  1)  (  j_t  +  X5  )  -  (23),  ReUtion

r ^ '  \da^ air/  f  between

dilTfrential

f»  being  say  integer,  and  shows  that  or  aar.^'^^

/ i^T '^'^^  f/'Vi-'c/l  ....

....(24).

Hence,  by  taking  / 0,  and  j-^k-ifia  the  first  place,  we  hare

^+»

i+ 1  differential  ooeffioents ^j^^ ;  and  by  taking  next  Is  l^and
j-t-k"*^  li  we  have  t  vanetiee  ^  ^  b*7>  have

in  all  2i  4- 1  varietieSy  aud  no  more,  when  -  in  the  »ubjectw  It  is

T

easily  seen  that  these  2«  + 1  varieties  sre  in  reality  independent
We  need  not  stop  at  present  to  show  this,  as  it  will  be  apparent
in  the  astoal  expansions  given  below.

Now  if  ffi{x,  y,  z)  denote  any  ratioiml  integral  function  of
»iy,z  of  degree  i,  W/^  (x,  y,z)  is  of  degree  i  -  2. lience  since

Digitized  by  Google

184  PRELDflKABT.  [B07*

Complete Henco  if  v'jGT,  s  Oy  we  Iiato  *  ^^I" equatioiui  amonff  ilw  oonatant

harmonic  of  J

inTwtj(^«d coefficienta,  and  the  number  of  independent  coofitants  remaining  is

constants  in  the  general  rational  integral  harmonic  of  de?roe  /.
But  we  have  seen  that  there  are  +  l  distinct  varieties  of  dif-
ferential ooeffidents  of  -  of  order  «,  and  that  the  nnmerator

r

of  each  is  a  liariiionic  of  degree  i.  Hence  every  conij)lcte  liar-
monic  of  order  %  is  expressible  in  terms  of  diflerentiai  coei^cients

of  - . It  is  impoBsible  to  form  2t  -i- 1  fanetioiia  symmetrioa]] j

T

among  three  variables,  except  when  2t  +  1  is  Uivi&ible  liv  3  ;  that
is  to  say,  when  t  =  3H+l,  n  being  any  integer.  Tliis  class  of
cases  does  not  seem  particularlj  interesting  or  important^  but
here  are  two  examples  of  iU

Example  1.  »  » 1,  St  4- 1 »  3.
The  haxmonios  are  obviously

_f/  1 d  I  (/I

Formula  (26)  involves  s  smgdarlj,  and  m  aaid  y  ^ymmetirically,
for  ereiy  Taloe  of  t  greater  than  unitjr,  bat  fbr  the  case  of  ts  1
it  is  esMiitiaU J  i^Tnunetrioal  i&  xeBpect  to  and  s^  as  in  this
ease  it  becomes

Examples. is4,  2»4-l»9.

T^n«g  first  for  three  diffisrential  ooeffioients  of  the  4th  order,
singular  with  respect  to  and  ifymmetrieal  with  respect  to
y  and  a;  and  thence  changing  cyclicallj  to  ym  and  ssy,  we  find

^  d*

dy*d^'  dxd/'  dxd:^*

d*  <y
d?di?*  dyds^'

dx'dy"  dzda^'  did^'

Digitized  by  Google

BO)-]

185

1  ...  Complete

Tlieso  uiue  tUffcrentiatious  of are  eKscntuilly  distinct  and  li»nnpniorf

fi  any  dt^rm

invcstigattd

of  the  4th  ordor  formed  aifft  biM-
Rymmetricully  among  x,  y,  z. By  putting  iu  tiiem  for

give  us  thexefove  niae

comiideriiig

wherever  it  occurs,  ita  equivalent  — +  i

1  (/^
that  it  is  -  which  is  differentiated,  and  for  -rj,  ita  equivalent
r

"  ^ ^  ^}  *  them  to  (25).

But  for  every  value  of  i  the  general  harmonic  may  be  exhibited
as  a  function,  with  2i  +  1  constants,  involving  two  out  of  the
three  variables  symmetrically.  Thin  may  be  done  in  a  variety
of  ways,  of  which  we  choose  the  two  following,  as  being  the
most  useful : — First,

General  ex-
]»Nnion  for
«QilBplete
tawiDoaieof

(25).

Secondly,  let z  +  yv  =  {, x  —  y«  =  i;

irluMk  H  finurij, «  b  teken  to  denote  tj^l.

1  1

(26),

(27);

where  [ar,  j/]  and  ?;]  denote;  the  same  quantity,  expressed  in
t^rms  of  X,  y,  and  of  ri  reepecUToly.  From  these  we  havoy
further,

Imaginary
linear  trant*

Digitized  by  Google

ise

mBUHIMABT.

linear  trans-
formatkMi.

or^  aocording  to  our  abbreviated  notation^

d*^

[BO).

..(29).

1

Hence,  as  ^*V  ^  0,  if  P  deuoto  -  or  anj  otlier  aolid  harmoiuc,

 (2d').

TTsing  (28)  in  (25)  and  taking  a„  a,,  iJ,„  B,,  to  denote

another  set  of  coefficients  readily  expresbible  in  terms  of
-^o*  -^,>  -^0' •  ■  we  find

...(30).

Expansion
of  eloment-

Tiie  diirereDtiiitions  here  are  performed  with  gnat  eaee,  hy  the
aid  of  X^eibDits'a  theonm. Thna  we  have

m(ii>«'l).n(n~l)
^i.2.(fn-H»-^(m+n-})''

i"-"^"-V-etc.J

and

fj.*.  ..-1^1^^  m(»t- l).n(»- 1)  ■]

....  (31)

Polar  trani»
formatioa.

This  eaqntession  leads  at  once  to  a  real  development^  in  tetms  of
polar  oo-ordinate%  thus Let

t^rwmB,  «»r8in^oo0^  .ysrain^ida^  (32);

■0 that  ^srsin^c*^,  i7»rBtn^-«* (33).

Then,  since  ^  =  x'  +  y'  =  r*  sin*  $,

and

^1?"  =  (W  V  =  (ft)"(r8in  ^)'(co«^+y8in^)' = (r8in^)--(ooa«^+v8in#^),
whet€  tan-m;  and  i^  fbrther,  we  take

(34)

KINEUATIOS.

187

we  have

d'"^"  I cr*'  1

d$-drj'  r d^'df'  r

sin— ^  - ,  ,  sin—- +

l.(f»+»+  ^)

SlU

^+  l).n(w-  1)

(35)

Setting  a.side  now  constant  factors,  which  have  been  retained
hitherto  to  show  the  rehttious  of  the  expreasions  we  have  investi-

gatod,  to  differenlaal  coefficieatB  of  ^ ;  taking  3  to  denote  anm-

r

million  with  respect  to  the  arbitrary  constants,  A,  A'»  B>  B'i
and  putting  nin^-v,  coh^  =  /x;  we  have  the  following  perfectly
general  expression  for  a  oomplete  surface  harmouio  of  order  i  i—^

:S  (A.co8s</>+A,'8in*<^)0^^+i  (B.co6«^+B>iii«^>ir^^...(3G)
where  « = m  and

m(«»-l) .«(«—  1)

-etc

^■»"'''"'*'"l.(ifi+«- .3.(»n-n-|)(m+n-^)

while J  differs  from  0(„  „,  only  in  having  //*  +  ?*+!  in  place

of  m  +  /(t,  in  the  deuouiinators.

The  formula  most  commonly  given  for  a  spherical  harmonic
of  order  i  (Laplace,  Mecanique  CdtaUf  livre  iii.  chap,  ii.,  or
Murphy's  Electridtyf  Pi^liminary  Prop.  zL)  is  somewhat  simpler^
being  as  follows

'S'*-^(A.cos«^  +  B,8in«^)eJ*  (37).

a^){i.S-\){i-B-2)(i-8-^)

3,4.(2i-l)(2i-3)

'-«tc.J
(38).

0^

Digitized  by  Google

188  PBBLDCIKAET.  [B  (».

Trigone*  wliet-e  it  may  be  remarked  that  0'  '  means  the  same  as

(-^'^m.ni  if  !»  +  »=»  and  in-n»«,  or  as  (-1)  »  /iZ^^  if
m+n+lBt  and  m-»n»<.  Formula  (38)  may  be  derived
algebcaically  from  (36)  by  putting  ^(1  -  /<■)  for  r  in  9^^^-i'¥^
and  in  :  or  it  may  be  obtained  directly  by  the  method

of  differentiation  followed  above^  varied  suitably.  But  it  may
also  be  obtained  by  aasuming  (with  and  b,  as  arbitrary
constant*)

V  =  2(a^*  +  b,if)(z'-'  +  prW'-*  +  yrV*-*  +  etc.),

wMob  is  obTiously  a  proper  form ;  and  detennining  q,  etc,  by
the  differential  equation  v*F;-0,  with  (29).

Anntlu  r  form  may  be  obUiined  with  even  greater  ease,  tliua  :

aud  dclcrmiiimg  p^,  p^f  etc.,  by  ilie  difiei'ential  ei^uatiuu,  we
have

(30)

(i-M)({-8-l)(i-8-2){i-8-S)  1

which  might  also  have  been  found  easily  by  the  diflSBrentiation  of
1

Henoe,  eliminating  imaginary  symbols^  and  retaimng  the
notation  of  (37)  and  (38),  we  have

[

(«+l),

-g-2Xt
4«.(«+  1)(«  +  2).1.2

(i-,){i-s^l)(i-s-2){i-8^^)  ^

(40)

(2^+l)(2/>4.2)...(»>.)
wnete  ^  "  (2*  + 1)(2«  +  3)...(2»  - 1) '

This  value  of  (7  is  found  by  comparing  wiih  (35).  Thus  we
that  C  must  be  equal  to  the  numerical  coefficient  of  the  last
term  of  (39),  iiTcspeotively  of  sign.  Or  (7  is  found  by  comparing
(40)  with  (38) :  it  is  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  the  last  term  of
(38)  divided  by  the  coefficient  of  the  last  term  within  the
btacfcets  of  (40). Or  it  is  found  directly  (that  is  to  say,

Digitized  by  Google

B  ( j)  ]  KINSBIATICSL  189

independenUy  of  oUier  equivalent  formulas)  tliiis: — ^We  haye,  Tn>nno-
by  (29'),  r"***

d' 1  d*  1

L=H'  2'--  if  »-«  is  even,

or =H  ; V-» if i.  odd.

(41)

Expanding  the  first  member  in  tenns  of  z,  i,  ij,  by  sncceBeiTe
differentiation,  urith  reference  first  to  •  times,  and  then  z,i-a
times»  we  find

(-) '  1  •  J  •  • . -  i)  C-«  +  1 )  (2«  +  2)  (2«  +  3) . . .  (£  +  . ..  (42),

for  a  term  in  its  numerator :  comparing  this  with  (39)  and  (40),
and  the  second  number  of  (41)  with  (3d),  we  find  C,

(k)  It  is  very  important  to  remark,  firsts  that  imporunt

p^opcrtle^of

fjf'f\'d<r=  0  (43),  vi^™^"**^

\ /»  t<!rn)!t  and

where and  f '/ (h  uotc  any  two  of  the  eh  inents  of  wliich  F  is  fipu^^kmt.
composed  in  one  of  the  preceding  expresaions;  and  secoudly,  that

e,©^8ui^t/^=0  (44),

3

the  case  of  » =  i'  being  of  coarse  excluded  For,  taking  r  =  a,
the  radius  of  the  spherical  surface;  and  cUr=ta^dWf  as  above;
we  have  dnr  =  sin  6d6d<l>,  etc.,  the  limits  of  $  and  ^,  in  the  inte-
gration for  the  whole  spherical  surface,  being  0  to  ir,  and  0  to  2x,

respectively. Thns,  since ooss^coss'^  (i^sO,  we  see  the

truth  of  the  first  remark;  and  from  (16)  and  (36)  we  infer  the
seoond,  which  the  reader  may  verify  algebraically,  as  an  exercise.

(/)  Eiich  one  of  tlie  preceding  scries  may  be  taken  by  either  ExpMuions
end,  and  used  witli  ?  <»r  tf,  eitlicr  or  both  of  them  negative  ^LlSonlps
or  fractional  or  iniaLcinaiy. Whether  Hiiito  or  infinite  in  its  [^"^^UJSget.
number  of  terms,  any  series  thus  obtained  exjiresses  when
multiplied  by a  harmonic  of  degree  t;  since  it  is  of  degree  i,
and  satisfies  ^^Y  cas© which  one  of  the  pre-

ceding scries  is  not  finite,  tlio  formula  taken  by  one  C7ul  gives
a  C(>n\ erring  seiicH ;  taken  by  tlie  other  end  a  diverging  series,
riius  taken  in  the  order  sliown  above,  convcrtjcs  wlien  $  is
between  0  and  4-')'',  or  between  13.")"  and  180**:  and  taken  witli
the  lust  term  of  that  oitler  fii*8t  it  conveiges  when  &  >  45°  and

Digitized  by  Google

190

PRBLDIINART.

[B(/).

Vilidtnf  of

Dbn^Hg^  <13r)".  Thvfly  aguii,  e^^^  and  of  (36),  being  each  of
divrixe  a  finite  number  of  terms  when  either  m  or  n  is  a  positive

]|^"  ^  ^  integer,  become  when  neither  is  so,  infinite  series,  whidi  diveige
when  V  <  1  and  oonveige  when  v>l.  Tlicse  two  series,  whether
both  infinite  or  one  finite  and  the  other  infinite^  when  oonveigBnt
are  so  related  that

#*^(«-l.»-»= V-  1  ^•,«)

us  is  easily  verified  for  a  few  terms  by  multiplying  -^(m-j,

'  / l\l  1

bj  the  ezpanaion  of  (1  - in  aaoending  powers  of  ^.  But

expansions  in  aaoendiog  powers  of  ^  are  of  oompaiatively  little

interest,  as  they  are  diTexgent  for  real  Tallies  of  and  therefore
not  available  for  the  proix>sed  pliysical  applications.  To  find
expansions  whieh  oonveige  when  v<l  talce  the  last  terma
of  (36)  first Thns,  if  we  put

\m w>(m-l)...(m-n  +  2)(m-n-i-l).n(n-1)...2.1
supposing  m  to  be  >n,  and  n  to  be  a  poeitiTe  integer,  we  find

^'"^  (m-n+l).l  '^^(m-»n.l)(«-n+2).1.2'^~**^J  >'

Writing  down  the  conTsponding  expression  for
from  (36),  and  using  (36'),  we  find

L («*-»+ 1)1  («»-n+"l)(m::^2).T.2

This  expansion  of  ©,^„,  is  derivable  algebraically  from  (36"')  by
Bialtiplying  the  second  member  of  (3G  ")  by

^cj  ...(36'^).

(which  is  eqvijil  to  unity).  Both  expansions  converge  when
v'<l,  or,  for  all  real  values  of  0  ;  just  failing  wlien  6~}.ir.
In  choosing  between  the  two  exjmnsions  (30"')  and  (3()'*),  prefer
(36'')  when  n  differs  by  less  than  ^  from  zero  or  some  ])ositive
integer,  otherwise  choose  C3G'");  hut  it  is  chiefly  imjiorluiit  to
have  them  both,  because  (3C'')  is  finite,  but  (36  ")  intinite,  when

uul  (36''')  is  finite^  hat  (36^  infinite,  when  ii» 1;

J  being  any  positive  integer.

Digitizer  uy  i^oogle

(2).]  KINEICATIGS.  191

Fut  now  «i  +  n  =  t,  m-n^8,

or  w*  =  J +  i  C*  "*  *)»

and  denote  by  Ku^^

wbat  ihe  teoond  membem  of  (36'")  and  (36*^  become  with  tbeee
^uee  for  m  and  ik A^un,  put

or  m  =  l(f-a),  n  =  i(»  +  «), } W

and  denote  bj Kv^  ]

what  the  aeoond  members  of  (36")  and  (36'*)  become  with  theae
▼alues  for  m  and  m. We  thua  have  two  equal  convergent  seriea

for and  two  eqnal  conTeigent  aeriea  for and  ii>^',  ^  are

fonoliciia  of  v  (or  of  0)  siidi  that

CoiBptele

/36*)  fbrtpherieal

* '  harmonics
of  »nj  t«»-

i/^(ilooa«d-i-i38in«^)  )  .

fr(i(  C08<^-l-^Ein«^)  j

and  ^{Aetmt^

are  suHiAce  hannonics  of  order  i.

The  first  tetma  of  tt^  and  e|^'  are and  y*',  or and  fuT'f
as  they  are  taken  from  (36'^^  or  (36*^,  and  in  general

and are  distinct  from  one  another.

Two  distinct  solutions  are  clcnrly  needed  for  the  physical
problems. But  in  the  particular  case  of  «  an  integer,  u^"  and
an»  not  diatSnoL For  in  this  caae  each  term  of after  the  first

t  terms  has  the  infinite  factor  — ^ ;  thus  if  Ca  denote  the  cocffi-

M

dent  of  the  (/+!)**»  term  of the  first  a  terms  of  .±.  vanish

when  e  is  an  integer,  and  thoae  that  follow  constitute  the  same
Beri«8  as  that  expressing  ^1*^  whether  we  take  (36'")  or  (36'*).
For  tlie  case  of  s  an  integer  the  wanting  solution  is  to  be  found
by  putting

wfm  ,  When  <r»0:

w^''  thus  found  is  such  that

(36'")

192

PBEUmNART.

IB©.

Comiilf  to
f  Xlirrssiriiis
for-pli'-ru-al

lllLTMloMli':*

of  anjr  te»«
■cnltypet

ia  a  surface  iianuonio  of  order  i  distinct  fioin  u'\ The  first

ina>ir»n(1ing

term  of  w^,  aooording  to  (36"'),  ia  v'log or  itn^kgy  acoording
to  (36*^,  and  sobBequent  terma  axe  of  the  form  (a  +  b  logv)  or
(o  +  61pgr)/»v*,  j  being  an  integer.  The  cinnmiatanoea  bekng
to  a  wdl-known  claaa  of  caaea  in  tiie  aolntioii  of  linear  dif*
ferentaal  equatiflna  of  tbe  aeoond  order  (aae  §  (/)  below).

Again,  lastlj,  remark  tliat  (38),  unleaa  it  is  finite  (whidi  it  is
if  and  tmly  if  t  — «  is  a  positive  integer),  diverge  when  |i<l
and  eonyerges  when  /i>  1,  if  taken  in  the  order  in. whidi  it  is
given  above.  To  obtain  aeriee  which  e(mveige  when  /i<l
(that  ia  to  aay,  for  real  valnea  of  6),  reverae  the  order  of  (38)
for  the  case  of  t-tf  a  poeitive  integer.  Thna,  aooording  as  t-i
is  even  or  odd,  we  find

4-1) Ci-.)(i-i>-2).(t>.-hl)(t-^^-h3)  '
1.2  1.2.3.4  '^"^

whera,  •  -  a  being  even,  .  ...(38'^

//_/  _  (i-s)({-8-})(i-8-2){i-s-^),.A.Z.2A

"  S.4...(<-a-S)(»-t).(2i-l)(2»-3)...(»+a+3)(»+a+l)
and

2.3

2.3.4.5

/4.*-etc.

►  (38"),

Pi

whei"©,  i-a  being  odd,

'  2.4...(i-<-3)(t-i»-l),(:ii-l)(2i-3)...(iW4)(/+^+2)

mien,  whatever  be  t  or  i,  or  s,  integral  or  fractional,  |X)sitivc
or  nogative^  real  or  imaginary,  the  formulas  within  the  brackets
{  )  are  conveigent  series  when  thej  are  not  finite  integral  fone-
tiona  of  fu Henoe  we  see  that  if  we  put

, (»-«).(t+«+l)  ,  (i-«)(£-«-2).(t+«+l)(;+#+3)  ,  ,
B 1  -  ^  -rs  -M-  +  ~  ^ ' «  -s— * —  '  M  -  etc.

1.2

1.2.3.4

and

(i-a-l).(l' 4-84-2) ,  (t-j-l)(^g-3).(H3f2)(»M4-4)

^1  2.3  2.3.  4.5  '*  ~

etc.

(38")

or
and

1 A \ k \ I  i (n-r4-«)(n4-l+t-f*)  .
whcL^  ^.=  1,  .l.=  l,  and  ^,.,=  ^-(;^V)(n^2)  .

(38'^),

I

Digitized  by  Google

3  (00  KINEUATIGS.  193

the  functions g^''  thus  expressed,  whether  thej  be  algebraic  J^^^Jl^JJ,

reiuions

or  tnosoendentel,  aw  tuoh  that  [[^nllom-S^

of  any  t«8-

)  pomn<kfiu

'1

and  (A  CM9^+ 3  tm.$4i)

are  the  two  uaxhce  hamMmics  of  order  t,  and  of  the  form

For  example^  if  i-a  be  an  even  integer, is  the

finite  fonctiom  with  ▼hich  we  are  femtliar  as  giving  a  latkmal
integral  aolution  of  the  form  (38"),  and  q'^  gives  the  solution  of

the  same  forai  wliich  is  not  integral  or  rational.  And  if  i'  -  s
is  odd,  q^^  gives  the  familiar  i*ational  integral  solution,  and  p^''
the  other  aolatioii  of  the  aame  fona  but  not  integral  or  rationaL

The  corresponding  solid  harmonies  of  degrees  i  and  -  i-l  are  f^'^jSJ"*'
obtained  by  multiplying  (38*)  by  r*  and  r"*''. Keducing  the "
latter  from  polar  to  rectanguliu:  co-ordinates,  we  find  them  of  the
form

(38"}.

and

[r'^-*»-eta]fl',(«,y)

where denotes  a  homogeneous  function  of  degree  s.  Now  (15)

^  of  any  aolid  haxmoinio  of  degree i  is  a  solid  hannonic  of
degree  —  »  —  1.  Hence

iwn a»  t-i  IVomIow«r

orden.

COB  ^  dz^  ^i-l^

are  sav&ce  harmonics  of  order  i,  and  they  are  clearly  of  the  first
and  second  forms  of  (38^.  Hence,  putting  into  the  foi-ms
shown  in  (38**)  and  performing  the  indicated  diffiwentiation  for
the  first  term  of  the  q  fiinction  and  the  first  and  second  terms  of
the  p  function,  so  as  to  find  the  numerical  coefficients  of  r~*~'~^
and  r''~'~'«  in  the  immediate  results  of  the  differentiation,  and
then  putting  fir  for  z,  we  find

Digilizeo  by  GoOgle

194

Biiccessive
derivation
firom  low«r

and

PBELDQNABY.

.(38*).

x«duoe  back  to  polar  ooHttdinatai  pat  for  a  momeiit
ThenweliaYe

Oft  «^

and

Henoe»  instead  of  (38*^  we  Uto

[Compare  §  782  (5)  below.]

Snppoaing  now  «  and  »  to  be  real  quantitiea,  and  going  back
to  (38"),  to  inveetigate  the  oonvergeney  of  the  aeriea  fior  •nd

q'\  we  see  that,  when  n  is  infinitelj  great,

Now  if  (1  -mT"  =

we  have,  by  the  binomial  theoi\ m,

^=1. J«0, andV"=l  +  ^^^-
Henoe^  when  ~e),  where  e  ia  an  infinitely  amaU  positiTe

qnantilyf

i»;;>-o  or  =  00,

and  J^''^'^^  or*  00,

aooordingas  k>«  or

Hence  if  »>a,  the  qnantitiea  within  the  braeketa  under

—  in  (Sd^^)  vanish  when  aad  aa  they  vary  cou-

Digitized  by  Google

B  (Q.]  SINE1£ATIG8.  195

tinaouslv,  and  within  finite  limits,  when  u.  is  continuously  Acquisition

U)  of  roots  with

inereased  from  ^1  to  +1,  it  follows  that vanishes  one  time  naeof  order.

more  than  does  g'^  ,  and one  time  more  than  does  v'\.  Now

looking  to  (38"'),  and  supposing  (as  we  clearly  may  without  loss

of  gtnenility)  tliat  8  is  positive,  we  see  tluit  every  term  of  'p*^_^

is  positive  if  i<fi  +  l. Hence  if  i  is  any  quantity  between  TherMtleis

t  and ^**pI,^  vanishes  when  /k<sa1,  and  is  finite  andJ^Sw^

positive  Ux  every  intermediate  value  of  fu

Hence  and  from  the  second  formula  of  (38**"),  q*^  vanishes

just  once  as  fi  is  increuiied  continuously  from  —  1  to  -f  1 :  thence
and  from,  the  Urst  of  (3S^), vanishes  twice :  hence  and  from

the  second  again,  ^^^vanishes  thrice,  and  so  on.  Again,  as  the
coefficient  of  every  term  of  the  series  (38  ^)  for  g^  is  positive  ^^o^^''

when  i  <s  +  \f  this  is  the  caso  for  q'^  ,  aud  therefore  this  func-  onlcr  has
tion  vanishes  only  for  /*  =  0,  as  fx  ia  increased  from  —  1  to  + 1,  »««»•
Hence  p^  vanishes  twice;  and,  then,  continuing  alternate  ap-
plioatioDS  of  the  second  and  first  of  (38'")^  we  see  that  g^^^

vanishes  thrice,  p'\  iowr  times,  and  so  on. ThuSy  putting  all

together,  we  see  that  q['lj_^  has  j  or  ^"  +  1  roots,  and  p^^^^  ^  has
J+l  or  j  roots,  according  as  ^'  is  odd  or  even;  j  being  any
integer  and  i,  as  defined  above,  any  quantity  between  s  and
« -f- 1. In  other  words,  the  number  of  roots  of  p  is  the  even  oensu*  or

roots  of  tes-

numl)or  next  above  i-s;  and  the  nimiber  of  roots  of  o/  is  the®®™l'**'"
odd  number  next  above  i  -  8. Farther,  from  (SS*^'")  we  see  that  onto;
the  roots  of  p*^  lie  in  order  between  those  of  q^,,  and  the  roots

of between  those  of  p^^.  [Compare  §  (p)  below.]  These

]>ri  ipcrties  of  the  p  and  q  functions  are  of  paramount  importance,
not  only  in  the  theory  of  the  development  of  ari>itFary  functions
by  aid  of  them,  but  in '  the  physical  applications  of  the
fractional  harmonic  analysis.  In  each  case  of  physical  ap-
plication they  belong  to  the  foundation  of  the  theory  of  the
simple  and  nodal  modes  of  the  action  invsstigated.  They
afford  the  principles  for  the  determination  of  values  of  s,

which  shall  make  b'"  or  vanish  for  each  of  two  stated

13—2

Digitized  by  Google

196

PRELIMINA&T.

Electric
indaofciion,
itkmof

water,  etc.*
in  ■paceM*

tWMOtWO

Electric
induction,
motion  of
wiitor.  140.,

in  Njjaro
b«»tw<'<'ri
•phorii  al
ikurfscf  iiml
two  pliiiics
meeting  m

[B(Q.

values  of  6.  This  is  an  anah-tical  problem  of  high  interest  in  con-
nexion with  those  extensions  of  spherical  harmonic  analysis :  it  is
essentially  involved  in  the  physical  application  referred  to  above
where  the  spaces  concernetl  are  bounded  partly  by  coaxal  cones.
When  the  boundary  is  com[>leted  by  the  intercepted  portions  of
two  concentric  spherical  surfaces,  functions  of  the  class  desci  ilxxl
in  (o)  below  also  enter  into  the  solution.  When  prepared  to
take  advantage  of  physical  applications  we  shall  return  to  the
subject;  but  it  is  necessary  at  present  to  restrict  ourbelves  to
these  few  observations.

(m)  in  physiGal  problems  saeh  as  tbose  already  referred
to,  the  space  oonsidered  is  bounded  by  two  planes  meeting,  at

any  angle in  a  diameter,  and  the  portion  of  spherical  surface

in  the  angle  between  them  (the  case  of  s<  1,  that  is  to  say,  the
ease  of  angle  exceeding  two  right  angles,  not  being  ezdnded)  the
harmonics  required  are  all  of  fractional  d^rees,  but  each  a  finite
algebraic  function  of  the  co-ordinates  tj,  z  i£  s  in  any  inoom*
mensurable  number.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  the  problem  be  to
find  the  internal  temperature  at  any  point  of  a  solid  of  tlie  Blmpe
in  question,  when  each  point  of  the  curved  portion  d  ita  enifiuse
is  maintained  permanently  at  any  arbitrarily  given  temperatore^
and  its  plane  Hides  at  one  con.stmt  temperature^  the  forms  and
the  degrees  of  the  harmonics  referred  to  are  as  foUows: —

•  +1,
S+2,

s<i>3,

J$*9

d

dz  r
(P  J

+1

2*,
St-Kl,

29  +  2,

-4«+

dz

dz'r

3^,
Ss-i- 1,

d

These  liarmonics  are  cxjtressed,  by  various  forinula)  (30)... (40),
etc.,  in  terms  of  real  co-ordinates,  in  what  precedes.

(n)  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  these^  and  every  other  q^herical
barmonicy  of  whatever  degree,  integnd,  real  but  fractional,  or

Digitized  by  Google

B  (n).]  KINEMATICS.  197

imagmaiT,  are  derivable  by  a  flnoBcal  form  of  prooeaa.  wUdi  in-  Harmonic

J ,  fmiction*  of

eludes  difTerentiation  as  a  particular  case. Tiiua  if  ( -r  )  deuotes  derived

Voiy/  from  llittt  of

an  operatioii  wbich,  wbea  f  is  an  iateger,  oonstitateB  talaqg  the  brK^<^"'i-
diflevmtaal  coeffident^  we  bave  dearlj  ^HMtonT

where denotes  a  function  of  9,  which,  when  « is  a  teal  integer,

becomes  (-)'i'f  *¥•••(«

The  investigation  o£  tliLs  genenilized  different iiition  presents
difficulties  which  are  confined  to  tlie  evaluation  of  F,,  and  which
baTe  formed  the  subject  of  highly  intcreHting  mathematical  in-;
TOBtigations  by  Liouvillc^  Gregory,  Xelland,  and  others.

If  we  aet  aside  tbe  fiuH«r  P,,  and  aatial^  ourselveB  with  deter-  Eximnsiont
minataimii  aijbrms  of  spherical  bannonioi^  we  have  only  to  apply
Leibniti^s  and  other  obvious  formuls  for  differentiation  with  any  v»y  (.(  nimoB
finsctional  or  imaginary  number  as  index,  to  see  l^t  the  equiva^  ^^vhiSeg^
lent  eatprcarions  above  given  for  a  oomplete  spherical  hannoniD  ^'

of  any  degree,  are  derivable  from  -  by  the  process  of  generalized

T

differentiatioii  now  indicated,  so  as  to  include  every  possible
partial  harmonio,  of  whatever  degree,  whether  integral,  or
firactional  and  real,  or  imaginary.  But^  as  stated  above,  those
ezpreBBions  may  be  used,  in  the  manner  ei^laaned,  for  partial
harmonics,  whether  finite  algebrsio  functions  of  ^,  s,  or  trso-
soendents  expressed  by  oonveigmg  infinite  series;  quite  inespeo-
tively  of  the  manner  of  derivation  now  remarked.

(o)  To  illustrate  the  use  of  s|>lierical  harmonics  of  imaginary  Imiurnary
degrees,  the  j)robIerii  regarding  the  conduction  of  heat  specified  fui  when
aVM)vo  may  be  v:u  it  <l  tlius :—  Let  the  solid  be  bounded  by  two  fiinct^orig
concentric  splierical surfaces,  of  radii  a  and  a',  and  by  two  axpmaed.^
cones  or  planes,  and  let  ovt  ry  point  of  each  of  these  flat  or
conical  sides  Ix'  maiDtaincd  with  any  arbitrarily  given  distribution
of  tempcrntiiro.  jiiid  the  whole  spherical  portion  of  tlie  boundary
at  one  constant  temperature. Harmonica  will  enter  into  the
solution,  of  degree

1  jwJ£l

Digitized  by  Google

PRELIHIKAST.  [B  (o).

wherey  denotes  any  integer.  [Compare  §  (d')  below.]  Converg-
ing series  for  these  and  the  others  required  for  the  solotion
are  included  in  onr  general  formolas  (36).. .(40),  etc

ijj)  The  iiiethtxl  of  finding  complete  spherical  hanuoiiicft  hy  the

differentiation  of  p  inyestigated  above;,  has  this  great  advantage^

that  it  shows  immediately  very  important  itroi)ertie8  which  they
possess  with  reference  to  the  vulues  of  the  variable  for  which

they  vanish. Thus,  inasmnch  as  ~  and  all  its  differential  coeffi-

cients  vanish  for  jB  =  *Qo,  and  for  y-*co,  and  for  z^^oa,

it  follows  that

1

vanishes^  times  when  x  is  increased  from~oo  to-i-oo

M ^ >» y >» »f »  ft

^od n ^ n  *  »»  »» »»  »

[Cumpure  with  the  investigation  of  the  i-oota  of  jt'^  and  in

§  [1)  above.]

Tlie  read*  r  \\\\o  is  not£uniliar  with  Fourier's  theory  of  eqoatioilS
will  ha\  e  no  difficulty  in  verifying  for  himself  the  present  appli-
cation of  the  principles  (h  vcloped  in  that  admirable  work.  Its
iuterpivtation  for  fractional  or  imaj^nary  valu^  of  j,  Xr,  /  is
wonderfully  intei*estin?,  and  of  obvions  value  for  the  physical
applications  <3i  partial  harmonics.

Thus  it  apixars  that  spherical  harmonics  of  laige  real  d^grees^
integral  or  fractional,  or  of  imaginary  degrees  with  large  real

parts  (a  ^Pj"  I,  with  a  huge),  belong  to  the  general  daaa,  to
which  Sir  William  IL  Hamilton  has  applied  the  designation
'*  Fluctuating  Functions."  This  property  is  essentially  involved
in  their  capacity  for  expressing  arbitrary  functions,  to  the
demonstration  of  which  for  the  case  of  complete  harmonics  we
now  proceed,  in  conclusion.

(r)  Let  C  be  tlic  ccntit)  and  a  the  rmlins  of  a  spherical
Hurf.uM^,  which  we  sliail  denote  by  S.  Let  F  be  any  external  or
intc  riiiil  [>oint,  aiul  let  f  denote  its  distance  from  C.  Let  dcr
<l.'iiou-  an  element  oi'  S,  at  a  point  F,  and  lot  EP^  D.  Then,  //
denoting  an  integration  ejLt«nded  over  iS,  it  itt  easily  proved  that

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

B  (r).]  KINEUATIOB.  199

PrelimtnuT

and jfj^=^i^  when  Piiintlun  iff

.(45).

/or  4atl

7*

This  IB  merely  »  partioiilar  caae  of  a  yetj  geanenX  tiiaoreni  of
Greea's^  mclud»d  in  thab  of  A  (a),  aboye,  as  will  be  shown  when
we  shaU  be  perticiilarly  oocaped,  later,  with  the  general  theoiy
of  Attiactian:  a  geometriGal  proof  of  a  special  theorem,  of  which
it  is  a  case,  Q  474,  fig:  3,  with  F  infinitely  distant,)  will  oooor
in  connexion  with  elementazy  investigations  r^gaidiqg  the  dis-  .
tribntion  of  eleetndtj  on  spherical  condootofs:  and,  in  the
meantime,  the  following  direct  evaluation  of  the  integral  itself
is  given,  in  order  that  no  part  of  ihe  important  investigation
with  which  we  are  now  engaged  may  be  even  temporarily
incomplete.

Choosing  polar  co-ordinates,  $^EGP,  and  the  angle  be-
tween the  plane  of  ^(7P  and  a  fixed  plane  thxoa^  CP,  we  have

do'-a'miO  (W  d<l>.

Henoe,  by  integration  from 0  to  ^  » 2w,

But  2>»»aP-2a/co8d+/';
and  therefore  sin^s^^:

the  limiting  values  of  i>  in  the  integral  being

when/>ci,

and  o+f,  when/<a»

Hence  we  have

in  the  two  eases  leqwctiTely,  which  proves  (46).

(«)  Let  now  F(E)  deaoto  uuy  ai^bitraiy  ftmotion  of  the  posltiOQ  Wtfy  cf
of on  iS^  and  let  ^robin

^^jjifl^s^  ^^^p--

Wlion  y  is  infinitely  nearly  equal  to  a,  every  element  of  this  in-  in'*^™^
tegrai  will  vanish  except  those  for  which  J)  is  infinitely  smalL

L-iyui^LKj  by  Google

200

PRKLnaNABT.

Groan's
pn>l)lcin
for  cn»a  of
spherical
■urfac«.  ex*
prpMoa  by
deAoite

It*

sion  in
harmonlo

Ilenoe  the  integral  will  have  the  same  value  as  it  would  have  if
had  everywhere  the  sanio  value  as  it  has  at  the  part  of  .S'
nearest  to  P ;  and,  therefore,  denoting  tbia  value  of  the  arbitraxy
Action  hy we  hare

^-m  jj^-

when/ differs  infinitely  lit^  fiom  a;  <nv  by  (45),

u^inaF(P)  (46').

Nov,  if  e  denote  any  'positive  qaantiij  leee  tlian  unity,
hasf^  hy  eKpangion  in  a  convergent  seiiei^

=  l  +  <^,e+Q/P-l-eto.

(l-2eoo80  +  e')i

Qif  Qgt  oto.,  denoting  fimctiong  of  tf»  Ibr  wbieh  esprenions  will  be
inveetigftted  below.  Each  of  them  is  equal  to  + 1,  when  0^0,
and  they  are  alternately  equal  to  - 1  and  •i*  1,  when  0-w,  It
is  easily  proved  that  each  is  >- 1  and  <  4- 1,  for  all  values  of
$  between  0  and  w.  Henoe  the  serioB^  which  beoomes  llie
geometzioal  series  1  Ae'i>s^«kete.,  in  the  eiAieme  casoi^  coik'
verges  more  rapidly  than  the  geometrical  seriei^  ezeept  in  those
extreme  cases  of  ^sO  snd  B^sw,

Henoe

2^  =y=  ^^1  + +  ^  +  eta j  whm/>a
and 1  =  1  ^1  +  9^+ +  etc.^  whon/<  a

.(«).

Now  we  have  -r?

and  therefore
Henoe  by  (48),

a  cos  &  —f

-{44

^(1+  -4^  +  -^-  +  ]  when/>a

and  — f  1  +  — +  —7-  +  J  when/<aj

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

upherical
surfHctJ,
BolvtHl  ex-
plicitly in
uarmooio

B  («).]  KINEICATICS.  201

Henoe^  for  u  (46),  we  have  the  foUowiag  exptaa&cfoa : —  hhS!tlr^

and

^'l[jIF(£}da+^JSQ,F{£)da-¥^JJQ^^ ... },  wl»en/<  a

 (51).

These  series  being  clearly  eoayBtgeat,  except  in  the  case  of/-  a,
and,  in  this  limiting  case,  the  unoxpftnded  value  of  u  having  been
poroved  (46')  to  be  finite  and  equal  to  ^iraF{I*),  it  follows  that  the
siua  of  each  series  approaches  more  and  more  nearly  to  this  value
wlien/i^)pi»acheB  to  equality  with  a. Henoe^  in  the  limits

r{r)^^lfSF(E)da+^({Q,F{£)da  +  5jJQ^\£)da l...(52),  ^£Sa

^  J  baraionio

«)xpaiisionof

which  Ls  the  celebrated  development  of  an  arbitrary  function  in  ^I^Sooil^
a  series  of Laplace's  coefficientSy"  or,  as  we  now  call  them,
spheriaU  iMrwonics.

(t)  The  preceding  investigation  shows  that  when  there  Is  one
detenninate  value  of  the  arbitmiy  fiinction  F  for  every  point  of
S,  the  series  (52)  converges  to  the  value  of  this  function  at  P,
Tbie  same  reason  shows  that  when  there  is  an  abrupt  transition  convrrfenn
in  the  value  of  F,  aeross  any  line  on  S,  the  series  cannot  oon*  neT^"  lost
veige  when  P  is  exaetfy  on,  but  must  still  oonveige^  however  2irapt*^
nearitmaybe  to,  thislina  [Compare  with  last  two  paragraphs  J^^^
cf  {  77  shova]  The  degree  of  non-conveigence  is  so  slight  that^  tUMtion.
as  we  see  from  (01),  the  introduction  of  fiactora  s,  6^,  «P,  Ac.  to
the  soooessive  tenns  s  being  <  1  by  a  veiy  small  diffiarenoe^  pro-
duces decided  convesgenoe  for  every  position  of  P,  and  the  value
of  the  series  diifen  veiy  little  from  F{P),  passing  veiy  rapidly
through  the  finite  difibirence  when  P  is  moved  aeraas  the  line  of
abrupt  changa  in  the  value  of  F{P),

(u)  In  the  development  (47)  of

1

(l-2dcos0-|.e^i'

the  coefficients  of  <?,  e*,  ,..e',  are  clearly  rational  integral  functions
of  cos  ^,  of  degrees  1,  2...i,  respectively.  They  are  given  ex-
plicitly below  in  (60)  and  (61),  with  &  -  0. But^  if  «^ «  and

Digitized  by  Google

■ytumptrical

harmonic
functiona
of  the  co-

of  the  two

202  PBBLnaNABT.  [B  (»).

^'  j  2/»  ^'  denote  rectangulai'  co-ordinates  of  P  and  of  £  re-
spectively, we  have

- xx'+  yy'  +  zsi
"~  LI'  »

Biiixalliar>

nioniA

Expansion

ooei

rr

where  r=(:^4y*-i>  and  f^a(fl^4>y^'+aOi  Henee^  de-
noting, as  above^  hy  the  ooeffident  of  «'  in  the  develc^imenty
we  have

^^^^.[fc.y.yy,^]  ^53^^

-^<[(^f  y> (^'i  y'>  ^)]  denoting  a  symmetrical  ftmetion  of  (m,  y»  s)
and  (as',  y',  «^),  which  is  homogeneous  with  reference  to  either  set
alona  An  ezplioit  ezpresdon  for  this  ftinetion  is  of  ooofse  Ibimd
from  the  expression  for  Q^  in  terms  of  oos  $,

Viewed  as  a  function  of  (a;^  z),  Qif*t^  is  ajmnietrical
round  OB ;  and  as  a  function  of  (zf,  y^,  ai^  it  is  (symmetrical
round  OP.  We  shall  therefore  call  it  die  hiaxal  harmonic  of
{x,  y,  z)  (oi^f  ^,  if)  of  degree  »;  and  the  biaxal  Bur£ftoe  har-
monic cf  order  t.

(y)  But  it  is  important  io  remark,  that  the  coefficient  of  any
term,  such  as  x'^y'*'z  \  in  it  may  be  obtained  alune,  by  meaus  of
Taylor's  theorem,  applied  to  a  function  of  thi-oe  variables,  thus : —

1  _  r  r

(1  -  2e  cos  ^+  e-)* (r*-2r/coa  ^ 4/')*  ~  [(«-af7+(y-y')'+(*-«')*l*  *

Now  if  F{Xj  y,  z)  denote  any  function  of  », and we  have

wliflo  it  must  be  remarked  that  the  interpretation  of  1.2..J,
whenj  =  0,  is  unity,  and  so  for  ib  and  I  also. Hence^  by  takiDg

1

=  «2

1

1.2...j.l.2...A;.1.2.../  dM/dz'  (ic*  +  y'  +  «^4'

a  development  which,  by  comparing  it  with  (48),  above,
to  be  convergent  whenever

Digitized  by  Google

'B  (v).]  KINEMATICS.  203

HenOD  ExprtHislon

for  biaxnl
harmutiic
doducecL

Vr)V,-r-  * s a  1 3  y  1  a 1.J j^j^  ^-A^^'

the  summation  incliuHnji;  all  terms  which  fulfil  the  indicated  con-
dition (j+k  +  l=  t).  It  is  easy  to  verify  that  the  second  iueml>er
is  not  only  integral  and  homogeneous  of  the  degi-ee  i,  in  x,  y,  Zj
as  it  is  expressly  in  x\  i/\  z  \  hut  that  it  is  syniinetrical  with
reference  to  thi;se  two  sets  of  varialdes.  Arriving  thus  at  tho
concltision  expressed  ahove  by  (.■)3).  we  have  now,  for  the  function
there  indicated,  an  explicit  expression  in  tenns  of  differential  co-
etlicients,  which,  further,  may  be  immediately  expanded  into  an
algebmic  form  with  ease.

(t/)  In  ihe  purticnlar  case  of  ai'sO  and  }f-%  (54)  becomes
reduced  to  a  single  term,  a  fiinction  of  fl^  »  symmetrical  about
the  aids  0Z\  and,  dividing  each  member  by  f^,  or  its  equal,  s^,
we  have

-  ,  o  r  '  a2  i  (55).  Axial  by.

By  actual  ilifferenti.ttiou  it  is  easy  to  find  the  law  of  successive  Axial  har-

/• 1 •  1 1  monic  with

tlenvation  ot  the  numerators ;  and  thus  we  find,  with  about  equal  iti  eo-ordi-

ease,  either  of  the  expansions  (31),  (40),  or  (41),  alx)vc,  for  the  formed

case  wi  =  n,  or  the  trigonometrical  fonnuhe,  which  are  of  couisc  bmjai.'^

obtained  by  putting  z  -  r  cos  0  and + =  r*  sLn  0.

{to)  If  now  we  put  in  these,  cos  ^  s  ^  **" ^ ,  introducing

again,  as  in  (u)  above,  the  notation  {x,  y,  c),  (j/,  y\  «'),  we  arrive
at  escpansionB  of in  the  terms  indicated  in  (53).

(a;)  Some  of  the  most  useful  ex|mnaions  of  d  are  very  readily  Expftnsiona
obtained  bj  introducing,  as  before,  the  imaginary  ooKjrdinates  luirmunto^
(^,  iy)  instead  of  (x,  y),  according  to  equations  (2G)  of  (J),  and
similarly,  {i\  -q)  instead  of  (x',  y). Thus  we  have

■D'=(f-f')('»-V) +  (*-*')••

Hence,  as  above,
 1

' [tf-0(i?-if')  +  (»-«')1*

Digilizeo  by  GoOgle

204  ntELmiNABT.  [B(«).

Expansions  HenCC
of  (licblaxal

oiontet  (nO'ft^f^^'aaS,  /  / M  9— 7^f>;^/J  ^,...(56).

Of  ooone  we  bare  in  tbis  case

and  octf^^iji^'.

rr

And,  jnst  as  above,  we  see  tiiai  this  expraasion,  olivioQaly  a  homo-
geneous function  of  ^,  Vt  ^»  of  d^gne  t,  and  also  of  ig^  ^,  ^
involves  these  two  systems  of  variables  symmetricaUj.

Now,  as  we  have  seen  above,  all  the differential  ooefBdents

of  ^  are  reducible  to  the  2i  +  1  independent  forma

/ d  1 / rf Y  "  / dV  1 /dV  1
/dVl \S) Hir'  W \dfi)  r*  \ih,)r*
Kdzjr* /d\*-^dl fd\'~^/dyi  /dyi

\dz) dir' \dz) \d$)  r*"'  \d$)r'

Hence  i^Qi,  viewed  as  a  function  of  s,  ^,  17,  is  expressed  by
tliose  2i  +  1  terms,  each  with  a  coefficient  involving  z\  rj'.
Aiiil  Ix'ciuiso  of  the  syiumetry  we  .see  that  this  coefficient  must
be  the  same  function  of  z\  rj',  into  some  factor  involving
none  of  these  variables  (t,  7y).  (:',  7;',  $').  Also,  by  the
symmetry  with  reference  to  ^,  rj'  and  we  see  that  tlie

numerical  factor  must  be  the  same  for  the  terms  similarly  involv-
ing y  on  the  one  hand,  and  17,  ^'  on  the  other.  Hence,

BtMxal  bar*

nonio  OX'
]>reawd
vymmetrioal

teritifl  of
dilFereniikl

(.) / _ d'  1  _d^  in

where

..(57).

«  ~  1.3...«.1.2...(t-«).|.f...(s-tH2s-i-l)(2«+S)...(i+j)

The  value  of  is  obtained  thus : — Conijuu  iug  the  coefficient
of  the  term  {zz')*''{^')'  in  the  numerator  of  the  expn'ssion
which  (5())  becomes  when  the  differential  coefficient  is  expauded,
with  the  coefficient  of  the  same  term  in  (57),  we  have

(-)'  =  jP^V  (58),

1.2. ..(»-«). 1.2...f

Digitized  by  Google

B  (x),]  KINEMATICa.  205

where  M  denotee  the  coefficieat  of  ar*f*  in  f***-r^; ,  - ,  or,  monic  ex-

ox'  dry  r presswi  in

syrametriart

which  is  the  lame,  the  coeffident  of  in  r^^i---^-  ~  -  .  dilf'Tential

dz  *~'d^''  r  ooemcienta.

From  this,  with  the  value  (42)  for  J/,  we  find  £^  as  above.

(y)  We  are  now  ready  to  reduce  the  expansion  of  to  a  real
trigonometrical  form. Firsts  we  have,  hj  (33),

(ft?  +  tf '^y  «  aCrr'  an  Bin  ^  COB  « - (69).

Let  now

*  L  4  («  +  1 ; .  1

+  4'(7TT)(rr2M^  2  ^-etc.J  ...(60);

(that  is  to  say,  C$l^-^,  in  aecoidanoe  with  the  preyiooe  no-
tation,) and  let  the  oorrespcmding  notation  with  aooents  epply
to  (y. Then,  by  the  aid  of  (57),  (58),  and  (59),  we  have

^ Sti'i'"('-i)  (2»+l)(2#+J)...(2f+»^)  .,,J*Jif*  Tnjrono-

^* ^ 1.2...«  1.2...(t-«)  ^' I < * /»  Mnmnsjon

* '  of  bmxi

of  which,  however,  the  first  term  (that  for  which  «  ^  0)  must  be
halved.

{z)  As  a  supplera(!nt  tothefimdamental  jii  oposition  f  fSiS^dnT-O^
(16)  of  {(j),  and  the  corresponding  propositions,  (43)  and  (44),
regarding  eU-mcutary  terms  of  harmonics,  we  are  now  prepared  to
evaluate  ^jSfdm.

Firat,  using  the  goneml  expression  (37)  investigated  above  for
and  mmlifying  the  arbitrary  constants  to  suit  our  present  F"^^*-
notation,  we  havo  d<iinitt«in.

'iU.coB  (f^  +  aj^];*  (62>  ^^''<^^^

SSS]  dv  =  jrkA]  ^BdB  (03).

To  evaluate  the  definite  integral  in  the  second  member,  we  have
only  to  apply  the  general  theorem  (52)  for  expansion,  in  terms  of
surfiuie  harmonics,  to  the  particular  case  in  which  the  arbitrary
function  F{B)  is  itself  the  harmonic,  coss^^l^.  Thus,  remem-
bering (16)^  we  have

cos#^^r=?!^^8ind'Jd'jr<i^'coa«^^

inxKl

hMnionia

Digitized  by  Google

16  PREUMDIAEY.  [B  (z).

Using  here  for  Qt  its  trigonometrical  expansion  jusfe  inreBtigiieJy
and  pcrfonning  the  integration  for  ^'  between  the  stated  limitSy

we  find  thiit  co.ss0-r/'may  lie  diviJrd  out,  and  (omitting  the
accents  in  the  rebiduul  cK  tiuite  integral)  w  e  coiicludo,

This  holds  without  exception  for  the  case  «=:0,  in  which

2

the  second  member  becomes  -^^ — y> is  convenient  here  to

zeoal  equation  (14),  which,  when  expressed  in  terms  of  J^j'*
instead  of  &(^n)>  becomes

/■

Jo

sin  «  0  (66),

where  i  and  must  be  different  The  properties  expressed  by
these  two  equations,  (65)  and  (66),  maj  be  verified  by  direct

integration,  from  the  explicit  expression  (60)  for  ;  and  to
do  so  will  be  a  good  analytical  exercise  on  the  subject

(a)  Denote  for  brevity  the  second  member  of  (65)  by  (t,  *),
BO  that

Jo

BmB{^yd$^(i,$)  (67).

Suppose  tlio  co-ordinates  6,  <f}  to  bo  used  in  (52) ;  so  that  a,  9y  <^
arc  the  tlirce  co-ordinates  of  /',  and  we  may  take  r/or-a' sin  BdB(1<^.
Workini*  out  by  aid  of  (01),  (05),  the  pix)cesses  indicated
symbolically  in  (52),  we  find

F{e,4>)--^[A,::,  +2(j;  cos««^+^  Mns^).j;'}  (68),

where

(69),

which  is  the  explicit  form  mo^t  convenient  for  general  use,  of  the
expansion  of  an  arbitrary  function  of  the  oo-ordinates  0,  <^  in
spherical  8ar£EM»  harmonics. It  is  most  easily  proved,  [when

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

B  (aOO  KINEUATICS.  207

once  tlio  general  theorem  expressed  by  (6G)  and  (65)  has  been  in

any  way  t'slublished,]  by  assuming  the  form  of  expansion  (G8),  JJf^jJl^

and  then  determining  the  coefficients  by  multiplying  both  mem-  functioii.  •

bers  by coHStfi  sin  Odd d<f>,  and  again  by si u  .>*<^  sin  ^tZ^c/^,
and  integrating  in  each  case  over  the  whole  spherical  surface.

(h^) In,  vhat  precedes  the  ezpsnaioiis  of  mafaao  haimonicsy  ^|S^„g'
wlietJior  oompletie  or  not^  have  been  obtained  aolely  by  the  differ-  ^^jjf^^.

\  K:>tions  of

entiation  of  -  with  reference  to  rectilineal  rectangular  co-  propwiiea.

otdinates  fl^  y»  s.  The  ezpanaionB  of  the  complete  hamonios
hare  beea  found  sunplj  as  ezpressioiis  for  differential  ooeffi-

cienta,  or  for  linear  functions  of  differential  coefficients  of

.  r

The  ezpaiudoiis  of  harmonicB  of  fradaonal  and  imaginaiy  ordera

have  been  infoned  frooi  the  ezpansionB  ci  the  complete  bar-

moiucB  merelj  by  generalizing  their  algebraic  foima. Ihe  pto-

pertiee  of  the  harmonicB  have  been  inTeatigated  solely  from  the

ifr  tpr  <pr  „

■S?*d-/*d^-''

in  terms  of  the  rectilineal  rectanguhu*  co-ordinates.  The  onginal
investigations  of  Laplace,  on  the  other  hand,  were  founded
exclusively  on  the  transformation  of  this  equation  into  jxilar
co-ordinates.  In  our  tirst  edition  this  transft)nnation  was  not
given — we  now  supply  the  omission,  not  only  on  account  of  the
historical  interest  attached  to  "Lai>laa's  equation''  in  tenus  of
polar  co-ordinates,  but  also  l>ecause  in  this  fonn  it  leads  du  ectly  by
the  ordinary  methods  of  trcatini:  difTorential  equations,  to  every
possible  ejrpansion  of  surface  harmonics  in  polar  co-ordinates.

{c) By  App.  Z  (</)(! 4)  we  find  for  Laplace's  equation  (20)
transformed  to  polar  co-ordinates,

In  this  put

V^JS/,  or  V^S^-*-'  (72).

We  find

/• 1VC ^ d/. .dS'\ 1 d'S,  -

Digitized  by  Google

T,n[)lnr4?'»
equation  for
surface  har«

nionic  in

pvA-.i  r  fo-

208  FBEUMINABT.  [B  (c).

whicli  is  tlie  odebnted  formula  oommonly  known  in  Rngland
&8  <*lAp1a(0e'8  Equation"  for  deiennining  S^,  the  "LaplaoelB
ooeffident"  of  order  «;  i  bdng  an  integer,  and  tlie  aolutions
admitted  or  sought  for  being  restricted  to  rational  integnd
junctions  of  cos  tf,  sin  0  cos  ^  and  sin  0  sin  ^

(df)  Doing  awaj  now  with  all  such  restriction^  suppose  t  to
be  any  number,  iiitogr.il  or  fractional,  real  or  imaginary,  only  if
imaginary  let  it  be  such  as  to  make  «(t  —  1)  roul  [compare  §  (o)]
above.  On  the  supposition  that  S^iB  a,  rational  integral  fumy
tionof  008^,  sin ^  COB ^  and  sin ^  sin 0k  it  would  be  the  sum  of

terms  such  as  9/** «^ Now,  allowing  §  to  have  any  value

cos

integral  or  fractional,  real  or  imagmaxy,  assume

.(T4)l

This  will  be  a  form  of  jmrticular  solution  adapted  for  a]ipHcation
to  problems  such  as  those  referred  to  in  §§  (l),  (w)  aboTc;  and
(73)  gives,  for  the  determination  of  0^'*,

1  d

SsAnitionoC

(g')  When  i  and  8  are  both  integers  we  know  from  ^(h)
above,  and  we  shall  verify  presently,  by  regidar  tiT-ntment
of  it  in  its  present  form,  that  the  differential  equation  (7'))  hixs
for  one  solution  a  mtional  integral  function  of  sin  0  and  cos  0.
It  is  thiB  solution  that  gives  the Laplace's  Function,"  or  the

"complete  surfooe  hannomc''  of  the  form  •  But  being  a

differential  equation  of  the  second  order,  (75)  must  liave  another
distinct  solution,  and  from  §  (h)  above  it  follows  that  this  second
solution  cannot  be  a  rational  integral  function  of  sin  0,  cos  0.  It
may  of  course  be  found  by  quadratures  from  the  rational  integral
solution  awording  to  the  regular  process  for  finding  the  second
particular  solution  of  a  differential  equation  of  the  second  order
when  one  jmrticular  solution  is  known.  Thus  denoting  by  0^*''
any  solution,  as  for  example  the  known  rational  integral  solu-
tion expressed  by  eqinition  (38),  or  (36)  or  (40)  above,  or
§  782  (e)  or  (/)  with  (5)  below,  we  have  for  the  complete

Digitized  by  Google

B  (e').]  KIimiA.TECS.  209

BolutioD,

fu

For  a  direct  investigation  of  the  complete  solution  in  iluito
terms  for  tlie  cu.so  i  -  s  a  positive  integer,  see  below  §  (/i'),
Example  2  ;  ami  for  the  case  i  an  iiit^er,  and  8  eitlicr  not  au
integer  or  not  <  i,  ssee  ^  (o  )  (IH).

The  ratioual  integral  solution  alone  can  entar^  and  it  .  alone
suilices,  when  the  problem  deals  with  the  complete  spherical
Biu&oe.  When  there  are  boondaries,  wliether  by  two  planes
meeiiiig  in  a  diaiiieCer  at  an  angle  equal  to  a  submultiple  of
fbiir  right  angles,  or  by  coaxal  cones  corresponding  to  certain
particular  values  of  $,  or  bj  planee  and  coneSy  both  the  rational
integral  solution  and  the  other  are  required.  But  when  there
are  coaxal  cones  for  boundaries,  the  values  of  %  required  by  the
boundary  oonditkoiB  |j§  {[)]  are  not  generally  integral,  and  it  is
only  when  i  —  s  is  integral  that  either  solution  is  a  rational  and
integral  function  of  sin  0  and  cos  $.  Ilence^  in  general,  for  the
class  of  proUems  referred  to,  two  solutions  are  required  and
neither  is  a  latioiial  integral  function  of  sin^  and  cos  $»

{/')  The  ordinaiy  prooess  for  the  solution  of  linear  differential
equations  in  scries  of  powers  of  the  independent  variable  whm
the  multipliers  of  the  differential  coefficients  are  rational  alge-
braic functions  of  the  independent  variable  leads  easily  from  the
equation  (75)  to  any  of  the  forms  of  rational  integral  solutions
referred  to  above,  as  well  as  to  the  second  solution  in  a  form
coiTasiwnding  to  each  of  them,  when  i  and  8  are  integers;  and,
quite  generally,  to  the  two  jmrticular  solutions  in  every  case,
whether  i  and  a  be  integral  GX  fractional,  real  or  imaginary.
Thus,  putting  as  above^

oos^B^  sin^BV  (77),

make  /x  tlie  independent  variable  in  the  fn-st  ])lace,  in  order  to  ?JISiS?*^
fiud  expanniona  u.  powers  of  ^=  thu.  (75)  becomes  ^^^^

i[(i-/)'5^*[l^.-(<*i)]e.-  (78).

This  is  the  form  in  which  "Laplace's  equation"  has  been  most
commonly  presented. To  avoid  the  appearance  of  supposing

vol*  I.  14

rariable
omitted
here  for
bmdtj.

Digitized  by  Google

D  PBEL1MINABT.  [B  (/*).

%  and  « to  be  integen  or  even  real,  put

i(t +  !)  =  «»  •'-J,  (79).

Uning  this  notation,  and  multiplying  both  members  by
we  have,  instead  of  (78),

(1  -M*)^  [(I  -Z.')^]  +  [<•(!  -i*')  -  i]  "= 0  (80).

To  inte^ie  this  equation,  assume

and  in  the  series  so  found  for  its  first  member  equate  to  aero  the
coefficient  of Thus  we  find

+  l)(n+  2)  a;,.  =  [2n'-a  +  b]  K\  -  [{n  - 1)  (n  -  2)  -  a]  A'.... . .  .(81).

The  first  member  of  this  Tanisbes  forn  =  - 1,  and  forn  =  -  2,  if
TTj  and  be  finite.  Henoe^  we  may  put  A"^  =  0  for  all  negative
values  of  give  arbitrary  values  to  and  A'^,  and  then  find
ir„  K^t  <fec.,  by  applications  of  (81)  with  7j  =  0,  n  =  1,  «  =  2,...
niccessively.  Thus  if  we  first  put  K^=\,  and  jE'^sO;  then
again  ir,*0|  i^jS  1;  we  find  two  series  of  the  fonna

and  fi  +  K^fjL*  +  A'^^*  +  &c.,

each  of  which  mtisfies  (80);  and  therefore  the  complete  adu-
ticn  ia

IP  -  C  (1  +  Jr,fi»  +  Jr,^*  +  Ac.)  4.  C"  (fi + + JT,/  +  Ac.) . . .  (82).

From  the  form  of  (81)  we  see  that  for  very  great  values  of  n  we
have

A,^,  =  2 A',  -  Ar^_,  approximately,

and  therefore

K^^^^K^^K^-K^^  approximately.

Hence  each  of  the  seri^  in  (82)  converges  for  every  value  of
less  than  unity.

(^')  But  thSa  18  a  very  unaatiafactciry  form  of  adution.  It
gives  in  the  form  of  an  infinite  seriee  l4>Jr^fi'+ir^|&*+ Aa  or

-f  jr,fiP  -¥  fto.,  the  finite  aolntion  which  we  know  exists
in  the  form

Digitized  by  G(>

B  Of').]  KINEBCAUGSL  211

g  Geometrical

when  b  is  the  square  of  an  odd  integer  and  when  a  =  i  (i  +  1),
I  lieing  an  odd  integer  or  an  even  integer;  and,  a  minor  defect,
but  Btill  a  serious  one,  it  does  not  show  without  elaboi-ate  veri-
tication  that  one  or  other  of  its  constituents  1  +  K^fi*  +  »Si:c.  or
ft  +  K^fi*  +  «kc.  consists  of  a  finite  numl>er,  or  i(t'  +  1),  of  terms
when  6  is  the  square  of  an  even  integer  and  a  =■  t  (i  +  1)«  i  being
an  even  integer  or  an  odd  integer.

(A')  A  form  of  solution  which  turns  out  to  be  much  simpler
in  every  case  is  suggested  by  our  piimaiy  knowledge  [g  (j)  above]
of  integral  solutiomk  Put

w  =  (1-^*0^11  (83),

v»

in  (80)  and  divide  the  firet  member  by  (1 -fi*)  Thus  we
iiod

fonn  of
■otetloat

00

modified
dUferential
I

AMume  now

v^^Ay  (85);

equating  to  leio  the  coefficient  of  |«.*  in  the  first  member  of
(84)  givee

(n+l)(n^-2)J,„-[(n-l)n+2(^6+l)n-a+Ji(76+l)]i,=0...(86),

or (n  +  l)(»  +  2)^.,,=  (n  +  i  +  *  +  o)(n  +  J  +  «-a)i(,  (ST),*****

if  we  put  a  =  J(a  +  J), 8-  (^)t

and  with  this  notation  (84)  becomes

(1  -/)  J  -  2  (• + i)/i [a'-  (.  ^irjv^o  (84 ).

The  aeoomd  member  of  (87)  shows  that  if  the  series  (85)  is  in
ilflffffftniling  powers  of  ft  its  first  term  must  have  eifher

n=— |— *  +  a, or  n  =  -i-«  —  a:

the  expansion  thus  obtained  would,  if  not  finite,  be  convergent  ^^"jjy^*
when  /i  >  1  and  divergent  when  /a  <  1 ,  und  tliev  arc  J^j^JJ^^
fore  not  suitetl  for  the  physical  applications. On  the  other  cl
hand,  the  first  menil>er  of  (87)  shows  that  if  t)io  series  (85)  is  in
aaoending  powers  of  /h  must  have  either  n  =  0  or

14—2

Digitized  by  Google

Complete
■olution  for
teueral

Alternative

Holution  by
rlinngiiig
ot «:

ito  impoti-
Mtoe.

212  PEELIMINABT.  [B  (A  ).

f»sl:  the  ezpuuioiiB  tlraa  obtauifid  are  neoeesarily  oonTeigeoi
when  fi<  1,  and  it  is  theiefoie  theae  that  axe  suited  for  our  pur^
poses.  Taking  then  A^^l  and  JL^^O,  and  denoting  by  p  the
seriessofound,  andag^  J^sOacnd  andf  theserifis;  ao

that  we  have

p«l  +  J.^«  +  jy  +  etc.  I
and  f  s|A4.^^^*  +  ui,^^  +  eto.  / ^  '*

eta  and  A^,  A,y  eta  being  found  by  two  sets  of  boo-
oeasive  i^lioations  of  (87);  then  the  complete  solntion  of  (84)  is

V  =  Cp+C'q  (90).

This  solution  is  identical  with  (38'"")  of  §  (/)  above,  as  we  see  by
and  (79),  which  give

a  =  i  +  i  (91).

(i^  The  sign  of  either  a  or  a  may  be  changed,  in  Tirtue  of
.  (86).  No  variation  however  ia  made  m.  the  solution  by  changing
the  sign  of  a  [which  corresponds  to  dianging  t  into  1,  and
verifies  (13)  (ff)  above] :  but  a  veiy  remarkable  variation  is  made
by  changing  the  sign  of  t,  from  which,  looking  to  (88),  (8^  (87),
we  infer  that  if  p  and  q  denote  what  p  and  q  become  when  —  a
is  substituted  for  a  in  (89),  we  have

p  =  (l-|*>l  .
and  ,  =  (1-^-)^; <*2>'

and  the  prescribed  modification  of  (89)  gives

p=l+^,;x^4-^^M*-f  etc.  1
q  -  /X  +  ^3/*^  + +  etc.  / ^

ft.,  9L^f  etc^and  A,,  A,,  eta  being  found  by  suooesBive  appUcar
taoos  of

(J')  In  the  case  of  "complete  hannonics"  8  ia  zero  or  an
integer,  and  the  p  or  q  solution  expressing  the  result  of  multiply-
ing the  already  fmite  and  integn^  p  or  q  solution  by  the  integral
polynoniiiil  (1  — /x')',  is  only  interesting  on  account  of  the  way  oi
obtaining  it  from  (87),  eta  in  virtue  of  (88).  But  when  either
a  -  }  <Nr  t  is  not  an  integer,  the  possession  of  the  alternative- solu-
tions, p  or  p,  9  or  q  may  come  to  be  of  grcsit  intrinsic  importanoe^
in  respect  to  obtaining  resulta  in  finite  form.  For,  snppomn|f  a
and  «  to  be  both  {xisitiv^  it  is  impossible  that  both  p  and  q  can
be  finite  polynomial%  but  one  or  both  of  p  and  q  may  be  so;  or

Digitized  by  Google

B  07]  KiNEimics.  213

one  of  the|i^  q  forms  and  the  other  of  the  p,  o  foi-ras  may  be
finite.  Thifl  we  see  from  (87)  and  (^4),  wluoh  show  as  follows: —  I^"^'*'

1.  If  )  -f  J-a  is  positiye^  p  and  q  mvst  eadh  be  an  infinite
series;  bat  p  or  (  will  be  finite  if  eitlier  J  +  f-  aorJ-ff  +  ais
a  posittve  integer*;  and  h>A  p  and  q  will  be  finite  if  )-i-<-a
and  i+B+a  are  positiTe  integers  dilforing  hj  •amity  or  any  odd
number.

2.  If  a^8+i,  one  of  the  two  series  p,  q  must  be  infinite;
and  if  a  -  5  -  I  is  zero  or  a  podtiTe  integer,  one  of  the  two
.series  p,  q  is  finite.  If,  lastly,  a4«  — ^  is  zero  or  a  positivB
integer,  one  of  the  two  f,  q  is  finite.  It  is  p  that  is  finite  If
a-«—  ^  is  zero  or  even,  (7  if  it  is  odd:  and  p  that  is  finite  if
a  «  -  ^  is  zero  or  even,  q  if  it  is  odd.  Hence  it  is  ^  and  p,  or
q  and  q  that  are  finite  if  2«  be  zero  or  even ;  but  it  is  p  and  q,
or  q  and  p  that  are  finite  if  2«  be  odd.  Hence  in  this  latter  case
<4he  complete  solution  is  a  finite  algebraic  function  of  ft.

(i^)  Remembering  that  by  a  and  9  we  denote  llie  poeitiTe
Taloes  of  the  sqiiara  roots  indicated  in  (88),  we  oolleet  finm  (/)
I  and  2»  that»  if  F  denote  a  rational  integral  fiinetion  cifi  and
{l-f^')^^,  the  ehaiacter  of  the  aolntioii of  (80)  is  aslqllowB  in
the  seversl  eases  indicated: —

("A;  o<»  +  J; if  8  and  a  -  J  are  integers.

B;  ^>^  +  i»  if  s+i  and  a  are  integera.

Tlie  complete  solution  is  F.

IL^

>A.;  a<$4-i;  if  8^(a>J)  is  an  integer,  but  a-^  not  an

integer.

B;  a^ff-i-i;  if  a-}A«  is  an  intcfer,  but not  an

integer.

.  A  particular  solution  ia  F ;  but  the  complete  solution  u  not  F*

(r) "Complete  SjOicncal  HarmonicSi'' or  "Laplace's  Co
effidenti^"  are  included  in  the  particular  solution  F  of  Oase  XL  Bi

{ti/) Differentiate  (84')  and  put

J-

*  Unity  being  nnderstood  as  iacluded  in  the  class  of  "  poai^e  int^ers.**

Digitized  by  Google

214  FBELIUINABT.  [B(m').

Thrae  We  find  immediately

mode*  tit

Let  t»'»/i~+(*a  +  «  +  J)i;  (97).

We  liaTe,  as  vnW  be  proved  presently,

<^  'f^^  -  ^  ^>'^  £  ^ (• + f)i«'= ^  •  •  w

Lasdj,  kt ti"=  (1  -  /x')  ^  - a + « + 1) /*«  (99).

We  bave,  as  inll  be  proved  praNntl j,

(l-/)^-3(»+l)<'^+[(«*l/-(«+i)'l»"=0...(100).

Tbe  operation  ^  perfimned  on  a  solid  bannonic  of  degree
-a-},  andtypeir{4^,y(d^+^} «^  and  transfinmed  to  polar

c»ordinateB  r,  fi,  4>,  with  attention  to  (83),  gives  tbe  transition
from  V  to  as  exprossod  In  (99),  and  tbns  (100)  is  proved  l  >/
to)  (15).

Similarly  the  o|)eration

tmnsformed  to  co-ordinates  r,  m  ^  gives  (97)|  and  thus  (98)  is
proved  by  (gr)  (15).

Tbns  it  was  tbat  (97)  (98),  and  (99)  (100)  were  found.  Bnt^
assuming  (97)  and  (99)  arbitrarily  as  it  were^  we  prove  (98)  and
(100)  most  easily  as  follows.  Let

«'=  2/?>", aiul  k" IB  'y  (101).

Then,  by  (97)  and  (99),  with  (85),  we  find

and /^"...=  (.a..-i)!Lti±l±liL-^.^.  J 002).

^^^7$  flying  (87),  we  find  tbat  tbe  oorrespondlng  equa-
tion is  satisfied  by  B\^,^jr^,  with  a^l  and  s-i-l  instead  of
aandf;  andbyi^  ..^.^ir;,  withaiklinstesdof  Oybntwith  #
unchanged*

B  (!»').]

KIN£ICA,TICS.

215

An  to  (95)  and  (9G),  they  merely  express  for  the  generalized  Eaun^letof
surface  harmonics  the  traii.sition  from  5  to  «  4  1  without  change
of  %  shown  for  complete  harmonics hy  Murphj's  formula,
§  782  (G;  below.

(W)  JBxampki  0/ (9$)  (iie),  and  (m).

i£xam|)lo  1. Let  a  -  +

(84')l)Mam«. (1-^*)  J'.-2(»  +  l),.^  =  0,
ci  which  the  complete  aolution  is  >  (103).

By  (95)  (96)  we  find

Trsteiulj

from  800*
torial  by  in>
crawe  of
withofldcri

(104).

as  A  Mlatum  of

ThlB  is  the  particular  finite  solution  indicated  in  §  (if)  II.  A.

The  liberty  we  now  have  to  let  a  be  negative  aa  well  m  positive
allows  us  now  to  include  in  our  formula  for  t*  the  eases  repre-
seiited  1^  the  double  sign  ^  in  XL  A  of  {k').

Example  2.  By  m  .successive  applications  of  (99)  (100),  with
the  upper  sign,  to  v  of  (103),  we  liad  for  the  complete  iiitegi-al  of

«' = c  {/W  J^j:^^ + i  V)} + CP  W

where  /(/x),  F(ji),  J^(ji)  denote  ntioosl  integral  algebiaio  loiio-
tions  of

Of  this  solution  the  part  C"F(/*)  is  the  particular  finite  solution
indicated  in  §  {k')  JJL  B>  We  now  see  that  the  complete  solutioii

involves  no  oiher  tnmsoendeni  liisn ^^.v,^...  When  s  Is  an

j(l-//

integer,  this  is  reducible  to  the  form

from  tec-

...  (105),  J^b^j»*

Digitized  by  Google

216

Exnmiiles  of

liirivution

oooUaued.

Ajtetatio

Zonal  of
order  zero:

(OPowmf
into  one
wrt'  riii!  by
augmenta-
tion of  «.
with  oroer
■tUlMTOt

PRELIMINABY.  £B  («').

a  being  a  oonseant  and  f  (fi)  a  nidoaul  integnd  algebraic  function
of  jK.  In  tbis  caae^  rememberii^  that  (105)  is  what  (84')
beoooiee  when  m+*+ J  is  pat  for  a,  we  maj  lecnr  to  our
notation  of  » (y)(j),  bjr  patting  i  for  m+B,  wbicb  is  now  an
mtiger :  and  going  bade,  by  (83)  to  (80)  or  (78),  put

.(837;

W  =  (l-^/i')''|*'

thus  (105)  is  equivalent  to

-/)|"]  +  +  «  =  0  (780.

Tbo  prooesB of  Example  2,  §  gives  the  complete  int^<rral  of
tbis  equation  wben  t-s  is  a  positire  integer.  When  al  o  s,  -.md
therefiire  also  t,  is  an  integer,  tbe  tranacendent  involved  be-

1  +  a

comes  ^oSyZ^i,' <^  <»so  the  algebraic  part  of  the  eolation

[orCP(/x)(l-/i'>  accordint,' to  the  notation  of  (105)  and  (78')]
is  the  ordiniuy  "Laplace's  Function"  of  order  and  tvpe  (i  s)  ■
the  ®j ,  ,  of  our  previous  notations  of  §§  (j),  (y).  ii  jg
iuti'i  estinir  to  know  that  the  other  particular  solution  wbicb  we
now  have,  c()ini>lcting  the  solution  of  the  differential  eqnation
for  these  functions,  iuYolTes  nothing  of  tnusoeodent  bat
1  +/*

log

(o')  Examples  o/(99)  (100),  and  (95)  (96)  contimt^..

Example  3. Returning  to  (»'),  Example  2,  let  «  +  ^  be  an

int^i  theintegml  J^j-^^jpisal^^  Thns  we  bavo  tbe

case  of  {k  )  1.  B»  in  which  the  complete  solution  is  algebnde.

(1^7  Betuining  to  (»7,  Example  1:  let  a«}  and  «  =  0;
(103)  becomes

of  wbicb  tlie  complete  integral  is

«-j<7iog}-±^+(r

1  —  /X

(103).

As  before,  apply  (d^  (96)  n  times  socoessiTely :  we  find

«.  =  i.l.2...(„-l)c[(^L)"-(j^"]  (106)

,d  by  CiOO(^l

B  (p').]  KINEMATICS.  217

OH  one  solution  of  tho  other

/t'tL  rfu  from  this  liy

(1  -^•)|^-  2(»  + 1)^^  - + 1)«  =  0  (OC).  — -..

»^ •  equivalent

To  find  the  o&ndt :  timt  j(ia6}  by  (99)  (100)  ^th  the  lower
agn;  the  eflfoct  is  to  diminlah  a  tnm  ^  to  — and  therefore  to
make  no  change  in  the  differential  equation,  but  to  deriTe  from

(106)  another  particular  solution,  whioh  is  as  follows :

».-i.i.s...(»-i).i..c[(j  ^)"+  (jii)"]  (ion

Giving  any  different  values  to  C  iu  (106)  and  (106'),  and,  using  Compict*
£^JC%o  denote  two  arbitrary  oonstants,  adding  we  hAvetiie  com-  fJsseraf/of
plete  solution  of  (96'),  which  we  may  write  as  follows :

'^=Q^-wh

{q")  That  (107)  is  the  solution  of  (96^)  we  verify  in  a  moment
by  trial,  and  in  so  doing  we  see  farther  that  it  is  the  oomjdete
solution,  whether  n  be  integral  or  not.

(/)  Example  4. Apply  (99)  (100)  with  iipper  sign  t  times  to  *wj»*fc«

(107)  and  succ^isive  resulte. We  get  thus  the  complete  solution  both  tes-
of  (84')  for  a-  J  =  i  any  integer,  if  n  is  not  an  integer.  But  if  n  cvSy  fnte-
is  an  integer  we  get  the  complete  solution  only  provided  i  <  n  :

this  is  case  I.  A  of  §  (^'). If  we  take  t^n-l,  the  result^
algebraic  as  it  i%  may  be  proved  to  be  ezpiessible  in  the  form

C  +  C"Jc/^(l -/)"-'

(i-/^T

w  hich  is  therefore  for  n  an  integer  the  complete
integral  of

(108):

except  die
of  8  nn  int«>
ger  and

^ _  .  i  >#.  when

being  the  case  of  (84')  for  which  aaff — and  « sn  an  integer :

applyii^  to  thiA  (99)  (100)  with  upper  sign,  the  constant  C  difr-

appesn^  and  we  find  m's as  a  solution  of

<*-''')0-''<"+i)''S=o

Henoe^  fior  tpn  one  solution  is  lost  The  other,  found  by

Digitized  by  Google

218

FBEUlCDrABT.

EzamplM  of
derivfttioa

bmicgi-
vnttSon  tit
-  upleto
liiflo  fbr

oontinaed  applicfttious  of  (99)  (100)  with  upper  sign,  ia  the

81X1

regular  **  Laplaoe's  fimction'*  growing  fnm  C  ain'  0 n4>y  whidi

is  the  case  represented  by  v'-  C  in  (109).  But  in  this  con-
tinuation we  are  only  doing  for  the  cuise  of  n  an  integer,  part
of  what  was  done  in  §  (n'),  Example  2,  wliei-e  the  other  part,
from  the  other  part  of  the  solution  of  (109)  now  lost,  gives  the
other  part  of  the  complete  solution  of  Laplace's  equation  subject
to  the  limitation  i  —  n  (or  t-^)  a  positive  integer,  but  not  to  the
limitation  of  t  an  integer  orn  an  integer.

(a)  Betunung  to  the  oommeneement  of  §  (r'),  ^th  •  pot
forfiy  we  find  a  complete  solution  growing  in  tibe  Ibtm

(110);

(1-^/  ^  '  (1+^/

which  may  be  immecHately  reduced  to

(i-V/

J'^  denoting  an  integral  algebraic  function  of  the  i***  degree,  readily
found  by  the  ])roper  successive  applications  of  (99)  (100).
Hence,  by  (83)  (79),  we  have

AVM  (1 4-  ^)'4-(-y;r/;(-^)  (i  -

to  =

(111).

(l-M*)''

as  the  eomplate  Mdutum  of  Laplaoe's  eqaatim

for  the  case  of  i  an  integer  without  any  restriction  as  to  tlio
value  of  8,  which  may  he  integral  or  fi-aotional,  real  or  imaginary,
with  no  failure  except  the  case  of  s  an  integer  and  i>  of  which
the  complete  ti-eatmeut  is  included  in  ^  (m  ),  Kxample  2,  above.

Digitized  by  Go

CHAPTER  n.

DYNA^UCAL  LA.WS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

205. In  the  precediDff  chapter  we  considered  as  a  subject  of  ideaa  of  ^

m  matter  Md

pure  geometry  the  motion  of  points,  unes,  suxiaoes,  and  volumes,  J[|^'^^
whether  taking  place  with  or  without  change  of  dimensions  and

form ;  and  the  results  we  there  arrived  at  are  of  course  altogether

independent  of  the  idea  of  matter,  and  of  the /orce5  which  matter
exerts.  We  have  heretofore  assumed  tlie  e.cistence  merely  of
motion,  distortion,  etc.;  wc  now  come  to  the  consideration,  not
of  how  we  mifjht  consider  such  motions,  etc.,  to  be  produced,  but
of  the  actual  causes  which  in  the  material  world  do  produce
them.  The  axioms  of  the  present  chapter  must  therefore  be
considered  to  be  due  to  actual  experience,  in  the  shape  either
of  observation  or  experiment.  How  this  experience  is  to  be
obtained  will  form  the  subject  of  a  subsequent  chapter.

906. We  cannot  do  better,  at  all  events  in  commencing,  than

follow  Newton  somewhat  closely. Indeed  the  introduction  to

the  Pnncipia  contains  m  a  most  lucid  form  the  general  founda-
tions of  Dynamics.  The  Definitumes  and  Axiomata  sive  Leges
Motilsy  there  laid  down,  riMpiirtj  only  a  few  amplifications  and
a«l(Hti<»nal  illustrations,  suggested  by  subsc<juent  developments,
to  suit  them  to  the  present  state  of  science,  and  to  make  a  much
better  introduction  to  dynamics  than  YiG  iind  in  even  some  of
the  best  modem  treatises.

S07.  We  cannot^  of  course,  give  a  definition  of  Matter  which  Hattw.
will  satisfy  the  metaphysician,  but  the  naturalist  may  be  con-
tent to  know  matter  as  that  'whieh  can  he  perceived  by  the  eeneee.

Of  as  that  which  can  he  acted  upon  by,  or  can  ex&ri,^  force.  The

Digitized  by  Google

220  PIlELlMLNiLKY.  [207.

latter,  and  indeed  the  former  also,  of  these  definiUoiis  invohes
rone. the  idea  of  Faree,  which,  in  point  of  fact,  is  a  direct  object  of
sense;  probably  of  all  oar  senses^  and  certainly  of  the  "mus-
cular sense." To  our  chapter  on  Properties  of  Matter  we  must

refer  for  further  discussion  of  the  question,  TT7ja/  is  matter  !
And  we  shall  then  be  in  a  position  to  discuss  the  question
of  the  subjectivity  of  Force.

206. The  QmnUty  of  MtUUr  in  a  body,  or,  as  we  now  call
ii,  the  Mast  of  a  body,  is  proportional,  according  to  Kewton,  to
DoMNgr. the  VctuiM  and  the  Dendty  conjointly. In  reality,  the  defini-
tion gives  us  the  meaning  of  density  rather  than  of  maaa;  for

it  shows  us  that  if  twice  the  original  quantity  of  matter,  air  for

example,  be  forced  into  a  vessel  of  given  capacity,  the  density
will  be  doubled,  and  so  on.  But  it  also  shows  us  that,  of  matter
of  uniform  density,  the  nuiss  or  quantity  is  proportional  to  the
volume  or  spac^  it  occupies.

Let  Jf  be  the  mass, p  the densily,  and  FthevoIimM^  of  a  bomo-
geneooB  body.  Then

if  =  l> ;

if  wc  so  take  our  units  that  unit  of  mass  is  that  of  unit  yoluiuo  of
a  body  of  unit  density.

If  the  density  vary  from  point  to  ]>r)int  of  tho  hody,  wc  have
evidently,  Viy  the  above  formula  and  the  elementary  notation  of
the  integral  calculus,

if  s  JJJpdxdjftbf

where  p  is  supposed  to  be  a  known  fonefcion  ci  x,y,z,  and  tiie
integration  extends  to  the  whole  space  opcapied  fay  Uie  matter  of
the  body  whether  this  be  continuoas  or  not^

It  is  worthy  of  particular  notice  that,  in  this  definition.
Newton  says,  if  there  be  anything  which  freely  pervades  the
interstices  of  all  bodies,  this  ia  not  t^ken  account  of  in  estimat-
ing their  Mass  or  Density.

MtuRin^ 209. Newton  further  states,  that  a  practical  measure  of  the
nuuw. mass  of  a  body  is  its  Weight. His  experiments  on  pendulums,
by  which  he  establishes  tliis  most  important  result,  will  be  de-
scribed later,  in  our  chapter  on  Properties  of  Matter.

Digitized  by  Google

209.]  DYNAUIGAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  221

As  will  be  presently  expluiued,  the  unit  mass  most  convenient
for  Britiish  measurements  is  an  imperial  pound  of  matter.

210.  The  Quantity  of  Motion,  or  the  Momentum,  of  a  rigid
body  muvitig  without  rotation  is  proportional  to  its  ma.ss  and
velocity  conjointly.  The  whole  motion  is  the  sum  of  the  motions
of  its  several  parts.  Thus  a  doubled  imu^s,  or  a  doubled  velocity,
would  correspond  to  a  double  q^uantity  of  motion;  and  so  on^

Henoe^  if  we  take  as  unit  of  Biomentum  tli6  momentum  of
a  unit  €i  matter  moving  with  unit  veiocityy  the  momentum  of  a
mass  M  moving  with  velocity  v  is  Mv,

211.  ChuTige  of  Quantity  of  Motion,  ox  Change Momen- churme  or
turn,  is  proportional  to  the  mass  moving  and  the  change  of  its
velocity  conjointly.

Change  of  velocity  is  to  be  undetBtood  in  the  general  sense-
ef  §  27.  Thus,  in  llie  figure  of  that  section,  if  a  velocity  re-
presented by  OA  be  changed  to  another  represented  by  OC,  the
change  of  velocity  is  represented  in  magnitude  and  direction
by

212.  Jiate  of  Change  of  Momentum  is  proportional  to  the  jjjj^^^
mass  moving  and  the  acceleration  of  its  velocity  conjointly.
Thus  (§  35,  b)  the  rate  of  change  of  momentum  of  a  falling
body  is  constant,  and  in  the  vertical  direction. Again  (§  35,  a)
the  rate  of  change  of  momentum  of  a  mass  M,  describing  a

circle  of  radius  li,  with  uniform  velocity  V,  is  — ^  *  and  is

direeted  to  the  centre  of  the  circle;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  a
change  of  direction,  not  a  change  of  speed,  of  the  motion.
Hence  if  the  mass  be  compelled  to  keep  in  the  circle  by  a

cord  attached  to  it  and  held  fixed  at  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the

MV^

force  with  which  the  cord  is  stretched  is  equal  to :  this  is

called  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  mass  M  moving  with  velocity
V  'm&  circle  of  radius  B.

QmemMy  (§  29),  for  a  body  of  mass moving  anyhow  in
space  there  is  change  of  momentum,  at  the  rate, in  thedireo-

Digitized  by  Googlc

222

PRELIMINAaY.

[212.

Rateot

chun^u  of
momentom.

KfaMUo

Particle
Midpoint.

Inerti*.

iiou  of  motion,  aud  M—  towards  the  centre  of  curvatui-e  of  the

P

path ;  and,  if  we  dioose,  we  may  ezhifalt  tlie  whole  aooeleratioii

of  momentum  by  its  thi'ee  rectangular  components  ^"^t  ^  J^*

if  ^ '  ^ Newtonian  notation,  Mx,  My,  Mz,

213.  The  Vis  Viva,  or  Kinetic  Energy,  of  a  moving  body  is
proportional  to  the  mass  and  the  square  of  the  velocity,  cou-
joiiilly.  If  we  adopt  the  same  units  of  mass  and  velocity  as
before,  there  is  particular  advantage  in  defining  kinetic  energy
as  half  the  product  of  the  mass  and  the  square  of  its  velocity.

214:.  Rate  of  Change  of  Kinetic  Energy  (when  defined  as
above)  is  the  product  of  the  velocity  into  the  component  of
rate  of  change  of  momentum  in  the  direction  of  motion.

For

d/Mv\  (f{Mv)

216.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  what  precedes,  with  the
exception  of  the  definition  of  mass,  we  have  taken  no  account
of  the  dimensions  of  the  moving  body.  This  is  of  no  conse-
quence so  long  as  it  does  not  rotate,  and  so  long  as  its  parts

preserve  the  same  relative  positions  amongst  one  another.  In
this  case  we  may  suppose  the  whole  of  the  matter  in  it  to  be
condensed  in  one  point  or  particle.  We  thus  speak  of  a  material
particle,  as  distinguislied  from  a  qeometrical  point  If  the  body
rotate,  or  if  its  parts  change  their  relative  positions,  then  we
cannot  choose  any  one  point  by  whose  motions  alone  we  may
determine  those  of  the  other  points.  In  such  cases  the  momen*
turn  and  change  of  momentum  of  the  whole  body  in  any  direc-
tion are,  the  sums  of  the  momenta,  and  of  the  changes  of
momentum,  of  its  parts,  in  these  directions ;  while  the  kinetic
energy  of  the  wholes  being  non-directional,  is  rimply  the  sum
of  the  kinetic  energies  of  the  several  parts  or  particles.

216.  Matter  has  an  innate  power  of  resisting  external  in-
fluences, so  that  every  body,  as  Hir  as  it  can,  remains  at  rest,  or
moves  uniformly  in  a  straight  line.

This,  the  Inertia  of  matter,  is  proportional  to  the  quantity  of

Digitized  by  Google

216.]

DTKAinCAL  TJLW8  AND  FBIKCIPLES.

223

matter  in  the  body.  And  it  follows  that  some  cause  is  requisite  lanUm,
to  disturb  a  bod/s  uniformity  of  motioiii  or  to  change  its  direc-
tion from  the  natural  rectilinear  path.

217. Force  is  any  cause  wliich  tends  to  alter  a  body's  natural  ^orco.
state  of  rest,  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line.

Force  is  wholly  expended  in  the  Action  it  produces;  and  the
body,  after  the  force  ceases  to  act,  retains  by  its  inertia  the
direction  of  motion  and  the  velocity  which  were  given  to  it^
Force  may  be  of  divers  kinds,  as  pressure,  or  gravity,  or  friction,
or  any  of  the  attractive  or  repulsive  actions  of  electricity,  mag-
netism, eta

• 218. Tiie  tliree  elements  specifying  a  force,  or  the  three  siwcifloa-
elements  which  must  be  known,  before  a  clear  notion  of  the  tont,
force  under  consideration  can  be  formed,  are,  its  place  of  appli-
cation, its  direction,  and  its  magnitude.

(a)  The  place  of  application  of  a  force.  The  first  case  to  be
considered  is  that  in  which  the  place  of  application  is  a  point.  '^'"^^'^
It  has  been  shown  already  in  what  sense  the  term  "point"

is  to  be  taken,  and,  therefore,  in  what  way  a  force  may  be
imagined  as  a(  tiiitr  at  a  point.  In  reality,  however,  the  ]>Iace  of
appliaitiuii  of  a  force  is  Jilways  either  a  surface  or  a  space  of
three  dimensions  occupied  by  matter.  The  point  of  the  finest
needU",  or  the  edge  of  the  sharpest  knife,  is  still  a  surface,  and
acts  by  pressing  over  a  finite  area  on  bodies  to  which  it  may
be  applied.  Even  the  most  rigid  substances,  when  brought
together,  do  not  touch  at  a  point  merely,  but  moidd  each  other
so  as  to  produce  a  surface  of  application.  On  the  other  hand,
gravity  is  a  force  of  which  the  place  of  application  is  the  whole
matter  of  the  body  whose  weight  is  considered;  and  the  smallest
particle  of  matter  that  has  weight  occupies  some  finite  portion
of  space.  Thus  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  there  are  two  kinds
of  forc^  distinguishable  by  their  place  of  application — force,
whose  place  of  application  is  a  surface,  and  force,  whose  place
of  application  is  a  solid.  When  a  heavy  body  rests  on  the
ground,  or  on  a  table,  force  of  the  second  character,  acting
downwards,  is  balanced  by  force  of  the  first  chaiacter  acting
upwards.

Digitized  by  Google

224r  PRELHUNA&Y.  [218.

Dir«ciioii. (^) ^®  secoTid  elemMit  in  the  specification  of  a  force  is  its

direction.  The  direction  of  a  force  is  the  line  in  which  it  acts.
If  the  place  of  application  of  a  force  be  regarded  as  a  point,  a
line  through  that  point,  in  the  direction  iu  which  the  force
tends  to  move  the  body,  is  the  direction  of  the  force.  In  the
case  of  a  force  distributed  over  a  suriacc,  it  is  frequently  pos-
sible and  C( •liven itjnr  to  assume  a  single  point  and  a  single  line,
such  that  a  certain  force  acting  at  that  point  in  tliat  line  would
produce  sensibly  the  same  effect  as  is  really  produced.

Kagiiitade.  (c)  The  third  element  in  the  specification  of  a  force  is  its
magnitude.  This  involyes  a  consideration  of  the  method  fol-
lowed in  dynamics  for  measuring  forces.  Before  measuring
anything,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  unit  of  measurement,  or  u
standard  to  which  to  reter,  and  a  principle  of  numerical  specifi-
cation, or  a  mode  of  referring  to  the  standard.  These  will  be
supplied  presently. See  also  §  258,  below.

Aooetentive  219.  The  Accdcrative  Effect  of  a  Force  is  proportional  to
the  velocity  which  it  produces  in  a  given  time,  and  is  measured
by  that  which  is,  or  would  be,  produced  in  unit  of  time;  in
other  words,  the  rate  of  change  of  velocity  which  it  produces.
This  is  simply  what  we  have  already  defined  as  acceleration,  §  28.

Mcflaim  of  220.  The  Measure  of  a  Force  is  the  quantity  of  motion  whidi
'**^* it  produces  per  unit  of  time.

The  reader,  who  has  been  accustomed  to  speak  of  a  force  of
so  many  pounds,  or  so  many  tons,  may  be  startled  when  he  finds
that  such  expressions  are  not  definite  unless  it  be  specified  at
what  part  of  the  earth  s  surface  the  pound,  or  other  definite
quantity  of  matter  named,  is  to  be  weighed;  for  the  heainness  or
gramty  of  a  given  quantity  of  matter  differs  in  different  latitudes.
But  the  force  required  to  produce  a  stated  quantity  of  motion  in
a  given  time  is  perfectly  definite,  and  independent  of  locality.
Thus,  ret  If  be  the  mass  of  a  body,  g  the  velocity  it  would
acijuire  in  falling  freely  for  a  second,  and  P  the  force  of  gravity
upon  it,  measured  in  kinetic  or  absolute  units.  We  have

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

221.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  rRINCIPLE&  225

221. Accor(linj]f  to  the  system  commonly  followed  in  mathe- 1"?!™***
matical  treatises  on  dynamics  till  fourteen  years  ago,  when  a  small  jyjjjjjj*
instalment  of  the  first  edition  of  the  present  work  was  issued
for  the  use  of  our  students,  the  unit  of  mass  was  g  times  the
mass  of  the  standard  or  unit  weight. This  definition,  giving  a
vaiying  and  a  very  unnatural  unit  of  mass,  was  exceedingly
inconvenient. By  taking  the  gravity  of  a  constant  mass
the  unit  of  force  it  makes  the  unit  of  force  greater  in  high  than  JJi  nJf***'
in  low  latitudes. In  reality,  standards  of  weight  ace  ^iwMMff,  gjjjjjjfj^
not  foreeB*  They  are  employed  primarily  in  commerce  for  the
paipose  of  measoring  out  a  definite  qwmiiiy  of  matter;  not  an
amount  of  matter  which  shall  he  attracted  hy  the  earth  with  a
given  force.

A  merchant,  with  a  balance  and  a  set  of  standard  weights,
would  give  his  customers  the  same  quantity  of  the  same  kind  of
matter  however  the  earth's  attraction  might  vaiy,  depending  as
he  does  upon  weights  for  his  measurement;  another,  using  a
spriii^halancei  would  defraud  his  customers  in  high  latitudes,
and  himself  in  low,  if  his  Instrument  (which  depends  on  constant
forces  and  not  on  the  gmvity  of  constant  masses)  were  correctly
adjusted  in  London.

It  is  a  sccondarj'  application  of  our  standards  of  weight  to
employ  them  for  the  measurement  of  Jbrce»,  such  as  steam  pres-
sures; muscular  power,  etc.  In  all  cases  where  great  accuracy
is  required,  the  results  obtained  by  such  a  method  have  to  be
reduced  to  what  they  would  have  been  if  the  measurements  of
force  had  been  made  by  means  of  a  perfect  spring*balance,
graduated  so  as  to  indicate  the  forces  of  gravity  on  the  standard
wwghts  in  some  conventional  locality.

It  is  therefore  very  much  simpler  and  better  to  take  the
imperial  pound,  or  other  national  or  international  standard
weighty  aa^  for  instance^  the  gramme  (see  the  chapter  on
Measures  and  InstnimentsX  as  the  unit  of  mass,  and  to  derive
from  it,  according  to  Newton's  definition  above,  the  unit  of
fince.  This  is  the  method  which  Qauss  has  adopted  in  his
great  improvement  (§  228  below)  of  the  system  of  measurement
of  forces,

VOL.  I.  15

Digitized  by  Google

226  PBKUMINABT.  [222»

g|j^it^>^  222.  The  formula,  deduced  by  Ckuniult  from  observation^
JbjMiogiit  and  a  certain  theory  regarding  the  figure  and  density  of  the
earth,  may  be  employed  to  calculate  the  most  probable  value
of  the  a^jparent  force  of  gnnity,  being  the  resuitaiit  of  true
gravitation  and  centrifugal  lorce,  in  any  locality  where  no
pendulum  obscnation  of  sufficient  accuracy  has  been  made.
This  formula,  with  the  two  coefficients  which  it  involves,
corrected  according  to  the  best  modern  pendulum  obser\'ation3
(Airy,  Encytk  MetropoUtana,  Figure  of  the  Earih)^  as  fol-
lows:—

Let  Q  be  the  apparent  force  of  gravity  on  a  unit  mass  at  the
equator,  and  g  that  in  any  latitude  X;  then

(7=  C?  (1+  005133  sin' X).

The  value  of  O,  in  terms  of  the  British  abflolute  unit,  to  be
explained  immediately,  is

32*088.

According  to  this  formula,  therefore,  polar  gravity  will  be
g = 32-088  x  1*005133  -  32*2527.

223.  Gravity  having  failed  to  furnish  a  definite  standard,
independent  of  locality,  recourse  must  be  liad  to  something  else.
The  principle  of  measurement  indicated  as  above  by  Newton,
SSwiui  ^^^^  introduced  practically  by  Gauss,  furnishes  us  with
Fom'  what  we  want.  Accoidiug  to  this  principle,  the  unit  force  is
that  force  which,  acting  on  a  national  standard  unit  of  matter
during  the  unit  of  time,  geneiatee  the  unity  of  velocity.

This  is  known  as  Gauss's  absolute  unit;  absolute,  because
it  furnishes  a  standard  force  independent  of  the  differing
amounts  of  gravity  at  different  localities.  It  is  however  ter-
restrial and  inconstant  if  tlic  unit  oi  time  depends  on  the  earth's
rotation,  as  it  does  in  our  present  system  of  chronometry.  The
period  of  vibration  of  a  piece  of  quartz  crystal  of  specified  shape
and  size  and  at  a  stated  temperature  (a  tuning-fork,  or  bar,  as
one  of  the  bars  of  glass  used  in  the  "musical  t^dapses")  gives  us
a  unit  of  time  which  is  constant  through  all  space  and  all  time»
and  independent  of  the  earth.  A  unit  of  force  founded  on  such
a  unit  of  time  would  be  better  entitled  to  the  designation  obso-

Digitized  by  Google

223.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  .  227

lute  than  is  the  "abflolute  unit"  now  generally  adopted,  which  is  Muweirs
founded  on  the  mean  eoiar  second.  But  this  depends  essentially  tiona  for
on  one  particular  piece  of  matter,  and  is  therefore  liable  to  all  unit  ^
the  accidents,  etc  which-  affect  so-called  National  Standards
however  carefully  they  may  be  preserved,  as  well  as  to  the
almost  insuperable  practical  difficulties  which  are  experienced
when  wo  attempt  to  make  exact  copies  of  them.  Still,  in  the
present  state  of  science,  we  are  really  confined  to  such  approxi-
mations. The  recent  discoveries  due  to  the  Kinetic  theory  of
gases  and  to  Spectrum  analysis  (especially  when  it  is  applied  to
the  li<,dit  of  the  heavenly  bodies)  indicate  to  us  natural  standard
pieces  of  matter  such  as  atoms  of  hydrogen,  or  sodium,  ready  made
in  infinite  numbers,  all  absolutely  alike  in  every  physical  pro-
perfy.  The  time  of  vibration  of  a  sodium  particle  corresponding
to  any  one  of  its  modes  of  vibration,  is  known  to  be  absolutely
independent  of  its  position  in  the  universe,  and  it  will  probably
remain  the  same  so  long  as  the  particle  itself  exists.  The  wave-
length for  that  particular  ray,  the  space  through  which
light  is  propagated  in  vacuo  during  the  time  of  one  complete
vibration  of  this  period,  gives  a  perfectly  invariable  unit  of
length;  and  it  is  possible  that  at  some  not  very  distant  day  the
mass  of  sudi  a  sodium  particle  may  be  employed  as  a  natural
standard  for  the  remaining  fundamental  unit.  This,  the  latest  •
improvement  made  upon  our  original  suggestion  of  a  Perennial
Spring  (First  edition,  §  400),  is  due  to  Clerk  Maxwell*;  who
has  also  comnumicated  to  us  another  very  important  and  in-
t<ircstin2f  suggestion  for  founding  the  unit  of  time  iii)on  pliysical
proj>erties  of  a  substance  without  the  necessity  of  sj)ecifying  any
particular  quantity  of  it.  It  is  this,  water  being  chosen  as  the
substance  of  all  othera  known  to  us  which  is  most  easily  obtained
in  perfect  purity  and  in  perfectly  definite  physical  condition. —
Call  the  standard  density  of  water  the  maximum  density  of
the  liquid  when  under  the  pressure  of  its  own  vapour  alone.
The  time  of  revolution  of  an  infinitesimal  satellite  dose  to  the
surface  of  a  globe  of  water  at  standard  density  (or  of  any  kind
of  matter  at  the  same  density)  may  be  taken  as  the  unit  of
time ;  for  it  is  independent  of  the  size  of  the  globe.  This  has

*  ElectriHtjf  and  Magnetim,  1878.

15—2

Digitized  by  Google

^28  PRELIMINARY.  [223.

Third  BUR-  siiggestcd  to  US  Still  anotlior  unit,  founded,  however,  Still  upon
the  same  physical  priociple. .  The  time  of  the  gravest  simple
harmonic  infinitesimal  vibration  of  a  globe  of  liqaid,  water  at
standard  density,  or  of  other  perfect  liquids  at  the  same  density,
may  be  taken  as  the  unit  of  time ;  for  the  time  of  the  simple
harmonic  vibration  of  any  one  of  the  fundamental  modes  of  a
liquid  sphere  is  independent  of  the  size  of  the  sphere.

Let  y  be  the  force  of  gravitational  attraction  bftweeu  two
iinita  of  matter  at  unit  distance. The  force  of  gravity  at  the

if  b)  be  the  angular  velocity  of  an  infinitesimal  RatelHte,  we
have,  by  the  equilibrium  of  centrifugal  force  and  gravity
212, '477),

Hence

and  therefore  if  I*  be  the  satellite's  period,

3

(which  is  equal  to  the  period  of  a  simple  pendolom  whose  length
is  the  i^obe's  radius,  and  weighted  end  infinitely  near  the  suz&oe
of  the  globe).  And  it  has  been  proved*  that  if  a  globe  of  liquid
be  distorted  infinitesimally  acoording  to  a  spherical  harmonic  of
order  %  and  left  at  rest^  it  will  perform  simple  harmonic  cseilla-
tums  in  a  period  equal  to

2rr h  ^-  ^♦tL)

V  Urr/;/2/(/-l)j'

Hence  if  T'  denote  the  period  of  the  gravest,  that,  namely,
for  which  i  =  2,  we  have

Tlie  senn-period  of  an  intinitesimal  satellite  round  the  earth  is
equal,  reckoned  in  seconds,  to  the  square  root  of  the  number  of
metres  in  the  earth's  radius,  the  metre  being  vexy  approximately

•  •'Dynamicnl  rrobleins  regarding  Elastic  Si'}i<  roiilal  Sheila  and  Sphctcids
of  InoompieBsible  Liquid"  (W.  Thomson),  VhiU  Tram.  Not.  27, 18C2.

Digilizeo  by  GoOglc

223.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  22d

the  leiiffth  of  the  seeuiula i»enJuluiu, wliosc  period  is  two  SuKnertfang
°  .1  for  Absolut*

eecomls. Hence  taking  the  earth's  radius  as  6,370,0(JO  metres,  Unitol

TlllMi

aud  itfi  density  aa  5^  times  that  of  our  i>Uiiidaixl  globe,

r=3h.  17m.
r»3lL40iiL

224.  The  absolute  unit  depends  on  the  unit  of  matter,  the
unit  of  time,  aud  the  unit  of  velocity;  and  as  tlio  unit  of  velo-
city di'peuds  on  the  unit  of  space  and  the  unit  of  time,  there  is,
iu  the  deHnition,  a  single  reference  to  mjuss  aud  space,  but  a
double  reference  to  time;  aud  this  is  a  point  that  must  be  par-
ticularly attended  to.

225.  The  unit  of  mass  may  be  the  British  imperial  pound;
the  unit  of  space  the  British  standard  foot;  and,  accurately

enough  for  practical  purposes  for  a  few  thousand  years,  the  unit
of  time  may  be  the  mean  solar  second.

We  accordiuiily  dehne  the  British  aUsoluto  unit  force  as  "the  BHtMtab-
force  whichy  acting  on  one  poiuid  of  matter  for  one  second,
generates  a  velocity  of  one  foot  per  second." Prof.  James
Thomson  has  suggested  the  name  "Poundal"  for  this  unit  of
force.

226.  To  illustrate  the  reckoning  offeree  in  "absolute  measure,"  comparison
find  how  many  absolute  units  will  produce,  in  any  particular  p»vity.
locality,  the  same  effect  as  the  force  of  gravity  on  a  given  mass.

To  do  this,  measure  the  effect  of  gravity  iu  producing  accelera-
tion on  a  body  unresisted  in  any  way.  The  most  accurate  method
is  indirect,  by  means  of  the  pendulum.  The  result  of  pendulum
experiments  made  at  Leith  Fort,  by  Captain  Kater,  is^  that  the
velocity  which  would  be  acquired  by  a  body  falling  unresisted
for  one  second  is  at  that  place  ^2  207  feet  per  second.  The
preceding  formula  gives  exactly  32*2,  for  the  latitude  55*  83',
which  is  approximately  that  of  Edinburgh.  The  variation  in
the  force  of  gravity  for  one  degree  of  difference  of  latitude  about
the  latitude  of  Edinburgh  is  only  *0000832  of  its  own  amount
It  is  nearly  the  same*  though  somewhat  more,  for  every  degree
of  latitude  southwards,  as  far  as  the  southern  limits  of  the
British  Isles.  On  the  other  hand,  the  variation  per  degree  is  sen-
sibly less,  as  far  north  as  the  Orkney  and  Shetland  Isles,  lleuce

Digitized  by  Google

230  PRELIMINART.  *  [226«

(•j^vi^^oT^^  tbe  augmentaiioii  of  gravity  per  degree  from  south  to  north
t^mi^"^  throughout  the  British  Isles  is  at  most  about  tiW  ^  whole
^«ue  amount  in  any  locality.  The  avei-age  for  the  whole  of  Qreat
Britain  and  Ireland  differs  certainly  but  little  from  32*2.  Our
present  application  is,  that  the  force  ot  gravity  at  Edinburgh  is
32  2  times  the  force  which,  acting  on  a  pound  for  a  second,
would  generate  a  velocity  of  one  foot  per  second  ;  in  other
words,  32'2  is  the  number  of  absolute  units  which  ]ii<  asnres  the
weight  of  a  pound  in  this  latitude.  Thus,  a])})roximateiy,  the
pouudal  is  equal  to  the  gravity  of  about  half  au  ouuce.

227.  Forces  (since  they  involve  oidy  direction  and  magni-
tude) may  be  rcpresunteil,  as  velocities  are,  by  straight  lines  iu
their  diroctious^aud  of  lengths  proportioDal  to  their  magnitudes,
respectively.

Also  the  laws  of  composition  and  resolution  of  any  numher
of  foroos  acting  at  the  same  point,  are,  as  we  shall  show  later
(§  255),  the  same  as  those  which  we  have  already  proved  to
hold  for  velocities;  so  that  with  the  substitution  of  force  for
velocity,  §§  26,  27,  are  still  true.

Rflbotira  223.  In  rectangular  resolution  the  Component  of  a  force  in
SSiSic?*  any  direction,  (sometimes  called  the  EffecHve  CompoMtU  in  that
direction,}  is  therefore  found  by  multiply  iog  the  magnitude  of
the  force  by  the  cosine  of  the  angle  between  the  directions  of
the  force  and  the  component.  The  remaining  component  in  this
case  is  perpendicular  to  the  other.

It  is  very  generally  convenient  to  resolve  forces  into  com-
ponents parallel  to  three  lines  at  right  angles  to  each  other;
each  such  resolution  being  effected  by  multiplying  by  the
cosine  of  the  angle  concerned.

OtoBvtricai 229.  The  point  wliose  distances  from  three  planes  at  right
SSfra!mi7  angles  to  one  another  are  respectively  equal  to  the  mean  dis-
or  centra  of  tancos  of  any  group  of  points  from  tiiese  planes,  is  at  a  distance
"^^^ from  any  plane  whatever,  equal  to  the  mean  distance  of  the
group  from  the  same  plane. Hence  of  course,  if  it  is  in  motion,
its  velocity  perpendicular  to  that  plane  is  the  mean  of  the  velo-
cities of  the  several  points,  in  the  same  directioa

Digitized  by  Google

229.]  DTKAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLB8.  231

Let  (a;,,  y,,  «,),  etc.,  be  the  points  of  the  group  in  numlx^r  t ;  Geomfltrioil
aad  3d,  17,  z  be  the  co-ordinates  of  a  point  at  distances  respectively  preiiminMy
eqiul  to  their  mean  distances  fxom  tlie  jUanes  of  referenoe ;  that  of  omtmof  *
is  to  najf  let

Tlius,  if  p^,  etc.,  and  denote  the  distances  of  the  points  in
question  from  any  plane  at  a  distance  a  from  the  origin  of  co-
oi'dinatcs,  pei'f)eu(lirular  to  the  direction  (/,  m,  n),  the  sum  of  a
and  p^  will  make  up  tlie  projection  of  the  broken  line  y^,  «,
on  {If  m,  n),  and  therefore

p^-lx^'^rm|f^'^^nzJ^a,  etc.;

Substitutiiig  in  this  last  the  expresBions  f or ^, wa  find

i  '

which  is  the  theorem  to  be  proved. Henoe^  of  course,

230.  The  Centra  0/  Inertia  of  a  system  of  eqaal  material  fi!}}^*'*
points  (whether  connected  with  one  another  or  not)  is  the  point
whose  distance  is  equal  to  their  average  distance  fiom  any  plane
whatever  (g  229).

A  group  of  material  points  of  unequal  masses  may  always  be
imagined  as  composed  of  a  greater  number  of  equal  material
points,  because  "we  may  imagine  the  given  material  points
divided  into  difTereut  numbers  of  very  small  parts.  In  any
case  in  which  the  magnitudes  of  the  given  ma.sses  are  incom-
niensurable,  \vc  may  approach  as  near  as  we  please  to  a  rigorous
fultilment  of  the  preceding  statement,  by  making  the  parts  into
which  we  divide  them  &u£^ciently  small.

On  this  understanding  the  piecedii^  definition  may  be  ap-
plied to  define  tbe  centre  of  inertia  of  a  system  of  materia
points,  whether  given  equal  or  not.  The  result  is  equivalent  to
this:-*

Digitized  by  Google

232

PBBUMINABT.

Centre  of  The  centre  of  inertia  of  any  system  of  material  points  what-
ever (whether  rigidly  connected  with  one  another,  or  connected
in  any  way,  or  quite  detached),  is  a  point  whose  distance  from
any  plane  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  products  of  each  mass  into
its  distance  from  the  same  plane  divided  by  the  sum  of  the
masses.

We  also  see,  from  the  proportion  stated  above,  that  a  point
whose  distance  from  three  rectangular  planes  fulfils  this  oou-
ditiim,  must  fulfil  this  condition  also  for  every  other  plane.

The  co-ordLuatee  of  the  centre  of  inertia,  of  masses  to,,
etc.,  at  points y^,  s^),  (x^ etc,  axe  given  by  the  follow-
ing f oxmultB

^^tg,a;,4-tg^r,+  etc. Siaig  * Stoy  Siee
Wj<(-fo,+  eta " * Sis  * Sw  '

These  formulae  are  perfectly  general,  and  can  easily  be  put
into  the  particular  shape  reijuiiod  for  any  given  c:use.  Thus,
8Up|K)se  thnt,  instead  of  a  set  of  detached  material  |M>ints,  we
have  u  couLiiuioiis  distribution  of  matter  through  certain  definite
jwi-tions  of  space  ;  the  density  at  x,  y,  z  being  p,  the  elementaiy
principles  of  the  iutegi^al  calculus  give  us  at  once

where  the  integrals  extend  through  all  the  space  oconpied  by  the
masB  in  question,  in  whieh  p  has  a  value  different  from  aero.

The  Centre  of  Inertia  or  Mass  is  thus  a  perfectly  definite
point  in  every  body,  or  group  of  bodies.  The  term  Centre  of
Gravity  is  often  very  inconveniently  used  for  it.  The  theory
of  the  result  int  action  of  gravity  which  will  be  given  under
Abstract  Dynamics  shows  that,  except  in  a  definite  class  of
distributions  of  matter,  there  is  no  one  fixed  point  which  can
properly  be  called  the  Centre  of  Gravity  of  a  rigid  body.  In
ordinary  oases  of  terrestrial  gravitation,  however,  an  approxi-
mate solution  is  available,  according  to  which,  in  common
parlance,  the  term  '^Oenlrs  of  GravUy^  may  be  used  as  equi-
valent to  CMr6  of  Inertia;  but  it  must  be  carefully  re-
membered that  the  fundamental  ideas  involved  in  the  two
definitions  are  essentially  different

Digitized  by  Google

23a]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  233

The  second  proposition  in  §  229  may  now  evidently  becentnol
stated  thus: — The  sum  of  the  momenta  of  the  parts  of  the
system  in  any  direction equal  to  the  momentum  in  the  same
direction  of  a  mass  equal  to  the  sura  of  the  masses  moving  with
a  Telocity  equal  to  the  velocity  of  the  centre  of  inertia.

231.  The  Moment  of  any  pliysical  agency  is  the  numerical  Moownt.
measure  of  its  iinportanre. Thus,  the  moment  of  a  force  round

a  point  or  round  a  line,  jsignifies  the  measure  of  its  importance
as  regards  producing  or  balancing  rotation  round  that  point  or
round  that  line.

232.  The  Moment  of  a  force  about  a  point  is  defined  as  the  Mo.nn  t  of

product  of  the  force  into  its  perpendicular  distance  from  the  '^^l^
point.  It  is  numerically  double  the  area  ot  the  triangle  whose
vertex  is  tlie  point,  and  whose  base  is  a  line  representing  the
force  in  magnitude  and  direction.  It  is  often  convenient  to
represent  it  by  a  line  numerically  equal  to  it,  tlrawn  through
the  vertex  of  the  triangle  perpendicular  to  its  piano,  through
the  front  of  a  watch  held  in  the  plane  with  its  centre  at  the
point,  and  facing  so  that  the  force  tends  to  turn  round  this  J^^^^^f^of
point  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the  hands.  The  moment  of  a  ^JjJ'^*
force  round  any  axis  is  the  moment  of  its  component  in  any
plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  round  the  point  in  which  the
plane  is  cut  by  the  axis.  Here  we  imagine  the  force  resolved
into  two  oomponentSi  one  parallel  to  thd  axis,  which  is  inefiective
so  &r  as  rotation  round  the  axis  is  oonoemed;  the  other  perpen-
dicular to  the  axis  (that  is  to  say,  having  its  line  in  any  plane
perpendicular  to  the  axis).  This  latter  component  may  be  called
the  effective  component  of  the  force,  with  reference  to  rotation
round  the  axis.  And  its  moment  round  the  axis  may  be  defined
as  its  moment  round  the  nearest  point  of  the  axis,  which  is
equivalent  to  the  preceding  definition.  It  is  clear  that  the
moment  of  a  force  round  any  axis,  is  etjual  to  the  area  of  the
projection  on  any  plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  of  the  tigure
representing  ittt  moment  round  auy  point  of  the  axis.

238.  The  projection  of  an  area,  plane  or  curved,  on  any  _  ^
plane,  is  the  area  included  in  the  projection  of  its  bounding  tion

line.

Digitized  by  Google

234  paELiMiKARY.  [233.

Digrenion If  we  jina<ziiie  an  area  di\  idL'cl  into  any  number  of  parts,  the

on  proiBO"  .  .

ttonof  projections  of  these  parts  on  any  ])lane  make  up  the  projection
of  the  whole.  But  in  this  statement  it  must  be  understood  that
the  areas  of  partial  projections  are  to  be  reckoned  as  positive  if
particular  sides,  which,  for  brevity,  we  may  call  the  outside  of
the  projected  area  and  the  front  of  the  plane  of  projection,  face
the  same  way,  and  u^^ative  if  they  face  oppositely.

Of  course  if  the  projected  surface,  or  any  part  of  it,  be  a  plane
area  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  projection,  the  projection
YaniflbeB.  The  projectionB  of  any  two  shells  having  a  common
edge,  on  any  plane,  are  equal,  but  with  the  aame,  or  opposite,
sigDB  as  the  case  may  be.  Hence,  by  taking  tiro  such  shells
fiunng  opposite  ways,  we  see  that  the  projection  of  a  closed
surface  (or  a  shell  with  evanescent  edge),  on  any  plane,  is
nothing.

Equal  areas  in  one  plane,  or  in  parallel  planes,  have  eqtial
projections  on  any  plane,  whatever  may  be  their  figures.

Hence  the  projectiuu  of  any  plane  figure,  or  of  any  shell,
edged  by  a  plane  figure,  on  another  plane,  is  equal  to  its  area,
multiplied  by  the  cosine  of  the  angle  at  which  its  plane  is  in-
clined to  the  plane  of  projection.  This  angle  is  acute  or  obtuse,
according  as  the  outside  of  the  projected  area,  and  the  front  of
plane  of  projection,  face  on  the  whole  towards  the  same  parts,
or  oppositely.  Hence  lines  representing,  as  above  described,
moments  about  a  point  in  different  planes,  are  to  be  com-
pounded as  forces  are. — See  an  analogous  theorem  in  §  96.

OonpK QBk  A  CdiqiXe  is  a  pair  of  equal  forces  acting  in  dissimilar
directions  in  parallel  lines.  The  Momeni  of  a  couple  is  the

sum  of  the  moments  of  its  forces  about  any  point  in  their  plane,

and  is  therefore  ecpial  to  the  product  of  either  force  into  the
shortest  distance  between  their  directions.  This  distance  is  called
the  Arm  of  the  couple.

The  Axis  of  a  Couple  is  a  line  drawn  from  any  chosen  point
of  reference  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  couple,  of  such
magnitude  and  in  such  direction  as  to  represent  the  magnitude
of  the  moment,  and  to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  the  couple
tends  to  turn.  The  most  convenient  rule  for  fulfilling  the
latter  condition  is  this: — Hold  a  watch  with  its  centre  at  the

Digitized  by  GoOglc

234.]  DTNAMICAL  ULWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  235

point  of  reference,  and  with  its  })kiue  parallel  to  the  plane  of  couiiie.
the  couple.  Then,  according  as  tlie  motion  of  the  hands  is
contrary  to  or  along  with  the  direction  in  which  the  couple
tends  to  turn,  draw  tlie  axis  of  the  couple  through  the  face
or  through  the  back  of  the  watch,  from  its  centre.  Thus  a
couple  is  completely  represented  by  its  axis  ;  and  couples  are  to
be  resolved  and  compounded  by  the  same  geometrical  construc-
tions performed  with  reference  to  their  axes  as  foices  or  velo-
cities; with  reference  to  the  lines  directly  representing  ihenu

286.  If  we  substitute,  for  the  force  in  §  232,  a  velocity,  we  Moment  of
have  the  moment  of  a  velocity  about  a  point;  and  by  intro-
ducing the  nia.ss  of  the  moving  body  as  a  factor,  we  have  an
important  element  of  dynamical  science,  the  Mornent  of  Momen-  Moment  of
turn.  The  laws  of  composition  and  resolution  are  the  siime
as  those  already  explained ;  but  for  the  sake  of  some  simple
applications  we  give  an  elementary  investigation.

The  moment  of  a  rectilineal  motion  is  the  product  of  its  Mommtof
leni^h  into  the  distance  of  its  line  from  the  point.

neuU

The  moment  of  the  resultant  velocity  of  a  particle  about  any
point  in  the  plane  of  the  components  is  equal  to  the  algebraic
sum  of  the  moments  of  the  components^  the  proper  sign  of  each
moment  being  determined  as  above^  §  233.  The  same  is  of
course  true  of  moments  of  displacements,  of  moments  of  forces
and  of  moments  of  momentum.

First*  consider  two  component  motions,  ABxad  AC,  and  letjgrtwo
be  their  resultant  (§  27). Their  half  moments  round  themotkmi^
point  0  are  respectively  the  areas  OAB,  OCA. Now  ^^-^^^^j^
tosrether  with  half  the  area  of  the  parallcluLri am  CABD,  is o»e plane,

°  1  o  ' the  sum  of

efiual  to  OBI). Hence  the  sum  of  the  two  half  moments  t'^e'fmo-

^  nients

together  with  half  the  area  of  the  parallelogram,  is  equal  toPj^|d^^^^
AUB  together  with  BOD,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  area  of  the  g^"^^";;'""^
whole  figure  OABD. But  ABD,  a  part />  n-suiui.t

o  '  roiunl  any

of  this  figure,  is  equal  to  half  the  area  of  /(Vv  fiSnttfnTifl.
the  parallelogram ;  and  therefore  the  re-
mainder, OAD,  is  equal  to  the  sum  of
the  two  half  moments.  But  OAD  is  half
the  moment  of  the  resultant  Telocity  round
the  point  0.  Hence  the  moment  of  the

Digitized  by  Google

23G

PRELIMINARY.

[235.

Any  niua-
ber  of

in

plane  com-
pounded by

Moment
roandaa

nwbola

motion,
round  «n

resultant  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  moments  of  tbe  two  com*
ponents.

If  there  are  any  number  of  component  rectilineal  motions  in
one  plane,  we  may  compound  them  in  order,  any  two  taken
toj^^etlur  first,  then  a  third,  and  so  on;  and  it  follows  that  the
sum  of  their  moments  is  equal  to  the  moment  of  their  resultant.
It  follows,  of  course,  tliat  the  sum  of  the  moments  of  any  number
of  component  velocities,  all  in  one  plane,  into  which  the  velo-
city of  any  point  may  be  resolved,  is  equal  to  the  moment  of
their  resultant,  round  any  point  in  their  plane.  It  follows  also,
that  if  velocities,  in  different  directions  all  in  one  plane,  be
successively  given  to  a  moving  point,  so  that  at  any  time  its
velocity  is  their  resultant,  the  moment  of  its  velociiy  at  any
time  is  the  sum  of  the  moments  of  all  the  velocities  which  have
been  successively  given  to  it.

Cor. — If  one  of  the  components  always  pas^ses  through  the
point,  its  moment  vanishes.  This  is  the  case  of  a  motion  in
which  the  acceleration  is  directed  to  a  tixed  point,  and  we  thus
reproduce  the  theorem  of  §  Ji6,  a,  that  in  tliis  case  the  aretis
described  by  the  radius-vector  are  proportional  to  the  times;
for,  as  we  have  seen,  the  moment  of  velocity  is  double  the  area
traced  out  by  the  radius-vector  in  unit  of  time.

236.  The  moment  of  the  velocity  of  a  pohit  ruiuid  any  axis
is  the  moment  of  the  velocity  of  its  projection  on  a  plane  per-
pendicular to  the  axis,  round  the  point  in  wliich  the  plane  is  cut
by  the  axis.

The  moment  of  the  whole  motion  of  a  point  during  any
time,  round  any  axis,  is  twice  the  area  described  in  that  time
by  the  radius-vector  of  its  projection  on  a  plane  peipendicular  to
that  axis.

If  we  consider  the  conical  area  traced  by  tbe  radiut-vector
drawn  from  any  fixed  point  to  a  moving  point  whose  motion  is
not  confined  to  one  plane,  we  see  that  the  projection  of  this  area
on  any  plane  through  the  fixed  point  is  half  of  what  we  have
just  defined  as  the  moment  of  the  whole  motion  round  an  axis
perpendicular  to  it  through  the  fixed  point.  Of  all  these
pianos,  there  is  one  uu  which  the  projection  of  the  area  is  greater

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

•  -

236.]  DTNAMICAL  LAWS  AMD  PRINCIPLES.  237

than  on  any  other;  and  the  projection  of  the  conical  area  on  ^lomntor
any  plane  perpendicular  to  this  plane,  is  equal  to  nothing,  the  J?^^\|J";^
2)roper  interpretation  of  x^ositive  and  negative  projections  being
used.

If  any  iiuuibcr  of  moving  points  are  given,  we  may  similarly
consider  the  conical  surface  described  by  the  radius-vector  of
each  drawn  from  one  fixed  point.  The  same  statement  applies
to  the  projection  of  tlie  many-sheeted  conical  siirface,  thus  pre-
sented. The  resultant  axis  of  the  whole  motion  in  any  finite  B«nuun(
time,  round  the  fixed  point  of  tlie  motions  of  all  the  moving
points,  IB  a  line  through  the  fixed  point  perpendicular  to  the
plane  on  which  the  area  of  tho  whole  projection  is  greater  than
on  any  other  plane ;  and  the  moment  of  the  whole  motion  round
the  resultant  axis,  is  twice  the  area  of  this  projection.

The  resultant  axis  and  moment  of  velocity,  of  any  number  of
moving  points,  relatively  to  any  fixed  puint,  are  respectively  the
resultant  axis  of  the  whole  motion  during  an  infinitely  short
time,  and  its  moment,  divided  by  the  time.

The  moment  of  the  whole  motion  round  any  axis,  of  the
motion  of  any  numher  of  points  during  any  time,  is  equal
to  the  moment  of  the  whole  motion  round  the  resultant  axis
through  any  point  of  the  former  axis,  multiplied  into  the  cosine
of  the  angle  between  the  two  axes.

The  resultant  axis,  relatively  to  any  fixed  point,  of  the  whole
motion  of  any  number  of  moving  points,  and  the  moment  of
the  whole  motion  round  it,  are  deduced  hy  t^^e  same  elemen-
tary constructions  from  the  resultant  axes  and  moments  of  the
individual  points,  or  partial  groups  of  points  of  the  system,  as
the  direction  and  magnitude  of  a  resultant  displacement  aro
deduced  from  any  given  lines  and  magnitudes  of  component  Mo  nrr  t  nr
displacements.

Corresponding  statements  apply,  of  course,  to  the  moments  of
velocity  and  of  momentum.

237. If  tlic  point  of  apjilication  of  a  force  be  displaced  Vlrtawl

.  .  valodiif •

through  a  small  space,  the  resolved  part  of  the  displacement  in

the  direction  of  the  force  has  been  called  its  Virtual  Velocity,

Digitized  by  Google

2dd  PBELUHKA&T.  [237.

^JJ^  This  is  positive  or  negative  acoording  as  the  virtual  velocity  is
iu  the  same,  or  in  the  opposite,  direction  to  that  of  the  force.

The  product  of  the  force,  into  the  virtual  velocity  of  its  point
of  application*  has  been  called  the  Virtual  Moment  of  the  force.
These  terms  we  have  introduced  since  they  stand  in  the  history
and  developments  of  the  science;  bat^  as  we  shall  show  further
on,  they  are  inferior  substitutes  for  a  far  more  useful  set  of  ideas
clearly  laid  down  by  Newton*

Work.  238.  A  force  is  said  to  do  work  if  its  place  of  application
has  a  positive  component  motion  in  its  direction;  and  the  work
done  by  it  is  measured  by  the  product  of  its  amount  into  this
component  motion.

Thus,  in  lifting  coals  from  a  pit,  the  amount  of  work  done  is
proportional  to  the  weight  of  the  coals  lifted ;  that  is,  to  the
force  oyeroome  in  zainng  them ;  and  also  to  the  height  through
FtR«ttei  which  they  are  raised.  The  unit  for  the  measurement  of  work
adopted  in  practice  by  British  engineers^  is  that  required  to
overcome  a  force  equal  to  the  gravity  of  a  pound  through  the
space  of  a  foot;  and  is  called  a  ^oo^Potmd
Scientiflo  III  purely  scientific  measurements,  the  unit  of  work  is  not
the  foot-pound,  but  the  kiiu  tic  unit  force  (§  225)  acting  through
unit  of  space.  Tlius,  for  example,  as  we  shall  show  iurthcr  on,
this  unit  is  adopted  in  measuring  tlie  ^volk  done  by  an  electric
current,  the  units  for  electric  and  magnetic  measurements  being
founded  upon  the  kinetic  unit  force.

If  the  weight  be  raised  obliquely,  as,  for  instance,  along  a
smooth  inclined  plane,  the  space  through  which  the  force  has
to  be  overcome  is  increased  in  the  ratio  of  the  length  to  the
height  of  the  plane ;  but  the  force  to  be  overcome  is  not  the
whole  gravity  of  the  weight,  but  only  the  component  of  the
gravity  psiallel  to  the  plane ;  and  this  is  less  than  the  gravity
in  the  ratio  of  the  height  of  the  plane  to  its  length.  By
wMKoffft  multiplying  these  two  expressions  together,  we  find,  as  we
might  expect,  that  the  amount  of  work  required  is  unchanged
by  the  substitution  of  the  oblique  for  the  vertical  path.

239. Generally,  for  any  force,  the  work  done  during  an
infinitely  small  displacement  of  the  point  of  application  is  the

Digitized  by  Google

289.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AKB  PBINCIPLES.  239

virtual  moment  of  the  force  (§  237),  or  is  the  product  of  the  y<"jt<**
resolved  part  of  the  force  in  the  direction  of  the  displacement
into  the  displacement.

From  this  it  appears,  that  if  the  motion  of  the  point  of
application  he  always  pei  peudicolar  to  the  direction  in  which
a  force  acts,  such  a  force  does  no  work.  Thus  the  mutual
normal  pressure  hetween  a  fixed  and  moving  hody,  as  the
tension  of  the  cord  to  which  a  pendulum  bob  is  attached,  or
the  attraction  of  the  sim  on  a  planet  if  the  planet  describe  a
circle  with  the  sun  in  the  centre,  is  a  case  in  which  no  work  is
done  by  the  force.

240.  The  work  done  by  a  force,  or  by  a  couple,  upon  a  hody^^^ofa
turning  about  an  axis,  is  tlie  product  of  the  moment  of  the

force  or  couple  into  the  angle  (in  radians,  or  fraction  of  a  radian)
through  which  the  body  acted  on  turns,  if  the  moment  remains
the  same  in  all  positions  of  the  body.  If  the  moment  be  varia-
ble^ the  statement  is  only  valid  for  infinitely  small  displace-
ments,  but  may  be  made  aocwate  by  employing  the  proper
average  moment  of  the  force  <Mr  of  the  couple.  The  proof  is
obvious.

If  (2  bo  the  moment  of  the  force  or  couple  for  a  position  of
tlie  body  given  hy  the  angle  ^,  ^(^,  - if  ^  is  constant,  or

^Qd$^q($^''$^  where  ^  is  the  proper  average  value  of  Q

when  variable,  is  the  work  done  by  the  couple  during  the  rotation
from  $^  to

241.  Work  done  on  a  bodv  by  a  force  is  always  shoAvn  by  a  Tmniirorm.
corresponding  increase  of  vis  viva,  or  kinetic  energy,  if  no  other  work,
forces  act  on  the  body  which  can  do  work  or  have  work  done
against  them. If  work  be  done  against  any  forces,  the  increase

of  kinetic  eneigy  is  less  than  in  the  former  case  by  the  amount
of  work  so  done.  In  virtue  of  this,  however,  the  body  possesses
an  equivalent  in  the  form  of  Potential  Energy  (§  273),  if  its  F«>t«nti«i
physical  conditions  are  such  that  these  forces  will  act  equally,
and  in  the  same  directions»  if  the  motion  of  the  system  is
reversed. Thus  there  may  be  no  change  of  kinetic  energy  pro-

Digitized  by  Google

240

PBELIMINAET.

[241.

Potential  duced,  and  the  work  doue  may  be  wholly  stored  up  as  potential
energy.

Thus  a  weigKt  requires  work  to  raise  it  to  a  height,  a  spring
requires  work  to  bend  it,  air  requires  work  to  compress  it,  eta;
but  a  raised  weight,  a  bent  spring,  compressed  air,  etc.,  are
stares  of  energy  which  can  be  made  use  of  at  pleasure.

g^jvtonii  In  what  precedes  we  have  given  some  of  Newton's

itatkn, Definitiones  nearly  in  his  own  words ;  others  have  been  enun*

ciated  in  a  form  more  suitable  to  modern  metho<ls;  and  some
terms  have  been  introduced  wbich  were  invented  subseqiunc
to  the  publication  of  the  Principia.  But  the  Axiomata,  sive
Leges  Moi*is,  to  which  we  now  proceed,  are  f^iven  in  Newton's
own  words;  the  two  centuries  which  have  nrarly  elapsed  since
he  first  gave  them  have  not  shown  a  necessity  for  any  addition
or  modification.  The  first  two,  indeed,  were  discovered  by
Galileo,  and  the  third,  in  some  of  its  many  forms,  was  known
to  Hooke,  Huygliens,  Wallis,  Wren,  and  others;  before  the
publication  of  the  Prindpiek,  Of  late  there  has  been  a  tendency
to  split  the  second  law  into  two,  called  respectively  the  second
and  third,  and  to  ignore  the  third  entirely,  though  using  it
tRrecUy  in  every  dynamical  problem ;  but  all  who  have  done  so
have  been  forced  indirectly  to  acknowledge  the  completeness  of
Newton's  system,  by  introducing  as  an  axiom  what  is  called
D'Alembert's  principle,  which  is  really  Newton's  rejected  third
law  in  another  form.  Newton's  own  interpretation  of  his  thinl
law  directly  points  out  not  only  D'Alembert's  principle,  but  also
the  modem  principles  of  Work  and  Energy.

^.fiff»  243.  An  Axiom  is  a  proposition,  the  truth  of  which  must
be  admitted  as  soon  as  the  terms  in  which  it  is  expressed  are
clearly  understood.  But,  as  we  shall  ?)iow  in  our  chapter  on
"Experience,"  physical  axioms  are  axiomatic  to  those  only  who
have  sufiicient  knowledge  of  the  action  of  physical  causes  to
enable  them  to  see  their  trutL  Without  further  remark  we
shall  give  Newton's  Three  Laws ;  it  being  remembered  that,  as
the  properties  of  matter  might  have  been  such  as  to  render  a
totally  different  set  of  laws  axiomatic,  these  laws  must  be  oon-

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

t

243.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  24t

sidered  as  resting  on  convictioDs  drawn  from  observation  and
experiment^  not  on  intuitive  perception.

244.  Lex  I. Corpus  omne  perseverare  in  statu  siio  quiescendtVhm^^
veil  rmvmdi  uni/ormiter  in  directum,  nisi  quatenus  illud  a  vinbus
impressis  cogitur  statnm  suuni  iantare.

Even/  hody  continues  in  its  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion
in  a  straight  line,  except  in  SO  far  aa  it  may  be  compelled  by
force  to  change  tkat  state,

245.  The  meaning  of  the  term  Rest,  in  ]jhysical  science  M.
is  essentially  relative. Absolute  rest  is  undefinaljle. If  tlio
universe  of  matter  were  finite,  its  centre  of  inertia  might  fairly

be  considered  as  absolutely  at  rest ;  or  it  migrht  be  imasfined  to
be  moviniT^  with  any  uniform  velocity  in  any  direction  whatever
tliroiiL.'^h  iiitiuite  space.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  the  first  law
ot  motion  enables  us  (§  240.  below)  to  explain  what  may  be
called  directional  rest.  As  will  soon  be  shown,  §  267,  the  plane
.  in  if?hich  tiie  moment  of  momentum  of  the  universe  (if  finite)
round  its  centre  of  inertia  is  the  greatest,  which  is  clearly  de-
terminable £rom  the  actual  motions  at  any  instant,  is  fixed  in
direction  in  space.

246.  We  may  logically  convert  the  assertion  of  the  first  law  •
of  motion  as  to  velocity  into  the  following  statements;-—

The  times  during  which  any  particular  body,  not  compelled
by  force  to  alter  the  speed  of  its  motion,  passes  through  equal
spaces,  are  equaL  And,  again — ^Every  other  body  in  the  uni-
verse, not  compelled  by  force  to  alter  the  speed  of  its  motion,
moTes  over  equal  spaces  in  successive  intervals,  during  which
the  particular  dicsea  body  moves  over  equal  spaces.

247.  The  first  part  merely  expresses  the  convention  uni-Tine.
versally  adopted  for  the  measurement  of  Time,  The  earth,  in

its  rotation  about  its  axis,  presents  us  with  a  case  of  motion  in
which  the  condition,  of  not  being  compelled  by  force  to  alter
its  speed,  is  more  nearly  fulfilled  than  in  any  other  which
we  can  easily  or  accurately  observe.  And  the  numerical
measurement  of  time  practically  rests  on  defining  equal  thtor*
vah  of  time,  as  times  during  which  the  earth  turns  through  equal
VOL.  I.  16

Digitized  by  Google

242

PBKLIMINABY.

[247.

angles.  This  is,  of  course,  a  mere  convention,  and  not  a  law  of
nature;  aod,  as  we  now  see  it,  is  a  part  of  Ncwtou  s  iirst  law.

Exampietof  248.  The  reiaaiiKkr  of  the  law  is  not  a  convention,  but  a
great  truth  of  nature,  wliich  we  may  iUustratc  by  referring  to
Bmall  and  trivial  cases  as  well  as  to  the  grandest  pheiiomeoa  we
can  conceive.

A  curling-stone,  projected  along  a  liorizontal  surface  of  ice,
travels  equal  distances,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  retarded  by
friction  and  by  tho  resistance  of  the  air,  in  successive  intervals
of  time  during  which  the  earth  turns  through  equal  angles.
The  sun  moyes  through  equal  portions  of  intentellar  space  in
times  during  which  the  earth  turns  through  equal  angles,  ezoept
in  BO  &r  as  the  resistance  of  interstellar  matter^  and  the  altiao-
tion  of  other  bodies  in  the  uniyerBe,  alter  his  speed  and  that  of
the  earth's  rotation.

i)im-tio«ai  240.  If  two  material  points  be  projected  from  one  position^
A,  at  the  same  instant  with  any  velocities  in  any  directions,
and  each  left  to  move  uninfluenced  by  force,  the  line  joining
them  wiU  be  always  parallel  to  a  fixed  direction. For  the  law

asserts,  as  we  have  seen,  that  AP  :  AP^i:  AQ  :AQ',  if  I\  Q,  and
again  P',  Q'  are  simultaneous  positions ;  and  therefore  I*Q  is
parallel  to  P' Q .  Hence  if  four  material  points  0,  P,  Q,  R  are
all  projected  at  one  instant  from  one  position,  OP,  OQ,  OR

Tho"inva-  are  fixed  directions  of  reference  ever  after. But,  practically.

pisne" the  determination  of  fixed  directions  in  space,  S  207,  is  made  to

of  the  solar  ■ p  f  •

, vraiem. depend  upon  the  rotaticu  of  groups  of  particles  exerting  forces
on  each  other,  and  thus  involves  the  Third  Law  of  Motion.

250.  The  whole  law  is  singularly  at  variance  with  the  tenets
of  the  ancient  philosophers  who  maintained  that  circular  motioa
is  perfect.

The  last  clause,  "nisi  quatejuis,"  etc.,  admirably  prepares  for
the  introduction  of  the  second  law,  by  conveying  the  idea  thai
i$  %8  force  alone  which  can  produce  a  change  of  motion^  How,
we  naturally  inquure,  does  the  change  of  motion  produced
depend  on  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  force  whidi
produces  it  ?  And  the  answer  is —

Digitized  by  Google

251.]

DTNAMIGAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

248

251. Lex  IL  Mutntumem  mottis  proporHondUm  esse  vi  xewton's
motrici  impresim,  et  fieri  wemdum  lineam  reekm  qud  vis  tila
imprimUur.

Change  of  motion  is  proportional  to  force  applied,  and  takes
place  in  the  direction  of  the  straight  line  in  wh  ich  the  force  acts,

862.  If  any  force  generates  motion,  a  doable  force  will
generate  double  motion,  and  so  on,  whether  simultaneously  or

successively,  instantaneously,  or  gradually  applied.  And  this
motion,  if  the  body  was  moving  beforehand,  is  either  added
to  the  previous  motion  if  directly  conspiring  with  it;  or  ia
subtracted  if  directly  opposed  ;  or  is  geometrically  compounded
with  it,  according  to  the  kinematical  principles  already  ex-
plained, if  the  line  of  proviotis  motion  and  the  direction  of  the
force  are  inclined  to  eacii  other  at  an  angle.  (This  is  a  para*
phrase  of  Newton's  own  comments  on  the  second  law.)

253.  In  Chapter  I.  we  have  considered  change  of  velocity,
or  acceleration,  as  a  purely  geometrical  element,  and  have  seen
how  it  may  be  at  once  inferred  from  the  given  initial  and  final
velocities  of  a  body.  By  the  defmition  of  quantity  of  motion
(§  210),  we  see  that,  if  we  multiply  the  change  of  velocity,
thus  geometricallj  detennined,  by  the  mass  of  the  body,  we
have  the  change  of  motion  referred  to  in  Newton's  law  as  the
measure  of  the  force  which  produces  it.

It  is  to  be  particularly  noticed,  that  in  this  statement  there
is  nothing  said  about  the  actual  motion  of  the  body  before  it
was  acted  on  by  the  force :  it  is  only  the  change  of  motion  that
concerns  us.  Thus  the  same  force  will  produce  precisely  the
same  change  of  motion  in  a  body,  whether  the  body  be  at  rest,
or  in  motion  with  any  velocity  whatever.

2H.  Again,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  nothing  is  said  as  to  the
body  being  under  the  action  of  one  force  only ;  so  that  we

may  logically  put  a  part  of  the  second  law  in  the  foUowing

(apparently)  ampliSed  form : —

When  any  forces  rrhatever  act  on  a  hod}/,  then,  vjhether  the
body  he  orirfinally  at  rest  or  moving  with  any  velocity  and  in  any
direction,  each  force  produces  in  the  body  the  exact  change  of

16—2

Digitized  by  Google

PBELUONART.

[254.

motion  which  it  would  have  produced  if  it  had  acted  singly  on
the  body  originaUy  at  rest.

oompoii-  255.  A  remarkable  consequence  follows  imraediately  from
ftTCHb  this  view  of  the  second  law.  Since  forces  are  measured  by  the
changes  of  motion  they  produce,  and  their  directions  assigned
by  the  directions  in  which  these  changes  are  produced;  and
since  tlie  changes  of  motion  of  one  and  the  same  boily  are  in
the  directions  of,  and  proportional  to,  the  changes  of  v^ocity —
a  single  force,  measured  by  the  resultant  change  of  velocity,
and  in  its  direction,  will  be  the  equivalent  of  any  number  of
simultaneously  acting  forces.  Hence

The  resuUant  of  any  number  of  forces  (applied  ai  cnepoin()  t#

to  he  found  hy  the  same  geometrical  process  as  tfie  resultant  of  any
number  of  simultaneous  velocities.

S56.  From  this  follows  at  once  (§  27)  the  construction  of
the  Parallelogram  of  Forces  for  finding  the  resultant  of  two

forces,  and  the  Polygon  of  Forces  for  the  resultant  of  any  num-
ber of  forces,  in  lines  all  through  one  point.

The  case  of  the  c(iuilibriuni  of  a  number  of  forces  acting  at
one  point,  is  evidently  deducible  at  once  from  this ;  for  if  we
introduce  one  other  force  equal  and  opposite  to  their  resultant,
this  will  produce  a  change  of  motion  equal  and  opposite  to  the
resultant  change  of  motion  produced  by  the  given  forces ;  that
is  to  say,  will  produce  a  condition  in  which  the  point  ezpe*
riences  no  change  of  motion,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  ia.
the  only  kind  of  rest  of  which  we  can  ever  be  conscious.

257.  Though  Newton  perceived  that  the  Parallelogram  of
Forces,  or  the  fundamental  principle  of  Statics,  is  essentially
involved  in  the  second  law  of  motion,  and  gave  a  proof  which
is  virtually  the  same  as  the  preceding,  subsequent  writers  on
Statics  (especially  in  this  country)  have  very  generally  ignored
the  fiiot ;  and  the  consequence  has  been  the  introduction  of
various  unnecessary  Dynamical  Axioms,  more  or  less  obvious,
but  in  reality  included  in  or  dependent  upon  Newton's  lawa
of  motion.  We  have  retained  Newton's  method,  not  only  on
iMoount  of  its  admirable  simplicity,  but  because  we  believe  it

Digitized  by  Google

257.]  DTNAiaCAL  L4W8  AMD  PBIKCIFLES.  245

contrilns  the  most  pliilosopliical  foimdation  for  the  Static  as  well
as  for  the  kinetic  branch  of  the  dynamic  science*

258.  But  the  second  law  gives  us  tlie  means  of  measuring  mcmm.
force,  and  also  of  measuring  the  mass  of  a  body.  ^SSad

For,  if  we  consider  the  actions  of  various  forces  upon  the
same  body  for  equal  times,  we  evidently  have  changes  of
velocity  produeed  which  are  proportional  U>  the  force&  The
changes  of  velocity,  then,  give  us  in  this  case  the  means  of
comparing;  the  magnitudes  of  different  forces.  Thus  the  velo-
cities ac(|uir»_  J  iu  one  second  by  the  same  mass  (falliug  freely)
at  different  parts  of  the  earth's  surface,  give  us  the  relative
amounts  of  tlie  earth's  attraction  at  these  places.

Again,  if  equal  forces  be  exerted  on  different  bodies,  the
changes  of  velocity  produced  in  equal  times  must  be  inversely
as  the  masses  of  the  various  bodies.  This  is  approximately  the
ease,  for  instance,  with  trains  of  various  lengths  started  by  the
same  locomotive:  it  is  exactly  realized  in  such  cases  as
the  action  of  an  electrified  body  on  a  number  of  solid  or  hollow
spheres  of  the  same  external  diameter,  and  of  different  metals
or  of  different  thicknesses.

Again,  if  we  find  a  case  in  which  different  bodies,  each  acted
on  by  a  force,  acquire  in  the  same  time  the  same  chamges  of
vdodty,  the  forces  must  be  proportional  to  the  masses  of  the
bodies.  This,  when  the  resistance  of  the  air  Is  removed,  is  the
case  of  falling  bodies ;  and  from  it  we  conclude  that  the  weight
of  a  body  in  any  given  locality,  or  the  force  with  which  the
earth  attracts  it,  is  proportional  to  its  mass;  a  most  important
physical  truth,  which  will  be  treated  of  more  carefully  in  the
chapter  devoted  to  "  Properties  of  Matter."

268.  It  appears,  lastly,  from  this  law,  that  eveiy  tliemm  of  TranMia-
Kinematics  connected  with  aoceleration  has  its  counterpart  in  the"kin'i^'^
AJnencs.  poiak.

For  Instance,  suppose  X,  7,  Z  to  be  the  components,  parallel
to  fixed  axes  id  x^yj  z  respectively,  of  the  whole  force  acting  ou
a  partade  <tf  mass  jr.  We  see  by  §  212  that

Af^'^^-T  M^^r  ir****-^.
^rfp-^'  ^rf?"-^'  ^d?'^*

or  M»=^X, Uy  =  Y,  Ms:^Z.

Digitized  by  Google

Tp*nsla-
tions  from
the  kitio-
uutica  of  ft
lioiui.

ment  of
force  Mid

KowUm't

246  PBELUONABT.

Also,  from  these,  we  may  evidently  write,

£269.

zx  —  rz

Tlio  second  inembei's  of  these  equations  aro  resix^ctivt'ly  the  cora-
poneuLs  of  the  impressed  forco,  along  the  tangent  (-5  9),  perjK.'n-
dielilar  to  the  oseulatin'^'  plane  (§  9},  and  towards  the  centre  of
curvature,  of  the  path  desciibed.

260.  We  have,  by  means  of  the  first  two  laws,  arrived  at  a

definitiuti  and  a  mea.sure  of  force  ;  and  have  also  found  how  to
compound,  and  therefore  also  liow  to  resolve,  forces ;  and  also
how  to  investigate  tlic  motion  of  a  single  particle  subjected  to
given  forces.  But  more  is  recjnired  before  we  can  completely
understand  the  more  complex  cases  of  motion,  especially  those
in  which  we  have  mutual  actions  between  or  amongst  two  or
more  bodies ;  such  as,  for  instance,  attractions,  or  pressures,  or
treosference  of  eneigy  in  any  form.  This  is  peiiiectly  supplied
by

261.  Lex  III.  Actioni  contrariam  semper  ef  cequalem  c^se
reactioneni :  sive  corporuin  duorum  actiones  in  se  mtUub  semper
esse  CBgpuUea  et  inparUa  conbxaria$  dirigi.

To  every  action  there  is  always  an  equal  and  eontrary  re-
action:  or,  t&s  mttfool  adims  of  any  two  hodiee  ors  always  equal
and  oppositely  directed,

262.  If  one  body  presses  or  draws  another,  it  is  pressed  or
drawn  by  this  other  with  an  equal  force  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion. If  any  one  presses  a  stone  with  his  finger,  his  6nger  is
pressed  with  the  same  force  in  the  opposite  direction  by  the
stone.  A  horse  towing  a  boat  on  a  canal  is  dragged  back-
wards by  a  force  equal  to  that  which  he  impresses  on  the
towing-rope  forwards.  By  whatever  amount,  and  in  whatever
direction,  one  body  has  its  motion  changed  by  impact  upon
another,  this  other  body  has  its  motion  changed  by  the  same

Digitized  by  Google

262.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AMD  PSINdPLSS.

nniount  in  the  opposite  direction;  for  at  each  instant  during  N«wton'«
the  impact  the  force  between  them  was  equal  and  opposite  on
the  two. When  neither  of  the  two  bodies  has  any  rotation,
whether  before  or  after  impact,  the  changes  of  velocity  which
they  experience  are  inversely  as  their  masses.

When  one  body  attracts  another  from  a  distance,  this  other
attracts  it  with  an  equal  and  qiposite  force.  This  law  holds
not  only  for  the  attraction  of  gravitation,  but  also,  as  Newton
himself  remarked  and  verified  by  experiment^  for  magnetic
attractions :  also  for  electric  forces,  as  tested  by  Otto-Guericke.

263.  Wliat  precedes  is  founded  upon  Newton's  own  com-
ments on  the  third  law,  and  the  actions  and  reactions  con-
templated arc  simple  forces.  In  the  scholium  appended,  he
makes  ti  r  following  remarkable  statement^  introducing  another
description  of  actions  and  reactions  subject  to  his  third  law,
the  AiU  meaning  of  which  seems  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of
commentators : —

Si  wUmttur  offenUs  actio  ex  ^us  vi  it  vekoOate  conjunelm;
§t  aimiUter  retittmtia  readio  (Btiifnetur  eonjtmeHm  ex  ejiis  parbimm
aingularum  vdocHatibus  et  tnnbus  resistendi  ah  earum  attriiione,
cohcesiohc,  puiulere,  et  acceleraiione  oriundis;  erunt  actio  et  reactiOf
in  omni  instrumentorum  usit,  sibi  invicem  semper  cequales.

In  a  previous  discussion  Newton  has  shown  what  is  to  be
understood  by  the  velocity  of  a  force  or  resistance  ;  i.e.,  that  it
is  the  velocity  of  the  point  of  application  of  the  force  resolved
in  the  direction  of  tiie  force.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  may
read  the  above  statement  as  follows : —

If  the  Activity*  of  an  agent  he  measured  by  its  amount  and  its
tfelooUy  covjoinUy;  and  if,  similarly,  the  Counternietivitjf  of  the
reeiatamce  be  measured  by  iho  itelocitiiee  of  it$  eeneral  parts  and
their  several  amounts  conjoinUy,  whether  these  arise  Jhm  friction,
cohesion,  weight,  or  aceeieraUon  ; — AcHtrity  and  Counter-actwiiy,
in  aU  oomhinations  of  moMnes,  tuiU  he  equal  and  opposite.

Farther  on  (§§  264,  293)  we  shall  give  an  account  of  the

*  We  trantdate  Newton's  word  "Aetio**lun  hf  ** Aetinlgr'*to  avoid  confnuon
with  the  word  "  Action"  so  universally  used  in  modem  dynamical  treatises,  ac-
corrliitg  to  the  definition  of  {  826  below,  in  relation  to  Maapertui*'  principle  of
"JLeast  Action."

248

PHELIMINART.

splendid  dynamical  theory  founded  hj  D'Alembert  and  Lit-
grange  on  this  most  important  remark*

D'&iem- 264. Newton,  in  the  passage  just  quoted,  points  out  that
b^aprin- ^£  resistance  against  acceleration  are  to  be  reckoned  as
reactions  equal  and  opposite  to  the  actions  by  which  the  ac-
celeration is  produced.  Thus,  if  we  consider  any  one  material
point  of  a  system,  its  reaction  against  acceleration  must  be
equal  and  opposite  to  the  resultant  of  the  forces  which  that
point  experiences,  whether  by  the  actions  of  other  parts  of  the
system  upon  it,  or  by  the  influence  of  matter  not  belonging  to
the  system. In  other  words,  it  must  be  in  equilibrium  with
these  forces. Hence  Newton's  view  amounts  to  this,  thai  all  the
forces  of  the  system,  with  the  reactions  against  acceleration  of
tlie  material  points  composing  it,  form  groups  of  equilibrating
Fystcms  for  tliese  points  considered  individually. Hence,  by
the  principle  of  superposition  of  forces  in  equilibrium,  all  the
forces  acting  on  points  of  the  system  form,  with  the  reactions
agunst  acceleration,  an  equilibrating  set  of  forces  on  the  whole
system. This  is  the  celebrated  principle  first  explicitly  stated,
and  very  usefully  applied,  by  D'Alembert  in  1742,  and  still
known  by  his  name. We  hare  seen,  however,  that  it  is  very
distinctly  implied  in  Newton's  own  interpretation  of  his  third
law  of  motion.  As  it  is  usual  to  investigate  the  general  equa-
tions or  conditions  of  equilibrium,  in  dynamical  treatises,  before
entering  in  detail  on  the  kinetic  branch  of  the  subject,  this
principle  is  found  practically  most  useful  in  showing  how  we
may  write  down  at  once  tiiu  equations  of  motiuu  for  any
system  for  which  the  equations  of  equilibrium  have  been  in-
vestigated.

Mutual  265.  Every  rigid  body  may  be  imagined  to  be  divided  into
indefinitely  small  parts. Now,  in  whatever  form  we  may

rigSi  bo4r.  eventually  find  a  physical  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  forces
which  act  between  these  parts,  it  is  certain  that  each  such
small  part  may  be  considered  to  be  held  in  its  position
relatively  to  the  others  by  mutual  forces  in  lines  joining  them.

266. From  tliis  we  have,  as  immediate  consequences  of  the
second  and  third  laws,  and  of  the  preceding  theorems  relating

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

SGd.}  DTNJkMIGAL  "LAMB  AND  FBINCIPLES.  249

to  CeDtrc  of  Inertia  and  Moment  of  Momentum,  a  number  of
important  propositions  such  as  the  following: —

(a)  The  centre  of  inertia  of  a  rigid  body  moWog  in  any  Motion  or
manner,  but  free  from  external  forces,  moves  uniformly  in  a£tiLora
straight  line.  *****

{b)  When  any  forces  whatever  act  on  the  hody,  the  motion  of
the  centre  of  inertia  is  t)ie  same  as  it  would  have  been  had
these  forces  been  applied  with  their  proper  magnitudes  and
directions  at  that  point  itselil

(c)  Since  the  moment  of  a  force  acting  on  a  particle  is  the  :Mn  n< .  t  of
same  as  the  moment  of  momentum  it  produces  in  unit  of  time,  of  u'rigid"^
the  dianges  of  moment  of  momentum  in  any  two  parts  of  a

rigid  body  due  to  their  mutual  action  are  equal  and  opposite.
Hence  the  moment  of  momentum  of  a  rigid  body,  about  any  axis
which  is  fixed  in  direction,  and  passes  through  a  point  which
is  either  fixed  in  space  or  moves  uniformly  in  a  straight  line,  is
unaltered  by  the  miitual  actions  of  the  parts  of  the  liody.

(d)  The  rate  of  increase  of  moment  of  momentum,  when  the
body  is  acted  on  by  external  forces,  is  the  sum  of  the  moments
of  these  forces  about  the  axis.

267.  We  shall  for  the  present  take  for  granted,  that  thecoiufmi-
mutual  action  hetween  two  rigid  bodies  may  in  every  case  be  momentum,
imagined  as  composed  of  pairs  of  equal  and  opposite  forces  laeutof^
iu  strait^ht  lines.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  sum  of  the
quantities  of  motion,  parallel  to  any  fixed  direction,  of  two
rigid  bodies  iuriuencing  one  another  in  any  possible  way,  re-
mains unchanged  by  their  mutual  action ;  also  that  the  sum
of  the  moments  of  momentum  of  all  the  particles  of  the  two
bodies,  round  any  line  in  a  fixed  direction  in  space,  and  passing
through  any  point  moving  uniformly  in  a  straight  line  in  any
direction,  remains  constant  From  the  first  of  these  propositions
we  infer  that  the  centre  of  inertia  of  any  number  of  mutually
influencing  bodies,  if  in  motion,  continues  moving  uniformly
in  a  straight  line^  unless  in  so  far  as  the  direction  or  velocity
of  its  motion  is  changed  by  forces  acting  mutually  between
them  and  some  other  matter  not  belonging  to  them ;  also  that
the  centre  of  inertia  of  any  body  or  system  of  bodies  moves

Digitized  by  Google

2d0  PBELUuNAar.

Tho"inva- just  as  all  tlicir  matter,  if  conccutrateJ  in  a  point,  would  move
rinne  'i-ja  uiidor  tliG  influence  of  forces  ecjual  an<!  parallel  to  the  forces
throu»th  the  reallv  .'ict  iiii;  on  its  diOVrent  parts. From  the  secoii'l  w.-  infer

a  iitPf  of  '  ' .  ...

imriia. fKT-  that  tlic  axls  i)f  rc'suitaut  rotation  throufrn  the  centre  <A  inertia

j»<  ii'lK  iilnr  _  ^ ,  ,

■ullanti^^^  any  j^ystem  of  bodies,  or  through  any  point  either  at  rest  or
moving  uniformly  ia  a  straight  line,  remains  unchanged  in
direction,  and  the  sum  of  moments  of  momenta  round  it
remains  constant  if  the  system  experiences  no  force  from  with*
out. This  principle  used  to  be  called  Consen^aiion  of  Areai,

Ippii(^uoo  ^  ^^'^  ill-considered  designation.  From  this  principle  it  follows
'  that  if  by  internal  action  such  as  geological  upheavals  or  sab-
sidenoeH^  or  pressure  of  the  winds  on  the  water,  or  by  evapora-
tion  and  rain-  or  snow-&ll,  or  by  any  influence  not  depending
on  the  attraction  of  sun  or  moon  (even  thongh  dependent  on
solar  heat),  the  disposition  of  land  and  water  becomes  altered^
the  component  round  any  fixed  axis  of  the  moment  of  momen-
tum of  the  earLh':^  rotation  remains  constan^.

iiat«  of  268.  The  foundation  of  the  abstract  theory  of  eneigy  is  laid
doius  wor  i^ewton  in  an  admirably  distinct  and  compact  manner  in  the
sentence  of  his  scholium  already  quoted  (§  263),  in  which  he
points  out  its  application  to  mechanics*.  The  actio  o^enHst
as  he  defines  it,  which  is  evidently  equivalent  to  the  product  of
the  effective  component  of  the  force,  into  the  velocity  of  the
point  on  which  it  acts,  is  simply,  in  modem  English  phrase-
ology* the  rate  at  which  the  agent  works.  The  subject  for
measurement  here  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  for  w  hich  Watt,
BwN*  a  hundred  years  later,  introduced  the  practical  unit  of  a  ''Horse-
power" or  the  rate  at  which  an  ngont  works  when  overcoming
33,000  times  the  weight  of  a  pound  through  the  space  of  a  foot
in  a  minute ;  that  is,  producing  550  foot-pounds  of  work  per
second.  The  unit,  however,  which  is  most  generally  convenient
is  that  which  Newton's  definition  implies,  namely,  the  rate  of
doing  woric  in  which  the  unit  of  energy  is  produced  in  the  unit
of  time.

•  The  ron<U  r  will  r,  member  that  we  use  the  word  "mechanics"  in  its  true
olassioal  seuse,  the  Kck'nce  of  machines,  the  sonso  in  whicli  Newton  liim  clf
QMd  it,  wh«a  ha  dumiMod  the  farther  consideration  of  it  by  eajiug  (in  uie
MboUimi  nfemd  to),  Cmtentm  meehmAm  tractart  turn  t»t  h^m  imIUmk

Digitized  by  Google

269.]

BTNAHICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

251

269.  Looking  at  Newton's  words  (§  263)  in  this  light,  we  J^^'JJJjJ'*
see  that  they  may  be  logically  converted  into  the  following  ^nuuM>

form : —

Work  done  on  any  system  of  bodies  (in  Newton's  state-
ment, the  parts  of  any  machine)  has  its  equivalent  in  work  done
against  friction,  molecular  forces,  or  gravity,  if  there  be  no
acceleration ;  but  if  there  be  acceleration,  part  of  the  work  is  *
expended  in  overcoming  the  resistance  to  acceleration,  and  the
additional  kinetic  energy  developed  is  equivalent  to  the  work
so  spent This  is  evident  from  §  214.

When  part  of  the  work  is  done  agaiiiat  molecular  forces,  as
in  beuding  a  spring;  or  against  gravity,  as  in  raising  a  weiglit;
the  recoil  of  the  spring,  and  the  fall  of  the  weiglit,  are  ca])able
at  any  future  time,  of  reproducing  the  work  originally  expended
(§  241).  But  in  Newton's  day,  and  long  afterwards,  it  was
supposed  that  work  was  ahsoluteUj  lost  by  friction ;  and,  indeed,
this  statement  is  still  to  be  found  even  in  recent  authoritative
treatises.  But  we  must  defer  the  examination  of  this  point  till
we  consider  in  its  modem  form  the  principle  of  Ckmservatim  of
Energy,

270.  If  a  system  of  bodies,  given  either  at  rest  or  in
motion,  be  influenced  by  no  forces  from  without,  the  sum  of  the
kinetic  energies  of  all  its  parts  is  augmented  in  any  time  by  an
amount  equal  to  the  whole  work  done  in  that  time  by  the
mutual  forces,  which  we  may  imsgine  as  acting  between  its
points.  When  the  lines  in  which  these  forces  act  remain  all
unchanged  in  length,  the  forces  do  no  work,  and  the  sum  of  the
kinetic  eneigies  of  the  whole  system  remains  constant.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  one  of  these  lines  varies  in  length  during  the
motion,  the  mutual  forces  in  it  will  do  work,  or  will  consume
work,  according  as  the  distance  varies  with  or  against  them.

271.  A  limited  system  of  bodies  is  said  to  be  dynamoaUy  ^^"^^^
conservative  (or  simply  oonserwiftve,  when  force  is  understood  to  *

be  the  subject),  if  the  mutual  forces  between  its  parts  always

porfoi-m,  or  always  consume,  the  same  amount  of  work  during
any  motion  whatever,  by  which  it  can  pass  from  one  particular
couHguration  to  tauother.

Digitized  by  Google

252

FRBUmKABT.

Foundation 272. TliC  whole  theory  of  energy  in  phvsical  science  is

oflhetheory  c z i  e  u  •

ofeneiv. louuded  on  inn  tol lowing  proposition: —

Tf  the  mutual  iorccs  between  tlie  parts  of  a  material  system

are  independent  of  their  velocities,  whether  relative  to  one

another,  or  relative  to  any  external  matter,  the  system  must  be

dynamically  conservative.

For  if  more  work  is  done  by  the  matual  forces  on  the

different  parts  of  the  system  in  passing  from  one  partionUr

Thyiicsi oonfignration  to  another,  by  one  set  of  paths  than  by  another

*ihe°PM^*  set  of  patha,  let  the  system  be  directed,  by  frictionlesB  con-

lioti^n  is Btraint^  to  pass  from  the  first  configuration  to  the  second  by

inSSSmd.  one  set  of  paths  and  return  by  the  other,  over  and  over  again

for  ever. It  will  be  a  continual  source  of  energy  without  any

consumption  of  materials,  which  is  impossible.

278.  The  poimUal  energy  of  a  conservative  system,  in  the
configuration  which  it  has  at  any  instant,  is  the  amount  of  work

required  to  bring  it  to  that  configuration  against  its  mutual
forces  during  the  piussage  of  the  system  from  any  one  chu>eu
configuration  to  the  configuration  at  the  time  referred  to.  It
is  generally,  but  not  always,  convenient  to  fix  the  particular
configuration  chosen  for  the  zero  of  reckoning  of  potential
energy,  so  that  the  potential  energy,  in  every  other  coniiguration
practically  considered,  shall  be  positive.

274.  The  potential  energy  of  a  conservative  system,  at  any
instant,  depends  solely  on  its  configuration  at  that  iustiiut,
being,  according  to  definition,  the  same  at  all  times  wlicn  the
system  is  brought  again  and  again  to  the  same  configuration.
It  is  therefore,  in  mathematical  language,  said  to  be  a  function
of  the  co-ordinates  by  which  the  positions  of  the  different  parts
of  the  system  are  specified.  If,  for  example,  we  have  a  conser-
vative system  consisting  of  two  material  points;  or  two  rigid
bodies,  acting  upon  one  another  with  force  dependent  only  on
the  relative  position  of  a  point  belon^ng  to  one  of  them,  taxd  a
point  belonging  to  the  other;  the  potential  energy  of  the
system  depends  upon  the  co-ordinates  of  one  of  these  points
rehktively  to  lines  of  reference  in  fixed  directions  throuf^  the
othe1^  It  will  therefore,  in  general,  depend  on  three  iadepen-

S74]  DTNAUICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  253

dent  oo-ordinates,  which  we  may  coaveDiently  take tlie  dis-  Potential

,  1  .  «  ,  enerfry  of

tance  between  the  two  points,  and  two  aoffles  specifymff  the  conserve,
absolute  direction  of  the  line  joining  them.  Tbti8»  for  example,
let  the  bodies  be  two  uniform  metal  globes,  electrified  with  any
given  qnantities  of  electricity,  and  placed  in  an  insulating
medium  such  as  air,  in  a  region  of  space  under  the  influence
of  a  yast  distant  electrified  body.  The  mutual  action  between
these  two  spheres  will  depend  solely  on  the  relative  position  of
their  centres  It  will  consist  partly  of  gravitation,  depending
solely  on  the  distance  between  their  centres,  and  of  electric
force,  uiiich  will  depend  on  the  distance  between  them,  but
alsu,  in  virtue  of  tlie  inductive  action  of  the  distant  body,  will
depend  on  the  absolute  direction  of  the  line  joining  their
centres.  In  our  divisions  devoted  to  gravitation  and  electricity
respectively,  we  shall  investigate  the  portions  of  the  mutual
potential  energy  of  the  two  bodies  depending  on  these  two
agencies  separately.  The  former  we  shall  find  to  bo  the  pro-
duct of  their  masses  divided  by  the  distance  between  their
centres;  the  latter  a  somewhat  complicated  function  of  the
distance  between  the  centres  and  the  angle  which  this  line
makes  with  the  direction  of  the  resultant  electric  force  of  the
distant  electrified  body.  Or  again,  if  the  system  consist  of  two
balls  of  soft  iron,  in  any  locality  of  the  earth's  surface,  their
mutual  action  will  be  partly  gravitation,  and  partly  due  to  the
magnetism  induced  in  them  by  terrestrial  ni.igiietic  force.  The
portion  of  tlie  mutual  potential  energy  depending  on  the  latter
cause,  will  be  a  function  of  the  distance  between  their  ceiitres
and  the  inclination  of  this  line  to  the  directidii  of  the  terrestrial
magnetic  force.  It  will  agree  in  mathematical  expression  with
the  potential  energy  of  electric  action  in  the  preceding  case,  so
far  as  the  inclination  is  concerned,  but  the  law  of  variation  with
the  distance  will  be  less  easily  determined.

876. In  nature  the  hypothetical  condition  of  §  271  is  appa-  inovitabie
rently  violated  in  all  circumstances  of  motion.  A  material  system  cnenry  of
can  never  be  brought  through  any  returning  cycle  of  motion  tioMl*^"**
w  ithout  spending  more  w^ork  against  the  mutual  forces  of  its
parts  than  is  gained  frurn  these  forces,  because  no  relative
motion  can  take  place  without  meeting  with  irictional  or

Digitized  by  Google

254

pbeliminahy.

[275.

Inevitable  othcF  fonus  of  icsistance ;  among  which  are  inchided  (1)
enerorof  mutuul  iViction  between  solids  sliding  upon  one  another;  (2)
motions,  resistances  due  to  the  viscosity  oi  tluius,  or  impertect  ol.i^ticitv
of  solids;  (3)  resistances  due  to  the  induction  of  electric  cur-
iBnts;  (4)  resifitances  due  to  varying  magnetization  under  the
influence  of  imperfect  magnetic  retentiveness.  No  motion  in
nature  can  take  place  without  meeting  resiBtance  due  to  some,
if  not  to  all,  of  these  influences.  It  is  matter  of  every  daj
experienee  that  fnction  and  imperfect  eiastidtj  of  solids  impede
the  action  of  all  artificial  mechanisms;  and  that  even  when
bodies  are  detached,  and  left  to  move  freely  in  the  air,  as  falling
bodies,  or  as  projectiles,  they  experience  resistance  owing  to  the
viscosity  of  the  air.

The  greater  masses,  planets  and  comets,  moving  in  a  less
resisting  medium,  show  less  indications  of  resistance*.  Indeed
it  cannot  he  said  that  observation  upon  any  one  of  these  boJie?,
with  the  exception  of  Encke's  comet,  has  demonstrated  resist-
ance. But  the  analogies  of  nature,  and  the  ascertained  facts  of
physical  science,  forbid  us  to  doubt  that  every  one  of  them,
every  star,  and  every  body  of  any  kind  moving  in  any  part  of
space,  has  its  relative  motion  impeded  by  the  air,  gas,  vapour,
medium,  or  "whatever  we  choose  to  call  the  substance  occupying
the  space  immediately  round  it;  just  as  the  motion  of  a  hfle
bullet  is  impeded  by  the  resistance  of  the  air.

BflMiof  276.  There  are  also  indirect  resistances,  owinff  to  friction
MofeioB.  impeding  the  tidal  motions,  on  all  bodies  (like  the  earth)  par-
tially or  whoUy  covered  by  liquid,  which,  as  long  as  these  bodies
move  relatively  to  neighbouring  bodies*  must  keep  diawing  off
eneigy  from  their  relative  motions.  Thus,  if  we  consider,  in
the  first  place,  the  action  of  the  moon  alone,  on  the  earth  with
its  oceans,  lakes,  and  rivers,  we  perceive  that  it  must  tend  to
equalize  the  periods  of  the  earth's  rotation  abont  its  axis,  and
of  the  revolution  of  the  two  bodies  about  tht  ir  n  ut  rr  df  inertia;
because  as  long  as  these  periods  ditler,  the  tidal  action  on  the

•  Nowton,  Principia.  (R<>marl<s  on  tbo  first  law  of  motion.)  "Majora  antcm
Flonotarum  ei  Cometurum  corpora  motus  suus  et  progreuuTOs  et  cizcolares,  in
qpskiis  admii  miiteiitilras  faetofl,  «oiis«rfiail  diatloi."

Digitized  by  Googl^

I

876.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  255

earth's  surface  must  keep  subtracting  energy  from  tlieir  motions.  JJJ^^o'
To  view  the  subject  more  in  detail,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  McUod.
avoid  unneco';F;nry  complications,  let  us  suppose  the  moon  to  be
a  unifonn  spherical  body.  The  mutual  action  and  reaction  of
gravitation  between  her  mass  and  the  earth's,  vrill  be  equivalent
to  a  single  force  in  some  line  through  her  centre;  and  must  be
such  as  to  impede  the  earth's  rotation  as  long  as  this  is  per-
formed in  a  shorter  period  than  the  moon's  motion  round  the
aarth.  It  must  therefore  lie  in  some  such  direction  as  the  line
MQ  in  the  diagram,  which  represents,  necessarily  with  enormous
exaggeration,  its  deviation,  OQ,  from  the
earth's  centre.  Now  the  actual  force  on
the  moon  in  the  Hue  MQ,  may  be  re-
garded as  consisting  of  a  force  in  the
line  MO  towards  the  earth's  centre,
sensibly  equal  in  amount  to  the  whole
force,  and  a  comparatively  very  small
force  in  the  line  MT  perpendicular  to

JdO.  This  latter  is  very  nearly  tangential  to  the  moon's  path,
and  is  in  the  direction  with  her  motion.  Such  a  force,  if  sud*
denly  commencing  to  act,  would,  in  the  first  place,  increase  the
moon's  velocity;  but  after  a  certain  time  she  would  have  moved
to  much  iarther  from  the  earth,  in  virtue  of  this  acceleration,  as
to  have  lost,  by  moving  against  the  earth's  attraction,  as  much
▼elocity  as  she  had  gained  by  the  tangential  accelerating  force.
The  eflTect  of  a  continued  tangential  force,  acting  with  the  mo-
tion, but  so  small  in  amount  ;us  to  m.ike  only  a  small  deviation
at  any  moment  from  the  circular  form  of  the  orbit,  is  to  gra-
dually increase  the  distance  from  the  central  body,  and  to  cause
as  much  again  as  its  own  amount  of  work  to  be  done  atjainst
the  attraction  of  the  central  mass,  by  the  kinetic  energy  of
motion  lost  The  circumstances  will  be  readily  understood,  by
considering  this  motion  round  the  central  body  in  a  very  gradual
spiral  path  tending  outwards.  Provided  the  law  of  the  centra!
force  is  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance,  the  tangential
component  of  the  central  force  against  the  motion  will  be  twice
as  great  as  the  disturbing  tangential  force  in  the  direction  with
the  motion;  and  therefore  one-half  of  the  amount  of  work  done

Digitized  by  Google

256

P&EUMIKABT.

[276.

inevitaiilo  .igainst  the  former,  is  done  by  the  latter,  and  the  other  half  by
eneiyof  kinetic  energy  taken  from  tlie  motion.  The  integral  effect  on
motirai.  the  moon  s  motion,  of  the  particular  disturbing  cause  now  under
Metioii.  consideration,  is  most  easily  found  by  using  the  principle  of
moments  of  momenta.  Thus  we  see  that  as  much  moment  of
momentum  is  gained  in  any  time  by  the  motions  of  the  centres
of  inertia  of  the  moon  and  earth  relatively  to  their  oommon
centre  of  inertia^  as  is  lost  by  the  earth's  rotation  abont  its  axis.
The  sum  of  the  moments  of  momentum  of  the  centres  of  inertia
of  the  moon  and  earth  as  moving  at  present^  is  about  4*45  tiroes
the  present  moment  of  momentum  of  the  earth's  rotation.  The
average  plane  of  the  former  is  the  ecliptic ;  and  therefore  the
axes  of  the  two  momenta  are  inclined  to  one  another  at  the
average  angle  of  23*  27^',  which,  as  we  are  neglecting  the  sun's
influence  on  the  plane  of  the  moon's  motion,  may  be  taken  as
the  actual  inclination  of  the  two  axes  at  present.  The  resultant,
or  whole  moment  of  momentum,  is  therefore  5  38  times  that  of
the  earth's  picsont  rotation,  and  its  axis  is  inclined  19**  13'  to
the  axis  of  the  earth.  Hence  the  ultimate  tendency  of  the  tides
is,  to  reduce  the  earth  and  moon  to  a  simple  uniform  rotation
with  this  resultant  moment  round  this  resultant  axis,  as  if  they
were  two  parts  of  one  rigid  body:  in  which  condition  the  moon's
distance  would  be  increased  (approximately)  in  the  ratio  1 :  1*46»
being  the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  present  moment  of  momen«
turn  of  the  centres  of  inertia  to  the  square  of  the  whole  moment
of  momentum ;  and  the  period  of  revolution  in  the  ratio  1 : 177,
being  that  of  the  cubes  of  the  same  quantities.  The  distance
would  therefore  be  increased  to  347,100  miles,  and  the  period
lengthened  to  48*36  days.  Were  there  no  other  body  in
the  universe  but  the  earth  and  the  moon,  these  two  bodies
might  go  on  moving  thus  for  ever,  in  circular  orbits  round  their
common  centre  of  inertia^  and  the  earth  rotating  about  its  axis  in
the  same  period,  so  as  always  to  turn  the  same  ftice  to  the  moon,
and  therefore  to  have  all  the  liquids  at  its  surface  at  rest  rela-
tively to  the  solid.  But  the  existence  of  the  sun  would  pre-
vent any  such  state  of  things  from  being  permanent.  There
would  1)L'  solar  tides — twice  high  water  and  twice  low  water — in
the  period  of  the  earth  s  revolution  relatively  to  the  sun  (that  is

Digitized  by  Google

276.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

257

to  say,  twicie  in  the  solar  day,  or,  which  would  be  the  same
thing,  the  month)..  This  could  not  go  on  without  loss  of  energy  ^J^^y  of
1^  fluid  friction.  It  is  easy  to  trace  the  whole  course  of  the  ^^j^^
disturbance  in  the  earth's  and  moon's  motions  which  this  cause  ftietiao.
wonld  produce*:  its  first  effbct'  must  be  to  britig  the  moon  to
fall  in  to  the  earth,  with  compensation  for  loss  of  moment  of
momentum  of  the  two  round  their  centre  of  inertia  in  in<Tea.seof
its  distance  from  the  sun,  and  then  to  reduce  the  very  rapid  rota-
tion of  the  compound  body,  Earth-and-Moon,  after  the  collision,
and  farther  increase  its  distance  fr(^Tn  the  Sun  till  ultimately,
(corresponding  action  on  liquid  matter  on  the  Sun  having  its
effect  also,  and  it  being  for  our  illustration  supposed  that  there  are
no  other  planets,)  the  two  bodies  shall  rotate  round  their  oommon
centre  of  inertia,  like  parts  of  one  rigid  body.  It  is  remarkable
that  the  whole  frictional  effect  of  the  lunar  and  solar  tides
should  be,  first  to  augment  the  moon's  distance  bom  the  earth
to  a  maximum,  and  then  to  diminish  it,  till  ultimately  the
moon  falls  in  to  the  earth :  and  first  to  diminish,  after  that  to
increase,  and  lastly  to  dioiinish  the  earth's  rotational  velocity.
We  hope  to  return  to  the  subject  later,  and  to  consider  the
general  problem  of  the  motion  of  any  number  of  rigid  bodies
or  material  points  acting  on  one  another  with  mutual  forces,
under  any  actual  physical  law,  and  therefore,  as  we  shall  see,
necessarily  subject  to  loss  of  energy  as  long  as  any  of  their
mutual  distances  vary;  that  is  to  say,  until  all  subside  into
a  state  of  motion  in  circles  round  an  axis  passing  through  their
centre  of  inertia^  like  parts  of  one  rigid,  body. It  is  probable

•  The  friction  of  these  solar  tides  on  the  earth  would  canse  the  earth  to
rotate  still  slower;  and  then  the  moon's  influence,  tending  to  keep  the  earth
rotating  with  always  the  samo  face  towards  herself,  would  lesisi  this  further
xednctkm  in  the  speed  of  the  Tolfttioii.  Thus  (as  explained  above  witbrelenmee
to  the  moon)  theze  wonld  he  from  (he  aim  a  tone  opposing  the  eaaih's  rotation,
and  from  the  moon  a  force  promoting  it.  Henee  aecordiug  to  the  preceding
explanation  applied  to  the  altered  circumstances,  the  line  of  the  eiirth's  at-
traction on  the  Dioon  parses  now  as  before,  not  throngli  thi-  centre  of  inertia  of
the  earth,  bat  now  in  a  line  slightly  bekitui  it  (instead  of  be/ore,  as  formerly).
It  therafafe  now  tesists  the  moon's  motion  of  mdntion.  The  eomUned  effeol
«f  this  vesittanee  and  of  the  eartVs  attraetion  on  the  moon  is»  lihe  that  of  a
lesisting  me<liiim,  to  canse  the  moon  to  faU  in  towaida  the  earth  in  a  spiral  path
nitti  gradaaUy  inonaiing  velodlj.

YOU  1.  17

Digitized  by  Google

258  pRELmnfABT.  [276.

laeviubie  that  thc  moon,  in  ancient  times  liquid  or  viaeoQS  in  its  onter
en^ngoi  layer  if  not  throughout^  was  thus  brought  to  turn  always  the
niotiooa. flame  &06  to  the  earth.

Tid»l

277.  We  have  no  data  in  the  present  state  of  science  for
estimating  the  relative  importance  of  tidal  friction,  and  of  the
resistance  of  the  resisting  medium  through  which  the  earth  and
moon  move;  but  whatever  it  may  be,  there  can  be  but  one
ultimate  result  for  such  a  system  as  that  of  the  sun  and  planets^
if  continuing  long  enough  under  existing  laws*  and  not  dis-
vitimate  turbod  by  meeting  with  other  moving  masses  in  i^aee.  ThtA
^^Zu  result  is  the  felling  together  of  all  into  one  mass,  which,  although
rotating  for  a  time,  must  in  the  end  come  to  rest  relatively  to
the  surrounding  medium.

ron<u>rfa.  278.  The  theoiy  of  energy  cannot  be  completed  until  we
are  able  to  examine  the  physical  influences  which  accompany
loss  of  eneigy  in  esch  of  the  classes  of  resirtance  mentioned
above,  §  275,  We  shall  then  see  that  in  eveiy  case  in  which
energy  is  lost  by  resistance^  heat  is  generated;  and  we  shall
leam  from  Joule's  investigations  that  the  quantity  of  heat  so
generated  is  a  perfectly  definite  equivalent  for  the  energy
lost.  Also  tbat  in  no  natural  action  is  there  ever  a  develop-
ment of  energy  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  the  dis-
ap[)carance  of  an  equal  amount  elsewhere  by  means  of
some  known  physical  agency.  Thus  we  shall  conclude,  that
if  any  limited  portion  of  the  mat  (rial  universe  could  be  per-
fectly isolated,  so  as  to  ho  prevented  from  either  giving
energy  to,  or  taking  energy  from,  matter  external  to  it,  the
sum  of  its  potential  and  kinetic  eneigies  would  be  the  same  at
all  times :  in  other  words,  that  eveiy  material  system  subject
to  no  other  forces  than  actions  and  reactions  between  its  parts,
is  a  dynamically  conservative  system,  as  defined  above^  §  271.
But  it  is  only  when  the  inscrutably  minute  motions  among
small  parts,  possibly  the  ultimate  molecules  matter,  which
constitute  lights  heat^  and  magnetism ;  and  the  intermoleeular
forces  of  chemical  affinity ;  are  taken  into  account,  along  with
the  palpable  motions  and  measurable  forces  of  which  we
become  cognizant  by  direct  observation,  that  we  can  recognise

Digitized  by  Google

278.]  DTKAMICAL  LAWS  AND  FBINCIPLES.  259

the  universally  conservative  character  of  all  natural  d}Tiamic  consemt-
action,  and  perceive  the  bearinir  of  the  principle  of  reversibility  emu^.
on  the  whole  class  of  natural  actions  involving  resistance,  which
seem  to  violate  it.  In  the  meantime,  in  our  studies  of  abstract
dynatnica^  it  will  be  sufficient  to  introduce  a  special  reckoning
for  eneigy  lost  in  working  against,  or  gained  from  work  done
by,  forces  not  belonging  palpably  to  the  conservative  class.

279.  As  of  great  importance  in  &rther  developments,  we
prove  a  few  propositions  intimately  connected  with  eneigy.

280.  The  kinetic  enerery  of  any  system  is  equal  to  the  sum  Kinetic

J J  I  eiicrtry  of

of  the  kinetic  energies  of  a  mass  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  masses  *  ■dr*^^
of  the  system,  moving  with  a  velocity  equal  to  that  of  its  centre
of  inertia»  and  of  the  motions  of  the  separate  parts  relatively  to
the  centre  of  inertia.

For  if  fli^  «  he  the  ooordinates  of  any  particle,  i%  of  the
>7>t^y  tt  %  i  its  oo-ordinates  relative  to  the  centre  of  inertia;
and  X,  the  co-ordinates  of  the  centre  cf  inertia  itself;  we  have
Ibr  the  whole  kinetic  energy

But  by  the  propertLes  of  the  centre  of  inertia,  we  have

Hence  the  preceding  is  equal  to
which  proves  the  proposition.

281.  The  kinetic  energy  of  rotation  of  a  rigid  system  about
any  axis  is  (§  95)  expressed  by  iSmr^to*,  where  m  is  the  mass
of  any  part,  r  its  distance  from  the  axis,  and  oi  the  angular
velocity  of  rotation.  It  may  evidently  be  written  in  the  form
i»*imt^.  The  factor  Xmr*  is  of  veiy  great  importance  in
kinetic  investigations,  and  has  been  called  the  Moment  o/Mom<>ntor
JneftMS  of  the  system  aboat  the  axis  in  question.  The  moment
of  inertia -about  any  aada  is  therefore  found  by  summing  the

17-2

Digitized  by  Google

Moment  of
inertia.

MoiMnt  of

of  a  rot

ting  rigid
body.

260  PKELIMINARY.  [281.

products  of  the  masses  of  all  the  partioleB  each  mto  the  sqnaie
of  its  distance  from  the  axis.

It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  moment  of  momentum
of  any  rigid  system  about  an  axis,  being  ^SfmrrsSmf^o*,  is  the

product  of  the  angular  velocity  into  the  moment  of  inertia^

If  wc  take  a  quantity  k,  such  thut

BMiiiuof  k  is  called  the  Badius  of  Oi/raium  about  the  axis  firom  which
r  is  measured.  The  radius  of  gyration  about  any  axis  is  there-
fore the  distance  from  that  axis  at  which,  if  the  whole  ma>s
were  placed,  it  would  have  the  same  moment  of  inertia  as  bf^-

Fijr-whfiei.  fore.  In  a  fly-wliecl,  where  it  is  desirable  to  have  as  great  a
moment  of  inertia  with  as  small  a  mass  as  possible,  within
certain  limits  of  (limcnsions,  the  greater  part  of  the  mass  is
formed  into  a  ring  of  the  largest  admissible  diameter,  and  the
radius  of  this  ring  is  then  approximately  the  radius  of  gyration
of  the  whole.

Momont  of
inrrtia
about  ftiiy

A  rigid  body  being  referred  to  rectangular  axes  passing
through  any  point,  it  is  required  to  find  the  moment  of  inertia
about  an  axis  through  the  origin  makiug  given  angles  with  the
co-ordinate  axes.

Let  X,  fi,  V  be  its  direction-cosines.  Then  the  distance  (r)  of
the  point  x, z  from  it  is,  by  ^  95,

and  theFBfbie

whieh  may  be  written

where  A,B,C  wee  the  moments  of  inertia  abont  the  azea,  and
asSm^  fiss Tirnxx,  y^lmojf.  From  its  derivation  we  see  that
this  quantity  is  €ta$nHaUy  posUwe,  Hence  when,  by  a  proper
linear  tnnsfonnation,  it  is  deprived  of  the  terms  containing  the
products  of  A,  /ly  r,  it  will  be  brought  to  the  form

wlieie  A,  B,  C  are  essentially  positive.  They  are  evidently  the
momenta  of  inertia  about  the  new  rectangular  axes  of  oo^jrdinatee.

Digitized  by  Google

281.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  261

and  X,  f^  F  the  oorrespondiiig  direction-ooones  of  the  axis  loimd  '^'^^^  ^
wbieh  the  moment  of  inertia  is  to  be  found.  about
I«et  ^>i?>C,  if  thej  are  nneqnaL  Then

shows  that  Q  cannot  be  greater  than nor  less  than  C.  AIspi
il  A,  By  C  he  equal,  Q  ia  equal  to  each.

If  o,  6,  c  be  the  mUii  of  gyration  about  the  new  axes  of  y,

and  the  above  equation  gives

But  vi  x^y^z  be  any  |X)int  in  the  line  whose  (lircction-oosines  are
A,  /A, and  r  its  distance  from  the  origin,  we  have

^  =  -  =  -  =  r,  and  Uierefore

therefore^  we  oonaider  the  eUipeoid  whose  equation  is

we  see  that  it  intercepts  on  the  line  whose  direction-oosines  are
X,  fi,  V — and  about  which  the  radins  of  gyration  is  a  length  r
which  is  given  bj  the  equation

or  the  rectangle  under  any  ladlns-veetor  of  this  ellipsoid  and
the  radius  of  gyration  about  it  is  constant. Its  semi^aies  are
^ f"  «■

evidently  ^  t  ^  i where  c  may  have  any  value  we  may  assign.
Thus  it  is  evident  that

282. For  eveiy  rigid  body  there  may  be  described  about  Moioent>i
any  point  as  centre,  an  ellipsoid  (called  Pain8ot*8  MomeaUU
£tUp9oid*)  which  is  such  that  the  length  of  any  ndius-vector  is

•  The  (Icfinitioa  U  not  Poiusot's,  but  onrs.  The  xnomental  ellipsoid  as  wo
dofine  it  is  fairly  called  Poinsot's,  because  of  the  pplcitdid  tise  he  has  made
of  it  in  his  weil-known  kinematic  representation  of  the  solution  of  the  problem
— 4o  find  the  nutHdn  of  a  rigid  body  with  «me  point  htld  flaed  but  otherwise
faliwimecd  by  no  lbflC0»— wbieh,  vitli  SylvMterVt  bsantifol  theorem  eompleting
it  10  M  to  gbi  a  purely  kinematicol  jneobaiuam  to  show  the  time  which  tlM
body  takes  to  attain  aoj  partiffliliir  poritiott,  we  zeluetantly  keep  beek  for  our
Seemd  Volome.

Digitized  by  Google

262  FEELimNAUY.  £282.

Momentia  inyenely  proportional  to  the  radius  of  gyration  of  the  body
about  t  hat  radius-vector  as  axis.

Principal  'J'lic  axes  of  this  ellipsoid  are,  ami  might  be  defined  as,  the
****  Pnncipal  Axes  of  inertia  of  the  body  for  the  poiut  in  question:
but  tlie  best  definition  of  principal  axes  of  inertia  is  given
below.  First  take  two  preliminary  leniinas  : —
Bquiiibra-  (1)  If  a  rigid  body  rotate  round  any  axis,  the  centrifugal
caitrifi^rf  forces  are  reducible  to  a  single  force  perpendicular  to  the  axis

of  rotation,  and  to  a  couple  (§234  above)  having  its  axis  parallel
to  the  line  of  this  force.

(2)  But  in  particular  cases  the  couple  may  vanish,  or  both
oouj^e  and  force  may  vanish  and  the  centrifugal  forces  be  in
equilibrium.  The  force  vanishes  if,  and  only  if,  the  axis  of
rotation  passes  through  the  body's  centre  of  inertia.
Mhrittea  DsF.  (1).  Any  axis  is  called  a  principal  axis  of  a  body's
AxeiTyf  inertia,  or  simply  a  principal  axis  of  the  body,  if  when  the  body
rotates  round  it  the  centrifugal  forces  either  balance  or  aie  le-
ducible  to  a  single  force.

Def.  (2).  A  principal  axis  not  through  the  centre  of  inertia
is  called  a  principal  axis  of  inertia  for  the  point  of  itself  through
which  the  resultant  of  centrifugal  forces  passes.

Def.  (3).  A  principal  axis  which  passes  through  the  centre
of  inertia  is  a  principal  axis  for  every  point  of  it.self.

The  proofs  of  the  lemmas  may  be  safely  left  to  the  student  as
exercises  on  §  55D  below ;  and  from  the  proof  the  identification
of  the  principal  axes  as  now  defined  with  the  principal  axes  of
Poinsot's  momental  ellipsoid  is  seen  immediately  by  aid  of  the
analysis  of  §  281.

283.  The  proposition  of  §  280  shows  that  tlie  moment  of
inertia  of  a  rigid  body  about  any  axis  is  ec[iial  to  that  which
the  mass,  if  collected  at  the  centre  of  inertia,  would  have  about
this  axis,  together  with  that  of  the  body  about  a  parallel  axis
through  its  centre  of  inertia.  It  leads  us  naturally  to  in-
vestigate the  relation  between  principal  axes  for  any  point  and
principal  axes  for  the  centre  of  inertia.  The  following  investi-
gation proves  the  remarkable  theorem  of  §  284,  which  was  first
given  in  1811  by  Binet  in  the  Journal  de  V£cole  Bolyieohm^^

Digitized  by  Googlej

283.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  miMCIPLEB.

263

Let  ilie  origiii,  O,  be  tlie  oentre  of  lii«riiiA,  muI  the  9SM  tlic  PrincijMl
prindpal  azes  at  that  point Then,  by  g§  280,  281,  we  ha?e  for
the  BKmient  €i  inertia  about  a  line  thioii|^  the  point  P  {k%Qt
whose  direetion-ooeinea  are  X,  ft,

^{A+M  (if + c)]>^' + M  (i:^ + e)}  fi'  {c +M{e

Snbatitating  for  Q,  A,  B,  C  their  values,  and  dividing  hj  M,
we  have

UA  it  be  rcquirctl  to  find  X,  ^,  v  bo  that  tlie  direction  8ixx;ificd
by  them  may  be  a  j)rinci}Kil  axis. Let  8  ~ +  fir)  +  v(f  U6.
let  8  represent  the  projectiou  of  01*  on  the  axis  sought.
The  axes  of  the  ellipsoid

(a'+V  +  D*"*  -2(i,6f»+  (a),

are  found  by  means  of  the  eipiadons

If,  now,  we  take  /  to  denote  OP,  or  +  r}'  +  the.se  eqnationfi,
where  p  is  clearly  the  square  of  the  radius  of  gyration  about
the  aaus  to  be  found,  may  bo  written

(a' +/• -p)X  -  ^  (ex + + ir)  -  0,
etoisetOi,

or  (a^+/'-p)X-^«  =  0,

etc.  =  etc.,

(6'- A')/A-i?«-0
(c'-ir)r-4j  =  0

where  Km  p  */*  Henoe

.(c)

X=

etc

Multiply,  in  order,  by  ^,  ijf,  ^  add,  and  divide  by  #,  and  we  get

o'-A' 6'-A'  c'-K

»1

Digitized  by  Google

264

PRELDCnrART.

[283.

Principal

Binf«'t

Centnl
•UipvoMU

Kinetio
•ymmetry
round  a
pointi

By  (c)  wc  see  tlmt  (X,  fi,  v)  is  the  direction  of  tlie  normal  through
the  point  J\  (i, of  the  surfAce  represented  bj  the  equation

^ V* ^ ,  /X
a»-it^6^^c'-Z**

wliidi  IS  obyioiuly  &  suiftoe  cf  the  aeoond  degree  oonfiicsl
tlieelUpBoid

(/),

and  paasing  through  P  in  Tutae  of  (d),  wlueli  deteniiui68  it  aooord-
iiigly.  The  three  iDots  of  this  onbio  are  clearly  all  veal;  one  of
them  18  less  than  the  least  of  a',  6',  c*,  and  positive  or  negative
according  aa  P  is  witiiin  or  without  the  elUpeoid  (/).  And  if
a  >  6  >  the  ^wo  others  are  between  c'  and  h',  and  between  V  and
a',  respectively.  The  addition  of/"  to  each  gives  the  aqnnre  of  the
ladina  of  gyration  round  the  corresponding  principal  i

284u  The  principal  axes  for  any  point  of  a  rigid  body  are
normals  to  the  three  surfaces  of  the  second  order  throagh  that
point,  confocal  with  the  ellipsoid,  which  has  its  centre  at  the

centre  of  inertia,  and  its  three  principal  diameters  co-iucident
with  the  three  principal  axes  for  that  point,  and  equal  respec-
tively to  the  doubles  of  the  radii  of  gyration  round  them.
This  ellipsoid  is  called  the  Ventral  EllipsoicL

285.  A  rigid  body  is  said  to  be  kinetically  symmetrical
about  its  centre  of  inertia  when  its  nioment^j  uf  inertia  about
three  principal  axes  through  that  point  are  equal ;  and  there-
fore necessarily  the  moments  of  inertia  about  all  axes  through
that  point  equal,  §  281,  and  all  these  axes  principal  axes.  Al)Out
it  uniform  spheres,  cubes,  and  in  general  any  complete  crys-
talline solid  of  the  first  system  (see  chapter  on  Properties  of
Matter),  are  kinetically  symmetrical,

A  rigid  body  is  kinetically  symmetrical  about  an  (uris  when
this  axis  is  one  of  the  principal  axes  through  the  centre  of
inertia*  and  the  moments  of  inertia  about  the  other  two,  and
therefore  about  any  line  in  their  phine,  are  equal  A  spheroid,
a  Square  or  equilateral  triangular  prism  or  plate,  a  circular  ring;
disc,  or  cylinder,  or  any  complete  ciystid  of  the  second  or
fourth  system,  is  kinetically  symmetrical  about  its  axis.

L-iyui^uu  by  GoOglc

286.]

DTKAiaGAL  LA^WB  Am  PBINCIPLBS.

265

286.  The  only  actions  and  reactions  between  the  parts  of  a  Energy  in
Bjstem,  not  belonging  palpably  to  the  conservative  class,  which  ajrwunto*.
we  shall  consider  in  abstract  dynamics,  are  those  of  friction
between  solids  sliding  on  solids,  except  in  a  few  instances  in
which  we  shall  consider  the  general  character  and  ultimate
results  of  effects  produced  by  viscomtj  of  fluids,  imperfect
elasticity  of  solids^  imperfect  electric  conduction,  or  imperfect
magnetic  xetentiveness.  We  shall  also,  in  abstract  dynamics,
consider  forces  as  applied  to  parts  of  a  limited  system  arbitrarily

from  without.  These  we  shall  call,  for  brevity,  the  applied  forces.

287.  The  law  of  enei^  may  then,  in  abstract  dynamics,  be
expressed  as  follows  : —

The  whole  work  done  in  any  time,  on  any  limited  material
system,  by  applied  forces,  is  equal  to  the  whole  effect  in  the
forms  of  potential  and  kinetic  eneigy  produced  in  the  system,
together  with  the  work  lost  in  friction.

288.  This  principle  may  bo  regarded  as  comprehending  the
whole  of  abstract  dynamics,  because,  as  we  now  proceed  to
show,  the  conditions  of  equilibrium  and  of  motion,  in  every
possible  case,  may  be  immediately  derived  from  it

288.  A  material  system,  whose  relative  motions  are  unre-  f  qtnii-
nsted  hj  friction,  is  in  equilibrium  in  any  particular  configurar
tion  if,  and  is  not  in  equilibrium  unlesst,  the  work  done  by
the  applied  forces  is  equal  to  the  potential  energy  gained,  in  any
possible  infinitely  small  displacement  from  that  configuration.
This  i-5  the  celebrated  principle  of  "virtual  velocities"  which
Lagrange  made  the  basis  of  his  AUcanique  Analytique.  The  ill-
chosen  name  "virtual  velocities"  is  now  falling  into  disuse.

280.  To  prove  it,  we  have  first  to  remark  tliat  the  system  Prindpto
cannot  possibly  move  away  from  any  particular  configuration  fdoeUieiL
except  by  work  being  done  upon  it  by  the  forces  to  which  it  is
subject :  it  is  therefore  in  equilibrium  if  the  stated  condition  is
fulfilled.  To  ascertain  that  nothing  less  than  this  condition  can
secure  its  equilibrium,  let  us  first  consider  a  system  having
only  one  degree  of  freedom  to  move.  Whatever  forces  act  on
the  whole  system,  we  may  always  hold  it  in  equilibrium  by  a
single  force  applied  to  any  one  point  of  the  system  in  its  line

Digitized  by  Google

266

PRELDtlNABT.

[29a

Principle of  motion,  opposite  to  the  direction  in  which  it  tends  to  move,

Ofvirliml  1 P  1  -11  •  • n ■ ^  11  •  •

veiocitiw.  and  of  such  magnitude  that,  in  any  iniinitely  small  motion  in
either  direction,  it  shall  resist,  or  shall  do,  as  much  work  as  the
other  forces,  whether  applied  or  internal,  altogether  do  or  resist.
Now,  by  the  principle  of  superposition  of  forces  in  equilibrium,
we  mi^t,  without  altering  their  effect,  ^^PP^y  ^  ^^J  point
of  the  system  &ach  a  force  as  we  have  just  seen  would  hold  the
system  in  equilibrium,  and  another  force  equal  and  opposite
to  it  All  the  other  forces  bdng  balanced  by  one  of  these  two^
they  and  it  might  again,  by  the  principle  of  superposition  of
forces  in  equilibrium,  be  removed ;  and  therefore  the  whole  set
of  given  forces  would  produce  the  same  effect,  whether  for
equilibrium  or  for  motion,  as  the  single  force  which  is  left
acting  alone.  This  single  force,  since  it  is  in  a  lino  in  which
the  point  of  its  application  is  free  to  move,  must  move  the
system.  Hence  the  given  forces,  to  wliich  this  single  force  has
been  proved  equivalent,  cannot  possibly  be  in  equilibrium
unless  their  whole  work  for  an  infinitely  small  motion  is
nothing,  in  which  case  the  single  equiralent  force  is  reduced
to  nothing.  But  whatever  amount  of  freedom  to  move  the
whole  system  may  have,  we  may  always,  by  the  application  of
frictionless  constraint,  limit  it  to  one  degree  of  freedom  only ;
^and  this  may  be  freedom  to  execute  any  particular  motion
whatever,  possible  under  the  given  conditions  of  the  system.
If,  therefore^  in  any  such  infinitely  small  motion,  there  is
variation  of  potential  energy  uncompensated  by  work  of  the
applied  forces,  constraint  limiting  the  freedom  of  the  system  to
only  this  motion  will  bring  us  to  the  case  in  which  we  have
just  demonstrated  there  cannot  be  equilibrium.  But  the  appli-
cation of  constraints  limiting  motion  cannot  possibly  disturb
etjuilibrium,  and  therefore  the  given  system  under  the  actual
conditions  cannot  be  in  ecjuilibrium  in  any  particular  con-
figuration if  there  is  more  work  done  than  resisted  in  any
possible  infinitely  small  motion  from  that  configuration  by  all
the  forces  to  which  it  is  subject.

Nt  utrai  291.  If  a  material  system,  under  the  influence  of  internal
Sium. and  applied  forces,  varying  according  to  some  definite  law,  is

Digitized  by  Google

mi

DTKAIOCAL  LAMS  AKD  PBINCIPLES.

267

Kilanced  by  them  in  any  position  in  which  it  may  be  placed,  x*^u*ml

•1-1 • • •  1 i  I rr..  • .  •  ,

its  equilibriuui  is  said  to  be  neutral.  This  is  tlie  c<ise  with  any  bnum.
spherical  body  of  unifona  material  resting  on  a  horusooial
plane.  A  right  cyliDder  or  cone^  bounded  by  plane  ends  per-
pendicular to  the  axis,  is  alao  in  neutral  equilibrium  on  a
horizontal  plane.*  Practically,  any  maas  of  moderate  dimensions
is  in  neutral  equilibrium  when  its  centre  of  inertia  only  is
fixed,  since,  when  its  longest  dimension  is  small  in  comparison
with  the  earth's  radius,  gravity  is,  as  we  shall  see,  approximately
equivalent  to  a  single  force  through  this  point.

But  if,  when  displaced  infinitely  little  in  any  direction  from  steUa
a  particular  position  of  equilibrium,  and  left  to  itself,  it  com-  SSSik
mences  and  continues  vibratinf]^,  without  ever  experiencing
more  than  infinitely  small  deviation  in  any  of  its  parts,  from
the  position  of  eqiiiliinium,  the  eriuilibrium  in  this  position  is
said  to  be  stable.  A  weight  suspended  by  a  string,  a  uuiforni
sphere  in  a  hollow  bowl,  a  loaded  sphere  resting  on  a  horizontal
plane  with  the  loaded  side  lowest,  an  oblate  body  resting  with
one  end  of  its  shortest  diameter  on  a  horizontal  plane,  a  plank,
whose  thickness  is  small  compared  with  its  length  and  breadth,
floating  on  water,  etc.  etc.,  are  all  cases  of  stable  Cfjuilibrium ;  if
we  lu'glcct  tlie  motions  of  rotation  about  a  vertical  axi.s  in  the
second,  third,  and  fourth  cases,  and  horizontal  motion  in  general,
in  the  fifth,  for  all  of  which  the  equilibrium  is  neutral.

JS,  on  the  other  hand,  the  system  can  be  displaced  in  any  rn<itabie
way  from  a  position  of  ecjuilibrium,  so  that  when  left  to  itself  SrSlilu
it  will  not  vibrate  within  infinitely  small  limits  about  the  posi-
tion of  equilibrium,  but  will  move  &ither  and  fiirther  away  from
it,  the  equilibrium  in  this  position  is  said  to  be  unstable.  Thus
a  loaded  sphere  resting  on  a  horizontal  plane  with  its  load  as
high  as  possible,  an  egg-shaped  body  standing  on  one  end,  a
board  floating  edgeways  in  water, .  etc.  etc.,  would  present,  if
they  could  be  realised  in  practice,  cases  of  unstable  equili-
brium.

When,  as  in  many  cases,  the  nature  of  the  equilibrium  varies

with  the  direction  of  displacement,  if  unstable  for  any  possible
displacement  it  is  practically  unstable  on  tlie  whole.  Thus  a
coin  standing  on  its  edge,  though  in  neutral  equilibrium  for
displacements  in  its  plane,  yet  being  in  unstable  equilibrium

Digitized  by  Google

268  PBELmiNABT.  [291.

tTiutabio for  tho.«?e  perpendicular  to  its  plane,  is  practically  unstable.  A
brium. Sphere  resting  in  eipiilibrium  on  a  saddle  prest  iits  a  case  in
which  there  is  stable,  neutral,  or  unstable  equilibrium,  accord-
ing to  the  direction  in  which  it  may  be  displaced  by  roILiDjg^
but,  practically,  it  would  be  unstable.

Test  of  the  292.  The  theory  of  eners:y  shows  a  very  clear  and  simple
JSJiSif test  for  discriminating  these  characters,  or  determining  whether
the  equilibrium  is  neutral,  stable,  or  unstable,  in  any  ca.se.  If
there  is  just  iis  much  work  resisted  as  pcHbrmed  by  the  applied
and  internal  forces  in  any  possible  displacement  the  equilibrium
is  neutral,  but  not  unless.  If  in  every  possible  infinitely  small
displacemeDt  from  a  position  of  equilibrium  they  do  less  work
among  them  than  they  resist,  the  equilibrium  is  thoroughly
stable,  and  not  unless.  If  in  any  or  in  every  infinitely  small
displacement  from  a  position  of  equilibrium  they  do  more  woik
than  they  xesist^  the  equilibrium  is  unstable.  It  follows  that
if  the  system  is  influenced  only  by  internal  forces^  or  if  the
applied  forces  follow  the  law  of  doing  always  the  same  amount
of  work  upon  the  ^stem  passing  from  one  configuration  to
another  by  all  possible  paths,  the  whole  potential  energy  must
be  constant,  in  all  positions,  for  neutral  equilibrium ;  must
be  a  minimum  for  positions  of  thoroughly  stable  equilibrium  ;
must  be  either  an  absolute  maximum,  or  a  maximum  for  some
displacements  and  a  minimum  for  others  when  there  is  unstable
equilibrium.

iveduction 293. We  have  seen  that,  according  to  D'Alembert's  prin-

♦yiu.aions ciplc,  a.s  explained  above  (§  204),  forces  acting  on  the  different

ul  itiotion  cf.  ^  j.t-  •  •  1

•ujr  •jr»ten»' pomts  ot  a  material  system,  and  their  reactions  against  the
accelerations  which  they  actually  experience  in  any  case  of
motion,  are  in  equilibrium  with  one  nnotlier.  Hence  in  any  actual
case  of  motion,  not  only  is  the  actual  work  done  by  the  forces
equal  to  the  kinetic  energy  produced  in  any  infinitely  small  tim^
in  virtue  of  the  actual  accelerations;  but  so  also  is  the  work
which  would  be  done  by  the  forces,  in  any  infinitely  small  tim^
if  the  velocities  of  the  points  constituting  the  system,  were  at
any  instant  changed  to  any  possible  infinitely  small  velocities^
and  the  accelerations  unchanged.  This  statementi  when  put  in

Digitized  by  Google

293.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  269

the  oonoiae  language  of  maihematical  analjeiB,  oooBtituies  i^uctkn
Lagrange's  application  of  the  *  principle  of  virtual  yelocitles '*
to  express  the  conditions  of  lyAlembert's  equilibrium  between  «vi
the  forces  acting,  and  the  resistances  of  the  masses  to  accelera-
tion. It  comprehends,  as  ve  have  seen,  every  possible  condi-
tion of  every  case  of  motion.  The  "  equations  of  motion"  in
any  particular  case  are,  as  Lagrange  baa  shown,  deduced  from
it  with  great  ease.

Let  m  be  the  mass  of  any  one  of  the  material  points  of  the
system;  y,  «  its  reotangnlar  co-ordinates  at  time  ti  relativelj
to  axes  fixed  in  directian  (§  249)  thtongh  a  point  reckoned  as
fixed  (§  345) ;  and  X,  T,  Z  the  oomponenta,  parallel  to  the  aame

axes,  of  the  whole  force  acting  on  it. Thus  -^^$  ~ ^*

d'z

—  f»  ^  are  the  components  of  the  i*eaction  against  acceleration.

And  theae^  with  X,  T,  for  the  whole  system,  most  fiilfil  the
oondltioDS  of  equilihrinm.  Henoe  if  fias^  fy,  &v  denote  any  arbi-
tnuy  variations  of  s  oomsistent  with  the  oonditions  of  the
ijstem,  we  have

^  {(^  - 3^  ^  (j^-"  f )«y  *  -  "*  S)  «^ } = <>••<»>•

\rhere  2  denotes  summation  to  include  all  the  particles  of  the  *^  v»t«nj-
system.  Tliis  may  be  called  tlie  indet<>rnunate,  or  tho  variational,
equation  of  motion.  TjaLjran<^'0  used  it  as  tho  foniulation  of  his
"whole  kinetic  .system,  deriving  from  it  all  the  common  eqtiationsof
motion,  and  his  own  remarkable  equations  in  pmemlized  co-ordi-
nate&(presentlyto  be  given).  We  may  write  it  otherwise  as  follows:

lm(iax  +  y^  +  xBz)^%{Xhx+ny  +  ZB9) (2),

where  the  first  member  denotes  the  work  done  by  forces  equal  to
those  required  to  prodnoe  the  real  acoeleratbns»  acting  through
the  spaces  of  the  arfoitraiy  displacements;  and  the  second  member
the  work  done  by  the  actual  forces  throo|^  these  imagined

IntfstcTuii*
tiftto  equ»*

tion  of

motion  of

If  the  moving  bodies  constitute  a  conservative  system,  and  if
F  denote  its  potential  energy  in  the  conBguration  specified  by
(*»  y>  h  etc.),  we  have  of  course  (§§  211,  273)

sr— s(i:&c+r?y+^)  (3).

Digiiizeo  by  GoOgle

PBELnaKA&T.  [293.

and  thflfefore  the  indeterminate  equation  of  motion  beoomes

aAi(;i&f4-^-l-»a«)=:-fir.  (4),

wbere  SF denotes  the  exoesi  of  the  potential  tsuwgy  in  the  con*
iigumtion  (x+Bx,  y+^,z+d9,  etc)  above  that  in  the  ocmfigura-
tion  {x,  y, »,  ete.).

One  immediate  particahvreeoltmiist  of  coone  be  tfaeoomiiMni
equation  of  eneigy,  which  must  be  obtained  bj  mppoaing  Sae,  By,
ht,  etc,  to  be  the  aetnal  variations  of  the  oo-ofdinates  in  an
infinitely  small  time  BL  Thus  if  we  take  Bx^^iOt,  ete.,  and
divide  both  members  by we  have

S  (Z*  + +  Z;^)  =  Sm  («*  +  ifi/  +  ^2 )  (5 ).

Here  the  fir.st  meml)er  iacom  posed  of  Xewton's  Actwnes  Atjenlium;
with  his  Beaclio/u's  Iiesi4t(eJttiuiii  so  far  as  friction,  gnivity,  and
molecular  forces  are  concenied,  subtracted :  and  tlie  second  consists
of  tlie  portion  of  the  Reactioms  due  to  acceleration.  As  we  Liivo
seen  above  (§  214),  the  second  member  is  the  nite  of  increase  of
2^m  {x*  +  -t-  i*)  i>er  unit  of  time.  Hence,  denoting  by  v  tlie
velocity  of  one  of  the  particles,  and  by  W  the  internal  of  the
firat  member  multiplied  by  dt,  that  is  to  say,  the  integral  w  urk
done  by  the  working  and  resisting  forces  in  any  time,  we  have

24W-JF+^.  (6),.

being  the  initial  kinetic  eneigy.  This  Is  the  integral  eqmir
tion  of  enexgy.  In  the  particular  case  of  a  conservative  i|ystea,
IT  is  a  fonction  of  the  coKndinates,  irrespectively  of  the  timoy  or
of  the  paths  which  have  been  followed.  Accotding  to  the  pre-
vious notation,  with  besideB  to  denote  the  potential  energy  of
the  qrstem  in  its  initial  configuration,  we  have  -  and

the  integral  equation  of  enexgy  becomes

or,  if  E  denote  the  sum  of  the  'potential  and  kinetic  energies,  a
constant,  jj^^  = F  (7).

The  general  indeterminate  equation  gives  immediately,  for  the
motion  of  a  system  of  fine  partides,

=  A',,  mj/^  =  r,,  m,s,  = wi/,  =  X„  etc

Of  these  equations  the  three  fur  each  particle  may  of  coui^se  be
treated  separately  if  there  is  no  mutual  influence  between  the
particles:  but  when  tlioy  exert  force  on  one  another,  A'^,  F^,  etc,
will  each  in  general  be  a  function  of  all  the  coordinates.

Digitized  by  GooglCL

29&]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

m

From  the  indeterminate  equation  (1)  Lagrange,  by  his  method  CtoMtaitoc
of  miiltiplMra»  deduces  the  requisite  number  of  equations  for  fatoth* in-
determining  the  motion  of  a  rigid  body,  or  of  any  system  of  con-
nected particles  or  rigid  bodies,  thus  : — Let  the  number  of  the
particles  be  t,  and  let  the  connexions  between  them  be  expreaaed
by  n  equatioDBi

<^ yi»  *i»  «f.  =

•^/(«»»yit«i»«,>  —  (8)

etc.  etc.

being  the  kimmatical  equations  of  the  system,  T?y  taking  tlie
variations  of  those  we  find  that  every  possilJe  infinitely  small  dis-
placement &Cj,  hy^,  hz^p ...  must  satisfy  then  linear  equations

Mnltiplytng  the  first  ol  those  by  X,  the  second  by  X,,  etc.,
adding  to  the  indeterminate  equation,  and  then  equating  the  oo-
of  ete.y  each  to  xero,  we  have

.dF dF  cT^

etc.

etc

.(10).

motion

Hiese  are  in  all  3t  equations  to  determine  the  n  unknown  Botormi-
quantities A,,  ...^  and  the  3t*  -  7i  independent  variables  to  tiona  o^
which  x^t  y,,...are  reduced  by  the  kinematical  equations  (8).
The  same  equations  may  be  found  synthetically  in  the  following
manner,  by  which  also  we  are  helped  to  understand  the  precise
iiMwming  of  the  terms  containing  the  multipliers  A,  A^  eta

First  let  the  partidee  be  free  from  constraint,  but  acted  on
both  by  the  given  forces  X,,  F,,  etc.,  and  by  forces  depending
on  mutual  distanoee  between  the  partielea  and  upon  their
poflitaonB  relatively  to  fixed  objects  subject  to  the  law  of  oon-
aervatum,  and  having  for  their  potential  energy

-l(>fe^^  +  A;,/'/  +  etc.),

■o  that  oompmienti  of  the  forces  aotoally  experienced  by  the
difi^arent  partidee  shall  be

Digitized  by  Google

motion
dwiuoed.

272  PBEUUtKARr.  [293.

eta,  etc

Hence  the  equations  of  motion  are
d*x ^ .„dF ,  „dF , t/ry,dk „.dk, ,  \1

et&i  ©tc

(11).

Now  suppose  A- ,  etc.  to  be  infinitf'ly  ^eat: — in  order  that  the
forcea  on  the  articles  may  not  be  indniti^Iy  great^  we  must  have

^=0,  i^,  =  0,  etc.,

that  IS  to  say,  tbe  equalions  of  oondition  (8)  most  be  Mfilled;
and  the  last  gnmpe  of  terms  in  the  seoond  members  of  (11)  now
disappear  because  thej  contain  tiie  squares  of  the  infinitel7  small
quantitifls  F^^  ^*  now  hF^X^  ^i^t-\%  <^  ^
have  equations  (10).  This  second  mode  of  proving  Lagrange'a
eqnationa  of  motion  of  a  constrained  sjrstem  corresponds  pre-
cisely to  the  imperfect  approach  to  the  ideal  caw  which  can  be
made  by  real  mechanism.  The  levers  and  bars  and  guide-
sm&oeB  cannot  be  infinitely  rigid.  Snppoee  then  k,,  etc.  to
be  finite  bat  veiy  great  quantities,  and  to  be  some  fonctiona  of
the  ooKnrdinates  depending  on  the  elastic  qualitieB  of  the  materials
of  which  the  guiding  mechanism  is  composed  equations  (11)
will  express  the  motion,  and  by  supposing  k,  k^,  etc  to  be
greater  and  greater  we  approach  more  and  more  nearly  to  the
ideal  caae  of  absolutely  rigid  mechanism  oonstraaniog  the  predae
fulfilment  of  equations  (8).

The  problem  of  finding  the  motion  of  a  system  subject  to  any
unvarying  kinematical  conditions  whatever,  under  the  action  of
any  given  forces,  is  thus  reduced  to  a  question  of  pure  analysis.
In  ihe  still  more  general  problem  of  determining  the  motion  when
oertain  parts  of  the  system  are  constrained  to  move  in  a  specified
manner,  the  equations  of  condition  (8)  involve  not  only  the
ooKnrdinates,  but  also  I,  the  time.  It  is  easily  seen  however  that
the  equations  (10)  still  hold,  and  with  (8)  fully  detennine  the
motion.  For •consider  the  equations  of  equilibrium  of  the  par-
tides  acted  on  by  any  forces  X/,  7/,  eta,  and  oonstnaned  by

Digitized  by  Google

2d3.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIFLES.  273

prop<»r  mechanism  to  fulfil  the  equations  of  condition  (8)  with  Determl-
the  actual  valuos  of  tlic  i)arameter8  for  any  particu]^  value  S^^"*"
of  L The  fqiiutions  of  equilibrium  will  be  uninflaenoed
by  the  fact  tluit  some  of  the  parametci-s  of  the  oonditioiis
(8)  have  different  values  at  dififerent  timea Henoe^  with

^* "  ****  dt''  ^' '  7^ '  uwtead  of  X/,  7/,  eta,  according
to  D'Alembcrt's  priiK  i])]o,  the  equations  of  motion  will  still  be
(8),  (0),  njul  (10)  quite  independently  of  whether  the  porameten
of  (8)  arc  all  oonstHnt,  or  have  valaas  yaiying  in  any  arbitnoy

maimer  with  the  time.

To  find  the  equation  of  eneigy  moltiplj  the  first  of  eqnatums
(10)  by  i^,  the  second  by  etc.,  and  add.  Then  ramaikiiig
that  in  virtoe  of  (8)  we  have

^/.  +  ^i^.'Hetc.  +  (-)=0,

dF^  .  (IF.

partial  differential  coefficients  of F„  etc  with  nferaiioe  to  t

(d  F\ /d  F  \
lltr  \dir  denouii^  by  T  the

kinetic  eneigy  ixt\^{^  •^f^^^w^  find

^=S(X*+73?+^i)-xQ-\(§).ete.=0....(12).

When  the  kinematic  conditions  axe  **wwarying^  <ih<4  ig  to
say,  when  the  equations  of  oondition  aie  equatioui  mm"!^  the
oo-ordinatea  with  constant  parametera,  we  have

and  the  equation  of  energy  becomes

dT

^=2(Xift+r:^+^)  (13),

showing  that  in  this  ease  the  fidfilnwnt  of  the  equations  of
condition  involTes  neither  gain  nor  loss  of  energy.  On  the
other  hand,  equation  (12)  shows  how  to  find  the  work  perfonned
or  ooosomed  in  the  fblfilmentof  the  VinemaiMfflfcl  conditions  when
they  are  not  unTarying.

VOL.  I.  18

Digitized  by  Google

274 '  PBBLIiaNABT.  [293.

;of  As  a  simjile  example  of  varying  consti-aint,  which  will  be  very

easily  Nvoi  krd  out  hy  equations  (8)  and  (10),  perfectly  illustrating
the  gcneml  principle,  the  student  may  take  the  case  of  a  p:irticle
acted  on  by  any  r,dven  fuixcs  and  free  to  move  any  w  in  i  t-  in
a  pltme  vrhith  is  kept  moving  with  any  given  uniform,  or  vaiyiug
angular  velocity  round  a  fixed  axis.
Gftoss'a  "NAHien  there  are  connexions  between  any  parts  of  a  system,  the

ofl««rt|*^  motion  is  in  general  not  the  Si\me  as  if  all  were  free. If  we  con-

sider any  particle  during'  any  intinitt  ly  small  time  of  the  motion,
and  call  the  ju'oduct  of  itvS  mass  into  the  Bquare  of  the  dLitauco
between  its  i>08itions  at  the  end  of  lliis  time,  on  the  two  suppoei'
tions,  the  constraint :  the  sum  of  the  constraints  in  a  piinimnm-
This  follows  easily  from  (1).

294.  When  two  bodie8«  in  relative  motion,  oome  into  con*
tact,  pressnre  begins  to  act  between  tbem  to  prevent  any  parts

of  them  from  jointly  occnpying  the  same  space.  This  force
commences  from  nothing  at  the  first  point  of  collision,  and
gradually  increases  per  unit  of  area  on  a  gradually  increasing
surface  of  contact  If,  as  is  always  the  case  in  nature,  each
body  possesses  some  degree  of  ela.sticity,  and  if  they  are  not  kept
together  after  the  impact  by  cohesion,  or  by  some  artificial
appliance^  the  mutual  pressure  between  tltem  will  reach  a
maximum,  will  begin  to  diminish,  and  in  the  end  will  come  to
nothing,  by  gradually  diminishing  in  amount  per  unit  of  aiea
on  a  graduailj  diminishing  surfiuie  of  contact  The  whole  pro-
cess wonld  occupy  not  greatly  more  or  less  than  an  hour  if
the  bodies  were  such  dimensions  as  the  earth,  and  such  degrees
of  rigidity  as  copper,  steel,  or  glass.  It  is  finished,  probably,
within  a  thousandth  of  a  second  if  they  are  globes  of  any  of
these  substances  not  exceeding  a  yard  in  diameter.

286.  The  whole  amount,  and  the  direction,  of  the  "Impact''
experienced  by  either  body  in  any  such  case,  are  reckoned
according  to  the  "change  of  momentum"  which  it  experiences.
The  amount  of  the  impact  is  measured  by  the  amount^  and  its
direction  by  the  direction,  of  the  change  of  momentum  which  is
produced.  The  component  of  an  impact  in  a  direction  parallel
to  any  fixed  line  is  similarly  reckoned  according  to  the  com-
ponent change  of  momentum  in  that  direction.

Digitized  by  Google

206.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  P&INCIPLES.  275

296.  If  we  imar^nc  the  whole  time  of  au  impact  divided  impact,
into  a  very  gieat  number  of  equal  intervals,  each  so  short  that

the  force  does  not  vary  seusibly  during  it,  the  component
change  of  momentum  in  any  direction  during  any.  one  of  these
intervals  will  (§  220)  be  equal  to  the  force  multiplied  by
the  measure  of  the  interval.  Hence  the  component  of  the
impact  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  forces  in  aU  the  intervaLa,
multiplied  by  the  length  of  each  interval

Let  F  be  the  oamponent  fozee  in  any  direction  at  any  instant^
T,  of  the  intonral,  and  let  /  be  tlie  amount  of  the  oonreapooding
oomponent  oC  the  whole  impact  Then

297.  Any  force  in  a  constant  direction  acting  in  any  cir-  Tim*-
cumstances,  for  any  time  great  or  small,  may  be  reckoned  on
the  same  principle  ;  so  that  what  we  may  call  its  whole  amount
during  any  time,  or  its  "  time-intcgnil"  will  measure,  or  be
measured  by,  the  whole  momentum  which  it  generates  in  the
time  in  question. But  this  reckoDiug  is  not  often  conyement

or  useful  except  when  the  whole  operation  considered  is  over
before  the  position  of  the  body,  or  configuration  of  the  system
of  bodies,  involired,  has  altered  to  mich  a  degree  as  to  bring  any
other  forces  into  phiy,  or  alter  forces  previously  acting,  to  sach
an  extent  as  to  produce  any  sensible  effect  on  the  momentum
measured.  Thus  if  a  person  presses  gently  with  his  hand»
during  a  few  seconds,  upon  a  mass  suspended  by  a  cord  or
chain,  he  produces  an  effect  which,  if  we  know  the  degree  of
the  force  at  each  instant,  may  be  thoroughly  calculated  on
elcmentar}'  principles.  No  approximation  to  a  full  determina-
tion of  the  motion,  or  to  answering  such  a  partial  question  as
*' how  great  will  be  the  whole  defection  produced?"  can  be
founded  on  a  knowledge  of  the  time-intefjml  '  alone.  If,  for
instance,  the  force  be  at  first  very  great  and  gradually  diminish,
the  effect  will  be  veiy  different  from  what  it  would  be  if  the
force  were  to  increase  very  gradually  and  to  cease  suddenly,
even  although  the  time-integral  were  the  same  in  the  two
cases.  But  iC  the  same  body  is  "  struck  a  blow,"  in  a  horizootal
direction^  either  by  the  band,  or  by  a  mallet  or  other  somewhat

18—2

Digitized  by  Google

276  PBELIMINARV.  [297.

Time^  bftid  masB,  tHo  action  of  the  fbroe  is  finished  before  the  soflpend-
mg  ooid  has  ezperienoed  any  sensible  deflection  from  the  Ter-
ticaL  Neither  gravity  nor  any  other  force  senstUy  alters  the

effect  of  the  blow.  And  therefore  the  whole  momentum  at  the
end  of  the  blow  is  sensibly  equal  to  the  "  amount  of  the  impacV'
which  is,  in  this  case,  simply  the  time-integral

Ballistic  298.  Sach  is  the  case  of  Bobins*  BaUUtie  Penduhm,  a
massive  cylmdrical  block  of  wood  cased  in  a  cylindrical  sheath
of  iron  closed  at  one  end  and  moveable  abont  a  horizontal  axis
at  a  considerable  distance  above  it — employed  to  measnre  the
velocity  of  a  cannon  or  mnsket-shot  The  shot  is  fired  into  the
block  in  a  horizontal  direction  along  the  axis  of  the  block  and
perpendicular  to  tlio  axis  of  suspension.  The  impulsive
penetration  is  so  nearly  instantaneous,  and  the  inertia  of  the
block  so  large  compared  with  the  momentum  of  the  shot,  that
the  ball  and  pendulum  arc  moving  on  as  one  mass  before  the
pendulum  has  been  sensibly  deflected  from  the  vertical.  This  is
essential  to  the  regular  use  of  the  apparatus.  The  iron  sheath
with  its  flat  end  must  be  strong  enough  to  guard  against  spliii-
ters  of  wood  flying  sidewise,  and  to  keep  in  the  bullet

299.  Other  illustrations  of  the  cases  in  which  the  time-
integral  gives  us  the  complete  solution  of  the  problem  may  be
given  without  limit.  They  include  all  cases  in  which  the
direction  of  the  force  is  always  coincident  with  the  dirccti<  n
of  motion  of  the  moving  body,  and  those  special  cases  in  which
the  time  of  action  of  the  force  is  so  abort  that  the  body's  motion
does  not,  during  its  lapse,  sensibly  alter  its  relation  to  the  direc-
tion of  the  foroe^  or  the  action  any  other  forces  to  which  it
may  be  subject  Thus,  in  the  vertical  £iil  of  a  body,  the  time-
integral  gives  us  at  once  the  change  of  momentum;  and  the
same  rule  applies  in  most  cases  of  forces  of  brief  duration,  as
in  a  "drive"  in  cricket  or  golf.

nirpctim- 300. The  simplest  case  whieh  we  can  consider,  and  the  one
tSUtSL usually  treated  as  an  introduction  to  the  subject,  is  that  of  the
collision  of  two  smooth  spherical  bodies  whose  centres  before
collision  were  moving  in  the  same  straight  line.  The  force
between  them  at  each  instant  must  be  in  this  line,  because  of

Digitized  by  Google

300.]  DTNAMIGAL  LIWB  AND  FBINGIFLE8.  277

the  symmetiy  of  circumstances  round  it ;  and  by  the  third  J^Jjf^Jf^'
law  it  must  be  equal  in  amount  on  the  two  bodies.  Ilence
(Lex  il)  they  must  experience  changes  of  motion  at  equal  rates
in  contraiy  directions;  and  at  any  instant  of  the  impact  the
integral  amounts  of  these  changes  of  motion  must  be  eqnaL
I«et  us  sappoee^  to  fix  the  ideas,  the  two  bodies  to  be  moving
both  before  and  after  impact  in  the  same  direction  in  one  line :
one  of  them  gaining  on  the  other  before  impact^  and  either
following  it  at  a  less  speed,  or  moying  along  with  it»  as  the
case  may  be,  after  the  impact  is  completed.  Gases  in  which
the  former  is  driven  backwards  by  the  force  of  the  colli»on,
or  in  which  the  two  moving  in  opposite  directions  meet  in
collision,  are  oaiiily  reduced  to  dependence  ou  tbe  .siiuiL'  furiiiula
hy  the  ordinary  algebraic  couvcutiou  with  regard  to  positivo
and  nonative  signs.

In  the  standard  case,  tlien,  the  quantity  '^f  motion  lost,  up
to  any  instant  of  the  impact,  by  one  of  the  bodies,  is  equal  to
that  gained  by  tlie  other.  Hence  at  the  instant  when  their
velocities  are  equalized  they  move  as  one  mass  with  a  momen-
tum equal  to  the  sum  of  the  momenta  of  the  two  before  impact.
That  is  to  say,  if  «  denote  the  common  velocity  at  this  instant,
we  have

(jf+jr)«=ifF+irr,

if  J/, denote  the  mas.ses  of  the  two  bodies,  and  F,  V  their
Velocities  before  impact.

During  this  first  period  of  the  impact  the  bodies  have  been,
on  the  whole,  coming  into  closer  contact  with  one  another,
through  a  compression  or  deformation  experienced  by  each,
and  resulting,  as  remarked  above,  in  a  fitting  together  of  the
two  surfiEu:es  over  a  finite  area.  No  body  in  nature  is  per-
fectly inekstic;  and  hence,  at  the  instant  of  closest  approxi-
mation, the  mutual  force  called  into  action  between  the  two
bodies  continues,  and  tends  to  separate  them.  Unless  pre-
vented by  natural  sur&oe  cohesion  or  welding  (such  as  is
always  found,  as  we  shall  see  later  in  our  chapter  on  Flroperties
of  Matter,  however  Lard  and  well  polished  the  surfaces  may

Digitized  by  Google

278

PRKHMTNABT,

Effect  of

ezperi>

Pirpctim-  be),  or  by  artificial  appliances  (such  as  a  coating  of  wax,  applied
•pber«i.  in  one  of  tlie  common  illustrative  experiments;  or  the  coupling
applied  between  two  railway  carriages  when  nin  together  so  as
to  push  in  the  springs,  according  to  the  usual  practice  at  rail-
way stations),  the  two  bodies  are  actually  separated  by  this
force,  and  move  away  from  one  another.  Newton  found  that,
pnoidcd  the  impact  is  not  so  violent  as  to  make  any  sensible
permanent  indentation  in  either  body,  the  relaUve  Telocity  of
aepaiation  after  the  impact  bears  a  proportion  to  their  preTious
relatiye  velocify  of  approach,  whidi  is  constant  for  the  same
two  bodies.  This  proportion,  always  less  than  unity,  ap-
proaches more  and  more  nearly  to  it  the  harder  the  bodies  are.
Thns  with  balls  of  compressed  wool  he  found  it  iron  nearly
the  same,  glass  j^.  The  results  of  more  recent  eacperiments  on
the  same  subject  have  confirmed  Newton's  law.  These  will  be
described  later.  In  any  case  of  the  collision  of  two  balls,  let
e  denote  this  proportion,  to  which  we  give  the  name  Coefficient
of  Restitution;*  au<l,  with  previous  notation,  let  in  addition
U,  XT  denote  the  velocities  of  tlie  two  bodies  after  the  conclusion
of  the  impact;  in  the  standard  case  each  being  positivet,  but
U  >U,  Then  we  have

and,  as  before,  since  one  has  lost  as  mudi  momentum  as  the
other  has  gained,

From  these  equations  we  find

(if+iO Jfr+  jrr-«3r  (f-  f),

with  a  similar  expression  for  IT.
Also  we  have,  as  abore.

Hence,  by  subtraction,

(M'¥M*)(ft^U)^eM'(r^r)^9[lt7''(MA-3r)vA'MV)

•  In  most  modern  treatisoa  this  is  called  a  "coeflkicnt  of  oln^ticity,"  which
is  clearly  a  mistake;  Bnppcstod,  it  may  be,  by  Newtun's  words,  but  iuo<.n-,i<triit
with  bis  facts,  and  utterly  at  variauoo  with  modem  language  aud  modem  kiiuw>
ledge  regarding  elastidij.

Digitized  by  Google

SOOJ  DTNAKIGAL.ULWB  AMD  HUNCIPLKS.  279;

aad  therefore  JiJfJf^'""

Of  course  we  have  also

Those  results  may  be  put  iu  words  tlius  : — The  relative  velocity
of  cither  of  the  bodies,  with  regard  to  the  centre  of  inertia  of
the  two  is,  after  the  completion  of  the  imjpacty  reversed  ia
directum,  and  diminished  in  the  ratio  6:1.

301. Hence  the  loss  of  kinetic  energy,  being,  according  to
§§  267,  280,  due  only  to  change  of  kinetic  energj^  relative  to
the  centre  of  inertia;,  is  to  this  part  of  the  whole  as  1  —  6^ :  1.
Ihua

Ini^  krnetio  energy  =  }  (ir+ Jf)  v^-i-^Jf  (F- 4-  iM'  («-  r)\

Loss  =Hl-e'){M(V-vy  +  Jt{v'*Vy\.

808.  When  two  elastic  bodies,  the  two  balls  supposed  above  Distriba-
for  instance,  impinge,  some  portion  of  their  previous  kinetic

energy  will  always  remain  in  them  as  vibrations.  A  porHon
of  the  loss  of  energy  (miscalled  the  effect  of  imperfect  elas-
ticity) is  necessarily  due  to  this  cause  in  every  real  case.

Later,  in  our  chapter  on  Properties  of  flatter,  it  will  bo
shown  as  a  result  of  experiment,  that  forces  of  elasticity  are,
to  a  veiy  close  degree  of  accuracy,  simply  propprtional  to  the
strains  (§  154;),  within  the  limits  of  elasticity,  in  elastic  solids
which,  hke  metals,  glass,  etc,  bear  but  small  deformations  with-
out permanent  change^  Hence  when  two  such  bodies  come
into  collision,  sometimes  with  greater  and  sometimes  with  less
mutual  velodtj,  but  with  all  other  oizoumstances  simihur,  the
velocities  of  all  partides  of  either  body,  at  ooneflponding  times
of  the  impacts,  will  be  always  in  the  same  proportion.  Hence
the  velocity  of  sepaxation  of  the  centres  of  inertia  after  impact  ^^^Jli.
will  bear  a  constant  proportion  to  the  previous  velocity  of^j^"^"^^^
approach ;  which  agrees  with  the  Newtonian  Law.  It  is  there-  JJJJ^ty.
fure  probable  that  a  very  scusiblo  portion,  if  not  the  whole,  of
the  loss  of  energy  in  the  visible  motions  of  two  elastic  bodies,
after  impact,  experimented  on  by  Newton,  may  have  been  due

Digitized  by  Google

280  PREL1MINA&T.  [302

Diftribu- to  vibrations;  but  unless  some  otber  cause  also  was  largely
ejrierKy^aftw  tiperative,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  loss  was  so  much  greater
with  iron  balls  than  with  glass.

803. In  oertain  definitd  eztreme  cases,  imaginable  altihoiigh

not  realizable,  no  energy  will  be  spent  in  vibrations,  and  the
two  bodies  will  separate,  each  moving  simply  as  a  rigid  body,
and  having  in  this  simple  motion  the  whole  energy  of  work
done  on  it  by  elastic  force  during  the  collision.  For  instance,
let  the  two  bodies  be  cylinders,  or  prismatic  bars  with  flat  ends,
of  the  same  kind  of  substance,  and  of  equal  and  similar  trans-
yerse  sections;  and  let  this  substance  have  the  property  of
compressibility  with  perfect  elasticity,  in  the  direction  of  the
length  of  the  bar,  and  of  absolute  resistance  to  change  in  every
transverse  dimension.  Before  impact^  let  the  two  bodies  be
placed  with  their  lengths  in  one  line,  and  their  transverse  sec-
tions (if  not  circular)  similarly  situated,  and  let  one  or  both  be
set  in  motion  in  this  line.  The  result,  as  regards  the  motions
of  the  two  bodies  after  the  coUision,  will  be  sensibly  the
same  if  they  are  of  any  real  ordinaiy  elastic  solid  matenal,
provided  the  greatest  transverse  diameter  of  each  is  very  small
in  comparison  with  its  length.  Then,  if  the  k  ngths  of  the  two
be  equal,  they  will  separate  after  impact  with  the  same  relative
velocity  as  that  with  which  they  approached,  and  neither  will
retain  any  vibratory  motion  after  the  end  of  the  collision,

304.  If  the  two  bars  arc  of  unequal  length,  the  shorter  will,
after  the  impact,  be  exactly  in  the  same  state  as  if  it  had
struck  another  of  its  own  length,  and  it  therefore  will  move  as
a  rigid  body  after  the  collision.  But  the  other  will,  along  with
a  motion  of  its  centre  of  gravity,  calculable  from  the  principle
that  its  whole  momentum  must  (§  267)  be  changed  by  an
amount  equal  exactly  to  the  momentum  gained  or  lost  by  the
'  first,  have  also  a  vibratory  motion,  of  which  the  whole  kinetic
and  potential  energy  will  make  up  the  deficiency  of  energy
which  we  shall  presently  calculate  in  the  motions  of  the  centres
of  inertia.  For  simplicity,  let  the  longer  body  be  supposed  to
be  at  rest  before  the  collision.  Then  the  shorter  on  striking  it
will  be  left  at  rest ;  this  being  cleaily  the  result  in  the  case  of

Digitized  by  Google

804]  DTNAUICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  281

e  =  1  in  the  preceding  formuljB  (§  300)  applied  to  the  impact  Jlj^jjjjjbn-
of  one  body  striking  another  of  equal  mass  previously  at  rest  fJ^gS*^
The  longer  bar  will  move  away  with  the  same  momentum,  and
therefore  with  less  velocity  of  its  centre  of  inertia,  and  less
kinetic  energy  of  this  motion,  than  the  other  body  had  before
impact,  in  the  ratio  of  the  smaller  to  the  greater  n^ass.  It  will
also  have  a  yery  remarkable  vibratory  motion,  which,  when  its
lengtb  is  more  than  double  of  that  the  other,  will  consist  of
a  wave  running  backwards  and  forwards  through  its  length,  and
causing  the  motion  of  its  ends,  and,  in  fact*  of  every  particle  of
it,  to  take  place  by  **  fits  and  starts,"  not  continuously.  The
full  analysis  of  these  circumstances^  though  very  simple,  must
be  reserved  until  we  are  especially  occupied  with  waves,  aud
the  kinetics  of  eLustic  solids.  It  is  sufficient  at  present  to
remark,  that  the  motions  of  the  ceutres  of  inertia  of  the  two
bodies  after  impact,  whatever  they  may  have  been  previously,
are  given  by  the  preceding  formuhs  with  for  e  the  value

spectively.

305.  The  mathematical  theory  of  the  vibrations  of  solid  elastic
spiiert'S  has  not  yet  been  worked  out;  and  its  application  to
the  case  of  tlie  vibrations  produced  by  impact  presents  con-  ■
siderable  difficulty.  Experiment,  however,  renders  it  certain,
that  but  a  small  part  of  the  whole  kinetic  energy  of  the  pre-
vious motions  can  remain  in  the  form  of  vibrations  after  the
impact  of  two  equal  spheres  of  glass  or  of  ivory.  This  is
proved,  for  instance,  by  the  common  observation,  that  one  of
them  remains  nearly  motionless  after  striking  the  other  pre-
viously at  rest;  since,  the  velocity  of  the  common  centre  of
inertia  of  the  two  being  necessarily  unchanged  by  the  impact,
we  infer  that  the  second  ball  acquires  a  velocily  nearly  equal
to  that  which  the  first  had  before  striking  it.  But  it  is  to  be
expected  that  unequal  balls  of  the  same  substance  coniing  into
collision  will,  by  impact,  convert  a  very  sensible  proportion  of
the  kinetic  energy  of  their  previuus  motions  into  energy  of
vibrations;  ami  generally,  that  the  same  will  be  the  case  when
equal  or  unequal  masses  of  different  substances  come  into  coUi-

Digitized  by  Google

282  PBEUMINAEY.  [305.

Sfltoof^'  sion;  although  for  one  particular  proportion  of  their  diameters,
depending  on  their  densities  and  elastic  qualities,  this  effect  will
be  a  minimum,  and  possibly  not  much  more  sciisil)]e  tban  it  is
when  the  substances  are  the  same  and  the  diameters  equal

306.  It  need  scarcely  be  said  that  in  such  cases  of  impact
as  tliat  of  the  tongue  of  a  bell,  or  of  a  clock-hammer  striking
its  bell  (or  spiral  spring  as  in  the  American  clocks),  or  of  piano-
forte hammers  striking  the  strings,  or  of  a  drum  struck  with  the
proper  implement,  a  large  part  of  the  kinetic  eneigy  of  the
blow  is  spent  in  generating  vibrations.

•n  impact

Momentof  307.  The  Moment  of  an  impact  about  any  axis  is  derived
from  the  line  and  amount  of  the  impact  in  the  same  way  as  the
moment  of  a  velocity  or  force  is  determined  from  the  line  and
amount  of  the  Telocity  or  force,  §§  235,  236.  If  a  body  is
struck,  the  change  of  its  moment  of  momentum  about  any  axis
is  equal  to  the  moment  <^  the  impact  round  that  axis.  But,
without  coneddering  the  measure  of  the  impact^  we  see  ^  267)
that  the  moment  of  momentum  round  any  axis,  lost  by  one
body  in  striking  another,  is,  as  in  eveiy  ease  of  mutual  -action,
equal  to  that  gained  by  the  other.

Thus,  to  recur  to  the  ballLstic  pendulum — the  line  of  motion
of  the  ljullet  at  impact  may  Le  in  any  direction  whatever,  hut  the
only  part  which  is  effective  is  the  component  in  a  plane  perpen-
dicular to  the  axis.  We  may  thercforc,  for  8imj)licity,  consider
the  motion  to  he  in  a  line  iieq>CTKUcular  to  the  axis,  though  not
necessarily  horizontal.  Let  7n  be  the  mass  of  the  Vjidlet,  v  its
velocity,  and  p  the  distance  of  its  lino  of  motion  from  the  axis.
Let  M  be  the  mass  of  the  jjendulura  with  the  bullet  lodged  in  it,
and  k  its  radiu.s  of  gyration.  Tlien  if  tn  be  the  ^^g'dft'*  velocity
of  the  pendulum  when  the  impact  is  complete,

from  which  tlie  solution  of  the  question  is  easily  determined.

For  the  Idnetio  eneigy  affcer  impaot  is  changed  ({  241)  into
its  equivale&t  in  potential  eneigy  when  the  pendulom  reaoheB  its
position  of  greatest  deflection.  Let  this  be  ^ven  by  the  angle
0 :  then  the  height  to  which  the  centre  of  inertia  is  raised  is
A  (1- cos  0)  if  A  be  its  distance  from  the  aids.  Thus

Digitized  by  Google

J807.]  DTNAHIGA£  LAWS  AXD  FBINCIPLEB.  288

BiUutio

an  expression  for  the  choid  d  the  angle  of  deflection.  In
practice  the  chord  of  th^  an^^e  0  is  measored  by  means  of  a
light  tape  or  cord  attached  to  a  point  of  the  pendalum,  and
dipinng  with  small  friction  through  a  dip  fixed  doae  to  the  posi-
tion oooupifid  by  that  point  when  the  pendulum  hangs  at  rest.

308.  Wo7'k  done  hy  an  impact  is,  m  general,  the  product  of  J?'^*"**
the  impact  into  half  the  sum  of  the  initial  and  final  velocities
of  the  point  at  which  it  is  applied,  resolved  in  the  direction  of
the  impact.  In  the  case  of  direct  impact,  such  as  tlmt  treated
in  §  oOO,  the  initial  kinetic  energy  of  the  body  is  ^MV^,  the
final  ^MU\  and  therefore  the  gain,  by  the  impact^  is

or,  which  is  the  same.

Bat  M{U^  F)  u  (§  2^^)  equal  to  the  amount  of  the  impact
Hence  the  propodtion:  the  eztendon  of  whidi  to  the  most
general  drcQmstances  is  easily  seen.

Let  i  be  the  amount  of  the  impulse  up  to  time  r,  and  /  the
whole  amount,  up  to  the  end,  T, Thus, —

Whatever  m.iy  he  tlio  conditionH  to  which  the  body  struck  is
subjected,  the  clKint^o  of  velocity  in  the  jwiiit  struck  is  ])ropor-
tional  to  the  amount  of  the  imjnilse  up  to  any  part  of  its  whole
time,  so  that,  if  01  be  a  constant  th  jufuding  on  the  masses  and
conditions  of  consti-aint  involved,  and  if  U,  v,  V  denote  the  com-
ponent velocities  of  the  point  struck,  in  the  direction  of  tlio
impulse,  at  the  begimuiig,  at  the  time  t,  and  at  the  end,  re-
spectively, we  iiave

Hence,  for  the  rate  of  the  doing  of  work  by  the  force  at  the
instant  t,  we  have

Digitized  by  Google

284  PBELDOKABT.  [908.

Work  done Hflooe  fiw  the  whoIe  work  ( IF)  done  b/ it

309.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  if  any  number  of  impacts
l>e  applied  to  a  body,  their  whole  effect  will  be  the  same  whether
they  be  applied  together  or  successively  (provided  that  the
whole  time  occupied  by  them  be  infinitely  short),  although
the  work  done  by  each  particular  impact  is  in  general  different
nccording  to  the  order  in  which  the  several  impacts  arc  applied.
The  whole  amount  of  work  is  the  sum  of  the  products  obtained
"by  multipljring  each  impact  by  half  the  sum  of  the  components
of  the  initial  and  final  velocitiea  of  the  point  to  which  it  is
applied.

EQuntions  310.  The  cffect  of  any  stated  impulses,  applied  to  a  rigid
moikn.  body,  or  to  a  system  of  material  puiuts  or  rigid  bodies  con-
nected in  any  way,  is  to  be  found  most  readily  by  the  aid  of
D'Alembert*8  principle;  according  to  which  the  given  impulses^
and  the  impnkive  reaction  against  the  generation  of  motion,
measured  in  amount  by  the  momenta  generated,  are  in  equi-
librium; and  are  therefore  to  be  dealt  with  mathematically  by
applying  to  them  the  equations  of  equilibrium  of  the  system.

liCt  P,,  A*,  be  the  com})onent  impulses  on  the  fii"st  pru-ticle,
7»,,  and  let  af,,  y, ,  2,  be  the  coniponents  of  the  velocity  in-
Rtantiineoiisly  aajuired  by  tliLs  particle.  C'ovnjionent  forces  oqiiaj
to  (P, -7«j.c,),  -w^y,),  ...  must  eq^uilibmte  the  system,
and  therefore  we  have  (§  290)

S  {(F-mit)  ix+  (Q  -  si»3^>  ^-f  (M-mi)  &}  »  0  (a)

where  Bx^,  ...  denote  tiie  eomponentt  of  any  infinitely  small
displacements  of  the  particles  possible  under  the  conditions  of
the  system.  Or,  whicih  amoimts  to  the  same  thing,  since  any
jiossible  infinitely  small  displaoements  are  aunply  proportional  to
auy  possible  velocities  in  the  same  direotiotis,

^{(P-mx)u  +  (g-m^)v  +  (Q-mz)io}=^0  (t)

.  J  i^ud  by  Google

810.]  DTNAKICAL  ULWS  AJXD  FBINCIFtES.  285

where  «, ,  v, ,  denote  any  pofldble  oomponent  -relodtieB  of  ihe  ^^/^^'J^^f^
first  particle,  etoii  noUoo.

One  partieiilar  earn  of  tins  equation  is  of  caoise  liad  bj  suppoo^
ing  t«j,  V,,  ...  to' be  equal  to  the  Tolodtiea  i^,  ...  actoally
a49qiiirad ;  and,  by  halvm^  ete.,  we  find

Tbis  agrees  with  §  308  above.

311. Eulur  discovered  that  the  kinetic  energy  acquired  from  Theoremof
rest  by  a  rigid  body  in  virtue  of  an  impulse  fulfils  a  maximum-  temiedbj
minimum  condition. Lagrange*  extended  this  proposition  to
n  system  of  bodies  connected  bv  an v  invariable  kinematic  re- Equation  ot

".  .  •  ' " T\  1  impulsive

lations,  and  struck  with  any  impulses.  Delaunay  found  that  ^ootioa,
it  is  really  always  a  maximum  when  tlie  impulses  are  giveitf
and  when  different  motions  possible  under  the  conditions  of
the  system,  and  fulfilling  the  la/w  of  energy  [§  310  (c)],  are
considered.  Farther,  Bertmnd  shows  that  tiie  energy  actually
aoquired  is  not  merely  a^maximom,"  but  exceeds  the  eneigy
of  any  other  motioB  fblfllting  these  conditioDs;  and  that  the
amount  of  the  excess  is  equal  to  the  energy  of  ihe  motion  which
must  be  compounded  with  either  to  produce  the  other.

Let  aCj',  y,' ...  be  the  comj>onent  velocities  of  any  motion  what-
CYer  fulfilling  the  equation  (c),  which  becomes

!£,  then,  we  take = y/- =  '^i* >  we  have

r -  T  =  i'Xm  {{2x  +  u)  u  +  (2^+  v)v  +  (2z  +  to)w}

=  2i»  (jptt  +  y» +iu>)  +  JSni  (u'  +  v'  +  to")  (e).

But,  by  (b),

^^{tbii  +  ^-^zufi^^XiFu+Qv+Bw),.,..  (/);

and,  by  («)  and  {d^

l,(Pu+Qv  +  Rw)  =  21^  -  %T  is).

Hence  («)  becomes

whence  T  -  J"  «  J  Sai  (u* to^  (A),

is  Bertrand's  resnlti

MieoMiq^e  iiaolyligatf,  2^  pattia,  8"^  Motion,  8  87.

Digitized  by  Google

286  PRBUHINABT.  [312.

Liquid  set  812.  The  cuergy  of  the  motion  generated  suddenly  in  a
iimNiMvetr.  moBB  of  incompressible  liquid  given  at  rest  completely  filling
a  Tessel  of  any  shape,  -when  the  vessel  is  suddenly  set  in
motion,  or  when  it  is  suddenly  bent  out  of  shape  in  any  way
whatever,  sabject  to  the  condition  of  not  changing  its  volamei,
is  less  than  the  energy  ef  m!$  other  motion  it  eon  have  with  the
same  motion  of  its  bounding  eurfaoe.  The  consideration  of  this
theorem,  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  was  first  published  in
the  Oamhridge  and  DuMin  MixAemaitiedl  Journal  [Feb.  1849],
has  led  us  to  a  general  minimum  property  regarding  motion
acquired  by  any  system  when  any  prescribed  velocities  are
generated  suddenly  in  any  of  its  parts;  announced  in  tho
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  for  April,  18G3.
It  is,  that  provided  impulsive  iorces  are  applied  to  the  system
only  at  places  where  the  velocities  to  be  produced  arc  pre-
scribed, the  kinetic  energy  is  less  in  the  actual  motion  than  in
any  other  motion  which  the  system  can  take,  and  which  has
the  same  values  for  the  prescribed  velocities.  The  excess  of
the  energy  of  any  possible  motion  above  that  of  the  actual
motion  is  (as  in  Bertrand*8  theorem)  equal  to  the  energy  of  the
motion  which  must  be  compounded  with  either  to  produce  the
other.  The  proof  is  easy: — here  it  is : —

Equations  ((/),  (e),  and  (/)  hold  as  in  §  (311).  But  now  each
velocity  component,  w,,  v^,  to,,  w^,  etc.  vanibhos  for  which  the
coiiq)Oiient  impulse  7*^,  Q^,  /i,,  7*^,  etc.  does  not  vanish  (because
ae, +  w, ,  yi  +  ^'i*  fulfil  the  prescribed  velocity  coiiditious).

Hence  every  ])roduct  Q^v^  etc.  vanishes. Hence  now

instead  of  (^)  and  {/<)  wc  have

2,{stu  +  ^+zw)^0  (g%

and  2^-ff'=JSi»(u*+«^+w*)  {hy

We  return  to  the  subjuct  in  §§  31G,  317  as  an  illustration  of
the  use  of  Lagrange's  generalized  co-ordinates;  to  the  introduc-
tion of  ^%'liich  into  Dyoamics  we  now  proceed.

Impulsive 313. The  method  of  generalized co-ordinates  explained
ESS'to**  above  (§  204)  is  extremely  useful  in  its  application  to  the
dynamics  of  a  system;  whether  for  expressing  and  working
out  the  details  of  any  particular  case  in  whid^  there  is  any

Digitized  by  Google

813.]  DTKAMIGAL  LAWS  AMD  f^CIPLES.  287

finite  number  of  dci^recs  of  freedom,  or  for  proving  general  impuisiro
principles  applicable  even  to  caseSi  such  as  that  of  a  liquid,  as
described  in  the  preoediiig  section,  in  which  there  may  be  an  gggit.
infinite  number  of  degrees  of  freedom.  It  leads  us  to  generalize
the  meaeure  of  inertia,  and  the  resolution  and  composition  of
forces,  impulses,  and  momenta^  on  dynamical  principles  corre-
sponding with  the  kinematical  principles  explained  in  §  204,
which  gave  us  generalized  component  yelodties:  and,  as  we
shall  see  later,  the  generalized  equations  of  continuous  motion
are  not  only  very  convenient  for  the  solution  of  problems,  but
most  insti'uctive  as  to  the  nature  of  relations,  however  compli-
cated, between  the  motiuiis  of  different  parts  of  a  system.  In
the  meantime  we  shall  consider  the  generalized  expressions  for
the  impulsive  generation  of  motion.  We  have  seen  above
(§  308)  that  the  kinetic  energy  acquired  by  a  system  given  at
rest  and  struck  with  any  given  impulses,  is  equal  to  half  the
sum  of  the  products  of  the  component  forces  multiplied  each
into  the  corresponding  component  of  the  velocity  acquired  by
its  point  of  application,  when  the  ordinaiy  system  of  rectangular
co-ordinates  is  used.  Precisely  the  same  statement  holds  on
the  generalized  system,  and  if  stated  as  the  convention  agreed
upon,  it  suffices  to  define  the  generalized  components  of  im-  Gsmniind
pulse,  those  of  velocity  having  been  fixed  on  kinematical  StSSpSn"
principles  (§  204).  Qeneralized  components  of  momentum  **
of  any  specified  motion  are,  of  course,  equal  to  the  generalized
components  of  the  impulse  by  which  it  could  be  generated  from
rcat.

(a)  Let  i//,  <f>,  6,  ...he  the  goncralizod  co-ordi  nates  of  a  material
system  at  any  time;  and  kt  ij/,  (j>,  6j  ...  ho  the  coirehpoiidijig
generalized  velocity-compoiieiits,  that  is  to  say,  tlie  rates  at
"which  iji,  (/>,  9,  ...  inerciusc  ])er  unit  of  time,  at  any  instant,  in
the  actual  motion.  If  x^,  y^,  denote  the  common  i-ectangular
co-ordLnatcs  of  one  ])articlu  of  the  system,  and  ic^,  y,,  i,  itu  com-
ponent velocities,  we  have

dx,  . dr.  .

etc.  etc

.(1).

Digitized  by  Google

288

PBELIMINABT.

Mprt'ssioii
for  kiii«Uo

Ctanemliied

c»mpo-
iieuta  of

Hence  the  kiiu  tic  energy,  which  is  2.^,m + +  i^),  in  tennii
of  rectangular  co-onlinutc.s,  become^!  a  quadratic  fuiictiou  of
ij.',  (jij  etc,  when  express* « I  in  terms  of  generalized  co-ordiaateSy
BO  that  if  we  denote  it  by  T  we  have

^=  i ^)4'  +  (4h  4»H'  + ...  ^  2 ^)  W  +  „.}  (2),

where  denote  fariooB  fanctiiona  of  tha

ocMvdiBtttei^  detennmable  aooording  to  the  tx>iiditioii8  of  the
aystem.  The  only  oonditioii  essentially  fulMed  hgr  these  eo-
effidenti  is,  that  they  must  give  *  finite  positiTa  Tslae  to  T  for
all  valaes  of  the  variables.

(6)  Agam  let  (X^,  £^  {X,,  ^tt^X  doioto  component
fecoes  on  the  paitides  y^,  z^),  {x^,  y.,  etc^  xeapectively  ;
and  let  ty^,  etc,  denote  the  oomponenta  of  any  in-
finitdy  small  notiooa  possiUe  withonthiealdng  theoonditioBaof
the  system.  The  work  done  l^y  those  faion,  qjpon  the  system
whsa  so  dispilaoed,  will  be

2(A'Sx+  rSy  +  ^&s)  (3).

To  transform  this  into  an  ezpression  in  terms  of  generalised  oo-
ordi  nates,  we  have

^ dct  fix.

+  ^-S^4.eta

eto.

eta

and  it  beoonnsB

«8f  •i-«8^.|-ete.

.(5),

where

.(6).

eta  eta

These  quantities,  ^,  etc.,  are  d^ly  ike  generalized  conv-
poneiUt  qf  tJis/orce  on  t/te  Bittern,

Let  %  ^,  ete.  denote  oomponent  irnpohm^  geneialiaed  on  the
same  prineiple;  that  Is  to  say,  let

t=JV<tt,  ^=JW,  etc.

Digitized  by  Googlei

313.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AKD  PRINCIPLES.  289

-^vliere  ...  denote  generalized  components  of  the  continuous

force  actbig  at  any  instant  of  the  infinitely  ahort  time  r,  within
wluch  the  impuke  is  completed.

If  this  impdae  is  applied  to  the  system,  prerioiulj  in  motion  ^^^^^^^J^^^
in  tliA  manner  ipediied  aboye^  and  if  8^,  8^  ...  denote  the  re-  or  mouon^
enlttng  angmentationB  of  the  oomponentB  of  Telod^,  the  means  ge^n^aad
of  the  component  Telodties  before  and  after  the  impnlse  will  be

i^+|8^,  ^  +

Hence,  according  to  tlie  general  principle  explained  aboro  for
calculating  the  work  done  by  an  impulse^  the  whole  work  done
in  thie  case  is

t(^+i8^)+*(*  +  i^)  +  etc

To  avoid  nnneceasaiy  complications,  let  ns  sappose  3^,  B^,  etc.,
to  be  each  infinitelj  small.  The  preoeding  expression  for  the
work  done  becomes

^^4>«^4-eto.;

and,  as  the  eflfeot  produced  hy  this  work  is  augmentation  of
kinetic  energy  iioui  2'  to  T  -t-  87',  we  must  have

STs^^-i-^^+eto.

"Sow  let  the  impnlses  be  such  as  to  angment  ifto^+t^,  and  to
leave  the  other  component  Telocities  unchanged.  We  shall  have

dT

t^+#^+eta=^8^.

dT

Dividiog  both  members  by  8^,  and  obserring  that  -7-.  is  a  linear

. .  "if  4f

function  of  ^,  <j>f  etc.,  we  see  that ,  --  .  etc.,  mnst  be  eq[iial

.  (IT

to  the  coeflicieiitii  ot"  i^, ...  respectively  in  —  .

(c)  From  this  we  see,  further,  that  the  impulse  reqtiired  to  pro-
duce the  component  velocity  if/  from  rest,  or  to  generate  it  in
the  Rystem  moving  with  any  other  possible  Telocity,  has  for  its

conj|x»ucuta  .

Iff)  ^, ^) {iff,  0)  ^,  etc.

Hence  we  conclude  tliat  to  generate  the  whole  resultant  velocity
(i^,  ...)  from  rest,  requires  an  impulse,  of  wliich  the  com-
jiyneuts,  if  denoted  by  ^,  iy,  ^  ... ,  are  expressed  as  follows  : —

VOL.  L  19

Digitized  by  Google

290

PREUMINAKT.

[313.

Vomflnta

KjrM»tio
menry  in
t«'rm'<  of
momentunill
Mid  vvloei-

in  terms  of

tooni«)n»

inmt.

1? - «A  +  (4*,  4>)ci>  +  {0, 4>)e  + ...
i={i,6)ip  +  {ii,  e)<i,  +  {e,  0)6+..,

etc

where  it  must  V>e  remrmhcred  tli.it,  a^^  soph  in  the  original  ex-
prossion  for  T,  from  whifh  they  are  (i»'riv»'<l,  (,^,  i^)  means  the
SHine  tliiiitj  MM  (i,'',  (/)\  and  so  on.  The  prrrfdiuj^'  PX-prt'5vsions  are
tho  ditiVroiitial  coefficients  of  T  with  reference  to  the  velocities;
that  is  to  B&j,

,  fJT  dT  ^  fir
^^df'  =  di'  ^^d4

(d)  Hie  Mopnd  iiMimbeni  of  these  eqimtioiui  being  linear  fVmo-
iionsof  ^,  may,  by  oidinaiy  elimination,  find  \p,  etc.,

in  terms  of  ^,  iff  etc.,  and  the  expressions  so  obtained  are  of
coarse  linesr  functions  of  the  last-named  elements.  And,  sinee
r  is  a  quadratio  Amotion  of <^  etc.,  we  haTo

2T=^$4f  +  Ti4>-^i&  +  etc  (9).

From  this,  on  the  supposition  that  T,  ^  ...  are  exparessed  in
terms  of  ^, we  hare  bj  diffarentiation

Now  the  algebraic  process  by  wliich  ^,  etc.,  are  obtaincyl  in
tenns  of  ^,  17,  etc.,  shows  that,  inasmuch  as  the  coefficient  of  ^  in
the  expression,  (7),  for  ^,  is  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  in  the
expression  for  rj,  and  so  on ;  the  coefficient  of  1/  in  the
sion  for  ^  must  be  equal  to  the  ooeffioient  of  ^  in  the
for  ^  and  so  on ;  that  is  to  say,

d^  dil^^dO

Hence  the  preceding  expression  becomes
^dT . .f/ii* dtl  ^dd>

d$

di^'^dn  ^di

and  therefore

Similarly

.  dT
^=^-,etc

1
■J

(10).

Digitized  by  Google

inomt'ii-
tuma.

313.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLED.  291

Thfise  ezTOeaaimiB  solve  the  direct  Tnoblem, — ^to  find  the  yelo-  veiooitiM

in  u-rtuM  .(I

tity  produced  hy  a  given  impnke  {i,  17, ...),  when  we  have  the
kinetic  ^Ba»gy,  T,  expreeaed  as  a  qnadiatic  function  of  the  com-
ponents of  the  impulse.

(e)  If  we  consider  the  motion  rimplr,  without  reference  to  the
impulse  required  to  generate  it  from  rest^  or  to  stop  it,  the  quanti-
ties it  Tjt ...  are  clearly  to  be  regarded  as  the  components  of  the
momentum  of  the  motion,  according  to  the  Bystem  of  generalised
oo^wdinates.

(y*)  Tlie  following  algebraic  relation  will  l>e  useful : —  RwtpnMal
. , , f «.  •  rclaliMl
+  f + +  etc  « +  m  +  {tf.  +  etc  (11),  between

where^  itih^t^  etc.,  having  ib»  same  signification  as  before,
i,f  %t  t,t  etc,  denote  the  impulse-components  corresponding  to
anj  other  values,  4*9  eta,  of  the  velocit7<«omponents.  It
is  proved  by  observing  that  each  member  of  the  equation  becomes
a  qrmmetrical  function  of  ^,  ^  etc. ;  when  for  eta,
their  values  in  terms  of  etc,  and  for  |,  if,  etc,  their  values
in  tenns  of  ^,  ^  etc,  are  substituted.

314. A  material  Pvstem  of  any  kind,  given  at  rest,  and

Kiibieoted  to  an  impulse  in  anv  specined  direction,  and  ot  any  "fK^nerai-

•  1  V '  ,1  ^  wod  co-

given  raagaitude,  moves  oft  so  aa  to  take  the  greatest  amount  ordi''ftt<»<i^^

of  kinetic  energy  wbich  the  specified  impulse  can  give  it,

mibject  to  §  308  or  §  309  (c).

Let  ij,  ...  be  the  components  of  the  given  impulse,  and
^,  ^  ...  the  components  of  the  actual  motton  produced  by  it,
which  are  determined  by  the  equations  (10)  above.  Now  let  us
suppose  the  B^stem  be  guided,  by  means  of  merely  dueotive
constraint,  to  take,  fipom  rest^  under  the  influence  of  the  given
impulse,  some  motion  (^,,  4««  *••)  cUfferent  from  the  actual
motion;  and  let  ...  be  ^e  Impulse  which,  with  this  con-
straint removed,  would  prodiuse  the  motion  (^^,  ...).  We
shall  have^  for  this  case,  as  above,

But  $  -  ^,  -q  —y}...  are  the  cr)mj>on('iit3  of  the  impulse  ex-
perienced m  virtue  of  the  constraint  we  have  supposed  introduced.
They  neither  perform  nor  consume  work  on  tlio  sy.stem  when
moving  as  directed  by  this  constraint ;  that  ia  to  say,

(t-  ^)  1^.+ -  'j) +  (C  -  0 +  etc,  -  0  (12);

19—2

Digitized  by  Google

292

PBEEJMINA&T.

Application
of  reneral'
ilea  co-
ordinates to
UMoremtof
•  til.

Theorems
of  §311  ill
terms  of
geoenliaad
oo-ordi<

Problems
whou  data
involve  im-
pulaea  and
▼elooities.

and  therefore

2^,  =  ^^,  +  '?^.  +  ^^,  +  et<s. (13).

Hence  wc  have

2  ( r  - =.  ^  - + ( ^  -  ^ J + et^.

But,  by  (11)  and  (12)  above,  we  have

i  («A  - +  '7. -  ^>  e =  (^  -  i)  ^,  +  (»?  - +  ete.  -  0,
and  tiierefore  we  have  finally

tliat  is  to  say, exceeds by  tlie  amount  of  tlio  Idnetic  energy
that  would  be  generated  by  an  impnlse  {$ - 17  - 17,,  C  -
applied  simply  to  the  system,  which  is  essentially  positive.
In  other  words,

816b  If  the  system  is  guided  to  take,  under  the  action  of  a
given  impulse,  any  motion  (;^^,  •••)  diffetent  from  the  natural
motion  (4'> •••)>  hwe  less  kinetic  eneigy  than  that  of

the  natural  motion,  by  a  difference  equal  to  the  kinetic  eneigy
of  the  motion  (-^/^  -  ^f^, ,  <^  - , . .  .)•

Con.  If  a  set  of  material  points  are  struck  independently
])y  impulses  each  given  in  amount,  more  kinetic  energy  is
generatod  if  the  points  are  perfectly  free  to  move  each  in-
dependently of  all  the  others,  than  if  they  are  connected  in  any
way.  And  the  deficiency  of  energy  in  the  latter  case  is  equal
to  the  amount  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  motion  which
geometricaUy  compounded  with  the  motion  of  either  case  would
give  that  of  the  other.

(a)  Hitliprto  we  have  cither  supposed  the  motion  to  befully  given,
and  the  imj  ulscs  required  to  prmluce  tlieiu,  to  be  to  be  found  ;  or
the  iiiipuLst  s  to  ]»o  fs^Wovi  and  the  motions  proilueed  by  them  to  b«i
to  be  found.  A  not  loss  important  class  of  problem.s  is  presented
by  supposing  as  many  linear  equations  of  condition  between  the
impulses  and  eonq)onent.>s  of  motion  to  be  given  as  there  arc  de-
gix^es  of  freedom  of  the  system  to  move  (or  indepemlent  co-oixli-
nates).  These  equations,  and  as  many  more  supp]ic<l  by  (8)
or  their  equivalents  (10),  stifficc  for  the  complete  solution  of  the
problem,  to  detcrmiue  the  impulaos  and  tho  motion.

Digitized  by  Google

315.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  21)3

(6)  A  very  impoi-tant  cased  tliis  okas  is  presented  by  |inMni1>>  Piobiema
ing,  among  the  yelodtieB  alone,  a  number  of  linear  equations  ivUli  involve  im-
constant  tetmSy  and  supposing  the  impulses  to  be  so  directed  and  jriUS^
related  as  to  do  no  w<nrk  on  any  velocitieB  satisfying  another  pre-
scribed set  of  linear  equations  with  no  constant  terms ;  the  vhole
number  of  equations  of  course  being  equal  to  the  nimiber  of  inde-
pendent co-ordinates  of  the  system. The  equations  for  soh-ing
this  problem  need  not  be  written  down,  ns  they  are  obvious  j  but
the  following  reduction  is  useful,  as  affi>rding  the  easiest  proof  of
the  mimmum  property  stated  below.

(e)  The  given  equations  among  the  velocities  may  be  reduced
to  a  set^  each  homegeneousi  except  one  equation  with  a  constant
term.  Those  homogeneous  equations  diminish  the  number  of  de-
grees of  freedom;  and  we  may  transform  the  oo-ordinatee  so  as
to  have  the  number  of  independent  co-ordinates  diminished  ac-
cordingly. Farther,  we  may  choose  the  new  co-ordinates,  so
that  the  linear  function  of  tiie  velocities  in  the  single  equatioin
with  a  constant  term  may  be  one  of  the  new  velodty-oomponents;
and  the  linear  funetions  of  the  velocitieB  ap2>euring  in  the  equation
connected  with  the  prescribed  conditions  as  to  the  impulses  may
be  the  lemalning  velocity-oomponenta  Thus  the  impulse  wiU
fulfil  the  condition  of  doing  no  work  on  any  other  component
velocity  than  the  one  which  is  given,  and  the  general  problem—

816.  QiTen  any  material  qrstem  at  rest:  let  any  parts  of cN^^t'^i^
it  be  set  in  motion  suddenly  with  any  spedfied  Telodties,  pes-
rible  according  to  the  oondltioDS  of  the  system;  and  let  its

other  parts  be  influenced  only  by  its  connexions  with  those;

required  the  motion:

takes  tbe  following  very  simple  form  : — An  impultso  of  the  cha-
racter s|)Ocified  as  a  particular  com]>onent,  acconling  to  the
generalized  method  of  co-ordinates,  acts  on  a  mateiial  Hvstem  ;
its  amount  Ijeing  such  as  to  produce  a  given  velocity -component
of  the  corresponding  type. It  is  required  to  find  the  motion.

The  solution  of  course  is  to  be  found  from  the  equataons

^  =  A, ,  =  0, (15)

(which  are  the  special  equations  of  condition  of  the  problem)  and
the  general  kinetic  equations  (7),  or  (10).  Choosing  the  latter,
and  denoting  by  [(,  i],  [$, etc.,  the  coefficients  of  ^€'9  ^  eta,

Digitized  by  Google

204

PBEUMIHABT.

[316.

Qancml

nrobi^ni

Kitii'tir
energy  a
miiumiitn
in  Uua

in  T,  we  Lave

.(16)

for  the  resultb

TbiB  vemilt  possesses  the  ramurkable  property,  that  tho
kmetio  oieigjr  of  the  motion  oxjjressed  by  it  is  less  than  tliat  of
Any  other  motion  which  fulfils  the  pgrescribed  oonditiou  as  to
velocity.  For,  if  i^,  ij^,  C,*  etc.,  denote  the  impulses  required  to
produce  any  other  motion,  <^,,  etc,  and  tho  oorreepond-
ing  kinefcio  enei^gr,  we  have,  by  (9),

But  by  (11),

$^1},  + +  10  +  etc.  =
aince^  by  (15),  we  have  17  =  0,  ^sO,  etc.  Hence

Now  let  also  tliis  «!orond  case  (»^,  <j>^,...)  of  motion  fulfil  tho  pre-
scribed velot'ity-cuinliiiou  ij/^  =  .4. We  shall  have

6,  (i.  -  f^) + 1, -*)+<,(*,-«)  +  •••
-  ,  -  fK*  -4)*  (*  -  iX*.  -  *) + (C  - -  +  •  ••

aince  ^,-^-0, 17  =  0,  C=0,....  Henoe  if  ^  denote  the  kinetie
eneigy  of  the  differential  motion  (ip,-\if,  <j>,- <l>,...)  we  have

2T^2T+2Z  -(17);

but  is  essentially  positive  and  tberdbre  T^y  the  kinetie  eneigy
of  any  motion  fulfilling  the  prescribed  velocity-condition,  but
differing  from  the  actual  motion,  is  greater  than  T  the  kinetic
energy  of  the  actual  motion ;  and  the  ai^ount,  9,  <tf  the  differ*
ence  is  given  by  the  equatloii

or  in  words,

817.  The  solution  of  the  problem  is  this: — The  motion
actually  taken  by  the  system  is  the  motion  which  has  less
kinetic  eoeigy  than  any  other  fulfilling  the  prescribed  velocity-
oonditions.  And  the  excess  of  the  eneigy  of  any  other  such
motion,  above  that  of  the  actual  motion,  is  equal  to  the  energy
of  the  motion  which  must  be  compounded  with  either  to  pro-
duce the  other.

Digitized  by  Google

317.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  FRlNdFLES.  293

In  dealing  witk  oases  it  may  often  happen  that  the  use  of  the  Kinetic
oo-ordinftte  system  ixH|uired  for  the  applioation  of  the  solution  minimum
(16)  is  not  convenieut ;  but  in  all  cases,  even  in  suoh  as  jjj
examples  (2)  and  (3)  below,  which  involve  an  infinite  number
of  degrees  of  freedom,  the  minimnm  property  now  proved  affoids
an  easy  solution.

Example  (1).  Let  a  smooth  plane,  constrained  to  keep  moving  impact  of
with  a  given  normal  velocity,  qy  come  in  contact  with  a  iVeu  'riK"iT)iitno
iiiela.stic  rigid  body  at  rest :  to  find  the  motion  produced. The  ma!»8''on^a
velocity-condition  hei*e  is,  that  the  motion  shall  consist  of  any  brS/la**
motion  whatever  giving  to  the  |)oint  of  the  body  which  Ls  stnick
a  stated  velocity, perpeinliculur  tu  the  imjanging  jdiuie,  com-
pounded with  any  motion  whatever  giving  to  tlje  nanie  point
any  velocity  parallel  to  this  plane. To  express  this  ctuidition,  let
ii,  V,  w  1)6  rectiingular  corajwnent  linear  v  elocities  of  the  centre
of  giavity,  and  let p,  a  be  comjKinent  anguhir  velocities  round
axes  through  the  centre  of  gmvity  parallel  to  the  line  of  re-
ference. Thus,  if  X,  y,  z  denote  the  co-ordinatea  of  the  point
struck  relatively  to  these  sixes  through  the  centre  of  giavity,
and  if  /,  m,  it  be  the  direction  co.^incs  of  the  noruial  to  the  im-
pinging plane,  the  piescribcd  velocity-condiliou  becomes

(tt  +  />«  -  try)  /  +  (t>  +  ou;  —  wz)  m  +  (u;  + -  px)  »  =  —  q  (a),

the  negative  sign  being  placed  before  q  on  the  understanding
that  the  motion  of  the  impinging  plane  is  obliquelj,  if  not  directly,
towardi  the  centre  of  gravity,  when  ^  fiti  n  are  ea^  positive.

now,  WB  suppose  the  rectangular  axes  through  the  oentre  of
gravity  to  be  princapal  axes  of  the  body,  and  denote  by  Mf,  Mf^
Mk?  the  moments  of  inertia  round  them,  we  have

r-Jir(tt«+ti^  +  w* + ff'p* + A V)  ,  (6).

This  muHt  Ije  made  a  niiniuuiin  subject  to  the  equation  of  con-
dition {(i).  Hence,  by  the  ordinary  method  of  indeterminate
multipliei-s,

J/w  +  A/  =  0,  Mv  +  \in  -  0,  Mw  +  Xn  -  0  |
H^tjr X  {ny-vvz)  =  0,  Mi/'p+X{/z-)u:)  - 0,  Mh'<r+X{nhX-l>/)  -  OT^

Tliese  six  equations  give  each  of  them  explicitly  the  value  of  one
of  the  six  unknown  quantities  t/,  r,  p,  a,  in  terms  ci  X  and

data.  Using  the  values  thus  found  in  (a),  we  have  an  equation
to  determine  k;  and  thus  the  solution  is  completed.  The  first
three  of  equations  (c)  show  that  A,  which  has  entered  as  an

Digitized  by  Google

296  PBELIMINABY.  [317

indetenninftte  multiplier,  is  to  be  interpreted  as  tlifi  measure  of
the  amomtl  of  tlie  impulML

Sxampk  (2).  A  sUted  velocity  in  a  stated  diiection  ia  oomr
iSf^  mmiioated  impulsiyelj  to  eaeh  end  of  a  fleziUe  ineztensible  oosd
ntniAla  faanning  any  cnrvilineal  aio :  it  is  requixed  to  find  the  initial
^^"^  motion  of  the  whole  oord.

Let  x^y,  zhe  the  co-ordinates  of  any  point  P  in  it^  and  ^  £
the  oomponenta  of  the  required  initial  velocity.  Let  alao  #  be
the  length  from  one  end  to  the  point  F,

If  the  cord  -were  oxtonsiljlt',  the  rate  jkt  unit  of  time  of  the
stretching  per  unit  of  h  n^'th  which  it  would  experience  at  P,  in
virtue  of  the  motion >),  i,  would  be

dxdx dudij  (hJi
ds  d» da  ds  dsda'

Henoe^  as  the  oord  is  inextensible,  by  hypothesis,

Jx  dx  ^  djf  dff  ^  dzdz  ,y
da  da da  da da  da  * ^

Snljeet  to  this,  the  IdnematiGal  condition  of  the  ayitem,  and

whe&fsO,  y=i/

'  when  9-i,

I  denoting  the  length  of  the  cord,  and  (w,  v,  to),  («.',  r',  w  ),  the
components  of  the  given  velocities  at  its  two  ends :  it  is  required
to  find ^,  i  at  eyery  point,  so  as  to  make

'^i^{x'  +  y'-i-z')da  (6)

a  minimnnii  ^  denotiug  the  mass  of  the  string  per  unit  of  lengtii,
at  the  pdnt  P,  whidli  need  not  be  nnifenn  from  point  to  point;
and  of  oounM

d8^{da^'¥d^+di^^  (c).

Multiplying  (a)  by  X,  an  indeterminate  multiplier,  and  proceeding
as  usual  according  to  the  method  of  Taxiations,  we  have

in  whkli  we  may  regard  x,y,9  BB  known  fimotionB  cSs,  and  this
it  is  oonvenient  we  ahoold  make  independent  variable.  Lite*

Digitized  by  Googlgj

317.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWB  AND  PBINCIPLES.  297

grating  "by  pai-ts"  the  portion  of  the  first ntember  whidi contains
X,  and  attending  to  the  terminal  oonditions,  we  find,  aocording  to  hj  impuiae
the  regular  prooeas,  for  the  eqaatkuu  oontaining  the  solution  Mten»rbid

oord  or

These  three  equations  with  (a)  suffice  to  determine  the  four
unknown  quantities,  ^  j^,  i»  and  A.  Using  (d)  to  eliminate  sk,  y,  &
from  (a),  we  have

Taking  now  8  for  independent  variable^  and  performing  the
difierentiatioii  here  indicated,  with  attention  to  the  following
relations : —

dx  d'x  /d*x\*  ^

and  the  expression  (§  9)  for  p,  the  radius  ol  onrvature^  we  find

ft  ds' ds ds fip'  ^  '*

a  linear  diiferential  equation  of  the  second  order  to  determine
A,  when  ft  and  p  are  given  functions  of  «.

The  interpretation  of  (d)  is  very  obvious.  It  shows  that  X  is
the  impulsive  tension  at  the  point  P  of  the  string  ;  and  that  the
yelocitj  which  this  point  acquires  instantaneously  is  the  resultant

of  -^r  tangentiaL  and  —  towards  the  centre  of  ourrature.

The  differential  equation  {e)  therefore  shows  the  law  of  trans-
mission of  the  instantaneous  tension  along  the  strinrr,  and  proves
that  it  (lepf  nds  solely  on  the  mass  of  the  cord  j>er  unit  of  length
in  each  jmrt,  and  the  curvature  from  point  to  point,  but  not  at
all  on  the  plane  of  curvature,  of  the  initial  form.  Thus,  for
instance,  it  will  be  the  same  along  a  helix  as  along  a  circle  of
the  same  curTaturc

Digitized  by  Google

208

PRBLIMIHARY.

[317.

G*'npmtion

or  motmn
by  impuliM
in  uii  iti-

c"tH  or

With  reference  to  the  fulfillint,'  of  the  six  terminal  equations,
a  difficulty  occurs  ina.siuiu  li  as  J:,  t),  i  are  i  xpt  t  .ss«'il  by  (if)  iuime-
diately,  without  the  iiitrmluctiou  of  fresh  arliitrary  cnnhtants,
ill  terms  of  A,  which,  an  the  solution  of  a  (litri  rcntial  eqiiatiou  of
the  s«'coud  de«^ree,  involves  only  two  ai'hitniry  constants.  Thy
explanation  is,  that  at  any  point  of  the  cord,  at  any  iuht^int,  any
velocity  in  any  tlirection  jh  i  jk  n-lit-nlar  to  the  tiUi;;cni  may  Ik*
generated  without  at  all  alterin;.^  the  condition  of  the  cord  even
at  jx)iiits  intinitely  near  it.  This,  which  seems  clear  enough
without  jiroof,  may  be  demonstrated  analytically  by  transfornjing
the  kinematical  equation  (a)  thus.  Let  y* be  the  component  tan-
gential vehH  ity,  q  the  component  velocity  towards  tlit?  centre  of
cur\atui*e,  and  p  tho  conij>oiu'nt  velocity  perpendicular  to  th«-
osculatuig  plane.  Using  tlie  elementary  formulas  for  the  direc-
tion cosines  of  these  lines  (.^  li),  aud  remembeiing  that  •  is  now
iudepeudent  variable,  we  have

Subttitutiag  theie  in  (a)  and  rednoing^  we  find

<1
P

(/).

»  form  of  the  kinftmaticfJ  equa^n  of  a  flexible  line  yrluxh.  will
be  of  mucJi  use  to  us  latw.

We  see,  iheiefbie,  that  if  the  tangential  components  of  the  im-
preesed  terminal  veloeitifls  have  any  preicribed  values,  we  mtj
give  beeide8»  to  the  ends,  any  velocities  whatever  perpendicular
to  the  tangents,  without  altering  the  motbn  acquired  by  any  part
of  the  cord.  From  tins  it  is  dear  also^  that  the  directioai  of  the
terminal  impulses  are  necessarily  tangontial ;  or,  in  other  woids,
that  an  impulse  inclined  to  the  tangent  at  either  end,  would
generate  an  infinite  transverse  velocity.

To  express,  then,  the  terminal  conditions,  let  F  and  be  the
tangential  velocities  produced  at  the  enda»  which  we  suppose
known. We  have,  for  any  pointy  P,  as  seen  above  from  (ef ),

Digitized  by  Google

317.]  DTNAlflCAL  LAWS  AND  FIIINCIPLE&  299

and  henoe  when  G«^(>rBtioa

of  mot  ion

1  (f  \ \  by  iiuputee

"  in  an  In-

rxtcnsiblo
pord  or

and  when  #  =  ^  1  ^^=F'

which  Buffice  to  tletormine  tho  constants  of  integration  of  (d).
Or  if  the  data  are  tiio  tiiugeutial  impulses,  /,  required  at  the
eudji  to  produce  the  motion,  we  have

when  #=  0,  X=  /,)

Mid  when  §^1,  X^J'j

Or  if  either  end  be  free,  we  fawve  Xa 0  at  it^  and  any  prescribed
condition  as  to  impidse  applied,  or  Telocity  generated,  at  the
other  end.

The  solution  of  tliis  proljh'in  is  very  in t*^ roasting,  as  showing
how  rapidly  the  |>n)}m^'atioii  of  tlic  impulse  falls  otf  with  "change
of  tiirection"  along  the  l  ord.  The  reader  will  have  no  difficulty
in  iUustTHtiug  this  by  working  it  out  in  detail  for  the  case  of  a

cord  either  uniform  or  such  that  m  t-  iB  oonstanty  and  given  in

us

the  fonn  of  a  circle  or  helix.  When  /x  and  p  are  coJisUiiit,
for  imtaiice,  the  iniinilsive  ten.simi  decreases  in  the  i)roportion
of  1  to  <  per  space  along  the  curve  ci^ual  to  p.  'i'ne  results  have
cuiiuu.s,  and  dynamically  most  interesting,  bearings  ou  the  mo-
tions of  a  whip  liish,  and  of  the  roj>e  in  har|>oouii)g  a  whale.

Mxaunph  (3).  Let  a  mass  of  incompressible  liquid  be  given  at  Impiilnive
rest  completely  filling  a  dosed  vessel  of  any  shape  ;  and  let,  by  {>  .  r  r  .
•ttddenly  commencing  to  change  the  shape  of  this  vessel,  any
arbitrarily  prescribed  nonnal  vdooitiee  be  suddenly  produced  in
the  Uqnid  at  all  points  of  its  bounding  surface,  subject  to  the
condition  of  not  altering  the  volume :  It  is  required  to  find  the
instantaneous  velocity  of  any  interior  point  of  the  fluid.

Let  «  be  the  coH>rdinates  of  any  point  P  of  the  space
occupied  by  the  fluid,  and  let  «^  io  be  the  components  of  the
required  velocity  of  the  fluid  at  this  point  Then  p  being  the
density  of  the  fluid,  and  ///  denoting  int^giation  throughout  the
space  occupied  by  the  fluid,  we  have

r= ///  ip  (tt'  +  «•  +  !<;•)  dttdydz  (a),

Digitized  by  Google

300  1*RELIMIMABT.  [317.

iB^griire which,  subject  to  the  kinematical  condition  (§  193)^

abtolkuM.  du dv  dw

^  di'-dg'^di-^

most  be  the  least  poesible,  with  the  gtveia  nulnoe  Talnea  of  tlie
normal  component  Telocity. By  the  method  of  Ttam&m  we  have

///[K»3u.rf..«*,)*x(''£.'«%'2;?)}*«,^=0....(c^

Bat  integratiiig  by  parts  we  have

and  if  (  m,  f»  denote  the  direction  cosines  cm!  the  normal  at  any
point  of  the  smftce^  dS  an  element  o£  the  tnxiaod,  and  //  in-
tegration over  the  whole  surface,  we  have

/ J\  {hidydz  +  Bvdzdx  +  hiodxily)  =  / j\  {Ihii  -h  imv  +  iihw)  dS  =  0,

since  the  normal  component  of  the  velocity  is  given,  which
requires  that  /^u  +  mSt?  +  nSto  =  0.  Using  this  in  going  back
with  the  result  to  (c),  (cf),  and  equating  to  aero  the  coefllcieDts  of
H  h>, we  find

d\  d\  d\  ,  ^

f^'di'  f^-^'  i^^s

Theae^  naed  to  eliminate «v  to  from  (5),  give

d  n  d\\  ^  d  n  dk\^  d^n  d\\  ^  ^

dx  Vp  f^'^J dy  \p  dy) dz  \p J  ^

an  equation  for  the  deteimination  of  X,  whence  by  («)  the
solutioa  is  completed.

The  condition  to  be  fulfilled,  besides  the  kinematical  eqnatian
(6),  amounts  to  this  merely, — that  p(vdx+  wfy+wdz)  must  be
a  complete  differential  If  the  fluid  is  homogeneous,  p  is  con-
stant^ and  udK+vdy+wdz  must  be  a  complete  diiibential;  in
other  wdds,  the  motioii  suddenly  generated  must  be  of  the
"  non-rotational''  character  [$  190,  (t)]  throughout  the  fluid
The  equation  to  determine  X  becomes,  in  this  case^

d'k d'\ ^  ,  .

dP^^""^-^

Digitized  by  Googl(

317.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  801

From  tlio  hydrodynamical  principles  explained  later  it  will  img^nre
l^pear  that  X,  the  function  of  which  p  (ndx  +  vdy  4-  v^dz)  is  incompm-
ihe  differential,  ia  the  impulfliYe  pressure  at  the  point  {Xy  y,  z)
of  the  fluid.  Hence  we  may  infer  that  the  equation  (/),  witJi
the  condition  tliat  \  sliall  have  a  given  value  at  every  point
of  a  certain  cloaod  surface,  has  a  possible  and  a  determinate
solutioa  for  eveiy  point  within  that  sui-face.  This  is  preciselj
the  same  problem  as  the  determination  of  the  permanent  tempo-
itature  at  any  point  irithin  a  heterogeneous  solid  of  which  the
surfitoe  is  kept  permanently  with  any  non-unifonn  distribution
of  temperature  over  it,  (/)  being  Fourier's  equation  for  the
uniform  conduction  of  heat  through  a  solid  of  which  the  conduct-
ing power  at  the  point  {x,  y,  s)  is  ^ . The  possibility  and  the

determinateneas  of  this  problem  (with  an  exception  regarding
multiply  continuous  spaces,  to  be  fully  conHidered  in  Vol.  IL)
were  both  proved  above  [Chap.  i.  App.  A,  by  a  demonstra*
tion,  the  comparison  of  which  with  the  present  is  instructive^
The  other  case  of  superficial  condition — that  with  which  we
have  commenced  here — shows  that  the  equation  (/),  with

/^+Mi^  +  n^  given  arbitrarily  for  every  point  of  the  but-

fiuis^  has  also  (with  like  qoaliBcation  respecting  midtiply  con-
tinuous qpaoes)  a  possible  and  single  solution  for  the  whole
interior  space.  This,  as  we  shall  see  in  examining  the  mathe-
matical theory  of  magnetic  induction,  may  also  be  inferred  from
the  general  theorem  (e)  of  App.  A  above,  by  supposing  a  to  be
aero  for  all  points  without  the  given  suf&oe,  vdA  to  have  the

value  -  for  any  internal  point  {x,  z).
P

318.  The  equations  of  continued  motion  of  a  set  of  free  Uw^n|;r  <.^
pArtides  acted  on  by  any  forces,  or  of  a  system  connected  in  motion  i'n

»  V  ^  if  ^  ^ t€rnis  of

any  manner  and  acted  on  by  any  forces,  are  readily  obtained i  n,  /  d
in  terms  of  Lagrange*s  Qeneralixed  Co-ordinates  by  the  regular
and  direct  process  of  analytical  transformation,  from  the  or-
dinary forms  of  the  equations  of  motion  in  terms  of  Cartesian

(or  rectilineal  rectangular)  co-ordinates.  It  is  convenient  first
to  etiect  the  traiislbnnatiou  for  a  set  of  free  particles  act^d
on  by  any  forces.  The  case  of  any  system  with  invariable
connexions^  or  with  connexions  varied  in  a  given  manner,  is

Digitized  by  Google

302

PRELIMINAAr.

[318.

dir«ci  bjr
trmn*fcHriiNi-
tion  from
the  { qu»>
tionsof
motion  In
UroMor
Oftrtttdan
oo-ordi>

then  to  he  dealt  with  by  supposing  one  or  more  of  the  gene-
ral izod  co-ordinates  to  be  constnnt  :  or  to  be  given  functions
of  tlie  time.  Thus  the  gfrioralized  equations  of  motion  are
merely  those  for  the  reduced  number  of  the  co-ordinates  re-
maining uQ-given;  and  their  integration  determines  these
co-ordinates.

Let  t»,,  7n^,  etc.  be  the  massei,  0^,,  2;,,  9;,,  etc  be  the  eo-
ordinates of  tiie particles;  and  A' ,  etc.  the  components
of  the  forces  acting  upon  them.  Let  tff,  ^,  etc.  be  other  Tariables
equal  in  nnmber  to  the  Cartesian  co-ordinates,  and  let  there  he
the  same  number  of  relations  given  between  the  two  sets  of
variables;  so  that  we- may  either  regard  ^,  ^  etc  as  known
functions  of  x^^  y,,  etc,  or  x,,  etc  as  known  functioosof
^,  ^  etc  Proceeding  on  the  latter  supposition  we  have  the
equations  (a),  (1),  of  §  313;  and  we  have  equations  (6),  (6),  of
the  same  section  for  the  generalised  components  %  ^,  etc.  of  the
force  on  the  system.

For  the  Carte&ian  equations  of  motion  we  have

-T.

hi.

di

^1  = 44^  >  -r,  =  m,  ^ete....(19).

Multiplying  the  first  by  the  Becond  by  and  so  on,
and  adding  all  the  products,  we  find  by  313  (6)

Now

d'r^  dxy^  _  <J  /  dx\  _  d  dr^  _d  f  dr\  _  .  dx^
Wd^~dt\  'd^J~  'didijf'dtV't^^  d^

-um-^'-w

UsLn;;  this  and  similar  expressions  with  reference  to  the  other
co-ordinates  in  (20),  and  remarkuig  that

(*.' + + +  +  ©tc  =  T  (22),

i^  as  before^  we  put  ^for  the  kinetic  eneigy  of  tiie  q^stem;  we
find

 (23).

I

Digitized  by  Google

31S.]

DTNASnCAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIFLER.

303

The  sabrtitutioiui  of for  ^  and  of  ^^f'  for  ^  ^"^^  used

ai/r  d\p  at

above,  sup})ose  .r,  to  be  a  function  of  the  ca-ordinatfs,  and  of  the

genenUized  velocity-coni]>onent.s,  as  sliown  in  eqxiations  (1)  of

^313. It  is  on  til  is  sii|>jM).sitiou  [wliie  h  makes  T  a  quadratic

function  of  the  genemli/.^Ml  velocity-components  with  functions

of  the  co-ordinates  as  coefficients  as  shown  in  §  313  (2)]  that  the

'  Y  in  (23)  are  perfonneiL  Proceeding

differentiatioM  ^-  and

siniilarly  with  reference  to  ^,  etc.,  we  find  expressions  similar  to
(23)  for  *,  etc.,  and  tlnis  w  r  have  for  the  equatiuns  of  motion  in
terms  of  the  generalized  co-ordiiiatea

rqiitKioiiii  of
motion  in
U-rins  of
Kpneralized
c'o-urdinatet
(li'<lii<"<  <l
ilin-cl  by
Irunsfnrm*-
tioii  from
th«  equa-
tions* of
motion  in
tt-rmM  of
CkrtMiu

na'

(24).

d  _dT
etc.

It  is  to  bo  remarked  tljat  tliere  is  notliing  in  the  preceding;
tmnsfnrmation  which  would  be  altered  by  sui>j>f>sing  t  to  appear
in  the  relations  between  the  Cartesian  nii<l  the  generalized  co-
ordinates: thus  if  we  suppose  these  relations  to  be

•^iK.  yi»  «i» ^1  ^1  0  =  ^\  (-^)»

etc.

we  now,  instead  of  §  313  {I),  liave

d  r  .  , d.r  .

etc.

.(2G),

wliere denotes  wliat  the  Telooity-oomponeiit woold  be

if  ij/j  <f>,  etc.  were  constant ;  bcinjT  analytically  the  partial  differ-
ential coofTioient  with  rt  hM  ence  to  t  of  tho  formula  deriTed  from
(26)  to  express  arj  as  a  function  of  ^  ^,  etc.

TTsing  (26)  in  (22)  we  now  find  instead  of  a  homogenMiiui
quadratic  function  of  ^,  ^  etc.,  as  in  (2)  of  §  313,  a  mixed

Digitized  by  Google

304

[318.

function  of  zero  degi  ce  vdA  fixBt  and  aeoomd  degneB,  &r  ilw
kinetic  energy,  aa  followB  :~

Lagrange'a
fqiutkma  of

motion  in
terms  of

deduwd

diirrt  liy

tion  from
the  equa-
tions of
iQotioti  in
terms  of
CnrU"*iM»
co-on.li"

where

•{((S)y-(O)' •(&;))■

etc

d<f>^  (lit/  d<f>  '  dij/  d<ftj
etc.

etc

..(28);

^>  (^)f  (^X  !^)>  (^1  4^)9  ^  b^iig  general  each  a  known
function  cii,  iff,  ^  etc

Equations  (24)  above  are  Lagrange's  celebrated  equations  of
motion  in  terms  of  generalised  co-ordinates.  It  was  first
pointed  out  by  Yieille*  that  they  are  applicable  not  only  when

1^,  <f>y  etc.  are  related  to  a^^,  y^y  z^,  x^,  etc.  by  invariable  relations
as  supposed  in  Lagrange's  original  demonstration,  but  also
when  the  relations  involve  t  in  the  manner  shown  in  equa-
tions (25).  Lagrange's  original  demonstration,  to  be  found
in  the  Fourth  Section  of  the  Second  Part  of  his  M*'(yinifpie
Anahjtique,  consisted  of  a  transformation  from  Cartesian  t  >
generalized  co-ordinates  of  the  indeterminate  equation  cf
motion;  and  it  is  the  same  demonstration  with  unessential
variations  that  has  been  hitherto  given,  so  fiir  as  we  know,
by  all  subsequent  writers  including  ourselves  in  our  first  edition
(§  329).  It  seems  however  an  unnecessary  complication  to
introduce  the  indeterminate  variations  &p,  etc. ;  and  we  find
it  much  simpler  to  deduce  Lagrange's  generalized  equations
by  direct  transformation  from  the  equations  of  motion  (19)
of  a  free  partide*

*  Sor  lea  6quatioua  dift^rentielleB  de  la  dynamitiuei  Liouville's  Journal^
1849»  p.  101.

Digitized  by  Cfwij

318.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLE».

305

When  the  kinematic  relations  are  iimuiable^  that  is  to  say  ^^j^^^g^
when  t  <iocs  not  appear  In  the  eqnattODB  of  oooditioii  (25),  we ^mcfSl
find  from  (27)  and  (28),  ZSoiT'

.(29),

and

Henoe  the  ^^^nation  of  motion  6Z|Mmded  in  this,  the  moat
important  olafls  of  cases,  is  as  follows :

where

 (2r').

Remark  that  Q^{T)  is  a  qnaihatic  function  of  the  velocity-com-
ponents (h'rivod  from  tliat  wliicli  expresses  the  kinetic  energy
(7*)  hy  tlie  process  iiulitMtcil  in  the  second  of  these  equations,
in  wliicli  ip  appears  singularly,  and  the  other  co-ordinates  sym-
metrically  with  one  anotlier.

Multiply  the  i/r-cquation  by  i^,  the  ^-equation  by  c^,  and  SO  Bqaatum  of
on ;  and  add. In  what  oomes  from (T)  we  find  terms

which  together  yield

With  til  is,  and  the  rest  simply  as  shown  in  (29'"),  we  find

+  [(^.*)V^  +  (^^)5^-^-]^
+

VOL.  L  20

Digitized  by  Google

sue

PRELIMINARY.

[31b.

BqiiMlioaflf

or

dT  .  dT.

dT

dt

Hamilton't

Wl]en  the  kinematical  relations  are  invariable,  that  is  to  say,
when  t  does  not  appear  in  the  equations  of  condition  (2.5),  the
equations  of  motion  may  be  put  under  a  slightly  ditTerent  form
first  ^Ten  by  Hamilton,  which  is  often  conTenient ;  thus : — Let

ifff  ^...>  be  expressed  in  terms  of  ^,  17,...,  the  impulses  re-
quired to  produce  the  motion  from  rest  atany  instant  [§  313(<^];
80  that  T  will  now  be  a  homogeneous  quadratic  fiuiction,  ami
tj/f  <lif ...  each  a  linear  function,  of  these  elements,  with  coeffi-
cients— functions  of  V»  depending  on  the  kinematicil
conditions  d  the  system,  but  not  on  the  particular  motion.
Thus,  denoting^  as  in  §  322  (29),  by  d,  [Mirtial  difiei-cntiation  with
referenee  to  ^,  ^»  ^}***>  considered  as  independent  Tsii-
ables»  we  hare  [§  313  (10)]

.  dr

.(30).

and,  allowing  d  to  denote,  as  in  what  precedes,  the  partial  dif*
InrentiationB  with  reference  to  the  system  ^,  ^,  </>, we
have  [S  313  (8jJ

^=rf^'  "^^di

The  two  expressions  for  T  being,  as  above,  §  313,

the  second  of  these  is  to  be  obtained  from  ihe  first  by  subatitn-
ting  for  ijff their  ezpressioos  in  terms  of tf, ...  Hence

dT_^dT  dTdl dTH _^ tl^Jl ?.  ^

dT d_/  dT dT  \
dil,\f  dl^'^  Urj^'"  J"^

dT  dT

ifrom  this  we  conclude
dT  dT

dT

Hence  Lagrange's  equatUms  become

5j  +  ^=*,etc.

dT
d4»

,  etc.

(33).

\

.(34).

Digitized  by  Google

318.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  1'lllNCIPLE.S.  307

In  §  327  below  a  purely  analytical  proof  will  be  given  of  HMnnton't
Lagrange's  generalized  equations  of  motion,  establbbing  them
directly  as  a  deduction  from  the  principle  of  "Least  Action/'

independently  of  any  expression  either  of  this  principle  or  of

the  o<|uations  of  motion  in  terms  of  Cartesian  co-ordinates.  In
their  Ihiniiltonian  form  tboy  aie  also  deduced  in  §  330  (33)  from
the  principle  of  Lciu»t  Action  nltiniately,  but  through  the  beau-
tiful "  Characteristic  Equation"  of  Hamilton.

319.  Hamilton's  form  of  Lagrange's  equations  of  motion  in
terms  of  generalized  co-ordinates  expresses  that  what  is  re-
quired to  prevent  any  one  of  the  components  of  momentum
from  varying  is  a  correspunding  component  force  equal  in
amount  to  the  rate  of  change  of  the  kinetic  energy  per  unit
increase  of  the  corresponding  co-ordinate,  with  all  com}jouents
of  momentum  constant:  and  that  whatever  is  the  amount  of
the  component  force,  its  excess  above  this  value  measures  the
rate  of  increase  of  the  component  momentum.

In  the  case  of  a  conservative  system,  the  same  statement
takes  the  foUowing  form: — ^The  rate  at  which  any  component
momentum  increases  per  unit  of  time  is  equal  to  the  rate,  per
unit  increase  of  the  corresponding  co-ordinate,  at  which  the
sum  of  the  potential  energy,  and  the  kinetic  energy  for  con-
stant momentoms,  diminishes.  Thb  is  the  celebrated  "canonical
form "  of  the  equations  of  motion  of  a  system,  though  why  it
has  been  so  called  it  would  be  bard  to  say.

Let  V  denote  the  potential  energy,  so  that  [§  293  (3)1  "CanonioAi

form"  of

*^^■*St^■  iV,  Hjjtty.-.

jir  j-ir  «qa>tiofMof

andtheMfore  *-_rJL  motion  of »

ajui  uierexore Jir  —  —  ^ , « —  —  -v^ ,  ...  conMrvm>

•r  tire  *y»tem.

Let  now  U  denote  the  algebraic  expression  for  the  nnvw  of  the
potential  energy,  V,  iu.  terms  of  the  co-ordinates,  »//,  </>...,  and  the
kinetic  energy,  in  temis  of  the  co-ordinates  and  the  coui|x)nenU
of  momentum,  ^,  Then

20—2

Digitized  by  Google

PRBUMINABT.

[319.

ttietueor

cquAtiont  of

motion; —
polar  CO-
oniinataa.

the  latter  being  eqnivaleat  to  (30),  sinoe  the  potential  eneigy  don
not  contain  i,  17,  etc.

In  the  following  examples  we  shall  adhere  to  Ligrange's  fm
(24),  as  the  most  conTenient  for  sach  applications.

Example  (A). — Motion  of  a  single  point  (m)  referred  to  polar
00-ordinatee  (r,  6,  <ji).  From  the  well-known  geometry  of  this
case  we  see  that  Sr,  rS^,  and  r  sin  6B<f>  are  the  amonatB  of  linear
displacement  corresponding  to  infinitely  small  increments,  Sr,

of  tlie  ro-ordinates :  also  tliat  these  displacements  are  respec-
tively in  the  direction  of  r,  of  the  arc  rSd  (of  a  great  circle)
in  the  plane  of  r  and  the  |)ole,  and  of  iho  arc  r&m68ff>  (of  a
small  ciivlc  in  a  plane  {)erpendioular  to  the  axis);  and  that  they
are  therefore  at  right  angles  to  one  another.  Hence  i£  ff
denote  the  components  of  the  force  experienced  by  the  point,  in
these  three  rectangular  directions,  we  have

F^Sf  and  ffrmnBz^^;

0,  ^>  being  what  the  generalized  components  of  force  (^  313)
l>ecoine  for  this  particular  system  of  co-ordinates.  Wc  also  seo
tljat  r,  r(9,  and  r  sin  6^  are  thi-eo  components  of  the  velocity,
along  the  same  rectangular  directions.  Hence

J' = }m(#' +  r'rf' + sin*  ^•).

From  this  we  hare

fit *  di

=  0.

^  =  mr{&'  +  sin' ^  =  wir'sin  6  cos
Hence  the  equations  of  motion  become

m|^-r(^'+sin««#')}»/;

I^L^)  _  r«  gin  5  cos j  =  Cr,

TO— ^ — 5? — ^'ssiirsintf;
or,  according  to  the  ordinary  notation  of  the  differential  calculus,

m

fd*r  fd&'

Digiiizeo  by  GoOgl

319.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINGIFLES.  809

,  ,  RMicnltMd

f»— (r"  Bitt'^-— )  =  Zrr  Sin  ^.  motion;—
at  \  qAJ  poii'i"  «)-

If  the  motion  is  oonfiiied  to  one  plane,  tbat  of  r,  tf,  we  have

^ 0,  aud  therefore  2f  =  0,  and  the  two  equations  of  motion
which  remain  are

These  equations  might  have  been  wiitten  down  at  ones  in  terms
of  the  seoond  hiw  of  motion  from  the  kinematioal  inTestigaticm  of

§  32,  in  which  it  was  shown  that  Ca— r^,  and  -4:(V^^

mn  the  components  of  accderatioa  along  and  peq)endioii]ar  to
the  radins-vectoTy  when  the  motion  of  a  point  in  a  plane  is  ex-
pressed aocording  to  jM>lar  co-oidinates,  r,  6.

The  same  equations,  with  ^  instead  of  6,  are  obtained  from  the
polar  equations  in  three  dimensions  by  putting  ^  =  J  tt,  which
implies  that  6r  =  0,  and  confines  the  motion  to  the  plane  (r,

Example  (B). — Two  ]>articles  arc  connected  by  a  .string  j  one  DjmMnical
of  them,  m,  moves  in  any  way  on  a  smooth  liuiizoiital  phme,  and  *"***^*
tlie  string,  passing  through  a  smooth  infinitely  small  ajicrture  in
this  ])lane,  l)oai-s  tlie  other  particle  }n\  hanging  vertically  down-
wartLs,  aud  ouly  moving  in  this  virtual  line:  (tho  .stri]ig  rc-
mainrug  always  stretched  in  any  practical  illustration,  but,  in
the  problem,  ])oing  of  coui-sc  su})J)os(h1  caj^ablc  of  tmnsmitting
negative  tension  with  its  two  parts  straight.)  Let  ^  bo  the  whole
length  of  the  strini:,  r  that  of  the  part  of  it  from  ?/?  to  the  aj>ei-turo
in  the  plane,  and  kt  6  bo  the  angle  between  the  direction  of  r
and  a  tixed  line  in  the  phme. We  havo

dr '  (10

Also,  there  being  no  other  external  force  than  gm'f  the  weight
of  the  second  particle,

^=-^7n', 0  =  0.

Digitized  by  Google

310

PREUMIKART.

[319.

ExRtnplps  of

tlli!  use  of

Lairnmge's
(ffiioralized
e<|tmtions  of
iiiution ;
djrnamic»l

Cas«  of
KUble  equi-
librium due
tonuAioa.

Examples
fontiruied ;
C  (aX  fold*

Ucuce  the  equations  of  motion  are

The  motion  of  m'  is  of  ooarae  that  of  a  particle  uifluenoed  onlj
by  a  force  towards  a  fixed  centre;  but  the  hiw  of  this  force,  P
(the  teniiUm  of  the  8tring)i  is  remarkable.  To  find  it  we  have
(§  82),  Pmm(''f4'ri^, But^  by  the  equations  of  the  miitioD,

wlu're  /*  (according  to  tlie  usual  notation)  denotes  the  moinont
of  itioiai  utuni  of  the  motion,  being  an  arbitrary  constant  of  in-
tegration. Hence

, 7nm ( h  _A

The  particular  case  of  projeotiim  which  gires  m  a  circular  motion
and  leaves  in'  at  rest  is  interesting,  inasmuch  as  (§  350,  below)
the  motion  of  m  is  stable^  and  therefore  m'  is  in  stable  equi-
librium.

Examjvle  (C). — A  rigid  boily  m  is  supported  on  a  fixed  axis,
and  another  rigid  body  n  is  .sup[»<»i  tod  on  tlie  lii-st,  by  another
axis  ;  the  motion  round  each  axis  being  perfectly  free.

Com  (a). — TJie  tteond  tma  paraUel  to  the  Jint,  At  any  time,
t,  let  ^  and  ^  be  the  inclinations  of  a  fixed  plane  throuj^  the
first  axis  to  the  plane  of  it  and  the  second  axi%  and  to  a
jilane  through  the  second  axis  and  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the
second  body.  These  two  oo-ordinatee»  ^  it  is  dear,  completely
specify  the  oonfiguntion  of  the  system.  Now  let  a  be  the  dis-
tance of  the  second  axis  from  the  fizst^  and  b  that  of  the  oentee
of  inertia  of  the  second  body  from  the  second  axis*  TliBYelocity
of  the  second  axis  will  be  ;  and  the  velocity  of  the  centre
of  inertia  of  the  second  body  will  be  the  resultant  of  two  velocitifls

a0,  and  btpy

in  lines  inclined  to  one  anotlioi*  at  an  angle  equal  to  —  ^  and
iiH  square  \\'ill  therefore  be  equal  to

a'^'  +  2a6^  cos -  ^)  6y .

Hence,  if  m  and  n  denote  the  masses,  j  the  radius  of  gyration
of  the  first  body  aliout  the  fixed  axis,  and  k  that  of  the  second

Digui^uu  uy  GoOgl

311).]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  311

body  about  a  parallel  axis  tlumigh  its  oentro  of  Inortia;  webave,  ^^^'^,^2.
according  to  ^  280,  281,  c  "ar/iliii

T  =  i{nii'4>'  +  n  [tt^^"  +  2a/»^f  cob -  ^)  +  b'^'  +  if

Hence  we  havo^

'  .  =-  »y'^-i>fia'^+fia6ooB(^-^)^ ; .  =  mi6GOB(^-^)^-)-n(6'-f ib^^ ;

The  mort  general  suppontion  we  can  make  aa  to  tbe  applied  forces,
is  equivalent  to  aHWiming  a  couple,  to  act  on  the  first  body,  and
a  couple,  %  on  the  second,  each  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the
axes ;  and  these  are  obviously  what  the  generalised  components  of
stress  become  in  this  particular  co-ordinate  system,  ^  ^.  Hence
the  equations  of  motion  are

+  «a«)  ^  +  nod

fuih ^["t^^^-^^)]  +  „ (ftt + j^^ ^  ,^^5 sin -  f ) =  ^.

If  there  is  no  other  sppUed  force  than  gravity,  and  if,  as  we  may
suppose  without  losing  generalitj,  the  two  axes  are  hoiiaontal,  the
potential  eneigy  of  the  system  will  be

gmJi  (1  -  cos  ^)  +  y«  {tt  [1  -  cos +  A)]  +  6  [1  -  cos +  A)]\,

the  distance  of  the  centve  of  inertia  of  the  first  body  from  the
fixed  axis  being  denoted  by  the  inclination  of  the  plane
through  the  fixed  axis  and  the  centre  of  inertia  of  the  first  body,
to  the  pkme  of  the  two  axes,  bdng  denoted  by  A,  and  the  fixed
plane  being  so  taken  that  ^  »0  whentheformer  plane  is  verttcaL
By  differentiating  this,  with  reference  to  ^  and  tfr,  we  therefore
have

—  *  =  gmh  sin  <^  +  f^/ia  sin +  ^i),  —  ^  =  ffnb  sin  (ip  +  A).

We  shall  exumuie  this  case  in  some  dttail  Inter,  in  coimoxion
with  the  interference  of  vibrations,  a  subject  of  much  importance
in  physical  science.

When  there  are  no  applied  or  intrinsic  working  forces,  we
have  ^sO  and  ^'asO :  or,  if  there  are  mutual  forces  between  the
two  bodies,  but  no  foroen  applied  from  without^  ^4*^  =  0.  In

.■  ^

Digitized  by  Google

Exnmplesof

thf  use  of

fceiH'ralizcHl
equAtiona  of

CO).

Motion  o(

fcoverning

niM<M's  in

WaitB

nentrifugal

Rovatnart

•laaof

gtnMhd

312  FBSUMINABT.  [319.

eithegr  of  tliesc  caaes  we  have  the  following  Ssst  int<^Fal : —

obtained  by  a<lding  the  two  equations  of  motion  and  integrating.
This,  whicl)  clearly  ox|)i*e.Hse.s  tlie  constancy  of  the  M'hole  moment  of
nionientvim,  iijives  (f>  and  ij/  in  terms  of  (tj/  —  <;^)  mid  (\}/  —  <^).  I'sing
tliesein  theiutegnil  equation  of  enerLry,  ]irovidt  il  the  mutual  forces
are  functions  of  \fr  — ^)  we  have  a  siuglo  equation  between

-4>)^  (^-^)» ooiiBtaiitSy  and  thus  the  full  solution  of

the  ]>mblem  is  reduce<l  to  quadratures.  [It  in  worked  out  fuilj
below,  as  Sub-example  G^.]

Case  (6). — Th$  teeond  <mt  perpeniieuXMr  to  ike  first  For
simplicity  Buppo«e  the  pivoted  axis  of  the  seoond  body,  n,  to  be
a^prineipal  axis  relatively  [§  282  Def.  (2)]  to  the  point,  .V,  in
whidi  it  is  out  by  a  ])lane  2>er{)eiidicular  to  it  through  the  fixed
azti  of  the  first  body,  in.  Let  ITE  and  bejn's  two  other
principal  axes. Denote  now  by

h  the  distance  from  N  to  m's  iixed  axis ;

k,  e,/  the  radii  of  gyration  of  n  round  its  three  principal
axes  throuj^  If;

J  the  radius  of  gyration  of  m  round  its  fixed  axis ;

6  the  inclination  of to  f»'s  fixed  axis ;

^  the  indination  of  the  plsne  parsllel  to  n's  pivoted  axis
tliiough  m's  fixed  axi%  to  a  fixed  ' plane  through  the
latter.

lU  ruarkiug  that  the  component  angular  velocities  of  n  round

If^£  and are  \p  cos  0  and  i/-  sin  tf,  we  find  immediately

r  » 1  {[iiy'' +  »  ( V  +  «•  cos"  ^ +/ ' ^)]  ^' +
or,  if  we  put

tnj'  +  n  {h'  +/')  =  G,  n  (e'  -D  =  D ;
r  =  i  {(fl' + i>  cos"  ^)  ^  +  nif

The  fiorther  working  out  of  this  case  we  leare  as  •  8impl«>  but
most  Interesting  exercise  for  the  student  We  may  return
to  it  kter,  as  its  apptication  to  tiie  theocy  of  centrifugal  chrono*
metric  regulators  is  very  important.

Digitized  by  Google

319.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

813

MMimpk  (C).  Take  the  case  0  (6)  and  mount  a  third  body  M notion  or
upon  an  axis  OC  fixed  telativelj  to  n  m  any  position  parallel  to  pivotni  cm
2fE, Suppoee  for  simpUcity  0  to  be  the  centre  of  inertia  of  M  pmu  iikii
and  OC  one  of  its  principal  axes;  and  let  OA^  OB  be  its  two  Ic  on's""
other  principal  axes  relatire  to  0, The  notation  being  in  other  GmiT^
reapecta  the  same  as  in  Example  C  (d),  denote  now  farther  by
B,  C  the  moments  of  inertia  of  M  round  OA,  OB,  OC';  ^  the
angle  between  the  plane  AOG  and  the  plane  through  the  fixed
axis  of  m  perpendicular  to  the  pivoted  axis  of  n ;  w, <r  the
component  angular  Telocities  of  M  round  OA,  OB,  OC.

In  the  annexed  diagmm,  taken  from  ^  iUl  above,  JiCZ'  in  a

X*ettcr  0  at  cen-
tre of  sphere
concealed  by
Y.

circle  of  unit  radius  having  its  centre  at  0  and  its  plane  parallel
to  the  iixed  axis  of  m  and  perpendicular  to  the  pivoted  axis
of  n.

The  component  velocities  of  C  in  the  direction  of  the  are  ZC
and  perpendicular  to  it  are  6  and  tj/miO;  and  the  component
angular  velocity  of  the  plane round  OC  is  ^cos  $,  Hence

v=  ^sin  ^ ->  ^  sin^  cos  ^

p  =  ^cos  <i>  +  ^  sin^sin^
and  o-  =  ^  COB  $  +  ^.

[Compaie  g  101.]

Digitized  by  Google

314

PREUHINART.

[319.

Motion  of
B  riKid  bodj
piroted  ou
OMof  it«
priodpal

ed  on  ft

KimbftUad
bowl.

Rif^id  bodj
rotating
freoljr;  re-
ferrra  to

moi).

Ojrroscopio

The  kinetic  enei^  of  tlie  motioii  of  M  relatively  to  ile
centre  o£  inertia,  is  (§  281)

and  (§  280)  its  whole  kinetic  energy  is  obtained  hy  addint;  tlie
kinetic  energy  of  a  material  point  equal  to  its  mass  mo>'iiig  with
the  %elocity  of  its  centre  of  inertia.  This  latter  part  u!  the
kinetic  energy  of  M  is  most  simply  taken  into  account  by  suj>-
posing  n  to  include  a  nuiU  i  iul  point  etpial  to  ^f  placet!  at  O  ;
and  using  the  previous  notation  k,  e,  f  fur  radii  of  g}  rali<  ai  of  n
on  the  luiderstanding  that  a  now  includes  this  addition.  IKiice
for  the  present  example,  with  the  pi'ecediog  notation  6',  we
liave

r  - \{G  +  D  cos'  B)  ip'  +  nJc'&'}
4- ^ sin  ^  ~  ^  sin  0  COB •*■  .fi cos  ^  +  ^  sin  ^  sin

+  C(^coe^-l>^)').
From  this  the  three  eqimtionB  of  motion  are  easQy  written  down.

By  putting  0  0,  D  =0,  and  ^  =  0,  we  have  the  case  of  the
motion  of  a  free  rigiil  body  relatively  to  its  centre  of  inertia.

By  putting  £  —  A  we  fall  on  a  case  which  includes  gyroscopes
and  gy  rostats  of  every  variety ;  and  have  the  following  much
sunpiiiied  formula :'

r  =  i  {[(? + +  (D  -  J)  coaPfl  ^  +  (n*» + -1) +  C cos  +
or

T=i[{B^  Fcoa'  0)^-^  (nk'  +  ^)  ^"  +  C  (^cos  6  +  ^)*},
if  we  put  £^G  +  At  and  F^D^A.

Examp/c  (T>).~~Oi/roscopic  pen'Inhnn. — A  rigid  l)ody,  is
attached  to  one  axi.s  of  a  universal  flexui-e  joint  109),  of  which
the  other  is  held  fixed,  and  a  Bceoud  IkkU',  (^^  is  suji]>oi  ted  on by
a  fixed  axis,  in  line  with,  or  parallel  to,  the  th-st-mentioned  arm  of
the  joint.  For  simplicity,  we  shall  Rnp|xyse  ^  to  be  kinetically
s\  iiunet  rical  about  its  bearing  axis,  and  OB  to  be  a  piiuci|>al
axis  of  an  ideal  I'igid  boily,  PQ^  composed  of  P  and  a  mass  so
di.stribut4?d  along  the  bearing'  axis  of  tlie  aetual  IkkIv  Q  as  to
ha\  «'  tlie  same  eenti*e  of  inertia  and  the  same  moments  of  inertia
rovmd  axes  pt i  udicidar  to  it.  T.et  AO  }>e  the  fixed  ann,  0  the
joint,  OB  the  movable  arm  bearing  the  Ixxly  /*,  and  ct»ineiding
with,  or  parallel  to,  the  axiH  of  Q. Let  BOA' let  ^  be  the

Digitized  by  Google

319.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  315

aiucie  which  the  plane  AOB  makes  with  a  fixed  plane  of  xeference,  Ojiwopic

»  ,  peudulujii.

throu^  OA,  chosen  so  as  to  contain  a  seotmd

principal  axis  of  the  imagined  rigid  body,  PQ,
when  OB  is  placed  in  line  with  AO;  and  let
^  be  the  angle  between  a  plane  of  reference  in
Q  through  its  axis  of  symmetry  and  the  plane
of  the  two  principal  axes  of  FQ  already  men-
tioned. These  three  coKvdinates  ($,  ^  ^}
clearly  specify  the  configuration  of  the  system  at
anytime^  <.  Let  the  moments  of  inertia  of  the
imagined  rigid  bo^  JPQ,  rofond  its  principal
axis  OB,  the  other  principal  axis  referred  to  above,  and  the
remaining  one»  be  denoted  by  %  1$,  ^  req)ectively ;  and  let
V  be  the  moment  of  inertia  of  Q  round  its  bearing  axis.

We  havo  scon  {§  109)  that,  with  th*^  kind  of  joint  we  have  sup-
posed at  0,  every  jwfvsible  motion  of  a  Ixnly  riijidly  coimected  witli
OBf  is  i-esolvable  into  a  rotation  round  0/,  the  line  bisecting  tlie
angle  AOB,  and  a  rotation  round  tho  line  through  0  perpen-
dicular to  the  piano  AOB.  Tlio  aiiguhu'  velocity  of  tho  latter
ia  ^,  according  to  our  pi-escut  notiition.  The  former  would  give
r-t  any  )K3int  in  OB  the  same  absohite  velocity  by  rotation  round
01,  that  it  ha8  by  rotation  with  angular  velocity  ^  round  AA' ;
and  is  therefore  equal  to

sin^'Oi^  • sin^  . ,  .

am lOB  ^  cv>  lo^ ^  *

Tliis  may  be  resolved  into  2^  sin*  =  ^  (1  —  cos  ^)  round  OB,
and  2<6sin  ^,^co8  \6=  4*  ^  round  the  pi'r|>oudicular  to  OB,  in
j>lane  AOB.  Again,  in  virtue  of  the  symmetrical  character  of
the  joint  with  reference  to  the  line  01,  the  angle  tft,  as  defined
above,  will  be  e(|iuil  to  the  axkglc  between  the  piano  of  tho  two
first-mentioned  principal  axes  of  body  P,  and  the  plane  AOB.
Hence  the  axis  of  the  angular  velocity  tj)  sin  6,  is  inclined  to  tho
principal  axis  of  moment  JiJ  at  an  angle  equal  to  <t>.  Resolving
thei-efore  this  angular  velocity,  and  $,  into  components  round  tho
axes  of  19  and  ®,  we  find,  foi-  tlie  whole  comi)onent  Angiilar
velocities  of  the  imagined  rigid  body  FQ,  round  these  axes,
<^  sin  0  cos <^  +  SsixL^  and  — ^sin ^sin  +  0  cos  ^,  respectively.
The  whole  kin<  tic  energy,  T,  is  composed  of  that  of  the  imagined
rigid  bo<ly  FQ,  and  that  of  Q  about  axes  through  it«  centre  of

Digitized  by  Google

316

PSBLDONABT.

[3X9.

Gyrosoopio
imndnlmii

EumpleoT

nuryinpf
relation

without
constraint
(rotating
axon).

inertia  :  we  therefore  have
2r= »(! -006 id  (^sm^<»8^+ ^8in^)'+e  (<^8iiid8in^-.^oos<^)'

(IT

91  (1  - 008  tf/ ^  4>  V Bin  ^  000  ^  4- j  sin  ^)  sin  0  COB  ^

4.e(^an^Bin^-tfoo«^)8in0sin^-fl['{^-^(l-oo8QK^-^^

dT

dT

-  U sin  0  ooB  ^ -f  ^  sin  ^) sin  ^  sin  ^  -  ^  COS  ^)

+ 0 iiin  ^  sill -  ^  cos  ^) siu  0  008^4- ^sin

-r  B  ]$  sin^  008^ + ^  sin  ^)  sin^- sin  0  sin  ^ COS  ^)co9  ^
dB

and  ^J=9l(l-cos^8in^*+lloo60co6<^<^(<^sm9oo8^+tf8in^)

oos^  8m^^(^  sin^  sin^-^  cos^)-^'  sin^^j^-  (1  -  oos^)

Kofv  let  a  couple,  act  on  the  body  in  a  plane  peri>endi-
cular  to  its  axis,  and  let  if,  act  on  P,  in  the  plant  ]h  i  ])en-
dicalar  to  OB,  in  the  plane  A'OBy  and  in  the  plane  through  OB
perpendicular  to  the  diagram.  If  ^  is  kept  constant,  and  ^
▼aried,  the  couple  0  will  do  or  lesist  work  in  simple  addition
with  L.  Hence,  lesolTing  L-¥G  and  N  into  components  round
07,  and  i>ei'pendicalar  to  it»  rejecting  the  latter,  and  remembering
that  2  sin is  the  angular  velocity  round  01,  we  have

*=28midH/i+6?)8mid+iVco8id}=[-(i,+GXl-co8^)+-LV8in^J.

Also^  obviously

U.siiii^'  these  several  expressions  in  T/igrange's  genciul  equations
(24),  we  have  tli«'  eqtiations  of  niotiun  of  tlie  system.  They  will
be  of  great  use  to  iis  l:it«'r,  when  we  shall  consider  sevenil  parti-
cular cases  of  remarkable  interest  and  of  very  gi*eat  impoitance.

Example  {E).-— Motion  of  a  free  partkk  7- f/vnred  to  rotating  axa.
Let  Xj  i/,zhe  the  coordinates  of  a  moving  ])article  refened  to
axes  rotating  with  a  constant  or  vaiying  angular  velocity  round
the  axis  OZ,  Lt^  x,,  «,  be  its  ooK>rdinates  referred  to  the
same  axis,  OiT,  and  two  axes  OX^,  OT^,  fixed  in  the  plane  per-

Digitized  by  Google

319.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  TRINCIl'LES.  317

pendicnlar  to  it. We  have  Bunptoar

vnryinif

a;, -Oleosa— vsma.  t/, t^assina-i-tfoofla :  r«>i»tion

•  .  .  witbouk

X,  =  X  cos  a  -  y  sin  a  —  (a;  sin  a  +  w  cos  a)  d,  y,  =  etc.  conttriliil
'  ^  J !  f  Ji  (rotating

whoro  o,  tlip  nncjlo  XfiX^  most  be  considered  as  a  given  func-

tion  of  U  Hence

dT  dT ,^  dT

AIa(s

Site  -m(a:-ya~ytt),  g^- =  m(y +  axx  +  xa).

and  benoe  the  equations  of  motion  are

m  (.1-  -  2^d  -  xa^  -  yci)  =  X,  f»  (y  +  2j«i  -  ya**  +  xii)  =  F,  nii  =

Jl,  Tj  Z  denoting  simplj  the  eomponente  of  the  force  on  the
particle,  jmrallel  to  the  moving  axes  at  any  instant.  In  this
example  i  enters  into  the  relation  between  fixed  rectangular  axes
and  the  ooH>rdinate  system  to  which  the  motion  is  ref> -n-f  rl ;  but
there  is  no  constraint.  The  next  is  given  as  an  example  of  vaiy*
ing,  or  kinetic,  oonstraint.

Example  ijc). — A  partirlr^  i/ifhu  Nc  d  bif  dm/  fu'C^s,  awl  at- ExamiAe  ot
tarhed  to  one  end  of  a  sf  rimj  of  whu/i  (he  otlter  is  moved  with  ani/  rcIaVion
constant  or  Vfin/iitf/  v/ori/i/  in  a  sfnih/hf  Inf. IaX  6  \yo  the  j[^^tk)
inclination  of  the  string  at  tiuir  ^  to  the  ^av»>n  straight  line,  and
4^  the  angle  l>etween  two  planes  through  this  line,  one  containing
the  string  at  any  instant,  an<I  the  other  fixed. These  two  co-
ordinates (0,  tf>)  specify  the  ixj.sition, of  the  particle  at  any
instant,  the  h^ngtli  of  the  string  hoing  a  given  constant,  a,  and
tlie  distance  Ci-',  of  its  other  end  L\  from  a  fixed  point,  0,  of  the
line  in  which  it  is  moved,  h^-ing  a  given  function  of  t,  which  wo
shall  dcnoti'  by T^et  x, z  he  the  co-ordinatos  of  the  particle
refem'd  to  t  hrce  iixed  rectangular  axes. Choosini,'  OX  as  the  given
straight  line,  and  TOX  the  fixed  plane  from  which  ^  is  measured,
we  have

jBsw-fiiooB^,  ysasintfcoe^  ssaon^sin^

Digitized  by  Google

318

PaELIMINABY.

Example  ol
varying
reiatiOB
due  to
kinetic

and  ior  i  we  have  thfi  same  expreauons  aa  in  Example  (A).
Hence

where  denotes  the  same  as  the  T  of  Example  (A),  with
r  =  0,  luid  r  =  a.  llencc,  denoting  as  tliei-e,  by  G  and  //  the  two
coni}>ouents  of  the  force  on  the  particle,  jK'rj»endiciilar  to  AV,
resj>eotively  in  the  plane  of  0  and  j>er|)endicular  to  it^  we  find,  fur
the  two  rei^uiitxl  et^uatiouA  u£  motion,

m{a(S-aRBe(M$4.')-m$ii\=a,  and  ma ^^''^^'^t^^^.

Theiie  d&ow  that  the  motion  is  tlie  »nme  as  if  E  were  fixed,  and
a  foi*ce  equal  to  —  mii  were  applied  to  the  pariicle  iu  a  directicm
parallel  to  £Xi  a  result  that  might  have  been  arrived  at  at  once
bj  snperimposing  on  the  whole  HTBtem  an  accelcmtion  equal  and
opposite  to  that  of  £,  to  e&ct  which  on  the  £oroe  >  mil  ia
required.

Example  (F).  Any  ease  of  varying  relations  such  that  in
318  (27)  the  coeffioienta  (^»^),  (fp,  ^) ...  are  independent  of  IL
Let  9  denote  the  quadratic  part,  L  the  lineu-  part,  and  £  [as
in  g  316  (27)]  the  oonstent  part  of  T  in  respect  to  the  Tekicitjr
oomponentB,  so  that

«  -  i  {{•A,  "A) +  2  (-A, f ^  +  (<^, ^' + . ..}

+ +  \ (a),

where  (^,^),  (^,  ^)  ...  denote  functions  of  the  oo-ordi.
nates  without  t,  and  (^),  (4), (^,  ^  $, ...)  functions  of  the
co^wdinates  and,  may  be  also,  of  t ;  and

T  =  Z-^L-^K  (h).

I-

We  have

dK  «

—7=0.

Henoe  the  contribution  from  JT  to  the  first  member  of  the  ^

dK

equation  of  motion  is  simply  —  ^ . Again  we  have

hence

di  dtl^ dift  ^ ^  \  dt  J

Digitized  by  Google

319.]  DTNAiaCAL  LilWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  319

Earther  we  have  Example  of

dL d{{l/)  . (/(</>)♦  nliltioti

^r,  ~  ^  J  I r '*""'  / I  dm«  to

uij/ (lip  d\p  kinetic

Hence  the  whole  contribution  from  L  to  the  ^-equation  of
motion  is

V,i^  -  ■#  J*  W»  ~  #  )^*-*Vdt  )

Lastly,  the  contrihution  from  ^  is  the  same  as  the  whole  from
r  in  ^  318  (29"')  ;  so  that  we  have

*  I  l^r-  +2  -  ^  - + J  ^  +  ...^  (rf),

and  the  completed  i//- equation  of  motion  is

d  dz _dz^ _ <m)\  1  ^ _ {^)\ ^^^^^

di  d^  \  d^/  ) \  dO d^  )

d  dK

It  is  importint  to  remark  that  the  coefficient  of  <^  in  this  i^-
e(|Uution  is  equal  but  of  op|>osite  sign  to  the  coefficient  of  ^  in
the  ^^-equation. [Compare  Examine  G  (19)  below.]

Proceetling  as  in  §  318  (20'")  (-9'),  we  have  in  respect  to  g  Equalion  of
precisely  the  same  formulas  as  there  in  respect  to  T. The  terms
inTolTixig  first  powers  of  Uie  velocities  simply,  balance  in  the
sum :  and  we  tind  tiually

?*Q-'^*;^-^=*^^*^*  (/).

where  <f(^,^....)  denotes  diffisrentlation  on  the  supposition  of
^,  ^  ...  variable ;  and  I  constant,  where  it  appears  explicitly.
Kow  with  this  notation  we  have

Hence  trom  (/)  we  have

Digitized  by  Google

320  PBEUBCIKABT.  [319.

Ejemwfor  Tako,  for  illuatration,  Examples  (E)  and  (F)  from  above;  in

which  we  have

[Example  (E)] C  -  J  m  (i'  +  2?*  +  c*),

and  [Example  (F)] Z^ima' (sin'^^'  +  $'),

mu*.

Write  out  explicitly  in  each  case  equations  (/)  and  (^),  and
verify  them  bj  direct  work  from  the  equations  of  motkm  forming
the  conclusions  of  the  examples  as  treated  above  (remembering
that  d  and  A  are  to  be  regarded  as  given  explicit  functaona  of  I).

bpiontioB  JBsBompie  (O). — Prdminmy^to  GyroitaHe  emmeaeumB  oftd  to

iMitaJSi Fluid  Mirtum, Let  there  be  one  or  more  co^trdinatea  Xi  X%  ^
which  do  not  appear  in  the  ooeflkientB  of  vdodtieB  in  the

(IT  (IT

expression  for  T ;  that  is  to  say  let  ^  =  0,  ^  =  0,  etc.  1  iia
equations  ooiresponding  to  these  co-ordinates  become

Farther  let  us  suppose  that  the  Ibrce^mponenta  X,  X',  eta
corresponding  to  the  co-ordinates  Xt  x'»  ^  ^  wtoi  we
shall  have

g=C.^=C>ta  (2);

or,  cxpnndeJ  according  to  previous  iioUition  [318  (21))],

(•A, x') ^  + x) <^  + . .•  +  (X' x) X (x, x') X . = I  . . . (3).

Hence,  if  we  put

('A,x)'A  +  (<^,x)<^  +  -.  =P  ]

Digitized  by  GoogI?

319.]  BTKAUICAL  LAWS  AND  PBIKCIPLIB.

WQ  have

(x.x)x  +  (x.x')x +  =C'-^  1
(x'»x)x  +  (x',x)x'+-.-=C"-/>'

821

I(momtioQ
of  oo-

HMoIving  thme  for  x,  x\  find

(x'»x')'  (x'»x")'  •••

(x".x')>  (x".x").--

(C'-/^  +  ...

Oc»x)»  (x»)f)»  (x»x")»  -

V'X)'  (x''X')'  (x'»x")'  •  ••

(x"»x)i  (x'^x)*  (x"»x")»  ••

and  BTinmetrical  expraiirioiis  ioTj(^j(\  or,  as  we  may  write
tbem  ahorti

where  (C,  C),  (C,  C),  ((^,(7), ...  denote  fnnctioDS  of  the  letained
coMordinates  ^,  ^  ^» ....  It  is  to  be  remembered  that^  because
(X,  XO  -  (x'.  X).  <X,  X")  =  (X".  X).  w«  «e  from  (6)  that

(67,  T  )  -  {C\  C\  {C\C") {C'\  C),  {C\  C")  ^  {C'\  C),  and  fio  on... (8).

The  following  formnlHS  for  X'X'  <''^n«lon.H(Hl  in  roKjK'ct  to
C,  f" ,  C  l>y  aid  of  tho  notjition  (H)  IxOow.  and  expanded  in
respect  to  ^,  ^  (4),  will  also  be  useful.

where

(IK

ir«((7,o.(^.x)+(c.er).(^,x')

-flr-(c,C).(<^.x)  +  (c,c').(«.x')  +  -

(9X

(10).

The  elimimition  of  Xi  X*  **•  ^'^^  ^  ^7  these  ezpreasianR  for
VOL.  I.  21

Digiiizeo  by  GoOgle

1

322  PBISLUIINABT.  [319.

I^nontiiHi tbem  is  fiunlitated  by  remarking  tliat,  as  it  is  a  quadratic  func-
tion of  ^,  ^,  ...  X,  X >  •••»  haye

Henoe  by  (3),

■0  that  we  have  now  only  fixst  powers  €i  Xt  Xt  ^  elimfnalft
Gleaning  out  x> X>  ***  ^  group  of  tenna,  and  denoting
by the  part  of  T  not  oontalning  x>  x'»  ^®

^-  ^0  +  i x)  -A  +  (<^.  x)  <^  + ...  +  n  X
+  [(«A>x'}^-^-(0,x')^+".  +  nx

 )s

or,  acoording  to  the  notation  of  (4),

r-  r, + J  { ((7,  C)  ((7*  -  /*) + 3  (c,  c")  (cc  ^FJ^+(€r,cr)(cr^n

+ (11).

It  is  xemarkable  that  only  aeoond  powers,  and  prodacts,  net
JInt  powtn,  of  the  yelocity-conipoiients  ^,  ...  aj^iear  in  this
expression. We  noay  write  it  thna : —

ar-e+iT  (12),

where  C  denotes  a  quadratic  function  of  i/., ... ,  as  follows:—
Z==^T,-h  {{C,  C) +  2  (C,  C)  PF  +  (6",  C)  F"  +  ...}..,.(13),
and  JTa  quantity  independent  of ^ as  follows: —

H((7,  (7)  C»  +  3  (<7,  C)  CC  ♦  (C,  (7)  (T  +  ...}  (14).

Kezti  to  eUminate  x,  j^, ...  from  the  Lagrange's  equations,  we
have^  In  virtue  of  (12)  and  of  the  oonstitntions  tiT,^  and  K,

dT dTdx dTdx' ^  d»
— -  +  — ^+etc-  -~  (16),

dx  dij/ dj(  d\p  d^

di  dye*

where , ,  eto.  are  to  be  found  by  (7)  or  (9),  and  therefim

rfi^  (14/

are  simply  the  coefficients  of  ^  in  (9)  j  so  that  we  have

g=-^'

where  if,  if'  are  functions  of  ...  ezplioitly  e»pitiased  by
(10). Using  (16)  in  (15)  we  find

Digitized  by  Google

319.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AKD  FBINCIPLES.  323

+ CM'  +  etc  (17).  « V  .

Again  remarking  that  +  A'  contains  «//,  both  as  it  appeared
originally  in  T,  and  as  farther  introduced  in  the  expreasionB  (7)
for  ^  we  see  that

+C 6"  +
diff dtjf dilf  "*

And  by  (9)  wo  have

dx ( .  f/J/" .  <^N' \ d  dK

wMch,  used  in  the  preceding,  giTea

/«r ir\  ,.f'dM .dy \ ^J.d^r .dT \  ^dK

Henoe

dT M dK ^^f.dM ,dN  \

whore  3  denotes  summatbn  with  regard  to  the  oonstants  (7,
etc.

Uang  this  and  ( 1 7)  in  the  Lagrange's  ^-equation,  we  find  finally
for  the  ^-equation  of  motiMn  in  twms  of  the  noDrignored  co-
ordinates alone,  and  ooncliide  the  symmetrioal  equatioiis  for  ^
etc.,  as  follows,

d  /dZ\  dZ  ^r^ifd.U  dy\  .  /iLU  dO\.  \  dK  _
dt\^)  -  d^^ \[d4>  - J  ^  -"[  m  -  T^r^'"] #  ^*

d  (dZ\ >1Z ^^((dN f/.IA  ; (dN dO\. ) dK  ^

d  (dZ\ dZ ^ UdQ dM\  , (dO dN\  , \  dK

0

'  (19).

[Compare  Example  F'  («)  above.  It  is  important  to  remark
that  in  each  equation  of  motion  the  first  power  of  the  related
velocity-component  disappears ;  and  the  coefficient  of  each  of  the
other  velocity-components  in  this  equation  is  equal  but  of  op|>o8ite
sign  to  the  coeflicient  of  the  velocity-component  corresponding  to
this  equation,  in  the  equation  ooiresponding  to  that  other  velocity*
component.]

21—2

Digitized  by  Googie

S24  PBELDOliABT.  [319.

|4a|»tioft«r  equatloii  of  energy,  found  as  above  [§  318  (29*^)  and

(2901  la

^fl!^+^)  =  ,fr^  +  *^  +  etc  (20).

The  fatorpretation,  considering  (12),  is  obvious.  The  ccMitiaii
with  Example  F'  (^)  is  most  instructive.

SvA-SxampU  (O,).— -Take,  from  above,  Example  C,  ease  (•) ;
and  put  alao,  for  brevity,  ii]f'-i>tMi'si^i»(6'-i-P)«J,

and  nab  s  e. We  have*

J  { .1 +  2c^(^  +  ^)  ooa ^ +.8 {^+ ^)"}  5

and  from  this  find  *

(IT  •  (IT

—  =-c^(^  +  ^)sin^,  — ^  =c^oos^  +  i?(^  +

Here  the  oo-ordinate  $  alone^  and  not  the  ooKNrdinate  appears
in  the  ooefficienta. Suppose  now 0  [which  is  4ihe  caae  oon-

dT

aidered  at  the  end  of  C  (a)  above].  We  have  .  ^  and
deduce

^  I  \4f  [C  +  {c  cos  eA-B)e]-¥  BO]

Hence  ^  =  i  a — »  ^ "i^  i

ii  -I- j9  4-26  0080'

and

*  Rt^mark  tlmt,  according  to  the  alterafcion  irom  ^,  ^,  ^  to  ^,  ^,  #,
aa  iudopendent  vtiriabloB,

dT  (dT\ /dT\  fr_/dr\

frhm  {  )  indicatM  the  origmnl  notation  of  G(a).

Digitized  by  Google

319.]  DTKAKIGAL  UkWS  AND  PBIMCIFLES.  325

and  th^  one  e(i nation  of  the  motion  becomes  SSfT?y"

dt\A  +  ii  +  '2ccoHe  J  - de\A  -i-£+2cc(Me)  ~ de  *

which  is  to  be  fully  integrated  first  by  multiplying  by  d$  and
integmting  once  ;  and  then  solving  for  dl  and  integrating  again
with  respect  to  6.  Tlie  fii-st  integral,  being  aimply  the  equation
of  eneigy  integrated,  is  [Example  G  (20)]

and  the  final  integral  is

In  the  particular  case  in  which  the  motion  commences  from  Iimomtion

of  co-
rest,  or  IS  such  that  it  can  be  brought  to  rest  by  proi>er  applica-  anUuatct.

tions  of  foi-ce-components,  etc.  without  any  of  the  force-

components  X,  X',  eta,  we  have  (7=:0,  (7'  =  0,  etc;  and  the
elimination  of  x,  x  >  ©to.  by  (3)  renders  T  a  homogeneous  quad-
ratio  fimction  of  ^  eto,  without  C,  etc. ;  and  the  equations
of  motion  beoome

d  dT  dT  ^
 .  =  *

eft  d\p  dif/
d  dT  dT^^

d(d<f>'d<l>~ \  (21).

ddT dT  ^

etc  etc

We  condnde  that  <m  the  sapposttions  made,  tiie  eliminati<m  of
the  Teloc%-component8  eoiresponding  to  the  non-appenring  oo-
otdinates  gLvee  an  ezprenion  for  ^e  kinetio  energy  in  terms
of  the  remaining  Telodty-components  and  coRssponding  co-
ordinates which  may  be  used  in  the  generalised  equations  just
as  if  these  were  the  sole  eo^ordinates.  The  reduced  number  of
equations  of  motion  thus  found  suffices  for  the  determination
of  the  co-ordinates  which  they  involve  without  the  necessity
for  knowing  or  finding  the  other  coordinates.  If  the  farther
question  be  put» — ^to  determine  the  ignored  co-ordinates,  it  is  to
be  answered  hy  a  simple  integration  of  equations  (7)  with
(7«0,  O'sO,  etc.

One  obvious  case  of  application  for  this  example  is  a  system  in
which  any  number  of  fly  whecla,  that  is  to  say,  bodies  which  are

Digitizer  by  Google

P&ELUCINART.  [319.

kinetically  Bymmetrical  round  an  axis  (§  285),  are  pivoted  fric-
tionlessly  on  any  moveable  ])nri  of  the  system.  In  this  case
witli  the  jjarticular  supiK)sitiou  6'  0,  C"  =  0,  etc.,  tlif»  result  ii>
simply  that  the  motion  is  t  he  i^iiuie  jui  if  each  tly  \v  heel  wt  ro
deprived  of  mointjut  of  im  rtia  rotind  its  beaiing  axis,  tluit  is  to
Bay  reduced  to  a  line  of  matter  tixed  in  the  j>08ition  of  this  axis
and  haWng  unchangeil  moment  of  inertia  round  any  axis  per-
pemlicular  to  it.  But  if  C,  C,  etc.  be  nut  each  zevo  we  have  a
case  embracing  a  very  interesting  class  of  dynamical  problems
in  which  the  motion  of  a  sysleiii  having  what  we  may  call
gyroHtatic  links  or  connexions  is  the  subject.  Example  (U)
above  is  an  example,  in  which  there  is  just  one  fly  wheel  and  one
moveable  body  on  which  it  is  pivoted.  The  ignored  co-ordiiiat<i
is  ^ ;  and  supposing  now  4^  to  be  zero,  we  have

_co8^)  =  C' (a).

If  we  suppose  C  ^0  all  the  terms  having  for  a  factor  vanish
and  the  motion  is  the  siime  as  if  the  fly  wheel  were  deprived  of
inertia  round  its  lx?aring  axis,  and  we  had  simply  the  motion  of
the  "  ideal  rigid  Vuxly  PQ"  to  consiilcr.  But  when  C  does  not
vanish  we  eliniinatt'  ij/  from  the  e(jUutious  hy  means  of  (a).  It
is  imjH^i-tjint  to  remark  that  in  every  case  of  Kxam|)le  (G)  in
which  C  O,  C"-0,  etc.  the  motion  at  each  inslant  possesses  the
property  (i§  312  above)  of  having  less  kinetic  energy  than  any
other  motion  for  which  the  velocity-components  of  the  non-ignored
co-oxdinates  have  the  same  values.

^  Take  for  another  example  the  final  form  of  Example  (j§hoiv%
pntAang  B  for  C,  and  A  fornix  +  A. We  have

T^i{{JS  +  JTooB* ^) ^  +  J ooa « + +  J ^}  . . .{22X
Hero  ndther  ^  nor  ^  appears  in  the  coefficifiiitfk  Let  m  loppoie
^sO,  aaidelimmate^,  toletiiaignoro^  We  have

dT

Hence  -  ^  - cus  ^  (23),

««H(iP+J»ooa«tf)^  +  -^  (24V

and

The  place  of  j(  in  (9)  above  Is  now  taken  by  and  comparing
with  (L>3)  we  find

Digitized  by  Google

319.]  DTNAUICAL  LAWS  ASD  PBISCIl'LES.  327

.(86);

Henoe,  and  m  £  is  oonstenii  the  equatunia  of  uotioa  (19)
become

and  — .  +C«mftir«0

and,  U8i2i|{  (24)  and  expanding,

dt  ""^ I  ..(27).

ildV  I'sm  ^  ooB  0^ -I- (7  sin s  e  j

A  most  important  cane  for  tlie  "  ignoratiuii  of  co  ordinates**  is
presented  by  a  large  chuss  of  problems  regarding  tlie  motion  of
friftionless  incompru.s.sible  fluid  in  which  we  can  ignore  the
iiitinile  number  of  co-ordinat<*8  of  indiv  idual  portions  of  the  iluid
and  take  into  account  only  the  co-ordinates  wliicli  suthce  to
sjR'cifv  the  whole  boundary  of  the  fluid,  including  the  l)Ounding
surfaces  of  any  rigid  or  flexible  solids  immei-sed  in  the  fluid.
The  analytical  working  out  of  Example  (0)  si  lows  in  fact  that  when
tlie  motion  is  such  as  could  be  pro<luced  from  rest  by  merely
moving  the  Itoumlary  of  the  Huid  without  applying  force  to  ita
individual  panicles  otherwise  than  by  the  tranh.iiutted  fluid
pressure  we  have  exactly  the  cjise  of  (7  =  0,  C  =  0,  etc.:  and
I.;iL,n  :iuge'8  generalized  equat  ions  with  the  kinetic  energy  expressed
in  tenns  of  velocity-components  completely  BpecilyLU|^  the  motion
of  the  bouudiuy  are  available.  Thus,

820. ProblemB  in  fluid  motion  of  remarkable  interest  and  Kinetics  oi

A  perfect

importance,  not  hitherto  attacked,  are  rery  readily  solved  by
the  aid  of  Lagrange's  generalized  equations  of  motion.  For
brevity  we  shall  designate  a  mass  which  is  absolutely  incom-
pressible, and  absolutely  devoid  of  resistance  to  change  of  shape,
by  the  simple  appellation  of  a  liquid.  We  need  scarcely  say
that  matter  perfectly  satisfying  this  definition  does  not  exist
in  nature:  but  we  shall  see  (under  properties  of  matter)  how
nearly  it  is  approached  by  water  and  other  common  real
liquids.  And  we  shall  find  that  niucli  practical  and  interesting
information  regarding  their  true  motions  is  obtaiued  by  deduc-
tions from  the  principles  of  abstract  dynamics  applied  to  the
ideal  perfect  liquid  of  our  definition. It  follows  from  £zample

Digitized  by  Google

328

PBIUIONABT.

[320.

KinetWof  (G)  above  (and  several  othor  j>roofs,  some  of  tliem  more  i
liquid.  synthetical  in  character,  will  be  given  in  our  Second  Volume,)
that  the  motion  of  a  homogeneous  liquid,  whether  of  infinite
extent,  or  contained  in  a  finite  closed  yessel  of  any  form,  with
any  rigid  or  flexible  bodies  moTing  through  it,  if  it  has  ever
been  at  rest,  is  the  same  at  each  instant  as  that  determinate
motion  (fulfilling,  §  312,  the  condition  of  having  the  least
possible  kinetic  eneigyj  which  would  be  impoUdyely  produced
from  rest  by  giving  instantaneously  to  every  part  of  the
bounding  surface,  sod  of  the  surface  of  each  of  the  solids
trithin  it,  its  actual  velocity  at  that  instant  So  that»  for
example,  however  long  it  may  have  been  moving,  if  all  tbe«e
surfaces  were  suddenly  or  gradually  brought  to  rest,  the  whole
fluid  mass  would  come  to  rest  at  the  same  time.  Hence,  if
none  of  the  surfaces  is  flexible,  but  we  have  one  or  nioif  lig-id
bodies  moving  in  any  way  through  the  liquid,  under  the  in-
fluence of  any  forces,  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  whole  motion
at  any  instant  will  depend  solely  on  the  finite  number  of  co-
ordinates and  component  velocities,  specifying  the  position  and
motion  of  those  bodies,  whatever  may  be  the  positions  reached
by  particles  of  the  fluid  (expressible  only  by  an  infinite  number
of  co-ordinates).  And  an  expression  for  the  whole  kinetic
energy  in  terms  of  such  element^  finite  in  number,  is  predsely
what  is  wanted,  as  we  have  seen,  as  the  foundation  of  Lagrange's
equations  in  any  particular  case.

It  will  dearly,  in  the  hydrodynamioal,  as  in  all  other  cases,
be  a  homogeiieous  quadratic  function  of  the  eomponents  of  velo
city,  if  referred  to  an  invariable  co-ordiniite  aystem;  and  iho.
ooefficients  of  ih.e  ^vcral  terms  will  in  general  be  funetioDS  cf
the  co-ordinates,  the  determination  of  which  follows  immediately
from  the  solution  of  the  minimum  problem  of  Example  (3)  %  SIT,
in  eadi  partiGular  case.

Example  (1), — A  hall  set  in  motion  through  a  mass  of  iitcom-
pressible  ^uid  extending  infinitely  in  all  directions  oti  one  side  of
an  infinite  plane^  and  originaUy  at  rest.  Let  x,  y,  s  be  the  co-
ordinates dF  the  emtre  of  the  ball  at  time  with  reference  to
rectangular  axes  through  a  fixed  point  0  of  the  bounding  plane,
with  OX  perpendicular  to  this  plane. If  at  any  instant  cither

Digitized  by  Googlel

8^.]  DTNAXICAL  LAWS  AKD  PRINCIPLIS.  329

eomponent or  z  of  the  velocity  be  remied,  tiie  kinetic  energy  Kinetics  of
will  clearly  be  Qnehanged,  and  hence  no  terms  ffit  zJ:,  or  xi/  can  liquid,
appear  in  the  ex|nres8ion  for  the  kinetic  energy :  which,  on  this
aocoimtk  and  because  of  the  ajpnmetiy  of  qrcnrogtanoee  with
referanoe  to  p  and  z,  is

Also,  we  see  that  P  and  Q  are  functions  of  rr  simply,  since  tl»e
circumstances  are  similar  for  all  values  of  y  and  z.  Hence,  by
differentiation,

dT dT dT  ^

d(dT\  dP

and  the  equations  of  motion  are

PrindpleB  snfficient  for  a  practica]  solntioii  of  the  problem  of
dotermining  P  and  Q  will  be  given  later.  In  the  meantime^  it
is  obvioQs  that  eadi  deeteaaes  as  x  increaseai  Hence  the  equa*
tiooa  of  motion  ahow  that

821. A  ball  projected  through  a  liquid  perpendicularly  BiTect  of »

yrom  an  infinite  plane  boundary,  and  influenced  by  no  other  Mibttmc!
forces  than  those  of  fluid  pressure,  experiences  a  gradual  ac-  |^^^|^ha
celeration,  quickly  approximating  to  a  limiting  velocity  which
it  sensibly  reaches  when  its  distance  from  the  plane  is  many
times  its  diameter.  But  if  projected  paraM  to  the  plane,  it
experiences,  as  the  resultant  of  fluid  pressure,  a  resultant  attrac-
tion towards  the  plane.  The  former  of  these  results  is  easily
proved  by  first  considering  projection  towards  the  plane  (in
which  case  the  motion  of  the  ball  will  obviously  be  retarded),
and  by  takiug  into  account  the  general  principle  of  reversibility
(§  272)  which  liari  i*ertt'ct  application  in  tlie  ideal  case  of  a  })or-
fect  liquid. The  second  result  i;3  ic&s  easily  foreseen  without

Digitized  by  Google

330

PBELDIINABT.

[321.

the  aid  of  Lafrrange's  analysis ;  but  it  is  an  obvious  cousequeuce
of  the  Haiuiltoniun  form  of  his  equations,  as  stated  in  woixls
Soemiriff in  §  319  above. In the precisely  equivalent case, of  a

attrnction  «>  i  J  ^

b.4w«-eti  liquid  extending  infinitely  in  all  directions,  aud  civen  at  rest;
r.vside  in*^^  ^"'^^  two  equal  balls  projected  through  it  with  equal  velocities
dinoSm.  Perpendicular  to  the  liue  joining  tlieir  centres — the  result  that

the  two  balls  will  seem  to  attract  one  another  is  most  le-

markable,  and  very  suggestive.

Hydro-
dynamical

exunipI«K
conUiiued.

"('.■litre  of

IVRCtioll  "

Example  (2). — A  tolid  g^mmtiriieal  round  an  axU,  mom$tg
through  a  liquid  so  as  to  keep  its  axis  aiwa^  m  one  plant.
Let  «>  be  the  angular  velocity  of  the  body  at  any  instant  about
any  axis  per|)endicu1ar  to  the  fixed  plane,  and  let  u  and  q  be  the
component  veloctties  along  ami  ])ei-|^endicnlar  to  the  axis  of
figure,  of  any  chosen  point,  C,  of  the  body  in  this  line.  By  the
general  principle  stated  in  §  320  (since  changing  the  sign  of
u  csnnot  alter  the  kinetic  energy),  -we  have

r=  J  (Au'  +  £2'  +  fJLio'  +  2£ioq)  (a),

trhere  i,  /$.',  and  E  aie  constants  depending  on  the  figure  o£
the  body,  its  mass,  and  the  density  of  the  liquid.  Kow  let  v
denote  the  velocity,  p«:pendicular  to  the  axis,  of  a  point  which
we  shall  call  the  centre  of  reaetwnf  being  a  point  in  the  axis  and

at  a  distance from  C,  so  that  (§  ^1).  q-v^-^ia.  Then,

denoting  li^  ^ by  /i,  we  have  T=  J  (-it*'  + +  /tw*)  (a').

Let  a;  and  y  be  the  co*oidinates  of  the  centre  of  rsaction  rdadvely
to  any  fixed  rectangular  axes  in  the  plane  of  motion  of  the  axis
of  figure,  and  let  $  be  the  an^^e  between  this  line  and  OX,  at
any  instant^  so  that

ui  =  0,  tt  =  ;ccos^+^8in^, -xwcLB^-yoo&Q  ....(().

Substituting  in  T,  diffcroiitiatiug,  and  retaining  the  notation
tt,  V  where  convenient  for  bi'evity,  wo  ha\  u

dT . dT  dT
di~^'  ^  = -itt cos Bind, Au am O-i-Bv cob $j

Digitized  byJ[^OOgIg^

321.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINOIPLBS.  931

HeUoo  the  equations  of  motion  are  chTll'inlcai

X t  A n\  T  \  exiitnples

 5  5  ^

where  X,  F  are  tbe  oompone&t  foroee  in  lines  through  C  parallel
to  OX  and  OF,  and  L  the  eouple,  applied  to  tiie  body.

Denoting  by  A,  ^,  t;  tlio  impulsive  couple,  and  the  components
of  iiu|)ul.si\  e  force  through  Cj  recpiired  to  produce  the  motion  at
anj  instant^  we  have  of  course  [§313  (<?)],

dT .  , dT  dT
X-jg  =  K^  =  ^,'?  =  ^

and  therefore  by  (c),  and  (6),

ti°^(^ooB0-i-i|8in^,  v--g(-^8in^-i-i|eoeq^ (/),

/I 1\  .  /Bin"^ cos'dX  I

to).

and  the  equations  of  motion  become

The  simple  case  of  X-  0,  }"=•  0,  Z  -  0,  is  particularly  interesting.
In  it  ^  and  7; are  each  constant;  nnd  we  may  therefore  choose  the
axes  OXy  OY,  so  that  7;  shall  vanish.  Thus  we  have,  in  (^),  two
first  integrab  of  the  equations  of  motion;  and  they  become

^--235-^"^^^

and  the  first  of  equations  (h)  becomes

'^^r+lZB^"^^^-^  W.

A  —  B

Inthia  kt^lor  a  moment^  and -^^^-^AIT.  Itbeocmes

fi  ^'^9'^ "  Sill  ^  =  0,

is  the  equation  of  motion  of  a  ecmnum  pendnlum,  of
9F,  moment  of  inertia  fk  roand  its  fixed  axis,  and  length

Digitized  by  Google

I

382  PRBLIMINABT.

h  from  tads  to  centre  of  gravity;  if  5^  be  tlie  angle  fiom
the  podtiaii  of  equilifariom  to  the  poeitioii  at  lame  L  Aa  we
■hall  aee^  ondor  Vinetaffl,  the  final  integral  of  thia  equation
cxpie— CB  ^  in  terma  of  I  bj  meana  of  an  elliptie  ftmetion.
By  naing  the  Tslae  thna  found  for  0  or  }^  in  (k),  we  have
eqnationa  gi>ing  x  and  y  in  terma  of  <  by  0(Mnmon  integration ;
and  thna  the  full  solution  of  onr  present  problem  ia  reduced  .to
quadiatnrea.  The  detailed  woridug  out  to  exhibit  both  the  actual
curve  deaciibed  by  the  oentie  of  reaction,  and  the  podtiaii  of
the  aam  of  Ihe  body  at  any  instant^  ia  highly  intereeting.  It  ia
very  easily  done  approximatoly  fat  the  case  of  veiy  email  angnlar
vibrntions;  that  is  to  say,  when  either  if  — ^  is  positive^  and
^  always  very  small,  or  A—B  negative,  and  ^  very  neariy
equal  to  But  without  attending  at  present  to  the  final
integrals,  rigorcnia  or  iqvprozmiate^  we  see  firom  {k)  and  {[)  thait

822.  If  a  solid  of  revolution  in  an  infinite  liquid,  be  set  in
motion  round  any  axis  perpendicular  to  its  axis  of  figure,  or
simply  projected  in  any  direction  without  rotation,  it  will  move

with  its  axis  always  in  one  plane,  and  every  point  of  it  moving
only  parallel  to  this  plane;  and  the  strauge  evolutions  which
it  will,  in  general,  perform,  are  perfectly  defined  by  comparison
with  the  common  pendulum  thus.  First,  for  brevity,  we  shall
Quadrantai  call  by  the  uamo  of  quadnintal  pendulum  (which  will  be  further

jHiuiuliim  I-/' 1 •  •  1111  1 1 ^  •  -x

defiued.  exemplined  m  various  cases  described  later,  under  electricity
and  magnetism ;  for  instance,  an  elongated  mass  of  soft  iron
pivoted  on  a  vertical  axis,  in  a  "uniform  field  of  magnetic
force  a  body  moving  about  an  axis,  according  to  the  same
law  with  reference  to  a  quadrant  on  each  side  of  its  position  of
equilibrium,  as  the  common  pendulum  with  reference  to  a  half
dtde  on  each  side.

Let  now  the  body  in  question  be  set  in  nmtioQ  by  an  im-
pulse, f,  in  any  line  tliron^li  the  centre  of  reaction,  and  an
impulsive  ccuple  A.  in  the  plane  of  that  line  and  the  axis.  This
will  (as  will  be  proved  later  in  the  theory  of  statical  couples)
have  the  same  effect  as  a  simple  impulse  f  (applied  to  a  point,
if  not  of  the  real  body,  connected  with  it  by  an  imaginary  in-
finitely light  framework)  in  a  certain  fixed  line,  which  we  shall
call  the  line  of  resultant  impulse,  or  of  resultant  momentam,

Hjdro-
4jtuuni<xl
•nunplrfl

Digitized  by  Google,

S22.]  BTKAUIGAL  LAWS  AH1>  PRIUCIFLES.  S3S

being  parallel  to  the  foimer  line,  and  at  a  distance  from,  it  equal  to  JfJSSdli

\  revolutkm

J  • The  whole  momentum  of  the  motion  generated  is  of  course  {^Jgjf**  •

295)  equal  to  f .  The  bodj  will  move  ever  afterwards
aooording  to  the  following  conditions : — (1.)  The  angular  velo-
city folbws  the  law  of  the  quadrantal  pendulum.  (2.)  The
distance  of  the  centre  of  reaction  from  the  line  of  resultant
impulse  varies  simply  as  the  .angular  velocity.  (3.)  The
velocity  of  the  centre  of  reaction  parallel  to  the  line  of
impulse  is  found  by  clividinf:^  the  excess  of  the  whole  con-
stant energy  of  the  motion  above  the  part  of  it  due  to  the
angular  velocity  round  the  centre  of  reliction,  by  half  the
momentum.  (4-)  If  ^l,  B,  and  fi  denote  constiiut?,  depending
on  the  mass  of  the  solid  and  its  distribution,  the  density  of  the
liquid,  and  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the  solid,  such  that

^,  —  are  the  linear  velocities,  and  the  angular  velocity,

respectively  produced  by  an  impulse  (  along  the  axis,  an'  im*
pulse  { in  a  line  through  the  centre  q£  reaction  perpendicular
to  the  axis,  and  an  impulsive  couple  X  in  a  plane  thiough  the
axb;  the  leugth  of  the  simple  gravitation  pendulum,  whose
motion  would  keep  time  with  the  periodic  motion  in  question,

is  ^^j^^^f when  the  aogular  motion  is  vibratory,  the

vibrations  will,  according  as  A  >  B,  ar  A  <Bf  be  of  the

axis,  or  of  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  vibrating  on
each  side  of  the  line  of  impulse.  The  angular  motion  will
in  fact  be  vibratory  if  the  distance  of  the  line  of  resultant
impulse  from  the  centre  of  reaction  is  any  tiling  less  than

pulse  to  the  initial  position  of  the  axis.  In  this  case  the  path
of  the  centre  of  reaction  will  be  a  sinuous  curve  symmetrical  on
the  two  sides  of  the  line  of  impulse ;  every  time  it  cuts  this  line,
the  angular  motion  will  reverse,  and  the  maximum  inclination
will  be  attained ;  and  every  time  the  centre  of  reaction  is  at  its
greatest  distance  on  either  side,  the  angular  velocity  will  be  at
its  greatest,  positive  or  negative,  value,  and  the  linear  velocity  of

>  where  a  denotes  the  inclination  of  the  im-

Digitized  by  Google

334

PRKTilMINABY.

[321

Motion  of the  centre  of  reaction  will  beat  its  least.  If,  on  the  other  band,

a  solid  of  ^  '  ^

thro!"h? ^^^^  resultant  impalse  be  at  a  greater  distance  than

 -  from  the  ceutre  of  reaction,  the  angular  motion

will  be  always  in  one  direction,  but  will  increase  and  dinainish
periodically,  and  tbe  centre  of  reaction  will  describe  a  sinnmis
curve  on  one  side  of  that  line;  being  at  its  greatest  and  least
deviations  wben  tbe  angular  velocity  is  greatest  and  least.  At
the  same  points  the  curvature  of  the  path  will  be  greatest  and
least  respectively,  and  the  linear  velocity  of  the  describing
point  will  be  least  and  greatest.

823. At  any  instant  the  component  linear  velocities  along
and  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  solid  will  be —  and

^  sin  ^

^.ggpg^tively,  if be  its  inclination  to  the  line  of  i»-

sultant  impulse ;  and  the  angular  velocity  will  be  —  if  y  be  tbe

distance  of  the  centre  of  reaction  from  that  line.  Tbe  whole
kinetic  eneigy  of  the  motion  will  be

f  cos'  e ^f^m'  0  f  /

and  the  last  term  is  what  we  have  referred  to  above  as  the
part  due  to  rotation  round  the  centre  of  reaction  (defined  in
§  321).  To  stop  the  whole  motion  at  any  instant,  a  simple
impulse  equal  and  opposite  to  (  in  the  fixed  "line  of  resultant
impulse"  will  suffice  (or  an  equal  and  parallel  impulse  in  any
line  through  tbe  body,  with  the  proper  impulsive  couple^  acoovd-
ing  to  the  principle  already  referred  to).

891.  From  Lagrange's  equations  applied  as  above  to  the  case
of  a  solid  of  revolution  moving  through  a  liquid,  the  couple
which  must  be  kept  applied  to  it  to  prevent  it  from  turning  is
immediately  found  to  be

324.]  DTNAMICIL  I1AW8  AND  PRINCIPLES.  9BS

if  u  and  v  be  the  component  velocities  along  and  perpendicular  Motion  or

«l  — I  nili  ^1/

'2AB  •

i(  as  before,  f  be  the  generating  impulse,  and  $  the  angle  be-
tween its  line  and  the  axis.  The  direction  of  this  couple  must
be  such  as  to  prevent  0  from  diminishing  or  from  increasing,
according  as  ii  or  S  is  the  greater.  The  former  will  clearly
be  the  case  of  a  flat  disc,  or  oblate  spheroid ;  the  latter  that  of
an  elongated,  or  oval-shaped  body.  The  actual  values  of  A
and  B  we  shall  learn  how  to  calculate  (hydrodynamics)  for
several  cases,  including  a  body  bounded  by  two  spherical  sur-
faces cutting  one  another  at  any  angle  a  submultiple  of  two
right  angles;  two  complete  spheres  rigidly  couiiected;  and  aa
oblate  or  a  prolate  spheroid.

325.  The  tendency  of  a  body  to  turn  its  flat  side,  or  its  ObaCTred
length  (as  tlie  case  may  be),  across  the  direction  of  its  motion
through  a  Htpiid,  to  which  the  accelerations  and  retardations  of
rot'itory  motion  described  in  §  322  are  due,  and  of  which  wo
have  now  obtained  the  statical  measure,  is  a  remarkable  illus-
tration of  the  statement  of  §  319 ;  and  is  closely  connected
with  the  dynamical  explanation  of  many  curious  observations
well  known  in  practicti  mechanics,  among  which  may  be  men-
tioned

(1)  That  the  course  of  a  symmetrical  square-rigged  ship
sailing  in  the  direction  of  the  wind  with  rudder  amidships  is
unstable,  and  can  only  be  kepi  by  manipulating  the  rudder  to
check  infinitesimal  deviations and  that  a  diOd's  toy-boat,

whether  " square-rigged'*  or  "fore-and-aft  rigged*,"  cannot  be

•  "Fore-and-aft"  nV  h  nny  ri^r  in  wliicb  (fts  in  "  cnttcrn  "  and  "  sclioonerfl '*)
the  chief  suils  come  into  the  i)lane  of  mast  or  mast.s  and  keel,  by  the  action  of
the  wind  npon  the  soila  wheu  the  vessel's  head  ia  to  wind.  This  position
of  the  Mils  if  vdMO^  when  tha  wind  is  right  Mtam.  Aooordinglj,  in
■*WMiiilg*'  S  lor«^d-ift  tigged  veMd  (fblt  ie  to  say  turning  her  round
stem  to  wind,  from  sailing  with  the  wind  on  one  side  to  Bailin^^  with  tlio
wind  on  the  other  «\df')  the  mainsail  mnst  be  hauled  in  as  closely  as  may  be  ^
towards  the  middle  jx  Hition  iieforo  tlic  wind  is  allowed  to  get  on  the  other  side
of  the  sail  from  tiuit  on  which  it  hud  been  pre^saiug,  so  that  when  the  wind

Digitized  by  Google

836

PBELUflNABT.

got  to  sail  pennaDently  before  the  wind  by  any  permanent  ad-
SiuSuiw*  justment  of  rudder  and  sails,  and  that  (without  a  wind  vane,  or
a  weighted  tiller,  acting  on  the  rudder  to  do  the  part  of
steersman)  it  always,  after  running  a  few  yards  before  the  wind,
turns  round  till  nearly  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the
wind  (cither  "gibing"  first,  or  "luffiDg"  without  gibing  if  it
is  a  cuttor  or  schooner)  : —

(2)  That  the  towing  rope  of  a  canal  boat,  when  the  rudder
IB  left  straight,  takes  a  position  in  a  vertical  plane  catting  the
axis  hefore  its  middle  point : —

(3)  That  a  boat  sculled  rapidly  across  the  direction  of  the
wind,  always  (unless  it  is  extraordinarily  unsymmetrical  in
its  draught  of  water,  and  in  the  amounts  of  sur&ce  exposed
to  the  wind,  towards  its  two  ends)  requires  the  weather  oar
to  be  worked  hardest  to  prevent  it  from  running  up  on  the
wind,  and  that  for  the  same  reason  a  sailing  vessel  generally

carries  a  weather  helm**  or  "  gripes ;"  and  that  still  more  does
80  a  steamer  with  sail  even  if  only  in  the  forward  half  of  her
length — griping  so  badly  with  any  after  canvass'f"  that  it  is  often
impossible  t«j  steer  : —

(4)  That  in  a  heavy  gale  it  is  exceedingly  difficult,  anti
often  found  impossible,  to  get  a  ship  out  of  "  the  trough  of  the
sea,"  and  that  it  cannot  bo  done  at  all  without  rapid  motion
ahead,  whether  by  steam  or  sails  : —

(5)  That  in  a  smooth  sea  with  moderate  wind  blowing
parallel  to  the  shore,  a  sailing  vessel  heading  towards  the  shore
with  not  enough  of  sail  set  can  only  be  saved  from  creeping
ashore  by  setting  more  sail,  and  sailing  rapidly  towards  the
shore,  or  the  danger  that  is  to  be  avoided,  so  as  to  allow  her  to
be  steered  away  from  it  The  risk  of  going  ashore  in  fulfilment

ilocB  get  on  tho  other  side,  and  when  therefore  the  s&il  dosheB  across  ihrongh
the  mid-ship  position  to  the  other  aide,  canying  massive  boom  and  gaff  with  it,
tlw  nag»  of  iUs  waMm  motion,  wUeh  is  oallod  ''giUng,''  ■lisU  bo  at  omJI
Mmagrbo.

•  Tlio  weather  Bide  of  any  objeot  is  the  pidc  of  it  to-^vards  tho  wind.  A  ship
U  Pftid  to  "carry  a  weather  helm"  when  it  is  noci  ssary  to  lu  ld  the  "helm"  or
"tiller"  permanently  on  tho  weather  side  of  its  middle  position  (by  wbiob  the
rudder  is  held  towards  the  lee  side)  to  keep  the  ship  on  her  eoono.

t  Henee  mlMii  moitM  om  altogetiMr  otmdenuMd  is  modam  mowaliipe  by
many  oompotsnt  nmtifltl  aatiioritiM.

Digitized  by  Google

325.]

DTNAIOCAL  LAWS  AND  PRIMGIPLES.  337

of  Lagrange's  equations  is  a  frequent  incident  of  "getting
under  way  '*  while  lifting  anchor,  or  even  after  slipping  from
moorings

(6)  That  an  elongated  rifle-huUet  requires  rapid  rotation  Md  smi^
about  its  axis  to  keep  its  point  ^remost.

(7)  The  curious  motions  of  a  flat  disc,  oyster-shell,  or  the
like,  when  dropped  ohliquely  into  water,  resemble,  no  doubt,  to
some  extent  those  desi  l  ilxnl  iu  §  322.  But  it  must  be  re-
membered that  the  real  circumstances  differ  greatly,  because
of  fluid  friction,  from  those  of  the  abstract  problem,  of  which
we  take  leave  for  the  present.

826.  Maupertuis'  celebrated  principle  of  Least  Action  ^^^^^
been,  even  up  to  the  present  time,  regarded  rather  as  a  curious
and  somewhat  perplexing  property  of  motion,  than  as  a  useful
guide  in  kinetic  investigations.  We  are  strongly  impressed
with  the  oonyiction  that  a  much  more  profound  importance
will  be  attached  to  it,  not  only  in  abstract  dynamics,  but  in  the
theory  of  the  several  branches  of  physical  science  now  beginning
to  receive  dynamic  explanations.  As  an  extension  of  it.  Sir
W.  R  Hamilton*  has  evolved  his  method  of  Varying  Action,
which  undoubtedly  must  become  a  most  valuable  aid  in  future
generalizations.

What  is  meant  by  "Action"  in  these  expressions  is,  unfor- Action,
tunately,  something  very  different  from  the  Actio  Agoniis  de-
fined by  Newton "f,  and,  it  must  be  admitted,  is  a  much  less
judiciously  chosen  word. Taking  it,  however,  as  we  find  it,  Time  amw
now  universally  used  by  writers  on  dynamics,  we  define  the  vMisr.
Action  of  a  Mofeing  System  as  proportional  to  the  average
kinetic  eneigy,  which  the  system  has  possessed  during  the  time
from  any  convenient  epoch  of  redconing,  multiplied  by  the  time.
Accordiug  to  the  unit  generally  adopted,  the  action  of  a  system
whicli  has  not  varied  in  its  kinetic  energy,  is  twice  the  amount
of  the  energy  multiplied  by  the  time  from  the  epoch. Or  if
the  energy  has  been  sometimes  greater  and  sometimes  less.

•  Phil.  Trans.  1834—1835.

t  Whieh,  howeTex  (§  203),  we  have  tnnalatod  «*  aetiTiij*'  io  sroid  oonfniion.

VOL.  I.  22

8S8  FBEUIIINABT.

TiaMftTw-  the  action  at  time  t  is  tlie  double  of  what  we  may  call  the
tinie-integral  of  the  energy,  tliat  is  to  say,  it  iB  what  is  de-
noted in  the  integral  calculus  by

2  JVjr,

wbere  T  denotes  the  kinetic  eneigy  at  any  time  t,  between

the  epoch  and  t

Let  m  be  the  maaa^  and  v  the  velixntj  at  time  r,  of  aaj  one  of
the  material  points  of  vhich  the  system  is  composed. We  bsve

r=2imt^  (1).

and  therefore,  if  A  denote  the  action  at  time

A^j*^^tmfdr  (2).

This  may  be  put  otherwise  by  taking  di  to  denote  the  speoe  de-
scribed by  a  partiele  in  time  <lr,  so  that  vdr  «  d$,  and  therafoce

A  =/2mif/a  (3),

or,  ii  Xf  y,  zhe  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  m  at  any  time,

^  a  /  2m  {dsdx + i^y ic£s)  (4).

Henoe  we  might,  as  many  writers  in  faet  have  Tirtnally  done^
define  action  thus : —

8|MMftf«r- The  action  of  a  system  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  average
{jSfflty  riioineniiuns  for  the  spaces  described  by  the  particles  from  any
era  each  multiplied  by  the  length  of  its  path.

LfMk  327. The  principle  of  Least  Action  is  this: — Of  all  the

different  sets  of  paths  along  which  a  conservative  systeni  way
be  guitled  to  move  from  one  configuration  to  another,  with  the
sum  of  its  potential  and  kinetic  energies  equal  to  a  given  con-
stant, that  one  for  which  the  action  is  the  least  is  such  that
the  system  will  require  only  to  be  started  with  the  proper
velocities,  to  move  along  it  unguided.  Consider  the  Problem  :—
«£.  em  o  QiYQQ wholo  initial  kinetic  eneigy ;  find  the  initial  velocities
through  one  given  oonfiguratiou,  which  shall  send  the  system
f  ir  miue unguided  to  another  specified  configuration. This  problem  is
Tn'i^ttoo  essentially  determinate,  but  generally  has  multaple  solutions
■r  o  ^  ^  ^ below) ;  (or  only  imaginaiy  solutions.)

Lviyiiized  by  GoogI*

827.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCm.ES.  339

If  there  are  any  real  solutions,  there  is  one  of  them  for  which  Le^t
the  acUon  is  less  than  for  any  other  real  solution,  and  less  than
for  any  constrainedly  guided  motion  with  proper  sum  of  po-
tential and  kinetic  energies. Compare  §g  346—366  below.

Let  X,  I/,  zho  the  co-ordinates  of  a  particle,  m,  of  the  pystcm,
at  time  t,  and  V  the  potential  energj'  of  tlie  system  in  its  parti-
cular coutiguration  at  this  instaut ;  and  let  it  be  required  t<)  find
the  way  to  pass  from  one  given  configuration  to  another  with
velocities  at  each  instant  satisfying  the  condition

^im{sl^+3j^-¥i^)+  V^£,tkWmBtKat  (5),

so  that  i<,  or

may  be  the  least  possible.

By  the  method  of  variations  wo  must  have =s  0,  where

ail«/Sm(;6(2a04'j^4-i(ias  +  &nia;+ (6).  '

Taldiig  in  this  dx^dbdtf  dy^^r^  dz^zdr^  and  ttaoasAang  that
Sm{*a*  +  yS^  +  iSi)  -  sr.  (7),

we  have

jSmiUdx^^d^f^mz)^  j'&Tdr  (8).

Also  by  integration  by  parts,

J^^{xdBx  +...)  =  {2m  {JxLc  +...)}-  [tm {xdx  + . . . )] -/Xot(x&c+  . . . ) r/r,

where  [...]  and  (...)  denote  the  values  of  the  quantities  enclosed^
at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  motion  considered,  and  where^
farther,  it  must  be  remembeied  that  dA^iiirf  eto.  Henoe,
from  above^

^  r<<r  [Sr-2m(;B&B  +  y£{y+«Ss)]  (9).

This,  it  may  lx>  observed,  is  a  |)erfectly  general  kiuctnatical  ex[>re8-
sion,  unrestricted  by  any  temiinal  or  kinetic  conditions.  Now
in  the  pi-esent  problem  we  suppose  the  initial  and  iinal  positions
to  be  invariable.  Jienco  the  terminal  variations,  hx,  etc.,  must
all  vauibh,  and  therefore  the  integnited  expressions  {•••}.[•••]  dis-
api^ear.  Also,  in  the  present  proldeni  87'^  —  ST,  by  the  equation
of  energy  (5).  Hence,  to  make  8.1=0,  since  the  intermediate
variations,  hXf  etc.,  are  quite  arbitrary,  subject  only  to  the  con-

22—2

Digitized  by  Google

Principle  of
I>*&«tActioa

ApplitMl

ui  niid

prIllTltl  IZL'd

auatidiis
motUm.

840  PBKLnnNABY,  [327.

ditums  of  the  system,  we  must  have

Sfi»(<e&B'»-^-i-a&8)-f.aF»0  (10)»

which  [(4),  I  293  above]  is  tho  genenl  ▼ariational  equation  cC
motioa  of  a  oonaervative  iijitem.  •  This  proves  the  propoatim.

It  is  interestini^  and  instructive  as  an  illustration  of  tlip  prin-
ciple of  least  aetiuii,  to  derive  directly  fi*oin  it,  without  imy  u.m*
of  Cartesian  co-ordinatea,  Lagniuge's  equatious  in  genenilize<l
co-oK  11  nates,  of  the  motion  of  a  conservative  system  318  (24}].
We  have

where  T  denotes  the  formula  of  ^  313  (2). If  now  we  put

*  dt' '

80  that ds'  <=  (ft  ^)  dtif'  +  2 ^}  d^lrdifi  +  etc..

we  have
Henoe

where  9{f,4,^)  denotes  Tariatioii  dependent  on  the  ezptioit  ap-
pearance of  ^,  ^  etc.  in  the  ooefBciaiis  of  the  quadratic  fone-
tion  T. The  second  chief  teim  in  the  formula  for  &i  is  dearly

fdT

equal  to d^y  and  this,  integi-ated  by  part«,  becomes

where  [  ]  denotes  the  difTerenee  of  the  values  of  the  bracketed
expression,  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  time  jdl.  Thus  we
have  finally

Digitized  by  Googl^

827.]

DTNAUICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

S41

Softrwe  have  a  purely  kinematical  formula.  Now  introduce  rrinripip  of
the  dynamioal  ooodition  g  293  (7)]

r-(7-r  (10)".

From  it  we  find

Lt-ajit  Action
appli"-"!
to  find
LagranK«'8
gencrnlizad

•i"— (^«^+  (loy.

Anauiy  we  have

dT  (IT

W-ft)^"^^^  +^^  +  eta  (lOr.

Honoe  (10)'  beoomea

uations
motioii.

To  make  thin  a  miniiiium  we  have

d  dj^  dT
dt  (l^  dip

+  J-0,eto;  (10)-

which  are  the  required  equatione  g  318  (24)].

Tnm  the  projiositioa  that  &issO  implies  the  equatlonfl  of
motion,  it  follows  that

828. In  any  ungiiidcd  motion  whatever,  of  a  conservative  wi,y  caiicd
system,  the  Action  from  any  one  stated  position  to  any  other,  acu<m/'Sgr^
though  not  necessarily  a  minimum,  fulfils  tlie  stationary  condi-
tion, that  is  to  say,  the  condition  that  the  variation  vanishes,
which  secures  either  a  minimum  or  mazimum,  or  maximum*
minimum.

This  can  scsroely  be  made  intelligihle  witlumt  mathematiBS
language.  Let  (a5„  y^,  «,),  (a:^  «J,  etc,  he  the  ooofdmates
of  particles,  m^,  etc.,  oompceing  the  system;  at  any  time  r  of
the  actual  motioiL  LetTbe  the  potential  energy  of  the  system,
In  this  ooofiguxation;  and  let  £  denote  tiie  grran  value  of  the
sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetio  energies.  The  equation  of
energy  is  ■

i  {m,(j6/  +  y.'  +  s.*)  + (^•.'  + +  i/)  +  etc.}  +  F= (5)  bis.
Choosing  any  part  of  the  motion,  for  instance  that  from  time  0
to  time  t,  we  have,  for  the  action  during  it,

Am^(E^V)dt^M'^Vdt  (11).

Digitized  by  Google

842  PRELDIINABT.  [328.

BtaUoniy  I^t  now  the  system  be  guided  to  move  in  any  other  way  j>os.sible
for  it,  with  any  other  velocitiea,  from  the  SiUiie  initial  to  the  same
final  conBgiiration  as  in  the  given  motion,  subject  only  to  the
condition,  that  the  sum  of  the  kinetic  and  potential  energies  ^>hall
still  be  E.  Let  y',  z'),  etc.,  be  the  co-ordinates,  and  V
the  corres]>onding  potential  eii<  rg>'  ;  and  let  {x^'y  y,',  2,'),  etc,,
be  the  component  velocities,  at  time  t  in  this  arbitraiy  motion  ;
equation  (2)  still  holding,  for  the  accented  letters^  with  onlj  £
* unchanged. For  the  action  we  shall  have

A'^JSt'-j'v'dr  {12),

where  t'  is  the  time  occupied  by  this  suppo^xl  motion.  Let  now
6  denote  a  ^mall  numerical  quantity,  and  let  7J^f  eta,  be  finite
lines  such  that

V'-V

The  "principle  of  stataonaiy  action*'  is,  tliat  — ^ —  TanisheB

when  6  is  made  infinitely  small,  for  every  possible  deviation
{$^6,  -q^O,  etc.)  from  the  natural  way  and  velocities,  Ku)»jeot  only
to  the  e(piation  of  energy  and  to  the  condition  uf  j^a.ssing  t}troui,'li
the  stated  initial  and  final  configurations :  and  conversely,  that  if
V-  V

— —  vanuheB  with  $  for  every  poerible  such  deviafcion  from  ft

certain  way  and  velocities,  specified  by  (aj^,  y^,  z^),  etc.,  as  the
co-ordinates  at  t,  this  way  and  tliese  velocities  are  such  that  the
system  unguided  will  move  accordingly  if  only  started  with
proper  velocities  from  the  initial  configuiution.

329.  From  this  principle  of  stationary  action,  founded,  as
we  have  seen,  on  a  comparison  between  a  natural  motion,  and
any  other  motion,  arbitrarily  guided  and  subject  only  to  the
Iftw  of  energy,  the  initial  and  final  configurations  of  the
aystem  being  the  same  in  each  case,  Hamilton  paaaee  to  the
consideration  of  the  variation  of  the  action  in  a  natural  or
unguided  motion  of  the  system  produced  by  varying  the  initial
and  final  configurations,  and  the  sum  of  the  potential  and
kinetic  energies.  The  result  is,  that

Digitized  by  Coogl(

880.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  3i3

880.  The  rate  of  deertatB  of  the  actum  per  uiiit  of  increase  vnrring

*  Action.

of  any  one  of  the  free  (generalized)  co-ordinates  (§  204)  ifieci-
fying  the  initial  confignration,  is  equal  to  the  correspond-
ing (generalized)  component  momentum  [§  313,  (c)]  <^  the
actual  motion  from  that  configiiration :  the  rate  of  incnaae  of
the  action  per  unit  increase  of  any  one  of  the  free  co-ordi-
nates specifying  the  final  configuration,  is  equal  to  the  corre-
sponding component  nionientum  of  the  actual  motion  towards
this  second  configuration  :  and  the  rate  of  incretise  of  the  action
per  unit  increase  of  the  constant  sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetic
energies,  is  e(]ual  to  the  time  occupied  by  the  motion  of  which
the  action  is  reckoned.

To  pioT6  this  ire  mnst^  in  our  prerlons  ezproanon  (9)  fbr
now  sappose  the  terminal  oo-ordinates  to  vary ;  BT  to  become
^-8r»  in  which  &ff  is  a  constant  during  the  motum;  and  each  AbMob
set  of  paths  and  Telooitiea  to  beloDg  to  an  unguided  motion  of  SVfSSsi
the  system,  which  requires  (10)  to  hold. Hence  inituu  md

energy}

If,  now,  in  the  first  place,  we  saj^KNM  the  particles  oonstituting
the  qrstrai  to  be  all  free  from  oonstraml^  and  therefore  (o^  y,  •)
tor  each  to  be  three  independent  variables,  and  for  distinctnesi^
we  denote  by  (r^',  y^',  z^)  and  (ajj,  y,,  «,)  the  co-ordinates  of  «»j
in  its  initial  and  final  positions,  and  by  {x^\  y/>  2^,>  i,)

the  components  of  the  velocity  it  has  at  those  points,  we  have^
from  the  preceding,  aocording  to  the  ordinary  notation  of  partial
ooefficientS|

dA ^ dA ^ dA ^  ^
dx^  ""^  »' dy^  ^'^lyi* 5"  «»•

A  s

rential  co-
efnctenta
equal  re-

spertlvely
••••V**/* to  initial
and  fhial

tnomcn-
tuiiiM,  (iriil
to  tlic  tima
from  bet'
(finning  to

Tn  those  equations  we  must  suppose  -4  to  be  expressed  as  a  func-  end.
tion  of  the  initial  and  final  co-ordinates,  in  all  six  times  as  many
indejx^ndent  variables  as  there  are  of  particles  ;  and  jF,  one  mors
variable,  the  sum  of  the  jx)tential  and  kinetic  energies.

If  the  H\  stem  consist  not  of  free  particles,  but  of  particles  con-
nected in  any  way  forming  either  one  rigid  body  or  any  number

Digitized  by  Google

844

rABT.

[m

Ta  raring

Rame  pro*

IKwitions
for  ir«'ne-
lalizi  (i  (•(>-

of  rigid  bodies  connected  with  one  another  or  not,  we  might,  it  ls
true,  lie  contontecl  to  regard  it  still  as  a  BysU'iu  of  fit.*e  luirticles,
by  tiiking  into  account  among  the  impressed  forces,  the  forces
necessary  to  compel  the  sjitisfaction  of  the  conditions  of  con-
nexion. But  although  this  method  of  dealing  with  a  system  of
connected  particles  is  very  simple,  so  far  as  the  law  of  energy
merely  is  concemetl,  Lagrange's  methods,  whether  that  uf  "c«jua-
tions  of  condition,"  or,  wliat  for  our  present  purpo.^es  is  niuch
more  convenient,  his  "generalized  co-ordinates,"  relieve  us  from
very  troublesome  interpretations  when  we  have  to  consider  the
displacements  of  particles  due  to  arbitrary  variations  in  the  con-
figuration of  a  system.

Let  us  suppose  then,  for  any  particular  configuration  (a;,,  y,,
{Xp s,) the  expression

iiij  {Afia^  +  ^fiy^  -f-  i,3sj  -f-  etc,  to  become  ^ + 178^  -i-^  -(-  et&  (15),

when  transformed  into  terms  of  i/r,  </>,  0...,  generalized  oo-oidi-
nates,  as  many  in  number  as  thei^  are  of  degrees  of  fr^om  for
the  system  to  move  [§313,  (c)].

The  same  transformation  applied  to  the  kinetic  energy  of  the
aystem  would  obviously  give

J«i^(*/+l?/+0+etc=J(^+i|^  +  {rf+eta)  (16),

and  henoe  it  etc.,  are  those  linear  fimetions  of  the  generalised
Telocities  which,  in  §  313  (e),  -we  have  designated  ss  *' gene-
ralised oomponents  of  momentmn;"  and  which,  when  the
kinetic  energy,  is  expressed  ss  a  qnadrattc  function  of  the  velo-
cities (of  coarse  with,  in  genera],  functions  ol  the  comnlinates
^, Of  etc.,  for  the  coefficients)  sie  derivable  from  it  thus :

^^dT _dT ^_dT  ^

(17).

Henoe^  taUng  as  before  non-aooentsd  letters  for  the  second,  snd
accented  letters  for  the  initial,  oonfigozations  of  the  qrstem  is>
spectively,  we  have

dA  dA
d^
dA
d^

audi  as  before.

dA_
di"'^

dA  .

dJB'^^

^«-ftetc

(18).

Digitized  by  GoogleJ

330.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

845

These  equatioiiB  (18)^  indading  of  ooune  (14)  as  a  particular  caso,  vnrving
express  in  mathematical  tonns  the  propoflition  stated  in  words
abo7e^  as  the  Principle  of  Vwrying  Adion,

The  values  of  the  momentumSy  thus,  (14)  and  (18),  expressed
in  tains  of  di£ferential  ooeffioients  of  must  of  course  satisfy
the  equatum eoietrgj. Hence,  for  the  case  of  free  particles.

1  fcLV dA* dA*\  «~  f^tk\

Or,  in  genend,  for  a  system  of  partidea  or  rigid  bodiea  connected
in  anj  way,  we  hare,  (16)  and  (18),

Hamilton's
"  charHcUT-
istic  ctiua-
tiori"  of
motion  in
CarU'siaa
oo-onli-

dA

Hunlltoo'i

(J,  dA j,dA  ^,dA

^  =  2{E-  V)

.(22),

d  A  dA

istte  equa-
tion or
motion  in
freneraliz«d
co-onU>

where  f,  ip,  eta,  are  expressible  as  linear  functions  of  ^  ,  ^
eta,  hy  the  aduiion  of  the  equations

(^,  ^)  ^ + (^,  ^>  ^  + ^  ^  +  eta  =  ^ =

dj

d^
dA  V

(23),

eta

eta

dA d  A

and <j>\  etc.,  as  similar  fonctionB  ^""^'^  ~

(^',  f )  ^'  +  (^',  41)  41  + , ^'  +  eta  =  V  =  - "  •

eta

eta

where  it  must  be  remembered  tliat  (i^,  (xfr,  tf>),  etc.,  are  func-
tions of  the  specifying  elements,  i/r,  <^  0,  etc.,  dei)t'ntling  on  tlio
kinematical  nature  of  the  co-ordinate  system  nlono,  and  quite
independent  of  the  dynamical  problem  with  which  wo  are  now
concenied  ;  being  the  coefficients  of  the  half  squares  and  the
products  of  the  generalized  velocities  in  the  expression  for  the

Digitized  by  Google

340  PREUMIMABT.  [33a

kinetic  enorgy  of  any  motion  of  the  fjrstem  ;  and  that  (ip\  \^'),
<f>'),  et*;.,  are  the  same  functions  with  ip',  ff>\  etc.,  written  for
i//,  0,  0,  etc. ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  that  ^  ia  a  fonction  of  all  the
elements  ij/,  ^,  etc.,  xj/'j  4>', Thus  the  first  member  of  (21)

is  a  quadFatic  fimctioa  of  ^ ,  ^ »  eta,  viih  coefficient^

known  fhnotianB  of  <//,  ^,  etc,  depending  merelj  em  tlie  kinfr*
matical  relations  of  the  qvtem,  and  flie  maaoco  of  iii  {>arts,  bat
not  at  all  on  the  actnal  foroea  or  motions ;  while  the  aeoond
member  ia  a  fimotion  of  the  eo-ordinatea  ^,  0,  etc.,  depending
on  the  foroea  in  the  dynamical  problem,  and  a  oonatant  ezpresaing
the  partlcalar  value  given  to  theanmof  the  potential  and  kinatie
energiea  in  the  actual  motion ;  and  so  for  (22),  and  ^\  ^%  etc
It  ia  remarkable  that  the  aingle  linear  partial  diilbrential  eqiia>
SS^Se^  tion  (19)  of  the  first  order  and  second  degree,  for  the  case  of
Snl^tiM  free  partidea,  or  its  equivalent  (21),  ia  sufficient  to  detennine  a
SSt^'"'  funetioa  such  tiiat  the  eqnationa  (14)  or  (18)  expreaa  the  mo-
mentoma  in  an  actual  motion  of  the  ayatem,  aubjeet  to  the  given
Ibrcea.  For,  taking  the  caae  of  free  particles  fint,  and  diffisren^
tiatiug  (19)  still  on  the  Hamiltonian  understanding  that  A  ia
expressed  merely  as  a  function  of  initial  and  final  ooordinatea,
and  of  Hf  the  aum  of  the  potential  and  kinetic  enerjg^ea,  vre  have

m  \dx  dx^dx dy  dx^dy dz  dx^dzj dx^ '
But,  by  (U),

I  dA  I  dA  _  ,

and  therefore

d'A  _ fiLr, cPA  r/v,  _ r/.^ d'A  di  rfA

ePA  _ dx^  _  ^  dx^
As^dx^  ~ *  </Xj *  dx^  *

Using  these  properly  in  the  precodino;  and  taking  half;  and
writing  out  for  two  particles  to  avoid  confusion  as  to  the  mean-
ing of  2,  we  have

Now  if  we  multiply  the  finri  member  by  d^  we  have  eleaily  the
change  of  the  value  of  aii^i  due  to  vaiying^  atill  on  tha  Hamil*

Digitized  by  Google

830.]  DYNAMICAL  I.AWB  AND  PBINCIPLEB.  847

toniaa  saf^sition,  the  co-ordinates  of  all  the  points,  ihttt  is  to  say,
the  configoratUMi  of  the  system,  from  what  it  is  at  any  moment  to  p^^^  ^^^^
what  it  becomes  at  h  time  dt  later;  and  it  is  therefore  the  actual  [^Ji^^"*"
chABffe  in  the  value  of  7n±,.  in  the  natural  motioi^  from  the  time,  nitiAtion
I,  when  the  configunttion  is  (x,,  ^i,  2,,  ajj,  •  , to  the  tune  gjjtoo.
i  +  dL It  is  therefoie  eqnal  to  m^iijM,  and  hence  (25)  beoomes  partiekM.
dV

simply  m,x^  ~  ~  ^  * '^'^"''^^^y  ^®

dV  dV  dV  ,

But  these  are  [§  293,  (4)]  the  elementary  differential  equations
of  the  motions  of  a  conservative  syatem  composed  of  free  mutually
influencing  particles.

If  next  we  regard  y^,  Xj,  etc.,  as  constant,  and  go
through  precisely  the  same  pvocess  with  reference  to  fxi^t  jfj',  s^',  x^^
eto.,  we  have  exactly  the  wme  equations  among  the  aiioented
letten,  with  only  the  difference  that  -  A  appeafs  in  plaoe  of  ;

dV

and  end  with  m^s6'= ,  from  which  we  infer  that^  if  (20)

is  RHtihtied,  the  motion  represented  by  (14)  is  a  natural  motion
throui^h  the  configuration  {x^,  y,',  2/,  xj,  etc.).
Hence  if  both  (19)  and  (20)  are  satisfied,  and  if  when  m

motion  represented  by  (14)  is  a  natural  motion  through  the
two  configui-ations  (a?/,  y/,  is/,  «/,  etc.),  and  (as,,  y^,
eta).  Although  the  signs  in  the  preceding  expressions  have  been
fixed  on  the  supposition  that  the  motion  is /rom  the  former,  to  the
latter  configuration,  it  may  clearly  be  from  either  towards  the
other,  since  whichever  way  it  is,  the  reverse  is  also  a  natoral
motion  (§  271),  according  to  the  general  property  of  a  oonservar*
tive  flystem.

To  prove  the  same  thing  for  a  consaraiiTe  system  of  partides  game  pio-
or  iigid  bodies  oonneeted  in  any  way,  we  have^  in  the  first  plaoe^  ffi^^

where,  on  the  HiuiiUtoiiian  principle,  we  suppose  <f),  etc.,  and
if  -q,  etc.,  to  bo  expressed  as  functions  of  ^,  ^  etc.,  tj/',  eta,

^  i;j  i^  .  -.  Lj  Google

348

PBELIMINABT.

Varying

[390.

and  the  sum  of  tlio  }H>t€ntiaI  and  kiDctic  energies.  On  the  same
supposition,  ditiereutiating  (21),  we  have

But,  by  (26),  and  by  the  oonsiderations  above,  we  have

,  d^ jdrj  ^ .  d$ .  d^ A<1^ . 1  /am

where  ^  denotes  the  rate  of  variation  of  ^  per  unit  of  time  in  the
actual  motion.
Again,  we  have

diff d^  dij/ drj  dtj/ '  dip

d^^  did^^  dfidilf  d»jf

etc.  etc.

if,  as  in  Hamilton's  sysU'm  of  canonical  equations  of  motion,  we
suppose  iff,  fji,  etc.,  to  be  expressed  as  linear  functions  of  $,  rj,  etc.,
with  coefficients  involving  i/',  <f>,  b,  etc.,  and  if  we  take  ?  to  denote
the  partial  difTtM-entiation  of  these  functions  witli  reference  to  the
system  ^,  </>,•■  ,  ii  LT^^rded  as  indejtendeut  variables.  Let

the  coefficients  Ik?  denoted  by  [(Z^,  li'],  etc.,  according  to  the  plan
followed  above;  so  thfit.  if  the  formula  for  the  kinetic  energy  be

^  -  h  {[f ,  ^]  e  +  L^,  ^^J  ij"  + ...  +  2 ^]  ^,  +  etc.J  (30).

we  have

dT

dT

.(31),

*  =  ^ + i»  + C  +  etc

etc  etc.
where  of  course  [i/^, and  [<^,  i/^J,  mean  the  same.

and  therefore,  by  (29),

Digitized  by  Googl^

830.]  DTKAHIGAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  349

whence^  bj  (28),  we  see  that  Buanton-

imn  form  of

fr  mi

This,  and  (28),  nduoe  the  first  member  of  (27)  to  2^-1'  2 ,  [^'^^^

and  therefore,  halving,  we  ooaclude

.dT dV  OT' dV ^  ^^^^

similarljr,  ^,  etc...(33}.

Tlieso,  in  ull  as  many  ditieroatial  equations  as  there  are  of  vari-
aliles,  etc.,  suflSce  for  determinincr  them  in  tonus  of  t  and

twice  as  many  arbitrary  constants.  But  every  s»)hitiou  of  the
dyuaniicul  ]iroblem,  as  has  been  demonstrated  above,  satisfies
(-1)  anil  (-^i);  and  therefore  it  must  satisfy  these  (33),  which  we
liave  derived  from  them.  These  (33)  are  thcit  fore  the  equations
of  motion,  of  the  system  referred  t<j  genenilized  co-ordinates,  as
many  in  number  as  it  has  of  degrees  of  free<lom.  They  are  the
Hamiltonian  explicit  equations  of  motion,  of  which  a  direct  de-
monstration was  given  in  318  above.  Just  as  above,  it  appeai-s
therefore,  that  if  (21)  and  (22)  are  satisfied,  (18)  expresses  a
natural  motion  of  the  system  from  one  to  another  of  the  two  con-
figurations <ft,0,.,.)  (^', &t"')'  Hence

331. Tlie  determination  of  the  motion  of  any  conservative  Honm

pro  if  rnn*

system  from  one  to  another  of  any  two  configurations,  when  the  eluded,
suni  of  its  potential  and  kinetic  energies  is  given,  di'pends  on
the  determinatioQ  of  a  single  fimction  of  the  co-ordinates  of
those  configurations  by  solution  of  two  quadratic  partial  differ-
ential  equations  of  the  first  ortb  r,  with  reference  to  those  two
sets  of  co-ordiDates  respectively,  with  the  condition  that  the
corresponding  terms  of  the  two  differential  equations  become
separately  equal  when  the  values  of  the  two  sets  of  co-ordinates
agree*  The  function  thus  determined  and  employed  to  express
the  solution  of  the  kinetic  problem  was  called  the  Charaeteri$ttc  chnmrtor.
Function  by  Sir  W.  R*  Hamilton,  to  whom  the  method  is  due.  uon.
It  is,  as  weliave  seen,  the  "action"  from  one  of  the  configura-
tions to  the  other;  but  its  peculiarity  in  Hamilton's  system  is,
that  it  is  to  he  expressed  as  a  function  of  the  co-ordinates  and
a  constant,  the  whole  energy,  as  explained  above.  It  is  evi*

Digitized  by  Google

350

P&KLUflNA&T.

[SSL

Ohsneter*
liitfo  equa-
tion of
motion.

Complete
intcfcnl  of
eluimotcri*-
tie  tqjaif

dently  symmetrical  with  res]x?ct  to  the  two  configuratioos,
chaugiug  only  in  sign  if  their  co-ordinates  are  interchanged.

ffinoe  not  only  the  complete  solution  of  the  problem  c€
motion  gives  a  solutioD»  Af  of  the  paitud  differential  equatiofl
(19)  or  (21),  but,  as  we  haTe  just  wen  [§  330  (33),  eku]*
every  solution  of  this  equation  oomapondB  to  an  actual  pro-
blem i"elative  to  the  motion,  it  becomes  an  object  of  math©-
matiail  analysis,  which  could  not  be  satisfactorily  avoided,  to
£nd  what  character  of  completeness  a  solution  or  int^;ral  of
lihe  differential  equation  must  have  in  order  that  a  complete  in-
tegral of  the  dynamical  equations  mny  be  derivable  from  it — a
question  which  seems  to  have  been  first  noticed  by  J acobi  What
is  called  a  "  complete  integral"  of  the  differential  equation  ;  that
k  to  say,  an  expression,

A»A.+F(ir,  ^  ^,...0,  A...)  {uy,

for  A  HttirfTuig  it  and  inTolviag  tho  nune  number  %  let  na  wup'
poee^  of  independent  arbitraiy  oonstaatSy  A^  a»  A***^  ihsn  an
of  the  independent  TuiaUee,  ^  etc.;  leadsi  as  he  fiivnd,  to  a
complete  (Loal  integral  of  the  aqnatiooB  of  motion^  expnaeed  as
IoUowb:—

'^^=a,^=»  (35),

da

dfi

and,  as  above,

dF  ^

(36),

where  c  is  the  oonstant  depending  oai  the  epoeh,  or  eraof  re^oiF
ing,  choeen,  and  ft,  V,...  are  i  —  1  other  arbitraiy  oonafaant%  con-
stituting in  ally  with  a,  fi,*.*,  the  proper  number,  2i,  of  arid-
traty  constants.  This  is  proved  by  remarking  that  (35)  are  the
equations  of  the  "coune"  (or  patiit  in  the  case  of  a  system  of
fine  partiolfis),  which  is  obvious. For  they  give

^ d  dF  , d  dF  , d  dF

^-mi.^^di.d^^^d9d;.^^-

^ d  dF,, d  dF d  dF..
^'T^d^^'f^^did^^^^dBdfi'^^-
etc.  etc

!n  all  t-1  equations  to  determine  the  ratios d^  :c{^  From
thee^  and  (21),  we  find

d^ d^  dB

.(37),

(38)

Digitized  by  Google

331.]

DTNAiaCAL  LA.W8  AND  PB1NCIPLS&

351

fsince  (37)  are  the  same  as  the  equations  which  we  obtain  bv  Ck)mpiete

.  *  intp)frttl  of

(lifTerentiatiug  (21)  and  (23)  with  reforenee  to  a,  /?,...  sucees- i-iiaractorw-
sively,  only  that  tliey  have  clip,  c?<^,  d&,...  in  place  of  ^, 0,...],  tloi?"*'

A  perfectly  general  solution  of  the  partial  differential  equation,  General
tliat  IB  to  say,  an  expression  for  A  including  every  function  of  arrived

^ which  can  satisfy  (21),  may  of  course  be  found,  by  tlio  [a,.'"
regular  process,  from  the  complete  integral  (34),  by  oHminaring  uitegrai.
o, from  it  by  meaua  of  an  arbitraiy  eqaation

and  the -  1)  e(^uations

dF  dF
1 da  dfi_

dA^ da.  dji

where/denotes  an  arbitrary  function  of  the i  elements  A ^a^jS,...
now  made  to  be  variables  depending  (m  tj/,  But  the  full
meaning  of  the  general  solution  of  (21)  will  be  better  understood
in  connexion  with  the  physical  problem  if  we  first  go  back  to  the
Hamilton  ian  solatifm,  aod  then  from  it  to  the  general.  Thns,
first,  let  the  equations  (35)  of  the  course  be  assumed  to  be
satisfied  for  each  of  two  sets  ^,  <f>,  0,...,  and  xj/',  </)',  6',...,  of
the  co-ordinates.  They  will  give  2(i -1)  equations  for  determine
ing  the  2(i  - 1)  constants  a,  j3, 21,  in  terms  of  J/,

tjf'j  *o  f'^fil  these  conditions. Using  the  values  of  a,

so  found,  and  assigning so  that  A  shall  vanish  when  i/'  =
^s=^',  etc.,  we  have  the  Hamiltonian  exim  ssion  for  A  in  terms
of  «/''» "">  ^"^^^  ^*  which  is  therefore  equivalent  to  a

"complete  integral"  of  the  partial  difierential  equation  (21),
Kow  let ...» be  connected  by  any  single  arbitrary  equation

f(f,  <t>\...)^0  (39),

and  by  means  of  this  e<|uation  and  the  following  (i  — 1)  equations,
let  their  values  Ix;  dttt  i  mined  in  terms  of  ^,  ^ and  £ : —

dA dA  dA

dij/ d<^'  'W

d^'  dJ^

Snbstitating  the  values  thus  found  for  t^',  ^,  etc.,  in  the
Hamiltionian  A,  we  have  an  expression  fiar  J,  which  is  the  general

352  PREUMINAET.  [33L

gnwiJ  eolation  of  (21). For  we  see  immediately  that  (40)  oxprfsj^t^

derived  tliat  the  values  of  A  are  equal  for  all  configurations  saLi^fvui^

plHe*""^' (39)|  that  is  to  say,  we  have

when  ^\  eta,  satisfy  (39]t  and  (40).  Henee  when,  lij  means
of  these  equations^  ^\  •  ate  eliminated  from  the  Hanultonlsn
expression  for the  complete  Hamiltonian  differential

dA

beoomes  merely

^-0'^<^)'^^

where  ^^/^  ^>  ^>  denote  the  diflbrential  coefficients  in  the  Hamil>

toniaii  expression.  Hence,  A  heiiig  now  a  function  of  xp,  etc,
both  as  these  apjtear  in  the  liaunltonian  exprcssion  and  as  they
ai'e  iutiouuced  by  the  elimination  of  i/^', etc.,  we  have

dA fdA\ J.\ fdA\  ^

and  therefore  the  new  expresuon  satisfies  the  partial  dIflEerential
equation  (21).  That  it  is  a  completely  general  solution  we  see,
because  it  satisfies  the  condition  that  the  action  is  equal  for  all
coofignrations  fulfilling  an  absolntely  arbitnury  equation  (39).

For  the  c;use  of  a  single  free  particle,  the  interpretiitiou  of  (39)
is  that  the  j>oint  (jc',  y',  z)  is  on  au  arbitrary  surface,  and  of  (40)
that  each  line  of  motion  cuts  this  Burface  at  right  angles.  Hence

332.  The  most  general  possible  solution  of  the  quadratic,
tAtTonof"  JKirlial,  (lilVereutial  oquatiuu  of  the  first  order,  which  Haniilton
iileteaora*  R^i'>^'''*'<^  t<>  satisfied  by  his  Characteristic  Fniiction  (either
lionottlM  configuration  alone  varying),  when  interpreted  for  the

case  of  a  single  free  particle,  expresses  the  action  up  to  any  point
(a?,  y,  z),  from  some  ix)iut  of  a  certain  arbitrarily  given  surface,
from  which  the  particle  has  been  projected,  in  the  direction  of
the  normal,  and  with  the  proper  velocity  to  make  the  mim  of
the  potential  and  actual  energies  have  a  given  value. In  other

Practical

iBllosqaft*

Digitized  by  Google

332.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  353

words,  the  physical  problem  solved  by  the  most  general  solu-
tion of  that  partial  differential  equation,  is  this : —

Let  free  particles,  not  nuitually  influencing  one  another,  be  rn  i  *  rtips
projected  normally  from  all  points  of  a  certain  arbitrarily  given
surface,  each  with  the  proper  velocity  to  make  the  sum  of  its
potential  and  kinetic  energies  have  a  given  value.  To  find,  for
the  particle  which  passes  through  a  given  point  {x,  y,  z),  the
"  action "  in  its  course  from  the  surface  of  projection  to  this
point.  The  Hamiltonian  principles  stated  above,  show  that
the  surfaces  of  equal  action  cut  the  paths  of  the  particles  at
right  angles;  and  give  also  the  foUovdng  remarkable  properties
of  the  motion : —

If,  from  all  points  of  an  arbitrary  surface,  particles  not
mutually  influencing  one  another  be  projected  with  the  proper
yelocities  in  the  directions  of  the  normals ;  points  which  they
reach  with  equal  actions  lie  on  a  sui&oe  cutting  the  paths  at
right  angles.  The  infinitely  small  thickness  of  the  space  be-
tween any  two  such  surfaces  corresponding  to  amounts  of
action  differing  by  any  infinitely  small  quantity,  is  inversely
proportional  to  the  velocity  of  the  particle  traversing  it ;  being
equal  to  the  infinitely  small  difference  of  action  divided  by  the
whole  momentum  <tf  the  particle.

Let  A,  m  y  be  the  direction  oosines  of  the  normal  to  the  but'
face  of  equal  action  throo|^  (m,  y, «). We  have

dA

dx

,  etc (1).

dA

But  -J-  =  «*5C,  eta,  and,  if  q  denote  the  resultant  velocity,
ox

fdA* dA* dA^i  ...

Hence  ^--i = y-  t

which  proves  the  first  projiosition.  Again,  if  BA  denote  the  in-
VOL.  L  23

Digitized  by  Google

354

PBELIMIMABT.

[331

Pmp«rt{e«  finitely  Huiall  diircrcnce  of  action  fiuin  (x,  y,  z)  to  aii^  utLer

Ofsurfwea  "  -  „  .  ,

Of « qual  i>omt  (u;  +  dc,  w  +  ow,  s  +  oc),  we  liave

Mthm.

cm;  (12

Let  the  second  ]x>int  be  at  an  infinitely  small  distanct^,  from
the  first,  in  the  directum  of  the  normal  to  the  surface  oi  equal
action;  that  is  to  say,  let

H«n€e,lv(l),  = +  ^  + (3);

whence,  by  (2),  e  =  ^ (4),

which  is  the  seoond  proposition.

RtttmpiM  333.  Irrespectively  of  methods  for  fiuding  the  "charnctor-
ilciioiu^"'*  istic  function "  in  kinetic  problems,  the  fact  that  any  c:i.sc  of
motion  whatever  can  be  represented  by  means  of  a  sinulo
function  in  the  manner  explained  in  §  331,  is  most  remarkable,
and,  when  geometrically  interpreted,  leads  to  highly  important
and  interesting  properties  of  motion,  which  have  valuable
applicaUonB  in  various  branches  of  Natural  Philosophy.  One
of  the  many  applications  of  the  general  principle  made  by
Hamilton*  led  to  a  general  theory  of  optical  instruments,  com-
prehending the  whole  in  one  expression.

Some  of  its  most  direct  applications;  to  the  motions  of
planets,  comets^  lIc,  considered  as  free  points,  and  to  the  cele-
brated problem  of  perturbations,  known  as  the  Prublem  of  llirce
Bodies,  are  worked  out  in  considerable  detail  by  Hamilton
{Phil.  Trans.,  1834-35),  and  in  various  memoirs  by  Jacobi,
Liouville,  Bour,  Donkin,  Cayley,  Boole,  etc.  The  now  alwin-
doned,  but  still  interesting,  corpuscular  theory  of  light  furnishes
a  good  and  exceedingly  simple  illustration.  In  this  theory  light
is  supposed  to  consist  of  material  particles  not  mutually  influenc-
ing one  another,  but  subject  to  molecular  forces  from  the  par-
tides  of  bodies — not  sensible  at  sensible  distances,  and  therdfore
not  causing  any  deviation  from  uniform  rectilinear  motion  in  a
homogeneous  medium,  except  wiUiin  an  indefinitely  small  dis-

•  Onth$  Thtary  of  Sy$Urm  o/  i:ay$. TnUM.  B.1  A.,  18i4,  1830,  1633.

Digitized  by  Google

333.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PHINCIPLES.

tance  from  its  boundary.  The  laws  of  reflection  and  of  sinele  ExAmpios

of  wyiDg

refraction  follow  correctly  from  this  h jpotbesU,  which  therefore
8a£Bce8  for  what  is  called  geometrical  optics.

We  hope  to  return  to  this  subject,  with  suf?icieut  detail,  Application
in  treating  of  Optics.  At  present  we  limit  ourselves  to  state  optica
a  theorem  comprehending  the  known  rule  for  measuring  the
magnifying  power  of  a  telescope  or  microscope  (by  comparing
the  diameter  of  the  object-glass  with  the  diameter  of  pencil
of  parallel  rays  emerging  from  the  eye-piece,  when  a  point  of
light  is  placed  at  a  great  distance  in  firont  of  the  object-glass),
as  a  particular  case.

334.  Let  any  number  of  attracting  or  repelling  masses,  or  or  kinetic*
perfectly  suiuuth  ehistic  objects,  be  fixed  in  space.  Let  two  jirt'S!?"
stations,  0  and  0\  be  chosen.  Let  a  shot  be  fired  with  a  stated
velocity,  V,  from  0,  in  such  a  direction  as  to  pass  through  (7.
There  may  clearly  be  more  than  one  natural  path  by  which  this
may  be  done ;  but,  generally  speaking,  when  one  such  path  is
chosen,  no  other,  not  considerably  diverging  from  it,  can  be
found ;  and  any  infinitely  small  deviation  in  the  line  of  fire  from
0,  will  cause  the  bullet  to  pass  infinitely  near  to,  but  not
through,  (y.  Now  let  a  circle,  with  infinitely  small  radius  r,  be
described  round  0  as  centre,  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the
line  of  fire  from  this  point,  and  let— all  with  infinitely  nearly  the
same  velocity,  but  fulfilling  the  condition  that  the  sum  of  the
potential  and  kinetic  eneigies  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  shot
from  0 — bullets  be  fired  from  all  points  of  this  circle,  all  directed
infinitely  nearly  parallel  to  the  line  of  fire  firom  0,  but  each  pre-
cisely so  as  to  pass  through  (/,  Let  a  target  be  held  at  an
infinitely  small  distance,  a',  beyond  0',  in  a  plane  perpendicular
to  the  line  of  the  shot  reaching  it  from  0.  The  bullets  fired
from  the  circumference  of  the  circle  round  O,  will,  after  pa.ssing
through  0',  strike  this  target  in  the  circuniicrcnce  of  an  exceed-
ingly small  ellipse,  each  with  a  velocity  (corresponding  of  course
to  its  position,  under  the  Law  of  energy)  diflering  infinitely
little  from  V,  the  common  velocity  with  which  they  pass
through  0'.  Let  now  a  circle,  equal  to  the  former,  be  described
round  0',  in  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the  central  path  through
O',  and  let  bullets  be  fired  from  points  in  its  cueumference,  each

23-2

856  PRELIMINABT.  [334.

Application  with  the  proper  velocity,  aud  in  such  a  direction  infinite! v

U>  «)inmon  , , ,  i ' i i  i •  ^  i

optiCT, nearly  parallel  to  the  central  path  as  to  make  it  pass  thr«>u>^h

or  kinetics ,^  ,  • i ii  •  i

ofyjiyto  0. These  buuets,  if  a  target  is  held  to  receive  them  perpen-
dicularly at  a  distance  a  »  a'^ ,  beyond  0,  will  strike  it  aloog

the  circumference  of  an  ellipse  eqnal  to  tlie  former  and  placed
in  a  "  corroppondinjy"  position;  and  the  points  struck  by  the  in-
dividual bullets  will  correspond;  according  to  the  following  law  of
"correspondence": — Let  Pand  be  points  of  the  first  and  second
circles,  and  Q  and  Q'  the  points  on  the  first  and  second  tai^gets
which  bullets  from  them  strike ;  then  if  be  in  a  plane  con-
taining the  central  path  through  (X  and  the  position  which  Q
would  take  if  its  ellipse  were  made  circular  by  a  pure  strain
(§  183) ;  Q  and are  similarly  situated  on  the  two  ellipses.

Fur,  let  A7.y }'  be  a  |>lano  per|>eiulic  ular  to  ihv  (.t.-iiii-.il  path
through  0  ;  and  X  O'V  tlio  corresponding;  plane  through  0'.  Let
A  ho  the  "  action  "  froni  0  to  0\  and  <^  the  action  from  a  jK»int
J*{.v,y,z),  in  the  neii4hl>ou)hood  of  O,  specified  "with  reference
to  the  fonnei'  axt  .s  of  co-ordinates,  to  a  j>oint  7*'  (./•',  y',  z  ),  in
the  neighhourhuoil  of  0',  specitied  with  reference  to  the  latter.

The  function  — ^^1  vanishes,  of  com-se,  when  x  =  0,  2/  0,
SsO,  x'~0,  ^'=0,  z'  =  0. Also,  for  the  Bamc  valaea  of  the

co-ordinateSy  its  differential  coefficients  and

,  must  vanish,  and  ^ ,  - must  be  respectively  equal  to

V  and  V,  Rince,  for  any  values  whatever  of  the  co-ordinates,

^  and are  the  oomponent  velocities  parallel  to  the  two  lines

ax  ay

OX,  OY,  of  the  particle  passing  through  P,  when  it  comes  from

1".  ^  -  2-  .nd  - «  th.  coo.p«n««.  ^  t.  or,  OT,

of  the  vcloi'ity  tli rough  P'  direct<'<l  so  as  to  reach  P, Hence  by
Taylor's  (or  Maclaurin's)  theorem  we  have
FV+  Vz

^^{{X,  X)qi*  +  (Y,  Y)y*^  ...  + Jr')«^+  ...

4  2(r,j^j»+...  +  a(r,ir)yv+...

+  2  (X, aatf' +  2  ( r,  1")  2/y  +  2  (;5r,  ^)
+  2  (X,  r ) xy'  +  2  ( A',  2r') +  . . .  +  2  {Z,  Y)  zy'\  +  li  ..,{\\

Digitized  by  CooqI

334.]  DTNAMTCAL  LA^  AHD  FBINCIPI^BS.  857

where  (Z,  X),  (X,  7),  etc.,  denote  constanti,  vli.,  the  values  of  Application

\ 9 \ * ff J  » 9  to  common

the  differential  coefficients  -r^, , etc,  -when  each  of  tlio  or  kinetic*

six  co-ordinates  a;,  y,  «^  a:',  vanishes ;  and  M  denotes  the
rraoainder  after  the  terms  of  the  seoond  d^ree.  According  to
Oaach/sprinciplM  regarding  the  cbavergence  of  Taylor's  theorem,
we  have  a  rigorous  expi*e8sion  for  ^  —  Aisk  the  same  form,  with-
out J?,  if  the  coefficients  (A",  X),  eta,  denote  the  values  of  the
differential  eoeffidrats  with  souie  variable  values  intermediate
between  0  and  the  actual  values  of  a;,  y,  etc.,  substituted  for  these
dements.  Hence,  provided  the  valu^  of  the  differential  oo-
effioients  are  infinitely  nearly  the  same  for  any  infinitely  small
values  of  the  co-ordinates  as  fw  the  vanishing  values,  R  becomes
infinitely  smaller  than  the  tei-ms  pr^^ding  it,  when  y,  eta,
are  each  infinitely  small  Hence  when  eaeh  of  the  variables
9,  y,  z,  x\  y'f  is  infiuitelj  small,  we  may  omit  J2  in  the  ex-
pression (1)  for  ^  -  ^.  Now,  as  in  the  proposition  to  be  proved,
let  us  suppose  z  and  z  each  to  be  rigorously  zero :  and  we  have

g -(X,  X) a:  +  (X,  r)y  +  (X, X)*'  -f  (X,  r)y';

These  expressions,  if  in  them  we  make  x  =  0,  and  y  =  0,  be-
come the  component  velocities  ]tarHl]<'l  to  OA^^  OY,  of  a  jmrticlc
passing  through  0  having  been  prelected  from  i^. Hence,  if

$,  17,  {  denote  its  co-ordinates,  an  infinitely  small  time,  —  ,  afler

it  passes  thi-oagh  0,  we  have  ^  =  a,  and

(  -  {{X,  X')  J  +  (X,  r)  y'}  ^,  ,  =  {(7,  X) +  (r,  T)  y\y...  (2).

Here  ^  and  iy  are  the  rectangular  ooordinates  of  the  i>oint  Q[  in
which,  in  the  second  case,  the  supposed  taiget  is  sfantck.  And
by  hypothens

aj*-f-y«=r»  (3).

If  we  eliininnte  x',  y'  between  these  three  equations,  we  have
clearly  an  ellipse  ;  and  the  f<»rmertwo  express  the  relation  of  the
"  corresponding  "  pointa.  Corresi^nding  equations  with  x  and
y  for  X  and  //  ;  with  i\  1)  for  ^,  7; ;  and  with  -  (X,  A"),

-(F,  X),  -(X,  r),  -(r,  r),  in  place  of  (X.  X),  (X,  n

Digitized  by  Google

358 P&fiLUilNART.  [3Si.

^^ipikatton (F,  X*},  (F,  7'),  express  the  first  case. Henoe  tbe  propodtioD,

opUcs.  as  is  most  easily  seen  hj  choosing  OX  and  wi  that  (JT,  F)
ofasingto and  (F,  JT')  may  each  be  mo.

Application  886.  The  most  obvious  optical  application  of  thu  remarkable
oitioii  lesttlt  18,  that  m  the  tue  of  any  optical  apparatus  whatever,  if
the  eye  and  the  object  be  interchanged  without  altering  the
position  of  the  instrument!  the  magnifying  power  is  unaltered.
This  is  easily  understood  when,  as  in  an  ordinary  telescope,
microscope,  or  opera-glass  (Galilean  telescope),  the  instrument
is  symmetrical  al>out  an  axis,  aud  is  curiously  coutradictory  of
the  common  ide<a  that  a  telescope  "  diminishes "  when  looked
through  the  wrong  way,  which  no  doubt  is  true  if  the  telescope
is  simply  reversed  about  the  middle  of  its  lenp^tb,  eye  an<l
object  remaining  fixed.  But  if  the  telescope  V)e  rt  moved  from
the  eye  till  its  eye-piece  is  close  to  the  object,  the  part  of  the
object  seen  will  be  seen  enlarged  to  the  same  extent  as  when
viewed  with  the  telescope  held  in  the  usual  manner.  This  is
easily  verified  by  looking  from  a  distance  of  a  few  jards»
in  through  the  object-glass  of  an  opera-glass^  at  the  eye  of
another  penon  holding  it  to  his  eye  in  tbe  usual  way.

The  more  general  application  may  be  illustrated  thus  : — Let
the  points,  0,  O  (the  centres  of  the  two  circles  described  in
the  preceding  enunciation),  l>e  the  optic  centres  of  the  eyes  of
two  persons  looking  at  one  another  through  any  set  of  lenses,
[►risms,  or  trans|)arent  mcilia  arranged  in  any  way  between
them.  If  their  pupils  are  of  equal  sizes  in  reality,  they  will
be  seen  as  similar  ellipses  of  equal  apparent  dimensions  by  the
two  observers.  Here  the  imagined  particles  of  light,  projected
from  the  circumference  of  the  pupil  of  either  eye,  are  substituted
for  the  projectiles  from  the  circum£arence  of  either  circle,  and
the  retina  the  other  ^e  takes  the  place  of  the  taiget  receiv-
ing them,  in  the  general  kinetic  statement

Ar  r  ii<^tiiNi  If  instead  of  one  free  particle  we  have  a  conservative

fr.  '^m'itu.**  system  of  any  number  of  mutually  influencing  fkee  particles,  the
flm  rL ssme  statcmout  may  be  applied  with  reference  to  the  initial
'^^^'^ position  of  one  of  the  partides  and  the  final  position  of  another,
or  with  reference  to  the  initial  positions  or  to  the  final  positions

Digitized  by  Google

330.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PEINCIPLEa

359

of  two  of  the  prirtiolca. It  serves  to  show  how  the  iuflnence  of  Application
'  .  .  , . to  flystem  of

an  intiuitely  sniall  change  in  one  ot  those  positions,  on  the  di-  frt«mutu.

rection  r)f  the  other  particle  passing  through  the  other  position,  Jjggjj

is  related  to  the  influence  on  the  direction  of  the  former  particle

passing  through  the  former  position  produced  by  an  infinitely

small  change  in  the  latter  position.  A  corresponding  etafcement,  and  to  c:o

in  terms  of  generalized  co-ordinatea^  may  of  conrse  be  adapted

to  a  system  of  rigid  bodies  or  particles  connected  in  any  way.

All  sndi  statements  are  included  in  the  following  veiy  general

proposition  s— •

The  rate  of  increase  of  any  one  component  momentum,  corre-
sponding to  any  one  of  the  co-ordinates,  per  unit  of  increase  of
any  other  co-ordinate,  is  equal  to  the  rate  of  increase  of  the  com-
ponent momentum  corresponding  to  the  latter  per  unit  increase
or  diminution  of  the  former  co-ordinate,  according  as  the  two  co-
ordinates chosen  belong  to  one  configuration  of  the  system,  or
one  of  them  belongs  to  the  initial  configuration  and  the  other  to
the  final

Jyt't  ip  aud  be  two  out  of  the  whole  nuinlxT  of  co-ordinates
constituting  the  argument  of  the  Hamiltonian  cliaract^ristic
function  A  ;  and  ^,  rj  tlxe  corresponding  mumentums.  Wc  have
[§  330  (18)]

dA_  ,dA

tlio  u]i|»(  r  or  lower  sign  Ix'ing  used  according  as  it  is  a  final  Or
an  initial  GOH>i:dinate  that  is  concerned.  Henoe

andthereioffe  ^*^t
if  both  coH)idinates  belong  to  one  oonfiguration,  or

if  one  belongs  to  the  initial  configuration,  and  the  other  to  the
final,  which  ia  the  second  proposition.  The  geometrical  inter-
pretation of  this  statement  for  the  case  of  a  free  particle,  and  two
co-ordinates  both  belonging  to  one  position,  its  final  position,  for

SCO  . *  PBELOflNABY.  [SSa

AivU»tion^  iostonoe,  gives  merely  the  propodtinn  of  §  332  above,  for  tbe

rrMmuto*  OMO  of  pttrtidee  projected  firom  one  p<»iit^  idth  equal  Telociiiai

iiaaaSng  in  all  dtnctloBS ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  case  of  the  arfaitnury

MdlioRe*  BOzfiMO  of  that  enundatioii,  being  reduced  to  a  point To  ooni-

vstan.  plete  the  set  of  rariatLonal  equalaons  deriTed  fiiom  §  330  we  have

which  ezpreases  another  remazkable  property  of  ocoi-

servatiye  motum.

dlit!!rN>d  Lagrange's  form  of  the  eqaatioDB  of

equuiMuBb  motion,  §  318,  we  may  now,  as  a  preliminary  to  the  oonaidera-
tion  of  stability  of  motion,  investigate  the  motion  of  a  system
infinitely  little  disturbed  from  a  position  of  equilibrium,  and
left  free  to  move,  the  velocities  of  its  parts  being  initially  in-
finitely sniiill.  The  resulting  equations  give  the  values  of  the
independeut  co-ordinates  at  any  future  time,  provided  tbe  dis-
placements continue  infinitely  small ;  and  the  mathematical
i'Xi>ressions  for  their  values  must  of  course  show  the  nature  of
the  equilibrium,  giving  at  the  same  time  an  interesting  example
of  the  coexi^ence  of  sinall  motions^  §  89.  The  method  con-
sista  simply  in  finding  what  the  equations  of  motion,  and  tbcir
integrals,  beoome  for  co-ordinates  which  diifer  infinitely  little
from  values  corresponding  to  a  configuration  of  equilibrium —
and  for  an  infinitely  small  initial  kinetic  eneigy.  The  solution
of  these  differential  equations  is  always  easy,  as  they  are  linear
and  have  constant  coefficients.  If  the  solution  indicates  that
these  differences  remain  infiivMy  small,  the  position  is  one  of
stable  equilibrium ;  if  it  shows  that  one  or  more  of  them  may
inereoBB  itidefinxUly,  the  resalt  of  an  infinitely  small  displace-
ment from  or  infinitely  small  velocity  through  the  position  of
equilibrium  may  be  a  finite  departure  from  it — and  thus  the
equilibrium  is  unstable.

Since  there  is  a  position  of  equUihriom,  the  kinematic  relations
must  be  invariable. As  before,

^)*'  +  (^  ^)^+eto....l...(l).
which  cannot  be  negative  for  any  values  of  the  cooidinatca
Now,  though  the  values  of  the  eoefficients  in  this  ezptession  are
not  generally  constant,  they  are  to  be  taken  as  constant  in  the
approjumate  investigation,  since  their  variations^  depending  en

Digui^uu  uy  GoOgl

337.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PKINC1PLE8.  861

the  infinitely  small  variationa  of  ipj  <f>,  etc.,  can  only  give  rise  to

tenns  of  the  third  or  higher  orders  of  bhiaU  quantifcifiB. Hence  •^ttUibrium.

Lugnuige'a  equatiooB  beoome  nmpljr

^©-•i©=*>-  <^)'

and  the  first  member  of  oat  h  of  these  equations  is  a  linear  func-

•  • •  *

tion  of  1^,  <fi,  etc.,  with  constant  coefficients.

Now,  since  we  may  take  what  oi  iiciu  we  please  for  the  gene-
ralized co-onliiiatc  s,  it  will  be  convenient  to  assume  that  i//,  <f>,  0,
etc.,  are  measured  from  the  ]K>sition  of  eqnilibrinm  considered  ;
and  that  their  values  are  llu  refore  always  iiiiiuitely  sniall.

Ilence,  intiaitely  small  quantities  of  higher  orders  l)eing
neglected,  and  tlie  forces  being  supposed  to  be  independent  of  the
velocities,  we  shall  have  linear  expressions  for  ^,  4>,  etc.,  in
terms  of  ^,  ^,  etc.,  which  we  may  write  as  follows  : —

^  =  ail/  +  bffi  +  cd  ...

♦  «aV  +  6>  +  c'^+...}  (3).

etc.  eta

Eqttatioiui  (3)  coMequcatly  beoome  linoar  differential  equations
of  the  aeoond  order,  with  oonstant  coeffietents;  as  many  in
number  as  there  are  variables ^  eta,  to  be  determined.

The  regular  prooeases  explained  in  elementaiy  treatises  on  dif-
ferential equations,  lead  of  comrse,  independently  ol  any  partion>
lar  relation  between  the  coefficients,  to  a  general  fonn  of  solution
(§  343  below).  Bat  this  form  has  very  remarkable  cfaaraeteristics
in  the  case  of  a  oomservative  system;  which  we  therefore
examine  particularly  in  the  first  place. In  this  case  we  have

where  F  is,  in  our  approximation,  a  homogeneous  quadratic
fiinction  of  ^,  ^, ...  if  we  talce  the  origin,  or  configuration  of
equilibrium,  as  the  configuration  from  which  (g  273)  the  poten-
tial energy  is  reckoned. Now,  it  is  obvious*,  firom  the  theoiy

*  Forinthe  fizslpIaMaqyiaehaMiimptionaB

Simultane*
ous  tnihB-

fnnnaf  ion

Cif  two

.  '  (iiiadniCir

etc.,  etc.  rtnift

gives  equations  for  i/,  ^,  etc.,  in  terms  of  ^,  0.  etc.,  with  the  game  cocfSciouts,  !)^.S!!Ji!f  ^
At  Bf  etc.,  if  thebe  are  independeut  of  t. Ucuce  (the  co-ordiuates  being  t  in

Digitized  by  Google

3G2

PIlELIMmAliY.

[337.

SliL'litly
duturbed

equiUtwinm.

of  tbe  tranBfonnation  of  quadratic  ftmctiona^  that  ire  nwyy  a
detetminate  linear  traiuifoiinatio&  of  the  co-ordinatea^  zodnoe  tlie

Snmil;;iiie-
uuK  I  rant*
fnrmatioa
of  t  wo
qundnitic
funcUons
to

nninber)  we  have  quantities  J',  A", ...  -B*  B^t  <B*t  •»  <te.,  to  be  detcnniaed
lij  t*  eqnatioilUI  expressing  that  in  2T  the  eocfTicients  of  <f>^,  etc.  are  each
equal  to  unity,  and  of  ^,0,  etc,  cnch  vauisb,  and  that  in  V  the  coefficients  ci
^,<P,f  ^t^^-  I'^^'li  vanish.  But,  particnlarly  in  respect  to  our  djriuuuical  problem^
the  following  process  in  two  steps  is  instructive

(1)  Let  the  quadratio  eqsrewloii  for  3*  in  termt  d  4**  4'^*  ota^  be
TCdneed  to  the  form  4^,*+^,*+ ...  bj  proper  ewrignrnwit  of  Talnes  to  A,  ete.
This  may  be  done  arbitrarily,  in  an  infinite  number  of  ways,  witboni  the
Bohition  of  any  alt,'ol>rnic  c iiuation  of  degree  higher  than  the  first ;  as  we  may
easily  see  by  working  out  a  synthetical  process  algebraically  according  to  the
analogy  of  iiuding  first  the  ooujogate  diametral  plane  to  any  chosen  diameter  of
an  ellipeoid,  and  then  the  diuneter  of  its  dllptie  section,  coujugnte  to  any

chosen  diameter  of  this  ellipse.

Thus,  of  the  ^-^^—^  equations  expressing  thai

the  cocfljcientH  of  the  proilucts  ^  0,,  \f0^,  tf,d^,  etc.  vanish  in  T,  take  firs^t  the
one  expressing  that  the  coefficient  of  ^,0^  vanishes,  and  by  it  find  the  value  of
one  of  the  li'n,  supposing  all  the  A's  and  all  the  li's  but  one  to  be  known.
Then  take  the  two  equations  expressing  that  the  coefllcieuts  of  and
vaniah,  and  by  them  find  two  of  the  C*»  wapposiag  all  the  Ca  bnt  two  to  be
known,  as  are  now  all  the  A*u  and  all  the  B*s:  and  so  on.  Thus,  in  tornu  of
an  the  J's,  all  the  B^b  but  one,  all  the  CTa  bnt  two,  all  the  D's  but  three,  and  so
on,  supposed  known,  we  find  V>y  the  Bolntiou  of  linear  equations  tlie  remaining
B*8,  Cs,  D's,  etc.  Laatly,  using  the  values  thus  found  for  the  unasaumed
quantities,  C,  etc.,  and  equating  to  luiity  the  coefficients  of  0*,
ete.  in  the  transformed  ezpreision  for  2T,  we  have  {  equatiems  amongthe  eqnaree

and  products  of  the

assumed  quantiticn,  {i)  A'a,  (i-l)  B'a,  {i-'2)  C'  s,

elo.,  tigr  which  any  one  of  the.i'fl»  any  one  of  the  B%  any  one  of  the  C»,  and  ao

Thus  the  thing  is  done,  and

diqK>8abIe  ratios  are  left  undetermined.

(2)  These  qnantitlee  may  be  determined  by  the

eqnatioDB  aipnw

Generaliied
orlhi

tion  ef  €0-

iug  that  also  in  the  transformed  quadratic  V  the  coefficients  of  f^^^,  rf^jf,,
4tfi^t  etc.  vanish.

Or,  having  made  flie  flrat  tnoafonnation  aa  In  (1)  above^  withaaniaiai  Ttfnea
for  ^^2^^  diipoaable  ratioa,  make  a  aeoond  traaafoimatioB  deteiminality  thoa:

—Let

^,=Z^^  +  fn^^+  ...
eto>i  et0«y

where  the  i*  qtiaatitieB  I,  m, r, ...  aatioiSy  the  i<  (<+l)  eqiaationa

d  by  Google,

337.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  363

exprcasion  for  27*,  which  is  essentially  positive,  to  a  sum  of  simpiifir^i

*  .  .  exi'rcisiomi

squares  of  geneniliz^'d  component  velocities,  antl  at  the  same  f"r  tho

.  '  kinitic  ana

time  y  to  a  sum  or  the  squares  or  the  corresponding  co-ordi- potential

nates,  each  multiplied  by  a  constant,  which  may  ha  either  positive

or  negative,  but  is  essentially  reah [In  the  case  of  an  equality

or  of  any  number  of  eipialitiea  among  the  vahirs  of  these  con-

fcUmts  (a,  ^,  etc.  in  tlie  notation  below),  rootij  as  they  are  of  a

detormiuantal  equation,  the  linear  transformation  ceases  to  be

wholly  determinate ;  but  the  degree  or  degrees  of  indeterminacy

which  sn|)ervene  is  the  revei*se  of  embarrassing  in  respect  to

either  the  process  of  obtaining  the  solution,  or  the  interpretation

and  use  of  it  when  obtained.] Hence ^  ...  may  be  so  chosen

that

T=h(^  +  4>'  +  etc.) (4),

and  V=i  {arj,'  + +  etc.)  (5),

a, eta,  being  real  positive  or  native  ooofltants.  Henoe
Lagmnge's  eqt»tions  beoome

^*=-a,/r,  i^=^-fi<f>,  eta  (6).

The  solutions  of  these  equations  are

4f^AooB(tJa^e),  dt^A'wMUJfi-^),  eta  (7),  ^liX^

of  motion,

Af  «,  A',  e',  etc.,  being  the  arbitrazy  oonstantB  of  integration.  Se'^TX-
Henoe  we  oondnde  the  motion  eonsbts  of  a  simple  bannonic  miid^'or
TBimtioii  of  each  eo^wdinate,  provided  that  a,  fi,  etc.,  are  all  vibration,
posittva This  oondltioii  is  satisfied  when  F  is  a  true  minimwm
at  the  oonfigiuation  of  eqnilibnum;  whioh,  as  we  havt  seen
Q  392),  is  neeesaarilj  the  case  when  the  equilibrium  is  stable.
If  an/  one  or  more  of  a,  ^, ...  yaniahee,  the  equilibrium  mi^^t

and  P-|-M^-^...sl,  l^+Mf*-|-...Bl,  ete.,  Simultanc

leaving  |  <  (<  - 1)  dtspoMblce.  r^mSioa
We  thaU  ilia  hate^  oMni^yi  the  Mme  iom  ior  27,  Chat  Is^-  quadmtic

»-t=f„'  +  ^,/+...  to  sums  of

And,  nerordin^r  to  the  known  theory  of  the  transformation  of  quachatic  functions,  •q«»««w.
wo  may  dot* miine  the — 1)  disposables  of  /,  rn, V,  m', so  as  to  make
the  prodncts  of  the  co-ordinates  etc.  diiiappear  irom  tho  ex-

pTflisioii  for  Vt  and  give

where  a,  fi,  y,  etc.,  are  the  roots,  necessarily  nal,  of  an  equation  of  tha
degree  of  which  the  coefficientfl  dt'pciul  on  the  coefBcients  of  tho  squftrcs  and
products  in  the  cxprcfHion  for  I'  in  terms  of <p,.  etc. Tjftter  [(?'),  (8)  and  (9)
of  $  343/1,  ^  fingif  prucesa  lor  carrying  oai  this  investigation  will  be  worked  ouU

Digitized  by  Google

IntegrMed
rqoatiofit
Of  motion.

the  rutid**

mental
Tiiodea  of
vibration ;

oroTIalUiig
•wurftoa

ooiiniroiti*

tioti  of

unatablo

cqnUlbrion.

Inflniteljr
•mall  di^

tiirhnnco
from  un»
Httihlc  cqili-
libhiun.  .

Potential
and  Kfnetio

enenries
exptvsited  aa
fniirliona  of
time.

S64  PBBLDCIKABT.  [337.

be  either  stable  or  unstable,  or  neutral ;  but  terms  of  bi^icr

orders  in  the  expansion  of  F  in  ascending  i>owers  and  products
of  the  co-ordinates  m^ouM  have  to  be  examined  to  test  it ;  and  if
it  were  stable,  the  period  of  an  infinitely  small  oscillation  in  the
value  of  the  corresponding  co-ortlinate  or  co-ordinates  would  be
infinitely  great  If  any  or  all  of  a,  ...  are  negative,  Fis
not  a  uiinimum,  and  the  equilibrium  is  (§  292)  essentially  un-
stable. The  form  (7)  for  the  solution,  for  each  co-onlinate  for
which  this  is  the  case,  becomes  imaginary,  and  is  to  be  changed
into  the  exponential  fonn,  thus;  for  instanoe^  let  ~a«j>,  a  iiotttiTe
quantity.  Tiius

^»(7€+«V5P+jr«-*Vi»  (8),

which  (unlesi  the  distnrbanoa  is  so  adjusted  as  to  make  the
arbitraiy  constant  C  Tsnish)  indwates  an  nnMtnik»A  increaae
in  the  deyiation.  This  form  of  solution  oxprosses  the  approxi-
mate law  of  falling  away  fiom  a  configuration  of  unstable  equili-
brium. In  general,  of  oourse,  the  apprtiTlmatkn  becomes  less
and  less  accurate  as  the  deviation  increases.

We  haye^  by  (5),  (4),  (7)  and  (8),

r=lai»[l+C0B2(<^a-e)]  +  etc.  )

and  T=  laA'  [1  -  cos  2  {tja  -  e)]  +  etc.  |

or  I'=ij>[-2Ci:+(7*€«Vi»+i:V«Vi»]+etc.J ^  ^'

and,  veidfying  the  constancy  of  tbe  sum  of  potential  and  kinetic
enei*gies,

T ■^■  V  =  h  {cuV  +  ft.r  4.  etc.)  )
or  T+  F  =  -2(j>CA'+g6'A'  +  etc)| ^  ^'

Example  or  One  example  for  the  present  will  suffice. Let  a  solid,  im-

SaSSSSr  mersed  in  an  infinite  Hquid  (§  320),  be  prorented  &om  any
motion  of  rotation,  and  left  only  freedom  to  moye  parallel  to  a
certain  fixed  plane,  and  let  it  be  influenced  by  forces  subject  to
the  conservatiye  law,  wbich  vanish  in  a  particular  position  cf
equilibrium.  Taking  any  point  of  reference  in  the  body,  choosiQg
its  position  when  the  body  is  in  equilibrium,  as  origin  of  leet-
angular  coordinates  OX,  OT,  and  reckoning  the  potential  eneig}
from  it,  we  shall  have,  as  in  general,

Digitized  by  Googl

337.]

DTNAinCAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

865

the  principles  stated  in  §  3*20  alx)ve,  allowing  us  to  regard  the  Example  of
co-orainates  x  and  y  as  lully  specifying  the  system,  provided  tal  modei,
always,  that  if  the  body  Ls  given  at  rest,  or  is  brought  to  rest,
the  whole  liquid  is  at  rest 320)  at  the  same  time. By  solving
the  ol'viousl}'  detemiinate  problem  of  finding  that  pair  of  conju-
gate diameters  which  are  in  the  same  directions  for  the  ellipse

-I-  Bf^  +  ZCxy  s  oonst^

and  the  ellipse  or  hyi)erbola,

aaf'k'bf^'k'  %e»jf  s  const,

and  ehoosing  these  as  oblique  axes  of  coordinates  (a;,,  ?/,),  wo
shall  have

2T=A^x^'  +  B,y^%  and  2V ^.a^x^ +h,y*.

And,  asil,,  /?,  are  essentially  jwsitivc,  we  may,  to  shorten  our
expressionB^  take  x^JA^-^^  VislB^-^t  so  that  we  shall  have

the  normal  ex]>r*  ssiuiis,  according  to  the  general  forms  shown
above  in  (4)  am]  (5).

The  interpretation  of  the  general  solution  is  as  follows : —

888^  If  a  oooservatiTe  system  is  infinitely  little  displaced  oenmi
from  a  configiuration  of  stable  equilibrium,  it  will  ever  after  ^SS^n^
vibrate  about  this  configuration,  remaining  infinitely  near  it ;  Knnitei^"°'
each  particle  of  the  system  performing  a  motion  which  is  com-  motion
])osod  of  simple  lianuouic  vibrations. If  there  are  i  degrees  of  lUn -itiou
freedom  to  move,  and  we  consider  any  system  (§  202)  of  gene-  libnum.
ralized  co-ordinates  specifying  its  position  at  any  time,  the
deviation  of  any  one  of  these  co-ordinates  from  its  value  for  the
configuration  of  equilibrium  will  vary  according  to  a  complex
harmonic  function  (§  08),  composed  of  i  simple  harmonics  gene-
rally of  incommensurable  periods,  and  therefore  (§  07)  the  whole
motion  of  the  system  will  not  in  general  recur  periodically
through  the  same  series  of  configurations.  There  are,  however,
t  distinct  displacements,  generally  quite  determinate,  which  we
shall  call  the  normal  displaoemetUs,  fulfilling  the  condition,  that
if  any  one  of  them  be  produced  alone,  and  the  system  then  left  fil^^^t"
to  itself  for  an  instant  at  rest^  this  displacement  will  diminish
and  increase  periodically  according  to  a  simple  harmonic  func-

S66  PSBLDONABT.

Jttn^jjMn-^tion  of  the  time,  and  consequentlj  eveiy  particle  of  the  system
will  execute  a  simple  harmonic  movement  in  the  same  peritnl
This  result,  we  shall  see  later  (VoL  ll.),  includes  cases  in  which
there  are  an  infinite  number  of  degrees  of  freedom ;  as  for  in-
stance a  stretched  cord ;  a  mass  of  air  in  a  closed  veascl ;  waves
in  water,  or  oscillations  of  water  in  a  vessel  of  limited  extent,  or
of  an  elastic  solid ;  and  in  these  applications  it  gives  tbe  theory
of  the  so-<»lled  fundamental  yilnation,"  and  successive  "  har-
monica "  of  a  cord  or  organ-pipe,  and  of  aU  the  different  posable
simple  modes  of  vibration  in  the  other  cases. In  all  the.se  cases
it  is  convenient  to  s^ive  the  name  "fundamental  mode'*  to  any
cue  of  the  possible  simple  harmonic  vibrations,  autl  not  to
restrict  it  to  the  gravest  simple  harmonic  mode,  as  has  beeu
hitherto  usual  iu  respect  to  vibratincr  cords  and  organ-pipes.
Theorem  of The  whole  kinetic  energy  of  any  complex  motion  of  the  sys-
eiiency; tem  is  [§  337  (4)]  equal  to  tlie  sum  of  the  kinetic  energies  of
ofpotentiai  the  fundamental  constituents ;  and  [§  337  (o)]  the  pot^jntial
eneiigy  of  any  displacement  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  potential
eneipes  of  its  normal  components.
Corresponding  theorems  of  normal  constituents  and  fanda-
i|l  n  'pn'.''"^  mental  modes  of  motion,  and  the  summation  of  their  kinetic
er.niiL-ii^i."  and  potential  eneigies  in  complex  motions  and  displaoements,

tioii  uf  uit*
Riable  e(
Ubriium

Riable  eqvi-  hold  for  motiou  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  configuration  of  war

stable  equilibrium. In  this  case,  some  or  all  of  the  conatititent

motions  are  failings  away  from  the  position  of  equilibrium
(according  as  the  potential  energies  of  tiie  con&Litueut  normal
vibrations  are  negative).

cnse  or^  838.  If,  as  may  be  in  particular  cases,  the  periods  of  tbe
vibrations  for  two  or  more  of  the  normal  displacements  are  equal,
any  displacement  compounded  of  them  will  also  fulfil  the  condi-
tion of  being  a  normal  displacement  And  if  the  system  be  dis-
placed according  to  any  one  such  normal  displacement
projected  with  velocity  corresponding  to  another,  it  will  execute
a  movement,  the  resultant  of  two  simple  harmonic  movements
r.rnphic  in  e(]ual  periods.  The  graphic  representation  of  the  variation
tlon.  of  the  corresponding  co-ordinates  of  the  system,  laid  down  a.s
two  rectangular  co-ordinates  in  a  plane  diagram,  will  conse-
quently (§  Oo)  be  a  circle  or  an  ellipse ;  which  will  therefore,

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

339.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

367

of  course,  be  the  fonn  of  the  orbit  of  any  particle  of  the  system  omphte
which  has  a  distinct  direction  of  motion,  for  two  of  the  displace-  tSk"""
roento  in  question.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  some  of
.  the  principal  parts  [as  for  instance  the  body  supported  on  the
fixed  axis,  in  the  illustration  of  §  319,  F.  j  nmple  (0)]  may  have
only  one  degree  of  freedom;  or  even  that  each  part  of  the
system  may  have  only  (fne  degree  of  freedom,  as  for  instance  if
the  system  is  composed  of  a  set  of  particles  each  constrained  to
remain  on  a  given  line,  or  of  rigid  hodies  on  fixed  axes,  mutually
influencing  one  another  by  elastic  cords  or  otherwise.  In  siich
a  case  as  the  last,  no  particle  of  the  system  can  move  otherwise
than  in  one  line;  and  the  ellipse,  circle,  or  other  graphical  re-
presentation of  the  composition  of  the  harmonic  motions  of  the
system,  is  merely  an  aid  to  comprelicn.siun,  and  is  not  the  orbit
of  a  motion  actually  taking  place  in  any  part  of  the  system.

940.  In  nature,  as  has  been  said  above  (§  278],  every  system
uninfluenced  by  matter  external  to  it  is  conservative,  when
the  ultimate  molecular  motions  constituting  heat,  lights  and
magnetism,  and  the  potential  energy  of  chemical  affinities,
are  taken  into  account  along  with  the  palpable  motions  and
measurable  forces.  But  (§  275)  practically  we  are  obliged  to  Diasipati
admit  forces  of  friction,  and  resistances  of  the  other  classes
there  eiiumerated,  as  causing  losses  of  energy,  to  be  reckoned,
in  abstract  dynamics,  without  regard  to  the  equivalents  of  heat
or  other  molecular  actions  which  they  generate.  Hence  when
such  resistances  are  to  be  taken  into  account,  forces  op{X)sed
to  the  motions  of  various  parts  of  a  system  must  be  introduced
into  the  equations.  According  to  the  approximate  knowledge
which  we  have  from  experiment,  these  forces  are  independent
of  the  velocities  when  due  to  the  friction  of  solids:  but  are
simply  proportional  to  the  velocities  when  due  to  fluid  viscosity
directly,  or  to  electric  or  magnetic  influences ;  vith  conections
depending  on  varying  temperature^  and  on  the  varying  con-
figuration of  the  system.  In  consequence  of  the  last*mentioned
cause,  the  resistance  of  a  retd  liquid  (which  is  always  more  or
less  viscous)  against  a  body  moving  rapidly  enough  through  it,
to  leave  a  great  deal  of  irregular  motion,  in  the  shape  of

Digitized  by  Google

368  PRELIMINABT.  [340.

View* of "eddies,"  in  its  wake,  seems,  when  the  motion  of  the  si»]id  has

Btokes  on  i •  /•  i  i  •

TMibrtMM  been  kept  long  enough  unnorni,  to  be  nearly  in  proportioa  to
thrmgh* s(^uare  of  the  velocity;  although,  as  Stokes  has  shown,  at
liquid. the  lowest  speeds  the  resistance  is  probably  in  simple  proportion
to  the  velocity,  and  for  all  speeds,  after  long  enoQgh  time  of
one  speed,  niay,  it  is  prohable,  be  approximately  expressed  as
ii^i^  pro-  the  sum  of  two  terms,  one  simply  as  the  vdocity,  and  the
other  as  the  square  of  the  velocity.  If  a  solid  is  started  firom
rest  in  an  incompressible  fluid,  the  initial  law  of  resistance  is
no  doubt  simple  proportionality  to  velocity,  (however  great,  if
suddenly  enough  given ;)  until  by  the  gradual  growth  of  eddies
the  resistance  is  increased  gradually  till  it  comes  to  fulfil
Stokes'  law.

Frietionof 311. The  effect  of  friction  of  solids  nibbing  a<^ainst  one
another  is  simply  to  render  impossible  the  infiniUly  small
vibrations  with  which  we  are  now  particularly  concernefl ;  and
to  allow  any  system  in  which  it  is  present,  to  rest  balanced
when  displaced,  within  certain  finite  limits,  from  a  configuration
of  frictionless  equilibrium.  In  mechanics  it  is  easy  to  estimate
its  efiects  with  sufficient  accuracy  when  any  practical  case  of
finite  oscillatioiiB  is  in  question. But  the  other  classes  of  dis-
sipative  agencies  give  rise  to  resLstances  simply  as  the  velocities^
MaiiKiMt  without  the  corrections  referred  to,  when  the  motions  are  in-
yfioSim.  finitely  small;  and  can  never  balance  the  system  in  a  con-
figuration deviating  to  any  extent,  however  small,  from  a
configuration  of  equilibrium. In  the  theory  of  infinitely  small
vibrations,  they  are  to  be  taken  into  account  by  .nldini,^  to  the
expressions  for  the  generalized  components  of  force,  proper
(§  343  a,  below)  linear  functions  of  the  generalized  velocities,
which  gives  us  equations  Htili  remarkably  amenable  to  rigorous
mathematical  treatment.

The  result  of  the  integration  for  the  case  of  a  single  d^;ree
of  freedom  is  very  simple;  and  it  is  of  extreme  importance,
both  for  the  exphmation  of  many  natural  phenomena^  and  for
use  in  a  large  variety  of  eiqterimental  investigations  in  Natural
Philosophy.  Partial  conclusions  from  it  are  as  follows: —

If  the  resistance  per  unit  velocity  is  less  than  a  certain
critical  value,  in  any  particular  case,  the  motion  is  a  simple

Digilizea  by  CoOglc

341.]  DTMAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  309

harmonic  oscillation,  with  aniphtude  decreasiiif'  in  the  wime  R^wistanres

.  T 1  varying  a-t

ratio  in  equal  successive  intervals  of  time.  But  if  tiie  re-  Yeloc.uei.
sistance  equals  or  exceeds  the  critical  value,  the  system  when
displaced  from  its  position  of  equilibrium,  and  left  to  itself,
returns  gradually  towards  its  positioD  of  equihbrium,  never  08-
cillating  through  it  to  the  other  side,  and  only  reaching  it  ^iter
an  infinite  time.

In  the  nnreeisted  motion,  let  n*  be  the  rate  of  aocd^rMion,
when  the  displacement  is  unity;  so  that  (§  87)  we  have

7* as  —  :  and  let  the  rate  of  retardation /di^e. to  tfie  resistance

corresponding  to  unit  velocity  be  k. Then  the  motion  is  of  the

oscillatory  or  non-oscillatory  class  according  as  k'Ki'ln/  <n  EiT.Ttof
ii^  >  (2nY. In  the  hrst  case,  tiie  period  of  the  oscillation  IS  varj'inir  as

Vflfx  uv  in

increased  by  the  resistance  from  TfoT  — j ,  and  .the  rate  nSSoa!'

at  which  the  Napierian  logarithm  of  the  amplitude  diminishes
per  unit  of  time  is  ^ib.  If  a  negative  value  be  given  io*k,  the
case  represented  will  be  one  in  .which  the  motion  is  assisted,
instead  of  resisted,  by  force  pn^portional  to  the  velocity:  but
this  case  is  purely  ideal.

The  (litrn-ential  equation  of  motion  for  the  case  of  one  degree
of  motion  is

of  which  the  complete  Integral  Is

f -{i4Binn'<+J5coei^<}€-»«,  where  n' =  ^(n* -  J^*),

or,  wliich  is  the  .same,

1^  =  (Ci-".'  +  C'W)e  i*',  wliere  «,  =  J{ik'  -  n%
A  and in  one  case,  or  C  and  C  in  the  other,  being  the  arbitrary
constants  of  integration. Hence  the  propositions  above. In  the  Cbneirf
case  of  k'  =  {2nY  the  general  soiution  is  ^  =  (C  +  C 1}  c"  *«,  *****

842.  The  general  solution  [§  343  a  (2)  and  §  345<]  of  the  infiidtcir
problem,  to  find  the  motion  of  a  system  having  any  number,  i,  of  mSkm  or*
degreesof  freedom,  when  infinitely  little  disturbed  from  a  position  9>at«ai.
of  stable  equilibrium,  and  left  to  move  subject  to  resistances
proportional  to  velocities,  sliows  tliat  the  whole  motion  m.iv  lio
resolved,  in  general  determinatciy,  into  2i  different  motions  «  ach
VOL.  I.  24

Digitized  by  Google

i

S70  PBELIMINARY.  [341

either  simple  harmonic  with  amplitude  diminishing  according
motion  of*  to  the  law  stated  above,  or  uou-oscillatoiT  nnd  con.sisiinix  of
tjitwa. equi-proportionate  diminutions  of  the  compuueuts  of  diBpiacc-

ment  in  equal  successive  intervals  of  time.

343. It  is  now  convenient  to  ceii^e  limiting  our  ideas  to
infinitely  small  motions  of  an  absolutely  general  system  through
configurations  infinitely  little  different  from  a  configuration  of
equilibrium,  and  to  consider  any  motions  large  or  small  of  a
hysiem^ systcm  SO  Constituted  that  the  positional*  forces  are  proportional
doflued. iq  displacements  and  the  motional*  to  velocities,  and  that  the
kinetic  energy  is  a  quadratic  function  of  the  velocities  with
constant  ooefi&cients. Such  a  system  we  shall  call  a  cycloidalf
Ewy  and system :  and  we  sh.all  call  its  motions  cy cloidal  motions.  A  good
and  instractiTe  lUostration  is  presented  in  the  motion  of  one
two  or  more  weights  in  a  Tertiod  line,  hung  one  from  anotlier,
and  the  highest  from  a  fixed  point>  by  spiral  i^iiiigi.

943  a.  If  now  instead  of  i/r,  we  denote  hy  the
generalised  oo-ordinateSy  and  if  we  take  11,  12,  21, 22...,  1 1,  la,
ai,  sa,...  to  sigiiify  constant  coefficients  (not  nnmhers  as  in,  the
ordinary  notation  of  arithmetic),  the  most  general  eqaations  of
motions  of  a  cjoloidal  njwtem  may  he  written  thus :

I'-otiiri'  il-
lustration.

PoidtlonnT *  Muoh  trottUe  and  Terbiage  is  to  be  avoided  by  the  introditttion  of  tfaete
aT  FotomI  '  (^^^  yriath  will  heneefbtth  be  hi  fieqiieiit  use. Thej  teiU  their  own
meanings  as  dearly  as  any  definition  ooold.

+  A  single  adjective  is  nrrdod  to  avoid  a  sen.  of  tronhl<  k  here.  Tlie  adjoptive
'cycloidal'  is  already  classical  in  re^^jvct  to  any  motion  with  one  dvpree  of
freedom,  curvUineal  or  reoUliueal,  lineal  or  angular  (Coulomb-torsional,  for  ex-
ample), following  the  same  law  as  the  Sfydoidal  pendulum,  thai  is  to  say: — the
di^fioMmeni  a  timpU  hamonie  fimeiim  Qf  the  Hme»  The  motion  of  a  partieie
on  a  oyoloid  with  vertex  up  may  as  properly  be  eallcd  ejdoidal;  end  in  it  the
displaconirnt  15^  an  imaginary  simple  haimonie,  or  a  leal  eipopwitiel,  or  the
sum  of  two  real  ejy^onenUals  of  the  time

In  tyiSxAitX  motion  as  defined  in  the  text,  each  component  of  disfHaeement  it

proved  to  be  a  mm  «f  eqKmenttals  (Cc^^hC/'+ete.)  real  or  imegin&ij,
reducible  to  a  sum  of  prodneti  of  real  exponentials  and  leal  simple  harmonies

[c«**eos  (at  -  «) + (r«*''eos(»'<  -O +ete.].

Digitized  by  Google

Differaitbd
equations  of

complex  .
cgrdoidAl

343  a]  DTNAHICAL  LkVTB  AND  PBINCEFLBS.  371

vL  f9l\ ~ . .  _ .  •••■•••ill*

Positional  forces  of  tlic  non-ooiiscrvative  class  are  included  by
a.ssuuiiag  12  =  21,  13  =  31,  23  =  32,  etc.

The  theory  of  simultaneous  linear  differential  equations  with
constant  cocfficieuts  ahowB  that  the  general  solution  for  each
oo-onlinate  is  the  snm  of  partioular  aolutions^  and  that  everj
particular  solutioii  is  of  the  fiorm

^,=«,t**,  ^,  =  a,.*«  (2).

AsRuming:,  then,  this  to  bo  a  solution,  and  substituting  in  the  Their  sola-
ditferential  equations,  we  luvre

X"^+X(lla,  +  12a,+ ...)  +  iia,  +  iaa,  +  ...  =  0

X«^+X(21tf,  +  22a,+  ...)  +  2ia,+
etc.  etc

22a,+ ...  -0

where  9  denotee  the  wve  homegeneoas  qnadratie  fanctioa  of
a,,  a,...,  that of  Tkm  equations,  i  in  nnmber,

X  hj  the  determiwantal  equation.  .  .

(II)X'  +  11X4-1I,  (12)\*+12X+I2,...
(2l)X'+21X  +  2I,  (22)X^  +  22X+22,...

where  (i  i),  (22),  (12),  (21),  etc.  denote  the  coefficients  of  squares
and  doubled  products  in  the  quadratic^  2T ;  with  identities

(«)  =  (2i),  (i3)-(3i),«te  W.

Tlie  equation  (4)  is  of  the  degree  2?,  in  X ;  and  if  any  one  of  its
roots  be  used  for  X  in  tlie  i  linear  equations  (3),  these  bccf>me
harmonized  and  give  the  i  -  1  nitios  a^j  a^,  I  n^,  etc. ;  and  we
have  then,  in  (2),  a  particular  solution  with  one  arbitnu-y  con-
stant, ttj.  Thus,  from  the  2t  roots,  when  imotjiial,  we  have  2i
<li.siinct  particular  solutions,  each  with  an  arbitrary  constant;
and  the  addition  of  these  solutions,  as  explained  above,  giv  es  tbo
general  solution.

24—2

Digitized  by  Google

872

PRSUMINABT.

[843  &.

3

tttttona
oomplflK

AlgebT*  of
linear  cquft-

Mlnw

d«t«rniii>
nants.

343  b.  To  show  ex]>licitly  tlio  determiuation  of  the  r»UiM
a^/a,,  etc.  put  for  brevity

(u)V'«-llX+  II  =  1*1, (i2)^'+  12X  +  I2  =  1*2,  eta,

(3a)  X'  +  32A  +  32  -  3%  etc  (5)';

and  generall J  Wt  j'k  denote  ooefficieiit  of  in  the  eq[iift>
tum  of  ($),  or  the  term  of  the  line  of  the  detenninent  (to
be  called  2>  for  brevity)  oonatitating  the  fint  member  of  (4).
Let  if  0*'^)  ^  fiMstor  of /ib  in  2>  ao  that  jk.JH/k)

la  the  aam  of  all  the  terma  of  2>  which  oontain  and
irehaye

'»=iCC>*-^<>*)

beeanae  in  the  aom  SS  each  tenn  of  J)  deftrly  ooooni  i  Ummi
and  taking  difibrent  groupings  of  tenns,  bat  each  one  only  coos^
wehttve

D=  I'l  +  1-2  J/(i  -2)+  1-3^1/  (1-3)  + etc.

ss  2'1  M  {2'l)  +  2'2  M(2'2)  +  2*3  3/(2-3)  +  C*^'

«  3'i  M  (3-1) + 3*2  if  {3*2)  +  3'3  M  (3*3)  +  etc

-  VI  if  (I'l) + «•!  if  (a*i)  +  3'i  M  (3-1) + eta
=  i'air(i*2)4>2*2Jf  (2*2)4  3*2  if  (3*2) -I- etc
"  I  '3  ^  ( I  '3)  +  2  '3  if  (2  3)  +  3'3  if  (3'3) + etc

....(5)-

in  all  Sf  difierent  eQqnreaaiona  for  !>•

IWther,  by  the  elementary  law  of  fbnnation  of  detennlniiili
we  aee  that

ifO-i*-i)-(-iy^''*'**'

j  k, i'(^x),  j  (*+2)» J'l,  i-2, j  (*-a)

(i+i)*,

{i+aV*»

0-i)-(i-j|
 (sf-

Digitized  by  Go

343  b.]

BYSAmCAL  LAWS  AND  PJilNClPLES.

S73

or

or

The  quantitiea  M{i'i),  M(v2),  JiU'i),  thiu  defined  Minora  of

are  what  are  oommonly  called  the  first  mmom  of  the  detemu*
nant  D,  vith  jiut  this  Taiiation  from  otdinaiy  uange  that  the
proper  ngns  are  given  to  them  bj  the  fiwtor

in  5**  80  tiiat  in  the  formatioii  of  D  the  ordinarj  complication  of
alternate  positlTe  and  negative  signs  when  i  is  even  and  all
signs  pofiitive  when  i  is  odd  is  avoided.  In  terms  of  the  nota-
tion (5)'  the  linear  equations  (3)  become

I'la^-f  x'2ag-i-  ......  -f  x'ui|S  0

a'lOi  +  i'za,,*  +  ^ia,  =  0

-f  t'sa,  -I-

and  when  D-^O,  wfiinsbis  reqniied'to  hwrnioiiise  them,  they
nuLy  be  put  under  any  of  the  following  %  different  bat  equivalent

t-  ^

F(7T)  if(riy  if (1-3)

=  etc

J/ (2  1) M(Z  2) J/ (3  3)

— T  =  etc.

a.

Mis'i) M(y2)  ATiys)
from  which  we  find

a, M(i'2)  _  M{2'2)  _  .¥(3-2)

=  etc.

=  etc.

(5)-'.

aj if(ri) M{2-i)  u}P{yi)
5^^(1-3) J/(2j) .l/(3-3)_  .

The  remaricable  relations  here  shown  anloog  the  minon^  due  Mtiona
to  the  evaneeoenoe  of  the  nujor  determinant  2>,  are  well  known  SSSonST
in  algebra. They  are  all  indnded  in  the  following  fnrmnla^  SmtdST.

M{j'k).M{l-n)-M{jn).M{l'k)^0  (6)'^,

which  is  given  in  Salmon's  Higher  Algtbra  (§  33  Ex.  1),  as  a
consequence  of  tiie  formula

M (j-k) .  M {l-n)  -  M ( yn)  .M{l'k)^D,M (J,  1% •  •  •  (5)",
wh«re  M  (j,  l-kj  n)  denotes  the  second  minor  formed  by  snp-
pressing  the/^  and columns  and  the and  vf^  lines.

Digitized  by  Google

374

PREUMINABT.

Aelatloni

umon^  the
luiiiont  of
ttii  ovaiips-

CnfW  of
equal  roots.

343  c.  When  thei*c  arc  equalities  among  the  ruot«  tbe
problem  has  generally  solutions  of  tlie  forai

To  ptOTe  thiB  let  X,  X'  be  two  unequal  rooto  wbidi  beoooM
equal  wiHi  aome  aligjit  cfaaoge  of  the  valuea  of  aome  or  all  of  tba
gmi  constantB  (it),  II,  ii,  (12),  12, 12,  eto.;:  and  let

^j«il4'«*«-/l,€^,  ete.  (6)'

be  a  particular  solution  of  (1)  corre^^joudiiig  to  these  roots.
Now  let

c,  =  ^/(X'-XX o,  =  ^;(X'-X),  etc.|
and  A=^'-^»  i ^

Using  these  in  (6)'  we  find

To  find  I )roi>er equations  for  the  relations  among  6,,  b^,  ...r,,  Cj, ...
in  order  that  (C)"'  may  1^'  a  solution  of  (1),  proceed  thus  : — lirst
write  down  e(iuatiou.s  (3)  for  the  X' solution,  with  coiiistant,^  ^I, ,  J/,
etc.:  then  subtract  from  these  the  corresjHinding  equatit)ns  for
the  X  solution:  thus,  and  introducing  the  notation  (G) wa  tind

{(ii)X"'+  11X'+  ii}cj  +  {(i2)X"'+  12X'  +  i2K  +  eta=0]

((2l)  k"  +  21X  +  2l\.C^-t-  {i22)K^ 22k'  +  22lCt+  OtO.

ete,  etou

and

{(ti)  X"*  11X'+  ii\h,  +  {{i2)\''4*  12X'+ 12}  6,  +  ete.
«-[e»-d.{V-X)]{(ii)(XH.X')  +  ll}

-  h  -  6,  (X'  -  X)]  {(i  a )  (A  +  XO  + 1 2 }  -  etc

{(ii) X'  +  2U'  +  2 1 } 6.  +  {<2 2)X"  +  22X'  +  22 }A  +  }  ... {G)\

=  1(2  0  (X-^  X')  +  21}•

-  h  -  6,  (X'  -  X)]  {<2a)  (X  +  X')  +  22}  +  etc

etc  eliO*

Eqnaticms  (6)"  require  tiiat  X'  be  asoot  of  the  detenninaiit^  and
«  ~  1  of  them  detennine  1  of>the  quantities  e^,  e^  etc  in  terms
of  one  of  them  assumed  arbitrarily.  Snpposiiig  now  c^,  eta
to  be  thus  all  known,  the  t  equations  (6)*  fisil  to  detennine  the  i
quantities  5„  it>  ^  ^  teims  of  tiie  rig^t-hand  membeis
because  X'  is  a  root  of  the  determinant.  The  two  sets  of
equations  (6)**  and  (6)'  require  that  X  be  also  a  root  of  the  de>
t^rminant :  and  t  - 1  of  the  equations  (6)*  detennine  i  -  1  of  the

=oj...(6y,

3^3  c]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

875

qnantitiM  bg,  6„  eto.  In  tarms  of  e,,  c^,  oto.  (snppoaed  already  cum*  or
known  as  above)  ainda  properljaaBomed  valiie  of  ono  of  tbo  h%  ^

343  (/.  When  X'  is  iniiuiU'ly  nearly  cfjiial  to  X,  (6)'"  becomes
infinitely  nearly  the  same  as  (6)^  and  (6)'''  suid  (6)*  become  in
tenna  of  the  notation  (5)'

I'l  c  +  i'2  c,  +  etc.  =  O'

a*ic^  +  2'2c,+  etc=0^  (6)**,

etc.  eta

l'lbi+  1'2  6,  +  etC.aa-C|

di'i

di2

d2'i

d2'2

dK

eta

-etc

-etc.

.(6)

eta

These,  (6)*',  (6)''",  are  cleaily  tlie  equations  ■wliich  wo  find
simply  by  trying  if  (G)  is  a  solution  of  (1).  (G)**  requires  that  X
bo  a  root  of  the  detenuiiiant  I) ;  and  they  give  by  (5)'^  with  c
substituted  for  «  the  values  of  t-  1  of  the  quantities  r,,  c,,  etc.
in  terms  of  one  of  theui  assumed  arbitrarily.  And  by  the  way
we  have  found  them  we  know-  that  (6)'"  Buj>eradded  to  (6)*'
shows  liiiit  X  muHt  bo  a  dual  root  of  the  determinant.  To  verify
this  multiply  the  fii-st  of  them,  by  J/(i-i),  the  8e<X)nd  by
M{2'i),  etc.,  aud  add.  The  coeflicients  of  6,,  6^,  etc.  in  the  sum
are  eaeh  identically  zei-o  in  vii  tuo  of  the  elementary  constitution
of  detemuiiants,  and  the  coeffioient  of  6j  Ls  the  major  determinant
2>.  Thus  irrespectively  of  the  value  of  X  we  find  in  the  fii-st  place,

2»^  —  I)  ^j2+if  +eta^

+if(3-i)~2+ota|-ota....(6)-".

Now  in  virtue  of  (6)''  and  (fiy  we  have

«i »i «i  «i

Uamg  anooeaaively  the  aeveral  ezpresaiona  given  by  (d)^  for
tbflae  imtioa,  in  (6)*"*,  and  patting  Z> »  0,  we  find

wbieh  witb  i>  sO  ahowa  that  X  ia  a  doable  root

Sappoae  now  that  one  of  the  e'a  has  been  aasnmed,  and  tiie
otbera  found  by  {iS^Y :  let  one  of  the  ('a  be  assumed  :  the  other

Digitized  by  Google

87C

PRBUMINART

[343  <f.

cnat,  of  i  -  1 Me  to  be  calculated  by  i-l  of  the  eqaatiaoB  (S)**,  Thus

tqualroou. f^j.  example  take  6,  =  0. In  the  first  place  use  all  ezoapt  the

first  o£  equatioiui  {d)^  to  determine  h^,  6,,  eto.:  we  thus

find

if(r,)6,=  -|jr(i,2i,2)''^+J/(i,2i,3)^^+etaJ^^

-{if(i,2-i,a)^+i^(i,a%-3)^i+etc.jc,-etc  [

J^(i'x)6,==etc. if(i'i)6^»6tc. etc.  eto.

Seoondly,  uae  all  eiroept  the  second  of  (6)**  to  find  6,,  6,,  eta :
we  thus  find

J/(2  i)/>,-etc.,  J/ (21)  6,  =  etc.,  J/(2  i)  6^  =  etc  (6)'.

Tlmxlly,  hy  using  all  of  (Q)""'  except  the  third,  foorthlj,  all
ezoept  the  fourth,  and  so  on,  we  find

if (ri)fti Jf(3-i)ft,  =  «tc,  if(3-i)i4»«l»  (6)*.

343  e.  In  certain  cases  uf  equality  among  the  roots  (343  m)
it  is  found  that  values  of  the  coefficients  (11),  11,  11,  etc.
difibring  infinitely  little  from  particular  values  which  give  the
equality  give  values  of  a,  and  a/,  a,  and  a,',  etc.,  which  are
itot  infinitely  nearly  eqOaL  In  such  cases  we  see  by  (6)"  that
6|,  6',,  etc.  finite,  and  c^,  r,,  etc.  vanish  :  and  so  the  solution
does  not  contain  terms  of  the  fonn  U*'^ :  but  the  requisite  number
of  aj*bitrary  constants  is  made  up  by  a  pro])er  degree  of  inde-
temiinateness  in  tlie  reeidaai;  equations  for  the  latios
6,/ 61,  etc.

Now  when  c^^O,  c^bO,  etc  the- second  mmben  of  eqtm-
tions  (6^,(6)^,  (6}*,ete.all  tMlbb,  and  as  \fb^fb^,  eta  do  not  aU
it  follows  that  we  have

1^(1-1) -0,  JLr(2-i)  =  0,  Miyi)  =  0,  etc  (6)

Ousof  Henw  by  (5)'^'  or  (5)'"' we  infer  that  all  the  first  minors  arc

zero  for  any  value  of  A.  which  is  doubly  a  root,  uiui  which  yet
docs  not  give  terms  of  the  form  ^c^'  in  the  solution.  This
Important  proposition  is  due  to  Routh*,  who,  escaping  the  errors
of  previous  writers  (§  343  m  below),  first  gave  the  complete
theoiy  of  equal  roots  of  the  determinant  in  cydoidal  motion.

*  StaMitif  of  Motion  (Adams  Fme  EmiSj  for  1877),  ehap^  1.  %  ff.

Digitized  by  Go

343  e.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PKIXCIPLES.

877

He  abo  nmaiked  that  the  fiictor  t  does  not  neoessarily  imply  Bratti^
instability,  as  tenns  of  the  fom  U~^,  or  ic*^  oos  (»<  -  0),  when  p
is  positiTa,  do  not  give  instability,  but  on  the  contrary  coire*
spoud  to  non-0BcU]«tory  or  oscillatory  sabsidenoe  to  equilibrium.

343  / We  fall  l>ack  on  the  case  of  no  motioDal  forces  by  Gm«  of  no
taking  11  =  0,  12  =  0,  etc.,  which  reduces  the  equations  (3)  for  °^'^
determiuing  the  ratios  a.  / a^/  a,,  eta  to

X*^  +  I  ittj  +  1 2a^+  etc.  =  0,  k'  ^  +  2 ittj  +  22a,  +  etc.  =  0,  etc.  (7),

or,  expanded,

[(ii)X'+ii]a,  +  [(i2)X«+i2]a^  +  eta  =  0^
[(21)  A«  +  2 1 ]  a,  +  [(22) X»  +  22]  0.  +  etc. » 0  }"  "^*

The  determinantjil  ofiuation  (-i)  to  liaimoiiizo  these  simplified
equations  (7)  or  (7')  becomes

=  0.

.(8).

I(i  i)  A*  +  1 1,  (i2)X'+  12,  ...

(2l)X"+2I, (22)X"+  22,  ...

This  is  of  degree  i,  in  X':  therefore  X  has  i  \y<urs  of  oppositely
signed  equal  values,  which  we  Oiay  now  denote  by

^ X,  ^X,  ^X  ,  •••  f

and  fbr  each  of  these  pain  the  series  of  ratio-equations  (T')  are
the  same.  Hence  the  complete  solution  of  the  differential  equa-
tions of  motion  may  be  written  as  lbIlow%  to  show  its  arbitraries
ezplunUy : —

etc.  etc  etc.

where  A,£',  A',  J/;  A",  i^';  etc.  deiu>te  2i  arbitrary  constants,
and

^«  <  ^'  etc

' «7' <" ■  '

are  t  sets  of  i  —  1  ratios  each,  the  values  of  which,  when  all  the
i  roots  of  the  determinantal  equation  in  X'  have  diiiei-ent  values,
are  fully  determined  by  jiving  sttccessively  these  i  values  to  X'
■m  (7-).

Digitized  by  Google

S  PE£UMiXA&r.  [343  </.

343  g.  When  there  are  eqaal  roots,  the  solution  is  to  be
ojii.)  !ei^-vi  according  to  §  343  e/  or  e,  as  the  case  may  be.  The
ca><'  t^  f  uojiiservaiive  system  (343  h)  necessarily  falls  under  §  343  «,

a*  k  proved  iu  §  343  w.  The  same  form,  (9),  btill  represents  the
c«^>iaplele  solutions  when  there  are  eqimlities  among  tlie  roots,  but
with  ».  h:iui:»Hl  conditions  as  to  arbitrariness  of  the  elements  appear-
in,'  iu  it.  SiipjK'se  X*-  \'  for  <  _\;ii!i{>le.  In  tliis  case  any  value
ui.iv  be  cl.osen  .ii  i  ;:mrily  for  't^,  ;ai<l  tlie  rL-m.under  of  the
£A.'t a^,  ...  are  then  fnlly  Uct<,rniiu«'<l  l«y  (7')^  again

another  value  may  be  chosi^n  for  aiul  with  it  a^'  /

rtj',  ...  are  determined  by  a  fresh  application  of  (7')  with
tlie  same  value  fur  k' :  and  the  arhitraries  now  are  A -k- A\

.4+'''!  J', +  A",  JBT,  A"',  BT,  andJJt'-w

nmnbering  still  2i  in  alL  Similarly  we  see  how,  beginning
with  the  fonn  (9),  convenient  for  (he  general  case  of  t  ditferent
roots,  we  have  in  it  also  the  complete  eolution  when  X'  is  triplj,
or  qnadmiilj,  or  any  nomber  of  times  a  root^  and  when  any
other  root  or  loots  also  aae  doable  or  multiple.

3i3  For  the  case  of  a  oonaervatiTe  q^atem,  that  is  to  say,
the  ease  in  which

ia»2i,  t3»3i»  S3»=32,  eta,  etc  (10^

the  difiiBirential  equations  of  motion,  (1),  become
dfdT\ dV  ^ d  f'JTx dV  ^  ^

and  the  aolving  linear  algebraic  equataona,  (3),  beoome

dZ dlrJ - crt dV  ^

</«r<i..=  •  s.i"/<Ai;"**

where

J(ii^/+2.i2^,^,+etc.),andiJ=i{iiaj"+2.i2a,a,+etc.)...(10"').

In  this  case  that  lootSy  X*,  of  the  detenninantal  equation  are  the
negatiyes  of  the  Tslues  of  a,  ...  ol  our  first  investigation;  and
thus  in  (10")}  (8),  and  (9)  we  have  the  promised  solution  bj  one
completely  expressed  process*  IVom  §  337  and  its  footnote  we  .
in^  that  in  the  present  case  the  n»ots  X'  are  all  real,  whether
negative  or  positive.

Digitized  by  Google

(a,  a')^V{a,  a>  0|

343  A  ]  DTNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  879

in  §  337  it  was  exprenly  assumed  that  T  (as  it  must  be  in  cydoMal
the  dynamical  problem)  iseaaentiaUy  positive;  but  the  investiga-  Comerfm*
tion  waa  equally  valid  for  any  case  in  which  either  of  the  quad-  timjS^Md
ratios  T  or  I''  is  incapable  of  changing  sign  for  real  values  of  the  S^ftSm?*"
variables  (^,, etc  for  T,  or  i/^,,  i/r^,  etc.  for  V). Thus  we
aee  that  the  roots  X'  are  ail  real  when  the  relations  (5)  and  (9)
are  satisfied,  and  when  the  magnitudes  of  the  residual  indepen-
dent coefficients  (ii),  (22),  (12),  ...  and  11,  22,  12,  ...  aresndi
that  of  the  resulting  quadratics,  9, one  or  other  is  essen<
tially  positive  or  essentially  n^gatiTe. This  property  of  the
(letcrminautal  equation  (7')  is  very  remarkable. A  more  direet
algebraic  proof  ia  to  be  desired. Here  is  one:^

348  h  Writing  oat  (7*)  Ibr  X*,  and  for  X",  multiplying  the
first  for  X'  by  |a/,  the  second  by  Ja/,  and  so  on,  and  adding;
and  again  mnltiplying  the  fint  for  X''  hf  )a,,  the  second  by  |a,,
and  so  OD,  and  adding^  we  find

X*C(a,  a')  +  r(a,  a')  =  0]
and  X'*C(c
where

€{a,  a')  =  J  {(ii)rt,rt,'  +  (i2)(a,a/+o,a/)  +  etc.}i
and  V  {a,  a')  =  J  {  11  u,i\  1 2  (a/*^'  +  rt^a/)  +  etc.}/  ^
Rrnjuik  til  at  according  to  this  (12)  notation  'JT  («,  a)  means
tiie  suiiie  thing  as  simply,  acconliiig  to  the  nututiou  of  (3)  etc.
iilxn  e,  uiul  »r  i')  ^^"^  siime  thing  as  T,  lionnirk  farther  that
(a,  a)  is  a  linear  function  of  a,,  ...  with  coefficients  each
involving  o^',  a^',  ...  linearly;  and  that  it  is  syninietrical  with
reference  to  a,,  a/,  and  a,,  a,',  etc ;  and  that  we  therefore
have

Z{mp,  p')  =  mZ{py  p')  =  Z{p,  mp')  and  j  ...(13).

Z(mp +nq,m'p+n'q)  =  mm'Z{p,p)-i-(mn' +  m'n)Z(pyq)  +  n7i'Z(qjq))

Preciaely  aimilar  statements  and  formulas  hold  for  V  (a,  a').

From  (11)  we  infer  that  if  X'  and  X"  be  unequal  we  must
faaTO

€(a,  a')»0,  and  %r(a»  a')»0  (14).

Now  if  there  can  be  imaginaiy  roots,  X*,  let  X'sp^o'^rj

and  X^ssp^frJ^  be  a  pair  of  them,  p  and  <r  being  i-eal.  And,

I.y  f^^^'-  ^><"ing  all  real,  let  p^  +  7,  J-  1,  p^~q^  J-  1,  be
arbitrarily  cho.seu  values  of r',',  and  let

380

PRELIMIXAEY.

[343

Cyclotd«l

notion.
Corisn-rvft-

livc

t Kiiml.  aud
no  intftion-
ai,  (oroM.

CaMof

bo  the  determinaUlif  deduced  values*  of  a,,  a,, a/,  a,',  ...

acooitUiig  to  (7');  we  lutve,  by  (13),  with

m  =  m  =1,  n  -  J—  ] ,  /i' -  ^-1,

C  (a,  a')  =  Z  (p,  p)-i-Z  (q,  q))
and  YT («,  «')  =r  (^,,  ^)  ^) /  l^*

Now  by  hv^jiothesis  either  Z  (x,  x),  ot  Hff  [x^x)  iB  easentully  of
one  sigu  for  all  real  values  of  x^,  x^,  etc.  Henco  the  second
member  of  one  or  other  of  equations  ( 1 4')  cannot  be  zero,  because
J9,f ...»  and  /y,,  7,,...  are  all  real.  But  by  (14)  the  first
member  of  each  of  the  equations  (14')  is  zero  if  X'  and  X'*  are
unequal:  henco  they  are  equal:  hence  either  i>,  =  0,  p^asO,  elc,
or  =r.  0,  0,  eta,  that  is  to  say  the  roots  X'  are  all  neccooariljr
real,  whether  negative  or  positive.

348  L Farther  we  now  aee  by  going  baek  to  (1 1) : —

(o)  if  for  all  real  values  of  x^,  x^,...  the  values  of  Z{x^  i)
and  V  {Xj  x)  have  the  same  unchaugiug  sign,  the  roots  X'  are  all

negative ;

(6)  if  for  different  real  values  of  x^,  j*^,  etc.,  one  of  the  two
^  (ar,  a;),  V  (x,  x)  lias  different  signs  (the  other  by  hyjKjthesis
having  always  one  sign),  some  of  the  roots  X'  are  negative  and
some  positive;

[c)  if  the  values  of  Z  and  V  have  essentially  opposite  signa
(jind  each  tlierefore  according  to  hypothesis  unchangeable  in
sign),  the  roots  A'  are  all  |)0sitive.

The  {it)  and  {<:)  of  this  tri])artito  conclusion  we  see  by  taking
X'*  =  X*  in  (11),  which  reduces  them  to

X1(  (a,  a)  +  r  (a,  a)  =  0  (15),

and  remarking  that  a,,  o^,  eta  are  now  all  reel  if  we  please  to
give  a  real  value  U>  a,. The  (h)  is  proved  in  g  343  o  below.

348  ffk IVom  (14)  we  see  that  when  two  roots  X*,  X",  am

infinitely  nearly  equal  there  is  no  approadi  to  equaUty  between
Oi  and  Oj',  a,  and  a/,  and  therefore^  when  there  an  no  motkmal
Cocoes,  snd  when  the  positional  foroes  are  oooservaiive,  equality
of  roots  essentially  falls  under  the  ease  of  §  343e  above.  This

may  be  proved  explicitly  as  follows : — ^let

-  (a^t  +  b^)  e^, ^, .  i^a^C  f  6,) ete  (15)'

•  Cases  of  equalities  among  tlio  rwts  arc  disregarded  for  the  moment  merclv
to  avoid  circumlocutious,  but  tiicj-  obviously  form  no  exception  to  the  reasouing
and  oooduMon.

Digitized  by  Go

...  (i5r.

348  m.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  Ain>  FitlKaPLEa  381

be  tlie  complete  solution  corrfspoiuling  t<>  the  root  X  supposed  to  ^fo'Jloi?.*'
be  a  dual  root. Using  this  in  fqiuitious  (1)  and  oquating  to  zero  ^^J'JJJ?'
in  each  equation  so  found  the  coefficients  of  U*^  and  of  e^,  vith  Jjj^j^
the  notation  of  (12)  we  find

X-^^>  +  ^j^-0, K  ^)  ^ ^j^) ^ 0, eta....  (\^\

db^ ^ da^  db^  '

ah^  da^  db^

Multiplying  the  firsts  fleoond,  thizd,  etc.  of  (15)''  by  \, b^  etc.
and  f^ing  we  find

X'«(a»6)  +  r(a,6)  =  0  (15)"i

and  aiiiularly  from  (15)"'  with  multipUen  a,,  etc.

X-«  (a,  B)  +  «r  (a,  5) + 2X1i;  («,  a)  -  0  (16)\

8abtnetuig(15)*'from(15)'we8e»ihat^(a^ii)»0.  Hence  we
miisfc  have  a^ ^0,  0,  etc.,  that  ia  to  flay  t^iereare  no  tenna  of
the  Irani  Ic^  In  the  solutum.  It  ia  to  be  remarked  that  the  in-
feranoe  of  «,  -  0,  a,  =  0,  etc.  from  «  (a,  a)  =  0,  ifl  not  limited  to
leal  loota  X  because  X*  in  the  pTOBont  case  is  eesentially  real,  and

whether  it  be  pceitiTe  or  negative  the  ratios  aja^,  aja^^  eta,  are
essentially  real.

It  is  remarkable  that  both  Lagrange  and  Laplace  fell  into
the  error  of  supposing  that  equality  among  roots  necessarily
implies  terms  in  the  solution  of  the  form  t€^*  (or  t  cos  pi),  and
therefore  that  for  stability  the  roots  must  be  all  unequal.  Tliis
we  find  in  the  M4canique  Anah/tique,  Sccoude  Partie,  section  vi.
Art  7  of  the  second  edition  of  1811  published  three  years  before
Ligrange's  death,  and  repeated  without  change  in  the  posthu-
mous edition  of  1853.  It  occurs  in  the  ooune  of  a  general
aolutioii  of  the  problem  of  the  infinitely  small  oscillations  of  a
system  of  bodies  about  their  positions  of  equilibrium,  with
conserTative  forces  of  position  and  no  motional  forces,  which
from  the  "  ATertissement"  (p.  tI)  prefixed  to  the  1811  edition
seems  to  have  been  first  published  in  the  1811  edition,  and  not
to  have  appeared  in  the  original  edition  of  1788*. It  would  be

•  Smce  this  statement  was  put  in  type,  the  first  edition  of  the  Mccanique
Analytique  (which  hod  been  inquired  for  in  Tain  in  the  UniTenity  libiaries  of
Cambridge  andGlasgcnr)  has  been  foond  hi  the  Univemty  libiaty  of  Edinbnrgji,

882  PRELIMINART.  [343  «R.

Cjdoidri  curions  if  socli  an  error  liml  remained  for  twenty-three  years  in
c55JS^-  Lagrange's  mind.  It  could  Bcarcely  have  existed  even  during
tSSalTand  tho  Writing  and  printing  of  the  Article  for  his  last  edition  if  he
had  been  in  the  habit  of  considering^  particular  applications  of
his  splendid  analytical  work :  if  he  bad  be  would  have  seen  that
a  proposition  which  asserted  that  the  equilibrium  of  a  partide
in  the  bottom  of  a  frictionless  bowl  is  unstable  if  the  bowl  be
a  figure  of  revolution  with  its  axis  yertical,  cannot  be  true.
No  such  obvious  illustration  presents  itself  to  suggest  or  prove
the  error  as  Laplace  has  it  in  the  MSBomque  Colette  (Premite
Parti e,  Livre  ii.  Art.  57)  in  the  course  of  an  investigation  of  the
seciiliir  ineqiialiLies  of  the  pknetary  system.  But  as  [by  a
peculiarly  simple  case  of  the  process  of  §  'U')^'  ('>^)]  l^as
reduced  his  analysis  of  this  problem  virtually  to  the  same  us
that  of  conservutive  oscillations  about  a  configuration  of  equili-
brium, the  physical  illustration^?  which  abouiul  for  this  case
suffice  to  prove  the  error  in  Lrqihice's  statement,  different  and
comparatively  recondite  as  its  dynamical  subject  is.  An  error
the  converse  of  that  of  Laplace  and  Lagrange  occurred  in  pafje
278  of  our  First  Edition  where  it  was  said  that  "  Cases  in  which
'*  there  are  equal  roots  leave  a  corresponding  number  of  degrees
"of  indetenninateness  in  the  ratios  lim^lin,  etc.,  and  so  allow
"the  requisite  number  of  arbitraiy  constants  to  be  made  upj"
without  limiting  this  statement  to  the  case  of  conservative
positional  and  no  motional  forces,  for  which  its  truth  is  obvious
from  the  nature  of  the  problem,  and  for  which  alone  it  is  obvious
at  first  sight ;  although  for  the  cases  of  adynamic  oscillations,
and  of  stable  precessions,  §  345**,  it  is  also  essentially  true.
The  correct  theory  of  equal  roots  in  the  generalized  problem
of  cycloidal  motion  has  been  so  far  as  we  know  first  given  by
Routh  in  his  investigation  referred  to  above  (§  343  e).

343  n.  Rotiiniing  to  §  313  /,  to  make  more  of  (6),  and  to
understand  the  emcicncy  of  the  oppositely  signed  roots,  X*,  as-
serted  in  it,  let  a'=-X'  in  any  case  in  which  k*  ia  n^ative^  and  let

•A.^r,  co«{<r<-e), =  r,oos(<r<-0X  etc  (16),

be  the  corresponding  particukr  aolutioii  in  fiiUy  realM  terms,

J^L^rJTljil^^'?*^'**  osculations,  with  the

wmarisaiile  mor  refmed  to  in  the  te«t.

Digitized  by  Google

343  n.]  DTKAmCAL  LAWS  AND  PBIKCIPLES.  8S3

as  in  ^  337  (0)  above  but  with  somowhut  difTcrcnt  notiition.  Cycloldnl
By  substituting  in  (1)  and  multiplying  the  fii-st  of  the  resulting  ("on!u>na-
equations  by  r  ,  the  second  by  r  ,  and  so  on  and  adding,  virtually  tiunai.  and

/•!  no  tnotiftii-

as  we  found  {lO),  we  now  hnd  al.  force*.

-^'Z{r,  r)-^TrT(r,  r) 0  (17).

Adopting  now  the  notation  of  {'J)  for  tljc  real  ]>08itive  onos  of
tiie  roots  X',  but  taking,  for  ])revity, ^  I,  fi^'  =  1,  a^"  -  1,  etc.,
we  have  for  tlie  comi)lete  solution  when  tlwre  lire  both  negative
and  positive  roots  of  the  <leterminantal  eijnation  (7  );
(y(c^+/?€-'^0-»-  (''tV-f7re-'^'')+etc.+/',cos(o-^-f)^r/cos((r7-p')+etc.J

V'<+-fi'€-^'0+etc.+r,cob(a(-e}+r,'co8(<r'<-«>etc >  ...(IS),
^jssetc, i/r^--etc.  etc  etc.  )

343  0.  Using  this  in  the  general  expressions  for  T  and  F,
with  the  notation  (12),  and  remarking  tliatthe  products  x  c^'',
ete.  and  c**  x  sin  (ei e),  etc.,  and  sin  {at-e)  x  sin  (o-'i  — e'),  etc,
disappear  from  the  terms  in  virtue  of  (11),  we  find

+  «F»«  (r,  r)  iin« -  e)  + (r',  lO  till*  (iT'l-eO J  ^  ^'
and

r=r(fl,  «)(iifW+ir«-*«)'+r(a',  a')(i  V<+  5'€-*'*)*+etc.'i

+  17(r,r)oo8«(al-«)  +  tr(r',r')oo8«(«/«-0  +  «*«. i  ^
The  faotors  which  appear  with

Z  (a»a),  ?r  (a,  a), . .  .«r  (r,  r), (r',  /)

in  this  ezprMOon  (19)  for  T  are  all  essentially  pontxre;  and  the

nme  is  tiue  of  IT  in  (20)  for  V,  Now  for  erer^  set  of  real

oo-ordinates  and  Telocity-oomponenti  the  poleniial  and  kinetio

eneigiea  are  ezpressible  by  the  fonnnlaa  (20)  and  (19)  beoanae

(18)  is  the  oomplete  solution  with  2f  arbitraries. Henee  if  the

▼alne  of  Fcan  change  sign  with  real  Taluea  of  the  oo^nidinates,

the  quantities  V  (a,  a),  V(cf^  a%  etc,  and  V(r,  r),  V  (/,  f%

etc,  for  the  serersl  roots  most  be  some  of  them  positire  and

some  of  them  negative;  and  if  the  Talue  of  T  could  change  sign

with  real  valaes  of  the  velodtpHSomponentSy  some  of  the  qnan-  •

titiee  C  («s  a)^  V  (a',  a7>  ^»  ^  ^ould

need  to  be  positive  and  some  negative. So  much  being  learned

from  (20)  and  (19)  we  must  now  recal  to  mind  that  aooording

to  hypothesis  one  only  of  the  two  quadratics  T  and  V  can  diange

sign,  to  conclude  from  (15)  and  (17)  that  there  are  both  positive

and  negative  roots  \*  when  eitiier  2*  or  T  can  change  sign.  Thus

(6)  of  the  tripartite  oonduskm  above  is  rigorously  proved.

Digitized  by  Google

384

PRELIMINARY.

[343 />.

motion.

tivH  jjONi-
tional,  and
DO  motion-
al.

Equal  inn  of
ent'iyy  in

general

Artificial  or

i<il-Jll  BC-

cumulafcivo

343/).  A  abort  al^^obmic  prtx)f  of  (&)oouUl  no  doubt  l>e
given  ;  but  our  somewhat  elal)omU}  discussion  of  the  subject  is:
portant  as  showing  in  (15). ..(20)  the  whole  relation  Vjet^^
the  previoQB  short  algebraic  investigation,  conducted  in  terms
involving  quantities  which  are  eoEwntiaUj  imni]:inary  for  the
case  of  oscillations  about  a  configuration  of  stable  equilibrium,
and  the  fully  realiied  solution,  with  formulas  for  the  potential
and  kinetio  energies  realized  both  for  oeoiUatioDB  and  for
fallings  away  from  unstable  equilibrium.

We  now  see  definitively  by  (15)  and  (17)  that,  in  real  d^Tiamica
(that  is  to  say  T  essentiaUy  po^iti^  c)  the  factors  V{a,  a)y
V{a\  a),  etc,  are  all  negative,  and  V  {r,  r),  K(r',f^,  etc.,  all
positive  in  the  expression  (20)  for  the  potential  eneigy.  Adding
(20)  to  (19)  and  using  (!.'))  and  (17)  in  the  sum,  we  fiiid
T-^  r=-4^J?A'«r(a,a)-4.1'/rX'*^(a',a),efcc.  )

+  a^Z  (r,  r)  +  <t*Z.  (/,  r')  +  etc.  j'-'K"^)'
It  ia  interesting  to  see  in  this  fonnula  how  the  constan<r^  of
the  sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetio  energies  ia  attained  in  any

solution  of  the  fbrm  Ai^^B^'*^  [whicb,  with
indndes  the  form  r  oos  (<rf  -  e)],  and  to  remark  that  for  any  single
solatiom  a€^»  or  solution  eompoanded  of  single  solutums  depend^
ing  on  unequal  values  of  X'  (whether  real  or  imaginary),  tlie  sum
of  the  potential  and  kinetio  energies  is  essentially

344.  When  the  positional  forces  of  a  system  violate  the  law
of  conscrvatiism,  we  have  seen  (§  272)  that  energy  without  limit
may  be  drawn  from  it  by  guiding  it  perpetually  through  a
returning  cycle  of  configurations,  and  we  have  inferred  that  in
every  real  system,  not  supplied  with  energy  from  without,  the
positional  forces  fulfil  the  conservative  law.  But  it  is  e&sy  to  ar-
range a  system  artificially,  in  connexion  with  a  source  of  energy,
so  that  its  positional  forces  shall  be  n  on -conservative;  and  tlie
consideration  of  the  kinetic  effects  of  such  an  ammgemeDt,  es-
pecially of  its  oscillations  about  or  motions  round  a  configura-
tion of  equilibrium,  is  most  instructive,  by  the  contrasts  which  it
presents  to  the  phenomena  of  a  natural  system*  The  preceding
formulas,  (7).. .(9)  of  §  343/  and  §  348  ^, express  the  general
solution  of  the  problem— to  find  the  infinitely  small  motion  of  a
cydoidal  system,  when,  without  motional  forces,  there  is  devia-
tion from  conservatism  by  the  character  of  the  positional  forces.

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

344.]  BTKAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  885

In  this  case  not  fulfilled,]  just  as  in  the  case  of  motional  ArtinrUi

^  .  Of  de-

forces fulfilling  the  conservative  law  (10),  the  character  of  the  ^"^'iv®

equilibrium  as  to  stability  or  iDStability  is  discrimiDated  accord-  criterion  of

ing  to  the  character  of  the  roots  of  an  algebraic  equation

degree  equal  to  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom  of  the  system.

If  the  roots  (X')  of  the  determinaatal  oquation  §  843  (8)  are
all  real  and  negative,  the  equilibrium  is  stable :  in  every  other
case  it  is  unstabls^

346.  But  although,  when  the  equilibrium  is  stable,  no
possible  infinitely  small  displacement  and  velocity  given  to
the  system  can  cause  it^  when  left  to  itself  to  go  on  moving
fiirther  and  fiurther  away  till  either  a  finite  displacement  is
reached,  or  a  finite  velocity  acquired;  it  is  veiy  remarkable
that  stability  should  be  possible,  considering  that  even  in  the
case  of  stability  an  endless  increase  of  velocity  may,  as  is  easily
seen  from  §  272,  be  obtained  merely  by  constraining  the  system
to  a  particular  closed  course,  or  circuit  of  configurations,  no-
where deviating  by  more  than  an  infinitely  small  amount  from
the  configuration  of  equilibrium,  and  leaving  it  at  rest  anywhere
in  a  certain  part  of  this  circuit  This  result,  and  the  distinct
peculiarities  of  the  cases  of  stability  and  instability,  will  be
sufficiently  illustrated  by  the  simplest  possible  example,  that  of
a  material  particle  moving  in  a  plane.

Let  the  mass  be  unity,  and  the  components  of  force  parallel
to  two  rectangular  axes  be  ^  +  6y,  and  a'x  +  6  y,  when  the
position  of  the  particle  is  {x,  y).  The  equations  of  motion
will  be

itsax-¥hyt  p^a*x  +  b*y  (1).

Let  J(rt'  +  5)^c,  and  },{a~b)  =  e:

the  componenta  of  the  force  l)ocoine

ax  +  cy-  ey,  and  cx  +  b'y  +  ex,

or  _„_ey,  and-^-

where  F=- 1  {aa^+hy  +  2eae;y).

The  terms  -  ey  and  +  ex  ate  dearly  the  oomponents  of  a  force

e{a^  +  y*)^,  perpendicular  to  the  radiua-vector  of  the  particle.
Hence  if  we  turn  the  axes  of  co-ordinates  through  any  angle,  ibe

VOL.  I.  25

Digitized  by  Google

386  PBELIMINABT.

Artincial  comBpotiding  toraui  in  the  tnuufovmed  oompouenta  aie  still

cawwhJS •'ty  and eas. If,  therefore,  we  dioose  the  axee  so  that

r=i(a*-+^i^)  (2).

the  equationa  of  motion  become,  without  Ion  of  genenliij,

To  integrate  these,  asHume,  m  in  general 343  (2)],

Then,  as  before  [5^  343  (7)],

(X'  +  o)/  +  e7«  =  0,  and  -e/ +  (X» +^)m  =  0.

Whence  (X'  +  eXX^  +  Z^j^-e*  (3^

which  gives

This  shows  that  the  ei^uilila  iuin  is  stable  if  both  a)8  +  ^  and
a  4-  j3  ai'e  poaitivo  and  <  4  ~  fiT  unstable  in  eveij  other
case.

But  let  the  particle  bo  constrained  to  remain  on  a  circle^  of
radius  r.  Denoting  by  B  its  angle-vector  from  OX,  and  trans-
forming (§  27)  the  equations  of  motion,  we  have

-  ()3  -  a)  sin  9co8 s  - a)  sin  2$<¥€  (4).

If  we  liad  e  -  0  (a  conservative  systt  ni  of  foiw)  the  positions  of
equilibrium  would  be  at  ^-0,  6  -  lir,  O-v,  and  O^^.tt]  and
tlie  motion  would  be  that  of  the  quadrsmtal  pendulum.  But
when  e  has  any  finite  value  less  than  A  — a)  whicli.  for  conve-
nience, wo  may  8up^)ose  positive,  there  are  positions  of  et^uili-
brium  at

= ^  =  ^-^, = and  ^=y-J&,

2«?

where  ^  is  half  the  acute  angle  whose  sine  is  ^  — :  the  6rst  and

third  being  positions  of  stalile,  and  the  second  and  fourth  of  un-
.stiible,  equilibrium.  Thus  it  aj>]»ear8  tliat  the  efT«x::t  of  the  con-
stant tari<^'eiitial  force  is  to  disjilace  the  positicms  of  staV>le  aial
unstable  equilil)riujn  forwanls  and  backwards  on  the  circle
through  Hiigl.  s  each  equal  to  ■'i.  And,  by  multi|)l\ iiig  (4)  by
'IBdl  aud  integrating,  wo  have  as  the  integral  equation  of  energy

^=C+i08-a)oo6  2^+2e^  (5).

345.]  DTNAJUGAL  LAWS  AND  P&INCIPLES.  387

From  this  we  see  that  the  vahie  of  C,  to  make  the  particle  ATtllW«l<

just  reach  the  pOHitioii  of  uii.stiiljle  equilibrium,  ia

C  =  -  J  08  -  a)  008  (»  -  2^)  -  « (»  -  2^).

and  by  equating  to  zero  the  ezpronioil  (5)  for  with  this  value
of  C  substituted,  we  have  a  traiwcendental  equation  in  $,  of
which  the  leai5t  negative  root,  6^,  gives  the  limit  of  vibrations  on
the  side  reckoned  backwards  from  a  position  of  stable  equilibrium.
If  the  pArticle  be  placed  at  rest  on  the  circle  at  any  distance  less

than  ^  ~  2^  h^ifre  a  position  of  stable  eqxdlihrium,  or  less  than

b  -6^  beJiirul  it,  it  will  vibrate.  But  if  placed  anywhere  beyond
those  limits  and  left  either  at  rest  or  moving  with  any  velocity
in  either  direction,  it  will  end  by  flying  round  and  round
forwards  with  a  periodically  increasing  and  diminishing  velocity,
but  increasing  every  half  turn  by  equal  additions  to  its  squares.

If  on  the  other  hand  «  >  ^(/8— a),  the  positions  both  of  stable
and  unstable  equilibrinm  are  imaginary;  the  tangential  force
predominating  in  every  position.  If  the  particle  be  left  at
rest  in  any  part  of  the  circle  it  will  fly  round  with  continually
increasing  veloGity,  but  periodically  increasing  and  diminishing

84&.  Leaving  now  the  ideal  case  of  positional  forces  violat-
ing the  law  of  conservatisni,  interestingly  curious  as  it  is,  and
instructive  in  respect  to  the  contrast  it  presents  with  the
positional  forces  of  nature  which  are  essentially  conservative,  let
us  henceforth  suppose  ihe  positional  forces  of  our  system  to  be
conservative  and  let  us  admit  infringement  of  conservatism  only
as  in  nature  through  motional  forces.  We  shall  soon  see  (§  345*^
and  that  we  may  have  motional  forces  which  do  not  violate
tbe  law  of  conservatism.  At  present  we  make  no  restriction  cyrioidai
upon  the  motional  forces  and  no  other  restnction  on  the  posi-
tional  forces  than  that  they  are  conservative.  JSS^if?'*'

restrict)  (1

The  diflerential  equations  of  motion,  taken  from  (1)  of  343a  jj^^**
above,  with  the  relations  (10),  and  with  V  to  denote  the  potential
eneigy,  are^

23—2

Digi  i^  .  -.  uy  Google

888  PREL1MIKABT.  [345\

CycIoid«l  d /dT\ ; io;  . .  '^^"^  r»

coiiaerva*  Qt  \dw '  i
tive  poai-  '  *

live  poai-  •  i»T  /1\

tional  forces  d  fdT\  atkt, j."'^..  n''

•nd  unre
strictcd
motional

4.'

ete.  ete.
Multiplying  the  fint  of  these  by the  aeeond  by  i/^,,  adding
and  tnmsposingy  ve  find

'-^:p'-<i  (2).

where

+  (12  +  21) +  22v^;  +  (13  +  31) +  ete.  (3).

345". The  quadratic  function  of  the  velocities  here  denoted
by  Q  has  been  called  by  Lord  Rayleigh  *  the  Dissipation  Funo-
Disaipa tioD. We  pt^fer  to  call  it  Diatipatimity, It  expresses  the  rate
ta^ at  which  the  j^alpaUe  energy  of  our  supposed  cycloidal  system  is
lost,  Dot»  as  we  now  know,  annihilated  but  (§§  278,  340,  341,
342)  dissipated  away  into  other  forms  of  eneigy.  Itiaeeientidly
R!l?iei«h'i  P^^^^ ^  aeeumed  mofumoZ  fcrcee  are  eueh  at  can  eand
theorem  of  in  noiure.  That  it  is  equal  to  a  quadratic  function  of  the  velo-
%Mif. cities  is  an  interesting  and  important  theorem.

Xntavnml  Multiplying  (2)  by  dt,  and  integrating,  we  find

eqmaionol

'-E.-fQdt  (4).

and  then  each  of  theiu  i&  zero. TLei'efore  i  Qdt  must  incrtuM*

where  is  a  constant  denoting  the  snm  of  the  kinetic  and
potential  eneigies  at  the  instant  <s  0.  Now  T  and  Q  are  each
of  them  easentially  positive  except  when  the  system  is  at  rest,

to  infinity  unless  the  system  comes  more  and  more  nearly  to  rest
as  time  advances.  Hence  either  this  must  be  the  case,  or  V
must  diminish  to  -  oo .  It  foUowa  that  when  Fn  positive  for  all
real  values  of  the  coKudinates  the  system  must  as  time  advances
come  more  and  more  nearly  to  rest  in  its  seroKxmfiguration,
whatever  may  have  been  the  initial  values  of  the  co-ordinates
and  velocities.  Even  if  T  is  negative  for  some  or  for  all  values
of  the  co-ordinates,  the  system  may  be  projected  from  some  giotn

*  Proceedivfis  of  the  London  Mathmatieal  Society,  JAa^,  1878;  Theerff  of
Hound,  Vol.  I.  §  SI.

Digitized  by  Google

345".]  DTNAinCAL  LAWS  AIXD  PBINCIPLBS.  889

confiquratioiii  with  such  velocitieB  that  when  /  -  »  it  shall  l>e  Cydoidal

'  system  wiUI

at  rest  in  its  zero  contitjnmtion  :  this  we  see  by  taking,  as  a  c^'>»*r>a-

particular  solution,  the  terms  of  (9)  ^  345'"  below,  for  which  Jii  is

no^tive. But  this  equilibrium  is  essentiallv  unstiible,  unless  r^^rirted
° ^  ^  '  '  .  ni()tii>n«l

is  |)Ositive  for  all  real  values  of  the  co-onliuates. To  prove  this  forow.

imagine  the  system  jilacod  in  uTiy  ci)ntiij;nnition  in  which  V  is
negative,  and  left  tliere  either  at  rest  or  with  any  motion  of
kinetic  energy  less  than  or  at  the  most  equal  to  —  F":  thus
will  be  negative  or  zero;  T+  V  will  therefoix;  have  increasing
negative  value  as  time  advances;  therefore  V  must  always  re-
main neL,'utive  ;  and  therefore  the  system  can  never  reach  its
zero  contiguraiioti.  Tt  is  c  h  ;u-  that  -  I'^  and  7^  must  each  on  the
whole  increase  tluiui,'h  there  may  be  fluctuations,  of  T  diminish-
ing for  a  tinie,  during  which  —  V  must  also  diminish  so  as  to
make  the  excess  (- V)  -  T  increase  at  the  rate  equal  to  Q  per
unit  of  time  ftcoordiug  to  formula  (2).

846".  To  illustrate  the  circumiitanoeR  of  the  several  caaM  let
X^m+nJ^  be  a  root  of  the  detonmnantal  equation,  m  and  n
being  both  real  The  oorresponding  realised  aolutioii  of  tho
dynamical  problem  is

^,  =  rjC"*  cos  (lU  -  e,),  «/r^  =  r^i""  cos  {ni  -  e^),  etc  (o),

where  the  differences  of  epochs  e^-e^,  e^-e^,  etc.  and  the  ratios
r^i  r^y  etc.,  in  all  2i  -  2  numerics*,  are  determined  by  the
2i  simultaneous  linear  equations  (3)  of  §  343  harmonized  by
taking  for  X  =  TO  +  n^-l,  and  again  k  =  m^nj~i.  Using
theae  expreaaiona  for  eto.  in  the  ezpreenoiui  for  K,  Q,  T,

we  find, —

F  - {C  +  A  cos  2nt  +  J?  sin  2iU)  \

Q  =  c'-'  {C  +  J '  cos  2nt  +  B'  sin  2nt)  [  (6),

T  = (C"  +  A"  cos  2iK  +  B"  sin  2nt))

•  The  term  numeric  ha<;  been  recently  introduced  by  Professor  James  Thon*
son  to  denote  a  number,  or  a  proper  fraction,  or  an  improper  fraction,  or  an
iucommen-surable  ratio  (Huoh  us  w  or  f). It  must  also  to  be  useful  in  mathe-

Tii;\tical  analysis  iucluJe  iiuagmary  expressions  such  as  m  +  n  J-l,vi\i(iTQ
m  and  n  are  real  numerics.  Namerio "  may  be  regarded  as  au  abbruviation
for  *'  Biuitxifial  espvession.''  It  lets  ns  avoid  the  hitolerabls  verbiage  of  integer
or  proper  or  improper  fraction  whioh  mathematioal  writers  hitherto  avs  so  often

eompdled  to  use;  and  is  more  appropriate  for  mere  number  or  ratio  than  the
de-iignatiou  "quantity,"  which  ratlier  implies  quantity  of  something  than  the
more  nnuierical  expression  by  which  quantities  of  anjr  measurable  things  are
reckoned  in  terms  of  the  unit  of  quantity.

Digitized  by  Google

390

FBXUMINABT.

[345^.

Cycloidal
H^  Hlem  with

li\r  Jiiisl-

tiuiial  forces
•nd  unre-
st rioted
motional
loroeB.

not  proved

negative
when  V
poeiliva

eo-onU*
s

positive  for
•ome  rootn
wtien  FbM

but  always
nepitive  for
yome  roots.

whoro  C,A,n,  C,  A',  li',  C'\  A",  B",  are  (IfUrniinat^?  oonstants:
and  in  order  that  Q  and  T  may  be  positiv«i  we  have

(7'>  +  B"),  and  (7"  >  +  J{A'"  +  B"')  (7).

Substituting  these  in  (2),  snd  equatmg  ooeffideats  of  ooixe-
spondmg  tenii%  we  find

2m  {C  +  C")=-C\
2  {« +  A")  +»  (j5  +  ^')} (8).

2  {w  (i?  +  i?")  -  »  (4  +  —
The  first  of  these  shows  that  C'¥Cr  and  m  must  be  of  oontruy
signa Henoe  if  F  be  essentially  posxtiTe  [which  requires  that  C
be  gieater  than  +  J{A*^ff)\  every  value  of  m  must  be  negativa

345''.  If  V  have  negative  values  for  some-  or  all  real  valuea
of  the  co-ordinates,?/*  must  clearly  be  ]K)sitivefor  some  rcKjts,  but
there  must  still,  and  always,  be  roots  for  which  m  is  negative.
To  jirove  this  last  clause  let  us  instead  of  (T))  take  sums  of  pax-
ticuiar  solutiouB  corresponding  to  different  roots

Xi^m^n 1,  X!  =  m'^ n'  J-  i,  etc.,

m  and  n  denoting  real  numerics.  Thus  we  have

^  rj€**00B -  e^)  +  r',e"»''  oos(«'<-«'i)  +  etc.\
V'i ''t***' (**^  - +  ^ 'a**''  006  (n't—  c'J  +  etc.>-  (9),
etc.  )

Sap]^osi'  now  w,  m',  etc.  to  l)e  all  positive  :  then  for  <  =  — oo  ,  we
slioultl  havej/',=0,  «/^,=  0,  0,  *j/^-0^  etc.,  and  therefore  F-^O,  T=Q.
Hence,  for  finite  values  of  T  would  in  virtue  of  (4)  be  less
than  —  V  (which  in  this  case  is  essentially  ])ositive):  but  we
may  place  the  system  in  any  configuration  and  project  it  with
any  velocity  we  please,  and  therefore  the  amount  of  kinetic
euer<;y  we  may  f^ive  it  is  uiUiraited.  Hence,  if  ('.>)  be  the  com-
plete solution,  it  nixist  include  some  negative  value  or  values  of
ni,  and  therefore  of  all  the  roots  X,  X',  etc.  there  must  be  some  of
which  the  real  part  is  neijative.  This  conclusion  is  also  ob%'ious
on  purely  algebraic  grounds,  because  the  coefficirut  of  X**"*  in
the  determinant  is  obviously  ll  +  22  +  3.*i-f-,..,  wIik  li  is  es.s<^ntially
|X)8itive  when  Q  is  positive  for  all  real  values  of  the  co-ordinates.

345\  It  is  an  important  subject  for  investigation,  interesting
both  in  mere  Algebra  and  in  Dynamics,  to  find  how  many  roots
there  are  with  m  positive,  or  how  many  with  m  ne|^tave  in  any
particular  case  or  class  of  cases;  also  to  find  under  what  con-

Digitized  by  Google

viscous  cla8S  it  is  easily  seen  that  n  cm  only  appear  if  F"  is  l^nt^i*
positive  for  some  or  all  real  values  of  the  co-ordinates :  n  must  to"'??*''

ino-

345*.]  DTNAiaCAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  S91

ditions  n  disappears  [or  the  motion  non-oscillatory  (comi)ai*e  Aon-osciN^
§  341)].  We  hope  to  return  to  it  in  our  second  volume,  and  sideuoeto
should  be  very  glad  to  find  it  taken  up  and  worked  out  fully  by  libn'aiD,or
mathematicians  in  the  mean  time.  At  present  it  is  obvious  that  froman^'*'
if  rbe  negative  for  all  real  values  of  i/^„  if/^,  etc.,  the  motion  must  ost-niatory
be  non-oscillatory  for  every  mode  (or  every  value  of  X  must  be  ^'^^h^o'"*
real)  if  O  be  but  large  enouf:'h  :  but  as  we  shall  see  immediatclv

/ ^  o  o  ^ brmni,  or

with  Q  not  too  large,  n  may  appear  in  some  or  in  all  the  roots,  fj^'^*^**^
even  though  V  be  negative  for  all  real  co-ordinates,  when  there  »»»ble.
are  forces  of  the  gvroscopic  class  [§  319,  Examp.  (G)  above  and  aw»!r"^t)m

345*  below). When  the  moticmal  forces  are  wholly  of  the  ^bieeq^*

 ^

dLsappear  if  V  is  negative  for  all  real  values  of  the  co-ordinates  ^vh?"//""^
(again  compare  §  341).

846^. A  chief  part  of  the  substance  of  §§  S45''...345*

above  may  be  expressed  shortly  without  symbols  thus : — When
there  is  any  dissipativity  the  equilibrium  in  the  zero  position  i.s
stable  or  unst<able  according  as  the  same  sy.stcm  with  no  motional  stability  of
forces,  but  with  the  same  positional  forces,  is  stable  or  unstable,  systam.
The  gyroscopic  forces  which  we  now  proceed  to  consider  may
convert  inistability  into  stability,  as  in  the  gyrostat  §  345*  below,
iohen  there  is  no  dissipativity : — but  when  there  is  any  dissi-
pativity gyroscopic  forces  may  convert  rapid  falling  away  from  aa
unstable  configuration  into  falling  by  (as  it  were)  exceedingly
gradual  spirals,  but  they  cannot  convert  instability  into  stability
if  there  be  any  dissipativity.

The  theoiem  of  Dissipativity  [§  345',  (2)  and  (3)]  suggests  the
following  nota^n,^

i(12  +  21)=[i2]  or[2i],  J(13  +  3l)  =  [i3]or  [31],  etc.|
and  i(12-21)  =  i2]or-2i],  i  (13  -  31)  =  13]  or  -  31],  etc.  j  ^  '*

so  that  the  symbols  [12],  [21J,  [13],  etc.,  and  12I,  21],  13],  etc.
denote  qiumtities  which  respectively  fulfil  the  following  mutual
relations^

i2]«-ail,  I3l=-3i3,a3l=-32],«tc/ ^  .
Thus  (3)  of  §  346'  becomes

Q  =  1 1^/  +  2  [1 2.1 +  22^/  +  2  U3l^.^.  +  etc  (12),

Digilizeu  by  GoOgle

392  PRELDOHART.  [345^

and  going  back  to  (1),  with  (10)  and  (12)  we  have

(IS).

d  dT dQ ,  , ,  .  </K  „

In  these  equations  the  terms  I2]^«»2i]^t*  I3]^t>30'^i»
»i!S^?or  etc.  represent  what  we  may  call  gyrosoopic  forces,  becanse,  as  we
toiTiC^  have  seen  in  §  319,  Ex.  G,  they  occur  when  fly-wheels  each  given
in  a  state  of  rapid  rotation  form  part  of  the  system  by  being
mounted  on  frictionleas  bearings  connected  through  framework
with  other  parts  of  the  system ;  and  because,  as  we  have  seen
in  §  .SI 9,  Ex.  F,  they  occur  when  the  motion  considered  is
motion  of  the  given  system  relatively  to  a  rigid  body  revolving
with  a  constrainedly  constant  angular  velocity  round  a  fixed
axis  This  last  reason  is  especially  interesting  on  account  of
Laplace's  dynamical  theory  of  the  tiiles  at  the  foundation  of
which  it  lies^  and  in  which  it  is  answerable  for  some  of  the  most
curious  and  instnictive  results,  such  as  the  beautiful  vortex
problem  presented  by  what  Laplace  calls  Oscillations  of  the
First  Species*."

845*".  The  gyrostatie  terms  disappear  from  the  equation  of

energy  as  we  see  by  §  345',  (2)  and  (3),  and  as  we  saw  pre-
viously by  §  :U9,  Example  G  (19),  and  in  §  319,  Ex.  F  (/).
^  Comparing  §  319  (/)  and  (</),  we  see  that  in  the  case  of  motion
c'lMJW.  relatively  to  a  body  revolving  uniformly  round  a  fixed  axis  it  is
not  the  ecjuation  of  total  absolute  energy  but  the  equation  of
energy  of  the  relative  motion  that  the  gyroscopic  terms  disappear
from,  as  (/)  of  §  319 ;  and  (2)  and  (3)  of  §  345'  when  the
subject  of  their  application  is  to  such  relative  motion.

*  The  intcgratc<1  equation  for  this  species  of  tidal  motioiis,  in  wa  ideal  ocean
I  qimlly  deep  over  the  whole  Holtd  rotnting  spheroid,  is  given  in  a  form  reatly  for
luiinorical  computation  in  "Note  on  tlio  *  Oscilliitions  of  the  First  Species' in
J.aplac«'8  Theorj'  of  the  Tides"  (W.  Thomson),  i'luL  Mag.  Oct.  IBIH.

Digitized  by  Google

345*^.]  DTNAHICAL  LAWS  AMD  PRIKCIFLISk  893

345*"'. To  diaooTOr  Bometfaing  of  the  ohanwter  ol  the  gyro-  Cgjjhgjt^
■oopie  inflaenoe  cMi  the  motion  of  a  Rvsteni,  suppoae  there  to  beifiiaBs
no  resifltances  (or  tuoous  influences),  that  is  to  say  let  the
diaupAtiTit>7» be  MTOb  Thedetermmaatal  eqiiatUm(4)beoomes

(ll)X'  +11,  (12)X»+i2]X  +  12,...
(21)X'+2ilX  +  21,  (22)X»  +22,...

Now  by  the  relations  (12)  =  (21),  etc.,  12  =  21,  etc., and  i2]^-2i],
we  see  that  if  X  be  changed  into  —X  the  determinant  becomes
altere<l  merely  by  interchange  of  terms  between  columns  and
rows,  and  hence  the  value  of  the  detemiiunnt  remains  unchanged.
Hence  the  fii-st  meml>er  of  (14)  cannot  c  ontain  odd  powers  of  X,
and  therefore  its  roots  must  be  in  pairs  of  ojipositely  signed
equals.  The  condition  for  stability  of  tquilibriiim  in  the  z*^ro
configunition  is  tlierefore  that  the  roota  X'  of  the  determiuaiital
equation  be  each  real  and  negative.

345'*.  Tlie  equations  are  simplified  by  transforming  tlie  co-  simpliflai-
onlinates  (§  3;J7)  so  as  to  reduce  T  to  n  mm  of  squares  with  cquatiuiu.
j>o8itive  coefficients  and  F  to  a  sum  of  squares  witli  positive  or
negative  coefficients  as  the  case  may  l)e,  or  which  is  the  same
tiling  to  adopt  for  co-onlinates  those  displacements  which  would
correspond  to  *' fundamentid  modes"  (§  338),  if  the  positional
forces  were  as  they  are  and  there  were  no  motional  forces.
Suppose  farther  the  iniit  values  of  the  co-ordinates  to  bo  so
chosen  that  the  coefficients  of  the  squares  of  the  velocities  in
2T  shall  be  eAch  unity;  and  let  us  put  zc,,  tzr^,  nr^,  etc.  instead  of
the  coefficients  1 1,  22,  33,  etc.,  remaining  in  2  F. Thus  we  have

^=  i  (^i'  + +  «tc-)»  «d  r='i  (tir,.^,*  +  «r^,*  +  etc)  (15).

If  now  we  omit  the  half  brackete  ]  as  no  longer  needed  to  avoid
ambiguity,  and  nnderetand  that  I3  »  -  ai,  13  a  -  31,  23  »  —  32,
eta,  the  equations  of  motion  are

#*+*''^.  +  23'A.  +  -¥^^,^0 ^j^j^

#.  +  3«^i  +  32^»+  +w,^,=  0

=  0...,..(14).

Digitized  by  Google

394

PBELDONABT.

[345^

Detertni-
natit  or
fcjrrostiitic
c^n<tervatifi0

Squuw
toots  «f

and  the  determinatital  eij^uation  becomes

2tX, X*  +  w^  23A,...

31A, 32A, X»  +  «;

.(17).

The  deteiininant  (which  for  brevity  wo  shall  denote  by  D)  in
this  case  is  what  has  been  called  by  Cayley  a  skew  determinant.
What  it  would  become  if  zero  were  substituted  for  X"  +  t3r„
etc.  in  its  principal  diagonal  is  what  is  called  a  skew
symmetric  determinant.  The  known  algebra  of  skew  and  skew
symmetric  determinants  gives

+ (A*  -I-  w J  (X»  +  W4) . . .  (X' + I  a*

-fX*2(X»+iirJ(X'+tr„).,.(X'+w,)(i2. 34+31.24+83. 14)»  i  (18),

+  X''X +  ^7) + . . .  (X'  +  t!7.)  (2 1 2  . 34 .  $6)*  +  etc.

+  X,*{Xi2,$4.s6  i-x,  if

whea.  t  is  even.  For  example  aee  (30)  below.  Wlien  X  Is  odd
the  last  term  is

X*-»  2:(^"  + (2 1 2  .  34 .  56 .  i -  2,  t -  i)"  (18'),

and  no  other  change  in  the  Ibnnula  is  neeefliaiy.  In  each  case
the  BDUkll  S  denotes  the  sum  of  the  products  obtained  by
making  every  possible  permntation  of  the  numbers  in  the  line  of
factors  following  it^  with  orders  chosen  acccording  to  a  proper
rule  to  render  the  sign  of  each  [noduct  positiTe  (Salmtn&'s  Jft^^Atr
AlffebrOf  Lesson  y.  Art  40).  This  sum  is  in  each  case  the  square
root  of  a  certain  corresponding  skew  symmetric  determinant.

An  easy  rule  to  find  other  products  from  any  one  given  to
begin  with  is  this: — Invert  the  order  in  any  one  factor,  and
make  a  simple  interchange  of  any  two  numbers  in  different
factors.  Thus,  in  the  last  2  of  (18)  alter  »-  i,  ♦  to  i,  t-  i,  and

interchange  i-  1  with  3:  so  we  find  12  .  t—  i,  4 .  56  t,  3  for

a  term  :  simihtrly  12  .  64  .  53  ...  t,  i—i,  and  62. 14.53... i-  '»  *>
for  two  others.  The  same  number  must  not  oocur  more  than
once  in  any  one  product.  Two  pix>dacts  difiering  only  in  the
ordei-s  of  the  two  numbers  in  factors  are  not  admitted.  If  n  be
the  number  of  factors  in  each  term,  the  whole  number  of  £M!tors
is  cleaily  1.3.5  •••  i^^  ~  ^"^7  ^  found  in  regular

^ i^  -  -.  uy  Google

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  FRINCIFLES.

395

progression  thus:  Begiu  with  a  single  factor  and  single  term  12.

Th^n  ai»i>lv  to  it  the  factor  14,  and  permute  to  suit  24  instead  skewmrm-

. .  .  nwlfMi.

of  34,  and  j>crmute  the  result  to  suit  14  instead  of  24.  Thirdly,

apply  to  tlie  sum  thus  found  the  factor  56,  and  permute  suc-
cessively from  5O  to  46,  from  46  to  36,  from  36  to  26,  and
from  26  U}  16.  Fourthly,  introduce  the  factor  78;  and  so  on.
Thus  we  tind

O, 12  12
21,  O  I

o,  12,  13,  14

21,  O, 23,  24

3i»32»  o,  34
41,  42,  43,  o

o,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16
21,  o,  23,  24,  25,  26
31,  32,  o,  34,  35,  36

4I1  42i  43»  Of  45»  46
5^  521  53»  54.  o,  56

=  12.  34  +  31  .  24  +  23.  14

- (12.34  +  31.24  h23. 14)56

+  (12.53  +  13.52  +  23.51)46
+  (12.45+41.52+42.51)36
+  (31.45+41 .35  +  34.51)26
+  (23.45+24.35+34.25)16

(19).

■  61,  62,  63,  64,  65,  o

The  second  niemlx>r  of  the  last  of  these  eq^uations  is  what  is
denoted  by  ^12.34.56  in  (lb).

846^. Each  term  of  the  detemunant  D  except

(A.'+cr,)  (X'+  r!r,)...(\'  +  tjTj
contains  X'aa  a  factor. Hence,  when  all  are  rxpaiidf  d  in  nowei-s  <ivro<«tatip

.  '  '  ».\>t.  Ill  Willi

of  X',  the  term  indei>endent  of  X  is  If  tliis  betWofreo-

dOBH.

ncLTative  there  must  be  at  least  one  real  po.sitive  and  oiu'  real
negative  root  X*.  ITence  for  stability  citlier  must  all  of  tzr,,
ar,,  ....  tJ7,  be  positive  or  an  even  number  of  them  negative.
Ex. : — Two  modes  of  motion,  x  and  ^  the  coordinates.  Let  the
equations  of  motion  be

and  the  determinantal  equation  is

(/X*  4.  E)  (J\*  +  F)+  fk*  =  0.

If  we  put

«  =  ^/VA  yv/JJ  (21),

and

E^wl,  F-iJ, and  g^yJ{IJ)  (22),

Digitized  by  Google

896

FBEUIOKABT.

OjriMtaftie equatiouB  (20)  and  the  determiiiautal  equation  become

i

«■

and  (X« + iir)  (V + 0  +  /X'  «  0  (24).

The  solution  of  this  quadiatio  in  X*  nay  be  put  under  the

following  forms, —

To  make  both  values  of  —  \'  real  and  positive  a?  and  ^  niuht
be  of  the  same  sigu.  It'  they  are  both  positive  no  farther  condi-
tion ia  necessary. If  they  are  both  negative  we  must  have

y>J^  +  JZl  (26).

These  are  the  eonditioms  that  the  aero  configuration  may  he  stable.
Bemark  that  when  (as  practically  in  all  the  gyrostatic  illustm-
tions)  •/  is  Teiy  great  in  comparison  with  J{»Ot  ^e  greater
Talne  of  -X'  is  approximately  equal  to  /,  and  therefore  (as  the
prodvet  of  the  two  rooto  is  exactly the  less  is  approximately
equal  to  ar^//. Bemark  also  that  2ir  /Jv  and  2*'  /Jt  are  the
periods  of  the  two  fundamental  vibrations  of  a  system  otherwise
the  same  as  the  given  system,  but  with  7=0.  Hence^  using  the
word  irrotational  to  refer  to  the  system  wHh  ^  »  0,  and  gyroeoopic^
or  gyrostatio,  or  gyrostat^  to  refer  to  the  actual  system;
From  the  preceding  analysis  we  have  the  curious  and  in-
teresting result  that»  in  a  system  with  two  freedoms^  two
irrotational  instabilities  are  converted  into  complete  gyrostatic
Oyroautio  Stability  (cEch  freedom  stable)  by  sufficiently  rapid  rotation;

but  that  with  one  irrotational  stability  the  gyrostat  is  essentially
unstable,  with  one  of  its  freedoms  unstable  and  the  other
stable,  if  there  be  one  irrotational  instability.  Various  good
illustrations  of  gyrostatic  systems  with  two,  three,  and  four  free-
doms (§§  345*,  and  are  afforded  by  the  several  different
modes  of  mounting  shown  in  the  accompanying  sketches,  ap-
plied to  the  ordinary  gyrostat*  (a  rapidly  rotating  fly-wheel
pivoted  as  finely  as  possible  within  a  rigid  case,  having  a  convex
curvilinear  polygonal  border,  in  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the
au8  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole).

*  Nolttre,  Mo.  879«  YoL  16  (Fateoaiy  1, 1877),  page  297.

Gyrostatic

influence
dominaat.

398

PRELIMINARY.

[34o\

OyroalaU,

on  gimbaU  ;

on  uniTrraal-
flexurv-jolnt
($  109)  in
place  of  gim-
iHiU;  coiuti-
tutlnx  Mn
Uivi'rtod
Kj'nincoplc
|j«ii<lulum
(I  S19,  Ex.  D).

Gyrostat  on  knlf(»-ed(r<>  frimbnls  with  Ita  axis  rcrtlral.  Two  frocdoms;  each  unstable  without
rotation  of  the  flr-whcel ;  each  stable  when  it  Is  rotating  rapkllv.  Ncxiecting  inertia  of  the  knife*
cd^es  and  ginibal-ring  we  have  /  •■  /  in  (20),  and  supposing  the  lerels  of  the  knife-edges  to  be  the
same,  we  have  E"  F.  Tlius  its  determinantal  equation  is  (/A*+  ET  +  z^sX'^-O.  A  similar  result,
expressed  by  the  same  equations  of  motion,  is  obtained  bj  supporting  the  gyrostat  on  a  little  ela«tic
universal  flexure-joint  of,  for  example,  thin  steel  pianoforte-wire  one  or  two  centimetre*  long
between  end  clamps  or  loldcrings.  A  drawing  is  tmncccssary.

\

on  stilU;

Two  freedoms,  one  aiimiithal  the  other  inclinational,  both  unstable  without,  both  sUblo  with,
rapid  rotation  of  the  fly-whet'l.

i 1-v  Goo-

345'.]  BTNAHICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINdFLES.  399

bifilarly
■lung  in  four
wajt.

No.  1.  No.  S.  No.  8.  No.  4.

FMr  frMdooM,  ndadbl*  to  flm*  if  Mrcd  byfttfaird  tbnMl  in  cmH  caae,  dteffonal  in  Am  ftn«

and  second,  latcnJ  In  tlic  third  and  fourtli.  t!ie  rn>e«lom  lhv\<\  nniuiHpd  N  inc  in  each  case  stable  and
independent  of  the  rotation  of  the  tly-wlit.i.1.  Tlirc«  modua  lauvntiaily  iuvoWcd  in  ttte  gyruatatic
ajtum  in  aacfa  cie,  tiro  tnrHmrtnnal  and  opa  MiBwiUMa.

Ma  1.— AzimuthaUy  stable  without  rotation ;  with  rotation  all  three  modes  stable.

Ma  1— AiimuttiaUy  atablck  one  tncHnalinnal  mode  unatattie  tlie  other  stable  without  rotaUon ;
wMi  retatfcw  two  iwninWe^  wm  eltliifc

No.  S.— The  aziniuthni  ino.l.-  uiist.iMr,  two  im iinationnl  nuwles  stable  the  other  unstable,  without
rotation;  with  rotation  one  asimuthal  mode  and  one  ''^'>"ftf'"''B'  mode  unstable,  and  one  indioa-
ttomlMde  etable.

No.  4.-.\z!tmithiiny  nm]  one  Inclinatloailmid*«MtaU^ OMlodtaMliOlial  BOde  ttM»^  HMmwI
rotation ;  with  rotation  all  three  stable.

345^'.  Take  for  another  exiimplo  a  Hyst<'ra  having  three  Gyrostatic
freedoms  (that  is  to  say,  three  independent  co-ordinates  three  fk«e-
f»>  fi»  W»  W  become

V'2  +  9  A  ~  9z4'y -  A  =  0  \  (27),

where  denote  tlie  values  of  the  three  paii-s  of  equals

23  or  -32,  31  or  -  13,  12  or  -21.  Tmagiiio  «//,,  i//,,  xl/ ^  to  ho
rectangular  co-ordiuatcs  of  a  inati-riul  point,  and  let  the  co-
ordinates he  trau.sfonned  to  other  axes  OX,  OY^  OZ,  so  chosen
that  OZ  coincides  with  the  line  whose  direction  cosines  rela-
tively to  the  j/',-,  j/^j-,  axes  are  proportional  to  y^^  g^.  The
equations  become

y  +  2«*=r  \  {2S},

in

Digilizeo  by  Cookie

400  P&ELOCIIIABT.  l3^o\

where  «  =  ^(^^'  +  g^'  +  g^'),  and  the  foroe-oomponenti  panlld
to  the  fiwah  azea  are  denoted  bj  Jt, Z  (instead  of  ~  ^  t

- ,  '•^t  becMBe  the  preBont  traosfonDatioii  is  dearly  bir

dependent  of  the  assomption  we  have  heen  making  latterly  that
the  positional  loroes  ave  oonservative).  These  (28)  are  simply
the  eqnatioDB  [§  319,  Bz.  (E)]  of  the  motiim  of  a  particle  rdit-
tively  to  oooidjnates  fevolving  with  angolar  velooiijr  nrand
the  aads  OZ,  if  we  suppose  A",  r,  Z  to  indnde  the  oomponentB
of  the  oentrifagal  ferae  due  to  this  rotation.

rcdi:rr<i  to  Hence  the  influence  of  the  gyroscopic  terms  however  ori-
n.utmg  ginating  in  any  system  with  three  freedoms  (and  therefore  also
vatM,  1^  system  widi  only  two  freedoms)  may  be  represented  1^
the  motion  of  a  material  particle  supported  by  massless  springs
attached  to  a  rigid  body  revolviDg  uniformly  round  a  fixed  aadsi
It  is  an  interesting  and  instractiTe  exercise  to  imagine  or  to
actually  construct  mechanical  arrangements  for  the  motion  of  a
material  particle  to  illuatrate  the  experimcntii  describeti  in
§  345\

345^. Conflider  next  the  case  of  a  qrstom  with  four  free-
doms.  The  equations  are

+  a  1  ^,  +  a3^,  + +  w,^,  =  0

31^,  +  3«^.  +  34^4  +  ''A  *  ^
^«+4i^.  +  4«*i  +  43^.+wA=0  .

Denoting  by  J)  the  determinant  we  have^  by  (18),

(X«+  m.)  (X'+  XT.)  (V  +  «r3)  (V  +
+  X*  {34'(X»4-w,)(X'+Br,)+i  2«(X'+«r,)(X«+ wJ+42"(X'+m,)(X«+oT3)
+  i3'(X'+or,)(X'+o7j+23'(V+tirJ(X'+ti7j+  i4'(X'+ wJ(X'+mJ}

+  X*(l2  34'+ 13  42+  14  23)"

(29).

..(30).

if

^4  be  each  zero,  U  becomes
X*+(xa»+i3*+i4*+a3*+4a*+34")A^+("  34  +  13  4a  +  i4  a3yx\
This  equated  to  sero  and  viewed  as  an  equation  for  X'  has  two

Digitized  by  Google

345"".]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PAINCIPLBB.  401

roots  each  equal  to  0,  and  two  others  given  bj  tlie  residual  Quodrupiy
quadratic  IZS"^

AV  (12V  i3'+ 14'+23«+  24«+34*)A«  +  (12  34+ 13  4^+14  23)*=0...(31).  SST*'

Now  remarking  that  the  solution  of  «'+^  +  £'»0  may  be
written

we  bare  from  (31)

-  X*  =  J  (i2'+  i3*+ 14»+  23'  +  24'+  34«  *  Js)

}

wbere  r«  V{(ia  +  34)*  +  (i3  +  42)'+(i4+»3n  I
and #«^«I2  -34)*  +  (i3-4a)'+(i4-23n  '

As  12,  34,  13,  etc.  are  eBaentially  real,  r  and  «  are  real,  ond
(unless  1 2  43  +  '3  4a  +  14  23  "  0,  wheu  one  of  the  values  of  A"  is

CAM  Of  nU*

zero,  a  cHse  whici)  must  be  considered  speoiallj,  but  is  excluded  insnrro-
for  the  present,)  they  are  unequal Hence  the  two  values  of  teUiMuw^

-  y  given  by  (32)  are  real  and  positive.  Hence  two  of  the
four  frceuonis  are  stable. The  other  two  (comsponding  to

—  X' s  0}  are  neutral

345^*. Now  suppose  w,,  w,,  w,. to  be  not  zero,  but  each  Qua<in>niy
very  small. The  determinantal  equation  will  be  a  biquadratic  sy^lrm."''
in  X*,  of  which  two  roots  (the  two  which  vanish  when  w„  etc  ra  iv  SSli.
vanish)  ore  approximately  equal  to  the  roots  of  the  quadiotio

(12  34  +  13  42+  14  23)'X.*+{j2'v:^m^-^  i3X^,-»-  mX^,

and  the  other  two  roots  are  approximately  equal  to  those  of  the
previous  residual  quadratic  (31).

To  solve  equation  (34),  first  write  it  thus ;

(x^) ('^"^'3"+i4"+23"+24'V34')^  +  (i2'34'+i3'42'+i4'23')'  =  0

where

"'i^i'  '^''^{',^'  '^'=7^5'

VOL.  h  20

Digitized  by  Google

PBELncIKABT.  [345**.

Thus,  taken  aa  a  qnailratic  for  X"^  it  has  the  sjirae  form  as  (31)
for  k'f  and  ao,  aa  before  in  (32)  ami  (33),  we  find

^-i(r'*.y  (37).

where
and

Now  if  nr, ,  fi7„  or,,  or^  be  all  four  pomtive  or  all  four  ii^tiy«^
12',  34',  13',  ete.  are  all  real,  and  therefore  both  the  valnee  of

-  ^  given  by  (37)  are  real  and  poaitive  (the  excluded  caae

referred  to  at  the  end  of  §  345"*,  which  niakea

ia'34'  +  1342'  +  1423'  =  0,

and  therefore  the  smaller  value  of 0,  being  still  excluded).

Hence  the  oorreaponding  freedoma  are  atable.  But  it  Is  not
neeeuary  for  stability  that t^gt  be  all  four  of  one

sign:  it  it  neoesaary  that  their  product  be  positive:  nnce  if  it
were  native  the  values  of  k*  given  by  (34)  would  boUi  be
real,  but  one  only  negative  and  the  other  positive.  Suppose  two
of  them«  w^  9^  for  example,  be  negative,  and  the  othor  twc^
tv,,  er^i  positive:  this  makes  ^i^e^,  ^8^a>  "^$^4  negative,
and  therefore  13',  14',  93^,  and  24'  imagbiary.  Instead  of  four
of  the  six  equations  (36),  put  therefore

Thus  13"  etc.  are  real,  and  13'  =  13'V-^  etc.,  and  (38)  become

r  =  M^2'^  34T -  (f 3"  +  42'r  -  ( 14"  +  23T|\
/  =  ^{(i2'-34T-(i3"-42T-(i4"-23T>i

Henoe  for  stability  it  is  necessary  and  safficient  that

( 1 2'  -f  34T  >  ( 1 3  "  +  4  2f^{i  4"  +  23'r  I  , . ,  ,

and (12'  -  34')'  >  (13"  -  42")'+  (14"-  23")'/

If  these  inequalities  are  reversed,  the  stabilities  due  to  t?,,  t?,
and  34'  are  undone  by  the  gyrostatic  connexions  13",  43'',  14"
and  23".  '

DTKAMICAX.  LAWS  AND  PRTNCTPLBS.

40^

345"'. Goin«,'  hack  to  (29)  we  Beo  tlmt  for  tho  particular  bnujjr  rnro*
solution  x}/^ «  r^,  ^-  =  a-c^,  eta,  given  by  tho  first  pair  of  roots  SinSlI^
of  (32),  they  become  approximately

Xa^  la  a,  + 13  a,  +  14  =  0  "I
Aa,  +  21  a,  4. 23  a,  +  24 =  0  I

Aa^  +  4 1 +  42  a,  +  43  rt,  -  0  J

.(*2);

hi'inj^  in  fsu-t  tiio  linear  algebraic  eqimtions  for  tbo  Rolution  in  tom^ited
the  form  c^'  of  tlio  ^nnplo  simultaneoua  differential  equations
(53)  below. And  if  we  take

(43),

for  fiflior  particular  ap|)roxiniato  solution  ot  (29)  corre«|)ouding
tu  {^7 )t  we  tiiid  from  ("29)  approximatt  ly

A-'6,  +  2r6,  +  237>^-*-247>^  0
X

1-6,  +  3i'6,  +  327i,  4-  347>^  -  0  |
r'6,  +  4i'6.+42'*.  +  43'*.-0j

(44).

Tlemark  that  in  (iL')  the  cooffic icnts  of  tho  first  t-onuR  arc
iiiiMi^inarv  and  those  of  all  the  otIi<  rs  n  al.  Hfiue  the  ratios
o,yrtj,  ^^iJ^^3i  ^'^'i imaginary. To  realize  the  equations  jmt

and  let 9|>  Pgt  etc  be  real ;  we  find,  as  equivalent  to  (42),

f-n^,+  2i  />,+  23/?,  +  24j»,  =  0  }•  (46).

wft+2iy,  +  23  7,  +  24  7^  =  0
etc.  etc;

(

Sealizatkm
o!  complex*
•dnltttioa.

E!innnating  7^,  5^^,  etc  from  the  seconds  by  tlje  firsts  of  these
pairs,  wo  find

(»•  +  li)/>,  + «  f»,  +  ft  + "  ft  =  ^

»ft+(»'+«)Pt+  23ft+  «ft^^'

»/>,+(«"  +  »)/>,+ »4/)^  =  0

«ft+ *  «ft+ « ft+(»'+**K*o

and  by  eliminating , etc.  similarly  we  find  similar  equations

2G— 2

Liyiiized  by  Google

of  complet-
ed ■olutkm.

404  PRELnaNABT.  [845*.

for  the  9'h  ;  vnth  the  same  coei&cients  ii,  ii^  etc.,  given  by  the
following  formulas : —

BMIlltaDt

root  km  n>

duMdto

■MMlmiota

tive
wtlh

tibiir

talperioda
equal  two

Algrbniio

Details  of

nnli7.«'d
HoiuUun.

(48).

11—  la  21  +  13  31  +  14  41
12=  13  32  +  1442

M=  12  234-1443
"-2331  +  24  41

etc.  etc.
Remember  now  that

la  — 91,  i3=-3i>  32  =  -23,  etc.  (49),

and  we  see  in  (48)  that

]S»a,  US  SI,  sbsi,  eta  (50);

and  farther,  that  11,  12,  etc.  are  the  negatives  of  the  coefficients
of  ^  a'f etc  in  the  quadratic

i  {(la  a,  <!•  13  a,-f  14  ay  +  (ai  a^  +  33  a,  -i-  24  ay + etc.}.. .(51)

expanded.  Hence  if  G  {an)  denote  this  quadratic,  and  G  {p})),
G  iqq)  the  same  of  the  7?'8  and  the  9*8,  we  may  write  (47)  and
the  corresponding  equations  for  the  9a  us  follows :

dGJii^)

0, -nV»,+  *^,i^^  =  0,  etc

, dG  (qq)

—  0,  etc.

(52).

These  equations  are  harmomaed  by,  and  aa  ia  easily  seen,  only
by,  assigning  to  n'  one  or  other  of  the  two  valiiea  of  -  X'  giren
In  (32),  above.  Hence  their  determinantal  equation,  a  bi-
qoadratie  in  n\  haa  two  pairs  of  equal  real  positiye  rootL  We
readily  verify  this  by  verifying  that  the  square  of  the  deter*
nunant  (42),  with  A'  replaced  by  -  is  equal  to  the  deter-
minant of  (47)  with  11,  12,  etc,  replaced  by  their  values  (48).
Hence  (§  My)  there  is  for  each  root  an  indetemunacgr  ^
ratios  Px/p^t  PjPo  &<:<'Oi*<luig  to  whidi  one  of  them  may  be
assumed  arbitrarily  and  the  two  others  then  determined  by  two
of  the  equations  (47);  so  that  with  two  of  the  j/a  assumed
arbitrarily  the  four  are  known :  then  the  corresponding  set  of
four  9^8  la  determined  explicitly  by  the  finta  of  the  pairs  (4C).
Similarly  the  other  root,  h'^  of  the  determinantal  equation  gives
another  solution  with  two  fresh  arbitraries.  Thua  ■  we  have  the
complete  solution  of  the  four  equations

by  Googje

340*"'.]  DTKAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBHTCIPLES.  44)5

d\l/

^'+«^,+ 13  ^,+  14^^-0

etc.  etc

DetaiUof
realised

(53).

with  its  lour  arbitraries.  The  formulas  (46). ..(52)  aie  dearly
the  sama  as  we  should  have  found  if  we  had  commenced  with

^,*-l»,8mnf -i-^jOoefi^  ^,=/>,8UiiiI-i-?,co8iM;  etc. ..(54),

as  a  particular  solution  of  (53).

845". Lnportant  properties  of  tikft  soliitiim  oC  (53)  are  fMad  orthoKo-

tnUS : —  proved

(o) Multiply  the  firsts  of  (Ki)  by  p^,  p^,  p^, and  add:

or  the  becouiU q^f  q^,  q^,  q^  aud  add :  either  way  we  Hud  tSSowm*

pmwnte  ot

Ml  +PA  +M.  +P^4^0  (55).  gSgfJ^

(6)  Multiply  the  firsts  of  (46)  by  j„  q^,  9,,  q^  and  add;**"^*
multiply  the  seconds  by  p^f  p,,  />„  (^Id:  and  compare  the

results:  we  find

n^p'r^nlq'  -  2i2  {p^q^ -p^q^  (56),

wheie  X  of  the  last  member  denotes  a  sum  of  such  double  ^"^"^^
terms  as  the  sample  without  lepetition  of  their  equah^  such  as

(c) Let  n*  n"  denote  the  two  values  of  -  X'  given  in  (32),
snd  let  (54)  and  pSl'^d

between

i/fj  = sin  nt  +  q^  cos  n'<, = p\  sin  n't  + cos  n7,  etc. . . .  (57)  JJ^JHen

be  the  two  corresponding  solutions  of  (53).  Imagine  (46)  to  be
written  out  for  n*  and  call  them  (46^) :  multiply  the  firsts  of  (46)
^71^itP'^J^pI^4^^'  mul^ply  the  firsts  of  (46')byp„p„j>,,p^
and  add.  Ph>ceed  correspondingly  with  the  seconds.  Ftoceed
similaily  with  multtplien  q  for  the  firsts  and  p  for  the  seconds.
"Bj  comparisons  of  the  sums  we  find  that  when  n*  is  not  equal
to  11  we  must  have

Jf»V-0, Si2(p>. -;>>,)  =0

2l2(ry>.-9>,)-0

vJ"o}  Si2(p'A-j»'rf,)«0j  '

Digitized  by  Google

406

PBELIMINARY.

OMeof

345"*. The  case  of  n^W  is  interesting. The  equations

%'g«0,  lij/p'^O,  2/^  =  0,  %'/>  -0,  when  n  differs  however
little  from  n%  show  (as  we  saw  in  a  oorrespondlng  case  in  §  343  m)
that  equality  of  n  to  n'  does  not  bring  into  the  solntion  terms
of  the  fom  Ctoonnt,  and  it  must  therefore  come  vntler  §  343e.
Tlie  condition  to  be  ftdfilled  for  the  equulity  of  the  roots  is  seea
from  (32)  aud  (33)  to  be

12  =-34,  i3=4-«»  and  14  =  23  (59):

and  to  give

»■■-  ia*+ 13*+ 14*  (60)

for  the  oommon  value  of  the  roots.  It  is  easy  to  verif j  that
these  rdations  reduce  to  zero  each  of  the  first  minors  of  (42),  as
they  must  aooording  to  Bouth's  theorem  (|  343e),  because  each
root,  \  of  (42)  is  a  double  root  According  to  the  same  theorem
all  the  firsts  second  and  third  minors  of  (47)  must  vanish  for
each  root»  because  each  rod,  n\  of  (47)  is  a  quadruple  root:
for  ihisy  as  there  are  just  four  equations,  it  is  neceaaaiy  and
sufficient  tluit

u  =  »=S3  =  4i  and  m  =  0,  15  =  0,  m-0,  »  =  0,  etc....(60'),

which  we  see  at  once  by  (48)  is  tlie  ca.se  when  (59)  are  fuldlled.
In  fact,  these  relations  iuimediat^'ly  reduce  (51)  to

G  {nu)  =  ^{12'  +  if +14'}  {'<;  4-  nf  +  a/  +  a/)  (61 ).

In  this  c;uio  one  |>articular  solution  is  readily  seen  from  (52)  and
(40)  to  be

13

n

(02).

H«iiii»ioM  for

WJM!  of

equal
iHirnnls.

Hence  the  general  solution,  with  four  arbitraries » p,,  |\>  J9«,  is

^,  = sin iU  +  ^{i 2/>,  +  13^1+ CO* nt

4f,-Pg Rin  Jt^  +  -  (-  1 2/>j  +  i4/>, -  12PJ  cos iU
sin  rU  + (-  i -  14/),  +  1 2pJ  cos  tU

sinn*  +  ^  (-  1 4p,  +  1 3;>^  -  1 2/j,)  cos  7it

It  is  easy  to  verify  that  thu  satisfies,  the  four  differentisl
eqiutions  (53).

.(63).

Digitized  by  Google

345"".]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLES.  407

a45^. Quite  tui  we  have  dealt  with  (42),  (45),  (53),  (54)  in  Tin»li%lier«
§  845^,  we  may  deal  with  (44)  and  the  simple  simnltaneouB  equa-
tiflDB  for  the  aolntioii  of  which  they  aerve,  which  are

dt ^  dt ^  dt

dt  dt  '  dt

etc.  etc.

■ad  two

lower,  of  the
four  nind»>

and  all  the  formulas  which  we  meet  in  so  dome  are  real  wlien  nm\\K\y

_  .  dealt  with

77,,  tr,,  w^  are  all  of  one  sign,  and  therefore  12  ,  13  ,  etc.,  all^«^iiiioa
real In  the  case  of  some  of  the  r^'s  negative  and  some  poaitiTe  limHar
there  is  no  difficulty  in  realiang  the  formulas,  bat  the  oon-^"*^'*^
aidemtion  of  the  simultaneoua  reduction  of  the  two  quadratics^

(( 1 2  a,-H3  «,+  14  gj' (2 1  g,  +  23 ^  24 ^ \  \

*l  ^.  )\  (65),

and  i(^i«,'  +  ^.««'  +  ^a«/+^40  J

to  wliieh  we  are  led  when  we  go  back  from  the  notation  12',  etc.
of  (30),  is  not  coraplet^-ly  in.stnictive  in  respect  to  stability,  jis
WHS  our  previous  explicit  working  out  of  the  two  roots  of  the
dt;termiuantal  equation  in  (37),  (38),  and  (40).

345*^. The  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  that  the  system  may  be  proTided
dominated  by  g}^rostatic  influence  arc  that  the  smaller  value  of  suticTn^
—  X*  found  from  (31)  and  the  great<?r  found  from  (34)  be  re-  S"njSSririi-
spectively  veiy  great  in  coiniiarison  with  the  greatest  Jind  very
email  in  comparison  witli  the  smallest,  of  the  four  quantities
tr, , tJ7,, irrespectively  of  tlieir  siijns. Su])posing  rsj^  to  bo
the  greatest  and  ur^  the  Bmalle^st,  thehc  conditions  aro  easily
proved  to  be  fulMed  when,  and  only  when,

(l2  .  34-^  73.  42  +  14.  23)'  ^  ^  .gg.

ia*+ 13*+ i4*  +  34*+4a*+ 23* » ^

and

(i2.34-f  13.42 -t-M.  23)'  ^g^^

\2*vjB^^  iS'v^v^'i'  i4*tjrjW,+  34*^,^,+  4a*w,w,-f  23"or,or^  *

where  »  denote  s  "  v^rt/  great  in  conijjarison  xmtK"  When  these
TOuditions  are  fultilied,  let  12,  13,  23,  etc.,  be  each  increased  in
the  ratio  of  ^  to  1.  The  two  greater  values  of  n  (or  kj^  1)
will  be  increased  in  the  same  ratio, to  1;  and  the  two  smaller

'^''litized  by  Google

408

P&ELIMINART.

[345"*

LInlliOf

ortkefbur

will  be  diminished  each  in  the  iiivei-HO  ratio,  1  to  Agjiiii,

let  J^w^y  J^w^y  n/^^ji  J'^'^i  ^  each  dimiuished  in  the
ratio  J/  to  1  ;  the  two  larger  values  of  n  will  be  sensibly
unaltered  ;  and  the  two  smaller  will  l>e  diminished  in  the  ratio
if*  to  1.

84(>^. Remark  that

(a)  When  (G6)  is  satisfied  the  two  greater  values  of  n  are
each

<V{{i2"+  13'+  i4'  +  34"  +  42'  +  23')}

(68);

•ad

<VKi2'+i3'+i4  +34  +42"  +  23  );  j
_  12.34 +J3i42  +  i4- 23 I

V(i2'+  13'+  14"+ 34*  + 42'+  23*)  J

and  that  when  they  are  very  unequal  the  greater  is  approxi-
mately equal  to  the  former  limit  and  the  less  to  the  latter.

Wlifiii  (67)  k  imtfiifiwd,  and  wlieii  tike  equilibrium  ia  staUc,
the  two  smaller  -values  of  n  are  each

12  .  34  +  13.  42  +  14  .  23  I

and

Limita  of
th»»  next
Hrwil<>s>t  mid
gn-ntt-st  01
the  foiir
periods.

ITW  C(fCUM~

dftl  •jatem

with  non<
dominant
KyruDtatic
iuQudnoes.

and  that  when  they  are  very  unequal  the  g^reatcr  of  the  two  is
approximately  equal  to  the  former  limits  and  the  less  to  tli«
latter.

345",  Both  (G6)  and  (07)  must  be  satisfied  in  order  that  tlie
four  periods  may  bo  found  ajijuoximiitely  by  the  solution  of  tlie
two  quadratics  (31),  (.SI).  If  (OTi)  is  satisfied  but  not  (67),- the
biquadratic  determinant  still  spUi.s  into  two  quadratics,  of  wliieh
one  is  ap[»roxiuiately  (•H)  but  the  other  is  not  aj)proxiiiuit*iy
(34).  Similarly,  if  (G7)  is  sati^^(led  but  not  (••O),  the  bicpiad-
ratic  splits  into  two  quadratics  of  which  one  ib  approximately
(34)  but  the  other  not  approxiuiately  (31).

845^.  When  neither  (66)  nor  (67)  ia  fulfilled  ihere  is  not
generally  any  splitting  of  the  biquadratio  into  two  rational  quad-
radcs;  and  the  oonditioiM  of  stability,  the  determination  of  the
fimdamental  periods,  and  the  working  out  of  the  complete  so-
lution depend  essentially  on  the  roots  of  a  biquadratic  equation.
When  «, ,  fir,,  ST,, are  all  positiye  it  is  dear  fhmi  the  equation

Digitized  by  Google

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

409

of  energy  [345",  (4),  with  <^»0]  that  the  mxAaaa  iB  stable  what^  r!^!^I!!f.
ever  be  the  yaluee  of  ^  gyroetatic  ooeffieienta  12,  34,  13,  etc.  ^'lli^^f^li;',"
and  therefore  in  this  case  each  of  the  four  roots  X'  of  the  biunad-  a  .unumt
ratio  is  real  ana  negative,  a  proposition  indnded  in  the  general  mtxmoK*,
theorem  of  §  345^  below.  To  illustrate  the  interesting  questums
whioh  oocnr  when  the  iv's  are  not  all  positiTe  put

ta^t^g,  34  -  Mi/,  13 etc  (70),

where  n,  34,  13,  etc.  deiioto  any  iiumtrics  whatever  subject  onlj
to  the  condition  that  thej  do  not  make  zero  of

IS  •  34 S3  •  4t  4*  14  •  'J*

When  9^,  w,,  m^f  are  all  negative  each  root  X*  of  the  bi-
quadratio  is  as  we  have  seen  in  §845'"  real  and  negative  when
the  gyrostatic  influences  dominate.  It  becomes  an  interesting
question  to  be  answered  hj  treatment  of  the  biquadrati<^  how
small  may  ^  be  to  keep  all  the  roots  X'  real  and  native,  and
how  large  may  ^  be  to  render  them  other  than  real  and  positive
as  thej  are  when  ^sOt  Similar  questions  occur  in  connexion
with  the  case  of  two  of  the  »^  negative  and  two  jxMitive,
when  the  gyrostatic  influences  are  so  proportioned  as  to  fulfil
345*^  (41),  so  that  when  g  is  infinitely  great  there  is  complete
gyrostatic  stability,  thouj^  when  0  there  are  two  instabHitifla
and  two  stabilities.

345^.  Hetuming  now  to  345"  and  345^,  345*^^  and  345",  CjmMin
for  a  gyrostatic  system  with  any  number  of  freedoms,  wo  see  by  with  any
345**  that  the  roots  X'  of  the  determinant*!  equation  (14)  or  (17)  Amdonu.
are  neooBsarily  real  and  negative  when  x?,,  tv,,  etc.  are
ttll  positive.  This  conclusion  is  founded  on  the  reasoning  of
§  345"  ro^'ai  (Iiti<^'  the  equation  of  energy  (4)  applied  to  the  case
for  which  it  becomes  T+  V^£^t  or  the  same  as  for  the
case  of  no  motional  forces.  It  is  easy  d  course  to  eliminate
dynamiciil  conaiderations  from  the  reasoning  and  to  give  a  purely
alg(4.r:ii(^  proof  that  the  roots  A*  of  the  doterminantal  equation
(14)  of  345**"  are  necessarily  real  and  negative,  provided  both  of
the  two  quadratic  functions  (11) «,'+ 2  (12)a,a,  +  eta,  and
llrt,^+a  12a|a,+  etc.  are  positive  for  all  real  values  of  a,,  a^,  etc.
But  the  equations  (14)  of  §  343  (^),  which  we  obtaiucd  and  used
in  the  course  of  the  corresponduig  demonstration  for  the  case  of
no  motional  forces,  do  not  hold  in  our  present  case  of  g^'rostatio
motional  forces. Still  for  this  present  case  we  have  the  con-

410  PBELIHINARY.  [345°*.

elusion  of  §  343  (m)  that  equality  among  the  roots  falls  essentially
under  the  case  of  §  343  (e)  above.  For  we  know  from  the  con-
sideration of  eiiergj',  as  in  345",  that  no  j)ai  ti<.ular  solution
can  be  of  the  form  or/ sin  o-/,  when  the  potentLil  enerpry  is
I)Ositive  for  nil  displacements:  yet  [though  there  cannot  l>e
equal  roots  for  the  gyrostatic  system  of  two  freciluins  34-3';
jLs  wo  si  (■  from  thu  solution  (25)  of  the  detmuinanUil  e(jnation
for  this  case]  there  ob\  iuiisly  may  be  e(juality  of  roots*  iu  a
quadruply  free  ijyrostutic  system,  or  in  one  with  more  than  four
freedoms.  Hence,  if  both  the  quadratic  functions  have  tho
Bame  sign  foi'  ail  real  values  of  a^,  a^,  etc.,  all  the  first  minoi's

*  Examples  of  this  may  be  invcutod  ad  libitum  by  conimoucing  with  pairs  of
•quations  mieh  as  (23)  and  altering  the  variaUes  by  (generalised)  orthogonal
transformatiopa,  For  one  verj  nmple  example  pat  ^-v  and  take  (28)  aa  one
pair  of  eqaatione  of  motion,  and  as  a  aeoond  pair  take

The  aeeond  of  (98)  and  the  fixat  of  tfaeee  multiplied  reapeettvefy  hj  eoea  and
aitta,  and  again  bj  ama  and  eoaa,  and  added  and  aahtraeted,  give

V^,->7Coaa|-f-Y  aina^^^  v^fsO,
and  ^+7rina|-f  Yooaail'-I-V^BO,

vhere  f^s^iona+veoBa,
and  ^s^'ooaa'-vBina.

Eliminating  ^'  and  i;  by  ttteae  laat  eqnationa,  from  the  flrat  and  fooiflk  of
the  eqnationa  of  motion,  and  for  igrnunetry  potting  ^|  inatead  of  |,  and

in»ttiad  of  Vi  and  fur  Kimplicity  putting  7  cos  a  =  {i,  and  yain  asA,  and  OOUeetiug
the  eqoationa  ol  motion  in  <adac,  we  liave  the  following, —

for  the  eqvationB  of  motion  of  a  qoadruplj  tree  gyroalatio  isyatem  having  two
equalities  among  its  four  fundamental  perioda.  The  two  diiferent  petioda  are
the  two  valoea  of  the  expression

a»/iVtt«r»+4tf)*V(iP«+i*"+«)K

Wlicu  these  two  values  aro  unequal  the  equalities  among  the  roots  do  not
pivc  rise  to  terms  of  the  form  tt^^  or  t  cos  at  in  the  solution.  But  if
«x=  -  (|//-  + :J which  lunkes  theso  two  values  cqtial,  and  therefore  all  four
roots  equal,  terms  of  the  form  <co8<rt  do  appear  in  the  solution,  and  the  equili-
brium is  unstable  b  the  toan^tional  oaae  ihoai^  it  la  ataUe  if  -  v  be  leea  than
i*/'  -f  ih^  bjr  ever  so  email  a  diffcrenec.

Ca<o  of

(  1 1  u;il  r<  1  ts

bittlr.

AppHcnliou
<ir  llr>uth'«
lbi:vrc4a.

Lviyiiizuo  by  LiOOgle

345"".]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  411

of  the  detenniiiaatal  equatioxi  {14),  §^345*"',  must  vanish  for  each
double^  triple^  or  multiple  root  of  the  equation,  if  it  has  any  (boomn.
such  roots.

It  will  be  interesting  to  find  a  purely  algebraic  proof  of  this
theorem,  and  we  leave  it  as  an  exerdse  to  the  student;  remarking
only  that,  when  the  ([uadratic  functions  have  contrary  signs  for
some  real  values  of a^,  etc.,  there  muy  be  ciivuility  among  the
roots  without  the  evsMoence  of  all  the  first  minora ;  or,  in  E<)aai  root*
dynamical  language,  there  may  be  terms  of  the  form  Ic^,  or  hiny
Isinirl^  in  the  soluticm  expres^iing  the  motion  of  a  gyi-ostatic  ^[!^'b!^"*^
system,  in  transitioDal  cases  between  stability  and  instabili^.  bTilty  n'l'id
It  is  eaay  to  invent  examples  of  such  cases,  taking  for  instance  ^'^''^^iV-
the  quadruply  free  gyroetattc  system,  whether  gyrostatically
<fa)minated  as  in  g  345""^,  but  in  this  case  with  some  of  the  four
quanUties  negative,  and  some  positive ;  or,  as  in  §  3  (5*^,  not
t;vt  ostatically  dominated,  with  either  some  or  all  of  the  quantities
nr^,, u7,  negative. All  this  we  recoumieud  to  the  student
as  interesting  and  instructive  exercise.

846^. When  aU  the  quantities  tV|,  Vg, V|  are  of  theoonditlom
same  sign  it  is  easy  to  find  the  conditions  that  must  be  fulfilled  suSL"  !«>-
in  order  that  the  system  may  be  gyrostatically  dominated.  For  "^^'^^
if  p^,  p^, p^  are  the  roots  of  the  equation

e^'  +  Cj3"~'  -f  . . .  +  c^_,3  + =  0,

we  have

-  (p,  +  P-  +  ...  +  P.)  - ,  and  - f -  +  i+ ...  +-)  « ^» .

Hence  if — ,  — p,, . . .  — be  each  positive,  eJne^iB  their  arithmetic
mean,  and  nc./c,.,  is  their  harmonic  mean.  Hence  e^/  nc^  is
greater  than  nc./c,.,,  and  the  greatest  of  ^p,,  —  p,,...,  —  p,  is
greater  than  e,  /nc,,  and  the  least  of  them  is  less  than  tt0,/e,_|.
Take  now  the  two  following  equations:

A'  +  A'"  2  12*  +X*-*  2  (Si2 . 34)'  +  A' i;  (2i2 .  34 .  56/+  etc.  =  0  (71),

w

here

12'

_  12 ,  _^3_  34  . i'^i'bJ-  /"\\

niniti-^orf  hv  Google

412  PRELIMINAKY.  [345°".

cycioidai  Suppoee  for  aimplioity  •  to  be  even. All  the  roots  X'  of  (71)

^(Utiiom ^  (§  below)  eeaentially  real  and  negative.  So  are  those  of

itetfodo- (73)  provi^  «,i W|  are  all  of  one  sign  as  we  now  auppoae
them  to  beii  Hence  the  amalleet  root  *  A*  of  (71)  is  lees  than

ii £(12.34.56,...,  »)•

S(2i2.34.56,...,f-3,  »-a)»

,  and  the  greatest  root  —  X'  of  (72)  is  greater  than

34  . 5^>V-  >  *-  I.  0

.(75).

Heooe  the  conditions  for  gyrostatic  domination  aie  that  (74)  most
be  much  greater  than  the  greatest  of  the  poeitiTe  quantities  ,
*  v.,...,  ^Wtf  and  that  (75)  must  be  Ytsry  mueh  less  than  the
least  of  these  positive  quantities.  When  these  conditions  are
fulfilled  the  i  roots  of  (18)  §  345**  equated  to  sero  are  sepontUe
into  two  groups  of  }t  roots  which  are  inBnitely  nearly  equal  to
the  roots  of  equations  (71)  and  (72)  respectivelj,  conditiona
of  reality  of  i^ch  are  investigated  in  §  345^  b^w.  The
interpretation  leads  to  the  lollowxng  interesting  coiDclQ8ions>—

GyTMtetio 845"". Consider  a  cydoidal  system  provided  with  non-
ptaincd. rotating  flywheels  mounted  on  frames  so  ooDnected  with  the
moving  parts  as  to  give  infinitesimal  angular  motions  to  the
axes  of  the  flywheeb  proportional  to  the  motions  of  the  system.
Let  the  number  of  freedoms  of  the  system  exclusive  of  the
ignored  co-ordinates  [§  319,  Ex.  (G)]  of  the  flywheels  relatively
to  their  frames  be  even. Let  the  forces  of  the  system  be  such
that  when  the  flywheels  are  given  at  rest,  when  the  system  is
at  rust,  the  ecjiiilibrium  is  cither  stable  for  all  the  freedonis,  or
uustable  for  all  the  IVeeJuins. Let  the  number  and  conucxiuns
of  the  gyrostatic  links  be  such  as  to  penult  gyrostatic  domina-
tion (§  .*14r)"')  when  each  of  the  tlywheels  is  set  into  sufficiently
Gyrostati- r^^pid  rotation. Now  let  the  flywheels  be  set  each  into  suf-
n^mntid' ficicutly  rapid  rotation  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  gyrostAtic
vsum: domination  (§  345"'):  the  equilibrium  of  the  system  becomes
stable :  with  half  the  whole  number  %  of  its  modes  of  vibration
exceedingly  rapid,  with  frequenr  ies  ec^nal  to  the  roots  of  a  cer-
tain algebraic  equation  of  the  degree  ^i;  apd  the  other  half  of

Digitized  by  GoogI

345"*'.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  413

its  modes  of  vibfation  very  slow,  with  frequencies  given  by  the
roots  of  another  algebraic  equation  of  degree  ^t.  The  first  class
of  fundamenta]  modes  may  be  called  adynamic  because  they
are  the  same  as  if  no  forces  were  applied  to  the  Hystem,  or
acted  between  its  moving  parts,  except  actions  and  reactions  in  ]^^*^^
the  normals  between  mutually  prcssiiii;  parts  (depend inc^  on  the  latimwivvry
iiRTtiaij  of  the  moving  parts). The  second  class  of  fundamental
modes  may  be  called  preccssional  because  the  precession  of  theandpro-
equinoxes,  and  the  slow  precession  ot  a  rapidly  s]nnning  top  cbciHaiicn-*
supported  on  a  very  fine  point,  are  familiar  instances  of  it.
Remark  however  that  the  oblitpiity  of  the  ecliptic  should  be
infinitely  small  to  bring  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  pre-
cisely within  the  scope  of  the  equations  of  our  "cycloidal
system.

n

846^. If  the  angular  velocities  of  all  the  flywheels  be
altered  in  the  same  proportion  the  frequencies  of  the  adynamic
oscillations  will  be  altered  in  the  same  proportion  direct ly,  and
those  of  the  processional  modes  in  the  same  projjurtiun  in-
versely. Now  suppose  there  to  be  either  no  inertia  in  the
system  except  that  of  the  flywheels  round  their  pivoted  axes
and  round  their  equatorial  diameters,  or  suppose  the  effective
inertia  of  the  connecting  parts  to  be  comparable  with  that  of
the  flywheels  when  given  without  rotation. The  period  of  each  J^^'^'^.I^''^"
of  the  adynamic  modes  is  comparable  with  the  periods  of  the
flywheels. And  the  periods  of  the  precessional  modes  are  com-  f°' '/^ll  ^
parable  with  a  third  proportional  to  a  mean  of  the  periods  of  wheeiaf*'
the  flywheels  and  a  mean  of  the  irrotational  periods  of  the  sys-  !n  cnH^f.dS'
tem,  if  the  system  be  stable  when  the  flywheels  are  deprived
of  rotation. For  the  last  mentioned  term  of  the  proportion  we  q^^Ta
may,  in  the  case  of  irrotational  inMnUtyy  substitute  the  time  of  iSi^*tte
increasing  a  displacement  a  thousandfold,  supposing  the  system  wltSnj-
to  be  fklling  away  from  its  configuration  of  equilibrium  privi  d  of
according  to  one  of  its  fundamental  modes  of  motion  (e*^).
The  reciprocal  of  this  time  we  shall  call,  for  brevity,  the
rapidity  of  the  system,  for  convenience  of  comparison  with  the
frequency  of  a  vibrator  or  of  a  rotator,  wliich  is  the  name  com-
monly given  t4)  the  reciprocal  of  its  period.

L-iyiii^LKj  by  Google

414

PRELIHINART.

[345«-*.

845"«i.  It  remains  to  prove  that  tbe  lootB  X*  of  (71),  and  of
(72)  alao  when  v,,...,  ir<  are  all  of  one  sign,  are  eesentiallj
real  and  negativa  (71)  is  the  detemmuuital  equation  of
§  345^  (43)  with  any  even  number  of  equations  in»toad  of  only
four.  The  treatment  of  ^  345^  and  345''  is  all  diredJj  ap-
plicable without  change  to  thia  rxtoiisir)n  ;  and  it  proves  that  the
roots  X'  are  real  and  negative  1>y  bringing  the  problem  to  that  of
the  orthogonal  reduction  of  tbe  essentially  positive  quadratic
function

G'vaa)a=J{(i2a,+i3a,+etc)*+(2io,+23a,+etc)*+(3ia,+32o,+etc.)'+etc.}  (76):

it  proves  also  the  equalities  of  enerjpes  of  (56),  §  345",  and  tlie
ortliogonalities  of  (o')),  ('>8) 345":  also  the  curious  al;je)»raic
Alsrtwte  theorem  that  the  detenniDautal  roots  of  the  quadratic  function

consist  of  |  e  })air8  of  equals.

Inasmuch  as  (72)  is  tbe  same  as  (71)  -v^ith  X~'  put  for  X  and
12*,  13',  23',  etc.  for  la,  13,  23,  etc.,  all  tlie  formulas  nnd  ]»rono-
sitions  which  we  have  proved  tor  (71)  hold  correspondingly  for
(72)  when  12',  13',  23',  etc.  are  all  real,  as  they  are  when,
tr,,  iir^,...«t  are  all  of  one  sign.

345"'".  Going  hack  now  to  §345*'",  and  taking  advantage  of
what  we  have  learned  in  §  345'*  and  the  consequent  treatment  of
the  problem,  particularly  that  in  ,^  315^'",  we  sec  now  how  to
simplify  ecjuations  (14)  of  §  345*'"  otherwise  than  was  done  in
i$  345'*,  by  a  new  method  which  has  the  advantage  of  being
ai)i)licn1>le  also  Ut  materially  sim)ilify  the  gent'ial  equations  (13)
of  55  34.V.  Ai>i)ly  orthogonal  transformation  of  the  co-ordinates
to  reduce  to  a  sum  of  squares  of  simple  co-ordinates,  the  <pjad-
ratic  function  (70).  Thus  denoting  by  G  (\p\f/)  what  G  {(la)
becomes  when  i/^, ,  tp^,  etc.  ai'c  substituted  for  a,,  a^,  etc.;  and
den<»ting  by  11^',  ^be  values  of  the  pairs  of  roots  of  the

determinantjil  e<juation  of  degive  which  are  simply  the  negative
of  the  rfxits  X'  of  e«pmtion  (71)  of  degive  hi  in  X*;  nnd  denoting

^1*  Vit  ^t*  Vtf'^nVkit fresh  00-ordinatea,  we  have

It  is  ea.sy  to  sei?  tluit  (he  gi  neral  equations  of  cycloidal  motion
(13)  of 345  '  tmnsfoiiued  to  the  ^-co-ordinates  come  out  in
iMiiitt  oti  follows:

PrrMif  of
rt-nlity  of
adyiinmic
HiiH  i>f  pro-

)MTil)ds

wlun
hy>«t<Mii'»
irnitHtional
H«Ti()<l>  nre
«  itli>T  nil
mil  or  All
ioMigliwiy.

Digitized  by  Go

dio"***.]  DTNAUICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

415

d  dT dQ  dV  ^

dt  dc^ d^^ ' "
d  dT dQ , dV  ^

1

Cjreloidftl

ddT^  dX)

It  di]  d  $

f

dV

d  dT dQ . dV  ^

f  d  dT dQ  dV  ^

1

.(78).

d  dT dQ  dV
dtdn^,dii^r''^'^^''^dri^i  ""J

345""^.  ConsideratioDS  of  space  and  tiine  prermt  us  from
d<  tai]e<l  ti-eatment  at  presoit  of  gyroBtatic  qratonut  with  odd
luiiii  Vii>rH  of  degTMS  of  freedom,  but  it  is  obvioas  from  §  345"'"  and
345"  that  tlte  general  eqmfctions  (13)  of  §  345^  may,  when  i  the
number  of  freedoms  Is  odd,  by  proper  transformatiim  from  oo-
ordinates  etc.  to  a  set  of  oo-ordmatee  C  ?t*-"6(l-D»

^  reduced  to  the  following  fonn :

r  d  dT dQ  dV  ^

dtd^^ di^  d^,

^.0

d  dT  dQ
^di  dii^  dlf^

dri^

d  dT  dQ  ^  dV  ^
dt  dl d^^ "*  di,

d  dT dQ J. dV  ^

d  dT

dQ

dV

—  =  0

d  dT

di  c^^i^.i)  diim^i)

dQ  , ^  dV

=  0

d  dT  dQ  dV  ^
dt  dC tiC  dC

416

PBEtmnfABT.

Kinetic  346.  There  ia  sciircely  any  question  in  dxTiamies  more  im-
portant  fur  Natural  Philosophy  tlian  the  stability  or  instability
of  motion.  \\  c  tiierefore,  before  concluding  this  chapter,  pro-
pose to  give  some  general  explanatioiis  and  leading  principles
regarding  it.

A  "conservative  disturbance  of  motion"  is  a  disturbance
in  the  motion  or  configuration  of  a  conservative  system,  not
altering  the  sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetic  eneigies.  A
twimM.  conservative  disturbance  of  the  motion  through  any  particular
configuration  is  a  change  in  velocities,  or  component  velocities,
not  altering  the  whole  kinetic  energy.  Thus^  for  example,  a
con8«srvative  disturbance  of  the  motion  of  a  particle  throu^li
any  point,  is  a  change  in  the  direction  of  its  motion,  unaccom-
panied by  change  of  speed.

iSityami*'  actual  motion  of  a  system,  from  any  particular

dSrinii.*'  oonfiguFatioD,  is  said  to  be  ttMe  if  every  possible  infinitely
small  conservative  disturbance  of  its  motion  through  that  con-
figuration may  be  compounded  of  conservative  disturbances,
any  one  of  which  would  give  rise  to  an  alteration  of  motion
which  would  bring  the  system  again  to  some  configuration
belonging  to  the  undisturbed  path,  in  a  finite  time,  and  without
more  than  an  infinitely  small  digresjsion.  If  this  condition  is
not  fuliilled,  the  motion  is  said  to  be  unstable.

Ksuipict.  940.  For  example,  if  a  body.  A,  be  supported  on  a  fixed
vertical  axis;  if  a  second,  B,  be  supported  on  a  parallel  axis
belonging  to  the  first ;  a  third,  C,  similarly  supported  on  B,  and
so  on ;  and  if  B,  C,  etc.,  be  so  placed  as  to  have  each  its  centre
of  inertia  as  far  as  possible  from  the  fixed  axis,  and  the  whole
set  in  motion  with  a  common  angular  velocity  about  this  axis,
the  motion  will  be  stable,  from  every  configuration,  as  is  evi-
dent from  the  princi|>Us  regarding  the  rosultnnt  centrifui^al
force  on  a  rigid  body,  to  be  proved  later.  Tf,  for  instance,  eaeh
of  the  bodies  is  a  Hat  rectiingular  board  hinged  on  one  edge,  it
is  obvious  that  the  whole  system  will  be  kept  stable  by  centri-
fugal force,  when  all  are  in  one  plane  and  as  far  out  from  the
axis  as  possible.  But  if  A  consist  partly  of  a  shaft  and  crank,
as  a  common  epinning-wheel,  or  the  fly-wheel  and  crank  of  a

Digitized  by  Google

348.]

DTNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.

417

steam-engine,  and  if  ^  be  supported  on  tlic  ciauk-pin  as  axis,  Exunplei.
and  turned  inwards  (towards  the  fixed  axis,  or  across  the  fixed
axis),  then,  even  altbougli  the  centres  of  inertia  of  C,  D,  etc.,
are  placed  as  far  from  the  fixed  axis  a,s  possihle,  consistent  with
this  position  of  B,  the  motioa  of  the  system  will  be  unstable.

849.  The  rectilinear  motion  of  an  elongated  bod}'  lengthwise,
or  of  a  flat  disc  edgewise,  through  a  fluid  is  unstable.  But  the
motion  of  either  body,  with  its  length  or  its  broadside  perpen-
dicular to  the  direction  of  motion,  is  stable.  This  is  demon-
strated for  the  ideal  case  of  a  perfect  liquid  (§  o20),  in  §  321,
Example  (2);  and  the  results  explained  in  §  322  show,  for  a  Kinetic  ito.
solid  of  revolution,  the  precise  character  of  the  motion  con-dro^rutmio  •
sequent  upon  an  infinitely  small  disturbance  in  the  direction
of  the  motion  from  being  exactly  along  or  exactly  perpendicular
to  the  axis  of  figure ;  whether  the  infinitely  small  osciUation,
in  a  definite  period  of  time,  when  the  rectilineal  motion  is
atabie,  or  the  swing  round  to  an  infinitely  nearly  inverted  po-
sition when  the  rectilineal  motion  is  unstable.  Observation
proves  the  assertion  we  have  just  made,  for  real  fluids*  air  and
water,  and  for  a  great  variety  of  circumstances  a£focting  the
motion.  Several  illustrations  have  been  referred  to  in  §  325 ;
and  it  is  probable  we  shall  return  to  the  subject  later,  as  being
not  only  of  great  practical  importance,  but  profoundly  interest-
ing although  very  ditiicuit  iu  theory.

860.  The  motion  of  a  single  particle  affords  simpler  and
not  less  instructive  illustrations  of  stability  and  instability.
Thus  if  a  weight,  hung  from  a  fixed  point  by  a  light  inexten-  rirouiar
sible  cord,  be  set  iu  motion  vSO  as  to  describe  a  circle  about  a  i^ualuuin,
vertieal  line  through  its  position  of  equilibrium,  its  motion  is
stable.  For,  a.s  we  shall  see  later,  if  disturbed  infinitely  little
ill  direction  without  gain  or  loss  of  energy,  it  will  describe  a
sinuous  path,  cutting  the  undisturbed  circle  at  points  succes-
sively distant  from  one  another  by  definite  fractions  of  the  cir-
cumference, depending  upon  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the
String  to  the  vertical.  When  this  angle  is  veiy  small,  the
motion  is  sensibly  the  same  as  that  of  a  particle  confined  to
one  plane  and  moving  under  the  influence  of  an  attractive

VOL.  I.  27

Digitized  by  Google

418  PRELIMINAHY.  [350

foroe  towards  a  fixed  point,  simplj  proportional  to  the  distance;
and  the  disturbed  path  cuts  the  undisturbed  circle  four  times
armtar in  a  revolution. Or  if  a  particle  confined  to  one  plane,  move

under  the  influence  of  a  centre  in  this  plane,  attracting  with  a
torce  inversely  as  the  square  of  tlie  (listance,  a  path  iuliintely
little  disturbed  from  a  circle  will  cut  the  circle  twice  in  a  re-
volution. Or  if  the  law  of  central  force  be  the  nth  power
of  the  distance,  and  if  ?i  +  be  j)o.^itive,  the  disturbed  patlj  will
cut  the  undisturbed  circular  orbit  at  successive  angular  in-
tervals, each  equal  to  7r/7'<  +  3.  But  the  motion  will  be
unstable  if  n  be  negative,  and  —  n  >  3.

Kin«(ioiU>  The  mteriou  of  stability  in  easily  investigated  for  circular

motion  round  a  centre  o:
the  genentl  orbit  (§  36),

mfawMMt' motion  round  a  centre  of  force  from  the  difierential  equation  of

Let  the  value  of  h  be  Buch  that  motion  in  a  circle  of  radittaa'*
satisfieB  tills  equation.  That  is  to  say,  let  P  h''u*  -  u,  vrh&i  u  s  a.
Let  now  k  b  a  +  |ii  p  being  infinitely  small. We  shall  have

if  a  (li'iioU-H  tlio  \aliH'  of  ~  (^t  -  li-^  when  u  =a  :  ajid  thei'cfore

dfc  \ h  uy

the  differential  equation  for  motion  infinitely  nearly  circular  is

-J  +  op  w  0,

(lb'

Tlie  integral  of  tliiM  is  roost  conveniently  written

p  =  A&m{0 +  fi)
when  a  is  positive,  and

wlien  o  is  negative

Hence  wo  see  that  tlie  circular  motion  ia  atable  in  the  former
case,  and  unstable  in  the  latter.

Digitized  by  Google

350.]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AMD  PRINCIPLES.  419

For  instauce,  if  P  -  /xr"  =  fiu",  we  have  ^^^^  ^

,  »  outwoffbit.

a

p

and  putting rzu^n^  in  this  we  find  a = n  4-  3 ;  whence  the

ivsult  sUted  above.

Or,  taking  Example  (B)  of  §  319,  and  putting  mP  for  P,  and
mh  for  A,

P w' /g  \

du  \ Itru'J rn  +  m'

Henoe,  putting  u^a,  and  making  k*^gm/ma*  ao  that  motion
in  a  circle  of  radius may  be  poosible^  we  find

in  /ti

Hence  the  circular  motion  Ir  always  sinble  ;  and  the  ])oricKl  of
tlie  variation  produced  hj  an  inOnitely  small  disturbance  from
it  is

2ir

V  "3»r'

361.  The  case  of  a  particle  moving  on  a  smooth  fixed  surface
under  the  influence  of  no  other  force  than  that  of  the  con-pmie

BKyvins  oa

straint,  and  therefore  always  moving  along  a  geodetic  line  of
the  surface,  affords  extremely  simple  illustrations  of  stability
and  instability.  For  instance,  a  particle  placed  on  the  inner
rircle  of  the  surface  of  an  anchor-ring,  and  projected  in  the
yjlane  of  the  rincr,  ^vould  move  perpetually  in  that  circle,  but
unstably,  as  the  smallest  disturbance  would  clearly  send  it
away  from  this  path,  never  to  return  until  after  a  digression
round  the  outer  edge.  (We  suppose  of  course  that  the  particle
is  held  to  the  sarfooe,  as  if  it  were  placed  in  the  infinitely
narrow  space  between  a  solid  ring  and  a  hollow  one  enclosing
it.) But  if  a  particle  is  placo<l  on  the  outermost,  or  greatest,

27—2

L-iyiii^LKj  by  Google

420  PRELIMINARY.  [351

circle  of  the  ring,  and  projected  in  its  plane,  an  infinitely  small
mc^^hVg  on  disturbance  will  cause  it  to  describe  a  sinuous  path  cutting  the

wutuH^  circle  at  points  round  it  successively  distant  by  angles  each  equal
to  7rjb/a,  or  intervals  of  time,  Trjblcjja  ,  where  a  denotes
tlie  radius  of  tliat  circle,  to  the  angular  velocity  in  it,  and  6  the
radius  of  the  circular  cross  section  of  the  ring.  This  is  proved
by  remarking  that  an  infinitely  narrow  band  from  the  outer-
most part  of  the  lii^  has,  at  each  point,  a  and  b  for  its  principal
radii  of  curvature,  and  therefore  (§  150)  has  for  its  geodetic

lines  the  gretft  circles  of  a  sphere  of  radius  VoS,  upon  which
(§  152)  it  may  be  bent

352.  In  all  these  cases  the  undisturbed  motion  has  been
circular  or  rectilineal,  and,  when  the  motion  has  been  stable,  the
effect  of  a  disturbance  has  been  penodiCf  or  recurring  with  the

biune  phases  in  equal  successive  intervals  of  time.  An  illus-
tration of  thorouLrlily  stable  motion  in  which  the  oftcct  ui'  a
disturbance  is  not  "  periodic,"  is  presented  by  a  particle  sliding
down  an  inclined  groove  under  the  action  of  j^ravity.  To  tfike
the  simplest  case,  we  may  consider  a  partiele  sliding  down
along  the  lowest  straight  line  of  an  inclined  hollow  cylinder.
If  slightly  disturbed  from  this  straight  line,  it  will  oscillate
on  each  side  of  it  perpetually  in  its  descent,  but  not  with  a
uniform  periodic  motion,  though  the  durations  of  its  excursions
to  each  side  of  the  straight  line  are  all  equal

Kinetic  sta-
bility. In-
commensu"
ruble  oBoil-

868.  A  veiy  curious  case  of  stable  motion  is  presented  by
a  particle  constrained  to  renuun  on  the  surface  of  an  andior-
ring  fixed  in  a  vertical  plane,  and  projected  along  the  great
circle  from  any  point  of  it,  with  any  velocity. An  infinitely

small  disturbance  will  give  rise  to  a  disturbed  motion  of  whicli
the  path  will  cut  the  vertical  circle  over  and  over  a^ain  for
ever,  at  unecjual  intervals  of  time,  and  mieijual  angles  of  the
circle ;  and  obviously  not  recurring  periodically  in  any  cycle,
except  with  definite  particular  values  for  the  wlx^le  energ}'-,
s  >me  of  which  are  less  and  an  infinite  number  are  greater  than
that  wliich  just  suffices  to  bring  the  particle  to  the  highest
point  ui  the  ring. The  full  mathematical  investigation  of  these

uiy  j^uj  by  Google

353.]

DTNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PaiNCIPLBa

421

circumstances  would  afford  an  excellent  exercise  in  the  theory
of  (litTi  rential  equations,  but  it  is  not  necessary  for  our  present
illustrations.

354. In  this  case,  as  in  all  of  stable  motion  with  only  two  p^diiatoiy

kinetic  vtil-

degrees  of  freedom,  which  we  have  just  considered,  there  has  ^'^•'y*
been  stability  throughout  the  motion ;  and  an  infinitely  small
disturbance  from  any  point  of  the  motion  has  given  a  disturbed
path  which  intersects  the  undisturbed  path  over  and  over  again
at  finite  intervals  of  time.  But,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  at
present  confining  our  attention  to  two  degrees  of  freedom,  we
have  a  limited  stability  in  the  motion  of  an  unresisted
jectile,  which  satisfies  the  criterion  of  stability  only  at  points
of  its  upward,  not  of  its  downward,  path.  Thus  if  MOPQ  be

the  path  of  a  projectile,  and  if  at  0  it  be  disturbed  by  an  infi-  Jgjjg^^
nitely  small  foroe  either  way  perpendicular  to  its  instantaneous  »  prqMito.

direction  of  motion,  the  disturbed  path  will  cut  the  undisturbed

infinitely  near  the  point  P  where  the  direction  of  motion  is  per-
pendicular to  that  at  (9:  as  we  Ciisily  sec  by  considering  that
the  line  joining  two  particles  projected  from  one  point  at  the
same  instant  with  efpial  velocities  in  tlie  directions  of  any  two
lines,  will  always  remain  pcrpi.  udicular  to  the  line  bisecting  the
angle  between  these  two  lines.

422  FBELtmirABT.  [353.

355.  The  principle  of  varying  action  jpves  a  mathematical
criterion  for  stability  or  instability  in  every  case  of  motion.
Thus  in  the  first  place  it  is  obviuus.  and  it  will  be  proved  l>eIow
(§§  358, 361),  that  if  the  action  is  a  true  minimum  iu  the  motioQ
cf  a  system  from  any  one  oonfiguration  to  the  configuration
reached  at  any  other  time,  however  much  later,  the  motion  is
thoroughly  unstable.  For  instance,  in  the  motion  of  a  particle
constrained  to  remain  on  a  smooth  fixed  surface,  and  unin-
fluenced  by  grayity,  the  action  ih  simply  the  length  of  the  path,
multiplied  by  the  constant  velocity.  Hence  in  the  particular
case  of  a  particle  iminflnenced  by  gravity,  moving  round  the
inner  circle  in  the  plane  of  an  anchor^ring  considered  above,  the
action,  or  length  of  path,  is  clearly  a  minimum  from  any  one
point  to  the  point  reached  at  any  subsequent  time.  (The  action
is  not  merely  a  ininiimjin,  but  i.-^  the  siualler  of  two  miniaunn?:,
when  the  coui-se  is  from  any  point  of  the  circular  jjath  u*  any
other,  throii'j^h  less  than  half  a  circumference  of  the  circle.)
Oh  the  i.tli'  i  hand,  ulthuugh  the  path  from  any  point  iu  the
^reat<  .st  circle  of  the  ring  to  any  other  at  a  di>tance  from  it
along  the  circle,  less  than  v^/uh,  is  clearly  least  possible  if  along
the  circumference ;  the  path  of  absolutely  least  length  is  not
along  the  circumference  between  two  points  at  a  greater  circular
distance  than  Wo^  from  one  another,  nor  is  the  path  along  the
circumference  between  them  a  minimum  at  all  in  this  latter
Moti uM  oil  case.  On  any  surface  whatever  which  is  everywhere  antidastic,
iwnurL^'"or  along  a  geodetic  of  any  surface  which  passes  altogether
pruv«dim-  ij^^^g]^  an  anticlastic  region,  the  motion  is  thoroughly  un-

stable. For  if  it  were  stable  from  any  point  0,  we  should  have
the  given  undbturbed  path,  and  the  disturbed  path  from  0
cutting  it  at  some  point  Q; — ^two  different  geodetic  lines  join-

MoUonora  ing  two  points;  which  is  impossible  on  an  anticlastic  surface,
inasmuch  as  the  sum  of  the  exterior  angles  of  any  closed

uiiiuuiei'  figure  of  geodetic  lines  exceeds  four  right  angles  (§  13(1)
when  the  integral  curvature  of  the  enclosed  area  is  negative,
which  (§§  l;i.S,  128)  is  the  case  for  every  portion  of  surface
thoroughly  anticlastic.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  easilv
proved  that  if  we  have  an  endless  rigid  band  of  curved  surface
everywhere  synciastic,  with  a  geodetic  line  running  through  its

Digitized  by  Google

355.]  DTHAKIGAL  I.1W8  AMD  PBINCIPLES.  4SS

middle,  the  motion  of  a  pai  ticlo  projected  aloug  this  line  will  on « ».vn-^
beatable  throughout,  tiud  an  iuftoitely  slight  disturbance  will (ace^stabku
giTe  a  disturbed  path  cutting  the  L^iven  undisturbed  path  again
and  again  for  ever  at  suoceasive  distances  differing  according  to
the  different  specific  curvatures  of  the  intermediate  portionfl  of
tbesurface.  If  fromaoy

polnti  Nf  of  the  ondis-  / y
turbeid  path,  a  perpen-
dicular  be  drawn  to  cut
the  infinitely  near  dis-
torbed  path  in  E,  the
angles  Oj^^^and  KOE
must  (§  138)  be  toge-
ther greater  than  a  right  angle  by  an  amount  equal  to  the  in-  Difrrrentiai

teffral  curvature  of  the  area  EOX. From  this  the  ditferential  dwturbed^

.  ...  iffif

equation  of  the  disturbed  path  may  he  obtained  immediately.

Let  lEON^a^  0y=8,  and  NE  =  U)  and  let  a  known
function  of  «,  be  the  specific  cin-vatnrc  (§  136)  of  the  s^irface  in
the  neighbourhood  of  X.  Let  also,  for  a  moment,  ^  denote  the
complement  of  the  angle  OEN, We  have

Jo

Hence

lint,  obviously,  ^  a  ^ ;

henoe  ^-i-dusO.

When  is  constiint  (as  in  the  cuso  of  the  equator  of  a  surface  of
revolutiuu  considered  above,  §  351),  tliis  gives

u  =  A  cos  (« +  £)t
agreeing  with  the  result 351)  which  we  obtained  by  develop-
ment into  a  spherical  surface.

The  case  of  two  or  more  bodies  supported  on  parallel  axes
in  the  manner  explained  above  in  §  348,  and  rotating  with  the
centre  of  inertia  of  the  whole  at  the  least  possible  distance  from
the  fixed  axis,  aflfords  a  very  good  illustration  also  of  tliis  pro-
position which  may  be  safely  left  lus  an  exercise  to  the  student.

424  PRKLDONART.  [356.

GeneittihK  366.  To  investigate  tho  effect  of  an  infinitely  small  con-
^ISnSSd  servatiYe  disturbance  produced  at  any  instant  in  the  motion
of  any  conservative  system,  may  be  reduced  to  a  practicable
problem  (however  complicated  the  required  work  may  be)  of
mathematical  analysis,  provided  the  undisturbed  motion  is
thoroughly  known.

(a)  First,  for  a  system  having  but  two  degrees  of  freedom  to

General
eqnftlionol  mOVC,  let

in  two  de*

(2);

2T^P^-¥Q4»*'^2R^^  (1).

where  P,  R  are  functions  of  the  co-ordinates  not  depending
on  the  actual  motion.  Then

d  ilT „•/ „T <IP  ., AtP ,t/:\  .  . HI!  ,,
and  the  Lagnnpan  eqtutions  of  motion  [§  31d  (24)]  are

Wo  shall  suj)poso  tlio  system  of  co-onlinatos  so  clioseii  that
none  of  the  fiiuctions  li,  nor  their  dili'ereiitial  coefficients

^'.^ ,  etc,  can  ever  become  iDfinita

(6)  To  investigate  the  effects  of  an  infinitely  small  disturbance,
we  may  consider  a  motion  in  which,  at  any  time  the  ccvonli-
nates  are  ^  -^p  and  <f>  -^fj,  p  and  q  being  infinitely  small ;  and,  by
simply  taking  the  variations  of  equations  (3)  in  the  usual  manner,
W8  arrive  at  two  simultaneous  differential  equations  of  the  seomid
d^gree^  linear  with  rcs|ject  to

Pt  7f  P*  it  p9  5»
but  having  rariable  coefficients  which,  when  the  undisturbed
motion  ^,  <^  is  fully  known,  may  be  supposed  to  be  known
functions  of  t.  In  these  equations  obviously  none  of  the  ooeffi>
cients  can  at  any  time  become  infinite  if  the  data  correspond  to
a  real  dynamir-al  problem,  provided  the  system  of  co-ordinates  is
properly  chosen  (a);  and  the  coefficients  of  p  and  y  arc  tho

Digui^uu  uy  Google

dd6  {by} BTKAMIGAL  LA.WS  AND  PBINCIFLE8.

425

values,  at  the  timo  t,  of  P,  7?,  and  R,  Q.  respectively,  in  the  Ocnfml  in-
order  in  which  they  npjiear  in  /*,  R  being  the  coefficients  of  iiisiurbtd
of  a  homogeneous  (|u:i<lmtic  function  (1)  which  is  essentially
ixwitive.  These  properties  being  taken  into  account,  it  nuiy  be
shown  that  in  no  case  can  an  uilinitely  small  interval  of  time  be
the  sohitiou  of  the  problem  presented  (§  347)  by  the  question  of
kiuulic  stability  or  instability,  which  is  aa  follows ; —

(c)  The  ooroponent  relocities  t^,  <^  are  at  any  iiutaat  changed
to  ^  +  a,  r  ft,  subject  to  the  condition  of  not  changiug  the
value  of  T,  Then,  a  and  being  infinitely  small,  it  is  required
to  find  the  interval  of  time  until  qjp  first  becomes  equal  to  ^/^.

{d)  The  differential  equations  in  p  and  q  reduce  this  problem,
and  in  fact  the  full  problem  of  tindiug  the  disturbance  in  the
motion  when  the  undisturbed  motion  is  given,  to  a  practicable
form.  But,  merely  to  prove  the  proposition  that  the  disturbed
conrse  camiot  meet  the  undisturbed  course  until  after  some  Unite
time,  and  to  estimate  a  limit  which  this  time  must  exceed  in  any
particular  case^  it  may  be  simpler  to  proceed  thus : —

(e)  To  eliminate  t  from  the  general  equations  (3),  let  them
first  be  transformed  so  aa  not  to  luive  i  iudepeudent  variable.
We  must  put

 df  » W-

And  by  the  equation  of  energy  we  have
^  _  {Pdblf'  +  Qd4^*+  2Rthf,d<f>^

it  being  assumed  that  the  systtiu  is  conservative.  Eliminating
dt  and  d  i  between  this  and  the  two  equations  (3),  we  tind  a
differential  equation  of  the  second  degree  between  ip  and
which  i.-j  the  differential  e(pi;ilioii  of  the  course.  For  sinqdieity,
let  us  suppose  one  of  the  co  <»nliiiat(  s,  <^  for  instance,  to  be  indo*
pendent  variable;  that  is,  let  d'fjt  -  0. We  have,  by  (4),

and  therefore i^di'  =  <Pl^  +

(5),

Google

426  PRBUMINARY.  [356  (e).

Ocnfrni  in- gj^^  the  rcsult  of  the  elimiuatioii  becomes
ofdisturb«4

></^-+^U*r  \{Js-V)

 (G),

*''(!/^)  *  function  of of  the  third  degree,  with  ytai-

able  coefficients,  none  of  wliich  can  beoome  infinite  as  long  as
^  ->  r,  tiie  kinetic  energy,  is  finite.

(/)  Taking  tUo  variation  of  thia  eqiiatioti  on  the  suppofiiticMl
that  ^  becomes  ^-^Pt  wl^re  jp  is  in£nitely  small,  we  have

(PQ-B^^*L''^*Mp^<i  (1).

where  L  and  M  denote  known  functions  of  ^  neither  of  which
has  any  infinitely  great  value.  This  dct4.rmine8  the  deviation,
of  the  ooume* Inasmuch  as  the  quadratic  (1)  is  essentiully
always  positive^  FQ^£^  must  be  always  positive. Hence,  if

for  a  particular  value  of p  vanishes,  and  ~  has  a  given  value

which  dofino.s  tlic  dibtuiltance  we  suppose  nmde  at  any  instant,
c/)  must  increase  liy  a  tiuito  amount  (and  therefore  a  finite  time
must  elapse)  ht  foro  tlic  value  of/>  can  be  again  zero;  tliat  is  to
.say,  before  the  disturbed  <K>urBe  can  again  cut  the  undisturbed
course.

{fj)  The  same  proposition  consequently  holds  for  a  system
iuiN  ing  any  number  of  degrees  of  freedom.  For  the  ]>reccding
j»roof  shows  it  to  hold  for  the  system  subjected  to  any  frictionless
constraint,  leaving  it  only  two  degrees  of  freedom ;  iuoludujg
that  particular  friction  less  constraint  which  would  not  alter  either
the  undisturbed  or  the  disturbed  course.  The  full  general  inves-
tig-ation  of  the  disturbed  motion,  with  more  than  two  degrees  of
freedom,  takes  a  necessarily  complicated  form,  Init  the  principles
on  which  it  is  to  be  carried  out  aro  sufficioutiy  indicated  by
what  we  have  done.

(/a)  If  for  LjPQ  ^B^yf9  snbatitute  a  constant  2o,  less  than
its  least  value,  irrespectively  of  sign,  and  for  Af/FQ-JI*,  a

Digui^uu  uy  Google

356  (h).]

D¥KAM1CAL  LAWa  AMD  PBUiCXPLES.

427

constaut  /3  greater  algebiuically  tliuu  its  greutest  value,  ^JSttlwi*

oTdUturbcd

Lavo  au  ei^uatiou

.(8).

Here  the  value  of  p  TanisheB  for  values  of  ^  Buocesdrely  ex-
ceeding one  anotlier  by  w/Jfi-a*,  whioli  is  dearly  leas  tban
the  increase  that  ^  must  have  in  the  actual  problem  before  p
vanishes  a  second  time.  Also,  we  see  from  this  that  if  a*  >  /9
the  actual  motion  is  unstable.  It  might  of  course  be  unstable
even  if  a'<^;  and  the  proper  analytical  methods  for  finding
either  the  rigorous  solution  Of  (7),  or  a  suiliciently  near  practical
solution,  would  have  to  be  used  to  close  the  criterion  of  stability
or  instability,  and  to  thoroughly  determine  the  disturbance  of
the  course.

(*)  Wlipn  tlio  system  is  only  a  single  particle,  confined  to  a
plane,  the  differential  eijuutiuii  of  the  deviation  may  be  put
under  a  remai'kably  simple  form,  useful  for  many  practical
problems.  Let  iV  be  the  normal  component  of  tho  force,  per
unit  of  the  mass,  at  any  instant,  v  the  velocity,  and  p  the  radius
of  curvature  of  the  path. We  have  (§  259)

DilTerential
c(]uation  of
(lutiirbed
path  of
■iiwIeiMr-
tioloina

Let,  in  the  di:igi-am,  OiV  be  tlie  uudifiturbed,  and  Oli  the
disturbed  path-  Let

Ey,  cutting  Oy  at  /  /

right  angles,  be  de-
noted by  n,  OiV
bv  8.  Jf  further  we
denote  by  p  the
radius  of  curvature
in  the  disturbed  i)ath,

remembering  that  u  ia  iuliuitely  small,  we  easily  iiud

1 1 a'tf  tt

w-^  W

Hence,  Uiiiug  S  to  denote  variations  from  y  to  £,  we  have

IT

8(.»)

By..^-^-'

R  P

.(10).

Google

428  PBEUIOKABT.  [356  (t>.

jWfflewntW But,  bj  the  equation  of  energy,

jiriKie  par- ft^i  tbcrcforo

Uence  (10)  becomes

p'  -  V-^

or,  if  we  denote  by  { the  rate  of  variation  of  I^,  per  unit  of  ills-
tanoe  from  the  p<Mnt  A" in  the  nonnal  direction,  ao  that  6N^^u^

'i^C--iyo  0^)-

This  indudesy  as  a  particalar  oaae,  t&e  equatioii  of  deviatioa
from  a  eiroular  orbit,  investigated  above  (§  doO).

837.  If,  from  any  one  configuration,  two  coiines  differing
infinitely  little  from  one  another  have  again  a  configuration  in.
common,  this  second  configuration  will  be  called  a  kinetic  focus
relatively  to  the  first:  or  (because  of  the  reversibility  of  the
motion)  these  two  configurations  will  be  called  conjugate  kinetic
foci.  Optic  foci,  if  for  a  moment  we  adopt  the  corpuscular
tiieory  of  li^4it,  arc  included  as  a  particular  case  of  kiuetic  foci
in  general.  By  §  SoG  ([/)  we  see  that  there  must  be  finite  in-
tervals of  space  and  time  between  two  conjtiLrate  foci  in  cvcrv
motion  of  every  kind  of  system,  only  provided  the  kiuetic
energy  does  not  vanish.

358. Now  it  is  obvious  that,  provided  only  a  sufficiently
short  course  is  considered,  the  action,  in  any  natural  motion  of
Theorem  of  a  system,  is  less  tlian  for  any  other  course  between  its  terminal
action,*^ Configurations.  It  will  be  proved  proently  (§  SOI)  that  the  first
configuration  up  to  which  the  action,  reckoned  from  a  given

Kinctio
toa.

initial  configuration,  ceases  to  bo  a  minimum,  is  the  first  kinetic
hJtSSuT  focus;  and  conversely,  that  when  the  first  kinetic  focus  is
'  passed,  the  action,  reckoned  from  the  initial  configuration,  ceases
to  be  a  minimum ;  aud  therefore  of  course  can  never  again  be  a
minimum,  because  a  course  of  shorter  action,  deviating  infi-
nitely little  from  it,  can  be  found  for  a  part,  without  altering  the
remainder  of  the  whole,  natural  course.

859.]

DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBINCIPLB8.

429

359.  In  such  statements  as  this  it  will  frequently  be  con-
venient  to  indicate  particular  configurations  of  the  system  by  S^a'rinSl
single  letters^  as  0,  P,  Q,  i2;  and  any  particular  course,  in*<^^
which  it  moves  through  oonfigurations  thus  indicated,  will  be

called  the  course  0.„P..,Q.„R  The  action  in  any  natural
course  will  be  denoted  simply  by  the  terminal  letters,  taken  in
the  order  of  the  motion.  Thus  OB  will  denote  the  action  from
O  to  E;  and  therefore  OR^^BO,  When  there  are  more
real  natural  courses  from  0  \o  R  than  one,  the  analytical
expression  for  OE  will  have  more  than  one  real  value ;  and  it
liiiiy  be  necessary  to  specify  for  which  uf  these  courses  the
action  is  reckoned. Tluis  we  may  have

OR  for  O...E...B,
OR  for  O...E'...Ii\
OR  for  a..£  "...JJ,
three  different  values  of  one  algebraic  irrational  expression.

360.  In  terms  of  this  notation  the  precedinfj  statement  Thporpm  of
(S  '>'^'^y  1"^^}'  he  expressed  thus: — It,  tor  a  consenative  system,  action,
moving  on  a  certain  course  ()...P...O'...P',  the  first  kinetic

focus  conjugate  to  0  be  0',  the  action  01^,  in  this  course,  will
be  less  .than  tlie  action  along  any  other  course  deviating  in-
finitely little  from  it;  but,  on  the  otlier  hand,  OF  is  greater  than
the  actions  in  some  courses  from  0  to  P'  deviating  infinitely
little  from  the  specified  natural  course  O...P...O'...P'.

861. It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  action  along  OP  is  Twootiimto

necessarily  tht  least  possible  from  0  to  P. There  are,  in  fact,  miriimmu
cases  ill  which  the  action  cctUies  to  be  lau^l  vf  all  pvs.yiblCf  before  in^ible.

4:i0  PltELlMIKART.  [301.

Twoormora  a  kinetic  focus  is  renchod.  Tims  if  OEAFOWA*  be  a  sinttous
mininram  rreodetic  line  ciittiii<f  tlie  outrr  ciitle  of  an  anclior-rinir,  or
|ioMiU«.> tlie  (Mjuator  of  an  oblate  sphcroitl,  in  .successive  jH.iuts  O.

A,  A\ it is easily soon that  0',  tlie first  kinetic  focus
conjugate  to  0,  nnist lie  somewhat  beyond  A, But  the
lrn<ith  OEAP,  althuugli  a  minimum  (a  stable  j)osition  for  a
Cnwoftwo  j,tretched  striiiL"),  is  not  the  sliortest  distance  on  the  surfax^e

ininimuiu,

mifiimnm**'  from  0  to  P,  as  this  nuist  obviously  be  a  line  lying  entirely  on
^I'^S-  ^'^^^ ^^^^  great  circle. From  0,  to  any  point,  Q,  short  of

Jjgj^'***  A,  the  distance  along  the  geodetic  OEQA  is  clearly  the  least
possible :  but  if  be  near  enough  to  A  (that  is  to  say,  between
A  and  the  point  in  which  the  envelope  of  the  geodetics  dntipni
from  0»  cuts  OEA),  there  will  also  be  two  other  geodetics  from
0  to  Q.  The  length  of  one  of  these  will  be  a  minimum,  and
that  <^  the  other  not  a  minimum.  If  Q  is  moved  forward  to  A,
the  former  becomes  OJ\A,  etjual  and  similar  to  OJtJA,  but  on  the
other  side  of  the  great  circle:  and  the  latter  becomes  the  great
circle  from  0  to  A.  Jf  now  Q  be  moved  on,  to  P,  beyond  A,
the  minimum  geodetic  OKAP  ceases  to  be  the  le^s  of  the  two
minimums,  and  the  gcfMioiic  ijFP  lying  altogether  on  the  other
side  of  the  great  circle  becomes  the  lea.st  possible  line  from  0  to  P.
But  until  P  is  advanced  beyond  the  point,  0',  in  which  it  is  cut
by  another  geodetic  from  0  lying  intinitely  nearly  along  it,  the
length  OEAP  remains  a  minimum,  according  to  the  general
proposition  of  §  358,  which  we  now  proceed  to  prove.

PitTerence  (")  1  o  f'-niii^  to  tlir  ji».(:iUon  (.f\^  3C0,  lot  /M)o  auy  configtim-

si'des^aud***  t loll  (liH"»'i  ill-,'  iiitlni(''ly  iitil--  iVfin  l,ut  nut  on  the  com-se
i^kinSitto**'  ()...  I' ...O' ...P  \  and  let  ,S'  l.o  a  confirmation  on  this  coxn-sc,
*'''**^  reached  at  s(Hue  linite  time  aft^^r  P  is  |t;(.ssed. liet  j/',  l)e

the  co-ordinHte»  of and  i/^^, ...  those  of  7*,  and  let

Thus,  by  Tavlor*8  theorem,
-I- etc.

)

Digui^uu  uy  GoOgl

3$1  (a).] ]>TNAMICAL  lAWS  AND  PR1KCIFLES.  431

P>ut  if  ^,  n, ...  denote  tho  coniixmcnts  of  momentum  at  7*  in  tlie  Differeroe

'  '  ...  Ix'twe.ntwo

course  0...1\  which  are  the  same  as  tliose  at  /*  iu  the  coiitiuua-

tion,  r..,Sf  of  this  course,  we  have  [§  330  (18)]  akinetic

' ^~  d^  ^ d^* ^~  df^ d^  '

Hence  the  ooeffioients  of  Ihe  terms  of  the  first  degree  of  h^^  t^,
in  the  preceding  expression  Tanisb,  and  we  have

+  etc.  I

(6)  Now,  assuming

a-.  =  a.8^  +  ^.a</>+...[  (2).

etc. etc.  }

according  to  the  known  method  of  linear  transformationfi,  let
a^f  a,,  l^j*  --  chosen  that  the  precediog  quadratic

Amotion  be  reduced  to  tlie  form

the  whole  number  of  degrees  of  freedom  being  i.

Tliis  may  he  done  iu  an  infinite  variety  of  ways;  and,  towards
fixing  upon  oue  particular  way,  we  may  take  o^-^,
and  suhjcct  the  others  to  the  condition.^

ija^  +  <^^,  +  ...  ^-  0,  ia,+  t{,ft^  0,  etc.

This  will  make  Af  =  0  :  for  if  for  a  moment  we  suppose to  be
on  the  course  O...I*...0\  we  have

and  therefore

But  in  this  cane  Ol\  +  P^^^  0.^;  and  therefoi*e  tlie  value  of  the
quadratic  must  be  rem;  that  is  to  say,  we  must  have  ilf=0.
Hence  we  liave

where  R  denotes  a  remainder  consisting  of  terms  of  the  thini
and  higher  degrees  in  8^,  8^  etc.,  or  in se,,  etc

432

PBEUXIKABT.

[561  (c).

between  two
•ideiMMl

thm  third  «C

a  kinKio
thaugle.

(c) Another  form,  which  vdW  be  used  below,  may  l>e  given  to
tho  same  oxprawion  thu8:-~Let 17,,  C.  -  )  ^  U/i  V.'*  C.  --)
be  the  oomponents  of  momentum  at  P^,  in  the  oouraes  OP,  and
iwpeetivdy. By  §  ddO  (18)  we  hftve

and  tlierafore ^yWs  tiieoram

Similarly,

(IPS  d'rs

(PPS

dOP

(/if/'

dPS

and  therefore,  as

. Ul'{OP+PS)^, d'{OP+PS)., )  ,

and  eo  for  -qf  - 1;^,  et& Hence  (1)  is  the  aame  as

1

(5).

wliero  7?  denotes  a  remainder  consistiDg  of  terms  of  the  third  and
higher  degrees.  Also  the  transformation  from  Sn^,  £^  ...  to
x^f  gives  dearly

+^*-A-.^.-»)>  (6).

etc.  etc.  I

{d)  Now  for  any  iiifiiiitely  small  time  the  velocities  n  main
sensibly  constant;  as  also  do  the  coefficients  («,'',  i/').  €'t<?.,
in  the  expression  313  (2)J  for  Ti  and  therefore  for  the  actiou
we  have

-  ^ijr  {(^,  ^)  (.;.  - +  2  (Or, -  .A,)  (<A  - +  et<r.}i

where  (i/'^,  <^,j,  ...)  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  contigunition  from
which  the  action  is  reckoned.  IJence,  if  P,  P',  P"  Ik'  any  three
configurations  infinitely  near  one  ntiother,  and  if  (J,  with  the
ptoper  differences  of  co-r>rdinates  written  after  it,  be  used  to
denote  square  roots  of  quadratic  functions  such  as  that  in  the
pi^eceding  expression,  we  have

uiy  j^uj  by  Google

361  (d).] DTNAiaCAL  U.WS  AND  FBIHCIPLES.  483

I'F-.jw.Qw  -n  (♦'-♦").  -i  te'rf

In  the  particular  case  of  a  single  free  particlo,  those  expressions
become  simply  proportional  to  the  distances  FF',
and  by  Euclid  we  have

imleM  P  is  ill  tiie  straight  liiM  P"/*^.

The  ▼erificatum  of  this  propodtioa  by  the  preceding  expressions
(7)  is  merely  its  proof  by  eo^Hrdinate  geometry  with  an  obliquo
reetilmeal  system  of  oo-ordinates,  and  is  necessarily  somewhat
oomplicated.  If  (i/^,  «^)  =  B)  =  (tf,  ^)  =  0,  the  coordinates  be-
come rectangular  and  the  algebraic  proof  is  easy.  There  is  no
difficulty,  by  following  the  analogies  of  these  known  procosse^  to
proTe  that,  for  any  number  of  co-ordinates,  ^,  ^  etc.,  we  have

unless

{espnuBDg  that  P  is  oa  the  ooone  fiom  JP  to  F^,  in  which  oase

FPy  etc,  being  given  by  (7).  And  further,  by  the  aid  of  (1),
it  is  easy  to  find  the  proper  expresBion  for  P'P  +  PF' -P'F\
when  P  is  infinitely  little  off  the  oonne  from  F  io  F'  :  but  it  is
quito  onneceflSBiy  for  us  here  to  enter  on  such  pniely  algefanuo
investigatiomi.

(«)  It  is  obrioas  indeed,  as  has  been  already  said  (§  358),  that
the  aotifla  along  any  natnial  eonrse  Is  ike  Uaat  posMa  Ukmn
|C»  Urmmai  wi^lguraiknt  if  only  a  saflkiently  short  oootse  is
indnded.  Henoe  lor  all  eases  in  irhieh  the  time  from  0  to  ^  is
less  than  some  partioolar  amooni,  the  quadratie  term  in  the  ex-
prearion  (3)  for  OP,-^P,S^OS  is  neoessarlly  positive^  for  all
values  of  a;,,  etc.;  and  thmfbre  A^,  A^f...A^^^  must  each  be
positive.

(  f)  Let  now  S  be  removed  further  and  furthor  from  0,  alonf;  Actionton

dtfT  rent

the  definite  course  0.  ..P...0\  until  it  becomes  0'. When  it  is  cours<^Hin-
(/,  let  P^  be  taken  on  a  natural  course  through  0  and  0',  de-  ^^m&ber

TOL.  I.  28

Digilizeo  by  Cookie

434

PBEUmKABT.

[861  (/).

kinetic  focL
proved  ultt*
mately
equal.

BtmiSdMi,

derUtlng
infinitely

little  frum
the  third,
ftfp  ti  lire t  her
C<lUttl  to  it,

they  con-
Btitute  an
unbroken
natural

Natural
course
j)n  n  i-d  not
a  cunrte  of
miniionni
action,
beyond  a

TUkting  infiiiitely  little  finom  the  oouzse  O^Qt^  Uien,  as  OFfl
10  a  natund  ooune^

aad  therefixro  (5)  becomes

■which  proves  that  the  chief,  or  quadratic,  term  in  the  other  ex-
preRsion  (3)  for  the  same,  vanishes.  Hence  one  at  hast  of  the
coetiicients  A^^...  must  vanijsh,  and  if  one  only, -4j_j  =  0  for
instanoei  we  must  have

a^  =  0,  aj,»0,...arj_,  =  0.

These  equations  expren  the  oonditioa  that  lies  on  a  aatmal
oouise  from  0  to  0'.

(p)  GonTondj  If  one  or  more  of  the  coeflldents  Ay^t  otc.,
Tsmdiee,  if  for  iwirtanee  =  0,S  must  he  a  kmetic  foena.  Eor
if  we  take 80  that

«»  =  0,  «,*0,...a;^=0,

we  hATe,  hy  (6),

(A)  Tlius  we  h:i\  e  proved  that  at  ii  kinetic  focus  conjugate  to
0  the  action  frum  0  ia  not  a  miiiLuium  of  the  fiiist  order*,  and
tliat  the  last  configuration,  iip  to  which  the  action  from  O  U  A
minima]!!  of  the  first  order,  is  a  kinetic  focus  conjugate  to  0.

(•)  It  remains  to  be  proved  that  the  actum  from  0  ceases  to
be  a  minimum  when  the  fii-st  kinetic  focus  conjugate  to  O  is
passed.  Let,  as  above  (§  360),  O...P...(y„,JP'he  a  natural  course
extending  beyond  0',  the  first  kinetic  focus  o(mjngate  to  0.  Let
P  and  F  be  so  near  one  another  that  there  is  no  focus  ooi^ugate
to  either,  between  them  ;  and  let  ...0'  be  a  natural  course

from  0  to  0'  deviating  infinitely  little  from  0...P...0'.  By  what
we  have  just  proved  («),  the  action  OCy  along  0...P,...0'  differi
only  by  an  infinitely  small  quantity  of  the  third  order^  from
the  action  0(y  akmg  0...jP.*.(^,  and  therefiue

^op,+p,(y+<yjp'+ii.

*  A  maximum  or  minimnm  *'  of  the  first  order"  of  any  fonetioii  of  one  or
moro  vnri:U*lc?,  is  one  in  which  Um  dUXwenUsl  of  tho  first  degree  Tsnidiee,  hut
not  that  of  the  second  d^ee.

Digitized  by  Google

30*1  (t).]  DYNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES.  435

But,  by  a  premier  application  of  («)  we  see  that  Nntunii

oounte

p,0'+(rr'  =  i\r'  +  Q

minianini

where  Q  denotes  an  infinitely  small  quantity  of  the  second  order,  ^.^^^^^
which  is  essentiaUy  positive. Hence  i»grtto

Ae(0.,.P.,.(y..,P^'^0P,  +  P,F  +  Q4-B,

and  therefore,  as is  infinitely  small  in  comparison  with  Q,

Ae(0..,P...O'.,.F')>OF,  +  F/^.

Hence  the  broken  course  P^^^P'  has  less  action  than

the  natural  course  0.„P,„(y,.,P't  and  therefore,  as  the  two
are  infinitely  near  one  another)  the  latter  is  not  a  minimum.

862. As  it  has  been  proved  that  the  action  from  any  con-  a  oonnw

-  ,  ...  1 /.  .  ... which  «l«

fiiniration  ceases  to  be  a  minimum  at  the  nrst  coniuofate  kinetic  « in  in  no
focus,  we  see  immediately  that  if  0  be  the  first  kinetic  ^''^^  jjijgjjf ^.
conjugate  to  0,  reached  after  passing  0,  no  two  configuratioDB  {jjg^
on  this  course  from  0  to  (/  can  be  kinetic  foci  to  one  another. f
For,  the  action  from  0  just  ceasing  to  be  a  minimum  when  0'  ^
is  reached,  the  action  between  any  two  intermediate  configura-
tions of  the  same  course  is  necessarily  a  minimum.

363.  When  there  arc  i  degrees  of  freedom  to  move  there  HowiMtiy
are  in  general,  on  any  natural  course  irom  any  particular  con- in
figuration,  0,  at  least  i  - 1  kinetic  foci  conjugate  to  0.  Thus,
for  example,  on  the  course  of  a  ray  of  light  emanating  from
a  luminous  point  0,  and  passing  through  the  centre  of  a  con-
vex lens  held  obliquely  to  its  path,  there  are  two  kinetic  foci
conjugate  to  0»  as  defined  above,  b^g  the  points  in  which  the
line  of  the  central  ray  is  cut  by  the  so-called  focal  lines*'*  of
a  pendl  of  rays  diverging  from  0  and  made  convergent  after
passing  thruu^h  the  lens.  But  some  or  all  of  these  kinetic  foci
may  be  on  the  course  previous  to  0;  as  for  instance  in  the
case  of  a  cuniinon  projectile  when  its  course  passes  obliquely
downwards  through  0.  Or  some  or  all  may  be  lost;  as  when,
in  the  optical  illustration  just  reforred  to,  the  lens  is  only
strong  enough  to  produce  convergence  in  one  of  the  principal
planes^  or  too  weak  to  produce  convergence  in  either.  Thus

*  In  omr  MMod  fdwae  «•  hope  to  ^ve  all  neaeisMy  elimentaty  oqilMiatiopg
on  this  inbjeet.

28—2

Digitized  by  Google

436

PRFJ.TMLXARY.

[3C3

HownMny  abo  in  ibe  case  of  the  ondistorbed  rectUineal  motion  of  a

kiDctie  ftwi

iBMVcMa  pointy  or  in  the  motion  of  a  point  tminfluenced  by  fonse,  on
an  anticlastic  surface  (§  355),  there  are  no  real  kinetic  focL

In  the  motion  of  a  projectile  (not  confined  to  one  vertical  plane)
there  can  only  be  one  kinetic  focus  on  each  path,  conjugate
to  one  given  point ;  though  tht  re  are  three  degrees  of  freedom.
Again,  there  may  be  any  number  more  than  i  —  l,  of  f*x;i  in
one  course,  all  conjugate  to  one  configuration,  as  for  instance
on  the  course  of  a  particle  uninfluenced  by  force,  moving  round
the  surface  of  an  anchor-ring,  along  either  the  outer  great
circle,  or  along  a  sinuous  geodetic  ffuch  as  we  hare  oonaidered
in  §  361,  in  which  clearly  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  foci
each  conjugate  to  any  one  point  of  the  path,  at  eqnal  sucoeasive
distances  from  one  another.

Referring  to  the  notiition  of  §  361  (/),  let  S  be  gradually
moved  ou  until  fii-st  one  of  the  coellicit'uts,  A^_^  for  instimce,
vanishes;  then  another,  Af_^,  etc.;  and  ho  on.  We  have  seen
that  each  of  these  positions  of  *S'  is  a  kinetic  focus:  and  thus  by
the  sncceasive  vanishing  of  the  i-l  coetlicitnLs  we  have  i  —  l
foci.  If  none  of  the  coefficients  can  ever  vanish,  there  are  no
kinetic  foci.  If  one  or  more  of  them,  after  vanishing,  comes  to
a  minimum,  and  agiiiu  vanishes,  as  is  moved  on,  there  may  be
any  number  more  than  i  —  1  of  foci  each  conjugate  to  the  same
configuration,  0,

Th«y>rcTn  of  8M.  If  f — 1  distinct^  oourBes  from  a  configuration  0,  eadi
••tiaii. differing  infinitely  little  from  a  certain  natural  coarse

cat  it  in  configurations  0„  0,,  0,,...0«.,,  and  if,  besides  these,
there  are  not  on  it  any  other  kinetic  fed  conjugate  to  0,  between
0  and  Q,  and  no  focus  at  all,  conjugate  to  E,  between  B  and  Q,
the  action  in  this  natural  course  from  0  to  Q  is  the  maximum

for  all  courses  0.,,P^y  P^...Q; being  a  configuration  infinitely

nearly  agreeing  with  some  configuration  between  E  and  0^  of
the  btiiudaid  course  O...E...O^..»0^.,.0^_^..,Q,  and  0.,,P^  ^r"Q

*  Two  courses  are  not  called  distinct  if  they  differ  from  one  another  only  in
fhe  abednto  magnitnde,  not  in  the  ifoportiong  of  the  eomponants,  off  the
deviations  Ij  whioh  th^  differ  from  flie  Btanderd  course.

Digitized  by  Google'

364.]

DTNAMICAL  LAWS  AND  PBIKCIFLESL

437

denoting  the  natural  courses  between  0  and  P,  and  and  TbeoNmor
which  deviate  infiuitely  little  from  this  standard  course.  Mtimu

In  §  361  (»),  let be  any  one, of  the  foci  0„  0„  ...
and  let be  called  iP,  in  this  ckm. The  demonstration  there
given  shows  ilial

Hence  there  are  t  -  1  different  broken  courses

0...P,,  P,  ...g;  0...  P„  P....  (?;  etc.,
in  each  of  which  the  action  is  less  than  in  the  standard  oooise
from  0  to  Q.  But  whatever  be  the  deviation  of  P^,  it  may
clearly  be  compounded  of  deviations  P  to  P, ,  FtoF^,  P  to  P„
...y  F  to  F^_^f  corresponding  to  these  t-1  oases  xespectiTely;
and  it  is  easily  seen  from  the  analysis  that

OP, + FjQ  ^0Q=  (OP,  +  P,  Q  -  0^)  +  (OP, + -  OC)  + . .  .
Henoe  OF,  +  F^Q  <  OQ,  which  was  to  be  proved.

863.  Considering  now,  for  simpHdty,  only  cases  in  which
there  aie  but  two  d^rees  (§§  195»  204)  of  freedom  to  move,  deffm^of^
we  see  that  after  any  infinitely  small  conservative  disturbance
of  a  system  in  passing  through  a  certain  configumtion,  the

system  will  first  again  pass  through  a  configuration  of  the
undisturbed  course,  at  the  lirst  configuratiou  of  the  hatter  at
which  the  action  in  the  undisturbed  motion  ceases  to  be  a
minimum.  For  instance,  in  the  ease  of  a  particle,  confined  to
a  surface,  and  subject  to  any  conservative  system  of  force,  an
infinitely  small  conservative  disturbance  of  its  motion  through
any  point,  0,  produces  a  disturbed  path,  which  cuts  the  un-
disturbed path  at  the  first  point,  (X,  at  which  the  action  in  the
undisturbed  path  from  0  ceases  to  be  a  minimunu  Or,  if
projectiles,  under  the  influence  of  gravity  alone,  be  thrown  from
one  point,  0,  in  all  directions  with  equal  yelocitieB,  in  one
vertical  plane,  their  paths,  as  is  easily  proved,  intersect  one
another  consecutively  in  a  parabola,  of  which  the  focus  ia  0,
and  the  vertex  the  point  reached  by  the  particle  projected
directly  upwards.  The  actual  course  of  each  particle  from  0
is  the  course  of  least  possible  action  to  any  point,  P,  reached
before  the  enveloping  parabola,  but  is  not  a  course  of  minimum
action  to  any  point,  Q,  in  its  path  after  the  envelope  is  passed.

Digitized  by  Google

438

PfiEUMU^ABT.

[366

Appiioac 366. Or  as.iiii,  if  a  particle  slides  roimd  alonfj  the  en-eatest

lion*  to  tiro  .  .

deRTCcsof circle  of  the  smooth  inner  surfiice  of  a  liollnw  aiiclior-riu^',  the

frnnnfim

*'atti«>n,"  or  simply  the  length  of  path,  from  point  to  point,  will
be  least  possible  for  lengths  (§  351)  less  than  tt  Vab.  Tluis,  if
a  string  be  tied  round  outside  on  the  greatest  circle  of  a
perfectly  smooth  aochor-ring,  it  will  slip  otf  unless  held  in
positioQ  by  staples^  or  checks  of  some  kind,  at  distances  of  not
]es8  than  v  ^ab  itom  one  another  in  succession  round  the  circle.
With  reference  to  this  example,  see  also  §  361,  above.

Or,  of  a  particle  sliding  down  an  inclined  cylindrical  grooTe,
the  action  from  any  point  wiU  be  the  least  possible  along  the
straight  path  to  any  other  point  reached  in  a  time  less  thfin
that  of  the  vibration  one  way  of  a  biiiiple  pendulum  of  length
equal  to  the  radius  of  the  groove,  and  iiitluenced  by  a  force
CMjual  g  cos  i,  instead  of  g  the  whole  force  of  gravity.  But  the
action  will  not  be  a  minimum  from  any  point,  along  the  straight
path,  to  any  other  point  reached  in  a  longer  time  than  this.
The  case  in  which  the  groove  is  horizontal  {%  —  0)  and  the  par-
ticle is  projected  along  it,  is  particularly  simple  and  instructive^
and  may  be  worked  out  in  detail  with  great  ease,  without  as-
suming any  of  the  general  theorems  regarding  action.

IlMniiton'9  367.  In  the  preceding  account  of  the  Hamiltonian  principle,
ISSS^  and  of  developments  and  aju^lications  which  it  has  received,  we
have  adhered  to  the  system  (^328,  330)  in  which  the  initial
and  final  co-ordinates  and  the  constant  sum  of  potential  and
kinetic  eneigies  are  the  elements  of  which  the  action  is  supposed
to  be  a  function.  Another  system  was  also  given  by  Hamilton,
according  to  which  the  action  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  initial
and  final  co-ordinates  and  the  tims  prescribed  for  tke  nwtion;
and  a  set  of  expressions  quite  analogous  to  those  with  which
we  have  worked,  are  establbhed.  For  practical  applioationa
this  method  is  generally  less  convement  than  the  other ;  and
the  analytical  relations  between  the  two  are  so  obvious  that  we
need  not  devote  any  space  to  them  here.

860. We  conclude  by  calling  attention  to  a  very  novel
ttwMca. analytical  investigation  of  the  motion  of  a  conservative  system,
by  Liottville  {Comptes  Bmidua,  June  16, 1856),  which  leads  im-

Digitized  by  Google

368.]  DTKAmCAL  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPUiS.  439

mediately  to  the  principle  of  least  action,  and  the  Hamiltonian  lAwgawt
principle  with  the  developments  by  Jacobi  and  others ;  but
which  alflo  establishes  a  very  remarkable  and  absolutely  new
theorem  r^;anling  the  amount  of  the  action  along  any  con«
strained  course.  For  brevity  we  shall  content  ourselves  with
giving  it  for  a  angle  free  particle^  referring  the  reader  to  the
original  article  for  Liouville's  complete  investigation  in  terms
of  generalized  co-ordinates,  applicable  to  any  conservative
system  whatever.

Let  (Xy  z)  be  the  co-ordinates  of  any  pdnt  through  which
the  particle  may  move:  V  its  ix>tential  eaiBirgy  in  this  poution:
£  the  sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetic  energies  of  the  motion  in
*  question :  A  the  action,  from  any  position  (as,,  y„  «J  to  (a^  y,  z)
along  any  course  arbitrarily  chosen  (8upjx)8ing,  for  instance,  the
particle  to  be  guided  along  it  by  a  frictionless  guiding  tube).
Then  (g  326),  the  mass  of  the  particle  being  taken  as  uiity,

Now  let  -J  be  a  function  of y,  z,  which  satisiies  the  partial
differential  equation

Then

"iv  U''' H^^-c/^^)

and,  il±f^fi  denote  the  actual  component  velodtlflB  along  the
arbitrsiy  path,  and  ^  the  rate  at  which  d  increases  per  unit  of
time  in  this  motion,

dx-dbdt,  dy  =  ydtt  d»=idi,  d^^kdi.

Hence  the  preceding  becomes

Liyiiized  by  Google

CHAFT£R  IIL

EXPERIENCE.

in'r^iSri"  Experieaoe,  in  physical  acienoe,  we  desig-

naie,  according  to  a  suggestion  of  Herachel's,  our  means  of

becoming  acquainted  with  the  material  universe  and  the  laws
"vvhicli  regulate  it.  In  general  the  actions  which  we  see  ever
takiug  place  around  us  are  comph^,  or  due  to  the  simultaneous
action  of  many  causes.  When,  as  in  astronomy,  we  endea^^our
to  ascertain  these  causes  by  simply  watching  tlieir  effects,  we
observe;  when,  as  in  our  laboratories,  we  interfere  arbitrarily
with  the  causes  or  oiicumstances  of  a  pbenomenoo,  we  are  aaid
to  eseperimetU^

ObKrv»-  370,  For  instance,  supposing  that  we  are  possessed  of  instm-
*****  mental  means  of  measuring  time  and  angles,  we  may  trace  out
by  successive  observations  the  relative  position  of  the  sun  and
earth  at  different  instants;  and  (the  method  is  not  susceptible
of  any  accuracy,  but  is  alluded  to  here  only  for  the  sake
of  illustration)  from  the  variations  in  the  apparent  diameter
t»f  the  former  we  may  calculate  the  ratios  of  our  distances  from,
it  at  those  instants.  We  have  thus  a  set  of  observations  in-
volving time,  angolar  position  with  reference  to  the  sun,  and
ratios  of  distances  from  it:  sufficient  (if  numerous  enou|^)  to
enable  us  to  discover  the  laws  which  connect  the  variationB
of  these  co-ordinates.

Similsr  methods  may  be  imagined  as  applicable  to  the
motion  of  any  planet  about  the  sun,  of  a  satellite  about  itii
primary,  or  of  one  star  about  another  in  a  binary  group.

871.  In  general  all  the  data  of  Astronomy  are  detennmed
in  this  way,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  such  subjects  as

Digitized  by  Google

S71.]  EXPERIENCE.  441

lides  and  Meteorology.  Isothermal  Lines,  lines  of  Equal  Dip,  obMrm*
lines  of  Equal  Intensity,  lines  of  Equal  "Variation**  (or  "Decli<*
nation*'  as  it  has  still  less  happily  been  sometimes  called),
the  Connexion  of  Solar  Spots  with  Terrestrial  Magnetism,
and  a  host  of  other  data  and  phenomena,  to  be  explained
under  the  proper  heads  in  the  course  of  the  work,  are  thus
deducible  from  Observation  merely.  In  these  cases  the  apparatus
for  the  gigantic  experiments  is  found  ready  arranged  in  Nature,
and  all  that  the  philosoplicr  has  to  do  is  to  watch  and  measure
their  progress  to  its  last  details.

872. Even  in  the  instance  we  have  chosen  above,  that  of

the  planetary  motions,  the  observed  oftccts  are  complex;  btciiuse,
unless  possibly  in  the  ciise  of  a  double  star,  we  have  no  instance
of  the  undisturbed  action  of  one  heavenly  body  on  another;
but  to  a  first  approximation  the  motion  of  a  planet  about  the
sun  is  found  to  be  the  same  as  if  no  other  bodies  than  tlicse
two  existed;  and  the  approximation  is  sufficient  to  indicate
the  probable  law  of  mutual  action,  whose  full  confirmation  is
obtained  when.  Ha  truth  being  assumed,  the  disturbing  effects
thus  calculated  are  allowed  for,  and  found  to  account  com-
pletely for  the  observed  deviations  from  the  consequences  of
the  first  supposition.  This  may  serve  to  give  an  idea  of  the
mode  of  obtaining  the  laws  of  phenomena,  which  can  only  be
observed  in  a  complex  form — and  the  method  can  always  be
directly  applied  when  one  cause  is  knowu  to  be  pre-eminent.

878.  Let  us  take  cases  of  the  otlier  kind — ^in  which  the  effects  Bsped-
are  so  complex  that  we  cannot  deduce  the  causes  from  the

observation  of  combinations  arranged  in  Nature,  but  must  en-
deavour to  form  for  ourselves  other  combinations  which  may
enable  us  to  study  the  effects  of  each  cause  separately,  or  at
least  with  only  slight  modihcation  from  the  interference  of
other  causes.

87^  A  stone,  when  dropped,  falls  to  the  ground;  a  brick
and  a  boulder,  if  dropped  from  the  top  of  a  cliff  at  the  same

moment,  fall  side  by  side,  and  reach  the  ground  together.  Bat
a  brick  and  a  slate  do  not;  and  while  the  former  falls  in  a
nearly  vertical  direction,  the  latter  describes  a  most  complex

Digitized  by  Google

442  KBELDIINABT.  [374.

22^' path.  A  shert  of  paper  or  a  fra^^ment  of  gold  leaf  presents  even
greater  irregularities  than  the  slate. But  by  a  slight  modifica-
tion of  the  circumstances,  we  gain  a  considerable  insight  into
the  nature  of  the  question. The  paper  and  gold  leaf^  if  roiled
into  balls,  fall  nearly  in  a  Tertical  lina Here,  then,  there  are
evidently  at  least  two  causes  at  work,  one  whicli  tends  to  make
all  bodies'  fall,  and  fall  vertieally;  and  another  which  depends
on  the  form  and  substance  of  the  body,  and  tends  to  retard
its  fall  and  alter  its  course  from  the  vertical  direction.  How
can  we  study  the  effects  of  the  former  on  all  bodies  without
sensible  complication  from  tbe  latter? The  effects  of  Wind,
etc.,  at  once  point  out  what  the  latter  cause  is,  the  air  (whose
existence  we  may  indeed  suppose  to  have  been  discovered  by
such  effects) ;  and  to  study  the  nature  of  the  action  of  the  former
it  is  necessary  to  e<^t  rid  of  the  cotn plications  arising  from  the
presence  of  air.  Henco  the  necessity  for  Experiment.  By  means
of  an  apparatus  to  bo  afterwards  described,  we  remove  the
greater  part  of  the  air  from  the  interior  of  a  vessel,  and  in  that
we  try  again  our  experiments  on  the  fall  of  bodies;  and  now  a
general  law,  simple  in  the  extreme,  though  most  important  in
its  consequences,  is  at  once  apparent — ^vis.,  that  oil  bodies,  of
whatever  size,  shape,  or  material,  if  dropped  side  by  side  at  the
same  instant,  fall  side  by  side  in  a  space  void  of  air.  Before
experiment  bad  thus  separated  tbe  phenomena,  hasty  philo-
sophers had  rushed  to  the  conclusion  that  some  bodies  possess
the  quality  of  heaviness,  others  that  of  lightness^  etc. Had  this
state  of  confusion  remained,  the  law  of  gravitation,  vigorous
though  its  action  be  throughout  the  universe,  could  never  have
been  recognised  as  a  general  principle  by  the  human  mind.

Mere  observation  of  lightning  and  its  effects  could  never  have
led  to  the  discovery  of  their  relation  to  the  phenomena  pre-
sented by  rubbed  amber.  A  modification  of  tbe  course  of
nature,  such  as  the  collecting  of  atmospheric  electricity  in
our  laboratories,  was  necessary.  Without  experiment  we  could
never  even  have  learned  the  existence  of  terrestrial  magnetism.

Rales  for d^^- When  a  particular  agent  or  cause  is  to  be  studied,
oflxS^^  experiments  should  be  arranged  in  such  a  way  as  to  lead  if
possible  to  results  depending  on  it  alone;  or,  if  this  cannot  be

Digitized  by  Google

375.]  SXPERIENGE.  443

done,  they  should  be  arranged  so  as  to  show  differences  pro-naiMibr
duced  by  varying  it.  ofapen-

876.  Thus  to  determine  the  resistance  of  a  wire  against  the

conduction  of  electricity  through  it,  we  may  measure  the  wholo
strength  of  cun'cnt  produced  in  it  by  electromotive  force  between
its  ends  when  the  amount  of  this  electromotive  force  is  given,
or  can  be  asrertained.  But  when  the  wire  is  that  of  a  submarine
telegraph  cable  there  is  always  an  unknown  and  ever  varying
electromotive  force  between  its  ends,  due  to  the  earth  (produc-
ing what  is  commonly  called  the  "earth-current"),  and  to  deter-
mine its  resistance,  the  difference  in  the  strength  of  the  current
prodoced  by  suddenly  adding  to  or  subtracting  from  the  tennes-
trial  electromotive  force  the  electromotive  force  of  a  given
voltaic  battery, is  to  be  very  quickly  measured;  and  this  is  to  be
done  over  and  over  again,  to  eluninate  the  effect  of  variation  of
the*  earth-current  during  the  few  seconds  of  time  which  must
elapse  before  the  electrostatic  induction  permits  the  current
due  to  the  battery  to  reach  nearly  enough  its  full  strength  to
practically  annul  error  on  this  score.

877.  Endless  patience  and  perseverance  in  designing  and
trying  different  methods  for  investigation  are  necessary  for
the  advancement  of  science:  and  indeed,  in  discovery,  be
is  the  most  likely  to  succeed  who,  not  allowing  himself  to  be

disheartciiud  by  the  non-success  of  one  form  of  experiment,
judiciously  varies  his  methods,  and  thus  interrogates  in  every
conceivably  useful  manner  the  subject  of  his  investigations.

878.  A  moet  important  remark,  due  to  Herschel,  regards

what  are  called  reMuai  phenomena. When,  in  an  experiment^  pbenomena.
all  known  causes  being  allowed  for,  there  remain  certain  un-
explained effects  (excessively  slight  it  may  be),  these  must

be  carefully  investigated,  and  every  conceivable  variation  of
arrangement  of  apparatus,  etc.,  tried;  until,  if  possible,  we
manage  so  to  isolate  the  residual  phenomenon  as  to  be  able
to  detect  its  cause.  It  is  here,  perhaps,  that  in  the  present
state  of  science  we  may  most  reasonal)ly  look  for  extensions
of  our  knowledge ;  at  all  events  we  are  warranted  by  the  recent
history  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  so  doing. Thus,  to  take  only

Digitized  by  Google

F&ELIMINABT.

Bflsiduai  a  very  few  instances,  and  to  say  nothing  of  the  discovery  of
electricity  and  magnetism  by  the  ancients,  the  peculiar  smell
observed  in  a  room  in  which  an  electrical  machine  is  kept  in
action,  was  long  ago  observed,  but  called  the  "  smell  of  elec-
tricity," and  thus  left  unexplained.  The  sagacity  of  Schonbein
led  to  the  discovery  that  this  is  due  to  the  formation  of  Ozone,
a  most  extraordinary  body,  of  great  chemical  activity ;  whose
nature  is  still  uncertain,  though  the  attention  of  chenusta  has
for  years  been  directed  to  it

379.  Slight  anomalies  in  the  motion  of  Uranus  led  Adams
and  Le  Verrier  to  the  discovery  of  a  new  planet;  and  the  fact
that  the  oscillations  of  a  magnetized  needle  about  its  posilion
of  equilibrium  are  "damped"  by  placing  a  plate  of  copper  below
it,  led  Arago  to  his  beautiful  experiment  showing  a  resistance  to
relative  motion  between  a  magnet  and  a  piece  of  copper;  which
was  first  supposed  to  be  due  to  magnetism  in  motion,  but  which
soon  received  its  correct  explanation  from  Faraday,  and  has  since
been  immensely  extended,  and  applied  to  most  important  pur-
poses. In  &ct,  from  this  accidental  remark  about  the  oecillatton
of  a  needle  was  evolved  the  grand  discovery  of  the  Induction  of
Electrical  Currents  by  magnets  or  by  other  currents.

We  need  not  enlarge  upon  this  point,  as  in  the  following
pages  the  proofs  of  the  truth  and  usefulness  of  the  principle  will
continually  recur.  Our  object  has  been  not  so  much  to  give
applications  as  principles,  and  to  show  how  to  attack  a  new  com-
bination, with  the  view  of  separating  and  studying  in  detail  the
various  causes  which  generally  conspire  to  produce  observed
phenomena^  even  those  which  are  apparently  the  simplestt

Unexpected 380.  If  ou  repetition  several  times^  an  experiment  Con-
or discor- tinually  gives  different  results,  it  must  either  have  been  very
meteor carelessly  performed,  or  there  must  be  some  disturbing  cause
UU*. not  taken  account  of. And,  on  the  other  hand,  in  cases  where
no  very  great  cuiticitlence  is  likely  on  repeated  trials,  an  unex-
pected degree  of  agreement  between  the  results  of  various  trials
should  be  regarded  with  the  utmost  suspicion,  iis  probably  due
to  some  unnoticed  peculiarity  of  the. apparatus  employed.  In

Digitized  by  Google

380.]

EXPERIENCE.

445

either  of  these  caaea,  however,  careful  observation  caimot  fail  unexpcotod
to  detect  the  cause  of  the  discrepancies  or  of  the  unexpected  <>i-

*  *  ' dance  of

agreement^  and  may  possibly  lead  to  discoveries  in  a  totally  ^^^^^^^
nnthought-of  quarter. Instances  of  this  kind  may  be  given
without  limit ;  one  or  two  must  suffice.

381.  Thus,  with  a  vert/  good  achromatic  telescope  a  star
appears  to  have  a  sensible  disc.  But,  as  it  is  observed  that
the  discs  of  all  stars  appear  to  be  of  equal  angular  diameter,
we  of  course  suspect  some  common  error.  Limiting  the  aper-
ture of  the  object-glass  mcreawa  the  appearance  in  question,
which,  on  fiill  investigation,  is  found  to  have  nothing  to  do  with
discs  at  alL  It  is,  in  fact,  a  diffraction  phenomenon,  and  will
be  explained  in  our  chapters  on  Light.

>  882.  Again,  in  measuring  the  velocity  of  Sound  by  experi-
ments conducted  at  night  with  cannon,  the  results  at  one  station
were  never  found  to  agree  exactly  with  those  at  the  other;
aometimesi  indeed,  the  differences  were  very  considerable.  But
a  little  consideration  led  to  the  remark,  that  on  those  nights  in
which  the  discordance  was  greatest  a  strong  wind  was  blowing
nearly  from  one  station  to  the  other.  Allowing  for  the  obvious
eflfect  of  this,  or  rather  eliminating  it  altogether,  the  menu  velo-
cities on  different  evenings  were  found  to  agree  very  closely.

888. It  may  perhaps  be  advisable  to  say  a  few  words  here  VjptUktm,
about  the  use  of  hypotheses,  and  especially  those  of  very
different  gradations  of  value  which  are  promulgated  in  the
form  of  Hatiiematical  Theories  of  different  branches  of  Natural

Philosophy.

384.  Where,  as  in  the  case  of  the  planetary  motions  and
disturhances,  the  forces  concerned  are  thoroughly  known,  the
mathematical  theory  is  absolutely  true,  and  requires  only  ana-
lysis to  work  out  its  remotest  details.  It  is  thus,  in  general,  far
ahead  of  observation,  and  is  competent  to  predict  effects  not  yet
even  observed — as,  for  instance,  Lunar  Inequalities  due  to  the
action  of  Venus  upon  the  Earth,  etc.  etc.,  to  which  no  amount
of  observation,  unaided  by  theory,  could  ever  have  enabled  ns
to  assign  the  true  cause.  It  may  also,  in  such  subjects  as  Geo-
metrical Optics,  be  carried  to  developments  far  beyond  the  reach

Digitized  by  Google

446

PRBLIMINART.

[384.

gjpothawt.  of  experiment;  but  in  this  scienoe  the  ammed  baaee  of  the
theory  are  only  approximate ;  and  it  fails  to  explain  in  all  their
pectdiarities  even  each  oomparatively  simple  phenomena  as
Halos  and  Rainbows— though  it  is  perfectly  snocessfiil  for  the
practical  purposes  of  the  maker  of  microeoopes  and  tdesoopes,
aiui  has  enabled  really  scientific  instrument-makers  to  carry  the
construction  of  optical  apparatus  to  a  degree  of  perfection  which
merely  tentative  processes  never  could  have  reached.

865.  Another  dass  of  mathematical  theories,  based  to  some
extent  on  experiment,  is  at  present  useful,  and  has  even  in
certain  cases  pointed  to  new  and  important  results,  which  ex-
periment has  subsequently  verified.  Such  are  the  Dynamical
Theory  of  Heat,  the  Undulatory  Theory  of  Light,  etc.  etc.  In
the  former,  which  is  based  upon  the  conclusion  from  experi-
ment that  heat  is  a  form  of  energy,  many  formula)  are  at  pre-
sent obscure  and  uninterpretable,  because  we  do  not  know  the
mechanism  of  the  motions  or  distortions  of  the  particles  of
bodies.  Besults  of  the  theory  in  which  these  are  not  involved,
are  of  course  experimentally  verified.  The  same  difficulties  exist
in  the  Theory  of  Light  But  before  this  obscurity  can  be  per-
fectly deared  up,  we  must  know  something  of  the  ultimate,  or
mokciular,  constitution  of  the  bodies,  or  groups  of  molecules,
at  present  known  to  us  only  in  the  aggregate.

Deduction 386. A  third  class  is  well  represented  by  the  Mathematical
bable  result  Theories  of  Heat  (Conduction),  Electricity  (Statical),  and  Mag-
u^p'on!!!!'"'  netism  (Permanent).  Although  we  do  not  know  how  Heat  is
»ertrsiiotu.  p^pgg,^^  ^  bodios,  noT  whfU  Statical  Electricity  or  Perma*
nent  Magnetism  are — ^the  laws  of  their  fluxes  and  forces  are  as
certainly  known  as  that  of  Gravitation,  and  can  therefore  like
it  be  developed  to  their  consequences,  by  the  application  of
Mathematical  Analysis. The  works  of  Fourier Green and
PoissonJ  aruieniarkable  instances  of  such  development.  An-
other good  example  is  Ampere's  Theory  of  lilectro-dynaniics,

•  Throrif  nnnhjtiqne  de  la  Chalcur, Pari'',  1822.

t  Essay  on  the  Application  of  Matlietnatical  Analysis  to  thf  Theories  of
EUetricity  and  Magnetism, Nottingham,  1828. Bepriuied  in  Crelle's  Joaxnal.
I  Uemoira  mr  U  Maffn^time. M6m.  dtt  VJmA.  dit  8«iiiMM,  1811.

Digitized  by  Googlc

387.]

SZPEKIENCK.

447

887.  When  the  most  probable  lesolt  is  required  from  a  Deduction
number  of  observatiouB  of  the  same  quantity  which  do  not  imi'^irr  ^uTt
exactly  agree,  we  must  appeal  to  the  mathematical  theory  ^^^^J,^^
probabilities  to  guide  us  to  a  method  of  combining  the  results

of  experience,  so  as  to  eliminate  from  them,  as  far  as  possible,
the  inaccuracies  of  observation.  Of  course  it  is  to  be  under-
stood that  we  do  not  liere  class  as  inaccuracies  of  observation
any  eiTors  %Ybich  may  affect  abke  every  one  of  a  series  of
observations,  such  as  the  inexact  determination  of  a  zero  point,
or  of  the  essential  units  of  time  and  space,  the  personal  equa-
tion of  the  observer,  etc.  The  process,  whatever  it  may  be,
which  is  to  be  employed  in  the  elimination  of  errors,  is  ap<
plicable  even  to  these,  but  only  when  several  disHnd  wriea  of
observations  have  been  made,  with  a  change  of  instrument  or
of  observer,  or  of  both.

388.  We  understand  as  inaccuracies  of  observation  the
whole  class  of  errors  which  are  as  likely  to  lie  in  one
diroction  as  in  another  in  successive  trials,  and  which  we  may
fairly  prosume  would,  on  the  average  of  an  infinite  number  of
repetitions,  exactly  balance  each  other  in  excess  and  defect.
Moreover,  we  consider  only  errors  of  such  a  kind  that  their
probability  is  the  less  the  greater  they  are;  so  that  such  errors
as  an  accidental  reading  of  a  wrong  number  of  whole  de-
grees on  a  divided  circle  (which,  by  the  way,  can  in  general  be
**  probably "  corrected  by  comparison  with  other  observations)
are  not  to  be  included.

889.  Mathematically  considered,  the  subject  is  no  means
an  easy  one,  and  many  high  authorities  have  asserted  that  the
reasoning  employed  by  Laplace,  Gauss,  and  others,  is  not  well
founded;  although  the  results  of  their  analysis  have  been

generally  accepted.  As  an  excellent  treatise  on  the  subject  has
recently  been  published  ])y  Airy,  it  is  n(jt  necessary  for  us  to
do  more  than  to  sketch  in  the  most  cursory  manner  a  simple  and
apparently  satisfactory  method  of  aiTiving  at  what  is  called  the
Method  of  Least  Squares,

890.  Supposing  the  aero-point  and  the  graduation  of  an
instnunent  (micrometer,  muial  jciicle,  thermometer,  electrometer,

. ..y  Google

4f48  P&ELUONABT,  [390.

Tvninrtion  jralvaDometer,  etc.)  to  be  <z^*o/u/€/v  accurate,  successive  readin^B

of  most  pro-  ^  ....

b«t)i-  rrsuit  of  the  value  of  a  quantity  (linear  distance,  altitude  of  a  star.

iau?^r*i^.  *^°^P^'^^^®»  P^^^**^^*  strength  of  an  electric  current,  eta)  may,
and  in  general  do,  oontinuallj  differ.  What  iB  most  probably
the  true  ^alue  of  the  observed  quantity  ?

The  most  probable  valae,  in  all  sach  cases,  if  the  observe*
tions  are  all  equally  tmstworUiy,  inll  evidently  be  the  simple
mean;  or  if  they  are  not  equally  tmstwortby,  the  mean  found  by
attribating  wmghfs  to  the  several  observations  in  proportion  to

,  their  presumed  exactness. But  if  several  such  means  have

been  taken,  or  several  single  obsen-ations,  and  if  these  several
means  or  observations  have  been  diflferentlj  qualified  for  the
determination  of  the  sought  quantity  (some  of  them  being
likely  to  give  a  more  exact  value  than  others),  we  must  assign
theoreticaUif  the  best  practical  method  of  combining  them.

891.  Inaccaracies  of  observation  are,  in  general,  as  likdy  to
be  in  excess  as  in  defect  They  are  also  (as  before  observed)  more

likely  to  be  small  than  gre^t ;  and  (practically)  large  errors  are
not  to  be  expected  at  aU,  as  such  would  come  under  the  class
of  avoidable  mistakes.  It  follows  that  in  any  one  of  a  series  of
observations  of  the  same  quantity  the  probability  of  an  error
of  magnitude  a  must  depend  upon  x^^  and  must  be  expressed
by  some  function  whose  value  diminishes  very  rapidly  as  x
increases.  The  probability  that  the  error  lies  between  x  and
+&E^  where  &p  is  very  small,  must  also  be  proportional  to  &b.

Hence  we  may  assume  the  probability  of  an  error  of  any
magnitude  included  in  the  range  ofxtoas  +  &xtobo

Now  the  error  must  be  included  between  +00  and  —00.
Hence,  as  a  iirst  condition,

j%{^)dx=^l  (1).

The  consideration  of  a  very  simple  esse  gives  us  the  mesas  of
determining  the  form  of  the  fiinction  ^involved  in  the  preosding
exprewrion*.

*  Gompure  Boob,  Tram,  It.8.E,,  1857.  See  Slao  TaM»  Tram,  lt,8,B,,  18Si

Digitized  by  Google

391.]  £XP£IU£NC£.  44rD

Suppose  a  atone  io  be  let  fall  with  the  olject  of  hitting  a  mark  Dednotiim
on  the  ground. Let  two  horisontal  linee  he  drawn  through  the  latito  iJSSt
mark  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and  take  them  as  axes  ofxbmatSS^
and  y  respectivelj.  The  chance  of  the  stone  falling  at  a  diatanoe
between  x  and  a  4*  8sb  from  the  axis  of  y  is  ^  (.t  )  Bx.
Of  its  falling  between  ^  and  y  +  By  from  the  axis  of  x  the
chance  is  <^  {y')

The  chance  of  its  falling  on  the  elementaiy  area  Bx8t/,  whoso  co-
ordinates are  x,  y,  is  therefore  (since  these  are  indept  iuleiit  cvoiit  s,
and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this  is  the  assumption  on  wliich  tlio
whole  investigation  depends)

if  a  denote  the  indefinitely  small  area  about  the  point  xt/.

Had  we  taken  any  other  set  of  rectangular  axes  with  the  same
origin,  we  should  have  found  for  the  same  probability  the  ex-
{xreesien  (a/*)  4»  isDt

}(  bemg  the  new  oo^rdinatea  of  a. Henoe  we  must  have

*  M  *  (y") = *  («'•)  *  aO»  5^  + 3^ = + y".

From  this  functional  eqnaHon  we  have  at  onoe

where  A  and  m  are  constants.  We  see  at  once  that  m  must  be
negative  (as  the  chance  of  a  large  error  is  very  small),  and  \vo

may  write  for  it  - ,  so  that  K  will  indicate  the  degree  of  de-
licacy or  coarseness  of  the  system  of  measui-emeut  employed.
Substituting  in  (I)  we  have

whence  A  =  -^-r- ,  and  the  law  of  error  is

1  lAvtf

Jw  h

The  law  of  error,  as  regards  ditUmee  from  tiU  marhf  wiUumt
rrftmnM  to  the  dureeHon  of  error,  la  evidently

//^(aO^(y«)rfa!rfy,

taken  through  the  space  between  oonoentiic  eiroles  whose  radii
are  r  and  r -f  fir,  and  is  thereforo

2

VOL.  I.  29

Digitized  by  Google

450

error.

Iaw  of

wUeh  18  of  the  usbob  form  as  the  law  of  error  to  the  ri^^t  or  left
of  a  line,  with  the  additional  ftctor  r  for  the  greater  space  for
error  at  greater  dintanowt  from  the  oentra  Am  a  Terification,  we
aee  at  once  that

aa  was  to  be  expected.

pfoteut  882.  The  ProbaMe  Error  .of  an  observation  is  a  nnmertcal
quantity  sacfa  that  the  error  of  the  obsenration  is  as  likely  to
exceed  as  to  fall  short  of  it  in  magnitude.

If  we  assume  the  law  of  error  just  found,  and  call  P  the

Prrimbie  893.  Thc  pfobable  error  of  any  given  multiple  of  the  value
ium^\^tn  r.  of  an  observed  quantity  is  evidently  the  same  multiple  of  the

probable  error  of  the  quantity  itself.
The  probable  error  of  the  sum  or  difference  of  two  quantities»

affected  Ijy  xit  dependent  errors^  is  the  square  root  of  the  sum  of

the  squares  of  their  separate  probable  errors.

probable  error  in  one  trial.

The  solution  of  this  equation  by  trial  and  error  leads  to  the
approximate  result

P- 0-477*.

To  prove  this,  let  ua  investigate  the  Uxw  of  error  of

where  the  laws  of  error  of  X  and  Fare

-7=€  5» — ,  and  -j^t  i^-r»

respectively.  The  cliance  of  an  error  in  of  a  magnitude  in-
cluded between  the  limits s  + is  evidently

For,  w  hatever  value  is  assigned  to  os^  the  value  of  y  Is  given  by
the  limits  s-tB  and  [or  s-fa^  s  +  fis  +  o;;  bat  the

chances  of  are  the  aame^  and  both  are  included  in  the  limits
(A  00  )  of  integration  with  respect  to  x\

Digitized  by  Google

393.]  EXPERIENCE.  451

Tlie  value  of  the  above  integral  becomes,  hy  effecting  tbe  in-  Probable

tegration  with  respect  to  ium,  UiiTer-

^  enco,  or

ab

and  tkis  is  easily  reduced  to

1 _. ««  83

Thus  the  probable  error  is  0'477<y<^T&',  whence  the  proposition.
And  the  aame  theorem  is  evidently  true  for  any  number  of  quan-
tities.

894.  As  above  reiiiarked,  tbe  principal  use  of  this  theory  is  PniggJ^
in  the  deduction,  from  a  large  series  of  observations,  of  the
values  of  the  quantities  sought  in  such  a  form  as  to  be  liable
to  tbe  smallest  probable  error.  As  an  instance — by  the  prin-
ciples of  physical  astronomy,  the  place  of  a  planet  is  calculated
from  assumed  values  of  the  elements  of  its  orbit,  and  tabulated
ia  the  IfauHoal  Almanac,  The  obterved  places  do  not  exactly
agree  with  the  predicted  places,  for  two  reasons — firsts  the  data
for  calculation  are  not  exact  (and  in  &ct  the  main  object  of  the
observation  is  to  correct  their  assumed  values) ;  second,  each
observation  is  in  error  to  some  unknown  amount.  Now  the
-iitiercnce  between  the  observed,  and  the  calculated,  places
dei>ends  on  tbe  errors  of  assumed  elements  and  of  observation.
The  methods  are  ap})liod  to  eliminate  as  far  as  possible  tbe  ,
second  of  these,  and  the  resulting  equations  give  the  required
corrections  of  the  elements.

Thus  if  0  be  the  calculated  B»  A  of  a  planet :  &i»  fie,  Sw,  etc,
the  oonections  required  for  the  assumed  elements — the  true
RA.  is  6  +  ASa+£Be+UBm  +  etD,f  HethoaoT

where  J,  JS,  II,  etc.,  are  approximately  known. Suppose  tbe  ^^Stm,
observed  R.  A  to  be  9,  then

or  ABa  +  Etc  +  Il3s7  +  . . .  =  0  -  ^,

a  known  quantity,  subject  to  error  of  ol)sorvjition.  Every  obser-
vation made  gives  us  an  equation  of  tbe  same  forin  as  this,  and
in  general  the  number  of  obHervations  greatly  exceeds  that  of  the
quantities  d«,  8^,  Stz;,  etc.,  to  be  found.  But  it  will  be  sufficient  to
consider  the  simple  case  whoi'e  only  om  quantity  is  to  bo  found.

20—2

Digitized  by  Google

PBELIHINART.  [394.
M-  thodof  Suppoia  a  nnmber  of  chtermtioDa,  of  the  same  qoaati^a^  kid

« m  mm  •

to  tlie  foUowmg  eqiuituiaB : —

and  let  tLe  probable  emm  he  E^, ...  Ifnltiply  the  tenna  of
each  eqnition  by  numbers  mTeraely  proportumal  to  £^,
This  will  make  the  probable  enoia  of  the  aecond  memben  of  all
the  equations  the  same,  e  sappoae. The  eq;iuitionB  hare  now  the

general  form  ax^h^

autl  it  is  required  to  find  a  syatenfc  of  lineer  fiictor^  bj  whidi

tho.sc  equation.^,  being  multiplied  in  order  and  added,  shall  lead

to  a  huid  equation  giving  the  value  of  x  with  the  probable  error  a
m.inimum. Let  them  Iw/,,/^,  etc. Then  the  final  equation  ia

(S/)  r  -  -  2  (bf)

and  tberefijte  =  (/*)

by  the  theorems  of  §  393,  if  F  denote  the  probable  error  otx.

Hence  ^^^t  ^  ^  muiimum,  and  its  differential  coef&cientfl

with  leqteot  to  eadi  sepafate  £utor  /  mnst  Tanish.
This  gives  a  series  of  equations,  whose  general  f onn  is

which  give  evidently/, /i  =  o,,  etc

Henoe  the  following  role,  which  may  easily  be  seen  to  hold  for
any  nnmber  of  linear  equations  oontaining  a  smaller  nnmber  of
wdmown  qnantitiei^

Make  the  probable  error  of  Uie  second  member  the  same  in  each
equation,  hy  the  emplof/nient  of  a  proper  factor ;  itudtiply  each
tiqwaUion,  hy  the  coejficient  of  x  in  U  and  add  all,  for  one  of  the
final  equationt;  and  so,  with  reference  to  y,  e,  etc,  for  the  othen.
The  probable  errors  of  the  values  of  y,  etc.,  found  from  these
final  equations  will  be  less  than  those  of  the  values  derived
firom  any  other  linear  method  of  combining  the  equatiooa

This  process  has  been  called  the  method  of  Least  Squaree^
because  the  values  of  the  unknown  quantities  found  by  it  are
such  as  to  render  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  errors  of  the
original  equations  a  minimum.

That  is,  in  the  simple  case  taken  above^
2  {ax  •  by  =  minimum.

Digitized  by  Google  J

394.]  EXPBRIEKCE.  453

For  it  is  evident  Uut  this  gives,  on  difierentiatuig  with  respect  ifcgod  of
to  Xy  2a  (ax  -  6)  =  0,  ■awm.

which  is  the  law  above  laid  down  for  the  formation  of  the  single
equation.

395.  "When  a  series  of  observations  of  the  same  ^^^^^tity  JJjJJUJjgJj
has  been  made  at  different  times,  or  under  different  circum- JJf^jjj^*
stances,  the  law  connecting  tlio  vahie  of  the  quantity  with  the
time,  or  some  other  variable,  may  be  derived  from  the  results
in  several  ways — all  more  or  less  approximate.  Two  of  these
methods,  however,  are  so  much  more  extensively  used  than  the
others,  that  we  shall  devote  a  page  or  two  here  to  a  prelimiiuuy
notice  of  them,  leaving  detailed  instanoes  of  their  application
till  we  come  to  Heat^  Electricity,  etc.  They  consist  in  (1)  a
Curve,  giving  a  graphic  representation  of  the  relatioQ  between
the  ordinate  and  abscissa,  and  (2)  an  Empirioal  Fonmiia  con-
necting the  variables.

896.  Thus  if  the  abscissa  represent  intervals  of  time,  and
the  ordinates  the  corresponding  height  of  the  barometer,  we
may  oonstract  carves  which  show  at  a  glance  the  dependence
of  barometric  pressure  upon  the  time  of  day;  and  so  on.  Such
curves  may  be  accurately  drawn  by  photographic  processes  on  a
sheet  of  sensitive  paper  placed  behind  the  mercurial  column,
and  made  to  move  past  it  with  a  uniform  horizontal  velocity
by  clockwork.  A  simihir  process  is  applied  to  the  Temperature
and  Electrification  of  the  atmosphere,  and  to  the  components
of  terrestrial  magnetism.

897.  When  the  observations  are  not,  as  in  the  last  section,

continuous,  they  give  us  only  a  series  of  points  in  the  curve,

from  which,  however,  we  may  in  general  approximate  very
closely  to  the  result  of  continuous  observation  by  drawing,
libera  manu,  a  curve  passirig  through  these  points.  This  pro-
cess, however,  must  be  employed  with  great  caution ;  because,
imless  the  observations  are  sufficiently  close  to  each  otlier,
most  important  fluctuntions  in  the  curve  may  escape  notice.  It
is  applicable,  with  abundant  accuracy,  to  all  coses  where  the
quanti^  observed  changes  yeiy  slowly.  Thus,  for  instance,
weekly  observations  of  the  temperature  at  depths  of  from  6  to

Digitized  by  Google

tkm  and

fin  ;i;ri^Til
furiuula:.

454  PRELDUKABT.  [397.

2-I?  feet  underground  were  found  by  Forbes  sufficient  for  a  very
accurate  approximation  to  the  law  of  the  phenomenon.

898.  As  an  instance  of  the  processes  employed  for  obtainiog
an  empirical  formula,  we  may  mention  methods  of  Interpo-
kaian,  to  which  the  problem  can  always  be  rednced.  Thus  from
sextant  observatbns,  at  known  intervals,  of  the  altitude  of  the
son,  it  is  a  common  problem  of  astronomy  to  determine  at  what
instant  the  altitude  is  greatest,  and  what  is  that  greatest  altt-
tude.  The  first  enables  us  to  find  the  true  solar  time  at  the
place;  and  the  second,  l>y  the  help  of  the  Nautical  Ahnanac,
gives  the  latitude.  The  ditlV  rciitial  calculus,  and  the  calculus
of  finite  (liftercnces,  give  us  formula3  for  any  re<juired  data  ;
and  Lagrange  hiis  shown  how  to  obtain  a  very  useful  oue  by
elementary  algebra.

By  Taylor's  Theoreni,  if  y  we  have

where  0  U  a.  proper  fraction,  and  is  nni/  qnantity  whatever.
Thin  formula  is  useful  only  when  the  Buocesaive  derived  values
of/{xJ  diminish  very  rapidly.

In  finite  differenoes  we  have

/{x + A)  =  i>*/(^)  =  (1  +  ^y/(x)

 (2);

a  very  useful  formula  when  the  higher  differences  are  small

(1)  suggests  the  proper  form  for  the  required  expression,  but  it
is  only  in  rare  cases  that/  {x^,  /"  («;),  etc,  are  derivable  directly
from  observation.  But  (2)  is  asefal,  inasmuch  as  the  suooessive
difi'erences,  A/(ii;),  Ay  (a;),  etc.,  are  easOy  calculated  from  the
tabulated  results  of  observation,  provided  these  have  been  taken
for  equal  suooessive  increments  of  x.

If  for  values  x^,  x^^  ...  a  function  takes  the  values  y^,  y,,
y*» y«»  Lagnmge  gives  for  it  the  obvious  expression

Digitized  by  Google

398.]  EXPERlEiiCE.  455

Hero  it  is  of  wane  aasained  that  the  fonotion  required  is  a  interp^ft.

*  tion  and

latknud  and  intonal  one  in  «  of  the  n— 1*^  d«me:  and,  in  empincai

•  formulw.

general,  a  aimilar  limitation  is  in  praotioe  applied  to  the  other
fonnnbe  above;  £br  in  order  to  find  the  oomi^ete  ezpression  for
/{x)  in  either,  it  is  neceeaaiy  to  determine  the  iralaes  of/*  {x^
/"  {x^^ ...  in  the  first,  or  of  ^ (x),  Ay(x), ...  in  the  second.  If
n  of  the  eoeflidents  be  required,  so  as  to  give  the  n  diief  terms
of  the  general  valne  of  /{x),  m  must  have  »  obeerved  simol-
taneoos  valnes  of  as  and  /  (a;),  and  the  cx2)rea8ions  become  deter-
minate and  of  the  n—l^  degree  in a;,  and  A  respectively.

In  practice  it  is  mmally  sufficient  to  employ  at  most  three  terms
of  either  of  the  first  two  series.  Thus  to  express  the  length  I
of  a  rod  of  metal  as  depending  on  its  temperature  i,  we  may
assume  from  (1)

being  the  measured  length  at  aoy  temperature  f^.

398'.  These  fomiulie  are  practically  useful  for  calculating
the  probable  values  of  auy  observed  element,  for  values  of  the
independeut  variable  lying  within  the  range  for  which  observa-
tion has  given  values  of  the  element.  But  except  for  values  of
the  independent  variable  either  actually  within  this  range,  or
not  far  beyond  it  in  either  direction,  these  formula  express
functions  which,  in  general,  will  differ  more  and  more  widely
from  the  tmth  the  further  their  application  is  pushed  beyond
the  range  of  observation.

In  a  large  class  of  investigations  the  observed  element  is  in  Periodio

....  fiinctioM.

its  nature  a  periodic  function  of  the  independent  variable.  The

harmonic  analysis  (§  77)  is  suitable  for  all  such.  When  the
values  of  the  independent  variable  for  which  the  element  has
been  observed  are  not  equiiliffercut  the  coefficients,  determined
according  to  the  method  of  least  squares,  are  found  by  a  process
which  is  necessarily  very  laborious ;  but  when  they  are  equi-
different,  and  especially  when  the  difference  is  a  submultiple
of  the  period,  the  equation  derived  from  the  method  of  least
squares  becomes  greatly  simplified.  Thus,  if  0  denote  an  angle
increasing  in  proportion  to  t,  the  time,  through  four  right  angles
in  the  period,  T,  of  the  phenomenon ;  so  that

Digitized  by  Google

456

PRELIMIXABY.

Periodic let  fiff)  «  ilo  +  ^ .  C€6  ^  +  J,  008  2tf  +  . . .

fuactkiiis.  »  "  '  ■  %

+  5,8111^+  i9,8in2^+ ...

where  -^1^;,,  A^,  A^,  ...  7?^,  7?  , ...  arc  unknown  coufficieuts,  to  be
determined  so  that  /{O)  may  express  the  most  probable  value
of  the  element,  not  merely  at  times  between  observations^  but
through  all  time  as  long  as  the  phenomenon  is  strictly  periodic.
By  taking  as  many  of  these  coefiicients  as  there  are  of  distinct
data  by  observation,  the  formula  is  made  to  agree  predaely  with
these  data  But  in  most  applications  of  the  method,  the  peri-
odicallj  recurring  part  of  the  phenomenon  ia  expressible  by  a
small  number  of  terms  of  the  haraionic  series,  and  the  higher
terms,  calculated  from  a  great  number  of  data,  express  either
irregularities  of  the  phenomenon  luA  likely  to  recur,  or  errors  of
observation.  Thus  a  comparatively  small  number  of  teniis  may
give  values  of  the  element  even  for  the  very  times  of  observa-
tion, more  probable  than  the  values  actually  recoiled  a.s  having
been  observed,  if  the  observations  are  numerous  but  not  mi-
nutely accurate.

The  student  may  exercise  himself  in  writing  out  the  equa-
tions to  determine  five,  or  seyen,  or  more  of  the  coefficients
according  to  the  method  of  least  squares;  and  redu<»ng  them
by  proper  fbrmnlse  of  analytical  trigonometry  to  their  simplest
and  most  easily  calculated  forms  where  the  yalues  of  0  for  which
f{6)  is  given  are  equidifferent.  He  will  thus  see  thai  when  the

difference  is  ^»  »  being  any  integeri  and  when  the  number

of  the  data  is  {  or  any  multiple  of  it,  the  equations  contain  each
of  them  only  one  of  the  unknown  quantities :  so  that  the
meiliod  of  least  squares  affords  the  most  ])robable  values  of
the  coetlicients^  by  the  easiest  and  most  direct  elimination.

Digitized  by  Google

CHAPTER  IV.

MELiSURES  AND  INSTKUMENTS.

899.  Having  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  for  the  ^f^^^'^
investigation  of  the  laws  of  nature  we  must  carefully  watch  measure,
experiments,  either  those  gigantic  ones  which  the  universe
furnishes,  or  others  devised  and  executed  hy  man  for  special
objects — and  having  seen  that  in  all  such  observations  accurate
measurements  of  Time,  Space,  Force,  etc.,  are  absohitely  neces-
sary, we  may  now  appropriately  describe  a  few  of  the  more
useful  of  the  iustnmients  onipl-Aed  for  these  purposes,  and  the
various  standards  or  unitii  which  are  employed  in  them.

400.  Before  going  into  detail  we  may  give  a  rapid  rAumS
of  theprindpal  Standards  and  Instruments  to  he  described  in
this  chapter. As  most,  if  not  all,  of  them  depend  on  physical

principles  to  be  detailed  in  the  course  of  this  work — we  shall
assume  in  anticipation  the  establisliuieut  of  such  principles,
giving  references  to  the  future  division  or  chapter  in  which  the
experimental  demonstrations  are  mure  })ai  ticularly  explained.
This  course  will  entail  a  slight,  but  unavoidable,  confusion —
plight,  because  Clocks,  Balances,  Screws,  etc.,  are  familiar  even
to  those  who  know  nothing  of  Natural  Philosophy;  unavoid-
able, because  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  our  subject  that  no  one
part  can  grow  alone,  each  requiring  for  its  full  development  the
utmost  resources  of  all  the  others.  But  if  one  of  our  depart-
ments thus  borrows  from  others,  it  is  satisfactory  to  find  that  it
more  than  ro]>ays  by  tlie  power  which  its  improvement  affords
them.

Digitized  by  Google

458  PBKLIMINABT.  [401.

j^Mor 401.  We  may  divide  our  more  important  and  {uDdamentai
instruments  into  four

Those  for  measuriug  Time ;

M  » Space,  linear  or  angular;

„ Force ;

„  Mass.

Other  instruments,  adapted  for  special  purposes  such  as  the
measurement  of  Temperature,  Liglit,  Electric  Currents,  etc.,  will
come  more  naturally  under  the  head  of  the  particular  physical

energies  to  whose  measurement  they  are  applicable.  Descrip-
tions of  self-recording  instruments  such  as  tide-gauges,  and
barometers,  thennomcters,  electrometers,  recording  photograph-
ically or  otherwise  tlie  continuously  varjnng  pressure,  tempe-
rature, moisture,  electric  potential  of  the  atmosphere,  and
magnetometers  recording  photographically  the  continuously
varying  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic
force,  must  likewise  be  kept  for  their  proper  places  in  our
work.

Calculating  Machines  have  also  important  uses  in  assisting
physical  research  io  a  great  variety  of  ways.  They  belong  to
two  classes

I.  Purely  Arithmetical,  dealing  with  integral  numbers  of
units.  iVll  of  this  class  are  cvuIvliI  from  the  primitive  use  of
the  calculuses  or  little  stones  for  counters  (from  which  are
derived  the  very  names  calculation  and  "  The  Calculus  "),
through  such  mechanism  as  that  of  the  Chinese  Abacus,  still
serving  its  original  purpose  well  in  infant  schools,  up  to  the
Arithmometer  of  Thomas  of  Colmar  aud  the  grand  but  partially
realized  conceptions  of  calculating  machines  by  Babbage.

II.  Continuous  Calculating  Machines.  As  these  are  not
only  useful  as  auxiliaries  for  physical  research  but  also  involve
djmamical  and  kincmatical  principles  belonging  properly  to
our  subject,  some  of  them  have  been  described  in  the  Appendix
to  this  Chapter,  from  which  dynamical  illustrations  will  be
taken  in  our  chapters  on  Statics  and  Kinetics.

Digitized  by  Google

402.]

MEASUBES  AND  INSTRUMENTS.

459

402. We  shall  consider  in  order  the  more  prominent  funda- pl«weiel

*  ,  instm*

niLntal  instruments  of  the  four  classes,  and  some  of  their  most*"*"**
important  applications: —

Clock,  Chronometer,  ChronoBOope,  Applications  to  Obser-
vation and  to  self-registering  Instruments.

Vernier  and  Screw-Micrometer,  Oathetometer,  Sphero-

meter,  Dividing  Engine,  Theodolite,  Sextant  or  Circle.

Common  Balance,  Bitilar  Balance,  Torsion  Balance,  Pen-
dulum, Ergometer.

Among  Standards  we  may  mention —

1.  7V«i«. — Day,  Hour,  Minute,  Second,  sidereal  and  solar.

2.  Space. — Yard  and  Metre :  Radian,  Degree,  Minute,  Second.

3.  Force. — Weight  of  a  Pound  or  Kilogramme,  etc.,  in  any

particular  locality  (gravitation  unit) ;  poundal,  or  dyne
(kinetic  unit).

4.  Mass. Pound,  Kilogramme,  eta

408.  Although  without  instruments  it  is  impossible  to  pro-
cure or  apply  any  standard,  yet,  as  without  the  standards  no
instrument  could  give  us  abaolute  measure,  y/e  may  consider  the
standards  first — referring  to  the  instruments  as  if  we  already

knew  their  principles  and  applications.

4j04. First  we  may  notice  the  standards  or  units  of  angular  Angular

immmrHi

measure :

Badian,  or  angle  whose  arc  is  equal  to  radins ;

Degree,  or  ninetietli  part  of  a  right  angle,  and  its  successive
subdivisions  into  sixtieths  called  Minutes^  Seconds,  Thirds,  etc
The  division  of  the  right  anirl*'  into  90  degrees  is  convenient
because  it  makes  the  half- angle  of  an  equilateral  triangle
(sin*^  i)  an  int^;ral  number  (30)  of  degreesL  It  has  long  been
universally  adopted  by  all  Europe.  The  decimal  division  of  the
right  angle,  decreed  by  the  French  Bepublic  when  it  success*
fully  introduced  other  more  sweeping  changes,  utterly  and
deservedly  foiled.

The  division  of  the  degree  into  00  minntcs  find  of  the
minute  into  GO  seconds  is  not  convenient  i  and  tables  of  the

Digitized  by  Googlc

400

PRELIiaKABT.

[404.

mrSulfe  similar  functions  for  degrees  and  hundredths  of  the  degree  are
much  to  he  desired.  Meantime,  when  reckoning  to  tenths  of  a
degree  suffices  for  the  accuracy  desired,  in  any  case  the  ordinary
tables  suffice,  as  6'  is of  a  degree.

The  decimal  system  is  exclusively  followed  in  reckoning  by
radians.  The  value  of  two  right  angles  in  this  reckoning  is
3*14159...,  or  ir.  Thus  w  radians  is  equal  to  180*.  Hence
180^-J.w  is  5r -29578...,  or  67*  ir  44"-8  is  equal  to  one
radian.  In  mathematical  analysis,  angles  are  umformly  reck-
oned in  terms  of  the  radian.

M  ja^iro  405.  The  practical  standard  of  time  is  the  Sidereal  Day,
being  the  period,  nearly  constant*,  of  the  earth's  rotation  about
its  axis  (§  247).  From  it  is  easily  derived  the  Mean  Solar  Day,
or  the  mean  interval  which  elapses  between  successive  passages
of  the  sun  across  the  meridian  of  any  placa  This  is  not  so
nearly  as  the  Sidereal  Day,  an  absolute  or  invariable  unit:

*  In  OUT  first  edition  it  \ra8  stated  in  this  section  that  Laplace  bad  c&lcnlated
from  ancient  obsorvntions  of  eclipses  that  tlio  period  of  the  earth's  rotation  aboat
its  axiH  had  not  altered  by  ^  n ^-Jsny^n^  it^^'lf  since  720  b.c.  In  §  830  it  waa
pointed  out  that  this  conclusion  is  overllirown  by  fartlier  infiirmation  from
PbjBioal  Asbonomy  acquired  in  tlie  interral  beiweoi  the  printing  of  tiw  two
Motions,  in  Tirtne  ol  a  coneekion  whioh  AdaniB  had  made  as  eariy  as  186S  i^oa
Li^klaoe's  dynamical  investigation  of  au  aoceleration  of  the  moon's  mean  motion,
produced  by  the  sun's  attraction,  showiug  tliat  only  about  half  of  the  observed
ncflolnration  of  the  moon's  mean  motion  relatively  to  the  angular  velocity  of  the
earth's  rotation  was  acconntod  for  by  this  cause.  [Quoting  from  the  first  edition,
§  830]  "In  1809  Adams  communicated  to  Delaunay  his  final  result: — that  at
*<  the  end  of  a  eentmy  the  moon  It  h""!  before  the  position  aho  woold  have,
*'  relatively  to  a  meridian  of  the  earth,  aeoinding  to  the  fnB"W  velocities  of  tho
"two  motions,  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  and  the  acceleration  of  the
"  moon's  motion  truly  calculated  from  the  various  disturbing  causes  then  recog-
''nized.  Delaunay  soon  after  verified  this  result:  and  about  the  beginning  oi
*'  1866  suggested  that  the  tnie  ezphmation  may  be  a  retardation  of  the  eazihHi
**  rotation  by  tidal  frietion.  Uang  this  hypothesis,  and  allowing  far  the  ooooe-
"  ([ucnt  retardation  of  the  moon's  mean  motion  by  tidal  reaction  (§276),  Adams,
•'in  an  estimate  which  he  has  communicated  to  u?,  founded  on  the  rough  as*
"  sumptiou  that  the  parts  of  tlio  earth's  retardation  duo  to  solar  and  lunar  tides
"  are  as  the  squares  of  the  respective  tide-generating  forces,  hnds  22'  as  the
"  eiror  by  whidi  the  earth  vonld  in  a  eentmy  get  bdiind  a  peifeeft  dock  rated
**  at  the  beginning  of  the  oentnry.  If  the  retordatiott  of  rate  glvkig  this  integral
*•  effect  were  nnifonn  (§  85,  h),  the  earth,  as  a  timekeeper,  would  be  going  alower
"  by  -22  of  a  f^econd  per  year  in  the  middle,  or  *44  of  a  Becond  per  year  at  the
"  end,  ilian  at  the  beginning  of  a  ceutoiy."

Digitized  by  Google

405.]  MSASUBES  AND  INSTBUMENTS.  461

Beciilar  changes  in  the  period  of  the  earth's  rotation  about  the  Ma»J^°'
son  aifect  it,  though  very  slightly. It  is  divided  into  24  houra,
and  the  hour,  like  the  degree,  is  subdivided  into  successive
sixtieths,  called  minutes  and  seconds. The  usual  subdivision
of  seconds  is  deeimaL

It  is  well  to  observe  that  seconds  and  minutes  of  time-
are  distinguished  from  those  of  angular  measure  by  notation.

Thus  we  have  for  time  13^'  43"  27"  58,  but  for  angular  measure
13'  4;>  27"-58.

When  long  periods  of  time  are  to  be  measured,  the  mean  solar
year,  consisting  of  306'242203  sidereal  days,  or  o65*242242  mean
solar  days,  or  the  century  consisting  of  100  such  years,  may  be
conveniently  employed  as  the  unit.

406.  The  ultimate  standard  of  accurate  ch Tonometry  must  Necossitj
(if  the  human  race  live  on  the  earth  for  a  few  million  years)  be  ptTcnniai

11-1  • f  iir  standartl.

founded  on  the  physical  properties  of  some  body  oi  more  con-  Ajpiing^
stant  character  than  the  earth :  for  instance,  a  carefully  arranged
metallic  spring,  hermetically  sealed  in  an  exhausted  glass  vessel.
The  time  of  vibration  of  such  a  spring  would  be  necessarily  more
constant  from  day  to  day  than  that  of  the  balance-spring  of  the
best  possible  chionometer,  disturbed  as  this  is  by  the  train  of
mechanism  with  which  it  is  connected:  and  it  would  almost
certainly  be  more  constant  from  age  to  age  than  the  time  of
rotation  of  the  earth  (cooling  and  shrinking,  as  it  certainly  is,
to  an  extent  that  must  be  very  considerable  in  fifty  million
years).

107.  The  British  standard  of  length  is  the  Imperial  Yard,  H^'fl^**
defined  as  the  distance  between  two  marks  on  a  certain  metallic  fouiidi^  on

•rtifioiw

bar,  preserved  in  the  Tower  of  London,  when  the  whole  has  a  c^faJMe^
temperature  of  GO*'  Fahrenheit.  It  was  not  directly  derived
from  any  fixed  quantity  in  nature,  although  some  important
relations  "^vith  such  have  been  mcfisured  with  [jreat  accuracy.
It  hiis  been  carefully  compared  with  the  length  of  a  seconds
pendulum  vibrating  at  a  certain  station  in  the  neighbourhood  of
London,  so  that  if  it  should  again  be  destroyed,  as  it  was  at  the
burning  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament  in  1834,  and  should  all
exact  copies  of  it,  of  which  several  are  preserved  in  various

Digitized  by  Google

462

FRELIMINABT.

Evth'i
dimentkxil

nolcoii*

places,  be  also  lost^  it  can  be  restored  by  pendulum  observa-
tions. A  less  accurate,  but  still  (except  in  the  event  of
earthquake  disturbance)  a  very  good,  means  of  reproduciDg  it
exists  in  the  measured  base-lines  of  the  Ordnance  Survey,  and
the  thence  calculated  distances  between  definite  stationis  in  the
British  Islands,  which  have  been  ascertained  in  terms  of  it  with,
a  degree  of  accuracy  sometimes  within  an  inch  per  mile,  that  ia
to  say,  within  about  jn>iuo-

408.  In  scientific  investigations,  we  endeavour  as  tnach
possible  to  keep  to  one  unit  at  ii  time,  and  the  foot,  ^vhvch  ia
defineil  to  be  one- third  part  of  tlie  yard,  is,  for  British  mea.saro-
inont,  generally  the  most  convenic^it.  Unfortunately  the  inch,
or  one-twelfth  of  a  foot,  must  sometimes  be  used.  The  statute
mile,  or  17G0  yards,  is  most  unhappily  often  used  when  great
lengths  are  considered.  The  British  measurements  of  area  and
volume  are  infinitely  inconvenient  and  wasteful  of  brain-energy,
and  of  plodding  labour.  Their  contrast  with  the  simple,  uni*
form,  metrical  system  of  France,  Germany,  and  Italy,  is  but
little  creditable  to  English  intelligence.

408.  In  the  French  metrical  system  the  decimal  division  is
exclusively  employed. The  standard,  (unhappily)  called  the
iMr«Mn|  MHre,  was  defined  originally  as  the  ten-millionth  part  of  the
witeiiiroat  length  of  the  quadrant  of  the  earth's  meridian  from  the  pole

to  the  equator;  but  it  is  now  defined  practically  by  the  accurate
stamlard  metres  laid  up  in  various  national  rcjxjsitories  in
Europe.  It  is  somewhat  longer  than  the  yard,  as  the  following
Table  shows :

aicMuroot
ImgVb.

Inch  -  2.'>  r>9977  millimetres.
Flint  ^  3-0 179 7 2  decimetres.
British  statute  milo

=  1G09-329  m6trcs.

CentimMre=  -3937043  inch.

:\retre  =  3 -280809  feet.
KiloniMre=  -6213767  British
statute  mile.

M<*n<itira  of

410.  The  unit  of  superficial  measure  is  in  Britain  the  square
yard,  in  France  the  m^tre  carrd  Of  course  we  may  use  square
inches,  feet,  or  miles,  as  also  square  millimetres,  kilometres,  etc,
or  the  Hedare^  10,000  square  metres.

nigitiTyl  hy  r^oogte-"

410.]  IfEASURES  AND  INSTRUMENTS.  463

Square  inch  s  6*451483  squAie  centimetres.
foot>«  9*290135 „  dedmitrea.
„ yard  =  83*61 121 „  dedmHres.
Aero ^ '4046792  of  a  hecUura
Square  Britiali  statute  mile = 258*9946  hectares.

Hectare  - 2*47 1 093  acres.

411.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  cubic  measure  in  the  two  m<  nsure  of
countries,  and  we  have  the  following  Table : —  volume.

Cubic  inch  a  16*38661  cubic  centimHres.

„ foots  28*31606 „ decimetres  or  Xifrsi.
GaUon » 4*543808  Utres.

„ » 277*274  cubic  inches,  by  Act  of  Ftoliameut

now  repealed,
litre a  -035315  cubic  feet.

412.  The  British  unit  of  mass  is  the  Pound  (defined  byMeMowoi
standards  only);  the  French  is  the  Kilogramme,  defined  origi-
nally as  a  litre  of  water  at  its  temperature  of  maximum  density;

but  now  practically  defined  by  existing  standards.

Grain  «  64*79896  milligrammes.
Pounds  453*5927  grammes.

Gramme  =  15*43235  grains.
Kilogrammes  2*20462125  lbs.

Professor  W.  H.  Miller  finds  (Phil  Tram.  1857)  that  the
"kilogramme  des  Archives"  is  equal  in  mass  to  15432'34874
grains;  and  the  "kilogramme  type  laiton"  deposited  in  the
Minist^  de  Tlnt^rieure  in  Paris,  as  standard  kir  French  com-
merce, is  15432*344  grains.

413.  The  measurement  of  force,  whether  in  terms  of  the  Mcaaueof
weight  of  a  stated  mass  in  a  stated  locality,  or  in  terms  of  the'**^
absolute  or  kinetic  unit,  has  been  explained  in  Cliap.  ii.  (See
§§  220 — 220).  From  the  measures  of  force  and  lengtli,  we
derive  at  onee  the  measure  of  work  or  mechanical  effect.  That
practically  employed  by  engineers  is  founded  on  the  gravita-
tion measure  of  force.  Neglecting  the  difference  of  gravity  at
London  and  Paris,  we  see  from  the  above  tables  that  the  follow-
ing relations  exist  between  the  London  and  the  Parisian  reckon-
ing of  work : —

Foot-poimd  =  0*13825  kilogramme-mfefcre.

Kilogramme-metres:  7 '2331  foot-pounda.

Digitized  by  Google

PRELIMINABY.

[414.

CM.  414;  A  Clock  is  primarily  an  inBtrament  which,  by  means
of  a  train  of  wheels,  records  the  number  of  vibrations  executed
by  a  pendulum ;  a  Chronometer  or  Watch  performs  the  same  duty

for  the  oscillations  of  a  flat  spiral  spring — just  as  the  train  of
wheel-work  in  a  gas-uiL'tre  counts  the  number  of  revolutions  of
the  main  shaft  caused  by  the  passago  of  the  gas  through  the
machine.  As,  however,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  friction,  re-
sistance of  air,  etc.,  a  pendulum  or  spring,  left  to  itself,  would
not  long  continue  its  oscillations,  and,  while  its  motion  con-
tinned,  would  periorm  each  oscillation  in  less  and  less  time  as
the  arc  of  vibration  diminished:  a  continuous  supply  of  eneigy
is  furnished  by.  the  descent  of  a  weight,  or  the  uncoiling  of
a  powerful  spring.  This  is  so  applied,  through  the  train  of
wheek,  to  the  pendulum  or  balance-wheel  by  means  of  a
mechanical  contrivance  called  an  Eecapemeni,  that  the  oscilla-
tions are  maintained  of  nearly  uniform  extent,  and  therefore
of  nearly  uniform  duration.  The  construction  of  escapements,
as  well  as  of  trains  of  clock- wheels,  is  a  matter  of  Media nic^y
with  the  details  of  which  we  are  notconcermd,  alibuugh  it  may
easily  be  made  the  subject  of  mathematical  investigation.  The
meaiis  of  avoiding  errors  introduced  by  changes  of  temperature,
which  have  been  carried  out  in  Compensation  pendulums  and
balances,  will  be  more  properly  described  in  our  chapters  on
Heat.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  little  inconvenience
if  a  clock  lose  or  gain  regularly;  that  can  be  easily  and  ac-
curately allowed  for:  irregular  rate  is  fatal

BieotriciUr  415.  By  means  of  a  recent  api)lication  of  electricity  to  be
olooktk  afterwards  described,  one  good  clock,  carefully  regulated  from
time  to  time  to  agree  with  astronomical  observations,  may  be
made  (without  injury  to  its  own  performance)  to  control  any
number  of  other  less-perfectly  constructed  docks,  so  as  to  com-
pel their  pendulums  to  vibrate,  beat  for  beat,  with  its  own.

chrono*  416.  lu  astronomical  observations,  time  is  estimated  to
tenths  of  a  second  by  a  practised  observer,  who,  while  watching
the  phenomena,  counts  the  beats  of  the  dock.  But  for  the  very
accurate  measurement  of  short  intervals,  many  instruments  have
been  devised. Thus  if  a  small  orifice  be  opened  in  a  laige  and

Digitized  by  Google

416.]  MEASURES  AND  INSTRUMENTS.  405

deep  vessel  fall  of  meicuiy,  and  if  we  know  hy  trial  the  weight  dwono-
of  metal  that  escapes  say  in  five  minutes,  a  simple  proportion
gives  the  interval  which  elapses  during  the  escape  of  any  given
weight  It  is  easy  to  contrive  an  adjustment  by  which  a  vessel
may  be  placed  under,  and  withdrawn  from,  the  issuing  stream
at  the  time  of  occurrence  of  any  two  auccessive  phenomena.

417.  Other  contrivanoea*  called  Stop-watches,  Chronoeoopes,
eta,  which  can  be  read  off  at  rest^  started'on  the  occurrence  of
any  phenomenon,  and  stopped  at  the  occurrence  of  a  second,
then  again  read  off ;  or  which  allow  of  the  making  (hy  pressing
a  stud)  a  slight  mark,  on  a  dial  revolving  at  a  given  rate,
at  the  instant  of  the  occurrence  of  each  phenomenon  to  be
noted,  are  common  enough.  But,  of  late,  these  have  almost
entirely  given  place  to  tlie  Electric  Chronoscope,  an  instrument
which  will  be  fully  described  later,  when  we  shall  have  oc-
casion to  refer  to  experiments  in  which  it  has  been  usefully
employed.

418.  We  now  come  to  the  measurement  of  space,  and  of

angles,  and  for  these  purposes  the  most  important  instruments

arc  tlie  ]  trnier  and  tlie  ^cratu.

418.  Elementary  geometiy,  indeed,  gives  us  the  means  of  DiaKtMui
dividing  any  straight  line  into  any  assignable  number  of  equal  ^'
parts;  but  in  practice  this  is  by  no
means  an  accurate  or  reliable  method.
It  was  formerly  used  in  the  so-called
Diagonal  Scale,  of  which  the  con-
struction is  evident  from  the  diagram.
The  reading  is  effected  by  a  sliding-
picce  whose  edge  is  peipendicular  to
the  length  of  the  scale.  Suppose
that  it  is  FQ  whose  position  on  the
scale  is  required. This  can  evidently

cut  only  one  of  the  transverse  lines.  Its  number  gives  the  number
of  tenths  of  an  inch  [4  in  the  figure],  and  the  horizontal  line
next  above  the  point  of  intersection  gives  evidently  the  number
of  hundredths  pn  the  present  case  4].  Hence  the  reading  is
7*44.  As  an  idea  of  the  comparative  uselessness  of  this
VOL.  I.  30

Digitized  by  Google

466

PRELIMINABY.

[419.

Diagonal
loale.

Vfimier.

method,  we  may  mention  that  a  quadrant  of  3  feet  radius,
which  belonged  to  Napier  of  Merchiston,  and  is  divided  on
the  limb  by  this  method,  reads  to  minutes  of  a  degree ;  no
higher  accuracy  than  is  now  attainable  by  the  pocket  sextants
made  by  Trougliton  and  Simms,  the  radius  of  whose  arc  is
virtually  little  more  than  an  inch.  The  latter  instrument  b
rcfid  by  the  help  of  a  Voruier.

420.  The  Vernier  is  commonlv  omploved  for  such  iustru-
ments  as  the  Barometer,  Sextant,  aud  Cathetometer,  while  the
Screw  is  micrometrically  applied  to  the  more  delicate  instru-
ments, such  as  Astronomical  Circles,  and  Micrometers,  and  the
Spherometer.

421.  The  vernier  consists  of  a  slip  of  metal  which  slides
along  a  divided  scale,  the  edges  of  the  two  being  coincident.

Hence,  when  it  is  applied  to  a  divided  circle,  its  edge  is  circular,
and  it  moves  about  au  jixis  passing  through  the  centre  of  the
divided  lirab.

In  the  sketch  let  0,  1,  2,. ..10  be  tlic  divisions  on  the  vernier,
OthX  etc.,  any  set  of  consecutive  divisions  on  the  limb  or  scale
along  whose  edge  it  slides.  If,  when  0  and  o  coin-
cide, 10  and  11  coincide  also,  then  10  divisions  of
the  vernier  are  equal  in  length  to  11  on  the  limb;
and  therefore  each  division  on  the  vernier  is  ^ths
or  of  a  division  on  the  limb.  If,  then,  the  ver-
nier be  moved  till  1  coincides  with  i,  0  wiU  be  -j^th
of  a  division  of  the  limb  beyond  o;  if  2  ooincide
with  ^  0  will  be  ^^ths  beyond  and  so  on.
Hence  to  read  the  vernier  in  any  position,  note
first  the  division  next  to  0,  and  behind  it  on
the  limb.  This  is  the  integral  number  of  divi-
sions to  be  read.  For  the  fmctional  part,  see
which  division  of  the  vernier  is  in  a  line  with
OTIC  on  the  limb ;  if  it  be  the  4th  (as  in  the
figure),  that  indicates  an  addition  to  the  reading  of  j^ths  of  a
division  of  the  limb;  and  so  on.  Thus,  if  the  figure  represent
a  barometer  scale  divided  into  inches  and  tenths,  the  reading

In

is  30*34,  the  zero  line  of  the  vernier  being  adjusted  to  the  level
of  the  mercury.

Digitized  by  Goo<?le

422. J  MEASURE  AND  INSTRUMENTS.  467

422.  If  Uie  limb  of  a  sextant  be  divided,  as  it  usually  is,  to  Temier.
third  parts  of  a  degree,  and  the  vernier  be  formed  by  dividing

21  of  these  into  20  ci[ual  parts,  the  instrument  can  be  read  to
twentieths  of  divisions  on  the  limb,  that  is,  to  minutes  of  arc.

If  no  liue  on  the  vernier  coincide  with  one  on  the  limb,  then
siDoe  the  divisions  of  the  former  are  the  longer  there  will  be
one  of  the  latter  included  between  the  two  lines  of  the  vernier,
and  it  is  usual  in  practice  to  take  the  mean  of  the  readings
which  would  be  given  by  a  coincidence  of  either  pair  of  bound-
ing lines.

423.  In  the  above  sketch  and  description,  the  numbers  on
the  scale  and  vernier  have  been  supposed  to  run  opposUe  ways.
This  is  generally  the  case  with  British  instruments.  In  some
foreign  ones  the  divisions  run  in  the  same  direction  on  vernier
and  limb,  and  in  that  case  it  is  easy  to  see  that  to  read  to
tenths  of  a  scale  division  we  must  have  ten  divisions  of  the
vernier  equal  to  nine  of  the  scale.

In  general,  to  read  to  tlio  nih  part  of  a  scale  division,  n  divi-
sions of  the  vernier  must  equal  >i  +  1  or  n—\  divisions  on  the
Limb,  according  as  these  run  in  opposite  or  similar  tlirections.

424.  The  principle  of  the  8orew  has  been  already  noticed  scn*.
(§  102).  It  may  be  used  in  either  of  two  ways, the  nut
may  be  fixed,  and  the  screw  advance  through  it,  or  the  screw
may  be  prevented  from  moving  longitudinally  by  a  fixed  collar,

in  which  case  the  nut,  if  prevented  by  fixed  guides  from  rotat-
ing, will  move  in  the  direction  of  the  common  axis.  The
advance  in  cither  case  cvulently  proportional  to  the  angle
through  which  tlie  screw  has  turned  about  its  axis,  and  this
may  be  measured  l>y  means  of  a  divided  head  fixed  perpcndi-
culaxly  to  the  screw  at  one  end,  the  divisions  being  read  off  by
a  pointer  or  vernier  attached  to  the  frame  of  the  instrument.
The  nut  carries  with  it  either  a  tracing  point  (as  in  the  divid-
mg  engine)  or  a  wire,  thread,  or  half  the  object-glass  of  a  tele-
scope (as  in  micrometers),  the  thread  or  wire,  or  the  play  of  the
tradsg  point>  being  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  screw.

425.  Suppose  it  be  required  to  divide  a  line  into  any
number  of  equal  parts. The  line  is  placed  parallel  to  the  axis

30-2

Digitized  by  Google

468

P&£LIM1NABT.

[425.

mnm,  of  the  screw  with  one  end  exactly  tinder  the  tracing  point,  or
under  the  fixed  wire  of  a  microscope  carried  by  the  nut,  and
the  screw-head  is  read  off.  By  turning  the  head,  the  tracing
point  or  microscope  wire  is  brought  to  the  other  extremity  of
the  line ;  and  the  number  of  turns  and  fractions  of  a  turn  re-
quired for  the  whole  line  is  thus  ascertained.  Dividing  this  by
the  number  of  equal  parts  required,  we  find  at  once  the  number
of  turns  and  fractional  parts  corresponding  to  one  of  the
required  divisions,  and  by  giving  that  amount  of  rotation  to
the  screw  over  and  over  again,  dmwing  a  line  alter  each  rota-
tion, the  required  division  is  effeeted.

JJJJJjJP'  426.  In  the  Micrometer,  the  movable  wire  carried  by  the
nut  is  parallel  to  a  fixed  wire.  By  bringing  them  into  optical
contact  the  zero  reading  of  the  head  is  known;  hence  when
another  reading  has  been  obtained,  we  have  by  subtraction  the
number  of  turns  corresponding  to  the  length  of  the  object' to
be  measured.  The  absolute  value  of  a  turn  of  the  screw  is  de-
termined by  calculation  from  the  uuiaber  of  threads  in  an  inch,
or  by  actually  appiymg  the  micrometer  to  an  object  of  known
dimensions.

sphjjo.  427.  For  the  measurement  of  the  thickness  of  a  plate,  or
the  curvature  of  a  lens,  the  Spheromeler  is  used.  It  consists  of  a
screw  nut  rigidly  fixed  in  the  middle  of  a  very  rigid  three-legged
table,  with  its  axis  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  three  Icet
(or  finely  rounded  ends  of  the  legs),  and  an  accurately  cut  screw
working  in  this  nut.  The  lower  extremity  of  the  screw  is  al-^
finely  rounded.  The  number  of  turns,  whole  or  fractional,  of
the  screw,  is  read  off  by  a  divided  head  and  a  pointer  fixed  to
the  stem.  Suppose  it  be  required  to  measure  the  thickneas  of
a  plate  of  glass.  The  three  feet  of  the  instrument  are  placed
upon  a  nearly  enough  flat  aurfiEkce  of  a  hard  body,  and  the  screw
is  gradually  turned  until  its  point  touches  and  presses  the  sur-
face. The  muscular  sense  of  toudi  perceives  resistance  to  the
turning  of  the  screw  when,  after  touching  the  liani  body,  it
presses  on  it  with  a  force  somewhat  exceeding  the  weight  of
the  screw.  The  first  effect  of  the  contact  is  a  diminution  of
resistance  to  the  turning,  due  to  the  weight  of  the  screw  coming

Digitized  by  Google

427.1

MEASURES  ASD  INSTBUMENTS.

4G9

to  be  borne  on  its  fine  pointed  end  instead  of  on  the  thread  of  Sphevo-
tbe  nut.  The  siulden  increase  of  resistance  at  the  instant  when
the  screw  commences  to  bear  part  of  the  weight  of  the  nut  finds
the  sense  prepared  to  perceive  it  with  remarkable  delicacy  on
account  of  its  contrast  with  the  immediately  preceding  diminu-
tion of  resistance.  The  screw-head  is  now  read  off,  and  the  screw
turned  backwards  until  room  is  left  for  the  insertion,  beneath
its  pointy  of  the  plate  whose  thickness  is  to  be  measured.  The
screw  is  again  tuzned  until  increase  of  resistance  is  again  per-
ceived; and  the  screw-head  is  again  read  ofL  The  difference  of
the  readings  of  the  head  is  equal  to  the  thickness  of  the  plate,
reckoned  in  the  proper  unit  of  the  screw  and  the  division  of  its
head

428.  If  the  curvature  of  a  lens  is  to  be  measured,  the  in-
strument  is  first  placed,  as  before,  on  a  plane  surface,  and  the
reading  for  the  contact  is  taken.  The  same  operation  is  repeated
on  the  spherical  soi&ca  The  difference  of  the  screw  readings
is  evidently  the  greatest  thickness  of  the  glass  which  would  be
cut  off  by  a  plane  passing  through  the  three  feet.  This  enables
us  to  calculate  the  radius  of  the  spherical  sur&ce  (the  distance
from  foot  to  foot  of  the  instrument  being  known).

Let  a  be  the  distance  from  foot  to  foot,  I  the  length  of  screw
cori-esponding  to  the  difference  pf  the  two  readings,  E  the  radius

a*

of  the  spherioal  surface;  we  have  at  once  2i?-*^'i-(  or,  as  {

is  generally  very  small  compared  with  a,  the  diameter  is,  very

429.  The  CoUhetonutgr  is  used  for  the  accurate  determina-  catheto-

meter.

tion  of  differences  of  level — ^for  instance,  in  measuring  the
height  to  which  a  fluid  rises  in  a  capillaiy  tube  above  the  ex-
terior free  surface.  It  consists  of  a  long  divided  metallic  stem,
turning  round  an  axis  as  nearly  as  may  be  parallel  to  its  length,

on  a  fixed  tripod  stand :  and,  attached  to  the  stem,  a  spirit-leveL

Upon  the  stem  slides  a  metallic  piece  bearing  a  telescope  of
which  the  length  is  approximately  enough  perpendicular  to  the
axis.  The  telescope  tube  is  as  nearly  as  may  be  perpendicular
to  the  length  of  the  stem. By  levelling  screws  in  two  feet  of  the

Digitized  by  Google

470  PEEUMINA&Y.  [429.

Catbeto- tHpod  the  bubble  of  the  spirit-level  is  brought  to  one  position

of  its  glass  when  the  stem  is  turned  all  round  its  axis.  This
secures  that  the  axis  is  vertical.  In  using  the  instrument  the
telescope  is  directed  in  succession  to  the  two  objects  whose
difference  of  level  is  to  be  found,  and  in  each  case  moved  (gone-
rally  by  a  delicate  screw)  up  ox  down  the  stem,  until  a  horizontal
wire  in  the  focus  of  its  eye-piece  coincides  with  the  image  of
the  object  The  difference  of  readings  on  the  vertical  stem
(each  taken  generally  by  aid  of  a  Yemier  sliding-pieoe)  cone*
spending  to  the  two  pcsitions  of  the  telescope  gives  the  required
^fference  of  level

Bahnet.  430.  The  common  Gravity  Balance  is  an  instrument  for
testing  the  equality  of  the  gravity  of  the  masses  placed  in  the
two  pans.  We  may  note  here  a  few  of  the  precautions  adopted
in  the  best  balances  to  guard  against  the  various  defects  to
which  the  instrument  is  Uable;  and  the  chief  points  to  be  at-
tended to  in  its  construction  to  secure  delicacy,  and  rapidity  of
weighing.

The  balance-beam  should  be  very  stiff,  and  as  light  as  possible
consistently  with  the  requisite  stiiQ&ies&  For  this  purpose  it  is
generally  formed  either  of  tubes,  or  of  a  sort  of  lattice-fiamework.

To  avoid  friction,  the  axle  consists  of  a  knife-edge,  as  it  is  called  ;
that  is,  a  wedge  of  liard  steel,  which,  when  the  balance  is  in  use,
rests  on  horizontal  plates  of  polished  agate.  A  similar  contri-
vance is  applied  in  very  deUcate  balances  at  the  points  of  the
beam  from  which  the  scale-pans  arc  suspended.  When  not  in
use,  and  just  before  use,  the  beam  with  its  knife-edge  is  lifted
by  a  lever  arrangement  from  the  agate  plates.  While  thus
secured  it  is  loaded  with  weights  as  nearly  as  possible  equal
(this  can  be  attained  by  previous  trial  with  a  coarser  iustni*
ment),  and  the  accurate  determination  is  then  readily  effected.
The  last  fraction  of  the  required  weight  is  determined  by  a  rider,
a  very  small  weight,  generally  formed  of  wire»  which  can  be
worked  (by  a  lever)  from  the  outside  of  the  glass  case  in  which
the  balance  is  enclosed,  and  which  may  be  placed  in  different
positions  upon  one  arm  of  the  beam.  This  arm  is  graduated  to
tenths,  etc.,  and  thus  shows  at  once  the  value  of  the  rider  in
any  case  as  depending  on  its  moment  or  leverage,  §  232.

.Digitized  by  Google

431.]

M£A8UBBS  AND  INSTBUMENT&

471

431.  Qualities  of  a  balance :  Balance.

1.  SUihilUy. — ^For  stability  of  the  beam  alone  without  pans
and  weights,  its  centre  of  gravity  must  be  below  its  bearing
knife-edge.  For  stability  with  tiie  heaviest  weights  the  line
joining  the  points  at  the  ends  of  the  beam  from  which  the  pans
are  hung  must  be  below  the  knife-edge  bearing  the  whole.

2.  Sensibiliti/. — The  beam  sliould  be  sensibly  defloctcil  from
a  horizontal  position  by  the  smallest  difference  between  the
weights  in  the  scale-pans.  The  definite  measure  of  the  sensi-
bility is  the  angle  through  which  the  beam  is  deflected  by  a
stated  difference  between  the  loads  in  the  pans.

3.  Quiickne88, — ^This  means  lapidity  of  oscillation,  and  con-
sequentiy  speed  in  the  performance  of  a  weighing.  It  depends
mainly  upon  the  depth  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  tiie  whole
below  the  knife-edge  and  the  length  of  the  beam.

In  our  Chapter  on  Statics  we  shall  give  the  investigation.
The  sensibility  and  quickness  will  there  be  calculated  for  any
given  form  and  dimensions  of  the  instrument.

A  fine  balance  should  tarn  with  about  a  500,000th  of  the
greatest  load  which  can  safely  be  placed  in  either  pan.  In
fact  few  measurements  of  any  kind  are  correct  to  more  than
gix  significant  figures.

The  process  of  Double  Weighinr/,  which  consists  in  counter-
poising a  mass  by  shot,  or  sand,  or  pieces  of  fine  wire,  and  then
substituting  weights  for  it  in  the  same  pan  till  equilibrium  is
attained,  is  more  laborious,  but  more  accurate,  than  single
weighing;  as  it  eliminates  all  errors  arising  from  unequal  length
of  the  arms,  etc.

Correction  is  required  for  the  weights  of  air  displaced  by  the
two  bodies  weighed  against  one  another  when  their  difference
is  too  laige  to  be  negligible.

432.  In  the  Torsion-halance,  invented  and  used  with  great  Jjjjjjjj^
effect  I  v  Coulomb,  a  force  is  measured  by  the  torsion  of

a  ghiss  fibre,  or  of  a  metallic  wire.  The  fibre  or  wire  is
fixed  at  its  upper  end,  or  at  both  ends,  according  to  circum*
stances.  In  general  it  carries  a  very  light  horizontal  rod  or
needle,  to  the  extremities  of  which  are  attached  the  body  on

Digitized  by  Google

472  FRSLDONAKT.  [432.

Torrioa- which  is  exerted  the  force  to  be  measured,  and  a  counterpoise.

The  upper  extremity  of  the  torsion  fibre  is  fixed  to  au  index
passing  through  the  centre  of  &  divided  disc,  so  that  the  angle
through  which  that  extremity  moves  is  directly  measured.  If,
at  the  same  time,  the  angle  through  which  the  needle  has
turned  be  measuied,  or,  more  simply,  if  the  index  be  always
turned  till  the  needle  assumes  a  definite  position  determined
by  marks  or  sights  attached  to  the  case  of  the  instrument —
we  have  the  amount  of  torsion  of  the  fibre,  and  it  becomes  a
simple  statical  problem  to  determine  from  the  latter  the  force
to  be  measured ;  its  direction,  and  point  of  application,  and
the  dimensions  of  the  apparatus,  being  known.  The  force  of
torsion  as  depending  on  the  angle  of  torsion  was  found  by  Cou-
lomb to  follow  the  law  of  simple  proportion  up  to  the  limits  of
perfect  elasticity — as  might  have  been  expected  from  Hookc'a
Law  (see  Fropertiea  of  MaUer\  and  it  only  remains  that  we  de>
termine  the  amount  for  a  particular  angle  in  absolute  measure.
This  determination  is  in  general  simple  enough  in  theory;  but
in  practice  requires  considerable  care  and  nicety.  The  torsion-
balance,  however,  being  chiefly  used  for  comparative,  not
absolute,  measure,  this  determination  is  often  unnecessary.
More  will  be  said  aboat  it  when  we  come  to  its  applications.

433.  The  ordinary  spiral  spring-balances  used  for  roughly
comparing  either  small  or  large  weights  or  forces,  are,  properly
speaking,  only  a  modified  form  of  torsion-balance*,  as  they  act
almost  entirely  by  the  torsion  of  the  wire,  and  not  by  longi-
tudinal extension  or  by  flexure.  Spring-balances  we  believe
to  be  capable,  if  carefully  constructed,  of  rivalling  the  ordinary
balance  in  accuracy,  while,  for  some  applications,  they  far  sur-
pass it  in  sensibility  and  convenience.  They  measure  directly
force,  not  mass;  and  therefore  if  used  fur  detcruiitung  masses
in  different  parts  of  the  earth,  a  correction  must  be  applied  for
the  varying  force  of  gravity.  The  correction  for  temperature
must  not  be  overlooked.  These  corrections  may  be  avoided
by  the  method  of  double  weighing.

*  Binel,  JirnmCL  de  VJ^coU  PcX^technifaet  x.  IttS:  and  J.  ThomMii,  CSii^
Mdg§  and  IhMin  Math.  Jtrnmal  (1849).

Digitized  by  Google

mSASUBES  AND  IMSTRUMENTS.

473

434,  Perhaps  the  most  <lelic<ate  of  all  instruinents  for  the^*""**^*
measurement  of  force  is  the  Pendulum.  It  is  proved  in  kinetics
(see  Div.  n.)  that  for  any  pendulam,  whether  oscillating  ahout
a  mean  vertical  position  nnder  the  action  of  gravity,  or  in  a
horizontal  plane,  under  the  action  of  magnetic  force,  or  force
of  torsion,  the  square  of  the  numher  of  smaU  oscillations  in  a
given  time  is  proportional  to  the  magnitnde  of  the  force  under
which  these  oscillations  take  place.

For  the  estimation  of  the  relative  amounts  of  gravity  at
different  places,  this  is  by  far  the  most  perfect  instrument.
The  method  of  coincidences  by  which  this  process  has  been
rendered  so  excessively  delicate  will  be  described  later.

436.  The  Bifilar  SuspeiuUnif  an  arrangement  for  measur- BifljMr^
ing  small  horizontal  forces,  or  couples  in  horizontal  planes,  in
terms  of  the  weight  of  the  suspended  body,  is  due  originally  to
Sir  William  Snow  Harris^  who  used  it  in  one  of  his  electro-
meters^as  a  substitute  for  the  simple  tondon-halance  of  Coulomb.
It  was  used  also  by  Gauss  in  his  bifUar  magnetometer  for  mea-  jMjftgifaip.
Buring  the  horizontal  component  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic
force*.  In  this  instniment  the  bifilar  suspension  is  adjusted  to
keep  a  bar-magnet  in  a  position  approximately  perpendicular
to  the  magnetic  meridian.  The  small  natural  augmentations
and  diminutions  of  the  horizontal  component  arc  shown  by
small  azimuthal  motions  of  the  bar.  On  account  of  some
obvious  mechanical  and  dynamical  difficulties  this  instrument
was  not  found  very  convenient  for  absolute  determinations,  but
from  the  time  of  its  first  practical  introduction  by  Qauss  and
Weber  it  has  been  in  use  in  all  Magnetic  Observatories  for
measuring  the  natural  variations  of  the  horizontal  magnetic
component  It  is  now  made  with  a  much  smaller  magnet  than
the  great  bar  weighing  twenty-five  pounds  originaJly  given  with
it  by  Oanss;  but  the  bars  in  actual  use  at  the  present  day  are
still  eiioimously  too  large f  for  their  duty. The  weight  of  the

*  Gaosg,  RetuUaU  an*  dm  Beobachtungen  de»  magtutuehtn  Vereiru  im
JahnlBn,  TxMidti«a  la  Tijk»*i  £MM(^  JTeii^^

t  The  mitpendad  magneti  used  for  determinixig  the  dinetion  and  tha  in-
tensity of  tiM  bmiaonlal  magnelie  fone  in  the  BaUiii  Mugiielie  Obeemtofy,

Digitized  by  Google

474

PBELIMINABT.

[435.

AlMolats

measure-
ment of
Terrestrial
Magnetic

BWhr  Mug- bar  wltli  attached  mirror  ought  not  to  exceed  eight  grammes,
so  that  two  single  silk  fibres  may  siifhce  for  the  bearing  tlireads.
The  only  substantial  alteration,  besides  the  diminution  of  its
majrnitude,  which  has  been  made  in  the  instrument  since  Gauss
and  Weber's  time  is  the  addition  of  ])hotographic  apparatus  and
clockwork  for  automatic  record  of  its  motions*  For  absolute
determinations  of  the  horizontal  component  force,  08088*8  method
of  deflecting  a  freely  suspended  magnet  by  a  magnetic  bar  brought
into  proper  positions  in  its  neighbourhood,  and  again  making
an  independent  set  of  observations  to  determine  the  period  of
oscillation  of  the  same  deflecting  bar  when  suspended  by  a  fine
fibre  and  set  to  vibrate  through  a  small  horizontal  angle  on
eacli  side  of  the  magnetic  meridian,  is  the  method  which  lias
been  uniformly  in  use  both  in  magnetic  observatories  and  in
travellers'  observatiuns  with  small  portable  apparatus  siuce  it
was  first  invented  by  Gauss*.

In  the  bifilar  balance  the  two  threads  may  be  of  unequal
lengtiis»  the  line  joining  their  upper  fixed  ends  need  not  be  hori-
zontal, and  their  other  ends  may  be  attached  to  any  two  points  of
the  suspended  body:  but  for  most  purposes,  and  particularly  for
regular  instruments  such  as  electrometers  and  magnetometers
with  bifilar  suspension,  it  is  convenient  to  have,  as  nearly  as  may
be,  the  two  threads  of  equal  length,  their  fixed  ends  at  the  same
level,  and  tlicir  other  ends  attached  to  the  suspended  body  sym-
metrically with  reference  to  its  centre  of  gravity  (as  illustrated
in  the  last  set  of  drawings  of  §  345*).  Supposing  the  instrument-
maker  to  liave  fulfilled  these  conditions  of  symmetry  as  nearly
as  he  can  with  reference  to  the  four  points  of  attacliuient  of  the
threads,  we  have  still  to  adjust  properly  the  lengths  of  the
threads*  For  this  purpose  remark  that  a  small  difference  in  the
lengths  will  throw  the  suspended  body  into  an  unsymmetrical

Bifliar
Balance.

fts  described  by  Dr  Lloyd  in  his  Treatue  on  Mafftictism  (London.  1874),  are  each
of  thorn  15  incheB  long,  I  of  tin  inch  broml,  niul  \  of  an  iurl)  in  tliic  knf  ^s,  and
must  thoreforo  wuigh  about  a  pound  each.  Tlie  correspouding  luagucts  used  at
the  Kev  Observatoiy  are  much  smaUer.  They  are  eaob  B'i  inehes  long,  0^
inch  broad,  aaad  0*1  indi  thiek,  and  therefore  the  wei^t  of  each  is  alMat  O'OU
pound,  or  nearly  55  grammes.

•  Iiiteiisitat  T'i«  Magm  tlcae  Tcrrettri»  ad  Metmtram  Alwtlutam  mwctitai
CommeutoiioiicB  Societatis  GottingenNs,  1832.

Digitized  by  Google

MEASUBES  AND  INSTEUHENTS

475

position,  in  which,  particularly  if  its  centre  of  gravity  be  very  guMar
low  (as  it  is  in  Sir  W.  Thomson's  Quadraat  Electrometer),  much
more  of  its  weight  will  be  borne  by  one  thread  than  by  the
other.  This  will  diminish  very  much  the  amount  of  the  hori-
Bontal  couple  required  to  produce  a  stated  asimuthal  deflection
in  the  r^pular  use  of  the  instrument^  in  other  words  will  in-
crease its  sensibility  above  its  proper  amount,  that  is  to  say,
the  amount  which  it  would  havo  if  the  conditions  of  symmetry
woe  fully  realised.  Hence  the  proper  adjustment  for  equaliz-
ing the  lengths  of  the  threads  in  a  symmetrical  bililar  balance,
or  for  giving  them  their  right  difference  in  an  unsymmetrical
arraTicrement,  in  order  to  make  the  instrument  as  accurate  as  it
can  bo,  is  to  alter  the  lenc,4h  of  one  or  both  of  the  threads,  until
we  attain  to  the  condition  of  mininiitm  sensibility,  that  is  to
say  minimum  angle  of  deflection  under  the  influence  of  a  given
amount  of  couple.

The  great  merit  of  the  Infilar  balance  over  the  simple  torsion-
balance  of  Coulomb  for  such  applications  as  that  to  the  hori-
sontal  magnetometer  in  the  continuous  work  of  an  observatory,

is  the  comparative  smallness  of  the  influence  it  experiences
from  changes  of  temperature.  The  torsional  rigidity  of  iron,
copper,  and  brass  wires  is  diminished  about  \  per  cent,  with  10**
elevation  of  temperature,  while  the  linear  expansions  of  the
same  metals  are  each  less  than  ^  per  cent,  witli  the  same
elevation  of  temperature.  Hence  in  the  unifilar  torsion-
balance,  if  iron,  copper,  or  brass  (the  only  metals  for  which  the
change  of  torsional  rigidity  with  change  of  temperature  has
hitherto  been  measured)  is  used  for  the  material  of  the  bearing
fibre,  the  sensibility  is  augmented  \  per  cent,  by  10^  elevation
of  temperature.

On  tlie  other  hand,  in  the  bifilar  balance,  if  torsional  rigidity
does  not  contribute  any  sensible  proportion  to  the  whole  direc-
tive couple  (and  this  condition  may  be  realized  as  nearly  as  we
please  by  making  the  bearing  wires  long  enough  and  making
the  distance  between  them  great  enough  to  give  the  requisite
amount  of  directive  couple),  the  sensibility  of  the  balance  is
affected  oidy  by  the  linear  expansions  of  the  substances  con-
cerned.  If  the  equal  distances  between  the  two  pairs-of  points

Digitized  by  Google

476

PRELIMINABT.

[435.

of  attachment,  in  the  nonnal  form  of  hifilar  balance  (or  that  in
which  tiie  two  threads  aio  vertical  when  the  suspended  body  is
uninfluenced  by  horizontal  force  or  couple),  remained  constant^

the  sensibility  would  be  augmented  with  elevation  of  tempera-
ture in  simple  proportiuii  to  the  linear  expansions  of  the  bearing
wires ;  and  this  small  influence  might,  if  it  were  worth  while
to  make  the  requisite  mechanical  arrangements,  be  perfectly
compensated  by  choosing  materials  for  the  frames  or  bars  bear-
ing the  attachments  of  the  wires  so  that  the  proportionate
augmentation  of  the  distance  between  them  should  be  just
half  the  elongation  of  either  wire,  because  the  sensibility*  as
shown  by  the  mathematical  formula  below,  is  ampLj  propor*
tional  to  the  length  of  the  wires  and  inTersely  proportional  to
the  square  of  the  distance  between  them.  But,  even  without  any
such  compensation,  the  temperature-error  due  to  linear  expansions
of  the  materials  of  the  hifilar  balance  is  so  smaU  that  in  the  most
accurate  regular  use  of  the  instrument  in  magnetic  observatories
it  may  be  almost  neglected ;  and  at  most  it  is  less  than  of
the  error  of  the  uuifilar  torsion-balance,  at  all  events  if,  as  is
probably  the  case,  the  changes  of  rigidity  with  changes  of  tempe-
rature in  other  metals  are  of  similar  amounts  to  those  for  the
three  metals  on  which  experiments  have  been  made.  In  reality
the  chief  temperature-error  of  the  hifilar  magnetometer  depends
on  the  change  of  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  suq>ended  magnet
with  change  of  temperature.  It  seems  that  the  magnetism  of
a  steel  magnet  diminishes  with  rise  of  temperature  and  ang*
ments  with  fall  of  temperature^  but  experiments!  in&rmatioii  is
much  wanted  on  this  subject.

The  amount  of  the  effect  is  very  different  in  different  bars,
and  it  must  be  experimentally  determined  for  each  bar  serving
in  a  bifilar  magnetometer.  The  amount  of  the  change  of  mag-
netic moment  in  the  bar  which  had  been  most  used  in  the
Dublin  Magnetic  Observatory  was  found  to  be  '000029  per  de-
gree Fahrenheit  or  at  the  rate  of  000052  per  degree  Centigrade,
being  alK)ut  the  same  amount  as  that  of  the  change  of  torsional
rigidity  with  temperature  of  the  three  metals  referred  to  above.

Let  «  be  the  half  length  of  the  bar  between  the  points  of
attachment  of  the  wires,  $  the  angle  through  which  the  bar  has

Digitized  by  Google

435.]  MEASURES  AND  INSTRUMENTS.  477

been  turned  (in  a  luniiontal  plane)  from  its  position  of  eqni-  Bmiar^
librinm,  I  the  length  of  one  of  the  winB,  «  ita  inoKnetioin  to  the
vertioaL

Then  {  ooet  is  the  differenoe  of  lerelB  between  the  ends  of  eecih
wire,  end  evidently,  hj  the  geometry  of  the  caee^

}/8in»aaanitf.
No>w  if  ^  be  the  ooaple  tending  to  turn  the  bar,  and  W  ite  weight,
the  principle  of  mechanical  effect  gives

<=  WltanuU,
Bat,  by  the  geometrical  condition  above,
r  sin  i  006  u2(»a' sin
Q  W

Hence
or

a*  sin  6^  2coRt'

sing

which  gives  the  couple  in  terms  of  the  deflection  $,

If  the  torsion  of  the  wirea  be  taken  into  aocoont,  it  is
sensibly  equal  to  $  (since  the  greatest  inclination  to  the  vertical
is  small),  and  therefore  the  ooaple  resulting  from  it  will  be  S$,
This  must  be  added  to  the  value  of  Q  just  found  in  order  to  get
the  whole  deflecting  couple^

436.  Ergometers  are  instruments  for  measuring  energy.  Eigomeleri.
Whites  friction  brake  measures  the  amount  of  work  actually
performed  in  any  time  by  an  engine  or  other  "prime  mover,"
by  allowing  it  during  the  time  of  trial  to  waste  all  its  work  on
friction.  MoHiia  ergometer  measures  work  without  wasting
any  of  it,  in  the  course  of  its  transmission  from  the  prime
mover  to  machines  in  which  it  is  usefully  employed.  It  con-
sists of  a  simple  arrangement  of  springs,  measuring  at  every
instant  the  cou^  with  which  the  prime  merer  turns  the  shaft
that  transmits  its  work,  and  an  integrating  madiine  from  which
the  work  done  by  this  conple  daring  any  time  can  be  read  oE

Let  L  be  the  couple  at  any  instant,  and  ^  the  whole  angle
through  which  the  shaft  has  turned  from  the  moment  at  which
the  reckoning  commences.  The  integrating  machine  shows  at
any  moment  the  value  of  jLd*^  which  (§  240)  is  the  whole  work
done.

Digitized  by  Google

478

PBSLBOarART.

[4«7.

ErgoBMtan.  437.  WliiW's  friction  brake  consists  of  a  lever  damped  to
the  shaft,  but  not  allowed  to  turn  with  it.  The  moment  of  the
force  required  to  prevent  the  lever  from  going  round  with  the
shaft,  multiplied  by  the  whole  angle  through  which  the  shaft
turns,  measures  the  whole  work  done  against  the  firiction  of  the
damp.  The  same  result  is  much  more  easily  obtained  by
wrapping  a  rope  or  chain  several  times  round  the  shafts  or
round  a  cylinder  or  drum  carried  round  by  the  shaft,  and
applying  measured  forces  to  its  two  ends  in  proper  directions
to  keep  it  nearly  steady  while  the  shaft  turns  round  without  it.
The  difference  of  the  inumcnts  of  these  two  forces  round  the
axis,  multiplied  by  the  angle  througli  which  the  shaft  turns,
measures  the  whole  work  spent  *ou  friction  against  the  rope.
If  we  remove  all  other  resistance  to  the  shafts  and  apply  the
proper  amount  of  force  at  each  end  of  the  dynamimetric  rope
or  chain  (which  is  very  easily  done  in  practice),  the  prime
mover  is  kept  running  at  the  proper  speed  for  the  test,  and
having  its  whole  work  thus  wasted  for  the  time  and  measured.

Digitized  by  Google

APPENDIX  B.

CONTINUOUS  CALCULATING  MACHINES.

I. TlDE-PREDICnNO  MaCHIKE.

Tho  ol)ject  is  to  predict  the  tides  for  any  port  for  which  the  Jjpi^,fJJ**
tidal  coiiutituents  hftve  been  found  from  the  harmonic  aualysis  ^k^^c^uue.
from  tide-gauge  observations ;  not  merely  to  predict  the  times
and  lidghts  of  high  water,  but  the  depths  o£  water  at  any  and
eveiy  instant,  showing  them  hj  a  continnons  corre,  for  a  year,  or
for  any  number  of  years  in  advance.

This  object  requiree  the  anmmation  of  the  simple  harmonio
innctions  representing  the  several  constituents*  to  be  taken  into
aoooant|  wliicli  i»  ]>erformed  by  the  machine  in  the  following
manner: — ^For  each  tidal  constituent  to  be  taken  into  account
tke.maohine  has  a  shaft  with  an  overhanging  crank,  which
carries  a  pulley  pivoted  on  a  paiallel  axis  adjustable  to  a  greater
or  leas  distance  from  the  shaft's  axis,  accoixiing  to  the  greater  or
less,  range  of  the  particular  tidal  constituent  fw  the  different
|)orts  for  which  the  machine  is  to  be  used.  The  several  shafts,
with  their  axes  all  parallel,  are  geared  togiether  so  that  thdr
periods  are  to  a  sufficient  degree  of  ajqprozimation  pfroportional
to  the  periods  of  the  tidal  constituents.  The  crank  on  each
shaft  can  be  turned  round  on  the  shaft  and  clamped  in  any  po-
sition :  thus  it  is  set  to  the  proper  position  for  the  epoch  of  the
particalar  tide  which  it  is  to  prodooeii  The  axes  of  the  several
shafis  are  horisontal,  and  their  vertical  planes  are  at  suooeasive
dirtaooes  one  firom  another,  each  equal  to  the  diameter  of  one  of
the  pulleys  (the  diameters  of  these  being  equal).  The  shafts  are
in  two  rows,  an  upper  and  a  lower,  and  the  grooves  of  the  pnUeyi
are  all  in  one  plane  peipendionlar  to  theur  axes.  ^

Suppose^  now,  the  axes  of  the  pulleys  to  be  set  each  at  aero
distance  from  the  axis  of  its  shaft,  and  let  a  fine  wire  or  chain,

•  See  Report  for  1876  of  the  Committee  of  the  British  Association  appointed
for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  Extension,  Improvement,  and  Hormouie
Anslyrifl  of  Tidal  ObBorvationt.

Digitized  by  Google

480

APPENDIX  BC.

with  one  end  hanging  down  and  carrying  a  weight,  pass  alter-
nately over  and  under  the  i)ulleys  in  order,  and  vertically  up-
wards or  downwards  (accoi*ding  as  the  number  of  pulleys  is  even
or  odd)  from  tlie  last  pulley  to  a  fixed  point.  The  weight  Lb
to  be  properly  guided  for  vertical  motion  by  a  geometrical  slide.
Turn  the  machine  now,  and  the  wire  will  remain  undisturbed
with  aU  its  free  parts  vertical  and  the  hanging  weight  unmoved.
But  now  set  the  axis  of  any  one  of  the  puUeya  to  a  distance  i  T
trom  its  shaft's  axis  and  turn  the  machine.  If  the  distance  of
tills  ])tilley  from  the  two  on  each  side  of  it  in  the  other  row  is  a
considenible  midtiple  of  ^  7',  the  hanging  weight  will  now  (if  the
machine  is  ttirnod  uniformly)  move  u]>  and  down  with  a  siiuj  le
hannonic  motion  of  amplitiide  (or  semi-range)  equal  to  7^  in  the
period  of  its  shaft.  If,  next,  a  second  pulley  is  displaced  to  a
distance  |  iT',  a  third  to  a  distance  |  T",  and  so  on,  the  hanging
weight  will  now  perform  a  complex  harmonic  motion  equal  to
the  sum  of  the  several  harmonic  motions,  eocA  in  its  proper
period,  which  would  be  produced  separately  hy  the  displace^
meats  T,  T\  T".  Thus,  if  the  machine  was  made  on  a  latgiB
scale,  with  T\...  equal  respectively  to  the  actual  semi-rangra
of  the  several  constituent  tides,  and  if  it  was  turned  round  '
slowly  (by  clockwork,  for  example),  each  shaft  going  once  round
in  the  actual  period  of  the  tide  whicli  it  represents,  the  hanging
weight  would  lise  and  fall  exactly  with  the  water-level  as
affected  by  the  whole  tidal  action.  This,  of  course,  could  be  of
no  use,  and  is  only  suggested  bj  way  of  illustration.  The  actual
machine  is  made  of  such  magnitude^  that  it  can  be  set  to  give  a  '
motion  to  the  hanging  weight  equal  to  the  actual  motion  of  the
water-level  reduced  to  any  convenient  scale :  and  provided  the  ,
whole  range  does  not  exceed  about  30  centimetres,  the  geo-
metrical error  duo  to  the  deviation  from  perfect  pftt^M'^*"  in
the  succes.«^ivo  free  parts  of  the  wire  is  not  so  great  as  to  be
practically  objectionable.  The  proper  order  for  the  shafts  ia  the
order  of  magnitude  of  the  constituent  tides  which  they  ]nroduoe^
the  greatest  next  the  hanging  weight,  and  the  least  next  the
fixed  end  of  the  wire :  this  so  that  the  greatest  cons-tituent  n&ay
have  only  one  pulley  to  move,  the  second  in  magnitude  only  two
pulley Sy  and  so  on.

One  machine  of  this  kind  has  already  been  oonaferncted  for  the
British  Aaaodatiom,  and  another  (with  a  greater  number  of  ahafta
to  include  a  greater  number  of  tidal  otmstituenti)  is  being  oon*

Digitized  by  Google

J.]  CONTINUOUS  CAICDLAXIND  MACHINES.  481

structed  for  the  Indian  Qoyemment. The  British'  AMOCiation  ^[l''^*!^^
machine,  which  is  kept  available  for  general  use,  under  charge  Macdulna  -
of  the  Science  and  Art  Department  in  South  KeiuriiigtoD,  has
ten  shafts,  which  taken  in  order,  from  the  hanging  weighty  give
respeotiTely  the  following  tidal  oonstitnents*:

1.  The  mean  Imiar  semi-dlimuil

2.  The  mean  solar  semi-diurnal.
3w The  larger  eUiptio  semi-diurnal.

4,  The  loni-BoIar  diurnal  dedinational

6,  The  lunar  diurnal  deelinational.

6.  The  luni<«olar  semi-diurnal  dedinationaL

7.  The  smaller  elliptic  semi-diumaL

8.  The  sdar  diurnal  dedinational.

9.  The  lunar  quarter^Uumal,  or  first  shallow-water  tide  of

mean  lunar  semi-diurnal.
10. The  luni-solar  quartomliumal,  shallow-water  tidei

The  hanging  weight  consists  of  an  ink-bottle  with  a  glass
tubular  pen,  which  marks  the  tide  level  in  a  continuous  curie
on  a  long  band  of  paper,  moved  horizontally  across  the  line  of
motion  of  the  pen,  by  a  vertical  cylinder  geared  to  the  revolving
shafts  of  the  machine.  One  of  the  five  slitling  points  of  the
geometrical  slide  is  the  point  of  the  pen  sliding  on  the  pajver
atretched  on  the  cylinder,  and  tlio  coujtlo  formed  by  tlie  normal
pressure  on  this  point,  and  on  another  of  the  live,  which  is  about
four  centimetres  above  its  level  and  one  and  a  half  centimetres
from  the  paper,  balances  the  couple  due  to  gi-avity  of  the  ink-
bottle  and  the  vertical  component  of  the  pull  of  the  bearing  wire,
which  is  in  a  line  about  a  millimetre  or  two  farther  from  the
paper  than  that  in  which  the  centre  of  gravity  moves.  Thus  is
ensnredi  notwithstanding  bdwU  inequalities  on  the  paper,  a
preMure  of  the  pen  on  the  peper  Tery  approximately  ooostant
and  as  small  as  is  desired.

Hour  marks  are  made  on  the  curve  by  a  small  hqrisontal
movement  of  the  ink-bottle's  lateral  guides,  made  once  an  hour;
a  somewhat  greater  movement,  giving  a  deeper  notch,  serves  to
mark  the  noon  of  every  day.

The  machine  may  be  turned  so  rapidlj  as  to  run  off  a  year's
tides  for  any  port  in  about  four  hours.

Each  cnuik  should  carry  an  adjustable  counterpoise^  to  be

*  See  Report  for  1876  of  the  British  Aaaociation's  Tidal  Cknnniitlae.
VOL.  I.  31

Digitized  by  Google

48a  AFnonnx  b*.  pL

Tide-pr0-  a<ljusted  80  that  when  the  crank  is  not  rertical  the  pulls  of  the

dieting  •* ^  _  ^  ...

iUohiae.  approximately  vertical  portions  of  wire  acting  on  it  through  the

pulley  which  it  carries  shall,  as  exactly  as  may  be,  balance  on
the  axis  of  the  shaft,  and  the  motion  of  the  shaft  should  be
resisted  by  a  .'^lis^ht  weight  hanging  on  a  thr^d  wrapped  onco
round  it  and  fittiiched  at  its  other  end  to  a  fixed  point.  This
part  of  the  design,  planned  to  secure  against  "lost  time"  or
"back  lash"  in  the  gearings,  and  to  preserve  imiformity  of
pressure  between  teeth  and  teeth,  teeth  and  screws,  and  ends  of
axles  and  "end-plates,"  was  not  carried  out  in  the  British
Association  machina

n. Machine  for  ths  Solution  of  Simultakeoub
Jasbaa  Equations*.

^^ioQ.  Let  JS^f  3^...  ^.  be  n  bodies  each  supported  on  a  fixed  aada

(in  pisotioe  eaeb  ii  to  be  supported  on  knife-edgee  like  tlie  beim
of  a  balance).

liet  i'jj, P^^J . . .  p.,  be  f»  poUejrs  each  piloted

Pg^ ...  n  i»  A»

...  Pjig  fl .  M

n  ^if ^0  •••  ^.1  be  n  oovds  paning  over  the  pnlleja;

n  A»  ^»..  •  ^.^ ^ ooniae  of  C,;

n ^9*  Al»  ^tt*  "'  »>  »»

..••.>...•  <..•••«««•••.••..«.«•••*••••••...•«•

„  ...  i>,,  i^,,  he  fixed  points;

M  '"K  ^® lengths  of  the  cords  between  D^y  JF,,

and  ...  and  D^^  E^y  along  the  courses  stated  above,  M-hen

...  B^y  are  in  particular  positions  which  will  be  called
their  zero  positions;

„  ^, +  ^g  +  e^, ... +  be  their  lengths  between  the  same
fixed  points,  when  B^, ...  are  turned  through  angles  af^,
as^  ...  a;,  from  their  zero  positions;

(11),  (12),  (13),. ..(1«),
(21),  (22),  (23),  ...(211),
(31),  (32),  (33), ...  (3»),

*  Sir  W.  numBOn,  J¥oe<idliv«  of  the  Bayal  Soeietff,  YcLzsfm.,  1898.

Digitized  by  Google

ILj  OOOTIMUOUB  CALCULATIKO  MACHINES.

qoiiitiUee  mck  that

(11)  a;, +  (12) ...  +  (l/j)a;.  =  e/

(31)«,  +  (32)iB,+  ...  +  (3/i)x,  =  6,

We  shall  aappose  se^ ... to  be  each  so  small  that  (11),
(12)^. ..(21)^  etc,  do  not  ytaj  sensibly  from  the  values  which
they  have  when  m^*„x^  are  each  uiiSnitely  small  In
imctice  it  will  be  eonvenient  to  soplacetheazeeof  .5^,  B^,„B^
and  the  nurantuigs  of  the  pulleys  on  B^ ...  B^  and  the  fixed
points  eta»  that  when  x^,  x^, ...  x^  are  xnfiboitely  small,

the  straight  parts  of  each  oozd  and  the  lines  of  infinitesinial  mo-
tion of  the  centres  ol  the  pnll^  round  which  it  posses  shall  be
allparalleL  Then  i(ll)»i  (21),...  |(nl)  will  be  simply  eqoal  to
the  distances  of  the  centres  oS  the  pnlleys  P„ ,  P„ ,  ...P„,  from  the
axis  of  i  (12),  J  (22) ...  J  (n2)  thedistanoes  of  P,^  ...
from  the  axis  of  2^,;  and  so  on.

In  practice  the  mountings  of  the  pulleys  are  to  be  adjustable
by  proper  geometrical  slides  to  allow  any  presoibed  positive  or
negative  value  to  be  given  to  each  of  the  quantities  (U),
(12),...(21),ete.

Suppose  this  to  be  done,  and  each  of  the  bodies  P„  ...  P.
to  be  placed  in  its  aero  position  and  held  there.  Attach  now
the  cords  firmly  to  the  fixed  points  jP^,  />„...  respectively;
and,  paasixig  them  round  their  proj)er  pulleys,  bring  them  to  the
other  fixed  points  E^yE^^..,  E^^  and  pass  them  through  infinitely
■mall  smooth  rings  fixed  at  these  points.  Now  hold  the  bodies
P,,  P,, ...  each  fixed,  and  (in  practice  by  weights  hung  on  their
ends,  outside  P,,  A',, ...  Pj  pull  the  cords  through  P,,  P,,...  P„
with  any  given  tensions*  T,,  ...  T,.  Let  G^,,  ...  be
moments  round  the  fixed  axes  of  P,,  P,,  ...B^ol  the  forces  re-
quired to  hold  the  bodies  lixed  wben  acted  on  by  the  cordj^  tlius

483

Equation-
Solvftr.

•  The  idea  of  force  here  first  introduced  is  not  essential,  indeed  is  not
technically  admissible  to  the  purely  kinematic  and  algebraic  part  of  the  sabjeet
proposed.  But  it  is  not  merefy  an  Idral  kuMmatio  eoiutraotiom  of  the  algebraie
fiiroblem  that  is  intended;  end  the  design  of  a  Unematio  madhine,  for  eneoees  in
pnotioe^  eeeentiaUy  involves  dynamical  considerations.  In  the  present  eeee
some  of  the  most  important  of  the  purely  algebraic  qneHtionseooeenied  are  leiy
inteieetingljr  iUnetrated  by  these  dynemioal  ooBeideratioaa.

31—2

Digitized  by  Google

484.  APPENDIX  B'.  [II.

BatutioD-  Btretehed.  The  prindple  of  "yirtnal  velcKatieBy**  just  as  it  came
from  Lagrango  (or  the  piindple  of  ''work**),  givea  immediafaJjr,
In  virtiie  of  (I),

Cr,=  (ll)7',  +  (21)7^.4....4.(nl)7'J

tf,= (12) +  (22)  T.Ar  ...  +  (n2) .  ^  ^

Q^^  (In) 4-  (2»)  r,+ ...  +  (»»)  T..

Apply  and  keep  applied  to  eaeh  of  the  hodies, B^^ ...
(in  practice  b/  the  weights  of  the  pulleya,  and  by  oonnter-pulHiig
aprings),  such  fofoea  aa  ahall  have  for  their  momentB  the  Taliiea

Q^yG^...G^,  calctdated  from  equations  (II)  with  whatever  values

seem  desirable  for  the  tensions  jT,,  ^T,, ...  T3.  (lu  practice,  the
straight  parts  of  the  corcls  are  to  be  approximately  vertical,  and
the  bcnlies  B^^  arc  to  be  each  balanced  on  its  axis  when  the
pulleys  belonging  to  it  are  renioved,  and  it  is  ailvi.saV)le  to  make
the  f  usions  each  equal  to  half  the  weight  of  one  of  the  pulleys
with  its  adjustahlo  fi  iiiiu  .)  The  machine  is  now  reaily  for  use.
To  use  it,  pull  the  cords  simultaneously  or  successively  till
lengths  equal  to  ,  c,,  ...e,  are  passed  thi-ough  the  rings  E^^
E^^  respectively.

The  joidU  required  to  do  this  may  be  positive  or  negative;  in
practice,  they  will  be  infinitesimal  downward  or  upward  pre.s.sure8
applied  by  hand  to  the  stretcliing  weights  which  remain  per-
manently hanging  on  the  cords.

Observe  the  angles  through  which  the  bodies  B^y  B^,  ...  B  are
turned  by  this  given  movement  of  the  coixhi.  These  angles  are
the  required  values  of  the  unknown  x^^  a;,,  •••^n*  satisfying  the
simultaneous  equations  (I).

The  actual  construction  of  a  practically  usefirl  macliine  for
calculating  as  many  as  eight  or  ten  or  more  of  unknowns  fn)m
the  same  number  of  linear  equations  iloes  not  promise  to  be  either
difficult  or  over-elaborate.  A  fair  ai)proximation  having  been
found  by  a  first  ap])lication  of  the  machine,  a  very  moderate
amount  of  straightforward  aritliiuoticnl  work  (aided  very  ad-
vantageously by  Crelle's  multiplication  tables)  suffices  to  calculate
the  residual  errors,  and  allow  the  machines  (with  the  setting  of
the  pulleys  unchanged)  to  be  re-applied  to  calculate  the  corrections
(which  may  be  treated  decimally,  for  convenience) :  thus,  100
times  the  amotmt  of  the  carrection  on  each  of  the  original  un-
knowns may  he  made  the  new  unknowns,  if  the  msgnitudes  thus

Digitized  by  Google

II.]

CONTINUOUS  CALCULATINQ  MACHINES.

485

falling  to  be  dealt  with  are  convenient  for  the  machine.  There  ^
is,  of  course,  no  limit  to  the  accuracy  thus  obtainable  by  succes-
sive aj>proxiraation8.  The  exceeding  easiness  of  each  application
of  the  machine  promises  well  for  its  real  usefulness,  whether  for
cases  in  which  a  single  application  suffices,  or  for  others  in  which
the  requisite  accuracy  is  reached  after  two,  three,  or  moi-e,  of
successive  approximations.

The  accompanying  drawings  represent  a  machine  for  finding
six*  unknowns  from  six  equations.  Fig.  1  represents  in  eleva-
tion and  plan  one  of  the  six  bodies  5,,  etc.  Fig.  2  shows  in
elevation  and  i>lan  one  of  the  thirty -six  pulleys  with  its
cradle  on  geometrical  slide  (§  198).  Fig.  3  shows  in  front-ele-
vation the  general  di.si)osition  of  the  instrument.

•  This  number  has  been  cliosen  for  the  first  practical  machine  to  be  con-
structed, because  a  chief  application  of  tlie  machine  may  be  to  the  calculation
of  the  corrections  on  approximate  valuea  already  found  of  the  six  elements  of
the  orbit  of  a  comet  or  asteroid.

Digitized  by  Google

486  APPENDIX  b'.  [IL

Equation-  2. One  of  the  thirty-six  pnlleys,  P,  with  its  eliding  cradle.

Full  Size.

Front  ele-
vatiuii.

PUn.

In  Fig,  3  only  one  of  the  six  coixls,  and  the  six  pulleys  over
which  it  passes,  is  shown,  not  any  of  the  other  thirty.  The  three
pulleys  seen  at  the  top  of  the  sketch  are  three  out  of  eighteen
pivoted  on  immoveable  bearings  above  the  machine,  for  the  pur-
]>osc  of  counteriK)ising  the  weights  of  the  pulleys  P,  with  their
sliding  cradles.  Each  of  the  counterpoises  is  equal  to  twice  the
weight  of  one  of  the  pulleys  P  with  its  sliding  cradle.  Thus  if
the  bodies  B  are  balanceil  on  their  knife-edges  with  each  sliding
cradle  in  its  central  position,  they  remain  balanced  when  one
or  all  of  the  cradles  are  shifte<l  to  either  side;  and  the  tension
of  each  of  the  thirty-six  essential  conls  is  exactly  equal  to  half
the  weight  of  one  of  the  pulleys  with  its  atljustable  frame,  as
8|)ecified  above  (the  deviations  from  exact  verticality  of  all  tlie
free  portions  of  the  thirty-six  essential  cords  and  the  eighteen
counterpoising  cords  being  ncglectc<l).

Google

'  4b8  "  ■ APPENDIX  [UL

III. An  Intgqbatino  Machine  aa^vinq  a  New  Kine-
matic Pbincipls*.

The  klfwimaiic  principle  for  integrating  t/dx,  wludi  is  used  in
the  inBtnuDMite  well  known  ae  Morin's  DynauMMneterf  and
Bang's  Planimeter},  adminble  as  it  is  in  many  respects,  involves
one  element  of  impeifBction  which  cannot  but  prevent  oar  con-
templating it  with  foil  satis&ction.  This  imperfection  consists
in  the  sliding  action  which  the  edge  wheel  or  roller  is  required
to  take  in  coajnnetum  with  its  rolling  action,  which  alone  is
desirable  for  exact  communication  of  motion  from  the  disk  or
cone  to  the  edge  roller.

The  veiy  ingenious,  simple,  and  practically  nsefol  instrument
well  known  as  Amsler's  Polar  Planimeter,  although  diflerent  in
its  main  features  of  principle  and  mode  of  action  from  the  instru-
ments just  referred  to,  ranks  along  with  them  in  invoh-ing  the
like  imperfection  of  requiring  to  have  a  sidewise  sliding  action
of  its  edge  rolling  wheel,  besides  the  dcsiialjlo  rf>llina:  action  on
the  sur£ace  which  impaiU  to  it  its  revolving  moLion — a  surface

*  Professor  James  Thomson,  Froceeding*  oj  the  Royal  Society,  YoL  zxxv.,  1876,
p.  2G2.

t  InstromentB  of  this  kind,  and  aqy  ofhen  Jbr  tnmmriug  inechMueal  work,
mij  better  iu  fatore  be  ealled  Ergometeni  than  Dynamometera.  The  nsino

^yuunometer"  has  been  and  continues  to  be  in  common  une  for  ngnifjing
a  spring  instrument  for  mensuring  force;  but  an  instnnneut  for  measuring
irork,  being  distinct  iu  its  nature  and  object,  ought  to  have  a  different  and  more
8uitablo  doaiguatiou.  The  name  *'  dynamometer,"  besides,  ajjpears  to  be  badly
formed  from  the  Greek;  and  for  debiguatiug  an  instrument  for  meaeurement  of
fane,  1  wnM  snggest  that  the  name  maj  with  advantage  be  changed  to
difnamimeter.  In  reapeot  to  the  mode  of  fonmng  woids  in  aiteh  eaaea,  leferanee
may  be  made  to  Giirttii8*8  Qtamnuur,  Dr  Smith's  Bni^iah  editioBi  §  864,  p.  SSO. —  -
J.  T.,  26th  February,  1876.

%  Sang'8  I'lanimotcT  is  very  clearly  described  and  figured  in  a  paper  by  its
inventor,  iu  the  Transactions  of  the  lio^al  Scottish  Society  of  Arts,  Yoh  if,
January  12,  1852.

Disk  .
Olobe-.  and
Cylinder-

Digitized  by  Google

•III.]  CONTINUOUS  CALCULATIKG  MACHINES.  '4^9

which  in  this  case  is  not  a  diak  or  cone,  but  is  the  surfaoe  of  the  Disk^
paper,  or  any  other  plane  face,  on  which  the  map  or  other  plane  cyiindpr.
diagram  to  be  evaluated  in  area  is  drawn.

Prof^sor  J.  Clerk  Maxwell,  having  seen  Song's  Planimeter
in  the  Great  Exhibition  of  1851,  and  having  become  convinced
that  the  combination  of  slipping  and  rolling  was  a  drawback  on
the  perfection  of  the  instrument,  began  to  search  for  some  ar-
rangement by  which  the  motion  should  be  that  of  perfect  rolling
in  every  action  of  the  instrument,  corresponding  to  that  of  com-
bined slipping  and  rolling  in  previous  instruments.  He  suc-
ceeded in  devising  a  new  form  of  planimeter  or  integrating
maehtne  with  a  quite  new  and  very  beautiful  principle  of  kine-
matic action  dq[»ending  on  the  mutual  rolling  of  two  equal
spheres,  eadi  on  the  other.  He  described  this  in  a  paper  sub-
mitted to  the  Royal  Scottish  Society  of  Arts  in  Januaiy  1855,
which  is  published  in  Vol.  nr.  of  the  Transactions  of  that  Society.
In  that  paper  he  also  ofoed  a  suggestion,  which  i^ipears  to  be
both  interesting  and  important,  proposing  the  attainment  of  the
desired  conditioiis  of  action  by  the  mutual  roUiog  of  a  cone  and
cylinder  with  their  axes  at  rig|ht  angles.

The  idea  of  using  pure  rolling  instead  of  combined  rolling
and  slipping  was  communicated  to  me  by  Tiot  Maxwell,  when
I  had  the  pleasure  of  learning  from  himself  some  particulars  as
to  the  nature  of  his  contriyanoe.  Afterwards  (some  time  be-
tween the  yean  1861  and  1864),  while  endeavouring  to  contrive
means  for  the  attainment  in  meteorological  observatories  of
certain  integrations  in  respect  to  the  motions  of  the  wind,  and
also  in  endeavouring  to  devise  a  planimeter  more  satisfactory  in
principle  than  either  Sang^s  or  Amsler's  planimeter  (even  though,
on  grounds  of  practical  simplicity  and  convenience,  unlikely  to
turn  out  preferable  to  Amsler's  in  ordinaiy  cases  of  taking
areas  from  maps  or  other  diagrams,  but  something  that  I  hoped
might  possibly  be  attainable  which,  while  having  the  merit  of
working  by  pure  rolling  contact,  might  be  simpler  than  the
instrument  of  Prof  Maxwell  and  preferable  to  it  in  mechanism),
I  succeeded  in  devising  for  the  desired  object  a  new  kinematic
method,  which  has  ever  since  appeared  to  me  likely  sometime
to  prove  valuable  when  occasion  for  its  employment  might  bo
found.  Now,  within  the  hi^i  few  days,  this  principle,  on  being
suggested  to  my  brother  as  perhaps  capable  of  being  iis{  fully
em])loyed  towards  the  development  of  tide-calculating  uuiclxiues

Digitized  by  Google

490

AFPEMDIX  B  '

[UL

DUks  ^  wliich  he  Lad  been  dcvismir,  has  been  found  bv  him  to  be  capnble
Qylinder-  of  l>eing  uitroduce<l  and  conibini  d  in  several  ways  to  produce

iraportiint  results.  On  his  ad\  ice,  therefore,  I  now  offer  to  the
Kojal  Society  a  brief  descriptiuu  of  the  new  principle  as  devised
by  me.

The  new  principle  consists  primarily  in  the  transmission  of
motion  from  a  disk  or  cone  to  a  cylinder  by  the  intervention  of
a  loose  ball,  wliich  presses  by  it,s  c^•a^^ty  on  the  disk  and  cylinder,
or  on  the  cone  and  cylinder,  as  the  case  may  Ije,  the  pressure
being  suflScient  to  give  the  necessary  frictional  coherence  at
each  point  of  rolling  contact;  and  the  axis  of  the  disk  or  cone
and  that  of  the  cylinder  Ijeing  both  held  fixed  in  position  by
bearings  in  stationary  framework,  and  the  arrangement  of  these
axes  being  such  that  when  the  disk  or  the  cone  and  the  cylinder
are  kept  stea<ly,  or,  in  other  worxls,  without  i*otation  on  their
axes,  the  ball  can  roll  along  them  in  contact  with  both,  so  that
the  point  of  rolling  contact  lictween  the  ball  and  the  cylinder
shall  traverse  a  straight  line  on  the  cylindric  surface  parallel
necessarily  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder — and  so  tliat,  in  the  caae
of  a  disk  being  used,  the  point  of  rolling  contact  of  the  ball
wiUi  the  di^k  shall  traverse  a  straight  line  ramring  tliroiigh  the
centre  of  the  disk — or  that,  in  case  of  a  oono  being  naedy  the
line  of  rolUng  contact  of  the  ball  on  the  cone  ahall  traverse  a
straight  line  on  the  oooioal  surface,  directed  necessarily  towards
the  vertex  of  the  cone.  It  will  thus  readily  be  seen  thsl^
^whether  the  C}  linder  and  the  disk  or  cone  be  at  rest  or  revolving
on  their  axes,  the  two  lines  of  rolling  contact  of  tbe  ball,  one
on  the  cylindric  surface  and  the  other  on  the  disk  or  cone,  when
both  considered  as  lines  traced  out  in  space  fibced  relatively  to
the  framing  of  the  whole  instrument,  will  be  two  parallel  straight
lines,  and  that  the  line  of  motion  of  the  ball's  centre  will  be
straight  and  parallel  to  them.  For  facilitating  explanatioii^
the  motion  of  the  centre  of  the  ball  along  its  path  parallel  to
the  axis  of  the  cylinder  may  be  called  the  ball's  longitadinal
motion.

Now  for  the  integration  of  ydxi  the  distance  of  the  pmnt  of
contact  ol  the  ball  with  the  disk  or  cone  firom  the  centre  of  the
disk  or  Tertez  of  the  cone  in  tlie  ball's  lon^todinal  motum  is
to  represent  y,  while  the  angular  apace  turned  by  the  disk  or
cone  firam  any  initial  position  represents and  then  the  ^"gwl««»
space  tonied  by  the  cylinder  wiU,  when  nraltiplied  fay  a  snitaUe

Digitized  by  Google

III.]  CONTINUOUS  OALGUULTINa  liACHINES.  491

constant  numeiiml  ooeffident,  express  the  integral  in  tenns  of  guk-,  ^
any  required  unit  for  ita  evaluation.  OjriiiMte^
The  longitudinal  motion  may  be  imparted  to  tiie  ball  by

having  the  framing  of  the  whole  instrument  so  placed  that  the
lines  of  longitudinal  motion  of  the  two  points  of  contact  and
of  the  ball's  centre,  which  are  three  straiglit  lines  mutually
parallel,  shall  be  inclined  to  the  horizontal  sufficiently  to  make
the  ball  teiul  docitledly  to  descend  along  the  line  of  its  longitu-
dinal motion,  and  then  regulating  ita  motion  by  an  abutting
controller,  wliioh  may  have  at  ita  point  of  contact,  where  it
} crosses  ou  the  ball,  a  plane  face  peri>emUcular  to  the  line  of  the
ball's  motion.  Otherwise  the  longitudinal  motion  may,  for  some
cases,  preferably  Ix;  imparted  to  the  ball  by  having  the  direction
of  that  motion  horizontal,  ami  having  two  controlling  flat  faces
acting  in  close  contact  without  tightness  at  opposite  extremities
of  the  ball's  diameter,  which  at  any  moment  is  in  the  line  of
the  ball's  motion  or  is  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder.

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that,  in  the  case  of  the  disk-,  ball-,  and
cylinder-integrator,  no  theoretical  nor  important  practical  fault
in  the  action  of  the  instnimeut  would  be  involved  in  any
deficiency  of  perfect  exactitude  in  the  practical  uccoinplishment
of  the  desired  condition  that  the  line  of  motion  of  the  ball's
jK)int  of  contact  Avith  the  disk  should  pass  tlirougli  the  centre  of
the  disk.  The  reason  of  this  will  be  obvious  enough  on  a  little
consideration.

The  plane  of  the  disk  may  suitably  be  placed  inclined  to  the
horizontal  at  some  such  angle  as  45^;  and  the  accompanying
sketch,  together  with  the  model,  which  will  be  submitted  to  the
Society  by  my  brother,  will  aid  towards  the  clear  understanding
of  the  explanations  which  have  been  given.

My  brother  has  pointed  out  to  me  that  an  additional  cpen^
tion,  important  for  some  pozpoeeSi  may  be  effected  by  arranging
that  the  machine  shall  give  a  continuous  record  of  the  growth
of  the  integral  by  introducing  additional  mechanisms  suitable
for  oontinually  describing  a  curve  such  that  for  each  point  of  it
the  abecissa  shall  represent  the  value  of  x,  and  the  ordinate
shall  reprcHcnt  the  integral  attained  from  a;  =  0  forward  to  that
value  of  26.  This,  he  has  pointed  out,  may  be  effected  in  practice
by  having  a  cylinder  axised  on  the  axis  of  the  disk,  a  roll  of
paper  covering  this  cylinder's  surface,  and  a  straight  bar  situated
parallel  to  this  cylinder's  aads  sad  resting  with  enough  of  pre»-

Digitized  by  Google

APPENDIX  b'.  [in-
sure on  the  surface  of  the  primary  registering  or  the  indicating
cylinder  (the  one,  namely,  which  is  actuated  by  its  contact  with
the  ball)  to  make  it  have  sufficient  frictional  coherence  with  that

SIDE  ELEVATION.  FRONT  ELEVATION.

surface,  and  by  having  this  bar  made  to  carry  a  pencil  or  other
tracing  \)o\nt  which  will  mark  the  desired  curv^e  on  the  secondary
registering  or  Uie  recording  cylinder.  As,  from  the  nature  of
the  apparatus,  the  axis  of  the  disk  and  of  the  secondary  register-
ing or  recording  cylinder  ought  to  be  steeply  inclined  to  the
horizontal,  and  as,  therefore,  this  bar,  carrying  the  pencil,  would
have  the  line  of  its  length  and  of  its  motion  alike  steeply  in-
clined with  that  axis,  it  seems  that,  to  carry  out  this  idea,  it
may  be  advisable  to  have  a  thread  attached  to  the  l>ar  and
extending  olf  in  the  line  of  the  bar  to  a  j)ulley,  passing  over  the
pulley,  and  having  suspended  at  its  other  end  a  weight  which
will  be  just  sufiicient  to  counteract  the  tendency  of  the  rod,  in
virtue  of  gravity,  to  glide  do>vn  along  the  line  of  its  own  sloi)e,
80  as  to  leave  it  perfectly  free  to  be  moved  up  or  down  by  the
frictional  coherence  between  itself  and  the  moWng  surface  of  the
indicating  cylinder  worked  directly  by  the  balL

Digitized  by  Google

ly.]

COMTINUOVS  CALCULATIKO  If ACHINEB.

493

IV. An  IMSTBOMENT  fob  CA]iGnLA.TING

THE  InTBGIUL  of  THE  PitODUCT  OF  TWO  GIVEN  FUNCTIONS*.

In  oonieqnenoe  of  the  recent  meeting  of  the  Britiah  Anodation  Machine  to
at  Bristol,  I  resumed  an  attempt  to  find  an  instmment  which  ^J^^^
should  supersede  the  heavy  arithmetical  labour  of  calculating  u  o  ?S£
the  integrals  required  to  analyse  a  function  into  its  simple  har^
momc  constituenta  according  to  the  method  of  Fourier.  Duiiqg
many  years  previously  it  had  appeared  to  me  that  the  object
ought  to  be  aocompHahed  by  some  simple  mechanical  means;
but  it  was  not  until  recently  iSbat  I  succeeded  in  devising  an
instrument  approaching  sufficiently  to  simpUci^  to  promise
practically  useful  results.  Having  azriyed  at  this  stagey  I  de-
scribed my  x^ropoaed  machine  a  few  days  ago  to  my  brother
Professor  James  Thomson,  and  he  described  to  me  in  return  a
kind  of  mechanical  integrator  which  had  occurred  to  him  many
years  ago,  but  of  which  he  had  never  published  any  description.
I  instantly  saw  that  it  gave  me  a  much  simpler  means  of  attain-
ing  my  spedal  object  than  anything  I  had  been  able  to  think  of
previously*  An  account  of  his  integrator  is  communicated  to
the  Royal  Society  along  with  the  present  paper.

while  the  rolling  globe  Ls  niovcd  so  as  always  to  be  at  a  distance
from  its  zero  poaitiou  equal  to  ^  (x).  Thia  being  done,  the  cylinder

obviously  turns  through  an  angle  equal  to  j  ^(x)  \l/(x)dx,  and

thus  solves  the  problem.

Ohe  way  of  giving  the  required  motions  to  the  ynfakting  disk
and  rolling  globe  is  as  follows

•  Sir  W.  TbomaoD,  Proceeding$  of  the  Royal  Society,  Vol.  zxiv.,1876,  p.  266.

Digitized  by  Google

494  APnsMDiz  bT.  [£V.

Kaebineto  On  two  pifloea  of  paper  draw  the  cuirea

calculate
IntMmlof

^  ^^^^^  ^  ~  ^

Attach  these  pieoee  of  paper  to  the  circumferaioe  ol  two
ctilar  eylmderBp  or  to  diflEerent  perto  of  the  ciiciiniieraiioe  of  ooie
eylinder,  with  the  axis  of  « in  each  in  the  direction  petpendicnlar
to  the  aade  of  the  cylinder.  Let  the  two  cjlinders  (if  there  aze
two)  be  geared  together  ao  aa  that  their  cironmlsrenoeB  shall
move  with  equal  velocitieSi  Attached  to  the  fiamewotk  let
there  be,  dose  to  the  ciroomferenee  of  each  cjlinder, »  dide  or
guide-rod  to  gmde  a  moveable  pointy  mored  by  the  hand  of  an
operator,  so  as  always  to  touch  the  carre  on  tJie  suiCaoe  of  tlie
cylinder,  whfle  the  two  cylinders  are  moved  round.

Two  operators  will  be  required,  as  one  ojienitor  could  not
move  the  two  points  so  as  to  fulfil  this  condition — at  all  events
unless  the  motion  were  very  slow.  One  of  these  points,  hy
proper  mechanism,  gives  an  angular  motion  to  the  rotating  disk
equal  to  its  own  linear  motion,  tlio  other  gives  a  linear  motion
equal  to  its  own  to  the  centre  of  the  roiling  globe.

The  machine  thus  described  is  immediatdy  appUoable  to
calculate  the  Talues  JET,,  ff^  ff^  etc.  of  the  hanncmc  constttoents
of  a  fbnction  ^(je)  in  the  splendid  generalisation  of  Fourier's
simple  hannoiiic  analyaiB,  which  he  initiated  himself  in  his
.solutions  for  the  conduction  of  heat  in  the  sphere  and  the
cylinder,  and  whidi  was  worked  out  so  aUy  and  beautifully  by
PoisBon*,  and  by  Stunn  and  liouville  in  their  memoraUe
papem  on  this  suljeot  pubUshed  in  the  first  Tolume  of  liouTiUe's
Jaumai  det  MaMnatiqUiet, Thus  if

^  W  = W  + i^)  + W  +  etc.

be  the  expression  for  an  arbitrary  functioii  xfrx,  in  terms  of  the
generalized  harmonic  functions  (x),  (x),  (a;),  etc,  these
functions  being  such  that

jy  {^) W  ^  =  0,  Jf  V,  (a;)  ^,  {x)  dx  =  0,  Jj^.  {x)  ^,  (x)  =  0,  etc,

•  His  general  demonstration  of  the  reality  of  tho  roots  of  transcendental
oquationfl  essential  to  thia  analysia  (an  exceediuKly  importftut  step  in  ativance
from  Fuiiriei 'a  position),  which  he  first  gave  in  the  liulUtin  dt  la  Sociite
PkUomathique  for  1628^  is  xepvoduoed  in  his  ThiorU  MatkimaiS^  4»  to

Digitized  by  Google

IV.]  GONTQfUOUS  OALCn^LTING  lULCfiDfES.  485

we  have

I  J  /  \  »  /  \  7  Intonulof
1 (X)  l}/  {.r)  dx  PrrxJuct  Of

'n  two  Ftilie-

Machino  to
calculnte

//.=

Jo

dx
dx

etc.

In  the  phyaical  appHcMaons  of  thb  iheoiy  the  integrals
which  oonstitiite  the  denominators  of  the  fommhui  for  etc.
ara  always  to  be  evaliuited  in  finite  terms  hj  an  eactensioin  of

Fourier's  foi-mula  for  the  /  xit*  dx  of  his  problem  of  the  cylinder*

Jo

made  by  Sturm  in  equation  (10),  §  iv.  of  his  Memoir e  sur  une
Classe  d Equations  cl  differences  partieilet  in  liouville's  Jowmal^
YoL  !•  (1836).  The  integrals  in  the  niunerators  ate  calculated
•with  great  ease  aid  of  the  manhlne  worked  in  the  manner
described  aboTOi

The  great  praotioal  nae  of  this  machine  will  be  to  perHoim
the  simple  hannonie  FoDrieranalysis  for  tidal,  meteorologiosl,
and  perhaps  eren  asteonomiosl,  observations.  It  is  the  case  in

and  the  inte|;ration  is  perfbimed  through  a  range  equal  to  ^

(i  anj  integer)  that  gives  this  application.  In  this  case  the
addition  of  a  rimple  crank  mechanimn,  to  give  a  simple  haimonio

angular  motion  to  the  rotating  disk  in  the  proper  period

when  the  qrlinder  bearing  the  curve  y  =  ^(x)  moves  nniformly,
supersedes  tiie  neoesrity  for  a  qrlinder  with  the  curve  y=<^{x)
traced  on  it,  and  an  o^^ei-ator  keeping  a  point  always  on  this
curve  in  the  manner  described  above.  Thus  one  operator  will  be
enough  to  csirjr  on  tlie  process;  and  I  believe  that  in  the  appli-
cation of  it  to  the  tidal  harmonic  analysis  he  will  be  able  in  an

«  Fourier's  TkiorU  Analytiqttt  it  la  CkaUmr,  §  819,  p.  t91  (Paris,  1832).

Digitized  by  Google

APP£NDIX  B'.

hour  or  two  to  Cud  by  aid  of  the  mnchine  any  one  of  the  simple
haiinonic  elements  of  a  year's  tides  recorded  in  curves  in  the
usual  manner  by  an  ordinary  tide  gauge — a  i-esult  which  hitherto
has  requirfxl  not  less  than  twenty  lioui-s  of  calculation  by  skilled
arithmeticians.  I  believe  this  iustrument  will  be  of  great  value
also  in  detcrmijiing  the  diurnal,  semi  diurnal,  ter-<liumal,  and
quarter-diurnal  constituents  of  the  daily  variixtions  of  temjxjrature,
barometric  pressure,  e^ust  and  west  coin|K)neuts  of  the  velocity  of
the  wind,  north  and  south  components  of  the  same ;  also  of  the
three  coTn]>onent8  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic  force  ;  also  of  the
electric  jxitontial  of  the  ail*  at  the  point  where  the  stream  of
water  breaks  into  drops  in  atmosj)heric  electrometers,  and  of
other  subjects  of  ordinary  meteorological  or  magnetic  observa-
tions; also  to  estimate  jireeisely  the  variation  of  teiTcstrial
magnetism  in  the  eleven  year's  sun-spot  periml,  and  of  sun-spots
themselves  in  this  period  ;  also  to  disprove  (or  prove,  as  the  ease
may  be)  supposed  relations  between  sun-s]tots  and  planetary
positions  and  conjunctions ;  also  to  investigate  lunar  influence
on  the  height  of  the  barometer,  and  on  the  components  of  the
torreatiial  magnetic  force,  and  to  find  if  lunar  influence  is
sensible  on  any  other  meteorological  phenomena — and  if  ao^  to
determme  precisely  its  character  and  amount.

Eram  tbe  dascriptkm  given  above  it  will  be  seen  thai  tibe  .
meclianism  requiied  for  the  instnimeiit  is  exoeedingly  simple  and
eBSf.  Its  siixniiacywiU  depend  essentiaUy  on  tiieaouEaiT' of  the
ciicular  cylinder,  of  the  gIobe»  and  of  the  plane  of  the  nitatii^
disk  nsed  in  ib,  For  each  of  the  three  saifsoes  a  mneh  lees
elaborate  applioation  of  the  method  of  scrsping  than  that  by
which  8b  Joseph  Whitworth  has  given  a  true  plane  with  sadi
marvellous  aeoaauey  will  no  doubt'  suffice  for  the  piaotioal  re-
quirements of  the  instroment  now  proposed.

Digitized  by  Google

y.]  COimNUOUS  CALCULATING  BCACHINES.  497

V.  Mechanical  Integration  of  Linear  Differen-
tial Equations  of  the  Second  O&der  with  Yabiable
Coefficients*.

Every  liaear  differential  enaation  of  the  second  order  may,  as  Merbanicfti

i  InteimUjon
IS  known,  be  redaoed  to  the  form  of  hmmt

^  •  DifferentW

EquAtioM

£(l.±\.u  (1)  of«

where  F  u  any  giTen  fbnetion  of  x.

On  account  of  the  great  importanoe  of  this  equation  in
mathematical  physics  (vibrations  of  a  non-unifonn  stretched
cord,  of  a  hanging  chain,  of  water  in  a  canal  of  non-unifonn
breadth  and  depth,  of  air  in  a  pipe  of  non-unifonn  sectional  are%
conduction  of  heat  along  a  bar  of  non-uniform  secticm  or  non-
uniform conductivity,  Laplaoe^s  differential  equation  of  the  tides^
eta  etc.),  I  have  long  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  means  of  fiusiUtat-
ing  its  practical  solution.

Methods  of  Calculation  such  as  those  used  byLaplaoe  him-
self are  exceedingly  valualik^  but  are  very  kbtmoas,  too
laborious  unless  a  serious  object  is  to  be  attained  by  calculating
out  results  with  minute  accuracy.  A  ready  means  of  obtaining
approximate  results  which  shall  show  the  general  diaraeter  of
the  solutions,  such  as  those  so  well  worked  out  by  Sturmf ,  has
always  seemed  to  me  a  desideratum.  Therefore  I  have  made
many  attempts  to  jilau  a  mechanical  integrator  which  should
give  solutions  by  successive  approximations.  This  is  clearly  done
now,  when  we  have  the  instniment  tor  calculating  j<f>  [x)  \p  {x)  dxy
founded  on  my  brother's  disk-,  globe-,  and  cylinder-integrator,
and  described  in  a  previous  communication  to  the  Koyal  Society  ^
for  it  is  easily  proved ;(  that  if

*  Sir  W.  Thomson,  Proeeediugi  of  the  Royal  SoeUiff,  Yd.  znv.,  1876,  p.
t  Memoire  sur  Ua  tquai^oM  ^^^[iNnitiUUu  UiMu*  4»  ieeond  orire,  Lioaville*8

Journal,  Vol.  i.  1836.

X  Cambridge  Senate-House  Examination,  Tborsdaj  afternoon,  January  22nd,
1874.

VOL,  I.  32

Digitized  by  Google

498

AFPE!n>IX  B'.

DifferentU  i

ontooood

eta,  J

where  «,  Is  any  function  of  to  begin  with,  ss  for  example
u^ssx;  tben  u,,  et&  are  succesBlTe  approximations  coiiTeig-
ing  to  that  one  of  the  Bolntiona  of  (1)  whidi  Tanishes  when

Now  let  my  brother  s  int^rator  be  applied  to  lind  ^— j  f

and  let  its  resiilt  feed,  aa  it  were,  continuously  a  second  machine,
which  shall  find  this  integral  of  the  product  of  its  result  into
Pdx,  The  second  machine  will  give  out  continuously  the  value
of  u^.  Use  again  the  same  process  with  ti,  instead  of  u^,  and
then  n^,  and  so  on.

After  tliu.s  iiltoiiiiLC,  as  it  were,  into  bypassing  it  tlironffli
the  nuicliine,  tlicu  u„  into  n,  hv  a  second  i)assa<_'o  thnmiih  tho
macliiiR',  and  so  du,  tlie  tliini;  will,  jui  it  were,  become  retiiuU
into  a  Kohition  w  liii  h  will  Ijo  more  and  more  noarlv  riijorouslv'
correct  tlio  often.  !•  we  pass  it  tlmnigli  the  n'.acliine.  If  does
not  sensibly  dltibr  from  u,,  then  each  ia  .sensibly  a  solution.

So  far  I  had  gone  and  was  satisfied,  feeling  I  had  done  what
I  wished  to  do  for  many  years.  But  then  came  a  i)lpasing
surprise.  Compel  agreement  between  the  function  fed  into  the
doul*le  machine  and  that  given  out  by  it.  This  is  to  be  done  by
e8tal)lishing  a  connexion  wliich  shall  cause  the  motion  of  the
centre  of  the  globe  of  the  fu  st  integrator  of  the  double  machine
to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  stuface  of  the  second  integrator's
<^linder.  The  motion  of  each  will  thus  be  necessarily  a  solution
of  (1).  Thus  I  was  led  to  a  conclusion  which  was  quite  unex-
pected ;  and  it  seems  to  me  very  remarkal)le  that  the  general
difierential  equation  of  the  second  order  with  variable  coefficients
may  be  rigorously,  continuously,  and  in  a  single  process  solved
by  a  machina

Take  up  the  whole  matter  a6  initio :  here  it  is.  Take  two  of
my  brother's  disk-,  globe-,  and  cylindeivint^rators,  and  connect
the  fork  which  guides  the  motion  of  the  globe  of  each  of  the
integiators,  by  proper  mechanical  means,  with  the  drcumferenee
of  the  other  integrator's  cylinder.  Then  move  one  integrator's
disk  through  an  angle  s  x,  and  simtiltanecusly  more  the  other

Digitized  by  Google

v.]  CONTINUOirS  CAICULATINQ  MACHINES.  499

tit  Meohfinical

integrator's  disk  through  an  angle  always  =  I  Pdx,  a  given

.  ™ .  /.  p ,  1 .  DilRrcntiaJ

function  of  x. The  circumference  of  tlic  second  integrator's  Kquationa

of  Second

cylinder  and  the  centre  of  tho  firat  integrator's  globe  move  each  Ordw. .
of  them  through  a  space  which  satiafies  the  differential  equa-
tion (1).

To  prove  this,  let  at  any  time  be  the  displacements  of

the  centn  s  (if  the  two  globes  from  the  axial  lines  of  the  disks  J
and  let  <fx,  P<  fr  be  infinitesimal  angles  turned  through  by  the  two
disks.  The  infinitesimal  motions  produced  in  the oLroumfereooes
of  two  (flinders  will  be

gidx  and  g^Pdx,

But  the  connexions  pull  the  second  and  first  globes  through  spaces
respectively  equal  to  those  moved  through  by  the  drcumferenoes
of  the  first  and  second  cylinders.  Hence

g^d»=ig^  and  g^Pd»^dg^\
and  eliminating  g^

d_/\  (Ig\

^vlli^■l^  shows  that put  for  u  satisfies  the  differential  e<^ua-

tiou  (1).

'  The  maeliine  givt-s  the  complete  integral  of  the  equation  with
its  two  Mibiti  ai  V  constants.  For,  for  any  particular  value  of  a*,
give  arbitral y  vahios  (r^,  [Tltat  is  to  say  meclianically ;  dis-

connect the  forks  from  tlie  eylindei-s,  shift  the  forks  till  the  globes'
centres  are  at  (listanees  6',,  from  the  axial  lines,  then  connect,
and  move  tlie  ni  ichine.]

We  have  for  this  value  of  a?,

that  is,  we  secure  arbitrary  values  for  g.  and  by  the  arbitrari-
ness  of  the  two  initial  positions 0^  of  the  globes.

Digitized  by  Google

500  ArMENDlX  b'.  [VL

of  General
lAnemx
Diffincntbl
BquationoC

VI.  Mkchanical  Integiution  of  the  general  Likeab
Differential  Equation  of  any  ORDEii  with  Vakiablb

COSFFICIEMTB*.

TtkB  any  number  %  of  my  brother's  disk-,  globe-,  and  cyliiider-
integntoiBy  and  make  an  integratiDg  chain  of  them  thus: —
Connect  the  ojUnder  of  the  first  so  as  to  give  a  motion  equal  to
its  ownt  to  the  fork  of  the  aeoond.  Similarly  connect  the
cylinder  of  the  second  with  the  fork  of  the  third,  and  so  on.
Let  g^f  g^  up  to  ^i,  he  the  positions  J  of  the  globes  at  any  tim^».
Let  ||ifitti'i-.<Mnfna.l  motions  P^dx,  P^dx^  i^^dx, ...  be  given  simul-
taneooflly  to  all  the  disks  (c£c  denoting  an  infinitesimal  motion  of
some  part  of  the  mechanism  vhoae  displacement  it  is  convenient
to  take  as  independent  variable).  The  motions  (dic^  dx^  .1.  dx^
<A  the  cylinders  thus  produced  aie

dK^  =  g^P^dx,  dK^  =  g,P^dx,,„dK,^gtP,dx  (1^

But,  by  the  connexions  between  the  cyliiulers  mid  forks  wliich
move  the  globes,  dK^  =  dg^  dK^~dy^  dK^^^^dg^^  and  there-
fore

d{Ij^g,P,dx,  dg.^  =  gj\dx,  ...  dg^^ g,_J\_^dx
and dK^  =9i^id^  dK^  =  g^P^dx,  ...  dK^  =  g^P^  dx,
Menoe

^'^P^d^l\dx''  P,_^dxT\d3c

Suppose,  now,  for  the  moment  that  we  couple  the  last  cylinder
with  the  first  fork,  so  that  their  motions  shall  be  equal — tli:it  is
to  say,  K^  =  g^.  Then,  putting  u  to  denote  the  common  value  of
these  variables,  we  have

\  d  I  d \ d  I  du

^}...(2).

</./•  dx

Pt^^dxPtdx

(4).

*  Sir  W.  Thomson,  Procccdiwji  of  the  Royal  Society,  Vol.  xxiv.,  187G.  p.  271.
t  For  brevity,  the  motion  oi  the  circuuferenoe  ol  the  ojrlinder  ia  called  the
cylinder's  motion.

X  For  brevity,  the  term  "  position"  of  any  one  of  the  glubes  is  used  to  denote
its  distance,  positiTe  or  negative,  from  the  aausl  line  of  the  rotating  disk  cn
whidi  it  pnsset.

Digitized  by  GoogI(

VI]  OONTUmOUS  CALCITLATIKa  MACRIMEa  601

Thus  an  endless  chain  or  cycle  of  integrators  with  disks  moved  M<irhanuml
80  specified  above  gives  to  each  fork  a  motion  fulfillinn;  a  dif-  «f  (^m^
ferential  equation,  which  for  the  case  of  the  fork  of  the  tth  iute-  Difrere»tiai
grator  is  equation  (4).  The  diiierential  equations  of  the  displace-  ISgMMer'
mente  o£  the  second  fork,  third  fork, ...  (t  — l)th  fork  maj  of
contBe  be  wntien  out  hj  inspection  irom  equation  (4).

This  seenui  to  me  an  exoeedmgly  interestijig  i-csidt;  but
though  Z',,  P,,  J^af  '•'  ^*  ^7  ^  given  fnnctionB  whatever  of
X,  the  differential  equations  so  solved  by  the  sunple  cycle  ci  Inte-
grators cannot^  except  for  the  case  of  i»  2,  be  regarded  as  the
general  Unear  equation  of  the  order  i,  because^  so  ftr  as  I  know,
it  has  not  been  proved  for  any  value  of  t  greater  than  2  that  the
general  equation,  which  in  its  usual  form  Is  as  follows,

«-5^^'?'<??='*-«'5;-»-«

can  be  reduced  to  the  form  (4),  The  general  equation  of  the
form  (5),  where  Q^,  Q^,  ■  ■  are  any  given  forms  of  x,  may  be
int^>grated  mechanically  by  a  chain  of  connected  integi^tors
thus: —

First  take  an  open  ehaan  of  •  simple  integrators  as  described
above,  and  simplify  the  movement  by  taking

P  -  P  ~  P  -  -P=l

SO  that  the  speeds  of  all  the  disks  are  equal,  and  dx  denotes  an
wfinitommfti  angular  motion  of  each. Then  by  (2)  we  have

^'"S?^' ^

Kow  establish  connexions  between  the  i  forks  and  the  ith
cylinder,  so  that

Putting  in  this  for  eto.  thdr  values  by  (6^  we  6nd  an
equation  the  same  as  (5),  exoept  that  appears  instead  of  «,
Hence  the  mechanism,  when  moved  so  as  to  fulfil  the  condition
(7),  performs  by  the  motion  of  its  last  cylinder  an  integration  of
the  equation  (5).  This  mechanical  solution  is  complete ;  for  we
may  give  arbitxarily  any  initial  values  to  ff„  g^_^t  y^,  g^]
that  is  to  say,  to

1

Digitized  by  Google

502

APPENDIX  B'

1  rit'-KHlt  inn

of  (irtitral
Liti'  nr
UiiliTfiitial
Kqitattori  of
Aiijr  Ordur.

Until  it  is  desired  actually  to  constract  a  macbine  for  thus

iutojrratint;  dift'i'irntial  e(iiuition8  of  the  tliird  or  any  liiirher
onlrr,  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  into  details  as  to  plans  for  tlie
meclianiiul  fultihnent  of  condition  (7);  it  i.s  enough  to  know
that  it  can  Im?  ful tilled  by  pure  mechanism  workinfj  continuously
in  counexiuu  with  the  rotating  disks  oi  the  train  of  integrators.

Ufchanlcal

Int«K»tum

of  iMiy

I)i(Tin»nti«l
Equation  of

Aujr  Older.

Addendum.

The  integrator  may  be  applied  to  integrate  any  differential
equation  of  any  order. Let  there  he  %  simple  integrators;  let
9^f  '^i  ^  ^®  diaplaoements  of  disk,  glohe^  and  i^linder  of  the
first,  and  so  tor  the  others. We  have

Now  by  proper  ni<^chanism  establish  such  relations  between

«ll  9l»  «lf  ^B*  9m9

that

(3i  —  1  relations).

This  will  leave  just  one  degi*ee  of  freedom;  and  thus  we  have
2t-  1  simultaneous  equations  solved.  Ab  one  particular  case
of  relations  take

aCj  =  ar^=  ...(i— 1  relations),
and  ^a^'^t*  etc.  (i-I  relationa);

so  that

ThoB  one  relation  is  still  available. Let  it  be

Thus  the  machine  solves  the  differential  equation

-/ d^n. d'-hi du \ ^  , . ^  .

Or  again,  take  2i  double  integrators.  Let  the  disks  of  all  bo
connected  so  as  to  move  with  the  aame  speed,  and  let  t  be  the

Digitized  by  Google

VI.]  CONTINUO0S  CALCtTLATIKG  HACHINES.  603

displacement  of  any  one  of  tliem  from  any  particular  position.  Mechan^j^

-  li.ir<  rt'ntial

«,  y, y  ,. y "  Ssroi^'

be  the  displacements  of  the  second  cylinders  of  the  several
doable  integrators.  Then  (the  second  globe-frame  of  each  being
connected  to  its  first  cylinder)  the  displacements  of  the  first
^obe-frames  will  be

(fg  <Pa/

de'  d^' df*  d^'^^

Let  now  JT,  1\  A",  T',  etc.  be  each  a  given  function  of

y»  x\  y\  ^\  etc.

By  proper  mQchanism  make  the  tii-st  globe  of  the  first  double
intogrator^frame  move  so  that  its  displacement  shall  be  equal  to
JT,  and  so  on. The  machine  then  solves  tilie  equations

For  example,  let

+  («"-«)/((«"-»)•+(/-»)•}

-»•.

+  (y"-y)/K«"-«r  +  (y"-yn
+

X'=etc,  r'=etc.,
where  /  denotes  any  function.

Construct  in  (frictionless)  steel  the  surface  whose  equation  is

(and  repetitions  of  it,  for  pi  iu  tical  convenience,  though  on*
theoretically  buffices).  By  aid  of  it  (vised  as  if  it  were  a  cum,  but
for  two  independent  variables)  arrange  that  one  moving  auxiliary
piece  (an  .r-auxiliary  I  shall  call  it),  capable  of  moving  to  and
fro  ill  a  straight  line,  shall  have  displacement  always  equal  to

(«'-a;)/l(;«'-a:)«+(y-y)'},

tbat  another  (a  y-auziliary)  shall  have  displacement  always
equal  to

(y'-y)/l(«'-^)'+(y'-y)">.

Digitized  by  Google

504  APPENDIX  B'.  [VL

lnt««nUoB ^^^^  another  (an  a:-auxiliiiry)  sluill  have  ULspliiccment  equal  to

gjjl^ and  80  on.

Then  connect  the  first  globe-frame  of  the  first  double  integm-
tor,  80  that  its  displacement  shall  be  equal  to  the  ram  of  the
displaoements  of  the  a^aiudliarieft;  that  is  to  saj,  to

*(=^'-x)A{x"-x)'*(3r-v)'i

4-  etc.

This  may  be  done  hy  a  oord  passing  over  pullcjrs  attached  to
the  Moxilianea,  with  one  end  of  it  fixed  and  the  other  attadied
to  the  globe-frame  (as  in  mj  tid»pgedicting  machine,  or  in
Wheatstone's  alphabetic  telegraph-sending  instrument).

Then,  to  begin  with,  adjust  the  second  globe-frames  and  the
second  cylinders  to  have  their  displacements  equal  to  the  initial
▼elocit7'-<xmipoiient8  and  initial  co-ordinates  of  •  particles  free
to  more  in  one  plana  Tom  the  machine,  and  the  positions  of
the  particles  at  time  I  are  shown  by  the  second  cylinders  of  the
several  double  integratois,  supposing  {hem  to  be  free  partidos
attrseting  or  repelling  one  jmother  with  forces  varying  according
to  any  function  of  the  distance.

The  same  may  clearly  be  done  for  particles  moving  in  three
diin(  usioii«  of  space,  since  the  components  of  force  on  each  may
be  lucchanically  constructed  by  aid  of  a  cam-surface  whose  ec^ua-
tion  is

and  taking for  the  distance  between  any  two  particleB,  and

or  ^l^-lf

or  =ai*-ar,  etc.

Thus  wo  have  a  complete  mechanical  integration  of  the  pro-
blem of  rinding  the  free  motions  of  any  number  of  mutually
influcncuii;  particles,  not  restricted  by  any  of  the  approximate
supp<»8ition8  which  the  analytical  ti*oatment  of  the  luuar  and
planetary  theories  requires.

Digitized  by  Google

VII.]

C0NTINU5US  CALCULATING  MACHINES.

505

VII.  Harmonic  Analtzer*

in  the  minor's  oommiinicatioii  to  the  Royal  Society  (''Proceed-
ings," Febrauy  3rd,  1876),  entitled  ''On  an  Instrument  for
Oalcnlating  (/^  (x)  ^  {x)  dx),  the  Int^ral  of  the  Product  of  two
given  FunctionB.'*

It  consists  of  five  disk-,  globe-,  and  cylinder-integrators  of  the
hind  described  in  ProlesBor  James  Thomson's  paper  "On  an
Integrating  Machine  having  a  new  Kinematic  Principle^'*  of  the
same  date,  and  represented  in  the  woodcuts  of  Apiiendix  iii.

The  five  disks  are  all  in  one  plane,  and  their  oentrss  in  one
lino,  The  axes  of  the  cylinders  are  all  in  a  line  parallel  to  it
The  diameters  of  the  five  cylinders  are  all  equal,  so  are  those  of
the  ^obes ;  hence  the  centres  of  the  globes  are  in  a  line  parallel
to  the  line  of  the  centres  of  the  disks,  and  to  the  line  of  the  axes
of  the  cylinders.

One  long  wooden  rod,  pro]}erly  supported  and  guided,  and
worked  by  a  rack  and  pinion,  carries  five  forks  to  move  the  five
globes  and  a  pointer  to  trace  the  curve  on  the  paper  cylinder.
The  shaft  of  the  paper  cylinder  carries  at  its  two  ends  cranks  at
right  au^'lcH  to  one  another ;  and  a  toothed  wheel  which  turns  a
parallel  shaft,  and  a  third  shaft  in  line  with  the  first,  by  means
of  three  other  toothed  wheels.  This  third  shalt  carries  at  its
two  ends  two  cranks  at  right  angles  to  one  another.

Another  toothed  wheel  on  the  shaft  of  the  paper  drum  turns
another  parallel  shaft,  which,  by  a  slightly  oblique  toothed  wheel
working  on  a  crown  wheel  with  ftlightly  obli(pic  teeth,  turns
onec^  the  five  disks  uniformly  (suppubin^  to  avoid  circumloou-
tion  the  paper  <lrimi  to  be  turning;  uuifoniily).  The  cylinder  of
the  iutegnitor,  of  wliiclj  tlii.s  oue  ia  the  diik,  gives  the  coutinu-
ously  gi'owin^'  value  of  (,'/<'■'•.

Each  of  the  four  cranks  ;,'i\ts  a  siuiplc  luinaoiiic  angular
motion  to  oiu'  of  tlio  other  foui-  «ii-,ks  by  means  of  a  slide  and
cru.H.shc'a'I,  <';ui  ving  a  rack  wliioli  wurk.s  a  sector  attached  to  the
disk. Hence,  the  cylindei-s  moved  by  the  diaka,  driveu  by  the

*  Sir  W.  Thomson,  JPtaceedings  oj  the  Hoyal  Sotiety,  Vol  ixvii.1 1S78,  p.871.

VOL.  I.

33

Digitized  by  Google

506  AFPEHDDL  B'.  [VII.

first  meutioned  pair  of  craokB)  give  the  coutmuoufilj  growiag
values  of

where  c  denotes  the  circumferenoe  of  the  paper  drum :  and  the
two  remaiuing  cjliuders  givu

JycoB-^ax,  and  sin— ^  ok;

where  <<>  denotes  the  angular  velocity  of  the  shaft  caixjing  tlie
aeoond  pair  of  abafta,  that  of  the  fizst  being  unity.

The  ina<!thffl<<^  with  tlie  toothed  wheeb  aefeoallj  moimled  on  it
when  shown  to  the  Royal  Sodetj,  gave  msS,  and  was  thsreforo
adopted  for  the  meteorologiesl  application.  By  xanoval  of  two
of  the  wheels  and  snbstitation  of  two  others,  which  were  laid  on

39  X  109

the  table  of  the  Boyal  Society,  the  value  of  »  becomes  ^  ^  HO*

(aoootding  to  factors  found  by  Mr  E.  Bobert%  and  sappUed  by
him  to  the  author,  for  the  ratio  of  the  mean  lunar  to  the  mean
solar  periods  rdatiyely  to  the  earth's  rotation).  Thus,  the  ssme
machine  can  serve  for  analyzing  out  smraltaneonsly  the  mean
lunar  and  mean  solar  semidiumsl  tides  from  a  tide-gauge  eorre.
But  the  dimensions  of  the  actual  ina<»liifiA  do  not  allow  range
enou|^  of  motion  for  the  majority  of  tide-gauge  curves,  and  they
are  perfectly  sufficient  and  suitable  for  meteorological  woik.  The
machine,  with  the  train  giving  (d  —  2,  is  therefore  handed  over  to
the  Meteorological  Office  to  be  brought  immediately  into  prac-
tical work  by  Mr  Sdbtt  (as  soon  as  a  brass  cylinder  of  proper
diameter  to  suit  the  2ih  length  of  his  curves  is  substituted  for
the  wooden  model  cylinder  in  the  machine  as  shown  to  the
Royal  Society)  :  and  the  construction  of  a  new  machine  for  the
fpidftl  tidal  analysis,  to  have  eleven  disk-,  globe-,  and  cylinder-integrators

AMji'a«'r°  lint',  und  four  crank  shafts  having  their  axes  in  line  with  the

pai)er  drum,  according  to  the  preceding  description,  in  proper
l)eriods  to  analyse  a  tide  curve  by  one  proet'ss  for  mean  level,  and
for  the  two  components  of  each  of  the  five  chief  tidal  con-
stituenth — thut  is  to  i>ay,

*  The  aetoal  numbera  of  the  teeth  in  the  two  pairs  of  idMds  oonatitnting  the
tiais  am  78 ;  80  and  109 : 110.

Digitized  by  Google

VII.]  OONTUmOUS  CALCULATINO  MACHINEB.  507

(1)  The  mem  solar  Bemi-diunial ;  tvm

liarmonic

(2)  „ „ lunar „  Aaaigmr,

(3)  „ „ Innar  qnarter-diimial,  shallow-water  tide ;

(4)  „ „ lunar  declinational  diurnal ;

(5)  f, yf luui-solar  declinational  diurnal ;

is  to  be  immediately  commenced.  It  is  hoi)ed  that  it  may  be
completed  without  need  to  api)ly  for  any  addition  to  the  grant
alxeadjr  made  by  the  Boyal  Societj  fior  hazmonie  analysers.

Goonterpoises  are  applied  to  the  orank  shafts  to  fblfil  the  eon-
dition  that  gravity  on  cranks^  and  sliding  pieces,  snd  seetora,  is
in  eqniUbiium.  Error  from  **  back  lasb"  or  "  lost  time"  is  thus
preyented  simply  by  friotional  resistsnoe  sgainst  the  rotation  of
the  nnilbnnly  rotating  disk  and  of  the  tertiary  shafts,  and  by
the  weights  of  the  sectors  attached  to  the  osdilating  disks.

Addition^  A])ril,  1879. The  machine  pnunised  in  the  pre-
ceding paper  has  now  been  completed  with  one  important  molli-
fication : — Two  oi  the  eleven  constituent  integrators,  instead  of
being  devoted,  as  proposed  in  No.  3  of  the  preceding  schedule,
to  evaluate  the  lunar  quarter-diurnal  Bhallow-water  tide,  are
arranged  to  evaluate  the  sdar  declinational  diurnal  tide,  this
being  a  constituent  of  great  practical  importance  in  all  other
seas  than  the  North  Atlantic,  and  of  very  great  scientific  interest
For  the  evaluation  of  quarter-diurnal  tides,  whether  lunar  or
sobur,  and  of  semi-diurnal  tides  of  periods  the  halves  of  those  of
the  diurnal  tides,  that  is  to  say  of  all  tidal  constituents  whose
periods  are  the  halves  of  those  of  the  five  main  constituents  for
which  the  machine  is  primarily  designed,  an  extra  paper-cylinder,
of  half  the  diameter  of  the  one  used  in  the  primsiy  application
of  the  machine^  is  constructed. By  putting  in  this  secondsry  gaeondaiy.
cylinder  and  repassing  the  tidal  curve  through  the  machine'the  ^{ttlEternarT,
secondary  tidal  constituents  (corresponding  to  the  first  "over>  JJ^J^'^^^^,
tones'*  or  secondary  harmonic  constituents  of  musical  sounds)  ^H^km
are  to  be  evaluated. Similarly  tertiary,  quatemazy,  etc.  tides
(conesponding  to  the  second  and  higher  overtones  in  musical  andogooji
sounds)  may  be  evaluated  by  passbg  the  curve  over  cylinders  of  ^^^^^^
one-third  and  of  smaller  sub-multiples  of  the  diameter  of  the
primary  i^linder. These  secondary  and  tertiary  tidal  consti-
tuents sre  only  perceptible  at  pJaces  where  the  rise  and  fall  is
influenced  by  a  large  area  of  sea,  or  a  coosiderBble  length  of

Digitized  by  Google

508  APPENDIX  B'.  [VII.

Tidal  channel  through  wliich  the  whole  amount  of  the  rise  imd  fail  is

Aaaijwt.  notable  in  proportion  to  the  mean  depth.  They  are  very  percep-

tible at  almost  all  commercial  ports,  except  in  the  Metliterranean,
and  to  them  are  due  such  curioas  and  practically  important
tidal  characteristics  as  the  double  high  waters  at  Southampton
and  in  the  Solent  and  on  the  south  coast  of  England  trom  the
Igle  of  Wight  to  Fortlandf  and  the  psrotnusted  ilanLtioD  ol  high
water  at  fiavia

END  OF  Fl&T  J.
