Commentaries on American Law, Vol. I (James Kent, 1828)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1828 printing, vol. I (https://archive.org/details/commentariesona13kentgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COMMENTARIES


AMERICAN  LAW.


BYJA>UBS  KENT-


VOLUME  I.


jfEir-roRK!

rtiBLlSHED  BT  0.  UALitSb.


. 1828.


i,,-c,it,  Google


SMtttfM  DUrid  xfJftm.T«rk,  n.
BE  IT  REMEMBERED,  that  cw tbe twmtf .Mh  dafoT  No*MiriMr,

A.  D. IflSS.  in  tbe  fiftj-firtt  ^Mr  oT  tb«  tnderx'DdpBc--  of  ihe
(^'*-)  Unit«d State*  of  Americk,  JuDetEent,  of  tbs  mid  diilrict.  hoth
d*paiitad  in  thii  oBoe  (be  litla  of  ■  book,  tbe  rifht  whereof  be  elaima  M
■Mlbor,  in  tba  wenli  blfanrinf ,  to  wit :
**CoaUDeM>TiMoaAaieriMDLaw. By  Junai  Keot. Volamel."
In  coafonnilT  to  tbe  Act  of  Coogrtt  at  the  Uoited  State*,  eotillrd,
**  Aq  Aot  for  ibe  eocoaragf'nMDt  of  LeaniiiK,  b;  lecnring  the  (xipiee
•f  Mapa,  Chart* and  Book*,  to  tbe  aolhon  aod  proprietor*  of  ioob
eopiea.  dviior  tbe  tipnei  tberetn  mentioaed." And  ilao  to  an Act*
«titilled Aq  Act.  mpplenfnlan-  to  *o  Art,  eatitled,  an  Act  for  the
•Dooorannwot  oT  rjcarniiif,  b>  lernrinf  ihe  copie*  id  Hapa,  Chart*,
am)  Booki,  to  tbe  aotbor*  aod  proprietor*  of  *uGh  copies,  duHi^  tb«
time*  tberetn  mentiotMd.  and  esteodin^  tbe  benefits  thereof  \a  the  aria
" ' ' f,  «ii(raTiiic,  and  etching  hiatorical  awl  atber  prioti."
JAMES  DILL,
Kltrk^UUSaulhtmJMtlHettifJfMt-nrk.


364733.


oTt"  rm'wbiui^  mMiT


r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


PREFACE,


Hatinq  retired  from  public  o£Bce  in  the  mimaier
of  I82ci,  1  had  the  honour  to  receive  the  appuiot-
meat  of  Professor  of  law  ia  Columbia  College.  The
trustees  of  that  iastiiuiioo  have  repeatedly  given  me
the  most  liberal  and  encouraging  proofs  of  their  re-
spect aod  coafidt'nce,  and  of  which  I  shall  erei  re-
taiuing  grateful  recollection.  A  similar  appointment
was  received  from  them  in  the  year  1793  ;  aod  this
renewed  mirk  of  their  approbation  determined  me  to
employ  the  entire  leisure  in  which  I  found  myself,  in
further  endeavours  to  di.'«charge  the  debt  which,  ac-
cording to  Liird  Bacon,  every  man  owes  to  his  pro-
fession. I  was  strongly  induced  to  accept  the  trust
from  the  want  of  occuiation :  being  apprehensive
that  the  snddea  cessation  of  my  habitual  employ-
nieni,'  and  the  contrast  between  the  discussions  of
the  forum,  and  the  solitude  of  retirement,  might  be


•  Iwuttppoiated  Recorder  of  New-York  in  March,  1797,  ud  fraiB
Ami  linw  ■dUI  Au{iuI,  lBt3,  wu  cooiuatlj  empk^ed  !■  j«dio»l  d*.
tiM-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4  rKBFACK.

ttnpropitious  to  tnj  tieakh  and  spirits,  and  cast  a  pre>
mature  shade  over  the  happiness  of  declining  years.

The  following  Lectures  are  the  fruit  of  the  accept-
ance of  that  trust ;  and  in  the  performance  of  my  col'
legiHte  dntv,  I  had  tlie  satisfaction  to  meet  a  collec-
tion of  interesting  young  geudeoien  of  fine  talents  and
pure  character,  who  placed  themselves  under  my  in-
•truction,  and  in  n  hose  future  welfare  a  deep  interest
it  fell.

Having  been  encouraged  lo  suppose  that  the  publi-
caiion  of  the  Lectures  mTght  renderthem  more  ex-
tensively useful,  1  hare  been  induced  to  submit  the
present  volume  to  (he  notice  of  students,  and  of  the
junior  meralierBof  the  profession,  for  whose  use  ibej
H'ere  originally  compiled.  Another  volume  is  want-
ing to  embrace  all  the  material  parts  of  the  Lectures
which  have  been  composed.  It  will  treat  at  large,
and  in  an  elementary  manner,  of  the  law  of  property,
lind  of  personal  rights,  and  commercial  contracts;  and
*  will  be  prepared  for  the  press  in  the  course  of  the  en>
suing  year,  unless,  in  the  mean  time,  there  should  be
treason  to  apprehend,  that  another  volume  would  be
trespassing  too  far  upon  the  patience  and  indulgence
of  the  public.

New-Torlb  NoreiabeT  23,  lUfl.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


OONTENTM,

PART  I.

OF  THE  LAW  Or  HATIOHS.

L«ctiir«  1.— Of  the  fauodation  and  Hiatoij  of  tba  Ltw  of

Natioost •• 1

Lecture  U.— Of  the  Rigbu  and  Dmies  of  Nationi  in  a  State

of  Peace *»

Lecture  III. — Of  the  Declaration,  and  oiber  early  meuurai

(.fa.WieofWar, *S

Le<dura  IV.— Of  tbe  various  kindi  of  Property  liable  |o

Cnpiure, *

I^ecture  v.— Of  the  RighU  of  BetligereDl  Natioiu  iD  rela-

lioffl  in  each  other, S3

Lectnre  VL— Of  the  geDeral  Bighu  and  Dutiei  of  Neutral

Nation lOf

Lecture  VII — Of  Re«iricti(in»  npon  Neotnil  Trade,  .... 124
. I<ecture  VIII.— Of  Truces, PaisporU,  and Treatiei  of

Ptiace 149

Lecture  IX. — OfOffuDceiagaiDsi  the  LawofNaiiou  ...  169


OP  TBE  GOVEENMEHT  AND  CONSTITUTIONAL  JU&HPftU-
DENCE  OP  THE  UNITED  STATES.

Lecture  X. Of  the  HiMory  of  the  American  Uoion,  ...  189

Lecture  XI.— Of  Oongresa, *<"

Lecture  XU.— Of  Judicial  CouimctioDt  of  the  Powera  of

Congren, 339


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lcctora  Xlir.— Of  tb*  PrMident, 33$  .

Lociur*  Xl  V. — Of  the  Judiciary  DtfpariniPni, , . . . .  TJS

Lectnre  XV. — Of  the  Original  aod  Af^llaM  Juritdiction

«f  tin  Supreme  Courts 39S

Lectara  XVL — Ofihe  Joriidietiiio  of  [lie  Federal  Couru

io  retpect  ta  the  CoaiiHon  Law,  uid

in  retpeci  to Partiet, 311

LeatanXVII. — Ofihe  diatrict  and  territarial  Court*  of  the

United  States 3S1

IiMtur*  XVIU. — Of  tb«  CoacuireM  Jeriadktion  of  the

State  GovernsieDta, 36S

Lcctuie  XIX.— Of  Conatitutional  ReilrictioDt  on  the  Pow-

en  of  the  aevorml  State*!  >■••••••••••  3&I


•rXHI  TASIOUS  80tIRCE8  OP  TBE  MURICIFAL  LAV
0¥  THE  SEVERAL  STATES.

Lecture  XX.— Of  Statute  Lav, 419

Lecture  XXL— Of  Reporia  of  Judicbl  Decbiou,  ......  *S9

Lecture  XXII. — Of  the  PriDci|)Bl  publicatioii*  on  the  Coa-

moD  Law,.. 463

Letture  XXIIL—Or  the  Civil  Uw, 481


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


COHHENTASIES


AMBRICAX  liAW.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATlS^S.

LECTURE  I.

OF  THE  FODNPATION  AND  HISTORT  OF  THE  LAW
OF  NATIONS.

When  the  UaUed  States  ceased  to  be  a  part  of  the  Bri-
tish  empire,  and  BBSumed  the  character  of  aa  iodepeodent
nation,  they  became  subject  to(that^Bjst£m  ^  rulftfl  ry*""**
reason,  morality,  and  custgia  lutd  astablished  among  the
civilized  aations  of  Europe,  as  their  public  ]a.Wy  During
the  waroftEe  American rerolution,  CongreBsctaimedcog-
nizanceof  all  matters  arising  upon  the  lav  of  nations,  and
they  professed  obedience  to  that  law,  "accordrag  to  the
general  usages  of  Europe. "«  ^By  this  law  we  areto  under-
stand  that  code  of  pufaUe  instruction,  which  defines  the
rights  and  prescribes  the  duties  of  nations,  in  their  inter-
course with  each  pjbeci J  :The  faithful  observance  of  this
law  is  essential  to  national  character,  and  to  the  faappioesa
of  mankind.  I  According  to  the  observation  of  the  President
de  UontesquieUj^i^it  is  founded  on  the  principlet  that  differ-
ent nations  ought  to  do  each  other  as  much  good  in  peacer


a  Ordinance  of  the  4th  December,  1181,  relalire  to  mariUine  optnnc
Jowfi»U  of  Cangrttt,  vol.  vii.  1I&-
b  L'EiprUduLoix,}!.  I.e.  3.

Vol.  I.  1


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


2  OF  THE  LAMe.  Of  NATIONS.  (Part  I.

and  as  little  harm  in-.tf^V,  as  possible,  withoot  injury  t«
their  true  interest4> )  '^ut,  as  the  precepts  of  this  code  are
not  definp^  iix'eHry  ca"e  with  perfect  precision,  and  as
nations  have  -bo  common  civil  tribunal  to  resort  to  for  tbe
interpr^tion  and  execution  of  this  law,  it  is  often  very  dif-
ficwtt.to  ascertain,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  parties  con-
^tfed, its precise  injunctions  and  extent;  and  a  still

'.'.pbater  difficulty  is  the  want  of  adequate  pacific  meaoB  to

■ '  secure  obedience  to  its  dictates.

/There  has  been  a  difference  of  opinion  among  writers,
concerning  the  foundations  of  the  law  of  nations.  It  has
been  considered  by  some  as  a  mere  system  of  positive  in-
stitutions, founded  upon  consent  and  usage  ;  while  others
have  insisted  (hat  it  was  essentially  tbo  same  as  the  law  of
nature,  applied  to  the  conduct  of  nations,  in  the  character
of  moral  persons,  susceptible  of  obligation  and  laws.  We
are  not  to  adopt  either  of  these  theories  as  exclusively  true.
The  most  useful  and  practical  pert  of  the  law  of  nations  is,
no  doubt,  instituted  or  positive  law,  founded  on  usage,  eon-
sent,  and  agreement.  But  it  would  be  ivnpvper  to  sepa-
rate this  law  entirely  from  natural  jurisprudence,  and  not
to  consider  it  as  deriving  much  of  its  force,  and  dignity,
and  sanction,  from  the  same  principles  of  right  reason,  and
the  same  view  of  the  nature  and  constitution  of  man,  from
which  the  science  of  morality  is  deduced.  There  is  a  na-
tural and  a  positive  law  of  nations.  By  the  former,  every
state,  in  its  relations  with  other  stales,  is  bound  to  conduct
itself  with  justice,  good  faith,  and  benevolence ;  and  this
application  of  the  law  of  nature  has  been  called  by  Vattel,
the  necessary  law  of  nations,  because  nations  are  bound  by
the  law  of  nature  to  observe  it ;  and  it  is  termed  by  others,
the  internal  law  of  nations,  because  it  is  obligatory  upon
them  in  point  of  conscience.'

We  ought  not,  therefore,  to  separate  the  science  of  pub-
lic law  from  that  of  ethics,  nor  encourage  the  dangerous

«  VtUUi,  PraUm.  tec.  V.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMtar«  I.] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  9

•ufgeAioo,  that  goTernoienu  are  not  u  Hrictly  bonod  by
the  obligations  of  truib,  juitice,  and  humanity,  in  relation
toother  powers,  as  they  are  in  the  manRgeraent  of  their
own  local  concerns.  States  or  bodies  politic,  are  to  ba
considered  as  moral  persons,  havinga  public  will,  capabia
and  free  to  do  right  and  wrong,  inasmuch  as  tbey  are  col-
lections of  individuals,  each  of  whom  carries  with  him  into
the  serriceof  the  community,  the  same  binding  law  of  mo-
rality and  religion  which  ought  to  control  bis  conduct  in
private  life.  The  law  of  nations  is  a  complex  system,  com-
posed of  various  ingredients.  It  consuls  of  general  prin-
ciples of  right  and  justice,  equally  suitable  to  the  govern-
ment of  individuals  in  a  state  of  natural  equality,  and  to
the  relation  and  conduct  of  nations  ;  of  a  cntlection  of  usa-
ges and  customs,  the  growth  of  civilization  and  commerce;
and  of  a  code  of  conventional  or  positive  law."  In  theal>>
sence  of  these  latter  regulations,  the  intercourse  and  con-
duct of  nations  are  to  be  governed  by  principles  fairly  to
be  deduced  from  the  rights  and  duties  of  nations,  and  the
nature  of  moral  obligation  ;  and  we  have  the  flinhnrily  *^
the  lawyers  of  antigjiitju.  and  of  some  of  the  first  masters
in  tbe^iodern  gcEool  of  public  law,  for  placing  the  moral
obligation  of  nations  and  of  iadividuals  on  similar  grounds,
and  for  considering  individual  and  national  morality  as
parts  of  one  and  the  same  science.

The  law  of  nations,  so  far  as  it  is  founded  on  the  princi-
ples of  natural  law,  is  equally  binding  in  every  age,  and
upon  all  mankind.  But  the  Christian  nations  of  Europe,
and  their  descendants  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  by  the
vast  superiority  of  their  attnioments  in  arts,  and  science,
and  commerce,  as  well  as  in  policy  and  government ;  and,
above  all,  by  the  brighter  light,  the  more  certain  truths,
and  the  more  definite  sanction,  which  Chrintianity  hascom-
municaled  to  the  ethical  jurisprudence  of  the  ancients,  have
established  a  law  of  nations  peculiar  to  themselves.  They

a  3  Jlfium,  448.  Steiy,  J.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pwl  I.

form  together  a  community  of  natiODt,  nnited  by  religion,
mannera,  morals,  humanity,  and  ecience,  and  united  also
by  the  mutual  advantageB  of  commercial  intercourae,  by
the  habit  of  forming  alliances  and  treaties  with  each  other,
of  interchanging  ambasaadors,  and  of  studying  and  recog-
nising the  same  writers'and  systems  of  public  law.  '

A(tet  devoting  the  present  lecture  to  a  cursory  view  of
the  history  of  the  law  of  nations,  I  shall  enter  upon  the  ex-
amination of  the  European  and  American  code  of  interna-
tional  law,  and  endeavour  to  collect,  with  accuracy,  its
leading  principles,  and  to  discuss  their  practical  details.

The  law  of  nations,  as  understood  by  the  European  world,
and  by  us,  is  the  ofTspring  of  modern  times.  The  most  re-
fined stales  among  tbe  ancients  seem  to  hare  had  no  con-
ception of  the  moral  obligations  of  justice  and  humanity
between  nations,  and  there  was  do  such  thing  in  existence
as  the  science  of  international  law.  They^^ardc^.^tf«a-
gers  andenemiesasjiearly  syn^onjmous,  and  considered
foreign  persons  and  property  as  lawful  prize.  Tbeir  laws
of  war  and  peace  were  bofliaroiiTand  deplorable.  So  little
were  mankind  accustomed  to  regard  the  rights  of  persoDs
or  property,  or  to  perceive  tbe  value  and  beauty  of  public
>  t  order,  that  in  the  most  enlightened  ages  of  the  Grecian  re-
I  iTT  I A^  'i.V.  pui,]ics,  piracy  was  regarded  as  an  honourable  employment.
There  were  powerful  Grecian  states  that  avowed  theprac-
ticeof  piracy ;  and  t  be  fleets  of  Athens,  the  best  disciplined
and  most  respectable  naval  force  in  all  antiquity,  were  ex-
ceedingly addicted  to  piratical  excursions.  It  was  the  re-
ceived opinion,  that  Greekswerebound  tonoduties,  norby
any  moral  law,  without  compact,  and  that  prisoners  taken  in
war  had  no  rights,  and  might  lawfully  be  put  te  death,  or
sold  into  perpetual  slavery,  with  their  wives  and  children.*


•  Mt/onPt  Hiiton/i/  Greece,  BTo.edit  vol  ii.  359-  toI.  vi.  107.  135.
eJpainm.  War^t  Enguiry  into  the  nUtoryofOuLaaofJ^aiiont,'r<A.
i.  177— IS3.  Ooguai  Originedee  Lcdx,  fee.  part  ii.  b.  «.  Gni<iMr,b.
iii.  c.  7.  JviliaU  HUl.  1. 43.  c.  3.  Polter^t  AMqaiOetofGrtice,  b.  Si.
c.  10.  &13.  b.  ir.c.  91.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leclure  I.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATTONS.  f

There  were,  however,  maoy  feeble  effort!,  aod  staaa
■aecesaful  ezampleB,  to  be  met  with  io  Grecian  butory  in
farour  of  oatiooal  juitice.  The  object  of  the  Amphietyooic
Council  was  to  institutaja  taw  of  nationi  among  the  Greekt,
and  to  check  violeace  and  settle  conteais  between  Grecian
■tates  hj  a  jmcific  adiuatinent.  It  wae  also  a  law  of  nations
amongthem,  andonewhich  was  very  religiously  observed,
to  allow  to  the  vanquished  tbe  privilege  of  burying  their
own  dead,Bad  te  grant  tbe  requisite  truce  for  that  par-
pose.  Some  of  the  states  had  public  ministers  resident  at
the  courts  of  others,"  and  there  were  some  distinguished
ioBtauces  of  great  humanity  shown  to  prisoners  of  war.
During  a  cessation  of  arms  in  tbe  course  of  the  Pelopon-
nesian  war,  Athens  and  Sparta  agreed  to  an  exchange  or
mutual  surrender  of  prisoners.^  Tbe  sound  judgment  and
profound  reflections  of  Aristotle,  naturally  raised  his  sense
of  right  above  the  atrocious  maxims  and  practices  of  his
■ge,  and  he  perceived  tbe  injustice  of  that  doctrine  of  Gre-
eian  policy,  that,  by  the  laws  of  war,  the  vanquished  be-
came tbe  absolute  property  of  the  victor.  C"  Wise  men,"
be  observed,  "  entertained  different  opinions  upon  that
subject.\Some  considered  superiority  as  a  proof  of  virtue,
because  it  is  its  natural  effect,  and  they  asserted  it  to  be
just  that  the  victors  should  be  masters  of  tbe  vanquished ;
whilst  others  denied  tbe  force  of  tbe  argument,  and  main-
tained that  nothing  could  be  truly  just  which  was  incon-
sistent with  humanity. "<^  He  then  proceeded  to  weaken
by  argument  tbe  ifolse  foundations  on  which  the  law  of
slavery,  by  means  of  capture  io  war,  was  established ;  and
though  he  does  not  write  on  tbe  subject  very  distinctly  or
forcibly,  it  seems  to  be  quite  apparent  that  his  conviotiooj
were  on  that  side^

Tbe  Romans  exhibited  much  stronger  proofs  than  the
Greeks  of  the  influence  of  regular  law,  and  there  wasa
marked  differencebetween  those  nations  in  theirintercourse


■  My/ord<t  Hutory,  ro).  5.  37B— 9.  b  T^ueyd. 1.  5.  t

c GilliW Ariilotle,  vol.!.  35,36.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


6  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [ftrt  I.

with  foreign  powers. /  It  waBaprinciple  of  the  Roman  gor
rernmeot,  that  none  \mt  a  §vora  loldier  could  lawfully  fight
the  enemy  jland  in  many  instance*  the  Romans  showed  that
they  excelled  the  Greeks,  by  the  possessioD  of  a  sterner
and  better  sense  of  justice.  The  institution  of  a  college  ot
heralds,  and  the  fecial  law,  were  proofs  c^  a  people. conai-
derablyadrancedin  the  cultiTatiooofihe  law  of  nations  as
a  scieace ;  and  yet  with  what  little  attention  they  were  ac-
customed to  liBteniotbe  voice  of  justice  and  hamanity,  ap-
pears but  too  plainly  from  their  haughty  triumphs,  their
cunning  interpretation  of  treaties,  their  continual  riolation
of  justice,  their  cruel  rules  of  war,  and  the  whole  series  of
their  wonderful  successes,  in  the  steady  progress  of  the
conquest  of  the  world./  The  perusal  of  Livy's  magnificent
Histo^  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  Roman  power,  ex-
cites our  constant  admiration  of  the  rigour,  (he  skill,  the
valour,  and  the  fortitude  of  the  Roman  people ;  yet,  not-
withstanding the  splendour  of  the  story,  and  the  attractire
simplicity  of  the  writer,  no  reader  of  taste  and  principle
can  well  avoid  feeling  a  thorough  detestation  of  tbe  fierce
spirit  of  conquest  which  it  displays,  and  of  tbe  barbarous
international  law  and  customs  of  tbe  ancients^

A  purer  system  of  public  morals  was  cultivated,  and  in-
sensibly gained  ground,  in  the  Roman  state.  The  cruelties
<tf  Mariufl  in  the  Jugurthan  war,  when  he  pat  part  of  tbe
inhabitants  of  a  Numidian  town  to  the  sword,  and  sold  the
rest  for  slaves,  were  declared  by  Sallust"  to  be  a  proceed-
ing contra  jw  belli.  ^At  the  zenith  of  (he  Roman  power,
tbe  enlarged  and  philosophical  mind  of  Cicero  was  struck
with  extreme  disgust,  at  the  excesses  in  which  his  country-
men indulged  their  military  spirit  He  justly  discerned
that  mankind  were  not  intended,  by  the  law  and  constitution
oftbeir  nature,  as  rational  and  social  beings,  to  live  is  eter-
nal enmity  witheach other ;  and  be  recommends,  io  one  of
the  most  beautiful  and  perfect  ethical  codes  to  be  met  with


a  Sat.Jttg-  ch,  91.


i,,-c,ih,G00glc


l^lure  I.} OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  T

among  the  remains  of  the  aacieats,  the  virtue»of  bunaDitj,
liberality,  and  justice,  towards  other  peo|tle,  as  being  found-
ed in  the  unirereal  law  of  nature.  Their  ancestors,  he  ob-
aerved,  considered  that  man  as  an  enemy  whom  they  re-
garded merely  as  a  foreigner,  and  to  deny  to  strangers  the
use  and  protection  of  the  city,  would  be  inhuman.  To
overturn  justice  by  plundering  ethers,  tended  to  destroy
civil  society,  as  well  as  violate  the  law  of  nature,  and  the
institutions  of  Heaven ;  and  by  some  of  the  most  happy
illustrations,  and  pathetic  ezamplies,  Cicero  vindicated  the
truth,  andinculcated  the  value  of  the  precept,  that  BaUiia^—
was  truly  useful  which  was  not  honest."  lu  the  latter  ages
of  tbe  Roman  empire,  when  their  municipal  law  became
highly  cultrvated,  and  adorned  by  philo&ophy  and  science,
the  law  of  nations  was  recognised  as  part  of  the  natural
reason  of  mankind,  y  ^aod  tero  naturalit  ratio  interotanet
hominet  constituit,  id  apud  amnet  gentit  ptra^ut  au-
toditur,  vacatur  que  jut  gentiiait,  quati  quo  jure  omnu
gentet  uianlur.^  The  Roman  law  was  destined  to  attain
the  honourable  distinction  of  becoming  a  national  guide  to
future  ages,  and  to  be  appealed  to  by  modern  tribunals
and  writers,  in  cases  in  whicb  usage  and  positive  law  were
silent,  as  one  authoritative  evidence  oflhc  decisions  of  the
law  of  nations.

It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  the  sages  from  whose
works  the  pandects  were  compiled,  speak  very  indistinctly
and  imperfectly  on  the  subject  of  national  law.  They  must
be  read  with  much  discrimination,  as  Grotius  observed/  for
they  often  call  that  tbe  law  of  nations  which  prevailed,  and
perhaps  by  casual  consent,  nmong  some  nations  only,  and
many  things  which  belonged  to  the  law  of  nations  they
treated  indiscriminately  with  matters  of  mere  municipal
law.  The  Iloman  jurisprudence,  in  its  moat  culiivaied
stale,  was  a  very  imperfect  transcript  of  the  precepts  of  no-


a  Qif.  b.  3.  wc.  fi,  6,  ?.  11.  h  Eig-VI.  9.  IhH^I

e  Prolfg.  ttc.  53.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


'«  OF  THIi  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I.

taral  justice,  on  the  subject  of  national  duty.  It  retained
strong  traces  of  ancient  rudeness,  from  the  want  of  the
Christian  aysteni  of  morals,  and  the  civilizing  restraints  of
commerce.  4  We  find  the  barbarous  doctrine  alill  asserted,
that  prisoners  of  war  became  slaves  yure  j-enttum,o  and
even  in  res|>ect  to  foreign  nations  with  whom  the  Romans
wereatpeace,  but  badno  particular  alliance,  it  is  lajddown*
in  the  Digest,  that  whoever  passed  from  one  country  to  the
other  became  immediately  a  slave.  Nam  H  cum  gente
aliqua  neque  amicUiam,  neque  hotpUium,  negue  Jadiu  amici-
tia  catua factum  habemut :  hi  kottet  gvidem  non  stmt.  Quod
autemeo nostra  adee*  pervenit,  illomm  jit:  tt  liber  homo
natUr  ah  tie  captut,  lenmtjit,  tt  eorum.  Idemque  ti  ah  Wii
adnot  aliquid  pereeniatfi  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  a
rule  of  national  law  more  directly  calculated  to  destroy  all
commercial  intercourse,  and  to  maintain  eternal  enmity
between  nation  s.J7

>{  The  irruption  of  the  northern  tribes  of  Scythia  and  Ger-
many, overturned  all  that  was  gained  by  the  Roman  law,
annihilated  every  restraint,  and  ail  sense  of  national  obliga-
tion, and  civil  society  relapsed  into  the  violence  and  confu-
sion of  the  barbarous  ages.  Mankind  seemed  to  be  doomed
to  live  once  more  in  constant  distrust  or  hostility,  and  to
regard  astranger  and  an  enemy  as  almost  the  same.  Piracy,
rapine,  and  ferocious  warfare,  deformed  the  annals  of  Eu-
rope. The  manners  of  nations  were  barbarous,  and  their
maxims  of  war  cruel.  Slavery  was  considered  as  a  lawful
consequence  of  captivity.  Mr.  Barrington'^  has  cited  the
laws  of  the  Wisigotbs,  Saxons,  Sicilians,  and  Bavarians,  as
restraining,  by  the  severest  penalties,  the  plunder  of  ship-
wrecked goods,  and  the  abuse  of  shipwrecked  seamen,  and
as  extendingthe  rightsofhospitality  to  strangers.  fiut,not-


m  InU.  1. 3,  4.  Dig.  lib.  1.  tiL  S.  •«.  5.  <?■  lib.  49.  tit.  16.  ch.  IS.  wc

b  Dig.  AS.  15.  5.  3.

€  ObBerratioo*  on  tba  Staiutei,  chteflj  the  more  ancioDt,  pa.  SS.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Uclure  I.]  or  TBE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  0

witbBtanding  a  few  efforts  of  this  kind  to  introdnce  order
andjustice,  and  though  muDictpal  law  had  undergone  great
improrement,  the  law  of  oationB  remaioed  in  the  rudeit
and  most  uncultivated  state,  down  to  the  period  of  thfi  16tli
century^  In  many  instances,  shipwrecked  strangers  were
made  prisoners,  and  sold  as  slares,  without  exciting  any
eomplaijit,  or  offending  any  public  sense  of  justice.  Nu->
merons  cases  occurred  of  acts  of  the  grossest  perfidy  and
cruelty  towards  strangers,  and  enemies.  Prisoners  were
put  to  death  for  their  gallantry  and  brare  defence  in  war.
There  was  no  reliance  npon  the  word  and  honour  of  men
in  power.  Reprisals  and  private  war  were  in  constant  ac-
tivity. Instances  were  freque'^iit  of  the  violation  of  emba»-
lies,  of  the  murder  of  hostages,  theimprisomnent  of  guests,
and  the  killing  of  heralds.  (  The  victor  in  war  had  bis  op*
lion  in  dealing  with  his  prisoners,  either  to  put  them  to
death,  or  reduce  them  to  slavery,  or  exact  an  exorbitant
ransom  for  their  deliverance. )  So  late  as  the  time  of  Car*
dinal  Ricblieu,  it  was  held  to  be  the  right  of  all  nations  to
arrest  strangers  who  came  into  the  country  without  a  safe
conduct.o

The  Emperor  Charlemagne  made  distinguished  effotU  to
improve  the  condition  of  Europe,  by  the  introduction  of
order,  and  the  propagation  of  Christianity }  and  we  have
cheering  exantples,  during  the  darkness  of  the  middle  ages,
c^some  recognition  of  public  law,  by  means  of  alliances,
aad  the  submission  of  disputes  to  the  arbitrament  of  a  neu*
trel  power. Hr.  Ward  enumerates  five  institutions,  exist-  "
ing  about  the  period  of  the  eleventh  century,  which  made  a
deep  impression  upon  Europe,  and  contributed  in  a  very  i
essential  degree  to  improve  the  law  of  nations. These  in-  /
stitntions  ware,  the  feudal  system,  the  concurrence  of  Eu- 1
rope  in  one  form  of  religious  worship  and  government,  the]


b  lb.  vol.  i.  8»— 318-
Vol.  I.  2


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


10  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  t^"'  ^'

yettabUshmeRt  of  cbivalry,  the  nefcottationi  and  treatiM
/  formiog  the  conrentionRi  law  of  Europe,  and  tb«  wttle-
( muntofa  scale  of  political  rank  ami  precedency.

Of  all  these  causes  of  reformation,  the  most  weight  is  ta
be  attributed  to  the  intimate  alliance  of  the  great  powers
a>  one  Christian  commiinitj.  {.  The  influence  of  Christiatii-
tf  was  rer;  efficient  towards  the  introduction  of  a  better
and  more  enligbtened  sense  of  rigbtand  justice  among  the
gOTornmenU  of  Europe.^  It  taught  the  duty  of  benevo-
lence to  strangers,  of  bunanity  to  the  vanquished,  of  the
obligation  of  good  faith,  and  ofthe  sin  of  murder,  rsTenge,
and  rapacity.  "^  The  historj  «f  Europe,  during  the  early  pe-
riodsof  uodern  history,  aboueda  with  intecestiogand  strong
cases,  to  show  the  authority  of  the  church  over  turbulent,
princes  and  fierce  warriors,  and  the  effect  of  that  authority
in  meliorating  manners,  checking  violence,  and  introducing
a  system  of  morals  which  inculcated  peace,  moderation,  and
justice.  The  church  bad  its  councils  or  convocations  of
tbp  clergy,  which  formed  the  nations  professing  Christiani-
ty into  a  connexion  resembling  a  federal  alliance  ;Bnd  those
councils  sometimes  settled  the  titles  and  claims  of  princes,
and  regulated  the  temporal  affairs  of  the  Christian  powers.
The  confederacy  of  the  Christian  nations  was  bound  to~
gether  by  a  sense  of  common  duty  and  interest,  in  respect
to  the  rest  of  mankind.  It  became  a  general  principle  of
belief  and  action,  that  it  was  not  only  a  right,  but  a  duty  to
reduce  to  obedience,  for  the  sake  of  conversion,  every  peo-
ple who  professed  a  religious  faith  diiTeret  from  their  own.
To  make  vrar  upon  infidels  was,  for  many  ages,  aconspicuou*
part  of  European  public  law  ;  and  this  gross  perversion  of
the  doctrines  end  spirit  of  Christianity  had  at  least  one  pro-
pitious effect  upon  the  Christian  powers,  inasmuch  as  it  led
to  the  cultivation  of  peace  and  union  between  them,  and
to  a  more  free  end  civilized  intercourse.  The  notion  that
it  was  lawful  to  invadeand  subdue  Mahometan  and  Pagaa
countries,  continued  very  long  to  sway  the  minds  of  men  ;
kad it  was  aot  until  afterlfae  age  of  Grotius  and  Bacon,  tbal


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LoWuM  r.] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  H

tbiserror  was  entirely  eradicated.  Lord  Coke"  held,  that
an  alliancefor  mutual  defence  vrasunUwful  between  Chria-
tiaiM  and  Turks  ;  and  Grotiua  was  very  cautious  as  to  tht
admission  of  the  lawfulnees  of  alliances  with  infidels,  and  h»
bad  no  doubt  that  all  Christian  aations  were  bound  to  as-
sist one  another  against  the  attacks  of  infidels-'r^ETen  Lord
Bacon'^  thought  it  a  matter  of  so  much  doubt,  as  to  pn^
pound  it  serioost;  as  a  question,  whether  a  war  with  infi*
dels  was  not  first  in  order  of  dignity,  and  to  be  preferred  to
all  other  just  temporal  quarrels  ;  and  whether  a  war  with
infidels  mi^ht  not  be  undertaken  merely  for  the  propagation
of  the  Christian  faith,  without  other  cause  of  hostility.  /

The  influence  of  chivalry  had  a  very  beneficial  effect
upon  the  laws  of  war.  It  introduced  declarations  of  war
by  heralds;  and  to  attack  an  enemy  by  surprise  was  deem-
ed cowardly  and  dishonourable.  It  dictated  humane  treat-
ment to  the  vanquished,  courtesy  to  enemies,  and  the  vir-
tues of  fidelity,  honour,  and  mag^DHniniity  in  every  species  i
of  warfare.

The  introduction  and  stndy  of  the  civil  law  must  also
have  contributed  largely  to  more  correct  and  liberal  views
of  the  rights  and  duties  of  nations.  It  was  impoHsible  that
BUch  a  refined  and  wise  system  of  municipal  and  ethical
jurisprudence  as  the  Roman  law,  could  have  been  taught
in  nniversitioB  and  schools,  and  illustrated  by  a  succession
of  eminent  civilians,  who  were  worthy  of  being  associated
with  the  Roman  sages,  without  at  the  same  time  producing
a  great  effect  upon  the  public  mind.  The  very  existence
of  such  a  grand  monument  of  the  embodied  wisdom  of  the
ancients,  when  once  it  became  to  be  known  and  examined,
must  hare  shed  a  broad  stream  of  light  upon  the  feudal  in-
stitutions, and  the  public  councils  of  the  European  nations.
/We  accordingly  find  that  the  rules  of  the  civil  law  came
'  to  be  applied  to  the  government  of  national  rights,  and
they  have  contributed  very  materially  to  the  erection  of


■  4ft«(.  155.  6  Orotiiu,  b.  2.  e.  1

e  Zkuon'i  fTorki,  Tot.  iii.  472.  492.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


n  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pari  I.

the  modern  iDteroatisnal  law  of  Europe.  From  the  13th
to  the  16th  century,  all  controver8ie§  between  nationi  were
adjudged  by  the  rules  of  the  ciril  law.  )
/  The  influepce  oftr^ties,  conrentioDs,  and  commercial
asBoeiRtionfl,  had  a  utill  more  direct  and  mible  influence
in  the  formation  of  the  great  modern  code  of  {lublic  law.
They  gave  b  new  character  to  the  law  of  nations,  and  reb-
dered  it  more  and  more  of  a  positive  or  instituted  code.
Commercial  ordinances  end  conventions  contributed
greetlj  to  improve  and  refine  public  law,  and  the  inter-
course of  nations,  hy  protecting  the  persons  and  properly
of  merchants  in  cases  of  shipwreck,  and  against  piracy,
and  against  seizure,  and  arrest  upon  the  breaking  out  of
war.  Auxiliary  treaties  were  tolerated,  by  which  one  na-
tion was  allowed  to  be  an  enemy  to  a  certain  extent  only.  '
Thus,  if,  in  time  of  peace,  a  defensive  treaty  had  been
made  between  one  of  the  parties  to  a  subsequent  war,  and
a  third  power,  by  which  a  certain  number  of  troops  were  to
be  furnished  iit  case  of  war,  a  compliance  with  this  engage-
ment implicated  the  auxiliary  as  a  party  to  the  war,  only
10  far  as  her  contingent  was  concerned.  The  nations  of
Europe  had  advanced  to  this  extent  in  diplomatic  science
as  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  13th  century,  and  such  a
refinement  wsb  totally  unknown  to  the  ancients.  Treaties
of  subsidy  showed  also  the  progress  of  the  law  of  nations.
The  troops  of  one  nation,  to  a  definite  extent,  could  be
faired  for  the  service  of  one  of  the  belligerents,  without  af-
fording ground  for  hostility  with  the  immunity  which  sup-
plied the  specific  aid.  The  rights  of  commerce  began  to
be  regarded  as  under  the  protection  of  the  law  of  nations,
and  Queen  Elizabeth  complained  of  the  Spaniards,  that
they  bad  prohibited  commerce  in  (he  Indian  seas  contrary
to  that  law.^

The  efTarts  that  were  made,  upon  the  revival  of  commerce,
to  suppress  piracy,  aud  protect  shipwrecked  property,  show
•  returning  sense  of  the  value,  and  of  the  obligations  of  na-
tional justice.  The  case  of  shipwrecks  may  be  cited,  and
dwelt  upon  for  a  moment,  as  »  particular  and  strong  instaoc«


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  I.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS..  18

oftbe  feeble  beginn'iDgs,tbe  alow  and  iBtflmipted  progreu,
and  final  and  triumphant  cuccesa,  of  the  principlei  of
public  right.  Valia"  imputes  the  bHrbarous  custom  of
plundering  shipwrecked  property,  not  merely  to  the  ordi-
nary cupiJity  for  gain,  but  to  a  more  particular  and  pecu-
liar cause.)Tbe  earliest  navigators  were  almost  all  pirates,
and  tbe  iahabitanta  of  the  coaate  were  constantly  armed
against  their  depredations,  and  whenever  they  had  tbe
tnisibrtune  to  be  shipwrecked,  they  were  pursued  with  a
Tindiclive  spirit,  and  deemed  just  objects  of  puniahment.y
The  practice  of  plundering  shipwrecks  has  been  traced  to
the  Rhodians,  and  from  them  it  passed  to  the  Romaoa;
Qud  the  efforts  to  restrain  it  were  very  feeble  and  gradual,  '
and  mixed  with  much  positive  injustice.  The  goods  cast
ashore  first  belonged  to  the  unfortunate  occupant,  and
then  they  were  considered  as  belonging  to  the  state.  This  "
change  from  private  to  public  appropriation  of  the  proper-
ty, rendered  a  returning  sense  of  right  and  duty  more
jiatural  and  easy.  The  Emperors  Hadrian  and  Antont>
DU8  had  the  honour  of  having  first  renounced  the  claim  to
shipwrecked  pro|>erty,  in  favour  of  the  rightful  owner.
But  tbe  inhuman  customs  on  this  subject'  were  too  deeply
rooted  to  bo  eradicated  by  the  wisdom  and  vigilance  of  the
Boman  lawgivers.  Thelaws  in  favour  of  tbe  uofortuoate
were  disregarded  by  isucceeding  emperors,  and  when  tbe
empire  itself  was  overturned  by  the  northern  barbarians,
the  laws  of  humanity  on  this  subject  were  swept  away  in
the  tempest,  and  the  continual  depredalinns  of  the  Saxon*
Ond  Normans,  induced  the  inhabitants  of  the  western
coasts  of  Europe,  to  treat  all  navigators  who  were  tfarowg
by  the  perils  of  the  sea  upon  their  shores,  as  piralea,  and
to  punish  themai  such,  without  inquiry  or  discrimination.
The  Emperor  Andronicus  Comneiius,  who  reigned  at
ConstantiDople  in  1183,  made  great  efforts  to  repress  this
inhuman  practice. His  edict  was  worthy  of  the  highest

«  Com.  mr  Onf.  torn.  %.  579— H7.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


14  OF  THE  LAWS  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  L

praise,  but  it  eeased  to  be  pat  in  execution  after  hit  death.
j  Pillage  had  become  ao  inveterate  moral  pestilence.  It  re-
'  quired  something  more  effectual  than  papal  bulls,  and  the
excommunication  of  the  church,  to  stop  the  eril.  The  re-
Tiralofcommerce,  and  with  it  a  sense  of  the  value  of  order,
commercial  ordinances,  aud  jiarticolar  conventions  end
treaties  betvecn  sovereigns,  contributed  gradually  to  sup-
press this  criminal  practice,  by  rendering  the  regulations
on  thatsubject  a  branch  of  the  public  law  of  nations.
Valio  says,  it  wan  reserved  to  the  ordinances  of  Lewis  XIT.
to  put  the  6nishing  stroke  towards  the  extinction  <^  this
species  of  piracy,  by  declaring  that  shipwrecked  persons
and  property  were  pieced  under  the  special  protection  and
aafe-guard  of  the  crown  ;  and  the  punishment  of  death,
without  hope  of  pardon,  was  pronounced  against  the  guilty>
'  The  progress  of  moderation  and  humanity  in  the  treat-
ment of  prisoners,  is  to  be  imputed  to  the  influence  of  con-
ventional law,  establishing  a  general  and  indiscriminate
exchange  of  prisoners,  rank  for  rank,  nnd  giving  protec-
tion to  cart^  ships  for  that  purpose.  It  is  a  practice  of  no
very  ancient  introduction  amongthe  states  of  Europe,  and
it  was  not  of  very  familiar  use  in  the  age  of  Grotius,  and
it  succeeded  the  elder  practice  of  ransom.  From  the  ex-
tracts which  Dr.  Robinson"  gives  from  Bellus,  who  was  a
judge  or  assessor  in  the  armies  of  Charles  V.  and  Philip
II.,  be  concludes,  that  no  practice  so  general,  and  so  fa-
Tourable  to  the  conduct  of  prisoners,  as  a  public  exchange
in  time  of  war,  was  known  in  the  16th  century.  The
private  interest  of  the  captor  in  his  prisoner,  continued
through  that  period  ;  and  the  practice  of  ransom,  founded
on  the  right  of  property  claimed  by  the  captor,  succeeded
to  the  Greek  and  Roman  practice  of  killing  prisoners,  or
selling  them  as  slaves.
■'  Thecuatom  ofadmittingresident  ministers  at  each  sove-
reign's court,  was  another  important  improvement  in  the
security  and  facility  of  national  intercourse ;  anj]  this  led  t»

Do,i,.cdtyGoO(^lc


Cectm  I.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  IS

the  settlement  of  a  great  queitioo,  which  wai  ver;  fre-
quently dbcuued  in  the  15tfa  and  10th  centutiet,  con-
cerning the  inviolability  of  ambassadors.  It  came  at  ImI
to  be  a  defioitive  principle  of  public  law,  that  ambasaa-
dors  were  exempted  from  all  local  jarisdietioti,  civil  and
crimioal  a  though  Lord  Coke  considered  the  law  in  hit
day  to  ^,  that  if  an  ambanadar  committed  any  crime
which  was  not  merely  ptabim  prohibitum,  fae  lost  his  prirt-
lege  and  dignity  as  an  ambassadnri  and  might  be  punish*
ed  as  any  ot!^r  prirate  alien,  and  that  he  was  even  bound
to  answer  civilly  for  his  contracts  that  were  good /we  ^en>
fium.o

Thus  stood  the  law  of  nations  at  the  age  of  Grotiua.  It
had  been  rescued,  to  a  very  considerable  extent,  from  the
cruel  usages  and  practices  of  the  northern  barbarians.  It
bad  been  restored  to  some  degree  of  science  and  civility
by  the  influence  of  Christianity,  the  study  of  the  Roman
law,  and  the  spirit  of  commerce.  It  had  grown  greatly  ia
value  and  efficacy,  from  the  intimate  connexion  and  coo-
•lant  intercourse  of  the  modem  nations  of  Europe,  who
were  derived  from  a  common  origin,  and  were  governed
by  similar  institutions,  manners,  laws,  and  religion.  But
it  was  still  in  a  slats  of  extreme  disorder,  and  its  princi-
ples were  little  known,  and  less  observed.  It  con-
sisted of  a  series  of  undigested  precedents,  without  order ,
or  authority.  Grotius  has,  therefore,  been  justly  conside-
red as  the  father  of  the  law  of  nations  ;  and  he  arose  like
a  splendid  luminary,  dispelling  darkness  and  confusion,
and  imparting  light  and  security,  to  the  intercourse  of  na-
liona.  It  is  said  by  Barbeyrac,^  that  Lord  Bacon's  works
first  suggested  to  Grotius  the  idea  of  reducing  the  law  of
nations  to  the  certainty  and  precision  of  a  regular  sciences
.  Grotius  has  himself  fully  explained  the  reasons  which  ted
him  to  undertake  his  necessary,  and  most  useful,  and  im-
portant work.'=  He  found  the  sentiment  universally  pr*
valent,  not  only  among  the  vulgar,  but  among  men  of  re-
puted wisdom  and  learning,  that  war  was  a  slraneer'  to  all


a4Jiut.l53. b  Pr^.  I»  P«ff.nc.t9. e  Pr»! g.  Di-J^.  ftff,

i.. .h, Google


16  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  (Pmn  L

juitiee,  and  that  no  commoDweattb  could  be  goT«rned
without  iiiju§tice.  The  saving  of  Euphemus  ia  Thucy-
didea,  be  perceived  to  be  in  almoat  every  one's  mouth,
that  Dothiog  which  was  useful  was  unjust.  Hanj'  por-
•ona,.  who  were  friends  to  justice  in  private  lifo,  made  no
account  of  it  in  a  whole  nation,  and  did  not  consider  it  as
applicable  to  rulers.  He  perceived  a  horrible  licentious-
ness and  cruelly  in  war,  throughout  the  Christian  world,
I  of  which  barbarians  might  be  ashamed.  When  men  took
I  up  arms,  there  was  no  longer  any  reference  for  law  either
1  human  or  divine,  and  it  seemed  as  if  some  malignant  fury
I  was  sent  forth  into  the  world,  with  a  general  license  for
I  the  commission  of  all  manner  of  wickedness  and  crime.a
'  The  object  of  Grotiua  was  to  correct  these  false  theo-
ries and  peroiciouf  maxims,  by  showing  a  comnHinity  of
^•eotimeot  among  the  wise  and  learned  of  all  nations  and
ages,  in  favour  of  the  natural  lew  of  morality.  He  like-
wise undertook  to  show  that  justice  was  of  perpetual  obli-
gation, and  essential  to  the  well  being  of  every  society,
and  that  the  great  comnaonwealth  of  nations  stood  in  need
of  law,  and  the  observance  offaitb,  and  the  practice  of
justice.  His  object  was  to  digest,  in  one  ayatematic  code,
the  principles  of  public  right,  and  to  supply  authorities  for
almost  every  case  in  the  conduct  of  nations  ;  and  he  bad
the  honour  of  reducing  the  law  of  nations  to  a  systemi
and  of  producing  a  work  which  has  been  resorted  to  at
the  standard  of  authority  in  erery  succeeding  age.  Tb*
more  it  is  studied,  the  more  will  our  admiration  be  ex"
cited  at  the  consummate  execution  of  the  plan,  and  the
genius  and  erudition  of  the  author.  There  wns  no  sys-
tem of  ibc  kind  extant,  that  bad  been  produced  by  the
ancient  philosophers  of  Greece,  or  by  the  primitive
Christians.  The  work  of  Aristotle  on  the  rights  of
war,  and  the  writings  of  the  Romans  on  their  fecial  law,
had  not  survived  the  wreck  of  ancient  literature  ;  and  the
treaties  of  some  learned  moderns  on  iiublic  law,  were


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  I.J OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  17

nHMt  imperfect,  aod  exceedingly  defective  in  illustrationfl
from  history,  and  in  omitting  to  place  their  (locisiona  upon
the  true  foundations  of  equity  and  justice."  Grotiua,
therefore,  went  purposely  into  the  details  of  history  and
the  usages  of  nations,  and*  he  resorted  to  the  testimony  of
philosophers,  historians,  orators,  poeu,  civilians,  and  di-
vines, because  they  were  the  materials  out  of  which  the
Bcienco  of  morality  was  formed ;  and  when  many  men,  at
different  times  and  places,  unanimously  affirmed  the  same
thing  for  truth,  it  ought  to  be  ascribed  to  some  unirersal
cause.  His  unsparing  citation  of  authorities,  in  support
o(  what  the  present  age  may  consider  very  plain  and  un-
disputed truths,  has  been  censured  by  many  persons  as
detracting  from  the  value  of  the  work.  On  the  other  hand,
the  support  that  he  gave  to  those  truths,  by  the  concurrent
testimony  of  all  nations  and  ages,  has  been  justly  sup-
posed to  contribute  to  that  reverence  for  the  principles  of
international  justice,  which  has  since  distinguished  the
European  nations.

Among  the  disciples  of  Grotius,  Puffendorf  has  always
held  the  first  rank.  His  work  went  more  at  large  into  (be
principles  of  natural  law,  and  combined  the  science  of
ethics  with  what  may  be  more  strictly  called  the  law  of
nations.  It  is  copious  in  detail,  but  of  very  little  practi-
cal value  in  teaching  us  what  the  law  of  nations  is  at  this
day.  It  is  rather  a  treatise  on  moral  philosophy  than  on
international  law ;  aod  [he  seme  thing  may  be  said  of
the  works  of  Wolfius,  Burlamaqui,  and  Butherforth.
The  Summary  of  the  Law  of  Nations,  by  Professor  Mar-
tens, is  a  treatise  of  greater  practical  utility,  but  it  is  only
a  very  partial  view  of  the  system,  being  confined  to
the  customary  and  conventional  law  of  the  modern  na-
tions of  Europe.  Bynkershoeck's  treatise  on  the  law
of  war  has  always  been  received  os  of  great  niithori-
ty,  on  that  particular  branch  of  the  science  of  the
law  of  nations,  and  the  subject  is  ably  and  copiously  dis'
cussed. The  work  is  replete  with  practical  illustration,


a  Pnhg.  of  Grot.  wc.  3i,  37, 38.

r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


18  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS:  E^"'  '•

though  too  ezclusiTe  in  its  references  to  the  ordioaoces  of
his  own  couDlry,  to  render  his  authority  very  unquestion-
able.  The  moat  popular,  and  the  most  elegant  writer  on
the  taw  of  nations,  is  Vattel,  whose  method  has  been
greatly  admired.  He  has  been  cited,  for  the  last  half
century,  more  freely  than  any  one  of  the  public  juristi}
but  he  is  very  deficient  in  philosophical  precision.  His
topics  are  loosely,  and  often  tediously  and  diffiisirdy  dis-
cussed, and  he  is  not  sufficiently  supported  by  the  authority
of  precedents,  which  constitute  the  foundation  of  the  posi-
tive law  of  nations.  There  is  no  work  which  combines,
ID  just  proportions,  and  with  entire  satisfaction,  an  ac-
curate and  comprehensive  view  of  the  necessary  and  of  the
instituted  law  of  nations,  and  in  which  principles  are  suf-
Aciently  supported  hy  argument,  authority,  and  examples.
Since  the  age  of  Grotius,  the  code  of  war  has  been  vastly
enlarged  and  improved,  and  its  rights  better  defined,  and
its  severities  greatly  mitigated.  The  rights  of  maritime
capture,  the  principles  of  the  law  of  prize,  and  the  duties
and  privileges  of  neutrals,  have  grown  into  veryimportant
titles  in  tbe  system  of  national  law.  We  now  appeal  to
more  accurate,  more  authentic,  more  precise,  and  more
commanding  evidence  of  the  rules  of  public  law,  by  a
reference  to  the  decisions  of  those  tribunals,  to  whom,  ib
every  country,  the  administration  of  that  branch  of  juris-
prudence is  specially  intrusted.  We  likewise  appeal  to
the  official  documents  and  ordinances  of  particular  stales*
which  have  professed  to  reduce  into  a  systematic  code,
for  the  direction  of  their  own  tribunals,  and  for  the  infor-
mation of  foreign  powers,  tbe  law  of  nations,  on  those
points  which  relate  particularly  to  the  rights  of  commerce,
and  the  duties  of  neutrality.  But  in  the  absence  of  higher
and  more  authoritative  sanctions,  the  ordinances  of  foreign
states,  tbe  opinions  of  eminent  statesmen,  and  tbe  writings
of  distinguished  jurists,  are  regarded  as  of  great  consider-
ation on  questions  not  settled  by  conventional  law.  In
cases  where  the  principal  jurists  agree,  the  presump*
tion  will  be  very  great  in  favour  of  the  solidity  of  their
aoaiims  i  waA  no  civilized  nation,  that  does  not  arrogantly

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Leclute  I.] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  19

■et  all  ordinary  law  and  justice  at  defiance,  will  venture
to  disregard  the  uaiform  seoie  of  the  established  writers
OD  iDteroational  law<  England  and  the  United  Statei
hare  been  equally  disposed  to  acknowledge  the  authority
of  1^  works  of  jurists,  writing  professedly  on  public  lawl
and  the  binding  force  of  the  general  usage  and  practice  of
Daiions,  and  the  still  greater  respect  due  to  judicial  deci-
aions  recognising  and  enforcing  the  law  of  nations.  lo
all  our  foreign  negotiations,  and  domestic  diacussioni
ofquestions  of  national  lawi  we  bare  paid  the  most  impli-
cit respect  to  the  practice  of  Europe,  and  the  opinions  of
her  most  distinguished  civilians.  lu  England,  the  report
made  in  1753,  to  the  king,  in  answer  to  the  Prussian  me-
morial, is  rery  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  obedience
shown  to  the  great  standing  authorities  on  the  law  of  na-
tions, to  which  I  have  alluded.  And  in  a  case  which  came
before  Lord  Mansfield,  in  1764,  in  the  K.  B."  he  refer-
-  red  to  a  decision  of  Lord  Talbot,  who  had  declared  that
the  law  of  nations  was  to  be  collected  from  the  practice  of
different  nations,  and  the  authority  of  writers;  and  who
bad  argued  from  such  authorities  as  Grotius,  Barbeyrac,
Bynkorshoeck,  Wiquefort,  dec.  in  a  case  where  British
authority  was  silenu  The  most  celebrated  collections
and  codes  of  maritime  law,  such  as  the  Coniolato  del  mare,
the  laws  of  Oleron,  the  laws  of  the  Hanseatic  league,  and,
above  all,  the  marine  ordinances  of  Lewis  XIV.,  are  also
referred  to,  as  eoiitaining  the  most  authentic  evidence  of
the  immemorial  and  customary  law  of  Europe.

The  dignity  and  importance  of  this  branch  of  jurispru-  <
dence,  cannot  fail  to  recommend  it  to  tbe  deep  attention  I
of  the  student ;  and  a  thorough  knowledge  of  its  principles  |
is  necessary  to  lawyers  and  statesmen,  and  highly  orne-  j
mental  to  every  scholar,  who  wishes  to  be  adorned  with  i
tbe  accomplishments  of  various  learning.  Many  ques-  /
tions  arise  in  the  course  of  commercial  transactions,  which
require  fortbeir  solution  an  accurate  acquaintance  with


e  Triqnet*  BaXb,  2  Burr.  147C.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


£0  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I.

the  conTonttoual  law  of  Europe,  and  the  general  doctrinei
of  the  prize  tribunals.  Though  we  may  remain  id  peace,
there  i§  atwayti  war  ragiog  in  some  part  of  the  globe,  and
we  have  at  the  present  moment''  neutral  righta  to  exact,
and  neutral  duties  to  perform,  in  the  course  of  our  UedU
terraoean  trade,  and  in  the  trade  to  the  Brazils,  and  along
the  shores  of  the  Pacific.  A  comprehensive  and  scientific
knowledge  of  international  law  is  highly  necessary,  not
only  to  lawyers  practising  in  our  commercial  ports,  but  to
every  gentleman  who  is  animated  by  liberal  views,  and  a
generous  ambition  to  assume  stationa  of  high  public  trust.
It  would  be  exceedingly  to  the  discredit  of  any  person  who
should  be  called  to  take  a  share  in  the  councils  of  the  na-
tion, if  he  should  be  found  deficient  in  all  the  great  leading
principles  of  this  law ;  and  I  think  I  cannot  be  mistaken
in  considering  the  elementary  learniog  of  the  law  of  na-
tions, as  not  only  an  essential  part  of  the  education  of  an
American  lawyer,  but  as  proper  to  be  academically  taught.
My  object,  therefore,  in  some  succoeding  lectures,  will  be
to  discuss  all  the  leading  points  arising  upon  the  right*
and  duties  of  nations,  in  the  several  relations  of  peace,  of
war,  and  of  neutrality.

a  NoTcmber,  IIK4i


Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


LECTITRE  II.

OF  THE  SIGHTS  AMD  DDTIES  OT  NATIONS  IN
A  STATE  OF  PEACE.

A  VIEW  of  the  externa)  riphts  and  dutin  of  oatiMiB  in
peace,  will  lead  ub  to  examine  the  grouoda  of  national  ia-
depeodeoce,  the  extent  of  territorial  jurisdiction,  the  rights
of  eiDbaas;,  and  of  commercial  intercouTBe.

Nations  are  equal  in  respect  to  each  other,  and  entitled
to  claim  equal  consideration  for  their  rights,  whatever  may
be  their  relative  diiiieiieions  or  strength, or  however  greatly
they  may  differ  in  government,  religion,  or  manners.  Thu
perfect  equality,  and  entire  independence  of  all  distinct
states,  is  a  fundamental  principle  of  public  law.  It  is  a  ne-
cessary consequence  of  this  equality,  that  each  nation  has  a
light  to  govern  itself  as  it  may  think  proper,  and  no  one  na-
tion is  entitled  to  dictate  a  form  of  government,  or  religioa,
or  a  course  of  internal  policy,  to  another.  No  state  is  enti-
tled to  take  cognizance  or  notice  of  the  domestic  adminis-
tration of  another  state,  or  of  what  passes  within  it  as  be-
tween the  government  and  its  own  subjects.')  The  Spa-
niards, as  Vattel  observes,  violated  all  thIbs  of  right,  when
they  set  up  a  tribunal  of  their  own  to  judge  the  Inca  of  Peru
ac<^ding  to  their  laws.  If  he  had  broken  the  law  of  nations
in  respect  to  tbem,thfy  would  have  hai^a  right  to  punish
him;  but  when  they  undertook  to  judge  of  the  merits  of  his
own  interior  administration,  and  to  try  and  punish  him  for


a  GrotiiadaJyT«itUittpaaM,h. l.c-S-wcB. VaUtl,  Drmldtt
0«w,  b.  <■  C.  4.  leo  64. RniKuffoTtiiU  Itat.  b.  X,  e.  Sr


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


3?  OF  THE  LAW  OP  NATIONS.  [f«i  i;

acts  oooamitted  in  the  courBe  of  it|  tbey  were  guilty  of  tb«
groMeit  injustice.  No  nation  bad  a  contention  witbinitielf,
but  the  ancient  Romans,  witb  th^r  usual  insolence,  imrae-
diately  interfered)  and  with  profound  dupliuty  pretended
to  take  part  with  the  oppressed  for  the  sake  of  justice,
though  in  reality  for  the  purpose  of  dominion.  It  was  by  a
Tiolation  of  the  right  of  national  independence,  that  they
artfully  diasolved  the  Acheean  league,  and  decreed  that  each
member  of  the  confederacy  should  be  governed  by  its  own
laws,  independent  of  the  general  autbority.<*  But  so  sur-
prisingly loose  and  inaccurate  were  the  theories  of  the  an-
cients on  the  subject  of  national  independence,  that  the
Greeks  seen  nefer  to  have  questioned  the  right  of  one  state
to  interfere  in  the  internal  concerns  of  another.^  We  bare
sereral  instances  within  time  of  memory ,of  unwarrantable
and  flagrant  violations  of  the  independence  of  nations.  The
interference  of  Russia,  Prussia,and  Austria,  in  the  internal
government  of  Poland,  and  first  dismembering  it  of  large
portions  of  its  territory,  and  then  finally  overturning  its
constitution,  and  destroying  its  existence  as  an  independent
power,  was  an  aggravated  abuse  of  national  right.  There
were  several  cases  which  preceded,  or  which  arose  during
the  violence  of  the  French  revolution,  vhich  were  unjusti-
fiable invasions  of  the  rights  of  independent  nations  to  pre-
scribe their  own  forms  of  government,  and  to  deal  in  their
discretion  with  their  own  domestic  concerns.  Among  other
instances,  we  may  refer  to  the  invasion  of  Holland  by  the
Prussian  arms  in  1787,  and  of  France  by  the  Prussian  arms
in  1792,  and  of  wars  fomeDled  or  declared  against  all  mo-
narchical forms  of  government,  by  the  French  rulers,during
the  earlier  and  more  intemperate  stages  of  their  revolution.
We  may  cite,  also,  the  invasion  of  Naples  by  Austria  in
1831,  and  the  still  more  recent  invasion  of  Spain  by  France,


a  Liny,  b.  33.  o.  30. Florut,  b.  S.  c.  7. J^nteiq-  Coiuid.  mr  b*
Caatetdtia  Orand-dfitom.  ch.  8.
b  Ma/onPi  HiH.  o/Qruct,  vol.  6.  127.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lfictun  n.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  KATIOKS.  ta

UDder  the  pretext  of  pntting  down  a  dangerous  spirit  ofin-
teroal  revolution  and  reform,  aa  ingtRDces  of  the  eanie  vio-
lation of  the  absolute  equality  and  independence  of  nations.
Every  nation  has  an  undoubted  right  to  provide  for  its
own  safety,  and  to  lake  duep  recaution  against  distant,  as
well  as  impending  danger."  A  rational  fear  is  said  to  be  a
justifiable  cause  of  war.  Pane  vtcinvm  impediri,  ne  in  imt
aolo,  sine  alia  caiua  luaqite  evideTUi  utUilate,  mvmmtntvM
nobi$  propinquum  extruat,  aut  aliud  qvidfaciat,  undejuata
foTvado  pcriaUi  ariatur.^  The  danger  must  be  great,  dis<
tioct  and  imminent,  and  not  rest  on  vague  and  uncertain
suspicion.  The  British  government  officially  declared  to
the  allied  powers  in  1821,'^  that  no  government  was  more
prepared  than  their  own,  "  to  uphold  the  rightof  any  state
or  states  to  interfere  where  their  own  security  or  essential
interests  were  seriously  endangered  by  the  internal  trans-
actions of  another  state.  That  the  assumption  of  tha
right  was  only  to  be  justified  by  the  strongest  necessity,  and
to  be  limited  and  regulated  thereby.  That  it  could  not  re-
ceive a  general  and  indiscriminate  application  to  all  revo-
lutionary movements,  without  reference  to  their  imme-
diate bearing  upon  some  particular  state  or  states ;  tbat  ita
excercise  was  an  exception  to  general  principles  of  tha
Kreatest  value  and  importance,  and  as  one  that  only  pro-
perly grows  out  of  the  circumstances  of  the  special  case  ;
and  exceptions  of  this  description  could  never,  without  the
Utmost  danger,  be  so  far  reduced  to  rule,  as  to  be  incorpo*
rated  into  the  ordinary  diplomacy  of  states,  or  into  the
institutes  of  the  law  of  nations."

The  limitation  to  the  right  of  interference  with  the  iii-
ternal  concerns  of  other  states,  was  defined  in  ibis  instance
with  uncommon  preeision ;  and  no  form  ofdvil  government
which  a  nation  may  think  proper  to  prescribe  for  itself,  can
be  admitted  to  create  a  case  of  necessity  justifying  an  iti-


m  VatM.  b.  X.  o.  4.  kc  49.  SO-

h  Httbw  tttJitrt  einlalU,  lib.  3,  c-  7.  ffc.  4'.

t  Lord CatHtftrsK^tiirculair dtrpatch 'if  Juniirt'ri!  li",  UlSl.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


U  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I.

terferencc  by  forec ;  for  a  nation,  under  any  form  of  civil
policy  which  it  may  cbooso  to  adopt,  is  competent  to  pre-
serre  its  faith,  and  to  maintain  the  relations  of  peace  and
amity  with  other  powers.

It  is  sometimes  a  very  grare  question,  when  and  how  far
one  nation  has  a  right  toassist  the  subjects  of  another,  who
have  revolted,  and  implored  that  assistance.  It  i^  Kaid,"
that  assiatance  may  be  afforded  cooRiateotly  with  the  law
of  nations,  in  extreme  cases,  as  when  rulers  have  violated
the  principles  of  the  social  compact,  and  given  just  cause
to  their  subjects  to  consider  themselves  discharged  from
their  allegiance.  Vattcl  raentioM  the  case  of  the  Prince
of  Orange  as  a  justifiable  interference,  because  the  tyranny
of  James  II.  had  compelled  the  English  nation  to  rise  in
their  defence,  and  to  call  for  his  assistance.  The  right
of  interposition  must  depend  upon  the  special  circumetan-
ees  of  the  case.  It  is  not  susceptible  of  precise  limita-
tions, and  is  extremely  delicate  in  the  application.  It
must  be  submitted  to  the  guidance  of  eminent  discretion,
and  controlled  by  the  principles  of  justice  and  sound  po-
licy. It  would  clearly  be  a  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,
to  invite  subjects  to  revolt  who  were  under  actual  obe-
dience, however  just  their  complaints;  or  to  endeavor
to  produce  discontents,  violence,  and  rtsbcllion,  in  neigh-
bouring states,  and  under  colour  of  a  generous  assist-
•  ance,  to  consummate  projects  of  ambition  and  dominion.
The  most  unexceptionable  precedents  arc  those  in  which
the  interference  did  not  take  place  until  the  new  states
had  actually  been  established,  and  sufficient  means  and
spirit  had  been  displayed  to  excite  a  confidence  in  their
stability.  The  assistance  that  England  gave  to  the  Unit-
ed Netherlands  when  they  were  struggling  n{;ainst  Spain,
and  the  asssstance  that  France  gave  to  this  country  du-
ring the  war  of  our  revolution,  were  justifiable  acts,  found-
ed in  wisdom  and  policy. And  it  isnot  to  be  doubted  that


a  VaUel,  b.  2.  c.  4.  Bee.  56.  RtOheTforth,  \>.  t.  c.  9. See  a)
il..  2.  cli.  Ij.  sect.  B. Pvff.  b.  C.  cl>.6.  ».!C|.  14.


1,-0,1  h,Googlc


Ucturs  n.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  tS

the  government  of  the  United  States  had  a  perfect  right
io  the  jeu  1822,  to  consider  as  it  then  did,  the  Spanish
provinces  in  South  America  as  legitimate  poweri,  which
bad  attained  sufficient  aolidity  and  strength  to  be  entitled
to  the  rights  and  privileges  belonging  to  independent
states."

Nati^ms  are  at  liberty  to  use  their  own  resources  in  auch
manner,  aod  to  apply  them  to  such  public  purposes,  as
they  may  deem  best,  provided  they  do  not  violate  the  per-
fect rights  of  other  nations,  nor  endanger  their  safety
nor  infringe  the  indispensable  duties  of  humanity.  They
may  contract  alliances  with  particular  nations,  and  grant
or  withhold  particular  privileges,  in  their  discretion.  By
positive  engagements  of  this  kind,  a  new  class  of  rights
and  duties  is  created,  which  forms  the  conventional  law  of
nations,  and  constitutes  the  most  diffusive,  and,  generally,
the  most  injportant  brancfaof  public  jurisprudence.  And
it  is  well  to  be  understood,  at  a  period  when  alterations  in
the  constitutions  of  governments,  and  revolutions  in  states,
are  familiaf ,  that  it  is  a  clear  position  of  the  law  of  nations,
that  treaties  are  not  affected,  nor  positive  obligations  of
any  kind  with  ether  powers,  or  with  creditors,  weakened,
by  any  such  mutations.  A  state  neither  loses  any  of  its
rights,  nor  is  discharged  from  any  of  its  duties,  by  a
change  in  the  form  of  its  civil  government.  The  body-
politic  is  still  the  same,  though  it  may  have  a  different  or-
gan of  communication.'*  So,  if  a  state  should  be  divided
in  respect  to  territory,  its  rights  and  obligations  are  nofc
impaired,  aod  if  they  have  not  been  apportioned  by  spe-
cial agreement,  those  rights  are  to  he  enjoyed,  and  thoso
obligations  fulfilled,  by  all  the  parts  in  common.o

The  eitent  of  jurisdiction  over  the  adjoining  seas,  ii


a  PntidmPi  Mnmg*  to  Congrtti  tif  UH  s' JfanA,  IHSZ,  mdact  ^
CongTU*  ^  4th  of  .Mag,  I8SC,  ch.  6%.

b  BurltimaitM,  JViiL  and  PoL  1Mb,  voL  9.  pkrt  4.  ob.  9.  tM.  It.
KufMmfortK'i  tadUuttt,  b.  2,  oh.  10.

C  RM«r/orA,  n6.  nip.

Vol.  I.  4


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


26  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  {V^tt  I.

often  a  (|ufi>tion  of  difficulty  and  of  dubioui  right.  At
far  as  a  nation  can  conveniently  occupj,  and  that  occu-
pancy is  acquired  by  prior  possession  or  treaty,  tbe  juris-
diction is  exclusive.  Navigable  rivers  which  flow  through
a  territory,  and  the  sea-coast  adjoining  it,  and  the  navi-
gable waters  included  in  bays,  and  between  headlands  and
arms  of  the  sea,  belong  to  the  sovereign  of  the  adjoining
territory,  as  being  necessary  to  the  safety  ofthe  nation,
and  to  the  undisturbed  use  of  the  neighbouring  shores.m
The  open  sea  \i  not  capable  of  being  possessed  as  private
property.  The  free  use  ofthe  ocean  for  navigation  und
fishing,  is  common  to  all  mankind,  and  the  public  jurists
generally  and  ezplidtly  deny  that  tbe  main  ocean  can
ever  be  appropriated.  The  subjects  of  all  nations  meet
there,  in  time  of  peace,  on  a  fooling  of  entire  equality  and
independence.  No  nation  has  any  right  of  jurisdiction  at
sea,  except  it  be  over  the  persons  of  its  own  subjects,  and
its  own  vessels  ;  and  so  far,  territorial  jurisdiction  may  be
considered  as  preserved,  for  the  vessels  of  a  nation  are,  in
many  respects,  considered  as  portions  of  its  territory,  and
persons  on  board  are  protected  end  governed  by  the  law
of  the  country  to  which  the  vessel  belongs.'*  Thisjuris-
dictioit  is  confined  to  the  ship  ;  and  no  one  ship  has  a  right
to  prohibit  the  approach  of  another  at  sea,  or  to  draw
round  her  a  line  of  territorial  jurisdirtion,  within  which  no
other  is  at  liberty  to  intrude.  Every  vessel,  in  lime  of"
peace  has  a  right  to  consult  it  own  safety  and  convenience,
and  to  pursue  its  own  courseand  business,  without  being  di»-
turbed,  and  without  having  violated  the  rights  of  or  hers.<:  Ai
to  narrow  seas,and  waters  approaching  tbe  land,  there  have
been  many  and  sharp  controversies  among  the  European
nations,  concerning  tbe  claim  for  exclusive  dominion.  The


a  Orotiui,  b,  s  c.  S.  tec.  ]«.— c.  3.  lec.  7.  Puf.  b.  3.  o  3.  tec.  «.  b.
4,  c  S.  lec.  3.  and  8. FaUel,  b.  1.  cb.  St-  33.

h  Orotuu,  b.  3.  c.  3.  MC.  10.  aod  13.  RuUurfari/i,  b.  .1  o.  fl.  rat-
Ul,  b.  1.  o.  le.  wo.  916- t  BantBtU  4r  CreuutU,  HB.  ForbM.  *.  Cocb'

s  Tbs  MarisDM  Flora,  11  WTualon,  3S.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


jUclure  n.I OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  J7

questiooi  arising  on  this  clBim  are  not  very  clearly  defined
and  settled,  and  eitravagant  pretenaions  are  occasionallj
put  forward.  The  Bubject  abouada  in  curious  and  ii]ter>
eating  discuaaiona,  and  fortunately  for  the  |>eace  of  mao-
kiod,  they  are,  at  the  present  day,  maiters rather  of  apeeii*
latire  curiosity  than  of  use.

Grotius  publiahed  hia  Mart  Libemm,  against  the  Portu-
guese claim  to  an  eKclusire  trade  to  the  Indiea,  through
the  South  Atlantic  aod  Indian  Oceana,  and  be  sbowa  that
tbeaes  wbs  not  capable  of  prirate  dominion.  He  vindi-
eateatfae  free  navigatioa  of  the  aeeRta,and  the  right  of
commerce  between  nationa,  and  justly  eiposea  the  folly
and  absurdity  of  the  Ponugueee  claim.  Selden'a  Jlfora
Chunm  was  intended  to  be  an  answer  to  the  doctrine  of
Grotius,  and  he  undertook  to  prove,  by  the  laws,  usages,
and  opinions  of  all  nations,  ancient  and  modern,  that  the
sea  was,  in  point  of  fact,  capable  of  private  dominion,  and
be  poured  a  flood  of  learning  over  the  subject.  He  fell
far  short  of  bis  great  rival  in  the  force  and  beauty  of  his
argument,  but  be  entirely  surpassed  him  in  the  extent  and
variety  of  his  citations  and  researches.  Having  eatahliah-
ed  the  fact,  that  mosr  nations  had  conceded  that  the  sen
was  rapable  ofprivatcdoininion,  he  showed,  by  numerous
documents  and  records,  that  the  English  nation  had  al-
ways asserted  arid  enjoyed  a  supremacy  over  the  surround-
ing or  narrow  seaa,  and  that  this  claim  had  been  recog-
nised by  all  the  neighbouring  nations.  Sir  Matthew  Hale
coiioidered  the  title  of  the  king  to  the  narrow  seas  adjoin'-
iiifi  the  coasts  of  England,  to  have  been  abundantly  proverl
by  the  treatise  orSelden,and  Bntler  sj^nks  ofit  as  a  Work
of  profound  erudition.*  Byokershoeck  hadulw  written  a
treatise  on  (he  same  contested  sutyert,  in  whii:h  h^  con-
cedejito  Selden  much  of  his  ar^timent,  and  adniili;  that
thesKRwas  sii3ce|)tible  of  dominion,  (houjifh  he  denies  the
title  of  the  English,  on  the  ground  of  a  vrniit  of  unioter-
ruptf^d  possession. He  said  there  was  no  inatance,  at  that


a  Harg,  Lai*  TraeU,  10.  Co.  Liu.  lib.  3-  n.  XOs.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


28  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  r.

time,  in  wbicli  the  eea  was  subject  to  any  partirolar  sove-
reign, where  the  lurrounding  territory  did  out  belong  to
him.*

The  claim  of  dominion  to  close  or  narrow  eeaa,  is  still
the  tbeine  of  diBcuBsion  and  conirorersy.  Pufiendorf  *>  ad-
mits, that  in  a  narrow  sea  the  dominion  of  it  may  belong
to  the  sovereigns  of  the  adjoining  shores.  Tattel  also<'
lays  down  the  position,  that  the  various  uses  to  which  the
sea  conliguoii8  to  the  coast  may  be  apitlied,  render  it  justly
the  subject  of  properly.  People  tiah  there,  and  drew  from
it  shells,  pearlit,  amber,  &c. ;  and  who  can  doubt,  he  ob-
serves, thai  the  peril  lisheriea  of  Bahram  and  Ceylon  may
not  be  lawfully  enjoyed  as  property  ?  Chitty,  in  his  late
work  on  conmerciat  laio,^  has  entered  into  an  elaborate
vindication  of  the  British  title  to  the  four  seas,  surround-
ing the  British  islands,  and  known  by  the  name  of  the
British  seas,  and,  consequently,  to  the  exclusive  right  of
6Rhing,  and  of  controlling  the  navigation  of  foreigners
therein.  On  the  other  band.  Sir  Wot.  Scott,  in  the  cose
of  the  Twet  Gtbroedtr*,*  did  not  treat  the  claim  of  terri-
tery  to  contiguous  portions  of  the  cea  with  much  indul-
gence. He  said,  thegeneral  inclination  of  the  law,  was
against  it ;  for  in  the  sea,  out  of  the  reach  of  cannon  shot,
tiniversal  use  was  presumed,  in  like  manner  as  a  common.
oae  in  rivers  flowing  through  conterminous  slates  was
presumed  ;  and  yet,  in  both  cases,  there  might,  by  legal
possibility,  exist  a  peculiar  property,  excluding  the  uni-
versal, or  the  common  use.  The  claim  of  Russia  to
sovereignty  over  the  Pacific  ocean  north  of  the  51st
d^ree  of  latitude,  as  a  close  sea,  was  considered  by>
ourgovernment,  in  1822,  to  be  against  the  righu  of  other


a  DiftrtoHo  dt  DtmtiHi>  Marit. Bj/nk.  Optra.  lOm.  Z,  1 S4.
h  Droit  de  la  JVol.  tt  Ottu.  lil>.  4.  cb.  S.  mc-  5—10.
eB.  I.cfa.  C3.
d  Vol.  I.a8~i0«.
1 3  Jtab.  Adm.  338.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  H] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  29

nations.^  It  is  difficult  to  draw  an;  precise  or  determinste
concluiion,  amidst  the  variety  of  opinions,  as  to  the  dis-
tance to  which  a  slate  may  lawrully  extend  its  exclusive
dominion  over  the  sea  adjoining  its  territories,  and  beyond
those  portions  of  the  sea  which  are  embraced  by  harbours,
(utfs,  bays,  and  estuaries,  and  over  which  its  jurisdictioo
unquestionably  extends.^  All  that  can  reasonably  be  as*
serted  is,  that  the  dominion  of  the  sovereign  of  the  shore
over  the  eontij^ous  sen,  extends  as  far  as  is  requisite  for
bis  safety,  and  for  some  lawful  end.  A  more  extended  do-
minion must  rest  entirely  upon  force,  and  maritime  su-
premacy. According  to  the  current  of  modern  authority,
the  general  territorial  jurisdiction  extends  into  the  sea  as
fur  as  cannon  shot  will  reach,  and  no  farther,  and  this  is
usually  calculated  to  be  e  marine  league;  and  the  Con-
gross  of  the  United  States  have  recognised  this  timitation,
by  authorizing  the  District  Courts  to  take  cognizance  of
all  captures  made  within  a  marine  league  of  the  American
shores.'^  The  executive  authority  of  this  country,  in  1793,
considered  the  whole  of  Delaware  bay  to  be  tvithin  our  '
territorial  jurisdiction  ;  and  it  rested  its  claims  upon  those
authorities  which  admit  that  gulfs,  channels,  and  arms  of
the  sea,  belong  to  the  people  with  whose  lands  they  are
encompassed  ;  and  it  was  intimated  that  the  law  of  nations
would  justify  the  United  States  in  attaching  to  their  coasts
an  extent  into  the  sea,  beyond  the  reach  of  cannon  shut.''
Considering  the  great  extent  of  the  line  of  the  American
coasts,  we  have  a  right  to  claim  for  fiscal  and  defensive
regulations,  a  liberal  extension  of  maritime  jurisdiction  ;
and  it  would  not  be  unreasonable,  as  I  apprehend,  to  as-
aume,  for  domestic  purposes  connected  with  our  safety  and


a  Mr.  Adami*  Letter  to  the  Ruitiin  Mmider,  March  MA,  IBSS.

A  .dsiiiu  <m  the  Maritime  Law  of  Europe,  vol.  1.  p.  90fl.

e  Byttk.q.Pylk.J.c.9.  rsUc/,  b.  i.e.  33.  tec.  SS9.  Act  <^ Cm-
greu,  June  5ft,  1794,  cb.  sO.

d  Opmiiyii  nf  the  Attorney  General  eofKeming  Ou  etitare  ^  Ar  thip
Grangetdal«d  i4A  of  May,  1193,  arui  the  Letter  qfAeStattary^SUOt^
la  the  French  Mmitltr,  o/\bA  of  May,  t7S3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


M  or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [PartL

welfare,  the  control  of  the  waten  on  our  coasts,  though
included  within  lines  stretching  from  quite  distant  head-
laods,  ns,  for  instaace,  from  Ca|>e  Ann  to  Cape  Ood,  and
from  Nantucket  to  Hontauck  Point,  and  from  that  point
to  the  capes  of  the  Delaware,  and  from  the  south  cape  of
Florida  to  the  Hissifipi.  It  in  certain  chat  our f^ovemment
Would  be  disposed  to  view  with  some  uDeasiiiess  and  sen-
sibility, in  the  ease  of  war  between  other  maritime  powers,
the  use  of  the  waters  of  our  coast,  far  beyond  the  reach  of
cannon  shot,  as  cruitiin);;  ground  for  belligerent  purposes.
In  1793,  our  government  thought  ihey  were  entitled,  in
reason,  to  as  broad  a  margin  of  protected  navigation  as
any  nation  whatever,  though  at  that  time  they  did  not
positively  insist  beyond  the  distance  of  a  marine  league
jVom  the  sea  shore ;"  and,  in  1806,  our  government  thought
it  would  not  be  unreasonable,  considering  the  extent  of
the  United  States,  the  sfaoalness  of  their  coast,  and  the
natural  indication  furnished  by  the  well  defined  path  of
the  Gulf  Stream,  to  eipect  ao  immunity  from  belligerent
warfare,  for  the  space  between  that  limit  and  the  Ameri-
can  shore.  At  least  ii  ought  to  be  insisted,  that  the  extent
of  the  neutral  immunity  should  correspond  with  the  claims
maintained  by  Great  Britain  around  ber  own  territory*
and  that  no  belligerent  right  should  be  exercised  within
"  the  chambers  formed  by  headlands,  or  any  where  at  sea
within  the  distance  ef  four  leagues,  or  from  a  right  line
from  one  headlaud  to  another.*)  lo  the  case  of  the  LittU
Bell,  which  was  cruising  many  miles  from  shore  between
Cape  Henry  and  Cape  Hatteras,  our  government  laid  atreaa
on  the  circumstance  that  she  was  "hovering  on  our  coasts,"
and  it  was  conteoded  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that
they  had  a  right  to  know  the  national  character  of  armed
ships  in  such  a  situation,  and  that  it  was  a  right  immedi-


a  Mr.  JefftrionU  LeUer  lo  M.  Otn^,  M)>iitnd,er  8lh.  1793-
b  Mr  Jfoduant't  Lttter  to  JUitr*.  Jfonrot  ami  Pindcnty,  iattd  JUa^
tTIft,  1806.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LKliin  n.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  Si

ately  coDnected  with  our  tranquillity  and  peaee.  It  wsi
further  observed,  that  all  nations  ezi^rciae  the  right,  and
noDC  with  more  rigour,  or  at  a  greater  diitance  from  the
eoast,  than  Great  Britua,  and  bone  on  more  justifiable
grounds  thau  the  United  States.*  There  can  be  but  little
doubt,  that  as  the  United  Stales  advance  in  commerce  and
naval  atren^th,  our  government  will  be  disposed  more  and
more  to  feel  and  acknowledge  the  justice  and  policy  of
tbeBtitisb  claim  to  aopremacy  over  the  narrow  seas  ad-
jacent to  the  British  isles,  because  we  shall  stand  in  need
of  similar  accommodation  and  means  of  security.

It  was  declared,  in  the  case  of  Li  Lottit^  thai  mar^
time  states  claim-,  upon  a  principle  just  in  itself,  and  tem-
perately applied,  a  right  of  visitation  and  inquiry  within
those  parts  of  the  ocean  adjoining  to  their  shores.  They
were  to  be  considered  as  pans  of  the  territory  for  varisns
domestic  purposes,  and  the  right  was  admitied  by  tha
courtesy  of  nations.  The  English  hovering  laws  wer«
founded  upon  that  right.  The  statute  of  9  Geo.  II.  c  35.
prohibited  foreign  goods  to  be  transhipped,  within  four
leagues  of  the  coast,  without  payment  of  duties;  and  the
act  of  Congress  of  March  2d,  1799,  ch.  136.  sec.  2S,  26,
C7. 99.  contained  the  same  prohibition ;  and  the  eiercise
of  JMrisdiction,  to  that  distance,  for  the  safely  and  protec-
tion of  the  revenue  laws,  was  declared  by  the  Supreme
Court,  in  Church  v.  Hid>bardf>  to  be  conformable  to  the
laws  and  usages  of  nations.

As  the  end  of  the  law  of  nations  is  the  happiness  and
perfection  of  the  general  society  of  mankind,  it  enjoins
upon  every  nation  the  punctual  observance  of  benevolence
■nd  good  will,  as  well  as  of  justice,  towards  its  neigh-
lK>urB.(i  This  is  equally  the  policy  and  the  duty  of  nations.
They  ought  to  promote  a  free  intercourse  for  commerdal


m  Mr.  Mimrot't  LMerlo  Mr.  Foaer,Oi:l.U\'b,l»\t,m»dPraSiMtU
Mv*ag»,  yiMtmher  bOi IBll.
b  2  DoifMM'f  Adm.  Rep.  34S.
eSCrnnrA,  187.
i  FaU«r«jEV«;t<n.«eQ.I3.l3.  b.9.cli I.  tec.  ^,  3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


»  OF.THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Partr.

purpoBM,  in  order  to  supply  each  other's  tvtfnta,  and  pnv
mote  each  other's  prosperity.  The  variety  of  climate*
and  productions  on  the  surface  of  (he  globe,  and  the  tacili-
ty  of  communication,  by  means  of  riven,  lakes,  and  the
ocean,  invite  to  a  liberal  commerce,  as  agreeable  to  the
taw  of  nature,  and  extremely  conducive  to  national  amity,
industry,  and  bappiness.»  Tbe  numerous  wunts  oi  civi<
lized  life  can  only  be  supplied  by  mutual  exchange  be-
tween nations  of  the  peculiar  productions  of  each;  and  who
that  is  familiar  with  the  English  classics,  has  not  dwelt
with  delight  on  the  description  of  the  extent  and  blessings
of  English  commerce,  which  Addison  has  given  with  such
graceful  simplicity,  and  such  enchanting-elegance,  in  one
of  the  Spectalor^i  visits  to  the  Royal  Exchange  ?b  But,  aa
every  nntion  has  the  right,  and  is  disposed  to  exercise  it,
of  judging  for  itself,  in  respect  to  the  policy  and  extent  of
its  commercial  arrangements,  the  general  freedom  of
trade,  however  reasonably  and  strongly  it  may  be  incul-
cated in  the  modern  school  of  political  economy,  is  but  an
imperfect  right,  and  necessarily  subject  to  such  regula-
tions and  restrictions,  as  each  nation  may  think  proper  to
prescribe  for  itself.  Every  state  oiay  monopolize  as  much
as  it  pleases  of  its  own  internal  and  colonial  trade,  or
grant  to  other  nations,  with  whom  it  deals,  such  distinc-
tions and  particular  privileges  as  it  may  deem  conducive
to  its  interest."  The  celebrated  English  navigation  act
of  Charles  11.  contained  nothing,  said  Afartens,  con-
trary to  the  law  of  nations,  notwithstanding  it  was  very
embarrassing  to  other  countries.  When  the  United  States
put  an  entire  stop  to  their  commerce  with  all  the  world,
in  December,  1807,  by  laying  a  general  embargo  on  their
trade,  without  distinction  as  to  nation,  or  limit  as  to  time,
no  other  {wwer  complaioed  of  it,  and  the  foreign  govern*
meat  most  affeclod  by  it,  and  against  whose  interests  it

a  f^allUl,b.i.c  2  wc.  21.  6  Spei/otor. vol.  l.Ko.  liS.

e  Puff.  b.  A.  c.  6.  MC  10.  VaUtl,  b.  i-  c  8.  tec.  S2.  97-  Mattm^
Swrnmary  nf  Ike  I^eacofJiTatiimt,  1*6- 143  1  Chilty  m  Ctmrnerciat  Lmt,
76 — !11.  JiSr.  Cmfring'i  LtUtxHo  Mr- OaUaUn.  of  Septcnibw  lllb  «td
No>ember:3th,  \Vi6.  Mr.  Oitlattn to  JVr.  Cintnfnf.of  Seplember tfd,
•ud  Decembor  SSth,  iSSS,  and  Mr. Clay  to  Jgr.  Gattatin,  November

1  lib,  ttise.


UcterelL] OF  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS.  i$

was  more  icniaediatelf  directed,  declared  to  our  gorern-
meiit,'  tbat,  a«  a  muaicipal  regulation,  foreign  statea  had
no  concern  with  it,  a&d  that  the  Britiah  government  did
not  conceive  that  they  bad  ths  right,  or  the  preteoBion,  to
make  any  complaint  of  it,  and  that  they  had  made  none.

No  nation  has  a  ri£ht,iDtimeof  peace,  to  interfere  witbi
or  interrupt,  any  commerce  wcliioh  ii  lawful  by  the  law  of
nations,  and  carried  on  between  other  independent  powers*
or  between  different  membersof  the  same  state.  The  claim
of  the  Portuguese,  in  the  height  of  their  maritime  power  in.
India,  to  exclude  all  other  European  people  from  com-
merce with  Asia,  was  contrary  to  national  law,  and  &  just
cause  of  war.  Vattel  called  it  a  pretension  no  leas  iniqui-
tous than  chimerical.^  The  recent  attempt  of  Russia  to
appropriate  to  herself  an  exclusive  trade  in  the  North  Pa-
cific, met  with  a  prompt  resistance  on  the  part  of  this
country ;  and  the  government  of  the  United  States  cEainf
ed  for  its  citizens  the  right  to  carry  on  trado  with  the  abor^
final  natives,  on  the  north-west  coast  of  America,  without
the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  other  nations,  even  in  armi
and  ammunitions  of  war.^

Treaties  of  commerce,  defining  and  establishing  tberigbts
and  extent  of  commercial  intercourse,  bare  been  found  to
be  of  great  utility  ;  and  they  occupy  a  very  important  title
ID  the  code  of  national  law.  They  wero  considered,  even
two  centuries  ago,  to  be  so  conducive  to  the  public  welfare,
as  to  overcome  the  bigotry  of  the  times  ;  and  Lord  Coked
admitted  them  to  be  one  of  the  four  kinds  of  national  com-
pacts that  might,  lawfully,  be  made  with  infidels.  They
have  multiplied  exceedingly  within  the  hiat  century,  for  it
has  been  found  by  experience,  that  the  general  liberty  of
trade,  resting  solely  on  principles  of  common  right,  benevo-
leoce,  and  souad  policy,  was  too  vague  and  precarious  to  ba


«  Mr.  GumUgU  Letter  to  JHr.PtnftiMy,  Sept.  t3d,  1II08.

(  b.  3.  0.  3.  wc.  ff4.

«  Mr.  Adanui  LtOer  to  UuSttfian  Minuter,  Mtreh  SOIh,  18tf.

d  iUd.  ISS.

Vofc.  I.  6


Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


%*  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [fnt  L

ConaifteDt  with  tbe  rafet]'  of  the  eilended  intercoanw  aod
complicated  intSTesU  of  f^reat  commercial  itateB.  Every
nation  may  enter  into  such  commercial  treatiei,  and  grant
■uch  ipecial  privileges,  aa  they  think  proper ;  and  no  na-
tion, to  whom  the  like  pririlegea  are  not  conceded,  hai  a
right  to  take  offeace,  provided  thcMe  treatiee  do  not  affect
their  perfect  rights.  A  state  may  enter  into  a  treaty,  by
which  it  grants  exclusive  privileges  to  one  nation,  and  de-
privet  itself  of  the  liberty  to  grant  similar  privileges  la
any  other.  Thus,  Portugal,  in  1703,  by  her  treaty  with
England,  gave  her  the  monopoly  of  her  wine  trade,  and
the  Dutch,  formerly,  by  a  treaty  with  Ceylon,  engrossed
tbe  cinnamon  trade,  and,  laterly,  they  have  monopolized
the  trade  of  Japan.'  These  are  matters  of  strii-t  legal
right ;  but  it  is,  nevertheless,  in  a  moral  sense,  the  duty  of
every  nation  to  deal  kindly,  and  liberally,  and  impartially
towards  all  mankind,  and  not  to  biitd  itself  by  treaty  with
one  nation,  in  contravention  of  those  general  duties  which
the  law  of  nature  dictates  to  be  due  to  the  rest  of  the  world.
Every  nation  is  bound,  in  lime  of  peace,  to  grant  a  pas-
aage,  for  lawful  purposes,  over  their  lands,  rivers,  and  seas,
to  the  people  of  other  states,  whenever  it  can  be  permitted
without  iaconvenience;  and  burthenaome  conditions  ought
Dot  to  be  annexed  to  tbe  transit  of  persons  and  profterty.
If,  however,  any  government  deems  the  introduction  of
foreigners,  or  their  merchandise,  injurious  to  those  iolerexti
of  their  own  people  which  they  are  bound  to  protect  and
promote,  they  are  at  liberty  to  withhold  the  indulgence.
Tbe  entry  of  foreigners  and  their  efferts  is  not  an  absolute
right,  but  only  one  of  imperfect  obligation,  and  it  is  subject
to  tbediscretionofthegovernment  which  tolerates  it-b  The
ttate  may  even  levy  a  tax  or  toll  upon  tbe  persons  and  pro-
perty of  strangers  in  tratuUu,  provided  tbe  same  be  a  rea-


«  I  ChUfy  am  Conmereiat  Zau,  40,41.  a.

t  ftgf.  b.  3.eb.3.»eo.S,  «,  7.  JlvtJur/orlA,h.t.<ib.  0.  r«tW,  b.a.
c-J  McM.— cB-iW.  100.— o. !.•«>.  1«8. 130.— fl.  10. i«!.l3ifclC»i(*


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lufnr«  11.3 OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  35

tODable  drarge,  by  w^y  of  recompense  for  the  expenn
which  the  accommodiitioD  createi.'  These  things  arn  now
generally  aettled  iiicotnmereiBl  ireaties,  by  which  itisuan-
ally  atipulated,  that  there  shall  be  free  navigation  and
etHnmeree  between  the  nations,  and  a  free  entry  to  persoai
and  properly,  subject  to  the  ordinary  revenue  and  police
lam  of  the  country,  and  to  the  special  terms  a»d  conditioni
prescribed  by  the  treaty.

A  nation  possessing  only  the  upper  parts  of  a  navigable
rirer,  is  entitJed  to  descend  to  the  sea  without  being  em-
barrassed by  useless  and  oppressive  duties  or  regulations.
It  is  doubtless  a  right  ofimperfert  obligation,  but  one  that
cannot  justly  bewithheld  without  good  cause.  When  SpaiOf
in  the  year  1792,  owned  the  mouth,  and  both  banks  oftbe
lower  Hissiitsippi,  and  the  United  States  the  left  bank  of
the  upper  portion  of  the  same,  it  was  strongly  contended
pn  rbe  part  of  the  United  States,  that  by  the  law  of  naturv
and  nations,  we  were  entitled  to  the  navigation  of  that
river  to  the  sea,  subject  only  to  such  modifications  as  Spain
might  reasonably  deem  necessary  for  her  safety  and  fiscal
accommodation.  It  was  further  contended,  that  the  right,
to  the  end,  carried  with  it,  as  aa  incident,  the  right  to  the
means  requisite  to  attain  the  end  ;  such,  fi>r  instance,  as
the  right  to  moor  vessels  to  the  shore,  and  to  land  in  caioj
of  necessity.  Thesameclear  rigfatofthe  United  States  o
the  free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  through  the  territo-
ries of  Spain  to  the  ocean,  was  asserted  by  the  Congress
under  the  coiifederation.l>  The  claim  in  that  case,  with
the  qualifications  annexed  to  it,  was  well  grounded  on  the
principles  and  authorities  oftbe  lawof  nations-o


r'a  RtiU«r/areA.b.  %.  cb.  9-  yaOel,  b.  S.c.  tO.KC.  134.  I  Chittjf,
103— 1 0B.

6  InHrurtiotu  gwfl  la  Mr.  Jtai  w  1 780.  Raoltilhn  »f  Congrut  ofHtp.
tanb'r.  i7tl8.  RepoH  of  the  St.reUay  of  SlaU  to  Iht  Praideni,  March
IB,  1793

e  Oroinu.  lib-  S.  c.  S  sec.  It,  IS,  13.  IS.— c.  3.  »ec.  I*-  Piif.  lib.S.
o.l.iec.6,a.S. TotW,  b.  i.tec.wa,— b.  2.MO.  IW-ISMSf.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


9«  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part.  I.

Wben  foreigners  are  admitted  intoa  state  upon  free  and
liberal  terms,  the  public  faith  becomes  pledged  for  their
protectioD>  The  courts  of  juptire  ought  to  be  freely  opeo
to  them  to  resort  to  for  the  redress  of  their  grierauces.
But  strangers  areequatly  bound  with  natives,  to  obedience
to  the  laws  of  the  country  during  the  lime  they  sojourn  in
it,  and  they  are  equally  amenable  for  infractions  of  the  law.
It  has  sotnetimes  been  made  a  question,  hotr  far  one  govern-
ment  was  bound  by  the  law  of  nations,  and,  independent  of
treaty,  to  surrender,  upon  demand,  fugitiven  from  justice,
wbo,haring  committed  crimesinone  country  ,flee  to  another
for  shelter.  It  is  declared  by  the  public  jurists,"  that  erery
state  is  bound  to  deny  an  asylum  to  criminals,  and  upon  ap-
plication and  due  examination  of  the  case,  to  surrender  tba
fugitivetotbeforeign  state  wlierethecrime  was  committed.
The  language  of  the  authorities  is  clear  and  explicit,  and
the  law  and  usafte  of  nations  rest  on  the  plainest  principles
of  justice.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  gorernment  to  surrender  ap
fiigitives  upon  demand,  after  the  civil  magistrate  shall  have
ascertained  the  exisience  of  reAsonable  grounds  for  the
charge,  and  sufficient  to  put  the  accused  upon  bis  trial.
The  guilty  party  cannot  be  tried  and  punished  by  any  other
jurisdiction  than  the  one  whose  laws  bare  been  violated,
and,  therefore,  the  dutyofsurrenderingfaim  applies  as  well
to  the  case  of  the  subjects  of  the  state  surrendering,  as  to
the  case  of  subjects  of  the  power  demanding  the  fugitive.
The  only  difficulty,  in  the  abBence  of  positive  agreement,
consists  in  drawing  the  line  between  the  class  of  offences  to
which  the  usage  of  nations  does,  and  to  which  it  does  not
apply,  inasmuch  as  it  is  understood,  in  practice,  to  apply
only  to  crimes  of  great  atrocity,  or  deeply  affecting  the
public  safety.  The  act  of  the  legislature  of  New- York,  of
the  5th  of  April,  1822,  cb.  148.  gave  facility  to  the  aurren-


d  Grofnu,  b.  3.  ob.21'  mo.  3t  4,  G.  and  HemecciiuU  Com,  h.  t  Burbi-
wtagui,  part  4.  o.  3-  kc-  19.  JRtiHtffoTlh,  b.  2,  o,  B.  VatUI,  b  t.A.
6.M0.7fi,77.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  11] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  aT

der  of  fugitires,  by  authorizing  the  Gorernor,  in  bis  dis-
cretion, on  requisition  from  a  foreign  goTemmenl ,  to  sur-
render op  fugitives  charged  with  murder,  fiirgery,  larcenj,
or  other  crimes,  which,  by  the  tawa  of  this  state,  were
punishable  with  death,  or  imprisonmnnt  in  the  state  pri~
son  ;  provided  the  evidence  of  criminBlity  was  sufficient,  by
our  laws,  to  detain  the  party  for  trial  on  a  like  charge.
Such  a  legislative  provision  was  requiHite,  for  the  judicial
power  can  do  no  more  than  to  cause  the  fugitive  to  be
arrested  and  detained,  until  sufficient  means  and  oppor-
tunity have  been  afforded  for  the  discharge  ofihis  duty,  to
the  proper  organ  of  communication  with  the  power  that
makes  the  demand.

The  European  nations,  in  early  periods  of  modern  hi»<
tory,  made  provision  by  treaty  for  the  mutual  surrender  of
criminals  seeking  refuge  from  justice.  Treaties  of  this
kind  were  made  between  England  and  Scotland  in  1 174,
and  England  and  France  tn  I3(>H,  and  France  and  Savoy
in  1378,  and  the  last  treaty  made  special  provision  for  the
surrender  of  criminals  though  they  should  happen  to  be
subjects  of  the  state  to  which  tbey  had  fled.  Mr.  Ward*
.considers  these  treaties  as  evidence  of  iheadvancementof
society  in  regularity  and  order.

Ambassadors  form  an  exception  to  the  genera)  case  of
foreigners  resident  in  the  country,  and  they  are  exempted
absolutely  from  all  allegiance,  and  from  ail  responsibility
to  the  laws  of  the  country  to  which  they  are  deputed.  As
tbey  arc  representatives  of  their  sovereigns,  and  requisite
for  negotiations  and  friendly  intercourse,  their  persons,  by
the  consent  of  all  nations,  have  been  deemed  inviolable,
and  the  instances  are  rare  in  which  popular  passions,  or
perfidious  policy,  have  violated  this  immunity.  Some
very  honourable  examples  of  respect  for  the  rights  of  am-
bassadors, even  when  their  privileges  would  seem  in  jus-
tice to  hare  been  forfeited  on  account  ofthe  gross  abuse  of

■  UM.  o/'Ihe  Lav  o/'AiilJeM,  toL  £.  318—300.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


»  OF  THE  LAW  OP  NAflONS.  (P«t  t

Ibem,  Kn  to  be  met  with  in  the  aDcient  Roman  ati|ialB>.
notwithstanding  the  extreme  arrogance  of  their  preten-
■ioDB,  and  the  intemperance  of  their  military  spirit*"  If,
bowerer,  ambaaniidorB  should  be  so  regardless  of  tbei'
duty,  and  of  the  object  of  their  privilege,  as  to  insult,  or
openly  attark  the  laws  or  gorernment  of  the  nation  to
whom  they  are  sent,  their  functions  may  be  suspended  by
a  refusal  to  treat  with  them,  or  application  can  be  made
to  their  own  sovereign  for  their  recall,  or  they  may  be  dit'
missed,  and  required  to  depart  within  a  reasonaUe  time.
We  have  bad  instances  within  our  own  times,  of  all  tfaes«
modes  of  dealing  with  ministers  who  had  given  offence^
and  it  is  not  to  be  denied,  that  every  government  has  a
perfect  right  to  juitge  for  itself  whether  the  language  or
coodoet  of  a  foreign  minister  be  admissible.  The  wri*
ters  on  public  law  go  still  further,  and  allow  force  to  be
applied  to  confine  or  send  away  an  ambassador,  wbeo  tha
■afety  of  the  state,  which  is  superior  to  all  other  consider-
ations, absolutely  requires  it,  arising  either  from  the  vio*
lence  of  hie  conduct,  or  the  influence  and  danger  of  hii
nachinationB.  This  is  all  that  can  be  done,  for  ambassa-
dors eunnot,  in  any  case,  be  made  amenable  to  the  civil  or
criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  country  ;  and  this  has  beentha
settled  rule  of  public  law  ever  since  the  attempt  made  in
the  reign  of  Elizabeth  to  subject  the  Scotch  ambassador
to  criminal  jurisdiction,  and  the  learned  discussions  which
that  case  excited.''  By  fiction  of  law,  an  ambassador  i*
considered  as  if  he  were  out  of  the  territory  of  the  foreign
power  ;  and  it  is  an  implied  agreement  among  nations,
that  the  ambassador,  while  be  resides  within  the  foreign
state,  shall  be  considered  as  a  member  of  bis  own  country,
and  the  gorernmeDt  he  represents  has  exclusive  cogni-
sance of  his  conduct,  and  control  of  his  person.  Tbe  at-
tendants and  effects  of  the  ambassador  are  under  bit  pro-


a  Lin,,  b-  3.  o.  4.  b.  30.  c.  <fi.

h  F<tlfel,b.4.c't.m>e.V7—l(a. VtmFt  ffi«bvy,  vol.  C  p.  48««-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


no OF  THS  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  39

toctionand  privilege,  and  equally  exempt  from  the  (breiga
jurisdiction)  though  there  are  atrong  inmancea  in  whiek
tbeir  iaviolability  has  been  deoied  and  invaded.^  The
dtMinctioo  betweeo  ambaseadon,  miniBteri  plenipotentia-
■7,  aod  envoys  eztraordinary,  relates  to  diplomatic  pre*
cedeace  and  etiquette,  and  not  to  tbeir  essential  powers
and  privileges.''

A  goTernment  may,  in  its  discretion,  lawfully  refuse  to
veeeive  all  ambassador,  and  without  affording  any  jost
cause  for  tvar,  though  the  act  would,  probably,  excite  un*
friendly  dispositions,  unless  accompanied  with  conciliatory
•xplanatiooa.  The  refusal  majr  be  upon  the  ground  oTthe
wnbassador's  bod  character,  or  former  offensive  condact*
«r  because  the  special  Mibject  of  the  embassy  is  not  pro-
per, or  not  convenient  for  discUssion.o  A  state  nay  also
be  divided  and  distracted  by  civil  laws,  so  as  to  render  it
snexpedieat  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  ei^er
party.  Bynkershoeck  says,<'  that  this  right  of  sending
ambassadors  belongs  to  the  ruling  party,  in  whom  itet  rei
agtndi  potcttat.  This  is  placing  the  right  where  all  foreiga
governments  place  it,  in  the  government  de  facta,  which
is  in  the  actual  exercise  of  power  ;  but  the  government  to
whom  the  ambttssodor  is  sent,  may  exercise  its  discretion
io  receiving,  or  refusing  to  receive  him.

It  sometimes  beoomes  a  grave  question,  in  national  dis^
«ussion8,how  far  the  sovereign  is  bound  by  the  act  of  his
Blinister.  This  will  depend  upon  the  nature  and  termaof
kis  authority.  It  is  now  the  usual  course  for  every  govern*
ment  to  reserve  to  itself  the  right  to  ratify  or  dissent  fronl
the  treaty  agreed  to  by  its  ambassador.  Ageneral  letter  of
credence  is  the  ordinary  letter  of  attorney,  or  credential  of
the  ainieter ;  aod  it  is  not  uoderstood  to  confer  a  power


a  RAterJbrtk.  b.  f .  c.  >. Ward"!  Rulory,  vol.  {.  tsS,  8>

b  Marimt.p.tOl—t07. Fotte/,  b.  «.  c,  b

t  RuAarforlk-  b.  9.  c.  0.

4  QwuL  J.  FiA.  lib.  9.  0.  3. ■


i,Googlc


40  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Ptrt  I.

upon  the  miDUtsr  to  biml  bis  TOvereigo  conclusively.  To
do  so  important  an  act  would  require  a  distinct  and  full
power,  containing  an  express  uiitbority  to  bind  the  princi-
pal definitively,  without  the  right  of  review,  or  the  neces-
sity of  ratification  ofl  Ilia  pert.  This  is  not  the  ordinary  or
prudent  course  of  busincM.  Ministers  always  act  under
instructions,  which  arc  confidential,  and  which,  it  is  admit-
ted, they  are  not  bound  to  disclose  ;■  end  it  is  a  well
grounded  custom,  as  Vattel  ol>Berves,l>  that  any  engage-
ment which  the  minister  shall  enter  into  is  of  no  fore*
among  sovoreigns,  unless  ratified  by  his  principal'  This
is  now  the  usage,  although  the  treaty  may  bave  been
•igned  by  plenipolentiarie8.o

Consuls  are  commercial  agents,  appointed  to  reside  in
the  see-ports  of  foreign  countries,  with  e  commission  (to
watch  over  the  commercial  rights  and  privileges  of  the  na-
tion deputing  them.  The  establishment  of  consuls  is  one
of  the  most  useful  of  modern  commercial  institutions.
They  were  first  appointed  about  the  12th  century,  in  the
opulent  slates  of  Italy,  such  as  Pisa,  Lucca,  Genoa,  aod
Venice,  aod  their  origin  has  been  ascribed  to  the  neces-
sity for  extraordinary  assistance  in  those  branches  of
commerce  formerly  carried  on  with  barbarous  aod  uncivi-
lized nations.<I  The  utility  of  such  a  mercantile  officer
has  been  perceived  and  felt  by  all  trading  nations,  and
the  Mediterranean  trade,  in  particular,  stands  high^
in  need  of  such  accredited  ageotB.s  Consuls  bare  been
multiplied  and  extended  to  every  pert  of  the  world,
where  navigation  and  commerce  can  successfully  pene-
trate, and  their  duties  and  privileges  are  now  generally
limited  and  defined  in  treaties  of  commerce,  or  by  the
statute  regulations  of  the  country  which  tbey  ropresent.  In


a  WtcqutforCi  VArnb.  tom.  1.  mc.  ]4. JHurfou,  p<  317.

h  b.  4.  c.  6.  wc.  77.

e  Tlie  Glix*  Ann,  I  DadtorCi  Adm.  Rep.  944.

d  I  Chittji  m  Commercial  Law,  46,  49.

«  Jaduan  on  Ihe  Coxuntm  of  (Ae  XedittrraneiBi,  p.  30.  ch.  4.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


tMiun  n.] or  THE  LAW  OF  NaTIO!^.  41

-tom«  places,  the;  hare  be«n  inreated  with  Judicial  pottefg
Qter  the  dbputes  between  thrir  own  merchants  in  foreign
Porta;  bat  in  the  commercial  treaties  made  by  Great
Britain,  there  is  rarel;  any  stipulation  for  clothing  them
with  judicial  authority,  except  in  treaties  with  the  Barbary
iwwers ;  and  in  England  it  baa  been  held,  that  a  consul
ia  Dot  strictly  a  judicial oflScar,  and  they  have  there  no  ju-
dioial  poWer.>  It  has  been  nrged  by  some  writers,  as  a
matter  highly  expedient,  to  establish  rules  requiring
merchants  abroad  to  submit  their  disputes  to  the  judicial
authority  of  their  own  consuls,  particularly  with  reference
to  shipping  eoncertis.  But  ao  government  can  inrest  its
eoDSuls  with  Jbdicial  power  orer  their  own  subjects,  in  a
foreign  country,  without  the  consent  of  the  government  of
the  foreign  country,  founded  on  treaty  ;  and  there  is  tH)
instaace,  in  any  nation  of  Europe,  of  the  admission  of
erimiaal  jurisdiction  ia  foreign  consuls.  The  laws  of  the
Uaited  States,  on  the  subject  of  consuls  and  vice-consuls,!)
•peeially  authorize  them  to  receive  the  protests  of  masters
and  others,  relating  to  American  commerce,  and  they  da*
elara  that  their  consular  certificates,  under  seal,  shall  re*
ceive  faith  and  credit  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States.
It  is  likewise  made  their  duty,  where  the  laws  of  the
conntry  permit,  to  administer  on  the  personal  estates  of
American  citizens,  dying  within  their  consulates,  snd
leaving  no  legal  representative,  and  to  take  charge  of  and
secure  the  effects  of  stranded  American  vessels,  in  the  ab*
senee  of  the  master,  owner,  or  consignee  ;  and  they  are
bound  to  provide  for  destitute  seamen  within  their  coa-
■ulates,  and  to  send  them,  at  the  public  expense,  to  the
United  States.  These  particular  powers  and  duties  are
similar  to  those  prescribed  to  British  consuls  and  to  connsis
under  the  consular  convention  between  theUnited  States
and  Prance,  in  17S8  ;  and  they  are  in  accordance  withtbe


■  3  Tmabm.  IS3, 1  Chitty,  60,  Sl>

^  AcU  of  CongrtM  of  I4ih  April,  ITM,  cb.  U.  «nd  ffM.  tS,  IttSr

A.  at.


m  3  Tmnton.  IS3, 1  Chithf,  60,  Sl>
'*  AcU  of  CongrtM  of  I4ih  April,  ITM

Vol.  I.  «

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


42  OF  the:  law  or  nations.  [Pan  u

Asages  of  natioDB,  and  are  not  to  be  eoastraed  to  Uie  ezelu*
BJoo  of  others  .resulting  from  the  nature  of  the  consular  ap-
pointment,'' The  former  consular  convention  between
France  and  this  country,  allowed  consuls  to  exercise  police
overall  vessels  of  their  resijective  nations,  "  within  the  in-
terior of  the  vessels,"  and  to  exercise  a  species  of  ciril
jurisdiction,  by  determining  disputes  concerning  wages,  and
between  themastersand  crewsofvcseela  belonging  to  their
own  country.  The  jurisdiction  claimed  under  the  oonsulaf
convention  with  France,  was  mere);  voluntary,  and  alto-
gether exclusive  of  any  coercive  authority  ;^  and  we  have
no  treaty  at  present  which  concedes  even  sqcb  consular
functions.  The  doctrine  of  our  courts  iB,c^hat  a  foreign
coiiiul,  duly  recognised  by  our  government,  may  assert
and  defend,  as  a  com]>etent  party,  the  rights  of  property
o/the  individuals  of  his  nation,  in  the  courts  of  the  United
States,  and  may  institute  suits  for  that  purpose,  without
any  special  authority  from  the  party  for  whose  benefit  be
acta.  But  the  court,  in  tbst  case,  said,  ihat  they  could  not
go  so  far  as  to  recognise  a  right  in  a  vice-consul  to  receive
actual  restitution  of  the  properly  or  its  proceeds,  without
■bowing  some  specific  power,  for  the  purpose,  from  the
party  in  interest.

No  nation  is  bound  to  receive  a  foreign  consul,  onless  it
has  agreed  to  do  so  by  treaty,  and  the  refusal  u  no  violation
of  the  peace  and  amity  between  the  nations.  Con-
sals  are  to  be  approved  and  admitted  in  the  usual  form,
and  if  any  consul  be  guilty  of  illegal  or  improper  con-
duct, he  is  liable  to  have  his  exequatur,  or  written  re-
cognition of  bis  character,  revoked,  and  to  be  punish-
ed according  to  the  laws  of  the  country  in  which
he  is  consul ;  or  he  may  be  sent  back  to  his  own
country,  at  the  discretion  of  the  government  which
be  has  offended.  The  French  consuls  are  forbidden  to
be  concerood  in  commerce,  and,  by  the  act  of  Congress

a  1  Btaaxt'  £.  M.  tit  CodbuU,  p-  SSS,  293.

h  Jfr.  FitkeHng  to  Mr.  Pindrnty,  January  letA,  1797.

t  Cms  of  tbs  Bello  Comum,  B  Wheakan,  IGt.,


t,Goo(^lc


LMtiif*  U.] OF  THG  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  45

of  February  28tb,  1803,  AmericaD  conaula  retiding  on  the
Barbara  coast,  are  forbidilea  alm> ;  but  British  aud  Ame-
rican conanlB  are  ^n'eralljr  at  liberty  to  be  concerned  in
trade  ;  and  in  such  cases  the  character  of  consul  does  not
give  any  protection  to  that  of  merchant,  when  these  cha-
racters are  united  in  the  same  person.^  Though  the  func-
tions of  consul  would  seem  to  require,  that  he  should  not
be  a  subject  of  the  stale  in  which  he  resides,  yet  the  prac-
ticeof  ihe  maritime  powers  is  quite  lax  ontbis  point,  and
it  is  usual,  and  thought  most  convenient,  to  appoint  sub-
jects of  the  foreign  country  to  be  consuls  at  its  ports.

A  consul  is  not  such  a  public  minister  as  to  be  entitled
to  the  privileges  appertaining  to  that  cbafacter,  nor  is  he
under  the  special  protection  of  the  law  of  nations.  He  is
entitled  to  privileges  to  a  certain  extent,  such  as  for  safe
conduct,  but  he  is  not  entitled  to  the  /lu  gentivm.  Vatlel
thinks'*  that  his  functions  require  that  he  should  be  inde-
pendent oflhe  ordinary  criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  coun-
try, and  that  he  ought  not  to  be  molested,  unless  he  vio-
lates the  law  of  nations  by  some  enormous  crime ;  and
that  if  guilty  of  any  crime,  he  ought  to  be  sent  home  to  be
IHiiiished.  But  no  such  immunities  have  been  conferred
on  consuls  by  the  modern  practice  of  nations ;  and  it  may
be  considered  as  settled  law,  that  consuls  do  not  enjoy  the
protection  of  the  law  of  nations  any  more  (ban  other  per-
•ons  who  enter  the  country  under  a  safe  conduct.  In  civil
and  criminal  cases  they  are  equally  subject  to  Ihe  laws  of
the  country  in  which  ihey  reside.*^  The  aarne  doctrine
declared  by the  public  jurists,  has  been  frequently laid


m  Beaaa'  L.  M.  rul.  I.  til.  Comols,  p.  391.  1  Chmy,tn,  Stl.  3  Ao(.
Adm  Rtp  S7.  The  lodiao  Chief.

i  B-  9.  o.  9.  tec.  34.

«  WirtpufarfM  V-tmb.,  b.  I.  c.  &.  ByrJc.  d'.foro  Itgat.  C- 10.  JSar~
fUfSsMahb.  4.  O.XMC.  S-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


44  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS:  [P«rt  I.

down  in  the  English  aod  American  c«urtB  of  juntiee.'  ft
■eetna,  bowerer,  from  some  decirioaa  in  France  ineBlioa-
ed  by  Mr.  Wardea,'>  that  foreign  cobhiiIs  cannot  be  pro-
leouted  before  a  French  tribunal  for  acts  done  by  them  in
f  ranee  by  order  of  their  government,  and  with  the  au-p
thorizationof  the  French  government,  and  that  in  general
a  ooniul  cannot  be  pro§eciited  without  the  previous  con-
■ent  of  hia  government.  Consular  privileges  are  much
leu  extensive  in  Christian  than  in  Mahometan  countrioa.
In  the  latter  they  cannot  be  imprisoned  for  any  causa
whatever,  except  by  demanding  justice  against  them  of
.  the  Porte,<:  and  they  partake  very  eoosiderably  of  the  cha-
racter of  resident  ministers.  Tbey  are  diplomatic  agents
under  the  nameofcousuls,  and  enjoy  ihe  rights  and  priri-
I^gea  which  the  Ottoman  Porte  reet^uises  in  relation  to
the  foreign  ministers  resident  at  Constantinople.  By
treaty  an  entire  immunity  is  usally  given  to'the  persoDS,
domestics,  and  effects  of  the  resident  consuls,  and  oo  coa-
auls  reside  with  the  Barbery  states  but  underthe  prote^
tion  of  treaties,*'

Considering  the  importance  of  the  eonsular  fliBOtioUf
and  the  activity  which  is  required  of  them  in  all  great  mari-
time ports,  and  the  approach  whinh  consuls  make  to  the
efficacy  and  dignity  of  diplomatic  characters,  it  was  a  wise
provision  in  the  eonatitutioq  of  the  United  States,  which
gave  to  the  Supreme  Court  original  jurisdiction  in  all  cases
affecting  consuls,  as  well  as  ambassadors  and  other  pub-
lic ministers,  apd  the  federal  jurisdiction  is  uoderstood  to
be  exclusive  of  the  state  courts."


a  Viveaih  t.  Becker.  3  Mauft  ^  Sebe.  384.  Clarke  v.  Ctetico.
1  Diuntim,  106.  Uaited  State*  r.  Baran,  9  Dallai,  X97.  The  Coin.
iDoDiTeBlth  T.  KnTBlofT,  5  Sirg-  4c  Raiel-  G4S, 1  CAiUy,  7Q.

t  OnGinJuIf.  p-lOS-US.

c  I  ChiUy.  71.

4  ShaUrH  Skelclut  of  Algien,  p.  38.  307.

•  k  Serg.  4-  Aw.  645.  3  Pidurinf,  80.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  HI.

or  THB  DECLARATION,  AND  OTHER  EAHLT  M^BDRES
or  A  STATB  or  WAR.

In  the  Ibm  Lecture,  we  oonaidered  lb«  principal  rig:bti
asd  dirtie§  of  oatioB*  inaAateofpeace;  and  if  tfaoiedutiea
were  generally  and  duly  fulfilled,  a  new  order  of  things
would  ariae,  and  sited  a  brig^bter  light  cner  the  history  of
fanman  affairs.  Peace  is  said  to  be  the  natural  state  of
man,  and  war  is  andertaken  for  the  sake  of  peace,  which  IM
iU  only  lawful  end  and  parpose.*  War,  to  use  the  laoguagie
ofLord  Bacon,'*  is  one  of  the  highest  trials  of  right;  for,
at  princes  and  states  acknowledge  no  superior  upon  earthy
tbey  pnt  themselves  upon  the  justice  of  God  by  an  appeal
to  arms.  The  history  of  mankind  isan  almost  uninterupt-
ed  oarration  of  a  state  of  war,  and  it  gives  colour  to  the
extravagant  theory  tuC  Hobbes-o  who  maintains,  that  the
natural  atate  of  man  is  a  state  of  war  of  all  against  all ;
and  it  adds  plausibility  to  the  conclusions  of  those  other
writers,  who,  baring  kfiown  and  studied  the  Indian  charac-
ter, insist  that  continual  war  is  the  natural  instinct  and  ap-
petite af  man  in  a  savage  state.  It  is,  doubtless,  true,  that
It  sincere  dis  position  for  peace,  and  a  just  appreciation  of
its  blessings,  are  the  aatural  and  necessary  result  of  sci-
eaoe  and  civiliiiatioo.


a  Cie.  ttf  Of.  1 .  1 1 .  Bud  S3. Grothu,  h.  ).  ch.  1.  Bwluma^  pit,
4.G.  l.Ma.4. fatlc/,  b.  4.0. 1.
b  Baeon't  Worki,  vol.  3.  p.  40.
c  ZiavurMoH,  psrt  1.  e.  13.


tvGooj^lc


OF  THE  LAWS  OF  NATIONS.  |F«rt  t


The  rifbt  of  self-defence  is  part  of  the  law  of  onr  na-
ture, aod  it  it  the  indispensable  duty  of  ciril  society  to  pro-
tect its  members  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  rij^hts,  both  of
person  and  property.  This  is  the  fundamental  principle
of  the  social  compact.  Ad  injury  either  done  or  threat-
ened, to  the  perfect  rights  of  the  natioo,  or  of  any  of 'its
members,  and  susceptible  of  no  other  redress,  is  a  just
cause  of  war.  The  injury  may  consist,  not  only  in  the  di-
rect riolatiun  of  personal  or  political  rights,  but  in  wrong-
fiilly  withholding  what  is  due,  or  in  the  refusal  of  a  reasona-
ble reparation  for  injuries  committed,  or  of  adequate  ex-
planation or  security  in  respect  to  manifest  and  impending
danger."  Grotius  condemns  the  doctrine,  that  wai  may
be  undertaken  to  weaken  the  power  of  a  neighbour,  under
the  apprehension  that  its  further  increase  may  render  him
dangerous.  This  would  be  contrary  to  justice,  unless  we
were  morally  certain,  not  only*of  a  capacity,  but  of  an  ac-
tual intention  to  injure  us.  We  ought  rather  to  meet  the
anticipated  danger  by  a  diligent  cultivation,  and  prudent
management  of  our  own  resources.  We  ought  to  concili-
ate the  respect  and  good  will  of  other  nations,  and  secure
their  assistance  in  case  of  need,  by  the  benerolence  and
the  justice  of  our  conduct.  War  is  not  to  be  resorted  to
without  absolute  necessity,  nor  unless  peace  would  be  more  '
dangerous,  and  more  miserable  than  war  itself.  An  injury
to  an  individual  member  of  a  state,  is  a  just  cause  of  war,
If  redress  he  refused;  but  a  nation  is  not  boundtogo  to  war
on  so  slight  a  foundation  ;  for  it  may  of  itself  grant  indem*
Bity  to  the  injured  parly ;  and  if  this  cannot  be  done,  yet
the  good  of  the  whole  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  welfare  of  a
part.b  Every  milder  method  of  redress  is  to  be  tried,  be-
fore the  nation  makes  an  appeal  to  arms;  and  this  is  the
HBge  and  moral  precept  of  the  writers  on  natural  law.


a  OrofiiM,  b.  S.  c.  1.  and  es. RuUierforlh,b.i.t!.9. roUrl,  b.  S.  C;
3.  MO.  3S.
6  arvtim,  b.S.  c.  St-SS. Ratherforlh,  b.  t  c.  9.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMRtra  m.] OF  THE  LAW  OW  NATIONS.  <

IfthequeiitioD  of  right  betweeo  two  powers  be  in  any  de-
pee  dubious,  they  ought  to  forbear  proceediug  to  estremi-
ties;  and  a  uatioa  would  be  coodemned  by  the  impartial
voice  ofinHnkind,  if  it  roiantarily  weotto  war  upoD  a  claim
of  which  it  doubted  the  l^aljty.  But,  on  political  subjeeta,
we  cannot  expect,  and  are  not  to  look  for,  the  same  rigor-
ouii  demoDBtration,  as  in  the  physical  sciences.  Policy  is
m  science  of  calculations  and  combinations,  arising  out  of
times,  places,  and  circumstances,  and  it  cannot  be  reduced
to  absolute  simplicity  and  certainty.  We  must  act  accord-
ing to  the  dictates  of  a  welMoformed  judgment,  resting  upoa
a  dilifcent  and  careful  examination  of  facts,  and  every  paci6c
node  of  redress  is  to  be  tried  faithfully  and  perseveriogly,
before  the  nation  resorts  to  arms.

Ifoneoationbe  bound  by  treaty  to  afford  assistanca,  in  a
case  of  war  between  its  ally  and  a  third  power,  the  assist--
ance  is  to  be  given  whenever  the  camfaderu  occurs ;  but
a  queMion  will  sometimes  arise,  whether  the  government
which  is  to  afford  the  aid,  is  to  judge  foritself  of  the  jus-
Uce  of  the  war  on  the  part  of  the  ally,  and  to  make  tb«
righttoassistancedepend  uponits  own  judgment.  Grotini
is  ofopinion,>  that  treaties  of  that  kind  do  not  oblige  us  t«
participate  in  a  war.  which  appears  to  be  manifestly  unjust
•n  the  part  of  the  ally;  and  it  is  said  lobeatacitcondiliotf
annexed  to  every  treaty  made  in  lime  of  peace,  and  stlpir*
lating  to  afford  succours  in  time  of  war,  that  the  stipula-
tion is  only  to  apply  to  a  just  war.  To  give  assistance  in
an  unjust  war,  on  the  ground  of  the  treaty,  would  be  con-
tracting anobligation  to  do  injustice,  and  no  such  contract  is
Talid.ti  But  to  set  up  a  pretext  of  this  kind  tu  avoid  a  posi-
tive engagement,  is  extremely  hazardous,  and  it  cannot
be  done,  except  in  a  very  clear  case,  without  exposing  the
nation  to  the  imputation  of  a  breach  of  public  faith.  la
doubtful  cases,  the  presumption  ought  rather  lobe  in  A-^
n>ur  of  onr  ally,  and  of  the  justice  of  his  war.


a  B.  t  ch.  95

i  yatJel,  b.  !.  c  It.  «ac.  K«.-fc.  9  c  9.  if(.  Cff)  b^.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4S  OF  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS.  [Parti

Ttie  doctrine  that  one  nation  is  not  bound  to  aasist  an-
other, under  any  circumstaoces,  in  a  war  clearly  unjust,
is  ftimilar  to  the  principal  in  the  feudal  lew,  to  be  met  with
in  the  Book  of  Feudt,  compiled  from  the  usages  of  the
Lombards,  and  forminjf  a  part  t^the  common  law  ofEu'
rope,  during  the  prevalence  of  the  feudal  system.  A  vas-
sal refusing  to  assist  his  liege  lord  in  a  just  war,  forfeited
bis  feud.  If  the  justice  of  the  war  was  even  doubtful,  or
not  known  affirmatively  to  be  nnjust,  (be  vassal  was
bound toassist ;  but  if  the  war  appeared  to  him  to  be  mani-
festly nnjurt,  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  help  bis  lord
to  carry  it  on  olTensively.*

A  nation  which  has  agreedto  render  assistance  toanother,
is  not  obliged  to  furnish  it  when  the  case  is  hopeless,  or
when  giving  the  anccors  would  expose  the  state  itself  to
im  minent  dunger.  -  Such  extreme  ruses  are  tacit  exceptions
to  the  obligation  of  the  treaty ;  but  the  danger  must  not  be
■light,  remote,  or  contingent,  for  this  would  be  to  seek  a
frivolous  cause  to  violateasolemn  engagement.''  In  the  case
ofa  defensive  alliance,  the  condition  of  the  contract  does
not  call  for  the  assistance,  unless  the  ally  be  engaged  in  a
defentht  war,  for  in  a  defensive  alliance,  the  nation  engages
only  to  defend  its  ally,  in  case  he  be  attacked,  and  even  then
We  are  to  inquire  whether  he  be  not  justly  attacked.^  The
defensive  alliance  applies  only  to  the  case  of  a  war  first
commenced,  in  point  of  fact,  against  the  ally ,  and  the  power
that  first  declares,  or  actually  begins  the  war,  makes  what
is  deemed,  in  the  conventional  law  of  nations,  an  nffintive
war.d  The  treaty  of  alliance  between  France  and  the
United  States,  in  1778,  was  declared,  by  the  second  article ,
to  be  a  defensive  alliance,  and  that  declaration  gave  a
character  to  the  whole  Insfrument,  and  consequently  the


a  Ftud.  Ub.  S.  (it.  98.  tec  I.  (  ralUl,  b.  3.  c.  c.  6.  mc.  03.

c  Valttl,  h:  3.  0.9.  HX. -79.

d  A  WIT  maj  be  dtfauiot  io  its  principles,  (1iODg:1i  offeniive  in  its  ppe
ntion,  ai  wbare  atlftck  U  the  beit  mode  to  repel  a  inenaced  inTBiion
tadthecaiiu/tcderiiofadrfeiuiv'  allisme  will  applf.  FatU/,  b.  3.  i
6.  Mct.  01-  lOO. Edi».  liitUiB,  Ka.  K9.  p.  2J4,  G.


t,Goo(^lc


Laemr«  HI.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  49

guKrantf ,  on  the  part  of  the  United  Statea,  of  the  French
posiessions  ia  Ainerica,  could  only  apply  to  future  defeo-
•ire  war9  on  the  part  of  France.  Upon  that  ground,  the
goTernment  of  this  country  in  1793,  did  not  consider  tbent-
selrea  bound  to  depart  from  their  neutrality,  and  to  take
part  with  France  in  the  war  in  which  ihe  was  then  en-
gaged.*  The  war  of  1793  was  first  actually  declared  and
commenced  by  France,  against  all  the  allied  powers  of
Europe,  and  the  nature  oftbe  guaranty  retfuired  uato  look
eoty  to  that  fact.

In  the  ancient  republics  of  Greece  and  Italy,  the  right  of
declaring  war  resided  with  the  people,  who  retained,  io
their  collectire  capacity,  the  exercise  of  a  large  portion  of
the  sovereign  power.  Among  the  ancient  Germans  it
belonged  also  to  the  popular  as8emblies,<>  and  the  power
WAS  afterwards  continued  in  the  same  channel,  and  ac-
tually resided  in  the  Saxon  Wittenagemote.c  But  in  the
monarchies  of  Europe,  which  arose  upon  the  ruins  of  the
.  feudal  system,  this  important  prerogatire  was  generally
assumed  by  the  king,  as  appertaining  to  the  duties  of  the
executive  department  of  government.  Many  publicists,
bowever,^  consider  the  power  as  a  part  of  the  sovereign
authority  of  the  state,  of  which  the  legislative  department
is  an  essential  branch.  There  are,  however,  several  ex-
ceptions to  the  generality  of  this  portion  ;  for  in  the  limit-
ed monarchies  of  England,  France,  and  Holland,  the  king
alone  declares  war,  and  yet  the  power,  to  apply  an  obser-
vation of  Vatte)  to  the  case,  is  but  a  slender  prerogative
oftbe  crown,  if  the  parliaments  or  legislative  bodies  of
those  kingdoms  will  act  independently,  since  the  kiag  can-
not raise  the  money  requisite  to  carry  on  the  war  without


' aSeePaHfiau.writteDia  1793,  by  Mr, Iltunilton,  tbtn  SecreUrf
of  tbe  Tre»Hir7,actd  tee  the lnilrtiet(ont /rpm  Ihe  Sterttary  ^  StaU
lolAe  •Sauriean  MinUUrt  to Franu.  Juljf  I6II],1187.
b  T\icit.deM.  a.c  tl.

c  MillarH  Vigia  o/lht  EnglUh  GmemTnenl,  b.  1.  o-  7,
4  Pnf.  h.  S.  c  6.  MO.  10.  ralltl,  b.  3.  c  1.  —a.  4.
Vol.  L  7


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


50  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pirt  L

their  eonsent.  The  wild  aod  destructive  wara  of  Charles
XII.  led  the  statei  in  Sweden  to  rB§erTe  to  themselves  the
right  of  declaring  war ;  and  in  the  form  of  gurernment
adopted  in  Sweden  in  1772,"  the  right  to  make  war  was
continued  in  the  same  legislative  body.  This  was  the
provision  in  those  ephemeral  constitutions  which  appeared
in  Poland  and  Prance  the  latter  port  of  the  last  century  )
and  as  an  evidence  of  the  force  of  public  opinion  on  this
subject,  it  may  be  observed,  that  in  the  constitution  pro-
posed  by  Bonaparte,  on  his  reascenaion  of  the  throne  of
France  in  1815,  the  right  to  levy  men  and  money  for  war
was  to  rest  entirely  upon  a  law  tn  be  proposed  to  the
House  of  Representatives  of  the  people,  and  assented  to
by  tliem-  In  this  conntry,  the  power  of  declaring  war,  as
well  us  of  raising  the  supplies,  is  wisely  confided  to  the  le-
gislature of  the  Union,  and  the  presumption  is,  that  no-
thing short  of  a  strong  case  deeply  affecting  our  essential
rights,  and  which  cannot  receive  a  pacific  adjustment,  after
all  reasonable  efiurts  shall  have  been  eibausted,  will  ever
prevail  upon  Congress  to  declare  war.

It  has  been  usual  to  precede  hostilities  by  a  public  decla-
ration communicated  to  the  euemy.  It  was  the  custom  of
the  ancient  Greek  and  Romans,  to  publish  a  declaration  of
the  injuries  they  had  received,  end  to  send  a  herald  to  the
enemv'sltordersiodemand  satisfaction,  liefore  they  actually
engngcd  in  war ;  an.)  iiivusions  without  notice  were  not
looked  upon  as  Itiwful.'*  War  was  declared  with  religious
prcpanition  and  solemnity.  According  to  Ulpian,''  they
alune  were  reputed  enemies  against  whom  the  Roman  peo-
ple hbid  publicly  decliued  war.  During  the  middle  ages,
a  previous  declnrution  of  war  was  held  to  be  requisite  by  the
laws  of  honour,  chivalry,  and  religion.  Lewis  IX.  refused
to  attack  the  Sultan  of  Egypt  until  he  made  a  previous  de-


«  Art.  48.

h  PMUrU  Anli'jutHu  ijfareece,  h.  3.  c.  7. Lay,  b.  I.  <
qff  I.  t  i-.  >i.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  in.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  51

clBration  to  him  by  a  herald  at  arms,  and  one  of  his  suc-
CMRoraMDt  8  herald  vritn great  formuUty  toiheGoveraor  .
of  the  Low  Countries,  when  be  declared  war  against  that
power  in  1635.^  But,  in  modern  times,  the  practice  of  a
solemn  declaration  made  to  the  enemy  has  fallen  into  dis-
UM)  and  the  nation  contents  itself  with  making  a  public
declaration  of  war  within  its  own  territory,  and  to  its  own
people.  The  jurists  are,  howeTor,  divided  in  opinion,  in
respect  to  the  necessity  or  justice  of  some  previous  delara-
tion  to  the  enemy  in  the  case  of  offensire  war.  Grotiust*
considers  a  previous  demand  of  satisfaction,  and  a  de-
claration, us  requisite  to  a  solemn  and  lawful  war ;  and
Puffendorf  °  holds  acts  of  hostility,  which  hare  not  been
preceded  by  a  formal  declaration  of  war,  to  he  no  better
than  acts  of  piracy  and  robbery.  Emerigon<>  is  of  ihe
same  0[Hnion  ;  and  be  cooaidered  the  hostilities  exercised
by  England  in  the  year  1755,  prior  to  any  declaration  of
war,  to  hare  been  in  contempt  of  the  law  of  nations,  and
eondemnedbyallEurope.  Vatlel strongly  recommends!^  a
previous  decbration  of  war,  as  being  required  by  justice
and  humanity ;  and  he  says,  that  the  fecial  law  of  ibe
Romans  gave  such  moderation  and  relif;ious  eulemoiiy  to
a  preparation  of  war,  and  bore  such  marks  of  wisdom  and
justice,  that  it  laid  the  solid  foundation  of  their  future
greatness.

Bynkershocck  has  devoted  an  entire  chapter  to  this
question, f  and  be  maintains,  that  a  declaration  of  war  is
not  requisite  by  the  law  of  nations,  and  that  though  it
may  very  properly  be  made,  it  cannot  be  re(|uired  a8  a
matter  of  right.  The  practice  rests  entirely  on  manners
and  magnanimity,  and  it  was  borrowed  from  the  ancient

a  I  Emtrigon,  Traiit  da  Au.  p.  iBl.
b  B.  I.c.3.iec.  4.
t  B.  S.  c  6  MC.  9.
d  ToaiU  du  JM.  lorn.  1,  p.  583.
s  B.  3.  c.  4.  wc.  61.
/Q1HWI.J.  Fu6.b.l.o.S.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


5j  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  L

Romana.  All  that  he  conteods  for  ia,  thdt  a  demand  of
what  we  conceive  to  be  due  should  be  [deviously  made.
We  are  not  bound  to  accompany  that  demand  with  threats
of  hostility,  or  to  follow  it  with  a  public  dectarMJon  of
war  i  and  be  citei  many  inntances  to  show,  that  witbio
the  two  last  centuries,  wars  hare  been  frequently  com-
meoced  without  a  previous  dechiration.  Since  tbe  time
of  Dynbershoec^,  it  bos  become  settled  by  the  practice  of
I^urope,  that  war  may  lawfully  exist  by  a  declaration
which  is  unilateral  only,  or  without  a  declaration  on
either  side.  It  may  begin  with  mutual  hostilities^*  Sines
the  peace  of  VersaiileB  in  1763,  formal  declarations  of  war
of  any  kind  seem  to  have  been  discontinued,  and  all  tbe
necessary  and  legitimate  ronsequences  of  war  flow  at
once  from  astateof  public  hostilities,  duly  recognised,  nnd
explicitly  announced,  by  a  domestic  manifesto  or  state
pa|>er.  In  the  war  between  England  and  France  in  1778,
the  first  public  act  on  the  part  of  the  English  government,
was  recalling  its  minister ,and  that  single  act  was  consider-
ed by  France  as  a  breach  of  the  peace  between  the  two
countries.  There  was  no  other  declaration  of  war,
though  each  government  afterwards  published  a  manifesto
in  vindication  of  its  claims  and  conduct.  Tbe  same  thing
may  be  said  of  tbe  war  which  broke  out  in  1793,  and  agoia
in  1803 ;  and,  indeed,  in  the  war  of  1756,  though  a  so-
lemn and  formal  declaration  of  war,  in  ibe  ancient  style,
was  made  in  June,  1756,  vigorous  hostilities  had  been
carried  on  between  England  and  France  for  a  year  pre-
ceding. In  the  war  declared  by  the  United  States  against
England  in  1812,  hostilities  were  immediately  commenced
on  our  part,  as  soon  as  the  act  of  Congress  was  passed,
without  waiting  to  communicate  to  the  English  govern-
ment any  notice  of  our  intentions.
But,  though  a  solemn  declaration,  or  previous  notice  to

a  Sir  trn.  Scott,  I  DodtonU  Mn.  Stp.  U1.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecmre  IH.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  3S

the  eoemj,  be  dow  laid  aaide,  it  it  enential  that  some  for-
mal  piililic  act,  proceeding  directly  from  tbe  cotniMtent
source,  should  aODOUDce  to  the  people  at  home  their  new
lelatiooB  and  duties  growing  out  afa  Rtate  of  war,  and
which  tibould  equally  apprize  neutral  nations  of  the  fact,  to
enable  them  to  cooform  tbeir  conduct  to  tbe  rights  be-
longing to  the  new  state  of  things.  War,  says  Vattel,^  is
at  pr<!sent  published  and  declared  by  manifestoes.  Sucb
an  official  act  operates  from  its  date  to  legalize  all  hostile
acts,  in  like  manner  as  a  treaty  of  peace  operates  from  its
date  to  annul  them.  (  As  war  cannot  lawfully  be  comueo'
ced  on  the  part  of  tbe  United  States,  nitbout  an  actc^
CongreM,  such  an  act  is,  of  course,  a  formal  official  notico
to  all  the  world,  and  equivalent  to  the  most  solemn  decia*
ration.)

When  war  is  duly  declared,  it  is  not  merely  a  war  be-
tween this  and  the  adrerae  government  in  their  political
duracters :  Every  man  is,  in  judgment  of  law,  a  party  to
the  acts  of  his  own  government,  and  a  war  between  the
gosernments  of  two  natioHB,  is  a  war  between  all  the  indi-
viduals of  the  one,  and  all  the  individuals  of  which  the  other
nation  is  composed.  Government  is  the  representative  of
the  will  of  all  the  people,  and  acts  for  the  whole  soei«ty.
This  is  the  theory  in  all  governments;  and  ihp  best  wrilera
on  tbe  law  of  nations  concur  in  the  doctrine,  that  when  the
sovereign  of  astate declares  wnr  against  another sovereian,
h  implies  that  the  whole  n.ition  declares  war,  and  that  all
the  subjects  of  the  one  are  enemies  to  nil  the  subjects  of  the
other.fc  Very  important  consequences  concerning  the  ob-
ligations of  subjects  are  deducible  from  this  principle.

When  hostilities  have  commenced,  the  first  objects  that
naturally  present  themselves  for  detention  and  capture,  are
the  persona  and  property  of  the  enemy,  found  within  the
territory  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  war. According  to


a  B.  3.C.  4.MC.  64.

b  GratiuB.  h.  3.  c.  3.  «eo.  B.— c.  4.  *ec.  8. Barlamaqiu,  pari  4.  e.  4.
MG.  to, VittUl,  b.  3.  c.  ft.  MC.  70.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


94  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Fart  h

•trict  authorit}',  antatehnaarighttodealasaaenemywitb
penoos  and  property  so  found  wirhiniis  [lower,  and  to  con-
fiscate the  profiertf.  and  detain  the  persoaa  as  prisoners  of
war.>  No  onet  says  Bynkerahoeck,  ever  required  that  no-
tice should  be  given  to  tha  subjecls  of  the  enemy,  to  with-
draw their  property,  or  it  would  be  forfeited.  The  prac-
tice of  nations  is  to  appropriate  it  at  oiii-e,  without  notice,
if  there  he  no  special  convention  to  the  contrary.  But,
though  Bynkershoeck  lays  down  rhis,  a»  well  as  oilier  rules
of  war,  with  great  harshness  and  severity,  he  mentions  se-
veral instances  arising  in  the  17th,  and  one  as  early  asthe
15th  ceolury,  of  stipulations  in  treaties,  allowing  fureiga
subjectsa  reasonable  Cirae  after  the  war  brpaka  out,  to  re-
cover and  dispose  of  their  effects,  or  to  withdraw  them.
Such  stipulationa  have  now  become  an  established  farmaia
in  commercial  treAtiea.'i  Emerigon^  considera  such  trea-
ties as  an  affirmance  of  com  mnn  right,  or  the  public  law  of
Europe,  and  the  general  rule  laid  down  by  some  of  the  later
publicists,  ia  in  conformity  with  that  provision.''  The  aove-
reign  who  declares  war,  says  Vattel,  ,can  oeithei  detain
those  subjects  of  the  enemy  who  are  within  his  dominiona
at  the  time  of  the  declaration  of  war,  nor  their  effects.
They  came  into  the  country  under  the  sanction  of  public
faith.  By  permitting  them  to  enter  his  territories,  and  con-
tinue there,  thesovereign  tacitly  promised  them  protectioD
and  security  for  their  return.  He  ia,  therefore,  to  allow
them  a  reasonable  time  to  retire  with  their  effects,  aiul  if
they  stay  beyond  the  time,  he  bos  a  right  to  treat  them  as


a  Oroliut,  b  3.  c.  S-  leo  4.— o.  XI.  «»■  0-  Bynk.  QutuL  Pui.  J.  c-
3.  and  7. ^arttni.  b.  8.  c- S.  lec.  6.

b  A  liberal  proiision  of  thii  kind  i»  inierted  io  the  receot  treaty  of
amity  and  cwnmerce  between  the  United  States  and  the  repablic  of  Co-
tombia,  which  was  ratified  at  Washington,  May  S7,  ICIS.

c  Tom  1.  p.  587.

d  VatUl.  b.  3.  c  4.  MC.  «3-  AzaiA,  part  8.  o.  4.  art.  8.  MO.  7.  U  Dnrit
PuWie  d«  VEmopt,  par  Jtfo6/y,  CEinru,  torn.  6.  p.  334.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  m.] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  M

disarmed  ftnemies,  unleas  detained  by  gicknesa,  or  other  io-
■urntoumBl>le  oecessiiv,  and  then  they  are  ti>  be  allowed
a  further  time.  It  has  been  frequently  provided  by  tieaty,
that  foreign  subjerits  should  be  permitted  to  remain,  aad
continue  their  buHiness,  notwithMtandiDg  a  rupture  belweea
the  governments,  so  long  ati  they  conducted  ioaoceotly ;
and  when  there  was  no  such  treaiy,  tucb  a  liberal  permta-
aioii  lias  been  often  announced  in  the  very  declaration  of
wer.'>  Sir  Michael  Foster')  mentions  several  instances  of
•u(-h  declarations  by  the  King  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  ba
■ays  that  aliens  were  thereby  ennbled  to  acquire  personal
ehuttels,  and  to  maintain  actions  for  the  recovery  of  their
personal  rights,  in  as  full  a  manner  as  alien  friends.

Besides  those  stipulations  in  treaties,  whicfi  have  softea-
«d  tbori;tnu'*'of  ""  by  the  civilizing  spirit  of  commerce,
many  governments  have  made  special  provision,  in  their
own  laws  and  ordinancex,  for  the  security  of  the  persons
and  property  of  enemy's  subjects,  found  in  the  country  at
,  the  contmencement  of  war.

It  was  provided  by  nujgna  ehnrta,"  that,  upon  the  break-
ing  out  of  war,  foreign  merchants  found  in  England,  and
belonging  to  thecountty  of  the  enemy, should  be  attached,
"  wii  hout  harm  of  body  or  good's,"  until  it  was  knonvn  how
Eimlish  merchants  were  treated  by  the  eneny;  and  "if
our  merchants,"  said  the  charter,  "  be  safe  and  well  treat*
«d  there,  theirs  shall  be  likewise  wirh  us."  It  has  been
deemed  extraordinary,  that  such  a  liberal  provison  sfaouM
have  found  a  place  in  a  treaty  between  a  feudal  king  and
bia  barons  ;  and  Montesquieuil  was  struck  with  adiniraiioo
at  the  fact,  that  a  protection  of  that  kind  should  have  been
ma<le  one  of  the  articles  of  English  liberty.  But  this  pro-
f  isiun  was  confined  to  the  effects  of  alien  merchants,  who


«  Fdtb/,  b.  3.  c.  4.  C3,

h  ''t«o«r«e  liflSgK  Trtaim,  p.  |85,  ;85;

e  Ch-  30.

d  Evnt<iu  Loii,W.  1*.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


56  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I.

were  within  the  realm  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,
and  it  was  understood  to  be  confined  to  the  case  of  mer-
chants domiciled  there-'  It  was  ncrampanied  aUo  with
one  very  ominous  r|iiHlification,  and  it  was  at  least  equal-
led, if  not  f^reail;  excelled,  by  an  ordtnance  of  Charles  V.
of  Fraoce,  a  centurf  afterwards,  vrhrch  declared  that  fo-
reign raerehaots,  who  should  be  in  France  at  the  time  of
the  declaration  of  war,  should  have  nothioi;  to  fear,  for
they  should  have  liberty  to  depart  freely,  with  their  effecta.b
The  spirit  of  ibe  prorision  in  magna  eharta  was  sus-
tained by  a  resolution  of  the  judj^es,  in  the  time  of  Henry
VIII,,  when  they  resolved  tfaat  if  a  Frencbmau  came  to
England  before  the  war,  neither  his  person  or  goods  should
be  seized.''  The  statute  of  staples,  of  27  Edw.  111.  c.  17.
made  still  a  more  libera)  and  {ireuise  enactment  in  favour
of  foreign  meschants,  residing  in  England  when  war  com-
menced between  their  prince  and  the  king  of  England.
They  were  to  bare  convenient  warning  of  forty  days,  by
proclamation,  to  depart  the  realm,  with  their  goods  ;
and  if  they  could  not  do  it  within  that  time,  by  reason  of
accident,  they  were  to  hare  forty  days  more  to  past  with
their  merchandise,  and  with  liberty,  in  the  mean  time,  to
sell  the  sume.  The  act  of  Congress  of  the  6th  of  July,
c.  73.  was  dictated  by  the  same  humane  nnd  enlightened
policy.  It  authorized  the  President,  in  case  of  war,  to
direct  the  conduct  to  be  obaerved  towards  subjects  of  the
hostile  nation,  and  being  aliens,  and  within  the  United
States,  and  in  what  cases,  and  upon  what  security,  their
residence  should  be  permitted ;  and  it  declared,  in  reference
to  those  who  were  to  depart,  that  they  should  be  allowed
such  reasonable  time  as  might  be  consistent  with  the  pub-
lic safety,  and  according  to  the  dictates  of  humonity  and
national  hospitality,  "  for  the  recorery,  disposal,  and  re-
moval of  their  goods  and  effects,  and  for  their  departure."


a  1 flnU'a  P.  C.  93.

6  IhiiulCi  Mreg.  Chron.  Km.  I.  338.

. n-o.  tit.  Prupiitv,  pl.38. JtnA-.  Onl,  301.  catcSS.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lectora  HI.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  »T

But  bowever  strong  (he  current  of  authority  in  favour
of  the  modern  and  milder  construction  of  the  rule  of  na-
tional law  on  this  subject,  the  point  seems  to  be  no  longer
open  for  discussioD  in  this  country ;  and  it  has  been  defini'
lively  settled,  in  favour  of  the  ancient  and  sterner  rule,  by
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.*  The  effect  of
war  upon  British  property,  found  in  the  United  Slates,  on
land,  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  was  learnedly  dis-
cussed, end  thorouglily  considered,  in  the  case  of  Brown  ;
and  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States,  at  Boston,
decided,)*  as  upon  a  settled  rule  of  the  law  of  nations,  that
the  goods  of  the  enemy  found  in  the  country,  and  all  the
vessels  end  cargoes  found  afloHt  in  our  ports,  at  the  com-
mencement of  hostilities,  were  liable  to  seizure  and  confis-
cation ;  and  the  exercise  of  the  right  rested  in  the  discre-
tion of  the  sovereign  of  the  nation.  When  the  case  was
brought  up,  on  appeal,  before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States,  the  broad  principle  was  assumed,  that  war
geve  to  the  sovereign  full  right  to  take  the  persons,  end
confiscate  the  property  of  the  enemy,  wherever  found ;
and  that  the  mitigations  of  this  rigid  rule,  which  the  wise
and  humane  policy  of  modern  times  had  introduced  into
practice,  might,  more  or  less,  afiect  the  oiercise  ot  the
right,  but  could  not  impair  the  right  itself.  Commercial
nations  have  always  considerable  property  in  the  posses-
sion of  their  neighbours  ;  and,  when  war  breaks  out,  the
question  what  shall  be  done  with  the  enemy's  property
found  in  the  country,  is  one  rather  of  policy  than  of  law,
and  is  one  properly  addressed  to  the  consideration  of  the
legislature,  and  not  to  the  courts  of  law.  The  strict  right
of  confiscation  of  that  species  of  property  existed  in  Con-
gress, and  without  a  legislative  act  authorising  its  confisca-
tion, it  could  not  be  judicially  condemned ;  and  the  act  of
Congress  <^  1813,  declaring  war  ageinst  Great  Britain,

a  BniirD  *.  Tbe  Uait«d  Slatei,  t  Crimeft,  110- See  aba  AhI  >t8,
«9.
b  lOaUiMft,663
Vol  J.  8


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


58  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  fPart  I-

WB8  not  such  an  act.  Until  some  statute  directly  apply-
inj;  to  the  subject,  be  passed,  the  property  would  continu*
under  thr  protection  of  the  law,  and  might  be  claimed  by
the  Britiijh  owner,  at  the  restoration  of  peace.

Though  this  decision  established  the  rifcht,  contrary  to
moch  of  modern  authority  and  praetire,  yet  a  great  point
was  |>rBtned  over  tbe  rigour  and  violence  of  the  ancient
doctrine,  by  making  the  exercise  of  the  right  to  depend
upon  a  special  act  of  Congress.

The  practice,  so  common  in  modern  Europe,  of  ioipo-
sing  embargoes  at  the  breaking  out  of  hostitiiy,  baa,  appa-
rently, the  effect  of  destroying  that  protection  to  property
which  the  rule  of  faith  and  justice  gives  to  it,  when
broui^ht  into  tbe  country  in  the  course  oftrade.  and  in  tbe
confidence  of  peace.  Sir  William  Scott,  in  the  case  of
the  Baedti  Lxut,"  explains  this  species  of  embargo  to  be
enact  of  a  hostile  nature,  and  amounting  to  an  implied
declaration  of  war,  though  liable  to  be  explained  away
and  annulled,  by  a  subsequent  accommodation  between
the  nations.  Tbe  seizure  is  at  6r8t  equivocal;  and  if  the
matier  in  dispute  terminates  in  reconciliation,  the  seizure
becomes  a  mere  civil  embargo ;  but  if  it  terminates  other-
wise, the  subsequent  hostilities  have  a  retioactive  effect,
and  render  the  embargo  a  hostile  measure,  so  initio.  I'be
property  detained  is  deemed  enemy's  pioperty,  and  liable
to  cotideinnation.  This  species  of  reprisal  for  some  pre-
vious injury,  is  laid  (fown  io  the  books  as  a  lawful
measure,  according  to  the  usage  of  nations  ;^  but  it  is  of-
ten reprobated,  and  it  cannot  well  be  distinguislied  from
the  practice  of  seizing  property  found  within  the  territory
upon  the  declaration  of  war.  It  does  not  differ  in  sub-
stance from  tbe  conduct  of  the  Syrecusans,  in  the  time  of
Dionysius  the  Elder,  (and  which  Mitford  considered  to  be
a  gross  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,)  for  they  voted  a
a  declaration  of  war  against  Carthage,  and  immediately


a  S  Rofi.  K3.

h  Fatttl,  b.  S.  o.  IS.  tec.  34S.  344. JToriffl


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  In.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  5$

jeized  the  effects  of  Cartbaginiait  traders  in  their  ware-
bouses,  and  Carthajrinian  riebly-laden  resaels  in  their  har-
bour, and  then  sent  a  berald  to  Carthage  to  negotiiite."  But
ihia  act  of  ihe  Syracnsans,  near  four  hundred  years  before
tbe  Christian  aera,  was  no  more  than  what  ia  the  ordinary
practice  in  England,  according  to  the  observation  of  Lord
Mansfield,  in  lAndo  v.  Roifney.*>  "  Upon  the  declaration  of
war  orhostilities.all tbeBhipBoftheenemy,*'heaayB,  "are
detained  in  our  ports,  to  be  confiscated,  asthe  property  of
tbe  cDRmy,  if  no  reciprocal  agreement  is  made."

Another  question  reBpectiofrtbeeffect  of  a  declaration  of
war  upon  property,  arose  in  the  case  oftbe  Rapids  It  was
held,  that  after  the  commencement  of  war,  an  American
citizen  could  not  lawfully  send  a  Tessel  to  the  enemy's  coun-
try, to  bring  home  bis  own  property,  without  renderinff  it
liable  to  seizure,  in  trantifa,  as  enemy's  property.  Every
thing  that  issues  froma  hostile  country  is,  prima /arte,  tbe
property  of  tbe  enemy,  and  a  citizen  cannot  lawfully  be
concerned  in  any  commercial  intercourse  with  the  en«my.
Tbe  English  courts  were  formerly  inclined  to  allow  goods,
in  the  enemy's  country  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  tn  be
brought  home ;  but  it  is  nowthe  settled  law,  that  it  tannot
be  done  safely,  without  a  license  from  the  gAvernment  ^

The  claim  of  a  right  to  confiscate  debts,  contracted  by  in-
dividuals in  time  of  peace,  and  which  remain  due  to  sub-
jects of  the  enemy  at  the  declaration  of  war,  rests  very  much
upon  the  same  principle  asthat  concerning  enemy's  tungi-
ble  property  found  in  the  country  at  the  opening  of  tbe
war ;  though  t  think  the  objection  to  the  right  of  confinca-
tion,  in  this  latter  case,  is  much  stronger.  In  former  times,
tbe  right  to  confiscate  debts  was  admitted  as  a  doctrine  of
national  law,  and  Grotius,  Puffendorf,  and  Bynkershoeck,


A  JKitf.  HiH.  o/Grtut,  *ol  6.  409-4.
b  Ootig.  613.
c  S  Craimch.  155.

d  Bell  T.  PotU  K  Ttrm,  MS- The  Oceui,  5  J&6.  Rep-  90.  Thi  Jnf-
Omit  CaUiariM,  n.  141.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


60  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  1.

pronounce  in  favour  of  it.'  It  had  the  countenance  of  the
civil  law,*'  and  even  Cicero,  in  bis  Q^a,^  when  statinj;
the  cases  in  which  promises  are  not  to  be  kept,  mentions
that  of  the  creditor  becoming  the  enemy  of  the  country  of
the  debtor.  Down  to  the  year  1737,  the  general  opinion
of  jurists  was  in  favour  oftbo  right ;  but  Vattel  says,  that  a
relaxation  of  the  rigour  of  tbo  rule  has  since  taken  place
among  the  sovereigns  of  Europe,  and  that,  as  the  custom
has  been  generally  received,  be  who  should  act  contrary  to
it,  would  injure  the  public  faith;  for  strangers  trusted  hil
subjects  only  from  a  firm  persuasion  that  tbo  general  cus-
tom would  be  observed.*)  There  has  frequently  been  a
stipulation  in  modern  treaties,  that  debts  sfaould  not  be  con-
fiscated in  tbe  event  of  war;  and  these  conventional  provi-
sions are  evidence  of  the  sense  of  tbe  governments  which
are  parties  to  them,  and  thai  tbe  right  of  confiscation  of
debtsandthingsinaction,  is  against  good  policy,  and  ought
to  be  discontinued.  The  recent  treaty  between  the  United
States  and  Colombia  contains  such  a  provixioo  ;  but  the
treaty  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  in
1795,  went  further,  and  contained  tbe  explicit  declaration,
that  it  was  "  unjust  and  impolitic,"  that  the  debts  of  indi-
Tiduals  should  be  impaired  by  national  difleroDcea.  A  very
ablediscussiooorthisassuniied  right  toconfiacatedebts,  was
made  by  Creneral  Hamilton,  in  the  numbers  of  CamUlvt,
published  in  1795.  He  examined  the  claim  to  confiscate
private  debts,  or  privatepropertyiobanka,or  in  the  public
funds,  on  tbe  grounds  of  reason  and  principle,  on  those  of
policy  and  expediency,  on  the  opinion  of  jurists,  on  usage,
and  on  conventional  law;  and  bis  argument  againsttbe  jus-
tice and  policy  of  the  claim  was  exceedingly  powerful.  He
contended  it  to  be  against  good  fititb  for  a  government


a  Oro(iui,b,  I.  ch.  I.  t«o.  6.-b.  S-ob.  8- tec.  4.  Puff,  iili.8.  cfa.  6. 16,
10.  Bytik.Vib.  I.  oh.7-

b  nig.4\.  i.«iid4S.  IS.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


I^ture  IIL] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  61

to  lay  its  bands  on  prirate  property,  acquired  by  tfaa  per-
mission, or  upon  the  invitntioo  of  the  goTeromeDt,  and
under  a  necessarily  implied  promise  of  protection  and  se-
curity. Vattel  says,  that  every  whece,  in  ease  of  a  war,
funds  credited  to  the  public  are  exempt .  from  confiscation
and  seizure.  Emerigon>  and  Martens^  make  the  same
declaration.  The  practice  would  hare  a  rery  injuhoui
influence  upon  the  ^ueral  sense  of  the  inviolability  and
•onctity  of  private  contracts ;  and  mth  debtors  wbo  bad
a  nice  and  accarate  aenie  of  justice  and  honour,  the  re-
quisition of  government  would  not  be  dieerftilly  or  readily
obeyed.  Voltaire  has  giveno  a  atrihinf  instance  of  the
impracticability  of  coafiscating  property  deposited  in  trust
with  a  debtor,  and  oftbe  firmness  of  Spanish  faith.  When
war  was  declared  between  France  and  Spain,  in  1084,
the  king  of  Spain  endeavoured  to  seize  the  property  of  the
French  in  Spain,  but  not  a  single  Spanish  factor  would
betray  his  French  oorrespondent.

Notwithstanding  the  weight  of  modern  authority,  and  oC
argument,  against  this  claim  of  ri^fat  on  the  part  of  the
sovereign,  to  confiscate  the  debts  and  funds  oftbe  subjects
of  bis  enemy  during  war,  the  judicial  language  in  this
country  is  decidedly  in  support  of  the  right.  In  the  ease
of  Bratm  y.  7%e  United  Stalet,<i  already  mentioned,  Judge
Story,  in  the  Circuit  Court  in  Massachusetts,  laid  down
the  right  to  confiscate  debts,  and  enemy's  property  found
in  the  country,  according  to  the  rigorous  doctrine  of  the
jurists ;  and  he  said  the  opinion  was  fully  confirmed  by  the
judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Here  v.  fly/wn,e  where
the  doetrine  was  eiplicitly  asserted  by  some  of  the  judges,
reluctantly  admitted  by  others,  and  denied  by  none.  Chief
Justice  Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  oftbe  Supreme
Court,  io  the  case  of  Brotm,  observed,  that  between  debu


•  Dtt  At.  Um.  1.  SSI.
b  B.  S.  o.  9.  we.  fi.

t  En<d  tur  Um  Moevn  tt  PE*pri(  ilu  JVitfww.
dSCnmcA,  no.
«  3  DaUiu,  199.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


6s  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS,  [Part  X,

contracted  under  the  faith  of  laws,  and  property  acquired
ID  the  course  of  trade  on  the  faith  of  the  name  laws,
reason  drew  no  distinction,  and  the  right  of  the  aotereiga
to  conGxcale  debts,  was  preciiely  the  same  with  the  rifiht
to  confiscate  other  property  found  in  the  country.  This
right,  therefore,  was  admitted  to  esisl  as  a  settled  and
derided  right,  ttrictojure;  though,  at  the  same  time,  it  wat
conceded  to  be  the  unirersal  practice,  to  forbear  to  aeiz*
and  confiscate  debts  and  credits.  We  may,  therefore,  lay
it  down  as  a  principle  of  public  taw,  so  far  as  the  same  ia
tindersttxid  and  declared  by  the  highest  judicial  authorities
in  this  country,  that  it  rests  in  the  discretion  of  the  legis-
lature of  the  Union,  by  a  special  law  for  that  purpose,  to
confiscate  debts  oontracted  by  our  eitixens,  and  due  to  tha
enemy  ;  but,  as  it  is  asserted  by  the  same  authority,  this
light  is  eontrary  to  nniversal  practice,  and  it  may,  tber»-
fcM-e,  well  be  considered  as  a  naked  and  impolitic  right,
condemned  by  the  enlightened  conaoience  and  judgment
of  modern  timet.

If  property  should  hare  been  wrongfully  taken  by  the
•tate  before  the  war,  and  be  in  the  country  at  the  opening  of
the  war,  such  property  cannot  be  seized,  but  must  be  re-
stored ;  because,  to  confiscate  that  species  of  enemy's  prow
perty  would  be  for  the  government  to  take  advantage  of  itc
own  wrong.  The  celebrated  Report  of  the  English  law
officers  of  the  crown  in  1753,  in  Amwer  to  the  Pruuian
JHetnorial,  stated,  that  French  ships  taken  before  the  war
1741,  were,  duringtheheatofthe  war  with  France,  as  well
as  afterwards,  restored  by  sentences  of  the  admiralty  courts
to  the  French  owners.  No  such  property  was  ever  attempt-
ed to  be  confiscated ;  for  had  it  not  been  for  the  wrong  done,
the  property  would  not  have  been  within  the  king's  domi-
nions. And  yet  even  such  property  is  considered  to  be
subject  to  the  ruleof  vindictive  retaliation:  and  Sir  Wm.
Scott  observed,  io  the  case  of  the  Santa  Crus.a  that  it  was


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leetun  ni.) OF  THE  tAW  OF  NATIONS.  CS

the  constant  practice  of  EoglaDil,  to  condemn  property
Mized  before  the  war,  if  the  enemy  conderanij — and  to  re-
store, if  the  enemy  restores.

One  of  the  immediate  and  important  consequeoces  of  tba
declaration  of  war,  is  the  absolute  interruption  and  inter-
diction of  all  commercial  correspondence,  inlercourse,  and
dealini;,  betv?een  the  subjects  of  the  two  countries.  The
idea  that  any  commercial  intercourse,  or  pacific  dealing,
«an  lawfully  subsist  between  the  people  of  the  powers  at
war,  eicept  under  the  cleor  andeipress  sanction  of  thegtH
Terament,  and  without  a  special  ficenne,  is  utterly  inconsist-
ent with  the  new  class  of  duties  growing  out  of  a  state  of
war.  The  interdiction  flows,  necessarily,  from  the  princi-
ple already  staled,  that  a  state  of  war  puts  all  the  members
of  the  two  nations  respectively  in  hostility  to  each  other ;
and  to  suffer  individuals  to  carry  on  a  friendly  or  commer-
cial intercourse,  while  the  two  governments  were  at  war,
would  be  placing  the  act  ofgovernment,  and  the  acts  of  in-
dividuals, in  contradiction  to  each  other.  It  would  coun-
teract the  operations  of  war,  and  throw  obstaclnsin  tha
way  of  public  efforts,  and  lead  to  disorder,  imbecility,
and  treason.  Trading  supposes  the  eiistence  of  civil  con-
tracts and  relations,  and  a  reference  to  courts  of  justice }
and  it  is,  therefore,  necessarily,  contradictory  to  a  state  of
war.  It  affords  aid  to  the  enemy  in  an  effectual  manner,
by  enabling  the  merchants  of  the  enemy's  country  to  sup-
port tbeir  government,  and  it  facilitates  the  means  of  coo*
Teying  intelligence,  and  carrying  on  a  traitorous  correspond
dence  with  the  enemy.  These  considerations  apply  with
peculiar  force  to  maritime  states,  where  the  principal  ob>
ject  is  to  destroy  the  marine  and  commerce  of  the  enemy,
in  order  to  force  them  to  peace."  It  is  a  well-Kttled  doc'
trine  in  the  English  courts,  and  with  the  English  jurists-,
that  there  cannot  exist,  at  the  same  time,  a  war  for  arms;


I  1  CmUy  on  Commercial  L^w,  3T9>


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


64  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I.

and  a  peace  for  commerce.  The  war  puts  an  end  at  once
loall  dealing)  and  all  eoniDiuaication,  with  each  other,  and
places  every  individual  of  the  respectiTa  governmentB,  aj
well  as  the  governments  themselves,  in  a  state  of  hostility.
This  is  equally  the  doctrine  of  all  the  authoritative  writers
en  the  law  of  nations,  and  of  the  maritime  ordigances  of
all  the  great  powers. .f  Europe.  It  is  equally  the  received
law  ofthis  country,  and  was  so  decided  frequently  by  the
Congress  of  the  United  States  during  the  revolutionary
war,  and  again  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States
during  the  course  of  the  last  war;  and  it  is  difficult  toeon-
CGive  of  a  point  of  doctrine  more  deeply  ot  extensively
rooted  in  the  general  maritime  law  of  Europe,  and  in  the
universal  and  immemorial  usage  of  the  whole  community
of  the  civilized  world.

It  follows,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  doctrine  of
the  illegality  of  all  intercourse  or  traffic,  without  express
permission,  that  all  contracts  with  the  enemy,  made  during
war,  are  utterly  void.  The  insurance  of  enemy's  property
is  an  illegal  contract,  because  it  isa  species  of  trade  andin-
tercourse  with  the  enemy.  The  drawing  of  a  bill  of  el-
change,  by  an  alien  enemy,  on  a  subject  of  the  adverse
country,  is  an  illegal  and  void  contract,  because  it  isa  com-
munication and  contract.  The  purchase  of  billson  the
enemy's  country,  or  the  remission  and  deposit  of  funds
there,  is  a  dangerous  and  illegal  act,  because  it  may  be
cherishing  the  resourcea.and  relieving  the  wants  of  the  ene-
my.  The  remission  of  funds,  in  monny  or  bills,  to  subjects
of  the  enemy,  is  unlawful.  The  inhibition  reaches  to  every
communication,  direct  or  circuitous.  All  endeavours  at
trade  with  the  enemy,  by  the  intervention  of  third  persons,
or  by  partnerships,  have  equally  failed,  and  no  artifice  has
succeeded  to  legalize  the  trade,  without  the  express  permis-
sion of  the  government."  Every  relaxation  of  the  rule
tfinds  to  corrupt  the  allegiance  of  the  subject,  and  prevenia

a  3  tiob.  K. 4  Sti.  t.  7B. 6  Sob.  127.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  III] OF  THE  LAW  OF  N\TIONS.  'tt

the  war  from  fulfilling  its  end.  The  only  ezceplton  to
thifl  strict  and  rigorous  rule  of  international  jurispruilencR
n  the  case  of  ransom  bills,  and  they  are  contrBcts  of  ne-
eessity,  founded  on  a  state  of  war,  and  engendered  by  its
violence.  It  is  also  a  further  consequence  of  the  inahiltty
of  the  audjects  of  the  two  states,  to  commune  or  carry  on
any  correspondence  or  basiness  together,  that  all  commer-
cial partnerships  existing  between  the  subjects  of  the  two
parties,  prior  to  the  war,  are  dissolved  by  the  mere  force
and  act  of  the  war  itself;  though  other  contracts  existing
prtorto  the  war,  are  not  extinguished,  bat  the  remedy  is
only  suspended,  and  this  from  the  inability  of  an  alien
enemy  to  sue,  or  to  sustain,  in  the  language  of  the  civi-
lians, apernma  liandi  injvdicio.  The  whole  of  this  doe-
trine  respecting  the  illegality  of  any  commercial  inter-
course between  the  inhabitants  oftwo  nations  at  war,  was
eztennively  reviewed,  and  the  principal  authorities,  ancient
and  modern,  foreign  and  domestic,  were  accurately  exa-
mined, and  the  positions  which  have  been  laid  down  esta-
bliabed,  in  the  case  of  Gruwnld  r.  fVaddihgton,'  fcided
in  the  Supreme  Court  of  this  state,  and  afterwards  affirm-
ed on  error.

This  strict  rule  has  been  carried  so  fur  in  the  British
admiralty,  as  to  prohibit  a  remittance  of  supplies  even  to
a  British  colony,  during  its  temporary  snbjection  to  the
enemy,  and  when  the  colony  was  under  the  necessity  of
supplies,  and  was  only  very  partially  and  imperfectly  sup-
plied by  the  enemy.t>  The  same  interdiction  of  trade  ap-
plies to  ships  of  truce,  or  cartel  ships,  which  are  a  species  of
navigation  intended  for  the  recovery  of  the  liberty  ofpri-
Mners  of  war.  Such  a  special  and  limited  intercourse  is
dictated  by  policy  and  humanity,  and  it  is  indispensabla
that  it  he  conducted  with  the  most  exact  and  ezcluaivo  at-
tention to  the  original  purpose,  as  being  the  only  condition
upon  which  the  intercourse  can  be  tolerated. All  trade,


a  15  JthumU  Rep-  57. 16  JiAnton,  438.  S.  C.  '

b  Cbm  of  the  Bella  Ouidita,  \u  l7!)5r-«ited^  in  tbe  cu«  of  tha  Hoop,
1  Rail.  lUp.  174.

YOL.  I.  9  ^^  ,

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Goo(^lc


66  QF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  L

therefore,  by  meaiiB  of  such  vessets,  in  unlawful,  without
the  expreu  cooHeat  of  both  the  governmeDts  concerned.'
It  is  equally  illegal  for  an  ally  of  one  of  the  belltgerenta,
and  who  carries  on  the  war  conjointly,  to  have  any  com-
merce with  the  enemy.  A  single  belligprent  may  grant
licetiMsto  trade  with  the  enemy,  and  dilute  and  wevkeD
bis  own  rights  at  pleasure,  but  it  is  otherwise  when  allied
nations  are  purxuing  a  common  caune.  The  community
of  interest,  and  object,  and  acrion,  creates  a  murual  duty
Dot  to  prejudice  that  joint  interest ;  and  it  is  a  declared
principle  of  the  law  of  nations,  founded  on  rery  clear  and
just  grounds,  that  one  of  the  belligerents  may  srize,  and
inflict  the  penalty  of  forfeiture,  on  the  property  of  a  sub-
ject, ofa  co-ally,  engaged  in  atrade  with  the  common  eae-
my,  and  thereby  affording  him  aid  and  comfort,  whilst  I  he
other  ally  was  carrying  on  a  severe  and  vigorous  warfare.
It  would  be  contrary  to  the  implied  contract  in  every  such
warlike  confederacy,  that  either  of  ihe  belligerents,  with-
out the  other's  consent,  should  do  any  thing  to  defeat  the
common  object.'*

In  the  investigation  of  the  rules  of  the  modern  law  of
nations,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  estensive  field
of  maritime  capture,  reference  is  generally  and  freely
made  to  the  decisions  of  thp  Englitth  conns.  They  are
in  the  hahit  of  taking  accurate  and  comprehensive  views
of  general  jurisprudence,  and  they  have  been  deHervedly
followed  by  the  courts  of  the  United  Htates,  on  all  the
leading  points  of  national  law.  We  fauve  a  series  of  judi-
cial decisions  ia  England,  and  in  this  country,  in  whit^h
the  usages  and  the  duties  of  nations  are  explained  :iiid
declared  with  that  depth  of  research,  and  that  liberal
and  enlarged  inquiry,  which  strengthens  and  embel-
lishes the  conclusions  of  reason.  They  contain  mure
intrinsic  argument,  more  full  and  precise  details,  more
accurate illustrations, and are of more authurityt


a  The  VeiiEH,  4  Rob.  355. Tbe  CaroliDB,  6  Rob.  336.
t  The  Nftyade, 4  A)t>3Sl. Tha  Nepluoiu,  6  BiA,  403.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LactDrallL] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  ^

thiin  the  loose  dicta  of  elementary  writers.  When  thoM
courts  in  this  country,  which  are  charged  with  the  adminis-
tratiun  of  international  law,  have  differed  from  the  Eng-
Itsb  udjiiCKtiona,  we  niuHt  t^e  the  law  from  domestic
sources;  but  such  bd  alteniatire  is  rarely  to  be  met  with,
and  there  is  scarcely  a  decision  in  the  Enfrlisb  prize  coiirtc
at  Westminster,  on  any  general  question  of  public  rifrht,
thit  i>a>  not  received  the  exprnss  approbation  aiid  sanc-
ti<>n  of  our  national  courts.  We  hove  attained  the  rank
of  a  i^reat  commercial  nation ;  and  war,  on  our  part,  ia  car-
ried OD  upon  the  same  principles  of  maritime  policy
which  have  directed  the  forces,  and  animated  the  council*
of  the  naval  (lowers  of  Europe.  When  the  United  States
formed  a  component  part  of  the  British  empire,  our  prize
law  aud  theirs  was  the  same  ;  and  after  the  revolution  it
continued  to  be  the  same,  as  far  as  it  was  adapted  to  our
circumstances,  end  was  not  varied  by  the  power  which  was
CHpable  of  changing  it.  The  great  value  of  a  series  of
judicial  decisions,  in  prize  cases,  and  on  other  questions
depending  on  the  law  of  nations,  is,  that  they  liquidate,
and  render  certain  and  staple,  the  loose  general  principles
of  that  law,  and  sho^v  their  applicatioo,  and  how  they  are
understood  in  the  couhtry  where  the  tribunals  are  sitting.
They  are,  thert^fore,  deservedly  received  with  very  great
resi>ect,  and  as  presumptive,  though  not  conclusive  evi-
dence of  the  law  in  the  given  case.  This  was  the  language
of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  United  States,  so  late  as
1815'  and  the  decisions  of  the  English  HigbCourt  of  Ad-
miralty, esneciatly  since  the  year  1798,  have  been  con-
sulted and  uniformly  respected  by  that  court,  as  enlight-
ened commentaries  on  the  law  of  nations,  and  affording  a
vast  variely  of  instructive  precedents,  for  the  application
of  the  principles  of  that  law.  They  have  also  this  to  re-
commendthem :  that  they  are  preeminently  distinguished


t,Goo(^lc


$8  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I-

for  sagacitj,  wisdom,  nnd  learniDg,  as  well  as  for  the
ebaete  aod  clasical  lieaulies  of  their  compoaition.

Many  of  the  most  important  priociples  of  public  law
have  been  brought  into  use,  and  received  a  practical  ap-
plication, and  been  reduced  to  legal  precision,  since  the
age  of  GrotiuH  and  Puffendorlf ;  and  we  mutit  resort  to  the
judicial  decisions  of  the  prize  tribunals  in  Europe,  and  in
this  country,  for  information  and  authority  on  a  great
muny  points,  on  which  all  tbe  leading  text  books  have  pre^
serted  a  total  silence-  Tbe  complexity  of  modern  com-
merce has  swelled,  beyond  all  bounds,  tbe  number  and  in-
tricacy of  questions  upon  national  taw,  end  particularly
upon  the  wry  comprehensive  bead  of  marilime  capture.
The  illegality  and  pcoal  consequences  of  trade  with  the
enemy  ;  tbe  illegality  of  carrying  enemy's  despatches,  or
of  engaging  in  the  coasting,  fishing,  or  other  privil^ed
trade  of  the  enemy  ;  the  illegality  of  transfers  of  property
*n  trawitu,  between  the  neutral  and  tbe  belligerent ;  tbe
rules  which  impress  upon  neutral  property  a  hostile  cha-
racter, arising  either  from  tbe  domicil  of  the  neutral  owner,
or  bis  territorial  possessions,  or  bis  connexion  in  a  house  in
trade  in  the  enemy's  country,  are  all  of  them  doctrines  m
the  modern  international  law,  which  are  either  not  to  be
found  at  all,  or  eertainly  not  with  any  fulness  of  discussion, '
and  power  c^  argument,  any  where,  but  in  tbe  judicial  io-
vestigationstowhicbl  have  referred,  and  which  bavegiieo
tbe  highest  authority  and  splendour  to  this  branch  of
learning.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


L£CTURE  IV.

OF  THE  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  FROPERTT  LIABU  TO
CAPTURE.

It  becomes  important,  ins  maritime  war,  to  determine
with  prec  iaion  what  relatioos  and  circuiuainncea  will  imprew
a  boHile  character  upon  persoue  and  property  ;  and  the  mo-
dern ioternational  law  of  the  commercial  world  n  replete
with  refined  and  complicated  diatinctioos  on  this  sobject.  It
it>^tled(  that  there  may  be  a  hostile  character  m^ely  ai
to  CQipniercial  purposeB,  and  iioattility  may  attach  only  to
the  person  as  a  temporary  enemy,  or  it  may  attach  only  to
|vepertyofaparticular  description.  This  hostile  rbaracter,
in  a  commercial  view,  or  one  limited  to  certain  iiitentH  and
purposes  only,  will  attach  in  consequcDce  of  having  posses-
fions  in  the  territory  of  the  enemy,  or  by  maintaining  a
-  commercial  establishmeni  there,  or  by  a  personal  residence,
or  by  particular  modes  of  traffic,  as  by  sailing  under  lh«
enemy's  flag  or  passport.  This  hostile  relation,  growing  out
of  particular  circumstances,  assumes,  as  valid,  the  distino*
tion  which  has  been  taken  between  a  permanent  and  a  lenb'
porary  alieo  enemy.  A  man  is  said  to  be  permanently  an
alien  enemy,  when  he  owes  a  permanent  allegiance  to  the
adverse  belligerent,  and  his  hostility  is  commensurate  in
point  of  time  with  bis  country's  quarrel.  But  he  who  does
not  owe  a  permanent  allegiance  to  the  enemy,  is  an  enemy
only  during  the  existence  and  continuanee  of  certain  cir-
cumstances. Aneutral,for  instance, said Cb- J. Eyre,*  can

a  SpweobiufbT.  BoMia^oc,  1  Bot.  tf  PulL  16S.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


7»  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS,  [P«rt  I.

be  8D  alien  eaem)'  only  with  respect  tohis  acts  doae  under
a  local  or  temporary  allefciance  to  a  power  at  war,  and  whea
hi*  tAin  tirary  allegiaace  determ'taes,  his  hostile  character
determineBalBo.

It  was  considered  by  Sir  Wra.  Scott,  in  the  case  of  the
Ph'xni:^,'  and  again  in  the  case  of  th(>  Vrow  Anna  Calha-
rina,''  to  be  a  fixed  principle  of  marilime  law,  that  the  pos-
■euion  of  the  soil  imprei^sed  upon  the  owner  the  character
of  the  country,  so  far  as  the  prmluce  of  the  soil  was  coa-
cerned,  wberevt^r  the  local  residence  of  the  owner  inight
be.  The  produce  of  a  hostile  soil  liear^i  a  hostile  character
for  the  purpose  of  capture,  and  is  the  subject  of  legitimate
prize  when  taken  in  acourseef  transportation  toany  other
country.  The  enemy's  lands  are  supposed  to  be  a  ^reat
source  of  his  wealth,  and,  perhaps,  the  most  solid  foiinda-
tion  of  his  power;  and  whoever  owns  or  possesses  land  in
tbe  enemy's  country,  though  he  may  in  fact  reside  else-
where, and  be  in  every  other  respect  a  neutral  or  friend,
must  be  taken  to  have  incorporated  himself  with  the  nation,
m>  far  as  he  is  holder  of  the  soil,  and  the  produce  of  that
■oil  ia  held  to  be  enemy's  property,  independent  of  the  per*
■onal  residence  or  occupation  of  tbe  owner.  Tbe  reasona-
blenesac^this  prindplewill  be  acceded  to  by  all  maritime
■ations,  and  it  was  particularly  recognised  as  a  valid  doc-
trine by  the  Supreme  Ceuri  of  the  United  States,  in  Bent-
aton  V.  Boyle.°

If  a  (lerson  has  a  settlement  in  a  hostile  country  by  the
mtunte nance  of  a  commercial  establishment  there,  he  will
be  considered  a  hostile  character,  and  a  subject  of  thi?  ene-
my's country,  in  regard  to  his  commercial  transactions  con-
nected with  that  establishment.  The  position  is  a  clear
one,t  hat  if  a  person  goes  into  a  foreign  country,  and  engages
in  trade  there,  be  is,  by  the  law  of  nations,  to  be  considered
a  merchant  of  that  country,  and  a  subject  to  all  civil  pur-
poses, whether  that  country  be  hostile  or  neutral,  and  he

■m  SEeb.Jtep.il. b  B  Jteb.  Hep.  161. t9CmuA,in.


i,,-c,ih,G00glc


Uetun  IV.] or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  71

Mnnot  be  permitted  to  rsiain  the  privileges  of  a  neulral
character,  during  bis  residence  and  ovcupaiion  ia  an
•neoiy's  country."  This  general  rule  bas  bet^n  applied  by
tbe  English  courts  to  the  case  of  EiigliNhiiien  residing  ina
neutral  country,  end  ihey  are  udmitled,  in  rexpfct  to  their
bona  fide  trade  to  the  privileges  of  the  neuttalc-hiiracter.'*
In  the  case  of  the  Danotu,'^  the  rule  waa  laid  down  by  the
£nfrlish  House  of  Lords  in  1802,  in  unrestricted  terms,
that  a  British  born  subject,  resident  in  Portugal,  was  al-
lowed the  benefit  of  the  Portuguese  chnrHcter,  so  far  aa
torender  his  trade  with  Holland,  then  at  war  nitb  England,
not  impeachable  as  an  illegal  trade.  The  same  rule  waa
afterwards  applied''  to  a  natural  tram  British  subject  do-
miciled  in  the  United  States,  and  it  was  held,  ibat  be
might  lawfully  trade  to  a  country  at  war  with  England,
but  at  peace  with  the  United  States.

This  same  principle,  that  for  all  commercial  purposes,
the  domicil  of  the  party,  without  leftrence  to  the  place  of
birth,  becomes  the  test  of  national  rharacter,  has  been  re-
peatedly and  explicitly  admitted  in  (he  courts  of  the  Uni-
ted States.  If  he  resides  in  a  belligerent  country,  fait
property  is  liable  to  capture  as  enemy's  property,  and  if  he
resides  in  a  neutral  country,  he  enjoys  all  the  privileges,
and  ia  subjected  to  all  the  inconveniences,  of  the  neuiral
trade.  He  takes  the  advantages  and  disadvantages,  wbat>
over  they  may  be,  of  the  country  of  his  residence.'

The  only  limitation  upon  the  principle  of  determining


a  S  Term,  31.  Wjlwo  r.  Marrjat.  3  Sm.  4  Putt.  1 13.  IVl>ConDeI  f.
Hector.  iltoi.Rep.  IS:  The  Indian  Chief,  i  Hob.  tUp,  101.  Tba
Aoaa  CatlMriOK. &Aei.  S17.  The  Pmideat.

b  3  Bo$.  if  Put/.  113. 1  Hob.  tiS. The  Emanuel.

C  Cited  in  4  Rob.  9B6.  nole.

d  Bell  r.  Reid,  1  JSauU  3s  Sctw.  ^tS.

«  CueoTtbedoop  riies(er,ai>at/ai,4i.  Mamy  r.  Schooner  Oct-
ij,9Crw>eh,t4.  Maley  ».  Sliatluck,  3  CVi71l/i,  488.  LiTir<{*ion  r.
Marjland  Ini.  Co.  7  Crtuuh,  608.  Tkie  Venus,  S  Croncft,  353.  The
Fraecsa,  SCrwuA,3e3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


7*  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS:  [Part  I.

character  Trotn  residence,  u,  that  the  party  must  not  be
found  ID  hosliiity  to  his  native  country.  He  must  do  no-
thins  inconsistent  with  bia  native  alleKinnce,  and  thit
qualification  is  annexed  to  ihe  rukhy  Sir  William  Scott  in
the  case  of  Tk«  Entanutl.  It  has  been  questioned  whether
the  rule  does  not  go  too  far,  even  with  this  restriction  ;
dut  it  appears  to  be  too  well  and  solidly  lettttd  to  be  novr
shaken.  A  person  is  not,  however,  to  be  permitted  to  ac-
quire n  iieatral  domicil,  that  will  protect  such  trade  in  op-
position to  the  lielligerent  claims  of  his  native  country,  if
he  emigrates  from  that  country  ^u^onfe  beflo-*

It  has  been  ■  question  admitting  of  much  discussion  and
difficulty,  arising  from  the  complicated  character  of  com-
mereial  speculations,  what  state  of  facis  constitutes  aresH
deuce,  w  astn  change  or  fix  the  commercial  character  of
the  party.  The  aninitu  mtmentft  appears  to  have  been  the
point  to  be  settled.  The  presumptioo  arising  from  actual
residence  in  any  place,  is,  thttt  the  party  ia  there  animo
wtanendi,  and  it  lies  upon  him  to  remore  the  presumption,
if  it  should  be  requisite  for  his  safety  t  If  the  intention
to  establisb  a  permanent  residence  be  ascertained,  the
recency  of  the  establishment,  though  it  may  have  been
for  B  day  only,  is  immaterial.  If  there  be  no  such  in-
tention,  and  the  residence  be  involuntary  or  constraincdt
then  a  residence,  however  long,  does  not  change  the  ori-
ginal character  of  the  party,  or  give  him  a  uew  and  bos-
tile  one.*'  But  the  circumstances  requisite  to  establish
the  domicil,  are  flexible,  and  easily  accommodated  to  the
real  truth  and  equity  of  the  case.  Thus  it  requires'
fewer  circumstances  to  constitutes  domicil  in  the  case
of  a  native  subject,  who  returns  to  re-assume  bis  original
character,  than  it  does  to  impress  the  national  cha-
racter on a stranger.'' The quo animo, in each


a  The  Uoi  Hermaoo8,2  WhtcUen,  70.

6  1  R*.'?e. The  BcToou.

e  6  Rnb.  eo,  The  l.'ianH. 5  Bob.  90.  The  Ocean.

d  5  Ro'i-  90-  ha  VirgiDJe.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LectanlV.] OF  THE  LAW  Or  NATIONS.  ti

cow,  the  real  sulgect  of  iuquiry ,  aad  wbeD  the  residence
exists  freely,  without  force  or  restraiot,  it  is  usual);  held  to
be  complete,  whether  it  be  ao  actual,  or  only  an  implied
residence.

When  the  residence  is  ooce  fixed,  and  has  comniUnica*
ted  a  natiooal  character  to  the  |)artf ,  it  is  not  devested  by  a
|)eriodical  absence,  or  even  by  occasional  visits  to  his  na*
lire  country."  Nor  is  it  invariably  necessary,  that  the  resi*
dence  be  personal,  in  order  to  impress  a  person  with  a  na*
tiooal  character.  The  general  rule  undoubtedly  is,  that  a
neutral  merchant  may  trade  in  the  ordinary  mauner,  to
the  country  of  a  belligerent,  by  means  of  a  statioaed
agent  there,  and  yet  not  contract  the  character  ofa  tlomi-
ciled  person.  But  if  the  principal  be  trading,  not  on  the
ordinary  fooling  ofa  foreign  merchant,  but  as  a  privileged
trader  of  the  enemy,  such  a  privileged  trade  pntS'  him
on  the  same  ground  with  their  own  subjects,  and  he  would
be  considered  as  sufficiently  invested  with  the  national
character  by  the  residence  ofhis  agent.  Sir  William
Scott,  in  the  case  of  the  Anna  Calkarina,^  applied  this  dis-
tinction to  the  case  of  a  neutral,  invevted  with  the  privile-
ges of  a  Spanish  merchaot,  and  the  full  benefit  of  the
Sjmnish  character  ;  and  this  ca^e  has  been  followed  to  its
fullest  extent  in  this  country .°  It  affords  a  sample  ofthat
piercing  and  unwearied  investigation  which  the  courts  of
admiralty  had  disiilayed,  in  unravelling  the  intricate  pro*
cess,  by  which  an  enemy's  trade  wus  attempted  to  be  pro-
tected from  hostile  seizure,  and  in  the  application  of  sound
principles  of  national  law  to  new  and  complex  cases.  On
the  same  ground  it  baa  been  decided,''  that  an  Ameaicao
consul  general  in  Scotland,  committing  bis  whole  duty  to


a  tAeUm,  IIS. B  CrmcA,  414. Uai^wU,  Cb>J.  3  ITtttmm,  14.
the  Friendwliaft.
b  4  Aob.  Itep.  107.
«.  Tbe  IndiaDo,  9  QaUiton,  MS,
d  4  Boh.  Rep.  n%.  TIm  Drao  dcbrondar*.

Vol.  I.  10


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


U  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  rP-rt  '■

vice-consalfl.  was  deemed  to  have  loat  bis  neutral  charae>
ter  by  engn^iiig  in  trade  in  France;  and  it  U  well  §eltled,
th>tt  if  a  foreigD  consul  csrrica  on  trade  aa  a  mercbaot,  in
an  enemy's  rountry,  his  consular  residence  and  character
will  not  protect  that  trade  from  interrupttoo  by  seizure  and
condemnation  as  enemy's  property.*

A  national  chararter  acquired  by  residencflt  may  be
thrown  off  Bt  pleasure,  by  a  return  to  the  native  country.
It  is  an  adventitious  character,  and  ceases  by  non-resi-
denc-e,  or  when  the  party  pati  himself  in  motion  bonafidt,
to  quit  the  country  tint  animo  nverttndi,  and  such  an  in-
tention is  essential  in  order  to  enable  the  party  to  reaa-
aumebisnatirecharacter.**  In  the  case  of  the  Ventu,<^  the
decisions  of  the  English  courts  on  the  subject  of  national
character  acquired  by  residence,  and  on  the  consequences
of  such  acquired  character,  were  recognised  as  bcin^
founded  on  sound  principles  of  public  law.  It  was  de-
clared, that  the  law  of  nations  distinguishes  between  a
tem|>orary  residence  in  a  foreign  country  for  a  special  pur-
pose, and  a  residence  accompanied  with  an  intention  to
make  it  the  party's  domicil,  or  permanent  place  of  abode  ;
and  that  the  doctrine  of  the  prize  courts,  and  the  common
law  i-ourts  of  England,  was  the  same  on  this  fuliject
with  that  of  the  public  jurists.  As  a  consequence  of  the
doctrine  of  dnmicil,  the  court  derided,  that  if  a  citizen  of
the  United  States  should  establiiih  his  commerrial  dnmi-
cil in  a  foreign  country,  and  hostilities  should  after-
wards break  out  between  that  country  and  the  United
States,  his  property,  shipped  before  knowledge  of  the
war,  and  while  that  domicil  continued,  would  be  liable  to
capture,  on  the  ground,  that  bis  permanent  reuidence  had


a  Valttt,  b.4.c-e.MC.  114.  S  Ro''.  fl-p.  «2.  The  Indian  Chief,  t
Va.  Sf  Bea  333.  Alhretch  r.  SawiugiD.  I  Johru.  Cku.  368.  Arnold  and
Bkin**r  *  U.  I.  Componj.

b  a  Rnft.  :  •.  The  Indiaii  Chief. 3  Wktaton,  M. The  Friend»cli«ft.

«  0  CrcmtA,  SS3>


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


IV.] OF  THE  LAW  dF  NATIONS.  75

itamped  him  with  the  national  character  of  that  countrf.
Tlifl  boatile  character  was  deemed  to  attach  tothe  Ameri-
can citizeD,  only  in  respect  to  his  property  conaected  with
his  reaideoce  in  the  enemy's  nountry.  and  the  converse  of
the  propmitioQ  was  aim  true,  that  the  subject  of  a  bellige-
rent state,  domiciled  in  a  neutral  country,  waa  to  be  consi-
dered a  neutral  by  both  the  belligerents,  in  reference  lo  hia
trade.  The  doctrine  of  enemy's  property,  arising  from  a
dcioiicil  in  an  enemy's  country,  is  taken  strictly ;  and  equita-
ble qualifications  of  the  rule  are  generally  disnllowed,  for
the  sake  of  presenting  frauds  ou  belligerent  rights,  and  to
give  the  rule  more  precision  and  certainty.

In  the  law  of  nations  as  to  Europe,  the  rule  is.  that
men  lake  their  national  character  from  the  general
character  of  the  country  in  which  they  reside,  and  thia
rule  applies  equally  to  America.  But  in  Asia  and  Africa
an  immiscible  character  is  kept  up,  and  Europeans,  tra-
ding under  the  protection  of  a  factory,  take  tbeir  national
character  from  the  establishment  under  which  they  live
and  trade.  This  rule  applies  to  those  parts  of  the  world
from  obvious  reasons  of  policy,  because  foreigners  are  not
admitted  there,  as  in  Europe,  "  and  the  wertern  parts  of
the  world,"  info  the  general  body  and  mass  of  the  society
ofthe  nation,  but  they  continue  strangers  and  sojouiners,
not  acquiring  any  national  character,  under  the  general
sovereignty  ofthe  country."

National  character  may  be  acquired  in  consideration  of
the  trafiein  which  the  party  is  concerned.  Ita  i^rson  tnop
nects  himself  with  a  house  of  trade  in  the  enemy's  country,
in  time  of  war,  or  continues,  during  a  war,  a  connexion
formed  in  o  time  of  peace,  he  cannot  protect  himself  by
having  his  domicil  in  a  neutral  country.  He  is  considfred  as
impressed  with  a  hostile  character,  in  reference  to  so  niurb
of  his  commerce  as  may  be  conaccted  with  that  08^allll^b•
nent.  The  rule  iathe  same,  whether  he  niaintainslliut  es-

m  3  Rob.  Sep.  S2. The  lodian  ChieE

Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


7«  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS-  [Fart  1.

tabliabmenl  as  a  pnrtper,  or  as  a  lule  trader.*  The  Su-
preme Court  of  the  United  Slates,  referring  to  the  Eng-
lish prize  cases  on  ibis  subjflct,  observed  that  they  con-
sidered the  rule  to  Ite  inflpxibiy  settled,  and  that  they  were
not  at  liberty  to  depart  from  it,  whatever  doubt  migbt
have  been  entertained,  if  the  case  was  entirely  nen.

But  though  a  belligerent  has  a  right  to  consider  as  ene-
mies, all  persons  who  reside  in  aJiustiie  country,  or  maia-
tain  commercial  esiabti^thutents  there,  whether  they  be  by
birth  neutnils,  or  alliefc,  or  ffllow-subjerls,  yet  the  rule  ta
Rccom[Hinicd  »Uh  this  equitable  qunlificatioD;  that  I  hey
are  enemius  sub  wiodo  only,  or  in  reference  to  so  much  of
their  pro|>«rty  as  is  connected  with  that  reHidence  or  e»-
tablitfhiDtJnt.  This  nice  and  subtle  distincstiun  allows  k
werchunt  lo  act  in  two  characters,  so  as  to  protect  his  pro-
perty connected  with  his  bouse  in  a  neutral  cenntry,  and
to  subject  to  seizure  and  forfeiture  his  effects  belonging  to
the  establishment  in  the  belligerent  country.  So  there
may  be  a  partnership  between  two  persons,  the  one  resid-
ing in  a  neutral,  and  the  other  in  a  belligerent  countryi
and  the  trade  uf  one  of  them,  with  the  enemy,  wit)  he  held
lawful,  and  that  of  the  oiher  unlawful,  and  consequently
the  share  of  one  partner  in  the  joint  traffic  will  be  con-
demned, while  that  of  the  other  will  be  restored.  Thia
distinction  has  been  frequently  sustained,  notwithstand-
ing the  difficulties  that  may  attend  the  dLicriminntion  be-
tween the  inoqceni  and  the  noxious  trade,  and  the  rule
bas  been  introduced  into  the  nariliiue  law  of  this
country.^

The  next  mode  in  Which  a  hostile  character  may  be  in-
pressed,  aceording  to  ibe  doctrine  of  the  English  courts,  ia


a  The  V'igfi  lamia.  1  RtA.  Rep.  1.  Tbe  Porllaod.  3  Bo*.  41.  The  In-
iRai..^  1  OaUitoiu  MS.  Ttie  Antonia  Johanna,  1  Wkaalnn,  1£9.  Tlie
Friendiciian.  4  Whtaim,  V'b.

tTliB  Portliiid.3  flo6.  R^.  41.  The  HermaB.  4  ReS.  MB.  Tfcs
^flDje  CUmoa,  &  iioi.  397. The  iJap  Jo«e  Indiaao.  I  Qall,  SH-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leciwe  IV] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  77

by  dealinf  inlhoiie  biADches  of  commerce  whicbwcrecoR-
flned,  ill  time  of  peace,  to  tlie  subjects  uftlie  enemy.  Thera
can  be uu  douttt,  that  a  special  liiMaae,  granted  by  a  belli-
gereat  u>  a  neutral  veaael.  to  trade  to  li«r  vokmy,  with  all
tfae  piivilegei  of  a  native  vessel,  itt  thntte  braocbea  of  com-
merce wbicb  were  befoie  coufined  to  naiire  subjects,  would
warraul  tbe  pr«4um|itiuu  that  sucb  vowel  was  ndupted  and
naturalized,  ur  that  sucb  perwiMtion  was  granted  io  fraud
of  tbu  belligerent  rigiit  ol'  capture,  and  ibe  pro|>ert}  ao  co>
Tered  may  reauouably  be  regarded  as  etwmy's  pro|>eriy.
This  was  the  ductrioe  in  tbe  caM  of  Bertnts  v.  Rtuker^  aa
oarly  as  1700."  But  the  t^ogliab  rule  goes  further,  and  it
•nnexesa  boptile  character,  and  the  penal  consequeocei
of  GoatiscBtioo,  to  the  ship  and  uirgo  of  a  neutral  engaged
in  tbe  coluitial  or  coasting  trade  of  tbe  enemy,  not  open  to
foreigners  in  time  of  peace,  but  cuafioed  to  native  nibjectc
by  tbe  fundamental  regulations  of  the  state.  This  prohi>
bitioo  stauds  upon  two  grounds  :  Isi.  That  if  tbe  coasting
or  culoiiiul  trade,  reserved  by  the  permaaent  policy  of  a
nation  to  its  own  subjects  and  vessels,  be  opened  to  neuirall
during  war,  tbe  act  proceeds  from  tbe  pressure  of  tbe  naval
force  of  the  eii«iny,aud  to  obtain  relief  from  that  pressure.
The  neutral  who  interposes  to  relieve  tbe  belligerent,  un-
der such  drcuoistauces,  rescues  hiOi  Oom  the  eondliion  to
which  the  arms  of  his  enemy  had  reduced  him,  restores  l«
bim  those  resources  which  bnd  been  wrested  from  him  bj
tfae  arms  of  his  adversary,  and  deprives  ilint  adversary  of
the  advaatages  which  succexst'ul  war  had  given  faim.  This
the  opposing  belligerent  pronoutit-.es  a  defiarture  from  neu.
tralily,  and  an  interference  inlbe  war,  to  bis  prejudice.  2d.
If  the  trade  be  net  opened  by  law,  the  neutral  employed  in
a  trade  reserved  by  the  enemy  to  lain  own  VMsels,  identifies
himself  with  that  enemy,  and  assumes  his  character.
These  principles  first  became  n  subject  uf  interesting  dis-
cussion in  tbe  war  of  1756,  and  tbey  are  generally  known


a  1  JFm.Bladt.  Atp.  313.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


rs  OF  THE  LAWS  OF  NATIONS.  (Pan  I.

in  Enifland,  and  in  this  oouotr;,  by  the  appellation  of  tbe
rule  of  1756;  but  the  rule  ia  said  to  have  been  asserted
before  that  period.

Ill  the  letter  of  PuflTendorf  to  Groningiua,  published  in
1701, a  he  says  that  the  English  and  the  Dutch  were  willing
to  leave  to  oeutrals  the  coRimerce  they  were  arcustomed  to
carry  on  in  time  of  peace,  but  were  not  willing  to  alloir
them  to  avail  tbemsetves  of  tbe  war  to  augment  it,  to  the
prejudice  of  tbe  English  and  the  Dutch.  The  French  ordi-
nance of  1704,*>  has  been  considered  na  foundtd  upon  the
basis  of  the  same  rule,  and  itit  regulations  made  to  enforce
it,  and  to  preserve  to  neutrals  tbe  same  trade  whicb  they
had  been  accutitomed  to  enjoy  in  peace.  There  is  soma
evidence,  also,  that  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  neutral  vef-
seis  were  considered,  both  by  England  and  Holland,  to  be
liable  to  capture  and  condemoation,  for  being  concerned
in  the  coasting  trade  of  tbe  enemy.  The  Dutch,  at  that
day,  cuntended  for  this  neutral  eiclusion,  on  the  authority
of  general  reasoning  and  the  practice  of  nations  ;  and  thn
•ameruleisBaidtokave  been  asserted  in  tbe  English  courta
in  the  war  of  1741  ,and  Iheexclusion  of  neutral  vessels  from
the  coasting  trade  ofthe  enemy,  was  declared  tostand  upon
tbe  law  of  uations.*:  But  it  was  in  tbe  war  of  1757,  that  the
rule  awakened  general  and  earnest  attention.  Mr.  Jenkio-
son,  in  his  *'  Discourse  on  the  conduct  of  Great  Britain  in
respect  to  neutral  nations,"  written  in  1750,  considered  it
to  be  unjust  and  illegal  for  neutrals  to  avail  themselves  of
the  pressure  of  war,  to  engage  in  a  new  specieii  of  traffic
not  permitted  in  peace,  and  which  the  necessities  of  one
belligerent  obligpd  him  to  grant,  to  the  detriment,  or  per-
haps to  the  destruction  of  the  other.  On  the  other  band,
Hubner,  who  published  his  Treatise^)  in  17.59,  is  of  opinion
that  neutrab  may  avail  themselves  of  this  advantage,  pre-


«  Puff.  Dr«-t  dti  Qent,  par  BarbeynK,  torn.  S.

b  i  Ka'in*4  Com  5«.

c  6  Bob.  Rep.  74.  and  9SX.  note.

d  Data  SoMM d«4  Batinteni  Jftulro-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LacMra  !V.] ©F  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  W

unted  bj  the  war,  though  he  admits  Ihn  fawfulnesB  of  the
trade  to  be  a  question  o-  tome  uocertainty.

Thus  seemed  to  stand  the  authority  of  the  rule  of  1756,
(and  it  certainly  stood  upon  loose  grounds,  in  jioint  of
offii'iat  authority,  as  has  heen  shown  in  a  note  to  the  1st
vulitrno  of  Mr.  fVkeaton't  Itrporti,  app.  note  3.)  when  it
WHS  rt^vived  and  brought  intooperation  by  England,  in  the
war  of  nO'-i,  and  again  upon  the  renewal  of  war  in  I6t>3.
The  rule  was  enforced  by  her,  under  occasional  relaia-
tions.  during  the  long  rnurse  of  the  wars  arising  out  of  ih*
French  revolution,  and  it  wbh  frequently  vindicated  by  Sir
William  Scott,  in  the  couriw  of  hi<t  judicial  decisions,  with
his  customary  ability  and  fiersuasive  manner,  as  a  rtil*
founded  in  oalural  jnstire.aod  the  established  jurisprudence
of  nations."  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain  that  the  go-
vernment of  the  United  States  constantly  and  earnestly
protected  against  the  legality  of  the  rule,  to  the  extent
claimed  by  Great  Britain;  and  they  inoisted,  inlbeirdipto*
■natic  intercnursG,  that  the  rule  was  an  attempt  to  estab-
lish "a  new  principle  of  the  low  of  nations,"  and  one  whicb
subverted  *'  many  other  principles  of  great  importance,
which  have  heretofore  been  held  sacred  among  nniions.''
They  insisted,  that  neutrals  were  of  right  entitled  "to
trade,  with  the  excefrtions  of  blockades  and  contrabands,
to  and  between  ail  ports  of  the  enemy,  and  in  all  articles,
although  the  trade  should  not  have  been  open  to  them  in
time  of  peace."**  It  was  considered  to  bo  the  right  of  every
independent  power,  to  treat,  in  time  of  peace,  with  every
other  nation,  for  leave  to  trade  with  its  colonies,  and  to
enter  into  any  trade,  whether  new  or  old,  that  waa  not  in
itself  illegal,  and  a  violation  of  noutrality.  One  slate  had
nalbing  todo  with  tho  circumstances  or  motives  which  io-


a  Roh.  Rep.  pairim,

h  Mr.Monrot^i  LeUer  la  Lrrd  .Vu'gravt,n/Srpl  S3rf,  [805,ani]„Vr.
MaaiOH^UUerf*JUenrt.»»^rocanil  I  ink  tey.  tinted  Ja>ij  ItlA.lWi.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


80  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pan  I.

duMd  another  nation  to  open  ber  porta.  Tbe  trade  must
have  a  direct  reference  to  tbe  hostile  efibru  of  the  belli-
gerents, tike  dealing  in  contraband,  in  order  to  render  it
a  breacti  of  neutrality.  The  rule  of  1758,  especially  to
reHfwct  to  colonial  trade,  has  also  been  repeatedly  attack-
ed by  writers  in  this  country,  with  great  ability  and  learn-
ing;  and  though  the  rule  would  seem  to  bare  received
the  very  general  approbation  of  Brilish  lawyersand  ttates-
iiieii,  yet  it  was  not  ezampted  from  serere  criticism,  even
ill  disiiuguiBhird  pulilicationfl  iu  that  country.  The  prin-
ciple of  the  rule  of  1756  may,  therefore,  very  fairly  be  con-
sidered as  one  unsettled  and  doubtful,  and  open  to  future
and  vexed  diitcuraion.  The  Chief  Justice  of  tbe  United
States,  in  the  case  of  the  Commercen,'  alluded  to  the  rule,
but  |)urpoHely  avoided  expressing  any  opinion  on  tbe  cor-
rectness of  the  principle.  It  is  very  |K>8sible,  that-  if  the
United  Statex  should  hereafter  attain  that  elevation  of
maritime  |)ower  and  influence,  which  their  rapid  growth
and  great  resources  seem  to  indicate,  and  which  shall
prove  sufficient  to  render  it  expedient  for  her  maritime
enemy  (if  any  such  enemy  abal)  ever  exist)  to  open  alibis
doinextic  trade  to  enterprising  neutrals,  we  mi^ht  be  in-
duced to  feel  more  sensibly  than  we  have  hitherto  done,
the  weight  of  the  arguments  of  the  foreign  jurists  in  favour
of  the  policy  and  equity  of  the  rule.

Suiting  under  the  flag  and  pass  of  an  enemy,  is  another
mode  by  which  a  hostile  character  may  be  affixed  to  pro-
perty; for,  if  a  neutral  vessel  enjoys  the  privilejresofa
furi'i^n  churacter,  sbc  must  expect,  at  the  same  time,  to  be
subject  to  the  inconveniences  attaching  to  that  character.
This  rule  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  fraudulent  mask  of
enemy's  property.  But  a  diclinction  U  mado,  in  (be  Eng-
lish cases,  between  the  ship  and  the  cargo.  Same  countries
have  gone  tw  far  as  to  make  the  flag  and  pass  of  rhc  ship
cnnHusiveon  the  cargo  also;  but  the  English  courts  have
never  carried  the  principle  to  that  extent,  as  to  cargoea

a  I  ff'Acaton,396-


t,Goo(^lc .


Uctun  IV.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  »

laden  before  tfae  war.  The  English  rule  is,  to  hold  the
ship  bound  by  the  character  imposed  upoo  it  by  the  autbo-
rity  of  the  gOTernment  from  vrhich  all  tfae  documents  issue.
But  goods  which  bare  no  such  dependence  upon  the  autho-
rity of  the  state  may  be  differently  considered  ;  and  if  the
cargo  be  laden  in  time  of  peace,  though  documented  as  fo-
reign property  in  the  same  manner  as  the  ship,  the  sailing
under  a  foreign  flag  and  pass  has  not  been  held  conclusire
as  to  the  cargo.'  The  doctrine  of  the  courts  in  this  coun-
try has  been  Fery  strict  on  this  point,  and  it  has  been  fre-
quently decided,  that  sailing  uoder  tbe  license  and  pas»-
port  of  protection  of  the  enemy,  in  fuftberance  of  his
views  and  interests,  was,  without  regard  to  the  object  of
the  Tojrage,  or  the  port  of  destination,  such  an  illegality
as  subjected  both  ship  and  cargo  to  confiscation  as  prize  of
war.^  The  federal  courts  placed  the  objection  to  these
licenses  on  tbe  ground  of  a  pacific  dealing  witb  the  enemy,
and  as  amounting  to  a  contract  that  the  party  to  whom  the
license  is  giren,  should,  for  that  voyage,  withdraw  himself
from  tfae  war,  and  enjoy  tbe  repose  tind  blessings  of  peace.
The  illegality  of  such  an  intercourse  was  strongly  con-
demned; and  it  was  held,  that  the  moment  the  vessel
sailed  on  a  voyage,  with  an  enemy's  license  on  board,  tbe
offence  was  irrevocably  committed  and  consummated,
and  that  the  dtUctum  was  not  done  away  even  by  the  ter-
mination of  the  voyage,  but  the  vessel  and  cargo  might
be  seized  aOer  arrival  in  a  port  of  the  United  States,  and
condemned  as  lawful  prize.

Having  thus  considered  the  principal  circumstances
which  have  been  held  by  the  courts  of  international  law,
to  impress  a  hostile  character  upon  commerce,  it  may  be
here  observed,  that  property  which  has  a  hostile  charao^


a  The  Eliiabetb.  6  Rob.  9.  Th«  Vreode  Scboltji,  cited  in  the  twie
toft  Rob.  &.

b  The  Jolia,  8  CraiuA,  181.  The  Aarore,  lb-  M3.  The  Ilirun,  /6.
444.  Tbe  Anadne,  9  WTualon,  113.  Tbe  Caledonia,  4  Wlualtn,  10&
Vot.  I.  11


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Kt  OF  TOE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  t

ter  at  the  commencement  of  the  voyaft^,  cannot  chatifts
that  character  by  assignment,  while  it  in  tn  irantitv,  go  aa
to  protect  it  from  capture.  This  would  lead  to  fraudu-
lent eontrivancea,  to  protect  the  property  from  capture,
by  colourable  aasignmental  to  neutral*.  During  peace,  a
tranBfer  in  transitu  may  be  made,  but  when  war  ii  existing
or  impending,  the  belligerent  rule  applies,  and  the  owner-
■hip  of  the  property  is  deemed  to  continue,  as  it  was  at
the  time  of  the  shipment,  until  actual  delivery.  This  ille-
gality of  transfer,  during,  or  in  cootemplatiun  of  war,  is'
for  the  sake  of  the  belligerent  right,  and  to  prevent  secret
transfers  from  the  enemy  to  neutralM,  in  fraud  of  that  right,
and  upon  conditions  and  reservations  wbirh  it  might  ba
impossible  to  detect.'  So,  property  shipped  from  a  opu>
tral  to  the  enemy's  country,  under  a  contract  to  become
the  property  of  the  enemy  on  arrival,  may  be  taken  m
trantitu  as  enemy's  properly,  for  capture  is  considered  as
delivery.  The  captor,  by  the  tights  of  war,  stands  in  the
place  of  the  ettemy.'>  The  prize  courts  will  not  allow  a
neutral  and  belligerent,  by  a  special  agreement,  to  change
the  ordinary  ruleofpeace,  by  which  goods  ordered  and  de-
livered to  the  master  are  considered  as  delivered  to  the
consignee.  All  such  agreements  are  held  to  be  construc-
tively fraodulent,  and  ifthcycouldopperate,  theywouldgo
to  cover  all  belligerent  property,  while  passing  belvt-en  a
belligerent  and  a  neutral  country,  since  the  risk  of  capture
would  be  laid  alternately  on  the  consignor  or  consignee,
OB  the  neutral  factor  should  happen  to  stand  in  the  one  or
the  other  ofthose  relations.  These  principles  of  the  Eng-
lish admiralty  have  been  explicitly  recognised  and  acted
upon  by  the  prize  courts  in  this  country.  The  great  prin-
ciples of  national  law  were  held  to  require,  that,  in  War,
enemy's  property  should  not  change  its  hostile  character  in


a  Vn>»  Maiyiretba,  1  B<A.  33G. Jan  Fredericb,  6  Sob.  138. S«a
■ImI  AiA.  1.  101 IS9. 9Ro6. 137. 1.  Ro6.  \S.  note.  4  Jto6.  3i.
ft  I  A«. t07.  338. ZRob.  133. 4  Ao6.  107.  111-115. 3Rob-300.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


IV.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  S9

traniilu  ;  and  that  no  lecret  liens,  no  future  elections,  no
prirate  contracts  looking  to  future  events,  should  be  abl«
to  cover  hostile  property  while  sailing  on  the  ocean."  Cap*
tors  disregard  all  equitable  liens  on  enemy's  pro{>ert]r,  and
by  their  hands  on  the  gross  tangible  property,  and  rely
on  the  simple  title  in  the  name  and  possession  of  thf  ene-
my. If  they  were  to  open  the  door  to  equitable  claims,
there  would  be  no  end  to  discussion  and  imposition,  and
the  simplicity  and  celerity  of  proceedings  in  prize  couru
would  be  lost.'>  All  reservation  of  risk  to  the  neutral  con-
signors, in  order  to  protect  belligerent  consignees,  are
held  to  be  fraudulent,  and  these  numerous  and  strict  rules
of  the  maritime  jurisprudence  »f  the  prize  courts,  are  in-
tended to  uphold  the  rights  of  lawful  maritime  capture,
and  to  prevent  frauds,  and  preserve  candour  and  ^ood
faith  in  the  intercourse  between  belligerems  and  neutrals.
The  modern  cases  contain  numerous  and  striking  instan-
cfM  of  the  acuteness  of  the  captors  in  tracking  out  deceit,
and  of  the  dexterity  of  the  claimants  in  eluding  invesiiga-
tiwi.


a  TbaPraooM,  I  Oa'/jmn.  446. 8  Crttnck.SSa.  36fi.3.C.

b  4  Aob.  £6. 6  Jlofr.  SIS. t  JI«fr.  S4.  uid  the  AnierKtB  c


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  V.

OP  THE  RIGHTS  OF  BBLLIGERRNT  NATIONS  IN  RCL&TION
TO  EACH  OTHER.

The  end  of  war  is  to  procure  by  force  the  justice  which
oaDDot  otherwise  heoblained;  and  the  law  of  natiooa  allowa
the  meaas  requisite  to  the  end.  The  jiersons  and  proprrtjr
of  the  enemj  may  he  attacked,  and  captured,  or  destroyed,
when  necessary  to  procure  reprtralion  or  security.  Tliere
ii  no  limitation  to  the  career  of  violence  and  destruction,  if
we  follow  the  earlier  writers  on  this  subject,  who  have  paid
too  much  deference  to  the  violent  maxims  and  pratices  of
the  aocients,  and  the  usages  of  the  Gothic  ages.  They
have  considered  a  state  ofwar  as  a  dissolution  of  all  moral
ties,  and  a  license  for  every  kind  of  disorder  and  intempe-
rate fierceness.  An  enemy  was  regarded  as  a  criminal  and
an  outlaw,  who  had  forfeited  all  bis  rights,  and  whose  life,
liberty,  and  property,  lay  at  the  mercy  of  ihe  conqueror.
Every  thing  done  against  an  enemy  was  held  to  be  lawful.
He  might  be  destroyed,  though  unarmed  and  defenceless.
Fraud  might  be  employed  as  well  as  force,  and  force  with-
out any  regard  to  the  means.^  But  these  barbarous  rights
of  war  have  been  questioned,  and  checked,  in  the  progress
of  civiliEatioD.  Public  opinion,  as  it  becomes  enlightened
and  refined,  condemns  all  cruelty,  and  all  wanton  destruc-
tion of  life  and  property,  as  equally  useless  and  injurioua ;


«  Groliui.  h,  3.  c.  4.  and  S. Puf  lib.  2.  e.  IS.  sec-  6. Bj/ni.  Q.  J.
Pub.  b.  I.e.  1,2,  3.  BurlimMg.fnA.e.i.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


A


16  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [PartL

and  it  cootrols  the  violence  of  war  bj  the  energy  and  §ere-
rity  of  iiB  reproaches.

GrotiiM,  even  ia  opposition  to  manj  of  his  own  authori-
tieSyBiidunder  aduesenseortheobligBtiuna  of  religion  and
humanity,  placed  boundi  to  the  ravtiged  of  war,  and  men-
tioned that  many  things  were  not  fit  and  commeadable,
tbuui^h  they  might  be  strictly  lawful;  and  that  the  law  of
nature  forbade  what  the  law  of  nations  (meaning  thereby
the  praaice  of  nations)  tolerated.  He  held,  that  the  law
of  natioat  piofaibited  the  use  of  poisoned  arms,  or  the  em-
ployment of  assassins,  or  violence  to  women,  or  to  the
dead,  or  making  slaves  of  prisoners  ;»  and  the  moderation
which  be  inculcated  hada  visible  influence  ipon  the  MOti*
ments  and  manners  of  Europe.  Under  the  sanction  of  hit
great  authority,  men  began  to  entertain  more  ealargeil
views  of  natiooal  policy,  and  to  coosider  a  mild  and  tem-
perate exercise  of  the  rights  of  war,  to  be  dictated  by  an
enlightened  self-interest,  as  well  as  by  the  precepts  of  Chris*
tianity.  And,  notwithstanding  some  subeequent  wnters>as
Bynkershoeck  and  Wolfius,  restored  war  to  all  its  horrors^
by  allowing  the  use  of  poison,  and  other  illicit  araas,  yet
lueb  rules  became  abhorrent  to  the  cultivated  reason  and
growing  humanity  of  the  Christian  nations.  Montesquieu
insisted,"  that  the  laws  of  war  gave  no  other  power  overn
captive  than  to  keep  him  safely,  and  that  all  unnecessary
rigour  was  condemned  by  the  reason  and  conscience  of  man-
kind. Kutheiforthc  has  spoken  to  the  same  ethct,  and
Martens''  enumerates  several  modes  of  war,  and  species
of  arms,  as  bein^  now  held  unlawful  by  the  laws  of  war.
Vattel''  has  entered  largely  into  the  subject,  and  he  arguea,
with  great  strength  of  reason  and  eloquence,  against  all
nnnecessary  cruelty,  all  base  revenge,  and  all  mean  and


fl  B.  3.  o  4.  &.  T.  t  bitt.  b.  ?.  o.  9.

h  B.  IC.  c.  t.  d  Summary,  b.  8  (

t  B.  3.  c.  B.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMtare  V.] OF  THE  LAW  OP  NATIONS.  87

perfidioOT  warfare;  and  be  recommendB  hit  benevolent
doctrines  by  the  preeepts  of  exalted  ethic*  and  Knind
policy,  and  by  illuRtrationfl  drawn  from  some  of  the  most
pathetic  and  illustrious  examples.

There  is  a  marked  difference  in  the  rights  of  war  carri-
ed on  by  land,  and  at  nea.  The  object  of  a  maritinie  war
is  ihe  destmction  of  the  enemy's  commerce  and  naviga-
tion, in  order  to  weaken  or  destroy  the  foundations  of  bis
oarRJ  power.  The  captore  or  destruction  of  private  pro-
perty is  essential  to  that  end,  and  it  is  allowed  in  mari-
time wars  by  the  law  and  practice  of  nations.  But  there
Ue  great  Hmitatioos  imposed  upon  the  operations  of  war
by  land,  though  depredations  upon  private  property,
and  despoiling  and  plundering  the  enemy's  territory,  is
•till  too  prevalent  a  practice,  especially  wben  the  war
is  assisted  by  irregulars.  Such  conduct  has  been
cood<;mned  in  all  a^^s  by  the  wise  and  virtuons,  and  it  is
usually  severely  punished  by  those  commanders  of  disci-
plined  troops  who  have  studied  war  as  a  science,  and  are
animated  by  a  sense  of  duty,  or  the  love  of  fame.  We
nay  inferthe  opinion  of  Xenophon  on  this  subject,  (and
he  was  a  warrior  as  well  as  a  philosopher,)  when  ho  states,
ia  the  Cyropadia'  that  Cyrus  of  Persia  gave  orders  to  hu
army,  wben  marching  upon  the  enemy's  borders,  not  to
disturbthe  cultivators  of  the  soil;  and  there  have  been
lucb  ordinances  in  modern  times  for  the  protectira  of
innocent  and  pacific  pnrsaitB.I>  Vattel  coiMjemns  very
strongly  the  aiwliations  of  a  country  without  palpable  ne-


a  Lib.  e.

h  I  Emerigon  4et  Ati.  lis,  i30.  467.  rcfor*  to  ordisaticMof  TraiK*
and  Hdtand,  in  fmoat  orpratecliuu  to  fisbcrmeD :  and  lo  Ihe  like  effect
WBslhe  oHerirftbB  Britith  ^vernment  in  IRIO,  for  alMlaiDing-  rpom
boililitiM  aB^JDit  llie  jababiUntt  or  the  Fcroe  itltnda,  and  IceluuL
General  Brune  Hated  (o  tlie  Duke  oj  York,  in  October,  1TSB,  wbcti  aa
•nnittjce  io  Hollaod  was  negntiatiD^,  Ilint  if  Llie  lalter  thouldcauu  tbe
dikes  to  be  dsatrofed,  and  tbc  couotr;  (o  b«  inuodaled,  vtieD  Dot  useful
(ohiiowD  kTDijr  ordetrinicaUl  to  Ibecneinj'd,  it  wonlil  beuomrarj  to
the  laH'iofiraf.  and  innil  dratT  iijioij  ]iiiii  the  rejiiobiiliaD  ol'  all  Hu  rope.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


SI  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [P«rtl.

ceisily ;  and  be  ajwaka  with  a  jiut  iodignatioa  of  the  burn-
tag  of  the  Palatinate  by  Turenne,  under  the  cruel  inBlruo-
tioHB  of  Louvois,  tbe  war  minister  of  Louis  XIV."  The
general  usage  now  is  not  to  touch  priFale  property  upon
land,  without  mnking  compensation,  unless  in  special
cases  dictated  by  tbo  necessary  operations  of  war,  or  when
captured  in  places  carried  by  storm,  and  which  repelled
all  the  overtures  for  a  capitulation.  Contributions  ar«
sometimes  levied  upon  a  conquered  country,  in  lieu  of  a
confiscation  of  property,  and  as  some  indemnity  for  the  ex-
penses of  maintaining  order,  and  affording  protection.'*
If  tbe  conqueror  goes  bnyond  these  limits  wantonly,  or
when  it  is  not  clearly  indispensable  to  the  just  purposes  of
war,  and  seizes  prirate  property  of  pacific  persons  for  the
sake  of  gain,  and  destroys  private  dwellings,  or  public
edifices,  devoted  to  civil  purposes  only ;  or  makes  war
upon  monuments  of  art,  and  models  of  taste,  he  violates
the  modern  usages  of  war,  and  is  sure  lo  meet  with  in-
dignant resentment,  and  to  be  held  up  to  the  general  scora
and  detestation  of  the  world.<:

Cruelty  to  prisoners,  and  barbarous  destruction  of  pri-
vate property,  will  provoke  the  enemy  to  severe  retaliation
upon  the  innocent.  Retaliation  is  said  by  Rutherforth^
not  to  be  B  justifiable  cause  for  putting  innocent  prisoners  or
hostages  to  death  ;  for  no  individual  is  chargeable,  by  the
(aw  of  nations,  wi^  the  guilt  of  a  personal  crime,  merely
because  the  community,  of  which  he  is  a  member,  is  guilty.
He  is  only  responsible  as  a  member  of  the  state,  in  his  pro-
perty, for  reparation  in  damages  for  the  acteofothers;and
it  is  on  this  principle,  that,  by  the  taw  of  nations,  private
property  may  be  taken  and  appropriated  in  war.  Retalia-
tion, to  be  just,  ought  to  be  confined  to  tbe  guilty  individuals
who  may  have  committed  some  enormous  violation  of  pub-
lic law. On  this  subject  of  retaliation,  Professor  Marteoi


a  VaUet,  b.  3.  c-  9.  tec.  1 S7.

6  ValUI,  b.  a.  c.  8.  sec.  1 47.— c.  8.  wc  165.

c foHf/,  b.  3.  c.  9.  aec.  160.

d  //Mf.b.  S.c.  9.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Ucture  v.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  t9

ii  not  BO  strict.'  Wbile  he  admits  thul  the  life  of  an  inno-
cent man  cannot  be  taken,  unless  in  extraordinary  cases,
yet  he  declares  tfaat  cases  will  sotnctimes  occur,  when  the
citablished  usages  of  war  are  violated,  and  there  are  no
other  means,  except  the  influence  of  retaliation,  of  re-
straining the  enemy  from  further  excesses.  Vattel  speaks
of  retaliation  as  a  sad  extremity,  and  it  i^  frequently  threat-
ened without  being  put  in  execution,  and,  probably,  with-
out the  intention  to  do  it,  and  in  hopes  that  fear  will  ope-
rate to  restrain  the  enemy,  instances  of  resolutions  to
retaliate  on  innocent  prisoners  of  war,  occurred  in  this
country  during  the  revolutionary  war,  as  well  as  during
the  war  of  1312 ;  but  there  was  no  instance  in  which  re-
taliation, beyond  the  measure  of  severe  con6nement,  took
p  lace  in  respect  to  prisoners  of  war.'>

Although  a  state  of  war  puts  all  the  subjects  of  the  one
natiuD  in  a  state  of  hostility  with  those  of  the  other,  yet, by
the  customary  law  of  Europe,  every  individual  is  not  al-
lowed to  fall  upoo  the  enemy.  If  subjects  confine  them-
selves to  sitnple  defence,  they  are  to  he  r^nsidered  as
acting  under  the  presumed  order  of  the  slate,  and  are  en-
titled to  be  treated  by  the  adversary  as  lawful  enemies,
and  the  captures  which  they  make  in  such  a  case,  are
allowed  to  be  lawful  prize.  But  they  cannot  engage  in
offensive  hostilities,  without  the  express  permission  of
their  sovereign ;  and  if  they  have  not  a  regular  commis-
sion, as  cridonce  of  that  consent,  they  run  the  hazard  of
being  treated  by  the  enemy  as  lawless  banditti,  not  enti-
tled to  the  protection  of  the  mitigated  rules  of  uodera
war.c

It  was  the  received  opinion  in  ancient  Rome,  in  the


a  Smninaryo/'lkt  Laiin>f^aHont,h.t.e.  l.sec.S.nofc.

b  Jo'maU  of  Congrun,  vol.  2.  p.  S45.  vol.  7.  p.  9.  and  147.  vol.  8.
p.  la  BrUiih  ordtri  in  Canada  of  snth  October,  and  Deetmber  IWA,
1BI3,  and  PrtMuItnti  Jleuagt  loCongren  <^  Dtctmbtr  nth,  1813,  and
O/Oclnbrriail^, 114.

t  Bynk.  Q.  J.  P-  cb.  «0. FolM,  b.  3.  c  16.  kic.  SIS. Jouraalt  iff
Congrt**,  Tol.  7-  IB7. Martttu,  b.  8.  c.  3.  *ec.  9.
Vol.  I.  12


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


to  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  fTnt  L

times  of  Calo  and  Cicero,'  that  one  who  was  not  regu-
larly enrolled  as  a  soldier,  could  not  lawrully  kill  an  ene-
my. But  the  law  of  Solon,  by  which  indiriduals  were
permitted  to  form  associations  for  plunder,  was  after-
wards introduced  into  the  Roman  law,  and  has  been
transmitted  to  us  as  pan  of  their  system.'*  During  the
/lawless  contusion  of  the  feudal  ages,  the  right  of  making
reprisals  was  claimed,  and  exercised,  without  a  public
commission.  It  was  not  until  the  6fteentfa  century  that
oommiesions  were  held  necessary,  and  bejran  to  be  issued
to  private  subjects  in  time  of  war,  and  that  subjects  were
forbidden  to  fit  out  vessels  to  cruise  against  enemies  with-
out license,  and  there  were  ordinances  in  Germanyt
France,  and  England,  to  that  efFect.c  It  is  now  the  prac-
tice for  maritime  states  to  make  use  of  the  voluntsry  aid
of  individuals  against  their  enemies,  as  auxiliary  to  tbo
public  force ;  and  Bynkershoeck  says,  that  the  Dutch  for-
merly employed  no  vessels  of  war  but  such  as  were  own-
ed by  private  persons,  and  to  whom  the  government  al-
lowed a  proportion  of  the  captured  property,  as  well  as
indemnity  from  the  public  treasury.  Vessels  are  now
fitted  out  and  equipped  by  private  adventurers,  at
their  own  expense,  to  cruize  against  the  commerce  of
the  enemy.  They  are  duly  commissioned,  and  it  is
said  not  to  be  lawful  to  cruize  without  a  regular  com-
mit«Bton.<l  Sir  Haithew  Hale  held  it  to  be  depreda-
tion in  a  subject  to  attack  the  enemy's  vessels,  except
in  his  own  defence,  without  a  commission.^  The  subject
has  been  repeatedly  discussed  in  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  states,''  end  the  doctrine  of  the  law  of  nations


a  DeOg.yt.  I.e.  II.

b  Dig.  VI.  Vt.  A. B^.<i.J.P.\t.y.ti.  IS.

<  Cod*  d€t  Prita.  torn.  1.  p.  1.  MaHau  on  Ptivattert,  p.  IB.  Roi*
jiwon't  Ctlleclaiua  MariHma,  p,  t1.

d  Bynk.  vb.  tup. JUarlau,  b.  6.  c.  3>  MC.  3.
«  Harg  Lam  T.  >4S,  246.  347.

/BrawD  «.  United  StalM,  S  OntncA,  1»-I3i.  Tlia  Nereide,  t
Crmadi,  4*9.  The  Dot  HennxiiM,  S  WkttUon  78.  and  iO  WiiMtm,
■SOC TbsABiidilsUibeUs,6  TAtotMi,!.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Ucwro  v.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  91

u  conniileteil  to  bai  that  private  cilizena  cannot  acquire  a
title  to  hoiitile  property,  unless  seized  under  a  commission,
but  they  injy  atill  la>rful)y  seize  hostile  property  in  their
oivn  defenre.  If  they  depredate  upon  the  enemy  without
a  commission,  they  act  upon  their  |>en1,  and  are  liable  to
be  punished  by  their  own  sovereign  ;  but  the  enemy  are
not  warranted  to  consider  them  as  criminals,  and,  as  re-
spects the  enemy,  they  violate  no  rights  by  capture-
Such  hostilities,  without  a  commission,  are,  however,
contrary  to  usage,  and  exceedingly  irregular  and  danger-
ous ;  and  they  would  probably  expose  the  party  to  the  un-
checked severity  of  the  enemy,  but  i  hey  are  not  acts  of
piracy.  Vattel,  indeed,  aays.a  that  private  ships  of  war,
without  a  regular  commission,  are  not  entitled  to  be  treat-
ed like  captures  mude  in  a  formal  war.  The  observation
is  rather  loose,  and  the  weight  of  authority  undoubtedly
is,  that  non-commissioned  vessels  of  a  belligerent  nation
may  at  all  limes  capture  hostile  ships,  without  being
deemed,  by  the  law  of  nations,  pirates.  They  are  lawful
combatants,  but  they  have  no  interest  in  the  prizes  they
may  take,  and  the  property  will  remain  Bubj«ct  to  con-
demnation infavour  of  the  government  of  the  caplor,  as
drnitt  of  tke  admiralli/.  It  is  said,  however,  that,  in  the
United  States,  the  property  is  not  strictly  and  techoirally
condemned  u)>on  that  principle,  but  jurt  rtipMtca;  and
it  is  the  settled  law  of  the  United  Stales,  that  all  captures
made  by  non-commissioned  captors,  are  made  for  the
government.^

In  order  to  encourage  privateering,  it  is  usual  to  allow
the  owners  of  private  armed  vessels  to  appropriate  to
themselves  the  property,  or  a  large  portion  of  the  propei  ly
they  may  capture ;  and  to  afford  ibem,  and  the  crews,
other  facilities  and  rewards  for  honourable  and  successful


a  B.  3.O.  15.  BBC.  CIS.

h  Cntu  Dig  tit.  Admirallr,  G.  3.  3  Wood.  Lee  13?.  I  Datfoa'*
4dn.  397.  Tha  Ganrriana.  I  flaU.  Rep.  £45.  Tbe  brig  J(Ne|ih.  Tin
IDm  Hermuioi,  lo  IVhsitm,  303.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


9t  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pan  !.

efibrts.  This  de|>end3  upon  the  municipal  regul^lions  of
each  particular  power,  and  as  a  neceesary  precaution
against  abuaei  the  owners  of  privateers  are  required,  bj
the  ordinances  of  the  commercial  siHtea,  to  ffive  adequate
security  tLat  they  will  conduct  the  cruise  according  to  the
laws  and  usages  of  war,  and  the  instructions  uf  (he  govern-
ment, and  that  tbey  will  regard  the  rights  of  neutrals,  end
bring  their  prizes  in  for  adjudication.  These  checks  are
essential  to  the  character  and  sufely  of  maritime  nations.*
Privateering,  under  all  the  restrictions  which  have  been
adopted,  is  very  liable  to  abuse.  The  object  is  not  fame
or  chivalric  warfare,  but  plunder  and  profit.  The  dis-
cipline of  the  crews  is  not  apt  to  be  of  the  highest  order,
and  privateers  are  often  guilty  of  enormous  excesses,  and
become  the  scourge  of  neutral  commerce.''  They  are
sometimes  manned  and  officered  by  foreigners,  having  no
permanent  connexion  with  the  country,  or  interest  in  its
cause.  This  was  a  complaint  made  by  the  United  States,
in  1819,  in  relation  to  irregularities  and  acts  of  atrocity,
committed  by  private  armed  vessels  sailing  under  the  flag
of  Buenos  Ayres.c  Under  the  best  regulations,  the  busi-
ness lends  strongly  to  blunt  the  sense  of  private  right,
and  to  nourish  a  lawless  and  fierce  spirit  of  rapacity.
Efforts  hive  been  made,  from  time  to  time,  to  abolish
the  practice.  In  the  treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  between
Prussia  and  the  United  States,  in  1735,  it  was  stipulated


o  Bynk-  QJ.  P  e.  19.  JowmaltofCongreti.  1776,  vol.  S-  102.  114.
.9rf»  ofCangreu  of  19lh  Junt,  1812,  ch.  107.  and  April  Wl/i.  1818.  cb.
83.  aec.  10.  HrBsideoCs  insiruclions  lo  private  armed  Teasels,  2  fFhealon,
mpp.p.W.  naBishinslrucUonsoflOit.  Marcli.  IRIO,  HnlPs  L.  J.  vol  4.
S63.  anil  app.  to  5  Whenton.Sl.  fn«e/,b.3.c.l5  aec.  29B.  JHarUat*
Summ.  969.  20O.  aole. Ord.  of  Bueoo*  Ayres, Maj', 1817. io spp. to

4  fFhenton.  38. Digest  of  (lie  code  of  British  laalnictioDS,  app. to

5  Whwlon,  189.


e  Mr.  Mama'  Letter  of  lit  Jamtary,  1CtS,toJ/r.  De  Fbrett,  tmd  htt
OJiiial  Report  o/2Sth  January,  1819.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Uelnre  V.]  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  9S

that,  in  case  of  war,  n«ith«r  party  should  grant  commis-
Monsto  any  private  armed  vesHel  to  attack  the  rotnmerce
of  the  other.  But  the  iipint  and  policy  of  mBritime  war-
fare) will  oot  permit  such  generoua  provisiona  to  prevail.
That  provision  wai  not  renewed  with  the  renewal  of  the
treaty.  A  similar  attempt  to  pa*  an  end  to  the  practice
waa  made  in  the  agreement  between  Sweden  nnd  Holland,
in  1675,  but  the  agreement  was  not  performed.  The
French  legislature,  Hoon  a^er  the  breaking  out  oftbe  war
with  Austria,  in  1792,  passed  a  decree  for  the  total  sup-
pression of  privateering,  but  that  was  a  very  transitory  act,
and  it  was  soon  swept  away  in  the  tempest  of  the  revolu-
^n.  The  efforts  to  slop  the  practice  have  been  very  fee-
ble and  fruitless,  notwithstanding  that  enlightened  and  en-
larged considerations  of  national  policy  have  shown  it  to
be  for  the  general  benefit  of  mankind,  to  surrender  the
licentious  practice,  and  to  obstruct,  as  little  as  possible,
the  freedom  and  security  of  cooamercial  intercourse  among
the  nations.

It  has  been  a  question,  whether  the  owners  and  officers
of  private  armed  vessels  were  liable,  in  damages,  for  illegal
conduct,  beyond  the  amount  of  the  security  giv«n.  Byn-
kershoeck''  has  discussed  this  point  (juite  at  large,  and  ha
eoocludes  that  the  owner,  master,  and  sureties,  are  jointly
BOd  severally  liable,  in  lolido,  for  the  damages  incurred  ;
and  that  the  master  and  owners  are  liable  to  the  whole  ex-
tent of  the  injury,  though  it  may  exceed  the  value  of  the
privateer  and  her  equipment,  and  the  sureties  are  bound
only  to  the  amount  of  the  sums  for  which  they  became'
bound.  This  rule  is  liable  to  the  modifications  of  munici-
pal regulations,  and  though  the  French  law  of  prize  was
formerly  the  same  as  the  rule  laid  down  by  Bynkersboeck,
yet  the  new  commercial  code  of  France,<=  exempts  the


B  I  EmerisoH  da  Au.  ltO-139.  4S7.  JUabtyU  DnU  Putlie,  oh.  It.
lec.  1.  CMia^urfA  Reviete,  vol.  B,  p.  13-15-  A'orOt  Americaa  Stvkv,
K.  a  vol-  t.  p-  166.

h  Q-J.  Pu6.  b.t.  ch.  19.

c  Cade  dt  Ctamtru,  trt.  S 1 1.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


M  OF  THE  LAW  OP  NATIONS.  [Put  I.

owners  of  private  nrmed  veatela  in  time  of  war,  from  re-
■poiuibility  for  trespsBsei  at  sea,  beyond  tbe  amount  of
the  security  they  may  bave  giren,  unless  tbey  were  ac-
complices in  the  tort.  The  English  statute  of  7  Geo.  II.
e.  15.  ia  to  the  same  effect,  in  respect  to  embezzlements
in  tbe  merchants*  service.  It  limits  the  respoiiHibilily  t»
the  amount  of  the  vesoel  nnd  freight,  but  it  does  not  apply
to  privateers  in  time  of  war ;  and  where  there  is  no  posi-
tive local  law  on  the  subject,  {and  there  is  oone  with  us,)
tbe  general  principle  is,  that  the  liability  is  commeDSurat*
with  the  injury.  This  was  tbe  rule  as  declared  by  the  Su-
preme Court  of  the  United  States,  in  Del  Colt,  Arnold,^
and  though  that  case  has  since  bepn  abaken  as  to  other
points,^  it  baa  not  been  disturbed  as  to  the  point  before  us.
We  may,  therefore,  consider  it  to  be  a  settled  rule  of  law
and  equity,  that  tbe  measure  of  damages  is  the  value  at
the  property  unlawfully  injured  or  destroyed,  and  that
each  individual  owner  is  responsible  for  the  entire  dama-
ges, and  not  rateably  pro  <anio.«

Vattel  admitSfd  that  an  individual  may,  with  a  safe  con-
■deoce,  serve  bis  country  by  fitting  out  privateers  ;  but  b*
holds  it  to  be  inexcusable  and  base,  to  take  a  commission
from  a  foreign  prince,  to  prey  upon  the  subjects  of  a  state
in  amity  with  bis  native  country.  The  lawH  of  the  United
States  have  madeample  provision  on  this  subject,  and  they
may  be  considered  in  affirmance  of  the  law  of  nations,
and  as  prescribing  specific  punishment  for  acts  which  were
before  unlawful.^  An  act  of  Congres  prohibits  citizens  to
accept,  within  tbe  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  acom>
mission, or  for  any  person,  not  transiently  within  tbe  United
States,  to  consent  to  be  retained  or  enlisted,  to  serve  afb-


«  3  DnlUu  333.

I  1  WTteaton,  t59. 1  Pirin^tRep.  I II. to  tbe  Hint!  poiaf.
e  6  Ro6.  (91. The  Karana. t  Whtaloa,  397.  Tbe  Anaa  Maria.
4  B.  3.  c.  15.  leo.  2S9.

*  Tklbot  T.  JuuoD,  3  Dallai,  133. Brif  Alerts  v. Blu  Msraa.
•  Crmdtt  369-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LKlura  v.] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  9S

r«i;;ii  slate  id  war,  against  a  government  in  amity  with  as.
It  likewise  prohibitx American  citizens  from  being  concern-
ed, without  the  limits  of  the  United  States,  in  fitting  out,  or
otherwise  assisting,  any  private  vessel  of  war,  to  cruiae
against  the  subjects  of  friendly  powers."  Similar  probibi-
lions  are  contained  in  the  laws  of  other  countiies  ;b  and  the
French  ordinance  of  the  marine  of  1661 ,  treated  such  acta
•8  piratical.  The  better  opinion  is,  that  a  cruiser,  furnished
with  commiBsions  from  two  different  powers,  is  liable  to  be
treated  as  a  pirate ;  for  thouj^h  the  two  powers  may  be  al-
lies, yet  one  of  them  may  be  in  amity  with  a  state  with
whom  the  other  is  at  war.<^  In  the  treaty  of  1625,  between
the  Uuited  States  and  the  Republic  of  Colombia,  it  is  de-
clared, that  no  citizen,  of  either  nation,  shall  accept  a
commission  or  letter  of  marque,  to  assist  an  enemy  in
hostilities  against  the  other,  tinder  paiu  of  being  treated
as  a  pirate.

The  right  to  all  captures  vests  primarily  in  the  sore-
reign,  and  no  individual  can  have  any  interest  in  a  prize,
whether  made  by  a  public  or  private  armed  vessel,  but  what
fae  receives  under  the  grant  of  the  state.  Thisisageneral
principle  of  public  juriBprudence,  bello  porta  cedunt  retpu^
&ca,  and  the  distribution  of  the  proceeilsof  prizes,  depends
upon  the  regulations  of  each  state,  and  unless  the  local
laws  hare  otherwise  provided,  the  prizes  vest  in  the  sove-
reign.'  But  the  general  practice  under  the  laws  and  ordi-
nances of  the  belligerent  governments  is,  to  distribute  the
proceeds  of  captured  property,whenduly  passed  upon,  and
condemned  as  prize,  (and  whether  captured  by  public  or


■  Aclo/CongrMofiOlkof^pnl,  tSIB,  o.  83.

(  SeolboAutlrtanOrdimiutofJVtutrahlyofAiigasnili,  I803,ari
t,3.

e  F«/m'*  Cetn.  torn.  «,  235,  6.  ByAerthotfk,  c,  17.  lod  nol«  by  Du-
^ofKMutohUTnDilalian.  p.  ISO. Sir  L.  Jenklmf  W&r**,  114,

d  OroHiu,  b.  3.  c.  8.  yaltel,  b.  3.  c  «.  •«!.  lOi.  Tlio  EI»ebe,  5  J?<*.
173.  Atcommun  law  the  foodi  lakca  fram  an  enttij  bt\orgfil  tolbe
iwptM,  FinckU  Laa,ta.  iH- ISvUarf.  Ua.  1  tFiJt-  ZIJ.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


gS  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [9m  I.

private  commissioned  veBsela,)  among  the  captors,  as  a
rewarrlfor  bravery,  and  a  stimulus  to  exertion. >

When  a  prize  is  taken  at  sea,  it  must  be  brought,  with  due
care,  into  some  convenient  port,  for  adjudication  by  a  com-
petent court ;  though  strictly  speaking,  as  betwetin  the  bel-
ligerent parties,  ihe  title  passes,  and  is  vested  when  the
capture  ia  complete,  and  that  was  formerly  heldio  be  com-
plete and  perfect  when  tbe  battle  was  over,  and  the  tpei
rtcnperandi  was  gone.  Vott,  in  bis  Commentaries  upon
the  Pundects,^  and  the  authors  he  refers  to,  maintain  with
great  strength,  as  Lord  Mansfield  observed  in  G&mt.
tViihen,o  that  occupation  of  itself  transferred  the  title  to
the  captor, per  tolam  occupati'inem  dominium  prada  kottibtu
acquiri.  The  que§tiaa  never  arises  but  when  the  original
owner  and  a  neutral  purobasing  from  the  cnptor,  and  be-
tween the  original  owner  and  a  receptor.  If  a  captured
■hip  escapes  from  the  captor,  or  is  retaken,  or  ifthe  owner
ransoms  her,  his  proj>erty  is  thereby  revested.  But  if  nei-
ther of  these  events  happens,  tbe  question  as  to  the  change
of  title  is  open  to  dispute,  and  many  arbitrary  lines  have
been  drawn,  partly  from  policy,  to  prevent  too  easy  dispo-
eitions  of  tbe  property  to  neutrals,  and  partly  from  equity,
to  extend  the yu«|n)(f/iniinit  infavoar  of  the  owner.  Gro-
tiuH,d  and  many  other  writers,  and  some  marine  ordinan-
ces, as  those  of  Louis  XIV.  and  of  Congress  during  the
American  war,  made  twenty-four  hours  quiet  possesion  bj
the  enemy,  the  test  of  title  by  capture.  Bynhershoedi'
says,  that  such  a  rule  is  repugnant  to  the  laws  and  cu»<
toms  of  Holland,  and  he  insittts,  that  a  firm  possession,  at
any  lime,  vests  the  properly  in  the  captor,  and  that  ships
•  andgoodi*  brouf;hl  infra  pratidia,  do  moat  clearly  change
the  property.  But  by  the  modern  usage  of  notions,
neither  the  twenty-four  hours  possession,  nor  the  bring-
ing the  prize  infra  pratidia,  is  sufficient  to  chaoge  tbe


a  1  If.  Black:  189-191.  •  d  B.  3.  «■  6.

6  Tom  3.  p.  1 155.  t  q.  J.  Pu6.  b.  1.  c.  4.  %aA  c  5.

c  3  Burr.  GnS.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LeeturtV.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  ST

fbwpertf  ia  the  ease  of  a  maritime  capture.  A  judicial  in*
quiiy  must  paw  upon  the  case,  and  ttie  present  enlighten-
ed  practice  of  the  commemal  ontions  has  subjected  all
Mcb  captures  to  the  scrutiny  of  judicial  trihunals,  as  the
onlj  sure  \raj  to  liiruish  due  proof  that  the  seizure  was
lawful.  The  property  is  not  changed  in  favour  of  a  Ten*
dee  or  recaptor,  soaa  to  bar  the  angina)  owner,  until  a  re-
gutar  sentence  ofcnndemiiation  has  been  pronounced  b/
tome  eourt  of  competent  jurisdiction,  belonging  to  the
■orereignof  the  captor;  and  the  purchaser  must  be  able
to  show  documentary  evidence  of  that  fnct,  to  support  hit
title.  This  salutary  rule,  and  one  so  necessary  to  check
irregular  conduct,  and  individual  outrage,  has  been  \oBg
established  in  the  Etiglitb  admiralty,*  and  it  is  now  every
where  recognised  as  the  law  and  praaice  of  nations.**

The  condemnation  must  be  pronounced  by  a  prize  eourt
of  the  government  oftbe  captor,  sitting  either  in  the  coun-
try of  the  captor  or  of  bis  ally.  The  prize  court  of  an  ally
cannot  condemn.  Prize  or  no  prize  is  a  question  belong-
ing exclusively  to  the  courts  of  the  country  of  the  captor.
The  reason  of  this  rule  is  said  to  be,°  that  the  sovereign  of
the  captors  has  a  right  to  inspect  their  behaviour,  for  be  it
answerable  to  other  states  for  the  acts  oftbe  cnptor.  The
prize  court  of  thecaptor  may  sit  in  the  territory  of  the  ally,
but  it  is  not  lawful  for  such  a  court  to  act  in  a  neutral  terri-
tory. Neutral  ports  are  not  intended  to  be  auxiliary  to  the
operationiofthe  power  at  war,  and  the  law  of  nations  hat
clearly  ordained,  that  a  prize  court  of  abelligerent  captor
cannot  exercise  jurisdiction  in  a  neutral  country.  This  pro-
hibition rests  not  merely  on  the  unfitness  and  danger  of


aCanh.4S3- lOJfoi-TO. ltJIitd.l4S. t  Bitrr.  nt.  3 Rob.  97.

6PI»d0w8d,l  II06. 117.  Henrick  and  Msria,  4  Baft.  «■  P'atlO,
b.  S.  o.  H.  ieo.  *1B.  HOmccH  Optra,  ^itOtoen,  ITW,  torn.  f.  310.
3M.ft  Hot  t9*.  Dour- SBl. «  CmtA,  W.  4  Wktiim,  «W.  >  ZteMfsa,
at.  s  Da/bu,  1.  s.  4.

«  H«lA*r/bHA'i  lMl£M»,  b.  t.  o. ».

Toi*  X.  18


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


$t  OF  THE  LAW  OF  N'ATKWS.  [FmL  I.

making  neutral  portB  the  theatre  of  hostile  proceedingB,
but  it  ataDiia  on  the  ground  of  the  usage  of  nations. '

It  was  for  EoniB  time  supposed  that  a  prize  court,  though
flitting  in  the  country  of  its  own  sovereign,  or  of  his  ally,
had  uu  jurisdiction  over  prizes  lying  in  a  neutral  port,  be-
cause the  court  wanted  that  poDnession  which  was  deemed
«s»emiai  to  the  exercise  of  a  jurisdiaion  in  a  iToceedtng
tn  rem.  The  principle  was  admitted  to  he  correct  by  Sir
IVilliam  Scutt,  in  the  case  of  the  Henrick  If  Mario,^  noA
he  acted  upon  it  in  a  prior  case."  But  he  cou^idered  that
the  English  admiralty  had  gone  too  far,  in  supporting  con-
demnatioDS,  in  England,  of  prizes  abroad  in  a  neutral
port,  to  permit  him  to  recall  the  vicious  practice  of  the
court  to  the  acknowle'^ged  principle ;  and  the  English  rule
U  now  definitively  aetiled,  agreeably  to  the  old  usage,  and
the  practice  of  other  uations.  The  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  States  has  followed  the  English  rule,  and  it
has  held  valid  ihe  condemnations,  by  a  belligerent  court,
of  prizes  carried  into  a  neutral  port,  and  remaining  there.
This  wad  deemed  the  most  couvi-nient  prutttice  fur  neu-
trals, as  well  as  for  ihe  parties  at  war,  and  though  the
prize  was  in  fact  within  a  ueutr  J  juriitdittiun,  it  was  still
to  be  deemed  under  the  control,  or  iu6  potealatt,  of  the
capior.<l

Sometimes  circumstances  will  not  permit  property  cap-
tured at  sea  to  be  sent  into  port ;  and  the  cuptur,  in  such
cases,  may  either  destroy  it,  or  permit  the  original  owner
to  ransom  it.  It  was  formerly  the  general  custom  to  redeem
property  from  the  bands  of  the  enemy  by  ransom,  and  th«


a  Glan  T.  Tbe  Sloop  BetMj,  i  DalloM,  t.  Flad  Owen,  1  Bob.  |H.
HaTdock  T.  KMbwood.  8  Ttrm,  iSt.  OJdy  r.  Borill.  I  EaO,  VJS.
JniMwrtoUc  Prvniaa  Memoriat.  nsz.  The  LUDTJnoible,  I  Whaat.
«38. Hie  Eilrolla,  4  Whealon.  8B8.

b i  .■;  '..  43

(  Note  to  the  CH«  of  tihe  Hentelder,  1  Rofr.  Mm.  Sep.

d  t  Bab.  I3t.  NoM  to  the  cam  of  the  •obooner  Sophie.  Smart  t.
Well,  3  T^rm,  3*3.  £51*1*.  bf  Dt^onetau,  p.  3H.  note.  HmlSDD  T.
OeeslisT,  4  <»an<*.  »3.  V,m»iatj.AttiaojA,-\Crtmtk,iXi.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lectura  V.J OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  99

mntract  is  unitoubtcdiy  rali'i,  when  miinicipal  ragalationi
do  not  intervene.  Il  >s  now  but  litlle  known  in  the  rora-
mercial  law  of  Enf^land  ;  fur  sereral  statutes  in  th«  reign
of  Geo.  III.  abfloluteljr  (irobibited  to  British  Bubjecta  th«
privilege  of  runMm  of  property  captured  at  aea,  uiileHS  io
a  ca§e  of  extreme  iiecesoity,  to  be  judged  of  by  the  court
of  admiralty."  A  raoBora  bill,  when  not  locally  prohibited,
IB  a  war  contract,  protected  by  good  faith  and  the  law  ot
nation*  ;  and  notwithstanding  that  the  contract  is  consi-
dered in  England  as  tending  to  relax  the  energy  of  war,
and  deprive  cruioera  of  the  chance  of  recapture,  it  is,  ia
many  views,  highly  rcHBonahle  and  humane.  Other  ma-
ritime nations  regard  ransoms  as  binding,  and  to  be  clas*.
ed  among  the  few  legitimate  commercia  b'  Ui.  They  have
Dever  been  prohibited  in  this  rxMintry  ;  and  the  act  of  Con-
gress of  August  2d,  1813,  intenlictmgthe  use  of  British
licenses  or  passes,  did  not  apply  to  the  contract  of  tanaom.b
The  effect  of  a  ransom  is  equivalent  to  a  safe  conduct
graniod  by  the  authority  of  the  staie  to  which  iho  captor
belongs,  and  it  binds  the  commanders  of  other  cruisers  to
respect  the  safe,  conduct  thus  given  ;  and  under  the  impli-
ed obligation  of  the  treaty  of  alliance,  it  binds  equally  the
cruisers  of  the  alUesof  the  captor's  country.*  From  tb?
very  nature  of  the  connexion  between  allies,  their  com-
pacts with  the  common  enemy  must  hind  each  other,
when  they  tend  to  accomplish  the  objects  of  the  alliance.
If  they  did  not,  the  ally  would  reap  all  the  fruits  of  tha
compact,  without  beine  subject  to  the  terms  and  condi-
tions of  it ;  and  the  enemy  with  whom  the  agreement  was
made,  would  be  exposed,  in  regard  to  the  »lly,  lo  all  th«
disadvantages  of  it,  without  participating  io  the  stipulated


Maritime  Lm,  ch  *•  •«-  6-  1  F>«r n,  ch.  U-  MO.


a  1  CAiUv  °"  Comm-  Lav 4SS.
Sl. tralin,»rt.b6.p.l49. lie  G«.d«,  oh.  6. srt  2. Orc*«,  t^  3.
tt.19. l5Jo*>.»^.« Goodrich  T. Oorloo.

ft  1  OaUa*.  15.  MUJ«  v.  TLo  B»oi«lk».


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


too  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [r«rt  L

benefits.  Such  an  inequality  of  obligation  is  contrary
to  every  principle  of  reason  and  justice.*

The  safe  conduct  implied  in  aranaom  bill,  requires  that
the  vessel  should  be  found  within  the  course  prescribed,
and  within  the  time  limited  by  the  contract,  unless  forced
out  of  her  course  by  stress  of  weather,  or  unavoidalile  ne-
cessity.I>  If  the  vessel  ransomed  perishes  by  a  peril  of  the
sea,  before  artival  in  port,  the  rausom  is,  nevertheless,
due,  for  the  capture  has  not  insured  the  prize  against  the
peiilfl  of  the  sea.  but  only  afiainst  recapture  by  cruisers  of
bis  own  nation,  or  of  the  allies  of  his  country.  If  there
should  be  a  stipulation  in  the  ransom  contract,  that  the
ransom  should  not  bo  due  if  the  vessel  was  lost  by  sea  pe-
rils, the  provision  ought  to  be  limited  to  total  losses  by
ahipwreck,  and  not  to  mere  stranding,  which  might  lead
to  frauds,  in  order  to  save  the  cargo  at  the  expense  of  the
Bbip.«

If  the  vessel  should  be  recaptured  out  of  the  route  pre-
scribed by  the  contract  for  her  return,  or  after  the  time
allowed  for  her  return,  and  be  adjudged  lawful  prize,  it
has  been  made  a  question  whether  the  debtors  of  the  ran-
Bom  are  discharged  from  their  contract.  Valin^  says,  that,
according  to  the  constant  practice,  the  debtors  are  dis-
charged in  such  case,  end  the  price  of  the  ransom  is  de-
ducted from  the  proceeds  of  the  prize,  and  given  to  the
first  captor,  and  the  residue  goes  to  the  second  laker.  So,
if  the  captor  himself  should  afterwards  be  taken  by  an  ene-
my's cruiser,  together  with  his  ransom  bill,  the  ransom
becomes  part  of  the  lawful  conquest  of  the  enemy,  and  the
debtors  of  the  ransom  are,  consequently,  discharged.^

In  the  case  of  Ricard  v.  Betlingham,^  an  English  vessel


atDnlUu.lS. PcOmt.  TnOe  du  DnU  d4  PnpritU,  No.  134.
ft  paiutr,»id No.  134, 135.
t  PoikieT,ibid.Ko.l3B.
d  Ord.  df  Pritet,  an  19.
<  Pothier,  TraiU  dt  Pn^ritU,  No.  13S,  1W.
/  3  Bwrr.  1134.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lect«f«  v.] OF  THE  LAWQF.NATIONS.  101

wai  captured  by  a  French  prirstedr^h4bA  war  of  1756,  aod
ranMmed.  sDd  a  hostage  giren  as  a  §ecul-it7  for  ths  pay-
BMiiit  of  the  ransom  bill.  The  hostage  di^Vhile  id  pos-
•erision  of  the  French,  and  it  was  made  a  q'uestioB  in  the
K.  B.  in  a  suit  brought  upon  the  ransom  bill  after  tfippaaee.
whether  the  death  of  the  hostage  discharged  the  eontnletV-
and  whether  the  alien  could  sue  on  tberanBont  bill  in  th^.-
Englisb  courts.  It  was  «bown,  that  such  a  contract  waa  '
Talid  among  the  other  nationa  of  Europe,  and  that  tbo
owner  of  the  bill  was  entitled  to  ane  upon  it,  end  thatit  wai
not  discharged  by  the  death  of  the  hostage,  who  was  taken
as  a  mere  collateral  security,  and  the  plaintiff  was,  accor-
dingly, allowed  to  recover.  But  it  has  been  since  decidad,
and  it  is  now  understood  to  be  the  law,  that,  doring  war,
and  while  thn  rharacter  of  alien  enemy  eontinues,  no  soit
will  He  in  the  British  courts,  by  the  enemy,  in  proper  per-
•OD>  00  a  ransom  bill,  notwithstanding  it  is  a  eontraet
BriE>ingyure  beUi,'  The  remedy  to  enforce  payment  of  the
ransom  bill  for  the  benefit  of  the  enemy  captor,  is  by  an
action  by  the  imprisoned  hostage,  in  the  couita  nf  hii  own
country,  for  the  recovery  of  bis  freedom.  This  severe
technical  objeciinn  would  seem  to  he  ppculiarlotheBritish
couits,  for  it  was  shown  in  the  catie  of  fticard  v.  Bttttnhttm,
to  be  the  practice  in  France  and  Holland,  to  nuotain  such
actions  by  the  owner  of  the  ransom  contract.  Lord  Man*-
field  considered  the  contract  as  woitfay  to  be  snirtained  by
sound  morality  and  good  policy,  and  as  governed  by  the
law  of  nations,  and  the  eternal  rales  of  justice.''  The
practice  in  FraDce,<=  when  a  French  vessel  has  been  ran-
somed, and  a  hostage  given  to  the  eueroy,  is  for  the  offi-
ceis  of  the  admiralty  to  seize  the  vessel  and  her  cargo,  on
faer  return  to  port,  in  order  to  compel  the  ownen  to  pay


<■  ADlbaa  v.  Fiiher,  Dwtg.  64).  oote. 1  Bub.  100.  Tba  Hoop-
6  Coran  v.  BlackboriM,  Doug.  Ut.
c  PtMtr  dt  ProprifU,  No.  144.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


IQZ  OF  THE  LAWOr  NATIONS,  ^rt  L

tbe  ransom  debt,  «'iid'-^'6lieve  the  hostage;  and  this  ii  ft
coorae  dictated,  by\a  prompt  and  liberal  eeniie  of  justice.

TberecBftArb  of  the  ranwm  bill,  according  to  Valii)>B
puts  an.end'totbe  claim  of  the  captor.  He  may  b«de-
prived.ofthe  entire  benefit  of  his  prize,  as  well  as  of  tha
^isntoni  bill,  either  by  recapture  or  rexcutt,  and  the  quest iona
'.  ^^nsing  onlbem  lead  to  the  consideration  of  postliminy  and
.  -  mlvage.  Upon  recapture  from  pirates,  the  property  is  to
be  restored  to  the  owner,  on  tbe  allowance  of  a  reasonable
oompeasalion  to  the  retaker,  in  the  nature  of  salvage;  for
it  is  a  principle  of  ibe  law  of  nations,  that  a  capture  by  pH
rates  does  not,  like  a  capture  by  an  enemy  in  solemn  war,
change  tbe  title,  or  devest  tbeoriginal  owner  of  his  right  to
the  property,  and  it  does  not  reqnire  the  doctrine  of  post-
liminy to  restore  it.'>  In  France,  property  may  be  reclaimed
by  tbe  owner  within  a  year  and  a  day ;  but  in  some  oth«r
countries  (and  Rrotius  mentions  Spain  and  Venice)  the  rula
formerly  was,  that  the  whole  property  recaptured  from  pi-
rates went  to  the  retaker,  and  i  hio  rule  was  founded  on  tbe
consideration  ofthe  desperate  nature  of  the  recovery.

Thejtupottliminii  was  a  fiction  of  the  Roman  law,  by
vbich  persons  or  things  taken  by  the  enemy  were  restored
to  their  former  state,  upon  coming  again  under  the  power  of
tbe  nation  to  which  they  formerly  belonged.  Potttiminivm
Sugit  twM  qui  caplus  ett,  in  civitate  lemptT  fviiie.^  It  is  a
right  recognised  by  the  law  of  nations,  and  contributes  es-
seatially  to  mitigate  tbe  calamities  of  war.  When,  there*
fore,  property  taken  by  the  enemy  is  either  recaptured  or
rescued  from  him,  by  the  fellow  subjects  or  allies  ofthe
original  owner,  it  does  not  become  the  property  of  the  re<
captor  or  rescuer,  as  if  it  had  been  a  new  prize,  but  it  iii_
restored  to  the  original  owner,  by  right  of  postliminy,  upon


a  Tom.  t.  li*-  3.  tit  S.  art- 19.

h  Crotiui,  b.  3.  c.  S-  wc.  IS,  17. Byak-  Q  J.  P.  o.  1$.  ud  17.

<  faZmCom-toiD.  t.Wl.


t,Goo(^lc


v.] «r  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  I08

certain  terms.  HovenbleB  are  not  entitled,  by  the  strict
rules  td*  (be  lawof  naiionH,  to  the  full  benefit  of  |>oBtlimiuf,
nnless  retaken  from  the  enemy  promptly  after  the  capture,
lor  theu  the  original  owner  neither  finds  a  difficulty  in  re-
-cognisiDg  his  effects,  hot  is  presumed  to  haTe  relinquished
thnm.  R«hI  property  is  easily  identified,  and  therefore
more  completely  within  the  right  of  postliminy ;  and  (ha
reason  for  a  stricter  limitation  of  it  in  respect  to  personal
pro{(frty,  arises  from  the  transitory  nature  of  it,  and  lb*
difficulty  of  idenlifyinfTit,  and  the  conf>equent  presumptioB
that  the  original  owner  had  abandoned  the  hope  of  recove-
ry.* This  right  does  not  take  efTeet  in  neutral  countries,
because  the  neutral  nation  is  bound  to  consider  tlie  war
on  each  side  as  equally  just,  ao  fur  ao  relates  to  its  efiecte,
and  to  look  upon  evet^  acquisition  made  by  either  party,
as  a  lawful  acquisition.  If  one  party  was  allowed,  in  a
neutral  territory,  to  enjoy  the  right  of  claiming  goods
taken  by  theotber,  it  would  be  a  departure  from  the  dut7
<if  neutrality.  The  right  of  postliminy  takes  place,  there"
fore,  only  within  ibe  territories  of  the  nation  oftheeaptOTf
or  of  hix  ally.^  If  a  prize  be  brought  into  a  neutral  port
by  the  captors,  it  does  not  return  to  the  former  owner  fcj
the  law  of  postliminy,  because  neutrals  are  bound  to  take
DOtioe  of  the  military  right  which  possession  gtres,  and
which  is  the  only  evidence  of  right  acquired  by  militatj
force,  ai  contradistinguished  from  civil  rights  and  titles.
They  are  bound  to  take  the  fact  for  the  law.  With  respect
to  persons,  the  right  of  postliminy  takes  place  even  in  s
oeutru)  country,  so  that  if  a  captor  brings  his  prisoners
into  a  neutral  port,  he  may,  perhaps,  confine  them  on
board  of  bis  ship,  as  being,  by  fiction  of  law,  part  of  the
territory  of  his  sovereign,  but  he  has  no  control  over  tbeoi
on  8hore.«


a  yoUel,  b.  ?■  o.  U.  *ec.  909.
b  Valttl.ibiiI.iiee.9in,tOS.

e  Falfa',  b.  5,  c.  7.  sec. 131 Bynfr.  hy  Dnponefau.  f-  116,
■otm. AttHTaiitOrd.o/mulrant^,AagutflA,  liOS- art- l9.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


104  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pari  J.

In  respect  to  real  property,  the  aequitilioD  by  the
conqueror  is  not  fully  consummated  until  confirmed  by  (he
treaty  of  peace,  or  by  the  entire  Bubmisaion  or  deitruction
of  tbu  state  to  which  it  belonged.  If  it  be  recovered  by
the  original  sovereign,  it  returns  to  the  former  proprietor,
Dotwithstanding  it  may,  in  the  meantime,  have  been  tran»-
ferred  by  purchase.  The  purchatier  is  understood  to  hare
taken  the  property  at  the  hazard  of  a  recovery  or  recon-
qaesi  before  the  end  of  the  war.  But  if  the  real  property,
•■  a  town  or  portion  of  the  territory,  for  inetanre,  be  ceded
to  the  conqueror  by  the  treaty  of  peace,  the  right  of  post-
liminy is  gone  for  ever,  and  a  previona  alienation  'by  the
conqueror  would  be  valid.*

In  a  land  war,  moveable  property,  after  it  has  been  in
complete  possession  of  the  enemy  for  twenty-four  hours,
becomes  absolutely  his,  without  any  right  of  postliminy  in
favour  of  the  original  owner;  and  much  more  ought  this
■peeies  of  property  to  he  protected  from  the  operation  of
the  rule  ofpostljminy,  when  it  has  not  only  passed  into  the
complete  possession  of  tb^  enemy,  but  bee*  bona  fidt
transferred  to  a  neutral.  By  the  ancient  and  strict  doc
trine  of  the  law  of  nations,  captures  at  sea  fell  under  the
same  rule  as  other  moveable  property,  lahen  oo  Innd,  anA
goods  so  taken  were  not  recoverable  by  the  original  owner
from  the  rescuer  or  retaker.  But  the  municipal  regular
tions  of  most  states  have  softened  the  rigour  of  the  law
of  nations  on  this  point,  by  an  equitable  exteoaion  of  tbt
right  of  postliminy,  as  against  any  recaption  by  their  own
subjects.  The  ordinances  of  several  of  the  continental
powers  confined  the  rigbt  of  restoration,  on  recaption,  to
cases  where  the  property  had  not  been  in  possession  of  thA
enemy  above  twenty-four  hours.  This  was  the  ruleeftb*
French  ordinance  of  16@1,>>  but  now  the  right  is  every
where  uodemood  to  continue  until  sentence  of  condemna*
tion,  and  no  longer.


a  VaUtl,  b.  3-  c.  14.  mc.  SIS. Jlfaltew,b.  8.  e.  3.  uc.  1 1,  12.
b  Ur.  3.  tit.  9.  Du  Prti^t,  art.  8.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


twun  v.] OF  THE  UW  <^  NAttONS.  IM

'  It  A  also  *»  rul0  ad  tbid  Butij^ct,  that  if  b  treaty  vf  peBCS
nakeB  no  particular  provisiona  relative  to  captured  pro*
perty,  it  refnains  ia  the  saoiB  caodilion  in  nhich  th«  trea*
17  find*  it,  a«d  it  is  tacitly  conceded  toibepoMesaort  Tfa0
right  of  poatlimlay  no  longer  exiMs,  after  theconcluaiontt^
the  peacet  It  is  a  right  which  belongs  exclusively  toa  state
bf  war,"  and  therefore,  a  transfer  to  a  neutral,  before  the
peace,  erenirithout  a  judicial  aeotenctf  of  coodemnatiDH)
n  valid,  if  there  has  been  no  rctiovery  or  recaption  bnfota
the  peaoei  The  intervention  of  peace  cures  all  d^tol  bf
title,  and  vests  a  lawful  posseuion  in  the  nelitral,  equally
ae  the  title  of  the  enemy  captor  faitnseir  is  quieted  by  tht}
inlervention  of  peaces  The  title,  in  the  hands  of  such  a
Beutral*  could  not  be  defeated  in  favour  of  the  orlgibsl
owner,  even  by  his  subsequently  becoming  on  enemyi  It
would  only  b^  liable,  with  his  other  property,  to  be  seikod
OS  prise  of  tvartc  •

Every  power  is  obliges]  to  cohfoiin  to  tbeM  tuleb  bt  the
law  of  nations  relati  ve  to  postlitnioy,  where  the  interests  of
neutrals  are  concerned.  But  in  cases  arising  between  ber
own  subjects,  or  between  them  and  those  of  her  allies,  tho
principle  tnny  undergo  such  modifications  as  policy  die
Mtes.  Thus,  by  several  English  statutes,  the  maritlmM
right  of  postliminy,  asautong  English  subjects,  subsists  td
the  end  of  the  war;  and|  therefore,  ships  or  gofxls,  Cep'
tureil  at  sea  by  an  enemy,  end  retaken  at  any  period  dur*
ing  the  war,  and  whether  before  or  after  sentence  oFcoii'
demnation,  are  to  bereiitored  to  the  origibal  proprietor^
en  securing  to  the  recaptora  certain  rdtes  of  salvage,  as  A
compensation  or  reward  for  the  service  they  havo  par*
formed.*!  The  maritime  law  of  England  gives  the  benefit
of  this  liberal  rule  of  restitution,  with  renpect  10  the  recap*
tured  property  of  her  own  subjects,  to  her  eitlies,  unless  it


a  FotW,  b.  S.  cKieo.  916.

6  Scibooner  Sophie,  6  Rcb.  138.

e  Thg  PariuintB  CoDcaption,  <  Roh.  4£,

d  I  Chilty  on  Cnwrnirtinf,  Late,  43S.

Vol.  I.  14


i,Googlc


106  or  THE  LAW  OP  NAtlMtS.  [Pan  I*

appear!  that  thej  eet  oa  a  lent  liberal  principlei  and  thea
it  treats  them  according  to  their  owd  measure  of  juatic«>*
The  allotment  of  siilve^,  on  recaptiire  or  rescue,  is  a
queBtion  not  of  municipB)  law  merely,  elcept  as  to  the  par-
ticular rates  of  it.  It  is  a  question  of  the  jvt  gentium,
when  the  subjects  ofallies  or  Bestral  states  claim  thebena^
fit  of  the  recaption.  Tbe  restituti<Mi  is  a  maWer  not  ot
strict  right,  after  tbe  property  baa  been  vested  in  the  ene>
any,  bat  one  of  favour  and  relaxation;  and  tbe  belligerent
reca|itor  has  a  right  to  annex  a  renionable  condition  to
bi)>  libera  lily  •'>  Neutral  property,  retakenfromthfennmy^
is  usually  restored,  without  the  payment  of  any  salvapa*
anlesit,  front  the  nature  of  the  case,  or  the  useges  of  the
•aemy,  thero  was  a  probability  that  the  property  would
have  been  condemned,  if  carried  into  the  enemy's  portSt
and,  in  tbat  esse,  a  reasonable  salvage  ought  tobeallow-
«d,  for  a  lwne6t  ha»  been  coifferred.e

The  United  Htstea,  by  theaot  of  Congress  of  3d  March,
|?U0<  directed  restoration  of  captured  property,  at  sea,  to
the  foreign  and  friendly  owner,  on  the  payment  of  reasona-
ble salvage ;  but  the  act  was  not  to  apply  wben  the  pro-
perty had  been  condemned  as  prise  by  a  competent  court)
before  recapture;  nor  when  the  foreign  government  would
not  restore  the  goods  or  vessels  of  the  citizens  of  the
United  Slates,  under  the  like  circumstances.  The  statute
continued  the  jtu  pottlmmii,  until  the  property  was  de-
Tested  by  a  sentence  of  condemnation,  and  no  longer ;  and
this  was  tbe  rule  adopted  in  the  English  courts,  before  the
extension  ^  the  right  of  postliminy  by  statues,  in  the  two
last  reignB.d


a  The  Santa  Cruz,  1  Itob.  49.

0  TbeTwsFneDdi,!  Ra6.  S7I. JVar(ka/<  an  fiu.  474. Dm^.  Oit.
t  Ttie  War  Omkao,  S  Bab.  S». The  Cariotta.  b  JM.  M.
4aAwT.B»l.  ItOt. TtM  L'Aotif,  I  £tf».  .Un.  IH.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


l^CTUftS:  TI.


•F  THE  QEREHAL  RIGHTS  AND  DUTIES  Or  KKUTRAL
KATIOHS.

The  rigliU  aiHl  dotiH  windi  belong  to  a  itat*  of  mir-
tralit7,  form  a  very  intereiting  title  io  the  code  of  iDtema-
tibUBl  lav.  Th^  onght  to  be  objects  of  particular  study
in  this  couDtr;,  iaasniucb  ai  it  is  our  true  policy  to  cbe-
Tiah  a  eptrit  of  peace,  and  to  keep  ouraalree  free  from
those  politcal  connekioas  which  would  tend  to  draw  u*
Into  the  rortex  <tf  European  contests.  A  nation  that
maintains  a  firm  and  arrupulnusly  unpartial  neutrality,
and  commands  the  respect  of  all  other  nations  by  its  pm-
denee,  jastice,  and  good  faith,  has  the  best  ^anee  to  pre-
terve  unimpaired  the  blessings  of  its  commerce,  the  A-ee^
4om  of  its  iDstitutioDS,  and  the  prosperity  of  its  resources.
Belligerent  nations  are  interested  in  the  support  of  thft
just  rights  of  aeulrals,  for  the  intercoarse  which  is  kept
up  by  meansof  their  commerce,  contributes  greatly  to  mi-
tigate the  evils  of  war.  The  public  law  of  Europe  bais
•Btablisbed  the  principle,  that,  in  time  of  nar,  countries
not  parties  to  the  war,  nor  interpoBiog  in  it,  shall  not  bft
tpaterially  affected  by  its  actiun  ;  but  they  shall  be  per^
mitted  to  carry  On  their  Bccustomed  trade,  Hndec  the  few
■ecessary  restrictions  which  we  shall  bereaftei  consider-
It  belongs  not  to  a  common  friend  to  judgebetween  th*
Mligereni  parties,  or  to  determine  the  qtieatioD  of  right
between  them.*  The  neutral  is  not  to  favour  one  of  them
tpthe  detriment  of  the  other  ;  and  it  is  an  essential  Gha>


Baynk,  1. 1.  c.  9. Buriamagm,  toI.  ftpart  4.  c.  6.  we.  IS,  11


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoOglc


101  OP  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS.  [Pwl  t

racfer  of  neutralit7i  to  AirnUb  no  aids  to  one  partjt  which
th«  neutral  {■  not  equally  ready  to  furniifa  to  tbe  other.  A
nation  which  would  be  admitted  to  the  privilegM  ot*ne)i>
trality,  D^uat  perform  the  dutiea  it  enjoins.  £rea  a  loan
of  money  to  one  of  tbe  belligereot  partiest  U  eopaklered
to  be  a  viplatioo  of  neutrality.*  A  fraudulent  neutrality  if
DO  ncuiralUy.  But  tbe  oeutral  duty  does  not  evtepd  «»
&r  as  to  prohibit  the  fulfitq)«nt  of  antecedent  engage^
mfiniB,  whieb  may  be  kept  consuiteBliy  with  as  exact  neo*
trulity.  unleaa  they  goaofor  a*  to  require  the  veutral  na^
tioD  to  beoooie  an  aasociate  in  (be  waN''  If  a  nuion  ba
under  a  previous  stipulation,  made  iu  time  of  peace,  l«
furniiib  a  giv««u  nui9b«r  of  sbipa  or  troops  to  one  c^tb*
parties  at  wari  tbe  cqntraa  piay  be  complied  with,  an^
tbe  siaie  of  peace  preserved.  In  1788,  I^eiwark  fur~
pislied  sb'ps  «nd  troofts  \o  ftusua.  in  ber  war  with  Str«-
deni  in  cpnsoquence  of  a  previous  treaty  prescrihing  tbe
amount,  and  this  was  declared  by  Denmark  to  be  an  act
coasiatuat  with  a  spirit  of  amity  and  cammercial  inter-
course with  Sweden.  It  was  answered  by  tbe  latter  i«
her  counter  declaration,  that  though  she  could  D(d  recoO'
ciletbe  practice  wUbthe  law  of  national,  yet  ah«  embraced
the  Danish  declaratioD,  and  oonGned  ber  btiatility,  so  far
OS  Denmark  was  concerned,  to  the  Danish  auziliariea  fur-
(lishedtoHussia^c  But  if  a  neitfral  power  be  un^r  con*
tract  to  furnish  succours  to  one  party,  he  ig  mhI  not
to  ho  bound  if  bis  ally  was  the  aggressor ;  and  ia
tbia  solitary  instance  the  neutral  may  exatsine  into
the  merits  of  the  war,  so  far  as  to  see  whether  the
fanu  foederit  ezists.d  An  inquiry  of  this  kind,  io-
flituted  by  the  party  to  the  contract,  for  the  purpose  of
deterntiiung  on  its  binding  obligation, holds  out  strong


«  Jfr.  Pickaing*t  L*Un  to  Mettr^  Pinctney.  MarihdU,  mnd  Oerr^t
Sd  of  March,  lliS.

b  VaUd,  b.  3.  G.  T-  Mc  104,  105.  Jtfr.  ^tftnonU  Utter  fq  JIfr.
ftneknm/,  StptenOtr  TtA,  )?93.

«  JVewA  R^.  for  1188.  liL  PvUic  Ptpna,  p.  99.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Udare  VI.} OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  10»

lemptations  to  abuse;  and,  in  tfaelanpUBjteofHr.  Jenkid*
Mfi,*  **when  the  execution  of  guaranties  depends  on  i)ue»'
tioo«  like  these,  it  will  never  be  difiictiU  for  any  ally  who
hath  a  mind  to  break  hia  en^g«HieDts,  to  find  ai>  evastoB
to  escape."

A  neutral  has  a  right  to  pursue  his  ordinary  commerce,
and  he  may  become  the  carrier  of  the  enemy's  goods,  with-
out being  subject  to  any  confiseatieo  of  the  ship,  or  of  tha
neutral  articles  on  board ;  though  not  without  the  risk  of
having  the  voyage  interrupted  by  thewixureofthabosliW
property.  A»  the  neutral  has  a  right  to  carry  the  property
of  enemies  in  bisownresBc),  so,  on  the  other  band,  bisowa
property  is  inriolable,  though  it  be  found  in  the  vessels  of
enemieit.  But  the  general  inviolability  of  the  neutral  cba^
racter  goes  further  than  merely  the  protection  of  neutral
property.  It  protects  tbe  property  of  the  belligerents  whea
within  the  neutral  jurisdiction.  It  is  not  lawful  to  maka
DOutral  territory  the  scene  of  hoHility,  or  to  attack  an  eneny
while  within  it;  and  if  the  enemy  be  attacked,  or  any  cap-
ture made  under  ntiutrel  protection, the  neutral  is  boundta
redress  the  injury,  and  effect  restitution.'*  The  books  are
All)  of  cases  recognising  this  principle  of  neutrality.  Iq
the  year  ITd'l,  the  British  ship  Grange  was  captured  in  De-
tawarehay  by  a  French  fri^te,  and,  upon  due  complaint,
the  AmericBD  goventment  caused  the  British  ship  to  be
prom{)tly  restored.':  So,  in  the  case  of  the  Anna,^  the
sanctity  of  neutral  territory  was  fully  asserted  and  vindi>
eated,  and  restoration  made  of  property  captured  by  a  Bri-
tish cruiser  near  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  witbia
the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States. It  is  a  violation  of


a  Difcountmthe  CoTidvet  cflkt  QtntawmtKl  of  Great  Britain  in  n-
^ftettQ  neutral  naUant,  1707.

6  0*aliw,b.3.a.4.MC.  3.B.I,  Syat- h>  I- «•  «■  P«tbl,  h.  3. «.  t,
MC.  |3S. Bttrlatnaqid.ioX.  t.  pirt  4.  c.  6.  mc.  19.

«  Mr.  Jtff^rinC, LOUT  toJt.  Tmrnt^ef  IM  Jtaj/.  ITSS.


t,Goo(^lc


113  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS* fP»rt  I.

full*  The  Deulr^  border  must  not  be  used  m  ■  shelter  for
URking  preparatioas  to  renew  the  ottacb  ;  and  though  the
Beutral  is  not  obliged  to  refuse  a  passage  and  safe^tjr  to
the  pursued  party,  be  ought  to  cause  him  to  depart  a*
•ODD  as  possible,  and  not  to  lie  by  and  watch  his  oppor-
tunity for  f\irther  contest.  This  would  be  making  the
■eutral  country  directly  auxiliary  to  the  war,  and  to  lh»
comfort  aod  support  of  one  party.  In  the  case  of  the
Anna**  Sir  William  Scott  was  inclined  to  agree  with
Bynkershoeck.  to  this  extent :  that  if  a  vessel  refused  to
submit  to  Tisitatioo  and  search,  and  fled  within  neutral
territory,  to  places  which  were  uninhabited,  like  the  little
mud  islands  before  the  mouth  of  the  Hisaisaippif  and  th«
cruiser,  without  injury  or  annoyance  to  any  person,  should
quietly  take  possession  of  his  prey,  he  Would  not  stretch
the  point  so  far,  on  that  account  only,  as  to  bold  the  cap-
ture illegal.  But,  in  this,  as  well  as  in  every  other  case
of  the  like  kind,  there  is,  tit  tirictojure,  a  riolation  of
neutral  jurisdiction,  and  the  neutral  power  would  have  a
right  to  insist  on  a  restoration  of  the  property.  It  was  ob-
served by  the  same  high  authority,  in  aitnther  case,  de-
pending on  a  claim  of  territory,c  "that  when  the  fact  is
established,  it  overrules  every  other  consideration.  The
capture  is  done  away  ;  the  property  must  be  restored,  not-
withsianding  that  it  may  actually  belong,  to  the  enemy."

A  neutral  has  no  right  to  inquire  into  the  validity  of  a  cap-
ture,  except  in  eases  in  which  the  rights  of  neutral  jurisdic-
(ion  were  violated ;  and,  in  such  cases,  the  neutral  power
will  restore  the  property,  if  found  in  (he  hands  of  the  ef-
fender,  and  within  ilsjurisdiction,  regardless  of  any  sentenoe
of  condemnation  by  a  court  of  the  belligerent  captor.<' It


a  fall't.  h.  3.  c.  7.  tec.  133.  1  Emrii-  TraiU  dti  ^u.  449.  AMmd,
vol.  S.  223.

h  h  Bnh.  3Ete

c  Tlie  Vrow  Addk  Cetharina.  5  RtA-  15.

d  Tlie  ArniganieBircBlrjnei,  1  Wheatan,  496.  The  AvalriattOr-
4inimc*^J/hitrtilUy,Aitgiut7,  1803,  art is.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lwturfe  VI.] or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  US

belonifti  aoleljr  to  the  neutral  government  to  raise  the  ob-
jeetion  toa  capture  and  title,  founded  on  the  violation  of
■eutrel  rights.  The  adverse  belligerent  has  no  ri^cht  to
wniplain,  whea  the  prize  is  duly  libelled  before  a  compe-
tent court."  if  any  complaint  >s  to  be  made  on  lite  part  of
the  captured,  it  must  be  by  his  government  to  the  neutral
government,  for  a  fraudulent,  or  unworthy,  or  unnecessary '
submission  toa  violation  ofiuterritory, and  such  snbmis-
■iort  will  naturally  provoke  retaliation.  In  th«  cose  of  *
prizes  brought  within  a  neutral  port,  the  neutral  sovereign
eze re iaes  jurisdiction  so  Car  as  to  restore  the  property  of  its
own  subjects,  illegally  captured;  and  this  m  done,  say*
Valin,'>  by  way  of  compensation  for  the  asylum  granted  to
the  captor  and  his  prize.  It  has  been  held,  in  this  country,
that  foreign  ships,  offending  against  our  laws,  within  our
jurisdiction,  may  be  pursued  and  seized  upon  the  ocean,
•nd  rightfully  brought  into  our  ports  fi>r  adjudination.o

The  government  of  the  United  StatM  was  warranted  by
(he  law  and  practice  of  nations,  in  the  declarations  made
in  1793  of  the  rules  of  neutrality,  which  are  particularly  re-
eognised  as  necessary  to  be  observed  by  the  belligerent
powers,  in  their  intercourse  with  this  country.*'  These
rules  were,  thatthe  original  arming  or  equipping  of  vessels
in  our  ports,  by  any  of  the  powers  at  war,  for  military  ser-
vice, was  unlawful ;  and  no  such  vessel  was  entitled  to  an
asylum  in  our  ports.  The  equipment  by  them  of  govern-
ment vessels  of  war,  in  matters  which,  if  done  to  other  ves*
lele,  would  be  applicable  equally  to  commerce  or  war,  was
lawful.  The  equipment  by  them  of  vessels  fitted  for  mer'
ehaodise  and  war,  and  applicable  to  either,  was  lawful ;  but
if  it  were  of  a  nature  solely  applicable  to  war,  it  was  un-


o  3  Rob.  I SZ.  note,  csie  of  the  Etraaca
&  Ci>o».  (Ota  «-  874.,
c  1 1  ^Tualon,  42.

d  yaile!,h.  3.  leo.  104. Woljhu,  »oc.*l|74. Jattrian  OrdtnaiKt i/f
Jftulralily,AustiUl,  1808.

Vol.  I.  13


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc

J


114  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Ptrtl.

lawful.  And  if  the  armed  ve§flel  of  one  nation  flbould  de-
part from  our  juriBdietion,  no  armed  vesBol,  being  within  (he
Mine,  and  belunging  (o  an  adverse  belligerent  power  should
depart  until  twenty-four  hours  after  the  former,  without
being  deemed  to  have  violated  the  law  of  nations.*  Con-
gress have  repeatedly)  by  statote,  made  luitable  proviuoo
for  the  auppott  and  due  observance  of  similar  rules  of  neu-
trality, and  given^anctiontotheprincipleor them, as  being'
*  founded  in  the  universal  law  of  nations.  It  is  declared  to
be  a  misdemeanor  for  any  person,  within  the  jurisdiction  of
^e  United  States,  tn  increase  or  augment  the  force  of  any
Armed  vessel,  belonging  to  one  foreign  power  at  war  with
another  power,  with  whom  we  are  at  peace ;  or  to  set  on
foot  or  prepare  any  military  expedition,  against  the  territo-
ry of  any  foreign  nation  with  whom  we  arc  at  peace  ;  or  to
hire  or  enlist  troops  or  seamen,  for  foreign  military  or  naval
service ;  or  to  be  concerned  in  firtinjf  out  any  vessel,  to
eruise,  or  commit  hostilities^in  foreign  service,  against  a  na-
tion at  peace  with  us  ;  and  the  vessel,  in  this  latter  case,  is
made  subject  to  forfeiture.  The  President  of  the  United
States  is  also  authorized  to  employ  force  to  compel  any
foreign  vemel  to  depart,  which,  by  the  law  of  nations,  or  by
treaty,  ought  not  to  remun  within  the  United  States,  and
to  employ  the  public  force  generally,  in  enforcing  the  ob-
servance of  the  duties  of  neutrality  prescribed  by  law.i>  In
the  case  of  the  Santiavaa  TfiKxdad,'^  H  was  decided,  that
captures  made  by  a  vessel  so  illegally  fitted  out,  whether  a
puMie  or  private  armed  ship, 'were  torts,  and  that  the  ori-
ginal owner  was  entitled  to  restitution,  if  the  property  was
brought  wiihin  our  jurisdiction;  but  that  an  illegal  outfit  did


d  Jfulrudiotu  to  (A«  Colledon  of  Uie  Curfoni*,  ^ugutliA,  I7B3.  Mr.
JeftTton'$  r^ttUnto  JU.  Oenet.  ofbth  and  nth  June,  17S3.  HU  LOUn
lo.ytrMorru.ofl%AA>ig'al,l193.  Mr.  Pideering^i  LtUtr  lo  JUr.
Pin-*ney,  Jm,  ISiA,  1797. Hii  LelUrloM.  Adel,  Jon.SOA,  I7B6.

I  AcU  i^CmgTiMiifbth  Jnne,  1764,  and  90IA  AprU,  1881,  cb.  83.

c  7  WktaUm,  S83,


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMiir*  VI  ] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  IX*

not  affed  a  capture  made  after  ihe  cruitie  to  whieh  tlw
outfit  tiati  been  applied  had  terminated.  The  ofienre  was
deposited  with  the  voyage,  and  the  delictum  ended  witb
the  terminaiiun  of  the  cruise.

Though  a  belli^rent  vessel  may  not  enter  within  iwu-
tni  jurisdiction,  for  hostile  pur|)osee,  she  may,  eoBsistent-
ly  with  a  state  of  neutrality,  until  probibitRd  by  the  neu-
tral power,  bring  ber  prize  into  a  neutral  port,  and  soil
iL*  The  neutral  power  is,  however,  at  liberty  to  reftise
this  privilege,  provided  the  refusal  be  made,  as  tbe  prir
Tiloge  ought  to  be  granted  to  both  parties,  or  to  neither.
Tbe  United  States,  while  a  neutral  power,  frequently  aa-
aertedthe  right  to  prohibit,  at  discretion,  the  sale,  within
Ibeir  ports,  of  prizes  brought  in  by  the  belligerents,  and
the  sale  of  French  prizes  was  allowed  as  an  indulgence  '
Buerely,  until  it  interfered  with  the  treaty  witb  England
of  1794,  in  r«>spect  to  prizes  made  by  privateers.*'  In  th«
opinion  t^some  jurists,  it  is  mora  consistent  with  a  state
•f  neutrality,  and  tbe  dictates  of  true  pulicy,  to  refuse  this
fiivour  ;  for  it  must  be  very  inconvenient  to  permit  ttw
iwivateers  of  contending  nations  (o  assemble,  together  with
tbeir  prizes,  in  a  neutral  port.  The  edict  of  tbe  States
Greneral  of  1656,  forbade  foreign  crutaers  to  sell  their
prizes  in  their  neutral  ports,  or  to  cause  them  to  be  ud-
ladeti;  and  the  French  ordinance  of  the  marine  of  1681
contained  tbe  same  prohibition,  aod  that  surh  vessel
should  not  rontioue  in  port  longer  than  twenty-four  hours,
unless  detained  by  stress  of  weather.^  Tbe  admiHion
into  neutral  ports  of  the  public  ships  of  the  belligerent
partie.a,  without  prizes,  is  considered  to  be  a  favour,  rn-
([uired  on  tbe  principle  of  hospitality  among  friendly  pow>

a  Bgnk.  b-  1.  c.  15.  yatUl,  b.  3.  c.  7.  tec.  I'SS.  Martmt.h.  8.e.  0.
MO.  6.

6  Iiulraeliont  to  Iht  American  Minitteri  to  Frtma,  Jul^  ibih,  IT97.
JIfr.  Pickerin^U  LtUtri  to  ja  Adet,JlayiiIh.aitdjr<Kemitrl6lk,P^0-
JlitLtUer  to  Mr.  Pincknty.  3mvary}Hh,  1797.

c  Valin't  Com.  [otn.  3.  272- '


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


U6  or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  IPwt  1.

era,  and  it  hti»  been  uniformly  conceded  on  the  part  of  th*
United  State*.*

But  neutral  ■hip»  do  not  afford  proteetioo  to  eoem^'s
properly,  and  it  may  be  seized  if  fbuod  on  board  of  a  neu-
tral Tessel,  beyond  the  limitH  of  the  neutral  jurisdiction.
This  ti  a  clear  and  well-settled  principle  of  the  law  of  na-
tioas.b  it  w  OS  formerly  a  question,  whether  tbe  neutral
ship  conveying  enemy's  property,  was  not  liable  to  con*
iiseation  for  that  cause-  This  was  the  old  law  of  France,
in  cases  in  which  the  master  of  the  vessel  knowiof  ly  took
aa  board  enemy's  properly  ;  but  Bynkersboeck  truly  ob-
serves) that  the  maater'u  knowledge  is  immaterial  in  this
cune,  and  that  the  rule  in  the  Roman  law,  making  tbe  ves-
sel liable  for  the  fraudulent  act  of  the  master,  was  a  mere
fiscal  regulation,  and  did  not  ap|>ly ;  and  for  tbe  neutral  to
carry  enemy'it  goods  is  not  unlawful,  like  smuggling,  and
does  not  affect  tht;  neutral  ship.  If  there  be  nothing  unfair
in  the  conduct  of  tbe  neutral  master,  he  will  even  be  enti-
tled to  hia  reasonable  demurrage,  and  his  freight  for  tbe
carriage  of  the  goods,  though  he  has  not  carried  them  to
the  place  of  destination.  They  are  said  to  he  seized  and
condemned,  not  ex  delicto,  but  only  ex  rt.  The  capture
of  them  hy  the  enemy,  is  a  delivery  to  the  person,  who,
by  the  rights  of  war,  was  substituted  for  the  owner.<^  Byn-
ker-ihoeck'<  thinks  tbe  master  is  not  entitled  to  freight,  be-
canse  ihe  goods  were  not  carried  to  tbe  port  of  destination,
though  he  admits  that  the  Dutch  lawyers,  and  tbe  cmw-
/afa,  give  freight.  But  tbe  allowance  of  freight  in  that
cnsejiasbeentheuniform  practice  of  the  English  admiral^
for  near  two  centuries  [mst,  except  when  there  was  some


a  JUr- Jffferiori^i Leiler  b>  Jgr  Hammond,  Sept.  Slh,  il93.  Jtutnu-
tio.ii  to  the  American  CommiinoatFM  lo  Fran't,  Ju!y  IStk.  1787-

i  Groliuif  1.  3.  c.  6.  tec.  «.  Haneec.  dt  Ahc.  ob.  •«■(.  c  t.  mc.  S.
JT;„i.  q  J.  Pvb.  c.  14.  ViOUt.  b.  3.  c.  7.  B«c.  115.  Antmr  in  I7Sg
toUie  PrutiianManorUl.  0>iuid«t  d*  la  Mtr,  par  Boutktr,  toffl.t.
c.2ie.  9«.  1004.

c  f«/(«/.b.3.c.7.»«),  115.

^B.  I.  ch.t4.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lwture  VI  ] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  117

circutnatanee  o^maki  Jidet,  or  a  departure  from  a  alrtrtlj
proper  neutral  conduct.'  The  freight  is  paid,  not  pro  ra-
ta,  bnt  Ml  toto,  ttecauae  capture  ia  conaidfred  as  delivery,
and  the  captor  [lays  the  whole  Freight,  Iwcause  he  repre-
sents hia  enemy,  by  posHeaaing  himfielf  of  the  enemy'i
goods  jure  belli,  and  he  interrupts  the  actdal  delivery  to
the  conaignee.''

The  right  to  take  enemy's  property  on  board  a  neutral
•bip,  has  been  much  conteaied  by  particular  nations,.
wboM  interests  it  strongly  oppoaed.  This  was  the  case
with  the  Dutch  in  the  war  of  17^,  and  Mr.  Jenkioson
(afterwarda  Earl  of  Liverpool)  published,  is  1757,  a  dis-
«ouraevery  full  and  satisfactory,  on  the  ground  of  aulborl-
ty  and  usage,  in  favour  of  the  legality  of  the  right,  when
no  treaty  intervened  to  control  it.  The  rn)e  ha*  been
nesdily  maintained  by  Great  Britain.  In  France  it  has
been  fluctuating.  The  ordinance  of  the  marine  of  16S1
asserted  the  ancient  and  severe  rule,  that  the  neutral  ahip,
having  on  board  enemy's  property,  waa  subject  to  confis-
cation. The  same  ruld  was  enforced  by  the  arrets  of
16»2  and  1704,  and  relaxed  by  those  of  1744  and  1778.c
In  1780,  the  Empresa  of  Russia  proclaimed  the  principles
of  the  Bahio  code  of  neutrality,  and  declared  she  would
mtuotatn  them  by  forc:e  of  arms.  One  of  the  articles  of
that  code  was,  that  "all  effects  belonging  to  the  subjects
of  the  belligerent  powers,  should  be  looked  upon  as  free
on  board  of  neutral  ships,  except  only  auch  goods  as  were
contraband."  The  principle  powers  of  Europe,  as  Swe-
den, Denmark,  Prussia,  Germany,  Holland,  France,
Spain,  Portugal,  and  Naples,  and  also  these  United  Slates,
acceded  to  the  Russian  principles  of  neutrality.!^  But  fh«


a  Jtuiin't  ZHtcourt  tn  I7&7,  p.  13.  TbeAUa*,  ba34  ete.  o  JI3..0
AiuiMrtothe  Pru-iim Memorial,  IT53.

i  Tfae  CopanliBgeD.  I  Jtob.  989.

t  falin't  Com.  1 . 3.  lit-  9.  dtt  PrUtt.  art-  7.

d  Jf.A.  Reg.  Tor  ITSO,  tit.  Public  ?Bp«n.  p.  113— IfO.  .JVarlm>*
Sumwuuy,  327.  edit.  PfaiL Joarnalt  of  Congrcu.  voJ.  7.  p.  GO.  ISL


i,Googlc


Ill  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  1.

want  of  the  conwot  of  •  power  of  such  deckled  maritiin*
■U|»eriorit7  as  that  of  Great  Brituio,  was  an  insuperable
obatacle  to  the  success  of  the  Baltic  coDventional  law  of
neutrality ;  aod  it  was  sood  afaaitduaed,  as  not  beiof;  saoo-
tioned  b;  the  exiatioff  law  of  oatioiw,  in  every  case  ta
which  the  doctrines  of  that  code  did  not  rest  upon  positir*
eompHct.  Duriuj;  the  whole  course  of  the  wars  growinf
out  of  the  French  Kevolution,  the  gnvernmeot  of  the  Uni-
ted States  admitted  ttie  Enifliah  rule  to  be  valid,  as  (b*
true  and  settled  doctrine  of  international  law ;  and  that
eaemy's  property  was  liable  to  seizure  oo  board  of  iiett>
trai  ships,  and  to  be  confiscated  as  prize  of  war.*  It  has,
however,  been  very  usual  in  couimercial  treaties,  to  stip»-
late,  that  free  ships  should  make  free  ^oode,  coatraband
of  war  always  excepted  ;  but  sach  stipulations  are  to  ba
considered  as  resting  on  conventional  law  merely,  aad  as
exceptions  to  the  operation  ofthe  general  rule,  wbicfa  everj
nation  not  a  party  to  the  stipulation  is  at  perfect  liberty  to
exact  or  surrender.  The  Ottoman  Porte  was  the  firat
power  to  abandon  the  ancient  rule,  and  she  stipulated,  in
her  treaty  with  Fraoce  in  16U4,  that  free  ship*  sbooM
make  free  goods,  and  she  afterwards  coasented  to
the  same  provision  in  her  treaty  with  Holland  ia
1612;  and,  according  to  Aiuni,)>  Turkey  has,  at  ail
times,  on  inlernatioaal  questions,  given  an  example  off
noderalioQ  to  the  more  ciTiliZPd  powers  of  Europe.

The  effort  made  by  the  Baltic  powers,  in  1801 ,  to  recall
find  enforce  the  doctrines  of  the  armed  neutrality  io  1780^
was  met,  and  promptly  overpowered,  and  the  confederacf
dissolved,  by  the  naval  power  of  England.  Russiagaveup
the  point,  and,  by  her  convention  with  England  of  the  I7tk
of  June,  1801,  expressly  agreed,  that  enemy's  property  was
not  to  be  protected  on  board  of  neutral  ships. The  rule


' aMr.JeffertiMUUtUrUiM.amtt.Jiai/%Uh,\lS3. Mr.  Ficktr-
ing'f  Letter  to  Mr.  Pineknty.  January IMA. 1797. Lettrr of  Metm.
Ptnekneif,  Marthail,  and  Oerry,  to  th* A-mcA  gownmmt,  January
T}Ui,  1798.
h  JUarUimt  I/ub  nf  Europe,  y  i-  3Io3>


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


L«eMre  VI.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  Ii9

bainnoebeeo  very  f«nersllf  acquietced  in ;  and  it  wssex-
preaaly  recognised  in  th«  Austrian  ordinance  ornflntrality,
poblitbed  at  Vienna  the  7th  of  August,  1803.  Its  reason
and  authority  have  been  nb\y  rindicated  by  English  states*
nen  and  jurists,  and  particularly  by  Mr.  Ward,  in  Ms
treatise  of  the  relatme  righU  tmd  duties  of 'btlligerent  and
neutral  povert  in  maricime  affair*,  publish^  in  1801,  and
which  exhausted  all  the  law  and  learning  Hp|>licab)e  to  the
question.

It  is  also  a  principle  of  the  law  of  nations  retatire  to
Bflutral  rights,  that  the  effect  of  neutrals,  found  on  board
«f  eaeny's  vessels,  shall  be  free ;  and  it  is  a  right  as  fully
and  firmly  settled  asthe  other,  tbnugh,  like  that,  it  is  often
changed  by  positive  agreement.*  The  principle  is  to  hi
WMt  with  in  the  Canioimto  dtl  Mart,  and  the  property  of
the  neutral  ia  to  be  restored  wilboal  any  compensation  for
detention,  and  the  other  necessary  inconTenisnces  incident
to  the  capture.  The  former  ordinances  of  France  of  1543,
1584,  and  1681,  declared  such  goods  to  he  lawful  prize;
Iwd  VaUn**  justifies  the  ordinances,  on  the  ground  that
the  neutral  by  putting  his  property  on  board  of  an  enemy*s
vessel,  favours  the  enemy's  commerce,  and  agrees  to  abide
the  fote  of  tbe  vessel.  Bat  it  is  fully  and  satisfactorily
abown,  by  the  whole  current  of  modern  anthority,  that  the
neutral  has  a  perfect  right  to  avail  himself  of  tbe  vessel  of
bis  friend  to  transport  bis  property  ;  and  Bynkersboeck
bos  devoted  an  entire  chapter  to  the  vindication  of  the
justice  and  equity  of  the  right.o


a  Oroliut,  b.  3.  c.  6.  Boa  IS.  Bi/nk.  c-  13.  Foltel,  b.  3.  o.  T.  MC.
116.  .dnnserfe  UuPnuaan  JJemorial,  1753.  Mr.  JefftrHn'M  ZtUer
to  Jit.  Gentt,  Jufy  iith,  1793.  JIfr.  PkkeriagU  LeUtr  to  Mr.  FuAhu^,
JinUMry  l«h,  1797.

b  Oom.  b.  3.  tit.  9.  dtt  Prim,  art.  7.

e  Omnilat  dt  la  Mer,  par  Bifueher,  lam.  3.  e.  ITS.  lec.  1012,  lOtS.
Htinectiut,  He  Jfot.  di.veet.c-  S.  trc.  B.  Opira^Xoxa,  C.  part  T-  p.
M9-36a. Vaihl,  b.  3.  c.  7.tec-  lid-  Bynlt.K.  13.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


130  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS-  [Ptrt  L

Tbfl  two  distioct  prapoflition8,that  enemy's  ^ooda  found
on  board  a  neutral  sbip  may  lawfully  be  seized  as  prize  of
war,  and  that  the  goodo  of  a  neutral  found  on  board  of  an
eneoiy's  reaael,  were  to  be  reelored,  have  been  explicitly
iocorporatdd  into  the  jurisprudence  of  the  United  States,
and  declared  by  the  Supreme  Court*  to  be  founded  in  Ibe
law  of  oatioM.  The  rule,  as  it  was  observed  Uy  tbe
Court,  retted  on  the  simple  and  intelligible  principle,  that
war  gave  a  full  right  to  capture  the  goods  of  ao  enemy,
but  gave  no  right  to  capture  the  goods  of  a  friend.  Tbe
neutral  flag  constituted  no  protection  to  enemy's  proper-
ty, and  the  belligerent  flag  communicated  no  hostile  char-
racter  to  neutral  property.  The  character  of  the  proper-
ty depended  upon  the  fact  of  ownership,  and  not  upon  the
character  of  tbe  vehicle  in  which  it  is  found.  After  rin-
dicating  the  simplicity  and  justice  of  the  original  rule  of
the  law  of  nations,  against  the  speculations  of  modera
theorists,  and  the  Wttno  ratio  of  (ho  armed  neutrality,
which  attempted  toeflfect  by  force  a  revolution  in  the  law
of  nations;  the  Court  stated,  that  nations  have  changed
this  simple  and  natural  principle  of  public  law,by  conveo*
tions  between  themselves,  in  the  whole  or  in  part,  as  they
believed  it  to  be  for  thoir  interest,  but  that  the  one  propo-
sition, that  free  ships  should  make  free  goods,  did  not
necessarily  imply  tbe  converse  proposition,  that  enemy's
ships  should  make  enemy's  goods.  If  a  treaty  eatablisbecl
tbe  one  proposition,  and  was  silent  as  to  the  other,  Ibe
other  stood  precisely  as  if  there  bad  been  no  stipulation,
and  upon  the  ancient  rule.  The  stipulation  that  neutral
bottoms  should  make  neutral  goods,  was  a  concession
made  by  the  belligerent  to  the  neutral,  and  it  i^ave  to  the
neutral  flag  a  capacity  not  given  to  it  by  tbe  law  of  nations.
On  tbe  other  hand,  tbe  stipulation  subjecting  neutral  pro-
perty found  in  tbe  vessel  of  an  enemy  to  condemnation  as
prize  ofwar,wasa  concession  made  by  the  neutral  to  tbe

a  The  Neraide,  9  Crmch,  368.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lartura  Vl-] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  121

belligerent,  and  took  from  the  neutral  a  privilege  be  pof-
■eucd  under  the  law  of  nations ;  but  neither  reason  nor
practice  rendered  the  two  concessions  so  indissoluble,  that
the  one  could  not  exist  without  the  other.  It  rested  en-
tirely iu  the  dittcretinn  of  the  contracting  parties,  whether
either%r  Koth  should  he  granted.  The  two  jiropositiont
are  distinct  and  independent  of  each  other,  and  they  have
frequently  been  kept  distinct  by  treaties,  which  stipulated
for  the  one,  and  not  for  the  other.

Tlie  government  of  the  United  States,  in  their  recent  ne-
gotiations with  the  republics  in  South  America,  have  pies»-
•d  very  earnestly  for  the  introduction  and  establishment
of  the  principle  of  the  Baltic  code  of  1780,  that  the  friendly
flag  should  cover  the  cargo;  and  this  principle  is  incor-
porated into  the  treaty  between  the  United  States  and
Colombia,  itt  1^25.  The  introduction  of  these  new  re-
public* into  the  great  community  of  civilized  nations,  ha*
jnstly  been  deemed  a  v:ery  favourable  opportunity  to  in-
culcate and  establish,  under  their  stinclion,  more  enlarged
and  liberal  doctrines  on  the  subject  of  national  rights.  It
has  been  the  desire  of  our  government  to  obtain  the  re-
ct^nition  of  the  fundnmentnl  principles,  consecrated  by
the  treaty  with  Prussia  in  1785,  relative  to  the  perfect
equality  and  reciprocity  of  commercial  rights  between  na-
tions: the  aliolitionof  private  war  u|)un  the  ocean,  and
the  enlargement  of  the  privileges  of  neutral  commerce.
The  rule  of  public  taw,  that  tbe  property  of  an  enemy  is
liable  to  capture  in  the  vessel  of  n  friend,  is  now  dpclaredf
on  the  purtof  our  government,  to  hove  no  foundation  in
natural  ri;;bt ;  and  that  the  usnge  rests  entirely  on  force.
Though  the  high  seas  nre  a  genemi  jiirii:(lii-(ion,  common
to  all,  yet  each  nation  has  a  special  jurisdiction  over  its
own  vessels ;  and  all  the  mnrilime  nations  of  modern
Europe  have,  at  times,  acceded  to  the  principle,  that  the
property  of  an  enemy  should  be  protected  in  the  vessel  of
a  friend.  No  neutral  nation,  it  is  said,  is  bound  to  submit
to  the  usage ;  and  the  neutral  ntny  have  yielded,  at  one
time,  to  the  usa^e,  without  sacrificing  the  right  to  vindi-
cate, by  force,  the  security  of  the  neutral  flag  at  another.
Vol.  I.  10  ,1

Co  Ogle


12a  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS:  [Pari  I.

The  neutral  right  to  cover  enemy's  property  Is  conceded
to  be  subject  to  this  qualificntioa  :  tbot  a  belligerent  oa-i
tioii  inny  justly  refuse  to  oeutralBthe  benefit  of  this  princ^
pic,  unless  it  be  conceded  al)^o.by  the  enemy  of  the  belli-
gerent to  the  same  neutral  Sag.*

But,  whatever  may  be  the  utility  or  reaeooablenesB  •T
the  neutral  clatm,  under  such  a  qualification,  I  Blioahl  ai>-
prebend  tbe  belligerent  right  tu  be  no  longer  an  open
question  ;  and  that  the  authority  and  usage  qn  which  that
right  rests  in  Europe,  and  the  long,  explicit,  and  autborr-
tative  admission  of  it  by  this  country,  have  concluded  ua
from  muhing  it  a  subject  of  controversy  ;  end  that  we  are
bound,  in  truth  and  justice,  to  submit  to  its  regular  exer-
cise, in  every  case,  and  with  every  twlligerent  power  who
does  not  freely  renounce  it-
It  has  been  a  matter  of  discussion,  whether  the  captor
of  tbe  enemy's  vessel  be  entitled  to  freight  from  the  owner
of  the  neutral  goods  found  on  board,  and  restored.  Under
certain  cireumstaDees,  the  captor  has  been  considered  to
be  entitled  to  freight,  even  though  the  goods  were  carried
to  the  claimant's  own  country,  and  restored  ;  and  he  clear-
ly is  entitled  to  freight,  if  he  performs  the  voyage,  and
carries  the  |;oodfi  to  the  port  of  original  destiuatioa.  la
DO  other  case  is  freight  due  to  the  captor,  and  the  doctrine
of  jjro  ratu  freight  is  entirely  rejected,  because  it  would  ia-
Tolve  a  prixe  court  in  a  labyrinth  of  minute  inquiries  and
considerations,  in  the  endeavour  to  ascertain,  is  every
case,  the  balance  of  advantage  or  disadvantage,  which  an
interrufrtion  and  loss  of  the  original  voyage,  by  capture^
might  have  produced  to  the  owner  of  the  goods-b

In  the  case  of  the  Nereide,  tbe  Supreme  Court  of  tbe
United  States  carried  the  principleof  immunity  of  neutral


a  LeUer  of  Jtlr-  Adami,  Secretary  of  Slalt,  la  Jir.  Anderton,  31(ft  Jlfay^
1823.  PruidenPi  Met$age  (a  the  Senale  ^'26lh  Dtttwiber,  1895,  and  la
lAc  Houtt  of  Rfpraentalita,  JdartA  \5th,  ItiSe.

b  Bynk.  Q.P  J.h  1.  ch.  13.  Tbe  Fortuna,  4  Ao&.  27S.  The  Ditn»v
HA.  S). Vtoi« Anna  Ca(barii)a,S  Itab.  SSS.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Unan  VI.] OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS;  ISS

property  OD  board  an  enemy's  vessel,  to  the  extent  of  al-
lowing it  to  be  laden  on  board  an  armed  belligerent  cruis-
«r;  audit  wat  held,  that  the  goods  did  not  lose  their  neu*
Iral  cbarncter,  not  even  in  consequence  of  resistance  made
hy  the  armed'vessel,  provided  the  nentral  did  not  aid  in
■ach  armament  or  resistance,  notwithstanding  he  had
chartered  tba  whole  vessel,  and  was  on  board  at  the  time
of  the  resistance.  The  act  of  arming  was  the  net  of  the
belligerent  party,  and  the  neutral  goods  did  not  contri-
bute to  the  armament,  further  than  the  freight,  which
would  be  paid  if  the  vessel  wag  unarmed,  and  neither  the
goods  northe  neutral  owner  were  chargeable  for  the  bos-
tile  acts  of  the  belligerent  vessel,  if  the  neutral  took  no
part  in  the  resistance'  A  contemporary  decision  of  an
opjwsite  character,  on  the  same  point,  wna  made  by  the
English  High  Court  of  Admiralty  in  the  case  of  the  Fatt'
ny  ;*  and  it  was  there  ol>8erved,  that  a  neutral  subject
was  at  liberty  to  put  his  goods  on  board  the  merchant  ves-
sel of  a  belligerent  ;  but  if  he  placed  them  on  board  an
armed  belligerent  ship,  ho  showed  an  intention  to  resist
visitation  and  search,  by  means  of  the  association,  and,
so  far  as  he  does  this,  ho  was  presumed  to  adhere  to  tbe
enemy,  and  to  withdraw  himself  from  his  protection  of
neutrality.  If  a  neutral  chooses  to  take  the  protection  of
a  hostile  force,  instead  of  his  own  neutral  character,  be
must  take  (it  waa  observed)  the  inconvenience  with  Iha
convenience,  and  his  property  would,  upon  just  and  sound
principles,  be  liable  to  condemnation  along  with  the  beU
ligerent  vessel.

Tbe  question  decided  in  the  case  of  the  NtrtiJe  Is  a
very  important  one  in  prize  law,  and  of  infinite  imjior*
tanee  in  its  pracfical  results;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted,
that  the  decisions  of  two  courts  of  the  highest  character,
on  such  a  point,  should  have  been  in  direct  contradiction
toeach  other. Tbe  same  pointaftcrwurdsarose,  and  was


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


lU  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  fPirt  I.

■gain  argued,  and  the  former  deciiion  repeatnl,  in  tbe
case  of  the  Atalanta.*  It  was  observed  in  this  latter  case,
tbat  the  rule  with  ua  was  correct  in  principle,  and  the
most  liberal  and  honourable  to  tbe  jurisprudence  of  this
country.  The  question  may,  therefore,  be  considered
here  as  at  rest,  and  as  having  received  the  most  authori-
tative decision  that  can  he  rendered  by  any  judicial  tribti-
nal  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic'


«  3  ITAMlon,  409.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  VII.


or  RESTRICTIONS  UPON  NEUTRAL  TRADB.

-  The  principal  restriction  which  the  law  ofDalions  im*
poses  on  the  trade  of  neutrals,  is  the  prohibition  te  furnish
the  belligerent  parties  with  warlike  stores,  and  other  arti-
cles which  are  directly  auxiliary  to  warlik'e  purposes.  Such
goods  are  denominated  contraband  of  war  ;  bui  in  the  at-
tempt to  define  them  the  authorities  vary,  or  are  deficient
in  precision,  and  the  subject  has  lon^  been  a  fruitful  source
of  dispute  between  neutral  and  belligerent  nations.

In  the  time  of  Grotius,  some  persons  contended  for  the '
rigour  of  war,  and  others  for  the  freedom  of  commprce.  As
neutral  nations  are  willing  to  seize  the  opportunity  which
war  presents,  af  becoming  r-arriers  for  the  bejiigerent
powers,  it  is  natural  that  they  should  desire  to  diminisbth'a
list  of  contraband  as  much  as  possible.  Clrotiufl  distin-
guishes' between  things  which  are  useful  only  in  war,
as  arms  and  amunition,  and  things  which  serve  merely  fol
pleasure;  and  things  whicb  are  of  a  mixed  nature,Bnd  useful
both  in  peace  and  war.  He  agrees  with  other  writers  in
prohibiting  neutrals  from  carrying  articles  of  the  first  kind
to  the  enemy,  as  well  as  in  permitting  the  second  kind  to
be  carried.  As  to  articles  of  tho  third  class,  which  are  of
indiscriminate  use  in  peace  and  war,  as  money,  provisionSf
ships,  and  naval  stores,  he  says  that  they  are  sometitnefl
lawful  articles  of  neutral  commerce,  and  sometimes  not  j
and  the  question  will  depend  upon  circumstances  existin|f


t,Goo(^lc


Jflfi  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pm  I.

at  tha  time.  Tliejr  would  be  contndMuid  if  carried  to  a
besieged  town,  camp,  or  port.  In  a  naval  wsr,  it  is  ad-
niitted,  that  ihips,  and  materials  for  ships,  become  contra-
band,  and  horses  and  saddles  may  be  included.'  Tattel
•peaks  with  some  want  of  precision,  and  only  says,  in
general  terms, *■  that  commodities  particularly  used  in  war
are  contraband,  such  as  arms,  military  and  naval  storef)
timber,  horses,  and  even  provisions,  in  certain  junctures,
when  there  are  hopes  of  reducing  the  enemy  by  famine.
Loccemu8,<:  and  some  other  authorities  referred  to  by
Valin,  consider  provisions  as  jfenerally contraband;  but
Vnlin  and  Pothier  insist  that  they  are  not  so,  either  by  the
law  of  France  or  the  common  law  of  nations,  unless  car-
ried to  besieged  or  blockaded  places.^  The  marine  ordi-
nance ofliouis  X[V->  included  horses,  and  their  equipage,
transported  for  military  service,  within  the  list  of  contra-
band, because  tbcy  were  necessary  to  war  equipments,  and
this  is,  doubtless,  the  general  rule.  They  are  included  in
the  restricted  list  of  contraband  articles  mentioned  in  tba
treaty  between  the  Unittsd  States  and  Colombia  in  1825.
Valin  says,  that  naval  stores  have  been  regarded  as  contra-
band from  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  and  the  Enj^.
lish  prize  law  is  very  explicit  on  this  point.  Naval  stores,
and  matArials  for  ship  building,  and  even  corn,  grain,  and
vi(uuals  of  all  sorts,  going  to  the  dominions  of  the  enemy,
were  declared  contraband  by  an  ordinance  of  Charles  I.  in
IdSB.'^  Sailcloth  is  now  held  to  be  universally  contraband,
even  on  a  destination  to  ports  of  mere  mercantile  naval
equipment;?  andmthccaseofthe  3farta,'>  it  was  held,  that


a  nathgr/orUi>iJnH.  b.  3.  C  9.
b  B.  3.  c  1.  MO.  1 13.
c  De  Jure  MarUimo,  lib.  I.  c.  4.  n.  9.

d  falin-'i  Com.  toui.  t.  p.  304. Pottter,  de  PropHtte,  No.  104.
e  Da  Prifit,  art.  1 1.
/  Ho.'^nKin'j  CfiWee.  Mar.  p.  63.
f  7^10  Vnotunm,  3  Rob.  108
h 1  RiA  EU7.  Phil.  C(l-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leclur*  Vll.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  IV

tor,  pitch)  and  hempt  and  whatever  other  miiterials  went  to
the  con  struct  ion  and  equipment  of  veBsels  of  war,  were
contraband  by  the  modern  law  of  nations,  though,  former-
ly, when  the  hostilities  <^  Furogie  were  less  naval  than  at
the  present  day,  they  were  of  a  disputable  nature.  The
executive  jOiverDinent  of  this  country  has  frequently  eon-
eeded,  that  the  materials  for  the  building,  equipment,  and
armament  of  ships  of  war,  as  limber  and  naval  stores,
were  contra  bond.  ■  But  it  does  not  seem  that  ship  timber
ii,  m  n,  in  all  cases,  to  be  considered  a  contraband  article,
though  destined  to  an  enemy's  ixirt.  In  the  case  of  the
Austrian  vessel  //  Folaate,  captured  by  the  Preach  priva-
teer L'EtoiU  dt  Bona^rte,  and  which  was  carrying  ship
timber  to  Messina,  an  enemy's  port,  it  was  held,  by  the
Council  of  Prizes  at  Paris,  1807,  upon  the  opinion  of  the
Advocate  General,  M.  Collet  Deseotils,  that  the  ship  tim-
ber in  that  case  was  not  contraband  of  war.  It  being  ship
timber  of  an  ordinary  character,  and  not  ezclusively  ap-
plicable to  the  building  of  ships  of  war.b

Questions  of  GODtrabaod  were  muchdiacasseddoriagthe
continuance  of  our  neutral  character,  in  (he  furious  war
between  England  and  France,  commencing  in  1793,  and
we  professed  to  be  governed-  by  the  modern  usage  of  im-
tioDS  on  this  point.*'  The  national  convention  of  France*
on  the  9th  of  May,  ]7d3,  decreed,  that  neutral  vessels^
laden  with  provisions,  destined  to  an  eaemy's  port,  shtHild
be  arreted,  and  carried  into  France ;  and  one  of  tbo  ear'  -
liest  acts  of  England  in  that  war,!)  was  to  detain  all  natural
vesseltt  going  to  France,  and  laden  with  corn,  meal,  or


aMr-Randofphl^LttUriaJf.  JM.  Juty  9th.  HSS.  ^r.  PblttT.
img''i  LtOrr  to  Mr.  P'ltteknry,  Jmrnory  I6A,  1767.  LtUer  of  Mturu
Pinckmcy,  Jtart/u^l,  and  Qtrry,  tt  the Frtadt  Minitler,  JmuMiy  SltA,

A  tUptrioirt  wttKrj«/  tt  roUtnnt  it  jvritprvJaitt,  far  X- JttrUx,
lorn.  9.  lit.  Prat  JUarUime,  tec  3-  tri.  3.
e  PruidtnP$  PrMltmaliemcf^MivtMlitg,  ^pril  S2(J,  1793.
d  hdrutlimt  tifUh  of  JttM,  1103.


i,,-c,!h,Googlc


n»  OP  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS.  {^wj  I:

ftotir.  It  was  intiitted,  on  the  part  of  England,"  that,  b^
the  ktw  of  nations,  atl  provisions  were  to  be  considered  a»
contraband,  in  the  case  where  thedepriring  the  enemy  of
those  supplies  was  one  of  the  means  employed  to  reduce-
him  to  reasonable  terms  of  peace;  and  that  the  actuat
situatioa  of  France  was  such,  as  to  lead  to  that  mode  of
distreming  her,  inasmuch  as  she  bad  armed  almost  th»
whole  labouring  class  of  her  peopk,  orthe  purpose  of  eom-
meneiug  and  supporting  hostilities  against  all  the  gorem-
■fientfl  ofEurope.  This  claim  on  the  part  of  England  waa
promptly  and  |)erseveriagly  rensted  by  the  United  States;
and  they  contended,  that  eor»,  flour,  and  meal,  beiug  the
jiroduce  of  the  aoi)  and  labour  of  the  coantry,  were  not
contraband  of  war,  Dnless  carriedt*  ■  place  actually  in-
Teflted.i>  The  treaty  of  commerce  with  England,  in  1794,
in  the  list  (^contraband,  slated,  that  whatever  materials
served  directly  to  the  building  and  equipment  of  vessels,,
with  the  exceptioD  of  anwrought  iron,  and  fir  planka,
should  be  considered  contraband,  and  liable  to  confiHca-
tion ;  but  the  treaty  leR  the  question  c^  provisions  open
and  unsettled,  and  neither  power  was  understood  to  have
Tetinquished  the  construction  of  the  law  of  nations  which
it  bad  assumed.  The  treaty  admitted,  that  provisions
were  not  generally  contraband,  but  might  become  so,  no-
aordtng  totlte  existing  law  of  nations,  in  certain  cases,
and  those  cases  were  not  defined.  It  was  only  stipu-
lated, by  way  of  relaxation  of  the  penalty  of  the  law,  that
whenever  provisions  were  contraband,  the  captors,  or
their  governmeiH,  should  pay  to  the  owner  the  full
value  of  the  articles,  together  with  the  freiglft,  and  a
reasonable  profit.  Ourgovernment  has  repeatedly  admit-
ted, that  as  far  as  that  treaty  enumerated  contraband  arti-


•  Mr.  Tlmmond's  Letter  (6  Xr.J'_ffertm.  September  l<U.  ITB3,  (wif
HU  LeUerln  Mr.  Riuutolph,  llrt  <^ April,  1794.

h  Mr  Jejferion'i  LeUer  to  Mr.  t'Hichtn,.  SepUmber  7tt,  1793,  m«
Mr.  RmdolpAPt  LtOer  to  Mr.  namaumd,  Jllay  Iri,  1784.


i,,-c,ih,G00glc


t.owur*V:i.] . OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  128

ties,  it  vaa  declaratory  of  the  law  of  oaiioni,  end  that  tb«
treaty  conceded  nothing  on  the  luhject  of  contraband.^

The  doctrine  of  the  Dnglteh  admiralty,  od  the  subject  of
f>rorisiona  being  coniiidered  contrabnnd,  was  laid  dova
very  fully  and  clearly,  in  the  case  of  the  Jongt  Margarf
ikti,^  It  was  there  observed,  that  (he  contraband  had
varied  very  much,  aud,  aometitnes,  in  such  a  menneras  to
make  it  difficult  tO'  atsifrn  the  reasons  of  tiia  variationsi
•wing  to  particular  circumstanceit)  the  history  itf  which
bad  not  accompanied  the  history  ofthe  decisions.  In  1673,
certain  articles  of  provision,  as  corn,  wiae,  aod  oil,  were
deemed  coairaband,  according  to  the  judgment  of  a  per-
son of  great  knowledge  and  experience  in  the  practice  of
the  admiralty  J  and,  in  much  later  times,  many  other  sorts
of  provisions  have  been  condemned  as  contraband.  In
1747  and  1748,  butter  and  salted  fish,  and  rice,  wcrecon-
demned  as  eontraband  (  and  those  cases  show  that  articles
of  human  food  have  been  considered  as  contraband,  when
it  was  probable  they  were  intended  for  naval  or  military
use.  The  modern  established  rule  is,  that  provisions  are
Dot  generally  contraband,  but  may  become  so,  under  cir-
cumstances arising  out  of  the  particular  Mtuation  of  the
war,  or  the  condition  of  iho  parties  engaged  in  it.  Among
the  circumstRnces  which  tend  to  preserve  provisions  from
being  liable  to  be  treated  as  contraband,  one  is,  that  they
arc  ofthe  growth  of  the  country  which  produces  them.
Another  circumstance  to  which  some  indulgence  is  shown
by  the  practice  of  ualionii,  is  when  the  articles  are  in  their
native  and  unmanufactured  state.  Thus,  iron  is  treated
with  indulgence,  though  anchors  arid  other  instruments,
fabricated  out  of  it,  are  directly  contraband.  Hetnpis
more  favourably  considered  than  cordage )  and  wheat  is


a  Mr.  PicktringU  LtUtr  to  Mr.  Mtnrof,  Srplrmbtr  KlK.  178(.  Hfc
T^tr  to  JUr.  Pinrlcney,  Jaawtry  Klh,  \V>T  hutmelkm*  fr»m  Me  Sc
rrtlary  t^  SlaU  lo  Iht  Americim  Jimiltrt  to  Frmnif,  Jufy  Hlh,  I197>

b  I  Hob.  IS9.  «dit.  Phil.
Vol  I.  17


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


IM  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  fTMt  L

not  considered bo  dozious  a  commodity,  nbeo going  to'
an  enemy's  country,  as  any  of  the  6ubI  preparations  of  it
for  human  use. The most important distiociioo is,
whether  the  articles  were  intended  for  the  ordinary  use  of
life,  or  even  for  mercantile  ships'  use,  or  ivbetber  tbef
were  going  with  a  highly  probable  destination  to  nilitury
uae> The  nature  and  quality  of  the  port  to  which  tbe  u-
ticles  are  goiag,  ia  not  ao  irrational  test. Iftbe  port  be  «
general  commercial  one, it  is  presumed  the  articleitare
going  foi  civil  use,  though  occaaionally  a  ship  of  war  may
be  conMnicted  in  that  port. But  if  the  great  predominant
efaaraeter  of  that  port,  like  Brest  in  France,  or  Portsmouth
in  England,  be  that  of  a  port  of  naval  miliury  equipment,
it  will  bf  presumed  that  the  articles  were  going  for  milita-
ry use,  although  it  is  possible  that  the  articles  might  have
been  applied  to  civil  consumption. As  it  is  impossible  to
ascertain  the  final  us*  of  an  article  onctpZ/u  tutu,  it  is  not  ao
injurious  rule,  which  deduces  the  final  use  from  the  imme-
diate destinatioo  ;  and  tbe  presumittittn  of  a  hostile  u^e,
founded  on  its  destination  to  a  military  (Mirt,  is  very  much
infliiraed,  if,  at  tbe  time  when  the  articles  were  going,  a
considerable aTfl)amGnt  waa  noIoriuuBly preparing, to
wiiiub  a  supply  of  those  articles  would  be  eminenfly  usefuL
These  doctrines  of  the  English  prize  law were  essen-
tially  tbe  same  with  that  adopted  by  the  Americttn  Con-
gress in 1775,  for  tbey declared, that all  veeaels, to
whomsoever  belonging,  carrying  provisions,  or  other  no*
cessaries,  to the  British  army  or  navy, within  tbe  co-
lonies, should be  liable to seizure and confiscation-a
They  were  likewise  fully  adopted  by  the  Supreme  Court
of  the United  States,  when we  came  to  know and
feel  tbe  value  of belligerent rights, by  becoming a
party  to  a  maritime  war. In  the  case  of  the Commer-
cen.b  a  neutral vessel, captured  by  one  of  our  cruisers,
in the  act  of  carrying  provisions  for  the  use  of  the  Bri-
tish armies  in  Spain,  the  court iield,  that  provisions,  being


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lwiun  VIIO OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  151

Deutral  propertj,  but  the  growth  of  the  enemy'*  country,
and  destined  for  the  8ii[i|ily  of  the  eoemy's  rnilitury  or  na-
Tal  force,  were  contraband.  The  court  observed,  that,  by
the  modern  law  of  OBtiona,  provisions  were  not  generally
oontrabaod,  but  that  Ibey  might  become  §o  oniUcount  of
Uie  particular  situation  of  the  war,  or  on  acaccount  of
their  deuination.  If  destined  for  the  ordinary  use  <4
life,  in  the  enemy's  country,  ihey  were  not  contrtt-
band  ;  but  it  was  otherwise  if  destined  for  the  army  or
navy  of  the  enemy,  or  for  his  porta  of  military  or  naval
equipment.  And  if  the  prorigions  were  the  growth  of  ibt
enemy's  country,  and  destined  for  the  enemy's  use,  they
were  to  be  treated  a^  contraband,  and  liable  to  forfeiture,
eren  though  the  army  or  navywere  in  a  neutral  port, for
it  would  be  a  direct  interposition  in  the  war.

This  case  followed  the  decisions  of  Sir  William  Scott,
and  carried  the  doctrine  of  contraband,  as  applied  to  prcH
visions,  to  as  great  an  extent.  It  held  the  voyage  of  the
Swedish  neutral  bo  illegal,  as  to  deserve  the  infliction  of
the  penalty  of  loss  of  freight.

It  ia  the  uiiu  beliid  which  determine  an  article  to  be
contraband,  and  as  articles  come  into  use  as  implements
of  war,  which  w«re  before  innoceot,  there  is  truth  in  the
remark,  that  as  the  mnans  of  war  vary  and  shifV  from
time  to  lime,  the  law  of  nations  sbifl  with  them;  not,  in-
deed, by  the  change  of  priuciples,  but  by  a  change  in  the
application  of  them  to  new  caseB,  and  in  order  to  meet  the
varying  uses  of  war.  When  goods  arc  once  clearly  shown
to  be  contraband,  confiscation  to  the  captor  is  the  natural
consoqnence.  This  is  the  practice  in  oil  cases,  as  to  the
article  itself,  excepting  provisions  ;  and  as  to  them,  when
they  become  contraband,  the  ancient  and  strict  right  of
forfeiture  in  so^ened  down  to  a  right  of  pre-emprion,  on
reasonable  terms.^  But,  generally,  to  stop  contrabund
goods,  would,  as  Vattel  ob9erveD,<>  prove  an  ineffectual
relief,  e9{»ecially  at  sea. The  penalty  of  confiscation  is


m  Cue  of  the  Haabct,  S  Rab.  182.  6  B.  3.  c.  7.  mc.  113.

Do,i,.cdtyGoO(^lc


4S8  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part.  I.

applied,  in  order  that  the  fear  of  loss  might  o)M!rate  bb  a
check  on  the  aviitity  for  gain,  an<l  deter  the  neutral  nier-
chant  from  supplying  the  unemy  with  contrnhand  articier.
The  ancient  practice  was,  to  seize  the  contraband  goods,
and  keep  them,  oa  paying  tiie  value.  Rut  the  modcro
practice  of  confiscatioo  in  far  more  agreeable  to  the  mutu-
al duties  of  nations,  and  more  adapted  to  the  preservation
of  their  rights.  It  is  a  general  understanding,  grounded
on  true  principlen,  that  the  fKtwers  at  war  may  seize  and
confiscute  all  contraband  goods,  without  any  complaint  on
the  part  of  the  neutral  merchant,  and  without  any  impu-
tation of  a  breach  of  neutrulity  in  the  neutral  soveri^ign
himself.^  It  was  contended,  on  the  part  of  the  French
nation,  in  17£I6,  that  neutral  government^  were  bound  to
restrain  their  subjeeti  from  rclling  or  exporting  articles,
contrabaud  of  war,  to  the  belligerent  powers.  But  it  was
BU(;ce!»fully  shown,  on  the  part  of  the  TTuited  States,  that
neutrals  may  lawfully  sell,  at  home,  ta  a  belligerent  pur-
chaser, or  carry,  ibemselves,  to  the  belligerent  powers,
contraband  articles,  subject  to  the  right  of  seizure  in  trm-
iitu.*>  This  right  has  since  been  explicitlydeciaredby  the
judicial  authorities  ofthis  cxtuairy,"  The  right  of  the  neu-
tral to  transport,  and  of  the  hostile  power  to  seize,  are
conflicting  rights,  and  neither  party  can  charge  the  other
with  a  criminal  act.

Contraband  articles  are  said  to  be  of  an  infectious  na-
ture, and  they  contaminate  the  whole  cargo  belonging  to
the  same  owners.  The  innocence  of  any  particular  urti-
cte  is  not  usually  admitted,  to  exempt  it  from  the  general
confiscation.  By  the  ancient  law  of  Europe  the  shiji,  a  [so,
was  liable  to  condemnation ;  and  such  a  penalty  was  deemed


h  VaOei.  B.3.D.  7.irc.  113.

6Jf.  Jldtt^  r^er  to  Jlr.  Pte^frbi,!-,  JUarcK  I  Itt,  1796.  Xr.  Pkhtr-
inz't  Letter  loJf.Mit.  January  Wlh,  und  May  tjth.  1796.  Cirtvlor
fUer  t^  the  Sfrrebiry  of  the  Airoy  to  Ike  Ctlteclort.  ^ofuil  ■«*,  1793.
■  e  I^icliaHsoiiT- Mirinelnt.  CompaDf,6.VaM.  A(^.  113.  He  Sm>
liuima  TriDidad,  7  ff^qten,  3G3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LectuK  VII.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  135

just)  and  flupported  by  the  general  analogies  oflaw,  for
the  owner  of  the  ship  had  engaged  it  in  an  unlawful  nom-
merce,  and  contraband  goodi  are  seized  and  condemned
ex  delicto.  But  the  modern  practice  of  the  courts  of  ad-
miralty, since  the  age  of  Grotius,  is  milder;  nnd  the  fact
of  carrying  contraband  articles  is  attended  only  with  the
loss  of  freight  and  expenses,  unless  the  ship  belongs  to  the
owner  of  the  contraband  arliclea,  or  the  carrying  of  them
has  been  connected  with  malignant  and  aggravating  cir-
cumstances; and  among  those  circumstances,  a  false  des-
tination and  falsa  papers  are  considered  as  the  most  bei*
nous.  lo  those  cases,  and  in  all  cases  of  fraud  in  ihe  owner
of  the  ship,  or  of  his  agent,  the  penalty  is  carried  beyond
the  refusal  of  fraight  and  expenses,  and  is  extended  to
the  confiscation  of  the  ship,  and  the  innocent  parts  of  the
cargo."  This  is  now  the  established  doctrine ;  but  it  is
•onetimes  varied  by  treaty,  in  like  manner  as  all  the  set-
tled principles  and  usages  of  nations  are  subject  to  conven-
tional modification.''

A  neutral  may  also  forfeit  the  immunities  of  his  nation-
al character  by  violations  of  blockade  ;  and,  among  the
rights  of  belligerents,  there  is  none  more  clear  and  incoa-
trovertible,  or  more  just  and  necessary  in  the  application,
than  that  which  gives  rise  to  the  law  of  blockade.  Byn-
kershceck<=  says,  it  is  founded  on  (he  princi|>leB  of  nalural
reason,  as  well  as  on  the  usage  of  nations ;  and  Grotius<l
considers  the  carrying  of  supplies  to  a  besieged  town,  or
a  blockaded |iort,  as  an  offence  eiceedingly  aggravated


a  B^h.  Q.J.  Pub.  b.  l.cb.  IS,  and  14.  Hsi-ur.  de  JVtu.  ob.  reel.
Merc.  v^l.  Com.  eh.  3.  tec.  «.  Optra,  torn.  3Ja.  Tlie  Stnadt  Eml>.
den,  1  Rob.  93.  The  Joojre  Tobi*.,  1  Ilab.  577.  The  Frauklio,  3
Jtob.  S17.  The  Neutralital,  3  Rob.  »i.  Tlie  Edward,  4  Sab.  6a.  Th*
Bangor 6  Rob.  125.

'  b  Id  Uie  tnaty  betweeii  Ihc  United  States  and  tbe Bepnbtic  cf  Co.
lombia,  il  it  provided,  tb«t  contraband  arliclei  iliall  not  alTecl  the  rest  of
th«  oarifo,  or  the  Tonel,  for  it  )•  declared  ttiat  they  ihall  be  lell  free  to  "
tb«  owner.
eQ.J.P.  b.  I.e.  4.  ICQ.  II.
4I  B.  IcI.Mc.S.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


134  or  THE  LAW  OF  NATION  {Part,  h

aoB  iBJuriotiB.  Tbfj  both  a^ee,  thst  the  neutral  may  4m
desk  with  severely  ;  and  Vattel  says,  he  may  be  treated
as  an  enemy .^  Tbe  law  of  blockade  is,  however,  so  harsh
and  severe  in  its  operalinn,  that,  in  order  to  apply  it,  tbe
fcct  of  the  B<^aal  blockade  must  be  established  by  clear
and  unequivocal  evidence  ;  and  the  neutral  must  have
bad  due  previous  notice  of  its  existence ;  and  tbe  squad-
jon  allotted  for  the  purpoxes  of  its  execution,  must  be  ful-
ly competent  to  cut  off  all  coinmuiiication  with  the  inter-
dicted place  or  port ;  and  the  neutral  must  have  been
^ilty  of  some  act  of  violation,  either  by  going  in,  or  at-
temptint;  to  enter,  or  by  coming  out  with  a  cargo  ladea
after  tbe  commencement  of  tbe  blockade.  Tbe  failura
of  either  of  the  points  requisite  to  establish  ihe  existence
of  a  legal  blockade,  amounts  to  an  entire  defeasance  of
tbe  measure,  even  though  the  notification  of  the  blockade^
had  issued  from  the  authority  of  the  government  itself.b
A  blockade  must  be  existing  in  point  of  fact,  and,  in
order  to  constitute  that  existence,  there  must  be  a  power
present  to  enforce  it.  All  decrees  and  orders  declaring
extensive  coasts,  and  whole  countries,  in  a  state  of
blockade,  without  the  presence  of  an  adequate  nava)
force  to  sopport  it,  are  manifestly  illegal  and  void,  and
have  no  sanction  in  public  law.  The  ancient  sutbon-
ties  all  referred  to  a  strict  and  actual  siege  or  block-
ade. Tbe  language  of  Grotiusi:  is  oppi/ium  obietium  vtl
Portui  daiutu,  and  the  investing  power  must  be  able  to
apply  its  force  to  every  point  of  the  blockaded  place,  so  as
to  render  it  dangerous  to  attempt  to  enter,  and  there
is  no  blockade  of  that  part  where  its  power  cannot
be brought  to  bear. Tbe  definition of  a  hlockad*

o  8.  3.C.  l.sec.  117

h  The  [Jet«ej.  I  Rob.  '.8. I  Chilly  on  Commercial  Law,  4M.

e  B.  3.C t.KC.  fi.

d  The  Mepniinii'.  1  Rt,(,.  C7.  The  BeWej-,  I  Rob.  78.  Tbe  8tert,  4
R»h.  fi6.  LflUr  ni  Vtt  Sixranry  ^tht  JVUej  to  Commodore  PreWe.
Fe6n>ary  41A,  lUOl.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Xwtora  VII.] or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  W5

girea  by  the  convention  of  the  Baltic  powers  in  1780,  and
agfiin  in  ISOl,  and  by  the  ordinance  of  Congreas  in  1781,
required  that  there  should  be  aetually  anumberof  veMel*
■tationed  near  enough  to  the  port  to  make  the  entry  up\Hf
rently  dangerous.  The  government  of  the  United  Slates
have  uniformly  insisted,  that  the  blockade  should  be  effec-
tive hy  the  presence  of  a  competent  force,  stationed,  and
present,  at  or  near  the  entrance  of  the  port ;  and  they  faav«
protested  with  great  energy  against  the  application  of  tb*
right  of  seizure  and  confiscation  to  iaeffectual  or  fictuiovs
blockades.'

The  oceasionalabsenceofthe  blockading  sqnadron,  pro-
duced by  accident,  as  in  thecaseof  a  storm,  and  when  the
station  is  resumed  with  duediligence,  does  not  suspend  the
blockade,  provided  the  suspension,  and  the  reason  of  it,  b«
known;  and  the  Ian  considers  an  attempt  to  take  advan-
tage c^such  an  accidental  removal,  as  an  attempt  to  break
theblockade,  and  as  a  mere  fraud.*)  The  American  govern-
ment seemed  disposed  to  admit  the  continuance  of  tba
blockade  in  such  a  case  ;>'  and  the  language  of  the  judiciid
authorities  in  this  state  has  been  in  fuvoar  of  the  solidity
and  justness  of  the  English  doctrine  of  blockade  on  this
point.*'  But  if  the  blockai^e  be  raised  hy  the  enemy,  or  hy
applying  the  naval  force,  or  part  of  it,  though  only  for  a
time,  to  other  objects,  or  by  the  mere  reoiissness  of  the
cruisers,  the  commerce  of  neutrals  to  the  place  ought  to  be
free.  The  presence  of  a  sufficient  force  is  the  natural  cri-


a  Mr.  Kitig't  LeIUr  to  Lord  Grcenvtlk,  Afai/  tSrf,  1T9B.  ^r.  Jb'ur-
thalPf  LetUr  to  Jtfr-  King.  SepltmberWIh,  1199.  Jfr.  Mnditon't  LtlUr
lo  Mr.  Piiuknty,  Oanier  Klh,  ISfll.  Litter  of  the  SetrtUiry  of  tlu  JVatf
to  Commodore  Preblt,  FtbruOTy  ith,  VKH.  Mr.  Pinfiraj,'*  Litlerlo
ijoedfftllttltg,  Jinaary  ilh,  UlI.

b  The  Freacricli  Molhe.'l  Pjib.  79.  TKeCuliimbia,  1  ltd.  130.  Tlie
JuffroirMari»s'cbroedcr,3iiu6.  155. The  HoffminR,  6.R.A  li6,  11'.
c  Mr.  MitrthallU  Letter  to  Mr.  Kmjr,  Aptember  2C/A,  1199. .
d  Radcliff.  J.  a  Joftown'.  C«*ef, n.lUiclifri^V.lut.fo.'.Johntin/'
JSep.  38.


Doili^cdtyGoOJ^IC


iW  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pari  I.

terion  by  which  the  neutral  is  enabled  to  aacertsio  the  ex-
iitence  of  the  bkckadf^.  He  looks  only  to  the  matter  of
fact,  and  if  the  blockadiDg  MiuBdroD  is  removed  when  he
arrives  before  the  port,  and  he  is  ignorant  of  the  caure  of
the  removal,  or  if  he  be  not  ignorant,  and  the  cause  be  not
an  accidental  one,  but  voluntary,  or  produced  by  an  enemy,
b«  may  enter,  without  being  antwerBbte  for  a  breae-  of  the
blockade.  When  a  blockade  is  raised  voluntarily,  or  by  a
superior  force,  it  puts  an  end  to  it  absolutely  ;  and  if  it  be
resumed,  neutrals  mu»l  be  charged  with  notice  f/e  nooo,  and
without  reference  to  the  for  mer  state  of  things,  betbrelhey
can  be  involved  in  the  guilt  of  a  violation  of  the  blockade.'*

The  object  of  a  blockade  is  not  merely  to  prevent  the  im-
portation of  supplies,  but  to  prevent  export  as  well  as  im-
port, and  to  cut  olf  all  communication  of  commerce  with
the  blockaded  port.  The  act  of  egress  is  as  culpable  as
the  act  of  inj^ress,  if  it  be  done  fraudulently;  and  a  ship
coming  out  of  a  blockaded  port  is,  in  thefirst  instance,  lia-
ble to  seizure ;  and  to  obtain  a  release,  the  parly  must  give
satisfactory  proof  of  the  innocence  of  his  intention.'*  But,
according  to  modern  usage,  a  blockade  does  not  rightfully
extend  to  a  neutral  vessel  found  in  port  when  the  block-
ade was  instituted,  nor  prevent  her  coming  out  with  the
cargo,  bnnajidt  purchased,  and  laden  nn  board  before  the
commencement  of  the  blockade.'^  The  modern  practice
does  not  require  that  the  place  should  be  invested  by  land
as  well  as  by  sea,  in  order  to  constitute  a  legal  blockade ;
and  if  a  place  be  blockaded  by  sta  only,  it  is  no  violation  of


a  Williami  v.  Smith,  %  Camtt,  1.  LtUer  if  the  Secrttary  of  SiaU  to
Jffr.  Khg,  September  2(itt.  1788. Tlie  Hoffnung:,  B  Roh.  I  IS.

6  Bynt.  Q.  J.  P.  b.  1.  ch.  4.  The  Frederick  Molke,  I  Roh.  71.  The
NcptuDua,  1  Rob.  144. The  Vni»  Jixlith,  1  Bnb.  129.

c  TLc  Bctsej,  I  Rob-  78-  The  Vroir  Jcdilh,  I  Bob.  I3G.  ThoComet,
1  EiIk.  32. Olirera  v.  Uobo  la*.  Com.  3  Wheabtn,  IG3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


liBCtureVII.] OF  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS.  iST

belligerent  rights  for  the  neutral  to  carry  on  uoramftred
with  it  \tj  inlaod  communications.*

It  18  absolutely  necessary  that  the  neutral  should  baV0
bad  due  notice  ofthe  blockade,  in  order  to  affect  him  with
the  penal  consequences  ofa  violation  of  it.  This  informa*
tion  may  be  communicated  to  him  in  two  ways  |  either  ac>
tually,  by  a  formal  notice  from  the  blockading  power,  of
constructively  by  notice  to  his  gorernmeot,  or  by  the  no*
toriety  of  the  facti  It  is  immaterial  in  what  way  the  neu*
tral  comes  to  the  knowledge  of  the  blockadoi  If  the  block*
ade  actually  exists,  and  he  has  knowledge  of  it^  he  il
bound  not  to  violate  it>  A  notice  to  a  foreign  government
is  a  notice  to  all  tbe  individuals  of  that  nation,  and  they
are  not  permitted  to  aver  ignorance  of  it,  because  it  is  the
duty  of  the  neutral  government  to  communicate  notice  to
their  people.''  In  the  case  of  a  blockade  without  regular
notice,  notice  in  fact  is  geoerally  requisite }  and  there  is
this  difference  between  a  blockade  regularly  notified,  and
one  without  such  notice :  that,  in  the  former  case,  the  act
of  sailing  for  the  blockaded  place,  with  an  intent  to  evade
it,  or  to  enter  contingently,  amounts,  from  tbe  very
commencement  of  the  voyagOi  to  a  breach  of  the  block'
ade  ;  for  tbe  port  is  to  be  considered  as  closed  up,  until  Iha
blockade  be  formally  revoked  or  actually  raised ;  wbercesi
in  the  letter  case  ofa  blockade  dtfactOt  tbe  ignorance  ot
the  party  as  to  its  continuance,  may  be  received  as  an  eX'
Guse  for  sailing  to  tbe  blockaded  place,  on  a  doubtful  and
provisional  destination>o  The  question  of  notice  is  a  que»<
tion  of-«ndence,  to  be  determined  by  the  facts  applicable
to  the  case.  The  notoriety  of  a  blockade  is  of  itself  suffi-
cient notice  of  it  to  vessels  lying  within  the  blackaded  portt
In  the  case  of  the  Adelaide,^  it  was  the  doctrine  of  the


a  Tbe  Ocean.  3  Jisb.  S97. Tlie  SwrU  ibid.  SSG.  note. LtUrr  ^tkt
Stertliiiy  of  Slate  to  Mr  King.  Srjit.  lOlh,  nS9.
b  Tbe  Nepinna*.  2  AcA. 100.  Tlie  Adelaide,  2  Aot.  Itl.nota.
c  Tbe  Columbh,  I  RoS.  i90. Tbe  Neptsoo),  i  Hob.  ii<{.
d  ittob.  III. in  noli ,
Vol.  I.  le


t,Goo(^lc


138  OF  TUC  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [fwt  I.

English  admiralty,  that  a  noti6calioo  given  to  one  itatSi
muat  be  presumed,  after  a  reaionable  time,  to  have  rvatb*
ed  the  subjects  of  neigbbouriof  Hates,  and  it  affects  tfaem
with  theknowledgeoftfaefact,  on  just  groundsof  evidence.
And  after  the  blockade  is  once  established,  and  due  notice
received,  either  actually  or  constructively,  the  neutral  ii
not  )>eroiitted  to  go  to  the  very  station  of  the  blockading
force,  under  pretence  of  iiiquiting  uhetber  the  blockade
bad  terminated,  because  this  wouM  lead  to  fraudulent  aU
tempts  to  evade  it,  and  would  amouni,  in  practice,  to  m
universal  license  to  attempt  to  enter,  and  on  being  pre«
TeniKd,  to  claim  the  liberty  of  ffoiog  elsewhere.  Some  re-
laxation Whs  very  reascmably  given  lo  thin  rule,  in  its  ap^
pliciition  to  distant  voyages  from  America ;  and  ships  sail-
ingfni  Europe  before  knowledge  of  the  bloctiHde  reached
tliem,  were  entitled  to  notice,  even  at  the  blockaded  port.
If  they  sailed  after  notice,  they  might  sail  on  a  contingent
dttstination  for  the  blockaded  port,  with  the  purpose  of
calling  for  information  at  some  European  port,  and  b«
alluwed  ihe  benefit  of  such  a  contingent  destination,  to  be
rendered  definite  by  the  information.  But  in  no  case  is
the  information  as  to  the  ejiatence  of  the  blockade,  to  h*
Mughtat  the  mouth  of  tbe  port.'

A  neutral  cannot  he  permitted  lo  place  himself  in  the
vicinity  of  the  blockaded  port,  if  his  situation  be  so  near
tbat  tie  may,  with  impunity,  break  the  blockade  whenever
be  pleases,  and  slip  in  without  obstruction.  If  that  were
to  be  permitted,  it  would  be  im|>ossible  that  any  blockade
could  be  maintained.  It  is  a  presumption,  almost  rfeytire,
that  the  neutral,  if  found  oa  the  interdicted  waters,  goes
there  with  an  intention  to  break  the  blockade ;  and  it  vrould
require  very  clear  and  satisfactory  evidence  to  repel  tbe
prosumption  of  a  criminal  intent.''

a  Tbe  SpM  and  Ireoe,  h  Rob.  76.

b  Tbe  Neutnliut,  0  Aob.30.  The  Charlotte  Christioe, tW.'  IDI.
The  Gut»Erwartuiia:,i6RlS3.  Bynk.  J.^.  Pvb.h.l.c.  H.  Tbe  Ar-
thur. I  Edm.  Rrj,  SOi.  RadcliS'  v.  U.  lai.  Co.  7  JoAnran'*  Sep.  47.
FiUNmmiHH  r.  Newport  Ini.  Co.  4  Crench,  18ff>


t,Goo(^lc


Lectow  VII. ]0F  TH  E  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  JS9

The  judicial  deciaions  in  England,  and  in  this  country^
have  given  great  precision  lo  the  law  of  blockade,  by  the
application  of  it  to  particular  caeea,  and  by  the  extent,  and
clearness,  and  equity  of  their  il I uut rations.  They  are  dii-
tinguished,  likewise,  for  general  eoinoideoce  and  harmony
in  their  principles.  All  the  cases  admit,  that  the  neutral
muRt  be  chargeable  with  knowledge,  eitheraciualor  cod-
ttructive,  of  the  existence  of  the  blockade,  and  with  an  io-
tent,  and  with  some  attempt,  to  break  it,  before  he  is  to
suffer  the  penalty  of  a  violation  of  it.  The  evidence  of  that
intent,  and  of  thq  overt  act,  will  greatly  vary,  according  to
circumstances  ;  and  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  those
circumstances  will  depend,  in  some  degree,  upon  the  cha-
racter and  judgment  of  the  prize  courts ;  but  the  true  prin-
ciples which  ought  to  govern  have  rarely  been  a  matter
of  dispute.  The  fact  of  clearing  out  or  sailing  for  a  block-
aded port,  is,  in  itself,  innocent,  unless  it  be  acnompanied
with  knowledge  of  the  blockade.  Such  a  vessel,  not  pos-
sessed of  such  previous  knowledge,  is  to  be  first  warned  of
the  fact,  and  a  subsequent  attempt  ro  enter  conittituteR  ibe
breach.  This  was  the  provision  in  the  treaty  with  England
in  1704,  and  it  basbeendeelared  in  othercases,  and  is  con-
sidered to  be  a  correct  exposition  of  the  law  of  nations.^

It  has  been  a  queetiiin  in  the  courts  in  this  country,  whe-
ther they  ought  to  admit  the  la  wof  the  English  prize  courts,
that  sailing  for  a  blockaded  [>ort,knowtng  it  lo  be  blockaded,
was,  in  itself,  an  attempt,  and  an  act  siiflirient  to  charge
the  party  with  a  bTeach  of  the  blockade,  without  reference
to  the  distance  between  the  port  of  departure  and  the  port
invested,  or  to  the  extent  of  the  voyage  performt^d  when
the  vessel  was  arrested.'' But  in  Yea(on  v.  Fri/,'^  the  Su-


a  FitMimmoiw  v.  Newport  Id».  Co.  4  Craneh,  ins  BrtliiA  Imtrvc-
tioni  to  thfirfttU  on  the  Wetl  India  tialion,  ilh  of  January.  '  I'M  Lrlttr
ofUli  Secretary  ofthe  JVavy  t»  Cammndare  PrtbU,  February  4th.  1H"4.

b  Fitz-iimmonsv.  Newport  Int.  Co.  4  CmncA,  18&.  Von&tirarei
r,,V-  lai.  Co.  2  JoAnfon'j  Gate*,  180.  409.

e  S  CroMh,  335.


t,Goo(^lc


140  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS-  [Pan  h

prome  Court  or  the  United  States  coincided  esaentiallywith
the  doctrino  of  the  Eiiglinh  prize  rourts,  for  they  held,  that
•ailing  rrotn  Tobago  for  Ciirj-acoa,  liDOwiog  the  lurier  tobo
blockaded,  was  a  breach  of  the  blockade;  and,  according
lo  the  opiniou  of  Mr.  Justice  Slorj,  in  ibe  case  of  the  Nc~
reide,'  the  set  of  sailing  with  an  intent  to  break  a  blockade,
is  a  siifiicieiit  breach  to  authorize  nontiBcatton.  The  of-
fence coiitiaueB,  aUhougb,  at  the  moment  of  capture,  (bo
vexsel  be,  by  ntress  of  weather,  driven  in  a  dirvrtion  from
the  port,  far  the  hostile  intention  still  reittnin^  unchanged.
The  distance,  or  proxiniilj,  of  the  two  ports,  would  cer-
tainly have  aa  effect  upon  the  e(|iiily  oftbo  ajiplication  of
the  rule.  A  Dutch  ordinniice,  in  1630,  declared,  that  ves-
sels bound  to  the  blockaded  ports  of  Flanders,  were  liable
to  con  6a  cat  ion,  though  found  at  a  distance  from  them,  unless
they  had  voluntarily  altered  the  voyage  before  coming  in
light  of  the  port ;  and  Bynkershoeck  contends  for  the  rea-
sonableness of  the  ordsr.')  What  that  distance  must  be  U
not  de6ned;  and  if  the  ports  be  not  very  wide  apart,  th«
act  of  sailing  for  the  blockaded  port  may  reasonably  he
deemed  evidcnceof  abreachof  it,  und  an  overt  act  of  fraud
upon  the  belligerent  rights.  But  a  relaxation  of  the  nile
has  been  required  aud  granted  in  (be  case  of  distant  voy-
ages, such  as  those  across  the  Atlantic,  and  the  vessel  is
Qlloived  to  sail  on  a  contingent  destination,  subject  to  the
duty  of  subsequent  inquiry  at  suitubie  placea.c  The  ordi-
nance of  Congress  of  1781,  seems  to  have  conceded  tbia
point  to  the  extent  of  the  English  rule,  for  it  made  it  law-
fulto  takeaodcondemnall  vessels,  of  all  nations,  "destined
to  any  such  port,"  without  saying  any  thing  of  notice  or
proximity.^

The  consequence  of  a  breach  of  blockade  is  the  confis-


s  &  CmncA,440 44S.
b  Q.J.P.h.i.c n. 3flo6,328.Mn
e  6  Rob.  76. C  CroncA,  20.
i<foumalto/Consrat,ron.^  IBS.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  Vll] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  141

cation  of  the  ship,  and  the  cargo  is  always,  prima  facte,
implicated  in  the  guilt  of  the  owner,  or  master  of  the  ship,
and  it  lays  with  them  to  remove  the  presumption,  that
the  veawl  was  going  in  for  the  benelit  of  the  cargo,  and
with  the  direction  of  the  owner.^  The  old  doctrine  wae
much  more  severe,  and  often  inflicted,  not  merely  a  for-
feiture of  the  property  lahcn,  but  imprisonment,  and  other
personal  punishment  i^  but  the  modern,  and  milder  usage,
has  confined  the  penalty  to  the  confiscation  of  the  ship  and
goods.  If  a  ship  has  contracted  guilt  by  a  breach  of  block-
ade, theofFence  is  not  discharged  until  the  end  of  the  voy-
age. The  penalty  never  travels  on  with  the  vessel  further
than  to  the  end  of  the  return  voyage,  and  if  she  istakeu
in  any  part  of  that  voyage,  she  is  taken  in  ielieia.  This
ifl  deemed  reasonable,  becaliBe  no  other  opportunity  ie
afibrded  to  the  belligerent  force  to  vindicate  the  law.  The
penalty  for  a  breach  of  blockade  is  also  held  to  be  remitted,
if  the  blockade  has  been  raised  before  the  capture.  The
delictwn  is  completely  done  away  when  the  blockade
ceases.d

There  are  other  acts  of  illegal  assistance  aflTotded  toB
belligerent,  besides  supplying  him  with  conlreband  goods,
and  relieving  his  distress,  under  a  blockade.  Among
these  acts,  the  conveyance  of  hostile  despatches  is  the
most  injurious,  and  deemed  to  he  of  the  most  hostile  and
Doxioua  character.  Thecarryingof  two  or  three  cargoes
of  stores,  is  necessarily  an  assistance  of  a  limited  nature ;
but  in  the  transmission  of  despatches  may  be  conveyed
the  entire planofa  cainpaign,  and  it  may  lead  to  a  defeat
of  all  the  projeets  of  the  other  belligerent  in  that  theatre
of  the  war.  The  appropriate  remedy  for  this  oflenee  ia
the  confiscation  of  the  ship,  and,  in  doing  so,  the  courts


a  I  R(A.  67.  The  MercDrioi-  P-id-  130.  The  Columbia.  3  Btb,
173.  TliB  NeptuoDi-  4  RiA.  93-  Ttie  Alexander.  1  Edw.  39.  The
Eichao^-

b  Bynk.Q.J.  f.b.1.c}t.

eRrd).  12R.  Tb«  Wehaan  Van  Pitlaw.  3  jRiA.  147.  The  ivSitm
Maria  Schro«i1er.

rfSiIe&.3S7. TheLUcttc


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoOglc


M2  OF*  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  pirt  l-

mahe  no  ioDovation  on  the  ancient  law,  but  thejr  onl;
applj  established  principles  to  new  combinations  of
circumstances.  There  would  be  no  penalty  io  tha
ttere  confiscation  of  the  despatches.  The  proper
and  efficient  remedy  is  the  confiscation  of  the  va-
hicte  employed  to  carry  them  ;  and  if  any  pririty  subsist*
between  the  owners  of  the  cargo  and  the  master,  they
■re  involved  by  implication  in  bis  delinquency.  If  the
cargo  be  the  property  of  the  proprietor  of  the  ship,  tbea^
by  the  general  rule,  ob  continenliam  delicti,  the  cargo
shares  the  same  fate,  and  especially  if  there  was  an  aclir*
interposition  in  the  service  of  the  enemy,  concerted  aiwl
contuiued  in  fraud.^

A  diatinctioD  has  bemi  made  between  carrying  despatch^
es  of  the  enemy  between  different  parte  of  his  dominieoa*
and  carrying  despatches  of  an  ambassador  from  a  neniral
country  to  his  own  sovereign.  The  affect  of  the  former
despatches  is  preanmed  to  be  hostile ;  but  the  neutral
fouotry  has  a  right  to  preserve  its  relations  with  the  ene-
my, and  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  commuak-
eatiooa  are  c^a  hostile  nature.  Ambassadors  resident  in
»  oeirtral  country,  are  favourite  objects  of  tbe  protection
•f  the  law  of  nations,  and  their  objects  is  to  preserve  tbe
relations  of  amity  between  the  gorernmenta ;  and  tbe
presumption  is,  that  the  neutral  state  preserves  its  integrity^
and  is  not  concerned  in  any  hostile  design.''

In  order  to  enforce  the  rights  of  belligerent  nations
againt  the  delinquencies  of  neutrals,  and  to  ascertain
the  real  as  well  as  assumed  character  of  al)  vessels  on
the  high  seas,  tbe  law  of  nations  arms  them  with  the
practical  power  of  visitation  and  search.  The  duty
of  self-preserration  gives  to  belligerent  nations  this
right.  It  is  founded  upon  necessity,  and  is  strictly
and  exclusively  a  war  right,  and  doee  not  exist  in  time
of  peace.  All  writers  upon  the  law  of  nations,  and
tbe  highest  authorities,  acknowledged  the  right  as  reatiog
en  sound  princif^es  of  public  jurisprudence,  and  upon  th*


sThs  AtiknU,6  iIo(.410. b  The  CwoiiiM,  S  iU  411.

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


Lecture  VII.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  lA

ioMitutett  and  practice  of  bII  great  tnaritime  power*.*  And
if,  u)ion  making  the  search,  ibe  vessel  be  found  employed
in  rontrubaud  trade,  or  in  carrying  enemy's  property,  or
troops,  or  despatcfaes,  she  is  liable  to  be  taken  and  brought
in  for  adjndicatioB  before  a  prise  court.

Neutral  nations  have  frequently  been  disposed  to  quef
tion  and  resist  the  exerciseoftbisrigbt.  This  was  particu-
larly the  case  with  the  Baltic  eoafederacy,  during  the  Ame-
rican war,  and  with  the  convention  of  Ibe  Baltic  powers  ia
1801.  The  ri^ht  of  Kearch  was  denied,  end  the  flag  of  the
atnte  was  declared  to  be  a  substitute  for  all  documentary
and  other  proof,  and  to  exclude  all  right  of  search.  Those
{lowers  armed  for  the  purpose  of  defending  their  neutral
pretensions;  and  England  did  not  hesitate  tocootiider  itai
an  attempt  to  introduce,  by  force,  a  new  code  of  maritime
law,  inconsistent  with  ber  belligerent  rigbts,and  bostileto
her  interests,  and  one  which  would  gotoextiuguish  the  right
of  maritime  capture.  The  atlwnpt  was  speedily  frustrated
and  abandoned,  and  the  right  of  searcbhaa,  since  that  timet
been  considered  incootrovertible.

The  whole  doctrine  was  very  ably  discussed  in  the  En|^
lish  High  Court  of  Admiralty,  in  thecaseof  the  AfarM;l>
and  it  was  adjudged,  that  the  right  was  incontestable,  and
that  a  neutral  sovereign  could  not,  by  the  interposition  of
force,  vary  that  right.  Two  powers  may  agree  among
themselves,  that  the  presence  of  one  of  their  armed  sbipa
along  witb  their  merchant  ships,  shall  be  mutually  under-
stood  to  imply  that  nothing  is  to  be  found,  in  that  convoy
of  merchant  ships,  inconsistent  with  amity  or  neutrality*
But  no  belligerent  power  can  legally  be  compelled,  by  mera
force,  to  accept  of  such  a  pledge;  and  every  belligerent
power  who  is  no  party  to  the  agreement,  has  a  right  to  in*
aint  on  the  only  security  known  to  tbo  law  of  nations  on  Ibis
sut'ject,  independent  of  uny  special  covenant,  and  that  is  tha


a  Vaael.h.3.c.7.»ec.  114.  Tke  Maria,  1  fioi.  2tl7.t  £MiJMn^J(fai:
Rep.  itb. 1 1  Wheats,  43.
b  1  liiA.  3BT.


t,Goo(^lc


144  OF  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS.  [P«t  t.

right  of  personal  visitation  and  nearch,  to  be  ekercued  by
Ihoae  who  have  an  interest  in  making  it.  The  penalty  for
The  violent  contravention  of  this  right,  is  the  confiscation
of  the  property  So  withheld  from  visitation ;  and  the  in-
fliction nf  this  penalty  is  conrDrmable  to  the  settled  prac-
tice of  nations,  as  well  as  to  the  principles  of  the  niunici-  '
pal  jurisprudence  of  most  countries  in  Europe.  There  may
be  cases  in  which  the  master  of  a  neutral  ship  may  be  an-
thoriEed,  by  thb  natural  right  of  self-preservation,  to  de-
fend himself  aj^inst  extreme  violence  threatened  by  a
truiser,  grossly  abusing  his  commission ;  but,  except  inex-
tremo  cases,  a  merchant  vessel  has  no  right  to  say  tor  itself,
and  an  armed  vessel  has  no  right  to  say  for  it,  that  it  will
not  submit  to  visitation  or  search,  or  to  be  carried  into  a
proximnie  court  for  judicial  inquiry.  Upon  these  princi'
pies,  a  fleet  of  Swedish  merchant  ships,  sailing  under  con-
voy of  a  Swedish  ship  of  war,  and  under  iostruclions  from
the  Swedish  government  to  resist,  by  force,  the  right  of
search  claimed  by  British  lawfully  commissioned  cruisers,
was  condemned.  The  resistance  of  the  convoying  ship
was  a  resistanceof  the  whole  convoy,  and  justly  subjected
the  whole  to  confiscation.*

The  doctrine  of  the  English  admiralty  on  the  right  of
visitation  and  search,  and  on  the  limitation  of  the  right,  has
been  recognised  in  its  fullest  extent  by  the  courts  of  justice
in  this  country.'*  The  very  act  of  sailing  under  the  protec-
tion of  a  belligerent,  or  neutral  convoy,  for  the  purpose  of
resisting  search,  is  a  violation  of  neutralily.  The  Danish
government  asserted  the  same  principle  in  its  corespond-
ence  with  the  government  of  the  United  States,  and  in  the
royal  instructions  of  the  10th  of  March,  18IO;c  and  none


a  The  Maria,  I  Rob.  287. The  Elwbe,  4  Rob  400.

b  The  Nereide,  9  Cranch,  4^7.  43B  413.  445.  463.  The  Marianna
Flora,  II  Wlualon.ii.

c  4  HalPtL.Joumii!,W3.  T.eUeriofCaujitK^te'ikranliloJar.  Er-
vins,iSt^and  :scih  ofV  arte,  tmd  3th  of  July,  1811.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lwtera  Vn.]  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS,  14)

of  the  powers  of  Europe  hare  called  in  qnestioo  the  Justice
of  the  doctfinei*  Confiscation  is  applied  by  way  of  peual'
ty  for  reeittanCe  to  search  to  all  vessels,  without  any  dis'
erimination  as  to  the  oatioaal  character  of  the  vessel  or
cargo,  and  without  separating  the  fate  of  the  .Cargo  from
that  of  the  ship.

This  rightof  search  is  confined  to  private  merchant  veS'
lels,  and  does  not  apply  to  public  ships  of  war.  Their
itnmuDtty  from  the  exercise  of  any  jurisdiction  but  that  of
the  sovereign  power  to  which  they  belong,  is  uniformly  as*
Bcrted,  claimed,  and  conceded.  A  contrary  doctrine  is  not
to  be  found  in  any  jurist  or  writer  on  the  law  of  nations,  or
admitted  id  any  treaty,  and  every  act  to  the  contrary  has
been  promptly  met  and  condemned.!)

The  exercise  of  the  right  of  visitation  and  search  tliust
Im  conductod  with  due  care,  and  regard  to  the  rights  and
safety  of  the  vessel.^  Ifthe  neutral  has  acted  with  candor
and  good  faith,  and  the  inquiry  has  been  wrongfully  pur'
sued,  the  belligerent  cruiser  is  responsilile  to  the  neutral
in  costs  and  damages,  to  be  assessed  by  the  prize  court
which  sustains  the  judicial  examination.  The  mere  exer*
cise  of  the  right  of  search  involves  the  cruiser  in  notres>
pass,  for  it  is  strictly  lawful.  But  if  he  proceeds  to  cap-
ture the  vessel  as  prize,  and  sends  her  in  for  adjudication,
and  there  was  no  probable  cause,  he  is  responsible,  ft  is
not  the  search,  but  the  subsequent  capture,  which  is  treat-
ad  in  such  a  case  as  a  tortious  act.'' If  the  capture  be  jus-


a  Tb«  AoMriaa  ordinanne  ofncatnUitj'  of  Ao^si  7ifa.  1063,  enjoined  it
Vpon  all  their  vesseh  to  anbrnil  to  *isit>tion  on  the  high  seaa,  aod  aot  lo
make  koj  difflcDitf  ai  to  the  proddction  or  tb«  documentary  fraaft  of
property.

b  narla^t  StaU  Paper*,rai.  i.p,  &03.  JH>.  Owurinjr''  LetUrlaMt,
Jttonrof,  Atigvd  3</,  1807. Edinburgh  RttUa/M-  Oclohtr,  1B07,  arL  tr

e  The  Anna  Ma  na,  i  $FhtUiti,  337.

Vol.  f.  19


t,Gtx:)(^lc


Ufi  «P  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  h

tifiable,  the  subsequent  detentioo  for  adjucatioo  it  nerer
punished  with  damages  ;  and  in  all  cases  of  marine  toru»
courts  of  admiralty  exercise  a  large  discretion  in  girtog  or
withholding  damages.'

A  rescue  effected  by  ths  crew,  after  capture,  aad  when
the  captors  are  in  actual  posHesHioD,  is  unlawful,  and  con-
sidered to  be  a  resistance  within  the  application  of  iha
penalty  of  confiscation,  for  it  is  a  delivery  by  force  from
force.>>  And  where  the  penalty  attaches  at  all,  it  atiachef
as  completely  to  the  cargo  as  to  the  ship,  for  the  mnster
acted  aa  agent  ofthe  owner  of  the  cargo,  and  bis  resistance
was  a  fraudulent  attempt  to  withdraw  it  from  the  rights  of
war."

A  neutral  is  bound  not  only  to  submit  to  search,  but  tft
bare  his  vessel  duly  furnished  with  ihi;  genuine  docunienta.
requisite  to  support  ber  neutral  character.*^  The  most  ma-
terial of  these  documents  are,  the  register,  pattnport,  sea  let-
ter, muster  roll,  logbook,  charter-party,  invoice,  and  bill  of
.  lading.  The  wanf  of  some  of  these  papers,  'n  strong  pre-
■umptive  evidence  against  the  ship's  neutrality  ;  yet  the
want  of  any  one  of  them  is  not  ebaolulely  conclusive.^  iSt
aliquid  tx  to(emnibut  dejiciat,  cum  eqviCai  potcU,  tW-venien-
dum  eit.  The  concealment  of  papers  material  for  the  pre-
servation of  the  neutral  character,  justifies  a  capture,  and
earring  into  port  for  adjucation,  though  it  does  not  abso-
lutely require  a  condemoatisn.  It  inguod  ground  to  refiisa
costs  and  damageson  restitution,  or  to  refuse  further  proof
to  relieve  the  obscurity  of  the  cane,  where  the  cause  labour-
ed under  heavy  doubts,  and  there  was  prima  fade  ground
for  condemnation  independent  of  the  concenlmeot.'' Tba


a  H  JTAniton,  54-59.

h  Tha  Despatch, :i  Aa6- 395.  Brown  v.UoioaIiM.Co.S£)Qy*«Atp' I-

e  The  Caihiirina  Elizabeth,  6  Rth.  332.

d  Ant'Ferlolht  Pruuian  Memorial,  1753.

«  Oanuh liulnieliont,  ]OthM<mA.  1310.  8  Tena.4S*.  4  TatmUM,
367.  The  r.'^jteroTa  Tcuel  n  the  onl;  docameot  <rbich  need  be  on
botrd  B  Tfuel  in  time  cf  univerral  peace,  (o  prove  natioDal  cliarmctei*.
Catlettc  t- i'  i  >rjc  Ini.  Co.  1  Puue,  594.

/  LiTin^tton  k  Gilcbrist  r.  Mar.  laa.  Co,  7  CroRfA,  S44t


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


I^Mtare  VII.] OF  THE  tAW  OF  NATIONS.  147

tpoliation  of  papers  U  a  still  more  aggrtiv&ted  and  inflam*
ed  circumstance  of  suspicioa.  Tbat  tact  may  exclude  fui^
tber  proof,  and  be  sufficient  to  iafer  guilt  ;  but  it  does  not
in  Englaud,  as  it  does  by  the  maritime  law  ofotber  coun>
tries,  create  an  absolute  presumption  jurw  et  dejtire  ;  and
yet,  a  casethat  escapes  witb  such  a  brand  upon  it,  is  saved
so  as  by  fire.*  The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  Statea
bas  followed  the  less  rigourous  Englisb  rule,  and  beld  tbat
tbe  spoliation  of  papers  was  not,  of  itself,  sufficient  ground
for  condemnation,  and  tbat  it  was  a  circumstsnce  open  for
ezplanatioa,  for  it  may  hare  arisen  from  accident,  necessi-
ty, or  superior  force.''  If  tbe  explanation  be  not  prompt
and  frank,  or  be  weak  and  futile;  if  the  cause  labours  un-
der heavy  inspicions,  or  there  be  a  vehement  presumplion
of  bad  faith,  ur  gross  prevarication,  it  is  good  cause  for  ibo
denial  of  further  proof  j  and  the  condemnation  ensues  fronk
defects  in  tbe  evidence,  which  the  party  is  not  permitted
tosapply.  The  observation  ofLord  Mansfield, in  Btrnardi
v.  Motteaux,*'  was  to  the  some  effect.  By  the  maritime
law  of  all  countries,  he  said,  throwing  papers  overboard
was  considered  as  a  strong  presumption  of  enemy's  pro-
perty ;  but  in  all  his  experience,  he  bad  never  known  ft
condemnation  on  that  circumstance  only.


a  Tbe  Hanter,  1  Dodton,  460.
&  Tbe  Pizsrfo,  2  WhtaUM,  3S.1.
e  Dmg.  fax.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  VIII.


OF  TRCCES,  PASSFORTS,  AND  TBEaTIBS  OF  PEACE.

HatINO  considered  the  rights  aod  duties  appertHimnf
to  a  state  of  war,  I  proceed  to  examine  the  law  of  aalions
relative  to  ne^ociations,  coaveiitinns,  and  treaties,  whicb
either  partially  interrupt  the  war,  or  terminate  ia  peace.

(It)  A  truce,  or  sUspentjion  of  arii:t,  does  not  terminate
the  wart  butit  is  one  of  thecommercia  belli  which  suspends
its  operations.  These  conventionit  rest  upon  theoblifcation
of  good  faith ;  aod  as  they  lead  to  pacific  uegotiaiione,  and
are  necessary  to  control  hostilities,  and  promote  the  caose
of  humanity,  they  are  sacredly  observed  by  civilized  na-
tions.

A  particular  truce  is  only  a  partial  cessation  of  hostilities,
as  between  a  town  and  an  army  besriging  it.  But  a  ge-
neral  tiuoe  applies  to  the  operations  of  the  war  ;  and  if  it
bo  for  a  long  or  iodefiaite  period  of  time,  it  amounts  to  a
temporary  peace,  which  leaves  the  state  of  the  rontending
parties,  and  the  questions  between  them,  remaining  in  tbe
nine  situation  as  it  found  tbem.  A  partial  truce  may  be
made  fay  a  subordinate  commander,  and  it  isaimwer  necRS-
Barily  implied  iii  the  nature  of  his  trust ;  but  it  is  requisite
to  a  general  truce,  or  suspension  of  hostilities  throughout
the  nation,  or  for  a  great  length  of  time,  that  it  be  made
by  the  sovereign  of  the  country,  or  by  his  special  authori-
ty." lUie  general  principle  on  the  subject  is,  tbut  if  a  com-
mander makes  a  compact  with  the  enemy,  and  it  be  of

a  FaUeU  b.  3-  g.  16.  uc.  333.33S. OnXiuf,  b.  3.  o.  X). '


Do,i,,-,-,ih,.Googlc


IM  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  (Put  L

•ucb  a  nature  that  tbe  power  to  make  it  could  be  reaaona-
bly  implied  from  tbe  nature  of  tbe  trust,  it  would  be  valid
•nd  binding,  thougb  he  abused  bin  trmt.  Tbe  obligatitm
ba  is  uuder  not  to  abuM  bii  trust,  regardi  bit  own  state^
and  not  the  enemy.*

A  truce  bindM  the  confracling  partiei  from  tbetime  it  i*
concluded,  but  it  doea  not  bindtbeindiTiduaUoftbe  natMm
■o  as  to  render  tfaem  personally  respoiuible  for  a  breach  ot
it,  until  they  have  had  actual  or  coostructive  notice  of  it.
Thou^  an  individual  may  not  be  held  to  make  pecuniar^'
eompenaation  fur  a  capture  made,  or  destruction  of  pro-
perty, after  the  naspension  of  hostilitiet,  and  before  notice
of  it  had  reached  him,  yet  tbe  sovereign  of  the  eouotry  is
bound  to  cause  restoratioa  to  be  made  of  all  prizes  made
after  the  date  of  a  general  truce.  To  prevent  the  danger
and  damage  that  might  arise  from  acta  committed  in  igno-
tance  of  the  truce,  it  is  common  and  proper  to  fii  a  pros-
pective period  for  the  cessation  of  hostilities,  with  a  due
reference  to  the  distance  and  situation  uf  places. <>

A  truce  onlytemporarily  stays  hosiilittes;  and  each  par-
ty to  it  may,  within  his  awn  territories,  do  whatever  )»
voold  have  a  right  to  do  in  time  of  ^eace.  He  may  con-
tinue active  preparations  for  war.  'ay  4*«pairing  forti&ca*
tiooB,  levying  and  disciplining  troo^xj,  -nd  collecting  pr»-
visions,  and  articles  of  war.  Se  nay  Ic  whatever,  under
all  tbe  circumstances,  would  be  deeiied  rompatible  with
good  faith,  and  thespirit  of  tbe  agfeement;  but  he  is  justly
restrained  from  doing  what  would  be  directly  injurious  to
tbe  enemy,  and  could  not  safely  he  done  in  the  midst  ot
hostilities.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  a  truee  between  the  go-
vernor of  a  fortifiedtown,  and  the  army  besieging  it,  neither
party  is  at  liberty  tocontinue  works,  constructed  either  for
attack  or  defence,  and  which  could  not  safely  be  done  if


a  Bmihafortk.b.tii.9. J>VM,  b,  3.  e.  IS.  wo.  Ml. Orsliiu.h^.
e.  fC  MO.  4-
k  ral(4,b-&.e.lS-MC.»9.t4!(»


t,Goo(^lc


LechroVm.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  l«

Jiostiiiriea  had  continued ;  for  this  would  be  to  mabo  8
miscbittVonB  and  rrauduleot  use  of  the  cewation  of  arms*
So,  it  wauld  be  a  fraud  upon  the  rights  of  the  besieging
army,  and  an  abuse  of  tha  armistice,  for  the  garrisoa  to
avail  themsekea  of  the  truee  to  introduce  provision  aod
auccoura  into  the  town,  in  a  wayi  or  through  passage**
which  the  beseigiag army  would  have  been  competent  to
prevent.*  The  meaning  of  every  such  compact  is,  that  all
things  should  remain  as  they  were  in  the  places  contented)
and  of  which  the  possession  was  disputed,  at  the  moment
of  the  conclusion  of  the  truce.l>

At  the  expiration  of  the  truce,  hostilities  may  recom-
mence without  any  fresh  declaratioB  of  war ;  hut  if  it  ba
for  an  indefinite  time,  jiistica  and  good  faith  would  require
due  notice  of  an  intention  to  terminate  il.o

Grotius  and  Tattel,''  as  well  as  other  writers  on  national
law,  have  agitated  the  question,  whether  a  truce  for  a
;given  period,  as,  for  instance,  from  the  first  of  January  to
the  first  of  February,  will  include  or  exclude  the  first  day
of  each  of  these  months.  Grotius  says,  that  the  day  from
whence  a  truce  is  to  be  computed,  is  not  one  of  the  days  ct
the  truce,  but  that  it  will  include  the  whole  of  the  first  day
of  February,  as  being  the  day  of  its  termination.  Tattel,
on  the  ether  hand,  is  of  opinion,  that  the  day  of  the  com-
mencement of  the  truce  would  be  included,  aod  as  the|time
ought  to  he  tafaen  largely  aod  liberally,  for  the  take  of
humanity,  the  last  day  mentioned  would  also  be  included.
Every  ambiguity  of  this  kind  ought  always  to  be  prevented,
by  positive  and  precise  stipulations,  as  from  such  a  day  to
such  a  day,  both  inclusiue.

(2.)  A  passport,  or  safe  conduct,  isa  privilege  granted  in
war,  and  exempting  the  party  from  the  effects  of  its  upc
ration,  during  the  time,  and  to  the  extent  prescribed  in  the


a  VMtt,  b.  3.  e.  16.  tec  MT.J^IS.

e  Ihid-  b-  3.  c  IS.  mo.  ?ea

a  Gri>;uM.b.  3.o.St.wsa.  4. ruffi/,  ^.  3.  o.  16.  t


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


ISS  OP  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pin  i:

pennissioD.  It  flows  from  ibe  aoverei^  authority  |  but  th«
power  of  granting  a  paiieport  may  be  delef^ted  by  tbe  sove-
reign to  pertons  in  ubordinate  commaitd,  and  the;  are  in-
Tealed  with  tbal  powereiiher  by  an  expren  commiaeioa,  of
by  the  nature  of  their  trust."  The  general  of  an  armyt  front
the  very  nature  of  hie  power,  can  grant  safe  conducts )  but
the  permi«ion  is  not  transferable  t^  the  person  named  tfl
the  passport,  for  it  may  be  that  the  gorernment  had  eperial
reasons  for  granting  the  privilege  to  the  very  individual
named,  and  it  is  to  be  presumed  to  be  personal.  If  the  safe
conduct  be  granted,  not  for  persons,  but  for  effects,  those
effects  may  be  removed  by  others  besides  the  owner,  pro^
vided  no  person  be  selected  as  (he  agent)  against  whom
rhere  may  eiist  a  personal,  objection  sufficient  to  render
him  ao  object  of  susfHcion  or  danger  within  the  territoriea
of  the  power  granting  the  permission.

He  wbo  promises  security,  by  a  passport,  is  morally
.  bound  to  afford  it  against  any  of  hia  subjects  or  forces,
and  to  make  good  any  damage  the  party  might  suslaia
by  a  violation  of  the  passport.  The  privilege  being  so
lar  a  dispensation  from  the  legal  effect  of  war,  it  is  always
to  be  taken  strictly,  and  must  be  confined  to  the  pur*
pose,  and  place,  and  time  for  which  it  was  granted.  A
safe  conduct  generally  includes  the  necessary  baggage
and  servants  of  the  person  to  whom  it  is  granted  ;  atid
to  save  doubt  and  difficulty,  it  is  usual  to  enumeratei
with  precision,  every  particular  branch  and  extent  of
the  indulgence.  If  a  safe  conduct  he  given  for  a  stated
term  of  time,  the  person  in  whose  favour  it  was  granted,
must  leave  the  enemy's  country  before  the  time  expires,
unless  detained  by  sickness,  or  some  unavoidable  circum-
stance, end  then  he  remains  under  the  same  protection.
The  case  is  different  with  an  enemy  who  comes  into  th«
country  of  his  adversary  during  a  truce.  He,  at  his  own
peril,  tahca  advantage  of  a  general  liberty,  allowed  by  the
susjimsion  of  hostilities,  and  at  the  expiration  of  the  truce,

>  VaUtl,  b-  3.  c.  17.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LecWrtVm.). OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS,  153

the  war  may  freely  take  iti  course,  without  being  inipe*
ded  by  BDy  cleims  ofiucb  a  party  for  protection.*

It  isitated  that  a  safe  conduct  may  even  be  reToked  by
him  who  granted  it,  for  some  good  reason  ;  for  it  ii  a  ge-
neral principle  in  the  law  of  nations,  that  every  privilege
Biny  he  revoked,  when  it  becomea  detrimental  to  the  Btate>
If  it  be  a  gratuitous  privilege^  it  may  be  revoked  purely
and  simply  ;  but  if  it  be  a  purchased  privilege,  the  party
interested  in  it  is  entitled  to  indemnity  against  all  inju-
rious consequences,  and  erery  party  affected  by  the  rero-
catien  is  to  be  allowed  liuie  and  liberty  to  depart  in
■afety.b

The  effect  of  a  license  giren  by  the  enemy,  to  the  sub-
jects of  the  adverse  party,  to  carry  on  a  kpecified  trade,
has  already  been  considered,  in  respect  to  the  light  in
which  it  is  viewed  by  the  government  of  the  citiaens  ai^
cepting  it.  A  rery  different  effect  is  given  to  these  licen-
ses by  the  government  which  grants  them,  and  they  are
regarded  and  respected  as  lawful  relaxations  or  suspeit-
aions  of  the  rules  of  war.  It  is  the  assumption  of  a  state
of  peace  to  the  extent  of  ibe  license,  and  the  act  rests  in
the  discretion  ef  the  sovereign  authority  of  the  state,
which  alone  is  competent  to  decide  how  far  considerationt
of  commercial  and  political  expediency  may,  in  particular
cases,  control  the  ordinary  consequences  of  wari  In  the
country  which  grants  them,  licensps  to  carry  on  a  pacific
commerce  are  ttricti  jurit,  as  being  exceptions  to  a  gene-
ral rule ;  though  they  are  not  to  be  construed  with  pe-
dantic accnracy,  nor  will  every  small  devintion  be  held  to
vitiate  the  fuir  effect  of  ibem.o  An  excess  in  the  quantity
of  goods  permitted  to  be  imported,  might  not  he  conside-
red as  noxious  to  any  extent ;  hut  a  variation  in  the  quali-
ty or  substance  of  the  goods  might  be  more  significant.
Whenever  any  part  of  the  trade  assumed  under  the  li-
cense, is  denuded  of  any  authority  under  it,  such  part  it
Uibject  to  condemnation.


«  F(i(W;b.  3.0.  17  Kc  «73,  C74.  6  FotM,  b.3.  c.  17.M

c  Tbs  CmtnoFwtiie,  4  Rih.  i.
Vol.  I.  ao


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


134  OF  TH  &  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  (Put  t>

Another  matenal  cimtmnenee  in  all  lieempi,  n  tka
limitaiiun  of  time  in  which  they  are  to  be  carried  into
effect,  for  what  ia  propsr  at  one  time,  may  be  very  unfit
and  miMchierous  at  any  other  time.  Where  a  lieena*
WBH  hmited  to  be  in  force  until  the  2&th  of  September)
and  the  ship  did  not  sail  from  the  foreifn  port  until  tlw
<4lh  of  October,  yet  an  the  goods  were  laden  on  board  by
the  12ib  of  September,  and  there  was  an  entir*  6om
fides  on  the  pait  of  the  person  holtliajf  the  license,  thia
wafl  held  to  be  le^l.>  But  where  a  license  was  to  brii^
■way  a  cargo  from  Bordeaux,  and  the  party  thoaght  pra>
per  to  chanjBie  the  license,  and  urcommodate  it  to  anothet
port  in  France,  it  was  held  to  be  a  ease  not  protected  by
the  license;  and  the  English  admiralty,  in  the  case  vt
the  Tute  Gtbroedert,^  held,  that  the  license  was  ritiat«d,
and.the  vessel  and  cargo  were  eoodemned.  It  has  aiss
been  held,  that  the  license  muK  be  limited  to  the  use  of
the  precise  persons  for  whose  benefit  it  was  obtained*
The  ^reat  principle  in  these  cases  ia,  that  subjects  are  not
to  trade  with  the  enemy  without  the  special  permisnoa
of  the  governaiMit }  and  a  material  inject  of  the  control
ivhicb  the  government  exercises  over  such  a  trade,  if^
that  it  may  judge  of  the  panicular  persons  who  are  fit  ta
be  iniruiited  with  an  exemption  from  the  ordiucuy  restrie*
tions  of  a  state  of  war.«

(3.)  The  object  of  war  it  peaae ;  and  it  is  tbe  duty  of
every  belligerent  power  to  make  war  fulfil  its  end  with
tbe  least  possible  mischief,  and  to  accelerate  by  all  fair  and
reasonable  means,  a  just  and  honourable  peace.  The  same
power  which  has  tbe  right  to  declare  and  carry  on  war,
would  seem  naturally  to  he  tbe  proper  power  to  make
andconcludea  treaty  of  peace ;  but  the  disposition  of  tbit
power  will  depend  upon  the  local  constitution  of  every  na*
tibn ;  and  it  sometimes  happens,  that  this  power  of  mahiof


<T  IS  EaH.&3. SCampb.  A*. P. 93.
b  )  Edv.  S5.

e  TI.O  Je»rirB  Johinnc*,  4  Kob-  tCJ. See  tbe  law  ■•  to  ticemes  eoi-
lected  ia  I  H^IPiJV.p.  Rip.  i».  notfc


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


hattan  VIU.] Ot  THE1.AW  OF  NATIONS.  15»

IMAM  !•  cocnmitted  to  a  bodj  of  men  wbo  haTe  uot  th*
power  to  make  war.  la  Sweden,  after  thedeatbof  Charle*
XIL  the  king  could  declare  war  without  tbe  coDsent  of  tbtt
xational  Diet,  but  be  Hiade  peace  io  coRJuDetion  witb  th*
Senate.*  9o,  by  the  coBsttUitKNi  </  the  United  Stntea,  (ha
Preaideot,  b/  and  with  the  K^ice  and  consent  of  two
thirds  of  the  Senate,  may  navkc  peace,  bnt  it  i>  reserved
to  CoflgreM  to  make  war.  This  provision  in  our  eonati*
tutioo  is  well  adapted  (as  will  be  shown  more  fully  hereaf-
ter) to  unite  io  the  oe^iatioa  and  conclusion  of  treaties^
tbe  advai^age  oftalents,  eimrience,  stability,  and  a  com-
prebeasive  knowledge  of  national  interests,  with  the  re-
quisite secceey  and  despatdi.

Treatiesof  peace,  when  made  by  thaoorapetent  power,
are  oblijj^iory  upon  the  wiiole  nation.  If  the  treaty  re-
quires  tbe  paymentt^raoney  to  carry  it  into  effect,  and  tbe
aaoney  cannot  be  raised  but  by  an  act  of  tbe  legislature,
the  treaty  is  morally  obligatory  upon  tbe  legislature  to  pesa
Ibe  law ;  and  to  refuse  it  would  be  a  breach  of  public  faitb.-
Tbe  department  of  the  government  that  is  intruited  by
the  constitutioa  witb  the  treaty-making  power,  is  compe-
tent to  bind  tbe  national  faith  ia  its  discretion ;  forlhe
-power  to  make  treaties  of  peace  must  be  coexteniire  with
all  the  exigencies  of  the  nation,  and  necessarily  invalvei
in  it  that  portion  of  the  natioual  sovereignty  which  has  tba  ,
'  exclusive  direction  of  diplomatic  negotiations  and  contraeta
with  foreign  powers.  All  treaties  made  by  that  power  be-,
comeofabsolnta  efficacy,  because  they  are  the  suprtjme
taw  of  tbe  land..

There  ean  he  no  doubt  that  the  power  contpetent  t»
bind  tbe  nation  by  treaty  may  alienate  the  pahlic  domain
and  property  by  treaty.  If  a  nation  has  conferred  upon
ib  executive  department,  without  reserve,  the  rijtht  of
treating  and  contracting  with  other  states,  it  is  considered
as  having  invested  it  with  all  the  power  necessary  to  make
a  valid  contract. That  department  is  tbe  organ  of  the

m  raUtU  b.  4.  c.  S.  »m.  io.

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


Wfl  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I;

nation,  and  the  alienations  by  it  are  ralid,  because  tbej
are  done  by  the  reputed  will  of  the  nation.  The  fanda-
nental  laws  of  a  itaie  maj  withhold  from  the  executive
department  the  power  of  alienatinjf  nbat  belonga  to  the
■tate ;  but  if  there  be  no  expreu  provision  of  that  kind,  the
inference  in,  that  it  has  confided  to  the  departmeot  charged
with  the  power  of  making  treaties,  a  discretion  commetH
surate  with  all  the  great  interests,  and  wants,  and  necessi-
ties of  the  nation.  A  power  to  make  treaties  of  peace  ne-
cessarily implies  a  power  to  decide  the  terms  on  which
they  shall  be  made,  and  foreign  states  could  not  deal  safe-
ly with  the  government  upon  any  other  presumption.  Th«
power  that  is  intrusted  generally  and  largely  with  authori-
ty to  make  valid  treaties  of  peace,  can,  of  course,  bind  the
nation  by  alienation  of  part  of  its  territory;  and  this  ia
equally  the  case  whether  the  territory  be  already  in  the  oc-
eupation  of  the  enemy,  or  remains  in  the  possession  of
the  ootioo,  and  whether  the  property  be  public  or  private.*
in  the  ease  of  the  sdiooner  Ptggy,^  the  Supreme  Court
of  the  United  States  admitted,  that  -individual  rights  ae-
qnired  by  war,  and  vested  rights  of  the  oiti»ns,  might  be
sacrificed  by  treaty  fbr  national  purposes.  80,  in  tbeeaie
of  Ware  T.  ifyfooa,*:  it  was  said  to  be  a  clear  principle  of
national  law,  that  private  rights  might  be  sacrificed  by
treaty  to  secure  the  public  safety,  though  the  government
would  be  bound  to  make  compensation  and  indemnity  to
the  individuals  whose  rights  had  thus  been  surrendered.
The  power  to  alienate,  and  the  duty  to  make  compensation,
are  both  laid  down  by  Grotiu8<l  in  equally  explicit  terms.

A  treaty  of  peace  is  valid  and  binding  on  the  nation,  if
made  with  the  present  rating  power  of  the  nationl'  or  the


«  I  Craneh.  103.
«  S  DalUu,  199.
d  B.  3.  c.  SO.  MO.  7.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LartortVIU.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  157

forerarnent  dt  facta.  Other  nationi  have  no  ri^ bt  to  Inter-
fere with  the  domestic  Rfiiiir§  of  any  [larticulaf  ntition.arto
«xaniine  and  judge  of  the  title  of  the  party  in  poMeflHion
of  the  lupreme  authority.  Tbey  are  to  ionk  only  to  the  fact
ofpoasession.*  And  it  ii  an  ecknowledged  rule  of  intrrna-
tional  law,  that  the  principal  party  in  whose  name  the  war
b  inade,  cannot  juMly  make  peace  witbont  including  those  '
defensive  allres  in  the  pacification  who  have  afforded  as-
■istanea,  though  they  may  not  have  acted  as  principals;  for
it  would  be  faithleu  and  cruel  for  the  prrncipal  in  the  war
lo  leave  his  weaker  ally  to  the  full  force  of  the  enemy's  r«-
■entmeot.  The  ally  is,  however,  to  be  no  farther  a  party
to  the  stipulations  and  obtigationsof  the  treaty,  than  he  hat
been  willing  to  consent.  A 11  that  the  principal  can  require,
is,  that  bis  ally  be  considered  as  restored  to  a  state  of  peace.'
Every  alliance  in  which  all  the  parties  are  principals  intbtf
war,  <d>liges  the  allies  to  treat  in  concert,  though  each  oM
makes  a  separate  treaty  of  peace  for  btniBelf.i)

The  effect  of  a  treaty  of  peace  is  to  put  an  end  to  the
war,  and  to  abotish  the  subjeot  of  it.  Peace  relates  to  the
war  which  it  terminate!.  It  is  an  agreement  to  waive  all
discussion  concerning  the  respective  rights  of  the  parties,
and  to  bury  in  oblivion  alt  the  original  caunes  of  the  war.
It  forbids  the  revival  of  the  same  war,  by  taking  arms  for
the  cause  which  at  first  kindled  it,  though  it  is  no  objec-
tion to  any  subsequent  pretensions  to  the  same  thing,  od^
other  foundations.*:  After  peace,  the  reiival  of  grievance*
arising  before  the  war  is  not  to  be  encouraged,  for  treaties
of  peace- are  intended  to  put  an  end  to  such  complaiRtsj
and  if  grievances  theneiisting  are  not  brought  forward  at
the  time  when  peace  is  concladed,  it  is  to  be  presumed
that  it  is  not  intended  to  bring  them  forward  at  any  future
time.i^  Peace  leaves  the  contracting  parties  without  any
right  of  cooiroitting  hostility  for  the  very  cause  which  kin*


•  rattfl.h.4.c.t.wec.l4.  c  FoUtAb.  4.  o.  >.  mo.  19.

b  Ibid.  b.  4.  cS.  mo.  H.  d  I  Dodaan:'*  AAat.  Rjp.  399.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


IM  OP  THE  LAW  or  NATIONS  ytuit.

MtA  tbe  war,  or  for  nbat  baa  pawed  u  A«  course  of  it.  It
Mt  tiierefore,  no  lon^r  permitteA  t»  take  up  arm*  again  for
th* MineeaHH.'  But  thie  friJI  not  preclude  tha  tight  to
«M»plaia  aod  reiiat,  if  tbe  tame  gcieraDCM  wbieb  kindled
tbe  war  be  renefred  and  repeated,  for  that  woatd  ftiruish  a
■ew  iiqurjr  aod  a  new  cause  of  war  evtally  just  with  tbe
Ibrmer  war.  If  ao  abstract  right  be  ia  queAioo  betweea
tbe  partiea.  the  right,  for  ioManoe,  toimpreieal  aeaoae^
MM  aubjecu,  froia  tbe  laercbaot  veneh  of  tbe  other,  and
the  partiea  make  peace  without  taking  any  aoiiee  of  tbe
<|lieali(Hk,  it  foUoira,^  of  oourse,  tbet  all  paat  grievancea,
damagea,.  awl  iajury,  ariaiug  under  auch  claim,  are  tbrewa
itua  oblivion,  bjr  th»a»iHat;  which  every  treaty-  impliea;
but  tbe  daiuiiaelf  w.  not  tberefaf  settled,  either  oae  way
•rih* other.  ^  reoaajna  open  for  future  dtacnaaoa,  be-
flawee  the  treaty  waetcd  an'  ezpreaa  coDceeaiiOB  or  reaair
eiHtio«<tf  theetaim  iia^f^t»

A  treaty  of  peace  leaveaeTerytbiogiotbeatalaki  which
it  fipda  it,  if  there  he  no  expreaa  atiputatioaoa  the  aabject.
If  aflthiog  be  aaid  in  a  treaty  of  peace  about  the  conquered
•oonttr  or  plaeee,  they  remaio  witb  the  poaaeasor,  and  hi*
tittacaniMXaaerwarda  he  called  in  queatioa.  During  war,
tbe  caoqMerar  ha»  only  a  uaufruetUBry  right  to  the  tecri  tory
ba  baa  tubdued,  aod  the  latent  right  aod  title  of  tbe  former
■oaeteign  coatiouea,  until  a  treaty  of  peace,  by  iia  ailence,
ar  byitaexproM  atipalatioB,  afaall  bare  extiaguiabed  his
(itla  fcr  erer.e

Tbe  peace  does  not  a&et  rigbta  which  had  no  relation
IB  the  war:  Oebta  ezistiog  prior  to  tbe  war,  and  injuriea
eoBiautted  prior  to  tbe  war.  but  which  mode  no  part  ofth*
reeaoaafiinuidertakiiv  it,  remain  entire,  and  the  remediea
ore  rerired.^  There  are  certain  caaea  ia  which  erea  debit


«  raa(l,b.  4.((.z.Mc  19.
»  tbid.  b.4.o.2.Ma.l»,S0.

el  A><lm,45S. fatW,  b.4.cl.  •«..  «l.  0««wi  lifc,  »  o.  ».  •»
4,  i-JliAlj^tDnadePEtmpt^tam.  I.e. 2.  p.  U4.
f  amtm,  b.  8.  e.  to.  mo.  i8.  ib.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Locim  vm.] or  Tirc  law  or  nations; 1S»

contracted,  or  fojuriea  committed,  bntweMi  twosubjecU
«f  the  bel%flr«iii  powera,  during  the  war,  are  tbt>  ground
«f  a  vatid  dawn.  '  Tfais  woutd  be  the  cbm  if  the  debt  be-
tween them  wa«  cootracUNlt  «r  the  u^ufywai  c«mmiued«
in  a  neutral  eonntry.^

A  treaty  of  peace  bindt  llie  oootracliog  partiea  froM  lb>
Moment  of  its  ooneldflioD.  Bat,  like  •  tniee,  it  ca»not  mt-
feet  tbenrii^ecti  of  the  nation  with  g«ih,  by  reaaonof  aett
of  hoaliK^  labwquMit  to  ihedate  oflfae  tr«aty,  pi«*idei
Cbey  ware  committed  before  the  treaty  wax  known.  AH
that  ean  be  required  in  nek  caaes  it,  that  the  goremment
make  immediate  reatkation  of  thing*  caplared  after  tbt
eesmtioa  of  bottilitiei ;  and  to  guard  a^init  toeoDTeoi'
«Dce  from  the  want  of  due  knowledge  of  the  treaty,  it  is
omai  to  fix  the  periodH  at  which  hoetilitiea  are  to  ceaM  al
differeiK  placet,  and  for  the  rettitution  of  property  takes
•Aerwnrds.b

But  though  in dindualfl  are  not  deemed  criminalforeoo*
tittuing  hofltilitieB  after  the  dale  of  the  peace,  eo  kmg  m
A*ty  are  ignomnt  of  it,  a  more  difficult  queatioa  to  deters
mine  ia,  whether  they  are  reaponiible,  eivifiter,  in  rach
cases.  Grotiuafi  says,  they  are  not  liable  to  answer  ia
damages,  but  it  ia  tbe  duty  of  the  government  to  restore
what  has  been  captured  and  not  destroyed.  Ia  the  case  of
the  American  ship  Mentor,^  which  was  taken  and  destroy-
ed, offDelaware  bay,  by  British  ships  of  war,  in  1783,  alL
terthe  oeasation  of  boattlitiee,  but  before  that  fiict  bad
•ome  to  the  knowledge  of  either  of  the  parties,  tbe  |iotnt
was  much  discussed  ;  and  it  waa  held,  that  the  injured
party  oould  not  pass  over  the  peraoa  from  whom  tbn
allitged  injury  had  been  receired,  and  fix  it  on  tlM
tamuandarof  the  English  squadron  on  that  station,  who
was  totally  ignorant  of  the  whole  transaction,  and  at  th^
distance  of  thirty  leagues  from  the  place  where  it  passedt


«  ratlet,  b.  4.  o.  *.  sec.  9t.

h  Ibid.  b.  4-  o.  3.  wc.  94,  !S. t  DuVu.  40.  4n^,  td.  t.  2tT<

c  B.3.  c^l.seo.  S.

4lRoi).  151.


i,Googlc


too  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Rrt  I.

There  was  no  initance  in  the  annali  of  tbe  prixe  courU,
of  Bucb  a  remote  and  cousequential  reipODiibility  in  sucfa  a
ease.  The  actual  nroug-doer  is  the  person  to  aaswer  'ux
judgment,  and  to  him  the  roaponsibility  (if  any)  is  attached.
He  may  have  other  persons  responsible  over  to  him,  but  tbe
iDJared  |>arty  could  look  only  to  him.  Tbe  baiter  opioioa
was,  that  tbougb  such  an  act  be  dona  through  igooranee
<^thece«aation  of  hostilities,  yet  mere  ignorance  of  that
fact  would  not  protect  tbe  officer  from  ciril  respoosibility
in  a  prize  court;  and  that,  if  he  acted  through  igBMraoce,.
bis  own  gorernment  must  protect  bim  and  save  him  harm-
less. When  a  place  or  country  is  exempted  from  hostili^
by  articles  of  peace,  it  is  tbe  duty  of  tbe  government  to
use  due  diligence  to  give  its  subjects  notice  of  the  fact*
and  tbe  governoient  ought,  in  justice,  to  indemnify  its
subjects,  who  act  in  ignorance  of  the  peace.  And  yet  it
would  seem,  from  that  case,  that  tbe  American  owner  was
denied  redress  in  tbe  British  admiralty,  not  only  against
the  admiral  of  the  fleet  on  that  Mation,  but  against  the  im-
mediate author  of  the  injury.  Sir  William  Scott  denied
the  relief  against  the  admiral ;  and  ten  years  before  that
.(ime,  relief  had  equally  been  denied,  by  his  predeceswr,
against  the  person  who  did  the  injury.  If  that  decisioa
was  erroneous,  an  appeal  ought  to  huve  been  prosecuted.  '
yVo  have  rhen  tbe  decision  of  the  English  High  Court  of
Admiralty,  denying  any  relief  in  such  case,  and  an  opinion
of  Sir  William  Scott,  many  years  afterwards,  that  the
original  wrong-doer  was  liable.  Tbe  opinions  cannot
otherwise  be  reconciled,  than  upon  the  ground  that  the
prize  courts  have  a  large  and  equitable  liiNcretioo,  in  al-
lowing or  withholding  relief,  according  to  the  special  «r-
pim.stances  of  the  individual  case  ;  and  that  there  is  no
fixed  or  inflexible  general  rule  on  tbe  subject.

If  a  time  be  fixed  by  tbe  treaty  for  hostilities  to  cease  in
a  given  pince,  and  a  capture  be  previously  made,  but  with
knowledge  of  the  peace,  it  has  been  a  question  among  tbe
writers  on  publir:  law,  whetbpribecaptnred  property  should
be  restored.  The  belter,  and  ibc  more  reasonable  opinion.


t,Goo(^lc


VUL] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS,  lH

is,*  that  the  capture  would  be  null,  though mede before  tbd
day.timit«d(  provided  the  captor  was  previoUBly  inrornitul
of  the  peace  ;  for,  aa  Utaerigoa  oboervest  liuc^  construe-
tire  knowledge  of  the  peace,  oftM*  the  time  limited  in  the
diflereat  parts  of  the  world,  renders  the  capture  void«
much  more  ought  actual  knowledge  ot  the  peace  to  pro-
duce  that  effect. i>


a  f  sSn,  Tratt  da  Pritet,  ob.  4.  lee.  4  kod  S.  Eineng«n,  n-rilt  dtt
•til.  c.  IS.  wo.  ]t>. AiarAonMarUimehim.  edit.  R.  t.  Vot.^.  p  331.

6  Thii  poJDt  Wu  terjr  eitcniirel?  disciluei}  in  ths  F*reiicb  pri^  cadrto,
u  the  inis  of  tha  mpture  of  (be  BrilMb  abip  SitintKtfd.  bf  tbe  Freuoh
jmrateor  B»liena;tttd  what  nUMiOcieat  hmtirladga  of  lb«  laot  of  the
peace,  to  aaoni  the  eaplara.  was  (he  great  qa^tioa.  It  appeaftd  Ibat
the  Bellona  lailad  (mm  the  tsle  ot  Fraace  tbe  97th  of  No* ember.  ISOt>
beforo  Dflwi  bad  arrired  at  ttle  I'aUnd  6(  tb«  *<^Tiln^  of  the  pre!  i  mi  Dane!
of  peaoe  batwoeo  Fraoae  add  RugUarf,  and  irhich  had  bMa  aigiiad  on
tbe  lUof  Oatob«rprac«diiig.  Tbe  caplure  wm  made  mi  tha  2Nhaf
Februarj,  I8(K,  within  the  period  of  Gre  moolb*  from  the  date  Of  tba
(reatj:  and,  b;  the  lltb  article  of  the  treaty,  it  WMprovidedi  that  cap-
tares  made  i<t  an;  (lart  oflhe  world,  after  ire  m  idlhi  f'rani  the  raliGca-
tioo  of  the  traatji  (hooM  be  nail  and  ^oid.  The  coptilre  wai  rflade  in  a
pItMM  where  a  ihorter  period  than  Are  moothi  did  not  apply.  Tbo  proi
claniktloo  of  tho  Kinf  ofOnal  Britain  of  tbe  Itth  of  Or^tobef,  IIOl.  as'
tiounced  tbe  fact  of  the  ligoaturet  of  the  preliminary  articlei  of  peace  j
hnd  it  dated  tba  (ubitance  oflhe  lllhsriicte,  and  Mrdered  all  host  ili  tie*
tooeawinthe  diSbrent  place*,  ffwn  and  afl^f  th«  reapedllve  periodt
■Motioned  in  that  artiola ;  and  thi*  procbunatioo  was  pnblialted  in  tbe
Calcutta  OasettB,  aod  made  known,  by  tbe  prodoctiou  of  that  paper,  to
ths  Ffench  cinieer,  at  aererml  time*,  bjdistinct  ressels,  iome  day*  pre*
Viaos  to  the  C^nre.  Tbia  oridence  of  tbe  peace  Was  also  Oomoiiiaicafad
to  the  capUid  of  the  French  retiel  a)  soon  as  the  capture  took  place,
ud  yet,  nolirithilaading  thb  notice,  the  tlog-lish  s'lip  wai  laktb  poMee*
■Ion  of,  and  carried  into  ibelile  of  France,  andlibened,aild  condemned,
Bf  lawful  prise  of' war.  Thri  scnteDce  01*  coodom nation  wai  alflnned  iA
1803,  <M  appeal  to  the  Council  ofPrilE*  at  I'aris,  andM.  ^er;'t n  hat  re-
ported  at  laifa  the  elaborate  ailment  aaj  opinioD  df  M.  Collet  Deacd-
tib,  tite  Imperial  AdTocale  General  in  the  Conncil  ofPriiet,  in  faVonr  ttf
Uw  4»|Xors.  The  ground  be  took,  and  upon  whicb  IhA  C'niDcil  of  Priief
proceeded,  waa,  that  the  king*!  H^d^matNin,  nnaccompanied  by  Any
French  atteatatioD,  mt  not  thaf  aufficient  and  iSdnbilable  evidence  to
tbe  French  craiatr,  of  the  fact  of  the  peace,  vpoo  which  be  ovfbl
Vou  I,  31


t,Goo(^lc


16»  or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [»*rt  I.

Another  qneetton  arose  flnhsequent  tntbe  trart;f  ofGbeDt
of  1814,  in  one  of  the  Britiiib  rice-admiralty  coarts,  ontb«
validity  of  a  recapture,  by  a  Britith  ship  of  war,  of  a
Britidh  vessel  captured  by  ao  AmericaD  privateer.  TtM
capture  made  by  the  Ampricao  eruiser  ffaa  valid,  being
made  before  tbe  period  fixed  for  the  ceaiiatioB  of  boetili-
ties,  and  in  ignorance  of  the  fact ;  but  the  prise  had  titrt
been  carried  into  port  and  condemned  ;  and  while  at  sea
ahe  was  recaptured  by  the  British  cruisf-r  after  the  period
6sed  for  the  cessation  of  hootilities,  but  withmit  the  know-
ledge of  the  peace.  Ii  waft  derided,  that  the  possmuiioa
of  the  vessel  by  the  American  privateer  was  a  lawful  poft-
•ession,  and  that  the  British  cruiser  rould  not,  after  I  ha
peace,  lawfully  use  force  to  devest  thiH  lawful  possession.
The  restoration  of  peace  put  an  end,  from  tbe  time  limited,
to  ell  force,  and  then  tbe  general  principle  applied,  that
things  acquired  in  war  remain,  a«to  title  and  possession,
))recisely  as  they  stood  when  tbe  peace  took  place.  The
vti  poMidf.tU\»  tbe  basis  of  every  treaty  of  peace,  unlesa
it  be  otherwise  agreed.  Peace  gives  a  final  and  per-
fect title  to  captures  without  condemnation,  and  as  it
forbids  all  force,  it  destroys  all  hopes  of  recovery  as
much  as  if  the  vessel  was  carried  infra  pratitfia,  and
condemned.' A  similar  doctrine  was  held  in  tbe  ca^e  of


to  h*te  iicted,>Dd  that  tbe  period  of  the  fire  ntaolbvhad  not  elapsed*
witKia  whicb  il  w»  kwful,  iti  tbe  [ndiaa  (eai,  [o  coiitiiiiie  bortUitiei.
Tbe  laaroed  and  vesenble  auttior  of  that  imnwaae  work,  (ha
Beptrlory  of  JuriiprtuUnee,  wy*.  on  iDtrodnoing-  the  mm,  that  he  •hall
be  ailenl  an  the  queilion,  and  contenlt  hiniH>ir  with  giriiig  the  ditciw-
•ion).  and  particularlj  the  opinioa  of  the  A  Irocate  GeDefal,  and  (bs
TBBiont  of  (he  C^OQDcil  oT  Prizes.  See  Repertoire  unmrieltt  rouofiM
dt  JuriipTudtixe,  par  M.  le  Comle  Merlin,  lom.  9.  (it.  Priie  JUaritUu,

aCnn  ^  AtLfgalTendcr,  Hali/ar,  Jprii,  jeiS,  cited WkeattmU
Dig.  305.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


VIH.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  l6»

tbe  acboonnr  5opA»e,»  and  ihe  treaty  of  peace  had  the  effea
of  quietini;  alt  titles  of  poBBeBsion  arisiiiif  frnm  the  war,  »i»d
of  puttinj^  an  end  to  the  claim  of  all  former  proprietors,  to
thiiifi  of  which  possesEiina  was  acquired  by  ri|[ht  gf  war.

If  nothing  be  said  to  the  contiKry,  tfaioga  stipulated  to
be  restored  are  to  be  returned  in  the  eoodttion  they  were
takeo ;  but  this  does  not  relate  to  alterations  which  have
been  the  natural  consequence  of  time,  andofthe  operar*
tioDS.of  war.  A  fortress  or  a  town  is  to  be  restored  in  tbe
condition  it  was  when  taken,  as  far  as  it  shall  arill  be  in
that  condition  when  the  peace  is  inade.^  There  is  no  obli-
gation to  repair,  as  well  as  restore,  a  diHmantled  fortress,
or  M  ravaged  territory.  The  peaee  exlinguisbee  all  claim
for  damages  done  in  war,  or  arising  from  the  operatioM
of  war.  Things  are  to  be  restored  in  the  condition  the
peace  found  them;  and  to  dismantle  a  foriiBoation,  or  to
waste  a  country,  afterlberonclosion  of  the  peace,  and  pee*
vious  to  the  aurrendert  would  be  an  act  of  perfidy. <>

Treaties  of  every  kind,  when  made  by  xhe  competent  ao-
tbority,  are  as  obligatory  upon  Dalions,aa  private  coatracts
are  binding  upon  individuals;  and  they  are  to  receive  a  fair
and  liberal  interpretation,  and  to  be  kept  with  the  most
Krupulous  good  faith.  Their  meaning  is  to  be  ascertained
by  (be  same  rules  of  construution  and  roiirse  of  reasoning
wliicb  we  apply  to  the  interpretation  nf  private  contracts.<l
Ifa  treaty  should  in  fact  be  viohited  by  one  of  the  contract-
ing parties,  either  by  proceedings  incompatible  with  tbe
particular  nature  of  tbe  treaty,  or  by  an  intentional  breach
of  any  of  its  arlirles,  it  rests  alone  with  the  injured  party  to.
pronounce  it  broken. The  treaty,  in  such  a  ease,  is  not


•  e  Rob.  13C.

b  VatUt  b.  4.  c.  8.  Mc.  31.  34.
c  Ibtd.  b-  4.  c.  3.  wc.  32.

d  Ibid.  b.  a:  o.  17- Byr«,  Oi.  J  in  1  Biw.  If  Fair.  43fl.  439. Opioini
«f  Sir  Jamet  MarrkU,  cited  in  1  CUUy  on  CW>nerria/£m0,  44.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


164  or  TBE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Part  I.

absolutely  void,  but  voidable,  at  the  election  of  the  injured
part]*.*  If  he  chooses  not  to  come  to  a  rupture,  the  treaty
remaina  obligatory.  He  may  waive  or  remit  ttie  infrac-
tion commitieil,  er  he  may  demand  a  just  Batisfaction.

There  iaarerymatorial  and  imponanldiatinction  made
by  the  writers  on  public  law,  between  a  new  war  for  some
new  oause,  and  a  breach  ofa  treaty  of  peace.  In  the  for-
mer oase,  the  rights  acquired  by  the  treaty  subsists,  not-
withstanding tbe  new  war;  but,  in  the  latter  case,  they
are  annulled  by  the  breach  of  the  treaty  of  peaoe,  on  which
thny  are  founded.  A  new  war  may  interrupt  the  exercise
of  the  rights  acquired  by  the  former  treaty,  and,  like  other
rights,  they  may  be  wrested  from  the  party  by  the  force  of
arms.  But  then  they  become  newly  acquired  rights,  and
partake  of  the  operation  and  result  of  the  new  war.  To
recommence  a  war,  by  breach  of  the  articles  of  a  treaty  of
IMBce,  is  deemed  much  more  odious  than  to  provoke  a  war
by  eome  now  demand  nnd  aggression,  for  the  latter  i»
umply  injustice,  but,  in  the  former  case,  the  party  isgnilty
both  of  perfidy  and  injustice^  The  violation  of  any  on^
article  of  a  treaty,  is  a  violaiion  of  the  whole  treaty;  fbr
all  the  articlcsare  dependent  on  each  other,  and  one  is  ta
be  deemed  a  condition  of  the  other)  and  a  violation  of
any  single  article  overthrows  the  whole  treaty,  if  the
injured  party  elects  so  to  consider  it.  This  may,  how-
ever, be  pieiented  liy  an  express  provision,  that  if  one
enicle  be  broken,  the  others  shell,  oeverthetess,  continuo
in  full  force.''  We  have  a  stinng  instance  in  eur  own  his-
tory of  the  annihilation  of  treaties  by  the  act  of  the
injured  party.  In  1798,  the  Congress  of  the  United
@tate8<i  declared  tdat  the  treaties  with  Ffance  were  no


a  Oralki*.  b-  2.  o.  15.  •«!.  1 5— b.  a  c.  20.  see.  3ft-38.  Buriaauiqui,  p.
355.  part  4.  C.  H.  MO.  8. FjKi*  b.  4  c,  4.  HC.S4,

b  Orofivf,  b.  3  c.  10.  sec.  ST,  3H. F'alk  I,  b.  i.  c.  4.  aec.  43.

e  Orath't,  b. »  c.  (3-  Ma-  hi.  rallet,  b.  4.  c  4.  sec-  47,  4B.— b.  2.  c.
13.  «ec.  !C^


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LecUreVni] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  165

longer  obligatory  on  the  United  States,  as  they  had  been
re|ieatedly  violated  on  the  part  oTlhe  French  gorernment,
and  all  ju8t  claims  for  reparation  refti»>ed.

As  a  general  rule,  the  obligations  of  treaties  are  dissi-
pated by  hostility.  But  if  a  treaty  cootnins  any  stipula-
tions which  contemplate  a  state  of  future  war,  and  make
provision  for  such  exigency,  they  preserve  their  force  and
obligation  when  the  rupture  takes  place.  All  those  dntiei
of  which  the  exercise  is  not  necessarily  suspended  by  th4
wart  subsist  in  their  full  foree.  The  obligation  of  keep^
iDg  faith  is  so  far  from  ceasing  in  time  of  war,  that  its  eiR'
cacy  becomes  increased,  from  the  increased  necessity  of
it>  What  would  become  of  prisoners  of  war,  andthe  terms
of  capitulation  of  garrisonn  and  towns,  if  the  word  of  bd
enemy  was  not  to  be  relied  on  i  The  faith  of  promiaei
and  treaties  wfaieh  bare  reference  to  a  state  of  war,  is  to
be  held  as  sacred  in  war  as  in  peace,  and  among  enemiet
as  among  fiieods.  All  the  writers  on  public  law  admit
this  position,  and  they  have  never  failed  to  recommend  the
duty  and  the  obsarvance  of  good  faith,  by  the  moat  pow-
erful motives,  and  the  most  pathetic  and  eloquent  appcalf
which  could  be  addressed  to  the  reason  and  to  the  moral
■ense  of  nations."  The  tenth  article  of  the  treaty  between
the  United  Stales  and  Great  Britain,  in  1794,  may  be
oaeutioned  as  an  instance  of  a  stipulation  made  for  war.
It  provided,  that  debts  due  from  individuals  of  the
one  nation  to  those  of  the  other,  and  the  shares  or  mo-
neys which  they  might  have  in  the  public  funds,  or  in
public  or  private  banks,  should  never,  in  any  event  of
irar,  be  sequestered  or  confiscated.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  obligation  of  that  article  was  not  impaired
by  the  war  of  1312,  bat  remained  throughout  that  war,  and
continues  lo  this  day  binding  upoii  the  two  nations,  and
will  continue  so  until  they  mutually  agree  to  rescind  the
article;  for  it  is  a  principle  of  universal  jurisprudence,  that
a  compact  cannot  be  rescinded  by  one  parly  only,  iftba

a  falkl,  b.  3.  c.  10.  nc  174. Ontitu,  b.  3.  c  U.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


166  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pm»  1- .

«tber  party  does  not  coiweot  to  Kuiod  it,  and  does  no  act
todettroy  it.  lu  the  ease  of  Tie  Society  for  PrpitgatUg
tht  Gospel  T.  !feu-Hme»,»  the  Supreme  Court  of  lb*
Vnited  Slates  would  not  admit  the  doctrioe  thai  treaties
liecan»e  extinguished  ipio  facto  by  war,  unless  revived  by
mo  express  or  implied  renewal  on  the  return  of  petice.
Such  a  doctrine  is  not  universally  true.  Where  treaties
•ontenplate  a  permaneat  arran^nient  of  national  rights,
•r  which,  Sxy  tbeir  terow,  are  meant  to  provide  for  the  event
•fan  iaterTening  war.  it  would  be  a^inst  every  priociplft
pf  just  interpretation  to  bold  tbem  extinjfuished  by  th«
•vent  of  war.  They  revive  at  pence,  Hnless  waived,  <w
new  and  repugoaol  stt|>ulations  be  made.

With  respect  to  the  cession  of  places  or  territories  by  a
treaty  of  peace,  though  the  treaty  operates  from  the  mak-
iag  of  it,  it  is  a  principle  of  public  law,  that  the  national
character  of  the  place  agreed  to  be  surrendered  by  treaty,
cootinuas  as  it  was  under  the  character  of  the  ceAng  enink-
try,  until  it  be  actually  transferred.  Full  sovereijEnty  can-
'lUot  be  held  to  have  passed  by  the  mere  words  of  thetrea-
>  ty,  without  actual  delivery.  To  complete  the  right  of
property,  the  right  to  the  thing,  and  the  possession  of  the
thing,  must  be  united.  This  is  a  uecessary  priticiple  in
the  law  of  property  in  all  systemsofjuriaprudence.  There
must  be  both  the;iw  tM  rem  and  thejW  in  re,  aecnrding  to
the  distinctioo  of  the  civilians,  and  which  Barbeyrac**  says
they  borrowed  from  the  canon  law.  This  general  law  of
property  applies  to  the  right  of  territory  no  less  than  to
other  rights.  The  practice  of  nations  has  been  conforma-
ble to  this  principle,  and  the  rooventional  law  of  nation*
is  full  of  instances  of  this  kind,  and  several  of  them  were
stated  by  Sir  Wm.  Scott  in  the  opinion  which  be  gave  io
the  case  of  the  Fomafi


a  8  Wheaton,  4S4.

(  Ptiff.  par  Barbtyrat,  liv.  4.  o.  9.  m


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


tecMra  Vra.] OF  THB  LAV  OF  NATIONS.  ifif

Th«  release  of  h  lerritury  from  ths  dnmtnion  and  sore-
rmgiily  of  Iha  country,  if  that  cession  be  the  result  of  coef«
cioo  or  con(|ae«t,  does  not  impose  any  obligaiwn  upon  tbft
governmeat  to  indemnify  thoM  who  may  Buffer  «  toss  of
property  by  the  cession.  The  annals  of  our  own  statfl
farntth  a  strong  illustratioa  of  this  position.  The  territory
conpoungthe  tfBie  of  Vermont  betonged  to  this  state;
and  it  separated  from  it,  and  erected  itnelf  into  an  inde-
pendent state,  without  the  consent,  and  against  the  will,
of  the  go*«riiment  of  this  state.  The  latter  continued  fbr
many  years  to  object  to  (he  separation,  and  to  discover
the  strongest  disposition  to  reclaim  by  force  the  allegiance
oftbe  inhabitants  of  that  state.  Rut  they  were  unable  to
do  it ;  and  it  was  the  case  of  a  rerolution  eRecred  by  (brce,
■aalogous  to  that  which  was  then  in  action  between  this
country  and  Great  Bntain.  And  when  this  state  found
itself  under  the  necessity  ef  acknowtedgitig  the  inde-
pendence of  Vermont,  a  question  arose  before  (}ur'l*>gistiH
tare,  whether  they  were  bound  in  duty  to  make  compensa-
tion to  individual  citizens  whose  property  would  be  sacri-
fieedby  the  event,  because  their  titles  to  land  lying  within
ibe jurisdiction  ofVermont,  and  derived  from  PJew-York»
Would  be  disregarded  by  the  government  of  that  state.
The  claimants  were  beard  at  the  bar  of  the  House  of  As-
sembly, by  counsel,  in  1787,  end  it  was  contended  on  their
behalf,  that  the  stale  was  hound,  upon  the  principles  of
the  racial  compact,  to  protect  and  defend  the  rights  and
property  of  all  its  members,  and  that,  whenever  it  became
necessary,  upon  grounds  of  public  ex|>edienGy  and  policy,
to  withdraw  the  protection  of  government  from  the  proper*
^  of  any  of  itscitixens,  without  actually  making  the  ut-
iDOSt  effiirtsto  reelaim  the  jurisdiction  of  tbe  country,  the
state  was  bound  to  make  compensation  for  the  loss.  In
answer  to  this  argument,  it  was  staled,  that  the  iode-
pendeace  ofVermont  was  an  act  of  force  beyond  the  pow>
er  of  this  state  to  control,  and  equivalent  to  a  conquest  of
that  territory,  and  the  state  had  not  the  competent  ability
to  recover,  by  force  of  unnH,  their  sovrrcignly  over  it,  and
it  would  have  beeu  folly  andruiu  tobavcaltemptiMlit.  All

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


IM  or  THE  LAW  Of  NATIONS.  [P-rt.  t

paci6c  meaiM  bed  been  tried  without  succeas ;  and  hi  tba
Mate  waa  compelled  to  yield  to  «  case  of  necessity,  it  had
discharged  its  duly  )  and  it  was  not  required,  upon  any  of
the  doctrinei  of  public  law,  or  principles  of  politicel  or
jBoral  obligation,  to  iodemniff  the  suffttrers.  The  cBHevin
triiich  ootopenNUioo  Iwd  been  made  for  louet  roi'Sequent
npoD  rerolutioDB  in  government,  were  peculiar  and  grai  li-
tous,  and  rested  entirely  on  benevolence,  and  were  given
from  motives  of  policy,  or  aa  a  reward  for  extraordinary
acts  of  loyalty  and  exertion.  No  governmenl  can  be  sup-
posed to  be  able,  consiiilsntly  with  the  welfare  of  the  whole
community,  and  it  is,  therefore,  not  required,  to  assume
the  burtbeo  of  losses  produced  by  «onquest,ur  the  violent
dUmembermeat  of  the  state.  It  would  be  incompotibte
with  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  social  compact.

This  was  the  doctrine  which  prevailed  in  the  le/;ialatura
of  this  state  ;  and  when  the  act  of  July  14tfa,  1789,  was
passed,  authorizing  commissioners  to  declare  the  consent
of  the  slate  lo  the  independetice  of  Vermont,  it  was  ex-
pressly declared,  that  the  act  was  not  to  be  construed  t*
give  may  person  claiming  lauds  in  Vermont,  under  title
from  this  state,  any  right  to  any  compensation  wbatao-
«ver  from  Mew- York.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  tXi

^f  OFFENCES  AGAINST  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONIi

'i^HE  violation  of  a  treaty  of  peace>  or  other  national
tompact,  is  a  violation  of  the  lew  of  nations,  for  it  is  a
breach  of  public  ^aith.^  Nor  is  it  to  be  undeiatood  that  lb«
law  of  nbtiofls  is  a  code  of  mere  elementary  speculation^
ivithout  any  e^cient  sanction>  It  has  a  real  and  propitioiu
infloence  on  tlie  fortunes  of  the  human  race^  It  is  a  cods
of  present,  active,  durable,  and  bindinfr  obligations  As  ita
great  fundamental  principles  arefoundedinthe  maxinisof
eternal  truth,  in  the  immutable  law  ofmoral  obligation,  and
In  the  suggestions  of  an  enlightened  public  interest,  tb^
jnaintain  a  steady  influence,  notwithstanding  the  occasional
violence  by  Which  that  influence  may  be  diaturbedt
the  law  of  natiianB  is  placed  under  the  protectioa
of  public  o|iiDion.  tt  is  enforced  by  the  cehsttrea  bt
'  the  press,  and  by  the  moral  influence  ofthoscgreat  maeteri
of  public  law,  who  are  eottsulted  by  all  nations  as  nracleso^
Wisdont ;  and  who  haveatlained,  by  the  mere  force  of  writ'*
ten  reason,  ttie  majestic  characteri  and  almost  the  authorit]^
of  universal  lawgivers,  controlling  iry  their  writings  tbtf
conduct  of  rulers,  and  laying  down  precepts  for  the  govttro'
inent  of  mankind.  No  nation  can  violate  public  law,  witb>
but  being  subjected  to  the  penal  consequences  of  reproacli
and  disgrace,  end  without  incurring  the  hazard  u^  punisb^
inent;  to  be  indicted  in  open  and  solemn  war  by  the  ii^arej


•  riiUe/,b.S.6.l6.wc.S3l. JI*MMimo/*CNvrMt  yAMmta'
Od.  I78I.

Tok  I,  m


t,Goo(^lc


170  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [Pttt  t

putj.  The  Iftw  of  nations  is  likewiHs  enforced  by  th»
■Boctiom  of  municipHi  law,  and  the  offences  which  fall
moreimmediBielf  under  its  cottnizaocai  and  which  are  the
most  obriouB,  the  mo*l  extensive,  and  moat  iDJuriouv  in
their  effects,  are  the  vielationi  of  saff*  conduct,  infringe*
meats  of  the  rights  of  ambassadorg,  and  pirary.  To  these
we  may  add  the  slave  Umde,  which  ma;  now  be  consider-
ed, not,  indeed,  as  a  piratical  trade,  absolutelj'  unlawful
hj  tha  law  of  nations,  but  as  a  trade  condemned  by  the
general  principles  of  justice  and  humanity,  openly  prtH
festied  and  declared  by  the  powers  of  Europe.

(I.)  A  safe  conduct  or  passport  containsa  pledge  of  the
public  faith,  that  it  shall  be  duly  reit|iected,  and  theobser-
vence  of  this  duty  is  essential  to  the  character  of  the, go-
vernment which  grants  it.  The  statute  law  of  the  United
States  has  provided,  in  furtherance  of  the  general  sanction
of  public  law,  that  if  any  person  shall  violate  any  safe  con-
duct ur  passport,  granted  under  the  authority  nf  thf  United
States,  he  shall,  on  conviction,  be  imprisoned  not  exceed-
ing three  years,  aod  fined  at  the  discretion  of  the  Court.*
.  ('i.)  The  same  punishment  is  inflirted  upon  those  per-
sons who  infringe  the  law  of  nations,  by  offering  violence
to  the  persons  of  ambassadors,  and  other  public  minii-
ters,  or  by  being  concerned  in  prosecuting  or  arresting
tfaem.^  This  is  an  offence  highly  injurious  to  a  free
and  liberal  communication  between  different  govern-
ments, and  mischievous  in  its  consequences  to  the
dignity  and  welV  being  ofthe  nation.  It  tends  to  provoke
the  resentment  of  tbe  sovereign  whom  the  Ambassador
represents,  and  to  bring  upon  the  state  the  calamities  of
war.  The  English  parliament,  under  an  impression  of
the  danger  to  the  community  frera  violation  of  tbe  right!
of  embassy,  and  urged  by  the  spur  of  a  particular  occa-
lion,  carried  tbe  provisions  ofthe  statute  of  7  Ann,  c.  13.
'.  t«-a dangeroiw  extent..  That  statute  prostrated  all  the


i,Googlc


l.Mtn«IX.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  m

Mfeguarda  to  life,  liberiy,  and  property,  nhi<!h  the  wi*-
dom  of  tlw  English  commoD  law  bad  eBtablwhed.  It  de-
,  dared,  that  any  persoo  conricted  of  suing  out  ur  eieeu-
ting  ciril  process,  upoD-an  ambassador,  or  his  dooieaiie
KFTaDts,  by  the  oath  of  the  party,  or  of  one  witness,  bo-
fore  the  Lord  Chancellor,  and  the  two  nhief  Justices,  or
aoy  two  oftbein.-niigbt  have  such  penalties  and  cor|>oral
punishAietit  inflicted  upon  him,  as  the  judges  should  think
fit.  The  preamble  to  the  statute  conlaios  a  special  and
inflamed  recitalnf  thebreaettof  the  law  of  nations  which
produced  h,  by  the  arrest  of  the  Russian  minister  in  .the
Mreeta  of  London.

Th«  Congress  of  the  United  States,  durii^  the  time  of
die  American  war,  dimovered  great solieitude  to  maintain
inrit^te  the  obligations  ofthe  law  of  nations,  and  to  have
infractions  of  it  punished  in  the  only  way  that  was  then
hwful,  hy  the  exercise  ofthe  authority  ofthe  legislature!
of  the  several  states.  They  recommtrnded  to  the  state*
to  proTide  eipeditout,  exemplary,  and  adet^iiste  punish-
ment, for  the  violation  of  safe  conducts  or  passports,  grant-
ed under  the  authority  of  Congress,  to  the  subjects  of  a
foreign  power  in  time  of  war;  and  for  the  commission  of
acts  <^  hostility  against  persons  in  amity  or  league  with
the  United  States ;  and  for  the  infractions  of  treaties  and
coorentions  to  which  the  United  States  were  a  party  ;  and
for  infractions  of  the  immunities  of  ambassadors,  and
other  public  ministers.'

(3.)  Piracy  is  rolibery,  or  a  forcible  depredation  on  the
hifh  seas,  without  lawful  authority,  and  done  antmo  fa-
navii.  It  is  the  same  olTence  at  sea  with  robbery  on  tmid  ;
and  all  the  writers  on  the.  law  of  nations,  and  oo  the
maritime  law  of  Europe,  agree  in  this  definition  nf  pira-
cy.t>  I^rates  have  been  regarded  by  all  civilized  nariunt
fts  the  enemies  of  the  human  race,  and  the  most  atrocioui


a  JmimtU  of  Congrtu,  vol.  7.  ]:il

h  The  United  buiei  t.  bmilli,  5  Wkulm,  IfiS.  lad  DOtti,  hid.  JO.


t,  Google


^ra  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  [P^t  t

fiolatonof  ibe  unirenal  law  of  society.*  They  are  eycry
where  pursued  and  punished  with  death  ;  and  the  sevem
fy  with  which  the  law  1^  animadTert^d  upon  this  crime,
arises  from  its  eaormity  awl  danger,  the  cruelty  that  ac-s
fODipanies  ■(.  the  neeeuU;  of  checking  it,  iha  difficulty  of:
detection,  at>d  the  facility  vitb  which  rt^beries  may  ba
cpmiAitteil  upon  ppciQc  traders  in  the  soiitudie  of  tfa«
Qceaq.  Every  uatioq  haa  a,  right  to  attack  and  externiH
oatfl  th^ip  without  any  deciarstian  of  wai ;  for  though  pi%-
rates  may  furnn  a  loose  and  temporary  association  aoaonf.
themsslvet,  aod  r^restablish  i,o  B^ica»  dcgre«  ibose  laws
pf  justice  which  they  have  violated  with  the  rest  of  th^
^orld,  yet  Ihey  ate  iwit  eonaidered  ^s  a  national  body,  or
entitled  tathe  ^t^s  ajTvifaras  ctjoe  of  the  c^^miq^unity  of)
nations.  They  acquire,  n^  r:gl^^  by  conquest  i  and  th^
law  offtatiqna,  and  ihe  munici{^l  Ifivt  of  every  oountry,
ftuthorii^e  tl^e  true  owrner  to  reolaim  l),iB  property  taken  by
IHrates,  wherever  i(  cap  be  foi^  ;  and  they  .do  not  re^
cognise  any  title  to  bte  derive^from^au  qct  of  piracy.  Th(^
principle,  that  a  ptralis^  ei  latre^ibui  cafja  domitUtim  sofK
Vutand  is  the  Received  opinion  of  ancient  civilians,  and-
^odern  tyritera  on  general  jurisprudence  ^  and  the  sama
^>ctrine  was  ntaintained  in  the  English  courts  of  common
lawprtor  tQthe  great  modern  impjrqve^eQt^  m^e  inthft
•uence  of  the  law  of  natinus.^

^y  the  Ca,[i9tilutiQn  of  the  United  Stat^,  Congr^a
\rere  euthoi  ized  to  define  aud  puni>>h  piraciea  aqd  felonies^
committed  on  the  h<gh  seaa,  ami  offence^  against  (be  Ian
of  national  In  pursuance  of  (his  authority,  i(  was  declare
pd  by  tbe  act  of  Congress  of  AprU  30lh.  1790,  sec.  8.  that
inurder  of  robbery  committed  nn  the  high  seati  or  in  any
river,  haven.or  bay,outofthe^ri8dictio;i  of  any  particular.
Ctate,  or  any  other  ofiences,  which,  if  comnutted  wilbjnthft-


a  Ck.  ut  Ferrtat.  Kb-5 3  hut.  113.

6  Bynk.  Q.  J.  Pub.  b.  I  -  o.  n. JIulAer/flrtA,  b.  S.  c.  0, Jlx'mi,  vo\
t.  p.»1.38l,3».edit.  N-Y. CVo.  £.  68&. .^mm.  | Jfovid.  Lffi^


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  IX.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS,  Ift

body  ofa  oouDly,  wouldi  by  the  laws  of  the  ITnited  States,
b«  punishable  with  death,  should  be  adjudged  to  be  piracy
and  felony,  and  puDishabJe  with  death.  It  was  further  do*
clarrd,  that  if  any  oaptain  or  mariner  should  piratically
and  feloniously  run  away  with  any  vessel,  or  any  goods  or
tniTchandise  to  the  value  of  fifty  dollars ;  or  should  yield
Up  auy  such  vessel  voluntarily  to  pirates ;  or  if  aoy  sea-
man should  forcibly  endeavour  to  binder  btv  comntander
from  defending  the  ship  or  goods  oominitted  to  bis  trutt»
or  should  miike  a  revolt  in  the  ship }  every  such  offender
ihould  be  adjudged  a  pirate  and  feinn,  and  be  punisha-
ble with  death.  Aroesaaries  to  vucb  piracies  before  the
fact  are  punishable  in  like  manner ;  but  aocemaries  after
the  fiiot  are  only  punishable  with  ftna  and  impri«K>n  meat.
And  by  the  uel  ofMarch  iti,  1819,  see.  5.  (and  which  act
was  mnde  perpetual  by  the  act  of  lAtb  of  Hay,  m20^  see.
fi.)Confcre88  declared,  that  if  any  person  on  the  high  seaa
vhoidd  commit  the  crime  of  piracy,  at  dtjtnrd  Ay  tht  Uiw  of
vttioM,  he  should,  on  convidiop,  suffer  death.  It  waa
again -xt^clared,  by  tbe  act  of  CongresK  of  15th  of  May,
I7S0,  sec.  3.  that  if  any  peraon  upon  the  high  seas,  or  is
^v  o|»en  roadritead,  nr  bay,  or  siver,  where  tbe  sea  ebb*
and  flows,  commits  the  crime  of  robbery  in  and  upon  any
vets^,  or  tbe  lading  thereof,  or , tbe  erew,  he  shall  be  ad-
^dged  a  pirate.  So,  if  aay  person  eonoerned  in  any  par*
ticular  enterprise,  or  belonging  to  any  particular  crew,
•bould  land,  and  eommtt  robbery  on  shore,  siuh  an  oA
fender  sball  atoo  be  adjudged  a  pirate.  Tiie  statute,  i»
this  reaped,  aeems  to  be  only  dcctaralory  of  the  law  of
nations }  for,  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  cnse  of  himdo  r,
Jtorfney,"  such  plunder  and  robtiery  ashore,  by  the  crew,
and  with  the  aid  of  vessels,  is  a  macine  case,  and  of  aiV>
miralty  jurisdiction.

Under  these  legislative  previsions,  it  has  been  madoft
question,  whether  it  wan  sufficient  to  referto  the  law  of  m>
tions  for  a  definition  of  piracy,  without  giving  the  crime  Ik


aOsty.eta.

Do,i,,-c,i_h,.Googlc


lU  Cff*  THE  LAW  OF  M  ATfON&  [Pm  1-

proeUa  dafinition  in  twnai.  Tbe  point  wai  lettled  in  th»
M.4e  of  the  Unitetl  State*  t.  Smilh  ;>  and  it  was  there  held
Mot  to  bfc  tiecewary  to  gire  by  statute  a  more  logical  em-
ineratioa  in  detail  of  all  the  facta  comtitDtiiig  tbe  oSeace,
and  thai  OoBgrew  might  aa  well  dafiae  it  bj  MiDg  a  tern
ofa  known  and  determinale  meaning,  as  by  expresaly
DDtBtioniog  all  the  particulars  included  in  that  term.  The
crime  of  piracy  was  defined  by  the  law  of  nations  witb
MHaonable  certainly,  and  it  doesnot  depend  u|M>n  the  par-
ticular proiiaione  ef  any  municipal  code  for  its  definition
.and  punishment.  Robbery  oo  tbe  high  seas  is,  therefore,
piracy  by  tbe  act  of  Coafress,  as  «eU  as  by  ihe  law  of
aatiuns.

There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  right  of  CoogreM  to  pan
laws  punishing  pirates,  though  they  may  be  fore^oera,
and  may  have  eommitted  no  particular  offence  against  the
United  Btatea.  It  is  of  no  importance,  .iuf  the  purpose  of
givinii  jurisdiction,  oa  tsAom  or  wAcrc  a  piratical  offenee
has  been  committed.  A  pirate,  who  is  one  bj  the  law  of
nattons,  noay  be  tried  and  punished  in  any  country  where
be  may  be  foand,  (br  he  is  .-eputed  to  be  out  of  the  pro-
tectioD  of  bU  laws  and  privilfges.^  Tbe  statute  of  any  go-
vemiiMnt  may  declare  an  offence  committed  on  board  ita
OwD  vessek  to  be  inracy,  and  sucth  as  offence  will  be
puoishable  exclusirely  by  the  nation  which  passes  the
statute.  But  piracy,  under  the  law  of  nations,  is  an  o(-
fence  against  all  nations,  and  punishable  by  all.  In  the
ease  of  the  Umtrd  StatcM  r.  Palmer,*'  it  was  held,  that  the
act  of  Cong>resB  (rf*  1790  was  intended  to  punish  offences
against  tbe  United  Slates,  and  not  offences  against  the
human  race  ;  and  that  the  ciime  of  robbery,  committed
by  a  person  who  was  not  a  citizen  of  the  United  Stately
on  tbe  high  seas,  on  board  of  n  ship  belonging  ex-
dusively  to  subji>cts  of  a  foreign  state,  was  not  piracy
tinder  the  act,  and  was  not  punishable  in  the  courts  ol*  the
Uuitod  States.  The  offence,  in  such  a  case^  must,  there-


h  Bynk.  Q.  /.  FmL  A.  IT-

e  3  WhuOmt  SlU-


i,Googlc


IX.] of  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  '/ '

fiira  be  \t£i  to  b«  puninhed  bj  the  aatioa  nnder  «how  flag
the  reasel  sdiled,  and  witbio  whoM  particular  jariHdictkM
alt  on  board  the  reuel  were.  This  decision  was  accnrding  t*
the  lew  and  practioe  of  nations,  for  it  is  a  clear  and  nellled
principle,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  every  nation  extends  to
its  own  citisens,  on  board  of  its  own  public  and  private  vet-
eels  ai  8eB/>  The  ease  applied  only  to  ihe  fact  orrobberf  '
ooaimitted  at  sea,  on  board  of  a  foreiffn  vessel,  at  the  tJoM
belonging  exHtisively  to  subjects  of  a  foreif^n  state  ;  and
it  was  not  intended  to  decide,  that  the  same  offence,  ooni<"~
Itaitted  on  board  of  a  veftsel  not  belonginfc  to  the  subject
of  anj  foreign  power,  was  not  pir4cy.  The  same  court,
afterwards,  in  the  case  of  the  Vnittd  Stattt  v.  Klmtock^
admutedtthat  murder  or  robbery,  committed  on  the  high
Mas,  by  persons  on  board  of  a  vessel  not  at  the  time  be-
longing to  the  subjects  of  any  foreign  power,  but  in  poe-
aession  of  a  crew  acting  in  defiance  of  all  law,  and  ae-
knowledging  obedience  to  no  government  or  flag  whatso*
•  «ver,  fell  within  the  purview  of  the  act  of  Congress,  and  wai
pHnishuble  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States.  Persons  of
that  description  were  pirates,  and  proper  objects  for  tba
pen^  code  of  all  nations.  The  act  of  Congress  did  not
apply  to  offences  committed  against  the  particular  eO>
Tereignty  ofa  foreign  power ;  or  to  murder  or  robbery
committed  in  a  vessel  belonging  at  the  time,  in  fact  aa
well  as  in  right,  to  the  subject  ofa  foreign  state,  and,  ia
TiftM  of  such  property,. sabjeet  at  the  time  to  its  control.
But  it  applied  to  offences  committed  against  all  nations,
by  persons  who,  by  common  consent,  were  equally
amende  to  the  laws  of  all  nations.

It  was  further  held,  in  the  ease  of  the  Uniui  Statu  r.
Pirmtet,"  and  ia  the  case  of  the  t'iuted  State*  r.  Hob»e*t*


a  BMt^irWi  bu.h.  ».  ch.  «. .Mr.  Jifftrton't  LtUtr  te  JK  Omm6

na/uK,  ins.

( t  Whmbm,  144
ettid.  184.
4  Ibid.  Ait.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


ira  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  tPart  h

in  pursuance  of  the  iome  principle,  that  the  moment  A
TMtel  assumed  a  pimtical  character,  and  waa  taken  from
her  officer^t  andpruceeded  on  a  piratical  cruise,  she  lost
all  claim  to  Dational  character,  and  the  crew,  whether
citizens  or  tureigneri,  were  equally  punishable,  under  iIm
act  of  ConjfreM,  for  acts  of  piracy  ;  and  it  would  be  im*
material  what  wastheoationalcbarac-terof  the  ved-i'l  be
fore  she  assumed  a  piratical  character!  Piracy  is  an  of*
fence  within  the  criminal  jurisdiction  of  all  nations.  It  ii
•gainst  all)  and  punished  by  all  i  and  the  plea  of  autre/oU
Mcquit,  resting  on  a  prosecution  instituted  in  the  courts  of
any  civilised  dtate,  would  be  a  good  plea  in  any  other  civi'
lized  state.  As  the  act  of  Congress  of  1790  declare!
•very  offence  committed  at  sea  to  be  piracy,  which  would
be  punishable  with  death  if  committed  on  land,  it  may  be
considered  as  enlargiiig  the  definition  of  piracy,  so  as  not
only  to  include  every  offence  which  is  piracy  by  the  law  of
nations,  and  the  act  of  CongresM  of  1^9,  but  other  offedcW
which  were  not  piracy  antil  made  so  by  statutci

An  alien,  under  the  sanvtioh  of  a  national  commissioDi
cannot  commit  piracy  while  he  pursues  his  authority.  His
acts  may  be  hostile,  and  his  nation  responsible  for  them<
They  may  nmdunt  (o  a  lait'ful  cause  of  war,  but  they  are
never  to  be  regarded  as  piracy.  The  Barbary  powers,  not'
withstanding  some  doubts  which  formerly  existed)  are  notff
and  tor  a  century  past  have  beent  regarded  as  lawful  pow
ers,  and  not  pirates.  They  have  all  the  tiuig^ia  of  regular
independent  goveromentsi  and  are  competent  to  maintain
the  Kuropean  relations  of  peatre  and  war.  Cicero,  andt
after  him,  Grntius,  define  a  regular  enemy  to  be  a  powe^
which  hath  the  elements  or  constitutents  of  a  nation,  suefa
oa  a  government,  a  code  of  laws,  a  national  treasury,  the
consent  and  agreement  of  the  citizens,  and  which  pays  n  re^
gard  to  treaties  of  peace  and  alliance;"  and  all  these  things,

«  Cic.  Philip.  4.  c.  6.  Orotiut,  b.  3.  c.  3.  »wj.  I.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leetnra  tX.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  ITT

Mi5»  l^ynkcrahoeck,*  are  to  be  found  among  the  atate*
orBqrbnr;.  .In  some  respects,  their  laws  of  wnr  have
retained  the  barbarity  ofthe  middle  ages,  for  the;  levj  tri-
bate  or  contributioas  or  all  auch  Christian  powers  a*
are  not  aide  to  protect  their  commerce  by  force;  and
they  also  make  ilares  of  tbeir  prisoners,  end  require  a
heavy  ransom  for  their  redemption.  But  this,  Bynker*
■hoeck  insists,  is  conformable  to  the  strict  laws  of  war  j
and  the  nations  of  Europe  who  carried  od  war  with  the
Barbary  states,  such  oa  Spain,  Naples,  Holland,  Slc.  have
heret<^ore  exercised  the  same  rule  of  ancient  warfare,
upon  the  principle  of  retaliation.  When  Lord  Exmouth,
in  181G,  attacked  Algiers,  and  compelled  the  Dey  to  terms
of  peace,  he  compelled  him  also  to  stipulate,  that  in  the
erent  of  future  wars  with  any  European  power,  no  Chris-
tian priiwners  of  war  should  be  consigned  to  slavery,  but
they  should  be  treated  with  all  humanity  as  prisoners  of
war,  until  regularly  exchanged  according  to  the  European
practice  ;  and  at  the  termination  of  boslilities,  the  prison-
ers should  be  restored  without  ransom.  By  that  treaty  of
peace  upwards  of  1000  prisoners)  belonging  toltaly,  Spain,
Portugal,  Holland,  and  Greece,  were  released  from  gall-
ing slavery,  and  in  which  part  of  them  had  subsisted  for
tbirty-fire  years.  This  stipulation  in  favour  of  general
humanity,  deserves  some  portion  of  that  exalted  eulogy
fiefltowed  by  Montesquieu'*  on  the  treaty  made  by  Gelon,
king  ofSyracuse,  with  the  Carthageniaos.  It  would  hava
been  sull  more  worty  of  a  comparison,  if  it  had  not  left
colour  for  the  construction,  that  the  renunciation  of  the
jiractice  of  condemning  Christian  prisoners  of  war  to  alave-
fy,  was  to  be  confined  to  the  "  event  of  future  itart  with
any  European  power;"  and  if  n  great  Christian  power  on
this  sida  of  the  Atlantic,  whoso  presence  and  whose
^rade  is  constantly  seen  and  felt  in  the  Mediterranean,  had
1  to  have  been  entirely  forgotten.


■  «.  J.P>A.h.}.cn.  i  £ipHl(l(tXi>i*,lf.lO.«.S.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


tJP  or  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  ff^n  F.

But,  ootwithHtanding  Bynkershoeck  had  ionatfid,  near  a
century  ago,  that  captures  by  the  Barbary  powers  worked
a  change  of  property  by  the  laws  of  war,  in  like  manner
aa  captures  made  by  regalar  powers,  yet,  in  a  case  in  the
Engliafa  admiralty  so  late  as  180l,>  it  was  coDtended,  that
the  capture  and  sale  of  en  EngUab  ship  by  Algerines,  wa«
an  invalid  and  unlawful  conVersioa  of  the  property,  on  the
ground  of  being  a  piratical  seizure.  It  was,  however,  de-
cided, that  the  African  states  bad  long  acquired  the  cha-
racter of  established  governments,  and  that  though  their
notions  of  justice  differ  from  tboM  entertained  by  the
Christian  powers,  their  public  acts  could  not  be  called  in
question  ;  and  a  derivative  title,  founded  on  an  Algerine
capture,  and  matured  by  a  confiscation  in  their  may,  was
good  against  the  original  owner.  In  the  time  of  Richard
I.  when  the  laws  of  Oberon  were  compiled,  all  infidels
were,  by  that  code,t>  regarded  as  pirates,  and  their  proper-
ty liable  to  seizure  wherever  found.  It  was  a  notion,  at  that
time,  that  such  persons  could  not  have  any  fellowship  or
communion  with  Christiana.

In  a  case  which  occurred  in  1675,  Sir  Leoline  Jenkins
held,  that  the  commander  of  a  privateer  regularly  com-
missioned, was  liable  to  be  treated  as  a  pirate,  if  he  ex-
ceeded the  bounds  of  his  commission.  Bynkershoeck
justly  opposes  tbiv  dangerous  opinion ;°  and  the  true  rule
undoubtedly  is,  that  the  vessel  must  have  lost  its  nntioDal,
and  assumed  a  piratical  character,  before  jurisdiaion  over
it,  to  that  extent,  could  be  exercised.
'  If  a  natural  born  subject  was  to  take  prizes  belonging  to
bis  native  country,  in  pursuance  of  a  foreign  commission  he
would,  on  general  principles,  be  protected  by  his  commissioD
from  the  charge  of  piracy.  But  to  prevent  the  mischief
of  such  conduct,  the  United  Slates  have  followed  the  pro-
visions of. the  English  statute  of  11  and  12  Wm.  Ill  c.  7*


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


CMtiin  IX.]  OF  THE  LAW<»'  NATIONS.  179

and  have,  by  the  aet  of  Congr««e  of  April  30th,  1790,  aec
9<  declared)  that  if  any  citizen  should  commit  any  act  of
hottility  against  the  United  States,  or  any  citizen  theKof,
opMi  the  high  seas,  under  colour  of  any  commisBion  from
any  foreign  prince  or  state,  or  on  pretence  of  authorityfron
any  peraoa,  such  offender  shall  be  adjudjced  to  be  a  pirute,
feloD,  and  robber,  and,  on  being  thereof  convicted,' shall
■uffer  death.  The  act -of  congress  not  only  authorizes  a
capture,  but  a  condemnation  in  tbe  courts  of  th«  United
State«,  for  all  piratical  aggretwions  by  foreign  vessels ;  and  '
whatever  may  be  the  responsibility  incurred  by  the  nation
to  foreign  powers,  in  executing  such  laws,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  courts  of  justice  are  bound  to  obey  and  adniiois*
ter  them.  All  such  hostile  and  criminal  aggressions  oa
the  high  seas,  under  tbe  flag  of  any  power,  render  pro*
party  taken  in  delicto  subject  to  confiscation  by  the  law  of
nations.*

(4.)  The  African  slave  trade  is  an  offence  against  tbe
manictpal  laws  of  moat  nations  in  Europe,  and  it  is  de-
clared to  be  piracy  by  the  statute  laws  of  England  and  the
United  States.  Whether  it  is  to  be  considered  as  an  offence
against  the  law  of  nations,  independent  of  compact,  haa
been  agrave question,  much  litigated  inihe  courts  charged
with  the  administration  of  public  law;  audit  will  be  useful
to  take  a  short  view  of  the  progress  and  present  state  of
the  sense  and  practice  of  nations  on  t^is  fiubject-

Personal  slavery,  arising  out  of  forcible  captivity,  has
existed  in  every  age  of  the  world,  and  among  the  most  re-
fined and  civilized  people.  The  possessioo  of  persons  so
acquired,  has  been  invested  with  the  character  of  property.
Tbe  slave  trade  wasa  regularbranchof  comtneiceamoog
tbe  ancients ;  anda  great  object  of  Athenian  trafik  with  tbe
Greek  settleraentson  the  Euxine,was  procuring  slaves  from
'  the  barbarians  for  the  Greek  market.''  In  modern  times,
treaties  havebeen  framed,  and  national  monopolies  sought^
tofacilitateand  extend  commerce  in  tbiflspecies of  property.1


a  Story,J.n  ITAaatoit,  3»-41. b  JUiifiri^t  HitL  nH.  i^.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


180  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  {Pitt  1.

It  bos  been  interwoven  into  the  municipol  inBtituttODs  of  all
tbe  European  colonies  in  America,  nncl  with  the  approbs-
tion  and  sanction  of  the  parent  slates.  It  forms  to  this  daj
tbe  foundation  of  Inrge  masses  of  property  in  the  southern
parts  of  t'^e  United  States.  But,  for  half  a  century  post,
tbe  African  slave  trade  befian  to  awaken  a  spirit  of  remorse
and  sympathy  is  the  breasts  of  men,  and  a  conTiction  that
tbe  traffic  was  repugnant  to  the  principles  of  Christiao
duty,  and  the  maxims  of  justice  and  humanity.

Montesquieu,  who  baa  disclosed  so  many  admirablo-
truths,  and  so  much  profound  reflection,  in  bis  Spirit  of
LawM,  not  only  condemned  all  slavery  as  useless  and  unjust,
but  he  animadverted  upon  tbe  African  slave  trade  by  the
most  pungent  reproaches,  li  was  impossible,  he  observed,
that  we  could  admit  tbe  negroes  to  be  liuman  beings,  be-
oause,  if  we  were  once  to  admit  them  to  be  men,  we  should
soon  come  to  believe  tliat  we  ourselves  were  not  Christians.
Why  has  it  not,  says  he,  entered  into  the  heads  of  the  Eu*
ropean  princes,  who  make  so  many  useless  conventions,  to
make  one  general  stipulation  in  favour  of  humanily?'  We
shall  see  presently  that  this  auggealinn  was,  in  some  degree,
carried  into  practice  by  a  modern  European  congress.

Tbe  constitution  of  ibe  United  States  laid  the  foundation
of  a  series  of  firovisions,  to  put  a  final  stop  to  tbe  progress
of  this  great  moral  pestilence,  by  adBiiliing  a  power  in
Congress  to  prohibit  tbe  importation  of  staves,  afitr  the
expiration  of  the  year  1807.  The  constitution  evidently
looked  forward  to  tbe  year  ]808  as  the  commeiicement
of  an  epoch  in  tbe  history  of  human  ifflproveoiODt.
Prior  to  that  time,  Congress  did  all  on  this  subjeot
that  it  was  within  their  competence  to  do.  By  tbe
acts  of  Harcb  22d,  1794,  and  May  lOih,  1800,  the
citizens  of  the  United  States,  and  residents  within
them,  ivere  prohibited  from  engaging  in  the  trans-
portation of  slaves  from  the  United  States  to  any  foreign
place  or  country,  or froin one  foreign  country  or  plsee


tvGqoj^lc


Lecture  IX.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  181

to  anotfaer.  These  provisionB  prohibited  our  citizeDB  from
all  concflni  in  the  slare  trade,  with  the  exception  of  di-
rect importation  into  the  United  Stales;  and  the  most
prom{>t  and  early  oteps  were  taken,  within  the  limits  of
the  constitution,  to  interdict  that  part  of  the  trafic  also.
By  the  act  of  2d  March,  1807,  it  was  prohibited,  under
severe  penahies,  to  import  slaves  into  the  United  States,
afler  the  1st  January,  1808;  and,  onthe20ih  April,  ]gl8,
the  penalties  and  punishmentit  were  increasfd,  and  the
prohibition  extended  not  only  to  importation,  but  general-
ly against  any  citizen  of  the  United  States  beirt^r  concern-
ad  in  the  slave  trade.  It  has  been  decided,"  that  these
■tatute  prohibitions  extend  ai  well  to  the  carrying  slave*
on  freigbt,  as  to  caDcs  where  tbey  were  the  property  of
American  eitizena,  and  to  carryingtbem  from  one  port  to
another  of  the  same  foreign  empire,  as  well  aa  from  one
foreign  eouotry  to  another.  The  object  was  to  prevent,
on  the  part  of  our  citizens,  all  concern  whatever  in  such
a  trade.

The  act  of  March  3d,  1819^,  WRnt  a  step  further,  and
authorized  national  armed  vessels  to  be  sent  to  the  coast
of  Africa,  to  stop  the  slave  trade,  so  far  as  citizens  or
rexidents  of  the  United  States  were  engaged  in  that  trade;
and  their  vessels  and  effects  were  made  liable  to  seizure
and  conBscation.  The  act  of  15th  May,  1830,  went  still
further,  and  declared,  that  if  any  citizen  of  the  Uniled
States,  being  of  the  crew  of  any  foreign  vessel  engufrcd  in
the  slave  trade,  or  any  person  whatever,  being  of  the  crow
of  any  vessel  armed  in  whole  or  in  pnrt,  or  navigated  for
,  oron  behalf  of  any  citizen  of  the  Ujiitcd  Siaics,  should
land  on  any  foreign  shore,  and  seize  any  negro  or  iniilaito,
with  intent  to  make'him  a  slave,  or  nhould  decoy,  or  for-
cibly bring  or  receive  such  nepro  on  board  such  vessel,
with  like  intent,  such  citizen  or  person  ehoiild  be  adjudged
a  pirate,  and,  on  conviction,  should  suffer  death.


o  TJw  MBriD0,9  Wh»am,  39i.— TbedecUnttioniof  the  ina«ter,«>D.
uectod  with  hi*  mIi  ia  fnrlheraaoe  of  (be  vopge,  have  been  held  to  be
evidence  on  bd  indictment  acaiut  (he  nvner  of  Ihe  rfiip,  under  tbe  set
•fWthAprU,  181B.  Uoited8t«tMr.G<»)iny,  l»»Ti«oto«,  46Q.

,  Google


182  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  \Tail.

It  is  to  be  ubservnd,  that  the  itatute  operates  ooly  where
our  muDicipal  juriBdiction  might  foe  applied  consiateotly
with  the  general  theory  of  public  law,  to  the  persoos  at
our  citizcDB,  or  toforeigners  on  board  of  American  reasels.
Declaring  the  crime  piracy,  does  not  make  it  ao,  within
Ute  purriew  ofthe  law  of  nationM,  if  it  were  not  ao  without
the  statute ;  and  the  legislature  intended  to  legislate  only
where  they  had  a  right  to  legislate,  orer  their  own  citizens
Aod  vessels.  The  question,  notwithstanding  these  express
■ioDS  in  thestatute,  still  remained  to  be  discussed  and  set-
tled, wbetber  the  African  slave  trade  could  be  adjudged
piracy,  or  any  irther  crime  within  the  contemplation  of  the
code  of  international  law.  ft  has  been  attempted,  by  ne>
gotiation  between  this  country  and  Great  Britain,  to  agree
chat  both  nations  ^ould  consider  the  slave  trade  piratical ;
but  the  convention  for  that  purpose  between  the  two  n»>
tions  has  not,  as  yet,  been  rBti6ed,  though  the  British  na-
tion have  carried  their  statute  denunciation  of  the  trade
as  far  as  the  law  of  the  United  States.

The  first  British  statute  that  declared  the  slave  trade
unlawful,  was  inUarcb,  1907.^  This  was  a  great  triumpb
of  British  justice.  It  was  called  for  by  the  sense  nf  (he
British  nation,  which  had  become  deeply  convinced  ofthe
impolicy  and  injustice  of  the  slave  trade  ;  and  by  the  sub*
sequent  statute  of  51  Geo.  III.  the  trade  was  declare^
to  be  contrary  to  the  principles  of  justice,  humanity,  and
found  policy  ;  and  lastly,  by  the  act  of  Parliament  of  SIst
March,  1S24,  the  trade  is  declared  to  be  piracy.  England
is  thus,  equally  with  the  United  States,  honestly  and
zealousl;  engaged  in  promoting  the  universal  abolin
tion  ofthe  trade)  and  in  holding  out  to  the  world  their
sense  of  its  extreme  criminality.  Almost  every  mari-
time nation  in  Europe  has  also  deliberately,  and
■olemnly,  either  by  legislative  acts,  or  by  treaties
and  other  formal  engagements,  acknowledged  the  in>
justice  and  inhumanity  of  the  trade;  and  pledged  itself  to
promote  its  abolition. By  the  treaty  of  Paris  ofthe  30th


a  Slat.  il.Geih  III.

r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


tectaire  IX.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  tsi

May,  1814,  between  Great  Britain  and  France,  Lewis,
XVtll.  agreed  that  the  traffic  was  repugnant lo  the  (irioci-
pies  of  natural  justice,  and  he  engaged  to  unite  his  effort!
at  the  ennuing  congress,  to  ipduce  all  the  powers  of  chria-
teodom  to  decree  the  abolition  of  the  trade,  end  that  it
•houid  cease  definitively,  on  tbe  part  of  the  French  go-
rernatent,iD  the  course  of  five  yean.  The  ministers  of
the  principal  European  powers  who  met  at  the  Congress
at  Vienna,  on  the  8th  of  February,  1815,  solemnly  declar*
ed,  in  the  face  of  Europe  and  the  world,  that  the  African
•lave  trade  had  been  regarded  by  just  and  enlightened
men,  in  alt  ages,  as  repugnant  to  the  principles  of  humani-
ty and  of  universal  morality,  and  that  the  public  voice
in  all  civilized  countries  demanded  that  it  should  be  sup-
pressed ;  and  that  the  universal  abolition  of  it  was
eonformable  to  the  spirit  of  tbe  age,  and  the  generous
principles  of  the  allied  powers.  In  March,  1815,  the
Emperor  Napoleon  decreed  that  the  slave  trade  should
be  abolished ;  but  this  effort  of  ephemeral  power  was  af-
terwards held  to  be  null  and  void,  as  being  the  act  of  an
usurper  ;  and  in  July  following,  Lewis  XVIII.  gave  direc-
tions that  this  odious  and  wicked  traffic  should  from  that
present  time  cease.  Thefirst  French  decree,  however,  that
was  made  public,  abolishing  the  trade,  was  of  the  date  of
tbe8th  January,  1817,  andlhat  wasonlya  purtialand mo-
dified decree.  In  December,  1817,  the  Spanish  govern-
ment prohibited  the  'purchase  of  staves  on  any  part  of  the
coast  of  Africa,  after  the  3lst  of  Hay,  1820;  and  in  Jan-
aary,  1818,  the  Portnguese  government  mode  the  like
prohibition  as  to  the  purchase  of  slaves  on  any  part  of  the
coast  of  Africa  north  of  the  equator.  In  1821,  there  was
not  a  flag  of  any  European  state  which  cuild  legally  covet
this  traffic,  to  the  north  of  the  oquator ;  and  yet,  in  1825,
the  importation  of  slaves  covertly  continued,  if  it  was  not
openly  countenanced,  from  the  Rio  de  la  Plata  to  the
Amazon,  and  through  the  whole  American  nrchi[>elngo.*

a  Riforl  ^a  Cvmniltee  ofUu  HoumTji/ RepruentaliBei  of  Uu  Uni'cd
SlaU*,  f^Arwtry  XSth.  IHSS.  Bee  atio  tho  Q.  Hetiae,  tio.  etl,  in  wbich
it  spytiiri  fron  « reference  tg  * arioat  docurnealt, tliAt ihe  AfTioaa

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


lU  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  {Put  h

Tbfl  case  of  the  Amedie*  wa§  the  earliest  decision  ia
the  Eoglish  courts  on  the  ^reat  question  touching  the  le-
falitf  ofthe  slare  trade,  on  general  principles  of  interna-
tional law.  That  was  the  case  of  an  American  reuel,
employed  in  carrying  slaves  frdm  the  coast  of  Africa  to
a  Spanish  colony.  She  was  captured  by  an  English  cruiser,
and  the  Teasel  and  cargo  were  condemned  to  the  cap-
tors, in  a  vice  admiralty  court  in  the  West  Indies,  and,  on
appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  England,  the  judgment
was  affirmed.  Sir  Wm.  Grant,  who  pronounced  the
opinion  of  the  court,  observed,  that  the  slave  trade  being
abolished  by  both  England  end  the  United  States,  the
coiitt  was  aulhoriscd  to  asHert,that  the  trade,  abstractedly
speaking,  could  not  have  a  legitimate  existence,  and  was,
prima  facie,  illegal,  u|)on  principles  of  universal  law.  The
claimant,  to  entitle  him  to  restitution,  must  show  affirma-
tively a  right  of  property  under  the  municifial  laws  of  his
own  country;  for,  if  it  be  unprotected  by  his  own  munici*
pal  law,  he  can  have  no  right  of  property  in  human  b»<
ingji  carried  as  his  slaves,  for  such  a  claim  is  contrary  to
the  principles  of  justice  and  humanity,  The  FortimiOt
wns  condemned  on  the  authority  of  the  Amtdie,  and  the
same  principle  was  again  affirmed.  But,  In  the  subse-
quent case  of  the  Diana,''  the  doctrine  was  not  carried
so  far  as  to  hold  the  trade  itself  to  be  piracy,  or  a' crime
against  the  law  of  nations.  A  Swedish  vessel  was  taken
by  a  Brislish  cruiser  on  the  coast  of 'Africa,  engaged  in
carrying  slaves  from  Africa  to  a.  Swedish  island  in  the
West  Indies,  and  she  was  restored  to  the  owner,  on
the  ground  that  Sweden  bad  not  then  prohibited  the
trade,  and  had  tolerated  it  ia  practice.  England  had
abolished  the  trade  as  unjust  and  criminal,  but  she
claimed  no  right  of  enforcing  that  prohibition  against
the  Subjects  of  those  states  which  bad  not  adopted  the
same  opinion;  and  England  did  not  mean  to  set  hert^elf  up
as  the  legislator,  and cwitot  morum,  for  the  whole  world,

■lave  tr-adi'  nu  orriail  oa  to  aa  enuTaioua  exleal  uoilur  the  French  dud  .
Partugae»c  Dagt,  Aawa  lo  Ihe  ^ear  1  it?6'.  But  b;  a  canrenlmn  belwi-en
England  HDd  licuil.  it  will  be  piratical  fbr  tlie  ■ubJMti  ot  tlrazil.Io  be
eiig«3  -()  1°  <>>e  rrade  art«r  the  jear  1830.
a  I  Aaon't  Rep.  340.  h  I  Doiiiot


'"^.^V


Ucnn  tX.] OF  THE  LAW  OP  NATIONS.  M

or  presume  to  iatorTere  with  (he  comuiercial  r«^l&tjoDB  ot
MhcT  Htates.  The  principle  ofthe  case  of  the  AmedU  WASf
that  where  the  munit-ipBl  law  of  the  country  to  which  ihfl
parties  belonged  bad  prohibited  the  trade,  English  tribu*
nala  would  hold  it  to  be  illegal)  upon  general  principles  o^
justice  and  humanity,  but  they  would  respect  the  proper*
ty  of  persons  engaged  in  it  under  the  sanction  of  the  laws
of  their  own  country.

The  doetriue  of  these  (Uses  is,  that  the  slare  tnlde,  &t>*
itraetedly  speaking,  is  immoral  and  unjust,  and  il  ia  ille*
gal,  when  declared  so  by  treaty,  or  municipal  law  ;  but  that
it  is  not  piralieal  or  illegal  by  the  cumnion  law  of  nationsi
because  if  it  were  so,  every  claim  fbuitded  on  the  trade
Would  at  once  be  rejetted  every  where,  and  in  eVerJf
court,  oo  that  ground  alonet

The  whole  subject  underwent  further,  and  a  most  Pull)
elaborate,  and  profound  discunioo,  in  the  case  ofthe  Lt
ItouU.*  A  French  vessel,  owned  and  documented  as  a
French  vessel,  Was  captured  by  a  British  armed  force  on
the- coast  of  Africa,  after  resistance  made  to  a  demand  to
visit  and  search.  She  wns  carried  into  Sierra  Leobei  and
condemned  by  a  court  of  vice-admiralty,  for  being  con*
cerned  in  the  slave  trade  contrary  to  the  French  lawi  Od
appeal  to  the  British  High  Court  of  Admiraltyt  the  t|ue»r
tion  respecting  the  legality  ofthe  capture  and  eondetnoa'
tioa  was  argued,  and  it  was  judicially  decided,  that  the
right  of  visitation  and  search,  on  the  high  seas,  did  not  bt*
ist  in  time  of  peace.  Ifit  belonged  toone  nation,  itequaU
)y  belonged  to  all,  and  would  lead  to  gigantic  mlschiefi
and  universal  war<  Other  nations  had  refused  to  accede
to  the  English  proposal  of  a  reciprocal  right  of  search  ill
the  African  seas,  and  it  would  require  an  ezpteas  conven*
tion  to  give  the  right  of  search  in  time  of  peace>  ThO
slave  trade,  though  unjust,  and  condemned  by  the  statute


Vol.  I.  24


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


186  or  THE  LAW  OF  NATfONS,  [P«rt  IJ

law  of  England,  was  not  pirary,  nor  wha  it  a  critne  by  the
universii)  Irnv  of  nalionfl.  To  make  it  piracy,  or  sufh  %
crime,  it  must  have  been  iio  ronaidered  nod  treated  iu  prac-
tice by  all  civilizpd  states,  or  made  so  by  virtue  of  a  een^
re)  convention.  On  the  contrary,  it  had  been  carried  ob
by  all  nations,  even  by  Great  Britain  b«rnelf,  until  within
a  few  years,  and  was  then  carried  on  by  Spain  and  Portu-
gal, and  not  absolutely  prohibited  by  France.  [i  u-rb,
therefore,  not  a  criminul  traffic  by  the  law  of  niiin'iis;
and  every  nation,  iudejiendent  of  treaty,  retained  a  legal
ri^lii  to  carry  it  on.  No  one  nation  had  a  right  lo  force
the  way  to  ibc  liberation  of  Africa,  by  trampling  on  the  in-
dependeace  ofother  states ;  or  to  procure  an  eminent  good
by  means  that  were  unlawful;  or  to  preM  forward  to  a
great  principle,  by  breaking  through  othergnat  principle*
thai  srood  in  the  way.  The  conde  mnalioo  of  the  French  ves-
sel at  SierniLeonewa8,,tfafretbre,  reverst-d.aiid  the  penat-
tiea  imposed  by  tbp  French  law  (if  any  there  were)  were
left  to  be  enforced,  not  inan  Engliph,  but  in  a  French  cniirt.
The  same  lubjerl  was  bronght  info  diwuHsion  in  the  K.
B.  in  1820,  in  Madrazo  v.  WUlet."  The  Court  held,  that
the  British  statutes  against  the  slave  trade  were  only  ap-
plicable to  British  subjecU,  and  only  rendered  the  slave
trade  unlawful  when  carried  on  by  them.  The  Biiiisk
parliament  could  not  prevent  the  subjects  of  other  statet
from  carrying  on  the  trade  out  of  the  iimita  of  the  British
dominions.  If  a  ship  be  acting  contrary  to  the  general
law  of  nations,  she  is  thereby  suhjert  to  condemnation ;
but  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  the  slave  trade  was
contrary  to  the  general  law  of  nations.  It  was,  un-
til lately,  carried  on  by  all  the  nations  of  Europe;
and  a  practice  so  sanctioned  can  only  he  rendered  il-
legal, on  the  principles  of  international  law  by  the  con-
tent of  all  the  powers.  Many  states  had  so  consented  ;
but  others  had  not,  and  the  cases  had  gone  no  further  thun


«  3  BameiBtll  4-  Aldtrton,  363.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LeciunlX.] OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  J87

to  eUabliBh  the  rule,  that  ships  beloogiag  to  coantriea  that
bad  prohibited  the  trade,  were  liable  to  capture  aad  coa-
deamatian,  if  found  engaged  iu  it.

The  final  decisioa  of  the  questiou,  in  tbia  country,  hai
been  the  same  as  in  the  case  uf  the  Le  hovu.  la  the  ca»e
of  the  I^a  Jtune  Eugenity*  it  waa  decided  in  the  Circuit
Court  of  the  United  States,  in  Mawachusetts,  after  a  mas-
terly discussion,  tbat  the  slave  trade  wa^  prohibited  by
nnirersal  law.  But,  lubdequeatly,  in  the  case  of  the  Ante-
lope,*' the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  declared
tbat  ibe  slave  trade  bad  been  aanctioaed,  in  modern  tiniea
by  tbe  laws  of  all  nations  who  posseMed  distant  colonies;
and  a  trade  could  not  be  coundered  as  contrary  to  tbe  law
of  nations,  which  bad  been  authorized  and  protected  by  the
luagei  and  laws  of  all  commercial  nations.  It  was  uoC
piracy,  except  bo  far  as  it  was  made  so  by  tbe  treaties  or
■tatuies  of  the  nation  to  which  the  party  belonged.  It
might  still  be  lawfully  carried  on  by  the  aubjectx  o(  thoss
nations  who  hare  not  prohibited  it  by  municipal  acts  or
treaties.


*  10  IFhealoH,  <6.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


IM  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  (Part  II.

the  union  of  thia  countrf  was  enwnltal  to  its  safely,  il»
prosperitjr,  and  its  greatoess,  bad  been  generally  known,
and  frequently  avowed,  long  before  the  late  revoluiiou,
or  the  claireia  of  the  British  iMrliament  which  produced  it.
The  people  of  the  New  Rngland  colonies  were  very  early
in  the  habit  of  confederating  together  fur  their  comuoB
defence.  As  their  origin  and  their  interealB  were  the  iMtme,
and  their  manners,  their  religion,  their  laws,  and  their
civil  instiiutions  exceedingly  similar,  they  were  nBlurallj
led  to  a  very  intimate  connezion,  and  were  governed  by
the  same  wants  and  wisben,  the  same  symiMthiirsaud  sjiirit.
The  colonies  of  HasHai-husetts,  Plymonlfo,  Connecticut,
and  New-Haven,  as  early  as  1643,  under  the  impression
of  danger  from  the  surrounding  tribei)  of  Indians,  entered
into  a  league  offensive  and  defensive,  which  they  dechired
should  tie6rm  and  prrpetual,  and  be  distinguished 'l)y  the
name  of  the  United  Colonies  of  New  England.  By  their
articles  of  contederaiion,  each  colony  was  to  have  exclu-
sive jurisdiction  within  its  own  territory  ;  and  in  every
war,  offensive  anddefensive,  each  of  the  confederates  wai
to  furnish  its  quota  of  men  and  money,  in  a  ratio  to  its
population;  and  acongress  of  two  commissioners, dele-
gated from' each  colony,  was  to  be  held  annually,  with
power  to  deliberate  and  decide  on  all  points  of  commoo
conr«rn  ,  and  every  determiuatioo,  in  which  three-fourths
in  number  of  the  assembly  concurred,  was  to  be  binding
upon  the  whole  confederacy.*

This  association  may  be  considered  as  the  foundation  of
«  series  of  efiurts  lor  a  more  extensive  and  more  perfect
union  of  the  colonies.  It  contained  some  provident  and
jealous  provisions,  calculated  to  give  seruriry  and  stability
to  the  whole.  It  provided  that  no  two  colonies  were  to
join  in  juritidif^ion,  without  the  consent  of  all ;  and  it  re-
qttired  the  like  unanimous  consent  to  admit  any  other  colo-


a  fficsnTt  St^  Pnptrt,  49R  SB3.  SSO.  fTilrAiiMiifi'f  Hitlory  r^Mu.
taduii^U.rtA  1.124.116.  fMtrltnfiPoiiluiamui JBdorfofAmeTiia.
\.  10.  p.  191,  ISX,


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lflctora  X.J  THE  UMTED  STATES.  Wl

aj  into  the  confederary;  and  if  any  one  member  violated
any  article  of  it,  or  any  way  injured  another  colony,  the
com  m  IBS  tone  rs  of  the  other  colonies  were  to  take  coftni-
zanre  of  the  matter,  and  determine  npon  it.  Thoufch  in
this  (ransBclion  the  New  England  colonies  acted  in  fect,aa
independent  sovereigntieSi  and  free  from  the  rontrol  of
any  superior  power,  yet  the  civil  war  in  which  England
was  then  involved,  occupied  the  whole  attention  of  tb*
mother  country,  and  this  first  step  towards  a  future  indft-
pendente  was  suffered  to  pass  without  much  notice,  and
without  any  animadversion  The  confederacy  lubsiated,
with  some  alterations,  for  upwards  of  forty  years,  and  for
part  of  that  time  with  the  countenance  of  the  governmeot
in  England.  It  waanol  diHsnlved  until  theyear  1666,  when
charters  of  the  New  England  colonies  were  in  effect  va*
cated  by  a  commission  from  King  James  II.

The  people  of  this  country,  after  the  dissolution  ofthw
earliest  league,  continued  to  affoid  other  instructive  prece-
dents of  association  for  their  safety.  A  congress  of  governor*
and  commissioners  from  other  colonies,  as  well  as  from
fiew  England,  was  occasionally  held,  to  make  arrangement!
for  the  more  effectual  protection  of  our  interior  frontier,
and  we  have  an  instance  ofone  of  these  assemblies  at  Alba-
ny,  in  1722.3  But  a  much  more  interesting  congress  wai
lield  there  in  the  year  1754,  and  it  consisted  of  coBimis>-
aioners  from  New  Hampshire.Massachusetts.Rbodelsland,
Connecticut,  NeW' York, Pennsylvania,  and  Maryland,  and
it  was  called  at  the  instance  ofthe  lords  commissionera  for
trade  and  the  plontatioos,  to  take  into  consideration  tiM
liest  means  of  defending  America,  in  case  of  a  war  with
France,  which  was  then  impending.  The  object  ofthe  En-
ghsh  adminiatralion  in  calling  this  convention,  was  merely
in  reference  to  treaties  of  friendiihip  with  the  Indian  tribes;
but  the  colonies  bad  more  enlarged  views;  and  the  commit
aioners  which  met  in  congreB8,and  who  enrolled  amongtheir


a  SmilhU  Hiib>iyo/J<ewYork,yoli.p.  \7U


tvGooj^lc


192  IVRISPRVDENCe  OF  t^ut  It.

narober  some  of  the  moat  dittinguitthed  naiBM  in  our  colo*
dirI  bistsry,  asserted  and  promulgated  wveral  inraluable
truths,  the  proper  reception  of  which  in  the  minds  of  their
Gountrymeo,  prepared  the  way  (br  their  Ajlure  indepen*
dencp,  and  our  present  greatness.  Two  ofthe  colonies  ex*
pressly  instructed  their  delegates  to  enter  ittto  articles  of
union  and  confederation  with  the  other  colonies,  >'r  their
general  security  in  peace  as  well  as  in  war.  The  conven-
tion unaniritously  resolved,  timt  a  union  nf  Ihe  colonies  wafl
absolutely  necKSsury  for  their  preservntion.  Theyn-jected
Blipro|iosalsfora  division  ofthecolonipx  into  separate  con*
teAvrttc'ieH,  and  proposed  a  pl«ii  of  fpdern  gnvernment,  con-
tistinjciif  a  general  cnunril  of  delegates,  to  be  triennially
chosen  by  the  provincial  aBsembliea,  and  a  president  freoe-
ral,  to  be  appointed  by  the  crown.  In  this  round!  wafl
vested,  subject  tothe  immediate  neffative  of  the  president,
and  the  erentual  negative  of  the  king  in  council,  the  rights
of  war  and  peace,  in  respect  to  the  Indian  nations;  and  Ihe
confederacy  was  to  embrace  uUthe  then  existing  colonies,
from  New-Hampshire  to  Georgia.  The  council  were  to
hare  authority  to  make  laws  for  the  government  of  new  set-
tlemems,  upon  territories  to  be  purchased  from  the  Indians,
and  to  raise  troops  and  build  forts,  and  even  to  equip  vessels
of  force,  to  guard  the  coast  and  protect  trade,  as  well  on  the
ocean  as  upon  the  lakes  and  rivers.  They  were  likewise  to
make  laws,  and  lay  and  levy  general  duties,  imposts,  and
taxes,  for  those  necessary  purposes."  But  the  times  were
not  yet  ripe;Dor  the  minds  of  men  sufficiently  entar;ged,  for
such  a  comprehensive  proposition;  end  this  bold  project  of
a  continental  union  had  the  singularfate  of  being  rejected,
not  only  on  the  part  of  the  crown,  but  by  every  provincial
assembly.  It  was  probably  supposed,  on  the  one  hand,  that
the  operation  of  the  union  would  leach  the  colonies  (he  se-


a  Minof*  Hirioryt/MauceluudU,weA.  1.  ch.  S.  Franklin't  Warkt^
p.  S5.  LoadoD  ed- 1779.  BtOcmtpUXiv-BanfMrt,  toL  3.  tSft.  5intH**
JhMry  ofXtV-iDHc,  vol.  3.  IBO.


t,Goo(^lc


lActurt  X.] TftE  UNITED  STATES.-  \9i

«pet  of  their  own  strength,  and  the  proper  means  to  gWe  it
•ctivitf  and  direction ;  while,  on  the  other  part,  the  colo-
nies were  jealous  of  the  preponderating  influence  of  the
royal  prerof;etire.  Wc  weredeslined  to  remain,  f  )r  some
yeera  longer,  separate,  and,  in  a  .considerable  degree,
alien  commonwealths,  emulous  of  each  other  in  obedience
to>tbe  parent  state,  and  in  devotion  to  her  interents ;  but
jealous  of  each  other's  prosperity,  and  divided  by  policy,
institutions,  prejirdice,  and  manners.  So  strong  was  the
force  of  these  considerations,  and  so  etasperaled  were  the
people  of  the  colonies  in  their  disputes  with  each  other,
concerning  boundaries  and  charter  claims,  that  Doctor
Franklin  (who  was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  the  con-
gress that  formet)  the  plan  of  union  in  1754)  observed,  in
'the  year  1761,thata  imion  of  the  colonies  was  absolutely
Impossible,  or  at  least  without  being  forced  by  tbe  most
frievous  tyranny  and  oppression."

The  great  value  ofa  federate  union  of  the  colonies  bad,
however,  HUiik  deep  into  the  minds  of  men.  The  subject
watt  familiar  to  our  colonial  ancestors.  They  bad  been  in
the  babil,  especially  in  seasons  of  danger  and  difficulty,
of  forming  associations,  more  or  lefts  extensive.  Tbe  ne-
cessity of  union  had  been  felt,  its  advantages  perceived,
its  principles  explained,  the  way  to  it  pointed  out,  and  the
people  of  this  country  were  led,  by  tbe  force  of  irresistible
motives,  to  resort  to  the  same  meuns  of  defence  and  secu-
rity, when  they  considered  that  their  liberties  were  in
danger,  not  from  the  vexatious  and  irregular  warfare  of
the  Indian  tribes,  but  from  the  formidable  claims,  end  still
more  formidable  power  <^  the  parent  state.  Soon  after
the  first  unfriendly  attempt  upon  our  chartered  privileges,
a  congress  of  delegates  from  nine  colonics  was  assem-
bled at  New- York  in  Octol>er,  1765,  at  the  recommenda-
tion of  MaKsachusetts,  and  they  digested  a  bill  of  rights,  in
which  the  sole  power  of  taxation  was  declared  to  reside


a  FrankrinU  irorki.p.  I5S.  I9S.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


19*  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  jPtrt.  M.

in  their  own  colonint  legislatures.*  This  wai  preparatory
to  a  more  ujittinsive  aud  general  associutionorihei-ulo-
Dies,  which  took  place  io  September,  L774,  and  laid  the
foundaiions  of  our  independence  and  permanent  glory.
The  oture  seriuua  claims  of  the  British  parliament,  und
the  im, .ending  opproHsions  of  the  British  Crown  at  this
last  critical  period,  induced  the  twelve  colonies,  which
were  spread  over  this  vast  coiiiinpnt  t'roin  JNovu  Scoiie  to
Georgia,  to  an  interchange  of  opiitiona  and  views,  and  to
unite  in  seii<!inj(  delegates  to  Philadelpbia,  *'  with  au*
tlicrtiv  and  direitimi  lo  meet  and  consult  lojfelher  for  the
ctiminuu  w<-]ltire."  In  pursuance  of  their  enlhority,  this
firxt  continental  congress,  whose  names  and  proceedings
arc  -1.1111  famtliiiT  tu  the  present  age,  and  will  live  in  the
griititiide  of  a  distant  posierity,  took  ioto  consideratioa
the  'ilHicled  state  of  their  country  ;  asserted,  by  a  num-
ber of  declaratory  resolulionx,  what  they  deemed  to  be
the  unalienable  rights  af  English  freemen  ;  pointed  out
to  their  conritituents  the  system  of  violenre  which  wai
preparing  against  (hose  rights ;  and  bound  them  by  the
niosi  sacred  of  all  ties,  the  ties  of  honour  and  of  their
country,  to  renounce  commerce  with  Great  Britain,  u
being  the  most  salutary  means  to  avert  the  one,  and  to  se-
cure the  blessings  of  the  other.  These  resolutions  re-
ceived prompt  and  universal  obedience;  and  the  UnioB
being  thus  auspiciously  formed,  it  wax  continued  by  a  suc-
ceiision  of  delegates  in  congress ;  and  ihrough  every  period
of  the  war,  and  through  every  revalntian  of  our  govern-
ment, this  union  has  been  revered  and  cherished  as  the
guardian  of  our  peace,  aud  tlie  only  solid  foundation  of
national  independence.

In  Hay,  1775,  a  congress  again  assembled  at  Philadel-
phia, and  was  clothed  with  ample  discretionary  power*.
The  delegates  were  instructed  (o  "concert,  agree  upon,  di-
rect, order,  and  prosecute,"  such  measures  as  they  should


a  8  Belkaap'i  A",  ff  396. Joumah  of  &t  AuatAhj  nf  l}u  Co-
(onij  <^  JV.  Y.  Oilober,  i:65.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LecUK  X.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  195

deem  most  fit  and  proper,  to  olttnin  redreis  of  American
grierances,  or,  in  moref;eneral  terms,  they  were  to  take
careof  the  liberties  of  the  country.'  Soon  after  ibeir  meet-
ing,Georgia  Bccedvd  to,  and  rompleleii  the  confederacy  of
Uie  thirteen  colonies.  Hostililies  had  already  commerced  in
the  province  of  Haseechusetts,  and  the  claim  of  the  Btitish
parliament  to  an  unconditional  and  unlimited  sovereignty
over  the  coloniea,  wai  to  be  assened  by  an  Bfipeal  to  arms.
The  continental  congress,  charged  with  the  prutecdon  of
the  rights  and  interests  of  the  United  Colonies,  and  io-
truBted  with  the  power,  and  sustuined  by  the  xeal  and  cud«
fidence  of  their  conaiituents,  prepared  for  reHieTance.
They  published  a  declaration  of  the  ceusen  and  necessity
of  taking  up  arms,  and  proceeded  immediately  to  levy  and-
organize  an  aruiy,  to  prescribe  rules  for  the  government
of  their  land  end  naval  forces,  to  contract  debts,  and  emit
a  paper  currency  upon  the  faithof  the  Union,  and'^railual-
ly  assuming  all  the  powers  of  sovereignty,  they,  at  last,  on
ttie  4th  day  of  July,  177G,  took  a  seiwrule  and  equal  sta-
tion among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  by  declaring  the
United  Colonies  to  be  free  and  independent  slates.

This  memorable  declaration,  in  imitation  of  that  pub*
liflhed  by  the  United  Netherlands  on  a  similar  oi-casion,
recapitulated  the  oppressions  of  the  British  kin^,  asserted
it  to  be  the  natural  right  of  every  people  to  withdraw
from  tyranny,  and  with  the  dignity  and  the  roriilude  of
conscious  rectitude,  it  contained  a  solemn  appeal  tu  man-
kind in  vindication  of  the  necessity  of  the  measure.  By
thisdecluralioii,  made  in  the  natne,  and  by  the  authoriiy
of  the  people,  the  colonics  were  absolved  from  all  allegi-
ancelolhe  British  crown,  and  all  political  connexion  be-
tween tbnm  andGreat  Britain  was  totally  dis!*olved.  The
principle  of  self-preservation,  and  the  right  of  every  com-
munity to  freedom  and  happiness,  gave  n  «ari'-tiiin  to  this
separation. When  ihu  government  estiib  t-h'il  ovi'mny

a  Journal*  ff  OmgroM,  «ol.  1.  p.  74.


,-c,ii,  Gothic


19G  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [I'art  U

people  becotnes  incompetent  to  fulfil  its  purpose,  or  de-
itructive  to  the  easential  ends  for  which  it  was  instituted)  it
is  the  right  ofthat  people,  founded  on  the  law  of  nature^
and  the  reason  of  mankind,  and  supported  by  the  sound-
est authority,  and  some  very  illuairiuus  precedents,  to
throw  off  such  government,  and  provide  new  guards  for
'  their  future  security.  This  right  is  the  more  apparent,
and  tlie  duly  of  eiercising  it  becomes  the  more  clear  and
unequivocal,  in  the  ca^^e  of  (tulooias  which  are  situated  at
a  great  distance  from  the  mother  ciMintry,  and  tvUich  can-
not be  goVGrni.<d  by  it  without  vexatious  and  cootinunlly
increasing  inconvenience  ;  and  when  they  have  arrived  at
maturity  in  strength  and  resources,  or,  in  the  language  of
Nuiitesquieu,  wliich  he  applied  to  our  very  case,  "when
they  have  grown  great  nations  in  the  forests  they  were
sent  to  inhabit."  If,  in  addition  to  these  intrinsic  causes,
gradually  and  powerfully  tending  to  a  separation,  the
parent  state  should  think  fit,  in  the  arrogance  of  power  and
superiority,  to  deny  to  her  colonies  the  equal  blessiugii  of
her  own  free  government,  and  should  put  forth  a  claim  to
an  unlimited  control,  in  her  owii  discretion,  over  all  their
rights,  and  the  whole  ad  ministration  of  their  affairs,  the
consequence  would  then  be  almost  inevitable,  that  the
colonists  would  rise,  und  repel  the  claim  ;  and  more  cer-
tainly would  this  be  the  case,  if  they  were  a  spirited  and
intelligent  race  of  men,  true  to  themselves,  and  just  to
their  posterity.

The  general  opinion  in  favour  of  the  importance  and
value  of  the  Union,  appears  evident  in  all  the  proceedings
of  congress;  and  as  early  as  the  declaration  of  inde-
pendence, it  was  thought  expedient,  fur  its  security
and  duration,  to  define  with  precision,  and  by  a  formal
instrument,  the  nature  of  our  compact,  the  powers  of
Congress,  and  the  residuary  sovereignty  of  the  BtBte»i
On  the  lllh  of  June,  1776,  Congress  undertook  to
dige!<t  and  prepare  articles  of  confederation.  But  the
business  was  attended  with  much  embarrassment  and
delay,  and  notwitliatanding  these  slates  were  then  sur-
rounded by  the  same  imminent  dangers,  and  were  coo-
tending  for  the  same  illustrious  prize,  if  was  not  until  the


Lecture  X.]  THF  UNITED  STATES.  197

IStb  of  November,  1777,  that  ConffreM  could  bo  far  unite  *
the  discorddnt  inierests  and  prejudices  ol  thirteen  distinct
com  ID  unities,  as  to  a^iee  to  the  articlea  of  confederation.
And  when  tho«e  Btlirles  were  aultraitled  to  the  etate  If^is-
latures  for  their  peraaal  and  ratification,  they  were  de*
dared  to  be  the  result  of  impending;;  neceuaity,  and  of  a
disposition  for  conciliation,  and  that  ihey  were  agreed  to,
nut  fur  their  iiitrinBic  excellence,  but  as  the  beat  aysteiB
which  could  be  adopted  to  the  circumstttnces  of  all,  and,
at  the  same  lime,  afford  any  tolerable  prospect  of  general
assent."  • .

These  cotebrated  articles  met  with  still  greater  obstsi
cles  in  their  process  through  the  states.  Most  of  the  le-
gislatures ratified  them  with  a  promptitude  which  showed
their  sense  of  the  necessity  of  the  confederacy,  and  of  the
indulgence  of  a  liberal  spirit  of  accommodation.  But
Delaware  did  not  accede  to  them  until  the  year  1779,  and'
Maryland  explicitly  rejected  them.^  She  instructed  her
delegates  to  withhold  their  assent  to  the  articles,  until
there  was  an  amendment,  or  additional  agreement,  to  ap-
propriate the  newl  ands  in  the  western  pans  oft  he  Union,  a'a '
a  common  fund  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  war.<^  These
lands  were  rliiimed  by  the  states  within  whode  asserted
limits  and  jurisdiction  they  were  situated,  and  several  of
them,  from  a  deep  sense  of  the  importance  of  the  Union,
agreed  to  an  unconditional  ratification  of  the  articlea,  or,
in  other  words,  to  a  separate  confederary  between  the
Mates  so  ratifying  the  same,  though  Maryland,  or  other
states,  should  withhold  their  approbation  and  sanction.*'
The  legislature  of  New- York,  by  their  acts  of  2;W  of  Oc-
tober, 1779,  and  l9th  of  February,  I7H0,  even  consent-
ed to  a  release  of  the  nnsettled  laitds  in  the  western  part
of  the  state,  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  surh  of  the  United
States  ns  should  become  members  of  the  federal  alliance ;
and  to  resign  the  jurisdiction,  as  well  as  the  right  of  pre-
cmption.over  her  waste  and  uncultivated  territory.  The
refusal  of  Maryland,  so  long  per»iated  in,  gave  encouruge-

a  Jmimali  of  Cong-  tdL  3.  c  Jn.irnaU  g/"  Omg.  vol,  6.  p.  MB.

t  tbid.  TOl.  7. ,  d  ibid.  toI.  S.

r,3n--.MI>;GOO(^IC


199  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  (Part  H.

tnent  to  the  enemy,  and  injured  the  common  canae,  and
damped  the  hopes  oftiie  friends  of  America  at  home  and
abroad.  These  considerations  at  last  induced  that  state
to  make  a  generous  sacrifice  of  her  pretensions,  and  on
the  6rst  of  Muich,  1781 ,  and  which  was  upwards  of  three
years  from  their  first  promulgation,  the  articles  of  confede-
ration received  the  unanimous  approbation  of  the  United
States.

The  difficulties  which  impeded  the  framing  and  adopt-
ing the  articles  of  confederation,  even  during  the  preiwur«
of  B  comnnn  calamity,  and  which  nothing  at  last  but  a
sense  of  common  danger  could  surmount,  form  a  striking
example  of  the  mighty  force  of  local  interests  and  discor-
dant passiobs,  and  they  teach  a  monitory  leeson  of  mo-
deration to  political  councils.

Notwithstanding  the  arttclen  of  confederation  conferred
upon  Congress,  (though  in  a  very  imperfect  raaoner,  and
under  a  most  unskilful  organization,)  the  chief  rights  of  po-
litical supremacy,  the  jura  twami  imperii,  yet  they  wore^
infact,  but  a  d^est,  and  even  a  limitation,  in  thesEiapeof,  a
written  compact,  ofthose  undefined anddiscretionary  sore-
reign  (lowers  which  were  delegated  by  the  coJonies  toCon^
greas  in  1775,  and  which  had  been  freely  exercised,  and
implicitly  obeyed.*  A  remarkable  inslanee  of  the  ez->
ercise  of  this  origiiml,  dormant,  and  vast  discretion^
appears  on  the  Journals  of  Congress  the  latter  end  of
the  year  1776L  The  progress  of  the  Briti-h  urnis  had,,
Dt  that  period,  excited  the  most  alarming  apprehen-
sions for  our  safety,  and  Congress  transferred  to  th*
commander  in  chief,  for  the  term  of  six  months,  com^
plete  dictatorial  power  over  the  liberty  and  prop<>rty
of  the  citizens  of  the  United  Sttilcs,  in  like  manner  as
the  Roman  Semtte,  in  the  criticnl  times  of  ihe  republic,
was  wont  to  have  recourse  to  a  dictator,  ne  guid  rupuOli-
ea  dbCriitienti  ea^t.*>  Such loose  undeterminate  autho-

a  CoQi^u,  bj  ordraanc?,  31s'  Deceraher,  l7Rt,  inrorporB""!  '1'»
Bank  uf  Nurth  America;  and  Jndga  Wilsoo.  in  en  »L<).'  Bii>ui"eTii  ia
I7S3,  Eho<*ed  their  coinpeleDcj  to  do  it  Joarnalt  of  Congreu,  toL  >
197. iFilion^i  Work;  »d1.  S 397

h  JouraalK^Congreiix'iaLt.^.tl^

r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


Lorture  X.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  199

rity  n>t  I'lf.  Union  origioally  poaMHted,  was  absolutely  in-
corurmtrlile  with  Huy  regular  DoiiouB  of  liberty.  Though
it  w  IS  rxerciseil  in  the  instanre  we  faare  referred  to.  aod
in  other  stroog  canes,  with  the  best  inlenliona,  and  undw
<be  impulse  of  an  irritiiatible  nece»ity,  yet  surh  an  irre-
gular sovereigm}  oever  can  be  durable.  It  will  either
dwiuHle  into  insignificance,  or  degenerate  into  despotisin.
The  powers  of  Congress,  as  eoumerated  in  the  article*
of  confederation,  would  jierhaps  hare  bt^en  competent  for
all  the  essential  puriioses  of  the  union,  had  th«y  been  duly
distributed  among  the  departmenti  of  a  well-balantwd  go-
Ternment,  and  been  carried  down,  through  the  mediuin  of
a  feileral  judicial  and  execuiire  |K)wer,  to  the  iodividnal
cilixena  of  the  union.  The  exclusive  cogn)2ance  of  our
foreign  relations,  the  rights  of  war  and  peace,  and  the
right  la  make  unlimited  requisitions  of  men  and  money,
were  confided  to  Congress,  and  the  exercise  of  them  was
binding  upon  the  states.  But,  in  imitation  of  all  the  for-
mer confederacies  of  independent  states,  either  in  atKieot
Greece  or  in  modern  Europe,  the  articles  of  confederation
carried  the  decrees  of  the  federal  council  to  the  stales  in
their  sovereign  or  collective  capacity.  This  was  the  great
fundamental  defect  in  the  confederation  of  1781  ;  it  lei
to  its  eventual  overthrow ;  and  it  has  proved  pernicious  or
destructive  to  all  other  federal  governments  which  adopt-
ed the  principle.  Disobedience  to  the  laws  of  the  unioo
must  either  be  submitted  to  by  the  government  to  its  own
disgrace,  or  those  laws  must  he  enforced  by  arms.  Tbe
mild  influence  of  the  civil  magistrate,  however  strongly
it  may  be  felt  and  obeyed  by  private  individuals,  will  not
be  heeded  by  an  organized  community,  conscious  of  its
■trength,  and  swayed  by  its  passions.  The  history  of  tbe
federal  governments  of  Greece,  Germany,  Switerland,
and  Holland,  afford  melancholy  exam|)les  of  destructive
civil  war  springing  from  the  disobedience  of  tbe  sejiarate
members.  I  will  mention  only  a  fingle  instance  to  this
eflecl,  taken  from  the  generally  un interesting  nnnalK  of
the  Svvixs  itantoiis.  lij  one  oi  the  nri  1 1  s  ufthe  lU-  vetic
alliance,  the  cantous  weru  1  e:ind  to  ALb.ini  u>.>  diffcicncs

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


300  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Port  II.

which  mi^ht  ariM  between  them  to  arbitrators.  In  th«
year  1440,  a  dispute  arMe  between  Zuric  on  the  one  side,
and  the  cantons  of  Schweitz  and  Gleris  oq  the  other,  re-
apectin;  some  territorial  claims.  Zuric  refused  to  submit
to  a  decision  against  her,  and  the  cuotending  parties  took
to  arms.  All  Switierland  was  of  course  armed  af^ainst
2uric,  the  refractory  member.  She  sought  proiection
froQi  her  iincient  eiiemy,  the  House  of  Austria,  and  the
controversy  was  not  terminhled  iu  favour  of  the  federal
decree,  until  after  six  yearsof  furious  and  destruciire  war.a

Hud  there  been  sufficient  energy  in  the  government  (^
the  United  States,  under  the  articles  of  confederation,  to
have  enforced  the  constitutional  rrquisilions,  it  might  hare
proved  fatal  to  public  lilierty  ;  for  Congress,  as  then  con*
Btitutcd,  was  a  most  unlit  and  unsafp  depository  of  politi-
cal power,  since  all  the  authority  of  the  nation,  in  one
complicated  mass  of  jurisiliction,  was  vested  in  a  single
body  of  men.  It  was,  indeed,  exceediagly  fortunate,'  aa
the  event  bus  subsequently  shown,  (hnt  the  state  legisla-
tures even  refused  to  confer  upon  Congress  the  right  to
levy  and  collect  a  general  impost,  notwithstanding  the
refusal  appeared  to  be  eiiremely  disastrous  at  the  time,
and  was  deeply  regretted  by  the  intelligent  friends  of  the
union.  Had  such  a  jinwer  been  granted,  the  effort  te
amend  the  confederation  would  probably  not  have  been
made,  and  the  people  of  this  country  might  have  bees
languishing,  to  this  day,  the  miserable  victims  of  a  feeble
and  incom|>etRnt  union.

Then;. was  no  provision  in  the  articles  of  confederation,
enabling  Congress  to  add  a  sanction  to  its  laws.  In  this
respect,  they  were  more  defective  than  some  of  the  other
federal  governmrnts  which  are  to  be  met  with  iu  history.
The  Amphyctionic  Council  in  Greece  had  authority  to  fine
and  puni!<h  their  refractory  states.  Laredrmnn  and  Phocis
were  both  prosecuted  before  the  Council  of  the  Amphic-
tions,  (which  was  a  council  ofthe  representatives  of  twelve


<  rlh!.  •I'-  In (■••nf'd. Ihh.  par  IFatterUtt,  IW.  5- Ptanta*t  Hut

9;r,(i.-j/«>.'.',  lOi.  1.  last  ch.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Leelare  X.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  tOl

nations  of  Greece,)  rih)  all  the  Greek  Rtatex  were  required
hy  proclamation  to  enforce  the  decree.  The  Germanic
Diet,  as  it  fornaerlj  exioted,  could  put  its  members  under
the  ban  of  (he  empire,  by  which  their  propertj  was  confis*
cated  ;  and  it  was  aided  in  enforcing  obedience  to  its  laws
hj  a  federal  judiciary,  and  an  eiecutive  head.*  Congress,
under  the  old  confederation,  tike  the  States  General  under
the  Dutch  confederacy,  were  restricted  ftoin  any  construc-
tive assumption  of  power,  however  essential  it  might  hare
been  deemed  to  the  complete  enjoyment  and  exercise  of
that  which  was  given.  No  express  grant  conveyed  any
implied  power ;  and  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  a  strict  and
I  igorous  adherence  to  the  letter  of  the  grant,  without  per-
mission to  give  it  a  liberal  and  er|tiitable  interpretation,
in  furtherance  of  the  beneficent  ends  of  the  government,
must,  in  many  cases,  frustrate  entirely  the  purposes  of  the
power.  A  government  too  restricted  for  the  due  perform-
ance of  its  high  trusts,  will  either  become  insignificant,  or
be  driven  to  usurpation.  We  have  examples  of  this  in  the
government  of  the  United  Netherlands,  before  it  was  swept
away  by  tbe  violence  of  the  French  revolution.  While  that
governmeat  moved  within  its  constitutional  limits,  it  was
more  absolutely  nerveless  than  any  other  government
which  ever  existed.  The  States  General  could  neither
make  war  or  peace,  or  contract  alliances,  ot  raise  money,
without  the  consent  of  every  province ;  nor  the  provincial
states  conclude  those  points  without  the  consent  of  every
city  having  a  voice  in  their  assemblies.  The  consequence
was,  that  the  federal  bead  was  frequently  induced,  by  im-
perious necessity,  to  assume  power  unwarranted  by  the
fundamental  charter  of  the  onion,  and  to  dispense  witb.tbe
requisite  unanimity.  This  was  done  in  the  years  1648,
16S7,  and  1661,  as  well  as  inanotherstronginatancegiveo
by  Sir  WilliamTemple,  and  of  which  he  was  the  author.'*

a  Thalmpariat  Chamber  had  appellate  jariidictiannDli.  lUaeatenoes
were  carried  into  eseooti'm  B|tiin*t  rtfraclorj  ttate*.  by  the  militaA
force  of  the  circlet.  P/i-^fel,  Abr.  Chro.  dt  PftUt.  tPAlltmagnt,  (oak  i
p.  400. PutUi'i  Conjl,  Htd.  p.  355.

(  7>mpV«  ff^enfcf,  toL  1.  Hi.  I  SB.  337.

Vol..  I,  36

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


202  illUSPRUDCNCE  Of  [Part  H.

The  fornier  ronredpration  of  this  countty  wai  defective
-«Ibo,  id  not  giving  complete  authority  lo  congreBs  to  intei*'
fere  in  contests  between  the  Mveral  itate*,  and  to  protect
each  Btaie  from  ioterDal  violeuce  eadrebellion.  In  many  r»>
ipecta  our  coofederaliou  was  anperior  to  those  of  Germany,
Holland,  or  Snitzerland,  and  particularly  in  the  ahaoluta
prohibilioii  to  the  several  ittateB,  from  any  lutf  rference  or
concern  in  foreign  or  domesticalliances,  or  from  the  main*
tPJiance  of  land  or  naval  force*  in  time  of  peace*  But  in
the  leading  features  which  I  have  suggeMeil,  and  inotfaera
of  inferior  importance,  it  was  a  moat  unskilful  fabric,  and
totully  incompetent  to  fulfil  the  eoda  for  which  it  was  erect-
ed. Almoat  as  soon  as  it  waa  ratified,  the  statea  began  to
&il  in  a  prompt  and  faithful  obedience  to  ita  lawa.  Aa  dan-
ger receded,  instances  of  n^lect  became  more  fret(uent,
and  by  the  titneof  the  peace  of  1783,  thediseaaeof  the  go-
vernment had  displayed  itself  with  alarming  rapidity.  The
delinquencies  of  one  atate  became  a  pretext  orapology  for
tbuae  of  another.  The  idea  of  supplying  the  pecuniary
exigences  of  the  nation,  from  requisitions  on  the  states^
waa  aoon  found  to  be  altogether  delusive*  The  Datiooal
engagemeota  seemed  to  have  been  entirely  abandoDedt
Eveolhecontributionsfor  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  go-
vernment fell  almost  entirely  upon  the  two  statea  which
had  the  most  domestic  resources.  Attempts  were  very  early
made  by  congress,  and  in  remonstrances  ihe  most  manly
and  persuasive,  lo  obtain  from  the  several  slates  the  right
of  levying,  for  a  limited  time,  a  general  impost,  for  tbeez-
cluxivepurposeof  protidiiigfor  the  dischurge  of  the  national
debt.  It  waa  found  impracticable  tounite  the  slatAs  in  any
provision  for  the  national  safely  and  honour.  Interfering
regulations  of  trade,  and  interfering  claims  of  territury>
were  dissolving  the  friendly  attachments,  and  the  sense  of
eommoD  interest,  which  bad  cemented  and  sustained  the
Union  during  the  arduous  struggles  of  the  revolution.  Symp-
tomH  of  distresR  and  marks  of  humiliation  were  rapidly  ac-
cumulating. It  was  with  diffii^iilty  that  theattpntionof  the
■tatei  could  be  sufficiently  exerted  lo  induce  them  to  keep


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LKtun  X.]  THE  UNITGD  STATES'.  xqs

up  8  sufficient  representation  in  conj^esi  to  form  m  quorum
.  tat  business.  Tbe  fioancefl  of  the  nation  were  anni-
hilated. The  whale  army  of  the  United  States  v/a-  re-
duced, in  1784,  to  80  persons,  and  the  states  were  urged
to  provide  some  of  tbe  militia  to  gnrrisoa  tbe  weelera
posts.  Ia*short,  to  use  ttw  language  ofthe  authors  oftha
FederaUtt,  "each  state,  yielding  to  tha  voica  ofimmediata
interest  or  convenienee,  successively  withdrew  its  xup-
port  from  the  confederation,  til)  tbe  frail  and  tottering
edifice  was  ready  to  fall  upon  our  beadst  and  to  crush  u»
beneath  its  ruins."

Most  of  the  federal  eonstitutions  in  tbe  worM  bare  de-
fenernted  or  perished  in  the  same  way,  arid  by  the  same
means.  They  are  tobedassed  among  tbe  most  defective
political  institutions  which  hare  been  erected  by  mankind
for  their  aeeurity.  The  great  and  incurable  defect  of  all
former  federal  gorernnienls,  such  as  the  Amphictyonic,
the  Achieau,  and  Lycian  rmifederacies  in  ancient  Greece ;
and  tbeGermanic,  the  Helvetic,  the  Hanseatic,  and  tbe
Dotch  republics,  in  modern  history,  is,  that  they  were  so-
vereignties over  sovereigns,  and  legisIairoiM,  not  for  private
individuals,  but  for  communities  in  their  political  capacity.
Tbe  only  coercion  for  disobedience  was  physir-a!  force,  in-
■tend  ofthe  decree  and  the  [weific  arm  of  the  civil  magis-
trate. The  inevitable  consequence,  in  every  case  in  which
h  member  chooses  to  be  di^iobedienl,  is  either  a  civil  wan
or  an  annihilation  of  national  authority.

The  first  effort  to  relieve  tbe  peopTe  of  thiscoontry  from
R  state  of  national  degradation  and  ruin,  came  from  Vir-
ginia, in  a  proposition  for  a  convention  of  delegates  to  re-
gulate our  commerce  with  foreign  tuitions.  The  proposal
was  well  received  hy  the  other  stateSr  and  several  of  thnm
sent  delegates  to  a  convention  whrcb  met  at  Annapolis,  ia
September,  1786.  This  small  assembly,  being  only  a
partial  represeolattonof  the  states,  and  being  deeply  sen-
Bihle  ofthe  radical  defects  of  the  system  of  tbe  existing
federal  government,  thought  it  inetpedient  to  attempt  a
partial,  and  probably  only  a  temporary  and  delusive  nll^
Ttattonofourastioiuil  calamities. They  eoncurred,tber»r

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


£04  JURISPRUDENCE  0¥  [Part  II.

fore,  in  a  strong  application  to  congress  for  a  general  god-
ventioii,  to  take  into  cousidciution  the  situation  of  tha
United  States,  and  to  devise  such  further  provisions  ai
•bould  be  proper  to  remlor  the  federal  government  not  a
mere  phantom,  as  heretofore,  but  a  real  government,  ade-
quate to  the  exigencies  of  the  union.  Congress  perceived
the  vrisdom,  and  felt  the  patriotism  of  the  suggestion,  and
Tecommendud  a  convention  of  delegates  from  the  several
stutes,  to  revite,  amend,  and  alter  the  articles  of  confede-
ration. All  the  states,  except  Rhode  Island,  acceded  to
the  proposal,  and  appointed  delegHtetf,  nho  aaspmbled  io
a  general  convention  at  Philadelphia  in  Hay,  1787.

This  was  a  crisis  must  solemn  and  eveotfui,  in  respect
to  our  future  fortune  and  proi|>er)ty.  Allihe  tVuilsctf  the
revolution,  and  perhaps  the  fina)  destiny  of  republican
government,  were  staked  on  the  experiment  which  was
then  to  be  made  (o  reform  the  nystem  of  our  national
compact.  Happily  for  this  country,  and  probably  as
aaspiciously  for  the  general  liberties  of  mankind,  tha
convention  combined  a  very  rare  union  of  the  best
talents,  experience,  information,  [latriolism,  probity,  and
character,  which  the  country  aflbrded;  and  it  commanded
that  universal  public  confidence  which  such  qualificalioni
were  calculated  to  inspire.  Af^er  several  months  of  tran-
quil  deliberation,  the  convention  agreed  with  unprece-
dented uuanimily  on  the  plan  of  government  which  now
forma  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  This  plan
was  directed  to  be  submitted  to  a  convention  of  delegates,
to  be  chosen  by  the  people  at  large  in  each  state,  for  their
assent  and  ratification.  This  was  laying  the  foundations
ofthe  fabric  of  our  national  polity,  where  alone  they  ought
to  be  laid,  on  the  broad  consent  of  the  people.  The  con-
ttitution  underwent  a  severe  scrntiny  and  long  dis-
cussion, not  only  in  public  prints  and  private  circles,
but  solemnly  and  publicly,  by  the  many  illustrious
■tatesmen  who  compooed  these  local  conventions.  Near
a  year  elapsed  before  it  received  the  ratification  of  a
requisite  number  of  tha  states  to  give  it  a  political  ex-
Utence. New-Hampshire  was  the ninth  state  which

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


Lactore  X.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  205

adopted  tbe  constitution,  nnd  thereby,  according  to
one  t^ita  articles,  it  was  to  become  the  governmeot  of  tbe
states  so  ratifying  tbe  same.  Her  example  was  immedi-
ately followed  bjr  tbe  powerful  states  of  Virginia  and  New-
York,  and  on  the  4th  of  March,  1789,  the  government  was
dulyorganized  and  put  is  operation.  North  Carolina  and
fibode  Island  withheld  some  time  longer  their  assent.
Their  scruples  were,  howerer,  gradually  overcome,  and  io
June,  1790,  the  constitution  bad  received  the  usanimnus
rniificatioQ  of  all  the  members  of  the  original  confederacy.
The  peaceable  adoptioD  of  this  governmont,  under  all
the  circumstances  which  attended  it,  presented  the  ease  of
an  effort  of  deliberation,  combined  with  a  spirit  of  amity
and  of  mutual  concession,  which  was  without  eKumple.  It
must  beasourceof  just  pride,  and  of  the  most  grateful  re-
collection to  every  American,  who  re6ects seriously  on  the
difficulty  of  the  ex|>eriment,  the  manner  in  which  it  was
oonducted,  the  felicity  of  its  issue,  and  tbe  fate  of  similar
trials  in  other  nations  of  tbe  earth.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoOglc


LECTURE  3UU

or  C0NQBE8S.

Yac  pow«r  of  making  lawi  is  the  nprAiiie  poww  is  a
itate,  andihe  department  in  which  it  reiideawiU  natarally
bare  sueh  ■  prepondBrance  io  the  political  ■ystem,  and  act
with  such  mighty  force  upon  the  public  mind,  that  the  lio*
of  separation  between  that  and  the  other  branchei  of  tb*
government  ought  to  be  marked  Tory  diriiactly,  and  with
the  most  careful  preciaioD>

The  constitution  of  the  United  States  has  effected  thw
purpose  with  great  felicity  of  execution,  and  in  a  way  well
calculated  to  preserve  the  equal  balance  of  the  fovern-
ment,  and  the  harmony  of  its  operations.  It  has  not  only
made  a  general  delegation  of  the  legislative  power  to  ona
branch  of  the  government,  t^the  eiecatire  to  another,  and
of  the  judicial  to  the  third,  but  it  has  specially  defined  the
general  powers  and  duties  of  each  of  those  departments.
This  was  esaential  to  peace  and  safety  in  a  goveromeot
clothed  only  with  specific  powers  for  national  purposes^
and  erected  in  the  midst  of  nonieroua  state  goreromenta
retaining  the  exclusive  control  of  their  local  concerns,  ft
will  be  the  object  of  ibis  lecture  to  review  the  legislativa
department ;  and  I  shall  consider  tbis  great  title  in  our  na*
tional  polity  under  the  following  beads : — (1.)  The  con-
stituent parts  of  Congress,  and  the  mode  of  their  appoint-
ment :  (2.)  Their  joint  and  separate  powers  and  privile-
ges :  (3.)  Their  method  of  enacting  laws,  with  the  quali*
fied  negative  of  their  President.

(1.)  By  the  constitution,'  allthel^istatirepowerstheref


t,Goo(^lc


208  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  U.

in  granted,  are  vested  in  a  congrew,  coDiisting  of  a  aenatb
and  hoUHe  of  representatives.

The  division  of  the  legislature  into  two  separate  and  in-
dependent branches,  is  Tounded  on  such  obvious  principlei
of  good  pohcjr,  and  is  so  strongly  recommended  by  the  un-
equivocal language  of  experience,  that  it  has  obtained  the
general  approbation  of  the  people  of  this  country.  The
great  object  of  this  separation  of  the  legisletare  into  two
housei,  Hcting  separately,  and  with  co-ordinate  powers,  is
to  destroy  the  evil  effects  of  sutM^n  and  strong  excitement,
■nd  of  precifHtale  measures  springing  from  passion,  ca-
price, prejudice,  pemonal  influence, and  party  intrigue.and
which  have  been  found,  by  sad  experience,  to  exercise  *
potent  and  dangerous  sway  in  single  assemblJet.  A  hasty
decision  is  not  so  likely  to  arrive  to  the  solemnities  of  a
Uw,  when  it  is  to  be  arrested  in  its  course,  sod  made  to  un-
dergo the  deliberation,  and  probably  the  jealous  and  criti'
eal  revision,  of  another,  and  a  rival  body  of  men,  sitting
in  a  different  place,  and  under  better  advantages  to  avoid
the  prepossessions,  and  eorrect  the  errors  of  the  other
branch.  The  legislatures  of  Pennsylvania  and  Georgia
consisted  originally  of  a  single  bouse.  The  instability  and
passion  which  marked  tbeir  proceedings  were  viAifole  at
the  time,  and  the  subject  of  much  public  animadversion  ;
and  in  the  subsequent  reform  of  their  constitutions,  the
people  were  so  sensible  of  this  defect,  and  of  the  ioeon-
venience  tbey  had  suffered  from  it,  that  in  both  states  a
aenate  was  introduced.  Tio  portion  of  the  political  histo^
ry  of  mankind  is  more  full  of  instructive  lessons  on  this
subject,  or  contains  more  striking  proof  of  the  faction-,
instability,  and  misery  of  states,  under  the  dominion
of  a  single  unchecked  assembly,  than  that  of  the  Ita-
lian republics  of  the  middle  ages;  and  which  arose
in  great  numbers,  and  with  dazzling  but  transient  splen-
dour, in  the  interval  between  the  fall  of  the  Western
and  tbe  Eastern  empire  of  the  Romans.  They  were
all  alike  illHionstituted,  with  a  single  unbalanced  assembly.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture XI.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  SOg

They  were  all  alike  miserablet  and  all  ended  id  Bimilar
disgrace.*

Many  speculative  writers  and  theoretical  potillcians,
about  the  time  ortbe  commencement  of  tlieFrencb  revolu-
tion, were  struck  with  the  simplicity  ofa  lej^istature  with  a
■ingfle  assembly,  and  concluded  that  more  than  one  house
was  useless  and  expenme.  This  led  the  elder  President
Adams  to  write  and  publish  his  );reat  work,  entitled,  "  A
Defence  of  the  Constitutions  ofCroverRment  ofthe  United
States,"  in  which  be  vindicates,  with  much  learning  and
ability,  the  value  and  necessity  of  the  division  of  tbe  l(.-^i»-
tature  into  two  branches,  and  uf  the  distribution  of  tbe
different  powers  of  the  government  into  distinct  depart-
ments. He  reviewed  the  history,  and  examined  the  con-
struction of  all  mixed  and  free  govemmenls  which  had
ever  existed,  from  the  earlietit  records  of  time,  in  order
to  deduce  with  more  certainty  and  force  his  great  prae*
tical  truth,  that  single  assemblies,  without  check  or  ba-
lance, or  a  government  with  all  authority  collected  into  one
centre,  according  to  the  notion  (^  M.  Turgot,  were  visinna-
ry,  violent,  intriguing,  corrupt,  and  tyrannical  dominations
of  majorities  over  minorities,  and  uniformly  and  rapidly
terminating  their  career  in  a  profligate  despotism.

This  visionary  notion  of  a  single  bouse  of  the  legisla-
ture was  carried  into  the  constitution  which  the  French
national  assembly  adopted  in  1791.  The  very  nature  of
things,  said  the  inteffl[ierate  and  crude  politicians  of  that
assembly,  was  adverse  to  every  division  of  tbe  legislative
body ;  and  that,  as  the  nation  which  was  represented  wad
one,  so  the  representative  body  ought  to  he  one  also.  The
will  of  the  nation  was  indivisible,  and  so  ought  to  be  the
voice  which  pronounced  it.  If  there  were  two  chambers,
with  a  veto  upon  tbe  nctsof  each  other,  in  some  cases  Ibey
would  be  reduced  to  perfect  inaction.  By  such  reasoning/
the  national  assembly  of  France,  consisting  of  upwards  of


a  Adam*''  Dt/imt

Vol  I.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


310  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  tPrntXTt.

one  thousand  members,  sRer  a  tihort  and  tumultuoafl  de-
bate, almust  unanimuusly  voted  to  reject  the  iiroposition
of  un  upper  house.^  The  same  false  and  vicious  principle
continued  for  aome  lime  longer  to  prevail  with  the  theorieta
of  that  country ;  and  a  single  bouse  was  likewise  eMab-
liahed  in  the  plan  of  fcovemment  published  by  the  French
convRnlion  in  1793.  The  instability  and  violent  meHKurea
of  that  convention,  which  continued  fur  xome  yearfi  to  fill
all  Europe  with  astonishment  and  horror,  tended  to  display
in  a  most  forcihln  nnd  affecliiifr  li^ht,  the  miKeriesofa
■ingle  unchecked  Itody  of  men,  rlothed  withall  the  legis-
lative powers  of  the  state.  It  is  very  possible  that  the
French  nation  mijibt  have  been  hurried  into  the  excesses
of  a  revolution  even  under  a  belter  orgHnizetion  of  their
government;  but  if  the  proposition  of  M.  Lally  Toteodal
to  consiitute  a  senate,  or  upper  house,  to  be  composed  of
members  chosen  for  life,  had  prevailed,  the  conslitutioQ
would  have  bad  mut-h  more  stability,  and  would  probably
have  been  much  better  able  to  preserve  the  nation  in  order
and  tranquillity.  Their  own  HufTerings  taught  ibe  Fren<  h
people  to  listen  to  that  oracle  of  wisdom,  tlie  ez|>ertence  of
other  countries  and  ages,  and  whirb  for  some  years  they
bad  utterly  disregarded,  amidst  the  hurry  and  the  violence
of  those  nssions  by  which  they  were  inflametl.  Nn  people,
said  M.  Boissy  d' Angles  in  1795,  can  testify  to  the  world
with  more  iruth  and  sincerity  than  Frenchmen  can  do,  the
dangers  inherent  in  a  single  legislative  assembly,  and  the
point  to  which  factions  may  mislead  an  assembly  without
reins  or  counterpoise.  We  accordingly  tind  that  tn  the  next
constiiutiun,  which  arose  tn  17117,  there  was  a  division  of
the  legitiiature,  and  a  council  of  ancients  was  introduced  to
give  stability  and  moderation  to  the  government;  and  this
idea  of  two  houses  was  never  afterwards  abandoned.

The  senate  of  the  United  States  is  com}weed>>  of  two
senators  from  each  state,  chosen  by  the  legislature  thereof

M  Jf.  A.  R^.for  nil. Hilt.  p.  49.  (  itit.  1.  fec.3.^


t,Go6(^lc


iMturtXI.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  211

(or  six  yean,  Bod  each  senator  has  one  vote.  The  senate
at  present  consists  of  foriy-eight  memtters,  reprfHenling
the  twenty-four  stales  of  the  union.  In  this  pait  of  the
constituiion  we  readily  perceive  the  features  of  the  old
confederation.  Each  slate  has  itti  equal  voice  and  equal
weight  in  the  senuie,  without  any  regard  to  disparity  of
population,  wealth,  or  dimennions.  This  arrangement
must  have  been  the  result  of  that  spirit  of  amity  and  mu-
tual concession,  which  was  rendered  indispensable  by  the
peculiarity  of  our  political  condition.  It  is  grounded  on
the  idea  of  sovereignty  in  the  states ;  ami  every  indepen-
dent community,  as  we  have  already  seen,a  is  equal  by
the  law  of  nationSi  and  has  a  (wrfect  right  lu  dictate  iti
own  terms  before  it  enters  into  a  social  compact.  On  the
principle  of  consolidation  of  the  slates,  this  organization
would  have  been  iuadmissible,  for  in  that  cat>e  each  state
would  have  been  merged  in  one  single  and  entire  govern-
ment. At  the  time  the  articles  of  confedcralioD  wnre
preparing,  it  was  attempted  to  allow  the  otates  an  influ-
ence and  power  in  congress  in  a  ratio  to  their  numbers
and  wealth,  but  the  idea  of  separate  and  inHe[)etideat
states  was  at  that  day  so  strongly  cheritihed,  that  the  pro-
position met  with  no  success. b

The  election  of  the  senate  by  the  Rtates  legislatures,  is
also  a  recogniloin  of  their  separate  and  independent  exis-
tence, and  renders  them  absolutely  essential  to  ihe  opera-
tion of  the  national  government.  There  were  diflit-ulties
•ome  years  ago  as  to  the  true  consi  ruction  of  the  coni^tilu-
tion  in  the  choiie  of  senators.  They  were  lo  lie  rAofen
by  the  legiilaluret,  and  the  legirilaturc  nns  to  prescribe  the
times,  places,  and  manner,  of  holding  elections  for  tiena-
tors,  and  Congress  are  authorized  to  make  and  alter  such
regulations,  except  as  to  the  plHce.<^  As  the  legisliilure
may  prescribe  the  manntr,  it  has  been  considered  and  set-
tled in  this  state,  that  the  legislature  may  preset i be  that


p  Lecture  8  p.  91,  b  JoamaltofCoi^a;  roL  3.  41S,

e  Art.  I.  tec.  4.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


tit  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  It

they  Bbell  be  chosea  bj  joint  vote  or  ballot  of  the  two
houses,  in  case  the  two  houses  cannot  separBtel;  concur
in  a  choice,  and  then  the  weight  of  the  senate  ii  dissipa-
ted and  lost  in  the  more  numerous  vote  of  the  assembly.
This  construction  has  become  too  convenient,  and  has
been  too  long  settled  by  the  recoftnition  of  senators  so
elected,  to  be  now  disturbed  ;  though  I  should  think,  if
the  question  was  a  new  one,  that  when  the  coBstitotion  di-
rected that  the  senulor!'  should  be  choBon  by  the  Itgiilature,
it  meant  not  to  the  members  of  the  legislature  per  capita,
but  the  legialuture  in  the  true  techuical  sense,  being  the
two  houses  acting  ill  their  8fi|>arate  and  organized  capaci-
tics,  with  the  ordinary  constitutional  right  of  negative  on
each  others'^  proceedings.  This  was  a  contemporary  ex-
position of  the  clause  in  question,  and  was  parlicularly
maitilainediii  the  well  known  letters  of  the  Fedeial  Far~
mer,"  who  surveyed  the  constitution  with  a  jealous  and
scrutinizing  eye.

The  small  number,  and  long  duration  of  the  Senate,
were  intended  to  render  tbem  a  safeguard  against  the  in-
fluence of  those  peroxyams  of  heat  and  passion,  which
prevail  occasionally  in  the  most  enlightened  communities,
and  enter  into  the  deliberation  of  popular  assemblies.  In
this  point  of  view,  a  6rm  and  independent  senate  is  justly
regarded  as  an  anchor  of  safety  amidst  the  storms  of  poli-
tical faction ;  and  for  the  want  of  such  n  stable  body,
the  republics  of  Athens  and  Florence  were  overturned
by  the  fury  of  commotions,  which  the  senates  of  Sjuita
sod  Rome  might  have  beeo  able  to  withstand.  The  cha-
racterislical  qualities  of  the  senate,  in  the  intendment  of
the  constitution,  are  wisdom  and  stability.  The  legal
presumption  is,  that  the  senate  will  entertain  more
enlarged  views  of  public  policy,  will  feei  a  higher
and  juster  sense  of  national  character,  and  a  greater
regard  for  stability  in  the  administration  of  the  govern-
tnent.  These  qualities,  it  is  true,  may,  in  most  cases,  be
squally  fouod  in  the  other  branch  of  the  legislature,  but


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


LectuM  XL] THE  UNITED  STATES;  SIS

tbe  constitutional  atructure  of  tbe  bouse  is  notequelly  crW
ciliated  to  produce  them  ;  fur,  as  the  house  of  rei^eaeota-
tivea  comes  more  immediatelf  from  tbe  people,  end  the
members  hold  their  seats  for  a  much  shorter  time,  thejr
are  presumed  to  partake,  with  a  quicker  sensibilily .  of  tbe
prevailing  temper  and  irritable  disposition  '  of  tbe  times,
and  te  be  in  much  more  danger  of  adofrtinf  aieawre*
with  precipitation,  and  of  changing;  them  with  levity.  A
mutable  legislation  is  attended  with  a  formidable  train  of
miBchiefs  to  the  community.  It  weakens  the  force,  and
increases  the  intricacy  of  tbe  laws,  hurt*  credit,  leMena
the  value  of  property,  and  it  is  as  infirmity  very  ineident
to  republican  establishments,  and  has  been  a  conitant
source  of  anxiety  and  concern  to  their  most  enlishtened
admirers.'  A  dispoaitiun  to  multiply,  and  to  change  laws,
upon  the  spur  of  the  occasion,  and  to  be  making  constant
and  restless  experiments  with  the  statute  code,  seems  te
be  the  natural  diseabe  of  popular  assemblies.  In  order,
therefore,  to  counteract  such  a  dangerous  propensity,  and
to  maintain  a  due  portion  of  confidencein  the  goverumeDt,
aod  to  insure  its  safety  and  characterat  home  and  abroad,
it  is  requbite  that  another  body  of  men,  coming  likewise
from  tbe  people,  and  equally  responsible  for  their  conduct,
but  resting  on  a  more  permanent  basis,  and  constituted
with  stronger  inducements  to  moderation  in  debate,  and
to  tenacity  of  purpose,  should  be  plated  as  a  check  upon'
the  intemperance  of  the  more  popular  department.

The  senate  have  been,  from  the  first  formation  of  tba
government,  divided  into  three  classes  ;  and  the  rotatioq
of  the  classes  was  origioally  determined  by  lot,  and  tbe
seats  of  one  class  are  vacated  at  the  expiration  of  every
second  year,  and  one  third  of  the  senate  are  chosen  every
Be''ond  year. 3  This  provision  was  borrowed  from  a  simi-
lar one  in  some  of  tbe  state  constitutions,  of  which  Virginia
gave  tbe  first  example;  and  it  is  admirably  calculated,

•  Ftdtnlia,  roL3.  No.  6S.  h  Art.  l-wq.  3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


S14  JURISPRUDtNCE  OT  [^lr(  U.

on  the  one  hand,  to  infuee  into  the  senate  biennially  <  re-
newed pablic  confidence  and  vigour ;  and,  no  the  other,
to  retain  a  large  portion  of  experienced  membera,  dul;
initiated  into  the  general  )irinri[ties  of  national  policy,  and
the  forms  and  rourse  of  buiiineHs  in  the  bonse.

The  superior  weight  nod  delicacy  of  the  trust  confided
to  the  senate,  and  which  will  be  shown  more  fully  bernaf-
ter,  is  a  reason  why  theconBtilulion^  requires  that  a  sena-
tor should  be  thirty  years  of  age,  and  nine  years  a  citizen
of  the  United  Estates,  and,  al  the  lime  of  his  election,  an
-inhabitant  ofthe  state  for  which  he  is  chosen.  The  same
age  was  also  requisite  for  a  Roman  senator,  though,  in
their  executive  officers,  no  qualification  ofage  was  requir-
ed. Nt  atat  ^dem  dutinguehatur  qvin  prima  juventa  con-
tuhtUM  ac  dictarura*  inirtnt.^  It  has  also  been  depuad
fit  and  proper,  in  a  country  which  was  colonized  original-
ly from  several  parts  of  Europe,  and  has  been  disposed  to
adopt  the  most  liberal  policy  towards  the  rest  of  mankind,
that  a  period  of  citizenship  sufficient  to  create  an  attach-
ment to  our  government,  and  a  knowledge  of  its  princi-
ples, Hhonld  render  an  emigrant  eligible  to  office.  The
English  policy  is  not  quite  so  enlarged.  No  alien  born
can  become  a  member  of  parliament.  This  disability  was
imposed  by  the  act  of  settlement  of  13  Wm.  HI.  c.  2.;
and  no  bill  of  naturalization  can  be  received  in  cither
bouse  of  parliament,  without  such  disabling  clauBe  in  it.

The  house  of  representatives  is  composed  of  members
ehosen  every  second  year  by  the  people  of  ihe  several
states,  who  are  qualified  electors  of  the  most  numerous
branch  of  the  legislature  ofthe  state  to  which  they  belong.
No  person  can  be  a  representative  until  he  hath  nttained
the  age  of  twenty  five  years,  and  hath  been  seven  years  a
citizen  of  ihe  United  States,  and  is,  at  the  time  of  his  elec-
tion, an  inhabitant  of  the  state  in  which  he  is  chosen.c


b  7bc.Jiw.Ub.  11.9t>
i  Aii.t.MO-a.


t,Goo(^lc


LMtnra  XI.3  THE  UNITED  STATES.  tl»

The  general  qualificatioas  of  e\vctar»  or  the  aaiembljr,
or  moat  numerous  braach  of  the  legislature  in  the  Kev<<ral
state  governmeiiis,  are,  that  (hej  be  of  tbe  age  of  twen-
ty-one years  and  upwards,  and  free  resident  citizens  uf  ibe
state  in  which  tbey  vole,  and  have  paid  taxes ;  and  in  some
of  the  states  they  are  required  10  possess  property,  and  to
be  wbite  as  well  aa  free  citizens.  Tbe  description  is  sK
muxt  every  where  so  large*  as  to  include  all  persons  who
are  of  com|)etent  discretion,  and  are  interested  in  the  wel-
fare of  the  government,  aad  liable  to  bear  any  of  its  dutiei
or  burdens.  The  house  of  represuntalivesmay,  therefore,
Very  fairly  be  said  10 represent  tbe  whole  bodyof  the  Ame-
rican i»eop)e.  Several  of  tbe  state  constitutions  have  pre-
scril)ed  the  same,  or  higher  qualifications,  as  to  property  ia
the  elected,  than  the  electors,  and  some  of  them  have  re-
quired a  religious  test.  But  tbe  constitution  of  Ibe  Unit-
ed States  requires  no  evidence  of  property  in  the  represen-
tative, nor  any  declaration  of  religious  belief.  He  is  only
required  to  be  a  citizen  of  the  competent  age,  and  frea
from  any  undue  bias  or  dependence  by  not  holding  any  of-
fice under  the  United  States.'

The  term  for  which  a  representative  is  to  serve  ought
not  to  be  so  short  as  to  prevent  him  from  obtaining  a  com^
prehensive  acquaintance  with  tbe  business  to  which  be  it
deputed  ;  nor  so  long  as  to  make  him  forget  the  transitory
nature  of  his  seat,  and  his  state  of  dependence  on  the  ap-
probation of  bis  constituents.  It  ought  also  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  fact  deeply  interesting  to  tbe  character  and
utility  of  representative  republics,  that  very  frequent  elec-
tions have  a  tendency  to  render  the  office  less  important
than  it  ought  to  be  deemed,  and  the  people  inattentive  in
tbe  exercise  of  their  right ;  whilst,  on  the  other  band,  long
intervals  between  the  elections  are  apt  to  make  them  pro-
duce too  much  excitement,  and  consequently  te  render  the
periods  of  their  return  a  time  of  too  much  competition  nod

a  Art.  l.Mc-Si


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


»lff  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  H.

conflict  for  the  public  tranquillitf.  The  constitation  baa
certainly  not  deviated  in  this  reiipect  to  the  latter  extreme,
in  the  establishment  of  biennial  elections.  It  has  proba'
biy  selected  a  medium,  which,  considering  the  situation
and  extent  of  our  cnuctry,  combines  as  many  advantages,
and  avoids  as  many  incoaveniences,  as  eny  other  term
which  might  have  been  inserted.

The  tepresentetivea  are  directed  to  he  apportioned  amon;
the  states,  accordintf  to  numbern,  which  ia  determined  by
adding  to  the  whole  number  of  free  persons,  exclusive  of
Indians  iiot  taxed,  three  fifths  of  all  other  persons.*  The
Dumber  of  representatives  cannot  exceed  one  for  every
thirty  thousand,  but  each  state  is  entitled  to  have  at  least
one  representative.  By  the  act  of  7th  March,  1822,  the
representatives  were  apportioned  among  the  several  stater
according  to  the  fourth  census,  and  to  a  ratio  ofone  repre-
sentative for  every  forty  thousand  persons  in  each  state,
making  in  the  whole  two  hundred  and  thirteen  members,
the  number  of  which  the  present  house  of  representatives
is  composed,  besides  delegates  from  three  of  the  territorie*
belonging  to  the  United  States,  and  which  have  a  right,  j*
debate,  but  not  to  vote.

Therule  of  apportionment  established  by  the  conatttutioD
is  exposed  to  the  objection,  that  three  6nhs  of  the  slaves  in
the  southern  states  are  computed  in  estiiblishing  the  appor-
tionment of  the  reprexentation.  But  thin  article  was  the
result  ofneceesity,  and  grew  out  of  (he  fact  of  the  existence
(^domestic  slavery  in  a  portion  of  our  country.  The  evil
has  been  of  too  long  stuading,  and  is  too  extensive  and  too
dee]tly  rooted  to  be  speedily  eradicated,  or  even  to  be  dis-
cussed without  great  judgment  and  di^icreiion.  But  the
same  rule  which  ap|>ortions  the  representatives,  extendsto
direct  taxes  ;  and  the  slaves  in  the  southern  states,  while
they  give  those  states  an  increased  number  of  repesenta-
tives,  coDtribute,  on  the  other  band,  when  that  mode  of

a  Art  1.  MC.  %


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


t  pcfjrc  XI.J  tHE  UKITED  STATES-  Hf

tn\iiiiun  in  resorlfd  to,  equally  to  iocreeee  the  meoBiire  of
tliuir  contritiutionsi'

The  numbt^r  ol'the  house  of  represeotativf'S  would  seem
to  be  quite  large  enough  on  itx  present  computation^  and
unlesslfae  ratio  be  heren^er  Riilarjretlbej'uDd  oneloevery
forty  thousand  persone,  the  house  will  be  in  danger  of  in-
creasing too  rapidly,  and  it  will  probably  becumR,  in  timet
much  ton  unwieldy  a  body  fur  convenienre  of  debate  a^
joint  GonsultatioDt  A  due  acquaintance  with  the  local  in-
terest of  erery  part  of  the  union  ought  to  be  carried  into
the  house)  and  a  sufficient  number  collected  for  all  the  pur-
jiosea  of  information,  ditcussion.  and  diffiiMve  sympathy
with  the  wants  and  wishes  of  the  people.  When  thene  ui>-
jects  are  obtained,  any  further  increase  neither  promotes
deliberation,  nor  inrreases  the  public  Aefety.  All  numerous
bodies  of  men,  although  selected  with  the  greatest  care,
•re  too  much  swayed  by  passion,  and  too  impatient  of
protracted  deliberation.

The  United  Slates,  in  their  improvements  upon  the  exer-
cise of  the  right  of  representation,  may  certainly  claim
pre-eminence  over  all  other  governments,  ancient  and  mo-
dern. Our  elections  are  held  at  stated  seasons  established
by  latt.  The  people  vote  by  ballot  in  small  districts,  and
pablic  officers  preside  over  the  elections,  receive  the  votes,
and  maintain  order  and  fairness.  Though  the  competition
between  candidates  is  generally  active,  and  the  iEeal  of  rival
parties  sufficiently  excited,  the  elections  are  every  where
conducted  with  tranquillity.  The  legislature  ofeachatate
prescribesthetimes,  places,  and  mannerof  holding  elect  ions,
subject,  however)  to  the  interference  and  control  of  con-
gress, which  is  permitted  themfurthesaheofibeirownprt^
•ervation,  and  which  it  is  to  be  presumed  they  will  never  be
disposed  ioe*ercise,  except  when  nny  state  shall  neglect  or
refuse  to  make  adequate  provision  for  the  purpose.  Tlie
privilege  of  voting,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  conferred

a  Ftderalut.  vol.  i.  No.  M.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


SIS  JURISPRUDENCE  Of  pNrt  H.

apon  all  pernoni  who  are  of  iuffident  mmpetencf  by  their
«};«,  and  of  sufficient  abiliiy  to  take  care  nf  tbemaelTea^
The  ancient  Greeks  and  Komans  had  not  only  very  imper-
fSect  notions  of  the  value  of  repreaenlalion,  butthenumbn'
and  power  of  their  popular  aMcmblies  were  m  great,  and
they  were  w  liable  lo  disorder,  as  to  render  it  a  very  provi-
dent measure  with  them  lo  be  fpiarded  in  diffusiogthe  pri-
vileges of  free  citizens.  Not  a  tenth  part  of  the  peopleof
Athens  were  admitted  to  ihe  privilege  nf  voting  in  the  as-
vemblies  of  the  people ;  and  indeed  nioe-tenths  oCihe  in-
babitants  throughout  all  Greece  were  slRvet."  lo  S|iBrta,
the  number  of  votes  was  fixed  at  ten  thousand.  In  Rome
this  privilege  wkm  for  many  ages  confined  to  the  Pomceria
of  the  rity,  and  it  continued  to  be  so  confined,  and  to  be
tolorahle  in  its  operation,''  until  the  meoiorable  social  war
eitended  it  to  all  the  inhabiiants  of  Ilaly.  As  no  test  of
property  or  character  was  required,  and  as  the  people  as-
wmbled  within  the  walla  of  Kome  ii


m  JiilfonPi  Oract,  *cd.  1.  354. 357.

b  Tlw  Roman  mode  of  puiing  Ix**,  and  *M!ng  ia  their  eomtffa.  nt
orierty,  and  nnder  gmt  olienki.  dnrinif  Ihe  beat  period*  of  the  troveni.
meDt.  WfaeD  a  Itir  wm  propoaed  and  ditcuned,  and  the  rclifpoua  rites
ia\f  porfiinnad,  aod  no  interoeU'on  made,  Ibe  fcople  proceedrd  to  vets,
an'l  every  citizea  wat  ordered  to  TApair  lo  bii  ceolarj.  The  nwtbod  of
ro«inK  wai  oriKinnll;  vivi  voce,  but  afterward*  by  ballot  bj  tbe  t^*»  te-
MVirue.  which  applied  equalry  to  (heelectionof  masiatralea,  to  pnblie
tri»l*.  and  to  makinf  aod  repealing  Uv*.  The  people  irare  made  to  pan
in  orderoreraooM  namiir  planki,  called  pontet.  into  tbe  lepla  or  enclo-
aarei,  where  certatD  offlcpr*  delivered  to  ever;  voter  two  tablet*,  ooa
fcr  and  one  agaiott  Ihe  propoaition,  aod  each  peraon  threw  into  s  cLe»t
which  oftbem  be  pleaaed,  and  they  were  pointed  oE  and  the  freatert
nnmber  of  pointi  either  way  delermioed  the  tenie  of  the  centnrj,  and  tbs
^reateat  namber  of  ceDtarie*  piined  for  Ihe  voice  of  the  whole  people,
who  eitlrer  pasted  or  rejected  lb*  law.  See  Hnnecrtu*'  Atitigvit  Ram-
JWr.lib.1.  lit.  t.*ec,3-n.  Optra,  lom.  4.  where  tlie  anoienl  learniDC
DaDieaubJMtMddleeEed;  wad  tee  Bonkt'i  Sain.  Hitt  b.  l.c.T.tec,4>


t,Goo(^lc


U^an  XL]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  S19

not  merely  to  vote,  but  to  make  lam,  this  great  ionova-
tion  produced  the  utmost  anarchy  and  corrtiptiun,  and  hai
juatly  beeo  rc^rded  ai  precipitating  the  fall  of  that  com-
inonwealth.*

The  English  imtion,  in  common  with  the  other  feudal
governmenta  of  Europe,  very  anciently  enjoyed  the  blea^
iogfl  of  popular  repreHentation,  and  the  knights,  citizens,
and  burgeases,  were  intended  to  represent  the  farmers,
merchants,  and  manufacturers,  being  the  several  orders
andclasseriofpeopleof which  the  nation  was  composed.'*
But  the  mutations  of  time,  and  commerce,  and  mauufactu*
ring  earablishmentB,  in  depopulating  ancient  boroughs,
and  in  establishing  new  cities,  have  insensibly  changed  the
structure  of  the  house  of  commons,  and  rendered  it,  in
theory  at  least,  a  very  inadequate  and  imperfect  orgao
^  the  will  uf  the  nation.  Archdeacon  Paley  observed,
forty  years  ago,<=  that  about  one  haifofthe  commons  were
•lected  by  the  people,  and  the  other  half  came  in  bv  pur-
chase, or  by  the  noroinatiun  of  single  propriRtorfl  ef  great
estates.  So  eitremely  unequal  is  the  popular  vote  at
elections  in  England,  that  less  than  seren  thousand  voters'
return  nearly  one  half  of  the  house  of  commons.  But,
notwithstanding  the  grrat  imperfection  of  the  constitution
of  the  English  house  of  commons,  if  it  were  to  be  tesif^d
by  the  arithmetical  accuracy  of  our  own  political  standards,
it  has,  neveithelesa,  in  all  periods  of  English  hiaiory,  felt
strongly  the  vigour  of  the  |H)|wiar  princijde.  While  on
thecontinent  of  Europe  the  deffeneracy  of  the  feudal  ays*
tem,  the  influence  of  the  pafial  hierarchy,  the  |>olilical
maxims  of  llie  imperial  or  civil  law,  and  the  fori^e  of
standing  armies,  extinguished  the  hold  and  irnfgular
freedom  of  theGothic governments,  and  abolished  ihe  re-


n  Mn'itttqttieu'*  Etprit  da  Loii,tam,  I.  L  S.  o-  i,—Oraifl.  tl  Dreni,
itt  Bom.  ch,  9.

b  I  Black-  Com.  tT4.  JHOar  m  (A«  Et^lUK  Cwulilution,  b.  X.  c.  <•
wc  1.

r  Moral  PMiiMophg,  p.  38&.


l,,-cnh,G00glc


tH  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  i?«t  II.

preaentatton  of  ibe  people,  the  English  house  of  commons'
continued  to  l>e  the  uiiyluin  of  European  liberty  ;  and  it
maintained  its  station  agniniit  all  the  violence  of  (h«
'  Planta{fenet  line  of  princes,  the  haughty  race  of  the  Tu-
dors,  and  the  unceasiit^  spirit  of  desputiam  in  the  house  of
Stuarl.  And  wheii  we  take  into  consideration  the  ad-
Diir.ibte  plan  of  their  judicial  iwlity,  and  thoee  two  diftin-
guiahtid  guardians  of  civil  liherl}',  trial  by  jury,  nud  the
freedom  of  the  presn,  it  is  no  longer  a  manor  of  astonish-
ment, that  the  nation  in  full  possession  of  those  inestima-
ble blessings,  should  enjoy  greater  security  of  person  and
property,  than  ever  was  etijoyed  in  Athene  or  S)>arta,
Carthage  or  Rome,  or  in  any  of  the  common  wealths  4^
Italy,  during  the  {lerind  of  the  middle  ages.

I  proceed  nest  to  consider  the  privileges  and  powers  of
th^  two  Houses  of  Congress,  both  aggregately  and  sepa-
ratelyk

Each  house  ia  made  Ibe  sole  Judge  of  the  election,  re-
turn, and  qualifications  of  its  members.*  The  same  pow-
er ia  vested  in  the  Bntiah  house  of  commons',  and  in  the
tegisiatures  of  the  neveral  states;  and  there  ia  no  other
body  known  to  the  constitution  10  which  such  a  power
might  safely  be  trusted.  It  is  requisite  to  preserve  a
pure  and  genuine  representation,  and  to  control  the
evils  of  irregular,  corrupt,  and  lumnltuoua  elections ;  and
as  each  houae  acts  in  these  cases  in  a  judicial  t^hnracler,
its  deciaiunv,  like  the  decisions  of  any  other  court  of
justice,  ought  10  be  regulated  by  knuwn  prin(-i|ilea  of
law,  and  atrictiy  adhered  to,  for  the  euke  of  uni-
formity and  certainly.  A  majority  of  each  house  con-
Btilutcs  a  quorum  to  do  business,  but  a  smaller  num-
ber may  adjourn  from  day  to  day,  and  ronipel  the
attendance  of  nbaent  menibera,  in  Much  miinner,  and  un-
der such  penalties,  as  each  house  may  provide  Each
house,  lik'-wise,  determines  the  rules  of  its  proceedings,
and  can  punish  its  members  for diaorderly  behaviour ;  and


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XI.) THE  ONITED  STATES.  221

with  theconcurrenceoftwolhirds.expela  member.  Each
house  if)  I  ike  wine  bound  to  keep  ajournal  of  its  proceedings,
and  from  time  to  lime  publish  such  pans  ad  do  Dot  re-
quire Hocrecy,  and  to  enter  the  y«as  and  nays  on  the  jour-
nal, on  any  queiition,  when  desired  by  one  fifth  of  the  mem-
bers present.'  The  members  of  both  houseHare  likewise
privile|^  from  arrest  during  their  attendance  on  con-
gress, and  in  going  to  and  returning  from  the  same,  ex-
cept ID  cases  of  treason,  felony,  and  brearh  of  the  peacfl.i*
These  privileges  of  the  (wo  houses  are  obviously  iiecessa-
ry  for  their  preservation  and  character ;  and  what  is  still
more  important  to  the  freedom  of  deliberation,  no  mem-
ber Can  be  questioned  out  of  the  house  for  any  speech  or
debate  therein.^

There  is  no  power  expressly  given  to  either  house  of"
congress  to  punish  for  contempts,  exceplwhen  committed
by  their  own  members;  but  in  the  cane  of  Anriir$on,  whO'
was  committed  by  order  of  the  house  of  representatives,
for  a  contemjit  of  the  house,  and  taken  into  custody  by
the  Sergeant  at  Arms,  an  action  of  trespass  was  brought '
against  the  officer,  and  the  qupxtion  on  the  powpr  of  the
house  to  commit  for  a  contempt,  wn»>  carried  by  writ  of  er-
ror to  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States.''  The"
court  decided,  that  the  house  had  that  power,  and  that  it
was  an  implied  power,  and  of  vital  importance  to  the  snfe-'^
ty,  character,  aud  dignity  of  the  house.  The  necessity  of
its  existence  and  exercise  was  founded  on  the  principle  of,
self  preservation  ;  and  the  power  to  punish  extends  no  fur-
ther than  imprisonment,  and  that  will  continue  no  longer
than  the  duration  of  the  power  that  imprisons.  The  im-
prisonment will  terminate  with  the  adjournment  or  disso-
sohition  of  congress. -'

The  house  of  representatives  has  the  exclusive  right  of
originating  all  bitU  for  raising  revenue,  and  this  is  the  only


m  Art.  1.  tec  S.  6  Art.  1.  leo.  6-  i  Art.  I.  we.  •.

d  ^nd«rion  v.  Dim,  6  Whtalm,  UM.


t,Googlc


tU  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [Part  IK

ftiiiege  that  bouse  enjoys  in  ita  legMlative  character^
which  is  Dot  shared  equally  by  the  other,  and  even  tbes*
bilb  are  amendable  by  the  senate  in  its  discretion."  Tba
two  housesareaneatireaod  perfect  check  upon  eachoiber
it>  all  busiaessappertuinio^  to  legislation  :  and  one  of  them
eanaoi  evan  adjourn,  during  the  session  of  congress,  for
aiore  than  three  days,  without  the  consent  of  the  other,  nor
to  any  other  place  than  that  in  which  the  two  houses  shall
he  aitttng.

The  powers  of  eottgretu  extend  generally  to  all  subjects
of  a  national  nature.  Many  of  those  powers  will  hereaA
ter  become  the  subject  af  particular  obserration  and  eritt*
«isn.  At  present  it  will  be  sufficient  to  obserre,  general-
ly, that  congress  are  aatboriaed  to  provide  for  the  oomnio»
defeitce  and  general  welfare,  and  for  that  purpose,  among
Qlhet  azpresa  granu,  tbey  are  authorized  to  lay  and  col-
lect taxes,  duties,  imposts  and  eicises ; — to  borrow  moo^
on  the  credit  of  the  United  States ; — to  regulate  coo-
■lerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among  the  several  states,
•nd  with  the  Indian  tribes  ; — to  declare  war,  and  define
Knd  punish  offences  against  the  law  of  nations  ; — to  raise,
■Miutain  aikd  gorera  srsaies,  and  a  navy ; — to  orgenisfl,
•m  and  discipline  the  militia;— end  to  give  full  efficacy
to  all  the  powers  contained  in  the  constitution.  Some  of
tbese  powers,  as  the  levyingtazes,  duties,  and  excises,  are
eoocurrent  with  similar  powers  in  the  several  states;  bat
in  most  caoes,  these  powers  are  exclnsive,  becausethe eon-
current  exercise  of  them  by  the  states  separately  woald
Asturb  the  general  harmony  and  |>eace,  and  because  tbey
would  be  apt  to  be  repugnant  tn  each  other  ia  practice,  and
lead  to  dangerous  collisions.  The  powers  which  aze«on-
ferred  upon  congress,  and  the  prohibitions  which  are  im-
poeed  upon  the  stateM,  would  seem,  upon  a  fair  and  just  con-
struction irf'tbem,  to  be  indispensable  to  secure  to  this  conn-
try  the  inestimatile  blessings  of  union.  The  articles  of  con-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


UctunXl.]  THE  UNTTED  STATEi.  «B

federation  digested  during  the  Atnerican  war,  intrttded  to
confer  «ipoa  congress  powers  nearly  equal  to  those  with
which  they  are  uow  invt^sied ;  but  that  compact  gave  them
none  of  the  means  req«iinite  to  carry  those  powers  into  ef-
fect. And  if  the  wntimeni  which  has.unifiirtnly  pervaded
tho  minds  of  the  people  of  this  country  be  a  just  one,  that
the  consolidated  union  of  these  states  is  indiapensabte  to
our  natiuDBl  prosperity  and  happiness— and  if  we  do  not
wish  to  be  once  more  guilty  of  the  great  absurdity  of  pro-
posing an  end,  and  denying  the  means  to  attain  it — then  w«
must  conclude,  that  the  powers  conferred  upon  congresf
are  not  disproportionBte  to  the  magnitude  of  the  trust  con-
fided to  the  union,  and  which  the  union  alone  is  competent

~  to  fulfil.

The  rules  of  proceeding  in  each  house  are  substantially
(be  same ;  and  though  they  are  essential  to  the  transaction
of  business  with  order  and  safety^  they  are  too  minute  to
be  treated  at  Ipngth  in  en  elementary  survey  ofthe  consti-
tutional  polity  and  general  jurisprudence  of  the  United
Slates.  The  house  of  represeatutives  choose  their  own
•peaker,  but  the  Vice-President  of  the  United  States  is  ec
O^Eciff  president  ofthe  senate,  and  gives  the  casting  vote
when  they  are  equally divided. Tbn  proceedings  and

'  discussions  io  the  two  bouses  are  ptibtic.  This  affords  (he
community  early  and  authentic  information  ofthe  progress,
reason,  and  policy  of  measures  pending  before  congress,
tod  it  is  likewise  a  powerful  stimulus  to  industry,  to  re-
•earch,  and  to  the  cultivation  of  talent  and  eloquence  im
debate.  Though  these  advantages  may  be  acquired  at  tlie
expense  of  much  useless  and  protracted  discussion,  yeltbe
balance  of  utility  is  greatly  in  favour  of  open  deliberation;
and  it  is  certain,  from  the  general  opposition  to  the  expe*
rimeot  that  was  made  end  continued  for  some  years  by  the
senate  ofthe  United  Stales,  of  sitting  wiih  closed  doors,
that  such  a  practice,  by  any  legislative  body  inthisoouo-
fry,  would  not  be  eudured.

The  ordinary  moJe  of  passing  lawa  is  briefly  as  fol-


t,Goo(^lc


324  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  II.

lows  :>  One  day's  uotice  of  a  motion  for  leave  to  bring  in  a
bill  in  caHesof  a  general  nature,  ia  required.  Every  bill
must  have  three  readings  previous  to  its  being  passed,  and
these  readings  uiUHt  be  on  Jili'tTenl  days,  and  no  bill  cao
be  committed  or  amended  until  it  faas  been  twice  readi
Such  little  checks  in  the  forms  of  doing  business,  are  pru-
dently intended  to  guard  against  surprise  or  imposiiion.
In  (he  bouse  of  representatives,  bills,  after  being  twice
read,  are  committed  to  a  committee  of  the  whole  house,
when  the  speaker  leaves  the  chair,  and  takes  a  part  in  the
debnte  as  an  ordinary  member,  and  a  chairman  is  ap-
pointed  to  preside  in  his  etaad.  When  a  bill  has  passed
cCne  bouse,  it  ia  transmitted  to  the  other,  and  goes  through
a  similar  form;  though,  in  the  senate,  iliere  is  leas  for-
mality, and  bills  are  often  committed  to  a  select  commit-
tee chosen  by  ballot.  If  a  bill  he  altered  oi  amended  ia
the  bouse  to  which  it  is  transmitted,  it  iathen  returned  to
the  bouse  in  whi<:h  it  originated,  and  if  the  two  houses
cannot  agree,  ihey  appoint  eomtnitteea  to  confer  together
on  the  subject.  When  a  bill  is  engrossed,  and  baa  iMssed
the  sanction  of  both  bouses,  it  is  transmitted  to  the  Presi-
dent of  the  United  Stutea  for  his  approbation.  If  he  ap-
provpsof  the  hill,  he  signs  it.  If  he  doea  not,  it  is  returned,
with  his  objections,  to  the  house  in  which  it  originated,
and  that  bouse  enters  the  objections  at  large  on  their
journals,  and  proceeds  to  reconsider  the  bill.  If,after8uch
reconsideration,  two  thirds  oflhut  hoase  should  figree  to
pasa  the  bill,  it  is  sent,  together  with  the  objections,  lutfae
other  house,  by  which  it  is  likewise  reconsidered,  and


a  See  Ihe  ttanding  raht  and  erden  of  tht  htrnte  of  rrprftenbitivet,
printed  in  1795  bf  Fraiicit  ChilJi.  Le^litioD  wii  a  tcienoe  cnltivated
with  BO  much  caie  and  refiaemeat  amaDg-  ihe  ancient  Rnmans,  thai  lliey
halt  taws  m  JDStrucl  iLem  how  to  make  lavs,  Tlie  Lei  Licinia,  and  Lex
Eb'itia,  the  Lcx  Ccrcilin,  aad  Ltx:  Didia.  provided  checka.  tiial  the  iiiir
should  nut  unintentionaflfcoDtainanj  parlicul*rpervinal  pmilegei.  or
weaken  tlie  force  ot  former  U»«,  or  be  crowded  i>iih  inuliirarioav  matter.
Gravttut,  Be  Ortu  H  PrngruMi  Juri*  Cmli;  lib.  1.  cb.  20.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leciurt  XL]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  faS

if  approved  by  two  thirds  of  lliat  hoiiB»it  becomns  a  Idwr.
But,  in  all  sucb  casea,  the  votes  of  both  houses  are  deter-
mined by  yeas  and  nays,  and  the  names  of  the  persoits  vo-
ting for  and  against  the  bill  are  entered  on  the  journals.
If  any  bill  shall  not  be  returned  by  the  prusldent  wiihio
ten  days  (Sundays  excepted)  after  it  shall  hare  been  pre-
sented to  him,  the  same  becomes  a  law  ftqually  as  if  be
bad  signed  it,  unless  congress,  by  adjournment,  in  the
mean  lime,  prevents  its  return,  and  then  it  does  not  be-
come a  law.'

The  practice  in  congress,  and  eaiiecially  in  the  second  "
or  last  session  of  each  congress,  of  retainiug  most  of  their
bitls  until  within  the  last  ten  days,  is  attended  with  the  di»- ''
advantage  of  shortening  the  time  allowed  to  the  president
for  perusal  and  reflection  upon  them,  and  of  placing  with-  '■
in the poWer  of  the  president,  the  absolute  negative  of
every  bill  presented  within  the  last  ten  days  preceding  the  "
4th  of  March  J  and  this  he  can  effect  merely  by  retaining
them,  without  being  obliged  to  assign  any  reason  what-  '
ever,  for  he  is  entitled  to  toit  days  to  deliberate. Host  of
the  bills that are  presented  to the president  in the
second  session of  congress  were,  a  few  years  ago,  pre*
sented  to  him  within  the  last  ten  days,  and  generally  with-
in the  last  two  days  ;  but  the  rules  of  congress  have  lal-
terally  checked  the  evils  and  danger  of  such  an  accuniula- '
tioo  of  business  on  the  last  ten  days  of  the  session.

The  qualified  negative  of  the  president  upon  the  forma-
tion of  iaws,  is,  theoretically  at  least,  some  additional  se-
curity against  a  passage  of  improper  laws,  through  preju-
dice or  want  of  due  reflection  ;  but  it  was  principally  in-
tended to  give  to  the  president  a  constitutional  weapon  to
defend  the  executive  de|iartmenl,  as  well  as  the  just  ba-
lance of  the  constitution,  against  the  usurpations  of  the  le-
gislative power.  To  enact  laws  is  a  transcendent  power ;
and  if  the  body  that  possesses  it  be  a  full  and  equa!  re-
presentation of  the  people,  there  is  danger  of  its  pressing


,-,,ii,GoO(^lc


US  JURISPRUDENCE  DP  [PirtU.

with  deatruetire  weight  upon  all  tba  other  parts  of  the
nacbinef-f  of  the  government.  It  has,  therefore  been
thought  DecesBar;,  by  the  most  skilful  and  the  most  expe-
rieuced  artist*  iu  the  science  of  civil  polity,  that  strong
barriers  should  be  erected  for  the  protection  and  Becuritj
of  the  other  necessary  powers  of  the  goveronient.  No-
thing has  been  deemed  more  fit  and  eipedieot  for  tb^
purpose,  than  the  provision  that  the  head  of  the  executive
depart  Qient  Hbould  be  ao  constituted  as  to  secure  a  requisite
■bare  of  independence,  and  that  he  should  have  a  nega-
tive upon  the  passing  of  laws,  and  that  the  judiciary  pow-
er, resting  on  a  still  more  permanent  basis,  should  have
the  right  of  determining  upon  the  validity  of  laws  by  the
■tandard  of  the  constitution.  A  qualified  negative  an-
swers all  the  salutary  purposes  of  an  absolute  one,  for  it
is  not  to  be  presumed  that  two  thirds  of  both  houses  of
congress,  on  reconsideratioo,  with  the  reasoning  of  the
president  in  opposition  to  the  bill  spread  at  large  u|ioa
tbeir  journals,  will  ever  concur  in  any  unconstitutional
measure.  In  the  English  constitution,  the  king  has  aa
absolute  negative ;  but  it  has  not  been  necessary  to  exer-
cise it  since  the  time  of  William  III.  The  influence  of
the  crown  has  been  exerted  in  a  more  gentle  manner,  to
destroy  any  obnoxious  measure  in  its  progress  through
the  two  houses  of  parliament.  Charles  1.  stood  for  a
long  time  upon  the  strict  and  forbidding  rights  of  his  pre-
rofnttive  ;  but  he  was  compelled,  by  the  spirit  and  clamour
of  the  nation,  to  give  bis  assent  to  hills  which  cut  down
that  prerogative,  and  placed  the  powers  of  government  io  .
the  hands  of  the  parliament.  The  peremptory  veto  ofthe
Roman  tribunes,  who  were  placed  at  thedoor  of  the  senate,
would  n(A  be  reconcilable  with  the  spirit  of  deliberation
and  independence  which  distinguishes  the  councils  of  mo-
dern times.  The  French  coostitutionof  1791,  alaboured
and  eoKi  ly  fabric,  on  which  the  philosophers  arul  statea-
men  of  France  exhausted  all  their  ingenuity,  end  which
was  prostrated  in  the  dust  in  the  course  of  one  year  from
its  existence,  gave  to  the  king  a  negative  upon  the  acts  of


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMtnn  XI.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  «r

the  legislatiire,  with  some  rer;  feeble  limitatibiiB.  Every
bill  was  to  be  preseoted  to  the  kiag,  who  might  refuse  his
aMODt ;  but  if  the  two  following  l^islatures  shonid  aac-
ees-iirely  present  the  same  bill  in  the  same  terms,  it  wai
then  to  become  a  law.  The  coufititutiaaal  aegatire  given
to  thePresident  of  the  United  States,  appeanto  be  more
wisely  digested  than  aaj  of  the  examples  wbicfa  have  been


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


t,Goo(^lc


LECTURB  XII.

OF  JUDICIAL  COKSTRUCTIONS  OF  THE  POWER  OF

CONUKESa.

I  PROCEED  to  consider  the  cases  ia  which  the  powers
of  congress  have  been  made  the  subject  of  judicial  inves-
tigation.

(1.)  Congress  have  declared  by  law,  that  the  United
States  were  entitled  to  priority  of  payment  oyer  private
creditors,  in  cases  of  insolvency,  and  in  the  distribution  of
the  estates  of  deceased  debtors.  The  act  of  congress  of
31st  Julyt  1780,  sec.  21.  confined  the  priority  to  custom
house  bonds.  The  act  of  4th  August,  1790,  ch.  35.  sec.
45.  limited  the  priority  in  the  same  manner.  The  act  of
2d  Hay,  1792,  placed  the  surety  in  a  custom  house  bond,
who  paid  the  debt,  on  the  same  footing,  in  respect  to  priori-
ty, as  the  United  States  ;  and  it  confined  the  cases  of  in-
solveocy  mentioned  in  the  former  law,  to  those  ofa  volun-
tary assignment,  and  of  attachments  against  absconding,
concealed,  or  absent  debtors.  The  act  of  3d  March,  1797,
ch.  74-  sec.  5.  went  further,  and  gave  the  United  States
a  preference  in  all  cases  whatsoever,  whoever  might  be
the  debtor,  or  however  he  might  be  indebted,  in  case  the
debtor  became  insolvent,  or  the  assets  in  the  hands  of  bis
representatives,  after  his  death,  were  insufScieoi  to  juiy
his  debts.  This  priority  was  declared  to  extend  to
cases  in  which  the  debtor  had  made  a  voluntary  as-
signment of  his  properly,  or  in  which  bis  effects  had  been
attached  as  an  absconding  or  absent  debtor,  or  in  which
an  act  of  legal  bankruptcy  had  been  committed.  The  act
of  March  2d,  1799,  cb.  128.  sec.  65.  provided,  that  in  »i|


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


3S0  JURISPRUDENCE  OT  [Put  U.

cases  c^inaoIrsDcy,  or  where  any  estate  in  tfae  hands  of
eiecutors  or  admiuiHtrators  stntuld  be  insuffieient,  debt*
due  to  the  United  States,  on  bonds  taken  under  the  collec-
tion act,  should  hare  preference ;  and  sureties  in  sucb
bond«,  on  paying  the  same,  bed  the  sane  preference  a»
was  reserred  to  the  United  States.

These  were  Ibe  legislative  proTisioBS  ftiTJng  preferenes
to  debts  due  to  the  United  States ;  and  in  t^iher  v.  Btight^
the  authontj  of  congress  to  pass  such  laws  was  drawn  id
question.  The  point  discussed  in  that  case  was,  whether
the  United  States,  as  holders  of  a'protested  bill  of  exchange,
negotiated  in  the  ordinar]'  course  of  trade,  were  to  be  pre-
Jerred  to  the  general  creditors,  when  the  debtor  becomes
bankruiit.  The  Supreme  Coart  decided,  that  the  acts  of
congress,  giving  that  general  priority  of  tbe  United  States,
were  constitutional.  It  was  a  power  (bunded  on  the  au-
thority to  make  all  laws  which  should  be  necessary  and
proper  to  carry  into  effect  the  powers  vetted  by  the  con-
stitution in  the  government  of  the  United  States.  Where
the  end  was  within  the  lawful  powers  of  the  government^
congress  possessed  the  choice  of  the  means,  and  were  em-
powered to  use  any  means  which  were  in  fact  condacive
to  tbe  exercise  of  the  pnwers  granted.  The  government  is
to  pay  tbe  debts  of  the  union,  and  must  be  authorized  to
use  the  means  most  eligible  to  effect  that  object.  It  has
a  right  lo  mnke  remittance  by  bills  or  otherwise,  and  to
take  those  precautions  which  will  render  the  transaction
safe,  if  this  claim  of  priority  interferes  with  tbe  right  of
the  state  sovereignties,  respecting  the  dignity  of  debts,
and  defeats  the  measures  which  tbey  wouM  otherwise  have
a  right  to  adopt  to  secure  themselves,  it  is  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  sapremacy  of  the  laws  of  iheunion  on  all
subjects  to  which  the  I^islative  power  of  congress  extends.

The  principle  is  here  settled,  that  the  United  States  are
entitled  to  secure  to  themselves  the  exclusive  privilege  of
being  preferred  as  creditors  to  private  citizens,  and  even  to
the  state  authorities,  in  all  cases  of  tbe  insolvency  or  bank-

a  2  CrwuA,  Oi«.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


'LKtnn  XII]  THE  VNITCD STATES.  231

rnptcy  of  their  debtor.  But  the  court  obserred*  that  no
lien  was  created  by  the  statutes  giviDg  the  preference.  Ko

bona  fide  transfer  of  property  in  the  ordinary  course  of  bi^
•iness  was  overreached.  It  was  only  a  priority  of  pny-
laent,  which,  under  different  modiScations,  was  a  regula-
tion ill  common  use,  and  a  binajide  alienaiioa  of  proper-
ty, before  the  right  «f  priority  attached,  was  admitted  to
be  good.

The  next  ease  that  brought  into  discussion  this  questioa
of  priority,  wastfiat  oftbe  United  States  v.  Hooe.^  Il  wai
there  b^,  that  the  priorty  to  which  the  United  Stotei
were  entitled,  did  not  partake  of  the  character  of  a  lien
«n  the  property  of  public  debtors.  The  United  States,
in  the  mere  eharaeter  of  creditor,  have  no  lien  on  the
real  estate  of  tfaeir  debtor.  If  the  priority  existed  fn>ra
the  time  the  debt  was  contracted,  and  the  debtor  should
continue  to  transact  business  with  the  world,  the  inconve-
aieace  would  be  immeuse.  The  priority  only  af^lied  to
cases  where  the  debtor  had  become  actually  and  notorloiM*
ly  insolvent,  and  being  unable  to  pay  his  debts,  had  tnada
•  voluntary  asaignment  of  all  his  property,  or  having  ab>
•oonded  or  absented  himself,  his  property  had  been  at-
tached by  process  of  law.  A  bone  fide  conveyance  of  part
of  the  property  of  the  debtor,  not  for  the  fraudulent  pur-
pose of  evading  the  law,  hut  to  secure  s  fair  creditor,  is
Dota  case  within  the  act  of  congress  giving  priority.)*  In
this  ease  of  the  United  States  v.  Baoe,  a  collector  of  the
revenue  had  mortgaged  pert  of  bis  property  to  his  surety
in  his  official  bond,  to  indemnify  him  from  his  responsibili-
ty as  surety,  and  to  secure  him  from  his  existing  and  fu-
ture eodorsementa  for  the  mortgagor  at  hank  ,  and  the
mortgage  was  held  valid  against  tbo  claim  of  the  United
States,  although  the  collector  vi'Q!i,  in  point  of  fact,  una-
ble to  pay  all  his  debts  at  the  time  the  inort^'Ugc  was  given,
and  although  the  mortgngco  knew,  when  he  took  llie
mortgage,  that  the  mortugor  was  largely  indebted  to  the
United  States.


B.3  Cironcft,G3.  *  1  P\uit<.'t Utp.  IC9.  629.

,  Google


Ut  JURISPBUDt:NCE  OF  [Part  If

Afterwards,  in  Harriaon  t.  Surry,<^  it  waa  held,  that  m
the  diMribmioo  of  a  bankrupt's  effects,  the  United  States
irere  entitled to  their  preference,  although  the  debt  was
contracted  by  a  foreigner  in  a  foreign  country,  and the
United  Stales  had  proved  their  debt  under a  conimiitioa
of  bankruptcy. Though  the  law  of  tb«  place  where  the
contract  it  made  be,  generally  speaking,  the  law  of  the
contract,  yet  the  right  of  priority  forms  no  part  of  the  cod-
Iract. The  insolvency which  was  to  entitle  the  United
States  to  a  preference,  was  declared,  in  Prince  r.  Bart-
ktt,*>  to  mean  a  legal  and  known  insolrency,  manifested
by  tiome notorious  act  of  the  debtor pursuant  to  iaw>
This  was  giving  to  the  world  some  reasonable  and  definite
'-lest  by  which  to  ascertain  the  existence  of  the  latent  and
dangerous  preference  given  by  law  to  the  United  States.
In  this  last  ca^e,  the  effects  of  an  insolvent  debtor,  duly
attached  in  June,  were  considered  not  to  be  liable  to  the
claim  of  the  United  States  <m  a  custom-bouse  bond  gives
prior  to  the  attachment,  and  put  in  suit  io  August  follow
iog. The  private creditor  had  acquired  a  lien  by  bis
attachment,  winch  could not  be  devested  by process  oa
the  part  of  the  United  States  subsequently  issued. Bui
the  decision  in  Thelutton  v.  Smitk,'^  established  the  prin-
ciple, that  the  preference  in  favour  of  the  United  States,
whenever  it  existed,  cut  out  a prior  judgment  creditori
fur  the  law  made  no  exception  in  favour  uf  such  a  credi-
tor. It  was  considered,  that  the  word  insolvency  in  tbs
acts  of  congress  of  1790,  1797,  and  1799,  meant  a  legal
insolvency,  and  that  a  mere  state  of  insolvency,  or  inabili'
ty  in  a  debtor  to  pay  all  bis  debts,  gave  no  right  of  pre*
ference  to  the  United  States,  unless  it was  accompnnied
bye  voluntary  assignment  of  all  the  property  for  the  be-
nefit of  creditors,  or  some  legal  act  of  insolveney. The
United  States,  in  all  such  cases,  are  to  be  first  satisfied
out  of  the  debtor's  estate  ;  but  if,  before  the  right  of  pre-
ference has  accrued,  he  has  made  a  bona  Jide  conveyance
of  his  estate to a third-  person,  or  has  mortgaged  the


i,Googlc


Lemtt  XII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  tH

person,  or  has  mortgage  the  sntne  to  secure  a  debti  or  if
the  property  has  been  seized  under  an  execution,  the  pro^
perty  ia  devested  frnni  the  debtor,  and  cannot  be  made
liable  to  the  United  States.  The  act  of  congress  defeat!
the  ordinary  preference  of  a  judgment  lien,  in  favour  of  the
preference  of  the  United  States^  in  the  cases  specified  in
the65(h  section  of  the  act  of  1799.*

The  United  States  have,  accordingly,  a  preference  a>
creditors  to  the  extent  above  declared,  in  four  cases,  viz,
(I.)  In  the  case  of  the  death  of  the  debtor  t^ithoiit  sufficient
assets ;  (3)  bankraptcy  or  legal  insolvency  manifested  bj
some  act  pursuant  to  law ;  (3)  a  voluntary  assignment  by
the  insolvent  of  all  his  properly  to  pay  his  debts ;  (4)  ia
the  case  of  an  absent,  concealed,  or  absconding  debtor,
whose  effects  are  attached  by  process  of  law.  The  priority
was  intended  to  operate  only  where,  by  law,  or  by  the  act
of  the  debtor,  his  property  was  sequestered  for  the  use  of
his  creditors;  and  it  is  proper  that  this  prerogative  right
Qf  the  United  States  should  be  strictly  construed,  and  pre-
cisely defined,  for  it  is  in  derogation  of  the  general  rights
of  creditors. •>

3.  The  next  question  which  called  forth  a  construction
from  every  part  of  the  government,  as  to  th^  inrplied  pow-
ers of  congress,  was,  whether  congress  had  power  to  incor-
[loratea  bank.  In  l  he  year  1791,  the  secretary  of  the  trea-
sury had  recommended  the  institution  of  a  national  bank,
as  being  of  primary  importance  to  the  prosperous  allminis-
Iration  of  the  6nancea,  and  of  the  greatest  utility  in  the
operations  connected  with  the  supfwrt  of  pubJic  credit.
But  the  bill  for  establishing  a  bank  was  opposed  in  the
house  of  representatives,  as  not  onlhorized  hy  the  constitu-
tion. It  was  contended,  that  the  government  of  the  United


It  la  CunraJ  t.  The  Altanlic  Intnnnce  Compony,  1  Prten^  Rep.  3S6.
tlie  cntcof  1%rltiitm  v.  Smith  wnn  eipUincd,  or  lalher  eMentially  orar-
ralcd,  in  mpect  (o  tbe  efioct  of  the  priority  of  the  United  Stales  over
juJcmeni  creditonf  and  luch  creditonare  jotlly  and  properly  reilored
Id  their  riglili  to  be  laliified  outof  th«  debtoi'i  land  bound  by  the  jndf-
metit,  in  preiereiKft  to  ilie  mere  pfer«(;ttlire  priority  of  the  United  States.

b  WatkiiM  V.  (Mi^tPiduring,  lOL

Vol.  I.  30


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


M4  JURlsraUDENCE  Of  (Part  II.

States  WKB  limited  to  the  exercise  ortlie  eniiTnerated  potr-
«rfl,  end  that  the  powir  to  incorporate  a  bank  waa  not  on*
of  them,  and  if  vested  ia  the  governmeDt,  it  must  be  an
implied  pover  ;  aad  it  was  cootended,  that  the  power
^vea  to  congress  to  pass  all  laws  necessary  and  proper
to  execute  the  specified  powers,  mast  be  limited  to  meaai
neeessary  to  the  end,  and  incident  to  the  nature  of  the
apecified  poirers.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  urgvd  in
farourof  the  bill,  that  incidental,  as  well  as  express  pow-
ers, necessarily  belonged  to  every  government,  and  that
when  a  power  was  delegated  to  effect  particular  ohjects,
all  the  known  and  usual  means  of  effecting  them  passed
aa  inddental  to  them;  and  it  vras  insisted,  that  a  hank
was  a  known  and  usual  instrument,  by  which  several  of
the  enumerated  powers  of  government  were  exercised.
After  the  bill  had  passed  the  two  bouses  of  congress,  the
question  touching  its  constitutionality  was  agitated  with
equal  ability  and  ardour  in  the  exerutire  cabinet.  The
■ecretnry  of  state,  and  the  attorney  general,  conceived
that  cone^ess  had  transcended  their  powers-,  but  the  secre-
tary  of  the  treasury  msintaifled  the  opposite  opinion.
Their  respective  opinions  were  founded  un  a  tiain  of
reasoning  denpting  great  invi^stigation  of  all  the  teadiog
and  fundamental  principles  of  the  coni^titution,  and  they
were  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  President  of  the
United  States.  It  was  argued  against  the  constitutionality
of  the  act,  that  the  power  to  incorporate  a  bank  was  not
among  the  enumerated  powers,  and  to  take  a  single  step
beyond  the  boundaries  specially  drawn  around  the  pow-
ers ofcongrees,  would  be  to  take  possession  of  an  un-
defined and  undefinable  6«ld  of  power ;  that  though  con-
gress were  authorized  to  make  all  laws  necesMiryand  pro-
per for  carrying  into  execution  the  enumerated  powers,
they  were  confined  lo  those  means  which  were  necessary,
and  not  merely  oonvenient.  It  meant  those  means  without
which  the  grant  of  the  power  would  be  nugatory,  and  that
if  such  a  latitude  of  construction  was  allowed  as  to  give
to  congress  any  implied  power  on  the  ground  of  conve-
nience, it  would  swaJJow  up  all  the  list  of  coumetatell


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


(.Mtm  XII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  S33

powertf  snd  redune  the  whole  to  one  phrase.  Oo  the  other
haDd,  it  was  contended,  that  every  power  vested  in  a  go-
Terninent  was,  in  its  nature,  sovereign,  aud  gave  a  right  to
employ  ail  the  means  fairty  applicable  to  the  attainment  of
the  end  of  the  power,  and  not  specially  prechided  by  ap^
cified  exceptions,  nor  contrary  to  the  essential  ends  oT\io-
litical  society  ;  that  though  the  government  of  the  United
Slates  was  one  of  limited  and  8|»evified  powers,  it  was  sove*
reign  with  regard  to  its  proper  objects,  and  to  its  declared
purposes  and  trusts ;  that  it  was  incident  to  sovereign
powerto  erect  corporations,  and,  eonseqnenlly,  it  was  inci-
dent to  the  United  Slates  to  erect  one  in  relationtotheob-
jeets  entrusted  to  its  management ;  that  implied  powers
are  as  completely  delegated  as  those  which  are  expressed,
end  the  power  of  erecting  a  corporation  may  as  well  be  im-
plied as  any  other  instrument  or  means  of  carrying  into
execution  any  ofthespecilied  powers;  that  the  exercise  of
the  power  in  that  case  had  a  natural  relation  to  the  lawful
•ads  of  the  government,  and  it  was  incident  to  the  sove-
reign power  to  regulate  and  to  employ  all  the  means  which
apply  with  the  beat  advantage  to  thnt  regulation ;  that  the
word  neeenaryin  the  ccHistiiulion,  ought  not  to  be  confined
to  those  means,  without  which  the  grant  of  power  would
be  nugatory,  and  it  often  means  no  more  than  needful,  re-
quisite, useful,  or  conduciveto,  and  that  was  the  true  sense
in  which  the  word  was  used  in  the  constitution.  The  re-
lation between  the  measure  and  the  end.  wns  the  criterion
of  constitutionality,  and  not  whether  there  was  a  greater
or  less  necessity  or  utility.  The  infinite  variety,  extent,
and  complexity,  of  national  exigencies,  necessarily  required
great  latitude  of  diHcretioa  in  the  selection  and  apptiralion
of  means ;  and  the  authority  intrusted  to  goveritniAnt
ought,  and  must  be  exercised,  on  principles  of  libera)  con-
struction.

President  Washington  gave  these  arguments  of  his  cabi-
net a  deliberate  and  profound  contemplation,  and  it  termi-  .
nated  in  a  conviction,  that  the  incorporaiion  of  a  bank  wna
a  measure  authorized  by  the  constitution,  and  the  bill
passed  into  a  law.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


tip  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [PanII.

Thii  same  question  cntnc  before  the  flupreme  court  of
the  URited  Statea  in  1819,  in  ihe  cnse  of  M'Cu//ocA  v.  The
-  State  of  Maryland,'  in  reference  to  the  new  bank  of  (he
United  Siatea,  which  wa§  incorporated  in  181G,  and  upon
which  the  legialature  of  Maryland  had  im(x>Bed  a  tei.
|*Iotwithstaiiding  the  question  arising  on  the  construction
of  the  powers  of  congress  had  been  xetilcdso  fur  asan  act
of  congress  could  sctlle  it,  in  ]791,  and  again  in  lt;^16,  it
was  thought  worthy  of  a  renewed  discussion  in  ibnt  caf«.
The  Chief  Justice,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court,
observed,  that  the  question  could  scarcely  be  considered  as
an  open  one,  after  the  principle  had  been  bo  early  intro-
duced and  reco^uixed  by  many  surceSHive  legislatures,  and
had  been  acted  u|K>n  by  the  judicial  deparlinent  as  a  law
of  undoubted  obitgation.  He  adniiited  that  it  belonged  lo  .
the  supreme  court  alone,  to  make  a  (innl  decision  in  the
case,  and  that  the  question  involved  a  consideration  of  (he
constitution  in  its  most  interesting  and  vital  part«.

It  was  admitted,  that  the  govern  meiit  of  the  United  States
was  one  of  enumerated  powers,  and  that  it  could  exercise
only  the  powers  granted  to  it ;  but  though  limited  in  its
powers,  it  was  supreme  within  its  sphere  of  action.  It  was
the  governmrnt  of  the  people  of  the  United  Siatea,  and
emanated  from  them.  Its  powers  were  delegated  by  all,
and  it  repretfeniedall.and  acted  for  all.  In  respect  to  those
iubjecis  on  which  it  can  act,  it  must  necessarily  bind  its
component  parts;  and  this  wastheexpresslnnguageoflhe
constitution,  when  it  declared  that  the  constitution.aml  the
laws  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  were  the  supreme  low  of
the  land,  and  requited  all  the  officers  of  the  stale  govern-
inents  to  take  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  it.  There  was  nothing
in  the  constitution  which  excluded  incidental  or  implied
powers.  The  articles  of  the  confederation  gave  nothing  to
the  United  Stales  but  what  was  expressly  granted  ;  but  the
new  c^nstituiiou  dropped  the  word  cxprrttly,  and  left  the
qne8tion,whethera  particula r  power  waBgranted,lo  depend
on  a  fair  couslructioii  of  the  whole  instrument.  Noconsti-

3ia.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lactnrc  XH  ] THE  UNITED  STATES.  2Sr

totion  can  cootain  an  accurate  detail  of  all  the  subdivisions
of  lis  powers,  and  of  all  the  means  by  which  they  might  be
carried  into  execution.  It  would  render  it  loo  prolix.  Its
nature  requires  tiiat  only  the  great  outlines  xhould  be  mark-
^,  and  itx  important  objects  detiignuted,  and  all  the  minor
ingredients  left  to  be  deduced  from  the  nature  of  those  ob-
jects. The  Bword  and  the  purse,  all  the  external  relations)
and  no  inconsiderable  ))ortion  of  the  industry  of  the  na-
tion, were  intrusted  to  the  general  governmeot ;  and  a  go-
vernment  intrusted  with  such  ample  powers,  on  the  dua
execution  of  which  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  the
nation  vitally  depended,  must  also  be  intrusted  with  am-
ple means  for  their  execution.  Unless  the  ivords  imperi-
ously require  it,  we  ought  not  to  adopt  a  construction  which
would  impute  to  the  framera  of  the  constitution,  when
grantinir  great  powers  fur  the  public  good,  the  intention  of
impeding  their  exercise,  b)  withholdingachoiceofmeani<

The  powers  given  to  the  government  imply  the  ordinary
means  of  execution;  and  the  government,  in  all  sound  rea-
son and  fair  interpretutiou,  must  have  the  choice  of  tha
means  which  it  deems  the  moat  convenient  and  appropri-
ate to  the  execution  of  the  power.  The  power  of  creating
a  corporation,  though  appertaining  to  sovereignly,  waa
not  a  great,  substantive,  ond  independent  power,  but
merely  a  means  by  which  other  objects  were  acconiplish-
ed  ;  in  like  manner,  no  seminary  of  learning  is  inxtiiut-
ed  in  order  to  be  incoritorated,  but  the  corpomte  charter
is  conferred  to  subserve  the  purposes  of  education.  The
power  of  creating  a  corporation  is  never  used  for  its  own
sake,  but  for  the  purpose  of  aflecting  something  else.  It
is  nothing  but  ordinary  means  to  attain  aome  piibhc  and
useful  end.  The  cnnatttution  has  not  \cSi  the  right  of  con-
gresa  to  employ  the  necessary  means  for  the  execution  of
its  powers  to  general  reasoning.  It  is  expressly  authoriz-
ed to  employ  sunb  means ;  and  nectsMary  means,  in  the
sense  of  the  conxtitution,  does  not  import  an  absolute
physical  necessity,  ao  strong  that  one  thing  cannot  exist
without  the  other.  It  stands  for  any  means  calculated  to
produce  the  end. The  word  necessary  admits  of  all  de-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


>M  JURISPRUDENCE  Of  fjPm  BL

gtee3  of  compariron.  A  tbtog  ibbj  be  ocMwary,  or
very  necessary,  or  absolutely andiodispenaably  Decessary.
The  word  it  used  io  various  seniles,  and  io  its  coDxtruction^
tb«  subject,  the  eontext,  the  intenlion,  are  all  to  be  take*
into?iew.  The  powen  of  the  governinent  were  givea
fi>f  the  welfare  oftbe  BHtioa.  Tbey  were  inteoded  to  en-
dure for  ages  to  come,  and  to  be  adapted  to  the  various
crise*  of  human  affairs.  To  (wescribe  the  8[)ecific  means  by
which  government  should  hi  all  future  time  execute  ita
power,  and  to  confine  the  choice  of  RieaDs  to  such  narrow
Kmits  as  abould  not  leave  it  in  ibe  power  of  conj^ress  to
adopt  any  which  might  be  appropriate  and  conducive
to  the  end,  would  be  most  nowise  and  pernicious,  b^
cause  it  would  be  an  attempt  to  provide  by  imorutabl*
rslas  for  exigencies  which,  if  foreseen  at  all,  mast  hav*
been  seen  dimly,  eod  would  deprive  the  legislature  of  lb*
capacity  t»  avail  itself  of  ex|»erience,  or  to  exercise  itsrea-
■Ofi,  and  accommodate  its  legislation  to  circumstances.

If  the  end  bs  l^ittmato,  and  witbtn  the  scope  of  the  con-
■titutioa,  all  means  which  are  appropriate,  and  plainly
adapted  to  tbisend,  and  which  are  not  prohibited,  are  law-
All;  and  a  corporation  was  a  means  not  less  usual,  nor  of
bigh^  di|(Dity,  nor  more  requiring  a  particular  BpeciGca-
tioa,thanother  means.  A  national  bank  waaacoovenient,
m  usefal,  and  essential  instrument,  in  the  prosecution  of
the  fiscal  operations  of  the  government.  It  was  clearly
an  appropriate  measure;  and  while  the  Supreme  Court
declared  it  to  be  within  its  power  and  its  duty  to  DuinlaiB
that  an  act  of  congress  exceeding  its  power  was  not  the  lav
•f  the  land,  yet  if  a  law  was  not  piohibited  by  the  consti-
tution, and  was  really  calculated  to  effect  an  object  is*
trusted  to  the  government,  the  court  did  not  pretend  to
the  |K>wer  to  inquire  into  the  degree  of  its  necessity.i'  That
would  be  passing  the  line  which  circumscribes  the  judi-
cial department,  and  be  treading  on  le^rislative  ground.

The  court,  therefore,  decided,  that  the  law  creating  the
Bank  oftbe  United  States,  was  one  made  in  pursuance  of
the  constitution  ;and  that  the  branches  oftbe  oational  bank,


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


UctumXll.]  THE  UmTED  STATES.  S3f

proceeding  from  the  Mine  atock,  and  betng  conducive  t9
the  complete  accompliBluDent  of  the  object,  were  equal^
constiintjonal.

The  Supreoie  Court  were  afterwards  led  id  nme  de-
gree to  review  (his  decision,  in  the  ease  of  Otbom  v.  Tke
United  Staff  Bank,*  and  tbej  there  admitted,  tbat  con-
gress eould  not  create  a  corporation  for  its  own  sake,  or
for  privnte  purposes.  The  whole  opinion  of  the  conrt,  ia
the  case  of  M'Culhch  v.  TTie  SlaU  of  MaryhnJ,  wa*
founded  on,  and  sustained  by,  the  idea,  that  the  bank  wai
an  instrttment  which  was  necessarj  and  pro|>er  for  cany-
iog  into  effect  the  powers  vested  in  the  government.  It
was  created  for  Rational  purposes  only,  though  it  was
undoubtedly  capable  of  transacting  private  as  well  a*
public  business;  and  while  it  was  th«  great  instrument  by
which  the  fiscal  operations  of  the  government  were  effect-
ed, it  was  also  trading  with  individuals  for  its  own  advan-
tage. The  bank,  on  any  ratioiial  calculation,  could  not
affect  its  object,  unless  it  was  endftwed  with  the  facukj
of  leading  and  dealing  in  money.  This  Acuity  was  ne-
cessary to  reader  the  bank  eompetent  to  (be  purposes  of
government,  and,  therefore,  it  was  const  itntiooally  and
rightfully  engrafted  on  the  institution.

(3.)  Tbe  construction  of  the  powers  of  congress  relative
(o  taxatioa,  was  brought  before  tbe  Supreme  Court  in
1796,  in  tbe  case  of  Hyltm  v.  The  United  Stalei.^  By
theaet  of  5th  June,  1704,  congress  laid  a  duty  upon  car-
tiagesfor  the  conveyance  of  persons,  and  the  questioa
was,  whether  this  was  a  direct  tax  within  the  meaning  of
the  constitution.  If  it  was  not  a  dirert  tax,  it  was  ad-
mitted to  be  rightly  laid,  under  that  part  of  the  constitulioi
which  declares  that  ell  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  shall
be  uniform  throughout  the  United  States  ;  but  if  it  was  n
direct  tax,  it  was  notconstitutiaially  laid,  for  it  must  then
be  laid  according  to  the  census,  under  that  part  of  the  con-
•litution  which  declares  that  direct  taxes  shall  be  appoi^
tioned  among  the  several  states,  according  to  ouinben.

«  9  Wieatoit,  B5t,  8M.  h  3  Daiir^  171.

r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


240  JURISPnuDENCE  OF  [Part  II,

The  Circuit  Court  in  Virginia  was  divided  in  opinion  on
the  question,  but  on  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Coun,  it  was
decided,  that  the  tax  on  carriaf^es  was  not  a  direct  tax,
iriihin  the  letter  or  meaning  of  the  constitulion,  and  waa
therefore  constitutionally  laid-

The  question  was  deemed  of  very  great  importance,  and,
was  elaborately  argued.  It  was  held,  that  a  general  power
was;;iven  to  congress  to  lay  and  collect  taxes  of  every
kind  or  nnturewithout  any  restraint.  They  bad  plenary
power  over  every  species  of  taxable  property  except  ex-
ports. But  there  were  two  rules  prescribed  for  Ibeir
government-— the  rule  of  nnifurmity,  and  the  lule  of  ap-
portionment. Three  kinds  of  taxes,  viz.  duties,  imposts,
and  excises,  were  to  be  laid  by  the  first  rule;  and  capita-
tion, and  other  direct  taxes,  by  the  second  rule.  If  there
were  any  other  species  of  tuxes,  as  the  court  seemed  to
•upposfl  there  might  be,  that  were  not  direct,  and  not  in-
eluded  within  the  words,  duties,  imposts,  or  excises,  they
were  to  be  laid  by  the  rule  of  uniformity  or  not,  as  con-
gress should  think  proper  and  reasonable.

The  constitution  contemplated  no  taxes  as  direct  taxes,
but  such  as  congress  could  lay  in  proportion  to  the  ceosus,
and  the  rule  of  apportionment  eould  not  reasonably  apply
to  a  tax  on  carriages,  nor  could  the  tax  on  carriages  be-
laid by  that  rule  without  very  great  inequality  and  injus-
tice. If  two  states,  equal  in  census,  were  each  to  pay
80,000  dollars,  by  a  tax  on  carriages-  of  eight  dollars  on
every  carriage,  and  in  one  state  there  were  100  carriages,
and  in  (he  other  1,000,  the  owners  of  carriages  in  one
state  would  pay  ten  times  the  lax  of  owners  rn  tbe
other.  While  A.,  in  the  one  state,  would  pay  for  bis
earriage  eight  dollars,  B.,  in  the  other  state,  would
pay  for  bis  carriage  80  dollars.  In  this  way,  it  was
shown  by  the  court,  that  the  notion  that  a  tax  on  car-
riages was  a  direct  tax  within  the  parview  of  the  constitu-
tion, and  to  be  apporttoned  according  to  the  ceosuti,  would
lead  to  the  grossest  abuse  and  oppression.  This  argu-
ment was  conclusive  against  the  construction  set  up,  and
the  tax  on  carriages  was  considered  as  included  within  the


t,G6o(^lc


liBcturBXlt.] THG  UNITF.D  STATES.  Ui

potrer  to  laf  duties,  and  llie  bott<^r  opinion  Heetned  to  bC)
that  the  direct  tnxeii  contemplated  by  tbe  conslilulioo
were  only  two,  viz.  a  capitation  or  |>oll  tax,  and  a  tax  on
land.  The  court  conrluded,  that  a  tax  on  carriafie!  waa
an  indirect  tax  on  expense  or  conflumption,  and,  there*
fore  properly  laid,  pursuant  to  the  ruleof  unirortnity.

In  Lnughborough  v.  Blalce,^  the  [tower  of  taxation  wai
again  brought  under  judicial  discusmon.  The  qnestioo
was  immediately  of  a  local  nature,  and  it  was,  whither  con-
gress had  the  right  to  impose  a  direct  tax  upon  the  unre-
pretteoted  District  of  Columbia ;  but  there  were  prinripleB
inrolred  ioihe  decision,  which  had  an  exiensive  and  im-
portant relation  to  the  whole  United  States.

It  was  declared,  that  the  power  to  tax  extended  equal'
ly  to  all  pieces  over  which  tbe  government  extended.  It
extended  as  well  to  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  to  the
territories  which  were  not  represented  in  rongress,  as  to
tbe  rest  of  the  United  States.  Though  duties  were  to  be
Huiform,  and  taxes  were  to  be  apportioned  according  to
Riimbers,  the  power  was  coextensive  with  the  empire.
TheinhabitantB  of  the  territories- of  Michigan,  and  of
Florida  and  Arkansas,  fur  instance,  as  well  as  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia,  though  without  any  representation  in
congress,  were  subject  to  the  full  operation  of  the  powei
of  lasation^equally  as  the  people  of  New-York  or  Massa-
ebusetta.  But  the  court  held,  that  congress  are  not  bound,
though  they  may,  in  their  discretion,  extend  a  direct  tat
to  the  territories  as  well  as  to  (he  states.  Adirecttax,
if  laid  at  all,  must  be  laid  on  every  state  conforma-
bly to  the  census,  aitd,  therefore,  congress  has  no  power
to  exempt  any  stute  from  its  due  share  of  the  bur-
then. But  it  is  understood  that  congress  are  under  no
necessity  of  extending  H  tax  to  the  unrepresented  District
ofCQlunibia,and  to  the  territories;  though,  ifthey  be  taxed,
then  the  constitution  gives  the  rule  of  assessment. This

as  irAenbm,  31?.

Vol  I.  31


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


242  JURTSPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  U.

construction  must  be  admitted  to  be  most  conTenient,  for
the  cipenae  of  assessiag  and  collectini^  h  tax  in  a  territory,
a*  the  Nortfa  West  Territory,  for  instance,  might  exceed
the  amount  of  the  tax.  Here  is  an  anomalous  cane  in  our
government,  in  which  representation  and  taxation  are  not
inseparable  though  the  principle  that  thu  power  of  taxa-
tion oould  not  rightfully  exist  without  representation,  was
a  fundamental  ground  of  our  revolution.  The  court  did
not  consider  a  departure  from  a  general  principle,  in  this
eaae,  to  be  very  material  or  important,  because  the  case
was  that  of  territories  which  were  in  a  state  of  infancy,  ad-
vanriog  to  manhood,  and  looking  forward  to  complete
equality  as  soon  as  that  state  of  manhood  should  be  at-
tained. It  was  the  case  also  of  the  District  of  Columbia,
which  had  voluntarily  relinquished  the  right  of  repreiMnta-
tion,  and  adopted  the  whole  body  of  congress  for  its  legiti*
mate  government.

(4.)  Congress  have  the  exclusive  right  of  pre-emption  to
all  Indian  lands  lying  within  the  territories  of  the  United
States.  This  was  so  decided  in  the  case  of  Johtuon  v.
M^Inttuh.'  Upon  the  doctrine  of  the  court  in  that  case,
and  in  that  of  FltUker  v.  Pecic,^  the  United  States  own
the  soil,  as  well  as  the  jurisdiction,  of  the  immense  tracts
of  wild  and  unpatented  lands,  included  within  their  terri-
tories, and  of  all  the  productive  funds  which  these  lands
may  hereafter  create.  The  title  is  in  the  United  States,
by  the  treaty  of  peace  with  Great  Britain,  and  by
subsequent  cessions  from  France  and  Spain ;  and  the
Indians  have  only  a  right  of  occupancy,  and  (he  United
States  possess  the  legal  title  subject  to  that  occopancy,
and  with  an  absolute  and  exclusive  right  to  extinguish
the  Indian  title  of  occupancy  either  by  conquest  or  pur-
chase. The  title  of  the  European  nationD,  and  which
passed  to  the  United  States,  to  this  immense  territorial
empire,  was  founded  on  discovery  and  conquest ;  and,
by  the  European  customary  law  of  nntions,  prior  dis-
covery gave  this  title  to  the  soil,  subject  to  the  po-isessory

a  8  Wheatm,  543.  b  Q  Crmuh,  142, 143.

Do,i,,-c,ib,.  Google


Lectare  XIL] THE  UNITED  STATES.  243

rilfht  of  the  oativea,  and  wbich  occupaacjr  was  all  the  right
that  European  conquerorH  and  discoverers,  and  which  the
United  States,  as  succeeding  to  their  title,  would  admit  to
reside  in  the  native  Indiana.  The  principle  is,  that  the  In-
diana are  to  be  considered  merely  as  occupantSi  to  be  pro-
tected while  in  peace  in  the  posaeaaion  of  their  lands,  but
to  be  deemed  incapable  of  transfeiriag  the  abaolute  title
to  any  other  than  the  sovereign  of  the  country.  The  con-
stitution gave  to  congress  the  power  to  dispose  of,  and  to
make  all  ueedful  rules  and  regulations  respecting  the  ter-
ritory, or  other  property  belonging  to  the  United  States,
and  to  admit  new  states  into  the  union.  Since  the  consti-
tution was  formed,  the  value  and  efficacy  of  this  power
have  been  magnified  to  an  incalculable  extent,  by  the  pur-
chase of  Louisiana  and  Florida  ;  and  under  the  doctrine
contained  in  the  case  I  bare  referred  to,  congress  bare
a  large  and  magnificent  portion  of  territory  under  their
absolute  control  and  disposal.  This  immense  property  hai
become  national  and  productive  stock,  and  congress,  in
the  administration  of  this  stock,  hare  erected  temporary
governments  under  the  provisions  of.tbe  ordinance  of  the
congress  under  Che  confederation  ;  and  they  hare  appoint-
ed the  officers  to  each  territary,  and  allowed  delegates  in
congress  to  be  chosen  by  the  inhabitants  every  second  year,
and  with  a  right  to  debate,  but  not  to  vote,  in  the  house  of
representatives.^

(5.)  By  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  congress
were,  by  general  lows,  to  prescribe  the  manner  in  which
the  public  acts,  records,  and  judicial  proceedings  of  every
state,  should  be  proved,  and  the  effect  thereof  in  every
state.  In  pursuance  of  this  power,  congress,  by  the  act  of
Hay  26, 1790,  provided  the  mode  by  which  records  and
judicial  proceedings  should  be  authenticated,  and  thende-
clared,  that  they  should  have  such  faith  and  credit  given  to
'hem  in  every  court  within  the  United  States,  asthey  had
by  law  or  usage  in  the  courts  of  the  state  from  lyhence  the


a  Adt  ^HhofAugua,\999.  Jamtary  luh,  ItOS.  JUordiM,  1817.
FAmarjf  ItiA,  1819- Apnlsilh.  IBSO.


t,Googlc


344  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [P«rt  II.

records  were  token.  Under  this  act  it  was  decided,  in  the
caie  of  Milla  v.  Durycf,^  that  if  a  judgment,  duly  auliien-
ticatcd,  had,  in  the  state  court  from  whence  it  wae  taken,
the  faith  and  credit  of  the  highest  nature,  viz.  record  evi-
dence, it  RitMt  hare  the  aame  faith  and  credit  in  every  other
court.  It  was  declaring  the  effect  of  the  record,  lodeclaro
the  faith  and  credit  (hat  were  (o  be  given  to  it.  The  con-
stitution intended  aoinclhing  more  than  1o  make  the  judg-
ments of  state  courts  prima  facie  fvidence  only.  It  con-
templated a  power  in  congress  to  give  a  conclusive  eflect
to  such  judgments.  A  judgment  is,  therefore,  conclusive
in  every  other  state,  if  a  court  of  the  |>articular  state  where
it  WHS  rendered  would  hold  it  conclusive.  AiV  debet  is  not
a  guwl  plea  in  a  suit  on  a  judgment  in  another  state,  be-
cause not  a  good  plea  in  such  tiiate.  JVu/  tiel  recurd  is  the
proper  plea  in  such  a  va*e.  This  same  decision  was  fol-
lowed in  Hampton  y.  M'Conntl,^  and  the  doctrine  contain-
ed in  it  may  now  be  considered  as  the  settle  law  of  the
land.  It  isnol,  however, to  be  understood,  I  bat  xu/m/ re-
cord is,  in  all  cases,  the  necessary  plea ;  but  any  special
plea  may  be  pleaded  which  would  be  good  to  avoid  the
judgment  in  the  state  where  it-was  pronounced.^:  And  in
Mayhew  V.  Tkatcktr,'*  the  court  would  seem  to  imply,  that
n  judgment  in  one  state,  founded  on  an  attachment  in  rem,
wouM  not  be  conclusive  evidence  of  the  debt  in  other  states,
if  the  defendant  had  not  personal  notice  of  the  suit,  so  aa
to  have  enabled  him  to  defend  it.

(6.)  Congress  have  authority  to  provide  for  calling  forth
the  militia  to  execute  the  laws  of  the  union,  suppress  insur-
rections, and  re|>el  invasions ;  and  to  proride-for  organi-
sing, arming,  and  disciplining  the  militia,  and  for  go-
Terning  such  part  of  them  as  may  be  employed  in  the
service  of  the  United  States;  reserving  to  the  states  re-


a  7  Craach,  481  B  3  Wktalon,  834.

e  Shumirir  t.  Stillman,  4  Coteen,  59S,

il  t  W^AtaUm,  139.— lo  Thurber  r.  Bbckbonriie,  1  A!  //  Rtp.  34?.
It  wai  beld  that  nil  debet  w»  a  t^ooJ  plea  lo  debt  on  s  judpnent  of  sdo-
ther  MaCe,  when  it  djd  not  appear  by  the  record  tbal  the  defsndaDt  hftd
e  (if  tbe  «uit.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XII]  THE  UFOTED  STATES.  2«

aper.tively,  the  appointment  of  the  officers,  and  the  au'tbori*
tjr  (if  training  the  militia,  acrording  to  the  disriplinc  |>re-
SfTibed  by  congress.  The  president  of  the  United  StHtes
is  to  be  the  commander  of  the  militia  when  call«^  into
actual  service.  The  act  of  28th  of  February,  1795,  au-
thorised the  president,  in  case  of  invasion,  or  of  imminent
danger  of  it,  to  call  forth  surh  number  of  the  militia  most
convenient  to  the  scene  of  action  as  he  might  judge  ne^-
cessary.  The  militia  so  called  out  are  made  subject  to
the  rules  of  war,  and  the  law  imposes  a  fine  upon  every
delinquent,  to  be  adjudged  by  a  court  martial  composed  of
militia  officers  only.  These  militia  court  martials  are  to  be
held  and  conducted  in  the  luanner.prescribed  by  the  arti-
cles of  war;  and  the  act  of  IStfa  ofApril,  1814,  prescribe!
the  manner  of  holding  them.

During  the  last  war,  the  authority  of  the  president  of
the  United  States  over  the  militia  became  a  subject  of
doubt  and  difficulty,  and  of  a  collision  of  opinion  between
the  general  government  and  the  governments  of  some  of
the  states.  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  government  of  Con-
necticut, that  the  militia  could  not  be  called  out,  upon  tba
requisition  of  the  general  government,  except  in  a  case
declared,  and  founded  u[m)o  the  existence  of  one  of  the
fpecified  exigencies ;  that  when  called  out,  they  could
not  be.  taken  from  under  the  command  of  the  officers  duly
appointed  by  the  states,  or  pinched  under  the  immediate
command  of  an  officer  of  the  army  of  the  United  Statei.
Nor  could  the  United  States  lawfully  detach  a  portion  of
the  privates  from  the  body  of  the  company  to  which  they
belonged,  and  which  was  organized  with  proper  officers
This  would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  government  of  Con-
necticut, impair,  and  eventually  destroy,  the  state  militia.
When  the  militia  are  duly  called  into  the  service  of  th«
United  States,  they  must  be  called  as  militia  furnished
with  proper  officers  by  the  slate.

Similar  difficulties  arose  between  the  government  of
the  United  States  and  that  of  the  state  of  Bfassacbusetta,
on  the  power  of  the  national  gerernment  over  the  militia.


t,Goo(^lc


246  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pari  II.

Both  those  states  refused  to  furni^  deiachinenta  of  mili-
tia for  the  maritime  froutier,  on  an  exposition  of  the  cod-
Itilution,  which  they  deemed  tound  and  just.

lo  Connecticut,  the  claim  of  the  governor  to  judge
whether  the  exigency  existed,  authoriaing  a  call  of  the
Biilitia  of  that  stale,  or  any  portion  of  it,  into  the  service
of  the  union,  and  the  claim  on  the  part  of  that  state  to  re-
tain the  command  of  the  militia,  when  duly  ordered  out,
as  against  any  subordinate  officer  of  the  army  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  were  submitted  to;  and  receired  the  strong  and
decided  sanction,  not  only  of  the  governor  and  council  of
that  state,  but  of  the  legislature  itself.*  In  Uassacba-
setts,  the  governor  consulted  the  judges  of  the  supreme
judicial  court,  as  to  the  true  construction  of  the  constitu-
tion on  these  very  interesting  points.  The  judges  of  the
■upreme  court  who  were  consulted  were  of  opinion,  that
it  belonged  to  the  governora  of  the  several  states  to  de^
tertnine  when  any  of  the  exigencies  contemplated  by  the
constitution  of  the  United  States  existed,  so  as  to  require
them  to  place  the  militia,  or  any  part  of  it,  in  the  aervioe
of  the  union,  and  under  the  command  of  the  president.
It  was  observed,  that  the  constitution  of  the  United
States  did  not  give  that  right,  by  any  express  terms,  to
the  president  or  congress,  and  that  the  power  to  deter-
mine when  the  exigency  exifted,  was  not  prohibited  to
the  Slates,  and  that  it  was,  therefore,  as  of  course,  re-
served to  the  states.  A  different  construction  would  place
all  the  militia  in  effect  at  the  nil)  of  congress,  and  pto-
duce  a  military  consolidation  of  these  states.  The  act  of
38th  February,  1795,  vested  in  the  president  the  power
of  calling  forth  the  militia  when  any  one  of  the  exigencies
existed,  and  if  to  that  he  su|>eradded  the  power  of  deter-
mining when  the  cam  foederis  occurred,  the  militia  would
in  fact  be  under  the  president's  control.

As  to  the  question  how  the  militia  were  to  be  commanded
when  duly  called  out,  the  judges  were  of  opinion,  that  the
president  alone,  of  all  the  officers  acting  under  the  United

a  See  <iffcial  doammUoflhe  litiU  of  Conntctieut,  Ai^vH,  iSlt.

/^  .Google


UcturaXII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  247

States,  was  authorized  to  comtnand  thetn,  and  tbat  he
must  cotnmaDtl  them  as  they  were  or|^nized,  under  of^
ficera  appointed  b;  the  states.  The  mihria  could  not  ba
placed  under  the  commaod  of  any  ofIir.er  not  of  the  mili-
tia, except  that  officer  be  the  President  of  the  United
States.  Bui  the  judges  did  not  determine  bow  ihe  ■
militia  were  to  be  commanded,  in  case  of  the  absence  of
the  president,  andof  a  union  of  militia  with  troops  of  the
United  States ;  and  whether  they  were  to  act  under  their
separate  officers,  hut  in  concert  as  allied  forces,  or  wbe*
ther  the  officer  present  who  was  highest  in  rank,  be  he
of  the  militia  or  of  the  federal  troops,  was  to  cooimand
the  whole,  was  a  difficult  and  perplexing  question,  which
the  judges  did  not  undertake  to  decide."

Tbe  president  of  the  United  Stales  declared  that  these
constructions  of  the  constitutional  powers  of  the  general
government  over  the  miliiia  were  novel  and  unfortunate,
and  be  was  evidently  and  decidedly  of  a  different  opinion.
He  observed,  in  bis  message  to  congress  on  the  4th  No-
vember, 181 2,  that  if  tbe  authority  of  the  United  States
to  callintoaervice,  and  tociHnmand  the  mililin,  conld  be
thus  frustrated,  wn  were  not  one  nation  for  the  pirrpoae
most  of  all  requiring  it.  These  embarrassing  questions^
and  tbe  bigb  authority  by  which  each  side  of  tbe  ar-
gument is  supported,  have  remained  to  this  day  un-
settled by  tbe  proper  and  final  decision  of  the  tribunal
that  is  competent  to  put  them  to  rest.  Tbe  case  of
Hatuton  v.  J^oore,^  is  the  only  one  in  which  tbe  national
command  of  the  militia  seems  to  have  been  at  all  a
subject  of  judicial  discussiun,  end  that  case  does  not
touch  the  points  at  issue  between  the  United  iljttttcs  and
tbe  states  of  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut,  though  the
opinionof  one  of  the  judges':  went  far  towards  destroying
tbe  claims  advanced  on  tbe  part  of  those  states.  I  do  not
wishto  interfere,  in  this  plucc,  with  vexed  and  undecided
questions. Hy  object,  in  tbe  course  of  these  elementary


I  BJfaii,  Btp-&H,  b  5  JFTit^ton,  1.  e  Johiuon,J-

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


348  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  IT.

I«cturet,  IB  to  confine  mynelf  to  a  comprehcDBiTe  and  just
■urveyofthe  principles  of  our  gorernmeiit  aa  ihe;  have
been  discussed,  or  as  the;  have  been  practically  explain*
ed  and  settled  by  competent  authority.  It  may^  however,
be  truly  observed,  that  since  the  year  J8I2,  when  those
questions  were  raised,  many  great  and  deeply  intepsttitjf
questions  arising  on  the  powers  of  the  union,  haTe  b'  n
iovestigated  and  decided,  and  the  progress  of  opinion,  and
the  course  of  those  decinions,  have  been  in  favour  of  a
pretty  liberal  and  enlarged  construction  of  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States.  The  principles  of  the  govern-
ment, as  now  understood,  would  be  much  more  favoura-
blethan  they  were  in  1812,  to  the  ciniro  of  the  President  of
the  United  States,  tojud^e  exclusively,  and  authoritative-
ly, vken  the  militia  were  to  be  called  out  into  the  service  of
the  union.*

The  case  o?  Houston  v.  Moore^  sf^ttled  soma  important
questions  arising  upon  the  national  authority  over  the  mili-
tia. The  acts  of  congress  alrt^ady  referred  to,  and  the
act  of  Sth  March,  1792,  for  establishing  a  uniform  militia,
were  cunstdercd  as  covering  the  whole  ground  of  congres-
sional legislation  over  the  subject..  The  manner  in  which
the  tnilitia  were  to  be  organized  warmed,  disriplined,  and
governed,  was  fully  prescribed ;  provision  was  made  for
dntfltDg,  detaching,  and,  calling  forth  the  state  quotas,
when  requested  by  the  president,  Hisorders  were  to  he
given  to  the  chief  executive  magistrate,  or  lo  any  militia
officer  he  mi^ht  think  proper.  Neglect  or  refusal  to  obey
his  orders  was  declaied  to  be  a  public  offence,  and  sub-
jected the  offender  to  trial  and  punishment,  to  be  adjudged
by  a  court  martial,  and  the  mode  of  proceeding  was  per-
spicuously detailed.

The  question  before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States  was,  whether  it  was  competent  for  a  court  martial,  de-
riving its  jurisdiction  under  state  authority,  to  try  and  punish
miliiia  men  drfifted,  detached,  and  called  forth  by  the  presi-
dent into  the  servicer  of  the  United  Stntes,  and  who  had  re-

a  Ilwaidociisd  in  M-irtiov.  Mi>ll,  ;  <;  (fAcifun,  iM.  itiui  ii  betoDged
sxclusivetjr  ta  the  Preaident  of  the  UoJled  States  to  jodge  wlien  tba


1,-0,1  h,Googlc


Leclaro  Xlt.]  THF  UNITED  STATES.  S4S

taaed  or  neglected  to  obey  the  col).  The  eotirt  decided,
tbat  the  niHitia,  wlien  called  into  the  service  of  the  United
States,  were  not  to  be  considered  aa  being  to  that  aervice,
or  in  the  character  of  national  militia,  until  they  were
mustered  at  the  place  of  rendezvous,  and  that  until  then,
the  state  retained  a  right,  concurrent  with  the  govern-
meat  of  the  United  States,  to  punish  their  delinquency.
But  afler  the  militia  bad  been  called  forth,  and  had  en-
tered into  the  service  of  the  United  States,  thtir  charac-
ter changed  from  state  to  national  militia,  and  the  authori-
ty of  the  general  government  over  such  detachments  was
eiclusive.  Actual  service  was  considered  by  congress  as
the  criterion  of  national  militia,  and  the  place  of  rendez-
vous was  tb«  Urmmu  «  quo  the  service,  the  pay,  and  sub-
jection to  the  articles  of  war  were  to  commence.  And  if
the  militia,  when  called  into  the  service  of  the  United
States,  refuse  to  obey  the  order,  they  remain  within  the
military  jurisdiction  of  the  state,  and  it  is  competent  for  the
state  to  provide  for  trying  and  punishing  ibem  by  a  state
court  martial,  to  the  extent  and  in  the  manner  prescribed
by  the  act  of  congress.  The  act  of  Pennsylvania  of  1814,
provided  for  punishing,  by  a  state  court  martial,  delinquent
militia  men,  who  were  called  into  the  service  of  the  United
States,  end  neglected  or  refused  to  serve ;  and  they  were
to  be  punished  by  the  inflirlion  of  the  penbllies  prescribed
by  the  act  of  congress,  and  such  an  act  whs  held  not  to
be  repugnant  to  the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  United
States.  It  was  the  lawful  exercise  of  concurrent  power,
and  could  be  concurrently  exercised  by  the  national  and
state  courts  martial,  as  it  was  authorized  by  the  laws  of
the  state,  and  not'prohibited  by  those  oflhe  United  States.
It  would  remain  to  be  exercised,  until  congress  should  vest
the  power  exclusively  elsewhere,  or  until  the  stales  should
divest  their  courts  martial  of  such  a  jurisdiction.  This
was  the  decision,  in  the  first  instance,  of  the  supreme  court

Vol.  I.  3!J


i,Googlc


ZSO  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pari  U:

of  Pennsylvania  ;*  and  it  was  affirmed,  on  anpeal,  b;  the
majuriry  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.

(7.)  Tbe  aiithMity  of  coogress  to  appropriate  public
moneys  for  internal  improTeineou,  have  been  much  dis-
cusHed  on  public  occaBion^,  and  between  the  hgiHlative
and  the  executive  branches  of  the  government ;  but  the  point
has  never  been  brought  under  judicial  consideration^

It  has  been  contended  that  under  the  power  to  establish
post  offices  and  post  roads,  and  to  raise  moneys  to  provide
for  the  general  welfare,  and  as  incident  theretOf  congress
have  the  power  toset  apart  funds  for  internal  iro|>rovement>
in  the  states,  with  their  asseni ,  by  meaAs  of  roads  and  ca-
nals. Such  a  power  has  been  exercised  to  a  certain  extent-
It  has  been  the  constant  practice  to  allow  to  the  new  siatei
a  certain  proportion  of  the  proceeds  arising  from  (be  fale
of  public  lands,  to  be  laid  out  in  the  construction  of  roads
and  caoulswithio  those  states,  or  leading  thereto.  In  180^
congress  authorizifd  a  road  to  be  opened  from  Nashville,
in  Tennessee,  to  Natchez ;  and,  in  180U,  they  authorized
the  canal  of  Carondelet,  leading  from  lake  Ponchartraine,
to  be  extended  lo  tbe  river  Mississippi.  The  Cumberland
road  was  constructed  under  the  act  of  March  29th,  I806t
and  this  road  had  been  made  under  a  covenant  with  the
state  of  Ohio,  by  the  act  or  April  -iO,  1802,  ihat  a  portion
of  the  proceeds  of  lends  lying  within  that  state,  should  be
api^ied  to  the  opening  of  the  roads  leading  to  that  stale,
with  the  consent  of  the  slates  through  which  the  road
might  pass.  But  the  expemliiurea  on  that  road  have  ex-
ceeded ibe  proceeds  of  saled  of  public  land  in  Ohio,  above
one  million  of  dollars,  and,  in  1617,  the  President  of  the
United  States  objected  toabill,  on  the  ground  that  ihecoD-
stitutioti  did  not  extend  to  making  ruads  and  canals,  and
improving  water^courses  through  the  different  states ;  nor
could  the  assent  of  those  slates  confer  the  power.  At^er-
wardg,  in  1822,  the  presidentobjected  toa  bill  appropriat-
ing money  fur  repairing  Cumberhuid  road,  and  establishing
gates  on  it.

On  these,  and  other  occasions,  there  has  been  a  great

a  3  Serg.  ir  Rau<lt,  169.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


L  Mlure  XII.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  251

and  decided  difference  of  opinion  between  congress  and  ihe
president  on  this  coaatilutional  question.  President  Jeffer-
son, in  his  message  of  December  26,  1806,  and  President
Hadisoa,  in  his  message  of  December  -id,  1816,  equally
denied  any  such  power  in  congresa.  On  the  other  band,
it  appears,  that  congress  claim  the  power  to  lay  out,  con-
struct, and  improve  post  loads,  with  the  assent  of  Ihe  states
through  which  they  puss.  They  nlno  claim  the  power  to
open,  construct,  and  improve  military  roads  on  the  like
terms,  and  the  right  to  cut  canals  through  the  several
Blates,  with  their  assent,  for  promoting  and  securiitg  in-
ternal commerce,  and  for  the  more  safe  and  ecomimical
transportation  of  military  stores  in  time  of  war ;  and  tear-
ing, in  all  these  cases,  the  jurisdictional  right  over  the  soil
in  the  respective  states.

In  the  inaugural  address  of  President  Adams,  on  the  4th
ofHarch,  18*25,  he  alluded  to  this  question,  and  his  opi-
nion seemed  to  he  in  favour  of  ilie  constitutional  ri^ht,  mid
of  the  policy  and  wisdom  of  the  liberal  application  of  the
national  resources  to  the  internal  improvement  of  tho
country.  He  intimated,  that  speculative  scruples  on  this
subject  would  probably  be  solved  by  the  practical  blessings
resulting  from  the  application  of  the  power,  and  the  ex-
lent  and  limitationsof  the  general  government,  in  relation
to  this  important  interest,  settled  and  acknowledged  to
tbesatisfactionofail.  This  declaration  may  be  consider-
ed as  withdrawing  the  influence  of  the  official  authority  of
the  president,  from  the  side  on  which  it  has  hitherto  press-
ed, and  adding  it  to  the  support  of  the  preponderating
opinion,  in  favour  of  the  competency  of  the  power  claimed
by  congress."


a  In  Februar}',  1031.  after  ao  aoimat*^  debate,  the  Huuie  or  Repre-
leDtative*,  bf  a  rote  of  101  (o67.  ■oiei)  lo  appropriate  {30,000  for  tbe
coolinaatioo  of  itureji  of  rootei  for  road*  and  canals.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  XIII.


OF  THE  PRESIDENT.


The  titi«  of  the  present  lecture  may  conveniently  be  ex*
amined  iotfaefollowingorder  :  1.  The  uaity  of  tbis  depart-
ment. 3.  The  qualifications  required  by  the  conBtitution
for  the  office  of  president.  3.  The  mode  of  bis  appoini-
meot. 4.  His  duration.  5.  His  support.  6.  His  powers.

(1.)  By  the  constitution,  tt  is  ordained,  that  the  execu-
tiFe  powers  sball  be  vested  in  a  |»-estdpDt.*

The  (^ject  oftbis  department  is  the  ezecutioa  of  the  taw ;
and  good  policy  dictates  that  it  should  be  or^uized  in  the
■  mode  best  calculated  to  attain  tbat  end  with  precision  and
fidelity.  Consultation  is  necessary  in  the  making  of  laws.
The  defect  or  grievance  they  areintended  to  rt^more,  must
be  distinctly  perceived,  and  the  operation  of  the  remedy
upon  the  interests,  the  morals,  and  the  opinion  of  ihp  com-
munity.  profoundly  considered.  A  comprehensive  know-
ledge of  the  great  interests  of  the  nation,  in  all  their  com*
placated  relations  and  practical  details,  seems  to  be  requir-
ed io  sound  legislation  ;  and  it  shows  tbe  necessity  of  a
free,  fiili,  and  perfect  representation  of  the  iteople,  in  the
body  intrusted  with  the  legislative  power.  But  when  lawe
are  duly  made  and  promulgated,  they  only  reoiain  to  be
executed.  No  discretion  is  submitted  to  the  executive  of-
ficer. It  is  not  for  him  to  deliberate  and  decide  upon  the
wisdom  or  expftdiency  at  tbe  law.  What  has  been  once
declared  to  be  law,  under  all  the  cautious  forma  of  delibe-
ration prescribed  by  the  constitution,  ought  to  receive
prompt  and  irresistible obedience. The  cbaracteristical


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


254  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [PartIL

qualitieft  retjuired  in  the  eiecuiire  fle|iartment,  are  promp-
titudc,  decision,  and  force  ;  and  these  qualities  are  moat
likely  to  exist  when  the  executive  authority  ia  limited  toa
single  person,  moving  by  the  unity  of  a  single  will.  Divi-
sion, indecision,  and  delay,  are  excet^ingly  anravourable  to
that  Bieadyaud  vigorous  administration  of  the  law,  which
is  necessary  to  secure  tranquillity  at  borne,  and  command
the  confidtince  of  foreign  nations.  Every  government,
ancient  and  modern,  which  has  benn  constituted  on  differ-
ent principles,  and  adopted  a  compound  executive,  has
suffered  the  evils  of  it;  and  the  public  interest  has  been
sacrificed,  or  it  has  languished  under  the  inconvenms  of
an  imbecile  or  irregulur  administration.  In  those  states
which  have  tried  th«  project  of  executive  councils,  the
weakness  of  them  has  been  strongly  feh  and  strikingly
displayed ;  and  in  every  instance  in  which  they  have  been
tried,  (as  in  Pennsylvania  and  Georgia,  for  instance,)  they
were  soon  abandoned,  and  a  single  executive  magistrate
created,  in  accordance  witb  the  light  afibrded  by  their
own  experience,  as  well  as  by  the  institutions  of  their
neighbours.

Unity  increases  not  only  the  efficacy,  but  the  responsibi-
lity of  the  executive  power.  Ev<;ry  actcan  be  immediately
traced  and  brought  home  to  the  proper  agent.  There  can
be  no  concealmBot  of  the  real  author.and, generally)  none
of  the  motives  of  public  measures,  when  there  are  no  a>«o-
ciates  to  divide,  or  to  mask  respomtihility.  There  will  be
much  less  temptation  to  depart  from  dul>,  and  much  greater
■oicitude for  reputation,  when  there  are  no  partners  to  share
the  odium,  or  to  communicate  confidence  by  theii  example.
The  eyes  of  the  people  will  be  constantly  directed  to  a  sin-
gle conspicuous  object ;  and,  for  these  reasons,  De  Lolme*
considered  it  to  be  a  sound  axiom  of  policy,  that  the  execu-
tive power  was  more  easily  confined  wbeu  it  was  one.  "  If
the  execution  of  tba  laws,"  he  observes,  '*  be  intrusted  to
a  number  of  Imnds,  the  true  cause  of  public  evils  is  bidden.


t  Contt.  of  England,  p.  111.


t,Goo(^lc


Ltctan  Xin.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  SM

Tyranny,  in  such  Btates,  does  not  always  beat  down  tbe
fences  that  are  set  aroud  it,  but  it  leups  over  them.  It
mocks  the  efforts  of  the  people,  not  because  it  is  invincible,
but  because  it  is  unknown."  The  justness  of  these  refleo
tioDS  might  be  illustrated  and  confirm*-^  by  a  review  oftbe
proceedings  oftbe  former  council  of  appointment  in  this
state.  All  efficient  responsibility  was  there  Inst,  by  reason
of  the  constant  <;baoge  of  the  members,  and  the  difficulty
of  ascertaining  the  individual  to  whom  the  origin  of  a  bad
appointment  was  to  be  attributed.

(2.)  The  constitution  requires,'  that  the  president  should
be  a  natural  born  citizen,  or  a  citizen  of  tbe  United  States
at  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  and  that  be
bave  attained  to  the  age  of  thirty-  five  years,  and  have
been  fourtean  years  a  resident  within  the  United  Stales.
Considering  the  greatness  of  tbe  trust,  and  that  tbis  de-
partment is  the  ultimately  efficient  power  in  government,
these  restrictiona  will  not  ap|>ear  altogether  useless  or  un-
important. Aa  the  president  is  re(|uired  to  be  a  natira
wizen  of  the  United  States,  ambitious  foreignerfl  cannot
intrigue  for  the  office,  and  the  qualification  of  birth  cuts
off  all  those  inducements  from  abroad  to  corruption,  nego-
liatioo,  and  war,  which  have  frequently  and  fatally  ha-
rassed the  elective  monarchies  of  Germany  and  Poland,
as  well  as  the  Pontificate  at  Rome.  The  age  of  the  presi-
dent is  sufficient  to  bave  formed  his  public  and  private
character ;  and  his  previous  domestic  residence,  is  intend-
ed to  afford  to  bis  fellow  citizens  the  opportunity  to  attain
a  correct  knowledge  of  his  principles  and  capacity,  and  to
have  enabled  hira  to  acquire  habits  of  attachment  and
obedience  to  the  laws, and of  devotion to  tbo  public

welfare.

(3.)  The  mode  of  his  appointment  presented  one  of  the
most  diliicult  and  momentous  questions  that  could  have
occupied  the  deliberations  oftbe  assembly  which  framed
the  constitution ;  and  if  ever  the  trnnqnillity  of  this  nation


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


236  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pirtlt.

is  to  be  disturbed,  and  its  peace  jeopardized,  hj  a  strug-
gle ibr  power  among  iheiaselveB,  it  will  be  upon  tbb  verr
subject  of  the  cbotce  of  a  president.  This  is  the  queRtioD
that  ra  eventually  to  test  the  goodness,  and  try  the  strength
of  the  constitution;  and  if  we  shall  be  able,  for  half  a
century  hereafter,  to  continue  to  elect  the  chief  magistrate
of  the  union  with  discretion,  moderation,  and  iittegrity,
we  shall  undoubtedly  stamp  the  highest  value  on  our  na-
tional character,  and  recommend  our  republican  institu-
tions, if  not  to  the  imitation,  yet  certainly  to  the  esteem
and  admiration  of  the  more  enlightened  part  of  mankind.
The  experience  of  ancient  and  modern  Europe  has  been
tmfavourable  to  the  practicability  of  a  fair  and  peaceable
popular  election  of  the  eierutive  head  of  a  great  nation.
It  has  been  found  impossible  lo  guard  the  election  from
I  he  mischiefs  of  foreign  intrigue  and  domestic  turbulence*
from  violence  or  corruption  ;  and  mankind  have  general-
ly taken  refuge  from  the  eviU  of  popular  elections  in  here-
ditury  executives,  as  being  the  least  evil  of  the  two.  The
tnost  recent  and  remarkable  change  of  this  kind  occurred
in  Prance  in  1S04,  when  the  legislative  body  changed
their  elective  into  an  hereditary  monarchy,  on  the  avowed
ground  that  the  competition  of  popular  elections  led  to
corruption  and  violence  Anditisacuriousfactin  Europe
an  history,  thut  on  the  first  partition  of  Poland,  in  1773,
when  the  partitioning  powers  thought  it  expedient  to  fos-
ter and  confirm  ail  the  defects  of  its  wretched  govern-
ment, they  sagaciously  demanded  of  the  Polish  diet,  that
tbo  crown  should  continue  elective."  This  was  done
for  the  very  purpose  of  keeping  the  door  open  for
foreign  intrigue  und  influeoce.  Mr.  Paley^  condemns  all
elective  monarchies,  and  he  thinks  nothing  is  gained  by  a
popular  choice  worth  the  dissentions,  tumults,  and  inter-
ruptions of  regular  industry,  with  which  it  is  inseparably
attended. lum  not  called  upon  to  question  the  wisdom  or

0  Cax^t  Traneli  in  Polan-I,  Ruma.  *«■  Tol  I  ■  ,
b  PiofipUio/Jifornland  Pol.  PkilOMphy, i45.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leclura  XIII.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  ^Tt

(Ktlicy  of  prererrin;  bereditarj  to  elective  monarchies
Bmoiig  (he  great  nntionB  of  EuropCi  where  differea'  or-
ders and  ranks  of  society  are  established,  and  large  inahsea
of  property  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  single  indivi-
duals, and  where  ignorance  and  poverty  are  widely  dif-
fused, and  standing  armies  are  necessary  to  preserve  the
stability  of  ihe  government.  The  state  of  society  and  of
property  in  this  country,  and  our  moral  and  political  ha-
bits, have  enabled  us  to  adopt  the  rcpuhiican  principle,
and  to  maintain  it  hitherto  with  illustrious  success-  It
remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  checks  which  the  consti-
tution has  provided  ngainst  the  dangerous  propensities  'if
our  system  will  ultimately  prove  effectual.  The  election
of  a  supreme  executive  magi-otrate  for  a  whole  nation,
eflects  so  many  interests,  addresses  itself  so  ntrongly  to
popular  passions,  and  holds  out  such  powerful  tempta-
tions to  ambition,  that  it  necessarily  becomes  a  strong
trial  to  public  virtue,  and  oven  hazardous  to  the  public
tranquillity.  The  constitution,  from  an  enlightened  view
of  all  the  difficulties  that  attend  the  subject,  has  not
thought  it  safe  or  piudent  to  refer  the  election  of  a  presi-
dent directly  and  immediately  to  the  people  ;  but  it  has
confided  the  power  to  a  small  body  of  electors,  appointed
in  each  slate,  under  the  direction  of  the  legislature  :  and
to  clo^e  the  opportunity  as  much  as  possible  against  nego-
tiation, intrigue,  and  corruption,  it  has  declared  that  con-
gress may  determine  the  time  of  choosing  the  electors,
and  the  day  on  which  they  shall  vote,  and  that  the  day
of  election  shall  be  the  same  in  every  state."  This  secu-
rity has  been  still  further  extended,  by  the  act  of  congressb
directing  the  electors  to  be  appointed  in  each  state  withia
thirty-four  days  of  the  day  of  election.

Theconstilutionc  directs  that  the  number  of  electors  in
each  slate  shall  be  equal  to  the  whole  number  flf  senators
and  representatives  which  the  state  is  cnli(l<:d  to  send  to
congress,  and  according  to  the  now  existing  apportionment


a  Art.  2.  kc.  4.  t  Act  nf  1«1  Marrh,  1703.

t  An.  t.  MO.  i,  3.

Vol.  I.  33


i,Googlc


150  JURrSFRUDENCE  or  [Part  H.

of  eongttia,  the  president  ii  elected  by  261  electors.  And
to  prevent  the  person  in  office  at  the  ;ime  of  the  electios
from  having  any  improper  influence  on  his  re-election,  by
hia  ordinary  agency  in  the  gorernment,  it  it  provided,  that
no  membflr  of  congreu,  nor  any  person  holding  an  office
of  trust  or  profit  under  the  United  States,  shall  be  an
elector ;  and  the  constitution  has  in  no  other  respect  de-
fined the  qualificationa  of  the  electors.*  These  electors
meet  in  their  respective  states,  at  the  place  appointed  by
the  legisloture  thereof,  on  the  first  Wednesday  in  Decem-
ber in  every  fourth  year  succeeding  the  last  election,  and
Vote  by  ballot  for  president  and  vice-president,  (for  this
last  officer  is  elected  in  the  same  and  for  tbe  same  period
as  the  president,)  and  one  of  whom  at  least  shall  not  be  an
inhabitant  of  the  same  state  with  the  electors.  They
name  in  their  balloU  the  person  voted  for  as  president,
,  and  in  distinct  ballots,  the  person  voted  for  as  vice-presi-
dent, and  of  the  number  of  votes  for  each,  which  list  they
sign,  and  certify  and  transmit,  sealed,  to  tbe  seat  of  go-
vernment oftbe  United  States,  directed  to  the  pr^identof
the  senate.  The  act  of  congress  of  Ist  March,  1793,  sec.
2.  direcU  that  the  certificate  of  the  votes  shall  be  deliver-
ed to  the  president  of  the  senate  before  the  first  Wednes-
day in  January  next  ensuing  the  elecctton.  The  presi-
dent of  the  senate,  on  the  second  Wednesday  in  February
succeeding  every  meeting  of  the  electors,  in  the  presence
of  both  bouses  of  congress,  opens  all  the  certificates,  and
the  votes  are  then  to  be  counted.  The  constitution  does
not  eipressly  declare  6y  whom  the  votes  are  to  be  counted,
and  the  result  declared.  In  tbe  case  of  questiona-
ble votes,  and  a  closely  contested  election,  this  power
may  be  alUimporUnt ;  and  I  presume,  in  tbe  absence
of  all  legislative  provision  on  the  subject,  that  the
president  of  the  senate  counts tbe  votes,  and  detei^

a  Art.  t.  Mc  1.


t,Goo(^lc-


Lecture  XUI.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  S59

miaes  tbfl  result,  and  that  the  two  houies  are  present  only
88  speetators,  to  witaeas  the  fairness  and  accuracy  of  the
transaction,  and  to  act  only  if  no  choice  be  made  by  the
electors.  The  bouse  of  representatives,  in  such  cases,  are
to  choose  immediateli/,  which,  I  presume,  may  be  while  tbe
two  houses  are  so  together,  though  they  may  vote  after
they  bare  retired,  for  the  constitution  holds  their  choice  to
be  valid,  if  niade  before  tbe  fourth  day  of  March  following.
And  in  the  cases  of  the  elections  in  1801  and  in  1825,  tbe
hoiiHe  of  rej>resentatives  retired  and  voted,  and  the  senate
were  admitted  to  be  present  as  spectators.  The  person
having  the  greatest  number  of  votes  for  president  is  pre*
•idem,  if  such  number  be  a  majority  of  the  whole  number
of  electors  appointed ;  but  if  no  person  have  sunh  naj<^
rity,  then,  from  the  persons  having  the  highest  number,
not  exceeding  three,  on  the  list  of  those  voted  for  as  presi-
dent, the  house  of  representatives  shall  choose  immedi-
Uely  by  ballot  the  president.  But  in  choosing  the  presi-
dent, the  votes  shall  be  taken  by  states,  the  representation
from  each  state  having  one  vote.  A  quorum  for  this  pur*
pose  shall  consist  of  a  member  or  members  fromtwothirdt
of  the  states,  nod  a  majority  of  all  the  slates  shall  be  n^
oessary  to  a  choice.  If  the  house  of  representatives  shall
not  choose  a  president  whenever  the  right  of  choice  shall
devolve  upon  them,  before  the  fourth  day  of  March  neit
following,  then  tbe  vice-president  shall  act  as  president,  as
in  tbe  case  of  the  death  or  other  coBstitutional  disability  of
the  preiiident.s

.  The  person  having  the  greatest  number  of  votes  aavico>
president,  is  vice-president,  if  such  number  be  a  majority
<^tbe  whole  number  of  electors  appointed ;  and  if  no  person
hare  a  majority,then,from  the  two  highest  numberaontha
list,  the  senate  shall  choose  the  rice-president ;  a  quorum
for  tbe  purpose  shall  consist  of  Iwothirds  of  the  whole  nnm-
bor  of  senators,  and  a  majority  of  the  whole  number  is  ne-
cessary to  a  choice ;  and  no  person  constitutionally  ineligi-

«  JbtendmeKUlo  a*  CaiulibJiM,  mit.lt.


t,Goo(^lc


a£«  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  tPurt  II.

blA  to  the  offic*  of  president,  shall  be  eligible  to  that  of
vice-president  of  (lie  United  States.'  The  conBtitation  doe*
pot  specifically  proscribe  when  or  where  the  senate  is  to
choose  a  vice-president,  if  no  rhoice  be  made  by  the  elect-
ors, and,  I  presume,  the  senate  may  elect  by  themselves,
et  any  time  before  the  fourth  day  of  March  followinj^.

It  is  provided  by  law,'>  that  the  term  of  four  years,  for
which  a  president  and  vice-president  shall  be  elected,  shall,
in  all  cases,  commence  on  the  fourth  day  of  March  aext
■ucceediug  the  day  on  which  the  votes  of  the  electors  shall
have  been  given.

In  case  of  the  removal  of  the  president  from  office,  or  of
his  death,  resignation,  or  inability  to  discharge  the  )>owera
and  duties  of  the  oflice,  the  same  devolve  on  the  vice-pre-
sident ;  and  congress  are  authorized  to  provide,  by  law,
for  the  cB^e  of  the  vacancy  in  the  office,  both  of  president
and  vice-president,  declaring  what  officer  should  then  act
as  president,  and  ihe  officer  so  designated  is  to  act  until  the
office  besufiplied.''  In  pursuance  of  this  constitutional  pro-
vision, the  act  of  congress  of  March  Ist,  1792,  sec.  9.  de-
clared, that  in  case  of  a  vacancy  in  the  office,  both  of  pre-
sident and  vice-prcKident,  the  preaideni  of  the  senate  jiro
tempore,  and  in  case  thi^e  nhou'd  l>e  no  president  of  tho
senate,  then  the  spcakf^r  of  the  house  of  representatives,
fur  the  time  being,  should  act  as  president,  until  the  va-
cnnt7  was  supplied.  The  evidence  of  refusal  to  accept,
or  of  a  resignation  of  the  office  of  president  or  vice-presi-
dent is  declared  by  the  same  act  of  congress,  sec.  II.  to  be
B  declaration  in  wiiljng,  filed  in  the  office  of  the  secretary
of  slate.  And  if  the  office  should,  by  the  course  of  events,
devolve  on  the  speaker,  after  the  congress  for  whirh  the
last  speaker  was  chosen  had  expired,  and  before  the  next
pieetiiig  of  congress,  it  might  be  a  question  who  is  to  serve,


titotki  Corutilutitm,  art.  IS.
6  Aa  of  Congnu,  March  I,  1788,
C  Art- 9. sec.  I.


t,Goo(^lc


Lectiirtt  XIII.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  36l

and  whether  the  speaker  of  the  house  of  representativeB,
then  eitinct,  could  be  deemed  the  (Person  intended.

The  mode  of  electinff  the  president  appears  to  be  veil
calculated  to  secure  a  discreet  choice,  and  to  avoid  all
tbo^eeviU  which  the  partisans  of  monarchy  have  «lescrib-
ed,  and  the  experienceof  other  nations  and  past  ages  have
too  clearly  shown  to  be  the  consequence  of  popular  elec-
tions. Had  the  choice  of  president  been  referred  at  once
to  the  people  at  large,  as  ene  single  community,  there  ,
might  have  been  reason  to  apprehend,  and  such  no  doubt
was  the  sense  of  the  convention,  that  it  would  hate  pro-
duced too  violent  a  cbnteat,  andliave  l^en  trying  the  ex-
periment on  too  e  tended  a  scale  for  the  public  virtue,
tranqutllity,and  happiness.  But  a  still  greater  end  more
io8U|>erable  difficulty  was,  that  such  a  measure  would  be
an  entire  consolidation  of  the  government  ofthiscountry^
and  an  annihilation  of  the  state  sovereignties,  so  far  as
concerned  the  organization  of  the  executive  department  of
the  union.  This  was  not  tobe  permitted  or  endured,  and
it  would,  besides,  have  destroyed  the  balance  of  the  union^
and  reduced  the  weight  of  the  slave-holding  stales  to  a
degree  which  they  would  have  deemed  altogether  ined-
mbsible*  Had  we  imitated  the  practice  of  most  of  the
louthern  states,  in  respect  to  their  state  executives,  and
referred  the  choice  of  the  president  to  congress,  this  would
have  rendered  bim  too  dependent  upon  the  immediate
authors  of  his  elevation  to  com|)ort  with  the  requisite
energy  of  bis  own  department ;  and  it  would  have  laid
him  under  the  temptation  to  indulge  in  improper  in-
trigue, or  to  form  a  dangerous  coalition  with  the  legis-
lative body,  in  order  to  secure  his  continuance  in  of-
fice. All  elections  by  the  representative  body  are  pe-
culiarly liable  to  intrigues  and  coalitions  for  sinister
purposes.  The  constitution  bas  avoided  all  these  ob-
jections, by  confiding  the  power  of  election  to  a  small
number  of  select  individuals  in  each  KtHte,  chosen  only
a  few  days  before  the  election,  and  solely  for  that  pur-
pose. This  would  seem,  prima  facit,  to  be  as  wise  a  pro-
vision as  the  wisdom  of  man  could  have  devised,  to  avoid


t,Goo(^lc


J«B  URISPRUDENCE  OF  [fart  If.

■II  o^rportuottr  for  tomga  or  domeitic  intrigne.  These
elmtor§  Bssenible  in  8c|)sratQ  and  dittanflf  detached
bodies,  and  tbey  arpcOHBtituted  in  a  manner  beBtcalcn-
hted  to  preserre  tbem  free  fil>in  all  inducemenu  to  di»-
wder,  biBB,  or  corruption.  There  i»  no  other  mode  of
appointing  the  chief  mapatrate,  under  all  eircunifltances
peculiar  to  our  political  condition,  which  appeara  to  unite
ia  iteelf  so  many  unalloyed  advantagea.  b  muat  not  be
pronounced  to  be  a  perfect  acheme  of  election,  for  it  has
aot  been  sufEcientlj  tried.  The  election  of  1801  threaten*
ed  tbe  tranquillity  of  the  union  ;  and  the  difficulty  that
occurred  in  that  case  in  producing  a  constitutional  choice>
led  to  the  amendment  of  the  constitution  on  this  rery
■ubject ;  but  whether  the  amendment  be  for  tbe  better  or
for  the  Worse,  may  be  well  doubted,  and  remains  yet  to  be
■eitled  by  the  lights  of  experience.  The  constitution  saya,
that  each  state  ia  to  apjKHnt  electors  in  such  manner  as
tbe  legislature  may  direct ;  and  in  this  and  some  other
atfites,  tbe  electors  hare  always  been  chosen  by  tbe  legia-
tatureitself,  in  the  mode  proscribed  by  law.  But  it  is  to
be  presumed  that  there  would  be  less  opportunity  for
dangerous  coalitions,  and  combinations  for  party,  or  am-
bitious, or  aelfisb  purposes,  if  the  choice  of  electors  waa
referred  to  the  people  at  large ;  and  this  seems  now  to  be
tbe  sense  and  exj)ression  of  public  opinion.

(4.)  The  president  thus  elected,  holds  his  office  for  the
term  of  four  years,  a  period,  perhaps,  reasonably  long  for
tbe  purpose  of  making  him  fevl  6rm  and  independent  in
the  discharge  of  his  trust,  and  to  give  stability  and  some
degree  of  maturity  to  his  system  of  administration.  It  is
certainly  short  enough  to  place  him  under  a  due  sense  of
dependence  on  tbe  public  approbation.

(5.)  Tbe  support  of  tbe  president  is  secured  by  a  provi<
sioD  in  the  constitution,  which  declares,^  that  he  shall,  at
stated  times,  receive  for  his  services  a  compensation,  that
■hall  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished,  during  the  period

«  Ari-t-McT.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Xin.] THE  ONITED  STATES,  SSt

for  which  h«  shall  have  been  elected  ;  and  that  be  shall  noc
receive,  within  that  time,  any  other  emolument  from  tbe
United  States,  or  anyof  them.  This  provision  is  intended
to  preserve  the  due  independence  and  energy  of  the  ezecu<
live  department.  It  would  be  in  vain  to  declare  that  the
dilTerent  departments  of  government  sbould  be  kept  sepft-
rate  and  distinct,  while  the  legislature  possessed  a  discre-
tionary control  over  the  salaries  of  tbe  executive  and  jwfi-
cial  officers.  This  would  be  to  disregard  tbe  voice  of  ex-
perience, and  tbe  operation  of  invariable  principles  of  hi^
man  conduct.  A  control  over  a  man's  living  is,  in  most
cases,  a  control  over  bis  action*.  The  constitution  af  Vir^
ginia  considered  it  as  a  fundamental  axiom  of  government,
that  the  three  great  and  primary  departments  sbould  ba
kept  separate  and  distinct,  so  that  neither  of  them  exer-
cised tbe  powers  properly  belonging  to  the  other.  But
without  taking  any  precautions  to  preserve  this  principle
in  practice,  it  made  the  governor  dependent  on  the  legisla-
ture for  hisannnal  existence  and  his  annual  support.  Tbe-
result  was,  as  Mr.  Jefferson  has  told  us,*  that  during  the
whole  session  of  tbe  legislature,  tbe  direction  of  the  execu-
tive was  habitual  and  familiar.  The  constitution  ofMas-
Mchusetts  discovered  more  wisdom,  and  it  set  tbe  first  ex-
ample in  this  country,  of  a  constitutional  provision  far  the
luppott  of  tbe  executive  magistrate,  by  declaring  that  the
governor  should  have  a  salary  of  a  fixed  and  permanent
value,  amply  sufficient,  and  established  by  standing  laws.
'Thckse  state coastitutions  which  have  been  madeoramend-
•d  since  the  eitablisbmenl  of  tbe  constitution  of  the  United
States,  bare  followed  the  example  which  it  has  happily
aet  them,  in  this  and  in  many  other  instances ;  and  we
may  consider  it  as  one  of  the  most  signal  blessings  be-
stowed on  this  country,  that  we  have  such  a  wise  fubric  of
(overameot  as  the  constitution  of  the  United  Stales  con-
stantly before  our  eyes,  not  only  for  our  national  prolcc*
tjon  and  obedience,  but  for  our  local  imitation  and  example.

a  tuition  /'irffiiiii,  f.  1.17.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


264  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [Fait  II.

Haring  thui  considered  the  manner  in  which  the  preti-
dent  is  constituted,  it  only  remains  for  us  to  review  the
powers  with  which  he  is  invested.

He  is  commander  in  chief  ofthe  army  and  navy  of  the
United  States,  and  of  the  militia  of  the  several  states,
called  into  the  service  ofthe  Union.*  The  command  and
application  of  the  public  force  to  execute  the  law,  maintain
peace,  and  resist  foreign  invasion,  are  powers  so  obTieusI;
of  an  executive  nature,  and  require  the  exercise  of  quali-
ties so  characteristical  of  this  department,  that  they  have
always  been  exclusively  appropriated  to  it  in  every  well  or-
gnnized  government  upon  earth.  In  no  instance,  perhaps,
did  the  enlightened  uuderstandiog  of  Hume  discover  less
acquaintance  with  the  practical  science  of  government,
than  when  he  gave  the  direction  ofthe  army  and  navy,  as'
wet)  as  hII  the  other  executive  powers,  to  one  hundred  se*
nntors,  in  his  plan  of  a  perfect  common  wealth.  *>  That  of
Hilton  was  equally  chimerical  and  absurd,  when,  in  his
"  Ready  and  easy  way  to  establish  a  free  Commonwealth,'*
be  deposited  the  whole  executive,  as  well  as  legislative
power,  in  n  single  and  permanent  council  of  senators.
That  of  Locke  was  equally  unwise,  for,  in  his  plan  of  le-
gislation for  Carolina,  he  gave  the  whole  authority,  legis-
lative and  executive,  to  e  small  oligarchical  assembly.
Such  specimens  as  these  will  well  justify  the  observation
of  President  Adams,(:  "  that  a  philosopher  may  be  perfect
master  of  Descartes  and  Leibnitz,  may  pursue  his  own  in-
quiries into  metaphysics  to  auy  length  you  please,  may
enter  into  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  human  mind,  and
make  the  noblest  discoveries  for  the  benefit  of  his  species  ;
nay,  he  may  defend  the  principles  of  liberty,  and  the
rights  of  mankind,  with  great  abilities  and  success,  and,
after  all,  when  called  upon  to  produce  a  plan  of  legisla-
tion, he  may  astonish  the  world  with  a  signal  absurdity,"


a  Art,  9.  sec.  S.

b  Hun'"'  t..n'.  Tol.  1.  p.  5$.

c  DeJcnien/^mtriciayitnlUui-n


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


Leciuro  XIII.] THE  tmiTED  STATES.  205

The  president  has  elao  the  •>owerto grant  reprierea and
pardons  for  offences  against  the  United  States,  except  in
cases  of  impeachment.  The  Marquis  Beccaria  hasi  con-
tended, that  the  power  of  pardon  does  not  exist  under  a
perfect  administration  of  law,  nnd  that  the  adinissioit  of
the  (lower  ia  a  tucit  acknowledgincBt  of  the  infirmity  of  the
course  of  justice.  And  where  is  the  adminisi  ration  of  jus-
tice, it  may  be  asked,  that  is  free  from  infirmity  f  Were  it
[lossible,  in  every  iniitance,  to  maintain  a  just  proportion
between  the  criitie  and  the  penalty,  and  were  the  rules  of
testimony,  and  the  mode  of  trial  soperfecl,  as  to  preclude
erery  possibility  of  mistake  or  injustice,  there  would  be
some  colourfortheadmission  of  this  plausible  theory.  But,
even  in  that  case,  policy  would  somerinies  require  a  re-
uiisiiton  of  a  punishment  strictly  due,  for  a  crime  certainly
ascertained.  The  very  notion  of  mercy  implies  the  accu-
racy of  the  claims  ofjustice.  An  ino;torable  ^vernment,
snys  Air.  Yorke,  in  his  Considerations  on  the  law  of  For-
fciture,^  will  not  only  carryjusliceiu  someinstances  tothe
height  ofinjury,  but  with  respect  loitaelf  it  will  be  dange-
rously just.  The  clemency  of  Masiachnsetts,  in  1786,
af^er  an  unprovoked  and  wunton  rebellion,  in  not  inflicting
a  single  capital  punisthment,  contributed,  by  the  jndicious
manner  in  which  its  clemency  was  applied,  to  the  tnoio
■firm  establishment  of  their  government.  And  this  power
of  pardon  will  appear  to  be  the  more  essential,  when  we
consider,  that  under  the  most  correct  administration  of
the  law,  men  will  sometimes  full  a  prey  to  the  vindictire-
ness  of  accuserf,  the  inaccuracy  of  testimony,  and  the
fallibility  of  jurors.  Notwithstanding  this  power  is  clearly
snp|>orted  on  principles  of  |M>licy,  if  not  of  justice,  English
Ifiwyers  of  the  first  class,  and  highest  n^pntation,^  have
stra'ngely  concluded,  that  it  cannot  exist  inn  republic,  be-
cause nothing  higher  is  acknowledged  than  the  magis-.


rt  P.  101.

6 Yorke  on  For/.  100- Black.  Com.  vol,  4.390.

Vol.  I.  34


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


3fi«  JURISPRUDENCE  Ot  [Put  H.

itrate.  Instead  nf  fulliag  into  such  an  erroneoua  eonctu-
sion,  it  might  fairly  be  insisted,  tbat  the  (lower  ma;  exist
with  greater  safety  in  free  states,  than  id  any  other  fonui
of  guvarament ;  because  abuses  ofthe  discretion  uaavoid-
aMy  confided  to  the  magistrate  in  granting  pardons,  are
much  better  guarded  against  by  the  sense  of  responsibility
under  which  be  acts.  The  power  of  pardon  vested  in  the
president  is  without  any  limitation,  except  in  the  single
case  of  impeachments.  He  is  checked  in  that  case  from
screening  {Hibltc  officers,  with  whom  be  might  possibly
hare  formed  a  dangerous  or  corrupt  coalition,  or  whe
might  be  his  particular  favourites  and  dependants.

The  president  has  also  the  power,  by  and  with  the  ad-
vive  and  consent  of  the  senate,  to  make  treaties,  provided
two  thirds  of  the  senators  present  concur.*

Writers  on  government  have  differed  in  ofMnion  as  to
the  nature  ofthis  power,  end  whether  it  be  properly,  in
the  natural  distribution  of  power,  of  legislative  or  execu-
tive coguiztuice.  As  treaties  are  declared  by  the  constiti^
tion  to  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  and  as,  by  means
oftb«m,  new  relations  are  formed,  and  obligations  con-
tracted, it  might  seem  to  be  more  conMtnafflt  to  the  priit-
eiples  of  republican  government,  to  consider  the  right
of  concluding  specific  terms  of  peace  es  of  l4>giHtalive
jurisdiction.  This  has  gi-nerally  been  the  ease  in  free
governmeuts.  The  determinations  respecting  pea«-e,
as  well  as  war,  were  made  in  the  public  assemblies
eif  the  nation  at  Athens  and  Rttme,  and  in  all  the  Gothic
governments  of  Europe,  when  they  first  arose  out  of
the  rude  institutions  of  the  ancient  Germans.  Os
the  other  band,  the  preliminary  negotiations  which
may  be  required,  the  secrecy  and  despatch  proper  to  take
advantage  of  the  sudden  and  favourable  turn  of  pubiie
affairs,  seem  to  render  it  ezpedit^nt  to  place  this  power  in
the  hands  of  the  executive  department.  The  constitu-
tion ofthe  United  States  bos  been  influenced  by  the  latter,


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leclura  XIII J  THE  UNITED  STATES.  SflT

more  than  by  the  former  considerationBt  for  it  bat  placed
ibia  power  with  the  pre»idont,  under  the  advice  and  «>n-
trol  oftheeenate,  who  are  to  be  considered  for  this  pur-
pose in  the  light  of  an  executive  council.  The  president
IB  the  constitutional  organ  of  communication  with  foreign
powers,  and  the  efficient  agent  in  the  conclusion  of  trea-
ties ;  but  the  consent  of  two  thirds  of  the  Beoators  present
is  essential  to  give  validity  lo  hia  negotiations.  To  have
required  the  acquiescence  of  a  inore  numerous  body,
would  hare  been  productive  of  delay,  disorder,  imbecility,
and  probxbly,  in  the  end,  a  direct  brea<^  of  the  constitu-
tion. The  history  of  Holland  shows  the  danger  and  folly
of  placing  too  much  limitation  on  the  exercise  of  the  trea-
ty-making power.  By  the  fundamental  charier  of  the
United  Provinces,  peace  conk)  not  be  made  without  the
unanimoua  consent  of  the  provinces ;  and  yet,  without
multiplying  instances,  it  is  sufficient  to  observe,  that  the
immensely  important  and  fundamental  treaty  of  Muns-
ter,  in  164H,  was  made  when  Zealand  was  opposed  to  it;
and  the  peace  in  1661,  when  Utrecht  was  opposed.  So
feeble  are  mere  limitations  upon  paper— mere  parchment
barriers,  when  standing  in  opposition  to  the  strong  force
of  public  exigency.

The  senate  of  the  United  States  is  a  body  of  men  most
wisely  selected  for  the  de|K>sit  of  this  power.  They  are
easily  assembled,  are  governed  by  steady  systemaiic  views,
feel  a  due  sense  of  national  character,  and  can  act  with
promptitude  and  firmness.

The  question,  whether  a  treaty  cooatitntionally  mado,
was  obligatory  upon  congress,  equally  asanyothernational
engagement  would  be,  if  fairly  made  by  the  competent  au-
thority ;  or  whether  congress  bad  any  discretionary  pow-
er to  carry  into  effect  a  treaty  requiring  the  af^ropriation
of  money,  or  other  act  to  be  done  on  their  part,  or  to  re-
fuse it  their  sanction,  was  greatly  discussed  in  congress
in  the  year  1796,  and  again  in  1816.  The  house  of  re-
presentatives, at  the  former  period,  declared,  by  resoltt-
tion,  that  when  a  treaty  depended  for  the  execution  of  any
of  its  stipulations  on  eo  act  of  congress,  it  was  the  right

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


2«  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pan  IX.

and  doty  of  the  house  to  deliberntp  on  the  expediency  or
inexpediency  of  cnrryitig  such  treiity  into  effect-  It  can-
not  be  mentioned,  at  this  day,  without  equal  regret  and
astonish  in  ent,  that  such  a  resoluiion  passed  ihe  house  of
representatives  on  the  7th  of  April,  1796.  But  it  was  a
naked  ahsiract  claim  of  right  never  acted  upon ;  aud
congress  shortly  afterwards  passed  a  law  to  carry  into
effect  the  very  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  which  gave  rise
to  that  resolution.  President  Wasington,  in  his  messHge
to  the  house  of  representatives  of  the  30th  of  March,
1796,  explicitly  denied  the  existence  of  any  such  power
in  congress  ;  and  he  insisted,  that  every  treaty  duly  made
by  the  president  and  senate,  and  promulgated,  thencefor-
ward became  (he  law  of  the  land.

If  a  treaty  be  the  law  of  the  land,  it  is  as  much  obliga--
tory  upon  congress  as  upon  any  other  biancb  of  the  go-
vernmenl,  or  upon  the  people  at  large,  so  long  as  it  cou-
tinuei  in  force  and  unrepetiled.  The  house  of  Tepre>ien-
tatirea  are  not  above  the  law,  and  they  have  no  dispens-
ing power.  They  have  a  right  to  make  and  repeal  laws,
provided  the  senate  and  president  concur ;  but  without
such  concurrence,  a  law  in  the  shape  of  a  treaty  is  as
binding  upon  ihem  as  if  it  were  in  the  shape  of  an  act  of
congress,  or  of  an  article  of  the  constitution,  or  of  a  con-
tract made  by  authority  of  law.  The  argument  in  favour
of  the  binding  and  conclusive  efficacy  of  every  treaty  made
by  the  president  and  senate,  is  so  clear  and  palpable,  that
it  has  probably  carried  very  general  conviction  through-
out the  community,  and  this  may  be  now  considered  as
the  decided  sense  of  public  opinion.  This  was  the  sense
of  Ihe  house  of  representatives  in  1816,  aud  the  resolution
of  1796  would  not  now  be  repeated.

The  president  is  the  efficient  power  in  the  appointment
of  the  officers  of  government.  He  is  to  nominate,  and
with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  senate,  to  appoint  am-
bassadors, other  public  ministers  andconfiuls,  the  judges  of
the  Supreme  Court,  and  all  other  officers  whoso  appoint-
ments are  not  otherwise  provided  in  the  constitutittn  ;  but
congress  may  vest  the  appointment  of  inferior  officers  ia

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lecture  Xin] THE  UNITED  STATES.  269

the  president  alone,  in  the  courts  of  law,  or  in  tbe  heeds
of  depart  merits.*

The  ajtimintment  of  tbe  subordinate  officers  of  gowtiin-
ment  concerned  in  iheadministratioo  of  the  law,  belongs
with  f^reat  propriety  to  the  president,  who  is  bound  to  seo
that  the  luws  nre  faithfully  oiecuted,  and  who  is  general-
ly charged  with  the  powers  and  responsibility  of  the  exe-
cutive department.  The  association  .of  tbe  senate  with
the  president  in  the  exerciseof  this  power,  is  an  exceplioo
to  the  general  delegation  of  executive  authority,  and  ifhe
were  not  expressly  invested  with  the  exclusive  right  of
nomination  in  tbe  instances  before  us,  the  organization  of
this  dejiartment  wutild  be  very  unskilful,  and  the  govern-
ment degenerate  into  a  system  of  cabal,  favouritism,  and
intrigue.  But  the  power  of  nomination  is,  for  all  the  use-
ful purposes  of  restraint,  equivalent  to  the  power  of  ap-
pointment. It  im|>09es  upon  tbe  president  tbe  same  live-
ly sense  of  responsibility,  and  the  same  indespeoaable  ne-
ceKsity  of  meeting  the  public  approbation  or  censure.
This,  indeed,  forms  the  ultimate  security  that  men  in  pub-
lic stations  will  dismiss  interested  considerations,  and  act
with  a  steady  zealous,  and  imdivided  regard  for  the
public  welfare.  The  advice  and  consent  of  the  senate,
which  are  requisite  to  render  the  nomination  effectual,  csn-
Bot  be  attended,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  with  very  mis-
chievous effects.  Having  no  agency  in  the  nomination,
nothing  but  simply  consent  or  refuHal,  tbe  spirit  of  person-
al intrigue  and  personal  attachment  must  be  pretty  much
extinguished,  from  a  want  of  means  to  gratify  it.  On  (he
other  hand,  the  advice  of  so  respectable  a  body  of  men
will  add  still  further  inducements  to  a  coolly  reflected  con-
duct in  the  president,  and  will  be  at  all  times  a  check  on
his  own  misinformation  or  error.

The  remaining  duties  of  the  president  consist  in  giving
information  to  congress  of  the  state  of  the  union,  and  in  re-
commending to  their consideration  such  measures  as  he


«  An.  I.Mct.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


rr^  niRTSPRUDENCE  of  [Pan  u,

aball  jn^feneeeuaryorexpedient.  Heisto  conrene  botb
bouses  of  congrPSB,  or  either  of  them,  on  eztraordinHry  oe-
casmas,  and  he  may  arfjourn  them  in  cases  ofdisagreenieDt.
He  is  to  supply  occasional  vacancies  that  happen  during
the  recess  of  the  senate,  b}  granting  eoromisiiions,  which
shaEl  ex[nre  at  iheend  of  their  next  session.  He  is  to  re-
ceive ambassadors  and  other  public  ministers,  to  commis-
'  non  all  the  officers,  of  the  United  States,  aod  take  ears
that  the  laws  be  faithfully  executed."

The  propriety  and  simplicity  of  these  duties  speak  for
themselves.  The  power  of  recf^iving  foreign  ministers  in-
elades  in  it  the  power  to  dismiss  them,  sinre  he  alone  is
the  organ  of  commuDication  with  them,  the  representative
of  the  people  ia  all  diplomatic  negocintions,  and  accoun-
table to  the  community,  not  only  fur  the  execution  of  the
law,  but  for  the  competent  t|ualificittioiia  and  cosdact  of
foreign  agents.

In  addition  to  all  the  precautions  which  have  been  men-
tioned, to  prevent  abuse  of  the  executive  trust,  in  tbemode
of  the  president's  appointment,  hn  term  of  office,  and  the
precise  and  definite  limitations  imposed  upon  the  exercise
of  his  power,  the  coBstitutioo  has  also  rendered  him  di-
rectly amenable  by  law  for  mal-administration.  The
inviolability  of  any  officer  of  government  ia  incompa-
tible with  the  republican  theory,  as  well  as  with  the
prioeiplea  of  retributive  justice.  The  president,  as  well
as  all  other  officers  of  the  United  States,  may  be  im-
peached by  the  house  of  representatives  for  treason,
bribery,  and  other  high  erimea  and  misdameanors,  and
upon  conviction  by  the  senate,  removed  from  office.^  If,
then,  neither  the  sense  of  duty,  the  force  of  public
opinitm,  nor  the  transitory  nature  of  the  seat,  are  suffi-
cient to  secure  a  faithful  discharge  of  the  executive
trusl,  but  the  president  will  use  the  authority  of  his  statioA
to  violate  the  constitution  or  law  of  the  land,  the  bouse  of


•  Art  s.  Mc.  I  &  t  Art.  t.  MQ.  4.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


*MXm  Xin.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  Tfrl

reprewotattrcB  can  arreM  fcim  in  hia  career  by  rasoitiD^
to  tke  power  of  impflachment.

I  have  now  finished  a  general  Mirrey  oftheofficeofpiw-
aident  of  the  United  States ;  and  considering  the  nature  and
extent  of  the  powers  aecessarily  incideot  to  that  atation,  it
was  difficult  to  constitute  the  office  in  such  a  manner  asio
render  it  equally  safe  and  useful,  by  ctnnbining  in  the  struo-
tureofits  powers  a  due  proportion  of  energy  and  reaponsi-
bility.  The  first  is  necessary  to  maintain  a  firm  adtninw*
tration  of  the  law;  the  second  is  equally  requisite  to  pre-
'aerre  inviolate  the  liberties  of  the  people.  The  authorsof
the  constitution  appear  to  have  surveyed  these  two  ol^eeu
with  profound  discernment,  and  to  have  organized  the  ex-
ecutire  depfutment  with  cenaammate  skill-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


t,Goo(^lc


LECTURE  XIV.

OF  THE  JDDICIAET  DEFAKTMENT.

Aa  the  judiciary  power  is  intrusted  with  the  adminis-
Iration  of  justice,  it  interferes  more  visibly  and  uniformly
than  any  other  part  of  government,  with  all  the  interest*
ing  coucerns  of  social  life.  Personal  security,  and  prirate
property,  re«t  entirely  upon  the  wisdom,  the  stability,  uud
the  integrity  of  the  court  of  justice.  lu  the  survey  whieh
is  to  be  taken  of  the  judiciary  establishment  of  the  United
States,  we  will  consider,  (1.)  The  judges  in  relation  to
their  appointment,  thetenureof  their  ufGce,  and  their  sup-
port and  responsibility.  (2.)  The  structure,  powers,  and
officers  of  the  several  courts.

The  advantages  of  the  mode  of  appointment  of  public
officers  by  the  president  and  senate,  huve  been  already
considered.  This  mode  is  peculiarly  fit  and  proper  in  r^
spect  to  the  judiciary  department.  The  just  and  vigorous
investigation  and  punishment  of  every  species  of  fraud
;and  violence,  and  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  compelling
every  man  to  the  punctual  performance  of  his  contracU«
are  grave  duties,  not  of  the  moat  popular  character,  though
the  faithful  discbarge  of  them  will  certainly  command  the
calm  approbation  of  the  judicious  observer.  The  fittest
men  would  probably  have  too  much  reservedoess  of  man*
ners,  and  severity  of  morals,  to  secure  an  election  resting
on  universal  sufTrage.  Nor  can  the  mode  of  appointment
by  a  l^ge  deliberative  assembly,  be  entitled  to  unquali-
fied approbntion.  There  are  too  many  occasions,  and  too
much  temptation  for  intrigue,  party  prejudice,  and  local
interests,  to  permit  such  a  body  of  men  to  act,  in  respect
to  such  appointments,  with  a  sufficiently  single  and  stea-
dy regard  for  the  general  welfare. In  ancient  Aome,  th*

VuL.  I.  3S


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


ffi  KmiSPRUDENCE  or  [Part  II-

prator  wai  eliMen  annual);  b;  the  people,  but  it  was  in
the  comitia  by  cenrum§,  and  the  cfaaice  was  confined  to
persons  belonging  to  thn  patrician  order,  until  tbe  cIom
of  the  founh  ittntury  of  the  city,  wheo  the  office  was  ren-
dered acceasihle  to  the  plelnantf ;  and  whfio  the;  became
licentious,  says  Honteaquieu/  the  office  became  corrupt.
The  popular  elections  did  very  w<-ll,  as  he  observes,  so
Jong  as  the  people  were  free,  and  magnanimous,  and  vir-
tuous, and  the  republic  was  without  corruptioo.  But  all
'  plans  of  governmeat  which  suppose  the  people  will  always
act  with  wisdom  and  integriry,  are  plainly  Utopian,  and
eoutrary  to  uniform  experience.  Govemment  mutit  be
framed  for  man  as  he  is,  and  not  for  man  as  he  would  be
if  he  were  froe  from  rice.  Without  referring  to  those
cases  in  our  own  country,  where  judges  have  been  annual-
ly elected  by  a  popular  assembly,  we  may  take  the  less  in-
Ttdiousease  of  Sweden.  During  the  diets  which  preceded
the  revolution  in  1772,  the  states  of  the  kingdom  some-
times appointed  commissioners  to  act  as  judges.  Tbe
atroDgest  party,  says  Catteau,'*  prevailed  in  the  trials  that
eame  before  them,  and  persons  condemned  by  one  tribu-
nal were  acquitted  by  another.

By  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.^  "th4>  judges
both  of  the  supreme  and  inferior  courts  are  to  hold  their
officesdunnggoodbeh8viour;and  theyare,  at  stated  limea
(o  receive  for  their  services  a  compensetion  which  shall  not
be  diminished  during  their  continuance  in  office."  The
tenure  of  the  office,  by  rendering  the  judges  independent,
both  of  tbe  government  and  people,  is  admirably  fitted  to
produce  the  free  exercise  of  judgment  in  the  discharge  of
their  trust.  The  principle,  which  has  been  the  subject  of
■e  much  deserved  eulogy,  was  derived  from  the  English
constitution.  Tbe  English  judges  anciently  held  their  seatt


«  Xtpril  det  Lobe,  Mr.  8,  c  IS.
c  Art3.MC.  ).


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


XIV.l THE  UNITED  STATES.  STS

at  th«  pleasure  of  the  king,  aadsodoeBthelordchaneellor
to  thifl  daj.  It  is  easy  to  perceire  what  a  dangeroiw  influ-
eoee  this  must  have  given  to  the  king  in  the  admiDiatration
of  justicef  ID  cuies  where  the  claims  or  preteosions  of  the
crowR  were  brought  to  bear  upon  the  rights  of  &  priraie
iiidiTidual>  But,  in  the  lime  of  Lord  Coke,"  the  barona  of
the  exchequer  were  cieatedduringgood  behaviour,  and  so
ran  the  commissions  of  the  common  law  judges  at  the  re*
fltoration  of  Charles  11.^  It  was  still,  however,  at  the  plea-
nire  oftbe  crown,  to  prescribe  the  form  of  the  commi»ioo,
nntil  the  statute  of  12  and  13  Wm.  HI.  c.  2.  established
by  law  the  commissions  ofthe  judges  to  be  ^ont/tuie  bent
getierint.  The  ezcellence  of  this  provision  has  recom-
mended the  adoption  of  it  bj  other  nations  of  Europe.  It
was  incorporated  iuto  oae  of  Iho  nodera  reforms  of  th*
constitation  of  Sweden,*'  and  it  was  anarticle  in  the  French
constitution  of  1 791 ,  and  in  the  French  eoastitution  of  1 705)
and  it  is  inserted  in  the  constitutional  charter  of  Louii
XVIII.  Thesame  stable  tenureoftbejudgesis contained
inaprorisioD  in  the  Dutch  constitutioo  of  1814,  anditia
a  principle  which  likewise  prevails  in  most  of  our  state
eonstitutiaos,  and,  in  some  of  them,  under  modifications
more  or  less  extensive  and  injurious.

In  monarchical  governments,  the  independence  of  tbo
judiciary  is  essential  to  guard  therightsofihesubjectfrom
the  injustice  of  the  crown  ;  but  in  republics  it  is  equally
aalutary,  in  protecting  the  constitution  and  laws  frum  tha
cneroBchmentsand thetyrennvof  fsction.  Laws,  however
wholesome  or  necessary,  are  frequently  the  object  of  tem-
porary aversion,  and  sometimes  of  popular  resistance,  't
is  requisite  that  the  courts  of  justice  should  be  able,  at  all
times,  to  present  a  determined  countenance  ttgaiuNt  all  li-
centious acts ;  and  to  give  them  the  firmness  to  do  it,  the
judges  ought  to  be  confident  of  the  security  oftheir  stations.
Nor  is  an  independent  judiciary  less  useful  as  a  check  uijoq


a  AlnA  117.  (  1  &d.S.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


9T6  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  IL

(he  )e|i;iBletiTe  power,  wliicli  is  somelirncB  disposed,  from
the  force  of  passion,  or  iho  temptniions  of  interest,  to  inake-
a  sacrifice  of  constitutional  rights ;  niid  it  in  a  wise  and  ne-
cessary principle  of  our  fforernment,  os  will  lie  ohown  herc-
sRer  in  the  course  of  these  lecturei-,  that  legislative  acts
are  subject  to  the  severe  scrutiny  and  impartial  interpreta-
tion nf  the  courts  of  jiistir«,  who  are  bound  to  rej>ard  the
constitution  as  the  paramount  law,  andthe  highest  evidence
of  the  will  of  the  people.

The  provision  for  the  permanent  nupport  of  the  judge*
is  well  calculated,  in  addition  to  the  tenure  of  their  ofiire,
lo  give  them  tire  requisite  independence.  It  tends  also  to
secure  a  succession  of  learned  men  on  the  bench,  who,  in
consequence  ofa  rertnin  undiminisliedsupimrt,  are  enabled
and  induced  to  quit  the  lucrative  pursuits  of  private  busi-
ness for  the  duties  of  that  imporlam  station.  The  consti-
tution of  the  Vnited  States,  on  ihiBBubjeci,  was  an  improve-
ment upon  all  previously  existing  conBtitulions,  >n  this  or
in  any  other  country.  It  was  provided  in  the  conslituiion
of  Massachusetts,  that  permanent  and  honourable  salaries
should  be  established  by  law  for  the  judges;  but  this  was
not  sufficiently  precise  and  definite,  and  the  more  certain
provision  in  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  has  been
wisely  followed  in  the  suiisequent  constitutions  of  most  of
.  the  individual  states.  The  cnnatilution  of  t^is  state,  as
amended  in  1821,  is  an  exception  to  thin  remark,  and  it
left  Ihe  judicial  department  in  a  more  dependent  condition,
and  under  greater  disabilities,  I  han  it  found  it,  and  greater
than  in  any  of  those  stales  in  the  union,  or  in  any  ofthose
governments  in  F.nrope,  whose  constitutions  have  been  re-
cently reformed.

But  though  the  constitution  nf  the  United  States  has  ren-
dered the  courts  of  justice  independent  of  undue  influence
from  the  other  departments,  it  has  made  (hem  amenahle
for  any  corrupt  violation  of  their  trust.  The  house  of  repre-
sentatives, as  we  have  already  seen,  is  invested  with  the
powerofimpeachmcnt,  and  thejudges  may, bythat process.


t,Goo(^lc


LcclUM  XIV.] THE  UNITED  STATES  S7T

bo  held  to  answer  before  ihe  senate,  ai.d  if  convicted,  ibey
ma;  be  removed  from  office.

The  federal  judiciary  being  tlfus  Mtabiished  on  princi-
ples which  are  essential  to  mainttiiD  ihai  deparlinetit  in  a
proper  state  of  indepeodeuce,  and  to  secure  the  pure  and
vigurous  administration  of  the  law.  the  constitution  pro-
ceeded to  designate,  with  comprehensive  precision,  the
objects  of  its  jurisdictioD.  The  judicial  pnwpr  extends'
to  all  cAses  in  law  and  equity  arising  under  the  constitu-
tion, Ihe  laws  and  treaties  of  the  union  ;  to  all  cases  af-
fecting umliassadors,  other  public  ministers,  and  consuls;
to  aiS  i-.asf.A  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction ;  to  con-*
troi-i^r.«iDS  to  which  the  United  States  shall  he  a  party  ;  to
controversies  between  two  or  more  states;  to  coDtrorer-
■ies  between  a  state,  when  plaintiff,  and  citizens  of  ano-
ther state,  or  foreign  citizens  or  subjects;  to  controver-
sies between  citizens  of  different  stales,  and  between  citi-
zens of  the  same  Btate,  claiming  lands  under  grants  of
different  states ;  and  between  a  state,  or  citizens  thereof,.
and  foreign  states ;  and  between  citizens  and  foreigners.
The  propriety  and  fitnesn  gf  tliese  judicial  powers  seem  to
result,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  from  Ihe  union  of  these
states  in  one  national  government,  and  they  may  be  con-
sidered to  be  requisite  to  its  existence.  The  judicial
power  in  every  government  must  be  coextensive  with  tbo
power  of  legislation.  Were  tli^re  no  ))ower  to  interpret,
pronounce,  aad  execute  the  law,  the  government  would
either  perish  through  its  own  imbecility,  as  was  the  case
with  the  articles  of  confAiieraiion,  or  other  powers  must  be
assumed  by  the  legislative  body,  to  Ihe  destruction  of
liberty  That  the  interpretation  of  treaties,  and  the  cases
of  foreign  ministers  and  maritime  matters,  are  properly
confided  tothe  federal  courts,  appears  from  the  close  con-
nexion those  cases  have  with  the  peace  of  the  union,  the
confusion  that  different  proceedings  in  the  separate  states
would  tend  to  produce,  and  the  responsibility  which  the
United  States  are  under  to  foreign  nations  for  the  conduct

a  Arts.  te&S.  AmmdmmUlotht  GHuWulioii.art. II.


tf  Google


trt  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  (Part  It

of  all  itB  momberi.  Tbe  other  caaei  of  enumerated  ^ria-
dlctioo  pre  evidently  of  national  coacers,  and  they  con-
■titute  Ofle  of  the  principal  motirea  to  union,  and  one  of  the
principal  cases  of  its  ueceHity,  which  waa  the  insurance
•fthe  domestic  trRnquillky.  The  want  of  the  federal
judiciarj  to  embrace  theae  important  subjects  was  once
leverelj  felt  in  the  German  confederacy,  and  diaorderr
liceme,  and  deaolatioD  rrtgned  in  that  unhappy  country,
■ntil  the  establi^ment  of  the  imperial  rhamber  by  tbe
Emperor  Maximilian,  near  tbe  close  of  theBfteenth  cen-
tury; and  that  jurisdiction  was  afterwards  tbe  great  source
of  order  and  tranquillity  in  the  Germanic  body."

Tbe  judicial  power,  as  il  originally  stood,  extended  ta
^its  prosecuted  againtt  one  of  the  Uunited  States  by  citi-
senH  of  another  state,  or  by  citizens  er  subjects  of  any
Ibreiga  state  ;  but  the  states  were  not  willing  to  aubmil  t»
be  arraigned  as  defendants  before  the  federal  courts,  at
tbe  instance  of  private  peraons,  be  tbe  cause  of  actiop
what  it  may.  The  decision  of  tbe  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  Sutes,  in  the  case  of  Chiskofn  v.  7%e  StaU  of
Gtorgia,^  decided  in  1703,  in  which  it  was  adjudged,  ^at
a  state  was  sueablo  by  citizens  of  another  atate,  gave  much
dissatisfaction,  and  tbe  legislature  of  CSporgia  carried  tbt;ir
opposition  to  an  open  de6ance  of  lb*  judicial  authority.
The  inexpediency  of  the  power  appeared  ao  great,  that
congresB,  in  1784,  proposed  to  the  states  an  amendment
lo  that  part  of  (he  constitution,  and  it  was  aubse^ueiulj
•mended  in  this  particular  under  the  provbion  in  tbe  fifth
article*  It  was  declared  by  the  amendment,''  that  the
judicial  power  of  the  United  States  ahould  not  be  eonstru<-
•d  to  extend  to  any  suit  in  law  or  etpiity,  commenced  or
proaecuted  against  one  of  the  United  Stales,  by  citizens  of
another  state,  or  by  citizens  or  subjects  of  any  foreign  statt-

With  these  general  remarks  aa  the  constitutional  prinei-
ples  of  the  judiciary  department,  and  the  objects  of  its  au-


a  AoficrtitntV  CkMTle*  V  Tol.  I.  183-  39E.  397.

ivan-n.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LecMn  Y!V.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  573

thoritjr,  we  |HX>ceed  to  k  particular  eiaraimtion  of  the  M-
veral  courts  of  the  United  States,  as  ordained  by  law.

(I.)  The  supreme  Court  was  instituted  by  the  constitu-
tion, but  it  received  its  present  organization  from  congress,
for  the  eonstkutioD  had  on);  declared,  in  general  tenos,
that  there  should  be  a  Supreme  Court  with  certain  original
and  appellate  powers.  It  consists  of  a  chief  justice,  and
six  associate  justices ,  any  four  uf  whom  make  a  quorusi;
and  it  holds  one  term  auaually  at  the  seat  of  governmeat,
comoiencing  on  the  first  Uonday  in  February.'  But  though
four  of  the  judges  are  requisite  for  business  in  general,  yet
kny  one  or  more  of  them  may  make  all  iieceiisary  orders  ia,
a  suit,  [H-eparatory  to  the  hearing  or  trial,  and  the  judge  of
the  fourth  circuit  attends  at  the  city  of  Washington  on  the
first  Honday  of  August  ainualty,  for  the  same  purpose.

The  Supreme  Court  has  ezcloaive  jurisdiction  of  all  cun-
(roreraies  of  a  civil  nature,  where  a  slate  is  a  party,  except
in  suits  by  a  state  against  one  or  more  of  its  citizens,  «r
against  citizens  of  other  states,  or  aliens,  in  which  cases  it
has  original,  but  not  exclusire  jurisdiction.  It  has  also,
exclusively,  all  such  jurisdiction  of  suits,  or  proceedings
against  ambasBadors,  or  other  public  ministers,  or  their
domestics,  or  domestic  servants,  asacourtoflaw  can  have
or  exercise,  consistently  with  the  law  of  nations ;  and  ori-
ginal, but  not  exclusive  jurisdiction,  of  all  suits  brought  1:^
ambassadors  or  other  public  ministers,  or  in  which  a  consul
or  vice-consul  shall  be  a  party.l>  The  Supreme  Court  was
also  clothed  by  the  congtitutiono  with  appellate  jurisdictioa,
under  such  exceptions  and  regulations  as  congress  should
prescribe ;  and,  by  the  act  of  1789,  already  referred  to,  ap-
peals lie  to  this  court  fron  the  circuit  courts,  and  the  courts
of  the  several  states.  Final  judgments  and  decrees,  in  civil


a  AtUn/Congrtti  of  Sdlli  April,  MOS.imd  February  tAtli,  IEOT.m
&  Bf  sctof  CoogrBM  or  14ih  May,  ISS6,  tlie  commenceiDeat  «f  U
Supreme  Court  is  altered  to  the  secoad  MunJay  id  Jaatiarf.

b  Aa  ofCmgrMi,  SepltmUr  34llt,  nui,  kc.  IJ.

e  ArL3.wc.  9-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


n»  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Put  tt.

actions,  and  auits  in  equity  in  the  circuit  courts  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  whether  broujfbt  ttaere  by  original  process,  or
remored  ttiere  from  tbe  dtait:  courts,  or  by  appeal  from  the
district  courts,  in  cases  where  the  matter  in  dispute  exceeds
2,U0U  dollars,  exclusive  of  costs,  •nay  bu  re-exumined,aDd
reversed  or  affirmed  in  the  Supreme  Conn.'  Final  judg-
ments aud  decrees  in  the  circuit  courts,  in  cases  uf  admi-
ralty and  maritimo  jurisdiction,  and  of  prize  or  no  rize,
where  the  matter  in  dispute  exceeds  2,00U  dollars,  exclu-
•ire  of  coats,  may  tie  reviewed  on  appeal  in  the  Suprems
Court  i  and  in  admiralty  and  prize  cases,  new  evidence  it  .
admitted  to  be  receivable  on  appeal  ia  the  Supreme  Court>
This  admission  is  conrormat>le  to  the  doctrine  aud  usage
of  appellate  courts  of  admiralty,  permitting  the  parties,
upon  the  appeal,  to  introduce  new  allegations,  and  new
proofst^and  to  add  new  counts  to  the  lit>eL<=  So,  also,  a
final  judgment  or  decree  in  any  suit  in  the  highest  court
of  law  or  equity  of  a  state,  may  be  brought  up  on  error  in
point  of  law,  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  Htates,
provided  the  validity  ofa  treaty,  or  statute  of,  or  aulhuritf
exercised  under  the  United  States,  was  drawn  inquestioo
in  the  state  court,  and  the  decision  was  against  that  vali-
dity ;  or  jfrovided  the  validity  of  any  slate  authority  wai
drawn  in  question,  on  the  ground  of  its  being  repugnant
*  to  the  constitution,  treaties,  or  laws  of  the  United  States,*
and  the  decision  was  in  favour  of  its  validity;  or  provided.
the  construction  of  any  clause  of  thu  constitution,  or  of  a
treaty,  or  statute  of,  or  commission  held  under  the  United
States,  was  drawn  in  question,  and  the  decision  was
against  the  title,  right,  privilege,  or  exemption,  specially
claimed  under  the  authority  of  the  union.d  Upon  error
from  a  decision  in  a  state  court,  no  other  error  can  be  as-
signed or  regarded,  than  such  as appears  upon  the  face


a  Act  <if  1789,  *ec-  ££.
(  Arti^Congrt**,Miirtk,td,  1103,  tec  II.
c  Tlie  Manaaaa  Flora,  1 1  Wheaton,  3U.
4  A.lqfSfjAembtrSVA,  1789,sec.35.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XIV.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  381

of  tiie  record,  end  immediately  respects  the  qoeetions  of
validity,  or  conHtruction  of  the  constitution,  treaties,  sta-
tutes, commissione,  or  eutliarities  in  dispute.

The  Supreme  Court  is  also  armed  with  that  superintend-
ing authority  over  the  inferior  courts,  which  ought  to  be
deposited  in  the  highest  tribunal,  and  dernier  resort,  of
the  people  of  the  United  States.  It  has  power  to  issuA
writs  of  prohibition  to  the  district  courts,  when  proceed*
ing  at  courts  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction,  and
to  issue  writs  of  mandaimu  in  cases  warranted  by  the  prin-
ciples and  usages  of  law,  in  any  courts  appointed,  or  per-
•ons  holding  office  under  the  authority  of  the  Uaitad
States.*  This  court,  and  each  of  its  judges,  have  power
to  grant  writs  ofne  txeat  and  of  injunction,  but  the  for-
mer writ  cannot  be  granted  unless  a  suit  in  equity  be
commenced,  and  satisfactory  proof  be  made  that  the  par-
ty designs  quickly  to  leave  the  United  States ;  and  no  in-
junction can  be  granted  to  stay  proceedings  in  a  state
court,  nor  in  any  case,  without  reasonable  notice  to  the
adverse  party.''  All  the  courts  of  the  United  States  have
power  to  issue  writs  of  icire  /aciat,  habeat  corput,  and  all
other  writs  not  specially  provided  by  statute,  which  may
be  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  their  respective  jurisdic-
tions, and  agreeable  to  the  principles  and  usages  of  law."
Sothe  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  as  well  as  the  judges
of  the  district  courts,  may,  by  habtat  corpai,  relieve  the
citixens  from  all  manner  ofunjust  imprisonment  occurring
■inder  or  by  colour  of  the  authority  of  the  United  States.<l
(2.)  The  circuit  courts  are  established  in  each  district
(with  one  or  two  exceptions)  of  the  seven  great  circuits
into  which  the  United  States  are  divided.  The  first  cii^
cuitiscomposedof  the  districts  of  Maine,  New- Hampshire,

a  Ato/iilk  SepUmttr,  17r,P,iec.  13.
b  AaofCmgrtu,  March  U,  1T93,  lecfi.
c  Att  tf  ink  SepUmber,  1789,  wc.  14.
It  Ibid.

Vol.  I,  36


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


282  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pirt  H]

Maasacbtisetti  and  Rbode  lalaad ;  the  lecond  drcuit,  of
the  diatrietB  of  Cunoecticut,  New- York,  and  Vermont ;  the
third  circuit,  of  the  diMricti  of  New-Jersey  and  Peonayl-
Vania ;  the  fourth  circuit,  of  the  dirtricta  of  Maryland  and
Delaware  ;  the  fifth  circuit,  of  the  diitricts  of  Virginia  and
North-Oarohna  ;  the  sixth  circuit,  ofthe  districts  of  South
Garaliimand  Geoff^ia;  and  the  seventh  circuir.ofthe  districts
of  Ke.iiiick;,  Eitst  and  West  Tenneaaee,  and  Ohio.  In  each
dinirict  of  lh«rie  circuits,  two  circuit  courtN  are  hnmially
held  by  oneof  thejudgesofiheSupremfiCi^uri  ai>d  thedii-
trictjii'lge  of  the  district;  but  the  Suprrine  Court  niny,  ia
eases  where  special  circumsitanfies  shall  in  tlieir  jitd^m^nt
render  the  same  necesaary,  assign  two  of  the  jtidges  c^
the  Supreme  Court  to  atiend  a  circuit  court,  and  when
tbp  diatrici  jud^e  phall  be  absent,  or  shall  hare  birn  cnun-
»el,  or  he  intnrerttMl  in  the  cause,  the  circuit  court  may
consist  only  of  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court.'

These  circuit  courts,  thus  organized,  are'  vested  wilk
original  co^rnizauce,  concurrent  with  the  courts  of  the  se-
veral states,  of  all  suits  of  a  civil  nature  at  common  law
or  in  eqiiiry,  where  the  matter  in  diHftute  eieeedsSOO  dol-
lars, eicliHire  of  costs,  and  the  United  States  are  plain-
tiffs, or  an  alien  is  a  party,  or  the  suit  is  between  a  citizen
of  the  state  where  the  suit  is  broughl,  and  a  citizen  of  an-
other state. .  They  have  likewise  exclusive  cognizance,
except  ID  certain  cases  which  will  be  bereaner  men-
tinned,  of  ell  criiaec  and  oSflncescosizable  under  the
authority  of  the  United  States,  exceeding  the  d<>gre^
of  ordinary  nnisdemeanora,  andofthem  they  bare  concur-
rent jurisdiction  with  the  dixtrict  courts.  But  no  per-
son can  be  arrested  in  one  district  for  trial  in  ano-
ther, and  no  civil  suit  can  be  brought  against  an  inbabt-
tantofthe  United  States  out  of  his  dintrict ;  and  the  act
of  congress  provides  a^^ainst  the  assumption  of  foder  al


a  Atl'^JKarrktd,  1793.  tec-  1. April  ?n(A.  1R02.  lec-  4. Feb-
mary  UA,  1807.mc.  2. JtforeA  SSd,  1B08,  kc  I.  March  301A,  1S30,

MC  1-


t,Goo(^lc


Lecture  XIV.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  283

jurttdiction  to  be  created  bj  the  a§8igitroent  of  promiBSory
notes  or  other  ehoses  in  action,  except  foreiffn  bills  of  ex-
change. The  circuit  courts  have  also  appvUste  jurisdi^-
ttttii  from  all  final  decrees  and  judgmeotfl  in  the  dinlriot
eourts,  where  tho  matter  io  diipute,  excluaive  of  eoDts,
exceeds  50  dollars.*  And  if  an;  suit  be  commenced  in  ft
state  court  against  an  alien,  or  bj  a  citizen  of  the  stale  ia
which  the  suit  is  brought  agaiDsr  a  citizen  of  another  state,
or  against  a  citizen  of  the  same  state  claiming  lands  under
a  grant  from  another  state,  and  the  matter  in  dispute  ex-
ceeds 500  dollars,  exclusive  of  eosu,  the  defendant,  od  .
giving  security,  nta^  remove  the  cause  to  the  next  circuit
court.l>'The  circuit  courts  have  also  original  cognizance  in
equity  and  at  law  of  ail  suits  arising  under  any  law  of  the
United  States  relative  to  copyrights,  and  the  rights  grow-
ing out  of  inventions  and  discoveries-o

(3.)  The  district,  as  well  as  the  circuit  courts,  are  de-
rived from  the  |wwer  granted  to  congress  by  the  cimstitn-
tion  of  constituting  tribunals  inferior  to  the  Supreme
Court.''  The  United  States  are  at  present  divided  into
twenty-nine  districts,  which  generally  consist  of  an  entire
state;  but  in  New- York,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Nortb
Carolina,  and  Tennessee,  there  are  mere  diatricxt  than  one.
A  court  is  established. in  each  district,  ennsisting  ef outt
judge,  who  holds  annually  four  stated  terms,  and  ekv  spe-
cial courts,  in  his  discretion.  ~  -■

The  district  eourts  hare,  exclusively  of  the  state  courts,
cognizance  of  all  lesser  crimes  and  offences  cognizttble
under  the  authority  of  the  i  nited  StHte«,  and  committed
witbia  their  reRpective districts,  or  upon  the  high  aeas,  end
which  are  punishable  by  fine  not  exoeet^ng  lOlPdolinrs,  bj
imprisonment  not  exceeding  six  inoDtbs,  or  when  corporal


a  Act  of  StjiUmttrtBA, ITB9,  wc- II.  XI.K. Act  QTStf  Jtvct,
U03,wo.  It.
b  Aetofi4tkS^lmbtr,t1S9,»ee.^t.
c  Jd  ^  F«6rHary  IN*.  1819,  wo.  t-
4ArL><sso.a.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


284  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  U.

puDishment,  not  exceeding  thirty  stripes,  is  lobe  inflicted.
They  have  also  exclusive  original  cofrnizflDee  of  all  civil
causes  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction,  of  seizures
under  impost,  navigation,  or  trade  lawR  of  the  United
States,  where  the  seizures  are  made  upon  the  high  seas,
or  on  waters  within  Iheir  districts  navigable  from  the  sea
by  vessels  of  ten  or  more  tons  burthen ;  and  also  of  ail
other  seizures  made  under  the  laws  of  the  United  States ;
and  also  of  at]  suits  for  penalties  and  forfeitures  incurred
under  thoselaws.  They  have  alsocngnizance  concurrent
with  the  circuit  courts,  nnd  the  stale  courts,  of  causes
where  an  alien  sues  for  a  tort  committed  in  ^olation  of  the
law  of  nations,  or  of  a  treaty  of  the  United  States ;  and  of
all  suits  at  common  law  in  which  the  United  States  ore
plaintiffs,  and  the  matter  in  dispute  amounts,  ezchisive  of
costs,  to  lOOdollars.  They  Imvc  jurisdiction,  likewise,
ezctusive  of  the  courts  ofthe  several  slates,  of  all  suits
Bgaiust  consult)  or  vice-consuls,  except  for  offences  abov^
the  magnitude  which  has  been  mentioned.'  They  have
also  cognizance  of  complaints,  by  whomsoever  inetilnted,
in  cases  of  captures  made  within  the  waters  of  the  United
Skates,  or  within  a  marine  league  of  its  coasts.''

The  judges  of  the  district  courts  have  also,  in  cases
where  the  party  has  not  hod  a  reasonable  time  to  apply
to  the  circuit  court,  as  full  power  to'graot  writs  of  injunc-
tion to  operate  within  their  respective  districts,  ssisex-'
arcised  by  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  to  con-
tinue until  the  next  circuit  coi|rt.c

In  addition  to  these  geoeral  powers  vested  in  the  district
courts, they  have,  in  those  cases  where  the  districts  are  so  .
ait(iated  as  not  to  permit  conveniently  the  presence  of  a
judge  ofthe  Supreme  Court,  the  powers  of  u  circuit  court
luperodded  to  their  ordinary  powers  of  a  district  court.

To  guard  against  (be  inconvenience  of  a  difference  of


uJhtr.  17F


a  Jct^  tVh  Seytalae

b  Jet  ^  April  SOlA,  I  SIS,  lec.  1.

e  Ad  ^FikTvary  I3M,  ISOT,  mo.  1.


i,Googlc


l»otur«XIV.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  M3

opinion  between  the  circuit  judce  and  the  district  judge,
when  boldinjt  together  a  circuit  court,  it  is  provided  by  InW,
that  in  all  cases  of  appeal  or  error,  from  the  district  to  the
wcuit  court,  judgment  is  to  be  rendered  in  canformity  to
tbe  opinion  of  the  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court,  presiding
in  such  circuit  court.  And  in  all  other  cases  of  a  disagree-
ment of  opinion  between  the  circuit  and  district  judges,
the  point  may  be  certified  into  the  Supreme  Court  for  its
decision,  but  in  no  ease  shull  impriaootnent  be  allowed,
or  puQishment  inflicted,  where  tbe  judges  of  tbe  circuit
court  ere  divided  in  opinion  upon  the  question.'

The  district  end  territorial  judges  of  the  United  States
are  required  to  reside  within  their  respective  jurisdictions;
and  no  federal  judge  can  act  as  counsel,  or  to  be  engaged
in  the  practice  of  the  lnW'i>

(4.)  The  Slate  courts  are,  ,in  some  cases,  invested  by
acts  of  congress,  with  the  cognizance  of  cases  arising  unrler
the  laws  of  the  Uoiied  States.  By  the  acts  of  March  8th,
1806,  end  April  Slat,  1808,  and  March  3d,  1815,  the
county  courts  within,  or  adjoining  the  revenue  districts,  in
certain  parts  of  the  states  of  New- York,  Pennsylvanin,  and
Ohio,  are  authorized  to  take  cognizance  of  proi^entjons
for  fines,  penalties,  and  forfeitures,  arising  under  the  reve-
jiue  laws  of  the  United  States;  and  the  stale  or  conntjr
couru  adjoining  any  collectiondistrict,  in  relation  to  taxes
or  internal  duties  which  may,  a)  any  time,  hereafter,  ba
assessed,  have  cognizance  of  all  suits  for  taxes,  dutiet,
fiues,  penalties,  and  forfeitures  arising  thereon.

In  attending  to  this  general  survey  of  the  organization
of  tbe  judiciary  establishment  of  tbe  United  States,  it  will
be  perceived,  that  all  the  great  features  of  the  system  ar*
to  be  found  in  the  act  of  congress  which  was  passed  in  Sep.
tember,  l7S9,atthefirst  session  of  thefirstcongreas  under
the  present  constitution. It  has  stood  the  test  of  expe-


h  Ad  ofDtetmbtr  Itth,  1813,  wc  K


i,Googlc


3S6  TURISPRITDCNCE  OF  [Pari  li:

rienee  nioce  that  lime,  with  very  Tittle  alteratioB  or  im-
praremeot,  sad  tbii>  fact  is  no  small  evidence  ofthe  wisdoin
of  tbe  plan,  hdiI  of  its  Rdaptalion  to  tbe  inleresF  and  con-
venience ofthe  country.  The  act  of  1789  waa  the  work
ef  much  profoutid  reflection,  and  of  great  I^^al  knowledge;
fuid  the  system  then  formed  end  reduced  to  practice  hat
^teen  >o  flucceasful  and  so  beneficial  in  ita  operation,  that
tbe  administration  of  justice  in  the  federal  courts  has  been
coostantly  rising  in  inftuenee  and  reputation.

The  prtDCtpal  officers  of  tbe  courts  are  attorneys  and
eounseltors,  elerks  and  marshals.

(I.)  Attorneys  and  counael  are  reffntarly  ndmitted  by  the
■eTeral  courts,  to  assist  the  parties  in  their  pleadings,  and
in  the  conduct  of  their  reuses,  in  those  cases  in  whiefc
tbe  parties  do  not  appear  and  manaf^  their  own  cause*
personally,  as  tbey  are  expresrly  pernilled  to  do.!>  Thia
pr'n'dege  conceded  to  parties,  though  reasonable  in  itself,
i»  upon  the  whole  aseless,  aad  the  necessity  of  a  dia-
tinet  proTeasion  to  render  the  application  of  the  law  easy
and  certain  to  every  indiridnal  ease,  has  always  been  fek
in  every  country  under  the  governeieat  ef  written  law.
As  propMly  becones  secure,  and  tbe  arts  are  cultivated,
and  commerce  flunrisbea,  aad  when  wealth  and  luxury  are
introduced,  and  create  the  infinite  distinctions  and  rpfine-
nteata  of  civilized  life,  tbe  law  will  gradually  and  ne-
cessarily aMtime  tbe  character  of  a  eorapKeated  science,
re<{uiring  for  ita  application  the  skill  aad  learning  of
a  particular  profeation.  After  the  application  of  the
twelve  tables,  suiters  at  Rome  were  obliged  to  resort  to
ibe  assistance  of  their  patrons,  and  judicial  proceedings  be-
came tbe  study  and  practice  of  a  distinct  and  learned  body  of
tnen.>>  The  dtrisioo  of  advocates  into  attorneysaod  coun-
sel bes  beenadc^ted  from  tbe  prevailing  usagein  tbe  Eng-
glisb  courts.  The  business  nftheformer  is  tocarryontbe
l^ractical  and  more  mechanical  parts  of  the  suit,  and  of  the


a  Aa  o/tilh  Stpten^er,  I78B,  tec.  SG.

i  anntnti,d»OnH(lFraf./w.  Clo.  HB.  3S.40-


i,,-c,"ih,Googlc


Lvcdin  XIV.] THE  VNITED  STATES.  UT

latter  to  draft  or  review  and  correct  the  special  pleadingt,
to  nianeKe  the  cause  at  the  trial,  -and  also  during  the
whole  GourM  of  the  suit,  to  apply  eatablished  principlesof
law  to  the  esigenGie§  of  thecB§e.  In  the  Supreme  Court
of  the  Uniied  States,  the  two  degrees  of  unorney  aod
counsel  are  kept  separate,  and  do  person  is  permitted  Co
practise  both  as  aitorof-y  and  rounsellor  in  that  court.
This  wash)  arule  of  court  in  February,  1790;  and  when,
afterwards,  iu  August,  1801,  the  court  declared  that  couDr
•ellors  might  be  admitted  as  attorneys  on  taking  the  usual
oath,  this  did  not  mean  or  imply,  that  if  a  counsellor  wat
thus  addmitled  an  attorney,  he  could  continue'  to  act  aa
counsellor  He  must  make  bis  election  between  the  two
degrees.  In  all  the  other  courts  of  the  United  States;,  aa
well  as  in  ihe  courts  of  this  state,  the  same  person  can  be
admitted  totbetwo  degrees  of  attorney  and  counsel, and
exercise  the  powers  of  each.

Besides  the  ordinary  attorneys,  the  statute  has  directed,*
that  a  meet  person,  learned  in  the  law,  be  appointed  to  a«t
as  attoraey  general  of  the  United  States,  and  besides  spe-
cial and  incidental  duties,  it  is  made  generally  his  duly  to
prosecute  and  conduct  all  suits  in  the  Supreme  Court  itk
which  the  United  States  are  concerned,  and  to  }(ive  his  ad-
vice and  opinion  upon  questions  of  law,  when  required  bj
the  president  or  the  heads  of  the  departments.  Each  jo-  ,
dicial  district  bas  likewise  a  public  officer  to  act  as  at-
torney for  the  United  States  in  the  district,  and  to  prosft-
cttteall  delinquents  for  crimes  or  offences  cognizable  ott-
der  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  and  to  prosecute  all
civil  actions  witbia  bis  district  in  which  the  United  States
are  concerned. b

(2.)  Clerks  are  appointed  by  the  sereral  courts,  except
that  the  clerk  of  the  district  court  is  ex  o^io  clerk  of  the
circuit  court  ia  such  district.  They  have  the  custody  of
the  seal  and  records,  and  are  bound  to  sign  and  seal  all  pro-


a  A.lo/Hih:iifUtnitr,\ias,tec.3S.

hBMlt.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


ZSft  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [PfcrlTI.

ceM,  and  to  record  ibe  proe«fldiDgs  and  judgments  of  the
courts*  And  thii  ii  a  iruit  of  no  munh  importance,  that,
in  addition  to  the  ordinary  oath  of  ofiice,  clerka  are  obli^
ed  to  give  security  to  the  public  for  the  faithful  perform-
•nce  of  their  duty.^  To  guard  still  further  agninut  abuse
of  office,  alt  moneys  paid  into  the  cirHiit  or  district  courts,
orreceired  by  the  officers,  in  cases  pending  therein,  are
required  to  be  imtoetliately  deposited  in  bank  ;  and  no
money  cao  be  drawn  out  of  bank,  except  by  en  order  of  a
judge,  to  be  signed  by  him,  and  certified  of  record  by  the
cleik.  The  clerka  are  likewise  bound,  at  every  regular
session  of  the  courts,  to  esbitiit  an  account  of  all  the  moneys
remaining  in  court. ^

(3.)  Marshaia  are  analogous  to  aherifis  at  common  law.
They  are  appointed  for  each  judicial  district  by  the  presi-
dent and  senate  for  the  term  of  four  years,  but  are  re-
movable at  pleasure ;  and  ilia  the  duly  of  the  marshal  to
attend  the  district  and  circuit  courts,  and  to  execute,  with-
in the  district,  all  lawful  precepts  directed  lo  him,  and  to
command  all  requisite  assistance  in  the  execution  of  hit
duty.  There  are  also  various  apecial  duties  assigned  by
statute  to  the  marshals.  The  appointment  of  deputies  is
a  power  incidental  to  (he  office,  and  the  marshal  is  re-
s|ionaible  civiliter  for  their  cooduct,  and  they  are  remova-
ble, not  only  at  his  pleasure,  but  tboy  are  also  by  statute
made  removable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  district  or  cir^
cuit  courts.c  The  act  says,  that  the  marshal  shall  be
removeable  at  pleasurt,  without  saying  by  whom ;  and
on  ibe  first  organization  of  the  government,  it  was  made
a  questioo  whether  the  power  of  removal,  in  the  case
of  officers  appointed  to  bold  at  pleasure,  resided  any
where  but  in  the  body  which  appointed,  and  of  course,
whether  the  consent  of  the  senate  was  not  requisite  tore-
move.  This  was  the  construction  given  to  the  constitution
while  it  was  pending  for  ratification  before  the  state  con-


a elofUlhSeplember,  r.S9,i

b  Arti'l'J'l'tnh^ii,  \ii\-l.

c  .1-1  ofiitti  SfpUmhtr,  1789,»


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Uaan  XIV.} THE  UNTTfiD  STATES.  iff

TeDtioni,  bf  the  author  of  the  Federalut,  "TheeotiseDtof
theaenate,"  the  fuderaliit  obsetvea,*  "would  be  necessary
to  displace  as  well  ai  to  appoint ;"  and  be  goei  on  to  ol^
Mrre^that  "tboee  who  can  best  estimate  the  value  of«
■teady  administration,  will  be  moit  disposed  to  price  a  pro*
rision  which  connects  the  official  existence  of  public  men
with  the  approbation  or  disapprobation  of  that  body,  which)
from  the  greater  permanency  of  its  own  composition,  will  in
all  probability  be  lean  subject  to  inconstancy  than  any  other
Member  ef  thegoTernmeDt."  But  the  construction  which
was  given  to  the  constitution  by  congresSf  after  great  con-
sideration and  discussion,  was  different.  In  the  ar-t  of  ea*
tablisbing  the  treasury  department,''  the  secretary  was  cob'-
templated  at  being  removable  from  office  by  the  presidents
The  words  of  the  act  are,  "  That  ichetuter  the  <ecr«fary
thaB  be  remoted  from  ofice  by  the  presittent  of  the  United
Statet,  or  in  way  other  case  of  vacancy  in  the  office,  the  af
aifltaitt  aball  act,"  &C.  This  amountml  to  s  legislative  con-
gtniction  of  the  constitution,  and  it  has  ever  since  beenac
quiesced  in,  and  acted  upon,  as  decisive  authority  in  the
case.  It  applies  equally  to  every  other  officer  of  govern-
ment appointed  by  the  president  and  senate,  whose  term  of
duration  is  not  specially  declared.  It  is  supported  by  tha
weighty  reason,  that  the  subordinate  officers  in  the  execu-
tive department  oiigbt  to  bold  at  the  pleasure  of  the  bead
of  that  department,  beeause  he  is  invested  generally  with
the  executive  authority,  and  every  participation  in  that
authority  by  the  senate  was  an  exception  to  a  general
principle,  and  ought  to  be  taken  strictly.  The  president
is  tlie  great  responsible  officer  for  the  faithful  execution  of
the  law,  and  the  power  of  removal  was  incidental  to  thai
duty,  and  might  often  be  requisite  to  fulfil  it.

This  question  has  never  been  made  the  subject  of  judi-
cial discussion ;  and  the  construction  given  to  the  constitU'

a  No.  77.  b  S^ttmbtr  ^,  178»>  MS.  T.

Vol.  I.  8?


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


390  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  ^rtH.

tion  in  1789,  has  continuwl  to  reel  on  this  loose  inctdmtal
declaratory  opinion  ofconffrefis,  aud  lh«  sense  and  practic*
of  j^veroment  since  that  time.  It  may  now  be  considered
as  firmly  and  defitii'ively  settled,  and  I  entertain  no  man-
ner of  doubt  ol'the  good  sense  and  practical  utility  af  the
coni>truction.  It  is,  however,  a  stnlting  feet  in  the  consti-
tutioual  history  of  our  j^oTernroent,  that  a  power  so  tran^
eendent  as  that  is,  which  places  at  the  disposal  of  the  pre*
sid«nt  alone,  the  tenure  of  every  executive  officer  appoint-
ed by  the  president  and  senate,  should  depend  upon  in-
ference merely,  and  should  have  been  gratuitously  declared
by  the  first  congress,  in  opposition  to  the  high  autboritj  <^
the  FederalUt ;  And  should  have  been  supported  or  acqui-
esced in  by  some  of  those  disiingui&hed  men  who  question-
ed or  denied  the  power  of  congress,  even  to  incorporate  a
national  bank.

The  marshal  is  obliged  to  give  security  to  the  United
States  in  ^,U00  dollars,  for  the  faithful  performance  ofthe
duties  of  his  office  by  himself  and  his  deputies;  and,together
with  his  deputies,  to  take  on  oath  of  office.'  By  the  com-
noa  law,  the  death  ofthe  principal  is  a  virtual  retieal  of
the  authority  of  the  substitute  or  deputy ;  but  to  guard
against  any  inconvenience  which  might  arise  from  the  ope-
ration of  this  principle,  and  to  prevent  the  mischiefs  of  a
vacancy  in  office,  thc^  act  establishing  the  judicial  courts  bai
provided,  that  in  case  ofthe  death  ofthe  marshal,  his  de-
puties shall  continue  in  office,  unless  otherwise  specially
removed,  and  shall  execute  the  sttmein  the  nameof  the  de-
ceased marshal,  until  another  marshal  be  appointed  and
sworn.  So,  a  marshal,  when  removed  from  office,  or  his
term  of  office  expires,  may  still  execute  all  process  in  his
handn^  and  he  remains  responsible  for  bis  prisoners  until
they  are  duly  delivered  over  to  his  successor. I>  And  with
respect  to  the  custody  of  the  prisoners,  under  the  laws  of


a  AaofUlhSepUmbtr,  17G9,  tec.  S7.
*i6td.MC.98.


t,Goo(^lc


Lectur*  XIV.] THE  UMTED  STATES.  991

the  United  States,  the  marshal  is  directed  to  deliver  hw
prisoners  to  the  keeper  of  one  of  thr  jails  of  the  state  in
which  he  ia  marihal,  in  cases  where  the  legislature  of  the
Mate,  in  eonformity  with  the  reeoiDmendation  of  congress,
bare  made  it  the  duty  of  the  jailers  to  receive  tbem  ;  but
where  they  have  not,  the  marshal,  under  the  directioo  of
the  district  judge,  is  to  provide  bis  own  place  of  security.*


a  RtMJulioiuqfCmgTeu,SepUiiAeTi3d.  im.andMareh  34,  ITtW.
See  aba  Ibe  act  of  CoDgraMoTSth  jBooarr,  i890.  ■ndl  PauH.36B.
The  marttiKl  ii  boand  ta  take  from  the  priaooer,  onder  United  Sutea,
proceai,  boodibr  tlM'Uiiiita,aaiB  lliecawi  of  priaoncfa  noder  atateprocaafc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


t,Goo(^lc


LECTURE  XV.

«r  THE  OBICI.NAL  AND  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION
OF  TUE  SUPREME  COURT.

Hating  taken  a  general  view  of  the  great  department!
of  the  government  of  the  United  Slatei,  I  proceed  to  a
more  preeiae  examination  of  its  powers  and  duties,  and
ef  the  degree  of  Bubordination  under  which  the  state  go-
Ternments  are  constitutiuoally  placed.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  constitution  of  the  United
States  is  no  instrument  containing  the  gnat  of  tptcifie
powers,  end  the  government  of  the  union  cannot  claim  unjr
powers  but  what  ate  coniained  in  the  grant ;  and  given,
either  expressly,  or  by  necessary  implication.  The  pow-
ers vested  io  the  state  governments  by  their  respective
eonstitutions,  or  remaining  with  the  people  of  the  spverat
■tales  prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  consiitution  of  the
United  States,  continue  unaltered  andunimpairt-d,  except
■o  far  as  they  are  granted  to  the  United  Slates.  Wf  are
to  ascertain  the  true  construction  of  the  constitution,  and
the  precise  extent  of  the  residuary  authorities  of  the  seve-
ral states,  by  the  declared  sense  and  practice  of  the  go-
Ternments  respectively,  when  there  is  no  collision  ;  and
in  all  othereases  where  the  question  is  of  a  judicial  nature,
we  are  to  ascertain  it  by  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States;  and  those  decisions  ought  to
be  studied,  and  universally  understood,  io  respect  to  all
the  leading  questions  of  constitutional  taw.  The  people
of  the  United  States  have  declared  the  constitution  to  be
the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  and  it  is  entitled  to  univer-
sal and  implicit  obedience.  Every  act  of  congress,  and
'  every  act  of  the  legislatures  of  the  states,  and  every  part

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


SM  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  \Pm  U.

of  Ibe  constitution  of  any  state,  vbich  is  repn^naDt  to  th«
constitution  of  the  United  Stdles,  ia  Deceraaril;  void.
Thia  is  a  clear  end  settled  principle  of  constitutionul  ju-
risprudence. The  judicial  power  ortbe  union  is  declared
to  extend  to  alleatet  in  law  and  equitj*  arisin;;  under  the
constitution  ;and  to  ihejndicial  power  it  belongs,  whenever
a  case  is  judicially  before  it,  to  determine  what  is  the  su-
preme  law  of  the  land.  The  determination  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  tbe  United  States  must  l>e  final  and  conclusire,
berauae  tbe  constitution  girea  to  that  tribunal  tbe  power
to  decide,  and  gives  no  ap|}eal  from  tbe  decision.

With  res|>ecl  to  tbe  judicial  power,  it  may  be  generally
obflprved  as  tbe  Supreme  Court  declared,  in  tbe  case  of
Titrner  v.  The  Bank  of  North  America,*  tbat  the  disposal
of  the  judicial  power,  except  in  a  lew  specified  cases,  be-
loDj^a  to  congress  ;  and  tbe  courts  cannot  exercise  juris-
diction  in  every  case  to  wbicb  tbe  judicial  power  extends,
without  tbe  intervention  of  conitreaSi  who  are  not  bound
lo  enlarge  tbe  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts  to  every
subject  wbicb  tbe  constitution  might  warrant.  So  again
it  has  been  decided,^  tbat  eongress  bave  not  delegated
the  exercise  of  judicial  power  to  the  circuit  ciuirts,  but
in  certain  specified  cases.  The  lltb  section  of  the  judi-
ciary  act  of  1789,  giving  jurisdiction  to  the  circuit  courts,
has  not  covered  the  whole  ground  of  the  <»)nf>titution,  and
those  courts  cannot,  for  instance,  issue  a  mandamui,  but  io
those  cases  in  wbicb  it  may  be  necessary  to  the  exercise
of  their  jurisdiction.!^

Tbe  original  jurisdiction  of  tbe  Supreme  Court  is  very
limited.  It  ia  confined  by  the  constitution  to  those  cases
which  affect  ambassadors,  other  public  ministers  and  con-
suls, and  to  tbofie  in  which  a  state  ia  a  party  ;''  and  it  has
been  made  a  question,  whether  this  original  jurisdiction  of
tbe  Supreme  Court  was  intended  by  tbe  coostitutioD  to  be
exclusive.  The  judiciary  act  of  1789  seems  to  bave  consi-


a  4  DalUu,  B.  b  M'latjre  v.  Vfaod,  7  CnBtcfc.004.

c  Art.  3.  too  9.

rf  Smith  T.  JackEoD,  1  Paine,  453.  ud  mo  Infra,  p.  3IS.


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


Lecmra  XV.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  ajW

dered  it  to  be  competent  for  coiigreaa  to  vest  concur-
vent  jurimliction,  in  those  specified  case^,  in  other  f  otirts  i
for  it  gave  a  concurrent  juritidiction,  in  some  of  those  cases,
to  the  circuit  courts.*  In  the  case  of  The  Unitetl  Staiet  r.
Ravara,^  this  point  arwe  in  the  Circuit-  Court  for  Peno-
sflrsnia  district,  and  it  was  held  that  congress  could  vest
«  concurrent  jiiriadiciian  in  other  courts,  of  those  very
cases  over  which  the  Supreme  Court  had  original  juri**
diction  ;  and  that  the  word  original  was  not  to  be  tafc«a
to  imply  exclusive  cognizance  of  the  cases  enumerst«d.
But  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Vniied  Statett
in  Marbury  v.  Afcn/won,"  goes  far  towards  establishing  the
principle  of  exclusive  jurisdiction  in  the  Supreme  Court
in  all  those  caaea  of  original  jurisdiction.  This  lust  cam
was  considered,  in  Penntyhania  r.  Kothff^,^  as  shaking
the  decision  in  the  cane  of  Ravarii  ;  and  yet  the  questioa
was  still  left  in  douhr  by  the  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case
•f  Tie  United  Statist  r.  Ortega,'  and  «  decision  upon  it
was  pnrpoBely  waived.

Admitting  this  original  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme
Court  may  be  shared  by  other  courts  in  the  discretion  of
ccMigress,  ithas  been  de^ed,  as  we  shall  presently  see,
that  this  original  jurisdiction  cannot  be  enlarged,  and  that
the  Supreme  Court  eannot  be  vested,  even  by  congress,
with  any  original  jurisdiction  in  other  eases  than  those
described  in  the  constitution.  It  is  the  appellate  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Supreme  Court  that  clothes  it  with  most  of  ite
dignity  and  efficacy,  and  renders  it  a  constant  object  of
attention  and  solicitude  on  the  part  of  the  gorcrnmenU
and  the  people  of  the  several  states.^

(1.)  The  Supreme  Court  has  appellate  jurisdiction  in
certain  cases  over  final  decisiotis  in  state  courts.

We  have  seen  that,  by  the  act  of  congress  of  the  24th  of
September,  1789,  sec.  25.a  final  judgment  or  decree  iu  any

a  Act  of  Sept.  SM,  1789,  sec.  13. 6  t  Oaltai,  397.

c  I  Crandt,  137. d  s  Sirg-  Sr  Rawlt,  645. t  1 1  WkealoA,  467.

y  "Hie  Imperial  Cbimber  mud  ihe  AuIicCoaocil  in  the  Gennaoic  ooa-

sUtutioD  iTBrfl  (ribanaJi  of  ippcllale  jiirisdiclron  only, ll  nas  llie  crit;!-

nal  law  of  Gorntany,  tliat  no  mS'i  can\i  be  tued,  except  in  Ilie  (tale  ur

provioce la whicti  be  bel«iiged. 1 ilallvuM the ^Vuli^U  Aget,  'Sit,  i.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


396  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pirt  U.

wit  in  the  faigheat  court  of  law  or  equity  of  a  itate,  tvher«
ia  drawn  in  question  the  validity  of  a  treaty,  and  the  deci-
tioD  is  against  its  validity  ;  or  where  is  drawn  ia  question
the  coDBtruclioQ  of  a  treaty,  and  the  decision  is  against
tfae  title,  right,  or  privilege,  set  up  or  claimed  under  h,
may  be  reexamined,  and  reversed  or  affirmed,  in  tfae
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  upon  a  writ  of  error ;
and,  upoo  reversal,  the  cause  may  be  remanded  for  final
decision  ;  or  the  Supreme  Co«rt  may,  at  their  discretion,
if  the  cause  shall  hare  been  once  remanded  before,  pro-
ceed toa  final  decision  of  the  same,  andaward  execution.
Under  this  authority,  in  the  case  of  ClerJce  r.  Haraood,^  it.
was  declared,  that  if  thefaighestcourt  in  a  state  reverse
the  judgment  of  a  subordinate  court,  and,  on  appeal  to  the
Supreme  Court  ofthe  United  Slates,  the  judgment  of  the
bigiiest  state  court  be  in  its  turn  reversed,  it  becomes  a
mere  nullity,  and  the  mandatie  for  execution  may  issue  to
the  inferior  state  court.  But,  in  the  case  of  Fair/in  v.
Hitnter,^  a  writ  of  error  from  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States  was  awarded  to  the  Court  of  Appeals  of
Virginia,  upon  a  judgment  in  that  court,  against  the  right
claimed  under  a  construction  of  the  treatises  made  with
Great  Britain  in  1783  and  1794,  and  the  judgment  of  the
Court  of  A|>[)eaU  was  reversed,  and  the  cause  remanded,
and  the  Court  of  Appeals  below  were  required  to  cause
tlie  original  judgment  which  had  been  reversed  in  that
court,  to  be  carried  into  due  execution.  The  Court  <tf
Appeals,  when  the  xause  came  bdck  to  them,  resolved,
that  the  appellate  power  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Uni-
ted States  did  not  extend  to  that  court,  and  that  bo  mu^
ofthe  act  of  congress  as  extended  the  appellate- jansdic'
tian  of  the  Supreme  Court  to  that  court,  was  not  war-
ranted by  the  constitution  ;  and  that  the  proceedings  in  the
Supreme  Court  were  coram  turn  j'ttdtce  in  relation  to  that
court,  and  they,  t^onsequently,  declined  obedience  to  its
mnndntc.  A  writ  of  error  was  awarded  upon  thjs  refusal,
end  ilio  cause  came  up  again  before  the  Supreme  Court  of

a  3  Drtllas,  21%  h  7  Crauh,  609.

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


Loeture  XV.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  S&T

the  United  States,  in  a  case  in  which  the  judginenl  of  th«
court  below  drew  ia  queation,  and  denied  the  validity  of
the  Btalute  of  the  United  States,  authorizing  an  ap)>eRl
from  a  state  court. >

A  graver  question  could  scarcely  have  arisen  in  that
court,  or  one  involving  considerations  of  higher  importance
and  delicacy,  or  more  deeply  affecting  the  permanency
and  tranquillity  of  the  American  union.  In  the  opinion
which  was  delivered,  the  court  observed  that  the  conali-
tutioD  unavoidably  dealt  in  general  language,  and  did  not
enter  into  a  minute  specijication  of  powers  or  declare  the
means  by  which  those  powers  were  to  be  carried  into  exe-
cution. This  would  have  been  a  perilous  and  difficult,  if
not  an  impracticable  task;  and  the  constitution  left  it  to
congress,  from  time  to  time,  to  adopt  its  own  means  to  ef*
fectuate  legitimate  objects,  and  to  mould  and  model  the
exercise  of  its  powers  as  its  own  wisdom,  and  the  public
interests,  nbould  require.

The  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  ia  declared  to
extend  to  all  cases  arising  under  treaties  made  under  the
authority  of  the  United  States.  It  was  an  absolute  grant
ofthe  judicial  power  in  that  cose,  and  it  was  competent  for
the  people  of  this  country  to  invest  the  general  govern-
rnent  with  that,  or  with  any  other  powers  they  might  deem
proper  and  necessary  ;  and  to  prohibit  the  states  from  the-
exercise  of  any  powers  which  were,  in  their  judgment,  in-
compatible with  the  objects  of  their  general  compact.
Congress  were  bound,  by  the  injunctions  of  the  constitu-
tion, to  create  inferior  courts,  in  which  to  Test  all  that  ju-
dicial jarisdiction  which  was  exclusively  Tested  in  the
United  States,  and  of  which  the  Supreme  Court  cannot
take  any  other  than  an  appellate  cognizance.  The  whole
judicial  power  must  be  at  alt  times  vested,  either  in  an
original  or  appellate  form,  in  some  courts  created  under
the  authority  ofthe  United  States. The  grant  of  the  ju-

«  I  rrA«fon,304. HartJDT.  Htinter.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


iSi  JURISPRUD£NCB  OF  (Tarl  ■.

dicial  power  was  absolute,  and  it  van  imperative  upon
congress  to  provide  for  the  eppellate  Juriitdictioii  of  the  fe-
deral courts,  in  all  the  cases  in  wfaich  judicial  power  wa>
exclusively  granted  by  the  conatitutioD,  aud  not  given  by
way  of  original  jurisdictioB  to  the  Supreme  Court.

The  court,  in  their  examination  of  the  judicial  powert
supposed  that  the  constitution  teok  a  distinction  briwi'eB
two  i^lasses  of  enumerated  cases.  It  iniended  that  the  ju>
dicial  power,  either  in  an  original  or  appellate  form,  should
extend  absolutely  toallcatti  in  luw  and  equity  arising  un-
der the  constitution,  the  lews  of  the  United  States,  and
treaties  made  under  their  authority ;  and  to  all  cases  af*
fecting  ambassadors,  other  public  ministers,  and  consuls ;
and  to  all  eases  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction;
because  those  cases  were  of  vital  importance  to  the  sove-
reignty of  the  union,  and  they  entered  into  the  natioual
policy,  and  affected  the  national  rights,  and  the  law  and
comity  of  nations.  The  original  or  appellate  juriedictiua
ought,  therefore,  to  be  commensurate  with  the  miscbieft
intended  to  be  remedied,  and  the  policy  in  view.  But,  in
respect  to  another  clasa  of  cases,  the  constitution  seemed)
ex  indiutria,  to  drop  the  word  all,  and  to  extend  the  juris-
diction of  the  judiciary,  not  to  all  controversies,  but  to
controvirsies  in  which  the  United  Stales  were  a  party,  or
between  two  or  more  states,  or  between  ciiizens  of  differ*
ent  states,  &c.  and  to  leave  H  to  congress  to  quAlify  (be
jurisdiction,  original  cr  appellate,  in  such  manner  as  pub-
.  Lie  policy  might  dictate.  But,  whatever  weight  might  b«
.  due  to  that  distinction,  it  was  held  to  be  manifest,  that  the
judicial  power  was,  unavoidably,  in  some  cases,  exclusive
of  all  state  authority,  and  in  all  others,  mi^ht  be  made  ao
at  the  election  of  congrens.  The  judiciary  act,  throuf{h-
out  every  part  of  it,  and  particularly  in  the  9th,  llth
and  13tb  sections,  assumed,  that  in  all  the  cases  to
which  the  the  judicial  powers  of  the  United  Stales  ex-
tended, congress  might  rightfnlly  vest  exclusive  juris-
diction, in  thci*  own  courts.  The  criminal,  and  the  ad-
miralryand  maritime  jurisdiction,  must  be  exclusive;  and
it  was  only  io  those  cases  where,  previogs  to  the  const:-


i,,-c,ih,Google


Lftctun  XV.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  29>

Itition,  state  tribunal!  poaneued  juriutictioii  independent
of  national  authoritj',  that  ibey  could  now  conttitutionallj
exercise  a  concurrent  jurisdiction.

Tbe  exercise  of  appellate  jurisdiction  was  not  limited  Iqr
the  constitution  to  the  Suprem*  Court.  Congress  might
create  a  succession  of  inferior  tribunals,  in  each  of  which
it  might  vest  appellate,  as  well  as  original  jurisdiction.
The  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court,  in  cases
where  it  had  not  original  jurisdiction,  was  declared  to  be
sutiJAct  to  such  exceptions  and  regulations  as  congress  might
prescribe.  It  remained,  therefore,  entirely  in  the  discre*
tionof  congress,  lo  cause  the  judicial  powertobeeiercised
in  every  variety  ufforra  of  apiiellate  jurisdiction,  and  rhe
appellate  power  was  not  limited  to  cases  pending'in  the
courts  of  the  United  States.  If  it  had  been  limited  tocasei
in  those  courts,  it  would  necessarily  follow,  that  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  federal  courts  must  have  been  exclusive  of  state
courts,  in  all  the  cases  enumerated  in  the  constitution.  If
the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  extends  to  all  casei
arising  under  the  constitution,  laws,  and  treaties  of  the
union,  and  to  all  caacsof  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdic-
tion, the  state  courts  could  not,  consistently  with  the  express
grant  in  the  constitution,  entertain  any  jurisdiction  in  those
cases  without  the  right  of  api>eal.  If  the  state  courts  might
entertain  concurrent  jurisdiction  over  any  of  those  cases
without  control,  then  the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  United '
States,  as  to  such  cases,  would  huve  do  existence,  which
would  be  contrary  to  the  manifest  intent  of  the  constitu-
tion. The  appellate  power  of  the  federal  courts  must  ex-
tend to  the  state  courts,  so  long  as  the  slate  courts  enter-
tain any  concurrent  jurisdiction  over  the  cases  which  the
constitution  has  declared  shall  fall  within  the  o^izanceof
the  judicial  power.  It  is  very  plain,  that  the  constitution
did  contemplate  that  cases  within  the  judicial  cognizance  of
the  United)8tatet  would  arise  in  the  state  courts,  in  the  ez>
ercise  of  their  ordinary  jurisdiction;  and  tliat  the  state
coorls  would  incidentally  take  cognizance  of  cases  arising
tmdei  the  constiloiion,  the  laws,  and  the  treatiei  o€  tbt


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


MO  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  £Part  II .

United  Slatesfandasihe  judicial  power  of  the  United  States
extfloded  to  all  such  cases,  l»j  the.  very  terniB  of  thecon-
Btitution,  it  fojlowed  aa  a  necessary  consequence,  ibal  the
appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  courts  of  the  United  States
must,  and  did  extend,  to  stale  tribunals,  and  attach  upon
every  case  within  the  cognizanceof  the  judicial  power.

All  the  enumerated  cases  of  federal  t-ognizsnce  are  those
which  touch  ilie  safety,  peace,  and  sovereignly  of  the  na-
tion, or  which  presume  that  stale  attachments,  state  pre-
judices, state  jealousies,  and  state  interests,  might  some-
times obstruct  or  control  the  regular  administration  of  jus-
tice. The  appellate  jiower,  in  all  these  cases,  is  founded
on  the  clearest  principles  of  policy' and  wisdom,  end  is
deemed  requisite  to  fulfil  effectually  the  great  and  benefi-
cent ends  of  the  constitution.  It  is  likewise  necessary,  in
order  to  preserve  unifonniiy  of  decision  throughout  the
United  States,  upon  all  subjects  within  the  purview  of  the
constitution  ;  and  the  mischiefs  of  op|xislte  ronst meltons,
^d  contradictory  decisions  in  the  different  states,  on  all
thesQ  points  of  general  concern,  would  be  deplorable.

The  right  of  removal  of  a  cause  from  a  state  court  by  a
defendant  who  is  entitled  to  try  his  rights,  and  aosert  his
privileges  in  the  national  forum,  is  also  the  exercise  of  ap-
pellate jurisdiction  ;  and  the  right  of  removal  of  a  cause
may  exist  before  or  after  jtidgment,  in  the  jliscreiion  of
congress.  The  Supreme  Court,  by  a  train  of  reasoning
which  appears  to  be  unanswerable  and  conclusive,  came  to
the  decision,  that  the  appellate  |iower  of  the  United  States
did  extend  to  cases  pending  in  the  state  rourls,  and  that
the  ^h  section  of  the  judiciary  act  of  17^9,  authorizing
the  exorcise  of  this  jurisdiction  in  the  specified  cases  by  a
writ  of  error,  was  supported  by  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the
eoiistilulioD.  The  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  in
Tirginia,  rendered  on  the  mandate  in  the  cause,  and  deny-
ing the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court,  was
consequently  reversed,  and  the  judgment  of  the  District
Court  in  Virginia,  which  iheCourt  of  Appeab in  Virginia
)iad  reversed,  was  affiimed.


t,Goo(^lc


Uclurt  XV.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  SOI

Whether  Uifl  Supreme  Court  bad  authority  lo  iBsae  the
eompulsory  process  uf  mandemut  lo  the  »lMe  courtt,  to
enforce  Ui«  judgment  of  leverHal,  was  a  question  which  the
court  did  oot  think  it  neceeaary  to  discuss  ur  decide  ;  and
one  of  tha  judges,  in  the  separate  opinion  which  he  gave
in  the  cause,  seemed  to  thitik  that  the  Supreme  Court,  in
the  exerriBeofii8a|>pellate  jurisdiction,  was  supreme  over
the  parties  and  over  the  case,  but  that  il  bad  no  oompul-
■ory  control  ovor  the  slate  tribunels.  The  court  iiaelf
gave  no  intimatioB  of  an  opinion,  whether  it  couM  or
could  not  lawfully  resort  to  compulsory  or  remrictiKe  pro>
cess,  operating  i»  ptnonata  upon  the  slate  tribunals }  and
h  was  no  doubt  deemed  discreet  not  to,  assert  more  au-
thority constitutionally  vested  in  the  court,  than  was  ne-
cessary for  the  occasion.  If  the  appellate  jurisdiciiou  be
founded,  aa  it  no  doubt  was  in  that  case,  on  a  solid  basis,
it  would  seem  to  carry  with  it,  as  of  course,  all  the  coer-
cive power  iucident  to  every  such  jurisdiction,  and  requi-
site to  support  it.

{2.)  Another  question,  which  was  largely  discussed  and
profoundly  considered  by  the  Supreme  Court,  was  touch-
ing its  authority  ttt  iosue  a  manJanuM,  when  not  arising  iu
a  case  under  its  appellate  jurisdiction>  and  when  not  re-
quired in  the  exercise  of  its  original  jurisdiction.  In  the
saaeof  Marbury  r.  MadUom,*  the  plaintifF  had  bean  nomi-
BBiad  by  the  president,  and  by  and  with  the  advice  and
consent  of  the  senate,  had  been  appointed  a  justice  of  the
peace  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  thf!  appointment
had  been  made  complete  and  absolute  by  the  preMdri>l'fl
signature  of  the  commission,  and  the  Commission  had
been  made  complete  by  affixing  to  it  the  seal  of  the  Uni-
ted States.  The  secretary  of  state,  afler  all  this,  with-
held the  commission,  and  the  withholding  of  it  was  ad-
judged to  be  a  violation  of  a  rested  le<;al  right,  for  which
the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to  a  remedy  by  mandamut  /  and
the  only  question  was,  whether  the  mandamus  could  con-
stitutionally issue  from  the  Supreme  Court.


■  1  Crmth,  137-

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


S02  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  {f art  U.

The  judiciary  act,  sec.  18.  authorized  the  Supreme
Court  to  iMue  writs  of  mandamut  in  cases  wsrninteil  bj
the  principle!  and  uiagea  of  law,  to  any  courts  appointed,
or  persons  holding  office,  under  the  autboriy  of  the  Uni-
ted States.  There  was  do  doubt  that  the  act  applied  to
the.case,  and  gave  the  power,  if  the  law  was  constitution-
al ;  but  the  court  was  of  opinion  that  the  act,  in  this  re-
fpect,  was  not  warranted  by  the  constitution,  because  the
issuing  of  a  mandamv*  in  this  case  would  be  an  exercise  of
original  jurisdiction  not  within  the  constitution,  anil  con-
gress had  not  power  to  give  original  jurisdidion  to  the-
Supreme  Court  in  other  cases  than  those  described  in  the
eonstituttoD.  It  had  not  authority  to  gire  to  the  Supreme
Court  appellate  jurisdicttoD,  where  the  constitution  had
dcrclared  that  it*  jurisdiction  sbould  be  original,  nor  orijp-
nai  jurisdiction  tvhere  the  constitution  had  declared  it
ahoukl  be  .appellate.  To  enable  the  court  to  issue  a  tntm-
doma,  it  must  be  shown  to  be  an  exercise,  or  necessary  to
ao  exercise,  of  appellate  jurisdiction.

(:t.)  The  eoBstitution  gives  to  the  Supreme  Court  ori-
ginal jurisdiction  in  those  cases  in  which  a  state  shall  be  tt
party ;  and  io  Fowler  v.  hindiey,^  the  question  arose,
tp&<n  a  state  was  to  be  considered  a  party.  The  parties
is  that  suit  claimed  title  to  lands  under  grants  from  difTer-
•nt  states.  The  plainiifT  brought  his  ejectment  in  the
Circuit  Court  of  Connecticut,  claiming  title  under  a
grant  from  that  state,  and  under  a  claim  that  the  lands
lay  within  the  jurisdiction  of  that  slate.  The  defend-
ant claimed  title  under  a  grant  from  New- York,  and  on
the  ground  that  the  lands  lay  within  the  rightful  as  well
as  actual  jurisdiction  (^  New-York.  The  court  laid
down  this  rule  on  the  subject  of  the  jurisdicttoo  of  the
Supreme  Court,  oo  account  of  the  interest  that  a  state  has
\a  the  controvef  sy,  that  it  must  be  a  case  in  which  a  rtate
is  either  nominally  or  substantially  the  party ;  and  that  it  is
not  sufficient  that  the  state  may  be  coosequentially  affected^

s8IMftw,4ll.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XV.]  THE  UNITED  STATE*.  «6

OS  beiug  bound  to  mako  retribution  to  h«r  grantM  upon  tb«
event  of  eviction.  Though  tliere  tuay  be  a  controveny
relative  to  soil  or  juriMliction  between  two  states,  yet  if
thut  controversy  occurs  iu  a  suit  between  two  iodividuala,
to  which  neither  of  the  states  is  a  party  upon  the  record,  it
U  not  a  case  within  the  (ir^^n/ jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme
Court,  because  the  states  may  contest  the  right  of  soil  in
the  Supreme  Court  at  any  time,  notwithstanding  a  iech-
sion  in  the  suit  between  the  individuals.  Nor  wif]  a  de-
cision as  to  the  right  of  noil  between  individuals  affect  the
right  of  the  state  as  to  jurisdictiuo,  and  that  jurisdiction
may  remain  animpaired.  though  the  state  may  have  parted
with  the  right  of  soil.  In  such  a  case,  the  Supreme  Court
would  not  allow  an  injunction  on  a  bill,  filed  by  the  state
of  New- York  against  the  state  of  ConnKticut,  to  stay  pro-
ceedings in  the  ejectment  suit  between  individuals,  though
a  general  claim  of  soil  and  jurisdiction  was  involved  in  the
private  unit,  because  the  state  of  New- York  was  not  a
party  to  the  suit  io  the  Circuit  Court,  nor  interested  ia
the  decisioo.'

(4.)  The  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court
exists  only  in  those  cases  in  which  it  is  afiirtnatively  given.
In  the  case  of  fVUcart  v.  Dauchy,^  the  Supreme  Court
considered  that  its  whole  appellate  jurisdiction  depended
upon  the  regulations  of  congress,  as  that  jurisdiction  was
given  by  the  constitution  io  a  qualified  manner.  The  Su-
preme Court  was  to  hare  appellate  jurisdiction,  "  with
euch  exceptions,  and  under  such  regulations,  as  congreM
should  make ;"  and  if  congress  bad  not  provided  any  rule
to  regulate  the  proceedings  on  appeal,  the  court  could  not
exercise  an  appellate  jurisdiction  ;  and  if  a  rule  be  pro-
vided, the  court  could  not  depart  from  it.  In  pursaanceof
this  principle,  the  court  decided  in  Clarke  v.  Baxadoaa,*:
that  a  writ  of  error  did  not  lie  to  that  court  from  a  court  of


a  4  DtlUu,  3.  N««-Vark  r.  Coancclicnt
e  I  Crmach,  9IZ.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


S04  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  EParl  U.

the  United  States*  territory  north'Weat  of  tbe  Ohio,  be-
cause the  act  of  Congreae  bad  not  authorized  ao  appeal  or
writ  of  error  fromsucha  court.  It  was  urged  that  iheja-
dieial  power  extended  to  all  cases  arisiDg  aoder  the  cod-
atitution,  and  that  where  tbe  Supreme  Court  liad  not  ori-
ginal, it  bad  appellate  jurisdiction,  with  Bucb  exceptions,
and  under  such  regulations,  as  coiigreeit  should  make ;  and
that  the  appellate  power  was  derived  from  tbe  coDslitu-
tion,  and  must  be  full  and  complete  in  all  cases  appertain-
ing to  the  federal  judiciary,  where  congress  had  not  by
law  interfered  and  controlled  it  by  exceptions  and  regula-
tions. The  court,  however,  adhered  to  the  doctrine  which
they  bad  before  laid  down,  and  proceeded  upon  the  prin-
ciple, that  though  the  appellate  powers  of  the  court  were
given  by  tbe  constitution,  they  were  limited  entirely  by  the
Judiciary  statutoa,  which  are  to  be  understood  as  making
exceptions  to  the  appellate  jutisdiction  of  the  court,  and
to  imply  a  negative  on  the  exercise  of  such  a  power  in
erery  case,  but  those  in  which  it  is  affirmatively  given  and
described  by  statute.  This  was  the  principle  also  expli-
citly declared  in  the  case  of  The  United  Stalet  v.  More,*
and  in  the  case  of  Duroiuteau  v.  The  Vniied  Statti.^  In
the  first  of  those  cases,  the  rule  of  construction  wfi^  car-
ried to  the  extent  of  holding  that  no  appeal  or  writ  of  er-
ror lay  in  a  criminal  case  from  the  circuit  court  of  the  dis-
trict of  roldnibia,  because  the  appellate  jurisdiction,  aa
to  that  district,  applied,  by  the  terms  of  the  statute,  to
civil  cases  only.  Tbe  rule  was  afterwards,  in  Ex  parte
Kiamtxf,'^  laid  down  generally,  that  tbe  Supreme  Coart
had  no  appellate  jurisdiction  from  circuit  courts,  in  crimi-
nal cases,  confided  to  it  by  tbe  laws  of  the  United  States.

(5)  The  constitution  says,  that  the  judicial  power  shall
extend  loall  cases  arising  under  the  constitution,  laws,  and
treaties  of  the  United  Stales ;  and  it  baa  been  made  a  ques-
tion as  to  wbnt  was  a  cote  arising  under  a  treaty. In


a3Cnmth,l59.  k  6  CrancA,307.  e  1  JFktaton,  38.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leetura  XV.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  805

Oieingi  y.  Norteood,*  there  was  an  ejertment  between  two
Gitizraa  of  Maryland,  for  lands  id  that  state  ;  aod  ibe  de-
fendant set  up  an  outstanding  title  in  a  British  subjeclt
which  he  contended  was  protected  by  the  British  treaty  of
1794.  The  Court  of  Appeals  decided  against  that  title
thus  sot  up  ;  and  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  Statet
held  that  not  to  be  a  case  within  the  appellate  jiirisdict  ion  of
the  court,  because  it  was  not  a  case  arising  under  the  trea-
ty. The  treaty  itself  was  not  drawn  in  question  either  di-
rectly or  incidentally.  The  title  in  question  did  not  grow
out  of  the  treaty,  and  as  the  claim  was  oot  under  the  trea-
ty, the  title  was  not  protected  by  it ;  and  whether  the  trea-
ty was  aa  obstacle  to  the  recovery,  was  then  a  question
exclusively  for  the  state  court.

(6.)  Tbo' judiciary  act  of  1789  required,  on  error  or  ap-
peal frora  a  state  court,  that  the  error  assigned  appear  on
the  face  of  the  record,  and  immediately  respect  some  ques-
tion affecting  the  validity  or  construction  of  the  constitu-
tion, treaties,  statutes,  or  authorities  of  the  union.  Under
this  act,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  record  should  state  in
terms  the  misconstruction  of  the  authority  of  the  union,  or
that  it  was  drawn  in  question  ;  but  it  must  show  some  act
of  cong««ss  applicable  to  the  case,  to  give  the  Supreme
Court  appellate  jurisdiction.  The  Court  was  so  precise
upon  this  point,  that  in  MUUr  v.  NKhoUi,^  notwithstand-
ing it  was  believed  that  an  act  of  congress,  giving  the
United  States  priority  in  cases  of  insolvency,  had  been
disregarded  ;  yet  as  the  fact  of  insolvency  did  not  appear
Dpon  record,  the  court  decided  that  they  could  not  take
jurisdiction  of  Ibe  ease.

(7.)  The  appellate  jurisdiction  may  exist,  though  astate  .
be  a  party,  and  it  extends  to  a  final  judgment  in  a  state

a  5  CraiKh,  344.

b  4  JFhtalon,  311.  Id  Hickie  t.  SUrite,  1  Ptleri'  Rep.  9R.  it  wai
htid,  that  ID  tlie  eaerciie  of  the  appellate  JQritdictioa  of  the  Suprame
Court,  (be  record  mutt  show  a  oornplete  tide  under  the  Irealj  or  act  of
coDgTom,  and  that  the  jodgmeut  of  Ibe  court  belon  tva*  ia  riolation  of
that  treat;  or  *tatn(e.
Vol.  I.  39


Do,i,,-,-,ih,.Googlc


M6  WRISPRUDENeE  OF  fPut  H.

court,  on  a  case  arisinf;  under  the  authority  of  the  union*
The  appellate  powers  uf  the  federal  judiciary  over  the  Mate
tribunala  was  again,  and  rery  largely  discuaaed,  in  thecsM
of  Cokttu  V.  Virginia  ;»  and  the  constitutional  authority
of  the  appellate  juriediction  of  the  Supreme  Court  woi
vindicated  with  great  strength  of  argument,  and  clearneM
of  illunratioo.  The  question  arose  under  an  act  of  coif
gress  institutiDg  a  Jnttery  in  the  diatriel  of  Columbia,
and  the  defeodeot  below  was  criminally  prosecuted  for
■elling  tickets  in  that  lottery,  contrary  to  an  act  of  (he  l»-
gislature  of  Virginia.  Judgment  wsh  rendered  against
Hm  in  the  highest  court  ofihe  state  in  which  the  cause  was
cognizable,  though  he  claimed  the  protection  of  the  act  of
congress.  A  writ  of  error  waa  brought  upon  thai  judg-
neut  into  tbe  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  Slates,  on  tho
ground  that  (he  prosecution  drew  in  questicm  the  validity
of  the  statute  in  Virginia,  as  being  repugnant  to  a  law  of
the  United  States,  and  that  the  decision  was  in  favour  of
the  state  law.  ft  waa  made  a  great  point  in  the  case,
whether  the  Supreme  Court  had  any  juriodiclion.

The  court  decided  that  its  appelliite  jurisdiction  was  not'
excluded  by  the  character  of  the  purtiss,  one  of  them  being
a  state,  and  the  other  a  citizen  of  the  state.  Jurisdiction
was  given  to  the  courts  of  the  union  in  two  cla!>aes  of  cases,
[n  the  first,  their  jurisdiction  depended  on  the  character  of
the  cause,  whoever  might  be  the  parties ;  and  in  the  second,
it  depended  entirely  on  the  character  of  the  parties,  and  it
was  unimportant  what  might  be  the  subject  of  controversy.
The  general  government,  though  limited  as  to  its  objects,
was  supreme  with  respect  to  those  objects.  It  waasuprema
ioall  casea  in  which  it  was  empowered  toact.  A  case  arising
under  tbe  constitution  and  laws  of  the  union,  was  cogni-
zablein  the  courtsof  the  union,  whoever  might  be  the  partiea
to  that  case.  The  sovereignly  of  the  states  was  limited,  or
■urrendered,inmany  eases  where  there  was  noot her  power
conferred  on  congress  than  a  constructive  power  to  main-

a  6  ff^Hlon,  9M.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LKMnXV.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  SOT

lain  the  priociplM  eMnblished  in  the  constitution.  One  of
ibe  instrumeots  by  which  that  duty  might  be  peaceably  per*
formeH,  waa  the  judicial  department.  It  was  authorized
to  decide  aU  eastt  of  ereiy  deBcription,  arising  under  the
constitution,  laws,  and  treaties  of  the  union  ;  and  from  tbil
general  grant  of  jurisdiction,  no  eiceptioniamadeofthoiie
eases  in  which  a  state  may  be  a  party.  It  was  likewise  a
political  axiom,  tbaFthe  judicial  powei  of  every  well  con-
atituled  government,  tnust  be  coeitensive  with  the  legislo-
lire  power,  and  nfust  be  capable  of  deciding  every  judicial
question  which  growsoutoftheconatitution  and  laws.  Tha
most  mischievous  consequences  would  follow,  ftom  ihe
absence  of  appellate  jurisdiction  over  a  siete  court  wherea
atate  was  a  party,  for  it  would  prostrate  the  government
and  laws  of  Ihe  union  at  the  feet  of  every  state.  The  power*
of  the  government  could  not  beexecuted  by  its  own  means,
in  any  state  disposed  to  resist  its  execution  by  a  course  of
legislation.  If  the  courts  of  the  uuioo  could  not  correct
the  judgments  of  the  state  courts,  inflicting  penalties  under
■tate  laws,  upon  individuals  executing  the  Inwsof  the  union,
each  member  of  the  confederacy  would  possess  a  e<(o  en
the  will  of  the  whole.  No  government  ought  to  be  so  de-
fective in  its  nrganization,  as  not  to  contain  within  itself
the  means  of  securing  the  execution  of  its  own  laws.  If
«ach  state  was  led  at  liberty  to  put  its  ewo  construction
upon  the  constitutional  powers  of  congress,  and  tn  legislate
in  conformity  to  its  own  opinion,  and  enforce  its  opinion
by  penalties,  and  to  resist  or  defeat,  iu  the  form  of  law,
the  legitimate  measures  of  the  union,  it  would  destroy  the
constitution,  or  reduce  it  to  the  imbecility  of  the  old  con-
federation. To  prevent  sueh  mischief  and  ruin,  the  eon-
ititution  ofthe  United  Slates,  most  wiselyandtnoitclearlj,
conferred  on  the  judicial  department  the  power  of  consiru^
ing  the  constitution  and  laws  in  every  case,  and  of  pre-
serving them  from  all  violation  from  every  quarter,  so  &f
as  judicial  decision  could  preserve  them.

The  case  before  the  court  was  one  in  which  jurisdiction
depended  upon  the  character  of  the  cause,  aa  it  was  a  case


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


SOi  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  U.

arising  under  the  law  of  the  onion.  It  was  not  an  ordioarj
case  of  a  controverHy  between  b  state  and  one  of  in  citi-
zenB,  fot  there  the  jurisdiction  would  depend  upon  the  cha-
racter of  the  parties.  The  cqurt  concluded,  that  the  ap-
pellate power  did  extend  to  ibe  case,  though  a  state  was  a
party,  because  it  was  a  case  touching  the  Talidity  of  an  act
of  congress,  and  the  decision  of  the  state  court  was  agaiimt
its  validity;  and  in  all  eases  arising  unftr  the  constitution,
laws,  and  treaties  of  the  union,  the  jurisdiction  of  the
court  RiHy  be  exercised  in  ao  appellate  form,  though  a
state  be  a  party.

The  court  observed,  that  the  amendment  to  the  consti-
tution, declaring  that  a  judicial  (tower  was  not  to  be  con-
strued to  extend  to  any  suit  in  law  or  equity  comtnenred
or  prosecuted  against  a  state  by  individuals,  did  not  apply
to  a  writoferror,  which  was  notasuit  against  a  stale  within
the  meaning  of  the  constitution;  and  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Supreme  Court,  in  cases  arising  under  the  constitution,
laws,  and  treaties  of  the  union,  may  be  exercised  by  a  writ
of  error  brought  upon  the  judgment  of  a  state  court.  The
United  States  are  one  oation'and  oae  people,  as  (o  all  case*
end  powers  given  by  the  constitution,  and  iht- judicial  power
must  he  competent,  not  only  to  decide  on  the  validity  of  the
constitution  or  law  of  a  state,  if  it  be  repugnant  to  the  con-
gtitution  or  law  of  the  United  States,  butaltw  to  decide  on
the  judgment  of  a  state  tribunal  enforcing  such  unconsti-
tutional law.  The  federal  courts  muxt  either  possess  ex-
clusive jurisi'iction  in  all  cases  affecting  the  constitution,
and  laws,  and  treaties  of  the  union,  or  they  must  have  power
to  revixe  the  judgments  rendered  on  ihf  m  by  the  state  tri-
bunals. If  the  several  state  courts  had  final  jurisdiction  over
the  same  cases  arising  upon  the  same  laws,  it  would  be  a
hydra  in  government,  from  which  not  hing  but  contradiction
and  confusion  could  proceed.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than
the  proposition,  that  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  nation  must
havepowertorevisethedecisionsof  local  tribunals  on  ques-
tions which  affect  the  nation,  or  the  must  important  endi
of  thegotflroment  might  be  defeated,  aad  we  ihouldjte  no


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Uetan  XV] THG  UNITED  STATES.  aO»

longer  one  nation  for  any  effinjeni  purpose.  The  doctrine
would  go  to  destroy  the  great  fundamental  priacipleaoa
which  the  fabric  of  the  union  stands. .

We  have  now  finished  the  review  of  ibe  most  important
points  that  have  ariaen  in  the  jurisprudence  of  the  United
States,  on  the  subject  of  the  original  and  appellate  juris-
diction of  the  Supreme  Court.  So  far  as  the  powers  of
that  court,  under  the  constitution,  and  under  the  35tk
section  of  the  judiciary  act  of  1789,  have  been  drawn  io
question,  they  have  been  maintained  with  great  success,
and  with  an  equal  display  of  dignity  and  discretion.*


a  In  WilHanu  v.M'arrit,  »ai  Monl^amtry  r.  Htrrumde:  19  Wheabm,
117.  129.  aodertht^SAth  ■ectjon  of  ihe  jndiciarj  act  of  tT89,  chap.  SO.  it
wu  held,  that  Ibe  Supreme  Court  hai  no  appellale  juritdictioo,  ooIcm
tbe  deciiloo  in  the  ttale  coort  be  agitaut  the  rig^bt  or  title  let  up  bj  the
partf  DDder  the coDttitDlioD  or  stataieof  tbe  Uaited  States, and  thelitis
depended  thereoD ;  or  onleii  the  docition  be  in  faooat  of  a  Mate  U*r,
when  Iti  validitj  wai  qaestioned.  ai  repo^But  to  the  txinititiilioii  of
Ibe  Unitad  States,  and  tba  rif  ht  of  the  part;  depended  upon  the  atats


i,Googlc


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


LECTURE  XTI.

OP  THE  JURISDICTION  OP  THE  FEDERAL  CODRTS  IN  RE-
SPECT TO  THE  COMMON  LAW,  AND  IN  RKSPECT  TO
PAKTlEt.

(I.)  It  bu  been  a  subject  of  much  difcusiion,  wfaetlier
the  courts  of  the  United  Slates  harea  oommoa  law  jurif-
diction,  and,  if  any,  to  what  extent.

In  the  case  of  tfae  United  Statet  v.  fVofraU,*  in  tb«  Cir-
cuit Court  at  Philndelfihia,  the  defeodaol  was  indicted  and
convicted  of  an  attempt  tn  bribe  tbe  commisMonera  of  the
revenue  ;  and  it  was  ooniended,  on  tbe  motion  in  arrest  of
judgment,  that  the  court  had  no  jurisdictioo  of  tbe  case*
because  all  the  judicial  authority  of  tbe  federal  courts  was
derived,  either  from  the  constitution,  or  tbe  acts  ofcongreaa
made  in  pursuance  of  it,  and  an  attempt  to  bribe  the  com-
missioner <rf'  the  revenue  was  not  a  violation  of  any  consti-
tutional or  legislative  prohibition.  Wbraever  congress
shall  tbiak  any  provision  by  law  necessary  to  carry  into
effect  the  constitutional  powers  of  the  government,  it  waa
■aid.  they  may  establish  it,  and  then  a  violation  of  its  sanc-
tions will  come  within  the  jurisdiction  of  tbe  circuit  courts,
whtdi  have  exclusive  cognisance  of  all  crimes  and  offencea
cognizable  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States.  Con-
gress had  provided  by  law  far  the  punishment  of  various
crimes,  and  even  for  tfae  punishment  of  bribery  itself  ia
tbe  case  of  a  judge,  an  officer  of  tbe  customs,  or  an  officer
of  tbe  excise;  but, in  the  case  of  the  commissioner  of  tbe
fevenae,  the  act  of  congress  did  uol  create  or  declare  tba


i,,-c,ih,GoOglc


J12  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [PartU.  '

ofTence.  The  question  then  fair);  and  direaly  presented
itself,  what  was  there  to  render  it  an  offence  arieing  un-
der the  constitution  or  laws  of  the  United  Staien,  and  c<^-
nizable  under. their  authority?  A  case  arising  under  a
law,  must  mean  a  case  depending  on  the  ezjmsition  ofa
law,  in  respect  to  something  which  the  law  prohibits  or  en-
joins ;  and  if  it  were  sufficient,  in  ordor  to  vrst  a  jurisdic-
tion to  try  a  crime,  or  sustain  an  action,  that  a  federal  offi-
cer was  concerned  and  affected  by  the  act,  a  source  of  ju-
risdiction would  be  opened  which  would  destroy  all  the
harries  between  the  judicial  authorities  of  the  states  and
ibe  general  goreroment.  Though  an  attempt  to  bribe  a
public  officer  be  an  offence  at  common  law,  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States  contains  no  reference  to  a  com-
mon law  authority.  Every  power  in  the  constitution  was
natter  of  definite  and  positive  grant,  and  the  very  powers
that  were  granted  could  not  take  effect  until  they  were
exercised  through  the  medium  ofa  law.  Though  congress
had  the  power  to  make  a  law  which  would  render  it  crimi-
nal to  offer  a  bribe  to  the  commissioner  of  the  revenue,
tbey  bad  not  done  it,  and  the  crime  was  not  recognized
either  by  the  legislative  or  conxtitutional  code  of  the  union.
Id  answer  to  this  view  of  the  subject,  it  was  observed,
that  the  offence  was  within  the  terms  of  the  constitution,
for  it  arose  under  a  law  of  the  United  States,  and  was  an
attempt  by  bribery  to  obstruct  er  prevent  the  execution  of
the  laws  of  the  union.  If  the  commissioner  of  the  reve-
nue had  accepted  the  bribe,  he  would  have  been  indicta-
ble in  the  courts  of  the  United  States;  and  upon  priniH-
ples  of  analogy,  the  offence  of  the  person  who  attempted  it
must  be  equally  cognizable  in  those  courts.  The  prosecu*
tion  against  Henfield  for  serving  oo  board  a  French  priva-
■  teer  against  the  Dutch,  was  the  exercise  ofa  common
law  power,  applied  to  an  offence  against  the  law  of  na-
tions, and  a  breach  of  a  treaty  which  provided  oo  specific
penalty  for  such  a  case.

The  court  were  divided  in  opinion  on  this  question.  In
the  opinion  of  the  circuit  judge,  an  indictment  at  common
law  could  not  be  sustained  in  theCircuit  Court. It  was  ad-

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lecture  XVI.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  aiS

mittfld  that  congress  wero  authorized  to  define  and  punish
the  Grime  ofbribery,  liut  as  the  act  charged  as  au  offence
in  the  indictment  had  not  been  declared  by  law  to  be  cri*
minsl,  the  courts  of  the  United  Slates  could  not  sustain  a
criminal  prosecution  for  it.  The  United  States,  in  their
national  capacity,  have  no  common  law,  and  their  courts
liave  not  anjr  common  law  jurisdiction  in  criminal  cases,
and  congress  have  not  provided  bj  law  for  the  ofTenre  con-
tained in  the  indictment,  and  until  thej  defined  the  offence,
and  prescribed  the  punishment,  he  thought  the  court  had
not  jurisdictiou  of  it.

The  district  judge  was  of  adiflerent  opinion,  and  he  held
that  the  United  States  were  constitutionally  possessed  of  a
•ommon  law powerto punish  misdemeanors,  and  the  power
might  have  been  exercised  by  congress  in  the  form  of  a
taw,  or  it  might  be  enforced  in  a  course  of  judiciul  pro-
ceeding. The  offence  in  quealino  was  one  against  the
well-being  of  the  United  States,  and  from  its  very  nature
cognizable  under  their  authority.

This  case  settled  nothing,  as  the  court  were  divided;  but
it  contained  some  of  (be  principal  arguments  on  each  side
of  this  nice  and  interexting  constitutional  question.

In  the  ctwe  of  The  United  Statei  v.  Burr,  which  arose
in  the  Circuit  Court  in  Virginia  in  1807,  the  chief  justice
of  the  United  Slates  declared,*  that  the  laws  of  the  several
•tales  could  not  be  regarded  as  rules  of  decision  in  trials
jbr  offence*  against  the  United  Slates,  because  no  man
could  be  condemned  or  prosecuted  in  the  federal  courts  on
a  stale  law.  The  expression,  triati  at mmmon  law,  nsedin
the  34th  section  of  the  judiciary  act,  was  not  applicable  to
prosecutions  for  crimes.  It  applied  to  civil  suits,  as  con-
tradistinguished from  criminal  prosecutions,  and  to  suits
at  common  taw,  as  contradistinguished  from  those  trhich
came  before  the  court  sitting  as  a  court  of  equity  and  ad-
miralty. He  admitted,  however,  that  when  the  judiciary

a  Opioion  delircrad  September  3d,  I  KOI,  and  reported  by  Mr.  Sildtit.

Vol.  I.  4«


i,Googlc


S14  JURISPRUDENCe  Ot  [Part  II.

•  t,we>14.aiithonzedtbecounitoiB8ue  writi  not  special
ly  provided  for  by  Matuie,  but  whirb  were  agreeable  to  the
prnuiplet  and  iuiigt$  of  lau>,  it  referred  to  that  jretierally
re«ogiiiB«d  aod  lo]:g  established  law  which  rorini-d  the
mbttratum  of  the  laws  of  every  state.
>  The  case  of  The  United  State*  v.  Bvdion  t{  Goodnin,*
brought  this  great^nmiion  in  our  iiHlionel  jurisprudetce
for  the  first  time  before  ihe  Supreme  Cuuit  of  the  IJiiiled
StHtns.  The  question  there  wa>,  Mheiher  the  Circuit  Court
of  the  United  States  hud  a  common  law  jurifutic'lion  in  rases
of  libet.  The  (l<:tendants  had  bt-enit^dicted  in  the  Circuit
Court  in  Conni^clieitt  for  a  libel  on  the  president  of  rhe
Vnilfd  States,  and  the  court  was  dividid  on  the  point  of
jtiri^dtriion.  A  majority  of  the  Supreme  court  decided,
lb»i  the  circuit  courts  could  nut  exercise  a  common  law
jurisdiction  in  criminal  cases.!)  Of  all  the  courts  which  the
United  States,  under  their  general  jiowers,  might  ronstitute,
the  Supreme  Court  was  the  only  one  that  posve^ed  juria*
diction  derived  immediately  from'  the  constitution.  All
other  courts  created  by  the  general  government  positessed
DO  jurisdiction  hut  what  was  given  them  by  the  powenbat
created  them,  and  could  be  vested  with  none  but  what  the
power  ceded  to  the  general  government  would  authorize
•them  Iti  confer,  and  the  jurisdiction  claimed  in  that  case
had  not  been  conferred  by  any  legislative  act.  When  ft
court  is  created,  and  its  operations  confined  to  certain  spe-
,  cific  objects,  it  could  not  assume  a  more  extended  juriedic-
tioo.  Certain  implied  powers  must  necessarily  result  to
the  courts  of  justice  from  the  nature  ofthcir  institution,  but
jurisdiction  of  crimes  against  the  state  was  not  oneofthem<
,  To  fine  tor  contempt,  to  imprison  for  contumacy,  to  enforce
t\tie  observaope  of  orders,  are  powers  necessary  to  the  exer-
cise of  all  other  powers,  and  incident  to  the  courts,  without
the  authority  of  a  statute. But  to  exercise  criminal  juria-


B  7  Cnmck,  M,

b  Id  Ibe  «tatei  of  Ohio  and  LonhioDa,  it  ii  nDderatood  to  b«  b«ld  tbat
tbere  is  do  commoo  law  iodrcUble  offence,  and  that  every  indiclable  of-
fSDca  oiBit  be  KroDiMled  opoo  woie  ttUut«.


t,Goo(^lc


Lectiirt  XVI.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  Sl$

diction  in  Gomtnon  law  cases  was  not  within  ihetr  implied
powers,  and  it  was  necessary  for  cunffress  to  make  the  aet
a  crime,  to  affix  a  (lunishinent  to  it,  and  to  declare  the
court  which  should  have  Jurisdiction.

The  general  rjuostion  was  afterwards  brouKfat  into  re-
newed discussioo  in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States
for  Massachusetts,  in  the  case  of  Tht  Unittd  Staut  t.
CooMgr'.*  Notwithstanding  the  decision  in  the  raxe  of
The  United  States  v.  Hudion  tf  Goodtoin,  the  coort  in
Uassachusetts  thought  thequestion,  in  consequence  of  itfl
Tast  importance,  entitled  to  be  rt-viewed  and  aguin  dis-
cussed, especially  as  the  case  in  the  Supreme  Court  bad
been  decided  without  argument,  aiid  by  a  majority 'Ooly
of  the  court.  In  this  case  the  defendant  was  iodicled  for
an  offence  committed  on  the  high  seas,  in  forcibly  rescuing
a  prize  which  had  been  captured  by  an  American  cruiser.
The  simple  question  was,  whether  the  Circuit  Court  had
jurisdiction  to  punish  offences  against  the  United  Stai*-.s,
which  had  not  been  preriouMly  defined,  and  a  specific
punishment  affixed  by  statute.  The  judge  who  presided
in  that  court  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  consider  the
broadqueatiun  whether  the  United  States,  as  a  sovereign
power,  had  entirely  adopted  the  common  iaw.  He  admit-
ted that  the  courts  of  the  United  States  wert"  courts  of  li-
mited jurisdiction,  and  could  nut  exercise  any  authorities
not  confided  to  them  by  the  constitution  and  laws  made  in
pursuance  of  it.  But  he  insiBied  that  when  an  authority
was  oDce  lawfully  given,  the  nalureand  extent  of  that  au-
thority, and  the  mode  in  which  it  should  be  exercised,  must
be  regulated  by  the  rales  of  the  common  law,  and  that  if
this  distinction  was  kept  in  sight,  it  would  dissipate  the
whole  difficulty  and  obscurity  of  the  subject.

It  was  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  constitution'  and  laws
of  the  United  States  were  made  in  reference  to  the  ezist-
encet^the  common  law.  whatever  doubts  might  be  enter-
tained as  to  the  question,  whether  the  common  law  of
England,  in  its  broadest  sense,  including  equity  and  ad-
miralty as  well  as  legal  doctrines,  was  the  oommnn  law  of
the  United  States. In  many  cases,  the  language  of  ihe

a  1  QnUiwn  4&8.

Google


S!6-  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  tP"rl  II.

coDititution  and  lawf  would  be  inexplicable  without  refer-
ence to  the  common  law  ;  and  the  existence  »t  the  com-
mon law  IB  not  only  supposed  by  ibe  conBtitution,  but  it  it
appealed  to  for  the  construction  and  interpretation  of  its
powers.

It  was  competent  for  congreis  to  confide  to  the  circuit
courts  jurisdiction  of  all  offences  against  the  United
States,  and  they  have  given  to  it  exclusive  cognizance  of
most  crimes  end  offences  cogniznble  under  the  autborily
of  the  United  States.  The  words  of  the  11th  section  of
the  judiciary  act  of  17S9  were,  that  the  circuit  courlfl
should  bare  "exclusive  cognizance  of  all  crimes  and  of-
fences cognizable  under  the  authority  of  the  United
States,  except  where  this  act  otherwise  provides,  or  the
laws  of  the  United  States  shall  otherwise  direci."  This
means  all  crimes  and  offences  to  which,  by  the  conslitu-
tion  of  the  United  States,  the  judiciul  power  extends,  and
the  jurisdiction  could  not  be  given  in  more  broad  and  com-
prehensive terms.  To  ascertain  what  are  crimes  end  of-
fences against  tho  United  States,  recourse  must  be  bad  to
the  principles  of  the  common  law,  taken  in  connexion  with
the  constitution.  Thus,  congress  bed  provided  for  the
punishment  of  murder,  manslaughter,  and  perjury,  under
certain  circumstances,  but  had  not  defined  those  crimes.
The  explanation  of  them  must  be  sought  in,  and  exclusive-
ly governed  by,  the  common  law ;  and  upon  any  other
supposition,  the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  would
he  left  in  its  exercise  to  arbitrary  discretion. ^  Id  a  great
variety  of  cases  arisiug  under  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  the  will  of  the  legislature  cannot  be  executed,  un-
less by  the  adoption  ofthe  common  law.  The  interpreta-
tion and  exercise  ofthe  vested  jurisdiction  of  (he  courts  of
the  United  States,  as  for  instance,  in  suits  in  equity  and  in
causes  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction,  and  in  very
many  other  cases,  must,  in  tbe  absence  of  positive  law,  be
governed  exclusively  by  the  common  law.

a  Judge  Wjkon,  !□  hii  cbaree  lo  a  graod  jarj  in  tb«  Circuit  Couri  at
th*  United  aiate«.iDV.rgiDiB.  in  1781,  bbserted,  that  we  mort  recur  lo
tbe  oommoa  law  bribe  df^finirion  anddetcriplianornianf  criowt  l^nsl
the  United  Slaiet. See  Wilion-'i  WotIu,  vol  3.  371—377.

Google


Lecture  XVI.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  417

There  are  maoy  crimee  and  ofTeDces,  such  as  ofTenceB
a^ainat  tiie  imvereigaty,  the  |>ublic  rights,  (he  public  jus-
tice, the  public  peace,  and  the  jiublic  police  of  the  United
States,  whirh  are  GOgiiiziible  uiiilcr  itd  authority  ;  and  in
the  exercUe  of  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  over
them,  the  princijilea  of  tlie  common  law  must  be  applied
in  the  absence  of  statute  regulations.  Treason,  conspira-
cies to  commit  treason,  eml>ezzlement  of  public  records,
bribery,  rediMance  to  judicial  process,  riots  and  misde-
meanors ou  the  bij^h  seas,  frauds  and  obstructions  of  (h«
public  laws  of  trade,  and  rubbery  and  embezzlement  of
the  mad  of  the  United  States,  are  offences  at  common
law,  and  when  directed  against  the  United  States,  they
are  efTcnces  against  the  United  States  ;  and  being  ofico-
ces,  the  circuit  courts  have  cognizance  of  them,  and  can
try  and  punish  them  upon  the  principles  of  the  common
law.  The  punishment  inusi  be  fine  and  imprisonmeDt,
for  it  is  a  settled  principle,  that  whore  an  offence  exists,  to
which  no  speci6c  punishment  is  affixed  by  statute,  &o»
and  imprisonment  is  the  punishment.  The  oomnwn  law
is  then  to  be  referred  to,  uot  only  as  the  rule  of  decision  ia
criminal  trials  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States,  but  in
the  judgment  or  punishment ;  and  by  common  law  b*
theant  the  word  in  its  lorgnxt  sense,  as  including  the  wbola
system  of  Engliith  j'triiprudcnce.

It  was  accordingly  roncluded,  that  the  circuit  courts  bad
cognizance  of  all  oSenois  ai^ainst  the  United  States,  and
what  those  offences  were,  dejiended  iijkhi  the  common  law
applied  to  the  powers  confided  to  thii  United  States;  and
that  the  circuit  courts  havinjc  such  cognizance,  might  pun-
ish by  fine  and  imprisonment,  where  no  punishment  was
specially  provided  by  statute.  The  admiralty  was  a  court
of  extensive  criminal,  as  well  as  civil  jurisdiction  ;  and  of-
fences of  admiralty  jurisdiction  were  exclusively  cogniza-
ble by  the  United  Slates,  and  were  offences  against  the
United  States,  and  punishable  by  fine  and  imprisonment,
when  no  other  punishment  was  specially  prescribed.

This  case  was  brought  up  to  the  Supreme  Court,  but  it
was  not  argued. Adifference  of  opinion  stillesinedamonf

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


518  JURISPRUDENCE  Or  [Partll.

the  members  of  the  coart ;  and  under  the  circumatancet,
the  court  merely  said,  that  they  did  DOt  choose  to  review
tbeir  former  dectBioa  in  the  case  of  The  United  States  v.
HaJton  tf  G'oiiain,  or  draw  it  in  doubt.'  Thedemion
was  for  the  defendant,  and  consequently  against  the  claim
to  any  common  law  jurisdiction  in  criminal  cases.

These  jarring  opinions  and  decisions  oft  he  federal  courts,
have  Bat  settled  the  general  question  as  to  the  application
and  influence  of  the  common' law,  upon  clear  and  definite
principles;  and  it  may  still  be  considered,  in  civil  cases,
an  open  for  further  conaideration.  The  rase  ot  Hudson  tf
Goodwin  decided  that  the  United  States  courts  had  no  ju-
risdiction ^iren  them  by  the  constitution  or  by  statute,
orer  libels;  and  the  case  of  Worrall  decided  that  they
bad  no  jurisdiction  in  the  case  of  an  attempt  to  bribe  a
commiMioner  of  the  revenue.  If  that  were  so,  the  com-
mon lew  certainiy  could  not  give  them  any.  The  cases
were  therefore  very  correctly  decided  upoa  the  principle
■tmimed  by  the  court.  But  the  subsequent  case  of  Cool-
idge  did  not  fall  within  that  principle,  berause  the  offence
there  charged  was  clearly  a  case  of  admiralty  jurisdictioo,
and  the  courts  of  the  United  States  would  seem  to  have
bad  general  and  ezcluuve  jurisdiction  over  the  case.
Mr.  Ou  Ponceau,  in  his  "  Dissertation  on  the  nature
and  extent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts  of  the  United
States,"  has  ably  examined  the  subject,  and  shed  strong
light  o)k  this  intrinsic  and  perplexed  branch  of  the  na-
tional jurisprudence.  He  pursues  the  distinction  origi-
nally taken  in  the  circuit  court  in  Massachusetts,  and
maintains,  that  we  have  not,  under  our  federal  govern-
ttient,  any  common  taw,  considered  as  a  source  of  Ju-
ritdiction ;  while  on  the  other  band,  the  common  law,
^nsidered  merely  an  the  wteani  or  instrument  of  exercising
the  jurisdiction,  conferred  by  the  constitution  and  laws
of  the  union,  does  exist,  and  forms  a  safe  and  benefi-
oial  system  of  national  jurisprudence. The  courtscaonot

a  t  Whsalm,  415.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lecture  XVI.J THE  UNITED  STATES.  3I»

derive  their  right  to  act  from  the  rommoo  Ian.  Tbey  mint
)onk  fur  that  right  to  the  rantAilutioD  and  law  of  the  United
Stutes.  But  whee  the  general  jurisdiction  or  autliorily  is
given,  as  in  caseR  of  admiralty  anij  maritime  jurisdiction,
tke  ruUt  of  action  under  that  jurisdiction,  if  not  preferibed
by  statute,  may.and  must  be  taken. from  the  common  law,
when  they  are  apidicable,  because  they  are  necessary  to
fire  effect  to  the  jurisdiclion.*

The  principle  assumed  by  the  courts  in  the  eaten  of
fForrall  and  of  Hadion  tf  Oooduin,  is  conaiilercd  to  be  a
safe  and  sound  principle-  The  mere  circumstance  that  the
party  injured  by  the  ofFeoce  diider  prosecutiun,  was  an  offi-
cer of  the  government  of  the  United  States,  dues  not  giva
jurisdiction;  fur  neither  the  constitution,  nor  the  judicial
acts  founded  upon  it,  gave  the  federal  courts  a  general  ju-
risdiction in  criminal  cases,  affecting  the  officers  of  govern-
ment, as  they  have  in  cases  affecting  public  ministers  and
consuls.  Because  an  officer  was  apptnntcd  under  the  con->
■titution,  that  would  not  of  iutlf  render  ail  cases  in  which
'  they  were  concerned,  or  might  be  affected,  cases  arising
under  the  constitution  and  laws,  and  cognizable  by  theju*
diciary.  Such  a  wide  construction  would  be  transferring
legislatire  power  to  the  judiciary,  and  vest  it  with  almost
unlimited  jurisdiction;  for  where  is  the  act  that  might  not,
in  some  distant  manner,  be  connected  with  the  conetitutioa
or  laws  of  the  United  States?  It  rests  alone  in  the  discre-
tion of  congress,  to  throw  over  the  persons  and  character
of  the  officers  of  the  government,  acting  in  their  official
stations,  a  higher  protection  than  that  afforded  by  the  laws
of  the  states;  and  when  laws  are  made  for  that  purpose,
the  federal  courts  will  be  charged  with  Ibe  duty  of  execu-
ting them.

This  appears  to  be  sound  di'Rtriue,  and  to  be  deduced
from  the  cases  which have been  mentioned. There  is


«  Cui  jurudUtio  data  ert,  oa  qaoque  >
fttrudialh  tapHeari  nan  pvlttt. ihg-  -i


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


92*  jurisprudence:  of  [Pan  If.

much  tteight  undoubtedly  due  to  ibe  arj^ument  of  the  Cir-
cuit Court  in  Uasaochusettn ;  and  an  attempt  to  bribe  an
officer  of  the  government,  or  to  libel  an  officer  of  the  go-
rernroeni  in  relation  to  hia  official  acts,  would  aeemtn be
an  offence  against  that  government.  They  tend  directly
to  weaken  or  pervert  ibe  administration  of  it ;  and  if  it  once
be  admitted  that  sucb  acta  amount  to  an  offmce  against  the
United  Statet,  they  must  (^  course  be  cognizable  under  its
authority,  and  belong  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  circuit
courts.  The  great  difficulty,  and  the  danfrer  is,  in  leaving
it  to  the  courts  to  say  what  it  an  offence  agmntt  the  Dnitii
States,  when  the  law  haa  not  aperifinally  defined  it.  The
safer  course  undoubtedly  is,  to  confine  the  jurisdiction  in
criminal  cases  to  »(atuu  offences  duly  defined,  and  to  esse*
within  the  exprcst  jurisdiction  given  by  the  constitution.
The  admiralty  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts  is  derired
expressly  from  the  const  it  tition;  ami  rrintinul  cases  belong-
ing to  that  jurisdiction  by  ihe  common  law,  and  by  the  law
of  nations,  might  well  have  been  supposed  to  be  cognizable
in  the  admiralty  courts,  without  any  statute  authority.  If
the  common  law  be  a  ruleof  decision  in  Ibe  exercise  of  the
lawful  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts,  why  ought  it  not
to  apply  to  criminal,  as  well  astocirilcases,  and  upon  tbe
same  princt,ile,  when  jurisdiction  is  clearly  vested  f  Ifcob-
gress  should  by  law  authorize  the  dislrici  or  circuit  courts
to  take  cc^nizonceofattempts  tobribean  officer  of  the  go-
vernment in  the  exercise  of  hia  official  trust,  and  should
make  no  further  piovision ,  the  courts  would,  of  course,  in
the  description,  definition,  prosecution,  and  punishment  of
the  offence,  be  bound  to  follow  those  general  principles
and  usages,  which  are  not  repugnant  totheconaiitutioo  and
lawa  of  the  United  States,  and  which  constitute  the  com-
mon law  of  the  land,  and-  form  the  basia  of  all  American
jurisprudence.  Though  the  judiciary  power  of  theUnited
States  cannot  take  cognizance  of  offenecs  at  common  law,
unless  thry  have  juriadiclioo  over  the  person  or  subject
matter,  given  iheni  tiy  the  constitution  or  laws  made  in  pur-
suance of  it ;  yet,  when  the  jurisdiction  is  ooco  granted,  tin


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leclure  XVl] THE  UNITED  STATES.  821

cominon  law,  under  ibe  correclion  of  the  constitution  and
atalute  law  of  the  United  States,  would  seem  to  be  a  neces-
sary and  a  safe  guide,  in  all  cnsce,  civil  and  criminal,  aris-
ing under  the  exercise  of  that  jurisdiction,  and  not  spe-
cially provided  for  by  statute.  Without  such  a  guide,  the
enurts  would  be  left  to  a  dangerou8discretion,andto  roam
at  large  in  the  trackless  firld  of  their  own  imaginations.

The  Supreme  Court  of  thellnited  States,  in  RobitiMonv-
Campbell,*  went  far  towards  the  admission  of  the  existence
and  application  of  the  common  law  to  civil  cases  in  the  fe-
deral courts.  The  judiciary  act  of  1789,^  had  declared*
that  the  laws  of  the  several  stales,  except  where  the  consti-
tution, treaties,  or  statutes  of  the  union,  othemise  re-
quired, should  be  regarded  as  rules  of  decision  in  trials  at
common  law  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States,  in  cases
where  they  applied.  The  subsequent  act  of  Hay,  1792,
confirmed  the  modes  of  proceeding  then  used  in  suits  at
common  law  in  the  federal  courts,  and  declared,  that  the
modes  of  proceeding  in  suits  in  equity  should  be  according
to  the  principles  and  usages  of  courts  of  equity.^  Under
those  provisions,  the  court  declared,  that  the  remedies  in
the  federal  courls,at  common  law,  and  in  equity,  were  to
be,  not  according  to  the  practice  of  state  courts,  "  but  ac-
cording to  the  principles  of  common  law  and  equity  as  dis-
tinguished and  defined  in  that  country  from  which  we  de-
rived our  knowledge  of  those  principles."

In  this  view  of  the  subject,  the  common  law  may  be
cultivated  as  part  of  the  juri^rudence  of  the  United  States.
In  its  improved  condition  in  England,  and  especially  in  its
improved  and  varied  condition  in  this  country,  under  the
benign  influence  of  an  expanded  commerce,  of  enlightett-
«djustice,of  republican  principles,  and  of  sound  philosoi-


a  9  Wktabm.  >1«.  10.  IbU.  169.  b  Sec.  34.

C  The  practice  of  Ihs  Sapremfl  CourUof  the  ttatei  inuttin  SepUnf
ter17B9,  wai  adopted,  labjecl  to  alteration*  by  tbe  federal  court*.
I  Paint,  4SS,  ao.  10  Whtalon.  1  Tlie  federal  coDits  follow  ihe  iieci-
■iontoftheilatecoDrtioa  thecoustructioii  of  >tale  lawi,  unless  tliej
cM>me  in  coiiSiot  with  Ihe  conslilutioa  or  law*  of  (hs  tJDil«d  ^tatca.
10  ^■•"ir.rt,  ja9.  1  Faiiu.  iB-l.
Vofc.  I.  41

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


33>  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [PartU.

pby,  the  commoa  law  has  become  a  code  or  matured  ethiei,
and  enlarged  civil  wisdom,  admirabl;  adapted  to  promote
and  secure  the  freedom  and  happiness  of  social  life.  It
has  provedto  be  a  sjstem  replete  witfa  vigorous  end  healthy
principles,  eminently  conduciTe  to  the  growth  of  ciril
liberty  ;  and  it  is  in  no  instanre  disgraced  by  such  a  sla-
vish |)olitical  maxim  as  that  with  which  the  Institutes  of
Justinian  are  introduced."  It  is  the  common  jurispru-
dence of  the  peitplf  of  the  United  States,  and  was  brought
with  them  as  colonists  from  England  end  established  here,
tofaratt  it  was  adapted  to  our  insiitutions  and  circum-
•tannes.  ft*  was  claimed  by  the  congress  of  the  United
Colonies  in  1774,  as  a  branch  of  those  '*  indubitable  rights
and  liberties  to  which  the  respective  colonies  are  en-
titled."'* It  fillfi  u|i  every  interstice,  and  occupies  every
vide  space  which  the  statute  law  winnot  occupy.  Its
principles  may  be  compared  to  the  influence  of  the  liberal
artH  and  sciences  ;  advenu  perfugium  ac  lotatium  prabeni  ;
deleetant  dotni,  non  impediuni  foru  ;  ptmoctant  nohucum,
pertgrinantur,  nutUamur.  Toiise  the  words  of  the  learn-
ed jurist  to  whom  I  have  already  alluded,'^  '*  we  live  in  the
midst  of  the  common  law,  we  inhale  it'at  every  breath,
imbibe  it  at  every  pore ;  we  meet  with  it  when  we  wake
and  when  we  lay  downtofleep,  when  we  travel  and  when
WF  stay  at  home;  and  it  is  interwoven  with  the,every
idiom  that  we  speak  ;  and  we  cannot  learn  another  syv-
tem  of  laws,  without  learning,  at  the  same  time,  another
lanjruage."

II.  The  jurisdintionorthe  federal  courts  ratfone  per*o-
fu rvm,  and  depending  on  the  relative  chararter  of  the
litigant  parties,  has  been  the  subjert  of  murh  judicial  dis-
cussion. '  The  constitution  gives  jurisdiction  totbe  federal
courts  of  all  suits  between  aliens  and  citizens,  and  between
citizens  of  different  states,  and  we  have  a  series  of  judicial
decisions  on  that  subject.


vol.  1.  p.  tL

vtenjumdktiim,  p.  91.

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


iMtunXVl.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  3x9

In  Btagham  y.  Cabot,^  the  Supreme  Court  hold,  that  it
<rafl  necessary  to  set  forth  the  citizenship  of  the  respective
parties,  or  the  alieoage  when  a  foreigner  was  roiicf  roed,
by  positive  averments,  in  order  to  bring  the  case  within  the
jurifidiction  of  the  Circuit  Court;  and  if  there  was  not  a
sufficient  allegation  for  that  purpose  on  record,  00  ^rimlio-
tionofthe  suit  wiMild  be  sutttaiiied.  The  same  doctrine
.  was  maintained  in  Turner  v.  EmUU,*>  and  in  Turner  v.  i%«
Jtank  of  .>or(A  America  f  and  it  was  declared,  that  tha
Circuit  Court  was  a  court  of  limited  jurimiiRtion,  and  had
eognizance  only  of  a  few  cases  specially  circumstanced,
and  the  fair  presumption  was,  that  a  cause  was  without
its  jurisdiction  till  the  contrary  appeared.  Upon  that  prin-
ciple the  rule  was  founded,  making  it  necessary  to  set
forth,  upon  the  record  of  the  Circuit  Court,  the  facts  or
circumstances  which  ^ve  jurisdiction,  either  exprosfily,
or  in  such  manner  as  to  render  them  certain  bv  le^al  in-
tendment, it  is  necessary,  therefore,  where  the  defendaat
appears  to  be  a  citizen  of  one  state,  to  show,  by  averment,
that  the  plaintiff  is  a  citizen  of  some  other  state,  or  an
alien  ;  or  if  the  suit  he  upon  a  promissory  note,  by  tfae  en-
dorsee, to  show  that  the  original  payee  was  so ;  fur  i'  is  his
description,  as  well  as  that  of  the  endorsee,  which  gives
tbt!  jurisdiction.

The  judiciary  act  of  1789,  sec.  11.  gives  jurisdiction  to
tbe  Circuit  Court  when  an  alien  is  a  party,  and  it  was  de-
cided in  Mottman  w  Higeinson,'^  that  the  jurisdiction  was
confined  to  the  case  of  suits  between  citizens  and  foreigners,
and  did  not  extend  to  suits  between  alien  and  alien ;  and
that  if  it  appeared  on  record  that  the  one  parly  was  an
alien,  it  must  likewise  appear  affirmatively,  that  tho  other
party  was  a  citizen.  So,  again,  in  Course  v.  Steofl,''  it  was
decided  to  the  name  effect.  The  principle  is,  that  it  mu^t
appear  on  the  record  that  the  charncterof  the  parties  ttiip.
ports  the  jurisdiction  ;and  the  points  in  this  case  were  re-

a  3  Dal!iu,XZ. 6  A  DaUai,  7. c  4  Da'!ai.  «. d  4  Dnll'u.  12.

•  4  Dallai,  K.  Tlie  omiiiioi]  of  tlie  above  ivr.TineaH,  or  tny  oll«t
raqaiaito  to  frire  juriidiction,  ii  mitlcr  ormbstanqe.  and  Dot  cured  bj
rerdict,  iH>r  acoeadftbla  artet  verdict. 1  Fabu,  4flS.  &94.


t,Goo(^lc


«4  lURISPRUDENCE  OF  fPartU.

Mserted  in  Montaht  r.  Murray,^  aod  in  Hoiigton  V.  Sou-
trbtmk,*'  eod  in  SuUivaa  v.  The  f^lton  Steam  Boat  Com-
pany." In  Maxjield  v.  hevyt^  the  queetion  of  juriadictt<»i
arising  from  the  character  of  the  parties,  was  discussed  ia
the  Circuit  Court  in  Penoaylvania,  and  the  court  animnd-
verted  severely  upon  an  attempt  to  create  a  jurisdiction  hj
fraud,  contrary  to  the  policy  of  the  constitution,  and  the
law.  The  suit  tr as  an  ejf^cimenl  between  citizens  of  tba
same  state,  to  try  title  to  land  ;  and  to  give  Jurisdictiou  to
the  Circuit  Court,  a  deed  was  given  colliisively,  and
without  any  consideration,  to  n  citizen  of  anolbfr  state,
for  the  sole  purpose  of  making  him  a  nominal  plaintiff,  ia
order  togive  the  federal  court  jurisdiction.  The  court  dis-
missed tlie  suit,  and  observed  that  the  constitution  nnd
laws  of  the  United  Stales  had  been  anxious  to  define  by
precise  boundaries,  and  prederve  with  great  caution,  tba
line  between  the  judicial  authority  bf  the  Union,  and  that  '
of  the  individual  states.  Mu  contrivance  to  defeat  the  law
of  the  lend,  and  create  jurisdiction  by  fraud,  could  be
tolerated.

The  doctrine  in  the  original  case  of  Bingham  r.  Cabot,
was  again  confirmed  in  AbercrombU  v.  Diipuii,^  with  some
aympttoms  of  reluctance  ;  and  it  would  setrm,  that  the  court
was  not  entirely  satisfied  with  the  precise  limits  in  which
their  jurisdiction  had  been  circumscribed,  and  embarrassed,
by  their  predecessors.  But  in  Strawbridge  v.  Currm.f  the
limitation  of  the  federal  jurisdiction  was  considered  as  being
still  more  close  and  precise.  The  Supreme.Court  declared,
that  where  the  interest  whs  joint,  and  two  or  more  persons
were  concerned  in  that  interest,  as  joint  plaintiffs,  or  joint
defendants,  each  of  them  must  he  competent  to  sue,  or  lia-  *
ble  to  be  sued,  in  the  federal  courts  j  and  the  suit  was  dis-
missed  in  that  case,  because  some  of  the  plaintiffs  and  de-
fendants were  citizens  of  the  same  atate-g The  next  case


«  4  Cr^ch.  48.  b  5  C™«A.  303.  c  6  fTAtaf^,  4^0.

n^ ;^-  '  '  C-«A.343.  /3  Cra^A,  867.  ,

d.cuon  a,>..B^  frocn  the  character  of  <he  p«r,y.  b,  j„i„i„«  „„t  ,„  Jitnor
eilizaD  or  another  alate ,  a  mtrt  nominal  p^rty.  wbodoe,  nol  pomi*  the  re-


Leeturo  XVI-l  THE  ITNITED  STATES.  825

that  arose  on  this  subject  was,  whether  a  corporation  was
a  citizen  within  the  meaning  of  the  constitution,  and  could
•u«  in  the  federal  courts  in  consequence  of  its  lejcai  cha-
racter.; and  it  was  decided,  in  the  cases  of  the  Hopt  In-
twance  Company  v.  Bomrdman,  and  of  the  Barik  of  tht
United  Stattt  v.  Deveaux,  that  a  corporation  aj;gregnte
was  not,  in  its  corporate  capacity,  a  citizen,  and  that  its
rijtht  to  litisate  in  the  federal  courts  depended  upon  the
character  of  the  individuals  who  composed  the  botly  poli-
tic, and  which  character  must  appear  by  proper  aver-
ments upon  the  record.^  But  a  corporate  afrgregate,  com-
posed of  citizens  of  one  state,  may  sue  a  citizen  of  another
■tate  in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States.

With  respect  to  the  question  on  the  peculiar  right  of  the
Bank  of  the  United  States  to  sue  in  the  federal  courts,  it
was  decided  in  reference  to  the  first  Bank  of  the  United
States,  that  no  right  was  conferred  on  that  bank  by  its
act  of  incorporation,  to  sue  in  those  courts.  It  had  only
the  ordinary  corporate  capacity  to  sue,  and  be  sued  ;  and
being  an  invisible  artifirial  being,  a  mere  legal  entity,  and
not  a  citizen,  its  r'isht  to  sue  must  depend  upon  the  cha-
racter of  the  individuals  of  which  it  was  composed.  The
constitution  of  the  United  States  supposed  apprehensions
might  exist,  that  the  tribunals  of  the  states  would  not
administer  justice  as  impartially  as  those  of  the  nation,  to
parties  of  every  dosrription,  and  therefore  it  estaliliKhed
national  tribunals  for  the  decision  of  controversies  be-
tween aliens  and  a  citizen,  and  between  citizens  of  ditfer-
ent  states.  The  persons  whom  a  corporution  represeiils
may  be  aliens  or  citizens,  and  thecontroveriiy  is  between
persons  suing  by  their  corporate  name  for  a  corporate


«  cilizea  of  one  itale  esUblJibe*  hit  doiiiwil  In  anoDwr,  it  ii  sufficient  to
enable  htm  to  mw  ia  the  federal  courC.  Even  if  he  temovei  from  mi«
•late  to  another  witb  tbe  arowad  «bject  t»  acquire  a  cepacitj  to  ine  in
the  federal  courti,  it  I)  aol  deemed  »  fraud  npon  Ow  Uw,  prorided  he  te-
more*  » iih  ibe  iDteolion  to  etUbUah  fail  permBiient  Kiideoce  CUiett,
T.  Paoifiu  Idi.  Co-  I  Paint,  S94.
m  5  CmtcA,  ST.  ei,

k  la  Breithanpt  r.  The  Bank  oTGeoritia,  I  Peterf  Jtep.  ns.  it  «m
lliere  held  that  a  bill  to  give  jariadiolioD  muit  ttate  that  the  atockbotdeis
were  citixens  <^  Geonna.  ,  -  ■

Co  Ogle


SX^  JURISPRUDENCE  or  [Part  U.

rigbtfand  tba  indindual  defendaot.  Wherelbe  menben
of  the  corporatioo  are  aliens  or  citizena  of  a  different
stale  from  the  opposite  party,  the;  come  within  the  rea-
•on  and  terms  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts.
The  court  can  look  beyond  the  corporate  name,  and  no-
tice tbe  character  of  the  members,  who  are  not  consider^
ed  to  every  intent  as  placed  out  of  view  and  nerged  in
tbe  corporatiofk  Incorporated  aHeos  may  sue  a  cittzen,
or  the  incorporated  citizens  of  one  state  may  sue  s  cittzea
of  another  state,  in  tha  federal  courts,  by  their  eorporato
name,  and  the  controversy  is  aubstaotially  between  aliens
and  a  citizen,  or  between  the  citizens  of  one  state  and
those  of  another.  In  that  case,  the  president,  directors,
and  company  of  the  Bank  of  the  United  States  averred,
that  they  werecitizens  of  Pennsylvania,  and  that  the  de-
fendaBts  were  citiiBne  of  Georgia;  and  this  averment,
>ot  traversed  or  denied,  was  sufficient  to  sustain  tbe  suit
in  the  Circuit  Court.  In  sails  by  the  prewnt  Bank  eftho
United  States,  such  an  avermeBt  is  not  necessary,  because
the  act  incorporating  the  bank*  authorizna  it  to  sue  and
be  sued  in  tbe  circuit  courts  of  the  United  States,  as  well
as  in  tbe  stats  courts.  Without  such  an  express  provi-
Moa,  it  would  have  been  difficuh  for  the  Bank  of  tbe  Uni>
ted  States  ever  to  have  sued  in  the  federal  courts,  if  the
foot  of  citizenship  of  all  tbe  members  was  to  be  scrutiniz-
ed, for  there  is  probably  few  or  no  states  which  have  not
some  stockholder  of  the  bank  a  resident  citizen. >>  It  was
indispensable  for  congress  to  have  provided  specially  for  a
jurisdiction  over  suita  in  which  tbe  bank  was  concerned,
or  no  jurisdiction  could  well  have  been  sustained.  It  was
truly  observed  by  the  Supreme  Court,  that  if  the  Bank  of
tbe  United  States  could  not  sue  a  person  who  was  a  citi-
zen of  the  same  state  with  any  one  of  its  members,  in  tbe  ,
circuit  courts,  this  disability  would  defeat  the  power.
A  trustee  who  holds  the  legal  interest,  is  competent  to


a  Act  of  Omgrttt,  April  10,  ISIS.  lec.  7.
b  Ocbora  r-  United  Mite*  Bank,  fl  WhvOon  1M.
Baokv.  FIaiitM*(Bwk  «  IFAmAm..901.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LaelureXVI.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  StT

•ue  in  right  ofhia  ovrn  character  as  a  citixen  or  alien,  as  the
case  may  be,  in  ihe  federal  courts,  and  without  reference
to  the  Ghsracter  or  dooticil  of  his  txilvy  que  tnut,  unten
he  was  created  trustee  for  the  fraudulent  purpose  of  giv-
ing jurisdiction  >  This  rule  equally  applies  to  executors
and  administrators,  who  are  considered  as  the  real  parties
in  interest ;  but  it  does  not  apply  to  the  case  of  a  general
assignee  of  an  insolvent  debtor,  and  he  cannot  sue  in  the
federal  courts  if  his  assignor  could  not  have  sued  there.
Thellth  section  of  the  judiciary  act  will  not  permit  juris-
diction to  vest  by  the  assignment  of  a  ckote  in  action,
(cases  of  foreign  bills  of  exchange  excepted,)  unless  the
original  hotderwas  entitled  to  me,  and  whether  the  assign-
ment was  made  by  the  act  of  the  party,  or  by  operations
of  law,  makes  no  difference  in  the  case.**

With  respect  to  the  district  of  Columbia,  and  to  the  ter-
ritorial districts  of  the  United  Stales,  they  are  not  ttatet
within  the  sense  «f  the  constitutioni  end  of  the  judiciary
act,  80  as  to  enable  a  citizen  thereof  to  sue  a  citizen  of  one
of  the  states  in  the  federal  courts.  Howerer  extraordinary
It  might  seem  to  be,  that  the  courts  of  the  United  States,
which  were  open  to  aliens,  and  to  the  citizens  of  every
state,  should  be  closed  upon  the  inhabitants  of  those  dis-
tricts, on  the  construction  that  they  were  not  citizens  of  ft
Hate,  yet  as  the  court  observed,  this  was  a  subject  for  le-
gislative, and  not  for  judicial  consideratioD.o

If  the  jurisdiction  of  the  circuit  court  between  citizens
of  different  states  has  onee  vested,  it  is  not  devested  by  a
cubsequentchangeofdomicilof  sneof  the  parties,  and  his
removal  into  the  same  state  with  the  adverse  party,  jMti-
tUate  Ute,^ The  jurisdiction  depends  upon  the  state  of  ,


n  Chani«dabiiM  *.  Decheoens,  4  Cranch,  306.  309.  Browoe  v
9tToie.  i  Craach,3ai3.  6ee»lioh  Crmclt,9U»od  Cbairatr.  Eiaarj.
«  IThMtM,  641

h  S«rBr.  Pilot,  6  CnmA,  33t.

«  Hepbam  r.  ElteeT,  X  Cnincl^  «45.  Corporation  of  New-Oikaot  v.
Winter,  \WTuaUm,9\.

4  Uorxan  r.  Morpu,  9  Wbeabm,  2S0.


t,Goo(^lc


938  JURISPRUDENCE  OF-  tPirl  Ii:

things  at  the  time  th«  action  is  brought.  So,  an  endor-
see of  a  note  who  resides  in  one  state,  may  sue  his  inline'
diate  endorser  who  resides  in  another  bIrIc,  though  that
immediate  endorser  and  the  maker  be  resideots  of  the
same  state.  The  endorsement  is  a  new  contract  between
the  parties  to  the  rerord,  quite  distinct  from  the  original
Dole.*

T^e  case  of  Oiborn  v.  Tht  Bavik  of  the  United  State$,^
brought  into  view  important  principles  touching  the  coo-
ftilutional  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts,  where  a  state
claimed  to  be  essentialljr  a  )>arty.  Thecourt  decided,  that
the  circuit  courts  had  lawful  jurisdiction,  under  the  act  of
congress  incorporating  the  national  bank,  ofa  bill  in  etiuitj
brought  by  the  bank  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  it  in  the
exercise  of  its  franchises,  whirb  were  threatened  to  be  in-
vaded under  a  law  of  the  state  of  Ohio,  and  that  as  the
state  itself  could  not  be  made  a  party  defendant,  the  suit
might  be  maintained  againM  the  officers  end  agents  of
,  the  slate  who  were  intrusted  with  (he  execution  of  such
laws.

As  the  amendment  to  the  constitution  prohibited  a
■tate  to  be  made  a  party  defendant  by  individuals  of  other
states,  the  eoutt  felt  the  pressure  and  difficulty  of  the  ob-
jection, that  the  state  of  Ohio  was  Bubstantially  a  party
defendant,  inasmuch  as  the  process  of  the  court  in  the
•uii  acted  directly  upon  the  state,  by  restraining  its  officers
from  executing  a  law  of  the  state.  The  direct  interest
o(  the  state  in  the  suit  was  admitted,  but  the  ob-
jection, if  it  were  valid,  would  go  in  its  consequences
completely  to  deotroy  the  powers  of  the  union.  If
the  federal  courts  had  no  jurisdiction,  then  the  agents
of  a  slate,  under  an  unconstitutional  law  of  the  state,
might  arrest  the  execution  of  any  law  of  the  United
Stales.  A  state  might  impose  a  fine  or  penally  on  any  per-
son employed  in  the  execution  of  any  law  oftbe  union,  and
levy  it  by  a  niinislerial  officer,  without  the  sanction  even  of
its  own  courts. All  tbe  various  public  officers  of  the  Uni-

a  Yoaag  v.  Brjan,  0  fTAcoton,  146.  MoUao  v-  TMnace,  8  WhtaluU
537.
Ii  9  ir.'ifilon.  "38.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LaemrtXVI] THE  UNITED  STATES.  ««9

ted  States,  auch  an  the  carrier  of  the  mnil,  the  collector  of
the  revenue)  and  the  meralial  of  the  district,  tnij^ht  be  in-
hibited, under  ruinaua  pcnaltieti,  frotn  the  [wrformanre  of
their  respective  duties.  And  if  thecoorta  of  the  United
States  cannot  rightfully  protect  the  agents,  who  execute
erer;  law  authorised  hy  the  constitntion,  from  the  direct
action  of  state  afents  in  the  collection  ofpenahies,  tbejr
•ould  not  rightfully  protect  those  who  execute  any  law.
The  court  inTisicd  thtit  there  wAa  no  such  deplorahle  lail-
ore  of  jurisdiction,  and  that  the  federal  judiciary  might
rightfully  protect  those  employed  in  carrying  into  execu-
tion the  laws  of  the  union  from  the  attempts  of  a  particu-
lar state,  by  its  agents,  to  resist  the  execution  of  those
laws.  It  may  use  prerentire  proceedings,  by  injiinctioo
or  otherwise,  against  the  agents  or  officers  of  the  state,
and  authorize  proceedings  against  the  very  property  seiz-
ed by  the  agent ;  end  the  court  concluded,  that  a  suit
brought  agaiiist  individuals  for  any  cause  whatever,  was
not  a  suit  againt  a  itaU  in  the  senne  of  the  constitution.
The  constitution  contemplated  a  distinction  between  cases
ID  which  a  state  was  interested,  and  those  in  which  it  was
a  party ;  and  to  be  a  party  for  the  purpose  of  jurisdiction,
it  is  necessary  to  be  one  upon  record.  The  constitution
only  intended  a  party  on  record,  and  to  be  shown  in  the
first  instance  by  the  simple  inspection  of  the  record,  and
that  is  what  is  intended  in  all  cases  where  jurisdiction  de-
pends upon  the  party.

The  question  of  jurisdiction  depending  upon  the  cha-
racter and  residence  of  parties,  came  again  into  discusaioa
in  the  case  of  Tke  Bank  of  the  Uniud  Slatet  v.  The  Plan-
ter's Bank  of  Georgia  ;*  and  it  was  decided  that  the  cir-'
.  cuit  courts  had  jurisdiction  of  suits  brought  bytbeBankof
the  United  States  against  a  state  bank,  notwithstanding
the  state  itself  was  a  stockholder,  together  with  private
individuals  who  were  citizens  of  the  same  state  with  some
ofthestockboldersof  the  Bank  of  the  United  Stales. It


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


330  JURISPRUDENCE,  be.  [Part  U.

waf  declared,  that  the  itate  of  Georgia  was  not  to  ba
deemed  h  purty  defendant,  tboagb  interested  as  a  stock-
bolder  in  the  defence.  Tbo  state,  so  far  aa  concerned
that  transaction,  was  dorested  of  its  sorerigo  character,
and  took  that  of  a  private  citizen.

We  hare  now  seen  hov  far  the  courts  of  the  United
States  bare  anuninon  lawjurisdiciinn  ;  and  it  appearato
hare  been  wholly  diKclaimed  in  criminal  cases;  and  the
true  distinction  would  seem  to  be,  that  all  fefleral  jarisdie-
tion  in  civil  and  criminal  cases,  must  be  derived  from  the
constitution  and  the  laws  made  in  pursuance  of  it ;  and
that  when  the  jurisdiction  is  vested,  the  principles  of  the
common  law  are  necessary  to  the  due  exercise  of  that  ju-
risdiction. We  have  spen,  likewise,  with  what  caution,
and  within  what  precise  limits  the  federal  couru  have  ex-
ercised jurisdiction  in  controversies  between  citizena  and
aliens,  and  between  citizens  of  different  states.  In  the
neit  lecture,  we  shall  enter  upon  a  particular  ezamina*
tionof  the  powers  and  claims  of  (be  federal  court*,  rela-
lire  to  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


1.ECTURE  XVII.

•F  THE  DISTRICT  AND  TEIIBITORUL  COOftTS  OF  THE
UNITED  STATES.

The  district  courts  act  aacourtsof  common  laWiBodalso-
BS  eourts  of  admiralty.

A  distinction  is  made  in  Englaad  between  the  instance
and  the  prize  court  of  admiralty.  The  former  is  the  ordi-
nary admiralty  court,  but  the  latter  is  a  special  and  etiraor^
dinary  jurisdiction  ;  and  although  it  be  eiercised  by  ibe
fame  person,  it  is  in  no  way  connerted  with  the  former,
either  in  its  origin,  iu  node  of  proceeding,  or  the  principles
which  govern  it.  To  constitute  the  prize  court,  or  to  call
it  into  action  in  time  of  war,  a  special  commission  issues,
and  the  rourt  proceeds  summarily,  and  is  governed  by  ge-
neral prioRiples  of  policy  and  the  luw  of  nations.  This  was
the  doctrine  of  the  English  Court  of  King's  Bench,  asde-
claredby  Lord  Mansfield  in  Lindo  v.  Rodney;^  andtbougb
some  parts  of  his  learned  and  elnborate  opinion  in  that  case
do  not  appear  tolie  very  clear  and  precise  on  the  point  con-
cerning the  difference  in  the  foundation  of  the  powers  of
the  instance  and  of  the  prize  court  nf  admiralty,  yet  I
should  infer  from  itlhat  thejudgeofthe  English  admiralty
requires  a  special  commission,  distinct  from  his  ordinary  '
commission,  to  eniible  him,  in  time  of  war,  to  assume  the
jurisdiction  of  prize.  The  practice  continues  to  this  day.  of
issuing  a  special  commission,  on  the  breaking  out  of  hostiti-


Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


3SX  JVRISPBUDENCE  OF  [Part  U.

ties,  to  the  coDitnimioners  fm  executing  tlie  office  of  lord
high  edmiral)  giving  thcni  jurisdiction  in  prize  cases.'

The  division  of  the  Court  of  Adoiirallj  into  two  courts
is  said  not  to  have  been  generally  known  to  the  common
lawyers  of  England  before  the  case  of  Lindo  r.  Rodney ;
and  yet  it  appenrs,  from  the  research  made  in  that  case,
that  the  prize  jurisdiction  wasesiablisbfdfrom  the  earliest
periods  of  the  English  judicial  biatury.  Tbe  instanceC^ouif
is  I  be  ordinary  and  appropriate  Court  of  Admiralty,  and
takes  cognizance  of  the  general  subjects  of  admiralty  juris-
diction, and  it  proceed!)  according  to  the  civil  and  maritime
law.  The  prize  court  has  (exclusive  cognizance  of  mntters
of  prize,  and  matters  incidental  thereto,  and  it  prorcrds  to
hear  and  dfterniiRC  according  to  the  course  of  the  admiralty
and  the  law  of  nations.  The  distinction  between  these  two
courts,  or  rnther  between  these  two  departments  of  the  same
court,  is  kept  up  throughout  all  the  proceedings;  nnd  the
appeals  from  the  decrees  of  these  two  jurisdictions  are  dis-
tioct,  and  made  to  sepurate  tribunals.  The  appeal  from  t  be
instance  court  lies  todelpgateH,  but  from  the  prize  court  it
lies  to  the  lords  commissioners,  of  appeals  in  prize  causes,
end  who  are  appointed  for  that  special  purpose.

Such  is  the  distinction  in  England  between  the  instance
and  the  prize  court  of  admiralty ;  and  in  the  case  £>par(e
L}fnelt,'A  was  held,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  admiralty
as  a  prize  court,  did  not  cease  witb  the  war,  but  exlrnded
to  all  the  incidents  of  prize,  and  to  an  indefinite  period  af-
ter the  war.  It  remains  to  see  how  far  that  distinction  is
knownorpreserved  in  the  jurisdiction  of  our  diatrirt  courts.

It  ia  said  bya  judge,  who  must  have  been  well  acquainted
with  this  sul  jeet,(for  be  was  a  regiMer  of  a  colonial  court  of
admiralty  before  our  revolution,)  ibat  this  distinction  be-
tween the  inetance  and  theprizecourt  was  not  known  to  our
admiralty  proceedings  under  the  colony  administrations.!*


a  Ex  parte  Lynch.  I  JUiddadcU  Rep,  15,
h  1  Peter*'  Adm.  Rep.  S,  6.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lectura  XVU.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  SS3

Id  the  caseof/cnm'n^i  r.  Corion,*  the  Diatrirt  Court  of
PenoBflvaDitt,  in  1792,deciiied,  that  prize  jurisdiction  was
involved  in  the  genersi  ddegation  of  admiralty  and  mart-
time  powers,  and  that  congress,  by  the  judiciary  act  of
1780,  meant  to  conrev  to  the  district  courts  all  the  powe'ri
appertainiog  to  admiralty  and  maritime  juriHdiction,  in-
cluding thai  of  prize-  Prize  jurisdiction  was  inherent  in
a  court  of  admiralty,  though  it  was  of  course  a  dormant
power  until  culled  into  activity  by  the  occurrence  of  war.
But  notwiih»taiidtag  this  early  decision  \a  favour  of  the
-  plenary  juriedivtion  of  the  district  courts  as  courts  of  ad«
miraltyi  there  was  great  doubt  entertained  in  this  country,
about  the  year  1793,  whether  the  district  courts  bad  juri»-
dictiou.  under  the  act  of  rongrcsxof  1789,  as  prize  courts.
The  District  Court  of  Haryland  decided  against  the  juris>
diction,  and  that  decree  was  affirmed  on  appeal  to  the
Circuit  Court,  on  the  ground  that  a  prize  ctiutte  was  not
a  civil  cause  of  admiralty  jurisdictioD,  but  rested  on  the
^'ui  belli,  and  ih^  there  was  no  prize  court  in  existence  in
the  United  Srates.  The  same  question  was  ceriied  up  to
the  Supreme  Court  of  llie  United  States,  in  February^
1794,  in  the  case  of  Glan  v.  The'tloop  BeUa/fi  and  waa
ably  discussed.  The  Supreme  Court  put  an  end  at  once
to  all  these  difficulties  about  jurisdiction,  by  declaring  that
the  district  courts  of  the  United  States  possessed  alltb»  .
powers  of  courts  of  admiralty,  whether  considered  as  iu*
stance  or  as  prize  courts.

In  the  case  of  The  Emulout,"  the  Circuit  Court  in  Hsisa-
chusetts  was  inclined  to  think,  that  the  admiralty,  from
lime  immemorial,  had  an  inherent  jurisdiction  in  prixe,
beoause  if  we  ezamiue  the  most  venerable  relics  of  ancient
maritime  jurisprudence,  we  shall  find  the  admiralty  in
possession  of  prize  jurisdiction,  independent  i>f  any  known
special  commission.  It  seems  to  have  always  constituted
an  ordinary,  and  not  an  extraordinary  branch  of  Ihe  ad-
miralty powers ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  Lord  Blana-


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


SM  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [Pan  a

6eld  leavM  the  point  uncertain,  whether  tbe  prizs  attd  th«
iiMance  jurisdictioDB  were  cueval  in  antiquitj,  or  whether
the  rormer  was  cooslitnted  bj  epecial  commiHioa.  Be
Uiat  at  it  majr,  tbe  equal  juriadictioo  of  the  admiralty  ia
thie  Gountry ,  u  an  instance  and  a§  a  prize  court,  is  t>oir
definitiTelj  settled ,  and  if  the  prize  branch  of  tbe  juris-
diction oftbe  admiralty  be  not  known  in  time  of  peace,  it
is  merely  because  its  powers  lie  doruaDt,  front  tbe  want  of
biiunesii  to  call  them  into  action.

There  is  no  pretence  of  claimon  the  part  of  courts  of
common  law,  to  any  share  in  the  prize  jurisdiction  of  the
oourtsof  admiralty.  It  is  necessarily  and  completely  ex-
dusire :  and  we  will  firxt  take  a  view  of  the  jurisdiction
and  powers  of  the  district  courts  in  prize  cases,  and  ihen  of
their  ordinary  admiralty  jurisdiction.  As  prize  questions
are  applicable  to  a  state  of  wur,  and  are  governed  chiefly
by  ibe  rules  of  the  law  of  nations,  and  the  usages  and  prae-
tioee  oftbe  maritime  powers,  I  do  not  propose  to  enlarge
on  that  subject.  My  object  will  be,  to  ascertain  the  exact
jurisdiction  of  the  District  Court,  in  all  its  various  powera
and  complicated  character.  I  shall  therefore  treat  of  it,
first,  as  an  admiralty  court;  and,  under  that  description,
1  shall  consider,  (I.)  Its  character  as  s  prize  court.  (2.)  As
•  court  of  criminal  jurisdiction  in  admiralty.  (3.)  Tbe  di-
Tiston  lino  between  tbe  admiralty  and  the  courts  of  com-
mon law.  (4.)  Its  powers  as  an  instance  court  of  admiralty.
I  sfaall  then  next  consider  its  jurisdiction  aaa  court  of  com-
iDon  law,  and  clothed  also  with  special  powers  over  pa-
tents, and  in  cases  of  bankruptcy.

(1.)  At  to  the  JHritdictioH  of  the  prize  courti.

The  ordinary  prize  jurisdiction  of  the  admiralty  exteddi
to  all  captures  in  war,  made  onlfae  high  seas.  I  know  of
no  other  deflnitioo  of  prize  goods,  said  Sir  William  Srott,
in  tbe  case  of  the  7W  Friend$,f  then  that  they  are  goods
taken  on  the  high  seat, /iire  bttK,oat  of  the  hands  of  the


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecltm  XVn.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  SSS

«neiny.  The  prize  juriadietioD  also  extendf  to  captures
in  foreign  porti  and  harbouis,  and  lo  captures  mBde  on
land  by  naval  forces,  and  upon  surrenders  to  nnral  forcei,
either  »oiely,  or  b;  joint  operation  witb  land  forces."  It
extends  to  r-aptures  made  in  rivers,  ports  atid  harbour*,  x>f
the  captor's  own  eountry.  But  as  to  plumler  or  booty  ia
a  mere  continental  land  war,  without  the  presence  or  in-
tervention of  any  ships  or  their  ciews.  Lord  Mansfield  ad-
mitted, in  Lindo  r.  Bodmy,  there  was  no  case,  or  authori-
ty, or  principle,  to  enable  him  to  bring  it  within  the  cog-
nizaace  of  a  prize  court.  The  prize  court  exteiKis  also  to
all  ransom  bills  upon  captures  at  sea,  and  lo  money  re-
eeived  as  a  ranxom  or  commutation,  on  a  capitulation  to
naval  forces  alone,  or  jointly  with  land  fbrces.t>  The  fede-
ral courts  have  asserted  for  the  prize  courts  tn  this  country,
a  jurisdiction  equally  as  ample  and  extensive  as  any
claimed  for  them  in  England.  In  tbe  case  of  the  Emulout,"
though  the  court  gave  no  opinion  as  to  the  right  of  the  aii*
tniralty  to  take  cognizance  of  me<Q  captures  made  on  the
land,  exclusively  by  land  forces,  yet  it  was  declared  lo  ba
very  clear,  that  its  Jurisdiction  was  not  confined  to  cap-
tures at  sea.  It  took  cognizanre  ot'all  captures  in  creeks,
havens,  aod  rivers,  and  also  of  all  captures  mode  on  land,
where  the  same  had  been  been  made  by  a  naval  force,  or
by  co-operatioii  with  a  naval  force ;  and  this  exercise  at
jurisdiction  was  settled  by  the  most  solemn  adjudications.
A  seizure  may  therefore  be  made  in  port,  in  our  own  eoun-
try, as  prize,  if  made  while  the  property  was  water-  borne.
Had  it  been  landed  and  remained  on  land,  it  would  have
deserved  consideration,  and  noopioion  was  given,  whether
it  could  have  been  proceeded  against  as  prize,  under  the
admiralty  jurisdiction,  or  whether,  if  liable  to  seizure,  and
eondHmoatiua  in  our  courts,  the  remedy  ought  not  to  hafe
been  pursued,  by  a  process  applicable  to  municipal  con-
•fiscations.

e  Lindo  j.  Rodoey,  Doug.  013.  note.

6  Ship*  lalttn  at  Qtaaa,  4  Rob-  3H»- Antboo  r. Fwlifir, Doug- 149.
ntfe.  MaiMDnorie  r.  Eeatiog,  3  Onllum,  325.
e  1  OaUitait,  563-


1,-0,1  h,Googlc


is6  nmisntUDENCE  or  {Putu.

It  IB  aodsntood  inEag-land,  that  the  admirRlty,  tnerety
by  itsowo  ioherent  poweri,  nef  er  exercuea  juriadictioD  aa
to  captUfM  or  seizures,  as  prize,  made  on  sfaore,  without
tho  co^peratiun  of  nnral  forces.  In  the  case  of  the  Ootter
Eemi,  cited  b;  Sir  WilliRDi  Scott  in  the  ease  of  the  7W
FriendM,'  end  decided  by  the  highest  aulhoritj,  that  of  the
lords  commissioners  of  appeal,  in  1784,  it  was  httld,  that
goods  taken  on  shore  as  prize,  where  there  had  been  no  act
of  capture  on  the  high  seas,  were  not  to  be  considered  as
prize,  and  that  the  prize  courts  had  nojiirixdiclianin  such  a
case.  But  it  is  admitted,  that  if  the  jurisdictiou  has  once
attached,  pad  the  goods  have  been  taken  at  sea,  they  may
be  followed  on  shore  by  the  process  of  tbe  prize  court,  and
its' jurisdiction  over  them  still  continues.  In  this  respect,
the  prize  court  seems  more  extensive,  alid  to  hold  a  firmer
jurisdiction,  than  the  instance  court;  for,  as  to  cases  of
wreck  and  derelict,  if  the  goods  are  once  on  shore,  or  land-
ed, the  cognizance  of  the  common  Inw  courts  attaches.''

Though  the  prize  be  unwarjantably  carried  intoa  foreigo
port,  and  there  delivered  by  the  captors  upon  security,  the
prize  court  does  not  lose  its  jurisdiction  over  the  capture,
and  the  questions  incident  to  it.<=  So,  if  the  prize  be  lost  at
Bea,  the  cnuri  may,  notwithstanding,  proceed  to  adjudica-
tion, and  at  the  instance  ofthe  captors  or  the  claimants.<'  It
has  jurisdiclioni  likewise,  though  the  prize  be  actually  lying
wit  bin  a  foreign  neutral  territory.  This  is  the  the  settled  law
ofthe  prize  jurisdiction,  both  in  England  and  in  this  coun-
try. The  principle  is,  that  the  possession  ofthe  captor,
though  in  a  neutral  country,  is  considered  to  be  the  posses-
sion of  his  sovereign,  and  nb  protettate  cvn'te.e  But,  it  is
admitted,  that  if  possession  of  the  thing  seized  be  actually,
as  well  as  constructively  lost,  as  by  recapture,  escape,  or  a


a  1  JIo6.  S38.

ft  The  Two  Friend*,  1  Rob.  237,  t3S.

•;  The  Peacock,  4  RtA.  136.

d  The  Suiennab,  eitoi.  4S.

»  fidt  tnpra,  p.  S8.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LeciuraXVIL]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  387

foluntary  diseharjte  of  th«  captured  Teaiel,  tbejuriadic-
tian  of  the  prize  court  ov«ir  the  subject  is  lost.  Though
captured  property  be  unjustifiably  or  illegally  converted
by  the  captors,  the  jurisdictioa  of  the  prize  court  over  the
•arc  coBtinues,  but  it  reati  in  the  sound  discretion  of  the
.  court,  whether  it  will  interfere  in  favour  of  the  captors  in
such  cases ;  aud  it  is  equAlly  discretionary  in  all  cases
where  the  disposition  of  the  captured  resse)  and  crew  has
not  been  according  to  duty.'  The  prize  court  may  always
proceed  in  rem,  whenever  the  prizR,  or  the  proceeds  of  the
prize,  can  be  traced  to  the  hands  of  any  pornon  whatever;
and  this  it  may  do,  not  withstanding  any  stipulation  in  the
nature  of  bail  had  been  taken  for  the  property.  And  it  is
a  principle  perfectly  well  settled,  and  constantly  conceded
and  applied,  thut  prize  courts  have  exclusive  Jurisdiction,
tnd  an  enlarged  discretion  as  to  the  allowance  of  frieght,
daraagea,  expenses,  and  costs,  in  all  cases  of  captures,
and  as  to  all  torts,  and  personal  injuries,  and  ill  treat-
nents,  and  abuse  of  power,  connected  with  captures ^urs
btUi  ;  and  the  courts  will  frequently  award  large  and  libe-
ral damages  inthose  cases.^

The  prize  courts  may  apj>ly  coniiscafion  by  way  of  pe-
nalty, for  fraud  and  misconduct,  in  respect  to  property  cap-
tured as  prize,  and  claimed  by  citizens  or  neutrals^c  They
■nay  decree  a  forfeiture  of  the  rights  of  prize  against  cafH
tors  guilty  of  gross  irregularity  or  fraud,  or  any  criminal
conduct ;  and,  in  such  cases,  the  property  is  condetoned
to  the  government  generally-^^

(2.)  At  to  the  criminal  juritdiction  •fihe  admiralty,
. The  ordinary  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdictioD,  ex*

a  The  Falcon,  6  Rob.  I D4.  The  Pgrnona,  1  Dodton,  9S.  L'Eole.  tt
ttab.  f  SO.  La  Dame  Cocile,  6  IM.  357. llie  ArabeUa  and  Mmttm,  *

h  LeCaax  <t.  VAt!V,Dtmg.  594.  Tba  AmiaUa  ISaiMj,  1  Poiu,  ill.
Chunberlaio  T  Ctiandier,3  ^<uon,C43,»4.  PrabablecauMorielzare
is  K  tuffieienl  excuBe  in  the  caaei  of  captures  jan  belli,  avd  u  ti)  murina
tort!  geiMratlj,  or  the  axerciie  of  bellieereiil  righii  to  a  limited  exteot
ander  italtite  proriiiooa. Tba  Palmjra,  IS  fFhaahn,  1.

(TliaJotninDaTlwlaii,  6  iJod-TS-  Oiwall  v.  Vigfoe,  15  EtuCM Bep.  TO.

d  CaM  of  the  Oeoife,  1  IFhtaUm,  408. t  fFluatan.  278.

Vol.  I.  43


t,Goo(^lc


S3S  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pirt  O-

elusive  of  prize  cases,  embraces  all  civil  and  criminal  easel
ofa  DiBrilime  oature ;  and  though  there  does  not  seem  to
be  any  difficult;  or  doubt  at  to  the  proper  juriadiction  of
the  prize  courts,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  unsettled  diMu^-
aioir  respecting  the  civil  and  eriminal  juris'liction  of  tha
district  court  as  ao  ioitunce  roun,  and  possessing  under
the  constitution  and  judiciary  act  of  VJS9,  admiralty  and
maritime  jurisdictirto.

The  act  of  coogress*  gives  to  the  district  courts,  eicltH
live  of  the  state  courts,  and  concurrently  with  the  circuit
courts,  cognizance  of  all  crimes  and  offences  cognizable
under  the  authority  of  the  United  titates,  and  committed
within  iheir  districts,  or  upon  the  high  seas,  where  only  a
moderate  corporal  punixhment,  or  fine  or  imprisonment,
is  to  be  inflicted.  This  is  the  ground  of  the  criminal  juris-
diction of  the  district  courts  ;  and  it  is  given  to  them  at
district  courts  ;  and  as  it  includes  the  minor  crimes  and
offences  committed  on  the  high  seas,  and  cognizable  in  the
courts  of  admiralty  under  the  English  law,  the  district
courts  may  be  considered  as  ezercising  the  criminal  juris-
diction of  a  court  of  admiralty  in  those  cases.  The  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  derlares,  that  the  judicial
power  of  the  union  shall  extend  to  all  coses  of  admiralty
and  maritime  jurisdiction;  and  it  has  been  supposed,>>  that
the  federal  courts  might,  without  any  statute,  and  under
this  genera)  delegation  of  admiralty  powers,  have  ezer-
dsed  criminal  jurisdiction  over  maritime  crimes  and  of-
fences. But  the  courts  of  the  United  States  have  been
reluctant  to  assume  the  ezejcise  of  any  criminal  jurisdie-
tion  in  admiralty  cases,  which  was  not  specially  confer*
ed  by  an  act  of  congress.  In  the  case  of  the  United  Statu
t  M'GiU,^  the  defendant  was  indicted  and  tried  in  tba
Circuit  Court  at  Philadelphia,  for  murder  committed  on
the  high  seas,  and  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  was  much
discussed.  One  of  the  judges  observed,  that  he  had  often
decided,  that  the  federal  courts  bod  a  common  law  jurisdie-
tion  in  criminal  cases ;  but  he  considered,  that  the  crime

a  Aa  i^Septtmbtr  iVh,  1719,  lec.  0  aod  1 1.

Do,l,.cdtyGoO(^lc


LMIon  XVU.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  339

•barged  (a  mortal  itroke  having  been  given  on  the  high
•eaa,  and  the  death  in  consequence  of  it  happening  oq
had)  waa  not  a  case  of  admiralty  and  maritime  juriiMlie-
tioo,  wiifain  the  meaning  of  the  congtitutioo,  or  of  the  Eng-
lish admiralty  law,  and  the  prisoner,  on  aocount  of  this  do-  .
CMst  ofjurisdiction,  was  acquitted.  The  other  judge  of  the
•ourt  gave  no  opinion,  whether  that  case  was  oneof  edmi-
rahf  and  maritime  jurisdiction,  upon  the  general  ptino-
1^  of  the  admiralty  and  maritime  law ;  aiid  he  confined
bimseirto  the  8lb  section  of  the  penal  act  of  congress  of
April  30tb,  1790 ;  and  the  case  charged  was  not,  by  tfaU
act,  within  thejurisdiaioa  of  the  circuit  court.

Afterwards,  in  the  case  of  The  United  Stales  r.  Bevaiu,*
tbe  Supreme  Court,  on  a  case  certified  from  the  Massaeha-
setts  circuit,  decided,  that  even  admitting  that  the  United
States  had  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  all  cases  of  admiralty
and  maritime  jurisdiction,  and  admitting  that  a  murder
committed  on  the  waters  of  astate  where  the  tide  ebbii  and
flows,  was  a  case  of  admiralty  and  maritime  Juriwliction,
yet  that  congress  bad  not,  by  tbe  8th  section  of  tbe  act  of
1790,  Gh.9. "  for  tbe  punishment  of  certain  crimes  against
the  United  States,"  conferred  on  the  courts  of  the  United
States jurisdictionoversuch murder.  The  act  confinedthe
federal  jurisdiction  to  murder  and  other  crimes  and  offences
committed  upon  the  high  seas,  or  in  any  river,  harbour,  ba-
sin, or  bay,  out  of  thejurisdiction  of  any  particular  state  ;aod
tbe  murder  in  question  was  committed  on  board  a  ship  of
war  of  the  United  States  in  Boston  harbour,  and  within  tbe
jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts.  There  was  no  doubt  of  tbe
competency  of  the  powers  of  congress  to  confer  such  a
jurisdiction  in  the  case  of  a  crime  committed  on  board  a
abtp  of  war  of  the  United  Stales,  wherever  the  ship  might
be ;  but  no  such  power  had,  to  that  extent,  been  as  yet  ex-
ercised by  congress  ;  and  it  must  have  followed  of  course,
in  that  case,  that  the  state  courts  had  jurisdiction  of  th^
crime  at  common  law,  for  it  was  committed  within  tbe  ter-
ritory of  tbe  state. It  was  admiUed  to  be  a  clear  point*


a3Wh«alon,S3e.

r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


S40  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [P«rt  II,

that  the  stale  courts  had  cognizance  of  crimes  anri  offences
committed  upon  tide  waters,  in  the  bays  and  barbouri
within  their  respective  toriitorial  jurisdictions.  And  in
the  case  of  The  Unittd  States  v.  tVUtbergtr,'  it  was  de-
eided,  that  the  courts  of  the  United  States  had  do  juria-
diction  of  the  crime  of  oianxlauiihter  committed  by  the
oiaater  upon  one  of  the  seamen  on  board  a  merchant  vet-
■el  of  the  United  States  lying  at  anchor  in  the  river  Tigris,
within  the  empire  ofChina,  because  the  act  of  congress  of
the  30th  ofApri),  17!M>,  ch-  36.  sec.  12.  did  not  reach  sbcli
a  case,  and  was  confined  to  the  crime  committed  on  the
high  seas.  Upon  the  principle  of  this  decision,  the  ofiend'
er  could  not  be  judicially  punished,  excejit  by  the  Chi-
nese government ;  and  it  was  said  upon  the  argument  in
that  rase,  ifaat  China  disclaimed  the  jurisdiction.  Tb«
law  was  defective  upon  this  point,  and  a  remedy  was  pro-
vided by  the  act  of  congress  of  3d  Afareh,  1825,  c  67^
which  declared,  that  if  any  offence  shall'be  committed  on
board  of  any  vessel  belonging  to  a  citizen  of  the  United
States,  while  lying  in  a  foreign  port  or  place,  the  offence
■hall  be  cognizable  in  the  circuit  eourti  of  the  United
States,  equally  as  if  it  had  been  committed  on  board  of
■such  vessel  on  the  high  seas,  provided  that  if  the  offender
shall  be  tried  and  acquitted  or  convicted  in  the  foreign
state,  he  shall  not  be  suliject  to  another  trial  here.  The
act  provide!^  also  for  thepunishmentof  many  other  crimes
against  the  United  States ;  but  the  crimes  in  any  river,  bay,
&.C.  to  he  cognizable,  must  be  committed  out  of  the  juris-
diction of  any  particular  slate,  except  it  be  conspiracies  to
defraud  insurers;  and- irturther  provided,  thot  the  act
was  not  to  deprive  the  state  courts  of  jurisdiction  over  the
same  offences.

It  appears  from  these  cases,  that  tbongh  thegeneral  co^
nizanceof  all  cases  of  admiralty  and  merit  imejurisdictimi,
as  given  b}  theconstitution,etlends  as  well  to  the  criminal
as  to  the  civil  jurisdiction  of  the  admiralty  as  known  to  the

a  5  mtalon,  76.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XVII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  341

English  Bnd  mariiime  law  when  the  nonatilution  was
adopted  ;  yet  that  without  a  particular  legislative  provi-
tioti  in  the  casi*,  th«  federal  courts  do  not  exercise  crimi-
nal juriwlictioii  aa  courts  of  admiralty  over  maritime  of-
fencea.  In  the  case  of  The  United  Sftf'  '•  Coolidge,*  it
was  iniisted  that  the  admiralty  was  a  court  of  ezteoMve
crimiaal  as  well  us  civil  jurisdiction,  and  that  oflences  of
admiralty  jurisdiction  were  exclusively  cognizable  by  the
United  States ;  and  that  a  marine  tort  on  the  high  seas,
as  for  instance,  the  forcible  rescue  of  a  prize,  was  puni^-
able  by  the  admiralty,  in  the  absence  of  poaitira  law,  hy
fine  and  imprisonment.  The  decision  of  the  8uprem«
Court  was  otherwise  ;>>  and  it  seems  now  to  be  settled,
that  the  federal  courts,  as  courts  of  admiralty,  are  to  ex-
ercise such  criininftl  jurisdiction  aa  is  conferred  upon  tbem
expressly  by  acts  of  congress,  and  that  ihey  are  not  to
exercise  any  other.  This  limitation  does  not,  however^
apply  to  private  prosecutions  in  the  district  court,  as  a
court  of  admiralty  or  prize  court,  to  recover  damages  for
a  marine  tort.  Sucb  cases  are  cognizable  in  the  admi-
ralty by  virttie  of  its  general  admiralty  jurisdiction,  and
«o  it was  held  in  tlie  case  of  The  AmiabU  Nancyfi

The  civil  jurisdiction  of  the  English  admiralty  is  ac-
cording to  the  forms  of  the  civil  lew,  and  before  a  single
judge ;  but  the  criminal  jurisdiction,  in  which  all  mari-
time felonies  are  tried,  is  in  the  courr  of  admiralty  ses-
sions, before  cOmmisaioners  of  oyer  and  terminer,  being
Ihejudgeof  the  court  of  admiralty,  and  three  or  four  as-
sociates. It  baa  cognizance  of  all  crimes  and  offences
committed  at  sea,  or  on  the  eoasts  out  oflbe  body  of  a
county  ;  and  in  that  rourt,  the  proceedings  are  fay  indict-
ment, and  trial  by  jury,  according  to  the  course  of  th«
common  law.^ The  criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  English

a  1  OalUton,  4B8.  b  I  Wkcaton,  ilb.

1 3  Whtalon.  646.  It  vbb  held  \a  Cliaraberlain  r.  Cbaodler,  3  JKium,
Z4t.  Ihat  tb«  idmirflltj  bad  jariidiclHMi  of  penoDtl  toH*  and  wKMlg*
committed  od  a  paHeDgeroo  tlte  bifb  nm,  by  DiemaMer  of  the  i^iip,
whether  ibe  tort*  were  bf  diiect  fbice,  ai  trMpana*)  or  were  oonaa-
queatifll  injuriea.

di  Blade:  Cim.  265.'


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Ui  JVRTSPRUDENCE  OF  [Put  IT

admiralty  received  its  preunt  inodi6cation  by  the  act  of
2ti  Hen.  VIII.  c.  15. ;  but  it  bad  a  very  extenaire  crimi-
nal jurisdiction,  coeral  witli  the  first  existence  of  the  court.
It  proceeded  by  indictment  and  petit  jury,  before,  and  in-
dependent of,  the  statute  of  Hen.  VMI. ;  and  all  criminal
(fences  cognizable  by  the  admiralty,  and  not  otherwise
provided  for  by  positive  law,  are  punishable  by  fine  and
imprisoDment.'  The  better  opinion,  however,  is,  that  the
Bticient  common  law,  or  primitive  criminal  jurisdiction  of
the  English  admiratty,  has  become  obsolete,  and  has  not
been  in  exercise  for  the  last  one  hundred  years  ;  and  that
no  ofTence  of  a  criminal  nature  can  be  tried  there,  which
does  not  fall  within  the  jurisdiction  specially  conferred  by
the  statute  of  Hen.  VI1I.>>  There  is,  therefore,  a  very
strong  precedent  for  the  doctrine  of  the  Supreme  Court
of  the  United  States,  which  refuses  to  the  federal  courts
any  criminal  jurisdiction  in  admiralty  cases  not  derived
from  statute.  And  to  whatever  extent  the  criminal  juris-
diction of  the  adioiralty  may  extend,  the  judiciary  act  of
1789  provides,  that  the  trial  of  all  issues  in  fact  in  the
district  courts,  in  all  causes  except  civil  causes  of  admt'
rally  and  maritime  jurtsditAion,  shall  be  by  jury.

(3.)  Ai  to  the  divuidnline  bttween  the  juriidiclion  of  iks
aSmirahy,  and  ofcourtt  of  common  law.

There  has  existed  a  very  contested  question,and  of  ancient
-ataoding,  touching  the  proper  division  or  boundary  line  be-
tween the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts  of  common  law  and  the
fourts  of  admiralty.  The  admiralty  juri-^diction  in  Englatid
originally  extended  to  all  crim6s  and  offences  committed
upon  the  sea,  and  in  all  ports,  rivers,  aod  arms,  of  the  sea,  as
far  M  the  tide  ebbed  and  flowed.  Lord  Coke's  doctrine
ivas,c  that  Ihe  sea  did  not  include  any  navigable  waters
witbinihe  body  of  a  county;  and  Sir  Matthew  Hale  Buppo»-
ed,<i  that  prior  to  the  statute  of  35  Edw.  III.,  the  com-


a  4  Ro6.  Stp.  74-  note.

itBrQ.Civ-ondAdm.Lau,»pp9aiii,Iio,3. Opmmt/LmB  Ofi-
evii)flhtCre*m,  iiitl.
t  4  InH.  139.
4  I  flofe'fP.  C.ch.  S.-


i,Googlc


Lwtora  XVIL] THE  CmTED  STATES.  54»

mon  law  and  the  admiralty  exercised  jurisdiction  concur-
rent);  in  the  nurrow  seaB.and  in  ports  and  bavens  within
th<t  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide.  Under  the  statures  of  13  R.
II.  c.  5.  and  15  R.  II.  c.  3>,  excluding  the  admiralty  juris-
diction io  cases  arising  upon  land  or  water  within  the
body  of  a  county,  eicept  in  cases  of  murder  and  mayhem,
there  have  been  long  and  vexatious  contentions  between
tbesdmiralty  and  the  common  law  courts.  On  the  ses
■bore,  the  common  law  jurisdiction  is  bounded  by  low
water  mark ;  and  between  high  and  low  water  mark,
where  the  sea  ebbs  and  flows,  the  common  law  and  the
admiralty  harea  divided  or  alternate  jurisdiction.*

With  respect  to  the  admiralty  jurisdiction  orer  arms  of
the  sea,  and  bays  and  navigable  rivers,  where  the  tJd*
ebbs  and  flows,  there  has  been  great  difference  of  opinion,
andgreat  litigation,  in  the  progress  of  the  English  jurit-
prudeore.  On  the  part  of  the  admiralty,  it  has  been  in-
sisted, that  the  admiralty  continued  to  possess  jurisdictioa
in  all  ports,  havens,  and  navigable  rivers,  where  the  sea
ebbs  and  flows  below  the  first  bridges.  This  seemed  also
to  be  the  opinion  of  ten  of  the  judges  at  Westminster,  oa
a,  reference  to  them  in  I713.'>  On  the  part  of  the  com-
mon law  courts,  it  has  been  contended,  that  the  bodies  of
■connties  comprehended  all  navigable  rivers,  creeks,  portt,
harbours,  and  arms  of  the  sea,  which  are  so  narrow  as  to
permit  a  person  to  discern,  and  attest  upon  oath,  any
thing  done  on  the  other  shore,  and  so  as  to  enable  an  in-
quisition offactstobetaken.^  InthecaseofJSruce  in  16134


alBfadb.  dm-itO.  CoiutBble<s  cue,  5  G>.  106,  7.  t  Lard  RofM.
1452. 3  BaO'i  P.  C.  SOS. 4  Blacki.  Com.  JG3.

b  Cit«d  in  Andrta't  Rep.  S3t.

e  King  V.  ScJegDanl,  AndrtMU  Rep.  C3I.  The  rasolution  «f  Am
{■dgM  in  1639,  ci^  in  X  Bro.  Chi.  and  Adm.  Late,  78.  4  Intl.  140.
HiiwMw'P.C.c.9.  tec.  14.  i  EomP,  P.  C.  BOA.  h  Wktalm^i  Rep.
ItW.  note. Com.  Dig.  lit.  Adin.  E.  7.  14.  Bacon^t  Abr.  tit.  Aim.  A.

4C£(as'l**CroirnC»ef,  IOS3,caw363.  4tb<!d<I.


t,Goo(^lc


944  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  H.

all  the  judges  agreed,  that  the  common  law  and  the  ad-
miralty had  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  bays,  havens,
creeks,  &.C.,  where  shi|)8  of  war  floated.

The  extent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  district  courts,  as
courts  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdirtioo,  was  very
fully  examined,  and  with  great  ability  and  reaearch,  by
the  Circuit  court  of  the  United  Stales  for  Ma»sachu-rcta,
in  the  case  o(  De  Lotto  j.  BoU.^  It  was  maintained,  that
in  very  early  periods,  the  admiralty  jurisdiction,  in  ciril
Gssesr  extended  to  all  maritime  causes  and  contracts,  and
in  criminal  cases  to  all  torts  and  offences,  as  well  in  ports
and  havens  within  the  ebb  and  flow  uf  the  tide,  as  upon
tbehtghseas;  andthatihe  English  admiralty  was  formed
upon  the  aame  common  model,  end  was  coexteasive  ia
point  of  jurisdiction  with  the  maritime  courts  of  the  other
coramercial  [lowers  of  Europe.  It  was  shown  by  on  ex-
ponitiooof  the  ancient  cases,  that  Lord  Coke  was  mis-
taken, in  his  attempt  to  confine  the  ancient  jurisdiction
ef  the  admiralty  to  the  high  seas,  and  to  exclude  it  from
the  narrow  tide  waters,  and  from  ports  and  barens.'  The
court  agreed  with  the  admiralty  civilians,  that  the  statutes
of  13  R.  II.  and  15  R.  II.,  and  2  H.  IV.,  did  not  cnrtail
this  ancient  and  original  jurisdiction  of  the  admiralty,  and
that  consistently  with  those  statutes,  the  admiralty  might
exercixe  jurisdiction  over  torts  and  injuries  upon  the  high
seas,  and  in  ports  within  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide,  em)
in  great  streams  below  the  first  bridges ;  and  also  over
all  maritime  GODttacts,  as  well  as  over  matters  of  prize
and  its  incidents.  It  appeared  from  an  historical  review
of  the  progress  of  the  controversy  for  jurisdiction,  which
lasted  for  two  centuries,  between  the  admiralty  and  the
courts  of  common  law,  that  the  latter,  by  a  silent  and
steady  march,  gained  ground,  and  extended  their  limits*
until  they  acquired  concurrent  jurisdiction  over  all
maritime  causes,  except  prize  causes,  within the  cogoi-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMtora  XVn.} THE  TTNITED  STA'TOS.  U3

.sanoB  of  the  admiriihy.  The  common  law  doctrine  wm,
Uwt  the  sea,  ex  si  lermini,  wan  without  the  body  of  any
«oaDty;biit  that  all  ports  aad  havenii,  and  all  navigable
tidewaters,  where  one  mi^ht  see  from  one  land  to  the  other
what  was  doing,  were  within  the  body  of  the  county,  and
vnder  the  exclusive jurisdirtion  oflbe  eomoionlawcourig.
On  the  sea  shore  or  cnait,  high  end  low  walur  mark  de-
leroiiaed  what  was  parcel  of  the  sea,  and  what  was  the
Kne  of  division  between  the  admiralty  and  (he  coarts  of
law ;  and  it  wan  held,  that  it  ought  to  be  so  considered  by
parity  of  reason,  wherethe  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  in  ports  and
havens;  and  that  the  admiralty  jurisdiction  eatends  to
all  tide  waters  in  ports  and  havens,  and  rivers  beneath  the
first  bridgeS'  It  was  admitted,  however,  that  the  ceoimon
law  originally  had  jurisdiction  on  the  high  seas,  eoncui^
rent  with  the  admiralty ;  and  that  in  cases  manifestly
witbtn  the  admiralty  jurisdiction,  both  civil  and  criminal,
the  common  law  now  claimed  concurrent  jurisdiction.

The  result  of  the  examiaalion  in  that  case  was,  that  th«
jurisdiction  of  the  admiralty,  until  the  statutes  of  Richard
II.,  extended  to  all  maritime  contracts,  and  to  all  torts,
injuries,  and  offences,  on  the  high  seas,  and  in  ports  and
havens,  as  far  as  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide;  that  the
common  law  interpretation  of  those  statutes  abridged  this
jurisdiction  to  things  wholly  and  exclusively  done  upoa
the  sea,  but  that  the  interpretation  was  indefensible  npoa
principle,  and  tbe  decisions  founded  upon  it  inconsistent  i
that  the  admiralty  interpretation  of  these  statutes  did  ooC
abridge  any  of  its  ancient  jurisdiction,  and  tAol  interpre-
tation was  coasistent  with  the  language  and  intent  of  the
statutes,  and  analogous  reasoning,  and  public  convenience,
and  the  decisions  at  common  law  on  this  subject  were  not
entitled  to  outweigh  the  decisions  of  the  great  civilians  of
the  admiralty.  The  vice-adroiralty  courts  in  this  country,
under  the  colonial  governments,  exercised  a  most  ample
jurisdiction  to  the  extent  now  claimed,  over  all  maritime
contracts,  and  over  torts  and  injuries,  as  well  in  ports  aa
Upon  the  high  b««s  ;  and  the  constitu^ioa  of  the  United


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


«46  JURISPRVn)GNCE  OF  {Pirlil.

Statei,  when  h  conferrpd  not  nnly  admiralty,  but  maritime
jurisdiction,  addpd  that  word  ex  indutttia,  to  remove  every
latent  doubt.  Thia  lai^e  and  liberal  conatruction  of  the
admiralty  powere  of  the  diatrict  courts,  and  their  extenaioa
to  all  maritime  contraota,  torts,  and  injuriea,  was  recom-
mended by  the  general  equil;  and  aimplicity  of  admiralty
proceedin^B,  and  the  poliry  and  wisdom  of  that  code  of
maritime  law  wbicb  bad  embodied  the  enlightened  reaccMl
of  the  civil  law,  and  the.  customs  and  uaages  of  the  mari-
time nations,  and  regulates,  by  its  deciaions,  the  commer-
cial intercourae  of  mankind.

It  is  understood,  that  the  enlarged  extension  of  the  civil
jurindiction  of  the' admiralty,  aa  declared  in  the  Gircuk
Court  in  Maaaachuiietta,  is  a  point  now  under  review,  end
remains  to  be  discussed,  and  dt- finitively  settled,  in  the  Su-
preme Conrt.  With  reapect  to  the  crimiualjurtsdictioDof
the  adniiralty,  we  have  already  seen,  that  the  courts  of  the
United  States  do  not  assume  any  jurisdiction  which  ia  not
expreasly  conferred  by  an  act  of  congress ;  and  the  argu-
ment for  the  extension  of  the  cu>f/ jurisdiction  oftbe  adini-
rally  beyond  the  limita  known  and  established  Id  the  Eng-
lish law,  at  the  time  of  the  formation  of  our  eouatitution,
is  not  free  from  very  great  difficulty.

It  has  been  made  a  question,  what  were  "  cases  of  ad-
miralty and  maritime  jurisdiction,"  wirhin  (he  meaning  of
the  conHitutioii  of  the  United  States.  Ii  is  not  in  the  power
of  congress  to  enlarge  that  juriadietion  beyond  what  was
understood  and  intended  by  it  when  the  constitution  was
adoiKed,  because  it  would  be  depriving  the  suitdrt^ the
right  of  trial  by  jury,  which  is  secured  to  him  by  the  con-
stitution in  suits  at  common  law;  and  it  ia  well  known  that
in  civil  suits  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction,  the
proceedings  are  according  to  the  course  of  the  civil  law,  and
without  jury.  If  theadmiralty  and  maritime  juriMictioo
rfthe  district  courts  embraces  all  maritime  contracts,  theo
su^pj  upon  policies  of  insurance,  charter  parties,-  marine  hjw
pot4iec»tions.  contracts  for  building,  repairing,  supplying,
and  navigating  ships,  and  contracts  between  "part  owners
of  ships,  must  ha  tried  ill  tfao  «Umralty  by  a  single  judge.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


XVa] THE  UNITED  STATES.  UJ

tothe  ezcluaioD  of  the  trial  hj  jury,  kbiI  ttieatate  court*
would  b*  devested,  at  one  stroke,  ofa  vast  field  of  cummer-
oal  jurisdiction.  Tbe  words  of  tht;  judiciary  act  of  1789,
tec.  9.  are,  that  the  district  couns  shall  have  >'  exchuiv*
ori^pnal  eof  oizanca  of  all  civil  causes  of  admir  Jiy  and  ma-
ritime  jurisdiction,  iucluding  all  seizures  under  laws  of  im-
POM,  navi^tioo,  or  trade,  of  tbe  United  States,  where  lh«
seizures  are  made  on  waters  which  are  navigable  from  tbe
•eSfhy  reseels  often  or  more  tons  burtbeo,  withiu  their
respective  districts,  as  well  as  upon  ibe  ^igh  seas."  But
Ibe  act  adds,  by  way  of  qualification  to  this  designation  of
admiralty  jurisdiction,  these  words,  viz.  "  saving  to  suitors
to  all  cases  the  right  ofacommon  law  remedy,  where  tfas
common  law  is  competent  to  give  it."

Tbe  act  of  congress  is  rather  ambigaous  in  its  raeanfng,
and  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  it  meant  to  (ronsider  aet-
Knres  on  tide  waters  in  pons,  harbours,^  arms,  and  creeks
<tftfae  sea,  SB  cases  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdii-tioo,
or  as  cases  simply  within  tbe  ct^nizance  of  the  district
courts,  for  the  expression  in  includiagt  that  is,  eoin|ire>
bending,  either  within  the  cognizance  of  the  court,  or
within  tbe  class  of  cases  of  admirvlty  jurisdictioo,  all  sei*
zures  under  laws  of  impost,  navigation  and  trade,  on  wa-
ters navigable  from  tbe  sea  by  small  vessels  often  tons  bur-
then. This  act  has,  however,  been  construed  to  put  a
construction  upon  tbe  words  "admimliy  and  maritime
jurisdiction," -conformable  to  tbe  claims  of  tbe  civiliana,
and  in  opposition  to  tbe  claims  of  the  common  law  tribu-
nals, and  there  are  a  series  of  decisions  in  the  Supreme
Court  of  tbe  United  States  to  that  effect.

In  the  case  of  the  United  States  v.  Le  Vetigeanet  ,*  m
French  privateer  was  libelled  in  tbe  District  Court  of  New-
York,  for  an  aUemptte  export  arms  from  the  United  Slates
to  a  formgo  country  contrary  to  law.  She  was  adjudge>i  to
be  forfeited  to  tbe  United  States.  The  decree,  on  ap|>eal
totbe  Circuit  Court, was  reversed. Oiiafurther  a|>i>eHtto


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


.94*  HTftlSPRUDCNCE  OF  [Part  It

tbe  SapremflCourtoftbe  United  StatM,  it  wu  contended,.
that  thu  was  a  criminal  case,  both  on  account  of  the  main
ner  of  pra§acution,  and  the  matter  charged ;  and,  therefore,
that  the  decree  of  the  Diitrict  Court  was  final,  and  that  it
ouf;ht  likewiieto  have  been  tried  by  a  jury  in  the  DiMrieC
Court ;  and  that  if  it  vraseren  a  cirilsuit,  it  was  not  a  ease
of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction.  To  render  it  auch,
the  cause  must  arise  wholly  upon  the  sea,  and  not  in  a  bay,
harbour,  or  water,  within  tbe  precincts  of  any  county  of  a
■tate.  But  tbe  Supreme  Court  deiudfld,that  it  wanaciril
suit,  not  of  common  law,  but  of  admiralty  and  maritime
jurisdiction.  Tbe  seizure  was  on  tbe  waters  of  the  United
States.  The  process  was  in  ran,  and  did  not,  in  any  dtt*
gree,  toucb  the  person,  and  no  jary  was  necessary.

Afterwards,  in  tbe  case  of  Tke  United  Statu  r.  7%e
tehooner  5a%,>  tbe  vei<ael  was  libelled  in  the  District
Court,  as  forfeited  for  being  concerned  in  tbe  slare  trade;
and  this  was  also  held,  on  appeal,  to  be  a  case,  not  of
common  law,  but  of  admiralty  jurisdiction.  So,  in  the
ease  of  the  Unittd  Statu  v.  tbe  Schooner  Btttty,^  it  was
held  that  all  seizures  under  the  act  nf  congress  suspendinf
commercial  intercourse  with  a  foreign  country,  and  made
va  waters  navigable  from  sea,  by  vessels  of  ten  tons  bur-
then, were  civil  causes  of  admiralty  jurisdiction,  being
proceedings  tn  rem,  and  not  according  to  tbe  course  of
the  common  law,  end  were  to  be  tried  without  a  jury.
Tbe  court  said,  that  the  place  of  seizure  being  on
navigaUe  waters,  decided  the  jurisidiction,  and  that
tbe  act  of  congreaa  meant  to  make  seizures  on  wa-
ters navigable  from  the  sea,  civil  causes  of  admiralty
and  maritime  jurisdiction.  In  this  last  caae,  the  coun-
sel for  the  claimant  contended,  that  the  seizure  was  made
within  the  body  of  a  county,  for  breach  of  a  municipal
law  of  trade,and  that  though  it  belonged  to  the  jurisdiction
of  the  District  Court,  it  was  not  a  case  of  admiralty  cog-
nizanee. All  seizures  ia  England  for  violation  of  the

•  Z  CnmtK,  40C.  »  4  CmiA,M>


t,Goo(^lc


Lwton  SVIL] THE  VNITGO  STATES.  $49

laws  of  rerflnue,  trade,  or  navigation,  were  tried  hj  a  jurj
in  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  according  to  the  course  of  tb«
comnon  law,  and  though  a  proceeding  waa  tn  nm,  it  wai
not  necetsarily  a  proceeding  or  cause  in  the  admiraTtjr*
'  In  the  case  of  The  Smtte/,'  where  the  veuel  and  cai^q
were  seized  and  libelled,  and  condemned  in  the  DUtrict
Court  of  Rhode  Island,  for  a  bieach  of  the  noniioporta-
tion  laws  of  the  United  States,  the  same  objectioD  wai
made  upon  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court,  and  it  waa
again  overruled  on  the  authoritf  of  the  preceding  cases.
The  same  objection  was  taken  in  the  case  of  7^e  Oetapta,^
and  it  was  contended  that  the  word  induding,  in  the  9lh
aectioo  of  the  Judiciary  act,  ought  not  to  be  construed  cu-
tnulatively,  and  that  a  suit  might  be  a  cause  of  admiralty
and  maritime  jurisdiction,  and  yet  triable  under  the  cont>
Dton  law  proceeding  by  information,  instead  of  the  civil
law  process  by  libel.  The  objection  was  again  OTerruled.
The  last  case  that  brought  up  the  same  point  for  review
and  discussion,  was  The  Stvah,'^  aqd  the  Supreme  Court
there  recognised  the  marked  and  settled  distinction  be-
tween the  common  law  and  the  admiralty  jurisdictions  of
the  district  courts.  In  seizures  made  on  land,  the  Die*
trict  Court  proceeds  as  a  court  of  common  law,  according
to  the  course  of  the  English  Exchequer,  on  informations
m  rtm,  and  the  trial  of  issues  of  fact  is  to  be  by  jury.d  But,
in  cases  of  seizures  on  waters  navigable  from  the  sea,  by
vessels  of  ten  or  more  tons  burthen,  the  court  proceeds  as
an  instance  court  of  admiralty,  by  libel  in  rem,  and  the
trial  is  by  the  court.

It  may  now  be  considered  as  the  iwctledlawoftbueoun->
try,  that  all  seizures  under  laws  of  impost,  navigation,  and
trade,  if  made  upon  tide  waters  navigable  from  the  sea,  are
•civil  cases  of  admiralty  jurisdiction,  and  the  successive  judgr
ments  of  the  Supreme  Court  upon  this  point,  are  founded
upon  the  judiciary  act  of  1788.  If  the  act  of  congress  de-
clares them  to  be  coses  of  admiralty  jurisdiction,  it  is  ap>
prehended  tbatthisis  an  extension  of  admiralty  powers  be-


iaii.ta.  dlhanqMon.J.  iPoiMM^-


.CoOglc


ISO  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Put  IT.

yood  tbfl  Eaglish  proaics.  Csmi  of  forfeitare  for  breacbM
of  r«Teaiw  law  are  cognizable  in  England  in  the  exchequer
upon  information,  though  the  seizure  was  made  upoa
navigable  waters,  and  they  proceed  there  to  try  the  faoC
oa  which  the  forfeiture  aritiei  by  jury.'  luforinations  ar«
filed  in  the  Ceurt  of  Eichequer  for  forfeiture  uponMizur*
of  property,  for  breach  of  lawi  of  revenue,  impoin,  nan-
gation,  end  trade.  la  the  ease  of  The  Attorney  GawraT
r.  Jackson,^  the  seizure  wai  of  a  veasal  lying  in  port  Mt
CowcH,  for  breacbof  the  act  of  naviji^ioii.  and  the  |m>-
eeeding  was  by  infermation  and  trial  by  jury,  according
to  the  course  of  the  comtnon  law.  Lord  Hale  said,*^  that
informations  of  that  nature  lay  exclusively  in  tbe  ex-
chequer.  Congress  bad  a  right,  in  their  discretion,  to
make  all  such  seizarea  and  forfeitures  cogoixable  in  the
district  courts  ;  bm  it  may  be  a  question  whether  they  bad
any  right  to  declare  them  to  be  cases  trf"  admiralty  jarit*
dietkm,  if  ihey  were  notso  by  tbe  law  <^tbe  land  when  tha
Mostitalion  was  made.  Tbe  constitution  secures  to  the
ciiixea  trial  by  jury  in  all  eriminal  prosecutions,  and  in  all
civil  suits  at  common  law,  where  the  value  in  contreversy
axeoeds  20  dollars.  These  proeecutiona  for  forfeitures  of
large  and  valuable  porttODS  of  property,  under  revenue
and  navigation  laws,  are  highly  penal  in  their  conse-
quences ;  end  tbe  government  and  its  officers  are  elways
liarties,  and  deeply  eoocerned  in  tbe  eoRvictioD  end  for-
feiture. And  if  by  an  act  of  congress,  or  by  judicial  ded-
sions,  the  prosecution  can  be  turned  over  to  the  edrai*
ralty  side  of  the  district  court,  as  being  neither  a  eritoiBal
proaecutionnora  suit  at  common  law,  the  trial  of  the  causa
H  then  transferred  from  a  jury  of  the  country  to  ihe  breast
of  a  single  jud|9;e.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  judi-
^ary  act  of  1789  did  not  intend  to  do  more  than  declare
the  jurisdiction  of  the  district  courts  over  these  eases ;  and
that  all  prosecutions  for  penalties  and  forfeitures  upon  sei-
zures under  lawM  of  impost,  navigation  and  trade,  were  not
to  be  considered  of  admiralty  jurisdiction,  when  the  case

a  Aitoraey  General  v.  Le  MMohaiit,  I  AuL  6C.

6  Bwib.  238.

e  Barg.  Law  TraeU,  S£7.

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


l^etBn  XVn.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  »l

admitted  of  a  prweeution  «l  eommon  law ;  for  th«  Mt  ••¥«•
to  "  fluitora  id  all  cases  the  right  of  a  cotnmoD  law  mnpriy,
where  the  comaion  law  was  competent  to  give  it.**  We
IiBve  seen  that  it  iscompeient  to  |cive  it,  faecanee,  under  the
Timorous  system  of  the  English  law,  such  proseciitioDs  w
rem  are  in  the  eicbequer  accordinff  to  the  course  of  th*
common  law;  and  it -may  be  doubled  whether  the  case  of
the  ht  Vengtana,  on  which  a,l1  the  subreqiient  decisionsof
the  Supreme  Court  have  rested,  was  sufficiently  considered.
There  is,  however,  much  colonial  precedent  for  t)iis  exten-
lion  of  admiralty  juriodiction*  The  vice-admiralty  court!
in  this  country,  when  we  were  colonies,  and  also  in  the  West
Indies,  obtained  jurisdiction  in  revenue  causes  to  an  extent
totally  unknowntotlie  jurisdiction  of  the  Enj^'ish  admiralty,
and  with  powers  quite  as  enlarged  as  those  claimed  at  tha
present  day."  But  this  eitenaion  of  the  jurisdiction  of  tb«
AoiericfiD  vice-admirslty  courts  beyond  theit  ancient  limits,
to  revenue  cases  and  penalties,  was  mnch  discussed  and
complained  of  on  the  part  oftkis  country  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  revolution.!'

Whatever  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdictino  tfie  dt^
trict  courts  possess  would  seem  to  be  txchuive,  forthe  eon-
•titution  declares  that  the  judicial  power  of  the  United
States  shall  extend  to  a/2ciucs  of  admiralty  and  maritime
jurisdiction;  and  the  actof  congressof  1789  says,  that  the
district  courts  shall  have  ttduiiw  original  eognizanee  of
all  dvil  causes  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction.  It
U  certain,  however,  that  the  Mate  conrts  take  an  extensive
and  unqneationed  cogntzance  of  maritine  contracts,  and
on  tbe  ground  that  they  are  not  cases,  strictly  and  techni-
cally speaking,  of  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdictioo.  If,
however,  the  claim  of  the  district  courts  be  well  fouDdedto
tbe  co^izanca  of  all  maritime  contracts,  wheresoever  the
same  may  be  mode,  or  whatever  may  be  tbe  form  of  the  con-

■  See  lberoniif>rtbecaaiRUNbii*»ftbeM  Tice.ailniinilijcoDni under
tbe  cdonial  esiabliiLinenti,  is  a  note  to  the  ctM  of  Da  Lorio  r.  Bett,
sod  to  Dtt  Pomxauon  Jaritdiction,  p.  I6S.

h  Jountoh  ofCongreu.  vol.  I.  p.  ti.  C9.  ^.  Jourtiatt  tfAi  ^tttm-
lOn^lkaCtloiiyofJfeu-Yorkfra.  S.  793- 397. tOO.


i,Googlc


Ut-  JUItlSPRtTDENCi:  OF  [PanlT.

tract,  it  wonid  seem  (bat the juriadictionofthertatecourts
over  thoie  contractB  could  not  be  lastained.'  But  I  appre-
hend it  may  fairly  be  doubted  whether  the  constitution  of
the  United  States  meaot  by  admiralty  and  maritime  ju-
risdiction, any  thing  more  than  that  jurindietion  which  was
settled  and  in  artive  practice  under  the  English  jurispru-
dence when  the  constitution  was  made;  and  whether  it  had
any  retrospective  or  historical  reference  to  the  usages  and
practice  of  the  ndmirelly,  as  it  once  existed  in  the  middle
afes,  before  its  territories  had  been  invaded  and  partly
subdued'by  the  bold  and  free  spirit  of  the  courts  of  com-
tnon  low,  armed  with  the  protectiRg  genius  and  masculine
vigour  of  trial  by  jury.*

(4.)  Ai  to  ike  jurUtliction  of  the  instance  evurti.

According  to  the  English  jurisprudence,  the  instaac*
court  takes  cognizance  only  of  crimes  committed,  and
things  done,  and  contracts  not  under  seal  made  svper  ahum
mare,  and  without  the  body  of  any  county.  This,  of  course,
ezcludeeall  creeks,  bays,  and  rivers,  which  are  within  the
body  of  some  county ;  and  if  the  place  be  the  sea  coast,  then
the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  tide  determines  the  admiralty.
The  cause  must  arise  lokoOy  upon  the  seaiand  not  within  the
precincts  of  any  county,  to  give  the  admiralty  jurisdrction.
If  the  action  be  foundedon  a  matter  done  partly  on  land  and
partly  onwater,  as  ifa  contract  be  made  on  land  tobe  executed
at  sea,  or  be  made  at  sea  to  be  executed  on  land,  the  com^
mon  law  has  the  preference,  and  excludes  the  admiralty.h
The  admiralty  has  cognizance  of  maritime  bypothecationa
of  vessels  and  goods  in  foreign  ports,  for  repairs  done,  or

a  ItWMheUin  thaoBMoftbailxopMarj,  I  Pnaic,  673.,  that  thsDil-
tricl  Coart*  hxl  cogTiisaikce  of  >ll  maritime  contrscti,  aod  tbal  m  bot-
todirv  bond  irat  one,  »vd  thejanMiietioi)  applied  equally  whether  it  was
gireab;  tbe  owner  or  maalar,  and  wbelher  giren  ia  (breifa  or  ia  onr  owa
porta,  A  Hmilar  decitioii  wai  made  in  Wilmer  t.  The  Smilax,  t  PtffVp
Rep.  t95.  BdI  in  Andrew*  and  S.  Euex  F.  and  M.  Idi.  Co.  3  JlaiMt,
IS,  17.  tbe  admi rally  joriidiclHKi  orer  mrnritime  cootract*  ia  coafined  ta
nMtdtd  contract!,  and  not  to  contTaot*  lewling  thereto,  aa  »  eoatract  ta.
build  a  ahip,  or  lign  a  ibippiog  paper,  or  exeonte  a  bottemrj  bond.

6  Om.  Dig.  til.  Adm.  S.  1.  7. 10.  It.  F.  1 ,  X.  4, 5.  a  Blatk  Cm.
108,  107.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Utlan  XVII.] THE  UNITES  STATES.  9»

Dsceasarf  supplies  furDisbed  ;>  and  in  tbe  case  otMtnetant
r  Cribboiu,^  it  wa;  admitted  by  the  K.  B.  that  the  admiraN
tj  bad  entire  jurHdiction  in  the  case  of  an  fajpotbacatioo
bond,  charging  a  ahip  with  money  taken  up  in  a  forei^D
port  for  necessaries,  though  the  bond  was  under  seal,  and
executed  on  land.  The  jurisdictioo  in  tuch  a  case,  de-
pended on  the  subject  matter)  for  here  the  contract  was
merely  m  rem,  and  there  was  ns  personal  covenant  for  the
payment  of  the  money,  and  the  admiralty  jurisdiction  in
auchaeasewasindispensable,  as  the  courts  of  common  law
do  not  proceed  in  rem.  If  the  admiralty  has  cognizanceof
the  principal  thing,  it  has  also  t^the  incident,  though  that
incident  would  not  of  itself,  and  if  it  stood  for  a  principal
thing,  be  within  the  admiralty  jurisdiction.  Upon  this
principle  it  is,  that  goods  taken  by  pirates  and  sold  on
land,  may  be  recovered  from  the  vendee,  by  suit  in  the  ad-
mirelty.*:  Suits  for  seamen's  wages  are  cognizable  in  tha
admiralty,  though  the  contract  be  made  upon  land;  and
this  is  intended  for  the  ease  and  benefit  of  seamen,  for  they
Are  all  allowed  to  join  in  the  suit,  and  all  the  persons  on
board  below  the  rank  of  the  roaster,  are  comprehended  in
thedeeoriptionofmariners.'l  Tbiscase  of  seamen's  wages
the  courts  of  common  law  admit  to  be  of  admiralty  jurie-
diction ;  and  this  is  an  exception  in  favour  of  seamen,  to  the
general  rule  that  the  admiralty  has  no  jurisdiiuiooof  any
matter  arising  on  land,  though  it  be  of  a  maritime  nature,
aa  a  charter-party  or  policy  of  insurance.  The  District
Court,  as  a  court  of  admiralty,  posseues  a  general  juris-
diction in  suits  by  material  meii,  tit  rest,  and  inpenonam.
The  proceeding  in  perttmam,  is  always  maintainable  by
those  men,  but  the  proceeding  in  rem  is  only  when  there  is
a  specific  Iten,  as  for  repairs  made,  or  necessaries  furnish-
ttd  to  a  foreign  ship,  or  to  n  ship  in  the  ports  of  the  state  to


ml  Satk.Si. i  Lord  Raym. 163.
6  3  Ttrwt  Afp.  XS7.

c  Com.  Dig.  tit  Adm.  F.  e. S  Bhdu.  Cm.  10R.
(JlSott.St-Str-ISI.  937. I  Xord  Atym.  391.  SXw.  CO.  4  ihi(.  IM-
,4t. Con.  Dig.  lit  AUDI.  E.  16.
Vol  I.  45


tvGpoj^lc


3S4  .^RISPRUDENCE  OF  [jPari  U.

which  she  does  not  belong.*  The  aet  of  congren  of  Julj
20th,  1790,  relative  to  seameo,  sect  ion  6.  has  given  a  speci-
fic and  summary  relief  for  seamen,  in  the  recovery  of  wagsi,
by  authorizing  the  diRtrict  judge,  or,  in  his  abaeuce,  ■  ma-
gistrate, to  summon  the  master  before  him,  and  to  attach
tbe  reHsel  as  security  for  the  wages.

We  have  now  finished  a  general  survey  of  the  admiral-
ty jurisdiction  ofi  he  dislri(-t  courts,  both  incitil  and  crimi-
nal cases,  and  both  as  an  instance  and  as  a  prize  court.  It
would  not  be  consistent  with  the  plan  of  these  elemeotarf
disquisitions,  to  give  a  detailed  sketch  of  the  course  of  pro-
ceeding, and  of  the  peculiar  practice  in  (he  admiralty  couru.
The  proceedings  are  according  lo  the  course  of  tbe  civil
law,  and  are  remarkHhie  for  their  comprehensive  brevity,
celerity,  and  simplicity.  Nothing  ran  be  more  unlike  in
its  process,  pleadings,  proof,  trial,  and  remedy,  than  the
practice  of  the  courts,  of  ndmiraliy  and  of  the  courts  (^
common  law.  For  a  knowledge  of  the  admiralty  prac-
tice, I  would  refer  the  student  to  Cltrkt'$  Practice  pf  tie
C'^urt  of  Admiralty  in  England,  which  is  a  work  of  un-
doubted credit ;  and  in  1800,  a  new  edition  was  published
in  this  country  by  Hr.  Hall,  with  an  appendix  of  precfr.
cedents.  I  would  also  refer  him  to  the  2d  volume  of
Browii'i  Civil  and  Admiralty  Low,  and  to  the  appendix  to
the  1st  and  2d  volumea  of  Mr.  ffktalon'i  Re^urlt,  where
he  will  find  the  practice  of  the  instance  and  priKe  courll
digested  and  summarily  explained.

1  prorecd  next  to  considerthejuriedictionofthe  District
Court  when  proceeding  as  a  court  of  conmonlaw.  )t  ex-
lends  to  all  minor  crimeg  and  ofiences,  cojcnizahle  under

a  TUt  General  AmiUi.  4  »  healon,  <JB  7Af  Jervtaltnt  2  Oaltium,
SIS.  TVu  Robert  Fulton,  I  Paine,  6.0  If  maienalB  for  a  ve«el  be  fur-
DtBljed  in  »  home  port,  and  a  dole  of  hand  girea  by  the  owner,  a  1ih«t  ia
(Be  admiralty  tn  pcrtonam  will  not  lip.  Rarmaj  »,  Allegre  IS  fFkrO'
ton,  61 1.  In  (bi*  iaMt  case  llie  axlent  of  admir^llj  juriadiciion  in  pma-
tumi  W3B  much  diacuued  and  qupitioned  by  Sir.  Juilice  Johnaon.  Bui.
in  WillariT.  I>oiT,3J/n»on,  93,  Mr.  JuMice  Story  coniidered  il  tobotlie
MltledjuriMliclinDoforthe  adiriratty,  Ihal  the  matter  could  me  ther«m
jMrMruDii  for  hit  wage*,  aod  the  seamen iit  rem  a'  wf  li  asinperionam,  tot
tlreir  wtgei. Thii  appe*r*  Id  be  a  weli  eMabliiLed  ditiiociion.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


tedun  XVIL] THE  UNITED  STATES.  395

the  Bulhoritf  of  the  United  States,  and  which  are  not
■tricttjT  ofadm  trait;  cogaizance ;  and  to  all  seizures  on  land,
and  OD  waters  not  nari^ble  from  th«  sea ;  and  ta  all  suim
Ibrpenalliei  and  for  forfeitures  there  incurred.and  to  all  suits
by.alienx  fur  torts  dune  in  violation  of  the  law  of  netiohs,
or  of  a  treaty ;  and  to  suits  af^ainrt  consuls  and  vice-con-
suls ;  and  to  all  suits  at  common  law,  where  the  United
Slates  sue,  and  the  matter  in  dispute  amounts  to  one
hundred  dollars.'  It  has  jurisdictioo  likewise  of  proceed-
ings to  repeal  patents  obtained  surreptitioiiMl]',  or  upon
false  suggestions.  This  is  given  by  the  act  of  contcress  of
21st  February,  1793,  chap.  II.,  and  it  is  a  jurisdiction
that  leads  frequently  to  the  most  intricate,  nice,  and  per-
plexed mvesligatioos,  respecting  the  originality  of  inven-
tions and  improvements  in  complirated  machinery.  It
was  made  a  question  in  the  District  Court  of  New- York,
in  the  case  Ex  parte  Wood,  whether  the  process  to  be
awarded  to  repeal  the  patent,  was  not  in  the  nature  of  a
$eirtfaciat  at  common  law,  upon  which  issue  of  fnct  might
be  taken,  and  tried  by  a  jury.  The  district  judze  decided,
that  the  proceeding  was  summary,  upon  a  rule  to  show
cause,  and  that  no  process  o( icirt  faciat  was  afterwards
admissible.  But  upon  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  Slales,l>  the  decree  of  the  Distrirt  Court  was
reversed,  and  the  District  Court  was  directed  by  munHa-
•u*  to  enter  upon  record  the  proceedings  in  the  cause,
antecedent  to  the  granting  of  the  rule  to  show  cause  why
process  should  not  issue  to  repeal  the  patent.  Thi^  Dis-
trict Court  was  further  directed  to  award  prorcss,  in  the
nature  of  b  tcire  faciat,  to  the  patentee,  to  show  cause  why
the  patent  should  not  be  repealed;  and  upon  the  return
of  the  process,  the  Court  was  to  proceed  to  try  the  cause
upon  the  pleadings  of  the  partioa,  and  the  issue  of  Inw  or
fact  joined  thereon,  as  the  case  mijiht  be ;  and  that  if  the
issue  be  an  issue  of  fact,  the  trial  thereofwes  to  be  by  jury,
according  to  the  course  of  the  common  law.


«  Juditnr--  Art  r,t  SegUaiittr,  1 7S,  m


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoOglc


MS  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  IPart  0.

This  waa  ajurt  aod  liberal  decision  of  th«  Supreme.
Court,  and  it  was  obterved,  in  the  opinion  which  wae  pro-
nouacfid,  that  it  was  not  lightly  to  be  presumed,  that  con-
grtaa,  id  this  claai  of  patent  caws,  placed  peculiarly  wilb-
iD  their  petroua^  and  prolectiun,  inTnlvinf  some  of  the
dearest  and  moat  valuable  rij^hta  which  society  acknow-
ledges, and  the  constitution  itself  meant  to  favouff  would
institute  a  new  and  summary  process,  which  shmild  finally
adjudge  upoQ  those  rights,  without  a  trial  by  jury,  with-
out a  right  of  appeal,  and  without  any  oftliose  guards
with  which,  in  equity  suits,  it  lias  fenced  round  ihe  gener-
al aomiotatration  of  justice.  The  Supreme  Court  then
went  into  an  analytical  exumination  of  the  10th  section  of
the  act  of  1793,  on  which  the  claim  of  summary  jurisdic-
tion rested,  and  vindicated  the  couslruction  whicb  they  8s>
sumed.  in  opposition  to  that  taken  by  the  District  Court.

The  jurisdiction  of  the  judges  of  the  district  courtSi-w
eases  of  bankruptcy,  has  presented  for  consideration  some
extremely  important  and  difficult  questions  on  the  pnint  of
jurisdiction.  We  have  no  bankrn|il  system  in  existence
under  the  government  of  the  United  Stales ;  but  there  are
some  lingering  traces  of  bunoess  yet  arising  and  undeter-:
mined,  under  the  bankrupt  act  of  the  year  ISltO  ;  and  we
are  in  oxpeciation,  at  every  session  of  congress,  of  a  re-
vival of  that,  or  some  other  analogous  systpm  and  rode  of
national  bankrupt  law.  The  question,  which  was  not  long
since  discussed  and  decided  in  the  District  Court  of  New-
York  ic  the  case  of  Cotnfort  Sands,*  ia  worthy  of  some
little  examination.

The  district  judge  observed,  that,  in  England,  the  sole
power  of  directing  the  execution,  and  controlling  the  ad-
Biinistration  of  the  bankrupt  system, in  all  its  departments,
and  in  every  stage  of  the  proceeding,  resided  in  Ihe  lord
chancellor.  He  examined  the  provisions  of  the  several
Euifltsh  bankrupt  acts,  from  34tb  and  35th  Hen.  VIII.  to
4&tbGeo.  IIl.,tosbowthBt,  by  them,thechBncetlorhasuu-r
a  [ARtai  5tofM  ilAw  JoNTw^,  vol.  1.  p.  It.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


LMbm  XVIl] THE  UNITED  STATES.  S57

thority  to,  appoint  the  commissioneri  of  bankraptito  lu*
persede  their  authorttf,  to  eolarge  the  time  for  the  bank*
rupt  to  surrender,  to  punish  for  cuocealiog  him,  to  remove
the  assigoeea  and  appoint  olhprs,  and  to  order  them  io
paj  dividends.  Under  this  delegation  of  power,  the  wbote
administration  of  the  bankrupt's  effects  w  vested  in  the
lord  chancellory  thou;rb  this  administraticm  was  given
imsaedialeiy  by  the  legislature  to  tbe  commissioners.  The
ebancellor,  in  virtue  of  bis  acknowledged  power  to  ap>
point  and  remove,  to  create  and  annihilate  these  officers,
possesses,  in  effect,  the  authority  to  control  and  direct
tbem  in  all  their  acta,  and  thus  effectually  to  exercise  the
whole  juriMliotioD.  His  power  is  adequate  to  every  case,
and  to  every  emergency,  that  can  arise  in  the  course  of
tbe  administration  of  the  bankrupt  system.  He  grants
relief  to  all  parties  interested,  tbe  bankrupt  as  well  as  the
creditor,  in  a  summary  wa^.

This  jurisdiction  of  the  English  chancellor  is  not  in  the
court  of  chancery,  but  in  the  individual  who  holds  the  |rreat
seal ;  and  it  is  exercised  Hummarily  upon  petition,  and  his
judgment  upon  the  petition  is  without  appeal,  unlesn  the
chancallor  in  bis  discretion  allqws  a  bill  to  be  filed  in  order
to  found  an  appeal  thereon.  Tbe  judge,  after  gi?it3^thia
viewof  tbe  jurisdictionoflhe  lord  cbanceller  of  England,
fitting  in  bankruptcy,  proceeded  to  examine  thcseveral
provisions  of  the  bankrupt  act  of  the  .United  States  oC
1800,  in  order  to  show,  that  upon  the  principles  of  coo-
atruction  adopted  in  England,  tlie  district  judge  had  the
same  jurisdiction  in  cases  of  bankruptcy  as  is  exercised  by
the  lord  chancellor.  Tbe  same  course  of  reasoning  wfaicb
sustains  the  jurisdiction  of  the  one,  would  confer  that  of
the  other.  He  insisted  that  the  jurisdiction  here  was  gi-
ven, not  to  the  District  Court,  but  to  the  individual  who
happened  to  hold  the  office  ofdistrict  judge,  and  that,  con-
sequently, all  his  decisions  in  bankruptcy  were  without
appeal,  for  ai^ieala  lie  ooly  from  the  decrees  of  tbe  I>ts-
trict  Courts

Tbe  district  judge  accordingly  proceeded  to  institute  aa
inquiry,  upon  tbe  petition  of  the  bankrupt,  into  the  exeeiH-
two  of  the  commiaiion  of  hankroptcy,  and  what  tbe  com-

.Google


351  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [P«rt  If.

iDiuioiiera  had  done  onder  it,  and  he  made  an  order  call-
ing upon  the  auignees  to  accnunt-

After  this  deciiion,  an  application  was  made  to  the  Cir-
cuit Court  of  the  United  States  to  tnke  cognizance  ofthif
case,  and  to  restrain  the  bankrupt  from  further  proceed-
ings hefore  the  district  judge  ;  but  that  court  held,  that  it
had  no  jurisdiction  in  the  case.

If  the  doctrine  in  this  case  be  sound,  and  that  the  dis-
trict judge  had  this  plenary,  absolute,  uncontrollable  and
exclusive  jurisdiction  in  all  cases  of  bankruptcy,  both  in  re-
spect to  the  person  and  estate  of  the  bankrupt,  then  it
must  be  admitted  that  the  bankrupt  act  of  1600  erected  a
tribunal  of  a  most  arbitrary  character,  and  it  is  fortunate
in  that  respect  that  the  bankrupt  act  was  speedily  repeal-
ed. According  to  this  decision,  the  state  tribunals,  such
as  the  Court  of  Chancery  and  the  Court  of  Errors  of  this
atate,  vhicb  asserted  and  exercised  concurrent  jurisdic-
tion between  the  bankrupt  and  his  creditors,  as  in  the  case
of  Codwite  and  othert  r.  Sandi  and  olhtrg,-*  were  all  under
a  mistake,  and  the  decrees  of  those  courts  repect-
irelf  were  null  and  void  fur  want  of  jurisdiction.  The
weight  of  authority  is,  however,  in  favour  of  the  concur-
rent jurisdiction  of  the  state  courts,  and  against  any  con-
stnwtion  of  the  bankrupt  act  of  1800,  which  would  vest
such  extravagant  powers  in  the  unchecked  discretion  of  a
single  judge.  There  was  nothing  in  that  act  which  do-
olared  or  intimated  that  the  judge  of  the  District  Court,
in  executing  the  powers  vested  in  the  district  judge,  was
not  to  he  deemed  to  be  acting  judicially  as  a  court.  The
aet  of  congress  was  susceptible  of  a  safer  construction,  and
one  better  adapted  to  the  genius  and  whole  detail  of  our
municipal  institutions ;  and  it  is  understood  that  the  Cir-
cuit Court  for  the  district  of  New- York  has  since  admitted
the  right  of  appeal  to  that  court,  and  also  the  concurrent
jurisdiction  ofthe  state  courts.^

a  A  Jofcnton't  Rtp.  S3S.

b  In  Loom  r.  Morrii,  1  Poww. S9S., it  irai  held  that  tiMCiKDitOoarU
oTthe  CniMd  Staioi  had  jarndJction  of  matter*  arUin^  under  the  bank-
nptlaw,  and  that  the  DUlrioi  Conrti  had  not  excliuiT«jiiri»Jiolicin  over
the  entire  axecnlMM  of  the  haokrapt  law ;  the/  cooU  aot  muan  tba  a^
■ignaei,  nor  compal  them  to  Mcoast.


i,Googlc


XVH] THE  ■UNITED  STATES.  359

With  respect  loihe  vant  lerrilories  belonging  to  the  Uni-
ted Ntati^s,  and  which  are  not  distinct  politimt  sitcietics,
known  to  theconmitutiun  hb  states,  congreKD  have  assumed
to  exercise  oyer  them  supreme  powers  of  soverttignt;.  In
the  Michigan  t<Tritory,congre8BhBve,hy  theactsof  7thof
August,  1769,  and  January  I4(h,  18U5,  adopted  the  printa-
ples  of  the  ordinance  of  the  confederation  congress  of  the
date  of  the  13th  of  July,  1787.  This  ordinance  was  form-
ed upon  sound  and  enlightened  maxims  of  civil  jurispr(^>
deuce,  find  thejudgeaappoiuted  in  that  territory  bold  iheir
offices  during  good  behaviour.  In  the  Arkansaw  teiri-
tary,  a  greater  suhjertion  ia  created  to  the  will  of  tha
presidentofthe  United  States.  The  governor  and  judges
are  appointed  by  the  president  and  senate,  but  they  arc
removeable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  president,  and  the
judges  subject  to  such  removal,  bold  for  four,  and  the  go-
vernor for  three  years.  The  legislative  power  of  the  ter-
ritory was  originally  vested  in  the  governor,  and  the  three
judges  of  the  superior  court,  by  the  act  of  March  2d,
1819.  But  a  legislative  assienibly,  to  be  composed  of  a
council  of  nine  members,  appointed  by  the  president  and
senate  of  the  United  States,  and  to  continue  in  office  for
five  years,  aod  of  a  house  of  representatives  to  be  chosea
by  the  inhabitants  biennially,  was  provided  hy  the  act  of
21st  of  April,  1820,  adopting  the  act  of  June  4th,  1813»
0.95.  The  Superior  Court  of  that  territory  has  exclusive
oognizanee  of  all  capital  offences,  and  the  trial  by  jury  is
wcured,  together  with  many  of  the  other  great  funda>
mental  principles  of  civil  liberty.  The  territorial  legisla-
tures both  of  Michigan  and  Arkansaw,  are  prohibited  from
interfering  with  the  primary  disposal  of  the  soil  by  the
United  States,  or  from  taxiitg  lands  of  non-resident
proprietors,  higher  than  those  of  residents,  or  from  inter-
rufitio^  the  navigable  waters  flowing  into  the  Miiisissippi
and  Missouri  rivers,  as  common  highways  free  to  all  tha
citizens  of  the  United  Stales.

Ia  the  organization  of  t  ho  territcrial  governments  of  Eobt


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


SG6  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  II.

and  West  Florida,  hj  the  act  of  coogren  of  March  30tb,
i8Si,  the  judges  of  the  superior  courts  are  appointed  bj
the  president  and  senate  of  the  United  States,  and  hold
their  offices  for  four  years ;  but  writs  of  error  and  appeal
lie  from  their  decisions  to  the  Supreme'  Court  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  equally  as  from  the  circuit  courts  in  the  several
states.

It  would  seem,  from  these  various  congressional  regnla-
tionsof  the  territories  belonging  to  the  United  States,  that
congress  have  supreme  power  in  the  government  of  them,
de|>ending  on  the  exercise  of  their  sound  discretion.  Nei-
ther the  District  of  Columbia,  nor  a  territory,  is  a  ttatt,
within  the  meaning  of  the  constitution,  or  entitled  to  claim
the  privileges  secured  to  the  members  of  the  anion.  This
has  been  so  adjudged  by  the  Supreme  Court.^  Nor  will  a
writ  of  error  or  appeal  lie  from  a  territorial  court  to  tba
Supreme  Court,  unless  there  be  a  special  statute  provision
for  the  purpose.**  There  is  such  a  provision  as  to  Florida,
and  there  is  a  limited  provision  of  that  kind  as  to  Arkon*
saw  and  Michigan,  extending  to  cases  in  which  the  United
States  are  concerned,  and  not  extending  further.^  if,
therefore,  the  government  of  the  United  States  should
carry  into  execution  the  project  of  colonizing  the  great
valley  of  the  Oregan  to  the  west  of  the  Rocky  HouDtaliiii
it  would  afford  a  subject  of  grave  consideration  wbal
would  be  the  future  civil  and  political  destiny  of  that
country.  It  wouM  be  a  long  time  before  it  would  be  po>
pulouB  enough  to  be  created  into  one  or  more  independent
states  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  upon  the  doctrine  taught
by  the  acts  of  congress,  and  even  by  the  judicial  de-
cisions of  the  Supreme  Court,  the  colonists  would
be  in  a  state  of  the  most  complete  subordination,  and
ns  dependent  upon  the  will  of  congress  as  the  people
of  this  country  would  have  been  upon  the  king  and  par-
liament of  Great  Britain,  if  they  could  have  sustained


a  2  Crnneft,  41S.  I  Wheilon,  91,
b  1  Crnncli,^\i.  S  Cranck,  li'J.
cAdaf3dMurch,im;.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LscturaXVII.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  36l

their  claim  to  bind  its  in  all  cases  whatsoever.  Such  a
state  or  absolute  sovcreij^nty  on  the  one  hnnd,  and  of  abso-
lute dependence  on  the  other,  is  not  congenial  with  the
free  and  independent  spirit  of  our  native  institutions  j  and
the  establishment  of  distant  territorial  governments,  ruled
according  to  will  and  pleasure,  would  have  a  very  natural
tendency,  at  all  proconsular  govorotnents  have  had,  to
abuse  and  onpression.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


t,Goo(^lc


LECTURE  XVIII.

or  THE  CONCURRENT  JUHISDICTION  OF  THE  STATU
aOVERNMENTa.

The  ques^D  kow  far  the  atate  govefoments  have  eon-
carrent  powers,  either  legiilative  or  judicial,  over  caie*
within  the  jorisdiction  of  the  government  of  the  United
StateB,  has  been  much  discussed.  It  will  be  mf  eadeavour«
in  the  course  of  the  present  lecture,  to  ascertain  the  just
doctrine  and  settled  distinctions  applicable  to  this  great  aad
most  important  constitutianal  subject.

(1.)  At  to  the  concurrent  poutert  ofUgialation  in  the  itatet.

It  was  observed  ia  the  Federalitt,'^  that  the  state  govera-
tnents  vrould  clearly  retain  all  those  rights  of  sovereignty
which  they  had  before  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of
the  United  States,  and  which  were  not  by  that  constitution
exclusively  delegated  to  the  union.  The  alienation  of
atate  power  or  sovereignty  would  only  exist  in  three  cases :
Where  the  constitution  in  expreM  terms  granted  an  exclti>
■ive  authority  to  the  union  ;  where  it  granted  in  on»  io-
stancean  authorityto'tbe  union,  and  in  another  prohibited
the  states  from  exercising  the  like  authority  ;  and  where  it
granted  an  authority  to  the  union,  to  wbidi  a  similar  av
thoriiy  in  the  states  would  be  absolutely  and  totally  coo'
tradictory  and  repugnant.

In  tbe  judicial  construction,  given  from  lime  to  time  to  the
oonsUtution,  there  is  no  very  essential  variation  from  tbo
coDtempurary  exposittoti  which  was  here  laid  down  by  th*


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


364  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  ^ui  IL

high  authoritj  of  the  Fedtralut.  JudgeChase,  ia  tbecase
of  Colder  V.  Ball,^  declared  that  tbe  state  legisUtures  re-
tained all  the  powers  of  legislation  wbich  were  not  express-
ly taken  away  by  tbe  constitution  of  the  United  Statea  ;
and  he  held,  that  no  constructive  powers  could  be  exer-
cised by  the  federal  government.  Subaeqiienl  judges  bav«
not  expressed  themselves  quite  so  strangly  in  faToor  of
state  rights,  and  in  restriction  of  the  powers  of  the  mitioo^
al  government.  Id  Starget  v.  Croumimkield,^  the  chief
justice  of  the  United  States  observed,  that  the  powers  of
the  states  remained,  after  the  adoption  of  tbe  constitution,
what  they  Were  before,  except  so  far  as  they  bad  been
abridged  by  that  instrument.  The  mere  grant  of  a  pow-
er to  congress  did  not  imply  a  prohibition  on  the  states  to
exercise  the  same  power.  Thus,  congress  are  autborixed
to  establish  uniform  laws  oo  tbe  subject  of  bankruptcy,
but  tbe  states  may  pass  bankrupt  law«,  provided  there  be
no  act  of  congress  in  tortx  establishing  a  aniforn  law  oa
that  subject.  The  statee  may  legislate  in  tbe  absence  pf'
congressional  regnletions.  It  is  not  the  mere  existence
of  the  power,  hut  its  exercise,  which  it  incompatible  witli
the  exercise  of  tbe  same  power  by  the  states.  It  is  not
tbe  right  to  establish  these  uniform  laws,  but  their  actual
establishment,  which  is  inconsistent  with  tbe  partial  acts
of  the  Slates.  But  the  concurrent  power  of  legishition  is
tbe  states  did  not  extend  to  every  case  in  which  the  exer-
cise by  tbe  states  had  not  been  expressly  prohibited.  The
correct  principle  was,  that  whenever  the  terms  in  whicb
the  power  was  granted  to  congress,  or  the  nature  of  tbe
power,  required  that  it  should  be  exercised  exclusively  by
congress,  the  subject  was  as  completely  taken  from  tb*
State  legislatures,  as  if  they  had  been  expressly  forbidden
to  act  on  it.  In  Houston  v.  Moore,'^  the  same  prin-
ciples were  laid  down  by  Judge  Washington  in  deliver-
ing the  opinion  of  the  court.  He  observed,  that  tbe
power  of  tbe  state  governments  to  legislate  on  tbe  subject

m9DaUtu,Me. H  Whtalm.  m.  eiW]ualon,i.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


tmtvn  XVm.5 THE  UNITED  STATES.  36a

•f  the  state  militia  having  existed  jwior  to  the  formation  of
the  GonBlttution,  aiitl  not  being  prohibited  hj  that  instru-
ueut,  it  remained  with  the  Mates,  subordinate,  aevertbe-
less,  to  the  paramount  power  of  the  general  governmeDt,
operating  upon  the  same  subject.  Ifcongrest,  for  instance,
did  not  exercise  the  power  of  providing  for  organizing,.
arming  and  disuplining  the  militia,  it  was  competent  for
the  atateii  to  do  it ;  but  as  congress  bad  exercised  its  coa-
(Mitntiooal  powers  upon  the  subject  of  the  militia  as  full;
as  was  thought  proper,  the  (tower  of  legislation  over  that
subject  bj  the  states  was  excluded,  except  so  far  as  it  had
been  permitted  by  congress.  The  doctrine  of  the  court
was,  that  when  congress  exercised  their  powers  upon  any
given  subject,  the  states  could  not  enter  upon  the  bama
ground,  and  provide  for  the  same  objects.  The  will  of
congress  maj  be  discovered,  as  well  by  what  they  have
Dot  declared,  as  by  what  they  have  expressed.  Two  di»-
tinct  wills  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  exercised,  in  rela-
tion to  the  same  subject,  effectually,  and  at  the  same  time
be  compatible  with  each  other.  If  tbey  correspond  in
every  respect,  then  the  latter  is  idle  and  inoperative.  If
they  differ,  they  must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  oppose
each  other  so  &r  as  they  do  differ.  It  was,  therefore,  not
true  and  constitutional  doctrine,  that  in  cases  where  the
atate  governments  have  a  concurrent  power  of  legislation
^itb  the  national  government,  they  may  legislate  upon
any  subject  on  which  congress  have  acted,  provided  the
two  laws  are  not  in  tbeir  operation  contradictory  and  ra-
pugnant  to  each  other.

Judge  Story,  in  the  opinion  which  he  gave  in  this  case,
•poke  to  the  same  effect,  and  defined  with  precision  tba
boundary  line  between  the  concurrent  and  residuary  pow-
«rs  of  the  states,  and  the  exclusive  powers  of  the  union.  As
mere  grant  of  power  in  affirmative  terms  to  congress,  did
'fioC,  per  <e,  transfer  an  exclusive  sovereignty  on  such  sub*
jects.  The  powers  granted  to  congress  were  never  ex-
clusive of  similar  powers  existing  in  the  states,  unless
where  tbe  constitution  has  expressly  in  terms  given  an
«zclu8ive  power  to  congress,  or  the  exercise  of  a  like
•power  was  prohibited  to  the  states ;  or  (here  was  a  din>ct

.Google


366  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  p*art  U.

repug:naac7  or  incompatibility  in  the  exercise  of  it  b;  tbe
•latet.  This  is  the  same  description  of  the  nature  ofthe
powers  as  that  given  by  the  Fedtralut.  An  exami^  of
the  first'  class  is  to  be  found  in  the  exclusive  legislatioo
delegated  to  congress  over  places  purcbased  for  forts,  ar-
•enals,  Sec  ;  and  of  the  second  class,  in  the  prohibition  of
B  state  to  coin  money,  or  emit  bills  of  credit ;  and  of  tbe
third  elasa,  in  the  poner  to  establish  a  uniform  rule  of  na-
turalization, and  in  tbe  delegation  of  admiralty  and  mari-
time jurisdiction.  In  all  other  cases,  tbe  states  retain-
concurrent  authority  with  congress,  except  where  the  lawa
of  the  states  and  of  the  union  are  in  direct  and  manifest
collision  on  the  same  subject,  and  then  those  of  the  union
being  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  are  of  paramount  au-
thority, and  the  state  laws,  so  far,  and  so  far  only  ti
such  incompatibility  exists,  must  necessarily  yield.

In  the  application  of  these  general  principles  to  the  ease
before  the  court,  it  was  observed,  that  tbe  power  given  to
congress  to  provide  for  organizini^i  arming,  and  disciplin-
ing the  militia,  was  not  exclusive.  It  was  merely  an  af-
firmative power,  and  being  not  incompatible  with  tbe  ez-
iAeoce  of  a  like  power  in  the  states,  it  might  well  leave  a
concurrent  power  in  the  latter.  But  when  once  coB^ress
have  acted  on  tbe  subject,  and  carried  this  power  into
eflect,  its  laws  for  tbe  erganization,  arming,  and  dis-
cipliuiog  the  militia,  were  supreme,  and  all  interfering
regulations  of  the  states  suspended.  A  state  may  or-
ganize, arm,  and  discipline  its  own  militia,  to  the  ab-
sence of,  or  subordinate  to,  the  regulations  of  coa-
gress.  This  power  originally  existed,  in  tbe  states,
and  tbe  grant  of  it  to  congress  was  not  necessarily  ex-
clusive, unless  B  concurrent  power  in  the  states  would
be  repugnant  to  the  grant,  and  there  was  no  such  repug-
nancy in  the  nature  of  the  ])ower.  But  the  question  was,
whether  a  state  legislature  badany  concurrent  power  re-
maining after  congress  bad  provided  in  its  discretion  for
the  case.  The  conclusion  was,  that  when  once  the  legisla-
ture of  the  union  has  exercised  its  powers  on  a  eiven  subject,
the  state  power  over  that  same  subject,  wbicb  bad  Iw-

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lecture  XVUI.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  SS?

fore  been  concurrent,  was  hj  that  exercise  prohibited,  and
tbtfl  was  the  opinion  of  the  conrt>

These  are  sound  expositions  of  the  paramount  powers  of
the  general  government,  and  the  same  doctrines  had  been
previously  declared  in  the  Court  of  Errors  of  this  stale,  in
the  steam  boat  case  of  Livii^iton  v.  Vim  Ingen.*  "  Our
safe  rule  of  construction  end  of  action,"  as  it  was  there  ob-
served,l>  "was  this,  that  if  any  given  power  was  originally
■  Tested  in  this  state,  if  it  had  not  been  exclusively  ceded  to
eongresB,  or  if  the  exercise  of  it  has  not  been  prohibited  to
the  states,  we  might  then  go  on  in  the  exercise  of  power,
until  it  came  practically  in  colliiiion  with  the  exercise  of
•ome  congressional  power.  When  that  happened  to  be-
the  case,  the  state  authority  would  so  far  be  controlled,
but  it  would  still  be  good  in  all  those  resjiects  in  which  it
did  not  contravene  the  provision  of  the  paramount  law."
A  similar  exposition  of  the  concurrent  jurisdiction  of  the
slates,  was  given  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsylvania,
in  Moore  r.  Houtton."

When  the  constitution  of  the  United  Stales  was  under
the  consideration  of  the  state  conventions,  there  was  much
concern  expressed  on  the  subject  of  the  general  powf  r  of
taxation  over  all  objects  of  taxation,  vested  in  ihe  national
government ;  and  it  was  supposed  that  it  wojuM  be  in  the
power  of  congress,  in  its  discretion,  to  destroy  in  effect  the
concurrent  power  oftaxntion  remaining  in  the  stales,  nml
to  deprive  them  of  the  means  of  supplying  their  own  wants.
All  the  resourcesof  taxation  might,  by  degrees,  become  Ihe
subjects  of  federal  mono)ioly.  The  stntes  must  support
themsolveabydirecttaxcs.duties,  and  excises,  and  congress
may  lay  the  same  burthen,  at  the  seme  time,  on  the  same
subject.  Suppose  the  national  tax  should  be  as  great  as  (he
article,  whether  it  be  land,  or  distilled  spirits,  or  pleasure


'f  Rrp-  607.  6  9  JohnianU  Rep.  p.  6

c  S  Strg.  tf  Rmcl.  119.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


«69  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  H.

carriages,  for  initance,  will  conveoieiitly  and  proEperouslj
bear,  and  the  state  should  be  obliged  to  lay  a  further  tax
for  its  owB  Decessitiei ;  the  doctrine,  as  I  understand  it,
is,  that  the  claim  of  the  United  States  would  be  preferred,
and  must  be  first  satisfied,  because  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  made  tn  pursuance  of  the  constitutioo.  are  the  so-
Aireme  law  ofthe  land.  The  author  of  the  Federalul'  ad-
mits, that  a  state  might  lay  a  tax  on  a  particular  article,
equal  to  what  it  would  welt  bear,  but  the  United  States
would  still  have  a  right  to  lay  a  further  tax  on  the  same
article ;  aad  that  all  collisions  in  a  struggle  betweeo  the
two  gorerntnents  for  revenue,  must  and  would  be  avoided
by  a  sense  of  mutual  forbearance.  He  no  where,  how
ever,  meets  and  removes  the  difficulty,  in  the  case  of  a
want  of  this  mutual  forbearance,  where  there  is  a  coa-
current  tax  laid  00  the  same  subject,  and  which  wilj^  t>ot
bear  both  taxes.  He  says  only,  that  the  United  States
wouM  have  no  right  to  abolish  the  stale  tax.  This  is
not  contended  ;  but  would  not  the  United  States  have  a,
right  to  declare,  that  their  taxes  were  liens  from  the  time
they  were  imposed;  and  woidd  they  not,  as  of  course,  ha
entitleil  to  be  first  paid ;  aud  must  not  the  state  collector,
in  all  cases,  stand  by  and  wait  until  the  national  tax  ia
collected,  before  he  proceeds  to  collect  his  state  tax  out  of
the  exhausted  subject  ?  Upon  the  doctrine  ofthe  federal
courts,  and  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Federalist  himself,
this  must  be  the  case;  and  though  the  state  legislatures
bave  a  concurrent  juriediction  in  the  case  of  taxation,  ex-
«ept  as  to  imposts,  yet  in  effect,  though  not  in  terma,  iliii
concurrent  power  becomes  a  subordinate  and  dcfieiident
power.  In  every  other  case  of  legislation,  the  concurrent
power  in  the  states  would  seem  to  be  a  |x>wer  entirely
dependent,  and  subject  lo  be  taken  away  nlnolutely,
whenever  congress  should  clioo»e  to  exercise  their  pow-
ers of  legislation  over  the  same  subject. 1  do '  not  mean

a  Tia.32. Scealra  Ko.  31-33,  31>


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


,  Lecfurt  XVIII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  309

to  be  understood  toquestioD  theraliditj'.or  to  eicite  alarm
at  theeziatenee  of  thii  doctrine.  Tfae  national  ^oremment
ought  to  be  supreme  within itsconstitutional  limits, for  itii
intrusted  with  the  paramount  interestsand  general  welfare
of  the  whole  nation.  Our  great  and  effective  security  cod-
siats  in  the  fact,  that  the  constituents  of  the  general  and  of
the  state  governments  are  one  and  the  same  people ;  and
the  powers  of  the  national  government  must  always  be
exercised  with  a  due  regard  to  the  interest  and  prosperity
of  every  member  of  the  union ;  for  on  the  occurrence  and
good  will  of  the  parts,  the  stability  of  the  whole  depends.
Hy  object  is,  to  discover  whet  this  concurrent  power  of
legislation  amounts  to,  and  what  is  its  value,  and  on  what
constitutional  foundations  it  is  supported.

It  was  observed  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  in  the  convention  of
this  state  in  I788,>  that  if  the  United  States,  and.the  state,
should  each  lay  a  like  tax  on  a  specific  article,  and  the  to-
dividual  should  be  unable  to  pny  both,  the  parly  who  first
levied  would  hold  the  property.  But  this  position  must  be
received  with  some  qualification.  The  United  States  have
declared  by  law,  that  they  were  entitled,  in  respect  to  their
debts,  to  priority  of  payment ;  and  when  it  was  said  that
this  claim  would  interfere  with  the  rights  of  the  slate  so-
vereignties, and  would  defeat  the  measures  they  bad  a  right
to  adopt,  to  secure  themselves  against  delinquencies,  the
answer  given  in  Fisher  v.  Blight^  is,  that  "  the  mischief  -
suggested,  so  far  aaitran  really  happen,  was  the  necessary
-consequence  of  the  supremacy  of  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  on  all  subjects  to  which  the  legislative  power  of
congress  extends."  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the
concurrent  power  of  legislation  in  the  states  is,  not  an  in-
dependent, but  a  subordinate  and  dependent  power,  liable,
in  many  cases,  to  be  extinguished,  and  io  all  cases  to  be

a  Dtbatt$  m  Uu  JViw-  York  Conrtiikn,  priiiied  by  Prtocn  Cbildi,  p.
113.
h  i  Oa)KA,391.
Tot,.  I.  47


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


37*  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  fFart  H.

postpoDed,  to  the  paramount  or  supreme  law  of  the  unioa.
wfaeuever  the  federal  and  the  state  rrgulatioM  interfere
with  each  other.

In  fVeyman  v..  Southard,^  the  question  arose,  how  far
the  judicial  process  of  the  federal  courts  could  be  controlled
by  the  laws  of  the  several  stales.  It  was  decided,  that
congress  had  ezclusive  authority  to  regulate  proceedings
and  executions  in  the  federal  courts,  and  that  the  stales  had
no  authority  to  control  such  process ;  and,  therefore,  exe-
cutions by  ^ertyiicia>  in  the  federal  courts  were  not  subject
to  the  checks  created  by  (he  new  Kentucky  statute.  It
was,  in  that  cane.,  further  observod,  that  the  forms  of  exe-
cution, and  other  process  in  the  federal  courts,  in  suits  at
common  law,  except  modes  of  proceeding!  were  to  be  the
same  as  used  in  September,  1769,  in  the  supreme  courts
of  the  states,  subject  only  to  alterations  and  additions  by
congress,  and  by  the  federal  courts,  but  not  to  alterations
since  made  in  the  state  laws  and  practice.  It  was  further
observed,  that  the  laws  of  the  several  Btates  were  to  be  re-
garded as  rules  ofdeeision  in  trials  at  common  law,  in  cases
where  they  apply.  This,  however,  did  not  mean  to  apply
to  the  process  and  practice  of  the  federal  courts.  As  to
them,  the  laws  of  the  states  were  no  rule  of  decision,  and
the  direction  was  intended  only  as  a  legislative  re'cognitioa
of  the  principles  ef  universal  jurisprudence  as  to  the  opera-
tion of  the  Itx  tod  in  the  trial  and  decision  of  causes.

(2.)  Ailo  the  coaaurtnl  power  of  the  ttate*  mi  matten  of
judicial  cognizanct.

In  the  82d  number  of  the  Fedtralut,  it  is  laid  down  as  a
rule,  that  the  state  courts  retained  all  pre-existing  authori*
ties,  or  the  jurisdiction  they  hud  before  the  adoption  of  the
constitution,  except  where  it  was  taken  away  either  by  an
exclusive  authority  granted  in  express  terms  to  the  union,
or  in  a  case  where  a  particularauthorily  was  granted  to  the
unioa,and  the  exercise  of  a  like  authority  was  prohibited  to

s  10  fFTualmt,  1.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


£«etoM  XVIII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  371

thfl  fllatea,  or  in  tba  ease  wber«  an  authority  was  grant-
Ad  to  the  union,  with  which  a  timilar  authority  in  th«
■tates  would  be  utterly  incompaiible.  A  concurrent  juris-
diction in  the  state  courts  wat  admitted  in  all  except  those
•numerated  cases  ;  but  this  doctrine  was  only  applicable
to  those  demriptions  of  causes  of  which  the  state  courts
hiid  previous  cognizance,  and  it  waa  not  equally  evident
in  relation  to  casoa  which  grew  out  of  the  coastituiiuii.
Congress,  in  the  course  of  legislation,  might  commit  the
decision  of  causes  arising  upon  their  laws,  to  the  federal
eourts  exclusively  ;  but  unless  the  state  courts  were  ez>
pressly  excluded  by  the  acts  of  congress,  they  would,  of
course,  take  concurrent  cognizance-of  the  causes  to  which
those  acts  might  give  birth,  subject  to  the  exceptions
which  have  been  stated.  In  all  cases  of  concurrent  juris-
diction, an  appeal  would  lie  from  the  state  courts  to  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States;  and  without  'sucli
right  of  appeal,  the  concurrent  jurisdiction  of  the  state
courts,  in  matters  of  national  concern,  would  be  inadmis-
sible ;  because,  in  that  case,  it  would  be  inconsistent  with
the  authority  and  efficiency  of  the  general  government.

Such  were  the  early  and  speculative  views  of  the  ablest
commentators  on  the  constitution,  in  relation  to  the  judi-
cial powers  of  the  state  courts.  We  will  now  examine
a  aeries  t^decuions  in  the  federal  courts,  defining  and
settling  the  bouudaries  of  the  judicial  authorities  of  the
states.

la  the  case  of  Martin  r.  Hunter ,>  Judge  Story,  in  de-
livering tbe  opinion  of  the  court,  seemed  to  think,  that  it
was  tbe  duty  of  congress  to  vest  tbe  whole  judicial  power
of  the  United  States  in  courtsordained  and  established  by
itself.  But  the  general  observaiion  was  subaequontly
qualified,  and  confined  to  that  judicial  power  which  waa
exclusively  vested  in  the  Uuited  States.  The  whole  judi-
cial power  of  the  United  States  should  be,  ut  all  times,
vested  either  in  an  original  or  appellate  form,  in  some

a  I  fnttam,  304.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


S72  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  tPart  II.

eonrts  cnaled  under  its  audiority.  It  waa  considered,
that  there  was  vast  weight  in  the  argumeot,  that  the  con-
Mitution  ia  imperatire  U|>on  congress  to  vest  all  the  judi-
cial power  of  the  United  States,  id  the  iihape  of  original
jurisdiction,  in  the  supreme  and  inferior  courts  created
under  its  own  authority.  At  all  eveDts,  it  waa  manifest,
that  the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  is,  uaavoida-
hly,  in  some  cases,  exclusive  of  all  state  authority,  and,
ID  all  cases,  may  be  made  so,  at  the  election  of  congresS'
No  part  of  the  oriniinal  jurisdiction  of  the  United  Stales
can,  consistently  with  the  constitution,  be  delegated  to
state  tribunals.  The  admiralty  and  maritime  jurisdiction
is  of  the  same  exrlusive  cognizance ;  and  it  can  only
be  in  those  cases  where,  previous  to  the  constitution.
Slate  tribunals  possessed  jurisdiction  independent  of  na-
tional authority,  that  they  can  now  constitutionally  exer-
cise a  concurrent  jurisdiction.  Congress,  throughout  the
judiciary  act,  and  particularly  io  the  9lh,  Jltb,  and  13th
■ectioDs,  have  legislated  upon  tbe  supposition,  that  in  all
the  cases  to  which  the  judicial  powers  of  the  United  States
extended,  they  might  rightfully  veM  exclusive  jurisdiction
in  their  own  courts.

State  courts  may,  intheexercise  of  iheirordinary,  origi-
nal  and  rightful  jurisdiction,  incidentally  take  cagnizance
of  cases  arising  under  the  constitution,  tbe  laws,  and  trea-
ties of  the  United  Slater;  yet,  to  all  these  cases,  tbe
judicial  power  of  the  United  States  extends  by  means  o
its  appellate  jurisdiction.

In  Houtton  v.  Moort,^  the  same  question  came  again  un-
der the  consideration  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  judge
Washington,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court,  observ-
ed, that  he  saw  nothing  unreasonable  or  inconvenient  in  the
doctrine  nf  the  Federalitt,  on  the  subject  of  tbe  concurrent
jurisdiction  »f  the  state  courts,  so  long  as  the  power  of  con-
gress to  withdraw  the  whole,  or  any  part  of  those  cases,
from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state  courts,  be,  as  he  thought  it


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XVIII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  Sfl9

must  be,  admitted.  The  practice  of  the  general  gorero-
ment  baa  been  conformable  to  thii  doctrine,  and,  in  tbt
judiciary  act  of  1789,  the  exclusive  and  concurrent  jurisdic-
tion conferred  upon  the  courti  by  that  act,  were  clearlf
diatinguiDhud  and  marked.  The  act  Bhows,  that,  in  the
Opinion  ofcongrees,  a  grant  of  juriadiclion  generally  wai
not,  of  itself,  sufficient  to  vest  an  exclusiYe  jurisdiction'  The
judiciary  act  grants  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  the  circuit
courts  of  all  crimes  and  offences  cognizable  uifder  the  aa-
tbority  of  the  United  States,  except  where  the  laws  of  the
Uuited  Slates  should  otherwise  provide ;  and  tbia  accounts
for  the  proviso  in  the  act  of  24th  of  February,  1807,  c.
Xd-  and  in  the  act  of  lOtb  of  April,  1816.  c.  44,  concern-
ing the  forgery  of  ibe  notes  of  the  Bank  of  the  United
States,  declaring,  that  nothing  in  that  act  contained  should
be  construed  to  deprive  the  courts  of  the  individual  atates
of  jurisdiction,  under  the  laws  of  the  several  states,  over
. offences  made  punishable  by  that  act.  There  is  a  similar
proviso  in  the  aa  of  Slat  of  April,  1806,  c.  49.  conrerning
tlie  counterfeiters  of  the  current  coin  of  the  Unitc^d  Staiea.
Without  these  provisoes,  the  state  courts  could  not  have
exercised  concurrent  jurisdiction  over  those  offences  con-
Bistently  with  the  judiciary  act  of  1789.  But , these  saving
clauses  restored  the  concurrent  jurisdiction  of  the  state
courts,  so  far  qs,  under  state  authority,  it  could  be  exer*
cised  by  them.  There  are  many  other  acts  of  congress
which  permit  jurisdiction,  over  the  offences  therein  de-
scribed,  to  be  cxei  cised  by  state  magistrates  and  courts.
This  was  necessary  ;  because  the  concurrent  jurisdiction
of  the  state  conru  over  all  offences  was  taken  away,  and  '
that  jurisdiction  was  vested  e>:c)usivety  in  the  national
courts  by  thejudiciary  act,  and  it  required  another  act  to
restore  it.  The  state  courts  could  exercise  no  jurisdiction
whatever  over  crimes  and  offences  against  the  United
Stales,  unless  where,  in  particular  uaaes,  other  laws  had
otherwise  provided ;  and  whenever  such  provision  was
made,  the  claim  of  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  the  particu-
lar cases  was  withdrawn,  and  the  concurrent  jurisdiction  of
the  state  courts,  «o  iaHanti,  restored,  not  by  way  of  grant


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


»74  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Put  U,

from  th«  nationnl  government,  but  by  the  removal  of  a
disability  before  imposed  upon  the  state  tribunals.

In  that  case,  tbe  Supreme  Court  diKlaimed  the  idea  that
congress  could  Buthoritutivelf  bestow  judicial  powers  oa
state  courts  and  magistrates.  "  It  was  held  to  be  perfectly
clear,  that  congress  cannot  confer  jurisdiction  upon  anj
courts  but  such  as  exist  under  the  constitution  and  laws  of
the  United  States,  although  the  state  courts  may  exercise
jurisdiction  in  cases  authorized  by  the  laws  oFthe  state,  and
not  prohibited  by  tbe  exdusire  jurisdictioo  of  the  federal
courts."

The  Supreme  Court,  having  thus  declared  the  true  foun-
dation and  extent  of  the  concurrent  jurisdiction  of  the
Mate  courts  in  criminal  cases,  proceeded  to  meet  and  solrfl
a  difficulty  occurring  on  this  subject  of  concurrent  juris-
diction, whether  the  sentence  of  one  jurisdiction  would
oust  the  jurisdiction  of  the  other.  The  decision  on  this
point  was,  that  tbe  sentence  of  either  court,  whether  of
conviction  or  acquittal,  might  be  pleaded  in  bar  of  the
prosecution  before  the  other ;  as  much  so  as  the  judg-
ment of  a  BiRte  court,  in  a  civil  case  of  concurrent  juriB-
dictipn,  might  be  pleadod  in  bar  of  an  action  for  the  same
cause  instituted  in  a  circuit  court  of  tbe  United  States.

There  was  another  difficulty  not  so  easily  surmounted,
and  that  was,  whether,  if  a  conviction  of  a  crime  against
the  United  States  be  hod  in  a  state  court  admitted  to  have
concurrent  jurisdiction,  the  governor  of  tbe  state  would
have  the  power  of  pardon,  and  in  that  way  control  the  law
and  policy  of  the  United  States.  Judge  Washington,  in
speaking  for  the  court,  did  not  answer  this  question,  hat
contented  himself  with  merely  observing,  that  he  was  by
no  means  satisfied  that  the  governor  could  pardon,  hut
that  if  be  could,  it  would  furnish  a  reason  for  vesting  the
jurisdiction  of  criminal  matters  exclusively  in  the  federal
courts.

The  conclusion,then,i8,tbatinjudiciaImatlers,  tbe  con-
current jurisdiction  of  the  state  tribunals  depends  altogether
upon  the  pleasure  of  congress,  and  may  be  revoked  and  ez-
liiiguisbed  whenever  they  think  proper,  in  every  coae  ia

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


XVin.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  875

wbicb  the  subject  matter  can  eonstitutionally  be  made  cog-
nizable in  tbe  federal  court*;  and  that,  without  an  expreaa
proTisioo  to  the  contrary,  the  state  courts  will  retain  a  coo-
current  jurisdiction  in  all  cases  where  they  had  jurisdiction
erigiaalty  orer  the  subject  matter.  We  will  next  see
whether  this  state  jurisdiction  does  not  equally  depend
apon  the  volition  of  the  state  courts.

There  aro  various  acts  of  congress,  in  which  duties  have
been  imposed  on  state  magistrates  and  courts,  and  by  which
they  hare  been  invested  with  jurisdiction  in  civil  suits,  and
«var  complaints  and  prosecutions  in  penal  and  criminal
caws  for  fines,  penalties,  and  forfeitures  arising  under  laws
of  the  United  States.  Wehnveseen  a  very  clear  intimation
.given  by  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  that  the  state
courts  w«re  not  bound  in  consequence  of  any  act  of  con-
gress, to  assume  and  exercise  jurisdiction  in  such  cases.  It
was  merely  permitted  to  them  to  do  so  as  far,as  was  coto-
ftatible  with  their  state  obligations,  and  in  some  instances
the  state  courts  have  acted  in  those  cases ;  and  in  other  in-
ttaoces  they  have  declined  jurisdiction,  though  expressly
Tested  with  it  by  the  act  of  congresfi.

lo  the  case  of  Fergmon,*  an  application  vras  made  to  the
Supreme  Court  of  this  state  for  the  allowance  of  an  Aaftew
eorput  to  bring  up  the  party  alleged  to  be  detained  in  cua-
tody  by  an  officer  of  the  army  of  the  United  States,  on  the
ground  of  being  an  enlisted  soldier,  and  the  elltigation
was,  that  he  was  en  infant,  and  so  not  duly  enlisted.  It
was  much  discussed,  whether  the  state  courts  had  concur-
rent jurisdiction,  by  habvat  cojput,  over  the  question  of
unlawful  imprisonment,  when  that  imprisonment,  was  by
an  officer  of  the  Uniied  States,  by  colour  or  under  pretext
of  the  authority  of  the  United  Slates.  The  Supreme  Court
did  not  decide  the  question,  and  the  motion  was  d^ied
on  other  grounds  ;  but  subsequently,  in  the  matter  of
Stacy,*'  the  same  court  exercised  jurisdiction  in  a  similar
cose,  by  allowing  and  enforcing  obedience  lo  the  writ  of


a  9  Johiu.  Rep.  S39-  b 10  Jo/tn,.  Stp.  328.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


$76  JUBISPRCIDENCE  OF  [Part  If .

haheat  corput.  The  qaestioa  was,  therefore,  setlled  io
,  farour  of  a  concurrent  juri§diGtion  in  that  case,  and  there
has  been  a  similar  decision  and  practice  hj  the  courts  of
other  states.*

lathe'cBseof  TAe  UniUd  States  r.  Dodgefi  the  Supreme
Court  of  this  state  held,  that  they  bad  jurisdiction,  and  did
BUBtain  a  suit  on  a  bond  for  duties  giren  to  a  collector  of
the  United  Stales  customs.  The  suit  was  authorized  by  the
judiciary  act  of  1789,  giving  concurrent  jurisdiction  to  the
state  courts  in  suits  at  common  law,  where  the  United
States  were  plaintiffs.  Afterwards,  in  the  case  of  7%e
United  Sratei  r.  Latkrop,"  the  same  court  discussed,  rerr
much'-at  large,  the  question  whether  a  state  court  had  ju-
risdiction of  an  action  in  favour  of  the  United  States  to  re-
cover a  penalty  or  forfeiture  for  breach  of  a  law  of  the
United  Slates,  and  when  a  suit  for  the  penally  was  by  the
act  declared  to  be  cognizable  in  a  state  court.  It  was  de-
cided that  the  court  had  no  such  jurisdiction,  and  that  k
could  not  even  be  conferred  by  an  act  of  congress.  The
difference  between  this  case  and  the  ene  preceding  was,
that  that  was  a  suit  on  a  bond  given  to  a  collector  of  the
customs  for  duties,  and  this  was  an  actionof  debt  for  n
penalty  for  breach  of  the  excise  law.  'They  were  both
cases  of  debts  due  to  the  United  Stales;  but  the  one  was
a  civil  debt,  and  the  other  a  penalty  for  breach  of  a  reve-
''  nue  law,  and  this  slight  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  de-
mand was  considered  to  create  a  most  momentous  diffe-
rence in  its  result  upon  the  great  question  of  juiisdiclion.
It  was  the  o[NDioo  of  the  court  that  congress  could  not


a  Cua  of  Lockm^OB,  belbra  Tilf^maD,  Chief  Jaitioe  trf'  PeDnijlvft^
nia,  Not  ember,  1613.  i  HaiPi  Lav  Journal,  92.  Same  case,  6  Ao/r*
fjOtr  Journal,  301—330.  A  limilar  cue  io  Maryland,  b  HalPt  Law
Journal,  4BS ;  and  in  EoutL  Carolioa,  5  Halft  Law  Journal,  4H7.  Coni'
oionireBllli  t.  HarriiOD,  1 1  JHomi  R^'  6S.  CaM  of  JoKph  Almeida  in
Maryland,  and  the  cue  of  Pool  and  othen  ia  Virgioia,  ciied  in  SergeoHPi
Conttilutioftal  Law,p.  17^,980.

A  14  Johtiton't  Rep-ii.

c  n  Johnion,  4-


l,,-c,ih,G00glc


LMuta  mill tut  Msttt^  itiT^  m

tnvesl  th«  ttattt  courlft  with  jtirtsdifctiirti  of  UkUlM  frlih^
the;  did  not  enjoy  concurrently  before  the  adoption  of  th<i
cODstitutioD  t  and  b  ^utiiary  penally  for  a  violation  oi
«n  act  of  congrMs  wei  a  putaiihmeiit  Ibr  an  ofienCe  trfdif-
)ed  nnrifer  the  constitutiont  and  the  Itatb  courts  bad  M
jurisdietioa  of  the  criminal  oflencek  or  peoal  Ihwb  of  thtt
lJait«d  Stalesi  The  judiciary  act  of  1789  wa§  the  thrit
ezposiiioA  of  the  conBtitutioii  tfitb  tespecl  to  the  cobCuiri-
(rent  juriBdieiitKi  of  the  state  Courts,  and  the  excliikiVle  }u*
risdietioU  ofthoiie  of  the  tltaited  StAtes )  and  by  that  act
the  exclusive  cogniitance  of'all  crimes  and  offences  CDgni^
cable  uoder  the  lauthofity  oFthe  United  StatM,  and  of  all
suits  for  penalties  And  forfeitures,  ivbs  girten  to  the  fedet-al
(Courts.  The  judiciary  act  in  no  inaiabctt  Bkclud;e<)  ttift
ttreviously  existingjuriMlidion  of  the  state  coufia,  except
in  a  few  specified  cases  of  a  itational  nature  i  but  their  ju^
risdictioM  was  excluded  in  all  criminal  cases,  and  with
trespect  to  oifencca  arising  under  the  acts  of  congresn  la
such  cases,  the  federal  Juristiiction  iVas  necessarily  ezclu-
«ive  i  but  it  was  not  so  as  to  pre-existitig  matters  wtthiti
the  jurisdiction  of  the  state  courts.

Thedoclrino  seems  to  be  admitted,  that  Rohgress  caki-
hot  compel  a  state  court  to  entertain  jdrisdiction  in  any
tase.  It  only  permits  state  courts  which  are  competent
for  the  purpose,  and  have  an  Inherent  jilrtsdiction  ailequatA
to  the  case,  to  entertain  suits  in  thti  given  cases  i  and  they
tlo  not  become  inferior  Courts  in  theseusb  of  the  constitu*
tion,  because  they  are  not  ordained  by  cotagrCsst  ^be
state  courts  are  Inft  to  infer  their  own  duty  from  their  owd
state  authoi'ity  and  organiKation  ;  but  if  they  do  volUntti-
tily  entertain  jurisdiction  of  causes  cogniaable  tinder  ihs
authority  of  the  United  Slates,  they  do  it  U[>bn  (he  Condi-
tion, that  the  appellate  JuriBdiciion  of  the  federal  courts
shntl  api>ly>  Theif  Jurisdiction  of  federal  causes  is,  how*
ever,  confined  to  civil  actions  for  tiivil  demands,  or  to  en*
force  penal  statutes  i  and  they  cannot  hold  criminal  juris*
tiiction  Over  offences  exclusively  existing  as  ofienret
against  the  Unit^  Statest  Every  criminal  proaecutiod
must  charge  the  offunce  to  have  been  committed  against
Vol.  I.  48

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoOglc


S78  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  jPanW.

the  sovereign  whose  courts  sit  in  judgemnt  upOD  the  of-
fenderi  and  whose  executive  may  pardon  him.

We  find  a  similar  decision  in  one  of  the  courts  tn  the
state  of  Ohio,  in  the  case  of  the  United  Slates  v.  CampbelL*
That  was  an  iaformatioii  filed  hj  the  collector  oftbe  revenue^
to  recover  a  penalty  for  breach  of  the  excise  law,  and  the
court  held  it  to  be  a  criminal  proseculioDi  and  that  one
sovereign  state  could  not  make  use  of  the  municipal  courts
of  another  government  to  enforce  its  penal  laws,  and  it
was  riot  in  the  power  of  congress  to  vest  Bucbajurisdiclioa
in  the  state  courts.  Upon  the  same  principle,  a  state
''court  in  Virginia,  in  the  case  of  The  State  v.  Feely,  deci-
ded, that  it  had  no  jurisdiction  to  punish  by  indictment
stealing  packeta  from  the  mail,  as  that  was  an  oflence
created  by  act  of  congress.^  And  in  Jaclctan  v.  Rote,  the
General  Court  of  Virginia  made  the  same  decision  pre-
tiseiyas  that  made  by  this  state  in  the  case  of  Lathrap  j
and  it  held,  that  the  act  of  congress,  authorizing  such
suits  for  pennlties  in  the  state  courts,  was  not  binding.  It
was  decided  in  another  case  in  Virginiu,^  that  congress
could  not  give  jurisdirtion  to,  or  refjuire  services  of,  a  state
court,  or  magistrate,  as  such,  nor  prosecute  in  the  state
courts  for  a  public  offence.''

After  these  decisions  in  the  states  of  Virginia,  Ohio,  and
New-York,  the  act  of  congress  of  the  3d  March,  1815,  ch.
100.  may  be  considered  as  eesentially  nugatofy.  That  act
Tested  in  the  state  courts,  concurrently  with  the  federal
courts,  cognizance  of  all  "complaints,  suits,  and  prosecu-
tions for  taxes,  duties, fines,  penalties,  and  forfeitures,  ari-
sing and  payable  under  any  act  of  congress  passed,  or  to  be
passed,  for  the  collection  of  any  direct  lax  or  internal  du-
ties;"  and  it  gave  to  the  state  courts  and  the  presidiiig  judge


«  S  HalPt  Laa  Journal,  ]  1 3.

h  -Sitf -iiniV  Contt.  Laa,  p.  !72.

C  ExparUPortl.

d  StrgtantU  CotuL  Laie,  p.  372.  274.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XVIII.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  3W

thereof,  the  same  power  as  was  Tested  in  the  district
judges,  to  mitigate  or  remit  anj  fine,  penalty,  or  forfeiture.
And  here  the  inquiry  naturally  suggests  itself,  can  the
slate  courts,  consistently  with  those  decisions,  sustain  a
criminal  proeecution  for  forging  the  paper  of  the  Bank  of
the  United  States,  or  for  counterfeiting  the  coin  of  the
United  Stales  f  These  are  cases  arising  under  acts  of
congress  declaring  the  offence.  The  state  courts  have  ex-
ercised criminal  jurisdiction  over  these  offences,  as  offences
against  the  state ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  maintain  the  juris-
diction upoo  the  doctrine  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  New-
York  in  the  case  of  Lathrop;  and  if  it  be  entertained,
there  are  difficulties  remaining  to  he  definitively  cleared.
These  difficulties  relate  to  the  effect  of  a  prosecution  in
one  jurisdiction  upon  the  jurisdiction  of  the  concurrent
court,  and  te  (he  effect  of  the  power  of  pardon  of  the  crime
■nder  one  government,  upoa  the  claim  of  concurrent  ju<
risdictioR.


i,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  XIX.

•r  CONSTlTDIIQnAL  RESTKICTiaNa  OK  THK  rOWMa
QF  THE  SETSRAI,  STATER.

We  proee«i)  to  wmmdep  tbe  Mtflnt  and  effert  of  nrtaja
exproBa  conBtitutiooEtl  reatrictions  on  the  auiboriij  oftb*
leparale  gtatos,

"  No  Bate,"  >ajs  iba  eolnlilgtioii,*  "  iliall  aolar  iMa
any  Ireaty,  alliance,  or  eoofederation  j  ^ranl  letters  of
uarqua  and  reprisal;  coin  moneys  enit  bills  of  credit  i
make  any  Ibiag  but  gold  and  silver  coin  a  tender  in  pay.
Bant  oTdebts  ;  pass  any  bill  «f  attainder,  u  fiul  fma»
law,  or  l«v  impairinf  tbe  abiigatioo  ofcootracts ;  or  (raal
any  title  rf  nobility.  No  state  sball,  witbout  tbe  eonseu
of  caagresa,  hy  any  imposts  or  duties  on  imparts  or  ei.
foru,  aioepl  irhal  may  ba  absolutely  necessary  for  cxecu.
tine  its  iaspeclioa lairs ,  nor  la, any  duly  oatonnage.  keep
iroops  or  ship,  of  war  in  tbe  time  of  peace,  enter  into  any
.poomcnt  or  compact  wilhanotharstate,  ar  irithaforeign
power,  or  engage  in  war,  aoless  aetaall,  i,i„ded,  or  in
«aeb  imminent  danger  as  will  not  admit  ofdelay,"

Most  of  tbeso  probibitions  would  seem  to  speak  (or
Iberasclves,  and  no.  to  stand  in  ased  ofciposition.  I  ,b,||
eottSa.  myself  to  those  cues  io  .hick  tbe  in.erpretslio.
and  eitoiM  of  smn.  rf-tb«»  restrieljoas  bate  been  mad.
Ihe  subject  of  judicial  invest^tioa,

(I.)  A<>««l'«"»J«asa»j.e»,io,<^J,rtoSn»

InCa/rf.r,,B«(,.b  th.,,u..tioooaH>.,.e.ni,g„f,„,^

.*K.l.«o.w.  »JO.«inU,.

Do,i,.cdt,Gooj^lc


882  JUBISPBUDENCE  OF  [Part  H:

post  facto  taw,  wiihia  the  prohibition  of  the  constitution,
was  extensively  diicussed.

The  legislature  of  Connecticut  had,  by  a  resolution  or
law,  set  aside  a  decree  of  the  Court  of  Probates  rejecting  a
will,  and  directed  a  new  hearing  before  the  Court  of  Pro-
bates, and  the  point  was,  whether  that  resolution  was  an
ex  p0it/acl0  law  prohibited  by  the  conBlitution  of  the  Uni-
ted States.

It  was  held,  that  the  words  ex  pott  facto  lavn  were  techni-
cal expressions,  and  meant  every  law  that  made  an  act
done  before  the  parsing  of  Ihe  law,  and  which  was  inno-
cent when  done,  criminal ;  or  which  aggravated  a  crime,
and  made  it  greater  than  it  was  when  committed;  or
which  changed  the  punishment,  and  inflicted  a  greater
punishment  than  the  law  annexed  to  the  crime  when  com-
mitted ;  or  which  altered  the  legal  rules  of  evidence,  and
received  less  or  different  testimony  than  the  law  required
at  the  time  of  the  commission  of  the  offence,  in  order  to
convict  the  offender.  The  Supreme  Court  concluded,
that  the  latr  or  resolution  of  Connecticut  was  not  within
the  letter  or  intention  of  the  prohibition,  and  was,  there-
fore, lawful.  Aftervvards,  in  FUtcherv.  Peck,'  it  was  ob-
served, that  an'ex poit  facto  law  was  one  which  rendered
an  act  punishable  in  a  manner  in  which  it  was  not  punish-
able when  it  was  committed.  This  definition  is  distin-
guished for  its  comprehensive  brevity  and  precision,  and
it  extends  equally  to  laws  inflicting  personal  or  pecuniary
penalties,  and  to  laws  passed  after  the  act,  and  affecting
a  person  by  way  of  punishment,  either  in  bis  person  or
estate.

(2.)  No  itate  can  control  ihe  exercise  of  any  authority  u»'
der  the  federal gotemment.

The  state  legislatures  cannot  annul  the  judgments,  nor
determine  the  extent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts  of  the
union.  This  was  attempted  by  the  legislature  of  Pennsyl-
Tania,  and  declared  to  be  inoperative  and  void  by  the  Su-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


l.ec(pr«  XIX.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  383

lireoae  Court  of  th«  United  States,  in  the«as«  of  TAe  United
StaUi  T.  Peters.*  Such  a  power,  aa  we  have  heretofore
leen,  necessarily  resides  in  the  supreme  judicial  Iribunal  of
the  aalion>  It  has  also  been  adjudged,  that  no  state  court
bas  authority  or  jurisdiction  to  enjoin  a  judgment  of  ibe  Cir-
cuit Court  of  the  United  Stales,  or  to  slay  proceedings  un-
der it.  This  was  attempted  by  a  slate  court  in  Kentucky,
and  declared  to  be  of  no  validity  by  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  States,  io  M'Kim  t.  Voorkiei.*>  No  state  tribu-
nal can  interfere  with  seizures  of  property  made  by  revenue
officers,  under  the  laws  of  the  United  States;  or  interrupt
by  process  of  replevin,  injunction,  or  otherwise,  Ihe  exer
cise  of  the  authority  of  the  federal  officers  ;  and  any  inter-
veation  of  state  authority  for  that  purpose  is  unlawful.  This
was  so  declared  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Slocum  ?.  May-
berry.^  Nor  can  a  state  court  issue  a  mandamus  to  an  of-
ficer of  the  United  States.  This  decision  was  made  in  the
eexe  o!  M' Cluny  v.  SilUman,^  and  it  arose  in  consequence
of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Ohio  sustaininga  jurisdiction  over
the  register  of  the  land  office  of  the  United  States  in  respect
to  his  ministerial  acts  as  register,  and  claiming  a  right  to
award  a  mandamtu  to  that  officer,  to  compel  him  to  issue
a  final  certificate  of  purchase.  The  principle  declared  by
the  Supreme  Court  was,  that  the  official  conduct  of  an  offi-
cer  of  the  government  of  the  United  States  can  only  be
controlled  by  the  power  that  created  him.

There  is  one  case  that  may  seem  to  be  repugnant  to
this  doctrine  of  the  federal  courts.  In  Milh  v.  Martin,*
the  Supreme  Court  of  this  state  sustained  an  action  of  re-
plevin for  goods  taken  by  a  deputy  marshal  of  the  United
States,  under  a  warrant  from  a  court  martial  composed  of
militia  officers  in  the  service  of  the  United  Stales.  The
court  martial  was  organized  and  convened  under  acts  of
congress  for  the  trial  of  such  persons  of  ijie  militia  as  had


a  i  Crtmc'i,  US.  6  7  Cr^mh,  279.  c  t  WluaUm,  \.

d  6  fnealon,  598.  <  19  JMtuon,  1-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


8»4  Jt'ftlStRUDENCB  or  {fart  U,

BRglerted  or  refused  to  rendezvoin  Bud  enter  tke  service
of  the  United  States,  according  to  order*  of  the  ^vproor
of  this  state,  issued  in  cooipIiRnce  With  ibe  requisitions  of
the  president  of  ihe  United  Stales  |  end  it  had  assessed  a
fine  U|>ob  the  phiiniiff,  for  having  hegleeted  or  reAised  to
enter  the  service  of  the  United  States  as  a  soldier  in  the
militia.  The  court  held,  tfaot  the  rules  and  articles  of  var
did  not  apply  to  the  case  of  a  delinquent  who  bad  never
■ctuallf  entered  the  service,  nor  did  they  apply  in  timeof
peace  to  ttitlitia  men  for  delinquencies  during  war.  Con*'
greHS  do  not,  by  any  exivting  laws,  assume  a  right  iosnb>
ject  Ihe  militia  to  roarlial  law,  except  while  ibey  are  in  Ihe
actual  service  and  pay  of  the  United  States.  The  court
therefore  gave  a  remedy  against  the  assessment  and  process
ofthe  court  martial,  on  the  ground  that  Ihe  plaintiff  Was
not  amenable  to  a  court  martial  of  ibe  United  States,  and
Ibat  the  court  martial  bad  nojurisdictioa  in  the  case.  The
whole  proceeding  was  void,  aud  ihe  taking  oriheplainii£ra
property  a  tre8[«86.  If  acourt  of  special  and  limited  juris-
diction exceeds  its  auihorily,  and  takes  cognizance  of  a  castf
not  within  it,  the  proceeding  is  coram  non  .jttdice,  and  void.
This  was  ihe  doctrine  of  the  court  in  that  case,  and  it  is
Apparently  at  variance  with  ihe  principle  laid  down  by  tbe
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  in  Ihe  case  of  the  (7r**
ted  StaUi  T.  Peltrt,  that  the  powerof  determining  the  ex*
tent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts  resides  in  tfafl
supreiue  judicial  tribunal  of  the  nation.  It  is  also  oppa*
rentty  at  variance  with  the  doctrine  of  the  some  court  in
Shcvm  T.  Maybttryt  where  it  is  said,  that  a  party  auppos"
ing  himself  aggrieved  by  a  seiaure  made  by  an  officer  of  lfa«
United  States,  cannot  replevy  the  property  out  of  the  tOS'
tody  ofthe  seizing  officer,  or  of  the  court  having  cogntkance
of  Ibe  cause.  If  the  officer  had  a  right  to  seize  under  Ihe
law»  of  Ihe  Uuited  States,  the  queation  nbelher  the  fbffei^
ture  hu9  been  actually  incurred,  belongs  exclusively  to  the
federal  courts,  and  cannot  be  drawn  to  another  forum ;  and
it  ilepcnde  upon  the  final  decree  of  such  courts,  whether
such  seizure  is  to  he  deemed  rightful  or  tortious. And  if


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lechire  XIX.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  385

it  be  adjudged  to  be  tortious,  then  the  party  may  proceed
by  suit  at  common  law,  in  the  Btate  courts,  to  recover
damages  for  the  illegal  act.^

The  distinction  which  would  appear  to  reconcile  all
these  decisions,  is  this :  if  the  officer  of  the  United  States
who  seized,  or  the  court  which  awarded  the  process  to
seize,  had  jurisdiction  of  the  subject  matter,  then  the  in-
quiry into  the  validity  of  the  seizure  belongs  eiclusively  to
the  federal  courts.  But  if  there  was  no  jurisdiction  in  the
instance  \a  which  it  was  asserted,  as  the  Supreme  Court
of  this  state  held  in  the  case  of  the  court  martial  assuming
eognizance  over  the  delinquency  of  a  member  of  the  state
militia,  then  the  state  courts  have  jurisdiction  to  protect
the  person  and  theprogierty  so  illegally  invaded  ;  and  it
is  to  be  observed,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state  court  in
Rhode  Island  was  admitted  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
Uaited  States  in  the  case  cited,  and  upon  that  very  ground.

lu  the  case  of  the  United  Slatet  v.  Barney,^  the  district
judge  of  Maryland  carried  to  a  great  extent  the  exemption
from  slate  control  of officeraor  persona  in  the  service  of
the  United  States,  and  employed  in  the  transportation  of
the  mail.  He  held,  that  an  innkeeper  had  no  lien  on  the
horses  which  he  had  fed,  and  which  were  employed  in  the
transfwrtation  of  the  mail.  The  act  of  congress  of  March,
1790,  prohibited  all  wilful  obstruction  of  the  passage  of
the  mail ;  and  a  claim  for  debt  would  not  justify  the  stop-
ping of  the  mail,  or  the  means  necessary  to  transport  it,
either  upon  principles  of  common  law  or  upon  the  statute. '

The  judge  slated  in  this  case,  that  even  a  stolen  hotse
found  in  the  mail  stage  could  not  be  seized ;  nor  could  the
driver,  being  in  debt,  or  having  committed  an  offence,  be
arrested,  in  such  a  way  as  to  obstruct  the  passage  of  the  '
mail. But  in  a  subsequent  case  in  the  Circuit  Court  cf


aThtiecahoia  Milti  t.JIImiiay' A*  reverMil  on  erior  to  llie  Su-
]>rerne  Coiirl  of  the  UaJled  Stalei,  and  ■!■  doctriuc  overtliroiTD.  Mania
V.  Molt,  I!  Wheabm,  19.

6  3  Hd/r*  Law  JuHrnof,  1S3.
Vol.  I.  49


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


3S6  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [PartlF.

Pennflylvania,*  it  was  hekl,  that  the  act  of  congrcM  wai
not  to  be  so  construed  as  to  endanfcer  the  public  peace  aad
Hafetf.  The  carrier  of  the  mail  driving  through  a  popu-
lous cttj  with  dangerous  rapidity,  and  contrary  to  a  mani-
cipel  ordinonce,  may  be  stopped,  and  the  mail  temporaritj
detained  by  an  officer  of  the  city.  So,  if  the  officer  bad
a  warrant  against  a  feloo  in  the  Ktege,  or  if  the  driter
ahould  commit  murder  in  the  street,  and  then  place  hina-
self  on  the  mail  stage  box,  he  would  not  be  proteeted
from  arrest,  though  a  temporary  stoppage  of  the  mail
might  be  the  consequence.  The  public  safety  in  the  one
case,  is  nf  more  moment  than  the  public  inconTeoience
which  it  might  produce  in  the  ether.

But  while  all  interference  on  the  part  of  the  state  aa-
thorities  with  the  exercise  of  the  lawful  powers  of  the  na-
tional government,  has  been,  in  moM  cases,  denied,  there
is  one  case  in  which  any  control  by  the  federal  over  the
state  courts,  other  than  by  means  of  the  established  ap-
pellate jurisdiction,  has  equally  been  prevented.  Id  Diggt
and  Keith  v.  Wolcott,^  it  was  deci4ed  generally,  that  a
court  of  the  United  States  could  not  enjoin  proceedings  in
a  state  court,  and  a  decree  of  the  Circuit  Court  of  the
United  States  for  the  district  of  Connecticut  was  reversed,
because  it  bad  enjoined  tbe  partial  from  proceeding  at
law  in  a  state  court.  Tins  decision  is  not  to  be  contest  adj.
andyet  the  district  judge  of  tbe  northern  district  of  New-
York,  in  tho  spring  of  1823,  in  the  case  of  Lmuivg  and
Thayerv.  The.]\orlh  River  Steam  Boat  (Company ,  Knjoia-
edthe  defendants  from  seeking  in  the  state  courts,  under
the  acts  of  the  state  legislaturei  the  remedies  which  those
acts  gave  them.  This  would  appear  to  htive  been  aa
untvHrrsnlnble  assumption  of  the  power  of  control  over
the  jurisdiction  of  the  stale  courts,  and  one  in  direct
hostility  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Iba
United  States,  In  the  case  of  Kenn'dy  v.  EarloJCat-
n7/u,c  en  injunction  had  been  unwarily  granted  in  the
English  Court  of  Chancery  to  restrain  a  party  from  pro-
ceeding in  a  suit  in  tfaeCotiitofSeKMonsin  Scotland,  where


Sietnult  n,  330^

Co  Ogle


Lecture  XlX.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  587

the  parties  were  domiciled.  It  waf  admitted,  that  thfl
Court  of  SessioDi  was  a  court  of  competent  juriodiction,
and  an  independent  foreign  tribunal,  though  subject  to  an
appeal,  like  the  Courtof  Chancery,  to  the  House  of  Lords.
If  the  Court  of  Chancery  could  in  that  way  restrain  pro-
ceedings in  the  Court  of  Sessions,  the  Sessions  might
equally  enjoin  proceedings  in  Chancery,  and  thus  stop  all
proceedings  in  either  court.  Lord  Eldon  said,  he  neter
meant  logo  further  with  the  injunction,  than  the  property
in  England ;  and  he,  on  motion,  dissolved  it  in  tola

(3.)  Nottate  eanpau  any  law  in^airing  th$  obligation
ofeonlractt.

We  come  next  to  a  prohibition  of  great  moment,  and
effectiog  extenniTely  and  deeply  the  Ingislatire  authority
of  the  states.  There  is  no  prohibitory  clause  in  iho  con-
stitution, which  has  given  rise  to  more  Tnrious  and  able
discuesiea,  or  more  protracted  litigation,  than  that  whicb
denies  to  any  slate  the  right  to  pass  any  law  impairing  the
obligation  of  contracts.  1  sbnll  endeavour  to  give  a  full
and  accurate  view  of  the  jadicial  decisions  defining  and
enforcing  (his  prohibition.

The  case  otFletekerv.  Peck,*  first  brought  this  prohi-
bitory clause  into  direct  discussion.  The  legislature  of
Georgia,  by  an  act  of  7th  of  January,  17S5,  authorized
the  sale  of  a  large  tract  of  wild  land,  and  n  grant  was
made  by  letters  patent  in  pursuance  of  (he  act,  to  a  num-
ber of  individuals,  under  the  name  of  the  Georgia  Com-
pany. Fletcher  held  a  deed  from  Peck  for  a  part  of  this
land,  under  a  title  derived  from  the  patent ;  and  in  the
deed  Peck  had  covenanted,  that  the  state  of  Georgia  was
lawfully  seized  when  the  act  was  passed,  and  had
good  right  to  sell,  and  that  the  letters  patent  were  lawful-
ly issued,  and  the  tide  had  not  since  been  legally  impaired.
The  action  was  for  breach  of  covenant;  and  the  breach
assigned  was,  that  the  letters  patent  were  void,  for,  that

a«Cran(A,87.


Do,^,-c,ih,.Googlc


■388  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  If-

the  legislature  of  Georgia,  by  act  of  13th  of  February,
1796,  declared  the  preceding  act  to  be  null  and  void,  as
being  founded  in  fraud  and  corruption.  One  of  the  ques-
tions presented  tothe  Supreme  Court  upon  the  case  whs,
whether  the  legislature  of  Georgia  could  const  itutionnlty
repeat  the  act  of  1795,  and  rescind  the  sule  made  under  it.
The  court  declared,  that  when  a  law  was  in  its  nature  a
contract,  and  absolute  rights  have  vested  under  that  coo*
tract,  a  repeal  of  the  law  could  not  devest  those  rights,
nor  aunihiiate  or  impair  the  title  so  acquired.  A  grant
was  a  cootrncl  within  the  meeuing  of  the  constitution.
The  words  of  the  constitntion  were  construed  to  compre-
hend executory  and  executed  contracts,  for  each  of  them
contains  obllgntiona  binding  on  the  parties.  A  grant  is  a
contract  executed,  and  a  partj  is  always  estopped  by  his
owngrant.  A  party  cannot  pronounce  hisown  deedinva-
'lid,  whatever  cause  mny  be  assigned  for  it?  invalidity,  and
.  though  that  party  be  the  legislature  of  a  state.  A  grant
'amounts  to  an  extinguishment  of  die  right  of  the  grantor,
and  implies  a  contract  not  to  reassert  that  right.  A  grant
from  a  state  is  as  much  protected  by  the  operation  of  the
provision  of  the  constitution,  as  a  gram  from  one  indivi-
dual toanothcr,  and  the  state  is  as  murh  inhibited  from
impairing  its  own  contracts,  or  a  contrart  to  which  it  is  a
party,  us  it  is  from  impairing  the  obligation  of  rnntracts
between  two  inilividuals.  It  was,  accordingly,  declared,
that  the  estate  held  under  the  act  of  1795,  having  passed
into  the  hands  a(  a  bona  fide  purchaser  for  a  valuable  consi-
deration,  the  state  of  Georgia  was  cnns'ilutionally  disa-
bled from  passing  any  law  whereby  the  estate  of  the  plain-
tiff could  be  legally  impaired  and  rendered  roid.

The  next  case  that  brought  this  provision  in  review  be-
fore the  Supreme  Court,  was  that  of  Tkt  State  of  JVcw-
Jersey  v.  Wilton.'  It  was  there  held,  that  if  the  legislature
should  declare  by  law,  that  certain  lands  to  be  thereafter

' a  t  Crmch,  IM.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XIX.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  S89

purchased  for  the  urs  of  the  Indians,  should  not  be  subject
to  any  tax,  such  a  tegislatire  act  amounted  to  a  contract
which  could  not  be  rescinded  by  a  subsequent  legislature.
In  that  case,  the  colonial  legislature  of  New-Jersey,  in
1758,  authorized  the  purchase  of  lands  for  the  Delaware
ludiuns,  and  made  that  stipulation.  Lands  were  accord-
ingly purchased,  and  conveyed  to  trustees  for  the  use  of
the  Indians,  and  the  Indians  released  their  claim  to  other
lands,  as  a  consideration  for  this  purchase.  The  Indians
occupied  these  lands  until  1803,  when  they  were  sold  to
individuals  under  the  aullioriiy  of  an  act  of  the  lofpslatare,
and,  in  1804,  the  legislature  repealed  the  act  of  1758,  ez-
emptiog  those  lands  from  ta&ation.  The  act  of  1758  was
held  to  be  a  contract,  and  the  act  of  1804  was  held  to  be  a
breach  of  that  contract,  and  void  under  the  constitution  of
the  United  Slates.

The  Supreme  Court  went  again,  and  more  largely,  into
the  consideration  of  this  delicate  and  interesting  constitu-
tional doctrine,  in  the  case  of  TtrretC  r.  Tay/nr.»  h  was
there  held,  thai  a  legislative  grant,  competently  made,
vested  an  indefeasible  and  irrevocable  title.  There  is  no
authority  or  principle  which  could  support  the  doctrine,
that  a  legislative  grant  was  revocable  in  its  own  nature,
and  held  only  JwanU  btnt  placUo,  Nor  can  tho  legisla-
ture repeal  statutes  creiitin<;  private  corimrationR,  or  con-
firming to  them  property  Dlroady  acquired,  under  tho  faith
of  previous  laws,  and  by  such  re|>etil  vest  the  property  in
others,  without  the  consent  or  default  of  the  corporators.
Such  a  proceeding  would  be  repugnant  to  the  letter  and
spirit  of  the  constitution,  and  to  the  principles  of  natural
justice.

But  it  was  in  the  great  case  of  Dartmouth  College  r.
Woodward,^  that  the  inhibition  upon  the  states  to  impair  by
law  the  obligation  of  contracts,  received  the  most  elaborate
discussion,  and  the  most  efficient  and  instructive  applica-
tion. It  was  there  held,  that  the  charter  granted  by  the

a  B  Cnaieh,4S.  b  4  Tr/icalett,5iB.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


»»  itJRlSPRUDeNCE  OF  [Pvt  II.

British  crown  tolfae  trustees  of  Dartmoutfa  Collegfliii  1769,
was  a  contract  within  the  meaning  of  the  constitution,  and
protected  by  it ;  and  that  the  college  was  a  private  charita-
ble institution,  not  liable  to  the  control  of  the  legislature ;
and  that  iheactof  the  legislature  of  New- Hampshire,  alter-
ing the  charter  in  a  material  respect,  without  the  consent  of
the  corporBtion,'<ias  an  act  impairing  the  obligation  of  the
charter,  and,  consequently,  unconstitutional  and  void.

The  chief  justice,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court,
observed,  that  the  provision  in  the  constitution  never  had
been  understood  to  embrace  other  contracts  than  those
which  respect  propert]r>  or  some  object  of  vahie,  and  con-
fer rights  which  may  be  asserted  in  a  court  of  justice.
Dartmouth  College  waia  private  eleemoajnary  institution,
endowed  with  a  eapacity  to  take  property  for  objects  un-
connected witbthe  government,  and  its  funds  were  bestowed
by  individuals  on  tbe  faith  of  the  charter,  and  those  funds
consisted  entirely  of  private  donations.  The  corporation
was  not  invested  with  any  portion  of  poFitical  power,  dot
did  it  partahe,  in  any  degree,  in  the  administration  of  civil
gnvernment.  It  was  the  institution  of  a  private  corpora-
tion for  general  charity.  The  charter  wasa  contract  to  which
the  donors,  the  trustees  of  the  corporation,  and  the  crown,
were  the  original  parties,  and  it  was  made  on  a  valuable
consideration,  for  the  security  and  disposition  of  property.
The  legal  interest  in  every  literary  and  charitable  institu-
tion is  in  trustees,  and  to  be  asserted  by  them,  and  they
claim  or  defend  in  behalf  of  tbe  religion,  charity,  and  edu-
cation, for  which  tbe  corporation  was  created,  and  the  pri-
vate donations  made.  Contracts  of  this  kind,  crealiogtbp-s*
charitable  institutions,  are  most  reasonably  within  the
purview  and  protection  of  tbe  eonslitution.  This  contract
remained  unchanged  by  the  revolution ;  and  the  duties,  as
well  as  the  powers  ef  the  government,  devolved  on  tbe  peo-
ple of  New- Hampshire,  but  the  act  of  tbe  state  which  was
complained  of,  transferred  the  whole  power  of  goveroing
the  college,  from  trustees  appointed  according  to  the  will  of
the  founder  expressed  in  the  charter,  to  tbe  executive  of


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LecturaXIX.) THE  UNITED  STATES.  9»1

Meff-Hampahire.  The  will  of  the  state  WM  tabstituted
for  ibe  will  of  the  donors,  in  every  essential  openuioa  of
the  college.  The  charter  was  reorgsnized  io  such  a
manner  auto  convert  a  literaty  instilutioD,  moulded  ac-
cording to  the  will  of  iu  founders,  and  placed  under  the
control  of  private  literary  meni  into  a  machine  entirely
subservient  to  the  will  of  government.  This  was,  conae*
quently,  subversive  of  that  contract,  on  the  faith  of  wbicb
the  donors  invested  their  pro|)crty  ;  and  the  act  of  the  le-
gislature of  New-Hampshire  was,  therefore,  held  to  b*
repugnant  to  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.

The  same  course  of  reasoning,  and  leading  to  the  same
coDcluaion,  was  adopted  and  expressed  by  some  of  tb«
other  judges.

In  the  opinion  given  by  Judge  Story,  he  added  torn*
new  and  interesting  views  of  the  nature  of  the  contract!
which  the  constitution  intended  to  protect.  He  denied
the  power  of  the  legislature  to  dissolve  even  the  contract
of  marriage,  without  a  breach  en  either  side,  and  against
the  wishes  of  the  parties.  A  dissolution  of  the  marriage  '
obligation,  without  any  default  or  assent  of  the  parties,-
nay  as  well  fall  within  the  prohibition  of  the  constitution,
as  any  other  contract  for  a  valnable  consideration.  A  man
baa  as  good  a  rigbtto  his  wife,  as  to  the  property  acquired  '
under  a  marriage  contract ;  and  to  devest  him  of  that
right  without  his  default,  and  against  bis  will,  would  be  as  -
flagrant  a  violation  of  the  principles  of  justice,  as  the  con-
fiscation of  bis  estate.  The  prohibitory  clause  be  also
considered  to  extend  to  other  contracts  besides  those
where  the  parties  took  for  their  own  private  benefit.  A
grant  to  a  private  trustee,  for  the  benefit  of  a  particular
cettm  que  trutU  or  forany  special  private  or  public  charity,
cannot  be  the  less  a  eontract,  because  the  trustee  tabes
nothing  for  bis  own  benefit.  Noi  does  n  private  donation,
vested  in  a  troBtee  for  objects  ofa  general  nature,  thereby
become  a  public  trust,  which  tbe  government  may,  at  its
pleasure,  take  from  the  trust.  Government  cannot  re-
voke a  grant  even  of  its  own  funds,  when  given  to  a  pri-
vate {terson,  or  to  a  cori)orutioii  lor  sj.>t:ciul  uses. It  has

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


392  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  D.

no  other  remaining  authority  but  what  is  judicial  to  enlbrce
the  projier  administration  of  the  trust.  Nor  is  a  graot
less  a  contract,  thouf^b  no  beneficial  interest  accrues  to  the
possessor.  Many  a  franchise,  whether  corporate  or  not,
may,  in  point  of  fact,  be  of  no  eicbangeable  value  to  the
owners,  and  yet  they  are  grants  within  the  meaning  and
protection  of  the  constitution.  All  incorporeal  heredita-
nenla,  as  immunities,  dignities,  offices,  and  franchises,
are  rights  deemed  valuable  in  law,  and  wheneverlhey  are
the  subjects  of  a  contract  or  grant,  they  are  just  as  much
within  the  reach  of  the  constitution  as  any  other  grant.
All  corporate  franchises  are  legal  estates.  They  are
powers  coupled  with  an  interest,  and  corporators  have
vested  rights  in  their  character  ss  corporators.  Uponlbis
doctrine  it  was  insisted,  that  the  trustees  of  Dartmouth
College  had  rights  and  privileges  under  the  charter,  of
which  they  could  not  be  devested  by  the  legislature  with-
out their  consent.  The  act  of  the  legislature  did  impair
their  lights,  and  vitally  affect  the  interest  of  the  college
under  ih«  charter.  If  a  grant  of  franchises  be  made  ■  to
A.  in  trust  for  a  special  purpose,  the  grant  cannot  be  re-
Toked,  and  a  new  grant  made  to  A.,  B-,  and  C,  for  the
•ame  pur|iose,  without  violating  tbe  obligation  of  the  first
grant.  If  property  be  vested  by  graot  in  A.  and  B.,  for
the  use  of  a  general  charity,  or  private  eleemosynary
foundation,  the  obligation  of  that  grant  is  impaired,  when
the  estate  is  taken  from  their  exclusive  management,  and
vested  in  them  in  common  with  ten  other  persons.

I  have  thus  stated  the  substance  of  tbe  argument  of  tbe
Supreme  Court  in  this  celebrated  case,  and  it  contains  one
of  the  most  full  and  elaborate  expositions  of  the  constitu-
tional sanctity  of  contracts  to  be  met  with  in  any  of  the
reports.  The  decision  in  that  case  did  more  than  any
uthor  single  act,  proceeding  from  the  authority  of  tbe
United  Stales,  to  throw  an  impregnable  barrier  around  all
rights  and  franchises  derived  from  the  grant  of  govern-
ment ;  and  to  give  solidity  and  inviolability  (o  the  literary,
cliHritublc,  retigtuus,  and  commercial  institutions  of  our
(-^iiiiriry.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Utcnn  XIX.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  sgs

The  samti  prohibitory  clause  ia  the  eonwtitution  cama.
■fOD  uodor  discussion  in  tlie  case  of  Green  r.  JtiddU,*  It
was  observed  by  tbe  court,  that  the  objection  to  a  law,  oa
the  ground  of  itB  impniriiig  tbe  obligation  of  contracts,
could  nerer  depend  upon  the  extent  of  tbe  change  whith
tbe  law  effects  in  it.  Any  deriaiioo  from  its  terms,  bf
poHtjMniag  or  ecceleratiog  the  period  of  performanca
whicb  it  prescribes,  impoaiag  conditions  not  expressed  ia
the  contract,  or  dispensing  with  the  performance  of  those
which  are  expressed,  boweve/ minute  or  apparently  im<
jnaterial  in  their  effect  upon  the  contract,  or  upon  any
jl^rt  or  parcel  of  it,  impairs  its  obligation.  Upon  tbi»  :
principle  it  is,  that  if  a  creditor  agrees  with  his  debtor  to'
postpone  tbe  day  of  payment,  or  in  any  other  way  to
change  the  terms  of  the  contract,  without  tbe  consent  of
the  surely,  the  latter  is  discharged,  although  the  chaqge
was  for  his  adrantnge.

Tbe  material  point  decided  in  that  case  was,  that  a
compact  between  two  states  was  a  contract  within  tbe
constitutional  probibition.  Tbe  terms  contract  and  com-
pact were  synonymous,  and  a  contract  is  an  agreement
of  two  or  more  parties  to  do  or  not  to  do  certain  acts.'
The  court  declared,  that  the  doctrine  had  been  already
annooneed  and  settled,  that  the  constitution  embraced  all
contracts  executed  and  executory,  and  whether  between
indiriduats,  or  between  a  state  and  individuals  ;  and  that
a  state  bad  no  more  power  to  impair  an  obligation  into
which  she  herself  had  entered,  than  she  bad  to  impair  th^
contracts  of  individuals.

Another  case  which  led  to  a  very  extensive  inquiry  into
the  operation  and  effect  of  the  constitutional  prohibitioB
Upon  the  states  not  to  pass  laws  impairing  the  obligation
of  contracts,  was  that  of  S^urgrt  v.  Croumijuhield.^  The
defendant  was  sued  in  one  of  the  federal  courts  upon  two
promissory  notes  given  in  March,  1811,  and  he  pleaded
'  bis  discharge  under  an  insolvent  act  of  New-York,  passed
in  April,  1811. This  insolvent  act  was  retrospective,  and  .

aB  trhtaton,i.  I  4  IfkiaUm.m.

Vol.  I  SO

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


S94  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Pwt  it

fliacbarged  the  debtor  upon  his  single  pelition,  and  upon
fais  surrendering  his  property  in  the  manner  therein  pre-
scribed, without  the  concurrence  of  any  creditor,  from  all
bis  pre-existing  debts,  and  from  all  liability  and  responsi-
bility by  reason  thereof.

The  chief  justice,  in  the  opinion  which  he  delirered  on
behalfof  the  court,  admitted,  that  until  congress  exercise
the  power  to  pass  uniform  laws  on  the  subject  of  bank-
ruptcy, the  individual  states  may  pass  bankrupt  laws,  pro-
vided those  laws  contain  no  provision  violating  the  obliga-
tion of  contracts.  It  was  admitted,  that  the  states  might
^b;  law  discharge  debtors  from  imprisonment,  for  impri-
sonment was  no  part  of  the  contract,  but  only  a  means  of
coercion.  It  was  also  admitted,  that  they  might  pass
statutes  of  limitation,  for  such  statutes  relate  to  the  reme-
dy, and  not  to  the  obligation  of  the  contract.  It  was  flir-
ther  stated  by  the  court,  that  the  insolvent  laws  of  far  the^
greater  number  of  the  states  only  discharged  the  persod
of  the  debtor,  and  left  the  obligation  to  pay  in  full  force,^
and  to  this  the  constitution  was  not  opposed.  But
a  law  which  discharged  the  debtor  from  his  contract
'  to  pay  a  debt  by  a  given  time,  witfauut  performance,  and
released  him,  without  payment,  entirely  from  any  future
obligation  to  pay,  imjiajred,  because  it  entirely  discharged,
the  obligation  of  that  contract;  and,  consequently,  the  dis-
charge of  tbo  defendant,  under  the  act  of  1811,  was  no
bar  to  the  suit.

The  court  held,  that  the  obligation  of  a  contrbet  was  not
fulfilled  by  a  cesiio  bofwnim,  for  the  parties  had  not  merely
in  view  the  property  in  posnessiun  when  the  contract  was
made,  hut  its  obligation  extended  to  future  acquisitions, end
to  release  them  from  being  liable,  impaired  the  obligation
of  the  contract.  There  was  a  distinction,  in  the  nature  of
things,  between  the  obligation  of  a  contract,  and  the  re-
medy to  enforce  that  obligation,  and  the  latter  might  be
nioililied,  as  the  wiadgm  of  the  legislature  should  direct.
But  the  constitution  intended  to  restore  and  preserve  pub-
lic confidence  completely.  It  intended  to  establish  a  grtet
principle,  that  contracts  should  be  inviolable.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


XIX.] THfi  UNITED  STATES.  595

The  case  in  which  this  decision  was  made,  was  one  in
which  the  contract  was  existing  when  the  law  was  passed ;
•nd  the  court  said,  that  their  opinion  was  confined  to  the
ease.  A  distinction  has  been  taken  between  the  case  of  a
contract  made  before,  and  one  made  after,  the  passing  of
the  act.  It  was  taken  by  the  Supremo  Court  of  this  state,
in  Mather  v.  Buth,*  and  hj  the  chief  justice  of  Massaehu-
•etts,  in  Btanehard  t.  Rm»tll,^  and  was  relied  on  as  a  sound
distinction  by  tbeCourt  of  Chancery  ofthis  slate,  in  Hkla  t.
Hotchkiufi  The'doctrine  of  these  cases  is,  that  au  insol-
rent  act  in  force  when  the  contract  was  made,  did  not,  in
the  sense  of  the  constitution,  impair  the  obligation  of  that
contract,  because  parties  to  a  contract  have  reference  to
the  existing  laws  of  the  country  where  it  is  niade,  and  aiv
presumed  to  contract  in  reference  to  those  laws.  Ii  is  nn
implied  condition  of  erery  contract,  that  the  party  shallbe
absolred  from  its  performance  if  the  event  takes  place
which  the  existing  law  declares  Bball  dispense  with  the  per-
formance. The  decision  in  Stargtt  v.  Croienimhield  is
supposed  to  be  consistent  with  that  distinction,  when  it  es-
tablishes the  principle,  that  an  insolvent  act  discharging  a
debtor  from  his  contract  existing  when  the  law  passed,  so
that  bis  future  ecqiiisitious eould  not  be  touched,  is  uncon-
stitutional, and  the  discharge  obtained  under  it  void.

But  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  in  M^MU-
htt  V.  M*Ndtl,<i  went  a  step  further,  and  held,  that  a  dis-
charge under  a  state  insolvent  law  existing  when  the  debt
was  contracted,  was  equally  a  law  impairing  tbeoliligniion
of  contracts,  and  equally  within  the  princiiile  declared  io
Sturge$  V.  Cnvmthirld.  This  was  a  discharge  under  the
insolvent  law  of  a  different  government  from  that  in  which
the  contract  was  made.  It  remains  yet  to  be  spltled,
whether  it  be  lawful  for  a  state  to  pass  an  insolvent  law


a  16  JoAiuon'i  Rep.  933.  h  13  Maa.  Rtj

e  IJo/uun'^Ch.Jttp.sm.  d  4JFhnlm,S


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


996  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [Part  If.

which  •ball  be  efTectual  to  diacbRrge  the  debtor  from  a  debt
contracted  after  the  (tassing  of  the  act,  and  contracted
within  tbestate  making  the  tavr.  The  general  language  of
tbe  court  would  soem  to  reach  even  this  case;  but  the  facti
in  the  caaes  decided  do  not  cover  this  grouod,  and  the
eases  decided  arc  not  authority  to  that  extent.  It  will  be
perceived,  that  the  power  of  the  states  over  this  subject  is,
at  all  events,  exceedingly  narrowed  and  cut  down ;  and  as
the  decisions  now  stand,  tho  debt  must  have  been  con-
tracted after  tbe  passing  of  the  act,  and  tbe  debt  must  have
been  euntracted  uitAin  the  slate,  or  else  a  diaoharge  will
not  extinguish  the  remedy  against  the  future  property  of
the  debtor.

And  while  on  this  point,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  observe,
that  tho  ccuio  bonomm  of  the  Roman  law,  and  which  pre-
vaila  at  present  in  most  parts  of  tbe  cootiuent  of  Europe,
only  eietDpted  the  person  of  the  debtor  from  impriaon-
ment.  It  did  nut  release  or  discharge  the  debt,  or  exempt
the  future  aoquisitioDS  of  the  debtor  from  execution  for  tbe
debt.  The  English  statute,  commonly  called  the  Lords'
act.^  went  no  further  than  to  discharge  the  debtor's  per-
son  i  and  it  may  be  laid  down  as  the  law  of  Germany,
France,  Holland,  Scotland,  England,  &.c.  that  insolvent
laws  are  not  more  extensive  in  their  operation  than  the
eetiio  bononm  of  the  civil  law;^  and  indeed  in  many  partt
(^  Germany,  as  we  are  informed  by  Huberus  and  Hei-
necciuSfC  a  catio  bonorvm  does  not  even^work  a  discharge
of  the  debtor's  person,  and  much  less  of  his  future  pro-
perty. .


«  »  G.  II.  and  33  O.  III.

b  Codt,f.  71.  I.  Dig.  At.  3,  4.*  S.  Vott  ad  Ptmd.  At.  3.  B.  Hti-
n«cniO)Mra,bHn.  S.  p-6S0.tora-fl.  384.  387.  Cod*  dt  Omunmc,  No.
568  StptrMri  UhmrKlelRau<miiedaJuruprvilcnee,parMerlto,iit
CBiiim  if t  Btmf ■  Eipntda  LoiXflam.  I.  114.  ISJohmonUR^ttt-
■ote.

c  Alb.  PnalM.  torn.  S.  1454.  Htmtct.  Ettm.  Jttr.  Citt.itcuttd.prd..
Paiuf.p.8.  l-42.iit3. Elem,Jur.atr.l\h  Z.  tit.  13.tea.  3S7.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Laclnre  XIXJ  THE  IGNITED  STATtS.  S97

(4.)  NoitaUcanpattnaturaJizationlauii.

B;  the  conBtitutioii  or  the  United  States,  congress  hare
power  to  establish  a  uniform  rule  of  naluralizatioD.  It
was  held,  ia  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States  at
Philadelphia,  Id  1702,  in  CoUet  r.  CoUet,'  that  the  stats
governmenUi  Mill  enjoyed  a  coacurrent  authoritj  with  the
United  States  Upon  the  subject  of  naturalization,  and  that
though  the;  could  not  contravene  the  rule  estaUisbed  hf
congress,  pr  "  exclude  those  citizens  who  had  been  uaadtr
•uch  by  that  rule,  fet  that  they  might  adopt  citizens  up(m
easier  terms  than  tbote  which  congress  nay  deem  it  ex-
pedient to  impose."  But  thoogh  this  decision  wai  made
by  two  of  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Courtt  with  the  con-
currence of  the  district  judge  of  Pcnnsylraoia,  it  ia  obri-
ona,  that  this  opinion  waf  hastily  and  inconsideratelj  de*
elared.  If  the  construction  given  to  the  conatitution  is
this  case  was  the  true  one,  the  provision  would  be,  in  a
peat  degree,  useless,  and  the  policy  of  it  defeated.  The
very  purpose  of  the  power  was  exclusive.  It  was  to  de-
prive the  states  individually  of  the  power  of  naturalizing
aliens  according  to  their  own  will  and  pleasure,  and  there-
by giving  them  the  rights  and  privileges  of  citizens  in
every  other  state.  If  each  state  can  naturalise  upon  one
year's  residence,  when  the  act  of  congress  requires  five,
of  what  use  is  the  act  of  congress,  and  how  does  it  become
a  uniform  rule  ?

This  decision  of  the  Circuit  Court  may  be  considered,
as  in  effect,  overruled.  In  the  same  Circuit  Court,  in
1797,  Judge  Iredell  intimated,  that  if  the  question  had  not
previously  occurred,  he  should  be  disposed  to  think,  that
the  power  of  naturalization  operated  exclusively,  as  soon
as  it  was  exercised  by  congress.'*  Aod  in  the  Circuit
Court  of  Pennsylvania  in  1814,  it  wkstheopinionof  Judge
Washington,  that  the  (lOwer  te  naturalize  was  exclusively


a  t  Dalla*,  3S4.
■b  United  StBtM  v.  Villsto,  2  DaOat,  370.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


S98  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [fartlL

Tested  in  congreig.'  Afterwards,  in  Chirac  v.  Chirac,'^  tb*
chief  justice  of  the  United  States  observed,  that  it  certaioly
ought  not  to  be  controverted,  that  the  power  of  nutumliza-
tion  was  rested  esclusirel;  in  congress.  In  HouMlon  r.
Moore,"  Judge  Story  mentioned  the  power  in  congress  to
establish  a  uniform  rule  of  naturalization,  as  one  which
was  exclusire,  on  the  ground  of  there  being  a  direct  re|iug-
nsncy  or  incompatibilitf  in  the  exercise  of  it  by  the  states.
The  weight  of  authority,  as  well  as  of  reason,  mdy,  there-
fore, be  coBsidered  as  clearly  id  favour  of  this  latter  con-
traction.

(5.)  7^  itatti  cannot  impo$t  a  tax  on  tkt  national  baiik^
or  Ut  bramehet.

The  inability  of  the  states  to  impede  or  control,  by  tax-
ation or  otherwise,  the  lawful  institutions  and  measure*
of  thenational  government,  was  largely  discussed,  and
•trongly  declared,  in  the  case  of  M^CtUhtJt  v.  7%e  StaU
of  Maryland^  In  that  case,  the  state  of  Mainland  had  im-
posed a  tax  upon  the  Branch  Bank  of  the  United  States
established  in  that  state,  and  assuming  the  bank  to  ba
constitutionally  created  and  lawfully  established  in  that
state,  the  question  arose  on  thb  validity  of  the  state  tax.
It  was  adjudged  that  the  state  governments  had  no  right
to  tax  any  of  the  constitutional  means  employed  by  the  go-
vernment of  the  union  to  execute  its  constitutional  powers,
nor  to  retard,  impede,  burden,  or  in  any  manner  control
the  operations  of  the  constitutional  laws  enacted  by  con-
gress, to  carry  into  effect  the  powers  vested  in  the  natien-
al  government.

To<lefine  and  settle  the  bounds  of  the  restriction  of  the
power  of  taxation  in  the  states,  and  especially  when  that
Testrictton  was  deduced  from  the  implied  powers  of  the
general  government, wasagreatand  difficut  undertaking;
but  it  appears  to  hare  been,  in  this  instance,  most  wisely

a  Oolden  r.  PriuM,  WhariaCt  IMgtd,  (tl.  Cornlitntioiial  Lav,  M-
b  S  WhtakM,tit.

c  5  meatorn,  48.
d  4  7Atftor>,31».


Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoO(^lc


Uctan  XIX.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  i99

and  most  lueceufully  performed.  It  was  declared  by  th«
•ourt,  that  it  -was  not  to  be  denied,  that  the  power  of  taza>
lion  was  to  be  concurrently  exercised  b;  the  two  goreriH-
mentB ;  but  such  was  the  paramount  ehsracter  of  the  con-
(titutioo  of  the  United  Statea,  that  it  had  a  capacity  to
withdraw  any  subject  from  the  action  even  of  thiti  power,
and  it  might  restrain  a  state  from  any  exercise  of  it  which
may  be  incompatible  with,  and  repugnant  to,  the  constitu-
lional  laws  of  the  union.  The  great  principle  that  govern-
ed the  case  was,  that  the  constitution  and  the  laws  made,
in  pursuance  thereof  were  supreme,  and  that  tbcy  con-
trolled the  constitution  and  lews  of  the  reapectire  states,  '
and  could  not  be  controlled  by  them.  It  Was  ef  the  Tcry
essence  of  supremacy,  to  remove  all  obstacles  to  its  action
within  its  own  sphere,  and  ao  to  modify  every  power  vested
insubordinate  governmenta  as  to  etempt  its  own  opera-
tions from  tbeir  influence.  A  supreme  power  must  con-
trol every  other  power  which  ia  repugnant  to  it.  Th«
right  of  taxation  in  the  states  extends  to  all  subjects  over
which  ita  sovereign  power  eztenda,  and  no  further.  The
sovereignty  of  a  state  extends  to  every  thing  which  exists
by  its  own  authority,  or  is  introduced  by  ita  permission  ;
but  it  does  not  extend  to  those  means  which  are  employed
by  congress  to  carry  into  execution  their  constitutional
powers.  The  power  of  state  taxation  is  to  be  measured
by  the  extent  of  the  state  sovereignty,  and  this  leaves  to  a
state  the  comtoand  of  all  its  resourcea,  anil  the  unim-
paired power  of  taxing  the  people  and  property  of  the
Slate.  But  it  places  beyond  the  reach  of  state  power  all
those  powers  conferred  on  the  goveroment  of  the  union,
and  all  those  means  which  are  given  for  the  purpose  of
carrying  those  powers  into  execution.  This  principle  r«-
•  lieves  from  clashing  sovereignty ;  from  interfering  powers ;
from  a  repugnancy  between  a  right  in  one  government  to  -
pulldown  what  there  is  an  acknowledged  right  in  another
to  build  up  ;  from  tha  incompatibility  of  a  right  in  one
government  to  destroy  what  there  ia  a  right  in  another  to
preserve.  The  power  to  tax  would  involve  the  |>ower  (o
d^troy,  nod  the  power  lu  dciitroy  iliigttl  delVdt  and  render

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


JURISPRUDENCE  OF  {Put  IL

I  the  power  to  create.  There  would  be  s  plain  re-
pugnance in  CDoferring  oo  the  ^rernment  a  power  to
eoDtrol  the  eonstitutional  mesiurea  of  another,  which
other,  with  respect  to  those  rer;  meaHur'eB,  wai  declared
to  be  tapreme  orer  that  which  exerts  the  control.  If  the
right  of  the  'states  to  tax  the  mrans  employed  bj  the
general  gorernment  did  really  exist,  then  the  declaration
that  the  constitution  and  the  laws  made  in  pursuance  there-
of should  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  would  be  empty
and  unmeaning  declamslion.  If  the  states  might  tax  one
instrument  employed  by  the  government  in  the  execntion
of  Us  powers,  they  might  tax  erery  other  instrument.  They
might  tax  the  mail ;  they  might  tax  the  mint ;  they  might
tax  the  papers  ofthe  cAstom  house ;  they  might  tax  judi-
cial  process  ;  they  might  lex  all  the  means  employed  by
the  gorernmentto  an  excess  which  would  defeat  all  the
ends  of  government.

The  claim  of  the  states  to  tax  the  Bank  of  the  United
States  was  thus  denied  and  shown  to  be  fallacious ;  and  that
there  was  a  manifest  repugnancy  between  the  power  of
Maryland  to  tax,  and  the  power  of  congress  to  prGserre
the  institixion  of  the  brfmch  bank.  A  tax  on  the  opera-
tions of  thebanh,  was  a  tax  on  the  operations  of  an  instm.
ment  employed  by  the  government  of  the  union  to  carry
its  powers  into  execution,  and  was  consequently  uncoa-
Btitutional.  A  case  could  not  be  selected  from  the  deci-
sions of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  superior
to  this  one  of  iVCuUoch  andthe  SlaU  of  Maryland,  for  the
clear  and  satisfactory  manner  in  which  the  supremacy  <^
the  laws  ofthe  union  have  been  maintained  l^  the  court,
and  an  undue  assertiooofslate  power  overruled  and  de-
fcaled^

But  the  court  were  careful  to  declare  that  their  decision
was  to  be  received  with  this  qualification :  that  the  states
were  not  deprived  of  any  resources  of  taxation  which  they
originally  possessed ;  and  thatthe  restriction  did  not  extend
to  a  tax  paid  by  the  real  property  of  the  bank;  in  common
with  the  real  property  within  the  state ;  nor  (oa  tax  imposed
upon  the  interest  which  tlie-citizcns  of  Maryland  might  hold

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


UcturtXlX.]  THE  UNITED  STAtES.-*  *)1

in  that  institution  in  commoo  with  other  property  of  thfl
same  description  throughout  the  state.

The  decision  pronounced  in  this  cuse  against  the  Validity
of  the  Maryland  tax,  Was  made  on  the  7th  of  March,  1619,
«nd  it  was  on  the  7th  of  February  preceding,  that  the  1e«
{islature  of  the  state  of  Ohio  imposed  a  similar  tax,  to  the
amount  of  S0,000  dollars  annually,  on  the  Branch  Bank  of
the  United  States  established  in  that  state.  NotWitbstand'
tag  this  decision,  the  ofHcers  oflhe  state  of  Ohio  proceeded
to  levy  the  tax,  and  that  actbrought  iipbefore  the  SuprettiS
Court  a  renewed  discussion  and  conslderjtttonof  the  legality
ofauch  a  tax.>  It  Was  attempted  to  withdraw  this  case
from  the  iofiuence  and  authority  of  the  former  decision,  by
the  suggestion  that  the  Bank  of  the  United  States  was  tl
mere  private  corporation,  engaged  in  its  own  business,  With
its  own  views,  and  that  its  great  ctid  and  princi|>al  object
were  pirate  trade  and  private  profit.  It  was  admilted*
that  if  that  were  the  case,  the  bunk  would  be  subject  to  the
taxing  power  of  the  state,  as  any  individual  would  be.  But
it  was  not  the  case.  The  bank  Was  not  created  for  its  owil
Bake,  or  for  private  purposes.  It  has  never  been  supposed
that  congress  could  erente  such  a  corporation.  It  was  not
8  private,  but  a  public  corporation,  created  for  public  and
national  purposes,  and  as  an  instrument  necessary  and
proper  for  carrying  into  effect  the  powers  veiled  in  the
government  oflhe  United  States.  The  business  of  lending
and  dealing  in  money  for  private  purposes,  Was  an  inci-*
dental  circnmstance,  and  not  the  primary  object ;  atid  the
bank  was  endowed  with  this  faculty  in  order  to  enable  it
to  effect  the  great  public  ends  of  the  institution,  find  with-
out which  faculty  and  business  the  bank  would  Want  a  ca'
pacity  to  perform  its  public  functions.  And  if  the  trade  of
the  bank  was  essential  to  its  character  aa  a  machine  for
the  fiscal  operations  of  the  government,  thai  trade  must  ba


a  OsboFD  T.  Buk  of  tbe  Uoited  Sutgt,  9  ff^htalon,  738'

TOL. I.  j>l


i,Googlc


402  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  U.

exempt  from  stale  control,  and  a  tax  upon  that  trade  bean
upon  the  whole  machine,  and  was,  conaequeotlji,  inaduic^
Bible,  and  repugnant  to  the  conatitution>

(6.)  The  ttau  gavemmenu  havt  no  jaritdiction  m  plaee$
ceded  to  the  United  Statet.

The  state  governments  ma;  likewise  lose  all  jurisdiction
over  places  purchased  by  congress,  bj  the  consent  of  the
legislature  of  the  stale,  for  the  erection  of  forts,  dock
^ards,  light  bouses,  hospitals,  military  academies,  and  other
needful  buildings.'  The  question  which  has  arisen  on  tbia
subject,  was  as  to  the  effect  of  a  proviso  or  reservation,
usual!;  annexed  to  the  consent  of  the  state,  that  all  civil
and  criminal  process  issued  under  the  authority  ofthe  state*
might  be  executed  on  the  lands  so  ceded,  in  like  manner
as  if  the  cession  had  not  heeo  made.  This  point  was
much  discussed  in  the  Circuit  Court  ofthe  UnitedStates  io
Rhode  Island,  in  the  case  ofthe  United  Statet  v.  CorruUA
It  was  held,  that  a  purchaseof  lands  within  the  jurisdiction
of  a  state,  with  the  consent  of  the  state,  for  the  national
purposes  contemplated  by  the  constitution,  did,  iptofacro,  hy
the  very  terms  of  the  constitution,  fall  within  the  exclusive
legislation  of  congress,  and  that  the  stale  jurisdiction  was
completely  ousted.  What,  then,  is  the  true  intent  and  ef-
fect ofthe  saving  clause  annexed  to  tbe  cessions  ?  It  does
not  imply  ibe  reservation  of  any  concurrent  jurisdiction  or
legislation,  or  that  the  state  retainrd  a  right  to  punish  for
acts  done  within  the  ceded  lands.  Tbe  whole  apparent  ob-
ject of  the  proviso  was  to  prevent  the  ceded  lands  iVom  be-
coming a  sanctuary  for  fugitives  from  justice,  for  acts  done
within  the  acknowledged  jurisdiction  ofthe  state ;  and  such
permission  to  execute  process  is  not  incompatible  with  ex-
clusive sovereiguiy  and  jurisdiction.  1'he  acceptance  of  a
cession,  with  this  reservation,  amounts  to  an  agreement  of
the  new  sovereign,  to  permit  the  free  exercise  of  such  pro-
cess, as  being  <jvoad  hue  his  own  process. This  construc-

•  0»Mt  ML  l.»ec.  a.  bSMaum.ev.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


EecturtXIX.] THE  UNITED  STATES.  408

lioo  has  been  frequently  declared  by  the  courts  of  the
United  States,  and  it  comports  entirely  with  the  ioteotion
of  the  parties,  and  upon  any  other  conBtruction  the  ces-
sion would  be  nugatory  and  void.  Judge  Story  doubteil
whether  congross  were  even  at  liberty,  by  the  terms  of  tha
constitution,  to  purchase  lands,  with  theconsent  of  a  Htate,
under  any  qualiScalion  of  that  consent,  which  would  de-
prive them  of  eiclusive  legiilation  over  the  place.  The
courts  of  the  United  States  have  Hole  and  exclusive  juris-
diction  over  an  offence  committed  within  a  ceded  place,
notwithstanding  the  ordinary  reservation  of  the  right  to
execute  civil  and  criminal  process  of  the  state.  That
was  no  resetvation  of  any  sovereignty  or  jurisdiction.

Congress,  in  exercising  powers  of  exclusive  legiKlalion
over  a  ceded  place  or  district,  unite  the  powers  of  general,
with  those  of  loe^l  legislation.  The  power  of  local  legis-
lation carries  with  it,  as  an  incident,  the  right  to  make
that  power  effectual.  Congress  exercises  that  particular
local  power,  like  all  its  other  powers,  in  its  high  character
as  the  legislature  of  the  union,  and  its  general  power  may
come  in  aid  of  these  local  powers.  It  is,  therefore,  com-
petent for  congress  to  try  and  punish  an  offender  for  an
offence  committed  within  one  of  those  local  districts,  in  a
place  not  within  such  jurisdiction  ;  or  to  provide  for  the
pursuit  and  arrest  of  a  criminal  escaping  from  one  of  those
districts,  aflcr  committing  a  felony  there  ;  or  to  punish  a
person  for  concealing,  out  of  (he  district,  a  felony  commit-
ted within  it.  All  these  incidental  powers  are  necessary
to  the  complete  execution  of  the  principal  power,  and  the
Supreme  Court,  in  Cohtnt  v.  Virginia,^  held,  that  they
were  vested  in  congress-
It  follows  asa  conspquence,  from  this  doctrine  of  the  fede-
ral courts,  that  state  courts  cannot  take  cognizance  of  any
offences  committed  within  such  ceded  districts;  and,  on
tho  other  hand,  that  the  inhabitants  of  such  places  cannot


«  6  WlualoR,  436—429.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


404


JURISPRUDENCE  OP  IPwlII.


«xercl9e  any  ci«l  or  political  privileges  under  tbe  laws  of
the  state,  because  they  are  not  bound  by  those  laws:  Thi«
has  been  so  decided  in  the  slate  courts.*  But  if,  in  anj'
ease,  the  United  Slates  have  not  actually  purchased,  and
tbe  slate  has  not,  in  poiul  of  fact,  ceded  the  place  or  ter*
titory  to  the  United  Slules,  its  jurisdiction  remains,  not-
withstanding the  place  may  have  been  occupied,  ever
since  its  surrender  by  Great  Britain,  by  the  Iroops  of  the
United  States,  as  a  fort  or  garrison.  The  Supreme
Court  of  this  state  accordingly  held,  in  the  case  of  The
People  y.  Godfrey,^  that  they  hnd  jurisdiction  of  a  mur-
der committed  by  one  soldier  upon  nnotlier  within  Niaga-
ra fort.  Nor  would  tbe  purchase  of  tbe  land  by  the  Uiti*
led  Estates  be  alone  sufficient  to  vest  them  with  tbe  juris-
diclion,  or  to  oust  that  of  the  slate,  without  being  accom-
panied or  followed  with  the  consent  of  ibe  legislature  of
the  state.  This  was  so  decided  in  the  caxe  of  The  Com.'
tionwtaltk  of  Pennsylvania  v.  Youngs

(7.)  The  constniction  of  ihe  potter  of  congress  to  reguhit
fommtrce  among  the  several  slabs-

I  proceed  next  lo  examine  the  judicial  decisions  under
the  power  given  to  congress  to  "  regulate  commerce  with
foreign  nations,  and  among  the  several  states ;''  and  it  will
be  perceived,  that  the  questions  arising  under  this  power
have  been  of  tbe  utmost  consequence  to  the  interests  of
tbe  uition,  and  the  residuary  claims  and  sovereignly  of
the  states.

The  first  question  that  arose  upon  this  part  of  the  consti-
tution was,  respecting  the  power  of  congress  lo  interrupt  or
destroy  the  commerce  of  tbe  United  States,  by  laying  a
general  embargo.wilhout  any  limitation  as  to  time.  By  the
act  of  congress  of  22dDecember,1807,an  embargo  was  la  id
on  all  ships  and  vessels  in  the  ports  and  harbours  of  the
United  States,  and  a  prohibition  of  exportation  from  tbe  Uni-

«  Commonwealth ». Clary,  8  Matt.  Rep.  75. Sam*  V. Toai«,
)  Bail>t  Journal  of  Juritprudeace,  63.
fi  n  Johiuon,  225.
•  (  H*UU  Jqurnai  tJJurispndeMt,  «,


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


XIX.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  «U

ted  States,  either  b;  land  or  water,  of  any  goods,  wares,  or
merchaDdise  orforeign  or  domestic  growth  or  manufac'
ture.  There  were  several  supplementary  acts  auxiliary
to  this  principal  one,  and  intended  more  efTectually  to  en-
force it  under  certain  fi[>ec>fic  exceptions.  In  the  case  of
I'he  Unittd  Statfi  v.  The  Brigantine  WiUiam,  in  the  Dis-
trict Court  of  Massachusetta,  in  September,  1808,^  it  was
objected,  that  the  act  wan  unconstitutional,  for  that  con-
gress had  no  right,  underthe  power  to  regulate  commerce,
thus  to  annihilate  it,  by  interdicting  it  entirely  with  foreign
oaiions.  But  the  court  decided,  that  the  embargo  act  was
within  the  constitutional  provision.  The  power  of  con-
gress was  sovereign  releti?e  to  commercial  intercourse,
qualified  by  the  limitations  and  reslrictioDs  expressed  in
the  constitution  ;  and  by  the  treaty-making  power  of  the
president  and  senate,  congress  had  a  right  to  control  or
abridge  commerce  for  the  advancement  of  great  national
purjMses.  N on- intercourse  and  embargo  laws  are  within
the  range  of  legislative  discretion  ;  and  if  congress  have
the  power,  fqr  purposes  of  safety,  or  preparation,  or  coun-
teraction, to  suspend  commercial  intercourse  with  foreign
nations,  they  are  aot  limited  as  to  the  duration,  more  than
as  to  the  manner  and  extent  of  the  measure.

A  still  grarer  question  was  presented  for  the  considera-.
tion  of  the  federal  judiciary,  in  the  ease  of  Qihbotu  v.  Og^
dtn,**  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States
in  February  term,  1324.  That  decision  went  to  declare,
that  several  acts  of  the  legislature  of  this  state,  granting
to  lAvingiton  and  Fviton  the  exclusive  navigation  of  the
waters  of  this  state  in  vessels  propelled  by  steam,  w«r9
unconstitutional  and  void  acts,  and  repugnant  to  the  pow-
er given  to  congress  to  regulate  commerce,  so  for  as  those
acts  went  to  prohibit  Tessels  licensed  under  the  laws  of
congress  for  carrying  on  the  coasting  trade,  A-om  naviga-
ting the  waters  of  this  state.


I  t  Halft  Late  Jounul,  t55,


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


406  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  ^m  H.

It  had  bceD  decided  in  the  Court  of  Errors  of  this  state,
io  1812, 'I  that  five  several  statues  of  this  state,  passed  be-
tween the  years  1796  aad  1811,  inclusive,  and  granting  end
securing  to  the  claimants  the  sole  and  exclusive  right  of
using  and  navigaling  boats  \>j  steam  in  the  waters  of  this
state,  for  a  term  of  years,  were  constitutional  and  valid
acts.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  the  court  io  that  case*
the  interoal  commerce  of  the  state  by  land  and  water  re-
mained entirely  and  exclusively  within  the  scope  of  its
original  sovereignty.  It  was  considered  to  be  very  diffi-
cult to  draw  an  exact  line  between  those  regulations  which
relate  to  external,  and  those  whir-h  relate  to  interoal  com-
merce, for  every  regulation  of  the  one  will  directly  or  indi-
reetly  affect  the  other.  But  it  was  supposed  that  there
could  be  DO  doubt  that  the  acts  of  the  state  which  were
then  uoder  consideration,  were  not  within  any  constitution-
al prohibition,  for  not  one  of  the  restrictions  upon  state
power,  contained  in  the  9th  and  lOtb  sections  of  the  lat
article  of  the  constitution,  appeared  to  apply  to  the  case ;
■or  was  there  any  existing  regulation  of  congress  cm  the
subject  of  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among  the
several  states,  which  was  deemed  to  interfere  with  the
grant.  It  was  declared  to  be  a  very  inadinissibie  pr<H
position,  that  a  slate  was  devested  of  a  capacity  to  grant
an  exclusive  privilege  of  navigating  a  steam  boat  within
its  own  waters,  merely  because  congress,  in  the  pleoarf
exercise  of  its  power  to  regulate  commerce,  might  make
some  future  regulation  inconsistent  with  the  exercise  of
that  privilege.  The  grant  was  taken,  undoubtedly,  subject
to  such  future  commercial  rpgulalions  as  conftrees  taigfat
lawfully  prescribe  ;  and  to  what  extent  they  might  (awfully
prescribe ifhem.  was  admitted  to  be  a  question  within  the
ultimate  cognizance  of  the  Su|>reme  Court  of  the  United
States.  The  opinion  of  the  court  went  no  further  ihau  to
maintain,  that  the  grant  to  Livingtton  and  Fulton,  was  not
within  any  constitutional  prohibition  upon  the  states,  nor

a  LinagOaar.  Vsd  Ingaa,  9  JoAnwn^  A^.  007.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Leetnn  XIX.] TUE  UNITED  STATES.  WT

was  it  repugnant  or  contradictory  to  aoy  existing  act  of
congress  od  the  subject  of  commerce ;  end  under  those
two  reatrictioDi,  erery  state  had  a  right  to  make  its  own
commercial  regulations.  It  was  generally  declared,  that
congress  bad  not,  in  the  nnderstanding  of  the  court,  any
direct  jurisdiction  over  our  interior  commerce  or  watersi
and  that  they  had  concurrent  juriadiction  over  our  naviga-
ble waters  only  so  far  as  might  be  iocideDtal  and  requisite
to  the  due  regulation  of  commerce  between  the  states  and
with  foreign  nations.

In  this  ease,  in  1812,  the  defendants,  wbo  objected  to
the  validity  of  the  state  grant,  did  not  set  up  any  patent
right,  or  any  other  right  under  any  particular  act  of  Gon>-
gress.  They  rested  entirely  on  the  objection,  that  the
statutes  conferring  the  exclusire  privilege  were  absolutely
unconstitoitionat  and  void.  But  afterwitrds,  in  the  case  of
Ogden  V.  Gibbfm3,»  the  defendant  set  up,  by  way  of  right
and  title  to  navigate  a  steam  boat  upon  the  writers  of  this
state,  in  opposition  to  the  grant,  that  his  boats  were  duly
enrolled  and  licensed  under  the  taws  of  the  United  States,
at  Perth  Amboy,  in  thestateof  New<Jersey,  to  be  employ-
ed in  carrying  on  the  coasting  trade.  The  question  in  that
case  was,  whether  such  a  coasting  license  conferred  any
power  to  interfere  with  the  grant ;  and  it  was  decided  in
the  Court  of  Chancery,  and  afterwards  in  the  Court  of
Errors, i>  that  the  coasting  license  merely  ^ave  to  the  steam
boat  an  American  character  for  the  purpose  of  revenue,
and  that  it  was  not  intended  to  decide  a  question  of  pro-
perty, or  to  confer  a  right  of  property,  or  a  right  of  n8ri<-
gation  or  commerce.  The  act  of  congress  regulating  the
coasting  trade,  was  never  intended  to  assert  any  supre-
macy over  state  regulations  or  claims,  in  respect  to  inter-
nal waters  or  commerce.  It  was  not  considered  by  our
courts  as  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  congress  to  regulate
commerce  among  the  statei".  The  law  concerning  the
coasting  trade  was  passed  on  the  18th  of  February,  1793,

<  4  JiAiuok'*  d.  R«p.  t&O.  6  17  J,-.k:t<.r,  ■■8!'.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


40S  JURISPRUDENCE  OP  [Part  ff.

■nd  it  never  occurred  to  any  one  during  the  whole  period
that  the  state  lawn  were  under  consideration  before  the
legislature,  and  in  the  councils  of  revision,  and  in  the
courts  of  justice,  from  1798  down  to,  and  including  the  ju-
dicial investigations  in  1812,  that  the  roasting  act  of  1793
was  a  regulation  of  commerce  among  the  states,  prohibi-
tory of  any  such  grant.  Snch  latent  powers  were  nerer
thought  of,  or  imputed  to  it.  The  great  objects  and  j>olicy
, of  the  coasting  act  were,  to  eiclude  foreign  ressela  from
commerce  between  the  states,  in  order  to  cherish  the
growth  of  our  own  marine,  and  to  provide  that  the  coasting
trade  sboiild  tie  conducted  with  security  to  the  revenue.
The  register  and  enrolment  of  the  vessel  were  to  ascertaift
the  national  character  ;  and  the  license  was  only  evidence
that  the  vessel  bad  complied  with  the  requisites  of  the  law,
and  was  qualified'  for  the  cnnsling  trade  under  American
privileges.  The  license  did  not  define  the  coasting  trade.
Free  trude  between  the  states  then  existed,  subject  to  local
6nd  municipal  regulations.  The  requisitions  of  the  coast-
ing act  were  restrictions  upon  the  general  freedom  ofthtit
commerce,  and  not  the  grant  of  new  rights.  Steam  vessels
were  subject  to  those  regulations  equally  with  any  other
vessels.  If  congress  had  intended  that  a  coasting  license
should  confer  power  and  control,  end  a  claim  of  sovereign-
ty subversive  of  local  laws  of  the  states  within  their  own
jurisdictions,  it  was  supposed  they  would  have  said  so  to
plain  and  intelligible  language,  and  not  have  left  their
claim  of  supremacy  to  be  hidden  from  the  observation  and
knowledge  of  the  state  governments,  in  the  unpretending
and  harmless  shape  of  a  coasting  license,  obviously  in-
tended for  other  purposes.

It  was,  therefore,  upon  considerations  like  these,  that  the
courts  of  justice  in  this  state  did  not  consider  the  grant  to
Livingiton  and  Fulton  as  disturbed  by  a  coasting  licens*
under  the  act  of  1793.  The  courts  in  this  state  did  not,
cither  in  this  case  of  Ogden  v.  Giltbons,  or  in  any  of  tb*
cases  which  preceded  it,  deny  to  congress  the  power  to  re-
gulate commerce  among  the  states,  by  express  and  direct


t.Goaj^lc


Lecture  XIX.] TMG  UNITEI)  STATES.  4K»

provisions,  so  as' to  control  and  restrict  the  exercise  of  the
state  grant.  They  only  insisted,  that  without  some  such
explicit  provision,  thestatejuriadiGtion  over  the  subject  re-
mained  in'ful)  force.  This  cause  was  afterwards  carried
Mp  by  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Tnited  StateS)
and  the  decree  reversed,  on  the  ground,  that  the  grant  wea
repugnant  to  the  rights  and  privileges  conferred  upon  a
steam  boat  oavigatiob  under  acoaating  license."  The  great
([uestion  was  fully  and  elaborately  discussed ;  and  though
it  would  not  be  proper  in  this  place  to  question  the  correct-
ness of  a  final  decision,  yet  it  has  always  appeared  to  me,
that  some  of  the  doctrines  and  expositions  of  the  court
would  carry  the  powers  of  the  general  government,  by
construction,  to  a  greater  extent  over  the  residuary  claims
and  assumed  rights  of  the  states,  than  any  decision  whicli
had  hitherto  been  made.

Id  the  construction  of  the  power  to  regulate  commerce,
tfae  court  held,  that  the  term  meant,  not  only  traffic  but  in-
tercourse, and  that  it  included  navigation,  and  the  power
to  regulate  commerce  was  a  power  to  regulate  navigation.
Commerce  among  the  several  states,  meant  commerce  in-
termingled with  the  states,  and  which  might  pass  the  ex-
ternal boundary  lineof  each  state,  and  be  introduced  into  the
interior,  ft  was  admitted,  that  the  power  did  not  extend  to
that  commerce  which  was  completely  internal,  and  carried
on  between  different  ports  of  the  same  state,  and  which  did
not  extend  to,  or  affect  other  states.  The  power  was  re-
stricted totbat  commerce  which  concerned  more  states  than
oue,  and  the  completely  internal  commerce  of  a  state  was
reserved  for  the  state  itself.  The  power  of  Congress  on
this  subject  comprehended  navigation  within  the  limits  of
every  state,  and  it  might  pass  the  jurisdictional  line  ofa
state,  and  be  exercised  within  its  territory,  so  far  as  the  na-
vigation was  connected  with  foreign  commerce,  sr  with
commerce  among  theseveral  states. This  power,  like  all

. a  Gibboot  V  Ogiea,  9  Wktalon,  X.


t,Goo(^lc


419  JURISPRUDENCe  OF  [Pari  0.

the  othMr  powen  of  coogren,  was  plenary  »n4  abwlute
witbiD  its  eekDowledgBd  tiniita.  But,  it  was  tadmitted,  that
uupection  laws  relativfe  to  the  quality  of  article*  to  be  n-
ported,  and  quaraotine  laws,  and  health  laws  of  trery  de-
acription,  and  laws  for  regolatitig  the  internal  commerce
•f  a  state,  and  those  which  respect  turopike  roads,  ferries,
&.C.  were  component  parts  of  an  immense  tnass  of  legisla-
tion, not  surrendered  to  the  general  goremment.  Though
congress  may  license  vessels  to  sail  from  one  port  to  bdo-
ther,  in  the  same  state,  the  act  ia  supposed  to  be  necessa-
rily iocidentBl  to  the  power  expressly  granted  to  congress,
and  it  implies  op  claim  of  a  direct  power  to  regulate  ibe
purely  internal  commerce  of  a  state,  or  to  act  directly  on
iusyrtem  of  police.  The  court  construed  the  word  regu-
late to  imply  full  power  over  the  thing  to  t>e  regulated,  and
to  exclude  the  action  of  all  others,  that  wouM  perform  tba
Mtme  operation  on  the  same  thing.

After  laying  down  these  general  propositions,  and  whidi
(as  I  understand  them)  none  ofthe  judicial  decisions  in  tbta
state  hare  ever  controverted,  the  court  procet^ed  to  ob-
serve, that  the  acts  of  this  state,  graining  exclusive  priri-
leges  to  certain  steam  boats,  were  in  collision  with  ibeacts  '
<^  congress  regulating  the  coasting  trade,  and  thai  the  acts
ofthe  slate  must,  in  that  case,  yield  to  the  supreme  or  para-
mount law.  If  the  law  of  congress  was  made  in  pursuaac*
ofthe  constitution,  (and  of  which  there  could  be  no  doubt,)
the  state  laws  must  yield  to  the  supremary  crf'it,  even
though  they  were  enacted  in  pursuance  of  powers  acknow-
ledged to  remain  in  the  states.  A  license  under  the  ads  ot
oon^ress  for  regulating  the  coasting  trade,  was  an  BUtb*>
rily  to  carry  on  that  trade.  The  words  of  the  act  of  congress
directing  the  proper  officer  to  grant  to  a  vessel  quali6ed  to
receive  it,  "  a  ticenseibr  carrying  on  the  coasting  trade,"
was  considered  as  cooveying  an  explirit  autfaurity  for  that
purpose.  It  was  the  legislative  grant  of  a  right,  and  it  con-
ferred all  the  right  which  congress  could  give  in  the  case,
and  it  was  not  intended  to  confermerely  the  national  cha*
ractar.  It  was  further  held.tbst  the  power  to  regulate  com-


tjGooj^lc


Bacbm  XIX.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  411

aierca  extended  to  navigation,  carried  on  by  Tflflsela  ex-
eluBirely  employed  in  traQsporting  pawen^ers,  and  to  ?efc
ioIb  propelled  by  steam,  as  well  a«  to  veweU  narigated  by
other  roostia.

This  is  the  aubftanee  of  the  argument  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States  in  the  steam  boat  ease.  Th«
only  great  point  on  trhicb  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Unt*
ted  States,  and  the  courts  of  tbia  state,  hare  differed,  is  to
the  construction  and  effect  giren  to  a  coasting  license.
They  did  not  differ  in  any  general  riew  of  the  powers  of
oongress ;  and  the  Supreme  Court  expressly  waived  any
inquiry  or  decision  on  the  point,  whether  the  exercise  of
the  power  assumed  by  the  stesm  boat  laws  would  have
beon  illegal,  provided  there  was  no  existing  regulation  of
congress  that  came  in  collision  with  them.  This  was  the
very  point  and  pith  of  the  decision  in  Livingtieti  v.  Fen
ingen.  It  was  upcm  the  assumption  that  there  was  no
such  regulation,  that  the  decision  in  ■Livingtton  t.  Van
higen  retted.  I  spprebend,  that  the  steam  boat  laws
would  never  have  been  posited,  and  the  decisions  under
them  which  have  been  complained  of,  would  never  have
been  made,  if  it  had  been  clearly  understood  by  the  au-
thorities of  this  slate,  that  the  coasting  license  act  was  the
actual  exercise  of  a  power  in  congress  repugnant  to  such
a  privilege,  and  if  the  opposition  boats  in  that  ease  had
produced  such  a  license.  The  formidable  effect  which
has  been  giren  to  a  coasting  license,  was  a  perfect  sur-
prise upon  the  judicial  authorities  of  this  state  ;  and  nona
of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  former  decisions  in  our
state  courts  on  this  subject  over  entertained  the  idea,  as  I
apprehend,  that  congress  intended,  by  a  coasting  license,
a  grant  of  power  that  was  to  bear  down  all  state  regula-
tions of  internal  commerce  that  stood  in  its  way.  Th^
original  and  leading  decision  of  Limngtfon  v.  Van  fngftt,
is  not  affected  by  this  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  States,  ffone  of  the  doctrines  in  that  case  are
controverted  by  the  Supreme  Court,  because,  in  that  case,
the  opposition  boats  set  up  no  license  under  the  coasting
act,  and  the  whole  controversy  has  turned  and  termina-
ted upon  the  effect  to  be  given  to  the  coasting  license.

Google


412  JURiSPRL'DCNCE  OF  [Part  U.

But  th«  decree  ofthe  Supreme  Ctnirt  seems  to  be  broad-
er than  the  facta  in  tbe  case  would  warrant.  The  tase
related  to  a  claim  of  rigbt  to  ateam  boat  navi|i^lion  be-
tween Elizabeth  Town,  in  New-Jersey,  and  the  city  of
New- York,  by  a  lieenud  boat ;  and  the  court  decided,
that  the  Jersey  boat  had  a  rigbt  to  navigate  the  waters  of
this  state  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  oo  the  coasting  trade,
any  law  of  this  state  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.
Tbe  decree  went  on  to  declare,  that  so  mucb  of  tbe  seve-
ral laws  of  this  state  as  prohibited  Teasels  duly  licensed
from  navigating  the  warers  of  this  state  by  means  of  6ro
or  steam,  were  repugnant  to  the  constitution,  and  void.
This  language  was  too  general  and  comprehensive  for  the
ease.  The  case  related  to  a  commerce  between  two  states,
which  commenced  in  the  one  and  terminated  in  the  other,
and  the  reasoning  of  the  court  did  not  go  beyond  tbe  case.
The  decree,  therefore,  as  i  apprehend,  coald  not  have
been  intended  to  establish,  that  a  steam  boat  licensed  un-
der the  coasting  act,  was  not  subject  to  the  laws  of  the
state  in  respect  to  mere  internal  vommetce,  or  that  the
■team  boat  privileges  held  under  the  laws  of  this  state
were  not  valid  in  respect  to  a  purely  domestic  or  internal
commerce  on  the  navigable  waters  of  this  state.  The
principle  settled  by  thedecitiion  applies  only  to  tbe  case
where  the  ^ermintof  the  voyage  or  coasting  trade  rested  in
different  states.  The  commerce  or  navigation  protected
by  tbe  coasting  license  must  eoncera  more  states  than
one,  in  order  to  make  it  a  commerce  among  the  states.
A  vessel  employed  in  the  regular  conveyance,  of  goods,
wares  and  merchandise,  or  of  passengen,  from  one  given
port  or  place  within  this  state  to  anotber,  as  for  instance,
between  tbe  cities  of  New- York  and  Albany,  is  as  entire-
ly employed  in  tbe  internal  commerce  of  tbe  itate,  as
it  would  be  if  the  same  vessel  was  employed  in  tbe  sama
regular  business  between  Albany  and  Troy,  or  upon  tbe
canal  between  Schenectady  and  Utica.  A  coasting  li-
cense may,  perhaps,  reasonably,  imply  a  trading  from
port  to  port  within  the  seme  state,  as  part  and  parcel  of
one  continuous  voyage  between  different  states.  But  if  a
coasting  license,  founded  on  the  power  in  congress  to  rc^tl-
ate  eommerce  among  the  several  stales,  be  beU  to  imply  >

, Google


LecWre  XlX-J  THE  UNITED  STATES.  4l3

rigbt  lo  DBTigate  regulatly  and  permeneiilly  between  two
porta  or  places  within  the  same  stale,  and  to  allow  the
vesiel  to  be  confined  eBsentiatly,  and  for  all  busineBS  pur-
poaet,  entirely  to  tbe  waters  of  the  state,  then  there
would  be  DO  distinction  between  commerce  among  the  seve*
ral  states,  and  commerce  confined  entirely  and  exclusively
within  a  state ;  and  all  slate  jurisdiction  over  its  purely
internal  commerce  would  be  utterly  destroyed.  This  was
never  intended  by  the  constitution,  and  it  is  what  tbe  Su-
preme Court  itself  appears  tn  have  disclaimed.'

I  have  now  finished  the  second  general  division  of  this
course  of  lectures  relating  to  the  government  and  constitu-
tional jurisprudence  of  the  United  Sutes.  Though  I  hare
considered  the  subject  in  a  spirit  of  free  and  liberal  in-
quiry, as  the  series  of  decisions  in  the  federal  courts  have
been  brought  under  examination,  I  have  uniformly  felt,
and  it  has  been  my  invariable  disposition  to  inculcate,  a
strong  sentiment  of  deference  and  respect  for  the  judicial
authoritiesof  the  union.  No  point  or  question  of  any  mo-
ment, touching  the  construction  of  the  powers  of  the  go-
vernment, and  which  has  received  an  authoritative  detec-
mination,  has  been  intentionally  omitted.  There  are
several  im|K>rtBnt  constitutional  questions  which  remain
yet  to  be  settled  ;  but  if  we  recur  back  to  the  judicial  an-
nals of  the  United  states  for  the  last  thirty  years,  we  shall
find  that  many  of  the  most  interesting  discussions  which
bad  arisen,  and  which  were  of  a  nature  to  affect  deeply
the  tranquillity  of  the  nation,  haveauRpiciousIy  terminated.
-  Tbe  definition  of  direct  taxes  within  tbe  intendment  of
the  constitution ;  the  extent  of  the  power  of  congress  to  re-
gulate commerce  with  foreign  nations  and  among  ibe  seve-
ral states ;  the  power  to  establish  a  uniform  rule  of  natu-

a  loBroiTD  T.  Tbe  iLtle  oE' Maiylaod.  1^  Wktalon.  419.  Ibc  Ijuprema
Court  oftbe  United  Stale*  decided,  Ilial  n  alate  law  requiriDgererj  im'
'  porter  of  goods  bj  bale  or  pacliaffe.  and  all  otbera  tclliiiE  ttiob  (mxli  bj
wbolemle,  bale,  or  package,  to  take  out  a  liceDie  and  pay  (or  it,  nnder
certaiopenaliieaoTlbrfeitiiret  broeglect  or  refiHa1,>ru  Tepagmot  to
the  oofwtitntioD  of  tbe  United  Slatet,  aod  vnd.  Tor  it  beh'i^w)  lo  (be  con-
(reu  lo  i^;«dats  forei^  cooun^rce,  and  do  date  can  lay  a  dnty  on  iin>


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


414  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Part  H.

FalJEation,  and  UBiform  hwf  on  the  mbjeot  o^  benhrupt-
ciei ;  the  potrer  of  coDgreM  orer  the  militia  of  the  statM  }
their  power  ofeiclunve  legiilation  over  districts  aad  ceded
places ;  the  mass  of  impbed  potrers  incideotal  to  tbe  ez-
presspowers  of  coDgTeM,.«uch  as  the  power  to  institute
and  protect  an  incorporated  bonk,  to  ley  a  general  and  in-
definite embargo,  and  to  give  to  the  United  States,  as  a
ereditor,  priority  of  paymeirt,'have  all  received  elab<»«te
discussion  in  tbe  Supreme  Court,  and  they  have,  to  a  cer-
tain extent,  been  aseenained  aad  defined  by  judicial  de-
eisioDS.  So,  also,  the  extent  of  the  constitutional  prohi-
bitions npon  the  states,  not  tepass  ex^otf  facto  laws ;  and
not  to  pass  laws  impairing  tbe  obligation  of  contracts;
and  nM  to  impede  or  control  by  taxes,  or  grants,  or  any
ether  exercise  of  power,  the  lawful  authorities,  or  institu-
tions, or  rights  and  privileges  depending  on  the  constitu-
tion and  laws  nf  the  United  States,  has  been  explored  and
declared  by  a  Buries  of  determinations,  which  have  contri-
buted, in  an  eminent  decree,  to  secure  and  consolidate  tba
anion,  and  to  elevate  the  dignity  and  enlarge  the  influence
of  tbe  national  government.

The  power  of  the  president  to  remove  all  executive
officers  at  his  will  and  pleasure,  has  been  settled,  not  in-
deed judicially,  but  perhaps  as  efiectually,  by  the  declar-
ed sense  of  the  legislature,  and  the  uniform  acquiescenee
and  practice  of  the  government.  The  absolute  and  un-
.eoDtroilable  efficacy  of  tbe  treaty-making  power,  has  also
been  definitively  established,  after  a  struggle  against  h  od
the  part  of  the  bouse  ofrepresentatives,  which  at  onetime
threatened  to  disturb  the  very  foundations  ef  tbe  consUtB-
tion.

The  comprehenuve  claims  of  tbe  judicial  power,  as  beiRf
(SMitensi  ve  with  all  eases  that  can  arise  under  tbe  constitu-
tion, and  laws,  and  treaties  of  the  union,  have  been  power-
fully and  sucossfully  vindicated.  The  appellate  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Supreme  Court,  controlling  and  causing  to  bow
to  its  supremacy,  the  highest  courts  of  justice  in  the  several
states ;  the  extensive  sway  of  admiralty  and  maritime  juris-
diction ;  tbe  character  of  the  parties  necessary  to  give  cog-
nizaoceto  the  federal  couns;tbefaithaod  credit  which  are
to  be  given  in  each  state  to  tbe  records  and  jodicial  proceed-


Lecture  XIX.]  THE  UNITED  STATES.  415

injIIH  in  e7erf  other  itate ;  the  aor«nigoty  of  congreM  or«r
all  its  tBrritoriM,  without  the  bouads  of  any  particular  state;
aod  theimtire  and  supreme  authority  of  all  the  conHtitu-
tional  powers  of  the  nation,  when  roniinj  in  collision  with
any  of  this  residuary  or  aiserted  powers  ofthe  states,  have
all  been  deelared  (as  we  faftve  seen  in  the  course  of  these
lectures)  by  an  authority  which  claims  our  respect  aitd
obedience.

In  the  first  ten  or  twelve  years  after  the  institutiou  of
the  national  judiciary,  or  from  1790  to  1601,  the  scanty
decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  are  almost  all  to  be  found
in  the  third  volume  of  Dallas's  Reports.  The  first  great
and  grave  question  which  cane  before  them,  was  that  re-
specting the  liability  of  a  state  to  be  sued  by  a  private  cre-
ditor ;  and  it  is  a  little  remarkable,  that  the  oourt,  io  on*
of  its  earliest  decisions,  should  have  assumed  ajorisdie-
tton  which  the  author  of  the  Ftderalitt  had  a  few  years
before  declared  to  be  without  any  colour  of  foundation.
During  the  period  1  have  mentioned,  the  federal  eoarts
were  chiefly  occufHod  with  qaestions  concerning  th«r  ad-
IBiralty  jurisdiction,  and  with  political  and  national  ques-
tions growing  out  of  the  revolutionary  war,  and  the  dan.
gerons  influenee  and  action  of  the  war  of  the  French  re-
Tolotion  upon  the  neutrality  and  peace  of  our  country.  It
%as  during  this  portion  of  our  juridical  history,  that  the
prioeiplea  of  the  doctrines  of  eipatriation,  of  ex  pott  fact*
laws,  of  constitutional  taxes,  and  of  the  construetiftn  and
obligation  of  the  treaty  of  1788  upon  the  rights  of  British
creditors,  were  ably  discusaetl,  and  firmly  declared.

The  reports  of  Mr.  Crannh  commence  with  the  year
1801,  and  the  nine  volumes  of  those  reports  cover  the  bu-
tiness  of  a  very  active  period  down  to  the  year  1815.  The
Supreme  Court  was  occupied  with  many  great  and  mo-
mentous questions,  end  eipecially  during  that  portion  of
the  time  in  which  the  United  States  bad  abandoned  their
neutral,  and  assumed  a  belligerent  character.  It  is  curiotie
to  observe  in  those  respects,  the  rapid  culiivalion  and  com-
plete adojHion  of  the  law  and  leariiinji;  of  ihe  English  iid-

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


416  JURISPRUDENCE  OF  [Parta.

miratty  and  prize  courts,  notwithBtanding  those  courtv
bad  been  the  constant  theme  of  complaint  and  obloqny  in
our  political  diRcuasions  for  the  fifteen  years  preceding  the
war.  In  the  last  three  volumes  ofUr.  Creach,  the  court
wan  conatantly  dealing  with  great  questions,  embracing
the  rights  and  the  policy  of  nations  ;  and  the  prize  and
maritime  law,  not  of  England  only,  but  of  all  the  commer-
cial nations  of  Europe,  was  suddenly  introduced,  and
deeply  and  permanently  interwoven  with  the  municipal
low  of  the  United  States.  We  perceive,  alito,  in  these
volumes,  the  constant  growth  and  accumulation  of  cases
on  commercial  law  generally,  and  relating  to  policies  of
insurance,  negotiable  paper,  mercantile  partnerships,  and
the  various  customs  of  (he  law  merchant.  The  court  was
likewise  busy  in  discussing  and  settling  important  princi>
ptes  growing  out  of  the  limited  range  uf  other  matters  of
fbderal  cognizance,  and  relating  to  the  law  of  evidence,  to
frauds,  trusts,  and  mortgages.  They  were  engaged  also
with  the  doctrine  of  the  limitation  of  suite,  the  contract  of
sale,  and  with  the  more  enlarged  subjects  of  domicil,  of  the
lex  tocit  of  neutrality,  and  of  the  numerous  points  of  inter-
national law.

By  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  Mr.  Wheaton's
reports  in  1816,  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  had
embraced  so  many  topics  of  public  and  municipal  law,
and  those  topics  bad  been  illustrated  by  so  much  talent  and
learning,  that,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  this  coun-
try, we  were  enabled  toperceive  the  broad  foundations  and
rapid  growth  of  a  code  of  national  jurisjirudence.  That
code  has  been  growing  and  improving  ever  since,  and  it  has
now  become  a  solid  and  magnificent  structure;  and  it  seems
destined,  at  no  very  distant  period  of  time,  to  cast  a  shade
over  the  leas  elevated,  and  perhaps  we  must  add,  the  less
attractive  and  ambitious  systems  of  justice  in  the  several
states.  The  most  interesting  parts  of  Mr.  Wheaton's  re-
ports arethosewliicb  contain  the  examination  nf  those  great
constitutional  questions  which  we  have  been  reviewing;  and
I  can  not  conceive  of  any  thing  more  grand  and  imposing  in
the  whole  administration  of  human  justice,  than  the  specta-

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


te«ure  XIX.] THE  UNItEO  STATES.  41T

die  of  (he  Supreme  Court  aitting  in  §olfltnn  judgmeut  upon
the  conflicting  claims  of  the  nations!  and  state  sovereign"'
ties,  and  tranquillizing  alt  jealous  and  angry  paBsioDSt  and '
binding  together  this  great  confederacy  of  states  in  peace
and  harmony,  by  theabiliiy,  the  moderation^  and  the  equity  •
of  its  decisions.

There  are  several  reasons  why  we  may  anticipate  ihfl
stilt  increasing  influence  of  the  federal  goTernmenti  and
the  continual  enlargement  of  the  natioual  system  of  law  in
magnitude  and  ralue.  The  judiciary  of  the  United  States
has  an  adrantage  over  many  of  the  state  courts  in  the
tenure  of  the  oiSce  of  the  judges,  and  the  liberal  and  stable
provisions  for  their  support.  The  United  States  are,  by
these  means,  fairly  entitled  to  command  belter  talents,  and
to  look  for  more  firmness  of  pur|KMe,  greater  iode]>en*
dence  of  action,  and  brighter  displays  of  learning.  The
federal  administration  of  justice  has  a  manifest  superiority
over  that  of  the  individual  states,  in  consequence  of  the
uniformity  of  its  decisions,  and  the  universality  of  their  ap*
plication.  Every  state  court  will  naturally  be  disposed  to
borrow  light  and  aid  from  the  national  courts,  rather  than
from  the  courts  of  other  individual  slates,  which  will  pro-
bably never  be  so  generally  respected  and  understood.
The  states  are  multiplying  so  fast,  and  the  reports  ofthcir
judicial  deciainas  arc  becoming  so  numerous,  that  few  law-
yers will  be  able  nr  willing  to  master  all  the  intricacies
and  anomalies  of  local  law,  existing  lieyond  the  bounda-
ries of  their  own  slate.  Twenty-four  independent  state
courts  of  final  jurisdiction  over  the  same  questions,  arising
upon  the  same  general  code  of  common  and  of  equity  law,
must  necessarily  impair  the  symmetry  of  that  code.

The  danger  to  be  apprehended  is*  that  students  will  not
have  the  courage  to  enter  the  complicated  labyrinth  of  so
many  systems,  and  that  they  will,  of  course,  entirely  ne-
glect them,  end  be  contented  with  a  knowledge  of  the  law
Qf  their  own  state,  and  the  law  of  the  United  Slates,  and
then  resort  for  further  assistance  to  the  never  failing  fuua'
tains  of  European  wisdom.
Vol.  I.  53

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


418  JURISPRUDENCE,  Ste.  ^art  H.

But  though  the  DBlional  judiciary  may  be  deemed  pre-
fiminent  in  the  weight  of  its  influence,  the  authority  of  its
decisioo8,and  in  the  attraction  of  their  materiolB,  there  are
abiiodant  conaiderations  to  cheer  and  animate  ub  in  the
cultivation  of  our  own  local  law.  The  judicial  power  of
the  United  Statea  is  necessarily  limited  to  national  objects.
The  vast  field  of  the  law  of  property,  the  very  ezteosirs
bead  of  equity  jurisdiction,  and  the  principal  rights  and
duties  which  flow  from  our  civil  and  domestic  relations,
fall  within  the  control,  and  we  might  almost  say,  the  ez<
elusive  cogoizance  of  the  state  governments.  We  look
essentially  to  the  state  courts  for  protection  to  all  these
momentous  interesu.  They  touch,  in  their  operation,
every  cord  of  human  sympathy,  end  control  our  best  des-
tinies. It  is  their  province  to  reward,  and  to  punish.
Their  blessings  and  their  terrors  will  accompany  us  to  the
fireside,  and  be  "  in  constant  activity  before  the  public
aye."  The  elementary  princi{JeB  of  the  common  law  are
the  same  in  every  state,  and  equally  enlighten  and  invigi>'
rate  every  part  of  our  countty.  Our  municipal  codes  can
be  made  to  advance  with  equal  steps  with  that  of  tbe  na-
tion, in  discipline,  in  wisdom,  and  in  lustre,  if  the  state  go-
venimentB  (as  they  ought  in  all  honest  policy)  will  only
render  equal  patronage  and  security  to  the  administratioa
Injustice.  Tbe  true  interests  and  the  permanent  freedom
of  this  country  require,  that  the  jurisprudence  of  tbe  indi-
vidual states  should  be  cultivated,  cherished,  and  exalted,
and  the  dignity  and  reputation  ofthe  state  authorities  sus-
tained with  becoming  pride.  In  their  subordinate  rela-
tion to  the  United  States,  they  should  endeavour  to  dis-
charge the  duty  which  they  owe  to  the  latter,  without  for-
getting the  respect  which  they  owe  to  themselves.  In  the
appropriate  language  of  Sir  William  Blackstone,  and
which  he  applied  to  the  people  of  his  own  counliy,  they
should  be  "  loyal,  j>et  free  ;  obedient,  and  yet  -indepen-
dent."


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


///y


PART  III.


«F  THE  VARIOUS  SOURCES  OF  THE  MUNICIPAL
LAW  OF  THE  SEVERAL  STATES.


I  LECTURE  XX.

OF  STATUTE  LAW.

HtJMCiFAL  law  is  a  rule  of  ciril  conduct,  prMeribed  by
the  suiHreme  power  in  a  atate.  It  ia  composed  of  written
Bad  unwrilLen,  or  statute  and  commoa  law.  Statute  law
is  the  express  written  will  of  the  legislature,  rendered  au-
thentic by  certain  prescribed  forms  and  solemnities.

It  is  a  principle  in  the  English  law,  that  an  act  of  parlia-
ment, delivered  in  clear  and  iDtelligible  terms,  cannot  be
questioned,  or  its  authority  controlled  in  any  court  of  jus>
tice.  "  It  is,"  says  Sir  William  Blackstone,  "the  exer--
cise  of  the  highest  authority  that  the  kingdom  acbnow-
ledges  upon  earth."  When  it  is  said  in  the  books,  ihata
statute  eontrary  to  natural  equity  and  reason,  or  repug-
qant,  or  impossible  to  be  performed,  is  void,  the  cases  aro
understood  to  mean,  that  the  courts  are  to  give  the  statute
a  reasonable  construction.  They  will  not  readily  pre-
sume, out  of  respect  and  duty  to  the  lawgiver,  that  any
very  unjust  or  absurd  consequence  was  within  the  contem-
plation of  the  law.  But  if  it  should  happen  to  be  too  pal-
pable in  its  direction  to  admit  of  but  one  construction,  there


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


426  SOURCES  OF  [Part  III;

ii  no  doubt  id  the  English  law,  as  to  the  binding  efficacy
of  the  fftatut«.  The  will  of  the  legiilature  a  the  Bupreme
law  of  the  laodf  and  demands  perfect  obedieaee.'

But  while  we  admit  thisconclusioo  of  the  English  law.
we  cannot  but  admire  the  intrepidity  and  powerful  sense
of  justice  which  led  Lord  Coke,  when  chief  justice  of  the
K-  B.  to  declare,  as  he  did  in  Doctor  Bonham't  case,''  that
tbe  eommun  law  doth  control  acts  of  parliament,  and  ad-
judges them  roid  when  against  common  right  and  reason.
The  same  sense  of  justice  and  freedom  of  opinion,  led
Lord  Chief  Justice  Hobart,  in  Day  t.  Soviet,*:  to  insist
that  an  act  of  parliament  made  against  natural  equity,  as
to  make  a  man  Judge  in  his  own  case,  was  void  ;  and  in-
duced Lord  Chief  Justice  Holt  to  say,  iu  the  case  of  the
City  of  London  v.  Wood,^  that  the  observation  of  Lord
Coke  was  not  extravagant,  but  was  a  very  reasonable  and
true  saying.  Perhaps  what  Lord  Coke  said  in  his  re-
ports, on  this  point,  may  have  been  one  of  the  many  things
that  King  James  alluded  to.  when  he  snid,  that  in  Coke's
Reports  there  were  many  dangerous  conceits  of  his  own
littered  for  law,  to  tbe  prejudice  of  the  crown,  parliameat,
and  sufojecta.c

The  principle  in  the  English  government,  that  the  par-
liament ia  omnipotent,  does  not  prevail  in  the  United  States'
In  this,  and  all  other  countries  where  there  is  a  written  cfm-
■titution,  designating  the  powers  and  duties  of  the  legisla-
tive, as  well  as  of  the  other  deparimenis  of  the  govern-
ment, an  actofthe  legislature  maybe  void  as  being  against
tbe  constitution.  It  must  conform,  in  (be  first  place,  to  tbe
eonstttutioo  of  tbe  United  States,  and  then  to  tbe  subordi-
nate  constitution  of  its  own  state,  and  if  it  infringes  the  pro*


a  I  B'adu.  Cm.  »1.  IM.  185. OiriOiaiiU  neU  to  I  Blackt.  Cowt.  4I,

fi  aCa.  IIS.

t  «•«■  87.

d  it  Mod.  6B1.

•  ffiKonU  7eri«,vol.  <,  p.  itfi.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XX.]  MUNiCIPAI.  LAW.  421

visions  of  either,  il  is  so  far  roiO. The  courts  of  jusfic*
have  a  right,  and  are  in  tluty  bound,  to  bring  every  law  to
the  test  of  the  constitution,  and  to  regard  the  constitution,
first  ofthe  Uaited  Stales,  and  then  of  their  own  state,  as
the  paramount  or  supreme  law,  to  which  every  inferior  or
derivative  power  and  regulation  roust  conform. The  con-
stitution is  the  act  of  the  people,  speaking  in  their  origi-
nal charaaer,  and  defining  the  permanent  conditions  of
the social  alliance ;  and there  can  he  no  doubt  on  the
point  with  us,  that  every  act  of  the  legislative  power,  con-
trary to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  the  constitution,
Is  absolutely  null  and  void.  The  judicial  department  is  the
proper  power  in  the  government  to  determine  whether  a
statute  be  or  be  noi  constitutional. The  interpretation  or
construction  of  the  constitution,  is  as  much  a  judicial  set,
and  requires  the  exercise  of  the  same  legal  discretion,  aa
the  interpretation  or  construction  of  a  law. To  contend
that  the  courts  of  justice  must  obey  the  requisitions  of  an
act  of  the  legislature,  when  it  appears  to  them  to  have
been  passed  in violation  of  the  constitution,  would  be  to
contend,  that  the  law  was  superior  to  the  constitution,  and
that  the  jud^iei  had  no  right  to  look  into  it,  and  to  regard
' it  as  the  paramount  law. It  would  be  rendering  the  pow-
er of  the  agent  greater  than  that  of  his  principal,  and  be
declaring,  that  the  will  of  only  one  concurrent  and  co-or-
dinate department of  the  subordinate  authorities  under
the  constitution,  was  absolute  over  the  other  depart menis,
and  competent  to  control,  according  to  its  own  will  and
pleasure, the  whole  fabric  of  the  goveinroeni,  and  the
fundamental  lawa  on  which  it  rested. It  would  be  per-
fectly idle  to  attempt  to  impose  restraints  upon  the  exer-
cise of  the  legislative  power,  if  the  constilutionnl  provi-
sions were  left  without  any  power  io  the  government  to
guard  and  enforce  them. From  the  mass  of  powers  ne-
cessarily vested  in  the  legislature,  and  the  active  and  so-
Tereign  nature  of  those  powers  ;  from  the  numerous  hor
dies  of  which  the  legislature  is  composed,  the  popular  sym-
pathies which  it  excites,  and  its  immediate  dependence
upon  the  people  by  the  neani  of  frequent  periodical  elec-

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


422  SOURCES  OF  [fart  tU.

tions,  it  fbllowB,  tfaaf  ibe  Icgislstive  departmeDt  of  the  go-
v«rDroeat  will  have  a  decided  sufKriority  of  influence.  It
it  constantly  acting  ujion  all  the  great  intercBtn  in  society,
'  and  agitating  its  fao(>e«  and  feara.  It  is  liiible  to  be  cod-
atantly  swayed  by  popular  prejudice  and  passion,  and  it  ia
difficult  to  keep  it  from  pressing  with  injurious  weight  up-
on the  constitutional  rights  and  privileges  of  the  other  de-
partments. An  independent  judiciary,  venernble  by  ita
gravity,  ita  dignity,  and  iU  wisdom,  and  deliberating  with
entire  seranity  and  moderation,  is  peculiarly  fitted  for  the
eialted  duty  of  expounding  the  constitulion,  and  trying
the  validity  of  statutes  by  that  standtrd.  It  is  only  by  the
free  exercise  of  this  power  that  courts  of  justice  are  ena-
bled to  repel  assaults,  and  to  protect  erery  part  of  the  go-
vernment, and  every  niemberof  the  community,  from  un-
due and  destructive  inuovatioot  upon  their  chartered
rigbtfl.

It  has  accordingly  become  a  settled  principle  in  the  le-
gal polity  of  this  country,  that  it  belongs  to  the  judicial
power,  aaa  matter  of  right  and  of  duty,  to  declare  every
act  of  the  legislature  made  in  violation  of  the  constitution,
or  (tf  any  prorifiion  of  it,  null  and  void.  The  progress  of
this  doctrine,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  discuss-
ed and  established,  is  worthy  of  notice.  It  had  been  very
ably  examined  in  the  Fedrralitti'  and  its  solidity  vindica-
ted by  unanswerable  arguments ;  but  it  was  not  until  the
year  1792  that  it  seems  to  have  received  a  judicial  consi-
deration.

In  Hayfmm't  ease,  which  came  before  the  Circuit  Court
of  the  United  States  for  the  district  of  New- York,  in  April,
1791,  the  judges  proceeded  with  the  utmost  delicacy  and
caution  to  declare  an  act  of  congress,  assigning  ministerial
duties  to  the  circuit  courts,  to  be  unconstitutional.  The
court  laid  down  the  position,  that  congress  cannot  constitu-
tionally assign  to  the  judicial  power  any  duties  which  are
Bot  strictly  judicial ;  and  that  the  act  io  question  was  not


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lactara  XX.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  tiS

Migatovj  apoo  the  court.  But  they  neveritielew  pro-
ceeded vdluntdrUy  and  ex  gratia  as  commiissioners  to  exe-
cute the  duties  of  the  act.

In  Pnonsylvania  and  North  Carolina,  the  circuit  courtc
oftbe  United  States,  within  those  districts  equally  held  tbe
act  not  binding  upon  them,  because  the  legislature  had  no
right  or  power  to  assign  to  them  duties  not  judicial;  but
they  were  oot  so  accommodating  as  the  Circuit  Court  of
New- York,  for  they  declined  to  act  under  the  law  in  any
capacity.^

In  1792,  the  Supreme  Court  of  South  Carolina,  in  the
case  of  Bowman  v.  MiddUton,^  went  further,  and  set  aside
an  act  oftbe  colony  legislature,  as  beingagainst  common
right  and  tbe  principles  of  magna  charla,  for  it  took  away
the  freehold  uf  one  man  and  vested  it  in  another)  witliont
any  compensation,  or  any  previous  attempt  to  determine
the  right.  They  declared  the  act  to  be  ipso  facto  void,  and
that  no  length  of  lime  could  give  it  validity.  This  was  not
strictly  a  question  arising  upon  any  special  provision  of  the
■tate  consUtution,  but  thecourt  proceeded  upon  those  great
fundamental  prini-iplcs  which  support  all  government  and
property,  and  which  have  been  supposed  fay  many  judges
in  England  to  be  sufficient  to  check  and  control  the  regu-
lations of  an  act  of  parliament.  Tbe  next  case  in  which
tbe  power  oftbe  judiciary  to  disregard  or  set  aside  a  statute
for  being  repugnant  to  tbe  constitution,  was  one  that  came
before  Judge  Paierson,  at  Philadelphia,  in  April,  1795*<i
He  asserted  tba  duty  oftbe  court,  and  tbe  paramount  au-
thority oftbe  constitution,  in  remarkably  clear  and  decided
language.  Tliat  was  a  case  of  an  act  of  Pennsylvania,
which  he  held  to  be  unconstitutional,  and  not  binding.  Ho
insisted,  that  the  constitution  was  certain  and  fixed,  and
contained  thr  permanent  will  of  the  people,  and  was  the
supreme  Ian  ,  and  paramount  to  tbe  power  of  the  legisla*


a  i  Ot'lai,  4t0,  411.  412.  b  I  Sri ji,  253.

c  Vauliornv.  Dorraoce,  9  rallai,  304.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


424  SOURCES  0¥  [Port  UI.

ture,  and  could  on\j  be  reroked  or  altered  hj  tbe  authority
that  rndde  it;  that  the  legislature  wa§  the  creature  nf  the
const  it  uti  on,  and  oired  iu  eiistence  to  the  c«nBtitutioD,aiicl
derived  its  poweri  from  the  constitution,  aod  all  its  acta
must  be  conformable  to  it,  or  else  thry  will  be  void.

Tbe  aame  question  afterwards  arose  before  the  Supreme
Court  of  South  Carolina,  id  the  case  of  Lindsay  t.  The
Ckarlaton  ComaiMnonen  f»  and  the  power  of  the  legisla-
ture to  tdbe  private  property  for  necessary  public  purpo-
ses, as  for  a  public  street,  was  freely  discussed;  and  though
the  judges  were  equally  dirided  on  the  questioD  whether  it
was  a  case  in  which  the  party  was  entitled  to  compensa-
tion, those  who  held  him  so  Nititled,  held  also,  that  the
law  was  unconstitutional  and  inoperative,  sntil  the  com-
pensation was  made.  The  judges,  in  exerdsing  that  fargb
authority,  claimed  to  be  only  the  administrators  of  the
.  public  will,  and  the  law  was  void,  not  becituse  the  judges
had  any  control  orer  tbe  legislative  powar,  but  because  tbe
will  of  the  people,  declared  in  the  constitution,  was  para-
mount to  that  oftheir  representatives  ei  pressed  in  tbe  law.

Hitherto,  this  question,  as  we  have  s^n,  was  confined
to  one  or  two  of  the  state  courts,  4ind  to  tbe  subordinate,  or
circuit  courts  of  the  United  States.  Bu^,  in  Marbwy  r.
MadUon,**  the  subject  was  brought  und^  tbe  considera-
tion of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  and  re-
ceived a  clear  and  elaborate  discussion.  iTbe  power  and
duty  of  the  judiciary  ta  disregard  an  unconstitutional  act
of  congress,  or  of  any  state  legislaturet  wWe  declared  ia
an  argument  approaching  to  the  precision  and  certainty  of
a  mathematical  demonstration.  \

The  question,  said  thechief  justice,  was,  w^etherao  act
repugnant  to  the  constitution,  can  become  ^  law  <^the
land,  andit  was  one  deeply  interesting  to  the  United  States.
The  powers  of  the  l^islature  are  defined  and  liinited  bya

a  a  Soy,  31.  6  I  Crtmch,  137.\


tvGoogIc


Lecture  XX.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4SD

vritten  conslilutioD.  But  to  what  purpone  ia  that  limila'
tion,  if  thoHe  limits  may  at  any  time  be  passed  ?  The  dis-
tiaction  betvreea  a  government  with  limited  and  unlimited
powers  is  abolished,  if  those  limits  du  not  confine  the  per>
Bons  on  whom  they  are  imposed,  and  if  acta  prohibited,
and  acts  allowed,  areof  equal  obligation,  If  the  constitu*
tion  does  not  control  any  legislative  act  repugnant  to  it,
then  the  lagislature  may  alter  the  constitution  by  aa  ordi-
nary act.  The  theory  of  every  government,  with  a  writ'
ten  constitution,  forming  the  fundamental  and  paramount
law  of  the  nation,  must  bo,  that  ao  act  of  the  legislature
repugnant  to  the  constitution  is  void.  If  void,  it  cannot
bind  the  courts,  and  oblige  (hem  to  give  it  effect ;  for  tbia
would  be  to  overthrow,  in  fact,  what  naa  established  ia
theory,  and  to  make  that  operative  as  law  which  is  not
law.  It  is  the  province  and  the  duty  of  the  judicial  de-
partmeitt,  to  say  what  the  law  is ;  and  if  two  laws  con-
flict with  each  other,  to  decide  on  the  operation  of  each.
So,  if  the  law  be  ia  opjMsition  to  the  constitution,  and
both  apply  to  a  particular  case,  the  court  must  either  de-
cide the  case  conformably  to  the  law,  disregarding  the
constitution,  or  conformably  to  the  constitution,  disre-
garding the  law.  If  the  constitution  be  superior  to  an  act
of  the  legislature,  the  courts  must  decide  between  these
conflicting  rules,  and  how  can  they  close  their  eyes  on  the
constitution  and  see  only  the  law  ?

This  great  question  may  be  regarded  as  now  finally  aet-^
lied  ;  and  I  consider  it  to  be  one  of  the  most  interesting
pointsiafavourof  constitutional  liberty,  and  of  the  security
of  property  in  this  country,  that  has  ever  been  judiciatry
determined."  We  never  had  any  doubt  or  difliculiy  in  this
state,  in  respect  to  the  competency  of  the  courts  to  declare
a  statute  unconstitutional,  when  it  clearly  appeared  to  be
•o. Thus,  in  the  case  of  The People  v.  Plattfi  the  Su-

a  8«e  tliB  deeuion  id  tbe  State  Conrti  to  tb«  nnw  pointi  in  I  JV*.  B.
Rtp.  199.  IS  Stg.  Sf  R.  330.  339.  CharltonU  Bep.  116.  1  tiar-  ^  /.
tse.  1  Hayw.iS.  SBijrw- 310.  371.  IJIfurp&jr,  5S.  3  Dttiauu.  i^^.
I  Kep.  Cod-  C.  8.  C.  907.

fi  IT  JolbMon,  195.

Vol.  I.  54

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


4t6:  SOURCES  OF  [PartDL

premeConrtkeld,  that  certain  statutM'affecting  the  right
frf*  Z.  Piatt,  and  hU  assigns,  to  the  exclusire  enjoyment  of
the  river  Saranae,  nere  in  violation  of  vested  rigfait  un-
der his  patent,  and  u  far  the  court  held  ihem  to  be  nn-
eoaatitutional,  inoperative,  and  void.  The  control  which
the  judicial  power  of  this  state  had,  until  the  year  1823,
over  the  passing  of  laws,  by  the  institution  oflhe  amtuU
ofrtvinon,  anticipated,  in  a  great  degree,  the  necessity
ofthis  exercise  of  duty.  A  lawcotituioinguDconMitution-
al  provisions,  was  not  likely  to  escape  the  notice  and  ob-
jection of  the  council  of  revision;  and  the  records  of  that
body  will  show,  that  many  a  bill  that  had  heedlessly  pesg-
ed  the  two  houses  of  the  legislature,  uas  objected  to,  and
defeated,  oo  constitutional  grounds.  The  records  to  which
I  refer  are  replete  withtheassertionof  salutary  and  sound
principles  of  public  law  and  constitutional  policy,  and  they
will  forever  remain  a  monument  of  the  wisdom,  firmnesfl»
and  integrity  of  the  council.

A  statute,  nben  duly  made,  takes  effect  from  its  dote
when  no  time  is  fixed,  and  this  is  now  the  settled  rule.  It
was  so  declared  by  the  Supreme  Court^of  the  United  States
in  Malthe%Bt  v.  Zane,^  and  it  was  likewise  so  adjudged  in
the  Circuit  Court  in  Nassachusetts  in  the  case  of  the  brig
^nti.''  I  apprehend,  ihatj  the  same  rule  prevails  in  the
Gourtsof  this  state,  and  that  it  eaonol  be  admitted  that  a
•tatute  shall,  by  any  fiction  w  relation,  have  any  effect  be-
fbra  it  was  actually  pasaad.  A  retroactive  sutule  would
partakoin  its  character  of  the  mischief  of  an  txpottfaetit
law,  as  to  all  cases  of  crimes  and  penalties ;  and  in  every
other  cose  relating  to  contracts  or  property,  it  weuM  b«
agaitist  every  sound  principle.  It  ivould  come  within  the
reach  of  the  doctrine,  that  a  statute  is  not  to  have  a  retro-
spective effect ;  and  which  doctrine  was  very  much  discuss-
ed in  the  case  of  Dath  y.  VankUeck,'''  and  shown  to  be
founded,  not  only  in  English  laiv,  but  on  the  principles  of
general  jurisprudence.


ml  Whialon,  18i^  ilOmUuitn,n.  c7J«AiiMn,4


t,Goo(^lc


Lecture  XX.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  «7

The  English  rule  formerly  was,  that  if  no  period  was
fixed  by  llie  statute  itself,  it  took  effect  by  relation,  from
the  first  day  of  the  sessioa  id  vf  hich  the  act  was  passed,
and  which  might  be  some  weeks,  if  not  months,  before  the
act  received  the  rojal  sanction,  or  eren  before  it  had  ever
been  introduced  into  parliament."  This  was  an  extraor-
dinary instance  of  the  doctrine  of  relation  working  frrosi
injustice  and  absurdity ;  and  yet  we  find  the  rule  declared,
and  aniformly  adhered  to,, from  the  time  of  Hen.  'VI.'>  All
the  judges  agreed,  in  the  case  of  Partridge  v.  Strange,  in
the  6  Etiw.  V1.0  that  the  statute  was  to  be  accounted  in
law  a  perfect  act  from  the  first  day  of  the  session  ;  and  all
persons  were  to  be  punished  for  an  offence  done  against  it
after  the  firrt  day  of  the  session,  unless  a  certain  time  was
appointed  when  the  act  should  takn  effect.  In  the  case  <tf
The  Sing  v.  TTiurit»n,^  this  doctrine  of  carrying  a  statute
back  by  relation  to  the  first  day  of  the  session,  was  ad-
mitted in  the  K.  B.;  though  the  consequence  of  it  was  to
render  an  act  murder,  which  would  not  hnve  been  so  witb-
Dut  such  relation.  The  case  of  the  Atlomry  General  r.
Panter,*  is  another  strong  instance  of  the  application  of
this  rigorous  and  unjust  rule  of  the  common  law,  even  at
so  late  and  enlightened  a  period  of  the  law  an  the  year
1773.  An  avtforlayinga  duty  on  the  exportation  of  rice
thereafler  to  be  exported,  received  the  royal  assent  on  the
2fhh  of  June  1767,  and  on  the  lOth  of  June  of  that  year,
the  defendants  had  exported  rice.  After  the  act  pnaeed,
a  duty  of  1 15  pounds  was  demanded  upon  the  prior  ez-
porltttion,  and  it  was  adjudged  la  the  Iri^h  Court  of
Exchequer  to  be  payable.  The  cause  was  carried
by  appeal  to  the  British  House  of  Lords,  on  thr  groiiiid  of
the palpable injustice  of  punishiog  the  party for  an


a  4Jiut.  3».

b  33  Hen-  yi.  18.  Bro,  ExpoiUioit-dei  Ttrnu,  33.

e  I  Blow  19.

d  1  £>tr.  ei.

«  e  Brv.  P.  C.  St3.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


428  SOURCES  OF  [Part  Ut.

act  innocent  and  lawful  when  it  wis  done;  but  the
decree  wea  affirmed^  upon  the  opinion  of  ibe  twelv«
judges,  that  the  statute,  by  legal  relation,  com-
menced from  the  first  day  of  the  eesdion.  The  K.  B.  also,
in  Latleii  V.  Holmes,^  considered  the  rule  to  be  too  well
settled  to  he  shaken,  and  that  the  court  could  not  take
notice  of  the  great  hardahi|i  of  the  case  The  voice  of
reason  at  last  prevailed,  and  by  the  statute  of  33  Geo.  HI.
c  13.  it  was  declared,  tliat  statutes  are  to  have  effect  only
from  the  time  they  received  the  royal  nssenl,  and  the
former  rule  was  abolished,  io  the  words  of  ihe  statute,  bf
reason  of  "  itt>  great  and  manifest  injustice."

There  is  a  good  deal  of  bnrdsbip  in  the  rule  as  it  dow
stands,  both  h«re  and  in  England  ;  for  a  statute  is  to  ope-
rate from  the  very  diiy  it  passes,  if  ibe  law  itself  does  not
establish  the  tinte.  It  is  impossitile,  in  any  state,  and
particularly  in  such  a  wide  spreud  dominion  as  that  of  the
United  States,  to  have  notice  of  thn  existence  of  Ihe  law,
until  some  time  after  it  has  panned.  It  would  be  no  more
than  reasonable  and  Just,  tliat  the  statute  should  not  be
deemed  to  operate  upon  the  pcr»>oiis  and  property  of  in-
dividuals, or  impose  pains  and  penalties  for  acts  done  in
contravention  of  it,  until  the  law  was  duty  promulgoted.
The  rule,  however,  is  deemed  to  be  fixed  beyond  the
|>ower  of  judicial  control,  and  no  time  is  allowed  for  the
publication  of  the  law  before  it  operates,  when  the
statute  itself  gires  no  time.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  the
brig  Ann,'^  the  vessel  was  libelled  and  condemned  for
sailing  from  Newburyport  in  Massachusetts,  on  Ihe  1 2tb
of  January,  1808,  contrary  to  the  act  of  congress  of  the
dth  of  January,  1808,  though  it  was  admitted  the  act
was  Dot  known  in  Newburyport  on  the  day  the  brig
sailed.  The  court  admitted  that  the  objection  to  the  for-
feiture of  the  brig  was  founded  on  the  principles  of  good
■ense  and  natui  al  rquiiy  ;  and  that  unless  such  time  be  al-
lowed as  would  enable  the  party,  with  reasonable  dilligence,

■  4  JWm,  «60.  6  1  GaWfSii,  M.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture XX.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  53»

to  aKeertaia  the  existeace  of  the  law,  an  ianooent  man  mi^t
be  puaUhed  id  hia  person  and  proiierty,  fur  an  act  which
was  innocent  for  au; ht  he  knew,  or  could,  by  pouibility,
have  known,  when  be  did  it.*

The  code  Napoleon^  adopted  ibe  true  rule  on  this  sub*
.  ject.  It  declared,  thai  laws  were  binding  from  the  moment
their  promulgation  could  be  known,  and  tbat  the  promul-
gation should  be  considered  as  known  in  the  department  of
the  imperial  residence  one  day  after  that  promulgation,  and
in  each  of  the  other  departments  of  tbe  French  empire,
afler  thi;  expiration  of  the  same  spaceof  time,  augmented
by  as  many  days  us  there  were  distances  of  twenty  league!
between  the  seat  of  government  and  the  place.

If  tlifl  siatute  be  constitutional  in  its  character,  and  faa*
duly  gone  into  operation,  the  next  inquiry  ia  respecting  ita
meaning;  and  this  lends  us  to  a  coosiderationof  tbe  esta*
blished  rules  of  construction,  by  which  its  sense  and  opera-
tion are  to  be  undtirsiood.

There  iaa  material  distinction  between  public  and  pri-
vate statutes,  and  the  books  abound  with  cases  explaining
this  distinction  iit  its  application  to  particular  statutes.  It
is  sometimes  ditficult  tii  draw  the  line  between  a  public  and
private  act,  for  statutes  frequently  relate  to  nielters  and
things  that  are  partly  public  and  partly  pritaie.  Generally
■peaking,  statutes  are  public;  and  a  private  statute  may
rather  be  considered  as  an  exception  to  a  general  rule.  It
operates  u|>on  particular  individuals,  or  upon  private  per-
sons. It  is  said  not  to  bind  or  include  strangers  in  interest
to  its  provisions,  and  they  are  not  bound  to  take  twtice  of
a  private  act,  even  though  there  be  nogeueral  saving  clause
of  the  rights  of  third  persons.  This  is  a  safe  and  jiist  rule
of  construction  ;  and  it  was  adopted  by  the  English'  courts
in  very  early  times,  and  does  great  credit  totbeir  liberality


a  Judge  LiTJngtton.  in  tSlO,  held  thai  Ihe  ernbarKolaw  olDtewsAtr,
I807,didiiotoperBieupoDa  veuel  wbicbniledfrom  Georgia  on  the  16th
of  Janaai7, 1008,  befbiD  notice  of  tbe  act  bad  arrired.  I  raintU  Ktp.  IS.

b  Art.  I.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


430  SOURCES  OF  tl*»t  IH.

■od  sfMrit  of  jiistiee.*  It  is  supported  bj  the  opinion  o^
Sir  Matthew  Hale  iu  Luey  v.  Lttingtnn,^  where  be  lays
down  the  rule  to  he,  that  though  efery  man  be  bo  &r  •
part;  to  a  private  act  of  parliament,  as  not  to  gainsay  it,
yet  he  ii  not  bo  far  a  party  aB  to  (^ive  up  hia  interest.  To
take  the  rose  stated  by  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  suppoae,
a  statute  recites,  that  vheretu  then  viom  a  contrmertif
eottcemiag  land  between  A,  and  B.,  and  enaeti  that  A.  $haU
enjoy  it,  this  wuuld  nut  bind  the  interest  of  third  persons  ib
that  land,  because  tbey  are  not  strictly  parties  to  the  act,
but  strangers,  and  it  would  be  manifest  injustice  that  the
Matute  should  affect  them.  This  rule,  as  to  the  limitaticni
of  Ihe  operation  of  prirate  statutes,  was  adopted  by  the
Supreme  Court  of  this  state,  and  afterwards  by  the  Court
of  Errors,  in  Jackton  v.  CatUns  Prirate  statutes  are  like*
wise  placed  under  another  limitation.  The  courts  of  jus-
tice are  bound,  ex  officiii,  to  take  notice  of  public  acts  with-
out their  being  pleaded,  for  they  are  part  of  the  general
law  of  the  land,  which  all  perflons,  and  particularly  rho
judges,  are  presumed  to  know  ;  but  they  are  not  bound  to
take  notice  of  prirate  acts,  unless  they  be  specially  plead-
ed, and  shown  in  proof,  by  the  party  claiming  the  effect  ot
them.

The  title  of  the  act,  and  the  preamble  to  the  act,  are,
strictly  speaking,  no  parts  of  it.  They  may  serve  to  show
thd  general  scope  and  purport  of  the  act,  and  the  induce-
ments which  led  to  its  enaetmeot.  They  may,  at  times,  aid
in  the  construction  of  it;  but  generally  tbey  are  very  loosely
and  careleBsly  inserted,  and  are  not  safe  expositors  of  the
law.  The  title  frequently  alludes  to  the  subject  matter  <^
the  act  only  in  general  or  sweeping  terms,  or  it  alludes  only
to  a  part  of  the  multifarious  matter  of  which  the  statute  is
composed. The  title,  aa  it  was  observed  in  United  Statet


a  37  Htrt.  VI.  t6. Bro.  Porfiamenl,  pi.  W. BommIPi caie, U
cm/  iS  Elix.  cited  in  Bumngbm'*  cue,.  8  Co.  138.  a.
b  I  P'tnt.  I7S.
atJ<^mmURtp.M9. 9  JohuonU  Rip.  iVi.  B.  C.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XX  ]  MUNICIPAL  LAW  4Sl

T,  Fither,*  when  taken  in  connexion  with  ether  parts,  may
assist  io  reoioving  ambiguities  where  the  intent  is  not
plain ;  for  when  the  mind  labours  to  discover  the  intrntion
ofthe  legislature,  it  seizes  every  thing,  even  the  tide,
from  which  aid  can  be  derived.  So,  the  preamble  may
be  reported  to  io  order  to  asrenaio  ibe  inducemeDls  to  the
making  ofthe  statute  ;  but  when  the  words  ofthe  enact-
ing clause  are  clear  and  positive,  recourse  must  not  ba
had  to  the  preamble.  Notwiihsiaadinj;  that  Lord  Coket>
eonnders  the  preamble  as  a  key  to  open  the  understand-
ing ofthe  statute,  Hr.  Barriogton,  in  his  Obtervationi  on
tkt  StaUUei,"  has  shown,  by  many  instances,  that  a  statute
frequently  recites  that  which  was  not  the  real  occasion  of
the  law,  or  states  that  doubts  existed  as  to  the  law,  when,
in  fact,  none  had  existed.  The  true  rule  is,  as  was  de-
clared by  Hr.  J.  Bullar  in  Cre^igntf  v.  IVittetwm,^  that
the  preamble  may  be  resorted  to  in  restraint  of  the  gene-
rality of  the  enacting  clause,  when  it  be  inconvenient  if
not  restrained,  or  it  may  be  resorted  to  in  explanation  of
the  enacting  clause  if  it  be  doubtful.  This  is  the  whole
extent  of  the  influence  ofthe  title  and  preamble  in  the
construction  of  the  statute.  The  true  meaning  of  the  sta-
tute is  generally  and  properly  to  be  sought  from  the  body
of  the  act  itself.  But  such  is  the  imperfection  of  human
language,  and  the  want  of  technical  skill  in  the  makers
ofthe  law,  that  statutes  often  give  occasion  to  the  most
perplexing  and  distressing  doubts  and  discussions,  arising
from  the  ambiguity  that  attends  (hem.  It  requires  gteat
experience,  as  well  as  the  command  of  a  perspicuous  die
tion,  to  frame  a  law  in  such  clear  and  precise  terms  as  to
secure  it  from  ambiguous  expressions,  and  from  all  doubt
and  criticism  upon  its  meaning.

It  is  an  established  rule  in  the  expoailiun  of  statutes,  that
the  intention  of  the  lawgiver  is  to  be  deduced  from  a  view
ofthe  whole,  and  of  every  part  of  a  statute,  taken  and


a  a  Crmch,  388.  6  Co.  Lilt.  79.  n.

c  P.  300.  d  i  Term,  163-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


40t  SOURCES  OF  [Part  ItT,

eomparfld  together.  The  real  intention,  when  accurately*
aflceitained,  will  always  prevail  over  ihe  literal  senie  of
terms.  When  the  words  are  not  explicit,  the  intention  ia
to  be  collected  from  the  occasion  and  neceaaity  of  the  law,
from  the  miachief  felt)  and  the  remedy  in  view ;  and  the
intention  ia  to  be  taken  or  presumed,  ao^^rding  to  what  is
consonant  to  reason  and  good  discretion.  These  rules,  by
which  the  mgta  of  the  law,  according  to  Plowde->  ■  have
ever  been  guided  in  aeeking  for  the  intention  of  the  legis-
lature, are  maxima  of  sound  iaterpretatioD,  which  have
been  accumulated  by  the  experience,  and  ratified  by  the
approbation  of  ages.

The  words  of  a  statute  are  to  be  taken  in  their  natural
and  ordinary  aignification  and  import ;  and  if  technical
words  are  used,  they  are  to  be  taken  in  a  technical  sense.  A
saving  clause  in  a  statute  is  to  be  rejected  when  it  is  di-
rectly repugnant  to  the  purview  or  body  of  the  act,  and
could  not  stand  without  rendering  the  act  inconsistent  and
destructive  of  itself. I>  Lord  Coke,  ia  Alton  Wooi^t  ease,«
gives  a  particular  illustration  of  this  rule,  by  a  case  which
would  be  false  doctrine  with  us,  but  which  serves  to  show
the  force  of  the  rule.  Thus,  if  the  manor  of  Dale  be  by
express  words  given  by  statute  to  the  king,  saving  tfaa
right  of  all  persons  Interested  therein,  or  if  the  statute
vesta  the  lands  of  A.  in  the  king,  saving  the  r^hta  of  A.,
the  interest  of  the  owner  is  not  saved,  inasmuch  aa  the
saving  clause  is  repugnant  to  the  grant ;  and  if  it  vera
allowed  to  operate,  it  would  render  the  grant  vain  and
nugatory.  But  there  is  a  distinction  in  some  of  the  books
between  a  saving  clause  and  a  proviso  in  'the  statute,
thoug  the  reason  of  the  distinetinn  is  not  very  apparent.
It  was  held  by  all  the  barons  of  the  exchequer,  in  the
case  of  The  Attorney  Oentral  v.  The  Governor  and  Com-
pany of  Chehea  Water  Works,*  that  where  the  proviso
of  an  act  ol^  parliament  was  directly  repugnant  to  the  pur-


a  Ptoicd-  Rfp.  p.  305.  6  Plowd.  MS. E  TfaunbM,  13 — tS.

r.  I  Co.  4'.  a.  ft  Filzg.  195. 4  Ow.  II.


l,,-c,ih,G00glc


UciureXX.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  493

view  of  it,  the  proviso  should  stand  and  be  held  a  repeal
of  the  purriew,  because  it  s|>eak8  the  last  intention  of  the
lawgiver.  It  was  conifiared  to  a  will,  in  winch  the  latter
part,  if  iaconaistent  with  the  former,  supersiedes  and  revokes
tt.  But  it  may  be  remarked,  u|>on  this  case  in  Fitzgibbmt,
that  a  proviso  repugnant  to  tho  purview  of  the  statute,
renders  it  equally  nugatory  and  void  as  a  repugnant  sar-  ■
ing  clauae  ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the  act  should  be
destroyed  by  the  one,  and  not  by  the  other,  or  why  the
proviso  and  the  saving  clause,  when  inconsistent  with  the
body  of  the  act,  should  not  both  of  them  be  equally  reject-
ed. There  is  also  a  technical  distinction  between  a  pro-
viso and  an  exception  in  a  statute.  If  there  be  an  excep-
tion in  the  enacting  clause  of  a  statute,  it  must  be  negativ-
ed in  pleading ;  but  if  there  be  a  separate  proviso,  that
need  not.^  Several  nets  in  pari  tnateria,  and  relating  to
the  same  subject,  are  to  be  taken  together,  and  compared
in  the  construction  of  them,  because  they  are  considered
as  having  one  object  in  view,  and  as  acting  upon  one  sys-
tem. This  rule  was  declared  in  the  case  of  Tke  Earl
of  Ailttbary  v.  Paf'erion /I*  and  the  rule  applies,  though
some  of  the  statutes  may  have  expired,  or  are  not  referred
to  in  the  other  acts.  7he  object  of  the  rule  is  to  ascer-
tain and  carry  into  effect  the  intenlioo;  and  it  is  to  be  in-
ferred, that  a  code  uf  statutes  relating  to  one  subject,  was
governed  by  one  spirit  and  policy,  and  was  intended  to  be
consistent  and  harmonioun  in  its  several  parts  and  provi-
sions. Upon  the  same  principle,  whenever  a  power  is  gi-
ven by  a  statute,  every  thing  necessary  to  the  making  of
it  effectual,  or  requisite  to  attain  the  end,  is  implied.
^aando  Itx  aliqutd  conctdtt  concedcre  videmr  eC  id,per^w>d
detenitur  ad  illud.

Statutes  are  likewise  to  be  construed  in  reference  to  the
principles  of  the  common  taw,  for  it  is  not  to  be  presumed
tht^  Iei;is1nture  intended  to  make  any  innovation  upon  the
oommon  law,  further  than  the  case  absolutely  required.


a  AlhiMfJ.  1  Utrn.  tf  Aid.  99. h  Doi-g.  9.7.

ToL.  I  -05


i,,-c,ih,Googic


4M  SOURCES  OF  [Pwt  IIL

Thit  hu  bem  the  languafe  <^  tb«  eeurta  io  every  «ge;
kiid  when  we  eoniider  the  constant,  Tehement,  and  ez-
alted  eulogy  which  the  ancient  ■af^ea  bestowed  upon  tbe
common  law,  aa  the  perfection  of  reason,  and  tbe  beet
birthright  and  noblest  inheritance  of  the  snbject,  we  catH
Dot  be  surprised  at  the  great  sanction  giren  to  this  rule  of
constroetion.  It  was  observed  by  the  judges,  in  the  rase
of  Stontli  r.  ZmuK,*  that  it  was  good  fur  tfa«  expositore  of
a  statute  to  approach  as  near  as  they  could  to  the  reason  of
the  eotdmon  law  ;  and  the  resolution  of  the  barons  of  the
exchequer,  in  HeydmCt  cane,**  was  ra  this  effect.  For  tbe
•ure  and  true  interpretation  of  all  statutes,  whether  pend
or  beneficial,  four  things  are  to  be  considered  :  What  wai
the  comtnoa  law  before  the  act ;  what  was  the  mit-chid'
against  which  the  common  law  did  not  provide ;  what  re-
medy the  parliament  had  provided  to  cure  the  defect ;  and
the  true  reason  of  tbe  remedy.  It  was  held  tobeiba
duty  of  tbe  judges  to  make  such  a  construction  aa  shouU
repress  the  mischief,  aud  advance  tbe  remedy.

In  the  construction  of  statutes,  the  sense  which  tb«
contemporary  members  of  the  profession  had  put  upon
them,  is  deemed  of  some  importance,  according  to  the
maxim  that  eonUmporanea  expontio  ett  forlunna  ts
Uge.  Statutes  that  are  remedial,  and  not  penal,  are
to  receive  an  equitable  interpretation,  by  which  the  let*
ter  of  tbe  act  is  sometimes  restra  ned.  and  sometimea
enlarged,  so  as  more  effectually  to  meet  the  beneficial
end  in  view,  and  prevent  a  failure  of  tha  remedy.  Thn
may  be  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the  registry  arts,
for  giving  priority  to  deeds  and  mortgages,  according
to  the  dates  of  the  registry.  If  a  person  claiming  under
a  registered  deed  or  mortgage  had  notice  of  the  unre>
gistered  prior  deed  when  ho  took  his,  and  procured
tbe  registry  of  itio  order  to  defeat  the  prior  dt-pd,  be  Khali
not  prevwl  with  his  prior  registry,  because  that  would


itcihyGooglc


LMtweXX]  UUNICIPAL  LAW.  435

be  to  coUDteraet  the  iateat  and  policy  of  th*  statutea,
wbicb  were  made  to  prevent,  and  not  to  uphold  frauds.

If  an  act  be  penal  and  temporarr  by  the  terma  or  nature
•f  it,  the  party  offendioy  miut  be  pmaecuted  and  punished
before  the  act  expirei.  Thougb  the  off^Dce  be  commit-
ted before  the  ezpiraiion  of  the  act,  the  party  cannot  be
punished  after  it  haa  aipired,  unlew  a  particular  provinion
be  made  by  law  for  the  purpose.*  If  a  statute  be  repeal-
ed, and  afterwards  the  repealing  act  be  repealed,  this  re-
Tires  the  original  act  ;^  and  if  a  statute  be  temporary  and
fimited  to  a  given  number  of  years,  and  before  the  expira-
tion of  the  time  it  be  continued  by  aoolher  act,  it  was  for-
merly a  question  under  which  slatute  acts  and  proceed-
ings were  to  be  considered  as  done.  In  the  case  of  Tht
CoUege  of  Phytidani,^  it  was  declared,  that  if  a  statute
be  limited  to  seren  years,  and  afterwards  by  another  sta-
tute be  made  perpetual,  proceeding*  ought  to  be  referred
to  the  last  statute,  as  being  the  one  in  force.  But  thia  de-
asion  was  erroneous,  and  contrary  to  what  had  been  said
by  P»pham,  Ch.  J.  in  DingU^  v.  Af>MH-,<'  and  all  acta,  civil
and  criminal,  are  to  be  charged  under  the  authority  of  the
first  act.  Thus,  in  the  ease  of  Roe  v.  Morgan,^  on  an  in-
dictment for  perjury,  in  an  affidavit  to  hold  to  bail,  it  was
laid  to  have  been  takfo  by  virtue  of  the  statute  of  12  Geo.
I.,  which  was  a  temporary  taw  for  five  years,  and  which
wasafterwards,  and  before  the  expiration  of  it,  continued
by  the  act  of  S  Geo.  I|.,  with  some  alterations.  Lord
Chief  Justiee  Hardwieke  said,  that  when  an  act  was  con-
tinued by  a  subsequent  act,  every  body  was  estopped  to
<ay  the  first  act  was  not  in  force ;  and  as  the  act  in  ques-
tion was  not  altered  in  respect  to  bail,  the  ofienee  was  pro-
perly laid  to  have  been  done  against  the  first  act.  In  Sh^


tt  1  Wm-BlaJci.  Rtp.  461.  7  WTiialoa,ibi.  Tbawmw  u  lojndi.
cUl  prooeedinc*  btgtm  nnder  mn  act  and  not  Goished  wbeo  it  ii  i«p«aled.
Tbey  cannot  be  pnnMd.  1  W.  Blaclu.  4&1.  7  Tom*.  39X.  WkarienU
D^.  560. N.  a.

h  Z  Jiut  S8S.

e  IMUttonU R^.tlt-

d  Cro.  EKt.  760.

e  Sir.  lOM.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4Se  SOURCES  OF  Part.  III.

nun  v.  Henbe*t,^  the  King's  Bench  held,tbnt  if  a  statute
be  permitted  even  to  expire,  and  be  afterwards  rerived  by
another  statute,  the  law  derives  its  force  from  the  first  sta-
tute, which  is  to  he  considered  as  in  operation  by  means
of  the  rerival.  If,  howcrer,  a  temporary  act  be  revived
after  it  has  expired,  the  intermediate  time  is  lost,  witHout
a  special  provision  reaching  to  the  intermediate  time.

If  a  statute  inflicts  a  penalty  fur  doing  an  act,  the  pe-
nalty implies  a  prohibition,  and  the  thing  is  unlawful,
though  there  be  no  prohibitory  words  in  the  statute.  Lord
Hoh,  ia  BartUtt  v.  I^ntr,t>  ap^riied  this  rule  to  the  case
of  a  statute  inflicting  a  penalty  for  making  a  particular
contract,  such  OS  a  simoniacal  or  usurious  contract ;  and
he  held,  that  the  contract  was  void  under  the  statute,
though  there  was  a  penally  imposed  for  piakingit.  Whe-
ther any  other  punishment  can  he  inflicted  than  the  penaU
ty  given  by  the  statute,  has  been  made  a  serious  question.
The  Court  of  K.  B.  in  Rex  r.  Robiiuon,''  laid  .down  ibis
distinction,  that  where  a  statute  created  a  new  offence,  by
making  unlawful  what  was  lawful  before,  and  prescribed
a  particular  sanction,  it  must  be  pursued,  and  none  other  ;
but  wher«  the  offence  was  punishable  at  common  law,
and'the  statute  prescribed  a  particular  remedy,  the  sanc-
tion was  cumulative,  and  did  not  take  away  the  common
law  punishment,  and  either  remedy  might  be  pursued.
.  The  same  distinction  bad  been  declared  long  before  :fi
and  the  proper  inquiry  in  such  cases  is,  was  the  doing  of
the  thing,  for  which  the  penalty  is  inflicted,  lawful  or  un-
lawful before  the  passing  of  the  statute  i  If  it  was  no  of-
fence before,  the  party  oflending  ia  liable  to  the  penalty,
and  to  nothing  else.


a  4  Term.  109.

b  Carth.  2&].Skimur,3it.

c  S  Burr,  799.

a  CutWt  c«H,  Cro.  J.  S44.  Regim  r.  Wigg,  *  Sulk.  460.


i'c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XX.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4S7

There  are  a  number  of  other  rliles,  of  perhapi  minor
impertance,  relative  to  the  conttlruction  of  statutes,  and  it
will  be  Buffirient  to  observe,  geoerally,  that  the  great  ob-
ject of  tlie  maxiniB  of  interpretation,  ia  to  discover  the  true
intention  of  the  law ;  and  whenever  that  intention  can  be
indubitably  ascertained,  and  it  be  not  a  violation  of  consti-
tutional right,  the  courts  are  bound  to  obey  it,  whatever
may  be  ibeir  opinion  of  its  wisdom  or  policy.  But  it  would
be  quite  visionary  to  expect,  in  any  code  of  statute  law,
such  precision  of  thought  and  perspicuity  of  language,  as
to  preclude  all  uncertainty  as  to  the  meaning,  and  exempt
the  community  from  the  evils  of  vexatious  doubts  and  liti-
gious i lit erpretot ions.  Various  and  discordant  readings,
glosses,  and  commentaries,  will  inevitably  arise  in  the  pro-
gress of  time,  and,  perhaps,  as  often  from  the  want  of  skill
and  talent  in  those  who  comment,  as  in  those  who  make
the  law.  Though  the  French  codes,  digested  under  the
revolutionary  authority,  arc  distinguished  for  sententious
brevity,  there  are  numerous  volumes  of  French  reports
already  extunt.  upon  doubtful  and  difficult  questions  arising
within  a  few  years  after  those  codes  were  promulgated.^

The  Emperor  Justinian,  in  one  of  the  edicts  which  he
published  in  confirmalron  of  the  authority  of  the  Pandects,
and  prefixed  tn  that  work,  exprpssly  prohibited  the  civi-
lians of  bis  tirne,  and  those  of  all  future  ages,  from  writing
any  commentary  upon  his  Ihws.'>  The  history  of  Justini-
an's reign  shows  the  fully  and  absurdity  of  this  attempt  to
bar  all  future  innovation.  Greater  changes  took  place  ia
a  few  years  ill  the  laws  and  jurisprudence  of  Justinian,
■aid Montesquieu,  than  in three hundred years  of  the


a  TYit  Journal  du  Pittai;  pramtarU  la  Juriiprwttnt  de  U  Cour  dt
CanaiUm,  tl  det  Couri  Royirlet,  mr  VappUeation  dt  tmu'la  Codu  Frtm-
tau  aux  <jiteMont  dotUtuta  et  d^fficila,  had  aincniDled,  in  IBIB,  lofiAj
volnmei  and  npwBrdi.

&  SKimda  Prctfiiba  Digutorxen,  wc.  SI.


t,Goo(^lc


4ra  aouRecs^frc  [Putm.

FreDch  nrtnarchy.  immediately  preMding  bis  time ;  and
thoM  changes  were  bo  iacessaiit  and  bo  trifling,  that  tb*
iacoDBtaiicy  of  the  emperor  can  ontf  be  ezpleioed  bj  ba,-
Ting  recoune  to  the  secret  historf  of  Procopiui.  where  h«
is  charged  with  having  sold  equally  bis  judgments  and  his
lawi."


a  Ormdrntr  4uSem(iM  ttkar  DKmimet,  s.  W.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


LECTURE  XXI.

or  RBPOIITB  OF  IDDICUL  DBCiaiOIfS.

Hatino  oonriderecl  the  nstnre  and  foree  of  written  law,
and  th«  general  tuIm  which  are  applied  to  the  interpreta-
tieo  of  Btatutei ;  we  are  next  to  eoander  the  character  of
ODwritteu,  or  common  law,  and  the  eridence  b;  which  its
existence  is  duly  ascertained.

The  common  law  includes  those  principles,  ungea,  and
nilsB  of  action,  applicable  to  the  governoieot  and  security
of  person  and  property,  which  do  not  rest  for  their  aiitbo>
lily  upcm  any  expresa  and  pontive  declaration  of  the  will
of  the  legislature.  According  to  the  observation  of  an
eminent  English  judge,'  a  statute  bw  is  the  will  of  the
legislature  in  writing,  and  the  common  law  is  nothing  bat
statutes  worn  out  by  time ;  and  all  the  law  began  by  eoa>
sent  of  the  legislature.

This  is  laying  down  the  origin  of  the  common  law  rather
too  strictly.  A  great  proportion  of  the  rules  and  maxims
which  constitute  the  immense  code  of  the  common  law,
grew  into  use  by  gradual  adoption,  and  receired,  from
time  to  time,  the  sanction  of  the  courts  of  justice,  w itboot
any  legislative  act  or  interference.  It  was  the  applica-
tion of  the  dictates  of  natural  jnstice,  and  of  cultivated
reason,  to  particular  eases.  In  the  just  language  of  Sir
Matthew  Hale,^  the  comnum  law  of  England  is  "  not  the
product  of  the  wisdom  of  some  one  man,  or  society  of  men,
in  any  one  age;  but  of  the  wisdom,  counsel,  experience,
and .  observation,  of  many  ages  of  wise  and  observing
aeo." And  his  further  remarks on  this  subject  would


a  Lord  Chief  Jutice  Wilmot,  t  JTitt.  Rtp.  348.351.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


441  SOURCES  OF  (Part  lU.

be  well  worthy  the  consideralion  of  tboae  bold  projectors*
who  can  think  of  etrikinK  off  a  perfect  code  of  law  at  a  sih-
gle  essay.  *'  Where  the  subject  of  any  law  U  lingle,  th«
prudence  of  one  age  may  go  far  at  one  essay  to  provide  a.
fit  law ;  and  yet,  even  in  the  wiiteBt  provisiona  of  that
kind,  experieaee  shows  us,  that '  new  and  unthought  of
emergencies  often  happen,  that  necessarily  require  new
supplements,  abatements,  or  explanations.  Bui  the  body
of  laws,  that  concern  the  common  justice  applicable  to  a
great  kingdom,  is  vast  and  comprehensive,  consists  of  in-
finite particulars,  and  must  meet  with  various  emergen-
oiea,  and,  therefore,  requires  much  time,  and  much  expe^
rience,  as  well  as  much  wisdom  and  prudence  successively,
to  discover  defects  and  inconveniences,  and  to  apply  apt
supplements  and  remedies,  for  tbem ;  and  such  are  the
common  laws  of  England;  namely,  the  productions  of
much  wisdom,  time,  and  experience."

But  though  the  great  body  of  the  common  law  consists
-of  a  collection  of  principles  to  be  found  in  the  opinions  of
sages,  ordedured  from  universal  and  immemorial  usage,
and  receiving  progressively  the  sanction  of  the  courts;  it
is,  nevenheless,  true,  that  with  us  the  common  law,  as  far
as  it  is  applicable  to  our  situation  and  government,  baa
been  recognized  and  adopted,  as  one  entire  system,  by
the  people  of  this  state.  It  was  declared  to  be  a  part  of
the  law  of  the  land,  by  an  express  provision  in  the  constitu-
tion of  1777,  and  in  the  amended  constitution  of  1821.

The  best  evidence  of  the  common  law  is  to  be  found  ia
the  decisions  of  the  courts  of  justice,  contained  in  the  ou_
merous  volumes  of  reports  which  crowd  the  lawyer's  libra-
.  ry  ;  and  in  the  treaties  and  digests  of  learned  men,  which
have  been  multiplying  from  the  earliest  periods  of  the
English  history  down  to  the  present  time.  The  reports  of
judicial  decisions  contain  the  most  certain  evidence,  and
the  most  authoritative  and  precise  application  of  the  rules  of
the  wmmon  law.  Adjudged  cases  become  precedents  for  fu-
ture cases  resting  upon  analogous  facts,  and  broitghl  within


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  44I

tbs  tame  reason  j  and  the  dilij^ence  of  couoiel,  and  thtf
labour  of  judge*,  are  constantly  required  in  the  study  of
the  reports,  id  order  to  understand  accurately  their  import*
and  the  principles  they  establiab.  But  to  attain  a  compe'
tent  knowledge  of  the  common  law  in  all  its  branches,  baa
"Mow  become  a  very  serious  undertaking,  and  it  requires  k
ateady  and  lasting  perseverance,  in  consequence  of  tbe
number  of  books  which  beset  nnd  encumber  the  path  ai
the  student.^  The  grievance  is  constantly  growing  worae*
for  tbe  number  of  periodical  law  reports  and  treatises
which  issue  from  tbe  English  and  American  press,  is  con"
linually  increaeing ;  and  if  we  wish  to  receive  assistance
from  the  commercial  systems  of  other  nations,  and  to  be*
come  acquainted  with  the  principles  oftbe  Raman  law,  ai
received  and  adopted  in  continental  Europe,  we  are  in
still  greater  danger  of  being  confounded,  and  of  having
our  fortitude  subdued,  by  the  immensity  and  variety  of  the
labours  of  tbe  civilians.^  It  is  necessary  that  the  student
should  exercise  much  discretion  and  skill  in  tbe  selec  tioa
of  the  books  which  he  is  to  peruke. To  encounter  tb«


a  The  Dumber  orTaliinies  of  Engliib  R^porls,  eicluMTfiofreparti  re*
hting- to  thecourlioradmiralt/,  electiooa,  tettlemeot  cue*,  and  Iriih
Veporls,  antoiint  at  prcient.  it  ii  taid,  to  394 :  aad  to  rendsr  thair  contentl
■ccenible,  the  di^eated  indexes  of  the  msdera  report*  aniou 01  to  33  ra>
lumei-  The  text  boolii,  or  treatisei.  amoaal  to  IB4  volamea,  and  the
diKeiCsamJabndgrneQti  to  bT  volnmea,  rnabing.  inlhe  tritole,  a  copioua
.library  of  648  Tolumes.  in  addition  to  the  gtaluta  iaw.  See  FtuntpliTeyt
uiRealPr'iperti/.p.lGS.  To  these  wo  maj  add  opwardi  of  ?0o  rolamM
of  Am^icau  reports,  trealites,  and  digeitt.

b  M.  Uamni  annexed  to  hi*  Leilrtt  tur  ht  Profeiuim  iPAdpocat,  a  ca*
talo(^fl  of  select  books  Tor  a  la  wyer'i  librarj,  and  which  be  deemed  tha
molt  DMsrul  to  possess  and  underslaud  ;  and  that  cBlnlogne,  in  tbe  edition
of  1772,  included  near  3,000  volume!,  and  msoy  of  (hem  ponderoiiiro-
Ijos.  and  not  one  ofthem  had  any  thing'  lo  do  irith  the  Engliili  ilaiate  or
comnwD  law.  It  ie  now  a  complaiaC  io  France,  that  the  crowd  of  reporta
of  decisions  encumber  the  law  librariei  ;  and  M.  nu:iin.  Id  his  Jurii-
prudence  da  Ami',  edit.  1F13^,  alludes  to  the  immensity  of  sach  collec-
tions, and  the  greal  abuses  to  which  that  apeaies  of  juriaprudeace  is  aub-
ject.

Vol.  I.  56


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


442  SOURCES  OF  p>«rl  IIL

whole  maes  of  law  publications  in  saecoMion,  if  practica-
ble, would  be  a  melancbol;  waste  or  misapplication  •€
atrenglh  and  time.

Lord  Bacon,  in  tbe  aphoriiniB  anneied  to  bis  Irea*
tiae  De  emgmentu  Seientiantm,  ipeska  of  the  necesiitj
of  a  revisioa  aad  di^Bt  of  the  law,  in  order  to  restore  it
to  a  sound  and  profitHble  state,  whenever  there  has  ari-
sen a  vast  accumulation  of  ^luities,  throwing,  the  system
into  confusion  and  uncertain^  The  evils  resulting  from
an  indigestible  heap  of  \&ili,  fand  legal  authorities,  are
great  and  manifest.  They  destroy  the  certainty  of  the
law,  and  promote  litigation,  delay,  and  aubtilty.  The
professors  of  the  law  cannot  afford  the  expense  and  time
necessary  to  collect  and  digest  the  volumes,  and  they  are
obliged  to  rely  too  much  on  the  second-hand  authority  oS
digeais— Hipie  advocatut,  cum  tot  Hbroi  per/egere  tt  vineen
nonpottU,  compendia  lecialur — glotta  fortatte  aliqtta  &ona.^
The  period  anticipated  by  Lord  Bacon  seems  now  to  have
arrived.  The  spirit  of  the  present  age,  and  the  cause  of
truth  and'juBlice,  require  more  simplicity  in  the  syslemj
and  that  the  text  authorities  should  be  reduced  within
manageable  limits;  and  a  new  digest  nf  the  whole  body
of  the  American  common  Ian,  upon  the  excellent  model
of  Cumyn'a  Digest,  and  executed  by  a  like  master  artist,
retaining  what  is  applicable,  and  rejecling  every  thing  that
isobxolete  and  inapplicable  to  our  institutinns,  would  be
an  immense  public  blessing.

A  aolemn  decision  upon  a  point  of  law,  arising  in  any
given  ca^e,  becomes  an  authority  in  a  like  case,  because  it
is  the  highest  evidence  which  we  can  have  of  the  law  appli-
cable to  the  Hiibject,and  the  judges  are  bound  to  follow  that
decision  so  long  as  it  stands  unreversed,  unless  it  can  ha
shown  that  the  kw  was  misunderstood  or  misapplied  in  that
particular  cose.  If  a  decision  has  been  made  upon  solemn

a  Baain^  Jiphoriiau,  Dt  aaamutaliene  'egmi  ntmia,  Jlpti.  No.  6»—
69.  f>»nimtdigfa4lfguai,^p/i.  ho.  66—64.  Dt  Mrtptoribv  amUitn-
HiU.  Aph,  No.  78.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Loctun  XXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  443

argnment  and  mature  deliberattoD,  the  prenimptioD  is  in
'forour  of  ita  correctaeBB ;  and  the  commuaily  hare  a  right
to  regard  it  as  a  just  declaration  or  eipoailioD  of  the  law,
and  to  regulate  their  actions  and  their  contracts  by  it.  It
would  therefore  be  extremely  inconvenient  to  the  public  if
precedents  were  not  duly  regarded,  and  pretty  implicitly
followed.  It  is  by  the  notoriety  and  stability  of  stich  rules,
that  professiouat  men  can  give  safe  advice  to  thoite  who
consult  them ;  and  people  in  general  can  venture  with  con-
fidence to  boy,  and  to  trust,  and  to  deal  with  each  other.B
If  Judicial  decisions  were  to  be  lightly  disregarded,  we
should  disMirband  unsettle  thegreat  land  mark  nuf  property.
If,  however,  any  solemnly  adjudged  case  can  be  shown  to
be  fourfded  in  error,  tt  is  no  doubt  the  right  and  the  duty  of
the  judges  who  hare  a  similar  case,  before  ibem,  to  correct
the  error.  But  when  a  rule  has  bern  once  deliberHlcly
adopted  and  declared,  it  ought  not  to  be  disturbed,  unless
by  a  court  of  appeal  or  review,  and  never  by  the  vame
court,  excejit  for  very  cogent  reasons ;  and  if  the  practice
'  were  otherwise,  it  would  be  leaving  us  in  a  stateof  per-
plexing uncertainty  as  to  the  law.**  The  longuage  of  Sir
William  Jonesc  isexceedinglyforribleoHthia  |K»int.  "No
man,"  says  he,  "  who  is  not  a  lawyer,  would  ever  know
how  to  act ;  and  no  miin  who  is  a  lawyer  would,  in  many
instances,  know  what  to  advise,  unless  courts  were  bound
by  authority  as  6rmly  us  the  Pagan  deities  were  supposed
to  be  bound  by  the  decrees  of  fate."

Throughout  the  whole  period  of  the  year  books,  from
the  reign  of  Ed.  III.  to  that  of  Hen.  VH.,  the  Judge-  were
incessantly  urging  the  sacredness  of  precend^iits,  and  that
a  counsellor  was  not  to  be  heard  who  spoke  against  them,
end  that  they  ought  to  judge  as  the  ancient  t-atteu  lau^ht.
If  we  judge  against  former  precedents,  said  t'h.  J.  Pri-
«ot,<l  it  will  bea  bud  example  to  tbebarristtrs  and  students


a  IS  Joluuon,  40t.

e  Jonef  Eiiay  on  BaUmeat,  p-  M.


i,,-c,ih,G00glc


444  SOURCES  OP  [Part  lU.

IKi  law,  and  thej  will  not  give  toy  credit  to  the  books,  or
bave  any  faith  in  ibem.  So'ibe  Court  of  King's  Bench  ot>>
•erved,  in  the  time  of  Jtiniea  I.,'  that  the  point  which  had
been  often  adjudged  ought  to  rest  in  peace.  The  inviola-
bililj  of  preredenlD  was  thus  inculcated  at  a  period  which
we  have  been  arcuslomed  to  regard  as  the  infancy  of  our
law,  with  as  much  veal  and  decision  as  at  any  subsequent
period.

But  I  wi»h  not  to  bcundersTood  to  press  too  strongly  the
doctrine  of  «rare  </rniu,  when!  recoiled  i  hat  there  are  one
tfaou^iand  easestobe  pointed  out  it)  the  English  and  Americun
booksof  reports,  which  have  been  overruled, doiibtf dor li-
miled  in  their  application.  Itispiobublethat  therecurdsof
many  oftheconrts  in  ihi^  country  are  replete  with  haHtyand
crude  decisions ;  and  such  cafes  ought  to  be  examined  wilb-
oiit  fear,  end  revised  without  relucinnce,  ruiWr  than  to
h-^ve  the  character  of  our  law  impaired,  and  the  beauty  and
faarmony  of  the  system  destroyed  by  ihc  perpetuity  of  error.
£ven  a  series  of  decisions  are  nni  always  conclusive  evi-
dence of  what  is  lew  ;  and  the  revision  of  a  decision  very
ofven  resolves  itselfinioa  merequestionofexpediency, de-
pending upon  the  consideration  of  the  importance  of  cer-
tainly in  the  rule,  and  the  extent  of  pro|ierty  to  be  affeetad
by  a  change  of  it.  Lord  Mansfield  frequently  observed,
that  the  certainty  ofa  rule  was  often  of  inuclitnore  impor-
tance in  mercantile  cases  than  the  reason  of  it,  and  that  a
seuled  rule  ought  to  be  observed  for  the  sake  of  property ;
and  yet,  perhaps,  no  English  judge  ever  mtide  greater  inno-
Tiitiooa  and  improvements  in  the  law,  or  felt  himself  leaa
embairassed  with  the  disposition  of  the  elder  case  wbeo
they  came  in  his  way,  to  impede  the  operalioo  of  bit  en-
lightened and  cultivated  judgment.  His  successor,  Lor^
Kenyon,  acted  like  a  Roman  dictator,  appointed  to  recall
and  reinvigorale  the  ancient  discipline.  He  controlled  or
overruled  several  very  important  decisions  of  Lord  Mans-
field, as  dangerous  innovations, and  on  the  ground  that


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lectura  XXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  440

they  had  departed  from  the  pKcedenta  of  former  timea,
wkI  disturbed  the  land-mHrks  of  prof»eny,  and  had  uoau-
thorizedly  eujieraddnd  eqiiiry  powem  to  a  court  of  law.
*'  It  it  my  wish  and  u>  comfort,"  raid  that  venerable  jud|Ee,
***  to  Btand  taper  antiquoi  tia$.  I  cannot  legislate  ;  liut  by
my  induKtry  I  can  discover  what  our  predeceaxors  have
dons,  and  I  will  tread  in  their  fbotatepa."  The  En^linh
courts  seem  now  to  consider  it  to  be  their  duly  to  adhere
to  th«  authority  of  adjudgred  cases,  wh«n  they  have  been  ao
clearly,  and  so  often,  or  so  long  established,  as  to  createa
practical  rule  of  pro|ierty,  notwithstanding  they  may  feel
the  hardship,  or  not  perceive  the  reasonableness  of  tbe
rule.  There  is  great  weight  in  the  maxim  of  Lord  Ba-
con,* that  opfuna  tit  Ux,  ^uk  minimum  reKnquit  arbitrio
fkdicu ;  optima*  judex,  qui  mtmiiitnt  5(6t.  The  great  dil^
ficulty  aatoeases,  conaifts  in  making  an  accurate  applica-
tion of  the  general  principle  contained  in  them  to  new
eases,  presenting  a  change  of  ciri^umstaoces.  If  ihe  an-
alogy be  imperfect,  the  application  may  be  erioncous.  The
expressions  of  every  judge  must  also  be  taken  with  refer-
ence to  the  case  on  which  be  decides ;  we  must  look  to
the  principle  of  the  decision,  end  not  to  the  manner  in
which  the  case  is  argued  upon  Ihe  bench,  othnrwiBe  the
law  will  be  thrown  into  eitreme  confusion. >>  The  enerctse
of  sound  judgment  ia  as  necessary  in  the  utie.  »s  diligence
and  learningare  requisite  in  the  pursuit ,  of  Hdjudged  cHBeB.c
Considering  the  inRiienceof  manners  u[>on  law,  and  the
force  of  opinion,  which  is  silently  and  almost  insensibly  con-


a  ApKor.  46  Biko"^'  Workt.  roL  1. 448.

h  s«i.Ch.  J.  t.  Bih^  sag.

e  M.  thtpin.  io  hi>  Juruprudenee  dti  AmU,  hai  giwta  at  mn;  ex-
oaHcQl  nitetaod  obaenntioiu  oa  tboTalue,  and  on  (ho  abuMof  Ibe  aa-
tboritj  of  reporlt  DfjadioialdeciiioDi.  He  admiUlhelbTce  artbrmtrbco
oorraollj  itat^d.  and  applied  with  diBcerament  and  aobrielj  j  and  Ihat
(be;  hare  the  furce  of  law  when  there  hai  been  a  leHeaof  uaiforni  deia-
■ioat  oa  the  ume  point,  because  tbej  then  bccoiae  tooctoaire  evideoca
of  Ifae  law.  7*ha  imineiMe  calleclloa  of  report!  bj  M.  Heriia,  in  Ua
Xtp^Mrt,  and  etpecially  in  hi*  Quutioiu  de  Droit,  he  would  m;,  bad
tbe  atamp  of  Papioian,  if  it  weie  penoitted  la  compare  any  lawyer  ti>
F*piaiaa<


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


44fi  SOURCES  OF  [Pan  IH.

trolling  the  course  of  buaineM  and  the  prartire  of  tb«
courts,  it  is  impossible  that  the  fabric  of  our  jurispi  udence
should  not  exhibit  deep  traces  of  the  progress  of  society,
M  well  as  of  tbe  footsteps  of  time-  The  nncient  reporlera
are  ffoing  very  fast  oot  only  out  of  use,  but  oat  of  dnte,  end
slmost  out  of  recollection.  The  modern  reports,  and  the
latest  of  tbe  modern,  are  the  moat  useful,  because  the;
contain  the  Inst,  and,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  the  most  cor-
rect exposition  of  the  law,  sod  the  most  judicious  applio-
tion  of  abstract  and  eternal  principles  of  right  to  tbe  re-
finemenlfl  of  properly.  Tbey  are  likewise  accompanied
by  illustrations  best  adapted  to  the  inquisitive  and  cuhi-
Tated  reason  of  the  present  age.  But  the  old  rfiportera
cannot  be  entirely  neglected,  and  I  shall  derole  the  re-
niainder  of  tHis  lecture  to  a  short  historical  review  of  tba
prinnpal  reporters  prior  to  the  present  times.  No  one
ought  to  read  a  book,  said  M.  Lami,>  (and  tbe  remark  has
peculiar  application  to  law  books,)  unless  be  knows  some-
thing of  the  author,  and  when  he  wrote,  and  the  character
ofthe  work,  and  the  characteroftfae  edition.

..Forthesakeof  fwrspicuity  and  convenient  arrangement,
we  will  divide  the  reports  into  two  classes:  those  that  pre-
ceded, and  those  tbal  are  subsequent  to  the  year  1688.  I
select  that  period,  because  tbe  distinction  between  the  old
and  new  law  seems  then  to  be  more  distinctly  marked.
The  cumbersome  and  oppressive  appendages  of  the  feudal
tenures  were  abolished  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  and  the
spirit  of  modern  improremeat,  and  of  commercial  policy,
began  then  to  be  more  sensibly  fell,  and  more  actively  dif-
fused. The  appointment  of  that  great  and  honest  lawyer.
Lord  Holt,  to  the  station  of  chief  justice  of  the  King's
Bench,  gave  a  new  tone  and  impulse  to  tbe  vigour  ofthe
common  law.  The  despotism  of  the  Stuarts  was  abolished
for  ever,  and  the  civil  and  political  liberties  of  tbe  English
nation  were  more  explicitly  acknowledged  and  defined  at
the  accession  of  tbe  House  of  Orange.  Tbeold  reporters
will  include  all  tbe  reports  from  tbe  year  books  down  ta


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lectnra  XXI.)  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4X1

that  period  ;  and  wo  will,  in  the  first  place,  bestow  upon
those  of  them  which  are  the  moat  diatioguiafaed,  a  cursory
(lance  and  rapid  review.

The  oldest  reports  eitant  on  the  English  law,  are  thft
Year  Books,  which  consist  of  eleven  parts  or  volumes,
written  in  law  French,  and  extend  from  the  beginninj;  of
the  reign  .of  Edward  I(.  to  the  latter  end  of  the  reign  of
Henry  VIII.,  a  period  of  about  two  hundred  years.  There
are  a  few  broken  cases  which  may  be  gleaned  from  the  old
abridgments,  and  particularly  from  .Fiizberbsrt,  which  go
back  to  the  reigo  of  Henry  III.  The  Year  Books  were
printed  by  subscription  in  1679;  but  they  have  never
been  translated,  and  they  are  not  worth  the  labour  and
•xpense  either  of  a  new  edition  or  of  translation.  The
aubstance  of  the  Year  Books  was  afterwards  included  in
the  grut  abridgments  of  Statham,  Fitzberbert,  and
Brooke,  and  those  compilations  superseded  in  a  considera*
ble  degree  the  use  of  them.  The  Year  Becks  were  very
much  occupied  with  discussions  touching  the  forms  of
writs,  and  the  pleading  and  practice  in  real  actions,  whieh
bare  gone  entirely  out  of  use.  In  a  late  case  in  the  C.  B.
the  judges  spoke  with  some  sharpness  of  reproof  against
going  back  to  the  Year  Books  in  search  of  a  precedent  in
the  ease  of  lerying  a  fine."  The  great  authenticity  and
accuracy  of  the  Year  Books  arose  from  the  manner  in
which  they  were  composed.  There  were  four  reporters
appointed  to  that  duty,  and  they  had  a  yearly  stipend  from
the  crown,  and  they  used  to  confer  together,  and  the  re-
ports being  settled  by  so  many  persons  of  approved  dili-
gence and  Teaming  deservedly  carried  great  credit  with
them.'*  But  so  great  have  been  the  changes  since  the  feu-
dal ages,  in  the  character  of  propei  ty,  the  business  of  civil
life,  and  the  practice  of  the  courts,  that  the  great  mass  of
curious  learning  and  technical  questions  contained  in  the
Year  Books,  has  sunk  into  oblivion;  and  it  will  be  no
cause  of  regret  if  that  learning  be  destined  never  to  be  re-


ft Preface  to  Pluirdin't  Jliporti.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


4a  SOUBCESOF  {PuttO.

claimed.  The  Year  Books  have  now  beoonw  nearly  ob>
•olete,  and  ihej  are' valuable  only  to  the  aatiquarj  and
biatorien,  Bi  a  faithful  portrait  of  ancient  customi  and
nanaers.'

The  Yeu-  Books  ended  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  be-
came persons  were  no  longer  appointed  to  the  taeh  of  re-
porting, with  the  allowRnce  of  a  fixed  nlary.  Prirate
lawyers  then  undertook  the  business  of  reporting  for  their
own  use,  or  for  the  purpose  of  publicatioo.  Hany  Ed-
ghsh  lawyers  have  regretted  that  the  practice  of  appmnt-
iog  public  reporters,  with  a  stipulated  compensation,  was
not  contiDued,  as  it  would  hare  relieved  the  profeuion
from  many  hasty  and  inaccurate  reports,  which  have  great-
ly increased  the  uncertainty  of  the  law.  The  reports  of
Dyer  relate  to  the  reigns  of  Henry  VllL,  Edward  VI.,
Mary,  and  Elizabeth.  They  have  always  been  held  in
high  estimation,  for  Dyer  presided  as  chief  justice  of  the
C.  B.  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  and  was  distinguished
for  learning,  ability,  and  firmness.  His  reports  were  af-
terwards enriched  by  marginal  notes  of  Chief  Justice  Tre-
by,  and  which  are  said  by  Hr.  Justice  Buller,l>  to  be  good
law.  The  work  was  compiled  in  taw  French,  and  pub-
lished in  an  English  translation  in  1793,  with  the  notes.

Pkiwden's  Commentaries  embrace  the  same  period  ai
the  reports  of  Dyer.  They  bear  as  highareputatiooforaQ-
ctiracy  as  any  ancient  btwk  of  reports,  though  Lord  Coke
laid  he  had  discev<  red  four  cases  in  Plowden  which  were
erroneous.^  Plowden  gives  the  pleading  in  those  cases  \n
which  judgment  was  entered ;  and  the  arguments  of  eounsd,
and  the  decisions  upon  the  bench  very  much  at  large.  Tbay
were  first  published  in  1578^  and  taken  originally,  as  h«
says,  for  his  private  ose. But  he  took  great  pains  in  rea-


alnarecentcaitein  1  BameaaU it  CramBtH.  410.,  (beCoartofKinc^i
Bench  decided  ■  C3K  cbieflj  upon  the  anthoritf  of  &  cilattoa  from  Ilie
Tear  Book  of  4«  Edw.  Ill-;  bat  roch  «  reference  »  rmdc.

b  3  Ttrm.  114.

c  Bacon'*  Worki,  Tol.  6.  p.  129.


l,,-c,ih,G00glc


liciureXXl.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  440

dering  his  work  accurate,  and  he  reported  noihioj;  but
-what  bail  been  debated  am)  decided  tipoD  demurrer,  or
■pecial  verdict ;  and  hix  reports  were  libewipe  submitted
to  the  inspection  of  the  serjeants  and  jiidgeti.  The  work
is,  tbereforfl,  distinguished  for  its  nuihenticily  and  ac-
curacy, and  though  not  of  sodramaitca  character  at  much
of  the  Year  Books,  it  is  exceedingly  interRsiing  and  iu^
aiructive,  by  the  evidence  it  afiordsof  the  extensive  learn-
ing, sound  doctrine,  and  logical  skill  of  the  ancient  Eng*
lish  bar.

Lord  Coke's  reports,  in  13  parts  or  volumes,  areconfifletl
to  the  reigns  ofElizabetband  James,  and  deservedly  staiul
Bt  the  head  of  the  ancient  reports,  as  an  immense  rejiosi-
tory  of  eommou  law  learning.  The  first  eleven  books  of
his  reports  contain  about  600  cases,  and  were  publinhcd
in  his  lifetime,  and  be  took  care  to  report  and  pubhsh  only
what  he  calls  leading  cases,  and  conducive  to  the  public
quiet.  Lord  Bacon  mid,  that  had  it  not  been  for  Sir  Ed-
ward Coke's  reports,  the  law  in  that  age  would  have  been
almost  like  a  ship  without  ballast.  Much  of  the  Varinns
and  desultory  learning  in  these  reports  is  law  tothis  day,
and  the  most  valuable  of  the  cases  reported  have  been
Selected  and  recommendcdlothe  attention  of  (be  American
atudent  by  Professor  HolTmon,  nf  the  university  of  Mary-
land, in  bis  "  Course  of  legal  study."  When  these  reports
were  published,  between  1600  and  1615,  there  were  no
other  prior  reports,  but  the  Year  Books,  Dyer,  and  Plow-
den.  Lord  Coke  said,  that  he  endeavoured,  in  bis  re-
ports, to  avoid  obscurity,  ambiguity,  and  prnlrxitv.  It  is
lingular  that  he  should  hnvo  bo  egregioualy  fuilcd  in  his
puriiose.  The  want  of  merhoilical  arrangement  and  lucid
order,  is  so  manifest  in  IiIr  reports,  and  he  abounds  so
greatly  in  extrajudicial  dicta  end  dnsultory  learning,  that
he  is  distinguished  above  must  other  reporters,  for  the
very  defects  he  intended  to  avoid.  It  is  often  very  dif-
ficult to  separate  the  arguments  of  counsel  from  tho
reasons  and  decision  of  the  court,  and  toascertain  precise-
ly the  point  adjudged.  This,  probably,  gave  occasion  to
Ireland  and  Manley's  Abridgment  of  Lord  Coke's  Reportr
Vol.  L  57

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


4M  SOURCES  OF  ffnt  Bit

•  in  which  they  undertake  to  detach  from  the  work  all  lh«
eollsteral  discuMion  and  learning,  and  to  gire  only  the
"  Very  lubMance  aod  marrow"  of  the  reporta.  A  work  of
thi*  kind  may  be  convenient  in  the  hurry  of  research,  but  I
-Iveliere  no  accurate  lawyer  would  erer  be  content  to  repctse
himielf  upon  such  a  barren  aceount  of  a  deciiiion,  without
looking  into  the  reason  and  authoritiee  on  which  it  wai
founded-  With  all  their  defectH,  Lord  Coke's  Reports
are  a  standard  work  of  that  age,  and  they  alone  are  suf-
ficient to  have  discharg«d  him  from  that  great  obligation
of  duty  with  which  he  said  be  was  bound  to  bis  profession.
When  Coke's  Reports  were  first  published,  they  gave
much  offence  to  King  James,  as  containing  many  doctrines
wbicbwere  deemed  too  free  and  injurious  to  the  prero-
gatire  of  the  crown ;  and  the  king  commanded  Lord  Coke
to  strike  out  the  offensive  parts,  and  he  also  referred  the
work  to  his  judges  to  be  corrected.^  But  Lord  Coke  was
too  independent  in  spirit,  and  ho  bad  100  high  a  regard  to
truth  and  law,  to  gratify  the  king  on  this  subject ;  and  be
was,  for  this  and  other  causes,  remored  from  the  office  of
Chief  Justice  of  the  K.  B.

Hobart's  Reports  of  cases  in  the  time  of  James  I.  were
printed  in  1646,  and  in  a  subsequent  age  they  were  revised
and  corrected  by  Lord  Chancellor  Nottiagbam.  Like  the
reports  of  JLrord  Coke,  they  are  defective  io  method  and
precision,  and  are  replete  with  copious  legal  discussions.
Hobart  was  chief  justice  of  the  C.  B.,  and  a  very  great
lawyer.  Judge  Jenkins,  the  contemporary  of  Coke  and
Uobart,  has  given  us,  in  the  preface  to  bis  reports,  an  ex-
alted eulogy  on  those  distinguished  men,  and  the  biographi-
cal sketch  of  their  characters  is  peculiarly  anioiated  and
lively.  Jenkins  compiled  his  reports,  or  centuries,  (as  he
quaintly  terms  them,)  during  the  tumult  of  the  civil  wars
under  Cbailes  1.  and  the  commonwealth ;  and  they  resem-
ble more  adigest  of  decisions  after  the  manner  of  Fitzher-
bert  and  Brooke,  than  regular  reports  of  adjudged  cases.

a  Lord  Bnnm'i  Worki,  vol.  6.  Iti.  1!8.  13!.  n3>


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lacture  XXL]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  45i

From  bi«  iatflmperate  language  and  bard  fate,  it  is  evident
he  was  a  zealous  royalist,  and  had  provoked  ihe  resent-
ment of  his  enemies.  He  composed  his  work,  as  hs  says,
when  be  was  "  broken  with  old  age  and  confinement  in  pri-
son, where  his  fellow  subjects,  grown  wild  with  rage,  bad
detained  him  for  fifteen  years,  and  that-  he  was  surrouDded
with  an  odious  multitude  of  barbarians."  He  renders  a  just
tribute  of  veneration  to  the  memory  of  Lord  Coke  and  Lord
Hobart,  as  two  men  who  had  furnished  surprising  light  ta
the  professors  of  the  law.  They  were  judges  of  great  au-
thority and  dignity,  who,  to  the  most  accurate  eloquence,
joined  a  superlative  knowledge  of  the  laws,  and  consum-  ,

male  integrity,  and  whose  names,  he  said,  would  floarish
AS  long  as  the  laws  and  the  kingdom  should  endure.  Lord
Hobart,  as  he  continues  to  observe,  was  adorned  with  the
brightest  endowments,  and  a  piercing  underHtanding,  and
be  had  always  equity  before  his  eyes.  Lord  Coke  was  a
judge  whom  power  could  not  break,  nor  favour  bend.  He
enjoyed  the  smiles  and  frowns  of  the  court  by  turns,  and
possessed  aa  immense  fortune,  wbtcb  he  had  honestly  ac-
quired. The  only  thing  objected  to  him  as  a  fault  wa»,
that  be  was  thought  to  go  too  great  lengths  with  the  re-
publican party,  but  be  admits  that  he  died  in  the  highest
estimation.

Croke's  Reports  of  decisions  in  the  courts  of  law  in  the
reigns  of  Elizabeth,  James,  and  Charles,  are  a  work  of
credit  and  celebrity  among  theold  reporters.  They  cooi-
mence  attout  the  time  that  Dyer  ended,  and  were  first  pub-
lished under  the  protectorate  of  Cromwell.  From  the  cha-
racter of  the  judge,  his  gravity,  learning,  diligence,  and
advantages,  and  from  the  precision  and  brevity  of  his  cases,
these  reports  have  §ustained  their  character  io  every  suc-
ceeding age,  and  are,  to  this  day,  familiarly  referred  to,  as
an  authentic  depository  of  the  rules  of  the  common  law.

The  reports  of  Yelverton  are  a  small  collection  of  select
eases  in  the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  and  the
first  ten  years  of  the  reigo  of  James.  He  was  a  Judge  of
the  C.  B.  and  one  ofthe  most  emmenl  lawyers  of  that  age>
aad  which  was  truly  the  A.ugustan  age  of  the  old  common

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


433  SOURCES  or  lP»rl  III.

law  learniag.  Tbeae  reporti  have  be«a  lately  recommend-
ed to  the  notice  of  the  Americun  lawyer,  by  a  new  edilion
publivhed  in  this  country,  and  enticbcd  witb  copious,
valuable,  and  accurate  nofen.  by  Mr.  Uetcalf.

In  the  rei^nof  Churles  ll.t.iemoet  dieiinguishedafibe
reporti  are  these  of  Chiei  juiitice  Saunders.  Tbey  nro
oorifined  todeciaiuiis  in  the  K.  B.  forthea[>aceofsixyrar9(
between  the  IStbaad  24lhyvars  of  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,
aad  Gontaialhe  pleadtngn  aiid.eiUries  in  ibe  rases  decided,
SB  well  as  the  arj^umifotfi  of  counsel,  aiid  the  judgment  of
the  court.  Tbey  are  recommunded  forlheaccururyofthe
flOtries,  and  the  con  ise,  cleur,  and  {lointcd  method  of  deci-
■ion;  andareparticuWIy  valuable  to  tbe  |iracliNiiig  lawyer
Ua  book  ofprocedeolsas  well  as  uf  decisious.  They  have
always  been  esteemed  tlie  moM  accurate  and  vuluuble  re-
ports of  that  uge,  and  tbis  is  the  chHfucter  nbicb  has  been
repeatedly  given  of  them  by  ibe  judges  io  niodtrn  times.a
Anew  ediuoii  of  lbe:«e  reports  was  piibliiiht'd  in  1799  by
Serjeant  WiHiams,  with  very  copious  notes,  which  in  many
instances,  are  distinct  and  elaborate  essays  on  ihe  subjects
ofwhich  tbey  treat.  Lurd  Uldon  has  snid,  in  reference
to  ibis  edition,  that  to  any  one  in  a  judicial  sttuution,  it
would  be  sufficioully  flattering  to  have  it  said  of  him,  that
he  was  as  good  a  common  lawyer  as  Serjeant  WilliamB.
•nd  that  no  man  over  Jived,  to  whom  the  i  baracler ofa  great
common  lawyer  more  properly  applied.  I  have  no  doubt
of  the  merit  of  the  edition,  and  of  the  great  learning  of  tho
editor.  The  autborittes,  new  and  old,  applii^able  to  the
aubject,  are  industriously  collected,  and  meihodically  ar-
ranged, fiut  with  ull  Ihe  praise  justly  due  to  the  edition,  it
is  liable  to  the  gr«at  objection  of  making  one  of  the  old
reporters  the  veiiide  of  voluminous  dissertations.  They
introduce  perplexity  and  confusion  by  their  number  and
length.  If  such  ireatieea  were  published  by  themselves,  the
atudent  would  know  better  where  to  6nd  them ;  but  when


a  3  Burr.  J  730. 2  Bo*.  S{  Pull  iS.

Dg,l,,-c,lh,.GOOglC


Leclun  XXI.}  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4SS

appended  to  a  plain  reporter,  the;  seem  to  be  out  of  place.
Nolea  would  appear  to  be  more  approjtriate,  if  they  wer*
coofiiied  simply  and  drily  to  tbe  illustration  of  the  case  in
the  text,  aad  (o  ahow,  by  a  reference  to  other  decieions^
how  far  it  might  atili  be  regarded  aa  an  aatbority,  and
wheni  and  where  it  had  been  eon&rmed,  or  queetioneit,  or
extended,  or  reatriciedi  or  overruled.  The  convenience
and  economy  of  tbe  profesition  would  certainly  be  well  con-
Bulted  by  this  course.  Thin  edition  of  Saundera  bo  far
flur|>a8ses  in  extent  and  variety  of  learning,  the  original
work,  ad  to  become  a  new  work  of  itself,  which  might
properly  be  denominated  Williaois'  notes ;  and  tbe  rene-
rable  simplicity  of  the  reporter  is  obacured  and  kwt,  in
tbe  commentaries  of  the  anuolator.

Tbe  reporu  of  Chief  Justice  Vaugbaa  contain  aome
very  interesting  cases.  He  was  a  grave  and  excellent
judge,  and  his  reports  cpDsisl  chiefly  of  bis  own  argu-
ments and  pinions,  delivered  while  he  was  chief  justice,
and  they  are  dtaiiiiguiahed  for  great  variety  of  learning.
The  reports  of  Sir  Thomas  Jones,  who  was  also  chief  jus-
tice in  the  reign  of  Charles  11. ;  of  Sir  CresVveil  Levinz,
who  was  9  judge  of  tbe  C  B. ;  of  Sir  Geffrey  Palmer,
who  was  attorney  .general  under  Charles  II. ;  of  Lord
Chief  Justice  Pollexfen,  whode  reports  consist  of  cases  ai^
gued  by  bim  while  be  was  at  the  bur  ;  and  of  Sir  Willian)
Jonea,  who  was  fur  twenty  two  years  a  judge,  are  all  a€
them  works  of  authority,  thoi^h  a  considerable  pari  of  tlie
discussions  and  ducittiona  which  they  record,  oeaSes  at  this
day  to  excite  much  attention,  or  to  be  very  applicable  to
the  new  and  varied  course  of  humun  affairs.  And,  ta-
deed,  it  may  be  here  observed,  that  a  very  large  propor-
tion of  the  matter  contained  in  tbe  old  leporters,  prior  to
the  English  revolution,  has  become  superseded,  and  is
now  cast  into  tbe  shade,  by  tbe  improvements  of  modern
times ;  by  the  disuse  of  real  actions,  and  of  the  subtleliea
of  special  pleading;  by  the  cultivation  of  maritime  juris-
prudence ;  by  the  growing  value  and  variety  of  personal
contracts;  by  the  spirit  of  commerce,  and  tbe  enlarge^
went  of  equity  jurisdiction;  by  tbe  introduction  of  mora

Doili^cdtyGoOJ^IC


An  SOURCES  OK  |;p«r(  III.

Uberal  and  enlightened  viewa  of  justice  and  public  policj-;
and,  inthort,  by  the  study  and  influence  of  the  civil  levr.

In  perusing  the  old  reports,  we  cannAt  but  be  struck
with  tbe  long,  laborious,  and  subtle  arguments,  and  the
great  delay  which  accompanied  tbe  investigation  of  points
of  law.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  case  of  Stowtll  v.  ZoiuAf
in  Plowden,  was  argued  twice  in  tbe  C.  B.,  and  then
twice  in  the  Exchequer  Chamber,  before  all  tbe  judges
of  England.  Co/nn'i  case,  io  Coke,  was  argued  first  at
the  bar  of  the  K.  B.  by  coansel,  then  in  the  Eicbeqner
Chamber,  first  by  counsel,  and  then  by  all  the  judges.  It
was  afterwards  argued  by  counsel  at  twn  diflTerent  times,
and  then  by  all  the  judges  at  the  next  term,  upon  four
different  days  ;  and  at  another  term  thereafter  by  all  tbe
juilgas  on  four  different  days.  So  again  in  M<mby  fy  Rich-
ard* V.  Scott,  in  Levinz,  tbe  ease  was  argued  at  tbe  bar
three  several  times,  by  distinct  counsel  each  time,  and  af-
terwards by  all  the  judges  at  tbe  bench.  It  was  quite
common  in  former  times  to  have  a  case  spoken  to  at  two,
and  thrfee,  and  four  several  timeh,  and  each  time  at  a  dif-
ferent term,  before  tbe  judgment  was  rendered.  Indeed,
BO  lale  as  the  time  of  Willes*  reports,  in  the  reign  of  Geo.
II.  we  find  a  casewhich  was  argued  five  times,  and  at  five
distinct  terms,  and  the  judgment  was  not  rendered  until
thespaee  of  five  years  had  elaptged  from  the  first  argu-
ment. It  was  nut  until  the  time  of  Lord  Mimnfield  that
such  repeated  arguments  were  disused,  and  great  des-
patch and  unexampled  facility  and  vigour  given  to  the
adrninistration  of  justice.  There  were  some  advantages
attending  these  repeated  discussions,  which  served  as  a
compensation  for  tbe  delay  and  expense  attending  them.
They  tended  to  dissipnte  shadows  and  doubts,  and  to  unite
the  opinions  on  the  bench,  and  prevent  that  constant  divi-
sion among  the  judges  which  has  much  weakened  the
authorityof  some  of  our  American  courts.

From  ihe  era  of  the  English  revolution,  the  reports  in-
crease in  value  and  importance;  and  they  deal  more  in
points  of  law  applicable  to  rhe  great  changes  in  property,
and  the  commerce  and  business  of  the  present  times. I

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


LeclareXXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  453

shall  not  undertake  to  speak  critically  of  the  particular
merits  of  the  modern  reports,  for  this  would  lead  me  into
too  extensive  details.  Those  of  Lord  Raymond  and  Ser-
jeat  Salkeld  embrace  the  reigns  of  William  and  Mary,
and  Queen  Ann  ;'  and  during  that  period  Lord  Chief  Jua-
tice  Holt  gave  lustre  to  the  jurisprudence  of  his  coun-
try. The  Reports  of  Sir  John  Strange,  of  Lord  Chief  Ba-
ron Cotnyns,  of  Lord  Chief  Justice  Wille«,and  part  of  the
reports  of  Serjeant  Wilson,  occupy  the  reigns  of  George
I.  and  II.  and  they  art  all  respectable,  and  the  reports  of
Willes  and  Wilson,  in  particular,  rery  accurate  re|>osito-
ries  ofthe  judicial  decisionx  of  those  reigns.  The  reports
of  Lord  Raymond  and  of  SergeantWiNon  are  aloopecnliar-
ly  valuable  to  the  pleader  for  the  many  useful  entries  and
forms  of  pleadings  which  accompany  the  cases.  From  that
period,  the  English  reports  are  to  be  read  and  studied  with
profound  attention.  The  reports  of  Burrow,  Cowper,  and
Douglass,  contain  the  substance  of  Lord  Manefield's  judi-
cial decisions,  and  ibey  are  among  the  most  interesting
reports  in  the  English  law.  All  the  courts  of  law  at  West-
minster ha?e  been  filled  with  very  eminent  men  since  the
time  of  the  accession  of  George  III.;  and  we  need  only
refer  to  tbe  Term  Reports,  and  to  East  and  bis  success-
ors, as  reporters  to  the  King's  Bench,  and  to  Wilson,
Henry  Blackstone,  Bosanquet  &  Puller,  Taunton,  and
their  successors  in  the  C.  B.,  for  views  and  sketches  of  the
-English  law  in  its  most  correct  and  cultivated  state.

A  still  deeper  interest  must  be  felt  by  the  American
lawyer  in  tbe  perusal  of  the  judicial  decisions  of  his  own
country.  Our  American  reports  contain  an  exposition  of
the  common  law,  as  received  and  modified  in  reference  to  ,
thegeniusof  onr  institutions.  By  that  law  we  are  governed
and  protected,  and  it  cannot  but  awaken  a  curre^iiondent
attachment.  ButI  need  not  undertake  the  invidious  task  of
selection  and  discriminution  among  the  numerous  volumes
ofthe  reports  of  American  deci^iion!:.  Tlicir  ri'lotive  clia-
racter  must  be  familiar  to  the  profession,  and  it  ivill  be  suffi-
cient to  iidvisetbe  student  to  examine  thoroughly,  and  to


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


ti6  SOURCES  OF  [Tart  lit.

(^aio  the  oiRstery  of  tfae  principle*  of  law,  aa  expounded
and  declared  by  our  more  itupnriant  tribunaU,  whether
th^  be  of  federal  or  of  state  jurisdiction.

We  have  hitherto  confioed  ouratteDtionlothe  reports  of
cases  in  the  courts  of  common  law.  But  the  eysteai  of
equity  is  equally  to  be  found  embodied  in  the  reports  of  ad-
judged cases;  and  the  maxims  of  the  Court  of  Chancery
are  as  fixed  as  those  which  govern  other  tribunals.  That
court  is  as  much  baund  as  a  court  of  law,  by  a  series  of  de-
cisions applicable  to  the  case,  and  establii^hinj;  a  rule.  It
has  no  discretionary  power  over  principles  and  established
precedents,  and  Chancery  has  grown  to  I>e  a  jurisdiction  of
so  much  strict  technical  rule,  ihatitis^aidbya  distinguish-
ed writer  on  equity  doctrinesithat  there  are  now  many  set-
tled rules  of  equity  which  require  to  he  moderated  by  the
rules  of  good  conscience,  as  much  as  the  most  rigorous  rules
of  law  did  before  the  chancellors  interfered  on  equitable
grounds.^  A  court  of  equity  becomes  in  the  lapse  of  time,
by  gradual  and  almost  inipf^rceplible  degrees,  a  court  of
strict  technical  jurisprudence,  like  a  court  of  law.  The
binding  nature  of  precedents  in  a  court  of  equity  was  felt
and  acknowledged  by  Lord  Keeper  Bridgman,  in  the  reign
of  Charles  II  ;'>  and  in  the  case  of  The  Earl  ofMontagut  r.
X^rd  Bath,*:  soon  after  the  rerolulion,  JiOrd  Chief  Justice
Treby,  who  sat  for  the  Lord  Chancellor,  declared,  that  the
Court  of  Chancery  was  limited  by  the  precedents  and  prac-
tice of  former  times,  and  that  it  was  dangerous  to  extend  ita
authority  further.  At  this  day,  justice  is  administered  in  a
court  of  equity  upon  as  fixed  and  certain  principles  as  in  a
court  of  law;  and  Lord  £ldon  has  secured  to  himself  a  tills
to  the  reverence  of  his  countrymen,  for  resisting  the  temp-
tation so  often  pressed  upon  him,  to  make  principles  and
precedents  bend  to  the  hardship  of  a  purticular  case. In


a  Suiidm^$  Lcttrrt  to  a  Man  ^Pruperty,  p.  1.
b  1  Mori.  307.
c  3  Ch-  Cat.  95.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


I*cl«rtXXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  «7

tbifl  couDtry  it  isat  least  as  importaDt  as  ie  any  other  that
the  ad iQiDiiit ration  of  justice,  both  legal  and  equitable,
•bould  be  stable  and  unirorm  ;  and  especially  if  there  be
any  weight  in  the  opinion  of  an  ancient  English  lawyer,
that  "variety  of  judgments,  and  novelty  of  opinions,  were
the  two  plagues  of  a  common  wen  ltb.">

We  have'no  reports  of  chancery  decisions  until  subse-
quent to  the  lime  of  Lord  Bacon.  Anciently.the  Court  of
Chancery  administered  justice  according  to  what  appeared
to  be  the  dictate  of  conscience  as  applied  to  the  case,  with-
out any  regard  to  law  or  rule  ;  and  great  inconvenience
and  mischief  must  have  been  produced  in  the  infancy  of
the-court,  by  reason  of  the  uncertainty  and  inconsistency
of  its  decisions,  flowing  from  the  want  of  settled  principles.
The  jurisdiction  of  the  court  was  greatly  enlarged  in  the
time  of  Cardinal  Wolsey,  who  was  chancellor  under
Henry  VIIL ;  and  he  maintained  his  equitable  jurisdiction
with  a  high  baud,  and  exercised  his  authority  over  every
thing  which  could  be  a  subject  of  judicial  inquiry,  and  de-
cided with  very  little  regard  to  the  common  law.  There
was  an  extraordinary  influx  of  business  during  his  admin-
istration. This  conduct  in  bis  judicial  capacity  was  one
of  the  grounds  of  accusation  agninst  him  when  he  was  im-
peached. Under  bis  successor,  Sir  Thomas  More,  who
was  tbe  first  chanceltor  that  ever  had  the  requisite.
legal  education,  businesa  rose  again  with  rapidity,  and  to
such  extent  as  to  require  the  assistance  of  a  master  of  the
ivlls.  He  allowed  injunctions  so  freely  as  to  displease  the
common  law  judges,  though  he  acted  always  with  great
ability  and  integrity. <>  To  show  how  wonderfully  business
in  chancery  had  increased  by  the  time  of  Lord  Bacon,
we  need  only  recur  to  the  fact  which  be  gives  us  bimself,(>
that  he  made  two  thousand  orders  and  decrees  in  a  year ;
and  yet  we  have  not  a  single  decision  of  bis  reported.


a  Prtf.  to  JenUn*'  Cmluria.

b  Reevrt'  Hitton/  o/lht  Engllth  Lnu,  toI.  4.  f

0  Bnt(m\  iforki,  vol.  4.  p.  530.

Vol.  r  58


r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoOglc


458  SOURCES  OF  [Put  IH.

ThoM  decision*,  if  well  and  faithfully  reported,  would
doubllem  lutre  presented  to  the  world  a  clear  illustratioB
and  masterly  display  of  many  principles  of  equity  since
greatly  considered  and  diDcusaed ;  for  even  upon  dry
technical  rules  and  points  of  law,  beafaed  the  illuminations
of  his  mighty  mind<

In  West's  Symboleo|frapfay,  a  work  published  at  the
close  of  Elizabeth's  reign,  we  have  divers  curious  and  au-
thentic precedents  of  the  process,  and  bills,  and  answers
in  chancery,  prior  to  the  time  of  Baron.  We  hare  also,
in  the  same  work,  a  brief  digest  of  rhe  powers  and  juris-
diction ofthe  court,  from  which  it  would  appear,  that
equity  was  regarded  in  that  day  as  a  matter  of  arbitrary
conscience,  unencumbered  by  any  rules  or  principles  of
law.  No  cases  are  cited  to  show  what  the  authority  was»
but  such  as  were  gleaned  from  the  Year  Books,  aud  the
treatiseaof  the  Doctor  and  Student, and  ofthe  Diversity  of
Courts.  It  was  not  until  after  the  reotoration,  that  any
reports  of  adjudged  cases  in  chancery  were  published.
The  volumes,  entitled,  '■  Reports  of  Cases  taken  and  ad-
judged in  the  Court  of  Chancery  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.j
Charles  II.,  James  II.,  William  IIL,  and  Queen  Anne,"
commence  with  the  reign  of  Charles  I.,  and  contain  the
earliest  adjudged  cases  in  equity.  But  that  work,  and
another  contemporary  work  of  the  same  character,  eo'
titled,  "  Cases  argued  and  adjudged  in  the  High  Court  of
Chancery,"  are  both  of  them,  in  their  general  character,
loose,  meagre,  and  inaccurate  reports,  of  not  murb  weight
or  authority.  But  the  report  of  some  cases  decided  by
Lord  Chancellor  Cuwper,  in  the  third  and  last  volume  a(
the  Reports  in  Chancery,  and  the  great  case  of  tkt  Dvkt
of  Norfolk,  and  the  ease  of  Bath  and  Montague,  at  the
cooclusioo  of  the  Cases  in  Chancery,  are  distinguished  ex-
ceptions to  this  complaint,  and  those  great  cases  are  fully
and  rery  interestingly  reported.  In  the  latter  part  ofthe
reign  of  Charles  II.,  Lord  Chancellor  Nottingham  raised
the  character  ofthe  court  to  high  reputation,  and  establielied
both  its  jurisprudence  and  its  jurisdiction  upon  wide  and
fational  foundatioiu. W«  hare  but  few  reports  of  his

r,3n--.MI>;GOOglC


Lectura  XXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  459

de<ti§ioDS  that  are  worthy  of  his  fame.  They  are  disperaed
through  several  works  of  inferior  authority.  It  ie  from
his  time,  however,  that  equity  became  a  regular  and  cul-
tivated science,  aad  the  judicial  decisions  in  chancery  are
to  be  carefully  studied.

Vernon's  Reports  are  the  best  of  the  old  reports  in  tbun-
cery.  They  were  published  from  hie  maouscripts,  after  his
death,  by  order  of  Chancellor  King,  and  were  found  to  be
quite  imperfect  and  inaccurate.  In  I8O61  Mr.  Raithby
favoured  the  profession  with  a  new  and  excellent  edition  of
Vernon,  enriched  by  learned  notes,  and  accurate  extracts
from  the  register's  books,  so  that  the  volumes  assumed  a
new  dress  and  more  unquestionable  authenticity.  Those
reports  include  part  of  the  judicial  administration  of  Lord
Nnttiogham,  and  the  whole  of  the  time  of  Lord  Somers;
but  they  give  us  nothing  equal  to  the  reputation  of  those
great  men.  They  bring  the  series  of  equity  decisions  down
to  the  conclusion  of  Lord  CbanceliorCowiier'sjudiciallife.

Precedents  in  Chancery  is  a  collection  of  cases  between
1689  and  1732 ;  and  the  author  of  those  reports,  and  ofihe
first  volume  of  Equity  Cases  Abridged,  is  generally  sup-
posed to  be  the  same  person.  The^  are  works  which  con-
tain very  brief  eases  in  comparison  with  the  volumnioua
details  of  modern  reports ;  but  they  areof  respectable  au-
thority.' Peere  Williams*  Reports  extend  from  the  be-'
ginning  of  the  last  century  to  the  year  1735,  and  rhey
embrace  the  period  of  the  decisions  of  a  succession  of  emi-
nent men  who  presidwl  in  chancery  in  the  former  (lart  of
the  last  century.  The  notes  of  Mr.  Cox  to  the  fourth  edi-
tion of  these  rciports,  gave  to  (hat  edition  the  character  of
being  the  best  edited  book  on  the  law.  Even  before  his
learning  and  industry  had  given  new  character  and  value
to  the  reports  of  Peere  Williams,  they  were  regarded  as
one  of  the  most  perspicuous,  useful,  and  interesting  repo-
sitories of  equity  law  to  be  found  in  the  language.


I  1  r«ey, /.  547. 3  r«wy,M5. 6r«My,M4.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


460  SOURCES  OF  [Part  III

Roseley'i  reports  ofcaaes,  during  the  time  of  Lord  Kingt
bavfl  received  a  various  and  contradictory  character  and
treatment.  Lord  Mans&eld  said  ii  was  a  book  not  to  be
cpinted  ;  but  Lord  Eldon,  who  is  presumed  to  have  been  a
better  judge  of  the  merits  of  the  work,  says,  that  Moseley
•a  a  book  of  considerable  accuracy.''  It  is  fortunate  that
we  hare  even  Mimpcrfert  a  view  of  the  decisions  of  Lord
King,  wbo  wait  an  eminent  scholar,  aitd  to  whom  Hr.
Locke  bequeathed  his  papers  and  library.

Lord  Talbot  presided  in  chancery  but  a  very  few  years.
He  was  a  pure  and  exuhed  character,  who  died  in  the  vi-
gour of  his  age,  and  bis  loss  was  lamented  as  a  great  na-
tional caloniity.  The  cases  during  hin  time,  under  the  title
of  Catet  tempore  Talbot,  are  well  reported,  and  have  a  le-
pulation  for  accuracy.

Lord  Hardwicke,thesuccesaor  of  Lord  Talbol,  held  the
great  seal  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  and  the  present
wise  luid  rational  system  of  English  equity  jurisprudence,
owes  more  to  him  than  perhaps  to  any  of  his  predecessors.
His  decisions  are  reported  in  the  elder  Vesoy,  and  Atkyas,
and  partly  in  Ambler  and  Dickens ;  and  though  ooce  i^
them  are  eminent  reporters,  either  for  accuracy  or  precision
in  the  statements  of  the  cases,  or  in  giving  the  judgment  of
thecouri,^  yet  the  value  of  bis  opinions,  and  the  great  ex-
tent of  his  learning,  and  the  solidity  of  his  judgment  have
been  sufficiently  perceived  and  understood.  There  is  do
judge  in  thejuridica!  annals  of  England,  whope  judicial  cha-
racter has  received  greater  and  more  constant  homage.  Hia
knowledge  ofthe  law,  said  a  very  competent  judge,  was
most  extraordinary,  and  he  was  a  consummate  mafilerof
the  professiun.c  His  decisions  at  this  day,  and  in  our  own
courts,  do  undoubtedly  carry  with  them  a  more  command-


a  3  Antl.  SGI. S  Burr.  2639. I  JUirtrale.  99.
b  BttUtr,  J.  in  6  BaU.  29.  n. Sir  J.  McatifieM,  in  a  Tinmton,  64.
4  ffiey,  13a.n. Pre/,  lo  Eden'i  SeporU. I  ScA.  Sc  Lef.  340.
e  Lord  Kenyan,  7  Term,  416.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  461

ing  weight  of  authority  than  those  ofany  other  judge ;  and .
the  best  editions  of  the  elder  Vesey  and  Atkyns  will  coo-
tiDue  to  6z  the  attentioo  aod  study  of  succeeding  ages.

Eden's  Reports  of  the  decisions  of  Lord  Northington,
the  successor  to  Lord  Hardwicke,  are  very  authentic,  and
highly  esteemed.  They  surpass  in  accuracy  the  reports
ether  of  Ambler  or  Dickins  within  the  same  period,  and
the  autburity  of  Lord  Northington  is  very  great,  and  it
arose  froui  the  uncommon  vigour  and  clearness  of  bis  ua-
derstaoding.  The  next  book  of  re))ortsof  daserred  cele-
brity is  BrowU)  commencing  with  Lord  Tburlow's  ap-
pointment to  the  office  of  chancellor  ;  and  the  high  cha-
racter of  the  court  at  that  period,  gave  to  those  reports  a
very  extensive  authority  and  circulation,  and  for  which
they  were  indebted  more  to  the  reputation  of  the  chancel-
lor, than  to  any  merit  in  the  execution  ofthe  work.  Cox's
Cases  in  Chancery  give  us  the  decisional  of  Lord  Kenyon
while  he  was  muster  of  the  rolls  under  Thurlow,  as  well
as  tho  decisions  of  the  lord  chancellor  during  the  same
period.  They  were  intended  as  a  supplement  to  the  re-
ports of  Brown  and  the  younger  Vesey,  so  far  us  those  re-
ports covered  the  period  embraced  by  these  cases,  and
they  are  neat,  brief,  and  perspicuous  reports  of  uoi|uea-
tionable  accuracy.  A  new  and  greatly  improved  editioo
has  I'ltely  been  published  in  New-York  under  the  super-
intendence ofone  of  the  masters  in  chancery.

The  reports  of  the  younger  Vesey  extend  over  a  large
space  of  time,  and  contain  the  researches  of  Sir  Richard
Pepper  Arden  as,  master  of  the  rolls,  and  the  whole  ofthe
decisions  of  Lord  Loughboruugb,  and  carry  us  far  into
thetimoof  Lord  Eldon.  These  reports  are  distinguished
for  their  copiousneis  and  fidelity.  The  same  character  it
due  to  the  reports  of  his  successors;  and  though  great
Gojnptaints  have  been  made  at,  the  delay  of  causes,  aris-
ing from  the  cautious  and  doubling  mind  of  the  present
venerable  lord  chancellor  of  England,  it  seems  to  be  uni-
.  versally  conceded,  that  he  bestowsextraordinary  diligence
in  the  investigation  of  immense  details  of  business,  and
arrives  in  the  eod  at  a  correa  eoaclusioa,  and  displays  a

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


4<g2  SOURCES  OF  Part.  HI.

roost  eompreliensive  and  familiar  acquaintance  with  equi-
ty principles.  It  ntufit.  nevsrtfaeleas,  be  admitted,  that
tbe  reports  of  Lord  £ldon'a  administration  in  equity,
amounting  to  perhaps  thirty  rolumeK,  and  replete  with  at-
tenuated discussion,  and  loose  suggestions  of  doubts  anJ
difficulties,  are  enough  to  taak  rery  aeveraly  tbe  patience
of  the  professioD.

There  are  recent  reports  of  decisions  in  other  depart-
ments of  equity,  which  are  deserving  of  great  attention.
The  character  of  those  branches  of  the  equity  jurisdiction
ia  eminently  sustained ;  and  tbe  reported  decisions  of
Lord  Redesdale  and  Lord  Manners,  in  the  Irish  Court  of
Chancery,  are  also  to  be  placed  on  a  lerel,  in  point  of  au-
thority, with  the  best  productions  of  the  English  bench.

-Upon  our  American  equity  reports,  I  have  only  to  ob-
serre,  that  being  decisions  in  cases  arising  under  our  do-
mestic laws  and  systems,  they  cannot  but  eicKe  a  stron-
ger interest  in  the  mind  of  the  student ;  and  from  tbeir
more  entire  application  to  our  circumstances,  they  will
carry  with  them  tbe  greater  authority.

I  hare  now  finished  a  succinct  detail  of  the  principal  re-
porters ;  and  when  the  student  has  been  thoroughly  initia-
ted in  the  elements  of  legal  science,  I  would  strongly  re-
commend them  to  his  notice.  The  old  cases  prior  to  the
year  1888,  need  only  be  occasionally  consulted,  and  the
leading  decisions  in  them  examined.  Some  of  them,
however,  are  to  be  deeply  explored  and  studied,  and
particularly  those  cases  and  decisions  whif^h  have  spread
their  influence  5ir  and  wide,  and  established  principles
which  lie  at  the  foundations  of  English  jurisprudence.
Such  cases  have  sttrad  the  scrutiny  of  cbntemporeiy
judges,  and  been  illustrated  by  succeeding  artists,  and
are  destined  to  guide  and  control  the  most  distant  pos-
terity. The  reports  of  cases  since  the  middle  of  the  last
century,  ought,  in  most  instances,  to  be  read  in  course,
and  they  will  conduct  the  student  over  an  immense  field
of  forensic  discussion.  They  contain  that  great  body  of  the
commercial  law,  and  of  the  law  of  contracts,  and  of  trusts,
which  governs  at  this  day.  They  are  worthy  of  being
studied  even  by  scholars  of  taste  and  general  literature,  at

t.oosle


,  LMlun  XXI.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  46S

being  autbentic  tnemorialaof  the  buainess  and  manners  of
the  age  in  which  the;  were  compoud.  Law  reports  are
dramatic  in  their  plan  and  structure.  They  abound  in  pa-
tbentic  incident,  and  displays  of  deep  feeliag.  They  are
faithful  records  of  those  "  little  competitions,  factions,  and
debates  of  mankind,"  that  fill  up  the  prindpal  drama  of
human  life;  and  which  are  engendered  by  the  love  of
power,  the  appetitefor  wealth, the  allurements  of  pleasure,
the  delusions  of  self-interest,  the  melancholy  perversion  of
talent,  and  the  machinations  of  fraud.  They  give  us  the
skilful  debates  at  the  bar,  and  the  elaborate  opinions  on
the  bench,  delivered  with  the  authority  of  oracular  wisilom.
They  become  deeply  interesting,  because  they  conlaia
true  portraits  of  the  talents  and  learning  of  the  sages  of
the  law.  We  should  have  known  but  very  little  of  the
great  mind  and  varied  accomplishments  ofLord  Mansfield,
if  we  had  not  been  possessed  of  the  faithful  reports  of  bis
decisions.  It  is  there  that  his  title  to  the  character  of
"  founder  of  the  commercial  law  of  England,"  is  verified.
A  like  value  may  be  attributed  to  the  reports  of  the  deci-
sions of  Holt,  Uurdwicke,  Willes,  Wilmot,  De  Grey,
Camdea,  Thurlow,  Kenyon,  Sir  William  Scott,  and  many
other  illustrious  names,  which  will  be  aa  immortal  as  the
English  law.

-  Nor  is  it  to  be  overlooked  as  a  matter  of  minor  impor*
Cance,  that  the  judicial  tribunals  have  been  almost  uniform-
ly distinguished  for  their  immaculate  purity.  Every  per-
son well  acquainted  with  the  contents  of  the  English  re-
ports, must  have  been  struck  with  the  unbending  integrity
and  lofty  morals  with  which  the  courts  were  inspired,  f  do
Dot  know  where  we  could  resort,  among  all  the  volumes  of
human  composition,  to  find  more  constant,  more  tranquil,,
and  more  sublime  manifestations  of  the  intrepidity  of  con-
scious rectitude.  If  we  were  to  go  batik  to  the  iron  times
of  the  Tudors,  and  follow  judicial  history  down  frooi  the  .
first  page  in  Dyer  lo  the  last  page  of  the  last  rtjwrter,  we-
should  find  the  higher  courts  of  civil  judicature,  generally,
and  with  rare  eicepiiona,  presenting  (be  image  of  the
sanctity  of  a  temple,  where  tnilh  and  justice  srem  to  be
eqthroned,  aud  to  be  jiersonified  in  their  dt-rrrcs.

Google


i,Googlc


LECTURE  XXII.


•r  THE  PRINCIPAL  PUBLICATION'S  ON  THE  COMMON  LAW,

The  reports  of  adjudged  casei  are  adniitled  to  coDtain
the  highest  and  tiio^t  authentic  evidence  of  the  principles
and  rules  of  tfae  common  law;  but  there  are  numerous
other  works  of  sages  in  the  profession  which  contribute
▼ery  esseotially  to  facilitate  the  researches,  and  abridge
the  labour  of  the  student.  Those  works  acquire  by  time
■od  their  intrinsic  ralue,  the  weight  of  authority ;  and  the
«arher  text  books  are  cited  and  rolied  upon  as  such,  in  the
discussions  at  the  bar  and  upon  the  bench,  in  cases  where
judicial  authority  is  wanting.

One  of  the  oldest  of  these  treatises  is  Olanville's  Trae-
tatui  de  Legibtu  Anglia,  composed  in  the  reign  of  Henry
II.  It  is  a  plain,  dry,  pergpicoouB  essay  on  the  ancient  ac-
tions, and  the  forms  of  writs  then  in  use.  It  has  become
almost  obsolete  and  useless  for  any  practical  purpose,  ow-
ing to  the  disuse  of  the  ^ncient  actions ;  but  it  is  a  curious
monumentoftbe  improved  state  of  the  Norman  ad  minis-
ftution  of  justice.  It  is  peculiarly  venerable,  if  it  be,  as  it
u  said,  the  most  ancient  book  extant  dpon  the  laws  and
customs  of  England.  It  has  been  cited  and  commented
upon  by  Lord  Coke,  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  Sir  Henry  Spel-
man,  SeldeO)  Blackatone,  and  most  of  the  eminent  lawyers
and  antiquaries  of  the  two  Inst  centuries.  Sir.  Reeret
■aya,  that  he  incorporated  the  whole  of  Glanville  into  his
history  of  the  English  law.

Bracton  wrote  his  treatise  De  Legiinu  tt  ContuetudinHui
Anglia,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  HI.,  and  be  is  said  to  have
been  a  judge  itinerant  in  that  reign,  and  professor  of  law  at

Vol.  I.  59


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4S6  SOURCES  OP  ^art  IH.

Otford.  He  is  a  clameal  writer,  and  bas  been  called,  bj
a  perfect  judge  of  hia  meriu,"  the  father  of  the  fioglish
law,  and  the  great  ornameat  of  the  age  in  which  beliTed.
H»  work  u  a  ■ystrmatic  performance,  giving  a  eompleto
view  of  the  law  io  all  its  titles,  as  it  stood  at  the  time  it  was
written  ;  and  it  is  6lled  with  a  copious  and  accurate  detail
oflegal  learning.  It  treats  of  the  several  wajs  of  acqui-
ring, maintaining,  aod  recovering  property,  much  in  the
manner  of  the  institutes  of  Justinian.  The  style  isclear
and  eipressive,  and  sometimes  polished  ;  and  it  has  bees
imputed  to  the  iDfluence  of  the  civil  and  canon  law,  whick
he  had  studied  aud  admired ;  and  the  work  evinces,  by  the
freedom  of  the  quotations,  that  he  bad  drank  deep  at  tboae
fbuntains.

Sir  William  Jones  says,  be  is  certainly  the  best  of  onr
juridical  classics,  though  he  is  perfectly  avrare  that  Brac-
ton  copied  Juntinian  almost  word  for  word.  In  the  raiga
of  Edward  I.  Bracton  was  reduced  into  a  compendium  1^
Thornton,  which  shows,  says  Selden,^  how  great  the  an*
thority  of  Bracton  was  in  the  time  of  Edward  I.  He  con-
tinued to  be  the  repository  of  ancient  English  jurisprudence
and  the  principal  source  of  legal  authority,  down  to  the
time  of  the  publication  of  the  iiistilules  of  Lord  Coke.

Staunforde,  in  his  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  published  abont
the  time  of  Philip  and  Hary,  beers  strong  testimony  to  the
merits  and  to  the  authority  or  Bracton.  It  is  stated  in  Plow-
den,c  that  neither  Glaoville  nor  Bracton  were  to  be  cited
as  authorities,  but  rather  as  ornaments  to  the  discourse,  and
in  several  other  books  the  same  thing  was  said.*!  But  Ur.

-  Reeve,  in  his  history  of  the  English  law,^  justly  vindicates
the  character  of  Bracton  from  such  unmerited  aspersioa ;

■  and  what  is  as  much,  and  perhaps  more  to  the  purpose,  tba


•  Ahw'*  Hulory  of  (Ae  £n;IuA  Laa,  670.

b  DUtirlaHonaHatiedtoFUIa,  ch.  t.  a.  I.

t  P.  3S7.  368.

a  1  Shoa.  118. It  St.  IVf.  143.

e  Vol  4.  p.  570,  t71.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMtur*  XXII.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  ^C

learned  Selden,  whose  kDowled^  of  English  legal  Bntiqui-
ties  iras  unriralled,  declare§,  that  thiil  notion  is  founded  in
error.  Gtanville  and  Bracton  are  authors  of  great  service
to  all  who  apply  themselves  to  the  study  of  the  law,  and
are  desirous  of  knowing  its  origin  and  |>rogre8B  from  the
Tery  foundation.*  Thej  contain  numberless  things,  said
Selden,  which  in  bis  day  either  remained  entire,  or  were
only  partially  abrogated ;  and  they  contain  such  informa-
tion on  ancient  customs  and  law*,  as  to  carry  with  them
authority,  as  well  as  illustration.  Lord  Holt,  in  the  great
ease  of  Coggt  t.  Bernard,  made  free  use  of  Bracton,  and
■poke  of  him  as  an  old  author,  but  one  full  of  reason  and
good  sense.

Britton  and  Fteta,  two  treatises  in  the  reign  of  Edw.  I.
were  nothing  more  than  appendages  to  Bracton,  and  from
which  they  drew  largely.  The  dissertation  which  Selden
annexed  to  the  edition  of  Fleta,  printed  in  his  time,  is
evidence  of  the  high  estimation  in  which  the  work  waa
then  held ;  and  it  is  a  little  singular  that  President  Hen-
ault,  in  his  chronological  abridgment  of  the  History  of
France,^  should  refer  to  this  ancient  English  treaties  of
Fleta  as  an  historical  authority.

Sir  John  Fortescue's  treatise  De  LoudibuM  Legum  An-
glia,  was  written  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VL  under  whom  he
was  chief  justice,  and  afterwards  chancellor.  It  is  in  the
form  of  a  dialogue  between  bim  and  the  young  prince,  and
he  undertakes  to  show,  that  the  commou  law  was  the  most
reasonable,  and  the  most  ancient  in  Europe,  and  superior
to  the  civil  law.  It  displays  sentiments  of  liberty,  and  a
senseof  a  limited  monarchy,  remarkable  in  the  fierce  and
barbarous  period  of  the  Lancastrian  civil  wars,  and  an  air
of  probity  and  piety  runs  through  the  work.  Ht<  innisted,
for  instance,  that  the  conviction  of  criminals  by  juricti,  and
without  torture,  was  much  more  just  and  humane  thtin  the
method  of  the  continental  nations ;  and  that  the  privilege  of


a  Seldtn't  DiiiertafMn,  cit  I.mo-  3>
ATqih.  I.9SS.


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


4M  SOURC£S  OF  [Part  III.

cbntlen^ng  juron,  and  of  bringing  writs  of  attaint  upon
corru|>l  verdicts,  and  the  usiial  wealth  of  jurors,  afforded
that  security  to  the  lives  and  property  of  English  subjects,
which  no  olber  country  wascapableof  aflbrding.  H«  run
a  parallel,  in  many  instance^!,  between  the  common  and
the  eifil  law,  in  order  to  show  the  suporior  equity  of  the
former,  and  that  the  procefilings  in  couru  of  juslice  were
not  so  dilatory  as  in  olber  nations.  Though  some  of  the
instances  of  that  superiority  which  he  adduces,  such  as  the
illegitimacy  of  ante-nuptial  childrent  and  the  doctrine  of
feudal  wardMhips,  are  of  no  consequence,  yet  the  semrily
arising  from  trial  by  jury,  and  the  serurity  of  life  and  pro-
perty by  means  of  the  mised  government  of  England,  and
the  limitations  of  the  royal  prerogative,  were  solid  and  pre-
eminent marks  of  superiority.

This  interesting  work  of  Fortescue  has  been  translated
from  the  Latin  into  Lnglioh,  and  illustrated  with  the  notes
of  the  learned  Selden ;  aad  it  was  strongly  recommended,
in  a  subsequent  age,  by  such  writers  as  Sir  Waher  Raleigh,
and  St.  Germain.  And  while  upon  this  uulhor,  wp  can-
not but  pause  and  admire  a  system  of  jurisprudence,
which,  in  so  uncultivated  a  period  of  society,  contained
such  singular  and  invaluable  provisions  in  favour  of  life,
liberty,  and  property,  as  those  to  which  Fortescue  refer-
red. They  were  unprecedented  in  all  Grerk  and  Roman
amiquily,  and  being  preHcrved  in  some  tolerable  degree  of
fresliness  and  vigour,  amidst  the  profound  ignorance  and
licentious  spiritof  the  feudal  agi's,  they  justly  entitle  I  he
common  law  to  a  share  of  rhat  ronsicnt  and  vivid  eulogy
which  the  Knglish  lawyers  have  always  liberally  bestowed
upon  theirinunicipal institutions.

Littleton's  Book  of  Tenures  was  composed  in  the  reign
of  Edwird  IV.  and  it  is  confined  entirely  to  the  doctrines  of
the  old  English  law,  concerning  the  tenure  of  real  estates,
and  the  incidents  and  services  relating  thereto.  In  the  first
book,  Littleion  treais  of  the  quantity  of  interest  in  estates,
under  the  heudu  of  fee  simple,  fee  (nil,  tenant  in  dower,
tenant  by  the  curtesy,  tenant  for  life,  for  years,  apd  at  will.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXII  ]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4€9

In  tbe  secood  book  he  treats  of  the  several  tenures  and
•ervicea  by  which  lands  were  then  held,  Bucb  as  homage,
feulty,  villeoagei  and  knifrht  service.  In  the  third  book
ha  treats  of  divers  subjects  relative  to  estates,  eod  their
tenures,  uuder  the  beads  of  parceners,  joint-tenants,  es-
tates on  condition,  releases,  warranty.  Sec.  He  explained
tbe  learuing  of  that  period  on  the  anbject  of  tenures  and
estates,  with  a  felicity  of  arrann^ment,  and  perspicuity
and  precision  of  style,  that  placed  him  above  all  other
writers  on  the  law.  No  one  ever  attained  a  more  decided
and  permanent  reputation  for  accuracy  and  authority.
Lord  Coke  says,"  that  Littleton's  Tenures  was  the  most
perfect  and  abwlute  work,  and  as  free  from  error  as  any
hook  that  ever  was  written  on  any  human  science.  He
said)  he  had  known  many  of  his  cases  drawn  in  question,
but  never  could  find  any  judgment  friren  against  any  of  '
tbem.  which  could  not  be  affirmed  of  any  other  book  in
our  law.  The  great  excellence  of  Littleton  is  his  full
knowledge  of  the  subject,  and  the  neatness  and  simplicity*
<^  his  manner.  He  cites  but  very  few  cbsom,  hut  he  holds
no  opinion,  says  his  great  comnsentatorj  but  what  is  sup-
ported by  authority  and  reason.  A  preat  part  ofLittle-
ton  is  not  now  law,  or  is  entirely  obsolete  with  as ;  and
particularly  much  of  the  matter  in  the  chapters  on  eataten
in  fee  tail,  copyholds,  feudal  services,  discontinuance,  at-
toramenl,  remitter,  conBrmation,  and  warranty.  But,
even  at  tbin  day,  what  remains  concerning  tenures,  can-
not  be  well  understood  without  a  general  knowledge  of
what  is  abolished  ;  and  even  ihe  obsolete  parts  of  Little
ton  <»n  be  studied  with  pleasure  and  profit,  by  all  who  are
desirous  to  trace  the  history  and  grounds  of  the  law.  It
faas  been  supposed  by  Hr.  Butler,  that  Littleton's  treatise
would  still  be  a  proper  introduction  to  the  institutes  of  the
English  law  on  the  subject  of  real  estates.

Perkin's  Treatise  of  tbe  Laws  of  England,  written  in
tbe  reign  of  Henry  VHL  has  always  been  deemed  a  valua-

a  Fr^au  to  OAt  IMUtton.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.GoOglc


47tt  SOURCES  OF  [Part  lU.

blebook  for  the  learning  and  ingenaitir  displajad  in  it  re-
lating to  the  title  and  conveyance  of  real  property.  Coke
said  it  wa«  wittily  and  learnedly  composed ;  and  Lord
Mansfield  held  it  to  be  a  good  authority  in  point  of  law.
So  great  was  its  popularity  with  the  profession,  that  it  bad
gone  through  thirteen  editions  when  it  was  translated
from  the  law  French  into  English  in  1757.  It  treau  of
graots,  deeds,  feoffments,  exchange,  dower,  curtesy,  de-
vises, surrenders,  reservations,  and  conditions ;  and  it
abounds  with  citations,  and  supports  the  positions  laid
down  by  a  reference  to  the  Year  Books,  or  Fiizhertwrt's
Abridgment.

The  Dialogue  between  a  Doctor  of  Divinity  and  a  Sto-
dent  in  Lew,  was  also  written  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,
and  discusBes  in  a  popular  manner  tnany  principles  and
points  of  the  common  law.  The  seventeenth  edition  of
this  work  was  pubhahed  in  1787,  and  dedicated  to  the
younger  students  and  professors  of  law.  It  has  always
been  considered  by  the  courts,  and  the  liest  of  the  juridi-
cal writers,  as  a  book  of  merit  and  authority.  The  form
of  writing  by  dialogue  was  mnch  in  use  among  the  an-
cients, and  some  of  the  finest  treatises  of  the  Greeks  and
Komans  were  written  in  that  form,  and  particularly  the
remains  of  the  Socratic  school  in  the  writings  of  Xeno-
phen  and  Plato,  and  the  rhetorical  and  philosophical  trea-
tises of  Cicero.  The  three  most  interesting  productions,
in  the  form  of  dialogue,  on  the  English  law,  are  Fortes-
cue,  already  mentioned,  this  work  of  St.  Germain,  and
the  elegant  and  classical  work  entitled  Eunomus,  or  Dia-
logues concerning  the  Law  and  Constitution  of  England  by
Mr.  Wynne.

But  the  legal  productions  of  the  preceding  ages  were  all
surpassed  in  value  and  extent  in  the  rpigns  of  Elizabeth  and
James,  by  the  results  of  ihe  splendid  talents  and  immense
erudition  of  Bacon  and  Coke.  The  writings  of  Lord  Ba-
con on  the  municipal  law  of  England  are  not  to  be  com-
pared in  reputation  to  his  productions  in  metaphysical  and
moral  science  ;  but  it  is,  nevertheless,  true,  that  he  sbed
light  and  learning,  and  left  the  impression  of  profound  and
original  thought  on  every  subject  which  he  touched. It

Coogk


L«clun  XXa]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  471

waa  the  course  of  bia  life  to  coDiiect  law  with  other  atudiea,
and,  therefore,  he  admitted,  that  hia  ar^umeota  might  bare
the  more  variety,  and  perhapa  the  greater  depth  ofreaaoa.
Hia  principal  law  Iracta  are,  hia  Elementa  of  the  Cominoo
Law, containing  ao illuatration  of  the  moat importaDt
maxima  of  the  common  law,  and  of  the  uae  of  the  law  ia
its  application  to  the  protection  of  peraon,  property,  and
character, and hia Reading  upon  the  Statute  of  Vaea.
Lord  Bacon  aeems  to  hare  disdained  to  cite  aulhoritiea  in
bia  law  treatises  ;  and  in  that  reaped  he  approved  of  the
method  of  Littleton  andFitzfaerbert.and  condemned  that
of  Perkins  and  Staunforde.' He  admits,  however,  that  in
bis  own  private  copy,  be  hftd  all  hia  authoritiea  quoted,  and
that  he  did  aoraetimea  "  weigh down  authorities  by  evi-
dence of  reason ;"  and  that  be  intended  rather  to  correct
the  law  than  aooth  received  error,  or  endeavour  to  recon-
cile contradictiona  by  unprofitable  subtlety. He  made  a
proposal  to  King  James  for  a  digest  of  the  whole  body  of
the  common  and  atatute  law  of  England;  and if  he  had
been  encouraged,  and  enabled  to  employ  the  resources  of
bia  great  mind  on  such  a  noble  work,  he  would  have  done
infinite  service  to  mankind,  and  have  settled  in  hia  favour
the  question,  which  be  said  would  be  made  with  posterity,
whether  be  or  Coke  was  the  greater  Lawyer. The  wri-
tings of  Lord  Bacon  are  distinguished  for  the  perspicuity
and  simplicity  with  which  every  subject  is  treated.

Lord  Coke's  Institutes  have  had  a  most  extensive  and
permanent  influence  on  the  common  law  of  England.  Th«
first  volume  is  a  commentary  upon  Littleton's  Tenures }
and  notwithstanding  the  magnitude  of  the  work,  it  has
reached  seventeen  editions.  Many  of  the  doctrines  which
bis  writings  explain  and  illustrate,  have  J>ecome  obsolete,
or  have  been  swept  away  by  the  current  of  events.  The  in-
fluence of  two  centuries  must  inevitably  work  a  great  r«^
volution  in  the  laws  and  usages,  as  well  as  in  ibe  ntanucra

a  Pr'/ttceU)  Mi  Lav  Tratlit


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4Tt  SOURCES  OF  fart  OS.

and  taste  of  a  nation.  Perhaps  eterj  thin;  useful  in  tfae
inatitatet  of  Coke  may  be  fodnd  more  methodically  ar-
ranged, and  .more  intereaUDgly  tau^fhl,  in  the  modern
compilation!  and  digests ;  yet  his  authority  ou  all  subjects
counected  with  the  ancient  law,  is  too  great  and  too  vene-
rable to  be  neglected.  The  writings  of  Coke,  as  Sutler
h»8  obseired,"  stand  between  and  connect  the  ancient  and
the  modern  law — the  old  and  the  new  jurisprudence.  He
explains  the  ancient  system  of  law  as  it  stood  in  his  day,
and  he  points  out  the  leading  circumstances  ofthe  innova-
tion which  was  begun.  We  have  in  his  works  the  begin-
ning uf  the  disuae  of  real  actions ;  the  tendency  of  the  na-
tion to  abolish  ihe  military  tenures;  the  rise  of  a  syatAmof
equity  jurisdictioa  ;  and  the  outlines  of  every  point  of  mo-
dern  law.

The  second  part  of  the  Institutes  of  Cohe  is  acotnmrai-
tary  upon  the  ancient  ftatutes,  beginning  with  magna  cbar-
ta,  and  proceeding  down  to  the  reign  of  Henry  VIH. ;  and
his  commentaries  upon  the  ancient  statutes  consisted,  as  he
himself  declared,  of  the  authentic  resolutions  of  the  courta
of  justice,  and  were  not  like  the  glosses  of  the  civilians
upon  the  teit  of  the  civil  law,  which  contain  so  manj  di-
versities of  opinion  as  to  increase  rather  than  to  resolve
doubts  and  uncertainties.  His  commentary  upon  magna
eharta,  and  particularly  on  the  celebrated  29tb  chapter,
is  deeply  interesting  to  the  lawyers  of  the  present  age,  as
well  from  the  value  and  dignity  of  the  teit,  as  the  spirit
of  justice  and  of  civil  liberty  which  pervades  and  animates
the  work.  In  this  respect  Lord  Coke  eclipses  his  cod-
temporaryand  great  rival,  Lord  Bacon,  who  was  as  in-
ferior to  Coke  in  a  just  sense  and  manly  vindication  of
the  freedom  and  privileges  of  the  subject,  as  be  was  su-
perior in  general  science  and  philosophy.  Lord  Coke,
in  a  very  advanced  age,  took  a  principal  share  in  pro-
posing  and  framing  the  celebrated  Petition  of  Right,
conlaiuing a parliamentary sanction  of those consti-

1  Pre/,  to  Co- Liu.

r,o,i,,-,-,ih,.GoO(^lc


Lecture  XXO.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  A7S

tutional  limitations  tipoa  the  royal  prerogative,  which
were  deemed  easeotial  to  the  liberties  of  the  nation.

The  third  and  fourth  parts  ofthe  Institutes  treat  of  high
treason  and  the  other  pleas  of  the  crown,  and  the  history
and  antiquities  of  the  English  courts.  The  harshness  dnd
severity  of  the  ancient  criminal  code  of  England  ia
ill  suited  to  the  taste  and  moral  sense  of  the  {iresent  age  J
and  those  parts  of  the  instttutesareuf  very  inconsiderable
Talue  and  use,  except  it  be  to  enlighten  the  researches  of
tbe  legal  antiquary.  In  this  respect,  Coke's  Pleas  of  the
Crown  are  inferior  to  the  work  under  that  title  by  Staun-
forde,  who  wrote  in  the  age  of  Philip  and  Mary,  and  was
the  earliest  writer  who  treated  didactically  on  that  subjecti
Staunforde  wrote  io  law  French  ;  but  Lord  Coke,  more
wisely  and  benevolenlly,  wrote  in  English,  because,  he
said,  the  matter  of  which  he  treated  concerned  all  tha
subjects  of  the  realm.

Before  we  quit  the  period  of  tbe  old  law,  We  must  tlot
omit  to  notice  the  grand  abridgmeats  of  Statham,  Fitz-
herbert,  and  Brooke.  Statham  was  a  baron  of  the  Ex-
chequer in  the  time  of  Edward  IV.  His  abridgment  of
the  law  was  a  digest  of  most  titles  of  the  law,  and  com-
prising  under  each  head  adjudged  cases  from  the  Year
Books,  given  in  a  concise  manner.  Tbe  cases  were
strung  together  without  regard  to  connexion  of  matter.
It  is  doubtful  whether  it  was  printed  before  or  aAer  Fitz*
herbert's  work,  but  the  latter  entirely  superseded  it.  Fitz-
herbert  was  published  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  and
came  oat  in  1514,  and  was  a  work  for  that  period  of  sin-
gular learaiag  and  utility.  Brooke  was  published  in  1573,
and  in  a  great  degree  superseded  the  others.  These  two
last  abridgments  contain  the  substance  of  the  Year  Books
regularly  digested ;  and  by  the  form  and  order  which  they
gave  to  the  rude  materials  before  them,  and  the  great
facility  which  they  afforded  to  ihc  acquisition  of  know-
ledge, they  must  have  contributed  very  greatly  and  ra-
pidly to  the  improvement  of  legal  science.  Even  those  ex-
ceedingly laborious  abridgments  were  in  their  turn  to  b%
superseded  by  the  abridgments  of  Rolle,  and  his  succes-
sors. Dr.  Cowell,  who  was  contemporary  to  Coke*  ptb*

Vol..  .1.  se  ,,„ Google


474  SOURCES  OF  [Part  m.

liahed  in  Latin  an  tnttitute  of  the  laws  of  Eogland,  after
the  manner  of  Justinian's  Institutea.  His  work,  was
founrled  u|)on  the  old  feudal  tenures,  such  as  the  law  t^
wards  and  liveries,  tenures  in  capite,  and  knight  service.
While  the  writiugs  of  Lork  Coke  have  descended  with
fame  and  honour  to  posterity,  it  was  the  fate  of  the  learn-
ed labours  of  Dr.  Cowell,  to  pass  unheeded  and  unkaowD,
into  irreclaimable  oblivion.  And.  with  respect  to  all  the
preceding  periods,  Reeves'  Histor;  of  the  English  Law
contains  the  hext  account  that  we  have  of  the  progress
of  the  law,  from  the  time  of  the  Saxons  to  the  reign  of
Elizabeth.  It  covets  the  whole  ground  of  the  taw  inclu-
ded in  theoliiabrid^ments,  and  it  iaa  work  deserving  of
the  highest  commendation.  I  am  at  a  loss  which  most  to
admire,  the  full  and  accurate  learning  which  it  contains,
ur  the  neat,  perspicuous  and  sometimes  elegant  style  ia
which  that  learning  is  conveyed.

The  treatise  of  Sir  Henry  Finch,  being  a  discourse  in
four  books  on  the  maxims  and  positive  grounds  of  ihe  law,
was  first  published  in  French,  in  1619,  and  we  have  the
authority  of  Sir  William  Blackstone  for  saying,  that  hia
method  was  greatly  superior  to  all  the  treatises  that  were
then  extaot.  His  text  was  weighty,  coneiae,  and  ner-
vous, and  his  illustrations  apposite,  clear,  and  authrnlic<
But  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  tenures,  and  the  disuse  of
real  actions,  have  rendered  half  of  his  work  obsolete.

Shepherd's  Touchstone  of  Common  Aaeurances  was  Ihe
production  of  Mr.  Justice  Dodderidgein  the  reign  of  James
1.  It  is  a  work  of  great  valueand  authority,  touching  tbe
common  law  modes  of  conveyance,  and  those  derived  from
tbe  statute  of  uses.  It  treats  also  copiously  of  the  law  of
uses  and  devises  ;  but  the  great  defect  of  tbe  book  is  the
want  ofthat  lucid  order  and  perspicuous  method  which  are
essential  to  the  cheerful  perusal  and  ready  perception  of
the  merits  of  such  a  work.  The  second  volume  of  CoU
hclatua  Juridica  has  an  analysis  of  the  theory  and  prac-
tice of  conveyancing,  which  is  only  a  compendious  abridg-
ment of  the  Touchstone ;  and  there  ia  a  very  improved  edi-


ted t,G60(^lc


t*cture  XXI.)  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  475

tion  of  it  by  Mr.  Preston,  who  has  favoared  the  profession
with  several  excellent  tracts  on  the  law  of  real  property.
Rolle's  Abridgment  of  the  Law  was  published  soon  after
the  restoration,  with  an  interesting  preface  by  Sir  Matthew
Hale.  It  brings  down  the  law  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of
Charles  [.,  and  though  it  be  an  excellent  work,  and,  id
point  of  method,  succinctness,  and  legal  precision,  a  model
of  a  good  abridgment.  Sir  Matthew  Hale  considered  it  an
unequal  monument  of  the  fame  of  Rolle,  and  that  it  felt
short  of  what  might  have  been  expected  from  his  abilities
and  great  merit.  It  is  also  deemed,  by  Mr.  Hargrave,  a
great  defect  in  Viner'x  very  exten^iive  abridgment,  that  he
should  have  attempted  to  engraft  it  on  such  a  narrow
foundation  as  that  of  Rolle's  work.  Rolle  was  chief
justice  of  England  under  the  protectorate  of  Cromwell,
and  imder  the  preceding  commonwealth  ;  but  as  his  abridg-
ment was  printed  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  he  has  oo
other  title  annexed  to  bis  name  than  that  of  Serjeant  Rolle,
and  his  republican  dignity  was  not  recognised.

Since  the  period  of  the  English  revolution,  the  new  di-
gests have  superseded  the  use  of  the  former  ones  ;  and  Ba-  ,
con,  Viner,  Coinyns,  and  Cruise,  contain  such  a  vast  acces-
sion of  modern  law  learning,  thai  their  predecessors  have
fallen  into  oblivion.  Vioer's  abridgment,  with  ell  its  de-
fects and  inaccuracies,  is  a  convenient  part  of  every  law-
yer's library.  We  obtain  by  it  an  easy  and  prompt  ac-
cess to  the  learning  of  the  Year  Books,  and  the  old
abridgments,  and  the  work  is  enriched  with  many  re-
ports of  adjudged  cases  not  to  be  found  elsewhere;
but,  after  all  that  can  be  said  in  its  favour,  it  is  an  enor-
mous mass  of  crude  undigested  matter,  and  not  worth  the
labour  of  the  compilation.  The  digest  of  Lord  Chief  Bnron
Comyns  is  a  production  of  a  vastly  higher  order  and  leputa-
tioD,  and  it  is  the  best  digest  extant  upon  the  entire  body  of
the  English  law.  Lord  Kenyon  held  his  opinion  alone  to
be  of  groat  authority,  for  he  was  considered  ty  his  contem-
poraries as  the  most  able  lawyer  in  Westminster  Hall."  The


,-,,ii,GoO(^lc


tfft  SOURCES  OF  [ftrtlU<^

title  Pleader  has  ttttp.a  been  considered  as  the  most  elabo-
rate and  useful  head  of  the  work,  but  the  whole  is  distin-
guidhed  for  the  variety  of  the  matter,  its  lucid  order,  the
precision  and  brevity  of  the  expression,  and  the  accuracy
and  felicity  of  the  execution.  Bacon's  Abridgment  was
oomposed  chiefly  from  materials  left  by  Lord  Chief  Baroo
Gilbert.  It  has  more  of  the  character  of  an  elementary
work  than  Comyn's  Digest.  The  first  edition  appeared  in
1736,  and  was  much  admired,  and  the  abridgmont  baa
maintained  its  great  influence  downtothe  present  time,  a«
being  a  very  convenient  and  valuable  collection  of  princi-
ples, arising  underthe  varioustitles  in  the  immense  systpm
of  the  English  law.  And  in  connexion  with  this  branch  of
(he  subject,  it  will  be  convenient,  though  a  little  out  of  the
order  of  time,  to  take  notice  of  Cruise's  recent  and  very
Taluable  Digest  of  the  laws  of  England  respecting  real
properly.  It  is  by  far  the  most  perfect  elementary  work
of  the  kind  which  we  have  on  the  doctrine  of  real  property,
and  it  is  distin<;uished  for  its  methodical,  accurate,  perspi-
cuous,  and  comprehensive  view  of  the  subject.  All  his
principles  arfe  supported  apd  illustrated  by  the  most  judi-
cious selection  of  adjudged  cases.  They  nre  arranged  with
great  skill,  and  applied  in  confirmation  of  his  doctrines
with  the  utmost  pertinency  and  force.

The  various  treatises  of  Lord  Chief  Baron  Gilbert  are  of
high  valucand  character,  and  they  contributed  much  to  ad-
vance the  science  of  law  in  the  former  |mrt  of  the  last  r«o-
tury.  His  Treatise  on  Tenuies deserves particniarnoiice,
as  having  esplained  upon  feudal  principles  several  of  the
leading  dociriDcs  in  Littleton  end  Coke  ;  and  il  isa  very
elementary  and  instructive  essay  upon  (hat  abstruse  branch
of  learning.  His  essay  ou  the  Law.of  Evidence  is  an  excel-
lent performance,  and  thegroundwork  of  all  the  subsequent
collections  ou  ihai  subject,  and  it  siill  maintains  its  charac-
ter, notwithstanding  the  law  of  evidence,  like  ibost  other
branches  of  the_  law,  and  particularly  the  Ian  of  commercial
contracts,  has  expanded  with  the  progress  and  the  esigen-
iies  of  society- His  treatise  on  the  law  of  (Jses  and  Truala


11,-0,1  h,Googlc


Lectnn  ^Xll.] MUNICIPAL  LAW.  ^

ifl  another  work  of  high  authoritjr,  aod  it  hat  beeo  render-  '
ed  peculiarly  valuable  by  the  reviaiou  and  copious  ootesof
Hr.  SugdeR.

The  treatiseaon  the  Pleas  of  the  CrowD,  by  Sir  Matthew
Hale  and  Serjeant  Hawkins,  appeared  early  in  the  last
century,  and  they  contributed  to  give  preciwion  and  cer-
tainty  to  that  most  deeply  interesting  part  ofjur isprudence.
They  are  both  of  them  works  of  authority,  and  have  bad
great  sanction,  and  been  uniformly  and  strongly  recom-
mended to  the  profession.  Sir  Hanin  Wright's  Intro-
duction to  the  Law  of  Tenures  is  an  eicellent  work,  and
the  value  of  it  cannot  be  better  recommended  than  by  the
fact,  that  Sir  William  Blackslone  has  interwoven  the  sub-
Mance  of  the  treatise  into  the  seeond  volume  of  bis  com-
mentaries. Dr.  Wood  published  in  1723  bis  Institute  of
the  Laws  of  England.  His  Abject  was  to  digest  tbe  law,
and  to  bring  it  into  better  order  and  system.  By  the  year
1754,  bis  work  bad  passed  through  eight  folio  editions,  and
thereby  afforded  a  decisive  proof  of  its  value  and  popu-
larity. It  was  greatly  esteemed  by  tbe  lawyers  of  that
age;  and  an  American  jud^e,*  (himself  a  learned  lawyer
of  the  old  school,)  has  spoken  of  Wood  as  a  great  autho-
rity, and  of  weight  and  respect  in  Wealminster  Hall.

But  it  was  the  fate  of  Wood's  Institutes  to  be  entirely
superseded  by  more  enlarged,  more  critical,  and  more  at-
tractive publications,  and  especially  by  the  commentaries
of  Sir  William  BIdckstone,  who  is  justly  placed  at  tbe  bead
of  all  the  modern  writers  who  treat  of  the  general  elemen-
tary principles  of  the  law.  By  the  excellence  of  bis  ar-
rangement, the  variety  of  his  learning,  the  justness  of  bis
taste,  and  the  purity  and  elegance  of  his  style,  he  commu-
nicated tothosesubjects  which  were  harsh  and  forbidding
in  the  pages  of  Coke,  the  attractions  of  a  liberal  science,
andthe  embellishmetituf  polite  literature.  The  second  and
third  volumes  of  tbe  commentaries  are  to  be  thoroughly


I.  Cb.  J.  1  Dalliu,  p.  357.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4T%  S6URCES  or  [Part  lU.

itudicd  and  accurately  anderatood.  What  is  obsolete  is
necesflary  to  illuHtrato  that  which  remains  in  use,  nod  the
greater  pQrt  of  the  matter  in  those  Tolumes  is  law  at  this
day,  tfnd  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic.

I  have  necessarily  beeA  obliged  to  omit  the  mention  of
many  valuable  works  upon  law,  as  ray  object  in  the  present
lecture  was  merely  to  select  those  whirh  were  the  most
useful  or  distinpiished.  With  respect  to  the  modern  di-
dactic treatises  on  various  heads  ofthe  law,  and  which  have
multiplied  exceedingty  within  the  period  of  the  present
generation,  I  can  only  take  notice  of  a  few  of  those  which
relate  to  the  law  of  real  property,  and  are  deemed  the  most
important.  The  numerous  worki,  both  foreign  and  domes-
tic, OD  various  branches  of  the  law  of  personal  rights  and
commercial  contracts,  1  may  haveoccasion  to  refer  to  here-
after, as  the  sDb}ect8  of  which  tbey  treat  pass  ander  con-
flideration  in  the  course  of  these  lectures.  Any  critical
notice  of  them,  at  present  would  lead  us  too  far  from  the
general  parpose  of  this  inquiry,  and  many  of  tbom  are  not
sufficiently  matured  by  time  to  become  of  much  authority.

Sanders'  Essay  on  Uses  and  Trusts  is  a  comprehensive
and  systematic  treatise,  but  it  wants  the  fulneae  of  illustra-
tioD,  and  neat  and  orderly' arrangement,  requisite  in  the
discussion  of  so  abstruse  and  complicated  a  branch  of  the
law.  The  learned  Hr.  Butler  haa  given  a  very  elaborate
noteon  the  same  subject  ;>  and  there  is  an  excellent  sum-
mary of  the  law  of  uses  and  truais  in  Cruise's  Digest,  ar-
ranged with  his  customary  skill,  and  supported  by  an  ac-
curate analysis  of  adjudged  cases,  which  are  opposite  and
pertinent  to  the  inquiry.

Sugden*3  Practical  Treatise  on  Powers  is  the  best  book
we  have  on  that  very  abstruse  title  in  the  law.  It  was  re-
garded by  the  author  as  his  favourite  performance,  and  he
is  entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  tito  student  for  his  masterly

a  Note  231.  to  lib.  3-  Co.  LiU.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Ucuro  XXU.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  479

eieculion  of  the  work.  It  ia  perspieuous,  methodical,  and
accurate.  Mr.  Sugden's  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Vendors
and  Purchasers,  is  also  a  correct  aud  useful  GolleCtion  of
equity  principles  on  a  suhject  extremely  interesting,  and
of  constant  forensic  discussion.  Roherts  on  Fraudulent
Coaveyances  covers  a  very  important  bead  tn  the  juri^
prudence  of  the  courts  of  equity.  He  has  collected  the
cases  arising  under  the  statutes  of  13  and  S7  Elizabeth,
respecting  conreyances  that  are  deemed  fraudulent  in
respect  to  creditors  and  purchasers ;  and  though  the
treatise  is  written  in  had  taMte,  il  is  a  useful  digest  of  the
law  DO  that  subject.  .  Powell's  essay  upon  the  learning  of
deriaes  contains  a  syiitepiatical  and  valuable  Tiew  of  an
important  branch  of  the  law  concerning  title  to  real  pro-
perty, and  it  is  enlivened  with  some  spirited  discuesioos  )
but  neither  that  essay,  nor  the  one  of  his  upon  mortgages,
are  to  be  compared  to  the  clear,  succinct,  and  masterly
analysis  of  the  cases  under  similar  titles  in  the  great  work
of  Mr.  Cruise.  Fearne's  Essay  on  Contingent  Remain-
ders and  Biecutory  Devises  isa  performance  of  very  supe-
rior character  It  is  ebiniently  distinguished  for  iha
ability  and  perspicuity  with  wbich  it  unfolds  and  eiplains
the  principles  of  the  most  intricate  parts  of  the  law.  Mr.
Preston's  recent  essays  on  Estates  and  Abstracts  of  Title
are  BO  well  executed,  end  oootain  such  sound  end
clear  views  of  the  law  of  real  property,  that  tfaey  have  al-
ready attained  the  distinction  and  authority  of  works  of
established  reputation.

I  hare  thus  attempted,  for  the  assistance  of  the  student,
to  unfold,  in  this  and  the  preceding  lecture,  the  principal
•ources  from  which  wederive  the  evidence  and  rules  of  ihe
common  law.  There  is  another  source  still  untouched,
frooi  which  a  great  accession  of  sound  principles,  particu-
larly CD  the  subject  of  personal  contracts,  has  been  receiv-
ed, to  enlarge,  improve,  and  adorn  our  municipal  codes.
I  allude  to  Ihe  body  of  the  civil  law,  contained  in  the  Tn-
stitate 8,  Digest,  and  Code  of  Justinian  ;and  our  alteolion
will  be  directed  to  that  uil>ject  in  the  iic^t  lecture-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LECTURE  XXIII.

OF  THE  CIVIL  LAW.

Tbb  great  body  of  the  Roman  or  civil  lav  was  eollect-
ed  and  digested  by  order  of  ths  Emperor  Justinian,  in  the
former  part  of  the  sixth  century.  That  compilation  has
oome  down  to  modern  times,  and  the  institutions  of  every
part  of  Europe  have  felt  its  infiueoce,  and  it  has  contribu-
ted largely!  by  the  richneM  of  its  materials,  to  tlieir  cha-
racter and  improvement.  With  most  of  the  European
nations,  and  in  the  new  states  in  Spanish  America,  in  the
province  of  Lower  Canada,  and  in  one  oS  these  Coited
States.^  it  constitutes  the  principal  basis  of  tbeir  unwrit-
ten or  common  taw.  It  exerts  a  very  considetal  influ-
ence upon  our  own  municipal  law,  and  particularly  oo
those  branches  of  it  which  are  of  equity  and  admiralty  ju-
risdiction, or  fall  within  the  cognizance  of  the  surrogate's
or  Gonsistoriel  courts.^

The  history  of  the  venerable  system  of  the  civil  law  ia
peculiarly  interesting.  It  was  created  and  gradually  ma-
tured on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber,  by  the  successive  wis-
dom of  Roman  statesmen,  magistrates,  and  sages :  and
after  governing  the  greatest  people  in  the  ancient  world,
for  the  space  of  thirteen  or  fourteen  centuries,  and  uoder-


a  Rm  tiiB  Cn4J  Cbde  n^  1A<  Slitl*  a/'£«wnana,u  adopted  in  1894.

h  T)i«  Roman  Uir  ii  blended  «ith  Ibsl  of  tbe  Dulch,  and  carried  into
Aieir  Aiialic  poi«eiiioD«  ;  and  when  tbe  iiland  of  Cofloii  paned  to  tbs
handioflbe  Engliih.iDttice  was  directed  lo  be  admioiKarBd  according
to  the  (brmer  *j*tein  of  lawi  in  Itie  Dotoh  oaartt  ,■  and  Veo  Leeureo^
Coramenlarie*  on  the  Roman  Dutch  La*  were  IrBiwbted  into  Eosltih
in  IKIO,  expre»ly  far  tbe  benefit  of  tl^  Eo|l)*h  judiciary  ia  that  iiland,
V*b.  I.  •!


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


4»S  SOURCES  OF  CP>rt  UI.

g«og  cxtraordinaiy  TiciaaitudeB  after  th«  fall  of  the  we«-
tero  empire,  it  wae  revived,  admired,  and  studied  in  ido-
dern  Europe,  on  aeconnt  of  the  variety  and  excellcDce  of
ita  general  principles.  It  is  d«w  taught  and  obeyed,  not
only  in  France,  Germany,  Holland,  and  Scotland,  but  in
the  islands  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  and  on  the  banks  of  the
Mississippi  and  the  St.  Lawrence.  So  true,  it  seeiilf,
are  the  words  of  D'Aguesseeu,  that  "  the  grand  destiniea
of  Rome  are  not  yet  accomplished ;  she  reigns  througbout
the  world,  by  her  reason,  after  having  ceased  to  reign  I7
ber  authority."

My  desigu  in  the  preMnt  lecture  is  to  make  a  few  ge-
neral observations  on  the  history  and  cbararter  of  the
dvil  law,  in  order  to  exeite  the  eurioeity,  and  direct  the
attention  of  the  student  to  the  proper  sources  of  informa-
tion on  the  subject.  The  acquaintance  which  I  have  with
that  law  is  necessarily  very  imperfect ;  and  I  am  satisfied
that  no  part  of  it  can  he  examined,  and  no  one  period  cf
its  history  can  be  touched  by  a  pemoD  not  educated  under
that  ^stem,  without  finding  himself  at  once  admtmished
of  the  difficulty  and  delicacy  of  the  task,  by  reason  of  the
overwhelming  massof  learninj^  and  criticism  which  preae
upon  every  branch  of  the  inquiry.

That  part  of  the  Roman  jurisprudence  which  has  heei
dennmiitated  the  ancient,  embraced  the  period  Croat  the
foundation  of  the  city  by  Rumulus,  to  the  establishment
of  the  twelve  tables.

The  fragment  of  tfae  Enchiridion  inserted  in  the  Pan-
dects," is  the  only  ancient  history  ofthe  first  ages  of  theRo>'
man  law  now  extant.  It  was  com|HMi^  by  Pompooius  ia
the  second  century  of  the  Christian  era,  and  rescued  from
oblivion  by  Justinian  i  and  Bynkershoeckb  has  republished
it,  and  endeavours  to  restore  the  integrity  of  the  original


m  Dig.lib.  l.(jt  S,Deoi


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


XXIII.] MUNICIPAL  LAW.  ,4U

lest  by  emendatioDs  and  a  critical  commentary.  From
this  fragmant  we  learn  that  Sextus  or  Caius  Pa{HriuB,  »ho
was  B  pontifex  mazimuB  about  the  time  of  the  expulsion
of  Tarquin,  made  a  colletf  ion  of  the  UgtM  rtgia,  or  lavri
and  u«a|[es  of  the  Romaiis  under  (heir  kings,  and  which
waa  known  hj  the  name  of  the  Jum  Civik  Papinanim.
Very  few,  if  any,  fragmenta  of  this  original  collection  by
Papirius  now  rematu,  though  efforts  have  been  made  to  re*
store,  if  possible,  some  portion  of  these  early  Roman  laws.*
Such  a  woik  was  evidence  of  great  pn^ress  in  juritiprii-
dence  under  the  kings,  and  it  must  have  contained  an  ae>
count,  which  would  hare  been  at  the  preaent  day  moat
deeply  interesting  and  curious,  of  the  primitive  iostitutioDS
of  a  city  destined  to  become  the  mistress  of  the  world.'*

The  genius  of  the  Roman  government  and  people  had
displayed  itself  by  the  time  of  the  expulsion  of  their  kings,
and  the  foundations  of  their  best  institutions  and  discipliB*
bad  been  laid.  Romulus  divided  the  people  into  tribes  and
eoriK,  and  instituted  the  patrician  order  and  the  Romaa
seDBts,  which  last  body  became  in  process  of  lime  the  most
powerful  and  majestic  tribunal  in  all  antiquity.  Thegebe-
ral  assemblies  of  the  people  were  a  part  of  the  primitive
government,  and  a  very  efficient  portion  of  the  legislative
power,  and  they  met  in  their  curite  or  parishes,  and  the
vote  of  every  citizen  belonging  to  the  curie  was  equal  in
these  eomitia  curiata."  Tbe  fecial  and  other  colleges  es-


«  BtinKc-  Artliq,  Rout.  Jar.  Prwtm'  wc.  1-  and  C

h  Mr.  Oi66an.  in  )iU  Hislorj,  vol.  B.  p.  6.  Dole,  denjet  altofether  IhA
fscl  of  BOf  luch  origiDal  compihtioD  bj  Pipiciu*.  I  am  incompeieot  to
decide  itich  B  qaettioD.  It  ii  cited  u  an  original  anJ  anibentic  work  bj
FomiMoius,  w\to  liad  infinitely  better  mepos  of  knowledge  than  an;  mo-
dent  writer,  and  it  i«  anamed  to  be  lo  bv  inch  matter  critic*  ■■  B3  nker-
■boeck  and  Heioeccini,  and  yet  tbe  lin^lar  learning  and  aoniaoeu  of
Gibbon  give  almoil  overbearing  weight  to  hi*  critical  opinion*.

c  I  have  followed  DionjHBi  of  Halicamaua*,  and  the  Roman  antbon
of  tbe  clanical  agea,  in  reipect  to  the  early  hitlorj'  of  Rome.  It  maj  be
that  Rorr.B  wa*  built  and  adorned  by  llie  Etrwcaoi  long  befoie  tbe  time
ofRomului,  but  I  have  Dot  bseo  inclined  to  follow  tlie  hiiiorioalikepti.
oiBOu  of  tome  modem  writen  aorar.aa  to  reject  a* fable  wbat  the  claaici
have  lau^t  m  cooceniiiw  tlie  civil  and  poUtioal  iuttitnlioa*  of  Uta  earijer


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


484  SOURCES  OF  [Put  UL.

tablishe^bir  Nusia,  bound  the  RomsM  to  religioua  iluci-
pltne.>^  Servias  Tulliiw  divided  tbe  people  iato  biz  claaaes
and  one  buadred  and  oioelj-three  centuries,  and  thU  warn
a  most  important  change  in  the  Roman  polity.  The  firac
class  contained,  the  patricians,  knights,  and  rich  oitizeni,
and  as  centuries ;  and  whenihe  people  assembled  by  cen-
turies in  their  comitia  eenluriaia,  (as  they  generally  did
thereafter  when  called  by  the  consuls  or  senate,)  they
voted  by  centuries  ;  and  the  first  class,  containing  a  ma-
jority of  all  tbe  centuries,  if  unanimous,  dictated  the  laws.
This  arrangement  threw  the  powers  uf  government  into
hands  ofthe  patrician  order,  and  of  men  of  property.

After  the  establishment  Aftbej-epublic,  all  the  highw
BiKgistrates  were  elected  in  the  comitia  centuriata,  which
were  convoked  by  the  consuls,  and  they  presided  in  them,
counted  the  votes,  and  declared  tbe  result ;  and  their
resolutions  were  leget  of  the  highest  authority,  and  binding
on  the  whole  community.  After  the  institution  of  tribunes,
they  convoked  the  assembties  ofthe  peopleby  tribes,  ami
there  all  tbe  people  met  on  an  equnlity,  and  voted  per  cd-
jiifa,  end  the  comitia  (ribata  were  the  same  in  effect  aix)
substance  as  tbe  comitia  cariata.^  They  elected  ibe  subor-
dioate  magistrates,  and  enacted  pUbitcita,  binding  on  the
plebeians  alone,  until  tbe  Hortensian  law  made  the  de-
crees of  the  people  in  their  ccmt^  (ributa  binding  equally
on  patricians  and  plebeians."

As  the  whole  administration  of  justice,  civil  and  criminal,
bad  been  transferred  from  the  kings  to  the  consuls,  it  Mwn
became  necessary  to  control  theeierciseofthiaformidable
power.  This  was  done  by  the  Valerian  law,  pro)>osed  by
the  consul  Valerius,  and  granting  to  persons  accused  of
crimes  a  right  of  appeal  from  tbe  judgment  ofthe  consuls  to

a  ^wut  religionibuttldmntijvnpopiiltimJfWixil.  l^acJItm-S  tS.

6  The  comihn  tribiUa  were  free  from  the  reitraiala  placed  npos  t^
tomiHtturii'ti,  inuniuch  at  thej  could  hi  bald  without  a  preTioni  MnatiH-
etnuuKum,  and  were  not  sobjectlD  the  check  ofthe  Aagpioei,  wbtcb  ««rt
UDder  the  miDa^meDi  of  the  patrician*.

cDig-  I- 1-2-8. QramniiUoTiu  etpng  jar.  di.  leo.  VL


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXIII.] MUNICIPAL  LAW.  485

the  people.  It  then  became  an  eBtabliBbed  principle  in
the  Romao  constitution,  that  no  eapitul  punJahment  could
be  inflicted  upon  a  Romau  citizen  without  the  vole  of  the
people,  though  ibe  consuls  retained  the  power  of  inflicting
very  severe  iraprisonment.*  The  Valerian  law  became
an  imperfect  |>a//a(/ttun  of  civil  liberty,  and  was  in  some
respects  analogous  to  (he  hapf.M  corpiu  act  in  the  English
law  ;  but  the  ap{>ointmeat  of  a  dictator  was  a  suspension
of  the  law.

As  the  royal  laws  collected  by  Papirivs  had  ceased  to
operate,  except  indirectly  by  the  force  of  usage;  and  as
the  Romaus,  for  twenty  years  afler  the  expulsion  of  Tar-
quin,  had  been  governed  without  any  known  public  rules,''
they  began  to  suffer  the  evils  of  uncertain  and  unsteady
laws.  The  call  for  written  law  was  a  long  time  resisted
on  the  part  of  the  magistrates  and  senate  ;  but  it  was  at
last  complied  with,  and  acomoiissionof  three  persons,  hy
the  joint  consent  of  the  senate  and  tribunes,  was  instituted
to  form  a  system  of  law.  This  commission  gave  birth  to
the  twelve  tables,  which  form  a  distinguished  era  in  the
history  of  the  Roman  law,  and  constitute  the  commence-
ment  of  what  has  been  called  the  middle  period  of  the
Roman  jurisprudence.^


«  Dig.t.r  S.  IS.

b  l-merto  magii  jure  H  totuvttudiM  gu<m  jter  lalem  hgrm.  Dig.  I.
«.3.

e  Tbe  KnckiriiUm  of  Pomponioi  taya,  (hat  Ihe  daputiea  were  cam-
DitaiiaDed  to  >eek  law*  rrom  the  GreciaD  ciliea ;  [Dig-  1.  ?■  8.  4.)  and
thetiripnul  hiiiori>iu,Liry(b.  8  cb.  31.  32.)  and  Dion;>ia>  of  llalicar-
natsni,  [Aniiq.  Rom.  b.  10.)  ibt,  tint  Die  depDiatmn  irai  ttai  to  Atbena
to leara  the lawinnd  inttiluliona  of  Greece-  Gravina.  (De  orlu  <lprc^.
jitr.riv.  aec.  33.  noA  He  jurt  liat  j-m(.dxii.  liibularvm.tecK.)  HoU
neccia*.  {Hitt.Jvr,  rie.  tec.  34.  Bnd^nliq-  Horn.  Jur.  froamit^c.  3.)
Voet,  (Com.  ad  Fond.  I.  2.  1.)  Dr.  Tajlor,  (HiM.  ^VieRonKm  Lms,
.  p.  8.)  aod  the  j^eoeralit^  of  modern  itriten  on  Ilamaa  bialorj  and  law,
atautOB  it  to  be  a  concedad  fact,  on  the  atithoritj  of  Lify,  Dionjruua,
Cicero, Pliny,  and  others,  that  the  embawj-  went  to  Athcni.  TacHai
(Aim.  3.  37.}  obierTei  generally,  accitit  qua:  lujiiom  tgregia.  and  Ihe  de*
putiet  muat  hare  visited  *t  Icaal  tba  Grecian  cities  io  lower  Italy.  A
baroed  Freoch  writer  has,  however,  written  three  diMcriatiou  to  prove


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


484  SOURCES  OF  |^wtB|/

llie  tweire  tabira  were  ratified  by  th«  eonwot  equally  of
the  patriciana  and  plebeians,  na-\  they  consisted  partly  of
•Dtirelaws  traoacribed  from  the  inuitutioui  of  other  aa-
tions,  partly  of  such  as  wern  altered  and  accommodated  to
the  manner*  of  the  Romans,  partly  of  new  proTisieas,  and
partly  oftfae  laws  and  usages  of  their  ancient  kin^."  They


tlwrs  wai  DO  iDofa  (hin;  m  b  GrMiiaa  embawj.  Dr.  Tajlor  hai  refer-
led  to  them,  bat  (be;  TaiM  to  oonrince  bioi.  Mf.  GibboD  {Hut  vol  8.
p>  i.)  ii  kIm  decidedly '  of  opioioa,  tbat  tbe  depalatioa  acTw  naiterf
AtbeiM.Bod  be  cireaTery  plaonbte  reatomror  hi*  beliefi  bat  I  tbink
the  tteifbt  of  the  opinion  of  Cicero  alooe  ii  not  easilj  to  be  turnKHUHed  ;
■bd  be  njt  {De  Ltgg.  b.  t.  oh.  33.  and  Z5.)  ihal  the  rcf  nlaliooa  ia  tbe
twelre  tablai  concerninK  fuaerab.  werv  traoslated  from  the  law*  oTSe-
lao.aadtbe  decerDriri  had  adopted  almott  Ibe  very  wordi  of  Solos.

a  armmi  d*  Orl»  M  Pmg.  J.  C  lec.  3S.  FragmeDts  of  tiie  IwelfS
tkUea  irere  collected,  and  dialribirted  wilh  great  Bccnrsoj  nikler  (beir
orig-iaal  and  proper  diTitioM.  bj  J.  Ootbofred,  in  a  work  eotillad  QatUor
Fantti  Jwri*  CteUu,  priated  In  1S&3 ;  and  bit  cotlecUun,  Heiaaccna
•ayt,  {Antif.  Jur.  Rom.  Prntem.  tec.  6.)  ii  lo  be  piefarred  lo  that  ef  all
otbem.  Hie  ooUectioa,  dt■tli^>lltioo,  and  iDterprMaiioB  of  tbe  (■blecbae
bees  fblkiwed  b;  Gravina,  wbo  bai  inserted  Ibe  origmak,  with  a  pu*.
l^raM,  at  tbe  coocIuuod  o(  hia  treatiie  de  Jurt  .ff-iUirali  aaiUum  H
Xlt.  TVibuJaruai.  He  baa  alio  gifa  a  copiui  cammeatar;  opoo  lliat
eollectioD.  The;  were  redt|^ted  end  iiuerted  at  len^  in  tbe  Ttdenif-
■mn  L'Hitlorit  Romam*  of  tbe  Jeiniti  t'oatKW  and  Rooille,  and  copied
from  tbem  iato  HoobeS  Romia  Hiitorj,  b.  3.  ch.  ST.  A  tummary  of
thia  carioDi  aod  celebrated  code,  vbich  had  aach  permaDent  ioBnenca
on  Romaq  jariipnideiice,  and  isaocoattaollj  alluded  tab;  Bomu  jariat*,
will  Dot  be  DQaoceptable  lo  the  AoMrioiD  atiideDL

The  lit  table  related  to  law  tmU.  and  regulated  tbe  right  of  citetion
of  tbe  defeadaot  before  tbe  prvter.  He  iru  allowed  to  give  bail  fbr  hia
S^iearaDoe,  and  if  old  or  infinn.  the  plaintiff  waa  to  proride  him  with  k
jumentniD,  or  open  carnage.  'Bet  even  thia  proTiiion  waa  reprobated
in  aAbt  agea  for  iti  BeTcril;.  A  QelL  .Voct.  AU  30.  1  )  The  praetor
waa  to  decide  the  caute  prompt!;  b;  daylight ;  aod  if  the  aocD*sr  want*
•d  witnetM*,  he  wu  allowed  to  go  before  bia  adveraary^  honte,  woi  to
repeal  hia  damind  for  three  days  tugetber,  b;  loud  ootcry.

Hm  Xd  uUe  related  to  ra'Atry,  thtft,  treipan,  ami  Itrtadi^^trvH.  It


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


XXIII.] MUNICIPAL  LAW.  487

were  wrilten  in  a  atyle  exceecitii|;lf  brief,  eltiptinli  and
obHcure ;  and  tbey  show  the  great  Bimplicit;  of  Roman
maniwrB;  and  are  evidence  trf"  a  pet^le  under  a  rugged  po-


•Sown]  the  ri^t  to  kill  a  robber  bj  night.  It  iD0klnI  corparal  puowb-
vent  bim)  iliTer?  on  oaartctioa  of  robber;,  ttolentbe  ptrlln  lettled  with
etcb  other.  SI*ve«  piiU]'  of  robberj  were  to  be  thrown  down  the  Tai^
pei«ii  Rook<  "nefla  and  treipnen  were  pani«hedb;ri  pecnnimr;  mnlctr
Trfp—M  by  nig^t  on  htrreiti  or  cornfiekli  were  puhliihed  capilallj,  w
Vielinit  to  Cmm.  No  term  of  preicriptiaa  five  ■  right  to  aloteo  goodi,
■or  anf  ngfatof  a  fbreijpwr  to  (he  goodiof  a  Eomar  citiaen.  Breaob««or
trnet  were  paniibed  with  the  Toifeiliire  oT double  tlie  Talae  of  th^  depoait.

The  3d  table  rekted  to  hunt,  etU  1A«  rghl  o/ ertditon  mer  their  ttAt-
&rt.  It  prahibited  dmto  (hao  one  per  cent,  intereit  for  tnonej,  and  tba
-debtor  waa  to  hare  thirty  da;i  aAerjndginent  to  pa;  bn  debt;  aad  irh«
4id  not  then  paj  or  giro  tecuritj,  hi*  creditor  had  a  r^ht  to  leiM  him,
and  load  turn  with  ehaioi  of  a  certain  weight,  and  nrainlainbinonaprB-
aertbed  poanly  allowance  ■■  and  if  he  failed  (o  pay  after  beinfc  lixty  da^i
is  priaon,  be  was  to  be  bron^t  before  (he  people  on  three  market  dayi,
and  the  debt  proclaimed :  and  if  there  were  aereral  oreditora,  he  mig;bt  at
tbeir  election  be  aold  beyond  (he  Tiber,  or  hit  body  cat  into  piece*.  (Mr.
OibboB.flbt.  Tcd.8.9S.  tahea  ihiilawin  the  literal  aenae,  and  w  doea  Gn.
Tina,  de  Jtm  A^.  Gml.  tt  XII.  Tab.  sec.  7f  :  and  bs  adopts  the  ar^-  -
■Rent  of  Saitoa  Cvciliua  Id  A.  OtU.  JVbrt.  Alt.  CO.  I.,  who  maintained,
Qwt  tbo  law  waa  only  cruel  la  appearance,  and  that  be  had  oever  read  at
beard  of  iti  being  executed,  for  ita  extreme  aererity  prevented  the  crea- '
tton  oTdeht-  MoDtewjaien  welIabwrTes,tbat,npo(ianchreaaooing,lbe
OiMt  Croat  lawa  would  be  beat :  aad  he  Ibinka  the  belter  conatrnctioD  10
%e,  that  tba  law  only  related  to  tbeditiaion  of  the  debtor^i  property.  Et-
prit  du  Laix,  b.  S8.  ch.  C.  Byokeraboeok,  Obittt.  Jur.  Som,  lib.  1.  c
1.,  aadHeiDeceini,.4nli9.  iZon.  lib.  3.  tit.  30.  ace.  4.  are  of  IheMma
Opioioa.  GniTina,  IM.  aec.  St  aaya,  there  are  rronnda  to  oonolude  that
the  tye*  rtgia,  with  the  escepCioD  of  aoch  aa  related  to  regal  domioatioB,
were  iDoorpOrated  into  the  three  fint  of  thrte  twelve  table*.)

The  4tb  table  related  to  tlu  ngkiM  tf/athtri  andfamiUa.  It  gave  te
ftlban  the  power  of  life  aod  dealhaudofialeorer  their  children,  and  (he
right  to  kUl  iDimediitely  a  child  born  defiirmed.  On  the  other  haiHl,  and
aa  MOW  compeoaalicw  for  theae  alraciooa  proriaiona,  it  declared,  that  ifa


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


488  SOURCES  OF  {Part  n[.

lice,  aod  very  considerably  ailranced  in  urilizalion.  They
contain  a  great  deal  of  wisdom  and  good  ttense,  intermixed
with  folly,  injuBtice, and  cruelty. Tbey  were  engrossed


bther  neglectei]  to  teach  bit  son  a  trade,  he  waa  doI  obliged  to  inaiataia
hii  hther  trbenin  want;  dot  w*  an  illegitimate  child  baand  toimnlaM
bit  fMber.

The  5^1  table  related  to  {nAenionew  and  gwtrdlajuk^.  It  declared,
dial  if  the  father  died  ioleilate,  and  hadnochildraii,  hii  o^reat  relalioo*
wer«  tobe  hjg  bein:  and  if  he  hadnorelalioiM,  amaoof  hiiawaiNinM  w«*
to  be  hii  heir.  He  had  the  rigfht  to  appoint  g'nardiaDato  faiachijdren.  If  a
freedman  died  intettate  and  witboat  faein,  hi*  efectt  went  to  the  family
of  hit  patron.  Tliehein  were  to  pa;  the  dflhtiaftheaocBatoriapropar-
tion  to  their  ibare  of  hia  estate  It  alio  provided,  in  the  caaa  of  lunatica
and  pradigali,  that  the  relation*,  aad  if  doim,  that  one  of  the  oaiiia  was
to  hare  the  care  of  the  peraon  and  ealate

The  eth  table  related  to  prr^wrly  onrfjKMWMlofi.  It  declared  that  the
title  of  foods  ibonld  not  pan  on  sale  and  deliverr,  withoat  pajmeut^
Two  j^eara  pooeasion  amouoted  to  a  right  of  prcsfinptioD  for  laiad*,
and  ooe  year  lor  moveable*.  It  likewise  declared,  that  jo  litigated  eases,
the  presamption  shoold  always  be  ao  the  aide  of  tbe  possessor :  and  (hat
in  dispDtea  abonl  liberty  and  alavery,  the  presampiioD  sbonld  alwajis  be
eo  the  side  of  liheiij.

The  7Ch  laUe  related  to  Ireipautt  and  dgmaga.  It  provided,  that
cooipeaaatioa  be  made  for  trespawet,  titd  that  for  arson  or  tnalicion*)y
aatting  fire  to  a  boose,  or  to  grain  oaar  it,  tbe  oboder  was  to  be  acooi^ed
and  burol  to  death.  Tbe  fsTfafionlswa*  applied  to  lossesofliraba  nnUa*
the  injured  parlj  accepted  sooie  olber  saiiifactioii.  A  pecnninry  Sna  of
three  bnndred  pound*  of  hnu*  was  declared  for  dislocating  aboae,  and
tweDtj-five  ease*  of  bras*  for  a  comoKKi  blow  with  tbe  fist.  (It  is  related
in  tbe  JVbrt.  Jtt.  SO.  I.  that  one  Lncio*  Neratiut,  in  after  times,  whea
tbe  ciij  became  weallfaj,  end  socb  a  fine  insignifioant,  amnaed  himself
bj  striking  freemen  in  tbe  face  as  he  nwt  them  in  the  street,  and  then
ordering  hi*  terrant,  who  followed  him  for  Ibe  purpose  with  a  hegof
brass  moor;,  to  count  ORt  and  tender  tbe  twentj-fivo  pieces  a«  the  com-
pensalion  fixed  b;  law. }  It  tra»  ptorided  alao  bj  this  table,  that  slan-
derers, bf  word*  or  rerse*,  shoaU  be  beaten  with  a  cinb.  False'  witoeiacs
were  to  be  ^rown  headlong  from  the  oapitol,  and  parricide*  were  to
besewednpioa  tack  and  thrown  into  tbe  Tiber.  Whoever  wilfoUy
killed,  or  poifDned,  or  prepared  poiton  for  a  freedmaa,  ornted  magical
woidt to  hurt  him,  waa  panitbabla  a*  a  boaucide. Ooardiaiu  and


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXIII.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4»

oti  ;!ible8  of  wood)  or  brasB,  or  ivory,  and  were  detlroyed
when  the  city  was  burat  by  the  Gaul^.  Tbey  were  aftei^
wards  collected,  and  existed  entire  in  the  third  century;


patroDi  who  acted  frandnlenl);  in  Ibeir  tnut,  vera  (o  be  fined  u>d
betd  odious.

The  Sth  table  rclited  to  ttlatt*  t'n  Uu  cowdry.  It  reqaired  a  ipaoe  of
two  and  a  half  feet  Id  be  Urt  between  ever;  hoiue,  aod  it  allowed  aocie-
lie*  or  ptirate  compaaiei  to  make  Ibeir  Qwn  bj-lftwi,  not  bcin^  incoa-
•iitenl  witli  the  public  law.  Tlie  prKior  wai  to  waigo  arbtlralon  in  casea
of  ditpatet  aboQl  bonodarie*;  and  it  prorided  redrea*  (iir  aniiaiicea  to
fleld*  b;  til*  (hade  of  treea,  or  bj  WBlarcounei.  It  required  road*  to  be
eight  feet  wide,  and  doable  at  cornert.  It  allowed  travellen  lodh*e  over
the  adjoiolDg  laadi,  if  the  road  was  bad-

The  9th  table  waicaDcemiiigU«cDiiiniofi  rj^Ui^lAepeofib.  Itpro-
bibiled  all  tpecial  privileget  to  an;  penoo,  and  it  reatored  debtora  wbo
had  been  redeemed  from  alar etj  to  tbeir  fbrmer  righti.  It  made  biiber;
io  a  judge  or  arbitrator,  or  the  holding  aedhioiu  aaMmbliea  io  Ihe  cit;  \^
night,  or  delireriag  up  a  Roman  ciliMn  to  a  Ibrelgiier,  or  lolicitiDg  a  ib-
reigner  to  declare  himself  against  Rome,  capital  offencM-  It  dsclared
that  all  cauaei  relating  to  llie  life,  liberty,  or  rigfati  of  a  Rontao  oitixen,
•hoald  be  tried  in  the  tomUia  cmturiota.  The  people  were  to  chooaa
qonitoi*  to  take  oognixaooe  of  capital  CMe«.

.  The  lOth  table  related  io/unvait.  It  pioUbiled  tbedeadtobeiBter-
red  or  bamt  within  the  citj.or  within  lixlj  feet  of  anj  Ikmm.  It  prohi-
bitod  all  escenive  wailing*  at  funerab,  and  women  frao)  tearing  their
faces  or  making  hideooioutcrie*  on  anch  octssioda.  It  regalated  and
limited  the  expeose  of  the  funeral  pilot,  and  all  coatliDaaa  at  fRMrslI,
auchas  the  drew  of  the  deceased,  the  plajersnpon  the  Ante,  the  perfnmed
]iquor«,  the  gold  thread,  the  orowD,  festoona,  Ac.

The  1 1th  table  mads  part  of  lliejiu  foemm,  or  poniificial  law.  AU  the
other  tables  related  tocivil  rights,  but  this  rebted  to  region  owl  \torthip
o/tht  gtd*.  It  required  all  peraons  to  come  with  parity  andpiet;  to  the
aaacrobliet  of  religion ;  and  no  penou  was  to  wnnhip  any  new  or  foMign
gods  in  prirate,  anlest  anthorized  by  public  sulhority.  Efer>-  one  was  to
(»baarve  bis  family  fettirals,  and  the  rights  used  in  his  own  family,  and  hj
his  aneetton,  in  the  worabip  of  hi*  docneslic  deitiei.  Honoar  was  to  b«
paid  to  tboae  heroe*  and  sages  whom  their  merit  had  raised Vt  ^mmtt.

Vol.  I.  62


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


490  SOURCES  OF  [Tirt  UI.

bat  did  not,  u  H«in«eciiu  BuppotM,  BuniTe  the  nzfb
centuiy  of  the  Christian  era.  Thii  code  criitained,  in  the
f  ubsequent  aj^ei  of  the  republic,  from  the  most  diattoguteh-
ed  philoBophers,  hifltorianB,  sod  Btaletioen,  the  blind  tri-
bute of  patriotic  Teaeratioa,  and  the  most  extravagant
eulogy,  at  being  a  sf  item  ioculcatiiig  the  soundest  princi-
ples of  philosophj  and  civil  polity,  and  surpassing  in  value
the  jurisprudence  of  Solon  and  Ljcurgus,  and  the  tea
books  of  the  laws  of  Plato,  and  whole  libraries  of  Grecian
pbiloaopby.^  As  Rome  increased  in  territory,  wealth,  arts,
and  refioenient,  her  laws  were  progressively  enlarged  and
improved,  and  adapted  to  the  progress  of  society,  and  its
increasing  wants  and  vices.  The  obligation  of  the  twelve
tables  was  gradually  diminished  or  destroyed  by  the  multi-
tude of  new  regulations,  and  the  history  of  the  Komaa
law,  from  the  time  of  the  twelve  tables  to  the  reign  cf
Hadrian,  is  eminently  instrnctive.

After  many  struggles,  the  patricians  were  obliged,  bf
the  /exHorafia,  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  the  jife6wet(^


Tbecoroniendsble  virtnM  Wfli«(ab«niikedaaioiig'tbepdi,  utdtnhstt
(emplM  erscted  to  Ibem,  bot  no  wonhip  wu  to  ba  piid  to  uij  vioa.  Tbs
ncrificM  to  Ibegodt  bj  (he  prieati  were  to  be  the  fniiti  of  the  esithmnd
joaog'  iDimBli,  aod  witb  the  mou  intboriMd  cerenMniei-  No  one  wo  (o
bBiDitiatad  u  Bay  myiteriw  bot  Ibcae  of  Cera*.  Stealiajof  wbat  WM
dBTOtoa  to  tbe  goie,  mad  inoeM ,  were  declared  to  be  capital  crteia*.

TholUhuUenluedlniniirnagt, out  tlu  right  t^htuboMU.  Itpt*-
•cribed  fraedoin  of  diroroe  at  tbe  pleamre  of  tbe  hiubaDd,  and  italknred
tba  htuband,  with  tbeooOHot  of  hi*  wife*!  relatiotu,  to  put  ber  to  death
•beo  taken  in  adnltery  or  drankeiuieH,  and  it  declared  it  to  be  onlaw*
tol  for  patriciBDi  to  iotenmrry  irith  plebeianr,

a  Qr.  rfa  OraL  b.  1.  cb.  43,  44.  De  Ltgg.  9.  im:.  f3.  Lm/U  Hul.
IL  34.  I^uit.  Am.  3.  S7.  J.  Oell.  JVhct.  .iltt.  <0.  i .  In  tbe  oeirly  diaearend
Ireatiaa  of  Cicero,  D»  R^iubHea,  lib.  2.  oh.  36, 37.  he  intiat*,  tbat  ttie  ten
fint  tables  were  corapoaed  with  tbe  greetMt  equity  and  prudeeoa.  bat
he  dBclaret  tbat  Ibe  two  lut  tablea,  added  by  the  deoemvin,  were  ini.
qaitoanlawB,  and  that  tbe  law  prohibiting  marriafei  betweeD  {debeiaw
and  leDatoiiBl  familiea  wat  a  moat  infiunotii  law.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LMtare  XXIIL] HUNICTPAL  LAW.  ^I

enacted  by  the  plflhiant  alone  id  tbeir  conitui  trUmta,  ai
being  of  equal  force  with  the  UgeM,  passed  at  the  instance
of  a  consular  or  senatorial  magistrate,  by  the  whole  ag-
gregate body  of  the  people,  patricians  and  plebeieas.  Tfae
senate  also  frequently  promulgHted  laws  under  the  name
of  tenatut  connUta,  by  tbeir  own  authority.^  A  lenotui  con-
Miltum  was  allowed  to  continue  in  force  only  one  year,
unless  ratified  by  the  commna  course  of  rojvtto  at/ popuAtm;
and  tbe  tribunes  could,  at  any  time,  by  tbeir  veto,  put  a
negatiTe  upon  any  projected  decree  of  the  senate.  That
body  likewise  assumed  the  right  to  dispense  with  laws,
tboogb.  by  a  law  proposed  by  the  tribune  Caius  Cornelius,
the  senate  could  not  exercise  their  dispensing  power,  un-
lesa  200  senators  were  present.  Within  a  very  few  years
after  the  adoption  of.tbe  tweke  tables,  the  prohibition  of
marriages  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians  was  abo-
lished ;  but  the  patricians  had  the  address  to  retain  the
management  end  control  of  the  whole  administration  of
justice.  This  was  effected  in  seFeral  ways.  It  was  af-
fected by  the  institution  of  legal  forms  of  judicial  pro-
oeeding  called  legit  actionet,  and  by  means  of  tbe  pomifi-
eet  who  regulated  tbe  calendar,  and  assumed  the  power  of
fixing  tbe  lawful  days  of  business,  the  diet  fatti  tt  nefattu
These  judicial  forms  and  solemnities  gave  order  and  uni-
forinity  to  tbe  administration  of  justice;  but  they  were
mysteries  of  jurisprudence,  confined  to  the  learned  of  tbe
patrician  order,  and  locked  up  in  the  pontifical  archives.
They  could  not  be  changed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  people,
and  the  right  to  interpret  them  belonged  lo  tbe  pontifical
college.^  They  remained  confused  and  undigested  until
Appius  Claudius  CcecuB,  a  member  of  the  imntijicn]  fra-
ternity, reduced  them  into  one  collection,  wbich  his  scribe
Cmeus  Flarius  surreptitiously  published,  to  tbe  great  sa-


«  7fut.  1.  X.4.  Dig.  1.3.9.

b  Dig.  b.  I.  tit-  2-  Dt  Orig.  Jar.  tee.  6.  Graviaa  aaye.  Or  Orhi
tiPng.  i.e.  lec-JS.  ttiat  thej  were  eiUbiiahed  bj  tlic  [lolicj  of  [Le
Btwieal  livjren.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


(


4M  SOURCES  OF  t^aillU.

titfiwtioa  of  the  people.  It  acquired  tbe  (hie  of  tfae  Jut
«H>f/e  FlmitmwM;  and  a  second  collectioo  of  these  le^l
prsoedents  afterwaida  appeared,  aod  was  called  tfae  Jum
ekile  ^liaKum,'  Tb»  Roman  icieDce  of  ipecial  pteodiog
becoBie  a  aabject  of  ridicole  by  Ctcers,  as  being  a  cun-
BiDg  and  captions  Terbal  science  ;  and  these  forms  were
expressly  abolifbed  hj  the  Emperor  Constantitie  as  ia»-


The  edicts  of  the  prctor  became  another  very  impor-
tant means  of  the  increase  and  improvement  of  the  Ro-
nao  law.  The  judicial  decisions  of  the  prgetors,  or  edictm
prtetorum,  became  of  great  consequence.  They  were  cal  l~
pdjuM  koHorariuat,  or  patrician  law,  derived  froai  tbo  ho-
nour of  the  prastor.o  There  had  been,  from  the  fognda-
tion  of  the  city,  a  magistrate  ctMed  prafectiu  iiriti,  to  ad-
ninister  justice  ID  the  absence  of  the  king  or  conool;  and
after  the  plebeians  obtained  a  share  in  the  consular  digni-
ty, the  patricians  created  a  permanent  eity  prvtor,  and
they  confined  bis  province  lothe  adininietratioo  of  justicr;
and  such  a  magistrate  was  indispensable,  as  the  conmla
were  engaged  in  foreign  and  ciecutive  duties.'^  The
praetor  was  at  firat  a  patrician,  and  elected  in  the  covtitia
untttriata,  though  the  office  in  time  became  accessible
to  plebeians.  BusioeHS  soon  required  a  second  preetor
to  preside  over  the  cnuses  of  foreigners,  called  prator  pe-
regriniu,  and  prattors  were  afterwards  allotted  to  the
provinces  as  the  empire  widened.  Under  Augustus,  the
praetors  had  multiplied  to  sixteen  ;  and  in  the  time  of  Pom-
ponius,  there  were  eighteen,  and  one  of  them  judged  defidei
eommiutt.*  Every  prietor,  on  entering  into  office,  establish-


a  Dif.  l.  3.  7.  £niy'(  HitC  9.  46.  Gravbta  <U  Ortu  Jur.  Cia.  kc
83.  and  th  Jur.  JfaL  et  XII.  Tab.  aec.  79.  80.

6  Legul^M  gmdimeauta*ttaaUaipi-ita)0€lionum,eaiUor/al)ulan9i,
auc^  tyllabanm.  Cie  dt  Oral.  I.  S5.  Sea  alio  Cod.  t.SB.  Dt
JomuilU  et  imptlralwnibiu  arUonum  tuhlalu.

C  Dif.  1. I.  7.  and  |.  3.  10.

d  Dig.\.  S.  MC  u.  ss.

«  Dig.  1.  X.  3S.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXIII^ MUNICIPAL  LAW.  4$S

«d  and  published  certain  rules  and  format  as  the  principle
and  method  by  which  be  proposed  to  administer  justice  for
tbe  jresT.  He  had  n»  power  to  alter  these  rules,  and  this
jmt  prtetoritim  vei  himorarittm,  tampered  the  ancient  law  by
tbe  spirit  ofeqnityaadpublicutilit]',  and  it  was  termed  the
Kving  interpreter  of  the  civil  law.*  But  as  tbe  prsetor  was
apt  to  rary  from  his  annual  edict,  and  tocbange  it  accord-
ing to  circumstances,  which  opened  the  way  to  many  frauds,
it  W€is  provided  by  a  law,  enacted  at  the  instance  of  the
tribune  Caius  Cornelius,  that  the  prsrtor  should  adhere  to
his  edicts  promulgated  on  the  cqmmeneement  of  his  ma-
f  istracy^  These  prieterian  edicts  were  studied  as  tbe  most
interesting  branch  of  the  Roman  lawi  and  they  became  a
lubstitute  for  ibe  knowledge  of  tbe  tweire  tables,  wbich
fell  into  neglect,  though  they  had  once  been  taught  as  a
earmen  necittaritmh  and  regarded  as  tbe  source  of  all  legal
disci  pline.b

The  opinions  of  lawyers,  called  the  rupmtta,  or  bttee-
pretationetprudenfim,  composed  another  and  very  efficimt
source  of  the  ancient  Roman  juris  prudence.

The  most  ancient  interpreters  were  the  members  of  the
eolleffe  ofponiijicei,  composed  of  men  of  the  fimt  rank  and
knowledge.  Civil  statesmen,  and  eminent  private  citizens,
followed  their  example,  and  sometimes  debated  in  tbe
forum.  Their  answers  to  questions  put,  were  gradually
adopted  by  the  courts  of  justice,  by  reason  of  their  intrin-
sic equity  and  good  sense ;  and  i^iey  became  incorporated
into  the  body  of  tbe  Roman  common  law,  under  the  name
of  fori  diaputatione$,  andyiu  civile,  or  rei^nta  prvdentvnts
This  business,  undertaken  gratuitously  by  persons  of  tbe
highest  distinction,  grew  into  a  public  profession,  aitd  law
became  a  regular  science,  taught  openly  in  private  bouses
as  in  schools. The  names  of  the principal  lawyers  who


a  Dig-  1-  1.7.  and  9.

hCic.d«L^S-b.  I.C'S.  sod  b.S.cM. Oratina  d«  Orbi  tt  Prog.
J.  C.  wo-  3S.
ej?i|:.  1.1.6.


t,Goo(^lc


4$4  SOURCKS  OF  (Part  UT.

beoamevin  this  way,  public  profeiaon  bf  the  law,  are  to
be  foond  in  the  work  of  Pomponius,*  and  in  the  writiog*
of  Cicero,  Horace,  Tacitui,  and  the  other  authors  of  tb«
elasncal  ages.  Their  opinions  were  preserved  by  their
Bucceuora,  and  fragments  of  them  are,  no  doabt,  diepere-
•d  in  diffisrent  parts  of  the  pandects,  withoot  the  sanetioa
of  their  names.))  Cicero  speaks  of  this  employment  of  dis-
tic^uisbed  jurists  with  tbegreatest  encomiums,  and  as  be-
ing the  grace  and  ornament,  and  most  honourable  basi-
Bess  of  old  age.  The  house  of  such  a  cirilrao  becomes  a
liring  oracle  lo  tbe  whole  city,  and  this  very  accomphsfaed
orator  and  statesman  fondly  anticipated  such  a  dignified
retreat  and  occupation  for  his  declining  years.<>  Tbe
philosophy,  and  policy,  and  wisdom  of  Greece,  were  col-
leeted  together,  says  Gravina,''  by  tbe  Roman  civilians,
and  all  that  was  useful  introduced  into  tbe  Roman  law ;  and
if  it  were  really  true  that  the  twelve  tables  were  not  drawn
by  the  rough  agents  who  compiled  tbent  directly  from  Gre-
cian  fountains,  we  are  assured  that  the  omission  was  abun-
dantly supplied  in  aAer  ages;  and  the  instituUons  of  Greece


a  Dig.  1. 1.

B  In  the  limM  oTtbe  republic,  (be  pnictice  of  tbe  law  trai  grataiioMw
ani  bigbl;  hottowmrj.  All  emplojmeDt  far  bire  wm  prohibited  bj  ■  ]ur
enacted  in  the  jetr  of  (he  city  650;  *(  the  iottaoce  of  the  Tribam  Mar.
en  Cinciofi  The  pntfeMioa  at  lenj^th  became  ■  bnuoeM  of  gain,  and  wu
abnaed  until  Aogottn*  revived  the  Chician  la»  with  additional  aanctioa
bf  adeereeoftba  MDBte.  Bat  M  a  reaaoncble oompeneitioa  wa«  necei.
iMTj  to  adTocatei  who  devoted  tbeir  time  and  talent*  to  tbe  protenioa,
tbe  <»)nipeiitatioa  waa  allawed,  and  r^^nlated  b;  a  decre*  of  the  aenate  in
tbe  time  i^ Claudia*:  (TfaciL  .Ann  b.  U.c.  6, 6,  T.}and  afterward*,  ao-
cording  to  the  Uw  of  tbt  PandteU,  b.  6&  tit.  13.  c  I.aec.S.  ID.  It.  the
jndcet  in  the  pniviace*  wete  to  detennjoe  oDi  aad  allow  a  reoaon^^
chaige  to  (be  adrocate.

t  Cic.  de  Oral.  1. 4A.  See  abo  QuttuttMoRV  t>*L  lib.  IS.  c  II.  where
Iw  allade*  to  Cicero,  and  *trongl]>  approve*  of  tbi*  em^ojrmentof  the
orator  when  be  retire*  from  practice  at  the  bar.

d  Orig.Jur.  Cn.  b.  1,  Pntten.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Uctura  XXm.] MUNICIPAL  LAW.  49S

were  studied  by  more  eolightened  itatwinHD,  aad  coDtrl-
buted  to  perfect  and  adorn  the  Roman  law.

In  the  AuguBtan  age,  the  body  of  the  RomaD  law  had
grown  to  ioimenae  magnUude.  ■  It  was  coniiiosed  of  the
leges,  or  will  of  the  whole  Rntnan  people  declared  io  the
eomiiia  caniuriata  ;  the  pkbucita,  enacted  in  the  comitia
tri&taa ;  the  tenatut  evmulta,  promulgated  by  the  single
authority  ofthe  senate ;  the  leguactionetf  the  tdicta  wiagi*'
tratuam;  the  retpoma  prudenttaaf  and,  subsequent  to  the
•ge  of  Cicero,  is  to  be  added  the  tmutitutio  principu,  or  or>
dinaoces  of  the  Romao  eniperors.b  The  Roman  civilians
begao  very  early  to  make  collections  and  digests  of  the  law.
The  bookof  Sextus  JQIius  contained  the  laws  of  the  twelve
tables*  the  forms  of  aetioos,  and  tlie  ruponta  pntdentum.
Fubliua  MuciuB,  Quintus  Hucius,  Brutus,  and  Hanilius,  all
left  volumes  upon  law,  and  the  three  books  of  the  latter  ex-
isted in  the  time  ofPomponius  as  monuments  of  his  fame.c
Servius  Sulpicius  left  behind  him  nearly  180  volumes  upon
tb«  civil  law.  Many  distinguished  scholars  arose  under  his
discipline,  who  wrote  upon  jurisprudence;  and  Aufidius  Na-
musa  digested  the  writings  of  ten  of  those  scholars  into  140-
bookfl.  Antistius  Labeo,  under  Augustus,  surpassed  all  his
contemporaries,  and  be  compiled  400  volumes,  many  of
trhich,  PompoDius  says,  he  possessed-d  The  noble  desiga
of  reducing  the  civil  lawintoaeoovenientdigest,  wascon-
eeived  by  such  greet  men  as  Cicere,  Pompey,  and  Julius  .
Caear ;  though  it  is  certain  that  no  systematic,  accessible,
«Dd  authoritative  treatise  on  the  civil  law,  appeared  during
the  existence  of  the  republic ;  end  Cicero  says,  that  the  law
lay  scattered  and  disipoted  in  his  time.*  The  Roman  jurit-


«  btKMMUt  •Koram  tuper  atm  ocrKlanm  legtm  ntmnhm-  Jmi^
3.  34.

b  Dig.  I.  1-7.  udl.  3. 12.

e  iNf .  1.  9  36.  BDd  30.

d  i>^.  1.  X.sec.41.  43,44.4t,  4?.

4  Ck.  (if.  OraL  lib.  t.  G.  33.  rSucl.  J.  Catar,  sec.  44.  tltmeccii  E!e-
mtida  JurU  Uit.  PrMcm.  ■«:-  2-  Dr.  Toy^ui  "s  Ei'tmmU  of  Ihe  Civil
Caw,  14.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


49C  SOURCES  OF  [Part  lU.

pradttBce  wu  dertined  to  continue  for  aereral  centuries
under. the  imperial goTerDnient,a  ibapelessand  enonnous
mass,  receiving  continnal  accumulations,  but  it  was  fortu-
nately cultivated  uqder  tbe  emperors  by  a  succession  of
illustrious  men,  equally  dittinguished  for  tbeir  learning,
wisdom,  and  probity.

Before  the  lime  of  Augnstus,  the  retponta  pndtntam
were  given  viva  voce,  and  they  had  not  the  force  of  any  au-
thority in  the  forum,  and  the  business  was  free  to  all  persons.
The  character  oftheaie  reapoiua  was  abused  and  discredited
by  the  crude  opinions  of  pretenders,  and  Augustus  restrain-
ed the  profession  of  the  jurisconsults  to  such  as  he  should
select  as  most  worthy,  and  (hoy  were  to  be  first  approved  of
and  commissioned  by  him.  They  then  begantogive  their
t^inioDH  in  writing,  with  their  reasons  annexed."  This
raised  their  influence,  and  reduced  the  prsHora  to  a  state  of
comparative  dependence  upon  those  living  oracles  of  law,
who  were  under  the  influence  of  the  emperor,  and  wboob-
tained  by  their  means  the  control  t^lhe  administration  of
the  law.t>  Heinecciusssystbat  Augustus  instituted  this  col-
lege of  civilians,in  order  that  he  might  covertly  assume  le^i»-
lative  power,  and  adapt  the  republican  jurisprudence  to  the
change  in  the  government.  He  likewise  instituted  s  cabi-
net council,  which  waa  called  the  emuUtory,  by  succeeding
princes.  It  was  composed  of  the  consuls,  several  other
magistrates,  and  a  certain  number  of  senators  chosen  by
lot."  lllpiaawas  a  memberoftfaisroyalcouncilander Alex-
ander Severus.  It  was  the  imperial  legislature.  Tba
power  of  the  cosutta  was  transferred  to  this  shadow  of  a
Roman  leoate,  for  the  old  constitutional  senate  not  being
able  conveniently  to  govern  all  the  provinces,  (according  to


a  Dig.  r.  t.  47. Httnete.  Hid-  Jur.  Cm.  lib.  1.  Mc  151,  I5B.  180.
i  Groirttia  de  OrfN. «(  frag.  MO.  4X.  Htmioi.  AitUq.  Rom.  lib.  1.  tit.

S.  MO-  39.
r  Oramita  de  Sommto  Iwtperio,  wo.  IT.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


Lecture  XXIII.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  «7

the  coiirti;  language  of  the  Pandect»,B)  gave  to  the  prince
the  right  to  make  laws.  The  judgments  of  the  prince  were
called  imperial  constitutions,  and  the;  were  usually  enacted
and  promulgated  in  three  ways ;  IbI.  Cy  rescript,  or  letter
in  answer  to  petitions,  or  to  a  distant  magistrate.^  2.  Bj
degrees  passed  l>y  the  emperor  on  a  public  hearing  in  a
courtof  justice;  and  Paulus  collected  six  books  of  those
decrees,  and  from  which  he  for  the  most  part  dissented.^
3d.  By  edict,  or  mere  voluntary  ordinances.  Gravina
says,  that  these  imperial  constitutions  proceeded  not  as
from  a  single  individual,  but  as  from  the  oracle  of  the  re-
public by  the  roice  of  the  senators,  who  were  consulted,
and  were  the  visible  representatives  of  the  majesty  of  the
commonwealth.''  Many  of  these  imperial  ordiuatices  were
suggested  by  the  best  of  the  civilians,  and  do  great  honour
to  their  authors ;  and  with  regard  to  private  and  personal
rights,  the  Romans  enjoyed  to  a  very  great  degree,  under
the  emperors,  the  benefit  of  their  primitive  fundamental
laws,  as  they  existed  in  the  times  of  the  republic.  The
profession  of  the  law  was  held  in  high  estimation  under
the  emperors,  and  Hadrian  took  off  the  restriction  of  Au-
gustus, and  gave  the  privilege  of  being  a  public  interpreter
of  the  law  to  the  profession  at  large. ^  It  was  restored  by
the  Emperor  Severus,  and  the  rrfpontajiruflenfuin  assumed
an  airof  great  importance.  Though  in  the  first  instance
they  were  received  as  mere  opinions,  they  gradually  as-
sumed the  weight  of  authority.  The  opinions  were  sent
in  writing  to  the  judges,  and  in  the  lime  of  Justinian,  ihcy
were  bound  to  determine  according  tp  those  opinions-f
These  retpoma  (of  which  many  are  preserved  in  the  Pan-
dects) were  not  of  the  same  authority  as  the  constitution,-


aOig.  1.3.  Mc.  11.

fr  Codt.  1.  14.  3.,  Orivina  dt  Orbt.  el  Prvg  sec.

e  Ormtna,f6uJ>  tec.  1^2  Dt  Rotnaao  fmpirie,  aec

d  Gravino  dt  Itonumo  Imperio,  ibul.

t  Dig.  I.  *.  S.  47.

fifui.  i.a.B.
Vol.  I.  63


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


49S  SOURCES  OF  [Put  W.

ti  bget,  but  tbc^  were  law  for  the  caM,  and  tbey  were  ap-
plied to  fature  caws  under  the  character  of  priDciplea  t>f
equity,  and  not  of  precepu  of  law.  In  the  agea  inmedi-
Btel;  preceding  Jusiioiao,  the  dvil  law  was  in  a  deplora-
ble conditioD,  by  reamn  of  itt  mapritude  aud  disorder  ;.
aod  icBrcely  any  geoiut,  §ayi  Beineccius,  was  bold  enough
t«  commit  bimwlf  to  Mich  a  labyrinth.  As  a  remedy  for
the  evil,  the  Eini>erore  TheodosiuB  and  Valentinian  con-
firmed by  decree  the  writings  of  Papinian,  PauliiB,  Gaius,
Ulpian,  and  Hodestinus,  by  name,  and  directed  tbat  they
alOna  be  permitted  to  be  cited  in  the  courts  of  justice,  with
tbe  exception  of  such  extracts  ae  they  had  tranaferrei
into  their  books  from  the  ancient  lawyers,  and  with  soine
other  qualified  exceptions  in  favour  of  Scievola,  Sabinot,
JulinnuB,  and  Marcellus.  The  opinion  of  the  majority  of
these  five  legislative  characters  was  to  govern;  and  where
there  was  in  any  case  an  equal  division  of  opinion,  thai  ef
Papinian  was  to  be  preferred."

The  first  authoritative  digest  of  the  Roman  law  which
actually  appeared  was  the  Perpetual  Edict,  compiled  by
Salvus  Julianas  under  the  orders  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian,
and  of  which  nothing  now  remains  but  some  fragments
collected  and  arranged  by  Golhofred,  and  published
•k>ng  with  the  body  of  the  civil  law.  Hadrian  was  tbe
firet  emperor  who  dispensed  with  the  ceremony  of  tbe
Hnatut  conndttt,  and  promulgated  bis  decreet  upiw
hia  sole  authority.''  The  pmtorian  edicts  bad  beea
■o  eootrolled  under  tbe  government  of  the  emperors
by  the  opinions*  of  the  civilians,  tbat  they  lost  the
greater  part  of  their  ancient  dignity,  and  Hadriaa
projected  the  design  of  reducing  the  whole  Roman  bw
into  one  regular  system. All  that  be,  however,  lived  te


a H4iBtet- AnUg.  Rom.  Jur-  lib.  I- tit.  Z-wc.  41.  ffiifor  Jvr.Ch.lib.
1.  ■«.  378.  Heinecoiiu  taji,  that  PapiDiao  tru  ercry  »hercc»Ued
Jiirittuylum  a  DoetrinalegaUttAaaurMt,  tad  be  far  •nrpMMd  ill  bis
brstbrsD,  estnu  luigopod  te  intmutio  rtligutrU.

*  OiUon'i  tSMoty,  vol.  8.  p.  IB.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


hwtan  XXIII]  HUNICIfAL  LAW.  499

perform,  was  to  procnre  the  compitetion  of  tbon  ediett
of  the  ptetora  which  bad  Rtood  tbetest  oi  experience,  tn
Bcoount  of  their  authority  and  equity,  and  bad  received
Ike  illustrationt  (^  ciriliaot.*  Muoy  able  profesaon  under-
took from  time  to  time  a  digert  of  tb«  civil  law.  Papiriua
Justus  collected  some  of  the  imperial  constitutions  into
twenty  books,  and  Julius  Paulua  compiled  six  books  of
decrees  or  imperial  decisions.  Gregorius  made  a  collet
tion  of  a  higher  character,  and  he  digested  into  order  the
chief,  if  not  the  whole  of  the  imperial  edicts  from  Hadrian
down  to  the  roign  of  Dioclesian  and  his  cnlleegues,  and  '
which  was  called  the  Gregorian  Code,  and  attained  great
authority  in  tbe  forum.  Hermogenes  continued  this  eot-
lactton  under  the  name  of  the  Htrmogtnian  Codt,^  Theo-
dosiut  tbe  younger  appointed  a  committee  of  eight  civi-
lians to  reduce  the  imperial  constitutions,  from  the  time  of
Constantine.  into  a  methodical  compendium ;  and  this
Thtodotian  code  became  a  standard  work  throughout  tbe
emjHre,  and  it  was  published  in  six  folio  volumes  in  1665,
with  a  vast  and  most  learned  commentary  by  Gothofrede.
Another  century  elapsed  before  Justinian  directed  Tribo-
nian,  who  was  an  eminent  lawyer  and  magistrate,  to  unite
with  him  a  number  of  skilful  civilians,  and  to  assume  the
(reat  task  of  collecting  the  entire  body  of  the  civil  law,
-Hhich  had  been  accumulating  for  fourteen  centuries,  into
•ne  systematic  code.  Whether  the  Roman  law  at  that
period  exceeded  or  fell  short  of  tbe  number  of  volumes  in
which  the  English  law  is  now  embodied,  it  in  not  easy  to
determine.  Tribonian  represented  to  tbe  emperor^  that
when  he  and  bis  learned  associates  undertook  the  business
of  digesting  the  civil  law,  be  found  it  dispersed  in  two
thousand  volumes,  aad  in  upwards  uf  three  mitliona  of
•mall  tracts  or  fragments,a  detached  from  tbe  writings  of
the  sages,  which  it  was  necessary  to  read  and  understand


«  Orarina  dt  Orlu  et  Prog.  Jar.  Civ.  wc  38,
ft  Heiitte.  Hut.  Jur.  Cit.  lib-  1.  wo  360— 37Z.

e  Dao  pate  millh  librorim  eue  cmucri/ilii.  d  pba  guam  trtttHlien*
tecem  miUia  penutm  a  vUrUm  ejTwa,  Stewtd.  Pn^.  <td  Dig.  mo.  I.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


SW  SOURCES  OF  [Part  III.

ID  or  <'r  to  make  the  Beleclions.  The  size  of  ihese  to-
lumu,  and  Ihe  exact  quaolity  of  matter  in  tbeie  small
jneceii  or  texts,  we  cannot  aacertaio.  It  is,  however,  a
fact  beyond  all  doubt,  that  the  state  of  the  Roman  law-
rendered  a  revision  indispensable.  JuHtinian  himself  as-
Bures  u>,"  ihat  it  lay  in  such  great  confusion,  and  was  of
such  infioite  extent,  as  (o  be  beyond  the  power  of  any  hu-
man cupadty  to  digest.

The  cuinpilations  made  under  Justinian,  and  which  con-
stitute the  existing  body  of  the  civil  law,  consist  of  the
followinif  works,  and  which  I  shall  mention  in  the  order  in
which  they  were  originally  published.

(1.)  The  Code,  in  twelve  books,  is  a  collection  of  all  the
im|ierial  statutes  that  were  thought  worth  pteserving  from
Hadnun  litJuHtiuinn.  In  the  revisi»n  of  them,  the  direc-
tto<i  lo  Tribonian,  and  his  nine  learned  associates,  was,
that  they  should  extract  a  series  of  plain  and  concise  laws,
omitting  the  pr<^ambles,  and  other  superfluous  matter,
and  they  were  likewise  intrusted  with  the  great  and  ha-
zardous power  to  extend,  or  limii,  or  alter  the  !ieuse.  in
such  manner  as  they  should  think  most  likely  to  facilitate
their  future  use  and  operation.''

(2.)  Tfao  Institutes,  or  Elements  of  the  Roman  Is^,  to
four  books,  were  collected  by  'fribonian  and  two  assot-ifltes.
They  contain  the  fundamental  principles  ofthe  nnrient  law
in  a  small  body,  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  students  at  law.
This  work  was  particularly  adapted  to  the  use  ofthe  law
schools  at  Berytus,  Rome,  and  Constantinople,  which  flou-
rished in  that  age,  and  shed  great  lustre  on  the  Roman  ju-
risprudence. It  is  such  an  admirable  compendium  ofthe
clementsof  the  civil  law,  that  it  has  in  modern  times  pass-
ed through  numerous  editions,  and  received  the  most  co-
piousaod  laborious  illustrations.  It  had  been  a  model  for
every  modern  digest  of  municipal  law.  The  institutes  were


a  Prima  Pra/.  id  D'g-  eec. I.
h  Prof,  prima,  ad  Cod-  tec.  3-


Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


tecmre  XXIH.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  501

C0Ri}nled  chiefly  from  tbe  writing^s  of  Gaius  ;  and  a  disco-
Tery  by  Mr.  Ntebubr  bo  late  as  J816,  of  a  re-written
manuscript  of  the  entire  InstitulioRS  of  Gaiua,  has  given
increased  interest  to  the  InHtitutes  of  Jiistinian.^'

(3.)  The  Digest,  or  Pandects,  is  a  vast  abridgment  in
fifty  books  of  the  decisions  of  preetors,  and  the  writings
and  opinions  of  tbe  ancient  sages  of  the  law.  This  is  the
work  which  has  principally  excited  the  study,  and  reflec-
tions, and  commentaries  of  succeeding  ages.  It  is  supposed
to  contain  the  embodied  wirnlom  of  the  Roman  people  in
civil  jurisprudence  for  near  1300  years,  and  tbe  European
world  has  ever  since  had  recourse  to  it  for  authority  and
direction  upon  puMic  law,  aod  for  the  exposition  of  the
principles  of  natural  justice.  The  most  authentic  and  in-
teresting information  concerning  the  compilation  of  the
Pandt^Gis,  is  to  be  found  in  the  ordinances  of  Justinian,
prelised,  by  way  of  prefnces.  to  the  work  itself.

In  the  first  ordinance  addressed  by  Justinian  to  bis
qnsestor  Tribonian,  he  directs  him  and  bis  ai>sociat(>s  to
read  and  correct  the  books  which  had  been  written  bv  au-
thority upon  the  Roman  law,  and  to  extract  from  them  a
body  of  jurisprudence  in  which  there  should  be  no  two  laws
contradictory  or  alike,  and  that  the  collection  should  be  a
substitute  for  all  former  works ;  that  the  compilation
should  be  made  in  fifty  books,  and  digented  upon  the  plan
of  tbe  perpetual  edict,  and  contain  all  that  i.^  worth  having
in  the  Roman  law  for  the  preceding  1400  years,  so  that  it
might  thereaAer  be  regarded  as  the  temple  and  sanctuary
of  justice.  He  directed,  that  the  selection  be  made  from
the  civilians,  and  the  laws  then  in  force,  with  such  discre-
tion and  sagaeity  as  to  produce  in  the  result  a  perfect  and
immortal  work.  And,  in  the  anticipation  of  the  result,  be
declared,  that  no  commentaries  were  to  be  made  uiwn  the

a  Secanacconnt  or  that  discoTerjin  JV.  A.  Aevuto  for  April,  1831.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


jfiH  SQURCES.OF  (Put  Dl-

digeA,  as  it  bad  been  found  that  ths  caatradietioiu  of  ex-
poaitor*  had  distarbed  tbe  whole  body  of  tbe  ancient  law.

In  about  three  yean  after  tbe  publication  of  tbis  firtt  or-
dinance,  Justinian  issued  another  upon  tbe  c«ai[J«tioii  of
the  work.  In  that  latter  ordinance,  addressed  to  tbe  sanate
And  people,  be  declared  that  he  hod  reduced  the  juriopni-
deoce  of  tbe  empire  within  reasonable  limita,  and  within
tbe  power  of  all  peraonsta  paaaes»at  a  Moderate  price,
and  without  tbe  necessity  of  expending  a  fiutone  in  ac-
quiriRf;  useless  Tolumeat^  laws.  He  stated,  that  in  tbe
comjiiiation  of  the  Paadects,  Tribonian  and  his  aaaociatra
bad  drawn  from  authors  of  suchaatiquitytbattbeir  twmet
were  unknown  to  the  learned  (^that  age.  If  defecU  should
be  discovered,  reeourse  must  be  bad  to  tbe  emperor,  and
he  pointedly  prohibited  all  persons  to  have  any  farther  re-
eourae  totbe  ancient  laws,  or  te  institute  any  comparwm
between  them  and  the  new  eompilatioa.  And  to  prevcBl
the  system  from  being  disfigured  and  disordered  by  tbe
glosses  of  interpreters,  be  declared,  that  nodtatioiw  ware
to  be  made  from  any  other  books  than  tbe  laatitntee,  tbe
Pandects,  and  the  Code;  and  that  no  commentariea
were  to  be  made  upon  them,  upon  paio  of  being  subjerted
to  the  charge  of  the  crMaen  falti,  and  to  bare  tbe  commcD-
taries  destroyed.

The  Pandects  are  supposed  to  barebem  compiled  with
too  much  haste,  and  ihoy  were  Tery  defective  in  precisioa
«nd  methodical  arrangement.  The  emperor  allowed  ten
years,  and  Tribonian  and  his  sixteen  culleagnes  finished  the
work  in  three  years.  It  ia  said  that  the  Pandects  were  com-
posed of  tbe  writings  of  forty  civilians,  the  principal  part
of  whom  lived  under  the  latter  Cseears,  and  the  dontrinei
only,  and  not  the  names  of  the  more  ancient  sages,  were
prewrved.  If  the  work  had  been  executed  with  tbe  care
and  leisure  that  Justinian  intended,  it  would  have  been  an
incomparable  monument  of  human  wisdom.  Tb«-ear«)
SB  It  is,  a  great  many  contradictory  doctrines  and  opioioM
in  thecompilationon  the  game  subject,  and  too  much  of  that
rery  uncertainty  which  Justinian  was  so  solicitous  to  avoid.
But  with  atlits  errors  and  imperfectioBs,  tbe  Pandects  are


UettfeXXni.I MUNICIPAL  LAW.  MS

Iha  greatiest  repository  of  Muod  legal  principleB,  applied
Mths  private  rights  and  buBiness  af  mankind,  that  has
aver  appeared  in  any  age  or  nation.  Justinian  has  gtveo
it  the  venerable  appellation  of  the  temple  of  human  jut-
liee.  The  excellent  doclnbes,  and  the  enlightened  equity
which  pervade  the  work,  were  derived  from  the  ancient
•ages,  who  were  generally  men  of  distinguished  patri-
ettsm,  and  snrtained  the  most  unhlemished  character,
and  had  been  frequently  advanced  to  the  highest  offices  in
the  adminiBiration  of  the  gorernment.  The  names  of
Gaius,  Sceevola,  Papinian,  Ulpian,  Pautus,  and  Hodesti-
Bus,  may  be  selected  from  a  multitude  of  civilians,  as  mo-
dels of  exalted  virtue,  and  of  the  most  cultivated  and  en-
lightened human  reason.  It  is  owing  to  their  writings  that
the  civil  taw,  for  the  purity  and  vigour  of  iu  style,  almost
rinis  the  productions  of  the  Augustan  age.

{4.)  The  navels  of  Justinian  are  a  collection  of  new  im-
perial statutes,  which  constitute  a  part  of  the  body  of  the
avil  law.  Those  ordinances  were  passfld  subsequent  to
Ae  dateof  the  code,  and  bad  been  required  in  the  course
of  a  long  reign,  and  by  the  exigencies  of  succeeding  times.
They  were  made  to  supply  the  omissions  and  correct  the
errors  of  the  preceding  publications  ;  and  they  are  said  by
eompetent  judges  to  show  the  declining  taste  of  the  age,
and  to  want  much  of  that  brerily,  dignity,  perspicaity,  and
elegance  which  distinguished  the  juridical  compositions  of
the  ancients.  Some  of  these  novels  are  of  great  utility,
and  particularly  the  118th  novel,  which  is  the  groundwork
of  the  English  and  our  statute  of  distribution  of  intestates*
Vffects.^  The  institutes  and pandects  were  afterwarda


■  Sir  JFiHiam  BbcbfoM,  Com.  ral.  t.  &I6.  doe*  not  teem  willii^  t*
■dmitUmttbtitBtateofdlitribations  ifU  taken  froin  the  civil  law  :  bat
wbM  Lonl  Holt  mod  Sir  JoMph  Jekjil  declare,  [1  P.  fFm.  tT.  Pra-  in
CKatt.  603.}  Ibal  the  atatale  wai  peooed  bf  a  cirilian,  and  ii  to  be  g;(N
vsrned  and  cooitnied  by  the  rulea  of  ilie  civil  law :  aod  when  we  coin-
fare  the  provikiDM  in  the  Bo^iali  *lBtute  and  the  Romaa  novel,  the  coe-
elntkra  (Mrh  to  be  itrj  furaad  \ktj  stronr,  that  Die  one  wm  faorn>«i4
Mwaliai^  (toiq  tfae  other


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


S04  SOURCES  OF  [Part  Ul.

trRDsIaled  into  Greek,  DtidtbenoreU  were  generally  com-
posed in  that  language,  which  had  become  the  vernacular
tongue  of  the  eastern  empire ;  and  as  the  evidence  of  the
univeriality  of  that  tongue,  Justinian  declared  that  one  of
his  constitutions  was  composed  in  the  Greek  language,  fur
the  benefit  of  all  nations.^

When  the  body  of  the  civil  law  as  contained  in  the  Insti-
tutes, the  Pandects,  and  the  Code,  was  ratified  and  confirm-
ed by  Justinian,  it  became  exclusively  the  law  of  the  land;
and  the  various  texts  from  which  the  compilation  was  made,
fell  speedily  into  oblivion;  and  oil  ofthnm,  except  the  Theo-
dosian  code,  and  fragments  of  ihe  other  parts,  disappeared
in  the  wreck  of  the  empire.  The  great  woik  itself  was  in
danger  of  being  involved  in  the  general  destruction  which
attended  the  irruption  of  the  northern  barbarians  into  the
southern  provinces  of  Europe^  The  civil  law  matntuined
its  ground  a  long  time  at  Ravenna  and  in  the  Illyrian  bor-
ders ;  but  all  Italy  passed  at  length  under  the  laws  as  well
as  under  the  yoke  of  the  barbarians; — btHuittct,  atgtie/en-
nat  immanttque  Liongobardorum  Uga  acctpit.*>  There  was
but  one  circumstance  that  could  give  any  thing  like  com-
pensation to  the  inhabitants  of  Europe  for  the  absence  or
silence  of  the  civil  law  during  the  violence  and  confusioa
of  the  feudal  ages;  end  that  circumstance  was  the  redeem-
iug  spirit  of  civil  and  political  liberty,  which  pervaded  the
Gothic  institutions,  arid  tempered  the  fierceness  of  militafy
governments,  by  the  bold  outlines  and  rough  sketches  of
popular  represeniation.  It  wasan  indelible  and  foul  blotoa
the  characrer  of  the  civil  law,  as  digested  under  Justinian,
that  it  expressly  avowed  and  inculcated  the  doctrine  of  the
absolute  power  of  Ihe  emperor,  and  that  all  the  right  and
power  of  the  Roman  people  was  tranaferred  to  him.*:  Thia


tt-hil.  3.6.3.

b  Graviiia  dt  OHu  H  Prog'  Jur,  Civ.  tec.  139.

c  /fut  i.t,t.Pnnmpr(t/.  odDig.uo.  t.Praf.wnmti-ad.  Dig.ti

n.%\.


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


LecWreXXIII]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  605

had  not  beeo  until  then  the  language  of  the  Rotnaa  laws  i
and  Gravina,  with  mucli  indignation,  charges  the  introduc-
tion of  the  Ifx  regia  to  the  frawd  and  servility  of  Tribo-
nian."  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  claim'of  despotism  beeame
afterwards  a  constitutional  principle ofitnperial  legislation.
It  has  been  made  a  question,  whei  her  the  Pandects  were  for
many  ages  so  entirely  lost  to  the  western  parts  of  Europe
88  has  been  generally  supposed.  It  is  certain)  howerer,
that  about  the  time  of  the, assumed  discovery  or  exbibitioa
of  a  complete  copy  of  them  at  Atnalphi  in  Italy,  near  the
middleof  the  twelfth  century,  the  study  of  the  civil  law  re-
vived throughout  Italy  and  western  Europe  with  surpri»-
ing  ardour  and  rapidity.  The  impression  which  the  science
of  law  in  BO  perfect  a  state  of  cultivation  made  upon  the
progress  of  society,  and  the  usages  of  the  feudal  jurispru-
dence, was  sudden  and  immense.**  In  defiance  of  the
command  of  Justinian  to  abstain  from  all  notes  or  com-
ments upon  his  laws,  the  civil  law,  on  its  revival,  was  not
only  publicly  taught  in  most  of  the  universities  of  Europe,
but  it  was  overloaded  with  tlie  commentaries  of  civilians.
From  among  the  number  of  distinguished  names,  I  would
respectfully  select  Viunius  on  the  Institutes,  Voet  on  the
Pandects,  and  Perezius  on  the  Code,  together  with  the
treatises  on  the  civil  law  which  abound  in  the  works  of
Bynkershoeck,  Heineccius,  and  Potiiier,  as  affording  a
mass  of  instruction  and  criticism,  most  worthy  of  the  atten-
tion and  diligent  examination  of  the  student.

a  DeJiomano Iinptrio,tec.33,2i-  Mr.  Gjbboo,inhUniitorj,vol.  8.
]7,  IB.  leema  CO  tliink  that  ttic  ler  regia  wai  created  by  (be  Tancj  of
Ulpiaa,  or  moie  probsibljof  TriboDhtn  himBeir.  The  lex  rtgia,  u  meo-
lioaed  in  the  Pandects,  1.  1.  (it.  4.  de  rontlllvlienilnu  prmctprnft  lib.  I.
and  in  tbe  Inatitateg,  1,  t-B.dechre»;—qaod  prinripi  placuU  tegU  katet
vtgomsi;  tihpoUeitmltgt  rtgia,  qttte  de  imperiorejiulala  eat,poputi»i*H-
tl  in  eum.,  omnt  tuura  imperiwn  et  pnUttalaa  amferal.  Seldra,  in  biidii-
iiertB(ioD  aanexed  to  Fle(a,  ch.  3.  sect.  2,  3, 4.  diicnuei  tbe  character  of
the  ^  r^rto,  and  he  lajt,  i(  ia  eTiden(  lliat  it  at  rip  pad  tbe  people  of  all
legialative  power,  and  be  placet  [ha  origin  of  i(  back  to  the  time  of  Au.
^itus  Ciesar,  wbea  (he  Roman  people  tranircrred  all  tbeir  power  and
anlhorily  to  him.

(  Etprit  de*  Ikux,  lir.sa.  cb.  42.

Vol,  .1,  64


t,Goo(^lc


500  SOURCES  or  IPanlll

The  civil  law  was  intruduced  and  taught,  in  the  first
instance,  in  England,  with  the  aaaie  zeal  as  oo  the  con-
tinent ;  but  the  rivalship,  and  even  boitilitf ,  which  soon
afterwards  arose  between  the  ci?il  and  common  law  ;  be-
tween the  two  universiliCB,  and  the  law  schools  or  collvges
at  Westminster  ;  between  the  clergy  and  laity,— tended  to
check  the  progress  of  the  system  in  England,  and  to  con-
fine its  influence  to  thuse  courts  which  were  under  the
more  immediate  superintendence  of  the  c1cr«y.'  The  ec-
clesiastical courts,  and  the  Court  ofChancery.  accordingly
adopted  thecanoo  and  Roman  law,  and  the  court  of  ad-
miralty, which  was  ronstituied  about  the  time  of  £dw.  I.
also  supplied  the  defects  of  the  laws  of  Oleron  from  the
civil  law,  which  was  generally  applied  to  fill  up  the  chasms
that  appeared  in  any  of  the  municipal  institutions  of  iha
modern  European  nations.'*  A  national  prtgudice  was  early
formed  against  the  civil  law,  and  it  was  too  much  cultira-
led  by  English  lawyers.  Lord  Coke  mentions,  by  way  of
reproach,  that  William  De  la  Pole,  Duke  of  Suffolk,  in  the
reign  of  Hen.  VI.  endeavoured  to  bring  in  the  civil  law,
which  gave  occasion  to  Sir  John  Fortescue  to  write  hii
work  in  praise  of  the  English  law ;  and  the  same  charge
was  made  one  of  the  articles  of  impeachment  against  Car-
dinal Wolsey.c  But  the  moro  liberal  spirit  of  modern
times  has  justly  appreciated  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the
Roman  system.  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  according  to  the
account  uf  Bishop  Burnet,'^  frequently  said,  that  the
true  grounds  and  reasons  of  law  were  bo  well  delivered
ia  the  digest,  thata  man  could  never  well  understand  law
as  a  science  without  first  resorting  to  the  Roman  law  for
information,  and  he  lamented  that  it  was  so  little  studied  in
England.  And  in  Lane  v.  Cotton,*  that  strict  English  law>

a  Blade*.  Com.  vol  I-  Introdutory  LeetuTt-  Reme'iHut-  oftht  Eng.
liik  Law,  nol.  I.Bi,82.  MiUar>tHuUirieiiyicvo/t/ieE>ielukC<mrit-
meat,  b.  2.  c  7 bcr  3.

6  3  Rrtve^t  Hut.  lUS.

e  3  /ntt  SOS.

d  Life  <:,  Sir  X.  Bale,  p.  St.

t  It  Mod.  A$  I.

Do,i,,-c,ih,.Googlc


Lactare  XXm.]  MUNICIPAL  LAW.  sffr

yer,  L«rd  Holt,  admitted,  that  the  lawa  sf  all  nationi
were  raised  out  or  the  ruins  of  the  cirit  latr,  and  that  the
principles  of  the  English  law  were  borrowed  from  that
■jstem,  and  grounded  upon  the  same  reasoo.

The  ralue  of  the  civil  law  ia  not  lo  be  found  in  ques-
tions which  relate  to  the  connexion  between  the  govern-
ment and  the  people,  or  in  provisions  for  personal  security
in  criminal  cases.  In  every  thing  which  concerns  civil
and  political  liberty,  it  cannot  be  compered  with  the  free
spirit  of  the  English  and  American  common  law.  But
vpon  subjects  relatin;;  to  private  rights  and  personal  con-
tracts, and  the  duties  which  flow  from  them,  there  is  no  sys-
tem of  law  in  which  principles  are  investigated  with  more
good  sense,  or  declared  and  enforced  with  more  accurate
and  impartial  justice.  I  prefer  the  regulations  of  the
common  taw  upon  the  subject  of  the  paternal  and  conju-
gal relations,  but  there  are  many  subjects  in  which  the
civil  law  greatly  excels.  The  rights  and  duties  of  tutors
and  guardians  are  regulated  by  wise  and  just  principles.
The  rights  of  absolute  and  usHfructuary  property,  and  the
various  ways  by  which  property  may  be  acquired,  enlarg-
ed, transferred,  and  lost,  and  the  incidents  and  accommo-
dations which  fairly  belong  to  property,  are  admirably
discussed  in  the  Roman  law,  and  the  most  refined  and
equitable  distinctions  are  established  and  vindicated.
Trusts  are  settled  and  pursued  through  all  their  numerous
modifications  and  complicated  details,  in  the  most  rational
end  equitable  manner.  So,  the  rights  and  duties  Sowing
from  personal  contracts,  express  and  implied  and  under
the  infinite  variety  of  shapes  which  they  assume  in  the
business  and  commerce  of  life,  are  defined  and  illustrated
with  a  clearness  and  brevity  without  example.  In  all  these
respects,  and  in  many  others  which  the  limits  of  the  pre-
sent discussion  will  not  permit  me  to  examine,  tbecivil  law
shows  the  proofs  of  the  hiL'hest  rnltivation  and  refinement ;
and  no  one  who  peruses  it  can  well  avoid  the  convic-


i,,-c,ih,Googlc


SOS  SOURCES,  &e.  [Put  HI.

tion  that  it  haa  been  the  fruitful  source  of  those  comprehen-
sive views  and  solid  principles,  which  bare  been  a)>pUe<]  to
elevate  and  adorn  the  jurisprudence  of  modern  natioDi.

The  institutes  ought  to  bo  read  in  course,  and  seco-
tately  studied)  with  the  assistance  of  soma  of  the  best
commentaries  with  which  tbej  are  acrompanied.  Some
of  the  titles  in  the  Pandects  have,also  been  recommeDded
by  Ueineccius  to  be  read  and  re-read  by  the  indefatigable
student.  The  whole  body  of  the  civil  law  will  excite  never-
failing  curiosity,  and  receive  the  homage  of  srholarstasa
singula!  monument  of  wisdom.  It  fills  such  a  large  space
in  the  eye  of  human  reason ;  it  regulates  so  many  interests
of  man  as  a  social  and  civilized  being ;  it  embodies  lo
much  thought,  refloGliou,  ezperienca,  and  labour ;  it  leads
us  so  far  htto  the  recesnes  of  antiquity,  and  it  has  stood  ss
long  '*  against  the  waves  and  weathers  of  time,"  that  it  ii
impoe'sible,  while  engaged  in  the  contemplation  uf  the
systfMn,  not  to  be  struck  with  some  portion  nf  the  awe  and
vencriiliim  which  are  felt  in  the  midst  of  the  solitudes  of
.  a  majestic  ruin.


END  OF  VOLUME  T^
