Commentaries on American Law, Vol. III (James Kent, 1832)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 2nd edition, vol. III (https://archive.org/details/commentariesona02kentgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================


(pbO


COMMENTARIES


ON


AHEXZRICAN LAW.


BY  JAMES  KENT.


VOLUME  III.


SECOND EDITION.


Jteii»==1?orit:

O. HALSTED.
1832.


Southern  District  or  New-York,  ra.
BE  IT  REMEMBERED,  That  on  the  ninth  day  of  October,  A.  D.  163?,  in  thcfiAy-thIrd
(L 8  )  ^^^  ^^  ^®  Independence  of  the  United  Statcci  of  America,  James  Kent,  of  the
Vi<.  o.)  ^^  (tifltrict,  has  dc|>oeitcd  in  this  office  the  title  of  a  Book,  the  right  whereof  he
claima  as  author,  in  the  words  following,  to  wit :

"  Commentaries  on  American  Law.  By  James  Kent.  Vol.  III.**
In  conformity  to  on  Aat  of  Coufrress  of  the  United  Statcit,  entitled,  "  An  Act  for  the  en-
couragement of  Learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Bookn,  to  the  authors
and  proprietors  of  mich  copies,  during  the  time  therein  mentioned.**  And  also  to  an  Act,
entitled,  "  An  Act,  supplementary  to  an  Act,  entitled.  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of
learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  authors  and  proprietors
of  such  copies,  during  the  times  therein  mentioned,  and  extending  the  beuefils  thereof  to
liia  arts  of  designing,  cngraviog,  and  etching  historical  and  other  prints.**

FRED.  I.  BETTB,
C]0rk  of  the  Soothem  District  of  New- York


Entered  acrording  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  one  thousand
eight  hundred  and  thirty-two,  by  James  Kent,  in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the
District  Qourt  of  the  United  Stales,  for  the  Southern  District  of  New-
York.


CLAITON  AMD  TAK  MORDBN,  PRIHTSES,

40  Wllliamstreet.


CONTENTS.


PART  V.


OP THE LAW CONCERNING PERSONAL PROPERTY.


(continued  from  the  second  yolcmb.)

p«g«
Lactume  XUh^OfUu  Hulofy  t^Jdariiime  I^o -1

1.  Of  the  nmritifDelegiftlatioD  of  the  ancients.. S
• 2.  Of  the  maritime  legishtion  of  the  middle

aj^. 8

3.  Of  the  maritime  legislation  of  (he  modems. .  15

Lbgturb  XlAlh'-^ftheLawofPartnerMkip S3

!•  Of  the  nature,  creation,  and  extent  of  part-

nerahips.. Id.

2.  Of  tlie  rights  and  duties  of  partners  in

their  relation  to  each  other,  and  to  the

pnhlic .• 36

And  herein,
(1.)  Of  the  interest  of  partners  in  their

stock  in  trade ^ Id.

(2.)  Acts  by  which  one  partner  may  bind

the  firm* 40

3.  Of  the  dissolution  of  partnership. 52

And  herein,
(1.)  Of  dissolution  by  the  voluntary  act

of  either  partner. 53

(2.)  By  the  death  of  a  partner. 55

(3. )  By  the  insanity  of  a  partner 58


IT  CONTENTS.

Page

(4.)  By  bankruptcy  of  a  partner 68

(5.)  By  judicial  decree 60

(6.)  By (he inability  of ttie parties  to

act 6«

(7.)  Consequeucea  of  tbe  diMolutioo Id,

Lecture  WAW .^Of  KegoUable  Paper 71

1.  Of  the  history  of  bills  and  notes Id.

2.  Of  the  essential  qualities  of  negotiable  pa-

per- 74

3.  Of  the  rtghU  of  the  holder 78

4.  Of  the  acceptance  of  the  bill 82

5.  Of  the  endorsement ..^..  88

6.  Of  the  demand  and  protest 93

7.  Of  the  steps  requisite  to  fix  the  drawer  and

endorser. 104

8.  Of  the  measure  of  damages 115

9.  Of  mercantile  guaranties 121

10.  Of the  principal treatises on bills and

notes. 124

Lecture  XLV .^Of  the  TUie  to  MerchanU' ^esnU 129

J  1.  Requisites  to  a  valid  title  to  vessels 130

2.  Who  is  liable  as  owner 133

3.  Of  the  custom-house  documents 139

4.  Ofpartowners 151

Lecture  XLVI. — Of  the  PertOM  emplcytd  in  the  navigation  of

Merchant  Shipi 160

1 .  Of  the  authority  and  d uty  of  the  master. Id.

2.  Of  the  rights  and  duties  of  seamen 176

Lecture  XLVII — Of  Ike  Contract  of  Afreightment 201

1.  Of  tlie  charter  party Id.

2.  Of  the  bill  of  lading 206

3.  Of  the  carriage  of  poods 208

4.  Of  the  delivery  of  the  goods  at  the  port  of

destination 214

5«  Of  the  responsibility  of  the  ship  owner 216

6.  Of  the  duties  of  the  shipper 218

7.  Ofthe  payment  of  freight... 219

8.  Of  loss  from  collision  of  abips 230

9.  Of  genera]  average 232

10.  Of  salvage 245

1 1 .  Of  tlie  dissolution  ofthe  contract  of  affreight-

tneirt 248


CONTENTS.  T

Pag«

Lbctdak  XLYllh-^Oftke  Lai^rfJiariiie  Luwranee 253

I.  Of  the  fonnatioD  and  subject  matter  of  Hie

contract Id.

And  herein,

(1.)  Of  the  parties Jtf.

(2.)  or  the  essential  or  usual  terms  of  the

policy 267

(3.)  Of  the  objecto  or  insurance 262

And  herein,

1.  or  illicit  trade id.

2.  Ofcontrabandof  war« 267

3.  Of  seamen's  wages 269

4.  Of  freight, profits,  and  cotomis-

sions ,. Itf*

5.  Of  open  and  Takied  policies 272

6.  Of  wager  policies 275

(4.)  or  reassurance,  and  double  insu-
rance 278

(5.)  Of  representation  and  warranty 282

(6.)  Of  the  nature,  variety,  and  extent
or  the  risks  or  perils  within  the  po-
licy 291

And  herein,  *

1 .  or  the  acts  of  the  goyemment  of  the

parties id.

2.  Of  interdiction  of  commerce. 293

3.  Of  risks  excluded  by  the  usual  me-

morandum 294

4.  Of  the  usual  perils  c<»?ered  by  the

policy „ 299

II.  Of  tlie  voyage  in  relation  to  the  policy 307

And  herein,
(1.)  When  the  policy  attaches  and  termi-
nates, id.

(2.)  or  deviation 312

HI.  or  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  insured  in

casesofloss. 318

And  herein,

(1.)  Of  abandonment Id.

(2.)  Of  the  adjustment  of  partial  losses....  336

(3.)  or  the  return  or  premium 340

IV.  or  the  writers  on  insurance  law 342


vi  CONTENTS.


liCCTUHV  XLIX.«-Q^«fffarilMie  Loofu

Lecture  L. — Qf  inmranee  pf  Lii$69f  and  ogamH  Fire 365

1.  Ofliree. «.

2.  Against  fire 370

And  herein,

(1.)  Of  the  ioterest  io  the  policy 371

(S.)  Of  the  terms  and  constnictioo  of  (he

policy 37?

(3.)  Of  the  adjasimeDt  of  the  loss 375


PART  VI.


OP  THE  LAW  CONCERNING  REAL  PROPERTY.


Lecture  Li.^Of  the  Foundation  of  TUUio  Larul. 377

AimI  herein  of  Indian  rights  and  titles.
LkAvre  LtU.^Of  Incorporeal  HeredUamenU 401

1.  Of  the  rigfatof  common 403

And  herein,
(1.)  Of  common  of  pastore  and  of  esto-

?er8 404

(2.)  Of  common  of  piscary, 409

2.  Ofways,  easements,  and  aquatic  rights.......  419

And  herein,

(1.)  Of  ways Id.

(2.)  Of  easements  and  aquatic  rights. 427

3.  Of  offices 454

4.  Of  franchises. 458

5.  Of  annuities 460

6.  Of  rents Id,

And  herein,
(t.)  When,  and to  what  extent,  rent  is

due 463

(2.)  Of  the remedy  for the recoFery  of

rent 471


CONTENTS.  vii

Lectitbc  LIU OfUuHiUaryoflheLMoo/Tenure 487

1.  Of  the  origin  and  establiahmeot  of  feudal

tenures  on  Ihe  continent  of  Europe 4H9

2.  Of  tlie  history  of  feudal  tenures  in  Eng-

land 501

3.  Of  the  doctrine  of  tenure  in  these  United

States 609


PART  V.

OF  THE  LAW  CONCERNING  PERSONAL

PROPERTY.

(COiTTIKQED  FBOX  THB  SBC02IO  TOIiUllK.)


LECTURE  XLH.

OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  MARITIME  lAW.

*

Befors  we  enter  more  at  large  upon  the  subject  of  com*
mercial  and  maritime  law,  it  may  tend  to  facilitate  and  en-
lighten our  inquiries,  if  we  take  a  brief  view  of  the  origin,
progress,  and  succeesive  improvements  of  this  branch  of  legal
learning.  This  will  accordingly  be  attempted  in  the  present
lecture.

The  marine  law  of  the  United  States  is  the  same  as  the
marine  law  of  Europe.  It  is  not  the  law  of  a  particular
country,  but  the  general  law  of  nafioos ;  and  Lord  Mans-
field applied  to  its  universal  adoption  the  expressive  language
of  Cicero,  when  speaking  of  the  eternal  laws  of  justice :
Nee  erit  alia  lex  RomcB,  alia  Athcenis  ;  alia  nunc,  alia
postkac  ;  sed  et  ontnes  gentes,  ct  omni  tempore  una  lex  et
setnpUema,  et  immortalis  continebit,^


a  Frag,  de  Hepub,  lib,  3.
TOL.  III.  1


2  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V-

In  treating  of  this  law,  we  refer  to  its  pacific  characto'  atf
the  law  of  commerce  and  navigation  in  time  of  peace.
The  respective  rights  of  belligerents  and  neutrals  in  time  of
war  constitute  the  code  of  prize  law,  and  that  forms  a  dia«
tinct  subject  of  inquiry,  which  has  already  been  suflSiciently
discussed  in  a  former  volume.  When  Lord  Mansfield  men-
tioned the  law  of  merchants  as  being  a  branch  of  public
law,  it  was  because  that  law  did  not  rest  essentially  for  its
character  and  authority  on  the  positive  institutions  and  local
customs  of  any  particular  country,  but  consisted  of  certain
principles  and  usages  of  trade  which  general  convenience,
and  a  common  sense  of  justice  had  established,  to  regulate
th&  dealings  of  merchants  and  mariners  in  all  the  commer-
cial countries  of  the  civilized  world.

(1.)  Of  the  fnaritime  legislation  of  the  ancients.

Though  the  marine  law  of  modern  Europe  has  its  foun-
dations laid  in  the  jurisprudence  of  the  ancients,  there  is  no
certain  evidence  that  either  the  Phoenicians,  Carthaginians,
or  any  of  the  states  of  Greece,  formed  any  authoritative
digest  of  naval  law.  Those  powers  were  distinguished  for
navigation  and  commerce,  and  the  Athenians  in  particular
were  very  commercial,  and  they  kept  up  a  busy  inter-
course with  the  Greek  colonies  in  Asia  Minor,  and  on  the
borders  of  the  Euxine  and  the  Hellespont,  in  the  islands  of
the  ^gean  sea,  and  in  Sicily  and  Italy.  They  were  pro-
bably the  greatest  naval  power  in  all  antiquity.  Themis-
locles  had  the  sagacity  to  discern  the  wonderful  inflaence
and  controlling  ascendancy  of  naval  power.  It  is  stated  by
Diodorus  Siculus,  that  he  persuaded  the  Athenians  to  build
twenty  new  ships  every  year.  He  established  the  Firceus  as
a  great  commercial  emporium  and  arsenal  for  Athens,  and
the  cultivation  of  her  naval  superiority  and  glory  was  his
fevourite  policy ;  for  he  held  the  proposition  which  Pompey
afterwards  adopted,  that  the  people  who  were  masters  of
the  sea  would  be  masters  of  the  world.  The  Athenians
encouraged,  by  their  laws,  navigation  and  trade ;  and  there


Lee.  XLII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. S

was  a  particular  jurisdiction  at  Athens  for  the  cognizance  of
contracts, and controversies  between  mercliants  and  mari-
ners. There were  numerous  laws  relative  to  the  rights
and  interests of  merchants,  and  of  their  navigation ; and
ia  many  of tbem  there  was  an  endeavour  to  remove,  as
much  as  possible,  the  process  and  obstacles  which  afflicted
the  operations  of  conm)erce. In  a  pleading  of  Demosthe-
nes against  L«acritus,  we  find  the  substsCbce  of  a  loan  upon
bottomry,  -with  all  the  provisions  and  perils  appertaining
to  such  a  contract,  carefully  noted.' As  a  consequence  of
the  commercial  spirit  and  enterprise  of  the  Greeks,  their  lan-
guage "was  spoken  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  the  Mediter-
ranean and  Suxine  seas. Cicero  was  struck  with  the  com-
parison between  the  narrow  limits  in  which  the  Lautin  lan<»
guage  was  copfined,  and  the  wide  extent  of  the  Greek.*  The
universality  and  stability  of  the  Greek  tongue,  wece  owing,
no  doubt,  in  a  considemble  degree,  to  the  conquests  of  Alex-
ander, to  the  loquacity  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  inimitable  ex-
cellence of  the  language  itself;  but  it  is  essentially  to  be  im-
puted to  the  commercial  genius  of  the  people,  and  to  the  fac-
tories which  they  established,  and  the  trade  and  correspond-
ence which  they  maintained  throughout  the  then  known
parts  of  the  eastern  world*

The  Rhodians  were  the  earliest  people  that  actually  creat-
ed, digested,  and  promulgated  a  system  of  marine  law.  They
obtained  the  sovereignty  of  the  seas  about  nine  hundred  years
before  the  Christian  era,  and  were  celebrated  for  their  naval
power  and  discipUne.  Their  laws  concerning  navigation
were  received  at  Athens,  and  in  all  the  islands  of  the  JEgean
sea,  and  throughout  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean,  as  part
of  the  law  of  nations. Cicero,  who  in  early  life  studied  rhe*


a  1  Poiter'0  Oreek  AnUq.  84.  Voyage  dujeune  Anacharnt,  tonu
B.  cb.  65. t  JdUf,  HisL  182—185.

5  OtYBca  legwUur  t»  ommbtufere  gentUnu :  LaUna  tui^JMnu  mi^
gm»  fONfy  OMiltnaifur. OraL  pro  Archia  Poeta^  1. 10.


4  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

tone  at  Rhodes,  says,"*  that  the  power  and  civil  discipline  of
that  republic  continued  down  within  his  time  of  memory,
in  vigour  and  with  glory.  We  are  indebted  to  the  Roman
law  for  all  our  knowledge  of  the  commercial  jurisprudence
of  the  Rhodians.  Not  only  their  arts  and  dominion  have
perished,  but  even  their  nautical  laws  and  usages  would
have  entirely  and  for  ever  disappeared  in  the  wreck  of  na-
tions, had  it  not  been  for  the  superior  wisdom  of  their  mas-
ters the  Romans ;  and  one  solitary  title  in  the  pandects,*  con-
tains all  the  fragments  that  have  floated  down  to  modern
times,  of  their  once  celebrated  maritime  code.  The  collec-
tion of  laws,  under  the  title  of  Rhodia/n  laws,  published  at
Basle,  in  1561,  and  at  Frankfort,  in  1596,  were  cited  as  ge-
nuine by  such  civilians  as  Cujas,  Grodefroi,  Selden,  Yinnius/
and  Gravina;  and  yet  it  has  since  been  discovjered  and  de<
clared  by  equally  learned  jurists,  as  Bynkershoeck,**  Heinec-
cius,'  Emerigon,-^  and  Azuni,'  that  the  collection  of  laws
which  had  been  thus  recognised  as  the  ancient  Rhodian  laws,
(and  of  ^'hich  a  translation  was  given  in  the collection


a  Oral,  pro.  Lege  JUanilia.  cb.  18.

b  Dig,  14.  2. De  Lege  Rhodia  de  Jactu.

e  Pecku  Comm.  ad  rem  nauiieam  cum  notu  Finnii.  Lvgd,  1647.

d  Opera^  torn.  2. De  Lege  Rhodia,  ch.  8.

e  Hitt.  Jur.  Civilis  Rom.  ae  Oerm.  lib.  1.  s.  296.

/  TVaUe  des  Aaa.  pref.

g  Maritmt  Law  of  Europe,  vol.  1.  277  to  295,  N.  Y.  Edit.  In  the
note  to  p.  286,  William  Johnson,  Esq.  the  learned  translator  of  Azvnt,
delects  many  gross  errors  in  the  pretended  collection  of  Rhodian  laws,
contained  in  the  English  **  complete  body  of  Sea  Laws."  Mr.  John-
son's opinion  is,  of  itself,  of  great  aathority  ;  and  his  notes  to  his  trans-
lation of  Azttoi,  show  a  familiar  and  accurate  acquaintance  with  legal
and  classical  antiquities.  Yet  notwithstanding  all  the  authority  against
the  authenticity  of  that  collection,  JIf.  Boulay  Paty,  in  his  Coure  de
Droit  Commercial  JiarUune,  torn.  1.  p.  10—21,  does  not  hesitate  to
give  a  succinct  analysis  of  that  coUectioo,  as  containing  at  least  the
sense  and  spirit  of  the  original  laws,  and  as  being  an  exposition  of  the
true  text*


Lee.  XLII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 6

of  sea  laws  published  at  Lfondon  in  the  reign  of  Queen
Anne,)  are  not  genuine,  but  spurious.  The  emperor  Augus-
tas first  gave  a  sanction  to  the  laws  of  the  Rhodians,  as  rules
for  decision  in  maritime  cases  at  Rome ;  and  the  emperor
Antonintis  referred  one  of  his  subjects,  aggrieved  by  the  plun-
der of  his  shipwrecked  property,  to  the  maritime  laws  of
Rhodes,  as  being  the  laws  which,  he  said,  were  the  sove*
reign  of  the  sea.«  The  Rhodian  laws,  by  this  authoritative
recc^nition,  became  rules  of  decision  in  all  maritime  cases  in
which  they  were  not  contrary  to  some  express  provision  of
the  Roman  law.  They  were  truly,  as  Valin  has  observed,
the  cradle  of  nautical  jarisprudence.

We  are,  therefore,  to  look  to  the  collections  of  Justinian,  for
all  that  remains  to  us  of  the  commercial  law  of  the  ancients.
The  Romans  never  digested  any  general  code  of  maritime
regulations,  notwithstanding  they  were  pre-eminently  distin-
guished for  the  cultivation,  method  and  system  which  they
gave  to  their  municipal  law.  They  seem  to  have  been  con-
tented to  adopt  as  their  own  the  regulations  of  the  republic
of  Rhodes.  The  genius  of  the  Roman  government  was
military,  and  not  commercial.  Mercantile  professions  were
despised,  and  nothing  was  esteemed  honourable  but  the  plough
and  the  sword.  They  encouraged  corn  merchants  to  import
provisions  from  Sardinia,  Sicily,  Africa  and  Spaing  but  this
was  necessary  for  the  subsi:gtence  of  the  inhabitants  of  Rome,
as  Italy  did  not  afford  a  sufficient  supply  for  the  city.  The
Romans  prohibited  commerce  to  persons  of  birth,  rank,  and
fortune  ;^  and  no  senator  was  allowed  to  own  a  vessel  larger


a  Dig.  14.2.9.

b  Code  4.  63.  3.  The  decree  id  the  code  speaks  contempfaoQBly  of
commerce,  aod  as  being  fit  only  for  plebeians,  and  not  for  those  who
were  konarum  luce  conspicuoe,  et  patrimonio  diiiores*  Even  Cicero
regarded  commerce  as  being  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  of  the  mas-
len  of  the  world :  nolo  eundem  populum  Imperatorem^  et  PorHiorem
cue  terrarvm.


6  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

thao  a  boat  sufficient  to  carry  his  own  corn  and  fruits.'  The
navigation  which  the  Romans  cultivated,  was  for  the  purpo-
ses of  war,  and  not  of  commerce,  except  so  far  as  was  requi-
site for  the  supply  of  the  Roman  market  with  provisions.*
This  is  the  reason,  that  amidst  such  a  vast  collection  of  wise
regulations  as  are  embodied  in  the  fabric  of  the  Roman  law,
affecting  almost  every  interest  and  relation  in  human  life,  we
meet  with  only  a  few  brief  and  borrowed  details  on  the  inte-
resting subject  of  maritime  affairs. But  those  titles  atone  for


a  Livffy  lib.  21.  oh.  63.  Dig,  50.  5.  3.  Cicero,  OraL  in  Verrtm^
lib.  5.  8.  18.

h  Haeti  Hiatoire  du  Com.  et  de  la  Kavig.  des  ancients,  p.  278, 279.
PolybiuB  in  his  General  History,  b.  3.  c.  3,  gives  the  substance  of  a
very  remarkable  commercial  treaty,  between  Rome  and  Carthage,
made  the  very  first  year  after  the  banishment  of  the  Tarquins.  It  goes
to  prove  that  the  Romans  were  then  a  great  commercial  people.  Po-
lybius  says  he  translated  it  from  the  original  brazen  tables  existing  in
the  Capitol  in  the  apartment  of  the  ^diles,  and  in  a  lang^uage  so  very
obsolete  as  to  be  difficult  of  interpretation.  By  that  treaty,  neither  the
Romans  nor  their  allies  were  to  sail  beyond  the  fair  promontory  which
forms  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  Gulf  of  Carthage.  If  forced  be*
yond  it,  they  we/e  not  allowed  to  take  or  purchase  any  thing,  except  ne-
cessaries for  refiting  their  vessels,  and  for  sacrifice,  and  they  were  to
depart  within  five  days.  The  object  of  this  provision,  was  to  exclude
the  Romans  and  their  allies  from  trading  with  Egypt  and  the  countries
on  the  lesser  Syrtis.  But  the  Roman  merchants  were  to  hare  free  ac-
cess to  Sardinia,  Sicily,  Carthage,  and  the  western  coast  of  Africa,  and
to  pay  no  customs,  but  only  the  usual  fees  to  the  scribe  and  cryer.  The
sale  of  their  cargoes  was  to  be  effected  by  public  auction,  and  the  pub-
lic faith  of  Carthage  was  pledged  to  the  foreign  merchant  for  his  pay-
ment of  the  amount  of  such  sales.  The  Carthaginians  engage,  on  their
part,  not  to  offer  any  injury  to  the  Roman  allies  in  Italy,  nor  build
any  fortresses  in  the  Latin  territory.  This  treaty,  as  Ntebuhr  saga-
ciously observes,  {History  of  Rome,  vol.  1.  468,}  divulges  the  fact  of  the
commercial  greatness  of  Rome  before  the  expulsion  of  Tarqnin ;  but
the  liberal  and  enlarged  spirit  of  commerce  which  inspired  the  Romans
under  their  kings,  was  soon  after  lost  in  the  paision  for  war  and  coo-
qaett.


Lcc  XLII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 7

their  brevity,  by  their  excellent  sense  and  practical  wisdom.
They  contain  the  elements  of  those  very  rules  which  have
received  the  greatest  expansion  and  improvement  in  the  mari-
time codes  of  modern  nations.  Whatever  came  from  the
pens  of  such  sages  as  Papinian,  Paul,  Julian,  Labeo,  Ulpian,
and  Scssvola,  carried  with  it  demonstrative  proo&  of  the  wis-
d(xn  of  their  philosophy,  and  the  elegance  of  their  taste.'


a  It  may  be  aaefol  to  cast  the  ey6  for  a  moment  oyer  the  most  mate-
rial priociples  and  provisions  in  the  Roman  law,  relative  to  maritime
rights.

The  title  ^auicBy  Ckmponesy  Siabularii,  tU  recepla  reHiluant^  (^^'
4. 9.)  related  to  the  respoosibilitj  of  mariners,  inn,  and  stable  keepers ;
tod  we  meet  here  with  the  principle  which  pervades  the  maritime  law
of  an  modern  nations,  for  it  has  been  as  generally  adopted,  and  as  widely
diffased,  aa  the  Roman  law.  Masters  of  vessels  were  held  responsible,
u  common  carriers,  for  every  loss  happening  to  property  confided  to
them,  though  the  loss  happened  without  their  fault,  unless  it  proceeded
from  some  peril  of  the  sea,  or  inevitable  accident ;  nisi  n  quid  damnof
faUUi  coniingUf  9el  ms  major  contigerit.  Ulpian  placed  the  rule  od
the  ground  of  public  policy,  as  it  was  necessary  to  confide  largely  in  the
honesty  of  such  people,  who  have  uncommon  opportunity  to  commit
secret  and  impenetrable  frauds.  The  master  was  responsible  for  the
sols  of  his  seamen,  and  each  joint  owner  of  the  vessel  was  answerable
in  proportion  to  his  Interest.

The  title  Furti  adversui  Jfauitu^  Cavpanesy  Stabularios,  (Dig.  47.
S.)  related  to  the  same  subject,  and  the  owner  and  master  were  therein
held  answerable  for  thefts  committed  by  any  person  employed  under
them  in  the  ship.  But  the  law  distinguished  between  thefts  by  mari-
ners and  by  passengers,  and  the  master  was  not  liable  for  thefls  by  the
latter.

The  title  De  ExercUoria  aciione  {D^*  14. 1.)  treated  of  the  responsi-
bility of  ship  owners  for  the  acts  of  the  master.  This,  said  Ulpian,  was
a  very  reasonable  and  useful  provision,  for  as  the  shipper  was  obliged
to  deal  with  masters  of  vessels, it  was  right  that  the  owner,  who  appoint-
ed the  master,  and  held  him  out  to  the  world  as  an  agent  worthy  of  con-
fidence, should  be  bound  by  his  acts.  This  responsibility  extended  la
every  thing  that  the  master  did  in  pursuance  of  his  power  and  duty  as
master.  It  extended  to  his  contracts  for  wages,  provisions,  and  repairs
for  the  ship,  and  for  the  loan  of  money  for  the  use  of  the  ship. The


8  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

(2.)  Of  the  maritime  legislation  of  the  middle  ages.
Upon  the  revival  of  commerce,  after  the  destruction  of  the
Western  empire  of  the  Romans,  maritime  rules  became  ne-
cessary. The  earliest  code  of  modern  sea  laws  was  compiled


owoer  was  not  responsible,  except  for  acts  done  by  tbe  master  in  his
cliaracter  of  master  ;  bat  if  he  took  np  money  for  tbe  use  of  tbe  ship,
and  afterwards  converted  it  to  his  own  use,  tbe  owner  was  bound  to  re-
spond, for  he  first  gave  credit  to  the  master.  A  case  of  necessity  for
the  money  must  bare  existed  ;  and  in  that  case  only,  tbe  power  to  bor-
row came  within  tbe  master's  general  authority.  Tbe  lender  was  obli-
ged to  make  out,  at  his  peril,  tbe  existence  of  such  necessity  ;  and  then
be  was  entitled  to  recover  of  the  owner,  without  being  obliged  to  prove
tbe  actual  application  of  the  money  to  the  purposes  of  the  voyage.  So,
if  tbe  master  went  beyond  his  ordinary  powers,  as  for  instance,  if  he
was  appointed  to  a  vessel  employed  to  carry  goods  of  a  particular  de-
scription, as  hemp  or  vegetables,  and  he  took  on  board  shafts  of  granite
or  marble,  tbe  owner  was  not  answerable  for  his  acts  ;  for  there  were
vessels  destined  on  purpose  to  carry  such  articles,  and  others  to  carry
passengers,  and  some  to  navigate  on  rivers,  and  others  to  go  to  sea.  If
several  owners  were  concerned  in  tbe  appointment  of  tbe  master,  tiiey
were  each  responsible  in  soUdo  for  bis  contracts.

Tbe  title  De  Lege  Rhodia  de  Jactu  {Dig.  14.  2.)  is  tbe  celebrated
fragment  of  tbe  Rhodian  law  on  tbe  subject  of  jettison.

It  was  ordained,  that  if  goods  were  thrown  overboard,  or  a  mast  cut
away  in  a  storm,  or  other  common  danger,  to  lighten  and  save  the  ves-
sel, and  tbe  vessel  be  saved  by  reason  of  tbe  sacrifice,  all  concerned
must  contribute  to  bear  tbe  loss,  as  it  was  incurred  voluntarily  for  tbe
good  of  all,  and  it  was  extremely  equitable  that  all  should  rateably  bear
tbe  burden  according  to  the  value  of  their  property.  There  were  some
reasonable  limitations  to  the  rule.  It  did  not  apply  to  tbe  pertonM  of
the  free  passengers  on  board,  for  the  body  of  a  freeman  was  said  not  to
be  susceptible  of  valuation  ;  and  it  did  not  apply  to  tbe  provisions  which
were  used  in  common.  The  goods  sacrificed  were  to  be  estimated  at
their  actual  value,  and  not  at  the  anticipated  profit ;  but  (he  goods  saved
were  to  be  estimated  for  the  sake  of  contribution,  not  at  the  price  for
which  they  were  bought,  but  at  that  for  which  they  might  sell.

Tbe  title  De  J^autico  Famore,  (Dig.  22.  2.  Code  4.  33.)  regulated
maritime  loans.  The  lender  was  allowed  to  take  extraordinary  inte-
rest, because  be  staked  his  principal  on  the  success  of  the  voyage  and


Lea.  XLII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 9

for  the  free  aQd  trading  republic  of  Amalphi,  in  Italy,  about
the  time  of  the  first  crusade,  towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh
century.  This  compilation,  which  has  been  known  by  the
name  of  ihe  Amalphitan  Table,  superseded  the  ancient  laws  ;
and  its  authority  and  equity  were  acknowledged  by  all  the
states  of  Italy,  though  the  whole  work  has  now  passed  into
irretrievable  oblivion.'* Other  states  and  cities  began  to  form


the  safety  of  the  vessel,  and  took  as  his  security  a  pledge  of  the  ship  or
cargo.  The  maritime  interest  ceased  upon  the  arrival  of  the  vessel ;
and  if  she  was  lost  by  reason  of  seizure,  for  having  contraband  goods  of
the  debtor  on  board,  the  lender  was  still  entitled  to  bis  principal  and
interest,  because  the  loss  arose  from  the  fault  of  the  debtor.

The  title  De  Incendio^  Ruina^  naufragio,  Rate,  nave  exjpvgntfla^
(Dig*  47.  9.)  related  to  the  plunder  of  vessels  in  distress ;  and  it  did  great
honour  to  the  justice  and  humanity  of  the  Roman  law.  The  edict  of  the
proBtor  gave  fourfold  damages  to  the  owner,  against  any  person  who,
by  force  or  fraud,  plundered  a  ship  in  distress.  The  guilty  per^
sons  were  liable  not  only  to  be  punished  criminally  on  behalf
of  the  government,  but  to  make  just  retribution  to  the  aggrieved  party ;
and  the  severity  of  the  rule,  said  Ulpian,  was  just  and  necessary,  in
order  to  prevent  such  abuses  in  cases  of  such  calamity.  The  same  pro*
vision  was  extended  to  losses  by  those  means  during  a  calamity  by
fire.  The  law  applied  equally  to  the  fraudulent  receiver  and  ori«
ginal  taker  of  the  shipwrecked  articles,  and  ho  was  held  to  be  equally
guilty.

This  carsory  view  of  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Roman  maritime
law,  (for  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  take  notice  of  all  the  refined
and  intelligent  distinctions,)  is  sufficient  to  show  how  greatly  the  mari-
time codes  of  the  moderns  are  indebted  to  the  enlightened  policy  and
coltirated  science  of  the  Roman  lawyers*  The  spirit  of  equity,  in  all  its
purity  and  simplicity,  seems  to  have  pervaded  those  ancient  institutions«

a  Azuni'i  Jtaritime  LaWtYol.  1.  376.  Mr.  Swinburne,  who  visited
Amalphi  on  his  excursion  to  the  ruins  of  Posslum,  in  1779,  found  the
city  in  great  decay,  with  only  the  wrecks  of  its  former  grandeur.  Its
trade  wiibered  with  the  loss  of  its  liberty,  and  passed  to  Pisa,  Genoa,
and  Venice.  It  was  conquered  by  the  Normans,  and  plundered  by  the
Pisans,  who  carried  away  a  copy  of  the  Pandects  found  there,  and  we
bear  no  more  of  the  Amalphitan  Table,  or  of  the  high  reputation  of  the
maritime  tribunals  of  Amalphi.— «^v^in6t<nie'f  Travels  in  the  two  Sid^

,  vol.  2.  138^150.

Vol.  m,  2


10  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

eolleictiops  of  maritime  law  ;  and  ^cprnpilation  of  the  usages
and  laws  of  the  Mediterranean  powers  was  made  and  publish-
ed, under  the  title  of  the  ConsolcUo  del  mare.  This  conimer-
dal  code  is  said  to  have  been  digested  at  Barcelona,  in  the
Catalan  tongue,  during  the  middle  ages,  by  order  of  the  kiugs
of  Arragon.  The  Spaniards  vindicate  tiie  claim  of  their
eountiy  to  the  honour  of  this  compilation  ;  and  the  q>inion
of  Casaregisy  who  published  an  Italian  edition  of  it  at  Yenice,
in  1737,  with  an  excellent  commentary,  and  of  Boucher,  who,
in  1808,  translated  the  Cqnsolato  into  ^rench,  from  an  edi-
tion printed  at  Barcelooa.in  1494,  are  in  favour  of  the  Spanish
claim.^  But  the  origin  of  the  work  is  so  far  involved  in  the
darkness  6i  those  ages,  as  to  render  the  source  of  it  very
doiibtfuf  :  and  Azuni,  in  a  laboured  article,^  endeavours  to
prove  that  the  Consolaio  was  compiled  by  the  Pisans,  in
Italy,  during  the  period  of  their  maritime  prosperity.  Gro-
tiue,^  on  the  other  hand,  and  Marquardus,  in  his  work  De
Jure  Mercatorum,  hold  it  to  be  a  collection  made  in  the  time
of  the  crusadeis,  fronl  the  maritime  ordinances  of  the  Greek
emperors,  of  the  emperors  of  Germany,  the  kings  of  France,
Spain,  Syria,  Cyprus,  the  Baleares,  and  from  those  of  the
republics  of  Yenice  and  Genoa.^ It  was  probably  a  compila*

tion  made  by  private  peraop^Kt^^^  "^"^^^l^^  ^^y  have  been
the  authors  of  it,  and  at  whatever  precise  point  of  time  the
Cansolato  may  have  been  compiled,  it  is  certain  that  it  be-
came the  comnoon  law  of  all  the  commercial  powers  of  Eu-


a  Hallam,  in  his  View  of  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages,  vol.  3.
278.  thinks  the  reasoniog;  of  Boucher,  in  his  Contulat  de  la  Mer^  torn.*
1.  70 — 76.  to  be  iacouclusive,  and  that  Pisa  first  practised  those  usag^,
which  a  century  or  two  afterwards  were  formally  digested  and  promul*
gated  at  Barcelona.

b  Jdaritime  Law,  vol.  1.  326—372.

c  Lib.  3.  ch.  1 .  s.  5.  note.

d  Boulay  Paiy,  in  his  Court  de  Droit  Commercial  J^ariiimey  torn.
1.  60.  insists,  that  Azuni  has  refuted  Grotius  and  the  other  publicists  on
this  point  in  a  trianiphant  manner.


Lee.  XLIL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 11

rope.  The  marine  laws  of  Italy,  Spaio,  France,  and  Eng-
land were  greatly  affected  by  its  influence  ;  and  it  formed
Ibe  basb  of  subsequent,  maritime  ordinances.'  It  has
been  translated  into  the  GasiiliaO). Italian,  German,  and
French  languages  ;  and  an  entire  translation  of  it  into  Eng-
lish has  long  been  desired  aod  called  .for  l>y  those  scholars  and
Imwyere  who  were  the  most  competent  to  judge  of  its
value.*  4

We  are  naturally  induced  to  overlook  the  want  of  order
and  systein  in  the  Consolato^  and  the  severity  of  some  of  its
rules,  and  to  justify  Emerigon  and  Boucher  in  their  admira-
tion of  the  good  sense  and  spirit  of  equity  which  dictated  its
decisions  upon  contracts,  when  we  consider  that  the  compila-
tion  was  the  production  of  a  barbarous  age.^  It  is,  undoubt-
edly, the  most  authentic  and  venerable  monument  extant,  of
the  commerdal  usages  of  the  middle  ages,  and  especially
among  the  people  who  were  concerned  in  the  various  branches
of  the  Mediterranean  trade.  It  was  as  comprehensive  in  its
plan  as  it  was  liberal  in  its  principles.  It  trjeated  of  maritime
courts,  of  shipping,  of  the  ownership  andieqpipment  of  ships,
of  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  bwneis  and  master,
of  freight  and  seamen's  wages,  of  the  duties  .and  government
of  seamen,  of  ransoms,,  salvage,  jettisons, -and  average  contri-
butions. It  ^treated  also  of  maritime  captures,  and  of  ^e  mu-


tt CataregiSf  who  was  one  of  the  most  competent  and  learned  of
commercial  lawyere,  says,  in  one  of  his  discovrses,  {Dis*  313.  n.  IS.)
thai  the  ConsokUo  had,  in  maritime  matterf>  by  universal  custom,  the
force  of  law  among  all  provinces  and  nations.

b  There  has  been  a  translation  of  two  chapters  on  prize  by  Dr.  Ro-
binson, and  of  some  chapters  on  the  ancient  or  commercial  courts,  and
OD  re-captures,  inserted  in  the  2d,  3d,  and  4th  volume  of  Hall's  Ameri"
can  Law  Journal*

c  Bynkershoeck,  in  his  Quculione*  Jur,  Pub,  lib.  1.  cb.  5.  praisea
the  justice  of  some  of  its  rules,  while  he,  at  the  same  time,  speaks  disre-
•pectfolly  and  unjustly  of  the  work  at  large,  as  a  farrago  Ugum  novli-
corum.


la  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V,

tual  rights  of  neutral  and  belligerent  vessels  ;  and,  in  fact,  it
contained  the  rudiments  of  the  law  of  prize.  Emerigon  very
properly  rebukes  Itubner  for  the  light  and  frivolous  manner
in  which  he  speaks  of  the  Consoldto  ;  and  he  says  in  return,
that  its  decisions  are  founded  on  the  law  of  nations,  and  bare
united  the  suffrages  of  mankind."*

The  laws  of  Oleron  were  the  next  collection  io  point  of
time  and  celebrity.  %  They  were  collected  and  promulgated
la  the  island  of  Oleron,  on  the  coast  of  France,  in  or  about
the  time  of  Richard  I. The  French  lawyers  in  the  highest
repute,  such  as  Cleirac,  Yalin,  and  Emerigon,  have  contended,
that  the  laws  of  Oleron  were  a  French  production,  compiled
under  the  direction  of  Queen  Eleanor,  Dutchess  of  Guienne,
in  the  language  of  Gascony,  for  the  use  of  the  province  of
Guienne,  and  the  navigation  on  the  coasts  of  the  Atlantic  ;
and  that  her  son,  Richard  I.,  who  was  King  of  England,  as
well  as  Duke  of  Guienne,  adopted  and  enlarged  this  collection.
Selden,  Coke,  and  Blackstone,  on  the  other  hand,  have  claim-
ed it  as  an  English  work,  published  by  Richard  I.  in  his
character  of  King  of  England.^ It  is  a  proof  of  the  obscurity
that  covers  the  early  history  of  the  law,  that  the  author  of
.  such  an  important  code  of  legislation  as  the  laws  of  Oleron,
should  have  been  left  in  so  much  obscurity  as  to  induce  pro-
found antiquaries  to  adopt  different  conclusions,  in  like  man-
ner as  Spain  and  Italy  have  asserted  rival  claims  to  the  origin
of  the  Consciato. The  laws  of  Oleron  were  borrowed  from
the  Ehodian  laws,  and  the  Consolato,  with  alterations  and
additions,  adapted  to  the  trade  of  western  Europe. They


a  TraUS  des  AiiuranceM,  pret

h  The  qQestion  is  of  no  sort  of  moment  to  or  at  the  present  day,  but  it
i»  quite  amasing  to  obserFO  the  zeal  with  which  Azuoi,  Boucher,  and
Boulay  Paty,  en(^agc  in  the  contest.  They  insist,  that  tho  pretension,
•a  theiy  term  it,  of  sach  men  as  Selden  and  Blackstone,  was  founded  oo
a  desire  to  flatter  the  English  nation,  and  to  depriye  the  French  of  the
(lory  of  the  composition  of  those  nantical  ordinances.


Lcc.  XLII.] O*'  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  18

have  served  as  a  model  for  subsequent  sea  laws,  and  have  at
all  times  been  extremely  respected  in  France,  and  perhaps
equally  so  in  England,  though  not  under  the  impulse  of  the
same  national  feeling  of  partiality.  They  have  been  admit-
ed  as  authority  on  admiralty  questions  in  the  courts  of  justice
in  this  country.*

The  laws  of  Wisbuy  were  compiled  by  the  merchants  of
the  city  of  Wisbuy,  in  the  island  of  Gothland,  in  the  Baltic
sea,  about  the  year  1288.  It  had  been  contended  by  some
writers,  that  these  laws  were  more  ancient  than  those  of  Ole-
ron,  or  even  than  the  Consolato.  But  Cleirac  says,  they
were  but  a  supplement  to  the  laws  of  Oleron,  and  constituted
the  maritune  law  of  all  the  Baltic  nations  north  of  the  Rhine,
in  like  manner  as  the  laws  of  Oleron  governed  in  England
and  France,  and  the  provisions  of  the  Consolato  on  the  shores
of  the  Mediterranean.  They  were,  on  many  points,  a  repe-
tition of  the  judgments  of  Oleron,  and  became  the  basis  of
the  ordinances  of  the  Hanseatic  league.^


a  See  Walton  ▼.  the  Ship  NeptuDe,  1  Peiert'  Adm.  Dec,  142.  Nat-
tentrom  y.  Ship  Hazard,  in  the  District  Codrt  of  MaisachasettB,  2
HmiTs  L.  J.  359.  Sims  v.  Jackson,  1  Pelere'  Mm.  Dec.  157.  all  of
wbicb  were  decided  on  the  authority  of  the  laws  of  Oleron.  In  1647,  it
was  resolred  bj  the  popular  go^emnient  of  Rhode  Island,  that  the  laws
of  Oleron  should  be  in  force  for  the  benefit  of  seamen.  (1.  PUkin't
HtMiory,  49.  Cleirac  published  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  centu*
ry,  the  laws  of  Oleron,  in  his  work  entitled,  Xet  Us  ei  Couhtmes  de  la
JHer,  with  an  excellent  commentary.  They  were  translated  into  En-
glisby  with  the  notea  of  Cleirac,  considerably  abridged,  and  published  in
the  collection  of  sea  laws  made  in  the  reig^n  of  Queen  Aone.  They
have  likewise  been  published  in  this  country  in  the'appendix  to  the  first
volomeof  Pelerg*  Admiralty  Decisionsy  from  the  copy  in  the  Sea  Xatot.
There  is,  likewise,  annexed  to  these  reports,  a  copy  of  the  laws  of  Wis*
hay,  of  the  Hanse  Towns,  and  of  the  marine  ordinances  of  Louis  XIV.,
and  they  have  given  increased  interest  to  a  valuable  publication.

b  Cleirac,  in  his  preamble  to  the  ordinances  of  Wisbuy,  {Let  Uk  H
CouiMmeidela  JHer^  p.  130.)  gives  from  Johannes  Magnus,  and  his
brother  Olans,  the  bistoriaDS  of  Sweden,  tad  the  Goths,  a  very  glowing


U  OP  PER90N%L  PROPERTY. (Part  V.

The  renowned  Hanseatic  association  was  begun  at  least  as
early  as  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  it  originated
with  the  cities  of  Lubeck,  Bremen,  and  Hamburgh.  The
free  and  privileged  Hanse  Towns  became  the  asylum  of  com-
merce, and  the  retreats  of  civilization,  when  the  rest  of  Eu-
rope was  subjected  to  the  iron  sway  of  the  feudal  system,  and
the  northern  seas  were  infected  by  "  savage  clans,  and  roving
barbarians/'  Their  object  was  mutual  defence  against  piracy
by  sea,  and  pillage  by  land.  They  were  united  by  a  league
offensive  and  defensive,  and  with  an  intercommiinity  of  citi-
zenship and:  privileged.  .lUibassocialidn  of  libe.  cities  of  Lu-
beck, Bri«ts¥.nck),''DhA(ki()bf  JBM«C«iogtie,  cbmrnenced  in  the
year  1264*,  a<icording'to'Creirat,ndndirl-'M64,  according  to
Azuni ;  and  it  became  so  safe 'and  beneficial  a  confederacy,
that  all  the  cities  and  large  towns  on  the  Baltic,  and  on  the
navigable  rivers  of  Germany,  to  tlie  number  of  eighty-one,
acceded  to  the  union.  One  of  the  means  adopted  by  the
confederates  to  insure  prosperity  to  their  trade,  and  to  protect
them  from  controversies  with  each  other,  was  the  formation  of
a  code  of  maritime  law.  The  consuls  and  deputies  of  the
Hanseatic  league^  in  a  general  convention  at  Lubeck  in  1614,
added  to  their  former  ordinances  of  1597,  (or  1591,  as  Azuni
insists,)  from  the'  laws  of  Oleron,  and  of  Wiebuy,  and  esta-
blished a  second  and  larger  Hanseatic  ordinance,  under  the


mccount  of.tfa^^.  fisrsnisit  tjleaAtli.iaBd  JbomraetciBl  pMBperUy  of  Wisboy,
tbe  ADcient  capKal  of  6otbYaAd,inid*then  a  free  SlidnadcpeikdeDt  city.
It  was  onoe  the  most  celebrated  and  flourisbiog  enponaili  ib'  Europe,
and  'mercbaots  from  all  parts  came  there  to  traffio^  and  bad  their  shops
and  warehouses,  and  enjoyed  the  same  privileges  as  the  oatire  inhabit-
ants. But,  in  Cleirac's  time,  this  bright  vision  had  vanished,  and  the
town,  with  its  trade  and  riches,  was  destroyed,  and  nothing*'  was  to  be
.  seenlbot  heaps  of  ruins,  the  «ad  eridence  of  its  former  splendour  anS
magnificence.  Here  is  one  gk-dand '  for  the  melancholy  admoniUon  of
'  the  l)oet,  ^'That  trade's  pnradempiffb  bastes  to  swift  decay."  Buttbe
logic  of  the  muse  is  eoturely  refuted  by  tbe-atability  of  commercial
;^wer^i(  other  ilUist»ioas  examplea.» ..  . .-.:..


tide  of  tht^Jui  Ehthsdaficikm- MariHifi/Hi^  was

published  at  Hanibiiigh  an  1667,  with  dco^maitoiryj)^  Ku-
rkke.  This  digest  of  nautical. usages  and  regtklatiQos,  ivas
founded  evidently  on  those  of  Wisbuy  and  Oleron,  and  from
the  great  influence  and  character  of  the  confederacy,  it  has
always  been  deemed  a  compilation  of  authority.*

(3.)  Of  the  mariiime  legislation  of  the  modems.
But  all  the  former  ordinances  and  compilations  on  man*
time  law,  were  in  a  great  degree  superseded  in  public  estima*
tion,  their  authority  diminished,  and  their  lustre  eclipsed,  by
the  French  ordinance  upon  commerce  in  1673,  which  treated
largely  of  n^otiable  paper  ;  and  more  especially  by  the  cele-
brated marine  ordinance  of  1681.  This  monument  of  the
wisdom  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIY.,  far  more  durable  and
more  glorious  than  all  the  military  trophies  won  by  the  valour
of  his  arms,  was  erected  under  the  influence  of  the  genius
and  patronage  of  Colbert,  who  was  not  only  the  minister  and
secretary  of  state  to  the  king,  but  inspector  and  general  super-
intendant  of  commerce  and  navigation.  It  was  by  the  spe-
dal  direction  of  that  minister,  and  with  a  view  to  illustrate


a  Les  Ut  et  Couttmes  de  laJder^  p.  157—165.  Ward,iD  bis  HiMtory
of  the  Law  of  Jfaiiont^  toI.  iL  276—290.  adduces  proofs,  that  the
HaDseatic  leagae  exercised  the  rights  of  sovereignty  as  a  federal  re-
pablic,  aod  with  coosiderable  strength  and  vigour,  until  the  fifteenth
eentary.  No  less  than  four  commercial  treaties  were  concluded  be*
tweeo  England  and  the  Hanse  Towns  in  the  space  of  three  years,  from
the  year  1472  to  1474.  But  the  league  was  dissolved  as  soon  as  the
great  powers  of  Europe  withdrew  their  cities  from  the  association ;  aod
the  members  of  this  confederacy  are  now  reduced  to  the  cities  of  Lubeck,
Hambargb,  and  Bremen.  Rym,  Fcsd,  torn.  9.  cited  in  Henry's  Hiit,
of  Great  Britain^  b.  5.  ch.  6.  Putter* s  Corulitutional  History  of  Ger^
many,  voL  ii.  p.  208.  Those  'Hanseatic  cities  had  a  diplomatic  repre-
sentalive  at  Washington  in  1827,  and  in  the  year  following  a  Conven-
lion  of  ^'Friendship,  Commerce,  and  Navigation,  between  the  United
States  and  the  free  Hanseatic  Republics  of  Labeck,  Bremen,  aod
Hamburgh,"  was  concluded*


16  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

the  advantages  of  the  commerce  of  the  Indies,  that  Huct  wrote
hb  learned  history  of  the  commerce  and  navigation  of  the
ancients.'  The  vigilance  and  capacity  of  the  ministry  of
Louis,  communicated  uncommon  vigour  to  commercial  in-
quiries. They  created  a  marine  which  shed  splendour  on
his  reign,  and  corresponded  in  some  degree  with  the  extent
of  his  resources.  It  required  such  a  work  as  the  ordinance
to  which  I  have  referred,  to  consolidate  the  establish ment  of
the  maritime  power  which  had  been  formed  by  the  sagacity
of  his  counsels.

That  ordinance,  says  Yalin,  was  executed  in  a  masterly
manner. It  was  so  comprehensive  in  its  plan,  so  excellent
in  the  arrangement  of  its  parts,  so  just  in  its  decisions,  so
wise  in  its  general  and  particular  policy,  so  accurate  and  clear
in  its  details,  that  it  deserves  to  be  considered  as  a  model  of
a  perfect  code  of  maritime  jurisprudence. The  whole  law  of
navigation,  shipping,  insurance,  and  bottomry,  was  systemati-
cally collected  and  arranged. It  required  the  greatest  extent
of  knowledge,  and  the  most  correct  discernment  and  liberali-
ty of  views,  to  form  and  execute  such  a  work. It  was  neces-
sary to  examine  the  commercial  usages  of  all  other  nations,  and
select  from  amidst  a  contrariety  of  practice  the  most  approved
rules.  It  was  necessary  to  retrench  that  which  was  superfluous,
to  enlighten  that  which  was  obscure^  and  to  supply  those  things
which  had  escaped  the  observation  of  the  earlier  founders  of  nau-
tical law,  or  been  recommended  by  the  lights  of  experience. It
is,  however,  an  extraordinary  fact,  that  the  able  civilians,  and
perhaps  the  distinguished  merchants,  who  assumed  the  task
of  legislators,  and  compiled  this  ordinance,  are  unknown  to
fame ;  and  though  the  event  be  of  so  recent  a  date,  and  oc-
curred at  the  most  polished  and  literary  era  in  French  histo-
ry, neither  letters,  nor  gratitude,  nor  national  vanity,  have
been  able  to  rescue  their  names  from  oblivion.^


a  ^gt,  du  Comm.  Hdela  J^dnig*  des  Ancient^  Pref.
h  Valin*i  Com,  tur  Ford,  Pret  p»  4*


Lee.  XLII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. IT

-  Talin  suppoeed  he  bad  discovered  the  source  of  the  ma-
leriab  of  the  ordinance  in  a  curious  and  vast  compilation  of
andent  DCiaritime  laws,  among  the  manuscript  collections  in
the  library  of  the  Duke  of  Pentbievre. The  compilation
consisted  of  the  Rhodian  and  Roman  law ;  of  the  Consolaio^
and  of  the  use  and  customs  of  the  sea ;  of  the  ordinances  of
Charles  V.  and  Philip  11.,  kings  of  Spain  ;  of  the  judgments
of  Oleron ;  of  the  ordinance  of  Wisbuy,  and  of  the  Teutonio
Haose ;  of  the  insurance  codes  of  Antwerp  and  Amsterdam  ;
of  the  Guidon,  and  of  all  the  French  ordinances  prior  to  the
year  1G60.  This  magnificent  repository  of  commercial  science'
is  suppoMd  to  have  been  the  true  and  solid  foundation  of  the
frbric  erected  by  artists  who  bad  too  much  modesty  to  make
their  work  the  vehicle  of  their  own  immortality.  Every  com*
mercial  nation  has  rendered  homage  to  the  wisdom  and  in-
t^iity  of  the  French  ordinance  of  the  marine,  and  they  havo
regarded  it  as  a  digest  of  the  maritime  law.  of  civilized  Europe.
Yalin  has  written  a  coQunentary  upcm  every  part  of  it,  and  it
almost  rivals  the  ordinance  itself  in  the  weight  of  its  authori-
ty, as  well  as  in  the  ^uity  of  its  conclusions.*


a  Tbe  ordiDance  hat  been  traiMlated  and  printed  in  Eng^od,  and

pabtiabed  in  die  collection  entitled  Sea  Lawt,  and  it  is  annexed  to  tbe

aaoond  rolBoie  of  Judge  Peters'  AStniraUy  Decuiom  in  the  District

CoQrt  of  Pennsylrania. It  has  Oeen  redigested,  with  some  few  modifi-

cations  and  additions,  in  tb»  new  Commercial  Code  of  France  of  1807 ;

and  that  code  was  tranitteted  by  Mr.  Rodman,  and  pabliahed  in  the  city

of  New- York  in  IP'4. Tbe  commercial  code  was  presented  to  tbe

French  legislatrfe  body  by  tbe  counsellors  of  state  in  1807,  as  baying

beM  conceired,  meditated, discussed  and  established,  bytheinapiraiionof

Jugreaiett  man  in  MHorffj  the  HerchPacificator  of  Europey  whiU  ha

wu  hoofing  hie  trifonphant  eagles  to  the  banke  of  the  astoniehed  Futula  ;

and  yet,  in  contradiction  to  much  of  this  adulation  and  incense,  tbe

code  will  be  found,  upon  sober  examination,  to  be  essentially  a  republic

cation  in  a  new  form  Cf  tbe  ordinance  of  1673,  relative  to  negotiable

paper,  and  of  tbe  marine  ordinance  of  1681,  digested  under  (he  orders

of  Colbert,  and  illustrated  by  the  commentaries  of  Valin. It  is  entitled,

bowerer,  to  the  merit  of  some  improrements  on  the  former  ordinances.

Vol.  m.  3


18  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. (Part  V.

Jn  additbn  U>  these  gesaenl  codes  of  ooiUmercMil  fegiflia-
tioD,  Uierehave  been  a  number  of  local  ordinances  of  dtstio-
guisbed  credk,  relating  to  nautical  matters  and  marine  in8u«>
ranee,  such  as  the  ordinances  of  Barcdona,  Florence,  Am*
sterdam,  Antwerp,  Copenhagen,  and  Konigsberg.  There
have  also  been  several  tr^itises  on  nautical  subjects  by
learned  ^vilians  in  the  several  countries  of  Europe,  wUch  are
of  great  authority  and  reputation.*

The  English  nation  never  had  any  general  and  solemnly
enacted  code  of  maritime  law,  resembling  those  which  have
iieen  mentioned  as  belonging  to  the  other  European  nationsi,
and  promulgated  by  legblative  authority.  This  deficiency  was
suppUed,  not  only  by  several  extensive  private  compila*
tions,*  but  it  has  been  more  eminently  and  more  authoritative-
ly supplied  by  a  series  of  judicial  decisions,  commencing  about
the  middle  of  the  last  century.  Those  decisions  have  shown,
to  the  admiration  of  the  world,  the  masterly  acquaintance  of
the  English  judiciary  with  the  principles  and  spirit  of  com-
mercial policy  and  geneml  jurisprudence,  and  they  have  af-
forded undoubted  proofs  of  the  entire  independ^ice,  impar-
tiality and  purity  of  the  administration  of  justice.  The  nu-
merous  cases  in  the  books  of  reports  which  have  arisen  upon
maritime  questions,  resemble  elementary  treatises  in  the
depth,  extent,  and  variety  of  their  researches,  while  they


and  of  being  more  compreheosive  in  its  plan  uiid  execution,  for  it  enu
braces  the  subjects  of  partnership,  comnion  carrier^^  bankroptcy,  insol-
vency, and  stoppage,  in  Iraniitu.

a  Those  ordinances  are  collected  by  Mag^t,  in  the  seoond  yotame
of  his  Eaay  on  Ihsurancet ;  and  Mr.  Gushing,  in  a  learned  note  to  his
translation  of  Pothier  on  JdarUim^  ContracU  of  LeUing  to  Htre,  pub«
liabed  at  Boston  in  1831,  has  alluded  to  the  most  distinguislied  writers
in  Italy,  Spain,  Portugal,  France,  Holland,  Germany,  and  Sweden,  oq
maritime  law.

b  Among  the  private  treatises,  the  most  distinguisbed  are  those  of
Malyoes,  Molioy,  Bewes,  Postlewaite,  Magens,  Wesket,  Millar^  Parkt
Marshall,  4bbott,  Chittj,  Holt,  Lawss,  and  Benecke,


Lee.  XjLtl.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  19

pftrtake,  at  the  same  time,  of  the  precision  nfiA  authority  d
kgialalm  eoactmeats.  liord  Mansfield,  at  a  very  early  period
<if  his  judidal  lifei  introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  English  haff
the  Bhodian  laws,  the  Cansolato  del  mare^  the  laws  of  0\»*
ion,  the  treatises  of  Boccus^  the  lawe  of  Wisbuy,  and,  abov^
all,  the  maiine  ordinances  of  Lonis  XIY.,  and  the  conunen-
(ary  of  Yahn.  These  authorities  were  Qited  by  him  in  Luk4
7.  Ijyde^^  and  from  that  time  a  new  direction  was  given  ts
Eof^h  sbidieB,  and  new  vigour,  and  more  liberal  and  en-
larged views,  communicated  to  forensic  investigations.  Since
the  year  1798,  the  decisions  of  Sir  WiUiam  ScoU  (now  Lord
Stoweli)  on  the  admirahy  side  of  Westminster  Hall,  have
been  read  and  admired  in  every  region  of  the  Republic  of
leUeiB,  as  modds  of  the  most  cultivated  and  the  most  enlight-
ened  humaa  reaaon.  The  English  maritime  law  can  now
be  studied  in  the  adjudged  cases  with  at  least  as  much  profit^
and  with  vastly  more  pleasure^  than  in  tb^  dry  and  formal
didactic  trealises  and  ordinances  professedly  devoted  lo  the
scienoe.  Tlie  doctrines  are  there  reaeoned  out  at  large,  and
proctically  applied.  The  arguments  at  the  bar,  and  the  opi*
nions  from  the  bench,  are  intermingled  with  the  gravest  re-
flecttons,  the  most  scrupulous  morality,  the  soundest  policy^
and  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  all  the  various  topics  that
concern  the  great  social  interests  of  mankind.

Nor  has  our  learned  profession  in  this  country  been  want-
ing in  the  study  and  cuhivation  of  maritime  law.  Our  im-
profement  has  been  rapid  and  our  career  illustrious,  since  the
adoption  of  tlie  present  constitution  of  the  United  States.
There  hav«  been  seveml  respectable  treatises  on  subjects  of
commercial  law,  and  some  of  them  we  may  notice,  when  we
are  upcm  the  branches  to  which  they  are  applied.  Tbe  deci-
sions in  the  federal  courts  in  ccHnroerdal  cases,  have  done
credit  to  the  moral  and  intellectual  character  of  the  nation ;
and  the  admiralty  courts  in  particular  have  displayed  great


a  2  Bxkrr*  882.


80  OF  PERSONAL  PROPfiRTY.  Part  V,

Research,  and  a  familiar  knowledge^  of  the  principles  of  the
marine  law  of  Europe.  But  I  Bhould  omit  doing  jastice  to
my  own  feelings,  as  well  as  to  the  cause  of  truth,  if  I  were
not  to  select  the  decisions  in  OaUison^s  and  Mason^s  Re-
pcrt9>,  as  specimens  of  pre-eminent  merit.  They  may  fairly
be  placed  upon  a  level  with  the  best  productions  of  the  English
admiraltyv  for  deep  and  accurate  learning,  as  well  as  for  the
highest  ability  and  wisdom^in  decision.

The  reports  of  judicial  decisions  in  the  several  states,  and
especially  in  the  states  of  Massachusetts,  New-York,  and
Pennsylvania,  evince  great  attention  to  maritime  questions,
and  they  contain  abundant  proofs,  that  our  courts  have  been
dealing  largely  with  the, business  of  an  enterprising  and  com-
mercial people.  Maritime  law  became  early  and  anxiously
an  object  of  professional  research.  If  we  take  the  reports  of
New- York  in  chronological  order,  we  shall  find,  that  the  first
five  volumes  occupy  the  period  when  Alexander  Hamilton
was  a  leading  advocate  at  our  bar.  That  accomplished  law-
yer (for  it  is  in  that  character  only  that  I  am  now  permitted
to  refer  to  him)  showed,  by  his  precepts  and  practice,  the
value  to  be  placed  on  the  decisions  of  Lord  Mansfield.  He  was
well  acquainted  with  the  productions  of  Yalin  and  Emerigon,
and  if  he  be  not  truly  one  of  the  founders  of  the  commercial
law  of  this  state,  he  may  at  least  be.  considered  as  among  the
earliest  of  those  jurists  who  recommended  those  authors  to
the  notice  of  the  profession)  and  rendered  the  study  and  cita-
tion of  them  popular  and  familiar.  His  arguments  on  com-
mercial, as  well  as  on  other  questions,  were  remarkable  for
freedom  and  energy ;  and  he  was  eminently  distinguished
for  completely  exhausting  every  subject  which  he  discussed,
and  leaving  no  argument  or  objection  on  the  adverse  side
unnoticed  and  unanswered.  He  traced  doctrines  to  their
source,  or  probed  them  to  their  foundations,  and  at  the  same
time  paid  the  highest  deference  and  respect  to  sound  autho*
rity.  The  repprted  cases  do  no  kind  of  justice  to  his  close
end  accurate  logic ;  to  his  powerfnl  and  comprehensive  intcl-


Lee.  XLII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 21

lect ;  to  the  extent  of  his  knowledge,  or  the  eloquence  of  his
illuBtrationB.  We  may  truly  apply  to  the  efforts  of  his  mind,
the  remark  of  Mr.  Justice  BuUer,  in  reference  to  the  judicial
opini<xi8  of  another  kindred  genius,  that "  principles  were
stated,  reasoned  upon,  enlarged  and  explained,  until  those
who  heard  him  were  loet  in  admiration  at  the  sti^ngth  and
stretch  of  the  human  understanding."


LECTURE  XLm.


OF  THE LAW OF  PARTNERSHIP.

Partnership  contracts  have  been  found,  by  experience,
to  be  convenient  to  persons  engaged  in  trade,  and  useful  to
the  community.  Merchants  are  thereby  enabled  to  consoli-
date their  credit,  and  extend  their  business.  With  the  aid  of
joint  counsel  and  accumulated  capital,  a  spirit  of  enterprise  is
senidbly  awakened,  and  boldness  of  plan  and  vigour  of  exer-
lion  communicated  to  mercantile  concerns.  Partnerships
have  grown  with  the  growth,  and  multiplied  with  the  exten-
sion  of  trade ;  and  the  law  by  .which  they  are  regulated  has
been  improved  by  the  study  and  adoption  of  the  best  usages
which  the  genius  of  commerce  has  introduced.  It  has  also
been  cultivated  and  greatly  enlarged,  under  a  course  of  judi«
cial  decisions,  until  the  law  of  partnership  has  at  last  attained
the  precision  of  a  regular  branch  of  science,  and  forms  a  dis-
tinguished part  of  the  code  of  qMnmercial  jurisprudence.

In  treating  of  this  subject,  I  shall  consider,  (1.)  the  nature,
creation,  and  extent  of  partnerships ;  (2.)  the  rights  and  du-
ties  of  partners,  in  their  relation  to  each  other,  and  to  the  pub-
lic ;  (3.)  the  dissolution  of  the  contract.

(1.)  OfthentUurey  creatitm,  and  extent  of  partnership*^

Partnership  is  a  contract  of  two  or  more  persons,  to  place

their  money,  effects,  labour  and  skill,  or  some,  or  all  of  them,

in  lawful  commerce  or  business,  and  to  divide  the  profit,  and


24  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

bear  the  loss,  in  certain  propdrtions.^  The  two  leading  prin-
ciples of  the  contract  are,  a  common  interest  in  the  stock  of
the  company,  and  a  personal  responsibility  for  the  partnership
engagements.  ,The  common  interest  of  the  partners  appHes
to  all  the  partnership  property,  whether  vested  in  the  first  in-
stance by  their  several  contributions  to  the  common  stock,  or
acquired  afterwards  in  the  course  of  the  partnership  business;
and  that  property  is  first  liable  for  the  debts  of  the  company,
and  after  they  are  paid,  and  the  partnership  dissolved,  then  it
is  subject  to  a^  division  among  the  members,  or  their  represen-
tatives, according  to  agreement.  If  on^  person  advances  funds,
and  another  furnishes  his  personal  services  or  skill,  in  carry-
ing on  a  trade,  and  is  to  share  in  the  p];ofits,  it  amounts  to  a
partnership.^  But  each  party  must  engage  to  bring  into  the
common  stock  something  that  is  valuable ;  and  a  mutual  con-
tribution of  that  which  has  value,  and  can  be  appreciated,  is


a  Puffendorf,  Droit  de  la  Jfat.  liv.  5.  ch.  8.  t.  1.  Pothier^  TraiU
du  Control  de  SociHe^  No.  1.  Repertoire  de  Jurisprudence^  art.  So-
ciite>  The  French  ordinaDoe  of  1673,  required  the  contract  of  partner^
•hip  to  be  reduced  to  writing^  and  registered ;  but  that  was  the  iotroduc-
tioD  of  a  new  rule,  aud  the  reg^ulatioo  bad  gone  into  disuse  in  the  time
of  Potbier,  though  be  considered  it  to  be  a  sage  provision.  {Poihier^  ibid^
No.  79.  82.  98.)  The  new  French  commercial  code  has  retained  the
regulation  of  the  ordinance,  and  it  requires  an  abstract  of  the  articles
of  partnership  to  be  attested,  and  publicly  registered ;  but  the  omission,
though  injurious  to  the  parties  as  between  themselves,  does  not  affect
the  rights  of  third  persons.  (Code  de  Com.  art.  39—44.)  So  by  the
pommercial  Ordinance*  of  Bifboa^  confirmed  by  Philip  V.  in  1737,  edit.
N.  T.  1824,  ch.  10.  sec.  4.  it  was' made  necessary,  in  every  partnership,
to  reduce  the  articles  to  writing,  and  acknowledge  them  before  a  no.tat
ry,  and  file  a  copy  with  the  university,  and  house  of  trade.  This  would
seem  not  to  be  now  the  general  law  in  Spain ;  for  it  is  admitted,  that
partnerships  may  be  formed,  as  in  the  English  law,  tacitly  as  well  as
expressly.  [iMtUutee  of  the  Civil  Law  of  Spain,  by  Jieso  4r  J^imuel^
|>.  2.  c.  15.,  translated  by  Jo/^nj<on,  London,  1825.)

b  Dob  V.  Halaey^  16  Jokm^Rep.  34,


Lcc.  XLIU.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 2B

of  the  esBenee  of  the  contract.'  It  would  be  a  TaUd  partner-
ship) notwithstanding  the  whole  capital  was,  in  the  fifst  in-
staDce,  advanced  by  one  party,  if  the  other  contributed  his
time  ajid  skill  to  the  business,  and  although  his  proportion
of  gain  and  loss  was  to  be  very  unequal.  It  is  sufScient  that
his  interest  in  the  profits  be  not  intended  as  a  mere  substitute
fi)r  a  commission,  or  in  lieu  of  brokerage,  and  that  he  be  re-
cmved  into  the  association  as  a  merchant,  and  not  as  an
agent*  A  joint  possession  renders  persons  tenants  in  com*
men,  but  it  does  not,  of  itself,  constitute  them  partners ;  and,
therefore,  surviving  partners,  and  the  representatives  of  a  de-
ceased  partner,  are  not  partners,  notwithstanding  they  have
a  community  of  interest  in  the  joint  stock.^  There  must  be
a  communion  of  profit  to  constitute  a  partnership  as  between
the  parties.  They  must  not  be  jointly  concerned  in  the  pur*
chase  only,  but  jointly  concerned  in  the  future  sale.  A  joint
purchase,  with  a  view  to  separate  and  distinct  sales  by  each
person  on  his  own  account,  is  not  sufficient.  If  several  per-
sons, who  had  never  met  and  contracted  together  as  partners,
agree  to  purchase  goods  in  the  name  of  one  of  them  only ,  and
to  take  aliquot  shares  of  the  purchase,  and  employ  a  com-
mon agent  jEbr  the  purpose,  they  do  not,  by  that  act,  become
partners,  or  answerable  to  the  seller  in  that  character,  provided
they  are  not  to  be  jointly  concerned  in  the  resale  of  their  shares,
and  have  not  permitted  the  agent  to  hold  them  out  as  jouitly
answerable  with  himself.''  The  same  distinctioh  was  known
in  the  civil  law :  qui  nolunt  inter  se  contendere,  solent  per
nuniium  rem  emere  in  commune  ;  quod  a  soeietate  longi


a  PoQUer,  TraUi  du  Con.  de  Soc.  No.  8, 9, 10. Ferrkre,  tur  In$L  3.
S6. Code  JVopoteon,  No.  1833.

b  Reid  ▼.  HolliDshead,  4  Bamw,  ^  Creai.  867f

c  Pemree  v..  Cbamberlam,  2  Vesey,  33.

d  Hoare  r.  Dawe»,  Doug,  371 . Coope  ▼.  Eyre,  1  H.  Blaeki.  11%.

Yoi-.  m.  4


26  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Pkrt  V.

remotum,* It  has  been  repeatedly  recognised  in  this  ooontry,
and  may  be  considered  as  a  settled  rule.*

If  the  purchase  be  on  separate,  and  not  on  joint  account,
yet  if  the  interests  of  the  purchasers  are  afterwards  mingled^
with  a  view  to  a  joint  sale,  a  partnership  exists  from  the
time  that  the  shares  are  brought  into  a  common  mass.*  A
participation  in  the  loss  or  profit,  or  holding  himself  out  to  the
world  as  a  partner,  so  as  to  induce  others  to  give  credit  on
that  assurance,  renders  a  person  responsible  as  a  partner/  A
partnership  necessarily  implies  a  union  of  two  or  more  per-
sons ;  and  if  a  single  individual,  for  the  purpose  ci  a  fictitiom
credit,  was  to  assume  a  co-partnership  name  or  firm,  the  only
real  partnership  principle  that  could  be  applicable  to  bis  case,
would  be  the  preference  to  be  given  to  creditors  dealing  with
him  under  that  description,  in  the  dbtribution  of  his  effects.
But  that  would  be  inadmissible,  and  contrary  to  the  grouods
upon  which  partnerships  are  created  and  sustained ;  and  so
the  law  on  this  point  has,  in  another  country,  been  under*
stood  and  declared.'  If  the  partnership  consists  of  a  large
unincorporated  association,  it  is  usually  regulated  by  special
agreement ;  but  the  established  law  of  the  land,  in  reference
to  such  partnerships,  is  the  same  as  in  ordinary  cases,  and
every  member  of  a  joint  stock  company  (whatever  private  ar-
rangement there  may  be  to  the  contrary  between  the  mem-
bers, and  which  is  only  a  mischievous  delusion)  is  liable  for
all  the  debts  of  the  concern.-^ It  is,  however,  the  judicial  lan-


ai>^.  17.2.  33.

h  Holmes  ▼.  United  losaraDce  Company,  2  Johru.  Can9, 329.  Post  v.
Kimberlj,  9  Johnt,  Rep,  470.  Osborne  ▼.  Breonar,  2  JfoU  4*  J(i'Cordy4S7,

e  Sims  ¥.  Willing,  8  Serg.  4*  Rawle,  103.

d  Lord  Elieoborongb. M^Iver  t.  Humble,  16  EaH,  173.

e  Nairn  y.  Sir  William  Forbes,  BeWi  CommerUaries  on  ths  Law  of
ScoUandj  rol.  ii.  625.«

/  The  King  t.  Dodd,  9  East^  516.  Holmes  t.  Higgin*)  ^  Bamw,  4r
Cretf.  74.  Hess  t.  Werts,  4  Serg.  4*  RavUe,  866.  Keasley  ▼.  Codd,
cited  in  a  note  to  tb^  case  of  Perring  v*  Hone,  2  Carr,  4r  PoyiM}  401.


Lee.  XLin.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 27

guage  in  some  of  the  cases,*  that  the  members  of  a  private
asBociatioa  may  limit  their  personal  responsibility,  if  there  be
an  explicit  stipulation  to  that  efiect,  made  wit!)  the  party  with
whom  they  contract,  and  dearly  understood  by  him  at  the
time. But  stipulations  of  that  kind  are  looked  upon  unfa*
Yourafaly,  as  being  contrary  to  the  general  policy  of  the  law ;
and  it  would  require  a  direct  previous  notice  of  the  intended
lifflitatioa  to  the  party  dealing  with  the  company,  and  his
dear  understanding  of  the  terms  of  tlie  limitation. Incorpo-
rated companies,  though  constituted  expressly  for  the  purposes
<tf  trade,  are  not  partnerships,  or  joint  traders,  within  the  pur
view  <tf  the  law  of  paitnership,  and  the  stockhold^v  are  not
peisonally  responsible  for  the  company's  debts  or  engagements,
and  their  property  is  aCTected  only  to  the  extent  of  their  inte-
rest in  the  company. To  render  them  personally  liable,  re-
quires an  express  provision  in  the  act  of  incorporation ;  and  a
disposikioa  to  create  such  an  extended  responsibility,  seems  to
be  increasing  in  our  country,  and  is  calculated  to  check  the
enterprise  of  such  institutions,  and  impair  the  credit  and
value  of  them  as  safe  investments  of  capital.

Though  there  be  no  express  articles  of  copartnership,  the
obligation  of  a  partnership  engagement  may  equally  be  im-
plied in  the  acts  of  the  parties ;  and  if  persons  have  a  mutual
interest  in  the  profits  and  loss  of  any  business  carried  on  by
them,  or  if  they  hold  themselves  out  to  the  world  as  joint
traders,  they  will  be  held  responsible  as  partners  to  third  per-
sons, whatever  may  be  the  real  nature  of  their  connexion,  or
of  the  agreement  under  which  they  act.  If  a  person  partakes
of  the  profits,  he  is  answerable  as  a  partner  for  losses,  on  the
principle,  that  by  taking  a  part  of  the  profits,  he  takes  from
the  creditors  a  part  of  the  fund  which  is  the  proper  security
fcr  the  payment  of  their  debts.^ Though  there  should  even


a  Gibioo,  J.,  Hess  ▼.  West,  4  Strg.  4*  RawU^  491: Piatt,  J.,

QQner  V.  Dajton,  19  Jo/buon,  537.

h  De  Grey,  Cb.  J.,  Grace  v.  Smith,  2  Black9.  Rep,  998. Eyre,  Cb«


28  .  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part


be  a  mutual  understanding  between  the  members  of  an
dation,  that  they  should  not  be  partners,  and  that  the  party
sought  to  be  charged  as  a  partner  was  not  to  contribute  either
his  money  or  labour,  or  to  partake  of  the  profits,  yet,  in  spite
of  these  stipulations,  he  becomes  a  partner  as  against  the
rest  of  the  world,  if  he  lends  his  name  to  the  company.  The
rule  is  founded  on  principles  of  general  policy,  to  prevent  the
frauds  to  which  creditors  would  otherwise  be  exposed.'

It  is  not  essential  to  a  legal  partnership,  that  it  be  confined
to  commercial  business.  It  may  exist  between  attorneys,
conveyancers,  mechanics,  artisans,  or  formers,  as  well  as  be-
tween merchants  or  bankers.^  The  essence  of  the  associa-
tion is,  that  they  be  jointly  concerned  in  profit  and  loss,  or  in
profit  only,  in  some  honest  and  lawful  business,  not  immoral
in  itself,  nor  prohibited  by  the  law  of  the  land ;  and  this  is  a
principle  of  universal  reception.'  The  contract  must  be  for
the  conunpn  benefit  of  all  the  parties  to  the  association,  and
though  the  shares  need  not  be  equal,  yet,  as  a  general  rule,
all  must  partake  of  the  profit  in  some  rateable  proportion,
and  that  proportion,  as  well  as  the  mode  of  conducting  the
business,  may  be  modified  and  regulated  by  private  agree-
ment, at  the  pleasure  of  the  parties.  If  there  be  no  such
agreement  on  the  subject,  the  general  conclusion  of  law  is,
that  the  partnership*  losses  are  to  be  equally  borne,  and  the
profits  equally  divided  f  and  this  would  be  the  rule,  as  I  ap-


J.,  Waugh  T.  Career,  S  H,  BUxckt,  247.  Cheap  v.  CramoDd,  4Bamw.
k  Aid.  663. Spencer,  J.,  Dob  ▼.  Halsey,  16  Johtu.  Rep.  40.

a  Eyre,  Cb.  J.,  fib.  aup.  Tbompson,  J.,  Post  f.  Kimberly,  9  •/ioAfif •
Rep,  489.

h  Willet  ▼.  ChamberB,  Cowp,  814.  Gould,  J.,  Coope  v.  Eyre,  1
H.  Bkuki.  43. Pothier,  Traite  deSoc,  No.  55.

c  Dig.  18.  1.  35.  2.  Pointer,  TraitS  du  Con.  de  Soc.  d.  14.  Briggs
▼.  Lawrence,  3  Term  Rep.  454.  Aubert  ▼.  Maze,  2  Bat.  4r  PulL  371.
Griivrold  ▼.  Waddington,  16  Johne.  Rep,  489.

d  InH.  8.  26. 1.  Pothier^  ub,  tup.  n.  73.  Peacock  ▼.  Peacock,  16
f^eeey,  49.


Lee.  XLUI.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 29

prebend,  even  though  the  contribution  between  the  parties
consisted  entirely  of  money  by  one,  and  entirely  of  labour  by
another.  In  equity,  according  to  Pothier,  each  partner  should
share  in  the  profit  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  what  he
Inrings  into  the  common  stock,  whether  it  be  money,  goods,
labour,  or  skill ,  and  he  should  share  in  the  loss  in  a  ratio  to
the  gain  to  which  he  would,  in  a  prosperous  issue  to  the
business,  have  been  entitled.  He  admits,  however,  that  the
proportion  of  gain  and  loss  may  be  varied  by  agreement,  and
the  agreement  may  render  the  extra  labour  of  one  of  the  con-
cern, equal  to  the  risk  of  loss,  and  a  substitute  for  his  share
of  loss."*

It  is  not  necessary  that  every  member  of  the  company
should,  in  every  event,  participate  in  the  profits.  It  would  be
a  valid  partnership,  according  to  the  civil  law,  if  one  of  the
members  had  a  reasonable  expectation  of  profit,  and  was,  in
consequence  of  his  particular  art  and  calling,  employed  to
sell,  and  to  have  a  share  of  the  profits  if  they  exceeded  a  cer^
tain  sum,  provided  this  was  granted  to  him  by  reason  of  his
pains  and  skill,  and  not  as  a  gratuity.*  So,  one  partner  may
retire  under  an  agreement  to  abide  his  proportion  of  risk  of
loss,  and  take  a  sum  in  gross  for  his  share  of  future  uncertain
profits,  or  he  may  take  a  gross  sum  as  his  share  of  the  pre-
sumed profits,  with  an  agreement  that  the  remaining  part-
ners are  to  assume  all  risks  of  loss.^  But  a  partnership,  in
which  the  entire  profit  was  to  belong  to  some  of  them,  in  ex-
duaion  of  others,  would  be  manifestly  unjust,  and  as  between
the  parties  themselves,  it  would  not  be  a  proper  partnership/
It  would  be  what  the  Roman  lawyers  called  societcu  Uonina^
in  allusion  to  the  fable  of  the  lion,  who,  having  entered  into


a  JPoUuery  ti6.  iup*  No.  15 — 19.  n.  26.
6  Dig,  17.  2.  44. Pothieryitb.  mp.  n.  13.
e  PoOUer^  Und.  n.  25, 26.

d  Ijowtj  t.  Brooks,  2  Jd^Cord'i  Bep.  421.  Biilsy  r.  Clark,6
57t.


30  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

a  partnership  with  the  other  animals  of  the  forest  in  hoot*
ingf  appropriated  to  himself  all  the  prey.*

There  may  be  a  general  partDership  at  large,  or  it  may  be
limited  to  a  particular  branch  of  business,  or  to  one  particti*
lar  subject* If  two  persons  should  draw  a  bill  of  exchange
they  are  considered  as  partners  in  respect  to  the  bill,  though  in.
every  other  respect  they  remain  distinct. By  appearing  oo
the  bill  as  partners,  the  person  to  whom  it  is  negotiated  is  to
collect  the  relation  of  the  parties  from  the  bill  itself,  and  they
are  not  permitted  to  deny  the  conclusion.^ This  principle
has  not  been  extended  to  the  case  of  two  persons  signing  a
joint  note,''  though  it  is  not  easy  to  perceive  a  distinction  b^
tween  -the  cases. '


a  Dig.  17.  2.  29.  2.  Potkier,  fi&.  ntp.  No.  12,  AutituUi  of  the  foiot
of  Holland,  by  J,  Fonder  LindenyUwatltXed  by  J.  Heory,  £«q.,  p*  671.
2.  BelVi  Comm.  615.

b  Lord  Mansfield.  Willet  v.  Chambers,  Cotop,  816.  Code  JfapO'
/eofi,No.  1841.

c  Carvick  t.  Vickery,  Doug.  653.  note.

d  Hopkins  y.  Smith,  11  Johns,  Rep.  161.

e  The  Roman  law,  which  has  been  followed  in  France,  diatioguiftbed
between  two  kinds  of  uniyersal  partnership,  the  one  univereorum  bono^
mill,  and  the  other  univerMorum  quce  ex  queutu  venUmt.  By  the  first,
the  parties  put  into  common  stock  all  their  property,  real  and  personal,
then  existing*,  or  thereafter  to  be  acquired.  All  future  acquisitions  by
purchase,  gift,  legacy,  or  descent,  went  into  this  partnership  as  of  course,
without  assignment,  unless  the  gift  or  legacy  was  declared  to  be  nnder
the  condition  of  not  being  placed  there.  Soch  a  partnership  was  chai^^
with  all  the  debts  of  the  parties  at  its  commencement,  and  with  all
the  future  debts,  and  personal  and  family  expenses.  The  validity  of  snob
ft  partnership  was  not  questioned,  notwithstanding  it  might  be  extreme-
ly unequal,  and  one  might  bring  much  more  property  into  it  than  aao-
ther,  and  acquire  ten  times  as  much  by  gift,  purchase,  or  succession,
and  notwithstanding  one  partner  might  have  a  family  of  children,  and
another  be  destitute  of  any.  (Fothter^  Traite  du  CofU.  de  Soc.  No.
28-^42.)  We  need  not  be  apprehensive  that  such  a  partnership  will
become  infectious,  for  it  appears  to  be  fmitful  in  abuse  and  discord ;
and  in  the  Code  JfapoUon^  No.  1837,  the  more  forbidding  features  of


Lee-  XLin.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 31

There  k  no  difScuIty,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  businessi
with  the  case  of  an  actual  partner,  who  appears  in  his  cha-
racter of  an  ostensible  partner.  The  question  as  to  the  per-
800  on  whom  the  reqionsibility  of  partner  ought  to  aUach  in
respect  to  third  persons,  arises  in  the  case  of  dormant  part-
neis,  who  participate  in  the  profits  of  the  trade,  and  conceal
their  names.  They  are  equally  liable  when  discovered,  as  if
thdr  names  had  appeared  in  the  firm,  and  although  they  were
unknown  to  be  partners  at  the  tirae  of  the  creation  of  the
debt* The  question  arises  also  in  the  case  of  a  nominal


Ibe  conneotioD  are  remored.  Tboagb  it  embraces  all  tbe  ezistiog  pro-
perty of  the  parties,  and  erery  species  of  gains,  it  does  Dot,  under  the  code,
extend  to  property  to  be  acquired  by  gift,  legacy,  or  inheritance,  and
erery  stipalatioo  to  that  effect  is  prohibited.  The  Cieil  Code  of  Liown-
ono,  which  has  thronghoat  closely  followed  the  €k)de  Mipoleon,  has
recognised  these  uniTersal  partnerships  applying  to  all  existing  property ;
bat  they  mast  be  created  in  writing,  and  registered,  and  they  are  under
the  checks  mentioned  io  the  French  code.  CivU  Code  ff  LouuiofM^
No.  2800—2805.

'  The  other  species  of  unirersal  partnership  applies  only  to  fatare  pro-
fits, from  whaterer  source  they  may  be  derived ;  and  it  is  formed  when
the  partiea  agree  to  a  partnership  without  any  further  explanation.  In
this  ease,  the  separate  acquisitions  of  each,  by  legacy  or  inheritance,
•re  kept  separate,  and  do  not  enter  into  the  common  mass ;  nor  does  it
embrace  present  real  property,  but  only  tbe  future  issues  and  profits  of
it;  and  it  is  not,  of  course,  chargeable  with  existing  debts,  though  it
w»  formerly  chargaabU  with  them  when  made  in  that  part  of  France,
ander  tbe  Droit  Couiwnier.  {Pothier,  vb,  wp.  n.  43—62.  Code  J^a-
fofeofi.  No.  1838.)  The  same  kind  of  general  partnerships,  embracing
ill  the  present  and  future  property  of  the  parties,  is  known  in  the  laws
of  Spain  and  of  Holland.  bu^uUi  of  the  civil  law  of  Spain,  by  Doo-
ton  Auo  Sf  JUanuely  b.  2.  c,  15.  JnMutee  of  the  laws  of  Holland^  by
J.  VandiT  Limden^  translated  by  J.  Henry,  Esq.,  p.  573.

a  Robinson  ▼.  Wilkinson,  3  Price*g  Exch,  Rep.  538.  Lord  Lough-
boroDgh,  1  H.  BltuJu.  Rep.  48.  Pitte  r.  Waugh,  4  Maee.  Rep,  4t4.
Duncan,  J.,  8  Serg.  4r  Rowle,  65.  A  dormant  partner  cannot  join  as
plaintiff  in  an  aetion,  for  there  is  no  pririty  of  communication  between
him  and  the  party  who  contracted  with  the  firm.  He  is  nevertheless
niable  as  a  defendant,  because  be  participated  in  the  profiU  of  the  ooo-


32  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

partner,  who  has  no  actual  interest  in  the  trade,  or  its  profits,
but  becomes  responsible  as  a  partner  by  suffering  his  name
to  appear  to  the  world  as  a  partner,  by  which  means  he  lends
to  the  partnership  the  sanction  of  his  credit.  There  is  a  just
and  marked  distinction  between  partnership  as  respects  the
public,  and  partnersliip  as  respects  the  parties ;  and  a  person
may  be  held  liable  as  a  partner  to  third  persons,  although  the
agreement  does  not  create  a  partnership  as  between  the  par-
ties themselves.  Though  the  law  allows  parties  to  regulate
their  concerns  as  they  please  in  regard  to  each  other,  they
cannot,  by  arrangement  among  themselves,  control  their  re-
sponsibility to  others  ;  and  it  is  not  competent  for  a  person,
who  partakes  of  the  profits  of  a  trade,  however  small  his  share
of  those  profits  may  be,  to  withdraw  himself  from  the  obliga-
tions of  a  partner.'  Each  individual  member  is  answerable
in  solido  to  the  whole  amount  of  the  debts,  without  reference
to  the  proportion  of  his  interest,  or  to  the  nature  of  the  stipu-
lation between  him  and  his  associates.  Even  if  it  were  the
intention  of  the  parties  that  they  should  not  be  partners,  and
the  person  to  be  charged  was  not  to  contribute  either  money
or  time,  or  to  receive  any  part  of  the  profits,  yet,  if  he  lends
his  name  as  a  partner,  or  suffers  his  qame  to  continue  in  the
firm  after  he  has  ceased  to  be  an  actual  partner,  he  is  respcm-
sible  to  third  pecsons  as  a  partner,  for  he  may  induce  third
persons  to  give  that  credit  to  the  firm  which  otherwise  it


tract.  Lloyd  y.  Archbold,  2  Tbunfon,  334.  Boardmaa  y«  Keeler,  S
Vermont  Rep.  65.  If  one  partner  borrows  money  in  his  individual  name,
a  dormant  partner  is  equally  liable,  if  the  borrower  represented  it  to  be
for  the  use  of  the  partnership,  though  without  such  a  representatioOy
the  creditor  must  prove  that  the  money  went  to  a  partnership  use.—
Etheridge  vTBinney,  9  Pink.  272.  Lloyd  v.  Asbby,  2.  Carr.  4*  Payne,
138.

a  Nor  can  a  partner  exonerate  himself  from  peraenal  responsibility
for  the  existing  engagements  of  the  company,  by  assigning  or  sellinf
out  his  interest  in  the  conceni.  Perring  v;  Hone,  2  Carr,  4r  Payfie>
401.


Lee.  XLIII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  33

would  not  receive,  nor  perhaps  deserve.  This  principle  of
law  inculcates  good  faith  and  ingenuous  dealing,  and  it  is
now  r^arded  by  the  English  courts  as  a  fundamental  doC'
trine.'  It  has  been  explicitly  asserted  with  us,  and  is  now
incorporated  in  the  jurisprudence  of  this  country.*  So  strict
is  the  law  on  this  point,  that  even  if  executors,  in  the  dbin-
terested  performance  of  a  trust,  continue  tlie  testator's  share
in  a  partnership  concern  in  trade,  for  the  benefit  of  his  infant
children,  they  may  render  themselves  personally  liable  as  dor*
mant  partners.^

A  person  may  be  allowed,  in  special  cases,  to  receive  part
of  the  profits  of  a  business  without  becoming  a  legal  or  re-
sponsible partner.  Thus  a  party  may  by,  agreement  receivei
by  way  of  rent,  a  portion  of  the  profits  of  a  form  or  tavern,
without  becoming  a  partner.''  So,  to  allow  a  clerk,  or  agent,
a  portion  of  the  profits  of  sales  as  a  compensation  for  labour,
or  a  factor  such  a  per-centage  on  the  amount  of  sal^s,  does  not
render  the  agent  or  factor  a  partner,  when  it  appears  to  be
intended  merely  as  a  mode  of  payment  adopted  to  increase
and  secure  exertion,  and  when  it  is  not  understood  to  be  an


a  Hoare  ▼•  Dawes,  Doug.  Rep,  371.  Grace  y.  Smith,  %,  Wwt,
Blacks.  Rep.  99Q.  Waughv.  Carver,  2  H.  Blacke.  Rep.  235.  Ba-
ker y.  Charltoo,  Peake't  JV.  P.  Rep.  80.  Hesketfa  y.  Blanchard,  4
Eati,  144.  Ex  parte  Hamper,  17  Veeey^  404.  Ex  parte  Lao^ate,
18  Veeey^  300.  Carleo  y.  Drury,  1  Vet.  4*  Bea.  157. ,  Cbrap  y.  Crm-
mond,  4  Bamw.  ^  Aid.  663.  Best  J.,  Smith  y.^Vatsoo,  2  Barwo*  4r
Creae,  401. Lacy  y.  WoolcoU,  2  Dtnoling  4r  i2.  458.

6  Panriaoce  y.  M^Clintee,  6  Setg  4r  Rawle,  259.  Gill  y.  Knbo,  ibids
333.  Dob  v.  Halsey,  16  Johru.  Rep.  40.  Shabrick  y.  Fisher,  2  De-
Mttcr.  Ch.  R^>  148. Osboroe  y.  BreoDao,  2  J^oU  4*  J^CordfASn.

e  Wightmao  y.  Townroe,  1  JdauU  4*  Seho.  412.  The  better  way
woold  be,  for  the  executors,  id  saoh  cases,  to  have  the  trade  carried  od
for  the  beoefit  of  the  infants,  under  the  direction  of  the  Conrt  of  Chan-
cery, as  has  freqoeotly  been  done  in  England.  See  4  Jokf^.  Ch*  Rep.
627,

d  Perrine  ?.  Hankinson,  6  HcM.  181.

Vol..  in.  6


34  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V^

iolerest  in  the  profits  in  the  character  of  profits.  Seamen
take  a  share  by  agreement  with  the  ship-owner,  in  the  profits
of  a  whale  fishery,  by  way  of  compensation  for  their  services ;
and  shipments  from  this  country  to  India,  upon  half  profits^
are  usual,  and  the  responsibility  of  partners  has  never  beta
supposed  to  flow  from  such  special  agreements.*  This  dis-
tinction seems  to  be  definitely  established  by  a  secies  of  ded-
sions,  and  it  is  not  now  to  be  questioned ;  and  yet  Lord  EI-
don  regarded  the  distinction  with  r^ret,  and  mentioned  k
frequently,  with  pointed  disapprobation,  as  being  too  refined
and  subtle,  and  the  reason  of  which,  he  said,  he  could  not
well  comprehend.^

The  English  law  does  not  admit  of  partnerships  with  a
lestricted  responsibility.  In  many  parts  of  Europe,  limited
partnerships  are  admitted,  provided  they  be  entered  upon  a
register.^  Thus,  in  France,  by  the  ordinance  of  1673,  limit-
ed partnerehips  {la  Soci€t€  en  commandite)  were  established,
by  which  one  or  more  persons,  responsible  in  aolido  as  gene-
ral partners,  were  associated  with  one  or  more  sleeping  part-
ners, who  furnished  a  certain  proportion  of  capital,  and  were
liable  only  to  the  extent  of  the  funds  furnished.  This  kind
of  partnership  has  been  continued  and  regulated  by  the  new
code  of  commerce ; ''  and  it  is  likewise  introduced  into  the


«  Dixon  V.  Cooper,  3  Wtb.  40.  Cheap  ▼.  Crantood,  4  Bamio.  &
Aid,  670.  BeDJamiDV.  Porteti8,2  H,  Black*.  590.  Meyer  y.  Sharpe,
6  Taunton,  74.  Hesketfa  y.  Blancbard,  4  Eattj  144.  Dry  y.  Botwell,
1  Campb.  JV.  P.  329.  Wilkenson  t.  Frazier,  4  Etp.  JV*.  P.  182.  Muzzy
T.  Whitney,  10  Johns.  Rep.  22(r. Rice  y.  Austin,  17  Jlfott.  Rep.  206.

h  Ex  parte  Hamper,  17  Vetey,  404.  Ex  parte  Rowlandson,  1  Rote,
89.  Ex  parte  Watson,  19  Vesey,  458.  Miller  y.  Bartlet,  16  Serg.  k
RaiwL  137.  JIfr.  Cary,  in  his  recent  treatise  on  the  Law  of  Partner-
ihipi  p.  11.,  vindicates  the  principle  on  which  the  aboYe  dhttnction  is
founded,  and  insists  that  it  is  perfectly  clear  and  just.

e  Lord  Loughborough,  1  H.  Blacke.  Rep.  48.

d  Repertoiri  de  Juruprudence^par  Merlin^  tit  Sociitiy  art.  8.  Code
de  Cdmmeree,  b.  1.  tit.  3.  sec.  1.


Lee.  XLUl.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 36

LoniBiaoian  code,  under  the  title  of  partnership  in  eommenr
danu*  It  is  supposed  to  be  well  calcubted  to  bring  dormant
capital  into  active  and  useful  employment ;  and  this  spedes
of  partnership  has,  accordingly,  been  authorized  by  statute  in
New-Tork.* It  is  declared  that  a  limited  partnership  may
consist  of  one  or  more  persons  jointly  and  severally  responsU
Ue  according  to  the  existing  laws,  who  are  called  general
paitners,  and  one  or  more  persons  who  ftirnish  certain  funds
to  the  common  stock,  and  whose  liability  shall  extend  no
lifftber  than  the  fund  furnished,  and  who  are  called  special
partners. The  names  of  the  special  partners  are  not  to  be
und  in  the  firm,  nor  are  they  to  transact  any  business  on  ac»
coant  of  the  partnership,  or  be  employed  for  that  purpose  as
agents,  attorneys,  or  otherwise ;  but  they  may,  nevertheless,
advise  as  to  the  management  of  the  partnership  concern.
Before  such  a  partnership  can  act,  a  register  thereof  must  be
made  in  the  clerk's  office  of  the  county,  with  an  accompany-
ing certificate  signed  by  the  parties,  and  containing  the  title
of  the  firm,  the  general  nature  of  the  business,  the  names  of
the  partners,  the  amount  of  capital  fiirnished  by  the  special
partners,  and  the  period  of  the  partnership. The  capital  ad-
vanced by  the  special  partners  must  be  in  cash,  and  an  affida-
vit filed  stating  the  fact. Publication  must  likewise  be  made
for  at  least  six  weeks  of  the  terms  of  the  partnership,  and
doe  publication  for  four  weeks  of  the  dissolution  of  the  part-
nership by  the  act  of  the  parties  prior  to  the  time  specified  in
the  certificate. No  such  partnership  can  make  assignments
or  transfers,  or  create  any  lien,  with  the  intent  to  give  prefer-
ence to  creditors. The  special  partners  may  receive  an  an-
nual interest  on  the  capital  invested,  provided  there  be  no  re-
duction of  the  original  capital ;  but  they  cannot  be  permitted


a  Chil  Code  of  Louisiana,  art,  2810.

6  Lawgof^J^.  Y,  April,  1822,  sess.  45.  ch.  244.,  and  leu.  50.  cb.
238 — re-enacted  by  JV*.  F.  Reviied  StaiuUM,  Tol.  1.  764,  with  tome
■lis:ht  variatioDs.


36  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

to  claiin  as  crediiors,  in  case  of  the  iosolyency  of  the  partner-
ship. It  is  easy  to  perceive,  that  the  provisions  of  the  act
have  beeft  taken,  in  most  of  the  essential  points,  from  the
Frsaiich  r^ulations  in  the  commercial  code,  and  it  is  the  first
instance  in  the  history  of  Che  l^islation  of  New- York,  that  the
statuCe  law  of  any  other  country  than  that  of  Great  Britain,
has  been  closely  imitated  and  adopted.

R  is  a  general  and  well  established  principle,  that  when  a
person  joins  a  partnership  as  a  member,  he  does  not,  without
a  special  promise,  assume  the  previous  debts  of  the  firm,  not
is  he  bound  by  them.  To  render  perscffis  jointly  liable  upon
a  contract  as  partners,  they  must  have  a  joint  interest  con-
temporary with  the  formation  of  the  contmct.''  If,  however,
goods  are  purchased  in  pursuance  of  a  previous  agreement
between  two  or*  more  persons,  that  one  of  them  should  pur-
chase the  goods  on  joint  account,  in  a  foreign  adventure,  they
are  aU  answerable  to  the  seller  for  the  price,  as  partners,  even
though  their  names  were  not  announced  to  the  seller ;  for  the
previous  agreement  made  the  partnership  precede  the  pur-
chase, ^d  a  joint  interest  attached  in  the  goods  at  the  instant
of  the  purchase.*

II.  Of  the  rights  and  duties  of  partners  in  their  rela-
tion to  each  other^  and  to  the  public,

1.  Of  the  interest  of  partners  in  their  stock  in  trade.
Partners  are  joint  tenants  of  their  stock  in  trade,  but  with-
out the  jus  accrescendi,  or  right  of  survivorship ;  and  this,
according  to  Lord  Coke,«  was  part  of  the  law  merchant,  for
the  advancement  and  continuance  of  commerce  and  trade.  It
would  seem  however,  to  have  been  a  point  of  some  doubt  as
late  as  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  whether  the
doctrine  of  survivorship  did  not  apply ;  for  the  Lord  Keeper,


a  Saville  v.  RobertsoD,  4  Term  Rep.  720. Youogi  v.  Hunter,  4
Taunt.  Rep.  582. Poindexter  r,  Waddjr,  6  Jdunf,  Rep,  418.
5  GoQthwaite  y.  Duckworth,  12  Eculy  421.
fi  Co.  LUt.  182.  a.


Lee.  XLIU.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 37

in  Jeffereys  v.  Snudly*  observed,  that  it  was  comin<m,  at  that
time,  for  traders,  in  articles  of  copartnership,  to  provide  against
survivoTBhip,  though  he  declared  that  the  provision  was  clear-
ly unnecessary.  On  the  death  of  one  partner,  his  representa-
tives become  tenants  in  common  with  the  survivor,  and  with
respect  to  chases  in  a^iion^  survivorship  so  fsj  exists  at  law,
that  the  remedy  to  reduce  them  into  possession  vests  excla-
avdy  in  the  survivor,  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  parties  in  in-
tensL^ But  no  partner  has  an  exclusive  right  to  any  part
of  the  joint  stock,  uutil  a  balance  of  accounts  be  struck  b^
tween  him  and  his  copartners,  and  the  amount  of  his  interest
accurately  ascertained. The  interest  of  each  partner  in  the
partnership  property,  is  his  share  in  the  surplus,  after  the  part-
oerehip  accounts  are  settled,  and  all  just  claims  satisfied/

If  partnership  capital  be  invested  in  land  for  the  benefit  of
the  company,  though  it  may  be  a  joint  tenancy  in  law,  yet
equity  will  h<^d  it  to  be  a  tenancy  in  common,  and  as  form-
ing part  of  the  partnership  fund ;  and  the  better  opinion  would
seem  to  be,  that  equity  will  consider  the  person  in  whom  the
legal  estate  is  vested,  as  trustee  for  the  whole  concern,  and
the  property  will  be  entitled  to  be  distributed  as  personal  es-
tate.' The  same  point  has  been  extensively  discussed  and


a  1  Vem.  «17.

6  BffartiD  t.  Crompe,  1  Ijord  Raym,  340.

e  NicoU  T.  Mamford,  4  Joknt.  Ch,  Rep,  523. Fox  v.  Hanbury,
Cowp.  Rep.  445.  Taylor  y.  Fields,  4  F'esey,  396. 15  Veeey^  559.  note,

ac.

d  Thornton  f .  Dixon,  3  Bro.  Ch.  Cat.  199.  Lord  Loughborough
in  Smith  v.  Smith,  5  Vetey,  189.  Rif^ey  v.  Waterworlh,  7  Fe««y,  424.
FeatherBteohaugh  v.  Fenwick,  17  Fetey,  29S.  Lord  Eldoo,  in  Town-
■eod  y.  Deraynes,  cited  in  Ooto  on  ParlnersMpy  54.  edit.  Phil.  1825;  in
Selkrig  T.  Davies,  2  Dow,  P.  C  242.  and  in  Crawshay  r.  Made,  1
Swoitftofi,  521.  Sigonmey  ▼.  Munn,  7  Conn.  Rep.  11.  Contra^  Sir
Wm.  Grant,  in  Bell  y.  Phyn,  7  Vetey^ASZ.  and  Balroain  y.  Shore,  9
Veeey.  500.  Gow  on  Partnerekip,  54,  55.  In  Sigoumey  v.  Jtftmn,
the  English  and  American  authorities  were  fully  examined  and  the  rab-
ject  discussed ;  and  the  doctrine  declared  that  real  estate  acquired  with


38  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

considered  in  this  country,  and  the  cases  are  not  inconsistent
with  this  principle,  when  they  admit,  upon  grounds  of  reason
and  policy,  that  real  estate,  acquired « with  partnership  funds,
and  held  by  partners  in  common,  may  be  conveyed  or  charged
by  one  partner,  on  his  private  account,  to  the  extent  of
his  legal  title,  whether  that  legal  title  covers  the  whole,  or  a
part  of  the  estate  ;  provided  the  purchaser  or  mortgagee  dealt
with  him  bona  fidcj  and  without  notice  of  the  partnership
rights,  and  there  was  nothing  in  Uie  transaction  from  which
notice  might  reasonaUy  be  inferred.''  In  Tennessee,  an  es-
tate so  held  in  joint  tenancy  by  partners  for  the  purposes  of
trade,  may  be  sold  by  the  survivor,  in  whom  is  the  legal  title ;
but  he  will  be  subject  to  account  to  the  representatives  of  the
deceased  partner  for  their  proportion  of  the  proceeds.*  In  tiew-
York,  the  Supreme  Court,  upon  the  strength  of  the  ultimate
opinion  of  Lord  Thurlow,  in  TTiamtan  v.  Dixon^  an  J  of
the  opinion  of  the  Master  of  the  Rolls,  in  Balmain  v.  Sharej
declared,  in  Coles  v.  Coles^^  that  the  principles  and  rules  of
law  applicable  to  partnerships,  and  which  govern  and  regu-
ate  the  dipoeitiou  of  the  partnership  property,  did  not  apply
to  real  estates,  and  that  in  the  absence  of  speciai  covenants
between  the  parties^  real  estate  owned  by  partners,  was  to
be  considered  and  treated  as  such,  without  any  reference  to
the  partnership.  The  language  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Mas-


partDerthip  fuSds,  for  partoersbip  purposes,  would  be  regarded  id  equi-
ty at  partDerebip  stock,  and  liable  to  all  tbe  iDcideots  of  partnertbip
property.  It  migbt  also  bj  agreement  of  tbe  parties  be  regarded  as
personal  stock  of  tbe  companj.

a  Fordo  y.  Herron,  4  Jdunf,  316.  M'Dermot  v.  Laurence,  7  Serg.
^  Rawle^  438.

5  M^Alister  V.  Montgomery,  3  Hoyio.  96.  But  in  South  Carolina,  one
partner  cannot  transfer  the  real  estate  of  the  firm,  and  used  for  its  ba-
linets,  by  deed,  unless  it  be  in  a  case  in  which  the  buying  and  selling
of  real  estate  is  tbe  object  ^  tbe  partnership.  Robinson  y.  Crowder,
4  MCordy  519.

c  15  Johm,  Rep.  159.


Lee.  Xl-in.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY-  39

sachusetts  in  Goodwin  v*  Michardson/^  is  nearly  to  the  same

^ed ;  and  it  seemed  to  be  considered,  that  partneiB,  pur-

chasing  an  estate  out  of  the  joint  funds,  and  takii^  one  cod-

vejance  to  themselves  as  tenants  in  common,  would  hoU

their  undivided  moieties  in  separate  and  independent  t]tk%

aud  that  the  same  would  go,  on  the  insdvency  of  the  firm,  or

oo  the  death  of  either,  to  pay  their  respective  creditors  at  laige^

These  latter  cases,  and  particularly  the  one  in  New-York,

go  to  the  entire  subversion  of  the  equity  doctrine  now  pieva^

knt  in  England  ;  but  the  other  American  decisioDs  are  more

restricted  in  their  operation,  and  are  not  inconsistent  with  the

most  correct  and  improved  view  of  the  English  law. Their

objea  is  to  secure  the  rights  of  purchasers  and  eDCombran*

ceis  without  notice,  from  being  afiected  by  a  claim  of  part*

aership  rights  of  which  they  were  igoorant le  Edgar  r.

DmmaUy^  a  right  to  land  had  been  acquired  with  partnerr

ship  stock,  and  a  title  taken  in  the  name  of  the  surviving

partner,  and  a  claimant  under  the  deceased  partner  was  hdd

entitled  in  equity  to  a  moiety  of  the  land,  against  a  purchaser

from  the  survivor,  with  notice  of  the  partnership  right  This

was  a  recognition  of  the  true  rule  of  equity  on  the  subject

In  NicM  V.  Mumfordf  it  was  held,  that  ship  ownens
were  tenants  in  common,  and  were  not  to  be  considered  as
partners,  mv  liaUe  each  in  solidoj  nor  entitled  in  the  sellle-


0  11  JioMg,  Rep.  469.

6  2  JVim/.  387.  lo  Wimloir  y.  ChiileDe,  SiaU  Reporit  mEfmt^
m  5.  C,  (1824,)  it  was  held,  that  land*  hdd  and  ined  by  partoefB^in  thr
%imnfw  of  a  mill,  was  copartoenhip  propertj,  and  sabfcct  to  be  applied^
lake  other  partoenbip  property,  to  the  paymeot  of  putnenfaip  debtiy  is
preference  to  Uie  daims  of  separate  creditors.  8o,in  Gresoe  r.  Greeoe^
1  Bamaumd'M  Ohio  Rep.  535.  it  was  held  that  lands  purchased  witb
partoerehip  foods  for  partoersfaip  purposes,  and  under  articles  that  the
partnership  property  ihonld  be  aold  for  the  payment  of  debts,  were  U>
be  considered  and  applied  as  personal  asseli  of  the  partnership  as
tween  the  partners  and  their  creditors.

e  4  Jdmu.  Ch.  R^.  52S.


40  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

ment  of  accounts,  on  the  principle  of  partnership. The  do^^
trine  of  Liord  Hardwicke  on  this  point,  in  Doddingion  v«
HcUletj^  was  considered  to  be  overruled  by  the  modern  deci-
sions in  chancery,^  and  by  the  universal  understanding  in  the
commercial  world.  ^But  when  the  case  of  NicoU  v.  Mun^
ford  was  reviewed  in  the  Court  of  Errors,*^  the  doctrine  of
Lord  Hardwicke  was  considered,  by  the  majority  of  the
judges,  to  be  the  better  doctrine ;  and  no  doubt  there  may  be
a  special  partnership  in  a  ship,  as  well  as  in  the  cargo,  in  re*
gard  to  a  particular  voyage  or  adveixture. It  was  assumed
by  the  court,  in  Lamb  v.  Durant,^  that  vessels,  as  well  as
other  chatteb,  might  be  held  in  strict  partnership,  with  all
the  control  in  each  partner  incident  to  commerciaf  partner-
ships. We  find  it  also  stated  by  Lord  Tenderden,"* that
in  case  of  the  death  of  any  part  owner,  after  an  injury  re-
ceived, the  right  of  action  survives  in  general  to  the  surviving
part  owners,  who  must  afterwards  pay  to  the  personal  repre-
sentatives of  the  deceased  the  value  of  his  share. This  rule,
as  to  the  remedy,  gives  to  the  ownership  of  vesseb  one  of  the
essential  attributes  of  a  partnership.

(2.)  Acts  by  which  one  partner  may  bind  a  firm.

The  act  of  each  partner  in  transactions  relating  to  the
partnership,  is  considered  the  act  of  all^  and  binds  all.  He
can  buy  and  sell  partnership  effects,  and  make  contracts  in
reference  to  the  business  of  the  firm,  and  pay  and  receive,


a  1  Vetey^  497.

h  See  5  Vetty^  575.  2  Vea.  tc  Bea.  ZiSi,  2  Rote,  76.  78.  1  Mon-
iagu  on  Partnerships  102.  Dote.  Merrill  y.  Bartlett,  6  Pick,  47.  Id
this  last  case  it  was  declared,  that  part  sbip-owoere  bad  do  lien  upoo  the
part  of  a  baokrupt  compaoioo,  for  bis  proportioo  of  the  advaoces  of  the
outfit  Part  owners,  or  tenants  in  common,  are  not  answerable  for  each
other's  debts.

c  ftOJohnt.  Rep.  611.

dl2  Mcui.  Rep.  54.

€  AbboU  on  Sh^^ping,  81  Edit.  BoeUm,  1829.


Lee.  XLUl.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 41

and  draw  and  endocBe,  and  accept  bilb  and  notes.  Acts  in
which  they  all  unite,  difler  in  nothing  in  respect  to  I^al  con*
sequences,  from  transactions  in  which  they  are  concerned  in-
dhidoally ;  but  it  is  the  capacity  by  which  each  partner  is
enabled  to  act  as  a  principal,  and  as  the  authorized  agent  of
his  copartners,  that  gives  credit  and  efficacy  to  the  associa-
tion. The  act  of  one  partner,  though  on  his  private  account,
and  contrary  to  the  private  arrangement  among  themselves,
win  bind  all  the  parties,  if  made  witfiout  knowledge  in  the
other  part^  of  the  arrangement,  and  in  a  matter  which,  ac^
cording  to  the  usual  course  of  dealing,  has  reference  to  busi-
ness transacted  by  the  firm.*

The  books  abound  with  numerous  and  subtle  distinctions
on  the  subject  of  the  extent  of  the  power  of  one  partner  to
bind  the  company,  and  I  shall  not  attempt  to  do  more  than
select  the  leading  rules,  and  give  a  general  analysis  of  the


In  all  contracts  concerning  negotiable  paper,  the  act  of  one
partner  binds  aU ;  and  even  though  he  signs  his  individual
nam^  provided  R  appears,  on  the  fiice  of  the  paper,  to  be  on
partnership  account,  and  to  be  intended  to  have  a  joint  opera^
tion.*  But  if  a  bill  or  note  be  drawn  by  one  partner  in  his
own  name  only,  and  without  appearing  to  be  on  partnership
account,  the  partnership  is  not  bound  by  the  signaturis,  even
though  it  was  made  for  a  partnership  purpose.^ If,  however,


a  Hops  r.  Cost,  cited  io  1  SkuVt  Rep,  53.  Svran  y.  Steele,  7  EatV*
Rfp.  210.  Rothwell  y.  Humphreys,  1  E»p.  JV.  P.  406.  Abbott,
Cb.  J.,  Sandilands  v.  Marsb,  3  Bumw,  Sc  Aid.  673.  Es  parte  Agaco,
2  Cox'm  Casetj  312.  Sfaippen,  J.,  Gerard  v.  Basse,  1  DalUW  Rep.  119.
Parker,  Cb.  J.,  in  Lamb  y.  Duraot,  12  Man,  Rep,  56,  57.  Mills  y.
Barber,  4  Day'e  Rep.  428.  Le  Roy,  Bayard  ft  Co.  y.  Johnson,  2  Pe.
Un'  U.  S.  Rep.  186. PolkUry  Traite  du  Coiu  de  Soc.  JhTo.  96^105.

b  Masoo  y.  Romsey,  1  Ceunpib.  Jf.  P.  384.

c  SiffkiD  y.  Walker,  2  Campb.  308.  Ripley  y.  Kingsbury,  1  Day's
Rep.  150.  note.  Emiy  r.  Lye,  15  EaeVtRep.  7.  Loyd  y.  Fresbfield
2  Carr.  ic  Payne^  325.

Vol.  III.  6


(


4ft  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

the  bill  be  drawn  by  one  partner  in  his  own  name,  upon  the
firm,  on  partnership  account,  the  act  of  drawing  has  been
held  to  amount,  in  judgment  of  law,  to  an  acceptance  of  the
bill  by  the  drawer  in  behalf  of  the  firm,  and  to  bind  the  firm
as  an  accepted  bill.'^ And  though  the  partnership  be  not
bound  at  law  in  such  a  case,  it  is  held,  that  equity  will  en-
force payment  from  it,  if  the  bill  was  actually  drawn  on  part-
nership account.^ Even  if  4he  paper  was  made  in  a  case
which  was  not  in  its  nature  a  partnership  transaction,  yet  it
will  bind  the  firm  if  it  was  done  in  the  name  of  th&  firm,  and
there  be  evidence  that  it  was  done  under  its  express  or  im-
plied sanction.'^ But  if  partnership  security  be  taken  from
one  partner,  without  the  previous  knowledge  and  consent  of
the  others,  for  a  debt  which  the  creditor  knew  at  the  time  was
the  private  debt  of  the  particular  partner,  it  would  be  a  fmu-
duient  transaction,  and  clearly  void  in  respect  to  the  partner-
ship.^ So,  if  firom  the  subject  matter  of  the  contract,  or  the
course  of  dealing  of  the  partnership,  the  creditor  was  charge-
able with  constructive  knowledge  of  that  fact,  the  partner-
ship is  not  liable.^ There  is  no  distinction  in  principle  upon
this  point  between  general  and  special  partnerships ;  and  the
question,  in  all  cases,  is  a  question  of  notice,  express  or  construe*
tive. All  partnerships  are  more  or  less  limited. There  is  none
that  embraces,  at  the  same  time,  every  branch  of  business  ;
and  when  a  person  deals  with  one  of  the  partners  in  a  matter
not  within  the  scope  of  the  partnership,  the  intendment  of  law


a  Doagal  v.  Cowles,  5  Day*s  Rep.  611.

b  Van  Reims  Dyk  y.  Kane,  1  OM.  Rep.  630.

c  Ex  parte  Peele,  6  Veeey^  602^

d  Arden  v.  Sharpe,  2  Eep.  JV.  P.  524.  Sfairreff  r.  WiUcs,  1  EtuVe
Rep.  48.  Ex  parte  BonboDOS,  8  Veeey^  540.  LiviDgrstoD  y.  Hastie,  2
Cainei*  Rep.  246.  Lansing^  v.  Gaine  and  Ten  Eyck,  2  Johne,  Rep.  300.
Baird  7.  Cochran,  4  Serg,  &  Rawle,  397.  Chazournes  y.  Edwards,  3
Pickering  f  4.

€  Green  y.  Deakin,  2  Siarkie's  JV,  P.  347.  New -York  Firemen's
losarance  Company  y.  Bennett,  5  Conn.  Rep.  574.


tec.  XLIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  43

will  be,  unless  there  be  circumstances,  or  proof  in  the  case,  to
destroy  the  presumption,  that  he  deals  with  him  on  his  pri-
vate account,  notwithstanding  the  partnership  name  be  assu*
med.'  The  conclusion  is  otherwise,  if  the  subject  matter  of
the  contract  was  consistent  with  the  partnership  business,  and
the  defendants  would  be  bound  to  show  that  the  contract  was
oat  of  the  regular  course  of  the  partnership  dealings.^  When
the  business  of  a  partnership  is  defined,  known,  or  declared,
and  the  company  do  not  appear  to  the  world  in  any  ^ther
light  than  the  one  exhibited,  one  of  the  partners  cannot  make
a  valid  partnership  engagement,  except  on  partnership  ac-
ccnint  There  must  be  at  least  some  evidence  of  previous
aathority  beyond  the  mere  circumstance  of  partnership,  to
make  such  a  contract  binding.  If  the  public  have  the  usual
means  of  knowledge  given  them,  and  no  acts  have  been  done
or  suffered  by  the  partnership  to  mislead  them,  every  man  is
presumed  to  know  the  extent  of  the  partnership  with  whose
members  he  deals  ;  and  when  a  person  takes  a  partnership
engagement  without  the  consent  or  authority  of  the  firm,  for
a  matter  that  has  no  reference  to  the  business  of  the  firm,  and
is  not  within  the  scope  of  its  authority,  or  its  regular  course
of  dealing,  he  is,  in  judgment  of  law,  guilty  of  a  fraud.^

If,  however,  the  negotiable  paper  of  a  firm  be  given  by  one
partner  on  his  private  account,  and  that  paper,  issued  within
the  general  scope  of  the  authority  of  the  firm,  passes  into  the
hands  of  a  bona  fide  holder,  who  has  no  notice,  either  actu-
ally or  constructively,  of  the  consideration  of  the  instrument ;
or  if  one  partner  should  purchase,  on  his  private  account,  an
article  in  which  the  firm  dealt,  or  which  had  an  immediate


a  4  Johm,  Rep,  Tlly  S78.  Spencer,  J.,  Dob  v.  Halsej,  16  J6hn9
Hep.  38.  Foot  v.  Sabin,  \9  ibid  1 54.  Laverty  f.  Burr,  1  Wendell,
539. U.  S.  Baok  v.  Bioney,  5  Maean,  176.

h  Doty  V.  Bates,  1 1  Johme.  Rep,  544.

c  Abbott,  Cb.  J.,  and  Bay  ley,  J.,  SaodilaDds  y.  Manh,  2  Barme,  <■
J^id.  673. Dickioaoo  r.  Valpy,  1  Lloyd  ^  WeUby,  6.


44  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

M«iDexi<m  with  the  busiDess  of  the  firm,  a  different  rule  ap-
plies, and  one  which  requires  the  knowledge  of  its  being  a
private,  and  not  a  partnership  transaction,  to  be  brought  home
tQ  the  claimant  These  are  general  principles,  which  are
considered  to  be  well  established  in  the  English  and  American
jurisprudence.*

With  respect  to  the  power  of  each  partner  orer  the  partner-
ship pr(^rty,  it  is  settled,  that  each  one,  in  ordinary  cases,
and  in  the  absence  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  purchaser,  has
the  complete  jua  dispanendi  of  the  whole  partnership  inte*
rests,  and  is  considered  to  be  the  authorized  agent  of  the  firm.
He  can  sell  the  efiects,  or  compound  oi*  discharge  the  partner-
ship debts.  This  power  results  from  the  nature  of  the  busi-
ness, and  is  indispensable  to  the  safety  of  the  public,  and  the
successful  operations  of  the  partnership/  A  like  power  ia
each  partner  exists  in  respect  to  purchases  on  joint  account,
and  it  is  no  matter  with  what  fraudulent  views  the  goods
were  purchased,  or  to  what  purposes  they  are  applied  by  the
purchasing  partner,  if  the  seller  be  clear  of  the  itDputation  of
collusion.  A  sale  to  one  partner,  in  a  case  within  the  scope
and  course  of  the  partnership  business,  is,  in  judgment  of  law,


a  Ridley  ▼.  Taylor,  13  E<uVi  Rep,  175.  Williams  v.  Thomas,  6
E9p.  JV.  P.  18.  Lord  EWoD,  Ex  parte  Peele,  6  Vetey,  604.,  and  £jp
parU  BonboDOB,  8  Ve$ey^  544.  Ardeo  v.  Sbarpe,  2  E»p,  JV.  P,  524.
Wells  T.  Masterman,  ibid,  731.  Bead  v.  Gibson,  1  Campb.  JV.  P,  185.
Usher  r.  Dauacey,  4  ibid.  97.  Liviog«toD  v.  Roosevelt,  4  Johns.  Rep.
f61. New-Tork  Fire  Iniurance  CompaDy  r,  Beooctt,  5  Conn,  Rep,

674.

b  Fox  Y.  Hanbury,  Cowp.  Rep.  445.  Best  J.,  in  Barton  x,  Williams,
6  Bamw,  ^  Aid,  395.  Pierson  v.  Hooker,  3  Johns,  Rep,  68.  One
partner  may  assign  over  the  partnership  effects  and  credits  in  the  name
of  the  firm,  provided  he  baa  charge  of  the  whole  business  of  the  firm.
Harrison  r,  Sterry,  5  Cranchy  289.  Mills  r.  Barber,  4  Day's  Rep,
428.  Lamb  r.  Dorant,  12  Mass.  Rep.  54.  PMier,  Traile  du  Con.
fteSoc.No.  67.69,72.90.


Lcc.  XLIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  U

a  sale  to  the  partDccship.'  But  if  the  purchase  be  contrary  to
a  stipulatioa  between  the  partners,  and  that  stipulation  be
made  known  to  the  seller,  or  if,  before  the  purchase  or  de*
livery,  one  of  the  partners  expressly  forbids  the  same  on  joint
account,  it  has  been  repeatedly  decided,  that  the  seller  must
show  a  subsequent  assent  of  the  other  partners,  or  that  the
goods  came  to  the  use  of  the  firm.*  This  salutary  check  to
the  power  of  each  partner  to  bind  the  firm,  was  derived  firom
the  civil  law.  In  re  paripotiorem  causam  esse  prohiben-
iis  constat^  It  has  been  questioned,  however,  whether  the
dissent  of  one  partner,  where  the  partnership  consists  of  more
than  two,  will  affect  the  validity  of  a  partoership  contract  in
the  usual  course  of  business,  and  within  the  scope  of  the  c(»i-
cero,  made  by  the  majority  of  the  firm.  The  efficacy  of  the
dissent  was,  in  some  small  degree,  shaken  by  the  Court  of
Ezchecpier,  in  Rooth  v.  Qtem;''  and  in  Kirk  v.  Hodg*
senf  it  was  considered,  that  the  act  of  the  majority,  done  in
good  faith,  must  govern  in  copartnership  business,  and  control
the  objection  of  the  minority,  unless  special  provision  in  the
articles  of  association  be  made  to  the  contrary.  But  this  last
decision  related  only  to  the  case  of  the  management  of  the
interior  concerns  of  the  partners  among  themselves,  and  to
that  it  is  to  be  confined.  The  weight  of  authority  is  decidedly
in  favour  of  the  power  of  a  partner  to  interfere  and  arrest  the
firm  from  the  obligation  of  an  inchoate  purchase  which  is
deemed  injurious.  This  is  the  rule  in  France  in  ordinary
commercial  partnerships ;  and  yet,  if  by  the  terms  of  the  part-


a  Willett  ▼.  Chambers,  Coiop.  Rep*  814.  Rap  f.  Latham,  S  Barnw,
4>  Aid.  795.  BoDd  y.  Gibson,  1  Campb.  .V.  P.  185.  Baldwin,  J.,  5
Da^iRep.  515. Spencer,  J.,  15  Johns,  Rep,  422,

h  WiUis  V.  Dyson,  1  Stor*tc'#,  JV.  P.  164.  Galvray  7.  Matthew,  1
Campb.  JV.  P.  403.  10  EasVs  Rep.  264.  S.  C.  Learitt  r.  Peck,  3
Ctnn.  Rqk.  124.

e  Dig.  10.  3.  28. PoUuer,  Trmlede  Soc,  No.  90.

d  7  Price'e  Rep.  193.

«  3  Jokne.  Ch,  Rep.  400.


46  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

nership,  the  management  of  its  business  be  confided  to  one  of
the  partners,  the  exercise  of  his  powers  in  good  faith,  will  be
valid,  even  against  the  will,  and  in  opposition  to  the  dissent,
of  the  other  members.*

A  partner  may  pledge,  as  well  as  sell,  the  partnership  ef-
fects, in  a  case  free  from  collusion,  if  done  in  the  usual  mode
of  dealing,  and  it  has  relation  to  the  trade  in  which  the  part-
ners are  engaged,  and  when  the  pawnee  had  no  knowledge
that  the  property  was  partnership  property.^  But  this  princi-
ple does  not  extend  to  part  owners  engaged  in  a  particular
purchase,  for  they  are  regarded  as  tenants  in  common,  and
no  member  can  convey  to  the  pawnee  a  greater  interest  than
he  himself  has  in  the  concern.'  And  if  one  partner  acts  fraudu-
lently with  strangers  in  a  matter  within  the  scope  of  the  part-
nership authority,  the  firm  is,  nevertheless,  bound  by  the  con-
tract The  connexion  itself  is  a  declaration  to  the  world
of  the  good  faith  and  integrity  of  the  members  of  the  asso^
ciation,  and  an  implied  undertaking  to  be  responsible  for
the  acts  of  each  within  the  compass  of  the  partnership  con-
cerns.*

It  was  formerly  understood,  that  one  partner  might  bind
bis  copartners  by  a  guaranty,  or  letter  of  credit,  in  the  name
of  the  firm  ;•  and  Lord  Eldon,  in  the  case  Ex  parte  Gor-
don/ considered  the  point  too  clear  for  argument.  But  a  dif-
ferent principle  seems  to  have  been  adopted ;  and  it  is  now  held,
both  in  England  and  in  this  country,  that  one  partner  is  not
authorized  to  bind  the  partnership  by  a  guaranty  of  the  debt


a  Poihtery  Traiie  du  Con.  de  Soc.  No.  71.  90.

b  Raba  Y.  Rylaod,  1  Goto**,  ^P.  132. T upper  7.  Haythorne,  ia
Chancery,  reported  tn  a  note  to  the  case  in  Goto.

c  Barton  v.  Williams,  5  Bamio.  <f*  .Aid.  395.

d  Willet  v.  Chambers,  Cowp,  Rep.  814. Rap  y.  Latham,  2  jBarmo.
4-  Aid.  796.

e  Hope  V.  Cust,  cited  in  1  East's  Rep,  53.
/  15  Fesey,  288.


Lee.  XLIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  47

of  a  third  person,  'without  a  special  authority  for  that  purpose,
or  one  to  be  implied  from  the  previous  course  of  dealing  be-
tween the  parties,  unless  the  guarauty  be  afterwards  adopted
and  acted  upon  by  the  firm.  The  guaranty  must  have  refer-
ence to  the  regular  course  of  business  transacted  by  the
partnership,  and  then  it  will  be  obligatory  upon  the  compa-
ny, and  this  is  the  principle  on  which  the  distinaion
rests.*  The  same  general  rule  applies  when  one  partner
gives  the  copartnership  as  a  mere  and  avowed  surety  for  ano-
ther without  the  authority  or  consent  of  the  firm,  for  this
would  be  pledging  the  partnership  responsibility  in  a  matter
entirely  unconnected  with  the  partnership  business.^

Nor  can  one  partner  charge  the  firm  by  deed,  with  a
debt,  even  in  commercial  dealings.  It  would  be  inconsistent
with  technical  rules,  and  contrary  to  the  general  policy  of  the
law ;  for  the  execution  of  a  deed  requires  a  special  authority  ;
and  such  a  power  has  been  deemed  by  the  English  courts  to
be  of  dangerous  tendency,  as  it  would  enable  one  partner  to
give  to  a  favourite  creditor  a  mortgage  or  a  lien  on  the  real
estates  of  the  other  partners/  But  one  partner,  by  the  special
authority  of  his  copartners  under  seal,  and  if  in  their  presence,
by  parol  authority,  may  execute  a  deed  for  them  in  a  trans-
action in  which  they  were  all  interested.  It  amounts,  in
judgment  of  law,  to  an  execution  of  the  deed  by  all  the
partners,  though  sealed  by  one  of  them  only  i**  and  the  gene-
ral doctrine  of  the  English  law  on  this  point  has  been
clearly  recc^nised  and  settled  by  numerous  decisions  in  our


a  DancftD  v.  Lowodes,  3  Campb.  A*.  P.  478.  Saodilands  v.  Marbb,
2  Bamvf.  4-  Aid.  673.  Crawford  t.  Stirling,  4  Eap.  JV.  P.  207.  S«t-
tOB  aod  M'Nickie  7.  Irwioe,  12  Serg,  <f*  RawUy  13.  Ex  parte  Nolle,
2  O.  &  JameMon,  295.

h  Foote  r.  Sabin.  19.  Johns,  Rep.  154.  New-York  Fire  Insaraocc
Company  t.  BeDnett,  5  Corni.  Rep.  574.

c  Harrison  v.  Jackson,  7  Term  Rep,  207.

d  Ballv.  Dunsterville,  4  Term  Rep.  313.  Williams  v.  Walsbj,  4
£«p.  *V.  P.  220. Steiglitz  t.  Egginton,  I  HolVt  •V.  P.  Ml.


%


/ I


48  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  r.

American  courts.*  The  more  recent  cases  have  very  con-
siderably  relaxed  the  former  strictness  on  this  subject,  and
while  they  profess  to  retain  the  rule  itself,  they  qualify  it  ex-
ceedingly, in  order  to  make  it  suit  the  eirigencies  of  commer-
cial associations.  An  absent  partner  may  be  bound  by  a  deed
executed  on  behalf  of  the  firm,  by  his  copartner,  provided
there  be  either  a  previous  parol  authority  or  a  subsequent
parol  adoption  of  the  act.*

One  partner  may  by  deed  execute  the  ordinary  release  of
a  debt  belonging  to  the  copartnership,  and  thereby  bar  the
firm  of  a  right  which  it  possessed  jointly.  This  is  within  the
general  control  of  the  partnership  funds,  and  within  the  right
which  each  partner  possesses,  to  collect  debts  and  receive  pay-
ment,  and  to  give  a  discharge.  The  rule  of  law  and  equity
is  the  same,  and  it  must  be  a  case  of  collusion  for  fraudulent
purposes,  between  the  partner  and  the  debtor,  that  will  de-
stroy the  effect  of  the  release.^  A  release  by  one  partner,  to  a


a  Gerard  ▼.  Basse,  1  Dallat'  Rep*  119. Green  r.  Beals,  2  Cavntt'

.  .  Rep,  254. Clemeot  v.  Brash,  3  Johns.  Com.  180. Mackaj  r.  Blood-

n  ' good,  9  Johne,  Rep,  285. Aoon.,  2  Rayw,  JV*.  C  Rep,  99. Mills  t.

Barber,  4  Day'i  Rep.  AStZ, Garland  v.  DaTidson,  3  Munf,  Rep.  189.

Hart  F.  Wilbeis,  1  Penn,  Rep,  285. Posej  y.  Bullitt,  1  Black/ord'e

JfuL  Rep.  99. Skinner  v.  Dayton,  19  Johnt.  Rep.  515.

b  In  Jackson  t.  Porter,  20  Jdartin'e  L.  Rep.  200,  it  was  admitted,
that  where  a  deed  was  executed  by  one  partner  in  the  name  of  the
firm,  parol  eridence  was  receivable  to  show  the  written  assent  of  the
other  partner.  The  case  of  Gram  ▼.  Seton  and  Bunker,  in  the  city  of
New- York,  (1  Hall^  JV.  F.  Rep.  262,)  goes  a  great  deal  further,  and
holds  that  one  partner  may  execute,  in  the  name  of  the  firm,  an  in-
strument under  seal,  necessary  in  the  usual  course  of  business,  which
will  be  binding  upon  the  firm ;  prorided  the  partner  had  previous  au-
thority for  that  purpose,  and  such  a%Uhority  need  not  he  under  eealy  wtr
VI  vriitng-,  nor  tpecicUly  communicated/or  the  tpeqfic  purpote^  hvl  xt  nuty
be  inferred  from  the  partnership  itself  and  from  the  hubsequent  conduct
of  the  co'partner  implying  an  assent  to  the  act.

c  Tooker's  case,  2  Co.  68.  Ruddock's  case,  6  Co.  25.  Hawkshaw
T.  Parkinsi  2  Stoanst.  Rep.  576 — 580.  Pierson  v.  Hooker,  3  Johns.  Rep,
68.  Bruen  y.  Marquand,  17  Johns,  Rep,  58.  Salmon  r.  Davis,  4  Bm^
ney,  375. Halsey  v.  Whitaey,  4  Mason,  206.  232.


Lee.  XLIII.] or  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  49

partnership  debtor,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  partnership,  has
been  held  to  be  a  bar  of  any  action  at  law  against  the
debtor.*  So,  also,  in  bankruptcy,  one  partner  may  execute  a
deed,  and  do  any  other  act  requisite  in  proceedings  in  bank-
ruptcy, and  thereby  bind  the  partnership.  This  is  another
exception  to  the  general  rule,  that  one  partner  cannot  bind
the  compliny  by  deed.*  Nor  can  one  partner  bind  the  firm  by
a  submission  to  arbitration,  even  of  matters  arising  out  of  the
business  of  the  firm.  The  principle  is,  that  there  is  no  im-
plied authority,  except  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  carry  on  the
boBiness  of  the  firm.^

The  acknowledgment  of  an.  antecedent  debt  by  a  single
partner,  daring  the  continuance  of  the  partnership,  will  bind
the  firm  equally  with  the  creation  of  the  debt  in  the  first  in-
stance ;  and  it  will  take  the  case  out  of  the  statute  of  limita-
tions, if  it  be  a  clear  and  unqualified  acknowledgment  of  the
debt.  Whether  any  such  acknowledgment,  or  promise  to
pay,  if  made  by  one  partner  after  the  dissolution  of  the  part-
nership, will  bind  a  firm,  or  take  a  case  out  of  the  statute,  as
to  the  other  partners,  has  been  for  some  time  an  unsettled,
and  quite  a  vexed  question,  in  the  books.  In  Whiicomh  t.
Whiting f  it  was  held,  that  the  admission  of  one  joint  ma-
ker of  a  note  took  the  case  out  of  the  statute  as  to  the  other
maker,  and  that  decision  has  been  followed  in  this  country.'
The  doctrine  of  that  case  has  even  been  extended  to  ac-
knowledgments by  a  partner  after  the  dissolution  of  the
partnership,  in  relation  to  antecedent  transactions,  on  the


a  Salmon  y.  Davis,  4  Binney^  37d.

6  Ex  parte  HoUgkiQsoii^  19  F^esey,  Z9l,

c  Stead  v.  Salt,  3  Bingham's  Rep.  101.  Kartbaus  r.  Ferrer,  T  Pe.
terM,Bep.t^\,

d  Doug.  Rep.  652.

£  Boond  Y.  Lathrop,  4  Conn.  Rep.  336.  Huot  v.  Bridgbam,  9
Pick.  Rep.  581. Ward  f.  Howell,  5  Harr.  Sc.  Johnt.  6b.

Vol.  III.  7


60  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

ground,  that,  as  to  them,  the  partnership  still  continued.'* But
there  have  been  just  and  necessary  qualifications  annexed
to  the  general  principle ;  for.  after  the  diascdution  of  a  part-
nership,  the  power  of  the  members  to  bind  the  firm  ceases,
and  an  acknowledgment  of  a  debt  will  not,  of  itself,  be  suffi-
cient, inasmuch  as.  that  would,  in  effect,  be  keeping  the  firno
in  life  and  activity/ To  give  that  acknowledgment  any
force,  the  existence  of  the  original  partnership  debt  must  be
proved,  or  admitted  aliunde.'' Of  late,  however,  the  decision
in  Whitcomb  v.  Whiting  has  been  very  much  questioned  in
England,  and  it  seems  now  to  be  considered  as  an  unsound
authority  by  the  court  which  originally  pronounced  it.'' And
we  have  the  best  authority  in  this  country  for  the  conclusion,
that  the  acknowledgment  of  a  debt  by  a  partner,  after  the  dis-
solution of  the  partnership,  will  be  of  no  avail,  and  will  not
take  the  debt  out  of  the  statute  as  to  the  other  partner,  on  the
ground,  that  the  power  to  create  a  new  right  against  the  part-
nership, does  not  exist  in  any  partner  after  the  dissolution  of
it ;  and  the  acknowledgment  of  a  debt,  barred  by  the  statute
of  limitations,  is  not  the  mere  continuation  of  the  original
promise,  but  a  new  contract  springing  out  of,  and  supported
by,  the  original  consideration. This  is  the  doctrine,  not  only
in  Pennsylvania,  but  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United


a  Wood  y.  Braddick,  1  Taunt,  Rep.  104.  Simpson  y.  Geddes,  S
Bay's  Rep.  533. Fisher  y.  Tucker,  1  MCord^t  Ch,  Rep,  190.

b  Hacklej  y.  Patrick,  3  Jokm,  Rep.  536.  Waldeo  y.  Sherbniner
15  ibid.  409.  ChardoD  y.  Colder,  2  Contl,  Rep.  S.  C.  685.  Fisher  r.
Tucker,  1  JdCord'sCh,  Rep.  S.  C.  177.  190.

e  Smith  y.  Ludlows,  6  Johns,  Rep.  267.  Joboson  y.  Beardslee,  15
ibid.Z.

d  Atkios  y.  Tredgold,  2  'Bamw,  k  Cress.  23.  In  Perbam  y.  Ray-
nall,  9  Moore's  C,  B,  Rep.  566.  the  authority  of  the  case  of  TThitcoinb
V.  Whitinff  is  reinstated,  and  it  was  held  to  contain  sound  doctrine  to  the
extent,  that  an  acknowledgment  within  the  six  years,  by  one  of  two
makers  of  a  joint  and  seyeral  note,  reviyea  the  debt  agfainst  both,  though
Uie  other  had  silked  the  note  as  a  snrety.


Lee.  XUII.]  *  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 61

States  ;*  and  the  law  in  England,  and  in  this  country,  seem
equally  to  be  tending  to  this  conclusion.^  BLt  there  is  a  dis-
tinction between  an  acknowledgment  which  goes  to  create  a
new  contract,  and  the  declarations  of  a  partner,  made  after  the
dissolution  of  the  partnership,  concerning  facts  which  trans-
pired previous  to  that  event,  and  declarations  of  that  character
are  held  to  be  admissible.'

If,  however,  in  the  terms  of  dissolution  of  a  partnership,
one  partner  be  authorized  to  use  the  name  of  the  firm  in
the  prosecution  of  suits,  he  may  bind  all  by  a  note  for  him-
self and  his  partners,  in  a  matter  concerning  judicial  pro-
ceedings.'

The  business  and  contracts  of  a  partner,  distinct  from,  and
independent  o(,  the  business  of  the  partnership,  are  on  his
own  account ;  and  yet  it  is  said,  that  one  partner  cannot  be
permitted  to  deal  on  his  own  private  account  in  any  matter
which  is  obviously  at  variance  with  the  business  of  the  part-
nership, and  that  tha  company  would  be  entitled  to  claim  the
benefit  of  every  such  contract  The  object  of  this  rule  is  to
withdraw  from  each  partner  the  temptation  to  bestow  more
attention,  and  exercise  a  sharper  sagacity,  in  respect  to  his
own  purchases  and  sales,  than  to  the  concerns  of  the  partner-


*  a  Bell  y.  Morrison,  1  Peters,  Rep.  351.  Levy  y.  Cadet,  17  Serg.  ic
RawL  126.  Searight  y.  Craighead,  1  Perm,  Rep,  135.  Hopkina  y.
Banks,  7  Cotoen,  650. Barker  y.  Stackpoole,  9  ibid.  420.

h  By  the  English  statute  of  9(h  May,  1828,  entititled  ^^  An  met  for
rendering  a  written  n.emorandum  necessary  to  the  validity  of  certain
promises  and  engagements,"  it  is  declared,  in  reference  to  acknowledg-
ments and  promises  offered  in  evidence  to  take  cases  out  of  the  statate
of  limitations,  that  joint  contractors,  or  executors,  or  administrators  of
any  contractor,  shall  not  be  chargeable  in  respect  of  any  written  ac-
knowledgment of  bis  co-contractor,  &c.,  though  such  co-contractor,  bis
ezecQtors,  &c.,  may  be  rendered  liable  by  virtas  of  such  new  acknow-
ledgment or  promise.

c  Parker  y.  Merrill,  6  ChreenUa/^  41.

d  Barton  y.  Itait,  5  Bamw.  U  Aid.  267.


62  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

ship  ia  the  same  line  of  business."* The  rule  is  evidentljr
founded  in  sound  policy  ;  and  the  same  rule  is  applied  to  the
case  of  a  master  of  a  vessel,  charged  with  a  cargo  for  a  foreign^
market,  and  in  which  he  has  a  joint  concern.^ But  a  persoEs
may  become  a  paitner  with  one  individual  of  a  partnership,
without  being  concerned  in  that  partnership  ;  for  though  A*
&,  B.  are  mercantile  partners,  A.  may  form  a  separate  part-
nersMp  with  C,  and  the  latter  would  have  no  right  to  a  share
in  the  profits,  nor  would  he  be  bound  for  the  engagements  of
the  house  of  A.  &  B.,  because  his  partnership  would  only  ex-
tend to  the  house  of  A.  &  C.'' But  such  involved  partner-
ships require  to  be  watched  with  a  jealous  observation,  and
especially  if  they  relate  to  business  of  the  same  kind,  inas-
much as  the  attention  of  the  person  belonging  to  both  firms
might  be  distracted  in  the  conflicts  of  interest,  and  bis  vigi-
lance and  duty  in  respect  to  one  or  the  other  of  the  concerns
inuch  relaxed.

HI.  Of  the  dissolution  of  partnership.

If  a  partnership  be  formed  for  a  single  purpose  or  transao*
tion,  it  ceases  as  soon  as  the  business  is  completed  ;  and
Aothing  can  be  more  natural  and  reasonable  than  the  rule  of
the  civil  law,  that  a  partnership  in  any  business  should  cease
when  there  was  an  end  put  to  the  business  itself.'' If  the


a  Pot/Uer,  IVaUi  du  Con.  de  Sac.  No.  59.  Glassingtoo  y,  Thwaitet,
1  Sim.  k  Stu.  )33.

h  Boulay  Petty ^  Cour$  de  Droit  Com.  torn.  2.  94.

c  Ex  parte  Barrow,  2  Roie's  Ctues  in  Bankruptcy,  252.  Lord  Eldoo
there  refers  to  the  case  of  Sir  Charles  Raymond,  as  containiog  tbB  doc-
trine. It  was  also  the  doctrine  of  the  civil  law,  and  is  the  law  of  (bote
ooantries  which  follow  the  civil  law.  Socii  mei  socitu,  metu  sociw  n^n
fH,  Di^.  17.  2.  20.  Pothier,  Traiti  du  Contrai  de  SocieU,  No.  91.
ErOc.  InH.  vol.  2.  6. 3.  sect.  23.  BelVe  Comm.  vol.  2. 654.  Cml  Code
o/Lomeianay  art.  2842,

d  Inil.  3.  26.  6.  Extincto  tubjedo,  tolliiur  acffunchan.  Pothier^
TraUf  de  Soc.  No,  140—143.  Ulustrates  this  rule  in  bis  uttitl  mao-


Lcc  XLUI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  63

partoeiBhip  be  for  a  defioile  period,  it  terminates  of  course
when  the  period  arrives.  But  in  that  case,  and  in  the  case
io  which  the  period  of  its  duration  is  not  fixed,  it  may  termi-
nale  from  various  causes,  which  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  ex-
plain, as  well  as  trace  the  consequences  of  the  dissolution.

A  partnership  may  be  dissolved  by  the  voluntary  act  of  the
parties,  or  of  one  of  them,  and  by  the  death,  insanity,  or  bank-
raplcy  of  either,  and  by  judicial  decree,  or  by  such  a  change
in  the  condition  of  one  of  the  parties  as  disi^bles  him  to  per-
form his  part  of  the  duty.  It  may  also  be  dissolved  by  ope-
ration of  law,  by  reason  of  war  between  the  governments
to  which  the  partners  respectively  belong,  so  as  to  render
the  business  carried  on  by  the  association  impracticable  and
unlawful.'*

(1.)  Dissolution  by  the  voluntary  aot  of  either  partner.

It  is  an  established  principle  in  the  law  of  partnership,  that
if  it  be  without  any  definite  period,  Bny  partner  may  withdraw
at  a  moment's  notice,  when  he  pleases,  and  dissolve  the  parU
nerBhip.*  The  civil  law,  and  the  English  law,  contain  the
same  rule  on  the  subject.^  The  existence  of  engagements
with  third  persons  does  not  prevent  the  dissolution  by  the  act
of  the  parties,  or  either  of  them,  though  those  engagements
will  not  be  afiected,  and  the  partnership  will  still  continue  as
to  all  antecedent  concerns,  until  they  are  duly  adjusted  and
settled.' A  reasonable  notice  of  the  dissolution  might  be  very


Mr,  by  a  namber  of  plain  and  familiar  examples. 16  Johnt,  Rep,  491.
8.  P.

a  hut.  3.  26.  lec.  7,  8.  Ftnntuf ,  b.  t.  3.  S6.  4.  Hub.  in  InsL  lib.
3«  tit.  26.  sec.  6.  Polhier,  Con.  de  Soc.  No.  147, 148..  11  Vesey^  6,
I  SwmH.  Rep.  480.  608. 16  Johns.  JRep.  491.

h  Peacock  v.  Peacock,  16  l^esey,  49.  Featberstoobaogh  y.  Fen-
^k,  17  Veeey^  298. Lord  EldoD,  id  1  StoaneL  Rep.  508.

c  but.  3.  26..4. Code,  4.  37.  5.

d  PolAicr,  TraiU  de  Soc.  No.  150.  says,  that  the  dinolution  by  the
>ct  of  a  party  ought  to  be  done  in  good  faith,  and  leaioDably— <fe6€<  eae
f«c(a  hena  Jide  et  iempeeUve. He  statea  the  case  of  an  adTaotageons


L


54 OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

advantageous  (o  the  company,  but  it  is  not  requisite  ;  and  a
partner  may,  if  he  pleases,  in  a  case  free  from  fraud,  choose  a
very  unseasonable  moment  for  the  exercise  of  his  right.  A
Bense  of  common  interest  is  deemed  a  sufficient  security
against  the  abuse  of  (he  discretion.'*  .Though  the  partnership
be  constituted  by  deed,  a  notice  in  the  gazette  by  one  partner,
is  evidence  of  a  dissolution  of  the  partnership  as  against  the
party  to  the  notice,  even  if  the  partnership  articles  require  a
dissolution  by  deed.^

But  if  the  partners  have,  formed  a  partnership  by  articles,
for  a  definite  period,  in  that  case  it  is  said,  that  it  cannot  be
dissolved  without  mutual  consent  before  the  period  ar-
rives.^  This  is  the  assumed  principle  of  law  by  Lord  Eldon
in  Peacock  v.  Peacock^^  and  in  Crawshay  v.  Maule  f  and
yet  in  Marquand  v.  The  Hjfiw-  York  Man.  Company ^f  it
was  held,  that  the  voluntary  assignment  by  one  partner,  of
all  his  interest  in  the  concern,  dissolved  the  partnership,
though  it  was  stipulated  in  the  articles,  that  the  partnership
was  to  continue  until  two  of  the  partners  should  demand  a
dissolution,  and  the  other  partners  wished  the  business  to  be
continued,  notwithstanding  the  assignment.  And  in  Skin-
ner V.  Dayton/ it  was  held  by  one  of  the  judges,*  that  there
was  no  such  thing  as  an  indissoluble  partnership.  It  was
revocable  in  its  own  nature,  and  each  party  might,  by  giving


bargain  for  tbe  partners  being  in  contemplation,  and  one  of  tbem,  with
a  view  to  appropriate  the  bargain  to  bimself,  suddenly  dissolves  tbe  part-
nership. A  dissolution  at  such  a  moment,  be  justly  concludes,  would
be  nnayailing.

a  17  Fefcy,  308,  309.

b  Doe  and  Waitbman  y:  Miles,  1  Starkie't  JV.  P.  181.

c  Goto  on  Partnenhip,  303.  305.  edit.  Phil.  1825.

d  16  Vesey^  56.

<  1  SwantU  Rep,  495.
y  17  Johnt.  Rep.  625.

^19  Johns,  Rep,  638.

h  Mr.  Justice  PUm.


Lee.  XLin.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 65

due  notice,  dissolve  the  partnership  as  to  all  future  capacity  of
the  firm  to  bind  bim  by  contract;  and  he  bad  the  same  legal
power,  even  though  the  parties  had  covenanted  with  each
other  that  the  partnership  should  continue  for  such  a  period
of  time.  The  only  consequetice  of  such  a  revocation  of  the
partnership  power  in  the  intermediate  time,  would  be,  that
the  partner  would  subject  himself  to  a  claim  of  damages  for  a
bitach  of  the  covenant.  Such  a  power  would  seem  to  be  im-
plied in  the  capacity  of  a  partner,  to  interfere  and  dissent
from  a  purchase  or  contract  about  to  be  made  by  his  asso-
ciates; and  the  commentators  on  the  Institutes  lay  down  the
principle  as  drawn  from  the  civil  law,  that  each  partner  has  a
power  to  dissolve  the  connexion  at  any  time,  notwithstanding
any  convention  to  the  contrary,  and  that  the  power  results
from  the  nature  of  the  association.  They  hold  every  such
convention  null,  and  that  it  is  for  the  public  interest  that  no
partner  should  be  obliged  to  continue  in  such  a  partnership
against  his  will,  inasmuch  as  the  community  of  goods  in
Bueh  a  case  engenders  discord  and  litigation.'

The  marriage  of  a  feme  8ol§  partner  would  likewise  ope-
rate as  a  dissolution  of  the  partnership,  because  her  capacity
to  act  ceases,  and  she  becomes  subjected  to  the  control  of  her
husband,  and  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  one  partner  to  in-
troduce, by  his  own  act,  the  agency  of  a  new  partner  into  the
firm.

(2.)  By  the  death  of  a  partner.

The  death  of  either  party  is,  ipsofacto^  a  dissolution  of  the
partnership,  however  numerous  the  association  may  be.  The
personal  qualities  of  each  partner  enter  into  the  consideration


a  Adeo  auiem  vitiim  at  ex  nalura  tste  soeietalis  unius  distentu  totam
iitnlciy  ui  quamins  ab  initio  eonvenerit,  ut  toeiettu  perpetuo  duraret^
>u/  ne  lieerti  ab  ea  retiUre  invitU  caterii  ;  tamen  tale  pactum^  tanquam
fttum  eeniro  naiuram  toeieiatisi  eujve  in  aiemum  nvlhi  edtio  est  eon-
ttmnere  Heei*  VinniuM  in  Jntt,  3.  26.  4  pi.  1.  Ferrinre^  ibid.  torn.  6.
IM* ZHf.  17.2.14.


66  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

of  the  contract,  and  the  survivors  ought  not  to  be  held  bound
without  a  new  assent,  when,  perhaps,  the  abilities  and  skill,
or  character  and  credit  of  the  deceased  partner,  were  the  in-
ducements to  the  formation  of  the  connexion.*  Pothier  says,
that  the  representatives  of  the  deceased  partner  are  bound  by
new  contracts  made  in  the  name  of  the  partnership,  by  the
survivor,  until  notice  be  given  of  the  death,  or  it  be  presumed
to  have  been  received.*  But  Lord  Eldon  was  of  opinion  that
the  death  of  the  partner  did,  of  itself,  work  the  dissolution ;
and  he  Was  not  prepared  to  say,  notwithstanding  all  he  had
read  on  the  subject,  that  a  deceased  partner's  estate  became
liable  to  the  debts  of  the  continuing  partners,  for  want  of  no-
tice of  such  dissolution."^  In  the  Roman  law,  and  in  the
commentaries  of  the  civilians,  every  subject  connected  with
the  doctrine  of  partnership  is  considered  with  admirable  saga-
city and  precision;  but,  in  this  instance,  the  rule  was  carried
80  far,  that  even  a  stipulation  that,  in  the  case  of  the  death  of
either  partner,  the  heir  of  the  deceased  should  be  admitted
into  the  partnership,  was  declared  void.*^  The  provision  in  the
Roman  law  was  followed  by  Argou,  in  his  institutes  of  the
French  law.*  Pothier  was  of  opinion,  however,  that  the  civil
law  abounded  in  too  much  refinement  on  this  point,  and  that
if  there  be  a  provision,  in  the  original  articles  of  partnership,
for  the  continuance  of  the  rights  of  partnership  in  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  deceased,  it  would  be  valid/  His  opinion
has  been  followed  in  the  Code  Napoleon  ;'  and  in  the  En
glish  law,  such  a  provision  in  the  articles  of  partnership  for


a  Pothier,  Traite  du  ConL  de  Sociite,  n.  146.  Jtm^.  3.  26.  5.  Vtn-
mia,  h.  (.  Pearce  v.  Cbamberlaio,  2  Vetetfy  sen.  33.  Lord  Eldon,  3.
Jderivale,  614. 1  Stoanet,  Rep,  509.

b  Pothier,  Traite  du  ConL  de  Soc.  No.  166, 167.

c  Yalliamy  v.  Noble,  3  JdervoaU,  614.

d  Dig.  17.  2.  35.  62.  69.

e  Jnst.  aut  Droit  Franeoi$y  1.  3,  cb»  93.

/  Pothier,  vh.  nip.  No.  145,

g  Art.  1868.


Lfee.  XLIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  6^

die  benefit  of  the  repjesentatiYes  of  a  deceased  partper,  is  Bot

quesdoned  ;  and  it  was  expresdy  sustained  by  Lord  Talbot.*

A  community  of  interest  still  exists  between  the  survivor

and  the  representatives  of  the  deceased  partner,  and  those

representatives  have  a  right  to  insist  on  the  application  of  the

joint  property  to  the  payment  of  the  joint  debts,  and  a  due  dis^

tribution  of  the  surplus. So  long  as  those  objects  remain  to

be  accomplished,  the  partnership  may  be  considered  as  having

a  limited  Continuance, If  the  survivor  does  not  account  in  a

reasonable  time,  a  Court  of  Chancery  will  grant  an  injunction

to  restrain  him  frotn  acting,  and  appoint  a  receiver,  and  direct

the  accounts  to  be  taken.^ If  the  surviving  partner  be  insoU

vent,  the  effects  in  the  hands  of  the  representatives  of  the  de«

ceased  partner  are  liable,  in  equity,  for  the  partnership  debts ;

and  it  is  no  objection  to  the  claim  that  the  creditor  had  not

Used  due  diligence  in  prosecuting  the  surviving  partner,  bo'


■  ■i ■ t t  I


a  WrexbatiiT.  HadleitoD,  I  Swatuton,  514.  note.  Pearce  t.  Cbani*
Jd,  2  Vetey,  ten.  33.  Balmain  ▼.  Shore,  9  Vesey^  500.  Waraei*
t.  CottDiDgbaiD,  3  Dc/w*$  ParL  Ccu.  76.  Grata  v.  Bajard,  1 1  Serg.  ^
RamUy  41.  If  ooe  partner,  bj  will,  contiDues  his  share  of  stock  in  a
partnership  for  a  definite  period,  and  the  partnership  be  continaed  after
bis  death,  and  becomes  insolvent,  the  partnership  creditors  have  no
claim  over  the  general  creditors  to  the  assets  in  the  lands  of  the  repre-
•eotatives  of  the  deceased,  except  as  to  the  assets  Tested  in  the  partner-
ship fondsA  Et  parte  Garland,  10.  Vetey^  1 10.  Pitkin  y.  Pitkin,
7  Consi.  Rep:  307.  In  the  case  of  the  LovMana  Bank  «.  Kenner*»
tueeemonf  1  Miller' $  LouUk  Rep.  384.,  after  an  extensive  examination
of  the  commercial  laws  and  usages  ot  Europe  and  the  United  States,  it
was  considered  to  be  a  doobtfnl  point,  whether  stipulations  in  contracts
of  partnership,  that  they  may  be  continued  after  the  death  of  one  of  the
partners,  for  the  benefit  of  the  heirs^  were  binding  on  the  latter  without
their  content.  They  were  not  so  binding  in  Louisiana  at  the  time  of  the
idoptwn  of  the  code  of  1 808.

h  Ex  parte  Rnffio,  6  Veeey,  126.  Harfz  y.  Schroder,  8  Fe«ey,  31 7^
Ex  parte  Williams,  11  yesey,  5.  Peacock  y.  Peacock,  16  Feeey,  6%
Wilson  y.  Greenwood,  1  StoansL  Rep.  480,  Crawshay  y.  Maule,  ibid*
606. Murray  v.  Mumford,  6  Cowen,  441. \6Jokni.  Rep,  493«

ToL.  IIL  8


OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Pmrt  V-

ibre  his  insolvency;  for  the  debt  is  joipt  and  several,  and
equally  a  charge  upon  the  assets  of  the  deceased  partner,  and
against  the  person  and  estate  of  the  snrvivor.'*

(3.)  By  the  insanity  of  a  partner.

Insanity  does  not  work  a  dissolution  of  partnership^  ipso
facto*  It  depends  upon  circumstances  under  the  sound  dis-
cretion of  the  Court  of  Chancery. But  if  the  lunacy  be  con-
firmed and  duly  ascertained,  it  may  now  be  laid  down  as  a
general  rule,  notwithstanding  the  decision  of  Lord  Talbot  to
the  contrary,  that,  as  partners  are  respectively  to  contribute
skill  and  industry,  as  well  as  capital,  to  the  business  of  the
concern,  the  inability  of  a  partner,  by  reason  of  lunacy,  is  a
sound  and  just  cause  for  the  interference  of  the  Court  of
Chancery  to  dissolve  the  partnership,  and  have  the  accounts
taken,  and  the  property  duly  applied.*

(4.)  By  bankruptcy  of  a  partner.

Bankruptcy,  either  of  the  whole  partnership,  or  of  an  indi-
vidual member,  dissolves  a  partnership;  and  the  assignees  be-
come, as  to  the  interest  of  the  bankrupt  partner,  tenants  in
common  with  the  solvent  partners,  subject  to  all  the  rights  of
the  other  partners ;  and  a  community  of  interest  exists  be-
tween them,  until  the  affairs  of  the  company  are  settled.  The
dissolution  of  the  partnership  follows  necessarily,  under  those
statutes  of  bankruptcy,  which  avoid  all  the  acts  of  the  bank-
rupt from  the  day  of  his  bankruptcy,  and  from  the  necessity
of  the  thing,  as  all  the  property  of  the  bankrupt  is  vested  in


a  Hamenly  y.  Lambert,  2  Johns.  Ch.  Rep.  508.

h  Wrexham  r.  Hodleston,  cited  1  SwanH,  Rep.  614.  note.  Sajerr.
BeoDet,  1  Cox't  Cat.  1 07.  Waters  ▼.  Taylor,  2  Vet.  ^  Bea.  301.  See
Tol.  2.  Leo.  Al.adfinem.  The  general  rule  mentioned  by  Spencer,  J.,
in  \bJohnt.  bl.  that  insanity  works  a  dissolution  of  a  partnership,  nut
be  taken  with  the  limitations  in  the  text.


Uc  3XIII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. M

his  aasignees,  who  cannot  carry  on  the  trade.* A  voluntary
and  bona  fide  assignment  by  a  partner  of  all  his  interest  in
the  partnership  stock,  has  the  same  effect  and  dissolves  the
partnership. This  is  upon  the  principle  that  a  partnership
cannot  be  compelled  by  the  act  of  one  partner  to  receive  a
stranger  into  an  association  which  is  founded  on  personal  confi«
dence.* The  dissolution  takes  place,  and  the  joint  tenancy  is
eevered,  from  the  time  that  the  partner,  against  whom  the
oommission  issues,  is  adjudged  a  bankrupt,  and  the  dissolutioii
rdates  back  to  the  act  of  bankruptcy. The  bankruptcy  ope-
nles  to  prevent  the  solvent  partner  from  dealing  with  the
partnership  property  as  if  the  partnership  continued ;  but,  ia
reqiecl  to  the  past  transactions,  he  has  a  lien  on  the  joini
fiinds  for  the  purpose  of  duly  applying  them  in  liquidation
and  payment  of  the  partnership  debts,  and  is  entitled  to  retain
them  until  the  partnership  accounts  be  taken.^ If  all  the  in-
terest of  a  partner  be  seized  and  sold  on  execution,  that  fact
will  likewise  terminate  the  partnership,  because  all  his  share
of  the  joint  estate  is  transferred,  by  act  of  law,  to  the  vendee
of  the  sheriff,  who  becomes  a  tenant  in  common  with  the  sol-
vent partners. I  have  not  met  with  any  adjudication  upon
the  point  in  the  English  law,  though  it  i«  frequently  assu-
med f  but  it  follows,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  from  the
sale  of  his  interest,  and  it  is  equivalent,  in  that  respect,  to  a
vduntary  assignment. It  was  a  rule  of  the  civil  law,  that
the  partnership  was  dissolved  by  the  insolvency  of  one  of  the
members,  and  an  assignment  of  his  property  to  his  creditors.


o  Fox  T.  Hanbury,  Ccwp.  445.  Lord  EldoD,  Ex  parte  Williams,
11  yesey,  6.  Wilson  r.  Greenwood,  1  Swamt.  Rtp.  48S.  Marquand
V.  N.  Y.  Man.  Co.  17  Johm.  Hep,  625.

h  huL  3.  26.  8.  17  Johfu.  Rep.  525.  Kingman  r.  Sparr,  7  Pielr.
235.

e  Harvey  v.  Grickett,  5  JIf .  4r  ^tho*  336.  Barker  v.  Goodair,  11
Fetey,  78. Datton  ▼.  Morrison,  17  Vuey^  193.

d  So  stated  arguendo  in  Sayer  ?•  Bennet,  1  Jlfonl^fu  on  FaH*  note
16. Own  on  PorlMersAip,  310.


60  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Pari  AT.

or  by  a  compulsory  sale  of  th^m  by  judicial  process  on  hAalf
of  biB  creditors,''

(5.)  ByjtuUcicU  decree.

We  have  seen,  that  the  partnership  may  be  dissolved  hy
the  decree  of  the  Court  of  Chancery,  in  the  case  of  insanity.
It  may  also  be  dissolved  at  the  instance  of  a  member,  and
against  the  consent  of  the  rest,  when  the  business  for  which
it  was  created  is  found  to  be  impracticable,  and  the  property
invested  liable  to  be  wasted  and  lost.^  It  may  be  dissolved
when  the  whole  scheme  of  the  association  is  found  to  bo
visionary,  or  foui^ed  upon  erroneous  principles/  So,  if  the
conduct  of  a  partner  be  such  as  renders  it  impracticable  to
carry  on  the  business,  or  there  be  a  gross  abuse  of  good  faith
between  the  parties,  the  Court  of  Chancery,  on  the  complaint
of  a  partner,  may,  in  its  discretion,  dissolve  the  association^
notwithstanding  the  other  members  object  to  it.  But  the
court  will  require  a  strong  case  to  be  made  out,  before  it  will
dissolve  a  partnership,  and  decree  a  sale  of  the  whole  concern.
It  may  restrain  a  single  partner  from  doing  improper  acts  in
future ;  but  the  parties,  as  in  another  kind  of  partnership,  en-
ter into  it  for  better  and  worse,  and  the  court  has  no  jurisdic-
tion to  make  a  separation  between  them  for  trifling  causes,  as
because  one  of  them  is  less  good  tempered  or  accommodating
than  the  other.  The  conduct  must  amount  to  an  exclusion
of  one  partner  from  his  proper  agency  in  the  house,  or  be  such
as  renders  it  impossible  to  carry  on  the  business  upon  the


a  Diet*  du  Digest  par  Thevenot  Deaaulu,  art.  Sociitiy  No.  56.  70.

b  Baring  y.  Diz,  1  Cox'm  Cos.  213.

€  Backlej  v.  Cater,  and  Pearce  ▼.  Piper,  referred  to  for  that  par<«
poie  by  LordEIdoD,  id  3  Kes,  Sf  Bea,  181.  See,  also,  to  the  same
point,  Reere  v.  Parkins,  2  Jacob  4r  Walk.  390.  In  these  cases  of  %
Bill  in  Chancery,  for  the  dissolution  of  a  partnership,  all  the  members,
bowerer  Qttmerous,  must  be  parties  to  the  bill,  for  they  all  hare  an  iptfs
TMt  in  the  suit Lon^^  f.  Youge,  2  Simontf  369.


Lee.  XUII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  61

terms  stipulated.* A  breach  of  covenants  in  articles  which  ii
important  in  its  consequences,  or  when  there  has  been  a  stu*
died  and  continued  inattention  to  a  covenant,  and  to  the  ap«
plication  of  the  associates  to  observe  it,  will  be  sufficient  to
authorize  the  court  to  interfere  by  injunction  to  restrain  the
breach  of  the  covenant,  or,  under  circumstances,  to  dissolve
the  partnership.* The  French  law  also  aUowed  of  a  dissolu-
tion within  the  stipulated  period,  if  one  of  the  parties  was  of
such  had  temper  that  the  other  could  not  reasonably  live  with
him,  or  if  his  conduct  was  so  irregular  as  to  cause  great  injury
to  the  society.^ A  mere  temptation  to  abuse  partnership  pro*
perty  is  not  sufficient  to  induce  the  court  to  interfere  by  injunc-
tion \*  but  when  a  partner  acts  with  gross  impropriety  or  folly,
and  there  is  a  strong  probability  that  the  safety  of  the  firm,
and  the  rights  of  creditors,  depend  upon  the  interference  of
Chancery,  it  forms  a  proper  case  for  the  protection  of  that  ju<
rifldiction  to  be  thrown  over  the  concern.'

In  some  instances,  chancery  will  restrain  a  partner  from  an
unseasonable  dissolution  of  the  connexion,  and  on  the  same
principle  that  it  wiU  interfere  to  stay  waste,  and  prevent  an
ineparable  mischief;  and  such  a  power  was  assumed  by
Lord  Apsley  in  1771,  without  any  question  being  made  as
to  the  fitness  of  the  exercise  of  it.^  In  the  ci?il  law  it  was
held  by  the  civilians  to  be  a  clear  point,  that  an  action  might  be
instituted  by,  or  on  behalf  of,  the  partnership,  if  a  partner,  in
a  case  in  which  no  provision  was  made  by  the  articles,  should
nndertake  to  dissolve  the  partnership  at  an  unseasonable  mch


a  Waters  v.  Taylor,  t  Ter.  4*  Betu  299.  Goodman  r.  Whitcombii
1  Jaeeb  if  Walk.  569.

h  Manball  y.  Colman,  2  JcuxA  4r  ^-  266.

c  JnU.  au  Droii  FrancoU  par  Argouy  torn.  2.  249.

d  Glaaaiogtoo  y.  Thwaites,  1  Simon  4r  Siu,  124.

•  TUgfamaDy  Ch.  J.,  11  Serg.  4r  BawU^  48.  j

/  ClaTany  r.  Van  Sommery cited  in  3  Wood.  Iac*  416.  and  1  Bwm^
9ltp.  611  note.


62  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

ment ;  and  they  went  on  {he  ground,  that  the  good  of  the
association  ought  to  control  the  convenience  of  any  iDdividual
memher.'  But  such  a  power,  acting  upon  the  strict  l^al
right  of  a  party,  is  extremely  difficult  to  define,  and  I  should
think  rather  hazardous  and  embarrassing  in  its  exercise.

(6.)  By  the  inability  of  the  parties  to  ad,
Pothier  says,  that  if  a  partnership  had  been  contracted  be-
tween two  persons,  founded  on  the  contribution  of  capital  by
the  one,  and  of  personal  labour  and  skill  by  the  other,  and
the  latter  should  become  disabled  by  the  palsy  to  afford  either
the  labour  or  skill,  the  partnership  would  be  dissolved,  be-
cause the  object  of  it  could  not  be  fulfilled/  This  conclu-
sion would  be  extremely  reasonable,  for  the  case  would  be
analogous  in  principle  to  that  of  insanity,  and  equally  proper
for  equitable  relief.

If  the  partners  were  subjects  of  different  governments,  a
war  between  the  two  governments  would  at  once  interrupt,
and  render  unlawful,  all  trading  and  commercial  intercourse,
and,  by  necessary  consequence,  work  a  dissolution  of  all  com-
mercial partnerships  existing  between  the  subjects  of  the  two
nations  residing  within  their  respective  dominions.  A  state
of  war  creates  disabilities,  imposes  restraints,  and  exacts  du-
ties, altogether  inconsistent  with  the  continuance  of  every
such  relation.  This  subject  has  been  largely  discussed,  and
the  doctrine  explicitly  settled  and  declared  by  the  courts  of
justice  in  New- York.*

(7.)  Consequences  of  the  dissolution.
When  a  partnership  is  actually  ended  by  death,  notice,  or
other  effectual  mode,  no  person  can  make  use  of  the  joint


a  Dig.  17.  2.  65.  5. Pothiery  Traiic  de  Soe.  No.  150, 151.
b  Traits  de  Soc.  No.  142.

e  Griswold  r.  WaddiogtOD,  15  Johns.  Rep,  57. 8.  C.  16  Jofme.
Rep,  438.


Le<.  XUII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  ftS

property  in  the  way  of  trade,  or  inconsistently  with  the  pur-
pose of  settling  the  affairs  of  the  partnership,  and  winding
up  the  concern. The  power  of  one  partner  to  bind  the  jSrm,
ceases  immediately  on  its  dissdution,  and  the  partners,  from
that  time,  become  distinct  persons,  and  tenants  in  common  of
the  joint  stock. One  partner  cannot  endorse  bills  and  notes
previously  given  to  the  firm,  nor  accept  a  biil  previously  drawn
on  it,  80  as  to  bind  it If  the  paper  was  even  endorsed  be-
fore the  dissolution,  and  not  put  into  circulation  until  after*
wards,  all  the  partners  must  unite  in  putting  it  into  circulation,
in  order  to  bind  them.' But  until  the  purpose  of  finishing
the  prior  concerns  be  accomplished,  the  partnership,  as  we
have  already  seen,  may  be  said  to  continue  ;  and  if  the  ob-
ject be  in  danger  of  being  defeated  by  the  unjustifiable  acts
or  conduct  of  any  of  the  partners,  a  court  of  equity  will  in-
terfere, and  appoint  a  manager  or  receiver  to  conduct  and  set-
tle the  business.^ A  dissolution  is  in  some  respects  prospec-
tive only,  and  either  of  the  former  partners  can  receive  pay-
ment of  debts  due  to  the  firm,  and  give  a  release.'' On  the
dissolution  by  death,  the  surviving  partner  settles  the  atlairs  of
the  concern,  and  the  Court  of  Chancery  will  not  arrest  the
business  from  him,  and  appoint  a  receiver,  unless  confidence
be  destroyed  by  his  mismanagement  or  improper  conduct.'^
The  surviving  partner  is  alone  suable  at  law,  and  he  is  enti-
tled to  the  possession  and  disposition  of  the  assets,  to  enable


a  Kilsonr  r.  Finlyson.  1  H*  Blacks.  lUp.  155.  Abel  ▼.  Sutton,  3
Etp.  ^.  P.  Hep.  108.  Lansing  v.  Gaine  and  Ten  Ejck,  2  Johns,
Rep.  300.  Sanford  t.  Mickles,  4  ibid.  224.  Foltz  ▼.  Ponrie,  2  De-
smiss,  Ck,  Rep.  40.  Fisber  ▼.  Tacker,  1  MCord's  Ch.  Rep.  173.
PoignaTd  t.  Livermore,  17  JlfaHtn,  324.  Tombeckbe  v.  Darnell,  5
•tfofofif  56.

b  Wilaoo  V.  Greenwood,  1  Swanst.  Rep.  480.  Crawshej  r.  Maale,
ibid.  606. 528.

c  Piatt,  J.,  19  Johnsonj  143. KiDg  ▼.  Smitb,  AX!arr.  4*  Payne,  108,

d  Philips  T.  AtkiDsoo,  2  Bro.  Ch.  Cos,  272.


64  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  Vi

him  to  discharge  the  debts  and  settle  the  concern.*  But  re-"
lief  may  be  bad  in  equity  against  the  representatives  of  the
deceased  partner  having  assets,  if  the  surviving  partner  be
insolvent*  Each  party  may  insist  on  a  sale  of  the  joint
stock  ;  and  when  a  court  of  equity  winds  up  the  concerns  of
a  partnership,  it  is  done  by  a  sale  of  the  property,  and  a  con-
version of  it  into  money.  If,  however,  before  a  sale  or  a  set-*
tlement  of  the  joint  concern,  the  partner  in  possession  of  the
capital  continues  the  trade  with  the  joint  property,  he  will  be
bound  to  account  with  the  other  partner,  or  the  representa*
tives  of  a  deceased  partner,  for  the  profits  of  the  trade,  sub-
ject to  just  allowances.^  The  good  will  of  a  trade  is  not  part-
nership stock.  It  has  been  decided  to  be  the  right  of  the  sur^
vivor,  and  which  the  law  gives  him  to  carry  on  the  trade,  and
that  the  representatives  of  a  deceased  partner  cannot  compel
a  division  of  it''  But  it  was  afterwards  doubted  whether  the
good  will  did  survive  and  could  be  separated  from  the  lease  of
the  establishment,  and  especially  if  the  survivor  continued
the  trade  with  the  joint  funds.'  The  joint  creditors  have  the
primary  claim  upon  the  joint  fund^  in  the  distribution  of  the
assets  of  bankrupt  or  insolvent  partners,  and  the  partner-
ship debts  are  to  be  settled  before  any  division  of  the  funds
takes  place.  So  far  as  the  partnership  property  has  been  ac-
quired by  means  of  partnership  debts,  those  debts  have,  in  equi-
ty, a  priority  of  claim  to  be  discharged ;  and  the  separate  credi-
tors are  only  entitled  in  equity  to  seek  paypient  from  the  sur-
plus of  the  joint  fund  after  satisfaction  of  the  joint  debtors^


a  Baraey  v.  Smith,  4  Harr.  4r  Johns*  485.

h  Simpson  v.  Vaugban,  cited  in  2  Vetetfy  101.  Jenkios  ▼.  DeGrootf
1  Caintt*  Coiu  in  Error y  1^.  Reimsdyle  v.  Kane,  iJGall,  Rep.  371<
630. Hamersly  ▼.  Lambert,  2  Johns.  Ch.  Rep.  508.

c  Brown  v.  Litton,  1  P*  Wm,  140.  Hammond  ?.  Douglas,  5  Vesty^
639.  Crawshay  v.  Collins,  15  Vesey^  218.  Featherstonhaugb  v.  FeiH
wick,  17  ibid*  298. Sigoarney  v.  Munn,  7  Conn.  Rep.  U.

d  Hammond  f.  Douglas,  5  Veseyy  639.

«  Lord  Eldon  in  Crawshay  f.  Collins,  15  Vesey^  224.  227«


Uc.  XUn.]  -  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  6t

Tho  eqaity  of  the  rule,  on  the  other  band,  equally  requires
that  ihe  joint  creditors  should  only  look  to  the  euipius  of  the
sepamte  estates  of  the  partners,  after  payment  of  the  eepa«
rate  debts. It  was  a  princi[de  of  the  Roman  law,  and  it  has
been  acknowledged  in  the  jurisprudence  of  Spain,  Bngland,
and  the  United  States,  that  partnership  debts  must  be  paid
out  of  the  partnership  estate,  and  private  and  separate  debts
oat  of  the  private  and  separate  estate  of  Uie  individual  part*
ner. If  the  partnership  creditors  cannot  obtain  payment  out
of  the  partnership  estate,  they  cannot  resort  to  the  private  and
separate  estate,  until  private  and  separate  crediton  are  satis*
iM.' The  basis  of  the  general  rule  is,  that  the  funds  are
to  be  liable  on  which  the  credit  was  given. In  contracts  with
a  partnership  the  credit  is  sui^x)sed  to  be  given  to  the  finn,
but  those  who  deal  with  an  individual  member  rely  on  his
soffitiency. In  pursuance  of  this  principle,  it  is  held,  that  the
ereditor  of  an  ostensible  partner,  aiKl  who  gave  him  credit  as
a  nngle  individual,  is  not  to  be  postponed  in  his  attachment
upoD  the  stock  in  trade,  to  another  creditM*,  who  may  subse-
quently attach  the  same  stock  ftr  a  debt  created  equally
upon  the  same  credit,  though  be  should  have  discovered  a
concealed  partner  and  set  up  his  claim  as  a  partnership
ereditor/ This  daim  of  the  joint  creditors  is  not  such  a  lieo
npon  the  partnership  property,  but  that  a  banajide  alienation
to  a  purchaser  for  valuable  consideration,  by  the  partners,  or
either  ot  them,  before  judgment  and  execution,  will  be  held
valid. These  are  just  and  obvious  principles  of  equity  on
which  we  need  not  enlarge,  and  they  have  been  recognised
and  settled  by  a  series  of  English  and  American  decisions.*


a  Mwgnn  ▼.  bia  Crediton,  20  Marlin't  L.  Rep,  599.

h  Lord  V.  Baldwin,  6  PidSr.  348. French  v.  Chase,  6  Qreenleaf,  166.

c  West  ▼»  Skip,  1  Vuey^  sen,  456.  Ex  parte  Rnffin,  6  Fetty,  119.
Ex  parte  Fell,  10  Feeey,  347.  The  Master  of  the  Rolls,  Campbell  r.
Mallett,  2  5iiKifitt.  Rep,  608.  610.  Ex  parU  Harris,  1  JUaddock'e  Ch.
Rep*  683. Murray  r.  Marcay,  5  Johnt,  Ch.  Rep,  60. Woddrop  r.

Vol.  m.  9


66  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

To  render  the  dissolution  safe  and  efiectoal,  there  must  be
due  notice  given  of  it  to  the  world,  and  a  firm  may  be  bound,
after  the  dissolution  of  a  partnership,  by  a  Gontroct  made  bj
one  partner  in  the  usual  course  of  business,^  and  in  the  name
of  the  firm,  with  a  person  who  contracted  on  the  faith  of  the
partnership,  and  had  no  notice  of  the  dissolution.*  The  prin-
ciple on  which  this  responsibility  proceeds,  is  the  negligence
of  the  partners  in  leaving  the  world  in  ignorance  of  the  fact
of  the  dissolution,  and  leaving  strangers  to  conclude  that  the
partnership  continued,  and  to  bestow  faith  and  confidence  on
the  partnership  name  in  consequence  of  that  belief

What  shall  be  suflScient  constructive  or  implied  notice  of
the  dissolution  has  been  a  vexed  question  in  (he  books.  A
notice  in  one  of  the  public  and  regular  newspapers  ef  the  city
or  county  where  the  partnership  bumness  was  carried  on,  is
the  usual  mode  of  giving  the  information,  and  may,  in  ordi-
nary cases,  be  quite  sufiicient  But  even  the  sufficiency  of
that  notice  might  be  questioned  in  many  cases,  unless  it  was
shown,  that  the  party  entitled  to  notice  was  in  the  habit  of
reading  the  paper.*  Public  notice  given  in  some  such  rea-
sonable way,  would  not  be  actual  and  express  notice,  but  it
would  be  good  presumptive  evidence  for  a  jury  to  conclude
all  persons  who  have  not  had  any  previous  dealings  with  the


Ward,  3  Destnut.  S.  C.  Rep.  203.  Bell  ▼.  Newmto,  6  Serg.  4r  JRavoU^.
78*  Doner  v.  Stauffer,  1  Perm.  Rep,  198.  White  t.  Udiod  Ids.  Co.,  1
JVbtf  k  M'  Cord's  Rep.  557.  Ridgely  v.  Carey,  4  Har.  k  M^ Henry ^  1^*U
M<Callob  T.  Dashiell,  1  HarrU  k  GUI,  96.

a  Le  Roy,  Bayard  &  Co.  ▼.  JoLnson,  %  Pelert*  U.  S.  Rep.  186.

b  In  the  case  of  carriers,  a  notice  limiting  their  responsibility  was
held  not  to  be  sufficiently  gi^en,  though  constantly  published  io  a
weekly  newspaper  which  the  party  had  taken  for  three  years.  It  could
Dot  be  intended,  said  the  court,  that  a  party  read  all  the  contents  of
any  Dewspaper  he  might  chance  to  take.  (Rowley  y.  Home,  3  Bing.
Rep.  S»}  This  was  doing  away  all  constructive  notice,  and  the  objipc-
tioD  was  severely  sustaioed.  I  should  apprehend,  that  such  notice  was
proper  evidence  Ibr  a  jury,  aod  from  which  they  might  iofer  ictoal
Botioe*


Lee.  XLin.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 67

firm. As  to  persons  wbo  hAve  been  previously  in  the  habit
of  dealing  ¥nth  the  firm,  it  is  requisite  thai  actual  notice  be
brought  home  to  the  creditor,  or,  at  least,  that  it  be  given  un-
der circumstances  from  which  actual  notice  may  be  injforred.
If  the  fiicts  are  all  found  or  ascertained,  the  reasonableness  <rf
notice  may  be  a  question  of  law  for  the  court,  and  so  it  was
hdd  in  Mawatt  v.  Howland  f-  but  generally  it  will  be  a
mixed  question  of  law  and  fact  to  be  submitted  to  a  jury  un-
der the  direction  of  ibe  court,  whether  notice  in  the  particular
case,  under  all  the  circumstances,  has  been  sufficient  to  justify
the  inference  of  actual  or  constructive  knowledge  of  the  feet
of  the  dissolution.^ The  weight  of  authority  seems  now  to
be,  that  notice  in  one  of  the  usual  advertising  gazettes  of  the
place  where  the  business  was  carried  on,  and  published  in  a
feir  and  usual  manner,  is  not  presumptive  evidence  merely,
but  conclusive  evidence  of  the  fact  as  to  all  persons  who  have
not  been  previous  dealers  with  the  partnership. Nor  is  no-
tice, in  feet,  requisite,  when  a  partnership  is  dissolved  by  ope*
ration  of  law. A  declaration  of  war  puts  an  end  to  the  con-
tinuance of  a  commercial  partnership,  between  subjects  of  the
two  countries,  having  each  his  domicil  in  his  own  eountry,
and  such  an  official  solemn  act  of  government  is  notice  to  all
the  world  of  the  most  authentic  and  monitory  kind,  and
supersedes  the  necessity  of  any  other.«
When  a  single  partner  retires  from  the  firm,  the  same  no-


a  3  I>€af9  Rep.  353.

h  Godfrey  ▼.  Turobiil],  1  Etp.  JV.  P.  371.  Parkin  t.  CarratberBp
3  Urid.  248.  Gorbam  r.  TbompsoD,  Peake't  JV.  P.  Cos.  42.  Gra-
bam  T.  Hope,  ibid.  154.  Leesoo  r.  Holt,  1  Starkie't  Rep.  186.  Jen-
kioa  T.  Blizai^,  ihid.  420.  W^iUiams  r.  KeatB,  2  Starkie'e  Rep.  290.
Wright  ▼.  Polbam,  2  ChiJUy,  121.  Rootb  ▼.  Quid,  IPriee'e  Rep.  193.
Lantiog  v.  Ten  Eyck,  2  JohiM.  Rep.  300.  Ketcbam  r.  Clark,  6  iMd.
144.  Grares  r.  Merry,  6  Ccwen't  Rep.  701.  Martin  r.  Walton,  1
JitCord'e  Rep.  16.  Bank  of  South  Carolina  v.  Humphreys,  9rid.  388.
Whitman  t.  Leeoard,  3  Ptdlr.  Rep.  177.

•  Grinrold  ▼  WaddiogtoDy  16  Jokne.  Rep.  67. 16  Jehne.  Rep.  494.


68  OP  PERSONAL  PROPBRTY. (Part  IT.


tice  is  reqimite  to  protect  from  continued  reepeogibilily  ;
•ven  if  due  notice  be  given,  yet  if  the  retiring  portner  -wit'
lin^y  safiers  his  name  to  continue  in  the  finn,  he  wiH  still  hm
hoiden.*  But  if  the  use  of  the  nftme  of  the  farmer  firm  b»
GOQtinued  without  his  authority,  and  the  retiring  paitner  had
given  due  notice  of  the  dissolution  of  the  connexion,  he  is  aei
responsible  for  the  use  of  his  name  without  his  consent  or  au^
thcMity,  and  without  any  act  to  warrant  it ;  and  he  is  not
bound  to  take  l^al  measures  to  have  the  use  of  the  former
name  of  the  firm  discontinued.  Persons  must  inquire,  and
know,  at  their  peril,  who  are  truly  designated  by  the  firm.^  A
dormant  partner  may  withdraw  without  giving  public  notios
of  the  dissolution  of  the  partnership  ;  for,  bring  unknown  as
a  partner,  the  firm  was  not  trusted  on  his  account,  and  ha  m
chargeable  only  for  debts  contracted  during  the  time  he  was
actually  a  partner/  If  a  partner  retires  without  notice,  he  is
Mt  liable  for  a  partnership  debt  cpntlracted  afterwards  with  a
psison  wha  never  knew  he  was  a  partnw,  and  when  he  was
not  so  notorious  as  a  partner,  as  to  raise  a  presumptleA  of  that
knowledge.'  In  the  case  of  an  infant  partner,  his  ads  and
contracts  are  of  course  voidable  ;  but  if,  on  arriving  at  fidl
age,  the  infant  does  not  disaffirm  the  partnership^  and  giva
notice  of  it  to  those  with  whom  the  partnership  have  had
dealings,  he  will  be  responsible  for  subsequent  debts  contrad-
ed  on  the  credit  of  the  partnership.  The  ground  of  the  rule
IB,  that  the  infant  acted  as  partner  during  his  in&ncy,  and
when  he  comes  of  age  he  neglects  to  inform  the  world  that


a  WUliami  v.  Keati»  2  Starkie**  H^.  SSO.  Brown  r.  Laonard.  t
CMfy*«i^p.  120.

k  NewMHue  r,  Colat^t  Campb.  Rep.  617,

€  Gvsni  V.  DnunmoDd,  4  Etp.  JV*.  P.  Rip*  89.  AnntloBg  v.  Hot-
•ey,  12  Sify.  ^  RaimU,  316.

4  Carter  t,  WhsUey,  1  9.  f  Adoi;^,  Ut 1  Lhyd  4r  WeUb^^

w»  s.  c.


Lee.  XLin.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY* 69

be  b  not  a  partner,  and  suffeiB  it  to  deal  under  mistake  and
ddurion.*

Having  thus  fiir  collected  and  reviewed  the  general  prin*
ciples  which  constitute  the  law  of  partnerBhip,  and  followed
those  principles  into  their  practical  details,  the  plan  of  these
lectures  will  not  permit  me  to  go  more  minutely  mto  the  sub-
ject, or  to  consider  the  legal  and  equitable  remedies  which
exist  between  partners,  and  between  them  and  third  persons,
in  idation  to  the  various  rights  and  duties  which  belong  to  the
asKidation. The  questions  arising  upon  those  remedies,  and
particulariy  in  respect  to  the  settlement  of  the  partnership
estate,  in  the  various  cases  of  dissolution,  and  especially  of
dinolution  by  bankruptcy,  are  subtle  and  numerous.  ■  The
decrees  in  equity  under  this  head  abound  with  minute  and
refined  distinctions,  and  they  form  a  comprehensive  and  very
complicated  part  of  this  branch  of  commercial  law.*


s  Goode  V.  Hsrritoo,  5  Borme.  4r  JM^  147,

h  Amaog  tboM  English  treatiwt  which  enter  more  at  hrge  oo  the
bv  of  putnenhip,  I  would  refer  the  stadent  to  a  Falaable  tiinmary  of
the  hw  of  pertnen,  in  the  third  Tolome  of  Mr.  Cbitty't  lai^  TreaHu
on  (he  Lmo9  of  Commerce  tmd  JUanufacturet^  and  the  CotUracU  reiating
ttenCo  /  and,  more  especially,  to  the  American  edition  of  Mr.  Goi9'«
FtaeHeal  Troatite  on  the  Law  of  Partnership,  from  which  I  have  de-
rired  great  asiittance.  The  American  editor,  Mr.  Aigraham,  has  ea-
riehed  tbe  work  by  a  series  of  learned  notes,  in  which  the  American
ones  are  diligentiy  collected,  and  the  force  and  application  of  them  ably
ooaridered ;  and  I  think  the  book  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  more  recent
tnatise  of  Mr.  Caryf  which  has  nothing  in  parUcular  to  recommend  it,
•loept  it  be  tbe  addition  of  new  oases,  arising  since  the  pnblication  of
Mr^Oois.


LECTURE  XLIV.


OF  NEGOTIABLE PAPER.

(1.)  Of  the  history  of  bills  and  notes.

It  18  the  general  opiDioD,  that  the  commerce  of  the  an^
cieots  was  carried  on  wkbout  the  ueie  of  bills  of  exchange^
ood  there  is  no  vestige  of  them  in  the  Roman  law.  A  pas^
sage  in  the  Pandects'  shows  it  to  have  been  the  practice  with
the  creditor  who  lent  money  on  bottomry,  or  respondentia)  to
a  foreign  merchant,  to  send  bis  slave  to  receive  the  loan,  and
maridme  interest,  on  the  arrival  of  the  vessel  at  the  foreign
port This  certainly  would  not  have  been  necessary,  says

•

PoChier,^  if  bills  of  exchange  had  been  in  use.  But,  however
the  fiict  may  have  been  with  the  Romans,  it  would  seem,
from  a  passage  in  one  of  the  pleadings  of  Isocrates,  thai  bills
of  exchange  were  sometimes  resorted  to  at  Athens,  as  a  safe
expedient  to  shift  funds  from  one  country  to  another/ Bills


a  Dig.  St.  2.  4. 1.

h  Traits  du  Chru  dt  Change^  Na  6.

e  See  the  pleading  ef  laocratet,  entitled,  TVqpmlicitf.  (iieefvftt
Btripta  omnia^  edit.  H,  Woljiw,  Batle,  1587.)  h^  tbat  interesliog
foreotic  aiigaineDt  which  Isocrates  puts  iato  the  month  of  a  ton  of  So»
jNRtf,  the  governor  of  a  province  of  Pontns,  in  hi*  anit  agaioat  Pa«to%
ta  Athenian  banker,  for  the  groaeest  breach  of  tnitt,  it  ia  stated,  that
tha  soor  wishing  to  receiFe  a  large  sum  of  money  from  his  father,  ap-
plisd  to  Slrofoc/ef ,  who  was  about  to  sail  from  Athens  to  Pontns,  to  leave
His  money,  and  take  a  draft  upon  his  father  for  the  amount*.  This,  said
Iba  orator,  waa  deemed  a  great  advantage  ta  the  young  man,  for  itsaved
bim  tbci  risk  of  remHtanoa  torn  Poatas,  o? er  a  sea  oovered  with  Laoar


72  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

of  exchange  are  of  such  indispensable  use  in  the  remittance
of  the  value  of  money  between  distant  places,  without  risk
and  expense,  that  foreign  commerce  cannot  conveniently  be
carried  on  without  them,  and  they  grew  into  use  on  the
coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  in  th6  fourteenth  century.'  As
they  fl^rve  the  purposes  of  cadi|  and&cilitate  commerce,  and
are  the  visible  representatives  of  large  masses  of  property,  they
may  truly  be  said  to  enlarge  the  capital  stock  of  wealth  in
circulation,  as  well  as  increase  the  trade  of  the  country.

Promissory  notes  are  governed  by  the  rules  that  api^y  Co
biUs.  The  statute  of  3d  and  4th  Anne,  made  promissory
notes  payable  to  a  person,  and  to  his  order,  or  bearer,  ne«
godable  like  inland  bills,  according  to  the  custom  of  mer*
chants.  That  statute  has  been  generally  adopted  in  this
country,  either  formally,  or  in  effect,  and  promissory  notes
are  every  where  negotiable.^ The  effect  of  the  statute


daBmoDiaD  pirates.  It  is  added,  that  StratocUs  was  so  cautioos  as  to  take
security  from  Paiion  for  the  mooey  adFanced  upon  the  bill,  and  td
whom  he  mig'ht  have  reconrse  if  the  Ooremor  of  Pontas  should  aot
bononr  the  draft,  and  the  young  Pontian  sbonld  faiL

a  In  1394,  the  city  of  Barcelooa*  by  ordinance,  regulated  the  aoo^t*
ance  of  bills  of  exchange  ;  and  the  use  of  them  is  said  to  have  beeo
introduced  into  western  Europe  by  the  Lombard  merchants,  in  the
thirteenth  century*  Jd.  Boucher  received  from  JIf.  Legau  Deflairt  a
natire  of  India,  a  memoir,  showing  that  bills  of  exchange  were  known
in  India  from  the  most  high  antiquity.  But  the  ordinanceof  Barcekoa
is,  perhaps,  the  earliest  authentic  document  in  the  middle  ages  of  the
establishment  and  general  currency  of  bills  of  exchange.  {Cotmilai  de
la  Jier^  far  BoucKery  tom.  1.614.  620.)  Jtf .  JderUn  says,  the  edict  of
Louis  XL  of  1462,  is  the  earliest  French  edict  on  (he  subject ;  and  he
attributee  the  invention  of  bills  of  exchange  to  the  Jews,  when  they
retired  from  France  to  Lombardy.  The  Italians,  and  merchants  of
Amsterdam,  first  established  the  use  of  them  in  France.  JReperioire  sle
Juritprudencej  tit.  LeUre  el  BilUi  de  Change^  sec.  2.  In  Enghad,
reference  was  made,  in  the  statute  of  5  Rich,  2.  c.  2.  to  the  drawing  of
foreign  bills. This  was  in  the  year  1381.

6  By  the  Jf.  T.  Revised  Siatuiet,  rd.  1. 76S.  see.  1—6,  promissery
Bolee  peyaUe  in  money  to  any  penon,  or  to  the  order  of  any  peraoo,  or


Lcc.  ILIV.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 7S

b  to  make  notes,  when  negotiated^  assume  the  shape  and
operation  of  bills,  and  to  render  the  analogy  between  them
80  aUongy  that  the  rules  established  with  respect  to  the  one,
ap|dy  to  the  othen*  It  was  a  question  much  discussed  be-
fore the  statute  of  Anne,  whether  notes  were  not,  by  the  prin-
eifdes  of  the  law  merchant,  to  be  treated  as  bills,  and  Lord
Holt  vigorously  and  successfully  resisted  every  such  attempt*
The  history  of  that  struggle  is  no  longer  interesting  ;  but
there  is  no  doubt  that  promissory  notes  were  recognised  as
mercantile  instrumeuts,  and  a  species  of  bills  of  exchange,
by  the  canon  law,  and  the  usage  of  trade  ;  aud  even  by  the


Co  bttrer,  «e  negotiable  id  like  maoner  ai  inland  billa  of  exchange,  ac-
cording to  the  cnttom  of  merchants.  The  payee  and  endorsee  of  everj
aoeb  note  payable  to  them  or  their  order,  and  the  holder  of  every  auch  note,
payable  to  bearer,  may  sue  thereon  in  tike  manner  aa  in  caaea  of  inland
biUa  of  exchange.  If  auch  notea  are  made  payaUe  to  the  order  of  the
maker,  or  to  the  order  of  a  fictitious  peraon,  and  be  negotiated  by  the
maker,  they  hare  the  same  etfect  and  validity,  aa  if  made  payable  to
bearer.  Promiaaory  notea  are  negotiable  thronghout  the  Union,  and
the  eodoraeecao  anein  hiaown  name.  In  ]\faaaachaaetta,  Virginia,
floalh  Carolina,  Alabama,  and  moat  of  the  atatea,  he  haa  all  the  privi-
lages  of  an  endorsee  under  the  law  merchant  But  in  Vermont,  New-
ieraey,  Pennaylvania,  Kentucky,  and  Indiana,  hia  righta  under  the  law
merchant  are  to  be  taken  with  aome  qualification,  and  «apecia&y  in  the
two  atatea  laat  mentioned .  See  Or\ffUh*9  Lau  Reguter^  poitim*  1  Jlfi-
Hof'*  Aiabama  Rep,  6.  296.  In  Indiana,  promiaaory  notea  jmi^^^  at
e  charUrtd  bank  within  the  itaiei  are  by  atatute  placed  on  the  aame
fooling  aa  inland  billa  of  exchange  by  the  law  merchants  But  other
promiwory  notea  are  not  governed  by  the  law  of  merchant,  which  haa
never  been  applied  in  that  atate  by  atatute  to  them.  Bullitt  v.  Scribner,
1  Btadifi>r^9  hid.  Rep.  14.  The  Ux  nurcatoria^  applicable  to  foreign
and  inland  billa  of  exchange,  ia  conaidered  to  be  adopted  in  Indiana  aa
part  of  the  common  law  of  England,  which  haa  been  adopted  by  atatute.
Piatt  v.Eada,lt&tJ.  81.

e  Heylyn  v.  Adamaoni  2  Burr,  Rep,  S69.  Brown  v.  Harraden,  4
Ttnm.  R^.  148.

b  Gierke  v.  Martin,  t  Lord  Rayw^  76V.

Vol.  m.  W


74  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY-  [Part  V,

French  ordinance  of  1673,  long  before  Lord  Holt  aaserted
them  to  be  of  late  English  invention.'*

My  object  in  the  present  lecture  is  to  endeavour  to  take  ^
comprehensive,  and,  at  the  same  time,  precise  and  accurate
view  of  the  general  doctrine,  and  most  material  rules  rela-
tive to  bills  ahd  notes ;  and  to  eflect  this  purpose,  I  shall  point
out  their  essential  qualities  ;  the  rights  of  tbe  holder  ;  the
negotiation  of  them,  and  the  requisite  steps  to  fix  the  respon-
mbility  of  the  several  parties  whose  names  are  upon  the  pa-
per.

(2.)  Of  the  essential  qualities  of  negotiable  paper.

A  bill  of  exchange  is  a  written  order  or  request,  and  a
promissory  note  a  written  promise,  by  one  person  to  another^
ftr  the  payment  of  money,  absolutely,  and  at  all  events.*  If
JLf  hving  in  New- York,  wbhes  to  receive  1000  dollars,  which
await  his  orders  in  tbe  hands  of  B.,  in  London,  he  applies  to
G^  going  from  New- York  to  London,  to  pay  him  1000  dol-
lars, and  take  his  draft  on  B.  for  that  sum,  payable  at  sight*
This  IS  an  accommodation  to  all  parties*  A.  receives  his
debt  by  transferring  it  to  C,  who  carries  his  nrKXiey  across  the
Atlantic,  in  the  shape  of  a  bill  of  exchange,  without  any
danger  or  risk  in  the  transportation,  and  on  his  arrival  at
London,  he  presents  the  bill  to  B.,  and  is  paid. This  is  the


a  The  pragfmatic  of  Pope  Pius  V.  De  CambiiSt  at  early  m  1671 ,  it
meDtionfld  by  Mr.  Da  Ponceau,  id  his  Duiertaiion  <m  the  Acidire  and
S^ieni  of  the  Jurudiclion  of  the  CaurU  of  the  United  States^  p  12S.  «e
proof  of  the  early  recog^nitioD  of  Dotct  as  negotiable  instruments  withia
the  oustom  of  merchants*  I  would  also  refer  to  the  appendix  to^
Cra9heh*i  R^^orti,  for  a  very  elaborate  ailment,  in  fiivour  of  the  posi*
tiooy.  that  at  common  law,  and  before  the  statute  of  Anne,  an  endorsee
of  a  promissory  note  eould  sue  a  remote  endorser.

h  This  definition  is  teken  from  Bayiey  on  Billi,  p.  1.  which  is  ■  coo-
eiae,  clear,  and  accurate  production.  The  American  edition,  pubUshed
at  Boston,  in  18S6,  is  enriched  with  all  the  English  and  American  de-
citiOBs  in  its  very  copious  notes.


Lee.  ILUY.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  7S

plain  and  femiliair  jUastiatioa  of  this  mode  of  mmittaiice^
given  by  Sir  Wiltiam  fibtckstooe ; and  the  practice  is  ao
very  ooiivenient,  and  su^esCs  itself  so  readily,  and  gives  soch
extension  to  ciedit,  and  circulati<Hi  to  capital,  that  it  would
eeem  almost  impoasiMe  that  it  should  not  have  been  in  usein
the  earliest  periods  of  oonunerce. A.,  who  draws  the  biD|  is
called  the  drawer. R,  to  whom  it  is  addressed,  is  called  the
drawee^  and,  on  acceptance,  be  becomes  the  acceptor. C^
to  whom  the  bill  is  made  payable,  is  called  the  fH^ee.* As
the  hill  is  payable  to  C^  or  his  order,  he  may,  by  endorse-
ment, direct  the  bill  to  be  paid  to  D.,  and  in  that  case,  C.  be-
comes the  endorser^  and  D.,  to  whom  the  bill  is  endorsed^  is
called  the  endorsee^  or  holder. A  check  partakes  more  of
the  character  of  a  bill  of  exchange  than  of  a  promiasory
note. It  is,  in  form  aod  effect,  a  bill  <tf  exchange. It  is  not
a  direct  promise  by  the  drawer  to  pay,  but  it  is  an  undertak*
log  on  bis  part  that  the  drawee  shall  accept  and  pay,  and  the
drawer  is  answerable  only  in  the  event  of  the  failure  of  the
drawee  to  pay. A  check  payable  to  bearer  passes  by  delivery,
and  the  hearer  may  sue  on  it  as  on  an  inland  bill  of  exchange.*
A  bill  or  note  is  not  confined  to  any  set  form  of  words*  A
promise  to  deliver^  or  to  6^  accountable,  or  to  be  responsible
for  so  much  money,  is  a  good  bill  or  note,  but  it  must  be  ex-
clusively and  absolutely  for  the  payment  of  money/ In  Eng*
land,  negotiable  paper  must  be  for  the  payment  of  money  in
specie,  and  not  in  bank  notes.'' In  this  country,  it  has  been
held,  that  a  note  payable  in  bank  bills  was  a  good  negotiable
note  v^ithin  the  statute,  if  confined  to  a  species  of  paper  uni-


a  An  imtniineDt  may  be  a  bill  of  exchaDge,  tbougb  the  drawer  wni
drawee  be  tba  same  person. Hanrey  v.  Kay,  9  B.St  Crea.  SSi.

b  Cruger  r.  Armstong,  3  Johns.  Cos.  6.  Cooroy  r.  Warreo,  Mi
259. Woods  V.  Schroeder,  4  Harr.  4*  John§.  27e«

c  Morris  r.  Lee,  2  Ld.  Raym.  1396.  8  Mod.  Rep,  362.  Sir*  629«
Martin  r.  Channtry,  Str.  1271.  Thomas  ▼.  Roosa,  Ijohni.  Rep.
A$\.

d  BayUy  on  BiUs^  edit  Boston,  1826,  p.  6.


76  OF  PEII60NAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

Tenally  current  as  cash.*  But  the  doctrine  of  these  cases
has  been  met  and  denied/  and  I  think  the  weight  of  argu*
ment  is  against  them,  and  in  fisLvour  oi  the  English  rule.  It
is  essential  that  the  bill  carry  with  it  a  personal  credit,  given
to  the  drawer  or  eadoraer,  and  that  it  be  not  confined  to  credit
upon  any  future  or  cctntingent  event  or  fund.  The  payment
must  not  rest  upon  ahy  contingency,  except  the  failure  of  the
general  personal  credit  of  the  person  dmwing  or  negotiating
the  instrument  It  would  perplex  the  commercial  transact
tions  of  mankind,  if  paper  securities  of  this  kind  were  encum-
bered with  conditions  and  contingencies,  and  if  the  persons  to
whom  they  were  ofiered  in  n^otiation,  were  obliged  to  inquire
when  those  uncertain  events  would  probably  be  reduced  to  a
certainty.  But  if  the  event  on  which  the  instrument  is  U>
become  payable,  be  fixed  and  certain,  and  must  happen,  as  if
the  bill  be  drawn  payable  six  weeks  after  the  death  of  the
maker's  father,  it  is  a  good  bill,  and  it  is  of  no  consequence
how  long  the  payment  is  to  be  postponed.' Nor  is  it  neces-


a  Keith  ▼.  Jonei,  9  Johm,  Rep,  ISO. Judah  v.  Harna,  \9tHd,  144.

b  M'Cormick  t.  Trotter,  10  Serg,  4r  BawU^  94.

c  Dawket  v.  De  Lorane,  3  WiU,  Rep,  207.  Beardesley  r.  Bald*
Fio,  2  Sir.  Rep,  1&51.  Roberts  ▼.  Peake,  1  Burr,  323.  In  Palmer
T.  Pratty  9  Moore* t  Rep,  C.  B*  it  was  held  that  a  bill  of  exchange  drawo
upon  a  cootiogency  was  yqid ;  but  a  bill  may  be  accepted  upon  a  con*
tiDgenoy.

d  Cook  T.  Colehan,  Str,  Rep*  121 T.  It  is  eren  held,  that  a  note
^yable  within  two  months  after  rach  a  ship  is  paid  off.  Is  a  good  nego-
tiable note,  as  the  event  is  morally  certain ;  (Andrews  y.  Franklin,  iSlr.
Rep,  24. ;)  but  I  should  think  suoh  a  reference  was  not  sufficiently
certain,  and  that  the  case  might  well  have  been  questioned,  if  it  bad  not
been  subsequently  oonfirmed  in  1  Wile*  Rep,  262.  3  ibid.  213.  The
numerous  Euglish  and  American  cases  all  going  to  the  support  of  this
one  general  proposition,  that  the  money  mentioned  in  the  instrument
must  be  payable  absolutely,  and  at  all  events,  and  not  made  to  depend
on  auy  uncertainty  or  contingency,  are  diligently  and  accurately  ool«
lected  in  BayUy  on  BiUe^  edit.  Boston,  1826,  p.  8—16.  and  GIttty  on
mUi,  edit  Philaddpbuh  1826,  p,  4Z^kQ.


Lee.  XUY.] OF  PERSONAL  FROFERTY.  77

fluy  that  the  note  shouidbe  made  al  home.  Fofdgn,  as
weH  as  inland  noles,  are  equally  negodaUe  witbin  the  ataCote
of  Anne  ;*  and  a  promiaaofy  note  nHbde  in  Eaglaiid,  aiid  tia^
fened  by  endoraemeni  or  deliveiy  in  a  fi^ragn  ooontiy,  to  a
party  taking  it  there  for  valoe,  gives  a  tide  which  may  be
asBnted  in  England.*

The  instiom^it  moat  be  made  payable  to  the  payee,  and
to  his  order  or  assigns^  or  to  hearer ^  in  order  to  lend^  it
negotiable.  It  must  have  negotiable  woids  on  its  fiioe,  show-
ing  it  to  be  the  intention  to  give  it  a  transfenable  quality.
WiQKNit  them  it  is  a  valid  inetrnmeDt  as  between  the  parties,
and  is  entitled  to  the  allowance  of  the  three  days  of  grace,
and  may  be  declared  on  as  a  promisBory  note  within  the
statute.  Bat  if  it  wants  negotiable  words,  it  cannot  be  tians-
fened,  or  n^otiated,  so  as  to  enable  the  assignee  to  sue  upon
k  in  his  own  name.'  If  the  name  of  the  payee  or  endonee
be  left  blank,  any  bona  fide  hdder  may  insert  his  own  name
aspaj^ee.'

It  is  usual  to  insert  the  words  V€due  received^  in  a  bill  or
note,  but  tbey  are  unnecessary,  and  value  is  implied  in  every
ImII,  note,  and  endorsement  These  words  are  not  usual  in
checks, which  are  negotiable,  like  inland  bOb,  and  are


a  Miloe  t.  Graham,  1  Bamw,  ^  Cru».  19S.  Beotley  t.  Nortlwint,
1  Mootfy  4^  Jtfdftm,  66.

6  De  la  CbairaieUe  t.  the  Bank  of  England,  9  B.  <^  Cre$9. 208.  Bat
thii  point  aeema  to  be  still  contested.  See  a  discussion  of  it  ia  the
London  Laio  MagOMme^  No.  7.  p.  117.

€  Hill  T.  Lewis,  1  Salk.  Rep.  132.  Barchell  ▼.  Slooook,  t  Lord
iZoyns.  1545.  Smith  t.  Kendall,  6  Term  Rep.  1S3.  Rex  ▼.  Box,  t
Thtiitf.  Rep.  325.  Gerard  ▼.  La  Coste,  1  Dallas*  Rep.  194.  Down-
ing T.  Backentoes,  3  Camee*  Rep.  137.  In  Gadcomb  r.  Johnson,  1
Fermoni  Rep.  136.  it  was  held  that  the  endorsee  of  a  note  not  negotia*
ble,  was  nefertheless  bonnd  to  follow  the  rules  of  the  law  merchant,  ia
making  the  demand  of  payment,  and  giving  notice  of  non-pajnient*

d  CracUey  r.  Claraiice,  2  MauU  k  8eiw.  90.


T8  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

governed  by  the  same  rules.''  Nor  49  it  neceasAry  that  the
maker  should  subscribe  his  name  at  the  bottom  of  the  note ;
and  it  is  sufficient  if  the  maker's  name  be  in  any  part  of  the
note,  as  if  it  should  run,  /,  A.  B,  promise  to  pay  C  Z>.,  or
order  J  one  hundred  dollars.^  This  is,  however,  so  much
out  of  the  common  course,  that  a  note  wanting  the  usual  sub*
scription  would  be  deemed  imperfect,  and  it  would,  in  point
of  fdct,  destroy  its  currency,  and  the  public  would  very  rea-
sonably conclude,  that  the  note  had  been  left  unfinished,  and
had  got  ibto  circulation  by  fraud  or  mistake.  If  the  note  be
payabb  ib  B.,  or  bearer,  it  need  not  be  endorsed ;  and  it  is
the  same,  in  effect,  as  if  the  name  of  B.  had  been  omitted.
The  bearer  may  sue  in  bis  own  name,  and  if  his  right  and
tiUe,  or  the  considenition  be  ctdled  in  question,  he  must  then
show  that  he  came  by  the  note  honafidCy  and  for  a  valuable
oonsideratioQ.'  So,  a  bill  or  note,  payable  to  a  fictitious  |ier-
son,  may  be  sued  by  an  inbdcent  endorsee,  as  a  note  paya*
ble  to  bearer ;  and  such  a  bill  or  note  is  good  against  the
drawer  or  maker,  and  will  bind  the  acceptor,  if  the  &ct  that
the  payee  was  fictitious  was  known  to  the  acceptor.'

(3.)  Of  the  rights  of  the  holder.

Possession  is  prima  fade  evidence  of  property  in  negotia-
ble paper,  payable  to  bearer,  or  endorsed  in  blank,  and  such
a  bona  fide  holder  can  recover  upon  the  paper,  though  it


a  Popplewell  ▼.  Wilson,  1  5(r.  jRep.  264.  Emery  r.  Bartlett,  f
Lord  R(tym.  1555.  Boebm  v.  Sterling,  7  Term  Rep,  423.  Whiter.
Ledwfcb,  cited  in  Sayley  <m  BiiU,  25.

b  Taylor  ▼.  Dobbins,  1  Str.  Rep.  399.  Elliott  r.  Cooper,  3  Lord
Raym,  1576.

e  Grant  t.  Vaugban,  3  Burr.  Rep.  1516.  Bowen  v.  Viel,  18  Jtfar-
Hn*»  Louie.  Rep.  565.

d  Collins  y.  Emett,  1  H.  Blaeke.  Rep.  313.  Minet  v.  Gibson,  3
Term  Rep.  481.  I  H.  Blacks.  Rep.  569.  Tatlock  v.  Harris,  3  Term
Rqf.  174.  Hunter  r.  B1odg;ett,  2  Teatee*  R^.  480^  Foster  T.  Shat-
tack,  2  JV*.  Hamp,  Rep.  446.


Lee.  XI.IV.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  79

came  to  him  from  a  pereoo  who  had  stolen  or  robbed  it  from

the  true  owner,  provided  he  took  it  innocently,  in  the  cpuree

of  .Uade,  for  a  valuable  consideration^  and  under  circumstan-

ees  of  due  caution  ;  and  he  need  not  account  for  his  posaes-

sion  of  it  unless  suspicion  be  raised.' This  doctrine  is  founds

•d  on  the  comm^cial  policy  of  sustaining  the  credit  and  cir^

eolation  of  negotiable  paper. Suspicion  must  be  cast  upon

the  title  of  the  holder,  by  showing  that  the  instrument  had

got  into  circulation  by  force  or  fraud,  before  the  anus  is  cast

upon  the  holder  of  showing  the  consideration  he  gave  for  it.^

So  much  protection,  for  the  sake  of  trade,  is  given  to  the  holder

of  negotiable  paper,  who  receives  it  fairly  in  the  way  of  ba

noess,  that  he  can  recover  upon  it,  though  it  has  been  paid,

if  he  received  it  before  it  fell  due. Where  one  has  done  a

mercantile  act,  said  Lord  Ch.  Baron  Gilbert,  he  subjects  him"

•df  to  mercantile  law/ If,  however,  it  appears  by  proof  or

admission  that  the  agent  to  whom  a  negotiable  note  is  en*

dorsed  for  the  use  of  his  principal,  has  no  interest  in  it,  he

cannot  sue  and  recover  upon  it  in  his  own  name.' There

are  but  two  cases  in  which  a  bill  or  note  is  void  in  the  hands

of  an  innocent  endorsee  for  valuable  consideration ;  and  these

cases  are,  when  the  consideration  in  the  instrument  is  money


a  Miller  r.  Race,  1  Burr,  R^.  452.  Grant  ▼.  VaughaOy  3  Burr*'
Rep,  1616.  Peacock  ▼.  Rhodes,  Doug,  Rep,  633.  King  ▼.  MUsod,
2  Campb.  Jf,  P.  6*  Sdomoiu  y.  The  Bank  of  England,  13  jEJajfr
Rep.  135.  tfi  noUi.  Cmger  v.  Armstrong,  3  Johns,  Cos,  5.  Conroy
f*  Warreo,  ibid.  259.  Thurston  v.  M«Eown,  6  JHofi,  Rep,  428.  A
note  payable  to  A.  B.,  or  bearer y  may  be  sued  in  the  name  of  a  bona
Me  bearer,  without  endorsement.  See  Matthews  ▼.  Hall,  1  F'ermoni
R^.  316.  where  the  cases  on  the  subject  are  thoronghlj  considered.

b  Collins  T.  Martin,  1  Bo$,  Sf  Pull,  648.  Reynolds  y.  Chettle,  t
Camph.  JC  P.  596.  Monroe  ▼.  Cooper,  5  Pickerings  412.  So,  if  there
wu  DO  original  consideration  for  the  bill,  the  holder  mast  show  that
sitber  be  or  the  original  endorsee  gave  ralne  for  it.  Thomas  r.  Newton^
2  Cearr.  Sc  Payne,  606.

e  Gilberfe  Les  PrcOoria,  288, 289.

d  Thatcher  r.  WinsloWy  5  Jlfosofs  58.


80  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V-

won  at  play,  or  it  be  given  for  a  usurious  debt.  The  Eng-
lish statutes  against  usury  and  gaming  (and  Tvhich  have
been  adopted  generally  throughout  the  United  States)  are
peremptory,  and  make  the  bill  or  note  absolutely  void.'  The
same  rule  would,  of  course,  apply  to  every  case  in  which  the
contract  is  by  statute  declared  absolutely  void.

As  between  the  original  parties  to  n^otiable  paper,  these
provisions  in  favour  of  the  bona  fde  assignee  do  not  apply,
and  the  consideration  of  a  bill,  note,  or  check,  may  be  in*
quired  into.  It  may  be  inquired  into  between  the  maker  and
payee,  and  between  the  endorser  and  endorsee,  and  the  con^
sideration  of  the  endorsement  also  may  be  shown,  for  the  lat-
ter are,  in  this  view,  treated  as  original  parties/  The  rule
equally  applies  when  the  endorsee  took  the  paper  with  notice
of  the  illegal  consideration,  or  of  the  want  of  it,  or  of  any
circumstances  which  would  have  avoided  the  note  in  thehands
of  the  endorser  ;^  or  when  taken  not  in  the  course  of  mercan-


a  Bowyeo  y;  Bampton,  Sir.  Rep*  1155.  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Pea-
cock V.  Rhodes,  Doug,  Rep,  636.  Loire  t.  Walker,  Und,  736.  Ack-
land  ▼.  Pearce,  2  Camph,  JV*.  P.  599.  Since  the  above  decisions,  the
•tatnte  of  58  Geo.  III.  c.  98.  was  passed,  which  protects  bills  and  notes
in  the  hands  of  an  endorsee,  for  valuable  consideration,  and  without  no-
tice, though  founded  on  usury  ;  and  as  there  seems  to  be  a  strong  dispo*
sition,  at  the  present  day,  to  free  usury  from  civil  impediments,  it  is
probable  there  is  a  relaxation  on  this  point  in  some  parts  of  this  country.
The  provisions  of  that  statute  on  this  point  have  been  adopted  in  the
J^eW'Tork ReoUed  SiatuUiy  vol.  1.  772.  sec.  5.

5  De  Bras  v.  Forbes,  1  Etp,  «7V.  P.  Rep,  117.  Ashhurst,  J.,  2  TVrm
Aip.  71.  Herrick  v.  Carman,  10  Johmon,  224.  Hill  v.  Ely,  6  Serg.
4^  R*  363.  Johnson  v.  Martinns,  4  HaUted^  144.  Hill  v.  Buckmin-
ster,  5  Pickerings  391.  Lawrence  v.  Stonington  Bank,  6  Conn,  Rep,
521.  In  this  last  case  it  was  held,  that  if  the  holder  received  the  bill
witbont  consideration,  as  where  successive  endorsees  were  merely  agenta
of  the  drawer,  for  the  collection  and  transmission  of  the  money,  he  it
taid  to  be  in  privity  with  the  first  holder,  and  is  accountable  for  the  pro-
ceeds of  the  bill.

c  Steers  v.  Lashley,  6  Term  Rep,  61.  Wiffen  v.  Roberts,  I  Etp,
JV*.  P.  261. Perkins  v.  Challis,  1  Jf.'Hamp.  Rep,  254.


Lee  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  81

tile  busineeB,  or  after  it  was  due,  or  under  circumstances  which
ought  to  have  led  to  an  inquiry.'  It  was  admitted,  in  Bay
y.  Cwidingtcfiy^  that  negotiable  paper  could  be  assigned  or
transferred  by  an  agent,  or  any  other  person,  fraudulently,  so
as  to  bind  the  true  owner  as  against  the  bolder,  if  it  was
taken  by  him  in  the  usual  course  of  trade,  and  for  a  fair  and
valuable  consideration,  without  notice  of  the  fraud.  But  it
was  held,  that  if  the  paper  be  not  negotiated  in  the  usual
course  of  business,  nor  in  payment  of  any  antecedent  and
existing  debt,  nor  for  cash,  or  property  advanced  upon  it,  nor
far.  any  debt  created,  or  responsibility  incurred,  upon  the  credit
of  the  note,  but  was  taken  from  the  agent  of  the  owner  of
the  note  after  he  had  stopped  payment,  and  as  security  against
ooQtingent  responsibilities  previously  incurred,  the  rights  of
the  true  owner  were  not  barred.  Such  a  case  did  not  come
within  the  reason  or  necessity  of  the  rule  which  protects  the
purchaser  of  paper  fraudulently  assigned,  because  it  was  not
a  case  in  the  course  of  trade,  nor  was  credit  given,  or  respon-
sitnlity  assumed,  on  the  strength  of  the  paper.  In  any  case
in  which  the  endorsee  takes  the  paper  under  circumstances
which  might  reasonably  create  suspicions  that  it  was  not
good,  he  takes  it  at  his  peril.  The  rule  is  usually  applied
(0  the  case  of  notes  over  due,  but  the  principle  is  of  general
application.^  In  CHll  v.  Cubitt^'^  the  Court  of  E.  B.  made
a  strong  application  of  the  principle,  and  held,  that  if  an  en-
dorsee takes  a  bill  heedlessly,  and  without  due  caution,  and
under  circumstances  which  ought  to  have  excited  the  suspi-


a  Brown  r.  Daris,  3  Term  Rep.  80.  Dowd  t.  HalliD|^,  4  Bamw.  4r
Creee.  330.  Ayer  v.  HutchiDs,  4  Jdatt.  Hep,  370.  Tbompaon  v.  HaJe»
6  Pick.  259.

6  5  Johu.  Ch.  Rep.  56.

c  Ayer  t,  Ha(cbins»  4  Jdaa.  Rep.  370.

d  3  Bamw.  ^  Creee.  466.  See  also,  to  the  lame  point,  Beckwitbv.
Corrall,  2  Ckarr.  ic  Payne^  261.  Snow  t.  Peacock,  3  Bingham,  406.
Strange  v.  Wigney,  6  ilrid,  677.

Vol.  m.  11


82  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

cions  of  a  pradent  aod  carefal  maoy  the  maker  or  acceptor
may  be  let  in  to  his  defence.  It  was  deemed  material  ix  the
interests  of  trade,  that  a  peraon  should  be  deemed  to  take  ne-
gotiable paper  at  his  peril,  if  he  takes  it  from  a  stranger  with-
out due  inquiry,  how  he  came  by  the  bilL  He  is  bound  to
exercise  a  reasonable  caution,  which  prudence  would  dictate
in  such  a  case ;  and  it  is  a  question  of  fiict  for  a  jury,  whether
the  owner  of  the  lost  or  stolen  bill  had  used  due  diligence  in
apprizing  the  public  of  the  loss,  and  whether  die  purchaser
of  the  paper  had,  under  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  exer-
cised a  reasonable  discretion,  and  acted  with  good  faith  and
sufficient  caution,  in  the  receipt  of  the  bilL  The  doctrine  of
Lord  Kenyon,  in  Lawsan  v.  Weston,^  is  expressly  overruled.
This  new  doctrine,  imposing  upon  the  owner  due  diligence  in
giving  to  the  public  notice  of  the  loss,  and  upon  the  purchaser
of  the  bill  due  caution  and  inquiry,  is  supposed  to  be  calcu-
lated to  increase  the  circulation  and  security  of  n^otiable
paper,  and  to  render  it  more  difficult  for  thieves  and  robbers
to  pass  it  ofT.^

(4.)  Of  the  acceptance  of  the  bilL

There  is  no  precise  time  fixed  by  law  in  which  bills  paya-
ble at  sight,  or  by  a  given  time,  must  be  presented  to  the
drawee  for  acceptance.  The  holder  need  not  take  the  earliest
opportunity.  A  bill  payable  at  a  given  time  after  date,  need
not  be  presented  for  acceptance  before  the  day  of  payment ;
but  if  presented,  and  acceptance  be  refused,  it  is  dishonoured,
and  notice  must  then  be  given  to  the  drawer.^  A  bill  paya-
ble sixty  days  after  sight,  means  sixty  days  after  acceptance,


a  4  Esp.  JV.  P.  56.

6  If  a  check  be  so  filled  ap,  throagh  ignorance  or  carelessness,  as  to
enable  the  bolder  conveniently  to  insert  three  hundred  before  fifty,  and
the  banker  is  thereby  misled  to  pay  the  inserted  sum,  the  loss  must  fall
on  the  drawer  of  it,  and  not  on  the  banker.  Pothiery  TraUi  du  Con'
trot  de  Change^  part  1 .  c.  4.  sec.  99. Young:  ▼.  Grote,  4  Binghaniy  253.

c  Bank  of  Washington  r.  Triplett,  1  PeUrt*  U.  S.  Rep.  S5.


Lee.  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 83

and  such  a  bill,  as  well  as  a  bill  payable  on  demand,  must
be  presented  in  a  reasonable  time,  or  the  holder  will  have  to
bear  the  loss  proceeding  from  his  default.'

The  acceptance  may  be  by  parol,  or  in  writing,  and  gene-
fal  or  special*  Though  a  bill  comes  into  the  hands  of  a
person  with  a  parol  acceptance,  and  he  takes  it  in  igno-
laoce  of  such  an  acceptance,  he  may  avail  himself  of  it
afterwards.  If  the  acceptance  be  special,  it  binds  the  accep-
tor sub  modOf  and  according  to  the  acceptance.  But  any
acceptance  varying  the  absolute  terms  of  the  bill,  either  in
the  sum,  the  time,  the  place,  or  the  mode  of  payment,  is  a


m  Mariua  on  Bs/tf,  19. Smith  t.  Wilson,  Andrew'*  Rep,  187.
Chamberlyn  t.  DelariFe,  2  WiU.  Rep,  353. Mailman  ▼.  D'E^ing,
t  fl.  Blades.  Rep.  565. Aymar  t.  Been,  7  Cowen'e  Rep.  705. Wal-
lace ▼.  Agry,  4  J^aeon^  336. In  this  last  case,  the  bill  was  drawn  in
Havana,  upon  London,  at  sixty  days'  sight,  and  it  was  held  that  it  might
be  sent  for  sale  (o  the  United  States,  according  to  the  course  of  trade,
and  need  not  be  sent  from  Cuba  directly  to  London. But  in  Camidge
T.  Allenby,  6  B.^  Crete,  373.  the  vendee  paid  vendor  of  goods  in  notes
of  a  conntry  bank  payable  on  demand  to  bearer. The  bank,  at  the
time,  had  stopped  payment,  but  the  fact  was  unknown  to  both  parties.
Hie  vendor  kept  the  notes  for  a  week,  without  circulation  or  demand  of
payment,  and  it  was  held  that  he  made  the  notes  his  own  by  this  negli-
gence.

6  Lnmley  v.  Palmer,  Str.  Rep,  1000.  Powell  v.  Monnier,  1  Aik,
R^,  612.  By  statute  1  and  2  Geo.  4.  c.  78.  no  acceptance  of  any
inland  bill  of  exchange  is  sufficient  to  charge  any  person,  unless  such
acceptance  be  in  writing  on  the  bill.  So,  by  the  JVl  F.  Revieed  5<a-
iMtet,  vol.  1. 768.  sec.  6. 9.  no  person  within  the  state  is  chaigeable  as  an
acceptor  on  a  bill  of  exchange,  unless  his  acceptance  be  in  writing,
signed  by  himself  or  his  lawful  agent ;  and  (he  holder  may  require  the
acceptance  to  be  upon  the  bill,  and  a  refusal  to  comply  will  be  a  refasal
to  accept.  An  acceptance  in  writing,  if  not  on  the  bill,  does  not  bind,
except  it  be  in  favour  of  the  person  who,  on  the  faith  of  it,  received  the
bill.  (Jbid.  sec.  7.)  So,  an  unconditional  promise  in  writing  to  accept
the  bill,  before  it  be  drawn,  is  an  acceptance  in  favour  of  the  person  who
receives  the  bill  on  the  faith  of  it,  for  a  valuable  consideration ;  [Ibid,
sec  8. ;)  and  every  drawee  who  refuses  to  return  a  bill,  within  24  hours,
to  the  holder,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  accepted  it  {Rid.  sec  11.)


84  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V


conditional  acceptance,  which  the  holder  is  not  bound  to
ceive ;  and  if  he  does  receive  it,  the  acceptor  is  not  liable  for
more  than  he  has  undertaken.  The  doctrine  of  qualified
acceptances  as  to  part  of  the  money,  is  spoken  of  in  Marius
and  Molloy  \*  and  in  the  case  of  Rowe  v.  Youngs  in  the
House  of  Lords,  it  was  established  to  be  the  true  constructioa
of  the  contract,  and  the  true  rule  of  the  law  merchant,  that
if  a  bill  be  accepted,  payable  at  a  particular  place,  the  holder
is  bound  to  make  the  demand  at  that  place.*  The  rule  is
also  settled,  that  a  promise  to  accept,  made  before  the  accept-
ance of  the  bill,  will  amount  to  an  acceptance  in  favour  of
the  person  to  whom  the  promise  was  communicated,  and  who
took  the  bill  on  the  credit  of  it/  In  Coolidge  v.  Payswif
all  the  cases  were  reviewed,  and  it  was  held,  that  a  letter,
written  within  a  reasonable  time  before  or  after  the  date  of  the
bill,  describing  it,  and  promising  to  accept  f  of  jit,  is,  if  shown
to  the  person  who  afterwards  takes  the  bill  upon  the  credit  of
that  letter,  a  virtual  acceptance,  and  binding  upon  the  person
who  makes  the  promise.  The  same  doctrine  was  also  held
by  the  Supreme  Court  of  New- York  in  Goodrich  v.  6ror-
don^^  and  it  was  there  decided,  that  if  a  person,  in  writing,
authorizes  another  to  draw  a  bill  of  exchange,  and  stipulates
to  honour  the  bill,  and  the  bill  be  afterwards  drawn,  and  taken
by  a  third  party,  on  the  credit  of  that  letter,  it  is  tantamount
to  an  acceptance  of  the  bill.  The  doctrine  rests  upon  the
decision  of  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Pillans  and  Rose  v.  Van
Mierop  and  Hopkins/  where  he  laid  down  the  broad  prin-
ciple, that  a  promise  to  accept,  previous  to  the  existence  of  the


a  Mariut,  17.  21. Jddlloy,  b.  2.  ch.  10.  lec.  21.
h  2  Brod.  ^  Bing.  165.
c  Milo  V.  Prest,  4  Campb.  Rep.  393.

d  2  Wheat  Rep.  66. See  also  to  S.  P.  1  Petere'  U.  S.  Rep,  264.
and  4  ibid.  121.
«  15  Johne.  Rep.  6. Parker  r.  Greele,  2  WendeU^  646.  S.  P.
/  3  Burr.  Rep.  1663.


Lee.  XUV.J OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  86

biD,  amounted  to  an  acceptance.  It  is  giving  credit  to  the
bill,  and  which  may  be  done  as  entirely  by  a  letter  written
before,  as  by  one  written  after  the  date  of  the  bill.  A  parol
promise  to  accept  a  bill  already  drawn,  or  thereafter  to  bo
drawn,  is  binding  if  the  bill  be  purchased  in  consideration  of
the  promise.  It  is  an  original  promise,  not  coming  within  the
objects  or  the  mischiefs  of  the  statute  of  frauds  ;  but  whether
euch  a  valid  parol  promise  to  accept  a  non-existing  bill,  would,
HI  the  view  of  the  law  merchant,  amount  to  an  acceptance  of
the  IhU  when  drawn,  is  a  question  not  necessarily  connected
with  the  validity  of  the  promise.**

Every  act  giving  credit  to  the  bill  amounts  to  an  accept-
ance,^ There  is  no  doubt  that  an  acceptance,  once  &irly
and  fully  made  and  consummated,  cannot  be  revoked ;  but
to  Tender  it  binding,  the  acceptance  must  be  a  complete  act,
and  an  absolute  assent  of  the  mind ;  for  though  the  drawee
writes  his  name  on  the  bill,  yet  if  before  he  has  parted  with
the  bill,  or  communicated  the  fact,  he  changes  his  mind,  and
erases  his  acceptance,  he  is  not  bound.^  The  acceptance
may  be  impliedly  as  well  as  expressly  given.  It  may  be  in-
ferred from  tiie  act  of  the  drawee,  in  keeping  the  bill  a  great
length  of  time,  contrary  to  his  usual  mode  of  dealing ;  for  this
18  giving  credit  to  the  bill,  and  inducing  the  holder  to  consider
it  accepted.'  If  the  bill  be  accepted  in  a  qualified  degree  only,


s  TofTDsley  t.  Samratll,  2  Pelers^  U.  8,  Rqp.  170.

6  Powell  T.  Monnier,  1  Atk.  611.  Wynne  7.  Raikes,  BEa»V»IUp.
514. Fairleey.  Herring,  3  Bingkamy  625.

t  Cox  ▼•  Troy,  5  Barnw.  Sg  Aid,  474.  Emerigoo,  tome  1.  45.  cites
Dwpwf  de  la  Serra^  art,  dea  leitrea  de  change,  oh.  10.  aa  laying  down
the  maxim,  that  while  the  acceptor  is  master  of  his  signatore,  and  before
he  baa  parted  with  the  bill,  he  can  cancel  his  acceptance.  This  doc-
trine of  La  Serra  is  cited  with  particular  approbation  by  Potbier,  TVosI^
da  Control  de  Change^  n.  44.  and  his  opinion  was  mentioned  with  great
nspect  by  the  K.  B.  in  the  case  last  referred  to,  and  there  is  now  entira
hannony  on  the  point  in  the  jorisprudence  of  the  two  Dations*

d  Harvey  ▼.  Martin,  1  Campb.  425.  note.


86  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V-

and  not  aboolutely,  according  to  the  tenor  of  it,  the  holder
may  accept  it,  and  it  will  be  a  good  acceptance,  pro  tanto,
or  he  may  insist  upon  an  absolute  acceptance,  and  for  the
want  of  it  protest  the  bilL  It  is  in  the  discretion  of  the  holder
whether  or  no  he  will  take  any  acceptance  varying  from  the
terms  of  the  bilL  This  doctrine  was  settled  in  England  up*
wards  of  a  century  ago,  and  in  opposition  to  the  distinguished
argument  of  Sir  John  Strange,  and  it  has  continued  unsha-
ken to  this  day.*

*  The  acceptor  of  a  bill  is  the  principal  debtor,  and  the
drawer  the  surety,  and  nothing  will  discharge  the  acceptor
bat  payment  or  a  release.  He  is  bound,  though  he  accepted
without  consideration,  and  for  the  sole  accommodation  of  the
drawer.  Accommodation  paper  is  now  governed  by  the  same
rules  as  other  paper.  This  is  the  latest  and  the  best  doctrine,
both  in  England  and  in  this  country/  These  are  the  strict
obligations  of  the  acceptor  in  relation  to  the  other  parties  to
the  bill,  and  they  do  not  apply  in  all  their  extent  as  between
the  drawer  and  the  party  who  endorses  or  lends  his  name  to
the  bill  as  surety  for  the  accommodation  of  the  drawer.  In
such  a  case  the  party  who  endorses  is  not  entitled  to  damages
from  the  drawer  beyond  what  he  has  actually  sustained.*  If
the  acceptor  alters  the  bill  on  acceptance,  be  vacates  it  as
Against  the  drawer  and  endorsers ;  but  if  the  holder  acquiesces
in  such  alteration  and  acceptance,  it  is  a  good  bill  as  between
the  holder  and  acceptor.'
A  third  person,  after  protest  for  non-acceptance  by  the


a  Wegerslofe  ?.  Keene,  1  Str.  Rep,  214.  Smith  7.  Abbott,  2  Sir.
Rep.  1152.

b  Fentam  t.  Pocock,  5  Taunton,  1 92.  The  GoTernor  and  Com*
pany  of  the  Bank  of  Ireland  v.  Beresford,  6  Dou)*s  Pari.  Cas^  234.
Bank  of  Montgomery  County  t.  Walker,  9  Serg,  <f>  jRaio2e,229.  Mur-
ray ▼.  Judab,  6  Cowen,  484.  Clopper  7.  The  Union  Bank  of  Mary-
land, 7  Harr.  k  Johns,  92. Church  7.  Barlow,  9  Pitkering^  547.

c  Dorsey  7.  Creditors,  19  Jiariui's  Low,  Rep,  498.

d  Paton  7.  Winter,  1  Taunton^  420.


Lee.  XUV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 87

diawee,  may  intenrene,  and  become  a  party  to  the  bill,  in  a
collatemi  way,  by  accepting  and  paying  the  bill  for  the  hoDour
of  the  drawer,  or  of  a  particular  endorser. His  acceptance  is
termed  an  acceptance  supra  protest,  and  he  subjects  him*
self  to  the  same  obligations  as  if  the  bill  had  been  directed  to
him. He has  his  remedy  against  the  person  for  whose
hoQocir  he  accepted,  and  against  all  the  parties  who  stand
prior  to  that  person. If  he  takes  up  the  bill  for  the  honour  of
the  eodorser,  he  stands  in  the  light  of  an  endorsee  paying  full
Talue  for  the  bill,  and  has  the  same  remedies  to  which  an
endorsee  would  be  entitled  against  all  prior  parties,  and  he
can,  of  course,  sue  the  drawer  and  endorser.' TJie  accept
aoce,  supra  protest,  is  good,  though  it  be  done  at  the  request,
tnd  under  the  guaranty  of  the  drawee  after  his  refusal,  and
the  party  for  whose  honour  it  is  paid  is  equally  liable.^ The
polky  of  the  rule  granting  these  privileges  to  the  accqior,
supra  protest,  is  to  induce  the  friends  of  the  drawer  or  en-
dorser to  render  them  this  service,  for  the  benefit  of  commerce
and  the  credit  of  the  trader,  and  a  third  person  interposes  only «
when  the  drawee  will  not  accept There  can  be  no  other
acceptor  after  a  general  acceptance  by  the  drawee. A  third
person  may  become  liable  on  his  collateral  undertaking,  as
guarantying  the  credit  of  the  drawee,  but  he  will  not  be
liable  in  the  character  of  acceptor. It  is  said,  however,  that
when  the  bill  has  been  accepted,  supra  protest,  for  the
honour  of  one  party  to  the  bill,  it  may,  by  another  individual,
be  accepted,  supra  protest,  for  the  honour  of  another.* The
holder  is  not  bound  to  take  an  acceptance,  supra  protest  j'^
but  he  would  be  bound  to  accept  an  offer  to  pay,  supra  pro-


a  Malford  t.  Walcott,  1  Lord  Raym.  574.  Merteaa  v.  Winoio;.
ton,  1  Etp.  Jf,  P.  Rep,  112. Cayley  on  Bills,  209.

b  Konig  T.  Bayard,  1  P^er»*  U.  S.  Rep.  250.

c  Beawei,  tit  Bills  of  Exchange^  pi.  43.  JackMn  t.  Hudioa,  2
Campb,  447.  ^

d  Mitford  y.  Walcot,  12  J^lod,  Rep.  410.


88  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTV. [Part  V-

test  The  ptotest  is  necessary,  and  should  precede  the  col-
lateral acceptance  or  payment ;'  and  if  the  bill,  od  its  facei
directs  a  resort  to  a  third  person,  in  case  of  refusal  by  the
drawee,  such  direction  becomes  part  of  the  contract*

As  between  the  holder  of  a  check  and  the  endoiser,  it
ought  to  be  presented  for  acceptance  with  due  diligence;'  but
as  between  the  holder  and  the  drawer,  a  demand  at  an  j  time
before  suit  brought  will  be  sufficient,  unless  it  appean  that
the  drawee  has  failed,  or  the  drawer  has,  in  some  other  man-
ner, sustained  injury  by  the  delay.''  The  drawee  ought  to
accept  or  refuse  acceptance,  as  soon  as  he  has  had  a  reison-
able  opportunity  to  inform  his  judgment.  If  he  cann«t  be
found  at  Ihe  proper  place,  the  holder  may  cause  the  bill  u>  be
protested ;  and  if  the  drawee  be  dead,  the  bill  may  be  pre-
sented to  his  executor  or  administrator.''

(5.)  Of  the  endorsement

A  vaUd  transfer  may  be  made  by  the  payee,  or  his  agent
•In  the  case  of  a  bill  made  or  endorsed  to  a  feme  sole^  who
afterwards  marries,  the  right  to  endorse  it  belongs  to  the  hus-
band. So,  the  assignee  of  an  insolvent  payee,  or  the  execu-
tor or  administrator  of  a  deceased  payee,  are  entitled  to
endorse  the  paper.-^  And  if  a  bill  be  made  payable  to  a  mer-


a  Poe/U'er,  h.  t  pi.  J  70.

h  Pothur,  h.  t.  pi.  137.  Hollandy.  Pierce,  14  Jlfaritn'«£otii».  i^p.
499.  Ad  acceptance  for  hoDour  is  not  an  absolute,  but  a  cooditioDal
acceptance,  and  an  aTerment  of  presentment  to  the  drawee  for^ajment
is  necessary. Williams  y.  Germaine,  7  Bamto.  k  Crest.  468.

c  Rickford  ▼.  Ridge,  2  Campb,  537.  Beeching  y.  Gower,  1  HoU^
313.  note  of  the  Reporter.  Clark  y.  Stackhouse,  2  JifaWtn't  Xotiu.
Rep,  327.

d  Cniger  y.  Armstrong,  3  Johnt.  Cqn.  5.  Conroj  y.  Warren,  ihid*
269. Rothschild  y.  Cornej,  9  Bamw.  4'  Cress,  388.

«  MoUoyj  b.  2.  c.  10.  sec.  34. Bayley  on  BUUy  128.

/  Parker,  Ch.  J.,  in  1  P.  Wms.  265.  Conner  y.  Martin,  cited  in  3
WUs,  Rep.  5. Rawlinson  y.  Stone,  3  WiU.  Rep.  1.


Lcc.  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 89

candle  house  consistiDg  of  several  partners,  an  endorsement
by  any  one  of  the  partners  is  deemed  the  act  of  the  firm.  If
the  bill  b#  made  payable  to  A.,  for  the  use  of  B.,  the  legal
title  is  in  A.,  and  he  must  endorse  iL

The  bill  cannot  be  endorsed  for  a  part  only  of  its  contents,
nnlesB  the  residue  has  been  extinguished ;  for  a  personal  con-
tract ^cannot  be -apportioned,  and  the  acceptor  made  liable  to
separate  actions  by  different  pA'sons.

Blank  endorsements  are  common,  and  they  may  be  filled
up  at  any  time  by  the  holder,  even  down  to  the  moment  of
trial  in  a  suit  to  be  brought  by  hun  as  endorsee ;  but  no  other
use  can  be  made  of  a  blank  endorsement  in  filling  it  up,  than
to  point  out  thevperson  to  whom  the  bill  or  note  is  to  be  paid.
A  note  endorsed  in  blank  is  like  one  payable  to  bearer,  and
passes  by  delivery,  and  the  holder  may  constitute  himself,  or
any  other  person,  assignee  of  the  bill.  The  courts  never  in-
quire whether  he  sues  for  himself,  or  as  trustee  for  some  other
person."^  Even  a  bond  made  payable  to  bearer,  has  been
held  to  pass  by  delivery,  in  the  same  manner  as  a  bank  note
payable  to  bearer,  or  a  bill  of  exchange  endorsed  in  blank.*
The  holder  may  strike  out  the  endorsement  to  him,  though
full,  and  all  prior  endorsements  in  blank  except  the  first,  and
charge  the  payee,  or  maker.'  There  is  no  necessity  for  any
n^oiiable  words  in  the  endorsement.  A  bill  originally  ne-
gotiable, continues  so  in  the  hands  of  the  endorsee,  unless
the  general  negotiability  be  restrained  by  a  special  endorse-


a  Peacock  v.  Rhodes,  Doug,  Rep.  633.  Francis  t.  Mott,  cited  in
Doug.  Rep.  634.  Bull.  JV*.  P.  275.  Livingston  ▼.  Clinton,  and  Cooper
▼.Kerr,  cited  in  3  Johns.  Cog.  264.  Lovell  7.  Evertson,  11  Johns.
Rep.  52.  Duncan,  J.,  in  13  Serg.  4r  RawUy  315.  Kiersted  ▼.  Rogers
k  Garland,  6  Harr.  <f*  Johns.  282.  In  Sprigg  y.  Cuny'a  Heirs,  1 9  Mar^
im*s  Louis.  Rep.  253.  it  was  held  that  the  holder  of  a  negotiable  note,
endorsed  in  blank,  might  sue  on  it,  without  filling  it  up  to  himself.

6  Gorgier  7.  Mieville,  3  Bamw.  <f*  Cress,  45.

c  Smith  7.  Clarke,  Peakes'  JV*.  P.  Rep.  225.  United  States  r.  Bar-
ker, 1  Paine's  Rep.  156.

Vol.  ni.  12


90 OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V,

ment  by  the  payee. He  may  stop  its  negotiability  by  a  spe-
cial endorsement,  but  do  subsequent  endorsee  can  restrain  the
negotiable  quality  of  the  bill.'* The  first  endorser  is  liable
to  every  Subsequent  bona  fide  holder,  even  though  the  bill  or
note  be  forged,  or  fraudulently  circulated.^ If  a  blank  note
or  check  be  endorsed,  it  will  bind  the  endorser  to  any  sum,
or  time  of  payment,  which  the  person  to  whom  he  intrusts
the  paper  chooses  to  insert  in%.* This  only  applies  to  the
case  in  which  the  body  of  the  instrument  is  left  blank. If
negotiable  paper,  regularly  filled  up,  be  endorsed  in  blank,
the  endorser  is  holden  only  in  the  clnracter  of  endorser,  and
according  to  the  terms  and  legal  operation  of  the  instrument.''
In  the  case  of  blank  endorsements,  possession  is  evidence
of  title  ;  but  if  the  endorsements  be  all  filled  up,  the  first  en-
dorsee cannot  sue  without  showing  that  he  had  taken  up  the
bill  or  note. The  acceptor  or  maker  is  liable  only  to  the  last
endorsee. The  prior  endorsers  have  parted  with  their  inte-
rest in  the  paper,  and  are  presumed  to  have  received  a  valua-
ble consideration  for  it. But  if  the  last  endorsee  protests  the
bill  for  non-payment,  and  it  be  paid  by  a  prior  endorser,  the


a  Edie  r.  East  India  Company,  2  Burr.  Rep.  1216.  Ancher  t.
The  Bank  of  England,  Doxtg,  Rep.  637.  Smith  r.  Clarke,  1  Etp.  Rep,
180.

b  Lambert  v.  Pack,  1  Salk.  Rep.  127.  Putnam  r.  SnUiFtn,  4  Jtfoff.
Rep.  45. Codwise  v.  Gleason,  3  Day^e  12^.  12;

e  Rossel  r.  Langttaffe,  Doug.  Rep.  514.  Violett  y.  Patton,  5  Craneh,
142.

d  See  JacksoD  v.  Richards,  2  Cainee'  Rep.  343.  In  Beckwith  r.
Aogell,  6  Conn.  Rep.  315.  it  was  held,  that  if  a  promissory  note  be  en-
dorsed in  blank,  under  a  parol  promise  to  guaranty  the  payment,  the
holder  may  fill  up  the  blank  pursuant  to  the  special  agreement,  and  proTc
that  agreement  by  parol.  Tlie  endorser  will  be  liable,  under  such  cir-
cumstances, without  proof  of  the  demand  and  notice  requisite  in  other
cases.  There  have  been  decisions  to  the  same  effect  in  Josselyn  r.
Ames,  3  Jdast.  Rep.  274.  Ulen  v.  Kittredge,  7  ibid.  233.  Moies  v.
Bird,  11  ibid.  436.  Nelson  v.  Duboys,  13JoAn«on,  175.  Campbell  ▼•
Bntler,  14  ibid.  349.


Lee.  XLIV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 91

latter  acquires;  by  such  payment,  a  new  title  to  the  instru-
ment.*

Though  the  holder  of  paper  fairly  negotiated,  be  entitled
to  recover,  and  to  shut  out  ahnost  every  equitable  defence,  yet
the  rule  appUes  only  to  the  case  of  negotiable  paper  taken
bona  fide  in  the  course  of  business  before  it  fells  due. If  ta-
ken after  it  is  due  and  payable,  the  presumption  is  against  the
validity  of  the  demand,  and  the  purchaser  takes  it  at  his
peril,  and  subject  to  every  defence  existing  against  it  before  it
was  negotiated.* But  it  has  been  a  question,  when  a  note,
payable  upon  demand,  is  to  be  deemed  a  note  out  of  time,  so
as  to  subject  the  endorsee,  upon  a  subsequent  negotiation  of
it,  to  the  operation  of  the  rule. When  the  facts  and  circum-
stances are  ascertained,  the  reasonableness  of  time  is  a  matter
of  law,  and  every  case  will  depend  upon  its  special  circum-
stances. Eighteen  months,  eight  months,  seven  months,  five
months,  even  two  months  and  a  half,  have  been  held,  when
unexplained  by  circumstances,  an  unreasonable  delay  ;  and
if  the  demand  be  not  made  in  a  reasonable  time  by  the  hol-
der, the  endorser  is  discharged.' On  the  other  hand,  in
TTiurston  v.  APKown,'^  a  note  payable  on  demand,  and  en-
dorsed wKhin  seven  days  after  it  was  made,  was  held  to  be
endorsed  in  season  to  close  all  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the


a  Mendez  t.  Carrerooo,  1  Lord  Rayvn.  742.  Gorg^ent  ▼.  M^Cartj,
tDaUoM'  Rep.  144.

h  Brown  t.  Daviea,  3  Term  Rep.  80.  Tioson  r.  Francis,  1  Camph.
Rep.  19.  Sargent  v.  Soutbgate,  5  Pickering,  312.  317.  319.  A  bill
may  be  endorsed  after  it  is  due,  for  it  continues  negotiable  ad  infinitum
Qotil  paid  or  discharged,  provided  the  subsequent  circulation  does  not
prejudice  an j  of  the  endorsers.  Hubbard  ▼.  Jackson, 4  Bingham^ 300.
Callow  T.  Lawrence,  3  Maule  ^  Selto.  95.

c  Furman  7.  Haskio,  2  Cainee'  Rep.  369.  Losee  ▼.  Dunkin,
7  Johns.  Rep.  70.  Field  ▼.  Nickerson,  13  J^ats.Rep,  131.  Sice  t.
CaDniogfaam,  1  Cowen*t  Rep.  397.  Martin  y.  Winslow,  2  Maton'e
Rep.  241.

d  6  Mass.  Rep.  428.


»#


92  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

note.  And  when  a  note  is  negotiated  in  season,  it  may  af-
terwards pass  from  one  endorsee  to  another,  after  it  is  due,
and  the  holder  will  be  equally  with  the  first  endorsee  protected
in  his  title."*  There  is  no  certain  time  in  which  a  bill  or  note,
payable  at  sight,  or  a  given  time  thereafter,  or  on  demand,
must  be  presented  for  acceptance.  It  must  not  be  locked  up
for  any  considerable  time ;  it  must  be  presented  for  payment
within  a  reasonable  time,  but  if  put  into  circulation,  the  courts
are  very  cautious  in  laying  down  any  rule  as  to  the  time  in
which  it  must  be  presented  ;  and,  in  one  case,  it  was  allowed
to  be  kept  in  circulation  without  acceptance,  so  long  as  the
convenience  of  the  successive  holders  might  require.*  That
was  the  case  of  a  foreign  bill ;  and  an  inland  bill  may  also  be
put  in  circulation  before  acceptance,  and  it  may  be  kept  a
reasonable  time  before  acceptance ;  but  what  would  be  a  rea-
sonable time  cannot  be  precisely  defined,  and  depends  upon
the  particular  circumstances  of  each  case.^  If  a  bill  or  note
be  absolutely  assigned  so  as  to  pass  the  whole  interest  in  the
instrument  to  the  endorsee,  its  negotiable  quahty  would  pass
with  it;  and  the  better  opinion  would  seem  to  be,  that  its
negotiability  could  not  be  impeded  by  any  restriction  contained
in  the  endorsement/  But  where  the  endorsement  is  a  mere
authority  to  receive  the  money  for  the  use,  or  according  to
tbe  directions  of  the  endorser,  it  would  be  evidence  that  the
endorsee  did  not  give  a  valuable  consideration,  and  was  not
the  absolute  owner.'  A  negotiable  instrument  may  be  en-
dorsed so  as  to  exempt  the  endorser  from  liability,  as  if  the
endorser  should  add,  at  his  oton  risk,  or  without  recourse.
In  that  case,  the  maker  or  acceptor,  and  prior  endorsers,  would


a  Chalmers  v.  LanioD,  1  Campb.  Rep,  383.
h  Goupy  V.  Harden,  7  Taxinl.  Rep,  159.

c  Fry  v.  Hall,  4  Taunt.  Rep.  396. Muilman  v.  D'Eguino,  2  H.
Blacks.  Rep.  565.

d  Parsons,  Cb.  J.,3  Jtfojf.  Rep.  228.

e  Siffourney  v.  Lloyd,  8  Bamw,  Sf  Creu.  622.


i


LcG.  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 93

be  hcdden,  according  to  the  rules  and  usages  of  commercial
papefi  but  the  immediate  endorser  would  be  exempted  from
responsibility  by  the  special  contract.^

If  the  bill  or  note  be  negotiated  after  it  is  due,  and  be  there-
by op«ned  to  every  equitable  defence,  yet  a  demand  must  be
made  upon  the  drawee  or  maker  within  a  reasonable  time,
and  notice  given  to  the  endorser  in  order  to  charge  him,
equally  as  if  it  had  been  a  paper  payable  at  sight,  or  nego-
tiated before  it  was  due.^

* (6.)  Of  ths  demand  and  protest.

The  demand  of  acceptance  of  a  foreign  bill  is  usually
made  by  a  notary,  and  in  case  of  non-acceptance  he  protests
it,  and  this  notarial  protest  receives  credit  in  all  courts  and
places  by  the  law  and  usage  of  merchants  without  any  aux-
iliary evidence ;  and  it  is  a  requisite  step  by  the  custom  of
merchants  in  the  case  of  a  foreign  bill,  and  must  be  made
promptly  upon  refusal.  It  is  sufficient,  however,  to  note  the
protest  on  the  day  of  the  demand,  and  it  may  be  drawn  up
in  form  at  a  future  period.  The  protest  is  necessary  for  the
purpose  of  prosecution,  and  it  must  be  stated  and  proved  in  a
suit  on  the  bill.^  On  inland  bills  no  protest  was  required  by
the  common  law,  and  it  was  only  made  necessary  in  England,
in  certain  cases,  by  the  statutes  of  9th  and  10th  Wm.  III.  ^


a  Dallas,  J.,  io  Goupy  y.  Harden,  7  TaunL  Rep.  163.  Rice  v.
Siearos,  3  Jkf<u«.  Rep,  225.  Welch  f.  Lindo,  7  Cranch's  Rep,  159.
Ersk.  InsL  of  the  Scotch  Law,  vol.  ii.  468.  BeWt  Com,  on  the  Scotch
Law^  vol.  i.  402.

6  M^Kiaoej  v.  Crawford,  8  Serg,  Sf  Rawle,  351.  Berry  v.  Robin-
SOD,  9  Johns,  Rep,  121.  Bishop  v.  Dexter,  2  Conn,  Rep,  419.  Dwight
V.  EmersoD,  2  JV.  Hamp,  Rep,  159.  Rugely  y,  DavidsoD,  3  5.  C,  Contt,
Rep,  33.

c  Tassell  v.  Lewis,  1  Lord  Raym,  743.  Rogers  v.  Stevens,  2  Term
Rep.  713.  Buller,  J.,  4  Term  Rep,  175.  Gale  v.  Walsh,  5  TermRep,
239.  Chaters  v.  Bell,  4  Esp,  Rep,  48.  Townslcy  v.  Sumrall,  2  Pe^
Ur$*  U,  S.  Reiu  170.


>


94  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

and  3d  and  4th  Anne  ;  and  yet,  notwithstanding  the  Ian*
guage  of  those  statutes,  it  has  long  been  the  settled  rule  and
practice  not  to  consider  the  protest  of  an  inland  bill  as  neces-
sary or  material."^  Nor  is  a  protest  of  an  inland  bill  generally
deemed  necessary  in  this  country,  though  the  practice  is  to
have  bills  drawn  in  one  state  on  persons  in  another,  protested
by  a  notary,  and  the  act  of  the  state  of  Kentucky  of  1798,
ch.  67.  seems  to  require  it.^  After  the  protest  for  non-ac-
ceptance, immediate  notice  must  be  given  to  the  drawer  and
endorser,  in  order  to  fix  them,  ahd  the  omission  would  not  be
cured  by  the  bill  being  presented  for  payment,  and  subsequent
notice  of  the  non-payment,  as  well  as  non-acceptance.*  The
drawer  or  endorser  may  be  sued  forthwith  upon  the  protest
for  non-acceptance,  without  wailing  until  the  bill  is  also  pre*


a  Bayley  on  BUU^  167.  edit.  Boston,  1826.  Wendle  v.  AndrewB,  2
Bamw.  4r  -^^^  696.

h  Townaley  v.  Sumrall,  2  PeterB'  U.  S.  Rep.  170.  Miller  t.  Hack-
ley,  5  Johnt.  Hep,  375.  In  this  last  case  it  was  said,  that  a  bill  drawn
in  New- York,  on  Charleston,  or  any  other  place  within  the  United
States,  was  an  inland  bill.  But  in  South  Carolina  and  in  Pennsylvania,
a  bill  drawn  in  one  state,  upon  a  person  residing^  in  another,  is  considered
in  the  light  of  a  foreign  bill,  requiring  a  protest.  (Duncan  v.  Course,  1
5.  C.  Coru.  Rep.  100.  Lonsdale  r.  Brown,  4  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  148.)
The  opinion  in  New-Tork  was  not  given  on  the  point  on  which  the  de-
cision rested  ;  and  it  was  rather  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Justice  Van  Ness,
than  that  of  the  court;  but  he  is  supported  by  Dr.  Tucker, (see  7\icker*s
BlacksUnei  vol.  ii.  467.  note  22.)  and  also  by  JUarius  on  BiUif  p.  2.
who  holds  that  bills  between  England  and  Scotland  were  inland  bills.
The  decision  in  South  Carolina  was  a  solemn  adjudication,  after  wrgVL^
ment,  on  the  very  question  ;  and  the  weight  of  American  authority  is,
therefore,  on  that  side.  In  Buckner  v.  Finley  &  Van  Lear,  2  Petere"
U.  S.  Rep.  586.  it  was  decided,  that  bills  of  exchange  drawn  in  one
state,  on  persons  living  in  another,  were  to  be  treated  ^s  foreign  bills  ;
and  this  decision,  I  apprehend,  puts  the  point  at  rest.

e  Roscow  V.  Hardy,  3  Campb.  Rep.  458.  United  States  v.  Barker,
4  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  464.


Lee.  XLIV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 95

sHited  for  payment,  and  refused.^  The  English  law,  requi*
ring  protest,  and  notice  of  non-acceptance  of  foreign  bills,  has
been  adopted  and  followed  as  the  true  rule  of  mercantile  law
in  the  states  of  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New- York,  Ma-
ryland  and  South  Carolina.^  But  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  States,  in  Brown  v.  Barry,*  and  in  Clarke  v.
Russely*  held,  that,  in  an  action  on  a  protest  for  non-pay-
ment on  a  foreign  bill,  protest  for  non-acceptance,  or  a  notice
of  the  non-acceptance,  need  not  be  shown,  inasmuch  as  they
were  not  required  by  the  custom  of  merchants  in  this  coun-
try, and  those  decisions  have  been  followed  in  Pennsylvania.'
It  becomes,  therefore,  a  little  difficult  to  know  what  is  the  true
role  of  the  law  merchant  in  the  United  States,  on  this  point,
after  such  contradictory  decisions.  The  Scotch  law  is  the
same  as  the  EngUsh,^  and  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  English
rule  VB  the  better  doctrine,  and  the  most  consistent  with  com-
mercial policy.

If  the  bill  has  been  accepted,  demand  of  payment  must  be
made  when  the  bill  faUs  due  ;  and  it  must  be  made  by  the
holder  or  his  agent  upon  the  acceptor,  at  the  place  appointed
for  payment,  or  at  his  house  or  residence,  or  upon  him  person-
ally if  no  particular  place  be  appointed,  and  it  cannot  be  made
by  letter  through  the  post  office.^ But  there  is  a  great  deal


a  Milford  r.  Mayor,  Doug,  Rep.  65.  Balliogalls  y,  Gloster,  3  Easfs
Hqi.  481. Wallace  v.  Agrj,  4  JUaton,  336.

h  Watson  T.  Loring,  3  Matt.  Rep.  557.  Sterry  v.  RobinsoD,  1  Day*s
Rep,  11.  MaBOD  t.  Franklin,  3  Johns.  Rep.  202.  Weldon  t.  Buck,  4
t5ii.  144.  Winthrop  v.  Pepoon,  1  Bay's  Rep.  .468.  Philips  r.  M«Car-
dj,  1  Harr.  Sf  Johns.  187.

c  3  Dallas'  Rep.  365.

d  Cited  in  6  Serg.  ^  RatoUy  358.

e  Read  r.  Adams,  6  Serg.  4*  Rawle,  356.

/  1  BeWs  Comm,  408.

g  Saunderson  r.  Judge,  2  H.  Blacks.  Rep.  509.  Stedroan  r.  Goocb,
1  Essp.  JV.  P.  Rep,  3.  Berkshire  Bank  v.  Jones,  6  Mass.  Rep,  524.
State  Bank  t.  Hard,  12  Mass.  Rep.  172.  Mason  v.  Franklin,  3  Johns,
R^.  202* Whittier  y.  Graffam,  3  Grecnlenf,  82.


06  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V,

of  perplexity  and  confusion  in  the  cases  on  this  subject,  ari-
sing from  refined  distinctions  and  discordant  opinions ;  and  it
becomes  very  difficult  to  know  what  is  precisely  the  law  of
the  land,  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  demand  upon  the  maker
of  the  note,  or  the  acceptor  of  the  bill.  If  there  be  no  par-
ticular and  certain  place  identified  and  appointed,  other  than
a  city  at  large,  and  the  party  has  no  residence  there,  the  bill
may  be  protested  in  the  city  on  the  day  without  inquiry,  for
that  would  be  an  idle  attempt.'  The  general  principle  is,
that  due  diligence  must  be  used  to  find  out  the  party,  and
make  the  demand ;  and  the  inquiry  will  always  be,  whether^
under  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  due  diligence  has  been
used.  The  agent  of  the  holder,  in  one  case,  used  the  utmost
diligence,  for  several  weeks,  to  find  the  residence  of  the  en-
dorser, in  order  to  give  him  notice  of  the  dishonouLof  the  bill,
and  then  took  a  day  to  consult  his  principal  before  he  gave
the  notice,  and  it  was  held  sufficient.^  If  the  party  has  ab-
sconded, that  will,  as  a  general  rule,  excuse  the  demand.^  If
he  has  changed  his  residence  to  some  other  place,  within  the
same  state^r  jurisdiction,  the  holder  must  make  endeavours
to  find  it,  and  make  the  demand  there ;  though  if  he  has  re-
moved out  of  the  state,  subsequent  to  the  making  of  the  note
or  accepting  the  bill,  it  is  sufficient  to  present  the  same  at  his
former  place  of  residence.''  If  there  be  no  other  evidence  of
the  maker's  residence  than  the  date  of  tBe  paper,  the  holder
must  make  inquiry  at  the  place  of  date ;  and  the  presump-
tion is,  that  the  maker  resides  where  the  note  is  dated,  and
that  he  contemplated  payment  at  that  place.' But  it  is  pre-


a  Boot  r.  Franklin,  3  Johns.  Rep.  207.

b  Firth  V.  Thrush,  8  Bamw.S;  Crest.  387.

c  4  Mcus.  Rep.  45. 4  Serg,  4r  i^tc/e,  480.

d  Anderson  y.  Drake,  14  Johns.  Rep.  1 14.  M<Grnder  v.  Bank  of
Washington,  9  Wheal.  Rep.  59C.  Bayley  on  Bills,  edit.  Boston,  126.
Gillespie  ▼.  Hannahan,  4  M-Cotd^  603.

e  Stewart  v.  Eden,  2  Caines'  Rep,  127.  Dancan  v.  M^Cullougb,  4
Serg.  Sf  Ratole,  480«


Lee,  XLIV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 97*

ramptioii  only ;  and  if  the  maker  resides  elsewhere  within
the  state  when  the  note  falls  due,  and  that  be  known  to  the
holder,  demand  must  be  made  at  the  maker's  place  of  resi'
dcnce.*

The  rale  in  the  English  law  is,  that  if  a  promissory  note
be  made  payable  at  a  particular  place,  the  demand  must  be
made  at  the  place,  because  the  place  is  made  part  and  parcel
of  the  contract*  If,  however,  the  place  appointed  be  desert*
ed  or  shut  up,  it  amounts  to  a  refusal  to  pay,  and  a  demand
voold  be  inaudible  and  useless  ;^  or  if  the  demand  be  made
upon  the  maker  elsewhere,  and  no  objection  be  made  at  the
time,  it  will  be  deemed  a  waiver  of  any  future  demand.'

In  New- York  it  has  been  decided,^  that  though  a  bill  or
DOte  be  made  payable  at  a  particular  place,  it  is  not  requisite
for  the  bolder  to  aver  or  prove  a  demand  of  payment  at  the
place.  Tills  would  appear  to  be  contrary  to  the  rule  as  now
anderstood  and  established  in  the  English  law ;  and  it  would
seem  to  be  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  Court  of  Errors  of
New- York,  in  the  case  of  Woodworth  v.  The  Bank  of
America/  where  the  rule  of  the  English  law*  was  recog-
nised, that  if  the  place  of  payment  be  designated  in  the  note,
demand  must  be  made  there. But  if  the  person,  at  whose


a  Anderaou  v.  Drake,  14  Johns,  Rep,  114.

b  SaunderBOD  y.  Judge,  2  H,  Blacks,  Rep,  509.  Sanderson  t.  Bowef«
14  £a«r«  Rtp,  500.  DickiosoD  t.  Bowes,  16  EatVs  Rep,  110.  Butter-
worth  T«  Le  Despenser,  3  MauU  k  Selw,  150.

c  Howe  r.  Bowes,  16  EasVt  Rep,  112.

d  Herring  v*  Sanger,  3  Johns.  Cos,  7l.

e  Wolcott  T.  Van  Santvoord,  11  Johns,  Rep,  248.  Caldwell  t.  Cas-
sidy,  8  Covoen'sRep,  271.  Haxtun  r.  Bishop,  3  Wendell,  1.  The  same
doctrine  is  held  in  Carley  v.  Vance,  17  J^ass,  3894  Weed  v.  Van  Hou«
ten,  4  Hoisted,  189.  Conn  r.  Gano,  1  Ohio  Rep,  483,  and  Irvine  r*
Withers,  1  SiewarVs  Ala,  Rep,  234.  But  in  Louisiana,  after  a  full  dis*
cuasion,  the  English  role  has  been  adopted  as  moat  conrenient  aodiiKwt
agreeable  to  the  contract. Mellon  r,  Croghan,  15  JtfoHifiy  423«

/  19  Johns,  Rep.  391.

Vol.  m.  13


98  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

place  or  house  the  note  or  bill  is  made  payable,  be  the  holder
of  the  paper,  in  that  case  it  has  been  held  by  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States,'  to  be  sufficient  for  the  holder  to
examine  the  accounts,  and  ascertain  that  the  party  who  is  to
pay  there  has  no  funds  deposited.  The  maker  or  acceptor  is
in  default  by  not  appearing  and  paying,  and  no  formal  de-
mand is  necessary.  The  cases  of  Saunderson  v.  Judge,
and  Berkshire  Bank  v.  Jones,^  were  deemed  to  be  control-
ling authorities  on  the  point.  If  the  defendant  was  ready  to
pay  at  the  time  and  place  designated  in  the  note  for  payment,
it  is  matter  of  defence,  and  will  go  to  discharge  him  fron»
interest  and  costs.*  The  case  of  Caldwell  v.  Ca^sidyf'
adopted  a  further  distinction  on  this  already  subtle  and  em-
barrassing point,  and  held,  that  though,  in  the  case  of  a  note
payable  at  a  particular  place,  demand  at  that  place  need
not  be  averred  ;  yet  if  the  note  be  made  payable  on  demand
at  a  particular  place,  a  demand  must  be  made  at  the  place
before  suit  brought.  With  respect  to  the  addition  of  memo-
randa to  a  bill  or  note,  designating  the  place  of  payment,
there  have  been  much  litigation  and  difficulty  in  the  cases.
It  is  stated  as  a  general  rule,*  that  a  memorandum  upon  a
note,  as  to  where  it  should  be  payable,  was  not  a  part  of  it  }
and  in  Exon  v.  Russell,^  such  a  memorandum  at  the  bot-
tom of  the  note  was  held  to  be  no  part  of  it.  On  the  other
hand,  in  Cowie  v.  Halsall,^  after  a  bill  had  been  accepted
generally,  the  drawer,  without  the  consent  of  the  acceptor,
added  a  [dace  of  payment,  and  it  was  held,  that  the  addiUoa


a  United  States  Bank  v.  Smith,  11  Wheat,  Rep,  171.  Bank  of  U.
S.  T.  Carneal,  2  Peters*  U.  S,  Rep:  543.

b  2H,  Blacks.  Rep,  509.  6  Mass,  Rep.  524.  Rahm  v.  Philaddphia
Bank,  1  Rawle^  335.  8.  ]^«

c  Haxtun  v.  Bishop,  3  Wendell,  1.

d  &  Coiom,  271.

e  Bailey  on  Bills,  25.

/  4  Jdaule  if  Seho,  505.

g  A  Bam,  3c.  Aid.  197.


Lcc.  XLIV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 99

was  a  material  variation,  and  discharged  the  acceptor.  In  the
case  of  TTie  Bank  of  America  v.  Woodwortk^"  a  note  was
endorsed  for  the  accommodation  of  the  maker,  and  returned
to  hkn  to  be  negotiated.  It  had  no  place  of  payment,  and
before  the  maker  had  parted  with  it,  he  added  in  the  margin
a  place  of  payment,  and  negotiated  it,  and  the  bona  fide
holder  made  the  demand  there.  The  Supreme  Court  held,
that  the  memorandum  was  no  part  of  the  contract,  but  mere-
ly an  intimation  to  the  holder  where  to  look  for  the  maker
and  his  funds.  But  the  Court  of  Errors  decided  otherwise,
and  overturned  this  very  reasonable,  and  established  the  very
rigorous  doctrine,  that  the  memorandum  was,  in  that  case,  a
material  alteration  of  the  contract,  which  discharged  the  en-
dorser. The  Supreme  Court  of  New- York  have  since  deci-
ded* that  where  the  endorser  commits  a  negotiable  note  to  the
maker,  with  a  blank  for  the  date,  or  sum,  or  time  of  payment,
there  is  an  implied  agency  given  by  the  endorser  to  the  ma-
ker to  fill  up  the  blanks.  The  principle  of  the  decisions  in
Massachusetts  is,  that  if  the  endorsement  be  made  at  the  time
of  making  the  note,  the  endorser  is  to  be  treated  as  an  origi-
nal promiser,  because  he  is  supposed  to  participate  in  the
consideration.'^

If  a  bill  of  exchange,  though  draw^n  generally,  be  accepted,
payable  at  a  particular  place,  it  is  a  special  or  qualified  accept-
ance, which  the  holder  is  not  bound  to  take  ;  but  if  he  does
take  it,  the  demand  must  be  made  at  the  place  appointed,
and  not  elsewhere.  This  is  the  plain  sense  of  the  contract,
and  the  words  accepted  payable  at  a  given  place^  are
equivalent  to  an  exclusion  of  a  demand  elsewhere.'*


a  18  Johns.  Rep,  315. S.  C  19  Jokne.  Rep.  390.

b  Mitcbeli  v.  Culrer,  7  Cowen't  Rep.  336.  fitecbaoici'  and  Far-
men'  Baok  v.  Schuyler,  ibid.  337,  note.

c  Parker,  Ch.  J.,  in  Tenney  v.  Prince,  4  Pickering,  385.

d  This  pfoiot  has  been  the  subject  of  great  litigation  aod  discussion  in
the  English  courts,  and  judges  of  high  professional  character,  and  of


J  00  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [PartV.

Three  days  of  grace  apply  equally,  according  to  the  cue*
torn  of  merchants,  to  foreign  and  inland  bills  and  promisaory
notes,  and  as  between  the  endorser  and  endorsee  of  a  nego-


great  professional  leaming,  have  entertained  directly  opposite  opinions
on  the  question.  In  Ambrote  t.  Hopwood^  2  Taufd,  Rep.  61 ,  the  C.  B.
held,  that  the  bill  must  be  presented  at  the  place  specified  in  the  accept-
ance, and  not  elsewhere.  This  was  in  1809.  In  Caltaghan  v,  AyUU^
3  TcKuni*  Rep,  397,  in  1811,  the  same  court  followed  the  same  doctrine,
and,  after  more  discussion,  declared  that  where  the  bill  was  accepted
payable  at  a  particular  place,  it  was  a  qualified  acceptance,  and  the  pre-
sentment must  be  averred  and  proved  to  have  been  made  tliere.  There
may  in  the  act  of  acceptance  be  a  qualification  of  the  jtUuty  as  well  as
of  the  timey  of  acceptance.  In  Fenlon  v.  Ooundry,  13  EcuVs  Rep,  459,
in  1811,  the  same  question  arose  in  the  K.  B.,  and  wai  decided  differ-
ently; and  it  was  held,  that  though  the  bill  was  accepted  payable  at  a
place  certain,  it  was  still  to  be  taken  to  be  payable  generally  and  nni*
versally,  and  wherever  demanded.  Afterwards,  in  Gammon  v.  SchmoU^
5  Taunt  Rep.  344,  the  Court  of  C.  B.,  notwithstanding  the  decision  of
the  K.  B.,  adhered  with  determined  purpose  to  their  former  doctrine ;
and  in  Bowes  v.  Howey  on  error  from  the  K.  B.,  into  the  Exchequer
Chamber,  5  TaumL  Rep.  30,  the  doctrine  of  the  C.  B.  was  established.
It  being  of  great  importance  to  the  mercantile  world  that  the  law  oq
this  subject  should  be  fixed  and  known,  the  same  point  was  brought  into
review  before  the  House  of  Lords,  in  1820,  in  the  case  of  Route  v»
Young y^  Bro.  Sf  Bing,  Rep,  165,  and  the  opinions  of  the  twelve  judges
were  taken  for  the  information  of  the  Lords.  The  point  was  elabo*
rately  discussed  in  the  separate  opinions  of  the  judges,  which  displayed
all  the  learning  and  acuteness  of  investigation  of  which  such  a  narrow
and  dry  question  was  susceptible,  A  majority  of  the  judges  were  in
favour  of  the  opinion  of  the  K.  B.,  and  they  held,  that  such  a  special  ac-
ceptance need  not  be  averred  and  proved  in  the  first  instance,  and  that
the  non-presentment  at  the  place  was  matter  of  defence,  and  to  be
taken  advantage  of  in  pleading.  But  Lord  Eldon  and  Lord  Redesdale,
and  four  out  of  the  twelve  common  law  judges,  were  of  opinion,  that
sucha  qualified  acceptance  must  be  averred, and  presentment  according
to  it  proved,  and  that  opinion  prevailed.  The  House  of  Lords  reversed
the  judgment  of  the  K.  B.,  and  overthrew  their  doctrine,  and  es(a«
blished  the  rule,  that  if  a  bill  of  exchange  be  accepted,  payable  at  a  par«
ticular  place,  it  was  necessary  to  aver  and  prove  presentment  of  the
bill  at  that  place,  and  the  party  so  accepting  is  not  liable  to  pay  on  a  dtt*


Lcc.  XI-IV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 101


nota  ;*  and  the  acceptor  or  maker  has  within  a  reason*
aUe  time  of  the  end  of  business,  or  bank  hours,  of  the  third
day  of  grace,  (being  the  third  day  after  the  paper  falls  due,)


maod  made  elsewhere. Lord  Eldon's  opinioD  in  the  House  of  Lords
iras  distioguisbed  for  being  clear,  nervous,  pertinent,  logical,  and  coo-
clnsiTe  ;  and  he  very  well  observed,  that  he  could  not  understand  the
good  sense  of  the  distinction  of  the  K.  B.,  that  if  a  promissory  note  be
payable  at  a  particular  place,  the  demand  roust  be  made  there,  because
the  place,  being  in  the  note,  is  a  part  of  the  contract ;  but  if  a  bill
be  accepted,  payable  at  a  particular  place,  it  is  not  a  part  of  the  accept*
ance,  and  the  presentment  need  not  be  made  there. Soon  after  this
decisioo  was  made,  the  statute  of  1  and  2  Geo^  IV.  ch.  77,  was  passed,
declaring  that  an  acceptance,  payable  at  a  particular  place,  had  the  effect
of  a  general  acceptance,  and  the  holder  was  not  bound  to  present  the
bill  at  any  particular  place,  and  the  acceptor  might  be  called  on  else-
where, as  well  as  at  the  place  indicated. So  far  the  rule  was  thrown
back  by  statute  into  the  situation  in  which  it  was  placed  by  the  K.  B. ;
bot  the  statute  further  provided,  that  if  the  bill  was  accepted  payable  at
a  specified  place  only^  and  not  eUewhere,  it  was  then  to  be  considered  a
qualified  acceptance,  and  demand  must  be  made  at  the  specified  place.
The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  in  U.  S,  Bank  v.  Smith,  li
Wheat.  Rep.  171,  were  inclined  to  think  that,  as  against  the  acceptor  of
a  bill  or  maker  of  a  note,  no  averment  or  proof  of  demand  of  payment
at  the  place  designated  in  the  instrument  was  necessary. They  with-
held a  decided  opinion  on  the  point. But  as  against  the  endorser,  such
demand  and  proof  were  held  to  be  indispensable. In  Fayle  v.  Bird,  S
Carr.  Sf  Payne,  303,  it  was  held,  that  on  a  bill  drawn  payable  in  Zon*
don,  presentment  must  be  made  at  some  place  there,  but  it  is  stated  in
Selby  T.  Eden,  11  Moore,  that  presentment  need  not  be  averred  in  the
declaration. In  Indiana,  they  follow  the  rule  that  if  a  promissory  note
be  payable  at  a  particular  place,  a  demand  of  payment  at  that  place
must  be  averred  and  proved,  1  Blackford's  Rep.  328.  As  evidence  of  the
endless  refinements  and  distinctions  on  this  subject,  we  may  refer  to  the
case  of  Mitchell  v.  Baring,  (4  Carr.  &  Payne,  35.)  where  it  was  held,
that  if  a  bill,  payable  in  London,  be  accepted  for  honour,  to  be  paid  if
protested  and  refused  when  due,  it  must  be  protested  at  Liverpool  where
the  drawee  resided.

a  Brown  t.  Harraden,  4  Term  Rep.  148.  Bussard  v.  Levering,  6
WheaL  Rep.  102.  Lindenberger  v.  Beall,  ibid.  104.  Crenshaw  t.
M'Kieroan,  1  ^fvnor'9  Alabama  Rep.  295. The  period  of  grace  variet


102  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

to  pay.  It  has  been  Baid,"*  that  the  acceptor  was  bound  to
pay  the  bill  on  demand,  on  any  part  of  the  third  day  of  grace,
provided  the  demand  be  made  wilhin  reasonable  hours.  Lord
Kenyon  thought  otherwise.  The  question  will  be  govemedi
in  a  degree,  by  the  custom  of  the  place ;  and  if,  in  a  commer-
cial city,  payments  are  made  at  the  banks,  they  must  be
made  within  bank  hours.  The  maker  or  acceptor  is  entitled
to  the  uttermost  convenient  time  allowed  by  the  custom  of
business  of  that  kind,  in  the  place  where  the  bill  is  presented,
and  he  is  not  entitled  to  any  further  time.^  If  the  third  day
of  grace  falls  on  Sunday,  or  a  great  holyday,  as  the  fourth  of
July,  or  a  day  of  public  rest,  the  demand  must  be  made  on
the  day  preceding.'  The  three  days  of  grace  apply  equally
to  bills  payable  at  sight  ;^  but  a  bill  or  note  payable  on  de-


in  different  countries.  In  France,  by  the  ordinance  of  1673,  tit.  5,  art
4,  it  was  ten  days;  but  by  the  new  code,  art.  135.  all  days  of  grace  are
abolished.  In  Massachusetts  a  promissory  note  was  held  not  entitled  to
grace,  unless  it  be  an  express  part  of  the  contract.  Jones  v.  Fales,  4
H€a»9'  Rep,  245.  But  in  1 824,  by  statute,  the  days  of  grace  were  given
to  promissory-  notes.  '  In  Broddie  v.  Searcy,  Peck's  Tenn.  Rep.  183,
the  law  merchant  and  the  three  days  of  grace  were  considered  applica*
ble  to  negotiable  promissory  notes,  and  applied  with  as  much  accuracy
and  strictness  as  in  the  most  commercial  states.

a  Boiler,  J.,  4  Term  Rep.  174.  The  opinion  of  BuUer,  J.,  has  been
adopted  in  Greeley  t.  Thurston,  4  Greenleafy  479.

6  It  was  held  in  Osborn  v.  Mancure,  3  Wendell,  170,  that  the  maker
had  the  whole  of  the  third  day  of  grace  to  make  payment,  if  he  thinks
proper  to  seek  the  holder.  If  a  presentment  of  a  bill  for  payment  be
to  a  private  individual,  and  not  to  a  bank  or  banker,  it  is  sufficient  to
make  the  demand  in  the  evening  of  the  day  of  payment.  Triggs  v.
Newnham,  10  Jdoore^  249.

G  Tassel!  v.  Lewis,  1  Lord  Raym.  743.  Jackson  v.  Richards,  2
Cfltnet'  Rep.  343.  Lewis  v.  Burr,  2  Caines*  Cat.  in  Error ,  195.  Bus-
sard  V.  Levering,  6  Wheal.  Rep.  102.

d  Colroan  v.  Sayer,  1  Barnard's  K.  B.  303.  Bayley  on  BilU,  151.
In  France,  while  days  of  grace  were  allowed  under  the  ordinance  of
1673,  Pothier  agreed  with  M.  Jousse,  in  his  commentary,  that  a  bill
payable  at  sight  had  no  days  of  grace ;  and  he  justly  observed,  that  it


Lee.  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  103

mandy  or  where  no  time  of  payment  is  expressed,  is  payable
immediately  on  presentment,  and  is  not  entitled  to  the  days
of  grace.'  A  bill  payable  at  so  many  days  sight,  means  so
many  days  after  legal  sight,  or  acceptance  ;^  and  when  the
time  is  to  be  computed  by  days,  as  so  many  days  after  sight,
the  day  of  the  date  of  the  instrument  is,  by  the  modern  prac-
tice, excluded.'

It  is  equally  unseasonable,  to  demand  payment  before  the
expiration  of  the  third  day  of  grace,  as  after  the  day.  The
demand  must  be  made  on  the  third  day  of  grace,  or  on  the
second,  if  the  third  day  be  a  day  of  puUic  rest ;  and  in  default
of  such  demand,  the  drawer  of  the  bill,  and  the'  endorser  of
the  note,  are  discharged.^  If,  however,  a  note  be  made  for
negotiation  at  a  bank,  whose  custom  is  to  demand  payment,
and  to  give  notice,  on  the  fourth  day,  that  custom  forms  a
part  of  the  law  of  the  contract,  and  the  parties  are  presumed
to  agree  to  be  governed,  in  that  case,  by  the  usage.* The


would  be  unreasonable  and  inconvenient  for  a  person  wbo  takes  a  draft,
for  bis  accommodation,  on  his  jonrnej,  payable  at  sight,  to  be  obliged  to
wait  the  days  of  gprace  for  his  money.  TraUS  du  Con.  de  Cfumge^
art.  172.

a  Cammer  v.  Harrison,  2  J^Cord'9  Rep*  246.  Bayley  on  Bill*,  141.
Sommerrille  t.  Williams,  1  SlewarVs  Alab,  Rep,  484.

b  Mitchell  v.  De  Grand,  1  Mason* s  Rep.  176.  If  a  bill  payable  at
so  many,  say  sixty  days  sight,  be  accepted,  payable  upon  a  given  day^
my  November  3dy  in  which  the  three  days  of  grace  were,  in  fact,  inclo-
ded,fhoagh  the  day  of  acceptance  did  not  appear  on  the  bill,  the  demand
is  to  be  made  on  the  day  specified  in  the  acceptance.  The  acceptor  it
boand  to  that  day,  and  it  being  in  point  of  fact  the  true  day,  the  drawer
and  endorsers  would  also  be  bound,  on  protest  and  due  notice  of  db*
fault  of  payment  on  that  day.  (Kenner  and  others  t.  their  Creditors,
20  MarHn*s  Louis,  Rep.  36. 1  Miller's  Louis.  Rep.  280.  8.  C.

c  BayUyon  Bills,  155.

d  Coleman  t.  Sayer,  Sir.  Rep.  829.  Wiffcn  t.  Roberts,  1  Esp.  JV*.
P.  Afp.  261. Leavitt  v.  Simes,  3  JV.  H.  Rep.  14.

e  Renner  t.  Bank  of  Colombia,  9  Wheal.  Rep.  581.  Mills  t.  The
Bank  of  the  United  States,  11  ibid.  431.  Bank  of  Washington  t.
Triplett,  1  PeUrs'  U.  S,  Rep.  25.  The  Bank  of  Columbia  r.  Fitz-
bngh,  1  Harru  4-  Gill,  239.


104  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V*


flame  rule  applies,  when  a  bank,  by  usage,  treats  a  particuli
day  as  a  bolyday,  though  not  legally  known  as  such,  and
make  demands,  and  give  notice,  on  the  day  preceding ;  the
parties  to  a  note  discounted  there,  and  conusant  of  the  usage^
are  bound  by  it.' Though  a  bill,  payable  at  a  given  time,
has  never  been  presented  to  the  drawee  for  acceptance,  the
demand  upon  the  drawee  for  payment  is  to  be  made  on  the
third  day  of  grace ;  for,  by  the  usage  of  the  conunercial  world,
which  now  enters  into  every  bill  and  note  of  a  mercantile
character,  except  where  it  is  positively  excluded,  a  bill  does
not  become  due  on  the  day  mentioned  on  its  face,  but  on  the
last  day  of  grace.^

(7.)  Of  the  steps  requisite  to  fix  the  drawer  and  endor-
sers.

There  is  no  part  of  the  learning  relating  to  negotiable  pa^
per,  that  has  been  more  critically  discussed,  or  in  which  the
rules  are  laid  down  with  more  precision,  than  that  which  con-
cerns the  acts  requisite  to  fix  the  responsibility  of  the  drawer
and  endorsers,  and  the  acts  and  omissions  which  will  operate
to  discharge  them.  True  policy  consists  in  establishing  some
broad  plain  rules,  easy  to  be  understood,  and  steady  in  their
obligation.

The  holder  must  not  only  show  a  demand,  or  due  diligence
to  get  the  money  of  the  drawee  of  the  bill  or  check,  and  of
the  maker  of  the  note,  but  he  must  give  reasonable  notice  of
their  default  to  the  drawer  and  endorsers,  to  entitle  himself  to
a  suit  against  them.^ The  object  of  the  notice  is  to  afibrd  an


a  City  Bank  v.  Cutter,  3  Pick.  Rep,  414.

6  Bank  of  Washington  v.  Triplett,  1  Peter»'  U*  S.  Rep.  25.

c  Heylyn  v.  Adamson,  2  Burr.  Rep.  669.  Rushton  v.  AsptQwall,
Doug.  Rep.  679.  WiUiams  v.  The  Bank  of  U.  S.,  2  Petere'  U.  S.
Rep.  96.  The  demand  and  notice  to  the  endorser  are  equally  requisite,
though  he  endorse  the  note  after  it  is  due.  Stockman  y.  Riley,  2
M-Cord'e  Rep.  398. Poole  v.  Tolleson,  1  ibid.  199.


Lee.  XLIV.]  0F<  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. im

opportunity  to  the  drawer  and  endorsers,  to  obtain  security
ham  those  persons  to  whom  they  are  entitled  to  resort  for

Notice  to  one  of  several  partners,  or  to  on«  cS


sereraljoint  drawers  or  endorsers,  is  notice  to  them  alL*  What
is  reasonable  notice  to  the  drawer  or  endorser,  is  sometimes
said  to  be  a  question  of  law,  and  at  other  times  to  be  a  ques-.
tion  of  fBLcL  The  question  of  reasonable  notice  is  usually
compounded  of  law  and  &ct,  and  proper  for  the  decision 'of  a
jury,  under  the  advice  and  direction  of  the  court ;  and  the
mixed  question  requires  the  application  of  the  powers  of  the
court  and  jury.^  The  elder  cases  did  not  define  what
amounted  to  due  diligence  in  givii^  notice  of  the  dishonour
of  a  bill,  with  that  exactness  and  certainty  which  practical
men,  and  the  business  of  life,  required.  According  to  the
modem  doctrine,  the  notice  must  be  given  by  the  first  direct  *
and  r^ular  conveyance/ This  means,  the  first  convenient


a  Porthome  v.  Parker,  1  Campb.  Rep.  82. '

h  Tiodal  T.  BrowD,  1  Tsrm  Rep.  167.  Darbiahire  v.  Parker,  6
EatVs  Rep.  3.  Hiltoo  y.  Shepberd,  6  EaH*M  Rep.  14,  m  nolie.  Bate-
man  T.  Joseph,  \5t  tkuVs  Rep.  433.  Cbet.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Stark,  6  Crmndk'e
Rep.  273.  Mar.  Ins.  Co.  t.  Raden,  ihid.  338.  Taylor  r.  Brigdaa,  $
Johne.  Rep.  173.  lo  Brahan  t.  Ragland,  1  Mmm^t  Alahama  Rep.  85,
what  ia  reaaonabla  Dotice  to  an  endorser  was  held  to  be  a  question  of
UtX  for  a  jury.  In  Ay  mar  t.  Beers,  7  Cowen^s  Rep,  705,  and  the
Bank  of  Columbia  ▼.  Lawrence,  1  PeUr*»  Rep,  578,  it  was  beld,  tfiat
the  reasonableness  of  notice,  or  demand,  or  due  diligence,  wbea  the
£M:ts  were  settled,  was  a  question  of  law  for  the  court,  and  not  a  quea-
tioo  of  fact  for  a  jury.  But  the  question  is  so  mixed  up  with  circum-
stances,  and  is  so  compounded  of  the  ingredients  of  law  and  fact,  that
it  will  be  found,  in  practice,  very  difficult  to  retain  on  the  belloh  the
ezclasive  jurisdiction  of  the  question.

e  Until  an  act  of  the  assembly  since  1823,  in  Louisiana,  the  poat-ef-
ttcm  was  not,  in  that  state,  a  proper  place  of  deposit  for  notice  to  endor-
sers, 19  Martin^  491.  It  is  not  now,  in  those  post-towns  where  the  en-
dorser Ures  within  three  miles  of  the  post-office,  and  there  is  no  peony-
post  esUblishment.  Louisiana  State  Bank  v.  Rowell,  18  iMU  506.
Cby  T.  Oakley,  17  Und.  137.

ToL.  III.  14


106  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  ▼•

and  practicable  mail  that  goes  on  the  day  next  to  the  third
day  of  grace  ;  so  that  if  the  third  day  of  grace  be  on  Thuis-
day,  and  the  drawer  or  endorser  reside  out  of  town,  the  notice
may,  indeed,  be  sent  on  Thursday,  but  must  be  stntf  by  the
mail  that  goes  on  Friday ;  and  if  the  parties  live  in  the  same
town,  the  rule  is  the  same,  and  the  notice  must  be  sent  l^  the
penny-post,  or  other  carrier,  on  Friday.'  The  law  does  not
require  excessive  diligence,  or  that  the  holder  should  watch
the  post-office  constantly,  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  and
transmitting  notices.  Reasonable  diligence  and  attention  is
all  that  the  law  exacts  ;^  and  it  is  settled,  that  each  party  into
whose  hands  a  dishonoured  bill  may  pass,  shall  be  allowed
one  entire  day  for  the  purpose  of  giving  notice.  If  the  de-
mand be  made  on  Saturday,  it  is  sufficient  to  give  notice  to
the  drawer  or  endorser  on  Monday  ]^  and  putting  the  notice
by  letter  into  the  post-office  is  sufficient,  though  the  letter


a  That  notice  may  be  giFen  on  the  aame  day  that  the  paper  is
payable  and  is  duly  dishonoured,  and  that  it  mufi,  if  possible,  be  giren  on
the  next  day,  or  put  in  the  post-offioe  for  that  purpose,  see  Shed  v.  Brett,
1  Pick.  R^.  401.  Osborn  f.  Moocure,  3  Wendell,  170.  I  Jtfinor'a
Alabama  Rep.  295.  Talbot  y.  Claike,  8  Pinck.  64.  Bizley  r.  Frank-
lin Ins.  Co.  aid.  86.  United  States  v.  Barker,  4  JFash.  Cir.  Rep,  464.
Townsley  v.  Springer,  1  Miller's  Louii.  Rep.  122.  515.

h  In  North  Carolina  the  rule  respecting  notice  is  'made  to  vary  with
the  pursuits  of  the  parties,  and  the  same  strictness  is  not  required  be-
tween farmers  in  the  country,  as  between  merchants  in  town.  The
reasonableness  of  notice,  or  due  diligence,  is  to  be  left  to  the  jury  under
the  direction  of  the  court. Brown  v.  Johnson,  1  Detereux,  293.

c  In  Hawkes  r.  Salter,  4  Bingham,  715,  it  was  held,  that  the  holder
had,  in  such  a  case,  the  whole  of  Monday  to  write  the  notice,  and  that »
letter  by  the  Tuesday  morning  post  was  sufficient.  This  was  a  relaxa-
tion of  the  strictness  required  by  the  former  rule.  So,  in  Firth  t.
Thrush,  8  B.  <f>  Creu.  387,  an  attorney  was  employed  to  give  notice.
He  wte  not  informed  of  the  endorser's  residence  for  several  weeks  aAer
the  bill  was  dishonoured,  though  he  had  used  due  diligence.  He  then
took  a  day  to  consult  the  holder  before  he  sent  the  notice,  and  it  was
Md  to  be  a  valid  notice.


Lcc.  XLIV.] OF  P^PSONAL  PROPERTY.  107

dioold  happen  to  miscarry.  If  the  holder  uses  the  ordinary
mode  of  cooveyance,  he  is  not  required  to  see  that  the  notice
is  brooght  home  to  the  party.  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  send  by
the  pnMic  mail.  The  notice  may  be  sent  by  a  private  con*
Teyance,  or  special  messenger,  and  it  would  be  good  notkci
though  it  should  happen  to  arrive  a  little  behind-the  mail.
Where  the  parties  live  in  the  same  town,  and  within  the  dis-
trict of  the  letter  carrier,  it  is  sufficient  to  give  notice  by  letter
through  the  post-office.  If  there  be  no  penny-post  that  goes
to  the  quarter  where  the  drawer  lives,  the  notice  must  be  per-
sonal, or  by  a  special  messenger  sent  to  the  dwelling-house ;
and  it  is  necessary,  in  that  case,  that  the  notice  be  personally
given  to  the  party  to  be  charged,  or  at  his  dwelling-house  ot
place  of  business,  and  the  duty  of  the  holder  does  not  require
him  to  give  notice  at  any  other  place.  The  notice,  in  all
cases,  is  good,  if  left  at  the  dwelling-house  of  the  party  in  a
way  reasonably  calculated  to  bring  the  knowledge  of  it  home
Co  him,  and  if  the  house  be  shut  up  by  a  temporary  absencoi
still  the  notice  may  be  left  there.  If  the  pardes  live  in  differ-
ent towns,  the  letter  must  be  forwarded  to  the  post-office
nearest  to  the  party,  though,  under  certain  circumstanceS|  a
more  distant  post-office  may  do  ;  but  the  cases  have  not  de-
fined the  precise  distance  from  a  post-ofke  at  which  the  party
must  reside,  to  render  the  service  of  notice  through  the  post-
office  good.*  •'


a  Grose,  J., and  Lawrence,  J.,  in  Darbishire  ▼.  Parker, 6  £a#f# l^p•
10.  Scott  ▼.  Lifibrd,  9  E<uVt  Rep.  347.  Smith  v.  Mullet,  S  Camph^
208.  Hilton  v.  Faircloagb,  ibid.  633.  Williams  t.  Smith,  2  Samw.
^  AUL  496.  Bancroft  v.  Hall,  1  HoWi  JV.  P.  476.  Bray  t.  Hair-
den,  6  Maule  <f>  Selvo.  68.  Jackson  r.  Richards,  S  Caine»*  Rep.  343.
Stevrart  ▼.  Eden,  ibid.  121.  Corp  v.  M'Comb,  1  Johne.  Cm.  328.
Ireland  ▼.  Kip,  10  Johns.  Rep.  490,  and  11  ibid.  231.  Lenox  v.  Ro-
bert!, 2  Wheat  Rep.  373.  Bassard  v.  Levering,  6  Wheat.  Rep,  lOf,
Lindenberger  ▼.  Beall,  ibid.  104.  Shed  ▼.  Brett,  1  Pick.  Rep.  401.
Mead  v.  Engs,  5  Cowen^e  Rep.  303.  Wbiltier  v.  Graffam,  3  Oreen-
Uirf*§  Rep.  82.  The  Bank  of  Colombia  r.  Lawrence,  1  PeUrt*  U.  S.  Rep.


lOe  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

The  notice  must  specify  tbat  the  bill  is  dishonouied,  and
the  design  of  it  is,  that  the  drawer  may  be  enabled  to  secure
his  claim  against  the  acceptor,  and  the  endorser  against  the
maker,  and  the  notice  may  come  from  any  person  who  b  a
party  to  the  bilL'  So,  any  agent,  having  possession  of  the
billi  may  give  the  notice,  and  it  need  not  state  at  whose  request
it  was  given,  nor  who  was  the  owner  of  the  bill.  There  b
no  precise  form  of  the  notice.  It  is  sufficient  that  it  state  the
frot  of  non-payment,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  state  expressly,
fiMT  it  is  justly  implied,  that  the  holder  looks  to  the  endorser.*
It  is  sufficient  for  an  agent  to  give  notice  to  his  principal  of
the  dishonour  of  a  bill,  and  it  then  becomes  necessary  for  the
piindpai  to  give  the  requisite  notice,  with  due  diligence,  to
the  parties  to  be  fixed.'  The  party  receiving  notice  is  boon^
to  give  notice  Ukejidse  to  those  who  stand  behind  him,  and  to
whom  he  means  to  resort  for  indemnity ;  and  if  a  second  en*
d(»ser,  on  receiving  notice  of  the  dishonour  of  the  bill,  should


578.  Williamf  r.  The  Bank  of  the  United  States,  S  FtUtf^  U.  S.
Rep.  90.  The  Bank  of  (he  U.  S.  v.  Caraeal,  ibid.  543.  Gallagher  v.
Boberti,  t  WomK  Cir.  R^.  191.  Davis  v.  WiUiams,  Peck's  TVnit,
Rep.  191.  2^  JV.  Y.  Rented  SitOiUee,  vol.  1, 769, 770,  sect.  12  to  17,
make  provision  for  presentmentB  and  notices  on  negotiable  paper,  in
special  cases,  as  when  part  of  the  city  of  New-York  is  the  seat  of  an
infections  disease,  and  the  residence  of  parties  becomes  disturbed.

a  Jameson  v.  Swinton,  S  Campb.  Rq>.  373.  Solarte  v.  Palmer,  7
Bingham^  630.

b  Shed  V.  Brett,  1  Pick.  Rep.  401.  Mills  v.  Bank  of  the  United
States,  11  WTieat  Rep.  431.  Bank  of  the  U.  S.  ▼.  Cameal,  2  Petere'
17.  8.  Rep.  643.  In  Chanoine  v.  Fowler,  3  Wendell^  173,  it  was  held»
that  the  notice  of  non-acceptance  or  non-payment  cannot  be  gi^en  by
a  stranger,  but  it  may  be  by  any  person  who  is  a  party  to  the  bill,  or
who  would,  on  iti  return  to  him,  have  a  right  of  action  on  it.  But  the
cases  of  Shed  «.  Brett,  and  JdilU  «.  Bank  of  U.  5.,  lay  down  the  law
eonoeming  notice  in  the  broad  terms  stated  in  the  text.

e  Haynes  v.  Birks,  3  B.  4r  PuUer.  599.  Tunno  v.  Lague,  2  Joftii-
«ofi*t  Cofer,  1.  Colt  v.  Noble,  5  JIfatt.  Rep.  167.  Firth  v.  Thrush,
m.f  Crui,  387.


Lee.  XLIV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 109

Defect  to  give  the  like  notice,  with  due  diligence,  to  the  first
endoiser,  the  latter  would  not  be  liable  to  him.*  It  is  not  ne-
oessary,  in  the  case  of  notice  of  the  non-acceptance,  or  non-
payment of  a  bill,  that  a  copy  of  the  bill  and  protest  should
accompany  the  notice.  It  is  sufficient  to  give  notice  of  the
&ct*  If  several  parts,  as  is  usual,  of  a  bill  of  exchange,  be
drawn,  they  all  contain  a  condition  to  be  paid  provided  the
others  remain  unpaid,  and  they  collectively  amount  to  one
bill,  and  a  payment  to  the  holder  of  either  is  good,  and  a  pay-
ment of  one  of  a  set  is  payment  of  the  whole.  The  drawer
or  endorser,  to  be  changed  on  non-acceptance  or  non-payment,
is  entitled  to  call  for  the  protest,  and  the  identical  bill,  or  num*
ber  of  the  set  protested,  before  he  is  bound  to  pay  ;  and  it
would  be  sufficient  to  produce  it  at  the  trial,  or  account  for  its
absence.^  His  rights  attach  (o  the  bill  that  has  been  dis-
hon<nired,  and  he  is  entitled  to  call  for  it.  He  may  want  it
for  his  own  indemnity,  and  without  it  he  might  be  exposed  to
claims  from  some  bona  fide  holder,  or  person,  who  had  paid
it,  supra  protest^  for  his  honour.

There  are  many  cases  in  which  notice  is  not  requisite,  or
the  want  of  it  waived.

If  the  drawee  refuses  to  accept,  because  he  has  no  effects  of
the  drawer  in  hand,  notice  to  the  drawer  is  not  necessary.'
This  exception  to  the  general  rule  proceeds  on  the  ground  of
fraud  in  the  drawer,  or  that  notice  to  him  would  be  useless  ;


a  Moripao  r.  Woodworth,  3  Johnt,  Cat.  89.  PalhMr^  Traiit  du
Con.de  CAofig-e,  No.  153.  Bat  if  the  first  eodorter  has,  io  point  of
hetj  had  dae  Dotice  from  any  snbaeqaeot  holder,  it  it  aufficient.  Staf-
ford f.  Yates,  18  Joknaon^  337.  Staoton  t.  Blossom,  14  Maa$  lUp.  116.
Bayley  od  Bills,  4  edit.  163.

b  Cromwell  y,  Hyosoo,  2  Etp,  JV.  P.  Rep.  511.  Charters  r.  Bell,
4  ibid.  48.  Robins  ▼.  Gibson,  1  Mauh  4r  Selw.  289.  Lenox  ▼.  Lev^-
rett,  10  Jtfott.  Rep.  1. Wallace  v.  Agry,  4  Jlfaiofi,  336.

c  Powell  T.  Roach,  6  Etp.  JV.  P.  Rep.  76.  JSeaiMf,  420.  424,  sec,
74. Kenworthy  y.  Hopkins,  l  Johns.  Cos.  107.

d  Bickerdike  ▼.  Bo)lman,  1  Term.  Rep.  405^


110  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Pari  V.

but  the  courts  have  regretted  the  existence  of  the  exceptioo,
and  they  cgnfine  it  strictly  to  the  case  of  want  of  effects,  and
where  the  drawee  is  not  indebted  to  the  drawer,  and  to  other
cases  in  which  the  drawer  had  no  right  to  expect  that  his  bill
would  be  honoured.  Notice  is  requisite,  if  the  want  of  it
would  produce  detriment ;  as  if,  in  case  notice  had  been  given,
and  the  bill  taken  up,  the  drawer  would  have  had  his  remedy
over  against  some  third  person  ;  or  if  it  was  drawn  with  a
b(ma  fide  expectation  of  assets  in  the  hands  of  the  drawee,  as
upon  the  faith  of  consignments  not  come  to  hand,  or  upon
the  ground  of  some  fair  mercantile  agreement'  The  excep-
tion applies  only  to  the  drawer,  and  not  to  the  endorser  of  a
bill  drawn  without  funds  ;^  and  it  is  now  settled  in  England,
in  France,  and  in  this  country,  that  neither  the  insolvency  <rf
the  drawer,  or  drawee,  or  acceptor,  or  the  fact  that  the  drawee
had  absconded,  does  away  the  necessity  of  a  demand  of  pay-
ment, and  notice  to  the  drawer ;  nor  does  knowledge  in  the
endorser,  when  be  endorsed  the  paper,  of  the  insolvency  of  the
maker  of  the  note,  or  drawee  of  the  bill,  do  away  the  necessity
of  notice,  in  order  to  charge  him.^ It  was  left  undecided  in


a  Rogers  y,  Stephens,  2  Term  Rep,  713.  CorDey  ▼.  Da  Costa,  1  Etp*
J^. P.  Rep,  302,  Staples^.  Okioes,t6iJ.  332.  Clegg f. Cotton, 3  Bo». 4r
Pull.  239.  BrowQ  y,  Maffey,  15  Eoit't  Rep.  216.  Rucker  r.  Hiller,
16  EatVM  Rep.  43.  Cory  t.  Scott,  3  Bamw.  Sf  Aid.  619.  French  y.
Bank  of  Columbia,  4  Cranck't Rep.  141.  Catbell  v.  Goodwin,  1  Har-
fit  ^  Oti/,.468.  Eicbeiberger  v.  Finley,  7  i7arr.  <•  JohM.  381.  Far-
mers*  Bank  v.  Vanmeter,  4  Randolph,  553.  Norton  ▼.  Pickering,  8
S.  &  Creet.  610. Lafitte  t.  Slatter,  6  Bingham,  623.

b  Wilkes  V.  Jacks,  Peake't  JV.  P.  Cotes,  202.  Leach  v.  Hewett,  4
Taunton^  730. RamdaloIIday  f.  Darieux,  4  Wath.  Cir.  Rep.  61.

c  Nicholson  v.  Goutbit,  2  H,  Blackt.  Rep.  609.  Esdaile^y.  Sowerby,
11  EatVt  Rep.  114.  Howe  v.  Bowes,  5  Taunt,  Rep.  30,  Rhode  v.
Proctor,  4  Bamw,  (f.  Creif.  517.  Jackson  y.  Richards,2  Caimt'  Rep,
343.  French  F.  Bank  of  Columbia,  4  Craned.  141.  Sandfordv.  Dillaw^y,
10  Mcut,  Rep.  52.  Buck  y.  Cotton, 2  Conn.  Rep.  126.  The  Juniata
Bank  ▼.  Hall,  16  Serg.  4r  Rawle,  157.  Groton  r.  Dallheim,  Q  Green-
leaf,  476. Hill  y.  Martin,  12  MartwCt  Louie.  Rep.  177. Mr.  Bell,  in


>

Lcc,  XLIV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. Ill

Rhode  V.  Proctor ^^  whether,  in  the  case  of  the  bankruptcy  of
the  party  entitled  to  notice,  the  holder  was  bound  to  give  no-
tice to  the  assigtiees ;  though  the  intimation  in  that  and  other
cases  is,  and  it  is  clearly  the  better  opinion,  that  the  notice  to
the  assignees  would  be  proper,  if  assignees  had  been  chosen
when  notice  was  to  be  given/  If  a  bank  check  be  taken  in
the  ordinary  course  of  business,  it  is  not  an  absolute  payment,
but  only  the  means  to  procure  the  money,  and  the  holder  is
bound  to  present  it  for  payment  with  ordinary  diligence,  and
the  next  day  will  be  in  season.  But  if  the  bank  be  totaUy
prohibited,  by  process  of  law,  from  the  exercise  of  its  functions,
before  the  check  can,  with  due  diligence,  be  presented,  no
demand  need  be  made,  o^ notice  given ;  and  the  holder  may
waive  the  check  altogether,  and  resort  to  his  original  demand.*
So,  if  the  maker  of  the  check^has  no  funds  in  the  bank  at  the
date  of  the  check,  it  need  not  be  presented  for  payment  pre-
vious to  a  suit  upon  it/

Giving  time  by  the  holder  to  the  acceptor  of  a  bill,  after  the
drawer  has  been  fixed,  will  discharge  the  other  parties  to  the
bill;  but  the  agreement  for  delay  must  be  one  having  a  suffi-
cient consideration,  and  binding  in  law  upon  the  parties/  If
the  holder  gives  time  to  the  endorser,  knowing  that  the  note
was  made  for  his  accommodation,  he  does  not  thereby  dis-


his  Commentaries y  vol.  i.  413,  mentions  a  number  of  Scotch  decisiont
to  the  same  effect.  See  also,  Pardeuw^  part  6,  tit.  8,  ch.  3,  sec.  4,  tm
the  tame  point.

a  4  Bamw.  ic  Creu.  517.

h  See  Ex  parte  Moliney  19  VeHy'9  Rep-  216,  and  Hiompton  on  BUU^
p.  535,  as  cited  to  that  point  by  Mr.  Justice  Baylej,  in  Rhode  v.  Proe-
tor. See  also  BelVtComm.  vol.  i.  421.

e  Cromwell  &  Wing^  v.  Lovett,  1  HalVi  JV.  F.  Rep.  56.

d  Franklin  &  Smith  v.  Vanderpool,  1  Holly  78.

e  M'Lemore  v.  Powell,  12  Wheat  Rep,  554.  Planters'  Bank  v«
SeUanaOy  2  QUI  4*  Johns.  230.  Giving  indulg^ence  to  the  acceptor  after
jodgment  against  the  drawer  does  not  discharge  him.  Pole  ? •  Ford,  2
ChUii^M  Rep.  125.


11«  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. . [Part  V.

cbargfe  the  drawer.*  Simply  forbeariDg  to  sue  the  accepCori
or  taking  collateral  security  from  him,  is  no  discbarge,  but
giving  him  new  credit  and  time,  or  accepting  a  composition  in
discbarge  of  the  acceptor,  will  produce  that  result.  The  prin-
ciple is,  that  the  drawer  and  endorser  are  in  the  light  of  sure-
ties for  the  acceptor,  and  the  holder  must  do  nothing  to  impair
the  right  which  they  have  to  resort  by  suit  to  the  acceptor  for
indemnity,  or  which  would  amount  to  a  breach  of  faith  in
him  towards  the  acceptor.^  If  the  liability  of  the  surety  be
varied,  it  discharges  him,  or  if  he  can  sue  the  acceptor,  in  con-
sequence of  the  resort  over  to  him  by  the  holder,  notwith-
standing the  time  given  to,  or  the  composition  made  with,  the
acceptor,  by  the  holder,  the  latter  is  enabled  indirectly  to  vio-
late his  contract  with  the  acceptor.*  But  receiving  part  of  the
debt  from  the  acceptor,  after  the  drawer  has  been  duly  fixed|
works  no  prejudice  to  the  holder's  right  against  the  drawer
or  endoraOB,  for  it  is  in  aid  of  all  parties  who  are  eventually
liable.  All  that  the  rule  requires,  is,  that  the  holder  shall  not
so  deal  with  the  acceptor  of  the  bill,  or  maker  of  the  note,  by
giving  time,  or  compounding,  or  giving  credit,  as  to  prejudice
the  right  of  the  other  parties  to  the  bill,  without  their  assent,
in  the  exercise  of  their  right  of  recourse  against  the  maker  or
acceptor.  The  holder  may  give  time  to  an  immediate  en-
dorser, and  proceed  against  the  parties  behind  him.  A  prior
party  to  a  bill  is  not  discharged  by  a  release  of  a  subsequent
party.  But  the  holder  cannot  reverse  this  order,  and  coa>-
pound  with  prior  parties  without  the  consent  of  subsequent
ones,  for  it  varies  the  rights  of  the  subsequent  parties,  and


a  Walker  r.  Bank  of  Mootgomerj  CouDtj,  12  Serg.  ^  Rawle,  38S.
S.  C.  9  Serg.  &  RaioU,  229.

b  Philpot  r.  Briaot,  4  Bingham,  717.  Planters'  Bank  v.  Sellmaii,
S  QUI  k  Jokntony  230. NoJte  ▼.  Creditors,  19  Martin* m  Louii.  Rep,  9.

e  Ex  parte  Smith,  3  JBro.  1.  Walwyn  r.  St.  QuiDtio,  1  Boi.  it  PuU.
652.  Eoglish  v.  Darley,  2  ibid.  61 .  Clark  y.  DevliOf  3  ibid.  36.  Es
parte  WUsod,  1 1  Fee.  Rep.  410.  Gould  y.  RobsoD,  8  EaH*i  Rep.  576.
PriDgT.  ClarksoD,  1  Barnw.  ^  Creee.  14.


Uc-  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  113

discharges  them.  The  parties  to  a  bill  are  chargeable  in
different  order.  The  acceptor  is  first  liable,  and  the  endor-
sers in  the  order  in  which  they  stand  on  the  bill ;  and  taking
new  security,  or  giving  time,  or  discharging,  or  compounding
with  a  subsequent  endorser,  cannot  prejudice  a  prior  endorser,
because  he  has  no  rights  against  a  subsequent  endorsee/

If  due  notice  of  non-acceptance  or  non-payment  be  not
given,  or  a  demand  on  the  maker  of  a  promissory  note  be  not
made,  yet  a  subsequent  promise  to  pay,  by  the  party  entitled
to  notice,  will  amount  to  a  waiver  of  the  want  of  demand  or
notice,  provided  tlie  promise  was  made  clearly  and  unequivo-
cally, and  with  full  knowledge  of  the  fact  of  a  want  of  due
diligence  on  the  part  of  the  holder.  ^  The  weight  of  authority
is  that  this  knowledge  may  be  inferred,  as  a  fact,  from  the
promise  under  the  attending  circumstances,  without  requiring
clear  and  afiirmative  proof  of  the  knowledge.^  So,  if  the  en-
dorser has  protected  himself  from  loss  by  taking  collateral
security  of  the  maker  of  the  note,  or  an  assignment  of  his
property,  it  is  a  waiver  of  his  legal  right  to  require  proof  of
demand  and  notice.''


a  English  y.  Darly,  3  Etp.  JV.  P.  Bep-  49.  S.  C.  2  Bot.  ^  Puli.
61.  Smith  ▼.  Knox,  3  Esp.  JV.  P.  Rep.  46.  Sargent  v.  Appleton,  6
JtfofjT.  Rep.  85.  Clopper  v.  The  Union  Bank  of  Maryland,  7  Harr,
4- Johns.  100.

6  Goodall  v.  Dolley,  1  Term  Rep,  712.  Hope  y.  Alder,  6  EaaVs
Rep.  16,tn  nolit.  Borradaile  v.  Lowe,  4  Taunt.  Rep.  93.  Stevens  y.
Lynch,  2  Campb.  JV.  P.  332.  12  East,  3S.S.  C.  Miller  y.  Ilackley,
5  Johns.  Rep.  375.  Martin  v.  Winslow,  2  JUiason's  Rep.  241.  Fother-
ingham  y/ Price,  1  Bay's  Rep.  291.  Thornton  y.  Wynn,  12  TTheal,
Rep.  183.  Pate  y.  M^Clure,  4  Randolph^  164.  Otifc  y.  Huasey,  3  JV.
//.  Rep.  346.

c  Lnndie  y.  Robertson,  3  Easl^  231.  Piersons  y.  Hooker,  3  Johns.
Rep.  68.  Hopkins  y.  Lisvfell,  \2Masa.  Rep,  52.  Breed  y.  Hillbonsa,
7  Conn.  Rep.  523. Contra,  Trimble  v.  Thome,  16  Johnson^  152.

d  Mead  y.  Small,  2  Greenleaf't  Rep.  207.  Bond  y.  Farnham,  5  Mats,
Rep,  170. Prentiss  y.  Danielson,5  Con.  Rep.  175.

Vol-  III.  15  *


114  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

If  the  endorser  comes  again  into  possession  of  the  bill,  he
18  to  be  regarded  prima  facie  as  the  owner,  and  may  sue-
and  recover,  though  there  be  on  it  subsequent  endorsements,
and  no  receipt  or  endorsement  back  to  him,  and  he  may
strike  out  the  subsequent  names.^  To  maintain  a  suit  against
the  endorser,  the  holder  must  show,  as  we  have  seen,  due
demand  of  the  maker  or  acceptor,  or  a  presentment  for  ac-
ceptance, and  due  notice  to  him  of  the  default ;  and  he  need
not  prove  any  prior  endorsement,  nor  the  hand  of  the  drawer.*
But  in  the  suit  against  the  acceptor,  the  holder  need  not  show
notice  to  any  other  person.  The  acceptor  is  liable  at  all
events.  Receiving  part  from  the  drawer  or  endorser  is  no
discharge  of  the  acceptor.  Nothing  short  of  the  statute  of
Umitations,  or  payment,  or  a  release,  or  an  express  declara-
tion of  the  holder,  will  discharge  the  acceptor.  He  is  bound,
like  the  maker  of  a  note,  as  a  principal  debtor.  His  accept*
ance  is  evidence  that  the  value  of  the  bill  was  in  his  bands,
or  had  been  received  by  him  from  the  drawer.  He  is  liable
to  the  payee,  to  the  drawer,  and  to  every  endorser.  He  is  the
first  person,  and  the  last  person  liable,  and  there  is  no  differ-
euce  in  this  respect  between  an  acceptance  given  for  accom-
modation, and  one  given  for  value.  He  is  liable  to  an  inno-
cent holder,  though  the  drawer's  hand  be  forged,  and  in  the
suit  against  him  it  is  not  necessary  to  prove  any  hand  but
that  of  the  first  endorser.^ Though  a  bill,  payable  to  a  ficti-


a  Dugan  v.  U.  States,  3  Wheat.  Rep,  172.  Norris  r.  Badger,  6>
CotoenV  R^*  499.

h  Critcblow  y.  Parry,  2  Canvph,  JV.  P.  Rep.  182.  By  the  law  of  Vir-
ginia aod  Kentucky,  the  bolder  of  a  promissory  note  must  make  every
reasonable  effort,  and  doe  and  If  g^l  diligence,  to  recover  of  tbe  drawer
before  be  can  sue  tbe  endorser,  oo  tbe  ground  of  non-payment  and  no-
tice. 2  Peier»'  U.  S,  Rep.  538,  note,  ibid.  345.  See  also,  to  tbe  same
point,  Bank  of  tbe'U.  S.  v.  Tyler,  4  Und.  366.

c  Simmonds  y.  Parminter,  1  Wilt.  Rep.  185.  Dingwall  y.Dunster,
Doug.  Rep.  247.  Smith  y.  Chester,  1  Term  Rep.  654.  Fentum  y.
Pocock,  6  TlotunJ.  Rep.  192.  Farqubar  y.  Southey,  2  Carr.  4*  Poyne,
JV.  P.  Rep.  497.  '


Lcc.  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  116

tious  payee,  be  Birictly  void,  yet,  if  the  fact  was  known  to  the
acceptor,  he  may  be  sued  by  an  innocent  endorsee,  equally  as
upon  a  note  payable  to  bearer  ."^  And  if  the  holder  of  a  bank
bill  outsit  into  two  parts,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  transmitting
it  by  mail  with  greater  safety,  this  does  not  affect  his  rights
upon  the  bill,  and  he  may  recover  upon  the  production  of  only
ona  of  the  parts,  provided  he  shows  that  he  is  owner  of  the
whole,  and  accounts  for  the  absence  of  the  other  part.  The
parts  of  a  divided  bank  bill  are  not  separately  negotiable.*

(8.)  Of  the  measure  of  damages.

The  engagement  of  the  drawer  and  endorser  of  every  bill
is,  that  it  shall  be  paid  at  the  proper  time  and  place,  and  if  it
be  not,  the  holder  is  entitled  to  indemnity  for  the  loss  arising
from  this  breach  of  contract.  The  general  law  merchant  of
Europe  authorizes  the  holder  of  a  protested  bill  immediately
to  redraw  from  the  place  where  the  bill  was  payable,  on  the
drawer  or  endorser,  in  order  to  reimburse  himself  for  the  prin-
cipal of  the  bill  protested,  the  contingent  expenses  attending
it,  and  the  new  exchange  which  he  pays.  His  indemnity
requires  him  to  draw  for  such  an  amount  as  wfll  make  good
the  (ace  of  the  bill,  together  with  interest  from  the  time  it
ought  to  have  been  paid,  and  the  necessary  charges  of  pro-
test, postage,  and  broker's  commission,  and  the  current  rate  of
exchange  at  the  place  where  the  bill  was  to  be  demanded  or


a  Gibaoo  v.  Minet,  1  H.  Blacks.  Rep.  569. S.  C.  3  Term  Rep,
481.

b  PattoD  T.  Bank  of  S.  C.  2  JVott  <f>  M^Cordy  464.  Martin  v.  Bank
of  tbe  United  States,  4  Wath.  Cir,  Rep.  253.  Bank  of  the  United
States  V.  Sill,  5  Conn.  Rep.  106.  Farmers'  Bank  v.  Reynolds,  4  Ran-
dolphy  186.  Bullet  ▼.  Tbe  Bank  of  Pennsykania,  2  fFoih.  Cir.  Rep.
172.  In  Scotland,  a  very  summary  remedy  is  given  to  the  holder  of
bills  of  exchange  and  promissory  notes  protested  for  non-payment,  by
allowing  the  protest  to  be  recorded  under  an  implied  consent  of  tb«
debtor.  This  authorizes  a  decree  by  consent  called  a  decree  of  regis-
tratioD,and  a  summary  execution,  1  BelN  Comm,  4. 387.


116  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V-

payable,  on  tbe  place  where  it  was  drawn  or  negotiated.  The
law  does  not  insist  upon  an  actual  redrawing,  but  it  enables
the  holder  to  recover  what  would  be  the  price  of  another  new
bill,  at  the  place  where  the  bill  was  dishonoured,  or  the  loss
on  the  re-exchange  ;  and  this  it  does  by  giving  him  the  face
of  the  protested  bill,  with  interest,  and  the  necessary  expenses,
including  the  amount  or  price  of  the  re-exchange.*  But  the
endorser  of  a  bill  is  not  entitled  to  recover  of  the  drawer
the  damages  incurred  by  the  non-acceptance  of  the  bill,
unless  he  has  paid  them,  or  is  liable  to  pay  them.*  Nor
is  the  acceptor  liable  for  the  extra  charges  on  the  re-
exchange,  lie  is  only  chargeable  for  the  sum  specified
in  the  bill,  with  interest.  The  claim  for  the  re-exchange
iu  against  the  drawer  who  undertakes  to  indemnify  the  holder
if  the  bill  be  not  paid.'

In  this  country  a  different  practice  from  that  of  re-exchange
was  introduced  while  we  were  English  colonies,  and  it  has
continued  to  this  day.  Our  usages  on  this  subject  form  an
exception  to  the  commercial  law  of  Europe.

In  New- York,  the  rule  had  uniformly  been,  to  allow  twenty
per  cent,  damages  on  the  return  of  foreign  bills  protested  for
non-acceptance  or  non-payment,  and  the  damages  were  com-
puted on  the  principal  sum,  with  interest  on  the  aggregate
amount  of  the  bill  and  damages,  from  the  time  that  notice  of
the  protest  was  duly  given  to  the  drawer  or  endorser.  The
mercantile  usage  was,  to  consider  the  twenty  per  cent,  an
indemnity  for  consequential  damages,  and  to  require  the  bill


a  Mellish  v.  Simeon,  2  H,  Blackt.  Rep.  378.  De  Taste!  v.  Baringf,
1 1  EatVs  Rep.  265.  Parsons,  Cb.  J.,  in  Grimsliaw  y.  Bender,  6  Mast,
Rep.  157.  Code  de  Commerce^  b.  l,lit.  8,  art.  177.  186.  FanLeeu-
wen's  Commentaries,  440.

b  Kins^ston  v.  Wilson,  4  Wash.  Cir,  Rep.  310.

c  Woolsey  v.  Crawford,  2  Camph.  445.  Napier  v.  Scboeider,  12
Ea$ty  420.  In  France,  the  claim  for  tlie  re-exchange  is  deemed  good
against  Ibe  acceptor. Polhiery  Trailc  du  Cont.  de  Change^  No.  117.


L<c.  XLIV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  117

4o  be  paid  at  the  rate  of  exchange  at  the  time  of  returD,  or  a
new  bill  to  be  furnished  upon  the  same  principles. But  the
Supreme  Court*  considered  the  twenty  per  cent,  to  be  in  lieu
of  damages  in  case  of  re-exchange,  and  the  demand,  with
that  allowance,  was  to  be  settled  at  the  par  of  exchange.
This  doctrine  was  overturned  by  the  Court  of  Errors,^  and
the  holder  was  held  to  be  entitled  to  recover,  not  only  the
twenty  per  cent  damages,  together  with  interest  and  charges,
but  abo  the  amount  of  the  bill  liquidated  by  the  rate  of  ex-
change, or  price  of  bills  on  England,  or  other  place  of  demand
in  Europe,  at  the  time  of  the  return  of  the  dishonoured  bill,
and  notice  to  the  party  to  be  charged ;  and  this  rule  was  sub^
sequently  followed  in  the  courts  of  law.^

The  rate  of  damages  on  bills  drawn  and  payable  within
the  United  States,  or  other  parts  of  North  America,  was  sub-
sequently, in  1S19,  regulated  in  New- York  by  statute,^  and
the  damages  fixed  at  five,  or  seven  and  a  half,  or  ten  per
cent,  according  to  the  distance  or  situation  of  the  place  on
which  the  bill  was  drawn.  But  by  the  new  revised  statutes,
which  went  into  operation  on  the  Istof  January,  1830,  the
damages  on  bills,  foreign  and  inland,  were  made  the  subject
of  a  more  extensive  regulation.  They  provide,'  that  upon
bills  drawn  or  negotiated  within  the  state,  upon  any  person,
at  any  place  within  the  six  states  east  of  New- York,  or  in
New- Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Delaware,  Maryland,  Vir-
ginia, or  the  District  of  Columbia,  the  damages  to  be  allowed
and  paid,  upon  the  usual  protest  for  non-acceptance  or  non-
payment, to  the  holder  of  the  bill,  as  purchaser  thereof,  or  of
some  interest  therein,  for  a  valuable  consideration,  shall  be


a  Heodricki  v.  FrankliD,  4  Johnt.  Rep.  Il9. Weldon  r.  Back,
ihid.  144.
h  GraTes  v.  Dash,  12  Johm.  Rep,  17.
c  DenstoD  ▼.  Henderson ,  13  Johns,  Rep.  322.
d  Laws  of  ^eW'York,  42d  sess.  cb.  34.
e  J^ew'  York  Revised  SlaliUes,  vol.  1.  770, 771.


118  OF  PERSONAL  PROPBRTY.  [Part  V-

ihree  per  cent,  upon  tbe  principal  sum  Bpecified  in  the  bill  ;
and  upon  any  person  at  any  place  ivithin  the  states  of  North
Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Kentucky,  and  Tennes-
see, five  per  cent. ;  and  upon  any  person  in  any  other  state
or  territory  of  the  United  States,  or  at  any  other  place  on,  or
adjacent  to,  this  continent,  and  north  of  the  equator,  or  in  any
British  or  foreign  possessions  in  the  West  Indies,  or  elsewhere
in  the  Western  Atlantic  Ocean,  or  in  Europe,  ten  per  cenU
The  damages  are  to  be  in  lieu  of  interest,  charges  of  protest,
and  all  other  charges  incurred  previous  to,  and  at  the  time  of,
giving  notice  of  non-acceptance  or  non-payment  But  the
holder  will  be  entitled  to  demand  and  recover  interest  upon
the  aggregate  amount  of  the  principal  sum  specified  in  the
bill,  and  the  damages,  from  the  time  of  notice  of  the  protest
for  non-acceptance,  or  notice  of  a  demand  and  protest  for  non-
payment. If  the  contents  of  the  bill  be  expressed  in  the
money  of  account  of  the  United  States,  the  amount  due  there-
on, and  the  damages  allowed  for  the  non-payment,  are  to  be
ascertained  and  determined,  without  reference  to  the  rate  of
exchange  existing  between  New-York  and  the  place  on  which
Ihe  bill  is  drawn.  But  if  the  contents  of  the  bill  be  expressed
in  the  money  of  account,  or  currency  of  any  .^fe^eign  country,
then  the  amount  due,  exclusive  of  the  damages,  is  to  be  ascer-
tained and  determined  by  the  rate  of  exchange,  or  the  value
of  such  foreign  currency,  at  the  time  of  the  demand  of  pay-
ment.

The  laws  and  usages  of  the  other  states  vary  most  essen-
tially on  the  subject  of  damages  on  protested  bills.  In  some
cases,  the  regulations  of  states  approximate  to  each  other,
while  in  others  they  are  widely  different.  In  some  cases  the
law  or  rule  is  unlike,  but  the  result  is  nearly  similar  ;  while
between  other  states  the  result  varies  from  four  and  a  half  to
fifteen  per  cent.  In  Massachusetts,  tbe  usage  always  has
been  to  recover  the  amount  of  the  protested  bill  at  the  par  of
exchange,  and  interest,  as  in  England,  from  the  time  pay-
ment of  the  dishonoured  bill  was  demanded  of  the  drawee,
and  tlie  charges  of  the  protest,  and  ten  per  cent  damages  in


Lcc.  XLIV.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 119

lieu  of  the  price  of  exchange.'  But  this  rule  has  been  chan^
ged,  by  statute,  in  1826,  and  biUs  on  Europe  are  now  settled
at  the  current  rate  of  exchange  and  interest,  and  Ave  per
cent  damages  ;  and  if  the  bill  be  drawn  upon  any  place  be-
yond the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  twenty  per  cent,  damages.  In
Pennsylvania,  the  rule,  for  a  century  past,  was  twenty  per
cent,  damages,  in  lieu  of  re-exchange ;  but  by  statute,  in  1821,
twenty  per  cent,  damages  were  allowed  upon  protested  bills
on  Europe,  and  twenty-five  per  cent,  upon  other  foreign  bills,
in  lieu  of  all  charges,  and  the  amount  of  the  bill  is  to  be
ascertained  and  determined  at  the  rate  of  exchange.  In  Ma*
ryland,  the  rule,  by  statute,  is  fifteen  per  cent,  damages,  and
the  amount  of  the  bill  ascertained  at  the  current  rate  of  ex-
change, or  the  rale  requisite  to  purchase  a  good  bill  of  the
same  time  of  payment  upon  the  same  place.  In  South  Caro-
lina, the  damages,  by  statute,  are  fifteen  per  cent.,  and  ia
Alabama  and  Louisiana,  twenty  per  cent  In  North  Caro-
lina, by  statute,  in  1828,  damages  on  protested  bills,  dmwn  or
endorsed  in  that  state,  and  payable  in  any  other  part  of  the
United  States,  except  Louisiana,  are  six  per  cent. ;  payable
in  any  other  part  of  North  America,  except  the  West  India
Islands,  ten  per  cent ;  payable  in  South  America,  the  Afri-
can Islands,  or  Europe,  fifteen  per  cent.  ;  and  payable  else-
where, twenty  per  cent.  In  Virginia,  the  damages  on  foreign
bills  protested  for  non-acceptance  or  non-payment,  are  ten  per
cent.  The  damages  in  Tennessee,  by  statute,  in  1830,  on
protested  bills,  over  and  above  the  principal  sum,  and  charges
of  protest,  and  interest  on  the  principal  sum,  damages  and
charge  of  protest  from  the  time  of  notice,  are  three  per  cent
on  the  principal  sum,  if  the  bill  be  drawn  upon  any  person  in
the  United  States ;  and  fifteen  per  cent,  if  upon  any  person  in
any  other  place  or  state  in  North  America  bordering  on  the
Gulf  of  Mexico,  or  in  the  West  Indies  ;  and  twenty  per  cent


a  Grimshftw  r.  Bender,  6  Mom.  Rep*  157.


120  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

•

if  upon  a  person  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  These
damages  are  in  lieu  of  interest,  and  all  other  charges,  except
the  charges  of  protest,  to  the  time  of  notice  of  the  protest,  and
demand  of  payment.  The  damages  in  Georgia,  by  statute,
in  1827,  on  foreign  bills  protested  for  non-payment,  ar&
ten  per  cent.,  together  with  the  usual  expenses  and  interest,
and  the  principal  to  be  settled  at  the  current  rate  of  ex-
change.*

The  inconvenience  of  a  want  of  uniformity  in  the  rule  of
damages  in  the  laws  of  the  several  states,  is  very  great,  and
has  been  strongly  felt.  The  mischiefs  to  commerce,  and  per-
plexity to  our  merchants,  resulting  from  such  discordant  and
shifting  regulations,  have  been  ably,  justly,  and  frequently
urged  upon  the  consideration  of  Congress  ;  and  the  right  of
Congress  to  regulate,  by  some  uniform  rule,  the  rate  and  rule
of  recovery  of  damages  upon  protested  foreign  biUs,  or  bills
drawn  in  one  state  upon  another,  under  the  power  in  thecon-
stitution  "to  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and
among  the  several  states ;"  and  the  expediency  of  the  exer-
cise of  that  right,  have  been  well,  and,  I  think,  conclusively
shown,  in  the  official  documents  which  have  been  prepared
on  that  subject.*


a  See  Oriffilh's  Law  Reguler,  passim,  under  tbe  head  of  <*  bills  of
exchange  and  promissory  notes.'*  And  ^ee  Report  of  Mr.  Verphmcky
from  the  select  committee  in  tbe  House  of  Representatives  of  the  Con-
gress of  tbe  United  States,  on  the  subject  of  foreign  bills,  made  March
22d,  1826. American  Jurist^  No.  4.  398. Ihid.  No.  6.  398.

b  See  the  Report  of  Mr.  Verplanck,  from  the  select  committee  al-
ready referred  to,  and  the  Report  of  a  Committee  of  the  Chamber  of
Commerce  of  J^e\D'  York,  in  February,  1 828.  In  that  last  document
the  Committee  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  approve  of  the  principle
of  damages  on  foreign  bills  returned  under  protest,  and  they  state  that
the  practice  of  re«exchanges,  vvhich  are  so  easily  made  between  the
great  capitals  of  Europe,  does  not  exist  between  Europe  and  the  Uni-
ted States;  nor  do  our  business  operations  require  them ;  and,  until
some  safe  and  satisfactory  substitute  is  established,  tbe  usage  in  tbit
country,  of  allowing  damages  on  protested  bills,  ought  to  be  continued.


Let.  XLIV.J OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  121

(9.)  Of  mercantile  guaranties.

A  guaranty,  in  its  enlarged  sense,  is  a  promise  to  answer
for  the  payment  of  some  debt,  or  the  performance  of  some
duty,  in  the  case  of  the  failure  of  another  person,  who,  in  the
first  instance,  is  liable.  As  this  engagement  is  a  common  one
in  mercantile  transactions,  and  analagous,  in  many  respects,
to  that  of  endorser  of  negotiable  paper,  a  few  remarks  con-
cerning its  creation  and  validity  will  not  be  altogether  inappli-
cable to  the  subject.

In  Pillans  v.  Van  Mierapj^  it  was  held,  that  a  note  of
guaranty,  being  in  writing,  and  in  a  mercantile  case,  came
within  the  reason  of  a  bill  or  note,  and  did  not  require  a  ochi-
sideratioQ  to  appear  upon  the  face  of  it.  But  there  was  a  Buf«
fident  ajqparent  consideration  in  that  case,  and  the  dicta  of
the  judges  were  afterwards  considered  as  erroneous,  in  Rann
V.  Hughes^  before  the  House  of  Lords.*  The  doctrine  in  the
latter  case  was,  that  all  contracts,  if  merely  in  writing,  and
not  specialties,  were  to  be  considered  as  parol  contracts,  and  a
consideration  must  be  proved.

The  English  statute  of  frauds,^  which  has  been  adopted
throughout  this  country,  requires,  that,  '^  upon  any  special
promise  to  answer  for  the  debt,  default,  or  miscarriage  of
another  person,  the  agreement,  or  some  memorandum  or  note
thereof,  must  be  in  writing,  and  signed  by  the  party  to  be
charged  therewith,  or  some  other  person  thereunto  by  him
lawfully  authorized."  An  agreement  to  become  a  guarantor,
or  surety,  for  another's  engagement,  is  within  the  statute  ;
and  if  it  be  a  guaranty  for  the  subsisting  debt  or  engage^
ment  of  another  person,  not  only  the  engagement,  but  the
consideration  for  it,  must  appear  in  the  writing.  The  word
agreement^  in  the  statute,  includes  the  consideration  for  the
promise,  as  well  as  the  promise  itself,  for  without  a  considera-


a  3  Burr.  Rtp.  1666.

6  7jBroi0n'«P.  C.550.

t  29  CharU*  II.  ch.  3,  sec.  4.

Vol.  m.  16


123  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

tion  there  is  no  valid  agreement.  This  was  the  decifiioo  in
the  case  of  Wain  v.  Warlters  /  and  though  that  decision
has  been  frequently  questioned/  it  has  since  received  the  de-
cided approbation  of  the  courts  of  law  ;^  and  the  Ch.  J.  of  the
C.  B.  observed,  that  he  should  have  so  decided  if  he  had
never  heard  of  the  case  of  Wain  v.  Warlters,  The  Eng-
lish construction  of  the  statute  of  frauds  has  been  adopted  in
New-York  and  South  Carolina,  and  rejected  in  several  other
states.'  The  decisions  have  all  turned  upon  the  force  of
the  word  agreement  ;  and  where,  by  the  statute,  the  word
promise  has  been  introduced,  by  requiring  the  promise  or
agreement  to  be  in  writing,  as  in  Virginia,  the  construction
has  not  been  so  strict^

Where  the  guaranty  or  promise,  though  collateral  to  the
principal  contract,  is  made  at  the  same  time  with  the  prin-
cipal contract,  and  becomes  an  essential  ground  of  the  credit
given  to  the  principal  debtor,  the  whole  is  one  original  and
entire  transaction,  and  the  consideration  extends  and  sustains
the  promise  of  the  principal  debtor,  and  also  of  the  guarantor*
No  other  consideration  need  be  shown  than  that  for  the  origi-
nal agreement,  upon  which  the  whole  debt  rested,  and  that
may  be  shown  by  parol  proof,  as  not  being  within  the  star
tute.-^ If,  however,  the  guaranty  be  of  a  previously  existing


a  5  EasVs  Aep.  10.

h  See  Ex  parte  Minet,  14  Ker.  Rep.  190.  Ex  parte  Gardom,  15
ibid.  286.

€  SanDders  f.  Wakefield,  4  Batmo.  4f  Aid.  695.  Jenkins  ▼.  Rey-
nolds, 3  Brod.  4*  Bing.  14.  Morley  y.  Boothby,  3  Bing.  Rep.  107.
Newbury  v.  Armstrong,  6  Bingham^  201.

d  Sears  ▼•  Brink,  3  Johm.  Rep.  210.  Leonard  t.  Vredenburgb,  8
t5td.29.  9  JfoU  4>  JIfCord,  372,  note.  Packard  y.  Richardson,  17
MoiM.  Rep.  122.  Leyy  y.  Merrill,  4  Oreenleaf*s  Rep.  180.  S.  P.  ibid.
387. Sage  y.  Wilcox,  6  Conn.  Rep.  81.

e  Marshall,  Ch.  J.,  5  Cranch*i  Rep.  161, 2.

/  Leonard  y.  Vredenbaiigh,  8  JohMie.  Rep.  29.  D*Wolf  v.  Raband,
1  FeUre'  Rep.  476. The  doctrine  in  8  JokM.  R^.  is  confitmed  in  1 1


Lm.  XUV.] of  personal  property.  123

debt  of  another,  a  consideration  is  necessary  to  be  shown,  and
that  must  appear  in  writing,  as  part  of  the  collateral  under^
taking ;  for  the  consideration  for  the  original  debt  will  not
attach  to  this  subsequent  promise  ;  and  to  such  a  case  the
doctrine  in  Wain  v.  Warlters  applies.  But  if  the  promise
to  pay  the  debt  of  another  arises  out  of  some  new  and  original
consideration  of  benefit  or  harm  moving  between  the  newly
contracted  parties,  it  is  then  not  a  case  within  the  statute.*

There  are  no  such  words  in  the  statute  of  frauds  as  original
and  collateral  The  promise  referred  to  1s  to  answer  for  the
debt  or  default  of  another.  The  term  debt  implies,  that  the
Uability  of  the  principal  had  been  precedently  incurred ;  but
a  default  may  arise  upon  an  executory  contract,  and  a  pro*
raise  to  pay  for  goods  to  be  furnished  to  another,  is  a  collate-
ral promise  to  pay  on  the  other's  de&ult,  provided  the  credit
was,  in  the  first  instance,  given  solely  to  the  other.  If  the
whole  credit  be  not  given  to  the  person  who  comes  in  to  an-
swer for  another,  his  undertaking  is  collateral,  and  must  be
in  writing.*

After  a  valid  guaranty  has  been  made,  the  rights  of  the
parties  in  the  relative  character  of  principal  and  surety  afibrds
an  interesting  subject  of  inquiry,  and  the  doctrine  in  the  case
of  negotiable  paper,  as  to  demand  and  notice,  has  a  feeble  and
qualified  application  to  the  guarantor.  Thus  it  has  been
held,  that  the  guarantor  of  a  note  could  be  discharged  by  the
laches  of  the  holder,  as  by  neglect  to  make  demand  of  pay-
ment of  the  maker,  and  give  notice  of  non-payment  to  the
guarantor,  provided  the  maker  was  solvent  when  the  note
fell  due,  and  became  insolvent  afterwards. The  rule  is  not


Johns,  Rep,  SSI,  and  13  Johns,  Bep,  175,  and  in  PUen'  Bep.  the  doc-
trine is  said  to  be  founded  in  good  sense  and  couyenience.

a  Leonard  v.  Vredenbargh,  8  Johns,  Rep,  29.  Bailej  ▼.  Freeman,
1 1  ibid,  221 .  Hunt  v.  Adams,  5  Jdass,  Rep.  358.  Williams  t.  Leper,
3  Bwrr,  R^,  1886. Atkinson  r.  Carter,  2  ChiUy*s  Rep,  403.

b  Ldaod  V.  Creyoa,  1  MCord,  100.


124  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

80  Strict  as  in  the  case  of  mere  negotiable  paper,  and  the  ne-
glect to  give  notice  must  have  produced  some  loss  or  preju-
dice to  the  guarantor.'  And  in  the  case  of  the  absolute  gua-
ranty of  the  payment  of  a  note,  no  demand  or  notice  is
requisite  to  .fix  the  guarantor.*  But  a  further  pursuit  of  this
subject  of  guaranty  would  iu>t  strictly  appertain  to  the  doc-
trine of  negotiable  paper ;'  and  I  shall  conclude  the  present
general  outline  of  that  subject,  with  sQpie  notice  of  the  prin*
oipal  pubUcations  on  bills  and  notes.

(10.)  Of  the  prindpal  treatises  en  biUs  and  nates.
It  would  have  been  impossible  to  enter  into  greater  detail
of  the  distinctions  and  minute  provisions  which  apply  to  nego-
tiable paper,  without  giving  undue  proportion  to  this  branch
of  these  elementary  disquisitions.'' The  treatises  and  leading


a  Oxford  Bank  v.  HajDes,  8  Pickeringt  423.  The  opinion  of  Dun-
can, J.,  in  Cannon  ▼.  Gibbs,  9  Serg*  4*  Rowle^  202,  is  to  the  same  point
See  also  Philips  ▼.  Astliog,  2  TaimUmj  206.  Warrington  r.  Fnrbor,  8
Eoity  242.

b  Breed  t.  Hillhonse,  7.  Conn.  Rej^  623.

c  The  student  will  find  the  law  conoeming  mercantile  guarantiee,
and  of  principal  and  surety,  fully  examined,  and  the  substance  of  the
numerous  cases  well  digested,  in  Fell's  Trealiie  on  Mercantile  Qvaran^
Uet.

d  As  evidence  of  the  diffusireness  of  the  subject,  and  the  infinity  of
its  subordinate  rules  and  distinctions,  I  would  refer  to  the  edition  of
ChiUy  en  BilUj  published  at  Philadelphia  in  1826,  which  is  a  bulky  oc.
tavo  of  729  pages  in  small  type,  and  which  has  an  index  alone  of  159
pages.  It  contains  the  citation  of  perhaps  2000  English,  and  600
American  adjudged  cases,  on  this  single  subject  of  bills  and  notes.  I
have  attempted  no  more,  in  the  course  of  the  lecture,  than  to  select  a
sufficient  number  of  cases  to  establish  the  general  principles,  and  to
show  their  wide  spread  adoption.  And  yet  I  am  apprehensive  it  may
be  thought  I  have  already  gone  too  far  into  detail,  and  encumbered  the
notes  too  much  with  references  to  authority.  The  apology  (if  any  be
necessary)  is,  that  these  commercial  subjects  cannot,  as  it  appears  to
me»  be  bandied  usefully  in  any  other  way.  -My  mind  has  been  too  long
disciplined  by  the  actual  business  of  life,  to  indulge  in  general  theory


Lcc.  XI-IV.l  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 126


must  be  thoroughly  understood,  before  the  student  can
expect  to  be  master  of  this  very  technical  branch  of  commer-
dal  laW|  and  a  brief  notice  of  the  best  works  on  the  subject
will  serve  to  direct  his  inquiries,

The  earliest  English  work  on  bills  is  in  Malynes*  Lex  Mer-
catoria. The  author  was  a  merchant,  and  the  work  was
compiled  in,  the  reign  of  King  James  I.,  and  dedicated  to  the
king. That  part  relating  to  bills  of  exchange  is  brief,  loose,
and  scanty ;  but  it  contains  the  rules  and  mercantile  usages
then  prevailing  in  England,  and  other  commercial  countries.
It  was  required,  at  that  early  day,  that  the  bill  should  be  pre-
sented for  acceptance,  and  again  for  payment,  with  diligence,
and  at  seasonable  hours,  and  on  proper  days ;  and  the  de&ult
in  each  case  was  to  be  noted  by  a  notary,  and  information
of  it  sent  to  the  drawer  with  all  expedition,  to  enable  him  to
secure  himself. If  the  drawee  would  not  accept,  any  other
person  was  allowed  to  accept  for  the honour  of  the  bill.
MaljTies  takes  no  notice  of  promissory  notes  or  checks,  and
he  even  laments  that  negotiable  notes  were  unkown  to  the
law  of  England.

The  next  English  treatise  on  the  subject  was  that  by  MariuS|
published  in  the  year  1651,  and  that  treatise  has  been  referred
to  by  Lord  Holt  and  Lord  Kenyon,  as  a  very  respectable  work.


OD  law  rabjects,  or  to  think  it  of  much  vahie.  The  first  duty  of  a  law
book  is  to  state  the  law  omUu,  truly  aod  accurately,  aod  then  the  rea-
son or  priociple  of  it  as  far  as  it  is  known ;  and  if  the  author  be  a  lec-
turer or  commentator,  he  may  be  more  free  in  his  obserrations  on  its
history  and  character,  aod  he  ought  to  illustrate  it  by  comparison  with  the
instituticms  of  other  countries  and  ages,  and,  in  strong  cases,  to  point
out  its  defects,  to  show  its  false  doctrines,  and  modestly  and  temperately
to  soggest  alterations  and  improrements.  All  this  I  ha?e  endeavoured
to  do,  so  far  as  the  subject  was  within  the  compass  of  my  means  and  re-
sources ;  but  still  the  existing  and  leading  rules  ought  to  be  laid  open
to  the  inspection  of  the  lawyer  and  the  scholar,  with  mathematical  pre-
cision, and  absolute  certainty.  I  say  ought^  for  bow  can  any  one  pre-
tend to  be  infallible  in  treating  of  subjects  perplexed  by  ten  thousand
cases,  and  when  every  rule  is  checked  or  qualified  by  reservations  and
exceptions  of  the  roost  fine-spun  and  subtle  character?


126  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Pan  V.

Marius  followed  the  business  of  a  notary  public  at  the  royal
exchange  in  London  for  twenty-four  years,  and  he  had,  of
course,  perfect  experience  in  all  the  mercantile  usages  of  the
times.  His  work  is  far  more  particular,  formal,  and  exact,
than  that  of  Malynes.  The  three  days  of  grace  were  then  in
use ;  and  Marius  decides  the  very  point  which  has  been  again
and  again  decided,  and  even  in  our  own  courts,  that  if  the  third
day  of  grace  feUs  on  Sunday,  or  a  holyday,  or  no  day  of  busi-
ness, the  money  must  be  demanded  on  the  second  day,  and
that  the  notice  of  the  default  of  payment  must  be  sent  off  by
the  very  first  post  after  the  bill  falls  due.  He  says,  likewise,
that  verbal  acceptances  were  good,  and  that  you  may  accept
for  part,  and  have  the  bill  protested  for  the  residue.  It  is  quite
amusing  to  perceive  that  many  of  the  points  which  have
been  litigated,  or  stated  in  our  courts,  within  the  last  thirty
years,  are  to  be  found  in  Marius ;  so  true  it  is,  that  case  after
case,  and  point  after  point,  on  all  the  branches  of  the  law,  are
constantly  arising  in  the  courts  of  justice,  and  discussed  as
doubtful  or  new  points,  merely  because  those  who  raise  them
are  not  thorough  masters  of  their  profession.  The  next  writer
who  treats  on  (he  subject  of  bills  is  MoUoy.  He  was  a  barrister
in  the  reign  of  Charles  U. ;  and  in  his  extensive  compilation,
dejure  Maritimo,  which  was  first  published  in  1676,  he  cast
a  rapid  glance  over  the  law  concerning  bills  of  exchange,  but
that  part  of  his  work  is  far  inferior  to  the  treatise  of  Marius.
Beawes's  Lex  Mercatoria  Rediviva,  is  a  much  superior
work  to  that  of  Malynes,  and  it  appears,  by  its  very  title,  to
have  been  intended  as  a  substitute.  It  contains  a  full,  and
very  valuable  collection,  of  the  rules  and  usages  of  law  on  the
subject  of  biUs  of  exchange.  Promissory  notes  were  th^n
taken  notice  of,  though  they  had  not  been  so  much  as  alluded
to  in  the  formal  and  didactic  treatise  of  Marius.  They  were
not  introduced  into  general  use,  until  near  the  close  of  the
reign  of  Charles  II.,  and  for  this  we  have  the  authority  of  Lord
Holt  in  Buller  v.  Crisp,^ Beawes  is  frequently  cited  in  our

a  6  Mod.  Rtp.  29.


Lee.  XLIV.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 12T

books  as  an  authority  on  mercantile  customs ;  and  a  new  and
enlarged  edition  of  bis  work  was  published  by  Mr. Chitty  in
1813. The  next  work  on  the  subject  of  bills  and  notes  was
by  Cunningham,  and  it  was  published  about  the  middle  of
the  last  century. It  consisted  chiefly  of  a  compilation  of
adjudged  cases,  without  much  method  and  observation. It
was  mentioned  by  the  English  judges  as  a  very  good  book ;
but  it  fell  into  perfect  oblivion  as  soon  as  Kyd's  treatise  on
bills  and  notes  appeared,  in  the  year  1790. Mr.  Kyd  made
free  use  of  Marius  and  Beawes,  and  he  ingrafted  into  his
W(Mrk  the  substance  of  all  the  judicial  decisions  down  to  that
time. His  work  became,  therefore,  a  very  valuable  digest  to
the  practising  lawyer,  and  particularly  as  during  the  times  of
Lord  Holt  and  Lord  Mansfield,  the  law  concerning  negotia-
ble paper  was  extensively  discussed,  aqd  vastl}^  improved.
Mr.  Bayley,  who  is  now  a  judge  of  the  R.  B.,  published  in
1789,  a  little  before  the  work  of  Kyd,  a  small  manual  or  digest
of  the  principles  which  govern  the  negotiability  of  bills  and
notes. As  a  collection  of  rules  expressed  with  sententious
brevity  and  perfect  precision,  it  is  admirable.  In  a  subsequent
edition,  he  stated  also  the  cases  from  which  his  principles
were  deduced. A  work  of  more  fuU  detail,  and  of  a  more
scientific  cast,  seemed  to  be  still  wanting  on  the  subject,  and
that  was  well  supplied  by  Mr.  Chitty's  treatise  on  bills,  notes,
and  checks,  first  published  in  1799. He  had  recourse,  though
in  a  sparing  degree,  to  the  treatise  of  Pothier  for  illustration
of  the  rules  of  this  part  of  the  general  law  merchant ;  and  it
is  obvious,  that  a  more  free  and  liberal  spirit  of  inquiry  dis-
tinguishes the  professional  treatises  of  the  present  age  firom
those  of  former  periods. The  works  of  Park  and  Marshall
on  Insurance,  and  Abbot  on  Shipping,  and  Chitty  on  Bills,
and  Jones  on  Bailment,  have  all  been  enriched  by  the  pro-
found and  classical  productions  of  France  and  Italy  on  com-
mercial jurisprudence.

The  treatise  of  Pothier  on  Bills  is  finished  with  the  same
order  and  justness  of  proportion,  the  same  comprehensiveness
of  plan,  and  clearness  of  analysis,  which  distinguish  his  other


128  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  Part  V-

treatises  on  coDtracts.  His  work  is  essentially  a  commentary
upon  the  French  OTdinance  of  1673  ]  and  he  had  ample  ma-
terials in  the  commentary  of  M.  Jousse,  and  in  the  treatises
on  the  same  subject  by  Dupuy  de  la  Serra,  and  by  Savary,
to  which  he  frequently  refers.  He  also  cites  two  foreign  wcnrks
of  learning  on  the  doctrine  of  negotiable  paper,  and  those  are
iSboccAta  De  Commerciis  et  Cambio,  and  Heioeccius's  trea-
tise,  entitled,  Elementa  Juris  Catnbialis.  The  latter  work
contains  very  full  and  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  professional
erudition  of  the  Germans  on  subjects  of  maritime  law.  He
refers  to  the  ordinances  of  various  German  states,  and  of
several  of  the  Hanse  towns,  relating  to  commercial  paper,
and  he  cites  eight  or  ten  professed  German  treatises  on  bills
of  exchange."*

It  has  been  a  frequent  practice  on  the  European  continent,
to  reduce  the  law  concerning  bills,  as  well  as  concerning  other
maritime  subjects,  into  system  by  ordinance.  The  commer-
cial ordinance  of  France,  in  1673,  digested  the  law  of  bills  of
exchange,  and  it  was,  with  some  alterations  and  amendments,
incorporated  into  the  commercial  code  of  1807.  Since  the
publication  of  the  new  code,  M.  Pardessus  has  written  a  valu-
able commentary  on  this,  as  well  as  on  other  parts  of  the
code ;  and  there  is  a  clear  and  concise  summary  of  the  law
concerning  negotiable  paper  in  M.  le  Comte  Merliris  Reper-
toire de  Jurisprudence^  under  the  title  of  Lettre  et  Billet
de  Change.  Thomson's  treatise  on  the  law  of  bills  and  notes
in  Scotland,  is  a  superior  work,  and  spoken  of  in  very  high
terms  by  persons  entirely  competent  to  judge  of  its  value.
The  law  concerning  negotiable  pc^r  has  at  length  become
a  science,  which  can  be  studied  with  infinite  advantage  in
the  various  codes,  treatises,  and  judicial  decisions ;  f(Mr,  in
them,  every  possible  view  of  the  doctrine,  in  all  its  branches,
has  been  considered,  its  rules  established,  and  its  limitations
accurately  defined.


a  See  HemeccU  Opera,  torn.  6,  injine.


LECTURE  XLV.

OF  THE  TITLE  TO  MERCHANTS^  VESSELS*

The  utility  of  an  outline  of  the  code  of  maritime  law,
must  consist  essentially  in  the  precision,  as  well  as  in  the  per-
q»cuily,  with  which  its  principles  are  illustrated  by  a  series
of  positive  rules.  Every  work  on  this  subject  will  unavoida-
bly become,  in  a  degree,  dry  and  minute  in  the  detail ;  but
it  would  be  destitute  of  real  value,  unless  it  were  practical  in
its  design  and  application.  The  law  concerning  shipping
and  seamen,  negotiable  paper,  and  marine  insurance,  con-
trols the  most  enterprising  and  the  most  busy  concerns  of
mankind ;  and  it  consists  of  a  system  of  principles  and  facts,
ia  the  shape  of  usages,  regulations,  and  precedents,  which
are  assimilated  in  the  codes  of  all  commercial  nations,  and
are  as  distinguished  for  simplicity  of  design,  and  equity  of
purpose,  as  they  are  for  the  variety  and  minuteness  of  their
provisions.  I  have  wished  (and  I  hope  not  entirely  without
success)  to  be  able  to  give  to  the  student  a  faithful  summary
of  the  doctrines  of  commercial  jiuisprudence,  and  to  awaken
iu  his  breast  a  generous  zeal  to  become  familiar  with  the  lead-
ing judicial  decisions,  and  especially  witli  the  writings  of  those
great  masters  in  the  science  of  maritime  law,  whose  talents
and  learning  have  enabled  them  to  digest  and  adorn  it.

The  law  of  shipping  may  be  conveniently  arranged  under

the  following  general  heads :  1.  Of  the  title  to  vessels. 2.

Of  the  persons  employed  in  the  navigation  of  merchants'  ships.

3.  Of  the  contract  of  aflreightment. This  arrangement  is

very  nearly  the  samo  with  that  pursued  by  Mr,  Abbott,  (now

Lord  Tenterden,)  in  his  treatise  on  the  subject,  and  which.
Vol.  III.  17


130  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  Y.

after  comparing  it  with  the  method  in  which  these  various
topics  have  been  discussed  by  other  writers^  I  do  not  think
can  be  essentially  improved.  It  has  been  substantially  adapt-
ed by  Mr.  Holt,  in  his  "  System  of  the  Shipping  and  Navi-
gation Laws  of  Great  Britain,"  and  still  more  closely  followed
by  M.  Jacobsen,  the  Danish  civilian,  in  his  treatise  on  the
^  Laws  of  the  Sea."  The  law  of  shipping,  as  thus  arranged
and  divided)  will  form  the  subject  of  thiS|  and  of  the  two  suc-
ceeding lectures.

(1.)  Requisites  to  a  valid  title  to  vessels.

The  title  to  a  ship  passes  by  writing.  A  bill  of  sale  is  the
true  and  proper  muniment  of  title  to  a  ship,  and  one  which
the  maritime  courts  of  all  nations  will  look  for,  and,  in  their
ordinary  practice,  require.*  In  Scotland,  a  written  convey-
ance of  property  in  ships  has,  by  custom,  become  essential ;
and  in  England  it  is  made  absolutely  necessary  by  statute,
with  regard  to  British  subjects.^  Possession  of  a  ship,  and
acts  of  ownership,  will,  in  this,  as  in  other  cases  of  property,
be  presumptive  evidence  of  title,  without  the  aid  of  documen-
tary proof,  and  will  stand  good  until. that  presumption  be
destroyed  by  contrary  proof;*  and  a  sale  and  delivery  of  a
ship,  without  any  bill  of  sale,  or  instrument,  will  be  good  at
law  as  between  the  parties.^  But  the  presumption  of  tide
arising  from  possession  may  easily  be  destroyed  ;  and  the  ge-
neral rule  is,  that  no  person  can  convey  who  has  no  title }
and  the  mere  fact  of  possession  by  the  vendor  is  not,  of  itself,


a  Lord  Stowell  id  tbe  Sisten,  5  Rob.  Adm,  Rep.  1 55.  Story,  J.,  1
M(U09C9  Rep.  139.  ,2  ibid.  435.  Obi  v.  Eagle  losuraDce  CompaDy,  4
JtfMon,  390.  ^

h  Stat.  34,  Geo.  III.  c.  68.  See  also,  Camdeo  ▼.  AodersoD,  5  Term
Rep.  709.  Tbe  Sisters,  5  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  155.  Belli  Commentariet
on  Ihe  Laws  of  Scotland,  vol.  i.  152.

c  Robertson  v.  Frencb,  4  EasVt  Rep:  130.
^'  d  Tagg^ard  v.  Loring,  16  Mase.  Rep.  336. Wendover  &  Hiatoo  ▼•
Hogeboom,  7  Johne.  Rep.  308.


Lcc  ILV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 131

ffuffident  to  give  a  title.  Though  the  master  of  a  ship,  as
we  shaU  presently  see,  be  clothed  with  great  powers  connect-
ed with  the  employment  and  navigation  of  the  ship,  he  has
even  no  authority  to  sell,  xmless  in  a  case  of  extreme  neces-
sity, and  then  he  has  an  implied  authority  to  exercise  his
discretioQ  for  the  benefit  of  all  concerned.*

It  has  frequently  been  the  case,  that  the  sale  of  a  ship  has
been  procured  in  foreign  countries  by  order  of  some  admiralty
court,  as  a  vessel  unfit  for  service.  Such  sales  are  apt  to  be  col-
lusively  conducted ;  and  the  English  courts  of  common  law
do  not  regard  them  as  binding,  even  though  made  bona  fide^
and  for  the  actual  as  well  as  the  intended  benefit  of  the  par-
ties in  interest  They  kold,  that  there  is  no  adequate  foun-
dation for  such  authority  in  the  legitimate  powers  of  the  ad-
miralty courts.  They  have  no  such  power  by  the  law  of
nations,  and  no  such  power  is  exercised  by  the  Court  of  Ad-
miralty at  Westminster.^  Lord  Stowell,  on  the  other  hand,
considered  the  practice  which  obtained  in  the  vice-admiralty
courts  abroad,  of  ordering  a  sale  under  the  superintendence
of  the  court,  to  be  very  convenient  when  the  fact  of  necessity
was  proved  ;  and  he  seemed  to  consider,  that  it  would  be  a
defect  in  the  law  of  England,  if  a  practice  so  conducive  to  the
public  utility,  could  not  legally  be  maintained.  The  Court
<tf  Admiralty,  feeling  the  expediency  of  the  power,  would  go
far  to  support  the  title  of  the  purchaser.'  The  proceeding
which  is  condemned  by  the  courts  of  law,  is  a  voluntary  pro-
ceedmg,  instituted  by  the  master  himself  on  petition  for  a  sale,
founded  on  a  survey,  proof,  and  report,  of  the  unnavigable
and  irreparable  condition  of  the  vessel It  is  essentially  the


a  Hayraan  7.  Milton,  5  Etp,  JV.  P.  Rep,  65»  and  see  tr^ro.

b  Reid  y.  Darby,  10  E(uV»  Rep.  143.  Morris  ▼.  RobiiuoD,  3  Bamw,
^  Creu.  196.

c  Fanny  and  Elmira,  1  Edw.  Adnu  Rep.  117.  The  Warrior,  2  Dod-^
JOA,  288.  293.  295.  Story,  J«,  in  the  caie  of  the  Schooner  Tilton,  5
JtfMOfi,  474.


132  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

act  of  tlie  master,  under  the  auxiliary  sanction  of  the  courts
founded  merely  upon  a  survey  of  the  ship  to  see  whether  she
be  seaworthy ;  and  it  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  case  in
which  the  admiralty  has  regular  jurisdiction  of  the  subject  by
a  proceeding  in  rem^  founded  on  some  adverse  claim.  In
such  cases,  the  power  of  sale,  in  the  sound  discretion  of  the
court,  is  indisputable,  and  binds  all  the  world.  This  is  a  pro-
position  of  universal  law,  founded  on  the  commercial  inter-
course of  states,  and  the  jvs  gentium.  So,  as  we  have
already  seen  in  a  former  volume,'  capture  by  a  public  enemy
devests  the  title  of  the  true  owner,  and  transfers  it  to  the  cap-
tor, after  a  regular  condemnation  by  a  prize  court  of  the  sove-
reign of  the  captor.*

Upon  the  sale  of  a  ship  in  port,  dehvery  of  possession  is
requisite  to  make  the  title  perfect.  If  the  buyer  suffers  the
seller  to  remain  in  possession,  and  act  as  owner,  and  the  seller
should  become  bankrupt,  the  property  would  be  Uable  to  his
creditors,  and,  in  some  cases,  also  to  judgment  creditors  on
execution.  The  same  rule  exists  in  the  case  of  the  mortgage
of  a  ship  ;  but  where  a  sale  is  by  a  part  owner,  it  is  similar
to  the  sale  of  a  ship  at  sea,  and  actual  delivery  cannot  take
place.  Delivery  of  the  muniments  of  title  will  be  sufficient,
unless  the  part  owner  be  himself  in  the  actual  possession.;  If
the  ship  be  sold  while  abroad,  or  at  sea,  a  delivery  of  the
grand  b]^  of  sale,  and  other  documents,  transfers  the  property,
as  in  the  case  of  the  delivery  of  the  key  of  a  warehouse.  It
is  all  the  delivery  that  the  circumstances  of  the  case  admit  of ;
and  it  is  giving  to  the  buyer,  or  mortgagee,  the  ability  to  take
actual  possession,  and  which  he  must  do  as  soon  as  possible


a  See  vol.  i.  102.

h  Id  the  case  of  the  Attorney  General  v.  Norstedt,  3  Price**  Exckeg.
Bep.  97,  a  judicial  sale  of  a  vessel  as  derelict  by  the  Instance  Court  of
the  Admiralty,  was  held  to  bind  even  the  crown's  right  of  aeizare  for
a  prerioQs  forfeiture.

€  Addis  V.  Baker,  1  Amt.  Rep.  222. AhboU  on  Shippings  10.


Lee.  XL  v.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 133

on  the  return  of  the  ship.  If  the  buyer  takes  possession  of  a
ship  scld  while  at  sea,  within  a  reasonable  time  after  her  arri-
val in  port,  hb  title  will  prevail  against  that  of  a  subsequent
purchaser  or  attaching  creditor.'  But  the  buyer  takes  sub-
ject to  all  incumbrances,  and  to  all  lawful  contracts  made  by
the  master  respecting  the  employment  and  hypothecation  of
the  ship  prior  to  notice  of  the  transfer.*
'  The  English  cases  speak  of  the  transfer  of  a  ship  at  sea
by  the  assignment  of  the  grand  bill  of  sale,  and  that  expres-
sion is  understood  to  refer  to  the  instrument  whereby  the  ship
was  originally  transferred  from  the  builder  to  the  owner,  or
first  purchaser.  But  the  American  cases  speak  simply  of  a
bill  of  sale,  and  usually  refer  to  the  instrument  or  transfer
from  the  last  proprietor  while  the  vessel  is  at  sea,  and  which
is  sufficient  to  pass  the  property,  if  accompanied  with  the  act
of  taking  possession  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be  (and
which  in  England  roust  be  by  statute  within  ten  days)  after
(he  vessel  arrives  in  port,''

(2.) Who  is  liable  as  owner.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  owner  is  personally  liable  for
necessaries  furnished,  and  repairs  made  to  a  ship,  by  order
of  the  master  ]^  and  the  great  point  for  discussion  is,  who  is
to  be  regarded  as  owner.  The  ownership,  in  relation  to  this
subject,  is  not  determined  by  the  register  ;  nor  is  a  regular
bill  of  sale  of  the  property  essential  to  exempt  the  former  owner


a  ExparU  Matthews,  2  Fe*«y,  272.  Hall  v.  Gurney,  Cooke's  B,  L.
231. Mair  t.  Glennie,  4  Jdaule  Sf  Selw.  240. Joy  ▼.  Sears,  9  Pick.  4.

b  Mair  t.  GleDDie,  4  Maule  ^  Selvo.  240.  Hay  t.  Fairbarn,  2
Bamw.  4-  Ald.1%2,  Atkinsoo  v.  MaJing',  2  Term  Rep.  462.  Port-
land Bank  t.  Stubbs,  6  Mass.  Rep.  422.  Putnam  r.  Dutch,  8  Mcus.
Rep,  287. Badlam  t.  Tucker,  1  Pick.  Rep.  396.

c  Portland  Bank  v.  Stacey,  4  Mass.  Rep,  663.  Wheeler  y.  Sum-
■er,  4  Afojofi,  183.

d  Webster  r.  Seekamp,  4  Bamto.  <^  Aid,  352.


134  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

from  responsibility  for  supplies  furnished.  Where  the  con-
tract of  sale  is  made,  and  possession  delivered,  the  circum-
stance that  the  naked  legal  title  remains  in  the  vendor  for  his
security,  does  not  render  him  liable,  as  owner,  on  the  con-
tracts, or  for  the  conduct  of  the  master.^

It  has  been  a  disputed  question,  whether  the  mortgagee  of
a  ship,  before  he  takes  possession,  be  liable  to  the  burdens
and  entitled  to  the  benefits  belonging  to  the  owner.  In  the
case  of  Chinney  v.  Blackbourne,^  it  was  held  by  the  K.  B.
that  the  mortgagor,  in  such  a  case,  and  not  the  mortgageoi
was  to  be  deemed  owner,  and  entitled  to  the  freight,  and
liable  for  the  repairs  and  other  expenses.  The  same  decision
was  made  by  the  C.  B.  in  Jackson  v.  Vernon,'  But  Lord
Kenyon,  in  Westerdell  v.  Dale^^  entertained  a  different
opinion,  and  he  considered  the  mortgagee,  whether  in  or  out
of  possession,  to  be  the  owner,  and  entitled  to  the  freight,  and
bound  for  the  expenses  of  the  ship.  The  weight  of  our  Ame-
rican decisions  has  been  in  favour  of  the  position,  that  a
mortgagee  of  a  ship  out  of  possession  is  not  liable  for  repairs
or  necessaries  procured  on  the  order  of  the  master,  and  not
upon  the  particular  credit  of  the  mortgagee,  who  was  not  in
the  receipt  of  the  freight ;  though  the  rule  is  otherwise  when
the  mortgagee  is  in  possession,  and  the  vessel  employed  in  his
service.* The  case  of  Fisher  v.  Willing/  has  a  strong  bear-


a  Wendoyer  r.  Hogeboom,  7  Johns.  Rep.  308.  Leonard  v.  Hon-
tiDgtoD,  15  ibid.  298. Tboro  r.  Hicks,  7  Cowm't  Hep.  697.

bin.  Blacks.  117,  note.

€  I  H.  Blacks.  Rep.  114.

d  7  Term  Rep.  306.  In  Dean  r.  M«Ghie,  4  Bingham,  45,  it  wai
beld,  tbat  on  a  mortgage  of  a  ship,  tbe  accruing  freight  passed  to  the
mortgagee.

e  M^Intyre  v.  Scott,  8  Johns.  Rep.  159.  Champlin  v.  Batler,  18
ibid.  169.  Tucker  r.  Buffington,  15  Jdass.  Rep.  477.  Colson  ▼.  Bon-
zey,  6  Greenleaf,  474.

/  8  Serg.  Sf  Rawle,  118,  a  mortgagor  in  possession  of  a  vessel  may
pledge  the  freight. Keith  v.  Murdoch,  JFheai.  Dig.  586,  pi.  11.


Lcc.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  136 .

iDg  in  favour  of  the  decisions  vbich  go  to  charge  the  niortga-
gor ;  for  it  was  held,  that  a  mortgagee  of  a  ship  at  sea  did
not,  merely  by  delivery  of  the  documents,  acquire  such  a  pos-
session as  to  be  liable  to  the  master  for  wages  accruing  after
lh«  date  of  the  mortgage.  The  contract  was  with  the  mort-
gagor, and  there  was  no  privity  between  the  master  and  the
mortgagee,  before  possession  taken,  sufficient  to  raise  an
assumption.  A  similar  decision  was  made  by  Ch.  J.  Abbott,
in  Martin  v.  Paxton,  and  cited  in  the  Pennsylvania  case.
The  case  of  7%c  Mohawk  Insurance  Company  v.  Eckford^
decided  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  in  the  city  of  New-
Tork,  in  1828,  and  the  case  of  Thorn  v.  Hicks^*^  show  that
the  rule  is  considered  to  be  settled  in  New- York,  that  a  mort-
gagee out  of  possession  is  not  liable  for  services  rendered,  or
necessaries  furnished,  to  a  vessel,  on  the  credit  of  the  mort-
gagor, or  other  person  having  the  equitable  title.  The  ques-
tion seems  to  resolve  itself  into  the  inquiry,  whether  the  cir-
cumstances afford  evidence  of  a  contract  express  or  implied,
as  regards  mortgagees  not  in  possession.  If  the  claimant
dealt  with  the  mortgagor  solely  as  owner,  he  cannot  look  U>
tlie  mortgagee.  To  whom  was  the  credit  given,  seems  to  be
the  true  ground  on  which  the  question  ought  to  stand.*  In
a  case  before  Lord  EUenborough,  in  ISIG,""  he  ruled,  that  a
mortgagee,  not  in  possession,  and  not  known  to  the  plaintiff,
was  not  liable  for  stores  supplied  by  the  captain's  order.  The
weight  of  authority  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  the  mortgagee
who  has  not  taken  possession  ;  and  if  he  has  left  the  posses-
sion and  control  of  the  ship  to  the  mortgagor,  he  will  not  he
liable  to  the  master  for  wages  or  disbursements,  or  to  any
other  person,  for  repairs  and  necessaries  done  or  supplied*  by
the  master's  order,  where  the  mortgagor  has  been  treated  as
owner. If,  however,  there  has  been  no  such  dealing  witli


a  7  Cowen^M  Rep.  697.

6  Baker  r.  Buckle,  7  /.  J5.  Jtfoore,  349.

c  TvfeDtjmaQ  r.  Hart>  1  Starkie'i  Rep.  366.


136  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

the  mortgagor  in  the  character  of  ov^ner,  but  the  credit  has
beea  given  to  the  person  who  may  be  owner,  it  is  a  point
still  remaining  open  for  discussion,  whether  the  liability  will
attach  to  the  beneficial,  or  to  the  legal  owner.  The  principle
of  the  decision  in  TVewheUa  v.  Rowe^^  was,  that  a  vendee
of  a  ship,  whatever  equitable  title  might  exist  in  him,  was  not
liable  for  supplies  furnished  before  the  legal  title  was  conveyed
to  him,  and  registered  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  regis-
try acts,  and  when  he  was  unknown  to  the  tradesman  who
supplied  the  materials/

There  are  analagous  cases  which  throw  light  upon  this
subject  Thus,  in  Young  v.  Branderf  the  legal  title  re-
mained for  a  month  after  the  sale  in  the  vendor  upon  the
face  of  the  register,  because  the  vendee  had  omitted  to  com-
ply with  the  forms  prescribed  by  the  registry  acts.  But  it
was  held,  that  he  was  not  liable  during  that  interval  for
repairs  ordered  by  the  captain,  under  the  direction  of  the
vendee,  and  who  had  no  authority,  express  or  implied,  from
the  legal  owner.  The  vendee  ordered  the  repairs  in  his  own
right,  and  there  was  no  privity  of  interest  between  him  and
the  legal  owner,  and  the  credit  was  actually  given  to  the
vendee.  So,  again,  the  regular  registered  owner  of  a  ship
was  held  not  to  be  liable  for  supplies  furnished  by  order  of  the
charterer,  who  had  chartered  the  ship  at  a  certain  rent  for  a
number  of  voyages.  The  owner  had  devested  himself,  in
that  case,  of  all  control  and  possession  of  the  vessel  during
the  existence  of  the  charter  party,  and  he  had  no  right,  under


a  llUcwrti?^^.  435.

h  The  same  principle  governed  the  decision  in  Harrington  t.  Fry,  2
Bingham^  179,  and  by  the  English  statute  of  4  Geo.  IV.  c.  41,  and  of  6
Geo.  IV.  c.  110,  on  a  transfer  of  a  ship,  or  any  interest  therein  by  mort-
gage or  assignment  by  way  of  security  for  a  debt^  the  entry  in  the  book
of  registry  is  so  to  state  it,  and  the  mortgagee  or  assignee  shall  not  by
reason  thereof  be  deemed  owner,  nor  the  mortgagor  cease  to  be  owner,
except  so  far  as  to  render  the  security  available.

e  8  EasVs  Hep.  10.


Lee  XLV.] OF*  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  137

A,  to  appoint  the  captain.'*  The  question  in  these  cases  »,
whether  the  owner,  by  reason  of  the  charter  party,  has  de-
vested himself  of  the  ownership  pro  hac  vice,  and  whether
there  has  been  any  direct  contract  between  the  parties,  vary*
ing  the  responsibility.

In  VaUejoY.  ff%ee/^,^  the  court  proceeded  on  the  ground^
thai  the  charterer  was  owner  pro  hac  vice,  inasmuch  as  he
appointed  the  master.  The  subject  was  much  discussed  in
lnHntire  v.  Brown,^  and  it  was  held,  that  where,  by  the
terms  of  the  charter  party,  the  ship  owner  appoints  the  master
and  crew,  and  retains  the  management  and  control  of  the
vessel,  the  charter  was  to  be  considered  as  a  covenant  to  carry
goods.  But  where  the  whole  management  is  given  to  the
freighter,  it  is  more  properly  a  hiring  of  the  vessel  for  the
voyage,  and  in  such  case  the  hirer  is  to  be  deemed  owner  te
the  voyage.  In  Hallei  v.  The  Columbian  Insurance  Qm^
paany^  the  owner  of  the  vessel,  by  the  charter  party,  let  the
whole  vessel  to  the  master,  who  was  to  victual  and  man  her
at  his  own  expense,  and  have  the  whole  management  and
control  of  her,  and  he  was  held  to  be  the  owner  fi>r  the  voy«
age  ;  and  ai  similar  decision  was  made  in  Taggard  v.  Ldh
rmg.*  The  case  of  Fletcher  v.  Br  addict  adopted  the  same
principle  which  had  been  laid  down  by  Ch.  J.  Lee,  in  Parish
v.  Crawford f  and  it  was  declared,  that  the  ownerships  in
respect  to  all  third  persons,  remained  with  the  original  pro*
prietor  when  the  vessel  was  supplied  and  repaired  by  the
owner,  and  navigated  by  a  master  and  sailors  provided  and
paid  for  by  him. In  that  case,  the  ship  was  chartered  by  the


a  Frazer  t.  Marsh,  13  EatV$  Rep,  238.
h  Cowp.  Rep,  143.
c  1  Johnt,  Rep,  229*
d  8  Johnt,  Rep,  272.
e  16  Jtfa#«.  Rep,  336.
/5Bo9.4'PuU.  182*
g  Sir.  Rep.  1251.

Vol.  nr  18


13S  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  {Part  V^

commiasioners  of  the  navy,  who  placed  a  comtnander  in  the-
Bavy  on  board,  and  the  roaster  was  to  obey  his  orders  ;  bu^
with  regard  to  third  persons,  it  was  still,  notwithstanding  that
very  important  fact,  considered  to  be  the  ship  of  the  owners^
and  they  were  held  answerable  for  damage  done  by  the  ship*
This  highly  vexed  question,  and  so  important  in  its  conse-
quences to  the  claim  of  lien,  and  the  responsibilities  of  owner-
ship, depends  on  the  inquiry,  whether  the  lender  or  hirer^
under  a  charter  party,  be  the  owner  of  the  ship  for  the  voy-
age. It  is  a  dry  matter  of  fact  question,  who,  by  ihe  charter
party,  has  the  possession,  command,  and  navigation  of  the
ship. If  the  general  owner  retains  the  same,  and  contracts
to  carry  a  cargo  on  freight  for  the  voyage,  the  charter  party
is  a  mere  afireightnient  sounding  in covenant,  and  the
freighter  is  not  clothed  with  the  character  or  legal  responsi-
bility of  ownership. The  general  owner,  in  such  a  case,  is
entitled  to  the  freight,  and  may  sue  the  consignee  on  the  bills
of  lading  in  the  name  of  the  master,  or  he  may  enforce  his
claim  by  detaining  the  goods  until  payment,  the  law  giving
him  a  lien  for  freight. But  where  the  freighter  hires  the  pos-
session, command,  and  navigation  of  the  ship^  fff  the  voyage,,
he  becomes  the  owner,  and  is  responsible  for  the  condua  of
the  master  and  mariners,  and  the  general  owner  has  no  lieo
for  the  freight,  because  he  is  not  the  carrier  for  the  voyage.
This  is  the  [uinciple  declared  and  acted  upon  in  the  greatly
litigated  and  very  ably  discussed  case  of  Christie  v.  Lewis  ;*
and  it  is  the  principle  declared  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States,  in  Marcardier  v.  ITie  Chesapeake  Insu-
rance Company,^  and Grade  yr  Palmerj^  and  followed
generally  by  the  courts  of  justice  in  this  country.' It  may  be
considered  as  the  sound  and  settled  law  on  the  subject


a  t  Brod.  4*  Bing.  4t0.

6  8  Cranch*t  R^»  39.

c  8  WliecU,  Rip.  605.

d  Pitkior.  BrBiMrd,6Coiin.iZip.43l.  ClarktOD,r.Edetr4  Gnoin'*


Lcc.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  139

(3.)  Of  the  customrhouse  documents.

The  United  States  have  imitated  the  policy  of  England,
and  other  commercial  nations,  in  conferring  peculiar  privi-
leges upon  American  built  ships,  and  owned  by  our  own
citizens ;  and  I  shall  now  examine  the  acts  of  Congress,  so
iar  as  they  go  to  ascertain  the  title  to  American  ships,  and
the  mode  of  transferring  that  title.  The  object  of  the  regis-
try acts  is  to  encourage  our  own  trade,  navigation,  and  ship
building,  by  granting  peculiar  or  exclusive  privileges  of  trade
to  the  flag  of  tlie  United  States,  and  by  prohibiting  the  com-
munication of  those  immunities  to  the  shipping  and  mariners
of  other  coufitries.  These  provisions  are  well  calculated  to
prevent  the  commission  of  fraud  upon  individuals,  as  well  as
to  advance  the  national  policy.  The  registry  of  all  vessels
at  the  custom-house,  and  the  memorandums  of  the  transfers,
add  great  security  to  title,  and  bring  the  existing  state  of  our
navigation  and  marine  under  the  view  of  the  general  govern-
ment. By  these  regulations,  the  title  can  be  effectually  traced
back  to  its  origin.*


Rep.  470.  Reynolds  ▼.  Toppan,  15  JtfdM.  Rep,  370.  Emery  v.  Her-
Ky,  4  GretnUaf'9  Rep.  407.  Lander  v.  Clark,  1  Halfs  JV*.  F.  Rep.
355.

a  A  biatorical  ?iew  of  tbe  laws  of  Eng^Iand,  with  regard  to  shipping
and  navigation,  is  given,  with  admirable  clearness,  metbod,  and  accn*
racy,  by  Mr.  Reeves,  in  bis  ^  History  of  the  Law  of  Shipping  and
MtvigcUion"  published  in  1792 ;  and  the  policy  of  that  sjstcni  be  con-
sidera  to  have  been  vindicated  and  triumphantly  sustained,  in  the  in-
crease of  the  English  shipping,  the  extension  of  their  foreign  naviga-
(ioo  and  trade,  and  the  unrivalled  strength  of  their  navy.  The  policy
of  tbe  British  statutes  was  to  create  skilful  and  hardy  seamen,  and  to
confine  the  privileges  of  English  trade,  as  far  as  was  consistent  with  tbe
extent  of  it,  to  British  built  shipping.  But  the  quantity  of  British
bailt  shipping  was  not  at  first  adequate  to  carry  on  tbe  whole  trade  of
the  country,  and  it  became  a  secondary  object  to  confer  privileges  on
foreign  built  ships  in  British  ownership.  In  proportion  as  British  built
shipping  increased,  tbe  privileges  conferred  on  foreign  built  ships  io
British  ownership  were  from  time  to  time  restricted. The  English  na-


X40  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V,

The  acts  of  Congress  of  Slst  December,  1792,  and  I8th
February,  1793,  constitute  the  basis  of  the  regulations  in  this


TigfttioD  laws,  prior  to  the  famooi  naTigation  act  of  12  CharUi  11.  c.  18,
were  cmde  and  oodigested.  Tbey  coromeDced  wilb  Uie  statute  of  5
Bichard  II.  aod  in  the  earlier  acts,  the  preference  of  Eoglish  abipa  and
mariners,  in  English  imports  and  exports,  was  given  in  simpfe  and  ab*
solute  terms,  and  tbey  kept  improring  in  accuracy  of  description  and
jostneu  of  policy  down  to  the  time  of  the  registry  acts.  The  oaFiga*
tioa  act  of  Charle$  II,  described  what  were  English  built  and  Eogliah
owned  ships,  and  in  what  cases  a  foreign  built  ship,  owned  by  an  Eng-
lish subject,  should  hare  the  privileges  of  an  English  ship.  The  act
did  not  require  any  foreign  ships  to  be  regbtered ;  but  a  foreign  built
ship,  unless  registered,  was  to  be  treated  as  an  alien  ship,  though  owned
by  a  British  subject.  The  statute  of  26  Oeo,  III.  c.  60,  was  framed  by
the  elder'Lord  Liverpool,  and  it  gave  rise  to  the  treatise  of  Mr.  Reeve,
who  dedicated  his  work  to  that  distinguished  nobleman.  The  navigation
act  of  CharUi  II.  only  required  ships  to  be  the  properly  of  British  sub*
Jects ;  but  in  the  progress  of  the  system,  the  qualification  of  being
British  hwU  was  added.  The  one  encouraged  British  seamen  and  mer'.
chants,  but  the  other  encouraged  also  British  ship  building.  The  sta*
tttte  of  26  Qeo»  III*  declared  that  the  time  bad  come,  when  the  policy
of  employing  British  built  shipping  exclusively  in  the  commerce  of
that  country,  ought  to  be  carried  to  the  utmost  extent,  and  it  accord^*
ingly  enacted,  that  no  foreign  built  ship,  except  prises,  nor  any  ship
built  upon  a  foreign  bottom,  although  British  owned,  should  be  any
longer  entitled  to  any  of  the  privileges  or  advantages  of  a  British  built
ship,  or  of  a  ship  owned  by  British  subjects.  This  statute  likewise  in-
troduced into  the  European  trade  the  necessity  of  a  register,  which  had
been  introduced  into  the  plantation  trade  by  the  statute  of  7  and  8  Wm*
III*  c.  22.  The  general  principle  established  by  the  act  of  26  Gto.  Ill,
was,  that  all  British  ships,  with  some  few  exceptions,  should  be  regis-
tered, and  a  certificate  of  the  registry  obtained,  in  the  port  to  which
the  ship  belonged.  All  ships  entitled  and  required  to  be  registeredi
were  made  subject  to  forfeiture  for  attempting  to  proceed  to  sea  with*
out  a  British  register.  All  ships  not  entitled  to  the  privileges  of  Bri-
tish built  or  British  owned  ships,  and  all  ships  not  registered,  although
owned  by  British  subjects,  were  to  be  deemed  alien  ships,  aod  liable  to
the  same  penalties  and  forfeitures  as  alien  ships.  British  subjects  might
still  employ  foreign  ships  in  neutral  trade,  subject  only  to  the  alien  du-
ties> The  statute  further  required,  that  npon  every  alteration  of  the


Lee.  XLV.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 141

country  for  the  foreign  and  coasting  trade,  and  for  the  fish-
eries of  the  United  States ;  and  they  correspond  very  closely
with  the  provisions  of  the  British  statutes  in  the  reign  of
George  IIL

No  vessel  is  to  be  deemed  a  vessel  of  the  United  States,  or
entitled  to  the  privileges  of  one,  unless  registered,  and  v^holly
owned  and  commanded  by  a  citizen  of  the  United  States.
The  American  owner  in  whole,  or  in  part,  ceases  to  retain


property,  an  eodorsement  was  to  be  made  upon  the  registry,  and  a  me-
moraodam  thereof  entered  at  the  cnstom-house ;  and  that  upon  erery
transfer,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  certificate  of  the  registry  was  to  be
let  oot  in  the  bill  of  sale.  The  statute  of  34  Oeo,  III.  c.  68,  was  an
enlargement  of  the  statute  26  Geo,  III.,  and  it  contained  several  pro*
Tisioos  for  granting  new  certificates  upon  a  transfer  of  property,  and
it  regulated  those  cases  only  in  which  a  title  to  a  certificate  had  been
giTen,  and  a  certificate  was  required  to  be  obtained,  and  it  required  all
registered  vessels  to  be  navigated  by  a  British  master,  and  a  crew  of
whom  three  fouKhs  were  British.

The  navigation  laws  of  Great  Britain  now  form  a  permanent  and
regular  code,  and  they  were  involved  in  a  labyrinth  of  statutes,  and  not
easily  rendered  simple  and  intelligible  to  practical  men,  until  the  sta.
tutea  of  4  Oeo.  IV.  c.  41,  and  6  Oeo.  IV,  c.  109  and  1 10,  reduced  all
the  former  provisions  into  one  consolidated  system. The  registry  acts
hare  peculiar  simplicity  and  legal  precision  for  statute  productions  of
that  kind,  and  they  are  regarded  by  English  statesmen  and  lawyers  aa
highly  honourable  to  the  ts^Ients,  experience,  and  vigilance  of  Lord
Liverpool,  who  has  established  on  solid  foundations  the  naval  power  and
commercial  superiority  of  bis  country. The  code  of  laws  constituting
the  navigation  system  of  England,  has  been  well  digested,  not  only  ia
the  history  of  Mr.  Reeves,  to  which  I  have  alluded,  but  by  Lord  Tenter*
den,  in  his  accurate  and  authoritative  **  Treatise  of  the  Law  retoHve  to
Merchant  Ships  and  Seamen ;"  and  still  more  extensively,  and  very
ably,  in  Holt's  ^'  System  of  the  Shipping  and  J^avigaiion  LatosofGreai
Britain^*' That  work  contains  all  the  laws  on  the  subject,  brought
down  to  the  year  1820. His  introductory  essay  is  a  clear,  but  brief
synopsis  of  the  history  and  policy  of  the  navigation  system. In  the  sixth
and  seventh  cb^pters  of  the  first  volume  of  Mr.  Chitty*s  ample  "  TVeaHse
on  the  Laws  of  Commerce  and  Manufactures^  and  Contracts  relating
thereto"  we  have  also  a  condensed  digest  of  the  same  code  of  naviga*
tioo  laws.


142  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

his  privileges  as  such  owner,  if  he  usually  resides  in  a  foreiga
country,  during  the  continuance  of  such  residence,  unless  he
be  a  consul,  or  an  agent  for,  and  a  partner  in,  some  Americaa
house,  carrying  on  trade  within  the  United  States.^  The
register  is  to  be  made  by  the  collector  of  the  port  to  which
such  ship  siiall  belong,  or  in  which  it  shall  be,  and  founded
on  the  oath  of  one  of  the  owners,  stating  the  time  and  place
where  she  was  built,  or  that  she  was  captured  in  war  by  a
citizen,  as  prize,  and  lawfully  condemned,  or  forfeited  for  a
breach  of  the  laws  of  the  States  ;  and  stating  the  owners  and
master,  and  that  they  are  citizens,  and  that  no  subject  of  a
foreign  power  was  directly  or  indirectly,  by  way  of  trust,  or
otherwise,  interested  therein. The  master  is,  likewise,  in

*

certain  cases,  to  make  oath  touching  his  own  citizenship.  *
Previous  to  the  registry,  a  certificate  of  survey  is  to  be  pro-
duced, and  security  given,  that  the  certificate  of  such  registry
shall  be  solely  used  for  the  ship,  and  shall  not  be  sold,  lent,
or  otherwise  disposed  of.  If  the  vessel,  or  any  interest  therein,
be  sold  to  any  foreigner,  and  the  vessel  be  within  the  United
States,  the  certificate  of  the  registry  shall,  within  seven  days
after  the  sale,  be  delivered  up  to  the  collector  of  the  district,
in  order  to  be  cancelled ;  and  if  the  sale  be  made  when  the
vessel  is  abroad,  or  at  sea,  the  certificate  is  to  be  delivered  up
within  eight  days  after  the  master's  arrival  within  the  United
States ;'  and  if  the  transfer  of  a  registered  vessel  be  made  to  a
foreigner  in  a  foreign  port,  for  the  purpose  of  evading  the  reve-
nue laws  of  the  foreign  country,  it  works  a  forfeiture  of  the
vessel,  unless  the  transfer  be  made  known  within  eight  days
after  the  return  of  the  vessel  to  a  port  in  the  United  States,
by  a  delivery  of  the  certificate  of  registry  to  the  collector  of
the  port^ So,  if  a  registered  ship  be  sold,  in  whole  or  in  part,


a  Act  of  31«<  December^  1792|  sec.  1  and  2.

b  Ibid,  sec.  3,  4  and  1 1.

c  Ibid.  sec.  6  aod  7.

d  ibid,  sec.  7. 16. The  Margaret,  9  WTieaton^  421.


Lee.  XLV.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 143

while  abroad,  to  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  the  veseel,  od
her  first  arrival  in  the  United  States  thereafter,  shall  be  enti-
tled to  all  the  privileges  of  a  ship  of  the  United  States,  pro-  (
vided  a  new  certificate  of  registry  be  obtained  within  three  <
days  after  the  master  makes  his  final  report  upon  her  first  !
arrival.'*  If  the  vessel  be  built  within  the  United  States,  the
ship-carpenter's  certificate  is  requisite  to  obtain  the  register ;
and  when  the  ship  is  duly  registered,  the  collector  of  the  port
shall  grant  an  abstract,  or  certificate  of  such  registry.*  There
are  several  minute  regulations  respecting  the  change  of  the
certificate,  and  the  granting  of  a  new  register,  which  need
not  here  be  detailed ;'  but  when  a  vessel,  duly  registered,  shall
be  sold  or  transferred,  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  a  citizen  ^  the
United  States,  or  shall  be  altered  in  form  or  burthen,  she
must  be  registered  anew,  and  her  former  certificate  of  regis-
try delivered  up,  otherwise  she  will  cease  to  be  deemed  a  ves-
sel of  the  United  States,  or  entitled  to  any  of  the  privileges  of
one.  In  every  case  of  sale  or  transfer,  there  must  be  some
instrument  of  writing,  in  the  nature  of  a  bill  of  sale,  which
shall  recite  at  length  the  certificate  of  registry,  and  without
k  the  vessel  is  incapable  of  being  registered  anew.'  Upon
every  change  of  master,  the  owner  must  report  such  change
to  the  collector,  and  have  a  memorandum  of  such  change  en-
dorsed upon  the  certificate  of  registry  ;  and  if  any  ship  so
registered  be  sold,  in  whole  or  in  part,  by  way  of  trust,  or  other-
wise, to  a  foreigner,  and  the  sale  be  not  made  known  as  above
directed,  the  whole,  or  at  least  the  share  owned  by  the  citizen
who  sells,  becomes  forfeited.'

Vessels  enrolled  and  licensed,  or  licensed  only  if  under


a  AdL  of  the  United  Siaiee^  March  %d^  1803,  sec.  3.

(  Law  of  the  United  Statei^  ZUt  December ^  1792,  sec.  9.

c  Ibid,  sec.  12  and  13.

d  Ibid.  sec.  14.

•  I6i(i.iec.l6andl6.


144  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

twenty  tons,  are  entitled  to  the  privileges  of  vessels  employed
in  the  coasting  trade  or  fisheries.*  Vessels,  to  be  enrolled,
must  possess  the  same  qualifications  ;  and  the  same  requi-
sites, in  all  respects,  must  be  complied  with,  as  are  made  ne«
cessary  for  the  registry  of  ships  and  vessels  ;  and  the  same
duties  are  required  in  relation  to  such  enrolments  ;  and  the
ships  enrolled,  with  the  master  and  owner,  are  subject  to  the
same  regulations  as  are  in  those  respects  provided  for  regis-
tered vessels.*  Any  vessel  may  be  enrolled  and  licensed,  that
may  be  registered,  upon  the  registry  being  given  up  ;  and
any  vessel  that  may  be  enrolled  may  be  registered,  upon  the
enrolment  and  license  being  given  up.''  In  order  to  obtain  a
license  for  carrying  on  the  coasting  trade,  or  fisheries,  the
owner,  or  ship's  husband,  and  roaster,  must  give  security  to
the  United  States,  that  the  vessel  be  not  employed  in  any
trade  whereby  the  revenue  of  the  United  States  may  be  de«
frauded  ;  and  the  master  must  make  oath  that  he  is  a  citizen^
and  tliat  the  license  shall  not  be  used  for  any  other  vessel,  or
any  other  employment ;  and  if  the  vessel  be  less  than  twenty
tons  burthen,  that  she  is  wholly  the  property  of  a  citizen
of  the  United  States.  The  collector  of  the  district  there-
upon grants  a  license  for  carrying  on  the  coasting  trade,  or
fishery.''  Vessels  engaged  in  such  a  trade  or  business,  with-
out being  enrolled  and  licensed,  or  licensed  only,  as  the  case
may  be,  shall  pay  alien  duties,  if  in  ballast,  or  laden  wiUi
goods  the  growth  or  manufacture  of  the  United  States,  and
shall  be  forfeited  if  laden  with  any  articles  of  foreign  growth
or  manufacture,  or  distilled  spirits.'  If  any  vessel  enrolled  or
licensed,  proceed  on  a  foreign  voyage,  without  first  surrender-
ing up  her  enrolment  and  license,  and  being  duly  registered,


a  Act  ofCkmgre$9y  February  ISfA,  1793,  sec.  1.
b  Ibid.  sec.  2.
c  Ibid,  sec.  3.
d  Ibid.  sec.  4.
e  Ibid,  ICC.  6.


JLec.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  145

she  shall,  with  her  cargo  imported  into  the  United  States,  bo
subject  to  forfeiture.'^  Tlie  other  general  provisions  relative
to  the  rights  and  duties  appertaining  to  the  coasting  trade  and
the  fisheries,  need  not  here  be  enumerated,  as  my  object  is  to
consider  the  subject  merely  in  reference  to  the  documentary
title  to  American  vessels.

It  is  further  provided,  by  the  act  of  March  2,  1797,  that
whenever  any  vessel  is  transferred  by  process  of  law,  and
the  register,  certificate  of  enrolment,  or  license,  is  retained  by
the  former  owner,  a  new  one  may  be  obtained  upon  the  usual
terms,  without  the  return  of  the  outstanding  paper.  Vessels
-captured  and  condemned  by  a  foreign  power  are  to  be  con-
sidered as  foreign  vessels,  and  not  entitled  to  a  new  register,
even  though  they  should  afterwards  become  American  pro-
perty, unless  the  former  owner  regain  his  title,  by  purchase
or  otherwise.*  Every  registered  or  unregistered  vessel,  owned
by  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  going  to  a  foreign  coun-
try, and,  if  an  unregistered  vessel,  sailing  with  a  sea  letter,  is
entided  to  a  passport,  to  be  furnished  by  the  collector  of  the
district.*'  But  no  sea  letter  certifying  any  vessel  to  be  the  pro-
perty of  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  can  be  issued,  except
to  ships  duly  registered,  or  enrolled  and  licensed,  or  to  ves-
sels wholly  owned  by  citizens  of  the  United  States,  and  fur-
nished with,  or  entitled  to  sea  letters,  or  other  custom-house
documents.''

The  English  registry  act  of  26  Geo.  III.  required  the  cer-
tificate of  the  registry  to  be  truly  recited  at  length  in  every
bill  of  sale  of  a  British  ship  to  a  British  subject ;  otherwise
such  bill  of  sale  was  declared  to  be  utterly  null  and  void  to  all
intents  and  purposes ;  and  this  was  held  to  be  necessary,  even
though  the  ship  was  at  sea  at  the  time,  and  the  vendee  took


a  Act  of  Congress,  Ftbruary  IZthy  1793,  sec.  6.
b  Act  of  the  U.  S.,  June  27, 1797.
e  Acts  of  Congress,  Jane  1, 1796,  and  March  2, 1803.
d  Act  of  Congress,  March  26, 1810.

Vol.  hi.  19


146  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V

the  grand  Inll  of  sale,  and  possession  of  the  ship,  immediately
on  her  arrival  in  port." The  laws  of  the  United  States  do  not
go  to  that  rigorous  extent ;  and  the  only  consequence  of  a
transfer,  without  a  writing  containing  a  recital  at  length  of  the
*  certificate  of  registry,  is,  that  the  vessel  cannot  be  registered
anew,  and  she  loses  her  privileges  as  an  American  vessel,
and  becomes  subject  to  the  disabilities  incident  to  vessels  not
registered,  enrolled,  or  licensed,  as  the  statute  prescribes. But
where  an  American  registered  vessel  was  in  part  sold,  by  pa-
rol, while  at  sea,  to  an  Amierican  citizen,  and  again  resold  by
parol  to  her  original  owner,  on  her  return  into  port,  and  be-
fore entry,  that  transaction  was  held  not  to  deprive  the  vessel
of  her  American  privileges,  or  subject  her  to  foreign  duties,
for,  in  that  case,  no  new  register  was  requisite. It  would
have  been,  except  in  date,  a  duplicate  of  the  old  onC;  and  per-
fectly useless.*

If  a  ship  be  owned  by  American  citizens,  and  be  not  docu-
mented according  to  the  provisions  of  the  registry  acts,  it  is
not  liable  to  any  forfeitures  or  disabilities  which  are  not  spe-
cially prescribed.  The  want  of  a  register  is  not  a  ground  of
forfeiture,  but  the  cause  only  of  loss  of  American  privileges.*
Every  vessel,  wherever  built,  and  owned  by  an  American
citizen,  is  entitled  to  a  custom-house  document  for  protection,
termed  a  passport,  under  the  act  of  June  1,  1796  ;  for  it  ap-
plies to  "  every  ship  or  vessel  of  the  United  States,  going  to
any  foreign  country."  As  our  registry  acts  do  not  declare
void  the  sale  or  transfer,  and  every  contract  or  agreement  for
transfer  of  property  in  any  ship,  without  an  instrument  in
writing,  reciting  at  large  the  certificate  of  registry ;  and  as
they  have  not  prescribed  any  precise  form  of  endorsement,  on
the  certificate  of  registry,  and  rendered  it  indispensable  in  every


a  Rolleston  f.  Hibbert,  3  Temi  Hep.  406.

b  The  United  States  y.  Willings  and  Francis,  4  CranefCi  Rep,  48.
€  Hatch  T.  Smith,  5  Mass.  Rep,  42. Philips  r.  Lediey,  1 Wa$h*
Cir.  Rep.  226, WiUing  f.  United  States,  ibid.  125.


Lee.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  147

sale,  as  is  the  case  ubder  the  British  statutes  of  26  Geo,  III.
c.  60,  and  34  Geo.  III.  c.  68,  we  arc  happily  relieved  from
many  embarrassing  questions  which  have  arisen  in  the  Eng-
lish courts  relative  to  the  sale  and  mortgage  of  ships.

There  has  been  great  difficulty,  and  some  alternation  of
opinion,  in  the  English  courts,  in  the  endeavour  to  reconcile
the  strict  and  positive  provisions  of  the  statute  with  the  prin-
ciples of  equity,  and  the  good  faith  and  intention  of  the  con-
tracting parties.'  It  has  even  been  a  question  of  much  dis"
cussion,  whether  the  statutes  of  26  and  34  Geo.  III.  had  not
destroyed  the  common  law  right  of  conveying  a  ship,  by  way
of  mortgage,  like  other  personal  property  ;  and  whether  the
mortgagee  had  not  a  complete  title,  beyond  the  power  of  re-
demption, after  the  transfer  of  the  legal  title,  according  to  the
prescribed  form  of  the  endorsement  on  the  ceitificate  of  tegis-


a  The  cases  of  RoUestoD  v.  Hibbert,  3  Term  Rep.  406,  CamdeD  v.
AndersoD,  5  Term.  Rep.  709,  Westerdell  y.  Dale,  7  ibid.  306,  Mou
V.  Cbaroock,  2  Ea8V$  Rep.  399,  Heath  v.  Hubbard,  4  Eful't  Rep.
110,  Mossy.  Mills,  6i6iJ.  144,  Hajtoa  v.  Jackson,  Zibid.  511,  and
Hibbert  t.  RoIIeston,  3  Bro.  Rep,  571 ,  aod  the  opioioDsof  Wood^  B.  4r
Heath,  J.,  io  Hubbard  v.  Johnstone,  3  Taunt.  Rep.  177,  and  of  Lord
Eldon,  in  Ex  parte  Tallop,  15  Ves.  Rep.  60,  and  Ex  parte  Houghton,
17  Fes.  Rep.  251,  and  of  Sir  William  Grant,  in  11  Fes.  Rep.  642,  may
be  selected  as  samples  of  the  strictness  with  which  the  statutes  are  con-
strued, and  of  the  defeat  of  bona  fide  transfers  of  vessels  by  failure  to
comply  with  the  literal  terms  of  the  statutes.  The  cases  of  RoIIeston  r.
Smith,  4  Term  Rep.  161,  Capadose  v.  Codner,  1  Bos.  Sf  Pull.  483,
Ratcbford  v.  Meadows,  3  Esp.  JV.  P.  Rep.  69,  Bloxham  ?.  Hubbard,  5
EasVs  Rep.  407,  Kerrison  v.  Cole,  8  EasVs  Rep.  231 ,  Robinson  ▼.  Mac-
donnell,  5  Maule  <f-  Selw.  228,  Curtis  y.  Perry,  6  Ves.  Rep.  739,  Mes-
taer  v.  Gillespie,  11  Fes.  Rep.  621.  6.37,  may  be  selected,  on  the  other
hand,  as  containing  evidence  of  the  influence  of  equity  upon  the  severity
of  those  provisions.  But  the  unreasonable  strictness  required  by  the
English  statutes  was  relaxed  by  the  acts  of  4  Geo.  IV.  c.  41,  and  6
Geo.  ly.  c.  110 ;  and  an  error  in  the  recital  in  a  bill  of  sale  of  the  cer-
tificate of  registry  is  no  longer  fatal.


148  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

try. The  language,  in  many  of  the  cases,^  was  in  favour  of
the  conclusion,  that  there  could  be  no  equitable  ownership  of
a  ship  distinct  from  the  legal  title,  and  that  upon  a  transfer
under  the  forms  of  the  registry  acts,  the  ship  becomes  the  ab-
solute property  of  the  intended  mortgagee,  and  that  the  terms
and  the  policy  of  the  registry  acts  were  incompatible  with  the
existence  of  any  equity  .of  redemption. But  these  opinions,  or
dictOj  have  been  met  by  a  series  of  adjudications,  which  as-
sume the  law  to  be  otherwise,  and  that  the  registry  acts  related
only  to  transactions  between  vendor  and  vendee,  and  to  cases
of  real  ownership  ',  and  that  an  equitable  interest  in  a  ship
might  exist  by  operation  of  law,  and  by  the  contract  of  the
parties,  distinct  from  the  legal  estate ;  and  that  notwithstand-
ing the  positive  and  absolute  terms  of  the  endorsement  upon
the  certificate  of  register,  a  mortgage  of  a  ship  is  good  and
valid,  according  to  the  law  as  it  existed  before  the  registry
acts,  provided  the  requisites  of  the  statutes  be  complied  with.^
The  opinion  of  Sir  Thomas  Plumer,  in  Thompson  v.  Smithy
contained  a  very  clear  and  masterly  vindication  of  the  validi-
ty of  the  mortgage  of  a  ship  consistently  with  the  preserva-
tion of  the  forms' of  the  registry  acts. He  effectually  put  to
flight  the  alarming  proposition,  that  since  the  registry  acts
there  could  be  no  valid  mortgage  of  a  ship  ;  and  he  insisted,
that  the  defeasance  annexed  to  the  bill  of  sale  ought  to  be
fully  endorsed  as  part  of  the  iostrument  on  the  certificate  of
registry,  if  the  ship  be  mortgaged  in  port ; or  if  mortgaged
while  at  sea,  a  copy  of  the  whole  transmitted  to  the  custom-
house ;  and  that  though  the  defeasance  should  not  be  noticed


a  Lord  EldoD  scattered  am&^gtiOf  vore«  to  that  efTect  in  Curtis  r.  Per-
ry, «  Vesey'i  Rep,  739.  Campbell  v.  Stein,  6  Dcad's  P.  C.  1 16.  Ex
|7ar<e  Tallop,  15  Vesey^s  Rep.  60.  Ex  parte  Houghton,  17  Vetey^t
Rep,  251. Dixon  y.  Ewart,  3  J\ieiriwde^9  Rep,  333.

b  M air  v.  Glennie,  4  Maule  4r  Selw,  240.  Robineon  v.  MacdonneU,
5  ibid.  228.  Hay  v.  Fairbairn,  2  Bamw.  4-  Aid.  193.  Monkhonse
T.Hay,  ZBrod.  4'  Bing.  114.  Thompson  v.  Smith,  1  Jdadd.  Ch.
jRep.  395.


Lee.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  149

in  any  of  the  forms  adhered  to  at  the  office  of  the  custorosy
and  the  instrument  should  be  registered  as  an  absolute  bill  of
sale,  the  mortgagor's  right  of  redemption  would  not  suffer  by
the  omission.  Bat  as  no  such  questions  can  possibly  arise  un-
der the  registry  acts  of  Congress,  these  discussioos  in  the
English  courts  are  noticed  only  as  a  curious  branch  of  the
history  of  the  English  jurisprudence  on  this  subject.'

The  registry  is  not  a  document  required  by  the  law  of  na-
tions as  expressive  of  a  ship's  national  character.*  The  re-
gistry acts  are  to  be  considered  as  forms  of  local  or  municipal
institution,  for  purposes  of  public  policy.  They  are  impera-
tive only  upon  the  voluntary  transfer  of  parties,  and  do  not
apply  to  transfers  by  act  or  operation  of  law.*  They  are
said  to  be  peculiar  to  England,  and  to  the  United  States,
whose  maritime  and  navigation  system  is  formed  upon  the
model  of  that  of  Great  Britain. But  by  various  French  or-


a  Iq  1823,  Mr.  Trolhpe  published,  at  London,  a  distinct  treatise, for
(be  very  purpose  of  vindicating^  the  validity  of  mortgages  of  ships.  It
was  entitled  **  A  Treatise  on  the  Mortgage  of  Ships,  as  affected  by  the
R^istry  Acts ;"  and  it  contains  a  view  of  all  the  discussions  on  the
question.  The  same  doctrine  is  maintained  in  Mr.  Patch' t  late  ^  Prac-
tical Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Mortgages,*'  p.  34.  Mr.  HoU^  in  a  note  to
his  Reports  of  Cases  at  Nisi  Prius,  vol.  i.  603,  fell  into  the  current  error,
that  upon  a  contract  of  mortgage  in  respect  to  a  British  registered  ship,
there  was  no  equity  of  redemption,  and  that  the  ship  became  absolutely
the  property  of  the  mortgagee,  without  any  relief  to  be  afforded  at  law,
or  in  equity  ;  but  subsequently,  in  bis  elaborate  treatise  on  shipping,  be
adopts  the  doctrine  in  IJiompson  v.  Smiih,  as  being  in  conformity  with
the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  registry  acts.  Holt  on  Shipping,  vol.  i.  306
— ^312.  The  statute  of  6  Geo.  IV.  c.  110,  has  removed  the  difficulties
which  attended  the  doctrine  of  mortgages  under  the  former  statutes,  by
declaring  that  the  transfer  of  ships  by  way  of  mortgage,  or  by  assign-
ment in  trust  for  payment  of  debts,  duly  registered,  shall  be  valid,  and
pass  the  interest  according  to  the  purposes  of  the  transfer.

6  I^e  Cheminant  v.  Pearson,  4  Taunt.  Rep,  367.

e  6  FeMy'j  Rep.  739.  15  ibid.  68.  Bloxham  y.  Hubbard,  5  EatCt
Rep.  407.


160  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

dinances,  between  1681  and  the  era  of  the  new  code,  it  was
requisite  that  ail  French  built  vessels  should  be  owned  exclu-
sively by  Frenchmen,  and  foreigners  were  prohibited  from
navigating  under  the  French  flag ;  and  a  Frenchman  for-
feited his  privileges  as  such  owner,  by  marrying  a  foreign
wife,  or  residing  abroad,  unless  in  connexion  with  a  French
house/  The  register  is  not,  of  itself,  evidence  of  property,
unless  it  be  confirmed  by  some  auxiliary  circumstance  to  show
that  it  was  made  by  the  authority  or  assent  of  the  person  named
in  it,  and  who  is  sought  to  be  charged  as  owner.  Without
proof  to  connect  the  party  with  the  register  as  being  his  direct
or  adopted  act,  the  register  has  been  held  not  to  be  even  pri-
ma facie  evidence  to  charge  a  person  as  owner  ;  and  even
then  it  is  not  conclusive  evidence  of  ownership.*  The  case
of  The  Mohawk  Insurance  Convpany  v.  Eckford,  decided
in  the  New- York  Court  of  Common  Pleas  in  1828,  went
upon  the  same  ground,  that  the  register,  standing  in  the  name
of  a  person,  did  not  determine  the  ownership  of  the  vessel,
though  it  might,  perhaps,  be  presumptive  evidence,  in  the
first  instance.  An  equitable  title  in  one  person  might  legally
exist,  consistently  with  the  documentary  title  at  the  custom-
house in  another.^


a  Boulay  Paly,  torn.  j.  257—260.

b  Tinkler  v.  Walpole,  14  EatVt  Rep.  226.  M»Ivcr  v.  Humble,  16
E(uVt  Rep,  169.  Fraser  v.  Hopkins,  2  TaunU  Rep,  5.  Sharp  v.  Uni-
ted Insurance  Company,  \A  Johns,  Rep.  201.  Colson  v.  Bonzey,  6
Oreenleaf^  474.  Bas  v.  Steele,  3  Wash,  Cir,  Rep,  381.  The  interest
that  appears  upon  the  registry  is  held  to  estop  the  owner  from  setting
up  a  claim  to  any  other  interest ;  but  if  he  deals  as  owner  of  a  larger
share,  he  is  liable  to  others  in  that  proportion.  This  is  the  English  role
upon  the  policy  of  the  registry  acts. Ex  parte  Yallop,  15  Vesey^  60.

c  By  the  French  law,  a  verbal  sale  of  a  ship  may  do  as  between  the
parties,  but  not  as  respects  the  claims  of  third  persons.  It  bas  been,  at
all  times,  the  policy  of  their  law,  to  require  tbe  written  evidence  of  a
sale.  Formerly,  every  sale  was  required  to  be  attested  before  a  notary,
but  now  a  private  instrument  is  suflici(«nt. But  the  law  of  France


Le«.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 151

(4)  Of  part  owners.

The  several  part  owners  of  a  ship  are  tenants  in  common.
Each  has  his  distinct,  though  undivided  interest ;  and  when
one  of  them  is  appointed  to  manage  the  concerns  of  the  ship
for  the  common  benefit,  he  is  termed  the  ship's  husband.  Ya-
lin  strongly  recommends  the  utility  of  these  associations  of
part  owners,  in  the  business  of  navigation  and  maritime  en
terprises,  in  order  to  unite  the  wisdom  of  joint  counsels,  as
well  as  to  divide  the  risks  and  losses  incident  to  a  very  ex
tended  maritime  commerce,  which  is  exposed  to  so  many
hazards  and  revolutions :  tua  omnia  uni  nunquam  navi
creditoJ^  The  marine  law  of  England,  respecting  part  ow-
ners of  vessels,  is  distingutshed  for  the  wisdom  and  equity  of
its  provisions,  and  it  has  an  undoubted  pre-eminence  over  the
common  law  doctrine  concerning  a  tenancy  in  common  in
chattels.  If  there  be  no  certain  agreement  among  them-
selves, respecting  the  employment  of  the  ship,  the  Court  of
Admiralty,  under  its  long  established  and  salutary  jurisdic-
tion, authorizes  a  majority  in  value  of  the  part  owners,  to
employ  the  ship  upon  any  probable  adventure,  and,  at  the
same  time,  takes  care  to  secure  the  interest  of  the  dissenting
minority. The  admiralty  practice  is  dictated  by  the  plain


places  Terj  material  checks  upon  the  transfer  of  ships  ;  for,  in  order  to
bar  the  rights  and  claims  of  third  persons,  it  is  requisite  that  the  vessel
make  one  irojage  at  sea  at  the  risk  of  the  purchaser,  and  without  oppo-
sition from  the  creditors  of  the  vendor  ;  otherwise  their  claims  are  pre-
ferred to  the  title  of  the  purchaser.  If  the  vessel  be  sold  while  ob  a
voyage,  that  voyag^e  is  not  computed,  and  it  requires  a  new  voyage  sub-
sequent to  such  sale,  to  bar  the  rights  of  privileged  creditors.  This
privilege,  under  the  French  ordinance  of  1681,  applied  to  creditors  of
every  description  existing  at  the  time  of  the  sale  ;  but  under  the  new
code  of  commerce,  it  would  rather  seem  to  be  confined  td  the  specified
class  of  privileged  creditors.  Ord.  b.  2,  tit.  10.  Det  J^atireMy  art.  2
and  3,  and  Valin't  Com.  ibid,  tom.  1 .  603.  Code  de  Com.  art.  1 93, 1 94.
196.  Boulaij  Paiy,  Coursdc  Droit  Com.  tom.  1.  168.  170.
a  Valin'M  Com.  tom.  1.  584.


162  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

reason  that  "  ships  were  raade  to  plough  the  ocean,  and  not
to  rot  by  the  wall."'  Ownership  in  a  ship  is,  ordinarily,  not
like  the  case  of  joint  concern,  or  partnership  ;  nor  does  the
English  law,  like  some  of  the  ordinances  of  other  countrieS|
give  power  to  the  majority  in  value  to  control,  in  their  discre-
tion, the  whole  concern.  The  Court  of  Admiralty  takes  a
stipulation  from  the  majority,  in  a  sum  equal  to  the  value  of
the  shares  of  the  minority,  either  to  bring  back  and  restore
the  ship,  or  pay  the  minority  the  value  of  their  shares.  In
that  case,  the  ship  sails  wholly  at  the  charge  and  risk,  and  for
the  benefit,  of  the  majority.  This  security  the  minority  ob-
tain upon  a  warrant  issued  upon  their  application  to  arrest
the  ship.  This  is  the  only  safe  proceeding  to  the  minority ;
lor  if  tne  ship  be  sent  to  sea  by  the  majority  without  this  se-
curity, and  she  be  lost  without  any  tortious  act  in  the  majori-
ty, the  minority  have  no  remedy  in  law  or  equity.  If  the  mi-
nority have  possession  of  the  ship,  and  refuse  to  employ  her,
the  majority,  on  a  similar  warrant,  may  obtain  possession,  and
send  the  ship  to  sea,  on  giving  the  like  security.  The  juris-
diction of  the  admiralty  extends  to  the  taking  a  vessel  from
a  wrong  doer,  and  delivering  her  over  to  the  rightful  owner ;
and  this  is  a  most  useful  part  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court.*
The  Court  of  Chancery  exercises  this  sort  of  equitable  juris-
diction in  cases  where  the  admiralty  cannot,  as  where  the
shares  are  not  ascertained.''
If  the  part  owners  be  equally  divided  in  opinion  in  respect


a  In  the  same  way  the  fir  tree,  though  originally  rooted  in  the  moun-
tain soil,  was,  according  to  the  beantiful  prosopopoeia  of  the  poet,  des-
tined to  witness  the  perils  of  the  deep — ccutu  abies  visura  marinos.

b  GraTes  v.  Sawcer,  T.  Raym,  Rep.  15.  Strelly  v.  Winson,  1  Vem,
Rep.  297.  Anon.  2  Ck.  Ou.  36.  Ouston  y.  Hebden,  1  WiU.  Rep.
101.  Lord  Ch,  J,  AbboU  on  Skipping,  part  1,  cb.  3.  In  the  matter
of  Blanshard,  2  Samw.  <^  Crcsn.  244.  In  Willings v.  Blight,  2  Petere*
Adm.  Rep,  288,  the  general  jurisdiction  of  the  admiralty,  as  stated,  seem-
ed to  have  been  assumed. See  also  the  Apollo,  1  Hag.  Adm.  Rep.  306.

e  Hally  v.  Goodson,  2  Mcrivate't  Rep.  77.


Lee.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  153

to  the  employment  of  the  ship,  either  party  may  obtain  the
Kke  security  from  the  other  seeking  to  employ  her.'  It  is
said,  that  the  Court  of  Admiralty  has  no  jurisdiction  to  com-
pel an  obstinate  part  owner  to  sell  his  share  ;^  and  yet  it  was
considered,  in  the  District  Court  of  Pennsylvania,  as  still  an
unsettled  point,  whether  the  court  might  not  compel  a  sale  of
the  shares  of  the  minority  who  unreasonably  refused  to  act."
If  a  part  owner  sells,  he  can  only  sell  his  undivided  right.
The  interest  of  part  owners  is  so  fieir  distinct,  that  one  of  them
cannot  dispose  of  the  share  of  another ;  and  this  may  be  con-
sidered  as  a  settled  principle.''  The  language  in  the  Court
of  Errors  of  New-Tork,  in  the  case  which  has  been  already
mentioned,  does  not  lead  to  an  opposite  conclusion.^ That


a  AhboU  on  Shipping,  ub,  sup,  sec.  6.

b  Onston  r.  Hebdeo,  ti6.  nip.  In  the  case  of  TTie  Apollo,  Lord
StoweU  Tindicated  the  legality  of  the  ioitJatory  measure  of  arresting  a
ship,  oD  the  application  of  a  part  owner,  who  dissents  from  her  intended
employment,  and  compelling  security  for  the  safe  return  of  the  ressel,
or  for  the  estimated  value  of  his  share.  And  while  he  was  extremely
cantioas  of  enlarging  his  jurisdiction  on  this  subject,  he  decreed.  imrae«
diate  payment  of  the  entire  amount  of  the  stipulated  sum,  upon  the  loss
of  the  ship*

c  Willings  ▼.  Blight,  ub,  wp.  The  remedy  for  the  dissenting  own-
ers, in  Scotland,  is  to  compel  a  sale,  or  that  the  other  owners  shall  give
or  take  at  a  price  put.  Mr.  Bell  intimates,  that  the  English  method  is
less  harsh  and  perilous.  BtlVt  Commenlaries  on  the  JJaws  ofScotlandy
f  ol.  i.  503.

d  It  was  so  declared  by  Mr.  Abbott  in  his  elementary  work  on  ship-
ping,  p.  4,  and  Lord  Ch.  J.  Dallas  observed,  in  8  Taunt,  Rep.  774,  that
one  part  owner  of  a  ship  could  not  bind  the  rest,  as  in  partnenbip


e  See  ante,  p.  40.  The  ordinance  of  Rotterdam,  of  1721,  gave  the
owners  of  above  half  the  ship  the  power  to  sell  the  same  for  the  general
account,  as  well  as  to  freight  her  and  outfit  her  at  the  common  expense,
and  against  the  consent  of  the  minority.  (Art.  171, 172.  2  Jdagens
on  insurance,  108.)  On  the  other  hand,  the  French  ordinance  of  1681,
prohibited  one  part  owner  of  a  ship  from  forcing  his  companions  to  a
sale,  except  in  case  of  equality  of  opinions  upon  the  uoderlakiog  of  a

Vol.  III.  20


154  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

case  only  admitted,  that  a  ship  might  be  held,  not  only  by-
part  owners,  as  tenants  in  common,  but  in  partnership,  by
partners,  as  any  other  chattel.  And  though  a  part  owner
can  sell  only  his  share,  yet  one  partner  can  dispose  of  the  en-
life  subject ;  and  the  case  of  vessels  does  not  form  an  excep-
tion, when  they  are  owned  by  a  partnership,  in  the  commer-
cial sense,  and  so  it  has  frequently  been  held.'

The  cases  recognise  the  clear  and  settled  distinction  be-
tween part  owners  and  partners.  Part  ownership  is  but  a
teikancy  in  common,  and  a  person  who  has  only  a  part  interest
in  a  ship,  is  generally  a  part  owner,  and  not  a'  partner.  As
part  owner  he  has  only  a  disposing  power  over  his  own  inte-
rest in  the  ship,  and  he  can  convey  no  greater  title.  But
there  may  be  a  partnership,  as  well  as  a  co-tenancy,  in  a
vessel ;  and,  in  that  case,  one  part  owner,  in  the  character  of


voyage.  Lir.  2,  tit.  8,  Des  Proprielaires,  art.  6.  Fio/tn,  ibid,  Tindi-
cateB  this  interdiction  as  conduciye  to  the  benefit  of  trade,  though  he
admits  it  has  its  inconyeniences,  and  that  such  is  the  destiny  of  all  hu-
man laws.

a  Wright  T.  Hunter,  1  EcuVm  Hep,  20.  Lamb  t.  Durant,  12  Mcus,
Rep,  54.  In  the  case  of  Davis  4r  Brooks  v.  The  Brig  Seneca,  decided
in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  District  of  Fennsylra-
nia,  in  May,  1829,  on  appeal  from  the  District  Court,  the  part  owners
were  equally  divided  in  opinion  as  to  the  employment  of  the  vessel.
One  party,  baring  equal  interest,  wished  to  employ  her  on  his  own  terras,
and  by  his  own  master,  and  the  other  party  claimed  the  same  right,  and
neither  would  recede.  The  District  Court  decided  that  it  had  no  power
to  award  a  sale  of  the  vessel.  The  Circuit  Court  reversed  that  decision,
and  decreed  a  sale.  Judge  Washington  admitted  tha  t  the  English  ad-
miralty had  no  such  jurisdiction,  but  he  went  upon  broader  ground,  and
held  that  the  court  had  jurisdiction  of  all  cases  of  a  maritime  nature,  and
was  governed  by  the  general  maritime  law  of  nations,  and  was  not  con-
fined to  that  of  England.  He  considered  the  5tb  and  <6th  articles  of
the  marine  ordinance  of  Louis  XIV.  {liv.  2,  lit.  8,  Des  Proprietaires)
and  Valin's  Commentary  thereon,  (tom.  1.  585,)  to  be  evidence  of  the
marine  law  of  nations,  that  the  court  could  award  a  sale  of  the  ship
when  the  part  owners  were  equally  divided,  as  in  that  case.  The  arti-
cles in  the  ordinance  were  agreeable  to  the  Roman  law.


Lee.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 156

partner,  may  sell  the  vhole  vessel;  and  he  has  such  an
implied  authority  over  the  \vhoIe  partnership  effects,  as  we
have  already  seen. The  vendee,  in  a  case  free  from  fraud,
will  have  an  indefeasible  title  to  the  whole  ship. When  a
person  is  to  be  considered  as  a  part  owner,  or  as  a  partner,  in  a
ship,  depends  upon  circumstances. The  former  is  the  general
relation  between  ship  owners,  and  the  latter  the  exception,  and
requires  to  be  specially  shown. But  as  the  law  presumes,
that  the  common  possessors  of  a  valuable  chattel  will  and  de-
sire whatever  is  necessary  to  the  preservation  and  profitable
employment  of  the  common  property,  part  owners,  on  the  spot,
have  an  implied  authority  from  the  absent  part  owners,  to
order  for  the  common  concern  whatever  is  necessary  for  the
preservation  and  proper  employment  of  the  ship. They  are
analagous  to  partners,  and  liable  as  such  for  necessary  repain
and  stores  ordered  by  one  of  themselves ;  and  this  is^the  prin-
ci[de  and  limit  of  the  liability  of  part  owners.'

Whether  part  owners  who  render  their  companions  liable
for  supplies  furnished,  oi  repairs  made  upon  a  ship,  are  to
have  their  accounts  taken,  and  the  assets  distributed,  as  if  the
ship  was  partnership  property,  or  as  if  they  had  each  a  dis-
tinct separate  interest  in  the  vessel  as  tenants  in  common,
depends,  as  we  have  already  seen,  upon  the  fact,  whether  the
ship  was  held  by  them,  in  the  particular  case,  as  part  owners
or  as  partners.  The  law  of  Holland  considered  it  to  be  preju-
dicial to  trade,  to  carry  the  responsibility  of  part  owners  to  the
extent  of  the  English  law ;  and  the  rule  there  is,  that  each
part  owner  shall  be  answerable  in  relation  to  the  ship  no  fur-
tlier  than  to  the  extent  of  his  share.^ The  English  and


a  Holi  on  Shippings  Int.  p.  53,  and  vol.  i.  p.  367^369.  Wright  ▼.
HuDter,  1  EatVs  Rep,  20. ScoKin  v.  Stanley,  1  Dallas*  Rep,  129.

&  Fan  Leemoeh't  Com.  on  the  Roman  Dutch  Law,  b.  4,  cfa.  2,  sec.  9.
Ftnnittf,  not.  in  Com,  Peckii,  tit.  De  Exerc.  155.  The  latter  sajs,  it
is  neither  agreeable  to  natural  equity,  nor  public  utility,  that  each  part
owner  sbonld  be  bound  in  solido,  or  beyond  his  share.


156  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

Scotch  lav  render  part  owners,  in  all  cases,  responsible  in
solido  as  partners,  for  repairs  and  necessary  expenses  relating
to  the  ship,  and  incurred  on  the  authority  of  the  master,  or
ship's  husband.^  But  where  a  ship  has  been  duly  abandoned
to  separate  insurers,  they  are  not  responsible  for  each  other  as
partners,  but  each  one  is  answerable  for  the  previous  expenses
of  the  ship,  ratably  to  the  extent  of  his  interest  as  an  insurer,
and  no  further.*  By  the  French  law,  the  majority  in  interest
of  the  owners  control  the  rest,  and  in  that  way  one  part  owner
may  govern  the  management  of  the  ship,  in  opposition  to  the
wishes  of  fifty  other  part  owners,  whose  interests  united  are  not
equal  to  his. This  control  relates  to  the  equipment  and  em-
ployment of  the  ship,  and  the  minority  must  contribute  ;  but
chey  cannot  be  compelled  to  contribute  against  their  will  for  the
cargo  laden  on  board,  though  they  will  be  entitled  to  their  por-
tion of  the  freight.  If  the  part  owners  be  equally  divided  on  the
subject,  the  opinion  in  favour  of  employing  the  ship  prevails
as  being  most  favourable  to  the  interests  of  navigation.  Many
of  the  foreign  jurists  contend,  that  even  the  opinion  of  the
minority  ought  to  prevail,  if  it  be  in  favour  of  employing  the
ship  on  some  foreign  voyage. Emerigon,  Ricard,  Straccha,
Kuricke,  and  Cleirac,  are  of  that  opinion  )  but  Yalin  has
given  a  very  elaborate  consideration  to  the  subject,  and  he
opposes  it  on  grounds  that  are  solid,  and  he  is  sustained  by
the  provisions  of  the  old  ordinance,  and  of  the  new  code.*
Boulay  Paty**  follows  the  opinion  of  Valin,  and  of  the  codes,
and  says,  that  the  contrary  doctrine  would  enable  the  minori-
ty to  control  the  majority,  contrary  to  the  law  of  every  asso-
ciation, and  the  plainest  principles  of  justice. The  majority


a  Bladoey  v.  Ritchie,  1  Siark.  Rep.  338.  Westerdell  r.  Dale»  7
Term  Rep.  306. BeWa  Com.  toI.  i.  520.  524.

b  The  United  iDsuraDce  Compaay  y.  Scott,  1  Johns.  Rep.  106.

c  Ord.  de  la  JUarine,  \W,  2,  tit.  8,  art.  5,  tit  Dea  PropriiUdreSy
and  Valin* t  Com.  ibid.  torn.  1.  573-^584.  Code  de  Commerce,  art.
«20.

d  Court  de  Droit  Commercial  J^aritime,  torn.  1 ,  p.  339—347.


Lee.  XLV.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY- 157

not  only  thus  control  the  destination  and  equipment  of  the
ship,  but  even  a  sale  of  her  by  them  will  bind  the  right  of
privileged  creditors  after  the  performance  of  one  voyage  by
the  purchaser,  but  not  the  other  part  owners.'

The  ship's  husband  may  either  be  one  of  the  part  owners,
or  a  stranger,  and  he  is  sometimes  merely  an  agent  for  con-
ducting the  necessary  measures  on  the  return  of  the  ship  to
port ;  but  he  may  have  a  more  general  agency  for  conduct-
ing the  affairs  of  the  vessel  in  place  of  the  owners,  and  his
contracts,  in  the  proper  line  of  a  ship's  husband's  duty,  will
bind  the  joint  owners.  His  duty  is,  generally  to  see  to  the
proper  outfit  of  the  vessel,  as  to  equipment,  provisions,  and
crew,  and  the  regular  documentary  papers  ;  and  though  he
has  the  powers  incidental  and  necessary  to  the  trust,  it  is  held,
that  he  has  no  authority  to  insure  for  the  owners,  or  bind
them  to  the  expenses  of  law  suits.^

The  rights  of  tenancy  in  common  among  part  owners,
apply  to  the  cargo,  as  well  as  to  the  ship,  and  they  have  not
a  community  of  interest,  as  partners,  so  as  to  enable  one  to
dispose  of  the  whole  interest,  and  bind  the  rights  of  his  co-
tenants.'


a  BmUay  Paly,  ub.  tup.  351 .  Pardessus,  torn.  2,  p.  27,  is,  however,
of  opioioD,  that  they  are  equally  concluded  with  the  creditors  by  the
sale,  aAer  one  voyage.  If  the  ship  be  seized  for  the  debt  of  ooe  of  the
part  oieners,  and  the  claim  of  the  others  be  put  in  before  judgment,  the
right  only  of  the  part  owner  can  be  sold ;  but  if  not  until  after  judgment,
the  entire  right  to  the  ship  is  sold,  and  the  other  part  owners  reclaim
ibeir  share  of  the  proceeds.  "^Boulay  Paty^  torn.  1.  227, 228.

b  French  r.  Backhouse,  5  Bitrr>  Rep.  2727.  Bell  v.  Humphries,  2
Stark.  Rep.  345.  Campbell  r.  Stein,  6  Dow's  Rep.  134.  Belts  Com-
merUaries,  vol.  i.  504.

€  Jackson  v.  Robinson,  3  JHcuon't  Rep.  138.


LECTURE  XLVI.

OF  THE  PERSOlfS  EMPLOYED  IN  THE  NAVIGATION  OF

MERCHANTS^ SHIPS.

(I.)  Of  the  authority  and  duty  of  the  master.

The  captain  of  a  sbip  is  ap  oflScer  to  whom  great  power,
momentous  interests,  and  enlarged  discretion  are  necessarily
confided,  and  the  continental  ordinances  and  jurists  have,  in
a  very  special  manner,  required,  that  he  should  possess  at-
tainments suitable  to  the  dignity  and  the  vastness  of  his  trust.
He  must  be  a  person  of  experience  and  practical  skill,  as  well
as  deeply  initiated  in  the  theory  of  the  art  of  navigation.
He  is  clothed  with  the  power  and  discretion  requisite  to  meet
the  unforseen  and  distressing '  vicissitudes  of  the  voyage ;
and  he  ought  to  possess  moral  and  intellectual,  as  well  as  bu-
siness qualifications,  of  the  first  order. His  authority  at  sea
is  necessarily  summary,  and  often  absolute,  and  if  he  chooses
to  perform  his  duties,  or  to  exert  his  power,  in  a  harsh,  in-
temperate, or  oppressive  manner,  he  can  seldom  be  resisted
by  physical  or  moral  force. He  must  have  the  talent  to  com-
mand in  the  midst  of  danger,  and  courage  and  presence  of
mind  to  meet  and  surmount  extraordinary  perils. He  must
be  able  to  dissipate  fear,  to  calm  disturbed  minds,  and  inspire
confidence,  in  the  breasts  of  all  who  are  under  his  charge.
lu  tempests,  as  well  as  in  battle,  the  commander  of  a  ship
^  must  give  desperate  commands ;  he  must  require  instan-
taneous obedience." He  must  watch  for  the  preservation  of
the  health  and  comfort  of  the  crew,  as  well  as  for  the  safety
of  the  ship  and  cargo. It  is  necessary  that  he  should  main-
tain perfect  order,  and  preserve  the  most  exact  discipline,  un-


160  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

der  the  guidance  of  justice,  moderation,  and  good  sense.
Charged  frequently  with  the  sale  of  the  cargo,  and  the  re-
investment of  the  proceeds,  he  must  be  fitted  to  superadd  the
character  of  merchant  to  that  of  commander ;  and  he  ought
to  have  a  general  knowledge  of  the  marine  law,  and  of  the
rights  of  belligerents,  and  the  duties  of  neutrals,  so  as  not  to
expose  to  unnecessary  hazard  the  persons  and  property  under
his  protection.*


a  Cleirac,  in  his  Jugemem  d'Oleron^  ch.  1,  sajs,  that  Uie  tiUe  oi
roaster  of  a  ship  implies  honoar,  experience,  and  morals ;  reverendum
honoretn  sumU  quuquis  magUtri  nomen  acceperii,  Tbe  French  ordi-
nances of  1584,  1681,  and  1725 j  and  the  ordinances  of  the  Hanse
Towns,  of  Bilboa,  of  Prussia,  and  Sweden,  have  all  required  the  mas-
ter to  be  previously  examined  and  certified  to  be  fit  by  his  experience,
capacity,  and  character.  He  was,  formerly,  when  trade  was  constantly
exposed  to  lawless  rapacity,  required  to  possess  military,  as  well  as
ordinary  nautical  skill :  omnibtu  privilegiU  militartbiu  gaudel.  Roc-
ctu  de  J^avtbui  et  Jfaulo^  note  7.  Emerigonj  Traiii  de*  Ass,  torn.
1.  192.  Valines  Com.  lir.  2,  tit.  Du  Capitainef  passim.  Jacobsen's
Sea  Lavosy  by  Frick,  b.  2,  ch.  1.  Boulay  Paiy,  Cours  de  Droit  JUar.
torn.  1,  368.  376.  379.  Repertoire  de  Jurisprudence ,  tit.  Capitaine  de
Vaisseau  Jdarchand.

The  English  writers  go  directly  to  the  discussion  of  these  subjects,
which  they  handle  dryly,  and  with  mathematical  precision  ;  while  the
foreign,  and  especially  the  French  jurists,  not  only  rival  their  neigh-
bours in  the  accuracy  of  their  minute  details  of  judicial  proceedings,
and  practical  rules,  but  they  occasionally  relieve  tbe  exhausted  atten-
tion of  the  reader,  by  the  riracity  of  their  descriptions,  and  the  enei^
and  eloquence  of  their  reflections.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  Uiat
the  decisions  of  Lord  Stowell  are  remarkable  for  taste  and  elegance,
and  they  are  particularly  distinguished  for  the  justness  and  force  with
which  they  describe  the  transcendent  powers,  and  define  the  delicate
and  imperative  duties  of  the  master.  And  the  duties  of  the  master,  and
particularly  the  necessity  of  kind,  decorous,  and  just  conduct,  on  the
part  of  the  captain,  to  the  passengers  and  crew  under  his  chatge,  and
the  firm  purpose  with  which  courts  of  justice  punish,  in  the  shape  of
damages,  every  gross  violation  of  such  duties,  are  no  where  more  forci-
bly stated,  than  in  Chamberlain  v.  Chandler,  3  Mason's  Rep.  242,  in
our  American  admiralty.


Lee.  XLVI.J  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 161

As  the  master  is  the  confidential  agent  of  the  owners^  he
has  an  implied  authority  to  bind  them,  without  their  know-
ledge, by  contracts  relative  to  the  usual  employment  of  the
ship.'*  This  is  a  reasonable  rule,  and  founded  on  just  prin-
ciples of  commercial  policy.  It  is  to  be  traced  to  the  Roman
law,  which  gave  to  the  ipaster,  on  the  voyage^  in  whatever
matter  concerned  the  ship,  the  powers  of  the  exerdtor  or
owner,  and  he  could  bind  him  by  his  acts  as  master ;  and  all
the  foreign  marine  ordinances  give  this  power,  but  with  great-
er precision  and  more  exact  regulation.  The  master  is  ap*
pointed  by  the  owner,  and  the  appointment  holds  him  forth
to  the  public  as  a  person  worthy  of  trust  and  confidence*
The  master  is  always  personally  bound  by  his  contracts,  and
the  person  who  deals  with  the  captain  in  a  matter  relative  to
the  usual  employment  of  the  ship,  or  for  repairs  or  supplies
fdrnished  her,  has  a  double  remedy.  He  may  sue  the  mas-
ter on  his  own  personal  contract,  and  he  may  sue  the  owner
on  the  contract  made  on  his  behalf,  by  his  agent,  the  master.
The  latter  may,  however,  exempt  himself  from  personal  re^
sponsibility,  by  expressly  confining  the  credit  to  the  owner,
and  stipulating  against  his  personal  liability.^  If  there  was
no  special  agreement  in  the  case,  the  French  law,  both  in  the
ordinance  of  1681,  and  in  the  new  code,  gave  to  the  owner
the  power  to  discharge  the  master  in  his  discretion,  and  with-
out being  responsible  in  damages  for  the  act.  M.  Delvin-
court,  and  M.  Pardessus,  in  their  commentaries  on  the  new
code,  condemn  the  existence  of  such  a  power,  while  M.  Bou^
lay  Paty  vindicates  it,  on  the  ground,  that  the  appointment
of  the  master  is  an  act  of  pure  and  voluntary  confidence,  and


a  Boton  r.  Sandford,  Carih.  Rep.  58.  Rich  ▼«  Coe,  Cowp.  Rep,
036.  EUis  ▼.  Turner,  8  Term  Rep.  531.  RejDolds  ▼.  Toppao,  16
Maes.  Rep.  370. Webster  ▼.  Seekarop,  4  Bamw.  4*  Aid.  352.

b  HoftkiDS  r.  SlaytoD,  C€ues  temp.  Hard.  360.  Lord  Manafiekl,
Parmer  ▼.  Davies,  1  Term  Rep.  108.  Lord  EUenborougb,  Hauey  r.
Christie,  9  EaeVs  Rep.  432.

ToL.  in.  21


162  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

the  principal  neeessarily  has  that  control  over  an  agent,  for
whose  acts  he  is  accountable,  and  it  is  in  the  power  of  the
master  to  provide  for  the  case  by  a  special  contract  for  indem-
nity in  case  of  dismission.'  In  the  Scottish  admiralty  it  is
also  held,  that  ship  owners  may  dismiss  the  master  at  any
time,  without  cause  assigned,  and^the  majority  may  dismisa
him  in  his  character  of  master,  even  if  he  be  a  joint  owner.*
The  master  is  bound  to  conduct  himself,  in  all  respects,  with
good  fiuth,  diligence,  and  competent  skill,  and  he  is  responsi-
ble to  the  owners,  as  their  agent,  for  his  conduct.  His  mis-
conduct will  subject  him  to  the  forfeiture  of  his  wages,  if  it
be  gross  in  its  circumstances,  and  attended  with  serious  da-
mage to  the  owner ;  and  in  cases  of  a  venial  nature,  the
'  damages,  which  his  unwarrantable  acts  may  have  produced,
wiD  be  a  charge  upon  his  wages.'

The  master  may,  by  a  charter  party,  bind  the  ship  and
freight.  This  he  may  do  in  a  foreign  port  in  the  usual  course
of  the  ship's  employment ;  and  this  he  may  also  do  at  home,
if  the  owner^s  assent  can  be  presumed.  The  ship  and  freight
are,  by  the  marine  law,  bound  to  the  performance  of  the  con-
tract' As  the  admiralty  has  no  jurisdiction  in  this  case,  un-
less according  to  the  unsettled  doctrine  laid  down  in  De  LAh
vio  V.  Boit,*  and  as  the  courts  of  common  law  cannot  carry
into  effect  the  principle  of  the  marine  law,  by  which  the  ship
itself,  in  specie,  is  considered  as  security  to  the  charterer,  it  m


a  Ord.  de  la  Mer,  des  Proprietaireij  «rt.  4.  Code  de  Commerce,
art.  21 8.  Jtf.  Pardetnu,  torn.  2.  35.  M,  Dahmcourt^  LuL  Com*  torn.
2.  294. Boulay  Paty,  torn.  1. 324^329.

b  BeWt  Com.  vol.  i.  506.  508.

e  Willard  r.  Dorr,  3  Jiaeonj  161.  Freeman  t.  Walker,  6  Oreen'
leaf,  68.

d  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  Ht.  3,  tit.  1,  art.  11,  and  Faith,  ilnd.  torn.  1.  629.
But  the  master  cannot,  merely  in  the  character  of  master,  bind  the  own-
en  by  a  charter-party  under  seal,  so  as  to  subject  them  to  an  action  of
Gorenant. Pickering  ▼.  Holt,  6  QremUaf  160.

e  See  toI.  i.


^ xjir  PERSONAL  FKuriSKTr.  163

Lee-  ^^

supposed  by  Mr.  Abbott,  that  the  owners  may  be  made  respon-
^le  for  the  stipulatiope  ia  a  charter  party  so  made  by  the
master,  by  a  special  aotioo  on  the  case,  or  by  a  suit  in  equity.*
The  master  can  bind  the  owners,  not  only  in  respect  to  the
usual  employment  of  the  ship,  but  in  respect  to  the  means
of  employing  her.>  His  power  relates  to  the  carriage  of  the
goods,  and  the  supplies  requisite  for  the  ship,  and  he  can  bind
the  owner  personally  as  to  repairs  and  necessaries  for  the  ship ;
and  this  was  equally  the  rule  in  the  Roman  law.  But  the
supplies  must  appear  to  be  reasonable,  or  the  money  advanced
for  the  purchase  of  them  to  have  been  wanting,  and  there
must  be  nothing  in  the  caae  to  repel  the  ordinary  presumption,
that  the  master  acted  under  the  authority  of  Xhe  owners.^  If
moneys  be  advanced  to  the  master  while  abroad,  it  will  be  in-
cumbent on  the  creditor,  if  he  means  to  charge  the  owner,  to
prove  the  actual  necessity  of  the  repairs  or  supplies  for  which
the  money  was  advanced ;  and  this  strictness,  requisite  to  the
exercise  of  the  master's  authority,  arises  from  the  facility  of
misapplication,  and  the  temptation  to  abuse,  to  which  the  pow-
er is  incident  But  if  the  money  wa»  fairly  and  regularly
lent  to  supply  the  necessities  of  the  ship,  the  inisappUcation
of  it  by  the  master  will  not  affect  the  lender's  claim  upon  the
owner.  This  is  equally  the  language  of  the  civil  law,  and
of  all  the  foreign  civilians.* The  great  case  of  CWy  v.

WhitSj  which  underwent  much  discussion,  established  the
principle  of  the  personal  responsibility  of  the  owners,  provided
the  creditor  could  show  the  actual  existence  of  the  necessity

of  those  things  which  gave  rise  to  his  demand ;  and  this  same


a  Abbott  on  Shippings  part  2,  ch.  2,  lec.  5.

b  Dig.  14. 1.  8.  and  10, 11^  Speerman  r.  De  Grave,  2  Vem.  Rep.
643.  SaDsam  t.  Brag^eotoo,  1  Vesey't  Rep,  443.  Ross  r.  The  Ship
Acti7e,2  Woih.  Cir.  R<p.  226.

c  Dig.  14. 1. 9.  Locceniw,  lib.  2,  c.  6,  n.  12.  2  Emerig.  440.  Bou-
tayPaify^  Court  de  Droit  Com.  1. 1.  119.  Roccus  De  J^Tambui,  not.
23,24.


164 OF  PERSONA.L  PROPERTY.


I*- ^


doctrine  is  considered  to  be  equally  well  established  in  the  ju-
risprudence of  this  country.*  Under  the  French  ordinance
of  1681,  the  master  might  hypothecate  the  sliJp  and  freight,
and  sell  the  cargo  to  raise  moneys  for  the  necessities  of  the
ship  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  but  he  could  not  charge  the
owners  personally.  He  could  only  bind  their  property  under
his  charge ;  and  the  new  code  of  commerce  has  followed  the
same  regulation.  It  declares,  that  the  owner  is  civilly  respon-
sible for  the  acts  of  the  master,  in  whatever  relates  to  the  ves-
sel and  the  voyage,  but  the  responsibility  ceases  on  the  aban-
donment of  the  vessel  and  freight.  The  power  of  the  mas-
ter is  limited  to  raise  money  for  the  necessities  of  the  voyage,
by  borrowing  on  bottomry,  or  pledging,  or  selling  goods  to
the  amount  of  the  sum  wanted.^  The  French  civilians  are
zealous  in  the  vindication  of  the  equity  and  wisdom  of  their
law,  which,  on  abandonment  of  the  ship  and  freight,  dischar-
ges the  owners  as  to  the  contracts,  as  well  as  to  the  defaults
of  the  master.  Emerigon  has  bestowed  an  elaborate  discus-
sion on  the  point ;  and  this  was  equally  the  maritime  law  of
the  middle  ages.""  The  law  on  this  subject  is  the  same  in
HoDand  ^  in  France,^  and  the  learned  Grotius,  in  a  work
where  we  should  hardly  have  expected  to  find  such  a  muni*
cipal  prorision,*  condemns  the  rule  in  the  Roman  law  making
pard  owners  personally  bound,  in  solido,  for  these  pecuniary
contracts  of  the  master,  as  very  improperly  introduced,  and
as  being  equdly  contrary  to  natural  equity,  and  public  utility.


a  1  Sro.  P.  C.  284,  edit.  1784.  Abbott  on  Shipping,  part  2,  cb.  3,
tec.  6.  S.  C.  Rocher  y. Bather,  1  Starkie,2J.  Waiowright  ▼.  Crair-
ford,  4  DalloM'  Rep.  225.  Milvrard  y,  Hallett,  2  Cotnef'  Rep.  Tt.
James  y.  Bixby,  11  JUata.  Rep.  34.

6  Ord.  liy.  2,  tit.  8.  Dei  Propriifctt^ee^  art.  2.  Code  du  Commerce^
art.  216.  234.

c  Cof/e,  art.  216.  £mer^on,Con<.  a  to  Gfro#f6,cb.  4,  sec.  11.  Boii%
lay  Paty,  torn.  1.  272—278.

d  Van  Leemoen'M  Com.  on  the  Dutch  LaWy  b.  4,  cb.  2,  lec.  9.

$  Qrot.  De  Jure  beUi  etpacie,  b,  2,  cb.  11,  tec.  13.


Lcc.  XLVI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  166

Sir  William  Scott,  in  the  case  of  the  Gfratitudine,*  doubts
whether  the  master  has  authority,  even  in  a  case  of  consum-
mate distress,  and  in  a  foreign  port,  to  bind  the  owners  be-
yond the  value  of  the  ship  and  freight  But  he  admits,  in
that  case,  after  an  admirable  discussion  of  the  principles  and
authorities  in  the  marine  law  on  the  subject,  that  the  master
has  power  to  hypothecate  the  cargo  in  a  foreign  port,  in  a  case
of  severe  necessity,  for  the  repairs  of  the  ship,  and  that  the
Court  of  Admiralty  would  enforce  the  lien.  However,  from
the  cases  already  referred  to,  it  would  seem  to  be  settled  in
the  English  and  American  law,  that  the  owner  may  be  per-
sonally bound  by  the  act  of  the  master,  in  respect  to  the  re-
pairs and  supplies  necessary  for  the  ship  while  abroad,  and
without  other  means  to  procure  them  ;  and  if  the  owner  be
Hrsonally  bound,  it  must  be,  as  it  was  in  the  Roman  law,  to
4e  ertent  of  the  requisite  advances.  Emerigon,  while  he
admitted  that  the  master  might  hypothecate  the  ship,  and
Bell  the  cargo,  to  raise  money  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the
«hip,  denied  that  he  could  bind  the  owners  personally  by  a

Jl  of  exchange  drawn  on  them  for  the  moneys  raised. But

held  otherwise,  and  Boulay  Paty  is  of  opinion,  that  the

erives  the  captain  a  discretion  on  this  point,  and  he

I . T\  Valin,  and  the  ancient  nautical  legislation.*

^ .  . ^^a  question  of  some  doubt,  and  even  contrariety

.1. %_• r^be  books,  whether  the  master  had  a  lien  on
the  ship  or  frei,  '  r  j

^  It  av. I?  Jot  his  wages,  supplies  or  advances  on  ac-
count of  the  shift, ,  L  . 3 T^ L

^ , *her  at  home  or  abroad. But  the  ques-
tion appears  to  be  u&

1 J  liL  X  .1.  * 'Jearly  and  definitely  settled  in  Eng-

land, that  the  master  c(k "^  ,  ,. ^  ,

J X r  xi. I-- j\ct8  "Poo  ^he  credit  of  the  owners,
and  not  of  the  ship,  and  K. "^ ,.  , , . ^  .  ,

!>  /i. IT  r  .^as  no  hen  on  the  ship,  freight,

or  cargo,  for  any  debt  of  his  u ^  °

.  , J  . J ,  ,  .  \  as  for  wages,  or  stores  fur-

nished, or  repairs  done  at  his  e.  . ,  ,

"^nse,  either  at  home  or  on


a  3  Rob,  Adm.  Rep^  S74.
h  2  Emerigon,  458. Valin'»  Cam.  tit.  Dut.
lay  Pafyt  tom.  2,  p.  73, 74.  '


166  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

the  voyage. The  principle  was  settled  by  Lord  Mansfield,
in  the  case  of  Wilkins  v.  Carmichaelj'^  against  the  master's
claim  to  a  lien  on  the  ship  for  wages,  or  money  expended
tx  stores,  or  repairs  done  in  England,  and  it  was  there  shown
to  have  been  the  previous  law  and  usage. It  was  afterwards
solemnly  adjudged  in  Hussey  v.  Christie^^  that  the  master
had  no  lien  on  the  ship  for  money  expended,  or  debts  incur-
red, by  him,  for  repairs  done  to  it  on  the  voyage ;  and  in
Smith  V.  Plumefj*  it  was  decided,  by  equal  authority,  that
the  master  had  no  lien  on  the  freight  for  his  wages  or  dis-
buniements  on  account  of  the  ship  during  the  voyage,  or  for
the  premiums  paid  by  him  abroad  for  the  purpose  of  procu-
ring the  cargo The  captain is  distinguished from  all
other  persons  belonging  to  the  ship,  and  he  is  considered  as
contracting  personalty  with  the  owner,  while  the  mate  ap^
mariners  contract  with  the  master  on  the  credit  of  th^"  ^^^P*
The  rule  has  its  foundation  in  policy,  and  the  benefit  of  navi-
gation, and  it  would  be  a  great  inconvenience,  if,  on  the
change  of  captain  for  misbehaviour,  or  any  other  reason,  h^
would  be  entitled  to  keep  possession  of  the  ship  until  he  wa^
paid,  or  to  enforce  the  lien  while  abroad,  and  compel  a  £;
fice  of  the  ship. Sir  William  Scott,  in  the  case  of  V  ^
vourite^*  observed,  that  it  had  been  repeatedly  dr '
the  master  could  not  sue  in  the  admiralty  for  Vf. . ,  , .
cause  he  stood  on  the  security  of  his  personal  ^^ST]
owner,  not  relating  to  the  bottom  of  the  ship* *u  ^  ^ y^
of  the  ca«e  of  Smith  v.  Plumer,  was  j^J^^^  ^^^^
no  Uenottthe  cargo  for  money  expend^  ^^  ^^  ^

him,  for  repairs,  or  the  necessary  pi>'


a  Doug.  Rep.  101.

b  9  EasVs  Rep.  426. ^^  ^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^ .^ AtkinioD  r.
c  1  Bamw,  <f.  Jild,  575^  ^
Cotesworth,  6  DawL  S;Z
d  2  Boh.  Adm.  Rep


Uc.  XLVI.)  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 167

can  hypothecate  and  create  a  lien  in  favour  of  others,  but  he
himself  must  stand  on  the  personal  credit  of  his  owners.

The  doctrine  before  us  in  the  English  law,  remains  yet  to
be  definitely  declared  and  settled  in  this  country.

The  case  of  the  ship  Cfrand  Thirk,'^  is  a  decision  in  the
Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States  for  New- York,  on  the
point,  that  the  master's  wages  and  perquisites  were  no  lien  on
the  ship ;  and  it  was  so  ruled,  also,  in  Fisher  v.  Willing,*
In  those  cases,  the  English  authorities  were  reviewed  and
cited  by  the  court,  and  the  principle  advanced  in  them  was
not  questioned,  and  seemed  to  be  assumed  as  settled  law.
But,  in  the  case  of  Gardner  v.  TTie  Ship  New-Jersey,^  it
was  rather  loosely  mentioned,  that  the  master's  claim  for  dis-
bursements abroad  was  a  lien  on  the  ship ;  and  more  recent-
ly, in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States  for  Massachu-
setts,' the  rule  was  laid  down,  that  the  master  had  a  hen
upon  the  freight  for  all  his  advances  and  responsibilities
abroad  upon  account  of  the  ship,  and  it  seemed  to  be  the
strong  incUnation  of  the  court  to  acknowledge  the  master's
lien  on  the  ship  for  the  same  object.  The  question,  therefore,
though  considered  to  be  settled  in  England,  is  still  a  vexed
and  floating  one  in  our  own  maritime  law.'


a  1  Fame's  Rep,  72.

h  8  Serg.  4r  Rawle,  118.

e  1  Peters*  Adm,  Rep,  227.

i  Ship  Packet,  3  Mason's  Rep,  255.

e  Id  tbe  case  of  the  Ship  Packet,  there  is  do  refereoce  to  the  decisioD
iD  Smith  T.  Plumer,  though  that  decisioo  cootaiDed  a  critical  review  of
all  the  authorities,  and  put  at  rest,  io  Westmioster  Hall,  the  very  poiot
as  to  the  lieo  oo  freight,  aod  io  oppositioo  to  the  rule  laid  dowo  iD  the
Ship  Packet.  Id  logersoU  y.  Vao  BokkeliD,  (7  Coweny  670.  5  JTendellp
314.  S.  C.)  which  had  Dot  beeo  seeD  wheD  the  first  editioD  of  this  voloma
was  put  to  the  press,  it  was  decided,  after  a  review  of  the  AmericaD  au-
thorities, that  a  master  had  a  lieo  od  the  freight  aod  cargo  for  his  oecetF-
sary  adraoces  made,  aod  respoosibilities  iocorred,  for  the  use  of  the
ship  in  a  foreign  port.  The  same  priociple  had  beeo  previously  assa-
road  aod  declared  by  tbe  Supreme  Court  of  Massachusetti,  in  Lane  t.


168  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

The  civil  law,  and  the  law  of  those  countries  which  have
adopted  its  principles,  give  a  lien  upon  the  ship,  without  any
express  contract  for  such  a  claim,  to  the  person  who  repairs,
or  fits  out  the  ship,  or  advances  money  for  that  purpose,  whe«
ther  abroad  or  at  home.^ The  English  law  allows  of  such


PeDniroao,  4  JUatt,  Rep,  92,  Lewis  v.  Haocock  &  Wioslow,  1 1  ifridf.
72,  Cowing  F.  Snow,  ibid.  416,  and  the  general  current  and  langpiage
of  the  American  cmgs  seem  now  to  have  settled  the  question,  that  the
master  has  such  a  lien  for  his  advances  and  responsibilities  as  against
the  owner,  though  there  should  be  no  question  as  to  the  owner's  solvency
and  personal  responsibility.  The  American  cases  have  taken  the  most
reasonable  side  of  the  question.  In  Drinkwater  v.  Brig  Spartan,
[American  Juriet,  No.  6,  p.  26,)  it  was  adjudged,  in  the  District  Court
in  Maine,  aAer  a  full  and  learned  examination  of  the  cases,  that  the
master  had  a  lien  on  the  freight  for  his  necessary  disbursements  for
incidental  expenses,  and  the  liabilities  which  he  contracts  for  these  ex-
penses during  the  voyage,  and  also  for  hie  own  wages.  But,  by  the
case  oi  Ingereoll  v.  Van  Bokkelin^  as  settled  in  the  Court  of  Errors  of
New-Tork,  the  English  law  was  recognised,  that  the  master  had  no  lieo
on  the  freight  for  his  wages,

a  Dig,  42.  5.  26.  and  34.  1  VoeVe  Com,  20.  2.  29.  Caearegig^
Disc,  18.  1  Valin't  Com,  363.  367.  The  new  French  code,  art.  191,
gives  the  order  of  privileged  debts  which  are  liens  upon  the  ship,  and
take  preference  to  each  other,  and  to  all  other  debts,  in  the  order  io
which  they  are  placed.  Among  them  are :  (5.)  The  expenses  of  repair-
ing the  vessel  at  the  last  port.  (6.)  Wages  of  the  master  vnd  crew  in
the  last  voyage.  By  the  Corwo/ato,  and  the  ordinances  of  Oleron,  and
of  1681,  the  wages  of  sailors  for  the  last  voyage,  had  the  preference
over  all  other  claims.  (7.)  Moneys  borrowed  by  the  captain  in  the  last
Toyage,  for  the  necessary  expenses  of  the  ship,  and  the  reimbursement
of  the  price  of  the  goods  sold  by  him  for  the  same  object.  If  the  cap-
tain made  successive  loans,  or  sales  of  cargo,  from  necessity,  the  last
loan  and  sale,  in  point  of  time,  is  preferred,  if  made  at  a  different  port.
(8.)  Debts  due  to  the  vendor,  material  men,  and  shipwrights,  if  the  ship
has  not  made  a  voyage,  and  to  those  who  furnished  stores  and  necessary
supplies  before  her  departure,  if  she  had  already  made  a  voyage.  The
Cnfwo/ofo,  and  the  ordinance  of  1681,  gave  those  creditors  a  preference
to  all  others.  The  vendor  loses  his  preference  after  the  ship  has  sailed.
Code  de  Cotrimerce,  art.  191.  Boulay  Paty^  Coure  de  Droit  Com,  1. 1 1
p.  no— 124.


Lcc.  XLVI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 169

a  lieo,  from  the  necessity  of  the  case,  for  repairs  and  neces*
saries  while  the  ship  is  abroad  ;  but  it  has  not  adopted  such
a  rule  as  to  repairs  made,  and  necessaries  furnished  to  the
ship  while  at  home,*  except  it  be  in  favour  of  tiic  shipwright
who  has  repaired  her,  and  has  not  parted  with  the  pos^^e^ion.
In  tliat  case,  he  is  entitled  to  retain  possession  until  be  is  paid
for  bis  repairs.  But  if  he  has  once  parted  with  the  possession
of  the  ship,  or  has  worked  upon  it  without  taking  possession,
he  is  not  deemed  a  privileged  creditor  having  a  claim  upon
the  ship  itself.*  In  this  country,  it  was  formerly,  and  rather
loosely  declared,  in  some  of  the  admiralty  courts  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  that  the  person  who  repaired,  or  furnished  sup-
plies for  a  ship,  had  a  lien  on  the  ship  for  his  demand.*  But
the  doctrine  was  examined,  and  the  rule  declared,  with  great
precision,  by  tlie  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  in  the
case  of  the  General  S/nith,'^  and  reasserted  in  tlic  case  of
the  St.  Jago  de  Cuba,^  The  rule  of  the  English  common
law  is  explicitly  adopted,  that  material  men,  and  mechanics,
furnishing  repairs  to  a  domestic  ship,  have  no  particular  lien
upon  the  ship  itself  for  the  recovery  of  tlieir  demands,  with
the  exception  of  the  shipwright  who  has  possession  of  the
ship. The  distinction  is,  that  if  re^xiirs  liave  been  made,  or


a  Walkiofion  v.  Baroardiston,  2  P.  Wint.  367^  BuxtOQ  v.  Snee,  1
Vesey't  Rep,  154. WUkios  v.  Carmichael,  Doug,  101.

b  Abbott  on  Shipping,  part  2,  cb.  3,  sec.  9 — 14,  contains  a  history
of  tbe  English  cases  on  the  point.  The  rule  is  settled  in  Scotland  in
perfect  conformity  to  theEog;libh  law.  Hamilton  v.  Wood,  and  Wood
F.  Creditors  of  Weir,  1  DelCs  Commentaries,  527,  who  8a}S,  that  (he
deviation  in  England  from  that  mariliiiie  rule  which  prevails  with  other
nations,  has  proceeded  rather  from  peculiar  notions  of  jurisdiction  than
from  any  general  principle  of  law  or  expediency,  and  that  it  has  been
established  in  Scotland  by  mere  adoption.

c  Stevens  v.  The  Sandwich,  District  Court  for  Maryland,  1  Peters*
Mm,  Rep,  233,  note. Gardner  v.  The  Ship  New-Jersey,  ibid,  223.

d  4  Wheat,  Rep.  438.

e  9  Wheals  ^2«9.  409.

YoL.  Iir.  22


170  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

necessaries  furnished,  to  a  foreign  ship,  or  to  a  ship  in  the
port  of  a  state  to  wliich  she  does  not  belong,  the  general  ma-
rine law,  following  the  civil  law,  gives  the  party  a  lien  on  the
ship  itself  for  his  security,  and  he  may  maintain  a  suit  in
rem^  in  the  admiralty,  to  enforce  his  right  But  in  respect
to  repairs  and  necessaries  in  the  port  or  state  to  which  the
ship  belongs,  the  case  is  governed  by  the  municipal  law  of
that  state,  and  no  lien  is  implied,  unless  it  has  been  recog-
nised by  that  law.'  If  a  material  man  gives  personal  credit,
even  in  the  case  of  materials  furnished  to  a  foreign  ship,  he
loses  his  lien  so  far  as  to  exclude  him  from  a  suit  in  rem,  yet
he  will  be  entitled,  upon  petition,  to  be  paid  out  of  the  remnants
and  surplus  remaining  in  the  registry.*  In  New- York,  by
statute,''  shipwrights,  material  men,  and  suppliers  of  ships.


a  The  Supreme  Court  of  tbe  United  States  has,  id  these  cases,  assu-
med, that  the  port  of  another  state  was  not,  as  respects  this  rule,  a  home
port.  The  Court  of  Session  in  Scotland  has  also  held,  that  Hull,  in
England,  was,  in  respect  to  Scotch  owners,  a  foreign  port.  (Stewart  t.
Hall,  1  BelV*  Cam,  525,  note.)  But  that  decision  was  reversed  in  the
House  of  Lords,  as  being  a  point  unnecessary  ;  and  the  question  is  still
open,  as  to  what  shall  be  deemed  a  home  port  in  respect  to  repairs.  Mr.
Bell  suggests,  that  the  natural  course  would  be,  to  adopt  tbe  rule  of  the
navigation  laws,  and  to  hold  all  British  ports  as  home  ports,  because  ac-
cess to  the  custom-house  title  and  communication  with  the  owners  are
so  easy,  and  may  be  so  prompt. See  supra^  p.  94.

h  Zane  v.  The  Brig  President,  4  Wath.  Cir,  Rep.  453.

c  By  the  J^ew-YorJc  Revised  Statutes ^dehtA  contracted  within  the
state,  by  the  master,  owner,  agent,  or  consignee  of  every  vessel,  are  a
lien  when  contracted  for  work  done  or  materials  furnished  for  building,
repairing,  fitting,  or  equipping  the  vessel,  or  for  provisions  and  stores
furnished,  or  for  wharfage,  and  expenses  of  keeping  the  vessel  in  port.
The  lien  is  preferred  to  any  other  lien  except  mariners'  wages,  and  it
ceases  after  twelve  days  from  the  departure  of  tbe  vessel  from  tbe  port
at  which  she  was  when  the  debt  was  contracted,  to  some  other  port  in
the  state,  and  immediately  on  tbe  vessel  leaving  tbe  state.  Every  such
vessel,  unless  she  be  under  seizure  at  the  time  by  virtue  of  process  from
an  admiralty  court  of  the  United  States,  or  had  been  sold  by  ovder  of
•uch  court,  and  the  debt  contracted  prior  to  such  sale,  may  be  attached


Lee.  XL VI.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 171

have  a  lien  for  the  amount  of  their  debts,  whether  the  ship
be  owned  within  the  state  or  not ;  but  the  lien  ceases  after
due  security  is  given,  or  when  the  vessel  leaves  the  state.

It  is  very  clearly  settled,  that  the  master,  when  abroad,  and
in  the  absence  of  the  owner,  may  hypothecate  the  ship,
freight,  and  cargo,  to  raise  money  requisite  for  the  comple-
tion of  the  voyage.*  This  authority  is,  however,  limited  to
objects  connected  with  the  voyage,  and  it  must  appear,  in  this
case,  as  well  as  when  he  binds  the  owner  personally,  that  the
advances  were  made  for  repairs,  or  supplies  necessary  for  the
voyage,  or  the  safety  of  the  ship,  and  that  the  repairs  and
supplies  could  not  be  procured  upon  reasonable  terms,  or  with
funds  within  the  master's  control,  or  upon  the  credit  of  the
owner,  independent  of  the  hypothecation.  The  master's
right  exists  only  in  cases  of  necessity,  and  when  he  cannot
otherwise  procure  the  money,  and  has  no  funds  of  the  owner,
or  of  his  own,  which  he  can  command,  and  apply  to  the  pur-
pose. He  is  to  act  with  a  reasonable  discretion,  and  is  not
absolutely  bound  to  apply  the  money  of  others  in  hand,  ex-
cept it  belong  to  the  owner,  in  preference  to  a  resort  to  bot-
tomry ;  and  it  has  been  suggested,  by  very  high  authority,
that  there  may  be  special  cases  in  which  the  master  may
raise  money  by  hypothecation,  even  though  he  has  his  own
money  on  lx>ard.  But  if  he  should  raise  money  by  bottomry
in  such  a  case,  the  admiralty  will  marshal  the  assets  in  favour
of  the  shippers  of  the  cargo,  so  as  to  bring  their  property  last
Jnto  contribution.^  The  power  of  the  master  to  charge  the
owners  relative  to  the  repairs  and  freight  of  the  ship,  does  not
exist  when  the  owners  are  present,  or  when  at  their  resi-


and  sold  to  satisfy  the  claim,  together  with  all  other  claims  of  the  like
kind  duly  exhibited  and  verified.  The  proceedings  under  the  process
of  attachment,  the  sale  of  the  vessel  and  distribution  of  the  proceeds,
are  specially  detailed  and  prescribed.  JV.  F.  Rev,  Stai.  vol.  ii.  493 —
500.

a  The  Gratitudine,  3  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  240.

b  The  Ship  Packet,  3  Mason'i  Rep.  255.


J72  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

dence.'  But  if  only  a  minority  of  the  owners  are  present^  or
reside  at  the  [dace,  then  the  captain's  power  remains  good/
It  is  incumbent  upon  the  creditor  who  claims  an  hypotheca-
tion, to  prove  the  actual  existence  of  the  necessity  of  those
things  which  gave  rise  to  his  demand,  though  he  need  not
see  to  the  actual  and  bona  ^rfe^application  of  the  money.
The  loan  must  not  exceed  the  necessity,  and  it  must  be
made  in  a  place,  and  under' circumstances,  to  aflbrd  relief.*
This  power  of  the  master  to  lx)rro\v  money  on  bottorar}',
and  hypothecate  the  ship  for  tlic  repayment,  may  exist  as
well  at  the  port  of  destination,  as  at  any  other  foreign  port,
when  the  necessity  for  the  exercise  of  the  right  becomes
manifest.''  A  doubt  has  been  raised,  whether  an  hypothe-
cation would  be  valid  when  made  to  the  consignee  of  the
owner.  The  power  in  that  instance  would  I)e  very  liable
to  abuse  and  coUusion,  and  the  averment  of  tlie  necessity
and  integrity  of  the  transaction  ought  to  undergo  a  severer
scrutiny.'


a  Code  de  Commerce ^  art.  232.  Ord,  de  laJdarine^  liv,  2,  tit.  1 .  In
the  case  of  the  Ship  La^inia  v.  Barclay,  1  JFashington*s  Cirndl  Rep.
49,  it  was  held  that  the  captain  could  not  raise  money  by  hypothecation,
when  one  of  the  owners  resided  at  the  port.  But  in  a  home  port,  tlie
master  may  bind  the  owner  for  necessary  and  ordinary  repairs  and
equipments,  under  a  presumed  authority.  Webster  v.  Seekamp,  4
Bamw.  Sf  Aid.  352.  This  is  likewise  the  rule  in  the  Scotch  law.
1  BelVi  Com.  524.

b  2Boulay  Paly^Zll.

c  Rucher  v.  Conyngham,  2  Peters'  Adm.  Rep.  295.  Cnpisino  ▼.
Perez,  2  Dallas'  Rep.  194.  The  Aurora,  1  Wheat.  Rep.  96.  Rocher
V.  B usher,  1  Stark,  Rep.  27. Roccus,  De  JVavibtis,  not.  23.

d  Reade  v.  Commercial  Insurance  Company,  3  Johns,  Rep.  352.

e  See  Rucher  t.  Conyngham,  2  Peters^  Rep.  307,  to  that  point.
The  power  g^iven  to  the  master  to  raise  money  while  abroad,  for  the
necessities  of  the  ship,  is  the  most  dangerous  f»rm  in  which  his  autho-
rity can  be  exerted,  and  all  the  foreign  authorities  have  recommended
and  enforced  the  same  precautions,  and  which  have  been  universally
adopted.  (Casaregis^  Disc.lA,  Roccus^  De  Paribus ^  n.  23.  Vin-
niusad  Peck.) In  Boyle  v.  Adam,  in  the  Scotch  admiralty,  in  1801,


Lcc.  XLVI.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 173

The  master,  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  and  when  it  be-
comes necessary,  may  also  sell  part  of  the  cargo,  to  enable
him  to  carry  on  the  residue  ;  and  lie  may  hypothecate  the
whole  of  it,  as  well  as  the  ship  and  freight,  for  the  attainment
of  the  same  object. The  law  does  not  fix  any  aliquot  part
or  amount  of  cargo  which  the  master  may  sell ;  nor  could
any  restraint  of  that  kind  be  safely  imposed. The  power
must,  generally  ppeaking,  be  adequate  to  the  occasion. The
authority  of  the  master  must  necessarily  increase  in  propor-
tion to  the  diflTicuUics  which  he  has  to  encounter. There  is
this  limitation  only  to  the  exercise  of  the  power,  that  it  can-
not extend  to  the  entire  cargo  ;  for  it  cannot  be  presumed  to
be  for  the  interest  of  the  shipper,  that  tlie  whole  should  be
sold,  to  enable  the  ship  to  proceed  empty  to  her  port  of  desti-
nation. The  hypothecation  of  the  whole  may,  however,  be
for  the  benefit  of  the  whole,  because  it  may  enable  the  whole
to  be  conveyed  to  the  proper  market.* This  power  of  the
master  to  pledge  or  sell  the  cargo,  is  only  to  be  exercised  at
an  intermediate  port,  for  tlie  prosecution  of  the  voyage  ;  and
if  he  unduly  breaks  up  the  voyage,  he  cannot  sell  any  part
of  the  cargo  for  repairs  for  a  new  voyage,  and  the  power  is
entirely  gone.^ But  if  the  voyage  be  broken  up  in  the  course
of  it  by  ungovernable  circumstances,  the  master,  in  that  case,
may  even  sell  the  ship  or  cargo,  provided  it  be  done  in  good
faith,  for  the  fr<^od  of  all  concerned,  and  in  a  case  of  supreme
necessity,  whiili  sweeps  all  ordinary  rules  before  it.* The


the  rule  that  the  lender,  on  an  hypothecation  bond,  was  not  bound  to  see
to  the  application  of  the  money,  was  qualified  in  a  case  where  the  ex-
penditure was  enormous,  and  the  master  a  weak  man.  Belts  Com,
vol.  i.  529,  note.

a  The  Gratitudine,  3  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  240.  263.  The  United  Insu-
rance Company  v.  Scott,  1  Johns.  Rep.  115.  Freeman  r.  The  East
India  Company,  5  Bamw.  4r  Aid.  617.

b  Watt  V.  Potter,  2  Mason's  Rep.  77.

c  Hayman  v.  Molton,  5  Esp.  JV*.  P.  Rep,  65.  Mills  F.  Fletcher,
Doug.  Rep.  219. Idle  t.  The  Boyal  Exchange  Insurance  Company,


174  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

merely  acting  in  good  faith,  and  j[pr  the  interest  of  all  coo-
cemed,  is  not  sufficient  to  exempt  the  sale  of  goods  from  the
character  of  a  tortious  conversion,  for  which  the  ship  owner,
and  the  purchaser,  are  responsible,  if  the  absolute  necessity
for  the  sale  be  not  clearly  made  out. Nor  will  the  sanction
of  a  vice-admiralty  court  aid  the  sale  when  the  requisite  ne-
cessity was  wanting.' All  the  cases  are  decided  and  peremp-
tory, and  upon  the  soundest  principles,  in  the  call  for  that  ne-
cessity. The  master  is  employed  only  to  navigate  the  ship  ;
and  the  sale  of  it  is  manifestly  beyond  his  commission,  and
becomes  the  unauthorized  act  of  a  servant,  disposing  of  pro-
perty which  he  was  intrusted  only  to  carry  and  convey.  The


8  TaunL  Rep,  755.  Freeman  r.  The  East  iDdia  Company,  5  Bamw,
4r  'Aid.  617.  Cannon  y.  Meaburn,  1  Bingk,  Rep.  243.  Robertson  v.
Clarke,  Und,  445.  Fanny  v.  Elmira,  Edw»  Adm.  Rep.  117.  Read  ▼.
Bonham,  3  Bro.  ^  Bing.  147.  Scnli  v.  Briddle,  2  TFash.  Cir.  Rep.
150.  The  Schooner  Tilton,  5  JViason,  476, 477.  In  the  case  of  the
American  Insurance  Company  v.  Center,  4  Wendell,  45,  it  was  held,
that  in  this  country  the  master's  right  to  sell  was  more  extensire  than
in  England ;  for  here,  if  there  existed  a  technical  total  /o«i,  and  the  mas-
ter has  reason  to  believe  the  owner  would  elect  to  abandon,  he  might
sell  the  ship.  The  English  rule  is  more  strict,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the
master  to  repair  the  vessel,  unless  there  be  an  <ictual  total  loss,  or  he  has
DO  means  of  repairing,  and  cannot  procure  any  by  the  hypothecation  of
the  ship  or  cargo.  In  the  case  of  Hall  r.  The  Franklin  Insurance  Com-
pany, 9  Pickering,  466,  the  stricter  doctrine  of  the  English  law  was
asserted  and  maintained.  The  master's  authority  to  sell  the  vessel  was
confined  to  cases  of  extreme  necessity,  and  where  he  acts  with  the  most
perfect  good  faith  for  the  interest  of  the  owner,  and  when  he  has  no  op-
portunity to  consult  the  owner  or  insurer,  and  the  necessity  leaves  him
DO  alternative.  This  strict  rule  is  the  one  best  supported  by  reason  and
authority.

a  Van  Omeron  v.  Dowick,  2  Campb.  JV.  P.  Rep.  42.  Morris  v.
Robinson,  3  Bamw.  S^  Cress.  196.  The  French  code  allows  the  master
to  sell  the  ship  in  the  single  case  of  innavigability,  but  by  the  ancient
ordinances  the  prohibition  was  entire  and  absolute.  Code  de  Commerce,
art.  237.  Ord.  de  la  Marine,  tit.  Du  Capitaine,  art.  19.  1  yalin's
Com.  p.  444. Boulay  Paly,  t.  2.  85.


Lee.  XLVI.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 176

master  in  siich  a  case  acts,  virtute  officii^  as  master.  Hm
agency  arises  by  operation  of  law,  from  tlie  necessity  of  the
case,  to  prevent  a  total  loss  of  the  property,  and  the  law  treats
him,  as  one  capable  of  selling  in  his  own  name,  but  for  the
benefit  of  the  owner.  He  can  give  a  sufficient  title  in  bis
own  name,  as  being  by  operation  of  law,  substituted  owner,
pro  kac  vice.  This  w^as  the  view  of  the  subject  taken  in  the
case  of  the  Schooner  Tilton,'^  and  the  doctrine  appears  to
rest  on  clear  and  solid  principles  of  law  and  policy.

When  part  of  the  cargo  is  sold  by  the  master  at  an  inter-
mediate port,  to  raise  money  for  the  necessities  of  the  voyage,
the  general  rule  has  been,  to  value  the  goods  at  the  clear
price  they  would  have  fetched  at  the  port  of  destination.  But,
in  Richardson  v.  Nourse,  the  price  which  the  goods  actu-
ally sold  for  at  the  port  of  necessity  was  adopted,  and  the
court  did  not  think  that  such  a  criterion  of  value  was  clearly
erroneous  in  point  of  law ;  and  with  respect  to  these  con-
tracts of  hypothecation  for  necessaries,  made  by  the  master
in  a  foreign  port,  it  is  the  universal  understanding  and  rule,
that  they  are  to  be  made  in  the  absence  of  the  owner,  and  noi
at  his  place  of  residence,  where  he  may  exercise  his  own
judgment.  If  the  liens  be  created  at  different  periods  of  the
voyage,  and  the  value  of  the  ship  be  insufficient  to  discharge
them  all,  the  last  loan  is  entitled  to  priority  in  payment,  as
being  the  means  of  saving  the  ship.  The  contract  does  noi
transfer  the  property  of  the  ship,  but  it  gives  the  creditor  a
privilege  or  claim  upon  it,  which  may  be  enforced  with  all  the
expedition  and  efficacy  of  the  admiralty  process.^

It  may  be  here  observed,  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  master
engaged  in  a  foreign  trade,  to  put  his  ship  under  the  charge
of  a  pilot,  both  on  his  outward  and  homeward  voyage,  when


a  5  Jtfofon,  481.
b  3  Bamw.  <^  Aid.  237.

c  Abboti  on  Shippingy  part  2,  ch.  3,  sec.  20. 22. Cbaae,  J.,  Blaioe
V.  The  Ship  Chariea  Carter,  4  Cranck^t  Rep.  328.


176  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

he  is  withia  the  usual  limits  of  the  pilot's  employment.'  Ttie
pilot,  while  ou  board,  has  the  exclusive  control  of  the  ship.
He  i9  considered  as  master  j^ro  hac  vice,  and  if  any  loss  or
injury  be  sustained  in  the  navigation  of  the  vessel  while  un-
der the  charge  of  the  pilot,  he  is  answerable,  as  strictly  as  if
he  were  a  common  carrier,  for  his  default,  negligence,  or  un-
skilfuloess  ;  and  the  owner  would  also  be  responsible  to  the
party  injured  for  the  act  of  the  pilot,  as  being  the  act  of  his
agent^  Some  doubt  has  been  thrown  on  the  point,  by  the
dictum  of  Ch.  J.  Mansfield,  in  Bowchcr  v.  Nordstrom,'  but
the  weight  of  authority,  and  the  better  reason  is,  that  the
master,  in  such  a  case,  would  not  be  res|3onsible  as  master,
though  on  board,  provided  the  crew  acted  in  regular  obedi-
ence to  the  pilot/

(2.)  Of  the  rights  and  duties  of  seamen.

We  come  next  to  treat  of  the  laws  applicable  to  seamen  ;
and  it  will  appear,  for  obvious  reasons,  that  in  the  codes  of  all
commercial  nations  they  are  objects  of  great  solicitude  and  of
paternal  care.  They  are  usually  a  heedless,  ignorant,  auda-
cious, but  most  useful  class  of  men,  exposed  to  constant  hard-
ships, perils,  and  oppression.  From  tbe  ntiture  of  their  em-
ployment, and  their  "  home  on  the  deep,"  they  are  necessarily
excluded,  in  a  great  degree,  from  the  Ijcnefits  of  civilization,
and  the  comforts  and  charities  of  domestic  life.  Upon  their
native  element  they  are  habitually  bufTcted  by  winds  and
waves,  and  wrestling  witli  tempests  ;  and  in  time  of  war  they


a  Law  V.  IloUingwortb,  7  Term  JRcp.  100.  The  William,  6  Rob.
Adm,  Rep.  316.

b  Bussy  V.  Donaldson,  4  Dallas'  Rep,  206.  lluggelt  v.  Montgo-
mery, 5  Bo9.  4*  Pull,  446.  Yates  v.  Drown,  8  Pickering,  23.  Pilot
Boat  Washington  v.  Ship  Saluda,  U,  S,  Districl  Court,  S.  C*,  April,
1831. Waiiamaon  v.  Price,  16  Martin's  Louis.  Rep.  399.

c  1  Taunt.  Rep.  568.

d  In  thecase  of  tbe  Portbmouth,  0  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  317.  Snell  ▼.
Rich,  1  Johns.  Rep.  305.


Lfec.  XLVI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  Itt

are  exposed  to  the  still  fiercer  elements  of  the  human  pas-
aioiis.  In  port  they  are  the  ready  and  the  dreadful  victims
of  temptation,  fraud,  and  vice.'  It  becomes,  therefore,  a  very
interesting  topic  of  inquiry,  to  see  what  protection  the  laws
have  thrown  around  such  a  houseless  and  helpless  race  of
beings,  and  what  special  provisions  have  been  made  for  their
security  and  indemnity.

The  seamen  employed  in  the  merchants'  service,  are  made
subject  to  special  regulations,  prescribed  by  statute.  Shipping
articles  are  contracts  in  writing,  or  .in  print,  declaring  the
voyage  and  the  term  of  time  for  which  the  seamen  are  ship-
ped, and  when  they  are  to  render  themselves  on  board  ;  and
the  articles  are  to  be  signed  by  every  seamen  or  mariner,  on  all
voyages  from  the  United  States  to  a  foreign  port,  and,  in  certain
cases,  to  a  port  in  another  state,  other  than  an  adjoining  one.
If  there  be  no  such  contract,  the  master  is  bound  to  pay  to
every  seamen  who  performs  the  voyage  the  highest  wages
given  at  the  port  for  a  similar  voyage,  within  the  three  next
preceding  months,  besides  forfeiting  for  every  seamen  a  penalty
of  twenty  dollars.  The  seamen  are  made  subject  to  forfeitures,
if  they  do  not  render  themselves  on  board  according  to  the
contract,  or  if  they  desert  the  service ;  and  they  are  liable  to
summary  imprisonment  for  desertion,  and  to  be  detained  until
the  ship  be  ready  to  sail.  If  the  mate  and  a  majority  of  the
crew,  after  the  voyage  is  begun,  but  before  the  vessel  has  left
the  land,  deem  the  vessel  unsafe,  or  not  duly  provided,  and


a  The  recklcBCDeM  with  which  sailors  dissipate  their  wages,  and  the
facility  with  which  they  are  cheated  out  of  them,  are  proTerbial ;  aod
those  persons  who  have  the  superioteDdence  of  marioe  hospitals  well
know,  how  severely  and  exteosively  sailors  are  afflicted,  beyond  all
other  classes  of  men,  by  those  odious  diseases  which  so  terribly  chastise
liceDtious  desire.  Such  a  scourge  is  far  worse  to  them  than  the  storms
aod  the  monsters  of  the  ocean  ;  than  either  the  preecipitem  Africvm
decertafUem  aquUonibui,  the  rabiem  noHy  the  numiira  natanHuy  or  the
mfamei  teopulca^  acrcceraunia.

Vol.  ni.  23


178  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

sball  require  an  examination  of  the  ship,  the  master  must  pro*
ceed  to,  or  stop  at,  the  nearest  or  most  convenient  port,  where
an  inquiry  is  to  be  made,  and  the  roaster  and  crew  must  con*
form  to  the  judgment  of  the  experienced  persons,  selected  by
the  district  judge  or  a  justice  of  the  peace. If  the  complaint
shall  appear  to  have  been  without  foundation,  the  expenses
and  reasonable  damages,  to  be  ascertained  by  the  judge  or  jus-
tice, aie  to  be  deducted  from  the  wages  of  the  seamen. But
if  the  vessel  be  found  or  made  seaworthy,  and  the  seamen
shall  refuse  to  proceed  on  the  voyage,  they  are  subjected  to
imprisonment  until  they  pay  double  the  advance  made  to  them
on  the  shipping  contract.*" Fishermen  engaged  in  the  fish*
eries  are  liable  to  the  like  penalties  for  desertion ;  and  the
fishing  contract  must  be  in  writing,  signed  by  the  shipper  and
the  fishermen,  and  countersigned  by  the  owner.*  The  articles
do  not  determine  exclusively  who  are  the  owners,  and  the
seamen  may  prove,  by  other  documents,  the  real  and  respon-
sible owners. The  object  of  the  articles  is  to  place  the  crew
of  a  fishing  vessel  upon  a  footing  with  seamen  in  the  mer-
chants' service,  and  to  make  them  liable  to  the  same  restric-
tbns,  and  entitled  to  the  same  remedies.' Provision  is  made
for  the  prompt  recovery  of  seamen's  wages,  of  which  one  third
is  due  at  every  port  at  which  the  vessel  shall  unlade  and  deli-
ver her  cargo,  before  the  voyage  be  ended  ;  and  at  the  end
of  the  voyage,  the  seamen  may  proceed  in  the  District  Court,
by  admiralty  process,  against  the  ship,  if  the  wages  be  not
paid  within  ten  days  after  they  are  discharged. The  seamen
having  like  cause  of  complaint,  may  all  join  in  one  suit,  and
they  may  proceed  against  the  vessel  within  the  ten  days,  if  she
be  about  to  proceed  to  sea ; but  this  remedy,  in  rem,  does  not
deprive  the  seamen  of  theic  remedy  at  common  law  for  the


a  Ad  </ CongreUy  July  S(Hhy  1790,cb.  S9,  lec.  1,  S,  3.  5  and  7.
b  ifnd,  June  I9th,  1813,  ch.  S,  sec.  1  and  S.
e  Wait  T.  Gibbc,  4  PUk€rwg,4t9B.


Lee.  XLVI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  179

recovery  of  their  wages.'  The  statutes  further  provide  for  the
safety  and  comfort  of  the  seamen,  by  requiring  that  every
ship  bebnging  to  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  of  the  bur-
then of  one  hundred  and  fifty  tons,  or  upwards,  navigated  by
ten  or  more  persons,  and  bound  to  a  foreign  port ;  or  of  the
burthen  of  seventy  tons,  or  upwards,  and  navigated  with  six
or  more  persons,  and  bound  from  the  United  States  to  any
port  in  the  West  Indies,  shall  be  provided  with  a  medicine
chest,  properly  supplied  with  fresh  and  sound  medicines  ;  and
if  bound  on  a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic  ocean,  with  requisite
stores  of  water,  and  salted  meat,  and  wholesome  ship-bread,
well  secured  under  deck.^

It  is  further  provided  by  statute,  for  the  just  and  benevolent
purpose  of  affording  certain  and  permanent  relief  to  sick  and
disabled  seamen,  that  a  fund  be  raised  out  of  their  wages,  earned
on  board  of  any  vessel  of  the  United  States,  and  be  paid  by
the  master  to  the  collector  of  the  port,  on  entry  from  a  foreign
port,  at  the  rate  of  twenty  cents  per  month  for  every  seamen.
The  like  assessment  is  to  be  made  and  paid  on  the  new
enrolment  or  license  for  carrying  on  the  coasting  trade,  and
also  by  persons  navigating  boats  and  rafts  on  the  Mississippi.
The  moneys  so  raised  are  to  be  expended  for  the  temporary
relief  and  maintenance  of  sick  and  disabled  seamen,  in  hos-
pitals or  other  proper  institutions  established  for  such  purpo-
ses ;  and  the  surplus  moneys,  when  sufficiently  accumulated,
shall  be  applied  to  the  erection  of  marine  hospitals,  for  the
accommodation  of  sick  and  disabled  seamen.  These  hos-
pitals, as  far  as  it  can  be  done  with  convenience,  are  to  re-
ceive sick  foreign  seamen  on  a  charge  of  seventy-five  cents


a  Ad  of  Congreiiy  July  ^Oih,  1790,  ch.  29,  sec.  0.  Tbe  statute  of
59  Geo.  III.  c.  58,  proTided,  also,  an  expeditious  remedy  for  the  reco-
very of  seamen's  wages,  by  allowing^  them  to  apply  to  tbe  summary  ju-
risdiction of  a  justice  of  tbe  peace,  wbere  tbe  wages  do  not  exceed  JS20«

5  Ibid.  sec.  8  and  9,  and  Act  of  Congress  of  March  2c2, 1805,  cb.  88.


180  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

per  day,  to  be  paid  by  the  master  of  the  foreign  vessel.'  And
to  relieve  American  seamen  who  may  be  found  destitute  ia
foreign  places,  and  as  evidence  of  the  constant  and  paternal
solicitude  of  the  United  States  for  the  preservation  and  protec*
tion  of  their  seamen  abroad,  it  is  made  the  duty  of  the  Ameri-
can consuls  and  commercial  agents,  to  provide  for  those  who
may  be  found  destitute  within  their  consular  districts,  and  for
their  passages  to  some  port  in  the  United  States,  in  a  reasona-
ble manner,  at  the  expense  of  the  United  States ;  and  Ame-
rican vessek  are  bound  to  take  such  seamen  on  board,  at  the
request  of  the  consul,  but  not  exceeding  two  men  to  every
hundred  tons  burthen  of  the  ship,  and  transport  them  to  the
United  States,  on  such  terms,  not  exceeding  ten  dollars  for
each  person,  as  may  be  agreed  on.  So,  if  an  American  ves-
sel be  sold  in  a  foreign  port,  and  her  company  discharged,  or
a  seaman  be  discharged  with  his  consent,  the  master  must
pay  to  the  consul  or  commercial  agent  at  the  place,  three
months  pay,  over  and  above  the  wages  then  due,  for  every
such  seaman,  two  thirds  of  which  is  to  be  paid  over  to  every
seaman  so  discharged,  upon  his  engagement  on  board  of  any
vessel  to  return  to  the  United  States ;  and  the  other  third  to
be  retained,  for  the  purpose  of  creating  a  fund  for  the  main-
tenance and  return  of  destitute  American  seamen  in  such
foreign  port.*

The  act  of  Congress  of  March  3d,  1S13,  declared,  that  no
seaman,  who  was  not  a  citizen  or  native  of  the  United  States,
should  be  employed  on  board  of  any  public  or  private  vessel
of  the  United  States.  But  the  provision  against  the  employ-
ment of  foreign  seamen,  is  probably  without  any  efficacy,  for
it  applies  only  to  those  nations  who  shall,  in  like  manner,
have  prohibited  the  employment  of  American  seamen.

Greenwich  hospital,  in  England,  is  a  noble  asylum  for  de-


a  AcU  ofCongrei*,  July  16<A,  1798,  March  2cf,  1799,  and  May  3^,
180S.
6  A4t  ofCangreuj  Fihrwiry  2814, 1803,  ch.  62.


L«c.  XLVI.)  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 181

cayed  and  disabled  seamen  belonging  to  the  royal  navy ;  but
another  national  establishment  was  wanting  for  seamen
maimed  or  disabled  by  sickness  or  accidental  misfortunes,  or
worn  out  by  age,  in  the  merchants'  servicie. This  was  pro-
vided for  by  the  statute  of  30  Geo.  II.  which  created  a  cor-
pwation,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  a  magnificent  charity,
with  liberal,  careful,  and  minute  provisions,  some  of  which
have  been  copied  into  our  own  statutes  ;  and  it  is  sustained
by  an  assessment  similar  to  our  own,  of  sixpence  sterling  per
month  out  of  seamen's  wages. In  one  respect,  the  English
charity  is  much  broader  than  ours,  for  it  reaches  to  the  poor
widow,  and  infant  children  of  every  seaman  who  perishes  in
the  service,  and  who  shall  be  found  to  be  proper  objects  of
charity.*

With  respect  to  the  behaviour  of  the  master  and  seamen,
and  the  discipline  on  board  of  merchant  ships,  it  is  held,  that
the  master  is  personally  responsible  in  damages  for  any  in-
jury or  loss  to  the  ship  or  cargo,  by  reason  of  his  negligence
or  misconduct  Being  responsible  over  to  others  for  his  con-
duct as  master,  the  law,  as  well  on  that  account  as  from  the
necessity  of  the  case,  has  intrusted  him  with  great  authority
over  the  mariners  on  board.  Such  authority  is  requisite  to
the  safe  navigation  of  the  ship,  and  the  preservation  of  good
order  and  discipline.  He  may  imprison,  and  also  inflict  rea-
sonable corporal  punishment  upon  a  seaman,  for  disobedience
to  reasonable  commands,  or  for  disorderly,  riotous,  orinsolent
conduct ;  and  his  authority,  in  that  respect,  is  analagous  to


«  The  ancient  Romans  nerer  provided  any  asjlum  for  the  poor.  Ha-
nanity  was  no  part  of  tiieir  national  character.  Its  cultiyation,  as  a
pablic  dnty,  is  one  of  the  inestimable  blessing^  of  the  introduction  of
Christianity.  There  did  not  exist  in  the  Roman  legislation  any  pro-
vision for  them,  unless,  says  HugOy  (History  or  tbk  Roman  Law,
•ec.  154,)  we  may  consider  the  lavr  of  the  twelve  tables,  which  regula-
ted funeral  expenses,  to  hare  been  introduced  in  their  favour,  as  a
means  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  families.


182  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

that  of  a  master  on  land  over  his  apprentice  or  scholar."* 17he
books  unite  in  the  lawfulness  and  necessity  of  the  power.
Without  it  authority  could  not  be  maintained,  nor  navigatioa
made  safe. Subordination  is  essential  to  be  strictly  enfarcedy
among  a  class  of  men  whose  manners  and  habits  partake  of
the  attributes  of  the  element  on  which  they  are  employed*
Disobedience  to  lawful  commands  is  a  most  noxious  offence^
and  the  most  dangerous  in  its  nature,  for  it  goes  at  once  to
the  utter  annihilation  of  all  authority. But  care  must  be
taken  that  the  punishment  be  administered  with  due  modem*
tion. The  law  watches  the  exercise  of  discretionary  power
with  a  jealous  eye. If  the  correction  be  excessive  or  unjustifi-
able, the  seaman  is  sure  to  receive  compensation  in  damages
on  his  return  to  port,  in  an  action  at  commpn  law.^ And  it
must  be  an  extreme  case  that  will  justify  a  master  to  confine
a  seaman  in  a  common  gaol  in  a  foreign  port. He  cannot  do


a  Jdolhy,  b.  2,  ch.  3,  sec.  12.  Tborne  v.  White,  1  Peter$'  Jidw^
Rep,  168.  Rice  y.  The  Polly  and  Kitty,  2  ibid.  ^0,  The  United
States  y.  Smith,  3  Wash,  Cir.  Rep.  525.  MichaelsoD  v.  DeDisoo,  3
Day'a  Rep,  294.  Comersford  y.  Baker,  before  Lord  Stowel,  June,
1825.  The  United  States  y.  Dewey,  New-York  Circuit,  June,  1828.
Lord  Stowell,  in  the  case  of  7%6  Agincimrt,  1  Hagg,  Adm.  Rep.  272.
The  Lowther  Castle,  ibid.  384.  United  States  y.  Freeman, 4 .Wofon, 512.
Butler  r.  M'Lellan,  District  Court  in  Maine,  1831,  Am.Jurist^'So.  13.
Though  the  maritime  codes  of  continental  Europe,  such  as  the  Cofwo-
latOy  the  laws  of  Oleron,  of  Wisbuy,  of  the  Hanse  Towns,  and  of  Den-
mark, carefully  ayoid  the  direct  mention  of  any  legal  authority  of  the
captain  to  correct,  by  corporal  chastisement,  the  misbehaviour  of  mari-
ners ;  yet,  as  the  learned  judge  of  the  District  Court  of  Maine  obseryed,
in  the  case  aboye  mentioned,  Ibis  power  in  the  master  seems  either  to
haye  been  inferred,  or  to  haye  become  sflently  established  by  usage.
Cataregi*  (Disc.  136,  n.  14,]  admits  that  the  master  may  inflict  slight
chastisement,  by  analogy  to  the  power  of  a  father  or  domestic  master  ;
and  the  ordinance  of  Louis  XIV.  (/to.  2,  tit.  1,  art.  22,)  confers  a  strong
power  of  personal  punishment  on  the  captain,  in  aggrayated  cases,  and
acting  under  the  adyice  of  the  mate  and  pilot.

b  Watson  y.  Christie,  2  Bos.  ^  Pull.  224.


Lee.  XLVI.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 183

it  as  a  puqishment,  but  odIj  by  way  of  precaution  under  the
existing  circumstances.^  The  master  may  also  confine  a
passenger  who  refuses  to  submit  to  the  necessary  discipUne  of
the  ship.^

The  master  has  also  the  right  to  discharge  a  seaman  for
just  cause,  and  put  him  ashore  in  a  foreign  country  ;  but  tlie
causes  must  be,  not  slight  but  aggravated,  such  as  habitual
disobedience,  mutinous  conduct,  theft,  or  habitual  drunken-
ness ;  and  he  is  responsible  in  damages  if  he  discharges  him
without  just  cause.'  This  power  of  discharge  extends  to  the
mate  and  subordinate  officers,  as  well  as  to  the  seamen,  for
the  master  must  be  supreme  in  the  ship,  and  subordination
and  discipline  are  indispensable  to  the  safety  and  welfare
of  the  service.  But  it  would  require  a  case  of  flagrant  diso-
bedience, or  gross  negligence,  or  palpable  want  of  skill,  to
authorize  the  captain  to  displace  a  mate,  who  is  generally
chosen  with  the  consent  of  the  owners,  and  with  a  view  to  the
better  safety  of  ttie  ship,  and  the  security  of  their  property.'
The  marine  law  requires  the  master  to  receive  back  a  sea-
man whom  he  has  discharged,  if  he  repents  and  offers  to  re-
turn to  his  duty  and  make  satisfaction ;  and  if  the  master
refuses,  or  if  the  seaman  has  been  unduly  discharged,  he  may
follow  the  ship,  and  recover  his  wages  for  the  voyage,  and


a  United  States  ▼.  Ruggles,  5  Afojon,  192.

b  Boyce  r.  Bayliffe,  1  Campb.  JV.  P.  68.

e  Relf  ▼.  The  Ship  Maria,  1  PeUrt*  Adm.  Rep.  186.  Black  y.  Ship
Louisiana,  2  ibid.  268.  Hulle  ▼.  Heig^btman,  2  EcuViBep.  145.  Sir
William  Scott,  in  the  case  of  the  Exeter,  2  Rob,  Adm.  Rep.  36 1 .  The
French  law  affords  peculiar  protection  to  seamen,  and  among  other
things  in  this,  that  it  prohibits  the  master  from  discharging  a  seaman  in
any  case,  in  a  foreign  country.  This  was  by  a  royal  declaration  of  18tb
December,  1728,  art.  1,  mentioned  in  1  Valin'e  Com,  p.  734  ;  and  it
is  adopted  f  n  the  Cktde  de  Commerce^  art.  270.

d  Atkyns  v.  Burrows,  1  Pelere*  Adm.  Rep,  244.  Thompson  y.
Bush,  4  Woih.  Cir.  Rep.  338.


184  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V-

the  expenses  of  his  retarn.'^  The  laws  of  the  United  States
make  it  highly  penal,  and  subject  the  master  to  fine  abd  im-
prisonment if,  without  justifiable  cause,  he  maliciously  forces
an  ofiScer  or  mariner  on  shore  while  abroad,  or  leaves  him
behind  in  any  foreign  port  or  place,  or  refuses  to  bring  home
those  whom  he  took  out,  and  are  in  a  condition  and  willing
to  return.*

It  was  a  question  which  received  a  profound  discussion,  and
led  to  a  learned  research,  in  Harden  v.  Gordorij^  whether  a
seaman,  who  became  sick  and  disabled  on  the  voyage,  was
entitled  to  medical  advice  and  aid  at  the  expense  of  the  ship.
It  was  there  shown  and  decided,  that  the  expense  of  curing
a  sick  seaman  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  was  a  charge  upon
the  ship  according  to  the  maritime  law  of  Europe,  cmd  the
rule  recommended  itself  as  much  by  its  intrinsic  equity  and
sound  policy,  as  by  the  sanction  of  its  general  authority.
Such  an  expense  was  in  the  nature  of  additional  wages  du-
ring sickness,  and  it  constituted  a  material  ingredient  in  the
just  remuneration  of  seamen  for  their  labour  and  services.
The  statute  law  of  the  United  States  has  not  changed  the
maritime  law,  except-«o  far  as  respects  medicines  and  medical
advice,  when  there  was  a  proper  medicine  chest,  and  medical
directions,  on  board  the  ship  ;  and  it  does  not  apply  to  nurs-
ing, diet  and  lodging,  if  the  seaman  be  carried  ashore.  The
claim  for  such  expenses,  equally  with  a  claim  for  wages,  may
be  enforced  in  the  courts  of  admiralty ;  and  Judge  Story,  in
the  case  last  referred  to,  vrith  great  force,  and  moving  on  solid
principles,  vindicated  the  admiralty  jurisdiction  over  the  whole


a  Law*  of  Oleron^  art.  13.  LawM  of  Wubuy,  art.  25.  Code  de
Commerce^  art.  270.  Relf  ▼.  The  Ship  Maria,  1  Peter§'  Adm.  12^.
193, 194.  HutchinsoD  v.  Combs,  Diatrict  Court  of  Maine,  Am,  Jv-
riH,  No.  13.

h  Act  of  CoDg^sa,  3d  March,  1825,  cb.  67,  sec.  10.

4i  2  JVoKM**  Ilq>.  541.


Lee.  XLVL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 185

conipensatioD,  ia  all  its  varied  forms,  when  due  to  seamen  for
their  maritime  servicer.

The  act  of  Congress  requires,  that  in  seamen's  shipping
articles,  the  voyage,  and  term  of  time  for  which  the  seamen
may  be  shipped,  be  specified.*  The  regulation  relates  to
voyages /rom  a  port  in  the  United  States,  and  it  does  not  ap-
ply to  a  voyage  commencing  from  a  foreign  port  to  the  Uni-
ted States.  The  voyage  within  the  intendment  of  the  statute,
means  one  having  a  definite  commencement  and  end.  The
terminus  a  quo,  and  the  terminus  ad  quern,  must  be  stated
precisely ;  and  in  a  case  of  a  general  adventure,  the  term  of
service  must  be  specified.  A  voyage  from  New- York  to  Cur-
racoa,  and  elsewhere,  means,  in  shipping  articles,  a  voyage
from  New- York  to  Curracoa,  and  the  word  elsewhere  is  re-
jected as  being  void  for  uncertainty.*

Seamen,  in  the  merchant  service,  are  usually  hired  at  a
certain  sum,  either  by  the  month,  or  for  the  voyage.  In  the
fishing  trade  the  seamen  usually  serve  under  an  engagement
to  receive  a  portion  of  the  profits  of  the  adventure.  The
rfiare,  or  profits  of  the  voyage,  are  a  substitute  for  regular
wages  ;  and  the  act  of  Congress"^  extends  the  admiralty  ju-
risdiction to  the  cognizance  of  suits  for  shares  in  whaling
voyages,  in  the  same  form  and  manner  as  in  ordinary  cases
of  wages  in  the  merchant's  service.

Every  seaman  engaged  to  serve  on  board  a  ship,  is  bound,
from  the  nature  and  terms  of  the  contract,  to  do  his  duty  in
the  service  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability,  and,  therefore,  a  pro-
mise made  by  the  master  when  the  ship  is  in  distress,  to  pay
extra  wages,  as  an  inducement  to  extraordinary  exertion,  is
illegal  and  void.  It  would  be  the  same  if  some  of  the  crew
had  deserted,  or  were  sick,  or  dead,  and  peculiar  efforts  be-


a  Act  of  20th  July,  1790,  cb.  29.

b  Decision  in  the  District  Court  of  MarylaDd,  by  Judge  Wincbes*
ter,  1  HalVs  L.  J.  209.
e  Act  of  Omgrexsy  \2(k  of  June,  1813,  cb.  2,  soc.  1  and  2.

ToL.  III.  24


186  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

came  requisite ;  for  the  general  engagement  of  the  seamea
is  to  do  all  they  can  for  the  good  of  the  service,  under  all  the
emergencies  of  the  voyage.  Lord  Kenyon  puts  the  illegality
of  such  a  promise  on  the  ground  of  public  policy,  and  Lord
Ellenborough  on  the  want  of  consideration.**  It  requires  the
performance  of  some  service  not  within  the  scope  of  the  ori-
ginal contract,  as  by  becoming  a  voluntary  hostage  upon  cap-
ture, to  create  a  valid  claim,  on  the  part  of  the  seaman,  to
compensation,  on  a  promise  by  the  master,  beyond  the  stipu-
lated wages.*  So,  no  wages  can  be  recovered  when  the
hiring  has  been  for  an  illegal  voyage,  or  one  in  violation  of  a
statute.  The  law  will  not  countenance  a  contract  ex  turpi
causa,  nor  permit  any  one  to  lay  claim  to  the  wages  of  ini-
quity.'

A  seaman  is  entitled  to  his  whole  wages  for  the  voyage,
even  though  he  be  unable  to  render  his  service  by  sickness,
or  bodily  injury,  happening  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  and
while  he  was  in  the  performance  of  his  duty.  This  is  not
only  the  invariable  usage  in  the  English  admiralty,  but  a  pro-
vision of  manifest  justice,  pervading  all  the  commercial  ordi-
nances.'' lie  will  equally  be  entitled  to  his  wages  to  the  end
of  the  voyage,  when  wrongfully  discharged  by  the  master  in
the  course  of  it.*' The  marine  law  very  equitably  distin-


a  Harris  v.  Watson,  Pealce's  JV.  P.  Rep,  72.  Stilk  v.  Mjrick,  2
Camph.J^.P.  317.

b  Yates  r.  Hall,  1  Term  Hep.  73.

c  The  VaDguard,  6  Rob.  Adm,  Rep.  207.

d  Chandler  v.  Grieves,  2  II.  Blacks,  Rep.  GOG,  note.  MboU  on
Shipping,  part  4,  ch.  2,  sec.  1.  Williams  v.  The  Brig  Hope,  1  Peters*
Adm.  Rep.  138.

e  Robinett  v.  The  Ship  Exeter,  2  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  261.  The  Bea-
ver, 3  ibid.  92.  Keane  v.  The  Brig  Gloucester,  2  Dallas'  Rep.  36.
2  Peters'  Adm.  Rep.  403.  Rice  v.  The  Polly  and  Kitty,  2  Peters*
Adm.  Rep.  420.  In  this  last  case,  the  seamen  were  forced  to  quit  the
bhip  by  the  cruelty  and  dangerous  threats  of  the  master,  and  their  wa-
ges were  allowed.


I.ec.  XLVI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 187

guishes  between  the  cases  in  wliicb  seamen's  services  arc  not
Tendered  in  consequence  of  a  peril  of  the  sea,  and  in  which
tbey  are  not  rendered  by  reason  of  some  illegal  act,  or  mis-
conduct, or  fraud,  of  the  master  or  owner,  interrupting  and
destroying  the  voyage.  In  the  latter  case,  the  seamen  are
entitled  to  their  wages,  and  tlie  rule  of  the  French  ordinance
is  just  and  reasonable.  It  declares,  tliat  if  the  seamen  be
hired  for  the  voyage,  they  shall,  in  such  case,  be  paid  the  en-
tire wages  for  the  voyage,  and  if  they  be  hired  by  the  month,
they  shall  be  paid  for  the  time  they  served,  with  the  allow-
ance of  a  reasonable  time  for  their  return  to  the  port  of  de-
parture.'* If  a  seaman  be  wrongfully  discharged  on  tlie
voyage,  the  voyage  is  then  ended  with  respect  to  him,  and  he
is  entitled  to  sue  for  his  full  wages  for  the  voyage.^

The  general  principle  of  the  marine  law  is,  (hat  freight  is
the  mother  of  wages,  and  if  no  freight  be  earned,  no  wages
are  due.  This  principle  protects  the  owner,  by  making  the
right  of  the  mariner  to  his  wages,  commensurate  with  the
right  of  the  owner  to  his  freight ;  but  that  the  rule  may  duly
apply,  the  freight  must  not  be  lost  by  the  fraud  or  wrongful
act  of  the  master.  The  poUcy  of  the  rule  applies  to  cases  of
loss  of  freight  by  a  peril  of  tlie  sea ;  and  it  was  truly  and
distinctly  stated  by  the  Court  of  K.  B.  in  the  time  of  Charles


a  Ord.  det  T.oycrs  des  Matelots^  art.  3.  Pothier^s  Lounge  desMate-
iots^  n.  203.  Ctuhing'a  Tran»lalion,  p.  J  23.  Roccui,  de  JSTav.  el
J^auloy  D.  43.  [ngersoWs  Translation^  p.  40.  Hoyt  v.  Wildfire,  3
Johns.  Rep.  518.

b  Sigard  r.  Roberts,  3  Esp.  J^.  P.  Rep.  71.  lo  the  cAse  of  the  Cas-
tilia,  1  Hogg.  *^dm.  Rep.  59,  a  scamao  who  had  left  the  ship  in  the
course  of  the  vojag-e,  the  master  failing  to  supply  bim  with  provisions,
was  held  not  to  have  forfeited  bis  wages.  And  in  the  Elizabeth,  2
Dodson's  Adm.  Rep.  403,  it  was  bold,  that  though  a  master  be  not  at
liberty,  by  the  general  rule,  to  discharge  bis  crew  in  a  foreign  port  with-
oat  their  consent,  yet  that  circumstances  might  vest  in  him  an  authority
to  do  so,  upon  proper  condilionty  as  by  providing  and  paying  for  their
return  passage,  and  their  wages  up  to  the  time  of  their  arrival  at  home.


^


188  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

II."  that  if  the  ship  perish  by  tempest,  fire,  enemies,  &c.,  the
mariners  lose  their  wages  ;  "  for  if  the  mariners  were  to  have
Iheir  wages  in  such  cases,  they  would  not  use  their  endea-
vours, nor  hazard  their  lives,  for  the  safety  of  the  ship."  If
the  voyage  and  the  freight  be  lost,  because  the  ship  was
seized  for  debt,  or  for  having  contraband  or  prohibited  goods
on  board,  or  for  any  other  cause  proceeding  from  misconduct
in  the  master  or  owner,  it  would  be  unreasonable  and  unjust
that  the  innocent  seamen  should  be  deprived  of  comf)cnEation
for  their  services,  and  the  marine  law  holds  them  still  entitled
to  their  wages.*  The  wages  are,  in  such  cases,  allowed  pro
tanto  to  the  time  of  the  loss  of  the  voyage,  and  with  such
additional  allowance  as  shall  be  deemed  reasonable  under  tlie
circumstances,*


a  Anon.  1  Sid.  Rep.  1 79.

b  Malyne^i  Lex  Mercatoria,  p.  105.  MoUoy^  de  Jure  MariiimOf  h.
2,  c.  3,  sec.  7.  Hoyt  y.  Wildfire,  3  Johns,  Rep.  518.  Jacobeen's  Sea
LatDi,  b.  2,  ch.  3.

c  Id  Woolf  v.  The  Brig  Oder,  2  Peters'  Mm.  Rep.  26 1 ,  wbere  the
voyage  was  broken  up  by  seizure  for  debt,  wages  up  to  the  time  were
allowed,  and  one  additional  month's  pay. Wages  are  not  lost  if  tbe  voy-

#

-age  be  broken  up  by  reason  of  civil  process  against  tbe  vessel,  oo  a
claim  of  ownership.  If  the  claim  be  unfounded,  adequate  damages  arc
^presumed  to  be  awarded  for  the  unfounded  libel,  and  if  well  founded,
tbe  wages  are  lost  by  the  default  of  the  shipper.  Van  Beuren  v.  Wil-
son, 9  Cowen,  158.  In  Hoyt  v.  Wildfire,  where  the  seamen  were  hired
for  a  voyage  from  New-York  to  the  East  Indies,  and  back  to  New-
York,  and  the  vessel  was  captured  and  condemned  on  the  outward  voy-
age for  having  contraband  goods  on  board,  wages,  according  to  tbe  rate
of  the  contract,  were  allowed  from  the  commencement  of  the  voyage
until  tbe  return  of  the  seamen,  with  reasonable  diligence,  to  New- York,
deducting  wages  received  while  in  other  service,  on  tbe  circuitous  re-
turn. The  court  observed,  that  the  rule  in  the  French  law  {Ord.  des
Layers  des  JSlalelots^  art.  3,  Potkier,  Louage  des  MatelotSy  No.  203)
ordained,  that  if  the  seamen  were  hired  for  the  voyage,  they  should,  in
such  a  case,  be  paid  their  entire  wages  for  the  voyage,  and  if  hired  by
•Che  month,  the  wages  due  for  the  time  they  had  served,  and  for  tbe  time
toecessary  to  enable  them  to  return  to  the  port  of  departuie ;  and  that


TLec.  XLVI] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  189

Seamen's  inrages,  in  trading  voyages,  are  due  pro  rata  iiine-
ris.  This  has  been  so  decided  in  the  Scottish  courts,  and
upon  principles  of  controlling  equity.*

If  the  seaman  dies  on  the  voyage,  there  is  no  settled  English
rule  on  the  subject  of  his  wages.  In  one  case,  the  court  in-
timated, that  his  representatives  might  be  entitled  to  a  propor-
tion of  the  wages  up  to  his  death,  when  the  hiring  was  by
the  month,  and  there  was  no  special  contract  in  the  way  ;*
and  a  similar  opinion  was  mentioned  by  one  of  the  judges  of
the  C.  B.  in  another  case.*  In  a  still  later  case,*^  it  was  as-
sumed by  the  Court  of  C.  B.,  that  the  wages  of  a  seaman,  who
died  on  the  voyage  in  which  wages  arose,  were  due  to  his
representatives ;  but  the  case  was  silent  as  to  the  precise  time
to  which  they  were  to  be  computed.  In  this  country,  there  have
been  contradictory  decisions  on  the  point.  In  the  Circuit  and
District  Courts  of  the  United  States,  in  Pennsylvania,  it  was
decided,  upon  the  authority  of  the  Laws  of  Oleron,  that  the
representatives  of  the  seaman  dying  during  the  voyage,  were
entitled  to  full  wages  to  the  end  of  the  voyage.*  On  the
other  hand,  it  was  subsequently  decided,  in  the  District  Court
of  the  United  States  for  South  Carolina/  and  in  the  District
Court  in  Massachusetts,^  that  full  wages,  by  the  marine  law,
meant  only  full  wages  up  to  the  death  of  the  mariner  ;  and  in
this  last  case,  a  very  able  and  elaborate  review  was  taken  of


tbere  was  no  reasoD  to  qnestioD  the  souodness  of  the  rule,  or  the  pro-
prietj  of  following  it  in  that  case.

a  Ross  y.  Glassford,  and  Morrison  y.  Hamilton,  cited  in  1  BelVsCom,
515.  Bat  the  rule  may  be  varied  by  agreement.  Appleby  y.  Dods,  8
EasVs  Rej/.  300.

6  Cutter  y.  Powell,  6  Term  Rep.  320.

c  Heatb,  J.,  in  Beale  y.  Thompson,  3  Bos.  ^  Pull.  425.

d  Armstrong  y.  Smith,  4  Bot,  Sf  Pull.  299.

e  Walton  y.  The  Ship  Neptune,  1  Peters'  Adm.  Rep:  142.  Sima
V.  Jackson,  Und.  157,  note.  1  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  414.  S.  C.

/  Carey  y.  Schooner  Kitty,  Bee's  Adm.  Rep,  255.

^  Natterstrom  y.  Ship  Hazard,  2  HalVs  L.  J.  359.


i


190  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

all  ibc  marine  ordinances  and  authorities  applicable  to  the
subject.  The  court  examined  critically  the  provisions  in  the
consolato  del  mare, and  in  the  laws  of  Olero.n,  of  Wisbuy,  and
of  the  Ilanse  Towns,  the  ordinances  of  Chailes  V.  and  Lewis
XIV.,  the  commentaries  of  Cleirac,  Valin,  and  Pothier,  and
all  that  had  been  said  and  decided  in  England  or  Massachu-
setts, in  relation  to  the  question.  If  the  two  decisions  in  Penn-
sylvania outweigh,  in  point  of  American  authority,  the  oppo-
site adjudications  are  best  supported  in  the  appeal  to  those  ordi-
nances of  European  wisdom  and  policy,  in  which  we  discern
the  deep  foundations  of  maritime  jurisprudence.'^

As  the  payment  of  wages,  in  general,  depends  upon  the
earning  of  freight,  if  a  ship  delivers  her  outward  cargo,  and
perishes  on  her  return  voyage,  the  outward  freight  being
earned,  the  seamen's  wages  on  the  outward  voyage  are  con-
sequently due.*  By  the  custom  of  mercliAnts,  seamen's  wa-
ges are  due  at  every  delivering  port,  and  their  wages  are  not
aflected,  without  their  special  agreement,  by  any  stipulation
between  the  owners  and  the  charterer,  making  the  voyages
out  and  home  one  entire  voyage,  and  the  freight  to  depend  on
the  accomplishment  of  the  entire  voyage  out  and  in.*  The
owners  may  waive  or  modify  their  claim  to  freiglit  as  Uiey


a  If  the  seaman  be  hired  by  the  voyage^  and  die  duriog  it,  the  stand-
ard books  of  maritime  law,  says  Mr.  Bell,  seem  to  give  the  outward
wages,  if  be  dies  during  the  outward  voyage,  and  the  whole  if  be  dies
daring  the  homeward  voyage.  But  if  he  be  hired  by  the  tnonlh,  it
rather  seems,  that  wages  will  be  due  only  to  the  time  of  his  death.
Beit's  Commentaries,  vol.  i.  514.

b  Anon,  Holt,  Ch.  J.,  1  Lord  Raym.  639.

-c  Notes  of  Judge  Winchester's  decisions,  1  Peters*  Adm,  Rep.  186,
note.  Ahhoit  on  Shipping,  part  4,  ch.  2,  sec.  4.  Bl^nchard  v.  Buck-
nam,  3  Greenlenf's  Hep.  1.  In  Thompson  v.  Faussat,  1  Peters'  Cir.
Rep»  182,  where  the  vessel  was  lost  on  her  homeward  voyage,  full  wa-
ges were  hold  due  to  the  seamen  up  to  the  arrival  at  the  last  port  of  de-
livery of  the  outward  cargo  ;  and  half  wages  from  that  lime  until  her
departure  from  the  last  port  at  which  the  return  cargo  wa.s  taken  on
board.


Lee.  XLVI.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 191

please,  but  their  acts  caanot  deprive  the  seamen,  without  their
consent,  of  the  rights  belonging  to  them  by  the  general  prin-
ciples of  the  marine  law. The  doctrine  of  wages  was  dis-
cussed at  the  bar,  and  upon  the  bench,  in  the  case  of  the  Two
Catharines,'^  with  distinguished  force  and  research ;  and  it
was  held,  that  where  a  ship  sailed  from  tlie  United  States
to  Gibraltar,  and  there  landed  her  cargo,  and  went  in  ballast
to  Ivica,  and  after  taking  in  a  return  cargo,  was  lost  on  the
voyage  back  to  the  United  States,  the  seamen  were  entitled
to  weiges  up  to  the  arrival  and  stay  at  Ivica. It  made  no  dif-
ference that  the  vessel  was  in  ballast  in  the  intermediate
voyage. The  voluntary  neglect  of  the  owner  will  not  ope-
rate, in  such  a  case,  to  the  injury  of  the  seamen. They  are
entitled  to  wages,  not  only  when  the  owner  earns  freight,  but
when,  unless  for  his  own  act,  he  might  earn  it. The  wages
are  due  by  an  arrival  at  a  port  of  destination,  when  no  cargo
is  on  board,  or  when  the  owner  chooses  to  bring  the  cargo
back  again,  and  when  the  port  of  destination  be  not,  in  ix)int
of  fact,  the  port  of  delivery. Even  if  the  ship  jicrishcs  ou
the  outward  voyage,  yet,  if  part  of  the  outward  freight  has
been  paid,  the  seamen  are  entitled  to  wages  in  proportion  to
tlie  amount  of  the  freight  advanced,  for  there  is  an  insepara-
ble connexion  between  freight  and  wages.*

Capture  by  an  enemy  extinguishes  the  contract  for  sea-
men's wages ;  and  Sir  William  Scott,  in  the  case  of  The
FriendSj"  held,  that  the  recapture  of  the  vessel  did  not  re-
vive the  right,  or  restore  him  to  his  connei:ion  with  the  ship,
inasmuch  as  he  was  not  on  board  at  the  recapture,  and  did
not  render  any  subsequent  service.  The  doctrine  of  this  case
yxas  o^envled  in  Bergstroni  v.  Mills  ^-^  and  the  American
decisions  have  fully  discussed  the  question,  and  they  lay  down


a  2  Jdason*s  Rep,  319.
b  Anon,  2  Show.  Rep,  291.
c  4  Rob.  Adm,  Rep,  143.
d  3  Esp.  JT,  P.  Rep,  36.


192  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

a  different  rule,  and  proceed  on  the  just  principle,  that  the
owner  recovers  his  freight,  and  that  is  the  parent  of  wages.
They,  accordingly,  allow  to  the  seamen  taken  prisoners  by
the  captor,  and  detained,  their  wages  for  the  whole  voyage,
if  the  same  be  afterwards  performed,  with  a  ratable  deduc-
tion for  the  expenses  of  salvage.  The  like  rule  applies  to  the
case  of  a  vessel  captured,  and  afterwards  ransomed,  and  en-
abled to  arrive  at  her  port  of  destination.**  Nothing  can  be
more  equitable  than  to  allow  to  seamen,  suffering  in  the  ser-
vice, their  compensation,  when  the  fund  out  of  which  it  was
to  arise  is  ultimately  recovered  and  enjoyed  by  the  owner.*
And,  upon  the  same  principle,  if  a  foreign  power  seizes  the
ship,  and  imprisons  the  seamen,  and  they  be  afterwards  re-
lectsed,  and  reassume,  and  complete  the  voyage,  and  earn
freight,  their  wages  are  continued  during  the  interruption  of
the  voyage,  in  like  manner  as  in  a  case  of  capture  and  recap-
ture. The  Court  of  K.  B.  declared  the  law  to  this  effect  in
Beale  v.  Thompso?!,^  and  they  proceeded  on  the  sound  and
incontestible  principle  of  the  marine  law,  that  tlie  title  to  wa-
ges depended  on  the  ship  earning  her  freight  for  the  voyage,
connected  with  the  further  fact,  that  the  manners  were  not
guilty  of  any  breach  of  duty.  IT  a  neutral  ship  be  captured,
and  even  condemned,  and  the  sentence  be  afterwards  reversed,
and  freight  for  the  voyage  allowed  in  damages,  the  seamen
are  entitled  to  their  wages.''  So,  in  the  case  of  shipwreck,
if  any  proportion  of  freight  be  paid  for  the  cargo  saved,  wa-
ges of  seamen  are  to  be  paid  in  the  same  proportion.  When-
ever freight  is  earned,  wages  are  due,  and  must  be  paid,  and


a  Girard  r.  Ware,  1  Petert'  Ctr.  Bep.  142.

6  Hart  v.  The  Ship  Little  John,  1  Peters.  Adm,  Rep.  115.  How-
land  T.  The  Brig  Layioia,  ibid.  123.  Singstrom  v.  Schoooer  Hazard,
2  Peters'  Adm.  Rep.  384.  Brooks  v.  Dorr,  2  Mass.  Rep.  39.  Wet-
more  y.  Heoshaw,  12  Johns.  Rep.  324.

c  4  EasVs  Rep.  546.

d  WiUard  v.  Dorr,  3  JUason,  161.


L«c.  XL VI.] OF  rEK»ONAL  PROPERTY.  193

every  agreement  thAt  goes  to  separate  the  validity  and  equity
of  the  demand  for  wages,  from  the  fact  of  freight  being
earned,  is  viewed  with  distrust  and  jealousy,  as  being  an  en-
croacliment  on  the  rights  of  seamen. The  courts  of  mari-
time law  extend  to  them  a  peculiar  protecting  favour  and
guardianship,  and  treat  them  as  wards  of  the  admiralty  ;  and
though  they  are  not  incapable  of  making  valid  contracts,
they  are  treated  in  the  same  manner  that  courts  of  equity  are
accustomed  to  treat  young  heirs  dealing  with  their  expectan-
cies^  wards  with  their  guardians,  and  cestui  que  trusts  with
their  trustees. They  are  considered  as  placed  under  the  in-
fluence of  men  who  have  naturally  acquired  a  mastery  over
them. Every  deviation  from  the  terms  of  tlie  common  ship-
ping paper,  (which  stands  upon  the  general  doctrines  of  ma-
ritime law,)  is  rigidly  inspected  ;  and  if  additional  burthens
or  sacrifices  are  imposed  upon  the  seamen  without  adequate
remuneration,  the  courts  will  interfere,  and  moderate  or  annul
the  stipulation.* It  has,  accordingly,  under  the  influence  of
these  just  and  humane  considerations,  been  held,  that  an  ad-
ditional clause  to  the  shipping  articles,  by  which  the  seamen
engaged  to  pay  for  all  medicines^  and  medical  aid^  fur-
ther than  the  medical  chest  afforded^  was  void,  as  being
grossly  inequitable,  and  contrary  to  the  policy  of  the  act  of
Congress.^ It  has  likewise  been  decided,  that  a  stipulation
that  the  wages  of  the  seamen,  earned  in  the  intermediate  p^
riods,  should  depend  upon  the  ultimate  successful  termination
of  a  long  and  divided  voyage,  was  inoperative  and  void.*


a  The  Minerva,  1  Hogg.  Adm.  Rep.  347.  The  Geoii^  Homey
ibid.  370.

b  Harden  v.  Gordon,  2  Mtuon^B  Rep,  541 .

c  The  Juliana,  2  Dod»on'»  Adm,  Rep,  604.  See  alto,  to  the  same
effect,  Judge  Winchester's  decision  in  the  District  Court  of  Maryland,
in  1  Petert^  Adm.  Rep.  187,  note.  Mellett  y.  Stephenson,  in  Mast.
1800,  cited  in  Alibott,  p.  490,  American  edition,  1810.  The  decision  of
Lord  Stowell,  in  the  Juliana,  is  made  with  great  force  and  spirit.
He  took  a  wide  view  of  the  subject,  and  concluded  on  the  authoritj  of

Vol.  m.  ?5


194  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

Mariners  are  bound  to  contribute  out  of  their  wages  for
embezzlements  of  the  cargo,  or  injuries  produced  by  the  mis-
conduct of  any  of  the  crew. But  tKe  circumstances  must  be
such  as  to  fix  the  wrong  upon  some  of  the  crew  ;  and  then,
if  the  individual  be  unknown,  those  of  the  crew,  upon  whom
the  presumption  of  guilt  rests,  stand  as  sureties  for  each  other,
and  they  must  contribute  ratably  to  the  loss. Some  of  the
cases  in  the  books  have  established  a  general  contribution
from  all  the  crew  for  such  embezzlements,  even  when  some
of  them  were  in  a  situation  to  repel  every  presumption  of
guilt ;  but  neither  public  policy,  nor  principles  of  justice,  ex-
tend the  contribution  or  forfeiture  of  wages  for  such  embez-
zlements, beyond  the  parties  immediately  in  delicto. This
just  limitation  of  the  rule  was  approved  of  by  the  English
Court  of  C.  B.,  in  TTiompson  v.  Collins,^  in  their  construction
of  the  clause  in  the  usual  shipping  articles,  inserted  to  enforce
this  regulation  of  the  marine  law. It  was  also  adopted  by
the  Supreme  Court  of  New-York,  in  Lewis  v.  Davis,^  and
afterwards  ably  and  thoroughly vindicated,  even  against
the  high  authority  of  Valin,  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Uni-
ted States  for  the  district  of  Massachusetts,  in  the  case  of
Spurr  v.  Pearson.'^ The  doctrine  of  that  case  is  so  moral
and  so  just,  that  it  may  be  said  to  rest  on  immovable  founda-
tions. The  substance  of  it  is,  that  where  the  embezzlement
has  arisen  from  the  fault,  fraud,  connivance,  or  negilence,  of
any  of  the  crew,  they  are  bound  to  contribute  to  the  repara-


the  court  of  admiralty,  of  tbe  court  of  chancery,  and  of  tbe  coorti  of
comraoQ  law,  that  where  a  voyage  was  divided  by  various  ports  of  de-
livery, a  proportional  claim  for  wages  attached  at  each  of  such  ports ;
and  that  all  attempts  to  evade  or  invade  that  title,  by  renunciations  ob-
tained from  the  mariners  without  any  consideration,  by  collateral  bonds,
or  by  contracts  inserted  in  the  body  of  the  shipping  articles,  were  inef-
fectual and  void.

a  4  Bot,  ^  PulL  347.

6  3  Johns,  Rep.  17.

€  I  Mcuon*t  Rep,  104.


Lee.  ILVI.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 195

tion  of  the  loss,  in  proportion  to  their  wages.  If  the  embez*
zlement  be  fixed  on  any  individual,  be  is  solely  responsible ;
and  where  it  was  made  by  the  crew,  but  the  particular  offen*
der  is  unknown,  and  from  the  circumstances  of  the  case,
strong  presumptions  of  guilt  apply  to  the  whole  crew,  all
must  contribute.  Where  no  reasonable  presumption  is  shown
against  their  innocence,  the  loss  must  be  borne  exclusively  by
the  owner  or  master.  In  no  case  are  the  innocent  part  of
the  crew  to  contribute  for  the  misdemeanours  of  the  guilty ;
and  in  a  case  of  uncertainty,  the  burthen  of  the  proof  of  in-
nocence does  not.  rest  on  the  crew,  but  the  guilt  of  the  parties
is  to  be  established  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,  before  the
contribution  can  be  demanded.

In  case  of  shipwreck,  and  there  be  relics  or  materials  of
the  ship  saved,  many  of  the  old  ordinances,  as  .well  as  the
new  commercial  code  of  France,  allow  a  compensation  to  the
seamen,  out  of  the  remains  which  they  had  by^ their  exer*
tions,  or  as  salvors,  contributed  to  preserve.'*  There  were  no
English  decisions  on  the  point,  when  Lord  Tenterden  pub-
lished the  third  edition  of  his  work  ;^  but  some  of  the  deci-
sions in  this  country  seem  to  consider  the  savings  of  the  wreck
as  being  bound  for  the  arrears  of  the  seamen's  wages,  and
for  their  expenses  home ;  and  Lord  Stowell  has,  since  the
Pennsylvania  decisions,  allowed  to  the  seamen,  by  whose  ex-
ertions part  of  a  vessel  had  been  saved,  the  payment  of  their
wages,  as  far  as  the  fragments  of  the  materials  would  form  a
fund,  although  there  was  no  freight  earned  by  the  owners.^
But  in  such  cases  where  the  voyage  is  broken  up  by  vis  mor


a  The  laws  of  Oleron^  art.  3,  of  JFisbuy,  art.  15,  the  Hanseatic  Ord.
art.  44,  the  Ord.  of  Philip  II.  tit.  Average,  art.  12,  the  Ord.  of  RoUer-
dam, art.  219,  aod  the  FrenchOrd.  of  the  Marine, liv.  3, tit.  4,  des  Lo'
yen  des  JdeUelolSf  art.  9. Code  de  Commerce^  art.  259.

b  Abbott^  part  4,  ch.  2,  sec.  6.

c  The  Neptuoe,  1  Haggard's  Mm,  Bep.  227.  1  Peters'  Adm.  Rep»
54.  195. 2  Ibid.  426. Frothingham  v.  Prince,  3  Mus.  Rep.  563.


]


196  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

jcr,  and  no  freight  earned,  no  wages,  eo  nomine^  are  due  ;
and  the  equitable  blaim  which  seamen  may  have  upon  the
remains  of  the  wreck,  is  rather  a  claim  for  salvage,  and  seems
to  be  incorrectly  denominated  in  the  books  a  title  to  wages.
Wages,  in  such  cases,  would  be  contrary  to  the  great  princi-
ple in  marine  law,  that  freight  is  the  mother  of  wages,  and
the  safety  of  the  ship  the  mother  of  freight.*  If,  however,
the  seamen  abandon  the  wreck  of  a  ship  as  being  a  hopeless
case,  and  without  the  intention  of  returning  to  possess  and
save  it,  they  lose  their  lien  or  privilege  for  any  equitable  com-
pensation,  whether  as  wages  or  salvage.  Their  claim  is  ex-
tinquished,  and  though  other  persons  may  possess  the  proper-
ty which  had  become  derelict,  it  belongs  to  the  original  owner,
burthened  with  their  claim  for  salvage.*

By  the  act  of  Congress,^  one  third  of  the  seamen's  wages
IB  dueatevery  port  where  the  ship  unlades  and  delivers  her
cargo,  unless  there  be  an  express  stipulation  to  the  contrary  ;
and  when  the  voyage  is  ended,  and  the  cargo  or  ballast  fully
discharged,  the  wages  are  due,  and  if  not  paid  within  ten
days  thereafter,  admiralty  process  may  be  instituted.  Bui
there  is  no  fixed  period  of  time  by  the  marine  law,  within
which  mariners  must  proceed  to  enforce  their  lien  for  wages.
It  does  not,  like  other  liens,  depend  upon  possession.  Seamen's
wages  are  hardly  earned,  and  liable  to  many  contingencies,  by
which  they  may  be  entirely  lost,  without  any  &ult  on  their
part  Few  claims  are  more  highly  favoured  and  protected  by
law,  and  when  due,  the  vessel,  owners,  and  master,  are  all
liable  for  the  payment  of  them.  The  seamen  need  not  libel
the  vessel  at  the  intermediate  port  where  they  are  discharged.
They  may  disregard  bottomry  bonds,  and  pursue  their  lien  for


a  Dunnett  f»  Tomhagen,  3  John*.  Rep.  154.  The  Saratoga,  3  Qal"
lison,  164.

6  Lewis  V.  The  Elizabeth  and  Jane,  DUtrict  Court  of  Maine,  Am.
Jwriti,  No.  13.

€  Ad  of  July  20<A,  1790,  ch.  29,  sec.  6.


Lee.  XLVI.1  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 197

wages  afterwards,  even  against  a  subsequent  bona  fide  pur-
chaser. It  follows  the  ship  and  its  proceeds,  into  whose
hands  soever  they  may  come  by  title  or  purchase.  Their
demand  for  wages  takes  precedence  of  bottomry  bonds
and  is  preferred  to  all  other  demands,  for  the  same  reason
that  the  last  bottomry  bond  is  preferred  to  those  of  a  prior
date.  Their  claim  is  a  sacred  lien,  and  as  long  as  a  single
plank  of  the  ship  remains,  the  sailor  is  entitled,  as  against  all
other  persons,  to  the  proceeds,  as  a  security  for  his  wages.*
The  seamen's  lien  exists  to  the  extent  of  the  whole  compen-
sation due  them.  There  is  no  difference  between  the  case  of
a  vessel  seized  abroad  and  restored  in  specie  or  in  value.  The
lien  re-attaches  to  the  thing  and  to  whatever  is  substituted  for
it.  This  is  not  only  a  principle  of  the  admiralty,  but  it  is
found  incorporated  into  the  doctrines  of  the  courts  of  common
law.*  In  the  French  law,  the  seamen's  lien  upon  the  vessel
is  extinguished  after  a  sale,  and  a  voyage,  in  the  name,
and  at  the  risk  of  the  purchaser  ;  and  the  preference  of  the
seamen's  claim  is  confined  to  the  wages  of  the  seamen  em-
ployed in  the  last  voyage/


a  Madonna  D'Idra,  1  DodwiCs  Rep-  37.  Sjdnej  Cove,  2  ibid.  11.
The  Ship  Mary,  1  Faine'9  Rep.  180.  Sheppard  v.  Tajlor,  5  PeUrt*
U.  S.  Hep.  675.

6  Sheppard  r.  Tajlor,  6  Peter*9  U.  S,  Rep,  675.

c  Ord.  de  la  Marine,  tit.  De  la  Scueie  dee  JVavtret,  art.  16.  De
t Engagement,  art.  19.  Code  du  Commerce,  art.  191.  193.  The  com-
mercial code  of  Napoleon  settles  the  order  and  rights  of  prtviiegped
dehts,  mach  more  fully  and  precisely  than  the  marine  ordinance  of
Lewis  XIV. ;  and  this  priority  in  faToar  of  seamen*s  wages  pervades
both  the  maritime  ordinances.  The  venerable  code  of  the  Coneoiato
del  Mare,  eh.  138,  expressed  itself  on  this  subject  with  the  energy  of
Ijord  Stowell,  when  it  declared,  that  mariners  must  be  paid  before  all
mankind,  and  that  if  only  a  single  nail  of  the  ship  wae  left,  they  were
entitled  to  it.  {Conaulai  de  la  Mer,  par  Boucher,  torn.  ii.  205.  See
also,  Cleirac  upon  the  Judgments  of  Oleron,  art.  8,  n.  31,  and  Boulay
Paty,  Court  de  Droit  Com.  torn.  i.  1 1 5.)  The  preference  given  to  sea-
men for  their  wages,  over  all  other  claiffls,  upon  the  ship  and  freight,  is


198  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

Desertion  from  the  ship  without  just  cause,  or  the  justifia-
ble discharge  of  a  seaman  by  the  master,  for  bad  conduct,
will  work  a  forfeiture  of  the  wages  previously  earned ;  and
this  is  a  rule  of  justice,  and  of  policy,  which  generally  per-
vades the  ordinances  of  the  maritime  nations.  By  the  Eng-
lish statute  law,**  and  by  the  act  of  Congress,^  desertion  is
accompanied  with  a  forfeiture  of  all  the  wages  that  are  due ;
and  whatev'er  unjustifiable  conduct  will  warrant  the  act  of
the  master  in  discharging  a  seaman  during  the  voyage,  will
equally  deprive  the  seaman  of  his  wages.  But  the  forfeiture
is  saved  if  the  seaman  repents,  makes  compensation,  or  oflS^r
of  amends,  and  is  restored  to  his  duty.  Public  policy  and  pri-
vate justice  here  move  together,  and  the  maritime  ordinances
unite  in  this  conclusion.  The  master  has  power  to  remit  a
forfeiture,  and  the  penalty  of  forfeiture  is  not  applied  to  slight
faults,  either  of  neglect  or  disobedience.  There  must  be,
either  an  habitual  neglect,  or  disobedience,  or  drunkenness,
or  else  a  single  act  of  gross  dishonesty,  or  some  other  act  of  a
heinous  and  aggravated  nature,  to  justify  the  discharging  a
seaman  in  a  foreign  port,  or  the  forfeiture  of  wages;  nor  will
the  admiralty  courts,  except  in  cases  of  great  atrocity,  visit
the  offences  of  seamen  with  the  cumulated  load  of  forfeiture
of  wages  and  compensation  in  damages.  They  stop  at  the  for-
feiture of  the  w^ages  antecedently  earned,  and  in  the  application
of  the  forfeiture,  the  advance  wages  are  made  a  charge  on  the


the  universal  law  of  maritime  Europe.  The  wages  of  seamen  are  a
lien  on  the  vessel  and  freight,  and  even  on  the  cargo  to  the  amount  of  the
freight  due  upon  it.  The  master  has  his  lien  on  the  cargo  for  bis  freight.
The  cargo  is  hj'pothecated  for  the  freight,  and  the  freight  is  hypotheca-
ted for  the  seamen's  wages.  The  lien  on  the  freight  is  not  taken  away
by  the  statute  of  the  United  States,  allowing  to  seamen  process  against
the  vessel.  See  Poland  v.  Brig  Spartan^  in  the  District  Court  of  Maine,
(American  Jurist j  No.  5,  p.  40,)  where  the  question  as  to  the  extent  of
the  lien  of  seamen  for  their  wages,  is  learnedly  discussed.

a  1 1  and  12  Wm,  III.  c.  7,  and  2  Geo.  11.  c.  36.  ^

b  Act  of  ^ih  Julyy  1790,  ch.  29,  sec  2  and  o.


Lee.  XLVL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 199

forfeited  wages,  but  the  hospital  money  is  apportioned  ratably
on  the  wages  for  the  whole  voyage.  In  these  regulations  the
moderation  of  the  courts,  and  the  solicitude  which  the  peculiar
condition  and  character  of  seamen  excites,  are  equally  mani-
fest.' So,  if  the  seaman  quits  the  ship  involuntarily,  or  is
driven  ashore  by  reason  of  cruel  usage,  and  for  personal  safe-
ty, the  wages  are  not  forfeited.^  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the
duty  of  the  seamen  to  abide  by  the  vessel  as  long  as  reason-
able hope  remains,  and  if  they  desert  the  ship  under  circum-
stances of  danger  or  distress  from  perils  of  the  sea,  when  their
presence  and  exertions  might  have  prevented  damage,  or  re-
stored the  ship  to  safety,  they  forfeit  their  wages,  and  are
answerable  in  damages.'^  And  even  when  a  seaman  might
well  have  been  discharged  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  for
gross  misbehaviour,  if  the  master  refuses  to  discharge  him,
and  leaves  him  in  imprisonment  abroad,  he  will,  in  that  case,
be  entitled  to  his  wages  until  his  return  to  the  United  States,
after  deducting  from  the  claim  his  time  of  imprisonment.'^


a  Wbitton  y.  The  Brig^  Commerce,  1  PeUrt*  Adm,  Rep,  160.  Thorne
r.  White,  Und,  175.  Relf  t.  The  Maria,  ibid,  186.  The  Ship  Meo-
tor,  4  Maaon^  84.  102.  The  Malta,  2  Hogg,  Adm.  Rep,  159.  Hutch-
inson T.  Combs,  District  Court  of  Maine,  Am,  Jurist^  No.  13.

b  Limland  y.  Stephens,  3  Etp,  JV.  P.  Rep.  269.

e  Sims  v.  Mariners,  1  Peters^  Adm.  Rep,  395.

d  ^Qck  T.  Lane,  12  Serg.  Sf  Rawle,  266.  In  the  examination  of  the
maritime  law  concerning  seamen,  I  have  been  led  to  consult,  very  fre-
quently, the  admiralty  decisions  in  the  District  Court  of  Pennsylvania,
and  I  feel  unwilling  to  take  my  leave  of  this  branch  of  the  subject,
without  expressing  my  grateful  sense  of  the  obligation  which  the  pro-
fession, and  the  country  at  large,  are  under,  to  the  venerable  author  of
those  decisions.  They  discover  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  mari-
time ordinances  of  continental  Europe,  those  abundant  fountains  of  all
modern  nautical  jurisprndence.  They  have  investigated  the  sound  prin-
ciples which  those  ordinances  contain,  in  a  spirit  of  free  and  liberal  in-
quiry ;  and  they  have  uniformly  discussed  the  rights  and  claims  of  ma-
riners, under  the  influence  of  a  keen  sense  of  justice,  a  strong  feeling
of  humanity,  and  an  elevated  tone  of  moral  sentiment.


LECTURE  XLVn.


OP THE CONTRACT OF  AFFREIGHTMENT.


(1.)  Of  the  charter  party.

A  charter  party  is  a  contract  of  affreightment  in  writing,
by  which  the  owner  of  a  ship  lets  the  whole,  or  a  part  of  her,
to  a  merchant,  for  the  conveyance  of  goods,  on  a  particular
voyage,  in  consideration  of  the  payment  of  freight.

All  contracts  under  seal  were  anciently  called  charters,  and
they  used  to  be  divided  into  two  parts,  and  each  party  inte-
rested took  one,  and  this  was  the  meaning  of  the  charta  par-
tiia.  It  was  a  deed  or  writing  divided,  consisting  of  two
parts,  like  an  indenture  at  common  law.''  Lord  Mansfield
observed,  that  the  charter  party  was  an  old  informal  instru-
ment, and  by  the  introduction  of  different  clauses  at  different
times,  it  was  inaccurate,  and  sometimes  contradictory.  But
tbis  defect  has  been  supplied,  by  giving  it,  as  mercantile  con-
tracts usually  receive,  a  Uberal  construction,  in  furtherance  of
the  real  intentit  ji  and  the  usage  of  trade.


a  ButleTy  n.  138,  to  lib.  3.  Co.  LiU.  Polhier'i  Charter  Party,  bj
Oii^tii^,o.  1.  Fa/in*fCMn.  torn.  1.617.  The  translation  of  Pothier*t
treatises  on  maritime  contracts,  by  Mr.  Cusbinsr*  and  published  at  Bos-
ton in  1821,  is  neat  and  accurate,  and  (he  notes  which  aris  added  to  the
Tolume,  are  highly  creditable  to  the  industry  and  learning  of  the  author.
It  would  contribute  greatly  to  the  circulation  and  cuUiiration  of  mari-
time law  in  this  country,  if  some  other  treatises  of  Pothier,  and  also,
the  Commentaries  of  Valin,  could  appear  in  an  English  dreu.
.  Vol.  hi.  26


20S  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Pmrt  V.

This  mercantile  lease  of  a  ship  describes  the  parties,  die
ship,  and  the  voyage,  and  contains,  on  the  part  of  the  owner,
a  stipulation  as  to  sea-worthiness,  and  as  to  the  promptitucie
with  which  the  vessel  shall  receive  the  cargo,  and  perform
the  voyage ;  and  the  exception  of  such  perils  of  the  sea  ibr
which  the  master  and  ship  owners  do  not  mean  to  be  recpoa-
sible.  On  the  part  of  the  freighter,  it  contains  a  stipulation
to  load  and  unload  within  a  given  time,  with  an  allowance  of
so  many  lay,  or  running  days,  for  loading  and  unloading  the
cargo,  and  the  rate  and  times  of  payment  of  the  freight,  and
rate  of  demurrage  beyond  the  allotted  days.*

When  the  goods  of  several  merchants,  unconnected  with
each  other,  are  laden  on  board,  without  any  particular  con-
tract of  affreightment  with  any  individual  for  the  entire  ship,'
the  vessel  is  called  a  general  ship,  because  open  to  all  mer-
chants ;  but  when  one  or  more  merchants  contract  for  the
ship  exclusively,  it  is  said  to  be  a  chartered  ship.  The  ship
may  be  let  in  whole,  or  in  part,  and  either  for  such  a  quan-
tity of  goods  by  weight,  or  for  so  much  space  in  the  ship,
which  is  letting  the  ship  by  the  ton.  She  may  also  be  hired
for  a  gross  sum  as  freight  for  the  voyage,  or  for  a  particular
sum  by  the  month,  or  any  other  determinate  period,  or  for  a
certain  sum  for  every  ton,  cask,  or  bale  of  goods  put  on  board ;
and  when  the  ship  is  let  by  the  month,  the  time  does  not
begin  to  run  until  the  ship  breaks  ground,  unless  it  be  other*
wise  agreed.*  The  merchant  who  hires  a  ship,  may  either
lade  it  with  his  own  goods,  or  wholly  underlet  it,  upon  his
own  terms ;  and  if  no  certain  freight  be  stipulated,  the  owner
will  be  entitled  to  recover,  upon  a  quantum  meruit^  as  much
freight  as  is  usual  under  the  like  circumstances,  at  the  time
and  place  of  the  shipment'


a  Ahboit  en  Shipping ^  part  3,  ch.  1,  lec.  6.

h  Pothiery  Charte  PartU^  No.  4.  AbbaU  on  Shippings  part  S,  cb.  1,
aeo.  3.

c  Poihier,  ibid.  No.  8.  Abboity  part  3,  cb.  1,  lae.  4.  Hantsr  r.
Fry,  S  Bamw,  ^  Aid.  4S1.


Lcc.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  203

It  18  the  duty  of  the  owner  of  the  ship,  not  only  to  see  that
die  18  duly  equipped,  and  in  a  suitable  condition  to  perform
the  voyage,  but  he  is  bound  to  keep  her  in  that  condition
throughout  the  voyage,  unless  he  be  prevented  by  perils  of
the  sea.' If,  in  consequence  of  a  failure  in  the  due  equip-
ment of  the  vessel,  the  charterer  does  not  use  her,  he  is  not
bound  to  pay  any  freight ;  but  if  he  actually  employs  her,  he
must  pay  the  freight,  though  he  has  his  remedy  on  the  char-
ter party  for  damages  sustained,  by  reason  of  the  deficiency
of  the  vessel  in  her  equipment.^ The  freighter  is  bound  on
his  part  not  to  detain  the  ship  beyond  the  stipulated  or  usual
time,  to  load,  or  to  deliver  the  cargo,  or  to  sail. The  eictra
days  beyond  the  lay  days,  (being  the  days  allowed  to  load
and  unload  the  cargo,)  are  called  days  of  demurrage ;  and
that  term  is  likewise  applied  to  the  payment  for  such  delay,
and  it  may  become  due  either  by  the  ship's  detention,  for  the
purpose  of  loading  or  unloading  the  cargo,  either  before,  ot
daring,  or  after  the  voyage,  or  in  waiting  for  convoy.' If
the  claim  for  demurrage  rests  on  express  contract,  it  is  strict-
ly enforced,  as  where  the  running  days  for  delivering  the
cargo  under  the  bill  of  lading  had  expired,  even  though  the
consignee  was  prevented  from  clearing  the  vessel  of  the  goods
by  the  default  of  others.^

The  old  and  the  new  French  codes  of  commerce  require
the  charter  party  to  be  in  writing,  though  Yalin  holds  that
the  contract,  if  by  parol,  would  be  equally  valid  and  binding.'


a  PatDam  y.  Wood,  3  JtfaM.  Rep,  481.

b  Ha?elock  v.  Geddes,  10  Ea$Vi  Rep,  555.

c  Lawet  an  Charter  Parties,  130.

d  Leer  y.  Yates,  3  Tamtony  387.  Harman  r.  Gandolpfa,  1  HoWe
JV*.  P.  35.  The  argaroent  is  fairly  stated,  aud  this  rigorous  rule  ablj
yindicated,  by  Mr.  Holt,  in  a  note  to  the  case  last  referred  to,  aud  that
note  was  afterwards  trauaferred  to  bis  Treatise  oo  Sbipping,  yol.  ii.  17,
Dote«

e  Ord,  de  la  Mar,  liy.  3,  tit  de*  Charte  Partiesy  art.  1 ,  and  Yalin's
Com.  ibid. Code  de  Comvieree,  art.  273.


S04  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [PartV.

In  the,  English  law,  the  hiring  of  ships  without  writing  is
undoubtedly  valid ;  but  it  would  be  a  very  loose  and  danger-
ous practice,  at  least  in  respect  to  foreign  voyages.  In  the
river  and  coasting, trade,  there  is  less  formality  and  less  ne-
cessity for  it ;  and  the,  contract  is,  no  doubt,  frequently  with-
out the  evidence  of  deed  or  writing.*

If  either  party  be  not  ready  by  the  time  appointed  for  load-
ing the  ship,  the  other  party,  if  he  be  the  charterer,  may  seek
another  ship,  or  if  he  be  the  owner,  another  cargo.  This  right
arises  from  the  necessity  of  precision  and  puqctuality  in  all
maritime  transactions.  By  a  very  short  delay,  the  proper
season  may  be  lost,  or  the  object  of  the  voyage  defeated.  And
if  the  ship  be  loaded  only  in  part,  and  she  be  hired  exclusive-
ly for  the  voyage,  and  to  take  in  a  cargo  at  certain  specified
rates,  the  freighter  is  entitled  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  the
ship ;  for  he  is  answerable  to  the  owner  for  freight,  not  only
for  the  cargo  actually  put  on  board,  but  for  what  the  vessel
could  have  taken,  had  a  full  cargo  been  furnished.^  The
master  has  no  right  to  complete  the  lading  with  the  goods  of
other  persons,  without  the  consent  of  the  charterer ;  and  if  he
grants  that  permission,  the  master  must  account  to  him  for
the  freight  He  has  no  right  to  complain,  if  the  charterer
refrises  to  grant  the  permission,  or  complete  the  lading,  pro-
vided he  has  cargo  enough  to  secure  his  freight.  This  was
the  regulation  of  the  French  ordinance,  and  it  has  been  adopt-
ed into  the  new  code.^

By  the  contract  the  owner  is  bound  to  see  that  the  ship  be
seaworthy,  which  means  that  she  must  be  tight,  stanch,
and  strong,  well  furnished,  manned,  victualled,  and,  in  all


a  Molloy,  de  Jure  Mar,  b.  2,  c.  4,  sec.  3.  Smith  t.  Shepherd,  cited
ID  AbboU  on  Skipping f  part  3,  cb.  4,  sec.  1.  Bouiay  Paty,  torn.  iL
268, 269.

b  Daffie  y.  Hayes,  15  Johns,  Bep,  327.

e  Ord.  du  Fret.  art.  2.  Pothier^  CharU  Partie^  n.  20, 21 ,  22.  24^
25. Cod€  de  Com.  n.  287.


Lee.  XLVII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 206

respectSi  equipped  in  the  usual  manner,  for  the  merchants'
service  in  such  a  trade. The  ship  n^ust  be  fit  and  compe-
tent for  the  sort  of  cargo  and  the  particular  service  for  which
she  is  engaged. If  there  should  be  a  latent  defect  in  the  ves-
bAj  unknown  to  the  owner,  and  undiscoverable  upon  exami-
nation, yet  the  better  opinion  is,  that  the  owner  must -answer
for  the  damage  occasioned  by  the  defect. It  is  an  implied
warranty  in  the  contract,  that  the  ship  be  sufficient  for  the
voyage,  and  the  owner,  Uke  a  common  carrier,  is  an  insurer
against  every  thing  but  the  excepted  perils.* To  this  head
of  seaworthiness,  may  be  referred  the  owner's  obligation  to
see  that  the  ship  is  furnished  with  all  the  requisite  papers  ac-
ocnrding  to  the  laws  of  the  country  to  which  she  belongs,  and
According  to  treaties,  and  the  law  of  nations. Such  docu-
ments are  necessary  to  secure  the  vessel  from  disturbance  at
home,  on  the  high  seas,  and  in  foreign  ports.^ If  the  charter
party  contains  any  stipulation  on  the  part  of  the  owner  to
keep  the  ship  in  good  order  during  the  voyage,  the  entire  ex-
pense of  the  repairs  requisite  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  are
then  to  be  borne  by  the  owner,  and  are  not,  in  that  case,  the


a  Lyon  t.  Melk,  5  EtuVs  Rep.  428.  PutDam  y.  Wood,  3  Jdass.  Rep.
481.  Silya  v.  Low,  1  Johm.  Cat.  134.  Ord,  de  la  Mariney  liv.  3,  tit.
8.  Du  Fret,  art  12.  Pothiery  Charte  PaHie,  No.  27.  Valines  Com.
h.  t.  says,  (and  in  this  he  agrees  with  the  English  law,)  that  the  owner
is  answerable,  on  his  contract^  for  latent  defects,  eren  though  the  ship
bad  been  pre?iously  visited  by  experienced  ship w rights,  and  the  defect
had  escaped  detection ;  though  Pothier,  (Charie  PartUj  n.  30.)  dis-
sents from  this  opinion  of  Valin,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  latent  defects  un-
known to  the  owner.

b  Abbott,  part  3,  ch.  3,  sec.  4.  Baring  y.  The  Royal  Exchange  As-
snrance  Company,  5  Ea9t*s  Rep.  99.  The  same  y.  Christie,  ibid.  398.
Baring  r.  Claggett,  3  Bo§.  4r  Pvlk  201.  Lothian  t.  Henderson,  ibid.
499.  Ord.  de  la  Marine,  liv.  3,  tit.  1.  ChaHe  Parlies,  art.  10.  Fa-
Un'i  Com.  h.  t.  The  ship  must  be  provided  with  a  bill  of  health  when
it  is  requisite  at  the  port  of  destination.  Levy  v.  Costerton,  4  Campb.
389.


!


206  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

subject  of  general  average  or  contribution.*  But  the  owner
does  not  insure  the  cargo  against  the  perils  of  the  sea.  He  is
answerable  for  his  own  fault,  or  negligence,  or  those  of  his
agents,  and  for  defects  in  the  ship,  or  her  equipment,  and
generally,  as  a  common  carrier,  he  is  answerable  for  all  losses
other  than  what  arise  from  the  excepted  cases  of  the  act  of
God,  and  public  enemies.*  The  responsibility  of  the  owner
begins  where  that  of  the  wharfinger  ends,  and  when  the
goods  are  delivered  to  some  accredited  person  on  board  the
ship.'  The  cargo  must  be  taken  on  board  with  care  and  skilly
and  be  properly  stowed,  and  the  contract  by  the  bill  of  lading
imports  that  the  goods  are  to  be  safely  stowed  under  deck,
and  if  they  are  stowed  on  deck  without  the  consent  of  the
owner,  they  are  at  the  risk  of  the  master,  and  he  would  not
be  protected  from  liability  for  their  loss  by  the  exception  in
the  bill  of  lading  of  the  dangers  of  the  seas.^  If  the  ship
had  been  advertised  by  the  agent  of  the  owner  for  freight  as
a  general  ship,  and  the  notice  had  stated,  that  she  was  to  sail
with  convoy,  this  would  amount  to  an  engagement  to  that
effect ;  and  if  she  sails  without  convoy,  and  be  lost,  the  owner
becomes  answerable  to  the  shipper  in  damages,  for  the  breach
of  that  representation.'

(2.)  Of  the  hill  of  lading.

In  execution  of  the  contract  of  charter  party,  the  master  of
the  ship  signs  a  bill  of  lading,  which  is  an  acknowledgment
of  the  receipt  of  the  goods  on  board,  and  of  the  conveyance  of
them  which  he  assumes.  The  bill  of  lading  contains  the
quantity  and  marks  of  the  merchandise,  the  names  of  the


a  Jackson  v.  Cbarnock,  8  Term  Rep*  509.

h  See  Yol.  ii.  Lee-  40.

c  Cobban  y.  Downe,  5  £ip.  JV.  P,  Rep.  41.

d  Crane  t.  The  Rebecca,  U.  S.  District  Court  for  Maine,  1831.
American  Jumf,  No.  11.

e  Buoguist  y.  Ditchell,  3  Eep,  JV.  P.  Rep.  64.  Magalbaem  t.
Buiber,  4  Campb,  54.


Uc.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  20T

shipper  and  consignee,  the  places  of  departure  and  discharge,
the  names  of  the  master,  and  of  the  ship,  with  the  price  of
the  freight  The  charter  party  is  the  contract  for  the  hire  of
the  ship,  and  the  biU  of  lading  for  the  conveyance  of  the
cargo ;  and  though  it  be  signed  by  the  master,  he  does  it  as
agent  for  the  owners,  and  it  is  a  contract  binding  upon  them>
By  the  bill  of  lading,  the  master  engages  as  a  common  car-
rier to  carry  and  deliver  the  goods  to  the  consignee,  or  his  or-
der ;  and,  by  the  common  law,  owners  were  responsible  for
damages  to  goods  on  board,  to  the  full  extent  of  the  loss.  But,
in  England,  by  the  statute  of  63  Oeo,  III.  c.  169,  owners,
and  part  owners  of  ships,  are  not  liable  beyond  the  value  ai
the  ship  and  freight,  even  though  the  loss  was  occasioned  by
the  misconduct  of  the  master,  and  a  part  owner.  This  sta-
tute assimilated  the  common  law  of  England  to  the  maritime
law  of  France,  and  other  commercial  countries ;  and  the  great
principle  was,  to  limit  the  responsibility  of  part  owners  to  the
amount  of  their  respective  capitals  embarked  in  the  ship.  The
value  of  the  ship  was  to  be  calculated  at  the  time  of  the  loss,
and  the  freight,  in  the  statute,  means  all  the  freight,  whether
paid  in  advance  or  not.^

There  are  commonly  three  bills  of  lading ;  one  for  the
freighter,  another  for  the  consignee,  factor,  or  agent  abroad,
and  a  third  is  usually  kept  by  the  master  for  his  own  use.
It  is  the  document  and  title  of  the  goods  sent ;  and,  as  such,
if  it  be  to  order,  or  assigns,  is  transferable  in  the  market.  The
endorsement  and  delivery  of  it,  transfers  the  property  in  the
goods  from  the  time  of  the  delivery.'


«  Beawu*  Lex  Mer.  133.  142.  Ferguson  v.  Cappeau,  6  Harr.  ^
Jtihu.  394.

h  Wilson  ▼.  Dickson,  2  Bamw.  4r  Aid,  2. See  infra.

e  See  toI.  ii.  Lee.  39.  This  is  also  the  law  in  France,  Code  de  Ccm^
merce,  art.  281 .  A  Mpping'^note  of  goods  at  sea  does  not  amoant  to  a
bill  of  lading,  and  it  is  not  endorsable  so  at  to  affect  a  change  of  proper-
ty, and  arrest  the  right  of  stoppage  w  trantUu  by  the  consirnor.  Aker-
flsan  ▼.  Hvinpfarej,  1  Carr,  Sf  Payne^  63.


208  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [PmrtT,

Where  there  are  several  bills  of  lading,  each  is  a  contract
in  itself  as  to  the  holder  of  it,  but  the  whole  make  only  one
contract  as  to  the  master  and  owners.  If  the  several  parts  of
the  bill  of  lading  be  endorsed  to  different  persons^  a  competi-
tion may  ^rise  for  the  goods ;  and  the  rule  genially  is,  thai
if  the  equities  be  equal,  the  prepay  passes  by  the  biU  first
endorsed.'

(3.)  Of  the  carriage  of  the  goods.

When  the  ship  is  hired,  and  the  cargo  laden  on  board,  the
duties  of  the  owner,  and  of  his  agent,  the  master,  arise  in  re-
spect to  the  commencement,  progress,  and  termination  of  the
voyage.  Those  duties  are  extremely  important  to  the  inte-
rests of  commerce,  and  they  have  been  well  and  accurately
defined  in  the  marine  law.^


a  Caldwell  r.  Ball,  1  Term  Rep.  205. 1  BMt  Com.  545.

h  The  doties  of  the  captain  are  prescribed  minutely  in  the  Freoch
atatate  codes.  Erery  ship  most  be  inspected  by  the  captain,  under  the
forms  prescribed,  before  she  sails,  and  if  he  has  no  such  official  report
of  the  Teasel,  he  becomes  responsible  for  every  accident.  He  must
keep  a  regular  journal  of  events  on  the  Toyage ;  and  the  ordinances
prescribe  rery  sage  regulations  in  case  of  the  death  of  any  seaman  on
board,  touching  his  effects.  He  must  be  exact  in  providing  the  requi-
site ship's  papers  before  he  sails ;  such  as  the  bill  of  sale,  register,  roU
d'eqidpage^  bill  of  lading,  and  charter  party,  process  verbal,  clearance
at  the  customs,  and  a  license  to  sail.  He  must  be  on  board  when  the
vessel  breaks  ground.  He  is  answerable  for  damages  even  by  ecufor^
tuUi  when  the  goods  were  on  deck,  unless  he  had  the  consent  of  the
owner  in  writing,  or  it  was  a  coasting  voyage;  and  if  he  sails  in  con-
formity to  the  regulations  of  the  ordinances,  he  becomes  respuusible  for
all  damages,  and  cannot  invoke  the  exception  of  force  majeure,  when
those  regulations  have  not  been  ofterved.  (Ord.  de  la  Mar.  art.  10,
tit.  Testament,  art.  4.  Ord.  1720, 1739,  and  1779.  Code  de  Com.  art.
2S4, 225,  226.  228,  229.  Code  Civil,  art.  59.  86.  1  Emerig.  374.
BauUxy  PaJty,  torn.  ii.  p.  1 — 35.  The  foreign  marine  ordinances  usual-
ly make  special  provision  for  the  proper,  storage  of  the  cargo.  We
bare  seen,  in  the  preceding  part  of  these  idctures,  that  the  master  was
retponsible  as  a  common  carrier  for  the  carriage  and  aafe  delivery  of


Lee.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY  209

When  the  voyage  is  ready,  the  master  is  bound  to  sail  aa
aoon  as  the  wind  and  tide  permit ;  but  he  ought  not  to  set
out  in  very  tempestuous  weather.'  If,  by  the  charter  party,
the  ship  was  to  sail  by  a  given  day,  the  master  must  do  it,  un-
less prevented  by  necessity ;  and  if  there  be  an  undertaking
to  sail  with  convoy,  he  is  bound  to  go  to  the  place  of  rendez-
vous, and  place  himself  under  the  protection  and  control  of
the  convoy,  and  continue,  as  far  as  possible,  under  that  pro-
tection, during  its  course.^  He  is  bound,  likewise,  to  obtain
the  requisite  sailing  instructions  for  the  convoy ;'  but  these
covenants  to  sail  with  the  first  fair  wind,  and  with  convoy,
are  not  conditions  precedent  to  the  recovery  of  freight,  and  a
breach  of  them  only  goes  to  the  question  of  damages.^

The  master  is  bound,  likewise,  to  proceed  to  the  port  of  de-
livery without  delay,  and  without  any  unnecessary  deviaticm
from  the  direct  and  usual  course.  If  he  covenants  to  go  to  a
loading  port  by  a  given  time,  he  must  do  it,  or  abide  the  for-
feiture ;"  and  if  he  be  forced  by  perils  out  of  his  regular
course,  he  must  regain  it  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  No-
thing but  some  just  and  necessary  cause,  as  to  avoid  a  storm,
or  pirates,  or  enemies,  or  to  procure  requisite  supplies  or  re-
pairs, or  to  relieve  a  ship  in  distress,  will  justify  a  deviation


the  goods  ;  aod  in  the  case  of  Sprott  v,  BrowD,  in  the  Scottish  coarts,
(BeWt  Com,  vol.j.  557,  note,)  a  large  mirror  was  shipped  from  London
to  Ediabargb,  in  a  case  marked  glass,  and  the  master  had  assumed  to
carry  it  safe,  and  it  was  found  broken,  on  delivery^  without  any  known
caase,  and  the  master  was  held  responsible.

a  Roccut,  note  56. Ord,  of  Rotterdam,  art.  128.

*  Morley  ▼,  Bordicu,  Sir.  Rep,  1265.  Lilly  v.  Ewer,  Doug,  Rep.
72. Jefieries  v.  Legendra,  Carth.  Rep.  21 6.

c  Webb  ▼.  Thomson,  1  Bos,  ^  Pall.  5.  Anderson  r.  Pitcher,  2
ibid.  164. Victorin  y.  Cleeve,  Sir.  Rep.  1250.

d  Constable  r.  Cloberie,  Palmer's  Rep,  397.  Davidson  r.  Gwynoe,
nEasVsRep.^^X,

e  Shubrick  y.  Salmond,  3  Burr.  Rep.  1637.

V9L,  III.  27


210  Of  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

from  the  regular  course  of  the  voyage.* If  he  deviates  un-
necessarily from  the  usual  course,  and  the  cargo  be  injured
by  tempests  during  the  deviation,  the  deviation  is  asuflScient-
4y  proximate  cause  of  the  loss  to  entitle  the  freighter  to  reco-
ver ;  though  if  it  could  be  shown  that  the  same  loss  not  only
fnight  but  musi  have  happened  if  there  had  not  been  any
deviation,  the  conclusion  might  be  otherwise.* Nor  has  the
captain  any  authority  to  substitute  another  voyage  in  the
place  of  the  one  agreed  upon  between  his  owners  and  the
freighters  of  the  ship^ Such  a  power  is  altogether  beyond
the  scope  of  his  authority  as  master.' In  cases  of  necessi-
ty, as  where  the  ship  is  wrecked,  or  otherwise  disabled,  in
the  course  of  the  voyage,  and  cannot  be  repaired,  or  cannot
tmder  the  circumstances  without  too  great  delay  and  expense,
ihe  roaster  may  procure  another  competent  vessel  to  carry  on
the  cargo  and  save  his  freight. If  other  means  to  forward
the  cargo  can  be  procured,  the  master  must  procure  them,  or
lose  bis  freight ;  and  if  be  offers  to  do  it,  and  the  freighter
will  not  consent,  he  will  tlien  be  entitled  to  his  full  freight.^
The  Rhodiau  law'  exempted  the  master  from  his  contract
to  carry  the  goods,  if  the  ship  became  unnavigable  by  the
perils  of  the  sea. Faber  and  Yiunius  were  of  opinion,  that
by  the  Roman  law  the  master  was  fiot  bounds  in  such  a  case,
to  seek  another  ship,  because  the  contract  related  only  to  the


a  Roccui  on  Int.  note  52.  Palrick  v.  Ludlow,  3  Johns,  Com.  10.
Post  T.  Phoenix  Ins.  Company,  10  Johns,  Hep.  79.  Reade  y.  Com.
Ids.  Company,  3  Johns,  Rep,  352.  Suydam  y.  Marine  Ins.  Company,
2  Johns.  Rep.  138.  Marshall,  Cb.  J.,  Mason  t.  Ship  Biaireau,  2
Cranch's  Rep,  257,  note.

6  Dayis  y.  Garrett,  6  Bingham,  716.

c  Burgon  v.  Sbarpe,  2  Campb.  J^.  P,  Rep,  529.

d  MolUn/y  h,  2,  c.  4,  sec.  5.  Griswold  r.  New-York  Insarance
Company,  3  Johns.  Rep.  321.  Bradburst  r.  Columbian  Insurance
Company,  9  Johns.  Rep.  17.  Scbieffelin  y.  New-York  Insurance
Company,  t6uf.  21.

«  D^.  14.2.  10.1.


Lee.  XLVIL]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 2H

ship  that  was  disabled.'  The  laws  of  Oleron,  and  the  ordi^
nances  of  Wisbuy,  gave  the  power  to  the  master  to  hiro
another  vessel,  if  he  choosed  to  do  so,  and  earn  freight ;  but
the  marine  ordiaance  of  Lewis  XIY.  declared  it  to  be  the  du-^
iy  of  the  master  to  hire  another  ship  in  such  a  case,  if  it  be
in  his  power.^  The  French  jurists  differ  in  opinion  in  re^
spect  to  the  obligation  of  the  master  to  hire  another  vessel  ta
carry  on  the  cargo,  when  his  own  becomes  irreparable.  Ya-i
lin  and  Pothier  contend,  that  the  master  is  no  further  bound
to  procure  another  vessel,  than  by  losing  his  freight  for  the
entire  voyage  if  he  omits  to  do  it ;  for^  by  the  contract  of  afn
freightment,  he  only  engaged  to  furnish  his  own  vessel,  and
when,  by  the  perils  of  the  sea,  or  by  some  superior  force,  for
which  he  Is  not  responsible,  he  becomes  unable  to  furnish  it^
all  that  he  is  bound  to  do,  by  the  principles  of  the  contract,  ia
to  discharge  the  freighter  from  the  freight  for  tlie  residue  of
the  voyage.  But  Emerigon  insists,  that  they  are  mistaken
in  their  construction  of  the  ordinance,  and  that  the  master  ia
guilty  of  a  breach  of  duty,  if  he  refuses  to  procure  another
vessel,  and  take  on  the  cargo,  if  it  be  in  his  power,  and  that
this  duty  results  from  the  nature  of  his  trust.''

The  new  French  code  has  followed  the  words  of  the  ordi-^
nance,  and  declared,  that  if  the  vessel  becomes  disabled,  and
the  master  can  have  her  repaired,  the  freighter  is  bound  Ux
wait,  or  pay  the  whole  freight ;  and  that  if  the  vessel  cannot
be  repaired,  the  master  is  bound  to  hire  another,  and  if  he
cannot  hire  another,  the  freight  is  due  only  in  proportion  to
the  voyage  performed. Boulay  Paty,  in  his  copimentaries


a  Vinnius,  noUe  ad  Com.  Peckiiy  ad  Rem  J^atUicavn,  p.  294,  295^
and  Anthony  Faber^  Com,  ad  Pand.  whom  Vinnius  cites  and  follows.

h  JugemenM  d'Oleron^  art.  4.  LoMt  ofWisbwj^  art.  16.  Ord<  rf»  /flfc
Mar,  tit.  Du  Fret,  art.  11.

c  Valin,  tit.  Du  Fret.  art.  11,  torn  i.  618.  Polhifiry  Charie  Farti^^
n.  68. fmertf on,  torn.  i.  428»  4^9^


212  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

on  the  new  code,  adopts  the  construction  of  Emerigon,  and
holds  his  reasoning  to  be  conclusive.*

The  English  rule  undoubtedly  is,  that  if  the  ship  bedisabled
from  completing  the  voyage,  the  ship  owner  may  still  entitle
himself  to  the  whole  freight,  by  forwarding  the  goods  by  some
other  means  to  the  place  of  destination  ;  and  he  has  no  right
to  any  freight,  if  they  be  not  so  forwarded,  unless  it  be  difih
pensed  with,  or  there  be  some  new  contract  upon  the  subject*
In  this  country  we  have  followed  the  doctrine  of  Emerigon,
and  the  spirit  of  the  English  cases,  and  hold  it  to  be  the  duty
of  the  master,  from  his  character  of  agent  of  the  owner  of
the  cargo,  which  is  cast  upon  him  from  the  necessity  of  the
case,  to  act  in  the  port  of  necessity  for  the  best  interest  of  all
concerned  ;  and  he  has  powers  and  discretion  adequate  to  the
trust,  and  requisite  for  the  safe  delivery  of  the  cargo  at  the
port  of  destination.  If  there  be  another  vessel,  in  the  same  or
in  a  contiguous  port,  which  can  be  had,  the  duty  is  clear  and
imperative  upon  the  master  to  hire  it ;  but  still  the  master  is
to  exercise  a  sound  discretion  adapted  to  the  case.  He
may  tranship  the  cargo,  if  he  has  the  means,  or  let  it  remain.
He  may  bind  it  for  repairs  to  the  ship.  He  may  sell  part,  or
hypothecate  the  whole.  If  he  hires  anotiier  vessel  for  the
completion  of  the  voyage,  he  may  charge  the  cargo  with  the
increased  freight,  arising  from  the  hire  of  the  new  ship ;  and
this  power  is  expressly  given  him  by  the  old  and  the  new  ordi-
nances of  France,  and  it  is  established  by  decisions  here.^
The  master  may  refuse  to  hire  another  vessel,  and  insist  on
repairing  his  own,  and  whether  the  freighter  be  bound  to  wait
for  the  time  to  repair,  or  becomes  entitled  to  his  goods  without
any  charge  of  freight, will depend  upon circumstances.


a  CodedeCommercei  art.  296.  Boulay  Paty^  Court  De  Droit,  Com,
t.  2.  400—405.

b  Lord  Ellenborough,  10  EatVsRrp.  393.

c  Mumford  v.  The  Commercial  Insuraoce  Company,  5  Johns.  Rep,
262. Searle  v.  Scovell,  4  Johns.  Ch.  Rep.  218.


Lee.  XLVIL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 213

What  would  be  a  reasonable  Ume  for  tbe  merchant  to  wait  for
the  repairs,  cannot  be  defined,  and  must  be  governed  by  the
facts  applicable  to  the  place  and  the  time,  and  to  the  nature
and  condition  of  the  cargo.  A  cargo  of  a  perishable  nature,
may  be  so  deteriorated,  as  not  to  endure  the  delay  for  repairs,
or  to  be  too  unfit  and  worthless  to  be  carried  on.*  The  master
is  not  bound  to  go  to  a  distance  to  procure  another  vessel,
nor  to  encounter  serious  impediments  in  the  way  of  putting
the  cargo  on  board  another  vessel.  His  duty  is  only  impe-
rative when  another  vessel  can  be  had  in  the  same  or  in  a
contiguous  port.^

In  the  course  of  the  voyage,  the  master  is  bound  to  take
all  possible  care  of  the  cargo,  and  he  is  responsible  for  every
iQJury  which  might  have  been  prevented  by  human  foresight
and  prudence,  and  competent  naval  skill.  He  is  chargeable
with  the  most  exact  diligence.'  If  the  sliip  be  captured  during
the  voyage,  the  master  is  bound  to  render  his  exertions  to
rescue  the  property  from  condemnation,  by  interposing  his
neutral  claims,  and  exhibiting  all  the  documents  in  his  power
for  the  protection  of  the  cargo.**  We  have  already  seen,  in
what  cases  and  to  what  extent  the  master  may  hypothecate
or  sell  the  cargo  at  a  port  of  necessity  ;  and  if  the  ship,  relieved
at  the  expense  of  the  goods  pledged  or  sold,  should  afterwards
perish,  with  the  residue  of  the  cargo  on  board,  before  arrival
at  the  port  of  destination,  the  better  opinion  is,  that  the  owner
is  not  entitled  to  payment  for  the  goods  sold.  The  merchant
is  not  placed  in  a  worse  situation  by  tbe  sale  of  the  goods


a  Herbert  v.  Ilallet,  3  Johns.  Cat.  93.  Clark  T.  Mass.  F.  &  M.
Ids.  Co.  2  Pickering,  104.

b  Saltus  Y.  Tbe  OceaD  Ins.  Co.  12  Johra,  Rep.  107.  Tredwell  r.
UoioD  Ids.  Co.  6  Cowen't  Rep.  270.

c  RoccuSf  n.  40.  55.  Dale  y.  Hall,  1  JFih,  Rep.  281.  VinniuSf
notce  ad  Peckium,  p.  259.  1  Emerigon,  373.  Proprietors  of  tbe  Trent
Navigation  y.  Wood,  3  Esp.  JV.  P.  Rep.  127.

d  Che?iott  v.  Brooks,  1  Jokm.  Rep.ZQA.


214  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

than  if  they  had  remained  on  board  the  ship.  But  the  foreign
authorities  are  very  much  at  variance  on  the  point,  and  it
remains  yet  to  be  settled  in  the  English  and  American  law.*

(4.)  Of  the  delivery  of  the  goods  at  the  port  of  destina-
tion.

On  arrival  of  the  ship  at  the  place  of  destination,  the  cargo
is  to  be  delivered  to  the  consignee,  or  to  the  order  of  the  ship-
per, on  production  of  the  bill  of  lading  and  payment  of  the
freight.  The  English  practice  is,  to  send  the  goods  to  the
wharf,  with  directions  to  the  wharfinger  not  to  part  with  them,
until  the  freight  and  other  charges  are  paid,  provided  the
master  be  doubtful  of  the  payment ;  for,  by  parting  with  the
possession,  the  master  loses  his  lien  upon  them  for  the  freight*
The  cargo  is  bound  to  the  ship  as  well  as  the  ship  to  the
cargo ;  but  the  master  cannot  detain  the  goods  on  board  the
ship  until  the  freight  be  paid,  for  the  merchant  ought  to  have
an  opportunity  to  examine  the  condition  of  them  previous  to
payment.^  The  foreign  ordinances  of  Wisbuy,  and  of  Lewis
XIY.,  allow  the  master  to  detain  the  goods,  while  in  the
lighter  or  barge,  on  the  passage  to  the  quay,  for  they  are  stili


a  Emerigon  baa  collected  all  the  authorities,  pr»o  and  con^  on  this
very  debatable  question.  See  IlalVs  Emerigon  on  Maritime  Loans,  p.
92.  ^on  nostrum  tantas  componere  lilts.  In  favour  of  the  right  of  (he
merchant  to  be  paid,  see  the  laws  of  Wisbuy,  art.  68.  Valines  Omt*
tit.  Du  Fretf  art  14,  vol.  i.  p.  655.  Cxuhing's  Polhier  on  JUarUime
Contracts f  p.  19.  Charte  Partie,  n.  34,  and  Cleirac,  Jugemens  d'Ole-
rjn,  art.  22,  n.  2.  In  opposition  to  such  a  claim,  Emerigon  reasons
from  the  provisions  and  omissions  in  the  Consolato  del  Mare,  and  the
Ordinances  of  Oleron  and  Antwerp,  that  the  merchant  is  not  entitled
to  pay.  Potbicr  also  admits,  that  experienced  persons,  whom  he  con-
sulted on  the  subject,  were  against  bis  opinion.  Abbott,  in  his  Treatise
on  Shipping,  part  3,  ch.  3,  sec.  10,  is  also  against  the  claim  of  the  ship-
per to  be  paid  for  the  goods  sold.

b  Abbott,  part  3,  ch.  3,  sec.  1 1.  Soldergreen  t.  Flight,  cited  in  $
EasVs  Rep,  622.

c  MboU,  ub,  supra..


L€«.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  215

iQ  liis  possession.'. The  manner  of  delivery^  and  ihe  period
at  which  the  responsibility  of  the  owners  and  master  ceases,
will  much  depend  upon  usage.^ The  general  rule  is,  that
delivery  at  the  wharf,  (when  there  are  no  special  directions  to
the  contrary,)  discharges  the  master.' But  the  very  reasoojt-
ble  qualification  of  the  rule  is,  that  there  must  be  a  deUvery
at  the  wharf  to  some  person  authorized  to  receive  the  goods,
or  due  previous  notice  must  have  been  given  to  the  consignee
of  the  time  and  place  of  delivery ;  and  the  master  cannot  dis-
cbarge himself,  by  leaving  them  naked  and  exposed  at  the
wharf. His  responsibility  will  continue  until  there  is  actual
delivery,  or  some  act  which  is  equivalent,  or  a  substitute  for
it,  unless  the  owner  of  the  goods,  or  his  agent,  had  previously
assumed  the  charge  of  the  goods  \'^  or  at  least  until  the  con-
signee has  had  notice  of  the  place  and  time  of  deUvery,  and
the  goods  have  been  duly  separated  and  designated  for  his
use.*

It  is  often  difficult  for  the  master  of  a  vessel  to  know  to
whom  he  can  safely  deliver  the  goods,  in  case  of  conflicting
claims  between  consignor  and  consignee,  or  consignor  and
the  assignee  of  the  consignee.  Prudence  would  dictate  that
he  deliver  the  goods  to  the  party  upon  whose  indemnity  he
can  most  safely  rely.  But  he  ought  not  to  be  put  to  the  peril
and  necessity  of  indemnity ;  and  it  is  desirable  that  he  should
know  to  whom,  of  right,  he  can  deliver  the  goods.  If  the
consignee  has  failed,  he  ought  to  deliver  to  the  claimant,  on


a  Laws  of  Wisbuf/y  art.  ^7.  -Ord.  de  la-Jdarine^  li?.  3,  tit.  Du
Frel^  art.  23.

h  Warden  y.  Mourilljan,  2  Esp,  JV.  P.  Rep.  693.

c  Hjde  y.  Trent  and  Mersey  Nayig^tion  Company,  6  Term  R^p,
389.  Cbickering  y .  Fowler,  4  Pick.  371 .  Cope  y.  Cordoya,  1  Rawle^
90. Fox  y.  Blossom,  JVw-  York  Com.  Pleasy  October,  1828.

d  Strong  v.  Natally  4  Bot.  ^  Pull.  16.  Ostrandcr  v.  Brown,  15
Johnson y  39.

e  Cbickeriog^  y.  Fowler,  Cope  y.  Cordoya,  and  Fox  y.  Blossom,  u6
9up.  1  Valin*t  Com.  636. See  yol.  ii.  Leo.  40.  S.  P.


216  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

behalf  of  the  consignee ;  and  if  the  consignee  has  assigned
the  bill  of  lading,  and  the  rights  of  the  consignor  be  still  in-
terposed and  contested,  it  is  safest  for  the  master  to  deposit
the  goods  with  some  bailee,  until  the  rights  of  the  claimants
are  settled,  as  they  can  always  be,  upon  a  bill  of  interpleader
in  chancery,  to  be  filed  by  the  master.'  Uaring  made  a  con-
signment, the  consignor  or  seller  has  not  an  unlimited  power
to  vary  it  at  pleasure.  He  may  do  it  only  for  the  purpose  of
protecting  himself  against  the  insolvency  of  the  buyer  or  con-
signee.^

(5.)  Of  the  responsibility  of  the  ship  owner.

The  causes  which  will  excuse  the  owners  and  master  for
the  non-delivery  of  the  cargo,  must  be  events  falling  within
the  meaning  of  one  of  the  expressions,  act  of  God,  and  pub-
lic enemies ;  or  they  must  arise  from  some  event  expressly
provided  for  in  the  charter  party.  It  is  well  settled  in  the
English  and  in  our  American  law,  that  carriers  by  water,
and  whether  the  carriage  relates  to  foreign  or  inland  naviga-
tion,  are  liable  as  common  carriers,  in  all  the  strictness  and
extent  of  the  common  law  rule,  unless  (he  loss  happens  by
means  of  one  of  the  excepted  perils.^  Perils  of  the  sea  denote
natural  accidents  peculiar  to  that  element,  which  do  not  hap-
pen by  the  intervention  of  man,  nor  are  to  be  prevented  by
hjuman  prudence.  A  casus  fortuities  was  defined  in  the
civil  law  to  be,  quod  damno  faiali  contingitj  cuivis  dUi-
gentissimo  possit  contingere.  It  is  a  loss  happening  in
spite  of  all  human  efibrt  and  sagacity.  The  only  exception
to  this  definition  is,  the  case  of  a  vessel  captured  and  plunder-
ed by  pirates,  and  that  has  been  adjudged  to  be  a  peril  of  the


a  AbboUy  part  3,  eh.  9,  sec.  25.

h  The  CoDstantia,  6  Rob,  Adm.  Rep.  321. I  Emerigon  det  Att.
317.
e  See  vol.  ii.  Lee.  40.


Lee.  XL VII.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 217


A  loss  by  lightniDg  is  within  the  exception  of  the  act
of  God ;  but  a  loss  by  fire,  proceeding  from  any  other  cause,
18  chargeable  upon  the  ship  owner.^  The  moment  the  goods
are  transferred  from  the  ship  or  the  lighter  to  the  warehouse,
this  extraordiViary  responsiUlity  ends,  and  the  warehouseman
k  not  so  responsiUe.*

It  is  often  a  difficult  point  to  determine,  whether  the  disas-
ter happened  by  a  peril  of  the  sea,  or  unavoidable  accident,
or  by  the  fault,  negligence,  or  want  of  skill  of  the  master.  If
a  rock  or  a  sand  bar  be  genercdly  known,  and  the  ship  be
not  forced  upon  it  by  adverse  winds  or  tempests,  the  loss  is  to
be  imputed  to  the  fault  of  the  master.  But  if  the  ship  be
forced  upon  such  a  rock  or  shallow  by  winds  or  tempests,  or
if  the  bar  was  occasioned  by  a  recent  and  sudden  collection
of  sand,  in  a  place  where  ships  could  before  sail  with  safety,
the  loss  is  to  be  attributed  to  a  peril  of  the  sea,  which  is  the
same  as  the  rt^  tnajor^  or  casus  fortuitus  of  the  civil  law.''
What  is  an  excusable  peril,  depends  a  good  deal  upon  usage,
and  the  sense  and  practice  of  merchants  ^  and  it  is  a  question
of  bet,  to  be  settled  by  the  circumstances  peculiar  to  the  case.
The  English  statute  law  has  exempted  ship  owners  in  some
of  these  hard  cases ;  but,  with  the  exception  of  a  statute  in
Massachusetts,  passed  in  1818,  limiting  the  responsibility  of
owners  for  the  acts  of  the  master  and  mariner;^,  to  the  value
of  the  ship  and  freight,  I  do  not  know  of  any  such  statute
exemptions  in  this  country.  The  owner  is  bound  for  the
whole  amount  of  the  injury  done  by  the  master  or  crew,  un-
less where  ordinances  or  statutes  have  established  a  differ-
ent rule.' By  the  maritime  law  of  many  parts  of  Europe,  the


•  Piokeriog  v.  Barkley,  StyU$,  132.  Barioo  r.  Wolliford,  Comb.  56.

k  Forward  v.  PiUard,  1  Term  Rep.  27.  Hydev.  Trent  and  Mertey
Navigation  Company,  5  Term  Rep.  389.

e  Oanide  r.  Trent  and  Mersey  Nayigation  Co.  4  Term  Rep.  531.

d  Smith  v.  Shepherd,  cited  in  JihboU^  part  3,  ch.  4,  sec.  1.

e  See  vol.  ii.  Leo.  40,  and  eupra^  where  the  exemptions  from  respon-
sibility under  the  English  statutes  are  stated.

Vol.  hi.  28


218  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Park  V

responsibility  of  owners  of  vessels  for  the  acts  of  masters,  w
limited  to  the  value  of  the  vessel  and  freight,  and  by  aban-
doning them  to  the  creditor  they  may  discharge  themselves.*

(6.)  Of  the  duties  of  the  shipper,  "^

We  have  seen  what  are  the  general  duties  of  the  master.
Those  on  the  part  of  the  charterer  are,  to  use  the  ship  in  a
lawful  manner,  and  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  let  Usu-
ally, the  command  of  the  ship  is  reserved  to  the  owner,  and
to  the  master  by  him  appointed,  and  the  merchant  has  not
the  power  to  detain  the  ship  beyond  the  stipulated  time,  or
employ  her  in  any  other  than  the  stipulated  service,  and  if  he
does  he  must  answer  in  damages.^  If  the  freighter  puts  on
board  prohibited,  or  contraband  goods,  by  means  whereof  the
ship  is  subjected  to  detention  and  forfeiture,  be  must  answer
to  the  ship  owner  for  the  consequences  of  the  act/  And  if
the  merchant  declines  to  lade  the  ship  according  to  contract,
or  to  furnish  a  return  cargo,  as  he  had  engaged  to  do,  he  must
render  in  damages  due  compensation  for  the  loss ;  and  the
English  law  leaves  such  questions  at  large  to  a  jury,  without


a  CoMulai  de  la  JHer,  torn.  2,  p.  41.  Emerig,  corUrats  a  la  Oro$$€j
cb.  4,  sec.  11,  wbo  refers  to  the  priocipal  foreign  authorities  od  the
point.  Boulay  Paty,  Court  de  Droit  Com*  torn.  1,  263 — 298.  The
latter  discusses  the  subject  with  bis  usual  comprebensive  eruditioD.
Ware,  J.,  in  Crane  v.  The  Rebecca,  {J.  <S.  District  Court  for  Maine  ^
1 83 1 .  Am*  Jurist  J  No.  11.  In  tbis  last  case  the  learned  judg^e  considers
the  owner's  responsibility  to  be  under  the  same  limitation  by  the  mari-
time law  of  tbis  country,  and  that  tbis  affords  a  conclushre  reason  why
the  ship  herself  should  be  liable  to  the  creditor  in  specie.  Another
learned  judg^e,  of  equal  authority,  is  of  a  different  opinion,  and  he  con-
siders the  limitation  of  the  owner's  responsibility  to  the  value  of  the  ves-
sel and  freight  to  rest  entirely  upon  special  authority.  Porter,  J.,  in
Malpica  v.  M^Kown,  1  Miller* t  Louis.  Rep,  259.  Martin,  J.,  in
Arayo  v.  Curvell,  ibid.  539.

b  Lewin  ▼.  East  India  Company,  Peake's'Rep.  241.

€  Smith  y.  Elder,  3  Johns,  Rep,  105.


Lee.  ILVIL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 219

defining  beforehand  the  rate  of  compensation,  in  imitation  of
some  of  the  ordinances  in  the  maritime  codes.

(7.)  Of  the  payment  of  freight.

Freight,  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term,  means
the  price  for  the  actual  transportation  of  goods  by  sea  from
one  place  to  another ;  but,  in  its  more  extensive  sense,  it  is
applied  to  all  rewards  or  compensation  paid  for  the  use  of
ships.*  The  personal  obligation  to  pay  freight,  rests  either
on  the  charter  party,  or  on  the  bill  of  lading,  by  which  the
payment  of  freight  is  made  a  condition  of  delivery ;  and  the
general  rule  is,  that  the  delivery  of  the  goods  at  the  place  of
destination,  according  to  the  charter  party,  is  necessary,  to
entitle  the  owner  of  the  vessel  to  freight.  The  conveyance
and  deUvery  of  the  cargo  is  a  condition  precedent,  and  must
be  fulfilled.  A  partial  performance  is  not  suflicient,  nor  can
a  partial  payment,  or  ratable  freight,  be  claimed,  except  in
special  cases,  and  those  cases  are  exceptions  to  the  general
rule,  and  called  for  by  principles  of  equity.

The  amount  of  freight  is  usually  fixed  by  agreement  be-
tween the  parties,  and  if  tliere  be  no  agreement,  the  amount
18  ascertained  by  the  usage  of  the  trade,  and  the  reason  of  the
case.  If  the  hiring  be  of  the  whole  ship,  or  for  an  entire  part
of  her  for  the  voyage,  the  merchant  must  pay  the  freight,
though  he  does  not  fully  lade  the  ship.  But  if  he  agrees  to
pay  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  goods  put  on  board,
and  does  not  agree  to  provide  a  frill  cargo,  the  owner  can  de-
mand payment  only  for  the  cargo  actually  shipped.  If  the
merchant  agrees  to  furnish  a  return  cargo,  and  he  furnishes
none,  and  lets  the  ship  return  in  ballast,  be  must  make  com-
pensation to  the  amount  of  the  freight ;  and  this  is  sometimes
termed  dead  freight,  in  contradistinction  to  freight  due  for  the
actual  carriage  of  goods.^


•  1  Peters'  Adm.  Rep.  206.

h  Rocctiff  note  73,  73,  74,  75. Edirio  v.  East  India  Compaoy,  S


aaO  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

It  is  supposed  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  case  of  BM  v.  Pul-
ler,'  that  the  master  would  be  entitled  to  freight  for  bfii^ng
back  the  outward  cargo,  if  it  could  not  be  disposed  of,  though
the  charter  party  was  silent  as  to  a  return  cargo.  It  would
stand  upon  the  equity  of  the  claim  to  dead  freight.^  The
French  law,  in  such  a  case,  also  allows  freight  for  bringing
back  the  cargo,  because  it  could  not  be  sold,  or  was  not  per-
mitted to  be  landed.^

If  there  be  no  express  agreement  in  the  case,  the  master
is  not  bound  to  part  with  the  goods  until  the  freight  be  paid,
but  if  he  refuses  to  deliver  the  goods  for  other  cause  than  the
non-payment  of  freight,  he  cannot  avail  himself  of  the  want
of  a  tender.  When  the  regulations  of  the  revenue  require  the
goods  to  be  landed  and  deposited  in  a  public  warehouse,  the
master  may  enter  them  in  his  own  name,  and  preserve  the
hen.  The  shipper  of.goods  on  freight  has  a  lien  on  the  ves-
sel for  the  loss  of  the  goods,  by  reason  of  the  non-performance
of  the  contract  entered  into  by  the  master  in  the  bill  of  lading.
7%e  ship  is  hound  to  the  merchandise  and  the  merchan-
dise to  the  shipj  according  to  the  language  of  Cleirac.  The
English  courts  of  common  law  will  not  allow  such  a  hen  to
be  enforced  by  the  admiralty  in  rem^  but  the  justice  and  ne-
cessity of  such  a  jurisdiction  is  admitted  and  not  invoked  in
vain  in  this  country,  and  the  lien  may  be  enforced  by  process
in  rem  against  the  vessel  in  the  district  courts.'  The  ship
owner's  lien  for  freight  is  gone  when  the  charterer  is  consti-
tuted owner,  and  takes  exclusive  possession  for  the  voyage,


Vem.  Rep,  210.  AtkinsoD  v.  Richie,  10  Easft  Rep.  530.  Peteri,  J.,
ID  Giles  V.  The  Brig  Cynthia,  1  Peters*  Adm.  Rep.  207.

a  2  Totml.  Rjep.  286.

h  Lawei  on  Charier  Parties ^  152.

c  Boulay  Paty,  torn.  ii.  391.

d  Utet  Cotdumee  de  la  Jtfer.  p.  72.  Boulaiy  Paty,  vol.  2,  297.
Crane  y.  The  Bebecca,  Diatrict  Court  of  Maias,  1831.  Am.  Juritt^
No.  II.


Lee.  XLVIL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 221

or  when  the  payment  of  the  freight  is,  by  agreement,  post-
poned beyond  the  time,  or  at  variance  with  the  time  and
place,  far  the  delivery  of  the  goods.  But  without  a  plain  in-
tent  to  the  contrary,  the  ship  owner  will  not  be  presumed  to
have  relinquished  his  heu  on  the  cargo  for  the  freight,  not-
withstanding he  has  chartered  the  vessel  to  another.'  The
general  right  of  the  master  and  owner  to  retain  the  goods  for
the  freight  is  equally  perfect,  whether  the  merchant  takes  the
wbde  vessel  by  a  charter  party,  or  sends  his  goods  in  a  gene-
ral ship.  The  lien  appUes  whether  the  hire  of  the  vessel  be
stipulated  in  a  charter  party,  or  the  freight  be  stipulated  in
the  bill  of  lading.  The  owner  is  equally  the  carrier  in  both
cases.  But  if,  instead  of  letting  the  use  of  the  ship  to  freight,
the  vessel  itself  be  let  to  hire,  and  the  charterer  has  the  pos-
sessbn  and  right  of  control,  he  is  then  considered  as  owner
for  the  voyage,  and  the  general  owner,  who  has  parted  with
the  possession,  has  no  hen  on  the  cargo  for  the  hire  of  the
ship.*  When  the  goods  are  to  be  deUvered  to  the  consignee
on  payment  of  freight,  the  consignee  makes  himself  respon-
sible by  receiving  the  goods  under  the  usual  condition  ex-
pressed in  the  bill  of  lading.'  And  if  the  goods,  by  the  bill  of
lading,  were  to  be  delivered  to  B.,  or  his  assigns,  he  or  they
paying  freight,  and  the  assignee  receives  the  goods,  be  is  re-
sponsible to  the  master  for  the  freight,  under  the  implied
undertaking  to  pay  it.'>  So,  if  the  master  delivers  the  goods
without  payment  of  the  freight,  he  may  sue  the  consignee  to

a  Chandler  ▼.  Belden,  18  JdhM,  Rep.  157.  Clarkson  y.  Edes,  4
CoiMnV  Rep.  470.  Rogglei  v.  Bocknor,  1  Paine's  Rep.  358.  Cbrittie
▼.  Lewii,  t  Brod.  ^  Bing,  410.  Flckman  t.  Wood,  6  Pick,  Rep.  348.
Driokwater  r.  Brig  B^rtan^  American  JurUtj  No.  5,  p.  33.  FeroaDdee
T.  SUva,  1  MiUer'e  Louie.  Rep.  274.

b  Drinkwater  y.  The  Brig  Spartan,  American  Jurisl,  No.  5,  p.  26.
ChrJttie  y.  Lewis,  2  Bro.  <^  Bing.  410.  Story,  J.,  io  Kleine  r.  CaCara,
2  Gall.  Rep.  68.

c  RoberU  r.  Holt,  2  Show.  Rep.  432.

d  Cock  y.  Taylor,  2  Campb.  JV.  P.  Rep.  587,  afterwaids  affirmed  io
K-  B.  IS  Eael,  399. Dou^ll  y.  Kemble,  3  Bingham,  383.  S.  P.


222  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

whom  the  goods  were  to  be  delfvered,  on  payment  of  freight,
upon  an  implied  promise  to  pay  the  freight,  in  consideration
of  bis  letting  the  goods  out  of  his  hands  before  payment.*  It
was  once  held,  that  if  the  master  parted  with  the  goods  to  the
consignee  without  securing  his  freight,  he  was  deprived  of  all
recourse  to  the  consignor ;  but  it  is  now  decided  otherwise.
If  the  master  cannot  recover  the  freight  from  the  consignee
to  whom  he  has  delivered  the  goods  without  receiving  the
freight,  he  still  has  his  remedy  over  on  the  charter  party
against  the  shipper,  and  the  condition  precedent  to  the  deli>
very  inserted  in  the  bill  of  lading  was  intended  only  for  the
master's  benefit.^.  The  buyer  of  the  goods  from  the  consignee
is  not  answerable  for  the  freight,  for  that  would  prove  to  be  a
most  inconvenient  check  to  the  transactions  of  business ;  and
the  buyer  takes  independent  of  the  charge  of  freight,  unless
that  charge  forms  part  of  the  terms  of  sale^  Nor  would  he
be  liable  even  if  he  should  enter  the  goods  at  the  custom-house
in  his  own  name,  while  the  freight  was  unpaid.'

If  part  of  the  cargo  be  sold  on  the  voyage  from  necessity,
the  owner,  as  we  have  seen,  pays  the  value  at  the  port  of  de-
livery, deducting  his  freight,  equally  as  if  the  goods  had  arrived.
But  if  the  ship  be  prohibited  an  entry  by  the  government  of
the  country,  and  such  prohibition  takes  place  after  the  com-
mencement of  the  voyage,  and  the  cargo  be  brought  back,
the  freight  for  the  outward  voyage  has  been  held  to  have  been
earned ;  and  the  case  was  distinguished  (though,  I  think,  the
distinction  is  not  very  obvious)  from  that  of  a  blockade  of  the
jviji  '  >»' destination,  and  decided  on  the  authority  of  the  French
tin|^  .xiice  of  the  marine.' Nothing  can  be  more  just,  observes


a  Mansfield,  Cb.  J.,  in  Brouocker  v.  Scott,  4  T\turU.  Rep.  1.

h  Tapley  y.  Martens,  8  Temif  451.  Christy  v.  Rowe,  1  TamUm,
300.  Shepherd  v.  De  Bernales,  1 3  Eattj  565.  AbboU  on  Shippings  part
3)  ch.  4,  sec.  4.

t  Artaza  y.  Smallpiece,  1  Esp.  JV.  P.  R^,  23.

d  Morgfan  t.  Insurance  Company  of  North  America,  4  Datlat*  R$p.
455.


Lcc.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  223

Valin,  than  that  the  outward  freight  should  be  allowed  in
such  a  case,  since  the  interruption  proceeds  from  an  extraordi-
nary cause,  independent  of  the  ordinary  maritime  perils."*  The
case  of  a  blockade  of,  or  interdiction  of  commerce  with,  the
port  of  discharge,  after  the  commencement  of  the  voyage,  is
held  to  be  different ;  -for,  in  that  case,  the  voyage  is  deemed
to  be  broken  up,  and  the  charter  party  dissolved  ;  and  if  the
cargo,  by  reason  of  that  obstacle,  be  brought  back,  no  freight
is  due.*  The  same  principle  applies  if  the  voyage  be  broken
up  and  lost,  by  capture  upon  the  passage,  so  as  to  cause  a
complete  defeasance  of  the  undertaking,  notwithstanding
there  was  a  subsequent  recapture,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Hi-
ram^  On  the  other  hand,  an  embargo  detaining  the  vessel
at  the  port  of  departure,  or  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  does
not,  of  itself,  work  a  dissolution  of  the  contract.  It  is  only  a
temporary  restraint,  which  suspends,  for  a  time,  its  perform-
ance, and  leaves  the  rights  of  the  parties,  in  relation  to  each
other,  untouched/  If  the  ship  be  laden,  and  be  captured  be*
fore  she  breaks  ground,  and  afterwards  recaptured,  but  the
voyage  broken  up,  the  ship  owners  are  not  entitled  to  any
freight,  though,  by  the  usage  of  the  trade,  the  ship  was
laden  at  their  expense.  It  is  requisite  that  the  ship  break
ground,  to  give  an  inception  to  freight.'  It  is  the  same  thing
with  a  blockade,  or  hostile  investment  of  the  port  of  depar-
ture. Such  an  obstacle  does  not  discharge  the  contract  of
affreightment,  because  it  is  merely  a  temporary  suspension  of


a  Ord,  tit.  Du  Fret,  art.  15.  Fa/tn,  ibid.  Code  de  Commerce,  art.
299.

b  Scott  V.  Libby,  2  Jokm.  Rep,  336.  JLiddard  v.  Lopes,  10  Ea$t*i
Rep.  526.

e  3  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  180.

d  Hadley  v.  Clarke,  8  Term  Rep.  259.  M'Bride  y.  Marine  losu-
ranee  Company,  5  Johns.  Rep.  308.  Baylies  v.  Fettyplace,  7  Mai9.
Rep.  325.

«  Curling  v.  Long,  1  Bo9.  ^  Pull.  634.


224  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

its  performance ;  and  the  ship  owner  may  detain  the  goods
until  he  can  prosecute  the  voyage  with  safety,  or  until  the
freighter  lenders  him  the  full  freight This  was  the  decisioD
in  the  case  of  Palmer  v.  LorxUard^*  in  which  the  doctrine
was  extensively  examinM ;  and  it  was  shown,  by  a  reference
to  the  foreign  ordinances,  and  the  soundest  dassical  writetv
on  maritime  law,^  that  the  master,  in  the  ease  of  such  an  in-
vincible obstacle  of  a  temporary  nature  to  the  prosecution  of
the  voyage,  is  entitled  to  wait  for  the  removal  of  it,  so  that
he  may  earn  his  freight,  unless  the  cargo  consists  of  perisha-
ble articles  which  cannot  endure  the  delay. He  stands  upon
a  principle  of  equity  which  pervades  the  maritime  law  of
Europe,  if  he  refuses  to  surrender  the  cargo  to  the  shipper
without  some  equitable  allowance  in  tlie  shape  of  freight,  for
his  intermediate  service.

When  the  goods  become  greatly  deteriorated  on  the  voyage,
it  has  been  a  very  Utigated  question,  whether  the  consignee
was  bound  to  take  the  goods,  and  pay  the  freight,  or  whether
he  might  not  abandon  the  goods  to  the  master  in  dbcharge
of  the  freight.  Yalin  and  Pothier  entertained  opposite  {pinions
upon  this  question.''  The  former  insists,  that  the  regulation
of  the  ordinance  holding  the  merchant  liable  for  freight  on
deteriorated  goods,  without  the  right  to  abandon  them  in  dis-
charge of  the  freight,  is  too  rigorous  to  be  compatible  with
equity.  He  says  the  cargo  is  the  only  proper  fund  and  pledge
for  the  freight,  and  that  Casaregi^  was  of  the  same  opinion.
Pothier,  on  the  other  hand,  was  against  the  right  of  the
owner  to  abandon  the  deteriorated  goods  in  discharge  of  the


a  16  J  ohm.  Rep.  348.

b  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  liv.  3,  tit.  3.  FVel,  art.  15,  and  tit.  Charier  Par-
tie$,  art.  8.  Valin,  h.  t.  Pothier^  CharU  PaHie,  No.  69.  100, 101.
LatDs  of  Oleron,  art.  4.  Consulate  par  BrntcKer^  oh.  80.  82.  84.  Roc-
cut  de  JVav.  n.  54. Jacobsen*i  Sea  Latotj  by  Friekt  p.  295.

c  Valin's  Com.  t  1,  670. Pothier,  Charte  ParUe,  No.  59.

d  Disc.  22,  D.  46,  and  Due.  23»  n.  86,  and  87.


Lee.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  226

freight ;  and  this  is  the  better  opinion,  and  the  one  adopted  in
the  case  of  Griswold  v.  The  New-  York  Insurance  Com-
pany.^  It  is  in  accordance  with  tlie  ordinances  of  the  ma-
rine, and  of  Rotterdam,  and  with  the  new  commercial  code
of  France  ;  and  the  latter  puts  an  end  to  all  further  doubt
and  discussion  on  the  subject  in  France.*  The  ship  owner
performs  his  engagement  when  he  carries  and  delivers  the
goods.  The  right  to  his  freight  then  becomes  absolute,  and
the  carrier  is  no  more  an  insurer  of  the  soundness  of  the  car-
go, as  against  the  perils  of  the  sea,  or  its  own  intrinsic  decay,
than  he  is  of  the  price  in  the  market  to  which  it  is  carried..
If  he  has  conducted  himself  with  fidelity  and  vigilance  in  the
course  of  the  voyage,  he  has  no  concern  with  the  diminution
of  the  value  of  the  cargo.  It  may  impair  the  remedy  which
his  lien  afforded,  but  it  does  not  affect  his  personal  demand
against  the  shipper.

If  casks  contain  wine,  rum,  or  other  Uquids,  or  sugar,  and
the  contents  be  washed  out,  and  wasted^  and  lost,  by  the
|)erils  of  the  sea,  so  that  the  casks  arrive  empty,  no  freight  is
due  for  them  ]  but  the  ship  owner  would  still  be  entitled  to
his  freight,  if  the  casks  were  well  stowed,  and  their  contents
were  essentially  gone  by  leakage,  or  inherent  waste,  or  im-
perfection of  the  casks.'

Should  the  cargo  consist  of  live  stock,  as  is  frequently  the
case  in  voyages  from  this  country  to  the  West  Indies,  and
some  of  the  horses  or  cattle,  for  instance,  should  die  in  the
course  of  the  voyage,  without  any  fault  or  negligence  of  the
master  or  crew,  and  there  be  no  express  agreement  respecting
the  payment  of  freight,  the  general  rule  is,  that  the  freight  is
to  be  paid  for  all  that  were  put  on  board. But  if  the  agree-


a  3  Johns.  Rep.  321.  Mr.  Bell  says  it  is  likewise  (be  Uw  in  Scot-
land. 1  Bell's  Com.  570.

»  Ord.  tit.  Du  Fret,  art.  25.  Ord.  of  RoHerdam,  art.  155.  Code
de  Com.  art.  305.  310. Boulay  Paly,  torn.  2, 488.

e  JioHoy,  b.  2,  c.  4,  sec.  14. Frith  t.  Barker,  2  Johns,  Rep.  327.

Vol.  Ill  29


226  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

luent  was  to  pay  for  the  transportation  of  them,  then  no
freight  is  due  for  those  that  die  on  the  voyage,  as  the  contract
is  not,  in  that  case,  performed.''  The  foreign  marine  law
allows  freight  paid  in  advance  to  be  recovered  back,  if  the
goods  be  not  carried,  nor  the  voyage  performed,  by  reason  of
any  event  not  imputable  to  the  shipper.^  The  reason  is,  that
the  consideration  for  the  payment,  which  was  the  carriage  of
the  goods,  has  failed.  But  the  marine  ordinances  admit,  that
the  parties  may  stipulate  that  the  freight  so  previously  ad-
vanced shall,  at  all  events,  be  retained.  In  Watson  v.  Duy-
kinck,*^  the  rule  of  the  marine  law  was  recognised,  though  it
was  not  applied  to  that  case,  because  the  contract  there  ap-
peared to  be,  that  the  freight  was  paid  for  receiving  the  pas-
senger and  his  goods  on  board  ;  and,  in  such  a  case,  the  pay-
ment is  to  be  retained,  though  the  vessel  and  cargo  be  lost  on
the  voyage.  The  general  principle  of  the  marine  law  was
admitted,  in  the  fullest  latitude,  in  Griggs  v.  Austin  f  and
whether  the  freight  previously  advanced  is  to  be  retained  or
returned,  becomes  a  question  of  intention  in  the  construction
of  the  contract.  The  French  ordinances  require  a  special
agreement  to  enable  the  ship  owner  to  retain  the  freight  paid
in  advance ;  and  Yalin  says,'  that  many  authors  on  mari-
time jurisprudence,  as  Kuricke,  Loccenius,  and  Straccha,
will  not  allow  even  such  a  special  agreement  to  be  valid/


o  X>(|gr*  1^9  ^*  1^* Mollay^  b.  2,  c.  4,  sec.  8.

h  Ord.  de  la  Jilar.  til.  Du  Fret,  art.  18.  JtoceuSf  de  Miv,  et  ICauiOy
not.  80.  Cieirat^  let  Us  el  Coutumes  de  la  Jilar»  p.  43.  Code  de  Com*
Bft.  302.

t  3  Johns.  Rep.  335.

d  3  Pick.  Rep,  20.

e  Com.  torn.  i.  661.

/  Straccha,  in  his  Tradaius  de  J^ercalura,  tit.  De  JSTav,  part  3,  n.
24,  as  referred  to  by  Valio,  does  not  support  the  reference.  He  only
vays,  it  was  a  question,  whether  the  advanced  freig^bt  was  to  be  returned
when  the  goods  were  not  carried,  and  that  a  ratable  freight,  in  such
oaie,  was  equitable.


Lee.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  227

The  English  law  is  not  so  scrupulous,  and  does  not  require
any  such  express  stipulation,  and  allows  the  intention  of  the
parties  to  retain  the  previously  advanced  freight  to  be  more
easily  inferred.  In  De  SUvale  v.  Kendall^''  the  Court  of  K.
B.  adopted  a  directly  opposite  principle,  and  observed,  that  if
the  charter  party  was  silent,  the  law  would  require  a  per-
formance  of  the  voyage  before  freight  was  due ;  bui  the  par-
ties  might  stipulate,  that  part  of  the  freight  be  paid  in  antici-
pation, and  be  made  free  from  subsequent  contingency  of  loss,
by  reason  of  loss  of  the  subsequent  voyage.  If  freight  be
paid  in  advance,  and  there  be  no  express  stipulation  that  it
shall  be  returned  in  the  event  of  freight  not  being  earned,  the
inference  is,  that  the  parties  did  not  intend  that  the  payment
of  the  part  in  advance  should  be  subject  to  the  risk  of  the  re-^
mainder  of  the  voyage ;  and  without  some  provision  of  that
kind,  a  new  impUed  contract  to  that  effect  could  not  be
raised.

The  question,  as  to  the  right  to  a  ratable  freight,  arises
in  two  cases  ;  (t.)  when  the  ship  has  performed  the  whols
voyage,  and  has  brought  only  a  part  of  her  cargo  to  the
place  of  destination  ;  (2.)  when  she  has  not  performed  her
whole  voyage,  and  the  goods  have  been  delivered  to  the  mer-
chant, at  a  place  short  of  the  port  of  delivery.  In  the  case  of
a  general  ship,  or  one  chartered  for  freight,  to  be  paid  accord-
ing to  the  quantity  of  goods,  freight  is  due  for  what  the  ship
delivers.*  The  contract,  in  such  a  case,  is  divisible  in  its  own
nature.  But  if  the  ship  be  chartered  at  a  specific  sum  for
the  voyage,  and  she  loses  part  of  her  cargo  by  a  peril  of  the
sea,  and  conveys  the  residue,  it  has  been  a  question,  whether
the  freight  could  be  apportioned.  The  weight  of  authority,
in  the  English  books,  is  against  the  apportionment  of  freight
in  such  a  case,^  and  the  question  has  been  repeatedly  discuss-


ft  4  Jiaule  <f*  Selw.  37.

6  Ritchie  t.  Atkinson,  10  EasVg  Rep.  296.

c  Bright  V,  Cowper,  1  Broton/oto,  21,  and  tbi»  case  is  cited  with  ap-


228  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

\

I

ed  and  determined  of  late  years.  It  has  been  held,  that  the
contract  of  affreightment  was  an  entire  contract ;  and  unless
fully  performed  by  delivery  of  the  whole  cargo,  no  freight  was
due  under  the  charter  party,  in  the  case  where  the  ship  was
chartered  for  a  specific  sum  for  the  voyage.  The  delivery  of
the  whole  cargo  is,  in  such  a  case,  a  condition  precedent  to
the  recovery  of  freight.  The  stipulated  voyage  must  be  ac-
tually performed.  A  partial  performance  is  not  sufficient,
nor  can  a  partial  payment  be  claimed,  except  in  special
cases.'*

The  apportionment  of  freight  usually  happens,  when  the
ship  is  forced  into  a  port  short  of  her  destination,  and  cannot
finish  the  voyage.  In  that  case,  if  the  owner  of  the  goods
will  not  allow  the  master  a  reasonable  time  to  repair,  or  to
proceed  in  another  ship,  the  master  will  be  entitled  to  the
whole  freight,  because  the  freighter  is  the  cause  of  the  con-
tract not  being  performed.  But  if  he  consents,  and  the  mas-
ter refuses  to  go  on,  he  is  not  entitled  to  freight,  because  he
has  not  performed  his  contract.  To  entitle  himself  to  freight,
the  master  must  proceed,  or  offer  to  proceed,  in  another  ves-
sel, or  repair  his  own,  and  take  on  the  cargo  ;  and  if  he  pro-
ceeds, he  reassumes  his  usual  risk  of  losing  the  freight,  by


probatioD  by  Grose,  J.,  in  7  Term  Rep,  385.  Malynes,  in  bis  Lex  Mer.
p.  100,  is  of  opinion,  tbat  tbere  is  no  freight  due,  though  be  speaks  in
a  loose  and  questionable  manner.  But  Abbott,  in  bis  Treatise  on
Sfuppingy  part  3,  cb.  7,  sec.  9,  thinks  it  bard  that  tbe  owners  should
lose  the  whole  benefit  of  the  voyage,  where  the  object  of  it  has  been  in
part  performed,  and  no  blame  is  imputable  to  them.  Holt,  in  his
System  of  Shippings  Int.  p.  89,  says,  that  a  partial  freight  is  due,  when
the  ship  has  brought  part  of  the  goods  in  safety  to  the  place  of  destina-
tion, for  a  proportionate  benefit  has  been  received.

a  Post  and  Russell  v.  Robertson,  1  Johns.  Rep.  24.  See,  also,  Clarke
T.  Gurnell,  1  Bulst.  167.  Cook  v.  Jennings,  7  Term  Rep.  381.  Os-
good T.  Groning,  2  Campb.  Jf.  P.  Rep.  466,  in  which  tbe  necessity  of
a  precise  performance  of  the  covenant  to  transport  and  deliver  tbe  car-
go is  required,  before  an  action  for  the  freight  can  be  maiotained.


tec.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  229

the  loss  of  the  cargo  in  the  subsequent  part  of  the  voyage,  or
of  earning  freight  by  its  safe  arrival  and  delivery  at  the  port
of  destination. If,  however,  the  merchant  accepts  the  goods
at  the  intermediate  port,  the  general  rule  of  the  marine  law
is,  that  freight  is  to  be  paid  according  to  the  proportion  of  the
voyage  performed,  and  the  law  will  imply  such  a  contract.
This  doctrine  pervades  the  marine  ordinances  aud  writers
on  marine  law  ;*  and  it  is  now  equally  well  settled  in  the
English  and  American  law,  that  freight,  pro  rata  itinerisj
is  due,  when  the  ship,  by  inevitable  necessity,  is  forced  into
a  port  shcMTt  of  her  destination,  and  is  unable  to  prosecute  the
voyage,  and  the  goods  are  there  voluntarily  accepted  by  the
owner. Such  acceptance  constitutes  the  basis  of  the  rule  for
a  pro  rata  freight ;  and  it  must  be  a  voluntary  acceptance,
and  not  one  forced  upon  the  owner,  by  any  illegal  or  violent
proceeding. The  numerous  cases  upon  which  this  doctrine
is  sustained,  are  all  founded  upon  that  of  Luke  v.  Lyde^  and
that  case  rested  upon  the  decision  in  the  House  of  Lords,  in
1733,  in  Lutwidge  ^  How  v.  Chrey} If  the  outward  and
homeward  voyages  be  distinct,  freight  is  recoverable  for  the
one,  though  the  other  be  not  performed. But  if,  by  the  terms
of  the  contract,  they  be  one  voyage,  and  the  ship  performs
the  outward,  and  fails  to  perform  the  homeward  voyage,  no
freight  is  recoverable.*^


a  LavDt  of  Oleron,  art.  4.  Ord.  of  WtMhty,  art.  16.  HoceuMy  note
81.  Slraccha  de  JVa«t6ti«,  part  3,  n.  24.  Ord.  de  la  Marine^  lir.  3,
tit.  3. Du  Fret,  art  2 1 ,  22.

b  Luke  T.  Lydo,2  BurVy  883.  Cooke  r.  JenniD^,  7  Term  Rep.  381.
Hooter  t.  Prinsep,  10  EaeVt  Reft,  378.  Liddard  r.  Lopez,  ibid,  526.
Abbott  on  Shipping,  part  3,  ch.  7,  sec.  13.  Robinsoo  y.  Marioe  Insu-
raoce  Company,  Z  Johns.  Rep:  323.  Hurton  t.  Union  Ins.  Company,
cited  in  Condyle  Marehail  on  Int.  281.  601.  Caze  &  Richard  v.  Balli-
more  Insurance  Company,  7  Cranch's  Rep.  358.  Armroyd  t.  Unioo
Insurance  Company,  3  Binney,  437.  Welch  y.  Hicks, 6  Cowen^t  Rep.
504. Vance  y.  Clark,  1  Miller'e  Lout.  Rep.  324.

e  Lawes  on  Charter  ParHee,  p.  149,  150.'  Mackrell  t.  Sinxmd,  2
ChiUy't  Rep.  666.


230  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

The  rule  by  which  the  amount  of  the  ratable  freight  is  to
be  ascertained,  is,  to  ascertain  how  much  of  the  voyage  had
been  performed  when  the  disaster  happened,  which  compelled
the  vessel  to  seek  a  port,  according  to  the  mode  of  adjustment
pursued  in  Luke  v.  Lyde  ;  or  else  to  calculate  how  much  of
the  voyage  had  been  performed,  when  the  goods  arrived  at
the  port  of  necessity,  according  to  the  better  course  pursued  in
the  cases  in  this  country.'

(8.)  Of  loss  from  collision  of  ships.

This  has  been  a  very  difficult  subject  for  discussion  and
decision,  and  various  opinions  have  been  entertained  by  the
writers  on  maritime  law.  The  evidence  as  to  the  true  cause
of  the  collision  is  of  difficult  access.  The  accident  usually
happens  in  the  darkness  of  night,  or  in  a  storm,  and  is  neces-
sarily  accompanied  with  confusion  and  agitation.  When  the
fact  is  clear,  that  a  fault  was  committed  by  one  party,  or  that
he  was  in  want  of  due  skill  or  care,  and  the  disaster  was  the
consequence  thereof,  the  party  in  fault  must  pay  all  the  da-
mages. There  are  settled  nautical  rules,  by  which;  in  most
cases,  the  want  of  skill,  or  care,  or  duty,  may  be  ascertained.
Thus,  the  vessel  that  has  the  wind  free,  must  get  out  of  the
way  of  the  vessel  that  is  close-hauled.  The  vessel  on  the
starboard  tack  has  a  right  to  keep  her  wind,  and  the  vessel  on
the  larboard  tack  is  bound  to  bear  up  or  heave  about  to  avoid
danger,  or  be  answerable  for  the  consequences.*  The  vessel
to  windward  is  to  keep  away  wlien  both  vessels  are  going  the
same  course  in  a  narrow  channel,  and  there  is  danger  of  run-
ning afoul  of  each  other.^ But  in  the  case  of  a  steam  vessel,


a  Marine  iDsuraoce  Company  r.  LieDox,  cited  and  approved  of  in
Robinsons  t.  The  Marine  Insurance  Company,  2  Joknt.  Rep.  323.
Coffin  y.  Storer,  5  Mass.  Rep.  252.

h  The  Woodrop  Sims,  2  Dod.  Adm.  Rep.  83.  The  Thames,  5  Rob.
Adm.  Rep.  345.

c  Marsh  T.  Blythe,  1  M'Cord,  360.


Lee.  XLVII.] OF  PEftSONAL  PROPERTY-  331

which  has  greater  power,  and  i?  more  under  command,  she
is  bound  always  to  give  way  to  a  vessel  with  sails,  in  a  case
.of  collision.'  So,  a  neglect  of  due  means  to  check  a  vessel
entering  a  river  or  harbour  where  others  lie  at  anchor,  is  a
fault  which  creates  responsibilty  for  damages  which  may  en*
sue.*  Where  the  collision  arose  by  vis  major^  or  physical
causes  exclusively,  and  without  any  negligence  or  fault,  open
or  concealed,  the  damage  must  be  borne  where  it  falls.^  The
greatest  difficulty  on  the  subject,  has  arisen  in  the  cases  in
which  the  collision  proceeded  evidently  from  error,  neglect,  or
want  of  sufficient  precaution,  but  the  neglect,  or  fault,  was
either  inscrutable,  or  equally  imputable  to  both  parties.  In
this  case,  of  blame  existing  which  is  undiscoverable,  the  ma-
rine law,  by  a  rusticum  judicium,  apportions  the  loss,  as
having  arisen  equally  by  the  fault  of  both  parties.**  The  rule
is  universally  declared  by  aU  the  foreign  ordinances  and  ju-
rists ;  and  its  equity  and  expediency  apply  equally  where
both  parties  are  to  blame,  and  where  the  fault  cannot  be  de-
tected. The  general  rule  of  the  maritime  law  is,  to  make  the
ships  contribute  equally,  without  regard  to  their  relative  value,
and  Yalin  considers  this  to  be  the  shorter,  plainer,  and  better
rule.'  There  has  been  much  difference  in  the  codes  and  au-
thorities in  maritime  law,  whether  the  cargo,  as  well  as  the


4L  The  ShaonoD,  2  Hagg,  Adm,  Rep.  173.

b  Neptune  2d,  1  Dodt.  Adm.  Rep.  467.

c  Dig.  9,  2. CmsuIcU  de  la  J^ar.  par  Boucher y  200—203.  AhboU
•»  Shippings  354. Jiarskali  on  Insurance,  493.

d  Cleirac,  Ut  et  CoiUumet  de  la  Mar,  68. The  Woodrop  Siios,  2
Dod.  Adm.  Rep.  85.

e  Com.  torn,  ii  166.  The  Marine  OrdiDaDce  of  the  city  of  Rotter-
dam in  1721,  declares  that  the  damage  resulting  from  collision  of  ships
shall  be  borne  equally,  unless,  indeed,  the  collision  happened  by  design,
or  any  remarkable  fault,  and  then  the  guilty  party  must  bear  the  whole
loss.  Ord.  of  Rotterdam,  sec.  255, 256.  The  Ordinance  of  Hamburg
of  1731,  tit.  8,  is  to  the  same  effect,  though  even  still  narrower  in  the
exception.


232  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

ship,  was  to  contribute  to  the  loss.  Yalin  contends,  that  the
contribution  is  only  between  the  ships,  and  that  the  cargoes
are  totally  excluded  from  the  benefit,  as  well  as  from  the
burden  of  contribution  in  the  case  of  such  a  disaster.  But  in
Le  Neve  v.  Edinburgh  and  London  Shipping  Company ^
tlie  cargo  of  the  ship  that  was.  sunk  and  lost  by  the  collision,
received  the  benefit  of  the  contribution.*

(9.)  Of  general  average.

The  doctrinC^  of  general  average  grows  out  of  the  incidents
of  a  mercantile  voyage,  and  the  duties  which  it  creates  apply
equally  to  the  owner  of  the  ship,  and  of  the  cargo.  General,
gross,  or  extraordinary  average,  means  a  contribution  made
by  all  parties  concerned,  towards  a  loss  sustained  by  some  of
tiie  parties  in  interest,  for  the  benefit  of  all ;  and  it  is  called
general,  or  gross  average,  because  it  falls  upon  the  gross
amount  of  ship,  cargo,  and  freight.

By  the  Rhodian  law,  as  cited  in  the  Pandects,^  if  goods
were  thrown  overboard,  in  a  case  of  extreme  peril,  to  lighten
and  save  the  ship,  the  loss,  being  incurred  for  the  common
benefit,  was  to  be  made  good  by  the  contribution  of  all.  The
goods  must  not  be  swept  away  by  the  violence  of  the  waves.


a  This  case  wai  decided  id  the  House  of  Lords  in  1824.  See  Beltt
Com.  vol.  i.  580 — 583,  wbo  has  collected  and  digested  the  foreign  an-
thorities  on  the  subject.  By  the  English  statute  of  53  Geo.  III.  c.  159,
ship  owners  were  protected  from  loss  by  damage  done  to  other  vessels
without  their  fault,  beyond  their  property  in  (he  ship,  freight,  apparel,
and  furniture.  In  the  case  of  the  DunJee,  it  was  held,  ihzt  Jishing  stares
of  a  Greenland  ship  were  liable  to  contribute  in  compensation  for  da-
mage done  to  another  ship  by  collision,  as  appurtenances  to  a  ship  of
that  character. The  Dundee,  1  Hagg,  Adm.  Rep.  109.

h  Dig,  14, 2, 1.  This  Rhodian  law  is  discussed  in  the  Pandects,  by
Paulus,  Papinian,  and  other  eminent  lawyers.  It  forms  the  subject  of
the  distinguished  commentaries  of  Feckius  and  Vinnius,  in  the  treatise
ad  Bern  JVbtittcam,  and  of  a  treatise  of  Bynkershoeck ;  and  it  has  re-
ceived most  ample  illustrations  in  the  dissertations  upon  it  by  numerous
other  civilians,  among  whom  may  be  selected  Emerigon  and  Abbott.


liCc.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  233

fer  then  the  loss  falls  entirely  upon  the  metchant  or  his  insu-
rer,  but  they  must  be  intentionally  sacrificed  by  the  mind
and  agency  of  man  for  the  safety  of  the  ship,  and  the  residue
of  the  cargo.  The  jettison  must  be  made  for  sufficient  cause,
and  not  from  groundless  timidity.  It  must  be  made  in  a  case
of  extremity,  when  the  ship  is  in  danger  of  perishing  by  the
fury  of  a  storm,  or  is  labouring  upon  rocks  or  shallows,  or  is
closely  pursued  by  pirates  or  enemies ;  and  then,  if  the  ship,
and  the  residue  of  the  cargo,  be  saved  by  means  of  the  sacri-
fice, nothing  can  be  more  reasonable  than  that  the  property
saved  should  bear  its  proportion  of  the  loss.  The  doctrine  of
general  average  is  one  of  those  rules  of  the  marine  law  which
is  built  upon  the  plainest  principles  of  justice ;  and  it  has,  ac-
cordingly, recommended  itself  to  the  notice  and  adoption  of
all  the  commercial  nations  of  the  world.  Tlie  title  in  the
Pandects,  De  lege  Rhodia  de  Jactv^  lias  been  the  basis  of
the  ordinances  of  modern  Europe,  on  the  subject  of  general
average ;  and  the  doctrine  of  jettison  was  transplanted  into
the  Roman  law  from  the  institutes  of  the  ancient  Rhodians.
A  jettison  is  only  permitted  in  cases  of  extreme  necessity  ;
and  the  foreign  ordinances"  require,  that  the  officers  of  the
ship,  and  the  supercargo,  if  on  board,  should,  if  practicable,
be  previously  consulted  ;  and  if  the  master,  in  a  case  of  false
alarm,  makes  a  jettison,  there  is  no  contribution.  A  regular
jettison,  says  Emerigon,  is  that  which  takes  place  with  order,
and  without  confusion,  and  is  founded  on  previous  delibera-
tion. Consultation  is  not  indispensable  previous  to  the  sacri-
fice. A  case  of  imminent  danger  will  not  permit  it.  But  it
must  appear  that  the  act  occasioning  the  loss  was  the  efiect
of  judgment  and  will ;  and  there  may  be  a  choice  of  perils
when  there  is  no  possibility  of  safety.  There  must  be  a  cer-
tain loss  voluntarily  incurred  for  the  common  benefit,  and  it


a  LawM  of  Olerotiy  art.  8)  of  JFitbuyj  art.  20,  2 1 .  38. Code  de  Com'
m^rce,  art.  410.

VoiA  III.  30


234  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. IPart  V.

is  not  necessary  that  the  vessel  should  be  exposed  to  greater
danger  than  she  otherwise  would  have  been.  To  avoid  an
absolute  shipwreck,  it  may  sometimes  be  necessary  to  run  the
vessel  ashore  in  a  place  which  appears  to  be  the  least  dan-
gerous, and  that  will  form  a  case  of  general  average.^  The
irregular  jettison  is  valid,  for  it  takes  place  in  the  instant  of  a
danger  which  is  imminept  and  appalling,  and  when  all  for-
mality and  deliberation  would  be  out  of  season,  or  impossi-
ble. All  acts  are  precipitate,  and  commanded  by  that  sense
of  self-preservation  when  life  is  in  jeopardy,  which  is  irresisti-
ble, and  sways  every  consideration.  Such  a  jettison  is  a  spe-
cies of  shipwreck,  and  it  is  called  semv-naufragiumJ'  The
captain  must  first  begin  the  jettison  with  things  the  least  ne-
cessary, the  most  weighty,  and  of  least  value,  and  nothing  but
the  greatest  extremity  would  excuse  the  master  who  should
commence  the  jettison  with  money,  and  other  precious  parts
of  the  cargo."

Before  contribution  takes  place,  it  roust  appear  that  the
goods  sacrificed  were  the  price  of  safety  to  the  rest ;  and  if


a  SimsT.  Guroey  and  Smith,  4  Binney,  513.  1  Emerig.AO^.  Targa
tays,  that  dariog  the  sixty  years  be  was  a  magistrate  id  the  Consulat  of
the  Sea  at  Genoa,  be  met  with  only  four  or  five  cases  of  a  regular  jet-
tison, and  they  were  suspicious  by  reason  of  their  very  formalities.

h  ConstUat  de  la  Jder,  ch.  384.  Targa^  ch.  58*  Ctuaregis,  Disc.
45,  n.  28.

c  Code  de  Commerce,  art.  411.  Emerigon,  t.  i.  609,  has  beautifully
illustrated  from  Juveoal,  the  growth  and  progress  of  an  irregular  jetti-
son, aod  that  imminent  danger  and  absorbing  terror  which  justify  it.
At  first  the  skill  of  the  pilot  fails :

Millam  prudentia  cani
Rectoris  conferret  opem*

Catullus  becomes  restless  with  terror  as  the  danger  presses,  and  at
last  he  cries—

Fkaulite  qwt  mea  sunt —

PrcecTpitore  vo/efM  jpt«/cA€mma.—iJiiv«nai,  sat.  19*


Lee.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  235

the  ship  be  lost,  notwithstanding  the  jettison,  there  will  be  no
ground  for  contribution.* Ail  damsige  arising  immediately
from  jettison,  or  other  act  of  necessity,  is  to  be  a  matter  of
general  average,  and,  therefore,  if,  in  cutting  away  a  mast,
the  cargo,  by  that  means,  be  injured,  or  if,  in  throwing  over
any  part  of  the  cargo,  other  parts  of  the  cargo  be  injured,  tlie
damage  goes  into  general  average,  t>ecause  it  is  to  be  con-
sidered as  part  of  the  price  of  safety  to  the  residue  of  the  pro-
perty.* So,  if  a  ship  be  injured  by  a  peril  of  the  sea,  and  be
obliged  to  go  into  port  to  refit,  the  wages  and  provisions  of  the
crew,  during  the  detention,  constitute  the  subject  of  general
average,  according  to  the  decisions  in  New-York  and  Massa-
chusetts.' Those  decisions  are  supported  by  the  rule  as  laid
down  in  Beawes,*^  and  they  are  in  coincidence  with  the  law
and  practice  of  Holland  and  France.' Lord  Tenterden,  in
his  treatise  on  shipping,^  observed,  that  the  Engli^  law  books
furnished  no  decision  on  this  point,  and  he  thought  it  sus-
ceptible of  a  reasonable  doubt,  tliough  his  opinion  was  evi-
dently against  the  justice  and  policy  of  the  charge  for  con-
tribution. Since  he  wrote,  the  question  has  been  decided
in  the  K.  B.  according  to  his  opinion,  and  in  a  case  in  which
he  sustained  and  enforced  a  contrary  opinion  in  his  character
of  counsel.^ The  result  ofthe  decisions  in  PZwrnmer  v.  Wild"
man^  and  Power  v.  Whitmore,^  is,  that  where  the  general
safety  requires  a  ship  to  go  into  port  to  refit,  by  reason  of
some  peril,  the  wages  and  provisions  of  the  crew  during  the


a  Pothier^  tit.  Avaries,  n.  113.

b  Maggratb  r.  Church,  1  Caines'  Rep.  196.

c  WaldeD  v.  Le  Roj,  2  Caines'  Rep,  263.  Padelford  v.  Boardmao,
4  Mags,  Rep.  548.

d  Lex  Mercal.  vol.  i.  161.

«  Ricard,  negoce  d' Amsterdam^  p.  280.  Emerigofij  Traite  det  A$9,
t.  i.  62 1.

f  Abbott  on  Shippings  part  3,  cb.  0,  sec.  8. -

g  Power  V.  Whitmorc,  4  •Maule  Sg  Selic,  141.

h  3  MauU  Sf  Seli€.  482. 4  ibid.  141.


236  OF  PERSONAL  PUOPERTY.  [Part  V.

detcnlion  arc  not  the  subject  of  general  average  ;  but  the
other  necessary  expenses  of  going  into  port,  and  of  preparing
for  the  refitting  the  ship,  by  unloading,  warehousing,  and
reloading  the  cargo,  are  general  average."*  The  costs  of  the
repairs,  so  far  as  they  accrue  to  the  ship  alone  as  a  benefit,
and  would  have  been  necessary  in  that  port,  on  account  of
the  ship  alone,  are  not  average.  Yet,  if  the  expense  of  the
repairs  would  not  have  been  incurred  but  for  the  benefit
of  the  cargo,  and  might  have  been  deferred  with  safety  to
the  ship,  to  a  less  costly  port,  sucli  extra  expense  is  general
average.

It  has  likewise  been  held,  that  the  wages  and  provisions  of
the  crew,  during  a  capture  and  detention  for  adjudication,  are
a  proper  subject  for  general  average  ;^  while,  in  the  case  of
a  vessel  detained  by  an  embargo,  they  are  not  so  subject,  and
are  chargeaible  exclusively  upon  the  freight.*^  The  French
ordinance  of  the  marine,  Pothier,  and  Ricard,  all  agree,  that
wages  and  provisions  are  nut  a  subject  for  contribution  in  the
case  of  an  embargo  ;  and  yet  it  has  been  held,  on  the  other
hand,  by  the  Court  of  Errors  in  Pennsylvania,  in  1807,  that


a  Beaices  L.  M,  \6l,  Abbott  on  Shippings  p.  280,  1st  edit,  and
Bedford  Com.  Ins.  Co.  v.  Parker,  2  Pick,  8,  support  the  position,  that
the  necessary  expenses  of  unloading,  and  reloading  the  cargxi  when  the
vessel  is  forced  into  a  port  to  refit,  are  to  be  broaght  into  general  aver-
age, for  all  persons  concerned  are  interested  in  the  measures  requisite
to  complete  the  voyage.  The  case  of  VVnIden  v.  Le  Roy,  2  Cotnef,
263,  assumes,  that  those  expenses  in  such  a  case,  go  into  general  ave-
rage, an  J  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  from  the  cases,  that  where  the
wages  and  provisions  of  the  crew  are  to  be  borne  by  general  contribu-
tion, those  other  expenses  are  equally  a  part  of  it.

b  Ricard^  nesoce  d' Amsterdam^  p.  279.  Bouiaij  Paty^  torn.  iv.  444.
Leavenworth  v.  Delafield,  1  Cainet'  Rep,  574.  Kingston  v.  Giiard,  4
Dallcu'  Rep.  274.

>  e  Robertson  v.  Ewer,  1  Term  Rep.  127.  Penny  v.  New-York  In-
surance Company,  3  Cainet'  Rep.  155.  M^Bride  v.  Marine  Insurance
Company,  7  Johns.  Rep.  431.


Lcc.  XLVIL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 237

ibey  were,  in  such  a  case,  the  subject  of  general  average.'*  In
respect  to  the  wages  and  provisions  of  the  crew,  while  the
vessel  was  detained  at  an  intermediate  port,  by  fear  of  ene-
mies, and  waiting  for  convoy,  they  were  allowed  to  form  the
subject  of  general  average,  by  the  courts  in  Holland,  amid^
conflicting  opinions,  and  after  very  protracted  and  exhausting
litigation.^  We  cannot  but  lament  the  uncertainty  and  con-
fusion which  the  contradictory  rules  on  this  subject  have  cre-
ated. There  is  no  principle  of  maritime  law  that  has  been
followed  by  more  variations  in  practice  than  this  perplexed
doctrine  of  general  average  ;  and  the  rules  of  contribuiiuii  in
diflerent  countries,  and  before  diflerent  tribunals,  are  so  dis-
cordant, and  many  of  the  distinctions  are  so  subtle,  and  so
artificial,  that  it  becomes  extremely  difficult  to  reduce  them
to  the  shape  of  a  connected  and  orderly  system.  The  French
jurists  complain,  that  their  ancient  nautical  legislation  left  tlie
question  of  contribution  very  much  at  large,  and  subject  to
arbitrary  discretion,  and  they  commend  very  highly  the  regu-


a  Insarance  Company  of  North  America  t.  Jones,  2  Binney'i  Rep,
547.

b  Bynky  Qucutt  J,  Priv.  lib.  4,  cb.  25.  Bjokeraboeck,  in  one  of
tbe  adjudged  cases  which  be  cites,  complains  that  the  existing  usages
bad  extended  contribution  to  every  kind  of  danger,  and  frequently
coonprebended  wages  and  provisions  of  tbe  crew  as  proper  objects  of  it,
and  that  tbe  practice  might  be  abused  to  the  destruction  of  the  mer-
chant. His  history  of  the  vexatious  litigation  in  these  cases  is  quite
curious.  In  one  of  them,  tbe  maritime  court  at  Amsterdam,  in  No-
vember, 1697,  and  again  in  November,  1698,  adjudged,  that  tbe  wages'
and  provisions  were  a  proper  subject  for  contribution.  The  decisions
were  affirmed,  on  appeal,  in  July,  1700,  and  reversed  on  a  further  ap-
peal,  in  July,  1710.  On  a  still  further  appeal  to  tbe  Supreme  Senate,
of  which  Bynkershoeck  was  a  member,  aAer  great  discussion,  and
much  division  in  opinion,  tbe  original  decisions  of  the  Amsterdam  ma-
ritime judges  were  restored  in  March,  171.3.  Magens,  in  bis  Essay  en
Insurance^  vol.  i.  66 — 69,  shows  the  uncertainty  and  difficulty  abroad
as  well  as  in  England, of  settling  tbe  proper  items  for  a  general  average,
and  particularly  as  to  tbe  wages  and  provisions  of  tbe  crew«


238  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

lation»  of  the  oidinance  and  of  the  code  as  just  and  equitable,
and  marked  with  certainty  and  precision.*

If  part  of  the  cargo  be  voluntarily  delivered  up  to  a  pirate,
or  an  enemy,  by  way  of  ransom  or  contribution,  and  to  induce
them  to  spare  the  vessel  and  residue  of  the  goods,  the  pro-
perty saved  must  contribute  to  the  loss,  as  being  the  price  of
safety  to  the  rest  The  expense,  also,  of  unlading  the  goods,
to  repair  damages  to  the  ship,  or  to  lighten  her  when  ground-
ed, must  be  sustained  by  general  contribution  ;  for  all  the
parties  concerned  are  interested  in  the  measures  requisite  for
the  prosecution  of  the  voyage.  If  the  masts,  cables,  and
other  equipments  of  the  vessel  be  cut  away,  to  save  her  in  a
case  of  extremity,  their  value  must  be  made  good  by  contri-
bution.* It  was  attempted,  in  the  case  of  Covington  v.  /fo-
berts^^  to  extend  the  application  of  the  general  rule  to  the
case  of  the  loss  of  a  mast,  in  carrying  an  unusual  press  of
sail  to  escape  from  an  enemy,  and  to  make  that  the  subject
of  general  average  ;  but  the  court  considered  that  to  be  no
more  than  a  common  sea  risk.  All  casual  and  inevitable
'  damage  and  loss,  as  distinguished  from  that  which  is  pur-
posely incurred,  is  the  subject  of  particular  and  not  of  general
average.**


a  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  De»  Avaries,  art.  7. Code,  art.  400, 401.  Bou-
lay  Paiy,  t.  4,  466.

6  Ord»  de  la  Mar,  tit.  AvarieSf  art.  6.  Valin^t  Com,  torn.  ii.  165.  1
Emerigan,  620 — 1.  Hennen  v.  Monro,  16  Marlin't  L&uu  Rep.  449.
'  e  5  Bo9.  Sf  Pull.  378.  Shiff  ▼.  Louisiana  State  Ins.  Co.  18  Martin^
629  to  S.  P.  Where  a  vessel  was  stranded  near  her  port  of  destination,
and  for  the  purpose  of  relieving^  her,  the  carg^o  was  put  into  lighters
and  forwarded  to  the  port,  and  during  the  passage  in  the  lighters,  part
of  the  cargo  was  injured  ;  such  a  loss  to  Ihe  cargo  was  held  to  be  a  pro-
per subject  of  general  average.  Lewis  v.  Williams,  1  HalVe  Jf,  F»
Rep.  430.

d  Emerigon,  iota.  i.  622,  states  an  interesting  case  to  illustrate  the
general  doctrine*  A  French  vessel,  being  pursued  by  two  cruisers  of
the  eneoiy,  the  master,  as  soon  as  it  ^ was  dark,  hoisted  a  boat  into  the


I-ec.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  239

If  the  ship  be  voluntarily  stFanded^  to  escape  danger  from
tempests,  or  the  chase  of  an  enemy,  the  damages  resulting
from  thai  act  are  to  be  borne  as  general  average,  if  the  ship
be  afterwards  recovered,  and  perform  her  voyage.'  But  if
the  ship  be  wholly  lost  or  destroyed,  by  the  act  of  running
her  ashore,  it  has  been  a  question  much  discussed,  and  differ-
ent opinions  entertained,  whether  the  cargo  saved  was  bound
to  contribute  to  bear  the  loss  of  the  ship.  In  Bradhurst  v.
The  Columbian  Insurance  Company,^  the  ship,  in  a  case
of  extremity,  was  voluntarily  run  ashore  and  lost,  but  the
cargo  was  saved  ;  and  it  was  held,  that  no  contribution  was
to  be  levied  on  the  cargo  for  the  loss  of  the  ship.  The  ma-
rine ordinances,  and  writers  on  maritime  law  were  consulted,
and  the  conclusion  drawn  from  them  was,  that  the  cargo
never  contributed  for  the  ship,  if  she  was  lost  by  means  of  the
act  of  running  her  ashore.  But  in  two  subsequent  cases,
where  the  ship  was  lost  under  like  circumstances,  it  was  de-
cided, on  a  like  review  of  the  European  law,  that  the  loss  was
to  be  repaired  by  general  average.*  The  question,  therefore,
in  which  the  foreign  and  domestic  authorities  so  materially
vary,  remains  yet  to  be  definitively  .settled.

A  temporary  safety  is  all  that  is  requisite  to  entitle  the


sea,  farQisbed  with  a  mast  and  sail,  and  a  lantern  at  the  mast  bead,
and  then  chang^ed  bis  coarse,  and  sailed  during^  tbe  night  without  any
light  on  board  bis  ship.  In  tbe  morning  no  enemy  was  in  sight ;  and
tbe  value  of  tbe  boat  thus  roluntarilj  abandoned  for  tbe  common  safe-
ty, was  made  good  by  general  contribution.

a  In  a  case  of  voluntary  stranding,  if  it  be  done  to -save  tbe  cargo,
tbe  damage  to  tbe  ship  and  cargo  is  the  subject  of  general  average  ;
but  if  it  was  resorted  to  for  to  save  the  lives  or  liberty  of  the  crew,  it  is
particular  average.  This  distinction,  Mr.  Benecke  says,  is  conforma-
ble to  the  practice  ofali  countries. — Benecke  on  the  Principlee  of  /n-
dtfmfiay,  p.  220— 1.

b  9  Johnt,  Rep.  9.

e  Caze  v.  Reilly,  3  Wath.  Cir.  Rep.  298.  Grey  v.  Wain,  2  Serg.
4r  Rawle^  229.


840  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY-  [Part  V.

owners  of  the  property  sacrificed  to  contribution  ;  and  if  the
ship  surviTes  the  disaster,  and  be  afterwards  lost  by  another,
still  the  goods  saved  in  the  second  disaster,  must  be  contribu-
tory to  the  oiiginal  loss,  for  without  that  loss  they  would  have
been  totally  destroyed.'  Goods  shipped  on  deck  contribute
if  saved,  but  if  lost  by  jettison,  they  are  not  entitled  to  the
benefit  of  general  average  ;  for  they,  by  their  situation,  in-
crease the  difiiculty  of  the  navigation,  and  are  peculiarly  ex-
posed to  peril.*

It  becomes  an  important  inquiry  on  this  subject,  what
goods  are  to  contribute,  and  in  what  proportions,  to  a  loss
voluntarily  incurred  for  the  common  safety.  The  general
doctrine  is,  that  all  the  merchandise,  of  whatever  kind  or
weight,  or  to  whomsoever  belonging,  contributes.  The  con-
tribution is  made,  not  on  account  of  incumbrance  to  the  ship,
but  of  safety  obtained,  and,  therefore,  bullion  and  jewels  put
on  board  as  merchandise,  contribute  according  to  their  full
value.  By  the  Rhodian  law,""  it  was  deemed  just  that  all
should  contribute  to  whom  the  jettison  had  been  an  advan-
tage, and  the  amount  was  to  be  apportioned  according  to  the
value  of  the  goods.  It  extended  to  the  effects  and  clothes  of
every  person,  and  even  to  the  ring  on  the  finger,  but  not  to
the  provisions  on  board,  nor  to  the  persons  of  freemen,  whose
lives  were  of  too  much  dignity  and  worth  to  be  susceptible  of
valuation.  The  modern  marine  codes  do  not  generally  go
to  the  extent  of  the  Rhodian  law,  and  they  vary  greatly  on
the  subject  By  the  English  law,  the  wearing  apparel,
jewels,  and  other  things  belonging  to  the  persons  of  passen-
gers or  crew,  and  taken  on  board  for  private  use,  and  not  as


a  VinrUutf  in  Peekium  ad  legem  Rhodiam^  p.  246. 250.  Bovlay  Pa*
fy,  Com.  IT.  443.

b  Smith  T.  Wright,  1  Cainet*  Rep,  43.  Lenox  v.  U.  I.  Comp.
3  JoknMon*s  Categ^  178.  Boulay  Paly^  torn.  4.  566.  Code  de  Commerce^
art.  421. Dodge  r.  Bartol,5  Greenleaf,  286.

c  Dig.  14,  2, 2.


Lee  XLVIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY  241

merchandise  for  transportation,  do  not  now  contribute  in  a
case  of  general  average."*  The  common  rule,  according  to
Hagens/  is,  that  what  articles  pay  freight  must  contribute,
and  what  pay  no  freight  pay  no  average  ;  and  that  articles
contribute  according  to  their  value,  and  not  according  to
weight.  By  the  French  ordinance  of  the  marine,  as  well  as
by  the  new  commercial  code,  provisions  and  the  clothes  of  the
ship's  company  do  not  contribute  ;  but  usage  goes  further,
and  does  not  subject  to  the  charge  of  general  average  either
dotbes,  jewels,  rings,  or  baggage  of  the  passengers,  for  they
are  considered  as  accessory  to  the  person.  Emerigon,  who
has,  according  to  his  usual  manner,  collected  and  exhausted
all  the  learning  appertaining  to  the  subject,  inclines  to  think
with  Pothier,  that  by  strict  law  and  by  equity,  the  clothes  and
Jewels  of  passengers  ought  to  contribute.  But  Boulay  Paty,
in  his  commentaries  on  the  new  code,  and  in  which  he  draws
most  liberally  on  the  resources  of  Emerigon,  thinks  they
ought  to  be  exempted,  and  that  the  existing  French  usage  is
proper.*

Instruments  of  defence  and  provisions  do  not  contribute,
because  they  are  necessary  to  all ;  and  yet  if  they  are  sacri-
ficed for  the  common  safety,  they  are  to  be  paid  for  by  con-
tribution ;  nor  do  the  wages  of  seamen  contribute  to  the
general  average,  except  in  the  single  instance  of  the  ransom
of  the  ship.  They  are  exempted  lest  the  apprehension  of
personal  loss  should  restrain  them  from  making  the  requisite
sacrifice,  and  the  hardships  and  perils  they  endure  well  enti-


a  Mbott,  part  3,  oh.  8,  sec.  14.

b  Jdagent  on  Insurance,  vol.  i.  62,  63.

c  Ord,  de  la  Marine,  tit.  Du  Fret,  art.  11.  Code  de  Commerce,  art.
419.  Pothier,  Det  Avaries,  d.  126.  1  Emerigon,  645.  Boulay  Pa-
ty, torn.  iv.  561,  562.  Id  BrowQ  y.  Si«py\eion,  4  Bingham,  119,  the
general  rule  was  declared  to  be,  that  provisions  for  the  crew  on  board
a  ship  are  not  mercett  put  on  board  for  Ibe  purposes  of  commerce,  and
do  not  contribute  to  a  general  average,  even  when  the  cargo  of  the
ship  consists  only  of  passengers.

Vol.  III.  31


242  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V-

Ue  them  to  an  exemptioa  from  further  distress.*  If  part  of
the  cargo  be  sold  for  the  necessities  of  the  ship,  it  is  in  the
nature  of  a  compulsive  loan  for  the  benefit  of  all  concerned^
and  bears  a  resemblance  to  the  case  of  jettison  ;  and  if  the
ship  be  afterwards  lost,  the  goods  saved  must  contribute  to-
wards the  loss  of  the  goods  sold,  equally  as  if  they  had  beea
thrown  overboard  to  lighten  the  vessel.  In  such  a  case,  a
portion  of  the  cargo,  according  to  Lord  Stowell,  is  abraded  for
the  general  benefit^

Without  entering  minutely  into  the  doctrine  of  adjusting
and  settling  a  general  average,'  it  will  be  sufficient  to  observe,
that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  goods  sacrificed,  as  well  as  the
goods  saved,  are  to  be  valued  at  the  clear  net  price  they  would
have  yielded,  after  deducting  freight,  at  the  port  of  discharge ;
and  this  rule  is  founded  on  a  plain  principle  of  equity.^  The
person  whose  loss  has  procured  the  safe  arrival  of  the  ship
and  cargo,  should  be  placed  on  equal  ground  with  those  per-
sons whose  goods  had  safely  arrived,  and  that  can  only  be  by
considering  his  goods  to  have  also  arrived.  The  owners  of
the  ship  contribute  according  to  her  value  at  the  end  of  the
voyage,  and  according  to  the  net  amount  of  the  freight  and
earnings. The  value  of  the  vessel  lost  is  estimated  according


a  1  Emerigon,  642.

b  Halts  Emerigon  on  Maritime  Loans,  p.  94.  The  Gratiludioe,  3
Bab.  Adm,  Rep.  264.

c  Mr.  Benecke  has  discussed  at  large,  and  very  ably,  the  complica-
ted and  difficult  subject  of  general  average,  and  the  adjustment  of  it;
and  to  him  I  must  refer  for  a  more  minute  detail  of  the  learning  and
principles  applicable  to  the  case.  Principles  of  Indemnity,  cb.  5
and  7.

d  The  Consolaio  del  Mare,  and  the  usage  of  divers  countries,  made
a  distinction  as  to  the  rule  of  valuation,  and  they  took  the  value  at  the
place  of  departure,  if  the  jettison  took  place  before  the  middle  of  the
voyage,  and  the  value  at  the  place  of  discharge,  if  afterwards.  But
the  ordinance  of  the  marine  did  not  make  any  fiuch  distinction.  1
JE/nnerigon^  654.


Lee.  XLVII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  243

to  her  value  at  the  port  of  departure,  making  a  reaBmable
allowance  for  wear  or  tear  on  the  voyage  up  to  the  time  of
the  disaster ;  and  the  practice  in  this  country,  at  least  it  is  the
practice  in  Boston,'  to  ascertain  the  contributory  value  of  the
freight  by  deducting  one  third  of  the  gross  amount.  As  to
losses  of  the  equipment  of  the  ship,  such  as  masts,  cables,  and
sails,  it  is  usual  to  deduct  one  third  from  the  price  of  the  new
articles  ;  for,  being  new,  they  will  be  of  greater  value  than
the  articles  lost.^  The  subject  of  the  adjustment  of  a  general
average  has  been  very  much  discussed  in  some  of  the  modern
cases.  In  Leavenworth  v.  Delafield^'  which  was  the  case
of  a  vessel  captured  and  carried  in  for  adjudication,  and
where  the  wages  and  provisions  of  the  crew  went  into  gene-
ral  average,  a  rule  of  adjustment  somewhat  peculiar  to  the
case  was  adopted  ;  for  no  disaster  had  happened  to  injure  the
vessel  or  cargo. .  In  Bell  v.  Smith^^  the  vessel  had  been  so
deteriorated  by  the  perils  of  the  sea,  as  to  render  a  sale  of  her
abroad  necessary  ;  and  the  general  average  was  calculated
on  the  price  she  sold  for,  and  not  on  four  fifths  of  her  original
value,  as  in  the  preceding  case  of  capture.  In  adjusting  the
difficult  subject  of  contribution  to  a  general  average,  one  rule
has  been  to  take  the  value  of  the  ship  and  cargo  at  the  port  of
necessity,  or  place  where  the  expense  was  incurred  ;  and  if
there  be  no  price  of  ship  and  cargo  at  such  a  place  to  be  well
and  satisfactorily  ascertained,  the  parties  concerned  may  be
forced  to  recur  to  the  value  at  the  port  and  time  of  departure
on  the  voyage.  The  doctrine  of  adjustment  underwent  a
very  full  discussion  in  Strong  v.  The  New-York  Firemen


a  3  JHoMon's  Rep.  439.

b  Abbott  on  Shipping,  part  3,  ch.  8,  sec.  14,15.  Strong  y.  Fire  Ins,
Co,,  11  Johm,  Hep.  323.  Simonda  v.  While,  2  Bamw,  ^  Creet.  806.
Gray  r.  Wain,  2  Serg.  *  RawUy  229.  257,  258.

c  1  Cainee'  Rep.  674.

d  2  Johns.  Rep.  98.


244  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

Instiraiice  Company ^"^  and  it  was  there  declared  to  be  the
duty  of  the  master,  in  cases  proper  for  a  general  average,  to
cause  an  adjustment  to  be  made  upon  his  arrival  at  the  port
of  destination,  and  that  he  had  a  lien  upon  the  cargo  to  en-
force the  payment  of  the  contribution.  This  was  shown  to
be  the  maritime  law  of  Europe.  When  the  general  average
was  thus  fairly  settled  in  the  foreign  port,  according  to  the
usage  and  law  of  the  port,  it  was  binding,  tliough  settled  dif-
ferently from  what  it  would  have  been  in  the  home  port.
The  very  same  principle  was  largely  examined  and  recog-
nised in  Simonds  v.  White,^  If,  however j  it  was  not  a  pro-
per case  for  a  general  average,  and  was  a  partial  loss  only,
then  these  cases  do  not  apply,  and  a  foreign  adjustment,
founded  in  mistake,  and  assuming  a  case  for  general  average,
when  none  existed,  iS  not  binding.^  With  respect  to  the  pay-
ment of  the  average,  each  individual  is  undoubtedly  entitled
to  sue  for  the  amount  of  his  share  when  adjusted  ;  but  the
English  practice  usually  is,  in  the  case  of  a  general  ship,
where  there  are  many  consignees,  for  the  master,  before  he
delivers  the  goods,  to  take  a  bond  from  the  different  mer-
chants for  payment  of  their  portions  of  the  average  when  the
same  shall  be  adjusted.''


a  11  Jokns.  Rep.  323.  Lewis  ?.  Williams,  1  JHo//'*  JV.  Y.  Rep.
430.  S.  P.

b  2  Bamw,  Sf  CrcM,  805.  There  is  a  remarkable  coincideoce  on  all
points,  in  the  discussions  and  decisions  in  the  two  cases  last  cited.  That
delivered  in  the  K.  B.  by  Lord  Ch.  J.  Abbott,  is  by  no  means  superior,
though  it  was  ten  years  subsequent,  in  point  of  time,  to  the  one  delive-
red in  the  Supreme  Court  of  New -York,  by  the  late  William  W.  Van
Ness  ;  and  that  distinguished  judge  examined  the  law  on  that  occasion
with  his  usual  discernment,  and  expressed  himself  with  accuracy  and
perspicuity.

c  Lenox  v.  United  Ins.  Com,3  Johns,  Gates,  178,  Power  v.  Whit-
more,  4  Maule  ^  Selw.  141.

d  Abbott,  p;iri  3 1  ch.  8.  sec.  17.


Lee.  XLVIL]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 245

(9.)  Of  salvage.

Salvage  is  the  compensation  allowed  to  persons  by  whose
assistance  a  ship  or  its  cargo  has  been  saved  in  whole  or  in
part  from  impending  danger,  or  recovered  from  actual  loss,  in
cases  of  shipwreck,  derelict,  or  recapture  ;  and  it  often  forms
a  material  ingredient  in  the  discussions  and  adjustment  which
take  place  when  a  voyage  has  been  disastrous. It  is  charge-
able upon  the  owners,  who  receive  benefit,  and  who  would
have  sustained  the  loss  if  it  had  not  been  prevented  by  the
exertions  of  the  salvors. The  allowance  of  salvage  depends
frequently  on  positive  statute  regulations  fixing  the  rate,  and
the  foreign  ordinances  contain  precise  enactments  on  this
head,  though  salvage  is  said  to  be  a  question  of  the  jus  gen-
Hum,  and  not  the  creature  of  local  institutions,  like  a  mari-
ner's contract." The  regulation  of  salvage,  by  the  statute  law
of  the  United  States,  is  confined  to  cases  of  recapture. In
the  case  of  shipwrecks,  or  derelicts  at  sea,  and  rescue,  and
most  other  cases,  the  law  has  not  fixed  any  certain  rate  of
salvage,  and  it  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  Court  of  Admi-
ralty, under  all  the  circumstances.* The  amount  to  be  al-
lowed varies  according  to  the  labour  and  peril  incurred  by  the
salvors,  the  merit  of  their  conduct,  the  value  of  the  ship  and
cargo,  and  the  degree  of  danger  from  which  they  were  res-
cued. The  courts  are  liberal  in  the  allowance  of  salvage  in
meritorious  cases,  as  a  reward  for  the  service,  and  as  an  incen-
tive to  effort ;  and  the  allowance  fluctuates  between  one  half,
one  third,  and  one  fourth,  of  the  gross  or  net  proceeds  of  the
property  saved,  but  one  third  has  been  the  most  usual  rate.
In  a  case  of  derelict.  Sir  William  Scott  observed,  that  in  no
instance  except  where  the  crown  alone  was  concerned,  and
where  no  claim  had  been  given  for  a  private  owner,  had  more


a  1  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  278.

h  The  Aqaila,  1  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  32.  The  Two  Friends,  %bid»  235.
The  Sarah,  cited  io  a  note  to  1  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  263.  Marshall,  Ch.
J.,  2  Cranch*M  Rep.  267. Bond  v.  Brig  Cora,  2  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  80.


246  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Pari  V.

ihan  one  half  of  the  net  proceeds  of  the  property  been  decreed
by  way  of  ealvage  ;  and  in  that  case  he  directed  the  salvage
to  be  apportioned  among  the  crews  of  the  two  vessels  which
were  the  salvors,  according  to  the  numbers  of  the  ere  ws.^  The
same  observations  were  made  by  the  court  in  M<ison  v.  Ship
BlaireaUj^  and  no  instance  was  found  in  which  salvors  were
allowed  beyond  a  moiety  of  the  value.  The  court,  in  thai
case^  reduced  tlie  allowance  made  in  the  court  below  to  the
salvors,  from  three  fifths  of  the  net  proceeds  of  the  ship  and
cargo,  to  two  fifths  thereof.  Though,  in  general,  neither  the
master,  or  a  passenger,  seaman,  or  pilot,  is  entitled  to  com-
pensation in  the  way  of  salvage,  for  the  ordinary  assistance
he  may  have  afforded  a  vessel  in  distress,  as  it  is  no  more
than  a  duty }  yet,  a  passenger,  or  an  officer  acting  as  sucb,
for  extraordinary  exertions  beyond  the  line  of  his  duty,  has
been  deemed  entitled  to  a  liberal  compensation  as  salvage/
So,  also,  in  a  case  of  extraordinary  peril,  it  is  admitted,  that
great  exertions  and  personal  hazard  may  exalt  a  pilotage  ser-
Tice  into  something  of  a  salvage  service.^  And  if  the  ship
has  been  abandoned  so  as  to  discharge  a  seaman  from  his
contract,  yet  if  he  subsequently  contributes  to  the  preserva-
tion of  the  vessel,  he  will  be  entitled  to  salvage.' As  the


a  L'Esperance,  1  Dodt.  Rep,  46.  But  in  a  case  of  extraordinary
■aWag^e  merit,  in  brioging  in  a  derelict,  the  court  have  not  only  allowed
a  moiety  for  salvage,  but  they  have  charged  the  costs  upon  the  other
moiety. The  Frances  Mary,  2  Hogg,  Adm.  Rep,  89.

b  2  Craneh'M  Rep,  268.

€  Newman  r.  Walters,  3  Bos,  cf*  Pull.  612.  Bond  v.  The  Brig  Co-
ra, 2  Wash.  Cir.  Rep,  80.  Case  r.  Le  Tigre,  3  ibid,  567.  The  ge-
neral  rale  is,  that  a  salvage  remuneration  is  given  only  to  the  persona
actually  occupied  in  the  salvage  service.  (The  Vine,  2  Hogg,  Adm.
R*.p,  1.)  But  where  the  service  has  been  performed  at  some  risk  to
the  property  of  the  o%oner$^  a  portion  of  the  remuneration  has  been  al-
lotted to  them. The  Salacia,  Hid,  262.

d  Sir  William  Scott,  in  The  Joseph  Harvey,  1  Rob,  Adm.  Rep,  257.
Phil.  edit.

e  Mason  r.  Ship  Blaireau,  2  Cranch'a  Rep.  240.


Lcc.  XLYII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  247

duty  of  the  seamen  ceases  by  capture,  any  exertion  subse-
quently and  successfully  made  to  recover  and  rescue  the  cap-
tured ship,  will  entitle  them  to  recompense.*  The  case  will
then  be  withdrawn  from  the  operation  of  the  general,  if  not
universal  principle,  that  so  long  as  the  person,  be  he  a  sea-
man, pilot,  or  other  person,  is  acting  within  the  line  of  his
duty  in  the  given  case,  he  has  no  valid  claim  for  a  salvage
remuneration.

The  subject  of  salvage  was  largely  discussed  in  our  courts
in  a  case  of  recapture.*  The  District  Court  of  New- York
allowed  as  salvage  one  half  of  the  value  of  the  ship.  The
Circuit  Court  reversed  the  decree,  and  denied  all  salvage.
The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  corrected  both  de-
crees, and  allowed  one  sixth  part  of  the  net  value,  after  de-
ducting the  charges.  The  court,  in  that  case,  admitted  the
rule  to  be,  that  a  neutral  vessel,  captured  by  a  beUigerent,
was  entitled  to  be  discharged  without  paying  salvage,  on  the
ground  that  no  beneficial  service  was  thereby  rendered,  as  the
neutral,  acting  properly,  would,  of  course,  be  discharged  by
the  courts  of  the  sovereign  of  the  captor  ;  and  they  sidmitted,
likewise,  the  exception  to  the  rule,  when  belligerent  captor^s
and  courts  were  notorious  for  their  unprincipled  rapacity.
This  rule,  and  the  exception,  have  been  frequently  declared
in  the  English  admiralty.*  The  rule  of  British  jurisprudence
in  respect  to  recaptured  property,  and  salvage  thereon,  is  to
give  the  benefit  of  the  rule  applicable  to  recaptured  property  of
British  subjects  to  allies,  until  it  appears  that  they  act  upon  a
less  liberal  principle,  and  then  the  allies  are  treated  according
to  their  own  measure  of  justice.'' The  same  rule  has  been


a  The  Two  Frieods,  I  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.  371.  The  Bearer,  3  ibid.
292.

b  Talbot  V.  Seaman,  1  Cranck'a  Rep,  1.

e  The  War  OnskaD,  2  Rob,  Adm,  Rep.  299.  The  Carlotta,  5  Hid.
54.

d  The  SanU  Craz,  1  Rob*  Adm.  Rep.  42.


248  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

adopted  by  statute  in  this  country,'  and  it  is  founded  on  the
immovable  basis  of  reciprocal  justice.

Though  the  contract  of  seamen  be  not  dissolved  by  ship*
wreck,  and  it  be  their  duty  to  remain  and  labour  to  preserve
the  wreck  and  fragments  of  the  ship  and  cargo,  yet  they
may  be  entitled  to  recompense,  by  way  of  salvage,  for  their
peculiar  services.  The  wages  recovered  in  the  case  of  ship-
wreck, are  in  the  nature  of  salvage,  and  form  a  lien  on  the
property  saved.  The  character  of  seamen  creates  no  inca-
pacity to  assume  that  of  salvors ;  and  were  it  otherwise,  it
would  be  mischievous  to  the  interests  of  commerce,  inconsis-
tent with  natural  equity,  and  would  be  tempting  the  unfor-
tunate mariner  to  obtain  by  plunder  and  embezzlement  in  a
common  calamity,  what  he  ought  to  possess  upon  principles
of  justice.  The  allowance  of  salvage  in  such  cases  is  and
ought  to  be  liberal ;  not  less,  in  any  case,  than  the  wages
would  have  amounted  to  ;  and  even  an  additional  recom-
pense should  be  made  in  cases  of  extraordinary  danger  and
distingubhed  gallantry,  where  the  service  was  much  en-
hanced, by  the  preservation  of  life,  and  the  great  value  of
the  property  at  stake.^

(10.)  Of  the  dissolution  of  the  contract  of  affreightment.

The  contract  of  affreightment  may  be  dissolved  witliout
execution,  not  only  by  the  act  of  the  parties,  but  in  many
cases  by  the  act  of  the  law.

If  the  voyage  becomes  unlawful,  or  impossible  to  be  per-
formed, or  if  it  bel)roken  up,  either  before  or  after  it  has  ac-
tually commenced,  by  war  or  interdiction  of  commerce  with
the  place  of  destination,  the  contract  is  dissolved.* There  is


a  Act  of  Congresi^  March  3cf,  1800,  oh.  14,  sec.  3.

b  The  Two  Catherioes,  2  ^ason't  Rep.  319.  The  Court  of  Admi-
ralty has  DO  power  of  rcmemeratiog  (be  mere  preservatioD  of  life  ;  but
if  it  be  connected  with  the  preservation  of  property,  it  forms  a  high
ingredient  of  merit  in  the  allowance  of  salvage.  1  Hagg.  Adm.  Hep,  83.

e  Liddard  v.  Lopes,  10  EasVs  Rep,  526.


Lee.  XLVn.]  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 249

IM>  difference  in  principle  between  a  complete  interdiction  of
commerce  which  prevents  the  entry  of  the  vessel,  or  a  partial
one  in  relation  to  the  merchandise  on  board,  which  prevents
it  being  landed.  The  contract  of  affreightment  in  respect  to
the  goods  is  dissolved,  for  the  shipper  cannot  demand  the  de-
livery of  the  goods  if  the  landing  of  them  would  expose  the
vessel  to  seizure.'  And  if  the  voyage  be  broken  up  by  cap^
tore  on  the  passage,  so  as  to  cause  a  complete  defeasance  of
the  undertaking,  the  contract  is  dissolved,  notwithstanding  a
subsequent  recapture.*  So,  if  there  be  a  blockade  of  the  port
of  destination,  by  means  of  which  a  delivery  of  the  cargo
becomes  impossible,  and  the  vessel  returns  to  the  port  of  de^
parture,  the  voyage  is  defeated  and  the  contract  dissolved.'

But  a  temporary  impediment  of  the  voyage  does  not  work
a  dissolution  of  the  charter  party,  and  an  embargo  has  been
held  to  be  such  a  temporary  restraint,  even  though  it  be  in*
definite  as  to  time.'  The  same  construction  is  given  to  the
legal  operation  of  a  hostile  blockade,  or  investment  of  the  port
of  4eparture,  upon  the  contract.  It  merely  suspends  the  per-
formance of  it,  and  the  voyage  must  be  broken  up,  or  the
completion  of  it  become  unlawful,  before  the  contract  will  be
dissolved.'  If  the  cargo  be  not  of  a  perishable  nature,  and
can  endure  the  delay,  then  the  general  principle  applies,  that
nothing  but  occurrences  which  prevent  absolutely  the  execu-
tion of  the  contract,  will  discharge  it.  The  parties  must  wait
until  those,  which  merely  retard  its  execution,  are  removed.
The  commercial  code  of  France,-^  declares,  that,  if  before  the


a  PatroD  r.  Silva,  1  MUler'g  Loui.  R^,  277.
b  The  Hiram,  3  Rob.  Adm,  Rep.  189.

e  Scott  T.  Libbjr.  2  Johnt.  Rep,  336.  The  Tuleta,  6  Rob.  Adm.  Rep.
177.

d  Hadley  y,  Clarke,  8  Term  Rep.  259.  M'Bride  v.  Marine  Idsu-
rance  Compaoy,  5  Johns.  Rep.  308.  Baylies  r.  Fetty place,  7  Jlati,
Rep.  325.

e  Palmer  t.  Lorillard,  Id  Johne.  Rep.  348.

/  Code  de  Commerce^  art.^276,  277.

Vol.  III.  32


260  OF  PEBBONAL  PROPERTY.  [P«ri  IT,

vessel  sails  on  her  Toyage,  an  interdiction  of  commerce  widi
the  country  to  which  she  is  bound  takes  place,  the  charter
party  is  dissolved,  though  it  would  be  otherwise  if  a  superioK
force  hindeiB,  for  a  time,  the  departure  of  the  ship,  or  if  aha
were  detained  by  superior  force  duriog  the  voyage.

In  parting  with  the  subject  of  this,  and  of  the  two  prece-
ding lectures,  I  readily  acknowledge  the  free  use  that  has  been
made  of  Lord  Tenterden's  excellent  treatise  on  maritime  law..
It  has  been  the  basis  of  the  compilation,  and  it  wasunpossiUe
to  have  found  any  other  model  so  perfect,  or  to  have  made
any  material  improvement  upon  it.  It  is  equally  distinguish*
ed  for  practical  good  sense,  and  for  extensive  and  accurate
learning,  remarkably  compressed,  and  appropriately  applied.
Another  work  from  which  I  have  derived  much  aasistante,  is
Mr.  Holt's  view  of  the  English  navigation  laws,  and  of  ma-
ritime contracts.^  He  has  followed  in  the  track  of  Lord  Ten*
terden,  and  with  great  credit  to  himself.  His  work  is  wholly
free  from  the  incumbrance  of  foreign  learning  on  the  same
subject.  This  omission  gives  the  appearance  of  a  dry  prac*
tical  character  to  the  work,  but  the  reading  of  it  becomes
quite  interesting  by  reason  of  the  clearness  of  its  analysis,
the  precision  of  its  principles,  the  perspicuity  of  the  style,  and
the  manly  good  sense  of  the  autboc  The  introductory  part
'  is  particularly  excellent,  for  it  contains  a  very  condensed,  yet
comprehensive,  and  perfectly  accurate  view,  of  all  the  prin*
ciples  in  the  work,  entirely  disembarrassed  from  adjudged
'  cases.

No  one  can  observe,  at  first,  without  surprise,  how  exten-
sively and  closely  subsequent  writers  follow  in  the  footsteps
of  those  who  preceded  them  ;  but  when  we  come  to  study
the  same  topics,  handled  so  often  by  master  spirits,  we  perceive
that  this  must  necessarily  be  the  case,  in  ethics  and  in  law,
where  discoveries  are  not  to  be  made,  as  in  the  physical
sciences.  The  entire  region  of  ethical  and  municipal  juris-
prudence has  been  amply  explored,  and  with  more  than  a


Lee  XLVIL] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY/  261

Denham  or  a  Parry's  success.'  Panaetius  was  the  original
author  of  the  substance  of  Cicero's  Offices^  as  Cicero  himself
acknowledges ;  and  that  consummate  work,  in  its  turn,  be-
came the  foundation  of  all  that  Grotius,  Puffendorf,  Cum-
berland, and  a  thousand  other  writers,  have  laid  down  as  the
deductions  of  right  reason,  concerning  the  moral  duties  of
mankind.  No  person  would  think  of  compiling  a  code  of
ethics  without  at  least  visiting  the  shades  of  Tusculum,  and
still  less  would  he  think  of  erecting  a  temple  to  jurisprudence,
without  adorning  it  With  materials  drawn  from  the  splendid
monuments  of  Justinian,  or  the  castellated  remains  of  feudal
grandeur.  The  literature  of  the  present  day,  '^  rich  with  the
spoils  of  time,"  instructs  by  the  aid  of  the  accumulated  wis-
dom of  ages.


a  lo  the  immense  collectioo  which  was  published  at  Amsterdam  id
1669,  of  the  rarioos  works  of  Straccha,  Santeraa,  and  others,  on  naa-
tical  and  maritime  subjects,  we  hare  laborious  essays,  replete  with  ob-
solete learning,  on  different  branches  of  commercial  law,  of  no  lesa
than  twenty  Italian  civilians,  whose  works  are  now  totally  forgotten,
and  even  their  very  names  have  become  obscured  by  the  oblivion  of
time.  Subsequent  civilians  may  have  erected  stately  tomes  from  the
matter  which  their  mini  have  furnished.


LECTURE  XLVIU.


OF  THE  LAW  OF  BIARIinB  INSURANCE.


Marine  insurance  is  a  contract  whereby  one  party^  for  a
stipulated  premium,  undertakes  to  indemnify  the  other
against  certain  perils,  or  sea  risks,  to  which  his  ship,  freight,
and  cargo,  or  some  of  them,  may  be  exposed,  during  a
certain  voyage,  or  a  fixed  period  of  time.

In  the  consideration  of  a  title  in  the  law  of  such  extensive
concern,  and  upon  which  so  many  learned  volumes  have
been  exhausted,  it  has  been  found  difficult  to  bring  the  sub-
ject within  manageable  limits,  and  suitably  restricted  for  the
object  of  these  lectures.  It  has  been  my  endeavour  to  state
the  leading  principles  of  the  contract,  and  to  dwell  upon  such
parts  only  as  are  best  adapted  for  elementary  instruction.

The  subject  will  be  considered  under  the  following  ar-
rangement :  (I.)  Of  the  formation  and  subject  matter  of  the
contract  (11.)  Of  the  voyage  in  relation  to  the  policy.
(IIL)  Of  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  insured  in  case  of  loss.

I.  Of  the  formation  and  subject  matter  of  the  contract.

(I.)  Of  the  parties.

All  persons,  whether  aliens  or  natives,  may  be  insured,
with  the  exception  of  alien  enemies,  for  it  is  a  contract  au-
thorized-by  the  general  law  and  usage  of  nations.* It  was


■^


•  Palhier  tBrms  it  a  oootrsct  da  Drdi  du  Qem*


254  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

for  a  long  time  an  unsettled  question  in  the  English  law,
whether  the  insurance  of  enemy's  property  was  lawful  In
the  year  1741,  a  bill  was  brought  into  ParUament  to  prohibit
insurai^ces  on  the  property^of  the  subjects  of  France,  then  at
war  with  Great  Britain ;  and  the  propriety  of  such  a  restrk>
tion  was  much  diseassed,  and  the  bill  was  dropped.  But  in
1748,  such  a  bill  passed  into  a  law.'  It  prohibited,  under  a
penalty,  the  assurance  on  ships  or  merchandises  belonging  to
Prance,  and  the  contracts  for  suchipoUcies  were  declared  void.
The  statute  of  33  Geo.  III.  c.  27,  was  to  the  same  effect, '
though  much  more  severe  in  its  penalties.  Those  statutes
were  temporary,  and  applied  only  to  the  then  existing  war,
and  they  left  the  question  still  undedded  as  to  the  legaUty  of
such  insurances  independent  of  statute.

Lord  Hardwicke,  in  the  year  1749,  declared,^  that  there
had  been  no  determination  that  such  insurances  were  unlaw-
ful, and  that  it  might  be  going  too  far  to  say,  that  all  trading
with  enemies  was  unlawful,  and  that  there  had  been  several
insurances  of  that  sort  during  the  war  of  1741.  But  in.
Brandon  v.  Nesbit,''  the  Court  of  K.  B.  gave  a  fedal  wound
to  the  opinion,  that  the  insurance  of  enemy's  property  was
lawful,  though  that  opinion  had  received  considerable  cur-
rency  under  the  sanction  of  the  great  name  and  influence  of
Lord  Mansfield.  It  was  certainly  without  any  just  foundation,
either  in  the  English,  law,  or  in  the  established  policy  and
principles  of  the  law  of  nations.  That  case  was  a  suit  on  a
X)olicy  of  insurance,  brought  in  the  name  of  an  English  agent,
for  his'  principal,  who  was  an  alien  enemy ;  and  it  was  ad-
judged, that  no  action  could  be  maintained  either  by,  cur  in
fisivour  ef  an  alien  enemy. The  case  of  Bristow  v.  Towers!^


a  Stat.  21  Cleo.  XI.  cb.  4.

h  Henkle  r.  The  Royal  £zchaDg;e  Auarance  Company,  1  Veny**
R^»  317.

e  6  Term  Rep,  23.

d  6  T^rm  Rep.  3ft.


Ue.  ZLYIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  26(>

■

was  sdll  0iore  direcdy  on  the  point,  and  the  legality  and  ex-
pedieocy  of  insurances  of  enemy's  property  were  diacossed
Tery  much  at  large,  and  with  great  ability  and  learning.  The
decision  of 'the  court  was  put  upon  the  strict  ground,  that  the
insurance  of  enemy's  property  was  illegal,  and  no  action
could  be  sustained  on  such  a  policy.  A  distinction  was  after-
wards taken  in  Bell  v.  Gilson/^  where  it  was  held,  that  the
insurance  of  goods  purchased  in  an  enemy's  country  during'
war,  by  a  British  agent,  and  shipped  for  British  subjects,  was
a  lawful  insurance.  But  every  >ii3tinction  of  that  kind  was
subsequently  abandoned  ;^  and  in  the  case  of  insurances  on
French  property  previous  to  war,  they  were  held  not  to  cover
a  loss  by  British  capture  after  the  war  was  renewed,  even
though  the  action  was  iiot  brought  until  after  the  restoration
of  peace.  It  was  declared,  that  an  insurance  of  enemy's  pro-
perty, as  well  as  all  commercial  intercourse  with  the  enemy,
was,  at  common  law,  unlawful,  and  that  an  insurance,  though
effected  before  the  war,  made  no  difference,  as  a  foreigner
might  otherwise  insure  previous  to  the  war,  against  all  the
evils  incident  to  the  war.  Insurances  of  enemy's  property
had  been  indulged,  but  never  were  legal.  The  judicial  lan^
guage  at  last  was,*  that  such  insurances  were  not  only  illegal
and  void,  but  repugnant  to  every  principle  of  public  policy.
The  former  opinion  in  fevour  of  the  expediency  of  such  in*
surances,  had  never  yet  produced  one  single  judicial  determi*
nation  in  favour  of  their  legality.

All  the  continental  ordinances  and  jurists,  concur  in  the
illegality  of  such  insurances.' Bjnskerehoek,  in  ap^^thapter


a  1  Boi.  ^  PulL  345.

k  Fartado  r.  Rodgere,  3  Bom,  4r  ^^i- 191. Gamba  t.  Ls  Merariefr
4  EomVm  Rep.  407. Brandoo  r.  Curling,  ibid.  410.

c  Lord  Ellenborough,  Kelloer  y.  Le  Mesurier,  4  EcuVm  Rep.  396.
Lord  Erskioe,  Ex  parte  Lee,  13  Vetey^e  Rep.  64.

d  Tbe  ordinaDces  of  Barcelona,  as  early  as  1484,  declared  such  iDtu-
rancetvoid.  CoruuUU  de  la  JUar*  par  Boucher^  torn.  i'l.  717.  See
also,  Le  Guidony  ob.  2,  sec.  5,  in  Cleirac,  Ue  ei^Qwitmrnee  de  la  Mer.


S66  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

devoied  to  the  coDsideration  of  this  question,  concludes  that
the  reason  of  war  absolutely  requires  the  prohibition  of  in^
surance  of  enemy's  property ;  because,  by  assuming  such
nsks,  we  promote  the  maritime  commerce  of  the  enemy.
Yalin  c<Misidered  that  insuring  enemy's  property,  -and  trading
with  the  enemy,  was  substantially  the  same  thing ;  and  he
truly  observed  that  when  the  English,  in  tlie  war  of  1766,
insured  French  ships  and  cargoes,  which  were  captured  and
condemned  as  prize  of  war,  and  paid  for  by  English  under-
writers, the  nation  only  took  with  one  hand  what  it  restored
with  the  other.'

The  doctrine  of  the  European  law,  on  this  subject,  was
extensively  discussed  and  explicitly  recognised  in  New- York,
in  the  case  of  Griswold  v.  Waddington  /  and  as  that  doe-
trine  is  founded  on  the  same  principle  of  general  policy  which
interdicts  all  commerce  and  trading  with  the  enemy,  in  time
of  war,  it  may  be  considered  as  the  established  law  of  this
country.

With  respect  to  persons  who  may  be  insurers,  the  rule  of
the  common  law  prevails  with  us,  and  any  individuals,  or
companies,  or  partnerships,  may  lawfully  become  insurers ;
and  we  have  no  incorporated  companies,  like  those  of  the
Royal  Exchange  Assurance^  and  the  London  Assurance
companies,  with  the  monopoly  or  exclusive  right  of  making
insurance  as  a  compaay  or  partnership  on  a  joint  capital.
During  the  colonial  government  of  this  country,  as  well  as
for  the  first  fifteen  or  twenty  years  after  the  peace  of  1783,
the  business  of  insurance  was  almost  entirely  carried  on  by


p.  197,  edit.  1  «71.  Ord.  of StockholmyO^  1756.  Z  Moffem,  257.  Ord.
tf  the  SkUes  Qmeral  of  the  J^etherUmdt,  in  1622,  1667,  1665>  and.
1689,  cited  in  Bynk.  Q. «/.  Pu6.  lib.  i.  cb.  21.  Emerigon^  de»  Asm.
torn.  i.  128.

a  VaXxfCM  Com,  torn.  ii.  32.  See  vol.  i.  Lee.  4,  bow  far  a  foreign  do-^
micil  commaDicates  to  a  citizen  the  disabilities  of  an  alien  enemy.

fr  16  Joftnf.  Mepi  438.


Lee.  XLVIIL]  Of  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. ^67

priYate  individuals,  each  taking  singly  for  himself,  and  not
in  solido,  a  risk  to  the  amount  of  his  subscriptioD.  But  in-^
corporated  companies  began  to  multiply  and  supplant  private
underwriters,  and  the  business  of  insurance  in  the  United
States  is  now  carried  on  almost  exclusively  by  incorporated
companies.  Individuals,  and  unincorporated  partnership
companies,  are  still  at  liberty  to  carry  on  the  business  of  in-
surance to  any  extent  they  please,  and  the  success  of  any
such  competition  with  the  incorporated  companies  would  de-
p^id  upon  the  ability  to  command  confidence,  and  the  judg-<
ment  and  skill  with  which  the  business  was  conducted.*

(2.)  Of  the  essential  or  usual  terms  of  the  policy.

If  the  ship  be  specified  in  the  policy,  it  becomes  part  of  the
contract,  and  no  other  ship  can  be  substituted  without  neces*
sity  ;  but  the  cargo  may  be  shifted  from  one  ship  to  another^
if  it  be  done  from  necessity,  and  the  insurer  of  it  will  still  be
liable.  An  insurance  on  the  body  of  a  ship  sweeps  in,  by  th«
comprehensiveness  of  the  expression,  whatever  is  appurte-
nant to  the  ship.  This  is  the  doctrine  taught  in  all  the  con-
tinental writers  on  insurance,  as  well  as  in  the  English  law.^
An  insurance  on  a  ship  means  prima  facie  the  legal  inte-
rest in  the  vessel,  and  not  the  mere  equitable  interest,  and  if
the  policy  be  intended  to  cover  the  equitable  interest  only,  that


a  Marine  iosuraDce  was  formerly  a  lawful  bosiness  in  New- York,
eqaallj  open  to  all  the  world  ;  but  hi  1829,  tbe  legislatare,  by  statute,
{Law»  JV.  F.  52J  «ef«.  cb.  336,)  prohibited  tnariDe  insaraiice,  of  lend-
iog  00  reipoDdentia  or  bottomry,  effected  within  tbe  state,  to  all  pencils
and  companies  residing  in  any  foreign  conntiy,  acting  by  any  agent
here.  Persons  and  associations  in  other  states  effisoting  such  insaraoces
in  New-Tork,  were  taxed  ten  per  cent,  on  their  preminms.  The  same
check  and  prohibition  applies  to  insurances  in  New- York  against  fire.
JV.  F.  Revised  StahUee,  yoI.  i.  714.

b  Emerigon,  torn.  i.  423. Boulay  Paiy,  torn.  iit.  379. Plantamoer
▼.  Staples,  1  Term  Rep.  Oil,  note.
Vol.  IIL  33


268  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  Y.

ioieresi  ought  to  be  disdoeed  to  the  insurer.*  An  insurance
will  be  valid  without  naming  the  ship,  as  upon  goods  on  board
anjf  ship  or  ships  ;  and  it  becomes  sometimes  a  nice  ques-
tion as  to  the  apfdication  of  the  loss,  when  there  are  two  or
more  policies  of  that  loose  description  on  different  paroeb  of
goods/  So,  it  will  be  valid  if  made  on  account  of  A.,  or  of
whom  it  may  concern/^  In  England,  the  statute  of  28
Geo.  III.  prohibits  insurances  in  blank,  as  to  the  name  of  the
insured ;  and  the  name  of  the  party  in  interest,  or  some  agent
in  his  behalf,  must  be  inserted ;  and  the  suit  on  the  policy  may
be  brought  in  the  name  of  the  principal  or  agent  The  inte-
rest of  the  real  owner  may  be  averred  and  shown,  but  if  one
partner  insures  in  his  own  name  only,  the  policy  will  cover
his  undivided  interest  in  the  partnership,  and  no  more.^  If
the  policy  has  the  words  and  whomsoever  it  map  concern^
then  it  will  cover  the  whole  partnership  interest ;'  and  Yalin
and  Boulay  Paty  think  it  covers  the  whole  if  the  policy  be
generally  on  his  goods/  On  such  a  policy  an  action  may  be
maintained  by  any  one,  whose  interest  was  intended  to  be  in-
sured by  it,  though  he  has  but  a  special  interest,  as  by  lien
or  otherwise.*^

The  form  of  the  policy  in  England  and  the  United  States,
contains  the  words  lost  or  not  lost ;  and  if  the  subject  in-
sured be  lost,  or  has  arrived  in  safety  when  the  contract  is
made,  it  is  still  valid,  if  made  in  ignorance  of  the  event,  and
the  insurer  must  pay  the  loss  or  retain  the  premium  as  the


a  Ohl  f .  Eag^le  Ids.  CompaDy,  4  Mcuony  390.

b  Emerignn^  torn.  i.  173.  Kewley  r.  Ryao,  2  H.  Blacks,  343.
Heochmao  r.  Offley,  ibid.  345,  note.

c  Bouiay  Paty^  torn.  iii.  528.  531,  torn.  i?.  28.

d  Faiin's  Com,  torn.  ii.  34.  1  Emerigon^  293,  284.  Graves  A
BarneweU  v.  Boston  Marios  Ins.  Company,  2  Cranch*$IUp,  419.  Da-
mas  f .  Jones,  4  Jlf(u«.  Rep,  647.

s  Lawrence  r.  Sebor,  2  Cmnes^  Rtp,  203.

/  raltn,  torn.  ii.  84. Boulay  Paiy,  torn.  iii.  886.

g  The  Pacific  Ins.  Company  ▼.  Catlett,  4  Wendell,  76.


I-ec.  XLVni.l OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  2S9

caae  may  be.  This  is  laid  down  by  the  foreign  jurists  as  a
geno^  principle  of  insurance,  without  reference  to  those
words,  which  are  said  to  be  peculiar  to  the  English  policies,
and  that  without  them  the  policy  would  be  void  if  the  subject
was  lost  when  the  insurance  v^  as  made«*  There  is  no  Eng-
lish adjudication  to  that  effect,  and  the  point  may  well  be
doubted,  inasmuch  as  all  the  continental  authorities  hold  such
iosurances  to  be  valid  if  made  in  ignorance  of  the  existing
loss.*

A  policy  on  a  voyage  from  abroad  may  be  good,  though
it  omits  to  name  the  ship,  or  master,  or  port  of  discharge,  or
consignee,  or  to  specify  and  designate  the  nature  or  species
of  the  cargo,  for  ail  these  may  be  unknown  to  the  insured
when  he  applies  for  insurance.'  The  policy,  in  such  a  case,
will  be  good  to  the  amount  insured,  if  effects  be  laden  in  any
ship,  to  any  port,  and  to  any  consignee.  The  text  writers,
however,  require  cargo  of  the  same  form  and  species,  and  the
policy  will  not  cover  the  same  thing  under  a  new  modification,
if  the  essential  character  of  the  article  has  changed ;  as  a  po-
licy on  a  cargo  of  wheat  will  not  coyer  a  cargo  of  flour.'  If
bottomry  or  respondentia  interest  be  insured  by  the  lender,  it
has  been  required  to  be  insured  eo  nomine^  and  not  under
the  general  description  of  goods,*  But  this  rule  was  origi'-
nally  adopted  on  the  ground  of  mercantile  usage,  and  where
the  usage  was  shown  to  be  different,  such  an  interest  was  al*


a  6  Burr.  Rep.  3803, 2804. Park^  31 .

h  Rota  OentuE  Decino^  42,  d.  8.  Roccui  de  Au,  n.  51.  Emerigon^
torn.  ii.  121.  Rugg^les  r.  Geo.  Int.  Ins.  CoropaDj,  4  Jkfofoni  74.  Kohne
V.  Int.  Company  of  North  America,  1  Wa$h,  dr.  Rep.  93.

c  Le  Quidofiy  cb.  12,  art.  2.  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  tit.  dei  Auurancee^
art.  4.  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  837.  BoiUay  Paty^  Coure  de  Droit
GMi.tom.iii.  411,  412.

d  Bouiay  PaJty^  tomi  iii.  388, 389.

e  GloTor  ▼.  Black,  3  Burr.  1394.  Robertson  r.  Union  Ins.  Com-
pany, 2  Johneon^t  Cat.  260. Kenny  r.  Clarkson,  1  Johne.  Rep.  385.


260  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

lowed  to  be  cov^ered  by  a  policy  oa  goods.'  If  pan  of  the
policy  should  be  written  and  part  printed,  and  there  should
arise  a  reasonable  doubt  upon  the  meaning  of  the  contract,
the  greater  effect  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  written  words,  for
they  are  the  immediate  language  selected  by  the  parties,  and
the  printed  words  contain  the  formida  adapted  to  that  and
all  other  cases  upon  similar  subjects.^

The  ancient  laws  of  insurance  required  the  insured  to  bear
the  risk  himself,  of  one  tenth  of  his  interest  in  the  voyage.
This  was  to  stimulate  him,  .by  a  sense  of  his  own  interest,  to
watch  more  vigilantly  for  the  preservation  of  the  cargo.  The
Dutch  ordinances  of  Antwerp,  Middleburg,  and  Amsterdam,
and  the  Le  Guidon,  had  such  provisions/  But  these  provi-
sions have  been  omitted  in  all  the  modern  codes,  as  being
odious  and  useless,  and  the  merchant  can  have  his  interest
insured  to  the  entire  extent  of  it.

Policies  are  generally  effected  through  the  agency  of  bro-
kers ;  and  the  insurance  broker  keeps  running  accounts  with
both  parties,  and  becomes  the  mutual  agent  of  both  the  un-
derwriter  and  the  insured.  His  receipt  of  the  premium
places  iiim  in  the  relation  of  debtor  to  the  one  party,  and
creditor  to  the  other.  The  general  rule  is,  that  the  broker  is
the  debtor  of  the  underwriter  for  the  premiums,  and  the  un*
derwriter  the  debt<»'  of  the  assured  for  the  loss.  The  receipt
of  the  premium  in  the  policy,  is  conclusive  evidence  of  pay«
ment,  and  binds  the  insurer,  unless  there  be  fraud  on  the  part
of  the  insured.''  If  the  ageiat  effects  an  insurance  for  his
principal  without  his  knowledge  or  authority,  and  the  princi-
pal afterwards  adopts  the  act,  the  insurer  is  bound  and  can-


A  Gregory  ▼.  Cbriatie,  1  Ckmdy't  Marshall,  118.

b  Lord  Ellenborougb,  4  Ecut^  136.  Coster  t.  Pbceoix  Ins.  Compa-
ny, C.  C.  Penn.  April,  1807.

«  S  Jlfo^^reru,  26.  68. i>  Guuion,  cb.  2,  art.  11.

d  Dalzell  ▼.  Mair,  1  Camfb.  Rep,  532.  Foy  f.  Bell,  3  Taunt.  Rep.
493.


I-ec,  XLVIII.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  261

not  object  to  the  want  of  authority.'  And  a  merchant  who
has  effects  of  his  foreign  correspondent  in  hand,  or  who  is
in  the  habit  of  insuring  for  him,  is  bound  to  comply  with  an
<irder  to  insure,  and  the  6rder  may  be  implied  in  some  cases
from  the  previous  course  of  dealing  between  the  parties.  If
the  agent  neglects  or  imperfectly  executes  the  order,  he  is
answerable,  as  if  he  himself  was  the  insurer,  and  is  entitled
to  the  premium.^

If  the  subject  matter  of  the  policy  be  assigned,  the  policy
may  also  be  assigned,  so  as  to  give  a  right  of  action  to  the
assignee.  But  if  there  be  no  statute  proviedoo,  (as  there  is  in
Pennsylvania,'' )  the  assignee  must  sue  in  the  name  of  the
assignor,  who  will  not  be  permitted  to  defeat  or  prejudice  the
right  of  action  of  the  assignee.  The  declaration,  in  such  a
suit,  may  contain  the  averment  that  the  plaintiff  sues  as  mere
trustee,  and  that  the  whole  interest  is  in  others.*'


a  Bridge  r.  Niagara  Ins.  Company  of  New- York,  1  HM  JV.  F.
Rep.  247.

M  Boller/J.,  in  Wallace  v.  Tellfair,  2  Term,  188,  note,  and  in  Sroitk
T>  Lascalles,  2  Temiy  188.  De  Taslett  r.  Croosillat,  2  Wath.  Or.
Rqf.  132. Morris  r.  Sammerl,  ibid.  203.

c  1  Binney*s  R^.  429.

d  2  Marshall  on  Int.  by  Condy,  800.  803.  805.  PkUl^e  (m  bu.  11.
Carter  y.  Union  Ins.  Company,  1  Johns,  Ch.  Rep.  483.  Wakefield  7.
Martin,  3  Mass.  Rep.  558.  Bell  v.  Smith,  5  Bamw.  4r  Cress.  Rep.
188.  Asbburst,  J.,  in  Delancey  t.  Stoddart,  1  Term,  26.  Craig  r.
The  U.  S.  Ins.  Company,  1  PeUrs'  Cir.  Rep.  410.  A  clause  in  a  poll-
cy  that  it  shall  be  Toid  if  assigned  without  the  consent,  in  writing,  of
the  insurer,  is  taken  strictly,  and  means  an  effectual  transfer  or  pledge
of  the  particular  policy.  In  Massachusetts,  it  has  been  decided,  that
if  there  be  an  absolute  transfer  of  the  subject  insured,  the  contract  of
insurance  is  avoided,  for  the  assured  cannot  sue,  as  he  has  not  suffered
any  loss,  and  the  assignee  cannot  sue,  for  he  is  no  party  to  the  contract.
But  if  the  assignment  be  in  the  nature  of  a  mortgage,  or  in  trust,  the
insured  may  nevertheless  sue  and  recover  to  the  extent  of  his  residuary
interest.  Carroll  v.  The  Boston  Marine  Ins.  Company,  8  Mass.  Rep.
515. Lazarus  r.  Commonwealth  Ins.  Company,  5  Pickeri$ig,  76.


262  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

(3.)  Of  the  objects  of  insurance.

Tbe  subdivision  of  this  head  will  include,  1.  Illicit
trade.  2.  Contraband  of  war.  3.  Seamen^ s  wages.  4.
Freiffhty  profits  and  commissidns.  6.  Open  and  va-
lued policies.  6.  Wager  policies.  I  shall  treat  of  ^ach
of  them  in  their  order.

1.  Of  iUicit  trade.

The  proper  subject  of  insurance,  is  lawful  property  en-
gaged in  a  lawful  trade.  We  have  seen  that  the  property
of  enemies,  and  a  trade  carried  on  with  enemies,  do  not  come
within  this  definition.  So^  an  insurance  on  a  voyage  under-
taken in  violatbn  of  a  blockade,  or  of  an  embargo,  or  of  the
provisions  of  a  treaty,  is  illegal,  whether  the  policy  be  on  the
ship,  freight,  or  goods,  embarked  in  the  illegal  traffic*  Any
illegality  in  the  commencement  of  an  entire  voyage,  will  ren-
der the  whole  illegal,  and  destroy  the  policy  intended  for  its
protection.*  It  is  a  clear,  settled  and  universal  principle,
that  an  insurance  on  property,  intended  to  be  imported  or
exported,  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  place  where  the  policy  is
made,  or  sought  to  be  enforced,  is  void.  No  court,  consist-
ently with  its  duty,  can  lend  its  aid  to  carry  into  execution
a  contract  which  involves  a  violation  of  the  laws  the  court  is
bound  to  administer/


a  The  Hnrtig^  Haoe,  3  Hah.  Adm.  Rep.  324.  Delmada  7.  Mot-
teax,  K.  B.  26  Geo.  III.  Park  on  Jns.  311.  Sir  W.  Scott,  in  the
Eenrom,  2  Rob.  6, Hughe*  on  the  Law  qflnsurance^  70.

b  WllaoD  r.  Marryatt,  8  Term^  31. Bird  r.  AppIetoD,  ibid.  662.

•  JobnstoD  T.  Sutton,  Doug.  Rep.  254.  Parkio  v.  Dick,  11  EcuVi
Rep.  502.  The  United  States  r.  Tbe  Pan!  Sherman,  1  Petere^  Rep.
98.  PhilUpi  on  Im.  p.  35.  1  Emerigon,  210,  ch.  8,  sec.  6.  And
tee  hii  opinion  in  a  note  to  2  Foltfi,  130  ;  in  which  he  refers  to  iSlroc-
<ha  de  Anecur.  Oloeta^  5  n.  2, 3,  where  we  have  the  establishment  of
tbe  above  doctrine,  that  the  insurance  of  prohibited  goods  is  null  and
void,  founded  on  the  sound  principle,  that  in  mercibui  ilUaiie  non  eU


Lee  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  863

It  has  been  a  questioa  of  great  discussion,  whether  a  trade
prohibited  by  one  country,  might  be  made  the  subject  of  law*
ful  insurance,  to  be  protected  and  enforced  in  the  courts  of
another  in  which  the  prohibition  does  not  exist.  This  ques*
tion  involves  principles  in  politics  and  morals  of  momentous
importance,  and  yet  the  jurists  of  England  and  France  have
differed  widely  in  opinion  upon  it.  Yalin  and  Emerigon  con*
aider  the  insurance  of  goods  employed  in  a  foreign  smug-
gling or  contraband  trade,  to  be  valid,  provided  the  insurer
was  duly  informed,  when  he  entered  into  the  contract,  of  the
nature  of  the  trade.  The  French  admiralty  at  Marseilles,  in
1758,  sustained  and  enforced  a  contract  of  insurance  in  fa-
vour of  a  French  merchant,  who  attempted  to  export  silks
from  Spain  contrary  to  the  law  of  that  country,  and  whose
vessel  was,  in  consequence  thereof,  seized,  and  the  cargo  con-
fiscated. Emerigon  justified  the  decision  in. France,  under
the  broad  terms  of  the  policy,  which  assumes  the  aversio
perictdif  and  by  the  usage  of  the  commercial  nations,  who
permit  their  subjects  to  carry  on,  at  their  own  risk,  a  smug-
gling trade,  contrary  to  the  revenue  laws  of  other  countries.*
Yalin  concurs  in  opinion  with  Emerigon  ;*  but  their  conclu-
sions were  met  and  opposed  by  the  manly  sense,  and  stern
moral  principles  of  Pothier,  who  denied  that  it  was  permit-
ted to  Frenchmen  to  carry  on,  in  a  foreign  country,  a  contra-
band trade  prohibited  by  the  laws  of  the  foreign  country/
They  who  engage  in  foreign  commerce  are  bound  by  the
law  of  nature  and  nations,  to  act  in  obedience  to  the  laws  of
the  country  in  which  they  transact  business.  Every  sove-
reign possesses  a  rightful  and  supreme  jurisdiction  within


tommercium.  The  same  priaciple  is  in  Hoccui  de  Anecur,  n.  21,  and
he  copied  it  almost  verhaHm  from  Santema  de  Attecur*  tt  Spons,  JfSerc^
part  4,  D.  17.

a  1  Emerig.  210 — 215. 2  Fo/tn,  128,  note.

b  Com,  de  Aseur.  torn.  ii.  127.

c  TraUi  dee  An.  n.  SB*


I

1


264  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V,

own  territory.  He  has  a  right  to  regulate  the  commerce  of
his  subjects  in  his  discretion ;  and  so  far  as  foreigners  inter-
fere with  that  commerce  within  his  dominion,  they  are  equal-
ly bound  with  natives  to  obey  the  laws  which  regulate  it  If
Frenchmen,  trading  in  Spain,  were  not  bound  by  the  Spa-
nbh  laws,  the  subjects  of  Spain  are  bound  by  them,  and  it  is
immoral  for  foreigners  to  seduce  Spaniards  into  an  illicit  trade.
In  every  view,  according  to  Pothier,  the  commerce  was  illicit,
and  contrary  to  good  faith,  and  the  insurance  of  it  was  equal-
ly inadmissible,  and  created  no  valid  obligation.

Emerigon,  who  was  enlightened,  as  he  admits,  in  the  whole
course  of  his  work,  by  the  luminous  mind  of  Pothier,  as  the
latter  was  by  Yalin,  bows  to  the  irresistible  energy  of  the  prin-
ciples of  Pothier,  and  concedes,  that  the  insurance  of  a  foreign
smuggling,  or  contraband  trade,  is  rather  tolerated  than  justi-
fied, and  allowed  only  because  other  nations  have  indulged
in  the  same  vicious  practice.'


a  It  i«  admitted,  that  such  an  iDSuraDce  is  not  bioding,  if  the  under-
writer  was  not  informed  of  the  prohibited  trade.  He  must  know  that
he  was  insuring^  a  contraband  or  smoggfling  trade.  Racau^  de  Ass,  n.
31,  says,  that  such  an  insurance  is  not  binding  ignoranie  <utecurator$  ;
and  Scmienka^  de  Atsecurat.  part  4,  n.  17,  whom  Roccus  cites,  uses  the
same  words.  Roccus  copied  from  him  ;  and  jet  those  qualifying  ex-
pressions, and  which  are  so  material  to  the  question,  do  not  appear  in
Mr.  IngersoU's  translation  of  Roccus.  I  mention  this  without  the  least
intended  disparagement  of  that  Tery  useful  translation,  the  general  ac-
curacy of  which  is  undoubted.  I  would  beg  leare,  howcTer,  respeat-
fttlly  to  express  my  regret,  that  the  many  interesting  references  which
are  embodied  in  the  text  of  Roccus,  should  hare  been  detached  and
omitted.  There  is  no  author  who  less  required  a  reui  edition,  than
Roccus.  His  two  tittle  treatises,  De  J^avibus  et  J^auio^  and  De  Aue-
€uraiionibu9^  are  golden  essays,  composed  with  the  comprehensive
energy  and  brevity  of  Tacitus  or  Montesquieu,  and  they  remind  us  of
the  admirable  precision  of  Littleton  and  Humphreys.  In  an  age  when
the  hiblomania  has  become  a  universal  epidemic,  and  writers  are  every
where,  and  on  every  subject,  "  piling  up  reluctant  quarto  upoti  solid
folio,"  lucb  authors  as  those  I  have  alluded  to,  shine  with  increased
lustre.


L«c,  XLVIII.] OF  PERSONAL  FROPERTT.  26t

lo  Gogland,  the  law  of  insuraoce  is  the  aame  aa  it  i$  iq
France.  A  policy,  unlawful  by  the  law  of  the  land  where  it
18  made,  is  void  every  where  ;  but  an  insurance  upon  a
amuggling  voyage,  prohibited  only  by  the  law  of  the  fore^^Oi
country  where  the  ship  has  traded,  or  intends  to  trade^  is  good
and  vaUd,  on  the  principle,  which  (i&s  been  adopted  from  a
motive  of  policy  or  comity,  that  one  country  does  not  take
notice  of  the  revenue  laws  of  another,  nor  hold  itself  bop^^
to  repudiate  commercial  transactions  which  violate  them^  ;  U/
the  underwriter,  tlierefore,  with  full  knowledge  that  h^  W|Wj
covering  a  foreign  smuggling  trade,  make  the  insurance,  it:i9*
held  to  be  a  fair  contract  between  the  parties,  and  he  is  boutidi
by  it*  The  decisions  of  Lord  Mansfield  on  this  subject,  must
be  considered  as  laying  down  an  exceedingly  lax  morality,
particularly  in  the  case  of  Planche  v.  Fletdier^  where  aa
insurance  upon  a  voyage  in  which  it  was  intended  to  defraud
the  revenue  of  a  foreign  state,  was  held  not  to  be  illc^^al,
though  fictitious  papers  were  fabricated  iot  the  purpose  of
facilitating  the  fraud.  Lord  Hardwicke  had  advanced  simi-
Ur  doctrine  in  Boucher  v.  hawsonf  when  he  declared,  that
the  unlawfulness,  t^  the  Portuguese  laws,  of  exporting  goU
£rom  Portugal,  made  no  difference  in  the  action  at  London,
for  in  England  it  was  a  lawful  trade.  The  statute  of  19  Geo.
IL  c.  37,  was  made  even  with  a  view  to  favour  the  smug-
gling of  bullion  from  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  cdonies.
Lord  Kenyeo,  in  the  case  of  WayvMll  v.  Reed^^  seemed  to
have  fdt  the  pressure  of  the  unsound  and  immoral  principle
involved  in  the  doctrine  of  the  English  courts,  for  he  pur-
posely waived  the  inquiry  whether  or  not  it  be  immoral  for
a  native  of  one  country  to  enter  into  a  contract  with  the  sub-
ject of  another,  to  assist  the  latter  in  defrauding  the  revenue


o  PhiDcbe  r.  Fletcher,  D<mg.  Rep,  SSa. Lever  r.  Fletcher,  BU.
Vae.  1780,  cited  Park  on  IfMr  313,  6Ui  edit.  •
' b  CfueM  temp,  H^^  1B3. •  -

r  5  7>rm  JRtfp.  &9e.

Vol.  ra.  34


266  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  YJ

laws  of  his  country.  The  English  writers  oh  insurance
have  not  concurred  entirely  in  opinion  on  the  question ;  for
while  Miller,  in  his  essay  on  The  Elements  of  Insurance^
approves  of  the  English  rule,  and  Mr.  Justice  Park  admits  it
without  any  complaint,  there  are  other  writers,  equally  intel-
ligent, who  most  poiqtedly  condemn  the  doctrine.'

In  this  country,  we  have  followed  the  English  rule,  as  de-
dared  by  Lord  Mansfield,  to  the  full  extent ;  and- the  under-
writer id  liable  for  losses  in  consequence  of  violations  of  the
trade  laws  of  foreign  states,  provided  hfi  was  appri7x>d  of  the
intention  on  the  part  of  the  insured,  to  violate  such  laws,
either  by  the  terms  of  the  policy,  or  the  standing  r^ulations
of  the  place  to  which  the  vessel  is  insured,  or  the  known  usa-
ges of  the  trade.  It  is  well  understood  and  settled,  that  the
underwriter  is  not  liable  for  any  loss  arising  from  foreign  illi-
cit trade,  unless  he  underwrote  with  full  knowledge  that  such
a  trade  was  the  object  of  the  voyage.  All  the  authorities,  fo-
reign and  domestic,  recognise  this  doctrine.  But  if  the  trade
be  known  to  be  illicit,  and  the  underwriter  makes  no  excep-
tion of  the  risk  of  illicit  trade,  it  will  be  presumed  he  intended
to  assume  it.  The  implication  would  be  very  fair  and  just,
and  would  suf^ly  the  place  of  more  direct  proof.*  It  is  cer-
tainly matter  of  surprise  and  regret,  that  in  such  countries
as  France,  England,  and  the  United  States,  distinguished
for  a  correct  and  enlightened  administration  of  justice,  smug-
gling voyages,  made  on  purpose  to  elude  the  ktws,  and  se-
duce the  subjects  of  foreign  states,  should  be  countenanced^


a  Miller  on  Ifuurance^  23.  Park  on  Insurance,  313.  Condy'9
JitarsKall  on  /nraranre,  toI.  i.  60.  ChUty  on  Commercial  Zow,  toI.  i«
8«— 84.

b  Fo/in,  torn.  ii.  127.  Plancbe  7.  Fletcher,  Doug.  Rep*  251.'  Roe*
cut,  de  Jiee.  Dot.  31*  Gardiner  t.  Smith,  1  Jofuu.  Cat.  141.  Richard-
M>D  T.  Mftine  loMiraoce  Company, 6  Man.  Rep.  102.  Parker  r.  Jonety
13  ibid.  173.  Aodrewa  il>  Essex  Fire  and  Marine  Insurance  Companj,
3  Ma$on*»  Rep,  18.  20.  Archibald  v.  Mer.  loaurance  Company,  3
pjdk  Bep.  70.


Lee.  XLVIII.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  267

and  evoQ  encouraged,  by  the  courts  of  justice. The  princi-
ple does  no  credit  to  the  coBdmercial  jurisprudence  of  the  age.*

2.  Cf  contraband  i)f  war.

The  insurance  by  a  neutral,  of  goods  usually  denominated
contraband  of  war,  is  a  valid  contract,  for  it  is  not  deemed
unlawful  for  a  neutral  to  be  engaged  in  a  contraband  trade.
It  is  a  commercial  adventure  which  no  neutral  nation  is
bound  to  prohibit,  and  which  only  exposes  the  persons  en-
gaged in  it  to  the  penalty  of  confiscation.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  all  articles  contraband  of  war  are  subject  to  seizure  in
iransittij  by  the  belligerent  cruisers,  and  so  far  it  is  a  case  of
imperfect  righi.^  Mr.  Phillips,  in  his  Treatise  of  the  Law
<tf  Insurance^  intimates,  that  the  trading  in  articles  contra-
band of  war  is  illegal  by  the  law  of  nations,  which  forms
part  of  the  municipal  law  of  every  state ;  and  that  the  pro-
per^r  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  lawful  subject  of  insurance,
even  in  a  neutral  state.^  But  though  it  may  be  difficult  to
answer  this  reasoning,  it  is  certain,  that  the  established  doc-
trine is  not  so  rigorous.  Yattd'  admits,  that  it  is  not  an  act
in  itself  unlawful  or  hostile,  for  a  neutral  to  carry  on  a  con-
traband trade  ;  and  if  the  neutral  right  to  carry,  and  the  bel-
ligerent right  to  seize  and  confiscate,  clash  with,  and  recipro-
^cally  injure  each  other,  it  is  a  collision  of  rights  which  hap-
pens icvery  day  in  war,  and  flows  from  the  efifect  of  an  inevir


a  Id  the  case  of  La  Jeune  Engeoie,  2  JUaton't  Rep,  469,  460,  a
•case  that  pleads  the  cause  of  humaoitj  wUb  admirable  eloqueoce,  the
rale  snpportiog^  smuggliog^  voyages  is  admitted,  but  pretty  plainly  coo-
demoed.

b  See  Tol.  i.  aod  the  authorities  there  cited  ;  and  io  addition  thereto,
see  SetoD  &  Co.  t.  Lovr,  1  Johns,  Cas,  1.  Barker  r.  Blakes,  9  EumVm
Rep,  283.  Pond  t.  Smith,  4  Conn,  Rep,  297.  Juhel  v.  Rhinelander,
It  Johnt,  Cob,  120,  and  affirmed  on  error,  iUd,  487.

c  PhUlipi  on  Jnturancey  p.  39.

d  B.  3,0.7,  sec.  Ul.


966  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  Y.

cable  neeearity.  The  Chief  Justice  of  MaaaachuBetts,  in
Richardson  v.  Maine  Insurance  Ccnvpany^^  examined  tlui
sabject  with  very  accurate  discriraiaation,  and  be  considered,
that  illicit  voyages  might  be  ranked  in  several  classes  :  (1.)
When  the  sovereign  of  the  country  to  which  the  ship  be-
longed, interdicted  trade  with  a  foreign  country  or  port ;  and
in  that  case,  the  voyage,  for  the  purpose  of  trade,  would  ba
illicit,  and  all  insurances  thereon  void.  (2.)  Where  the
trade  in  question  is  prohibited  by  the  trade  laws  of  a  foreign
state ;  and  in  that  case,  the  voyage,  in  such  a  trade,  may  ba
the  subject  of  insurance  in  any  slate  in  which  the  trade  is  not
prohibited,  for  the  municipal  laws  of  one  jurisdiction  have  ne
fixce  in  another.  (3.)  When  neutrals  transport  to  bellige-
rants,  goods  contraband  of  war.  The  law  of  nations  does
not  go  to  the  extent  of  rendering  the  neutral  shipper  of  goods
contraband  of  war,  aii  offender  against  his  own  sovereign.
While  the  neutral  is  engaged  in  such  a  trade,  he  is  with-
drawn from  the  protection  of  his  sovereign,  and  bis  goods  ace
liable  to  seizure  and  condemnation  by  the  powers  at  war.  To
this  penalty  the  neutral  must  submit,  for  the  capture  was
lawful.  The  neutral  may  lawfully  transport  contraband
goods,  subject  to  tiie  qualification  of  being  rightfully  liable  to
seizure  by  a  belligerent  power ;  but  be  is  never  punished  by
bis  own  sovereign  for  his  contraband  shipments.  In  like
manner,  the  neutral  may  lawfully  carry  enemy's  property,
and  the  belligerent  may  lawfully  internipt  him  and  seize  it
An  insurance,  then,  by  neutrals,  in  a  neutral  country,  is
vidid,  whether  it  relates  to  an  interloping  trade  in  a  foreign
port,  illicit  lege  loci,  or  to  a  trade  in  transporting  contraband
goods,  which  is  illicit  jure  belli.  But  to  render  the  insurance
in  either  case  valid,  the  nature  of  the  trade,  and  of  the  goods,
should  be  disclosed  to  him,  or  there  should  be  just  ground,


0  e  JtfoM.  /^p.  lOf .


I^e.  XLVni.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  869

from  the  Gircumstances  of  the  trade,  or  otherwise,  to  presume
that  be  was  duly  inforoied  of  the  fiicts.*

3.  Of  seamen^s  v>agea.

The  commercial  ordinances  have  geaeially  prohibited  the
iDsumnce  of  seamen's  wages,  and  the  expediency  of  the  pro-
hibition arises  from  the  consideration,  that  if  the  title  to  wages
did  not  depend  upon  the  earning  of  freight  by  the  perform-
ance of  the  voyage,  seamen  would  want  one  great  stimulus
to  exertion  in  times  of  difficulty  and  disaster.  Tliough  there
be  no  statute  ordinance  on  the  subject  in  the  English  law,
yet  it  is  every  where  assumed,  as  a  settled  principle  in  the
marine  law  of  England,  that  seamen's  wages  are  not  insura-
ble.* But  the  goods  that  seamen  purchase  abroad  with
their  wages,  do  not  fall  within  the  reason,  nor  do  wages  al«
ready  earned  and  due ;  and  yet  if  a  seaman,  at  an  interme-
diate port,  by  a  refusal  to  proceed,  coerces  the  master  to  have
his  wages  already  earned  insured,  such  a  policy  has  been
held  void  in  the  French  courts.*

4.  Of  freight^  prqfitSy  and  commissions.

In  France  and  Spain,  freight  not  earned  cannot  be  insured}
and  for  the  same  reason,  that  seamen's  wages  are  not  insura*
Ue.  Several  of  the  commercial  tribunals  wished,  howeveti
to  adopt  the  practice  of  the  English,  and  give  a  greater  ez«
tension  to  the  liberty  of  insurance.  To  this  it  was  answered,
that  risk  was  of  the  essence  of  the  contract,  and  that  there


a  Parsons,  Ch.  J.,  6  Jdasa,  Rep,  114, 115.  Id  New-Tork,  tbe  qd*
dervrriter  is  presumed  to  assume  the  risk  of  contraband  of  war,  without
a  prerious  disclosure  of  tbe  nature  of  the  cargo ;  and  on  the  ground  of
that  presumption  the  contraband  cargo  need  not  be  disclosed.  Setoo
▼.  Low,  1  Johns,  Cos.  1. Jubel  ? .  Rhinelander,  2  ibid.  120.  487.

h  1  Mageng  on  Jnsuraneey  1 8.  Lord  Mansfield,  in  3  Burr,  R$p.
1912.  Webster  t.  De  Tastet,  7  Term  Rep.  157.  Lord  Stowell,  in  1
Hogg.  Adm.  Rep.  239.

e  Hmerigcn^  torn.  i.  236.


270  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V*

could  be  no  real  loss  of  that  which  is  a  Donentity,  and  bad
DO  certain  existence,  as  future  contingent  freight  and  profits.*
By  leaving  the  freight  to  be  earned  uncovered,  the  master
has  stronger  inducements  to  be  vigilant  in  the  preservation  of
the  ship  and  cargo.  This  is  the  reason  assigned  by  Cleirae ;
but  Emerigon  says,  the  true  ground  of  the  prohibition  is,
the  uncertainty  of  the  existence  of  any  future  freight*  In
England,  and  in  the  United  States,  future,  or  expected  and
contingent,  and  even  dead  freight  is  held  to  be  an  insurable
interest  It  is  sufficient  that  the  insured  has  an  interest  in
the  subject  matter  from  which  the  freight  is  to  arise.  It  is
necessary,  however,  that  the  ship  should  have  actually  begun
to  earn  freight,  in  order  to  entitle  the  insurer  to  recover,  for,
until  then,  the  risk  on  the  freight  does  not  commence.  An  in-
choate right  to  freight  is  an  insurable  interest  The  risk  ge-
nerally begins  from  the  time  the  goods,  or  part  of  them,  are
put  on  board ;  and  if  the  ship  has  been  let  to  freight  under  a
charty  party  of  affireightmenl,  the  right  to  freight  commences,
and  is  at  risk,  so  soon  as  the  ship  breaks  ground  ;  and  if  the
charterer  omits  to  put  on  board  the  expected  cargo,  and  the
ship  performs  the  voyage  in  ballast,  the  right  to  freight  is
perfect  But  when  the  freight  arises  from  the  tmnsportation
of  the  goods,  it  commences  when  the  goods  are  put  on  board,
and  the  policy  attaches  to  the  extent  of  the  goods  on  board,
or  ready  to  be  shipped.'


a  Boukty  Paty,  torn.  iii.  482, 483.

b  Ord.  de  la  Mar,  du  Frety  art.  15.  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  347.
CUirac,  aur  U  Guidon^  ch.  15,  art  1.  1  Etnerig.  224.  Ord.  of  BU"
boa^  cb.  22.

c  ToDge  r.  Watts,  Str,  Rep.  1251.  Tliompson  r.  Tajlor,  6  Term
Rep,  478.  Forbes  t.  Aspinall,  13  EasVe  Rep,  323.  DaTidsoD  v.
Wiilasej,  1  Maule  (f*  iSe/to.  31-3.  Rilej  t.  Hartford  losurance  Com-
pany, 3  Conn.  Rep,  368.  LiTingston  r.  Columbian  Insuraoce  Com-
pany, 3  Johne.  Rep.  49.  Davy  y.  Hallett,  3  Caines'  Rep.  16.  Mr.
Benecke,  in  bis  Tfeaiiee  on  the  FrincipUe  of  Indemnity ^  p.  57,  sayt,
tet  tbs  practioe  of  insuring  ship  and  freigbt  separately,  is  attended


Lee.  XLVra.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  271

Profits  are,  equally  with  freight,  a  proper  subject  of  insu-
rance. The  right  to  insure  expected  or  contingent  profits,  is
settled  in  England,  and  has  received  repeated  and  elaborate
confirmation.'  They  are  likewise,  in  this  country,  held  to
be  an  insurable  interest.^  Insurances  oh  freight,  profits,  and
commissions,  are  required,  by  the  course  and  interests  of  trade,
and  have  been  found  to  be  greatly  conducive  to  its  prosperi*
ty.  Bui  the  doctrine  that  pervades  the  cases  is,  that  the  in-
sured must  have  a  real  interest  in  the  subject  matter  from
which  the  profits  are  expected.  There  must  be  a  substantial
basis  for  the  hope  or  expectation  of  profits,  in  order  to  pre-
vent the  policy  from  being  considered  a  wager.  Commis-
sions are  a  species  of  profit  expected  to  arise  upon  the  sale  of
property  consigned  to  an  agent  or  supercargo,  and  they  are  an
insurable  interest  in  England,  and  other  countries,  where  in-
surances on  profits  are  legal.^

In  France,  assurances  on  profits  are  unlawful,  and  contra-
ry to  the  code,  as  they  were  also  to  the  ordinances  of  the  ma-


with  many  difficolties,  and  that  the  best,  if  not  the  only  way  to  obfiate
them,  and  to  put  the  owner,  under  all  circumstaneea,  in  the  lame  sitoa-
tioo  in  which  he  would  have  been  in  case  of  a  safe  arrival,  would  be  to
insure  the  ship  and  freight  jtnntly^  as  one  wdivisibU  risk,  in  the  same
poliey.  In  Adams  r.  Pennsylvania  Ins.  Company,  1  Hawle^  97,  in  the
case  of  a  valued  policy  on  freight,  there  was  specie  on  board  belonging
to  the  owner  of  the  ship,  and  the  ship  was  lost  before  any  cargo  was
porchased,  or  contracted  for,  or  procured ;  and  it  was  held  that  there
was  no  claim  upon  the  insurer,  for  there  was  only  a  reasonable  expeeta^
Hon  of  profit  upon  a  cargo  expected  to  be  procured  and  shipped.  The
contingency  of  expected  freight  was  too  remote.

a  Grant  r.  Parkinson,  cited  in  Park  on  Insurance^  p.  354,  6(h  edit.
Le  Cras  v.  Hughes,  ibid.  358.  Craufurd  v.  Hunter,  8  Term  Hep.  13.
Barclay  v.  Cousins,  2  EasVs  Rep.  544.  Henrickson  v.  MayetK)n,t6tcf.
649,  note.

b  Loomis  V.  Shaw,  ft  Johns.  Cos.  36.  Tom  v.  Smith,  3  Caines*  Rep*
145.  Abbot  V.  Sebor,  3  Johns.  Cas.  39.  Fosdick  r.  Norwich  Marine
Ins.  Company,  3  Day*s  Rep.  108.

c  Benecke  on  IndemnHty^  p.  35.


872  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

rine,  and  for  the  same  reasoD  that  insurances  on  freight  are
not  allowed.  The  subject  insured  must  have  a  physical  ex*
istence,  and  be  a  substance  capuUe  of  being  exposed  to  the
hazards  of  the  sea.  And  yet  there  seems  to  be  no  more  ob*
jection  to  the  insurance  of  a  thing  having  only  a  potential
existence,  than  to  the  sale  of  it,  and  it  is  admitted,  that  the
sale  of  the  proceeds  of  a  future  vintage,  or  of  the  next  cast
of  the  net  by  a  fisherman,  is  a  good  and  valid  sale.  The
hope  or  expectation  of  profit,  in  these  cases,  is,  says  Pothier,*
a  moral  entity,  susceptible  of  value,  and  of  being  sold.  But
in  Italy,  Portugal,  and  the  Hanse  Towns,  they  are  held  law-
ful ;  and  Santerna,  and  after  him,  Straccha,  and  then  Roc-
cus,  nil  show,  that  the  profit  of  goods  may  lawfully  be  esti-
mated in  an  insuraiiceon  goods.^  The  English  cases  have
required  the  insured  to  show,  in  an  insurance  on  profits,  that
some  profit  would  have  been  produced  upon  the  adventure,  if
the  peril  to  the  property  from  which  the  profits  were  to  arisOi
had  not  intervened.'  I  should  apprehend  that  was  the  pro-
per course,  though  the  cases  in  this  country  have  not  expli-
citly declared,  that  the  party  must  show  affirmatively  that  the
goods,  if  they  had  arrived  safe,  would  have  come  to  a  profitar
ble  market,  or  that  the  state  of  the  foreign  market  was  such
as  to  have  afforded,  as  in  Grant  v.  Parkinson^  a  very  strong
expectation  of  profits.  Such  an  expectation  seems  to  have
been  assumed  in  the  American  cases.

6.  Of  open  and  valued  policies.

An  open  policy  is  one  in  which  the  amount  of  interest  is
not  fixed  by  the  policy,  but  is  left  to  be  ascertained  by  the
insured,  in  case  a  loss  should  happen.  A  valued  policy  is
where  a  value  has  been  set  on  the  ship  or  goods  insuredy


a  TraiU  du  Con,  de  VenU^  d.  5,  6.

h  Roccusy  0.31.  96.  Santerna^  de  Asa,  and  Spons,  Merc,  Tract,
part  3,  D.  40,  41.  Slraccha,  de  Ass.  Ghss,  6,  d.  1.  Ord,  of  Basn^
burg^  2  MagenSf  213. Benecke^  35.

e  Hodgson  w.  Glorer,  6  EcuVs  Rep,  316.


Lee.  XL VIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  8791

and  instfted  in  the  policy  in  the  nature  of  liquidated  da-

If  a  policy  on  profits  be  an  open  one,  there  must  be  proof
given  of  the  amount  of  the  profits  that  would  probably  have
been  made,  if  the  loss  had  not  happened ;  there  would  not
otherwise  be  any  guide  to  the  jury,  in  the  computation  of  the
loss.  In  JMumford  v.  JSallett^*  it  was  supposed  that  every
pdUcy  on  profits  mu8t>  of  necessity,  be  a  valued  one,  because
without  the  valuation  it  would  be  extremely  difiScuit  to  as-
certain the  amount  to  be  recovered.  A  loss  on  the  profits
must  be  regulated  by  the  loss  of  the  property  from  which  the
profits  were  to  arise.*

The  value  in  the  policy  is,  or  ought  to  be^  the  real  value
of  the  ship,  or  the  prime  cost  of  the  goods,  including  the  in-
cidental  expenses  of  them  previous  to  the  shipment|  and  the
premium  of  insurance.'  It  means  the  amount  of  the  insa-
rable  interest ;  and  if  the  insured  has  some  interest  at  risk|
and  there  be  no  fraud,  the  valuation  on  the  policy  is  conclu^
sive  between  the  parties ;  for  they  have,  by  agreement,  set^
tied  the  value,  and  not  left  it  open  to  future  inquiry  and  dis-
pute as  between  themselves.  If  the  valuation  should,  how^
ever^  be  grossly  enormous,  as  in  the  case  put  by  Lord  Mans-
field, where  cargo  was  valued  at  2,000/.,  and  the  insured
had  only  the  value  of  a  cable  on  board,  there  is  no  doubt  it
would  raise  a  strong  presumption  of  fraud ;  and  either  the
valuation  or  the  policy  would  be  set  aside^  A  valuatbn^
fraudulent  in  fact,  as  respects  the  insurer,  entirely  vacates  the
policy,  and  discharges  the  insurer ;  and  the  English,  Ameri-»
ean,  and  French  la^of  Insurance  contain  the  same  general
doctrine  on  the  subject^


«  1  John$»  Rep,  433.
b  Abbott  V.  Sebor,  3  Johns.  Coi.  39.
e  PoiMer^  de»  Au,  o.  43.

d  Lord  ManafieM  in  Lewis  r.  Backer,  2  Burr.  Rep.  till. SbaiT
T.  Feltoo,  2  EaeV*  Rep.  109. Feite  r.  Agailar,  3  Taunt.  Rep.  SM,

ToL.  in.  36


874  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

There  are  cases  which  suggest  that  the  valuation  is  appli-
cable only  to  cases  of  total  loss,  and  does  not  apply  to  ave-
rage losses.'  But  the  better  opinion  is,  that  in  settling  all
losses,  total  or  partial,  the  valuation  of  the  property  in  the
policy,  is  to  be  considered  as  correct  in  the  adjustment  of  the
kiss,  and  the  adjustment  is  to  be  the  same  as  if  the  goods  had
actually  cost,  or  the  ship  and  freight  were  actually  worth,
the  sum  at  which  they  were  valued.  Mr.  Benecke  concludes,
from  a  consideration  of  the  case^^  that  the  opinion,  that  in
a  case  of  a  partial  loss  the  valuation  ought  to  be  disregard-


Haigh  T.  De  la  Cour,  3  Camph.  Rep.  319.  Forbes  t.  AspiDall,  15
EtuVs  Rep.  323.  Aubert  t.  Jacobs,  Wighlwick^a  Rep,  1 18.  Wilcott
T.  Eagle  Ids.  Company,  4  Pick.  Rep.  429.  Marine  Ins.  Company  T.
Hodgson,  6  CranchU  Rep.  206.  Condy's  ^anhcUl,  296, 29 1 .  PhUHpe
on  Insurance^  305 — 313.  Valin'a  Com.  tom^ii.  147.  PMier^  dee
Ate.  D.  151.  159.  Boulay  Patij,  torn.  iii.  397,  398,  M.  Delmncouriy
in  his  InstUulee  de  Droit  Com.  torn.  ii.  345, 346,  contends,  that  though
thfi  valuation  be  made  without  fraud,  if  there  be  palpable  evidence  of
mntake  in  the  valuation,  the  policy  may  be  opened  ;  and  Valin,  Po-
thier,  and  Emerigon,  are  of  that  opinion.  But  Boulay  Paty  thinks  that
the  excess  in  the  raluatioa  by  mistake,  is  not  sufficient  to  open  the  po-
licy i  and  there  must  be  proof  of  actual  fraud  going  to  the  destruction
•f  the  contract.  Co%urs  de  Droit  Com.  Com.  iii.  401.  The  Ordinance
of  the  .\  wimey  h.  t.  art.  8,  and  the  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  336,  make
fraud  the  basis  of  opening  the  valuation.'  Le  GuuToii,  ch.  2,  art.  13,
aod  VcUiny  Com,  torn.  ii.  52,  consider  an  over  valaatioo  of  a  moiety,  or
one  third,  or  even  of  one  fourth,  to  be  evidence  of  fraud  ;  but  other
text  writers  justly  conclude  that  every  case  will  depend  upon  its  owd
circumstances,  without  being  governed  by  l^y  such  rule.  Mr.  Be-
necke  has  referred  to  the  various  and  discordant  provisions  of  the  prin-
cipal commercial  nations  of  Europe,  concerning  valuations,  and  they
are  generally  held  to  be  conclusive,  uoleu  shown  to  be  fraudulent*
Benecke  on  Indemnity ^  151, 152.

a  Lord  Mansfield  in  Le  Cras  v,  Hughes,  cited  in  2  EmteRep.  IIS.
Bewail,  J.,  7  Jdcue.  Rep,  370.  Allegro  r.  Insurance  Company,  6  JJorr*
StJohna.AOB.


Lcc.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  276

ed,  is  as  destitute  of  authority,  as  it  is  void  of  justice  and
sound  reason.*

A  valuation  does  not  preclude  the  inquiry,  whether  the
whole  interest  valued  has.  been  at  risk.  If  the  valuation  of
freight  of  a  v^hole  cargo  be  made,  the  under^'riter  will  not
be  liable  beyond  the  extent  of  the  freight  of  the  goods  put
on  board.*  This  doctrine  applies  equally  to  an  insurance
upon  cargo ;  and  the  insured,  on  a  valued  policy  on  cargo^
will  not  recover  beyond  the  interest  he  had  at  risk.  There
must  be  a  total  loss  of  the  whole  sul  ject  matter  of  insurance
to  which  the  valuation  applied,  whether  the  insurance  was
on  goods,  or  upon  freigiit.  The  valuation  fixes  the  price  of
the  whole  subject  at  risk,  but  it  does  not  admit,  that  the  pro-
perty on  which  the  valuation  was  made,  was  on  board  the
vessel.'  If,  therefore,  certain  articles  be  comprised  in  a  valua*
tion,  and  part  are  safely  landed  before  the  ship  is  lost,  the  va-
luation must  be  opened,  and  the  claim  of  the  insured  re-
duced in  the  proportion  which  the  articles  actually  lost  bore  to
the  valuation  of  the  whole  at  the  commencement  of  the  risk/

6.  Of  wager  policies.

A  mere  hope  or  expectation,  without  some  interest  in  the
subject  matter,  is  a  wager  policy,  and  all  such  policies  are,  by
statute,  in  England,  declared  void."  But  the  English  courts
have  refined  greatly,  in  considering  what  is  an  interest  suffi-
cient to  sustain  a  policy,  and  to  place  it  out  of  the  reach  of
the  prohibition.  If  a  person  be  directly  liable  to  loss  in  the
happening  of  any  particular  event,  as  if  he  be  an  insurer,  or


a  Goldsmith  r.  Gillies,  4  TaunU  Rep*  803.  Tuddo  v,  Edward,  IS
E<uC8  Rep,  488.  Forbes  ▼.  Aspioall,  13  EtuVi  Rep,  323.  PhiUipt
on  Insurance^  312 — 317. Benecke  on  Indemnity,  p.  162, 163.  167.

h  Forbes  r.  Aspioall,  13  EatVt  Rep.  323.

c  Parker^  Ch.  J.,  Haven  ▼.  Gray,  12  Man,  Rep.  71.

d  Benecke  on  Indemnify ,  146.

«  19  Geo.  II.  c.  37. 14  Geo.  III.  c.  48.


f76  OP  PERSONAL  PBOPERTY, [Part  V.

be  answerable  as  owner  for  tbe  negligence  of  the  master,  hm
has  an  insurable  interest.*  In  the  case  of  Lticena  v.  Crau^
fwrdf  the  distinction  between  a  reasonaUe  expectation  of
gain  in  the  shape  of  freight,  commissions,  or  profits,  founded
on  some  interest  in  the  subject  matter  which  was  to  produce
them,  and  a  mere  shado\7y  hope  or  expectation,  was  fiilly,
and  very  ably  investigated,  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,
and  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  great  talents  were  displayed
and  exhausted  upon  that  litigated  point  The  decision  was^
that  commissions  to  become  due  to  public  agents,  and  all  rear
sonable  expectations  of  profits,  were  insurable  interests.  The
interest  need  not  be  a  property  in  the  subject  insured.  It  is
suflldent  if  a  loss  of  the  subject  would  bring  upon  the  in*
sured  a  pecuniary  loss,  or  intercept  a  profit.  Interest  does
not  necessarily  imply  a  right  to,  or  property  in,  the  subject
insured.  It  may  consist  in  having  some  relation  to^  or  con*
cem  in,  the  subject  of  the  insurance,  and  which  relation  of
concern  may  be  so  affected  by  the  peril  as  to  produce  damage,
Where  a  person  is  so  circumstanced,  he  is  interested  in  the
safety  of  the  thing,  for  he  receives  a  benefit  from  its  existence,
and  a  prejudice  from  its  destruction,  end  that  interest  is,  in
the  view  of  the  English  law,  a  lawful  subject  of  insurance.'
It  was  admitted  by  the  judges  of  tbe  Court  of  K.  B.,  in
Oraufurd  v.  Hunter j*  that,  at  common  law,  prior  to  the  sta-
tute of  OtQ.  II.,  wager  pdicies  were  not  illegal ;  and  the
courts  have  been  very  much  embarrassed  in  their  endeavours
to  draw  the  line  of  diBtioction  between  wagers  that  were  and
were  not  admissible  in  courts  of  justice. The  law  has  been


a  Walker  r.  Maitland,  5  Bamw.  ^  Aid,  171.

h  3  Bo9.  if  PuU.  75. Sibid.  269.

e  Lawreoce,  J.,  in  5  Bot.  4r  Pt«/'.  302,  303, 304.  Bughea  on  L^^
fwrancef  p.  30.  Ao  eqaitable,  as  well  as  a  legal  interest,  and  an  inte-
rest held  ander  an  executory  contract,  are  valid  subjects  of  insurance^
ColambiaD  Insurance  Company  r.  Lawrepce,  ft  PeUrs*  Stiy.  C.  Rtfj
«6.

fl  8  TWts  JUp*  13.


Lee.  XLVin.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  877

thought  to  descend  from  its  dignity  when  it  lends  its  aid  to
recover  the  fruits  of  an  idle  and  frivolous  wager.  In  Good
y.  Elliotj*  Mr.  J.  BuUer  made  a  vigorous,  but  unsuccessful
0tand,  against  suits  upon  wagers  in  any  case ;  and  nothing
could  have  been  more  impertinent  than  the  wager  in  that
case,  which  was,  whether  one  third  person  had  purchased  a
wagon  of  another.  Many  of  the  cases  stated  by  Mr.  J.  BuUer,
were  of  a  nature  to  draw  into  discussion,  and  unnecessarily
aflfect  the  character  or  feelings  of  third  persons ;  and  to  sus^
tain  suits  upon  such  wanton  wagers,  would  be  a  disgrace  to
any  administration  of  justice.  The  case  of  Jones  v.  Ran*
doll,*  went  quite  far  enough,  when  it  sustained  an  action
upon  a  wager  whether  a  decree  in  Chancery  would  be  rever-
sed on  appeal  to  the  House  of  Lords.  If  wagers  are  to  be
allowed  in  any  case,  as  valid  ground  for  a  suit,  the  betting  on
the  return  of  a  ship,  in  the  shape  of  a  policy  without  inte*
rest,  is  as  harmless  as  any  that  could  be  devised.  In  Eger*
ton  V.  Purzemany*^  it  was  ruled  in  the  English  courts,  that
a  wager  on  a  battle  between  two  dogs  was  iUegal,  and  not
the  ground  of  action.

In  New- York,  the  courts  had  formerly  assumed  it  to  be  a
clear  and  settled  principle  of  the  common  law,  that  a  policy
in  which  the  insured  had  no  interest,  and  which  was,  in  fact,
nothing  more  than  a  wager  or  bet  between  the  parties  to  the
contract,  whether  such  a  voyage  would  be  performed,  or  such
a  ship  arrive  safe,  was  a  valid  contract.''  It  was  only  re-
quired that  the  wager  should  concern  an  innocent  transac-
tion, and  not  be  contrary  to  good  morals  or  sound  policy.'


a  3  Term  Rep.  693.

h  Caufp.  Rep,  37.

e  1  Carr»  4r  P^yne^  613.

d  Juhel  r.  Church,  2  Johns.  Cat.  333.  Abbot  r.  Sebor,  3  ibid^  39,
CleodeoiDg^  r.  Church,  3  Cainee*  Rep.  141.  Bachumn  ▼•  Ocean  Ins.
Company,  6  Cowen's  Rep.  318.

e  Bunn  r.  Riker,  A  Johne.  Rep.  4S6.  Mount  ft  Wardall  r.  Waitet,
7  ibid,  434. Campbell  r.  Riobardaon,  10  yJM.  406.


278  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

But  now  by  statute"  all  wagers,  bets,  or  stakes  made  to  de-
pend upon  any  lot,  chance,  casualty,  or  unknown,  or  contin-
gent event  whatever,  are  declared  to  be  unlawful,  with  the
exception  of  contracts  on  bottomy  or  respondentia,  and  all  in-
surances made  in  good  faith  for  the  security  or  indemnity
of  the  party  insured.  The  statute  has  effectually  destroyed
wager  policies  ;  for  they  are  not  within  the  exception.  In .
Massachusetts,  the  Supreme  Court  expressed  a  strong  opinion
against  the  validity  of  a  wager  policy,  and  the  doctrine  there
is,  that  all  gaming  is  unlawful  according  to  the  general  poli-
cy and  laws  of  the  commonwealth.  In  Pennsylvania,  every
species  of  gambling  policy  is  reprobated,  and  they  follow  the
principles,  while  they  do  not  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the
English  statute  in  the  reign  of  George  ii.*  Wager  policies,
without  any  real  interest  to  support  them,  are  condemned  ako
by  positive  ordinances  in  France,  and  in  most  of  the  ^mmer*
cial  nations  of  Europe.*

(4.)  Of  reassurance  and  double  insurance.
After  an  insurance  has  been  made,  the  insurer  may  have
the  entire  sum  he  hath  insured,  reassured  to  him  by  some


a  Jf,  T.  Rev.  SUlutes^  vol.  i.  662,  sec.  8,  8, 10.

6  Amory  v.  Gilman,  2  Mats,  Rep.  1.  Babcock  v.  TbompwD,  3
Pick.  Rep.  446.  Pritchctt  v.  los.  Compaoy  N.  A.,  3  Yeales'  Rep.  464.
Craig  V.  Murgatroyd,  4  ibid.  168.  Id  Vermont,  it  is  held  that  do  suit
will  lie  to  recover  property  won  of  another  by  a  bet  or  wager.  Colla-
mer  v.  Day,  2  Vermont  Rep.  144.

c  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  liv.  3,  tit.  6.  Des  Ass.  art.  22.  1  Emerigonf
264.  In  Scotland,  the  rule  of  the  civil  law  relative  to  Sponsiones  ludi'
croe  was  early  adopted  as  common  law,  and  no  wager  or  gaming  coo-
tract  will  support  an  action.  1  BelVs  Com.  300.  Code  de  Commerce^
art.  357.  Ord.  of  Oenoa^  of  Middleburg^  of  Rotterdam^  of  Amster^
dam^  of  Hamburgh  and  Siockftolm,  collected  in  2  Magens„  65.  68.  88.
132.  229.  257.  Roccus^  de  Assecut.  n.  88.  He  refers  to  a  decision  of
the  Rota  of  Genoa,  in  which  the  principle  is  declared,  si  non  adett  rwi-
cum^  assecunUio  non  valet ;  nam  non  adest  materia  in  qua  forma  posset
fundari. Deeisiones  Rota  Oenum^  55,  n.  9.


Lee.  XLVIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  2W

other  insurer.  The  object  of  this  is  indemnity  against  \Ab
own  act ;  and  if  he  gives  a  less  premium  for  the  reassurance^
all  his  gain  is  the  difference  between  what  he  receives  as  a
premium  for  the  original  insurance,  and  what  he  gives  foF
the  indemnity  against  his  own  policy.  If  be  gives  as  much
for  reassurance,  he  gains  nothing  by  the  transaction  ;  and  if
he  gives  a  higher  premium,  as  insurers  will  sometimes  do  to
cover  a  dangerous  risk,  he  becomes  a  loser  by  his  original  in*
surance.  These  reassurances  are  prohibited  in  England,  ex-
cept, in  special  cases,  by  the  statute  of  19  Geo,  II.  ch.  37  ;
but  they  are  allowed  with  us."^  The  contract  of  reassurance
is  totally  distinct  from,  and  unconnected  with,  the  primitive
insurance ;  and  the  reassured  is  obliged  to  prove  the  loading
and  value  of  the  goods',  and  the  existence  and  extent  of  the
loss,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  he  were  the  original  insured.*
He  need  not  abandon  to  the  reinsurer,  as  soon  as  the  first  in-
sured has  abandoned  to  him,  for  he  has  no  connexion  with
the  first  insurance.  If  he  proves  the  original  claim  against
him  to  be  valid,  when  he  resorts  over  to  the  reinsurer,  he
makes  out  a  case  for  indemnity.'

These  reassurances  are  allowed  by  the  French  ordi-
nances,'' and  the  first  insurer  can  reassure  to  the  same
amount ;  but  the  better  opinion  is,  that  he  cannot  insure  the
premium  due  him  for  the  first  insurance.  Yalin,  Pothier,
M.  Estrangin  the  commentator  upon  Pothier,  and  Boulay
Paty,  are  all  opposed  to  Emerigon  on  this  point,  and  they
certainly  bear  down  his  opinion.'

The  insured  amy  likewise  cause  to  be  insured  the  solvency


a  Hastie  t.  De  Peyster,  3  Cainet^  Rep,  190.  Merry  t.  Prince,  S
Matt.  Rep.  176.

h  Pothier,  li.  t.  D.  153. Emerigon,  torn.  i.  247.  250.

e  Hastie  v.  De  Peyster,  ub  sup.

d  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  de»  Atturanee$,  art.  20.  Code  de  Commeree,  art.
342.

e  Valin,  b.  t.  Pothier,  b.  t.  n.  35.  1  Emerigon,  249.  3  Boulay
Paiy,  432.


280  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. (Part  V.

of  the  first  insurer ;  but  this  will  not  often  be  the  case,  for  k
lessens  greatly  the  profits  of  the  voyage,  by  multiplying  the
charges  upon  it;  and  Marshall  says,  it  has  never  happened
in  England,  for  a  double  insurance  answers  better  the  end
proposed.'  The  second  insurer  does  not  become  strictly  a
surety  for  the  first  insurer.  It  is  a  totally  distinct  contract,
without  any  participation  in  the  other,  and  he  is  not  bound
to  render  any  service  to  the  first  one.  It  is  a  conditional
obligation  of  a  special  kind.^  Valin  and  Potbier  contend,  that
the  second  insurer  of  the  solvency  of  the  first  one,  becomes  a
surety  for  the  first,  and  is  entitled  to  oppose  to  the  claim  the
exception  of  discussion,  which  is  to  require,  that  the  first  in-
surer should,  at  his  expense,  be  first  prosecuted  to  judgment
and  execution ;  but  Emerigon  and  Boulay  Paty  are  not  of
that  opinion,  though  they  admit,  that  the  first  insurer  must
be  put  l^aily  in  default  after  a  legal  demand.^

A  double  insurance  is  where  the  insured  makes  two  in
surances  on  the  same  riBk,  and  the  same  interest.  But  the
law  will  not  allow  him  to  receive  a  double  satis&ction  in  case
of  loss,  though  he  may  sue  on  both  policies.  The  under""
writers  on  the  difierent  policies  are  bound  to  contribute  rata-*
biy  towards  the  loes.^  They  pay  according  to  the  rate  of
their  subscriptions,  without  regard  to  the  order  of  time  in
which  the  pcdici^  were  made ;  and  if  the  insured  recoveiB


a  Omdy's  JUarshaU^  p.  145.

b  Santema^  de  Att,  pan,  3,  o.  55,  56,  57, 58.  Sirauhat  de  Asw*
inirodue.  n.  48, 49,  who  cites  and  adopts  the  opinion  of  Santerna ;  and
both  of  them  refer  back  to  the  civil  law,  and  to  the  doctors  who  bad
commented  upon  it ;  and  tbej,  in  their  tarn,  are  quoted  and  followed
by  Emerigon^  torn.  i.  253.

e  Pothier,  Traili  de*  An.  No.  33.  Fa/tn,  torn/  ii.  66.  Le  Chri^
don^  ch.  2,  art.  20.  1  Emerigon,  259.  Boulay  Paiy^  torn.  iii.  440.
442.

d  Rogers  ▼.  Daris,  and  Davis  v.  Gilbert,  decided  at  N.  P.  by  Lord
Mansfield,  Park  on  Ine.  374,  375,  6th  edit.  Lucan  ▼.  Jeffersoo  Ini.
Company,  6  Covoen^t  Rep,  635.


Lee,  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  281

his  whole  loss  from  one  set  of  underwriters,  they  will  be  en-
titled to  their  action  against  the  other  insurers,  on  the  same
interest  and  risk,  for  a  ratable  proportion  of  the  loss.'^ The
doctrine  of  contribution  applies  very  equitably  to  such  a  case.
It  was  so  declared  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States
at  Philadelphia,  in Thurston  v.  Koch  ;^  and  though,  in
most  countries  of  Europe,  the  first  policy  in  the  order  of  time
is  to  be  exhausted  before  the  second  operates,  yet  the  rule
requiring  the  insurers  in  each  policy  to  bear  a  ratable  share
of  the  loss,  was  declared,  in  that  case,  to  be  founded  in  equity,
and  in  sound  princifdes  of  commercial  policy. The  French
rule  is,  that  if  there  exist  several  contracts  of  insurance  on
the  same  interest  and  risk,  and  the  first  policy  covers  the
whole  value  of  the  subject,  it  bears  the  whole  loss,  and  the
subsequent  insurers  are  discharged  on  returning  all  but  half
per  cenL  premium. But  if  it  does  not  cover  the  entire  value,
the  subsequent  policies,  in  case  of  loss,  are  bound  only  to
make  up  the  part  uncovered.V  The  ancient  rule  in  England
was  according  to  the  French  ordinance,'' and  it  has  been
deemed  more  simple  and  convenient. Merchants  frequently
prefer  it,  and  it  is  perfectly  consonant  to  a  strict  construction
of  the  contract  with  the  first  underwriter.

PoUcies  have  sometimes  a  clause  introduced  into  them  to
prevent  the  rule  of  contribution,  and  to  make  the  insurers  re-
sponsible according  to  the  order  of  date  of  their  respecliye
policies.  Where  two  policies  were  dated  upon  the  same  day,
it  was  held,  that  prior  in  date  was  intended  to  be  equivalent
to  prior  in  time,  and  that  tlie  policy  first  in  time,  in  point  of
fact,  was  to  bear  the  loss.'


a  Ncwby  t.  Reed,  1  Blackt.  Rep.  416.
b  4  DalloM*  Rep,  348. ^pp.  p.  32.
e  Code  de  Commerce,  art.  359.

d  Malyne's  Lex  Mercatoria,  112. The  Africau  Compaoy  r.  Bull,
1  Show.  Rep.  132. GilberVt  Rep.  232.
€  Brown  v.  Hartford  Ins.  Company,  3  Day's  Rep.  68. The  same

Vol.  III.  36


288  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V-

As  a  general  rule  of  cooBiruction,  and  independent  of
usage,  tbe  first  policy  under  such  a  clause  as  that  to  whkh  I
have  referred,  would  have  to  bear  the  whole  loss,  whether
partial  or  total,  to  the  extent  of  the  policy.'  But  the  usage
of  the  companies  in  New- York  is  understood  to  be,  that  par-
tial losses  are  to  be  apportioned  between  the  policies  without
regard  to  dates,  provided  the  cargo  on  board  was  large  enough
to  have  attached  both  policies  to  it.  This  is  the  French
rule.  In  France,  if  there  be  goods  on  board  to  the  amount
of  both  policies,  and  a  partial  loss  ensues,  the  insurers  con-
tribute ratably  in  proportion  to  their  subscriptions.*

(5.)  Of  representation  and  warranty.

All  the  writers  who  have  treated  of  the  contract  of  insu-
rance, agree,  that  it  is  eminently  a  contract  of  good  faith,
which  is  peculiarly  enjoined  upon  the  insured,  as  he  pos*
sesses  an  entire  knowledge  of  all  those  circumstances  which
combine  to  form  the  contract,  and  is  bound  to  communicate
the  facts  and  objects  which  aie  to  determine  the  will  of  tlie
insurer.  It  is,  accordingly,  an  established  principle,  that  a
misrepresentation  to  the  underwriter,  or  concealment  of  a
fact  material  to  the  risk,  will  avoid  the  policy.  It  will  avoid
it  though  the  loss  arose  from  a  cause  unconnected  with  the
misrepresentation,  or  even  though  the  misrepresentation  or
concealment  happened  through  mistake,  neglect,  or  accident,
without  any  fraudulent  intention.'  Lord  Mansfield  laid  down,


poiot  was  afterwards  so  ruled  id  Potter  v*  Marine  los.  Company,  2
McuofCt  Rep,  475.

a  Columbian  Ins*  Company  t.  Lynch,  1 1  Johns,  Hep.  233.  Rogers
Y,  Davis,  Park  on  Jne,  374.

b  Ord*  de  la  Mar.  dee  Am,  art.  25.  2  Fa/tn,  73,  74.  Code  de  Com-
mercCf  n.  360. Poihier^  b.  t.  n.  77.

e  Carler  r.  Boebm,  3  Burr.  Rep,  1905.  Pawson  v.  Walson,  Cottp.
Hep.  785.  Fitzberbert  v.  Mather,  1  Term  Rep,  12.  Ratclifie  t.
Sboolbreed,  Park  on  Ineurance,  249,  6(h  edit.  Mac  Dowall  t.  Fraser,
t)oug.  Rep,  260.  Shirley  v.  Wilkinson,  Doug,  Rep.  293.  n.  Bridget
V.  Httuter,  1  Maule  4r  Selw.  15*


Lee.  XLVIII.] OF  PER60NAL  PROPERTY.  283

with  great  strength  and  clearness,  the  general  principle  which
governed  this  branch  of  the  subject,  and  they  have  been  im-
{dicitly  adopted  in  all  succeeding  cases^  The  special  facts
upon  which  the  contingent  chance  was  to  be  computed,  usu-
ally lie  in  the  knowledge  of  the  insured  only,  and  the  un-
derwriter trusts  to  his  representation,  and  proceeds  upon  the
confidence  that  he  does  not  withhold  any  facts  material  to
the  estimate  of  the  risk.  The  suppression  of  any  such  facts,
whether  by  design,  or  mistake,  or  negligence,  equally  ren-
ders the  policy  void,  for  the  risk  run  becomes  different  from
the  one  assumed  in  the  policy.  The  law  requires  ^errima
fides  in  the  formation  of  the  contract,  and  y^  either  party
may  be  innocently  silent,  as  to  grounds  open  to  both,  for  the
exercise  of  their  judgment.  The  underwriter  need  not  be
told  general  topics  of  speculation  and  intelligence.  He  is
bound  to  know  every  cause  which  may  occasion  natural,  or
political  perUs.  Men  argue  differently  from  natural  pheno-
mena and  political  appearances,  and  when  the  means  of  in-
formation and  judging  are  open  to  both  parties,  each  acta
from  his  own  skill  and  judgment.  The  question  in  those
cases  always  is,  whether  there  was,  under  all  the  circum*
stances,  a  fair  representation,  or  a  concealment ;  if  the  mis-
representation or  concealment  was  designed,  whether  it  was
fraudulent,  and  if  not  designed,  whether  it  varied  materially
the  object  of  the  policy,  and  changed  the  risk  understood  to
be  run.  If  the  misrepresentation  was  by  fraudulent  design,
it  avoids  the  policy  without  staying  to  inquire  into  its  mate*
riality ;  and  if  by  mistake,  or  oversight,  it  does  not  affect  the
policy,  unless  it  was  material,  and  not  true  in  substance.*


a  Manball,  io  bia  Law  of  Insurance,  p.  479,  questions,  yery  strong^lj,
tbe  propriety  of  the  decisioD  in  Carter  t.  Boebon,  from  wbicb  I  hare
chiefly  drawo  I  be  above  pnociples.  But  whatever  may  be  tbe  opioioa
as  to  the  application  in  that  case  of  tbe  doctrines  stated,  there  is  no  ques-
tion as  to  their  solidity  independent  of  the  case,  and  they  were  confirm-
ed by  Lord  Ellenboroogb,  io  4  EasVs  Rep.  596,  and  recently  by  the


284  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [PariV.

If  the  information  be  stated  as  mere  (pinion,  or  expecta-
tion, and,  perhaps,  as  mere  belief,  it  does  not  amount  to  a
representation,  or  affect  the  policy,  provided  it  was  given  in
good  faith,  for  the  underwriter,  in  such  a  case,  takes  the  risk
upon  himself.*

A  representation  to  the  first  underwriter,  in  favour  of  the
risk,  extends  to  all  subsequent  underwriters,  and  on  the
ground  that  they  subscribed  upon  their  confidence  in  his  judg-
ment and  knowledge  of  the  risk,  and  are,  therefore,  entitled
to  avail  themselves  of  all  the  conditions  upon  which  he  sub-
scribed.* This  rule  has  not  been  favourably  received  by
later  judges,  and  it  is  strictly  confined  to  representations  made
to  the  first  underwriter,  and  not  to  intermediate  ones/  Nor
does  it  extend  to  a  subsequent  underwriter  on  a  different
policy,  though  on  the  same  vessel,  and  against  the  same
risks.^*

The  knowledge  or  information  material  for  the  insurer  to
know,  and  necessary  to  be  communicated  to  him,  when  the
contract  is  made,  is  a  question,  not  of  science,  or  one  which
rests  upon  the  opinion  of  mercantile  men,  but  a  question  of
feet  for  a  jury,  and  they  are  to  judge  of  the  materiality  of  the
information  under  a  consideration  of  all  the  circumstances


Sapreme  Court  of  the  United  Slates,  in  M^Lanahan  v.  The  UoiTersal
Ins.  Company,  1  PeUrt'  Rep,  170.  See  also  Flino  v.  7'obin,  1  JHoody
4-  JJaikin,  367.  S.  P.

a  Lord  Mansfield,  Covjp,  Rep.  788.  Barker  v.  Fletcher,  Doug,
Rep,  305.  Hubbard  v.  Glover,  3  Campb,  Rep,  312.  Bowden  ▼.
Vanghan,  10  EatVt  Rep.  A\b,  Kicc  v.  New-England  Marine  Ins.
Company,  4  Pick,  Rep,  439.  Allcgre  ?.  Maryland  Ins.  Company,  2
GUL  i^  JofmsoTiy  136.

b  Barber  v.  Fletcher,  ub,  gup,  Slackpole  v.  Simon,  Park  on  Ins,
582,  6lh  edit.

c  Brine  v.  Featherslone,  4  Taunt,  Rep,  869.  Lord  Ellcnboroufrb,
Forrester  v.  Pigou,  1  MauU  4r  Selw,  9.  Bell  v.  Carstairs,  3  Campb,
Rep,  543.

d  Elling  V.  Scott,  2  Jokm,  Rep.  157.


Lee.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  285

that  belong  to  the  case.*^  This  point  was  fully  considered,
and  with  a  review  of  the  EngUsh  and  American  authorities,
in  the  case  of  the  New-  York  Firemen  Insurance  Company
V.  Walden  ;*  and  that  doctrine  has  since  received  the  unquali-
fied sanction  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States/
The  books  abound  witii  cases  relative  to  the  very  litigated
question  as  to  what  are,  and  what  are  not,  necessary  disclo-
sures. The  largest  and  most  accurate  digest  of  the  English
and  American  decisions  on  this  subject,  is  to  be  seen  in  Mr.
Phillips?  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Insurance^  ch.  7 ;  and
it  will  not  be  consistent  with  my  purpose  to  do  more  than
bring  into  notice  the  leading  principles  which  govern  this  very
practical  branch  of  the  law  of  insurance.

It  is  the  duty  of  the  insured  to  communicate  every  species
of  intelligence  which  he  possesses,  which  may  affect  the  mind
of  the  insurer  either  as  to  the  point  whether  he  will  insure  at
all,  or  as  to  the  rate  of  premium.  The  decisions,  in  some  of
the  old  cases,  contain  strict  doctrines  on  th^  ^subject  of  con-
cealment, which  have  never  been  shaken  \*  and  the  modern
cases  are  equally  sound  and  exact  in  their  requbitions.^  But
the  insured  is  not  bound  to  communicate  loose  rumours,  nor
any  facts  which  the  underwriter  may  be  presumed  to  know
equally  with  himself.

The  insured  is  not  bound  to  disclose  all  by-gone  calamitiei^,
or  produce  his  portfolio  of  letters ;  and  he  need  only  dis^cloee
the  material  facts  known  to  him  at  the  date  of  the  last  intel-
ligence.-^ The  underwriter  is  bound  to  know  the  nutuje


a  Durell  y.  Bederlcy,  1  HolVs  •A'*.  P.  Rep,  283.

b  \2John»,  Rep,  513.

e  M'Lanaban  v.  The  Universal  Ins.  Company,  1  Pclert*  Pep,  170.

d  Dacosta  v.  ScaQdrett,  2  P.  Wms,  170.  Seaman  v.  Fooercau,«S/r.
1IH3.

e  Lynch  v.  Hamilton,  3  Taunl,  Rep.  37.  Bcckwaite  r,  Waigrove,
cited  ibid, Richards  v.  Murdock,  1  Lloyd  Sp  Weltby^  132.

/  Freeland  y.  Glover*  6  Esp.  jY,  P.  14.  7  East's  Rep.  457.  S.  C.
Kemble  v.  Bowne,  I  Cainet*  Rep.  75.  Vallance  v.  Dewar,  1  CawpK
JV".  P.  Rep,  503.


286  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  Y.

and  general  course  of  the  trade  and  of  the  voyage,  and  he
assumes  that  kind  of  knowledge  at  his  peril.'  The  general
rule  is,  that  all  facts  material  to  the  risk,  and  known  to  the
one  party  and  not  to  the  other,  must  be  disclosed  when  the
policy  is  to  be  effected  ;  and  they  must  be  fully  and  fairly  dis^
closed.^  But  if  the  subject  on  which  disclosures  would  other-
wise be  requisite,  be  covered  by  a  warranty,  either  express  or
implied,  in  that  case  it  need  not  become  a  matter  of  represen-
tation/ It  is  likewise  sufficient  in  the  case  of  a  representa-
tion, that  it  be  equitably  and  substantially  complied  with  ]*
and  in  furtherance  of  that  perfect  good  faith  which  is  so
strongly  called  for  in  the  formation  of  this  contract,  it  is  ad-
judged that  if  the  party,  after  having  given  instructions  for
effecting  a  policy,  receives  intelligence  material  to  the  risk,
he  roust  forthwith,  or  with  due  and  reasonable  diligence,  com-
municate it,  or  countermand  his  instructions.^  If,  however,
the  insured  acts  with  good  faith,  the  validity  of  the  policy
will  not  be  affected  by  the  fraudulent  misconduct  of  the  mas-
ter, in  withholding  from  his  owner  information  of  the  loss^
until  after  the  policy  was  underwritten/


A  Planche  t.  Fletcher,  Doug,  Rep,  251.  Calbraith  v,  Gracie,  1
Candy's  JUarghally  388,  a.  note.  Delooguemere  v.  N.  Y.  Firemen  Ins.
Company,  10  Johns,  Rep,  120.  Kington  y.  Knibbs,  1  Campb,  JV*.  P.
Rep,  508.  n.  Vallance  v.  Dewar,  ibid.  503.  Stewart  t.  Bell,  5  Bamw»
<f»  Aid.  238. Seton  t.  Low,  1  Johns,  Cat,  1.

b  Ely  V,  Hallet,  2  Caines'  Rep,  57.  Kobne  ▼.  Ins.  Company  N.  A.
6  Binney't  Rep.  219. IToyt  v.  Oilman,  8  JUats,  Rep,  338.

c  Sboolbred  r.  Natt,  Park,  300,  6lb  edit.  Haywood  v.  Bodgers,
4  EcuVs  Rep,  590.  Walden  y.  N.  Y.  Firemen  Ins.  Company,  12
Johns.  Rep.  128.

d  Pawson  y.  Watson,  Cowp,  Rep,  IBB.  De  Habn  y.  Hartley,  1
Term  Rep.  343. Sockley  y.  Delafield,  2  Caines'  Rep.  222.

e  Emerigon^  torn.  ii.  148.  Valines  Com,  torn.  ii.  95.  Grieve  y.
Young,  Miller  on  Insurance^  65.  Watson  y.  Delafield,  2  Caines*  Rep,
224.  2  Johns.  Rep.  526.  S.  C.  M'Lanahan  y.  Uniyersal  Ins.  Com-
pany, 1  Peters*  Rep,  170.

/  Gen.  Int.  Ins.  Company  y.  Haggles,  12  WheoX,  Rep.  408.  S.  C.
4  Mason,  234.


LiBc.  XLVIII.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  287

The  French  ordinance  of  the  marine  had  no  positive  pro-
visions on  this  subject,  and  yet  the  same  principles  \^hich
prevail  in  the  English  law  were  recognised  as  sound  rules  ap-
plicable to  the  government  of  the  contract."  In  the  new
code*  it  is  provided,  that  any  concealment  or  misrepresenta-
tion on  the  part  of  the  insured,  which  would  diminish  the
opinion  of  the  risk,  or  change  the  subject  matter  of  it,  annuls
the  insurance.  It  is  held  to  be  void  even  when  the  conceal-
ment or  misrepresentation  would  have  had  no  influence  on
the  loss.  Nor  is  it  deemed  necessary,  under  the  French  law,
to  prove  fraud  in  fact ;  and  the  concealment  or  misrepresen-
tation is  equally  fatal,  whether  it  proceeded  from  design,  for-
getfulness,  or  negligence.^  The  severe  dispositions  of  the
code  are  much  commended  by  the  French  lawyers,  as  an
improvement  upon  their  ancient  jurisprudence,  and  a  great
protection  to  the  insurer  against  impositions  of  which  he  was
often  the  victim.

There  is,  in  every  policy,  an  implied  warranty  that  the
ship  is  seaworthy  when  the  pohcy  attaches.  This  means,
as  we  have  already  seen,  that  the  vessel  is  competent  to  re-
sist the  ordinary  attacks  of  wind  and  weather,  and  is  com-
petently equipped  and  manned  for  the  voyage,  with  a  suffi-
cient crew,  and  with  sufficient  means  to  sustain  them,  and
with  a  captain  of  general  good  character  and  nautical  skill.''
This  warranty  of  seaworthiness  relates  to  the  commence-


«  Emerig<m,  torn.  i.  69.

^  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  348.

c  Pardessut,  torn.  iii.  330.  Boulay  Paly,  torn.  iii.  510.  The  latter
writer  cites  several  decisions  from  the  Journal  de  Jurisprudence  Com^
merciale  et  Mariiime  de  Marteille,  made  within  the  teo  preceding^  years,
by  which  contracts  of  insurance  were  declared  void  oo  this  very  groond
of  misrepresentation  and  concealment ;  and  they  do  great  credit  to  the
exemplary  justice  of  the  French  tribunals. Ibid.  p.  514—- 527.

d  Law  V.  Hollingworlh,  7  Term  Rep.  160.  Wilkie  v.  Geddes,  3
JDoio's  Rep.  57.  Silva  v.  Low,  1  Johnt,  Cos,  184.  Browo  v.  Girard,
4  Yealet*  Rep.  115.


288  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

ment  of  the  risk,  and  the  warranty  is  not  broken  if  she  be-
comes unseaworthy  afterwards."  There  are  numerous  ca-
ses iii  England,  and  in  this  country,  on  the  question  of  sea-
worthiness, and  they  have  generally  been  questions  depend-
ing upon  matters  of  fact,  and  lead  to  inquiries  too  minute  for
general  elementary  instruction.*  A  breach  of  the  implied
warranty  of  seaworthiness,  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  has
no  retrospective  operation,  and  does  not  destroy  a  just  claim
to  damages  for  losses  occurring  prior  to  the  breach  of  this  im-
plied cofSdition.***  The  standard  of  seawprthinesd  has  been
gradually  raised  within  the  last  thirty  years,  from  a  more
perfect  knowledge  of  ship  building,  a  more  enlarged  expe-
rience of  maritime  risks,  and  an  increased  skill  in  navigation.

In  many  ports  certain  equipments  would  now  be  deemed
essential,  which,  at  an  earlier  period,  were  not  customary  on
the  same  vojrages.  Seaworthiness  is  to  be  measured  by  the
standard  in  the  ports  of  the  country  to  which  the  vessel  be-
longs, rather  than  by  that  in  the  ports  or  country  where  the
insurance  was  made.''

Every  warranty  is  part  of  the  contract,  and  is  dther  ex-
press or  implied.  If  it  be  an  express  warranty,  it  must  ap-
pear upon  the  face  of  the  polipy.  It  differs  from  a  represen-
tation in  this  respect,  that  it  isHihe  nature  of  a  condition  pre-
cedent, and  requires  a  strict  and  literal  performance.  Whe-
ther the  thing  warranted  be  material  or  net,  and  whether  the
.  loss  happened  by  reason  of  a  breach  of  the  warranty,  or  did
not,  ia  immaterial.  A  breach  of  it  avoids  the  contract  ab
initio.  Every  condition  precedent  requires  a  strict  perform-
ance to  entitle  a  party  to  his  right  of  action. But  seawor-


m  Petera  v.  Pbceoix  Ids.  Company,  3  Serg,  4*  Rfi^l^%  25.

h  The  cases  are  well  collected  in  PhilUpton  Insurance^  p.  113—
119.

c  Aonen  y.  Woodmau,  3  Taunt.  Rep.  299.  SewalK  J.,  3  Mass,
Rep.  347.

d  Tidmarsh  v.  Washington  F.  &  M.  Ins.  Company,  4  Mason^  439.


Lm.  XL VIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  289


thioeas  in  port  may  be  one  thing,  and  seaworthinesB  for  a
whole  voyage  quite  another,  and  a  ship  may  be  seaworthy  in
harbour  when  under  repair,  though  she  would  not  be  so  in
that  condition  at  sea.* It  was  held,  in  the  case  of  Weir  v.
Aberdeen,^  that  though  a  ship  be  unseaworthy  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  risk,  yet  if  the  defect  be  cured  before  a
loss,  a  subsequent  loss  is  recoverable  under  the  policy. The
argument  of  Lord  Tenter<|en  in  fiivour  of  this  doctrine  is
very  weighty,  but  a  doubt  seems  to  have  been  latterly  thrown
over  its  solidity  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.^
The  most  usual  express  warranties  are,  that  the  ship  was
safe  at  such  a  time,  or  would  sail  by  such  a  day,  or  would
sail  with  convoy,  or  a  warranty  againat  illicit  and  contraband
trade,  or  that  the  property  insured  is  neutral. During  the
long  maritime  wars  that  grew  out  of  the  French  revolution,
and  while  we  continued  in  our  neutral  position,  the  warran-
ty of  neutrality  attracted  great  attention,  and  became  a  very
fruitful  topic  of  discussion  in  the  courts  of  justice. It  was
understood  and  settled,  that  it  was  not  sufBcient,  under  this
warranty,  that  the  ship  and  cargo  be  in  feict  neutral. They
must  be  neutral  to  the  purpose  of  being  protected,  and,  there-
fare,  the  ship  must  have  the  requisite  insignia  of  neutrality,
by  being  duly  documented  as  a  neutral  vessel,  and  by  being
unaccompanied  with  documents  diat  go  to  fisdsify  the  warran-
ty. She  must  also  have  been  conducted,  throughout  the
^oys^}  according  to  the  duties  which  particular  treatises,
and  the  general  rules  of  ntMitrality,  enjoin,  so  as  to  be  enti-
tled to  protection,  by  the  law  of  nations,  in  the  courts  of  the
belligerent  powers. To  construe  the  engagement  to  be  less


•«M«<


•  Annen  ▼.  Woodroao,  3  7>i«ifi<.  Rep-  299.  Boaifl  v.  Nutt,  Coup,
tttp,  601.  Pawtoo  ▼.  WattoD,  ibid.  786.  Dehahn  t.  Hartley,  1  Tengn
nep.  S43.  Worsley  ▼.  Wood,  6  l^rm  Rep,  710.  Fowler  ▼.  JCtoa
Fir6  Ids.  Compahy,  6  CotM»*«  Rtp.  673.

b  2  Bamw,  4r  Aid.  320.

e  M^Lfanahan  y.The  Unirenal  Ids.  Company,  1  FtUrs' Hep,  170.

Vol.  in.  37


290  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

than  that,  would  be  to  render  it,  in  a  great  d^ree,  idle  and
nugatory.  On  such  a  warraoty  the  iosurer  lays  out  of  view
the  risk  of  loss,  by  reason  of  the  want  of  due  proof  of  neu-
trality, and  of  a  strictly  neutral  conduct  The  insured  hav-
ing in  his  own  hands  the  means  to  maintain  his  averment,
he  is  bound  to  do  it  whenever  and  wherever  the  neutrality  of
the  property,  or  its  privileges  as  such,  are  called  in  question.*
The  warranty  imposes  upon  the  insured  the  exact  obser-
vance of  all  tfaoe^  duties  which  belong  to  a  neutral  vessel ;
and  by  the  violation,  or  by  the  omission,  of  any  clear  and
certain  neutral  duty,  the  vessel  forfeits  her  neutrality,  and  the
warranty  is  broken.  The  neutral  is  bound  to  submit  to  visi-
tation and  search,  and  resistance  thereto  would  be  a  breach
of  the  warranty.*

Many  interesting  questions  arise  in  the  course  of  a  mari-
time war,  upon  the  warranty  of  neutrality,  but  which  attract
no  attention  while  they  remain  dormant  in  a  season  of  ge-
neral peace.  One  of  those  questions  held  a  prominent  place
some  years  ago  in  the  jurisprudence  of  this  country,  and  led
to  very  vexed  discussions,  and  contradictory  results.  The
controversy  to  which  I  allude  was  concerning  the  legal  effect,
in  a  suit  upon  the  policy,  of  a  sentence  of  condemnation  in
the  admiralty  courts  of  the  belligerent  powers,  of  property
warranted  neutral,  but  captured,  libelled  and  condemned  as
enemy's  property.*^  The  general  result  of  those  discussions
has  been  already  stoted,  and  they  will  probably  not  be  re-
vived until  some  maritime  war  shall  hereafter  arise,  to  stimu-
late cupidity,  and  disturb  the  commerce  of  the  ocean.


•  Blzg^  w.  New-Tork  Io8.  Company,  1  Cainet^  Rep.  549.  Bttring
T.  Royal  Exchange  Ins.  Company,  6  EatVt  Rep.  99.  Carrere  v.  Union
Int.  Company,  Condy*a  Marahally  406,  a.  note.  Calbraith  t.  Gracie,
ibid.  Phoenix  Ins.  Company  v.  Pratt,  2  Birm.  Rep.  308.  Wilcocks
▼.  Union  Int.  Company,  ibid.  574.  Coolidge  ▼.  N.  Y.  Firemen  Inc.
Company,  14  Johm.  Rep.  308.

b  See  Tol.  i.  153.

c  See  Tol.  ii.  Lee.  27.


L«e.  XLVllL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  291

(6.)  Of  the  nature^  variety^  and  extent  of  the  risks  or
perils  within  the  policy.

The  general  rule  is,  that  the  insurer  charges  himself  with
all  the  maritime  perils  that  the  thing  insured  can  meet  with
on  the  voyage :  prctstare  tenetur  quodcunqkie  damnum  oh-
veniens  in  mari.  It  was  an  ancient  opinion  stated  by  San-
terna,  that  the  insurer  was  not  responsible  for  very  unusual
and  extraordinary  perils  not  specially  stated.  But  such  a
principle  is  now  utterly  exploded,  and  the  poUcy  sweeps  with-
in its  inclosure  every  peril  incident  to  the  voyage,  however
strange  or  unexpected,  unless  tliere  be  a  special  exception.*
The  perils  enumerated  in  the  common  policy  are  sufficiently
comprehensive  to  embrace  every  species  of  risk  to  which  ships
and  goods  are  exposed  from  the  perils  of  the  sea,  and  all
Other  causes  incident  to  maritime  adventure.  The  enume-
rated list  may  he  enlarged  or  abridged  at  the  pleasure  of  the
parties.

A  person  may  protect  himself  by  insurance  against  all  los-
ses except  such  as  may  be  repugnant  to  public  policy  or  po-
sitive prohibition,  or  occasioned  by  his  own  misconduct  or
fraud.  Against  the  latter  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  any  insu-
rance could  be  effected,  nor  would  the  courts  tcrferate  such  a
vicious  principle ;  for  this  would,  as  Pothier.say8,  be  a  contract
which  would  invite  cul  delinquendumJ'

1.  Of  the  acts  of  the  government  of  parties.
An  insurance  against  loss  by  reason  of  the  acts  of  one's
own  government,  as  an  arrest,  or  embargo,  is  valid.  There
is  no  distinction  on  this  point  between  a  foreign  and  domestic
embargo ;  and  if  the  embargo  intervenes  after  the  commence-
ment of  the  risk,  it  suspends  but  does  not  dissolve  the  contract


a  Santema  de  Aaa,  para  3,  n.  72.  Ord,  de  la  Mar,  tit.  An,  art.  SO.
Code^  art.  350. Boulay  PaJty^  torn.  it.  9.

h  Goix  V.  Koox,  1  JohM.  Cat,  337.  Simeoo  v.  Basett,  2  MaiaU  4.
Stho,  94. Pot^ter,  TraiU  de  Aat.  No.  65.


J»2  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

of  insurAnce,  and  the  insured  may  abandon  and  claim  a  to-
tal loes/  The  same  principle  is  incorporated  into  the  new
French  commercial  code,  and  it  pervades  universally  the  law
of  insurance.*  A  distinction  has,  however,  been  taken  be-
tween that  case  and  a  claim  arising  between  subjects  of  dif-
ferent states,  and  it  has  been  held,  that  a  foreigner  could  not
claim  against  a  British  underwriter,  founded  on  the  act  of
his  own  state,  any  more  than  if  the  claim  was  created  by
his  own  act,  and  on  the  principle  that  he  was  to  be  deemed  a
party  to  the  public  authoritative  acts  of  his  own  government.*
But  Lord  Ellenborough  afterwards  threw  a  doubt  over  the
doctrine,  and  explained  away  the  force  of  it,  by  raising  re-
fined distinctions.  He  said,  the  exclusion  of  risk  occasioned
by  the  act  of  the  assured's  own  government,  was  only  an
implied  exclusion  from  the  reason  and  fitness  of  the  thing,
and  might  be  rebutted  by  circumstances.'  The  distinctions
were  afterwards  pointedly  disclaimed,  and  the  whole  doctrine
exploded,  on  a  writ  of  error,  in  the  Exchequer  Chamber  \*
and  it  was  there  established,  that  it  was  no  objection  to  tha
right  of  recovery  by  the  insured,  that  the  loss  happened  by
the  act  of  the  government  of  his  country,  though  he  and  the
insurer  were  subjects  of  different  states.  The  latter  rule  has,
likewise,  after  a  dear  and  accurate  review  of  the  cases,  been
adopted  as  just  and  solid  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  New- York ;
and  it  was  declared,  that  a  subject  was  not  to  be  deemed  a
party  to  the  legislative,  and  much  lees  to  the  judicial  acts  of
his  own  country,  so  as  thereby  to  deprive  him  of  remedy  on


ft  Paf  •  V.  TliompioD,  cited  in  Park  on  tnturoMe^  109,  n.  0th  edit.
Odlio  V.  PeDO.  Im.  Co.  f  Wtuh,  €Hr,  Bep,  31 S.  Delano  t.  Bedford
Inauranoe  Company,  10  Ma$a.  Rep.  347.  M^Bride  v.  Marine  Iniu-
ranoe  Company,  5  Johns*  Rep,  299.

k  Cod§  di  Com,  art.  369. 1  Emetigony  641. PoMer^  h.  t  No.  §9.

e  CoDway  v.  Gray,  10  Mkut'i  Rep,  636.  Menaatt  v.  Bonbam,  16
EnH'e  Rep.  477. Fliadt  v.  Soott,  t6id.  6S6.

d  Bameon  v.  BajMtt,  S  MtmU  4*  Sehe.  94.

$  Basttt  V.  Mayor,  6  T^aunl.  Rep.  8S4.


Ler.  JLLVIIl.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  293

a  policy  by  a  foreign  iiwurance  office,  by  reason  of  any  acts
or  judgments  of  bis  own  country.  The  contrary  doctrine  was
founded  on  a  foneiful  and  unreasonable  theory.'

2.  Of  inierdicium  of  commerce.

An  interdiction  of  commerce  with  the  port  of  destination^
or  a  denial  of  entry  by  the  power  at  the  port,  or  by  a  block-
ade, has  been  held  not  (o  be  a  loss  within  the  policy,  by  de-
cisions in  England  and  in  this  country.  The  loss  must  be
occasioned  by  a  peril,  acting  upon  the  subject  insured  imme-
diatdy,  and  not  circuitously,  and  a  just  fear  of  capture  is  not
sufficient.*  But  there  are  other  cases,  which  have  declared
that  an  inteidiction  of  commerce  with  the  port  of  destination
by  means  of  a  Uockade,  or  the  possession  of  the  port  by  an
enemy,  was  a  peril  within  the  pdicy.  It  is  considered  a  loss
by  restraint  of  princes  which  could  not  be  resisted,  and  ope-
rates as  effectually  as  if  the  vessel  was  actually  seized.  It
would  be  unreasonable  to  require  the  insured  to  rush  into
danger  with  the  moral  certainty  of  loss.  There  is  no.  doubt
about  the  general  principle,  that  if  the  voyage  be  relinquished
merely  through  fear  of  capture,  the  loss  is  not  cover#  by
the  policy.  The  apprehension  of  capture,  or  of  any  other
peril  in  transitu  is  no  ground  of  abandonment.  In  the  cases
in  which  a  just  fear  of  one  of  the  perils  insured  against,  has
been  deemed  equivalent  to  the  presence  of  vis  major  and
sufficient  to  charge  the  loss  upon  the  insurer,  the  danger  was
imminent,  and  might  be  said  to  be  present  and  palpable,  as
well  as  apparently  remediless  and  morally  certain.  If  there-
fore the  danger  be  so  great  as  to  amount  to  almost  a  certain-


•  FfROcis  7.  Ocean  Insurancs  CoropaDj,  6  Cinoen*9  Rep.  404.

^  Hadkinton  v.  RobioaoD,  3  Bot,  <f»  P%Uler,  388.  Lnbback  t.  Row-
crslt,  5  Eep.  J^.  P.  Rep.  50.  Parkin  ▼.  Tnnno,  1 1  JBwI't  Rep.  ft.
Richardson  ? .  Maine  Insurance  Co.  6  JVwt.  Rep.  lOS.  King  ▼.  Tke
Delaware  Ins.  Co.  X  Waeh.  Cir.  Rep.  300.  Smitb  v.  The  Univenal
las.  Co.  6  WheaioHt  176.


294  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Pari  V.

ty  of  capture,  it  becomes  a  restraint  in  contemplation  of  the
policy.*

A  warranty  against  illicit  trade  was  introduced  into  some
of  our  American  policies  in  1788.  It  was  intended  to  apply
only  to  seizures  for  breaches  of  the  laws  of  trade,  and  the
commercial  regulations  of  ports.  It  does  not  extend  to  sei-
zures for  offences  against  the  law  of  nations,  nor  to  acts  of  law-
less violence,  though  committed  under  a  pretext  of  some  mu-
nicipal regulation  ;  nor  to  arbitrary  seizures  under  the  pre-
tence of  illicit  trade,  when  in  truth  no  such  thing  existed.  It
only  applies  to  protect  the  insurers  against  illicit  trade  actu-
ally carried  on  or  attempted.^

3.  Of  risks  excluded  by  the  usual  memorandum.
To  prevent  disputes  respecting  partial  losses,  arising  from
the  perishable  quality  of  the  goods  insured,  or  from  trivial
subjects  of  difference,  it  has  been  a  general  practice  to  intro-
duce into  policies  a  stipulation,  by  way  of  memorandum,
that  upon  certain  enumerated  articles,  the  insurer  should  not
be  liable  for  any  partial  loss  whatever,  and  upon  others  for
non^under  a  given  rate  per  cent.  This  clause  was  first  in-
troduced into  the  English  policies  about  the  year  1749.  Be-
fore that  time  the  insurer  was  liable  for  every  injury,  how-
ever small,  that  happened  to  the  thing  insured.  In  France,
if  there  be  no  such  express  stipulation,  the  ordinance  of  the
marine,  and  afterwards  the  new  code,  provides  that  the  in-


a  I  Etneriffont  507—512.  '  Symonds  v.  Union  losuraDce  Co.  4  Dal-
lot*  Rep,  417.  Schmidt  r.  Union  Insurance  Co.  1  Johns.  Rep,  249.
Craig  v.  Union  Insurance  Co.  6  Johns,  Rep.  226.  Barker  v.  Blakes,  9
Easi*s  Rep,  283.  Olivera  v.  The  Union  Insurance  Co,  3  Wheat. Rep,
183*  Saltus  V.  Union  Insurance  Co.  15  Johns.  Rep,  623.  Thompson
V.  Read,  IS  Sgrg,  i*  Rawie,  440.  Simonds  v.  Union  Insurance  Co.  1
PTash,  dr.  Rep,  382.

h  Faadel  y.  Phoenix  Ins.  Co.  4  Serg.  ^  RawU,  29.  Cuculu  ▼,  The
Orleans  Ins.  Co.  18  MaHm*s  Lout,  Rep,  1 1


L«<.  XL VIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTr.  29&

surer  shall  not  be  liable,  if  the  partial  loss  does  not  exceed
ooe  per  cent,  of  the  value  of  the  article  damaged.*

The  memorandum  clause  in  a  policy,  usually  declares  that
the  enumerated  articles  should  be  free  from  average  under  a
given  rate,  unless  general^  or  the  ship  be  stranded.  In
consequence  of  this  exception,  all  small  partial  losses,  how-
ever inconsiderable,  are  to  be  borne  by  a  general  average,
provided  they  were  incurred  in  a  case  proper  for  such  an
average  ;  and  in  Cantillon  v.  London  Assurance  Compa-
nyf  it  was  held  that  the  exception  amounted  to  a  condition^
and  that  if  the  ship  was  stranded,  the  insured  was  let  in  to
prove  his  whole  partial  loss.  But  in  Wilson  v.  Smith,^  that
decision  was  overruled,  and  it  was  Iield  that  those  words  did
not  make  a  condition,  but  only  an  exception  ;  and  that  in  the
case  of  stranding,  and  in  all  cases  proper  for  a  general  ave-
rage, and  in  those  cases  only,  the  memorandum  did  not  ap-
ply. Afterwards,  in  Mason  v.  Skurray^^  Lord  Mansfield
held  the  same  doctrine ;  and  in  Cocking  v.  Fraser,'  the
principle  was  carried  still  further,  and  received  its  due  expan-
sion, and  was  clearly  and  precisely  defined.  It  was  settled
by  a  strong  determination  of  the  court  of  K.  B.,  that  though
a  total  loss  may  exist  in  certain  cases  when  the  voyage  is  de-
feated, yet  in  case  of  perishable  articles  within  the  memoran-
dum, the  insurer  b  secure  against  all  damage  to  them,  whe-
ther great  or  small,  whether  it  defeats  the  voyage,  or  only
diminkhes  the  price  of  the  goods,  unless  the  article  be  com-
pletely and  actually  destroyed,  so  as  no  longer  physically  to
exist.  ^Considering  the  difiiculty  of  ascertaining  how  much
of  the  loss  arose  by  the  perils  of  the  sea,  and  how  much  by


ft  3  Burr.  Rep.  1551. Ord.  de  la  Mar,  tit.  Atturancety  art.  47.
Codt  de  Commerce^  art.  408.
h  Cited  3  Burr,  Rep,  1553,
c  3  Burr,  Rep.  1550.
d  Parkonint,  160.
e  Parknnlns,  151. 25  Geo.  Iff.


296  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

the  periflhaUe  nature  of  the  commodiiyi  and  the  impootioDt
to  which  insurers  would  be  liable  in  consequence  of  that  dif-
ficulty, the  rule  of  construction,  as  settled  in  that  case,  is
▼ery  salutary,  by  reason  of  its  simplicity  and  certainty.

But  this  decision  was  shaken,  and  the  original  doctrine  of
Lord  Cb.  J.  Ryder,  in  Caniillon  v.  London  Assurance
Company,  revived,  by  the  decision  of  the  K.  B.  in  Burnet  ▼.
Kensington,'  wbich  declared,  that  if  the  ship  be  stranded,
it  destroyed  the  exception,  and  let  in  the  general  words  of  the
policy. It  was  also  shaken  by  the  observations  of  Lord  Al-
vanley,  in  Dyson  ▼.  JRowcroft,^  and  of  Lord  Ellenborough,
in  Cologan  v.  London  Assurance Company.^ In  our
American  courts,  the  doctrine  of  the  case  of  Cocking  v.
Eraser  is  the  received  law. Tt  was  explicitly  and  pointedly
recognised  as  a  sound  decbion  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  New-
York,  in  Maggrath  v.  Church,*  and  it  has  received  a  simi-
lar sanction  in  subsequent  cases,  in  that  and  in  other  courts ;'
and  the  weight  of  authority  is  in  favour  of  the  doctrine,  that
in  order  to  charge  the  insurer,  the  raemcwandum  articles
must  be  specifically  and  physically  destroyed,  and  must  not
exist  in  specie. It  has  been  frequently  a  vexed  point  in  the
discussions,  whether  the  insurer  was  holden,  if  the  memo*
randum  articles  physically  existed,  though  they  were  abso-
lutely of  no  value. The  ditta  of  some  of  the  judges  in  the
cases  referred  to,  are  in  favour  of  the  doctrine,  that  an  extin-
guishment of  the  memorandum  articles  in  value,  was  equi-
valent to  an  extinguishment  in  specie  ;  and  there  is  much
plausible  reasoning  in  favour  of  that  expbaination  of  tfie  rule.


a  7  T§rm  Rep.  910.

b  3  Bm.  4*  Pu^.  474.

c  5  MauU  4*  Selvf,  447.

d  I  GoMieff'  i?ep.  196.

€  Neilsoo  T.  Colambia  los.  Company,  3  Coinet*  lUp.  108.  Saltut
▼.  Ocean  Ina.  Company,  14  Johfu,  R$p.  138.  Marcardier  r.  Chesa-
peake Int.  Company,  8  Crmuh's  Rap,  39.  Morean  v.  The  U.  S.  Ins.
Company,  1  WhnA.  J^p.  219.


Lm.  XLVIII.] of  personal  PROPERTT.  297

Lord  Ellenborough,  in  Cologan  v.  London  Assurance  Com-
pan/ffj  expressed  himself  strongly  on  the  point,  and  declared,
that  it  could  not  be  less  a  total  loss  because  the  commodity
subsisted  in  specie,  if  it  t^iibsisted  only  in  the  form  of  a  nui-
sance. There  was  a  total  loss  of  the  thing,  if,  by  any  of  the
perils  insured  against,  it  was  rendered  of  no  use  whatever,
although  it  might  not  be  entirely  annihilated.*

If  there  be  a  total  loss  of  the  voyage  by  reason  of  ship-
wreck, or  any  other  casualty,  and  there  be  no  other  means
to  forward  the  cargo,  there  is  no  distinction  between  the
memorandum  articles  and  the  rest  of  the  cargo.  The  total
loss  applies  equally  to  the  whole.^  When  part  of  the  articles
in  the  memorandum  are  totally  destroyed  by  the  perils  in-
sured against,  and  the  residue  remains  partially  damaged,  it
has  been  a  very  unsettled  question,  whether  the  insured  was
entitled  to  recover  for  the  part  so  totally  lost.  The  case  of
Davy  V.  Milf<yrdf  is  a  strong  determination  in  favour  of  the


a  5  JUiauU  ^  Selw.  447.  Parry  T.  Aberdcin,  9  Bamw.  Jjr  Creu.
41 1.  Mr.  Benecke  says,  that  the  prevalent  opiDiOD  now  is,  that  if  the
memorandum  articles  are,  by  sea  damage,  rendered  of  fut  valtie^  there  is  a
total  loss,  (bough  (hey  exist  in  specie.  And  yet  be  puts,  and  leaves  un-
answered the  question,  whe(her,if  a  cargo  of  fibh  valued  at  100  pounds,
be  entirely  rotten,  aod  can  be  sold  for  one  shilling,  for  manure,  is  that
deemed  of  any  value  ? Benecke  on  Indemnity^  379.

6  Manning  v.  Newnham,  Condy*a  Marthall^  586.  Colop an  v.  Lon-
don Assurance  Compaoy,  5  Maule  4r  Sel\JD,  447.  Morean  v.  U.  S.  Ins*
Company,  1  Wheat.  Rep.  219.  Maggrath  v.  Church,  1  Caine$'  Rep,
ai4,  and  see  Phillips  on  Insurance,  p.  489,  where  all  the  cases  on  this,
equally  as  on  all  other  subjects  which  lie  discusses,  are  collected  and
stated  with  extraordinary  diligence  and  accuracy,  consideriog  the  com-
plicated nature  and  infioite  variety  of  the  questions  aud  decisions  that
at  this  day  constitute  the  law  of  insurance.  The  French  code,  art.  409,
exempts  the  insurer,  under  the  clause  free  from  average^  from  all  par-
tial losses,  except  in  cases  which  authorize  an  abandonment ;  and,  ia
■ach  cases,  the  insured  has  the  option  betweed  the  abandonment  and
the  claim  for  average  loss.

c  15  East's  Rep.  569.

Vol.  III.  38


I


298  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V-

recovery.  It  was  said,  that  tbere  was  no  case,  nor  no  reason
to  maintain,  that  where  the  least  particle  of  the  thing  insared
subsisted  in  specie,  though  the  greater  part  was  actually  de-
stroyed, the  insured  should  be  precluded  from  recovering  the
value  of  that  which  was  totally  lost.  The  language  of  some
of  the  judges,  afterwards,  in  Cologan  v.  London  Assurance
Company ^'^  was  to  the  same  effect.  But,  in  oppositioQ  to
that  doctrine,  we  have  the  case  of  Hedburgh  v.  Pearson^
in  which  the  hogshead?  of  sugai*  covered  by  the  memoran-
dum were  saved,  but  the  greater  part  of  the  loaves  in  each
hog^shead  were  washed  out  and  destroyed  by  a  peril  of  the
sea,  and  yet  it  was  held  to  be  only  an  average  loss,  and  the
insurer  wholly  discharged.  So,  in  Gverlain  v.  Col.  Ins.
Co,j'  part  of  the  memorandum  articles  (and  which  were  dis-
tinct kinds  of  provisions,  and  specifically  enumerated  in  the
policy)  were  lost  by  shipwreck,  and  the  insured  was  not  al-
lowed to  rcoovcr,  on  the  ground  that  the  insurance  was  upon
^  much  cargo  as  an  integral  subject,  and  the  insurer  was  not
liable  for  any  particular  item,  though  it  was  totally  lost.  The
court  referred  to  several  decisions  in  the  French  tribunals,  as
reported  by  Emcrigon,^  and  to  the  doctrine  of  that  writer,  by
which  it  appears,  that  in  France,  under  the  clause  free  of
average,  the  insurer  is  not  holden,  though  part  of  the  subject
insured  be  totally  destroyed.  The  principle  is,  that  the  par-
ties have  a  right  to  make  their  own  contracts,  and  if  the  con-
tract be  lawful,  it  becomes  a  law  to  the  court,  and  it  would
introduce  uncertainty  and  confusion  to  undertake  to  modify
the  <x)ntract  (as  they  do  iu  Italy,  under  this  very  clause')
upon  assumed  principles  of  equity.  The  cases  of  Biays  v.
The  Chesapeake  Insurance  Company^  Morean  v.  The


a  5  Maule  <p  Selir.  447.

b  1  TawiL  Rep.  154.

e  7  Johns.  Rep.  5^7.

d  1  Emerigon^  669 — 670.

•  Targa,  ch.  dS,  not.  18. Ciuaregii^  Due*  47,  n.  10.


Lee.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  299

Untied  States  Insurance  Company^  and  of  Humphrey  v.
The  Union  Insurance  Company^'^  have  established  the
same  rule,  that  the  underwriter  pays  nothing  if  the  loss  of
the  memorandum  articles  be  partial,  and  not  total,  and  it  is
partial  only  when  part  of  the  cargo  arrives  in  safety,  however
deteriorated  in  value,  though  another  part  of  the  cargo  had
been  whdly  destroyed  by  disasters  on  the  vo)'age.  This  may
DOW  be  considered  as  the  settled  law  of  this  country  on  the
subject*

The  French  law  positively  requires,  that  goods,  subject  by
their  nature  to  particular  detriment  or  diminution,  be  specified
in  the  poUcy,  otherwise  the  insurer  is  not  liable  for  the  losses
which  may  happen  to  those  articles,  unless  the  insured  was
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  cargo  at  the  time  tlie  contract
was  made/  This  is  a  valuable  rule,  calculated  to  guard
against  dispute  and  imposition.

4.  Of  the  usual  perils  covered  by  the  policy.
It  will  not  be  necessary,  nor  will  this  course  of  instruction
permit  me  U>  do  more,  than  take  notice  of  a  few  of  the  pro-
minent perils  which  accompany  the  voyage,  and  surround  it
with  danger.

The  ignorance  or  inattention  of  the  master  or  mariners,
is  not  one  of  the  perils  of  the  sea.'' Those  words  apply  to  all


a  7  Cranch,  415. 1  Wheat,  Rep  21 9.  227.  note. 3  Mtuony  429.

6  Wadsworth  t.  Pacific  Ins.  Company,  4  Wendell^  33.  lo  tbat  caia
it  wat  decided,  tliat.tbe  underwriter  was  not  answerable  for  a  partial
loss  on  memorandum  articles,  except  for  general  average,  unless  (here
be  a  total  lo$a  of  the  vhole  of  the  particular  species,  whether  the  parti-
cular arUcIe  be  shipped  in  bulk,  or  in  separate  boxes  or  packages.  So
in  Brooke  v.  Louisiana  Ins.  Co.  17  JlfaHm,  530,  where  the  insurance
was  of  a  cargo  of  mules  as  memorandum  articles,  it  was  held  tbat  there
must  be  a  physical  total  loss  of  the  whole  number  insured,  to  autboriBe
a  recorery. See  16  Martin ^  640.  681,  discussions  on  the  same  case.

c  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  tit.  Dee  Jiaa,  art.  31.  Code  de  Cffmnurce^  art.
355.

d  Pothier^  h.  t.  No.  64.  Gregson  ?.  Gilbert,  Park  on  Inturemce^  tS.


300  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY-  [Part  V.

thooe  natural  perils  and  operations  of  the  elements  which  oc-
cur without  the  intervention  of  human  agency,  and  which
Che  prudence  of  man  could  not  foresee,  nor  his  strength  restaC
Qttod  fato  contingit,  et  cuivis  patrifamiliasy  quamvis  di-
ligentissimo  possit  contingere. The  imprudence,  or  want
of  skill  in  the  master,  may  have  been  unforseen,  but  it  is  not
a  fortuitous  event,* The  insurer  undertakes  only  to  indem-
nify against  extraordinary  perils  of  the  sea,  and  not  against
those  ordinary  ones  to  which  every  ship  must  inevitably  be
exposed ;  but  it  is  often  difficult  to  discriminate  between  da-
mage occasioned  by  the  ordinary  service  of  the  voyage,  and
which  fulls  upon  the.  owner,  and  by  a  peril  of  the  sea  for
which  the  insurer  is  responsible. Damages  resulting  from
the  ordinary  employment  of  the  ship,  or  the  inlierent  infirmi-
ty of  the  article,  as  the  loss  of  an  anchor  by  the  friction  of  the
rocks,  or  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  equipment  of  the  ship,  or
her  destruction  by  worms,  or  the  diminution  of  liquids  by  the
ordinary  leakage  to  which  they  are  naturally  subject,  or  hemp
taking  fire  in  a  state  of  effervescence,  may  be  mentioned  as
instances  of  losses  whicli  are  not  within  the  policy,  because
they  are  not  losses  attributable  to  a  cas  fortuity It  has  even
been  a  vexed  question,  whether  damage  done  to  a  ship  by
rats,  was  among  the  casualties  comprehended  under  perils  of
the  sea,  and  the  authorities  are  much  divided  on  the  question.
The  better  opinion  would,  however,  seem  to  be,  that  the  in-


«  In  Siraccha,  Oiossa.  2S  cam*  forimiua  is  defined  to  be  acddens^
^uod  per  euslodiam,  curam  et  dUigentiam  menlU  kumance  evUari  non
poletl,  SanUma^  de  An.  para  3,  o.  65,  adds,  ubi  diiigentiisimus  prts-
canseeit  ei  prooidistet  iKm  dicitur  proprie  casus  fvrluilus^

b  Valiny  iom.  ii.  81.  Pelhier,  dee  Ass,  No.  66.  1  Emerigont  390.
Rbol  V.  Parr,  1  Etp.  «Ar.  P,  Rep.  444.  Martin  v,  Salem  Marine  Insu-
rance Company,  2  Jlfa<«.  Rep.  420.  Boyd  v.  Dubois,  3  Campb.  JV.  P.
Ii£p*  12X  Mr.  Phillips,  in  his  TVeaiise  on  iMurance^  p.  252,  very
properly  adds,  that  if  Uie  injury  to  tbe  ship  by  worms  arose  from  the
lost,  by  a  sea  peril,  of  tbe  protection  of  tbe  copper  sboatbiog,  tbe  insa-
i«rt  may  reasonably  be  cbai:g^ed«


Le«.  XLVIII.] 01^  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  301

surer  is  not  liable  for  this  sort  of  damage,  because  it  arises
from  the  negligence  of  the  common  carrier,  and  it  may  be
prevented  by  due  care,  and  is  within  the  control  of  human
prudence  and  sagacity.*

When  a  missing  vessel  shall  be  presumed  to  have  perished
by  a  peril  of  the  sea,  depends  upon  circumstances,  and  there
is  no  precise  time  fixed  by  the  English  law/  In  the  French
law,  a  vessel  not  heard  from  is  presumed  to  be  lost  after  the
expiration  of  one  year  in  ordinary  voyages,  and  of  two  years
in  long  ones.*^  The  ordinances  of  foreign  states  have  been
very  arbitrary  on  this  point.  Thus,  by  the  ordinance  of
Hamburgh,  a  ship  was  presumed  to  be  lost,  if  bound  to  any
place  in  Europe,  and  not  heard  from  in  three  months,  and
by  the  Recopilaci&n  des  Loyes  de  Indias,  in  Spain,  if  not
heard  from  witliin  a  year  and  a  half.^  In  the  case  of
missing  vessels,  the  loss  is  presumed  to  have  tiappeued  im-
mediately after  the  date  of  the  last  news  ;  so  that  if  an  insu-
rance be  for  three  months,  and  the  vessel  not  being  heard
from,  a  further  insurance  is  made  for  a  year,  and  the,  vessel


.  a  Dale  ▼.  Hall,  1  JFila.  Rep.  281.  Hooter  7.  Potts,  4  Campb.  JV:
P.  Rep*  %03.  Ayuiar  v.  Aster,  6  Cowen*$Rep.  266.  Rocau^  de  A$$.
n.  49.  Cleirac,  sur  le  Guidon^ch,  5,  art.  8,  and  Emerigon^  torn.  i.  377,
378,  who  cites  the  Dig.  19.  2.  13.  6,aDd  Casaregis,  Straccha,  Saoteroa,
Koricke,  aod  Targa,  may  all  be  coosidered  as  roaiotaioiog  the  princi-
ple, that  the  owner,  and  not  the  iosurer,  is  boldeo  for  an  injury  by  rats ;
aod  Che  only  case  that  I  have  onet  with  directly  to  the  contrary,  is  Gar-
rigues  y.  Coxe,  I  Binn,  Rep.  592.  The  opinion  of  Santema^  De  An.
part  4,  D.  31, 32,  is  not  consistent  with  his  own  principles ;  for,  while
be  admits,  that  an  injury  by  rats  cannot  properly  come  under  tbe  name
of  etuutfortuUua  ;  magit  eat  improvisus  provenieni  ex  aileriua  cu/pa^
quam/oriuiiva,  he  still  concludes  it  to  be  a  peril  generally  ood  absolute*
ly  assumed,  when  not  controlled  by  usage.

h  Green  f.  Brown,  Sir.  Rep,  1199.  Brown  v.  Neilsoo,  1  Cainee*
Rep*  525.  Gordon  y.  Bowne,  2  Johns.  Rep,  150.  Houstman  y.  Tboro-
ton,  1  HoWt  JV*.  P.  Rep.  242.

c  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  375.

d  1  Magens,  89,  90.


302  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

is  never  beard  from,  in  that  case  the  first  insurer  pays  the
loss.*

What  degree  of  peril  changes  it  from  an  ordinary  to  an
extraordinary  character,  so  as  to  bring  it  wiihin  the  stipula-
tion of  indemnity,  is  frequently  a  perplexing  question,  to  be
determined  by  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case.  And
to  prevent  uncertainty  and  dispute,  it  is  a  settled  rule,  that
the  peril,  whatever  it  may  be,  upon  which  the  policy  attaches,
must  be  the  proximate,  and  not  the  remote  cause,  of  the
loss.  Causa  proxima  non  remota  spectatur}  If  a  ship
be  driven  ashore  by  the  wind,  and  in  that  situation  be  cap-
tured by  an  enemy,  the  loss  is  to  be  imputed  to  the  capture,
and  not  to  the  stranding.^  When  a  partial  loss  is  followed
by  a  total  loss,  the  former  may  be  considered  as  merged  in
the  latter.  The  courts  are  not  to  be  seeking  about  for  odds
and  ends  of  previous  partial  losses,  when  there  is  an  over-
whelming cause  of  loss  which  swallows  up  the  whole  sub-
ject matter.'  So,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  first  loss  be  dis-
tinct and  total,  and  be  followed  by  abandonment,  the  rights
of  the  parties  are  fixed,  and  the  courts  are  not  to  cast  their
eyes  forward  to  see  what  further  perils  awaited  the  pro-
perty.*

By  the  rule  and  practice  in  these  United  States,  the  wa-
ges and  provisions  of  the  crew  during  the  necessary  deten-
tion of  the  vessel  for  repairs  requisite  in  the  course  of  the
voyage,  by  reason  of  perils  insured  agednst,  are  considered  as
included  in  the  perils  of  the  sea,  and  made  chargeable  upon


a  Boulay  Paiy^  torn.  iv.  246.

6  Walker  t.  Maitlaod,  6  Bamte.  4*  Aid.  171.  It  is  apon  the  prin-
ciple mentioned  in  the  text,  that  the  insurer  on  goods  is  not  liable  when
tbej  are  sold  by  the  captain  of  a  ship,  to  defray  the  expense  of  repairs,
rendered  necessary  by  a  tempest.  Powell  v.  Gudgeon,  5  J(f.  4<  iS.  431.
Sergoy  v.  Hobson,  4  Bingham,  131.

c  Green  ▼.  Elmslie,  Peake's  JV.  P.  Rep,  213.

d  Lirie  v.  Jansen,  12  EcuVt  Rep,  648.

e  Schieffelin  ▼.  N.  T.  Ins.  Co.  9  Johnt,  Rep,  27.


Lcc.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  303

the  insurer  ;"*  and  we  have  already  eeen^  how  far  wages  and
provisions  constitute  an  item  of  general  average  in  the  cases
of  capture,  embargo,  or  detention.  But  I  cannot  undertake
to  specify  more  particularly  the  various  kinds  of  losses  which
are  deemed  to  be  covered  by  the  general  stipulation  to  indem-
nify against  perils  of  the  sea.  Many  subtle  distinctior^  have
been  raised  and  discussed  in  the  books  on  this  point,  and
several  of  them  have  been  stated  or  referred  to  by  Mr.  Phil-
lips.*

The  enumerated  perils  of  the  sea,  pirates,  rovers,  thieves,
include  the  wrongful  and  violent  acts  of  individuals,  whether
in  the  open  character  of  felons,  or  in  the  character  of  a  mob,
or  as  a  mutinous  crew,  or  as  plunderers  of  shipwrecked  goods
on  shore.**  The  theft  that  is  insured  against  by  name,
means  that  which  is  accompanied  by  violence,  {latrocinium,)
and  not  simple  theft  :  furtum  non  est  casus  fortnitvs.*
But  the  stipulatioa  of  indemnity  against  takings  ai  sea,
arrests,  restraints  and  detainments  of  all  kings,  princes,
and  people,  refers  only  to  the  acts  of  government  for  govern-
ment purposes,  whether  right  or  wrong.  An  arrest  in  the
domestic  port,  after  the  voyage  commenced,  justifies  an  aban-
donment ;  but  if  made  before  the  risk  commenced,  the  con-


a  Waldeo  t.  Le  Roy,  2  Caines'  Rep.  263.  Barker  v.  PhcDi'x  las.
Co.  8  Johnt,  Rep,  307. Padelford  v.  Boardman,  4  J\Icut.  Rep,  548.

b  Stipra^  p.

c  See  Phillipi'  Treatise  on  Insurance,  p.  254 — 259.  Pirates^  ro-
vers, thieves,  are  perils  expressly  Dientioned  in  the  policj  ;  but  in  tbe
early  history  of  insurance,  it  was  quite  a  vexed  question,  whether  tliej
were  included  amon^  the  general  perils  of  the  sea  ;  and  Santerna,  and
after  him  Straccha,  have  noticed  the  discus&ions,  and  compiled  learning,
on  the  point.  It  was  conceded,  that  piracy  was  a  casus  foriuitut  of  the
sea,  but  not  theft.  Santema,  De  Ass.  and  Spans,  pars  3,  n.  61 — 65.
Straccha,  Qlossa.  22,  passim.

d  Nesbit  v.  Lushington,  4  Term  Rep.  783.  Brown  f.  Smith,  1  Doui's
Rep.  349. Bondrett  v.  Hentigg,  1  HolVs  JV*.  P.  Rep.  149.

6  Boulay  Paly,  torn.  in.  35.


304  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY, [Part  V.

tract  18  discharged.*  An  arrest  by  the  admiralty  process,  at
the  instance  of  an  individual,  on  a  private  claim,  is  not  a  case
within  the  policy,  and  it  is  to  be  presumed  the  Court  of  Ad<
miralty  would  indemnify  the  owner  or  insured  in  the  award
of  costs  and  charges  against  the  unjust  prosecutor.*  Under
the  insurance  against  fire,  it  is  held,  that  if  the  ship  be  burnt
under  justifiable  circumstances,  to  prevent  capture,  or  from
an  apprehension  of  a  contagious  disease,  the  insurer  is  lia-
ble/ If  sails  and  rigging,  put  on  shore  while  the  vessel  is
repairing  at  a  foreign  port,  be  burnt,  they  are  covered  by  the
policy.'  It  has  likewise  been  held,  aRer  a  very  learned  dis-
cussion, that  the  insurer  is  answerable  for  a  loss  by  fire  occa-
sioned by  the  negligence  of  the  master  and  mariners.'  This
decision  is  subsequent  to  that  of  Grim  v.  The  Phenix  In-
surance Company/  in  which  it  was  held,  after  a  discussion
equally  searching  and  elaborate,  that  a  loss  by  fire  arising
from  carelessness,  was  not  covered  by  the  insurance.  The
French  law  coincides  with  the  English  decision/  Every
species  of  capture,  whether  lawful  or  unlawful,  and  whether
by  friends  or  enemies,  is  also  a  loss  within  the  policy.  Bar-
rairy  is  a  peril  specially  insured  against,  and  Lord  Mansfield
thought  it  very  strange,  that  the  underwriter  should  under-


a  Boulay  Paiy^  torn.  iv.  238.

h  Nesbit  v.  Lusbington,  vhi  tvp.  Ord.  of  Hamburgh  2  J^a^ent,
218.

c  Pothier.  h.  t.  n.  53.  Targa^  cb.  56.  Emtrigon^  torn.  i.  434.
Gordon  v.  RimmingtoD,  1  Camph.  JV.  P.  R&p.  123.

d  Pell  J  V.  Royal  Ex.  Ass.  Co.  1  Burr^  341.

e  Busk  V.  Tbe  Royal  Exchange  Assurance  Company,  2  Bamw.  if
Aid.  73. Walker  v.  Maitland,  5  ibid.  171.

/  13  Johns.  Rep.  461.

g  Boulay  Paty^  torn.  iF.  23.  In  Peiaptco  Int.  Co.  r.  Coulter,  3  Pe-
tert'  U.  S.  Rep.  222,  the  decision  was  according  to  the  English  rule,
that  where  tbe  policy  covers  the  risk  of  barratry,  and  fire  is  the  proxi-
mate cause  of  the  loss,  the  insurer  is  liable,  and  (be  defence  that  negli-
gence WAS  the  remote  cause,  is  inadmissible.  The  weight  of  authority
is  therefore  decidedly  against  the  New-Tork  decision.


Lee.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  305

take  to  indemnify  against  the  misconduct  of  the  master,  who
is  the  agent  of  the  insured,  and  subject  to  his  control*  It
means  fraudulent  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  master,  in  his
character  of  master,  or  of  the  mariners,  to  the  injury  of  the
owner,  and  without  his  consent,  and  it  iocludes  every  breach
of  trust  committed  with  dishonest  views.  Barratry  is  used
by  the  French  writers  in  its  larger  sense,  as  comprehenduig
n^ligence,  as  well  as  wilful  misconduct ;  therefore,  no  illus-
iration  can  be  safely  drawn  from  the  French  authorities,
when  the  term  is  used  as  in  the  EngUsh  and  American  law,
in  a  more  limited  sense,  and  applicable  only  to  the  wilful  mis-
conduct of  the  master  or  mariners.  To  trade  with  an  enemy
without  leave  of  the  owner,  though  it  be  intended  for  his
benefit,  or  for  a  neutral  to  resist  search,  though  his  motive  be
to  serve  the  owner,  or  for  a  letter  of  marque  to  cruise,  and
take  a  prize,  though  done  for  the  benefit  of  the  owner,  if  the
ship  be  lost  by  reason  of  the  acts,  are  all  of  them  acts  of  bar-
ratry. So,  sailing  out  of  port  in  violation  of  an  embargo,  or
without  paying  the  port  duties,  or  to  go  out  of  the  regular
course  upon  a  smuggling  expedition,  or  to  be  engaged  in
smuggling  against  the  consent  of  the  owner,  are  all  of  them
acts  of  barratry,  equally  with  more  palpable  and  direct  acts
of  violence  and  fraud,  for  they  are  wilful  breaches  of  duty  by
the  master,  in  his  character  of  master,  to  the  injury  of  the
owner.* It  makes  no  difference  in  the  reason  of  the  thing.


a  We  arc  told  by  Roccus,  De  Ass.  n.  89,  that  barratry  is  expressly
eiKcepted  in  the  policies  at  Naples.  So,  by  the  ordiDance  of  Philip  I  J.
for  Antwerp,  and  by  the  usag^e  at  Rotterdam  and  Cadiz,  barratry  in  the
captain  ormarioers  was  not  insurable.  On  the  other  band,  at  Ham-
bargb,  and  Genoa,  and  Bilboa,  it  might  be  insured  against.  Emerigon^
Det  An,  t.  1 ,  366,  7. Ord,  de  Bilboa,  cb.  22,  n,  1 9.

b  Stamma  v.  Brown,  Sir.  Rep.  1 173.  Knight  v.  Cambridge,  as  ci*
ted  by  Lord  Mansfield  in  Cowp.  153,  and  by  Lord  Ellcnborougb  in  8
EoMty  135, 136.  Vallejo  v.  Wheeler,  Cov^p.  Rep.  143.  RobeHson  v.
Ewer,  I  Term  Rep.  127.  JIavclock  v.  Ilancilt,  3  Term,  Rep.  277.
Moss  T.  Byrom,  6  Term  Rep.  379. Phyn  v.  Royal  Exchange  Assu-

Vol.  III.  39


306 OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. t^^^^it  V.

wbeCber  the  injury  the  owner  suflfers  be  owing  to  an  act  of
ihe  roaster,  induced  by  motives  of  advantage  to  himself,  or
of  malice  to  the  owner,  or  a  disregard  to  those  laws  which  it
was  the  master's  duty  to  obey,  and  which  the  owner  relied
upon  him  to  observe.  It  is,  in  either  case,  equally  barratry.
If  the  ship  be  barratrously  taken  out  of  her  course,  that  act
takes  the  whole  property  from  the  possession  of  the  insured,
and  produces  a  total  k)ss.*  But  it  is  requisite,  that  the  loss
resulting  from  the  barratry  must  actually  happen  during
the  continuance  of  the  voyage  ;  and  if  the  ship  be  not  seized
for  a  smuggling  act  until  she  has  been  moored  twenty
hours  in  aafety  at  the  port  of  destination,  the  insurer  is  dis-
charged.*

We  have  seen,  that  it  is  a  vexed  question,  rendered  the
more  perplexing  by  well  balanced  decisions,  and  in  direct  op-
position to  each  other,  whether  a  loss  by  fire  proceeding  from
negligence,  be  covered  by  a  policy  insuring  against  fire.  It
is  equally  doubtful,  whether  a  loss  by  any  other  peril  in  the
policy,  operating  immediately  and  proximately  upon  the  pro-
perty, be  chargeable  upon  the  insurer,  when  the  remote  cause
of  that  loss  was  the  negligence  or  misconduct  of  the  master
and  mariners,  not  amounting  to  barratry.  Among  a  num-
ber of  cases  that  bear  upon  the  question,  the  case  of  Cleve-
land V.  Union  Insurance  Cowvpany^  may  be  selected  as  a
strong  decision  in  favour  of  the  insurer ;  and  the  more  recent
case  of  Walker  v.  Maitland,^  as  one  equally  strong  against


ranee  Company,  7  Ttrm  Rap,  505.  Earll  y.  Rowcroft,  8  EtuVt  Rep*
]26.  Hood  V.  Nesbit,  2  DtUku'  Rep.  137.  Keodricke  r.  Delafield,  2
Cainei*  Rep*  67.  BrowD  v.  Uoioo  los.  Co.  5  Day<^  1.  Cook  v.  Com.
loB.  Co.  U  Johns,  Rep,  40.  Grim  v«  The  Phcnix  loEurance  Compa-
ny, 13  i7oAn#.  Rep,  451.  Wilcocks  ▼.  Uuion  Insurance  Company,  t
Bum.  Rep,  574. Mtllandon  v.  N.  Orleans  Ins.  Co.  1 1  JIfarftn,  602.

m  Dixoo  V.  Raid,  5  Barmo.  ^  ,Ald,  597.

h  Lockyer  v.  Oflley,  1  Term  Rep,  252.

«  8  JIfaw.  Rep,  308.

d  5  Bamw,  ^-  Ald^  \7U


Lee.  XLVIII.} OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  307

him,  OD  that  very  point  It  may  be  expedient  to  suspend
one's  own  judgment,  under  such  a  sad  uncertainty  of  the  law,
andleavethe  question  for  further  judicial consideration,since  an
eminent  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Uniied  States  has
thought  proper  to  take  this  course.*

II.  Of  the  voyage  in  relatimi  to  the  policy.

(I.)  When  the  policy  attaches^  and  terminates.

The  commencement  and  end  of  the  risk,  depend  upon  the
nvords  of  the  policy.  The  insurer  may  take,  and  modify,
what  risks  he  pleases.  The  policy  may  be  on  a  voyage  otitf
or  on  a  voyage  in,  or  on  the  whole  complex  voyage  out  and
in  ;  or  it  may  be  for  part  of  the  route,  or  for  a  limited  time,
or  from  port  to  port^  in  an  intennediate  stage  of  the  voyage.
If  insurance  on  a  ship  be  from,  such  a  place,  the  risk  does
not  commence  until  the  vessel  breaks  ground.  If  at  and
fromj  it  then  includes  all  the  time  the  ship  is  in  port  after
the  policy  is  subscribed,  if  the  ship  be  at  home ;  and  if  abroad,
it  commences,  according  to  a  decision  in  Pennsylvania,  only
from  the  time  she  has  been  safely  moored  twenty-four  hours
after  her  arrival.^  But  if  a  ship  be  expected  to  arrive  at  a  fo-
reign port,  and  be  insured  at  and  from  that  place,  or  from
her  arrival  there,  other  cases  say,  the  risk  attacties  from  her


a  3  JHoion's  Rep.  26. ,

b  Garrigaes  v.  Coxe,  1  Binn.  Rep.  592.  lo  Tread  well  v.  The
Udiob  losuraDco  C-ompany,  6  Cbioen'f  Rep.  270,  tlie  court  said,  that  a
policy  a<  and  from  J^Torlh  Carolina  loJfew-York^  did  not  attath,  at  least
as  to  seaffortbiness,  until  the  vessel  had  passed  tbe  boundary  line  of  the
MtaJUy  tbotigh  the  voyage  had  commenced  when  the  vessel  sailed  with
tbe  cargo  from  Perqaimions'  river,  at  or  near  (he  town  of  Hertford,
ID  that  state.  That  was  giving  too  narrow  a  construction  to  the  words
at  and  from  ;  for  though  it  has  been  justly  held,  that  the  warranty  of
seaworthiness  has  not  the  same  extended  application  t'li  as  out  of  port,
while  the  vessel  is  dismantled,  and  undergoing  necessary  repairs,  (Smith
▼.  Surridge,  4  Exp.  JV.  P.  Rep.  25,]  yet,  to  every  reasonable  extent,
such  a  policy  covers  the  risk  of  the  vessel  while  within  port,  or  witbia
tbe  line  of  tbe  state.


309  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

first  arrival*  The  risk  is  usually  made  to  continue  until  the
vessel  has  been  anchored  for  twenty-four  hours  in  safety,  and
no  longer ;  and  tlie  rule  has  been  applied,  though  the  lose
proceeded  froin  a  cause,  or  death  wound,  existing  before  the
ship's  arrival/  But  the  risk  continues  during  quarantine,
though  after  the  twenty-four  hours. ^

If  the  policy  be  to  a  country  generally,  as  to  Jamaica^  the
risk  ends  at  the  first  port  made  for  the  purpose  of  unloading,
after  the  vessel  has  been  moored  there  in  safety  for  twenty-
four  houi's.''  But  in  France,  where  insurances  are  generally
to  the  Prenc/i  West  India  Islands^  tlie  risk  on  the  ship
continues  until  the  cargo  is  discharged  at  the  last  place  of


a  Motteaux  v.  The  Loudon  Assii  ranee  Companj,  1  AQc*  Rep.  548.
Condy's  JUarshcUl,  2&1.  2  Caine$'  Catet  in  Error ^  172.  lo  Panneter
V.  Cousins,  2  Ccunpb*  JV.  P.  Rep,  235,  the  ship  was  insured  at  and  from
St.  Michael  to  England,  and  the  ship  arriving  there  in  distress,  was
blown  out  to  sea  and  destroyed,  after  lying  at  anchor  above  twenty-four
hours,  and  Lord  Ellenborough  ruled,  that  the  insurer  was  sot  liable,
because  the  vessel  had  not  once  been  at  the  place  in  good  safety,  aud
the  policy  on  tlie  homeward  voyage  had  not  attached.  It  is  surprising,
that  the  construction  of  the  policy  at  and  from^  should  still  remain  te
be  settled.  The  words  ought  long  since  to  have  been  defined  and  fixed
with  mathematical  precision.  Lord  Ilardwicke  says,  tlie  policy  at*
taches  from  tlie/rtt  arrival,  Ch.  J.  Tilghman  says,  it  attaches  as  soon
as  the  vessel  h<u  been  tafely  moored  Iwenly-four  houri.  Lord  Ellen  bo-
rough requires  the  vessel  to  be  at  the  place  in  good  safely,  whether  it
takes  place  within,  or  not  until  above  twenly-ibur  hours  after  she  baa
arrived  and  anchored.

b  Lockyer  v.  Offley,  1  Term  Rep.  252.  Meretony  v.  Dunlope,  ci-
ted in  1  Term  Rep.  260.  In  Peters  v.  The  Phenix  Insurance  Compa-
ny, 3  Serg.  (f*  Ravole^  25,  the  court  overruled  this  case  of  Meretony  v.
Dunlope,  and  held,  that  where  a  vessel  received  her  death  wound  du-
ring the  voyage,  or  suffered  damage  above  50  per  cent.,  she  might  be
abandoned,  though  she  had  been  ipoored  twenty-four  hours  in  safety  in
the  port  of  destination,  and  that  it  was  of  no  moment  at  what  time  the
loss  was  ascertained,  if  it  occurred  during  the  voyage.

c  Waplea  v.  Eaincs,  Sir.  1243.

d  Leigh  v.  Mather,  I  Etp.  JV.  P.  Rep.  412.


Lcc.  XLVIII.l OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  909

destinatioD.*  If  the  policy  contaias  a  liberty  to  touchy  stay^
and  tradcy  or  to  toutJi  and  stay^  or  if  there  be  a  known
usage  of  trade,  the  risk  will  be  prolonged  according  to  that
usage,  or  the  terms  of  the  policy,  and  intermediate  voyages
may  be  covered  by  the  insurance.*

The  risk  upon  the  cargo  is  subject  to  much  modification
by  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  but  it  usually  commences
from  the  loading  thereof  aboard  the  ship.  By  the  French
law,  the  policy  covers  the  goods  while  on  the  passage  in
lighters  from  the  wharf  to  the  ship,  in  the  harbour  where  she
is  anchored,  though  not  if  the  goods  are  to  ascend  or  descend
a  river  to  the  ship.'  The  risk  continues  while  the  cargo  is
actually  on  board  the  ship,  and  no  longer ;  though  if  the  cargo
be  temporarily  landed  from  necessity,  duiing  the  voyage,
they  are  still  protected  by  the  policy.'  If  the  policy,  as  is
usual,  covers  the  risk  upon  tbe  goods  until  safely  landed^
then  the  risk  continues  during  their  passage  to  the  shore,  and
unUI  all  the  goods  are  landed.'  Policies  of  insurance  are
construed  according  to  the  usages  of  trade ;  and  if  it  be  the
ordinary  course  of  the  trade  for  the  owner  to  employ  a  cooEk-
mon  public  lighter  to  remove  the  goods  from  the  ship  to  the
shore,  the  policy  covers  them ;  though  if  he  was  to  employ
his  own  lighter,  or  take  the  goods  under  his  own  charge,  the
insurer  would  be  discharged.-^


•  t  Emerig^m^  72.

h  Salrador  t.  Hopkins,  3  Burr.  Rep.  1707.  Gregory  ▼.  Ghristie,
cited  ID  Cbfuiy't  Mar$haU^VtZ.  FarquharBoo  v.  HiiDter,  Park  on  in-
mrofice,  67.

e  Bouiwy  Pdt^y  Und.  iti.  419. Codede  Comfliierre,art  328.

d  Boulojf  Paijfy  torn.  iii.  427.

e  Tieniay  ▼.  EtberiDgtoo^  cited  io  1  Burr.  Rip.  348.  Gardioier  t.
Smith,  1  Johns.  Com.  141.

/  Rocker  y.  Loodoo  Asiurance  Ck>.  cited  2  Bo9.  Sf  Putt.  432,  m
n»tiM.  Horry  ▼.  Royal  Exchange  Assorance  Co.  2  Bos.  4r  PulL  430.
Mattbie  ▼.  PotU,  3  ibid.  23.  Strong  y.  NaUlly,  4  ibid.  16.  Cogge-
aball  y.  American  Ina.  Company,  3  WendeU^  283. A  policy  on  caigo.


310  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

There  are  usually  distinct  policies  on  the  outward  aod  oit
the  homeward  voyage,  and  if  the  ship  perishes  in  (he  har-
bour abroad,  after  having  discharged  part  of  her  outward^
and  received  part  of  her  homeward  cargo^  there  may  arise
questions  as  between  the  different  policies  on  the  cargo.  It
is  stated  in  the  French  law,  that  the  policy  on  the  outward
cargo  does  not  end  but  by  the  total,  or  almost  total,  discharge
of  the  outward  cargo ;  and  I  should  presume  the  risk  on  the
homeward  cargo  attaches  as  fast  as  it  is  received  on  board,
and  that  the  case  may  happen  in  which  there  was  aliment
sufficient  to  sustain  both  policies  concurrently  in  point  of  time.
If  the  policy  be  on  the  voyage  out  and  home,  on  cargo  te
such  a  value,  or  on  a  trading  voyage,  the  policy  w3l  attach
on  every  successive  cargo  taken  on  board  in  the  course  of  the
voyage,  and  the  amount  of  properly  on  board  to  the  sum
mentioned,  remains  covered,  if  on  board,  without  regard  te
the  fact  that  part  of  the  original  cargo  was  landed  at  an  in-
termediate port,  and  the  cargo  on  board  at  the  time  of  the
loss  was  the  proceeds  of  the  outward  cargo.  The  policy
attaches  on  goods  taken  in  exchange,  or  substituted,  in  the
course  of  a  trading  voyage,  as  often  as  the  goods  may  be
changed.''  But  if  the  policy  be  on  goods  outward,  and  upon
their  proceeds  home,  and  the  same  goods  are  brought  back
in  the  same  vessel,  without  liaving  been  changed  or  landed
at  the  port  of  destination,  they  are  not  covered  by  the  policy
on  the  homeward  voyage.  The  policy  had  reference  to  a
change  of  cargo  at  the  port  of  destination,  and  meant  a  sub-


or  goods  and  mercbandise,  wiU  not  cover  articles  stowed  apoo  deck.
Allegro  T.  Marylaod  loa.  Company,  2  QUI  ^  Johnson^  136  ^  dot  will
tbose  words  cover  live  stock,  unless  tbere  be  some  local  mercantile
usage  to  give  extension  to  them,  ibid.  Wolcott  v.  Eagle  Ins.  Company,
^Picktrin^,  429.

a  Macsfield,  Cb.  J.,  in  Grant  v.  Paxton,  1  Taunton  474.  Columbia
Ins.  Co.  V.  CaUett,  12  WheaUmy  3ft3.  Coggesball  v.  American  Ins.
Co.  3  JFe$idelly  2S3.


Lee.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  311

fdtuted  cargo  for  the  one  carried  out,  and  not  the  cargo  itself.
The  homeward  cargo,  procured  by  money  or  credit  advanced
on  the  outward  cargo  may,  and  has  been  deemed,  by  a  rea-
sonable construction,  as  the  proceeds  of  the  outward  cargo  ;*
but  it  would  be  too  extravagant  a  departure  from  the  terms
of  a  written  contract,  to  make  the  issues  and  profits  of  a  cargo
stand  in  this  case  for  the  original  cargo.^

In  insurances  on  freight,  the  risk  usually  begins  from  the
time  the  goods  are  seut  on  board,  and  not  before/  But  if
the  ship,  sailing  under  a  contract,  be  lost  on  her  way  to  the
port  of  lading,  or  at  the  port  of  lading  to  which  she  had  ar-
rived in  ballast,  before  any  goods  are  put  on  board,  or  when
part  of  tiie  cargo  is  on  board,  and  preparations  making  to
receive  passengers,  the  insurer  on  freight  and  passage  money
is  liable  ;.  because  an  inchoate  right  to  freight,  which  is  an
insurable  interest,  had  commenced,  and  there  was  an  incep-
tion of  the  risk,  which  attaches  on  the  whole  freight  for  the
voyage.'

If  the  policy  be  an  open  one,  the  recovery  is  limited  to  the
actual  amount  of  freight  which  would  have  been  earned  ;
and  it  is  necessary  to  prove  that  goods  were  on  board  from
which  freight  was  to  arise,  or  that  there  was  some  contract,
under  which  the  ship-owner  would  have  been  entitled  to
freight,  if  the  peril  had  not  occurred.  In  a  valued  policy,  if
the  insured  has  done  something  towards  earning  the  freight,
and  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  earning  it  but  the  occur-


a  Hayen  v.  Gray,  12  Mast*  Rep,  71.  Whitney  ?.  The  American  Ins.
Co.  3  C(iv«n,2l0.

b  Dow  V.  Hope  Ins.  Co.  1  HalVt  JV.  F.  Rep.  166.

e  Tonge  r.  Watts,  5^r.  Rep.  1251.  "*

d  Thompson  ?.  Taylor,  6  Term  Rep.  478.  Mackenzie  v.  Shedden,
2  Campb.  A".  P.  Rep.  431.  Horncastle  v.  Stuart,  7  EasVt  Rep.  400.
Trascott  T.  Christie,  2  Brod.  4-  Ring.  320.  Riley  v.  Hartford  Ins.  Co.
2  Cof»n.  Rep.  373.  Hart  y.  Delaware  Ins.  Co.  Condyle  Jiiarshalli
281,  n.


312  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

rence  of  the  peiil,  his  interest  in  the  whole  freight  has  com-
menced  and  been  put  at  risk,  and  the  weight  of  authority  is,
that  he  is  entitled  to  recover  the  amount  of  the  valuation,
though  only  part  of  the  cargo  be  on  board.*  In  the  case  of
De  Longuemere  v.  Fire  Insurance  Company ^^  the  court
did  not  question  the  decision  in  Forbes  v.  Aspinall^^  where
a  valued  policy  on  freight  was  opened,  and  a  recovery  allow-
ed only  as  to  the  portion  of  the  cargo  on  board  when  the
peril  occurred  ;  and  they  rather  concurred  in  it,  on  the  ground
that  the  residue  of  the  cargo,  which  was  to  be  the  aliment
for  the  freight,  was  not  in  that  case  ready  to  be  shipped,  and
the  vessel  was,  in  fact,  a  mere  seeking  ship,  and  for  auglit
that  appeared,  the  residue  of  the  cargo  might  never  have  been
obtained*

(2.)  Of  deviation.

The  policy  relates  only  to  the  voyage  described  in  it^  and
to  the  route  proper  for  the  voyage  insured  ;  and  if  the  vessel
departs  voluntarily,  and  without  necessity,  from  the  usual
course  of  the  voyage,  the  insurer  is  discharged,  for  it  is  a  va-
riation of  the  risk,  and  the  substitution  of  a  new  voyage.
The  meaning  of  the  contract  of  insurance  for  the  voyage  is,
that  the  voyage  shall  be  performed  with  all  safe,  convenient,
and  practicable  expedition,  and  in  the  regular  and  customary
track.  In  the  case  of  an  unjustifiable  deviation,  the  insurer
is  discharged ;  not  indeed  from  loss  occurring  previous  to  the
deviation,  but  from  all  subsequent  losses.  These  are  ele-
mentary principles  in  the  law  of  insurance,  and  pervade  the
institutions  of  every  country  on  the  subject.^


a  Montg^omery  r.  Eggiogton,3  Term  Rep,  362.  DaTidsoD  v.  Wil-
lasey,  1  MauU  4r  SeU/o,  313.  Livioi^stoii  r.  Columbian  Ids.  Company,
3  Johne.  Rep,  49.  De  Longuemere  v.  The  Pbenix  Ins.  Co.  10  Johns.
Rep,  127. Same  ▼.  Fire  las.  Co.  10  ibid,  201.

k  10  J«^ffu.  l^p.  201.

c  13  EaH*i  Rep.  323.

d  Rocauy  de  An.  n.  20.  52. EmerigoiHy  iom.  ii.  28.  59,  60. 9


Im.  XLVIIL] of  personal  property.  313

The  shortneis  of  the  tune,  or  of  the  distance  of  a  deviation,
makes  no  difference  as  to  its  effect  on  the  contract ;  if  volun-
tary and  without  necessity,  it  is  the  substitution  of  another
risk,  and  determines  the  contract,'  So  strictly  has  this  doc-
trine been  maintained,  that  where  a  vessel  having  liberty  in
sailing  down  the  Frith  of  Forth  to  touch  at  Leith,  she  touched
at  another  port  in  its  stead  equally  in  her  way,  it  was  held  to
be  a  fatal  deviation,  though  neither  risk  nor  premium  would
have  been  increased,  if  it  had  been  permitted.^

The  great  cause  of  litigation  in  the  courts,  on  this  sub-
ject of  deviation,  is  as  to  the  facts  and  circumstances  which
Aviil  be  sufficient  to  justify  it,  on  the  ground  of  usage  or
necessity,  or  of  the  true  construction  of  the  policy  ;  and
these  are  mostly  questions  of  law  for  the  determination  of  the
court

Stopping,  or  going  out  of  the  way  to  relieve  a  vessel  in  dis-
tress, or  to  save  lives,  or  goods,  may  perhaps,  under  certain
circumstances,  not  be  considered  as  a  deviation  which  dis-
charges the  insurer.  Mr.  Justice  Lawrence  intimates,  in  one
case,*  that  it  might  be  justifiable  ;  but  Judge  Peters  observed,
that  such  deviations  were  justified  to  the  heart  on  principles
of  humanity,  but  not  to  the  law.  If,  however,  the  object  of
the  deviation  was  to  save  life.  Judge  Washington  afterwards
observed,  that  he  would  not  be  the  first  judge  to  exclude  such
a  case  from  the  exceptions  to  the  general  rule,  tlM)ugh  he
could  not  extend  the  exception  to  the  case  of  saving  pro-
perty.^ The  Chief  Justice  observed,  in  the  case  of  Mason


Mus.  Rep,  447. Condy's  Marthallj  p.  184,  1C5. Phillips  an  InMU-

ronce,  p.  161.

a  Fox  V.  Black,  and  Townson  t.  Gujod,  ciled  in  Beawes,  vol.  i.  306.
9  Matt.  Rep.  449.  Martin  ▼.  The  Delaware  Ins.  Co.  2  JFath.  Cir.
Rep,  254.

b  Elliott  T.  Wilson,  7  Bro.  P.  C.  459.

c  6  EaU't  Rep.  54.

d  1  Peiert'  Adm.  Rep,  40.  64.  2  ibid.  378.  Bond  ?.  The  Brig
Cora,  2  Wath.  Cir.  Rep.  CO.

Vol.  III.  40


3t4  OF  PERSONAL  PUOPERTY.  [Part  V.

V.  Sfiip  BlaireaUy"^  that  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States  had  great  doubts  whether  stopping  to  relieve  a  vessel
in  distress,  was  an  unjustifiable  deviation  in  regard  to  the
policy.

The  courts  are  exceedingly  strict  in  requiring  a  prompt
and  steady  adherence  to  the  performance  of  the  precise  voy-
age insured  ;  and  considering  the  particular  state  of  facts
upon  which  calculations  of  the  value  of  risks  are  made,  and
the  uncertainty  and  danger  of  abuse  that  relaxations  of  the
doctrine  would  introduce,  the  severity  of  the  rule  is  founded
in  sound  policy.

If  there  be  liberty  granted  by  the  policy  to  touchy  or  to
touch  and  stay,  ut  an  intermediate  port  on  the  passage,  the
better  opinion  now  is,  that  the  insured  may  trade  there,  when
consistent  with  the  object,  and  the  furtherance  of  the  adven-
ture, by  breaking  bulk,  or  by  discharging  and  taking  in  cargo,
provided  it  produces  no  unnecessary  delay,  nor  enhances
nor  varies  the  risk.^  And  if  there  be  several  ports  of  discharge
mentioned  in  the  policy,  and  the  insured  goes  to  more  than
one,  he  must  go  to  them  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  named
in  the  policy,  or  if  they  be  not  specifically  named,  )ie  must
generally  go  to  them  in  the  geographical  order  in  which  they


a  2  Cranch's  Rep^  Z51,  note.

b  Raioe  v.  Bell,  9  EasVs  Rep.  195.  Cormack  v.  Gladstone,  1 1  ibid.
347.  Laroclie  v.  Oswin,  1 2  ibid,  1 3  L  Urquliart  v.  Barnard,  1  Tauni*
Rep,  450.  ICane  v.  Columbian  Insurance  Company,  t  Johns.  Hep:
264.  Hughes  V.  Union  Insurance  Company,  3  Wheat,  Rep.  169.
Thorndike  v.  Boardman,  4  Pickering's  Rep.  471 .  Cbasc  v.  -Eagle  Ins.
Co.  6  Pick.  51.  Tbts  liberal  construction  is  also  f^tven  to  tbe  liberty
to  touch,  and  make  port  freely ,  contained  in  tbe  French  policies,  and  if
noHT  goods  be  taken  in  at  such  stopping  port,  the  policy  on  cargo  at-
taches on  Ibem  as  a  substitute  fur  the  others.  If  the  policy  be  on  car-
go to  such  an  amount,  and  the  ship  discbarges  part  of  her  cargo  at  the
stopping  port,  but  reserves  sufficient  on  board  as  aliment  for  the  policy,
and  pursues  the  voyage,  the  policy  attaches  on  the  residuum  of  the  cargo.
Emerigon^  torn.  ii.  c.  13.  ecc  8.  Boulay  Paiy,  Cours  de  Droit  Com.,
t.  4,  140— .147.


Lcc.  XLVIII.] OT  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  316

occur,  tboiigh  there  may  be  cases  in  which  he  need  not  fol-
low the  geographical  order.*  This  hberty  to  touch,  stay,  and
trade,  is  always  construed  to  be  subordinate  to  the  voyage
insured,  and  to  the  usual  course  of  that  voyage,  and  for  pur-
poses connected  with  it  It  does  not  extend  to  ports  and
places  opposite  to,  or  wide  of,  the  usual  course,  or  wholly  un-
connected with  the  voyage  insured.  This  principle  is  as  old
as  the  law  of  insurance,  and  has  accompanied  it  in  every
stage  of  its  progress.^

The  law  requires  the  voyage,  so  far  as  concerns  the  un-
derwriter, to  be  performed  with  reasonable  diligence,  and
every  unnecessary  delay  in  or  out  of  port,  will  amount  to  a
deviation.^  Deviation  is  always  understood  to  be  an  aflcr
tliouglit,  arising  subsequent  to  the  commencement  of  the
voyage,  and  produced  by  the  perception  of  some  new  interest,
or  the  influence  of  some  strong  temptation.  A  premeditated
intention  to  deviate,  amounts  to  nothing,  unless  it  be  actually
carried  into  execution ;  and  this  rule  is  adopted  in  England
and  in  the  courts  of  the  United  Statesj'  If  the  ship  quits,
from  necessity,  the  course  described  in  the  policy,  she  must
pursue  such  new  voyage  of  necessity,  in  the  direct  course,  and
in  the  shortest  time,  or  it  will  amount  to  a  deviation. This


a  Beatson  r,  Haworth,  6  Term  Rep,  531.  Maraden  v.  Beid,  3
EuVs  Rep,  572.  Clason  r,  Simmonds,  cited  in  6  Tenn  Rep,  533.
Kane  v.  Col.  Ins.  Co.  2  Johns,  Rep,  264.  Metcalf  v.  Parry,  4  Campb,
A".  P,  Rep,  123. Houston  r.  New-£n|^land  Ids.  Co.  5  Pickering,  U9.

b  Siraccha,  Gloss,  14.  Casaregis,  Disc,  67,  d.  23,  and  Disc.  134.
Valin^  torn.  ii.  78, 79.  Em^rigon,  torn.  ii.  ch.  13,  sec.  6  and  8,  passim,
Gardiner  y.  Senhou8e,3  Taunt.  Rep.  16.  Langborn  v,  Ailnutt,  4  i(>f(/.
5t1.  Hammond  y.  Reid,  4  Bamto.  4*  ^Id,  72.  Lolly  v.  Wbitmore,
5  ilnd.  45. Bottomlej  y.  Boyill,  5  Bamw.  4r  Cress.  210.

e  Jarratt  y.  Ward,  1  Campb.  J^,  P,  Rep.  263.  Smith  y.  Snrridge,  4
Etp.  A*,  p.  Rep.  25.  Oliyer  y.  Maryland  Insurance  Company,  7
Cranck's  Rep,  487.  9  Jlass.  Rep,  447.  Earl  v.  Sbaw,  1  Johns,  Cos,
317.

d  Foster  y.  Wilmer,  Sir.  Rep,  1249.  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Dovg^
Rep.  18.  365. 3  Cranch's  Rep,  357. 7  J^lass,  Rep.  35.2.


316  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

was  the  doctrine  as  declared  by  Lord  Mansfield  m  the  case  of
Lavabie  v.  Wilson^^  and  that  case  is  reported  at  large  in
Emerigon,*  with  a  liberal  and  exalted  eulogy  (pronounced  in
the  midst  of  war  between  the  two  countries)  on  the  wisdom
and  probity  of  the  English  administration  of  justice :  tanta
vis  prohilatis  est,  ut  earn  in  hoste  etiatn  diligamus.  All
permissions  given  by  the  policy  out  of  the  ordinary  course  and
incidents  of  the  voyage,  are  to  be  construed  strictly.  If  the
vessel  have  liberty  to  carry  letters  of  marque,  she  may  devi-
ate for  the  purpose  of  defence,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  cap-
ture.* In  Haven  v.  Holland,^  a  pretty  enlarged  discretioD,
and  one  carried  to  the  very  verge  of  the  law,  was  confided  to
the  captain  as  to  the  best  mode  of  defence,  and  it  was  held,
that  the  letter  of  marque  might  chase  and  capture  hostile
vessels  in  sight,  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  without  its  being
a  deviation  ;  and  if  he  captures  the  vessel,  the  juaster  may
make  the  victory  effectual,  and  man  out  the  prisse,  and  the
delay  for  those  purposes  is  not  a  deviation.  If  liberty  be
given  her  to  chase  and  capture,  that  will  not  enable  her  lo
convoy  her  prize  into  port,''  though  she  may  do  it  if  she  be
not  thereby  led  out  of  the  way  '/  and  to  cruise  for  six  weeks,
means  six  consecutive  weeks,  and  not  at  different  times.^

The  object  of  the  deviation  must  be  considered,  in  order
to  determine  its  effect  upon  the  policy.  It  must  be  commen-
surate only  with  the  necessity  that  produces  it,  and  that  ne-
cessity will  justify  a  deviation  on  account  of  a  peril  not  in-
sured against.* And  when  the  deviation  is  governed  by  that


a  Doug*  Rep.  S84.
6  TrcUtc  des  Att.  torn.  ii.  62.
c  Parr  v.  Anderson,  6  Ea$^9  Rep»  202.
d  2  MoMon's  Rep,  230.
e  Lawrence  v.  Sidebotham,  6  Ea»Vg  Rep,  464
/  Ward  V.  Wood,  13  Mass,  Rep.  539.
g  Syers  v.  Bridge,  Doug,  Rep.  509.

h  ScoU  r.  Thompson,  4  Botf  4- PulL  181. RobinwAs  f.  Marine
Insarance  Company,  2  Jok$is,  Rep,  89.


Lcc.  XLVIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  317

necessity,  as  a  deviation  from  stress  of  weather,  or  to  procure
necessary  repairs,  or  to  join  convoy,  or  to  avoid  capture  or  de-
tention, it  works  no  injury  to  the  policy,*

There  has  been  considerable  discussion  in  the  books  rela-
tive to  the  identity  of  the  voyage  described  in  the  policy,  and
the  voyage  actually  begun.  If  tlie  vessel  sails  on  a  diflerent
voyage,  the  policy  never  attaches ;  but  if  she  be  lost  before
she  comes  to  the  dividing  point,  between  the  course  of  the
voyage  in  the  policy,  and  the  course  of  the  new  voyage,  the
change  of  the  voyage  often  becomes  a  contested  question  as
to  the  intention  of  the  party.  If  the  ship  really  sailed  on  ano-
ther voyage,  the  policy  never  attached,  though  the  vessel  be
lost  before  she  came  to  the  dividing  point ;  but  if  the  termini
of  the  voyage  described  in  the  policy  be  the  same  as  those
upon  which  the  vessel  sailed,  it  is  the  same  voyage,  and  a
mere  intention,  afterwards  formed,  to  deviate,  is  of  no  conse-
quence, if  the  vessel  be  lost  before  she  came  to  the  dividing
point.  The  distinction  between  an  alteration  of  the  voyage,
and  a  mere  deviation  in  the  course  of  it,  is  very  reasonable
and  solid.  The  one  is  adopted  previous  to  the  commence-
ment of  the  risk,  and  shows  that  the  party  had  receded  from
his  agreement,  but  the  other  takes  place  after  the  risk  has
commenced,  and  relates  only  to  the  execution  of  the  original
plan.'  It  has,  however,  been  held,  in  one  case,  after  much
discussion,'^  and  suggested  in  another,  in  opposition  to  the  ea-


a  Candy' 9  J^arshall,  203,  b.  to  213.  PhUlipt  on  Insurance^  cb.  12,
p.  179—224.  Tbe  Utter  work  has  collected  and  digested  all  tbe  Eng-
lish and  American  cases  on  this  very  diffusive  head  of  deviation,  and  to
which  I  must  refer  for  a  more  particular  knowledge  of  the  distinctions
and  exceptions  with  which  the  books  abound.

b  Wooldridge  v.  Bo^rdell,  Doug.  Rep.  16.  Kewley  v.  Rjan,2  if.
Blacks.  Rep.  343.  Middlewood  v.  Blakes,  7  Term  Rep.  162.  Silva
V.  Low,  1  Johne.  Cat.  184.  Henshaw  v.  The  Marine  Insurance  Com«
pany,  2  Cainee*  Rep.  273.  Marine  Insurance  Company  v.  Tucker,  5
Cranch's  Rep.  367. Boulay  Paly^  torn.  iv.  p.  56,  57. .

c  Lawrence  v.  Ocean  Insurance  Company,  11  Johns.  Rep.  241.  S.
C.  14  ibid.  46.


31S  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  pPart  V.

iablishcd  rule,  that  the  identity  of  the  voyage  docs  not  al-
ways  consist  in  the  identity  of  the  termini  /  and  that  though
the  terminus  ad  quern  be  dropped,  and  another  substituted
ill  the  course  of  the  voyage,  it  may  he  still  the  same  voyage ;
and  if  the  vessel  be  lost  before  she  comes  to  the  dividing  point
between  the  course  to  the  original,  and  to  the  substituted
port  of  desUnation,  it  is  an  intention  to  deviate,  and  nothing
more.*

III.  Of  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  insured  in  cases
of  loss.

(1.)  Of  abandonment.

A  total  loss  witliin  the  meaning  of  the  policy,  may  arise
either  by  the  total  destruction  of  the  thing  insured,  or,  if  it
specifically  remains,  by  such  damage  to  it  as  renders  it  of
little  or  no  value.  A  loss  is  said  to  be  total  if  the  voyage  be
entirely  lost  or  defeated,  or  not  worth  pursuing,  and  the  pro-
jected adventure  frustrated.  In  such  cases,  the  insured  may
abandon  all  his  interest  in  the  subject  insured,  and  all  his
hopes  of  recovery,  to  the  insurer,  and  call  upon  him  to  pay
as  for  a  total  loss.  The  object  of  the  provision  is  to  enable
the  insured  to  be  promptly  reinstated  in  his  capital,  and  be
thereby  enabled  to  engage  in  some  new  mercantile  adven-
ture. Long  interruption  to  a  voyage,  and  uncertain  hopes  of
recovery,  would  often  be  ruinous  to  the  business  of  the  mer-
chant ;  and,  therefore,  if  the  object  of  the  voyage  be  lost,  or
not  worth  pursuing,  by  reason  of  a  peril  insured  against,  or
if  the  cargo  be  so  damaged  as  to  be  of  little  or  no  value,  or


a  JobnaoD,  J.,  in  3  Craneh's  Rep,  385.

b  The  foreign  j arista  distingaish  between  tlie  voyage  insured y  and
the  voyage  of  the  ship,  Independenler  tt  habet  eissecuralio  a  viaggio
navii.  If  a  ship  sails  on  a  Toynge  from  Saint  Malo  to  Toulon,  and  is
insured  from  Saint  Malo  to  Cadiz,  the  latter  is  the  voyage  insured,  but
tbe  former  is  the  voyage  of  the  ship,  and  the  voyage  insured  is  known
by  its  two  extremes,  or  the  terminus  a  quo^  and  the  terminus  ad  quern.
CfuaregU^  Disc,  67,  n.  &  and  31. Boulay  Paty^  torn.  iii.  416, 417.


I


Lee-  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  319

where  the  salvage  is  Very  high,  and  further  expense  be  ne- 1
cessary,  and  the  insurer  will  not  engage  to  bear  it,  or  if  what  |
is  saved  be  of  less  value  than  the  freight,  or  where  the  da- 1
mage  exceeds  one  half  the  value  of  the  goods  insured,  or  \
where  the  property  is  captured,  or  arrested,  or  even  detained
by  an  indefinite  embargo ;  in  these  and  other  cases  of  a  like
nature,  the  insured  may  disentangle  himself,  and  abandoa
the  subject  to  the  underwriter,  and  call  upon  him  to  pay  a  /
total  loss.  In  such  cases,  t))e  insurer  stands  in  the  place  of
the  insured,  and  takes  the  subject  to  himself  with  all  the
chances  of  recovery  and  indemnity.  A  valid  abandonment
has  a  retrospective  effect,  and  does  of  itself,  and  without  any
deed  of  cession,  transfer  the  right  of  property  to  the  insurer
to  the  extent  of  the  insurance ;  and  if  after  an  abandonment,
duly  made  and  accepted,  the  ship  should  be  recovered,  and
proceed  and  make  a  prosperous  voyage,  the  insurer,  as  owner,
would  reap  the  profits.*

These  considerations  have  introduced  the  right  of  aban-
donment into  the  insurance  law  of  every  country,  and  yet
the  text  writers  have  generally  condemned  the  privilege  as
inconsistent  with  just  notions  concerning  the  nature  of  the
contract  of  insurance,  which  is  a  contract  of  indemnity.  But
it  has  now  become  an  ingredient  so  interwoven  with  the
whole  system  of  insurance  that  it  cannot  be  abolished,  though
the  late  English  cases,  says  Mr.  Benecke,  show  a  stronger
inclination  in  the  courts  to  restrict  than  to  enlarge  the  right.
The  laws  of  Hamburgh  distinguish  themselves  from  all  others,


a  Gobs  ▼.  Withers,  3  Burr.  Rep,  683.  Hamilton  y.  Mendes,  ibid.
1198.  Mills  V.  Fletcher,  Doug,  Rep.  231.  Maoniogf  y.  Newnham^
Park  on  Insurance,  221.  Cazalet  v.  St.  Bar  be,  1  Term  nep,  187.
Queen  y.  Uoidn  Ids.  Co.  2  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  331.  Mr.  Benecke  jiislly
obsenres,  that  tlie  principles  in  some  of  these  cases  by  Lord  Mansfield,
were  too  generally  expressed  to  serve  as  a  basis  of  the  law  of  abandon-
ment, and  that  it  was  from  actual  decisions,  and  not  from  such  general
observatioDS,  that  the  law  must  be  collected.— BenccA:^  on  Indemnily^
3iB

\  ;


320  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

by  restriciiog  the  right  of  abandonaient  to  the  only  case  of  a
missing  ship."

As  soon  as  the  insured  is  informed  of  the  loss,  he  ought
(after  being  allowed  a  reasonable  time  to  inspect  the  cargo,
and  for  no  other  purpose)  to  determine  promptly  whether  he
will  or  will  not  abandon,  and  he  cannot  lie  by  and  speculate
on  events. If  he  elects  to  abandon,  he  must  do  it  in  a  rea-
sonable time,  and  give  notice  promptly  to  the  insurer  of  his
determination  ;  otherwise  he  will  be  deemed  to  have  waived
his  right  to  abandon,  and  will  be  entitled  to  recover  only  for
a  partial  loss,  unless  the  loss  be,  in  fact,  absolutely  total. If
the  thing  insured  exists  in  specie,  and  the  insured  wishes  to
go  for  a  total  loss,  an  abandonment  is  indispensable/ The
same  principle  which  requires  the  insured  who  abandons,  to
do  it  in  a  reasonable  time,  also  requires  the  insurer  who  re-
jects an  abandonment,  to  act  promptly ."^ The  pbject  of  the
abandonment  is  to  turn  that  into  a  total  loss,  which  otherwise
would  not  be  one ;  and  it  is  unnecessary,  and  would  be  idle,
to  abandon  in  tlie  case  of  an  entire  destruction  of  the  subject.'


a  Ord,  of  Hamburgh^  \\U  11.  The  Insurance  Companies  of  Phi-
ladelphia, in  1807,  agreed  that  their  policies  should  provide  against
abandonment  in  cases  of  capture  or  detention,  until  sixty  days  afier
advice  receif  ed  of  the  act,  unless  the  property  be  sooner  condemned  ;
and  in  cases  of  embargo,  until  aAer  four  calendar  months  ;  and  against
any  abandonment  on  account  of  seizure  or  detention  in  port,  under
French  decrees,  or  on  account  of  the  port  of  detention  being  blocka-
ded.

b  Mitchell  V.  Edie,  1  Term  Rep.  608.  Martin  v.  Crokatt,  14  EosVm
JUp*  465.  Hunt  v.  Royal  Exchange  Insurance  Company,  5  JUaule  4r
Selw.  47.

c  Hudson  V.  Harrison,  3  Brod,  ^  Bing,  97.  The  insurer  may  take
possession  of  a  vessel  stranded  and  abandoned  to  him,  and  repair  her,
provided  be  does  it  diligently  or  in  a  reasonable  time,  and  if  be  has  not
accepted  the  abandonment,  and  the  repairs  amount  to  less  than  half  the
value,  he  may  restore  the  vessel.  Peele  v.  Suffolk  Ins.  Co.,  7  Pick,
254.

d  This  was  also  the  opinion  of  CasaregiSf  Disc.  3,  n.  23. Disc.  70,


Lcc-  XLVin.l  OF  FER80NAL  PROPERTY. 321

It  18  only  necessary  when  the  loss  is  constnicdvely  total.
The  right  of  abaDdonmeDt  does  not  depend  upon  the  cer-
tainty, but  upon  the  high  probability  of  a  total  loss,  either  of
the  property,  or  voyage,  or  both.  The  insured  is  to  act,  not
upon  certainties,  but  upon  probabilities  ;  and  if  the  fiicts  pre-
sent a  case  of  extreme  hazard,  and  of  probable  expense,  ex-
ceeding half  the  value  of  the  ship,  the  insured  may  abandon,
though  it  should  happen  that  she  was  afterwards  recovered
at  a  less  expense.'  Though  the  subject  may  physically  ex-
ist, yet  there  may  be  a  technical  total  loss  to  the  owner,  if
the  thing  be  taken  from  his  free  use  and  possession.  Such
are  the  common  cases  of  total  losses  by  embargoes,  by  cap-
tures, and  by  restraints,  and  detainments  of  princes.  The
right  to  abandon  exists  when  the  ship,  for  all  the  useful  pur-
poses of  the  voyage,  is  gone  from  the  control  of  the  owner  ;
as  in  the  cases  of  submersion,  or  shipwreck,  or  capture,  and
it  is  uncertain,  or  the  time  unreasonably  distant,  when  it  will
be  restored  in  a  state  to  resume  the  voyage  ;  or  when  the
risk  and  expense  of  restoring  the  vessel,  are  disproportioned
to  the  expected  benefit  and  objects  of  the  voyage.  All  these
general  doctrines  concerning  abandonment  have  been  entirely
incorporated  into  our  American  law,  and  they  exist  to  aU
sential  purposes  in  the  French  jurisprudence.^


D.  5,  and  33.  Ad  abandoomeDt  in  a  policy  oo  freight  held  to  be  uiuie-
oeMarj  when  the  ship  is  hopelessly  stranded,  for  then  there  is  nothing  to
abandon.  Idle  f.  Royal  £x.  Ass.  Co.  8  TaunUm^  765.  Mount  ▼.
Harrison,  4  Bingham,  388.

a  Fontaine  V.  Pbenix  Insurance  Co.  11  Johnt,  Rep.  293.  Robert*
son  T.  Carutbers,  2  Starkie*s  JV.  P.  Rep.  571.  Though  the  reuei  be
disabled  on  the  Foyage,  and  it  becomea  reasonable,  under  the  circum-
stances of  the  case,  that  the  master  should  procure  another  resael  to
send  on  the  cargo,  and  though  he  may  not  be  able  to  do  it  at  the  port  of
distress,  or  at  a  contiguous  port,  yet  it  has  been  held  not  to  be  a  proper
case  for  abandonment.  Bryant  f,  Commonvrealth  Ins.  Co.  6  Ptckering^
131.

b  Emerigon,  torn.  ii.  194 — 197.  PoikUry  dee  nAu,  n.  131.  138.
Gardiner  y.  Smith,  1  Johnt,  Ca$.  141 .  Abbott  ?.  Broome,  1  Cothef'  Rep.

Vol.  III.  41


322  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. (Part  V.

Tbe  case  of  Pede  v.  Hie  Merchants^  Insurance  Cam-
pant/j*  contains  a  very  elaborate  review  of  the  whole  law  of
abandonment,  and  the  conclusion  is,  that  the  right  of  aban-
donment is  to  be  judged  of  by  aU  the  circumstances  of  each
particular  case,  and  that  there  was  no  general  rule  that  the
injury  to  the  ship  by  the  perils  insured  against,  must  in  aft
cases  exceed  one  half  her  value,  to  justify  an  abandonment
The  law,  as  declared  in  the  great  cases  before  Lord  Mansfidd,
of  Goss  v.  WitherSj  Hamilton  v.  Mendes,  and  Mills  v.
Fletcher  J  has  been  acted  upon  for  half  a  century,  and  their
doctrine  has  never  been  shaken ;  and  the  late  case  of  Aflver
V.  Henderson*  left  the  law  on  the  subject  of  abandonment
exactly  where  those  cases  had  placed  it

The  French  ordinance  of  the  marine  confined  abandon-
ment to  the  five  cases  of  capture,  shipwreck,  stranding,  arrest
of  princes,  and  an  entire  loss  of  the  subject  insured.^  But  the
new  commercial  code  has  modified  and  enlarged  the  privi-
lege of  abandonment  It  applies  to  the  cases  of  capture,
shipwreck,  stranding  with  partial  wreck,  disability  of  the  ves-
sel occasioned  by  perils  of  the  sea,  arrest  of  a  foreign  power,
or  arrest  on  the  part  of  the  government  of  the  insured  after
the  commencement  of  the  voyage,  and  a  loss  or  damage  of
the  properly  insured,  if  amounting  to  at  least  three  fourths  of
its  value/  The  English  and  American  law  of  abandonment
applies  not  only  to  those  cases,  but  to  every  case  wliere  the
perils  covered  by  the  policy  have  occasioned  a  loss,  either  of
th€  subject,  or  of  the  voyage. It  is  understood,  that  mere


292.  Union  Inearance  Co.  v.  Robinson,  2  Cainet*  Rep.  280.  Lee  r.
Boftrdroan,  3  Mast,  Rep.  238.  Marine  Insurance  Co.  v.  Tacker,  3
Cranck'i  Rep.  357,  Cbes.  Insurance  Co.  v.  Stark,  6  Cranch't  Rep,
268. Peele  v.  Merchants*  Insurance  Co.  3  Mason* t  Rep.  27.

«  3  Maton's  Rep,  27.  '

b  4  JdauU  4-  SettD.  576.

«  Ord.  de  la  Mar.  art.  46.

d  Code  de  Comii^rce^  art.  369.


Lee.  XLVIIl.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  S22

Btraading  of  the  ship  is  not,  of  itself,  to  be  deemed  ft  total
loss  ;  yet  it  may  be  attended  with  circumstances  that  will
justify  an  abandonment,  even  though  the  hull  of  the  ship
should  not  be  materially  damaged  ;  as  if  she  be  stranded
where  there  are  no  means  of  adequate  relief,  and  the  expense
of  the  removal  would  exteed  the  value  of  the  ship.  The
foreign  writers  distinguish  innavigability  from  shipwreck,  and
there  has  been  some  difficulty  as  to  the  true  definition  of
shipwreck.* But  the  right  to  abandon  does  not  turn  upon


a  There  are  two  kinds  of  shipwreck  : (1.)  When  the  vessel  sinks,
or  is  dashed  to  pieces. (2.)  When  she  is  stranded,  which  is,  when  t»he
grounds,  and  fills  with  water. The  latter  may  terminate  in  shipwreck,
or  nray  not,  and  it  depends  on  circumstances  whether  it  will  or  will  not
justify  an  abandonment. The  shades  of  difference  between  shipwreck
of  the  two  kinds,  and  wreck  absolute  and  partial,  and  stranding  with
and  without  wreck,  are  minutely  stated  by  the  French  ciTiliaiis. S«e
Boulay  Paty^  torn.  iv.  p.  13—14.  230, 231,  and  Ord.  de  la  J\iar.  h.  t.
art.  46,  which  distinguishes  between  shipwreck,  wreck,  and  stranding.
lo  Bishop  T.  Pentland,  1  B.^  Cress.  219,  1  Manning  &  Ryland,  49,
tlrofuftngf  was  held  to  be  when  a  ship,  by  accident,  is  on  the  ground  or
strand,  and  is  injured  thereby. A  stranding  in  the  sense  of  a  policy  is,
when  a  ship  takes  ground,  not  in  the  ordinary  course  of  navigation,  but
by  accident  or  the  force  of  wind,  or  the  sea,  and  remains  stationary  for
some  time. But  the  cases  make  a  stranding  to  depend  to  much  upon
special  circumstances,  and  they  make  so  many  distinctions  that  it  is  im-
possible to  give  any  precise  definition  or  rule  on  the  subject. M^Dou-
gle  V.  Royal  Ex.  Ass.  Co.  4  Campb,  283. 4  MauU  Sf  S.  503. Ra}-
ner  v.  Goodmand,  5  Bamto,  Sf  Aid.  225. Burnett  v.  Kensington,  1
Esp.  JV*.  P.  Rep.  416, Carrutfaers  y.  Sydebotham,  4  Maule  4*  S.  77.
Barrow  y.  Be!l,  4  B.  ^  Cress.  736,  are  cases  to  show  the  perplexities
and  nice  refinements  on  this  point. Innavigability,  in  the  tense  of  in-
surance law,  is  when  the  vessel,  by  a  peril  of  the  sea,  ceases  to  be  navi-
gable by  irremediable  misfortune:  in  eum  Slatum,  qui promlentia  hu-
mana  reparari  non  potest. The  ship  is  relatively  innavigable,  when  it
will  require  almost  as  much  time  and  expense  to  repair  her,  as  to  build
a  new  one. This  is  the  doctrine  of  Targa  and  Emerigon,  and  of  llie
judicial  decisions  which  the  latter  reports. (Tar^ra,  oh.  54,  p.  239,  and
eh.  60,  p.  256. Emerigon^  torn.  i.  591 — 59B.) Innavigability,  when
duly  established,  constitutes  a  total  loss,  and  a  right  to  abandon.  When


324  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

any  definiUoD,  aod  the  cases  on  the  subject  have  been  govern-
ed by  their  own  peculiar  circumstances,  connected  with  the
property  at  the  time,  and  with  reference  to  the  genenl  prin-
ciples and  analogies  of  law.*

The  English  rule  is,  that  an  abandonment,  though  right-
fully made,  is  not  absolute,  but  is  liable  to  be  controlled  by
subsequent  events ;  and  that  if  the  loss  has  ceased  to  be  total
before  actbn,  the  abandonment  becomes  inoperative.  The
rule  was  suggested,  but  left  undecided,  in  Hamilton  v.  Men-
desj  but  it  was  explicitly  declared  and  settled  in  subsequent
cases.*  The  English  rule  does  not  rest,  however,  without
some  distrust  as  to  its  solidity.  It  was  much  doubted  in  the
House  of  Lords,  by  Lord  Eldon,  in  Smith  v.  Robertson  f
every  question  as  to  the  principle  was  expressly  waived,  and
it  has  since  been  very  much  shaken.^  But  in  these  United
States  a  different  rule  prevails,  and  it  is  well  settled  in  Ame-
rican jurisprodence,  that  an  abandonment  once  rightfully
made,  is  binding  and  conclusive  between  the  parties,  and  the
rights  flowing  from  it  become  vested  rights,  and  are  not  to
be  devested  by  subsequent  events.  The  right  to  abandon  is
to  be  tested  by  the  actual  facts  at  the  time  of  the  abandon-


it  it  Mtablished  by  an  official  survey  and  report,  {procet  verhatiXt)  it
creates  a  prentmpUo  juri»  of  innaTigability,  by  a  peril  of  the  sea,
against  tbe  insurer,  and  wbicb  he  may  contradict ;  but  without  such  a
aorvey,  which  is  required  by  the  French  ordinances,  the  presumption  is
jurii  et  de  Jure  against  the  insured,  that  the  inna?igabiiity  proceeded
from  inherent  defects. Emerigon^  torn.  i.  577.

a  Wood  V.  L.  and  K.  Ins.  Co.  6  Mcum.  Rep,  479, Peele  ?.  Mer
chants'  Ins.  Co.  3  Manm^e  Rep,  42, 43, 44.

6  Bainbridge  v.  Neilson,  10  EasVe  Rep.  329.  Patterson  v.  Ritchie,
4  Jiraii2s  (f>  Seiw,  394.

e  S  Dow*e  Rep.  474.

d  Hotdsworth  v.  Wise,  7  B.  4r  Creet.  794.  It  was  there  held,  that
if  a  ship  has  been  once  necessarily  abandoned,  the  owners  may  recover
for  a  total  loss,  though  she  is  afterwards  recovered  and  brought  into
port.  This  was  coming  to  the  true  and  sound  doctrine  on  the  subject.
See  also  Naylor  r,  Taylor,  9  B.  if'  Creee.  718.


Lcc-  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  325

ment,  and  not  upon  the  state  of  the  information  received.*
The  opinion  of  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Hamilton  v.  Mendes^
was  very  destitute  of  precision  on  this  point,  and  the  Ameri-
can rule  is  founded  on  principles  of  equity,  and  public  conve-
nience. The  Opposite  doctrine,  said  a  great  authority,*  ap-
peared to  trench  very  much  upon  the  true  principles  of  aban-
donment, add  not  to  be  supported  by  very  exact  or  cogent
analogies.  The  Court  of  Sessioh  in  Scotland,  even  went  so
far  as  to  consider  the  right  to  abandon  to  depend  merely  upon
the  information  at  the  time,  and  that  if  the  right  be  exercised
btmafide  upon  the  state  of  focts  received,  the  transaction  was
closed  and  definitive,  and  wa^s  not  to  be  opened  or  disturbed
by  any  subsequent  event,  or  any  event  of  which  the  intelli-
gence subsequently  arrived.^


a  ChuKh  T.Bedient,  1  Caiine»^  C<uf  in  Error ^%\.  Depau  T.OceaD
Ids.  Co.  5  Cowm'8  Rep.  63.  Dutilh  v.  Gatliff,  4  DalUu^  Rep,  446.
Marshall  y.  Delaware  Ins.  Co.  2  JFcuh,  Cir.  Rep,  54.  Rhieelander  ▼.
Ins.  Ca  of  Pennsylvania,  4  Cranck*$  Rep,  29.  Marshall  ▼.  Delaware
Ins.  Ca  ibid.  202.  Lee  t.  Boardman,  3  Jdass,  Rep.  238.  Wood  v.
If.  and  K.  Ins.  Co.  6  ibid,  479.  Adams  t.  Delaware  Ins.  Co.  3  Binn.
Rep.  287. Peele  v.  The  Merchants'  Ins.  Ca  3  Masm'e  Rep.  27.

6  Story,  J.,  3  Jltason'e  Rep.  37.

c  Smith  ▼.  Robertson,  2  Dcw'e  Rep.  474.  In  the  opinion  in  Peele
V.  The  Merchants'  Insurance  Company,  it  was  observed  by  the  court,
io  reference  to  the  definitive  nature  of  an  abandonment,  when  once  duly
made,  that  it  was  <*  no  slight  recommendation  of  the  American  doc-
trine, that  it  stands  approved  by  the  cautious  learning  of  Vaiin,  the
moral  perspicacity  of  Po/Ai>r,  and  the  practical  and  sagacious  judgment
of  Emerigon.'*  But  an  observation  of  Faitn,  in  the  place  referred  to,
makes  me  doubt  whether  he  merited  the  eulogy  in  respect  to  that  point ;
for  he  says,  that  though  there  should  he  informaHon  of  a  lossjvsHfying
the  abandonment^  yet,  if  the  ship  should  be  repaired  by  the  care,  and  at
the  expense  of  the  insurer,  he  thinks  the  insurer  would  have  a  right  to
compel  the  insured  to  receive  back  the  vessel  and  cargo,  notwithstand-
ing the  abandonment,  and  put  up  with  the  payment  of  a  partial  loss.
F'aiin'e  Com.  torn.  ii.  144,  or  lib.  3,  tit.  6,  art.  60.  That  opinion  of  Fo-
lin,  I  take  to  be  heresy  in  American  law,  and  it  is  pointedly  condemned
by  Emerigon^  torn.  ii.  195.


320  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

There  is  a  material  difference  between  an  insurance  on
ship,  and  on  cargo,  and  some  confusion  is  introduced  by
blending  the  cases ;  but  the  essential  principles  of  abandon-
ment, with  some  variation,  apply  equally  to  each. A  total
loss  of  cargo  may  be  effected  not  merely  by  its  destruction,
but,  in  very  special  cases,  by  a  permanent  incapacity  of  the
ship  to  perform  the  voyage,  as  when  it  produces  a  destruction
of  the  contemplated  adventure.  .  A  loss  of  the  voyage  for  the
season,  or  a  case  of  retardation  only,  unless  the  cargo  be  of  a
perishable  nature,  does  not  amount  to  a  total  loss  of  the  car<
go/ It  is  only  in  particular  cases  that  the  loss  of  the  voyage
will  be  a  ground  of  abandonment  of  the  cargo. The  goods
are  not  so  necessaiily  connected  with  the  ship,  that  if  the
ship  be  lost,  ttiere  must,  of  course,  be  a  loss  of  voyage  with
respect  to  the  goods. In  Geman  v.  The  Royal  Exchange
Assurance^*  tiie  ship  was  forced  back  by  stress  of  weather,
and  the  cargo  found  to  be  so  damaged  as  not  to  be  in  a  state
to  send  on,  and  an  abandonment  was  held  .good. There
must  be  an  actual  total  loss,  or  one  in  the  highest  degree
probable,  to  justify  an  abandonment  of  the  cargo.'' In  Hud-
son V.  Harrison^  it  was  admitted  to  be  extremely  difficult
to  deduce  any  general  rule  from  the  circumstances  under
which  the  insured  has  a  right  to  abandon  the  cargo. It  is  a
very  entangled  branch  of  the  law  of  insurance. If  the  ship
has  been  lost,  and  the  cargo  materially  damaged,  the  cases
and  text  writers  vary  as  to  the  right  of  the  insured  to  aban-
don, or  whether  he  must  send  on  the  goods  when  half  is
saved,  or  a  third,  or  a  quarter. The  doctrine  of  the  old
cases,  that  the  insured  may  abandon  when  the  voyage  is


a  Anderson  v.  Wallia,  2  MauU  4*  Selw.  240.  Everth  v.  Smith,  ibid.
278.

b  6  Tcnml.  Rep.  383«

e  Anderson  v,  Wallis,  2  Maule  <f.  Selw.  240. .  Hunt  v.  The  Roj^
Exchange  ABsarance  Compaoj,  6  JUaule  <(•  Se/to.  47.  Wilson  ▼.  Tlie
Royal  Exchange  Asfturanco  Company,  2  Campb*  JV*.  P.  Rep,  624.

d  3  Brod,  cf*  Ring.  97.


Lcc.  XLVlll.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  827

lost,  is  narrowed.  Every  such  loss  will  not  justify  it.  A
retardation  is  not  sufikient  If  the  profits  be  reduced  one
half,  it  was  said  the  owner  was  not  bound  to  prosecute  the
voyage,  but  every  case  seems  to  rest  upon  its  own  circunv-
aiances.

When  a  case  proper  for  abandonment  exists,  and  it  be  duly
made,  the  underwriter  cannot  intercept  the  exercise  of  the
right,  and  destroy  its  effect,  by  an  offer  to  pay  the  amount  of
the  repairs.  In  a  case  proper  for  abandonment,  the  iasured
may  stand  upon  his  rights,  uncontrolled  by  the  underwriter,
for  the  option  to  abandon  rests  with  him,  and  not  with  the
other  party.  He  may  elect  to  repair  the  damage  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  insurer,  even  if  it  amounts  to  the  whole  value  of
the  ship ;  and,  on  tlie  other  hand,  he  is  not  obliged,  against
his  consent,  to  take  the  remnants  and  surplusses  of  a  lost  voy-
age, and  claim  under  the  poUcy  only  the  average  or  expenses
incurred  by  the  calamity.  This  is  the  more  recent,  and,  I
think,  the  more  solid  doctrine  on  the  subject,  and  it  is  enforced
with  great  strength  in  the  case  of  Peeh  v.  The  Merchant^
Insurance  Company ^^  which  has  so  fully  investigated  and
explained  all  the  prominent  points  under  this  interesting  title
in  the  law  of  insurance.

In  Pole  V.  FKtzgercUd,^  decided  in  the  Exchequer  Cham-
ber, in  the  middle  of  tbe  last  century,  on  error  from  the  K.
B.,  it  was  held,  after  great  discussion  and  consideration,  that
on  an  insurance  of  a  ship  for  a  voyage,  it  was  not  suflScient
that  the  voyage  be  lost,  if  the  ship  was  safe.  It  was  declared,
that  the  insurance  was  of  the  ship,  and  not  of  the  voyage,
and  the  decision  was  aflirmed  in  the  House  of  Lords,  not-
withstanding Lord  Mansfield  made  a  very  strong  argument
against  it  in  his  character  of  counsel.^  After  Lord  Mansfield
came  into  the  Court  of  K.  B.,  he  introduced  and  established


«  3  Jlfofon,  27.

b  IFt//e«*  Kep.  641.

c  5Bro.P.C.  137—142.


1


328  OF  PEHBONAL  PHOPERTT. [Part  T.

the  doctrine  which  he  had  maiDtained  as  counsd,  that  on
the  insuiance  of  a  ship  for  a  specified  voyage,  a  loss  of  eiiher
the  ship,  or  the  voyage^  was  the  same  things  and  justified  an
abandonment. This,  according  to  Lord  Eldon,*  was  an  act
of  the  King's  Bench,  reversing  a  judgment  of  the  Exdiequer
Chamber,  and  the  House  of  Lords. The  case  of  FUzgertUd
V.  PoU^  after  having  slept  unnoticed  and  disregarded  for  half
a  century,  was  mentioned  with  respect,  first  in  the  Supreme
Court  of  New- York,*  and  then  in  Hadkinstm  v.  Robinsmiy^
and  more  recently  by  Lord  Ellenborough,^  who  intimated,
that  the  loss  of  the  voyage  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  loes  of
the  ship,  and  that  it  was  well  to  resort  to  the  good  sense  of
the  judgment  in  Pole  v.  Fitzgerald^  to  purify  the  mind
from  those  generalities. It  is  settled,  that  a  loss  of  the  voy-
age as  to  the  cargo  is  not  a  loss  of  the  voyage  as  to  the  ship,
for  a  policy  on  a  ship  is  an  insurance  of  the  ship  for  the  voy-
age, and  not  an  insurance  on  the  ship  and  the  voyage.' And,
under  this  qualification,  I  apprehend,  the  doctrine  of  the  case
of  Manning  v.  Heumham  to  be  the  established  doctrine,
that  if  the  ship  be  prevented  by  a  peril  within  the  pdicy  from
proceeding  on  her  voyage,  and  the  voyage  be  thereby  lost,  it
is  a  total  loss  of  ship,  freight,  and  cargo,  provided  no  other
ship  can  be  procured  to  carry  on  the  caigo.-^ It  must  be  ad-
mitted, however,  that  the  extreme  variety,  and  apparent  con-
flict of  many  of  the  cases  on  this  subject  of  abandonment,
are  enough  to  justify  the  complaint  of  Lord  Eldon,  that  there
is  as  much  uncertainty  on  this,  as  on  any  other  branch  of
the  law.


a  1  Dow'sJRep,  359. 3  Doto'9  Rep,  All.
b  1  Johns.  Cat,  309.
c  3  Bot.  4*  Pull.  388.
d  2  Maule  ^  Selw.  293.

e  Alexander  r.  Baltimore  losurance  Cotnpaoy,  4  Cranch't  Rep.  370.
See  also,  1  Maton*9  Rep.  343.
/  C<mdy*9  JUarthally  585, 586.


L«c.  XLVIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  339

It  is  undentood  to  be  a  fixed  rule,  that  if  tbe  ship  be  so
injured  by  perils  as  to  require  repairs  to  tbe  extent  of  more
than^half  her  value,  the  insured  may  abandon  ;  for  if  ship
or  cargo  be  damaged  so  as  to  diminish  their  value  above  half,
they  are  said  to  be  lost.  The  rule  came  from  the  French
laW)  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  treatise  of  Le  GnuUm^'^  where
it  is  applied  to  the  case  of  goods ;  and  in  respect  to  both  ship
and  cargo,  the  rule  has  been  incorporated  into  the  French,
English,  and  American  jurisprudence.^  There  has  been
considerable  discussion  in  the  text  books,  as  to  the  right  to
abandon,  when  a  part  only  of  the  property  insured  is  da-
maged ab6ve  a  moiety,  or  lost,  and  this  will  depend  upon  the
manner  in  which  it  is  insured.  If  the  insurance  be  upon
different  kinds  of  goods  indiscriminately,  or  as  one  entire  par-
cel, it  is  then  an  insurance  upon  an  integral  subject,  and  an
abandonment  of  part  only  cannot  be  made.  But  if  the  arti-
cles be  separately  specified  and  valued,  it  has  been  considered
so  far  in  the  nature  of  a  distinct  insurance  on  each  parcel,
that  the  insured  was  allowed  to  recover. as  for  a  total  loss  of
the  damaged  parcel,  when  damaged  above  a  moiety  in  value.
Mr.  Phillips  has  suggested  a  doubt  whether  this  distinction
be  well  founded.  The  rule  was  taken  from  the  French
treatises,  and  unless  the  different  sorts  of  cargo  be  so  dis-
tinctly separated  and  considered  in  the  policy,  as  to  make  it
analogous  to  distinct  insurances  on  distinct  parcels,  there


a  Cb.  7,  art.  1  and  9.  .

6  yalin'sCom.  torn.  ii.  101.  Pothier^  det  Ams.  n.  121.  Gossr.
Withers,  2  Burr.  Rep*  683.  Gardiner  y.  Smith,  1  Johns,  Cat,  141.
Dickey  v.  N.  Y.  Ins.  Co.  4  Cotoen't  Rep.  222.  Marcardia  v.  The
Chesapeake  Ins.  Co.  9  Cranch's  Rep.  39.  Ludlow  v.  Columbian  Ins.
Co.  1  Johns.  Rep.  335.  Peters  v.  Phenix  Ina.  Co.  3  Serg.  4*  Rawle,
26.  Wood  V.  L.  and  K.  Ins.  Co.  6  Mast.  Rep.  479.  Story,  J.,  3  Ma-
son's Rep.  69.  The  loss  must  exceed  one  half  of  the  goods  insured,
or  the  gross  amount  paid  for  them.  Budd  ▼.  Union  Ins.  Co.  4  M^Cord*s
j%ep.  1.

Vol.  III.  42


330  OF  PBRSONAL  PROPERTY.  [P«rt  Y-

eannoi  be  a  separate  abandooment  of  a  part  of  the  caigo
inmired.*

The  meaning  of  the  words  in  the  rule,  "  one  half  of  the
value/*  has  been  held  to  be,  the  half  of  the  general  market
value  of  the  vessel  at  the  time  of  the  disaster,  and  not  her
value  for  any  particular  voyage  or  purpose.  The  expense  of
the  repairs  at  the  port  of  necessity,  is  the  true  test  for  deter-*
mining  the  amount  of  the  injury,  and  such  sum  is  to  betaken
as  will  fully  reinstate  the  vessel,  and,  in  general,  with  the
same  kind  of  materials  of  which  she  was  composed  at  the
time  ot  the  disaster.  It  has  also  been  considered,  that  the
three  objects  of  insurance,  vessel,  cargo,  and  freight,  stand  od
the  same  ground  as  to  a  total  loss  by  a  deterioration  to  more
than  one  half  of  the  value/

In  ascertaining  the  value  of  the  ship,  and  the  quantum  of
expense  or  injury,  difSculties  have  arisen,  and  they  were  fully
discussed,  and  very  clearly  explained,  in  Peele  v.  TTie  Mer-
chants^ Insurance  Company,'  The  valuation  in  the  policy
is  conclusive  in  case  of  a  total  loss,  but,  in  some  respects,  it  is
inapplicable  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  quantum  of
injury  in  case  of  a  partial  loss  of  goods.  The  rule  in  that
ease  is,  to  ascertain  the  amount  of  injury  by  the  difference
between  the  gross  proceeds  of  the  sound  and  damaged  goods.'


«  Gnerlain  v,  Tbe  Colamb.  Ids.  Co.  7  Johnt.  Rep.  527.  Deide-
ricks  T.  Com.  Ins.  Co.  10  ibid.  234.  Candy's  Marthall,  600.  PkU-
lipt  on  Insurance^  434,  435.  Fo^tn,  torn.  ii.  108.  PoUiier,  b.  t.  No.
121.  131,  132.  Emerigon,  torn.  ii.  214.  Le  Guufon,cb.  7,  sec.  8,  9.
In  Seton  f.  The  Delaware  Ins.  Co,  2  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  175,  it  was
held,  that  a  partial  loss  of  an  entire  cargo,  by  sea  damage,  if  amount-
ing to  more  than  half,  might,  under  circumstances,  be  conyerted  into
a  technical  total  loss  ;  but  not  if  a  distinct  part  of  the  cargo  be  de-
stroyed, and  the  voyage  be  not  thereby  broken  up.

h  Center  v.  American  Ins.  Co.  7  Cowen's  Rep.  564.  4  Wendell^
45.  S.  C.

c  3  Mason's  Rep.  70 — 78.

d  Johnson  ▼.  Shedden,  2  EoiVt  Rep.  581.


Let.  XL VIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  331

This  k  also  the  true  rule  as  to  the  ship,  though  there  ii
greater  difficulty  in  the  application.  The  value  of  the  ship
at  the  time  and  place  of  the  accident,  is  the  true  basis  of  cal-
culation.* And  with  respect  to  the  arbitrary  and  fluctuati)Qg
rule  as  to  the  allowance  of  one  third  new  for  old,  there  is
no  doubt  of  its  application  in  cases  of  partial  loss  ;  but  suob
a  deduction  is  not  allowed,  and  does  not  apply  to  cases  of
total  loss.  The  reason  of  this  allowance  to  the  underwriter,
of  one  third  of  the  expense  of  the  reparations,  is  on  account
of  the  better  condition  in  which  the  ship  is  put  by  them,
than  she  was  when  insured  ;  and,  therefore,  neither  the  rea-
son of  the  rule,  nor  the  rule  itself,  applies  to  the  case  of  a  ship
suffering  a  partial  loss  on  her  first  voyage,  when  she  is  new,
and  cannot  be  made  better  by  repairs.  The  half  value
which  authorizes  an  abandonment,  is  half  the  sum  which
the  ship,  if  repaired,  would  be  worth,  without  any  such  de-
duction.* .

Upon  a  valid,  abandonment,  the  master  becomes  the  agent
of  the  insurer,  and  the  insured  is  not  bound  by  his  subsequent
acts  unless  he  adopts  tbem.^  It  is  the  same  thing  with  the
consignee  of  the  ca^o.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  master,  result-
ing from  his  situation,  to  act  with  good  faith,  and  care,  and
diligence,  for  the  protection  and  recovery  of  the  property,  for


a  The  Patapaco  Ins.  Companj  ?.  Sonthgate,  5  PeUrt'  U>  S,  Rep.
604.

h  Dopoy  F.  The  U.  Ins.  Co.  3  JokM,  Cat,  182.  CotUra^  Smith  v.
Bell,  2  Coined  Cages  in  Error,  153.  Coolidge  F.  The  Gloucester  Int.
Co.  IS  Masi.  Rep,  Z4l.  Peele  f.  Mariue  Ins.  Co.  ZMason^e  Rep.
76,  77.  The  extent  of  loss,  in  the  case  of  a  ship,  says  Boulay  Paty,
is  estimated  by  a  comparison  of  the  valae  in  the  policy,  with  the  Falae
at  the  place  of  loss,  and  not  with  the  amount  of  the  expense  requisite
to  repair. Coun  de  Droit  Com.  torn.  i?.  252.

e  If  the  insured  interferes  himself  in  the  character  of  owntr  with
the  property  after  an  abandonment,  it  will  depend  upon  circumstances
and  the  quo  animo,  whether  or  not  it  amounts  to  a  wai?er  of  the  aban-
donment. Columb.  Ins.  Co.  y.  Ashby,  4  PHere'  U.  S,  Rep,  139.


332  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  T.


the  benefit  of  whom  it  may  eventuaUy  coQcern. The
ter  of  an  insured  ship  injured  by  the  perils  of  the  sea,  and  not
competent  to  complete  the  voyage,  may  sell  her  in  a  case  of
necessity,  as  when  the  ship  is  in  a  place  in  which  she  cannot
be  repaired  ;  or  the  expense  of  repairing  her  would  be  extra-
vagant, and  exceed  her  value ;  or  he  had  no  moneys  in  his
possession,  and  was  not  able  to  raise  any.* In  cases  of  cap*
ture  he  is  bound,  if  a  neutral,  to  remain  and  assert  his  claim
until  condemnation,  or  the  recovery  be  hopeless.* His  wages,
and  those  of  the  crew,  are  a  charge  on  the  owner,  and  ulti-
mately, in  case  of  recovery,  to  be  borne  as  a  general  average
by  all  parties  in  interest ;  and  if  the  abandonment  be  accqpt>
edy  the  underwriter  becomes  owner  for  the  voyage,  and  in
that  character  liable  for  the  seamen's  wages,  and  entitled  to
the  freight  subsequently  earned.' If  the  master  purchases  in
the  vessel,  or  ransoms  her,  the  insurer  will  be  entitled  to  the
benefit  of  the  purchase  or  composition  ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  if  the  insured  affirms  the  purchase  of  the  master,  it  will
be,  at  the  option  of  the  insurer,  a  waiver  of  the  abandonment.
The  insurer  can  accept  of  the  re-purchase  of  the  master,  as
his  constructive  agent,  and  affirm  the  act,  or  he  may  leave  it
to  fall  upon  the  master.'


a  Somes  r.  Sngroe,  4  Carr.  4r  Payne,  276.

b  Mftrshall  r.  The  Union  Ini.  (;o.  2  JFath.  Cir.  Rep.  4SS.

c  Hammond  r.  Essex  F.  k  M.  Ins.  Co.  4  Mason,  196.  It  has  been
made  a  question  whether  the  nnderwriter,  after  an  accepted  abandon-
ment, is  bound,  in  his  new  character  of  owner,  to  go  on  and  complete
the  royag^.  In  Case  r.  Davidson,  5  Maule  <f>  Selw.  89,  Holroyd,  J.,
was  of  opinion  that  he  was  under  no  such  obligation  to  the  freighter,
whose  rights  as  owner  of  the  goods  were  personal,  lying  in  contract
with  the  ship-owner,  and  not  running  toith  the  ship.  There  is  a  sugges-
tion of  Mr.  Justice  Putnam,  to  theKame  effect,  in  Coolidge  r.  Glouces-
ter Mar.  Ins.  Co.  15  JUast,  Rep.  343.

d  Saidler  k  Craig  r.  Church,  cited  in  2  Caines'  Rep.  286.  United
Ins.  Co.  r.  Robinson,  2  Caines'  Rep.  280.  Jumel  r.  Marine  Ins.  Co.
7  Johns.  Rep.  412.  Willard  ▼.  Dorr,  3  Mason's  Rep.  161.  Bouiay
Paly,  torn.  iv.  309,310.


L««.  ILVIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  333

It  has  been  a  very  controverted  question,  whether  an  aban-
donment of  the  ship  transferred  the  freight  in  whole  or  in
part.  It  was  finally  settled  in  the  jurisprudence  of  New-
York  and  of  Massachusetts,  and  adopted  as  the  true  rule  in
tlie  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States  for  Massachusetts,  that
on  an  accepted  abandonment  of  the  ship,  the  freight  earned
previous  to  the  disaster  was  to  be  retained  by  the  owner,  or
his  representative,  the  insurer  on  the  freight,  and  apportioned
pro  rata  itineris  ;  and  that  the  freight  subsequently  to  be
earned  went  to  the  insurer  on  the  ship.*  In  the  case  of
Armrayd  v.  The  Union  Insurance  Cwn'panyf  the  ques-
tion was  raised,  but  left  undecided,  whether  the  entire  or  only
a  pro  rata  freight,  in  such  a  case,  went,  on  abandonment,
to  the  insurer  of  the  ship.  This  litigious  question  has  now
been  settled  in  England  ;  and  in  Case  v.  Davidson^^  where


a  United  InBurance  Co.  v.  Lenox,  1  Johns.  Ccu.  377.  2  ibid.  443.
Dary  ▼.  Hallet,  3  Caines'  Rep.  20.  Mar.  Ins.  Co.  r.  U.  loa.  Co.  9
Johns.  Rep.  186.  Coolidge  y.  Gloucester  M.  Ins.  Co.  15  Jdats.  Rep.
341 . Hammond  v.  Essex  F.  &  M.  Ins.  Co.  4  Jlfoion,  190.

6  3  Binney^t  Rep.  437.

e  5  Jdaule  4r  Selto.  79,  S.  C.  affirmed  on  error,  2  Brod.  Sf  Bing.
379.  In  this  case  the  court  did  dot  make  any  distinction  between  the
freight  earned  as  a  pro  rata  freight,  antecedent  to  the  abandonment,
and  that  earned  afterwards,  but  the  entire  freight  was  held  to  pass  with
the  transfer  of  the  ship.  There  would  seem,  therefore,  to  be  a  rari*
ance  on  this  point  between  the  English  and  the  American  cases.  I  was
misled  in  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  by  the  marginal  note  of  the  de-
cision, in  which  it  is  stated  in  the  report  of  the  case  by  McnUe  Sf  Sel-
toyii,  and  repeated  in  the  report  of  the  case  on  error  by  Broderip  if*
Bingham^  that  an  abandonment  of  the  ship  to  the  insurer  on  ship,  oar.
ried  the  freight  **  earned  subsequently  to  the  abandonment  as  incident
to  the  ship ;"  and  in  the  statement  of  the  case  it  is  also  said  that  the
underwriter  on  the  ship  who  recovered,  claimed  "  a  proportion  of  the
money  received  by  the  defendants  for  freight."  But  on  a  closer  inspec-
tion of  the  case,  it  appears  that  the  underwriter  claimed  and  recovered
the  entire  freight,  and  that  no  distinction  was  made  between  the  freight
arising  prior  and  subsequent  to  the  lots,  or  prior  and  subsequent  to  the
abandonment.


334  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  Y.

ship  and  freight  were  separately  insured,  aiid  each  subject
abandoned  as  for  a  total  loss,  it  was  adjudged  that  the  aban-
donment of  the  ship  transferred  the  freight  as  incident  to  the
ship,  and  that  an  abandonment  was  equivalent  to  a  sale  of
the  sliip  to  the  abandonee.^ The  French  jurisprudence  on
this  subject  has  been  equally  embarrassing  and  unsettled.
The  ordinance  of  1681  had  no  textual  regulation  relative  to
freight,  in  cases  of  abandonment. It  was  left  to  the  decisions
of  the  tribunals,  and  they  denied  to  the  insurer  on  the  ship
any  freight  for  the  goods  saved. Yalin  exposed  the  error,*
and  maintained  that  freight  on  abandonment,  whether  pud
in  advance  or  not,  ought  to  go  to  the  insurer. In  1778  it
was  settled  at  Marseilles,  under  the  sanction  of  EmerigOD,
that  freight  was  an  accessory  to  the  ship  ;  and  in  abandon-
ing the  ship,  the  freight  acquired  during  the  voyage  went
with  it.* The  ordinance  of  1779  followed  that  doctrine,  and
declared  that  acquired  freight  already  earned  on  the  voyage,
was  insurable,  and  did  not  go  with  the  ship  on  abandonment,
but  that  the  future  freight  to  be  earned  on  the  goods  saved,
would  go  to  the  insurer,  if  there  was  no  stipulation  to  the  con-
trary in  the  policy,  saving  the  wages  of  seamen  and  bottomry


a  Mr.  Benecke,  Principles  of  indemnity ^  p.  408,  after  gtriog  an  io-
terestiDg  history  of  the  prog^ress  of  the  questioD,  coDclndes  that  the  io-
sarer  on  the  freight,  in  case  of  an  abaDdonment  of  that  also,  will  still
ha^e  a  personal  claim  on  the  owner  for  the  freight  subsequently  earned,
and  which,  but  for  the  abandonment,  would  have  belonged  to  him.
Though  the  decision  of  Lenox  and  The  United  Insurance  Co.  in  New«
York,  had  been  in  print  for  eighteen  or  twenty  years,  it  seems  (o  have
been  entirely  unknown  to  the  English  Courts,  and  to  Mr.  Benecke,  in
1824,  though  he  has,  in  the  course  of  his  work,  ransacked  the  local  laws
and  ordinances  of  most  of  the  petty  as  well  as  great  commercial  states
and  cities  in  Europe.  I  should  think  it  was  almost  time  for  English-
men to  find  out  that  there  is,  in  point  of  fact,  a  very  cultivated  system
of  commercial  jurisprudence  actually  existing  and  in  operation  on  this
side  of  the  Atlantic.

6  Com.  liv.  3,  tit.  6,  Dee  Assurances^  art.  15.

c  jE^iiMf^ofi,  tom.  ii.  917— tt7.


L€«.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  336


The  new  code*  declared  that  the  freight  of  goods
saved,  though  paid  in  advance,  went,  upon  abandonment,  to
the  insurer  on  the  ship.  The  construction  given  to  the  code
by  the  Royal  Court  at  Rennes,  in  1822,  in  the  case  of  Blaize
V.  T%B  Company  of  General  Assurance  at  Paris,  was,
that  the  future  freight  did  not  go  to  the  insurer  on  the  ship,
but  only  the  freight  on  the  goods  saved  and  already  earned
at  the  time  of  the  loss.^

(2.)  Of  the  adjustment  of  partial  losses.

In  an  open  policy  the  general  rule  is,  that  the  actual  or
market  value  of  the  suligect  insured,  is  to  be  estimated  at  the
time  of  the  commencement  of  the  risk.  The  object  of  inquiry
is,  the  true  value  of  the  subject  put  at  risk,  and  for  which  an
indemnity  was  stipulated.

There  are  two  kinds  of  indemnity  that  may  lawfully  be
obtained  under  a  contract  of  insurance.  The  first  is,  to  pay
what  the  goods  would  have  sold  for  if  they  had  reached  the
place  of  destination ;  and  the  value  there  consists  of  the  prime
cost  and  expenses  of  the  outfit,  the  freight  and  expenses  at
the  port  of  delivery,  and  the  profit  or  loss  arising  from  the
state  of  the  market.  This  species  of  indemnity  puts  the
insured  in  the  same  situation  as  if  no  loss  had  happened.
The  other  kind  of  indemnity  is,  to  pay  only  the  first  cost  of
the  goods,  and  the  expenses  incurred  ;  and  this  places  the
insured  in  the  situation  he  was  before  he  undertook  the  ad-
venture. It  annuls  the  speculation,  and  excludes  the  conside-
ration of  any  eventual  profit  or  loss.  The  first  kind  of  insu-
rance is,  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Benecke,'  more  conformable
to  the  nature  of  mercantile  transactions,  and  afibrds,  in  every
case,  an  exact  indemnity  ;  but  the  second  kind  of  insurance


a  Code  de  Commerce,  art.  386.

b  Bouiay  Paty,  tom.  ir.  397 — 417.

€  TreaUse  on  the  Principlei  of  Indemnity  in  Marine  Intunmce^  cb.  1 .


336  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  tP»rt  V.

of  goods  is  the  one  in  practice  in  England,  and  other  com-
niercial  countries.

The  actual  or  market  value  at  the  port  of  departure,  may
frequently  be  different  from  the  invoice  price,  or  prime  cost,
and  when  that  happens,  or  can  be  ascertained,  it  is  to  be  pre-
ferred.'  In  Gahn  v.  Broome^^  the  invoice  price  was  adopted
as  the  most  stable  and  certain  evidence  of  the  actual  value  ;
but  in  Le  Roy  v.  United  Insurance  Company ^^  the  invoice
price  was  understood  to  be  equivalent  to  the  prime  cost,  and
that  was  commonly  the  market  value  of  the  subject  at  the
commencement  of  the  risk. The  court,  in  that  case,  did
not  profess  to  lay  down  any  general  rule,  but  they,  neverthe-
less, adopted  the  prime  cost  as  being  a  plain  and  simple,
and,  generally  speaking,  the  best  rule  by  which  to  test  the
value  of  the  subject. The  English  Court  of  King's  Bench,
in  Usher  v.  Noble^*  pursued,  in  effect,  the  same  rule,  by
estimating  a  loss  on  goods  in  an  open  policy,  at  the  invoice
price  at  the  loading  port,  and  taking  with  that  the  premium
of  insurance,  and  commission,  as  the  basis  of  the  calcula-
tion.*

If  goods  arrive  damaged  at  the  place  of  destination,  the
way  to  ascertain  the  quantity  of  damage,  either  in  open  or
valued  policies,  is  to  compare  the  market  price,  or  gross
amount  of  the  damaged  goods,  with  the  market  price  or  gross
amount  at  which  the  same  goods  would  have  sold  if  sound/
But  this  mode  of  adjustment  affords  no  perfect  indemnity


a  Snell  v.  Delaware  Ins.  Co.  4  Dalitu*  Rep.  430. Canon  r.  Marine
Id8.  Co.  2  Wash,  Cir.  Rep.  468.

b  1  Jokm*  Cat.  120.

c  1  Johnt.  Rep,  343.

d  12  EoiVi  Rep,  639.

6  This  is  admitted  in  the  French  law  to  afford  all  the  iodemoity  that
was  stipulated  by  the  policy. Boulay  Paly^  torn.  iv.  p.  41, 42.

/  Lewis  T.  Rucker»  2  Burr,  Rep.  1167.  Johnson  v.  Sheddoo,  2
EfuVi  Rep.  b^\.  Usher  r.  Noble,  ItEaaVt  i?epv 639.  Benecktan
Jfidemnily^  426.


Lee.  XLVIIL] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  337

to  the  insured,  for  he  has  to  pay  freight  for  the  goods  as  if
they  were  sound,  and  which  freight  he  cannot  recover  of
the  insurer.  Various  expedients  have  heen  suggested  to
remedy  the  inconvenience,  and  the  true  one  is  to  insure  the
sum  to  be  paid  for  the  freight  and  charges  at  the  port  of  de-
livery,*

We  have  seen,  in  a  former  lecture,*  that  an  adjustment  of
a  general  average  at  a  foreign  port  is  conclusive  ;  and  it  is
equally  so  between  the  parties  to  the  policy,  and  between  the
parties  in  interest  in  the  adventure.  It  is  the  rule  in  all
foreign  countries  for  the  underwriter  to  be  bound  by  foreign
adjustments  of  general  average,  unless  there  be  a  stipulation
to  the  contrary  in  the  policy,  as  is  the  case  in  those  of  the
insurance  companies  at  Paris.*  There  is  a  material  differ-
ence between  the  adjustment  of  a  partial  loss,  and  of  a  gene-
ral average,  since  the  former  is  adjusted  according  to  the
value  at  the  time  and  place  of  departure  of  the  vessel,  and
the  latter  according  to  the  value  at  the  foreign  port.'  And,
as  in  cases  of  partial  loss,  it  is  to  be  adjusted  upon  a  compari-
son of  the  gross  proceeds  of  the  sound  and  damaged  goodS|
the  underwriter  has  nothing  to  do  either  with  the  state  of  the
market,  or  with  the  loss  on  landing  expenses,  freight,  and
duty,  accruing  in  consequence  of  the  deterioration ;  for  no  pre*
miura  is  paid  for  those  items,  and  all  other  modes  of  adjust-
ing particular  average,  except  that  founded  on  the  principle
of  the  gross  proceeds,  are  erroneous.'  In  settling  losses  under
the  memorandum  in  the  policy,  which  declares  articles  free  of
average  under  say  five  per  cent.,  if  a  partial  loss  to  an  article
be  foundj  on  survey  and  sale,  to  have  been  five  per  cent.,  the
insurer  pays  the  damages  and  the  expenses. If  under  five


a  Beneeke  on  Indemnify^  17 — 20.
b  Ante*  Leo.  47.

c  MoHoy^  b.  2y  eh.  6,  sec.  16. 7  Jdatt.  Rep,  370. 5  Cowen^i  Rep.
63. Beneckeon  IndemnUy,  ^S\.
d  1  Emerigon^  659. Ord.  de  la  Mar.  tit.  Du  Jet,  art.  6.
e  Benecke  on  IndemnHy^  p.  426, 427.

Vol.  IIL  43


338  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V.

per  cent,  he  pays  nothing,  and  the  insured  bears  the  espen-
ses.  The  expenses  are  like  costs  of  suit,  and  fall  upon  the
losing  party.  The  expenses  are  not  taken  to  make  up  the
five  per  cent."

If  extraordinary  expense,  and  extra  freight,  be  incurred  in
carrying  on  the  cargo  in  another  vessel,  when  the  first  one
becomes  disabled  by  a  peril  of  the  sea,  the  French  rule  is,  to
charge  the  same  upon  the  insurer  of  the  cargo.* This
question  is  left  undecided  in  the  English  law,  but  in  this
country  we  have  followed  the  French  rule.*^ With  respect
to  leakage,  the  rule,  in  cases  free  from  special  stipulation,  is,
that  the  insurer  is  not  liable  for  waste  occasioned  by  ordinary
leakage,  and  only  for  leakage  beyond  the  ordinary  waste,
and  produced  by  some  extraordinary  accident The  prac-
tice is,  to  ascertain,  in  each  particular  case,  what  amount  of
leakage  is  to  be  attributed  to  ordinary  causes,  or  the  fault  o(
the  insured,  or  bad  stowage,  and  what  to  the  perils  of  the
sea  ;  and,  in  pursuing  this  inquiry,  the  season  of  the  year,
the  nature  of  the  articles, the  description  of  the  vessel,


a  Beneckeon  Indemnity ^  p.  436.  Mr.  Benecke,  in  cb.  9,  has  gone
ioto  particalar  calculations  on  the  subject  of  tbe  adjustment  of  partica-
lar  average,  on  every  kind  of  expense  or  damage  short  of  a  total  Uns,
and  applied  his  principles  to  almost  all  the  variety  of  cases  that  can
arise,  and  to  bis  lucid  explanations  I  must  refer  tbe  student  for  a  more
practical  knowledge  of  the  subject.  Tbe  five  per  cent,  is  to  be  com-
puted upon  tbe  valuation  in  the  policy,  after  deducting  the  premium.
Brooks  V.  Oriental  Ins.  Co.  7  Pick.  259.  Distinct  successive  losses  to
the  ^ip  cannot  be  added  together  to  make  up  tbe  6  per  cent,  tbongh  it
may  be  otherwise  as  to  tbe  cargo.  In  tbe  one  case,  many  trifling  losses
may  fall  within  (he  common  wear  and  tear  of  the  ship  borne  by  the
t>wner ;  but  in  tbe  other,  the  entiie  damage  cannot  be  ascertained  until
the  cargo  is  unladed.  Ibid,

h  Emerigofiy  torn.  i.  4^9 — 433. Code  de  Commerce,  No.  391. 393.

e  Mumfurd  v^.  Tbe  Commercial  Ins.  Co.  5  Johns.  Rep.  262.  Searle
V.  Scovell,  4  Johns.  Gh.  Rep.  218.  Dodge  r.  Tbe  Marine  Ins.  Ca  17
Jir^M.  Rep,  All.


Lee*  XLVIIL] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  339

the  length  of  the  voyage,  and  tlie  stowage,  are  all  to  be  con-
sidered.'

An  adjustment  of  a  loss  cannot  be  set  aside  or  opened  ex'^
cept  on  the  ground' of  fraud,  or  mistake  of  facts  not  known.
It  is  only  prima  facie  evidence  of  the  claim,  and  tlie  party
roust  have  a  full  disclosure  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case
before  he  will  be  concluded  by  it.  In  the  language  of  Lord
Ellenborough,  they  must  all  be  blazoned  to  him  as  they
really  existed.^  And  in  making  the  adjustment,  in  the  case
of  a  partial  loss,  the  rule  is  to  apply  the  dd  materials  towarda
the  payment  of  the  new,  by  deducting  the  value  of  them  from
the  gross  amount  of  the  expenses  for  the  repairs,  and  to  allow
the  deduction  of  the  oiie  third  new  for  old  upon  the  balance.*
In  England,  if  the  injury  be  sustained,  and  the  repairs  made,
when  the  vessel  is  new,  no  deduction  of  new  for  old  is  made ;
because  the  vessel  being  new,  it  is  tiot  supposed  that  she  is
put  in  better  condition  by  the  repairs.  But  in  New- York
that  distinction  has  not  been  adopted,  and  the  deduction  of
one  third  new  for  old  is  made,  whether  the  vessel  be  new  or
old.'

The  insurer  is  liable  for  all  the  labour  and  expense  attend-
ant upon  an  accident  which  forces  the  vessel  into  port  to  be
repaired  ;'  and  in  consequence  of  the  general  permission  in


a  Phillip*  on  Insurance,  p.  246, 247.  Jdiller  on  Insurance,  132.  2
Valiny  14.  80.  83. Emerigon,  vol.  i.  391.

6  Dow  w.  Smith,  1  Caines*  Rep,  32.  Shepherd  y.  Chewter,  1
Campb.  Jf,  P.  Rep.  274. Steel  v.  Lacy,  3  Taunl.  Rep.  286.

e  Barnes  r.  The  Nat.  los.  Co.  1  Cowen,  265.  Savag^e,  Ch.  J.,  in
Dickey  ▼.  N.  T.  Ins.  Co.  4  Cowen,  245.  Brooks  v.  Oriental  Ins.  Co.
7  Pick.  269.

d  Danham  y.  Com.  Ins.  Co.  11  Johns.  Rep.  315.  Temporary  re-
pairs in  the  coarse  of  the  voyage  are  held  to  be  particular  ayerag^e,  but
other  repairs  abroad,  from  strict  necessity,  to  enable  the  vessel  to  return,
and  which  become  useless  afterwards,  are  general  average.  Brooks  y.
Oriental  Ins.  Co.  7  Pick.  259.

e  Shiff  y.  Miss.  Ins.  Comp.  1  Miller's  Loui,  Rep.  304.


340  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

the  pdicy  for  the  insured  to  labour  for  the  recovery  of  the
property,  the  insurer  may  be  rendered  liable  for  the  expenses
incurred  in  tlie  attempt  to  recover  the  lost  property,  in  addi-
tion to  the  payment  of  a  total  loss.*  It  has  been  a  question
much  contested  in  the  French  tribunals,  whether  the  insurer
can,  in  cases  distinct  from  the  above  stipulation,  be  held
chargeable  at  the  same  time,  and  cumulatively,  with  the
amount  of  an  average,  and  also  with  the  amount  of  a  subse-
quent total  loss,  in  the  same  voyage.  This  is  said  to  be  con-
trary to  all  principle,  and  the  elements  of  the  contract ;  and
it  was  decided  in  the  Court  of  Cassation,  in  1823,  after  great
litigation,  that  the  insurer  was  not  holden  beyond  the
amount  of  his  subscription,  and  for  which  he  received  a  pre-
mium, notwithstanding  the  prior  partial  and  the  subsequent
total  loss.*

(3.)  Of  the  return  of  premium.

The  premium  paid  by  the  insured  is  in  consideration  of
the  risk  which  the  insurer  assumes  ;  and  if  the  contract  of


a  1  Cainet'  Rep,  284.  450.  7  Johm*  Rep,  62.  424. 433.  4  Z>itifil.
Rep,  367.  Emerigoo  has  taken  notice  of  this  itipulation  in  the  Eog-
lith  policies,  by  means  of  which  the  insurer  may  become  chargeable
beyond  the  amount  of  his  snbscription  ;  and  there  is  the  same  stipula-
tion, by  which  they  may  be  so  charged,  in  the  policies,  at  Antwerp,
Rouen,  Nantes  and  Bordeaux ;  and  there  is  the  same  clause  in  tbey«r*
mtfto  giren  by  Loccenius.  In  the  form  used  at  Marseilles  there  is  no
•nch  olanse,  and  without  such  clause,  and  as  a  general  rule,  the  insurer
is  not  chargeable  beyond  his  subscription.  But  with  such  a  special
olaiiaO)  Valin  and  Emerig^n  both  agree,  that  the  expense  must  be  borne
by  the  insurer,  though  it  go  beyond  the  effects  recovered.  This,  bow-
ever,  is  denied  by  Boulay  Paty,  who  insists  that  the  sum  subscribed
limits  all  claim  upon  the  insurer.  1  Emerigony  484.  2  Emerigtm^
202—213.  ValWi  Com.  torn.  ii.  99.  Boulay  Paty,  tom.  iv.  312,
313.

6  Kermet  r.  la  Compagnie  Royale  d 'Assurance,  reported  in  the
Journal  de  CoMMOlumy  1 823,  and  quoted  at  large  in  Boulay  Paty^  tom«
IT.  619—632. And  see  also  ibid,  p.  272—276.


Lcc.  XL VIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  341

iosurance  be  void  ab  initio^  or  the  risk  has  not  been  com-
menced, the  insured  is  entitled  to  a  return  of  premium.  If
the  insurance  be  made  without  any  interest  whatsoever  in
the  thing  insured,  and  this  proceeds  through  mistake,  misin-
formation, or  any  other  innocent  cause,  the  premium  is  to
be  returned.  So,  if  the  insurance  be  made  with  short  inte-
rest, or  for  more  than  the  real  interest,  there  is  to  be  a  rata-
ble return  of  premium.  If  the  risk  has  not  been  run,  whe-
ther it  be  owing  to  the  fault,  pleasure,  or  will  of  the  insured,
or  to  any  other  cause,  the  premium  must  be  returned,  for  the
consideration  for  which  it  was  given  lails.''  If  the  vessel
never  sailed  on  the  voyage  insured,  or  the  policy  became
void  by  a&ilureof  the  warranty,  and  without  fraud,  the
policy  never  attached  ;  but  if  the  risk  has  once  commenced,
though  the  voyage  be  immediately  thereafter  abandoned,
there  is  to  be  no  return  or  apportionment  of  premium.  And
if  the  premium  is  to  be  returned,  it  is  the  usage  in  every
country,  where  it  is  not  otherwise  expressly  stipulated  in
the  policy,  for  the  insurer  to  retain  one  half  per  cent,  by
way  of  indemnity  for  his  trouble  and  concern  in  the  trans-
action.^

The  insurer  retains  the  premium  in  all  cases  of  actual
fraud  on  the  part  of  the  insured,  or  his  agent.""  So,  if  the
trade  be  in  any  respect  illegal,  the  premium  cannot  be  re-
claimed.^ If  the  voyage  be  divisible,  there  may  be  an  ap-
portionment of  the  premium,  and  if  the  risk  as  to  the  one
part  of  the  voyage  has  not  commenced,  the  premium  may


a  Tjrie  ▼.  Fletcher,  Cotop,  666.  Loraine  v.  ThomliosoD,  Doug,
585.  8  Term  Rep,  156.  arg.  Holmes  r.  U.  Itu.  Co.  2  Johns,  Ca$,
3^9. Taylor  r.  Sumner,  4  Mats.  Rep,  56.

h  Emerigon^  torn,  ii.  154.  PhiUip^s  on  Luuranee^  503.  Codede
Commerce,  art.  349. Hendricks  v.  Com.  Ins.  Co.  8  Johns,  Rep,  1.

c  Tyler  ▼.  Hern,  Park  on  Insurance^  285.  Chapman  v.  Eraser,
Marshall  on  Insurance,  652.

d  March  v.  Abel,  3  Bos,  ^  Pull  35.  Van  Dyck  r.  Hewitt,  1  EasVs
Rep.  96.


342  OF  PERSONAL  PHOrERTY. [Part  V.

be  proportionably  retained.  But  tbe  premium  cannoi  be
divided  and  apportioned,  unless  the  risks  were  divisible  and
distinct  in  tbe  policy.  If  the  voyage  and  the  premium  be
entire,  there  can  be  no  apportionment.  It  is  requisite  that
the  voyage,  by  the  usage  of  trade,  or  the  agreement  of  the
parties,  be  divisible  into  distinct  risks  ;  and,  in  that  case,  if
no  risk  has  been  run  as  to  one  part,  there  may  be  an  appor-
tionment of  premium."

The  French  code  provides  for  the  apportionment  of  pre-
mium, in  the  case  of  an  insurance  on  goods,  when  part  of
the  voyage  has  not  been  performed.*  M.  Le  Baron  Locr^,
in  his  commentary  upon  this  article,  vindicates  it  by  very
ingenious  reasoning,  which  M.  Boulay  Paty^  thinks,  bow-
ever,  does  not  remove  the  difficulty,  and  he  contends,  that
such  a  provision  is  contrary  to  a  principle  of  the  contract,  that
when  the  risk  has  once  commenced,  the  right  to  the  entire
premium  is  acquired.

IV.  Of  the  writers  an  insurance  law.

I  have  now  finished  a  survey  of  the  leading  doctrines  of
marine  insurance,  which  is  by  far  tbe  most  extensive  and
complex  title  in  tbe  commercial  code.  There  is  no  branch
of  the  law  that  has  been  more  thoroughly  investigated,  and
more  successfully  cultivated  in  modern  times,  not  only  in
England,  but  upon  tbe  European  continent.  Maritime  law,
in  general,  partakes  more  of  the  character  of  international
law,  than  any  other  branch  of  jurisprudence  ;  and  I  trust  I
need  not  apologize  for  the  free  use  which  has  been  made,  for
the  purpose  of  illustration,  not  of  English  authorities  only,


a  StevensoD  ▼.  Snow,  3  Burr.  Rep.  1237.  Loogv.  AUea,  JUarthaU
on  huurance^  660.  Donath  y.  Ids.  Co.  of  N.  A.,  4  Dalku*  Rep.  463.
Ogden  ▼.  Firem.  Ids.  Co.  12  Johns.  Rep.  114.  Phiil^  on  Insurance,
503—510.

b  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  356.

c  Court  de  Droit  Commercial  J^iariOme,  torn.  iv.  98, 99.


Lee,  XLYIII.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  343

but  of  the  writings  of  other  fore^  lawyers,  and  the  decisions
of  foreign  tribunals,  relative  to  the  various  heads  of  the  law
merchant.  I  am  justified,  not  only  by  the  example  of  the
most  eminent  of  the  English  lawyers  and  judges,  but  by  the
consideration,  that  the  law  merchant  is  part  of  the  European
law  of  nations,  and  grounded  upon  principles  of  universal
equity.  It  pervades  every  where  the  institutions  of  that  vast
combination  of  Christian  nations,  which  constitutes  one  com-
munity for  commercial  purposes  and  social  intercourse ;  and
the  interchange  of  principles,  and  spirit,  and  literature,  which
chat  intercourse  produces,  is  now  working  wonderful  im-
provements in  the  moral  and  political  condition  of  the  human
race.

The  general  principles  of  insurance  law  rest  on  solid  foun-
dations of  justice,  and  are  recommended  by  their  public
utility ;  and  yet  it  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  none  of  the  na-
tions of  antiquity,  though  some  of  them  were  very  commer-
cial, and  one  of  them  a  great  maritime  power,  appear  to  have
used,  or  even  to  have  been  acquainted,  with  this  invaluable
contract.'  It  was  equally  a  stranger  to  the  early  maritime
codes  compiled  on  the  revival  of  arts,  learning,  and  commerce,
at  the  conclusion  of  the  middle  ages.  The  Consolaio  del
Mare^  the  laws  of  Oleron,  and  the  laws  of  the  Hanseatic
association,  were  all  silent  upon  the  subject  of  the  contract  of
insurance.  The  first  allusion  to  it  is  said  to  have  been  made
in  the  latter  part  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  where  we
should  not,  at  that  early  age,  have  first  expected  to  find  it :
in  the  laws  of  Wisbuy,  compiled  in  the  Teutonic  language,
on  the  bleak  shores  of  an  island  in  the  middle  of  the  Baltic
sea.* It  is  so  necessary  a  contract,  that  Yalin  concludes.


a  Bjnkershoeck  &Dd  Emerigfon  both  agree,  that  the  contract  of  io-
sa ranee  was  not  to  be  found  in  the  Roman  law,  though  some  traces  of
it  have  been  supposed  to  be  perceived  in  the  Roman  history.  Bynk*
Quasi.  J.  Pub,  lib.  1,c.  91. Emerigon^  det  Ait.  Pref.

b  The  allusion  to  marine  insurance  in  art.  66,  of  the  Imu>»  nf  WU-


344  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Ptot  \.

maritime  commerce  cannot  well  be  sustained  without  it,  tar
no  prudent  ship-owner  would  be  willing  to  risk  his  own  fix--
tune,  and  that  of  others,  on  an  unprotected  adventure  at  sea.
The  business  of  uncovered  navigation  or  trade,  would  be  spi-
ritless or  presumptuous. The  contract  of  insurance  protects,
enlarges,  and  stimulates  maritime  commerce  ;  and  under  its
patronage,  and  with  the  stable  security  which  it  affoitki,  com-
merce is  conducted  with  immense  means,  and  unparalleled
enterprise  over  every  sea,  and  to  the  shores  of  every  country,
civilized  and  barbarous. Insurers  are  societies  of  capitalists,
who  are  called  by  their  business  to  study,  with  profound  sa-
gacity, and  with  exactness  of  calculation,  the  geography  and
navigation  of  the  globe,  the  laws  of  the  elements,  the  ordi-
nances of  trade,  the  principles  of  international  law,  and  the
customs,  products,  character,  and  institutions  of  every  coun-


huy,  IB  10  obicare  or  eqniTocal,  that  the  most  celebrated  jorists  bare
dUlerod  in  opioion,  as  to  the  origio  of  the  contract. CUirac,  io  bis
commentary  on  that  article  of  the  Laws  of  Wisbuy,  applies  it  directly
to  insurances ;  and  he  had  studied  that  compilation  thoroughly,  for  be
translated  it  into  French,  from  the  old  German,  or  T\tdesque  language,
in  which  the  code  had  been  preserved  to  bis  day. In  the  collection  of
Sea  LaufSf  published  at  London  under  Queen  Anne,  the  article,  as
translated,  applies  to  marine  insurance. Emerigon,  also,  in  the  pre-
face to  bis  treatise,  gives  that  construction  to  the  article,  and  he  and
Cleirac  are  great  authorities  on  the  point. On  the  other  hand,  Emeri-
gon  admits  that  Stypmaonu8,Gibalinus,An8aldu8  and  Casaregis,  would
not  allow  that  the  use  of  insurances  was  introduced  into  commerce
until  towards  the  fifteenth  century  ;  and  Fa/tn  intimates,  that  the  con-
tract of  insurance  came  from  the  Italians,  and  passed  from  them  to  the
Spaniards,  Dutch,  and  other  commercial  nations. Malynes^  as  early  as
1622,  traced  the  practice  of  insurance  from  Claudius  Caesar  to  the  in-
habitants of  Oleron,  and  then  to  Antwerp  and  London. Cleirac's  Um
Ui  et  Coulumei  de  la  Mer.  p.  155. Jdalynes*  Lex  MercatoHa^  part  1 ,
105. Emerigofiy  Traiti  det  Au.  Pref, Valih's  Com.  tom.  ii.  27.
Bynkershoeck  said,  he  had  no  evidence  that  the  contract  of  insu-
rance was  in  use  in  Holland  in  the  fifteenth  century,  though  he  found
it  to  have  been  in  established  use  by  the  middle  of  the  following  centu-
ry. Quasst,  J.  Priv,  lib.  4,  cb.  1.


L««.  XLVIIL] OF  PERSONiLL  PROPERTY.  345

try,  where  tide  waters  rdl,  or  to  which  winds  can  waft  the
flag  of  their  nation."

Many  of  the  states  and  great  commercial  cities  of  Europe,
in  the  early  periods  of  modern  history,  made  and  published
ordinances  relating  to  insurance,  and  most  of  them  have  been
c<dlected  in  Mctgen^a  Essay  on  Insurance^  published  in
1766.  The  most  important  of  these  compilations,  were  the
ordinances  of  Barcelona,  Bilboa,  Florence,  Genoa,  Antwerp,
Rotterdam,  Amsterdam,  Copenhagen,  Stockholm,  and  Ko-
ningsberg,  as  well  as  royal  ordinances  of  the  kings  of  France,
Spain,  and  Portugal.  They  are  authentic  memorials  of  the
prosperity  of  commerce,  and  evidence  of  the  early  usages  in
respect  to  a  contract  governed  by  general  principles  of  policy
and  justice.  We  may  also  refer  to  the  decisions  of  the  Rota
of  Genoa,  (of  whioh  so  much  use  is  made  by  Roccus,)  to  show
how  early  and  extensively  insurance  questions  became  a
source  of  litigation  and  topic  of  discussion  in  the  courts  of


a  The  French  lawyers  have  described  the  contract  of  iniurance  in
strong  and  eloquent  langnage.  C'etl  uiu  apeee  de  jtUy  said  Emerigon,
tralj  and  gravely  ;  qyi  €xige  btauanqt  de  prudence  de  te  part  de  eeux
qui  9*y  admwunt.  li  faui  faire  Vanalyse  det  hoMardSf  et  peeteder  la  tet-
enee  du  ealeui  dee  probabiUtieM  ;  prhfoir  Us  eeueiU  de  la  mer,  et  eeux  de
la  mauoaitefoi  ;  ne  pas  perdre  de  vue  les  cos  insolUes  et  extraordinaires ;
eombiner  le  tout^  le  comparer  a»ee  le  taux  des  primes^  et  Juger  qtul  sera
le  resuUat  de  (^ensemble.  Bat  the  French  connMlIors  of  etate,  McMrs.
Corretto,  BAgoaen«  and  Maret,  in  their  report  to  the  legialative  body,
on  the  8th  September,  1807,  declared,  that  Ce  beau  cantrat  est  le  noble
produii  du  genie  de  Vhomme^  et  le  premier  garant  du  commerce  maritime.
It  a  consuUe  les  saisons ;  ila  porte  ses  regards  sur  la  mer  ;  U  a  inierroge
ce  terrible  element ;  ilena  Juge  Vineonstanee  j  il  en  apresenH  Us  orages ;
it  a  epie  la  politique  ;  ila  ruonnu  les  portes  et  les  chits  des  deux  mondes ;
il  a  tout  soumis  a  des  cdUuls  saoans^  a  des  theories  approximatufcs^  et  il  a
dii  au  eommercani  habile  ;  au  navigateur  intrepide  :  certes  U  y  a  des  de-
sastres  eur  lesquels  Phumanite  ne  peut  que  gemir ;  mais  quant  a  voire
fortune  aUe«,  franoissee  Us  merSf  deployea  voire  activite  et  votre  industrie  :
Je  me  charge  de  vos  risques.

Vol.  in.  44


346  OF  PERSONAL  P^^ERTY.  [Part  V.

justice.*  Bui  without  dwelling  upon  these  historical  viewsy  my
object  at  the  close  of  this  lecture  is,  merely  to  direct  tlie  aUea-
tion  of  the  student  to  the  character  and  value  of  the  mort
distinguished  works,  which  have  elevated  and  adorned  this
branch  of  the  law.

The  earliest  work  extant  on  insurance,  is  the  celebrated
French  treatise  entitled  Le  Chiidon.  It  was  digested  and
prepared  some  centuries  ago,  by  a  person  whose  name  is  un-
known, for  the  use  of  the  merchants  of  Rouen.  It  was  pul  -
lished  by  Cleirac  in  1671,  in  his  collection  entitled  Ltes  Us
et  Coutumes  de  la  Mer  ;  but  it  was  a  production  of  a  much
earlier  date,  and  it  contains  decisive  evidence  that  the  laiA  of
insurance  had  become,  in  the  sixteenth  century^  a  regular
science.  Emerigon  viewed  it  as  containing  the  true  princi-
ples of  nautical  jurisprudence,  and  was  valuable  for  its  wis-
dom, and  for  the  great  number  of  principles  and  decisions
which  it  contained  ;  and  when  Cleirac  gave  to  the  world  his
revised  and  corrected  edition  of  the  T^  Guidon^  he  regretted
that  he  was  not  able  to  rescue  from  oblivion  the  name  of  an
author  who  had  conferred  signal  honour  on  his  country^  by
the  merit  and  soUdity  of  his  production,  though  it  wanted  the
taste  and  elegance  of  later  ages.^

The  treatise  of  Roccus  on  insurance,  has  been  universally
regarded  as  a  text  book  of  great  authority.  He  was  an  emi-
nent civiUan  and  judge  at  Naples,  and  published  his  work
in  1656  ;  and  Mr.  Ingersoll,  the  American  translator,  per-
ceives an  analogy  between  the  treatises  of  Roccus  and  Lit-
tleton's tenures.  That  analogy  does  truly  exist  in  the  sound
logic,  admirable  precision,  and  vast  power  of  compression.


a  Tbofle  decisions,  under  the  title  of  Decinones  RoUz  Genua  deJUer-
cMturay  are  contained  in  the  roluminous  compilation,  which  includes
the  works  of  Santema  and  of  Straccha,  and- was  published  at.  Amster-
dam in  1669.  Tbe^  amount  to  215  decisions,  and  many  of  them  relate
to  insurance  questions,  and  they  settled  principles  which  govern  at  this
day.

b  Chirac's  pref.  to  Le  Chiidon,


L.«€.  XLVIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  347

which  are  displayed  throughout  bis  works. He  made  free
use  of  the  treatises  of  Santerna  and  Straccha  on  insurance
law,  and  gave  authority  to  those  very  creditable  productions
of  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century.' Bynkershoeck
has  devoted  the  fourth  book  of  his  QtuBstianes  Juris  Pri-
vaii  to  the  contract  of  insurance. It  constitutes  a  large  trea-
tise, which  discusses,  with  his  usual  freedom  of  thought  and
expression,  almost  every  important  branch  of  the  law  of  ma-
rine insurance. His  work,  which  occasionally  refers  to  the
Roman  law,  is  almost  entirely  grounded  on  Dutch  edicts,
and  judicial  decisions  in  the  courts  of  Holland. It  is  essen-
tially a  collection  of  reports  of  cases  adjudged  in  the  Dutch
courts,  and  I  do  not  perceive  that  he  ever  refers  to  the  deci-
sions of  the  Rota  of  Genoa,  or  to  the  writings  of  Santerna,
Straccha,  or  Roccus,  which  were  before  his  eyes. Such  re-
serve, or  proud  disdain  of  foreign  illustration  and  aid,  detracts
greatly  from  the  scientific  character  and  liberal  temper  of
the  work. But  we  proceed  to  the  mention  of  authors,  by
whose  learned  labours  the  utility  of  all  preceding  treatises
on  insurance  was  superseded,  and  their  feme  and  lustre
eclipsed.


o  The  treatise  of  Santerna^  a  Portuguese  lawyer,  De  Attecuraiioni'
bui  et  Spomionibus  Mereatorum,  and  the  larger  aud  later  work  of
Straccha  of  Ancona,  De  AuecunUionibtu,  equally  abound  in  refer-
ences throughout  the  body  of  their  works,  to  the  ciyil  taw  and  the  early
cirilians.  The  latter  is  essentially  the  groundwork  of  the  treatises  of
Roccus,  and  yet  both  Straccha  and  Santerna  are  rudely  termed,  by
Bynkershoeck,  semi-barbarous  writers,  though  they  were  familiar  not
only  with  the  Roman  law,  but  with  the  Roman  classics.  Etnerigon
and  y^aUn  make  free  use  of  the  works  of  these  authors,  as  they  do  also
of  the  commercial  discourses  of  CcuaregU.j  who  is,  without  contradic-
tion, as  Valin  says,  {Com,  sur  Ord.  Pref,)  the  best  of  all  the  writers
whom  he  had  enumerated,  and  he  had  already  mentioned  Cleirac,  Strac-
cha, Stypmannus,  Loccenius,  Kuricke,  Peckius,  Vinnius,  and  Wey-
sten.  Casaregii  has  also  received  the  highest  and  warmest  eulogy
from  the  learned  and  eloquent  author  of  the  article  No.  15,  in  the  JVbr/yi
American  Review,  vol.  7,  p.  323.


348 OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  T.

Yalin'fl  copious  commentary  upon  that  port  of  die  oidi-
nance  of  Louis  XIY.  which  relates  to  insurance,  is
of  great  attention,  and  it  has  uniformly  and  every  where
ceived  the  tribute  of  the  highest  respect,  for  the  good
sound  learning,  and  weight  of  character,  which  are  attached
to  his  luminous  reflections. Pothier's  essay  on  insurance  is
a  concise,  perspicuous,  accurate,  and  admirable  elementary
digest  of  the  principles  of  insurance,  and  it  contains  the  fun-
damental doctrines  and  universal  law  of  the  contract. Bat
the  treatise  of  Emerigon  very  far  surpasses  all  preceding
works,  in  the  extent,  value,  and  practical  application  of  his  prin-
ciples. It  is  the  most  didactic,  learned,  and  finished  production
extant  on  the  subject. He  professedly  carried  his  researches
into  the  antiquities  of  the  maritime  law,  and  illustrated  the
ordinances  by  what  he  terms  the  jurisprudence  of  the  tribu-
nals ;  and  he  discussed  all  incidental  questions,  so  as  to  bring
within  the  compass  of  his  work  a  great  portion  of  interna-
tional and  commercial  law,  connected  with  the  doctrines  of
insurance. In  the  language  of  Lord  Tenterden,  no  subject
in  Emerigon  is  discussed  without  being  exhausted,  and  the
eulogy  is  as  just  as  it  is  splendid. Emerigon  was  a  pmctical
man,  who  united  exact  knowled^re  of  the  details  of  business
with  manly  sense  and  consummate  erudition. He  was  a
practising  lawyer  at  Marseilles,  for  perhaps  forty  years,  and
the  purity  of  his  private  life  corresponded  with  the  excellence
of  his  public  chamcter. Yalin  acknowledges  that  he  owed
some  of  the  best  parts  of  his  work  to  the  genius  and  industry
of  that  eminent  civilian,  who  gratuitously  pressed  upon  him,
wilh  a  cordiality  and  disinterestedness  almost  without  exam-
ple, a  rich  collection  of  materials,  consisting  of  decisions  and
authorities,  suitable  to  illustrate  and  adorn  the  jurisprudence
of  the  commentary. It  would  be  difficult  to  peruse  the  testi-
mony which  Yalin  has  so  frankly  borne  to  the  moral  as  well
as  literary  and  professional  accomplishments  of  Emerigon,
without  being  sensibly  touched  with  the  generosity  of  the
friendship  of  those  illustrious  men.


Lm.  ILVIII.] of  personal  property.  349

Since  the  renovatioQ  of  the  marine  ordinance  of  Louis
XIV.,  in  the  shape  of  the  commercial  code  of  France  of  1807,
there  his  arisen  a  host  of  commentators,  such  as  the  Baron
Locre,  Pardessus,  Laporte,  Delvincourt,  Toullicr,  and  Boulay
Paty,  of  various  and  unequal  merit.  TouUier,  though  ahready
quite  voluminous,  has  not  as  yet  touched  on  the  commer-
cial code.  On  the  law  of  insurance,  I  would  select  and  re-
commend Boulay  Paty,  as  the  latest  and  best  writer.  He
has  explained  and  illustrated  every  part  of  the  code,  but  de-
voted nearly  half  of  his  voluminous  work  to  the  single  head
of  insurance,  and  he  has  treated  the  subject  very  much  in  the
style  of  Emerigon.  He  has  trodden  in  his  footsteps,  adopted
his  copious  learning,  applied  his  principles  with  just  discrimi-
nation, and  given  us  a  complete  treatise  on  every  branch  of
insurance,  according  to  the  order,  and  under  the  correction  of
the  new  code.

The  first  notice  of  the  contract  of  insurance  that  appears
in  the  English  reports,  is  a  case  cited  in  Coke's  Reports,'  and
decided  in  the  31st  of  Elizabeth  ;  and  the  commercial  spirit
of  that  age  gave  birth  to  the  statute  of  43d  Elizabeth,  passed
to  give  facility  to  the  contract  But  the  law  of  insurance
received  very  little  study  and  cultivation  for  ages  afterwards ;
and  Mr.  Park  informs  us  that  there  were  not  forty  cases
upon  matters  of  insurance  prior  to  the  year  1756,  and  even
those  cases  were  generally  loose  nisi  prius  notes,  containing
very  little  information  or  claim  to  authority.  From  that  time
forward,  the  decisions  of  the  English  courts  on  insurance
assumed  new  spirit  and  vigour,  and  they  deserve  to  be  stu-
died with  the  utmost  application.  When  Sir  William  Black-
stone  published  the  second  volume  of  his  Commentaries,  Lord
Mansfield  had  presided  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  for
nearly  ten  years,  and  in  that  short  space  of  time  the  learning
relating  to  marine  insurance  had  been  so  rapidly  and  so  ex-
tensively cultivated,  that  he  concluded  that  if  the  principl


a  6  Coke*i  lUp.  ATI.  h.


360  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

settled  were  well  and  judiciously  collected,  they  would  form
a  very  complete  title  in  the  code  of  commercial  jurisprudence.
Mr.  Park  (now  a  judge  of  the  Court  of  King's  Bench)  took
the  suggestion,  and  published  his  System  of  the  Law  of
Marine  Itisurances  in  1786,  and  he  had  the  advantage  of
the  labours  of  the  whole  period  of  Lord  Mansfield's  judi-
cial life  ;  and  the  decisions  are  collected  and  digested  with
great  copiousness,  erudition,  and  accuracy.  He  extracted
all  that  was  valuable  from  the  compilations  of  Malynes,
MoUoy,  Magens,  Beawes,  and  Weskett  -,  and  he  had  the
good  sense  and  Uberality  to  enrich  his  work  with  the  ma-
terials of  those  vast  and  venerable  repositories  of  commer-
cial learning,  the  Le  Cbxidon^  the  foreign  ordinances,  and
the  writings  of  Roccus,  Bynkershoeck,  Yalin,  Pothier,  and
Emerigon.

About  the  time  that  Park  published  his  treatise,  the  Ele-
ments of  the  Law  relating  to  Insurances^  by  Mr.  Miller,  a
Scotch  advocate,  appeared  at  Edinburgh.  He  evidently  com-
piled his  work  without  any  knowledge  of  the  contemporary
publication  of  Mr.  Park  ;  and  though  the  English  cases  are
not  so  extensively  cited  and  examined  by  him,  he  supplied
the  deficiency  by  a  digest  of  cases  in  Scotland  ;  and  he  ap-
pears to  have  been  equally  familiar  with  the  continental
civilians,  and  to  have  discussed  the  principles  of  insurance
with  uncommon  judgment  and  freedom  of  inquiry.  Since
the  publication  of  Miller's  treatise,  no  work  appeared  in  Scot-
land on  the  subject  of  insurance,  until  Mr.  Bell  took  a  concise
view  of  that,  as  well  as  of  otiier  maritime  contracts,  in  his
very  valuable  Commentaries  ;  and  he  states  that  since  the
period  of  1787,  the  mercantile  law  of  Scotland  has  been  ma-
king rapid  strides  towards  maturity.

The  treatise  of  Park  had  passed  through  five  editions,
when  Mr.  Marshall  published,  in  1802,  his  TVeatise  on  the
Law  of  Insurance.  It  contains  a  free  and  liberal  discussion
of  principles,  and  it  is  more  didactic  and  elementary  in  its
instruction  than  the  work  of  his  predecessor,  but  it  abounds


Lee.  XL VIII.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  351

with  citations  of  the  same  cases  at  Westminster^  and  a  refer-
ence to  the  same  learned  authors  in  France  and  Italy.  Mr.
Park  is  entitled  to  the  superior  and  lasting  merit  of  being  the
artist  who  first  reduced  the  English  law  of  insurance  to  die
beauty  and  order  of  a  regular  sciencej  and  shed  upon  it  the
rays  of  foreign  genius  and  learning.  The  American  edition
of  Marshal],  by  Mr.  Condy,  is  greatly  to  be  preferred  to  any
other  edition,  and  even  that  improved  work  is  now  in  a  con-
siderable degree  superseded  by  Mr.  Phillips'  Treatise  on  the
Law  of  Insurance,  published  at  Boston,  in  1823.  This  au-
thor has  very  diligently  collected  and  ingrafted  into  his  work
the  substance  of  all  the  American  cases  and  decisions  on  insu-
rance, which  had  been  accumulating  for  a  great  number  of
years.  In  that  view  it  is  an  original  work  of  much  labour,
discrimination,  and  judgment,  and  of  indispensable  utility  to
the  profession  in  this  country.^

The  treatise  of  Mr.  Benecke  on  the  Principles  of  Indem-
nity in  Marine  Insiarance,  may  be  considered  as  an  original
work  of  superior  merit,  written  by  a  business  man,  on  the
most  useful  and  practical  part  of  the  law  of  insurance.  It
contains  great  research,  clear  analysis,  strong  reasoning,  and
an  accurate  application  of  principles,  and  was  intended  for
the  use  of  jlhe  merchant  and  ship-owner,  as  well  as  of  the
practising  lawyer.  The  work  was  the  result  of  many  years'
study,  researches,  and  experience  ;  and  the  public  expecta-
tion of  its  value,  firom  the  well  known  character  and  ability  of


a  In  1838  a  new  Treatise  on  the  Law  relating  to  Inmrancey  by  Da-
vid Hughes,  Esq.  of  the  inner  temple,  was  published  at  London.  It
goes  over  the  same  ground  already  fully  and  sufficiently  occupied  by
bis  two  eminent  predecessors,  Park  and  Marshall ;  and  with  very
scanty  reference  to  any  foreign  authorities,  it  cites  all  the  modem  Eng-
lish cases.  It  is  a  plain,  methodical,  and  correct  treatise,  and  must  be
valuable  to  an  English  lawyer,  so  far  as  it  has  incorporated  into  the
work  the  substance  qfthe  recent  decisions  not  to  be  found  in  the  former
works. Beyond  that  information,  the  treatise  is  entirely  superfluous.


3»2  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

the  authofi  had  been  highly  raiaed^  a  long  time  before  the
puUicatioD.'


•  The  treatise  of  Mr.  Beoecke  was  published  in  1824,  and  yet  io
Jaoobsen's  work  on  the  Law9  of  ikt  8ea^  publisbed  at  Altona,  in  1814,
be  speaks  of  this  treatise,  by  its  title,  as  hang  in  preparation  by  a
ierband.


LECTUUE  XLIX.


OF MARITIME LOANS.


The  contracts  of  bottomry  and  respondeiUia  are  mari
time  loans  of  a  very  high  and  privileged  nature,  and  tbey
are  always  upheld  by  the  Admiralty  with  a  strong  hand,
when  entered  into  bo^ia  fide^  and  without  any  suspicion  of
fraud.  The  principle  on  which  tbey  are  founded  and  sup-
ported is  of  great  antiquity,  and  penetrates  so  deeply  into  it,
that  Emerigon  says  its  origin  cannot  be  traced.  It  was  bor ,
rowed  by  the  Romans  from  the  laws  of  the  ancient  Bbodians,
and  it  is  deeply  radicated  in  the  general  maritime  law  of  Eu-
rope,  from  which  it  has  been  transplanted  into  the  law  of
this  country.  The  object  of  hypothecation  bonds  is  to  pro-
cure the  necessary  supplies  for  ships  which  happen  to  be  in
distress  in  foreign  ports,  where  the  master  and  owners  are
without  credit,  and  in  cases  in  which,  if  assistance  could  not
be  procured  by  means  of  such  instruments,  the  vessels  and
their  cargoes  must  be  left  to  perish.  The  authority  of  the
master  to  hypothecate  the  ship  and  freight,  and  even  the
cargo,  in  a  case  of  necessity,  is  indisputable."  The  vital
principle  of  a  bottomry  bond  is,  that  it  be  taken  in  a  case  of
unprovided  necessity,  where  the  owner  has  no  resources  or
credit  for  obtaining  necessary  supplies.  If  the  lender  knew
that  the  owner  had  an  empowered  consignee  or  agent  in  the
port,  willing  to  supply  his  wants,  the  taking  the  bond  is  a
fraud  ;  but  if  fairly  taken  under  an  ignorance  of  the  fact,  the


a  Vide  mpra^  p.  173.

Vol.  in.  46


354  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

courts  of  admiralty  are  disposed  to  uphold  sucb  bonds,  as  ne-
cessary for  the  support  of  commerce  in  its  extremities  of  dis-
tress.'* And  if  the  lender  of  money  on  a  bottomry  or  respon-
dentia bond,  be  willing  to  stake  the  money  upon  the  safe
arrival  of  the  ship  or  cargo,  and  to  take  upon  himself,  like
an  insurer,  the  risk  of  sea  perils,  it  is  lawful,  reasonable  and
just,  that  he  should  be  authorized  to  demand  and  receive  an
extraordinary  interest  to  be  agreed  on,  and  which  the  lender
shall  deem  commensurate  to  the  hazard  he  runs.*

A  bottomry  bond  is  a  loan  upon  the  ship  and  freight,  and
is  in  the  nature  of  a  mortgage,  by  which  the  ship-owner,  or
the  master  on  his  behalf,  pledges  the  ship  as  a  security  for
the  money  borrowed,  and  it  covers  the  whole  freight  of  the
voyage,  from  the  port  of  departure  to  the  port  of  destination.
A  respondentia  bond  is  a  loan  upon  the  pledge  of  the  cargo,
though  an  hypothecation  of  both  ship  and  cargo  may  be
made  in  one  instrument ;  and,  generally,  it  is  only  a  personal
obligation  on  the  borrower,  and  is  not  a  specific  Hen  on  the
goods,  unless  there  be  an  express  stipulation  to  that  effect  in
the  bond ;  and  it  amounts,  at  most,  to  an  equitable  lien  on
the  salvage,  in  case  of  loss.^ The  condition  of  the  loan  is


a  The  Nelson,  1  Hogg.  Adm.  Rep.  169.

h  Dig.^1,^.  Denaulicofcenore.  CoJe,4.33.  Ibid.  Emerigm^
h.  t.  cb.  1 ,  sec.  1 ,  has  collected  all  that  the  Roman  law  had  said  on  the
sabject.  The  speeches  of  Demoslhenes  against  Zenothemis,  Apatn-
rius,  Pborroio,  Lacritus,  and  Dioojsodoras,  relate  to  the /centit  natilt-
cum  of  the  Roman  law,  or  the  bottomry  contract  of  the  modern  com*
mercial  nations.  See,  in  the  American  Juruiy  No.  6,  p.  248,  an  nc*
count  of  maritime  loans  at  ancient  Athens,  by  the  learned  Aoc^ostut
Boekh,  Greek  Lecturer  and  Professor  at  the  University  of  Beriia«  Tbt
goods  were  generally,  and  sometimes  the  vessel  was  pledged  for  the
security  of  the  loan  with  maritime  interest.  See  also  Lord  Stowell,  in
the  case  of  The  Alexander,  1  Dodton^t  Adm.  Rep.  278.  The  Angus*
ta,  ibid.  283. The  Hero,  2  ibid.  139.

c  2  Blacks.  Cam,  459.  Busk  v.  Fearon,  4  EasV*  Rep.  319.  Ac-
cording to  Emerigorif  vol.  ii.  476.  661,  the  respondentia  lender  has  a
on  the  cargo  of  the  borrower  on  board  ;  and  if  the  loan  be  for  the


Lee.  XUX.] OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  356

the  safe  arrival  of  the  subject  hypothecated,  and  the  entire
principal  as  well  as  interest  is  at  the  risk  of  the  lender  during
the  voyage.  The  money  is  loaned  to  the  borrower,  upon
condition  that  if  the  subject  pledged  be  lost,  by  a  peril  of  the
sea,  the  lender  shall  not  be  repaid,  except  to  the  extent  of
what  remains  ;  and  if  the  subject  arrives  safe,  or  if  it  shall
not  have  been  injured,  except  by  its  own  defect,  or  the  fault
of  the  master  or  mariners,  the  borrower  must  return  the  sum
borrowed,  together  with  the  maritime  interest  agreed  on,  and
for  the  repayment,  the  person  of  the  borrower  is  bound,  as
weU  as  the  property  pledged.  This  is  the  definition  of  the
contract  given  by  Pothier ;'  and  it  was  taken  from  the  Ro-
man laws,  and  has  been  adopted  by  Emerigon,  and  be  says
the  definition  is  given  in  nearly  the  same  terms  by  all  the
maritime  jurists,^

Money  may  also  be  lawfully  loaned  at  any  rate  of  interest,
upon  the  mere  hazard  of  a  specific  voyage,  to  be  mentioned
in  the  contract,  without  any  security  either  upon  the  ship  or
carga  But  this  last  species  of  maritime  loan,  depending
upon  the  event  of  the  voyage,  has  a  tendency  to  introduce
wagering  and  usurious  contracts,  and  it  has  been  restrained
in  England,  by  the  statute  of  19  Geo.  II.  c.  37,  as  to  East
India  voyages.  If  the  borrower  has  no  effects  on  board,  or,
having  some,  he  borrows  much  beyond  their  value,  it  will
afibrd  a  strong  ground  to  suspect  fraud,  and  that  the  voyage
will  have  an  unfortunate  end.^  Such  loans  were  entirely
suppressed  in  France,  by  the  marine  ordinance  of  1681.
They  were  considered  to  be  wagers,  in  the  form  of  bottomry
contracts  ;  and  it  was  declared  that,  in  case  of  loss,  the  bor-
rower upon  goods  should  not  be  discharged  without  proving


outward  and  homeward  Toyage,  the  lien  affects  the  retarn  carg^o,  beiog^
the  proceeds  of  the  outward  cargo. But  this  is  not  the  English  law.

a  CotUrat  a  la  groue,  n.  1 .

b  Emerigon^  TraUi  d€»  Controls  a  la  groue^  ch.  1 ,  sec.  ?.

c  Ouaregit^  dts.  62,  n.  7. Cruidony  ch.  19,  sec.  10.


366  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

that  he  had  goods  od  board  at  the  time  of  the  loss,  on  fak
own  account,  to  the  amount  of  the  sum  lent.*  The  same
prohibition  was  continued  in  the  commercial  code,  and  the
loan  on  bottomry,  or  at  respondentia,  is  valid  to  the  extent
only  of  the  value  of  the  subject  matter  on  which  the  loan  is
effected.^  Sergeant  Marshall  says,""  that  there  is  no  common
law  decision  that  sanctions  such  a  loan,  and  he  considers  it
to  be  a  gambling  contract.  The  weight  of  authority  is,
however,  in  favour  of  the  validity  of  these  maritime  loans,
where  nothing  is  hypothecated.''  The  lender  runs  the  risk
of  the  voyage,  and  receives  extraordinary  interest  by  way  of
compensation.  The  contract  is  not  usurious,  for  the  princi-
pal loaned  is  put  at  risk/

The  general  rule  is,  that  the  power  of  tlie  master  to  take
up  money  upon  bottomry  or  respondentia,  exists  only  after
the  voyage  has  commenced,  and  is  to  be  exercised  in  some
foreign  port  where  the  owner  does  not  reside/  But  it  is
not  indispensable  to  the  validity  of  an  hypothecation  bond,
that  the  ship  or  cargo  should  be  in  a  foreign  port.  The  law
does  not  look  to  the  mere  locality  of  the  transaction.  If
forced  into  a  port  of  the  same  country  in  which  the  owner
resides,  the  master  may  hypothecate  the  ship  and  cargo,  in
a  case  of  extreme  necessity,  and  when  he  had  no  opportu-
nity or  means,  or  it  was  extremely  difficult,  to  communicate
with  the  owners. Occasions  may  arise  in  which  the  diffe-


a  Ord.  de  la  JUar,  tit.  des  corUraU  a  grotH  aventurcy  art.  14.  Ibid*
art.  3.

b  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  317.

e  Candy's  Manhall,  vol.  ii.  746.

d  2  Blacks.  Com.  469. Jfolloy,  b.  2,  cb.  10,  sec.  13.

e  Soome  r.  Gleen,  1  Sid.  Rep.  27.  The  J^ew-York  Revised  Sta-
tuieSf  Tol.  i.  662,  declare  void  all  wager  contracts,  except  contracts
OD  bottomry  or  respondentia. See  supra,  Lee.  48.

/  Candy's  Marshall,  vol.  ii.  741,  b.  c.  Beade  v.  Com.  Ins.  Com-
pany, 3  Johns.  Rep.  360.  1  Emerigon^  torn.  ii.  424.  436.  Code  de
Commerce,  art  321 . Lister  v*  Baxter,  Sir,  Rep.  695.


Lee  XLJX.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  367

rent  [x>rts  of  the  same  country  may  be  as  much  separated
and  cut  off  from  all  communicatiou  with  eacli  other,  as  if
they  were  situated  in  distant  parts  of  the  globe/

There  is  great  analogy  between  the  contracts  of  bottomry
and  insurance.  They  are  frequently  governed  by  the  same
principles,  though  each  of  them  has  a  character  peculiar  to
itself.  They  contribute  in  diflerent  proportions  to  the  facility
aud  security  of  maritime  commerce ;  but  the  immense  capi-
tals now  engaged  in  every  branch  of  commerce,  and  the  ex-
tension of  marine  insurance,  has  Very  essentially  abridged
the  practice  of  such  loans.  The  master  cannot  hypothecate
for  a  pre-existing  debt,  and  the  necessity  of  the  loan  must  be
shown  to  have  existed  at  the  time  it  was  made,  and  that  the
master  had  no  other  means  of  raising  the  money  at  marine
interest ;  and  when  that  fact  is  established,  the  misapplica-
tion of  it  by  tlie  master,  without  the  knowledge  and  assent
of  the  lender,  will  not  afiect  its  validity.^  The  marine  in-
terest depends  entirely  upon  the  risk,  and  therefore  if  the  pro-
posed voyage  be  abandoned  before  the  risk  has  attached,  the
contract  is  turned  into  a  simple  and  absolute  loan  at  ordinary
legal  interest.  So,  if  the  borrower  had  not  goods  on  board
the  ship  to  the  value  of  the  sum  borrowed,  the  contract,  iu
case  of  loss,  is  reduced  in  proportion  to  the  diminished  value,
and  the  borrower  is  bound  at  all  events  to  return  the  surplus
of  the  sum  borrowed  with  the  ordinary  interest.  The  mari-
time interest  is  in  a  ratio  to  the  maritime  risk,  or  value  of  the
goods  shipped.^  After  the  voyage  has  commenced,  and  the
loan  has  been  for  a  moment  at  hazard,  though  the  vessel  be
shortly  forced  back,  by  the  perils  of  the  sea,  into  the  port  of
departure,  and  the  voyage  broken  up,  the  lender  is  entitled  to


a  La  Ysabel,  t  DotUon's  Rep.  273.

b  The  Jane,  1  Dodson't  Rep.  461.  Emerigon,  torn.  ii.  434.  Ilur-
ry  V.  The  Ship  John,  1  Wash.  Cir.  Rep.  293.

c  Emerigony  Traite  des  ContraU  a  la  groste,  cb.  6,  sec.  1.  Frank-
lio  Ins.  Company  v.  Lord,  4  Jdason,  248.


358  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Phrt  V.

his  principal,  with  the  marine  interest,  for  the  whole  had
been  put  at  hazard.' The  same  principle  of  necessity,  which
upholds  a  bottomry  bond,  entitles  a  bond  of  a  later  date,  fiiir-
ly  given  at  a  foreign  port,  under  a  pressure  of  necessity,  lo
priority  of  payment  over  one  of  a  fonner  date ;  notwithstand-
ing this  is  contrary  to  the  usual  rule  in  other  cases  of  securi-
ty/ The  equity  of  it  consists  in  this,  that  the  last  loan  fur-
nished the  means  of  preserving  the  ship,  and  without  it  the
former  lenders  would  entirely  have  lost  their  security,  and
therefore  it  supersedes  a  prior  mortgage  as  well  as  any  other
prior  lien.*^ The  bottomry  bond  is  also  to  be  paid  before  any
prior  insurance.' The  bottomry  bond  cannot  be  made  lo
cover  advances  made  upon  the  personal  security  of  the  bor-
rower, and  not  upon  the  exclusive  security  of  the  ship  ;  but
taking  bills  of  exchange  at  the  same  time,  by  way  of  col-
lateral security,  does  not  exclude  the  bottomry  bond,  nor  di-
minish its  solidity.'

The  perils  which  the  lender  on  bottomry  runs,  are  usually
specified  in  the  bond ;  and,  according  to  the  forms  in  com-
mon use,  they  are  essentially  the  same  as  those  against  which
the  underwriter,  in  a  policy  of  insurance,  undertakes  to  in-
demnify. By  the  French  law,  the  lender  can  insure  the  mo-
ney lent,  for  he  runs  the  risk  of  it.  He  can  insure  the  prin-
cipal, though  not  his  maritime  interest.^  The  respondentia
bonds  in  Philadelphia,  are  said  to  be  peculiar.  The  lender
is  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  salvage,  and  is  liable  for  general


a  Boolay  Paty,  Cours  de  DroU  Com.  torn.  iii.  74*76. 167—169.

6  The  Rbadamanthe»  1  Dodmm's  Rep,  204.  The  Betsey,  Mf.
S89.  The  Jerasalem,  2  Gallison't  Rep.  350.  Code  de  Commerce,
art  323.

e  The  Sloop  Mary,  1  Paine'e  Rep,  671.

d  Boulay  Paty,  (om.  iii.  228.  232.

e  The  AugusU,  1  Dodson's  Rep.  283. The  Jane,  i(i</.  461.

/  Chudon^  oh.  18,  sec.  2,  oote,  by  Cleirac.  Rocevs,  De  JVaotfrtuv
D.  51.  Falini  torn.  ii.  12.  Appleton  y.  Crowoinshield,  3  Jdasi.  Rep.
443. Code  de  Commerce^  art.  347.


I^c  XLIX.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 369

and  particular  average. They  extend  to  perils  by  fire,  ene-
mies, men  of  war,  or  any  other  casualties.' There  is  not,
in  respect  to  the  contract,  any  constructive  total  loss. No-
thing but  an  utter  annihilation  of  the  subject  hypothecated,
will  discharge  the  borrower  on  bottomry.* The  property
saved,  whatever  it  may  be  in  amount,  continues  subject  to  the
hypothecation. The  lender  can  look  only  to  what  is  saved ;
and  if  that  be  not  equal  to  the  value  of  the  loan,  the  lender
must  bear  the  loss  of  the  residue,  and  he  cannot  recover  tlie
deficiency  of  the  borrower. By  the  general  marine  law,  the
lender  on  bottomry  is  entitled  to  be  paid  out  of  the  effects
saved,  so  far  as  those  effects  go,  if  the  voyage  be  disastrous.*
The  position  laid  down  by  Lord  Mansfield,  and  afterwards
by  Lord  Kenyon,'  that  the  lender  on  bottomry  or  responden-
tia was  not  liable  to  contribute,  in  case  of  a  general  average,
has  been  much  and  justly  questioned  in  the  elementary
works.' It  is  contrary  to  the  maritime  law  of  France,  and  of
other  parts  of  Europe,  and  in  Louisiana  we  have  a  decision


a  losaraoce  CocnpaDy  of  PeDDsylvania  v.  Du?al,  8  Serg.  4r  RowU^
138.  By  the  Code  de  Commerce ,  art.  330,  the  lender,  on  bottomry,
and  at  respondentia,  is  also  cbarg^eable  for  general  and  for  particular
average.

b  Thompson  r.  The  Royal  Exchange  Assurance  Company,  1  Maule
4r  Selw.  30.

c  Parker,  J.,  and  Sewall,  J.,  in  Appleton  ▼.  Crowniosbield,  3  JUass,
Rep.  443.  Wilmer  t.  Smilax,  2  Petere*  Adm.  Rep,  295,  note.  Fa-
im'j  Com.  torn,  ti  12.  Code  de  Commerce,  art.  327.  Magens  on  Imu"
ranee,  toI.  ii.  52.  56.  196—198.  430.  Emerson,  torn.  ii.  544.  547.
Phillip*  on  Ifuvrance,  301 .

d  Joyce  v.  Williamson,  and  Walpole  r.  Ewer. — Park  on  Ins,  6th
edit.  563.  565.  In  the  former  case,  Lord  Mansfield  declared  it  to  be
a  clear  point,  that  by  the  law  of  England  there  was  neither  average  nor
salvage  upon  a  bottomry  t>ond.  This  must  be  understood  with  the  ex-
ception In  the  statute  of  19  Geo.  II.  c.  37^  which  on  East  India  risks
allows  the  benefit  of  salvage  to  the  lender  on  bottomry  or  at  respon-
dentia.

«  See  Condyle  JdanhM,  rol.  ii.  760, 761.  PhUlipi  on  Imuraneef
901, 302.


J6U OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Put  T.

u^iiiM  it.' The  new  French  law,  eootrarr  lo  tbe  otdiiiaiice
id  1681,  chturges  ihe  lender  with  einiple  average,  on  paitkl
locpcw,  unle80  there  be  a  pomtive  stipulatioD  to  the  oontiar; :
but  0uch  a  rtipulationy  to  exempt  him  from  gross  or  general
average,  would  be  void,  and  contrary  to  natural  equity.*  Tlie
reasoning  of  Emerigon  is  conclusive  in  iavour  of  die  i^ght
of  making  the  lender  chargeable  wiifa  his  equitable  propor-
tion of  an  average  contribution. If  he  owes  the  preserva-
tion of  his  money  lent,  to  the  sacrifice  made  by  ocfaers  for
the  preservation  of  the  ship  and  cargo,  why  should  be  not
contribute  towards  a  jettison,  ransom,  or  composition,  made
for  the  common  safety  ?  If  no  such  sacrifice  had  been  inade,
he  would  have  lost  his  entire  loan,  by  the  rapacity  of  pirates,
or  the  violence  of  the  storm.

If  the  ship  or  cargo  be  lost,  not  by  the  perils  of  the  sea,
but  by  the  default  of  the  borrower  or  master,  the  hypotbeca-
tion  bond  is  forfeited,  and  must  be  paid. Tbe  lender,  who
IB)  in  eflfoct,  an  insurer,  does  not,  as  in  ordinary  cases  of  insu-
rancO|  assume  Uie  risk  of  barratry,  or  loss  by  tbe  fraud  or
nu^ouduct  of  the  borrower  or  his  agents.' And  the  doctrine
of  dtaworthine^s,  deviation,  and  the  necessity  of  diligence
ami  iH^rrtvt  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  borrower,  are  equally
ai^jK'Ablo  to  this  contract,  as  to  that  of  insurance. Theien-
\\^  is  nut  to  bear  losses  proceeding  from  tbe  want  of  seawor-
lliiuftus  ^  fi^o'^  unjustifiable  deviation,  or  from  the  fault  of
\h^  borrower,  or  the  inherent  infirmity  of  the  ctirgo. Nor
\i\¥t>»  ho  run  the  risk  of  the  goods  shipped  en  board  another
Hliip  witliout  necessity.'


m  Chandler  v.  G«rnier,  18  .Varftn,  599.

k  Ord.  dt  ia  JUar.  b.  t.  aH.  16.  C^dt^  art.  330.  Emerigon^  Traiii
dn  C0nirdU  m  /«^^aM<«  ch.  7,  tec.  1.

f  Bt€U9^  7>«  A«»jfr«(,  D.  51.  Western  r.  Wildy,  Skitmer^  152.
CW.  d9  Is  JIfar.  lit.  CeiiiraCt «  im  grtity  art.  12.  Emerigon^  torn.  ii.
kW^^  5 1 1. C$d0  d€  ConMeiTf,  aH.  326.

d  l\iMiV*«  JimrtlUM,  ?ol.  ik  7S3--756.  Bov/ny  Pafyy  torn.  iii.  158
. XtA.  I7I--I76. ih%d.  192.


I-6«.  XLIX.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 361

These  maritime  loans  may  be  safely  effected  in  a  fair  and
proper  case,  as  we  have  already  seen,  at  the  port  of  destina-
tion, as  weU  as  at  any  other  foreign  port."*  So,  the  con-
signee of  the  cargo,  and  even  the  agent  of  the  owner  of  the
ship,  under  special  circumstances,  may  take  a  bottomry  bond,
by  way  of  security  for  advances  ma(]e  by  him.*  The  owner
himself  may  also  execute  a  bottomry  bond  abroad,  and  it
will  be  enforced  in  our  American  Admiralty  Courts,  which
have  undoubted  jurisdiction  over  such  contracts,  though  exe-
cuted  on  land  and  under  seal.""

It  has  been  made  a  question,  whether  a  loan  on  bottomry
or  respondentia  be  good,  if  the  ship  or  goods  be  already  at
sea  when  it  is  effected,  inasmuch  as  the  motives  to  the  loan
are  supposed  to  have  ceased  after  the  ship's  departure.  Va-
lin  is  in  favour  of  the  validity  of  the  loan,  and  he  considers
that  the  presumption  is,  either  that  the  money  has  been  use-
fully employed  in  the  things  put  at  risk,  or  in  paying  what
was  due  on  that  account ;  and  this  reasoning  is  deemed  so-
lid by  MarshaU,  notwithstanding  it  stands  opposed  to  the
high  authority  of  Emerigon.'  It  has,  likewise,  been  recent-
ly sanctioned  by  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States,  who  have  adjudged  that  it  is  not  necessary
that  a  respondentia  loan  should  be  made  before  the  departure
of  the  ship  on  the  voyage,  and  that  it  may  be  made  after  the
gbods  are  at  risk.  Nor  is  it  necessary  that  the  money  should
be  employed  in  the  outfit  of  the  vessel,  or  invested  in  the
goods  on  which  the  risk  is  run.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  risk
of  the  voyage  be  substantially  and  really  taken,  and  the  ad-
vance made  in  good  faith  for  a  maritime  premium. Th^


a  3  Johns,  Rep.  352.

6  The  Alexander,  1  Dodton,  278. The  Hero,  2  ibid,  139.

c  The  Sloop  Mary,  1  Paine* s  Rep,  671.  MenetODe  r.  Gibbons,  3
Term  Rep,  267.

d  Valin*9  Com.  torn.  i.  3$6,  Emerigon^  (om.  ii.  494.  Cendy*e
Marthall,  vol.  ii.  747.  a.

Vol.  III.  46


363  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Pah  T.

lender  is  not  presumed  to  lend  upon  the  fiuth  iA  any  particu-
lar appropriation  of  the  money  ;  and  if  it  were  otherwise,  hii
security  could  not  be  avoided  by  any  misafylicatkm  of  the
fund,  where  the  risk  was  bona  fide  run  upon  other  goods.
The  loan  may  be  made,  and  the  risk  taken,  upon  the  usual
fxHing  of  policies  of  insurance,  lost  or  not  lost,  and  predsdy
as  the  ship  was  then  in  port )  and  if,  before  the  hypotheca-
tion be  given,  the  property  be  actually  lost  by  any  of  the
perils  enumerated  in  it,  the  loss  must  be  borne  by  the  len-
der.*

After  the  risk  has  ceased,  by  the  safe  arrival  of  the  ship,
marine  interest  ceases,  and  gives  place  to  the  ordinary  legal
interest,  on  the  aggregate  amount  of  the  debt  due,  consist-
ing of  the  money  lent  with  maritime  premium.  This  is  un-
dereiood  to  be  the  rule  in  the  French  law.  The  ordinary  in-
terest begins  upon  the  accumulated  sum  when  the  marine
interest  ceases ;  and  Boulay  Paty  follows  the  authority  of
Bmerigon,  and  of  the  French  judicial  decisions,  in  support
of  this  rule,  and  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  Pothier  and
Pardessus,  who  insist,  that  no  interest  whatever  accrues  be-
tween the  cessation  of  the  maritime  interest,  and  the  judicial
demand  of  the  debt*


a  Conard  ▼.  The  Atiantic  Insurance  Company,  1  Ptter§^  U.  S.  Rep.
386.

b  Emerigont  torn.  ii.  414.  Polhier,  Traiie  du  Prei,  a  la  grout  ad-
verUurti  No.  51.  M.  Pardettut^  Cour  de  Droit  Commer,  t  \u  273.
Boulay  Paly^  t.  iii.  80 — 89.  Marshall  on  insurance,  to],  ii.  752,  lays
down  the  rule  according^  to  the  opinion  of  Pothier,  who  holds  that  the
ordinary  interest,  after  the  rislc  has  ceased,  commences  only  on  the
priooipal  sum  lent,  and  not  on  the  joint  principal  and  maritime  interest,
for  that  would  be  compoond  interest.  There  are  no  English  decisions
on  the  point,  and  if  the  French  law  is  to  govern,  it  is  decidedly  against
the  opinion  of  Pothier.  There  is  ground  for  the  conciosion,  that  when
the  risk  has  been  run,  and  the  peril  ceases,  the  loan,  with  the  extraor-
dinary premium,  becomes  an  absolute  debt,  which  ought  to  carry  inte-
real  if  the  payment  be  delayed.  The  French  law  declares,  and  it  is  also
the  doctrine  of  Casaregis,  that  a  bottomry  contract,  if  made  payable  lo


Lee.  XLIX] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 363

The  French  code'  prohibits  all  loans  in  the  nature  of  bot-
tomry or  respondentia,  upon  seamen's  wages  or  voyages.  A
sailor  is  not  generally  in  a  situation  to  expect  any  great  pro-
fit, which  would  justify  a  loan  upon  maritime  interest,  and
wages  are  too  slender  a  basis  for  a  maritime  loan,  and  the
provision  is  dictated  by  sound  policy.  The  English  and
American  Courts  of  Admiralty  have  a  broad  equity  jurisdic-
tion over  such  contracts.  The  bottomry  bond  may  be  good
in  part,  and  bad  in  part ;  and  if  the  premium  has  been  un-
duly enhanced  from  a  knowledge  of  the  master's  necessities,
the  court  of  admiralty,  which  acts  ex  aquo  et  bonoj  may
moderate  it,  or  refuse  to  ratify  it.^  But  if  marine  interest  has
not  been  stipulated,  no  court  can  supply  the  omission,  and  it
will  be  taken  to  be  a  contract  upon  ordinary  interest ;  for  no
new  obligation  can  be  inferred  or  reasoned  out,  by  a  commen-
tary on  the  contract  itself.'^


order f  or  bearer y  is  negotiable  like  a  bill  of  exchange,  and  i«  to  be  dealt
with  and  protested  in  like  manner.  Casaregigf  disc.  65.  Boulay
PtUy,  torn.  iii.  97. Code  de  Commerce^  art.  313.

a  Code  de  Commerce^  art.  319.

6  1  Dodion,  277.  283.  The  Ship  Packet,  3  JtfofOfi,  255.  1  Hagg^
Adm.  R^.  176.  326, 327.

e  PoUUer,  TraiUi  du  PreL  a  la  Oroise,  o.  19.  See,  for  farther  in-
formation on  the  subject  of  maritime  loans,  Emerigon*§  Eeeay  on  JVart-
tdne  Loane^  which  is  the  most  complete  treatise  extant  on  the  subject.
The  substance  of  it  has  been  ably  incorporated  into  the  work  of  M.
Boalay  Paty,  on  a  Course  of  Jdariiime  Commercial  Law,  and  it  has
been  closely  and  accurately  translated,  by  John  £.  Hall,  Esq.  of  Bal-
timore.


LECTURE  L.


OF INSURANCE  OF LIVES, AND AGAINST FIRE.

I


I


(1.)  Of  Insurance  of  Lives.

The8K  insurances  are  liberal  contracts,  and  while  they
create  an  advantageous  investment  of  capital,  they  operate
benevolently  towards  the  public.  Their  usual  purpose  is  to
provide  a  fund  for  creditors,  or  fcnr  family  connections  in  case
of  death.  The  insurer,  in  consideration  of  a  sum  in  gross,
or  of  periodical  payments,  undertakes  to  pay  a  certain  sum,
or  an  annuity,  upon  the  death  of  a  person  whose  life  is  in-
sured. Such  is  the  nature  of  these  contracts,  that  they  are
weU  calculated  to  relieve  the  more  helpless  members  of  a  fa-
mily from  a  precarious  dependence,  resting  upon  the  life  of  a
single  person ;  and  they  very  naturally  engage  the  attention
and  influence  the  judgment  of  those  thinking  men,  who  have
been  accustomed  to  reflect  deeply  upon  the  past,  and  to  form
just  anticipations  of  the  future.

The  practice  in  Europe,  of  life  assurances,  is  in  a  great '
degree  confined  to  England,  and  it  has  within  the  last  fif-
teen years  been  introduced  into  the  United  States.'  It  is
now  slowly,  but  graduaUy,  attracting  the  public  attention  and
confidence  in  our  principal  cities.  According  to  a  maxim  of
the  civil  law,  the  life  of  a  freeman  was  above  all  valuation  :
liberum  corpus  cestimationem  non  recipity  and  the  nautical


a  The  M€u§achtuetU  HotpUal  lAfe  Iruurance  Company  was  incor-
porated in  1^18.


366 OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Pan  V.

legialaiion  of  some  parts  of  Europe,  od  this  subject,  has  been
founded  upon  the  principle,  that  it  was  unfit  and  improper  to
allow  insurances  on  human  life.  They  have  been  tolerated
in  Naples,  Florence,  and  by  the  ordinances  of  Wisbuy,  but
they  were  condemned  in  the  Z^e  Quidon^  as  contrary  to  good
morals,  and  as  being  the  source  of  infinite  abuse.  So^  insu-
rances for  life  were  expressly  forbidden  by  the  ordinance  of
Lewis  XIY. ;  and  the  prohibition  was  made  to  rest  on  the
reason  given  in  the  civil  law.  The  ordinances  of  Amster-
dam, Rotterdam,  and  Middleburg,  adopted  the  same  rule,
which,  though  true  in  some  respects,  was  in  this  case  very
absurdly  applied.*  The  new  French  code  has  omitted  any
express  provision  on  the  subject,  though  Boulay  Paty  thinks
that  a  prohibition  is  covertly  but  essentially  contained  in  Art
334  of  the  code,  and  he  inveighs  vehemently  against  poUoies
upon  human  life,  as  being  gambling  contracts  of  the  most
pernicious  kind.^  Most  of  the  commentators  on  the  new
code,  as  Delvincourt,""  Locre,''  De  Laporte,  and  Estrangin>
concur  in  the  same  opinion.  Pardessus,  on  the  other  hand,
is  in  favour  of  the  legality  of  such  insurances,  and  this  Qrast
have  been  the  opinion  of  the  French  government^  for  a  rqj^


a  Le  Chndoni  ch.  16,  art  5.  Ord.  of  Wubuj^y  art  66.  Ord*  cfo  te
Mar.  tit.  Aisurances,  art.  10.  VaHn,  torn.  ii.  64.  Pothier^  h.  t.  n.  fH.
Emerigon^  torn.  i.  198.

b  Ccwrt  de  Droit  Com,  torn.  iii.  366.  368.  496 — 506.  lOa  amdi-
iumea  iwU  plena  trittittimi  everUus,  et  pouunt  vvriiare  ad  delinquet^
dum.  Chiioaly  dec.  57,  n.  58.  Boulay  Paty  says,  that  these  life  assa-
ranees  ought  to  bo  left  to  their  English  neighbours.  The  English  are
willing  they  should  be  so  left,  and  exult  in  the  distinction,  for  Sergeant
Marshall,  in  his  Treaiue  on  Insurance^  vol.  ii.  768,  suggeato  that  tlie
prohibition  of  insurance  on  lives  in  France  and  Italy  prooeeds  from
motives  of  policy,  founded  on  a  startling  sense  of  the  great  infirmity  of
their  public  moralM,  which  would  expose  to  hazard  lives  so  insured.

c  Mmt.  de  DroU  Com.  FrancaU,  torn.  ii.  345.

d  EiprU  du  Codede  Commerce,  torn.  iv.  75.

e  7bm.ii.  303.


Jat€.  L.J  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  367

ordinance  of  1820,  established  a  company  for  the  purpose  of
insuring  lives.

There  are  now  two  chartered  life  assurance  companies  es-
tablished in  France,  and  though  the  terms  of  insurance  are
moderate,  and  the  companies  extremely  respectable,  they  have
met  with  very  little  encouragement,  and  this  grave  spedes  of
insurance  does  not  seem  to  be  congenial  to  the  taste  and
habits  of  either  the  French  or  Italians.  In  the  Netherlands,
life  assurance  societies  are  established  with  reasonable  anti-
cipations of  success.  An  ordinance  of  the  government  gives
them  a  monopoly,  by  excluding  all  foreign  companies  from
interfering  with  the  business  on  their  native  soil.  The  same
exclusion  exists  in  Denmark,  while  the  life  assurance  insti-
tutions in  that  kingdom  are  said  to  do  nothing.  They  are
more  likely  to  flourish  in  Germany  than  in  any  other  part  of
continental  Europe,  judging  from  the  experiment  already
made,  and  the  character  and  dispositions  of  the  people.'

The  life  assurance  companies  in  England  commenced  with
the  Amicable  Society,  in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,
and  in  1827,  there  were,  in  the  united  kingdom,  forty-four  life
assurance  companies,  aU  maintaining  a  zealous  and  dangerous
competition.  The  companies  used  formerly  to  select  and
take  only  lives  of  health  and  vigour,  but  now,  it  is  said  to  be
the  practice,  to  accept  all  lives  proposed,  where  no  positive
disease  is  manifested.  So,  residence  in  any  part  of  Europe
is  universally  admitted,  and  the  companies  are  very  much
exposed  to  frauds,  and  the  consequent  diminution  of  credit
and  confidence,  by  the  assurance  of  bad  lives,  and  sinking
the  average  duration  of  lives  insured,  much  below  the  ave-
rage duration  of  human  Ufe.^  There  is  no  doubt  a  good
deal  of  intrinsic  difficulty  in  the  subject,  and  it  requires  no
ordinary  degree  of  science,  skill,  and  experience,  to  form  just
and  accurate  rates  of  insurance,  or  tables  of  annuities  on


a  Edinburgh  ReoUw^  vol.  zlr.  p.  488—490.
6  Edin,  Rev.  ibid.  498.  600.


388  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. / [P*rt  V.

scales  measuring  truly  the  probabilities  and  value  of  Ufe,  in
its  various  stages  of  existence,  in  different  climates,  in  diflfer-
ent  employments,  and  in  the  vicissitudes  of  action  to  which  it
is  subject.

(1.)  The  party  insuring  must  have  an  interest  in  the  life
insured.  The  English  statute  of  14  Geo.  III.  against  wager
policies,  included  in  the  prohibition,  insurances  on  lives,  when
the  person  insuring  had  no  interest  in  the  life,  and  it  prohibit-
ed the  recovery  under  the  policy  of  a  greater  sum  than  the
amount  or  value  of  the  interest  of  the  insured  in  the  life.  A
bona  fide  creditor  has  an  insurable  interest  in  his  debtor's  life
to  the  extent  of  his  debt,  for  there  is  a  probability,  more  or
less  remote,  that  the  debtor  would  pay  the  debt  if  he  lived."
The  insurance  is  frequently  made  a  part  of  the  creditor's  se-
curity in  loans  of  money.  A  person  may  insure  his  own  Ufe
for  the  benefit  of  heirs  or  creditors,  or  he  may  insure  the  Ufe
of  another  in  which  he  may  be  interested,  and  assign  the  po-
licy to  those  who  have  an  interest  in  the  Ufe.  The  poUcy  is
good  for  the  creditor  as  a  collateral  security,  though  he  may
have  other  security,  and  being  substantiaUy  a  contract  of  in-
demnity against  the  loss  of  the  debt,  it  ceases,  as  to  the  cre-
ditor, with  the  extinguishment  of  the  debt.*  If  it  be  as-
signed by  way  of  security,  it  is  not,  in  that  case,  extinguished
by  the  payment  of  the  debt,  but  the  reversionary  interest  in
the  insured  becomes  the  means  of  credit  to  him  on  other  oc-
casions. The  insurable  interest  in  the  Ufe  of  another  person,
must  be  a  direct  and  definite  pecuniary  interest,  and  a  person
lias  not  such  an  interest  in  the  life  of  his  wife  or  child,  mere-
ly in  the  character  of  husband  or  parent.''  But  if  a  child
be  supported  by  its  father,  who  is  dependent  on  some  fund
terminable  by  his  deatli,  the  child  has  an  insurable  interest


a  Anderaoa  v.  Edie,  Park  on  Im,  6th  edit.  575.

6  Goodsall  r,  Boldero,  9  EatV§  Rep,  72.

e  Halford  ?.  Kymer,  10  Bamw,  ^  Crttt,  794.


Lee.  L.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  . 369

in  tbe  iather^s  life.*  So,  a  trustee  who  has  a  legal,  though
not  the  beneficial  interest  in  the  life  of  another,  may  insure  it.*
The  necessity  of  an  interest  in  the  life  insured,  in  order  to
support  the  policy,  prevails  generally  in  this  c6untry,  because
wager  contracts  are  almost  universally  held  to  be  unlawful,
either  in  consequence  of  some  statute  provision,  or  upon  prin-
ciples of  the  common  law/

(2.)  We  have  seen  that  the  terms  and  conditiwis  of  the
English  policies  are  more  relaxed  now  than  formerly,  but
this  is  not  the  case  witli  the  American  policies  upon  lives.
They  contain  a  condition,  when  relating  to  the  lives  of  per-
sons in  the  northern  states,  that  the  policy  is  to  be  void  if  the
insured  should  die  upon  the  high  seas,  or  the  great  lakes ;
or  shall,  without  the  previous  consent  of  the  company,  pass
beyond  the  settled  limits  of  the  United  States  and  of  the
British  provinces  of  the  two  Canadas,  Nova-Scotia,  and  New-
Brunswick  ;  or  south  of  the  states  of  Virginia  and  Kentucky ;
or  enter  into  the  military  or  naval  service ;  or  in  case  he
should  die  by  suicide,  or  in  a  duel,  or  by  tbe  hands  of  justice.
The  life  insurance  v/ould  be  avoided  upon  the  general  policy
of  the  law,  on  the  execution  of  the  assured  for  felony,  with-
out the  insertion  of  this  last  condition.'  The  basis  of  the
insurance  is  a  declaration  in  writing  of  the  person  making
the  insurance,  as  to  the  birth-place,  age,  residence,  and  em-
ployment of  the  party  insured,  with  a  description  of  the  dis-
eases or  infirmity  (if  any)  with  which  he  has  been  afllicted.
This  declaration  not  bein^  spread  out  at  large  upon  the  poli-
cy, is  not  strictly  a  warranty,  and  it  is  sufficient  if  it  be  given
in  good  faith,  and  be  true  in  substance.  Whatever  averment
or  representation  is  inserted  in  the  policy  becomes  a  warranty,
and  must  be  strictly  true. But  if  there  be  no  warranty,  or


a  liord  T.  Dall,  12  Jtfiuf.  Rep.  115.

b  Tidsirell  v.  Ankeratein,  Peake*i  Caiet^  151.

c  Vide  lupra,  Lcc.  48.

d  Amicable  As9.  Society  v.  Bolland,  2  Dow  Sf  Clark,  1.

Vol.  in.  47


370  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

representation^  or  fraudy  the  insuier  raos  the  lisk  of  the  gooA-
ness  of  the  life  ;*  and  even  a  warranty  that  the  person  is  in
good  health  is  not  fiikified  by  the  &ct  that  he  was  at  the
time  subject  to  great  inconvenience,  and  a  partial  pabey^  in
consequence  of  an  old  wound  not  dangerous  to  life ;  or  Cbat
he  was  troubled  with  spasms  and  cramps  from  fits  of  the  gout.
This  has  been  held  to  be  a  reasonably  good  state  of  health
within  the  warranty.  The  seeds  of  death  are  in  every  ha-
man  constitution,  and  it  is  only  requisite  that  there  be  not  at
the  time  any  existing  disorder  tending  to  shorten  life.*

(3.)  The  life  in  the  given  case  may  be  insured  for  the
term  of  natural  life,  as  is  usual,  or  it  may  be  insured  for  a
definite  period.  In  the  case  of  a  policy  of  the  latter  kind,  if
the  party  receives  a  mortal  wound  within  the  period,  and
dies  after  it  has  expired,  the  underwriter  is  discharged.*

II.  Of  Insurance  against  Fire.

By  this  insurance,  the  under\i'riter,  in  consideration  of  the
premium,  undertakes  to  indemnify  the  insured  against  all
losses  in  his  houses,  buildings,  furniture,  or  merchandise,  by
means  of  accidental  fire  happening  within  a  prescribed  pe-
riod. The  premium  is  usually  paid  in  advance,  and  the  con-
tract efTectcd  by  the  parties  without  the  intervention  of  a  bro-
ker.

It  has  been  made  a  question  by  some  persons  whether  the
negligence  and  frauds  which  the  insurance  of  property  from
fire  has  led  to,  did  not  counterbalance  all  the  advantages  and
relief  which  such  insurances  have  aflbrded  in  cases  of  ex-
treme distress.  But  the  public  judgment  in  England,  and  in
this  country,  has  long  since  decided  that  question  with  per-
fect satisfaction ;  and  insurance  companies  against  fire  have


o  Stackpool  f,  Simon,  at  N.  P.  S  JUanhall  on  In*,  772.
b  Rom  ▼.  Bradshaw,  1  Black*,  Rep.  312. Watioo  r.  Mainwarini^,
4  TaunUm,  763. Willis  v.  Poole,  at  N.  P.  2  Marshall  on  int.  771.
€  Willes,  J.,  1  2Vm,  260.


Lcc.  L.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY- 371

multiplied  exceedingly,  and  extended  tbeir  dealings  to  every
part  of  the  country,  and  excited  and  deserved  public  confi-
dence, by  reason  of  the  solidity  of  their  capital,  and  the  skill,
prudence,  and  int^rity  of  their  operations.

We  will  consider  1,  the  interest ;  2,  the  terms  and  con*
struction  of  the  policy ;  3,  the  adjustment  of  the  loss.

(1.)  Of  the  Interest  in  the  Policy.

If  policies  were  without  interest,  they  would  be  peculiarly
hazardous,  by  reason  of  the  temptation  which  they  would  hold
out  to  the  commission  of  arson,  and  they  would  fall  within  the
general  prohibition,  by  statute,  of  wager  policies.*  According
to  Lord  King  and  Lord  Hardwicke,*  an  insurance  against
fire,  without  an  interest  by  the  insured  in  the  property  lost,
at  the  time  of  insuring  and  at  the  time  of  the  loss,  was  void
even  at  common  law.  A  creditor  may  have  a  policy  on  the
house  and  goods  of  his  debtor,  upon  which  he  has  a  lien  or
mortgage  security,  for  that  gives  him  a  sufficient  interest.  So
a  trustee,  or  agent,  or  factor,  who  has  the  custody  of  goods
finr  sale  on  commission,  may  insure  them,  and  a  bona  fide
equitable  interest  may  be  insured.''  In  the  case  of  De  Fo-
rest V.  Pulton  Fire  Insurance  Company/  the  court  car-
ried this  question  of  constructive  interest  to  a  still  greater  ex-
tent, and  it  was  decided,  that  a  commission  merchant,  con-
signee, or  factor,  having  goods  of  the  consignor  or  principal
in  his  possession,  has  an  insurable  interest  therein,  not  mere-
ly to  the  extent  of  his  commissions,  but  to  the  full  value  of
the  goods,  without  reference  to  his  lien. He  was  to  be


a  Vide  ffupra,  Leo.  48.

b  Lynch  v.  Dalzell,  3  Bro,  P,  C.  497. Sadler*t  CompaDy  v.  Bad-
cock,  2  Aik.  554.

c  Laceoa  v.  Crawford,  3  Bos,  4r  Pull.  75.  95.  98.  5  Ibid.  289,  8.
C.  2  Mankall  on  In$*  789.  Locke  ▼.  Norib  American  loe.  Company,
13  Man.  Rep,  67*

d  1  HM»  JVr.  Y.  Rep.  84.


372  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  V.

deemed  owner  as  to  all  the  world,  except  his  principal,  for  the
purpose  of  an  insurable  interest.  But  it  is  usually  made  a
condition  in  our  American  policies,  that  the  nature  of  the
property  be  disclosed,  and  goods  held  in  trust,  or  on  commis-
sion, must  be  insured  o^  sudi^  or  they  will  not  be  covered  by
the  policy.  A  person  having  an  interest  in  the  rent  of  build-
ings, may  insure  the  rent  from  loss  by  fire  within  the  pre-
scribed period,  and  the  claim  would  be  for  the  loss  of  so  much
rent  as  would  have  arisen  between  the  time  of  the  fire  and
the  end  of  the  given  period,  if  the  peril  had  not  intervened.*
And  as  in  tlie  case  of  marine  insurance,  if  the  policy  he  for
whom  it  mat/  concerfi^  it  will  cover  any  interest  existing  at
its  date.*

(2.)  Of  the  Terms  and  construction  of  the  Policy.

A  policy  against  fire  is  strictly  a  policy  on  time,  and  the
commencement  and  termination  of  the  risk  are  stated  with
precision.  The  English  pdicies  (and  I  presume  the  Ameri-
can also)  contain  the  exception  of  damage  by  fire  happening
by  "  invasion,  foreign  enemy,  or  any  military  or  usuiped
power  whatsoever."  It  is  sometimes  added,  "  or  by  riot,  or
civil  commotion,"  for  the  words  "  usurped  power"  mean  inva-
sion from  abroad,  or  an  internal  rebellion,  and  not  the  power
of  a  common  mob.^

The  insured  is  bound  in  good  faith  to  disclose  to  the  in-


a  If  the  policy  be  on  a  bouse  which  is  rented  to  a  tenant,  and  it  be
destroyed  by  fire,  Mr.  Bell  considers  it  to  be  a  difficult  and  unsettled
question,  whether  the  policy  would  co7er  the  rent  lost,  as  being  part  of
the  owner's  loss,  when  the  policy  was  silent  as  to  rent  eo  nomine.  See
1  Beirs  Com.  on  the  Law»  of  Scollandy  627.  But  I  apprehend  that
with  us  such  consequential  damages  would  not  be  estimated,  and  that
the  claim  of  the  assured  would  be  confined  to  the  direct  loss  of  the
building.

b  Jefferson  Ins.  Company  ads*  Cotbeal,  JV.  F.  Sup.  Court  of  Com.
P/efl»,  March,  1829.

c  Drinkwater  v.  London  Assuiance,  2  WU*.  363.


JLcc.  L.]  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY-  373

surer  every  fact  material  to  tbe  risk,  and  witliin  his  know-
ledge, and  which,  if  stated,  would  influence  tbe  niind  of  the
insurer  in  making  or  declining  the  contract.'  The  strictness
and  nicety  required  in  the  contract  of  marine  insurance,  do
not  so  strongly  ap|4y  to  insurances  against  fire,  for  tbe  risk
is  generally  assumed  upon  actual  examination  of  the  subject
by  skilful  agents  on  the  part  of  the  insurance  offices.*  Rea-
sonable grounds  of  apprehensbn  of  loss  from  existing  facts
known  to  tbe  insured,  tind  denoting  impending  danger,  must
be  stated  to  tlie  insurer,  or  the  policy  will  be  void,  even  though
there  was  no  intentional  fraud  in  the  case.*  If  there  be  a  re-
presentation of  facts,  it  is  sufficient  if  the  same  be  fisdrly
made  and  substantially  true ;  and  if  the  representation  be  re-
ferred to  in  general  terms  in  tlie  policy,  and  not  spread  out
at  large  on  the  face  of  tlie  instrument,  it  is  still  only  a  repre-
sentation, and  does  not  amount  to  the  technical  warranty.^
When  the  policy  contains  a  warranty,  it  is  construed  with
severity,  and  must  be  strictly  complied  with.^  And  yet  w  here
a  policy  contained  a  clause  prohibiting  the  use  of  tbe  build-
ing for  storing  therein  goods  denominated  in  the  memoran-
dum annexed  to  the  policy  as  hazardous ;  tbe  keeping  of
sudi  goods  as  oil,  or  spirilous  liquors,  by  a  grocer,  in  ordina-
ry quantities,  for  his  ordinary  retail,  was  held  not  to  be,  un-
der the  circumstances,  a  storing  of  them  within  the  policy/
A  representaUon  that  ground  contiguous  to  the  building  in-
sured is  vacant,  does  not  amount  to  a  warranty  that  it  shall


«  Columbiao  Im.  Company  ▼•  Lawrence,  2  Peten'  Sup*  C.  Rep*
«5.

b  Jolly  V.  Baltimore  Equitable  Society,  1  Harr.  Sf  GiU^  295.

e  Bufe  ▼.  Turner,  6  Taunton^  338.

d  JefEbnon  Ins.  Company  ads.  Cotbeal,  5iip.  Court  of  Com,  PUat^
•AT.  K.,  Maroh,  1829.  Delonguemere  ▼.  Tbe  Tradesmen's  Ids.  Com-
pany, ibid,  Dec.  1828,  and  March,  1829.

e  Worsley  v.  Wood,  6  Terrn^  710.  Fowler  v.  £tna  Fire  Ins.  Com-
pany, 9  Gotten^  673.

/  LaogdoD  v.  N.  York  Equitable  ha.  Company,  1  jETo^,  226.


37i  OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  V-

conUnue  vacant  during  the  continuance  of  the  risir,  or  pre-
vent the  insured  from  erecting  a  building  upon  it,  provided
he  had  not  already  formed  and  concealed  that  intention,  and
that  the  erection  was  not,  in  point  of  fact,  in  any  way  the
cause  of  the  loss.*  So,  if  it  was  represented  at  the  time  of
the  insurance,  that  the  building  was  connected  with  another
building  on  one  side  only,  and  before  the  loss  happened,  it
became  connected  on  two  sides,  this  does  not  avoid  the  poli-
cy, unless,  in  point  of  &ct,  the  risk  thereby  becomes  increas-
ed.* The  assured  may  exercise  the  ordinary  and  necessary
acts  of  ownership  over  his  buildings,  and  make  the  requisite
repairs,  without  prejudice  to  his  policy.  A  contrary  rule  would
be  so  inconvenient  as,  in  a  great  degree,  to  destroy  this  spe-
cies of  insurance.  But  if  a  loss  accrues  by  means  of  gross
negligence  or  misconduct  of  the  workmen ;  or  if  the  altera-
tions in  the  building  materially  enhance  the  risk,  and  are  not
necessary  to  the  enjoylnent  of  it,  or  were  not  the  exercise  of
ordinary  acts  of  ownership,  the  insurers  will  be  released  from
their  contract.

The  English  statute  of  9th  May,  182S,  has  prudently  pro-
tected the  insurer  from  the  impositions  to  which  he  is  natu-
rally exposed,  by  the  practice  of  covering  under  one  policy
extended  and  cumulated  subjects  of  risk.  The  statute  re-
quires that  detached  buildings,  or  goods  therein,  occasioning
a  plurality  of  risks,  be  valued  and  insured  separately  ;  and
all  insurances  against  fire,  made  upon  two  or  more  separate
subjects  or  parcels  of  risk  collectively,  in  one  sum,  are  de-
clared void.  It  is  a  condition  of  the  policy,  in  most  cases,
that  if  there  be  any  other  insurance  already  made  against
loss  by  fire  on  the  property,  and  not  notified  ia  the  insurers,


a  The  Globe  lo8.  Company  ads.  StebbiDs,  Sup.  Court  of  Com,
Pleat,  Jf.  Y.y  March,  1829.

b  Stetson  r.  Mass.  Marine  Ins,  Company,  4  Mcum.  Rep,  330.

c  Stetson  ▼.  Mass.  Fire  Ins.  Company,  4  JUiUi.  lUp.  330.  Joily  r.
Baltimore  EqniUble  Society,  1  Harr.  Sf  GUij  295.


Ltc  L.] OF  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. 376

the  policy  is  to  be  deemed  void  ;  and  if  there  be  any  other
insurance  on  the  property  afterwards  made,  the  insurers  are
to  have  notice  of  it  with  reasonable  diligence,  and  the  same
is  to  be  duly  acknowledged  in  writing,  or  that  omission  will
also  render  the  policy  void.

Fire  policies  usually,  and  very  prudently,  contain  a  prohi-
bition against  the  assignment  of  them,  without  the  previous
consent  of  the  company.  But  without  this  clause,  they  are
assignable  in  equity,  like  any  other  chose  in  action,  though
to  render  the  assignment  of  any  value  to  the  assignee,  an
interest  in  the  subject  matter  of  the  insurance  must  be  assign-
ed also.'*  This  restriction  upon  assignments  of  the  policy
applies  only  to  transfers  before  a  loss  happens.^  In  some
cases,  the  statute  creating  a  fire  insurance  company  authori-
zes assignments  of  policies  to  the  purchaser  of  the  subject
insured,  and  authorizes  the  assignee  to  sue  in  his  own  name,
provided  notice  be  given  of  the  assignment  before  a  loss  hap-
pens, so  as  to  allow  the  company,  at  their  election,  to  return
a  ratable  proportion  of  the  premium,  and  be  exonerated  from
the  risk.

(3.)  Of  the  adjustment  of  the  loss.

Settlements  of  losses  by  fire  are  always  on  the  principle  of
a  particular  average,  and  the  estimated  loss  is  paid  without
abandonment  of  what  has  been  saved.  Damages  and  rea-
sonable charges  on  removing,  at  a  fire,  articles  insured,  are
covered  by  the  policy.  So  there  may  be  a  general  average
for  a  sacrifice  made  by  the  insured  for  the  common  good,  in
a  case  of  necessity.  It  is  analogous  to  the  law  of  contribu-r
tion  by  co-sureties.^  If  a  tenant  erects  a  building  on  a  lot
held  under  a  lease,  with  liberty  to  renew  or  remove  the  build-


a  Marshall  an  /iw*  800.

b  Brichta  ▼.  Fayette  Fire  Iiw.  CompsDy,  JV.  F.  Sup,  Court  of  Com'
P/ea«,  June,  1839.
r  Welles  v.  Boston  Ins.  Company,  6  Pick.  182.


i


376  OP  PERSONAL  PROPERTY. [Part  Y-

ifig  at  the  end  of  the  lesse^  and  the  building  be  deetroyed  hy
fire  a  few  days  before  the  end  of  the  lease  ;  though  the  bu3d-
ing  as  it  stood  was  worth  more  than  the  sum  insured,  and  if
removed,  it  would  have  been  worth  much  less,  yet  the  courts
kx>k  only  to  the  actual  value  of  the  building  as  it  stood  when
lost,  and  they  do  not  enter  into  the  consideration  of  these
incidental  and  cdlateral  circumstances  in  fixing  on  the  true
standard  of  indemnity.*

It  is  usually  stipulated  in  the  policy,  that  in  case  of  any
prior  or  subsequent  insurance  on  the  same  property,  and  of
which  due  notice  has  been  given,  and  a  loss  occurs,  the  as-
sured is  not  to  recover  beyond  such  ratable  proportion  of  the
damages  as  the  amount  insured  by  the  policy  shall  bear  to
the  whole  amount  insured,  without  reference  to  the  dates  of
the  diflerent  policies.  The  loss  is  to  be  certified  upon  oath,
and  the  certificate  of  a  magistrate,  notary,  or  clergyman,  is
made  necessary  to  be  procured  in  favour  of  the  truth  and
fairness  of  the  statement  of  the  loss,  and  a  strict  and  literal
compliance  with  the  terms  of  these  conditions  is  held  indis-
pensable to  a  right  of  recovery/


a  Laarsot  v.  The  Cbalbam  Fire  Ids.  Company,  1  HcUVs  JV.  F.
Rep,  41.
6  Worsley  y.  Wood,  6  Term,  710.


PART  VI.


OP  THE  LAW  CONCERNING  REAL  PROPERTY.


LECTURE  LI.

or THE FOUNDATIOX OF TITLE TO UlND.

In  passing  from  the  subject  of  personal  to  that  of  real  pro-
perty, the  student  will  immediately  perceive  that  the  latter  is
governed  by  rules  of  a  distinct  and  peculiar  character.  The
law  concerning  real  property  forms  a  technical  and  very  arti-
ficial system  ;  and  though  it  has  felt  the  influence  of  the  free
and  commercial  spirit  of  modem  ages,  it  is  still  very  much
under  the  control  of  principles  derived  from  the  feudal  policy.
We  have  either  never  introduced  into  the  jurisprudence  of
this  country,  or  we  have,  in  the  course  of  improvements  upon
our  municipal  law,  abolished  all  the  essential  badges  of  the
law  of  feuds ;  but  the  deep  traces  of  that  policy  are  visible
in  every  part  of  the  doctrine  of  real  estates,  and  the  techni-
cal language,  and  many  of  the  technical  rules  and  fictions  of
that  system,  are  still  retained.

It  is  a  fundamental  principle  in  the  English  law,  derived
from  the  maxims  of  the  feudal  tenures,  that  the  king  was
the  original  proprietor  of  all  the  land  in  the  kingdom,  and  the
true  and  only  source  of  title.* In  this  country  we  have


a  2  Bluki.  Cam,  51.  63.  86.  105.

YoL.  HL  48


378  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

adopted  the  same  principle,  and  applied  it  to  our  repuUican
governments ;  and  it  is  a  settled  and  fundamental  doctrine
with  us,  that  all  valid  individual  title  to  land  within  the  Uni-
ted Slates,  is  derived  from  the  grant  of  our  own  local  govern-
ments, or  from  that  of  the  United  States,  or  from  the  crown,
or  royal  chaitered  governments  established  here  prior  to  the
revolution.  This  was  the  doctrine  declared  in  New- York,
in  the  case  of  Jacksmi  v.  Ingrakatn^^  and  it  was  held  to  be
a  settled  rule,  that  the  courts  could  not  take  notice  of  any
title  to  land  not  derived  from  our  own  state  or  colonial  go-
vernment, and  duly  verified  by  patent.  This  was  also  a
fundamental  principle  in  the  colonial  jurisprudence.  Even
with  respect  to  the  Indian  reservation  lands,  of  which  they
still  retain  the  occupancy,  the  validity  of  a  patent  has  not
hitherto  been  permitted  to  be  drawn  in  question  in  a  suit  be-
tween citizens  of  the  state,  under  the  pretext  that  the  Indian
right  and  title,  as  original  lords  of  the  soil,  had  not  been  ex-
tinguished.^ It  was  also  declared  in  Fletcher  v.  Peck^^  to  be
the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  that
the  nature  of  the  Indian  title  to  lands  lying  within  the  terri-
torial limits  of  a  state,  though  entitled  to  be  respected  by  all
courts  until  it  be  legitimately  extinguished,  was  not  such  as
to  be  absolutely  repugnant  to  a  seisin  in  fee  on  the  part  of  the
government  within  whose  jurisdiction  the  lands  are  situated.^


a  4  Johns.  liep.  163.  Jacksoo  v.  Waters,  12  Johns.  Rep,  365,  S.
P.  By  the  JV*.  F.  Revised  Statutes^  vol.  i.  718,  sec.  1 ,  the  people  are
declared  to  possess  the  original  and  ultimate  property  in  and  to  all  lands
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state.

b  Jackson  v.  Hudson,  3  Johns,  Rep,  375.

e  6  Cranch's  Rep,  87.

d  This  was  the  language  of  a  majority  of  the  court  in  the  case  of
Fletcher  v.  Peck.  It  was  a  mere  naked  declaration,  without  any  dis-
cussion or  reasoning  by  the  court  in  support  of  it ;  hut  Judge  Johnson,
in  the  separate  opinion  which  he  delivered,  did  not  concur  in  tlie  doc-
trine. He  held  that  the  Indian  nations  were  absolute  proprietors  of  the
soil,  and  that  practically,  and  in  cases  unaffi>cted  by  particalar  treaties.


tec.  LI.]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  379

But  the  history  and  grounds  of  the  claims  of  the  European
governments,  and  of  the  United  States,  to  tlie  lands  on  this
continent,  and  to  dominion  over  the  Indian  tribes,  have  been
since  more  largely  and  fully  discussed.

In  Johnson  v.  M^Intosh^*  it  was  stated  as  an  historical
feet,  that  on  the  discovery  of  this  continent  by  the  nations  of
Europe,  the  discovery  was  considered  to  have  given  to  the
government  by  whose  subjects  or  authority  it  was  made,  a
title  to  the  country,  and  the  sole  right  of  acquiring  the  soil
from  the  natives  as  against  all  other  European  powers.  Each
nation  claimed  the  right  to  regulate  for  itself,  in  exclusion  of
all  others,  the  relation  which  was  to  subsist  between  the  dis-
coverer and  the  Indians.  That  relation  necessarily  impaired,
to  a  considerable  degree,  the  rights  of  the  original  inhabit-
ants, and  an  ascendency  was  asserted  in  consequence  of  the
superior  genius  of  the  Europeans,  founded  on  civilization  and
Christianity,  and  of  their  superiority  in  the  means,  and  in
the  art  of  war.  The  European  nations  which  respectively
established  colonies  in  America,  assumed  the  ultimate  domi-
nion to  be  in  themselves,  and  claimed  the  exclusive  right  to
grant  a  title  to  the  soil,  subject  only  to  the  Indian  right  of  oc-
cupancy. The  natives  were  admitted  to  be  the  rightful  oc-
cupants of  the  soil,  with  a  legal  as  well  as  just  claim  to  retain
possession  of  it,  and  to  use  it  according  to  their  own  discre-
tion, though  not  to  dispose  of  the  soil  at  their  own  will,  ex-
cept to  the  government,  claiming  the  right  of  pre-emption.
The  practice  of  Spain,* France,  Holland,  and  England,


the  reitrictioDs  apoo  the  right  of  8oil  in  the  IndiaDs  amoaoted  only  to
an  exclusioo  of  all  competitors  from  ibe  market,  and  a  pre-emptive
right  to  acquire  a  fee  simple  by  parcbase,  when  the  proprietors  should
be  pleased  to  sell.

a  8  Wheat,  Rep.  543.

h  By  the  laws  of  Spaio,  particular  portions  of  the  soil  of  Louisiaim
were  allotted  to  the  Indians,  and  care  was  taken  to  make  tbe  acquisitions
Taluable,  by  preventing  tbe  intrusion  of  white  settlers.  The  Lanoi  (f
the  Indifii  directed,  that  when  tbe  Indians  gave  up  their  lands  to  the


380  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

proved  the  very  general  recognition  of  this  principle,  of  a
claim  and  title  to  American  territories  given  by  discovery.
The  United  States  adopted  the  same  principle,  and  their  ex-
clusive right  to  extinguish  the  Indian  title  by  purchase  or
conquest,  and  to  grant  the  soil,  and  exercise  such  a  degree  of
sovereignty  as  circumstances  required,  has  never  been  judi-
cially questioned.  The  rights  of  the  British  government
within  the  limits  of  the  British  colonies,  passed  to  the  United
States  by  the  force  and  effect  of  the  act  of  independence,
and  the  uniform  assertion  of  those  rights  by  the  crown,  by
the  colonial  governments,  by  the  individual  states,  and  by
the  Union,  is,  no  doubt,  incompatible  with  an  absolute  tiUe
in  the  Indians.  That  title  has  been  obliged  to  yield  to  the
combined  influence  which  military,  intellectual,  and  moral
power,  gave  to  the  claim  of  the  European  emigrants.

This  assumed  but  qualified  dominion  over  the  Indian
tribes,  regarding  them  as  enjoying  no  higher  title  to  the  soil
than  that  founded  on  simple  occupancy,  and  to  be  incompe-
tent to  transfer  their  tide  to  any  other  power  than  the  govern-
ment which  claims  the  jurisdiction  of  their  territory  by  right
of  discovery,  arose,  in  a  great  degree,  from  the  necessity  of
the  case.  To  leave  the  Indians  in  possession  of  the  country
Was  to  leave  the  country  a  wilderness,  and  to  govern  them  as
a  distinct  people,  or  to  mix  with  them,  and  admit  them  to  an
inter-community  of  privileges,  was  impossible  under  the  cir-
cumstances of  their  relative  condition.  The  peculiar  charac-
ter and  habits  of  the  Indian  nationti;,  rendered  them  incapa-


whites,  others  should  be  assigned  to  them,  and  the  lands  allotted  to  the
Indian  tribes  by  the  Spanish  officers,  in  pursuance  of  Ihe  laws  of  tlie
Indies,  were  giren  to  them  in  complete  ownership,  equally  as  if  they
were  held  under  a  complete  grant.  But  as  the  fodians  were  considered
in  a  state  of  pupilage,  the  authority  of  the  public  officers,  who  were
constituted  their  guardians,  was  necessary  to  a  ralid  alienation  of  their
property.  Recap,  de  lot  Indiat,  cited  by  Porter,  J.,  in  18  JUartin't
Rep.  357 — 359,  who  speaks  most  liberally  of  the  humane  policy  and
justice  of  the  Spanish  laws  in  relation  to  the  Indian  tribes.


Lee.  LL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  381

ble  of  sustaining  any  other  relation  with  the  whites  than  that
of  dependence  and  pupilage.  There  was  no  other  way  of
dealing  with  them  than  that  of  keeping  them  separate,  sub-
ordinate, and  dependent,  with  a  guardian  care  thrown  around
them  for  their  protection.  The  nile  tliat  the  Indian  title  was
subordinate  to  the  absolute,  ultimate  title  of  the  government
of  the  European  colonists,  and  that  the  Indians  were  to  be
considered  as  occupants,  and  entitled  to  protection  in  peace
in  that  character  only,  and  incapable  of  transferring  their
right  to  others,  was  the  best  one  that  could  be  adopted  witli
safety.  The  weak  and  helpless  condition  in  which  we  found
the  Indians,  and  the  immeasurable  superiority  of  their  civil-
ized  neighbours,  would  not  admit  of  the  application  of
any  more  liberal  and  equal  doctrine  to  the  case  of  Indian
lands  and  contracts.  It  was  founded  on  the  pretension  of
converting  the  discovery  of  the  country  into  a  conquest,  and
it  is  now  too  late  to  draw  into  discussion  the  validity  of  that
pretension,  or  the  restrictions  which  it  imposes.  It  is  esta-
blished by  numerous  compacts,  treaties,  laws,  and  ordinances,
and  founded  on  immemorial  usage.  The  country  has  been
colonized  and  settled,  and  is  now  held  by  that  title.  It  is  the
law  of  the  land,  and  no  court  of  justice  can  permit  the  right
to  be  disturbed  by  speculative  reasonings  on  abstract  rights.

This  is  the  view  of  the  subject  which  was  taken  by  the
Supreme  Couit  in  the  elaborate  opinion  to  which  I  have  re-
ferred. The  same  court  has  since  been  repeatedly  called
upon  to  discuss  and  decide  great  questions  concerning  In-
dian rights  and  title ;  and  the  subject  has  of  late  become
exceedingly  grave  and  momentous,  affecting  the  faith  and
character,  if  not  the  tranquillity  and  safety,  of  the  govern-
ment of  the  United  States.

In  the  case  of  The  Cherokee  Nalioti  v.  The  State  of  Geor-
gioy*  it  was  held  by  a  majority  of  the  court  that  the  Cherokee
nation  of  Indians,  dwelling  within  the  jurisdictional  limits  of


a  January  term,  1831, 5  Peters'  U.  S.  Rep.  1.


382  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pwl  VI.

the  United  States,  was  not  a  foreign  state  in  the  eenae  in
which  the  terra  is  used  in  the  constitution,  nor  entitled  as
such  to  proceed  in  that  court  against  the  state  of  Greorgia.
But  it  was  admitted  that  the  Cherokees  were  a  state,  or  dis-
tinct political  society,  capable  of  managing  its  own  affaira,
and  governing  itself,  and  that  they  had  uniformly  been  treated
as  such  since  the  settlement  of  our  country.  The  numerous
treaties  made  with  them  by  the  United  States,  recognise
them  as  a  people  capable  of  maintaining  the  relations  of  peace
and  war,  and  responsible  in  their  political  capacity.  Their
relation  to  the  United  States  was  nevertheless  peculiar.  They
were  domestic  dependent  nations,  and  their  relation  to  us  re-
sembled that  of  a  ward  to  his  guardian ;  and  they  had  an
unquestionable  right  to  the  lands  they  occupied,  until  that
right  should  be  extinguished  by  a  voluntary  cession  to  oor
government  The  subject  was  again  brought  forward,  and
the  great  points  which  it  involved  reasoned  upon  and  judi-
cially determined,  in  the  case  of  Worcester  v.  The  State  of
Georgia,  in  January  term,  1832,  and  which  was  another
case  arising  out  of  the  operation  of  the  laws  of  Georgia.

The  legislature  of  that  state,  in  the  years  1828,  1829,
and  1830,  passed  several  penal  statutes,  in  reference  to  the
Cherokee  nation  and  territory.  The  purport  and  effect  of
those  laws  was  to  demolish  the  Cherokee  government  and
institutions,  and  annihilate  their  political  existence  as  a
nation ;  and  to  divide  their  territory  among  the  adjoining
counties  in  Georgia,  and  extend  the  civil  and  criminal  law  of
the  state  over  the  Indian  territory.  Those  laws  dealt  with
them  as  if  they  were  alike  destitute  of  civil  and  political  pri«
vileges,  and  were  mere  tenants  at  sufferance,  without  any
interest  in  the  soil  on  which  they  dwelt,  and  which  had  been
uninterruptedly  claimed  and  enjoyed  by  them  and  their  an-
cestors as  a  nation  from  time  immemorial.  Their  lands  had
been  guarantied  to  them  as  a  nation,  and^e  protection  of  the
United  States  pledged  to  them  in  their  national  capacity,  and
their  existence,»cojnpetence,  and  rights,  as  a  distinct  pditical


Lee.  LI.3  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  383

society,  recognised,  by  treaties  made  with  them  in  the  years
1785, 1791, 1798,  1805, 1806, 1816, 1817,  and  1819,  by  the
government  of  the  United  States,  under  all  the  forms  and
flolemnities  of  treaty  compacts.  The  statutes  of  Georgia  ne-
vertheless prohibited  the  Cherokeep,  under  highiy*penal  sanc-
tions, from  the  exercise,  within  the  territory  they  so  occupied,
of  any  political  )[X)wer  whatever,  legislative,  executive,  or  judi-
cial. They  were  declared  not  to  be  competent  witnesses  in
any  court  of  the  state,  to  which  a  white  person  might  be  a
party,  unless  such  white  person  resided  in  the  Cherokee  na-
tion ;  and  they  were  also  declared  to  be  incompetent  to  con-
tract with  any  white  person.  Their  territory  was  divided
into  sections,  and  directed  to  be  surveyed  and  subdivided
into  districts,  and  disposed  of  by  lottery  among  the  citizens  of
Georgia,  Their  gold  mines  were  taken  possession  of  by  force,
and  the  use  of  them  by  the  Indians  prohibited.  They  were
however  declared  to  be  protected  in  the  possession  of  their

*

improvements^  until  the  legislature  should  enact  to  the
contrary^  or  the  Indians  should  voluntarily  abandon  them.
The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  in  the  case  of
Worcester^  reviewed  the  whole  ground  of  controversy,  rela-
tive to  the  character  and  validity  of  Indian  rights  within  the
territorial  dominions  of  the  United  States,  and  especially  in
reference  to  the  Cherokee  nation  wnthin  the  territorial  limits
of  Georgia.  They  declared  that  the  right  given  by  Euro-
pean discovery  was  the  exclusive  right  to  purchase,  but  this
right  was  not  founded  on  a  denial  of  the  right  of  the  Indian
possessor  to  sell.  Though  the  right  to  the  soil  was  claimed
to  be  in  the  European  governments,  as  a  necessary  conse*
quence  of  the  right  of  discovery  and  assumption  of  territorial
jurisdiction,  yet  that  right  was  only  deemed  such  in  reference
to  the  whites ;  and  in  respect  to  the  Indians,  it  was  always
understood  to  amount  only  to  the  exclusive  right  of  pur-
chasing  such  lands  as  the  natives  were  willing  to  sell.  The
royal  grants  and  charters  asserted  a  title  to  the  country
against  Europeans  only,  and  they  were  considered  as  blanl(


384  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

paper,  bo  far  as  the  rights  of  the  natives  were  concerned.
The  English,  the  French,  and  the  Spaniards,  were  equal
competitors  for  the  friendship  and  the  aid  of  the  Indian  na-
tions. The  crown  of  England  never  attempted  to  interfere
with  the  national  affairs  of  the  Indians,  further  than  to  keep
out  the  agents  of  foreign  powers,  who  might  seduce  tbem  into
foreign  alliances.  The  English  government  purchased  the
alliance  and  dependence  of  the  Indian  nations  by  subsidies,
and  purchased  their  lands  when  they  were  willing  to  sell,  at
a  price  they  were  willing  to  take,  but  they  never  coerced  a
surrender  of  tbem.  The  English  crown  considered  them  as
nations  competent  to  maintain  the  relations  of  peace  and  war,
and  o(  governing  themselves  under  her  protection.  The
United  States,  who  succeeded  to  the  rights  of  tlie  British
crown  in  respect  to  the^ Indians,  did  the  same,  and  no  more;
and  the  protection  stipulated  to  be  afforded  to  the  Indians,
and  claimed  by  them,  was  understood  by  all  parties,  as  only
binding  the  Indians  to  the  United  States  as  dependent  allies.
A  weak  power  does  not  surrender  its  independence  and  right
to  self-government  by  associating  with  a  stronger,  and  taking
its  protection.  This  is  the  settled  doctrine  of  the  law  of
nations,  and  the  court  concluded  and  adjudged,  that  the
Cherokee  nation  was  a  distinct  community,  occupying  its
own  territory,  with  boundaries  accurately  described,  in  which
the  laws  of  Georgia  cannot  rightfully  have  any  force,  and  into
which  the  citizens  of  Georgia  have  no  right  to  enter,  but  with
the  assent  of  the  Cherokees  themselves,  or  io  conformity  with
treaties,  and  with  the  acts  of  Congress.  The  court  accord-
ingly considered  the  acts  of  Georgia  which  have  been  men-
tioned, to  be  repugnant  to  the  constitution,  treaties,  and  laws
of  the  United  States,  and  consequently  that  tliey  were,  in
judgment  of  law,  null  and  void.

The  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  tlie  United  States
was  not  the  promulgation  of  any  new  doctrine,  (for  the  seve-
ral local  governments,  before  and  since  our  revolution,  never
regarded  the  Indian  nations  within  their  territorial  domains


L€c.  LI.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  385

as  subjects,  or  members  of  the  body  politic,  and  amenable
individually  to  their  jurisdiction.  They  treated  the  Indians
within  their  respective  territories  as  free  and  independent
bribes,  governed  by  their  own  laws  and  usages,  under  their
own  chiefs,  and  competent  to  act  in  a  national  character,  and
exercise  self-government,  and  while  residing  within  their  own
territories,  owing  no  allegiance  to  the  municipal  laws  oflhe
whites.  The  judicial  decisions  in  New- York  and  Tennes-
see, in  1810  and  1823,  corresponded  with  those  more  recently-
pronounced  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Union,  and  they
explicitly  recognised  this  historical  fact  and  declared  this  doc-
trine.' The  original  Indian  nations  were  regarded  and  dealt
with  as  proprietors  of  the  soil  which  they  claimed  and  occu-
pied, but  without  the  power  of  alienation,  except  to  the  go-
vernments which  protected  them,  and  had  thrown  over  them,
and  beyond  them,  their  assumed  patented  domains.  Those
governments  asserted  and  enforced  the  exclusive  right  to  ex-
tinguish Indian  titles  to  landf^Jnclosed  within  the  exterior
Unes  of  their  jurisdictions,  by  fair^Krchase,  under  the  sanction
of  treaties ;  and  they  held  all  individual  purchases  from  the
Indians,  whether  made  with  them  individually,  or  collectively
as  tribes,  to  be  absolutely  null  and  void.  The  only  power
that  could  lawfully  acquire  the  Indian  title  was  the  state,  and
a  government  grant  was  the  only  lawful  source  of  title  admit-
ted in  the  courts  of  justice.  The  colonial  and  state  govern-
ments, and  the  government  of  the  United  States,  uniformly
dealt  upon  these  principles  with  the  Indian  nations  dwelling


a  JacksoQ  v.  Wood,  7  Johns*  Rep.  295.  Goodell  v.  Smith,  20  ihid.
693.  Holland  ▼.  Pack,  Peck^s  Tenn.  Rep.  151.  The  ]egit]atare  of
New- York,  8o  late  as  1813,  by  statute,  authorized  the  goveroor  "  to
bold  a  treaty  or  ireaiiee  on  the  part  of  the  people  of  this  Haie^  toiih  the
Oneida  fMiion  ofJndiane^  or  any  other  of  the  Indian  nations  or  tribes
^eahin  Vus  state^  for  the  purpose  of  extiDgoishiog  their  claim  to  such
part  of  their  lands,  lying  within  this  state,  as  he  may  deem  proper,  for
such  snms  and  annuities  as  may  be  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  par-
ties.", Lavu  Jf.  T.  36th  less.  ch.  130.

via.,  m.  49


386  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  YI.


within  their  territorial  limitB.  The  Indian  tribes  placed  them-
selves  under  the  protection  of  the  whites,  and  they  ware  che-
rished as  dependent  allies,  but  subject  to  such  restraints  and
qualified  control  in  their  national  capacity,  as  were  considered
by  the  whites  to  be  indispensable  to  their  own  safety,  and
requisite  to  the  due  discharge  of  the  duty  of  that  protection.

There  has  been  considerable  diversity  of  opinion,  and
much  ingenious  speculation,  oa  the  claim  of  right  to  this
country  by  the  Europeans,  founded  on  the  title  by  discovery.
We  have  seen  that  with  respect  to  the  English  cdonists  in
America,  the  claim  was  modified,  and  much  of  its  extrava-
gance destroyed,  by  conceding  to  the  native  tribes  their  po-
litical rights  and  privileges,  as  dependent  alhes,  and  their
qualified  title  to  the  soil.  As  far  as  Indian  rights  and  terri-
tories were  defined  and  acknowledged  by  the  whites  by  treaty,
tliere  was  no  questbn  in  the  case,  for  the  whites  were  bound
by  the  moral  and  national  obligations  of  contract  and  good
feith.  And  as  far  as  Indian  nations  had  formed  themselves
into  regular,  organized  governments,  within  reasonable  and
definite  limits  necessary  for  the  hunter  state,  there  would
seem  also  to  be  no  ground  to  deny  the  absolute  nature  of
thmr  territorial  and  political  rights.  But  beyond  these  p<»nt8
our  colonial  ancestors  were  not  willing  to  go.  They  seem  to
have  deemed  it  to  be  unreasonable,  and  a  perversion  of  the
duties  and  design  of  the  human  race,  to  bar  the  Europeans,
with  their  implements  of  husbandry  and  the  arts,  with  their
laws,  their  learning,  their  liberty,  and  their  religion,  from  all
entrance  into  this  mighty  continent,  lest  they  might  trespass
upon  some  part  of  the  interminable  forests,  deserts,  and  hunt-
ing grounds  of  an  uncivilized,  erratic,  and  savage  race  of
men.  Nor  could  they  be  brought  to  entertain  much  respect
for  the  loose  and  attenuated  claim  of  such  occupants,  to  the
exclusive  use  of  a  country  evidently  fitted  and  intended  by
Providence  to  be  subdued  and  cultivated,  and  to  become  the
residence  of  civilized  nations.

It  was  part  of  the  original  destiny  and  duty  of  the  human


Ut.  LI.]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  387

race  to  subdue  the  earth  and  till  the  ground  from  whence
they  were  taken. The  white  race  of  men,  as  Governor
Powoall  observed,  have  been  "  land-workers  from  the  begin'
ning  f  and  if  unsettled  and  sparsely  scattered  tribes  of  hun'
ters  and  fishermen  show  no  disposition  to  emerge  from  the
savage  to  the  agricultural  and  civilized  state  of  man,  their
right  to  keep  some  of  the  fairest  portions  of  the  earth  a  mere
wilderness,  filled  with  wild  beasts,  for  the  sake  of  hunting,
becomes  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  civilization  and  moral
improvement  of  mankind. Tattel  did  not  place  much  valu0
on  the  territorial  rights  of  erratic  races  of  people,  who  sparsely
inhabited  immense  regions,  and  sufiered  them  to  remain  a
wilderness,  because  their  occupation  was  war,  and  their  sub^
sistence  drawn  chiefly  from  the  forest He  observed  that  the
cultivation  of  the  soil  was  an  obligation  imposed  by  nature
upon  mankind,  and  that  the  human  race  could  not  well  sub*
flist,  or  greatly  multiply,  if  rude  tribes,  which  had  not  advan*
ced  from  the  hunter  state,  were  entitled  to  claim  and  retain
all  the  boundless  regions  through  which  they  might  wander.
If  such  a  people  will  usurp  more  territory  than  they  can  sub-
due and  cultivate,  they  have  no  right  to  complain,  if  a  nation
of  cultivators  puts  in  a  claim  for  a  part,  and  confines  the
natives  within  narrower  limits. He  alluded  to  the  establislH
ment  of  the  French  and  English  colonies  in  North  America,
aa  being,  in  his  opinion,  entirely  lawfril,  and  he  extolled  the
moderation  of  William  Penn,  and  of  the  first  settlers  in  New-
England,  who  are  understood  to  have  fairly  purchased  of  the
natives,  from  time  to  time,  the  lands  they  wished  to  cokh*
nize.''

The  original  English  emigrants  came  to  this  country  with
no  slight  confidence  in  the  solidity  of  such  doctrines,  and  in
their  right  to  possess,  subdue,  and  cultivate  the  American
wilderness,  as  being,  by  the  law  of  nature  and  the  gift  of
Providence,  open  and  common  to  the -first  occupants  in  the

a  DraU  du  Gent,  c.  1 ,  lec.  81.  209.


388  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

character  of  cultivators  of  the  earth.  The  great  patent  €3^
New-England,  which  was  the  foundation  of  the  subeequeat
titles  and  subordinate  charters  in  that  country,  and  the  op-
nions  of  grave  and  learned  men,  tended  to  confirm  that  con-
fidence. According  to  Chalmers,  the  practice  of  the  Euro-
pean world  had  constituted  a  law  of  nations,  which  8temly
disregarded  the  possession  of  the  aborigines,  because  they  had
not  been  admitted  into  the  society  of  nadons.* But  what-


a  Chalmers*  Political  Armals,  p.  676.  Tbe  Puritans  circulated  a
paper  io  England,  immediately  preceding  their  projected  emigation  to
Mataacbusetti  Bay,  entitled,  Gen^roi  CoruideratioMfor  the  PlaniaUon
of  Jfew-England.  (Mather's  Magnalia,  vol.  i.  65,  edit.  1820.)  It
was  published  at  large  in  HtUchinton's  Stale  Papers,  (Boston,  1769,
p.  27,)  and  it  declared  that  *■*  tbe  whole  earth  was  the  Lord's  garden,
and  he  bad  gi?en  it  to  the  sons  of  Adam,  to  be  tilled  and  improTed  by
them.  Why  then  should  any  stand  starving  for  places  of  habitation,
and  in  the  mean  time  suffer  whole  countries,  as  profitable  for  tbe  use  of
man,  to  lie  waste  without  any  improvement.*'  In  answer  to  the  objec-
tion that  they  bad  no  warrant  for  taking  land  a  long  time  possessed  by
other  sons  of  Adam,  it  was  stated  that  what  **  was  common  to  all  was
proper  to  none.  This  savage  people  ruletb  over  many  lands  without
title  or  property,  for  they  inclose  no  ground,  neither  have  they  cattle  to
maintain  it.  There  was  more  than  enough  for  them  and  us.  By  a
miraculous  plague,  a  great  part  of-the  country  was  left  void  of  inhabi-
tants. Finally,  they  would  come  in  with  good  leave  of  tbe  natiTes."
We  may  also  refer  to  an  able  paper,  written  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bulkley,
of  Colchester,  in  Coooecticut,  in  1724,  entitled,  '^  An  Inquiry  into  the
right  of  the  Aborigioal  Natives  to  the  Lands  in  America,  and  the  Titles
derived  from  them."  (JUassachusetts  Hist»  Collections,  vol.  iv.  159.)
In  that  treatise,  the  learned  author  confines  Indian  titles,  which  have
any  solidity  or  value,  to  those  particular  parcels  of  land  which  they  bad
subdued  and  improved,  and  insists  that  tbe  English  had  an  undoubted
right  to  enter,  and  appropriate  for  agricultural  purposes,  all  the  residue
of  the  waste  and  unimproved  lands  in  the  country,  as  being  common,
and  open  to  the  first  donate  occupants.  He  contended,  that  in  a  state
of  nature,  the  only  title  to  property  was  the  labour  by  which  tbe  same
was  appropriated  and  cultivated,  and  that  the  Indian  tribes  were  still  in
that  imperfect  state  of  civil  policy  which  borders  upon  a  state  of  nature,
and  the  extensire  tracts  of  country  which  they  claimed  as  national  pro-


Lee.  LL]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  389

ever  loose  opinions  might  have  been  entertained,  or  latitudi-
nary  doctrines  inculcated,  in  favour  of  the  abstract  right  to
possess  aqd  colonize  America,  it  is  certain  that  in  point  of
fcu^  the  colonists  were  not  satisfied,  or  did  not  deem  it  expe-
dient, to  settle  the  country  without  the  consent  of  the  abori-
gines, procured  by  fair  purchase,  under  the  sanction  of  the
civil  authorities.  The  pretensions  of  the  patent  of  King
James  were  not  relied  on,  and  the  prior  Indian  right  to  the
soil  of  the  country  was  generally,  if  not  uniformly  recognised
and  respected  by  the  New-England  Puritans.  They  always
negotiated  with  the  Indian  nations  as  distinct  and  indepen-
dent powers,  and  neither  the  right  of  pre-emption,  which  was


perty,  was  not  subject  to  any  regulatioo,  or  defined  as  property,  and
lay  neglected  in  that  common  state  wherein  nature  bad  left  it.  Cotton
Mather^  also,  in  bis  Jdagncdia  ChrisH  Americana,  (vol.  i.  72,)  consider-
ed it  as  an  instance  of  tbe  roost  imaginable  civility,  tbat  tbe  English
parcbased  several  tracts  of  land  of  tbe  natives,  nohoUfutanding  the  j7a-
tenl  which  they  had  for  the  couniry,  Tbe  great  patent  of  New-Eng-
land, granted  by  King  James,  in  1620,  recited  tbat  tbe  king's  subjects
bad  **  taken  actual  possession  of  tbe  continent  mentioned  in  tbe  patent,
io  the  name  and  to  tbe  use  of  tbe  king,  as  sovereign  lord  thereof  ;—
that  there  were  no  other  subjects  of  any  Christian  king  or  state,  by
any  authority  from  their  sovereign  lords  or  princes,  actually  in  posses-
sion of  any  of  tbe  lands  between  the  degrees  of  forty  and  forty-eight  ;—
that  tbe  country  being  depopulated  by  pestilence  and  devastation,  tbe
appointed  time  had  come  in  which  almighty  God  had  thought  fit  and
determined  that  those  large  and  goodly  territories,  deserted  as  it  were
by  their  natural  inhabitants,  should  be  possessed  and  enjoyed  by  such  of
bis  subjects  as  should  be  conducted  thither ; — tbat  tbe  settlement  would
tend  to  the  reducing  and  conversion  of  such  savages  as  remained  wan-
dering in  desolation  and  distress,  to  civil  society  and  the  Christian  reli-
gion, and  to  tbe  enlargement  of  tbe  king's  dominions,"  Tbe  grant  was
of  all  tbe  continent  between  tbe  fortieth  and  forty-eighth  degrees  of
north  latitude,  and  **  in  length  by  all  the  breadth  aforesaid  throughout
the  main  land  from  sea  to  sea,  provided  tbe  same,  or  any  part,  be  not
actually  possessed  or  inhabited  by  any  other  Christian  prince  or  state."
See  tbe  patent  at  large  in  Haxard'e  State  Papere^  vol.  i.  103,  and  in
Bay  We  Htetorkal  Memoir  ^  vol.  i.  160.


890  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [P»t  VL

uniformly  claimed  and  ezereified,  nor  the  state  of  dependeooe
and  pupilage  under  which  the  Indian  tribes  within  their  ttf-
riiorial  limits  were  necessarily  placed^  were  carried  so  fiur  aa
to  destroy  the  existence  of  the  Indians  as  self-governing  ccMn*
muntties.'  The  manner  in  which  the  people  of  this  countiy,
through  all  periods  of  their  colonial  history,  treated  and  dealt
with  the  Indians,  is  a  subject  of  deep  interest,  and  well  wor-
thy of  the  thorough  and  accurate  examination  of  every  peF-
son  conversant  with  our  laws  and  history,  and  whose  bosom
glows  with  a  generous  warmth  for  the  honour  and  wel&re<tf
his  country.

The  settlement  of  that  part  of  America  now  composing
the  United  States,  has  been  attended  with  as  little  violence
and  aggression,  on  the  part  of  the  whites,  in  a  national  pmnt
of  view,  as  were  compatible  with  the  feet  of  the  entry  of  a
race  of  civilized  men  into  the  territory  of  savages,  and  with


a  WboQ  the  Puritaiu  of  New-Englaod  first  settled  at  PlymcNith»  udl
made  treaties  with  the  Indians,  those  treaties  bore  the  lang^ag^  of  de«
pendeoce  and  submissioD  ;  aod  the  English  accepted  of  the  acknoir-
lodgments  of  the  sachems  that  they  were  dependent^  and  oZfiet,  and
loyal  mlffecU  of  King  Jame9, (Morton't  J^euj'England  Memorialy
p«  64.  67.  286. Baylie*M  HiitoriccU  Memoir,  voL  i.  66.  82.) But
when  war  was  about  commencing  with  King  Philip,  in  1675,  be  insisted
that  all  former  agreements  with  Plymouth  were,  as  be  truly  appre-
hended they  were,  agreements  of  amity  and  not  of  subjection,  add  the
Indians  regarded  themselves  as  allies,  and  not  as  subjects  of  England*
Those  Indian  stipulations  were  regarded  by  Massachusetts  as  amount-
ing only  to  a  state  of  qualified  dependence. (Bayli€*»  HiiL  JHemoir^
vol.  ii.  part  3,  p.  23. TrumhulVt  Hi»i,  of  Conneclicuif  vol.  i.  342.
ChcUmert'  Political  Annalt,  p.  398.) As  further  eridence  of  the  truth
of  the  historical  deductions  mentioned  in  the  text,  we  may  refer  to  the
king's  proclamation  after  the  treaty  of  Paris,  in  1763,  founded  on  the
immense  acquisitions  of  territory  by  England,  under  that  treaty. It
declared  <<  that  the  several  nations  or  tribes  of  Indians  with  whom  we
were  connected,  and  who  live  under  our  protection,  should  not  be  mo-
lested or  disturbed  in  the  possession  of  such  parts  of  our  dominions  and
territories,  as,  not  having  been  ceded  or  purchased  by  us,  are  reserved
to  them,  or  any  of  them,  as  their  hunting  grounds."


Lee  U.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  S91

the  power  and  the  determination  to  reclaim  and  occupy  it.
The  colony  of  Massachusetts,  in  1633,  prohibited  the  pur-
chase of  lands  from  the  natives,  without  license  from  the
government ;  and  the  colony  of  Plymouth,  in  1643,  passed
a  similar  law. Very  strong  and  authentic  evidence  of  the
distinguished  moderation  and  equity  of  the  New-England
governments  towards  the  Indians,  is  to  be  found  in  the  letter
of  Governor  Winslow,  o[  the  Plymouth  colony,  of  the  Ist
May,  1676,  in  which  he  states,  that  before  King  Philip's
war,  the  English  did  not  possess  one  foot  of  land  in  that
cdony,  but  what  was  fairly  obtained,  by  honest  purchase,  from
the  Indian  proprietors,  and  with  the  knowledge  and  allowance
of  the  general  court."* The  New-England  annals  abound
with  proo&  of  a  just  dealing  with  the  Indians  in  respect  to
their  lands. The  people  of  all  the  New-England  colonies,
settled  their  towns  upon  the  basis  of  a  tide,  procured  by  fair
purchase  from  the  Indians,  with  the  consent  of  government,
except  in  the  few  instances  of  lands  acquired  by  conquest,
after  a  war  deemed  to  have  been  just  and  necessary.^ In-
stances are  to  be  met  with  in  the  early  annals  of  New-Eng-
land, of  regular  and  exemplary  punishment  of  white  per-
sons, for  acts  of  injustice  and  violence  towards  the  Indians.*
The  Massachusetts  Legislature,  in  1633,  threw  the  protec-
tion of  its  government  over  the  Indians  in  the  enjoyment  of
their  improved  lands,  hunting  grounds,  and  fishing  places,


a  Hazard^t  CoUectioM  of  State  Papert,  ro\.  ii.  631—534.  Holmei*
American  AnneUti  vol.  i.  383.

b  Holmti'  Annali,  Tol.  i.  166—169.  220.  S31.note4,233.  245.248.
259.  312,  317.  Winthrop^s  HUiory,  toI.  i.  259.  Hazard^i  SiaU
Papersy  toI.  ii.  poitim,  JiauackutetU  Hittoricai  CollecUoiUy  pauim,
TrumbulPi  Hist,  of  Cbnnec/tctii,  toI.  i.  113—117.  Sullivan's  HisL
Distriei  of  Maine,  143—149.  Dwighi's  Travels,  vol.  i.  167.  Bay*
He's  HisL  Memoir,  toI.  i.  287.

c  WvUhrop's  Hist,  ff  Jfew-Efighmd,  toI.  i.  34. 267. 269.  BayU^a
HisL  JHemair,  vol.  i.  245—248.  Morton's  Jfem-EngUmd  Memorial,
p.  207.


392  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

by  declaring  that  they  should  have  relief  in  any  of  the  courts
88  the  English  have.*

The  government  of  the  colony  of  New-York,  has  a  claiai
equally  fisiir  with  that  of  any  part  of  America,  to  a  policy  uni-
formly just,  temperate,  and  pacific,  towards  the  Indians  with-
in the  Uraits  of  its  jurisdiction. While  the  Dutch  held  and
governed  the  colony,  the  Indian  titles  were  always  respectedj
and  extinguished  by  &ir  means,  and  with  the  consent  of  the
natives. This  policy  was  continued  by  their  conquerors,  and
on  the  first  settlement  of  the  English  at  New- York,  in  1665,
it  was  ordained,  that  no  purchase  of  lands  firom  the  Indians
should  be  valid  without  the  governor's  license,  and  the  exe-
cution of  the  purchase  in  his  presence,  and  this  salutary
check  to  fraud  and  injustice,  was  essentially  continued.* Re-
gulations of  that  kind  have  been  the  invariable  American
poUcy. The  king,  by  proclamation,  soon  after  the  peace  of
1763,  prohibited  purchases  of  Indian  lands,  unless  at  a  pub-
lic assembly  of  the  Indians,  and  in  the  name  of  the  crown,
and  under  the  superintendence  of  bis  colonial  authorities.
A  prohibition  of  individual  purchases  of  Indian  lands  without
the  consent  of  government,  has  since  been  made  a  constitu-
tional provision  in  New- York,  Virginia,  and  North  Carolina.
The  colonists  of  New- York  settled  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  most  formidable  Indian  confederacy  known  to  the  coun-


a  Holmes'  AnnaU,  vol.  i.  217, 218.

b  Smith's  Hist,  of  JVew-York,  vol.  i.  p.  39.  Dvke  of  Tories  Laws^
ID  the  coliectioos  of  the  New -York  Historical  Society,  vol.  i.  JFood*s
Sketch  of  the  First  SeUlement  of  Long-Island,  p.  12.  22, 23.  CoUec-
Itofif  of  the  Jfew-York  Hist.  Society,  vol.  i.  171.  211.  224.  227.  239.
At  evidence  of  the  just  and  friendly  disposition  of  the  Dutch  towards
the  Indians,  we  have  the  interesting  fact,  that  the  Minesink  valley,  on
the  Delaware,  was  settled  by  Dutch  emigrants  as  early  as  1644 ;  and
being  an  industrious,  quiet,  and  pious  people,  and  having  purchased  the
lands  from  the  Indians,  they  lived  in  uninterrupted  peace  and  friendship
with  them  for  upwards  of  100  years.  Preston's  Jfotices  of  Minetinkf
published  1829.


Lcc.  LI.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  393

try,  and  came  in  contact  ivith  their  possessions.  But  the  six
nations  of  Indians,  of  which  the  Mohawks  were  the  head,
placed  themselves  and  their  lands  under  the  protection  of  the
government  of  New- York,  from  the  earliest  periods  of  the  co-
lony adn)inis(ration.'  They  were  considered  and  treated  as
separate  but  dependent  nations,  and  the  friendship  which  sub-
sisted between  them  and  the  Dutch,  and  their  successors,  the
English,  was  cemented  by  treaties,  alliances,  and  kind  offi-
ces. It  continued  unshaken  from  the  first  settlement  of  the
Dutch  on  the  shores  of  the  Hudson  and  the  Mohawk,  down
to  the  period  of  the  American  war ;  and  the  fidelity  of  that
friendship  is  shown  by  the  most  honourable  and  the  most
undoubted  attestations.*  And  when  we  consider  the  long
and  distressing  wars  in  which  the  six  nations  were  involved,
on  our  account,  with  the  Canadian  French,  and  the  artful
means  which  were  used,  from  time  to  time,  to  detach  them  from
our  alliance,  it  must  be  granted,  that  the  faith  of  treaties  has
nowhere,  and  at  no  time,  been  better  observed,  or  maintain-
ed with  a  more  intrepid  spirit,  than  by  those  generous  barl>a-
rians/


a  Coldeo*8  History  of  the  Five  JAUions^  pastim^  Governor  Fow-
nal*8  ^ministration  of  the  Colonies^  p.  268—274.  Journals  of  the
Confederation  Congress^  vol.  i.  May  1 , 1 782.

b  The  ipeech  of  tbc  Indian  Good  Peter  to  the  commissioners  at  Fort
Scbujicr,  in  1788,  is  strong  proof  of  the  fact  He  said  that  "wbeo
the  white  men  first  came  into  the  coantry,  they  were  few  and  feeble,
and  the  five  nations  numcroas  and  powerfal.  The  Indians  were
friendly  to  the  white  men,  and  permitted  them  to  settle  in  the  coantry,
and  protected  them  from  their  enemies."  Collections  of  the  Mw'York
HUlorical  Society,  vol.  iii.  3^6.

e  Colden's  History  of  the  Five  Nations  of  Canada^  d^endeni  on  the
Province  of  J^eto-Tork,  vol.  i.  84.  el  passim,  Chalmers*  PoUHcal
Jinnals^  p.  576.  The  confederacy  of  the  ^ve  nations  (and  which  was
known  as  the  confederacy  of  the  six  nations  after  the  Tascaroras  were
admitted  into  the  onion)  migfht  afford  the  subject  of  an  historical  sketch,
in  the  hands  of  a  master,  replete  with  the  deepest  interest  and  cariosity.
It  was  distingaished,  from  tbc  time  of  the  first  discovery  of  the  Hudsoo

Vol.  in.  50


394  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

Id  New- Jersey,  the  proprietaries  very  early  secured  all  their
titles  by  Indiaa  purchases ;  and  all  purchases  to  be  made.


down  to  (be  war  of  1756,  for  its  power,  policy,  and  marital  Bpirit. At
(he  close  of  the  17lb  century,  thatcoofedcracy  was  computed  toconCaio
10,000  fig-bling^  meo. (Burke't  Account  of  the  European  setUemenis
in  America,  vul.  ii.  193.) But  this  was  a  very  exagg^erated  compata-
tioo,  for  in  1677,  an  iDtelhgenl  imr eWer,  {Jfentwortk  Qreehalph,)  who
visited  the  &ve  oatioDs,  computed  the  whole  number  of  fighting^  meo  at
2150. Id  1747  they  were  supposed  not  to  exceed  1500. The  threat
inflaeDce  of  Sir  William  Johnson  is  said  to  have  collected  only  1000  In-
dians for  so  exciting  an  expedition  as  that  against  Montreal,  in  1760.
{Douglau^  Summary  of  the  BrUiih  SetUemenU  in  ^"orih  America^  yol.
i.  185, 186. Annual  Register  for  1760. Chalmers'  Political  Annals^
p.  609.) The  ^ve  nations,  during  the  time  of  tbejr  ascendancy  and
glory,  extended  their  dominion  on  erery  side,  and  levied  tribute  on  dis-
tant tribes. {Proud* s  Hist,  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  ii.  294.) Tbe  Mo-
hawks were  tbe  terror  and  scourge  of  all  tbe  New-England  Indians,
and  those  dwelling  west  of  Connecticut  river  paid  them  tribute.  ( TVtim-
bulVs  HitL  of  Connecticut^  vol.  i.) Charlevoix  ( Travels  in  Canada,  vol.
i.  152.  167. 171,)  speaks  in  strong  terms  of  the  power  and  fierceness  of
tbe  Iroquois,  who,  as  early  as  1720,  bad  almost  extirpated  the  Algon- .
quins,  tbe  Ilurons,  and  other  tribes  of  Canadian  savages. Governor
Colden  was  well  acquainted  with  their  history,  and  by  means  of  his
office  of  Surveyor  General  of  the  Province  of  New-York,  he  bad  access
to  tbe  most  authentic  sources  of  information. He  wrote  the  first  part
of  bis  History  of  the  Five  Nations  as  early  as  1727,  and  he  says  that
they  carried  their  arms  to  the  Carolinas  and  the  banks  of  tbe  Missis-
sippi, arid  entirely  destroyed  many  Indian  nations. Tbe  Chevalier
Tonti  accompanied  M.  de  la  Salle  in  his  expedition  an*!  discoveries  on
the  great  Lakes  and  the  Mississippi,  in  1678 — 1684,  and  was  appointed
Governor  of  Fort  St.  Louis,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Mississippi ;  and  he
mentions  the  rematkable  fact,  that  in  1684  about  500  Iroquois  warriors
came  and  attacked  bis  fort,  being  jealous  of  the  new  establishment.
(Acoennt  of  De  la  Sa11e*s  discoveries,  by  M.  Tonti,  inserted  in  the
Collections  of  the  J^ew-Tork  Historical  Society^  vol.  ii.  286.) In  1684,
Lord  Howard,  governor  of  Virginia,  was  under  the  necessity  of  meet-
ing the  chiefs  of  the  five  nations  at  Albany,  in  order,  by  negotiation,  to
check  their  excursions  to  the  south. {Colden's  History,  vol.  i.  44»
53.) In  the  Indian  war  in  Virginia,  which  terminated  in  1677,  all  tbe
Indian  tribes  on  tbe  east  side  of  the  Alleghany  ridge,  became  tribatariei


liec.  LL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY,  396

witliout  the  consent  of  die  government,  were,  by  a  law,  in
1682,  declared  to  be  void.  In  Weet-New-Jersey,  in  1676,
the  liberality  of  the  duaker  iofluence  went  so  far  as  to  pro-
vide by  law,  that  in  all  trials  where  Indians,  being  natives  of
the  province,  were  concerned,  the  jury  was  to  consist  of  six
persons  of  the  neighbourhood  and  six,  Indians.'  In  1758,
the  Indians,  at  a  treaty  at  Easton,  released,  for  a  valuable  con-
sideration, all  claims  to  lands  in  New-Jei-sey,^  and  the  legis-
lature of  Pennsylvania,  in  1783,  asserted  it  to  have  been  their
uniform  practice,  to  extinguish  Indian  titles  by  fair  purchase.


of  the  proTioce,  but  protected  by  the  whites  in  their  petsons  and  pro-
perty. The  &ye  natioos  kept  superior  to  any  such  subjection,  and
though  their  head  quarters,  or  great  counqii  place,  was  at  Onondaga,
in  the  western  part  of  New- York,  they  continued  their  hostile  marches
along  the  frontiers  of  Virginia. A  treaty  was  at  length  made  with  thcro,
in  172^,  by  which  they  stipulated  not  to  cross  the  Potomac,  or  pass  to
(he  eastward  of  the  great  mountains  ;  and  the  tributary  Indians  of  Vir-
ginia agreed,  on  their  part,  not  to  pass  the  same  to  the  north  or  west ;
and  by  a  colony  itatute,  any  tribulary  Indians  violating  Ike  treaiy  were
to  he  transported  and  sold  as  slai>es. (4  Randolph's  Rep.  633.) Biit
the  ambitious  spirit  and  daring  enterprise  of  the  six  nations  continued
to  a  much  later  period. An  intelligent  old  Mohawk  Indian  communi-
cated the  fact  to  General  Schuyler,  that  in  his  early  life  be  was  one  of
a  parly  of  Mohawks  who  left  their  castles  on  an  expedition  against  the
Chickasaws,  in  Carolina. The  expedition  was  disastrous,  and  the
Chickasaws  destroyed  them  by  an  attack  in  ambush,  and  only  two,  of
which  he  was  one,  escaped. His  companion  fled  to  St.  Augustine,  but
he  returned  home  by  land,  and  supplied  himself  on  his  long  journey,
with  food,  by  his  bow  and  arrow. lie  cautiously  avoided  all  Indian
settlements,  and  did  not  see  the  face  of  a  human  being  from  the  time  he
fled  from  the  battle,  in  Carolina,  until  he  reached  the  Mohawk  castles.
This  anecdote  I  received  in  the  year  1803,  from  General  Schuyler,  who
appeared  to  place  implicit  confidence  in  its  accuracy  ;  and  no  person
was  more  competent  to  afibrd  precise  information  on  every  subject  con-
nected with  our  colonial  history,  and  Indian  aflairs,  than  that  very  intel-
ligent and  accomplished  man.

a  Learning  Sf  Spicer's  Collections,  p.  273.  400, 401.  479.  667.

6  Annual  Register  for  1759,  p.  191.


396  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pfirt  VI.

The  juslice  and  equity  of  the  original  Indian  purchases  by
William  Penn,  the  founder  of  Pennsylvania,  particularly  at
his  memorable  treaty  of  1682,  were  known  and  celebrated
throughout  Europe.* So,  Governor  Calvert,  in  1633,  platit-
ed  Maryland,  after  fair  purchases  from  the  Indians,  and  in
1644,  all  Indian  purchases,  without  the  consent  of  the  pro-
prietary of  the  province,  were  declared,  by  law,  to  be  illegal
and  void.^ There  are  also  repeated  proofs  upon  record,  of
purchases  from  Indians,  which  covered  a  considerable  part  of
the  lower  country  of  Virginia ;  and  Mr.  Jeffereon  says,  that
the  upper  country  ivas  acquired  by  purchases  made  in  the
most  unexceptionable  form.^ The  cases  of  unautliorizcd  in-
trusions upon  Indian  lands  happened  in  the  early  settlement
of  Virginia  ;**  for  laws  were  very  soon  made  in  Virginia  to
protect  Indians  in  their  territorial  possessions  and  rights  from
the  frauds  of  the  whites.* Georgia  was  settled  under  similar
good  auspices,  and  Savannah,  with  a  considerable  tract  of
land,  was  purchased  from  the  Creek  Indians,  by  Govemw
Ogelthorpe,  in  1733  and  1738,  under  the  sanction  of  solemn
treaties. In  1763,  a  large  cession  of  lands  in  Georgia,  was
also  made  by  the  Creeks,  Cherokecs,  and  other  nations  of
Indians^

The  historicid  facts  and  documents  to  which  wc  have  re-
ferred, relative  to  the  acquisition  of  the  Indian  lands  in  this
country,  are  sufficient  to  vindicate  the  justice  and  moderation


a  Watson,  in  his  Annal*  of  Philadelphia^  in  1830,  has  given  some
curious  details  respecting  the  localities.of  (he  spot  where  Williani  Penn
held  hi&  first  Indian  treaty,  a  treaty  memorable  in  diplomatic  annals
for  the  simplicity  and  moral  grandeur  of  the  spectacle,  and  its  auspicious
and  permanent  influence  upon  the  minds  of  (he  Indians.  The  chain  of
friendship  then  formed,  continued,  says  Proud,  [Hist,  of  Pennsylvasiia^
vol.  i.  212,]  uninterruptedly  for  more  than  seventy  years.

b  Chalmeri'  Annals^  2X6.
' e  JefferMon'M  ^oUt  on  Virginia^  p.  153.

d  ChalmerMf  b.  1.  58.  ^

e  Mr.  Law*  of  Ftrgifwij  p.  96.


Lee.  LL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  397

of  our  colonial  ancestors.  But  wars  with  the  natives  result-
ed, almost  inevitably,  from  the  intrusion  of  the  whites.  The
origin  of  those  wars  is  not  imputable  to  any  general  spirit  of
unkindness  or  injustice  on  the  part  of  the  colonial  autliorities,
though  they  sometimes  exhibited  signal  and  severe  proofe  of
the  display  of  superior  power  and  cruel  retaliation.*^  There
were  also,  at  times,  acts  of  fraud  and  violence  committed  by
individual  colonists,  prompted  by  cupidity  and  a  conscious-
ness of  superior  skill  and  power,  and  springing  from  a  very
blunt  sense  of  the  rights  of  savages.*  The  causes  of  wars
with  the  Indians  were  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  case.
They  arose  from  Indian  jealousy  of  the  presence  and  location
of  white  people,  for  the  Indians  had  the  sagacity  to  perceive,
what  the  subsequent  history  of  this  country  has  abundantly
verified,  that  the  destruction  of  their  race  must  be  the  conse-
quence of  the  settlements  of  the  English,  and  their  exten-
sion over  the  country.'' And  if  wars  with  them  were  never


a  The  cases  I  allude  to  in  New-Eogland,  were  the  iocnreions  upon
tho  Indian  settlements  on  Block  Island;  the  extirpation  of  the  PeqiioU;
tlie  occasional  execution  of  sachems  and  other  prisoners  of  war,  and  (iie
sale  of  captives,  including  women  and  children,  for  slaves.  See  H^in^
Ikrop'i  Hut.  of  J^euf'England,  vol.  i.  p.  192—199.^2^237.  Jbid.
voi.  ii.  131—134.  Hutchin»on's  Hut.  of  MaMochuselU,  vol.  i.  307.
HoimeM*  American  Annals,  vol.  i.  181.  237—241.  272.  Baylie'a  Jlu-
ioriccU  Memoir ,  vol.  ii.  TrvmhulPs  Hist,  of  ConnecHctU,  vo).  L  112.
The  roost  reprehensible  conduct  towards  the  Indians  was  tuat  in  Caro-
lina, of  fomenting  hostilities  among  the  tribes,  in  order  to  purchase  or
kidnap  Indian  captives,  and  sell  them  for  slaves  in  the  West  Indies.  Mr.
Crahame,  on  the  authority  of  Archdale,  Oldmixon,  Hewit,  and  Chal-
mers, states  this  fact,  and  says  that  it  was  not  until  after  persevering
and  vehement  remonstrances,  that  a  law  was  procured,  first  to  regulate,
and  then  to  extirpate  this  profligate  practice.  Qr<iha$ne*M  HisL  of  Ike
American  Coloniee,  vol.  ii.  1S5, 136.

b  Hidchyuon*s  History^  vol.  i.  p.  5. 263.  Holmu'  Annals^  vol.  i.
147, 148.

c  The  war  with  tlie  Peqnots  in  1637,  and  the  confederacy  of  lodiaa
nattoos  formed  in  1675,  by  Metacom,  the  sachem  of  the  Wampaooags,
commonly  called  King  Philip,  would  seem  to  have  been  formed  by  the


T


398  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  TL

QDJustly  provoked  by  the  coloDial  governnients  or  people,  j^t
they  were,  no  doubt,  stimulated  oo  the  part  of  the  Indians^
by  the  consciousnees  of  impending  danger,  the  suggestions
of  patriotism,  and  the  influence  of  a  fierce  and  lofty  spirit  ot
national  independence.  In  all  thdr  wars  with  the  whites^
the  means  and  the  power  of  the  parties  were  extremely  un-
equal, and  the  Indians  were  sure  to  come  out  of  the  contest
with  great  loss  of  numbers  and  territory,  if  not  with  almost
total  extermination.  There  was  always  much  in  the  Io«
dian  character,  in  its  earlier  and  better  state,  to  excite  admi-
ration, as  there  was,  and  still  is,  in  their  sufiferings,  to  excite
sympathy.

The  government  of  die  United  States,  since  the  period  of
our  independence,  has  pursued  a  steady  system  of  pacific,
just,  and  paternal  policy  towards  the  Indians,  within  their
wide  spread  territories. It  has  never  insisted  upon  any  other
daim  to  the  Indian  lands,  than  the  right  of  pre-emption,
upon  fair  terms ;  and  the  plan  of  permanent  annuities,  which
the  United  States,  and  the  state  of New- York,  among
others,  have  adopted,  as  one  main  ingredient  in  the  conside-
ration of  purchases,  has  been  attended  with  beneficial  eflects.
The  efforts  of  the  national  government  to  protect  the  Indians
from  wars  with  each  other,  from  their  own  propensity  to  in-
temperance, from  the  frauds  and  injustice  of  the  whites,  and


influence  of  these  patriotic  views  on  the  part  of  (he  lodiaos. This  is
the  conclusion  as  to  those  wars,  which  is  drawn  by  an  able  and  learned
colonial  annalist. {Chalmerg^  Political  Anncds^  p.  291.  398.) So  the
massacre  of  the  whites  in  Virginia  in  1622,  arose,  says  Go?ernor  Win-
tbrop,  (and  be  wrote  from  contemporary  information  which  came  from
the  Indians,)  because  the  Indians  saw  the  English  took  op  all  their
lands,  and  would  drive  them  out  of  the  country. (Winthrop's  History
by  Savage,  vol.  ii.  164.) The  proud  Mohawks  more  patiently  submit-
ted to  their  impending  fate ;  for  sagaciously  dreading  the  rapid  progress
of  the  white  population,  they,  in  1735,  conveyed  a  very  valuable  part
of  their  territory  to  the  corporation  of  Albany,  to  take  effect  v^pon  the
total  diteolution  of  their  fri6e,and  this  deed  Governor  Cosby  afterwards
wantonly  destroyed. (Smith*s  HisL  ofjfew'  York,  vol.  ii.  30.)


I.ec.  LI.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  399

to  impart  to  them  some  of  the  essential  blessings  of  civiliza-^
lion,  have  been  steady  and  judicious,  and  reflect  lustre  on
our  national  character.  This  affords  some  consolation  under
a  view  of  the  melancholy  contrast  between  the  original  cha-
racter of  the  Indians,  when  the  Europeans  first  visited  them,
and  their  present  condition.  We  then  found  them,  a  nume-
rous, enterprising,  and  proud  spirited  race ;  and  we  now  find
them,  a  feeble  and  degraded  remnant,  rapidly  hastening  to
annihilation.  The  neighbourhood  of  the  whites  seems,
hitherto,  to  have  had  an  immoral  influence  upon  Indian
manners  and  habits,  and  to  have  destroyed  all  that  was  no-
ble and  elevated  in  the  Indian  character.  They  have  gene-
rally, and  with  some  very  limited  exceptions,  been  unable  to
share  in  the  enjoyments,  or  to  exist  in  the  presence  of  civili-
zation ;  and  judging  from  their  past  history,  tlie  Indians  of
this  continent  appear  to  be  destined,  at  no  very  distant  period
of  time,  to  disappear  with  those  vast  forests  which  once  co-
vered the  country,  and  the  existence  of  which  seems  essential
to  their  own.'^


a  An  able  aod  well  instructed  writer  in  tbe  J^Torth  American  Review^
N.  S.  vol.  13,  (1826,)  art.  5,  has  salisfactorily  shown  that  the  intentions
of  the  government  of  the  United  States,  in  their  treatment  of  the  In-
dians, and  in  all  their  intercourse  with  them,  have  been  uniformly  just
and  benevolent.  But  under  the  administration  of  President  Jackson,
the  policy  and  course  of  conduct  of  the  government  of  the  United  States
in  respect  to  the  Indian  tribes  on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi,  and
south  of  the  Ohio  and  the  Potomac,  has  essentially  changed.  The  pro-
tection which  was  directed  to  be  afforded  to  the  Indians,  under  the  act  of
Congress  of  30th  March,  1802,  seems  to  have  been  withdrawn ;  and
the  Cherokccs,  in  particular,  have  been  left  in  a  defenceless  slate,  to
tbe  penal  laws  of  the  state  of  Georgia.  The  President,  by  his  message
to  Congress  of  the  15th  February,  1832,  declared  his  conviction,  **  that
tbe  destiny  of  the  Indians  within  the  settled  portion  of  the  United  States,
depends  upon  their  entire  and  speedy  migration  to  the  country  west  of
tbe  Mississippi,'*  and  that  if  any  of  the  Indians  repel  the  offer  of  remo-
val, they  must  remain  **  with  such  privileges  and  disabilities  at  tbe
respective  stiites  within  whose  jurisdictioD  Ibey  be,  may  prescribe."


400  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

The  case  of  the  soutbern  Indiana  is  cme  which  appears  to  be,  io  erety
view,  replete  with  difficulty  and  danger ;  and  especially  when  we  oon-
sider  the  diiTerent  and  conflicting  views  which  have  been  taken  of  their
rights,  by  the  supreme  executive  and  judicial  authorities  of  the  union.
The  condition  of  the  Indian  tribes  in  the  north-western  part  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  is  also  deplorably  wretched. They  have  outlived,  in  a  great
degree,  the  means  of  subsistence  in  the  hunter  state,  and  Ijbe  tribes
west  of  Lake  Michigan,  and  on  the  waters  of  the  upper  Mississippi,  are
unable  to  procure  the  requisite  food  and  clothing. They  perish  from
diseases  incident  to  savage  life,  and  arising  from  scanty  and  unwhole-
some food,  and  listless  indolence,  and  intemperance,  and  the  want  of
every  comfort. These  causes  operate  as  fatally  as  wasteful  wars  with
each  other. (See  observations  of  General  Lincoln,  io  Meus.  HiHoncal
Collections,  vol.  v.  p.  6,  and  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Ktrkland,  ibid.  vol.  iv.  p.
67. Governor  Clinton's  discourse  before  the  New-Tork  Historical
Society,  in  the  Collectiom  oftk^  JV.  F.  Historical  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  37,
Memoir  of  Oovemor  Cass,  of  the  J^lichigan  Territory,  addressed  to  the
Secretary  of  War,  in  October,  1821. Jdajor  Long's  expedition  to  the
source  of  St.  Peter's  river,  in  1823,  vol.  ii.  passim.) They  consider
their  country  lost  to  them,  by  encroachment  and  oppression,  and  tbej
are  irreclaimably  jealous  of  their  white  neighbours. The  i estless  and
enterprising  population  on  their  borders,  are  exempt,  no  doubt,  from
much  sympathy  with  Indian  sufferings,  and  they  are  penetrated  with
perfect  contempt  of  Indian  rights. If  it  were  not  for  the  frontier  gar-
risons and  troops  of  the  United  States,  officered  by  correct  and  discreet
men,  there  would  probably  be  a  state  of  constant  hostility  between  the
Indians  and  the  white  borderers  and  hunters. They  covet  the  Indian
liuntinj^  grounds,  and  they  must  have  them  ;  and  the  Indians  will  finally
be  compelled  by  circumstanres,  annoyed  as  they  are  from  without,  and
with  a  constantly  and  rapidly  diminishing  population,  and  with  increas-
ing poverty  and  misery,  to  recede  from  all  the  habitable  parts  of  the
Mississippi  valley,  and  its  tributary  streams,  until  they  become  esseo.
tially  extinguished,  or  lost  to  the  eye  of  the  civilized  world.


LECTURE  LII.


OF INCORPOREAL HEREDITAIHENTS.

Things  real  consist  of  lands,  tenements,  and  heredita-
ments. The  latter  is  a  word  ahnost  as  comprehensive  as
property,  for  it  means,  any  thing  capable  of  being  inherited^
be  it  corporeal  or  incorporeal,  real,  personal,  or  mixed.''  A
tenement  comprises  every  thing  which  may  be  holden,  so  as
to  create  a  tenancy,  in  the  feudal  sense  of  the  word,  and  no
doubt  it  includes  things  incorporate,  though  they  do  not  lie
in  tenure.*  Corporeal  hereditaments  are  confined  to  land^
which,  according  to  Lord  Coke,"^  includes  not  only  the  ground
or  soil,  but  every  thing  which  is  attached  to  the  earth,  whether
by  the  course  of  nature,  as  trees,  herbage,  and  water,  or  by
the  hand  of  roan,  as  houses  and  other  buildings ;  and  which
has  an  indefinite  extent,  upwards  as  well  as  downwards,  so
as  to  include  every  thing  terrestial,  under  it  or  over  it.' In*


a  Co,  Ldlt.  6.  a«

b  Preston  on  Estates,  toI.  i.  8.  Co.  Litt,  1 9.  b.  20.  a.  Doe  r.  Dy-
btll,  1  JIfoore  4r  Payne,  330,

c  Co,  LUL  4.  a.

d  ft  Blacks.  Com,  18.  There  are  exceptions  to  the  g^eneral  rule,
that  land  iocludes  every  thin^  above  and  below  the  surface.  Thus  a
roan  may  have  an  inheritance  in  an  upper  chamber,  thoug^h  the  lower
buildings  and  the  soil  be  in  another,  and  it  will  pass  by  livery.  Co,  Lilt.
48.  b.  In  England,  gold  and  silver  mines  belong  to  the  crown,  and  in
grants  from  the  state  in  this  country  they  are  reserved ;  and  it  is  usual,
in  such  a  city  as  London,  for  different  persons  to  have  several  freeholds
in  the  same  spot.  The  cellar  may  belong  to  one  person,  and  the  upper
rooms  to  another.  Doe  v.  Burt,  1  Tsrm,  701.  A  grant  of  water  does
not  pass  the  symI  beneath,  but  it  passeth  a  right  of  fishing,  Co.  LUt.  4.  b.

Vol.  III.  51


403  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [P*rt  VI.

corporeal  tenements  and hereditaments  comprise  certain  io-
beritable  rights,  which  are  not,  sirictly  epeaking-,  of  a  corpo-
real nature  or  land,  although  they  are,  by  their  own  nature,
or  by  use,  annexed  to  corporeal  inheritances,  and  are  rights
issuing  out  of  them,  or  concern  tliem. They  pass  by  deed,
without  livery,  because  they  are  not  tangible  rig^hts.* These
distinctions  were  well  known  to  the  civil  law,  and  are  clearly
defined  in  the  Institutes. They  have  their  foundation  in  the
nature  of  things,  and  very  material  legal  consequences  A>w
from  tliem  in  practical  jurisprudence. Res  corpercUes  sunt
qucB  sua  naiura  tangi  possunt^  velvti  fundus  / incarpo-
rates  sunt  qucb  tangi  non  possutii  et  in  jure  con^isittni^
sicut  iisusfructus,  ususy  <fcc.*

The  incorporeal  hereditaments  which  subsist  by  our  law,
are  fewer  than  those  known  and  recognised  by  the  Englkb
law.  We  have  no  such  rights  as  advowsons,  tithes,  digni-
ties,^ and  franchises  of  the  diace ;  and  those  titles  require


a  BracUm,  lib.  ii.  ch.  18. Co,  LilL  20.  a. 49.  a.

h  Just.  Iwft,  2.  2.

e  The  law  of  dig^nities,  though  unknown  to  us,  is  of  great  importance
in  the  English  law,  and  it  freqneotly  brings  into  view  deep  inveetiga'
tioos  in  regal  and  parliamentary  antiquities. As  matters  for  curious
inquiry,  we  may  particularly  select  two  great  peerage  cases  before  the
House  of  Lords,  as  being  replete  with  antiquarian  erudition  and  re-
search. The  cases  I  allude  to,  are, (I.)  The  case  of  the  Earldom  of
Oxford,  in  the  time  of  Charles  I.,  in  which  the  title  and  dignity  of  that
Earldom,  under  the  name  of  the  noble  bouse  of  Le  Vere,  was  traced  up
through  successive  descents  and  generations  to  the  time  of  William  the
Conqueror. The  case  at  large,  with  the  opinions  of  the  judges,  is  re-
ported  in  Sir  W.  Jonea'  Reporiiy  96. (3.)  The  case  of  the  Barony  of
L^Isle,  decided  a  few  years  ago,  upon  the  claim  of  Sir  John  Shelley
Sidney,  who  traced  up  his  claim  in  a  clear  course  of  descent  to  the
Countess  of  Shrewsbury,  in  the  time  of  Edward  IV. The  Barony  bad
fallen  into  abeyance,  and  slept  in  the  tomb  of  the  Countess  of  Warwick
ever  since  the  year  1421. But  as  no  time  bars  in  cases  of  peerage,  it
was,  upon  very  plausible  grounds,  attempted  to  be  revived  in  1825.
The  case  was  reported  by  Mr.  Nicolas. See  the  London  Law  Maga-
xine  for  July  1829,  art.  3.


ice.  LIIO  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  4U3

complicated  regulations,  and  have  been  a  fruitful  source  of
discussion.  The  most  litigious  cases  in  the  Exchequer  Re-
ports, are  those  relating  to  tithes ;  and  it  is  a  great  relief  to
the  labours  of  the  student,  and  a  greater  one  to  the  duties  of
the  courts,  and  infinitely  more  so  to  the  agricultural  interests
of  the  country,  that  the  doctrine  of  tithes  is  unknown  to  our
law.

The  incorporeal  rights,  which  I  shall  now  consider,  are,
1.  Commons ;  2.  Ways,  easements,  and  aquatic  rights ;  3.
Offices  ;  4.  Franchises ;  6.  Annuities  ;  and  ti,  Rents.

I.  The  right  of  common  is  a  right,  which  one  man  has
in  the  lands  of  another.  The  object  is,  to  pasture  his  cattle,
or  provide  necessary  fuel  for  his  family,  or  for  repairing  his
implements  of  husbandry.'

This  ^ght  was  intended,  in  early  ages,  for  the  encourage-
ment of  agriculture,  and  existed  principally  between  the
owner  of  a  manor,  and  his  feudal  tenants.  "  By  the  ancient
common  law,"  said  Lord  Coke,  when  commenting  upon  llie
statute  of  Merton,*  "  if  a  lord  of  a  manor  enfeoflfcd  others
of  some  parcels  of  arable  land,  the  feofTees  should  iiave  com-
mon appendant,  in  the  waste  ground  of  the  manor,  for  two
causes :  (1.)  As  incident  to  the  feoffment,  for  tlie  feoflee  could
not  plough  and  manure  his  ground  without  beasts,  and  they
could  not  be  sustained  without  pasture ;  and,  by  consequence,
the  tenant  shall  have  common  in  the  wastes  of  the  manor
for  his  beasts  of  the  plough  ;  and  this  was  the  beginning  of
common  appendant.  (2.)  Tlie  other  reason  was,  for  main-
tenance and  advancement  of  agriculture,  which  was  much
favoured  in  law."  The  policy  of  the  old  law  in  favour  of
common  of  pasture,  and  of  estovers,  as  being  conducive  to
improvement  in  agriculture,  has  entirely  changed,  or  become
obsolete ;  and  this  incorporeal  right  is  now  found  to  be  an
incumbrance  rather  than  an  advantage. The  right  ofcom-


a  Finck*i  Law,  157.

b  2  Irut.  86. 4  Co.  37.  a.


4M  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  TL

■MA  is  link  kunm  or  oaed  io  this  ooontr y,  and  probably
does  ml  exist  in  any  of  the  noitbern  or  westero  parts  of  the
United  Suies,  which  have  been  seUled  since  Uie  revolulioD.
The  Ch.  J.  of  FennsylYania,  while  he  admiUed  that  a  r^ht
of  conuDOQ  was  an  estate  well  known  in  the  law,  declared
that  he  knew  of  refv  few  instances  of  rights  of  conoDHin.*
BqI  the  right  is  still  known  and  enjoyed,  and  has  been  fre-
i|iiently  a  sobject  of  UtigatioD,  in  some  paits  of  the  state  of
New-York  ;  and  it  is  inleresting  to  perceive  the  nice  distinc-
tions, and  the  dear  and  accurate  sense  of  justice,  which  arose
and  were  applied  to  this  head  of  the  law.

(1.)  Of  oomjnoM  of  pasture  and  of  estovers.

CommoQ  of  pasture  was  known  as  common  of  pasture
appendant,  and  common  of  pasture  appurtenant The  first,
or  conunon  appendant^  is  founded  on  prescription,  and  is
regularly  annexed  U>  arable  land. It  authorized  the  owner
or  occupier  of  arable  land  to  put  commonable  beasts  upon
the  waste  grounds  of  the  manor,  from  the  necesity  of  the
case,  and  to  encourage  agriculture. The  tenant  was  limited
U>  such  beasts  as  were  levaiit  and  couchant  on  bis  estate,
because  such  cattle  only  were  wanting  to  plough  and  manure
his  land. It  was  deemed  an  incident  to  a  grant  of  land,  as
of  common  right,  and  to  enable  the  tenant  to  use  his  plough
laud. Comnum  appurtenant  may  be  annexed  to  any  kind
of  land,  and  may  be  created  by  grant,  as  well  as  prescription.
It  allowed  the  owner  to  put  in  other  beasts  than  such  as
plough  or  manure  the  land ;  and,  not  being  founded  in  ne-
cessity, like  the  other  right,  as  to  commonable  beasts,  was
not  fevoured  in  the  law.*

The  law  concerning  common  appendant  received  great
discussion  and  consideration,  in  Bennett  v.  Reeve^  in  1740.'


a  Trustees  of  the  Western  UDirersitj  y.  Robiosoo,  12  Serg.^
Jiai0to,33.

k  t  Blanks,  Conu  33. 3  CruUe*$  Dig,  tit.  Common.

«  miu»*  Rep.  ftn.


I.CC.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY,  405

It  was  admitted  to  be  the  settled  law,  that  common  appen-
dant belonged  only  to  arable  land,  and  could  not  be  severed
from  it ;  and  that  if  the  land  be  divided  ever  so  often,  every
little  parcel  was  entitled  to  common  appendant,  but  only  for
commonable  cattle,  or  such  as  were  necessary  to  plough  and
manure  the  tenant's  arable  land. The  Court  of  C.  B.,  after
two  arguments,  rejected  the  claim  of  a  tenant,  who,  by  the
process  of  subdivision,  claimed  only  a  yard  of  land,  to  a  right
of  common  for  sixty-four  sheep. He  was  entitled  only  to  a
right  of  common  for  such  cattle  as  were  wanted  to  plough
and  manure  his  yard  of  land,  and  in  this  way  the  court
brought  his  claim  within  reasonable  limits.

Common  of  pasture,  whether  appendant  or  appurtenant,
might  be  apportioned  upon  the  alienation  of  the  land  to  which
the  common  belonged,  because  it  was  founded  in  necessity
and  cou)mon  right. '^  God  forbid,"  said  Lord  Coke,^  ^'  that
the  law  should  not  bo  so,  for  otherwise  many  commons  in
England  would  be  avoided  and  lost." Thus,  in WilcU^s
casef  he  being  seised  of  forty  acres  of  land,  to  whicli  a
right  of  common  of  pasture  on  two  hundred  adjoining  acres
for  commonable  cattle  was  appurtenant,  sold  five  acres. It
was  held,  that  the  alienee  had  a  right  of  common  appurte-
nant to  the  five  acres,  and  that  the  alienation  of  part  of  the
land  did  not  destroy  the  right  of  common  either  of  the  alienor
or  alienee,  but  each  retained  a  right  of  common  proportioned
to  their  estates. The  warm  language  of  Coke  shows  the
deep  conviction  of  that  age,  that  these  rights  of  common  were
indispensable  to  the  tillage  of  the  English  tenantry. But
the  change  of  manners  and  property,  and  the  condition  of
society  in  this  country,  is  so  great,  that  the  whole  of  this  law
of  commonage  is  descending  fast  into  oblivion,  together  with
the  memory  of  all  the  talent  and  learning  which  were  be-
stowed upon  it  by  the  ancient  lawyers.


a  4  Co.  36.  b  VsCo.  78.


406  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  (Part  VI.

There  have  been  eeveral  cases  on  ibis  subject  of  the  ri^hi
of  commoD  of  pasture,  and  of  estovers,  discussed  in  the  Su-
preme Court  of  New- York,  and  the  principles  to  be  deduced
from  the  ancient  decisions  were  fully  and  accurately  ooo-
sidered.

The  first  case  I  allude  to  was  that  of  W<itts  v.  Coffin^*
which  was  upon  a  lease  executed  before  the  revolutionary
war,  in  which,  by  express  covenant,  the  grantor  had  con-
veyed to  the  lessee  in  fee  common  of  pasture,  and  reasona-
ble estovers,  out  of  the  woods  of  the  manor  of  Rensselaer-
wick,  at  Claverack.  The  grantor  had  cultivated,  or,  in  an-
cient language,  approved  the  manor  lands,  by  leasing,  so  as
to  leave  no  common  o(  estovers,  or  of  pasture,  and  in  that
way  had  actually  destroyed  the  exercise  of  the  right  under
the  covenant  The  only  question  was,  as  to  the  remedy  ;
and  it  was  held,  that  the  tenant  could  not  set  off  that  claim
under  the  covenant,  against  the  rent  due  upon  the  perpetual
lease,  but  must  resort  to  his  covenant  if  any  remedy  existed.
It  was,  however,  left  undecided,  whether  any  right  of  com-
mon existed  after  the  waste  and  unappropriated  parts  of  Cla-
verack had  disappeared  by  the  settlement  and  improvement
of  the  country.  In  England,  before  the  statute  of  Merton,
20  Hsn.  III.,  it  was  supposed,  that  the  lord  could  not  im-
prove any  part  of  his  waste  grounds,  however  extensive  they
might  be,  provided  another  person  had  a  grant  of  common  of
pasture  therein,  because  the  common  issued  out  of  the  whole
waste,  and  every  part  of  it.  But  that  statute,  and  the  statute
of  Westminster  2.  13  Edw.  I.,  allowed  him  to  doit  if  he  left
sufficient  common  of  pasture  for  the  tenants,  and  this  was  all
that  any  tenant  could,  in  common  justice,  have  required,  be-
fore the  provision  of  the  statute.  It  is  now  well  settled  in  the
English  law,  that  the  owner  of  lands  in  which  another  has
a  right  of  common,  may  improve  and  inclose  part  of  the  com-


all  Johns.  Rep.  495.


^


£««•  Lll.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  407

inon,  leaving  a  sufficiency  of  common  for  the  tenant  In
those  cases  in  which  a  right  of  common  of  pasture  exists
here,  the  right  of  the  owner  of  the  soil  to  improve,  would
aeem  necessarily  to  be  subject  to  the  same  limitation,  and  to
be  exercised  consistenly  with  the  preservation  of  a  right  of
common.

The  next  case  in  which  this  right  of  common  was  discuss-
ed, was  that  of  Livingston  v.  Ten  Broeck.*  In  that  case,
an  ancient  deed  had  conveyed  a  large  tract  qf  land  in  the
manor  of  Livingston,  with  a  right  of  common  of  pasture,  and
of  estovers  ;  and  the  court,  in  the  decision  of  that  case,  recog-
nised several  principles  of  ancient  law  applicable  to  this  right
of  common.

Thus,  if  a  person  seised  of  part  of  the  land  subject  to  com-
mon, should  purchase  part  of  the  adjoining  land  entitled  to
common,  here  would  bean  unity  of  title  in  one  and  the  same
person  to  part  of  the  land  entitled  to  a  privilege  of  common,
and  to  part  of  the  land  charged  with  that  privilege,  or  out  of
which  the  common  was  to  be  taken.  This  unity  of  title  ex-
tinguished his  right  of  common,  and  upon  this  principle,  that
if  it  was  to  continue  in  his  hands,  his  interest  would  induce
him  to  take  common  for  the  land  he  purchased  out  of  that
part  of  the  manor  which  he  did  not  own,  in  order  to  relieve
his  own  land  of  the  burthen,  and  to  cast  it  upon  his  neigh-
bour. This  temptation  to  abuse  and  fraud,  the  cauUous
policy  of  the  old  law  would  not  permit.  So,  also,  if  a  man,
having  common  in  a  large  field  owned  by  several  persons,
purchased  an  acre  from  one  of  them,  his  right  of  common
was  extinguished  upon  the  same  principle.  This  was  the
rule  declared  in  Rotherkam  v.  Green}  and  the  right  of
common  became  extinct  equally  in  either  case,  by  aliening  or
releasing  part  of  the  land  entitled  to  common,  and  by  pur-
chasing part  of  the  land  charged  with  it. If  it  were  other-


a  16  JohMy  Rep,  14.  b  Cro,  El%x»  593.


«&  or  EEJkL  ntOPERTT.  [Part  TL

be  iluug^  -mriih  tbe

Tkendeis^  that  this  i%k

€r  modified  bgr  the  act  of

the  temptation  to

of  vfakh  cxmnnan  k

be  cjJDca. Ait  cxLjicr^kLaBeat  of  the  rigbt  as  to  a  partioB

K  23  extiogiBBliflKBtof  the  vfaale;  and
<i  ^^<"*^-'  poLMcy  ns  iHiBtnted  ia  tbe  case  to
■  hkjft  1  faar^f  icfaioL

la  l>)na«a  r.  Ai^L'  aDctbrr  fanoch  of  this  same  sob-
jett  vas  bcoofist  izD^5er  the  ooosakntion  of  the  Supreme


It  vas  besd.  that  mcoqxxval  hcirdilamfnts  descend  bj
inbcncaace  as  real  ertate.  and  in  that  case,  a  n^bi  of  com-
BUQ  of  cttorers  vLich  had  doocnded  to  chSdien,  was  held
io  be  incapable  of  diTi^ioQ  betveeo  them,  and  thia  upon  an
old  and  juat  priDciple  of  law,  to  preTcnt  the  land  from  being-
dooblr  or  tiebiy  charged. In  accordance  wkh  the  case  of
the  Eart  ^  HumiiMgiam  v.  Lm-d  Mmmtjog^^  it  was  beU,
that  a  comiDoii  in  gross  and  uncertain,  as  the  right  to  cut
wood  and  dig  tar(  might  be  asBigned,  but  it  coidd  not  be  alien-
ed in  such  a  way  as  to  give  the  encire  right  to  several  per-
sons,  to  be  enjoyed  by  them  separately. Loid  Coke  said/
that  if  such  a  right  of  common  descended  to  coparceners,  as
it  was  not  partible,  the  eldest  should  hare  the  right,  and  the
rest  should  have  contribution,  or  an  allowance  of  tbe  value
in  some  other  port  of  the  inheritance. But  if  the  ancestor
left  no  inheritance  from  which  to  make  compensation  or
recompense  to  the  younger  coparceners,  one  parcener  was  to
have  it  for  a  time,  and  tbe  other  for  the  like  time,  so  that  do
prejudice  should  accrue  to  the  owner  of  the  soil. This  mode
of  enjoyment,  alternately,  or  in  succession,  was  carried,  in  the


a  16  Johm.  Rep.  30.

b  OodboU.  17. Co.  LiU.  164,  b.  S.  C.

€  Co.  LiU.  165.  a.


j:.ee.  UL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  409

^tncient  law^  to  a  ludicrous  exteot.  Thus,  says  Coke,  ao-
wording  to  the  rules  to  be  found  in  BractoDi  Britton,  and
fl^a,  in  the  case  of  a  common  of  piscary  descending  to  two
or  more  parceners,  the  one  may  have  one  fish,  and  the  other
the  second  ;  the  one  may  have  the  first  draught,  and  the  other
the  second.  If  it  be  of  a  mill,  the  one  was  to  have  the  mill
for  a  time,  and  the  other  for  the  like  time,  or  the  one  the  fiyrst
toil  dish,  and  the  other  the  second.

In  tbecase  in  New-York  last  refened  to^  it  was  held,  that  this

law  was  changed  under  the  operation  of  our  statute  of  descents,

and  that  if  such  a  right  of  common  descended  to  several

heirs  as  tenants  in  common,  or  parceners,  it  could  not  be

divided,  but  there  must  be  a  joint  enjoyment. They  may

jointly  alien,  but  one  tenant  cannot  convey  alone,  nor  can  the

eldest  heir  take  the  whole  of  this  indivisible  right  of  common

of  estovers,  and  make  recompense. It  is  a  joint  right,  to  be

enjoyed  jointly  by  the  heirs,  or  their  assignees  ;  and  upon

the  principle,  that  the  land  charged  with  the  right  is  not

to  have  an  increase  of  burthen  by  the  multiplication  of

claimants.

This  right  of  common  may  b^  controlled  by  custom.  It
may  be  held  subservient  to  a  distinct  right  in  the  lord  of  the
manor,  founded  on  immemorial  usage,  to  dig  in  the  soil,  with-
out leaving  sufficient  herbage  for  the  commoners.*

•
(2.)  Of  common  of  piscary.

This  is  said  to  be  a  liberty,  or  right  of  fishery  in  the  water
covering  the  soil  of  another  person,  or  in  a  river  running
through  another  man's  land.^  A  common  of  fishery  is  not
Ml  exclusive  right,  but  one  enjoyed  in  common  with  certain
olher  persons ;  and  Lord  Holt  said  it  was  to  be  resembled  to
the  case  of  other  common.' The  books  speak  likewise  of  a


«  BatesoD  v.  Grseo,  5  Tnrm  Rep.  411.

b  t  Biacki.  Cam.  34.  39. Crui»e*M  DigeH^  tit.  Contmany  aea  34.

e  t  SaUe.  637.

YoL.  m.  62


410  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part

fret  fishery^  as  being  a  franchise  in  the  hands  of  a  sabfect,
existing  by  grant  or  prescription,  distinct  from  an  ownership
in  the  soil. It  is  an  exclusive  right,  and  applies  to  a  public
navigaUe  river,  without  any  right  in  the  soil There  is^
also,  a  several  fishery ^  which  is  a  private  exclusive  right  of
fishery  in  a  navigable  river  or  arm  of  the  sea,  accompanied
with  the  ownership  of  the  soil. It  is  a  grant  along  with  tbo
soil,  though  the  soil  may  be  granted  without  this  several
fishery ;  and  it  has  likewise  been  strongly  asserted  and  main-
tained, that  a  several  fishery  may  exist  without  the  owner-
ship of  the  soil.*

But  these  distinctions  between  common  of  piscary,  fi:ee
fishery,  and  several  fishery,  seem  to  be  quite  unsettled  in  the
books  ;*  and  the  authorities  referred  to  by  Mr.  Haigrave*
throw  embarrassment  in  the  way  of  the  attempt  to  mark,
with  precisicm,  the  line  of  discrimination  between  these  seve-


0»


a  Conu  Dig.  tit.  PrerogaHife^  D.  60.  Hale^  DeJvre  Jtfom,  ch.  5*
The  caie  of  the  Royal  Fishery  of  the  Baone,  Dome**  Rep,  149*
Smith  V.  Kemp,  2  Salk,  637.  Carter  v.  Mnrcpt,  4  Burr.  A^.  216S.
Sejmoarv.  Lord  Coarteoay,  5  Burr.  Hep,  2814.  Mr.  Aogell,  in  hit
ralaable  JVeaiUe  an  the  Common  Law,  in  reloHon  to  Water  (kwnet^
p.  6 — 10,  has  collected  the  authorities  on  the  qoestioo,  whether  a  seve-
ral fishery  may  exist  witlioat  the  property  io  the  soil.  The  reason  of
tbe  thiog,  and  the  weight  of  authority,  are  in  favour  of  the  affirmative
of  the  question,  and  he  justly  concludes  that  property,  in  water  courses,
may  be  subjected  to  every  kind  of  restriction  by  positive  asreement*
In  Duke  of  Somerset  v.  Fogwell,  5  B.  4"  Creei.  875,  it  was  declared,
that  in  ordinary  cases  the  owner  of  a  eeveral  fishery  was  to  be  pre-
sumed to  be  owner  of  the  soil.  He  is,  however,  only  prima/acie  owner
of  the  soil. Partheriche  v.  Mason,  2  ChiUy*i  Rep,  658.

b  See  the  discussions  at  the  bar  in  Freary  v.  Cooke,  14  Man,  Rep,
488.  Sir  William  Blackstone  says,  that  a  free  fishery  is  an  exclusive
right— Com.  vol.  ii.  39,  40.  But  in  Seymour  v.  Lord  Courtenay,  6
■Burr,  Rep,  2814,  Lord  Mansfield  declared,  that  it  was  essential  to  a
free  fishery  that  more  than  one  person  should  have  a  co-extensive  right
in  the  same  subject.  So,  in  Melvin  v.  Whitting,  7  Pickerings  7S,  it
was  held,  that  a  free  fishery  was  not  an  exclusive  fishery.

fi  ffarg,  Co.  LiU*  lib.  2.  No.  181.


ticc-  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  411

ral  rights  of  fishery.  In  a  modern  case,*  the  judges  took  a
distinction  between  a  common  fishery,  {commune  piscn^
riumj)  which  may  mean  for  all  mankind,  as  in  the  sea,  and
a  common  of  fishery,  {communiam  piscaruBf)  which  is  a
right,  in  common  with  certain  other  persons,  in  a  particular
stream  ;  and  the  text  writers  were  deemed  to  have  spoken
inaccurately  .when  they  confounded  the  distinction.  The
more  easy  and  intelligible  arrangement  of  the  subject  would
seem  to  be,  to  divide  the  right  of  fishing  into  a  right  com-
mon to  all,  and  a  right  exclusively  in  one  or  a  few  indivi-^
duals*

It  was  a  settled  principle  of  the  common  law,  that  the
owners  of  lands  on  the  banks  of  fresh  water  rivers  above  the
ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  tide,  had  the  exclusive  right  of
fishing,  as  well  as  the  right  of  property  opposite  to  their  re-
spective lands  ad  JUum  medium  aqtUB  ;  and  where  the
lands  on  each  side  of  the  river  belonged  to  the  same  person,
he  had  the  same  exclusive  right  of  fishery  in  the  whole  river,
so  fitr  as  his  lands  extended  along  the  same.  The  right  ex-
ists in  rivers  of  that  description,  though  they  may  be  of  the
first  magnitude,  and  navigable  for  rafts  and  boats,  but  they
are  subjected  to  the  ju^  publicum^  as  a  common  highway  or
easement,  for  many  navigable  purposes.  The  common  law,
while  it  acknowledged  and  protected  the  right  of  the  owners
of  the  adjacent  lands  to  the  soil  and  water  of  the  river,  ren-
dered that  right  subordinate  to  the  public  convenience,  and
ail  erections  and  impediments  made  by  the  owners  to  the
obstruction  of  the  firee  use  of  the  river  as  a  highway  for  boats
and  rafts,  are  deemed  nuisances.  This  right  of  fishery  in
rivers  not  navigable,  is  also  subject  to  the  qualification  of  not
being  so  used  as  to  injure  the  private  rights  of  others ;  and
it  does  not  extend  to  impede  the  passage  of  fish  up  the  river
by  means  of  dams  or  other  obstructions.  The  impediment
was  at  common  law  a  nuisance,  and  in  Massachusetts  it  sub-


0  Bennett  v.  Cottar,  S  Tawnion,  183.


413  OF  BBAL  FBOFBRT.  [Tnt  ¥1.


jeelvtliepany  cfuliiigkloaiMBaltjgifailiytfHtaleu*  1^-
der  these  toMOoafale  qneHfimriniii^  the  righl  ef  pUwm
peitjr  in  riven  was  teoognind  at  coBMnoit  law  m  the
agesy  and  it  has  beea  umkxvaiy  athnitteii  dofwn  to  dns  day.*
The  law  was  hid  dowo  Teiy  deaily  and  emphatiadly  in  the
caeecf  the  river  Banner  in  Iielandy'  which  is  regarded  aan
leadiiig  casi^  and  a  soond  authority,  and  the  doctrine  cf  thai
case  was^  thai  a  subject  migfat  have  a  sevenl  fiediold  kila-
lest  in  a  navigable  river  or  tide  water,  by  special  gnmt  frooi
the  crown,  but  not  otherwiw  ;  and  that  without  sodi  giant,
or  prescriptioo  which  kevidenceof  agrant,  the  r^htof  Mh
ing  was  common.  On  the  other  band,  it  was  hdd,  that  in
rivers  not  navigable,  (and  in  the  common  law  sense  of  the
term,  those  only  were  deemed  navigable  in  which  the  tide
ebbed  and  flowed,)  the  ovmers  of  the  soil  on  each  side  had
the  interest,  and  the  right  of  fishery ;  and  it  was  an  enhi-
rive  right,  and  extended  to  the  centre  of  the  stream  oppoeile
their  respective  lands.  This  case  was  ibikwed  by  that  of
Carter  v.  Murcat^*  in  which  the  K.  B.  recognised  that  doc-
trine io  ilB  fullest  exteot ;  and  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  in  hb  trea-
tise De  Jure  Maris f  baa  not  only  laid  down  the  same  pRV
positioos,  but  he  has  discussed  the  subject  with  great  and  ac-
curate learning,  and  it  has  become  a  text  book  of  the  highest
authority^

Thia  private  right  of  dsbery  is  confined  to  fresh  water
rivers,  unless  a  special  grant  or  prescription  be  shown  ;  and
the  right  of  fishing  in  the  sea,  and  in  the  bays  and  arms  of
the  sea,  and  in  navigable  or  tide  waters,  under  the  free  and


a  Weld  T.  Horabj,  7  JEa«<,  195.  Commonwealtk  v.  Cbspm,  h
Pickering,  199.

b  Hale,  De  Jure  Maris,  cb.  1,  cites  a  record  in  tbs  K.  B.  m  esrlj
M  18  and  19  £dw.  I.  in  which  thia  rule  was  alserted.

e  Danet*  Rep.  149.

d  4  Burr.  Rep.  2162.

«  Harg.  Lane  TroieU^  art.  1.


X^c.  UL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  413

maaculine  genius  ci  the  English  comnx>n  law,  is  a  right
puMk  and  common  to  every  person ;  and  if  any  individual
*will  appropriate  an  exclusive  privilege  in  navigable  watei%
and  arms  of  the  sea,  he  must  show  it  strictly  by  grant  or
prescription.* The  common  right  of  fishing  in  nav^abk
waters,  is  founded  on  such  plain  principles  of  natural  law,
that  it  is  considered  by  many  jurists  as  part  of  the  law  of
nations. The  civil  law  declared,  that  the  right  of  fishing  in
riyeiB,  as  well  as  in  the  sea,  and  ports,  was  common  ;  and
in  some  respects  it  went  beyond  the  common  law,  for  it  held,
that  all  rivers  where  the  flow  of  water  was  perennial,  belong-
ed wholly  to  the  public,  and  carried  with  it  the  right  of  fisbe*
ry,  as  well  as  the  public  use  of  the  banks.^ Bracton  adopted
the  doctrine  of  the  civil  law,  and  held,'  that  the  right  of  fish-
ing in  rivers,  and  the  use  of  the  banks,  was  common  jure
gentium. But  it  is  every  where  agreed,  that  this  commcA
right  is  liable  to  be  modified  and  controlled  by  the  municipal
law  of  the  land,  and  no  person  has  a  right  to  pass  over  the
lands  of  others  in  order  to  get  to  the  water. In  Blundd  v.
Caiterali*  which  called  forth  a  very  elaborate  and  learned
discussion,  the  doctrine  of  the  civil  law,  as  stated  by  Bracton,
was  disclaimed,  and  it  was  held,  that  the  public  had  no  com-
mon law  right  of  crossing  the  beach,  or  sea  shore,  for  the
purpose  of  bathing  in  the  sea,  as  against  the  lord  of  a  manor
who  wvjs  owner  of  the  soil  of  the  shore,  and  had  the  exclu-
sive right  of  fishing  therein. So,  also,  in  France,  before
their  revolution,  the  right  of  fishing  in  navigable,  and  not
navigable  rivers,  was  not  common  to  all  the  subjects,  but  be-


a  HaUy  De  Jure  MarUf  oh.  4.  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  in  Lord  Fitz-
walter's  case,  1  Mod.  Rep.  105.  Warren  r.  Matthews,  1  Salk.  Rep.
367.  6  Mod.  JRip.  73.  Ward  v.  CresweD,  Willea'e  Rep.  S66.  The
Mayor,  fto.  oi  Oxford  y.  Riebardaon,  4  Term  R^.  437.  Carter  Vr
Maroot,  4  Burr.  Rep.  2162.

h  Bui.  2. 1.  2. Dig.  43.  tit  12, 13, 14, 15.

9  L.  1.  o.  12.  MO.  6.

d  $  Banrn.  i^  JUd.  fUB.


414  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  (Part  VI.

longed  to  the  king,  and  such  individaals  as  under  him  poB'
eeased  jurisdictional  rights,*  The  Napoleon  code  was  formed
upon  the  ruins  of  seigneurial  and  feudal  rights,  and  it  is  de-
clared, that  rivers,  and  naYigable  or  floatable  streams,  shores^
and  land  between  high  and  low  water  mark,  were  considered
as  dependencies  of  the  pubtic  domain,  and  that  the  right  of
fishing  was  under  the  regulation  of  particular  laws.*  It  is
now  understood,  that  the  owners  of  the  lands  on  rivers  not
navigaUe  or  floatable,  (flotiables,)  have  the  exclusive  right
of  fishing  therein,  as  well  as  the  exclusive  ownership  of  the
soil  composing  the  bed  of  the  river.  Though  some  com-
munes attempted  to  appropriate  that  right  to  themselves,  the
claim  was  put  down  by  decrees,  and  on  the  principle  that  the
abolition  of  feudal  rights,  of  which  the  right  of  fishing  was
one,  was  for  the  benefit,  not  of  the  communes,  but  of  the  feu-
dal vassals,  who  had  become  free  in  their  persons  and  pro^
perty,  and  that  there  no  longer  existed  any  such  seigneurial
rights/

The  English  doctrine,  as  to  navigable  rivers,  and  the  com^
mon  right  as  to  the  use  thereof,  and  as  to  the  right  of  fishing,
as  well  as  to  the  right  to  the  soil,  in  rivers  not  navigable,  inr
the  common  law  sense  of  the  term,  has  been  declared  to  be
the  law  in  several  of  the  United  States.' The  legislature  of


«  JnH.  Droit  Franc,  par  Argau^  torn.  i.  214.  Poihiert  TraiU  Ar
Drmlt  de  ProprieUt  No.  63.

b  Cad€  Ifapoleony  No.  638.  716.

c  TouiUer's  DroU  Cml  Franeaii,  torn.  iti.  No.  144,  145,  146.
QuuHont  de  Droits  par  Merlin^  torn.  ir.  tit.  Peehe.  The  latter  aQthor
bat  coliected  the  aocieot  antboritiet  in  support  of  the  leigoearial  ex-
cluaiTe  right  of  fishery  in  all  streams  not  navigable,  and  the  several
decrees  of  the  revolutionarj  goTemmenti  abolishing  those  feudal  and
odious  rights.

d  The  People  v.  Piatt,  17  Johm.  Rep.  196.  Hooker  v.  CummingSy
to  ibid.  90.  Ex  parte  Jennings,  6  Cowen*e  Rep,  618.  Berry  t#
Carle,  3  Qreenteafe  Rep.  269.  Soott  v.  Willson,  3  JV.  H.  Rep.  321.
ComnMmwealth  v.  Charlestown,  1  PidkenHf's  R^.  180. Adamav.^


Lee.  UL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  416

New-York,  when  they  re-enacted,  in  1787,  all  the  British
statutes  that  were  deemed  applicable  to  our  situation,  con«
sidered  a  common  of  fishery ,  as  an  existing  right,  for  they
provided  the  writ  of  novel  disseisin^  for  the  disturbance  of
it.* So  a  franchise  of  a  several  fishery y  at  a  particular  place
in  a  public  river,  has  been  admitted  to  exist,  and  an  instance
of  such  a  grant  was  mentioned  in  the  case  of  Stoughion  t.
Baker} The  statute  law  of  the  colony  of  Massachusetts
made  some  alterations  in  the  common  law. Each  town
might  appropriate  the  right  of  free  fishing  in  navigable  rivers
within  the  town,  and  the  right  of  free  fishing  was  confined  to
householders. The  legislature  likewise  assumed  the  regula-
tion of  the  passage  and  protection  of  fish  in  streams  not  navi-
gable, in  the  technical  sense  ;  and  it  is  now  considered  that
fisheries  are,  as  at  common  law,  the  exclusive  right  of  tl^e
owners  of  the  banks  of  rivers  not  navigable,  unless  otherwise
appropriated  by  statute,  and  that  the  right,  unless  secured  by
a  particular  grant  or  prescription,  b  held  subject  to  legislative
control.^ The  New-York  Revised  Statutes*  have  also
deemed  the  regulation  of  fisheries  in  waters,  navigable  or  not
navigable,  a  matter  of  public  concem ;  and  they  have  regu-
lated the  time  and  mode  of  fishing  in  the  waters  of  the  state,
and  particularly  in  respect  to  certain  kinds  of  fish,  and  in  the
waters  of  the  upper  Hudson. The  courts  of  common  pleas
in  each  county  have  likewise  the  authority,  under  certain
checks  and  restrictions,  to  regulate  the  fishing  in  any  of  the


Pene,  2  Conn.  Rep.  481.  Arnold  r.  Mnndj,  1  HaUUtf*  Rep.  1.
Danit't  Abr.^  ?ol.  ii.  692.  sec.  13.  Brown  t.  Kennedy,  5  Harr,  4r
Jokn$»  196.

a  LcoM  ofJf,  F.,  lOtb  less.  cb.  60.  sec.  7.

h  4  Man,  A«p.  627.

c  Waters  r.  Lilley,  4  Pickering'i  Rep.  146.  Ingrabam  t.  WOkin-
ioQ,t6td.  268.  Vinton  r.  Welsh,  9  ibid.  87.  Dane's  Abr.,  yol.  ii.  p.
188  to  712,  or,  ch.  68.  In  thst  chapter  Mr.  Dane  has  diligently  coUeo*
ted  the  English  and  American  aothorities  applicable  to  the  snbjeot,

d  Vol.  L  687»  688.


416  OF  RSAL  PROPERTY.  [Pah  YI.

■UDeams,  poiidUi  or  lakes  in  their  lespecdve  oountieBy  and  to
prevent  the  destruction  of  the  fish  therein.  In  Jaeobwn  y.
fknifUaifiy  and  afterwards  in  Gould  v.  Jamesj*  it  was  con-
sidered that  a  person  might,  by  grant  or  prescripti(M9,  have  an
earalusive  right  of  fishery,  even  in  an  arm  of  the  sea,  or  in  a
oav^^e  river,  where  the  tide  ebbed  and  flowed  ;  and,  in
New-Jersey,  the  right  of  several  fishery  has  been  attempted
to  be  carried  beyond  the  rule  of  the  common  law.  The  doc-
trine asserted  is,  that,  in  that  state,  the  whole  of  the  soil  un-
der its  navigaUe  and  tide  waters,  is  individual  and  not  pub-
lic property,  and  that  it  passed  in  fee  simple  fi[omthe  original
proprietors  under  the  royal  patents,  to  the  present  occupiers
and  grantees.  The  title  was,  originally,  in  the  king,  by  right
of  discovery,  according  to  the  public  law  of  Europe  ;  and,  it
is  said,  be  was  competent  to  convey,  and  did  convey  the  soii
in  New-Jersey,  as  well  under  navigable  waters  as  elsewhere,
to  the  Duke  of  York,  and  by  him  it  was  conveyed  to  Sir
George  Carteret  and  the  representatives  of  Lord  Berkeley,
and  from  them  the  title  passed,  and  has  been  regularly  trans-
mitted to  the  present  owners  of  lands  on  the  navigable  waters
of  the  stata  Upon  that  broad  foundation  it  was  maintained,
that  the  proprietors  of  land  on  rivers  and  waters^  navigable
as  well  as  not  navigable,  had  immemorially  claimed  and  ez-
eicised  the  right  to  the  soil,  and  to  a  several  fishery  in  all
waters  within  the  state  in  front  of  their  lands  and  shores,  sub-
ject, nevertheless,  to  the^^  publicum^  or  use  of  the  same,  as
a  public  highway  for  all  navigable  purposes,  and  also  subject
to  the  regulations  of  the  legislature  for  the  passage  and  [nto-
tectbn  of  fish.^  But  whatever  force  might  have  been  due
to  such  an  opinion,  if  the  question  was  res  integre^  the  law
is  now  declared,  after  a  very  profound  and  exhausting  foren-
sic diacussionj  to  be,  that  there  is  no  several  fishery  in  the


«  t  •/•Jbif.  B^.  170. 6  Cbweit't  JR^.  369. Rogecs  v.  Joust,  1
WemUa,  «7.  a  P.
6  Qri/Uh's  RegisUr^  tit.  New-Jeraey,  art  Fiaheri».,


I.ec.  LH.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  417

navigable  waters  of  New-Jersey^  but  the  same  is  coininon  lo
all  the  people  of  the  state.*

Though  the  right  of  fishery  in  a  navigable  river  be  a  com-
mon right,  the  adjoining  proprietors  have  the  exclusive  right
to  draw  tbe  seine,  and  take  fish  on  their  own  lands  ;  and  if
an  iriand  or  a  rock,  in  tide  waters,  be  private  property,  no
person  but  the  owner  has  the  right  to  use  it  for  the  purpose
of  fishing.^  It  has  been  further  decided,  that  though  the  sea-
shore, between  high  and  low  water  mark,  be  held  by  grant
as  private  property,  the  common  right  still  exists  to  go  there
and  fish,  and  even  to  dig  and  take  shell  fish  ;  and  if  the
owner  of  the  soil  claims  an  exclusive  right,  he  must  show  a
prescription  for  it,  controlling  the  general  right  at  common
law.'

In  Pennsylvania,  the  English  doctrine  that  no  rivers  are
deemed  navigable,  so  as  to  give  the  common  right  of  fishing,
except  those  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  has  been  held  not
to  be  applicable  to  the  great  rivers  in  that  state,  and  that  the
owners  of  land  on  the  banks  of  such  rivers  as  the  Susque-
hanna and  Delaware,  for  ins^ince,  have  no  exclusive  right


a  Arnold  r.  Mnndy,  1  HaUted^i  Rep.  1.  In  Maryland  it  it  also  de-
clared, that  the  king,  before  the  rerolation,  had  the  right  to  grant
kndt  covered  by  naWgable  waters,  subject  to  the  right  of  the  public  to
fish  and  narigate  them;  and  that  this  right,  subject  to  the  restriction,
passed  to  the  proprietors  of  Maryland  by  the  royal  grant,  and  that  the
right  was  then  rested  in  the  state.  Browne  v.  Kennedy,  5  Harr,  Sf
Joknt.  195.  In  Mr.  Angell's  Treaiue  on  the  right  of  property  in  tide
*€aUr»f  ch.  7,  ho  has  shown  that  a  right  of  sereral  fishery  in  navigable
waters  in  front  of  their  lands,  may  and  does  exist  in  individuals,  by
usage,  in  several  of  the  states.

6  Lay  v.  King,  5  Day*»  Rep.  7S. The  Commonwealth  v.  Shaw,  14

Ssrg.  4-  Rawlet  9.

t  Bagott  V.  Orr,  2  Bom.  4r  Pull.  472.  Peck  v.  Lockwood,  6  JDay'e
Bep.  S2.  But  the  case  of  Bagott  y.  Orr,  may  be  considered  as  over-
rolpd  by  that  of  Binndell  v.  Catterall,  5  Bamvo.  ^  Aid,  268 ;  and  the
doctrine  in  Peck  v.  Lockwood  seems  to  be  very  questionable.

Vol.  UL  53


418  07  IBiX  PROPERTY.  [Part  ¥L

of  fishing  in  the  riven  oppoaila  their  roBpecttve  lAode,  Tb»
right  to  fisheries,  in  such  rivers,  is  declared  to  be  vested  in  the
slnle,  and  open  to  all  the  wodd  ;*  and  a  similar  ecrceptioD  to
the  rule  of  the  common  law  has  been  suggested  to  exist  in
South  CandiDa.^

The  conclusion  on  this  subject  is,  that  a  right  of  fishery  in
navigable  or  tide  waters,  below  high-water  mai^,  is  a  com*
moo  right ;  and  if  one  or  more  individuals  set  up  an  ezdo-'
sive  right  to  a  free  or  severalfishery,  it  must  be  cieariy  shown
by  prescription  or  positive  grant  In  rivers  and  streams  not
navigable,  as  tide  waters,  the  owners  of  the  soil  over  which
they  flow  have,  at  common  law,  (and  which  common  law
has  been  generally  recognised  in  these  United  States,)  the
exclusive  right  of  fishing  each  on  his  own  side,  unless  aonie
other  person  can  show  a  grant  or  prescription  for  a  oomm<Mi
of  piscary,  in  derogation  of  the  right  naturally  attached  to  the
ownership  of  the  soil ;  and  such  right  is  held  subject  lo
the  public  use  of  the  waters  as  a  highway,  and  to  the  free
passage  of  fish,  and  in  subordination  to  the  regulaUoos  to  bo
prescribed  by  the  legislature  for  the  general  good.

The  disturbance  of  a  right  of  common  of  pasture  arises,
when  a  person  who  has  no  right,  iiiterfbres  by  putting  in  his
cattle,  or  if  he  has  a  right  to  use  the  land  for  commonable
oattle,  by  putting  in  those  which  are  not  commonable,  or  by
surcharging  the  common  by  putting  in  more  cattle  than  the
pasture  will  sustain.  In  these  cases,  the  owner  of  the  so3
has  bi3  action  of  trespass,  and  the  commoner  his  special  ac-
tion upon  the  case,  inasmuch  as  both  the  owner  of  the  land,
and  the  owner  of  the  right  of  common,  are  injured.  The
common  law  gave  to  the  commoner  a  writ  of  admeasure^
ment  of  pasture^  under  which  process  a  jury,  with  the


II  I tiw^mmmmm^


a  Caraon  y.  Blazer,  2  Binney't  Rep.  475.  Shrank  r.  The  Preii.
dent,  &c.  of  the  Schuylkill  Nayigation  Company,  14  Serg.  ^  Rta»U^
71.

h  Catee  y.  Wadliogtoo,  1  JItCord'i  Rep.  580.


Lee.  Ln.]  OF  REAL  FBOPERTY.  419

Aeriff,  app9rt]oii«d  the  quantity  of  cattle  U>  the  extent  of  the
ground,  and  the  number  of  proprietors.  So,  also,  if  the  com*
moner  be  dkiened^  either  of  the  common  of  pasture)  of  esto^
▼eis^  or  aS  fishery,  he  may  have,  where  statute  regulatioas
have  not  prevented  it,  a  writ  of  novel  diiseiHn  to  reinstate
himsdf  in  the  possession.  Such  injuries  are  now  generally
nsdressed  by  the  more  &miUar  and  easy  remedy  of  an  actioii
upon  the  case;  and  the  mention  of  those  old  and  obsolete  ac^
Clone  in  the  first  revisioD  of  the  statute  laws  of  New-York,  in
1787,*  arose  from  the  circumstance  that  the  statute  of  West^
minster  2d,  13  Edw^  I.,  was  literally  tmnscribed.  But  the
Neuh  York  Revised  S$atuteSy  which  went  into  operation  in
1830,  have  abolished  the  writ  of  navel  dmemn,  and  all  the
other  real  actions ;  and  the  remedy  for  a  vldatlon  of  these
incorporeal  rights,  is  either  by  an  action  of  ejectment,  or  a
special  action  on  the  case,  aocioiding  to  the  nature  of  the
figbt  and  the  injury.

IL  Of  vapsi  easemeniSf  and  aquatic  rights^

(1.)  Of  ways.

This  incorporeal  hereditament  is  a  right  of  private  passive
ever  another  man's  gmund.  It  may  arfae  either  by  gnuot  ef
the  owner  of  the  soil,  or  by  prescription,  which  supposes  a
grant,  or  fix>m  necessity.  If  it  be  a  freehold  right,  it  must
be  created  by  deed,  though  it  be  only  an  easement  upon  the
land  of  another,  and  not  an  interest  in  the  land  itself.^  A
fight  of  way  est  vi  termini  imports  a  right  of  passing  in  a
particular  line,  and  not  the  right  to  vary  it  at  pleasure^  and
go  in  diflferent  directions.  This  would  be  an  inconvenience
to  the  owner  of  the  land  charged  with  the  easement^  and  an
abuse  of  the  right.^ It  is  likewise  a  principle  of  law,  that


a  Laws  tfJf.  F.  seas.  10,  ch.  4,  sec.  6,  and  cb.  60,  tec.  7.
h  Hewlins  v.  Shippsm,  6  Bamw,  4*  Cresi,  221.
c  Jones  V.  Percival,  6  Pickerings  485.


420  OF  REAL  FROPOtTT.  [Put  ▼!.

nothing  pasKS  as  incident  to  tbe  grant  of  an  easement,  but
what  is  requisite  Ur  the  fiiir  enjoyment  of  the  privilege.*

If  it  be  a  right  of  way  in  groesj  or  a  m^ne  personal  right,
it  cannot  be  assigned  to  any  other  person,  nor  transmitted  by
descent.  It  dies  with  the  person,  and  it  is  so  exdusmly
personal,  that  the  owner  of  the  right  cannoi  take  another  per-
son in  company  with  him.*  But  when  a  right  of  way  is  an-
nexed to  an  estate,  it  may  pass  by  assignment  when  the  land
is  sold  to  which  it  was  annexed  as  appurtenant  Thus,  in
the  case  stated  in  Staples  v.  Heydon,*  if  one  be  seised  of  lot
A*  and  lot  B.,  and  he  used  a  way  from^kt  A^  over  lot  BL,  to
a  miO,  or  to  a  river,  and  he  sells  lot  A.  with  all  ways  and
easements^  the  grantee  shall  have  tbe  same  privilege  of  pass-
ing over  lot  B.  that  the  grantor  had.

A  rigbtof  way  may  arise  from  necessity  in  several  respeeta
Thus,  if  a  man  sells  land  to  another  whidi  is  wholly  sur-
rounded by  his  own  land,  in  this  case  the  purchaser  is  enti-
tled to  a  right  of  way  over  the  other's  ground  to  arrive  at  his
own  land.  The  way  is  a  necessary  incident  to  the  grant,
and  without  which  the  grant  would  be  useless/  '  This  prin-
ciple was  carried  so  far,  in  a  modern  ease,'  as  to  be  applied
to  a  trustee  selling  land  he  held  in  trust,  and  to  which  there
was  no  access  but  over  the  trustee's  own  land.  The  right  <tf
way  in  that  case  passed  of  neoessity  as  incidental  to  the  grant;
for  though  he  conveyed  in  tbe  character  of  trustee,  it  could
not  be  intended  tiiat  he  meant  to  make  a  void  grant,  and
every  deed  must  be  taken  most  strongly  against  the  grantor.
Lord  Kenyon  said  it  was  impossible  to  distinguish  that  from
the  ordinary  case  where  a  man  granted  a  close  surrounded
by  his  own  land. The  general  rule  is,  that  when  the  use  of


a  LymftO  y.  Arnold,  5  JHcuon^  195.

b  Finch's  Law,  17.  31.

•  6  Mod.  Rep.  3. 2  Lord  Raym,  922.

d  Clarke  y.  Cogge,  Cro,  Jac>  170.

«  HowtoQ  T.  FresTBon,  S  Term  B^.  50.


Lee.  LH.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  431

a  tbii^  iff  granted^  every  ihing  is  granted  by  which  the
grantee  may  have  and  enjoy  such  nse.  If  one  man  gives
another  a  license  to  lay  pipes  of  lead  in  his  land  to  convey
water  to  a  cistern,  he  may  enter  on  the  land  and  dig  therein
to  mend  the  pipes.*  So,  if  a  person  has  a  shop  on  another's
soil  by  permission,  he  has  a  right  of  ingress  and  egress  as  to
the  soil  between  the  highway  and  the  shop.  The  right  is
necessary  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  tenement.*  The  maxim  is^
that  quando  aliquis  cUiquid  cancedii^  concedere  videtttr^
ei  idy  sine  quo  res  uti  nan  potest.

If  a  man  hath  several  distinct  parcels  of  inclosed  land,
and  he  sells  all  but  one  surrounded  by  the  others,  and  to
which  he  has  no  way  or  passage  except  over  one  of  the  lots
he  has  sold,  it  has  been  made  a  question,  whether  he  be  en-
titled to  a  right  of  way  against  his  own  deed,  when  he  has
been  so  improvident  as  to  reserve  none. It  is  said,  in  Clarke


tf  Twytden,  J.,  in  Pomfret  y.  Rioroft,  1  Sound.  Rep,  321.

b  Doty  vy  Gorbam,  5  Pickerings  487.  In  Chambers  v.  Fnrey,  1
Teates*  lUp.  167,  the  Sopreme  Court  of  Pennaylyania  held,  that  the
owner  of  a  ferry  over  a  navigable  stream,  bad  no  right  to  land,  or  re-
ceive freight  on  the  adjoining  banks,  even  tbougb  the  lauding  place
was  a  public  highway,  withoat  the  owner's  consent.  The  dedication  of
ground  for  the  pnrpose  of  a  public  road,  was  said  to  give  no  right  to
use  it  for  the  other  purpose.  This  doctrine  was  afterwards  referred  to,
recognised  and  adopted  by  the  same  court,  in  Cooper  v.  Smith,  9  Serg^
Sf  jRaw/e,  26.  The  same  principle  is  to  be  found  in  SofHUe^  11.  pL  29,
where  it  is  said,  that  in  every  ferry  the  land  on  both  sides  of  the  water
ought  to  belong  to  the  owner  of  the  ferry,  for  otherwise  he  could  not
land  on  the  other  side.  But  this  strict  and  severe  rule  is  now  some-
what  relaxed  in  England,  and  in  Peter  v.  Kendal,  6  Bamte.  4r  Cren.
703,  the  K.  B.  denied  the  justness  of  the  conclusion  in  Saville,  and
held,  that  the  owner  of  a  ferry  need  not  have  the  property  in  the  sml
CO  either  side.  It  was  sufficient  that  the  landing  place  was  a  public
highway.  It  was  a  right  incident  to  the  ferry,  to  use  such  a  landing
place  for  the  purposes  of  a  ferry.  This  is  by  far  the  most  reasonable
oonolosion,  upon  the  right  to  the  use  of  a  public  highway  to  which  m
feny  is  ooooeoied.


438  OF  REAL  FROPERTT.  [Part  W

^*  Oogge^^  that  the  law  reseiTes  to  him  a  right  of  way  ia
aach  case  from  neceaaily. Bui  the  poakion  in  that  caaeimiim
to  have  been  contraiy  to  the  doctrine  ki  the  prior  case  of
DM  V.  Babthorpe,^  where  it  was  held;  that  if  a  man  bad
a  dose^  and  a  wood  adjoiniog  it,  and  time  oat  of  mind  a  way
kad  been  used  over  the  close  to  the  wood,  aikl  he  then  seya
the  close  to  one  man,  and  the  wood  to  another,  the  gianles
of  the  wood  has  no  right  of  way  over  the  clos^  fer  the  gran*
tor  had  excluded  himself,  as  he  bad  sold  the  close  without  re^
serving  such  a  right ;  and  as  he  had  lost  his  rights  he  could
not  communicate  any  to  the  grantee  of  the  wood. But  in
this  last  case,  it  did  not  appear  to  be  necessary  to  go  over  the
dose  in  question  to  the  wood,  and  there  might  have  been
another  way  to  it ;  and  the  weight  of  authority  is,  that  the
grantor  has  a  right  of  way  to  1>#  remaining  land,  in  cose  ef
necessity,  when  he  cannot  otherwise  approach  hk  land.  Thsr
law  presumes  a  right  of  way  reserved,  or  rather  gives  a  new
way,  from  the  necessity  of  the  case,  and  the  new  right  of  way
ceases  with  the  necessity  for  it' This  principle  of  law  haa
been  fot  a  long  time  recognised. Thus,  in  Packer  v.  W^-
stedy*  decided  in  the  Upper  Bench  under  the  protectorate  of
Cromwell,  A.  had  three  parcels  of  land,  and  there  was  a  pri-
vate way  out  of  the  first  parcel  to  the  second,  and  out  of  the
two  first  parcels  to  the  third. B.  purchased  all  these  parcels,
and  then  soM  the  two  first  to  C. There  was  no  way  to  the
land  not  sold,  but  through  the  other  two  parceb ;  and  the
court  adjudged,  that  the  way  continued  from  necessity,  and
that  the  party  was  not  liable  in  trespass  for  using  it  So,  abo^
in  Dutton  v.  Taj/ler,'  A.  owned  two  closes,  B.  and  C,
and  there  was  no  passage  to  close  B.  but  through  close  C,


a  Cro.  Jac.  170.

5  Cro.  Eliz,  300.

c  Holmes  r.  Elliott,  S  BinghaaCi  Hep.  70. 9  JVoOre,  IM.  S.  C*

d  S  Sii,  Rep.  SS.

€  t  IaOw.  Rep.  14S7.


Lm.  LIL]  of  real  property.  428

•nd  he  mid  dose  C,  and  it  wbb  held,  upon  pka  aod  demur*
mr^  that  Che  right  of  way  still  existed  from  necessity,  and
that  it  was  not  for  the  public  good  that  the  dose  R  should  be
left  uncokivated.  This  last  case  is  supposed  to  be  binding ;
and  Lord  Kenyon  said,  in  Hawtafl  v.  FVearsim,  that  he  was
pcepared  to  submit  to  the  express  authority  of  it,  though  his
reason  was  not  convinced,  aod  he  thought  there  were  great
difficulties  in  the  question.

But  the  doctrine  of  the  case  of  Dutton  v.  Taylery  re-
ceived confirmation  in  Buckby  v.  Coles j*  where  it  was  deci-
ded, that  if  a  person  owned  close  A.  and  a  passage  of  neces-
sity to  it  over  close  B.,  and  he  purchased  close  B.,  and  there-
by united  in  himself  the  title  to  both  closes,  yet  if  he  after-
vrards  sold  B.  to  one  person,  without  any  reservation,  and
dien  dose  A.  to  another  person,  the  purchaser  of  close  A.
has  a  right  of  way  over  close  B  This  case  seems  to  put  an
end  to  all  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  a  right  of  way  from
necessity,  even  over  the  land  which  the  claimant  of  the  way
bad  previously  sold.

If  a  right  of  way  be  from  dose  A.  to  close  B.,  and  both
doses  be  united  in  the  same  person,  the  right  of  way,  as  well
as  all  other  suboidinate  rights  and  easements,  is  extinguished
by  the  unity  of  possession.*  But  there  is  a  distinction  be-
tween a  right  of  way  existing  from  necessity,  and  one  merdy
by  way  of  easement  or  convenience.  The  former  is  not  ex*
tioguished  by  the  unity  of  possession,  as  a  right  of  way  to  a
church  or  market,  or  a  right  to  a  gutter  carried  through  an
adjoining  tenement,  or  to  a  water  course  running  over  the
adjoining  lands.*  Sergeant  Williams'  is  of  opinion,  that  the
right  of  way,  when  claimed  by  necessity,  is  founded  entirely


a  S  Tacmf.  Ktp.  311.

h  Whalley  r.  TompMo,  1  Bob.  cf*  PuU.  371.
e  Popham,  J.,  in  Jorden  t.  Atwood,  Otoen'f  Rep.  1S1. CruiMi'i
JMg*  tit.  Wa^.  S3, 24. Note  to  1  So#.  <^  PW/.  374.
d  Note  6,  to  1  Smmd.  Rtp.  323.


421  OF  REAL  PROPratTT.  [Pwt  YL

upon  grant,  and  derives  its  force  and  origin  fiom  iL  it  ii
either  created  by  expieBB  words,  or  it  is  created  by  operation
of  law,  as  incident  U>  the  grant ;  so  that  in  both  cases  the
grant  is  the  foundation  to  the  title.  If  this  be  a  sound  con-
struction of  the  rule,  then*it  follows  that  in  the  cases  I  lum
mentioned,  the  right  of  the  grantor  to  away  over  the  land  he
has  sold  to  Us  remaining  land,  must  be  founded  upon  an  im-
plied restriction  incident  to  the  grant,  and  that  it  cannot  be
supposed  the  grantor  meant  to  deprive  himself  of  all  use  rf
hiB  remaining  land  This  would  be  placing  the  right  upon
a  reasonable  foundation,  and  one  consistent  with  the  general
principles  of  law.

There  is  a  temporary  right  of  way  over  the  adjdning  land,
if  the  highway  be  out  of  repair,  or  be  otherwise  impassable^
as  by  a  flood. But  this  right  of  going  upon  the  adjoining
land  applies  to  public  and  not  to  private  ways.* A  person
having  a  right  to  a  private  way  over  another's  land,  has  no
right  to  go  upon  the  adjoining  land,  even  though  the  private
way  be  impassable  or  foundrous,  by  being  overflowed  by  a
river. The  reason  given  is,  that  the  owner  of  the  way  may
be  bound  to  repair,  and  the  impassable  state  of  the  private
way  may  be  owing  to  his  own  neglect ;  but  if  public  roads
become  impassable,  it  is  for  the  general  good  that  the  people
should  be  entitled  to  pass  in  another  direction. There  may
be  a  dietinction  between  a  private  way  arising  from  necessity,
and  a  private  way  founded  on  grant  or  prescription ;  and
such  a  distinction  was  alluded  to  by  one  of  the  Judges  in
Taylor  v.  Whitehead. If  a  person  be  obliged,  of  necessity,
to  go  over  another's  farm  to  arrive  at  the  land  which  the
other  sold  him,  and  the  private  way  assigned  be  destroyed  by
a  flood  or  otherwise,  he  may,  of  right,  cross  the  fiirm  on
another  line,  and  he  is  not  obliged,  at  his  peril,  to  keep  such
a  road  of  necessity  in  repair. By  selling  land  surrounded


a  Taylor  r.  Whitehead,  Doug.  Rep.  745. W.  Jonei^  290. Hson't
otM,  3  Saik.  18S.  pL  4. S  Blackt.  Com.  36.


Lee.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  426

with  his  own,  the  grantor  has  bound  himself  to  furnish  the
purciiaser  a  reasonable  passage  to  it.

The  right  of  way,  as  to  a  foot  or  tow  path  along  the  banks
of  navigable  rivers,  has  been  a  subject  of  great  discussion,  and
of  much  regulation  in  the  laws  of  different  nations.

In  the  cinl  law,  the  banks  of  pubUc  rivers  and  the  sea
shore  were  held  to  be  pubhc.  Riparum  usus  pvblicus  est ;
littorum  quoque  tistes  publiais  est  jure  gentium.'^  The
law  of  nations  was  here  used  for  natural  right,  and  not  in-
ternational law,  in  the  modern  sense  of  it ;  and  it  is  stated
in  the  Institutes  of  Justinian,  that  all  persons  have  the  same
liberty  to  bring  their  vessels  to  land,  and  to  fasten  ropes  to
the  banks  of  the  river,  as  they  have  to  navigate  the  river
iUself.  These  liberal  doctrines  of  the  Roman  law  have  been
introduced  into  the  jurisprudence  of  those  nations  of  Europe
which  have  followed  the  civil,  and  made  it  essentially  their
municipal  law.  Thus,  in  Spain,  the  sea  shore  is  common
to  the  public  ;  and  any  one  may  fish,  and  erect  a  cottage  for
shelter.  The  banks  of  navigable  rivers  may  also  be  used  to
assist  navigation.^  In  the  French  law,  navigable  or  floata-
ble rivers,  as  they  are  termed,  have  always  been  regarded  as
dependencies  of  the  pubhc  domain,  and  the  lands  on  each
side  subject  to  the  servitude  or  burthen  of  towing-paths  Yor
the  benefit  of  the  public.*^

The  English  law  was  anciently  the  same  as  the  Roman


a  /iMf.  2.  1.  4  and  5.

b  InatUuUt  of  the  Civil  Law  of  Spain,  by  Doctors  Asso  and  MoMul,
b.  2.  tit.  1.  This  is  also  the  law  in  Louisiaoa  ;  the  baoks  of  Davigable
rivers,  though  they  are  the  property  of  those  who  possess  the  adjacent
lands,  are  nevertheless  subject  to  the  pubh'c  use  so  far  that  vessels  may
make  fast  to  the  shore  and  to  the  trees  planted  there,  and  tbey  may  be
unloaded,  and  the  goods  deposited,  and  nets  dried  there.  So,  any  per-
son may  build  cabins  on  the  sea  shore  for  shelter,  and  fish  from  there,
and  moor  ships,  and  dry  nets  there. Civil  Code^  art.  443.  446.

e  Ferriert'B  Imt.  2.  1.  4  and  5,  and  note  ibid.  Code  JV*a|>o2eofi,Na
638.  650.

Vol.  III.  54


426  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

law,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  authority  of  Bracton,'  who
cites  the  words  of  the  civil  law,  declaring  the  banks  of  navi-
gable rivers  to  be  as  much  for  public  use  as  the  rivers  them-
selves. So,  Lord  Holt  held,*  that  every  man,  of  commoa
right,  was  justified  in  going  with  horses  on  the  banks  of  navi-
gable rivers  for  towing.  But  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  in  his  trea-
tise De  Jure  Maris,  and  in  which  he  has  exhausted  the
learning  concerning  public  property  in  the  sea  and  rivers,
and  collected  all  the  law  on  the  subject,  concluded  that  indi-
viduals had  a  right  to  a  tow  path,  for  towing  vessels  up  and
down  rivers,  on  making  a  reasonable  compensation  to  the
owner  of  the  land  for  the  damage.^  This  condition,  which
he  annexes  to  the  privilege,  shows,  that  in  his  opinion,  there
was  no  such  common  right  in  the  English  law,  inasmuch  as
it  depended  on  private  agreement  with  the  owner  of  the  soil.
The  point  remained  in  this  state  of  uncertainty,  until  the
case  of  Ball  v.  Herbert,  in  ITSQ,**  brcught  the  whole  doc-
trine into  discussion.  The  case  was  respecting  a  claim  to
tow  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Ouze,  in  Norfolkshire,  with  men
and  horses,  whenever  it  was  necessary  for  the  purposes  of
navigation,  doing  as  little  damage  as  possible.  It  was  ad-
mitted that  the  Ouze  was  a  navigable  river  where  the  tide
ebbed  and  flowed.  The  question  was,  whether  at  common
law,  the  public  had  a  right  to  tow  vessels  on  the  banks  of
either  siilc  of  a  navigable  river ;  and  it  was  investigated  and
argued  with  great  ability.  All  the  cases  bearing  on  the  ques-
tion were  collected  and  reviewed,  and  the  court  concluded
that  there  was  not,  and  never  had  been,  any  right  at  com-
mon law,  for  the  public  to  tow  on  the  banks  of  navigable
rivers.  The  claim  was  directly  contrary  to  common  expe-
rience ;  and  it  was  observed  by  Lord  Kenyon,  that  the  navi-


a  Lib.  1,  c.  12,  sec.  6.

6  I  Lord  Raym.  725. 6  Mod.  Rep.  1 63.

e  Harg.  L.  T,  p.  85,  86,  87.

d  3  Term  Rep.  253.


Lee.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  427

gators  on  the  Thames  were  frequently  obliged,  at  several
places,  to  pass  from  one  side  of  the  river  to  the  other,  with
great  inconvenience  and  delay,  because  they  had  no  such
general  right.  It  was  admitted,  that  on  many  navigable
rivers,  there  was  a  custom  to  tow  on  the  banks  ;  but  the
privilege  in  those  cases  rested  on  the  special  custom,  and  not
on  any  common  law  right.  The  statutes  which  have  given
a  right  of  towing  on  parts  of  the  Severn,  Trent,  and
Thames,  are  evidence  that  no  such  general  right  before
existed.

(2.)  Of  easements  and  aquatic  rights.

It  is  a  settled  principle  in  the  English  law,  that  the  right
of  soil  of  owners  of  land  bounded  by  the  sea,  or  on  navigable
rivers,  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  extends  to  high-water
mark  ;  and  the  shore  below  common,  but  not  extraordinary
high-water  mark,  belongs  to  the  public ;  and  in  England  the
crown,  and  in  this  country  the  people,  have  the  absolute  pro-
prietary interest  in  the  same,  though  it  may,  by  grant  or
prescription,  become  private  property.*  But  grants  of  land,
bounded  on  rivers,  or  upon  the  margins  of  tlie  same,  or  along
the  same,  above  tide  water,  carry  the  exclusive  right  and  title
of  the  grantee  to  the  centre  of  the  stream  ;  and  the  public,
in  cases  where  the  river  is  navigable  for  boats  and  rafts,  liave
an  easement  therein,  or  a  right  of  passage  as  a  public  high-
way. .  The  proprietors  of  the  adjoining  banks  have  a  right
to  use  the  land  and  water  of  the  river,  as  regards  the  public,
in  any  way  not  inconsistent  with  the  easement ;  and  neither
the  state,  nor  any  other  individual,  has  the  right  to  divert  the
stream,  and  render  it  less  useful  to  the  owners  of  the  soil. It


a  Hale,  De  Jure  Maris,  ch.  4,  5.  Rex  v.  Smilli,  Doug.  425.  In
Conoecticot,  it  was  held,  io  the  case  of  East- Haven  v.  Hemingtoay,  7
Conn.  Rep.  186,  that  the  owners  of  laod  adjoining  a  navigable  riTer,
have  an  exclusive  right  to  the  soil  between  high  and  low  water  mark,
for  the  purpose  of  erecting  wharves  and  stores.


428  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VL

would  require  au  express  exception  in  the  grant,  or  aome  desr
and  unequivocal  declaration,  or  certain  and  immemorial
usage,  to  limit  the  title  of  the  owner,  in  9uch  cases,  to  the
edge  of  the  river.  Where  a  stream  b  used  in  a  grant  as  a
boundary  or  monument,  it  is  used  as  an  entirety  to  thecentxe
of  it,  and  to  that  extent  the  fee  passes.  Prima  faciej  said
the  vice  chancellor  of  England,'  the  proprietor  of  each  bank
of  a  stream  is  the  proprietor  of  half  the  land  covered  by  the
stream.  If  the  same  person  be  owner  of  the  lands  on  both
sides  of  the  river,  he  owns  the  whole  river  to  the  extent  of
the  length  of  his  lands  upon  it.  If  a  fresh  water  river,  run-
ning between  the  lands  of  separate  owners,  insensibly  gains
on  one  side  or  the  other,  the  title  of  each  continues  to  go  cul
JUum  medium  aqua  ;  but  if  the  alteration  be  sensibly  and
suddenly  made,  the  ownership  remains  according  to  the  for-
mer bounds,  and  if  the  river  should  then  forsake  its  channel
and  make  an  entire  new  one  in  the  lands  of  the  owner  on
one  side,  he  will  become  owner  of  the  whole  river,  so  &r  as
it  is  enclosed  by  his  land.  This  is  the  general  doctrine  as  to
alluvions.  If  soil  be  formed  out  of  the  sea  or  a  river,  by  siow^
and  imperceptible  alluvion  and  accretion,  it  belongs  to  the
owner  of  the  adjoining  land.^  Islands  situated  in  a  river  do
not  form  any  exception  to  this  general  principle,  and  they  be-
long to  the  person  who  owns  the  land  on  that  side  of  the  river
to  which  they  are  nearest,  though,  if  they  be  situated  in  the
middle  of  the  river,  they  would  belong  in  severalty  to  the
owners  on  each  side,  according  to  the  original  dividing  line,
otJUum  aqucB,  continued  on  from  the  place  where  the  wa-
ters begin  to  divide.^


a  Wright  v.  Howard,  1  Simons  <f*  Slewarl^  190.

6  Jusl.  Itut.  2. 1.  20.  Bracton,  lib.  2,  cb.  2.  Hale^  De  Jure  Jda-
m,  ch.  6.  2  Blacks,  Com.  26 1 ,  262.  The  Kiog  v.  Lord  Tarboroogh,
3  Bamw,  4*  Cress.  91. 1  Dow,  N.  S.  178.  S.  C.

c  Hoie,  De  Jure  Maris,  ch.  1,2,  3,  4  and  6.  Braclon,  De  Acq,
Her.,  lib.  ii.  ch.  2,  aec,  2.  Dig.  41 . 1 .  29.  The  King  r.  Smith,  Doug.
Rep.  441. Code  Jfapoleon,  No.  561.


iec.  LIl.]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  429

This  priaciple  of  the  common  law  has  been  recognitsed
and  prevails  in  the  states  of  Maine,  New-Hampshire,  Massa-
chusetts, Connecticut,  New- York,  New-Jersey,  Maryland,
Ohio,  and  Virginia.* In  Massachusetts,  some  alterations  in


a  Berry  t.  Carle,  3  Greenleaf^s  Rep*  269. Morrison  t.  Keen,  ibid.
474. Claremont  v.  Carlton,  2  JV.  H.  Rep.  369. King  v.  King, 7
JUotf.  Rep.  496. Lunt  v.  Holland,  14  t6iJ.  149. Ingraham  y.  Wil-
kinson, 4  Pickering's  Rep.  268. Adams  v.  Pease,  2  Conn.  Rep.  48 K
Warner  v.  Soatbworth,  6  ibid.  471. In  this  last  case  it  was  held,  tliat
if  a  wide  ditch  or  a  wide  atone  wall  constituted  the  boundary  line,  and
tbe  owner  on  one  side  conveyed  bis  land,  bounding  the  grantee  on  tho
ditch  or  wall,  tbe  same  principle  would  apply,  and  the  grant  would  ex-
tend to  the  centre  of  the  ditch  or  wall. Palmer  y.  Mulligan,  3  Caines*
Rep.3\S. The  People  y.  Plait,  IT  Johns.  Rep.  195. Hooicer  y.
Cummiogs,  20  ibid.  90. Ex  parte  Jennings,  6  Cowen's  Rep.  518.  Ar-
nold y.  Mundy,  1  HcUsted's  Rejt.  1. Hayes,  Ex'r.  v.  Bowman,  1  Ran^
dolpKs  Rep.  417. Mead  y.  Haynes,  3  iJbid.  33. Gavit  y.  Chambers,
3  Ohio  Rep.  495. Browne  y.  Kennedy,  5  Harr.  4*  Johns.  195. la
this  l»st  case  it  was  held,  that  if  the  state  be  entitled  to  the  soil  coycred
by  a  river  not  navigable,  and  grant  the  lands  lying  on  such  a  ri?cr,  and
names  the  river  as  a  boundary,  the  grantee  becomes  a  riparian  proprie-
tor, and  entitled  to  the  land  the  river  covers,  ad  filum  medium  aquas.
A  variety  of  cases  to  the  same  effect,  are  cited  in  the  learned  note  of
tbe  reporter,  in  6  Cowen's  Rep.  544;  and  they  demonstrate  the  exis-
tence of  the  rule  that  a  grantee,  bounded  on  a  river,  (and  it  is  almost
immaterial  by  what  mode  of  expression,)  goes  ad  medium  Jilum  aqum^
unless  there  bo  decided  langaage,  showing  a  manifest  intent  to  st<*p  shot  t
at  the  water's  edge. In  the  case  of  the  CantU  Commissioners  y.  the
People,  5  Wendeil,  423,  the  langaage  of  the  judges  of  the  Court  of  Er-
rors, in  New-York,  was,  that  by  the  rule  of  the  common  law  which  pre-
vailed hero,  grants  of  lands,  bounded  on  rivers  above  tide  water,  ex-
tended usque  filum  aquast  including  the  beds  of  riyers  and  the  islands
therein;  and  the  exclusive  right  of  fishing,  unless  the  same  was  clearly
intended  to  be  reserved,  but  subject,  qevertbeless,  to  the  right  of  the
public  to  use  the  waters  as  a  highway. The  right  of  tho  riparian  owner
to  the  stream,  is  as  sacred  as  other  private  property,  and  the  state  can-
Dot  appropriate  the  water  to  public  uses  by  artificial  erections  or  im-
provements, without  making  compensation. Lands  under  the  waters
of  navigable  lakes  are  placed  on  the  same  footing  with  lands  under  the
waters  of  navigable  rivers,  and  they  require  a  specific  grant  to  enable


430  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  TI.

the  commoD  law  have  been  made  by  statute  ; for  by  (he
colony  ordinance  of  1641,  and  by  usage  arising  therefrom,
the  proprietors  of  the  adjoining  land,  on  bays  and  arms  of
the  sea,  and  other  places  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  go
to  low-water  mark,  subject  to  the  public  easement,  and  not
exceeding  one  hundred  rods  below  high-water  mark. Ac-
cording to  judicial  constructions  of  that  ordinance,  the  fats
between  high  and low  water  mark may  be  occupied  by
wharves  and  other  erections,  provided  the  easement  or  pas-
sage be  not  too  much  obstructed.' The  common  law,  as  we
have  already  scon,  has  been  rejected,  or  deemed  inapplicable
to  the  great  inland  rivers  in  Pennsylvania,  and  the  owners
of  the  land  on  the  banks  of  theoi  do  not,  as  of  course,  acquire
a  right  to  the  soil  covered  by  the  waters  of  the  rivers,  but  the
soil  and  waters  of  the  rivers,  with  the  rights  and  privileges
incident  thereto,  remain  in  the  public*^ In  South  Carolina
the  doctrine  of  the  common  law  on  this  subject  has  been  faeld^
to  be  inapplicable  ;  but  as  the  common  law  still  applies  to
rivers  capable  of  being  made  navigable,  and  which  possess
obstructions  to  the  passage  of  boats  of  every  description,  and


the  raparian  proprietor  to  go  beyond  the  shore,  aod  the  graot  of  the  bed
of  such  lakes  can  oolj  be  made  to  the  oiroer  of  the  adjoining  land.
This  is  the  rule  equally  as  to  the  waters  of  nangable  rivers  and  lakes
by  statute.  J^ew-York  Revised  Statutes,  vol.  1.  208,  sec.  67.

a  Storer  v.  Freeman,  6  J^ass.  Rep.  435.  Doners  Mr*  vol.  ii.  693,
694.  Parker,  Ch.  J«)  in  lograham  v.  Wilkinson,  4  Pickering^s  Rep*
258.  In  the  case  of  the  Commonwealih  of  J^assachusetts  y.  Wright,
{the  American  Jurist,  No.  6,  p.  185,)  it  was  decided,  in  1829,  that  a
wharf  extending  into  the  navig^able  channel  in  Boston  harbour,  so  as  in
the  course  of  time  to  injure  the  navigation,  was  indictable  as  a  public
nuisance ;  and  upon  conviction,  it  was  ordered  to  be  abated  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  defendants.  See  Hex  v.  Lord  Grosvenor,  2  Starkie,  51 1,
and  Hale,  De  Portibus  Maris,  ch.  7,  sec.  2.  Whether  the  erection  in
such  cases  amounts  to  a  common  nuisance,  is  a  question  of  fact.

b  Carson  v.  Blazer,  2  Binney's  Rep,  Alb.  Shrank  v.  The  President
of  the  Schuylkill  Navigation  Co.,  14  Serg.  <^  RatoU,  71.


Lee.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  431

as  the  adjoiniDg  owners  in  such  cases  go  adJUum  aqatn^  the
modifications  which  the  common  law  has  undergone  do  not
seem  to  be  very  material.

Tbe  sea  shore,  according  to  Lord  Hale's  definition,  is  the
ground  between  the  ordinary  high  and  low  water  mark,  and
it  prima  facie,  and  of  common  right,  belongs  to  the  king,
but  may  be  vested  in  a  subject  by  prescription,  or  by  grant,
as  if  the  king  grants  a  manor  cum  littore  m.aris  eidem  ad-
jacente,  the  shore  itself  will  pass.*  But  it  was  said  by  the
Ch.  J.,  in  Arnold  v.  Mtindy,'*  that  a  grant  bounded  upon
navigable  water,  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows,  extended  to
high-water  mark  when  the  tide  was  high,  and  to  low-water
mark  when  the  tide  was  low,  and  that  the  intermediate  space
between  high-water  and  low-water  mark,  might  be  reclaim-
ed, and  exclusively  appropriated  by  the  owner  of  the  adjacent
land,  to  wharves,  buildings,  and  other  erections.  There  may
be  a  movable  freehold,  as  is  stated  by  Lord  Coke ;'  and  if
a  grant  was  made  of  tbe  sea  shore,  the  freehold  would  shift
as  the  sea  receded  or  encroached,  and  it  would  take  all  the
soil  that  should,  from  time  to  time,  be  within  high  and  low
water  mark/  But  I  should  apprehend  the  better  opinion  to
be,  that  in  ordinary  grants  of  land  bounded  on  the  sea,  or  a
river,  the  boundary  limit  must  be  stable,  either  at  ordinary
high  or  low- water  mark,  and  not  subject  to  alternate  change
with  the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  tide.  In  Handley*s  Lessee
V.  ArUhony/  it  was  considered  as  a  general,  natural,  and
convenient  rule  of  construction  in  public  grants  of  territory
bounded  by  a  river,  instead  of  being  bounded  by  the  bank  or


a  Cotes  V.  Wadliogtoo,  1  MCord's  Rep.  580.

b  Haley  De  Jure  Maris ^  cb.  4  and  5.  By  the  Cwil  Code  ofhovin-
ana^  art.  44^,  the  sea  shore  is  declared  to  be  that  space  of  land,  over
which  the  sea  spreads  in  the  highest  water,  during  the  winter  season.

e  t  HalsleeTs  Rep.  1.

d  Co.  IaU.  48.  b.

e  Baylej,  J.,  in  Scratton  r.  Brown,  4  Bamw.  4>  Cren.  485.

/  5  Wheat.  Rep.  374.


433  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  ▼!.

shore,  to  take  the  pennaoent  river  for  the  boundary  line,  and
that  would,  of  course,  carry  the  line  to  ordinary  low-water
mark,  and  include  the  land  left  diurnally  bare  by  the  receding
of  the  water.  The  rule  was,  in  that  case,  apf^ed  to  a  coun-
try or  state  bounded  by  a  river  ;  and  the  English  com-
mon law  does  not  allow  the  riparian  owner,  under  the  grant
of  the  sovereign,  of  lands  bounded  on  tide  waters,  to  go  be-
yond ordinary  high-water  mark/  Such  grants  are  con-
strued most  favourably  for  the  king,  and  against  the  grantee ;
and  Sir  William  Scott  has  vindicated*  such  a  rule  of  con-
struction as  founded  in  wise  policy,  for  grants  from  the  crown
are  made  by  a  trustee  for  the  public,  and  no  alienation
should  be  presumed,  that  was  not  clearly  and  indisputably
expressed.

The  law  with  respect  to  public  highways,  and  to  fresh
water  rivers,  is  the  same,  and  the  analogy  perfect,  as  concerns
the  right  of  soil.  The  owners  of  the  land  on  each  side  go  to
the  centre  of  the  road,  and  they  have  the  exclusive  right  to
the  soil,  subject  to  the  right  of  passage  in  the  public  Being
owners  of  the  soil,  tltey  have  a  right  to  all  ordinary  remedies
for  the  freehold.  They  may  maintain  an  action  of  ejectment
for  encroachments  upon  the  road,  or  an  assize  if  disseised  of
it,  or  trespass  against  any  person  who  digs  up  the  soil  of  it,
or  cuts  down  any  treee  growing  on  the  side  of  the  road,  and


a  Parsons,  Ch.  J.,  to  Storer  v.  Freeman,  6  Jdass.  Rep.  438.  Cor-
teljou  V.  Van  Brundt,  2  Johns.  Rep»  357.  Id  Kean  ▼.  Stetsoo,  5
Pickeritiffi  492,  it  was  considered,  that  the  whole  of  a  narigable  n>er
iooladed  within  high-water  mark,  on  each  side,  was  a  public  higbwaj,
and  owners  of  the  adjoining  lands  hare  no  right  to  erect  whanres  and
other  obstructions  between  high  and  low  water  mark,  if  it  maleriallj
injure  or  straiten  the  passage  for  vessels  and  boats.  A  grant  or  pre-
scription to  occupy  the  flats  of  a  navigable  river,  with  wharves  and
other  erections,  is  always  upon  the  implied  condition,  that  they  do  not
essentially  impair  the  public  easement  in  the  stream,  for  then  the  erec-
tion would  become  a  nuisance.

6  5  Rob.  Adm,  Rep.  182.


Lee.  LIIO  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  433

left  there  for  shade  or  ornament.*  The  freehold,  and  all  pro-
fits, belong  to  the  owners  of  the  adjoining  lands.  They  may
carry  water  in  pipes  under  the  highway,  and  have  every  use
and  remedy  that  is  consistent  with  the  servitude  or  easement
of  a  way  over  it,  and  with  police  regulations.*  The  esta<
Uished  inference  of  law  is,  that  a  conveyance  of  land  bounded
on  a  public  highway,  carries  with  it  the  fee  to  the  centre  of
the  road  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  grant.  The  idea  of  an
intention  in  a  grantor  to  withhold  his  interest  in  a  road  to
the  middle  of  it,  after  parting  with  all  his  right  and  title  to
the  adjoining  land,  is  never  to  be  presumed.  It  would  be
contrary  to  universal  practice  ;  and  it  was  said,  in  Peek  r.
Smithj  that  there  was  no  instance  where  the  fee  of  a  hi^-
way,  as  distinct  from  the  adjoining  land,  was  ever  retained
by  the  vendor.  It  would  require  an  express  declaration  to
sustain  such  an  inference  ;  and  it  may  be  considered  as  the


«  The  Jf.  F.  RgftUed  SiaMeg,  rdi.  1.  6^,  sec  126,  speoimUy  de^
dare,  that  all  trees  staodini^  or  lying  on  any  land  over  wbiob  a  high'
waj  is  laid  oat,  are  for  the  ase  of  the  owner  of  Uie  land,  except  soch  of
them  as  may  be  requisite  to  make  or  repair  the  highway  or  bridges  on
the  land.

h  1  RoL  Abr.  S92.  B.  Goodtitle  v.  Alker,  1  Burr.  Rep.  133.
Headhm  v.  Hedley,  1  HoWs  Jf.  P.  Rep.  463.  Cortelyoa  v.  Van
Bmndt,  S  /oAiw.  Rep.  367.  Jackson  r.  Hathaway,  16  i6u£.  447*
Makepeace  v.  Wordeo,  1 JV.  Hamp*  Rep.  16.  Peck  ▼•  Smith,  1  Cknm*
Rep.  103.  Perley  r.  Chandler,  6  Jtfa#«.  Rep.  454.  Bobbins  ▼•  Bor^
man,  1  Pickering^ $  Rep.  \9St^  Adams  y.  Emerson,  6  Pick*  57«  Writ-
ter  Y.  Hanrey,  1  MCord^  67.  Boiling  t.  Mayor  of  P.,  3  Randoiph^
663.  Chambers  t.  Furry,  1  TtaUe*  Rep.  167.  The  statute  of  New«
York,  (JV*.  F.  Retiaed  Stabdee^  rol.  i.  626,)  allowing  the  owners  of
lands  adjotoiog  highways  to  plant  trees  on  the  sides  of  the  road,  and  to
bring  actions  of  trespass  for  injuring  them,  assumes  and  affirms  the
prieoiple  of  the  common  law  in  relation  to  such  rights.  Though  a
turnpike  corporation  has  only  an  easement  in  the  land  oyer  which  the
turnpike  road  is  located,  a  grant  of  the  use  of  the  land  necessary  for
the  enjoyment  of  the  franchise,  as  by  erecting  toll-houses,  and
wells  and  cellars  for  their  accommodation,  is  necessarily  im]
Tueker  r.  Tower,  9  Pick.  109.

YoL.  m.  56


434  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Port  VI.

just  and  seUled  doctrine,  that  a  grant  of  land  bounded  apoa
a  highway  or  river,  carries  the  fee  in  the  highway  or  river  to
the  centre  of  it.  But  it  is  competent  for  the  riparian  proprie-
tor to  sell  his  upland  to  the  top  or  edge  of  the  bank  of  a  riv^,
and  to  reserve  the  stream,  or  flats  below  high-water  mark,  if
he  does  it  by  clear  and  specific  boundaries.*  The  purchaser,
in  such  a  case,  takes  the  bank  of  the  river,  as  it  is,  or  may
thereafter  be  by  alluvion,  or  decrease  of  the  flow  of  the  river.
He  takes  it  subject  to  the  common  incidents  which  may
diminish  or  increase  the  extent  of  his  boundaries.^  He  may
also  convey  the  bed  of  a  stream  separate  from  the  land  which
bounds  it.'

The  civil  law  treated  very  extensively  of  these  incorporeal
rights  annexed  to  land  ;  and  what  in  the  common  law  are
termed  easements^  went  under  the  general  denomination  of
servitudes^  because  tliey  were  charges  on  one  estate  for  the
benefit  of  another.  TouUier  defines  servitudes  to  be  real
rights,  Jtira  in  re,  existing  in  the  property  of  another.  Like
incorporeal  hereditaments,  they  have  been  held  not  to  pass
without  a  grant.'  By  virtue  of  such  a  right,  the  proprietcMT
of  the  estate  charged  is  bound  to  permit,  or  not  to  do,  certain
acts  in  relation  to  his  estate,  for  the  utility  or  accommodation
of  a  third  person,  or  of  the  possessor  of  an  adjoining  estate.
The  term  is  a  metaphoriccd  expression,  borrowed  from  per-
sonal servitude,  but  the  charge  is  entirely  attached  to  real
estates,  and  not  to  the  person.  Servitutum  ea  naiura  est,
ut  aliquid  patiatur  aut  non  faciat,  ServitiUem  twn  kth
minem  debere  sed  rem.*


a  Storer  v.  Freeman,  6  Mass,  Rep,  435.  17  Ibid,  299.  Jscksoa  r.
Hathaway,  15  Jokfison^  447.

b  Adams  v.  Frotbiogbam,  3  Mau,  Rep.  352.  Scratton  v.  Brown,  4
BamiD,  4>  Creee,  485. Duolap  v.  Stetson,  4  Maean^  349.

c  Den  V.  Wright,  1  Peters'  Cir.  ;  ep.  64.

d  Orleans  Navigation  Company  y.  New-Orleans,  %  Marlm^  214.

e  Dig,  8. 1.  15.  Ibid.  8.  5,6*2.  TouUier's  DraU  Ciml  Fnme.
ton*  ill.  D.  376. JnsiUuUs  of  <A#  ViM  Law  of  Spain^  by  Doctors  Jsto


Lee.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  435

The  reguIatioDs  in  the  civil  law  on  the  subject  of  urban
and  rural  servitudes,  were  just  and  equitable,  and  the  pro-
visions made  to  define  and  protect  those  rights,  were  far
more  minute  and  precise  than  those  which  are  to  be  found


mod  Manuel^  translated  bj  L.  F.  C,  JohruUm,  1825.  This  digest  of
the  cml  jurispradence  of  Spain  collects  summarilj,  and  states  with
great  precision,  the  Spanish  lair  concerning  senritudes,  both  in  town
and  country  ;  (lib.  2,  tit.  6,)  and  it  appears  to  be  a  rerj  close  adoption
of  the  distinctions  of  the  ciril  law  on  the  subject  of  rural  and  city  ser-
vices. The  Code  Napoleon,  b.  2,  tit.  4,  has  also  condensed,  and  the
€iml  Code  ofLouitiana  has  borrowed  from  it,  the  principles  of  the  ci-
vil law  on  the  subject  of  senritudes.  Before  the  promulgation  of  the
code,  tbera  were  many  French  treatises  on  senritudes,  and  in  the  i?«-
perioire  de  Jurisprudence,  par  Merlin,  and  in  his  Questions  de  DroU^
tit.  Sertitude,  a  crowd  of  Italian,  German,  and  French  treatises  on  ser-
vitudes, are  cited,  and  among  them  the  TVaiie  des  Servitudes,  by  JLo-
Uture^  which,  Toullier  says,  has  been  of  great  use  to  all  succeeding
writen.  The  subject  is  treated  at  larg^  by  Merlin,  and  he  has  enriched
it  with  forensic  discussions.  The  treatise  by  Desgodets  was  a  simple
oommeotary  upon  the  law  of  buildings  under  the  custom  of  Paris ;  but
•ince  the  era  of  thecode,,M.  Le  Page  has  published  two  octavo  volumes,
entitled,  Lois  des  BaUmes,  ou  le  ^ouveau  Desgodeis,  in  which  the  law  of
vicinage,  in  relation  to  city  servitudes,  is  examined  with  great  minute-
ness of  detail.  The  Traite  du  Voisinage,  in  two  volumes  octavo,  by
M.  Ftiumel,  a  French  lawyer  of  the  old  regime,  discusses  at  large  the
different  subjects  embraced  by  the  law  of  vicinage  in  an  alphabetical  or
dictionary  form ;  and  be  is  a  learned  and  voluminous  writer,  who  baa
pablished  several  interesting  tracts  on  various  branches  of  the  law,  and
who  speaks  with  freedom  and  contempt  of  the  great  mass  nf  laws  and
ordinances  promulgated  by  the  revolutionists  in  France  prior  to  1  SCO,
when  the  firet  edition  of  his  work  on  the  law  of  vicinage  appeared.  In
those  legislative  assemblies,  he  says,  there  were  peu  de  jurisconsultes^
beaueoup  d'hommes  de  lou  Since  the  new  code,  the  Traiti  des  Servi'
hides,  suioant  Us  Prineipes  du  Code,  par  M,  Pardessus,  is  much  re-
garded, and  this  eminent  professor  is  always  cited  by  Toullier  with  re-
apect,  though  he  combats  with  freedom  many  of  his  opinions.  Toullier
himself  (torn.  iii.  326  to  654,)  has  discussed  the  whole  of  this  subject  of
servitudes  npon  the  principles  of  the  code,  with  his  usual  order,  accura-
cy and  learning.


496  OF  RBAi;  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

OQ  the  aame  Bubjects  in  the  books  of  the  GommoD  law  ;  and
it  18  dilBcult  to  solve  many  questioDs  arising  od  those  ligfatB^
without  having  recourse  to  the  solid  and  luminous  princifileB
of  the  civil  law,  which  are  of  permanent  and  univenal  appli-
cation/

In  cities,  where  the  population  is  dense,  and  the  bufldings
compact,  a  great  variety  of  urban  services  grow  out  of  the
relation  of  vicinage*  There  is  the  right  of  support j  which
arises  from  contract,  or  prescription  which  implies  a  grant.
This  right  is  where  the  owner  of  a  house  stipulates  to  allow
hiB  neighbour  to  rest  his  timbers  on  the  walls  of  his  house.
There  is  also  the  servitude  of  drip^  by  which  one  man  en-
gages to  permit  the  waters  flowing  from  the  roof  of  his  neigh-
bour's house  to  £dJI  on  his  estate.  So  there  is  the  right  of
drainy  or  to  convey  water  in  pipes  through,  or  over  the  estate
of  another.  The  right  of  way  may  also  be  attached  to  a
house,  entry,  gate,  weU,  or  city  lot,  as  well  as  to  a  country
farm.  These  servitudes  or  easements  must  be  created  by
the  owner,  and  one  tenant  in  common  cannot  estaUish
^em  upon  the  common  property  without  the  cons^t  of  his
co-tenant*

The  exercise  of  these  servitudes  may  be  limited  to  certain
times.  The  right  of  drawing  water,  for  instance,  fipom  a
neighbour's  well,  may  be  confined  to  certain  hours,  or  a  right
of  passage  may  be  confined  to  a  part  of  the  day.  If  there  be
a  party-wall  between  two  houses,  and  the  owner  of  <»e  of


a  M^  Fouroel,  when  f  peakiog  of  the  RomaD  law  id  relatioD  to  Uiit
sabject,  says,  that  Quelque  chose  que  voue  demandex  aux  low  /Zommaet,
ellcM  voui  enfowrmuetU  la  ripame  ;  and  we  may  say  of  that  law,  as  the
yoQDger  Fiioy  said  of  Titus  Aristo,  who  was  an  aocompli^ed  lawyer,
mod  his  parttoular  friend ;  MhU  est  guod  diicere  velie^  quod  ille  doeere
mompoesU*

b  Dig.  8. 1.  2.  Ibid.  8.  2.  19.  Pothier,  Couiume  d'OrleoMt  bU.
to  tit  13,  (2m  Serwtudei,  art.  2,  n.  6.  See  also  bis  Traiti  du  QtiOfi-
Comtrat  de  CommunauU,  pastim.  Instiiuiee  of  the  Civil  la^j^Spam^
by  Doctors  Jieeo  and  Jdamnei^  book  2,  tit  6.


Jm.  U1J\  of  real  property.  437

the  houaee  pulls  it  down,  ia  order  to  bufld  a  new  one,  and
with  it  he  takes  down  the  party-wail  belonging  equally  to  him
aod  his  neighbouri  and  erects  a  new  house  and  a  new  wall,
he  is  bound,  on  his  part,  to  pull  down  the  wall  and  reinstate
it  in  a  reasonable  time,  and  with  the  least  inconvenience ;
and  if  the  necessity  of  the  reparation  of  the  old  wall  be  estab-
lished, the  neighbour  is  bound  to  contribute  ratably  to  the  e^^-
pense  of  the  new  walL But  he  is  not  bound  to  contribute  to
building  the  new  wall  higher  than  the  old  one,  nor  with  more
costly  materials. All  such  extra  expense  must  be  home  ex-
clusively by  him  who  pulls  down  and  rebuilds.* If  the  owner
of  a  house  in  a  compact  town  finds  it  necessary  to  pull  it
down,  and  remove  the  foundations  of  his  building,  and  he
gives  due  notice  of  his  intention  to  the  owner  of  the  adjoining
house,  he  is  not  answerable  for  the  injury  which  the  owner
of  that  bouse  may  sustain  by  the  operation,  provided  he  re-
move his  own  with  reasonable  and  ordinary  care.* Where
there  had  been  no  party-wall,  but  the  walls  of  the  bouse  pull-
ed down  stood  wholly  on  its  lot,  yet  if  the  beams  of  the  other
house  rested  upon  the  wall  pulled  down,  and  had  done  so  for
^  period  sufficient  to  establish  an  easement  by  prescriptioni
the  owner  o[  the  adjoining  house  would  be  entitled  to  have
his  beams  inserted  for  a  resting  place  in  the  new  wall. Such
an  easement  is  continual,  without  requiring  the  constant  aod
immediate  act  of  man  ;  and  it  is  an  apparent  one,  shown  by
an  exterior  work ;  and,  consequently,  it  has  the  qualities  suf-
ficient by  the  common  law,  and  also  deemed  in  the  French
law  suiBcient,  to  establish  an  easement  by  prescription.' It
has  been  held,  in  England,  that  the  owners  of  a  party-wall,
built  at  joint  expense,  and  standing  partly  on  the  land  of  each,
are  not  tenants  in  common,  but  each  party  continues  owner


a  CampbeU  v.  Mesier,  4  Johns,  Ch,  Rep.  334.  Pothier,  Du  Quasi'
Control  de  CommunatUe^  No.  187—192.  220, 221.

b  PejtoD  V.  St.  Thomas'*  Hospital,  9  Bamw.  4r  Crus,  725.  Mas-
lej  ▼.  Goyner,  4  Carr,  4r  Poyne^  161.

c  Code  MipoUtm^  No.  690.


(


438  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pmrt  ?L

of  bis  land,  and  has  a  right  to  the  use  of  the  wall,  aod  a
remedy  for  a  disturbance  of  that  right  But  the  commoa  or
of  a  wall  separating  adjoining  lots  belonging  to  diferent  own-
ers, is  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  wall,  and  the  land  on
which  it  stands,  belong  equally  to  the  diflferent  ownera^  in
equal  undivided  moieties,  as  tenants  in  common.*

In  connection  with  this  subject  of  party- walls,  may  be  men-
tioned the  law  concerning  division  fences  between  the  ownen
of  adjoining  lands. These  interests  are  generally  the  oig^ct
of  local  statute  regulations. The  doctrine  is,  that  at  ootn-
mon  law  the  tenant  of  a  close  was  not  bound  to  fence  against
an  adjoining  close,  unless  by  force  of  prescription,  and  if
iiound  by  prescription  to  fence  his  close,  he  was  not  bound  to
fence  against  any  cattle  but  such  as  were  rightfully  in  the
adjoining  close. If  not  bound  at  common  law  to  fence  his
land,  he  was  nevertheless  bound,  at  bis  peril,  to  keep  his  cat-
iie  on  his  own  grounds,  and  prevent  them  from  escaping.
The  l^al  obligation  of  the  tenants  of  adjoining  lands  to  make
and  maintain  partition  fences,  where  no  prescription  exists,
and  no  agreement  has  been  made,  rests  entirely  on  positive
provisions  by  statute ;  and  trespass  will  lie  against  the  owner
of  cattle  entering  on  the  grounds  of  another,  though  there  be
no  fence  to  obstruct  them,  unless  he  can  protect  himself  by
statute,  or  prescription,  or  agreement. The  public  have  no
rights,  even  in  a  public  liighway,  but  a  right  of  way  or  pas-
sage, and  if  cattle  be  placed  in  the  highway  for  tlie  purpose  of
grazing,  and  escape  into  an  adjoining  close,  the  owner  of  the
cattle,  unless  he  owns  the  soil  of  that  part  of  the  highway  on


a  Matti  T.  Hawkins,  5  Taunt.  Rep.  20.  Cubitt  v.  Porter,  8  Barnw*
4>  Creii.  S57.  The  building  act  of  14  Oeo.  III.  oh.  78,  has  giwea  to
each  party  certain  easements  in  the  wall  on  the  land  of  the  other,  and
has  made  special  and  ample  provision  on  the  subject  of  houses  and  par*
tition  walls  in  the  city  of  London.  Some  statute  regulations  of  that
kind  seem  to  be  required  in  large  cities,  though  in  France  the  customi
of  Paris  and  Orleans  have  supplied  the  place  of  more  minute  statute
proviaions.


JLec.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  439

'vrhich  he  placed  bis  cattle,  cannot  avail  himself  of  the  insuf*'
ficiency  of  the  fences,  in  excuse  of  the  trespass.'

Important  questions  have  arisen  in  j-espect  to  the  use  of
running  waters,  between  different  proprietors  of  portions  of
the  same  stream ;  and  such  questions  are  daily  growing  in
interest,  as  the  value  of  water  power  is  more  and  more  felt  in
manufacturing  establishments.

Every  proprietor  of  lands  on  the  banks  of  a  river,  has  nato*
rally  an  equal  right  to  the  use  of  the  water  which  flows  in  the
stream  adjacent  to  his  lands,  as  it  was  wont  to  run,  {currere
solebcU^)  without  diminution  or  alteration. No  proprietor  ha»
a  right  to  use  the  water,  to  the  prejudice  of  other  proprietors,
above  or  below  him,  unless  he  has  a  prior  right  to  divert  it,  or
a  title  to  some  exclusive  enjoyment. He  has  no  property  in
the  water  itself,  but  a  simple  usufruct  while  it  passes  along.
Aqua  currit  et  debet  currere^  is  the  language  of  the  law.
Though  he  may  use  the  water  while  it  runs  over  his  land,
he  cannot  unreasonably  detain  it,  or  give  it  another  direction,
and  he  must  return  it  to  its  ordinary  channel  when  it  leaves
his  estate. Without  the  consent  of  the  adjoining  proprietors,
he  cannot  divert  or  diminish  the  quantity  of  water  which
would  otherwise  descend  to  the  proprietors  below,  nor  tlffow
the  water  back  upon  the  proprietors  above,  without  a  grant,
or  an  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  twenty  years,  which  is  evi-
dence of  it* This  is  the  clear  and  settled  general  doctrine  on


a  Rust  ▼.  Low,  6  Mcub.  Rep*  90.  Little  y.  Lathrop,  5  Qreenleaf^
356.  Stackpole  v.  Healy,  16  Mau,  Rep.  33.  Avery  v.  Maxwell,  4
Jf.H.Rep.  36.  WelU  v.  Howell,  19  Jokmon^  385.  Holladaj  ▼•
Manb,  3  Wendell,  142.  The  JV.  F.  RevUeti  Staluiei,  toI.  u  353^355,
have  prescribed  rules  for  makiag  and  maintaiDiog  lufficient  diriaioo
feuces  between  the  owners  of  adjoiniag  lauds,  but  tbere  is  an  express
exception  in  favoar  of  owners  cboosinf  to  let  their  lands  lie  open,  and
in  that  case  I  apprehend  that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  respecti? e  ownen
would  be  remitted  to  their  common  law  rights  and  duties.

6  Dig.  39.  3, 4  and  10.  Pothier,  Traiti  du  Control  d§  Soci^iy  «•-
etmd  app.  No.  236, 237. Brown  ▼.  Best,  1  WiU.  Rep.  174. Bealey


440  OF  BKAL  PBOPBKTT.  (Pmtn.


the  iobject,  and  all  the  difficuky  that  ariKS  coiinto  id  the
application.  The  owner  mnsl  so  i»e  and  apply  the  water,
as  to  work  no  material  injury  or  annoyance  to  his  neigMMjar
bdow  him,  who  has  an  equal  r%fat  to  the  subseqoent  ose  of
the  same  water.  Streams  of  water  are  intended  for  the  nse
and  oorofort  of  man ;  and  it  wooU  be  onreasonable,  and  coo*
trary  to  the  universal  sense  of  mankind,  to  debar  every  rqia-
rian  proprietor  from  the  application  of  the  water  to  domestic,
agricultural,  and  manufecturing  purposes,  provided  the  use  of
it  be  made  under  the  limitations  which  have  been  mentioned ;
and  there  vrill,  no  doubt,  inevitably  be,  in  the  exercise  of  a
perfect  right  to  the  use  of  tlie  water,  some  evaporation  and
decrease  of  it,  and  some  variations  in  the  weight  and  vdod^
of  the  current  But  de  minimis  mm  curat  lex^  and  a  right
of  action  by  the  proprietor  below  would  not  necessarfly  flow
from  such  consequences,  but  would  depend  upon  the  nature
and  extent  of  the  complaint  or  injury,  and  the  manner  of
using  the  water.  AU  that  the  law  requires  of  the  party,  by
or  over  whose  land  a  stream  passes,  is,  that  be  should  use
the  water  in  a  reasonable  manner,  and  so  as  not  to  destroy,
or  render  useless,  or  materially  diminish,  or  afl^  the  apfdi-
cation  of  the  water  by  the  proprietors  below  on  the  stream.
He  must  not  shut  the  gates  of  his  dams  and  detain  the  water
unreasonably,  or  let  it  off  in  unusual  quantities,  to  the  aO'


▼•  Dosff )  o  EoH  i  Rtp*  5N)8«  W^n^ht  ▼.  Jnowsrd)  1  oiinon  w^  Stttuft^
190.  Gardoer  ? .  Village  of  Newburgb,  2  Johns.  Ch.  R^.  162.  Bel-
knap T.  Belknap,  ibid.  463.  Merritt  ▼.  Parker,  1  Ck>»e*s  JC  J.  JUp.
460.  Tyler  ▼.  WilkiDBon,  4  Mason,  397.  Coalter  ▼.  Hooter,  4  JUm-
dolph,  5S.  Hammood  v.  Fuller,  1  Paige,  197.  HutcbinaoD  y.  Cole-
mao,  5  HaUted,  74.  Id  the  case  of  BarroD  and  Craig  v.  Corporatioo  of
Baltimore,  {Jimerican  Jurist,  No.  4,  p.  203,]  the  Corporation,  id  ths
exercise  of  tbeir  municipal  powers,  direrted  certain  streams  from  their
aatural  channels  to  a  point  near  the  plaintiff's  wharf  on  navigable
ter  within  the  harbour  and  city  of  Baltimore,  to  which  point  a  laiige
posit  of  sand  and  earth  was  carried  down  by  the  streams  and  injured  the
ralue  of  the  wharf.  It  was  held,  that  a  private  action  lay  for  the  ds-
mage  arising  from  this  corporate  act.


JLec.  Ln.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  441

noyance  of  bis  neighbour.*  Pothier  lays  down  the  rule  very
strictly^  that  the  owner  of  the  upper  stream^  must  not  raise
the  water  by  dams,  so  as  to  make  it  fall  with  more  abun-
dance and  rapidity  than  it  would  naturally  do,  and  injure  the
proprietor  below.*  But  this  tule  must  not  be  construed  lite-
rally, for  that  would  be  to  deny  all  valuable  use  of  the  water
to  the  riparian  proprietors.  It  must  be  subjected  to  the  qua-
lifications which  have  been  mentioned,  otherwise  rivers  and
streams  of  water  would  become  utterly  useless,  either  for
manufacturing  or  agricultural  purposes.  The  just  and  equi-
table principle  is  given  in  the  Roman  law : — Sic  enim  de-
bere  quern  meliorem  agrum  suum  facere^  ne  vicini  dete-
riorem  facicU.^

This  natural  right  to  the  use  of  waters,  as  an  incident  or
particular  easement  to  the  land,  may  be  abridged,  or  enlarged,
or  modified,  by  grant  or  prescription.  Though  a  stream  be
diminished  in  quantity,  or  corrupted  in  quality,  by  means  of
the  exercise  of  certain  trades,  yet  if  the  occupation  of  the
party  so  taking  or  using  it,  has  existed  for;90  long  a  time  as
to  raise  the  presumption  of  a  grant,  the  other  party  whose
land  is  below,  must  take  the  stream  subject  to  such  adverse
right ;  and  twenty  years  exclusive  enjoyment  of  the  water
in  any  particular  manner,  affords,  according  to  the  Englisli
law,  and  the  law  of  New- York,  Massachusetts,  and  several
other  states,  presumption  of  such  a  grant.' But  nothing  short


a  Beinell  v.  Stroll,  4  DalUu'  Rep.  211.  Palmer  v.  Mulligan,  S
CaineM'  Rep.  307.  Colbara  v.  Richards,  13  Jlfcwi.  Rep.  420.  Cook
▼.  Hull,  3  Pickfiring'B  Rep.  269.  Ruonels  v.  Balleo,  2  JV.  H.  Rep
632.  Tyler  ▼.  WiUcinaoD,  4  Jtfatofi,  397.  Merritt  v.  Briockerhoff;
17  Johns.  Rep,  306.  Vao  Bergeo  ▼.  Van  Bergen,  3  Johne.  Ck.  Rep.
282.  Williams  r.  Morland,  2  Barmo.  Sf  Cress.  910.  Tbompaoa  t«
Crocker,  9  Pick.  59.

b  TraiU  du  Conirat  de  SociHi^  second  app.  No.  236.

e  Jhe  Code  J^apoleony  No.  640, 641.  643, 644,  establishes  the  same
just  rules  in  the  use  of  runniog  waters.

d  The  time  of  UmitaUoD  varies  in  partieolar  states* Thus,  in  Con-

ToL.  in.  66


442  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  TI.

of  a  contract,  or  of  such  a  time  of  enjoymeot  of  water  diTeit-
ed  from  the  natural  channel,  or  interrupted  by  dams,  or  other
obstructions,  or  materially  changed  in  its  descent  or  character,
will  justify  the  owner  as  against  any  land  owner  lower  down
the  stream,  to  whom  such  alterations  are  injurious.  In  the
character  of  riparian  proprietors,  persons  are  entitled  to  the
natural  flow  of  the  stream  without  diminution  to  their  injury,
and  to  them  may  be  applied  the  observation  of  Whitlock,  J^
in  Shury  v.  Piggott,'^  that  a  water  course  begins  ex  jure
naiurcBj  and  having  taken  a  course  naturally,  it  cannot  be
diverted.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  owners  of  artificial
works  may  acquire  rights  by  actual  appropriation  as  against
the  riparian  proprietor,  and  the  extent  of  the  right  is  to  be
measured  by  the  extent  of  the  appropriation,  and  the  use  of
the  water  for  a  period  requisite  to  establish  a  conclusiye  pre-
sumption of  right  In  such  a  case,  the  natural  right  of  the
riparian  proprietor  becomes  subservient  to  the  acquired  right
of  the  manufacturer.^  The  general  and  established  doctrine
is,  that  an  exclusive  enjoyment  of  water,  or  of  light,  or  of  any
other  easement  in  any  particular  way,  for  twenty  years,  or
for  such  other  period  less  than  twenty  years,  which  in  any
particular  state  is  the  established  period  of  Umitation,^  and
enjoyed  without  interruption,  becomes  an  adverse  enjeyment
sufficient  to  raise  a  presumption  of  title  as  against  a  right  in
any  other  person,  which  miglit  have  been,  but  was  not  as-


neoticnt  and  Vennoot,  the  term  of  prescription  is  fiAeen  years,  and  in
South  Carolina,  five  years ;  (Maoning  ▼.  Smith,  6  Conn.  Hep,  289.
MartiD  V.  Bigelow,  2  Aikensy  184.  Aoderson  v.  Gilbect,  1  Bay^M  Rep.
375,)  but,  I  presume,  that  generally,  in  this  coantry,  vre  follow  the  Eog.
lish  time  of  prescription.  It  was  so  understood  by  Cb.  J.  Parker,  in
Gayetty  v.  Betbune,  14  Jdasi,  Rep.  49.

a  3  BuUl.  Rep,  339.

b  Brown  r.  Best,  1  WIU,  R^.  174.  Bealey  v.  Shaw,  6  Eaett
Rep.  208.  Tyler  ▼.  Wilkinson,  4  Maeon^  397.  Hatch  v.  Dwight,  17
Mcue.  Rep.  289.

e  State  v.  Wilkinson,  2  Vermont  Rep.  480.


JLo€.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  448

serted.' The  right  is  confined  to  the  extent,  and  the  mode
of  the  enjoyment  during  the  twenty  years. All  that  the  law
requires  is,  that  the  mode  or  manner  of  using  the  water
should  not  be  materially  varied,  to  the  prejudice  of  other
owners  ;  and  the  proprietor  is  not  bound  to  use  the  water  in
the  same  precise  manner,  or  to  apply  it  to  the  same  mill,  for
such  a  construction  of  the  rule  would  stop  all  improvements
in  machinery/ He  is  only  not  to  vary  the  enjoyment  to  the
prejudice  of  his  neighbour. He  may,  by  his  erections  and
dams,  increase  the  quantity  of  the  water  appropriated,  or
increase  the  velocity  of  the  current  below,  provided  no  mate-
rial injury  be  produced  to  the  land  or  works  of  the  occupant
of  the  stream  below  him,  or  to  his  enjoyment  t)f  them. This
presumption  of  title  founded  on  that  enjoyment,  is  equally
well  eetablished  in  English^  and  American  law.'' To  render


a  Shaw  v.  Crawford,  10  Johns.  Rep,  336.  Bealey  y.  Shaw,  6  East,
214.  But  the  makiog  and  enjoy iog  of  window  lights  for  20  years,  will
not  jnclade  the  owner  of  (he  adjoining  premises,  and  prerent  him  from
baiiding  up  against  such  lights,  unless  there  be  evidence  of  his  know-
ledge of  the  fact  as  a  sufficient  foundation  for  presuming  a  grant.  And
the  presumption  of  knowledge  of  the  windows  will  not  be  made  against
the  owner,  merely  from  the  fact  that  be  had  a  tenant  in  possession  da-
ring the  time,  who  might  be  altogether  indifferent  and  careless  as  to  tba
enoroachment. Daniel  v.  North,  1 1  Eeut^  372.

6  Palmer  r.  Kebblewhaite,  2  iS^oio.  250.

e  Lewis  v.  Price,  Esp.  Dig.  636.  Bradbury  r.  Grinsell,  2  Sound,
Rep.  175,  a.  Brown  v.  Best,  1  Wih.  Rep,  174.  Bealey  ▼.  Shaw,  6
EasVe  Rep.  208.  Balston  y.  Bensted,  1  Campb.  JV.  p.  Rep,  463.
Saunders  t.  Newman,  1  Bamvo.  4r  ^Id.  258.  Barker  ▼.  Richardson,
4  Bamw.  4*  ^Id.  578.  Lewis  ▼.  Cross,  2  Bamto.  4r  Creee,  686.  Wil-
liams V.  Morland,  ibid,  910.  Livatt  v.  Wilson,  3  Bingh.  Rep,  115.
Gray  t.  Bond,  2  Brod.  ^  Bingh.  667.  Wright  v.  Howard,  1  Simon
4*  Stuart,  ^  90.

d  Hazard  ? .  Robinson,  3  Jdaeon'e  Rep.  272.  Sherwood  t.  Burr,  4
Day's  Rep.  244.  Ingraham  v.  Hutchinson,  2  Conn.  Rep.  584.  Stilea
T.  Hooker,  7  Cowen'sRep.  266.  Campbell  v.  Smith,  3  HalsUd's  Rep.
139. Cooper  r.  Smith,  0  Serg,  <f-  RanBle,  26. Strickler  t.  Todd,  10


444  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Vd^ri  TI.

the  enjoyment  of  an  easement  for  twenty  years  a  presamp-
tion  juris  et  dejure^  or  conclusive  evidence  of  right,  it  roust
have  been  continued,  uninterrupted,  and  adverse,  that  is,  un-
der a  claim  of  right,  with  the  acquiescence  and  knowledge  of
the  owner.'  The  time  of  enjoyment  requisite  for  the  pre-
scription is  deemed  to  be  uninterrupted  when  it  is  continued
from  ancestor  to  heir,  and  from  seller  to  buyer.  It  must  be
a  lawful  continuation  from  one  person  to  another,  and  any


Md.  63.  Tyler  v.  Wilkloaoo,  4  Jdtuon,  397.  In  Mattachuaetts,  the
common  law  remedy  against  a  mill  owner,  for  overflowing  anotber'a
land,  ii  taken  away,  and  a  special  and  more  limited  remedy  substituted.
The  ProTincial  statute  of  1713,  allowed  the  dams  of  com  and  saw-
mills to  stand,  though  they  should  cause  the  land  of  others  to  be  over-
flowed, and  the  injured  party  was, 'by  a  particular  process,  to  have  an
annual  compensation  in  damages  assessed  by  a  jury.  Mills,  in  the  in-
fancy of  the  country,  were  public  easements,  and  required  marked  eo-
conragement.  But  this  statute  was  substantially,  and  Ch.  J.  Parker
thinks  incautiously,  renewed  in  1796,  when  the  necessity  of  such  en-
couragement to  mill  erections  had  ceased,  and  lands  had  greatly  risen
in  Talne,  (Stowell  v.  Flagg,  11  Mati,  Rep,  Z6A.)  There  are  similar
statute  provisions  in  the  states  of  Maine,  Rhode-Island  and  Viiginia,
and  they  appear,  said  the  Ch.  Justice,  to  be  material  and  unjustifiable
abridgements  of  the  common  law  right  to  the  enjoyment  of  property.
In  Virginia,  the  statute  regulation  concerning  the  use  of  running
streams,  and  the  erection  of  mill  dams,  provides,  that  if  a  person  own-
ing lands  on  both  sides  of  a  stream,  wishes  to  build  a  dam,  he  may  ap-
ply at  once,  without  notice,  to  the  owners  of  the  land  above  and  below,
for  a  writ  ad  quad  damnum.  The  jury  summoned  under  that  writ  ar^
to  examine  the  lands  above  and  below  belonging  to  others,  and  declare
the  damages  that  would  arise  to  the  several  proprietors,  who  are  then  to
be  summoned,  and  the  court  determines  whether,  under  all  the  circum-
stances, leave  ought  to  be  gifen  to  build  the  dam.  If  given,  the  party
applying  is  laid  under  certain  conditions  for  preventing  the  obstructioo
of  the  passage  for  fish  and  ordinary  navigation,  and  convenient  crossing
of  the  water  course,  as  should  seem  meet.  The  applicant,  upon  paying
the  damages  assessed,  to  the  parties  entitled,  may  proceed  to  erect  his
mill  and  dam,  2  Rev.  Code,  c.  235.  Crenshaw  v.  Slate-River  Compa-
ny, &  Randolph^  245.
a  Bracton,  lib.  2,  c.  23,  sec.  1. Sargent  v  Ballard,  9  Pick*  251 .


Lee.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTT.  445

interruption  of  the  enjoyineDt  by  an  adverse  claim  and  pos-
session, destroys  the  prescription.'

The  cases  usually  say,  that  this  right,  acquired  by  twenty
years  undisturbed  and  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  an  ease-
ment, is  founded  on  the  presumption  of  a  grant  or  release,
and  if  so  it  is  not  an  absolute  title,  but  one  that  is  liable  to
be  rebutted  by  circumstances,  and  is  to  stand  good  until  the
presumption  of  title  be  fully  and  fairly  destroyed.  This  was
the  doctrine  so  late  as  the  cases  of  Campbell  v.  Wilson^^
andjof  Livett  v.  Wilson^^  and  it  is  the  prevalent  language
in  all  the  books,  English  and  American.  But  some  of  the
later  English  authoritiea||eem  to  give  to  this  presumption  the
most  unshaken  stability,  and  they  say  it  is  conclusive  evi-
dence of  title.  In  T)fler  v.  Wilkinson/  where  the  whole
law  on  the  subject  is  stated  with  learning,  precision,  and
force,  the  presumption  is  even  made  to  be  one  juris  et  de
jurcy  and  to  go  to  the  extinguishment  of  the  right  in  various
ways,  as  well  as  by  grant.  The  operation  of  the  presump-
tion, founded  on  the  &ct  of  the  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of
the  easement  for  twenty  years,  is  said  to  exist,  notwithstand-
ing personal  disabilities  of  particular  proprietors  might  have
intervened,  and  where,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  proceedingSi
grants  would  not  be  presumed.

The  nature  and  extent  of  the  right  acquired  by  prior  occu-
pancy of  a  running  stream  becomes  frequently  an  important
and  vexatious  question  between  different  riparian  proprietors.
The  law  gives  considerable  weight  and  effect  to  the  first  ap-
propriation of  the  elements  of  light,  air,  and  water  ;  and,
therefore,  if  I  build  my  bouse  close  to  my  neighbour's  wall,  I
cannot  compel  him  to  demolish  it,  though  it  may  obstruct  my
light,  for  the  first  occupancy  is  in  him. On  the  other  hand,


a  Ifui.  Juitin,  lib.  2,  tit.  6,  tec.  7, 8.  Sargfeot  v.  Balltrd,  vb,  tup.
b  3  E(uV»  Rep.  294.
c  SBtnf.  Rep.  115.
d  4  Maumf  397.


446  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  TI.

according  to  the  English  law,  the  owner  of  a  bouse  will  be
restrained  by  injunction,  and  he  will  be  liable  to  an  action  on
the  case,  if  he  makes  any  erections  or  improvennents,  so  as  to
obstruct  the  ancient  lights  of  an  adjoining  bouse.* So,  if  I
raake  a  tanyard,  which  renders  less  pleasant  and  salubrious
the  air  of  the  house  and  garden  subsequently  established  ad-
joining it,  the  nuisance  is  said  to  be  without  a  remedy  to  the
person  who  voluntarily  plants  himself  near  it.* If  I  am  the
first  person  who  applies  the  water  of  a  rulhniog  stream  to
the  purpose  of  irrigation,  or  of  a  mill,  I  cannot  afterwards  be
lawfully  disturbed  in  any  essential  degree,  in  the  exercise  of
my  right,  provided  the  water  be  U||d  by  me  in  such  a  rea-
sonable manner,  as  not  to  divert  the  natural  course  of  the
stream  from  the  lands  below,  nor  essentially  to  destroy  the
same  use  of  it  as  it  naturally  flowed  over  the  lands  of  the
proprietors  above  and  below  me.' Prior  occupancy  short  of


^  a  WilsoD  v.  Peto,  6  Moorcy  C.  B.  47.  Bj  the  cuatom  of  tbecity  of
LoodoD,  a  man  may  build  to  aoj  height  upoa  aDcient  fuuodationa,  al-
though he  may  darken  his  Deighboura'  lights  thereby,  provided  all  the
four  walls  belong  to  him,  but  the  pririlege  does  not  apply  if  he  owns  on-
ly three  of  the  walls ;  and  a  reversioner  may  recover  for  obstructing  an
ancient  light,  to  the  injury  of  his  reversionary  interest.  Shad  well  v.
Hutchinson,  3  Carr.  Sf  Payne,  615.  The  action  may  be  repeated  for
the  continuance  of  the  nuisance,  4  ibid,  333.  S.  C.  This  common  law
right  of  prescription  in  favour  of  ancient  lights,  does  not  reasonably  or
equitably  apply,  and  it  is  not  the  presumed  intention  of  the  owners  of
city  lots,  that  it  ever  should  be  applied  to  buildings  on  narrow  lots  in  the
rapidly  growing  cities  in  this  country.  By  sucii  a  prescriptive  claim,
the  value  of  vacant  lots,  and  of  lots  with  old  and  low  buildingfs  upon
them,  would  be  destroyed,  if  substantial  buildings  could  not  be  erected
on  them,  lest  they  might  obstruct  the  light  and  prospect  of  the  side  lights
of  some  building  on  an  adjoining  lot,  which  had  stood  for  twenty  years.

b  2  Blacks.  Com.  14.  403.  Com.  Dig.  tit.  Action  upon  thi  Catefor
a  Jfuiionce,  C.  Van  Bergen  v.  Van  Bcrgcu,  3  Johns.  Ch.  Rep.  28?.
Rex  V.  Cross,  2  Carr.  Sf  Payne  JV".  P.  Rep.  483.  Back  v.  Stacy,  2
Russell,  121.

c  Piatt  V.  Johnston,  15  Johns.  Rep.  213.  In  Hatch  v.  Dwight,  17
«tfa#c.  Rep.  289,  the  Ch.  J.  went  beyond  the  doctrine  in  the  text,  for  be


L«#.  LIL]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  447

the  statute  term  of  prescription,  and  without  consent  or  grant,
will  not  confer  any  exclusive  right  as  between  different  ripa-
rian proprietors,  to  the  use  of  a  running  stream.*  If,  how-
ever, the  prior  occupant  has  enjoyed  the  use  of  water  in  any
particular  mode  for  twenty  years,  so  as  to  have  acquired  a
title  by  prescription,  he  is,  in  that  case,  entitled  to  remain  un-
disturbed in  his  possession,  in  the  mode,  and  to  the  extent
commensurate  with  the  right  as  it  has  been  acquired  and  de-
fined by  enjoyment.*  But  if  the  prior  use  of  the  stream
should  have  been  materially  altered  within  the  twenty  years,
to  the  injury  or  annoyance  of  any  adjoining  occupant,  who
had,  in  the  mean  time,  possessed  himself  of  the  use  of  tlie
water,  the  title  by  prescription  would  be  wanting  as  to  such


said,  that  the  first  occupant  of  a  mill-site,  bj  erectiog  a  dam  and  mill,
had  a  right  to  water  sufficient  to  work  his  wheels,  eren  if  it  should  ren-
der useless  the  privilege  of  any  one  above  or  below  upon  the  same
stream.  If  the  right  of  prior  occupancy,  in  the  case  stated,  did  not  go
thus  far,  thj  water  privilege  would  seem  to  be  rendered  wholly  useless
for  Tnill  purposes  to  all  parties.  A  more  limited  rule  was  laid  down  in
Martin  v.  Bigelow,  3  dtf  iAretij'  Vermont  Rep.  184 ;  for  it  was  there  held,
that  the  mere  prior  occupancy  of  a  running  stream  by  a  mill,  did  not
prevent  another  person  from  using  the  same  water  above,  on  the  same
stream,  in  a  prudent  way,  unless  the  mill  below  had  been  erected  and
the  water  used  for  it  more  than  fifteen  years,  being  the  period  of  limita-
tion. The  court  said,  that  the  common  law  on  this  point  was  not  appli-
cable in  Vermont,  as  it  would  go  to  allow  the  person  who  erected  the
first  mill  on  a  small  stream,  to  control  and  defeat  all  mill  privileges  on
the  same  stream  above  him.  So;  in  Anthony  v.  Lapham,  6  Pickerings
175,  it  was  declared,  that  the  owner  of  land,  through  which  a  natural
stream  flows,  may  use  it  for  watering  his  cattle  or  irrigating  his  land,
but  he  must  use  it  in  the  latter  way  so  as  to  do  the  least  possible  injury
to  his  neighbour  below,  and  he  must  return  the  surplus  into  the  natural
channel.

a  Tyler  t.  Wilkinson,  4  Jfason,  401, 402.

b  Saunders  r.  Newman,  1  Bamw.  Sf  Aid.  958.  Van  Bergen  t.  Van
Bergen,  3  Johm,  Ch,  Rep.  38S.  Sherwood  v.  Burr,  4  DayU  Rep.
244.


\


448  OP  BEAL  PHOPERTT.  [Pftrt  YL

altentioitti  and  thejr  wodd  be  onkwfii],  and,  eonsecpieiitlT^
a  grDuod  of  actaoo.*

Aiiglitacqaired  by  use  may,  bcweYer,  be  IobI  by  non-iBer,
and  an  abeoluta  diecootinuance  of  the  nee  for  twenty  yeam
afibids  a  presumpdon  of  the  eztinguishroeQt  of  tbe  right  in
fitTonr  of  aome  other  advene  righL*  Aa  an  enjoyment  for
twenty  years  is  necessary  to  found  a  presumption  of  a  grant,
the  goieral  rule  is,  that  there  must  be  a  similar  non-user  to
raise  the  presumption  oi  a  rdease.  But  I  do  not  apprehend
that  the  mere  non-user  of  an  easement,  even  for  twenty  yean,
will  necessarily  raise  a  presumption  of  its  extinguishment,
unless  there  has  been,  in  the  mean  time,  some  act  done  by
the  owner  of  the  land,  charged  with  the  easement,  inconeas-
tent  with,  or  adverse  to,  the  existence  of  the  right ;  and,  in
that  case,  a  release  or  extinguishment  of  the  right  will  be
presumed/  The  doctrine  of  the  civil  law  was,  that  a  servi-
tude was  presumed  to  have  been  released  or  renounced,  when
the  owner  of  the  estate  to  which  it  was  due,  permitted  the
owner  of  the  estate  charged  with  it,  to  erect  such  works  on  it,
as  a  wa]|,  for  instance,  which  naturally  and  necessarily  hin-
dered the  exercise  of  the  right,  and  operated  to  annihilate  it.
The  mere  sufferance  of  works  to  be  erected,  repugnant  to  the


a  Goodrich  v.  Knapp,  M.  8.  case,  decided  in  the  Supreme  Court  of
New-Tork,  18S8.

b  Preioott  V.  Phillip!,  decided  in  1797,  end  reported  in  2  JSeefw'
Poihi$rf  136.  Lawrence  ▼.  Obee,  3  Campb.  Rep,  514.  Bracton  laid
down  tbe  nme  principle,  that  inoorporeal  rights  acquired  by  use  may
be  equally  lost  by  disuse.  Lib.  iv.  Dt  OMtua  soecs  dUtetniMa,  cb.  38,
seo.  3.

e  See  the  reasoning  of  Sir  William  D.  Evans,  in  JCMmt*  PolhUr^
vol.  ii.  136  ;  and  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Justice  Story,  in  Tyler  v.  Wilkin-
son, in  which  be  says,  that  the  proprietors  of  Sergeantt  Trench  were
entitled  to  so  much,  and  no  more  of  the  water  of  tbe  river,  as  bad  been
aooustomed  for  twenty  years  to  flow  through  their  trench,  to  and  from
their  mills,  whether  actually  used,  or  necessary  for  the  mills,  or  not.
Bee  also,  White  v.  Crawford,  10  JUaee.  Rep,  183.


t.ec.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  449

enjoyment  of  the^eervitude,  would  not  raise  the  presumption
of  a  release,  unless  the  sufferance  continued  for  a  time  requi-
site to  establish  a  prescription ;  or  the  works  were  of  a  per^^
xnanent  and  solid  kind,  such  as  edifices  and  walls,  and  pre-
sented an  absolute  obstacle  to  every  kind  of  enjoyment  of  the
easement. There  must  be  a  total  cessation  of  the  exercise
of  the  right  to  the  servitude,  during  the  entire  time  necessary
to  raise  the  presumption  of  extinguishment,  or  there  must
have  been  some  permanent  obstacle  permitted  to  be  I'aised
against  it,  and  which  absolutely  destroyed  its  exercise.* If
the  act  which  prevents  the  servitude  be  incompatible  with  tlie
nature  or  exercise  of  it,  and  be  by  the  party  to  whom  the
servitude  is  due,  it  is  sufficient  to  extinguish  it ;  and  if  it  bo
extinguished  for  a  moment,  it  is  gone  forever.*

Unity  of  possession  of  the  estate  to  which  an  easement  is
attached,  and  of  the  estate  which  the  easement  encumbersi
is,  in  efiect,  an  extinguishment  of  the  easement.  But  this
does  not  apply  to  a  way  of  necessity ;  and  though  it  be  sus*
pended  by  the  unity  of  possession,  it  revives  by  necessary
implication,  when  the  possession  is  again  severed.^  Nor  is  a
water  course  extinguished  by  unity  of  possession,  and  this
from  the  necessity  of  the  case,  and  the  nature  of  the  subject.
This  was  settled,  after  a  very  elaborate  discussion,  in  Shiiry
v.  PigoU^*  and  that  case  was  accurately  examined  and  de-
liberately confirmed,  in  all  its  paits,  in  Hazard  v.  Robinson.
But  the  use  of  water,  in  a  particular  way,  by  means  of  an


a  Dig,  8.  6.  5.  Foef.  Com.  ad  Pan£U  lib.  8,  tit.  6,  sec.  5  and  7.
TouUlier^M  Droit  Civil  Francai»f  torn.  iii.  n.  673.  Repertoire  de  Jurit'
prudence-y  par  Merlin,  tit.  Servitude,  oh.  30,  sec.  6,  ch.  33.  Tovillier
Bays,  that  the  article  Servitude  io  the  Repertoire  is  composed  with  great
care.  CivU  Code  of  LouiHana,  art.  8 1 5 , 8 1 6.  Ilaigbt  ? .  Tbe  Proprie-
tors of  ibe  Morris  Aqueduct,  4  Wash.  Cir.  Rep,  601 .

b  Tajlor  r.  Hamptoo,  4  M^Cord,  96.

c  1  Saund.  Rep.  323,  note  6.  Story  J.,  io  Hazard  ? .  Robinson,  3
Ma9on*e  Rep.  VJ6.

d  3  BuUi  Rep.  339. PophanCe  Rep.  166.

Vol.  III.  57


46U  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pari  VL


aqaeduct,  may  be  extinguished  by  the  unity  at
and  title  of  both  the  parcels  of  land  connected  with  the
ment ;  and  if  the  adverse  enjoyment  of  an  easement  be  ex-
tinguished, within  the  period  of  prescription,  by  the  unity  of
title,  and  the  land  which  possesses  the  easement  be  shortly
thereafter  sepamted  again  from  the  land  charged  with  the
easement,  by  a  re-conveyance,  the  right  to  be  acquired  by
user,  must  commence  de  novo  from  the  last  period.*  As  to
light  and  air,  the  right  to  them  is  acquired  by  mere  occu-
pancy, and  will  continue  so  long  only  as  the  party  ccmtinues
the  enjoyment,  or  shows  an  intention  to  continue  it.  A  per-
son may  lose  a  right  to  ancient  lights  by  abandonment  of
them,  within  a  less  period  than  twenty  years,  if  be  indicates
an  intention,  when  he  relinquishes  the  enjoyment  of  them,
as  by  building  a  blank  wall  to  bis  house,  never  to  resume  ic
It  is  the  modem  doctrine,  that  the  ceasing  to  enjoy  such  an
easement  will  destroy  the  right,  provided  the  discontinuance
be  absolute  and  decisive,  and  unaccompanied  with  any  inten-
tion to  resume  it  within  a  reasonable  time  ;  and  it  is  a  whole-
some and  wise  qualification  of  the  rule,  considering  the  ex-
tensive and  rapid  improvements  that  are  everywhere  making
upon  real  property.^  It  has  been  an  unsettled  question  what
length  of  time  was  requisite  to  create  the  presumption  of  a
valid  dedication  of  a  highway  to  the  public.  It  seems  to  be
agreed  that  some  portion  of  time  is  necessary  to  establish  a
presumptive  dedication  of  it  Thus,  in  the  case  of  77ie
Tnistees  of  Rugby  Charity  v.  Merryweaiher^  before  Lord
Kenyon,  at  the  London  sittings,^  eight  years  free  use  of  a
way  by  the  public,  with  the  permission  of  the  owner,  was
deemed  quite  sufficient  time  for  presuming  a  dereliction  of
the  way  to  the  public ;  and  Lord  Kenyon  referred  lo  a  case
in  which  six  years  had  been  held  sufficient But  this  decision


a  MaoBiog  v.  Smitb,  6  Conn.  Rep,  289.

6  Moore  ▼.  Rawaon,  3  Bumva*  ^  Creu,  332.

e  11  £<M<,  395,  note.


Lee.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  461

has  been  much  questioned  ia  aubsequeat  cases.  Id  Wood-
yer  v.  Hadden^^  the  Inoguage  of  the  court  was,  that  time
was  a  material  ingredient  in  the  foundation  of  the  presump-
tioa.  In  that  case,  nineteen  years'  use  of  a  street  for  a  public
highway  was  held  not  to  be  clear  and  decisive,  and  therefore
not  sufficient  evidence  of  a  dedication  of  it  to  the  public
Again,  in  W(H)d  v.  Yealf  it  was  adjudged  that  no  dedica-
tion of  a  highway  to  the  public  by  a  tenant  fi>r  years,  though
it  were  for  ninety-nine  years,  or  by  any  other  person  except
the  owner  of  the  fee,  would  be  binding  upon  such  owner ;  and
it  was  intimated  by  Lord  Tenterden,  that  during  the  progress
of  the  requisite  time,  the  highway  ought  to  have  been  .used
as  a  thoroughfare.  The  true  principle  on  the  subject,  to  be
deduced  from  the  authorities,  I  apprehend  to  be,  that  if  there
be  no  other  evidence  of  a  grant  or  dedication,  than  the  pre-
sumption arising  from  the  &ct  of  acquiescence  on  the  part  of
the  owner,  in  the  free  use  and  enjoyment  of  the  way  as  a
public  road,  the  period  of  twenty  years,  applicable  to  incorpo-
real rights,  would  be  required,  as  being  the  usual  and  analo-
gous period  of  limitation.  But  if  there  were  clear,  unequivo-
cal, and  decisive  acts  of  the  owner,  amounting  to  an  explicit
manifestation  of  his  will  to  make  a  permanent  abandonment
of  the  road,  those  acts  would  be  sufficient  to  establish  the  de-
dication within  any  intermediate  period.^  In  Hatch  v.
Dwight^^  it  was  declared,  upon  the  same  principle,  that  if  a
mfll-^te  unoccupied  be  abandoned  by  the  owner,  evidently
with  an  intent  to  leave  it  unoccupied,  it  would  be  unreasona-
ble that  the  other  riparian  proprietors,  alK)ve  and  below,
should  be  prevented,  by  fear  of  suits,  from  making  a  profita-


a  5  Taunton,  125.

b  5  Barnw,  4*  'Aid,  454.

c  The  doctrine  of  the  case  of  Pritchard  v.  AtkiD9on,4  JV.  H,  Rep.
1 ,  is  to  this  eflfectt  and  seventeeo  years  was,  in  that  case,  deemed  te  be
a  Bofficient  period.

d  n  Mass*  Hep,  2Q9.


452  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

Me  use  of  their  sites.  The  law  is  sdicitous  to  prevent  all
kind  of  imposition  and  injury,  from  confidence  reposed  in  the
acts  of  others  ;  and  a  parol  license  to  do  an  act,  on  one's  own
land,  affecting  injuriously  the  air  and  light  of  a  neighbooFs
house,  is  held  not  to  be  revocable  by  such  neighbour  after  it
has  been  once  acted  upon.'  Such  a  license  is  a  direct  en-
couragement to  expend  money,  and  it  woidd  be  against  con-
science to  revoke  it,  as  soon  as  the  expenditure  begins  to  be
beneficial.  The  contract  would  be  specifically  enfiuroed  ia
equity.  Such  a  pardl  license  to  enjoy  a  beneficial  privilege
is  not  an  interest  in  land  witliin  the  statute  of  frauds.  I^
however,  a  parol  license  be  granted  for  a  temporary  purpose^
as  the  permission  to  erect  a  dam,  it  has  been  held  to  termi-
nate with  the  decay  of  the  dam,  as  the  purpose  of  the  license
has  then  been  fulfilled.^  In  Liggins  v.  Inge^^  tlie  court
distinguished  between  licenses  which,  when  countermanded,
leave  the  party  in  statu  quo,  and  Ucenses  for  theconstnictioa
of  buildings  and  works,  and  they  are  not  revocable.

The  modern  cases  distinguish  between  an  easement  and  a
license.  A  claim  for  an  easement  must  be  founded  upon  grant
by  deed  or  writing,  or  upon  prescription  which  supposes  one, for
it  is  a  permanent  interest  in  another's  land,  with  a  right  at  all
times  to  enter  and  enjoy  it.  But  a  license  is  an  authority  to
do  a  particular  act,  or  series  of  acts,  upon  another's  land,  with-
out possessing  any  estate  therein.  It  is  founded  in  personal
confidence,  and  is  not  assignable.  This  distinction  between
a  privilege  or  easement  carrying  an  interest  in  land,  and  re-
quiring a  writing  within  the  statute  of  frauds  to  support  it,
and  a  license  which  may  be  by  parol,  is  quite  subtle,  and  it


a  Webb  V.  Paternoster,  Palmer's  Rep,  71.  2  Eq,  Ca,  Abr.  5«2.
Short  ¥.  Tajlor,  cited  ihi.  Winter  v.  Brockivcll,  8  EasVs  Rrp,  308,
I^e  Fevre  v.  Le  Fevre,  4  Serg*  «5r  RawlCf  241.  Kerick  v.  Kero,  14
Serg,  <f>  Rawle,  267.

6  Hepburn  ▼.  McDowell,  t7  Serg.  cf*  Rawhy  383,

c  7  Bingham,  632.


Lcc.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  453

becomes  difficult,  in  eonie  of  the  cases,  to  discern  a  substan-
tial difference  between  thera.  The  case  of  Wood  v.  Lake^^
which  held  a  parol  agreement  for  the  liberty  to  stack  coal
upon  any  part  of  the  close  of  another,  for  seven  years,  to  be
valid,  was  questioned  at  the  time  by  Mr.  Justice  Foster,  and
it  has  been  since  forcibly  attacked  by  Sir  Edward  B.  Sug-
den,  in  his  Treatise  of  the  Law  of  Vendors  and  Purcha^
sers  /  and  yet  that  case  has  been  recognised,  and  the  doc-
trine of  it  sanctioned,  by  Lord  Ch.  J.  Gibbs,  in  Tayler  v.
Walters.^  The  decision  in  Cook  v.  Steams^  narrows  the
limits  assigned  to  a  parol  license,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
the  cases  of  Ricker  v.  Kelly,  and  Clement  v.  Durginy*
seem  to  approach  and  favour  the  more  questionable  doctrine
in  Wood  V.  Lake/


a  Saj/er**  Rep.  3.

b  P.  56.  3d  Loncl.  edit.

4:  1  TamUon^  373.

d  1 1  Ma*a»  Hep,  533.

e  I  Qreenleaf^  117. o  Ibid,  9.

f  Co  the  subject  of  casements  and  aquatic  rights,  I  have  derived
much  aid  and  Tacility  in  my  researches,  from  the  three  valuable  treatises
of  Mr.  Angell,  which  treat  of  toa^cr  courses^  of  tide  vatersj  and  of  the
righU  acquired  by  culver se  enjoyment  for  tweniy  years.  In  those  essajt,
the  autlior  has  failitfuliy  collected  the  law  and  authorities  applicable  to
the  subject,  and  accompanied  his  digest  of  them  with  free  and  judicious
criticism.  In  the  propositions  of  the  English  Parliamentary  commis-
sioners on  the  subject  of  real  property,  it  was  suhmittcd,  that  adverse
enjoyment  during  twenty  years  of  any  profit  or  easement  in  or  over  the
soil  of  another,  should  be  prtma/cKte  evidence  of  a  right,  but  one  liable
to  be  rebutted  by  proof,  that  the  owner  bad  been  under  disability  ;  or
that  the  land  had  been  under  a  lease,  or  that  there  was  a  life  interest
therein,  but  such  proof  was  not  to  be  open  to  the  lessee  or  tenant  for  life.
The  adverse  enjoyment  (•r  sixty  years  was  to  be  conclusive  evidence  of
a  right,  without  regard  to  the  disabilities  of  the  parties,  or  the  state  of
the  title  to  the  land.  The  non-user  of  any  profit  or  easement  in  or  over
the  soil  of  another  during  twenty  yeais,  was  to  he  prima  facie  evidence
of  its  extingui«hment,  but  liable  to  be  rebutted.  I  should  have  appre-
hended that  all  those  propositioDs,  except,  the  sixty  yean  prorisioo,


454  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VL

III.  Of  offices.

Offices  are  another  species  of  incorporeal  bereditaments^
and  they  consist  in  a  right,  and  correspondent  duty,  to  exe-
cute a  public  or  private  trust,  and  to  take  the  emolumeDts
belonging  to  it' Offices,  in  England,  may  be  granted  lo  a
man  in  fee,  or  for  life,  as  well  as  for  years,  and  at  will.* In
the  United  States,  no  public  office  can  properly  be  termed  an
hereditament,  or  a  thing  capable  of  being  inherited. The
constitution,  or  the  law  of  the  state,  provides  for  the  extent  of
the  duration  of  the  dfice,  which  is  never  more  permanent
than  during  good  behaviour. Private  ministerial  offices  only
can  be  classed  as  hereditaments,  and  I  do  not  know  of  any
such  subsisting  among  us. It  would  not  be  consistent  with
our  manners  and  usages,  to  grant  a  private  trust  or  employ-
ment to  one,  and  his  heirs,  in  fee  ;  though  I  do  not  know  of
any  positive  objection  to  such  a  contract  in  point  of  law. But
in  the  revision  of  the  statute  law  of  New- York,  in  1787,  most
of  the  provisions  in  the  ancient  English  statutes  relative  to
offices,  were  re-enacted. It  was  provided,  among  other
things,^  that  if  a  man  be  unduly  disturbed  in  his  office,  a
writ  of  novel  disseisin  should  be  maintained  for  offices  in  fee,
and  for  life,  as  well  as  for  lands  and  tenements. This  r^^-
lation  was  taken  from  the  statute  of  Westminster  2d,  13  Edw.
I.,  and  it  was  probably  a  very  useless  provision,  and  it  has
been  omitted  in  the  last  revision  of  the  laws  of  New- York,
which  went  into  operation  in  January,  1830. But  we  have
(and  very  properly)  re-enacted''  the  substance  of  the  statute
of  5  and  6  Edw,  VI.,  ch.  15,  against  buying  and  selling
offices,  and  it  prohibits  the  sale  of  any  office,  or  the  deputa-


were  already  part  of  (be  English  law,  and  that  it  was  useless  to  have
proposed  them.

a  Finch's  Law,  162.

6  2  Blacks.  Com.  36.

c  Lawsof  JiT,  Y.  sess.  10,  ch.  50,  sec.  7.

d  JV.  K.  Reniscd  SUUtOesyyol  2,  696,  sec.  35, 36,  37.


•^n


Lec.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  455

lion  of  any  (^5ce,  or  taking  any  fee  or  reward  therefor.  The
offence  is  made  a  misdemeanor,  and  is  likewise  punished
with  the  loss  of  the  office  ;  but  it  does  not  apply  to  the  case
of  a  deputy  agreeing  to  pay  his  principal  part  x>f  the  profits
of  an  (^ce,  and  to  be  allowed  to  reserve  another  part  to  him^
self  as  a  compensation  for  his  services.*  The  object  of  die
statute  was  to  prevent  corruption  in  office,  and  it  alludes  only
to  corrupt  bargains  and  sales  of  offices,  and  not  to  the  fair
and  necessary  appointment  of  deputies  with  a  reasonable
allowance,  though  on  this  point  there  iiave  been  some  refined
distinctions  established.

If  an  officer  has  a  certain  salary,  or  certain  annual  profits,
a  deputation  of  his  office,  reserving  a  sum  not  exceeding  the
amount  of  his  profits,  has  been  held  not  to  be  contrary  to  the
statute,  because  the  principal  is  entided  to  the  fees  and  per-
quisites of  the  office,  and  the  deputy  to  a  recompense  for  his
labour  in  the  execution  of  it.  So,  if  the  profits  be  uncertain,
the  deputy  may  lawfully  agree  to  pay  so  much  out  of  the
profits,  for  in  that  case  he  cannot  be  charged  for  more  than
be  receives.  But  if  the  office  consists  of  uncertain  fees  and
profits,  and  the  deputy  agrees  to  pay  a  certain  sum  annuall}^,
without  restricting  the  payment  to  the  proceeds  of  the  profits,
it  would  be  a  sale  within  the  statute  ;  and  the  case  is  not
altered  by  the  office  yielding  more  in  condngent  profits  than
the  amount  of  the  money  stipulated  to  be  paid.*  It  would
also  be  a  contract  within  the  purview  of  the  statute,  for  tlie
deputy  to  secure  all  the  profits  to  the  person  appointing  him,
for  this  would  infallibly  lead  to  extortion  in  the  deputy.'


a  Galliford  v.  De  Cardoncll,  2  Salk,  Rep.  466.

b  Godolpbio  ▼.  Tudor,  2  Salk,  Rep.  468.  WHlet'a  Rep.  575,  note,
S.  C.

c  Layng  ▼.  Paioe,  Wilies't  Rep.  571.  The  statute  of  5  and  6  Edw,
VI.  has  been  re-enacted  in  Virginia,  with  the  addition  of  a  proviso ^  (haC
Ihe  act  was  not  to  prohibit  the  appointment,  and  acting  of  anj  depaiy
clerk,  or  deputy  sheriff,  who  shall  be  employed  to  assist  their  principals
in  the  execatioa  of  their  respective  offices. Prima  facie  this  proviso


456  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

The  statute  id  New-York  would  eeem  to  be  broader  tlian
the  English  statute  of  5  and  6  Edw.  YI.,  for  it  has  omitted
the  explanatory  and  restrictive  words  in  that  statute,  applying
it  to  "  office  or  offices,  or  any  part  or  parcel  of  them  tliat  shall
in  any  wise  touch  or  concern  the  administration  or  executioo
of  justice ;"  and  the  preamble  shows,  that  it  was  intended  to
apply  to  ^'  places  where  justice  is  to  be  administered,  or  any
service  of  trust  executed."  In  England,  the  place  of  under
marshal  of  London  is  a  service  cf  public  trust,  and  yet  it  has
been  held  to  be  saleable,  because  it  only  concerned  the  police
of  the  city.*^  If,  however,  the  statute  of  New-York  should  not
admit  of  a  more  comprehensive  construction  than  the  one  from
which  it  was  taken,  yet  the  pruiciples  of  the  common  law
supply  all  deficienci^ ;  and  many  agreements  for  the  sale  of
c&ceB  that  are  not  within  the  statute  of  Edtc.  YI.  have  been
held  void,  as  being  agaiQst  public  policy.  The  sale  of  any
office  in  which  the  public  are  concerned,  is  held  to  be  against
piincifdes  of  public  policy,  and  an  offence  at  common  law.
If  A.  should  agree  to  allow  to  B.  a  certain  proportion  of
the  profits  of  an  office  in  the  king's  dock-yards,  in  case  the
latter  retired,  and  be  succeeded  to  the  appointment,  the  agree-
ment would  be  void,  as  not  supported  by  a  valid  considera-
tion.*

The  provisions  and  rules  of  the  ancient  common  law  were
remarkably  provident  in  respect  to  tlie  public  interest ;  and


would  aeem  to  hare  been  unnecessary,  but  it  has  been  decided  under  it,
that  where  a  sheriff  farmed  his  shrievalty  to  G.  whom  be  appointed  bis
deputy  for  a  aum  in  g^ross,  to  be  paid  him  by  G.,  who  was  to  discharge
all  the  duties,  and  take  all  the  emoluments  of  the  office,  the  contract
was  lawful !  Sailing  r.  M'Kinney,  1  Leigh^  42.  Upon  this  construc-
tion the  proviso  rises  into  great  importance*

a  Lord  Hardwicke,  in  BuUerr.  Richardson,  1  Aik.  Rep,  210.  Amb.
Rep,  73.

b  Parsons  v.  Thompson,  1  JET.  Blanks,  Rep.  322.  Blachford  v.  Pres-
ton, 8  TVm,  89.  Best,  Cb.  J.,  in  Richardson  r.  Mellish,  9  Mwrty
435.


tec.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  457

an  office  of  trust,  that  concerned  the  administration  of  justice,
could  not  be  granted  for  a  terra  of  years,  for  then  it  might
Test  in  executors  and  administrators,  if  the  officer  should  die
within  the  term  ;  and  it  would  be  impossible  that  the  law
should  know  beforehand,  whether  the  representatives  would
be  competent  to  discharge  the  trust.  This  was  so  ruled  by
Ix>rd  Coke,  and  others,  in  Sir  George  Reyners  case,  re-
specting the  office  of  marshal  of  the  marshalsea."  Sir  Henry
Finch,  in  his  Discourse,^  held  that  the  grant  of  an  office  to
an  ignorant  man  who  had  no  skill  at  all,  was  utterly  void  ;
as  if  the  king,  by  his  letters  patent,  made  a  clerk  of  the  crown
in  the  K.  B.,  who  had  no  experience  in  office,  and  was  utterly
insufficient  to  serve  the  king  and  people.

The  general  rule  is,  that  judicial  offices  must  be  exercised
in  person,  and  that  a  judge  cannot  delegate  his  authority  to
another.  I  do  not  know  of  any  exception  to  this  rule  with
us,  though  in  England  there  are  several.'  What  is  a  judi^
cial,  and  what  is  a  ministerial  function,  has  been  sometimes
a  matter  of  dbpute.  In  Medhtirst  v.  Waite,*  Lord  Mans^
field  said  it  was  taking  the  definition  too  large,  to  say  that
every  act,  where  the  judgment  was  at  all  exercised,  was  a
judicial  act,  and  that  a  judicial  act  related  to  a  matter  in  liti-
gation. But  a  ministerial  office  may  be  exercised  by  deputy,
though  a  deputy  cannot  make  a  deputy,  according  to  the
maxim,  delegata  poiestas  non  potest  delegari.  The  dis-
tinction between  a  deputy  and  an  assignee  of  an  office,  as
stated  by  Lord  Coke,  in  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury's  case,*
will  serve  to  explain  the  application  of  the  statute  against
buying  and  selling  offices  to  assignees  and  not  to  deputies.
An  assignee  of  an  office,  he  says,  is  a  person  who  has  an  es-


a  9  Co#  95.

b  Page  162.

e  4  Insi.  291. MoUds  t<  Werby,  1  Lev.  Rep.  76.

d  3  Burr.  Rep.  1259.

€  9  Co.  42.

Vol.  m.  §8


466  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  pPtt*

tate  or  iatereat  io  the  office  itself,  and  doth  all  tkmg^  m
own  Dame,  and  for  whom  his  grantor  shall  not  ajMWcr.
a  deputy  hath  not  any  estate  cmt  interest  in  the  <Aca.  He  is
but  the  officer's  shadow,  and  doth  all  things  ia  the  oaiae  ti
the  officer  himself,  and  nothing  in  hie  owo  name,  mad  \m
grantor  shall  answer  for  him.*

IV.  Of  franchiies. .

Franchises  are  certain  privileges  conlmed  by  gn&t  froni
government,  and  vested  in  individuals.  In  En^and  Ihcy
are  very  numerous,  and  are  understood  to  be  royal  privileges
in  the  hands  of  a  subject*  Tbey  contain  an  implied  cove-
nant on  the  part  of  the  government  not  to  invade  the  nghts
vested,  and  on  the  part  of  the  grantees  to  execute  the  condi-
tions  and  duties  prescribed  in  the  grant  Some  of  Ibeae
franchises  are  presumed  to  be  founded  on  a  valuable  eoe-
sidemtion,  and  are  necessarily  exclusive  in  their  nature.  The
government  cannot  resume  them  at  pleasure,  or  do  any  act
to  impair  the  grant,  without  a  breach  of  contract  An
io  such  a  franchise,  and  an  estate  in  land,  rest  upon  the


•  As  tbs  SDoient  statute  of  5  sad  6  Edw,  YI.,  against  the  tsls
of  oflioei,  bss  bcea  reviTed  and  re-enacted  in  New- York,  it  oigfal
hare  been  ai  well  to  bave  also  re-enacted  the  statate  of  12  JUcki-
ard  II.,  (A.  D.  1388,)  entitled,  an  act  tbat  tame  ihtUi  obtem  oji-
est  6y  9uUt  or  for  rtward^  hui  tipon  dueH*  't\i»j  all  seen  to  bave
eonstituted  parts  of  one  ancient  system,  and  to  bave  been  dictated  bf
tbe  same  provident  and  geoeroas  spirit.  It  declared,  tbat  tbe  appoint*
ing  power  wbo  sbould  *^  onlain,  name,  or  make  justices  of  the  peace,
sberiffs,  customers,  oomptrollers,  or  any  otber  officer  or  minister  of  tbe
king,  sbould  be  firmly  sworn  not  to  ordain,  name,  or  make  any,  for  any
gift  or  brocage,  favour  or  affection  ;  and  Viat  none  Vfhich  purtuetk  6y
Aim,  orbtf  othor,  privily  or  openly  ^  to  be  in  any  manner  of  qffue^  ekali
be  pui  in  ike  eame  qffice^  or  in  any  otber."  Tbis  statute,  aaii  Loid
Coke,  (Co'^  LiU>  234.  a.)  was  wortby  to  be  written  in  letten  of  gold,
but  more  wortby  to  be  put  in  due  execntioo.

6  a  Blttdu.  Com.  37. Fmeh'eLawy  164.


L«e.  LIL]  OF  R1UL  PROPERTT.  4Sd

principle,  being  equally  grants  of  a  right  or  privilege  for  an
adaqnate  consideratiop.  If  the  creation  of  the  franchise  be
not  declared  to  be  exclusive,  yet  it  is  necessarily  imfJied  in
the  grant  of  the  franchise,  that  the  government  will  not,
either  directly  or  iodirectiy,  interfere  with  it,  so  as  to  destroy
or  materially  impair  its  value.  Every  such  interference^
whether  it  be  by  the  creation  of  a  rival  franchise  or  other>
wise,  would  be  in  violation  or  in  fraud  of  the  grant.  AH  elc*
elusive  grants  or  franchises  ought  to  be  so  construed  as  to  giV6
them  due  effect,  by  excluding  all*  contiguous  competition,
which  would  be  injurious,  and  operate  fraudulently  upon  the
grant  The  common  law  contained  principles  applicable  to
this  subject,  dictated  by  sound  judgment  and  enlightened
morality.  It  declared  all  such  invasions  of  franchises  to  be
nuisances.*  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  great  proportion
of  the  franchises  that  occupy  a  large  space  in  the  treatises  on
English  law ;  and  whoever  claims  an  exclusive  privilegie
with  us,  must  show  a  grant  from  the  legislature.  Corporar
tbns,  or  bodies  politic^  are  the  most  usual  franchises  known
in  our  law  ;  and  they  have  been  sufficiently  considered  in  a
former  volume.  These  incorporated  franchises  seem,  indeed,
with  some  impropriety,  to  be  classed  by  writers  amotig  here*
ditaments,  since  they  have  no  inherkable  quality,  inasmuch
as  a  corporation,  in  cases  where  ih&ce  is  no  express  limitaUon
to  its  continuance  by  the  charter,  is  supposed  never  to  die,
btft  to  be  dothed  with  a  kind  of  legal  immortality.  Special
privileges  conferred  upon  towns  and  individuals  in  a  variety
of  ways,  and  fer  numerous  purposes,  having  a  connexion
with  the  puMic  interest,  are  franchises.


a  Bro,  action  nnr  U  Mwe,  pi.  67,  tit  JVUtfoiiM,  pi.  13.  t  Aol.  Mr.
140,  pi.  so.  140,  pi.  1, 2, 3.  F.  N.  B.  184.  Yard  r.  Ford,  2  Swmd.
172.  Newbargb  Tarapike  Company  ▼.  Miller,  6  Johiu,  Ch*  Rep.
111.  4  ibid,  160,  &  P.  Dartoiouth  Colkge  r.  Woodirard,  4  IFhea-
Ion,  618.


460  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VL

V.  Of  annuities.

An  aDnuity,  says  Lord  Coke,'  is  a  yearly  sum  stipnlated
to  be  paid  to  another,  in  fee,  or  for  life,  or  years,  and  chaige-
able  only  on  the  person  of  the  grantor.  If  it  be  agreed  to  be
paid  to  the  annuitant  and  his  heirs,  it  is  a  personal  fee,  and
transmissible  by  descent  like  an  estate  in  fee,  and  forfeitable
for  treason  as  an  hereditament,^  and  for  that  reason  it  belongs
to  the  class  of  incorporeal  hereditaments.  It  is  chargeable
upon  the  person  of  the  grantor,  for  if  the  annuity  was  made
chargeable  upon  land,  iuwould  then  become  a  rent  chai^ge.^
The  remedy  for  a  failure  in  the  payment  of  the  annuity,  was
anciently  by  the  original  writ  of  annuity,  but  now  the  reme-
dy is  by  a  personal  action  of  debt  or  covenant  on  the  instnj-
inent  by  which  the  annuity  is  created.  Unless  the  graDtor
grants  the  annuity  for  himself  and  his  heirs,  the  heirs  of  the
grantor  are  not  bound,  for  the  law  presumes,  by  the  omisskxi
to  name  them,  that  he  did  not  intend  to  include  them  in  the
obligation.''

TI.  Of  rents.

Rents  are  the  last  species  of  these  incorporeal  heredita-
ments, and  they  form  a  very  important  and  interesting  title
under  this  branch  of  the  law.

Rent  is  a  certain  profit  in  money,  provisions,  chattels,  or
labour,  issuing  out  of  lands  and  tenements  in  retribution  for
the  use,  and  it  cannot  issue  out  of  a  mere  privilege  or  ease-
ment.^ There  were,  at  common  law,  according  to  Littleton/
three  kinds  of  rent,  viz.  rent  service,  rent  charge,  and  rent
seek. Rent  service  WBia  where  the  tenant  held  his  land  by


a  Co.  LiU.  144.  b.

b  Co.  Liu.  2.  a. Nevil's  case,  7  Co.  34.  b.
e  Co.  LiU.  144*  b.
d  Co.Litt.  144.  b.

e  2  Blacks.  Com.  41. Oilbert  onRenii,  9. Co.  LUt.  142,  a. Boa-
sard  T.  Capel,  8  Barmo,  4*  Cress.  141.
/  Sec  213.


l>c.  UL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  461

lealty,  or  other  corporeal  service,  and  a  certain  rent ;  and  it
-was  called  rent  service,  because  there  was  some  corporeal  ser-
vice incident  to  the  tenancy,  as  fealty,  homage,  or  other  ser-
vice.' A  right  of  distress  was  inseparably  incident  to  this
rent. Rent  charge,  or  fee-farm  rent,  is  where  the  rent  is
created  by  deed,  and  the  fee  granted ;  and  as  there  is  no  feal-
ty  annexed  to  such  a  grant  of  the  whole  estate,  the  right  of
distress  is  not  an  incident,  and  it  requires  an  express  power
of  distress  to  be  annexed  to  the  grant,  which  gives  it  the
name  of  a  rent  charge,  because  the  lands  are,  by  the  deed,
charged  with,  a  distress/ iien/ ^ecA:,  ^cti^,  or  barren  rent,
was  rent  reserved  by  deed,  without  any  clause  of  distress,  and
in  a  case  in  which  the  owner  of  the  rent  had  no  future  inte-
rest or  reversion  in  the  land. The  owner  of  the  rent  was  ac-
cordingly driven  to  the  slow  and  tedious  remedy  by  a  writ  of
annuity,  or  a  writ  of  assize/ But  the  statute  of  4  Geo.  II.  c.
28,  abolidhed  all  distinction  between  the  several  kinds  of  rent,
ao  far  as  to  give  the  same  remedy  by  distress  in  cases  of  rents
seek,  rents  of  assize,  and  chief  rents,  as  in  the  case  of  rent  re-
served upon  a  lease. The  statute  of  New- York,'  has  not
adopted  that  provision  in  so  many  words,  but  it  gives  the  re-
medy by  distress  in  all  cases  where  any  certain  services,  or
certain  rent  reserved  out  of  lands  or  tenements  remain  due.
The  remedy  is  extended  equally  to  the  grantees,  and  assig-
nees of  the  lessor,  and  to  the  heirs,  executors  and  administra-
tors of  the  party  entitled. There  is,  therefore,  the  same  uni«
versal  remedy  by  action  and  by  distress,  for  every  species  of
rent  or  service  lawfully  due,  when  the  same  is  certain,  and
the  landlord  who  distrains  has  a  reversionary  interest* .  The


a  LiU.  8.  213. Co.  LiiL  142.  a.

b  IML  8.  217. CV>.  LilL  143«  b.

e  LiU,  8.  213.  217,  218.  235,  236.  CV>.  LiU.  150.  b.  160  a.  GU-
bert  on  DUtressesy  6.

d  JV.  F.  RecUed  Staiuiei,  vol.  1.  747,  sec.  18. 20, 21, 22.

e  Cornell  v.  Lamb,  2  Cowen's  Rep.  652.  Smilb  v.  Colson,  10  Johtu.
Bep.  91. A  doubt  waa  suggested,  io  the  case  of  ComeU  v.  Lamb^


Mt  OF  REAL  PROPEBTT.  (PwtVL

$amDcj  dint  will  authorize  a  difltrass  doet  not  tMeesMoBf  i^
quire  a  fcnnal  leaee,  and  it  may  be  implied  torn  cirewiBliB-
cesi  and  a  parol  lease  will  be  suffideot.*

The  best  way  of  reeerving  perpetual  teutoj  if  it  be  inteaA-
ed  that  rents  should  always  be  of  the  same  value,  is  to  8Cip«»
late  that  the  payment  be  in  kind,  such  as  wheat,  or  other  pn^
duoe,  or  in  cattle  or  poultry.  This  was  the  almoet  univetBttl
practice  in  ancient  times,  and  a  great  proportioQ  of  the  an-
cient leases  in  New-York,  in  the  manor  counties,  were  of  that
description.  By  the  statute  of  18  Eliz,  one  third  pait  of  the
rent  upon  college  leasee,  was  directed  to  be  reserved  in  conii
to  be  paid  either  in  corn,  or  at  the  current  prices  at  tfie  near-
est public  market.  We  have  an  instance  ia  New- York  of  the
same  provident  foresight  in  the  act  ingtihUing  the  fm<««m»


whether  th«  right  of  dhtress  oonld  exist,  in  thoie  esses  where  fhe  Isol
was  oUodia/,  withoet  an  aithority  for  that  purpose  ia  fhe  leeae  or  eon*
treot  To  establish  the  right  of  distress  at  ooiMsoo  law»  withoat  aiqr
power  in  the  lease,  there  always  existed  a  rent  doe,  a  rerersiooaiy  int»>
rest  in  the  landlord,  and  fealty  doe  as  incident  to  the  tenure  of/reeoml
common  tocag;  To  remore  this  doubt,  it  was  declared  by  the  A*si9-
Tork  Revued  StatutoM^  vol.  i.  718,  seo.  4,  rendering  all  lands  in  Che
state  allodial,  that  the  abolition  of  tenures  should  not  take  away  or  Bi^
«haige  any  rents  or  senrioes  certain,  which  bad  been,er  migM  heeeea-
ted  or  resenred.  This  was  intended  to  sabjeot  allodial  lands  le  the
incidents  which  before  applied  to  socage  tenures.  ,

a  Koigbt  T.  Bennett,  3  Bing,  Rep,  361.  Cornell  r.  Lamb,  S  Cow-
sn'«  Rep,  652.  Jacks  y,  Spnitb,  1  Bay's  Rep.  315.  It  was  to  be  pre-
sumed that  in  those  states  in  which  the  English  law  of  distress  for  rent
has  been  essentially  preserred,  the  remedy  had  equally  been  extended
to  eyery  kind  of  rent.  But  I  should  infer  that  this  was  not  the  case  in
Virginia,  for  in  the  American  Juriet,  No.  8,  the  question  is  raised,  and
discussed  with  much  acuteness  and  research,  ioA«<fcerm  VirgMa^  on
the  corweyanee  qfland  in  fee  etrnpUy  reeerving  renty  the/ec^for^  without
an  expreee  eHpuioHon  to  that  effect^  hae  arightofd^Mrete.  The  writer
concludes  in  the  affirmatire,  and  that  on  a  feoffment  in  foe  wiJfh  a  rsser-
wdion  of  renJt^  the  feoffee  thereby  becomes  a  tenant,  and  the  focAr  a
landlord,  with  the  remote  rerenioiiery  interest  called  a  wryerier.


1^09.  Ul.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  403

tjf^^  and  limidDg  its  annualincome  to  40,000  buobeb  of  wheat.
This  anaogemeDt  saves  the  interest  of  the  persons  in  whose
iiaiTOur  rent  is  resenred,  from  sinking  by  the  depreciation  of
viooey,  owing  to  the  augmentation  of  gold  and  silver^  and  the
^ocmnulation  of  paper  credit The  rents  which  have  been
laeerved  in  com,  says  Doctor  Smith,  have  preserved  their  valua
navoh  better  than  those  which  have  been  reserved  in  nK)ney.*
In  the  feudal  ages  a  great  proportion  of  the  produce  of  th9
land  went  as  rent  to  the  landlord* The  cultivators  of  the
soil  were  generally  bondsmen,  or  tenants  at  will,  whose  la-
bours in  peace,  and  services  in  war,  were  equally  at  the  com^-
mftnd  of  the  landlord. In  modern  times,  the  rent  of  land
tuMS  been  tripled  and  quadrupled,  but  the  produce  of  the  land,
ia  the  progress  of  improvement,  has  been  increased  in  a  much
ipreater  proportion,  and  the  amount  of  the  yearly  produce
of  kad  is  several  times  greater  than  the  amount  of  the  year*
ly  rent*

We  will,  in  the  first  place,  ascertain  when,  and  to  what  exr
teat,  rent  is  due,  and  then  take  a  view  of  the  remedy  for  the
recovery  of  rent

j^  (1.)  Il  is  a  rule  of  law,  that  the  rent  must  be  reserved  to
him  from  whom  the  land  proceeded,  or  to  his  lawful  repre-
sentatives, and  it  cannot  be  reserved  to  a  stranger.  Thus,  if
A.  leases  a  lot,  or  parcel  of  land,  to  R.,  on  a  certain  rent,  the
payment  of  that  rent  cannot  be  reserved  to  C. ;  and  the  rea-
son IS,  that  the  rent  is  payable  as  a  return  for  the  possession
of  the  land,  and  it  must,  therefore,  be  rendered  to  the  person
from  whom  the  land  passed.'  It  was  also,  on  the  same  ground,
decided^  in  Prescott  v.  De  Forest^  and  afterwards  in  Cw-
neU  V.  Lambj*  that  the  right  of  distress  for  rent  was  inci*
dent  to  the  reversion,  and  that  no  other  person  could  distrain


a  LenoM  tf^ew^Tork^  aeac  36,  cb.  69,  mc.  1.

i  SmM'M  WeaUh  ^JmUmi,  ToL  i.  34. 187.

c  Ihid.  ToL  i.  333.

d  LUL  s.  346. Co.  LUL  143.  b.

e  16  J49A1W.  /^p.  159. 2  CawM*M  Rep.  652.


464  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pari  Tf .

but  he  who  owned  the  reversion. The  person  wbodistraiiw
most  have  some  reversionary  interest  to  sustain  the  ri^L  If
the  landlord  dies  before  the  rent  becomes  due,  it  goes  to  the
heir  as  iDcident  to  the  reversion  ;  but  if  he  dies  after  the  rent
had  become  payable,  it  goes  to  the  executor  or  administrator
as  part  of  the  personal  estate,  and  the  executor  or  admiDstra-
tor  has  the  same  remedy  by  action  or  by  distress,  for  the  re-
covery of  all  such  an  ears,  that  the  testator  or  intestate  might
have  had  if  living.' If  the  tenant  be  evicted  from  the  lands
demised  to  him,  by  a  title  paramount,  before  the  rent  ftib
due,  he  will  be  discharged  from  the  payment  of  the  rent,  for
the  obligation  to  pay  ceases  when  the  consideration  for  it  cea-
ses, and  which  was  the  enjoyment  of  the  land/ But  if  the
lawful  eviction  by  paramount  title,  be  of  part  only  of  the  de>
mised  premises,  the  rent  is  apportionable,  and  the  eviction  a
bar  pro  tanto,^ So,  if  there  be  an  actual  expulsion  of  the  te-
nant from  the  whole,  or  a  part,  by  the  lessor,  before  the  rent
becomes  due,  and  be  continued  until  after  the  rent  becomes
due,  the  entire  rent  is  suspended  ]*  but  no  offensive  or  out-
rageous conduct  on  the  part  of  the  landlord,  as  by  erecting  a
nuisance  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  demised  premises,  will
be  sufficient/


a  1  Saiund,  Rep.  287,  d.  IK  Stra£fbrd  ?.  Wentwortb,  Prte.  m  CA.
655.  Rocking^bam  r.  Pebrice,  1  P.  Wmt,  177.  Law  of  Jftw-Tork^
teM.  36,  ch.  63,  sec.  18.  Jfeio-York  Revued  Statutety  roi.  i.  747» mc
fl,S2.

6  i  Roi.  Abr.  tit.  Rent,  O. 1  Samd,  205,  n.

c  Ste7eotoD  v.  Lambard,  2  Etut,  576.  Liao8iDg>  t.  Van  Alstyne,  2*
JFemieUyS6\.

d  SalmoD  t.  Smith,  1  Sound.  Rep.  202  and  204,  note  2.  Co.  LUL
148.  b.  AtcoQgb'a  case,  9  Co.  135.  Pa^^  ?.  Parr,  Stylu'  Rep.  432.
Timbrall  ▼.  Bullock,  ibid.  446.  Peodletoa  v.  Dyett,  4  CowetCe  Rep.
581.  The  same  priaciple  applies  if  tbe  teaant  bas  been  obliged  to  paj
rent  to  a  person  bafiog  a  prior  and  better  title  to  it^  Sapaford'r.^
Fletcher,  4  TVrm,  511.

<  Peodletoo  v.  Dyett,  ub.  eup.


Ue.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  465

The  cases  have  aflbrded  a  fuU  discuseion  of  the  iDieresting
question,  bow  far  a  tenant  is  excused  from  the  payment  of
rent,  when  be  is  deprived,  even  by  inevitable  necessity  or
misfortune,  and  without  any  de&ult  on  his  part,  or  on  the
part  of  the  landlord,  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  premises.  In
Tavemer^s  casey"^  which  arose  in  34  and  35  Hen.  YIII.,  a
man  made  a  lease  of  land,  and  of  a  flock  of  sheep,  rendering
a  certain  rent,  and  all  the  sheep  died.  The  question  was,
whether  the  tenant  could  have  relief  from  this  calamity,  at  the
expense  of  hb  landlord,  by  an  apportionment  of  the  rent.
It  was  very  much  debated,  and  different  opinions  were  enter-
tained by  the  sergeants  and  judges  who  discussed  the  subject.
Some  of  them  thought  there  was  good  reason  and  equity  to
apportion  the  rent,  or,  in  other  words,  to  make  a  proportional
deduction  for  the  loss  of  the  sheep.  But  others  held  to  the
contrary  opinion,  and  that  though  the  sea,  or  an  inundation,
should  gain  upon  the  land,  or  part  of  it  be  burnt  by  wildfire,
the  entire  rent  must  issue  out  of  the  remainder,  and  that  it
would  be  different  if  part  of  the  land  should  be  recovered  from
the  tenant  by  a  title  paramount  to  that  derived  from  his  land-
lord. The  point  was  left  unsettled  by  this  early  decision,  but
the  opinion  of  those  who  were  for  the  payment  of  the  entire
rent,  gained  a  decided  superiority  in  the  course  of  the  subse-
quent century.

In  ParcLdine  v.  Janef  an  action  of  debt  was  brought  for
rent,  upon  a  lease  for  years,  and  the  defendant  pleaded,  by  way
of  excuse  for  the  non-payment  of  the  rent,  that  he  had  been
driven  from  the  premises  by  public  enemies,  viz. :  by  Prince
Rupert  and  his  soldiers.  The  case  was  fully  and  ably  ar-
gued before  the  King's  Bench,  during  the  time  of  the  civil
wars,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  It  was  insisted,  that  by  the
law  of  reason,  a  man  ought  not  to  pay  rent  when  he  could
not  enjoy,  without  any  default  on  bis  part,  the  land  demised


a  1  X>y.  Ittp,  55.  b.

6  AUyiCM  Rep.  26. StyUt'  Rep,  47.

Vol.  III.  59


4«6  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  YI,

to  biin,  and  that  the  civil  and  canon  law  exempted  the  party
in  such  a  case. But  Roile,  J.,  (the  same  person  who  was
author  of  the  abridgment,)  overruled  the  plea,  and  held,  that
neither  the  hostile  army,  nor  an  inundation,  would  exempt
the  tenant  from  paying  rent. The  same  doctrine  has  been
continued  to  this  day ;  and  it  is  well  settled,  that  upon  an  ex-
press contract  to  pay  rent,  the  loss  of  the  premises  by  fire,  or
inundation,  or  external  violence,  will  not  exempt  the  party
from  bis  obligation  to  pay  the  rent The  case  of  HaUett  v.
WyliCy^  was  decided  on  that  principle  ;  and  the  principal
English  authorities  were  reviewed. Since  that  decisioni  the
point  has  been  presented  and  decided  the  same  way  in  the
English  C.  B.,  in  Baker  v.  Holtzapffell]^  and  the  unset-
fled  question,  whether  a  court  of  equity  would  grant  relief  to
the  tenant  against  the  landlord's  claim  at  law  for  rent,  has
also  been  put  at  rest  by  the  decision  in  Hare  v.  Grove^*  in
the  English  Exchequer,  and  of  Holtzapffell  v.  Baker f  in
the  English  Court  of  Chancery. In  both  of  these  cases,  the
Court  of  Equity  refused  to  interfere  in  favour  of  tlie  tenant,
who  was  considered  as  having  no  equity  against  the  effect  of
his  own  express  agreement  to  pay  the  rent The  same  rule
prevails  equally  in  England,  and  in  this  country,  in  the  case
of  an  express  covenant  to  pay  rent ;'  but  it  is  understood,  that
by  the  civil  law,  the  prcetor  would  exempt  the  tenant  from
paying  rent,  or  modify  the  obligation,  according  to  equity,
when  the  property  was  destroyed  by  fire,  inundation,  or  vio-


a  3  Johm*  Rep,  44.

6  4  TaimL  lUp.  45.

€  3  AfuL  Btp.  687.

d  IB  Ve$ey'i  Rep*  115.  See  alw,  to  the  rame  point,  Leeds  v.  Chat-
bam,  1  Simon^  146,  and  Lamott  v.  Sterrett,  1  Harr,  4r  Johns.  43.

e  Pollard  v.  Shaeffer,  1  Dalias*  Rep,  210.  Fowler  v.  Bolt,  6  Jdatt,
Rep.  63.  Wagoer  ?.  While,  4  Harr,  4r  Johns.  564.  Leeds  t.
Cbatbam,  1  Simon^  146,  conira.  Ripley  v.  Wightmaa,  4  JS^Cordt
447.


tec.  LII»]  OF.  REAL  PROPERTY.  467

lence,  or  the  crops  failed  by  a  bad  season.*  So,  Lord  Nor-
thingtorij  in  Brown  v.  Q^mlterf  thought  it  very  dear,  that  a
man  should  not  pay  rent  for  what  he  cannot  enjoy,  if  occa-
sioned by  an  accident  which  be  did  not  undertake  to  meet.
But  I  apprehend  that  the  law,  as  it  is  now  settled  on  that
point,  rests  on  solid  foundations  of  justice  and  policy.  It  is
to  be  observed,  that  the  case  only  applies  to  express  agree*
ments  to  pay ;  and  if  a  party  will  voluntarily  create  a  duty
or  charge  upon  himself,  he  ought  to  abide  by  it  when  the
other  party  is  not  in  fault,  and  when  he  might  have  provided,
if  he  had  chosen,  against  his  responsibility  in  case  of  such
accidents.  The  loss  of  the  rent  must  fall  either  on  the  lessor
or  lessee,  and  there  is  no  more  equity  that  the  landlord  should
bear  it  than  the  tenant,  when  the  tenant  has  engaged  ex*
prossly  to  pay  rent,  and  when  the  landlord  must  bear  the  loss
of  the  property  destroyed.  The  calamity  is  mutual ;  and
there  is  much  weight  in  the  observation  of  the  counsel,  in
one  of  the  cases  referred  to,  that  these  losses  by  fire,  may  of*'
ten  proceed  from  the  carelessness  of  tenants ;  and  if  they  can
escape  from  the  rent,  which  they  may  deem  inconvenient,  by
leaving  the  property  carelessly  exposed,  it  might  very  much
lessen  the  inducements  to  a  reasonable  and  necessary  vigi-
lance on  their  part.

Inevitable  accident  will  excuse  a  party  from  a  penalty,  but
will  not  relieve  him  from  his  covenant  to  perform.  Thus,
in  a  case  as  early  as  28  and  29  Henry  YIII/  the  party  cove-
nanted to  sustain  and  repeur  the  banks  of  a  river,  under
pain  of  forfeiture  of  10/.,  and  the  banks  were  destroyed  sud-


a  Dig.  19.  2.  15.  2.  Ibid.  50. 17.  23.  Code,  4. 65. 8. ;  and  see  the
copious  aDDotations  in  the  Elzevir  edition  of  the  Corpui  Jurit  CivUiM^
annexed  to  the  artiole  in  the  Code.  The  doctrine  of  the  civil  law  is
also  followed  in  the  French  law.  Code  Civil,  n.  1722.  1733. ;  and
Puffendorf  (b.  5,  c.  6,  aec.  2)  considers  the  rule  of  the  civil  law  to  be
ju«t  and  equitable.

b  Amb.  Rep.  619.

e  1  Dyer,  33.  a.


468  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [P^rt  VL

denly  by  a  great  flood.  The  court  held,  that  he  was  bound
to  repair,  but  was  not  subjected  to  the  penalty.  And  in  a
modern  case,  in  the  time  of  Lord  Mansfield,*  it  was  hdd,
that  the  assignee  of  a  lease,  in  which  the  lessee  covenanted
for  himself  and  his  assigns^  absolutely  to  repair,  was  bound
to  repair,  notwithstanding  the  buildings  were  destroyed  by  fire.
And  if  the  premises  be  out  of  repair,  the  tenant  cannot  make
repairs  at  the  expense  of  the  landlord,  or  deduct  the  amount
of  them  out  of  the  rent,  unless  there  be  a  special  agreement
for  that  purpose  between  the  tenant  and  his  landlord.^  But
if  the  tenant  be  not  under  any  agreement  to  repair,  and  the
premises  become  unsafe  and  useless  from  want  of  repairs,  the
tenant,  from  year  to  year,  may  quit  without  notice,  and  be
would  not  be  liable  in  an  action  for  use  and  occupation,  fix-
any  rent  after  the  occupation  had  ceased  to  be  beneficial/

When  rent  is  due,  a  tender  upon  the  land  is  good,  and  pre-
vents a  forfeiture. The  tenant  is  not  bound  to  go  and  seek
the  landlord,  provided  the  contract  be  silent  as  to  the  place  of
payment,  and  yet  a  personal  tender  to  the  landlord,  off  the
land,  is  also  good.' The  time  of  payment  depends  upon  the
conixact ;  and  if  there  be  no  special  agreement  to  the  contra-
ry, the  payment  would  be  due  either  yearly,  half-yearly,  or
quarterly,  according  to  the  usage  of  the  country,  and  the
presumed  intention  to  conform  to  it If  there  be  no  usage  in
the  case,  the  rent  is  due  at  the  end  of  the  year. But  in  the
city  of  New- York,  it  is  provided  by  statute,  that,  in  the  ab-
sence of  any  special  agreement,  the  rent  is  payable  quarter-
ly, and  the  hiring  terminates  on  the  first  of  May  thereafter.'


a  Bollock  ▼.  Dommitt,  3  ChUty's  K.  B.  Rep.  603.

6  Mumford  v.  Brown,  6  Cowen^  475.

€  Edwards  v.  Hetheriogton,  cited  in  Saliabary  ▼.  Marshall,  4  Carr,
4r  Payne^  65.

d  Walter  ▼.  Dewey,  16  Johns,  Rep*  222.  Gibbs,  Ch.  J.,  Soward
T.  Palmer,  8  Tamt.  Rep.  277.  Hunter  r.  Le  Conte,  6  Cowen^e  Rep.
728.

4  JV.  r.  Revised  StaUUes,  vol.  i.  744,  sec.  1.


Lee.  Lil.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  46tf

On  the  subject  of  the  apportiontneut  of  rent,  there  are  se-
veral distinctions  to  be  noticed.  There  are  two  modes  of  ap-
portioning rent  The  one  is,  by  granting  tlie  reversion  of
part  of  the  land  out  of  which  the  rent  issues ;  the  other,  by
granting  part  of  the  rent  to  one  person,  and  part  to  another.*
It  IS  laid  down  as  a  general  rule,  in  the  nfu>re  ancient  cases,
that  if  the  owner  of  a  rent  service  purchased  part  of  the  land
out  of  which  the  rent  issued,  tlie  rent  was  to  be  apportioned
according  to  its  just  value,  and  the  tenant  was  discharged  of
the  rent,  in  a  ratio  to  the  value  of  the  land  purchased.  But
if  a  man  had  a  rent  charge,  and  purchased  part  of  the  land
out  of  which  the  rent  issued,  the  whole  rent  was  held  to  be
extinguished.*  The  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  the  appor-
tionment of  rent  was,  that  it  exposed  the  tenant  to  several
suits  or  processes  of  distress,  for  a  thing  which  was  originally
entire,  and  he  ought  not  to  be  obliged  to  pay  his  rent  in  dif-
ferent parcels,  and  to  several  landlords,  when  he  contracted
to  pay,  in  one  entire  sum,  to  one  person.  But  the  conve-
nience of  mankind  dictated  the  necessity  of  an  apportionment
of  rent  in  a  variety  of  cases.  Though  it  was  a  principle  of
the  common  law  that  an  entire  contract  could  not  be  appor-
tioned, yet  the  apportionment  of  rent  was,  under  certain  cir-
cumstances, allowed  by  the  common  law,  either  on  severance
of  the  land  from  which  it  issued,  or  of  the  reversion  to  which
it  was  an  incident.  A  person  has  a  right  to  sell  the  whole  or
any  part  of  his  reversionary  interest  in  land.  It  may  be  ne^
ceasary  to  divide  his  estate  out  on  rent  among  his  children,  or
to  sell  part  to  answer  the  exigencies  of  the  family ;  and  it
would  be  intolerable  if  such  a  necessary  sale  worked  an  ex<>
tinguishment  of  the  whole  rent  The  rent  passes  as  an  in-
cident to  the  purchaser  of  the  reversion^  and  the  tenant  may
always  avoid  several  suits  and  distresses  by  a  punctual  pay-


a  Abbott,  Cb.  J.,  5  Bamw.  Sf  Aid,  876.

h  LiU.  sec.  222. Co.  LiU.  1 47.  b.  148.  a. Talbot's  eaae,  8  Co.  102
CUbeH  on  RenU,  152.  163, 164.


470  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [P«rt  \l

men!  of  his  rent. The  rent  is  to  be  apportioned  among  the
several  owners  of  the  reversion  or  of  the  rent,  accocding  to
the  value  of  the  land  ;  and  whenever  the  questioa  beconKi
a  litigated  one  in  a  court  of  justice,  it  is  the  business  of  the
jury,  upon  evidence  produced,  to  apportion  the  rent  to  tbe  va-
lue of  the  land. These  things  are  now  generally  r^ulaled
by  the  agreement  of  parties,  whenever  a  sale  of  part  only  of
the  demised  premises  is  made,  and  the  tenant  has  no  ooncero
with  the  transaction,  since  he  pays  no  more  than  his  stipula-
ted rent,  and  to  the  claimants  in  the  proportions  settled  by
themselves. There  is  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  a  rent  charge
may  be  apportioned,  whenever  the  reversioner  or  owner  of
the  rent  either  releases  part  of  the  rent  to  the  tenant,  or  con-
veys part  of  the  land  to  a  stranger.* The  rent  is  also  liabk
to  apportionment  by  act  of  law,  as  in  cases  of  descf  nt  and
judicial  sales.* If  the  landlord  enters  upon  part  of  the  de-
mised premises  by  wrong,  the  better  opinion  is,  that  it  sus-
pends the  payment  of  the  whole  rent  until  the  tenant  be  re-
stored to  the  whole  possession,  for  the  lessor  ought  not  Co  be
able  so  to  apportion  his  own  wrong  as  to  oblige  tbe  tenant  to
pay  any  thing  for  the  residue ;  but  the  rule  is  otherwise  in
the  case  of  a  lawful  entry  into  part  of  the  demised  premises^
by  the  authority  of  the  tenant  himself/

The  rule  at  common  law  was,  that  neither  law  nor  equity
would  apportion  rent  as  to  time,  and,  therefore,  if  the  tenant
for  life  gave  a  lease  for  years,  rendering  a  yearly  rent,  and
died  in  the  course  of  the  year,  the  rent  could  not  be  appor-
tioned, and  the  tenant  would  go  free  of  rent  for  the  first  part
of  the  year. The  principle  was,  that  an  entire  contract  could


a  Co.  Liu.  148.  a.  Gilbert  on  RerUs^  163.  Farley  v.  Craig,  6  Hal-
tUd,  262.

b  Wotton  ▼.  Shirt,  Cro.  Eliz.  742.  LUL  sec.  224.  1  Rol.  Abr.
tit.  Apportionmml^  O.  pi.  3,  4, 6.

c  Hodgkins  r.  Robsoo,  1  Vent,  Rep.  210.  Vaugban  ▼•  Blaocbard,
1  Yealee'  Rep.  176.


Lmc.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  471

not  be  apportioned.  The  imperfect  performance  of  it  depend-
ing on  various  acts,  could  not  reasonably  afford  a  title  to  Uie
whole,  and  from  the  complex  nature  and  uncertain  value  of
part  performance,  it  cou  d  not  afford  a  title  to  any  part  of  the
stipulated  consideration.*  But  the  statute  of  11  Geo.  II.,  c.
19,  sec.  15,  supplied  the  principle,  tliat  apportionment  should
be  made  of  rent  in  respect  to  time  in  such  cases,  and  that
part  of  the  statute  has  been  re-enacted  or  adopted  in  this
country.*

(2.)  The  remedy  provided  by  law  for  the  recovery  of  rent,
depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  instrument  or  omtract  by


a  Bro»  Ahr,  tit.  JipportionmerU,  p].  7.  26. Clun's  case,  10  Co,  127.
Jetiner  v.  Morgan,  1  P.  9Ffn#.  392. The  Master  of  Ibe  Rolls,  id  Hay
▼.  Palmer,  2  ilnd,  502. Anonilies  and  serraDts*  wag^,  like  rents,
were  not  in  general  apportionable  at  common  law,  and  tbe  rule  seemed
to  be  applicable  to  all  periodical  payments  becoming  due  at  fixed  inter-
vals. If  a  servant  was  bired  for  tbe  monlb  or  year,  and  the  service
ceased  witbio  tbe  time,  there  was  no  apportionment  of  wages  for  tbe
actual  time  of  service,  though  the  rule  operated  in  some  cases  most  un-
justly. Bro,  Mr.  tit.  JlpportionmerUj  pi.  13.  22.  26. Countess  of
Plymouth  v.  Tbrogmortoii,  1  Salk.  65. But  the  old  rule  is  now  held
to  be  relaxed,  and  wages,  it  is  understood,  may  be  apportioned,  npon
tbe  principle  that  such  is  the  reasonable  construction  of  the  contract  of
hiring. Lawrence,  J.,  6  Termj  326. M^Clure  v.  Pyatt,  4  MCord^
26. And  though  annuities  are  not  subject  to  apportionment,  like  rent,
under  tbe  statute  of  11  Geo.  II.,  yet  if  the  annuitant  dies  within  the
quarter  or  year,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  the  annuity  was  given  for
maintenance  in  infancy,  or  for  the  separate  maintenance  of  a  feme-
covert,  equity  will  apportion  the  annuity  up  to  the  day  of  the  annui-
tant's death,  on  the  principle  that  the  allowance  was  necessary. Hay
V.  Palmer,  2  P,  Wms.  501. Pearly  v.  Smith,  3  Aifc*  260. '  Howell  v.
Hanforth,  2  Blaeki.  Rep,  1016. llSerg.  Sf  RawU,  173,  S.  P. Divi-
dends, or  moneys  invested  in  stock,  are  also  held  not  to  be,  as  a  general
rule,  apportionable,  either  in  law  or  equity. Wilson  v.  Harmer,  2  Ves,
672. Rashleigh  v.  Master,  3  Bro,  99.

b  TT,  T.  Rewed  SkUules^  vol.  i.  747,  sec.  22.  17  Serg.  if  RawU,
171.  Ex  pearle  Smiih,  1  StoantL  Rep,  S^B,  Tbe  editor  has  annexed
a  learned  note  to  the  last  case,  on  the  doctrine  of  apportioDiDent  as  tz-
ittiag  both  before  and  since  the  statute  of  U  Geo.  IL


472  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  £P»rt  Tl

which  paymeoi  is  secured.  The  suit  may  be  an  actknc
covenant,  or  debt,  or  assumpBit,  for  the  use  and  occupatioBfl
the  land.  The  laoc&ord  may  also  re-enter,  or  recoT^-  posss-  I
sioa  of  the  land,  by  the  action  of  ejectment,  for  noD-payraea
of  rent,  provided  half  a  year's  rent  or  more  be  in  arrear,  and
uo  sofBcient  distress  can  be  found  ;  and  if  the  tenant,  in  such
a  case,  does  not  redeem  within  six  months  after  execotka
issued,  the  land  will  be  deemed  discharged  from  the  lease  a
contract.*  But  the  more  usual,  prompt,  and  efiectual  renK-
dy,  18  by  distress,  which  was  provided  by  the  common  lav,
and  has  been  r^ulated  and  greatly  improved  by  statute  ii
England  and  in  this  country.

In  New- York  we  have  adopted  the  common  law  on  tbt
subject  of  distress  for  rent,  and  we  have  likewise  re-enacted
the  substance  of  the  English  statutes  of  52  Heru  III.,  3  £Jw.
l,  13  Edw.  I.,  21  Hen.  Tin.,  17  Car.  XL,  2  IT.  and  Jtf,
8  AnnCi  and  11  Geo.  11.,^  and  which  statutes  were  made
on  purpose  to  control  abuses,  and  mitigate  the  rigour  of  the
common  law. The  English  common  and  .statute  law,  in
relation  to  distress  for  rent,  has  been  generally,  and,  I  appre-
hend, essentially  adopted  in  several  of  the  other  states,  as^  far
instance,  in  New- Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Indiana,  Maryknd,
and  South  Carolina  ;*  but  the  whole  law  has  been  judicially
declared,  in  North  Carolina,  to  be  irreconcilable  with  the


a  This  was  the  proTision  of  the  statute  of  4  Geo.  II.,  and  it  is  sikiptsd
in  New-York,  (JV*.  T.  Rewed  SUUuUiy  vol.  ii.  505,)  and  probsblj  ia
several  of  the  other  states.

b  jr.  Y.  Retn9ed  Statutes,  vol.  i.  747,  sec.  18— S4.  Rnd.  toI.  ii.
600^505.

€  Hartshoro  ▼.  Kiennan,  S  HaUteiTi  Rep.  99.  Hoskins  v.  Paal,  4
t6uf.  1 10.  Woglam  ▼.  Cowperlhwaite,  2  Vallite'  Rep.  68.  Garret  t.
Hughlet,  1  Harr.  ^  Johns.  3.  City  Council  of  Charleston  ?.  Price,
1  M'Cord's  Rep,  299.  Dorsey  r.  Hays,  7  Harr.  ^  Johns.  370.  Nsale
v.  Caatice,  ibid.  372.  Smith  v.  Meaoes,  16  Serg.  4^  Bawley  375.
Ridf  e  T.  Wilson,  I  Black/ord't  Ind.  Rqi.  409.  Crips  r.  Talriode,  4
Jtf>  Cord,  20.


PEi!


L%€u  m.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  473


'" spirit  of  tbeir  laws  and  government,  and  to  be  of  no  force  in

' "  that  state.'  It  is  deenied  to  be  equally  objectionable,  in  the
opinion  of  judicial  authority,  in  South  Carolina,  and  fit  to  be

--■  abolished,  as  being  an  unreasonable  and  oppressive  relict  of
tbe  feudal  system,  and  repugnant  to  the  policy  of  our  institu-
tions.^ In  Louisiana,  the  English  remedy  for  rent  essentially
prevails,  for  the  lessor  has  a  right  of  pledge  on  the  movable
eflfects  of  the  lessee  found  upon  the  premises,  and  also  on  the
movable  eflects  of  third  persons  being  in  a  house  or  store  oq
the  premises  by  their  consent,  express  or  implied.  The  right
does  not  extend  to  goods  transiently  or  accidentally  on  the
premises,  and  the  lesscH*  may  exercise  his  right  of  seizing  the
goods  while  on  the  land,  or  within  fifteen  days  after  they  are
removed,  provided  they  continue  to  be  the  property  of  the

c ;  lessee.*  In  the  New-England  states,  their  law  of  attach-
ment on  mesne  process  has  superseded  the  law  of  distress
for  rent  ;  but  under  their  attachment  laws,  the  principles  of
tbe  common  law  doctrine  of  distress  seem  to  have  been  esseo-

^  dally  assumed,  subject  to  tbe  same  checks  and  limitations
which,  under  the  English  statute  law,  and  modem  deci-
sions, have  modified  and  improved  it.'  I  shall,  therefore^
proceed  to  consider  the  remedy  by  distress  for  rent,  upon  the
principles  of  the  English  common  and  statute  law,  as  being
incorporated  into  the  jurisprudence  of  most  of  the  United
States.

The  exorbitant  authority  and  importance  of  the  feudal
aristocracy,  and  the  extreme  dependence,  and  even  vassalage

;;  of  the  tenants,  was  the  occasion  of  introducing  the  law  of  dis-
tresses, and  which  summary  remedy  is  applicable  to  nootb^

i'  contracts-  for  the  payment  of  money,  than  those  between  land-
lord and  tenant The  non-payment  of  rent,  or  non-perform-


«  Dalgleith  v.  Grandy,  Cam.  4»  Jfnr.  Rep.  9SL
h  ToQDg^blood  V.  Lowry,  2  .^Cbrcrt  Rep,  39.
e  CMl  Code  o/Lamnana,  art  2676— S679.
d  Potter  y.  HaU,  3  Pick.  Rep.  368.

Vol.  IIL  60


474  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VL

ance  of  any  other  stipulated  service,  was  originally,  by  the
feudal  law,  a  forfeiture  of  the  feud,  and  the  lord  was  at  liberty
to  enter  and  reassume  it.  The  severity  of  those  feudal  for-
feitures was  then  changed,  and  intended  to  be  softened  into
the  right  of  distress,  which  was  borrowed,  as  Baron  Gilbert
supposes,*  from  the  civil  law,  for  by  that  law  the  creditor  bad
a  right  to  seisse  a  pledge  in  order  to  obtain  justice.  So,  un-
der the  feudal  law,  instead  of  insisting  upon  an  absolute  f<»r-
feiture  of  the  land,  or  even  of  the  right  of  the  lord  to  enter
and  hold  the  lands  until  the  tenant  had  rendered  his  service,
the  law  substituted  the  seizure  of  the  cattle,  and  other  mova-
bles found  upon  the  land,  and  allowed  them  to  be  detained
as  a  fledge  until  the  damages  were  paid.  This  power  of
distress,  as  anciently  used,  was  soon  found  to  be  as  grievous
and  oppressive  as  the  feudal  forfeiture.  It  was  equally  dis-
tressing to  the  tenant  to  be  stripped  in  an  instant  of  all  his
goods  and  chattels,  for  arrearages  of  rent,  as  it  was  to  be  turn-
ed out  of  the  possession  of  his  farm.  The  power  of  distrain-
ing for  rent,  and  other  feudal  services,  became  an  engine  of
the  most  insupportable  tyranny  and  oppression.^  These
abuses  were  first  stated  in  the  statute  of  51  Hetu  III.,  De
Districtione  Scaccarii^  wherein  it  is  mentioned,  that  the
commonalty  of  the  realm  had  sustained  great  damage  by
wrongful  taking  of  distresses  for  the  king's  debts  ;  and  it  pro-
vided, that  when  beasts  should  be  distrained  and  impounded,
the  owner  might  feed  them  without  disturbance ;  and  that
the  things  distrained  should  not  be  sold  until  the  expiration
of  fifteen  days  ;  and  that  if  there  were  any  chattels  to  dis-
train, neither  beasts  of  th^  plough,  nor  sheep,  should  be  dis-
trained ;  and  that  the  distress  should  be  reasonable  in  amount,
according  to  the  estimation  of  neighbours.  In  the  following
year,  the  statute  of  Marlebridge,  in  the  62d  Hen,  III.,  was
passed,  providing  more  generally  against  the  abuse  of  the


a  Oilbert  oh  Diitreuesy  p.  2.
b  Jbidm  p.  3.


I-ec.  MI.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  476

right  of  distress,  and  that  statute  stated  the  abuses  of  land-
lords in  strong  language  :  Magnates  graves  ultiones  fece-
runt,  et  districtiones  quosque  redemptiones  reciperunt  ad
voluntatem  suam. What  made  the  grievance  more  insup-
portable was,  that  the  lords  refused  to  permit  the  king's  courts
to  take  cognizance  of  the  distresses  which  they  had  made  at
their  own  pleasure,  and,  therefore,  as  Sir  Edward  Coke  ob*
senres,  they  assumed  to  be  judges  in  their  own  causes,  con-
trary to  the  solid  maxim  of  the  common  law.^ This  statute
restored  the  authority  of  the  regular  courts,  and  ordered  all
distresses  to  be  reasonable,  and  that  whoever  made  an  exces-
sive distress,  should  be  grievously  amerced. The  distress  was
not  to  be  taken  or  driven  out  of  the  county,  and  it  was  not  to
be  made  upon  the  public  highway,  and  a  remedy  by  replevin
was  given  for  a  wrongful  distress. By  these  salutary  pro-
visions, the  power  of  distress  was  confined  to  the  original
intention  of  the  law,  which  was  to  seize  the  tenant's  goods
by  way  of  pledge,  in  order  to  compel  him  to  perform  his  feudal
engagements.*

The  common  law  also  imposed  several  benign  restrictions
upon  this  summary  and  somewhat  perilous  authority  of
distress.  It  forbade  perishable  articles  to  be  distrained,  be^
cause  all  pledges  ought  to  be  returned  in  the  same  good  con-
dition as  when  taken.  It  forbade  the  tools  and  implements
of  a  man's  trade,  as  well  as  the  beasts  of  the  plough,  to  be
distrained,  provided  other  articles  could  be  found  ;  because
the  taking  of  such  articles  would  tend  to  produce  an  utter  in-
ability in  the  tenant  to  redeem  the  pledge.^  The  goods  were
also  to  be  put  into  a  pound,  and  there  kept  safely,  without
being  used  by  the  landlord,  until  they  were  redeemed,^


a  ft  Ifut.  103, 103.

b  Oiiberl  on  DUtreiseSy  4.  34.

e  t  Inst.  132, 133. GilbfTl  on  DiHresses,  35, 36.

d  Cro.  Jac,  148.  A  teoder  of  amends  comes  too  late  after  the  goods
ire  impouoded,  for  they  are  then  in  the  custody  of  the  law.  Pilkiog-
ton's  case,  5  Co.  76.  a.


476  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Ptel  Ylr

But  if  the  tenant  was  dispoeed  to  controvert  the  legality  of
the  distressi  either  by  denying  any  rent  to  be  due,  cr  by  aver«
ring  it  to  be  paid,  the  law  provided  him  with  a  remedy  by
the  writ  of  replevin ;  which  was  a  writ  authorizing  the  she-
riff to  take  back  the  pledge  and  deliver  it  to  the  tenant,  on  re-
ceciving  security  from  him  to  prosecute  the  writ  to  effect,  and
to  return  the  chattels  taken,  if  be  should  fail  in  making  good
his  defence.

In  modei^n  times,  the  whole  policy  of  the  law  respecting
distresses  has  been  changed.  It  was  inconvenient,  if  not  ab-
surd, that  prop  rty  should  be  kept  in  an  inactive  state  in  or*
der  to  compel  a  man  to  perform  his  stipulated  payment.  A
distress  at  this  day  is  no  more  than  a  summary  mode  of  sei-
zing and  selling  the  tenant's  property,  to  satisfy  the  rent  which
he  owes ;  and  the  extent  and  manner  of  the  operation  have
been  changed,  and  made  entirely  reasonable  and  just,  and
equally  conducive  to  the  security  of  the  landlord  and  the  pro-
tteUon  of  commerce.

When  rent  is  due  and  unpaid,'  and  when  no  judgment
in  a  personal  action  has  been  had  for  the  recovery  of  the
same,  the  landlord,  upon  demand,  may  enter  immediate-
ly, by  himself  or  bis  agent,^  upon  the  demised  premi-
ses, and  distrain  any  goods  and  chattels  that  are  to  be
found  there,  belonging  to  the  tenant  or  others ;  and  thii
light  of  the  landlord  to  distrain  any  goods  and  chattels
upon  the  premises,  is  founded  upon  reasons  of  public  conve-
nience, and  to  prevent  collusion  and  fraud.' But  this  incoo*


a  JV.  F.  Revised  StcUuteSf  vol.  ii.  500,  sec.  2.

6  As  a  check  to  abuse  in  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  distress,  the
JfeW'Tork  Revised  SlaitUeSy  vol.  ii.  601,  sec.  3.  8,  require  every  dis-
tress to  be  made  by  the  sheriff  or  one  of  bis  deputies,  or  by  a  coostable
or  marshal  of  the  city  or  town,  and  upon  the  previous  affidavit  of  tbe
landlord  or  his  ag^ent,  of  the  amount  of  rent  due,  and  tbe  time  when.

c  Gorton  v.  Falkner,  4  Term  Rep,  565.  Jones  v.  Powell,  5  Bortitf.
^  Creee.  647.  In  Virginia,  by  statute,  io  1818,  tbe  property  of  stran-
gers found  upon  tbe  premises,  is  exempted  froitfdistreis. 4  Rando^^


Lm.  UL]  of  real  property.  477

▼eDieot  privilege  is  subject  to  many  exceptions.  Articles
that  may  be  temporarily  placed  upon  the  land  by  way  of  trade,
and  belonging  to  third  persons,'  are  exempted  from  distress,
on  the  broad  principle  of  public  convenience,  and  for  the  be-
nefit of  commerce.  A  horse  at  a  pubUc  inn,  or  sent  to  a  live-
ry stable  to  be  taken  care  of,  or  corn  at  a  mill,  or  doth  at
a  tailor's  shop,  or  a  grazier's  cattle  put  upon  the  land  for  a
night,  on  the  way  to  market,  or  goods  deposited  in  a  ware-
house for  sale,  or  on  storage  in  the  way  of  trade,  or  goods  of
a  principal  in  the  hands  of  a  factor,  are  not  distrainable  for
rent*  With  respect  to  the  cattle  of  a  stranger  found  upon
the  land,  there  is  tliis  distinction,  that  if  they  broke  in  they
are  distrainable  immediately,  but  if  the  fences  were  bad,  they
are  not  distrainable,  until  the  owner,  after  notice,  has  neglect-
ed  to  take  them  away.  Corn  and  grass,  whether  growing
or  cut,  are  seizable  by  way  of  distress,  and  those  articled  and
cattle  may  be  secured  or  impounded  upon  the  premises,  and
there  sold. The  distress  must  be  reasonable,  and  it  cannot


334.  lo  Oorfofi  v.  Faiknert  Mr.  J.  Asbborst  considers  tbe  foundation
of  tbe  principle  tbat  tbe  g^oods  of  tbe  stranger  may  be  taken  to  be,  tbat
tbe  landlord  is  supposed  to  give  credit  to  tbe  visible  stock  on  tbe  premi«
■es,  and  be  ougbt,  iberefore,  to  bave  recourse  to  every  tbing  be  finds
tbere.  But  tbe  Cbief  Justice  in  Pennsylvania,  in  Brown  v.  Sims,  17
Serg,  4»  BawU^  138,  was  of  opinion  tbat  tbe  rigbt  of  distraining  a  stran*
ger's  goods  on  tbe  premises,  rested  on  no  principle  of  reason  or  justice,
and  be  tbougbt  tbat  tbe  constantly  growing  exceptions  to  tbat  part  of
tbe  law  of  distress,  would,  in  tbe  end,  eat  out  tbe  rule  itself.  In  New-
Jersey,  by  statute,  tbe  goods  on  tbe  premises  not  belonging  to  tbe
tenant  are  exempted  from  distress  for  rent  due  from  tbe  tenant.  JV.  J*'
RevUed  Law9^  201,  sec.  8.

a  Hoskips  v.  Paul,  4  HaUUd,  110.

h  S  Scamd.  Rep.  289,  a.  n.  7.  Gisbourne  r.  Hunt,  1  Salk,  Rep.
949.  3  Blackt.  Com.  8.  Gilmao  v.  Elton,  3  Brod,  4*  Bing.  76.
Co.  LUL  47.  a.  Tbompson  v.  Masbiter,  1  Bing.  Rep.  383.  Mattbias
V.  Mesnard,  2  Carr.  4r  Payne,  353.  Brown  v.  Sims,  17  Serg.  4*
Btnole^  138. Toangblood  w.  Lowry,  2  M^Cord^e  Rep.  39r


its  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI

be  made  in  a  public  highway,  or  removed  out  of  the  county.'
The  highway,  in  particular,  ought  to  be  secure  to  the  tenant
for  the  intercourse  of  commerce,  and  the  preservation  of  peace
and  good  order. Nor  can  beasts  of  the  plough,  sheep,  or  im-
plements of  a  man's  trade,  be  taken  for  rent,  so  long  as  other
property  can  be  found  ;  but  they  may  be  distrained  if  not  in
actual  use  at  the  time,  and  there  be  no  other  sufficient  dis-
tress on  the  premises.* In  the  case  of  Simpson  v.  Hartopp^*
the  question  was,  whether  a  stocking  frame,  in  the  actual  use
of  a  weaver  at  the  time,  was  distraiuable  for  rent ;  and  after
two  distinct  arguments,  at  different  terms,  it  was  adjudged,
that  it  was  noL Lord  Ch.  J.  Willes  took  an  accurate  and
elaborate  view  of  the  law  on  the  subject ;  and  it  was  stated,
that  there  were  several  sorts  of  things  not  distrainable  at
common  law. 1.  Things  annexed  to  the  freehold,  such,  for
instance,  as  furnaces,  millstones,  and  chimney  pieces. 2.
Things  delivo-ed  to  a  person  exercising  a  public  trade,  to  be
worked  up  or  managed  in  the  way  of  his  trade,  as  a  horse  at
a  smith's  shop,  materials  sent  to  a  weaver,  a  horse  brough't  to
an  inn ;  though,  with  respect  to  a  carriage  at  a  livery  stable,
it  has  since  been  determined,'  that  it  was  not  privileged  from-
distress  for  rent  by  the  lessor  of  the  stable. 3.  Cocks,  or
sheaves  of  corn. 4  Beasts  of  the  plough,  and  instruments
of  husbandry. 6.  Instruments  of  a  man's  trade. These
two  last  sorts  were  only  exempted  from  distress  stib  modo  ;


a  By  the  JWw-Forik  Revised  Sktlutee^  vol.  ii.  501, 8ec.  5, 6,  the  dii-
tresa  cannot  be  driven  out  of  the  town,  except  to  a  pound  within  three
milea  distance,  and  within  the  same  county  ;  and  all  beasts  and  chattels
taken  at  one  time,  must  be  kept,  as  near  as  may  be,  in  the  same  place.

h  Gorton  ▼•  Falkner,  4  Term  Rep.  665.  %  InH,  133,  133.  JV.  F.
RenUed  StatuUe^  toI.  ii.  502,  sec.  13.  In  Louisiana,  the  tandlord  bu
a  privilege,  by  way  of  pledge,  on  the  tools  of  a  tradesman  found  on  the
premises,  for  the  payment  of  rent  Parkqr  v.  Starkweather,  19  Jtfor^
tm^  337.

e  WiUet'e  Rep,  512.

d  Francis  v.  Wyatt,S  Btarr.  Rep.  1498.


I^eK.  UI.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  479

that  is,  upon  the  supposition  that  there  was  other  sufficient
distress.  The  court,  in  that  case,  held,  that  the  stocking
frame  was  privileged  from  distress  while  the  party  was  ac-
tually using  it,  even  though  there  was  no  other  distress  on
the  premises.  If  it  had  not  heen  in  actual  use,  it  might  have
been  distrained  ;  and  if  things  in  actual  occupancy  could  be
distrained,  it  would,  as  Lord  Kenyon  observed,*  perpetually
lead  to  a  breach  of  the  peace.  The  case  of  Webb  v.  Bellj^
seems  to  have  laid  down  a  contrary  doctrine  to  a  certain  ex-
tent ;  for  it  was  there  held,  that  two  horses,  and  the  harness,
&stened  to  a  cart  laden  with  corn,  might  be  distrained  for
rent  But  Lord  Ch.  J.  Willes  doubted  the  law  of  that  case ;
and  even  in  the  case  itself  a  doubt  is  suggested,  whether,  if  a
man  had  been  upon  the  cart,  the  whole  team  would  not  have
been  privileged  for  the  time.  In  Massachusetts,  under  their
law  of  attachment  upon  mesne  process,  which  is  analogous
to  the  common  law  doctrine  of  distress  for  rent,  it  has  been
held,  that  a  stage  coach  at  a  tavern,  in  preparation,  and  near-
ly ready  to  depart,  might  be  attached  ;  and  the  court  incUned
to  think,  that  stage  coaches,  steam-boats,  and  vessels  in  ac-
tual use,  might  be  attached,  though  the  decision  did  not  go
to  that  broad  extent.^


a  Storey  v.  Robioaon,  6  Term  Rep.  138.

b  1  Sid.  Rep.  440.

e  Potter  ▼.  HalU  3  Pick.  Rep.  368.  Tbe  Jfew-Tork  Revised  Sia^
tutee,  vol.  ii.  501,  602,  sec*  10—14.  Ibid.  p.  367,  sec.  22,  speciallj
exempt  spioniog  wheels,  weayiog^  looms,  aod  stoves,  kept  for  use  io  m
direlliDg^-boase,  aod  sheep  to  tbe  Dumber  of  ten,  aod  the  cloth  maoofao-
tured  from  them,  ooe  cow,  two  swine,  and  (he  pork  of  the  same,  aod  a
few  necessary  articles  of  furniture,  as  well  as  wearing  apparel  and  bed-
ding^, and  owned  by  a  householder,  and  the  necessary  tools  of  a  me-
chanic to  the  value  of  ^25,  from  distress  for  rent,  as  well  as  from  exe-
cution. But  things  annexe<l  to  the  freehold  for  the  purpose  of  trade  or
manufacture,  and  not  fixed  into  the  wall  of  any  building,  so  as  to  be
essential  to  its  support,  and  grain,  grass  and  roots,  whether  growing  or
gathered  and  remaining  on  tbe  land,  may  be  distrained* Oo  tbe  other


480  OF  REAL  PROPERTT.  [P^rt  TL

After  the  distress  baa  been  duly  made,  if  the  goods  be  nol
replevied  vritbin  five  days  after  noticei  Uie  statute  of  New*
York  has  provided,  tbat  the  goods  shall  be  forthwith  apprais*
ed,  and  sold  at  public  vendue,  under  the  superinteodeoce  of
a  sheriff  or  constable,  towards  sadsfaction  of  rent*  And  ihii
law  of  distress  is  liable  to  so  rauch  abuse  on  the  part  of  Cbe
landlord,  and  tenants  are  so  often  driven  to  desperate  ezp^
•dients  to  elude  the  promptitude  and  rapidity  of  the  recovery,
that  the  kw  has  been  obliged  to  hold  out  the  peoaky  of
double  damages  against  the  one,  if  he  distrains  when  no  rent
is  due,  and  of  treble  damages  against  the  other,  if  be  unlaw-
fully rescues  the  goods  distrained.*  If  the  tenant  holds  over,
the  possession  may  be  recovered  in  New- York,  by  the  land*
lord,  under  a  new  and  summary  course  of  proceeding/  The
proceeding  applies  to  tenants  for  years,  and  from  year  toyeari
or  for  part  of  a  year,  or  at  will,  or  at  sufferance,  and  to  tho
assigns,  under  tenants,  or  legal  representatives  of  such  te-
nant ;  and  it  applies  to  holding  over  after  the  expiration  of
the  term  without  permission,  or  after  default  in  the  payment
of  rent  pursuant  to  contract But  in  the  ease  of  a  tenancy


haod,  penooal  properly  deposited  with,  or  hired  or  lent  to  the  tenant
witli  the  consent  of  the  landlord,  cannot  be  distrained ;  nor  can  the  pro-
perty of  others  which  accidentally  strays  on  the  premises,  or  is  deposited
with  a  tavern-keeper,  or  the  keeperof  a  warelionse,  in  tbensoal  coiinto
of  their  business,  or  deposited  with  any  person  for  the  purpose  of  beinf
repaired  or  manufactured. Ibid*  toL  ii.  502,  sec.  10.  14.

By  the  Roman  law,  the  landlord's  lien  for  his  rent  of  a  farm  was  con-
fined to  the  produce  of  the  field.  Neither  cattie,  nor  implements  of
husbandry,  nor  furniture,  were  included.  But  the  rule  yaried  in  the
case  of  bouses  rented,  and  the  permanent  movables  within  the  honse
were  liable  to  distress  for  rent. Dig.  20.  2.  7. 1.

a  t^.  F.  Revised  Statutes,  yoI.  ii.  504,  sec.  24, 25, 26  ;  and  within
ten  days  after  the  sale,  the  officer  must  file,  in  the  office  of  the  town
clerk,  the  original  warrant  of  distress,  and  the  original  affidavit  of  the
landlord  or  his  agent. Ibid.  501,  sec.  9.

b  JV.  r.  Renieed  Staiutee,  voL  il.  504,  sec.  23.  27.

c  Ibid.  512,  sec.  28.


Lee.  Lll.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  481

at  will,  or  sufferance,  one  month's  previous  notice  in  writing,
to  the  tenant,  to  remove,  must  have  been  given  ;  and  in  case
the  proceeding  be  for  non-payment  of  rent,  there  must  have

•

been  a  previous  demand  of  the  rent,  or  three  days  notice  in
writing,  to  pay,  or  deliver  the  possession.*  This  summary
remedy  for  non-payment  of  rent  applies  also  where  the  tenant
has  been  discharged  under  any  insolvent  act,  as  to  his  debts
or  person,  or  after  the  estate'  has  been  sold  under  an  execu-
tion against  such  person.^  But  it  does  not  apply,  when  it  shall
appear  that  satisfaction  for  the  rent  might  have  been  obtained
by  distress,  and  the  whole  provision  is  general,  and  applies  to
every  part  of  the  state.  At  common  law,  distress  could  only
be  made  on  the  land  out  of  which  the  rent  issues,'  but  now
by  statute,  if  the  tenant  carries  away  his  goods,  before
or  after  the  rent  becomes  due,  leaving  the  rent  unpaid,
the  goods  of  such  tenant  are  not  only  liable  to  be  seized
wherever  found,  at  any  time  within  thirty  days  after  the  rent
becomes  due,  though  the  removal  may  have  been  more  than
thirty  days  preceding,  but  the  tenant  forfeits  double  the  value
of  the  goods.'' And  in  order  to  give  further  and  effectual  se-


tt JV*.  K  Rewtd  SUUtUes,  vol.  i.  745,  sec.  7,  8, 9.  vol.  ii,  513,  sec*
28.

b  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  513,  sec.  28.

c  This  doctriae  was  enforced  with  g;reat  stnctness  in  (he  case  of
Bwzardv.  Capel,  (8  Bamw*  Sf  Creu,  141.  6  Bingham^  160,  S.  C.  on
error,)  where  it  was  decided,  that  a  bargee  attached  to  a  wharf  by  a  rope
could  not  be  distrained  for  rent  by  the  lessor  of  the  wharf,  though  the
land  on  which  the  wharf  stood  was  demised,  and  tlie  lue  of  the  land  in
the  rirer  Thames  opposite  the  wharf,  between  high  and  low  water  mark,
was  demised  as  appurtenant  to  the  wharf,  but  not  the  land  itself  over
which  the  barge  floated  when  it  was  distrained.

d  J^.  Y.  Revised  Statutes,  vol.  ii.  602,  sec.  15.  503,  sec.  17.  Rey-
nolds v.  Shuler,  5  Chwen's  Rep.  323.  The  statute  of  New- York  goes
further  than  the  English  statute  of  It  Geo.  II.,  or  the  statute  of  Penn«
sylvania  of  1772,  for  by  them  the  goods  must  hare  been  removed  after
the  rent  was  due,  to  authorize  the  landlord  to  distrain  them.  Grace  v.
Shirely,  12  Serg,  Sf  Rawle^  217.

Vol.  III.  61


482  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  TL

curity  Co  the  te&t  el  the  landlord,  no  goods  of  a  tenant,  or  of
any  other  person  being  on  the  premises,  and  liable  to  distreaB,
can  be  taken  on  execution  at  the  instance  of  a  creditor,  until
the  arrears  of  rent  dae  at  the  time,  and  not  exceeding  one
year,  be  previously  deducted.*  The  sheriff  must  have  no-
tice of  the  landlord's  claim,  otherwise  he  is  not  bound  to
kiK>w  who  the  landlord  is,  or  what  rent  is  in  arrear.*  The
one  year's  rent  to  the  landlord,  in  case  of  execution  against
the  personal  property  of  the  tenant,  is  not  to  exceed  the  last
year's  rent,  and  by  the  Revised  Statutes  of  NeuhYarky  if
the  tenant  denies  that  rent  is  due  as  claimed,  he  may  tender  a
bond  with  sureties  to  the  officer  to  pay  all  rent  due,  not  ex-
ceeding one  year's  rent.  The  bond  is  to  be  executed  to  the
landlord,  and  delivered  to  him,  and  for  his  use,  by  the  officer,
and  it  is  to  be  received  as  a  substitute  for  his  lien  on  the  ex-
cution.'

This  power  of  the  landlord  does  not  extend  to  the  seizure
of  goods,  as  a  distress  for  rent,  when  the  goods  have  been
sold  bonajidey  and  for  a  valuable  consideration,  before  the
seizure  was  made.' But  a  mortgage  of  the  goods  is  said  not


a  Jf.  F.  Revised  Stattdes,  Yoh  i.  746,  sec.  12—17. Rncsell  ▼.  Doty,
4  Cowen*i  Rep.  576.

b  Smith  ▼.  Russell,  3  Taunt.  Rep.  400. Alexander  v.  Maboo,  11
Johns.  Rep.  185. JV.  Y.  Revised  Statutes,  toI.  i.  746,  sec.  12, 13.

e  JV*.  F.  Revised  Statutes,  toI.  L  746,  sec.  12 — 17.  The  process  and
fonns  of  the  summary  proceediug^  in  New- York,  to  oust  the  tenant
wroD£^fttlly  holding  over,  are  given  in  a  note  to  the  case  of  Jfiehols  v.
WUliams,  8  Cof0«n,  1.  If  the  tenant  for  life  or  years,  or  any  other
person  coming  in  under  or  by  collusion  with  such  tenant,  wilfully  holds
after  demand  and  one  month's  notice  to  quit,  he  is  chargeable  at  the
rate  of  double  the  yearly  value  of  the  land,  and  the  special  damages,  and
equity  cannot  afford  him  any  relief,  j/.  Y.  Revised  Statutes,  vol.  ii.
745,  sec.  1 1.  Double  rent  is  likewise  given  if  a  tenant  gives  notice  of
his  intention  to  quit,  and  does  not  remove  pursuant  to  notice.  Ibid.
sec.  10.

d  JV*.  F.  Revised  Statutes,  vol  iL  503,  sec.  16. Neale  v.  Clantioe*
7  Horr.  *  Johns.  372,  S.  P.


Lcc.  LII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  483

to  be  a  sale  wilhin  the  provision,  so  as  to  protect  them  from
distress.'  And  if  the  interest  of  the  tenant  in  the  term  has
ceased,  and  the  tenancy  ended,  and  the  tenant,  with  his  goods,
removed  from  the  premises,  a  distress  for  rent  could  not  for*
merly  l>e  made,  though  it  be  within  thirty  days  from  the  ter-
mination of  the  tenancy.^  The  remedy  by  distress,  accord-
ing to  the  common  law,  assumed  the  tenancy  to  continue,
and  ceased  with  it ;"  but  by  the  statute  of  8  Anne^  (and
which  has  been  adopted  in  this  country,'' )  the  remedy  by  dis-
tress, is  extended  to  six  months  after  the  determinati(»i  of  the
tenant's  lease,  whether  the  lease  be  for  life,  for  years,  or  at
will.  It  was  made  necessary,  under  the  statute,  that  the
landlord's  title  and  the  tenant's  possession,  should  equally  have
continued,  but  by  the  Nevh  York  Revised  Statutes^  it  is  de-
dared  generally,  that  the  distress  may  be  made  upon  any
goods  remaining  or  removed,  in  the  same  manner,  within  the
same  time,  and  under  th&same  provisions  and  restrictions,  as  "
if  the  tenancy  had  not  ended.'  The  distress  may  also  be
made,  under  the  above  limitations,  for  all  the  arrears  of  rent
arising  during  the  tenancy,  tliough  the  rent  of  several  years
should  happen  to  be  in  arrear/


a  Reynolds  y.  Sbuler,  5  Cowen**  Rep.  323.

b  TerboBS  w.  Williwne,  5  Cotom^t  Rep,  407.

c  Co.  LiU.  47.  b. Peoo&Dt's  case,  3  Co.  64. Stanfill  v.  Hicks,

1  Lord  Rdym.  280.

d  JV.  Y.  Rensed  StaliOei,  vol.  ii.  500,  sec.  1.

e  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  500,  sec.  1 .  Ibid.  503,  sec.  1 6.  Tbe  New-York  sU-
tutes  have  likewise  given  a  summary  remedy  to  tbe  landlord,  with  the
aid  of  a  magistrate,  in  cases  wbere  tbe  premises  are  deserted,  and  tbe
rent  left  in  arrear.  JV:  Y.  Revised  SUUuies,  vol.  ii.  512.  A  like
summary  remedy  to  obtain  possession,  wbere  tbere  are  not  goods  on  tbe
premises  sufficient  to  pay  tbe  rent,  is  given  by  statute  in  Pennsylvania,

in  1830.

/  Brathwaite  v.  Cooksey,  1  H.  Blacks.  465.  Wrigbt  v.  Williams,
5  C<noen:s  Rep.  601.  Blake  v.  De  Liesseline,  4  MCord^  496.  The
English  real  property  commissioners,  in  their  report  in  1829,  proposed


484  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

But  the  object  of  this  work  will  not  permit  me  to  descend
into  greater  detail,  and  I  am  obliged  to  be  confined  to  a  gene-
ral view  of  the  law  on  the  subject  of  rent,  and  the  remedy
to  recover  it.  The  contract  for  rent,  and  the  remedy,  are  in
constant  use  and  application ;  and  in  the  cities  and  large
towns  there  are  few  branches  of  the  law  that  affect  more
sensibly  the  interests  of  every  class  of  the  people.*  The  law
may  be  deemed  rather  prompt  and  strict  with  respect  to  the
interests  of  the  landlord,  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  it  is  a  ne-
cessary provision,  and  one  dictated  by  sound  policy.  It  is  best
for  the  tenant  that  he  should  feel  the  constant  necessity  of
early  and  punctual  performance  of  his  contract.  It  stimu-
lates to  industry,  economy,  tempemnce,  and  wakeful  vigi-
lance ;  and  it  would  tend  to  check  the  grovirth  and  prosperity


that  no  person  should  bring  any  action,  or  distrain  for  any  arrears  of
rent,  after  six  years  from  the  time  when  the  same  became  dae.

Whenever  goods  are  wrongfully  distrained,  the  owner  may  recoirer
them  by  an  action  of  replevin.  This  action  of  replevin  lies  also  ia
other  cases  where  goods  have  been  tortioualy  taken.  Pangbam  v.
Patridge,  7  Johm.  Rep,  140.  See  also  6  Btimey,  2.  14  Johnson^  87.
IS  Ibid.  402.  Idlhid.  31.  ZO  lirid,  467.  1  Wendell,  109,  to  the
same  point.  The  JV*.  F.  Revised  Statutet,  vol.  ii.  522,  have  granted
the  writ  of  replevin  whenever  goods  have  been  wrongfully  taken,  or
are  wrongfully  detained.  But  the  statute  provides  that  replevin  shall
not  lie  for  goods  taken  by  warrant  for  any  tax,  assessment,  or  fine,  nor
for  goods  seized  on  execution  or  attachment,  unless  they  be  goods  ex-
empted by  law  from  such  process,  nor  unless  the  party  hath  a  right  at
the  time  to  reduce  the  goods  into  his  possession.

a  The  modern  regulations  on  the  subject  of  distresses  for  rent,  are
founded  on  the  statutes  of  2  ^.  ^  Jlf.  c.  3  ;  8  Anne^  c.  14  ;  4  Geo,
II.  c.  28  ;  11  Gro,  II.  c.  19  ;  and  those  statutes  have  been  re-enacted,
with  some  improvements,  in  New-York,  and  doubtless  form  the  basis
of  our  American  law  on  the  subject  of  distress  for  rent,  in  all  those
states  where  tbat  remedy  prevails.  The  statute  of  1 1  Geo,  If.,  ch.  19,
seems  to  have  been,  for  instance,  very  strictly  adopted  and  followed  in
Pennsylvania  and  Marjland.  1^  Serg.  S^  Rawle,  218.  1  Harr.  ^
Johnt,  372,  373.


Lee.  LIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  4S5

of  our  cities,  if  the  law  did  not  afford  to  landlords  a  speedy
and  effectual  security  for  their  rents,  against  the  negligence,
extravagance,  and  frauds  of  tenants.  It  is  that  security
which  encourages  moneyed  men  to  employ  their  capital  in  use-
ful and  elegant  improvements.  If  they  were  driven  in  every
case  to  the  slow  process  of  a  suit  at  law  for  their  rent,  it  would
lead  to  vexatious  and  countless  law-suits,  and  be,  in  many
respects,  detrimental  to  the  public  welfare.


t


I


LECTURE  LIII.


OF  THE HISTORY OF  THE LAW OF  TENURE.

Tenure  is  inseparable  from  the  idea  of  property  in  land,
according  to  the  theory  of  the  English  law.  All  the  land  in
England  is  held  mediately  or  immediately  of  the  king.
There  are  no  allodial  lands  to  which  the  term  tenure  does
not  strictly  apply,  nor  any  proprietors  of  land,  except  the
king,  who  are  not  legally  tenants.  To  express  the  highest
possible  interest  that  a  subject  can  have  in  land,  the  English
law  uses  the  terms  fee  simple,  or  a  tenancy  in  fee,  and  sup-
poses that  some  other  person  retains  the  absolute  and  ultimate
right.  The  king  is,  by  fiction  of  law,  the  great  lord  para-
mount, and  supreme  proprietor  of  all  the  lands  in  the  king-
dom, and  for  which  he  is  not  bound  by  services  to  any  supe-  \
rior.  Pradium  Domini  Regis  est  directum  Dominium^
cujus  nuUus  author  est  nisi  Deus.*  So  thoroughly  does
this  notion  of  tenure  pervade  the  common  law  doctrine  of
real  property,  that  the  king  cannot  grant  land  to  which  the
reservation  of  tenure  is  not  annexed,  though  he  should  even
declare,  in  express  words,  the  grant  to  be  absque  aliquo  inde
reddendo.^  Sir  Henry  Spelman'  defines  a  feud  to  be  usus
fructus  reiitmnobUis  sub  canditiane  fidei  ;  veljusutendi
pr^Bdio  cUieno. The  vassal  took  the  profits,  but  the  proper-


a  Co.  LUL  i.  b.  66.  a. 2  Blacks.  Com.  105.
b  Bro,  tit.  Tenureiy2.  52. 6  Co.  6.  b. 9  Co.  123.  a. Wrighi
Tenurei^,  137, 138.
€  Treatite  ofFtniM  and  Tmwru  by  Knight  ServieCj  cb.  1.


48S  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

ty  of  the  soil  remained  u}  the  lord,  and  the  seignory  of  the
lord  and  the  vassaPs/eiicf  made  together,  eaith  Spelman,  that
^'  absolute  estate  of  inheritance,  which  the  feudists,  in  time  of
old,  called  allodium"

This  idea  of  tenure  pervades,  to  a  considerable  degree,  the
law  of  real  property  in  this  country. The  title  to  land  is  es-
sentially allodial,  and  every  tenant  in  fee-simple  has  an  abso-
lute and  perfect  title,  yet,  in  technical  language,  his  estate  is
called,  an  estate  in  fee-simple,  and  the  tenure  free  and  com-
mon socage. I  presume  this  techtiical  language  is  very  ge-
nerally interwoven  with  the  municipal  jurisprudence  of  the
several  states,  even  though  not  a  vestige  of  feudal  tenure  may
remain. In  many  of  the  states,  there  were  never  any  marks
of  feudal  tenure,  and  in  all  of  them  the  ownership  of  land  is
essentially  free  and  independent. By  the  statute  of  New-
York,  of  the  20th  February,  ITSZ,"  entiUed,  An  Act  con-
cerning Tenures^  the  legislature  re-enacted  the  statute  of
12  Car.  II.  ch.  24,  abolishing  the  military  tenures,  and  turn-
ing all  sorts  of  tenures  into  free  and  common  socage. Under
that  statute,  all  estates  of  inheritance  at  common  law,  were
held  by  the  tenure  of  free  and  common  socage ;  but  all  lands
held  under  grant  of  the  people  of  the  state,  (and  which  in-
cluded, of  course,  all  the  lands  in  the  western  and  northern
parts  of  the  state,  which  have  been  granted  and  settled  since
the  revolution,)  were  declared  to  be  allodial  and  not  feudal,
and  to  be  owned  in  free  and  pure  allodium. The  New-  York
Revised  Statutes,  which  took  effect  on  the  first  day  of  Ja-
nuary, 1830,  went  the  entire  length  of  abolishing  the  existing
theory  of  feudal  tenures,  of  every  description,  with  all  their
incidents,  and  declaring  all  lands  within  the  state  to  be  allo-
dial, and  that  the  entire  and  absolute  property  was  vested  in
the  owners,  according  to  the  nature  of  their  respective  estate?,
subject  only  to  the  liability  to  escheat.^ But  though  tlie  dis-


a  XrOtof  of  JfeW'Yorky  scss.  10,  cb.  36.

6  JV*.  F.  RevUed  Slaiutetf  toI.  i.  718,  tec.  3.


Lee.  LIlI.l  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  489

tinction,  in  this  country,  between  feudal  and  allodial  estates,
either  does  not  exist  at  all,  or  has  become  merely  nominal,  it
will  be  impossible  for  the  student  to  understand  clearly  and
accurately  the  doctrine  of  real  property,  and  the  learning"
which  illustrates  it,  without  bestowing  some  attention  to  the
history  and  character  of  feudd  tenures.

L  Of  the  origin  and  establishment  of  feudal  tenures
on  the  continent  of  Europe.

Some  writers  have  supposed,  that  the  sources  of  feuds  were
not  confined  to  the  northern  Grothic  nations  who  overturned
the  western  empire  of  the  Romans  ;  and  that  an  image  of
feudal  policy  had  been  discovered  in  almost  every  age  and
quarter  of  the  globe.*  But  the  resemblances  which  have
been  suggested  are  too  loosely  stated,  and  are  too  faint  and
remote,  to  afford  any  solid  ground  for  comparison.  The  in-
stitutions which  seem  to  have  been  most  congenial  to  the  feu-
dal system,  were  to  be  found  in  the  Roman  policy.  The  re-
lation of  patron  and  client  resembled,  in  some  respects,  the


a  Voeif  in  his  Digressio  de  Feudis^  sec.  1,  and  Mr.  HwgnLve^  in
note  1  to  lib.  ii.  Co.  LiU.  bare  referred  to  the  several  anthors  by  whom
this  opinion  has  been  adyanced,  and  also  by  whom  it  has  been  refnted.
I  would  further  add,  that  the  feudal  policy  is  declared  by  Dr.  Robert-
son to  ha? eezisted  in  its  most  rigid  form  among  the  ancient  Mexicans ;
and  the  government  of  the  Birman  empire  is  said  to  exhibit,  at  this  day,
a  faithful  picture  of  Europe  during  the  feudal  ages.  The  same  resem-
blances have  been  traced  among  the  Mahrattas,  and  the  Rajpoots  in
Hindostan,  and  also  in  the  island  of  Ceylon.  IloberUon*M  Hiitory  pf
America,  b.  7,  vol.  ii.  280.  Col.  Symes*  Ewbauy  to  Jiva,  toL  ii.  356.
Anatic  Annual  JUgiMier  for  1799,  tit.  JUiiceUaneous  Tracts^  p.  US.
CoL  Tod's  AnnaU  of  Rc^pootana^  reviewed  in  Edinburgh  Reoiew,  No*
103.  Niebuhr  says  the  feudal  system  was  obstinately  preserved  among
the  states  or  cities  of  the  Etruscans,  prior  to  the  dominion  of  the  So-
roans.  The  governments  were  rigid  aristocracies,  with  kings  elected
for  Ufe,  and  the  labouring  classes  were  serfs.  HUlory  ofBome^  vol.  i.
99.  lOK

Vol.  ni.  62


490  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

feudal  lord  and  vnaeoly  and  Niebohr,  in  his  History  of  Rome^^
declares  that  rektioa  to  have  been  the  feudal  system  in  its
noblest  fonn.  The  grants  of  forfeited  lands,  by  the  Roman
conquerors  to  their  veteran  soldiers,  as  a  recompense  for
past  service^  and  more  especially  the  grants  of  the  Emperor
Alexander  Severus,  and  in  the  time  of  Constantine,  on  the
condition  of  rendering  future  military  service,  afford  the  most
plausible  argument  for  deducing  the  feudal  customs  and  te-
nures from  the  Roman  law.  There  were,  however,  strong
and  essential  marks  of  difference  between  the  two  systems.
The  connexion  between  the  patron  and  client  was  civil,  and
not  military,  and  the  Roman  estates  and  military  grants  were
stable,  and  of  the  nature  of  allodial  property.  The  leading
points  of  difference  between  the  Roman  and  feudal  juri^ru-
dence,  in  relation  to  land,  have  been  abundantly  shown,  by
the  most  able  and  the  most  learned  of  the  modem  legal  an-
tiquaries.^


a  Vol.  i.  99.

h  Hargrave^t  note  1  to  lib.  ti.  Co.  LiU.  Butler's  note  77  to  lib.  tii.
Co.  LiU.  StdlivafCt  Treatise  on  the  Feudal  Lato,  lec.  iii.  Mr  Speoce,
in  bit  work,  entitled,  An  Inquiry  into  ike  Ori^n  of  the  Laws  and  Po-
lilical  Instiluiions  of  Jdodem  Europe  ,London,  1826,  p.  5.  32,  &c.,  has
examined  the  Roman  policy  on  (his  subject,  and  studied  the  Roman
laws,  and  particularly  the  Tbeodosian  code,  with  the  utmost  attention.
He  has  drawn  from  that  copious  source  of  legal  antiquities,  a  body  of
facts  to  sustain  and  illustrate  the  theory,  that  the  barbarians  adopted,  in
a  great  degree,  the  laws  and  institutions  of  the  Romans,  as  they  found
them  in  the  provinces  which  they  invaded  and  subdued.  His  conclu-
sion would  apply  better  to  France  than  to  any  other  part  of  Europe.
In  Spain,  it  is  said  that  the  early  Spanish  lawgivers  disliked  the  Roman
laws,  and  drove  them  from  their  tribunals.  The  Visigoths  prohibited
the  use  of  them.  See  Institutes  of  the  Civil  Law  of  Spain,  by  .Asso  4*
Jdanuel,  pref.  A  historian  more  learned,  even  in  the  antiquities  of
Spain,  than,  probably,  either  of  those  Spanish  doctors,  admits  that  the
Visigoths  of  Spain  indulged  their  subjects  at  first  with  the  enjoyment  of
the  Roman  law,  but  at  length  they  composed  a  code  of  civil  and  crimi-
nal jurisprudence,  which  superseded  those  foreign  institutions.  Ot6-
ban's  History  qftke  Roman  Empire,  vol.  vi.  378.


Lee.  LIIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  491

The  better, and  the  prevailiDg  opinion,  is,  that  the  origin
of  the  feudal  system  is  essentially  to  be  attributed  to  the  nor-


On  the  other  baod,  tbe  Tbeodosian  code,  and  the  books  of  the  juris-
consults, authorized  by  that  code,  were  tbe  law  of  Gaul  when  it  was
conquered  by  tbe  Visigoths,  Burgundiana,  and  Franks ;  and  those  laws
continued  to  be  almost  universally  observed  under  the  kings  of  the  first
race,  and  tbe  Breviarium  contributed  to  preserve  the  knowledge  and
use  of  the  Roman  law  among  the  West-Goths.  But  eventually  the  use
of  the  Roman  law  was  interdicted  in  the  West-Gothic  empire.  The
Emperor  Charlemagne,  in  the  year  788,  caused  tbe  Theodosian  code  to
be  transcribed  from  the  abridgment  of  it  in  the  edition  of  Alaric,  king
of  the  Visigoths  ;  and  that  abridgment  of  the  code,  which  is  sometimes
called  the  Anian  Breviary,  or  tbe  Lex  Jtomana  of  the  Visigoths,  was
the  only  one  from  which  a  knowledge  of  the  civil  law  was  gained  by
the  jurists  of  Gaul,  prior  to  the  recovery  of  the  Pandects.  Hiatoire  du
Droit  Francois,  par  VAbhe  Fleury,  ch.  6  and  11.  The  Breoiariwn
Aniani,  so  called  after  Anian,  tbe  first  minister  of  Alaric,  was  publish-
ed at  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  by  order  of  Alaric,  and  it  was
compiled  essentially  from  the  Theodosian  code,  and  partly  from  the
codes  of  Gregorios  and  Hermogenes,  and  tbe  writings  of  Roman  juris-
consults ;  and  it  was,  in  its  turn,  superseded  by  the  more  popular  and
vigorous  doctrines  of  the  feudal  system.  Its  poverty  is  incredible,  says
Savigny,  when  viewed  in  connexion  with  the  rich  materials  from  which
it  was  formed.  There  is  no  doubt  that  villenage,  or  the  servitude  of
the  globe,  existed  in  the  Homan  provinces  before  the  German  con-
quests. This  appears  from  the  contents  of  tbe  code  De  AgricolU^  et
CensitU,  et  Colonu.  Code,  lib.  ii.  tit.  47 ;  and  Montesquieu  has  justly
and  sagaciou&Iy  inferred,  even  from  the  laws  of  tbe  Burgundians,  that
preedial  servitude  existed  in  Gaul  before  it  was  invaded  by  those  barba-
rians. Etprit  des  Loix,  liv.  xxx.  ch.  10.  But  this  humble  service
bore  no  resemblance  to  grants  by  military  chiefs  <o  their  free-born  sol-
diers and  companions,  on  condition  of  rendering  future  military  service.
M.  Savigny,  in  his  History  of  the  Roman  Law  during  the  Middle
Ages,  vol.  i.  (translated  from  German  by  E.  Caibcart,)  contends,  from
a  full  examination  of  original  documents,  that  tbe  Roman  law  was  kept
up  after  tbe  German  conquests,  by  the  aid  of  Roman  judges,  and  the
former  inhabitants  in  the  provinces  continued  in  the  possession  of  their
personal  freedom  and  property  to  a  considerable  degree.  They  pre-
served their  separate  manners  and  laws,  and  there  arose  a  system  of
persomd  rights  and  laws. The  Roman  and  bis  German  conqueror  re-


492  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pari  VI.

ihem  Gothic  conquerors  of  the  Roman  em|Hre»  It  was  part
of  their  military  policy,  and  devised  by  them  as  the  most  ef-
fectual means  to  secure  their  conquests.  The  chieftain,  as
head  or  representative  of  his  nation,  alloted  portions  of  the
conquered  lands,  in  parcels,  to  his  principal  follov^ers,  and
they,  in  their  turn,  gave  smaller  parcels  to  their  sub-tenants
or  vassals,  and  all  were  granted  under  the  same  condition  of
fealty  and  military  service.*  The  rudiments  of  the  feudal
law  have  been  supposed,  by  many  modem  feudists,  to  have
existed  in  the  usages  of  the  ancient  Germans,  as  they  were
studied  and  described  by  Ceesar  and  Tacitus.* But  there


aided  in  the  aame  city  or  place,  each  ooder  bis  own  lawi*  It  often  hap-
pened, aaid  Bishop  Agpbard,  in  his  letter  to  Liouis  le  Debonnaire,  that
fire  men,  each  under  a  difierent  law,  might  be  found  walking  or  sitting
together.  Atfirst,  only  two  laws  were  admitted:  thelawof  thevicloffv^
which  was  pioperly  a  territorial  law,  and  the  law  of  the  Yanqnished
provincials,  which  was  personal.  In  process  of  time,  the  laws  of  other
German  races  oonqnered  by  the  Franks,  were  acknowledged  along  with
the  laws  of  the  victor,  and  of  the  yanqnished  Romans.  In  the  Bnrgun*
dian  collection  of  laws,  it  was  declared  Uiat  InUr  Romanot^  Romanii
iegibut  pr€Bcipimu»  judicari.  Ibid,  vol.  i.  100. 103.  With  the  Bor-
gundians,  the  Roman  lands  were  divided  between  the  Burgnndians  and
Romans.  The  former  took  half  of  the  house  and  two  thirds  of  the  cul-
tivated lands,  and  one  third  of  the  bondsmen.  The  West-Goths  also
deprired  the  Romans,  by  allotment  or  partition,  of  two  thirds  of  their
lands.  Rid.  p.  279.  283.  In  Italy,  the  East-Goths,  under  Odoacer,
took  one  third  of  the  land.  Ibid.  p.  315,  316.  But  the  Lombards,
who  succeeded  to  the  Greek  dominion  in  Italy,  took  only  one  third  of  the
produce  of  the  Roman  estates,  and  the  Romans  were  apportioned  among
the  Lombards  as  their  hotpites^  or  guests,  and  were  chargeable  with
the  above  tribute.  M.  Savigny  insists  Uiat  the  Roman  civil  institationa
in  the  provincial  cities  were  generously  allowed  by  the  Burgnndians,
West-Goths,  Franks,  and  Lombards,  to  be  retained  by  the  vanquished.
Ibid.  387—434.

a  Craig's  Jiu  FeudaUy  lib.  L  Di^.  iv.  sec.  4.  De  Fntdorum  Otp-
gins  e«  Progreuu.

b  Sir  Henry  Spelman  on  FeudM  and  T^ntiret-dy  KniglU  Service^  ch*
2. Grolttif ,  De  Jure  Belii^  ei  Padt,  lib.  i.  ch.  3,  sec.  23. Wrighi


Lee.  UlL]  Of*  REAL  PROPERTY.  493

could  not  have  been  any  thing  more  among  the  ancient  Ger-
mans, than  the  manners  and  state  of  property  fitted  and  pre-
pared for  the  introduction  of  the  feudal  tenures.  Land,  with
them,  was  not  subject  to  individual  ownership,  but  belonged
as  common  property  to  the  community,  and  portions  of  it
were  annually  divided  among  the  members  of  each  respec*
tive  tribe,  according  to  rank  and  dignity**  The  German  na-
tions beyond  the  Rhine  and  the  Danube,  prescribed  limits  to
the  march  of  the  Roman  legions ;  and  while  the  latter  suc-
cessfully established  the  government,  arts,  institutions,  and
laws  of  their  own  country,  in  Spain,  Gaul,  and  Britain,  the
free  and  martial  Germany  resented  every  such  atteibpt,  and
preserved  unimpaired  their  native  usages,  fierce  manners,  and
independent  geniua*


cm  Tenures i  ch.  i.  p.  6,  7.  Sullivan  on  Feudal  Law^  lee.  iii.  Dal*
rympU*e  Essay  on  Feudal  Property  ch.  i.  Hie  corUradus  (eciliceC
feudalis)  propritu  est  Oermanicarum  Qentium,  neque  usquam  uivemftir,
nisi  ubi  Ghvumi  sedes  posuerunL  This  is  the  language  of  Grotius,
aod  that  of  Craig  is  (o  the  same  effect :  Hasc  sunt  juris  feudalis  prima
cunalnUa,  heecfeudarum  infantia  ab  usu  et  eonsuetudine/erocissimarum
gentium,  qwz  ab  Aquilone  in  Ramanum  orbem  incurrerant,  primwn
nata  el  iniroducta.  Jus  Feudale,  1. 4,  5.  In  a  few  passages  of  Caesar
aod  Tacitus,  cooceroiog  the  customs  of  the  Germaos,  oiay  be  sceo,
says  Dr.  SuUivao,  the  old  feudal  law,  aud  all  its  original  parts,  ia  em-
bryo.

u  Casar,  De  Bel.  Oal.  b.  6. Tadtus,  Jdor.  Qer.  ch.  5.  1 1.  26.

b  Velleius  Pater,  b.  2,  ch.  117, 118.  It  was  their  custom,  said  the
Germans  to  Julius  Ceesar,  delivered  down  to  them  from  their  ancestors,
to  oppose,  not  to  implore,  whoever  made  war  upon  them.  Ccesar,  De
BeL  Oal.  4.  6.  The  German  tribes  had  national  institutions  belbra
their  conquests,  aod  they  were  societies  of  freemen,  who  possessed,  in
their  collective  capacity,  all  powers  legislative  and  judicial.  The  no-
bles, as  to  power,  were  merely  freemen.  The  land  was  divided  into
districts,  and  the  judicial  power  was  in  all  the  freemen  of  the  district,
and  the  Count  presided  at  the  public  meetings,  and  commanded  the
tribes  in  war.  The  other  classes,  distinct  from  the  freemen,  were  bond-
men and  slaves.  Savigny*s  History  of  the  Boman  Ltno  durit^  tka
JUiddle  Agest  vol.  i.  cfa.  4.


494  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pan  VI,

The  traces  of  the  feudal  policy  were  first  distinctly  per-
ceived amoDg  the  Franks,  Burgundians  and  Lombards,  after
they  had  invaded  the  Roman  provinces. They  generaUy
permitted  the  Roman  institutions  to  remain  in  the  cities  and
towns,  but  they  claimed  a  proportion  of  the  land  and  daves
of  the  provincials,  and  brought  their  own  laws  and  usages
with  them.* The  crude  codes  of  the  barbarians  were  re-
duced to  writing  after  they  had  settled  in  their  new  conquests,
and  they  supplanted,  in  a  very  considerable  degree,  the  Ro-
man laws.* The  conquered  lands  which  were  appropriated
by  the  military  chiefs  to  their  faithful  followers,  had  the  con-
dition of  future  military  service  annexed,  and  this  was  the
origin  of  fiefs  and  feudal  tenures. The  same  class  of  persons
who  had  been  characterized  as  volunteers  or  companions  in
Germany,  became  loyal  vassals  under  the  feudal  grants.*

These  grants,  which  were  first  called  benefices,  were,  in
their  origin,  for  life,  or  perhaps  only  for  a  term  of  years.'


a  The  barbariao  conquerors  of  Gaul  and  Italy  generously  allowed
erery  man  to  elect  by  what  lanr  be  would  be  governed.  Esprit  det
Loix,  b.  28,  ch.  2.  Hallam  on  the  Middle  Agee^  vol.  i.  83.  But  Sa-
▼igny  insists  that  the  law  by  wbicb  every  man  was  to  be  governed,  was
determined  by  birtb,  and  not  by  election  or  free  choice,  and  he  enters
into  an  elaborate  and  critical  discussion  of  the  point.  Hittory  of  the
Roman  LaiOy  vol.  i.  134 — 150.

b  Eeprit  dee  LoiXy  b.  2Q,paisim.  Ibid.  b.  30,  cb.  6,  7.  9.  Montes-
quieu  has  given  a  very  interesting  account  of  the  institutions  and  cha-
racter of  the  laws  of  the  northern  nations,  which  they  introduced  and
established  in  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  and  the  struggle  which  those
laws  and  usages  maintained  with  the  provincial  laws  of  the  Romans.
See  also  Spenne't  Inquiry,  b.  3,  c.  2,  3.

c  Esprit  dee  Loix^  b.  3,  c.  16.

d  Hallam  on  the  Jdiddle  Ages,  vol.  i.  89,  insists,  in  opposition  to
roost  of  the  writers  on  the  feudal  system,  that  these  beneficiary  grants
were  never  precarious  and  at  will.  He  controverts,  on  (his  point,  the
position  of  Craig,  Spelman,  Du  Gauge,  Montesquieu,  Mably,  Robert-
son, and  all  the  other  feudists.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  Lord  Ch.  B.
Gilbert,  in  his  lYealise  on  Tenures^  p.  2.  8,  considered  feuds  to  have
beeo  originally  for  life.


Lee.  UlL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  495

The  vassal  had  a  right  to  use  the  land,  and  take  the  proGts,
and  he  was  bound  to  render  in  return  such  feudal  duties  and
services  as  belonged  to  a  military  tenure.  The  property  of
the  soil  remained  in  the  lord  from  whom  the  grant  was  re-
ceived. The  right  to  the  soil,  and  to  the  profits  of  the  soil,
were  regarded  as  separate  and  distinct  rights.  This  distinc-
tion continued  when  feuds  became  hereditary.  The  king  or
lord  had  the  dontiniu7n  directum^  and  the  vassal,  or  feuda-
tory, the  dominium  utile  ;  and  there  was  a  strong  analogy
between  lands  held  by  feudal  tenure,  and  lands  held  in  trust,
for  the  trustee  has  the  techniced  legal  title,  but  the  cestui  que
trust  reaps  the  profits.  The  leading  principle  of  feudal  te-
nures, in  the  original  and  genuine  character  of  feuds,  was
the  condition  of  rendering  military  service.  Prior  to  the  in-
troduction of  the  feudal  system,  lands  were  allodial,  and  held
in  free  and  absolute  ownership  in  like  manner  as  personal
property  was  held.  Allodial  land  was  not  suddenly,  but  very
gradually  supplanted  by  the  law  of  tenures,  and  some  centu-
ries elapsed  between  the  first  rise  of  these  feudal  grants  and
their  general  establishment."

They  were  never  so  entirely  introduced  as  to  abolish  all
vestiges  of  allodial  estates.  Considerable  portions  of  land  in
continental  Europe  continued  allodial,  and  to  this  day,  in
some  parts  of  it,  the  courts  presume  lands  to  be  allodial  until
they  are  shown  to  be  feudal,  while,  in  other  parts,  they  pre-
sume the  lands  to  be  feudal  until  they  are  shown  to  be  allo-
dial*


a  Hallam,  vol.  i.  97.  112,  says,  that  five  ceotories  elapsed  before
allodial  estates  bad  giren  way,  aod  feuds  had  attained  to  maturity  ;
and  be  considers  that  (be  establisfannent  of  feuds  on  the  continent  was
essentially  confined  (o  the  dominions  of  Charlemagne,  and  (bat  (hey
bad  not  great  influence,  either  in  the  peninsula  or  among^  the  Baltic
powers*

b  Voet,  in  bis  DigruHo  de  Feudii^  sec.  4.  Com,  ad  Pond,  lib.  38,
aays,  that  if  it  be  uncertain  whether  an  estate  be  feudal  or  allodial,  the
presumption  is  in  favour  of  its  being  allodial, as  being  the  free  and  na(u-


496  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Pan  VL

The  precise  time  when  benefices  became  hereditary,  is  un-
certain. They  began  to  be  hereditary  in  the  age  of  Charle-
magne, who  facilitated  the  conversion  of  allodial  into  feudal
estates.*  The  perpetuity  of  fiefs  was  at  last  established  by  a
general  law,  which  allowed  fie6,  in  imitation  of  allodial  es-
tates, to  descend  to  the  children  of  the  possessor.^  The  per-
petuity of  fiefs  was  established  earlier  in  France  than  in  Ger-
many ;  but  throughout  the  continent  it  appears  they  had  be-
come hereditary,  and  accompanied  with  the  right  of  primo-
geniture, and  all  the  other  incidents  peculiar  to  feudal  govern-
ments, long  before  the  era  of  the  Norman  conquest^ The


nd  state  of  tbiogt.  And  in  Germ&oy  allodial  estates  are  prevalent  eren
to  this  day.  {Heinec,  Elem,  Jur.  Germ.  torn.  vi.  230^231.)  The
feudal  tenures  and  seirices  existed  in  France  down  to  tbe  period  of  the
late  reToltttioQ ;  but  in  those  parts  of  France  g^yemed  by  U  droU  eerU,
all  lands  were  presumed  to  be  allodial  until  tbe  contrary  was  shown  ;
while  in  tbe  pays  couiwniers  tbe  rule  was,  that  there  was  no  land  with-
out a  lord,  and  those  who  pretended  their  lands  were  free  were  bound
to  prove  it  {lh$t,  au  DroU  JFVancaiiy  par  Argou^  torn.  i.  195.)  But
now,  in  France,  the  feudal  law,  with  all  its  rights  and  incidents,  is  abo-
lished, as  being  incompatible  with  freedom  and  social  order.  TouUlkr^
DroU  Ciml  FrancaiSy  torn.  iii.  64. Ibid.  torn,  t'u  192.

a  Craig,  Jus  Feudale,  lib.  i.Dieg.  4,  sec.  10.  The  Abby  de  Mably,
in  his  Observations  sur  FHisL  de  France^  b.  2,  cb.  5,  note  3,  says,  that
Louis  le  Debonnaire,  tbe  son  and  successor  of  Charlemagne,  first  ren-
dered fiefs  hereditary  in  France ;  but  a  much  greater  authority  says,
that  hereditary  benefices  existed  under  tlie  first  race  of  French  kings,
or  before  Pepin,  the  father  of  Charlemagne.  Ilallam  on  the  Middle
Ages,  Tol.  i.  91.

b  This  was  by  a  capitulary  of  Charles  the  Bald,  A.  D.  877.  Esprit
des  LoiXy  b.  3 1 ,  c.  25.

e  Craig,  in  his  Jus  FeudalSy  lib.  i.  Dieg*  4,  De  Feudorum  Origins
et  ProgressUf  has  given  an  interesting  summary  of  tlie  history  of  feuds.
He  traces  them  from  their  infancy,  when  they  were  precarious,  or  at
will,  to  their  youth,  when  they  were  for  life,  or  descended  to  the  sons
cmly,  between  the  year  660  and  the  ascension  of  Charlemagne,  in  the  year
600 ;  and  to  their  advancement  towards  maturity  under  the  reign  of  the
Emperor  Conrad  II.,  when  they  descended  to  grand-children  and  to


Lee.  LIII*]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  497

right  of  primogeniture,  and  preference  of  maids  in  the  line  of
succession,  became  maxims  of  inheritance  an  pursuance  of
the  original  military  policy  of  the  feudal  system.  It  was  the
object  of  these  rules  to  preserve  the  fee  entire  and  undivided,
and  to  have  at  all  times  a  vassal  competent,  from  his  sex  and
age,  to  render  the  military  services  which  might  be  required.
The  practice  of  subinfeudations,  or  arriere  fiefs^  by  the
higher  ranks  of  feudal  vassals,  grew  with  the  growth  of  te-
nures, and  they  were  created  on  the  same  condition  of  military
service  by  the  inferior  vassals  to  their  immediate  lords.  The
feudal  governments  gradually  assumed  the  appearance  of
combinations  of  military  chieftains,  in  a  regular  order  of  sub-,
ordination,  but  loosely  connected  with  each  other,  and  feebly
controlled  by  the  monarch,  or  federal  head.

It  would  appear,  at  first  view,  to  be  very  extraordinary,
that  such  a  free  and  rational  species  of  property  as  allodial,
and  which  was  well  calculated  to  meet  the  natural  wants  of


brothers  id  the  case  of  paternal  feuds — infeudo  patemo^  et  non  infeudo
novUer  acquisUo,  The  last  step  in  the  advancing  progress  of  feuds,
was  when  they  were  clothed  with  the  general  attributes  of  hereditary
estates.  See  also  Consuetudineg  Feudorum,  b.  1,  tit.  1  and  8 ;  b.  2,  tit.
1  ] .  Esprit  de$  Loix,  b.  3 1 ,  ch.  28, 29.  3  K  32.  InH.  au  Droit  Fran-
caiSj  par  Argou,  torn.  i.  b.  2,  ch.  2,  Det  Fiefs,  Hallam  on  Vie  State  of
Europe  during  the  Mddle  Ages,  vol.  i.  91.  96.  The  Book  of  Fiefs,
under  the  title  of  Consuetudines  Feudorum^  is  supposed  to  have  been
compiled  by  two  Mifaoesc  lawyers,  A.  D.  1 170,  from  the  law  of  Hefs
in  Lombardy  ;  but  Voet,  in  his  Digressio  de  Feudis,  sec.  2,  says,  that
it  is  uncertain  who  were  the  authors  of  the  collection.  This  code  of
feudal  law  is  usually  annexed  to  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis,  and,  there-
fore, conveniently  accessible  to  the  American  lawyer.  It  is  the  source
from  which  modern  lawyers  and  historians  have  drawn  much  of  their
knowledge  of  the  feudal  jurisprudence  of  continental  Europe.  Mr.
Butler  says,  it  attained  more  authority  in  the  courts  of  justice  than
any  other  compilation,  and  was  taught  classically  in  most  of  the  acade-
mies of  Italy  and  Germany.  It  has  justly,  according  to  Craig,  the
force  and  authority  of  law,  by  the  consent  of  almost  all  nations— ex
consensu  pene  omnium  gentium.

Vol.  m.  63


498  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

iodividuab,  and  the  exigencies  of  society,  should  ever,  in
any  one  instance,  have  been  voluntarily  laid  aside,  or  ex-
changed for  a  feudal  tenure.  As  a  general  rule,  the  allodial
proprietor  had  the  entire  right  and  dominion.  He  held  of  no
superior  to  whom  he  owed  homage,  or  fealty,  or  miUtary  ser-
vice. His  estate  was  deemed  subservient  to  the  purposes  of
commerce.  It  was  alienable  at  the  will  of  the  owner.*  It
was  a  (dedge  to  the  king  for  the  good  behaviour  of  the  sub-
ject, and  was  liable  to  forfeiture  for  crimes  against  the  state.
It  was  a  security  to  individuals  for  the  performance  of  private
contracts,  and  might  be  taken  and  sold  for  debt.  It  passed
to  all  the  children  equally  by  inheritance.  In  these  respects
allodial  estates  were  the  very  reverse  of  lands  held  by  a  feu-


a  The  term  allodial  is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  oi,  which  ng-
nified  integer,  aod  ocf,  which  sig^nified  eUUue,  or  poiseeeio  ;  so  that  al-<N/,
or  aUodxwoiy  signified  vniegra  posMesno,  or  absolute  doQiinioo.  Thi«
etymology  of  the  word,  Dr.  Gilbert  Stuart  says,  was  commuDtcated  to
him  by  a  learned  Scots  judge.  (ShtarVe  Vievf  of  Society  in  Europe,  p.
205.)  Whether  this  idea  be  well  founded,  or  bo  merely  ingenious,  (for
Dr.  Robertson,  in  his  yiew  of  Society,  prefixed  to  his  history  of  Charles
v.,  note  8,  quotes  a  German  glossary  which  makes  cUlodium  to  be  com-
pounded of  the  German  particle  an,  and  lot,  i.  e.  land  obtained  by  lot,)
it  at  least  correspond*  with  the  character  of  allodial  estates.  Mr.
Crabb,  in  his  History  of  the  Engliih  Law,  (p.  1 1 .)  gives  another  origin
of  aUodium,  He  says  it  was  derived  from  a  privative,  and  lode,  or
leude,  a  vassal,  that  is,  without  vassalage.  Mr.  Hallam  says,  that  allo-
dial lands  are  commonly  opposed  to  beneficiary  or  feudal,  and  in  that
sense  the  word  continually  occurs  in  ancient  laws  and  documents.  But
it  sometimes  stands  simply  for  an  estate  of  inheritance,  and  hereditary
fiefii  are  frequently  termed  allodia.  See  his  View  of  the  Slate  of  £«-
rope  during  the  Middle  Ages,  (vol.  i.  80,)  a  work  which  appears  to  be
equally  admirable  for  vigour  of  mind,  for  profound  research,  for  manly
criticism,  and  for  the  spirit  of  freedom.  In  the  French  law,  FranC'
aleu  signifies  allodial  land,  or  an  estate  entirely  free,  and  not  holdeu
of  any  superior,  and  wholly  exempt  from  aU  seiguorial  rights  and
services.  Inst,  au  Droit  Francois,  par  Argou,  tom.  i.  193.  Alio-
dium  est  proprietas  qwz  a  niUlo  recognoscitur.  Ferriere's  Diet.  tit.
Franc^Ueu.


Lee.  LIIl.]  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  499

dal  tenure.  Land  under  that  servitude  was  locked  up  from
comroerce,  and  from  that  control  over  it  by  the  owner,  which
13  so  necessary  in  the  intercourse  and  business  of  social  life.
But  it  appears  to  be  well  ascertained,  that  the  feudal  policy
was  gradually  adopted  throughout  Europe,  after  the  over-
throw of  the  western  empire,  upon'the  principle  of  self  pre-
servation. The  turbulent  state  of  society,  consequent  upon
the  violent  fall  of  that  empire,  and  the  want  of  regular  go-
vernment competent  to  preserve  peace  and  maintain  order
and  justice,  encouraged  and  recommended  the  feudal  a«ocia-
lion.  A  feudal  lord  and  his  vassals,  connected  by  the  mu*
tual  obligation  of  protection  and  service,  acted  in  concert  and
with  efficacy.  The  strength  and  spirit  of  these  private  com-
binations made  amends  for  the  weakness  of  the  civil  magis-
trate. A  proud  and  fierce  feudal  chief  was  sure  to  revenge
any  injury  offered  to  himself  or  any  of  his  dependants,  by
the  united  force  of  this  martial  combination.  Much  higher
compositions  were  exacted,  even  by  law  and  in  the  courts  of
justice,  for  injuries  to  vassals,  than  to  allodial  proprietors.'
They  were,  in  some  measure,  in  the  condition  of  aliens  or
outlaws,  in  the  midst  of  society ;  and  the  feudal  tenants,  uni-
ted by  regular  subordination  under  a  powerful  chieftain,  had
the  same  advantage  over  allodial  proprietors,  as  has  been  just-
ly observed  by  an  eminent  historian,*  which  a  disciplined
army  enjoys  over  a  dispersed  multitude ;  and  were  enabled  to
commit,  with  impunity,  all  injuries  upon  their  defencdess
neighbours.  Allodial  proprietors,  being  thus  exposed  to  vio-
lence, without  any  adequate  legal  protection,  were  forced  to


a  Monleaquieu,  in  his  accoant  of  the  changes  of  allodial  into  feudal
eatates,  says  it  was  the  privilege  of  a  vassal  of  the  king,  by  the  Salio
and  rtpuarian  laws,  to  pay  600  sous  for  tbo  murder  of  a  vassal,  and  200
sous  for  killing  a  freeman  or  allodial  proprietor,  whether  Frank  or  Bar-
barian, and  only  100  sous  for  killing  a  Roman !  Etprit  de»  Loixj  b.
31,cb.  8.

b  Hvm^9  Hittary  ofEngUmdy  appendiz>  ii.


600  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

fly  for  shelter  within  the  enclosure  of  the  feudal  association.
They  surrendered  their  lands  to  some  powerful  chief,  paid
him  the  reverential  rites  of  homage  and  fealty,  received  back
their  lands  under  the  burdensome  services  of  a  feudal  tenure,
and  partook  of  the  security  of  vassals,  at  the  expense  of  the
dignity  of  freemen.  Allodial  estates  became  extinguished  in
this  way  and  from  these  causes,  and  the  feudal  system  gra-
dually spread,  and  was  extended  over  the  principal  kingdoms
of  Europe.^

A  state  of  anarchy,  according  to  Mr.  Hallam,  was  the
cause,  rather  than  the  effect,  of  the  general  establishment  of
feudal  tenures.  The  original  policy  of  the  system  was  gene-
rous and  reasonable,  for  it  had  in  view  public  defence  and
private  protection.  Very  able  and  eloquent  champions  of  the
cause  of  civil  liberty,  have  admitted,  that  the  feudal  system
was  introduced  and  cherished  by  the  spirit  of  freedom ;  and
that  it  had  a  tendency,  before  the  original  design  of  it  was
perverted  and. abused,  tp  promote  good  faith,  to  purify  public
morals,  and  to  refine  and  elevate  social  sympathies.*

But  this  same  loyal  association,  which  was  so  auspicious
in  its  beginnings  as  in  a  great  degree  to  destroy  the  value  of
allodial  property,  degenerated  in  process  of  time,  and  became


a  Esprit  des  Loix,  b.  31,  ch.  8.  Robertson's  History  of  Charlu
v.,  vol.  i.  note  8,  annexed  to  bis  View  of  Society.  Haltam's  View  of
Society  in  Vie  J4iddle  Ages,  vol.  i.  cb.  2,  p.  93,  94.  StuarVs  View  of
Society  in  EuropCy  b.  1 ,  ch.  2,  sec.  3.  Spence's  Inquiry ^  p,  346.  This
last  writer  abows,  from  tbe  capitularies  of  Cliarlemag^ne,  tbat  in  his  time
there  was  scarcely  a  person  in  bis  widely  extended  empire,  who  was
not  the  vassal  either  of  tbe  monarch,  or  of  some  bishop ,  or  count,  or
other  powerful  individual.

6  Dr.  SttuxrVs  View^  b,  2,  ch.  1,  sec.  1.  Hallam^  vb,  sup.  vol.  f.
99.  178, 179.  Sir  Henry  Spelmao,  in  his  Treatise  of  Feuds  tmd  Te-
nures^ ch.  3,  viewed  tbe  feudal  law  in  tbe  same  light.  <<  It  was,"  he
observes,  *^  carried  by  tbe  Lombards,  Saliques,  Franks,  Saxons,  and
Goths,  into  every  kingdom,  and  conceived  to  be  tbe  most  absolute  law
for  supporting  the  royal  estate,  preserving  union, confirming'  peace,  and
rappressing  robbery,  incendiaries,  and  rebellions."


Lee.  LIIl.}  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  601

tbe  parent  of  violence  and  anarchy,  promoted  private  wars,
and  led  to  a  system  of  the  most  grievous  oppression.  Ex-
cept in  England,  it  annihilated  the  popular  liberties  of  every
nation  in  which  it  prevailed,  and  it  has  been  tbe  great  effort
of  modern  times  to  check  or  subdue  its  claims,  and  recover
the  free  enjoyment  and  independence  of  allodial  estates.

(2.)  Of  the  history  of  feudal  tenures  in  England.

England  was  distinguished  above  every  part  of  Europe
for  the  universal  establishment  of  the  feudal  tenures.  There
is  no  presumption  or  admission  in  the  English  law,  of  the
existence  of  allodial  lands.  They  are  all  held  by  some  feu-
dal tenure.  There  were  traces  of  feudal  grants,  and  of  the
relation  of  lord  and  vassal,  in  the  time  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,
but  the  formal  and  regular  establishment  of  feudal  tenures  in
their  genuine  character,  and  with  all  their  fruits  and  services,
was  in  the  reign  of  William  the  Conqueror.^


a  The  ordiDaoces  of  William  tbe  NormaD,  establishing  tbe  feudal
tenure  of  lands,  to  be  held  jure  hereditaria  in  perpetuum,  are  quoted
as  authentic  by  tbe  most  learned  of  tbe  English  lawyers  ;  {Wright  on
Tenures,  p.  65  to  76.  Blacks.  Com,  vol.  ii.  p.  50,)  and  they  are  col-
lected in  Lombard' t  Archdionomia,  p.  170.  L.  L.  Conq.  Win.  I.,  ch.
52.  55.  Those  laws  purport  to  have  been  enacted,  per  commune  crni'
cUium  iotiiu  regni.

It  has  been  a  subject  of  great  dispute,  and  one  which  has  occasioned
the  most  laborious  investigations,  whether  feudal  tenures  were  in  use
among  the  Saxons.  This  is  to  us  a  question  of  no  moment,  and  it  is  no
where  any  thing  more  than  a  point  of  speculative  and  historical  ca-
riosity ;  but  even  in  that  view  it  may  command  the  attention  of  the
legal  antiquarian.  Though,  in  a  general  sense,  military  services  and
feuds  might  have  been  known  to  tbe  Anglo-Saxons,  yet  the  weight  of
authority,  even  in  opposition  to  such  names  as  Coke  and  Selden,  would
rather  seem  to  be  in  favour  of  the  conclusion,  that  hereditary  fiefs,  with
their  servitudes,  such  as  aid,  wardship,  marriage,  and  perhaps  relief,
(for  Sir  Henry  Spelman  and  Mr.  Hallam  differ  on  that  point,)  were
introduced  by  the  Conqueror.  Spelman  wrote  his  great  work  on
Feuds  and  Tenures  by  Knight  Servicey  to  refute  (he  argument  of  the


603  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

The  tenures  which  w^e  aulboritativety  established  in
Englaod,  iu  the  time  of  the  Conqueror,  were  principally  of


Iriah  jadges,  and  to  gopport  tbe  position  in  bis  G/Mfory,  that  fends  were
introduced  at  tbe  Norman  conquest,  and  be  insists  that  fends  were  not
hereditary  in  England  under  tbe  Saxon  dynasty.  He  declares,  that
there  is  not  a  single  charter  in  the  Saxon  tongue,  before  tbe  conquest,
in  which  any  feudal  word  is  apparently  expressed.  His  diacnssiao  of
the  general  question  is  distinguished  for  its  acuteness  and  research,  and
he  has  been  followed  in  his  opinion,  either  wholly  or  in  a  great  degree,
by  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  Sir  Martin  Wright,  Sir  William  Blackstonr,
and  Mr.  Butler.  To  these  great  authorities  may  be  added  the  equal
name  of  Mr.  Burke,  who,  in  bis  admirable  Abridgment  rf  EngliA
IliHaryy  b.  2,  cb.  7,  maintains  tbe  position,  that  the  Anglo-Saxons,  those
mthless  conquerors,  who  swept  beforo  them  the  laws,  language,  and
religion  of  the  ancient  BritcAs,  and  lived  in  savage  ignorance  amid  tbe
ruins  of  Roman  arts  and  magnificence,  knew  nothing  of  hereditary  fiefs,
or  any  thing  analogous  to  feudal  tenures.  Craig,  in  his  learned  and
elaborate  work  on  tbe  feudal  law,  is  equally  of  opinion  with  Spelman,
(and  he  preceded  Spelman  in  this  inquiry,)  that  tbe  feudal  law  was  first
introduced  into  England  by  William  the  Conqueror.  (Jut  FeudmU,
lib.  L IH^.  7.)

Mr.  Turner,  on  the  other  band,  in  bis  recent  HUtory  of  Ihe  AngU"
Saxmig^  throws  the  weight  of  bis  authority,  and  great  Saxon  learning,
into  the  opposite  scale.  He  says,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  tbe  most
essential  part  of  what  has  been  called  tbe  feudal  system,  actually  pre-
railed  among  tbe  Anglo-Saxons.  He  admits,  that  though  all  their
lands  were  charged  with  tbe  irinoda  neceuiUity  yet  that  the  military
service  (tbe  most  materia]  of  those  three  servitudes)  might  be  commuted
by  a  pecuniary  mujct,  and  lands  were  hereditary  without  primogeni-
ture. These  admissions  destroy  tbe  foree  of  bis  conclusion.  (Turner'*
SRMtory,  vol.  ii.  641,  542,  or  Appendix,  No.  4,  b.  6,  ch.  3.)  Mr.
Beeve  and  Mr.  Hallam  take  a  middle  course,  and  perceive,  in  the  de-
pendence in  which  free,  and  even  noble  tenants,  held  their  estates  of
other  subjects  under  the  Anglo-Saxon  constitution,  much  of  tbe  intrin-
sic character  of  the  feudal  relation,  tljough  in  a  less  mature  and  sys-
tematic shape  than  it  assumed  after  the  Norman  conquest.  (Reeve*
Hutery  of  the  English  Law,  vol.  i.  p.  9.  HalUm  en  the  Middle  Ages,
rd.  ii.  ch.  8,  part  1.)  It  would  be  presumption  in  me,  even  if  the  oc-
casion called  for  it,  to  attempt  much  discussion  of  such  a  question,  inas-
much as  I  have  no  means  of  access  to  original  documents. There  is


I«ee.  LIIl.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  503

two  kinds,  according  to  the  services  annexed. They  were
either  tenures  by  knight  service^  in  which  the  services,


ooe,  and  ooly  ooe  Saxon  moDumeDt  which  I  have  examiDed,  and  I
woold  suggest,  though  with  very  great  diffidence,  that  the  ADglo-Saxoo
laws,  as  collected  aod  traoslated  from  Saxon  into  Latin,  by  William
Lambard,  in  his  ArchaionMrniek^  (Whelock's  edit.  Cambridge,  1644,)
seem  to  show  sufficiently,  by  their  silence  on  the  topic  of  fends,  and  by
Che  general  tenor  of  their  provisions,  that  the  feudal  system  was  not  then
in  any  kind  of  force  or  activity. These  laws  are  the  erode  productioiM
of  a  semi-barbarous  race. Their  chief  objects  were,  (1.)  The  preser-
vation of  the  peace. (2.)  The  settling  the  rate  of  pecuniary  mulcts  or
compositions  for  all  sorts  of  crimes,  and  when  corporal  punishment  was
resorted  to,  the  prescription  was  cruel. (3.)  The  settling  the  ceremo-
nies of  religious  observances,  and  the  oaths  of  purgation  and  proof  in
judicial  trials. (4.)  The  regulation  of  the  fraternities  of  frank  pledges.
Those  laws  are  evidence,  however,  of  the  existence  and  great  extent  of
the  evils  of  pnedial  and  domestic  servitude ;  and  they  show,  also,  even
amidst  their  gross  superstitions,  numerous  indications  of  the  civiliciog
genius  of  Christianity,  and  the  effect  of  religious  discipline  and  restraint,
in  taming  savage  manners,  and  inculcating  upon  the  minds  of  a  rude
and  illiterate  people  the  obligations  of  peaco,  good  order,  and  justice.
As  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  contained  very  few  regulations  concerning
private  civil  rights,  it  has  been  supposed  that  those  rights  were  undtr
the  government  of  Roman  laws  remaining  with  tlie  original  natives.

It  is  worthy  of  observation,  and  goes  in  confirmation  of  tlie  conclu-
sion, that  the  English  law  of  feuds  was  essentially  of  Norman,  aod  not
of  Anglo-Saxon  origin,  that  allodial  lands  were  changed  into  feudal,
throughout  the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  and  the  feudal  structure  com-
pleted there,  about  the  same  time,  with  the  like  revolution  in  landed
property  in  England.  This  event  took  place  under  Malcolm  III.,  who
began  his  reign  A.  D.  1057.  Dalrymple's  Enay  on  the  History  of
Feudal  Property,  p.  20, 21.  Though  Craig  admits  that  the  feudal  law
was  unknown  in  Scotland  before  the  year  1000,  yet  be  1s  of  opinion
that  it  was  introduced  into  Scotland  before  it  was  used  in  England ;  and
be  insists  that  it  existed  in  Scotland,  with  the  incidents  of  wardship,
marriage,  and  relief,  some  time  before  the  conquest.  Jsu  Feudale^  lib.
u  Dieg.  8.

Another  question  arising  in  the  ancient  history  of  the  English  law
is,  whether  the  great  similarity  between  the  ancient  laws  of  England
aod  thoee  of  the  Dutcby  of  Normandy^  was  produced  by  the  exporta-


604  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

though  occasionally  uncertain,  were  altogether  of  a  military
nature,  and  esteemed  highly  honourable;  according  to  the
martial  spirit  of  the  times ;  or  they  were  tenures  by  socage^
in  which  the  services  were  defined  and  certain,  and  general-
ly of  a  praedial  or  pacific  nature.^  Tenure  by  knight  service,
in  addition  to  the  obligation  of  fealty  and  the  military  ser-
vice of  forty  days  in  a  year,  was  subject  to  certain  hard  con-
ditions. The  tenant  was  bound  to  afiford  aid  to  his  \orA  by
the  payment  of  money,  when  his  lord  stood  in  need  of  it,  on
certain  emergent  calls,  as,  when  he  married  his  daughter,
when  he  made  his  son  a  knight,  or  when  he  was  taken  pri-
soner. So,  when  a  tenant  died,  his  heir  at  law  was  obliged
to  pay  a  relief  to  the  lord,  being  in  the  nature  of  a  compen-
sation for  being  permitted  to  succeed  to  the  inheritance.  If
the  heir  was  under  age,  the  lord  was  entitled  to  the  wardship
of  the  heir,  and  he  took' to  himself  the  profits  of  the  land
during  the  minority.  Various  modes  were  devised  to  elude
the  hardships  of  this  guardianship  in  chivalry,  incident  to  the
tenure  by  knight  service.  The  lord  had  also  a  right  to  dis-
pose of  his  infant  ward  in  marriage,  and  if  the  Litter  re-
fused, he  or  she  forfeited  as  much  as  was  arbitrarily  assessed
for  the  value  of  the  match.  If  the  tenant  aliened  his  land,
he  was  liable  to  pay  a  fine  to  the  lord,  for  the  privilege  of


tion  of  the  Eng^ltsh  laws  iDto  NormaDdy,  or  the  importation  of  the  Nor-
man laws  into  England.  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  in  bis  History  of  the  Gdm-
mon  Lqw^  cb.  6,  will  not  allow,  as  Lord  Coke  had  refused  to  allow  be-
fore him,  that  the  English  took  their  laws  from  the  Norman  race,  and
he  insists  that  the  laws  of  Normandy  were,  in  the  greater  part  thereof,
borrowed  from  the  English.  He  appeals  to  the  Grand  C&uHumier  de
JVbrmafufte,  and  which,  he  says,  was  compiled  after  the  time  of  King
John.  This  venerable  code  of  Norman  laws  and  usages  is  interesting
to  those  persons  who  are  fond  of  the  study  of  legal  antiquities.  I  am
indebted  to  the  kindness  of  an  English  lawyer  for  the  possession  of  a
copy  of  the  work,  in  Norman  French,  witli  a  Latin  commentary,  neatly
printed  at  Rouen,  A.  D.  1539.
a  Wright  on  Tenuru,  139^142.


Ijec.  LIII.]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  605

selling. Lastly,  if  the  tenant  died,  without  leaving  an  heir
competent  ^o  perform  tlie  feudal  services,  or  was  convicted  of
treason  or  felony,  the  land  escheated  or  reverted  to  the  feu-
dal lord.* The  gieatest  part  of  the  lands  in  England  were
held  by  this  tenure  by  knight  service  ;  and  several  of  these
fruits  and  consequences  of  the  feudal  tenure,  belonged  also  to
tenure  in  socage. The  oppression  of  tlie  feudal  conditions  of
relief,  wardship  and  marriage,  was  enormously  severe  for
many  ages  after  the  Norman  conquest,  and  even  down  to  the
reign  of  the  Stuarts.  Upon  the  death  of  the  tenant  m  Capite^
bis  land  was  seized  by  the  crown,  and  an  inquisitio  post
mortem  taken  before  the  escheator,  stating  the  description
and  value  of  the  estate,  and  tlie  name  and  age  of  the  heir.
The  adult  heir  appeared  in  court  and  did  homage  to  the  king,
and  paid  his  relief  and  recovered  the  estate. If  the  heir  was
a  minor,  the  land  remained  in  wardship  until  he  was  of  age,
and  sued  out  his  writ  de  atate  probanda^  and  under  that
process  he  procured  his  release  from  wardship. The  sale  of
the  marriage  of  the  heir,  whether  male  or  female,  was  a
valuable  perquisite  to  the  king  or  his  grantee. The  ward
was  in  contempt  if  he  or  she  refused  the  proffered  match.
In  the  reign  of  Henry  II.,  the  crown  wards  were  inventoried


a  LUUetofC9  Tenures,  b.  2.  Wright  on  Tenures ^paetm.  2  Blacks,
Com.  cb.  5.  Mr.  HaHam^  vol.  i.  101 — 106,  vol.  ii.  23,  says,  that  re-
liefs, fines  apoD  alienation,  escheats,  and  aids,  were  feudal  incidents  be-
longing to  feuds,  as  established  on  the  continent  of  Europe ;  and  that
wardship  and  marriage  were  no  parts  of  the  grant  or  feudal  system,  but
were  introduced  into  England,  and,  perhaps,  invented  by  the  rapacious
feudad  aristocracy,  under  the  Norman  dynasty.  He,  however,  gives
instances  of  their  prevalence  afterwards  all  over  Europe.

The  Master  of  the  Rolls,  in  the  great  case  of  Burgess  v.  Wfaeate,
1  Eden's  Rep.  177,  says,  that  the  right  of  escheat  was  not  founded  on
want  of  an  heir,  but  of  a  tenant  to  perform  the  services,  and  that  the
words  had  been  used  promiscuously,  because  before  the  power  of  alien-
sution,  want  of  tenant  and  heir  was  the  same  thing,  for  at  the  death  of  the
ancestor,  none  but  the  heir  could  be  tenant.

Vol.  III.  C4


606  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

like  tbe  slaves  of  a  plantation,  and  according  to  the  assizes
of  Jerusalem,  the  matron  of  sixty  years  might  refuse  a  hus-
band without  incurring  the  penalties  of  a  contempt.'  The
abuses  of  the  feudal  connexion  took  place  equally  in  other
parts  of  Europe,  but  the  spirit  of  rapacity  met  with  a  more
steady  and  determined  resistance,  by  the  English  of  tbe
Saxon  blood,  than  by  any  other  people.  This  resistance
produced  the  memorable  national  compact  of  Magna  Char--
tUy  which  corrected  the  feudal  policy,  and  checked  many
grievances  of  the  feudal  tenures  ;  and  the  intelligence  and
intrepidity  of  the  House  of  Commons,  subsequent  to  the  era
of  the  great  charter,  enabled  the  nation  to  struggle  with  bet-
ter success  than  any  other  people  against  the  enormous  op-
pression of  tbe  system.

A  feoffment  in  fee,  did  not  originally  pass  an  estate  in  the
sense  we  now  use  it.  It  was  only  an  estate  to  be  enjoyed  as
a  benefice,  without  the  power  of  alienation,  in  prejudice  of
the  heir  or  the  lord ;  and  the  heir  took  it  as  an  usufructuary
interest,  and  in  default  of  heirs  the  tenure  became  extinct,
and  the  land  reverted  to  the  lord.  The  heir  took  by  pur-
chase, and  independent  of  the  ancestor,  who  could  not  alien,
nor  could  the  lord  alien  the  seignory  without  the  consent  of
the  tenant  This  restraint  on  alienation  was  a  violent  and
unnatural  state  of  things,  and  contrary  to  the  nature  and
value  of  property,  and  the  inherent  and  universal  love  of  in-
dependence. It  arose  partly  from  favour  to  the  heir,  and
partly  from  favour  to  the  lord,  and  the  genius  of  the  feudal
system  was  originally  so  strong  in  favour  of  restraint  upon
alienation,  that  by  a  general  ordinance  mentioned  in  the
Book  of  Fiefsf  the  hand  of  him  who  knowingly  wrote  a
deed  of  alienation,  ^vas  directed  to  be  struck  off.

The  first  step  taken  to  mitigate  tlie  severe  restriction  upon


a  Sullivan's  Lectures^  lee.  13. Harg.  n.  65  to  lib.  2.  Co.  LiU* Q.
jRevicto,  No.  77,  p.  59.
b  Lib.  2,  tit.  55.


Lee.  LIII.l  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  607

alieQation  of  the  feudal  estate,  was  the  power  of  alienatioa
by  the  tenant  with  leave  of  the  lord,  and  this  tended  to  leave
the  heir  dependent  upon  the  ancestor.  The  right  of  aliena-
tion was  first  applied  to  the  lands  acquired  by  the  tenant  by
purchase ;  and  Glanville  says,^  that  in  his  time,  it  was,  ge-
nerally speaking,  lawful  for  a  person  to  alien  a  reasonable
port  of  his  land  by  inheritance^  or  purchase,  and  if  he  had  no
heirs  of  his  body,  he  might  alien  the  whole  of  his  purchased
lands.  If,  however,  he  had  a  son  and  heir,  be  could  not  dis-
inherit him,  and  alien  the  whole  even  of  his  purchased  lands.
The  restraint  was  almost  absolute  when  the  tenant  was  in
by  descent,  and  quite  relaxed  when  he  was  in  by  purchase ;
and  there  was  no  distinction  on  this  subject,  whether  the  fief
was  held  by  a  military  or  socage  tenure.  The  free  aliena-
tion of  land  commenced  with  burgage  tenures,  and  was  dic-
tated by  the  genius  of  commerce/  The  next  variation  in
&vour  of  the  tenant  was  the  right  to  alien  without  the  lord's
license,  when  the  grant  was  to  him  and  his  heirs  and  assigns,
and  the  general  right  of  alienation  seems  to  have  been  great-
ly increased,  and  extensively  established,  in  the  age  of  Brae-
ton.*  The  tenant  gained  successively  the  power  of  aliena-
tion, if  the  grant  was  only  to  him  and  his  heirs  ;  and  the
power  to  charge,  or  encumber  the  land.  The  lord's  right
was  BtiU  further  affected  by  acts  of  Parliament,  and  judicial
determinations,  for  the  fee  was  made  subject  by  elegit  to  the
tenant's  debts,  and  also  by  process  under  the  statutes  mer-
chant and  staple.^  It  was  further,  and  as  early  as  the  reign
of  Edw.  III.,  made  subject  to  the  dower  of  the  wife.*  Subin-
feudation was  also  an  indirect  mode  of  transferring  the  fief,


a  B.  7,  eh.  1.

6  DalrympU's  Essay  on  Feudal  Property^  cb.  3,  sec.  1.
c  Braclon,  b.  2,  c.  6, 8cc.  4  and  Y;  cb.  6,  fo.  18,  b. ;  ch.  27,  sec.  1.
d  West,  H.  13  Edw,  I.  cb.  18  ;  aUo  13  Edw.  I.  De  JiJercaloribus,
znd  21  Edw.  III.
e  Bro.  tit.  Dower t  pi.  64.


SOB  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

and  resorted  to  as  an  artifice  to  elude  the  feudal  restraint  upon
alienation  ;  and  by  the  time  the  statute  of  Quia  Emptores^
18  Edw.  I.  was  enacted,  prohibiting  subinfeudations  to  ail
but  the  king's  vassals,  this  feudal  restraint  had  essentially
vanished,  and  the  policy  of  that  statute  was  to  recall  the  sta-
bility and  perpetuity  of  landed  estates.'

Successive  improvements  in  the  character  of  the  estate^
and  the  condition  of  the  tenabt,  greatly  relieved  the  nation
from  some  of  the  prominent  evils  of  the  feudal  investiture.
But  the  odious  badges  of  the  tenure  still  existed  ;  and  Lord
Bacon,  in  his  speech  at  a  conference  before  the  Lords,  on  be-
half of  the  Commons,  in  the  reign  of  James  L,  strongly  re-
commended, by  way  of  composition  with  the  crown,  the
abolition  of  wards  and  tenures,  as  having  become  troublesome
and  useless.* At  length,  upon  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.,


«  Sir  Thomas  Clarke,  the  Master  of  the  Rolls,  in  Burgess  v.  Wbeate,
1  Eden' 9  Rep.  191,  has  given  a  short,  but  clear  view,  of  the  progress
of  the  feudal  estate  in  its  recovery  from  the  feudal  restraint  of  noo*
alienation.  See  also  Mr.  Butler's  note  77  to  lib.  3.  Co.  Lilt.  V.  No.
6, 7, 8,  9,  10,  and  1 1  ;  and  see  especially  the  able  and  learned  history
of  the  alienation  of  land,  in  Dalrymple's  Essay  on  Feudal  Property,
ch.  3.

b  Lord  Bacon's  Works^  vol.  iii.  359.  It  appears,  by  the  directions
given  by  order  of  James  I.  to  the  Master  of  the  Wards,  that  the  king,
while  he  sought  to  restrain  the  abuses,  set  a  high  value  on  his  preroga-
tive rights  of  wardship  and  marriage.  There  was  a  yearly  inquisition
directed  to  be  taken  by  persons  of  credit,  for  each  county,  of  the  pei^
Bons  and  lands  in  wardship,  to  be  certified  and  returned  into  the  exche-
quer ;  and  though  Lord  Bacon  declared  that  the  policy,  spirit,  and
utility  of  the  military  tenures  was  entirely  gone,  yet  it  appears  that  the
people  were  grievously  oppressed  by  *<  feudaries,  and  other  inferior
ministers  of  like  nature,  by  colour  of  the  king's  tenures;"  and  the  royal
instructions  were,  that  "  the  vexations  of  escheators  and  feudaries
be  repressed,  which  upon  bo  substantial  ground  of  record  vex  the  coun-
try with  inquisitions  and  other  extortions ;  and  that  the  Master  of
Wards  take  special  care  to  receive  private  information  from  gentlebien
of  quality  and  conscience  in  every  shire,  touching  these  abuses."  So
late  as  the  reign  of  Charles  I.,  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  as grantee  of


JLec.  LIIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  609

tenure  by  knight  service,  with  all  its  giievous  incidents,  was
by  statute  abolished,  and  the  tenure  of  land  was,  for  the  most
part,  turned  into  free  and  common  socage,  and  every  thing
oppressive  in  that  tenure  was  also  abolished.  The  statute  of
12  Charles  11.  essentially  put  an  end  to  the  feudal  system
in  England,  although  some  fictions,  (and  they  are  scarcely
any  thing  more,)  founded  on  the  ancient  feudal  relation  and
dependence,  are  still  retained  in  the  socage  tenures.

(3.)  Of  the  doctrine  of  tenure  in  these  United  States.

Socage  tenure  denotes  lands  held  by  a  fixed  and  determin-
ate service,  which  is  not  military,  nor  in  the  power  of  the
lord  to  vary  at  his  pleasure.  It  was  the  certainty,  and  pacific
nature  of  the  service,  duty,  or  render,  which  made  this  spe-
cies of  tenure  such  a  safeguard  against  the  wanton  exactions
of  the  feudal  lords,  and  rendered  it  of  such  inestimable  value
in  the  view  of  the  ancient  English.  It  was  deemed  by  them
a  point  of  the  utmost  importance,  to  change  their  tenures  by
knight  service  into  tenure  by  socage.  Socage  tenures  are,
however,  of  feudal  extraction,  and  retain  some  of  the  leading
properties  of  feuds,  as  has  been  shown  by  Sir  Martin  Wright,
in  his  learned  treatise  on  tenures ;'  and  which  work  has
been  freely  followed  by  Sir  William  Blackstone,  in  his  per-
spicuous and  elegant,  and  we  may  truly  add,  masterly  dis-
quisitions on  the  feudal  law.  Most  of  tlie  feudal  incidents
and  consequences  of  socage  tenure,  were  expressly  abolished
in  New -York,  by  the  act  of  1787  ;  and  they  were  wholly
and  entirely  annihilated  by  the  New- York  Revised  Statutes^
as  has  been  already  mentioned.^  They  aie  also  abolished  by
statute  in  Connecticut ;  and  they  have  never  existed,  or  they


the  wardship  of  an  heiress,  extorted  jC  10,000  sterling  for  his  consent  to
a  marriage  on  every  account  desirable.  Lord  Bacon't  Worka^  vol.  iii.
364 — 368. Sullivan^  Lectures  on  Feudal  Law^  lee.  13.

a  P.  141  to  144.

b  St^ra^  p.  3*78.


510  OP  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

have  ceased  to  exist,  ia  all  esseotial  respects,  ia  every  other
state. The  only  feudal  fictions  and  services  which  can  be
presumed  to  be  retained  in  any  part  of  the  United  States,
consist  of  the  feudal  principle,  that  the  lands  are  held  of  some
superior  or  lord,  to  whom  the  obligation  of  fealty,  and  to  pay
a  determinate  rent,  are  due. The  act  of  New- York,  in
1787,  provided,  that  the  socage  lands  were  not  to  be  deemed
discharged  of  "  any  rents  certain,  or  other  services  incident,
or  belonging  to  tenure  in  common  socage,  due  to  the  people
of  this  state,  or  any  mean  lord,  or  other  person,  or  the  fealty
or  distresses  incident  thereunto." The  Revised  Statutes*
also  provide,  that  '^  the  abolition  of  tenures  shall  not  take
away  or  discharge  any  rents  or  services  certain,  which  at  any
time  heretofore,  have  been,  or  hereafter,  may  be,  created  or
reserved." The  lord  paramount  of  all  socage  land  was  none
other  than  the  people  of  the  state,  and  to  them,  and  them
only,  the  doty  of  fealty  was  to  be  rendered  ;  and  the  quit-
rents  which  were  due  to  the  king  on  all  colonial  grants,  and
to  which  the  people  succeeded  at  the  revolution,  have  been
gradually  diminished  by  commutation,  under  various  acts  of
the  legislature,  and  are  now  nearly,  if  not  entirely  extin-
guished.

In  our  endeavours  to  discover  the  marks  or  incidents  which
with  us  discriminated  socage  tenure  from  allodial  property,
we  are  confined  to  the  doctrine  of  fealty,  and  of  holding  of  a
superior  lord.  Feally  was  regarded  by  the  ancient  law  as
the  very  essence  and  foundation  of  the  feudal  association.
It  could  not  on  any  account  be  dispensed  with,  remitted,  or
discharged,  because  it  was  the  vinctdum  commune,  the
bond  or  cement  of  the  whole  feudal  policy.*  Fealty  was  the
same  as  Jidelitas,  It  was  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  lord,
and,  to  use  the  words  of  Littleton,^  when  a  freeholder  doth


a  JV*.  F.  Ren$ed  Sialuies,  toI.  i.  718,  sec.  4.
b  WrifffU  on  Tenures^  p.  35.  55.  138.  140.  145.
c  Sec.  91.


Lee.  LIIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  611

fealty  to  his  lord,  he  shall  lay  his  right  hand  upon  a  book,
and  shall  say,  "  Know  ye  this,  my  lord,  that  I  shall  be  faith-
ful and  true  unto  you,  and  faith  to  you  shall  bear,  for  the
lands  which  I  claim  to  hold  of  you,  and  that  I  shall  lawfully
do  to  you  the  customs  and  services  which  I  ought  to  do  at  the
terms  assigned  :  so  help  roe  God  and  his  saints."  This  oath
of  fealty  every  where  followed  the  progress  of  the  feudal  sys-
tem, and  created  all  those  interesting  ties  and  obligations  be-
tween the  lord  and  his  vassal,  which,  in  the  simplicity  of  the
feudal  ages,  they  considered  to  be  their  truest  interest  and
greatest  glory.  It  was  also  the  parent  of  the  oath  of  alle-
giance, which  is  exacted  by  sovereigns  in  modern  times.
The  continental  jurists  frequently  considered  homage  and
fealty  as  synonymous ;  but  this  was  not  so  in  the  English
law,  and  the  incident  of  homage  was  expressly  abolished  in
New-York  by  the  act  of  1787,  while  the  incident  of  fealty
was  as  expressly  retained.  Homage,  according  to  Littleton,
was  the  most  honourable  and  the  most  humble  service  of  re-
verence, that  a  Frank  tenant  could  make  to  bis  lord  ]  but  it
is  quite  too  abject  and  servile  a  ceremony  of  submission,  al-
legiance, and  reverence,  to  be  admissible  at  this  day.

Lands  held  by  socage  tenure,  (and  all  lands  granted  or  pa-
tented before  the  revolution  were  so  held  in  New- York  prior
to  1830,)  would  seem,  in  theory,  to  have  been  chargeable  with
this  oath  of  fealty ;  and  every  tenant,  whether  in  fee,  for  life,
or  for  years,  was,  by  the  English  law,  obliged  to  render  it
when  required,  as  being  an  indispensable  service,  due  to  the
lord  of  whom  he  held.  Fealty  was  at  common  law  deemed
inseparable  from  tenure  of  every  kind,  except  the  tenure  in
Frankalmoigne ;  but  a  tenant  at  will  was  not  bound  to  it,  as
his  estate  was  too  precarious ;  and  though  Littleton  says,
that  a  tenant  for  years  was  bound  to  render  fealty  to  the  les-
sor, Mr.  Hargrave  has  referred  to  some  cases  which  raise  a
doubt  upon  that  point.'* He  also  observes,  that  no  statute  has

a  LUtUtony  sec.  117.  130,  131,  132.  139.  Co,  LiJU.  63.  cu  67.  b.
Harg,  D.  13  to  lib.  ii.  Co,  Lilt.


612  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  [Part  VI.

ever  varied  the  law  of  fealty,  and  that  the  title  to  fealty  still
remains,  though  it  is  no  longer  the  practice  to  exact  its  per-
formance. However,  if  required,  it  must  be  repeated  on
every  change  of  the  lord,  and  the  remedy  for  compelling  the
performance  of  fealty  is  by  distress.'^  Sir  Matthew  Hale^
says,  the  oath  of  fealty  may  be  due  to  an  inferior  lord,  and
then  the  oath  must  have  the  saving  salva  fide  et  ligentia
domini  regis.  It  may  be  exacted  in  England  by  landlords,
and  lords  of  manors,  from  tenants  other  than  tenants  at  will,
or  from  year  to  year.  The  New- York  statute  of  1787,  saved
the  services  incident  to  tenure  in  common  socage,  and  which
it  presumed  might  be  due,  not  only  to  the  people  of  the  state,
but  to  any  mean  lord,  or  other  private  person,  and  it  saved
the  fealty  and  distresses  incident  thereunto.  But  this  doc-
trine of  the  feudal  fealty,  was  never  practically  applied,  nor
assumed  to  apply  to  any  other  superior  than  the  chief  lord
of  the  fee,  or,  in  other  words,  the  people  of  the  state,  and
then  it  reserved  itself  into  the  oath  of  allegiance  which  every
citizen,  on  a  proper  occasion,  may  be  required  to  take.  Lord
Coke  did  not  designate  any  very  material  difference  between
the  oath  of  fealty,  and  the  general  oath  of  allegiance,  though
he  raised  the  question  as  to  the  difference  which  might  exist
between  them  5*  but  Sir  Matthew  Hale,**  in  a  long  and  learn-
ed dissertation,  undertakes  to  explain  the  difference  between
the  oath  of  allegiance  and  the  oath  of  fealty.  Under  the
New- York  statute  of  1787,  fealty,  in  the  technical  sense  of
the  feudal  law,  was  a  dormant  and  exploded  incident  of  feu-


a  Harg.  n.  20  to  lib.  ii.  Co.  Lilt,  The  distress  was  also  the  retnedj
of  the  feudal  lord  for  eoforciog^  his  claim  to  relief,  and  the  yalidiCy  of
bis  title  was  tried  on  the  part  of  the  heir  in  tlie  action  of  replevio.
Case  of  The  Provost  of  Beverly,  40,  Ed.  3.  9.  Bjr  the  ^ew-York  He-
wed Statutes^  Tol.  i.  747,  sec.  18,  distress  is  a  remedy  given  for  all  cer-
tain services,  as  well  as  certain  rent  reserved  out  of  lands,  and  due.

b  H.  P.  C.  vol.  i.  67.

c  Co,  Lilt,  68.  b.

d  H.  P.  C.  vol.  i.  p.  62—70.


Lee.  LIIL]  OF  REAL  PROPERTY.  613

dal  tenure  ;'*  and  by  the  Revised  Statutes,  even  the  fiction
has  become  annihilated,  unless  it  may  be  supposed  to  be  lurk-
ing in  the  general  declaration,  that  ^^  the  people  of  this  state,
in  their  right  of  sovereignty,  are  deemed  to  possess  (he  ori-
ginal and  ultimate  property  in  and  to  all  lands  within  the  ju-
risdiction of  the  state."^

Thus,  by  one  of  those  singular  revolutbns  incident  to  hu-
man affairs,  allodial  estates,  once  universal  in  Europe,  and
then  almost  universally  exchanged  for  feudal  tenures,  have
now,  after  the  lapse  of  many  centuries,  regained  their  primi-
tive estimation  in  the  minds  of  freemen.  Though  the  doc-
trine of  a  feudal  tenure  by  free  and  common  socage,  may
be  applicable  to  the  real  property  in  this  country,  chartered
and  possessed  before  our  revolution,  and  though  every  pro-
prietor should  be  considered  as  holding  an  estate  in  fee  sim-
ple, none  of  the  inconveniences  of  tenure  are  felt  or  known.
We  have  very  generally  abolished  the  right  of  primogeniture,


a  In  Coniell  v.  Lamb,  2  Cowen'a  Rep.  652,  it  vras  declared,  by
Woodwortb,  J.,  that  fealty  was  not,  in  fact,  doe  on  any  tenare  in  this
state,  and  bad  become  altogether  fictitious.  The  statute  of  1787
would  seem,  according  to  the  feudal  theory,  not  to  have  been  penned
with  philological  accuracy,  when  it  declared,  that  the  tenure  of  all
lands  derived  from  the  people  of  this  state  should  be  allodial,  and  not
feudal.  Allodial  estates  hare  no  mark  of  tenure,  and  are  enjoyed  in
absolute  right,  and  tenure  signifies  the  holding  of  a  superior  lord.  Sir
Henry  Spelman  says,  that  the  first  place  in  which  he  met  with  tenure
in  a  feudal  sense,  was  among  the  laws  of  the  Saliques  and  Germans,  in
the  constitution  of  the  Emperor  Conrad,  about  tlie  year  915,  when
beneficia,  afterwards  called  feuds,  fir^t  became  hereditary.  {Spelman^s
Treatise  of  Feuds,  ch.  3.  Tenure  est  la  manierepar  quay  les  tenements
stmt  tenus  des  Seigneurs,  Ctutum.  de  Jform*  cited  by  Sir  Martin
Wright  on  Tenures,  p.  139,  note.)  But  the  statute  did  not  commit  any
mistake,  because  it  used  the  word,  not  in  a  feudal,  but  in  the  popular
sense,  for  right  or  title,  in  like  manner  as  in  England,  the  king,  wboee
inheritance  cannot  possibly  import  a  tenure,  is  said  to  be  seised  in  bis
demesne  as  of  fee.

h  JV.  F.  Revised  Statutes,  vol.  i.  718,  sec.  1.

Vol.  ffl.  65


f


•  '■  1


514  OF  REAL  PROPERtt.  [Part  VI.

and  preference  of  males,  in  the  title  by  descent,  as  well  as
the  feudal  services,  and  the  practice  of  subinfeudation,  and
all  restraints  on  aUenation.  Socage  tenures  do  not  exist
any  longer,  in  some  of  the  United  States,  while  they  still  ex-
ist, in  theory  at  least,  in  others ;  but  where  they  do  exist,
they  partake  of  the  essential  qualities  of  allodial  estates.  An
estate  in  fee  simple  means  an  estate  of  inheritance,  and  no-
thing more,  and  in  common  acceptation  it  has  lost  entirely
its  original  meaning  as  a  beneficiary  or  usufructuary  estate,
in  contradistinction  to  that  which  is  allodial.  It  was  used
even  by  Littleton  and  Coke,  to  denote  simply  an  inheritance ;
and  they  are  followed  by  Sir  Martin  Wright,  and  Sir  William
Blackstone.'  Whether  a  person  holds  his  land  in  pure  alio-
diutnj  or  has  an  absolute  estate  of  inheritance  in  fee  simple,
is  perfectly  immaterial,  for  his  title  is  the  same  to  every  es-
sential purpose.  The  distinction  between  the  two  estates
has  become  merely  nominal,  and  a  very  considerable  part  of
Littleton's  celebrated  treatise  on  tenures,  on  which  Lord  Coke
exhausted  his  immense  stores  of  learning,  has  become  obso-
lete. But  those  parts  of  it  which  have  ceased  to  be  of  mo-
dern application,  will,  nevertheless,  continue,  like  the  other
venerable  remains  of  the  Gothic  system,  to  be  objects  of  ex-
amination and  study,  not  only  to  the  professed  antiquarian,
but  to  every  inquisitive  lawyer,  who,  according  to  the  advice
of  Lord  Bacon,  is  desirous  "  to  visit  and  strengthen  the  roots
and  foundation  of  the  science."^


a  Co.  Liu,  1. 2  Blacks.  Com.  106.

b  Oeii  un  beau  tpeclacle  que  celui  des  loix  feodales :  un  chene
anUque  s^eleve :  il  faut  percer  la  terre  pour  les  racines  trouver.  Mon-
tesquieu's account  of  the  feudal  laws  is  the  best  and  most  solid  part
of  his  work.  He  traces  tbem  up  to  the  forests  of  Germany,  and
shows  that  they  were  suggested  by  the  usages,  promoted  by  the
policy,  and  matured  by  the  martial  genius  of  the  ancient  Germans.
Those  fierce  tribes  of  barbarians,  having  long  been  inured  to  tur-


JLec,  LIII.]  or  REAL  PROPERTY.  515

buleot  warfare,  at  leng^th  broke  through  the  restraints  imposed  by  dis-
ciplined valoar,  put  to  flight  the  Roman  eagles  in  all  the  northern
provinces  of  the  empire,  and  finally  prostrated  the  most  extensive
and  best  cemented  monarchy  which  had  ever  insulted  and  enslaved
mankind.


END OP VOLUME I  IT.
